古文：五月，丙寅，加河阳节度使张汉瑜同平章事。
现代文：起阏逢困敦五月，尽柔兆摄提格，凡二年有奇。唐昭宗天元年五月丙寅，朝廷加授河阳节度使张汉瑜为同平章事。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty, the imperial court awarded Zhang Hanyu the Heyang Festival, making Zhang Hanyu a peer of the emperor.

古文：帝宴硃全忠及百官于崇勋殿，既罢，复召全忠宴于内殿。全忠疑，不入。
现代文：昭宗在崇政殿宴请朱全忠及文武百官。宴席散后，昭宗又召朱全忠进内殿饮宴；朱全忠怀疑昭宗要谋害自己，不进去。
English: Shozong invited Zhu Quanzhong and hundreds of civil and military officials to a banquet at the Su Zheng Palace. After the banquet was over, Shozong also invited Zhu Quanzhong to a banquet in the inner palace; Zhu Quanzhong suspected that Shozong was plotting to kill himself and would not go inside.

古文：帝曰： 全忠不欲来，可令敬翔来。 
现代文：昭宗说： 朱全忠不想来，可以让敬翔进来。 
English: Akimune said, "If Zhu Quanzhong doesn't want to come, he can let Qixiang come."

古文：全忠擿翔使去，曰： 翔亦醉矣。 
现代文：朱全忠指使敬翔离去，说： 敬翔也醉了。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong ordered Qixiang to leave, saying: Qixiang is also drunk.

古文：辛未，全忠东还，乙亥，至大梁。
现代文：辛未，朱全忠东归；乙亥，朱全忠回到大梁。
English: In Xin Wei, Zhu Quanzhong returned to the East; in Yi Hai, Zhu Quanzhong returned to Daliang.

古文：忠义节度使赵匡凝遣水军上峡攻王建夔州，知渝州王宗阮等击败之。
现代文：忠义节度使赵匡凝派遣水军溯流上三峡，攻打王建所辖之夔州，主持渝州事务的王宗阮等将他们打败。
English: The loyalty festival made Zhao Kuangning send his navy upstream of the Three Gorges to attack Zhangzhou, which was under the jurisdiction of Wang Jian, and Wang Zong Ruan, who presided over the affairs of Yuzhou, defeated them.

古文：万州刺史张武作铁纟亘绝江中流，立栅于两端，谓之 鏁峡 。
现代文：万州刺史张武作粗铁绳断绝长江水流中央的航道，在两端设立栅栏，称为 锁峡 。
English: Zhang Wu, a historian from Wanzhou, made a thick iron rope to cut off the channel in the middle of the Yangtze River and set up a fence at both ends, known as the Lock Gorge.

古文：六月，李茂贞、王建、李继徽传檄合兵以讨硃全忠。
现代文：六月，李茂贞、王建、李继徽传布檄文合兵讨伐朱全忠。
English: In June, Li Maozhen, Wang Jian, and Li Jihui jointly issued a proclamation to expel Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠以镇国节度使硃友裕为行营都统，将步骑数万击之；命保大节度使刘鄩弃鄜州，引兵屯同州。
现代文：朱全忠任命镇国节度使朱友裕为行营都统，率领步兵、骑兵数万人攻击岐州、州；命令保大节度使刘放弃州，带兵前往同州驻扎。
English: Zhu Quanzhong appointed Zhenguo Jiedu to make Zhu Youyu the commander-in-chief and led tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to attack Qizhou and Zhoushan; ordered Baoda Jiedu to make Liu abandon Zhoushan and lead the troops to stay in Zhoushan.

古文：癸丑，全忠引兵自大梁西讨茂贞等。
现代文：癸丑，朱全忠统帅大军自大梁出发，向西讨伐李茂贞等。
English: Ugly, Zhu Quanzhong, commander of the army, set out from Daliang to fight Li Maozhen in the west.

古文：秋，七月，甲子，过东都入见。壬申，至河中。
现代文：秋季，七月甲子，朱全忠路过东都洛阳，入城朝见昭宗；壬申，到达河中。
English: In autumn, in July, Zhu Quanzhong passed through the eastern capital Luoyang and entered the city to see Zhaozong in the morning; he went to Jinshin and arrived in the middle of the river.

古文：西川诸将劝王建乘李茂贞之衰，攻取凤翔。
现代文：西川诸将劝节度使王建乘李茂贞衰弱的机会，攻取凤翔。
English: The Nishikawa generals advised Wang Jian to take advantage of Li Maozhen's weakness and capture Fengxiang.

古文：建以问节度判官冯涓，涓曰： 兵者凶器，残民耗财，不可穷也。
现代文：王建为此询问节度判官冯涓，冯涓说： 战争是凶器，残害百姓，耗损钱财，因此，不应穷兵黩武。
English: Wang Jian asked the judge of the festival, Feng Yu, about this. Feng Yu said, "War is a deadly weapon, it destroys people and wastes money. Therefore, it is not necessary to have a large number of soldiers.

古文：今梁、晋虎争，势不两立，若并而为一，举兵向蜀，虽诸葛亮复生，不能敌矣。
现代文：现在大梁朱全忠、晋阳李克用两虎相争，势不两立，如果朱全忠、李克用的两支军队合而为一，发兵攻蜀，虽然诸葛亮再生，也是不能抵挡的。
English: At present, Zhu Quanzhong and Li Ke, the great leader of Jinyang, are fighting with two tigers. If the two armies of Zhu Quanzhong and Li Ke are combined into one and send troops to attack Shu, although Zhuge Liang is reborn, it will not be able to resist.

古文：凤翔，蜀之籓蔽，不若与之和亲，结为婚姻，无事则务农训兵，保固疆场，有事则觇其机事，观衅而动，可以万全。 
现代文：凤翔是蜀的屏障，不如与李茂贞和睦亲善，结为婚姻，无事就致力农业生产，操练军队，保卫巩固边界，有事就察看时机，看准破绽而行动，可以万无一失。 
English: Fengxiang is the barrier of Shu, it is better to have a good relationship with Li Maozhen, get married, work hard on agricultural production, train the army, defend and consolidate the border, and look for opportunities in case of problems.

古文：建曰： 善！
现代文：王建说： 好！
English: Wang Jian said: Good!

古文：茂贞虽庸才，然有强悍之名，远近畏之，与全忠力争则不足，自守则有馀，使为吾籓蔽，所利多矣。 
现代文：李茂贞虽然是个庸才，然而有勇猛无所顾忌的名声，远近都怕他，与朱全忠拼力抗争虽不足，但保卫自己却有余，使他作为我的屏障，得利很多啊！ 
English: Although Li Maozhen is a mediocre talent, he has the reputation of being brave and fearless. People near and far are afraid of him. Although it is not enough to fight with Zhu Quanzhong, he has more than enough to defend himself, so that he can be my barrier and benefit a lot!

古文：乃与茂贞修好。
现代文：于是，与李茂贞建立亲善关系。
English: As a result, he established a friendly relationship with Li Maozhen.

古文：丙子，茂贞遣判官赵锽如西川，为其侄天雄节度使继崇求婚，建以女妻之。
现代文：丙子，李茂贞派遣判官赵前往西川，替他的侄子天雄节度使李继勋求婚；王建把女儿嫁给李继勋为妻。
English: On behalf of his nephew, Tianxiong Jiedu, Li Maozhen sent the magistrate Zhao to the West River to propose to Li Jixun; Wang Jian married his daughter to Li Jixun.

古文：茂贞数求货及甲兵于建，建皆与之。
现代文：李茂贞屡次向王建求索财物及铠甲兵器，王建都给了他。
English: Li Maozhen repeatedly asked Wang Jian for property and armor weapons, and Wang Jian gave him everything.

古文：王建赋敛重，人莫敢言。
现代文：王建征收赋税很重，没有人敢说。
English: Wang Jian levied heavy taxes, and no one dared to speak out.

古文：冯涓因建生日献颂，先美功德，后言生民之苦。
现代文：冯涓借王建的生日进献颂词，先赞美他的功德，后陈述百姓的困苦。
English: Feng Jun borrowed Wang Jian's birthday to deliver a eulogy, first praising his merits, and then stating the hardships of the people.

古文：建愧谢曰： 如君忠谏，功业何忧！ 
现代文：王建看了非常惭愧，致谢说： 像您这样忠言直谏，成就功业又有什么可忧虑的呢！ 
English: Wang Jian looked very ashamed and thanked him, saying, "As you are so honest and straightforward, there is nothing to worry about in achieving your career!"

古文：赐之金帛。
现代文：于是，赏赐给冯涓金帛。
English: As a result, Feng Rong was awarded the Golden Scepter.

古文：自是赋敛稍损。
现代文：从此赋税稍有减少。
English: Since then, the tax has been slightly reduced.

古文：初，硃全忠自凤翔迎车驾还，见德王裕眉目疏秀，且年齿已壮，恶之，私谓崔胤曰： 德王尝奸帝位，岂可复留！
现代文：当初，朱全忠自凤翔迎接昭宗车驾返回长安，见德王李裕眉目清秀，并且已经成年，很厌恶他，私下对崔胤说： 德王曾经窃据帝位，哪里能够再留下！
English: At first, Zhu Quanzhong drove back to Chang'an from Fengxiang to meet Zhaozong. He saw that King De Li Yu had a clear-cut brow and was already an adult. He was disgusted with him and privately said to Cui Yin: King De once usurped the imperial throne, where can he stay again!

古文：公何不言之！ 
现代文：您为什么不向陛下说！ 
English: Why don't you tell His Majesty!

古文：胤言于帝。
现代文：崔胤把朱全忠的话向昭宗说了。
English: Cui Yin told the words of Zhu Quanzhong to Akimune.

古文：帝问全忠，全忠曰： 陛下父子之间，臣安敢窃议，此崔胤卖臣耳。 
现代文：昭宗问朱全忠，朱全忠说： 陛下父子之间的事情，我怎么敢私下议论，这是崔胤出卖我罢了。 
English: Zhaozong asked Zhu Quanzhong. Zhu Quanzhong said, "How dare I discuss the matter between Your Majesty's father and son in private? This is just Cui Yin betraying me."

古文：帝自离长安，日忧不测，与皇后终日沉饮，或相对涕泣。
现代文：昭宗自从离开长安，每天忧虑发生意外事变，整天与何皇后沉湎酒中，或者相对哭泣。
English: Since leaving Chang'an, Zhaozong has been worried about unexpected events every day. He and Queen He have been drinking wine all day, or crying.

古文：全忠使枢密使蒋玄晖伺察帝，动静皆知之。
现代文：朱全忠让枢密使蒋玄晖侦察昭宗的言行，昭宗的动静他都知道。
English: Zhu Quanzhong asked the confidential envoy Jiang Xuanzhang to investigate the words and deeds of Zhaozong. He knew all about Zhaozong's movements.

古文：帝从容谓玄晖曰： 德王，朕之爱子，全忠何故坚欲杀之？ 
现代文：昭宗从容对蒋玄晖说： 德王是朕的爱子，朱全忠为什么一定要杀他？ 
English: Zhaozong calmly said to Jiang Xuanqi: King De is my beloved son. Why did Zhu Quanzhong have to kill him?

古文：因泣下，啮中指血流。
现代文：因此落泪，咬中指流血不止。
English: As a result, she shed tears and bit her middle finger until it bled profusely.

古文：玄晖具以语全忠，全忠愈不自安。
现代文：蒋玄晖将此情形详细告诉朱全忠，朱全忠更加不安。
English: Jiang Xuanzhang told Zhu Quanzhong about this situation in detail, which made Zhu Quanzhong even more uneasy.

古文：时李茂贞、杨崇本、李克用、刘仁恭、王建、杨行密、赵匡凝移檄往来，皆以兴复为辞。
现代文：当时，李茂贞、杨崇本、李克用、刘仁恭、王建、杨行密、赵匡凝往来传移檄文，都以兴复皇室为辞。
English: At that time, Li Maozhen, Yang Chongben, Li Kegui, Liu Rengong, Wang Jian, Yang Xingmi, and Zhao Kuangge passed the imperial edict back and forth, all with the aim of restoring the imperial family.

古文：全忠方引兵讨，以帝有英气，恐变生于中，欲立幼君，易谋禅代。
现代文：朱全忠正在率领军队向西讨伐岐州、州，因昭宗有英武之气，恐怕宫中产生变故，想要另立幼君，以谋求禅让取代。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was leading an army to the west to fight against the Qizhou and Zhu regions. Since Zhaozong had the spirit of bravery, I am afraid that there would be a change in the palace, and he would want to set up another young prince to replace him.

古文：乃遣判官李振至洛阳，与玄晖及左龙武统军硃友恭、右龙武统军氏叔琮等图之。
现代文：于是，朱全忠派遣判官李振到洛阳，与蒋玄晖及左龙武统军朱友恭、右龙武统军氏叔琮等谋划。
English: As a result, Zhu Quanzhong dispatched the judge Li Zhen to Luoyang to plan with Jiang Xuanqiu, Zhu Youqiong of the Left Dragon Military Unification Army, and Shu Shi of the Right Dragon Military Unification Army.

古文：八月，壬寅，帝在椒殿，玄晖选龙武牙官史太等百人夜叩宫门，言军前有急奏，欲面见帝。
现代文：八月壬寅，昭宗在何皇后殿内，枢密使蒋玄晖选择龙武牙官史太等一百人，在夜里敲击宫门，说军事前线有急事奏报，要面见昭宗。
English: In August of the same year, Zhaozong was in the palace of the Empress He. The imperial envoy Jiang Xuanzang chose Long Wu Ya official Shi Tai and a hundred others to knock on the palace door at night, saying that there was an urgent report on the military front and they wanted to meet Zhaozong.

古文：夫人裴贞一开门见兵，曰： 急奏何以兵为？ 
现代文：夫人裴贞一开门见兵士，说： 有急事奏报用兵士做什么？ 
English: As soon as Mrs. Peizhen opened the door to meet the soldiers, she said, "I have an urgent matter to report.

古文：史太杀之。
现代文：史太杀了她。
English: Stuart killed her.

古文：玄晖问： 至尊安在？ 
现代文：蒋玄晖问： 陛下在哪里？ 
English: Jiang Xuanqiu asked: Where is Your Majesty?

古文：昭仪李渐荣临轩呼曰： 宁杀我曹，勿伤大家！ 
现代文：昭仪李渐荣对窗大叫道： 宁可杀了我们，不要伤害陛下！ 
English: Zhao Yi Li Qian Rong shouted to the window: You'd better kill us, don't hurt your majesty!

古文：帝方醉，遽起，单衣绕柱走，史太追而弑之。
现代文：昭宗刚醉，急忙起来，穿着单衣绕柱逃跑，史太追上并把他杀死。
English: After getting drunk, Shozong got up in a hurry and ran around the pillar in his singlet. Shi Tai caught up with him and killed him.

古文：渐荣以身蔽帝，太亦杀之。
现代文：李渐荣用身体遮挡昭宗，史太也杀了她。
English: Li Yan Rong shielded Zhaozong with his body, and Shi Tao also killed her.

古文：又欲杀何后，后求哀于玄晖，乃释之。
现代文：史太又要杀何皇后，何皇后向蒋玄晖哀求，才放了她。
English: Shi Tai also wanted to kill Empress He, but Empress He only released her after she pleaded with Jiang Xuanzang.

古文：癸卯，蒋玄晖矫诏称李渐荣、裴贞一弑逆，宜立辉王祚为皇太子，更名柷，监军国事。
现代文：癸卯，蒋玄晖假造诏令，称李渐荣、裴贞一谋杀昭宗，应该立辉王李祚为皇太子，更名李，代理军国政事。
English: However, Jiang Xuanzang forged the imperial edict, saying that Li Qianrong and Pei Zhenyi had murdered Zhaozong, and that Hui Wang Lijun should be appointed as the crown prince, renamed Li, and act as the military and political affairs.

古文：又矫皇后令，太子于柩前即位。
现代文：又假传皇后令，太子于灵柩前即位。
English: The crown prince ascended the throne in front of the coffin.

古文：宫中恐惧，不敢出声哭。
现代文：宫中一片恐惧气氛，不敢哭出声来。
English: There was a climate of fear in the palace, and no one dared to cry out.

古文：丙午，昭宣帝即位，时年十三。
现代文：丙午，昭宣帝即位，时年十三岁。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Emperor Zhaoxuan ascended the throne at the age of 13.

古文：李克用复以张承业为监军。
现代文：李克用再以张承业为监军。
English: Li Ke used Zhang Chengye again as a supervisor.

古文：淮南将李神福攻鄂州未下，会疾病，还广陵，杨行密以舒州团练使泌阳刘存代为招讨使。神福寻卒。
现代文：淮南将领李神福攻打鄂州，没有攻克，适逢病重，回广陵，杨行密以舒州团练使泌阳刘存代为招讨使；李神福不久就死了。
English: Li Shenfu, the general of Huainan, attacked Ezhou, but failed to conquer it. When he fell seriously ill, he returned to Guangling. Yang Xingmi used the Shuzhou group training to recruit Liu Cunde as an envoy; Li Shenfu died soon after.

古文：宣州观察使台濛卒，杨行密以其子牙内诸军使渥为宣州观察使，右牙都指挥使徐温谓渥曰： 王寝疾而嫡嗣出籓，此必奸臣之谋。
现代文：宣州观察使台去世，杨行密以自己的儿子牙内诸军使杨渥为宣州观察使。右牙都指挥使徐温对杨渥说： 吴王卧病，而令嫡子出藩，这一定是奸臣的阴谋。
English: The Xuanzhou observation envoy Tai died, Yang Xingmi sent his son Yanai to the army to send Yang Wo as the Xuanzhou observation envoy. Xu Wen, who commanded the right wing, said to Yang Wo: "Wu Wang is ill, and it must be a treacherous minister's plot to order his legitimate son to leave the domain.

古文：他日相召，非温使者及王令书，慎无亟来！ 
现代文：他日召您回来，不是我派遣的使者及吴王的令书，千万不要立即回来！ 
English: He called you back the other day. It wasn't a messenger sent by me or an order from King Wu. Don't come back immediately!

古文：渥泣谢而行。
现代文：杨渥哭着道谢，就上路了。
English: Yang Wo cried and said thank you, and went on his way.

古文：九月，己巳，尊皇后为皇太后。
现代文：九月己巳，昭宣帝尊何皇后为皇太后。
English: In September, the Empress Zhaoxuan became the Empress Dowager.

古文：硃全忠引兵北屯永寿，南至骆谷，凤翔、邠宁兵竟不出。
现代文：朱全忠率领的军队北边驻扎永寿，南边到达骆谷，凤翔、宁的军队竟不出战。
English: The army led by Zhu Quanzhong was stationed in Yongshou in the north and reached Luogu in the south, but the army of Fengxiang and Ning did not go to war.

古文：辛未，东还。
现代文：辛未，朱全忠率兵东还。
English: Xin Wei, Zhu Quanzhong and his soldiers returned to the east.

古文：冬，十月，辛卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛卯朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in October, the sun rises, and a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：硃全忠闻硃友恭等弑昭宗，阳惊，号哭自投于地，曰： 奴辈负我，令我受恶名于万代！ 
现代文：朱全忠听到朱友恭等杀死昭宗的消息，假装震惊，放声大哭，自己扑倒在地上，说： 奴才们害死我了，让我千秋万代蒙受恶名！ 
English: When Zhu Quanzhong heard the news that Zhu Yougong and others had killed Zhaozong, he pretended to be shocked and burst into tears. He threw himself on the ground and said, "The minions have killed me and made me suffer a bad name for thousands of generations!"

古文：癸巳，至东都，伏梓宫恸哭流悌，又见帝，自陈非己志，请讨贼。
现代文：癸巳，朱全忠到达东都洛阳，伏在昭宗的灵柩上恸哭流涕；又进见昭宣帝，自陈杀死昭宗不是自己的心意，请求讨伐乱臣贼子。
English: Soon after, Zhu Quanzhong arrived in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and prostrated himself on the coffin of Zhaozong, weeping profusely. He also went to see Emperor Zhaoxuan, since Chen's killing of Zhaozong was not his own intention, and asked him to fight the ruffian thief.

古文：先是，护驾军士有掠米于市者，甲午，全忠奏硃友恭、氏叔琮不戢士卒，侵扰市肆，友恭贬崖州司户，复姓名李彦威，叔琮贬白州司户，寻皆赐自尽。
现代文：在这之先，护卫皇帝的军士有在市上抢米的，甲午，朱全忠奏参朱友恭、氏叔琮不能约束士卒，侵扰街市店铺，将朱友恭贬为崖州司马，恢复原姓名李彦威，氏叔琮贬为白州司马，不久都赐令自尽。
English: Prior to this, the sergeants of the emperor's escort had robbed rice in the market. In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Zhu Quanzhong played the role of Zhu Youqiong, and Mr. Shuxuan could not restrain the soldiers, invaded the street market shops, relegated Zhu Youqiong to Yaozhou Sima, restored the original name of Li Yanwei, and relegated Mr. Shuxuan to Baizhou Sima, and soon ordered them to commit suicide.

古文：彦威临刑大呼曰： 卖我以塞天下之谤，如鬼神何！
现代文：李彦威自杀前大声呼喊说： 出卖我来堵塞天下的指责，但拿鬼神怎么办！
English: Before committing suicide, Li Yanwei shouted loudly: "Sell me to block the world's accusations, but what about the ghosts and gods!"

古文：行事如此，望有后乎！ 
现代文：如此行事，还指望有后代吗！ 
English: If you behave like this, do you expect to have descendants?

古文：丙申，天平节度使，张全义来朝。
现代文：丙申，平天节度使张全义来朝见。
English: Bishin said that it was a normal day for Zhang Quanyi to come to see the emperor.

古文：丁酉，复以全忠为宣武、护国、宣义、天平节度使，以全义为河南尹兼忠武节度使、判六军诸卫事。
现代文：丁酉，又任命朱全忠为宣武、护国、宣义、天平节度使；任命张全义为河南尹兼忠武节度使、判六军诸卫事。
English: Ding Xi also appointed Zhu Quanzhong as the envoy for the military proclamation, national defense, proclamation of righteousness, and Tianping Festival; appointed Zhang Quanzhong as the envoy for the Henan Yin and Zhongwu Festival, and decided on the six military guards.

古文：乙巳，全忠辞赴镇，良戌，至大梁。
现代文：乙巳，朱全忠辞别前往藩镇，庚戌到大梁。
English: At this time, Zhu Quanzhong left for the hanzhen and Geng Yao went to Daliang.

古文：镇国节度使硃友裕薨于梨园。
现代文：镇国节度使朱友裕在梨园行营去世。
English: Zhu Youyu died on the town festival in Liyuan.

古文：光州叛杨行密，降硃全忠，行密遣兵围之，与鄂州皆告急于全忠。
现代文：光州背叛杨行密，投降朱全忠，杨行密派遣军队包围光州。光州与鄂州都向朱全忠告急。
English: Gwangju betrayed Yang Xingmi and surrendered to Zhu Quanzhong. Yang Xingmi sent troops to encircle Gwangju. Both Gwangju and Ezhou urgently warned Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：十一月，戊辰，全忠自将兵五万自颍州济淮，军于霍丘，分兵救鄂州。
现代文：十一月戊辰，朱全忠亲自统帅五万军队自颍州渡过淮河，在霍丘驻扎，分派军队救援鄂州。
English: In November, Zhu Quanzhong personally led 50,000 troops from Zhangzhou across the Huai River, stationed in Huoqiu, and dispatched troops to rescue Ezhou.

古文：茨媳澼凸庵葜冓霮构懔戡按兵不出战，全忠分命诸将大掠淮南以困之。
现代文：淮南军队解除对光州的包围返回广陵，按兵不出来迎战，朱全忠分派诸将大肆虏掠淮南来让广陵陷于困境。
English: The Huainan army lifted the siege on Gwangju and returned to Guangling, but the soldiers did not come out to fight. Zhu Quanzhong dispatched generals to plunder Huainan to let Guangling fall into a dilemma.

古文：钱镠潜遣衢州罗城使叶让杀刺史陈璋，事泄。
现代文：钱暗中派遣衢州罗城使叶让杀死衢州刺史陈璋，事情泄露。
English: Qian secretly sent Ye Zhan to Luocheng to have Ye Zhan kill Chen Zhen, the affair was leaked.

古文：十二月，璋斩让而叛，降于杨行密。
现代文：十二月，陈璋斩杀叶让而背叛钱，投降杨行密。
English: In December, Chen Xi killed Ye Zhen and betrayed Qian, and surrendered to Yang Xingmi.

古文：初，马殷弟賨，性沉重，事孙儒，为百胜指挥使。
现代文：当初，武安节度使马殷的弟弟马，生性沉着勇敢，侍奉孙儒，任百胜指挥使。
English: At first, the Wu'an Festival made Ma Yin's younger brother Ma, who was calm and brave by nature, serve Sun Ru and serve as the commanding envoy of the victory.

古文：儒死，事杨行密，屡有功，迁黑云指挥使。
现代文：孙儒死后，侍奉杨行密，屡次立有战功，升任黑云指挥使。
English: After Sun Ju's death, he served Yang Xingmi, repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, and was promoted to the position of Black Cloud's commander.

古文：行密尝从容问其兄弟，乃知为殷之弟，大惊曰： 吾常怪汝器度瑰伟，果非常人，当遣汝归。 
现代文：杨行密曾无意中询问他的兄弟，才知道是马殷的弟弟，大为惊讶，说： 我常常奇怪你的器度奇特，果然不是平常的人。应当让你回去。 
English: Yang Xingmi had inadvertently inquired about his brother, only to find out that he was Ma Yin's younger brother. He was very surprised and said, "I have often wondered about your strange appearance. You are definitely not an ordinary person. You should be allowed to go back."

古文：賨泣辞曰： 賨西残兵，大王不杀而宠任之，湖南地近，尝得兄声问，賨事大王久，不愿归也。 
现代文：马哭着推辞说： 我是淮西的残兵，大王不杀而宠信任用。湖南离此不远，曾经得到哥哥的问讯，我侍奉大王已经很久，不愿意回去了。 
English: Ma cried and said, "I am a leftover soldier from Huaxi. The great king does not kill, but favors and trusts. Hunan is not far from here. I once received an inquiry from my brother. I have been serving the great king for a long time, and I do not want to go back.

古文：行密固遣之。
现代文：杨行密坚决让他回去。
English: Yang Xingmi resolutely let him go back.

古文：是岁，賨归长沙，行密亲饯之郊。
现代文：这一年，马回长沙，杨行密亲自到郊外为他饯行。
English: This year, when he returned to Changsha, Yang Xingmi personally went to the suburbs to accompany him.

古文：賨至长沙，殷表賨为节度副使。
现代文：賨到长沙，马殷上表请任賨为节度副使。
English: When he arrived in Changsha, Ma Yin asked him to be appointed as the deputy envoy of the State Council.

古文：它日，殷议入贡天子，賨曰： 杨王地广兵强，与吾邻接，不若与之结好，大可以为缓急之授，小可通商旅之利。 
现代文：有一天，马殷与賨商议向皇上进贡的事，賨说： 杨王地广兵强，与我疆界接连，不如与他结为友好，从大处说可以作为缓急之援，从小处讲可以有通商旅之利。 
English: One day, Ma Yin and Zou were discussing the matter of paying tribute to the emperor. Zou said: King Yang has a vast and strong army, and our borders are connected. It would be better to make friends with him. From a large perspective, it can be used as a priority aid, and from a small perspective, it can be beneficial for trade and travel.

古文：殷作色曰： 杨王不事天子，一旦朝廷致讨，罪将及吾。
现代文：马殷变色说： 杨王不侍奉天子，一旦朝廷发兵讨伐，罪将涉及我们。
English: Ma Yin changed color and said: King Yang does not serve the Son of Heaven, once the imperial court sends troops to fight, the crime will involve us.

古文：汝置此论，勿为吾祸！ 
现代文：你放弃这种主张，不要为我招祸！ 
English: If you give up this idea, don't make trouble for me!

古文：初，清海节度使徐彦若遗表荐副使刘隐权留后，朝廷以兵部尚书崔远为清海节度使。
现代文：当初，清海节度使徐彦若临终上表荐举副使刘隐代理留后，朝廷任命兵部尚书崔远为清海节度使。
English: At first, the Qinghai Festival made Xu Yanruo nominate the deputy envoy Liu Yin as the acting envoy, and then the imperial court appointed the military commander Shang Shuxu Cui Yuan as the Qinghai Festival envoy.

古文：远至江陵，闻岭南多盗，且畏隐不受代，不敢前，朝廷召远还。
现代文：崔远到达江陵，听说岭南盗贼很多，并且畏惧刘隐不接受替代，不敢前进，朝廷召崔远回京师。
English: When Cui Yuan arrived in Jiangling, he heard that there were many thieves in Lingnan, and he was afraid that Liu Yin would not accept his replacement, so he did not dare to move forward. The imperial court called Cui Yuan back to Beijing.

古文：隐遣使以重赂结硃全忠，乃奏以隐为清海节度使。
现代文：刘隐派遣使者用重贿交结朱全忠，朱全忠于是奏请以刘隐为清海节度使。
English: Liu Ying sent an envoy to bribe Zhu Quanzhong. Zhu Quanzhong then asked Liu Ying to be the envoy to the Qinghai Festival.

古文：昭宣光烈孝皇帝
现代文：昭宣光烈孝皇帝
English: Emperor Zhaoxuan of the Guangxiao Dynasty

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝下之下天祐二年春，正月，硃全忠遣诸将进兵逼寿州。
现代文：唐昭宣帝天二年春季正月，朱全忠派遣诸将率兵进逼寿州。
English: In the first month of the second year of Tang Zhaoxuan Emperor's reign, Zhu Quanzhong dispatched generals and soldiers to Zhouzhou.

古文：润州团练安仁义勇决得士心，故淮南将王茂章攻之，逾年不克。
现代文：润州团练安仁义勇敢决断，深得军心，所以淮南将领王茂章攻打润州，过了一年没有攻克。
English: The Rongzhou Regiment practiced Anrenyi, bravely and decisively, and won the hearts and minds of the soldiers. Therefore, the Huainan general Wang Maozhang attacked Rongzhou, but did not conquer it after one year.

古文：杨行密使谓之曰： 汝之功，吾不忘也，能束身自归，当以汝为行军副使，但不掌兵耳。 
现代文：杨行密派遣使者对安仁义说： 你的功劳我不会忘记，能够自缚归来，当让你任行军副使，只是不掌兵权罢了。 
English: Yang Xingmi sent an envoy to An Renyi, saying, "I will not forget your service. If you can return unharmed, you should be appointed deputy envoy, but you should not hold military power."

古文：仁义不从。
现代文：安仁义没有投降。
English: Ahn did not surrender.

古文：茂章为地道入城，遂克之。
现代文：王茂章挖地道进城，于是占领了润州。
English: Wang Maozhang dug a tunnel into the city and occupied Runzhou.

古文：仁义举族登楼，众不敢逼。
现代文：安仁义带全族上楼，众人不敢逼近。
English: An Renyi took the whole family upstairs, but no one dared to approach.

古文：先是，攻城诸将见仁义辄骂之，惟李德诚不然，至是仁义召德诚登楼，谓曰： 汝有礼，吾今以为汝功。 
现代文：此前，攻城各将领望见安仁义就骂他，只有李德诚不这样，到这时，安仁义召李德诚登楼，对他说： 你有礼貌，我现在把功劳给你。 
English: Previously, all the generals of the siege saw An Renyi and scolded him, only Li Decheng did not. At this time, An Renyi called Li Decheng upstairs and said to him: You are polite, I will give you the credit now.

古文：且以爱妾赠之。
现代文：并且把自己的爱妾赠送给他。
English: And gave him his beloved concubine.

古文：乃掷弓于地，德诚掖之而下，并其子斩于广陵市。
现代文：于是，把弓箭扔在地上。李德诚夹着安仁义下楼，连同他的儿子在广陵街市斩首。
English: Therefore, he threw his bow and arrow on the ground. Li Decheng took An Renyi downstairs and beheaded him together with his son in Guangling Street.

古文：两浙兵围陈询于睦州，杨行密遣西南招讨使陶雅将兵救之。
现代文：两浙军队在睦州把陈询包围，杨行密派遣西南招讨使陶雅率领军队前去救援。
English: The two Zhejiang armies encircled Chen Zhen in Muzhou, and Yang Xingmi dispatched the Southwest Invitation to persuade Tao Ya to lead the army to the rescue.

古文：军中夜惊，士卒多逾垒亡去，左右及裨将韩球奔告之，雅安卧不应，须臾自定，亡者皆还。
现代文：陶雅的军营中夜里受惊，许多士卒越过营垒逃走，左右及裨将韩球跑来报告陶雅，陶雅安睡不理。片刻便自行安定，逃走的士卒都回来了。
English: In the middle of the night, Tao Ya's military camp was startled. Many soldiers fled across the ramparts. The left and right guards ran to report to Tao Ya. Tao Ya slept peacefully. After a while, she stabilized on her own, and the soldiers who had fled returned.

古文：钱镠遣其从弟镒及指挥使顾全武、王球御之，为雅所败，虏镒及球以归。
现代文：钱派遣他的堂弟钱镒及指挥使顾全武、王球抵御，被陶雅打败，俘虏钱镒及王球返回广陵。
English: Qian sent his cousin Qian Rong and commander Gu Quanwu and Wang Qiu to resist, but they were defeated by Tao Ya, and Qian Rong and Wang Qiu were captured and returned to Guangling.

古文：庚午，硃全忠命李振知青州事，代王师范。
现代文：庚午，朱全忠任命李振主持青州事务，替代王师范。
English: In the afternoon, Zhu Quanzhong appointed Li Zhen to preside over Qingzhou affairs, replacing Wang Shimen.

古文：全忠围寿州，州人闭壁不出。
现代文：朱全忠包围寿州，州人关闭营垒不出战。
English: Zhu Quanzhong surrounded Shoushou, and the people of Shoushou closed their camp and did not fight.

古文：全忠乃自霍丘引归，二月，辛卯，至大梁。
现代文：朱全忠于是从霍丘带兵回去，二月辛卯到大梁。
English: Zhu Quanzhong led his troops back from Huoqiu and arrived in Daliang in February.

古文：李振至青州，王师范举族西迁，至濮阳，素服乘驴而进。
现代文：李振到青州，王师范全族西迁，到濮阳，换上素服骑驴前进。
English: Li Zhen went to Qingzhou, Wang Shifan moved west, to Fenyang, put on plain clothes and rode a donkey.

古文：至大梁，全忠客之。
现代文：到达大梁，朱全忠以客人对待。
English: Arriving in Dalian, Zhu Quanzhong was treated like a guest.

古文：表李振为青州留后。
现代文：上表请任李振为青州留后。
English: The above table shows the appointment of Li Zhen as the successor of Qingzhou.

古文：戊戌，以安南节度使、同平章事硃全昱为太师，致仕。
现代文：戊戌，朝廷以安南节度使、同平章事全昱为太师，退休。
English: At the same time, the imperial court retired with Annan as the ceremonial envoy and Tongping Zhangjiquan as the grand master.

古文：全昱，全忠之兄也，戆朴无能，先领安南，全忠自请罢之。
现代文：朱全昱是朱全忠的哥哥，戆厚朴实，没有能力，先兼任安南，朱全忠自己请求罢免他。
English: Zhu Quanzhang is the elder brother of Zhu Quanzhong. He is thick, simple, and incompetent. He first served as Annan, and Zhu Quanzhong himself asked to remove him.

古文：是日社，全忠使蒋玄晖邀昭宗诸子：德王裕、棣王祤、虔王禊、沂王禋、遂王祎、景王祕、祁王祺、雅王禛、琼王祥，置酒九曲池，酒酣，悉缢杀之，投尸池中。
现代文：这一天是社日，朱全忠让蒋玄晖邀请唐昭宗诸子德王李裕、棣王李、虔王李禊、沂王李、遂王李、景王李秘、祁王李琪、雅王李、琼王李祥，在九曲池摆酒，喝得酣醉，把他们全都勒死，抛尸九曲池中。
English: This day was the social day. Zhu Quanzhong asked Jiang Xuanzhang to invite all the sons of Tang Zhaozong, including De Wang Liyu, Zhi Wang Liyu, Qian Wang Liyu, Zhi Wang Liyu, Sui Wang Liyu, Jing Wang Lihai, Zhi Wang Liji, Ya Wang Liyu and Qiong Wang Lixiang, to have a drink at the Jiuquan Pool. He was so drunk that he strangled all of them and threw their bodies into the Jiuquan Pool.

古文：硃全忠遣其将曹延祚将兵与杜洪共守鄂州，庚子，淮南将刘存攻拔之，执洪、延祚及汴兵千余人送广陵，悉诛之。
现代文：朱全忠派遣他的部将曹延祚率领军队与杜洪共同守卫鄂州。庚子，淮南将领刘存攻取鄂州，生擒杜洪、曹延祚及汴州兵士一千余人送往广陵，把他们全部杀死。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent his general Cao Yanjun to lead the army and jointly guard Ezhou with Du Hong. Geng Zi and Liu Cun, the general of Huainan, captured Ezhou, and sent Du Hong, Cao Yanjun and more than one thousand soldiers from Zhangzhou to Guangling, killing them all.

古文：行密以存为鄂岳观察使。
现代文：杨行密任命刘存为鄂岳观察使。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Liu Cun as the observation envoy of Mt.

古文：己酉，葬圣穆景文孝皇帝于和陵，庙号昭宗。
现代文：已酉，将圣穆景文孝皇帝葬于和陵，庙号昭宗。
English: After his death, Emperor Mu Jingwen Xiao was buried in the Peace Mausoleum, with the temple name Zhaozong.

古文：三月，庚午，以王师范为河阳节度使。
现代文：三月庚午，朝廷任命王师范为河阳节度使。
English: In the late afternoon of March, the imperial court appointed Wang Shifan as the envoy to the Kheyang Festival.

古文：戊寅，以门下侍郎、同平章事独孤损同平章事，充静海节度使；以礼部侍郎河间张文蔚同平章事。
现代文：戊寅，朝廷任命门下侍郎、同平章事独孤损同平章事，充静海节度使；任命礼部侍郎河间张文蔚同平章事。
English: In Wu Yin, the imperial court appointed a subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhangji, to be the sole subordinate attendant and Tongping Zhangji, to be the sole subordinate attendant and Tongping Zhangji, to be the sole subordinate attendant; appointed a ceremonial attendant, Kawama Zhang Wenwei, to be the subordinate attendant.

古文：甲申，以门下侍郎、同平章事裴枢为左仆射，崔远为右仆射，并罢政事。
现代文：甲申，任命门下侍郎、同平章事裴枢为左仆射，崔远为右仆射，一并停止参与政事。
English: Gao Shin, appointed his servant, Tongping Zhangji Pei Chu as his left and Cui Yuan as his right, and stopped participating in politics.

古文：初，柳璨及第，不四年为宰相，性倾巧轻佻。
现代文：起初，柳璨中进士，不到四年升为宰相，生性乘巧轻浮。
English: At first, he was a junior high school student in Liuye, and was promoted to prime minister in less than four years.

古文：时天子左右皆硃全忠腹心，璨曲意事之。
现代文：当时皇上左右都是朱全忠的亲信，柳璨想尽办法去侍奉他们。
English: At that time, the emperor was surrounded by Zhu Quanzhong's cronies, and Liu Bei tried his best to serve them.

古文：同列裴枢、崔远、独孤损皆朝廷宿望，意轻之，璨以为憾。
现代文：同时位列宰相的裴枢、崔远、独孤损都是朝廷素负重望的人，心中看轻他，柳璨以此怀恨在心。
English: At the same time, the prime ministers Peizhu, Cui Yuan, and Duyuko were all people who had high expectations from the imperial court. They despised him in their hearts, and Liu Bei held a grudge against them.

古文：和王傅张廷范，本优人，有宠于全忠，奏以为太常卿。
现代文：和王李福的师傅张廷范本是戏子，朱全忠宠爱信任他，柳璨奏请任命他为太常卿。
English: And Wang Lifu's teacher Zhang Tingfan was an actor. Zhu Quanzhong loved and trusted him, and Liu Yuxiao asked him to be appointed as Tai Changqing.

古文：枢曰： 廷范勋臣，幸有方镇，何籍乐卿！
现代文：裴枢说： 张廷范是有功劳的大臣，有方镇来安置他，何必给他掌管礼乐的太常卿！
English: Pei Zu said: Zhang Ting Fan is a meritorious minister, Fang Zhen has come to place him, why not give him Taizhongqing, who is in charge of ceremonial music!

古文：恐非元帅之旨。 
现代文：恐怕不是元帅的意思。 
English: I'm afraid I didn't mean marshal.

古文：持之不下。全忠闻之，谓宾佐曰： 吾常以裴十四器识真纯，不入浮薄之党，观此议论，本态露矣。 
现代文：相持不下，朱全忠听到这些话，对宾客僚佐说： 我常认为裴十四的器量见识真诚纯粹，不入轻浮浅薄之流，观此议论，本来的面目显露出来了。 
English: Unable to hold it together, Zhu Quanzhong heard these words and said to his guest and colleague: I often think that Pei XIV's ability to see is sincere and pure, and does not fall into the stream of frivolity and shallowness. Watching this discussion, the original face is revealed.

古文：璨因此并远、损谮于全忠，故三人皆罢。
现代文：柳璨借此在朱全忠面前诬陷裴枢以及崔远、独孤损，所以三人都被罢去宰相之职。
English: Liu Bei used this to frame Peizhu and Cui Yuan in front of Zhu Quanzhong, and all three were removed from the post of prime minister.

古文：以吏部侍郎杨涉同平章事。
现代文：朝廷任命吏部侍郎杨涉为同平章事。
English: The imperial court appointed Yang Zhan, a servant of the cadre department, as a peer.

古文：涉，收之孙也，为人和厚恭谨，闻当为相，与家人相泣，谓其子凝式曰： 此吾家之不幸也，必为汝累。 
现代文：杨涉是杨收的孙子。为人和平宽厚，恭敬谨慎，听到任为宰相，与家里人相对哭泣，对他的儿子杨凝式说： 这是我家的不幸，一定成为你的连累。 
English: Yang Zhan is the grandson of Yang Jie. He is a peaceful and generous person, respectful and prudent. When he heard that he was appointed as prime minister, he cried with his family and said to his son Yang Jingshi: This is the misfortune of my family, it will definitely become your burden.

古文：为清海节度使刘隐同平章事。
现代文：清海节度使刘隐加封同平章事。
English: The Qinghai Festival made Liu Ying add the seal of nobility.

古文：壬辰，河东都押牙盖寓卒，遗书劝李克用省营缮，薄赋敛，求贤俊。
现代文：壬辰，河东都押牙盖寓死，遗书劝李克用减少营建工程，减轻赋税，征求贤才。
English: In Imjin and Hedong, Li Ke was advised to reduce construction projects, reduce taxes, and solicit talents.

古文：夏，四月，庚子，有彗星出西北。
现代文：夏季，四月庚子，有彗星从西北方出现。
English: In the summer, in April, a comet appeared from the northwest.

古文：淮南将陶雅会衢、睦兵攻婺州，钱镠遣其弟镖将兵救之。
现代文：淮南将领陶雅会同衢州、睦州的军队攻打婺州，钱派遣他的弟弟钱镖率兵前去救援。
English: Tao Ya, the general of Huainan, will attack Ganzhou with the troops of Ganzhou and Mengzhou. Qian will send his brother Qiandar to lead the troops to the rescue.

古文：五月，礼院奏，皇帝登位应祀南郊，敕用十月甲午行之。
现代文：五月，礼院上奏，皇帝登位应该祭祀南郊；敕令在十月甲午举行。
English: In May, the Emperor's enthronement ceremony was performed in the ceremonial hall, and it was decided that the emperor should offer a sacrifice to the southern suburbs; the imperial edict was issued in the afternoon of October 1st.

古文：乙丑，彗星长竟天。
现代文：乙丑，彗星尾长贯穿天空。
English: Second, the comet's tail stretches across the sky.

古文：柳璨恃硃全忠之势，姿为威福。
现代文：柳璨仗恃朱全忠的势力，恣意作威作福。
English: The forces of Liu Bei and Zhu Quanzhong arbitrarily make threats and do good.

古文：会有星变，占者曰： 君臣俱灾，宜诛杀以应之。 
现代文：适逢有彗星出现，占卜的人说： 君臣都有灾祸，应该诛杀以应天意。 
English: When a comet appeared, the soothsayer said, "All princes and ministers are plagued by misfortune. They should fight and slay in accordance with the will of Heaven."

古文：璨因疏其素所不快者于全忠曰： 此曹皆聚徒横议，怨望腹非，宜以之塞灾异。 
现代文：柳璨因此向朱全忠上书列举他平日所不喜欢的人说： 这些人都聚集同伙横加议论，怨恨不满，应该拿他们遏止灾祸。 
English: Therefore, Liu Bei wrote to Zhu Quanzhong, listing the people he disliked on a daily basis, saying, "These people have gathered together with their comrades to argue and express their resentment and dissatisfaction. We should use them to stop the disaster."

古文：李振亦言于硃全忠曰： 朝廷所以不理，良由衣冠浮薄之徒紊乱纲纪；且王欲图大事，此曹皆朝廷之难制者也，不若尽去之。 
现代文：李振也对朱全忠说： 朝政不能治理的缘故，确实是由于官员中的轻浮浅薄之徙紊乱法纪；况且大王想要图谋大事，这些人都是朝廷中难于制服的人，不如全部除去他们。 
English: Li Zhen also said to Zhu Quanzhong: The reason why the imperial government cannot be governed is indeed due to the frivolity and superficiality of officials and the disorder of law and order; moreover, the great king wants to plot big things, these people are difficult to subdue in the imperial court, it is better to remove them all.

古文：全忠以为然。
现代文：朱全忠以为是这样。
English: Zhu Quanzhong thought so.

古文：癸酉，贬独孤损为棣州刺史，裴枢为登州刺史，崔远为莱州刺史。
现代文：癸丑，贬独孤损为棣州刺史，裴枢为登州刺史，崔远为莱州刺史。
English: Zou Yuxiu, Guan Yuanzhao is the history of Zhangzhou, Peizhu is the history of Dengzhou, and Cui Yuan is the history of Laizhou.

古文：乙亥，贬吏部尚书陆扆为濮州司户，工部尚书王溥为淄州司户。
现代文：乙亥，贬吏部尚书陆为濮州司户，工部尚书王溥为淄州司户。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Shang Shulun from the Ministry of Civil Affairs became the governor of Gansu Province, and Shang Shulun Wang Xi from the Ministry of Industry became the governor of Gansu Province.

古文：庚辰，贬太子太保致仕赵崇为曹州司户，兵部侍郎王赞为潍州司户。
现代文：庚辰，贬以太子太保退休的赵崇为曹州司户，兵部侍郎王赞为潍州司户。
English: Geng Chen demoted Zhao Chong, who had retired as the eunuch of the eunuch, to the position of the secretary of Caozhou, and the attendant of the military department, Wang Zan, to the position of the secretary of Zhangzhou.

古文：自馀或门胄高华，或科第自进，居三省台阁，以名检自处，声迹稍著者，皆指以为浮薄，贬逐无虚日，搢绅为之一空。
现代文：其余或者豪门贵胄，或者科举及第，在三省台阁任职，以名节自居，声誉政迹稍为显著的人，都被指为轻浮浅薄，贬官驱逐连日不断，朝中官员为之一空。
English: The rest, either high-ranking noblemen, or members of the Science Education Committee and the Third, who served in the cabinet of the three provinces, and considered themselves to be famous, and whose reputation and achievements were slightly remarkable, were all accused of being frivolous and shallow, and the demotion and expulsion of officials continued day after day, and the officials of the DPRK and China were empty.

古文：辛巳，再贬裴枢为泷州司户，独孤损为琼州司户，崔远为白州司户。
现代文：辛巳，又贬裴枢为泷州司户，独孤损为琼州司户，崔远为白州司户。
English: At the same time, Baizhu was demoted to the position of the governor of Zhangzhou, Duolong to the position of the governor of Qiongzhou, and Cui Yuan to the position of the governor of Baizhou.

古文：甲申，忠义节度使赵匡凝遣使修好于王建。
现代文：甲申，忠义节度使赵匡凝派遣使者与王建和好。
English: Jiashen, the festival of loyalty made Zhao Kuangning send an envoy to make peace with Wang Jian.

古文：六月，戊子朔，敕裴枢、独孤损、崔远、陆扆、王溥、赵崇、王赞等并所在赐自尽。
现代文：六月戊子朔，敕令裴枢、独孤损、崔远、陆、王溥、赵崇、王赞等同时在当地赐令自杀。
English: In June, Wu Zishuo ordered Baizhu, Du Yuanzhao, Cui Yuan, Lu, Wang Hui, Zhao Chong, Wang Zan and others to commit suicide at the same time.

古文：时全忠聚枢等及朝士贬官者三十余人于白马驿，一夕尽杀之，投尸于河。
现代文：当时朱全忠把裴枢等人及被贬斥的朝中官员三十余人聚集在滑州白马驿，一个晚上把他们全部杀死，将尸体抛入黄河。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong gathered Baizhu and others, as well as more than 30 disparaged officials of the DPRK and China, in Baimao, Nanzhou, killed them all in one night, and threw their bodies into the Yellow River.

古文：初，李振屡举进士，竟不中第，故深疾搢绅之士，言于全忠曰： 此辈常自谓清流，宜投之黄河，使为浊流！ 
现代文：起初，李振屡次参加进士考试，结果不中，所以很嫉妒科举出身的官员，对朱全忠说： 这些人常自称为清流，应该把他们投入黄河，使他们成为浊流！ 
English: At first, Li Zhen repeatedly took the entrance examination, but the results were not good, so he was very jealous of the officials who came from the imperial examination, and said to Zhu Quanzhong: These people often call themselves a clear stream, they should be thrown into the Yellow River to make them a turbulent stream!

古文：全忠笑而从之。
现代文：朱全忠笑着依从了李振。
English: Zhu Quanzhong smiled and obeyed Li Zhen.

古文：振每自汴至洛，朝廷必有窜逐者，时人谓之鸱枭。
现代文：李振每次从汴州到洛阳，朝廷一定有被放逐的官员，当时人称他为猫头鹰。
English: Every time Li Zhen went from Zhangzhou to Luoyang, the imperial court must have exiled officials. At that time, people called him an owl.

古文：见朝士皆颐指气使，旁若无人。
现代文：每见朝中的官员，都是颐指气使，旁若无人。
English: Every time I see an official from the government or the central government, they are doing their bidding, as if no one is watching.

古文：全忠尝与僚佐及游客坐于大柳之下，全忠独言曰： 此木宜为车毂。 
现代文：朱全忠曾经与属官及游客坐在大柳树下面，朱全忠自言自语地说： 这株柳树适宜于做车毂。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong once sat under a big willow tree with his subordinate officials and tourists. Zhu Quanzhong said to himself: This willow tree is suitable for making chariots.

古文：众莫应。
现代文：属官没有响应。
English: The officials did not respond.

古文：有游客数人起应曰： 宜为车毂。 
现代文：有几个游客起身响应说： 适宜做车毂。 
English: Several tourists stood up and said in response, "It's a good time to be a rickshaw puller."

古文：全忠勃然厉声曰： 书生辈好顺口玩人，皆此类也！ 
现代文：朱全忠勃然大怒，声音严厉地说： 书生之辈喜好顺口附和以玩弄人，都像这样！
English: Zhu Quanzhong flew into a rage and said sternly in a loud voice, "This is what it's like for the generation of students who like to play tricks on others!

古文：车毂须用夹榆，柳木岂可为之！ 
现代文：车毂必须用榆木制作，柳木岂能制作！ 
English: The chariot wheels must be made of birch, not willow!

古文：顾左右曰： 尚何待！ 
现代文：环视左右的人说： 还等待什么！ 
English: People looking around say: What are we waiting for?

古文：左右数十人捽言 宜为车毂 者，悉扑杀之。
现代文：左右数十人，拉出说 适宜做车毂 的游客全部打死。
English: Dozens of people were killed, including all of the tourists who were pulled out and told that they were suitable to be chariots.

古文：己丑，司空致仕裴贽贬青州司户，寻赐死。
现代文：已丑，辞官家居的司空裴贽，被贬为青州司户，不久赐死。
English: He was already ugly, so he was demoted to the position of the head of the household in Qingzhou. He died soon after.

古文：柳璨馀怒所注，犹不啻十数，张文蔚力解之，乃止。
现代文：柳璨余怒所注视的人，还不止数十人，张文蔚尽力排解，才停止。
English: There were more than dozens of people watching Liu Yuxuan, and Zhang Wenwei tried her best to resolve the situation before stopping.

古文：时士大夫避乱，多不入朝。
现代文：当时士大夫躲避祸乱，多不到朝廷来。
English: At that time, Shidafu avoided the calamity and did not come to the imperial court.

古文：壬辰，敕所在州县督遣，无得稽留。
现代文：壬辰，敕令所在州县督催遣送他们到东都洛阳来，不得滞留。
English: In Imjin, the magistrate of the prefecture where the imperial edict was issued urged them to come to Luoyang, the eastern capital, and they were not allowed to stay.

古文：前司勋员外郎李延古，德裕之孙也，去官居平泉庄，诏下未至。戊申，责授卫尉寺主簿。
现代文：前司勋员外郎李延古是李德裕的孙子，离官住在河南府的平泉庄，诏令下达后没有到洛阳来，戊申责授卫尉寺主簿。
English: Li Yan Gu, the grandson of Li Deyu, the former Grand Master of the Order of the Garter, lived in Pingshuanzhuang, Henan Province, after his retirement. He did not come to Luoyang after the imperial edict was issued, but he was awarded the title of Grand Master of the Temple.

古文：秋，七月，癸亥，太子宾客致仕柳逊贬曹州司马。
现代文：秋季，七月癸亥，以太子宾客退休的柳逊被贬为曹州司马。
English: In the autumn, in July of the year of the boar, Liu Xun, who had retired as a guest of the Emperor, was relegated to the position of Caozhou Sima.

古文：庚午夜，天雄牙将李公佺与牙军谋乱，罗绍威觉之；公佺焚府舍，剽掠，奔沧州。
现代文：庚午夜里，天雄牙将李公与牙军谋划作乱，天雄节度使罗绍威察觉了他们的活动；李公焚烧节度使府舍，抢劫虏掠，逃奔沧州。
English: In the middle of the night, Tianxiong Jia led Li Gong and Jia's army to plan a riot. Tianxiong Jietu made Rossowe aware of their activities; Li Gong burned Jietu's residence, robbed and plundered, and fled to Cangzhou.

古文：八月，王建遣前山南西道节度使王宗贺等将兵，击昭信节度使冯行袭于金州。
现代文：八月，王建派遣前山南西道节度使王宗贺等率兵在金州攻击昭信节度使冯行袭。
English: In August, Wang Jian sent Wang Zonghe and other soldiers to attack Zhaoxin and Feng Xing in Jinzhou.

古文：硃全忠以赵匡凝东与杨行密交通，西与王建结婚，乙未，遣武宁节度使杨师厚将兵击之，己亥，全忠以大军继之。
现代文：朱全忠因为山南东道节度使赵匡凝东面与杨行密彼此相通，西面与王建结为婚姻，乙未，派遣武宁节度使杨师厚率军前去攻打他；已亥，朱全忠亲自统帅大军随后前进。
English: Zhu Quanzhong, because of Shannan's hosting of the festival, made Zhao Kuangcheng communicate closely with Yang Xinglong on the east side, and married Wang Jianjun on the west side, and sent Wu Ning Festival to make Yang Shihou lead the army to attack him; after that, Zhu Quanzhong personally commanded the army and then advanced.

古文：处州刺史卢约使其弟佶攻陷温州，张惠奔福州。
现代文：处州刺史卢约派遣他的弟弟卢佶攻下温州，张惠逃奔福州。
English: Wenzhou ruler Shiluo sent his younger brother Lu Yao to conquer Wenzhou, while Zhang Hui fled to Fuzhou.

古文：钱镠遣方永珍救婺州。
现代文：钱派遣方永珍救援婺州。
English: The money was sent by Yongzheng to rescue Zhangzhou.

古文：初，礼部员外郎知制诏司空图弃官居虞乡王官谷，昭宗屡征之，不起。
现代文：起初，礼部员外郎和制诰司空图放弃官职住在虞乡王官谷，唐昭宗屡次征召他，都不出来做官。
English: At first, Geiro, a member of the etiquette department, and Skytu, the keeper of the imperial edict, gave up their official posts and lived in Wangan Valley, Yue Township. Tang Zhaozong repeatedly conscripted him, but he did not come out to work as an official.

古文：柳璨以诏书征之，图惧，诣洛阳入见，阳为衰野，坠笏失仪。
现代文：柳璨用诏书征召他，司空图害怕，到洛阳入朝进见，假装是衰老粗野，朝芴掉落，丧失仪态。
English: Liu Bei conscripted him with an imperial edict, Su Kuangtu was afraid, went to Luoyang to see the emperor, pretended to be old and rude, fell down the stairs and lost his manners.

古文：璨乃复下诏，略曰： 既养高以傲代，类移山以钓名。 
现代文：柳璨于是又颁下诏书，大略说： 司空图既自命清高来轻蔑世人，却似扬言移山者沽名钓誉。 
English: Liu Bei then issued another edict, saying in broad terms: "Sikutu, who despised the world with his self-proclaimed loftiness, is like a man who threatens to move mountains in order to gain fame.

古文：又曰： 匪夷匪惠，难居公正之朝。可放还山。 
现代文：又说： 司空图不是伯夷，也不是柳下惠，难以在公平正直的朝廷里担任官职，可以放他回山。 
English: He also said, "Sikutu is neither a Boi nor a Liu Shitehui, and it is difficult for him to hold an official post in a fair and honest imperial court. He can be sent back to the mountains."

古文：图，临淮人也。
现代文：司空图是临淮人。
English: Sifu is a person from Linhuai.

古文：杨师厚攻下唐、邓、复、郢、随、均、房七州，硃全忠军于汉北。
现代文：杨师厚攻下唐、邓、复、郢、随、均、房七州，朱全忠驻扎在汉江北岸。
English: Yang Shihou conquered Tang, Deng, Fu, Zou, Sui, Chun, Fang and seven provinces, while Zhu Quanzhong was stationed on the north bank of the Han River.

古文：九月，辛酉，命师厚作浮梁于阴谷口，癸亥，引兵渡汉。
现代文：九月辛亥，朱全忠命令杨师厚在阴谷口作浮桥；癸亥，率兵渡过汉水。
English: In September of Xinhai, Zhu Quanzhong ordered Yang Shihou to build a pontoon bridge at the mouth of the Yin Valley; in Xinhai, he led his soldiers across the Han River.

古文：甲子，赵匡凝将兵二万陈于汉滨，师厚与战，大破之，遂傅其城下。
现代文：甲子，赵匡凝率领二万军队在汉水边上列阵，杨师厚与他作战，把他打得大败，于是逼近襄阳城下。
English: A son, Zhao Kuangge, led twenty thousand troops to line up on the edge of the Han River. Yang Shihou fought with him, defeated him, and then approached the city of Xiangyang.

古文：是夕，匡凝焚府城，帅其族及麾下士沿汉奔广陵。
现代文：当天晚上，赵匡凝焚烧府城襄阳，率领他的族人及部下将士沿汉水逃奔广陵。
English: In the evening of the same day, Zhao Kuangge burned the prefectural capital Xiangyang, and led his people and subordinates to flee Guangling along the Han River.

古文：乙丑，师厚入襄阳；丙寓，全忠继至。
现代文：乙丑，杨师厚进入襄阳；丙寅，朱全忠跟着到达。
English: Second Ugly, Yang Shihou entered Xiangyang; Cui Yin, Zhu Quanzhong followed.

古文：匡凝至广陵，杨行密戏之曰： 君在镇，岁以金帛输硃全忠，今败，乃归我乎？ 
现代文：赵匡凝到达广陵，杨行密跟他开玩笑说： 您在藩镇，每年用金帛进纳给朱全忠，现在败了，这才归顺我吗？ 
English: When Zhao Kuangning arrived at Guangling, Yang Xingmi jokingly said to him, "You are in the hanzhong, and every year you use gold ingots to pay tribute to Zhu Quanzhong. Now that you have been defeated, will you submit to me?

古文：匡凝曰： 诸侯事天子，岁输贡赋乃其职也，岂输贼乎！
现代文：赵匡凝说： 诸侯为天子做事，每年缴纳赋税是他的职分，哪里是缴纳给贼人朱全忠呢！
English: Zhao Kuangning said: Princes do things for the Son of Heaven, paying taxes every year is his duty, where is the payment to the thief Zhu Quanzhong!

古文：今日归公，正以不从贼故耳。
现代文：今天归顺您，正是因为不从贼人的缘故。 
English: I submit to you today precisely because I do not follow a thief.

古文：毙忻芎裼鲋酳＊鸀偁封皇弟禔为颍王，祐为蔡王。
现代文：杨行密厚待他。丙寅，敕封皇弟李为颍王，李为蔡王。
English: Yang Xing treated him generously. Cui Yin, the younger brother of Emperor Xianfeng, took Li as the King of Xing, and Li as the King of Cai.

古文：丁卯，荆南节度使赵匡明帅众二万，弃城奔成都。
现代文：丁卯，荆南节度使赵匡明率领二万军队放弃江陵城投奔成都。
English: The Dingwu and Jingnan festivals caused Zhao Kuangming to lead 20,000 troops to abandon Jiangling City and rush to Chengdu.

古文：戊辰，硃全忠以杨师厚为山南东道留后，引兵击江陵。至乐乡，荆南牙将王建武遣使迎降。
现代文：戊辰，朱全忠以杨师厚为山南东道留后，率兵进攻江陵；到达乐乡，荆南牙将王建武派遣使者迎接投降。
English: After staying in Shannan with Yang Shihou as his host, Zhu Quanzhong led his troops to attack Jiangling in the Wu Dynasty. When they arrived at Le Township, Jing Nan Ya sent an envoy to Wang Jianwu to accept the surrender.

古文：全忠以都将贺瑰为荆南留后。
现代文：朱全忠任命都将贺为荆南留后。
English: Zhu Quanzhong appointed He as the successor of Jingnan.

古文：全忠寻表师厚为山南东道节度使。
现代文：不久，朱全忠上表奏请任命杨师厚为山南东道节度使。
English: Soon after, Zhu Quanzhong asked Yang Shihou to be appointed as the host of the festival in Shannan.

古文：王宗贺等攻冯行袭，所向皆捷。
现代文：王宗贺等进攻冯行袭，打到哪里都取得胜利。
English: Wang Zonghe and other offensive Feng Xing attacked, and achieved victory everywhere.

古文：丙子行袭弃金州，奔均州。
现代文：丙子，冯行袭放弃金州，逃奔均州。
English: He Zi and Feng Xingyan abandoned Jinzhou and fled to Junzhou.

古文：其将全师朗以城降。
现代文：他的部将全师朗献城投降。
English: His division surrendered the whole division to Lang Xiancheng.

古文：王建更师朗姓名曰王宗朗，补金州观察使，割渠、巴、开三州以隶之。
现代文：王建将全师朗姓名改作王宗朗，补授金州观察使、分割渠、巴、开三州归他管辖。
English: Wang Jian changed the name of the entire Shilang to Wang Zonglang, and added the observation of Jinzhou, the division of the canal, and the three states of Ba and Kai under his jurisdiction.

古文：乙酉，诏更用十一月癸酉亲郊。
现代文：乙酉，诏令改用十一月癸酉亲自举行郊祀。
English: According to the imperial edict, the suburb worship was held in November instead of January.

古文：淮南将陶雅、陈璋拔婺州，执刺史沈夏以归。
现代文：淮南将领陶雅、陈璋夺取婺州，活捉刺史沈夏而回。
English: The Huainan generals Tao Ya and Chen Qi captured Zhangzhou, and captured the assassin Shen Xia alive.

古文：杨行密以雅为江南都招讨使，歙、婺、衢、睦观察使，以璋为衢、婺副招讨使。
现代文：杨行密任命陶雅为江南都招讨使，歙、婺、衢、睦观察使；任命陈璋为衢、婺副招讨使。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Tao Ya as the south of the Yangtze River to invite the envoys, and the envoys of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation of the observation.

古文：璋攻暨阳，两浙将方习败之。
现代文：陈璋攻打暨阳，两浙将领方习把他打败。
English: Chen Xi attacked and defeated Ji Yang, and the two Zhejiang generals, Fang Xi, defeated him.

古文：习进攻婺州。
现代文：方习进攻婺州。
English: Fang Xi attacked Zhangzhou.

古文：濠州团练使刘金卒，杨行密以金子仁规知濠州。
现代文：濠州团练使刘金去世，杨行密任命刘金的儿子刘仁规主持濠州事务。
English: After the death of Liu Jin in the Bozhou Rehearsal, Yang Xingmi appointed Liu Jin's son, Liu Rengui, to preside over the affairs of Bozhou.

古文：杨行密长子宣州观察使渥，素无令誉，军府轻之。
现代文：杨行密的长子宣州观察使杨渥，向来没有好名声，节度使府的人都轻视他。
English: Yang Wou, the eldest son of Yang Xingmi, has never had a good reputation, and people in the capital despise him.

古文：行密寝疾，命节度判官周隐召渥。
现代文：杨行密卧病，派遣节度判官周隐前去召回杨渥。
English: Yang Xing was seriously ill and sent the festival judge Zhou Ying to summon Yang Wou.

古文：隐性憃直，对曰： 宣州司徒轻易信谗，喜击球饮酒，非保家之主。馀子皆幼，未能驾驭诸将。
现代文：周隐为人愚直，回答说： 宣州司徒杨渥轻易听信谗言，喜好击球饮酒，不是保家的主人，其余的儿子都幼小，不能控制各位将领。
English: Zhou Ying, a man of straightforwardness, replied, "Xuanzhou's Szeto Yang Wo, who easily listens to advice, likes batting and drinking, is not the master of the family, and the rest of his sons are young and cannot control the generals.

古文：庐州刺史刘威，从王起细微，必不负王，不若使之权领军府，俟诸子长以授之。 
现代文：庐州刺史刘威，跟随您从低贱时兴起，一定不辜负您，不如让他暂时代领军府事务，等到诸子长大再传授给他们。 
English: Liu Wei, the statesman of Zhangzhou, who rose from humble beginnings to follow you, will surely live up to you. It would be better to let him temporarily lead the affairs of the military government, and then pass it on to his children when they grow up.

古文：行密不应。
现代文：杨行密不应声。
English: Yang Xingmi snapped.

古文：左右牙指挥使徐温、张颢言于行密曰： 王平生出万死，冒矢石，为子孙立基业，安可使他人有之！ 
现代文：左右牙指挥使徐温、张颢对杨行密说： 您一生出万死，冒箭石，为子孙建立基业，怎么能让别人占有它呢！ 
English: The commander of the left and right teeth told Xu Wen and Zhang Xuan to Yang Xingmi: You have worked hard all your life to build a foundation for your children and grandchildren, how can you let others occupy it!

古文：行密曰： 吾死瞑目矣！ 
现代文：杨行密说： 我死也瞑目了。 
English: Yang Xingmi said, "I'm ready to die.

古文：隐，舒州人也。
现代文：周隐是舒州人。
English: Zhou Ying is from Shuzhou.

古文：他日，将佐问疾，行密目留幕僚严可求。众出，可求曰： 王若不讳，如军府何？ 
现代文：某一天，将领、佐官探问病情，杨行密用眼睛示意幕僚严可求留下来；众人出去后，严可求说： 您如果有不测，军府怎么办？ 
English: One day, when the generals and admirals inquired about his condition, Yang Xingmi used his eyes to indicate that the staff officers could ask Yan to stay. After everyone left, Yan could ask: "If something happens to you, what will the military do?"

古文：行密曰： 吾命周隐召渥，今忍死待之。 
现代文：杨行密说： 我命周隐前去召回杨渥，现在苟延残喘等待他。 
English: Yang Xingmi said, "I went to summon Yang Wou every week for the rest of my life, and now I am waiting for him with bated breath."

古文：可求与徐温诣隐，隐未出见，牒犹在案上，可求即与温取牒，遣使者如宣州召之。
现代文：严可求与徐温到周隐处，周隐没有出来见面，牒文还在桌子上，严可求就与徐温取了牒文，派遣使者前往宣州召回杨渥。
English: Yan Kegui and Xu Wen went to Zhou Ying's place, Zhou Ying did not come out to meet, the ultimatum was still on the table, Yan Kegui took the ultimatum with Xu Wen and sent an envoy to Xuanzhou to recall Yang Wou.

古文：可求，同州人也。
现代文：严可求是同州人。
English: Strictly speaking, they should be from the same state.

古文：行密以润州团练使王茂章为宣州观察使。
现代文：杨行密任命润州团练使王茂章为宣州观察使。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Wang Maozhang, the Rongzhou Group Training Envoy, as the Xuanzhou Observation Envoy.

古文：冬，十月，丙戌朔，以硃全忠为诸道兵马元帅，别开幕府。
现代文：冬季，十月丙戌朔，朝廷任命朱全忠为诸道兵马元帅，另外开设元帅府。
English: In the winter, in October, the imperial court appointed Zhu Quanzhong as marshal of the armies and horses of all provinces, and opened a marshal's office.

古文：是日，全忠部署将士，将归大梁，忽变计，欲乘胜击淮南。
现代文：这一天，朱全忠部署将士，将要返回大梁，忽然改变计划，想要乘胜进攻淮南。
English: On this day, Zhu Quanzhong deployed soldiers and was about to return to the girders, but suddenly changed his plan and wanted to take advantage of the victory to attack Huainan.

古文：敬翔谏曰： 今出师未逾月，平两大镇，辟地数千里，远近闻之，莫不震慑。
现代文：敬翔直言劝说道； 现在出兵不到一月，平定荆州、襄阳两大藩镇，开辟疆域数千里，远近听到这事，没有不震惊的。
English: It has been less than a month since the troops were dispatched, the two major towns of Jingzhou and Xiangyang have been pacified, and thousands of miles of territory have been opened up. Hearing this from far and wide, no one is not shocked.

古文：不听。改昭信军为戎昭军。
现代文：这个威望值得珍惜，不如暂且回去，停止战争，等待时机行动。 
English: This prestige is worth cherishing. It is better to go back for the time being, stop the war, and wait for the right time to act.

古文：仍割均州隶之。
现代文：朱全忠不听。朝廷改昭信军为戎昭军。
English: Zhu Quanzhong did not listen. The imperial court changed the Shosho army to the Eunsho army.

古文：辛卯，硃全忠发襄州。壬辰，至枣阳，遇大雨。
现代文：辛卯，朱全忠自襄州出发；壬辰到达枣阳，遇到大雨。
English: Xinwu, Zhu Quanzhong departed from Xiangzhou; Renchen arrived in Zaoyang and encountered heavy rain.

古文：自申州抵光州，道险狭涂潦，人马疲乏，士卒尚未冬服，多逃亡。
现代文：自申州到光州，道路崎岖狭窄，满是烂泥积水，人马疲乏，士卒还没有冬衣，多数逃跑了。
English: From Shinshu to Gwangju, the road was narrow and bumpy, full of mud and standing water, the men and horses were tired, the soldiers did not have winter coats, and most of them ran away.

古文：全忠使人谓光州刺史柴再用曰： 下，我以汝为蔡州刺史；不下，且屠城！ 
现代文：全忠派人对光州刺史柴再用说： 献城归降，我任命你为蔡州刺史；不献城归降，将要屠杀全城人！ 
English: The loyalists said to the people of Gwangju: Surrender the city and I will appoint you as the governor of Gwangju; if you do not surrender the city, I will massacre the entire city!

古文：再用严设守备，戎服登城，见全忠，拜伏甚恭，曰： 光州城小兵弱，不足以辱王之威怒。
现代文：柴再用严加防守戒备，披甲登城，看见朱全忠，拜伏在地，非常恭敬，说： 光州城小兵弱，不值得惹大王动威发怒。
English: Chai then put on a strict defensive alert, put on armor and went to the city, saw Zhu Quanzhong, bowed to the ground, very respectful, said: Gwangju city is weak, it is not worth provoking the great king to anger.

古文：王苟先下寿州，敢不从命。 
现代文：大王如果先攻克寿州，岂敢不听从命令。 
English: If the great king conquers Shoushou first, he will not dare to disobey the order.

古文：全忠留其城东旬日而去。
现代文：朱全忠在光州城东留驻十天，就走了。
English: Zhu Quanzhong stayed in the east of Gwangju for ten days and then left.

古文：起居郎苏楷，礼部尚书循之子也，素无才行，乾宁中登进士第，昭宗覆试黜之，仍永不听入科场。
现代文：起居郎苏楷是礼部尚书苏循的儿子，向来既无才能，又无品行，乾宁年间考中进士，昭宗复试将他贬斥，并且永远不准他再入科场考试。
English: Kijiro Sukai was the son of the head of the etiquette department, Shang Shuxu Suqun. He had neither talent nor moral character. During the Qianning era, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, but the Shozong re-examination rejected him, and he was never allowed to re-enter the science field examination.

古文：甲午，楷帅同列上言： 谥号美恶，臣子不得而私，先帝谥号多溢美，乞更详议。 
现代文：甲午，苏楷率领同僚奏言： 谥号美恶，臣子不能私定。先帝的谥号大多溢美之词，乞求再详细商议。 
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, Su Kai led his colleagues to make a report: "The nickname is good or bad, a courtier cannot decide privately. Most of the former emperor's nicknames are words of praise, begging for further detailed discussion."

古文：事下太常，丁酉，张廷范奏改谥恭灵庄愍孝皇帝，庙号襄宗，诏从之。
现代文：这件事下达太常去办，丁酉，张廷范奏请改昭宗谥号为恭灵庄愍孝皇帝，庙号为襄宗，诏令依从张廷范的建议。
English: This matter was ordered to be dealt with too often. Ding Xi and Zhang Tingfan requested that Zhaozong's posthumous name be changed to Emperor Gonglingzhuang and his temple name to Xiang Zong. The imperial edict followed Zhang Tingfan's suggestion.

古文：杨渥至广陵。
现代文：杨行密的长子宣州观察使杨渥到达广陵。
English: The eldest son of Yang Xingmi, Xuanzhou observation made Yang Wo reach Guangling.

古文：辛丑，杨行密承制以渥为淮南留后。
现代文：辛丑，杨行密承制任命杨渥为淮南留后。
English: After the appointment of Yang Wou as Huainan, Yang Xingxing secretly appointed Yang Wou as Huainan.

古文：戊申，硃全忠发光州，迷失道百馀里，又遇雨，比及寿州，寿人坚壁清野以待之。
现代文：戊申，朱全忠从光州出发，迷失道路一百余里，又遇雨，等到抵达寿州，寿州兵民已经坚壁清野来等待他。
English: Wushin, Zhu Quanzhong set out from Gwangju, lost his way for more than a hundred miles, and was caught in the rain. By the time he arrived in Shoushu, the soldiers and civilians of Shoushu had come to wait for him.

古文：全忠欲围之，无林木可为栅，乃退屯正阳。
现代文：朱全忠想要包围寿州城，但没有树木可以用来修建栅栏，于是退兵驻扎正阳。
English: Zhu Quanzhong wanted to encircle Shoushu City, but there were no trees that could be used to build a fence, so he withdrew and stationed in Zhengyang.

古文：癸丑，更名成德军曰武顺。
现代文：癸丑，朝廷将成德军改名为武顺。
English: As a result, the imperial court changed the name of Chengde Army to Wushun.

古文：十一月，丙辰，硃全忠渡淮而北，柴再用抄其后军，斩首三千级，获辎重万计。
现代文：十一月丙辰，朱全忠渡过淮河往北去，光州刺史柴再用绕道袭击他的后军，斩首三千级，获得器械粮草数以万计。
English: In November, Zhu Quanzhong crossed the Huai River to the north, and Gwangju Jinshi Chai attacked his rear army with a detour, beheading 3,000 troops and obtaining tens of thousands of equipment, grain and grass.

古文：全忠悔之，躁忿尤甚。
现代文：朱全忠后悔此行，暴躁发怒格外厉害。
English: Zhu Quanzhong regretted the trip and was extremely angry and irritable.

古文：丁卯，至大梁。
现代文：丁卯，朱全忠到达大梁。
English: On November 13th, we arrived in Dalian.

古文：先是，全忠急于传禅，密使蒋玄晖等谋之。
现代文：在这以前，朱全忠急于传位禅让称帝，密令蒋玄晖等商议筹划。
English: Before this, Zhu Quanzhong was in a hurry to pass on the title of emperor, and secretly ordered Chiang Xuan Pi and others to discuss and plan.

古文：玄晖与柳璨等议：以魏、晋以来皆先封大国，加九锡，殊礼，然后受禅，当次第行之。
现代文：蒋玄晖与柳璨等人商议：由于魏、晋以来，都是先封大国，加九锡之礼、特殊的礼遇，然后接受禅让，应当依次序进行。
English: Jiang Xuanqi and Liu Xuan and others discussed: Since Wei and Jin were the first countries to be conquered, it should be done in the following order: first, they should pay tribute and special courtesy, and then accept zen concessions.

古文：乃先除全忠诸道元帅，以示有渐，仍以刑部尚书裴迪为送宫告使，全忠大怒。
现代文：于是，先授给朱全忠诸道元帅，用以表示有先后次序，并以刑部尚书裴迪担任送官告使，朱全忠勃然大怒。
English: As a result, Zhu Quanzhong was first awarded the title of marshal of all the provinces, which was used to indicate that there was a priority order, and the Criminal Investigation Department's Shangshu Peidi served as the official courier. Zhu Quanzhong was furious.

古文：宣徽副使王殷、赵殷衡疾玄晖权宠，欲得其处，因谮之于全忠曰： 玄晖、璨等欲延唐祚，故逗遛其事以须变。 
现代文：宣徽副使王殷、赵殷衡嫉妒蒋玄晖专权受宠，想要得到他的位置，因此向朱全忠诬陷蒋玄晖说： 蒋玄晖、柳璨等想要延续唐室的宗脉，所以迟缓禅让的事来等待事变。 
English: Xuan Hui's deputy Wang Yin and Zhao Yin Heng were jealous of Jiang Xuan Yao's exclusive power and wanted to get his position, so they slandered Jiang Xuan Yao to Zhu Quanzhong, saying: Jiang Xuan Yao and Liu Yao wanted to continue the lineage of the Tang dynasty, so they delayed the transfer of power to wait for things to change.

古文：玄晖闻之惧，自至寿春，具言其状。
现代文：蒋玄晖听说后非常害怕，亲自到寿春，详细地说明这件事的情形。
English: After hearing this, Jiang Xuanyao was very scared and went to Shouchun to explain the situation in detail.

古文：全忠曰： 汝曹巧述闲事以沮我，借使我不受九锡，岂不能作天子邪！ 
现代文：朱全忠说： 你们巧言陈述无关紧要的事情来阻止我，假使我不受九锡之礼，难道不能做天子吗！ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong said, "You have cleverly stated unimportant things to stop me. If I don't accept Jiuxi's gift, can't I become a heavenly son?"

古文：玄晖曰： 唐祚已尽，天命归王，愚智皆知之。
现代文：蒋玄晖说： 唐室的气数已尽，天命归属大王，无论愚笨还是聪明的人都知道。
English: Jiang Xuanqi said, "The Tang Dynasty's energy is exhausted, and the destiny belongs to the great king. No matter how stupid or clever people are, they all know this.

古文：玄晖与柳璨等非敢有背德，但以今兹晋、燕、岐、蜀皆吾勍敌，王遽受禅，彼心未服，不可不曲尽义理，然后取之，欲为王创万代之业耳。 
现代文：玄晖与柳璨等不敢违背恩德，但由于现在晋、燕、岐、蜀都是我们的劲敌，大王突然接受禅让帝位，他们心里不服，不能不设法尽理尽义，然后取得帝位，这只想为大王创建万代基业罢了。 
English: Xuanzang and Liu Bei did not dare to violate the Ende, but since Jin, Yan, Qi, and Shu are now our fierce enemies, the great king suddenly accepted the throne of Zenzang. They were not satisfied with their hearts, and they could not help but try to do everything right and then obtain the throne. This was just to create a universal inheritance for the great king.

古文：全忠叱之曰： 奴果反矣！ 
现代文：朱全忠大声责骂他说： 奴才果然反了！ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong scolded him loudly and said, "The slave has indeed turned against me!"

古文：玄晖惶遽辞归，与璨议行九锡。
现代文：蒋玄晖惊惧立即告辞回洛阳，与柳璨商议行九锡之礼。
English: Jiang Xuanqi was alarmed and immediately left for Luoyang, where he discussed with Liu Bei how to perform the nine-syllable salute.

古文：时天子将郊祀，百官既习仪，裴迪自大梁还，言全忠怒曰： 柳璨、蒋玄晖等欲延唐祚，乃郊天也。 
现代文：当时，唐昭宣帝将要举行祭天祀典，百官已经练习礼仪，裴迪从大梁回到洛阳，传达朱全忠生气时说的话： 柳璨、蒋玄晖等想要延长唐室的福运，才郊祀祭天。 
English: At that time, Emperor Zhaoxuan of the Tang Dynasty was about to hold a ceremony of sacrificing to the gods, and the officials had already practiced the etiquette. Paddy returned to Luoyang from Daliang to convey Zhu Quanzhong's angry words: Liu Bei, Jiang Xuanzhong and others wanted to prolong the good fortune of the Tang Dynasty, so they worshiped the gods in the suburbs.

古文：璨等惧，庚午，敕改用来年正月上辛。殷衡本姓孔名循，为全忠家乳母养子，故冒姓赵，后渐贵，复其姓名。
现代文：柳璨等惧怕，庚午敕令改用来年正月上旬的辛日，赵殷衡本来姓孔名循，是朱全忠家奶妈的养子，所以冒充姓赵，后来渐渐显贵，恢复原来姓名。
English: Liu Yao and others were afraid, and the Geng afternoon edict was changed to the bitter day of the first half of the first month of the year. Zhao Yinheng was originally surnamed Kong Nanzhu and was the adopted son of Zhu Quanzhong's wet nurse, so he pretended to be surnamed Zhao. Later, he gradually showed his nobility and restored his original name.

古文：壬申，赵匡明至成都，王建以客礼遇之。
现代文：壬申，赵匡明到成都，王建用客礼招待他。
English: In Jinshin, Zhao Kuangming went to Chengdu, and Wang Jian invited him with a courtesy call.

古文：昭宗之丧，朝廷遣告哀使司马卿宣谕王建，至是始入蜀境。
现代文：唐昭宗发丧，朝廷派遣哀使司马卿前往成都宣谕王建，到这时才进入蜀境。
English: When Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty died, the imperial court sent a mourning envoy, Sima Qing, to Chengdu to preach to Wang Jian. It was only then that they entered Shu territory.

古文：西川掌书记韦庄为建谋，使武定节度使王宗绾谕卿曰： 蜀之将士，世受唐恩，去岁闻乘舆东迁，凡上二十表，皆不报。
现代文：西川掌书记韦庄替王建谋划，派武定节度使王宗绾告诉司马卿说： 蜀地将士，世受唐室恩惠，去年听说皇上东迁洛阳，共上二十表，都没有回答。
English: Wei Zhuang, the secretary of the Nishikawa Shoshu, planned for Wang Jian and sent the military to set the date of the festival so that Wang Zongya could tell Sima Ching: "Shu Di soldiers, who have been favored by the Tang Dynasty, heard last year that the emperor had moved to Luoyang, a total of twenty tables, but they did not answer.

古文：寻有亡卒自汴来，闻先帝已罹硃全忠弑逆。
现代文：不久有逃跑的兵卒从汴州前来，听说先帝已经遭朱全忠杀害。
English: Soon, some soldiers who had escaped came from Zhangzhou and heard that the former emperor had been killed by Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：蜀之将士方日夕枕戈，思为先帝报仇。
现代文：全蜀将士正在日夜枕戈以待，想为先帝报仇。
English: All the generals of Shu are lying in wait day and night, wanting to avenge the former emperor.

古文：不知今兹使来以何事宣谕？
现代文：不知道现在使者前来宣谕什么事？
English: I don't know what the envoys are coming to announce now.

古文：舍人宜自图进退。 
现代文：舍人您应该自己考虑去留。 
English: However, you should consider staying on your own.

古文：卿乃还。
现代文：司马卿于是回洛阳。
English: Sima then returned to Luoyang.

古文：庚辰，吴武忠王杨行密薨，将佐共请宣谕使李俨承制授杨渥淮南节度使、东南诸道行营都统，兼侍中、弘农郡王。
现代文：庚辰，吴武忠王杨行密病逝。淮南将佐共同请求宣谕使李俨承制任命杨渥为淮南节度使、东南诸道行营都统，兼侍中、弘农郡王。
English: Geng Chen and Wu Wuzhong's king Yang Xingmi died of illness. Huainan generals jointly requested the proclamation to appoint Yang Wo as Huainan's festival envoy, southeastern provinces' commander-in-chief, chamberlain, and Hongnong County's king.

古文：柳璨、蒋玄晖等议加硃全忠九锡，朝士多窃怀愤邑，礼部尚书苏循独扬言曰： 梁王功业显大，历数有归，朝廷速宜揖让。 
现代文：柳璨、蒋玄晖等商议加朱全忠九锡之礼，朝中官吏多数心怀愤恨，唯独礼部尚书苏循扬言说： 梁王功业显赫盛大，天道所归，朝廷应该迅速把帝位让给梁王。 
English: Liu Bei, Jiang Xuanqi and others discussed adding Zhu Quanzhong and Jiuxi to the ceremony, and most of the officials in the imperial court harbored resentment. However, the ceremonial department Shang Shuxu Xuan threatened to say: King Liang's achievements are outstanding and magnificent, and the imperial court should quickly cede the throne to King Liang.

古文：朝士无敢违者。
现代文：朝中官吏没有敢违抗的。
English: None of the officials in the imperial court dared to disobey.

古文：辛巳，以全忠为相国，总百揆。以宣武、宣义、天平、护国、天雄、武顺、佑国、河阳、义武、昭义、保义、戎昭、武定、泰宁、平庐、忠武、匡国、镇国、武宁、忠义、荆南等二十一道为魏国，进封魏王，仍加九锡。
现代文：辛巳，任命朱全忠为相国，总理一切事务；以宣武、宣义、天平、护国、天雄、武顺、佑国、河阳、义武、昭义、保义、戎昭、武定、泰宁、平卢、忠武、匡国、镇国、武宁、忠义、荆南等二十一道为魏国，进封魏王，并加九锡之礼。
English: Xin Mi, appointed Zhu Quanzhong as a relative of the country, the prime minister of all affairs; with twenty-one such as Xuanwu, Xuanyi, Tianping, Guo Guo, Tianxiong, Wu Shun, You Guo, Heyang, Yiwu, Zhao Yi, Baoyi, Rong Zhao, Wuding, Taining, Pinglu, Zhongwu, Kuang Guo, Zhen Guo, Wu Ning, Zhongyi, and Jingnan as Wei Guo, he was awarded the title of Wei King, and was given the honor of Jiuxi.

古文：全忠怒其稽缓，让不受。
现代文：朱全忠怨恨他们迟缓，辞让不接受。
English: Zhu Quanzhong resented their tardiness and did not accept their resignation.

古文：十二月，戊子，命枢密使蒋玄晖赍手诏诣全忠谕指。
现代文：十二月戊子，派枢密使蒋玄晖捧着亲笔诏书到朱全忠处宣旨。
English: In December, Wu Zi sent a confidential envoy, Jiang Xuanqi, with an imperial edict in his own handwriting to Zhu Quanzhong to issue the edict.

古文：癸巳，玄晖自大梁还，言全忠怒不解。
现代文：癸巳，蒋玄晖自大梁回到洛阳，说朱全忠的怒气没有消解。
English: Soon after, Jiang Xuanzhang returned to Luoyang from Daliang, saying that Zhu Quanzhong's anger had not dissipated.

古文：甲午，柳璨奏称： 人望归梁王，陛下释重负，今其时也。 
现代文：甲午，柳璨奏称： 众望归向梁王，陛下放弃沉重的负担，现在正是时候。 
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Liu Yuxiao said: The hopes of the public are turning to King Liang, and it is time for His Majesty to give up the heavy burden.

古文：即日遣璨诣大梁达传禅之意，全忠拒之。
现代文：当天，派遣柳璨前往大梁传达禅让帝位的意思，朱全忠拒绝接受。
English: On the same day, Zhu Quanzhong sent Liu Ye to Daliang to convey the meaning of "Zen lets the throne," but he refused to accept it.

古文：初，璨陷害朝士过多，全忠亦恶之。
现代文：当初，柳璨陷害朝中官吏过多，朱全忠也厌恶他。
English: At first, there were too many officials in the North Korean government who were framed by Liu Xuan, and Zhu Quanzhong also detested him.

古文：璨与蒋玄晖、张廷范朝夕宴聚，深相结，为全忠谋禅代事。
现代文：柳璨与蒋玄晖、张廷范日夜饮宴聚会，深相交结，替朱全忠谋划禅让帝位的事。
English: Liu Bei and Jiang Xuanqi and Zhang Tingfan had a day and night drinking party, and they were deeply intertwined, plotting for Zhu Quanzhong to abdicate the throne.

古文：何太后泣遣宫人阿秋、阿虔达意玄晖，语以他日传禅之后，求子母生全。
现代文：何太后哭着派遣宫人阿虔、阿秋向蒋玄晖转达意愿，说他日禅让帝位之后，请求保全母子活命。
English: The Empress Dowager He sent the courtiers Aqen and Aqiu to Jiang Xuanqin in tears to convey her wishes, saying that after he abdicated the throne, he asked to keep his mother and son alive.

古文：王殷、赵殷衡谮玄晖，云 与柳璨、张廷范于积善宫夜宴，对太后焚香为誓，期兴复唐祚。 
现代文：王殷、赵殷衡诬陷蒋玄晖，说他 与柳璨、张廷范在积善宫夜宴，对着何太后焚香发誓，约定兴复唐室帝位 。
English: Wang Yin and Zhao Yinheng framed Jiang Xuanqi, saying that he and Liu Bei and Zhang Tingfan had a banquet at the Jie Zhen Palace, swore to burn incense to the Empress Dowager He, and agreed to restore the throne of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：全忠信之，乙未，收玄晖及丰德库使应顼、御厨使硃建武系河南狱；以王殷权知枢密，赵殷衡权判宣徽院事。
现代文：朱全忠相信他们的话，乙未，逮捕蒋玄晖及丰德库使应顼、御厨使朱建武关押在河南府监狱；任命王殷暂时主持枢密院，赵殷衡暂时署理宣徽院事务。
English: Zhu Quanzhong believed their words, and arrested Jiang Xuanzhang, Feng Deku Envoy Ying Zhou, and Gu Gu Envoy Zhu Jianwu, and detained them in Henan Provincial Prison; appointed Wang Yin to temporarily preside over the Privy Council, and Zhao Yin Heng to temporarily take over the affairs of the Xuanhui Court.

古文：全忠三表辞魏王、九锡之命。
现代文：朱全忠三次上表辞让关于魏、九锡的诏命。
English: Zhu Quanzhong issued the imperial edict of letting Wei and Jiuxi win three times.

古文：丁酉，诏许之，更以为天下兵马元帅，然全忠已修大梁府舍为宫阙矣。
现代文：丁酉，颁诏允准朱全忠的辞让，再任命他为天下兵马元帅，然而朱全忠已经改修大梁府舍为宫殿了。
English: Ding Xi, issued an edict to grant Zhu Quanzhong's resignation, and then appointed him as the world's marshal of soldiers and horses. However, Zhu Quanzhong had already renovated the Dairang Mansion into a palace.

古文：是日，斩蒋玄晖，杖杀应顼、硃建武。
现代文：这一天，斩蒋玄晖，仗杀应顼、朱建武。
English: On this day, Jiang Xuanqin was beheaded, and Yingqin and Zhu Jianwu were killed.

古文：庚子，省枢密使及宣徽南院使，独置宣徽使一员，以王殷为之，赵殷衡为副使。
现代文：庚子，取消枢密使及宣徽南院使，只设宣徽使一员，任命王殷担任，赵殷衡任副使。
English: Geng Zi cancelled the envoy of the Privy Council and the envoy of the Southern Court of the State Council of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and only appointed one envoy of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, appointing Wang Yin as the envoy and Zhao Yinheng as the deputy envoy.

古文：辛丑，敕罢宫人宣传诏命及参随视朝。
现代文：辛丑，敕令停止宫人宣传诏命及参与朝会。
English: It was so ugly that the imperial edict ordered palace officials to stop promoting the imperial edict and participating in the imperial meeting.

古文：追削蒋玄晖为凶逆百姓，令河南揭尸于都门外，聚众焚之。
现代文：追革蒋玄晖官职为凶逆百姓，令河南府把蒋玄晖的尸体抬到都门外，聚众焚烧。
English: The Henan government was ordered to take the body of Jiang Xuanqian outside the capital and burn it.

古文：玄晖既死，王殷、赵殷衡又诬玄晖私侍何太后，令阿秋、阿虔通导往来。
现代文：蒋玄晖已经死了，王殷、赵殷衡又诬陷蒋玄晖与何太后私通，让宫人阿秋、阿虔通导往来。
English: Jiang Xuanqian was already dead, and Wang Yin and Zhao Yinheng falsely accused Jiang Xuanqian of having illicit relations with Empress Dowager He, and ordered the courtiers Ah Qiu and Ah Qian to mediate between them.

古文：己酉，全忠密令殷、殷衡害太后于积善宫，敕追废太后为庶人，阿秋、阿虔皆于殿前扑杀。
现代文：已酉，朱全忠密令王殷、赵殷衡在积善宫害死何太后，敕令追废何太后为平民，阿秋、阿虔都在殿前用刑仗打死。
English: After his death, Zhu Quanzhong ordered Wang Yin and Zhao Yinheng to kill the Empress Dowager He at the Jie Zhen Palace. The Empress Dowager He was declared a commoner, and both Aqiu and Aqian were beaten to death in front of the palace.

古文：庚戌，以皇太后丧，废朝三日。
现代文：庚戌，因为皇太后之丧，停朝三日。
English: Due to the death of the Empress Dowager, the Geng Zang parade was suspended for three days.

古文：辛亥，敕以宫禁内乱，罢来年正月上辛谒郊庙礼。
现代文：辛亥，颁布敕令，因为宫廷内乱，停止来年正月上辛南郊祭天祀典。
English: Xinhai, issued a royal decree, because of civil unrest in the court, to stop the next year's New Year's Day in the southern suburb of Shangxin.

古文：癸丑，守司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事柳璨贬登州刺史，太常卿张廷范贬莱州司户。
现代文：癸丑，守司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事柳璨被贬为登州刺史，太常卿张廷范被贬为莱州司户。
English: As a result of the scandal, Shou Jikku, who was also a subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhang Jizhiyu, was demoted to the position of the secretary of state, and Tai Changqing Zhang Tingfan was demoted to the position of the secretary of state of Laizhou.

古文：甲寅，斩璨于上东门外，车裂廷范于都市。
现代文：甲寅，将柳璨在上东门外斩首，在都中闹市车裂张廷范。
English: A Yin, beheaded Liu Ye outside the Shangdong Gate, and cracked Zhang Tingfan in the bustle of the city.

古文：璨临刑呼曰： 负国贼柳璨，死其宜矣！ 
现代文：柳璨临刑时大喊说： 负国贼子柳璨，死得应该呀！ 
English: At the time of his execution, Liu Yao shouted: "You traitor, Liu Yao, you deserve to die!

古文：西川将王宗朗不能守金州，焚其城邑，奔成都。
现代文：西川将领王宗朗不能守卫金州，便焚毁城邑，逃奔成都。
English: Wang Zonglang, the general of the West River, was unable to defend Jinzhou, so he burned the city and fled to Chengdu.

古文：戎昭节度使冯行袭复取金州，奏称 金州荒残，乞徙理均州， 从之。
现代文：戎昭节度使冯行袭又夺取金州，奏称： 金州荒凉残败，乞求将军府迁往均州。 
English: Emperor Zhao Zedong ordered Feng Xing to attack and capture Jinzhou. He reported that Jinzhou was desolate and in ruins, and begged for the general's residence to be moved to Junzhou.

古文：更以行袭领武安军。
现代文：朝廷准从。改任冯行袭统领武安军。
English: He was transferred to Feng Xinghai as the commander of the Wu'an Army.

古文：陈询不能守睦州，奔于广陵，淮南招讨使陶雅入据其城。
现代文：陈询不能守卫睦州，逃奔到广陵，淮南招讨使陶雅入城占据睦州。
English: Chen Ying was unable to defend Muzhou and fled to Guangling. Huainan lobbied Tao Ya to enter the city and occupy Muzhou.

古文：杨渥之去宣州也，欲取其幄幕及亲兵以行，观察使王茂章不与，渥怒。
现代文：杨渥离开宣州时，想要带着他的帐幕及亲兵起程，观察使王茂章不同意，杨渥怨怒。
English: When Yang Wo left Xuanzhou, he wanted to take his tent and soldiers with him. Wang Maozhang disagreed, and Yang Wo was angry.

古文：既袭位，遣马步都指挥使李简等将兵袭之。
现代文：袭位以后，派遣马步都指挥使李简等率兵袭击王茂章。
English: After the attack, Ma Bodu sent Li Jian and other soldiers to attack Wang Maozhang.

古文：湖南兵寇淮南，淮南牙内指挥使杨彪击却之。
现代文：湖南军队侵犯淮南，淮南牙内指挥使杨彪把湖南军队击退。
English: The Hunan army invaded Huainan, and the commander of Huainan Province ordered Yang Biao to repel the Hunan army.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝下之下天祐三年春，正月，壬戌，灵武节度使韩逊奏吐番七千馀骑营于宗高谷，将击嗢末及取凉州。李简兵奄至宣州，王茂章度不能守，帅众奔两浙。
现代文：天祐三年春季，正月壬戌，灵武节度使韩逊奏报吐蕃七千余骑兵在宗高谷扎营，将要攻击末及攻取凉。李简的军队突然到达宣州，王茂章估计不能守住，率众投奔两浙。
English: In the spring of the third year of Tianyu, in the first month of Lingwu, the Lingwu Festival caused Hansong to report that more than seven thousand cavalry were encamped in Zonggaogu, and were about to attack and conquer Liangshan. Li Jian's army suddenly arrived in Xuanzhou, and Wang Maozhang estimated that he could not hold it, and led the people to flee to Zhejiang.

古文：亲兵上蔡刁彦能辞以母老，不从行，登城谕众曰： 王府命我招谕汝曹，大兵行至矣。 
现代文：亲兵上蔡人刁彦能以母亲年老推辞，不跟从同行，登城告诉兵众说： 王府命我召集告谕你们，大兵就要到了。 
English: When the soldiers arrived, Cai Ren and Yan Yan were able to use the excuse that their mother was too old to accompany them. They went to the city and told the soldiers: "The royal court has ordered me to call you and tell you that the soldiers are about to arrive."

古文：众由是定。
现代文：众人因此安定下来。
English: People settled down as a result.

古文：陶雅畏茂章断其归路，引兵还歙州，钱镠复取睦州。
现代文：陶雅害怕王茂章断绝他的归路，带兵回歙州，钱又夺取睦州。
English: Tao Ya was afraid that Wang Maozhang would cut off his way back, take the soldiers back to Zhangzhou, and the money would take Muzhou.

古文：镠以茂章为镇东节度副使，更名景仁。
现代文：钱任命王茂章担任镇东节度副使，改名王景仁。
English: Qian appointed Wang Maozhang as deputy envoy of the Zhendong Festival, and changed his name to Wang Jingren.

古文：乙丑，加静海节度使曲承裕同平章事。
现代文：乙丑，静海节度使曲承裕加官同平章事。
English: The second ugliness, the tranquil sea and the degree of the festival make the song succeed and increase the official and equal chapter.

古文：初，田承嗣镇魏博，选募六州骁勇之士五千人为牙军，厚其给赐以自卫，为腹心。
现代文：当初，田承嗣镇守魏博，选募六州矫健勇猛武士五千人为牙军，给与他们优厚的给养赏赐，藉以保卫自己，作为心腹亲信。
English: At the beginning, Tian Chengzhi guarded Weibo, selected and recruited five thousand strong and brave warriors from six states to be the dental army, and gave them a generous reward to protect himself as a confidant.

古文：自是父子相继，亲党胶固，岁久益骄横，小不如意，辄族旧帅而易之。自史宪诚以来皆立于其手。
现代文：从此，父子相继，亲族团结，年久更加骄傲专横，稍不如意，就消灭旧主帅而更换，自史宪诚以来的节度使都是立于他们之手。
English: From then on, father and son successively, relatives united, and became more proud and imperious over the years, a little unsatisfactory, they eliminated the old coach and replaced it. Since Shi Xiancheng, the festival has been in their hands.

古文：天雄节度使罗绍威心恶之，力不能制。
现代文：天雄节度使罗绍威心里厌恶他们，但力量小不能制服他们。
English: They were loathed in Rossoway's heart, but small forces could not subdue them.

古文：硃全忠之围凤翔也，绍威遣军将杨利言密以情告全忠，欲借其兵以诛之。
现代文：朱全忠包围凤翔的时候，罗绍威派遣军将杨利言秘密地把情况告诉朱全忠，想借他的军队诛灭牙军。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong was encircling Fengxiang, Yang Ligang, the commander of the army dispatched by Roshowe, secretly informed Zhu Quanzhong of the situation and wanted to use his army to annihilate the Yaga army.

古文：全忠以事方急，未暇如其请，阴许之。
现代文：朱全忠因为当时军情紧急，没有空闲时间依照罗绍威的请求，暗中答应了他。
English: Zhu Quanzhong secretly agreed to Roshowe's request because the military situation was urgent at that time and there was no free time.

古文：及李公佺作乱，绍威益惧，复遣牙将臧延范趣全忠。
现代文：等到李公作乱，罗绍威更加畏惧，又派遣牙将臧延范崔促朱全忠。
English: When Li Gong started a riot, Luo Shaowei was even more afraid and sent his general Fan Cui to urge Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠乃发河南诸镇兵七万，遣其将李思安将之，会魏、镇兵屯深州乐城，声言击沧州，讨其纳李公佺也。
现代文：朱全忠这才发河南等镇兵十万，派遣他的部将李思安率领，会同魏博、镇冀的军队驻扎深州乐城；声言攻击沧州刘守文，讨伐他接纳天雄叛将李公。
English: It was only then that Zhu Quanzhong dispatched 100,000 soldiers from Henan and other towns, sent his general Li Si'an to lead the troops, and stationed them in Shenzhou Lecheng together with the troops from Wei Bo and Zhenji. He attacked Liu Shouwen of Cangzhou and tried to persuade him to accept the Tianxiong traitor Li Gong.

古文：会全忠女适绍威子廷规者卒，全忠遣客将马嗣勋实甲兵于橐中，选长直兵千人为担夫，帅之入魏，诈云会葬，全忠自以大军继其后，云赴行营，牙军皆不之疑。
现代文：适逢嫁给罗绍威之子罗廷规的朱全忠之女死了，朱全忠派遣客将马嗣勋在口袋里装满铠甲兵器，挑选长年警卫的兵士一千人装做挑夫，率领他们进入魏州，欺骗说是前来会葬。朱全忠亲自统帅大军跟在他们的后边，说是到行营去，魏博的牙军都没有怀疑他们。
English: When the daughter of Zhu Quanzhong, who was married to Luo Tinggui, the son of Roshowe, died, Zhu Quanzhong sent a guest to fill Ma Shihun's pockets with armored weapons, selected a thousand soldiers who had been guards for many years to act as porters, and led them into Weizhou, deceiving them that they were coming for a funeral. Zhu Quanzhong personally led the army behind them, saying that they were going to the camp. Weibo's dental army did not suspect them.

古文：庚午，绍威潜遣人入库断弓弦、甲襻。是夕，绍威帅其奴客数百，与嗣勋合击牙军。牙军欲战而弓甲皆不可用，遂阖营殪之，凡八千家，婴孺无遗。
现代文：庚午，罗绍威秘密地派人进入武库把弓弦、铠甲系带弄断，当天晚上，罗绍威率领他的家奴宾客数百人，与马嗣勋合击牙军，牙军想要应战但弓甲都不能用了，于是全营牙军都被杀死，一共八千家，婴儿幼童没有遗留一个。
English: In the afternoon, Rossoway secretly sent someone into the arsenal to break the bowstring and armor belt. That evening, Rossoway led hundreds of his family guests to join Ma Shihun to fight the Dacian army. The Dacian army wanted to fight, but the bow and armor could not be used. So the entire camp of the Dacian army was killed. A total of eight thousand families, babies and children did not leave a single one.

古文：诘旦，全忠引兵入城。
现代文：第二天早晨，朱全忠带领军队进入魏州城。
English: The next morning, Zhu Quanzhong led the army into the city of Weizhou.

古文：辛未，以权知宁远留后庞巨昭、岭南西道留后叶广略并为节度使。
现代文：辛未，朝廷任命暂时为宁远留后事务的庞巨昭、岭南西道留后叶广略同时为节度使。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Pang Jiao Zhao, who was temporarily in charge of affairs after Ningyuan's stay, and Lingnan Xi Dao's stay-behind Ye Guang Rong, as the festival envoys at the same time.

古文：庚辰，钱镠如睦州。
现代文：庚辰，钱前往睦州。
English: Geng Chen, Qian went to Mutsu.

古文：西川将王宗阮攻归州，获其将韩从实。
现代文：西川将领王宗阮攻打归州，俘获归州将领韩从实。
English: Xichuan general Wang Zong Ruan attacked Huizhou and captured Huizhou general Han Zonshi.

古文：陈璋闻陶雅归歙，自婺州退保衢州。
现代文：陈璋听说陶雅回歙州，自婺州退走保卫衢州。
English: Chen Yu heard that Tao Ya returned to Ganzhou and retreated from Ganzhou to defend Ganzhou.

古文：两浙将方永珍等取婺州，进攻衢州。
现代文：两浙将领方永珍等攻取婺州，进攻衢州。
English: The two Zhejiang generals led by Yong Zhen and others captured Ganzhou and attacked Ganzhou.

古文：杨渥遣先锋指挥使陈知新攻湖南。
现代文：杨渥派遣先锋指挥使陈知新攻打湖南。
English: Yang Wo dispatched the vanguard commander Chen Zhixin to attack Hunan.

古文：三月，乙丑，知新拔岳州，逐刺史许德勋，渥以知新为岳州刺史。
现代文：三月乙丑，陈知新攻克岳州，驱逐刺史许德勋。杨渥任命陈知新为岳州刺史。
English: In the second month of March, Chen Zhixin conquered Yuezhou and drove out Xu Deshun. Yang Wo appointed Chen Zhixin as the governor of Yuezhou.

古文：戊寅，以硃全忠为盐铁、度支、户部三司都制置使。
现代文：戊寅，朝廷任命朱全忠为盐铁、度支、户部三司都制置使。
English: In Wu Yin, the imperial court appointed Zhu Quanzhong as the envoy of the three departments of salt, iron, and households.

古文：三司之名始于此。
现代文：三司之名开始于此时。
English: The name of the three divisions began at this time.

古文：全忠辞不受。
现代文：朱全忠辞谢不接受。
English: Zhu Quanzhong did not accept the resignation.

古文：夏，四月，癸未朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月癸未朔，发生日食。
English: In summer, a solar eclipse occurs in early April.

古文：罗绍威既诛牙军，魏之诸军皆惧，绍威虽数抚谕之，而猜怨益甚。
现代文：罗绍威消灭牙军后，魏博各军都非常害怕，罗绍威虽然屡次安抚晓谕他们，但猜疑怨恨更加厉害。
English: After the destruction of the Fang Army by Roshowe, all the armies of Weibo were very afraid. Although Roshowe repeatedly pacified and talked to them, the suspicion and resentment were even stronger.

古文：硃全忠营于魏州城东数旬，将北巡行营，会天雄牙将史仁遇作乱，聚众数万据高唐，自称留后，天雄巡内州县多应之。
现代文：朱全忠在魏州城东扎营数十天，将要北上巡视行营，恰巧天雄牙将史仁遇作乱，聚众数万，占据高唐，自称天雄留后，天雄巡内各县多数响应他。
English: Zhu Quanzhong camped for dozens of days in the east of the city of Weizhou, and was going to go north to inspect the camp. It just so happened that Tianxiong Ya caused a disturbance, gathered tens of thousands of people and occupied Gaotang. After claiming to be Tianxiong, most of the counties in Tianxiong's inspection responded to him.

古文：全忠移军入城，遣使召行营兵还攻高唐，至历亭，魏兵在行营者作乱，与仁遇相应。
现代文：朱全忠把军队移入魏州城内，派遣使者召唤行营兵回来攻高唐；行营兵到达历亭，其中的魏兵作乱，与史仁遇相呼应。
English: Zhu Quanzhong moved the army into the city of Weizhou and sent an envoy to summon the marching soldiers to come back and attack Gaotang; the marching soldiers arrived at Liting, and one of the Wei soldiers caused a disturbance, echoing Shi Ren's encounter.

古文：元帅府左司马李周彝、右司马苻道昭击之，所杀殆半，进攻高唐，克之，城中兵民无少长皆死。
现代文：元帅府左司马李周彝、右司马符道昭攻击作乱魏兵，杀死近一半，又进攻高唐，将城夺取，城中兵民无论年少年长全都死了。
English: The Left Secretary of the Marshal's Office, Li Zhouqi, and the Right Secretary of the Marshal's Office, Fu Dao Zhao, attacked the Wei soldiers, killing nearly half of them, and attacked Gaotang, capturing the city. All the soldiers and civilians in the city died, regardless of age.

古文：擒史仁遇，锯杀之。
现代文：活捉了史仁遇，用据把他锯死了。
English: He captured Shi Ren Rong alive and killed him with a saw.

古文：先是，仁遇求救于河东及沧州，李克用遣其将李嗣昭将三千骑攻邢州以救之。
现代文：在这以前，史仁遇向河东及沧州求救，李克用派遣他的部将李嗣昭率领三千骑兵进攻邢州来救援。
English: Prior to this, when Shi Ren asked for help from Hedong and Cangzhou, Li Ke sent his subordinate Li Shizhao to lead three thousand cavalry to attack Zhangzhou to rescue him.

古文：时邢州兵才二百，团练使牛存节守之，嗣昭攻七日不克。
现代文：当时，邢州兵才二百名，团练使牛存节守城，李嗣昭连攻七日没有攻下。
English: At that time, there were only two hundred soldiers in Zhangzhou, and the group practice made the cattle keep the festival and defend the city. Li Shizhao did not attack for seven days.

古文：全忠遣右长直都将张筠将数千骑助存节守城，筠伏兵于马岭，击嗣昭，败之，嗣昭遁去。
现代文：朱全忠派遣右长直都将张筠率领数千骑兵帮助牛存节守城，张筠在马岭埋伏军队，攻击李嗣昭，把他打败，李嗣昭逃跑离去。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched several thousand cavalry led by Zhang Ye to help Niu Cunjie defend the city. Zhang Ye ambushed Li Shizhao's army in Ma Ling, attacked and defeated him, and Li Shizhao fled.

古文：义昌节度使刘守文遣兵万人攻贝州，又攻冀州，拔蓚县，进攻阜城。
现代文：义昌节度使刘守文遣一万军队攻贝州，又攻冀州，攻克县，进攻阜城。
English: During the Yichang Festival, Liu Shouwen sent ten thousand troops to attack Beizhou, Jizhou, and Fucheng.

古文：时镇州大将王钊攻魏州叛将李重霸于宗城。
现代文：当时，镇州大将王剑在宗城攻打魏州叛将李重霸。
English: At that time, the Zhenzhou general Wang Jian attacked the Weizhou traitor Li Chongba in Zongcheng.

古文：全忠遣归救冀州，沧州兵去。
现代文：朱全忠派他回去救冀州，沧州军离去。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent him back to save Jizhou, and the Cangzhou army left.

古文：丙午，重霸弃城走，汴将胡规追斩之。
现代文：丙午，李重霸弃城逃走，汴州将领胡规追击，把他杀了。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Li Chongba abandoned the city and fled, and the general of Zhangzhou, Hu Jian, chased and killed him.

古文：镇南节度使钟传以养子延规为江州刺史。
现代文：镇南节度使钟传任命养子钟延规为江州刺史。
English: The Zhenan Festival made Zhong Chuan appoint his adopted son Zhong Yanbo as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：传薨，军中立其子匡时为留后。
现代文：钟传去世，军中立钟传的儿子匡时为留后。
English: When Zhong Chuan died, Zhong Chuan's son Kuang Shih, who was in the middle of the army, stayed behind.

古文：延规恨不得立，遣使降淮南。
现代文：钟延规怨恨不立自己为留后，派遣使者投降淮南。
English: After Zhong Yan Jie's resentment at not being allowed to stay, he sent an envoy to surrender Huainan.

古文：五月，丁巳，硃全忠如洺州，遂巡北边，视戎备，还，入于魏。
现代文：五月丁巳，朱全忠前往州，于是巡视北边，察看兵器装备，然后返回，进入魏州。
English: In May, Zhu Quanzhong went to the state, so he inspected the north, inspected weapons and equipment, and then returned to enter Weizhou.

古文：丙子，废戎昭军，并均、房隶忠义军。以武定节度使冯行袭为匡国节度使。
现代文：丙子，撤销戎昭军，均州、房州合并属忠义军；任命武定节度使冯行袭为匡国节度使。
English: He revoked the Rensho Army and merged the Junzhou and Fangzhou armies to form the Loyalist Army; he appointed Wu Ding Jie to make Feng Xing Gao the Jie Jie of Kuangguo.

古文：杨渥以升州刺史秦裴为西南行营都招讨使，将兵击钟匡时于江西。
现代文：杨渥任命州刺史秦裴为西南行营都招讨使，率兵在江西攻击镇南留后钟匡时。
English: Yang Wo appointed the provincial governor Qin Pei as the envoy to the southwestern campaign, and led the troops to attack the town of Nanluo in Jiangxi.

古文：六月，甲申，复以忠义军为山南东道。
现代文：六月甲申，又恢复忠义军为山南东道。
English: In June, Jiaxun restored the loyalist army as the host of Shannan.

古文：硃全忠以长安邻于邠、岐，数有战争，奏徙佑国节度使韩建于淄青，以淄青节度使长社王重师为佑国节度使。
现代文：朱全忠以长安与州，岐州相邻，屡有战争，上奏将佑国节度使韩建调到淄青，任命淄青节度使长社人王师重为佑国节度使。
English: Zhu Quanzhong took Chang'an as a neighboring prefecture and Qizhou as a neighboring prefecture, and there were frequent wars. He transferred Han Jian, the head of the Youguo Festival, to Jiaqing, and appointed Wang Shichong, the head of the Jiaqing Festival, as the Youguo Festival envoy.

古文：秋，七月，硃全忠克相州。
现代文：秋季，七月，朱全忠攻克相州。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Kesang State.

古文：时魏之乱兵散据贝、博、澶、相、卫州及魏之诸县，全忠分命诸将攻讨，至是悉平之，引兵南还。
现代文：当时魏博乱兵散据贝、博、澶、相、卫五州，朱全忠分别派遣诸将攻击讨伐，到这时全都平定了，于是带兵回河南。
English: At that time, the Wei and Bo rebels were scattered in the five provinces of Bei, Bo, Yao, Sang and Wei, and Zhu Quanzhong separately dispatched generals to attack and crusade. By this time, they were all pacified, so he led his troops back to Henan.

古文：全忠留魏半岁，罗绍威供亿，所杀牛羊豕近七十万，资粮称是，所赂遗又近百万，比去，蓄积为之一空。
现代文：朱全忠在魏州留居半年，罗绍威按需要供给，所杀牛、羊、猪近七十万钱，物资粮草与此相当，贿赂赠送的财货又近百万，等到朱全忠离开，积蓄贮藏全空了。
English: Zhu Quanzhong stayed in Weizhou for half a year, Roshowe supplied as needed, the cattle, sheep and pigs killed were nearly 700,000 yuan, the supplies of grain and grass were equivalent to this, and the bribes and gifts of goods were nearly one million. By the time Zhu Quanzhong left, the savings and storage were completely empty.

古文：绍威虽去其逼，而魏兵自是衰弱。
现代文：罗绍威虽然除去了威胁自己的牙军，但是魏博军队从此衰弱了。
English: Although Roshowe had eliminated the threatening Fang army, Weibo's army had since been weakened.

古文：绍威悔之，谓人曰： 合六州四十三县铁，不能为此错也！ 
现代文：罗绍威为此非常悔恨，对人说： 聚集所属六州四十三县的铁也铸不成这次大错啊！ 
English: Rossoway was very remorseful about this and said to the people: "Gathering the iron of the forty-three counties of the six states does not make this a big mistake!

古文：壬申，全忠至大梁。
现代文：壬申，朱全忠到达大梁。
English: Jinshin, Zhu Quanzhong reached the girder.

古文：秦裴至洪州，军于蓼州。诸将请阻水立寨，裴不从。钟匡时果遣其将刘楚据之。
现代文：秦裴到达洪州，在蓼州驻扎，众将领请依江水设立营寨，秦裴没有听从；钟匡时果然派遣部将刘楚占据其地。
English: Qin Pei arrived in Hongzhou and was stationed in Zhangzhou. The generals asked him to set up a camp by the river, but Qin Pei did not listen. Zhong Kuang sent a detachment to occupy Liu Chu's territory.

古文：诸将以咎裴，裴曰： 匡时骁将独楚一人耳，若帅众守城，不可猝拔，吾故以要害诱致之耳。 
现代文：诸将因此抱怨秦裴，秦裴说： 钟匡时的勇将只有刘楚一人，如果他率众守城，不能突然攻克，我故意让出要害之地引他出来罢了。 
English: The generals complained to Qin Pei about this, and Qin Pei said: Liu Chu was the only brave general at the time of Zhong Kuang. If he had led the people to defend the city, he would not have been able to suddenly conquer it. I just deliberately let him out of the critical area.

古文：未几，裴破寨，执楚，遂围洪州，饶州刺史唐宝请降。
现代文：不久，秦裴攻破营寨，俘获刘楚，于是包围洪州，饶州刺史唐宝请求投降。
English: Soon, Qin Pei broke through the camp, captured Liu Chu, and then surrounded Hongzhou. Raozhou asked Tang Bao to surrender.

古文：八月，乙酉，李茂贞遣其子侃为质于西川，王建以侃知彭州。
现代文：八月乙酉，李茂贞派遣他的儿子李侃到西川作人质；王建让李侃主持彭州事务。
English: In August, Li Maozhen sent his son Li Kan to the West River as a hostage; Wang Jian let Li Kan preside over the affairs of Pengzhou.

古文：硃全忠以幽、沧相首尾为魏患，欲先取沧州，甲辰，引兵发大梁。
现代文：朱全忠认为幽州刘仁恭、沧州刘守文父子相为首尾是魏州罗绍威的威胁，想要先攻取沧州；甲辰，率领军队从大梁出发。
English: Zhu Quanzhong thought that Liu Renkong of Yuzhou and Liu Shouwen of Cangzhou, father and son, were a threat to Wei's Rossowei, and wanted to capture Cangzhou first; Ji Chen led the army from Daliang.

古文：两浙兵围衢州，衢州刺史陈璋告急于淮南。杨渥遣左厢马步都虞候周本将兵迎璋。
现代文：两浙的军队包围衢州，衢州刺史陈璋向淮南告急，杨渥派遣左厢马步都虞候周本率兵迎接陈璋。
English: The armies of the two Zhe surrounded Bozhou. The Bozhou magistrate Chen Qi sent an urgent message to Huainan. Yang Wo dispatched the left-wing horse-drawn carriage and the left-wing horse-drawn carriage to meet Chen Qi.

古文：本至衢州，浙人解围，陈于城下。璋帅众归于本，两浙兵取衢州。
现代文：周本到达衢州，浙人解除包围，在城下列阵，陈璋率众归于周本，两浙军队夺取衢州。
English: Zhou Ben arrived in Zhangzhou, the Zhe people lifted the siege, and in the city's lower ranks, Chen Yu led the people to return to Zhou Ben, and the two Zhe armies captured Zhangzhou.

古文：吕师造曰： 浙人近我而不动，轻我也，请击之！ 
现代文：吕师造说： 浙人离我们很近却不发动进攻，是轻视我们，请攻击他们！ 
English: Lv Shizhu said: The people of Zhejiang are very close to us but do not launch an attack. They despise us. Please attack them!

古文：本曰： 吾受命迎陈使君，今至矣，何为复战！
现代文：周本说： 我受命迎接陈使君，现在他已到了，为什么再战！
English: Zhou Ben said: I was ordered to welcome Chen Zhijun, now he has arrived, why fight again!

古文：彼必有以待我也。 
现代文：他们一定有对付我们的办法。 
English: They must have some way of dealing with us.

古文：遂引兵还。
现代文：于是带领军队返回。
English: So he led the army back.

古文：本为之殿，浙人蹑之，本中道设伏，大破之。
现代文：周本为军队殿后，浙人在后面跟踪，周本中途设下埋伏，把渐军打得大败。
English: After Zhou was captured by the army, the Zhejiang people followed behind. Zhou set up an ambush in the middle of the way and defeated the Qian army.

古文：九月，辛亥朔，硃全忠自白马渡河，丁卯，至沧州，军于长芦，沧人不出。
现代文：九月辛亥朔，朱全忠由白马渡过黄河，丁卯，到沧州，驻扎在长芦县，沧州军队不出战。
English: In September Xinhai Shuo, Zhu Quanzhong crossed the Yellow River from Baima, Dingwu, to Cangzhou, stationed in Changlu County, Cangzhou army did not fight.

古文：罗绍威馈运，自魏至长芦五百里，不绝于路。又建元帅府舍于魏，所过驿亭供酒馔、幄幕、什器，上下数十万人，无一不备。
现代文：罗绍威运送粮饷，自魏州到长芦五百里，路上连续不断；又在魏州建筑元帅府舍，经过的驿亭都供应酒食、帐幕、各种器具，上下数十万人，没有一件不准备周全。
English: Rossoway transported grain and straw from Weizhou to Changlu, a distance of 500 miles, continuously on the road; he also built a marshal's residence in Weizhou, and the passing straw pavilions provided food and wine, tents, and various utensils for hundreds of thousands of people, none of which were not well prepared.

古文：秦裴拔洪州，虏钟匡时等五千人以归。
现代文：秦裴攻克洪州，俘虏钟匡时等五千人而回。
English: Qin Pei invaded Ke Hongzhou, captured Zhong Kuang, and sent back five thousand people.

古文：杨渥自兼镇南节度使，以裴为洪州制置使。
现代文：杨渥自己兼任镇南节度使，任命秦裴为洪州制置使。
English: Yang Wo himself concurrently served as the Zhennan Festival envoy and appointed Qin Pei as the Hongzhou Festival envoy.

古文：静难节度使杨崇本以凤翔、保塞、彰义、保义之兵攻夏州，匡国节度使刘知俊邀击坊州之兵，斩首三千馀级，擒坊州刺史刘彦晖。
现代文：静难节度使杨崇本用凤翔、保塞、彰义、保义四镇的军队攻打夏州，匡国节度使刘知俊拦击坊州的军队，斩首三千余级，生擒坊州刺史刘彦晖。
English: The Jingnan Festival made Yang Chongben attack Xiazhou with troops from the four towns of Fengxiang, Bosei, Zhangyi and Boyi; the Kuanggu Festival made Liu Zhijun intercept the troops from Fangzhou, beheading more than three thousand people, and stabbing Liu Yanyan, the governor of Weifang.

古文：刘仁恭救沧州，战屡败。乃下令境内： 男子十五以上，七十以下，悉自备兵粮诣行营，军发之后，有一人在闾里，刑无赦！ 
现代文：刘仁恭率兵救援沧州，屡次战败，于是下令境内百姓： 男子十五岁以上，七十岁以下，全部自备兵粮前来行营，军队出发以后，如有一人在乡里，立即诛杀不宽赦！ 
English: Liu Renyong led the troops to rescue Cangzhou, but they were repeatedly defeated, so he ordered the people in the territory: Men over the age of fifteen and under the age of seventy, all come to camp with their own provisions. After the army departs, if there is one person in the village, they will be immediately killed without mercy!

古文：或谏曰： 今老弱悉行，妇人不能转饷，此令必行，滥刑者众矣！ 
现代文：有人劝谏说： 现在老弱全部前来，妇女不能转运粮饷，这命令一定要执行，滥杀的人太多了。 
English: Some people tried to persuade them, saying, "Now all the old and weak people should come forward, women can't transport grain, this order must be carried out, there are too many people being killed indiscriminately."

古文：乃命胜执兵者尽行，文其面曰 定霸都 ，士人则文其腕或臂曰 一心事主 ，于是境内士民，稚孺之外无不文者。
现代文：刘仁恭这才命令胜任持拿兵器的人全部出行，在他们的脸上刺字 字霸都 ，读书人就在他们的手腕或者胳膊上刺字 一心事主 ，于是境内的士人百姓，除婴儿小孩以外没有不刺字的人。
English: It was only then that Liu Renkong ordered all the competent people with weapons to travel, tattooing the characters "字霸都" on their faces, and the readers to tattoo the characters "一心事主" on their wrists or arms. As a result, there was no one in the territory who did not have the characters except for babies and children.

古文：得兵十万，军于瓦桥。
现代文：刘仁恭得到十万兵卒，驻扎在瓦桥。
English: Liu Rengong received 100,000 soldiers and stationed them in Tile Bridge.

古文：时汴军筑垒围沧州，鸟鼠不能通。
现代文：当时，汴州军队修筑营垒包围沧州，连鸟鼠都不能通过。
English: At that time, the Zhangzhou army surrounded Cangzhou by building barracks, and even the birds and mice could not pass.

古文：仁恭畏其强，不敢战。
现代文：刘仁恭惧怕他们强盛，不敢出战。
English: Liu Renkong was afraid of their prosperity and did not dare to go to war.

古文：城中食尽，丸土而食，或互相掠啖。
现代文：城中食物吃尽，把土揉搓成丸子吞吃，或者互相掳掠啖食。
English: They eat up all the food in the city, roll the soil into balls and devour it, or steal food from each other.

古文：硃全忠使人说刘守文曰： 援兵势不相及，何不早降！ 
现代文：朱全忠派人到城下劝说刘守文： 援兵势必不能等到了，为什么不早些投降！ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent someone to the outskirts of the city to persuade Liu Shouwen: Reinforcements cannot wait, why not surrender earlier!

古文：守文登城应之曰： 仆于幽州，父子也。梁王方以大义服天下，若子叛父而来，将安用之！ 
现代文：刘守文登上城楼回答说： 我同幽州是父子关系，梁王正在用大义征服天下，假如儿子背叛父亲前来，将怎么任用他呢！ 
English: Liu Shouwen ascended the tower and replied: I have a father-son relationship with Youzhou. King Liang is conquering the world with great righteousness. If a son betrays his father, how will he be appointed?

古文：全忠愧其辞直，为之缓攻。
现代文：朱全忠因他的言辞直率而感到羞惭，为此延缓了攻击。
English: Embarrassed by his bluntness, Zhu Quanzhong delayed the attack.

古文：冬，十月，丙戌，王建始立行台于蜀，建东向舞蹈，号恸，称 自大驾东迁，制命不通，请权立行台，用李晟、郑畋故事，承制封拜。 
现代文：冬季，十月丙戌，王建开始在蜀建立行台，王建面向东方舞拜，放声大哭，声称： 自从先帝大驾迁往东都洛阳，制命不能通达，请暂时设立行台，用李晟、郑畋的旧时成例，秉承制令拜官封爵。 
English: In the winter, in October, Wang Jian began to build a procession platform in Shu. Wang Jian danced towards the east, cried loudly, and said: Since the former emperor moved to the eastern capital Luoyang, the system cannot be reached, please temporarily set up a procession platform, using the old-time examples of Li Xi and Zheng Xi, and adhering to the system.

古文：仍以膀帖告谕所部籓镇州县。
现代文：并用榜帖文书告知所属藩镇州县。
English: And use the list of documents to inform the province, town and county.

古文：刘仁恭求救于河东，前后百馀辈。李克用恨仁恭返覆，竟未之许，其子存勖谏曰： 今天下之势，归硃温者什七八，虽强大如魏博、镇、定，莫不附之。
现代文：刘仁恭向河东李克用请求救援，前后一百余次；李克用痛恨刘仁恭反复无常，始终没有答应，他的儿子李存勖说： 现在天下的形势，归降朱全忠的藩镇已经十之七八，像魏博、镇、定那样强大的藩镇都没有不归附朱全忠的。
English: Liu Renkong made more than a hundred requests for rescue to Li Keqiang of Hedong; Li Keqiang hated Liu Renkong's capriciousness and never agreed. His son Li Cunxu said: "In the current global situation, 7 out of 10 towns of Zhu Quanzhong have surrendered. There are no powerful towns such as Wei Bo, Zhen and Ding that have not surrendered to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：自河以北，能为温患者独我与幽、沧耳，今幽、沧为温所困，我不与之并力拒之，非我之利也。
现代文：自黄河以北，能成为朱全忠忧患的，只有我们河东与幽州、沧州了；现在幽州、沧州被朱全忠围困，我们不与他们协力抗拒朱全忠，不符合我们的利益。
English: From the north of the Yellow River, only we, the east of the river, Yuzhou and Cangzhou, can become the worries of Zhu Quanzhong. Now Yuzhou and Cangzhou are besieged by Zhu Quanzhong. If we do not cooperate with them to resist Zhu Quanzhong, it is not in our interest.

古文：夫为天下者不顾小怨，且彼尝困我而我救其急，以德怀之，乃一举而名实附也。
现代文：打天下的人不顾念小的仇怨，况且他们曾经使我们困难而我们解救他们的危急，用恩德安抚他们，才是一举而名实相合呢。
English: Those who attack the world do not care about petty grudges, moreover, they once caused us difficulties, and we relieved their crisis, and pacified them with grace, which is a match in name and reality.

古文：此乃吾复振之时，不可失也。 
现代文：这是我们再振兴的时机，不能失掉啊。 
English: This is an opportunity for us to reinvigorate ourselves, and we must not lose it.

古文：克用以为然，与将佐谋召幽州兵与攻潞州，曰： 于彼可以解围，于我可以拓境。 
现代文：李克用认为对，与将佐商量召请幽州军队一同攻打潞州，说： 对于他们可以解除包围，对于我们可以开拓疆域。 
English: Li Kejun thought it was right, and in consultation with the commander of the Southern Theater Command, he summoned the Yuzhou army to attack Zhangzhou together, saying: For them, they can lift the siege, and for us, we can open up the territory.

古文：乃许仁恭和，召其兵。仁恭遣都指挥使李溥将兵三万诣晋阳，克用遣其将周德威、李嗣昭将兵与之共攻潞州。
现代文：于是应允刘仁恭和好，召请他的军队，刘仁恭派遣都指挥使李溥率领三万军队前往晋阳，李克用派遣他的部将周德威、李嗣昭率兵与李溥共同攻打潞州。
English: Therefore, he agreed to make peace with Liu Rengong and called for his army. Liu Rengong sent Du Du to command Li Jun to lead 30,000 troops to Jinyang. Li Ke used to send his generals Zhou Dewei and Li Shizhao to attack Zhangzhou together with Li Jun.

古文：夏州告急于硃全忠。戊戌，全忠遣刘知俊及其将康怀英救之。
现代文：夏州向朱全忠告急，戊戌，朱全忠派遣刘知俊及他的部将廉怀英前往援救。
English: Xia Zhou sent urgent advice to Zhu Quanzhong, and Zhu Quanzhong sent Liu Zhijun and his subordinate Liang Huaiying to the rescue.

古文：杨崇本将六镇之兵五万，军于美原。
现代文：杨崇本统率六镇的五万军队，在美原驻扎。
English: Yang Chongben led fifty thousand troops from six towns and stationed them in Mihara.

古文：知俊等击之，崇本大败，归于邠州。
现代文：刘知俊等发动攻击，杨崇本被打得大败，回归州。
English: Liu Zhijun and others launched an attack, Yang Chong was defeated and returned to the state.

古文：武贞节度使雷彦恭屡寇荆南，留后贺瑰闭城自守。
现代文：武贞节度使雷彦恭屡次侵犯荆南，荆南留后贺关闭城门自守。
English: The Wu Zhen Festival made Lei Yanyong repeatedly invade Jingnan, Jingnan stayed behind, He closed the city gate and defended himself.

古文：硃全忠以为怯，以颍州防御使高季昌代之，又遣驾前指挥使倪可福将兵五千戍荆南以备吴、蜀。
现代文：朱全忠以为贺怯懦，命颖州防御使高季昌代替他，又派遣驾前指挥使倪可福率兵五千戍守荆南来防备吴、蜀。
English: Zhu Quanzhong thought He was cowardly and ordered Gao Jichang to replace him in the defense of Yingzhou. He also dispatched the commander-in-chief Ni Kefu with 5,000 soldiers to defend Jingnan against Wu and Shu.

古文：朗兵引去。
现代文：朗州军队引退离去。
English: The Lanzhou army retires and leaves.

古文：十一月，刘知俊、康怀贞乘胜攻鄜、延等五州，下之。
现代文：十一月，刘知俊、康怀英乘胜进攻、延等五州，全部攻下了。
English: In November, Liu Zhijun and Kang Huaiying took advantage of the victory to attack and extend to five states, all of which were captured.

古文：加知俊同平章事，以怀贞为保义节度使。
现代文：刘知俊加为同平章事，以廉怀英担任保义节度使。
English: Liu Zhijun was promoted to the rank of Tongping, and Ren Huaiying was promoted to the rank of Guoying.

古文：西军自是不振。
现代文：州、岐州的军队从此一蹶不振。
English: Since then, the armies of Guizhou and Qizhou have been in a slump.

古文：湖州刺史高彦卒，子澧代之。
现代文：湖州刺史高彦去世。他的儿子高澧接替他。
English: Huzhou assassin Takahiko died and was succeeded by his son, Takahiro.

古文：十二月，乙酉，钱镠表荐行军司马王景仁，诏以景仁领宁国节度使。
现代文：十二月乙酉，钱上表举荐行军司马王景仁；诏令王景仁兼任宁国节度使。
English: At the end of December, Wang Jingren, the Sima of the Marching Armies, was recommended by the Qian Shang table; Wang Jingren was also appointed as the Ningguo Festival envoy.

古文：硃全忠分步骑数万，遣行军司马李周彝将之，自河阳救潞州。
现代文：朱自忠分出步、骑兵数万人，派遣行军司马李周彝率领，自河阳出发救援潞州。
English: Zhu Zizhong sent out tens of thousands of cavalry and dispatched marching troops led by Sima Li Zhouqi to rescue Zhangzhou from Heyang.

古文：闰月，乙丑，废镇国军兴德府复为华州，隶匡国节度，割金、商州隶佑国军。
现代文：闰十二月乙丑，取消镇国军兴德府，恢复华州，隶属匡国节度，分割金州、商州隶属佑国军。
English: On leap December 2nd, the Zhenguo Army was disbanded from Xingdefu and restored to Huazhou, which was subordinate to the Kuangguo Army, and divided into Jinzhou and Shangzhou, which were subordinate to the Yu Guo Army.

古文：初，昭宗凶讣至潞州，昭义节度使丁会帅将士缟素流涕久之。
现代文：当初，唐昭宗被杀的恶耗传到潞州，昭义节度使丁会率领将士身穿白色丧服长时间哭泣流泪。
English: At first, the bad news of the murder of Tang Zhaozong spread to Zhangzhou, and the Zhaoyi Festival made the Ding Association lead the generals wearing white mourning clothes to cry and shed tears for a long time.

古文：及李嗣昭攻潞州，会举军降于河东。
现代文：等到李嗣昭进攻潞州，丁会全军归降河东李克用。
English: When Li Shizhao attacked Zhangzhou, Ding would order the entire army to surrender to Li Ke in the east of the river.

古文：李克用以嗣昭为昭义留后。
现代文：李克用任命李嗣昭为昭义留后。
English: Li Keqiang appointed Li Shizhao as the successor of Zhao Yi.

古文：会见克用，泣曰： 会非力不能守也。
现代文：丁会进见李克用，哭着说： 丁会我不是力量不足不能守卫。
English: Ding Hui looked at Li Kejun and said with tears: Ding Hui, I am not too weak to guard.

古文：梁王陵虐唐室，会虽受其举拔之恩，诚不忍其所为，故来归命耳。 
现代文：梁王朱全忠欺凌虐待唐室，丁会我虽然受他举荐提拔的恩情，实在不能容忍他的作为，所以前来归附听命。 
English: Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong bullied and abused the Tang family. Although I was recommended and promoted by him, I really could not tolerate his actions, so I came to submit to his orders.

古文：克用厚待之，位于诸将之上。
现代文：李克用对待他非常优厚，地位在诸将之上。
English: Li Ke used to treat him very generously, and his status was above that of generals.

古文：己巳，硃全忠命诸军治攻具，将攻沧州。
现代文：己巳，朱全忠命令各军备办攻城器具，将要攻打沧州。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong ordered all armaments to prepare siege equipment, and they were about to attack Cangzhou.

古文：壬申，闻潞州不守，甲戌，引兵还。
现代文：壬申，听说潞州失守，甲戌，朱全忠带兵回去。
English: Jinshin, I heard that Zhangzhou was lost, Jiaxuan, Zhu Quanzhong led the soldiers back.

古文：先是，调河南北刍粮，水陆输军前，诸营山积，全忠将还，命悉焚之，烟炎数里，在舟中者凿而沉之。
现代文：在这以前，朱全忠征调黄河南北的粮草，由水陆两路运往军前，各营的粮草堆积如山。朱全忠将要撤退，命令全部烧毁，烟雾火光蔓延数里，在舟中的粮草就凿舟沉入水中。
English: Prior to this, Zhu Quanzhong ordered the grain and grass from the north and south of the Yellow River to be transported to the front of the army by land and water, and the grain and grass of each battalion piled up like a mountain. Zhu Quanzhong was about to retreat and ordered them all to be burned. The smoke and fire spread for several miles, and the grain and grass in the boat sank into the water.

古文：刘守文使遗全忠书曰： 王以百姓之故，赦仆之罪，解围而去，王之惠也。
现代文：刘守文派人给朱全忠送书信说： 您为了百姓的缘故，赦免我的罪过，解除包围而去，这是您的恩惠。
English: Liu Shouwen sent a letter to Zhu Quanzhong saying, "For the sake of the people, please forgive my sins, lift the siege and leave. This is your favor.

古文：城中数万口，不食数月矣。与其焚之为烟，沉之为泥，愿乞其馀以救之。 
现代文：沧州城中数万人，几个月没有粮食吃了，与其把粮草烧毁化为烟雾，沉水化为淤泥，希望乞求剩余的粮草来救百姓。 
English: Tens of thousands of people in the city of Cangzhou have not eaten grain for several months. Instead of burning grain and grass into smoke and sinking water into silt, they hope to beg for the remaining grain and grass to save the people.

古文：全忠为之留数囷以遗之，沧人赖以济。
现代文：朱全忠留下几堆粮食送给他，沧州百姓赖以得到接济。
English: Zhu Quanzhong left several piles of grain to be given to him, which the people of Cangzhou relied on to receive aid.

古文：河东兵进攻泽州，不克而退。
现代文：河东军队进攻泽州，没有攻下就撤退了。
English: The Hedong army attacked Zezhou, but retreated without capturing it.

古文：吉州刺史彭玕遣使请降于湖南，玕本赤石洞蛮酋，钟传用为吉州刺史。
现代文：吉州刺史彭派遣使者向湖南请求归降。彭本来是赤石洞蛮的首领，钟传用他为吉州刺史。
English: Peng, the governor of Jizhou, sent an envoy to Hunan to plead for surrender. Originally, Peng was the leader of the Akashi-dong clan. Zhong Chuan used him as the governor of Jizhou.

