古文：二十有五年春，王正月丙午，卫侯燬灭邢。
现代文：二十五年春季，周历正月丙午，卫侯燬灭亡邢国
English: In the spring of the 25th year, on the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, at noon, the Wei and Hou dynasties were destroyed and the country was destroyed.

古文：夏四月癸酉，卫侯燬卒。
现代文：夏季四月癸酉日，卫侯燬去世。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, Wei Houxuan passed away.

古文：宋荡伯姬来逆妇。
现代文：宋国大夫荡的妻子伯姬越境迎妇。
English: Dr. Song's wife, Bo Ji, crossed the border to meet her husband.

古文：宋杀其大夫。
现代文：宋国杀了自己国家的大夫。
English: Song killed his own country's doctor.

古文：秋，楚人围陈，纳顿子于顿。
现代文：秋季，楚国包围陈国，将顿子送回顿国。
English: In autumn, Chu surrounded Chen and sent Tonzi back to Ton.

古文：葬卫文公。
现代文：安葬卫文公。
English: The funeral of Lord Weiwen is over.

古文：冬十有二月癸亥，公会卫子、莒庆，盟于洮。
现代文：冬季十二月癸亥日，僖公与卫子、莒庆在洮地结盟。
English: In the winter of December, on the day of the Year of the Boar, the Duke of Zou allied with the guards and Zou Qing in Zou.

古文：二十五年春，卫人伐邢，二礼从国子巡城，掖以赴外，杀之。
现代文：二十五年春季，卫军进攻邢国，礼氏两兄弟跟随邢国大官国子在城上巡察，两人左右挟持国子把他扔到城外，使他摔死。
English: In the spring of the 25th year, the guards attacked Shikoku, and the two brothers of the Reishi clan followed the high official of Shikoku, Kuniko, to inspect the city. The two men held Kuniko in their arms and threw him outside the city, causing him to fall to his death.

古文：正月丙午，卫侯燬灭邢。
现代文：正月二十日，卫侯燬灭亡邢国。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the year, Wei Hou Yi was overthrown and his country was destroyed.

古文：同姓也，故名。
现代文：由于卫国和邢国同姓，所以记载卫侯的名字。
English: Since the names of the emperors of the two states were the same, the names of the emperors of the two states were recorded.

古文：礼至为铭曰： 余掖杀国子，莫余敢止。 
现代文：礼至在铜器上作铭文说： 我挟持杀死国子，没有人敢来阻止我。 
English: Li Zhi wrote an inscription on the bronze vessel, saying: "I have kidnapped and killed the son of the country, and no one dares to stop me."

古文：秦伯师于河上，将纳王。
现代文：秦穆公把军队驻扎在黄河边上，准备送周襄王回朝。
English: Qin Mu stationed his army on the edge of the Yellow River, preparing to send King Zhou Xiang back to China.

古文：狐偃言于晋侯曰： 求诸侯，莫如勤王。
现代文：狐偃对晋文公说： 求得诸侯的拥护，没有像为天子的事情尽力这样有效。
English: Xuxuan said to Jinwen Gong: Seeking the support of the princes is not as effective as doing one's best for the Son of Heaven.

古文：诸侯信之，且大义也。
现代文：可以得到诸侯信任，而且合于大义。
English: It can gain the trust of the princes, and it is consistent with the Great Righteousness.

古文：继文之业而信宣于诸侯，今为可矣。 
现代文：继续文侯的事业，同时信用宣扬在诸侯之中，现在是机会了。 
English: Now is the opportunity to continue the cause of the princes, and at the same time to promote trust among the princes.

古文：使卜偃卜之，曰： 吉，遇黄帝战于阪泉之兆。 
现代文：让卜偃占卜，说： 大吉。得到黄帝在阪泉作战的预兆。 
English: Let Bu Yao do the divination and say: "Dakichi. Get the omen of the Yellow Emperor's battle in Hanquan."

古文：公曰： 吾不堪也。 
现代文：晋文公说： 我当不起啊。 
English: Jin Wenkong said, "I can't do it.

古文：对曰： 周礼未改。今之王，古之帝也。 公曰： 筮之。 
现代文：卜偃回答说： 周室的礼制没有改变，现在的王，就是古代的帝。 晋文公说： 占筮！ 又占筮，得到《大有》变成《睽》，说： 吉利。
English: Bu Yao replied, "The ceremonial system of the Zhou dynasty has not changed, and the current king is the ancient emperor." Jinwen Gong said, "Catch the dragonfly!" and "Catch the dragonfly," and got "Great" to become "Dragonfly," and said, "Good luck."

古文：筮之，遇《大有》之《睽》，曰： 吉，遇 公用享于天子 之卦。战克而王享，吉孰大焉。
现代文：得到 公被天子设享礼招待 这个卦，战胜以后天子设享礼招待，还有比这更大的吉利吗？
English: To be publicly invited by the Son of Heaven to enjoy a gala banquet. Is there any greater good luck than to win this battle and then be invited by the Son of Heaven to enjoy a banquet?

古文：且是卦也，天为泽以当日，天子降心以逆公，不亦可乎？
现代文：而且这一卦，天变成水泽来承受太阳的照耀，象征天子自己降格来迎接您，不也是可以吗？
English: Moreover, this riddle, the sky turns into a lake of water to withstand the sun's shine, symbolizing that the Son of Heaven has lowered himself to meet you, isn't that also okay?

古文：《大有》去《睽》而复，亦其所也。 
现代文：《大有》变成《睽》而又回到《大有》，天子也就回到他的处所。 
English: "Greatly" becomes "greatly" and returns to "greatly," and the Son of Heaven returns to his place.

古文：晋侯辞秦师而下。
现代文：晋文公辞退秦军，顺流而下。
English: Jin Wenkong withdrew from the Qin army and went down the river.

古文：三月甲辰，次于阳樊。右师围温，左师逆王。
现代文：三月十九日，军队驻扎在阳樊，右翼部队包围温地，左翼部队迎接周襄王。
English: On March 19th, the army was stationed in Impotence, the right-wing troops surrounded Warmi, and the left-wing troops greeted King Zhou Xiang.

古文：夏四月丁巳，王入于王城，取大叔于温，杀之于隰城。
现代文：夏季四月初三日，襄王进入王城。在温地抓了太叔，把他杀死在隰城。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of summer, King Xiang entered the royal city. He arrested his great uncle in Warmi and killed him in Lucheng.

古文：戊午，晋侯朝王，王享醴，命之宥。
现代文：初四日，晋文公朝觐周襄王。周襄王用甜酒招待晋文公，又让晋文公向自己回敬酒。
English: On the fourth day of the first lunar month, King Jinwen held a court banquet for King Zhou Xiang. King Zhou Xiang invited King Jinwen with sweet wine, and asked King Jinwen to make a toast to himself.

古文：请隧，弗许，曰： 王章也。
现代文：晋文公请求死后能用隧道葬他，周襄王没有允许，说： 这是王室的规章。
English: When Prince Jinwen requested to be buried in a tunnel after his death, King Zhou Xiang did not allow it, saying: This is a royal regulation.

古文：未有代德而有二王，亦叔父之所恶也。 
现代文：还没有取代周室的行为而有两个天子，这也是叔父所厌恶的。 
English: He has not yet replaced the behavior of Zhou Miao with two heavenly sons, which is also detested by his uncle.

古文：与之阳樊、温、原、茅之田。
现代文：赐给晋文公阳樊、温、原、攒茅的田地。
English: Jinwen Gong was given the fields of Yangshuo, Wen, Yuan and Nanmao.

古文：晋于是始启南阳。
现代文：晋国在这时候才开辟了南阳的疆土。
English: It was only at this time that Jin opened up the territory of Nanyang.

古文：阳樊不服，围之。
现代文：阳樊人不服，晋国军队包围了阳樊。
English: Impotent people are not satisfied, the Jin army has surrounded Impotent.

古文：苍葛呼曰： 德以柔中国，刑以威四夷，宜吾不敢服也。
现代文：仓葛大喊说： 德行用来安抚中原国家，刑罚用来威慑四方夷狄，你们这样干，无怪我们不敢降服了。
English: Cangge shouted: Virtue is used to pacify the Central Plains countries, and punishment is used to deter the barbarians from the four directions. If you do this, it is no wonder that we dare not surrender.

古文：此谁非王之亲姻，其俘之也？ 
现代文：这里谁不是天子的亲戚，难道能俘虏他们吗？ 
English: Is there anyone here who is not a relative of the Son of Heaven? Can they be captured?

古文：乃出其民。
现代文：于是就放百姓出城了。
English: So they let the people go out of the city.

古文：秋，秦、晋伐鄀。
现代文：秋季，秦国和晋国进攻鄀国。
English: In the autumn, Qin and Jin attacked Yan.

古文：楚鬥克、屈御寇以申、息之师戍商密。
现代文：楚国的鬬克、屈御寇带领申、息两地的军队戍守商密。
English: The armies of the two places, led by Zengke and Qu Miko of Chu, entered into a secret agreement.

古文：秦人过析隈，入而系舆人以围商密，昏而傅焉。
现代文：秦军经过析地，绕道丹江水湾子，同时捆绑着自己的士兵假装俘虏，以包围商密，黄昏的时候逼近城下。
English: The Qin army bypassed the Danjiang River and the Shuiwanzi River, and at the same time tied up their own soldiers to pretend to be captives in order to encircle the merchants, and approached the city at dusk.

古文：宵，坎血加书，伪与子仪、子边盟者。
现代文：夜里，掘地歃血，把盟书放在上面，假装和鬬克、御寇盟誓的样子。
English: At night, digging up the blood, put the covenant on it, pretending to swear an oath with the barbarians and invaders.

古文：商密人惧曰： 秦取析矣，戍人反矣。 
现代文：商密的人害怕，说： 秦军已经占领析地了！戍守的人背叛了！ 
English: The business people are afraid and say: The Qin army has occupied the land! The defenders have betrayed us!

古文：乃降秦师。
现代文：于是就向秦军投降。
English: So he surrendered to the Qin army.

古文：秦师囚申公子仪、息公子边以归。
现代文：秦国军队囚禁了申公鬬克、息公屈御寇而回国。
English: The Qin army imprisoned Shen Gong Rongke and his son Qu Miao and returned to the country.

古文：楚令尹子玉追秦师，弗及，遂围陈，纳顿子于顿。
现代文：楚国的令尹子玉追赶秦军，没有赶上。楚军就包围陈国，把顿子送回顿国。
English: Yin Ziyu, the ruler of Chu, chased the Qin army, but did not catch up. The Chu army then surrounded Chen and sent Tonzi back to Don.

古文：冬，晋侯围原，命三日之粮。
现代文：冬季，晋文公率军包围原国，命令携带三天的粮食。
English: In the winter, Jin Wenkong led the army to encircle the original country and ordered to bring three days of grain.

古文：原不降，命去之。
现代文：到了三天原国不投降，就下令离开。
English: When three days had passed without the native country surrendering, they were ordered to leave.

古文：谍出，曰： 原将降矣。 
现代文：间谍从城里出来，说： 原国准备投降了。 
English: The spy came out of the city and said: The old country is ready to surrender.

古文：军吏曰： 请待之。 
现代文：军官说： 请等待一下。 
English: The officer said, "Wait a minute.

古文：公曰： 信，国之宝也，民之所庇也，得原失信，何以庇之？
现代文：晋文公说： 信用，是国家的宝贝，百姓靠它庇护。得到原国而失去信用，用什么庇护百姓？
English: Jin Wenkong said: Trust is the treasure of the country, and the people rely on it for protection. If you get the original country and lose trust, what do you use to protect the people?

古文：所亡滋多。 
现代文：所损失的东西更多。 
English: There's a lot more to lose.

古文：退一舍而原降。
现代文：退兵三十里，原国投降。
English: Thirty miles back, the old country surrenders.

古文：迁原伯贯于冀。
现代文：晋文公把原伯贯迁到冀地。
English: Emperor Jinwen moved the original emperor to Ji Province.

古文：赵衰为原大夫，狐溱为温大夫。
现代文：任命赵衰作为原地的地方官，狐溱作为温地的地方官。
English: Zhao Zhen was appointed as the local official of the original place, and Foxtel was appointed as the local official of the warm place.

古文：卫人平莒于我。
现代文：卫国人调停莒国和我国的关系。
English: The Defender of the Fatherland mediates the relations between the two countries.

古文：十二月，盟于洮，修卫文公之好，且及莒平也。
现代文：十二月，鲁僖公和卫成公、莒庆在洮地结盟，重温卫文公时代的旧好，同时和莒国讲和。
English: In December, Lu Wei, Wei Chenggong, and Wei Qing allied with each other in Handan to revisit the good old days of Wei Wengong's era, and at the same time to make peace with Wei.

古文：晋侯问原守于寺人勃鞮。
现代文：晋文公向寺人勃鞮询问镇守原地的人选。
English: Jin Wenkong asked Burgundy, a member of the temple, about candidates for the position of the town guard.

古文：对曰： 昔赵衰以壶飱从径，馁而弗食。 
现代文：勃鞮回答说： 以前赵衰用壶盛饮料并携带了食物跟随您，他一个人走在小道上，饿了也不去吃它。 
English: Burgundy replied: "Previously, Zhao Zhen followed you with a pot of drink and brought food. He walked alone on the trail and would not eat it when he was hungry.

古文：故使处原。
现代文：所以晋文公让赵衰作为原地的地方官。
English: Therefore, Jinwen allowed Zhao Zhen to become the local official.

