古文：十有一年春，王正月。
现代文：十一年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏五月戊寅，公败宋师于鄑。
现代文：夏季五月戊寅日，庄公在鄑地将宋军打败。
English: In the summer of May, on the day of Wu Yin, Zhuang Gong defeated the Song Army in Xuan Di.

古文：秋，宋大水。
现代文：秋季，宋国发大水。
English: In autumn, the Song Dynasty had a great drought.

古文：冬，王姬归于齐。
现代文：冬季，齐桓公来迎娶共姬。
English: In the winter, Prince Qi Kuan came to marry Gong Ji.

古文：十一年夏，宋为乘丘之役，故侵我。
现代文：十一年夏季，宋国为了乘丘那次战役的缘故而入侵我国。
English: In the summer of the eleventh year, the Song Dynasty invaded China because of the Battle of Jingshan Hill.

古文：公御之，宋师未陈而薄之，败诸鄑。
现代文：庄公出兵迎战。宋国的军队还没有摆开阵势，我军就逼近压过去，在戬地打败宋军。
English: Zhuang Gong sent troops to meet the war. Song's army had not yet set up a position, so our army pressed forward and defeated the Song army in Shantian.

古文：凡师，敌未陈曰败某师，皆陈曰战，大崩曰败绩，得儁曰克，覆而败之曰取某师，京师败曰王师败绩于某。
现代文：凡是作战，敌方没有摆开阵势叫做 败某师 ，都摆开了阵势叫做 战 ，大崩溃叫做 败绩 ，俘虏敌方的勇士叫做 克 ，伏兵而击败敌军叫做 取某师 ，周天子的军队被打败叫做 王师败绩于某 。
English: Whenever there is a battle, if the enemy does not set up a position, it is called the defeat of a certain division; if it does set up a position, it is called a battle; if it collapses, it is called a defeat; if it captures the enemy's warriors, it is called a defeat; if it ambushes and defeats the enemy's army, it is called the capture of a certain division; if Zhou Tianzi's army is defeated, it is called the defeat of Wang's division.

古文：秋，宋大水。
现代文：秋季，宋国发大水。
English: In autumn, the Song Dynasty had a great drought.

古文：公使吊焉，曰： 天作淫雨，害于粢盛，若之何不吊？ 
现代文：庄公派使者去慰问，说： 上天降下大雨，危害了庄稼，为什么不慰问呢？ 
English: Zhuang Gong sent an emissary to offer condolences, saying: The heavens have rained heavily, endangering the crops, why not offer condolences?

古文：对曰： 孤实不敬，天降之灾，又以为君忧，拜命之辱。 
现代文：宋闵公回答说： 我对于上天不诚敬，上天降灾，还使贵国国君担忧，承蒙关注，实不敢当。 
English: Song Yigong replied, "I have not been honest with Heaven, and I have brought disaster to Heaven, and I have also caused your country's sovereign to worry and receive attention. I really dare not do that.

古文：臧文仲曰： 宋其兴乎。
现代文：臧文仲说： 宋国恐怕要兴盛了吧！
English: Yu Wenzhong said: I'm afraid that the Song Dynasty will prosper!

古文：禹、汤罪己，其兴也悖焉；桀、纣罪人，其亡也忽焉。
现代文：禹、汤责罚自己，他们勃然兴起；桀、纣责罚别人，他们马上灭亡。
English: If Yu and Tang punish themselves, they will rise up; if Ya and Ya punish others, they will immediately perish.

古文：且列国有凶称孤，礼也。
现代文：而且别国发生灾荒，国君称孤，这是合于礼的。
English: Moreover, it is proper for the sovereign of a country to be absent when a disaster or famine occurs in another country.

古文：言惧而名礼，其庶乎。 
现代文：言语有所戒惧而名称合于礼制，这就差不多了吧！ 
English: The name fits the etiquette, and that's pretty much it!

古文：既而闻之曰： 公子御说之辞也。 臧孙达曰： 是宜为君，有恤民之心。 
现代文：不久，又听说上面那番话是公子御说所说的，臧孙达说： 这个人适合当国君，因为他有体恤百姓的心思。 
English: Not long after, he heard that the above-mentioned words were said by the prince, and Sun Da said: This man is suitable to be the ruler of the country, because he has compassion for the people.

古文：冬，齐侯来逆共姬。
现代文：冬季，齐桓公来鲁国迎娶共姬。
English: In winter, Prince Qi Kuan came to Lu to marry Gong Ji.

古文：乘丘之役，公以金仆姑射南宫长万，公右歂孙生搏之。
现代文：在乘丘战役中，庄公用叫金仆姑的箭射中南宫长万，庄公的车右歂孙活捉了长万。
English: In the Battle of Hengshan Hill, Zhuang Gong used an arrow called the Golden Servant to shoot Chang Wan in the South Palace. Zhuang Gong's right-hand grandson caught Chang Wan alive.

古文：宋人请之，宋公靳之，曰： 始吾敬子，今子，鲁囚也，吾弗敬子矣。 
现代文：宋国人请求把南宫长万释放回国。长万是力气极大的人，宋闵公开玩笑说： 原来我尊敬你，如今你成了鲁国的囚犯，所以我便不敬重你了。 
English: The people of Song requested the release of Chang Wan of the Southern Palace. Chang Wan was a man of great strength, and Song Tao openly joked: Originally I respected you, but now you are a prisoner of Lu, so I do not respect you.

古文：病之。
现代文：南宫长万因此而怀恨他。
English: The head of the Southern Court held a grudge against him because of this.

