古文：黄帝闲居，辟左右而问于岐伯曰：余已闻九针之经，论阴阳逆顺，六经已毕，愿得口问。
现代文：黄帝在闲暇独处的时候，屏退左右之后问岐伯说：我已经学到了九针针术方面的知识，也能判断阴阳顺逆的问题了，对六经也很熟悉，我还想学到一些你从别人的口述中了解的知识。
English: When the Yellow Emperor was alone in his leisure time, after the screen retreated to the right and left, he asked Qibo and said: I have learned the knowledge of nine-needle needlework, I can also judge the problem of yin and yang, I am also familiar with the Six Classics, I still want to learn some knowledge you know from other people's dictation.

古文：岐伯避席再拜曰：善乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯听罢，忙离开座位，对黄帝跪拜行礼说：这个问题提得好！
English: Listen to Qi Bo, quickly leave his seat, kneel and bow to the Yellow Emperor and say: This question is well put!

古文：此先师之所口传也。
现代文：这些知识都是先师口授传给我的。
English: All of this knowledge was passed on to me by my mentor.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻口传。
现代文：黄帝说：我很想听一听。
English: Huang Di said, "I would like to listen to it."

古文：岐伯答曰：夫百病之始生也，皆生于风雨寒暑，阴阳喜怒，饮食居处，大惊卒恐。
现代文：岐伯回答说：各种疾病的发生，大多是风雨寒暑侵袭的变化，房事不节，喜怒过度，饮食失调，起居无常，以及突受惊吓等原因所引起。
English: Qibo replied: The occurrence of various diseases is mostly caused by the changes of wind and rain, cold and heat, irregularities in the house, excessive emotions, eating disorders, impermanence of living, and sudden shock.

古文：则血气分离，阴阳破败，经络厥绝，脉道不通，阴阳相逆，卫气稽留，经脉虚空，血气不次，乃失其常。
现代文：这些原因造成体内血气分离而逆乱，阴阳失去平衡，经络之气逆乱而闭塞，脉道壅塞不通，阴阳之气逆乱不顺，卫气滞留于内不能向外散布，使得经脉虚空，气血循行紊乱，体内的一切生命活动失去平衡最终便导致了疾病的发生。
English: These causes cause the separation of blood and gas in the body to be disordered, yin and yang to be out of balance, the meridians of qi to be disordered and blocked, the blood vessels to be blocked, the qi of yin and yang to be disordered and unsatisfactory, and the qi to remain inside and not be able to spread out, making the meridians empty, the qi and blood to be disordered, and all life activities in the body to be out of balance, eventually leading to the occurrence of disease.

古文：论不在经者，请道其方。
现代文：这些论述在医经上没有记载，请让我说明其中的道理。
English: These discourses are not recorded in the Canon of Medicine, so let me explain why.

古文：黄帝曰：人之欠者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人打哈欠，是什么气造成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What causes a person to yawn?

古文：岐伯答曰：卫气昼日行于阳，夜半则行于阴。
现代文：岐伯回答说：卫气白天行于人身的阳分，夜间行于人身的阴分。
English: Qi Bo replied, "During the day, Weiqi acts on the yang part of the body, and at night on the yin part of the body.

古文：阴者主夜，夜者卧。
现代文：阴气主于夜间，夜间人的主要生命活动是睡眠。
English: The yin and yang are predominant at night, and the main life activity of people at night is sleep.

古文：阳者主上，阴者主下。
现代文：阳气主生发而向上，阴气主沉降而向下。
English: The yang principle arises and rises, while the yin principle sinks and sinks.

古文：故阴气积于下，阳气未尽，阳引而上，阴引而下，阴阳相引，故数欠。
现代文：因此人在夜间入睡之前，阴气沉积于下，阳气开始入于阴分，但还没有全部进入的时候，阳气引阴气向上，阴气引阳气向下，阴阳相引，于是不停的哈欠。
English: Therefore, before falling asleep at night, the yin gas is deposited below, and the yang gas begins to enter the yin point, but when they have not all entered, the yang gas pulls the yin gas up, the yin gas pulls the yang gas down, and the yin and yang phase pulls, so they yawn incessantly.

古文：阳气尽，阴气盛，则目瞑；阴气尽而阳气盛，则寤矣。
现代文：入夜之后，阳气已全部进入于阴分，所以能够安静的睡眠；到黎明时阴气将尽，而阳气渐盛，就会清醒了。
English: After nightfall, the yang qi has all entered the yin component, so you can sleep peacefully; by dawn, the yin qi will be exhausted, and the yang qi will gradually increase, and you will be awake.

古文：泻足少阴，补足太阳。
现代文：治疗打哈欠，应该泻足少阴肾经以抑其阴气，补足太阳膀胱经以助其阳气。
English: For the treatment of yawning, it is necessary to relax the legs and the kidneys to suppress the yin qi, and supplement the solar bladder to help the yang qi.

古文：黄帝曰：人之哕者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人患呃逆，是什么气造成的呢？
English: Huangdi said: "Human diseases, on the other hand, are caused by what kind of gas?

古文：岐伯曰：谷入于胃，胃气上注于肺。
现代文：岐伯说：食物水谷入于胃，经过了胃的腐熟、消化，在脾气的推动之下将精微物质上注于肺。
English: Qi Bo said: The food enters the stomach through the gullet, and after the stomach is ripened and digested, the fine substance is injected into the lungs under the impetus of temper.

古文：今有故寒气与新谷气，俱还入于胃，新故相乱，真邪相攻，气并相逆，复出于胃，故为哕。
现代文：如果胃中素有寒气，饮食水谷进入胃中之后，新生的水谷精微之气与素有的寒气相搏，正邪相攻，二气混杂而上逆，再从胃中逆行而出，而成为呃逆之症。
English: If there is cold gas in the stomach, after the food trough enters the stomach, the newly born trough's subtle gas will fight with the cold gas, attack the positive and the evil, mix the two gases and go up and down, and then go out of the stomach and become the opposite of hiccup.

古文：补手太阴，泻足少阴。
现代文：治疗呃逆，可补手太阴肺经，泻足少阴肾经。
English: The treatment of urinary inversion can make up for the fact that the hands are too yin and the lungs are too yang and the legs are too yin and the kidneys are too yang.

古文：黄帝曰：人之唏者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人发生唏嘘抽咽的，是什么气造成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the nature of the breath that causes a person to choke?

古文：岐伯曰：此阴气盛而阳气虚，阴气疾而阳气徐，阴气盛而阳气绝，故为唏。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这是阴气盛而阳气虚，阴气运行快速而阳气受阻、运行缓慢，甚至阴气亢盛而阳气衰微而造成的。
English: Qibo replied, "This is caused by the yin qi being strong and the yang qi being weak, the yin qi running fast and the yang qi being blocked and running slowly, and even the yin qi being strong and the yang qi being weak.

古文：补足太阳，泻足少阴。
现代文：治疗时应该补足太阳膀胱经，泻足少阴肾经。
English: During treatment, the solar bladder meridian should be supplemented, and the laxity should be reduced by the yin and yang kidney meridian.

古文：黄帝曰：人之振寒者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人有时发冷打寒颤，是什么气造成的呢？
English: Huang Di said: People sometimes feel cold and shiver. What is the cause of this?

古文：岐伯曰：寒气客于皮肤，阴气盛，阳气虚，故为振寒寒栗，补诸阳。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这是由于阴寒之气留滞于皮肤，阴气盛而阳气虚，因此而产生振寒、颤栗的表现。
English: Qibo replied: This is due to the fact that the cold air lingers on the skin, the yin air is strong and the yang air is weak, thus producing the symptoms of chills and shivers.

古文：黄帝曰：人之噫者，何气使然？
现代文：治疗应采用温补各阳经的方法。黄帝说：人出现嗳气，是什么气造成的呢？
English: The treatment should adopt the method of warming and supplementing each yangjing. Huang Di said: When a person has a hernia, what is the cause of it?

古文：岐伯曰：寒气客于胃，厥逆从下上散，复出于胃，故为噫。
现代文：岐伯回答说：寒气侵入胃中，扰乱了胃气，胃气不能和降而发生上逆，就成为嗳气。
English: Qi Bo replied, "Cold air invades the stomach and disturbs the gastric gas. If the gastric gas cannot go up and down, it will turn into radon gas.

古文：补足太阴、阳明，一曰补眉本也。
现代文：治疗应补足太阴脾经和足阳明胃经，另外一说是补足太阳经的荥穴通谷穴。
English: The treatment should supplement the foot yin spleen meridian and foot yang bright stomach meridian, and the other is to supplement the sun meridian through the valley hole.

古文：黄帝曰：人之嚏者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人打喷嚏，是什么气造成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "When a person sneezes, what is the gas that causes it?

古文：岐伯曰：阳气和利，满于心，出于鼻，故为嚏。
现代文：岐伯回答说：阳气和利，满布于心中，并上出于鼻，成为喷嚏。
English: Qi Bo replied, "Yang qi and benevolence are full of cloth in the heart, and come out of the nose to become sneezing.

古文：补足太阳荣眉本，一曰眉上也。
现代文：治疗应该补足太阳膀胱经的荥穴通谷穴，另外一说是针刺眉根的攒竹穴。
English: The treatment should supplement the acupoint of the solar bladder, and the other is the acupoint of the acupuncture eyebrow.

古文：黄帝曰：人之亸者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人出现了全身无力、疲困解惰的亸症，是什么气造成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: What is the cause of a person's general weakness, fatigue and laziness?

古文：岐伯曰：胃不实则诸脉虚，诸脉虚则筋脉懈惰，筋脉懈惰则行阴用力，气不能复，故为亸。
现代文：岐伯回答说：胃气虚，人体经脉气血不足，筋骨肌肉失于荣养也就解惰无力，这种情况之下，再强行入房，元气大损，气不能马上恢复，就出现了亸症。
English: Qi Bo replied: "The stomach is weak, the human body is deficient in qi and blood, the musculoskeletal muscles are deprived of nourishment and are weak. Under these circumstances, if you force entry into the room, the qi will be greatly damaged, and the qi cannot be immediately restored, and porphyria will occur.

古文：因其所在，补分肉间。黄帝曰：人之哀而泣涕出者，何气使然？
现代文：因其病变主要发生在肌肉之间，治疗时就应该根据病症发生的具体部位，在分肉之间用补法进行针刺治疗。黄帝说：人在哀伤的时候鼻涕和眼泪都会流出，是什么气造成的呢？
English: Because the lesion mainly occurs between the muscles, the treatment should be based on the specific site of the disease, and acupuncture should be performed between the lobes. Huang Di said: When a person is sad, snot and tears will flow out, what is the cause of it?

古文：岐伯曰：心者，五脏六腑之主也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：心是五脏六腑的主宰。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The heart is the master of the five viscera.

古文：目者，宗脉之所聚也，上液之道也。口鼻者，气之门户也。
现代文：目是诸多经脉汇聚的地方，五脏六腑的经气上注于目，也是经气由上而外泻的通道。口鼻为气之门户。
English: The eyes are the place where many meridians converge. The meridians of the five viscera flow into the eyes, and they are also the channels through which the meridians flow out from above. The mouth and nose are the portals of the meridians.

古文：故悲哀愁忧则心动，心动则五脏六腑皆摇，摇则宗脉感，宗脉感则液道开，液道开故泣涕出焉。
现代文：所以悲伤、哀怨、愁苦、忧伤的情绪会牵动心神，心神不安就会使五脏六腑皆受影响，继而波及各经脉，经脉的波动使得各条排泄液体的通道尽皆开放，液道开放，所以鼻涕和眼泪会同时涌出。
English: Therefore, the emotions of sadness, grief, sorrow, and sadness will affect the mind, and anxiety will affect all the five viscera, and then affect all the meridians. The fluctuation of the meridians makes all the channels for excreting liquid open, and the liquid channels are open, so the snot and tears will gush out at the same time.

古文：液者，所以灌精濡空窍者也。
现代文：人体中的液体，有灌输精微物质以濡养各个孔窍的作用。
English: The liquid in the human body has the effect of instilling fine substances to wet and nourish each orifice.

古文：故上液之道开则泣，泣不止则液竭，液竭则精不灌，精不灌则目无所见矣，故命曰夺精。
现代文：因此，眼泪的通道敞开就会涕泣不止，涕泣不止就会导致津液枯竭，津液枯竭会使精气无所灌注，精气无所灌注就会使眼睛看不见东西，所以称为 夺精 。
English: Therefore, if the tear duct is open, the crying will not stop, and if the crying does not stop, the tears will dry up, and if the tears dry up, the essence will not be perfused, and if the essence is not perfused, the eyes will not be able to see anything, so it is called "seizure of essence."

古文：补天柱经侠颈。黄帝曰：人之太息者，何气使然？
现代文：治疗此症可补天柱穴，穴位在足太阳膀胱经脖子两边的发际处。黄帝说：人有时常叹息，是什么气造成的呢？
English: The treatment for this disease is to fill the post hole, which is located at the base of the foot, the solar bladder, and the hairline on both sides of the neck. Huang Di said: People sometimes often sigh, what is the cause of it?

古文：岐伯曰：忧思则心系急，心系急则气道约，约则不利，故太息以伸出之，补手少阴、心主、足少阳，留之也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：过于忧思会造成心系拘急，心系拘急就会使气道受到约束，受到约束就会使气行不畅，因此深长地呼吸才能使得气机得以舒缓。治疗应补手少阴经、手厥阴经、足少阳经，并采用留针法。
English: Qi Bo replied, "Too much worry will cause the nervous system to be anxious, and the nervous system will constrain the airway, and the airway will be constrained. Therefore, it is necessary to breathe deeply to relieve the qi. The treatment should be to supplement the hands with less yin, the hands with more yin, and the feet with less yang, and use the needle retention method.

古文：黄帝曰：人之涎下者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人流口水,是什么气造成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "People drool. What is the cause of drool?

古文：岐伯曰：饮食者，皆入于胃，胃中有热则虫动，虫动则胃缓，胃缓则廉泉开，故涎下。
现代文：岐伯回答说：饮食水谷进入胃中，胃中有热，胃中的寄生虫因受热而蠕动，就会使胃气迟缓，胃通于口，胃气迟缓使得舌下的廉泉穴开张，而使口水流出。
English: Qi Bo replied, "Dietary troughs enter the stomach, there is heat in the stomach, the parasites in the stomach wriggle due to heat, which will slow down the gastric qi, the stomach passes into the mouth, the gastric qi slows down the opening of the spring hole under the tongue, and the saliva flows out.

古文：补足少阴。黄帝曰：人之耳中鸣者，何气使然？
现代文：由于足少阴肾经上连于廉泉穴，故治疗针刺足少阴肾经以补肾水。黄帝说：人发生耳鸣，是什么气造成的呢？
English: Since the Shao Yin Kidney Sutra is connected to the Lianquan Cave, the best treatment is to prick the Shao Yin Kidney Sutra with needles to replenish the kidney fluid. Huang Di said: What is the cause of tinnitus?

古文：岐伯曰：耳者，宗脉之所聚也，故胃中空则宗脉虚，虚则下溜，脉有所竭者，故耳鸣。
现代文：岐伯回答说：耳是人身宗脉聚集的地方，若胃中空虚，水谷精微供给不足，则宗脉无以为养，脉中亦空虚，宗脉虚则阳气不升，精微不得上达，入耳的经脉气血不得充养而耗伤，而致耳中鸣响。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The ear is the place where the human lineage is concentrated. If the stomach is empty and the trough is deficient in the supply of fine elements, then the lineage is not nourished and the vein is also empty. If the lineage is deficient, then the yang will not rise and the fine elements will not be able to reach the ear. If the meridians of qi and blood entering the ear are not nourished and are damaged, then the middle ear will ring.

古文：补客主人，手大指爪甲上与肉交者也。
现代文：治疗时应在足少阳胆经的客主人穴及位于手大指爪甲角的手太阴肺经的少商穴，以补法针刺。
English: During treatment, acupuncture should be used to supplement the treatment at the guest master's anus, which has a small amount of yang and gall in the foot, and the small merchant's anus, which has a small amount of yin and lung in the hand, which is located at the nail angle of the big toe.

古文：黄帝曰：人之自啮舌者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人有时自咬其舌，是什么气造成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "People sometimes bite their tongues. What is the cause of this?

古文：岐伯曰：此厥逆走上，脉气辈至也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这是厥逆之气上行于头，随各脉各行其位导致的。
English: Qibo replied, "This is the result of the spirit of rebellion rising to the top, with each vein following its own path.

古文：少阴气至则啮舌，少阳气至则啮颊，阳明气至则啮唇矣。
现代文：少阴逆气上达就会咬舌，少阳逆气上达就会咬脸颊内部，阳明逆气上达就会咬嘴唇。
English: If the Yin and Yang are out of balance, they will bite their tongues, if the Yang and Yang are out of balance, they will bite the inside of their cheeks, and if the Yang and Yang are out of balance, they will bite their lips.

古文：视主病者，则补之。
现代文：治疗应根据主病在何经，采用补的针刺手法。
English: The treatment should be based on the main disease and the type of menstruation, using the complementary acupuncture method.

古文：凡此十二邪者，皆奇邪之走空窍者也。
现代文：以上提到的十二种病邪，都是邪气侵入孔窍所致的病症。
English: The twelve kinds of diseases mentioned above are all diseases caused by evil spirits invading orifices.

古文：故邪之所在，皆为不足。
现代文：而邪气能侵入这些部位，都是由正气不足引起的。
English: And the evil spirit can invade these parts, which is caused by the lack of righteous spirit.

古文：故上气不足，脑为之不满，耳为之苦鸣，头为之苦倾，目为之眩。中气不足，溲便为之变，肠为之苦鸣。下气不足，则乃为痿厥心悗。
现代文：凡是，上焦气不足的病症，就会使得脑髓不充，有空虚之感，耳鸣，头部支撑无力而低垂，双目晕眩；中焦气不足，二便不调，肠中鸣响；下焦气不足，两足微弱无力而厥冷，心中窒闷。
English: In any case, the disease of insufficient upper concentration will cause the cerebral marrow not to be full, a feeling of emptiness, ringing in the ears, the head support is weak and low, and the eyes are dizzy; insufficient middle concentration, irregular bowel movements, ringing in the intestines; insufficient lower concentration, weak and cold feet, and suffocation in the heart.

古文：补足外踝下留之。黄帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：治疗以上各症，应该用补法针刺足太阳膀胱经位于足外踝后部的昆仑穴，要留针。黄帝说：上述的各病如何治疗呢？
English: For the treatment of the above symptoms, the foot solar bladder should be pricked with a supplement needle through the Kunlun hole located at the back of the ankle, and the needle should be left. Huang Di said: How to treat the above diseases?

古文：岐伯曰：肾主为欠，取足少阴。
现代文：岐伯回答说：肾气不足引起的打呵欠，应该补足少阴肾经的穴位。
English: Qi Bo replied: The yawning caused by the shortage of kidney qi should be supplemented with the acupoints of the Shao Yin Kidney Sutra.

古文：肺主为哕，取手太阴、足少阴。
现代文：肺气不足引起的呃逆，应补手太阴肺经和足少阴肾经的穴位。
English: On the contrary, it is necessary to replenish the acupoints of the too yin pulmonary meridian and the less yin renal meridian.

古文：唏者，阴与阳绝，故补足太阳，泻足少阴。
现代文：哽咽，原因是阴盛阳衰，所以治疗应补太阳膀胱经，泻足少阴肾经。
English: The cause of choking is yin-sheng and yang-sheng, so the treatment should supplement the sun-bladder meridian, and the laxity is less than the yin-kidney meridian.

古文：振寒者，补诸阳。
现代文：发冷打寒颤，治疗应补各阳经。
English: Chills and chills, treatment should complement each Yangjing.

古文：噫者，补足太阴、阳明。
现代文：嗳气，治疗应补足太阴脾经和足阳明胃经。
English: In the treatment of bad breath, it is necessary to supplement the foot yin spleen meridian and foot yang bright stomach meridian.

古文：嚏者，补足太阳、眉本。
现代文：打喷嚏，治疗应补足太阳膀胱经。
English: Sneezing, the treatment should be to supplement the solar bladder.

古文：亸，因其所在，补分肉间。
现代文：肢体懈怠无力，根据其发病部位，补分肉间。
English: Limb slackness and weakness, according to the site of its onset, complement each other.

古文：泣出，补天柱经侠颈，侠颈者，头中分也。
现代文：流涕泪，治疗可补足太阳膀胱经挟项的天柱穴，挟项，指后颈正中两旁的发际处。
English: Flowing tears, treatment can replenish the solar bladder via the supraorbital hole of the clamp, the clamp, the hairline on both sides of the middle of the nape of the neck.

古文：太息，补手少阴、心主、足少阳，留之。
现代文：叹气，治疗可补手少阴心经、手厥阴心包经和足少阳胆经，要留针。
English: Sighing, the treatment can make up the hands less yin and heart meridian, the hands less yin and heart meridian and the feet less yang and gall meridian, and the needle should be left.

古文：涎下，补足少阴。
现代文：流口水，治疗可补足少阴肾经。
English: Drooling, treatment can be supplemented with Shao Yin Nephrology.

古文：耳鸣，补客主人，手大指爪甲上与肉交者。
现代文：耳鸣，治疗可补足少阳胆经的客主人穴、手大指指甲上与肉相交处的手太阴肺经的少商穴。
English: Tinnitus, the treatment can supplement the guest master hole of the foot less yang and gall, and the small merchant hole of the hand too yin and lung at the intersection of the thumbnail and fingernail.

古文：自啮舌，视主病者，则补之。
现代文：自己咬舌头，观察主病所在之经，用补的方法。
English: Bite your tongue, observe where the main disease is located, and use the method of supplementation.

古文：目眩头倾，补足外踝下留之。
现代文：目眩，头不能上抬的，治疗可补足外踝下的足太阳膀胱经的昆仑穴，要留针。
English: If you are dizzy and can't lift your head, the treatment can be to fill the Kunlun hole under the outer ankle. Leave the needle in place.

古文：痿厥心悗，刺足大趾间上二寸留之，一曰足外踝下留之。
现代文：痿厥，心闷，治疗可刺足大趾间上二寸处，要留针，另一种说法是可刺足外踝下的昆仑穴，要留针。
English: Xing Jue, depressed, can be treated by pricking the upper two inches between the big toe and leaving a needle, another way is to prick the Kunlun hole under the outer ankle and leave a needle.

