古文：周敦颐，字茂叔，道州营道人。
现代文：周敦颐，字茂叔，道州营道人。
English: Zhou Dunyao, also known as Maoshu, was a Taoist from Doushuying.

古文：元名敦实，避英宗旧讳改焉。
现代文：原名敦实，避英宗旧讳改名。
English: His original name was Dunshi, but he changed his name to avoid the British.

古文：以舅龙图阁学士郑向任，为分宁主簿。
现代文：因他的舅舅龙图阁学士郑向而任职，担任分宁主簿。
English: Because of his uncle, Longtu Ge bachelor Zheng Xiang, he served as the chief bookkeeper of Bining.

古文：有狱久不决，敦颐至，一讯立辨。
现代文：有诉讼案很久不能判决，周敦颐到任，审讯一次就辨明。
English: Some lawsuits cannot be adjudicated for a long time, and once Zhou Dunyao takes office, the trial will be clear.

古文：邑人惊曰： 老吏不如也。 部使者荐之，调南安军司理参军。
现代文：同乡惊奇地说 ：过去的官吏不如他。 刑部使者推荐他，改调南安军司理参军。
English: His fellow villagers were surprised and said, "The officials in the past were not as good as him. The Criminal Investigation Department envoy recommended him, and he was transferred to be the secretary of the Nan'an Army to join the army."

古文：有囚法不当死，转运使王逵欲深治之。
现代文：有囚犯依法不该处死，转运使王逵想严惩他。
English: There is a prisoner who should not be put to death according to the law, and the transfer makes Wang Xuan want to severely punish him.

古文：逵，酷悍吏也，众莫敢争，敦颐独与之辨，不听，乃委手版归，将弃官去，曰： 如此尚可仕乎！
现代文：王逵，凶残骄悍的酷吏，众官都不敢与他争执，周敦颐一个人与他辩议，不听他的意见，于是请别人代行己责，打算弃官而归，说 ：照这样怎么能做官呢？
English: Wang Yao, a cruel, arrogant and harsh official, all the officials did not dare to argue with him. Zhou Dunyao was the only one who argued with him and did not listen to his opinion, so he asked others to act on his behalf, intending to resign, saying: "How can you be an official like this?"

古文：杀人以媚人，吾不为也。 逵悟，囚得免。
现代文：杀人以献媚于人，我不干这种事。 王逵悔悟，囚犯得以免死。
English: I don't do this kind of thing, killing people to flatter them. Wang Yao repented, and the prisoner was spared death.

古文：移郴之桂阳令，治绩尤著。
现代文：调任郴州桂阳县令，治官政绩特别大。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Guiyang County of Luzhou, and his performance as a governor was particularly outstanding.

古文：郡守李初平贤之，语之曰： 吾欲读书，何如？ 敦颐曰： 公老无及矣，请为公言之。 二年果有得。
现代文：郡守李初平认为他贤能，对他说： 我想读书，怎么样？ 周敦颐说 ：您老学习得不够，我为您讲说。 二年果然学有所得。
English: The county governor, Li Huping, thought he was very capable and said to him, "I want to study, how about it?" Zhou Dunyao said, "You have never studied enough, let me tell you.

古文：徙知南昌，南昌人皆曰： 是能辨分宁狱者，吾属得所诉矣。 富家大姓、黠吏恶少，惴惴焉不独以得罪于令为忧，而又以污秽善政为耻。
现代文：调任南昌知府，南昌人都说： 是能够辨别分宁狱事的人，我们可以诉讼了。 富家大姓、狡猾胥吏、品行恶劣的年轻人，惶恐不安，不但以得罪于府令为忧虑，而且又以损害善政为耻辱。
English: When he was transferred to the governor's office of Nanchang, the people of Nanchang all said, "He is the one who can distinguish the difference between Ning prison and others, so we can sue him." The rich families, the cunning officials, and the young people with bad moral conduct were scared and anxious, not only because they were worried about offending the government, but also because they were ashamed of harming good governance.

古文：历合州判官，事不经手，吏不敢决。虽下之，民不肯从。
现代文：后历任合州判官，事不经他的手，官吏不敢决断，虽决断处理了，民众不肯听从。
English: Later, successive judges of the Hechu District Court did not take matters into their own hands, and officials did not dare to make a decision. Although the decision was made, the people did not want to listen.

古文：部使者赵抃惑于谮口，临之甚威，敦颐处之超然。
现代文：刑部使者赵扌卞为诬陷的言词所迷惑，到合州很是威风，周敦颐泰然处之。
English: The messenger of the criminal department, Zhao Jun, was confused by the words of the frame-up, and it was very dignified to go to Hezhou. Zhou Dunjun dealt with it calmly.

古文：通判虔州，抃守虔，熟视其所为，乃大悟，执其手曰： 吾几失君矣，今而后乃知周茂叔也。 
现代文：任虔州通判时，赵扌卞为虔州知州，深入了解了他的所作所为，于是完全明白理解了，握住他的手说： 我差点失掉你了，从今以后我算知道了周茂叔。 
English: During the sentencing of Ren Qizhou, Zhao Zhe was Qizhou's mentor. He deeply understood what he had done, so he completely understood it. He held his hand and said: I almost lost you. From now on, I know Uncle Zhou.

古文：熙宁初，知郴州。
现代文：熙宁初年，任郴州知州。
English: In the first year of Xi Ning, he was appointed as the leader of Bozhou and Chizhou.

古文：用抃及吕公著荐，为广东转运判官，提点刑狱，以洗冤泽物为己任。
现代文：因为赵扌卞和吕公著的推荐，担任广南东路转运判官、提点刑狱，以澄清冤狱、润泽万物为自己的职责。
English: Because of the recommendation of Zhao Wei and Lu Gong, he served as the judge of the Guannan East Road transshipment and raised the point of imprisonment, to clarify the unjust imprisonment and moisturize everything as his duty.

古文：行部不惮劳苦，虽瘴疠险远，亦缓视徐按。
现代文：检查辖区事务不怕劳苦，虽因瘴疠疾病危险，路途遥远，但仍然一一亲临检查断事。
English: Inspecting the affairs of the jurisdiction is not afraid of hard work. Although the road is far away due to the danger of tick disease, they still come to inspect and adjudicate one by one.

古文：以疾求知南康军。
现代文：因为疾病请求担任南康知军。
English: Due to illness, he requested to serve as the commander of the Southern Kangchi Army.

古文：因家庐山莲花峰下。前有溪，合于溢江，取营道所居濂溪以名之。
现代文：因家住庐山莲花峰下，屋前有小溪，汇合于湓江，取营道所住的房子旁有濂溪作为它的名字。
English: Because the family lived under the lotus peak of Lushan Mountain, there was a creek in front of the house, which merged into the Lijiang River. The house next to the road where the family lived had Lushan Creek as its name.

古文：抃再镇蜀，将奏用之，未及而卒，年五十七。
现代文：赵扌卞再次担任蜀地官员时，打算奏请任用他，未上任就去世了。终年五十七岁。
English: When Zhao Wei served as an official of Shu again, he intended to petition for his appointment, but died before taking office. He was fifty-seven years old.

古文：黄庭坚称其 人品甚高，胸怀洒落，如光风霁月。廉于取名而锐于求志，薄于徼福而厚于得民，菲于奉身而燕及茕嫠，陋于希世而尚友千古。 
现代文：黄庭坚称道： 他的人品、道德修养很高，胸怀宽广、洒脱，好似晴空的阳光和风、灿烂的月亮，不重于求得廉洁的名声而刻意于追求远大的志向，不看重享受而努力为民造福，不注重自身的利益而关心孤寡的忧乐，鄙薄迎合世俗之人而崇尚长久的友情。 
English: Huang Ting insisted: His character and moral cultivation are very high, his mind is broad and free, just like the sunshine and wind of the clear sky and the brilliant moon. He deliberately pursues lofty aspirations without attaching importance to obtaining a clean reputation. He does not value enjoyment but strives to benefit the people. He does not pay attention to his own interests but is concerned about the sorrows and joys of the lonely. He is contemptuous of and panders to worldly people but advocates long-term friendship.

古文：博学行力，著《太极图》，明天理之根源，究万物之终始。
现代文：周敦颐学问广博，努力实践。著作《太极图》，阐明天理的根源，研究万物的始终。
English: Zhou Dunlian has extensive knowledge and diligently practices. He wrote "Taiji Diagram," expounded the root of tomorrow's logic, and studied the beginning of all things.

古文：其说曰：
现代文：他的解说是：
English: His commentary was:

古文：无极而太极。
现代文： 无极至太极。
English: From the infinite to the infinite.

古文：太极动而生阳，动极而静，静而生阴，静极复动，一动一静，互为其根，分阴分阳，两仪立焉。
现代文：太极的运动产生阳，动极产生静，静中即产生阴，静极又动，一动一静，互以对方为其根本，分辨出阴阳，天地就出现了。
English: The movement of Taiji produces Yang, the moving pole produces Jing, the middle of Jing produces Yin, the static pole also moves, one moving and one still, each taking the other as the fundamental, distinguishing Yin and Yang, heaven and earth appear.

古文：阳变阴合，而生水、火、木、金、土，五气顺布，四时行焉。
现代文：阳变阴合，即产生水、火、木、金、土，五气的正常变化，四季就依次而行。
English: Yang changes into yin and yang changes into yin and yang, that is, water, fire, wood, metal, earth, and the normal changes of the five elements are produced, and the four seasons follow one after another.

古文：五行一阴阳也，阴阳一太极也。太极本无极也。
现代文：五行即阴阳的一种，阴阳即太极的一类，太极原本就是无极。
English: The five elements are a type of yin and yang, and yin and yang are a type of tai chi. Tai chi is originally a form of wu chi.

古文：五行之生也，各一其性。
现代文：五行的产生，各有其特性。
English: The production of the five elements each has its own characteristics.

古文：无极之真，二五之精，妙合而凝，乾道成男，坤道成女。
现代文：无极的真谛，二五的精髓，奇妙地组合、凝结，乾道生成男，坤道生成女。
English: The truth of infinity, the essence of twenty-five, strangely combined and condensed, the dry road produces a man, and the kundalini road produces a woman.

古文：二气交感，化生万物，万物生生，而变化无穷焉。
现代文：二气的交互感应，生成万物，万物生化不息，以致变化无穷。
English: The interaction of the two airs generates all things, and all things continue to be biochemical, resulting in endless changes.

古文：惟人也得其秀而最灵，形既生矣，神发知矣，五性感动而善恶分，万事出矣。
现代文： 只有人得其秀而最灵，物形出现了，就会有精神的感知，五性感动，以分别善恶，万事从中而出。
English: Only when a person is the most brilliant and the most spiritual, and a physical form appears, will there be a spiritual perception, the five natures will be moved to distinguish between good and evil, and everything will come out of it.

古文：圣人定之以中正仁义而主静，立人极焉。
现代文：圣人阐明，确定以中、正、仁、义来主静，以成为人的最高境界。
English: The sage clarified and determined that the middle, upright, benevolent, and righteous should be the main focus, so as to become the highest realm of human beings.

古文：故圣人与天地合其德，日月合其明，四时合其序，鬼神合其吉凶。
现代文：所以圣人与天地化合而成道德，太阳与月亮化合而成光明，四季的变化组合成时间的顺序，鬼神分合化解出吉凶。
English: Therefore, saints and heaven and earth combine to form morality, the sun and the moon combine to form light, the changes of the four seasons combine to form the order of time, and ghosts and gods combine to resolve good and evil.

古文：君子修之吉，小人悖之凶。
现代文：君子通过修养得吉，小人违背它则为凶。
English: A gentleman achieves good luck through cultivation, while a villain is evil if he violates it.

古文：故曰： 立天之道，曰阴与阳。
现代文：所以说： 苍天确定的常道，叫作阴、阳。
English: Therefore, he said: The common way determined by heaven and earth is called yin and yang.

古文：立地之道，曰柔与刚。
现代文：大地运行的常道，叫作柔、刚。
English: The normal path of the earth's movement is called soft and hard.

古文：立人之道，曰仁与义。 又曰： 原始反终，故知死生之说。 大哉《易》也，斯其至矣。
现代文：人世间遵守的常道，叫作仁、义。 又说： 从开始到结果的反复变化，所以知道死生变化的道理。 伟大的《易》经，这是最高的境界。 
English: The common way to be observed in the human world is called benevolence and righteousness. It is also said: From the beginning to the result of repeated changes, so we know the truth of the change of life and death. The great "I Ching," this is the highest realm.

古文：又著《通书》四十篇，发明太极之蕴。
现代文：又写作有《通书》四十篇，阐述太极的详细内容与真谛。
English: He has also written forty articles for "Tsushin" (Comprehensive Book), expounding the details and true meaning of Taijiquan.

古文：序者谓 其言约而道大，文质而义精，得孔、孟之本源，大有功于学者也。 
现代文：写序的人说 ：他的言论简约，但道理宏大，文字质朴而意义精微，得到了孔子、孟子思想的本源，对于学者是有很大的功绩的。 
English: The person who wrote the introduction said: His speech is simple, but the reason is grand, the text is simple but the meaning is subtle, and he has obtained the source of Confucius and Mencius's thought, which is a great achievement for scholars.

古文：掾南安时，程珦通判军事，视其气貌非常人，与语，知其为学知道，因与为友，使二子颢、颐往受业焉。
现代文：周敦颐任职南安时，程王向通判军事，视其气质、相貌不是普通的常人，与他交谈，了解他治学探求大道，因此同他结交为朋友，送二个儿子程颢、程颐前往受训学业。
English: When Zhou Dunyao served in Nan'an, Cheng Wangxiang judged him to be a military man, considering his temperament and appearance to be not an ordinary ordinary person. He talked to him and understood that he was studying and exploring the road. Therefore, he made friends with him and sent his two sons, Cheng Yao and Cheng Yao, to receive training and study.

古文：敦颐每令寻孔、颜乐处，所乐何事，二程之学源流乎此矣。
现代文：周敦颐每每命令他俩探寻孔子、颜子感到快乐的地方，他们感到快乐的是什么事呢，二程的学说渊源就是来自于这里。
English: Zhou Dunyi always ordered them to explore the places where Confucius and Yan Zi felt happy. What made them feel happy? The origin of the doctrine of the two courses is from here.

古文：故颢之言曰： 自再见周茂叔后，吟风弄月以归，有 吾与点也 之意。 侯师圣学于程颐，未悟，访敦颐，敦颐曰： 吾老矣，说不可不详。 留对榻夜谈，越三日乃还。
现代文：所以程颢有言论说 ：自又见到周茂叔后，以吟弄风花雪月以归，有 我与点相同 的感觉。 侯师圣从学于程颐，没有觉悟明白，拜访周敦颐，周敦颐说： 我老了。学说不可不详细。 晚上，二人于床边对坐交谈，过了三天才回去。
English: Therefore, Cheng Yu said: "Since I saw Uncle Zhou again, I have the same feeling as a dot, as I am playing with the wind and the snow and the moon." Hou Shisheng learned from Cheng Yu, did not realize and did not understand, visited Zhou Dun Yu, Zhou Dun Yu said: "I am old. The theory must be detailed." In the evening, the two sat at the bedside and talked to each other, and it took three days to go back.

古文：颐惊异之，曰： 非从周茂叔来耶？ 其善开发人类此。
现代文：程颐见他惊奇地说 ：这不是从周茂叔那儿学来的吗？ 他善于启发人的才智就像这样。
English: Cheng Yu was surprised to see him and said, "Didn't you learn this from Uncle Zhou Maoz? His ability to inspire people is just like this."

古文：嘉定十三年，赐谥曰元公，淳祐元年，封汝南伯，从祀孔子庙庭。
现代文：嘉定十三年，赐谥号叫作元公。淳元年，封为汝南伯，从祀于孔子的庙庭中。
English: In the 13th year of Jiading, he was given the title of Yuan Gong. In the 1st year of Chun, he was given the title of Yunan Bo, and was enshrined in the temple courtyard of Confucius.

古文：二子寿、焘，焘官至宝文阁待制。
现代文：二个儿子，名字叫周寿、周焘。周焘官至宝文阁待制。
English: Two sons, their names are Zhou Shou and Zhou Ye. Zhou Ye's official residence is the Baobeng Pavilion.

古文：程颢，字伯淳，世居中山，后从开封徙河南。
现代文：程颢，字伯淳，世代定居中山，后来从开封府迁到河南府。
English: Cheng Yu, also known as Bo Jun, settled in Zhongshan for generations, and later moved from Kaifeng to Henan.

古文：高祖羽，太宗朝三司使。
现代文：高祖父程羽，宋太宗时期的三司使。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Cheng Yu, was an envoy to the Three Emperors during the Song Dynasty.

古文：父珦，仁宗录旧臣后，以为黄陂尉。
现代文：父亲程王向，仁宗时录用旧时大臣的后裔，被委任为黄陂县尉。
English: His father, Cheng Wangxiang, a descendant of a former minister, was appointed to Huangpi County Lieutenant.

古文：久之，知龚州。
现代文：任职很久后，升为龚州知州。
English: After a long time in office, he was promoted to the post of Zhangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：时宜獠区希范既诛，乡人忽传其神降，言 当为我南海立祠 ，于是迎其神以往，至龚，珦使诘之，曰： 比过浔，浔守以为妖，投祠具江中，逆流而上，守惧，乃更致礼。 珦使复投之，顺流去，其妄乃息。
现代文：当时宜獠区希范已经被杀了，他故乡的人忽然传说他的神灵降世，说 ：应当为我在南海立祠庙 ，于是迎送他的神灵至南海，到龚州，程王向派人责问送神的人，送神的人说： 近来经过浔州，浔州知州以为是妖怪，投祭祀品到江里，祭祀品逆水而上，知州害怕，于是改为以礼相待。 程王向派人又把祭品投入江里，祭品顺流而下，这种迷信欺骗于是被平息。
English: At that time, Xi Fan of Yili District had already been killed, and the people of his hometown suddenly said that his deity had descended to the world, saying, "A temple should be built for me in the South China Sea," so he sent his deity to the South China Sea, to Bozhou. King Cheng sent someone to ask the person who sent the deity, and the person who sent the deity said, "Recently, after passing through Bozhou, Bozhou Chizhou thought it was a monster, and threw the sacrificial object into the river. The sacrificial object went up against the water, and Chizhou was afraid, so they treated each other with courtesy

古文：徙知磁州，又徙汉州。尝宴客开元僧舍，酒方行，人欢言佛光见，观者相腾践，不可禁，珦安坐不动，顷之遂定。
现代文：程王向改职为磁州知州，又改为汉州知州，曾经在开元寺僧舍款待宴请客人，刚刚开始喝酒，人们喧哗说佛光显现，看的人互相挤撞践踏，不能禁止，程王向安静地坐着不动，过一会儿就安定下来了。
English: Cheng Wangxiang changed his job to Magizhou Chizhou, and changed it to Hanzhou Chizhou. He once hosted a banquet for guests in the monk's house of Kaiyuan Temple. He had just begun to drink, and people were clamoring that the Buddha's light was appearing. People watching were jostling and trampling each other, which could not be prohibited. Cheng Wangxiang sat quietly and did not move, and after a while he settled down.

古文：熙宁法行，为守令者奉命唯恐后，珦独抗议，指其未便。
现代文：熙宁新法推行，做州县官吏的听从命令唯恐落后，程王向独自抗议不行，指出新法的不恰当之处。
English: With the implementation of the new law in Xi'an, the state and county officials should follow the orders and fear falling behind. Cheng Wangxiang could not protest alone and pointed out the inappropriate points of the new law.

古文：使者李元瑜怒，即移病归，旋致仕，累转太中大夫。
现代文：朝廷派来的使者李元瑜发怒，他就推托生病而回归故里，不久退休，经多次转官，升为太中大夫。
English: Li Yuan Yu, an envoy sent by the imperial court, was so angry that he returned to his hometown, blaming his illness. He soon retired, and after several transfers, he was promoted to the post of Vice-Minister of Health.

古文：元祐五年，卒，年八十五。
现代文：元五年，去世，终年八十五岁。
English: He died in 1895, aged 85.

古文：珦慈恕而刚断，平居与幼贱处，唯恐有伤其意，至于犯义理，则不假也。
现代文：程王向仁慈、忠恕同时又刚毅、果断，平时与幼童和没有权势钱财的人相处，唯恐有伤害别人的意思，至于违犯了仁义道理，则不包庇袒护了。
English: Cheng Wang is benevolent, loyal and at the same time strong-willed and decisive. He usually gets along with young children and people without power or money, for fear of hurting others. If he violates the principle of benevolence and righteousness, he will not be protected.

古文：左右使令之人，无日不察其饥饱寒燠。
现代文：他左右的副职小官等人，没有一天不观察他的饥与饱、寒与热。
English: The vice-minor officials and others around him did not go a day without observing his hunger and satiety, cold and heat.

古文：前后五得任子，以均诸父之子孙。
现代文：先后得到五次任命子弟的机会，分别给了叔伯的子孙。
English: The uncle's children and grandchildren were given the opportunity to appoint their children five times in succession.

古文：嫁遣孤女，必尽其力。
现代文：出嫁孤女，一定尽自己最大的努力。
English: If you want to marry an orphan, you must do your best.

古文：所得奉禄，分赡亲戚之贫者。
现代文：所得到的薪俸，分别用来赡养亲戚中的贫穷人。
English: The salaries received are used separately to support the poor among relatives.

古文：伯母寡居，奉养甚至。
现代文：伯母寡居，他奉养她很好。
English: His aunt was a widow, and he took good care of her.

古文：从女兄既适人而丧其夫，珦迎以归，教养其子，均于子侄。
现代文：侄女嫁人后死了丈夫，程王向把她接回来，教育抚养她们母子，像对待儿子、侄儿一样。
English: After her niece married and her husband died, Cheng Wangxiang brought her back and educated and raised her mother and son, treating them like sons and nephews.

古文：时官小禄薄，克己为义，人以为难。
现代文：当时官职小，俸禄少，克制自己，追求道义，别人都以为很难得。
English: At that time, the official position was small, the salary was small, self-restraint, pursuit of morality, others thought it was difficult to obtain.

古文：文彦博、苏颂等九人表其清节，诏赐帛二百，官给其葬。
现代文：文彦博、苏颂等九人表彰他的清廉和志气节义，皇帝诏令赏赐帛二百匹，官府为他出葬。
English: Nine people, including Wen Yanbo and Susong, commended him for his integrity and determination. The emperor rewarded him with 200 horses, and the government buried him.

古文：颢举进士，调鄮、上元主簿。
现代文：程颢问： 是哪一年藏的？ 回答说： 藏了四十年。 
English: Cheng Yu asked: What year did you hide it? He answered: I hid it for forty years.

古文：鄮民有借兄宅居者，发地得瘗钱，兄之子诉曰： 父所藏。 颢问： 几何年？ 曰： 四十年。 彼借居几时？ 曰： 二十年矣。 遣吏取十千视之，谓诉者曰： 今官所铸钱，不五六年即遍天下，此皆未藏前数十年所铸，何也？ 其人不能答。
现代文： 他们什么时候借住的呢？ 回答说： 借住二十年了。 派遣官吏拿来十千钱仔细观察，对上诉的人说： 现在官府所铸的钱，不超过五六年就已经流通至天下各地，这都是没有埋藏前数十年所铸的钱，是什么原因呢？ 上诉的人不能回答出这个道理。
English: When did they borrow the money? They replied, "It's been borrowed for twenty years." They sent an official to carefully observe the ten thousand yuan and said to the appellant, "The money minted by the government has been circulated to all parts of the world for no more than five or six years. This is all money minted decades ago that has not been buried. What is the reason for this?" The appellant could not answer this question.

古文：茅山有池，产龙如蜥蜴而五色。
现代文：茅山有个池子，生长的龙像蜥蜴有五种颜色。
English: There is a pond in Mao Mountain. The growing dragon lizards have five colors.

古文：祥符中尝取二龙入都，半涂失其一，中使云飞空而逝。
现代文：祥符年中取二条龙送至京都，半路上遗失了一条，中使说是飞入空中消失了。
English: In the middle of the auspicious year, two dragons were taken and sent to Kyoto. Halfway there, one was lost, and the middle messenger said that it flew into the air and disappeared.

古文：民俗严奉不懈，颢捕而脯之。
现代文：民众习俗是严格侍奉而不懈怠，程颢捕捉到后做成肉干吃了。
English: The people's custom is to strictly serve and not slack off, and Cheng Yao was caught and made into dried meat and eaten.

古文：为晋城令，富人张氏父死，旦有老叟踵门曰： 我，汝父也。 子惊疑莫测，相与诣县。
现代文：程颢担任晋城县令时，富户人家张氏的父亲死了，清早有一年迈的老人亲到他的门前说： 我，就是你父亲。 那个人的儿子惊疑不已，不知所措，同他一起到晋城县衙。
English: When Cheng Yao was the governor of Jincheng County, the father of a rich family, Zhang Ruo, died. Early in the morning, an old man came to his door and said, "I am your father." The man's son was surprised and overwhelmed, and went to Jincheng County with him.

古文：叟曰： 身为医，远出治疾，而妻生子，贫不能养，以与张。 颢质其验。
现代文：那个老人说： 我身为医生，因远出为别人治病，而妻子生了儿子，因为贫穷不能抚养，就送给了富人张氏。 
English: The old man said, "As a doctor, I have traveled far and wide to treat others. My wife gave birth to a son, but because I was too poor to raise him, I gave him to a rich man, Mr. Zhang.

古文：取怀中一书进，其所记曰： 某年月日，抱儿与张三翁家。 颢问： 张是时才四十，安得有翁称？ 叟骇谢。
现代文：程颢对他们进行质问、检查验证。老人取出怀中的一封书信进呈送上，这封书信上记载说： 某年，某月，某日，抱儿子送给了张三翁家里。 程颢问 ：张氏当时才四十岁，哪有称他为翁的道理呢？ 
English: Cheng Yao questioned and checked them. The old man took out a letter in his arms and presented it to him. The letter recorded that: A certain year, a certain month, a certain day, his son was given to Zhang Siong's family. Cheng Yao asked: Mr. Zhang was only forty years old at the time, why was he called Weng?

古文：民税粟多移近边，载往则道远，就籴则价高。
现代文：那个老人惊骇不已，辞谢走了。老百姓交粟为税多送到附近边地，装载前往则道路远，就近买则价格高。
English: The old man was so shocked that he resigned and left. The common people had to pay more taxes to send the poppies to the outlying areas nearby. The roads were too far to go to load the poppies, and the prices were too high to buy the poppies nearby.

古文：颢择富而可任者，预使贮粟以待，费大省。
现代文：程颢选择富户可以任用的人，预先令他贮藏粮粟做好准备，费用大量节省。
English: Cheng Hao chose a person who could be appointed by a rich family and prepared him to store grain in advance, saving a lot of costs.

古文：民以事至县者，必告以孝弟忠信，入所以事其父兄，出所以事其长上。
现代文：民众因事至县衙的人，他一定以孝、悌、忠、信相告诫，在家里就要服侍听从父亲、兄长的，在外面就要服侍听从年长与上辈的。
English: If the people come to the county magistrate because of the incident, he will certainly admonish them with filial piety, diligence, loyalty, and mutual trust. At home, they should serve and obey their father and elder brother, and outside, they should serve and obey their elders and superiors.

古文：度乡村远近为伍保，使之力役相助，患难相恤，而奸伪无所容。
现代文：打算计划按乡村的远近建立伍保，使他们相互之间在财力、劳役上相互帮助，患难之时互相抚恤，从而邪恶、伪诈没有容身的场所。
English: It is planned to set up village guards near and far, so that they can help each other with financial resources and labor services, and support each other in times of distress, so that there is no place for evil and fraud.

古文：凡孤茕残废者，责之亲戚乡党，使无失所。
现代文：凡是孤寡残废的人，责令他的亲戚、乡邻党里帮助他，使他们不至于流离失所。
English: Anyone who is widowed or disabled should order his relatives, village neighbors and party members to help him, so that they will not be displaced.

古文：行旅出于其途者，疾病皆有所养。
现代文：而在外面旅行的人，患了疾病都有人帮助照顾。
English: And those who travel outside have someone to help take care of them if they get sick.

古文：乡必有校，暇时亲至，召父老与之语。
现代文：乡里一定要有学校，闲暇的时候亲自去讲学，召集父老乡亲与他们交谈。
English: There must be a school in the village, and when you have free time, you should go to lectures in person, and gather your parents and fellow villagers to talk with them.

古文：儿童所读书，亲为正句读，教者不善，则为易置。
现代文：小孩所读的书，亲自为他断句点读，教育不好的人，就改换另外安置。
English: The books read by children are to be read to them by themselves, and those who are not well educated are to be transferred to another location.

古文：择子弟之秀者，聚而教之。
现代文：选择民间优秀的子弟，聚集一起进行教育。
English: Select outstanding folk children and gather them together for education.

古文：乡民为社会，为立科条，旌别善恶，使有劝有耻。
现代文：乡间民众组成社会，为他们制订乡规民约，分别善恶行为，表彰善行，惩戒恶行，使人有劝善耻恶的进取心。
English: Rural people form a community, and a township regulation and people's agreement are formulated for them, distinguishing between good and evil behavior, commending good deeds, punishing evil deeds, and giving people the initiative to persuade good, shame, and evil.

古文：在县三岁，民爱之如父母。
现代文：在晋城县三年，老百姓爱戴他就像父母一样。
English: In Jincheng County for three years, the people loved him as much as his parents.

古文：熙宁初，用吕公著荐，为太子中允、监察御史里行。
现代文：熙宁初年，受吕公著的推荐，任命为太子中允、监察御史里行。
English: In the first year of Xi Ning's reign, he was recommended by Lü Gongzhu and appointed as the Prince's Vice-Councilor and Supervisor.

古文：神宗素知其名，数召见，每退，必曰： 频求对，欲常常见卿。 一日，从容咨访，报正午，始趋出，庭中人曰： 御史不知上未食乎？ 前后进说甚多，大要以正心窒欲、求贤育材为言，务以诚意感悟主上。
现代文：宋神宗平素就知道他的名声，几次召见他，每次退出的时候，一定对他说： 连续几次要求对策，想常常看见你。 有一天，皇上悠闲地登门造访，时间正是中午，于是，他急速出来迎接，堂庭上的人说： 御史您不知道皇上还没有吃饭吗？ 前后与皇上谈论叙说了很多话，大致是以端正心术，窒息欲望，征录贤能，培育人才为主要的谈话内容，想务必以诚恳的意见来感动皇上。
English: Song Shensong always knew his reputation. He summoned him several times, and each time he withdrew, he must have said to him, "I have asked for countermeasures several times in a row, and I want to see you often." One day, the emperor leisurely visited the door, the time was noon, so he rushed out to greet, and the people in the court said, "Sir, do you not know that the emperor has not eaten yet? I talked with the emperor back and forth, and said a lot of things, roughly based on the main content of the conversation, such as the correct heart technique, suffocation desire, recruitment of talents, and cultivation of talents. I wanted to impress the emperor

古文：尝劝帝防未萌之欲，及勿轻天下士，帝俯躬曰： 当为卿戒之。 
现代文：曾劝戒皇上防止、抑制没有产生的欲望，以及不要轻视天下的有识之士，神宗皇帝弯腰靠近他说： 你的话，我应当作为自己的告诫。 
English: Having admonished the emperor to prevent and restrain ungenerated desires, and not to despise the intelligent people of the world, Emperor Shenzong bent down to him and said, "Your words should serve as my admonition.

古文：王安石执政，议更法令，中外皆不以为便，言者攻之甚力。
现代文：王安石主持政务，讨论更改法律条令，朝廷内外的人都以为不好，说的人很严厉地攻击新法。
English: Wang Anshi presided over government affairs and discussed changing laws and regulations. People both inside and outside the imperial court thought it was bad, and those who said so severely attacked the new law.

古文：颢被旨赴中堂议事，安石方怒言者，厉色待之。
现代文：程颢接受圣旨到中堂议论政事，王安石刚刚对发表意见的人怒气冲冲地予以指责，声色俱厉地对待他们。
English: After Cheng Yao accepted the edict to go to the Great Hall to discuss political affairs, Wang Anshi just angrily rebuked those who voiced their opinions and treated them harshly.

古文：颢徐曰： 天下事非一家私议，愿平气以听。 安石为之愧屈。
现代文：程颢慢条斯理地说 ：议论国家的事情不是像哪一家来议论私人的事情，希望平心静气地来听。 王安石为此感到羞愧、理屈。
English: "Discussing state affairs is not like a family discussing personal matters, and I hope you will listen calmly," Cheng Yu said slowly and rationally. Wang Anshi felt ashamed of this, he reasoned.

古文：自安石用事，颢未尝一语及于功利。
现代文：自从王安石治理国事以来，程颢从没有一句话谈到功利。
English: Ever since Wang Anshi took charge of state affairs, Cheng Yu never said a word about utilitarianism.

古文：居职八九月，数论时政，最后言曰： 智者若禹之行水，行其所无事也；舍而之险阻，不足以言智。
现代文：任职八九个月的时间，几次议论当时的政事，最终发表看法说： 有智慧的人像大禹治水，畅通行达就不会出什么乱子；舍弃这个而想排除危险阻拦，就不足以去谈论智慧。
English: During his eight-nine months in office, he discussed the political affairs of the time several times, and finally expressed the view that: A wise person is like Dayu controlling water, and there will be no trouble with smooth passage; abandoning this and trying to eliminate dangerous obstacles is not enough to talk about wisdom.

古文：自古兴治立事，未有中外人情交谓不可而能有成者，况于排斥忠良，沮废公议，用贱陵贵，以邪干正者乎？
现代文：从古以来兴治立国的事情，没有朝廷内外的人都说不可行而能够达到目的、成就大事的，况且还有排斥忠良大臣，阻拦、废弃公众议论，使用资历低贱而欺凌资历高贵的人，以歪邪的人去干扰公正的人呢？
English: Since ancient times, people both inside and outside the imperial court have been saying that it is impossible to govern and establish a country, but it is possible to achieve goals and accomplish great things. Moreover, there is the exclusion of loyal ministers, the obstruction and abandonment of public discussion, the use of low-level qualifications to bully highly qualified people, and the use of crooked people to interfere with fair people.

古文：正使徼幸有小成，而兴利之臣日进，尚德之风浸衰，尤非朝廷之福。 遂乞去言职。
现代文：即使侥幸能取得一些小小的成就，而追求功利的大臣一天天地进升，崇尚道德的风气渐渐衰竭，这尤其不是朝廷的福运兆头。 于是请求辞去议论国事的职务。
English: Even if some small achievements can be made by chance, and ministers who pursue utilitarianism are rising day by day, and the moralistic culture is gradually exhausted, this is especially not a sign of good luck for the imperial court. So he asked to resign from the post of discussing state affairs.

古文：安石本与之善，及是虽不合，犹敬其忠信，不深怒，但出提点京西刑狱。
现代文：王安石本来与他相处很友好，到这时开始与他意见不统一而有矛盾，但仍然敬重他的忠诚、守信，没有很生气，只是派出朝廷任命他为提点京西路刑狱。
English: Wang Anshi was originally very friendly with him, but at this time he began to have disagreements with him, but still respected his loyalty and trustworthiness. He was not very angry, but sent the court to appoint him as the head of the Beijing West Road Penitentiary.

古文：颢固辞，改签书镇宁军判官。
现代文：程颢坚决辞谢，改任他为签书镇宁军判官。
English: Cheng Yao resolutely resigned and was appointed as the judge of the signing ceremony of the Zhenning Army.

古文：司马光在长安，上疏求退，称颢公直，以为己所不如。
现代文：司马光在长安，上奏疏请求隐退，称赞程颢公正、率直，认为自己在这方面不如他。
English: Sima Guang in Chang'an, on the record, asked for retirement, praised Cheng Hao as fair and straightforward, and considered himself inferior to him in this respect.

古文：程昉治河，取澶卒八百而虐用之，众逃归。
现代文：程日方治理黄河，挑选了澶州的士兵八百人，在使用中虐待他们，许多士兵逃回了军中。
English: During the administration of the Yellow River by the Japanese side in Chengdu, 800 soldiers from Zhangzhou were selected, and they were mistreated during use. Many soldiers fled back to the army.

古文：群僚畏昉，欲勿纳。
现代文：许多僚属害怕程日方，打算不收留他们。
English: Many of my colleagues are afraid of the Japanese side of Chengdu and are not willing to accept them.

古文：颢曰： 彼逃死自归，弗纳必乱。
现代文：程颢说 ：他们死里逃生自己回来，不收留他们会出乱子。
English: Cheng Yao said, "They escaped death and came back on their own. If we don't take them in, there will be trouble."

古文：若昉怒，吾自任之。 即亲往启门拊劳，约少休三日复役，众欢踊而入。
现代文：如果程日方生气发怒，我自己担当这个责任。 于是随即亲自到衙门口开导、慰劳他们，约定稍微休息几天再恢复治理黄河的役作，众人欢呼跳跃而入。
English: If the Japanese side is angry and angry, I will take this responsibility myself. Therefore, I personally went to the gate of the castle to enlighten and comfort them, and agreed to take a few days off before resuming the role of managing the Yellow River. Everyone cheered and jumped in.

古文：具以事上，得不遣。
现代文：详细地把事情呈上，得以不遣散。
English: He reported the incident in detail and was able to keep his job.

古文：昉后过州，扬言曰： 澶卒之溃，盖程中允诱之，吾且诉于上。 颢闻之，曰： 彼方惮我，何能为。 果不敢言。
现代文：程窻后来从澶州经过，扬言说 ：澶州士兵的溃散，大概是程中允引诱所致，我打算把这个事上奏给皇上。 程颢听说以后，说： 他的所作所为还怕我告他，怎么他还敢告诉皇上。 
English: Cheng Yao later passed through Bozhou and threatened, "The dispersion of soldiers in Bozhou was probably caused by the seduction of Cheng Zhong Yun, and I intend to report this to the emperor." After hearing this, Cheng Yao said, "He is still afraid that I will accuse him of what he has done. How dare he tell the emperor?"

古文：曹村埽决，颢谓郡守刘涣曰： 曹村决，京师可虞。
现代文：后来果然不敢说这个事。曹村挡水的埽决口了，程颢对知州刘氵奂说： 曹村河道决口了，京师都城就值得忧虑了。
English: Later, he did not dare to say this. Cao Village's water barrier was breached, Cheng Yao said to Chizhou Liu Yao: Cao Village's river was breached, and Beijing Shidu City was worth worrying about.

古文：臣子之分，身可塞亦所当为，盍尽遣厢卒见付。 涣以镇印付颢，立走决所，激谕士卒。
现代文：做臣子的职责，用身体去挡塞也是该做的，何不全部把地方厢兵士卒交给我。 刘氵奂把知州官印交付给程颢，他立即跑到河道溃决的地方，激励晓谕士兵。
English: It is the duty of a vassal to use his body to block the way, so why not hand over all the local soldiers to me. Liu Bei delivered the official seal of Zhizhou to Cheng Yu, who immediately ran to the place where the river was broken and encouraged the soldiers.

古文：议者以为势不可塞，徒劳人尔。
现代文：议论的人以为这个决口的情势不可能挡塞得了，只是徒劳人力罢了。
English: Commentators thought that the situation of this breakthrough was impossible to block, but it was just a waste of manpower.

古文：颢命善泅者度决口，引巨索济众，两岸并进，数日而合。
现代文：程颢命令会游泳的人横渡到决口中，牵引巨大的绳索以帮助众人，在决口两边齐头并进，数天以后，决口就挡住了。
English: Cheng ordered swimmers to swim across to the breach, dragging huge ropes to help the people. They went hand in hand on both sides of the breach, and after a few days, the breach was blocked.

古文：求监洛河竹木务，历年不叙伐阅，特迁太常丞。
现代文：请求监洛河竹木务，几年中没有述职升迁，故特别迁升为太常丞。
English: He requested the supervision of the Luohe Bamboo and Wood Department, but was not promoted for several years. Therefore, he was specially promoted to the position of Taizheng.

古文：帝又欲使修《三经义》，执政不可，命知扶沟县。
现代文：神宗又想派他修撰《三经义》，执政宰相认为不可以，任命担任扶沟县知县。
English: Shenzong also wanted to send him to compile the "Three Classics," but the ruling prime minister thought it was not possible and appointed him to serve as the prefect of Fuguo County.

古文：广济、蔡河在县境，濒河恶子无生理，专胁取行舟财货，岁必焚舟十数以立威。
现代文：广济、蔡河流经这个县境内，靠近河道的恶少子弟无事生非，专门经常去威胁、勒索夺取行船上的钱财货物，一年中肯定要烧毁船只十余艘以树立他们的威风。
English: The rivers of Guangji and Cai pass through this county, and the bad boys near the river have nothing to do with it. They often threaten and blackmail to seize the money and goods on the ships, and they will definitely burn more than ten ships in a year to establish their prestige.

古文：颢捕得一人，使引其类，贳宿恶，分地处之，令以挽繂为业，且察为奸者，自是境无焚剽患。
现代文：程颢抓获了一人，使他交出同伙，赦免了他过去的罪恶，对其他人分别加以处罚，命令他们以拉纤作为职业，同时又观察那些作奸犯科的人。至此，这个县境内再也没有剽掠抢劫的祸患。
English: Cheng Yao caught one person, made him hand over his accomplices, pardoned his past crimes, punished the others separately, ordered them to pull fiber as a profession, and at the same time observed those who committed crimes. So far, there is no longer a scourge of looting and robbery in this county.

古文：内侍王中正按阅保甲，权焰章震，诸邑竞侈供张悦之，主吏来请，颢曰： 吾邑贫，安能效他邑。
现代文：内侍宦官王中正检查巡视保甲，权势气焰震动地方，各地竞相奢侈地供他铺张，以取悦于他，主管的官吏来请他，程颢说： 我这个县里贫穷，哪里能够效法其他的县呢。
English: The imperial eunuch Wang Zhong was inspecting the inspection of Bao Jia, the power and prestige of which shook the place, the various regions competed to provide him with luxury to please him, and the responsible officials came to invite him. Cheng Yu said: I am poor in this county, where can I follow the example of other counties?

古文：取于民，法所禁也，独有令故青帐可用尔。 除判武学，李定劾其新法之初首为异论，罢归故官。又坐狱逸囚，责监汝州盐税。
现代文：从老百姓中掠取，是法律所禁止的，只有我县令过去藏青的帐子可用作奢侈品了。 改任命为判武学，李定因为他在推行新法之初首先发表不同的意见而弹劾他，罢免了现有官职而复原位，又因狱中逃走了犯人，责令他监汝州盐税。
English: Plundering from the common people is prohibited by law, only the tablecloth used by our county magistrate in the past can be used as a luxury item. He was renamed as the judge of martial arts, Li Ding impeached him because he first expressed different opinions at the beginning of the implementation of the new law, dismissed the existing official position and restored the original position, and because the prisoner escaped from prison, he was ordered to pay Ruzhou salt tax.

古文：哲宗立，召为宗正丞，未行而卒，年五十四。
现代文：哲宗即位以后，召回任命他为宗正丞，没有上任就去世了，终年五十四岁。
English: After Tetsuzo's accession to the throne, he was recalled and appointed as Zong Zheng Rong, but died before taking office, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：颢资性过人，充养有道，和粹之气，盎于面背，门人交友从之数十年，亦未尝见其忿厉之容。
现代文：程颢有超过常人的天资气质，修养很好，和睦纯洁的气质，显露于全身，门生故旧朋友跟他交往几十年，也从来没有见过他声色俱厉的样子。
English: Cheng Yao has more than ordinary people's natural temperament, good cultivation, harmonious and pure temperament, revealed in the whole body. His old friend and protégé has been in contact with him for decades, and has never seen his voice.

古文：遇事优为，虽当仓卒，不动声色。
现代文：遇到什么事都很好地去做，即使是时间很仓促的时候，也没有急躁不耐烦的样子。
English: Do everything well, even if the time is very short, there is no impatience or impatience.

古文：自十五六时，与弟颐闻汝南周敦颐论学，遂厌科举之习，慨然有求道之志。
现代文：在十五六岁的时候，与弟弟程颐听说汝南周敦颐谈论学问，于是厌弃科举考试的学习方式，感慨地有追求道义的志向。
English: When he was 15 or 16 years old, he and his younger brother Cheng Yao heard that Runan Zhou Dunyao was talking about learning, so he abhorred the way of studying for the imperial examinations and passionately had the ambition to pursue morality.

古文：泛滥于诸家，出入于老、释者几十年，返求诸《六经》而后得之。
现代文：广泛地学习各家的思想学说，对于道家、佛经的学习研究有几十年之久，然后反过来又求之于《六经》当中而有所得。
English: He has extensively studied the ideologies and doctrines of various schools. He has studied and researched the Taoist and Buddhist scriptures for decades, and then, in turn, sought them in the "Six Classics" and gained something.

古文：秦、汉以来，未有臻斯理者。
现代文：从秦、汉以来，没有谁达到这样高的境界的。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, no one has reached such a high level.

古文：教人自致知至于知止，诚意至于平天下，洒扫应对至于穷理尽性，循循有序。
现代文：教导别人从穷究知识到达知识的最高境界，使意念至诚以达到平治天下，从洒水扫地日常生活应对达到穷究真理，纯洁性格，善于有步骤地进行。
English: Teach others to reach the highest level of knowledge from the pursuit of knowledge, to make the intention to be sincere to achieve world peace, to deal with daily life from the sprinkling of water to the pursuit of truth, to be pure in character, and to be good at proceeding in a systematic manner.

古文：病学者厌卑近而鹜高远，卒无成焉，故其言曰： 道之不明，异端害之也。
现代文：担忧学者们厌弃平常的知识而好高骛远的毛病，以致最后一事无成。所以他有这样的说法 ：道义不清楚，是因有不符合正统思想的主张损害它。
English: Worried that academics were abandoning ordinary knowledge in favour of lofty ideals that would ultimately achieve nothing, he said: "Morality is not clear, it is undermined by claims that are not in line with orthodoxy."

古文：昔之害近而易知，今之害深而难辨。
现代文：过去的损害较浅近而容易了解，现在的损害较深远而难以辨别。
English: Past damage is more recent and easier to understand, while current damage is more far-reaching and difficult to discern.

古文：昔之惑人也乘其迷暗，今之惑人也因其高明。
现代文：过去迷惑欺骗别人是乘别人处于模糊不清醒的时候，现在迷惑欺骗别人是凭借别人自觉清醒的时候。
English: In the past, deceiving others was to take advantage of others when they were in a fuzzy and unconscious state. Now, deceiving others is to take advantage of others when they are consciously awake.

古文：自谓之穷神知化，而不足以开物成务，言为无不周遍，实则外于伦理，穷深极微，而不可以入尧、舜之道。
现代文：自认为穷尽神志、知晓变化，而实际上不足以认识事物的本质，成就天下的要求，在理论上说没有不周到的，而实际上仅仅了解一些表面的伦理常识，至于穷究事物的真谛达到细致入微的境界，实际上不能够到达尧、舜的那种道义境界。
English: They think that they have exhausted their wisdom and know the changes, but in fact they are not enough to understand the essence of things and fulfill the requirements of the world. In theory, they are not inconsiderate, but in fact they only understand some superficial ethical common sense. As for investigating the true meaning of things and reaching a nuanced level, in fact, they cannot reach the moral level of,.

古文：天下之学，非浅陋固滞，则必入于此。
现代文：天下的学问，若不是浅显鄙陋、晦涩固滞，就一定会达到如此的程度。
English: The world's learning, if it is not shallow, despicable, obscure and stagnant, will certainly reach such a level.

古文：自道之不明也，邪诞妖妄之说竞起，涂生民之耳目，溺天下于污浊，虽高才明智，胶于见闻，醉生梦死，不自觉也。
现代文：自从道义不清楚，邪怪妖异虚妄的学说乘机竞相而起，充塞老百姓的耳目，使天下淹没于污泥浊水之中，虽有很高的才能，超人的智慧，然而因固执而拘泥于所见所闻，以致醉生梦死，而自己还不明白。
English: Since the morality is not clear, and the evil, monstrous, and false doctrines take the opportunity to compete with each other, filling the ears and eyes of the common people, and drowning the world in muddy water, although they have high talents and superhuman wisdom, they are stubborn and stick to what they see and hear, so that they are drunk with life and death, and they still do not understand.

古文：是皆正路之蓁芜，圣门之蔽塞，辟之而后可以入道。 
现代文：这就是正确的道路都被荆棘与丛生的杂草所堵塞，圣贤的门道而被遮蔽塞住不通，直到迎头破开之后才可达到深明道义的真正境界的原因。 
English: This is the reason why the right path is blocked by thorns and overgrown weeds, and the doorway of sages is blocked and blocked, and the true realm of profound morality cannot be reached until it is broken head-on.

古文：颢之死，士大夫识与不识，莫不哀伤焉。
现代文：程颢的死，不论是认识还是不认识的士大夫，没有不感到哀伤的。
English: No scholar or doctor who knew or didn't know Cheng Yao was not saddened by his death.

古文：文彦博采众论，题其墓曰明道先生。
现代文：文彦博采纳大家的议论，在他的墓碑上题字称 明道先生 。
English: Fumihiko adopted everyone's discussion and inscribed the epitaph on his tombstone as Mr. Akimichi.

古文：其弟颐序之曰： 周公没，圣人之道不行；孟轲死，圣人之学不传。
现代文：他的弟弟程颐为他写序说 ：周公死后，圣人的道义没有再流行，孟轲死后，圣人的学术没有人再继承传扬。
English: His brother Cheng Yu wrote a preface for him: After the death of Zhou Gong, the morality of the sage was no longer popular. After the death of Meng Yu, no one inherited and propagated the wisdom of the sage.

古文：道不行，百世无善治；学不传，千载无真儒。
现代文：道义不流行，上百世没有善政大治；学术没有传承，上千年没有真正的儒士。
English: Morality is not popular, there has been no good governance for hundreds of years; academics have not been passed down, and there have been no true Confucianists for thousands of years.

古文：无善治，士犹得以明夫善治之道，以淑诸人，以传诸后；无真儒，则贸贸焉莫知所之，人欲肆而天理灭矣。
现代文：没有善政大治之世，士大夫还可以了解善政大治的道义，把善良美好留给别人，传之后世；没有真正的儒士，就感到模模糊糊地不知怎样做才好，人的私欲盛行而天理消失了。
English: Without a world of good governance, a scholar can still understand the morality of good governance, leaving the good and beautiful to others and passing it on to future generations; without a true Confucian, he feels vaguely that he does not know what to do, people's selfish desires prevail and the heavenly law disappears.

古文：先生生于千四百年之后，得不传之学于遗经，以兴起斯文为己任，辨异喘，辟邪说，使圣人之道焕然复明于世，盖自孟子之后，一人而已。
现代文：明道先生生活于一千四百年以后，从遗留下来的经典中得到了一直没有传世的学术，以大兴儒学作为自己终生的大任务，辨别不符合正统思想的教义主张，破除怪诞的邪说，使圣人的道义很有光彩地重新流行于社会，大概从孟子以后，只有他一个人而已。
English: Mr. Mingdao lived 1,400 years later. From the surviving classics, he obtained scholarship that has not been passed down to the next generation. He made it his life's mission to promote Confucianism, to distinguish between doctrinal propositions that do not conform to orthodox thought, to destroy grotesque heresies, and to make the morality of saints resurface gloriously in society. After Mencius, he was probably the only one.

古文：然学者于道不知所向，则孰知斯人之为功；不知所至，则孰知斯名之称情也哉。 
现代文：然而学者们对道义不知道在哪里，那么，谁知道这个人所建立的功业呢？不知道达到什么样的程度，那么，谁知道这个名字所包含的值得称道的情义呢？ 
English: However, scholars do not know where the morality is, so who knows what achievements this person has made? Do not know to what extent, so who knows the praiseworthy sentiment contained in this name?

古文：嘉定十三年，赐谥曰纯公。
现代文：嘉定十三年，赐给谥号叫作 纯公 。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jiading, he was given the nickname "Chonggong."

古文：淳祐元年封河南伯，从祀孔子庙庭。
现代文：淳元年，追封为河南伯，可入孔子庙庭一齐祭祀。
English: In the first year of the June era, he was posthumously awarded the title of Henan Bo, and was allowed to enter the Confucius Temple courtyard for worship.

古文：程颐，字正叔。
现代文：程颐，字正叔。
English: Cheng Yu, also known as Uncle Zheng.

古文：年十八，上书阙下，欲天子黜世俗之论，以王道为心。
现代文：十八岁的时候，上书朝廷，希望皇上诏令罢黜世俗的说教，以王道作为本心。
English: At the age of eighteen, he sent a letter to the imperial court, hoping that the emperor's edict would banish worldly preaching and take the royal road as his true heart.

古文：游太学，见胡瑗问诸生以颜子所好何学，颐因答曰：
现代文：游历太学时，听见胡王爰问他的学生，颜子喜欢什么学问，程颐于是回答说：
English: While traveling to Taishu, he heard Hu Wangyao ask his students what kind of learning Yan Zi liked. Cheng Yao then replied:

古文：学以至圣人之道也。
现代文： 学习是为了要达到圣人的 道 的境界。
English: To study is to reach the realm of the sage's path.

古文：圣人可学而至欤？
现代文：可以通过学习圣人而达到其境界吗？答：是的。学习的道如何？
English: Is it possible to reach the realm of a sage by studying him? A: Yes. What is the path of study?

古文：曰：然。学之道如何？曰：天地储精，得五行之秀者为人，其本也真而静，其未发也。五性具焉，曰仁、义、礼、智、信。
现代文：说：天地储藏的精华，得到五行之秀者为人，其本质既真又静，他们在未发的时候，五性都具备了，五性是仁、义、礼、智、信。
English: He said: "The essence of heaven and earth is stored, and those who obtain the excellence of the five elements are human beings. Their essence is both true and quiet. When they are not yet born, they have all five natures. The five natures are benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, wisdom, and faith.

古文：形既生矣，外物触其形而动其中矣，其中动而七情出焉，曰喜、怒、哀、乐、爱、恶、欲。
现代文：形既生了，外物碰触到形状就会牵动其中心，其中心动，七情就会表现出来。七情叫喜、怒、哀、乐、爱、恶、欲。
English: Once the form is born, when a foreign object touches the shape, it will affect its center, and when its center moves, the seven emotions will be expressed. The seven emotions are called joy, anger, sorrow, happiness, love, evil, and desire.

古文：情既炽而益荡，其性凿矣。
现代文：情感炽热而会更加激荡，其性格就会明确地表露出来。
English: Emotions will be hotter and more turbulent, and his character will be clearly revealed.

古文：是故觉者约其情使合于中，正其心，养其性；愚者则不知制之，纵其情而至于邪僻，梏其性而亡之。
现代文：因此觉悟的人制约自己的情感使它合乎中庸之道，端正心术，修养性情；愚蠢的人则就不知道抑制自己的情感，而是放纵自己的情感以至于滑向邪恶、古怪，桎梏自己的性情而丧失自己。
English: Therefore, the enlightened person controls his emotions and makes them conform to the way of moderation, rectifies his mind, and cultivates his disposition; the stupid person does not know how to control his emotions, but indulges his emotions to the point of slipping into evil, eccentricity, and losing himself by suppressing his disposition.

古文：然学之道，必先明诸心，知所养；然后力行以求至，所谓 自明而诚 也。
现代文： 然而，学习的道理，一定须先明白于心中，知道自己所修养的目的、手段，然后应该努力实践以达到这个目的，这就是所谓 自明而诚 。
English: However, the principle of learning must first be understood in the heart, know the purpose and means of self-cultivation, and then strive to practice to achieve this goal. This is the so-called self-evident and sincere.

古文：诚之之道，在乎信道笃，信道笃则行之果，行之果则守之固，仁义忠信不离乎心，造次必于是，颠沛必于是，出处语默必于是，久而弗失，则居之安，动容周旋中礼，而邪僻之心无自生矣。
现代文：至诚的道理，在于很虔诚地相信道，诚实地相信道，才能够获得应有的结果，获得了应有的结果就会努力固守，仁义忠信不离于心，匆忙之际一定像这样，颠沛流离之时一定像这样，为人处事、说话、沉默也一定像这样，如此长久而不存过失，那么，居守就会安稳，动容周旋符合礼，而邪恶、古怪的心思就不会自己产生了。
English: The truth of sincerity lies in the fact that it is only by devoutly believing in the Tao and honestly believing in the Tao that one can obtain the results one deserves. Once one obtains the results one deserves, one will strive to adhere to them. Kindness, righteousness, and loyalty are inseparable from one's heart. It must be like this when one is in a hurry. It must be like this when one is on the move. It must be like this when one is dealing with people, when one is speaking, and when one is silent. It must be like this for such a long time without making mistakes. Then one's residence will be stable, one's movements will be proper, and

古文：故颜子所事，则曰： 非礼勿视，非礼勿听，非礼勿言，非礼勿动。 仲尼称之，则曰： 得一善则拳拳服膺而弗失之矣。 又曰： 不迁怒，不贰过。  有不善未尝不知，知之未尝复行。 此其好之笃，学之得其道也。
现代文： 因此，颜子所做的事，可以说是： 不合乎礼的不要看，不合乎礼的不要听，不合乎礼的不要说，不合乎礼的不要采取行动。 孔仲尼称赞不已，还说： 得一善行就衷心信服，就牢牢地记在心里而没有忘记、失掉。 又说： 不迁怒于人，不第二次犯同样的过失。  有不善的行为没有不知道的，知道了的没有再做过它。 这就是忠实地喜好它，并从学习中得到了真谛。
English: Therefore, one can say of the things done by Yan Zi: Don't look at what is not proper, don't listen to what is not proper, don't speak what is not proper, and don't act what is not proper.Kong Rong Ni praised her heartily, saying, "If you do a good deed, you will be convinced from the bottom of your heart, and you will keep it firmly in your heart without forgetting or losing it."He also said, "Don't be angry with others, and don't make the same mistake twice."If you don't know about a bad deed, and if you know about it, don't do it again.This

古文：然圣人则不思而得，不勉而中；颜子则必思而后得，必勉而后中。
现代文：然而，圣贤之人则不通过思考就可以得到学习的真谛，不需要努力就可符合于道；然而颜子则必须通过思考而后才能得到学习的真谛，必须通过努力而后才能符合于道。
English: However, sages and saints can obtain the true meaning of learning without thinking, and can conform to the Way without effort; whereas, fools must obtain the true meaning of learning through thinking, and can conform to the Way through effort.

古文：其与圣人相去一息，所未至者守之也，非化之也。
现代文：他与圣人的差别就在于这一丁点儿，所没有达到的就努力持之以恒，而不是去变更或丢掉它。
English: The difference between him and the sages is this little thing, that if you don't achieve something, you try to hold on to it and not change it or throw it away.

古文：以其好学之心，假之以年，则不日而化矣。
现代文：以他好学的上进之心，通过一些年的努力，那么在不会很长的日子里就会成功。
English: With his eagerness to learn, and through years of hard work, he will succeed in the not too distant future.

古文：后人不达，以谓圣本生知，非学可至，而为学之道遂失。
现代文： 后人没有达到这个境界，以为圣人本来就是生而知之的，而不是通过学习就可以达到的，因此，为学的道理渐渐丧失。
English: Later generations did not reach this level, thinking that sages were born with knowledge, rather than being able to achieve it through study. As a result, the reason for studying was gradually lost.

古文：不求诸己，而求诸外，以博闻强记、巧文丽辞为工，荣华其言，鲜有至于道者。
现代文：不努力求助于自己，反而求助于外界，以博闻强记、虚浮华丽的辞章为工巧，夸耀、粉饰自己的言论，很少有达到明道境界的人。
English: They don't try to turn to themselves, but turn to the outside world. They boast and embellish their words, using well-told stories and flashy slogans. Very few people have reached the state of enlightenment.

古文：则今之学，与颜子所好异矣。
现代文：而现在的学习，则与颜子所喜欢的不同了。 
English: But now studying is different from what Yan Zi liked.

古文：瑗得其文，大惊异之，即延见，处以学职。
现代文：胡王爰看见他的这篇文章后，对他感到很是惊奇，于是延请相见，安排他任学职。
English: After seeing his article, Hu Wangyao was very surprised by him, so he invited him to meet and arranged for him to work as a student.

古文：吕希哲首以师礼事颐。
现代文：吕希哲最先以老师的礼节跟随程颐学习。
English: Lu Xizhe first followed Cheng Yao's study with the courtesy of a teacher.

古文：治平、元丰间，大臣屡荐，皆不起。
现代文：治平、元丰年间，许多大臣多次推荐他为官，都不肯就任。
English: During the periods of Ji Ping and Yuan Feng, many ministers repeatedly recommended him for the post, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：哲宗初，司马光、吕公著共疏其行义曰： 伏见河南府处士程颐，力学好古，安贫守节，言必忠信，动遵礼法。
现代文：哲宗初年，司马光、吕公著一齐上疏阐明他的行为和道义，又说： 我们知道河南府处士程颐，努力学习，喜好历史，安于贫穷，固守气节，言行一定要符合忠信的原则，行动一定遵守礼制法规。
English: In the first year of Zhezong, Sima Guang and Lu Gong jointly wrote a book to clarify his behavior and morality, and said: We know that Cheng Yao, the Henan prefectural official, studies hard, likes history, is content with poverty, adheres to the qi festival, his words and deeds must conform to the principle of loyalty, and his actions must comply with the rules of etiquette.

古文：年逾五十，不求仕进，真儒者之高蹈，圣世之逸民。
现代文：年龄过了五十，不乞求仕进，是真儒者的高风亮节，圣世社会的隐逸之民。
English: Over the age of fifty, they do not beg for advancement, they are the high winds and bright festivals of true Confucians, the secluded people of the holy world society.

古文：望擢以不次，使士类有所矜式。 诏以为西京国子监教授，力辞。
现代文：希望能够越级提升他，使儒士们有效法的模式、榜样。 哲宗诏令他担任西京洛阳国子监的教授，他力辞不就职。
English: It was hoped that he could be promoted beyond his rank and become a model and example of effective law for Confucianists. Zhezong Dahal ordered him to serve as a professor of the West Beijing Luoyang State Children's Supervisor, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：寻召为秘书省校书郎，既入见，擢崇政殿说书。
现代文：不久，诏令他担任秘书省校书郎，待入朝觐见之后，又提升他为崇政殿说书。
English: Soon after, the emperor ordered him to serve as secretary of the provincial school scribe, and after he was admitted to the imperial court, he was promoted to be the scribe of the Imperial Throne.

古文：即上疏言： 习与智长，化与心成。
现代文：于是，他上疏说： 温习与智长，感化与心成。
English: As a result, he said: Warm learning and wisdom, inspiration and heart.

古文：今夫人民善教其子弟者，亦必延名德之士，使与之处，以薰陶成性。
现代文：现在，那些善于教化其子弟的人，也必须延请著名德高望重的儒士们，使他们与之相处，以熏陶成性，潜移默化。
English: Now, those who are good at indoctrinating their children must also invite famous and respected Confucianists to get along with them, to instill character and gradually transform.

古文：况陛下春秋之富，虽睿圣得于天资，而辅养之道不可不至。
现代文：况且陛下正年富力强，虽睿智圣哲得力于天资聪颖，而教化、修养之道不可不到。
English: Moreover, His Majesty is in the prime of his life and is strong and powerful. Although sages and wise men are strong because of their talent and cleverness, the path of enlightenment and cultivation cannot be avoided.

古文：大率一日之中，接贤士大夫之时多，亲寺人宫女之时少，则气质变化，自然而成。
现代文：大概一日之中，接见贤哲士大夫的时候很多，亲近寺人宫女的时候很少，那么气质变化，自然而成。
English: In the course of a day or so, there are many times when I see a wise and learned doctor, and few times when I am close to a temple maiden, so the temperament changes naturally.

古文：愿选名儒入侍劝讲，讲罢留之分直，以备访问，或有小失，随事献规，岁月积久，必能养成圣德。 颐每进讲，色甚庄，继以讽谏。
现代文：希望皇上挑选著名儒士入侍君侧，劝讲圣贤之道，讲解罢留的标准，随时与儒士探讨，即使有些小的失误，随事谈出看法，日积月累，坚持久远，就一定能够修养成高尚的圣贤德性。 程颐每次进讲，态度特别庄严，其中夹有讽刺、劝谏。
English: It is hoped that the emperor will select famous Confucianists to join the emperor's side, preach the way of sages, explain the standard of retirement, and discuss with Confucianists at any time. Even if there are some small mistakes, talk about opinions at random, accumulate over time, and persist for a long time, they will certainly be able to cultivate into a noble saintly virtue. Cheng Yu's attitude is particularly solemn every time he gives a lecture, which includes irony and persuasion.

古文：闻帝在宫中盥而避蚁，问： 有是乎？ 曰： 然，诚恐伤之尔。 颐曰： 推此心以及四海，帝王之要道也。 
现代文：神宗丧期还没有结束，冬至那天，百官上表称贺，程颐说： 季节时序变迁，皇上思念先帝殷切深厚，希望改朝贺为安慰。 
English: Shenzong's mourning period had not yet ended. On the day of the winter solstice, hundreds of officials congratulated him on the table, and Cheng Yu said: The season's time sequence changes, the emperor misses the former emperor ardently and deeply, and hopes to change the morning greeting as a consolation.

古文：神宗丧未除，冬至，百官表贺，颐言： 节序变迁，时思方切，乞改贺为慰。 既除丧，有司请开乐置宴，颐又言： 除丧而用吉礼，尚当因事张乐，今特设宴，是喜之也。 皆从之。
现代文：丧期结束以后，有关衙署请求举行乐舞、置办酒宴，程颐又说 ：丧期满了应该用吉礼，而且还当根据事情的性质和实际情况举行乐舞，现今特设宴请，是喜庆的事情。 都据此照办。
English: After the end of the mourning period, the relevant government departments requested to hold music and dance, and to arrange a wine banquet. Cheng Yu also said: the mourning period is over, it is necessary to use auspicious gifts, and it is also necessary to hold music and dance according to the nature of the matter and the actual situation. Today's special banquet is a festive event. Everything was done according to this.

古文：帝尝以疮疹不御迩英累日，颐诣宰相问安否，且曰： 上不御殿，太后不当独坐。
现代文：哲宗皇帝曾经因为疮疹不愈而有好些天不到迩英殿上朝，程颐到宰相那里问皇帝安否，并说： 皇上不临朝上殿，太后不应当独自坐朝称制。
English: Emperor Zhezong had not been able to go to the imperial court for several days due to a sore that would not heal. Cheng Yu went to the prime minister to ask about the emperor's well-being, and said, "If the emperor does not go to the imperial court, the empress dowager should not go to the imperial palace alone."

古文：且人主有疾，大臣可不知乎？ 翌日，宰相以下始奏请问疾。
现代文：况且皇上有病，大臣难道可以不知道吗？ 第二天，宰相以下的官员开始奏请政事，询问皇上病况。
English: Moreover, the emperor was ill, so how could the minister not know? The next day, officials from the prime minister on down began to petition the government to inquire about the emperor's condition.

古文：苏轼不悦于颐，颐门人贾易、朱光庭不能平，合攻轼。
现代文：苏轼不喜欢程颐，程颐的门人学生贾易、朱光庭为此愤愤不平，联合一起攻击苏轼。
English: Su Yao did not like Cheng Yao. Cheng Yao's disciples, students Jia Yi and Zhu Guangting, were indignant about this and jointly attacked Su Yao.

古文：胡宗愈、顾临诋颐不宜用，孔文仲极论之，遂出管勾西京国子监。
现代文：胡宗愈、顾临指责程颐不适合于朝廷使用，孔文仲的指责、议论尤为激烈，于是出朝管勾西京国子监。
English: Hu Zongyu and Gu Lin accused Cheng Qi of being unsuitable for use in the imperial court, and the accusations and discussions of Kong Wenzhong were particularly fierce, so he went to the imperial court to take charge of the West Beijing State Children's Supervisor.

古文：久之，加直秘阁，再上表辞。
现代文：好久以后，加封直秘阁，又上表谢。
English: After a long time, the cabinet was sealed and a thank-you letter was sent.

古文：董敦逸复摭其有怨望语，去官。
现代文：董敦逸又提起他对朝廷有怨望的话，故被去官。
English: When Dong Dunyi mentioned that he had a grudge against the imperial court, he was demoted.

古文：绍圣中，削籍窜涪州。
现代文：绍圣年间，程颐被削夺原籍、放逐到涪州。
English: During the Shaosheng era, Cheng Yao was deprived of his nationality and exiled to Zhangzhou.

古文：李清臣尹洛，即日迫遣之，欲入别叔母亦不许，明日赆以银百两，颐不受。
现代文：李清臣担任洛阳西京河南府尹，当天就强迫他走，程颐想去与叔母话别也未被允许，第二天临别赠送他银子百两，程颐没有接受。
English: Li Qingchen held the post of Luoyang Xijing Henan Fu Yin, and forced him to leave the same day. Cheng Yao was not allowed to say goodbye to his aunt if he wanted to. The next day, he gave him 100 taels of silver as a parting gift, but Cheng Yao did not accept it.

古文：徽宗即位，徙峡州，俄复其官，又夺于崇宁。
现代文：徽宗即位的时候，迁徙至峡州，不久就恢复了他的官职，在徽宗崇宁年间又被削夺了官职。
English: When Huizong ascended the throne, he moved to Xiaozhou, and soon resumed his official position. During the reign of Huizong Chongning, he was deprived of his official position.

古文：卒年七十五。
现代文：卒年七十五岁。
English: He died at the age of seventy-five.

古文：颐于书无所不读。其学本于诚，以《大学》、《语》、《孟》、《中庸》为标指，而达于《六经》。
现代文：程颐对书是无所不读，他的学问是以诚为本，以《大学》、《论语》、《孟子》、《中庸》为指导，扩展到《六经》各书。
English: Cheng Qi was an omnivorous reader. His learning was based on sincerity and extended to the books of the "Six Classics" with the guidance of "University," "Analects," "Mencius" and "Middle Way."

古文：动止语默，一以圣人为师，其不至乎圣人不止也。
现代文：行动举止，言谈缄默，都以圣人为导师，不达到圣人的境界不停止追求。
English: Conduct, speech and silence are all guided by the sage, and if you do not reach the realm of the sage, do not stop pursuing.

古文：张载称其兄弟从十四五时，便脱然欲学圣人，故卒得孔、孟不传之学，以为诸儒倡。
现代文：张载称赞他们兄弟二人十四五岁的时候，便超然脱俗想效法圣人，故最终得到了孔子、孟子没有被后人传承的学问，成为各个儒生倡导的楷模。
English: When Zhang Zai praised their two brothers at the age of fourteen or fifteen, he transcended the world and wanted to emulate the sage, so he eventually obtained the knowledge of Confucius and Mencius that was not passed down to posterity, and became a model for all Confucianism.

古文：其言之旨，若布帛菽粟然，知德者尤尊崇之。
现代文：他的话的重要，就像布帛菽粟等穿的、吃的一样，了解德性的人尤其尊敬、崇尚他。
English: His words are as important as the cloth poppies people wear and eat, and people who understand virtue especially respect and admire him.

古文：尝言： 今农夫祁寒暑雨，深耕易耨，播种五谷，吾得而食之；百工技艺，作为器物，吾得而用之；介胄之士，被坚执锐，以守土宇，吾得而安之。
现代文：他曾经说： 现今农夫历经严寒、酷暑与风雨，深耕土地，多次锄草，播种五谷，我得到了以它为食；百工技艺之人，制造了各种器物，我得到了以它为用；身披介胄的士兵，穿着铠甲，拿着武器，以此驻守疆土国防，我因此而得以安宁。
English: He once said: "Nowadays, the farmer has gone through the cold, the heat and the wind and rain, deep plowing the land, repeatedly weeding and sowing grain, and I got it for food; the man of a hundred craftsmen, made all kinds of utensils, and I got it for use; the soldiers wearing armor, wearing armor, holding weapons, and guarding the territory and national defense, so I can be at peace.

古文：无功泽及人，而浪度岁月，晏然为天地间一蠹，唯缀缉圣人遗书，庶几有补尔。 于是著《易》、《春秋传》以传于世。
现代文：我没有什么功德泽惠于别人，而只是虚度岁月光阴，安闲享乐为天地间的一只蠹虫，只是联缀辑录圣人留下来的书籍，希望有所补益。 于是撰著《易传》、《春秋传》以传于社会。
English: I have no merit to benefit others, but just waste time and time, leisure enjoyment is a tapeworm in heaven and earth, just a collection of books left by saints, hoping to make up for it. So I wrote "Easy Biography" and "Spring and Autumn Biography" to pass on to society.

古文：《易传序》曰：
现代文：《易传·序》说：
English: "Easy Transmission · Sequence" said:

古文：《易》，变易也，随时变易以从道也。
现代文： 易，是变易，随时变易以适应道。
English: Easy, is changeable, changeable at any time to adapt to the road.

古文：其为书也，广大悉备，将以顺性命之理，通幽明之故，尽事物之情，而示开物成务之道也。
现代文：我著书籍，内容广大，全部备有，打算以此弄通性命的道理，勾通黑暗、模糊与光明、清楚之间的联系，穷尽事物的变化之情状，以此揭示事物的发展、变化及其结果产生的原因所表现出的道理。
English: In my books, the contents of which are vast and all available, I intend to use them to understand the principles of life, the connection between darkness, fuzziness and light, and clarity, and to exhaust the situation of changes in things, so as to reveal the development of things, changes and the reasons for their results.

古文：圣人之忧患后世，可谓至矣。
现代文：圣人对后世的忧虑、担心，可以说是论述圆满了。
English: The sage's worries and concerns about the hereafter can be said to be a complete exposition.

古文：去古虽远，遗经尚存，然而前儒失意以传言，后学诵言而忘味，自秦而下，盖无传矣。
现代文：离古代虽然很遥远，但留下来的经典还存在，然而，从前的一些儒学之士在失意的时候留下来的一些话，后来的学者们读诵他们的言论，但忘了领会他们的意思，从秦朝以后各代，大概没有传学的人了。
English: Although very far from ancient times, the remaining classics still exist. However, in the past, some Confucian scholars left behind some words when they were frustrated. Later scholars read their words, but forgot to understand their meaning. From the Qin Dynasty and later generations, there is probably no one to teach.

古文：予生千载之后，悼斯文之湮晦，将俾后人沿流而求源，此《传》所以作也。
现代文：我出生于儒学形成的千年之后，追悼儒士们的圣学于晦涩与湮废之中，将会使后人按照流传去寻找源头，这就是我写作这个《传》的原因。
English: I was born a thousand years after the formation of Confucianism, and commemorating the sacred teachings of the Confucianists in the obscurity and decadence will make future generations follow the tradition to find the source, which is why I write this "Biography."

古文： 《易》有圣人之道四焉：以言者尚其辞，以动者尚其变，以制器者尚其象，以卜筮者尚其占 。
现代文： 《易》中有圣人之道表现在四个方面 ：以论来显示其辞藻，以动势来显示其变化，以所做器具来显示其迹象，以八卦卜筮来显示占卜吉凶。 
English: In Yi, the sage's way is shown in four aspects: the discourse shows his words, the momentum shows his changes, the tools show their signs, and the fortune-teller's oracle shows his fortunes.

古文：吉凶消长之理、进退存亡之道备于辞，推辞考卦可以知变，象与占在其中矣。 君子居则观其象而玩其辞，动则观其变而玩其占 ，得于辞不达其意者有矣，未有不得于辞而能通其意者也。
现代文：吉凶消长的道理，进退存亡的道理存在于辞藻之中，推敲考查易卦可以知道变迁，象与占在辞藻、变化之中。 君子处静观察其象而玩味辞藻，动中观察其变动而玩赏所占卜卦 ，讲求辞藻不达其意的人有，但没有不通过辞藻的表达而能够表明自己的意思的人。
English: The principle of the ebb and flow of auspicious and inauspicious events, the principle of progress and retreat, and the existence of death exist in words and phrases, and the changes can be known by studying and examining the Yi Gua. The image and the meaning are in the words and changes. The gentleman quietly observes the image and plays with the words and phrases, and observes the changes in the movement and plays with the divination of the words and phrases. There are people who say that the words and phrases are not satisfactory, but there are no people who can express their own meaning without the expression of words and phrases.

古文：至微者理也，至著者象也。
现代文：最微细的是理，最显著的是象。
English: The most subtle is the reason, the most obvious is the image.

古文：体用一源，显微无间，观会通以行其典礼，则辞无所不备。
现代文：体与用为同一源流，显著与微细之间没有明确的界限，观察会通之处以行其典礼，那么，辞就无所不备。
English: The body and the use are the same source, there is no clear boundary between the obvious and the subtle, observe the meeting place to perform its ceremony, then the words are all-encompassing.

古文：故善学者，求言必自近，易于近者，非知言者也。
现代文：故善于学习的人，寻求表达的言论一定很相近，容易找到相近意思的人，并不一定知道怎样用言论去表达。
English: Therefore, people who are good at learning must be very close to the speech they seek to express. People who are easy to find similar meanings do not necessarily know how to express them with speech.

古文：予所传者辞也，由辞以得意，则在乎人焉。《春秋传序》曰：
现代文：我所做的《易传》所传授的是优美的语言，以优美的语言表达所要表达的意思，则在人的所作所为了。 《春秋传·序》说：
English: The "Easy Biography," which I made, teaches beautiful language, and expressing the meaning to be expressed with beautiful language depends on what people do. "Spring and Autumn Biography: Introduction" says:

古文：天之生民，必有出类之才起而君长之，治之而争夺息，导之而生养遂，教之而伦理明，然后人道立，天道成，地道平。
现代文： 天下的民众，一定要有杰出才能的人作为他们的君长，由这样的人来治理国家，争战夺地的事情就会平息，引导万民劳动就会获得生活的条件，满足自己生养的愿望，教育他们就会使伦理明晓，然后人道兴起、流行，天道成立，地道安定。
English: The people of the world must have people of outstanding talent as their rulers. Such people will govern the country, the war for land will be calmed down, guide the labor of all people will obtain the conditions of life, satisfy their own desire to be born and raised, educate them will make ethics clear, and then humanity will rise and become popular, the heavenly way will be established, and the natural way will be stable.

古文：二帝而上，圣贤世出，随时有作，顺乎风气之宜，不先天以开人，各因时而立政。
现代文：尧、舜二帝以上各代，圣贤不断出现于社会，随时都有所作为，顺应时代发展的风气，不以古代的成法来开启人的智慧，而是各因时间的变异、社会的变化来立法治政。
English: Over the generations of emperors and empresses, sages have constantly appeared in society and have made contributions at any time, conforming to the trend of the times. They do not use ancient laws to open people's wisdom, but legislate and govern due to time variations and social changes.

古文：暨乎三王迭兴，三重既备，子、丑、寅之建正，忠、质、文之更尚，人道备矣，天运周矣。
现代文：到了周文王、周武王、周成王三王接替兴起，历法都已具备，以子、丑、寅月分别为建正，崇尚忠直、质朴、文才的风气更盛，做人的道理已全部具备，天地运转的规律已相当周全。
English: By the time the three kings Zhou Wen Wang, Zhou Wu Wang and Zhou Cheng Wang succeeded each other, the calendars were already in place, with Zi, Ug and Yin months respectively, and the customs of advocating loyalty, simplicity and literary talent were more prevalent. The principles of being human were all in place, and the laws of the operation of heaven and earth were quite complete.

古文：圣王既不复作，有天下者虽欲仿古之迹，亦私意妄为而已。
现代文：圣贤的帝王既不重复行事立法，天下后来的帝王虽然有仿效古代圣贤的迹象，但多心怀私意，系胆大妄为而已。
English: The sages' emperors did not repeat the act of legislation. Although the emperors who came later in the world showed signs of emulating the ancient sages, they were selfish and arrogant.

古文：事之缪，秦至以建亥为正；道之悖，汉专以智力持世，岂复知先王之道也。
现代文：事情发生谬误，是从秦代以建亥为正月开始；道的背离，是从汉代专门以智谋来治理国家世事为端绪，这样怎么能重新了解先王圣贤的治道呢？
English: The fallacy of the incident occurred from the beginning of the first month of Jianhai in the Qin Dynasty; the deviation of the Tao was initiated from the Han Dynasty to specifically use wisdom to govern the country's world affairs. How can we re-understand the ruling way of the ancestors?

古文：夫子当周之末，以圣人不复作也，顺天应时之治不复有也，于是作《春秋》，为百王不易之大法。
现代文： 孔夫子生当西周末年，认为圣人不可能重新推行原有的旧法，顺从天时、适应时势的治理也不会重新出现，于是写作《春秋》，为以后百代帝王不可变更的大法。
English: Confucius, who was born at the end of the Western Han Dynasty, believed that it was impossible for a sage to re-implement the original old law, and that the governance of obeying the times and adapting to the current situation would not reappear, so he wrote "Spring and Autumn," a great law that would not be changed for the next hundred emperors.

古文：所谓 考诸三王而不缪，建诸天地而不悖，质诸鬼神而无疑，百世以俟圣人而不惑 者也。
现代文：所谓 考察于三王而没有谬误，建正于天地而没有违背，质证于鬼神而没有疑问，历经百世千年以待圣人检验而没有疑惑 即是指此。
English: This is what is meant by the so-called "examination by the three kings without error," "established in heaven and earth without violation," "challenged by ghosts and gods without doubt," and "tested by sages for a hundred thousand years without doubt."

古文：先儒之传，游、夏不能赞一辞，辞不待赞者也，言不能与于斯尔。
现代文：先世儒士的传记，子游、子夏不能够赞颂一句话，优美的语言是文字不能形容的，言论不能局限于此。
English: In the biography of the previous generation of Confucianists, Ziyu and Zixia cannot praise a single sentence. The beautiful language cannot be described by words, and the speech cannot be limited to this.

古文：斯道也，唯颜子尝闻之矣。 行夏之时，乘殷之辂，服周之冕，乐则《韶舞》，此其准的也。
现代文：这个道理，只有颜子曾经听说过。 推行夏代计算年月时序的历法，乘载殷商时代式样的车辆，穿戴西周时代式样的衣服、帽子，听乐则是《韶舞》之类，这是最适当、准确的标准。
English: This is a principle that only Yan Zi has ever heard of. It is the most appropriate and accurate standard to implement a calendar that calculates the chronological order of the year and the year in the summer, to ride a vehicle in the style of the Shang Dynasty, to wear clothes and hats in the style of the Western Zhou Dynasty, and to listen to music such as "Dance of the Dragonflies."

古文：后史以吏视《春秋》，谓褒善贬恶而已，至于经世之大法，则不知也。
现代文：后世判断史书就以《春秋》笔法为标准，主要是指褒扬善举、贬损恶行之类，至于经营治世、管理国家的大法，就不知道了。
English: Subsequent generations judge history books by the standard of the "Spring and Autumn" style of writing, mainly referring to praising good deeds and belittling bad deeds. As for the great law of managing the world and managing the country, it is not known.

古文：《春秋》大义数十，其义虽大，炳如日星，乃易见也。
现代文： 《春秋》大义包含数十个方面，其含义很大、广泛，其光明显著像太阳、星星，是容易看见的。
English: "Spring and Autumn" contains dozens of aspects, its meaning is great and extensive, and its light is obviously like the sun and stars, and is easy to see.

古文：惟其微辞隐义、时措从宜者，为难知也。
现代文：只是其中细微的辞意、隐寓的含义，按照时序的不同来确定合宜的东西，就难以知道了。
English: However, it is difficult to know the subtle meaning of the words and the hidden meaning, and to determine the appropriate thing according to the different time sequence.

古文：或抑或纵，或予或夺，或进或退，或微或显，而得乎义理之安，文质之中，宽猛之宜，是非之公，乃制事之权衡，揆道之模范也。
现代文：有的抑制，有的放纵；有的给予，有的削夺；有的推进，有的退后；有的细微，有的显著；而完全根据义理安排，文辞质量的适中，宽泛猛烈的合宜，是与非的公道，成为判断、权衡事物的标准，推测揣度道理的准则。
English: Some restraint, some indulgence; some giving, some taking away; some advancing, some retreating; some subtle, some significant; but entirely according to the arrangement of the principles, the moderate quality of the words, the broad and violent appropriateness, is the justice of right and wrong, and becomes the standard for judging and weighing things, and the criterion for speculating.

古文：夫观百物然后识化工之神，聚众材然后知作室之用，于一事一义而欲窥圣人之用心，非上智不能也。
现代文：大概观察百物而后可以识别化工的神韵，聚集很多的材料而后可以知道修建房子的用途，想从一件事情、一种含义中去窥测圣人的用心，不是具有上等的智慧是不能做到这一点的。
English: It is possible to observe hundreds of objects and then recognize the charm of the chemical industry, to gather a lot of materials and then know the use of building a house, and to want to spy on the saint's intentions from one thing and one meaning. It is not possible to do this without superior wisdom.

古文：故学《春秋》者，必优游涵泳，默识心通，然后能造其微也。
现代文：所以学习《春秋》的人必须认真仔细品味，心领神会，然后才能通晓其细微末节。
English: Therefore, people who study "Spring and Autumn" must seriously and carefully taste and understand, and then they can understand its subtleties.

古文：后王知《春秋》之义，则虽德非禹、汤，尚可以法三代之治。
现代文：后来帝王知晓《春秋》微言大义，其德性如果不是像禹、汤一样，是不能够效法夏、商、周三代的治世的。
English: Later, emperors knew that "Spring and Autumn" was full of small talk. If their virtue was not like Yu and Tang, they would not be able to emulate the reigns of Fa Xia, Shang, and the three dynasties.

古文：自秦而下，其学不传，予悼夫圣人之志不明于后世也，故作《传》以明之，俾后之人通其文而求其义，得其意而法其用，则三代可复也。
现代文： 从秦朝以来，《春秋》等圣人之学没有人传承，我追思圣人之志，担忧它不被后世所明了，因此，特别写作《春秋传》以阐明圣人的意旨，使后世的人们能够通晓文辞、寻思其微言大义，了解它的意思而后在言行中效法它，那么，三代的治世就可以重新出现了。
English: Since the Qin Dynasty, the teachings of saints such as "Spring and Autumn" have not been passed down. I thought about the saint's will and worried that it would not be understood by future generations. Therefore, I specially wrote "Spring and Autumn Biography" to clarify the saint's intention, so that future generations could understand the words, think about its subtle meaning, understand its meaning and then imitate it in words and deeds. Then, the reign of three generations could reappear.

古文：是《传》也，虽未能极圣人之蕴奥，庶几学者得其门而入矣。
现代文：这个《传》，虽然说不能穷极圣人在其中隐含的最深奥的道理，但可以说，学者差不多可把它作为登堂入室的门径，是指导其入门之作。 
English: Although this "Biography" cannot be said to exhaust the most profound truth hidden in the sage, it can be said that scholars can almost use it as a doorway to enter the hall, and it is a guide for their entry.

古文：平生诲人不倦，故学者出其门最多，渊源所渐，皆为名士。
现代文：程颐平生从教始终诲人不倦，所以当时的学者属他的门徒学生的人最多，由于其学术渊源的影响，都为当时学士名流。
English: Cheng Hao never tired of teaching throughout his life, so the scholars at that time were mostly his disciples and students. Due to the influence of his academic background, they were all famous scholars at that time.

古文：涪人祠颐于北岩，世称为伊川先生。
现代文：涪州人为程颐在北岩建祠，当时人们俗称他为伊川先生。
English: Zhangzhou people built a shrine for Cheng Yao in Beiyan. At that time, people commonly called him Mr. Ichuan.

古文：吕大钧、大临见《大防传》。
现代文：嘉定十三年，南宋宁宗皇帝诏令赐给谥号叫作 正公 。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jiading, Emperor Ningzong of the Southern Song Dynasty issued a decree to give him the nickname Zhenggong.

古文：张载，字子厚，长安人。
现代文：理宗淳元年，追封为伊阳伯，诏入孔子庙庭一齐祭祀。张载，字子厚，长安人。
English: In the first year of the Risso era, he was posthumously awarded the title of Iyangbo, and he was enshrined in the Confucius Temple. Zhang Zai, a thick character, was from Chang'an.

古文：少喜谈兵。至欲结客取洮西之地。
现代文：少年时代喜欢谈论军事，以致想交结客人取得洮西的地盘。
English: As a boy, he liked to talk about the military, so much so that he wanted to make a deal with a guest to acquire a site in Shaanxi Province.

古文：年二十一，以书谒范仲淹，一见知其远器，乃警之曰： 儒者自有名教可乐，何事于兵。 因劝读《中庸》。
现代文：二十一岁那年，以书信拜谒范仲淹，范仲淹一看就知道他是一个有远大抱负的人，于是告诫他说： 儒学之士自有名教感到可乐，为什么要谈论兵事呢？ 因此，劝告他读《中庸》。
English: At the age of twenty-one, he wrote to Fan Zhongyan, who knew him to be a man of great ambition, and admonished him: "Confucian scholars are famous for their joy in teaching, so why talk about military affairs? Therefore, he advised him to read the "Middle Way."

古文：载读其书，犹以为未足，又访诸释、老，累年究极其说，知无所得，反而求之《六经》。
现代文：张载读了这本书，还以为不满足，于是又访寻学习佛教、道家之书，长年累月探究这种说教的深刻含意，无所收获，便反过来求之于《六经》。
English: Zhang Zai read this book and thought that it was not enough, so he also visited and studied the books of Buddhism and Taoism, and spent many years and months exploring the profound meaning of this teaching. There was nothing to be gained, so he turned to the "Six Classics."

古文：尝坐虎皮讲《易》京师，听从者甚众。
现代文：曾经坐在虎皮讲席上在京师讲解《易》经，跟随他听讲的人很多。
English: He once sat on a tiger-skin lectern in Beijing to explain the Yi Sutra, and many people followed him to listen.

古文：一夕，二程至，与论《易》，次日语人曰： 比见二程，深明《易》道，吾所弗及，汝辈可师之。 撤坐辍讲。
现代文：一天傍晚，程颢、程颐二兄弟来了，与他讨论《易》经，第二天告诉别人说： 近来见到二程，研究了解《易》中道义很高深，是我所达不到的，你们可拜他为老师。 于是撤掉师座，停止讲学。
English: One evening, Cheng Rong and Cheng Rong, two brothers, came to discuss the Yi Sutra with him. The next day, they told others, "Recently, I have seen Rong Rong studying and understanding the Yi Sutra, and the morality in it is very high and profound, which is beyond my reach. You can worship him as a teacher." So they removed the teacher's chair and stopped lecturing.

古文：与二程语道学之要，涣然自信曰： 吾道自足，何事旁求。 于是尽弃异学，淳如也。
现代文：同二程谈论道学的要义，精神焕发地、很自信地说 ：我求得的道义已满足了，没有什么其他的事值得追求的了。 于是全部抛弃了其他的学说，淳朴诚信学道。
English: At the same time, he talked about the essence of morality, and said with great confidence, "The morality I sought has been satisfied, and there is nothing else worth pursuing," so he abandoned all other doctrines and studied the way of honesty and simplicity.

古文：举进士，为祈州司法参军，云岩令。
现代文：考取进士，任命为祁州司法参军、云岩县令。
English: He passed the entrance examination, and was appointed as the commander of Yunyang County and the member of the military of Luzhou Judiciary.

古文：政事以敦本善俗为先，每月吉，具酒食，召乡人高年会县庭，亲为劝酬。使人知养老事长之义，因问民疾苦，及告所以训戒子弟之意。
现代文：治理政事以敦厚根本完善民俗为首先要办的事务，每个月的吉日，准备酒菜食物，召集乡间年龄很大的老人会聚在县衙署，亲自为他们劝酒应酬，使人们都知道奉养老人侍奉年长的人的道义，于是询问民间的疾苦，以及告知所以教训、劝告子弟的目的。
English: On the auspicious day of every month, prepare food and wine, gather the very old people in the countryside to gather at the county government office, personally advise them to drink alcohol, so that people know the morality of supporting the elderly and serving the elderly, and then inquire about the hardships of the people, and inform them of the purpose of teaching and advising their children.

古文：熙宁初，御史中丞吕公著言其有古学，神宗方一新百度，思得才哲士谋之，召见问治道，对曰： 为政不法三代者，终苟道也。 帝悦，以为崇文院校书。
现代文：熙宁初年，御史中丞吕公著说他有深厚的儒学基础，神宗刚刚即位之初，更新政治，想得到有才能的博学之士帮助谋划治理国家，召他问治理方法，回答说 ：治理政事不效法三代的人，终究是苟且于治道。 皇帝听后感到高兴，任命他为崇文院校书。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xining, Grand Historian Zhongzheng Lv Gong wrote that he had a deep foundation in Confucianism. Shensong, who had just ascended the throne, wanted to update politics and get the help of talented scholars to plan the governance of the country. He called him to ask about the governance method, and he replied, "People who do not follow the law in governing political affairs for three generations are ultimately adhering to the way of governance." The emperor was pleased to hear this and appointed him as a scholar of literature.

古文：他日见王安石，安石问以新政，载曰： 公与人为善，则人以善归公；如教玉人琢玉，则宜有不受命者矣。 明州苗振狱起，往治之，末杀其罪。
现代文：有一天他见到了王安石，王安石问他新政如何，张载回答说： 您与人为善，那么别人也以善道报答您；如果像教导玉工雕琢玉器那样，则应该有不接受听从命令的。 明州苗振狱事兴起，张载去审理这件狱事，最后因为苗振的罪行杀了他。
English: One day, he met Wang Anshi. Wang Anshi asked him how the New Deal was going. Zhang Zai replied, "If you are kind to others, then others will also repay you with kindness. If you teach the way a jade craftsman carves jade, then there should be people who do not accept to follow orders. The Mingzhou Miao Zhen prison service arose, Zhang Zai went to investigate this prison service, and finally killed him for Miao Zhen's crime.

古文：还朝，即移疾屏居南山下，终日危坐一室，左右简编，俯而读，仰而思，有得则识之，或中夜起坐，取烛以书。
现代文：回到朝廷，随即因病迁移隐居在南山脚下，整天端端正正地坐在一间房子里，座位左右都是书籍，俯身读书，仰坐思考，有所心得就记载下来，有时半夜起床坐着思考、学习，点上蜡烛照着写作。
English: Returning to the imperial court, he immediately moved to a secluded place at the foot of Nanshan Mountain due to illness. He sat in a house all day, with books around the seat. He leaned over to read, sat back to think, and recorded his thoughts. Sometimes he got up in the middle of the night to sit and think and study, and lit a candle to write.

古文：其志道精思，未始须臾息，亦未尝须臾忘也。
现代文：他的志向道义，精于思考，从没有一会儿停止过，也从没有一会儿忘记过。
English: Never for a moment did he stop striving, never for a moment did he forget.

古文：敝衣蔬食，与诸生讲学，每告以知礼成性、变化气质之道，学必如圣人而后已。
现代文：他穿的是破旧衣服，吃的是蔬菜粗食，给他的学生讲习学业，每次都教以知礼成性、变化气质的道理，学业一定要像圣人才罢休。
English: He wore shabby clothes, ate vegetables and coarse food, and lectured his students on their studies. Each time, he taught them the principles of wisdom, courtesy, and change of temperament. They must stop their studies like saints.

古文：以为知人而不知天，求为贤人而不求为圣人，此秦、汉以来学者大蔽也。
现代文：他认为，了解人而不了解天道，要求做贤人而不要求做圣人，这是秦、汉以来学者的一大弊端。
English: He believed that it was a major drawback of scholars since the Qin and Han dynasties to understand people without understanding the heavenly way, and to be a sage without being a saint.

古文：故其学尊礼贵德、乐天安命，以《易》为宗，以《中庸》为体，以《孔》、《孟》为法，黜怪妄，辨鬼神。
现代文：所以他的学问是尊崇礼教，以德为贵，乐天安命，以《易》经为学的宗旨，以《中庸》为本体，以《孔子》、《孟子》为效法的对象，黜除怪诞妖妄，辨清鬼神妖怪。
English: Therefore, his learning is to respect and venerate the rituals and teachings, to value virtue, to rejoice in the safety of life, to take the Yi Sutra as the purpose of learning, to take the "Middle Way" as the body, to take "Confucius" and "Mencius" as the object of imitation, to eliminate the grotesque and delirious, and to distinguish ghosts and spirits.

古文：其家昏丧葬祭，率用先王之意，而傅以今礼。
现代文：他的家里婚、丧、葬、祭之礼，大概都用先王的本意，而附之以现在的礼节。
English: His family weddings, funerals, funerals, and festivals, probably all use the original intention of the former king, but with the current etiquette.

古文：又论定井田、宅里、发敛、学校之法，皆欲条理成书，使可举而措诸事业。
现代文：又议论考定井田、宅里、发敛、学校的礼法，都想编排条理成书籍，使之可以成就于他的学术事业。
English: He also discussed the etiquette of the koden, the residence, the house, and the school, all of which he wanted to arrange and organize into books so that he could succeed in his academic career.

古文：吕大防荐之曰： 载之始终，善发明圣人之遗旨，其论政治略可复古。
现代文：吕大防推荐他说： 张载自始至终，善于发现圣人遗留下来的旨意，他所谈论的政治是稍可复行古制。
English: Lv Dafo recommended him, saying, "Zhang Zhaozhong is good at discovering the will left behind by saints, and the politics he talks about can be traced back to the ancient system.

古文：宜还其旧职，以备谘访。 乃诏知太常礼院。
现代文：应当恢复他原来的官职，以备咨询探访。 于是召他知太常礼院。
English: His former official position should be restored, in preparation for a consultation visit, so he was summoned to the Chichuang Rite Academy.

古文：与有司议礼不合，复以疾归，中道疾甚，沐浴更衣而寝，旦而卒。
现代文：因与太常礼院官员议论礼仪不一致，又以生病辞归，到半路上病得很厉害，晚上洗澡换衣后去睡觉，第二天清晨去世。
English: Due to disagreements on etiquette with officials of the Taichang Academy of Etiquette, he resigned due to illness. He became very ill halfway through the trip, took a bath in the evening and changed his clothes before going to bed. He passed away early the next morning.

古文：贫无以敛，门人共买棺奉其丧还。
现代文：因贫穷没有财物办理丧事，他的门生合起来买棺材办理丧事。
English: Due to poverty, he had no money to pay for the funeral, so his disciples pooled their resources to buy a coffin to pay for the funeral.

古文：翰林学士许将等言其恬于进取，乞加赠恤，诏赐馆职半赙。
现代文：翰林学士许将等人说他不热衷于官职的升迁，请求追加赠赐优恤，皇帝诏令赏赐馆职俸禄的一半。
English: Hanlin Scholar Xu Zheng and others said that he was not keen on the promotion of the official post, and requested an additional bonus, and the emperor issued a decree to reward half of the salary of the post.

古文：载学古力行，为关中士人宗师，世称为横渠先生。
现代文：张载博学古代，努力实践，成为关中士大夫们的一代宗师，社会上的人都称之为 横渠先生 。
English: Zhang Zai studied ancient times and worked hard to practice, becoming a generation of teachers for the Kwan sergeants and doctors. People in the society call him Mr. Hengqiu.

古文：著书号《正蒙》，又作《西铭》曰：
现代文：所著书名是《正蒙》，又写有《西铭》，说：
English: The title of his book is "Zhengmeng," and he also wrote "Ximing," saying:

古文：乾称父而坤母，予兹藐焉，乃混然中处。
现代文： 乾称为父亲，而坤称为母亲，我从这里来到人间，于是混然处于人间。
English: Qian is called the father, while Kun is called the mother. I came to the human world from here, so I am mixed up in the human world.

古文：故天地之塞吾其体，天地之帅吾其性，民吾同胞，物吾与也。
现代文：所以天地的交合构成了我的身体，天地的运行造就了我的性格，民众是我的同胞，万物我与他们共有。
English: Therefore, the intercourse of heaven and earth constitutes my body, the movement of heaven and earth creates my character, the people are my compatriots, and I share everything with them.

古文：大君者，吾父母宗子；其大臣，宗子之家相也。
现代文： 皇上君主，是我天地父母的宗子；他的大臣们，是天地父母宗子的家人。
English: The Emperor is the great-grandson of my heavenly parents; his ministers are the family members of the great-grandson of my heavenly parents.

古文：尊高年所以长其长，慈孤幼所以幼其幼，圣其合德，贤其秀也。
现代文：尊敬年老人，以长辈的礼仪对待长者，爱护关心孤独幼儿，以爱幼的善心对待幼儿，圣人要具备各种美好的道德，以俊秀的人才为贤能。
English: Respect the elderly, treat the elderly with the etiquette of the elders, love and care for the lonely children, treat the children with the kindness of the children, the saints should have all kinds of good morals, and take the handsome talent as the ability.

古文：凡天下疲癃残疾、恂独鳏寡，皆吾兄弟之颠连而无告者也。 于时保之 ，子之翼也。 乐且不忧 ，纯乎孝者也。
现代文：凡是天下老弱病残、鳏寡孤独，都是我应以兄弟之间的联系去对待而无须要别人相告的人。 按时去保护他们 ，是子孙们的道德义务。 快乐而不忧愁 ，纯粹是尽孝的责任。
English: All the old, the weak, the sick, the widowed and the lonely in the world are people whom I should treat as brothers and sisters without having to inform others. It is the moral obligation of my children and grandchildren to protect them on time. To be happy and not sad is purely a duty of filial piety.

古文：违曰悖德，害仁曰贼，济恶者不才，其践形惟肖者也。
现代文：违背就是背离道德；损害仁义就是贼，帮助恶狠的人是不才的表现，在行动上遵守常道是相似于有孝道的人。
English: To violate is to deviate from morality; to harm benevolence and righteousness is to be a thief; to help evil-doers is a sign of incompetence; and to act in a normal way is similar to a person with filial piety.

古文：知化则善述其事，穷神则善继其志，不愧屋漏为无忝，存心养性为匪懈。
现代文： 融会贯通了就善于阐述事情的道理，穷尽精微大义就善于继承圣贤的大志，不因为屋漏而感到惭愧为无辱，立志修身养性在于不懈。
English: It is good at expounding the truth of things when integration is complete, it is good at inheriting the aspirations of saints and sages after exhausting the subtleties of justice, it is not ashamed and humiliated because of omissions, and it is unremitting in its determination to improve itself.

古文：恶旨酒，崇伯之子顾养；育英材，颍封人之锡类。
现代文：厌恶美酒，是崇伯子善于顾养的方法；培育英材，是颖封人的赏赐的类型。
English: An aversion to fine wine is a method by which Chongbozi is good at nurturing; cultivating ying wood is a type of reward for Yingfu people.

古文：不弛劳而底豫，舜其功也；无所逃而待烹，申生其恭也。
现代文：不弛于操劳而善始善终，是舜的功绩；没有逃脱的出路而静待烹煮，是申生恭顺的表现。
English: It is the merit of the egrets that they do not slacken in their efforts and have a good beginning and a good ending; it is the manifestation of the egrets that they quietly wait for cooking without a way out.

古文：体其受而归全者，参乎；勇于从而顺令者，伯奇也。
现代文：身体所接受的而归于一个人的，是曾参吗？勇敢地顺从而服从命令的人，是伯奇。
English: What the body receives and assigns to a man, is the Zengshen? The man who bravely follows and obeys orders, is the Birch.

古文：富贵福泽，将厚吾之生也；贫贱忧戚，庸玉女于成也。
现代文：富贵福运恩泽，将使我的生存更加有利；贫贱忧愁痛苦，是父母天地对他们的考验和成全。
English: Prosperity, fortune, and grace will make my existence more favorable; poverty, poverty, sorrow, and pain are the test and perfection of the parents' heaven and earth.

古文：存，吾顺事；殁，吾宁也。
现代文：存活时，我顺其自然；死了，我也得到安息。 
English: When I am alive, I go with the flow; when I am dead, I rest.

古文：程颐尝言： 《西铭》明理一而分殊，扩前圣所未发，与孟子性善养气之论同功，自孟子后盖未之见。 学者至今尊其书。
现代文：程颐曾经说 ：《西铭》阐明理一而分殊，发展了从前圣贤们所没有讲到的道理，与孟子的人性本善、修养气质的论点是同一个道理，自从孟子以后大概再没有见到过。 学者们到现在仍然尊崇这本书。
English: Cheng Yao once said: "Ximing" expounds the principle of "one is different from another" and develops the truth that the saints and sages did not tell before. It is the same principle as Mencius's argument about the nature of human nature and the cultivation of temperament, which has probably not been seen again since Mencius. Scholars still revere this book.

古文：嘉定十三年，赐谥曰明公。
现代文：嘉定十三年，宋宁宗诏令赐给谥号叫作明公。
English: In the 13th year of Jiading, the imperial edict of the Song and Ning Dynasties gave him the title of Ming Gong.

古文：淳祐元年封郿伯，从祀孔子庙庭。
现代文：淳元年，追封为伯，可入孔子庙庭一齐祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Jun era, he was posthumously awarded the title of haku, and was allowed to enter the Confucius Temple courtyard to offer sacrifices together.

古文：卒于官，年四十七。邵雍字尧夫。
现代文：他的弟弟叫张晋戈。邵雍，字尧夫。
English: His younger brother is named Zhang Jinguo. Shao Yong, the character is a widower.

古文：其先范阳人，父古徙衡漳，又徙共城。
现代文：他的祖先是范阳人，他的父亲邵古迁居衡漳，又迁居共城。
English: His ancestors were from Fanyang. His father, Shao Gu, moved to Hengyuan and then to Gongcheng.

古文：雍年三十，游河南，葬其亲伊水上，遂为河南人。
现代文：邵雍三十岁时，游历河南，把他的父亲葬在伊水岸边，于是成为河南府人。
English: At the age of thirty, Shao Yong traveled to Henan and buried his father on the shore of the Yishui River, thus becoming a native of Henan Province.

古文：雍少时，自雄其才，慷慨欲树功名。
现代文：邵雍年少的时候，自觉有雄奇之才能，慷慨地想树立功名。
English: When Shao Yong was young, he was self-conscious of his extraordinary talent and generously wanted to make a name for himself.

古文：于书无所不读，始为学，即坚苦刻厉，寒不炉，暑不扇，夜不就席者数年。
现代文：对于书籍没有不读的，开始做学问，就很刻苦努力，寒冷时不生炉子，酷暑时不用扇子，晚上不上床就席睡觉有几年的时间。
English: For those who do not read books and start learning, they work very hard, do not have a stove when it is cold, do not use a fan when it is very hot, and do not go to bed at night and sleep for several years.

古文：已而叹曰： 昔人尚友于古，而吾独未及四方。 于是逾河、汾，涉淮、汉，周流齐、鲁、宋、郑之墟，久之，幡然来归，曰： 道在是矣。 遂不复出。
现代文：而后感叹说 ：过去的人崇尚友人像古代一样，而我自己却独独没有到各处走师访友。 于是越过黄河、汾水，跋涉于淮水、汉江一带，周游齐、鲁、宋、郑这些古国的原有辖区，很久以后，幡然归来，说： 道在这里了。 于是不再出去。
English: Then he lamented, "In the past, people revered their friends as in ancient times, but I alone did not go everywhere to visit my teachers and friends. So I crossed the Yellow River and Surabaya, trekked around Huai Shui and the Han River, and traveled around the original jurisdictions of Qi, Lu, Song, and Zheng ancient countries. After a long time, I suddenly returned and said, "The way is here." So I stopped going out.

古文：北海李之才摄共城令，闻雍好学，尝造其庐，谓曰： 子亦闻物理性命之学乎？ 雍对曰： 幸受教。 乃事之才，受《河图》、《洛书》、《宓义》八卦六十四卦图像。
现代文：接受《河图》、《洛书》、宓羲八卦六十四卦图象。
English: Accept the "River Map," "Laoshu" and "Sixty-Four Views of the Eight Trigrams" images.

古文：之才之传，远有端绪，而雍探赜索隐，妙悟神契，洞彻蕴奥，汪洋浩博，多其所自得者。
现代文：李之才的传承，它的渊源端绪很久远，而邵雍探索精微、研究深奥，奇妙地领悟，心领神会地默契，洞察入微、探求深奥，如汪洋浩瀚、广博，大多是自己学习、研究所得的。
English: Li Zhi Cai's inheritance, its origin goes back a long way, while Shao Yong's exploration of subtlety, study of the profound, strange understanding, understanding of the tacit understanding, insight into the subtle, and exploration of the profound, such as the vastness and vastness, are mostly self-study and research.

古文：及其学益老，德益邵，玩心高明，以观夫天地之运化，阴阳之消长，远而古今世变，微而走飞草木之性情，深造曲畅，庶几所谓不惑，而非依仿象类、亿则屡中者。
现代文：随着他学问的增长，他的德性更高，研习玩赏的水平更加高明，可以观察了解天地的运行变化，阴阳二气的增加与减少，时间久远的古代到现在的社会变化，细微的能跑、能飞的动物到树草花木的性情特征，可以很仔细地了解它们的变化与发展，差不多达到所谓不惑而无疑问的境界，而不是依靠仿照象数学，主观地推测而屡中的。
English: With the growth of his learning, his virtue is higher, the level of study and appreciation is more advanced, he can observe and understand the changes in the movement of heaven and earth, the increase and decrease of yin and yang, the social changes from ancient times to the present, the subtle running and flying animals to the temperamental characteristics of trees, plants and flowers, and can carefully understand their changes and development, almost reaching the so-called no-doubt and no-doubt realm, rather than relying on imitation like mathematics, subjective speculation and repeated.

古文：遂衍宓羲先天之旨，著书十余万言行于世，然世之知其道者鲜矣。
现代文：于是增加宓羲先天的旨意，写成十多万字的著作流行于社会，然而社会上能知道他的学问的门道的人是很少的。
English: As a result, his writings of more than one hundred thousand words became popular in society. However, there are few people in society who know the path of his learning.

古文：初至洛，蓬荜环堵，不芘风雨，躬樵爨以事父母，虽平居屡空，而怡然有所甚乐，人莫能窥也。
现代文：初到洛阳的时候，居住茅草房，不能遮挡风雨，他亲自砍柴烧火煮饭以侍奉父母，虽然常常断炊，然而却怡然自得，感到很快乐，别人不能看清他快乐的秘密所在。
English: When he first arrived in Luoyang, he lived in a thatched-roof house that could not shelter him from the wind and rain. He personally cut firewood and cooked meals to serve his parents. Although he often skipped meals, he was self-satisfied and felt very happy. Others could not see the secret of his happiness.

古文：及执亲丧，哀毁尽礼。
现代文：到为父母守丧的时候，哀痛损己完全合乎礼仪。
English: When it comes to the time of mourning for parents, grief is completely in line with etiquette.

古文：富弼、司马光、吕公著诸贤退居洛中，雅敬雍，恒相从游，为市园宅。
现代文：富弼、司马光、吕公著许多贤能的人退居洛阳的时候，都很敬重邵雍，常常互相一起串门游览，为他买园圃住宅。
English: When Fuxi, Sima Guang and Lv Gong, along with many other virtuous people, retired to Luoyang, they all respected Shao Yong, often visiting each other's homes and buying garden houses for him.

古文：雍岁时耕稼，仅给衣食。
现代文：邵雍年年按季节种田收割，仅仅能自给衣食。
English: Shaoyong harvests crops on a seasonal basis every year, and can only feed and clothe itself.

古文：名其居曰 安乐窝 ，因自号安乐先生。
现代文：给他的住宅取名叫 安乐窝 ，因此，他自称 安乐先生 。
English: He called his house Anlewo, so he called himself Mr. Anle.

古文：旦则焚香燕坐，晡时酌酒三四瓯，微醺即止，常不及醉也，兴至辄哦诗自咏。
现代文：早晨他焚香端坐，下午饮酒三四盅，微微有些醉意即不饮了，常常不到醉酒的程度，兴致所到就吟诗自咏。
English: In the morning, he would sit and burn incense. In the afternoon, he would drink three to four glasses of wine. When he was slightly drunk, he would stop drinking. Often, he would not reach the level of drunkenness. Whenever he felt like it, he would chant a poem.

古文：春秋时出游城中，风雨常不出，出则乘小车，一人挽之，惟意所适。
现代文：春秋季节就在洛阳城中游玩，刮风下雨常常不出屋，外出则乘小车马，一个人牵着缰绳，随意之所好，到哪算哪。
English: In the spring and autumn seasons, they go to play in Luoyang City. When it is windy and rainy, they often do not go out. When they go out, they take horse-drawn carriages, one person holds the reins, and they can go wherever they like.

古文：士大夫家识其车音，争相迎候，童孺厮隶皆欢相谓曰： 吾家先生至也。 不复称其姓字。
现代文：士大夫们家里都知道他车子的声音，争相恭候迎接，小孩、佣人都欢呼跳跃、相互转告说： 我家的先生到了。 不再称他的姓氏名字。
English: All the judges and magistrates in the family knew the sound of his car and waited eagerly to greet him, while the children and servants jumped for joy and told each other: "Our master has arrived.

古文：或留信宿乃去。
现代文：有时候留下来住宿二夜，然后才离开。
English: Sometimes they stay for two nights and then leave.

古文：好事者别作屋如雍所居，以候其至，名曰 行窝 。
现代文：喜欢管闲事的人另外做房屋给邵雍居住，以等待、恭候他的到来。名字叫作 行窝 。
English: People who like to meddle in other people's affairs also built a house for Shaoyong to live in, to wait and wait for his arrival. The name is Xingwu.

古文：司马光兄事雍，而二人纯德尤乡里所慕向，父子昆弟每相饬曰： 毋为不善，恐司马端明、邵先生知。 士之道洛者，有不之公府，必之雍。
现代文：司马光把邵雍当作兄长看待，二人纯洁、高尚的道德被乡里所钦慕向往，父子兄弟之间每每互相告诫说 ：不要做不善的事，恐怕司马端明、邵先生知晓了。 有士大夫到洛阳的，有的不到官府衙署，却必到邵雍家里。
English: Sima Guang regarded Shao Yong as his elder brother, and the pure and noble morals of the two were admired and yearned for by the villagers. Between the father and son brothers, they always warned each other, saying, "Don't do bad things, I'm afraid Sima Duanming and Mr. Shao know about it."

古文：雍德气粹然，望之知其贤，然不事表襮，不设防畛，群居燕笑终日，不为甚异。
现代文：邵雍品德、气质纯粹凛然，一看就知道他是一个贤能的人，然而他不注重表现、推荐自己，与人交往没有界限阻碍，成天和大家在一起闲居宴请笑谈，不以为有什么奇怪。
English: Shao Yong's moral character and temperament are pure and admirable. At a glance, you know that he is a capable person. However, he does not pay attention to performance and recommends himself. He has no boundaries to interact with people. He lives with everyone all day long, invites them to dinner, and makes fun of them. He does not think there is anything strange.

古文：与人言，乐道其善而隐其恶。
现代文：与别人谈话，乐于谈论别人的善行而隐瞒他的缺点。
English: Converse with others, and be willing to talk about another's good deeds while concealing his faults.

古文：有就问学则答之，未尝强以语人。
现代文：有的就便请教学问，他就回答他，从没有把自己的观点强加于人。
English: Some would ask him questions, and he would answer them, never imposing his views on others.

古文：人无贵贱少长，一接以诚，故贤者悦其德，不贤者服其化。
现代文：对别人不分贵与贱、老与少，一律以诚相待，因此，贤能的人喜欢他高尚的道德，不贤的人叹服他的感化。
English: He treats everyone with sincerity, regardless of whether they are high or low, old or young. Therefore, the virtuous people like his high morals, and the wicked people admire his influence.

古文：一时洛中人才特盛，而忠厚之风闻天下。
现代文：一时间，洛阳城中的人才盛况空前，而忠诚、淳厚的风气传闻于天下。
English: For a while, the talent in Luoyang was at an all-time high, and the loyal and honest culture was rumored all over the world.

古文：熙宁行新法，吏牵迫不可为，或投劾去。
现代文：熙宁年间推行新法，官吏受牵制被迫无所作为，有的自己弹劾自己离职。
English: During the Xining era, when the new law was implemented, officials were constrained and forced to do nothing, and some of them impeached themselves and left office.

古文：雍门生故友居州县者，皆贻书访雍，雍曰： 此贤者所当尽力之时，新法固严，能宽一分，则民受一分赐矣。
现代文：邵雍的门生故友在州县做官的，都写信向邵雍询问访察，邵雍说： 这是贤能的人应当尽力职守的时候，新法固然严厉，能宽松一分，那么民众就会受一分恩赐了。
English: Shaoyong's protégés and old friends who are officials in counties and prefectures have all written to Shaoyong to inquire about the inspection. Shaoyong said: This is a time when people of virtue should do their best. Although the new law is strict, if it can be relaxed by one point, then the people will be blessed by one point.

古文：投劾何益耶？ 
现代文：自己弹劾自己有什么好处呢？ 
English: What good does it do to impeach yourself?

古文：嘉祐诏求遗逸，留守王拱辰以雍应诏，授将作监主簿，复举逸士，补颍州团练推官，皆固辞乃受命，竟称疾不之官。
现代文：嘉年间，下诏访求隐逸之士，留守王拱辰以邵雍应诏，授予他将作监主簿，又荐举隐逸之士，补为颍州团练推官，都坚决辞谢未成才接受任命，最终又说有病而不到任。
English: During the Jia years, Wang Gongchen, who was left behind, made a visit to solicit the absentees, and Shao Yong, who was left behind, responded by granting him the title of supervisor. He also recommended that the absentees be promoted, and he was appointed as the presiding officer of the Zhangzhou Rehearsal Team. They all resolutely declined to accept the appointment before they were able to do so, and finally said that they were ill and would not take office.

古文：熙宁十年，卒，年六十七，赠秘书省著作郎。
现代文：熙宁十年，去世，终年六十七岁，追赠秘书省著作郎。
English: Xining ten years, died, aged sixty-seven, posthumously awarded the Secretary of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：元祐中赐谥康节。
现代文：元年间追赐谥号叫作 康节 。
English: In the first year of the year, the celebration of the posthumous conferment of the honorary title was called the Kang Festival.

古文：雍高明英迈，迥出千古，而坦夷浑厚，不见圭角，是以清而不激，和而不流，人与交久，益尊信之。
现代文：邵雍高明英俊，才智见识出众，傲视千古。他坦率平易、忠厚朴实，不露锋芒，因此他清醒而不激动，平和而不随波逐流，别人与他交接久了，更加尊重、信任他。
English: Shao Yong is tall and handsome, his wisdom is outstanding, and he is proud of the ages. He is frank and easy-going, loyal and simple, and does not show a sharp edge. Therefore, he is sober and not excited, peaceful and not drifting with the tide. Others have been in contact with him for a long time, and respect and trust him more.

古文：河南程颢初侍其父识雍，论议终日，退而叹曰： 尧夫，内圣外王之学也。 
现代文：河南府程颢初次侍奉他的父亲认识了邵雍，与他从早到晚，一直讨论不休，回去后，感叹地说： 尧夫，是内圣外王之治的学问啊。 
English: Cheng Yao from Henan Province met Shao Yong for the first time when he was serving his father. He and Shao Yong discussed endlessly from morning to night. After returning home, he said with a sigh: "My lord, this is the knowledge of ruling the inner and outer kingdoms.

古文：雍知虑绝人，遇事能前知。
现代文：邵雍的智慧、思维超越常人，遇事能预测而事先了解。
English: Shao Yong's wisdom and thinking surpass ordinary people, and he can predict and understand things in advance.

古文：程颐尝曰： 其心虚明，自能知之。 当时学者因雍超诣之识，务高雍所为，至谓雍有玩世之意；又因雍之前知，谓雍于凡物声气之所感触，辄以其动而推其变焉。
现代文：程颢曾经说 ：他的心里虚怀若谷，光明磊落，自然能在事前预测了解。 当时学者因为邵雍有超人的造诣和远见卓识，想有高于邵雍的所作所为，甚至称邵雍有玩世不恭的意思；又因为邵雍能预测未来，就说邵雍对一般物质的声气存废有所感觉，只是以它的动态运行来推测它的变化。
English: Cheng Yao once said: "His heart is full of vanity and arrogance, and it is natural to be able to predict and understand in advance. At that time, scholars thought that because Shao Yong had superhuman accomplishment and foresight, he wanted to be higher than Shao Yong's actions, and even called Shao Yong cynical; and because Shao Yong could predict the future, it was said that Shao Yong had a sense of the sound and gas of general materials, but only used its dynamic operation to predict its changes.

古文：于是摭世事之已然者，皆以雍言先之，雍盖未必然也。
现代文：于是列举世事中已经如此者，都以为是邵雍有言在先，邵雍大概未必是这样的。
English: As a result, those who enumerate what has already happened in the world all think that it was Shao Yong who had the first word, and Shao Yong is probably not necessarily like that.

古文：雍疾病，司马光、张载、程颢、程颐晨夕候之，将终，共议丧葬事外庭，雍皆能闻众人所言，召子伯温谓曰： 诸君欲葬我近城地，当从先茔尔。 既葬，颢为铭墓，称雍之道纯一不杂，就其所至，可谓安且成矣。
现代文：邵雍病重之际，司马光、张载、程颢、程颐从早到晚守候在侧，快要死的时候，大家在外面的房子里议论丧葬事情，邵雍对众人所说的话都能听见，召他的儿子邵伯温来对他说 ：各位君子想把我埋葬在离城很近的地方，应当把我葬在咱祖先的坟茔一起。 葬事毕后，程颢为他写了墓志铭文，称颂邵雍的道纯净而不杂乱，就他所达到的境界，可以说是既安稳又成熟。
English: When Shao Yong was gravely ill, Sima Guang, Zhang Zai, Cheng Yao and Cheng Yao waited by his side from morning till night. When he was about to die, everyone was discussing funeral matters in the house outside. Shao Yong could hear what everyone was saying. He called his son Shao Bowen to come and say to him, "If you gentlemen want to bury me in a place very close to the city, you should bury me together with the graves of our ancestors." After the funeral, Cheng Yao wrote an epitaph for him, praising Shao Yong's path as pure and not chaotic. As far as he had reached, he could be said to be both

古文：所著书曰《皇极经世》、《观物内外篇》、《渔樵问对》，诗曰《伊川击壤集》。
现代文：他所写作的书叫作《皇极经世》、《观物内外篇》、《渔樵问对》，他的诗叫作《伊川击壤集》。
English: The books he wrote are called "Imperial Wisdom," "Looking at Things Inside and Out" and "Questions from Fishermen," and his poems are called "The Collection of Ikawa's Battles."

古文：子伯温，别有传。
现代文：儿子邵伯温，另外有传。
English: His son, Shao Bowen, is another legend.

