古文：儒者论圣人，以为前知千岁，後知万事，有独见之明，独听之聪，事来则名，不学自知，不问自晓，故称圣，则神矣。
现代文：俗儒评论圣人，认为圣人前知千年以前的事，后知万年以后的事，有独到的眼力，有独到的听力，事物一出现就能说出它的名目来，圣人不学就能感知，不问就能通晓，所以一提到圣人就认为和神一样了。
English: Confucianists commented on sages, saying that sages knew things a thousand years ago and things ten thousand years in the future, that they had unique eyesight and unique hearing, that they were able to name things as soon as they appeared, that sages could perceive without learning and understand without asking, and that they were considered to be the same as gods as soon as they were mentioned.

古文：若蓍龟之知吉凶，蓍草称神，龟称灵矣。
现代文：就像蓍草和龟甲能占卜吉凶，蓍草称为神，龟甲称为灵一样。
English: Just as the reed and the tortoise shell can tell fortunes, the reed is called the god, and the tortoise shell is called the spirit.

古文：贤者才下不能及，智劣不能料，故谓之贤。
现代文：贤者才能低下比不上圣人，智慧较差不能预知未来，所以称之为贤人。
English: The ability of a sage is lower than that of a sage, and wisdom is poor and cannot predict the future, so it is called a sage.

古文：夫名异则实殊，质同则称钧，以圣名论之，知圣人卓绝，与贤殊也。
现代文：名称不同那么实质也不同，实质相同那么名称就一样，就 圣 这个名称来说，就可知圣人超群无比，与贤人不一样。
English: If the name is different, the essence is also different. If the essence is the same, the name is the same. As far as the name "saint" is concerned, it can be known that a saint is incomparable and different from a sage.

古文：孔子将死，遗谶书，曰： 不知何一男子，自谓秦始皇，上我之堂，踞我之床，颠倒我衣裳，至沙丘而亡。 
现代文：孔子临死的时候，留下谶书说： 不知是一个什么男子，自称是秦始皇，走上我的内堂，坐在我的床上，弄乱了我的衣裳，以后他到沙丘就会死去。 
English: When Confucius was on the verge of death, he left behind an imperial edict saying: "I don't know what kind of man, claiming to be the First Emperor of Qin, walked into my inner hall, sat on my bed, ruffled my clothes, and after that he will die in the sand dunes."

古文：其後，秦王兼吞天下，号始皇，巡狩至鲁，观孔子宅，乃至沙丘，道病而崩。
现代文：以后，秦王统一了天下，号称 始皇 ，巡游到达鲁国地区，观瞻了孔子的住宅，才到沙丘，就在途中生病死了。
English: After that, Qin Wang unified the world, known as the First Emperor, and cruised to the Lu region. He visited the residence of Confucius before reaching the sand dunes, and died of illness on the way.

古文：又曰： 董仲舒乱我书。 
现代文：又说： 董仲舒整理发挥我著的书。 
English: He also said: "Dong Zhongshu organized and promoted my book.

古文：其後，江都相董仲舒，论思《春秋》，造著传记。
现代文：以后，江都相董仲舒研究《春秋》，编写了传记。
English: Later, Jiangdu scholar Dong Zhongshu studied "Spring and Autumn" and compiled a biography.

古文：又书曰： 亡秦者，胡也。 
现代文：又写道： 亡掉秦朝的，是名叫胡的人。 
English: He also wrote: It was a man named Hu who brought down the Qin Dynasty.

古文：其後，二世胡亥，竟亡天下。
现代文：以后，二世胡亥果然丢掉了天下。
English: Later, the second Hu Hai really lost the world.

古文：用三者论之，圣人後知万世之效也。
现代文：用这三件事来评论它，这就是圣人能预知万年以后的事情的证明。
English: To comment on it with these three things is to prove that a sage can see ten thousand years into the future.

古文：孔子生不知其父，若母匿之，吹律自知殷宋大夫子氏之世也。
现代文：孔子生下来以后不知道他的父亲是谁，他的母亲隐瞒了他，他用吹律管的办法知道了自己是殷宋大夫子氏的后代。
English: When Confucius was born, he did not know who his father was. His mother hid it from him, and he learned by means of a wind instrument that he was a descendant of the Yin Song Daifu Zi clan.

古文：不案图书，不闻人言，吹律精思，自知其世，圣人前知千岁之验也。
现代文：孔子不根据河图、洛书，没有听人说，自吹律管精心思考，知道了他的身世，这就是圣人前知千年以前的事的证明。
English: Confucius did not rely on the river map and Luo Shu, nor did he listen to anyone, but he thought carefully and knew his lineage. This is the proof that the sage knew things a thousand years ago.

古文：曰：此皆虚也。
现代文：我认为这些说法都是虚妄不实的。
English: I think these claims are completely untrue.

古文：案神怪之言，皆在谶记，所表皆效图书。 亡秦者胡 ，《河图》之文也。
现代文：考察神怪的说法，全在谶书之中，它所记载的都是从河图、洛书哪里仿效来的。 亡秦者胡 就是仿效《河图》上的话。
English: The theory of investigating supernatural phenomena is all in the Book of Records, and what it records is copied from the river map and the book of Luo. The deceased Qin ruler Hu is said to have imitated the words in the "river map."

古文：孔子条暢增益以表神怪，或後人诈记，以明效验。
现代文：孔子使它条理通畅给它增添润色，用来记载神怪的事情；也许是后人伪造的，用来表明圣人的效验。
English: Confucius streamlined it and added polish to it, and it was used to record supernatural events; it may have been forged by later generations to show the efficacy of the sage.

古文：高皇帝封吴王，送之，拊其背曰： 汉後五十年，东南有反者，岂汝邪？ 
现代文：汉高祖封刘濞为吴王，给他送行的时候，拍着他的背说： 汉朝开国五十年后，东南地区有谋反的人，难道会是你吗？ 
English: The ancestor of the Han Dynasty, Liu Bei, was crowned the King of Wu. When seeing him off, he patted him on the back and said, "Fifty years after the founding of the Han Dynasty, is it really you who is plotting a rebellion in the southeastern region?

古文：到景帝时，濞与七国通谋反汉。
现代文：到汉景帝的时候，刘濞与七国串通反叛汉朝。
English: By the time of Emperor Han Jing, Liu Bei had conspired with the Seven Kingdoms to rebel against the Han Dynasty.

古文：建此言者，或时观气见象，处其有反，不知主名。高祖见濞之勇，则谓之是。
现代文：提出这句话的人，也许是观察了天象，判断东南地区将会有反叛发生，并不知当事人的名字，高祖见刘濞勇武，就认为他是这个当事人。
English: The person who put forward this sentence may have observed the celestial body and judged that there would be a rebellion in the southeastern region, and did not know the name of the party. Gao Zu saw Liu Xiyongwu and thought that he was the party.

古文：原此以论，孔子见始皇、仲舒，或时但言 将有观我之宅 、 乱我之书 者，後人见始皇入其宅，仲舒读其书，则增益其辞，著其主名。
现代文：根据这点来推论，孔子预知秦始皇、董仲舒所做的事，也许仅仅只是说过 将有人观览我的住宅 、 整理我的著作 这样的话，后人见秦始皇入孔子的住宅，董仲舒读孔子的书，就增添孔子说过的话，把当事人标明出来了。
English: Based on this, it can be deduced that Confucius' foreknowledge of Qin Shi Huang and Dong Zhongshu's actions may have been merely that he said, "Someone will inspect my house and sort out my writings." In this way, when later generations saw Qin Shi Huang enter Confucius' house and Dong Zhongshu read Confucius' books, they added the words of Confucius and identified the parties involved.

古文：如孔子神而空见始皇、仲舒，则其自为殷後子氏之世，亦当默而知之，无为吹律以自定也。
现代文：如果孔子真的神奇，能够凭空预知秦始皇、董仲舒所做的事，那么他自己是殷后子氏的后代，也应该默默无声地就知道这一点，用不着以吹律管的办法来自己确定。
English: If Confucius is really miraculous and can predict the deeds of Qin Shi Huang and Dong Zhongshu out of thin air, then he himself, a descendant of the Yin Houzi clan, should also know this silently, without having to blow a rhythm tube to determine it for himself.

古文：孔子不吹律，不能立其姓，及其见始皇，睹仲舒，亦复以吹律之类矣。
现代文：孔子不吹律管，就不能确定他的姓，涉及到他预知秦始皇、董仲舒的事，也还是用了吹律管以定姓氏的这类办法了。
English: Confucius could not determine his family name without blowing the rhythm tube, and he still used the method of blowing the rhythm tube to determine his family name when it came to his foreknowledge of Qin Shihuang and Dong Zhongshu.

古文：案始皇本事，始皇不至鲁，安得上孔子之堂，踞孔子之床，颠倒孔子之衣裳乎？
现代文：考察秦始皇原本的史实，秦始皇并没有到鲁国，怎么会上孔子的内堂，坐在孔子的床上，弄乱孔子的衣裳呢？
English: Examining the original historical facts of Qin Shihuang, Qin Shihuang did not go to Lu, how could he go to Confucius' inner hall, sit on Confucius' bed, and mess up Confucius' clothes?

古文：始皇三十七年十月癸丑出游，至云梦，望祀虞舜於九嶷。
现代文：秦始皇三十七年十月癸丑的那一天出游，到达云梦泽，在九嶷山对虞舜举行 望 祭。
English: Qin Shi Huang, the first emperor of the Qin Dynasty, went on a trip in October of the 37th year of his reign. He arrived at Yunmenze and held a memorial festival for the yakitori in Jiuye Mountain.

古文：浮江下，观藉柯，度梅渚，过丹阳，至钱唐，临浙江，涛恶，乃西百二十里，从陕中度，上会稽，祭大禹，立石刊颂，望於南海。
现代文：乘船顺长江而下，在藉柯观览，渡过梅渚，经过丹阳，到达钱塘，亲临钱塘江，波涛汹涌，就往西行一百二十里，从江面狭窄处，渡过钱塘江，登上会稽山，祭祀大禹，立石碑刻颂辞，对南海举行 望 祭。
English: Take the boat down the Yangtze River, take a look at Ke, cross Meizhu, pass Danyang, reach Qiantang, visit the Qiantang River, the waves are rough, then go west for one hundred and twenty miles, cross the Qiantang River from the narrow point of the river, climb Mount Huiqi, worship Dayu, erect a stone monument to carve a eulogy, and hold a memorial to the South China Sea.

古文：还过，从江乘，旁海上，北至琅邪。
现代文：回来经过吴县，从江乘渡江，沿着海边北上，向北直到琅邪山。
English: After returning, we passed through Wuxian County, from the Yangtze River to the Yangtze River, along the coast to the north, and northward to the Yuya Mountain.

古文：自琅邪北至劳、成山，因至之罘，遂并海，西至平原津而病，崩於沙丘平台。
现代文：从琅邪山往北到崂山、成山，由这里到之罘，于是沿着海边航行，往西到达平原津就病了，最后死在沙丘平台。
English: He sailed along the coast from Shanzhai Mountain in the north to Lushan Mountain and Chengshan Mountain, and from there to Zhouzhuang Mountain. When he reached the plain of Tsu in the west, he fell ill and eventually died on the sand dune platform.

古文：既不至鲁，谶记何见，而云始皇至鲁？
现代文：既然秦始皇没有到过鲁国，谶书依据什么说秦始皇到鲁国呢？
English: Since Qin Shihuang did not go to the State of Lu, on what basis does the imperial edict say that Qin Shihuang went to the State of Lu?

古文：至鲁未可知，其言孔子曰 不知何一男子 之言，亦未可用。 不知何一男子 之言不可用，则言 董仲舒乱我书 亦复不可信也。
现代文：连秦始皇是否到过鲁国都不知道，书上记载的孔子说的 不知是一个什么男子 的话，也就不可信了。 不知是一个什么男子 的这句话不可信，那么记载的 董仲舒整理我的著作 这句话也又不可信了。
English: Even the First Emperor of Qin did not know whether he had been to the State of Lu, and the words of Confucius recorded in the book, "I do not know what kind of man I am," cannot be trusted, and the words "I do not know what kind of man" cannot be trusted, and the words recorded by Dong Zhongshu, "I organize my works," cannot be trusted.

古文：行事，文记谲常人言耳，非天地之书，则皆缘前因古，有所据状。如无闻见，则无所状。
现代文：已有的事实，文字记载无论如何异常，不过是人所说的话罢了。只要不是天上掉下来、地下冒出来的书，就都得遵循前人因袭古人，有所依据而加以描述；如果从来没有听说或看到过，那么也就没有什么可描述的了。
English: The existing facts, no matter how unusual the written records, are nothing more than the words of man. As long as books do not fall from the sky and emerge from the ground, they must be described according to the predecessors because of the ancients; if you have never heard or seen, then there is nothing to describe.

古文：凡圣人见祸福也，亦揆端推类，原始见终，从闾巷论朝堂，由昭昭察冥冥。
现代文：大凡圣人预见祸福，也是估量事物的苗头而加以类推，考察事物的开端而预见到它的结果，从民间小事推论到朝廷大事，由明显的事而察知昏暗的事。
English: A great sage foresees misfortune and good fortune. He also estimates the seedling of things and makes an analogy, examines the beginning of things and foresees its result, deduces from folk trifles to imperial events, and detects dark things from obvious things.

古文：谶书秘文，远见未然，空虚暗昧，豫睹未有，达闻暂见，卓谲怪神，若非庸口所能言。
现代文：谶书中的神秘记载，远见尚未发生的事，说得空洞而含糊，预见尚未出现的事，乍一听，猛一看，显得离奇古怪，好像不是一般人的口里所能说得出来的。
English: The mysterious records in the scrolls, the visions of things that have not yet happened, are empty and vague, and the foresight of things that have not yet appeared, at first hearing and at a glance, appear bizarre and strange, as if they cannot be said by ordinary people.

古文：放象事类以见祸，推原往验以处来事，者亦能，非独圣也。
现代文：仿效同属一类的事情以预测祸患，推究过去的经验以判断未来，贤者也能做到这点，并非只有圣人才能做到。
English: To imitate things of the same kind in order to foretell calamities, to consult the past in order to judge the future, is the work of sages, not of saints.

古文：周公治鲁，太公知其後世当有削弱之患；太公治齐，周公睹其後世当有劫弑之祸。
现代文：周公谈论如何治理鲁国，太公预知周公的后代必将有君权削弱的祸患；太公谈论如何治理齐国，周公预见到太公的后代必将有杀君篡国的祸乱。
English: Zhou Gong talked about how to govern Lu, and the Grand Duke foresaw that Zhou Gong's descendants would have the misfortune of weakening the monarchy; the Grand Duke talked about how to govern Qi, and Zhou Gong foresaw that the descendants of the Grand Duke would have the misfortune of killing the prince and usurping the country.

古文：见法术之极，睹祸乱之前矣。
现代文：彼此都预见到对方采用的治国方法和手段的最终结果，预见到祸乱的苗头了。
English: Each foresaw the ultimate outcome of the other's methods and means of governing the country, and foresaw the seeds of disaster.

古文：纣作象箸而箕子讥，鲁以偶人葬而孔子叹，缘象箸见龙干之患，偶人睹殉葬之祸也。
现代文：纣王制作了象牙筷子而箕子发出哀叹，鲁国用偶人随葬而孔子为此发出慨叹，这是由制作象牙筷子预见到纣王要吃龙肝的祸患，由用偶人随葬预见到用人殉葬的灾祸。
English: The king of Yao made ivory chopsticks and the cripple lamented, the country of Lu buried people with dolls and Confucius lamented this. This is because the making of ivory chopsticks foresaw the calamity of the king of Yao eating dragon's liver, and the use of dolls for burial foresaw the calamity of burying people with dolls.

古文：太公、周公俱见未然，箕子、孔子并睹未有，所由见方来者，贤圣同也。
现代文：太公、周公都预见到了尚未发生的事情，箕子、孔子都看到了还没有出现的事情，用来预见未来的推理方法，贤人和圣人是一样的。
English: Taigong and Zhou Gong both foresaw things that have not yet happened, Zizi and Confucius both saw things that have not yet appeared, and the reasoning methods used to foresee the future are the same for sages and saints.

古文：鲁侯老，太子弱，次室之女倚柱而啸，由老弱之徵，见败乱之兆也。
现代文：鲁侯年老，太子幼弱，次室邑的女子靠在柱子上长啸叹息，是依据老弱的征候，预见到败乱的先兆。
English: Lu Hou is old, the prince is young and weak, and the woman in the next room is leaning against the pillar and sighing. It is based on the signs of old and weak, anticipating the omen of defeat.

古文：妇人之知，尚能推类以见方来，况圣人君子，才高智明者乎！
现代文：凭妇人的见识，尚且能够推究同类事情而预见到未来，何况圣人君子，才高智明的那一类人呢！
English: With a woman's insight, it is still possible to deduce the same kind of things and foresee the future, not to mention saints and gentlemen, who are highly intelligent!

古文：秦始皇十年，庄襄王母夏太后薨，孝文王后曰华阳后，与文王葬寿陵，夏太后襄王葬於，故夏太后别葬杜陵，曰： 东望吾子，西望吾夫，後百年，旁当有万家邑。 
现代文：秦始皇七年，庄襄王的生母夏太后死了。秦孝文王的王后叫华阳后，与秦孝文王同葬在寿陵，夏太后的儿子庄襄王埋葬在范陵，所以夏太后另外埋葬在杜陵，她说： 向东可以看到我的儿子，向西可以看到我的丈夫，此后一百年，旁边将会出现万户人家的城镇。 
English: In the seventh year of the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty, Empress Dowager Xia, the birth mother of King Zhuangxiang, died. Queen Dowager Hua Yang, the queen of King Qin Xiaowen, was buried together with King Qin Xiaowen in Shouling Mausoleum. The son of Empress Dowager Xia, King Zhuangxiang, was buried in Fanling Mausoleum. Therefore, Empress Dowager Xia was also buried in Duling Mausoleum. She said, "To the east, you can see my son, to the west, you can see my husband. A hundred years from now, there will be a town of a million households nearby."

古文：其後皆如其言。
现代文：那以后出现了正如她所说的情况。
English: What happened next was exactly what she described.

古文：必以推类见方来为圣，次室、夏太后圣也。
现代文：如果一定要把能用类推的方法预见未来的人称为圣人，那么，次室女子、夏太后都是圣人了。
English: If it is necessary to call a person who can foresee the future by analogy a saint, then the second wife and the Empress Dowager Xia are all saints.

古文：秦昭王十年，樗里子卒，葬於渭南章台之东，曰： 後百年，当有天子宫挟我墓。 
现代文：秦昭王七年，樗里子死了，埋葬在渭水南岸章台的东面，他说： 此后一百年，必定有天子的宫殿夹着我的墓。 
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Qin Zhaowang, Yili Zi died and was buried to the east of Zhang Tai on the south bank of Surabaya. He said, "In the next hundred years, there will surely be a palace of the Son of Heaven next to my grave."

古文：至汉兴，长乐宫在其东，未央宫在其西，武库正值其墓，竟如其言。
现代文：到了汉朝兴起，长乐宫建在他的墓的东面，未央宫建在他的墓的西面，武器库正对着他的墓，竟然同他说的完全一样。
English: When the Han Dynasty arose, the Changle Palace was built to the east of his tomb, the Weiyang Palace was built to the west of his tomb, and the arsenal was facing his tomb, which was exactly the same as what he said.

古文：先知之效，见方来之验也。
现代文：这些先知的事例，都是能预见未来的证明。
English: The examples of these prophets are proof of their ability to foresee the future.

古文：如以此效圣，樗里子圣人也。
现代文：如果用这种情况来证明圣人，那么樗里子就算圣人了。
English: If this situation is used to prove that a person is a saint, then Yuriko would be considered a saint.

古文：如非圣人，先知见方来不足以明圣。
现代文：如果他不算是圣人，那么只凭能够先知、预见未来，就不足以说明是圣人。
English: If he is not a saint, then just being able to prophesy and foresee the future is not enough to prove that he is a saint.

古文：然则樗里子见天子宫挟其墓也，亦犹辛有知伊川之当戎。
现代文：这样说来樗里子预见到天子的宫殿夹着他的坟墓，也就像辛有预知伊川一带将会变成戎族居住的地区一样。
English: In this way, Yuriko foresaw that the palace of the son of heaven would contain his grave, just as she foresaw that the Ikawa area would become a region inhabited by the Ebisu people.

古文：昔辛有过伊川，见被发而祭者，曰： 不及百年，此其戎乎！ 
现代文：从前辛有经过伊川，见到披头散发祭祀的人，就说： 不超过一百年，这个地方将会变成戎族居住的地区了！ 
English: Once upon a time, Shin passed through Ikawa, and when he saw the people distributing offerings, he said, "In no more than a hundred years, this place will become an area inhabited by the Ebisu people!"

古文：其後百年，晋迁陆浑之戎於伊川焉，竟如。
现代文：那以后一百年，晋国迁移陆浑之戎到伊川一带居住，竟然像辛有所预言的一样。
English: A hundred years after that, the Luhun army moved from Jin Province to live in the Icheon area, just as Sin had predicted.

古文：辛有之知当戎，见被发之兆也。樗里子之见天子挟其墓，亦见博平之也。
现代文：辛有预见到伊川将变成戎族居住的地区，是由于见到了披头散发的先兆；樗里子预见到天子的宫殿会夹着他的坟墓，也是由于见到了墓旁有广阔平坦的地基。
English: Shin had foreseen that Ikawa would become an area inhabited by the Ebisuzoku people, because he saw the precursors of the spread of the beetles; Shuriko foresaw that the palace of the son of heaven would hold his grave, also because he saw a broad, flat foundation next to the grave.

古文：韩信葬其母，亦行营高敞地，令其旁可置万家。
现代文：韩信埋葬他的母亲，也设法营建在又高又宽敞的地方，让墓的旁边可以安置万户人家。
English: Han Xin also tried to build a tall and spacious place to bury his mother, so that thousands of families could be accommodated next to the tomb.

古文：其後竟有万家处其墓旁。
现代文：以后竟然有万户人家居住在墓旁。
English: Since then, tens of thousands of families have been living next to the grave.

古文：故樗里子之见博平有宫台之兆，犹韩信之睹高敞万家之台也。
现代文：所以樗里子见到广阔平坦的土地有修建宫台的征兆，就像韩信看到又高又宽敞的地方会出现万户人家一样。
English: Therefore, when Hao Li Zi saw the vast flat land, there were signs of palace construction, just as when Han Xin saw the high and spacious place, there would be thousands of people's homes.

古文：先知之见，方来之事，无达视洞听之聪明，皆案兆察迹，推原事类。
现代文：能够先知预见到未来的事情，并没有超过一般人的视力和听力，都是通过考察事情的征兆和迹象，根据同类事物进行推论得来的。
English: The ability to foretell future events does not exceed the vision and hearing of the average person. It is obtained by observing the signs and symptoms of events and making inferences based on the same kind of things.

古文：春秋之时，卿大夫相与会遇，见动作之变，听言谈之诡，善则明吉祥之福，恶则处凶妖之祸。
现代文：春秋的时候，卿、大夫相互交往聚会，看到动作异常，听见言谈反常，善就说明是吉祥的福祐，恶就判断是凶妖的祸患。
English: In spring and autumn, when nobles and doctors mingle with each other at gatherings, if they see abnormal movements or hear abnormal speech, the good will be interpreted as auspicious blessings, and the evil will be judged as the evil of evil spirits.

古文：明福处祸，远图未然，无神怪之知，皆由兆类。
现代文：能预先判明祸福，老早就考虑到尚未出现的事情，并没有神怪的才智，都是由于察觉了先兆。
English: The foreknowledge of good and evil, the forethought of things not yet come to pass, and the ingenuity of no miracle, are due to the perception of portents.

古文：以今论之，故夫可知之事者，思虑所能见也；不可知之事，不学不问不能知也。
现代文：现在用它来论述，所以能够知道的事，通过思虑就能预见到；通过思虑不能够知道的事，不学不问就不能够知道。
English: What can be known by reason can be foreseen by thought; what cannot be known by reason cannot be known without study.

古文：不学自知，不问自晓，古今行事，未之有也。
现代文：不学就能自己知道，不问就能自己通晓，从古到今已有的事例中，还没有见到过。
English: Among the cases that have existed from ancient times to the present, we have yet to see one in which a person can know for himself without learning, and can understand for himself without asking.

古文：夫可知之事，推精思之，虽大无难；不可知之事，历心学问，虽小无易。故智能之士，不学不成，不问不知。
现代文：可以知道的事，只要精心去思考它，事情再大也不难明白；不可以知道的事，即使用心学习和请教别人，事情再小也不容易弄懂，所以即使有智能的人，不学就没有成就，不请教别人就不会知道。
English: Things that can be known are not difficult to understand, no matter how big they are, as long as you think about them carefully; things that cannot be known, even if you use your heart to study and ask others for advice, are not easy to understand, no matter how small they are. Therefore, even if you are intelligent, if you do not study, you will not achieve anything, and if you do not ask others for advice, you will not know.

古文：难曰：夫项托年七岁教孔子。
现代文：有人责难说： 项讬年仅七岁就教导孔子。
English: Some people have criticized him for teaching Confucius when he was only seven years old.

古文：案七岁未入小学而教孔子，性自知也。
现代文：考察他七岁时尚未进入小学而教导孔子，这是天生的自知了。
English: Considering that he taught Confucius at the age of seven before entering primary school, this is innate self-knowledge.

古文：孔子曰： 生而知之，上也。学而知之，其次也。 
现代文：孔子说： 天生就知道的，是上等；通过学习而知道的，是次一等。 
English: Confucius said: "To be born with knowledge is the best; to learn it is the second best."

古文：夫言生而知之，不言学问，谓若项托之类也。
现代文：只说天生就知道的，不讲学习和请教别人，说的就是像项讬这样的人。
English: They only talk about what they were born with, not about learning and asking others for advice. They are talking about people like Xiang Yu.

古文：王莽之时，勃海尹方年二十一，无所师友，性智开敏，明达六艺。
现代文：王莽的时候，勃海郡的尹方年纪才二十一岁，没有老师也没有学友，却天生智慧聪明，通晓六艺。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, Yin Fang of Bohai County was only twenty-one years old. He had no teacher or classmates, but he was naturally wise and clever, and well versed in the six arts.

古文：魏都牧淳於仓奏： 方不学，得文能读诵，论义引《五经》文，文说议事，厌合人之心。 
现代文：魏都牧淳于仓向皇帝上奏： 尹方不用学习，得到文章就能读诵，论说道理能引用五经文字，解释文字议论事理，都能满足人们的心意。 
English: Wei Du Moku Jun Yu Cang appealed to the emperor: Yin Fang does not need to study, he can read and recite when he gets the article, he can quote the Five Classics when he talks about reason, and he can explain the text when he talks about reason, all of which can satisfy people's hearts.

古文：帝征方，使射蜚虫，筴射无知者，天下谓之圣人。
现代文：皇帝征召尹方，让他辨认鸟虫书，又对他进行策试，他没有不知道的，天下人称他是圣人。
English: The emperor summoned Yin Fang, asked him to identify the book of birds and insects, and tested him. He did not know that people around the world called him a saint.

古文：夫无所师友，明达六艺，本不学书，得文能读，此圣人也。
现代文：没有老师、学友，却通晓六艺，根本不学写字，得到文章却能诵读，这是圣人了。
English: There is no teacher, no classmates, but he is familiar with the six arts, he does not learn to write at all, but he can read when he gets an article. This is a saint.

古文：不学自能，无师自达，非神如何？
现代文：不学自己能知道，没有老师自己能通晓，不是神而先知又是什么呢？ 
English: For what is a prophet, save a teacher of the law, and a teacher of knowledge?

古文：曰：虽无师友，亦已有所问受矣；不学书，已弄笔墨矣。
现代文：回答说：即使没有师友，也已经有所提问与接受指教了；不学写字，已经摆弄过笔墨了。
English: He replied, "Even if you don't have a mentor, you've already asked questions and received instruction; if you don't learn to write, you've already played with pen and ink.

古文：兒始生产，耳目始开，虽有圣性，安能有知？
现代文：小孩刚生下来，耳目才开始张开，即使有圣性，怎么能有知识呢？
English: When a child is just born and his eyes and ears are just beginning to open, even if he has holiness, how can he have knowledge?

古文：项托七岁，其三四岁时，而受纳人言矣。
现代文：项讬虽然才七岁，但他三四岁时，已经能接受容纳人们所讲的事情了。
English: Although Xiang Yu is only seven years old, when he was three or four years old, he was already able to accept what people said.

古文：尹方年二十一，其十四五时，多闻见矣。
现代文：尹方虽然才二十一岁，但他十四五岁时，已经有许多所闻所见了。
English: Although Yin Fang was only twenty-one years old, when he was fourteen or fifteen, he had already heard and seen a lot.

古文：性敏才茂，独思无所据，不睹兆象，不见类验，却念百世之後，有马生牛，牛生驴，桃生李，李生梅，圣人能知之乎？
现代文：天性聪明才智过人，独自思考无所依据，没有觉察到预兆，不见类似的效验，往下推想到百代之后，会有马生牛，牛生驴，桃树结李子，李树结梅子，圣人能预见到这些情况吗？
English: Natural intelligence is superior to human intelligence, there is no basis for thinking alone, there is no awareness of omens, there is no similar effect, inferred that after hundreds of generations, there will be horses and cattle, cattle and donkeys, peach trees and plums, plum trees and plums, can the sage foresee these situations?

古文：臣弑君，子轼父，仁如颜渊，孝如曾参，勇如贲、育，辩如赐、予，圣人能见之乎？
现代文：往下推想到百代之后，会有臣杀君，子杀父，像颜渊那样的仁人，像曾参那样的孝子，像孟贲、夏育那样的勇士，像子贡、宰予那样的能言善辨的人，圣人能预见到这些情况吗？
English: If we extrapolate this to a hundred generations, there will be vassals who kill their princes, sons who kill their fathers, benevolent people like Yan Yuan, filial children like Zeng Zhan, warriors like Meng Xi and Xia Yu, and people who can speak and discern like Zigong and Zayu. Can a sage foresee these situations?

古文：孔子曰： 其或继周者，虽百世可知也。 
现代文：孔子说： 如果将来有人继承周朝的礼制，即使经过一百代，它的损益情况也还是可以预见得到的。 
English: Confucius said: If someone inherits the ceremonial system of the Zhou Dynasty in the future, even after a hundred generations, its profit and loss situation can still be foreseen.

古文：又曰： 後生可畏，焉知来者之不如今也？ 
现代文：又说： 后辈是可令人敬畏的，怎么能知道后来的人不如现在的呢？ 
English: He also said: The younger generation can be awe-inspiring, but how can we know that those who come after are not as good as the current generation?

古文：论损益，言 可知 ，称後生，言 焉知 。
现代文：孔子论将来礼制的增减改易，称为 可以知道 ，讲后辈，称为 怎么知道 。
English: Confucius said that the increase, decrease and change of the etiquette system in the future would be called "it is possible to know" and the younger generation would be called "how to know."

古文：後生难处，损益易明也。
现代文：这是因为后辈的情况难以断定，而制度的增减改易容易判明的缘故。
English: This is because the situation of the younger generation is difficult to determine, while the increase or decrease of the system is easy to determine.

古文：此尚为远，非所听察也。
现代文：这些例子都比较遥远，不是人们所能耳闻目见的。
English: These examples are more distant, not something people can hear or see.

古文：使一人立於墙东，令之出声，使圣人听之墙西，能知其黑白、短长、乡里、姓字所自从出乎？
现代文：让一个人站立在墙的东面，叫他发出声音，让圣人在墙的西面听他的声音，圣人能知道这个人皮肤黑白、身材高矮、籍贯、姓名和家族渊缘吗？
English: Let a man stand on the east side of the wall, let him make a sound, let the sage listen to his voice on the west side of the wall, can the sage know this man's skin black and white, tall and short, origin, name and family background?

古文：沟有流澌，泽有枯骨，发首陋亡，肌肉腐绝，使人询之，能知其农商、老少、若所犯而坐死乎？
现代文：水沟里有流尸，山泽里有枯骨，头发和面孔都烂掉了，肌肉都腐烂消失了，让人去询问圣人，圣人能知道他是务农还是经商，年龄大小，以及犯什么罪而被处死的吗？
English: There are dead bodies in the gutters, dead bones in the mountains, hair and faces have rotted away, muscles have rotted and disappeared. Let people ask the saint, can the saint know whether he is a farmer or a businessman, his age, and what crime he was executed for?

古文：非圣人无知，其知无以知也。
现代文：并不是圣人无知，而是只凭他的才智是无从知道的。
English: It is not that the sage is ignorant, but that his intellect alone cannot know.

古文：知无以知，非问不能知也。
现代文：凭他的才智无从知道，不问就不能知道。
English: With his talent, there's no way to know. You can't know without asking.

古文：不能知，则贤圣所共病也。
现代文：不问不能知道，这是贤圣同样具有的缺陷。
English: If you don't ask, you can't know, which is the same defect of sages and saints.

古文：难曰： 詹何坐，弟子侍，有牛鸣於门外。
现代文：有人责难说： 詹何坐着，他的学生在旁边侍候，有一头牛在门外面鸣叫。
English: One critic said: "Zhan He is sitting, his students are waiting next to him, and there is a cow mooing outside the door.

古文：弟子曰： 是黑牛也，而白蹄。 
现代文：学生说： 这是一头黑牛，而蹄子是白色的。 
English: The student said: This is a black cow, but the hooves are white.

古文：詹何曰： 然。是黑牛也 而白其蹄。
现代文：詹何说： 对，这是一头黑牛，而它的蹄子被人弄白了。 
English: Zhan He said: Yes, this is a black cow, and its hooves have been whitened.

古文：使人视之，果黑牛而以布裹其蹄。
现代文：派人看这头牛，果然是黑牛而被人用白布裹在牛蹄上。
English: They sent someone to look at the cow, and sure enough, it turned out to be a black cow with a white cloth wrapped around its hooves.

古文：詹何，贤者也，尚能听声而知其色。以圣人之智，反不能知乎？ 
现代文：詹何，是位贤人，尚且能够听声音就知道牛的颜色，凭圣人的才智，反而不能知道吗？ 
English: Zhan He is a wise man. Even though he can hear the sound, he knows the color of the cow. With the wisdom of a saint, can he not know it?

古文：曰：能知黑牛白其蹄，能知此牛谁之牛乎？
现代文：回答说：能够知道是黑牛而被人弄白了蹄子，能够知道这头牛是谁的牛吗？
English: He replied: "Can you tell if it's a black cow that's had its hooves whitened? Can you tell whose cow it is?"

古文：白其蹄者以何事乎？
现代文：把它的蹄子弄白是为什么呢？
English: What makes its hooves white?

古文：夫术数直见一端，不能尽其实。
现代文：术数仅仅能见到一个方面，不能弄清全部事实。
English: Surgery can only see one side, can not figure out all the facts.

古文：虽审一事，曲辩问之，辄不能尽知。
现代文：即使明了一件事，如果多方面地加以辩驳和追问，往往就不能全部知道了。
English: Even if one thing is clear, if it is refuted and questioned in many ways, it is often not possible to know everything.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：不目见口问，不能尽知也。
现代文：不亲眼望见亲口询问，就不可能全部知道。
English: You can't know everything unless you see it with your own eyes and hear it from the source.

古文：鲁僖公二十九年，介葛卢来朝，舍於昌衍之上，闻牛鸣，曰： 是牛生三牺，皆已用矣。 
现代文：鲁僖公二十九年，介国葛卢来朝见，住在昌衍旁，他听见牛叫，就说： 这头牛生过三头纯色牛，都已经被用来祭祀了。 
English: In the twenty-ninth year of the reign of King Lu Xun, Ge Lu, a member of the imperial court, came to see the emperor. He lived near Changyan. When he heard a cow mooing, he said, "This cow has given birth to three pure-colored cows, all of which have been used for sacrifice.

古文：或问： 何以知之？ 
现代文：有人问： 你怎么知道这些的呢？ 
English: Someone asked: How do you know all this?

古文：曰： 其音云。 
现代文：他回答说： 它的叫声这样说的。 
English: And he answered and said, These are the words of the cry of it.

古文：人问牛主，竟如其言。
现代文：这个人去问牛的主人，情况果然同葛卢说的完全一样。
English: The man went to ask the owner of the cow, and the situation turned out to be exactly as Galo had said.

古文：此复用术数，非知所能见也。
现代文：这又是在运用术数，不是凭智慧所能见到的。
English: Again, this is a result of using magic numbers, and is not something that can be seen with wisdom.

古文：广汉杨翁仲听鸟兽之音，乘蹇马之野，田间有放眇马，相去，鸣声相闻。
现代文：广汉郡的杨翁伟能听得出鸟兽的话，他乘坐一匹跛马拉的车到野外去，田间有一匹正放着的瞎了一只眼的马，两马相距几里远，鸣叫声却相互听得见。
English: Yang Wengwei of Guanghan County can hear the words of birds and beasts. He takes a horse-drawn cart to go to the field. There is a blind horse with one eye in the field. The two horses are several miles apart, but they can hear each other's singing.

古文：翁仲谓其御曰： 彼放马目眇。 
现代文：翁伟对他的车夫说： 那匹正放着的马知道我们这匹马是跛的，而它自己的眼是瞎了一只的。 
English: Weng Wei said to his driver, "The horse that is being released knows that our horse is lame and that its own eye is blind.

古文：其御曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：他的车夫问： 你怎么知道这些呢？ 
English: His coachman asked: How do you know all this?

古文：曰： 骂此辕中马蹇，此马亦骂之眇。 
现代文：翁伟回答说： 那匹马骂这匹车辕中的马是跛的，这匹马也骂那匹马是瞎了一只眼的。 
English: Weng Wei replied, "The horse called the horse in the cart lame, and the horse called the horse in the cart blind.

古文：其御不信，往视之，目竟眇焉。
现代文：他的车夫不相信，就去看那匹马，那匹马竟然是瞎了一只眼的。
English: His driver didn't believe him and went to check on the horse, which was blind in one eye.

古文：翁仲之知马声，犹詹何、介葛卢之听牛鸣也。据术任数，相合其意，不达视听，遥见流目以察之也。
现代文：杨翁伟听得懂马的声音，就像詹何、介国的葛卢听得懂牛叫一样，是依靠术数，把两匹马叫声的意思合在一起考察出来的，不是凭借视力强而转眼就看出来的。
English: Yang Wengwei's ability to understand the sound of a horse, just like Zhan He's ability to understand a cow's bellowing, is based on counting and combining the meaning of two horses' bellowing. It is not a result of his strong eyesight.

古文：夫听声有术，则察色有数矣。
现代文：听声音有方术，那么察看颜色就有术数了。
English: If there is a way to listen to sound, then there is a way to look at color.

古文：推用术数，若先闻见，众人不知，则谓神圣。
现代文：运用术数来推算，就像事先听到和见到过似的，大家不明白这一点，就认为他是神是圣了。
English: Using magic numbers to calculate, as if he had heard and seen it before, people do not understand this and think he is a god or a saint.

古文：若孔子之见兽，名之曰狌々，太史公之见张良，似妇人之形矣。
现代文：就像孔子看见一头野兽，马上能说出它是猩猩；司马迁看到画上的张良，说他相貌像女人这类事情一样。
English: Just as Confucius saw a wild animal and could immediately tell that it was an orangutan, Sima Qian saw Zhang Liang on the painting and said that he looked like a woman, and so on.

古文：案孔子未尝见狌々，至辄能名之，太史公与张良异世，而目见其形。
现代文：考察孔子并没有见过猩猩，而见到了就能说出它的名字；司马迁和张良不在同一个时代，而眼睛却看到了他的相貌。
English: Confucius did not see the orangutan, but when he saw it, he could name it; Sima Qian and Zhang Liang were not in the same era, but his eyes saw his appearance.

古文：使众人闻此言，则谓神而先知。
现代文：假如大家听到这些话，就认为他们是神而先知的人。
English: If anyone hears these words, they will think they are from God, and that they are prophetic.

古文：然而孔子名狌々，闻《昭人之歌》；太史公之见张良，观宣室之画也。
现代文：然而孔子叫出猩猩的名字，是听到过山野之民唱的歌；太史公看出张良的形象，是从宣室的画像上先见过的。
English: However, Confucius called out the name of the orangutan when he heard the song sung by the people of the mountains and fields; Taishigong saw the image of Zhang Liang when he first saw it on the image of Xuanwu.

古文：阴见默识，用思深秘。众人阔略，寡所意识，见贤圣之名物，则谓之神。
现代文：贤圣暗中看到过而默记在心，运用心思深沉而隐秘；众人马虎大意，很少留心，见到贤圣说出事物的名称，就认为他们很神。
English: The sages saw in secret and kept it in their hearts, and used their minds in a profound and secret manner; the people were careless and paid little attention, and when they saw the sages utter the names of things, they thought they were gods.

古文：推此以论，詹何见黑牛白蹄，犹此类也。
现代文：以此推论，詹何见到黑牛弄白了蹄子，也是这类情况。
English: By this reasoning, when Zhan He saw a black cow with whitened hooves, it was also such a case.

古文：彼不以术数，则先时闻见於外矣。
现代文：他如果不是靠术数推算出来的，那就是先前已经从外边听见或见到过了。
English: If he is not deduced by the number of operations, it is because he has been heard or seen from the outside before.

古文：方今占射事之工，据正术数，术数不中，集以人事。
现代文：当今以占射事物为职业的人，首先依据术数来判断吉凶，术数判断不中，就掺杂以人事。
English: Today's people who make a career out of shooting things first judge good and bad luck according to the number of operations, and if the number of operations is not correct, they mix it with personnel.

古文：人事於术数而用之者，与神无异。
现代文：能把人事和术数结合起来运用的人，就和神没有什么不同了。
English: A person who can combine human resources and the number of operations and use them is no different from God.

古文：詹何之徒，方今占射事者之类也。
现代文：詹何这类人，就是当今占射事物一类的人。
English: People like Zhan He are the type of people who are obsessed with shooting things nowadays.

古文：如以詹何之徒，性能知之，不用术数，是则巢居者先知风，穴处者先知雨。
现代文：如果认为詹何这类人天生就能预知那些事，不依靠术数来推算，那他们就像鸟类能预知刮风，蚯蚓蚂蚁之类能预知下雨一样了。
English: If you think that people like Zhan He are born with the ability to predict those things, without relying on the number of operations to calculate, then they are like birds that can predict wind, and grasshoppers and ants that can predict rain.

古文：智明早成，项托、尹方其是也。
现代文：聪明才智早熟，项讬、尹方大概就属于这一类人吧。
English: Clever and precocious, Xiang Yu and Yin Fang probably belong to this category of people.

古文：难曰： 黄帝生而神灵，弱而能言。
现代文：有人责难说： 黄帝天生就很神灵，刚生下来就能说话。
English: Some people reproachfully said: The Yellow Emperor was born with a divine spirit, and could speak as soon as he was born.

古文：帝喾生而自言其名。
现代文：帝喾生下来就能自己说出自己的名字。
English: When he was born, he was able to say his own name.

古文：未有闻见於外，生辄能言，称其名，非神灵之效，生知之验乎？ 
现代文：没有在外面的见闻，生下来就能说话，称呼自己的名字，难道不是神灵和天生预知的证明吗？ 
English: Is it not a proof of divinity and innate foreknowledge to be born able to speak and call one's own name, without having seen or heard anything outside?

古文：曰：黄帝生而言，然而母怀之二十月生，计其月数，亦已二岁在母身中矣。
现代文：回答说：黄帝生下来能说话，然而他的母亲怀他二十五个月才生下他来，计算这个月数，他也已经有两年在他母亲的身体中了。
English: He answered, "The Yellow Emperor was born able to speak, but his mother only gave birth to him when she was twenty-five months pregnant with him. Counting this number of months, he has already been in his mother's body for two years.

古文：帝喾能自言其名，然不能言他人之名，虽有一能，未能遍通。
现代文：帝喾生下来能自己说出名字，然而他不能说出别人的名字，即使有一方面的才能，却不能通晓所有的事情。
English: The emperor was born with the ability to pronounce his own name, but he could not pronounce the names of others. Even if he had some talent, he could not know everything.

古文：所谓神而生知者，岂谓生而能言其名乎？
现代文：所谓神灵能天生先知的人，难道讲的是生下来就能说出他自己的名字吗？
English: Does the man who says that the gods can give birth to a prophet mean that he can give his own name at birth?

古文：乃谓不受而能知之，未得能见之也。
现代文：还是说没有经过传授就能知道，没有接触过就能预见呢？
English: Or is it possible to know without being taught, and to foresee without being exposed?

古文：黄帝、帝喾虽有神灵之验，亦皆早成之才也。
现代文：黄帝、帝喾虽然有神灵的证明，但也都是属于有早熟的才智。
English: Although the Yellow Emperor and the Empress Dowager had proof of divinity, they also had precocious intelligence.

古文：人才早成，亦有晚就，虽未就师，家问室学。
现代文：人的聪明才智有成熟得早的，也有经过后天学习才成就的。
English: Human ingenuity has matured early, and has also been achieved through acquired learning.

古文：人见其幼成早就，称之过度。
现代文：即使没有请教老师，在家里已经向人请教和学习过了。人们见他年幼而才智早成，称赞他就过头了。
English: Even if he did not consult a teacher, he had already consulted and learned from others at home. People saw him as young and precocious, and praised him too much.

古文：云项托七岁，是必十岁，云教孔子，是必孔子问之。
现代文：说项讬七岁，这一定是有十岁了；说他教孔子，这一定是孔子去问过他。
English: If he says he is seven years old, he must be ten years old; if he says he teaches Confucius, he must have been asked by Confucius.

古文：云黄帝、帝喾生而能言，是亦数月。
现代文：说黄帝、帝喾生下来就能说话，这也一定是生下来几个月了。
English: To say that Emperor Huangdi and Empress Dowager Cixi were able to speak when they were born, they must have been born a few months ago.

古文：云尹方年二十一，是亦且三十。云无所师友，有不学书，是亦游学家习。
现代文：说尹方二十一岁，这也一定是将近三十岁了；说他没有什么师友，又不学习写字，这也一定是他出外或在家学习过了。
English: To say that Yin Fang is twenty-one years old must also mean that he is nearly thirty years old; to say that he has few mentors and does not learn to write must also mean that he has studied abroad or at home.

古文：世俗褒称过实，毁败愈恶。
现代文：世间习俗称赞别人时总是超过实际情况，说别人的坏话往往超过了他的罪恶。
English: The custom of the world is always to praise a man more than he deserves, and to speak ill of him more than he deserves.

古文：世俗传颜渊年十八岁升太山，望见吴昌门外有系白马。
现代文：世俗传说颜渊十八岁登泰山，望见吴都阊门外有一匹拴着的白马。
English: According to legend, Yan Yuan climbed Mount Tai at the age of 18 and saw a white horse tied up outside the gate of Wudou.

古文：定考实，颜渊年三十不升太山，不望吴昌门。
现代文：考查实际情况，可以肯定颜渊是三十岁，没有登泰山，也没有望见吴都的阊门。
English: Examining the actual situation, we can be sure that Yan Yuan is thirty years old, has not climbed Mount Tai, and has not seen the gate of Wudu.

古文：项托之称，尹方之誉，颜渊之类也。
现代文：对项讬、尹方的称誉，就如称誉颜渊这类情况一样。
English: The praise for Xiang Yu and Yin Fang is the same as the praise for Yan Yuan.

古文：人才有高下，知物由学。
现代文：人的才智有高低之分，认识事物要通过学习才行。
English: People's intelligence varies from high to low, and it is only possible to understand things through learning.

古文：学之乃知，不问不识。
现代文：通过学习才能知道，不请教别人就不能认识事物。
English: You can only know through learning, and you can't know things without asking others.

古文：子贡曰： 夫子焉不学，而亦何常师之有？ 孔子曰： 吾十有五而志乎学。 
现代文：子贡说： 我的老师是无处不学习的，可是又何必要有个固定的老师呢？ 孔子说： 我十五岁就有志于学问。 
English: Zigong said: My teacher does not study anywhere, but why do I need a fixed teacher? Confucius said: I was interested in learning at the age of fifteen.

古文：五帝、三王，皆有所师。
现代文：五帝、三王，都是有所师法的。
English: The five emperors and three kings all had their teachers.

古文：曰： 是欲为人法也 。
现代文：有人说： 这是为了给人们做榜样。 
English: One said: "It's to set an example to people.

古文：曰：精思亦可为人法。何必以学者？
现代文：我说：精心思考也可以作为人们的榜样，为什么一定要以勤学做榜样呢？
English: I said: Careful thinking can also serve as an example for people, so why do we have to follow the example of diligent study?

古文：事难空知，贤圣之才能立也。
现代文：事理很难凭空思考而得知，贤圣的才能却可以通过学习而具备。
English: It is difficult to know things by thinking about them, but the ability to be a saint can be learned.

古文：所谓神者，不学而知。所谓圣者，须学以圣。
现代文：那些称为 神 的，是不学而知的；哪些称为 圣 的，必须通过学习才能成为圣。
English: Those who are called gods are unlearned; those who are called holy must be learned to be holy.

古文：以圣人学，知其非圣。
现代文：因为圣人也需要学习，所以知道他并不是神。
English: Because a sage also needs to study, so he knows that he is not a god.

古文：天地之间，含血之类，无性知者。
现代文：天地之间，含有血气的动物，没有天生就知道一切的。
English: Between heaven and earth, there is no animal that is born with the ability to know everything.

古文：狌狌知徃，鳱鹊知来，禀天之性，自然者也。
现代文：猩猩知道过往人的姓名，喜鹊知道未来的喜事，因为它们承受了天的本性，自然就是如此的。
English: Orangutans know the names of people from the past, and magpies know the joys of the future, because they have inherited the nature of heaven, which is naturally so.

古文：如以圣人为若狌々乎？
现代文：如果认为圣人是像猩猩那样的吗？
English: What if saints are thought to be like chimpanzees?

古文：则夫狌々之类，鸟兽也。
现代文：那么猩猩之类可是鸟兽啊。
English: So chimpanzees and the like are birds and beasts.

古文：僮谣不学而知，可谓神而先知矣。
现代文：童谣可以不学而知，可以算是神而先知了。
English: Nursery rhymes can be known without learning, and can be regarded as divine and prophetic.

古文：如以圣人为若僮谣乎？
现代文：如果认为圣人是像童谣那样吗？
English: What if saints were thought of like nursery rhymes?

古文：则夫僮谣者，妖也。
现代文：那么童谣可是一种妖象啊。
English: Then nursery rhymes are a kind of bogeyman.

古文：世间圣神，以为巫与？
现代文：世间圣、神的东西可以认为是巫吗？
English: Can something that is sacred and divine be considered witchcraft?

古文：鬼神用巫之口告人。
现代文：鬼神通过巫的口来指示人。
English: Ghosts and gods instruct people through the witch's mouth.

古文：如以圣人为若巫乎？
现代文：如果认为圣人是像巫那样的吗？
English: What if saints are thought to be like witches?

古文：则夫为巫者，亦妖也。
现代文：那么做巫的人也是一种妖啊。
English: So a witch is also a kind of demon.

古文：与妖同气，则与圣异类矣。
现代文：巫与妖象同属一种气，那么与圣人就不属于一类了。
English: Witches and goblins belong to the same air, so they do not belong to the same class as saints.

古文：巫与圣异，则圣不能神矣。
现代文：巫与圣人不同，那么圣人也就不能称为神了。
English: A sorcerer is not the same as a saint, so a saint cannot be called a god.

古文：不能神，则贤之党也。
现代文：不能称为神，那就属于贤人一类的了。
English: If he cannot be called a god, then he belongs to the category of wise men.

古文：同党，则所知者无以异也。
现代文：与贤人同属一类，那么圣人所知的就与贤人没有什么不同了。
English: If a sage is in the same category as a sage, then what a sage knows is no different from what a sage knows.

古文：及其有异，以入道也。
现代文：至于他们有所差别，是由于他们所掌握的 道 不一样。
English: If there is any difference between them, it is due to the different paths they have taken.

古文：圣人疾，贤者迟；贤者才多，圣人智多。
现代文：圣人走得快，贤人走得慢；贤人才能多，圣人智慧多。
English: The sage walks fast, the sage walks slow; the sage has more talent, the sage has more wisdom.

古文：所知同业，多少异量；所道一途，步驺相过。
现代文：他们所掌握的是同一种 道 ，只是量的多少不同而已；他们所走的是同一条路，只是走得快的超过了走得慢的而已。
English: What they have mastered is the same kind of path, only the amount is somewhat different; they are walking the same path, but they are walking faster than those who are walking slowly.

古文：事有难知易晓，贤圣所共关思也。
现代文：事情有难以知道的有容易明白的，这都是贤圣所共同关心的。
English: There are things that are difficult to know and things that are easy to understand, and all of these are of common concern to the Sages' Sanctuary.

古文：若夫文质之复，三教之重，正朔相缘，损益相因，贤圣所共知也。
现代文：就像社会风气文质的重复，三种教化的循环，历法的相互沿用，典章制度的增减和相互沿袭，这都是贤圣所共同知道的。
English: Just like the repetition of social customs and styles, the cycle of three kinds of education, the mutual use of calendars, the increase and decrease of the system of rules and regulations, and the mutual follow-up, these are all common knowledge of the sages and saints.

古文：古之水火，今之水火也。今之声色，后世之声色也。
现代文：古代的水火，就同现在的水火一样；现在的声色，就同后代的声色一样。
English: The water and fire of ancient times are the same as the water and fire of today; the voice of today is the same as the voice of future generations.

古文：鸟兽草木，人民好恶，以今而见古，以此而知来。千岁之前，万世之后，无以异也。
现代文：无论是鸟兽草木，还是人民的好恶，根据现在而推知古代，根据当前而推知未来，千年之前，万代之后，没有什么不同的。
English: Whether it is birds, animals, plants, or people's likes and dislikes, ancient times are inferred based on the present, and the future is inferred based on the present. There is no difference between a thousand years ago and a thousand generations later.

古文：追观上古，探察来世，文质之类，水火之辈，贤圣共之。见兆闻象，图画祸福，贤圣共之。见怪名物，无所疑惑，贤圣共之。
现代文：往前观察上古，往后探察后世，知道 文质 、 水火 一类的事情，这是贤人圣人同样能做到的；看见了征兆，察觉了迹象，就能说明祸福，这是贤人圣人同样能做到的；见到奇怪的东西能够说出它的名称，不会有什么疑惑，这是贤人圣人同样能做到的。
English: Looking forward to the ancient times and looking back to the future, knowing things such as culture, water and fire, is something that wise men and sages can also do; seeing signs and perceiving signs can explain misfortune and good fortune, which is something that wise men and sages can also do; seeing strange things can say its name, there will be no doubt, which is something that wise men and sages can also do.

古文：事可知者，贤圣所共知也；不可知者，圣人亦不能知也。
现代文：可知的事物，贤人圣人同样都能知道；不可知的事物，即使是圣人也不可能知道。
English: What is knowable can be known by wise men and sages; what is unknowable cannot be known even by sages.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：使圣空坐先知雨也，性能一事知远道，孔窍不普，未足以论也。
现代文：假如圣人凭空坐在那里而事先就知道天要下雨，也只是生来能够在这一件事物上有先知远见，他的聪明才智并不全面，不值得一提。
English: If a sage sits there out of thin air and knows in advance that it is going to rain, but is only born with the ability to have foresight in this matter, his wisdom is not comprehensive and is not worth mentioning.

古文：所论先知性达者，尽知万物之性，毕睹千道之要也。
现代文：所谓先知先觉生来就能通达事理的人，就能尽知万物的本性，能完全看清各种 道 的要领。
English: So-called seers, who are born with the ability to understand things, can fully know the nature of all things and can fully see the essentials of various paths.

古文：如知一不通二，达左不见右，偏驳不纯，踦校不具，非所谓圣也。
现代文：如果是知道一个部分就不通晓另一个部分，通达左边却看不见右边，认识片面杂乱而不纯，残缺而不完备，就不是所说的圣人了。
English: If you know one part but not another, if you can see to the left but not to the right, if your knowledge is one-sided, confused and not pure, incomplete and not complete, then you are not a sage.

古文：如必谓之圣，是明圣人无以奇也。
现代文：如果一定要说他是圣人，这反而说明圣人并没有什么神奇。
English: If it must be said that he was a saint, this rather shows that there is nothing miraculous about saints.

古文：詹何之徒圣，孔子之党亦称圣，是圣无以异於贤，贤无以乏於圣也。
现代文：詹何这类人是圣人，孔子这类人也是圣人，这就是说圣人没有什么不同于贤人的地方，贤人并不比圣人差。
English: This kind of person is a saint, and this kind of person is also a saint. That is to say, a saint is no different from a sage, and a sage is no worse than a saint.

古文：贤圣皆能，何以称圣奇於贤乎？
现代文：贤人圣人都能这样，为什么说圣人比贤人神奇呢？
English: All sages and saints can do this, so why is it said that a saint is more miraculous than a sage?

古文：如俱任用术数，贤何以不及圣？
现代文：如果都运用术数推算，贤人为什么比不上圣人呢？
English: If we all use the calculation of the number of operations, why are the sages not as good as the saints?

古文：实者，圣贤不能性，须任耳目以定情实。
现代文：实际上，圣贤不能天生地知道一切，必须依靠耳听、眼看来确定事情的真象。
English: In fact, sages cannot know everything by nature, and must rely on their ears and eyes to determine the truth of things.

古文：其任耳目也，可知之事，思之辄决；不可知之事，待问乃解。
现代文：他们使用耳目，可以知道的事，经过思考就可以理解；不能知道的事，要等到请教了别人才能理解。
English: They use their eyes and ears, and what they can know, they can understand through thinking; what they can't know, they can't understand until they consult others.

古文：天下之事，世间之物，可思而，愚夫能开精；不可思而知，上圣不能省。
现代文：天下的事情，世间的万物，可以通过思考而知道，再愚蠢的人也能明白；通过思考不能知道，即使是上圣也不能明白。
English: The things of the world, all things of the world, can be known through thinking, even the most stupid can understand; cannot be known through thinking, even the most holy cannot understand.

古文：孔子曰： 吾尝终日不食，终夜不寝以思，无益，不如学也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我曾经整天不吃饭，整夜不睡觉地去思考，结果没有什么好处，还不如去学习。 
English: Confucius said: I used to think all day without eating and all night without sleeping, but it did no good. I might as well study.

古文：天下事有不可知，犹结有不可解也。
现代文：天下的事物有不可知的，好比绳结有不能解开的一样。
English: There are things in the world that cannot be known, just as there are knots that cannot be untied.

古文：见说善解结，结无有不可解。
现代文：倪说善于解绳结，绳结没有解不开的。
English: Ni said he was good at untying knots, and there was no knot that could not be untied.

古文：结有不可解，见说不能解也。
现代文：如果绳结有解不开的，那么倪说也不能解开了。
English: If there is a knot that can't be untied, then it can't be untied.

古文：非见说不能解也，结有不可解。及其解之，用不能也。
现代文：并不是倪说不会解绳结，而是有的绳结根本就解不开，等到他去解这种结时，因此也就解不开了。
English: It wasn't that Ni said he couldn't untie the knot, but that some knots couldn't be untied at all, and when he tried to untie them, they couldn't be untied.

古文：圣人知事，事无不可知。
现代文：圣人知道一切事物，事物没有什么不能知道的。
English: A sage knows everything, and there is nothing that cannot be known.

古文：事有不可知，圣人不能知，非圣人不能知，事有不可知。
现代文：如果事物有不能知道的，那么就是圣人也不能知道了。
English: If there are things that cannot be known, then even a sage cannot know them.

古文：及其知之，用不知也。故夫难知之事，学问所能及也；不可知之事，问之学之，不能晓也。
现代文：并不是圣人不能知道事物，而是事物有根本就不能知道的，等到圣人想去知道这种事物时，因此也就不可能知道了。所以较难知道的事物，通过学习和请教别人就能够知道；根本不能知道的事物，即使通过学习和请教别人，仍然不能认识。
English: It is not that a sage cannot know things, but that there are things that cannot be known at all, and when a sage wants to know such things, it is therefore impossible to know them. Therefore, things that are more difficult to know can be known through study and asking others; things that cannot be known at all, even through study and asking others, still cannot be known.

