古文：霍彦威，字子重，洺州曲周人也。
现代文：霍彦威，字子重，洺州曲周人。
English: Huo Yanwei, the character Zizhong, is from Zhangzhou Quzhou.

古文：梁将霍存得之于村落间，年十四，从征讨。
现代文：梁将霍存在村落间得到他，十四岁，跟随征讨。
English: Liang would ho around the village to get him, aged fourteen, to follow the crusade.

古文：存怜其爽迈，养为己子。
现代文：霍存爱他豪爽雄迈，收为养子。
English: Huo Cun loved his heroic spirit and adopted him as his son.

古文：存，梁史有传。彦威未弱冠，为梁祖所知，擢在左右，渐升戎秩，亟立战功。
现代文：霍彦威没成年时被梁太祖所赏识，提拔在身边服事，渐渐升武职，多立军功。
English: When Huo Yanwei was not an adult, he was appreciated by Liang Taizu, promoted to serve around him, gradually promoted to military service, and made more military achievements.

古文：尝中流矢，眇其一目。
现代文：曾中过流矢，瞎了一只眼。
English: Zeng was shot and blinded in one eye.

古文：开平二年，自开封府押衙、右亲从指挥使、检校司空授右龙骧军使。
现代文：梁太祖开平二年，自开封府押衙、右亲从指挥使、检校司空授任右龙骧军使。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Kaiping, Liang Taizu was appointed as the military envoy of the Right Dragon and the Right Dragon and the Right Dragon and the Right Dragon and the Right Dragon and the Right Dragon.

古文：三年，自右监门卫将军授左天武军使，迁右监门上将军。
现代文：三年，自右监门卫将军授左天武军使，迁右监门上将军。
English: Three years later, he was given the title of Left Heaven Military Envoy from the Right Supervisor Gatekeeper General, and was transferred to the Right Supervisor Gate General.

古文：乾化三年，与袁象先同诛硃友珪，梁末帝授洺州刺史，转河阳留后。
现代文：乾化三年，和袁象先一同诛杀朱友王圭，梁末帝授予他氵名州刺史，转河阳留后。
English: After three years of purification, he and Yuan Xiang first fought together to kill Zhu You Wang Gui. Emperor Liang awarded him the title of "Celebrity of the State" and he stayed in Heyang.

古文：乾化末，邠州留后李保衡背李茂贞以城归梁，梁以彦威为邠州节度使。
现代文：乾化末年，州留后李保衡背叛李茂贞献城归顺梁朝，梁朝任霍彦威为州节度使。
English: At the end of the Qianhua era, after staying in the state, Li Baoheng betrayed Li Maozhen and surrendered the city to the Shun Liang Dynasty. The Liang Dynasty appointed Huo Yanwei as the state festival envoy.

古文：其年五月，茂贞遣将刘知俊率大军攻之，彦威固守逾年，竟不能下；或得其俘，悉令放之，秦人怀其惠，遂无侵扰。
现代文：这年五月，李茂贞派将军刘知俊率大军攻打州，霍彦威坚守一年多，始终不能攻下，有时抓到李茂贞的俘虏，霍彦威下令全部放走，秦人感谢他的恩惠，便不再侵扰。
English: In May of that year, Li Maozhen sent General Liu Zhijun and his large army to attack the state. Huo Yanwei held out for more than a year, but was never able to capture it. Sometimes Li Maozhen's captives were captured. Huo Yanwei ordered that they all be released. The Qin people thanked him for his favor, and no longer intruded.

古文：转滑州节度使。移镇郓州，兼北面行营招讨，总大军于河上。
现代文：霍彦威转任滑州节度使，移守郓州，兼北面行营招讨，总领大军驻在黄河边。
English: Huo Yanwei was transferred to the post of the festival envoy of Slanting, moved to Shanzhou, and also went to the north to recruit troops. The commander-in-chief of the army was stationed on the Yellow River.

古文：师徒屡败，降授陕州留后。
现代文：部队多次遭受失败，降职任陕州留后。
English: The troops suffered defeat many times, and he was demoted and stayed behind in Shaanxi.

古文：庄宗入汴，彦威自陕驰至请罪，诏释之。
现代文：唐庄宗进入汴州消灭梁朝，霍彦威从陕州赶到请罪，庄宗下诏释放了他。
English: Tang Zhuangzong entered Zhangzhou to destroy the Liang Dynasty, Huo Yanwei rushed from Shaanxi to plead guilty, Zhuangzong issued an edict to release him.

古文：一日，庄宗于崇元殿宴诸将，彦威与段凝、袁象先等预会。
现代文：一天，庄宗在崇元殿宴请各位将军，霍彦威和段凝、袁象先等人都参加。
English: One day, Zhuang Zong held a banquet at the Chongyuan Hall and invited all the generals, including Huo Yanwei, Duan Rong, and Yuan Xiangxian.

古文：酒酣，庄宗举酒属明宗曰： 此席宴客，皆吾前岁之劲敌也，一旦与吾同宴，盖卿前锋之效也。 
现代文：酒酣时，庄宗举起酒杯对明宗说： 这一席客人，都是我以前的劲敌，一旦和我同席喝酒，都是你前锋的功劳了。 
English: When the wine was poured, Zhuo Zong raised his glass to Ming Zong and said, "This table of guests are all my former rivals. If you drink with me, it's all thanks to your striker."

古文：彦威等伏陛谢罪，庄宗曰： 与卿话旧，无足畏也。 
现代文：霍彦威等趴在阶前谢罪，庄宗说： 和你们谈谈旧事，不必害怕。 
English: Huo Yanwei and others prostrated themselves in front of the steps to confess their sins, and Zhuang Zong said: "Talk to you about old things, don't be afraid.

古文：因赐御衣、器币，尽欢而罢。
现代文：赐给御衣、器币，尽欢而散。
English: He gave them robes and money, and they went away happy.

古文：寻放归籓。
现代文：不久放回藩地。
English: They were soon released back into the domain.

古文：明年，从明宗平潞州，授徐州节度使。
现代文：第二年，随从明宗平定潞州，任徐州节度使。
English: In the second year, he followed the Ming Dynasty to subdue Bozhou and served as the Xuzhou Festival envoy.

古文：契丹犯塞，庄宗以明宗为北面招讨使，命彦威为副。
现代文：契丹侵犯边塞。庄宗任明宗为北面招讨使，命霍彦威为副使。
English: The Khitan invaded the border fortress. Zhuo Zong appointed Ming Zong as the envoy to the north, and appointed Huo Yanwei as the deputy envoy.

古文：彦威善言论，颇能接奉，明宗尤重之。
现代文：霍彦威善于言谈，颇能应接逢迎，明宗尤其看重他。
English: Huo Yanwei is good at talking, quite able to meet and greet, Mingzong attaches great importance to him.

古文：赵太叛于邢州，奉诏讨平之。
现代文：赵太在邢州反叛，奉诏讨平了他。
English: Zhao Tai rebelled in Zhangzhou and was defeated by imperial edict.

古文：时赵在礼据魏州，与明宗会兵于鄴下，大军夕乱，明宗为其所逼，彦威从入魏州。皇甫晖等尤忌彦威，欲杀之，彦威机辩开说，竟免。
现代文：这时赵在礼占据魏州，与明宗在邺下会师，大军在晚上作乱，明宗被乱军逼迫，霍彦威跟随明宗进入魏州，皇甫晖等人尤其忌恨霍彦威，想杀掉他，霍彦威机智辩解，最后免于受害。
English: At this time, Zhao occupied Weizhou in the ceremony, and joined forces with Mingzong under his command. The army rioted in the evening. Mingzong was persecuted by the rioting army. Huo Yanwei followed Mingzong into Weizhou. Wang Fuxi and others especially hated Huo Yanwei and wanted to kill him. Huo Yanwei wittily defended himself and was finally spared from harm.

古文：及出，彦威部下兵士独全，卫护明宗至魏县。
现代文：从魏州出来后，只有霍彦威部下的士兵得以保全，护卫明宗到了魏县。
English: After leaving Weizhou, only the soldiers under the command of Huo Yanwei were saved, and the escort Mingzong arrived in Weixian.

古文：时明宗欲北趋常山，彦威与安重诲恳请赴阙。从至洛阳，彦威首率卿相劝进于至德宫。旬日之间，内外机事，皆决于彦威。
现代文：这时明宗想往北去常山，霍彦威和安重诲恳请他回朝廷，于是跟着明宗到了洛阳，霍彦威带头率卿相在至德宫劝明宗即帝位，十几天内，内外机要事务都由霍彦威决定。
English: At this time, Mingzong wanted to go north to Changshan. Huo Yanwei and An Chongyi implored him to return to the imperial court, so he followed Mingzong to Luoyang. Huo Yanwei led the leading officials to the German court to persuade Mingzong that the throne. Within ten days, the important domestic and foreign affairs were decided by Huo Yanwei.

古文：擅收段凝、温韬下狱，将置于法。安重诲曰： 温、段罪恶，负于梁室，众所知矣。
现代文：擅自收捕段凝、温韬下狱，将要依法处置，安重诲说： 温、段二人的罪恶是有负于梁室，大家都知道。
English: Unauthorized confiscation and arrest of Duan Rong and imprisonment of Wen Rong will be dealt with in accordance with the law, An Chong said: The evil of the two people, Wen and Duan, is inferior to the beam room, everyone knows.

古文：今主上克平内艰，冀安万国，岂为公报仇耶！ 
现代文：现在主上刚平定内难，希望安定万国，怎么能为自己报私仇呢！ 
English: Now that the Lord has just settled the internal difficulties and hopes for the stability of all nations, how can he avenge himself?

古文：至天成初，除郓州节度使。值青州王公俨拒命，改平卢军节度，至镇，擒公俨，斩之。
现代文：至天成初年，任郓州节度使，遇上青州王公俨抗拒命令，便改任平卢军节度使，到藩镇后，获王公俨并杀掉。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, he was appointed as the festival envoy of Bozhou, and when Qingzhou Wang Gongyi resisted the order, he was changed to the festival envoy of the Pinglu Army. After arriving at the town, he was beaten and killed by Wang Gongyi.

古文：明年冬，赐觐于汴州，明宗接遇甚厚，累官至检校太尉、兼中书令。
现代文：第二年冬天，四次到汴州进见，明宗接待很优厚，升官到检校太尉、兼中书令。
English: In the winter of the second year, he went to Zhangzhou four times to visit Mingzong. Mingzong received him very graciously, and he was promoted to the rank of inspector first lieutenant and middle school secretary.

古文：三年冬，卒于理所，年五十七。
现代文：三年冬天，死在青州任上，五十七岁。
English: Three years later, in the winter, he died in Qingzhou, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：奏至之日，明宗方出近郊。忽闻奏讣，掩泣归宫，辍朝三日，至月终不举乐。
现代文：讣告送到那天，明宗正到近郊，忽然听到讣告，哭着回宫，停止上朝三天，至月底不奏乐。
English: On the day the obituary was delivered, Mingzong was on his way to the suburbs when he suddenly heard the obituary. He returned to the palace in tears, stopped playing for three days in the morning, and did not play music until the end of the month.

古文：《五代会要》：天成四年六月敕： 故平卢军节度使霍彦威，勋名显著，宅兆已营，度遵定谥之规，俾议送终之制，宜以三公礼葬。 册赠太师、晋国公，谥曰忠武。
现代文：册赠太师、晋国公，谥号称忠武。
English: He was given the title of Grand Master and Prince of Jin Province, and his posthumous name was Zhongwu.

古文：子承训，弟彦珂，累历刺史。
现代文：儿子霍承训，弟霍彦珂，历任刺史。
English: His son, Huo Chengxun, and his brother, Huo Yanke, were successively appointed as leaders.

古文：皇朝乾德中，立明宗庙于洛州，诏以彦威配飨庙庭。
现代文：北宋乾德年中，在洛州建立明宗庙，下诏以霍彦威配享庙庭。
English: In the middle of the Northern Song Dynasty, Emperor Qiande established the Ming Dynasty Temple in Lozhou, and issued the edict that Huo Yanwei should enjoy the temple garden.

古文：《清异录》：宣武子都，尤勇悍，其弩张一大机，则十二小机皆发，用连珠大箭，无远不及，晋人极畏此。
现代文：王晏球，字莹之，自称洛阳人。少年时遇上动乱，被蔡州贼寇抓去，汴人杜氏收为义子，因而冒姓杜氏。
English: Wang Yingzhi, or Wang Yingqiu, claims to be from Luoyang. When he was a young boy, he was caught up in the turmoil and captured by the Caizhou bandits. He was adopted as a godson by Du Shi, and thus assumed the surname Du Shi.

古文：晏球预选，从梁祖征伐，所至立功，累迁子都指挥使。
现代文：王晏球年少就沉着勇敢有决断，倜傥出众。梁太祖镇守汴州时，选富家子弟中有才能的安置在帐下，号称 厅子都 。王晏球被选上，跟随梁太祖征伐，多次立功，递升为厅子都指挥使。
English: At a young age, Wang Yaoqiu was calm, brave and decisive, and he stood out from the crowd. When Liang Taizu was in charge of Zhangzhou, he selected the talented children of rich families and placed them under his charge. It was known as the Hall of Capital. Wang Yaoqiu was selected, followed Liang Taizu in the conquest, made many contributions, and was promoted to the commanding officer of the Hall of Capital.

古文：梁开平三年，自开封府押衙充直左耀武指挥使，授右千牛卫将军，军职如故。
现代文：后梁开平三年，由开封府押衙兼任左耀武指挥使，授右千牛卫将军，军中职务如故。
English: Three years after Liang Kaiping's death, he was appointed by the Kaifeng government to serve as the commander of the Left Yaowu and the commander of the Right Qianyuwei, and his position in the army remained the same.

古文：硃友珪之篡位也，怀州龙骧守御军作乱，欲入京城。已至河阳，友珪命晏球出骑迎战击乱军，获军使刘重遇，以功转左龙骧第一指挥使。
现代文：朱友王圭篡位时，怀州龙骧守御军作乱，准备进入京城，已到了河阳，朱友王圭命王晏球出击迎战乱军，抓获军使刘重遇，以军功转任左龙骧第一指挥使。
English: When Zhu Youwang Gui usurped the throne, the troops of the Yongkang defenders in Waizhou made a riot and prepared to enter the capital. They had already arrived in Heyang. Zhu Youwang Gui ordered Wang Qianqiu to attack the rebels, captured the envoy Liu, and was transferred to the first commanding envoy of Zuo Longkang for his military service.

古文：梁末帝嗣位，以晏球为龙骧四军都指挥使。
现代文：梁末帝即位，任王晏球为龙骧四军都指挥使。
English: Emperor Liang Mucu ascended to the throne, and appointed Wang Xuanqiu as the commander and envoy of the four armies of Longjing.

古文：贞明二年四月十九日夜，汴州捉生都将李霸等作乱，纵火焚剽，攻建国门，梁末帝登楼拒战。
现代文：贞明二年四月十九日夜，汴州捉生都将李霸等人作乱，纵火抢掠，进攻建国门，梁末帝登楼抵抗。
English: On the night of April 19 of the second year of Zhenming, Li Ba and others in Zhangzhou made a riot, set fire and looted, attacked Jianguomen Gate, and Liang Mudi ascended the building to resist.

古文：晏球闻乱，先得龙骧马五百屯于鞠场，俄而乱兵以竿竖麻布沃油焚建国缕，势将危急。
现代文：王晏球听说发生兵变，先得到龙骧军战马五百匹关在球场，不久乱兵用木竿麻布沾油焚烧建国门城楼，情势十分危急。
English: After hearing about the mutiny, Wang Qianqiu first got 500 war horses from the Longyi Army and locked them in the stadium. Soon, the soldiers set fire to the Jianguomen City Tower with a wooden pole and hemp cloth dipped in oil. The situation was very critical.

古文：晏球隔门窥乱兵，见无甲胄，即出骑击之，奋力血战，俄而群贼散走。
现代文：王晏球从门内窥见乱兵没有甲胄，便骑马出击，奋力血战，顷刻乱兵溃走。
English: Wang Yingqiu peeked through the door and saw that the ruffians were not wearing armor, so he rode out to attack, fought a bloody battle, and in an instant the ruffians were routed.

古文：梁末帝见骑军讨贼，呼曰； 非吾龙骧之士乎？ 
现代文：梁末帝望见骑兵杀敌，喊道： 这不是我的龙骧兵吗？ 
English: Emperor Liang Mu Di saw the cavalry kill the enemy and shouted: "Isn't this my dragoon soldiers?

古文：晏球奏曰： 乱者惟李霸一都，陛下但守宫城，迟明臣必破之。 
现代文：王晏球上奏说： 作乱的只有李霸一部分，陛下只须守住宫城，天亮时我一定能平定乱兵。 
English: Wang Yao said at the top of his speech, "Only a part of Li Baolu caused the disturbance. Your majesty only needs to defend Miyagi. I will surely be able to quell the disorderly soldiers at dawn."

古文：既而晏球尽戮乱军，全营族诛，以功授单州刺史。寻领军于河上，为行营马军都指挥兼诸军排阵使。
现代文：过一会儿，王晏球杀尽乱军，李霸军全营灭族。因军功授单州刺史，不久带兵到黄河边，任行营马军都指挥兼诸军排阵使。
English: After a while, Wang Qianqiu killed all the rebels, and Li Ba's entire battalion exterminated the tribe. He was awarded a single-state award for military merit, and soon led the soldiers to the Yellow River. He was both the commander of the camp horse army and the army's platoon commander.

古文：庄宗入汴，晏球率骑军入援。至封丘，闻梁末帝殂，即解甲降于庄宗。
现代文：唐庄宗进入汴州，消灭梁朝，王晏球带骑兵去救援，走到封丘，听说梁末帝已经死了，就放下武器向庄宗投降。
English: Tang Zhuangzong entered Zhangzhou and destroyed the Liang Dynasty. Wang Bingqiu led his cavalry to rescue Liangzhu and went to Fengqiu. When he heard that Emperor Liang was dead, he laid down his weapons and surrendered to Zhuangzong.

古文：明年，与霍彦威北捍契丹，授齐州防御使、北面行营马军都指挥使，仍赐姓氏，名绍虔。
现代文：第二年，与霍彦威在北边抵抗契丹，授齐州防御使、北面行营马军都指挥使，又赐国姓李，名叫绍虔。
English: In the second year, he and Huo Yanwei resisted the Khitan in the north, and he was awarded the defense envoy of Qizhou and the command envoy of the horse army marching in the north. He was also given the surname Li, and his name was Shao Qian.

古文：鄴之乱，明宗入赴内难，晏球时在瓦桥，遣人招之。
现代文：邺州内乱时，明宗去救内难，王晏球当时在瓦桥，明宗派人征召他。
English: During the civil strife in Zhangzhou, Mingzong went to help in the internal difficulties. Wang Yingqiu was in Wabiao at the time, and Mingzong sent someone to recruit him.

古文：明宗至汴，晏球率骑从至京师，以平定功授宋州节度使，上章求还本姓名。
现代文：明宗到汴州，王晏球率骑兵跟着到了京师，以平定内难有功授宋州节度使，王晏球上表章请求恢复原来姓名。
English: Ming Zong went to Bozhou, and Wang Yao's cavalry followed him to the Beijing Division. In order to pacify the Song State Festival, Wang Yao requested that the original name be restored.

古文：契丹遣托诺率骑千余来援都，突入定州，晏球引军保曲阳。
现代文：明宗天成二年，授北面行营副招讨，用兵守卫满城。这一年，王都占据定州，契丹派秃馁率一千多骑兵来援助王都，突进到定州，王晏球撤军保曲阳。
English: In the second year of the reign of Ming Zong Tiancheng, Wang Du occupied Dingzhou, Qidan sent more than a thousand cavalry with vultures to assist Wang Du, stormed into Dingzhou, and Wang Yaoqiu withdrew to Baoquyang.

古文：王都、托诺出军拒战，晏球督厉军士，令短兵击贼，戒之曰： 回首者死。 
现代文：王都、秃馁进军接战，王晏球督促军士，令短兵杀敌，警告军士说： 回头退却者处死。 
English: The king and the vulture marched into the battle, and the king and the vulture urged the sergeant, ordered the short soldiers to kill the enemy, and warned the sergeant: Those who turn back will be executed.

古文：符彦卿以龙武左军攻军其左，高行周以龙武右军攻其右，奋剑挥楇，应手首落，贼军大败于嘉山之下，追袭至于城门。
现代文：符彦卿带龙武左军攻敌人左边，高行周以龙武右军攻敌人右边，奋剑挥木过，手起头落，敌军在嘉山之下大败，唐军追击到城门。
English: Fu Yanqing led the Longwu Left Army to attack the enemy's left side, Gao Xing Zhou led the Longwu Right Army to attack the enemy's right side. The enemy army was defeated at the foot of Jiashan Mountain, and the Tang Army chased them to the city gate.

古文：俄而契丹首领特哩衮率勇骑五千至唐河。
现代文：不久契丹首领惕隐率五千骑兵到唐河。
English: Soon, the Khitan leader Titi secretly led five thousand cavalry to the Tang River.

古文：是时大雨，晏球出师逆战，特哩衮复败，追至易州，河水暴涨，所在陷没，俘获二千骑而还。特哩衮以余众北走幽州，赵德钧令牙将武从谏以骑邀击。
现代文：这时下大雨，王晏球出兵迎战，惕隐又被打败，唐军追杀到易州，河水暴涨，所到地方都被淹没，俘获二千骑兵而回，惕隐带剩下的残兵往北去幽州，赵德钧令牙将武从谏带骑兵截击，赵德钧分别把守各条要道。
English: At this time, it was raining heavily. Wang Qianqiu sent troops to meet the battle. Ti Ying was defeated again. The Tang army chased them to Yizhou. The river water surged, and all the places they went to were flooded. They captured two thousand cavalry and returned. Ti Ying took the remaining soldiers north to Yuzhou. Zhao Deyu ordered his cavalry to intercept the cavalry. Zhao Deyu guarded each important road separately.

古文：德钧分扼诸要路，旬日之内，尽获特哩衮已下酋长七百余人，契丹遂弱。晏球围城既久，帝遣使督攻城，晏球曰： 贼垒坚峻，但食三州租税，抚恤黎民，爱养军士彼自当鱼溃。 
现代文：十来天之间，全部抓获惕隐以下酋长七百多人，契丹于是衰弱下去。王晏球包围定州城已很久，皇帝派使者督促攻城，王晏球说 ；敌人壁垒森严，只要收取三州的租税，爱抚百姓，养护士兵，敌人自然会从内部溃烂。 
English: In the space of ten days, more than seven hundred people, all of them chiefs from Ti Yin downwards, were captured, and the Khitan then weakened. Wang Yeqiu had surrounded the city of Dingzhou for a long time, and the emperor sent an envoy to urge the siege of the city, Wang Yeqiu said; the enemy has strict barriers, as long as the taxes of the three states are collected, the people are caressed and the soldiers are protected, the enemy will naturally fester from within.

古文：帝然其言。
现代文：皇帝同意了他的话。
English: The emperor agreed to his words.

古文：晏珠能与将士同其甘苦，所得禄赐私财，尽以飨士，日具饮馔，与将校筵宴，待军士有礼，军中无不敬伏。
现代文：王晏球能和将士同甘共苦，得到的俸禄赏赐等私财，全部分给士兵，每天具办饮食，和将校们宴饮，对待军士有礼，军中没有不尊敬他的。
English: Wang Xuanqiu was able to share the joys and hardships with the soldiers. He gave all of his personal wealth, such as the salaries and rewards he received, to the soldiers. He prepared meals every day, had banquets with the officers, and treated the sergeants with courtesy. There was no one in the army who did not respect him.

古文：其年冬，平贼。
现代文：这年冬天，平定敌军。
English: This winter, the enemy was subdued.

古文：自初战至于城拔，不戮一士，上下欢心，物议以为有将帅之略，以功授天平军节度使。未几，移镇青州，就加兼中书令。
现代文：从开始作战到攻下敌城，不杀一士，上下欢欣，舆论认为他有将帅风度。以军功授天平军节度使，没多久，调到青州，加兼中书令。
English: From the beginning of the battle to the capture of the enemy city, he did not kill a single person, and everyone rejoiced. The public opinion thought that he had a handsome demeanor. The commander of the Tianping Army, who was awarded military merit, was soon transferred to Qingzhou, and he was also given the title of General.

古文：长兴三年，卒于镇，时年六十。
现代文：长兴三年，死在任职的地方，终年六十岁。
English: Changxing for three years, died in his place of duty, aged sixty.

