古文：王守诚王守诚，字君实，太原阳曲人。
现代文：王守诚，字君实，太原阳曲人。
English: Wang Shoucheng, Zha Junshi, Taiyuan Yang Quren.

古文：气宇和粹，性好学，从邓文原、虞集游，文辞日进。
现代文：气度和蔼纯洁，尤爱学习。因与邓文原、虞集交往，文辞日益进步。
English: His temperament was pure and amiable, and he especially loved to study. Due to his interactions with Deng Wenyuan and Yu Ji, his literary skills improved day by day.

古文：泰定元年，试礼部第一，廷对赐同进士出身，授秘书郎。
现代文：泰定元年，礼部考试得第一，朝廷赐给进士出身，任命为秘书郎。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he won the first place in the examination of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was given the title of secretary by the imperial court.

古文：迁太常博士，续编《太常集礼》若干卷以进。
现代文：升迁为太常博士，参加续编《太常集礼》若干卷。
English: He was promoted to Dr. Tai Chang and participated in several volumes of the sequel "Tai Chang Collection."

古文：转艺林库使，与著《经世大典》。
现代文：既而升迁为艺林库使，参与著《经世大典》。
English: He was promoted to the position of art librarian and participated in the publication of "The Great Book of History."

古文：拜陕西行台监察御史。除奎章阁鉴书博士。拜监察御史。
现代文：拜为陕西行台监察御史、奎章阁鉴书博士及监察御史。
English: He is the inspector of the history of Shaanxi and Taiwan, the doctor of Keizhangge and the inspector of history.

古文：佥山东廉访司事。改户部员外郎、中书右司郎中。拜礼部尚书。
现代文：其后任山东廉访司佥事，又改任户部员外郎、中书右司郎中，拜礼部尚书。
English: Later, he served as Shandong Lianghuizi Anji, and was also reappointed as a member of the household department, a member of the middle school, and a member of the worship department.

古文：与修辽、金、宋三史，书成，擢参议中书省事。调燕南廉访使。
现代文：参与修纂辽、金、宋三史。成书后提升为参议中书省事，后调任燕南廉访使。
English: He participated in the compilation of the three histories of Liao, Jin, and Song. After the book was completed, he was promoted to the position of the councillor of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China, and later he was transferred to the position of the envoy of Yan Nanlian.

古文：至正五年，帝遣使宣抚四方，除守诚河南行省参知政事，与大都留守答尔麻失里使四川，首荐云南都元帅述律铎尔直有文武材。
现代文：至正五年，帝遣使至各地宣抚，守诚与大都留守答尔麻失里出使四川，到任后首先推荐了有文武之材的云南都元帅述律铎尔直。
English: In the first five years of the Taishō era, the emperor sent envoys to various regions to make proclamations. Most of the envoys to Sichuan were sent by Shoshen and Shoshen, but Shoshen and Shoshen stayed in Dalmaoli. After taking office, he first recommended the Yunnan capital marshal Shulun Erzhi, who was a man of letters and martial arts.

古文：州县官多取职田者，累十有四人，悉厘正之。
现代文：守诚判案明察审慎，对诉讼的供词没有漏洞又能吐露实情的，都给以平反。州县官中十四人多领职田者，守诚皆予更正。
English: Shoucheng's judgements were prudent and prudent, and his confession to the lawsuit was without loopholes and able to reveal the truth, all of which were rehabilitated. Among the fourteen state and county officials who received more than one job, Shoucheng was corrected.

古文：因疏言： 仕于蜀者，地僻路遥，俸给之薄，何以自养。请以户绝及屯田之荒者，召人耕种，收其入以增禄秩。 
现代文：因此上疏说： 在蜀地为官，由于地方偏僻遥远，俸禄微薄，难以自养，希望将绝户及荒芜的屯田，召人耕种，以增加州县官的俸禄。 
English: Therefore, Shang Zuo said: "As an official in Shu Di, due to the remoteness and remoteness of the place, the salary is meager and it is difficult to support oneself. I hope to invite people to cultivate abandoned houses and barren farmlands to increase the salary of state and county officials."

古文：进资政大夫、河南行省左丞。未上，母刘氏殁于京师，闻丧亟归，遂遘疾，以至正九年正月卒，年五十有四。
现代文：宜宾县尹杨济亨申请在蟠龙山建宪宗神御殿，儒学提举谢晋贤请求修复文翁石室做书院，守诚皆采纳上报，他的风采轰动全国，其功居全国各道之首。至正九年正月病卒，享年五十四岁。
English: Yin Yang Jiheng of Yibin County applied to build the Imperial Palace of Confucianism in Longshan, Confucianism was proposed by Xie Jianxian, and the request to restore the stone room of Wen Weng as a college was accepted by Shucheng. His style was sensational throughout the country, and his achievements ranked first in all provinces. He died of illness in the first month of the ninth year, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：帝赐钞万缗，谥文昭。
现代文：顺帝赐钞万缗，谥号文昭。
English: Emperor Shun bestowed tens of thousands of yuan in banknotes, and his posthumous name was Wenzhao.

古文：有文集若干卷。
现代文：有文集若干卷。
English: There are several volumes of anthologies.

古文：王思诚王思诚，字致道，兖州嵫阳人。
现代文：王思诚，字致道，党州嵫阳人。祖辈务农。
English: Wang Shicheng, known as Zhidao, was born in Shiyang, the capital of Dangzhou. His ancestors were farmers.

古文：后从汶阳曹元用游，学大进。
现代文：思诚天资过人，七岁拜师学《孝经》、《论语》，都能背诵。
English: Shicheng was gifted, and at the age of seven, he learned "Filial Piety" and "Analects" from his teacher, and was able to recite them.

古文：中至治元年进士第，授管州判官，召为国子助教，改翰林国史院编修官。
现代文：至治元年中进士，任管判官，后召至京师任国子助教，又改任翰林国史院编修官。
English: He entered the priesthood in the middle of the first year of the Heian period, and was appointed as a judge. Later, he was called to Beijing to serve as an assistant professor of Kuniko, and was also appointed as an editor of the Hanlin Academy of National History.

古文：寻升应奉翰林文字，再转为待制。至正元年，迁奉议大夫、国子司业。
现代文：以后又转任待制。至正元年，升迁为奉议大夫、国子司业。
English: After that, he was transferred to the position of shosei. In 1861, he was promoted to the position of hogo no daibu and kokushi no tsukudani.

古文：二年，拜监察御史，上疏言： 京畿去年秋不雨，冬无雪，方春首月蝗生，黄河水溢。
现代文：次年任监察御史，上疏顺帝，言京城一带去年秋不下雨，冬亦无雨，春又有蝗灾，加上黄河决堤，此系阴阳失调。
English: The following year, the inspector of imperial history, Shang Shou Shun, said that there was no rain in the Beijing area last autumn, no rain in the winter, locusts in the spring, and the Yellow River broke through the dike. This is a yin and yang imbalance.

古文：盖不雨者，阳之亢，水涌者，阴之盛也。
现代文：请发卒堵决，给灾民死者以棺木，这样可协调阴阳，消除水旱灾祸。
English: Please issue a decision to block and give coffins to the victims of the disaster, so that the yin and yang can be coordinated and the disaster of floods and droughts can be eliminated.

古文：河南、湖广等处打捕鹰房府，打捕户尚玉等一万三千二百二十五户，阿难答百姓刘德元等二千三百户，可以签补，使劳佚相资。 又言： 燕南、山东，密迩京师，比岁饥馑，群盗纵横，巡尉弓兵与提调捕盗官，会邻境以讨之，贼南则会于北，贼西则会于东，及与贼会，望风先遁，请立法严禁之。 
现代文：狱吏谎报他们生病时间之长短，用药次数之多少，以掩盖其失职。呈请制定以囚犯病死狱中之多少来衡量看守者罪行轻重之法令。 又说 ：燕南、山东邻近京师，近几年来，饥馑相继，群盗四起，巡尉弓兵与提调捕盗官，联合邻境，共同征剿，然而贼在南，他们却会合于北，贼在西，他们却会合于东。及与贼相遇，他们又望风而逃。请立法严禁。 
English: Prison officials lied about the length of time they were sick and the number of times they took medicine to cover up their dereliction of duty. The petition requested the enactment of a law to measure the severity of the guards' crimes by the number of prisoners who died of illness in prison. It also said: Yan'nan and Shandong are close to Beijing Division, in recent years, famine has occurred one after another, there have been four cases of banditry, lieutenant archers and transferred thieving officers have united the neighborhoods and jointly collected plunder, but the thieves are in the south, but they meet in the north, the thieves are in the west, but they meet in the east. And when they meet

古文：又言： 初开海道，置海仙鹤哨船四十余艘，往来警逻。
现代文：又言 ：初开海运漕粮，置海仙鹤哨船四十余艘，往来巡逻以保护漕船。
English: He also said: the first sea-borne grain carts will be launched, and more than 40 sea crane sentry boats will be set up, and patrols will be carried out to protect the carts.

古文：今弊船十数，止于刘家港口，以捕盗为名，实不出海，以致寇贼猖獗，宜即莱州洋等处分兵守之，不令泊船岛屿，禁镇民与梢水为婚，有能捕贼者，以船畀之，获贼首者，赏以官。
现代文：如今这些哨船损害十数艘，只活动于刘家港口，以捕盗为名，实不出海。以致海盗猖獗。应该在莱州洋等处分兵把守，不让在岛屿旁停泊船只，禁止镇民与船夫通婚，有能捕捉盗贼的奖给船只；捉住贼首的，赏赐官职。
English: Nowadays, these sentry boats have damaged more than a dozen ships, and only operate in the port of Liu Jia. In the name of catching thieves, they do not actually go to sea. As a result, piracy is rampant. It is necessary to send troops to guard the sea in Laizhou and other places, do not allow ships to anchor near the islands, prohibit townspeople from marrying boatmen, and reward ships that can catch thieves. If you catch the thief's head, you will be rewarded with an official post.

古文：仍移江浙、河南行省，列戍江海诸口，以诘海商还者，审非寇贼，始令泊船。
现代文：仍移江浙、河南行省兵民，戍守江海口道，待查清返程海商若非寇贼后，才准许船只停泊。
English: They still moved to Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Henan to gather soldiers and civilians from the provinces, and guarded the Jianghaikou Road. If the returning sea merchants were not robbers, they would not allow the ships to berth until the investigation was clear.

古文：下年粮船开洋之前，遣将士乘海仙鹤于二月终旬入海，庶几海道宁息。 
现代文：到第一年粮船开航之前，派遣将士乘海仙鹤于二月下旬入海，这样海道大概就可以安宁了。 
English: In the first year, before the grain ship set sail, soldiers were sent by sea cranes to enter the sea in late February, so that the sea route could be calm.

古文：丰润县一囚，年最少，械系濒死，疑而问之，曰： 昏暮三人投宿，将诣集场，约同行，未夜半，趣行，至一冢间，见数人如有宿约者，疑之，众以为盗告，不从，胁以白刃，驱之前，至一民家，众皆入，独留户外，遂潜奔赴县，未及报而被收。 
现代文：朝廷采纳了这些建议。松州的官吏为得到贿赂而故意诬陷百姓，向台臣诉冤的就有四十人，于是命思诚查问。思诚以其他名义秘密去松州，逮捕监州以下官员二十三人，都判了罪。丰润县一囚犯，年纪最小，因戴刑具将至死，引起思诚怀疑，问他，他说： 傍晚遇见三人，与他们同行，半夜他们便用尖刀逼我走在前面，到一老百姓家门前，他们大家都进去了，让我一人留在户外，我就偷偷地到县府报告，还未报案，就被抓住了。 
English: The court accepted these suggestions. Songzhou officials deliberately framed the people in order to get bribes, and there were forty people who complained to the Taiwanese, so they ordered Shicheng to investigate. Shicheng secretly went to Songzhou under other names, arrested twenty-three officials under the supervision of the state, and all were convicted. A prisoner in Fengrun County, the youngest, was about to die because he was wearing a torture device, which aroused Shicheng's suspicion. When he asked him, he said, "In the evening, I met three people and walked with them. In the middle of the night, they forced me to walk in front of them with a sharp knife. I went to

古文：思诚遂正有司罪，少年获免。
现代文：思诚于是判了有司的罪，那少年获释了。
English: Shicheng then convicted the magistrate and the boy was released.

古文：出佥河南山西道肃政廉访司事，行部武乡县，监县来迓，思诚私语吏属曰： 此必赃吏。 
现代文：思诚出任河南、山西道肃政廉访司佥事，到武乡县巡视，监县出来迎接，思诚暗地对随从说： 此人定是贪官。 
English: Shicheng took up the post of Henan and Shanxi provinces anti-corruption inspector, went to Wuxiang County to inspect, and the county supervisor came out to meet him. Shicheng said to his follower secretly: This person must be a corrupt official.

古文：未几，果有诉于道侧者，问曰： 得无诉监县敓汝马乎？ 其人曰： 然。 
现代文：不久，果然有人在路旁诉冤，思诚问他 ：是控诉监县夺你的马的吧？ 那人说 ：是。 
English: Not long after, someone did complain on the side of the road. Shicheng asked him, "Did you complain to the county supervisor for taking away your horse?" The man said, "Yes."

古文：监县抵罪。
现代文：于是将监县问罪。
English: As a result, the prefectural inspector was charged with a crime.

古文：吏属问思诚先知之故，曰： 衣弊衣，乘骏马，非诈而何！ 
现代文：随从问思诚为何预先能知道此事，思诚说： 穿着破烂的衣服，骑着骏马，不是诈取来的又是什么？ 
English: The follower asked Shicheng why he knew about the matter in advance. Shicheng said: Wearing tattered clothes and riding a horse, what was it that was not stolen?

古文：陕西行台言： 欲疏凿黄河三门，立水陆站以达于关陕。 
现代文：陕西行台写公文给思诚 ，希望疏通黄河三门，设立水陆站，直通关陕。 
English: Shaanxi and Taiwan wrote a public document to Shicheng, hoping to dredge the three gates of the Yellow River, set up water and land stations, and pass through Guanxi and Shaanxi.

古文：移牍思诚，会陕西、河南省宪臣及郡县长吏视之，皆畏险阻，欲以虚辞复命，思诚怒曰： 吾属自欺，何以责人！
现代文：思诚会同陕西、河南宪臣及郡县长官去察看，大家都害怕地险路隘，想用假话回报，思诚生气地说 ：我们自己欺骗自己，怎么督责他人？
English: Shicheng would go to inspect with Shaanxi, Henan gendarmes and county magistrates. Everyone was afraid of dangerous roads and wanted to return with lies. Shicheng said angrily: We deceive ourselves, how can we blame others?

古文：何以待朝廷！
现代文：以什么态度对待朝廷？
English: What was his attitude towards the imperial court?

古文：诸君少留，吾当躬诣其地。 
现代文：你们稍停一会儿，我要亲自到那里看看。 
English: If you'll just stop for a minute, I want to go down there and see for myself.

古文：众惶恐从之，河中滩碛百有余里，礁石错出，路穷，舍骑徒行，攀藤葛以进，众惫喘汗弗敢言，凡三十里，度其不可，乃作诗历叙其险，执政采之，遂寝其议。
现代文：大家都害怕地跟着他，黄河中滩碛之路一百多里，礁石错出，无路可走，便下马徒步，攀藤前行。大家疲乏得喘着气，流着汗，却不敢说什么。行了三十里路，推测走不通了，就作诗叙述经过的险情，被执政者采纳，取消了行台的建议。
English: Everyone followed him fearfully. The path of the raft in the middle of the Yellow River was more than a hundred miles, the reef was out of the way, there was no way to go, so they got off the horse and walked on foot, climbing the rattan. Everyone was tired and sweating, but they did not dare to say anything. After thirty miles of travel, it was impossible to speculate, so they wrote a poem to describe the dangers that had passed. It was adopted by the rulers and the proposal to walk was canceled.

古文：召修辽、金、宋三史，调秘书监丞。
现代文：后来召他编修辽、金、宋三史，又调任秘书监丞。
English: Later, he was called to edit the three histories of Liao, Jin, and Song, and was transferred to the post of secretary-supervisor.

古文：会国子监诸生相率为哄，复命为司业。
现代文：刚巧国子监的学生率领着人相斗，又再任命他为司业。
English: It just so happened that a student of the National Children's Supervisor led the people to fight, and then appointed him as the secretary.

古文：后河决，柳俱没，官犹征之，凡十余年，其子孙益贫，不能偿，思诚连请于朝除之。
现代文：思诚召集学生在堂下，开除了五个带头相斗的学生，受降斋处分的七十人，对学习勤奋的升级，学习懒惰的除名，从此大家更加互相勉励，于是越级提升思诚为兵部侍郎。因母亲病逝，扶柩南归。
English: Shicheng gathered the students in the hall, expelled the five students who led the fight, the seventy people who were punished by the reduction of fasting, the upgrading of study diligence, and the removal of learning laziness. From then on, everyone encouraged each other more, so Shicheng was promoted to be the attendant of the military department. Due to his mother's death, Fushun returned to the south.

古文：郡庭生嘉禾三本，一本九茎，一本十六茎，一本十三茎，茎五六穗，僚属欲上进，思诚曰： 吾尝恶人行异政，沽美名。 
现代文：守丧期满，起为太中大夫、河间路总管。磁河水决堤泛滥成灾，思诚召集民工修堤，日夜兴工，一个月便完成，是年农业获得好收成。南皮民祖辈曾沿御河种柳，政府征税，名曰 ：柳课 。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the chief doctor of Taizhong and the head of the road between the rivers. The water of the magnetic river broke through the dike and caused a flood. Shicheng called for migrant workers to repair the dike. They started working day and night and completed the work in a month. The agricultural harvest was good. The ancestors of the Nanpi people used to grow willows along the Yihe River, and the government levied taxes. The name is: Willow Class.

古文：乃止。所辖景州广川镇，汉董仲舒之里也，河间尊福乡，博士毛苌旧居也，皆请建书院，设山长员。
现代文：黄河决堤，把这些柳树都淹没了，而官府仍旧征税，十余年来不止，人民交加贫困，思诚奏请朝廷免除。所辖景州广川镇是汉代董仲舒的家乡，河间尊福乡有博士毛苌的旧居，思诚皆请于该两处建立书院。
English: The Yellow River burst its banks, drowning these willows, but the government still levied taxes. For more than ten years, the people were impoverished, and Sincere asked the court to exempt them. Guangchuan Town of Jingzhou, which is under the jurisdiction of the government, is the hometown of Dong Zhongshu in Han Dynasty, and there is the former residence of Dr. Mao Kun in Haima Sonfu Township. Sincere asked to build a college in these two places.

古文：召拜礼部尚书。
现代文：其后，思诚奉召回朝，拜礼部尚书。
English: After that, Shicheng was called back to the morning, and the worship department was closed.

古文：十二年，帝以四方民颇失业，命名臣巡行劝课。思诚至河间及山东诸路，召集父老，宣帝德意，莫不感泣，缄进二麦、豌豆，帝嘉之，赐上尊二。
现代文：至正十二年，各地人民失业者多，顺帝命名臣去巡察，思诚至河间及山东诸路，召集父老，宣扬皇上关心民间疾苦的恩德，百姓莫不感激泪下。
English: By the 12th year of the Zheng He, there were many unemployed people all over the country. Emperor Shun named a minister to inspect the situation. Shicheng traveled to the provinces of Hebei and Shandong to convene the elders and proclaim the emperor's concern for the suffering of the people. The people were so grateful that they shed tears.

古文：召还，迁国子祭酒，俄复为礼部尚书，知贡举，升集贤侍讲学士，兼国子祭酒。
现代文：思诚又召还至京，升迁为国子祭酒，不久又拜为礼部尚书，主持科举考试。又升为集贤侍讲学士，兼国子祭酒。
English: Shicheng was also called back to Beijing and promoted to the highest rank of Kuniko Matsuri, and soon he was also appointed to the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies and presided over the imperial examinations. He was also promoted to Jixian Attendant Lecturer, and also Kuniko Matsuri.

古文：应诏言事：一曰置行省丞相以专方面；二曰宽内郡征输以固根本；三曰汰冗兵以省粮运；四曰改禄秩以养官廉；五曰罢行兵马司以便诘捕；六曰复倚郭县以正纪纲；七曰设常选以起淹滞。
现代文：他应诏奏进七事：一曰置行省丞相，二曰宽内郡征发，三曰淘汰冗兵，四曰改进禄秩，五曰罢行兵马司，六曰复倚郭县，七曰设常选。
English: He reported seven things in response to the imperial edict: on the first day, he appointed a provincial chancellor, on the second day, he conscripted and dispatched soldiers from Kannae County, on the third day, he eliminated redundant soldiers, on the fourth day, he improved the rank and pay scale, on the fifth day, he went on strike against the Division of the Horse and Armor, on the sixth day, he recovered Yasuigaku County, and on the seventh day, he established regular elections.

古文：寻出为陕西行台治书侍御史，辞以老病，不允，力疾戒行。
现代文：不久出任陕西行台治书侍御史。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Shaanxi and Taiwan.

古文：十七年春，红巾陷商州，夺七盘，进据蓝田县，距奉元一舍。思诚会豫王阿剌忒纳失里及省院官于安西王月鲁帖木儿邸，众汹惧无言，思诚曰： 陕西重地，天下之重轻系焉。察罕帖木儿，河南名将，贼素畏之，宜遣使求援，此上策也。 
现代文：十七年春，红巾军攻陷商州，夺取七盘，占据蓝田县，距奉元仅三十里，思诚在安西王月鲁帖木儿官邸会见豫王阿剌忒纳失里及省院官，大家万分恐惧，拿不出任何对策，思诚说 ：陕西是要地，关系天下得失，察罕帖木儿是河南名将，贼一向害怕他，应该派使臣去求援，这才是上策。 
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, the Red Scarf Army invaded Shangzhou, captured seven trays, occupied Lantian County, and was only thirty miles away from Fengyuan. Shicheng met with Yu Wang and the provincial academician at the official residence of Wang Yuelu Timur in Anxi. Everyone was very afraid and could not come up with any countermeasures. Shicheng said: Shaanxi is a crucial place, the relationship is a matter of gain and loss. Chakhan Timur is a famous general in Henan. Thieves have always been afraid of him. They should send envoys to ask for help. This is the best strategy.

古文：戍将嫉客兵轧己，论久不决，思诚曰： 吾兵弱，旦夕失守，咎将安归！ 
现代文：戍将憎恶豫王之兵排挤自己，始终久议不决，思诚说 ：我军力弱，失守于早晚之间，到时候谁来负责？ 
English: Shicheng said, "Our military strength is weak and we will be defeated sooner or later. At that time, who will be responsible?"

古文：乃移书察罕帖木儿曰： 河南为京师之庭户，陕西实内郡之藩篱，两省相望，互为唇齿，陕西危，则河南岂能独安乎？ 
现代文：于是写信给察罕帖木儿曰 ：河南是京师的门户，陕西是内郡的屏障，两省相望，互为唇齿，陕西有危险，河南能独得安宁么？ 
English: So he wrote to Tsakhan Timur, saying: Henan is the gateway to Beijing, Shaanxi is the barrier of the inner county, the two provinces look out at each other, they are each other's lips and teeth, Shaanxi is in danger, can Henan alone obtain peace?

古文：众乃安。既而援兵破贼，河南总兵官果以察罕帖木儿擅调，遣人问之，思诚亟请于朝，宜命察罕帖木儿专守关陕，仍令便宜行事，诏从之。
现代文：察罕帖木儿刚到陕州，收到信非常高兴，说： 先生果真有为国为民之心，我宁愿负擅调的罪责。 于是选派五千轻兵，迅速前往救援。不久，援兵击败贼兵。此时河南总兵官果然以察罕帖木儿擅自调兵派人谴责他，思诚立即向朝廷请求命察罕帖木儿专守关陕。皇上下诏同意他的请求。
English: Cahan Timur had just arrived in Shaanxi, and was very happy to receive the letter, saying: "You really have a heart for the country and the people, I would rather bear the guilt of arbitrarily transferring troops." So he selected five thousand light soldiers and quickly went to the rescue. Soon, the reinforcements defeated the bandits. At this time, the Henan chief military officer did indeed send someone to condemn Cahan Timur for arbitrarily transferring troops, and Sincerity immediately asked the court to order Cahan Timur to exclusively guard Guan Shan. The emperor and empress agreed to his request.

古文：十七年，召拜通议大夫、国子祭酒，时卧疾，闻命即起，至朝邑，疾复作。十月，卒于旅舍，年六十有七。谥献肃。
现代文：古时候对罪犯的妻子儿女都不抓，更何况母亲？我不忍心看到因儿子逃跑而牵连其母亲。 命令释放。十七年任命为通议大夫，国子祭酒，十月卒于旅舍，享年六十七，谥号献肃。
English: In ancient times, the wives and children of criminals were not arrested, let alone the mother? I can't bear to see the mother implicated because of the son's escape. Ordered to be released. In 1917, he was appointed as a doctor of general discussion, Kuniko sacrificed wine, died in October at the hostel, at the age of 67, and his posthumous name was dedicated.

古文：李好文李好文，字惟中，大名之东明人。
现代文：李好文，字惟中，大名东明人。
English: Li Haowen, the character Wei Zhong, the daimyo Dongming Ren.

古文：登至治元年进士第，授大名路浚州判官。
现代文：中至治元年进士，受任为大名路氵睿州判官。
English: From the middle of the 19th century to the first year of the 21st century, he was appointed as a magistrate of Daming Road and Ruizhou District.

古文：入为翰林国史院编修官、国子助教。
现代文：进京任翰林国史院编修官、国子助教。
English: Entered Beijing as an editor-in-chief of the Hanlin Academy of National History, and Kuniko as an assistant professor.

古文：泰定四年，除太常博士。
现代文：泰定四年任命为太常博士。
English: In the fourth year of the Tai Ding era, he was appointed as Dr. Tai Chang.

古文：会盗窃太庙神主，好文言： 在礼，神主当以木为之，金玉祭器，宜贮之别室。 
现代文：适逢盗贼偷窃太庙已故皇帝灵位牌，好文说： 按礼教，已故皇帝灵位牌应用木制造，金玉祭器应该贮存另室。 
English: On the occasion of thieves stealing the late emperor's prayer card of the Great Temple, a good article said: According to the etiquette, the late emperor's prayer card should be made of wood, and the gold and jade offering should be stored in another room.

古文：白长院者，选僚属数人，仍请出架阁文牍，以资采录。三年，书成，凡五十卷，名曰《太常集礼》。
现代文： 祖宗建国以来，每遇大礼，都是临时去取祭器，博士不过是遵循先例应答罢了。往年有诏编《集礼》，而今又令各省及各郡、县编纂，礼乐来自朝廷，郡县有什么呢？ 经三年书成，共五十卷，名曰《太常集礼》。
English: Since the founding of the country, whenever there was a grand ceremony, the priest would go to fetch the sacred vessels. The doctor merely followed the precedent and responded. In the past, there was a collection of "rituals" compiled by imperial edict, but now it is compiled by the provinces and counties. The ceremonial music comes from the imperial court, but what about the counties? After three years of writing, a total of fifty volumes, it is called "Taichang Collection."

古文：好文曰： 怙势杀人，甚于用刃，况因有所求而杀之，其情为尤重。 
现代文：升迁为国子博士后，因亲丧归家，期满又起用为国子监丞，授予监察御史。当时要再用 至元 为纪元年号，好文说： 年号承袭没听说过，只沿袭名声而不求实际，未见得有好处。 
English: After he was promoted to Kuniko doctor, he returned home due to a relative's death, and at the end of his term, he was appointed as Kuniko supervisor and granted the supervision of imperial history. At that time, it was necessary to re-use Zuyuan as the era name, and a good article said: I have not heard of the year name inheritance, I only follow the reputation without seeking reality, and I have not seen any benefits.

古文：乃置之死，河东为之震肃。出佥河南、浙东两道廉访司事。六年，帝亲享太室，召佥太常礼仪院事。
现代文：后来他出任检察河南、浙东道廉访司的事务。至元六年召任太常礼仪院事。
English: Later, he served as a procurator of Henan Province and Zhejiang Province, and was appointed as an official of the Imperial Household Agency in 1861.

古文：至正元年，除国子祭酒，改陕西行台治书侍御史，迁河东道廉访使。
现代文：至正元年任国子祭酒，后改任陕西行台治书侍御史，又升迁河东道廉访使。
English: In the first year of Zheng He, he held the post of Guozhizhishu, and later he was transferred to the post of Guozhizhishu Shangshi in Shaanxi Province, and then he was promoted to the post of He Doduo Lian envoy.

古文：三年，郊祀，召为同知太常礼仪院事。帝之亲祀也，至宁宗室，遣阿鲁问曰： 兄拜弟可乎？ 
现代文：三年举行郊祀，召他为同知太常礼仪院事，帝亲自祭祀，至宁宗室，派遣阿鲁问 ：兄祭拜弟可以吗？ 
English: Three years later, a suburb ritual was held, and he was summoned to attend a ceremony at the Imperial Household Agency. The emperor himself performed the ritual, and dispatched Aru to Ning's ancestral home to ask, "Is it okay for an elder brother to sacrifice to a younger brother?"

古文：好文与博士刘闻对曰： 为人后者，为之子也。 
现代文：好文与博士刘闻回答说 ：做人臣的为之子啊！ 
English: Gao Wen and Dr. Liu Wen replied: To be a minister's son!

古文：帝遂拜。
现代文：帝于是拜祭。
English: The emperor then began to worship.

古文：俄除参议中书省事，视事十日，以史故，仍为治书。已而复除陕西行台治书侍御史，时台臣皆缺，好文独署台事。
现代文：此后每当亲自祭祀，一定命好文任礼仪使。四年任江南行台治书侍御史，尚未启程，又改任礼部尚书，参与编写辽、金、宋史，任治书侍御史，仍参与写史的事务。不久又任陕西行台治书侍御史。当时缺少台臣，好文独自代理台事。
English: After that, whenever he personally officiated at a religious service, it was certain that he would be appointed as a ceremonial envoy. He was appointed to the south of the Yangtze River to govern Taiwan for four years, and before he left, he was appointed as a ceremonial secretary, participated in the compilation of the history of Liao, Jin and Song, was appointed as a ceremonial secretary, and still participated in the writing of history. Soon after, he was appointed as a ceremonial secretary to govern Taiwan in Shaanxi. At that time, there was a shortage of Taiwanese ministers, and he acted as the sole representative of Taiwan affairs.

古文：西蜀奉使，以私憾摭拾廉访使曾文博、佥事兀马儿、王武事，文博死，兀马儿诬服，武不屈，以轻侮抵罪。
现代文：西蜀奉使因私恨弹劾廉访使曾文博、佥事兀马儿、王武，文博死了，兀马儿被诬陷伏法，王武不屈，以轻视上级而治罪。
English: West Shuxu Envoy Impeached the Corrupt Envoy Zeng Wenbo for Self-Hatred, Anecdote about Wang Maer and Wang Wu, Wenbo Died, Wang Maer Was Framed for Subversion, Wang Wu Unbowed, Punished for Disrespecting Superiors.

古文：好文曰： 奉使代天子行事，当问民疾苦，黜陟邪正，今行省以下，至于郡县，未闻举劾一人，独风宪之司，无一免者，此岂正大之体乎！ 
现代文：好文说 ：奉使代天子行事，应问民间疾苦，按官吏的功绩差错给以升降，现在行省以下，以至郡县，没听说有一个人受到弹劾，只有御史们没有一个幸免，这难道是正大光明的做法吗？ 
English: A good article said, "When an envoy is sent to act on behalf of the Son of Heaven, he should ask the people about their hardships, and promote and demote officials according to their merits and demerits. Now, below the provincial level, even down to the county level, I have not heard of a single person being impeached, and only the imperial historians have not been spared. Is this a fair and bright approach?

古文：率御史力辨武等之枉，并言奉使不法者十余事。
现代文：于是他率领御史为武等申辩其冤屈。并揭发奉使十余件不法之事。
English: As a result, he led the envoys to defend their grievances, and exposed more than ten illegal acts committed by envoys.

古文：六年，除翰林侍讲学士，兼国子祭酒，又迁改集贤侍讲学士，仍兼祭酒。
现代文：六年任翰林侍讲学士，兼国子祭酒，后又迁改集贤侍讲学士，仍兼祭酒。
English: For six years, he served as the Hanlin Attendant Lecturer, and also served as the Kuniko Sacrificial Wine. Later, he was transferred to serve as the Xian Attendant Lecturer, and still served as the Sacrificial Wine.

古文：好文力辞，上书宰相曰： 三代圣王，莫不以教世子为先务，盖帝王之治本于道，圣贤之道存于经，而传经期于明道，出治在于为学，关系至重，要在得人。自非德堪范模，则不足以辅成德性。
现代文：至正九年，出任参与湖广行省政事，不久又召为太常礼仪院使。命好文以翰林学士兼谕德。好文极力辞谢，上书宰相说 ：三代圣王，莫不以教子作为首要任务，所有帝王治本的方法在于行道，而圣贤之道在于经典之中，传授经典就在于明白其中的道理，国家要出色地治理就在于学习经典，而最重要的是要培养人才，自身在道德方面不是模范的人，就不能辅佐出好的德性。
English: In the ninth year of the Heian period, he was appointed to participate in the provincial government of Hukang, and soon he was called to be an envoy of the Taichang Rite Academy. The mission of the good man was to be a scholar of Hanlin and a preacher of virtue. The good man thanked him very much, and the prime minister said in a letter: Three generations of holy kings should take the godson as the primary task. The method of all emperors is in the road, and the way of saints is in the classics. To teach the classics is to understand the truth. To govern the country excellently is to study the classics. And the most important thing is to

古文：自非学臻阃奥，则不足以启迪聪明。
现代文：自己学习没有完善，就不能启迪教育者的聪明。
English: Without perfecting one's own study, it is impossible to enlighten the wisdom of educators.

古文：宜求道德之鸿儒，仰成国家之盛事。
现代文：应让道德高尚，学识渊博的儒家学者来完成此事。
English: Confucian scholars with high morals and profound knowledge should be allowed to do this.

古文：而好文天资本下，人望素轻，草野之习，而久与性成，章句之学，而浸以事废，骤膺重托，负荷诚难。
现代文：而我天资既低，威望又不高，粗俗成性，因忙于事物，把所学的经典荒废了，若突然让我肩负此重托，实难胜任。
English: But my talent is low, my prestige is not high, I am vulgar, and because I am busy with things, I have wasted the classics I have learned. If I were suddenly to shoulder this heavy responsibility, it would be really difficult to be competent.

古文：必别加选抡，庶几国家有得人之助，而好文免妨贤之讥。 
现代文：望另选高明，可望国家有辅佐人才，而好文也免于妨贤之讥。 
English: It is hoped that the country will have supporting talents, and the good article will be free from the ridicule that hinders the wise.

古文：丞相以其书闻，帝嘉叹之，而不允其辞，好文言： 欲求二帝三王之道，必由于孔氏，其书则《孝经》、《大学》、《论语》、《孟子》、《中庸》。 
现代文：丞相把他的上书呈报皇上，帝更加赞叹，仍不允他辞官。好文说 ：要寻求二帝三王之道德，一定要从学孔孟之书开始，如《孝经》、《大学》、《论语》、《孟子》、《中庸》。 
English: The emperor was even more impressed when the chancellor presented his petition to the emperor, who still did not allow him to resign. The good article said: "To seek the morality of the two emperors and three kings, we must begin by studying the books of Confucius and Mencius, such as "The Book of Filial Piety," "The University," "The Analects," "Mencius" and "The Middle Way."

古文：乃摘其要略，释以经义，又取史传及先儒论说，有关治体而协经旨者，加以所见，仿真德秀《大学衍义》之例，为书十一卷，名曰《端本堂经训要义》，奉表以进，诏付端本堂，令太子习焉。好文又集历代帝王故事，总百有六篇：一曰圣慧，如汉孝昭、后汉明帝幼敏之类；二曰孝友，如舜、文王及唐玄宗友爱之类；三曰恭俭，如汉文帝却千里马、罢露台之类；四曰圣学，如殷宗缉学，及陈、隋诸君不善学之类。
现代文：他摘出其中要点，解释经义，用古代儒家的论说，仿效宋代真德秀的《大学衍义》的例子，作书十一卷，书名叫《端本堂经训要义》，写成奏折，奏与皇上，让太子学习。他又集历代帝王的事迹一百零六篇，分为四类：一曰圣慧，如汉孝昭、后汉明帝自幼聪敏；二曰孝友，如舜、文王及唐玄宗友爱；三曰恭俭，如汉文帝却千里马、罢建露台；四曰圣学，如殷宗好学及陈隋皇帝之不善学。以供太子学习参考。
English: He picked out the important points, explained the meaning of the sutras, used the ancient Confucian theory, and imitated the example of "University Derivation" of Song Dynasty Zhen De Xiu. He wrote eleven volumes, the book is called "The Essentials of Duan Hondo's Sermon," and was written as a recital, played with the emperor, for the prince to learn. He also collected one hundred and six deeds of emperors throughout the ages, divided into four categories: First, wisdom, such as Han Xiao Zhao and post-Han Ming Emperor since childhood; Second, filial friends, such as Yu, King Wen and Tang Xuan Zong friendship; Third

古文：以为太子问安余暇之助。又取古史，自三皇迄金、宋，历代授受，国祚久速，治乱兴废为书，曰《大宝录》。又取前代帝王是非善恶之所当法当戒者为书，名曰《大宝龟鉴》。
现代文：又取自三皇至金宋历代皇朝的更迭。国运的久暂及治乱兴衰辑为一书，名曰《大宝录》。又取前代帝王之是非善恶以及应当效法、应当引以为戒的事，辑为一书，名曰《大宝龟鉴》。
English: It is also taken from the changes of the imperial dynasties from the Third Emperor to the Jin and Song dynasties. The rise and fall of the national movement and the rise and fall of the rule of chaos are compiled into one book, called "Great Treasure Record." Also, the rights and wrongs of the previous emperors, good and evil, as well as things that should be followed and should be cautioned, are compiled into one book, called "Great Treasure Turtle Record."

古文：皆录以进焉。
现代文：将这两部书进呈皇帝。
English: He presented the two books to the emperor.

古文：久之，升翰林学士承旨，阶荣禄大夫。
现代文：过了许久，好文升为翰林学士承旨，进阶荣禄大夫。
English: After a long time, Hao Wen was promoted to Hanlin Scholar, and advanced to the rank of honorary doctor.

古文：十六年，复上书皇太子，其言曰： 臣之所言，即前日所进经典之大意也，殿下宜以所进诸书，参以《贞观政要》、《大学衍义》等篇，果能一一推而行之，则万几之政、太平之治，不难致矣。 
现代文：至正十六年，又上书皇太子说： 臣之所言即前日所进经典大意，殿下宜以所进诸书，参照《贞观政要》、《大学衍义》等篇，果能一一施行，则国家政务不难办好，太平之治不难达到。 
English: In the 16th year of the Taisho era, the crown prince wrote again, saying, "What the minister said is the gist of the classics introduced the day before. Your highness should refer to the books introduced, refer to "Chastity and Politics" and "The Meaning of University," etc. If they can be implemented one by one, it will not be difficult to run the national government affairs well and achieve peace and tranquility.

古文：皇太子深敬礼而嘉纳之。
现代文：皇太子深为敬重他，采纳他的意见。
English: The Crown Prince deeply respects him and accepts his opinion.

古文：后屡引年乞致仕，辞至再三，遂拜光禄大夫、河南行省平章政事，仍以翰林学士承旨一品禄终其身。
现代文：其多次请求告老还乡。皇帝不准，拜光禄大夫、河南行省平章政事，以翰林学士承旨一品俸禄而终其身。
English: He repeatedly requested to return to his hometown as an old man. The emperor did not allow him to do so, so he went to Henan Province to engage in political affairs with the title of Bai Guanglu Doctor, and ended his life with the title of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：后复从京兆萧渼游，其学益宏以肆。
现代文：孛术鲁翀，字子翚，祖籍隆安。金朝泰和年间，改女真族姓氏。
English: She was born in Long'an and changed her family name to Zhen in the Taizhou and Jin Dynasties.

古文：翰林学士承旨姚燧以书抵渼曰： 燧见人多矣，学问文章，无足与子翚比伦者。 于是渼以女妻之。
现代文：翀幼年时，就能勤奋学习，父亲去世后家境渐衰，翀虽无抚恤，但对学习更加努力。后拜萧克翁为师，克翁是宋参政萧燧四代世孙，他的学问和品德受到全州人的尊敬。后来姚燧又与京兆萧斗说： 燧认识的人很多，但论学问、论文章，都不能同子相比。 于是斗把女嫁给翀为妻。
English: When he was a child, he was able to study diligently. After his father's death, his family situation gradually deteriorated. Although he did not have a pension, he worked harder on his studies. Later, he was taught by Bai Xiao Ke Weng, who was the fourth generation of the grandson of Song Sanzheng Xiao Wei. His learning and character were respected by the people of the whole state. Later, Yao Wei and Jing Zhao Xiao Dou said: "I know a lot of people, but I can't compare with my son in terms of learning and writing." So Dou married his daughter to Wei.

古文：大德十一年，用荐者，授襄阳县儒学教谕，升汴梁路儒学正。
现代文：大德十一年受人推荐，授予翀襄阳县儒学教谕，后升为汴梁路儒学正。
English: In the eleventh year of his life, Dade was recommended by someone and awarded the Confucianism Instruction of Xiangyang County, and was later promoted to the head of Confucianism in Qiliang Road.

古文：会修《世皇实录》，燧首以翀荐。至大四年，授翰林国史院编修官。
现代文：适逢修编《世皇实录》，姚燧首先推荐翀，至大四年，翀为翰林国史院编修官。
English: When it was time to edit the "Emperor's Record," Yao Jun first recommended Zou, and by the time he was four years old, Zou was the editor of the Hanlin Academy of National History.

古文：延祐二年，擢河东道廉访司经历，迁陕西行台监察御史，赈济吐蕃，多所建白。
现代文：延二年，提升为河东道廉访司，后又升任为陕西行台监察御史。赈济吐蕃，他提出很多建议。
English: After two years of extension, he was promoted to the Department of Investigation of Corruption in Hebei Province, and later he was promoted to the Inspector General of Shaanxi and Taiwan Affairs. He put forward many suggestions.

古文：五年，拜监察御史。时英皇未出阁，翀言： 宜择正人以辅导。 
现代文：五年任命为监察御史，当时太子英宗尚未去所封之地，翀提出应选择正直的人辅导皇子。
English: Five years later, he was appointed as the inspector of imperial history. At that time, Prince Yeongjong had not yet gone to the place where he was to be enthroned. He suggested that an honest person should be chosen to guide the prince.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：帝称赞并采纳了这个建议。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：寻劾奏中书参议元明善，帝初怒，不纳，明日，乃命改明善他官，而传旨慰谕翀。
现代文：不久翀弹劾中书参议元明善，帝初知此事很是恼怒，不理会，第二天改任元明善为其他官职。并传旨安慰翀。
English: Soon after, the impeachment of the councillor Yuan Mingshan was announced. The emperor was very angry when he first learned of the matter and ignored it. The next day, Yuan Mingshan was reassigned to other official positions. He also sent a message of consolation to the emperor.

古文：巡按辽阳，有旨给以弓矢环刀。后因为定制。
现代文：翀赴辽阳巡视，帝传旨给予弓箭和环刀，以后便形成为制度。
English: He went to Liaoyang for inspection, and the emperor ordered him to give him a bow and arrow and a ring knife, which later became a system.

古文：还往淮东核宪司官声迹，淮东宪臣，惟尚刑，多置狱具，翀曰： 国家所以立风纪，盖将肃清天下，初不尚刑也。 
现代文：他往返淮东查核宪司官的声望和政绩，淮东御史倾向用刑治，设置很多狱具，翀说： 国家立法度和纲纪，目的是清除天下的坏人，而不是一开始就用刑。 
English: He went back and forth to Huadong to investigate the reputation and political achievements of the constitutional officials. Huadong imperial history tended to use punishment and set up a lot of prison equipment. Zou said: national legislation and discipline, the purpose is to remove the bad people in the world, rather than using punishment at the beginning.

古文：取其狱具焚之。
现代文：于是把一些狱具都烧了。
English: So they burned some of the prison equipment.

古文：时有旨凡以吏进者，例降二等，从七品以上不得用。
现代文：当时圣旨规定：凡是依靠官吏推荐的，照例降职二等，从七品以上不能录用。
English: At that time, the imperial edict stipulated that anyone who relied on the recommendation of officials would be demoted to the second grade as usual, and could not be hired beyond the seventh grade.

古文：许之，因著为令。除右司都事。时相铁木迭儿专事刑戮，以复私憾，翀因避去。
现代文：翀说： 科举制未成立，人才多靠官吏推荐，如果一概压制，恐怕不能使天下人都公正地对待，由官吏推荐，应止于五品。 
English: Zou said: The imperial examination system has not been established, and talents mostly rely on the recommendation of officials. If it is suppressed, I am afraid that it will not be possible for the world to treat everyone fairly. The recommendation of officials should be limited to five products.

古文：夫为宰相者，必福德才量四者皆备，乃足当耳。 拜住大悦，以酒觞翀曰： 非公，不闻此言。 
现代文：帝同意了他的意见，并作为法令规定下来。不久，翀被提升为翰林修撰，又改任左司都事。此时拜住为左相，派人劝勉翀说 ：现在法度已定，不同以往，应该早日到职视事。 
English: The emperor agreed with his opinion and stipulated it as a decree. Soon, Yao was promoted to the position of Hanlin Shuxian, and also changed to the position of Zuo Si Duji. At this time, Baizhu, as Zuo, sent a person to persuade Yao, saying, "Now that the law has been decided, unlike in the past, you should come to work as soon as possible.

古文：迎驾至行在所，翀入见，帝赐之坐。升右司员外郎，奉旨预修《大元通制》，书成，翀为之序。
现代文：翀勉强启程。朝廷将国子监转属中书省，由翀兼领。后升为右司员外郎，奉旨预修《大元通制》，翀为该书作序。
English: He reluctantly set off. The imperial court transferred the position of provincial overseer to the Ministry of Education and Culture, which he also headed. Later, he was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the secretary, and he was ordered to revise the "Great Yuan System" in advance. He wrote the preface for the book.

古文：泰定元年，迁国子司业。
现代文：泰定元年，升迁国子监司业。
English: In the first year of the Tai Ding era, he was promoted to the post of provincial son supervisor.

古文：明年，出为河南行省左右司郎中。
现代文：次年，出任河南行省左右司郎中。
English: The following year, he served as the middle-ranking secretary of the Henan Provincial Party Committee.

古文：丞相曰： 吾得贤佐矣。 
现代文：丞相说 ：我得到了很有才能的助手。 
English: The Prime Minister said: "I have gained a very talented aide.

古文：翀曰： 世祖立国，成宪具在，慎守足矣。
现代文：翀说： 世祖建国，旧的法律都存在，谨慎守着就行了。
English: Zou said, "Since the founding of the country, the old laws still exist. All you have to do is follow them carefully."

古文：及文宗亲祀天地、社稷、宗庙，翀为礼仪使，详记行礼节文于笏，遇至尊不敢直书，必识以两圈，帝偶取笏视，曰： 此为皇帝字乎？ 因大笑，以笏还翀。
现代文：就像行舟，不是一个人的能力能运行的。 三年提升燕南河北道廉访使，以后又纂修《太常集礼》，书编成后还未来得及献上，帝又下诏使翀兼经筵官。文宗空着大位来等待明宗，翀说： 大兄远在北方，皇位不能久空，应摄位等候明宗到来。 
English: Just like sailing a boat, it is not a single person's ability that can operate it. Three years later, the Yangnan-Hebei Province Independent Envoy was promoted, and after that, the "Taihang Collection" was compiled and revised. After the book was compiled, there was still time to present it, and the emperor also issued an edict to the eunuch and eunuch. Wenzong came to wait for Mingzong with a vacant throne, and the eunuch said: Big brother is far away in the north, the throne cannot be empty for a long time, we should wait for the arrival of Mingzong.

古文：竣事，上《天历大庆诗》三章，帝命藏之奎章阁。
现代文：文宗听取了他的意见。文宗亲自祭祀天地、社稷、宗庙，以翀为礼仪使。
English: Wenzong listened to his opinion. Wenzong himself sacrificed heaven and earth, shrines and temples, and used the yakitori as a ceremonial weapon.

古文：擢陕西汉中道廉访使。会立太禧院，除佥太禧宗禋院，兼祗承神御殿事，诏遣使趣之还。
现代文：后选翀为陕西汉中道廉访使，正逢上立太禧院，任佥太禧宗院，兼祗承神御殿事，诏书派使促子回。
English: Later, he was chosen to be the unofficial envoy of the Han Dynasty in Shaanxi Province. He was appointed to the Imperial Household Agency, the Imperial Family Agency, and the Imperial Household Agency, and he was sent back to China.

古文：迎驾至龙虎台，帝问： 子翚来何缓？ 
现代文：当大臣在龙虎台迎驾时，帝问： 子为什么来得这样慢？ 
English: When the minister arrived at Longhu Square, the emperor asked, "Why is the child so slow in coming?"

古文：太禧院使阿荣对曰： 翀体丰肥，不任乘马，从水道来，是以缓耳。 
现代文：太禧院使阿荣说 ：翀身体太胖，只能乘船来，因此慢了。 帝曾问： 鲁子饮食怎样？ 
English: Taishiin asked A Rong to say, "Your body is too fat, you can only come by boat, so you are late." Emperor Zeng asked, "How is Lu Zi's diet?"

古文：又问： 谈论如何？ 
现代文： 谈论怎样？ 
English: How to talk about it?

古文：曰： 翀所谈，义理之言也。 
现代文：回答说 ：饮食与大家一样。  翀所谈的都是义理方面的。 
English: He replied, "My diet is the same as everyone else's, and all I talk about is the doctrine.

古文：从幸上都，尝奉敕撰碑文，称旨，帝曰： 候朕还大都，当还汝润笔赀也。 
现代文：他跟随帝至上都，奉帝命撰写碑文，帝说： 等我回大都后，还给你润笔费吧。 
English: He followed the emperor to the capital, and wrote the inscription according to the emperor's order. The emperor said: When I return to the capital, I will give you back the money for the inscription.

古文：旧制，弟子员初入学，以羊贽，所贰之品与羊等。
现代文：后升迁为集贤学士兼国子祭酒。学生都为翀能到来暗自高兴。按旧制弟子初入学须送两种物品和羊，作为见面礼。
English: Afterward, he was promoted to Jixian Baccalaureate and Guo Zi Festival Wine. The students were all secretly happy that he could come. According to the old system, two kinds of goods and a sheep must be sent to the disciple for the first time, as a welcome gift.

古文：翀曰： 与其餍口腹，孰若为吾党燥湿寒暑之虞乎！ 
现代文：翀说 ：与其饱足口腹，不如为我们朋辈有防燥湿寒暑的安身之处。 
English: Zou said: "Instead of filling our stomachs, it would be better for our peers to have a place to stay that is protected from the heat and humidity.

古文：命撙集之，得钱二万缗有奇，作屋四区，以居学者。诸生积分，有六年未及释褐者，翀至，皆使就试而官之。
现代文：集钱二万多缗，造屋四区，使学生有了住处。学生中有积分六年而未毕业的，翀让这些学生经过考试都做了官。
English: They raised more than 20,000 baht and built houses in four districts, so that the students had a place to live. If there are students who have earned points for six years but have not graduated, let these students become officials after passing the exam.

古文：帝师至京师，有旨朝臣一品以下，皆乘白马郊迎。大臣俯伏进觞，帝师不为动，惟翀举觞立进曰： 帝师，释迦之徒，天下僧人师也。
现代文：帝师到京师，帝有旨规定一品以下的朝臣，都乘白马在郊外迎接，大臣们都弯腰低头敬酒，帝师未被感动，只有翀举起酒杯站着说： 帝师是释迦的徒弟，是天下僧人的老师啊。
English: When the emperor arrived in Beijing, the emperor had decreed that all courtiers below the rank of vassal were to be greeted on a white horse in the suburbs. The ministers all bowed their heads and made a toast. The emperor was not moved, and only Zou stood up with a glass of wine and said, "The emperor is the disciple of Buddha and the teacher of all the monks in the world."

古文：余，孔子之徒，天下儒人师也。
现代文：我是孔子的徒弟，是天下儒人的老师啊。
English: I am a disciple of Confucius, a teacher of Confucians around the world.

古文：请各不为礼。 
现代文：请大家都不必行礼。 
English: Everyone, please do not have to bow.

古文：帝师笑而起，举觞卒饮，众为之栗然。
现代文：帝师笑着站起来，举起酒杯一饮而尽。大家都为此而震惊。
English: With a smile, Teishi stood up, raised his glass and drank it all. Everyone was shocked.

古文：文宗崩，皇太后听政，命别不花、塔失海牙、阿儿思兰、马祖常、史显夫及翀六人，商论国政。
现代文：文宗驾崩，皇太后听政，命别不花、塔失海牙、阿儿思兰、马祖常、史显夫及翀六人商议国事。
English: After the death of Emperor Wenzong, the empress dowager listened to the government, did not take orders, and lost The Hague, Arslan, Mazu Chang, Shi Xianfu, and thirty-six people to discuss state affairs.

古文：翀以大位不可久虚，请嗣君即位，早正宸极，以幸天下。
现代文：翀以大位不可久空，请嗣即位。
English: Since the throne cannot be vacant for long, I ask you to succeed to the throne.

古文：帝既即位，大臣以为赦不可频行，翀曰： 今上以圣子神孙，入继大统，当新天下耳目。
现代文：帝即位后大臣们都认为大赦不能频繁，翀说： 现在皇上是以圣子神孙继承大事，应使天下耳目为之一新。
English: After the enthronement of the emperor, the ministers all believed that the amnesty should not be frequent. Zou said: Now that the emperor is the heir to the great things with the holy son and grandson, it is necessary to make the eyes and ears of the world one.

古文：明年，召为翰林侍讲学士，以疾辞，不上。
现代文：现在不赦，对新君怎么能消除怨气哟？ 皇太后认为翀的话有道理，就决定了。翀被升为礼部尚书，进阶中宪大夫。
English: Now I don't forgive, how can I get rid of my grudge against the new prince? The empress dowager thought his words were reasonable, so she made the decision. He was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and advanced to the position of Middle Doctor of the Constitution.

古文：至元四年卒，年六十。
现代文：元统二年任江浙行省参知政事。至元四年卒，享年六十。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed to the post of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Councillor. He graduated in the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty and died at the age of sixty.

古文：赠通奉大夫、陕西行省参知政事、护军，追封南阳郡公，谥文靖。
现代文：赠通奉大夫、陕西行省参知政事、护军，追封南阳郡公，谥号文靖。
English: He was bestowed with the titles of minister of medicine, political advisor to the governor of Shaanxi Province, and military escort. He was also awarded the title of governor of Nanyang County, and his posthumous name was Wenjing.

古文：其为学一本于性命道德，而记问宏博，异言僻语，无不淹贯。
现代文：翀做学问本源于性命道德之说，记问宏博，对于异言僻语没有不贯通的。
English: The basis of learning is derived from the saying of life and morality, the memory is broad, and there is no impenetrability for foreign languages.

古文：文章简奥典雅，深合古法。
现代文：文章简奥典雅，深合古法。
English: The article is simple, profound and elegant, and is in line with the ancient law.

古文：姚燧以文章负大名，一见其文，深叹异之，力荐于朝，授翰林国史院编修官。
现代文：天下学者都视为表率，认为在许衡之后能用师道自任的人，只有耶律有尚和孛术鲁翀二人。著有文集六十卷。李泂字溉之，滕州人。天资聪敏，记忆力强，文辞老练。深为姚燧赏识，极力向朝廷推荐，因而授翰林国史院编修官。
English: Scholars all over the world regard him as a role model, and believe that after Xu Heng, the only two people who can use the teacher's way to be self-appointed are Yerut Shang and Zou Shu Lu Yao. He has authored sixty volumes of anthologies. Li Xing Zirui Zhi, a native of Tengzhou. He is gifted, intelligent, has a strong memory, and has a sophisticated vocabulary. He is deeply appreciated by Yao Yao, and strongly recommends him to the imperial court, thus awarding Han Lin the editor of the National Academy of History.

古文：未几，以亲老，就养江南。
现代文：不久因双亲年迈，回江南奉养。
English: Soon, due to the old age of his parents, he returned to the south of the Yangtze River to take care of them.

古文：久之，辟中书掾，非其志也。及考除集贤院都事，转太常博士。
现代文：以后征召为中书掾，经考核授集贤院都事，迁职太常博士。
English: Later, he was recruited as a middle school teacher, and after examination, he was awarded the Shixian Academy, and was promoted to the position of a regular doctor.

古文：拜住为丞相，闻泂名，擢监修国史长史，历秘书监著作郎、太常礼仪院经历。
现代文：拜住任丞相提拔为监修国史长史、秘书监著作郎、太常礼仪院经历。
English: He was promoted to superintendent of national history, secretary superintendent, and master of ceremonies at the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：泂既为帝所知遇，乃著书曰《辅治篇》以进，文宗嘉纳之。
现代文：泰定初授翰林待制，困亲丧未完葬辞而归。天历初再召为待制，这时文宗正开设奎章阁，李泂多次进见，越级升为翰林直学士，特授奎章阁承制学士。著《辅治篇》进献，文宗称好并采纳其中建议。
English: At the beginning of the lunar calendar, he was summoned again to attend the funeral. At that time, Wenzong was opening the Kuizhang Pavilion. Li Qian repeatedly visited the pavilion and was promoted to the direct bachelor of the Hanlin Pavilion. He was specially awarded the bachelor of the Kuizhang Pavilion. Wenzong was commended for the presentation of the "Supplementary Chapter" and adopted the suggestions therein.

古文：朝廷有大议，必使与焉。
现代文：朝廷有大议一定要他参与。
English: The imperial court had a strong opinion that he must participate.

古文：会诏修《经世大典》，泂方卧疾，即强起，曰： 此大制作也，吾其可以不预！ 
现代文：适逢诏修《经世大典》，竳因病卧床，便立即强起，说： 这是重要著作，我怎么可以不参与？ 
English: When it was time for the imperial edict to revise the Classic of Confucianism, Zou, who was bedridden due to illness, immediately stood up and said, "This is an important work, how can I not participate?

古文：力疾同修。书成，既进奏，旋谒告以归。复除翰林直学士，遣使召之，竟以疾不能起。
现代文：书编修后，立即进奏，不久告假而归。后来再授翰林直学士，并遣使召见，竟因病不能起床。
English: After completing the book editing, he immediately went to play, and soon returned from leave. Later, he was awarded the Hanlin Zhi Bao, and was sent to see him, but he could not get up due to illness.

古文：泂骨骼清峻，神情开朗，秀眉疏髯，目莹如电，颜面如冰玉，而唇如渥丹然，峨冠褒衣，望之者疑为神仙中人也。
现代文：李泂容貌英俊，神情开朗，秀眉疏髯，目光炯炯，颜面如玉，唇如朱丹，戴着高帽子，穿着大衣服，看见他就会疑为神仙。
English: Li Yao is handsome, cheerful, with a sparse brow and narrow eyes, his face is like a bead, his lips are like jade, he wears a tall hat and big clothes. If you saw him, you would suspect him to be a god.

古文：其为文章，奋笔挥洒，迅飞疾动，汩汩滔滔，思态叠出，纵横奇变，若纷错而有条理，意之所至，臻极神妙。泂每以李太白自似，当世亦以是许之。
现代文：他写文章时，奋笔疾书，思如泉涌，滔滔不绝，纵横奇变，纷繁而有条理，意之所至，臻极神妙。常以李太白自拟，当时的人也这样称赞他。
English: When he was writing articles, he was writing furiously, thinking like a torrent, talking endlessly, changing vertically and horizontally, multitudinous and organized, and his meaning was sublime. He often imitated Li Taibai, and people at the time also praised him in this way.

古文：尝游匡庐、王屋、少室诸山，留连久乃去，人莫测其意也。
现代文：曾游匡庐、王屋、少室各山，留连长久才离开，人们推测不出他这样做的意思是什么。
English: He had traveled to the mountains of Guanzhong, Wangya and Shoshu, and stayed there for a long time before leaving. People could not guess what he meant by doing so.

古文：侨居济南，有湖山花竹之胜，作亭曰天心水面，文宗尝敕虞集制文以记之。
现代文：侨居济南，该地有湖、山、花、竹，环境幽美，他修了个亭子题为 天心水面 ，文宗曾敕令虞集为此作记。
English: The expatriate lived in Jinan, which has a lake, mountains, flowers, and bamboo, and a beautiful environment. He built a pavilion entitled Tenshin Waterfront, which was recorded by Wenzong Zengyu Lingyu Ji.

古文：泂尤善书，自篆、隶、草、真皆精诣，为世所珍爱。
现代文：竳尤其工于书法，篆、隶、草都很有造诣，为世上人们珍爱。
English: Dragonflies are especially adept at calligraphy, and dragonflies, lilies and grasses are all very accomplished and are treasured by people around the world.

古文：卒年五十九。
现代文：终年五十九岁。
English: He was fifty-nine years old.

古文：有文集四十卷。
现代文：有文集四十卷。
English: Forty volumes of the anthology have been handed down to posterity.

古文：丁内外艰，服除，调功德使司照磨。
现代文：苏天爵，字伯修，真定人。参加国子学生公试，名列第一，从此换了布衣，穿上官服，授从仕郎、大都路蓟州判官之职。
English: Su Tianjie, also known as Bo Xiu, was a real person. He took part in the national student public examination and ranked first. From then on, he changed his clothes, put on an official uniform, and was awarded the position of a waiter and a magistrate of Dadu Road, Zhangzhou.

古文：泰定元年，改翰林国史院典籍官，升应奉翰林文字。
现代文：泰定元年改任翰林国史院典籍官，升应奉翰林文字。
English: In the first year of the Tai Ding era, he was appointed as the classics and bibliography officer of the Hanlin National Academy of History, and was promoted to be a scholar of Hanlin characters.

古文：至顺元年，预修《武宗实录》。二年，升修撰，擢江南行台监察御史。
现代文：至顺元年参预修纂《武宗实录》，二年升修撰，又升为江南行台监察御史。
English: In the first year of Shun, he participated in the preliminary revision and compilation of the "Wu Zong Record," and in the second year, he was promoted to the revision and compilation, and he was promoted to the inspector of the history of the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：明年，虑囚于湖北。
现代文：第二年天爵到湖北审录犯人的罪状，不避瘴毒，巡视各地。
English: The following year, Tianjue went to Hubei to investigate the crimes of the prisoners. He did not shy away from poisoning and inspected various regions.

古文：湖北地僻远，民獠所杂居，天爵冒瘴毒，遍历其地。
现代文：有囚犯说自己是冤案，天爵说： 监察官员一年来两次，为何不申诉？ 
English: A prisoner said that he was a victim of injustice. Tian Jue said: The inspector comes twice a year, why not appeal?

古文：囚有言冤状者，天爵曰： 宪司岁两至，不言何也？ 
现代文：囚犯说 ：以前来录罪状的只是应付一下，现在御史来了怕受刑，所以不得不说了。 
English: The prisoner said: "In the past, those who came to record the charges only had to cope with them, but now that you are here, you are afraid of being punished, so you have to talk about it.

古文：入为监察御史，道改奎章阁授经郎。
现代文：天爵每遇事一定要细心推究，即使是盛夏，也要挑灯夜读，以便审判定案，毫无倦意。
English: Tian Jie must carefully investigate every situation. Even in the height of summer, he must light a lamp and read at night, so that the court can make a final decision without getting tired.

古文：元统元年，复拜监察御史，在官四阅月，章疏凡四十五上，自人君至于朝廷政令、稽古礼文、闾阎幽隐，其关乎大体、系乎得失者，知无不言。
现代文：凡查清因冤案入狱的，全都释放。入朝廷任监察御史，后又改任奎章阁授经郎。元统元年再任监察御史，任职四个月写奏章四十五篇，从朝廷政令，到考古礼文等有关国家大事，他都是知无不言。
English: He entered the Imperial Court as the Supervisor of History, and later he was appointed as the Keizhangge's scribe. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was reappointed as the Supervisor of History, and during his four months in office, he wrote forty-five pieces of music. He knew everything about national events, from imperial decrees to archaeological texts.

古文：所劾者五人，所荐举者百有九人。
现代文：其间他弹劾了五人，推荐了一百零九人。
English: During that time, he impeached five people and recommended 109 others.

古文：明年，预修《文宗实录》，迁翰林待制，寻除中书右司都事，兼经筵参赞官。
现代文：第二年参与编修《文宗实录》，并升迁为翰林待制，不久又任中书右司都事兼经筵参赞官。
English: In the second year, he participated in the compilation of the "Wenzong Record," and was promoted to the position of Hanlin standby system. Soon, he was appointed as the secretary of the Central Government of the People's Republic of China and the adviser of the Central Government of China.

古文：后至元二年，由刑部郎中改御史台都事。
现代文：后至元二年由刑部郎改任御史台都事。
English: Later, in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred from Gyoburo to the position of Goshidai tsuji.

古文：三年，迁礼部侍郎。
现代文：三年升迁为礼部侍郎。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to Reibu-sajiro.

古文：五年，出为淮东道肃政廉访使，宪纲大振，一道肃然。
现代文：五年任淮东道肃政廉访使，此时大小官员都很奋发，全道更加佩服他。
English: During his five-year tenure as a visiting envoy of the Huaihai Host Government, officials of all ranks worked very hard, and the whole country admired him even more.

古文：入为枢密院判官。
现代文：后又任命为枢密院判官。
English: He was later appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：明年，改吏部尚书，拜陕西行台治书侍御史，复为吏部尚书，升参议中书省事。
现代文：第二年改任吏部尚书、陕西行台治书侍御史。再任吏部尚书，升迁为参议中书省事。
English: In the following year, he was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and served as the governor of Shaanxi Province. He was reappointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and was promoted to be a member of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：是时，朝廷更立宰相，庶务多所弛张，而天子图治之意甚切，天爵知无不言，言无顾忌，夙夜谋画，须发尽白。
现代文：这时朝廷更换宰相，很多事务都松弛荒疏，而皇上振兴图治之心切，天爵知无不言，无所顾忌，对朝廷事务日夜操劳策划，以致白了须发。
English: At this time, the imperial court changed the prime minister, many affairs were slack and desolate, and the emperor was anxious to revitalize and govern. The emperor knew everything, had no scruples, and worked day and night to plan the affairs of the imperial court, so that it was time to go.

古文：至正二年，拜湖广行省参知政事，迁陕西行台侍御史。
现代文：至正二年任湖广参知政事，后升迁为陕西行台侍御史。
English: He served as the governor of Guangxi for two years, and was later promoted to the position of the governor of Shaanxi and Taiwan.

古文：四年，召为集贤侍讲学士，兼国子祭酒。
现代文：四年召回朝廷任集贤侍讲学士，兼国子祭酒。
English: Four years later, he was recalled to the Imperial Court to serve as a lecturer and deliver a lecture on "Kokushi Matsuri Sake."

古文：天爵自以起自诸生，进为师长，端己悉心，以范学者。
现代文：他从学生成为师长，更以身作则，尽心讲学，做学生的楷模。
English: He went from being a student to a teacher, and even more, he led by example, devoted himself to teaching, and was a role model for his students.

古文：明年，出为山东道肃政廉访使，寻召还集贤，充京畿奉使宣抚。
现代文：第二年出任山东道肃政廉访使，不久充任京畿奉使宣抚，了解民间疾苦，查访贪官污吏。
English: In the second year, he served as a visiting envoy to Shandong Province to investigate political corruption, and soon he was appointed as the envoy to Gyeonggi Province to understand the hardships of the people and visit corrupt officials.

古文：究民所疾苦，察吏之奸贪，其兴除者七百八十有三事，其纠劾者九百四十有九人，都人有包、韩之誉，然以忤时相意，竟坐不称职罢归。
现代文：由他兴办和废除的有七百八十三件事，被追究弹劾的有九百四十九人，在京都人中享有与包拯、韩琦同等的声誉，但由于他的行动得罪了很多人，竟以不称职之罪被免职回家。
English: There were 783 cases initiated and abolished by him, and 949 people were investigated for impeachment. He enjoyed the same reputation as Bao Zheng and Han Zheng among the people of Kyoto, but because his actions offended many people, he was removed from office and sent home for incompetence.

古文：七年，天子察其诬，乃复起为湖北道宣慰使、浙东道廉访使，俱未行。拜江浙行省参知政事。
现代文：七年后天子发现天爵是因诬告获罪，再次启用他，并被任命为湖北道宣慰使、浙江道廉访使，但俱未到任，后又官拜江浙行省参知政事。
English: Seven years later, Tian Zi found out that Tian Jie was convicted of false accusation, and reinstated him. He was appointed as a consolation envoy of Hubei Province and a visiting envoy of Zhejiang Province. However, he did not arrive at the post, and later he was appointed as the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province.

古文：十二年，妖寇自淮右蔓延及江东，诏仍江浙行省参知政事，总兵于饶、信，所克复者，一路六县。
现代文：九年召任大都路总管，不久再任两浙都转运使，他整治得法，八十万锭课钞如期收齐了。十二年帝诏命他为江浙行省参知政事，带兵平定了饶、信一带地方。
English: In the ninth year, he was appointed as the general manager of the metropolitan road, and soon after that, he was appointed as the transfer envoy of the two Zhejiang provinces. He was able to rectify the law, and the 800,000 baht banknotes were collected as scheduled. In the twelfth year, the emperor ordered him to be the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, and he led the troops to pacify the Rao and Xin regions.

古文：其方略之密，节制之严，虽老帅宿将不能过之。
现代文：他计划严密，纪律严明，即使老帅、宿将也不比他高明。
English: He is a meticulous planner and a strict disciplinarian. Even the old coach and the captain are not better than him.

古文：然以忧深病积，遂卒于军中。年五十九。
现代文：由于劳累过度，积劳成疾，逝于军旅中，年仅五十九岁。
English: As a result of overwork, accumulated work became a disease, he died in the army, only fifty-nine years old.

古文：天爵为学，博而知要，长于纪载，尝著《国朝名臣事略》十五卷、《文类》七十卷。
现代文：天爵治学既渊博而又所重，擅长记载，曾著《国朝名臣事略》十五卷，《文类》七十卷，他写文章擅长叙事，平易温厚，自成一家。
English: Tian Jie Zhi's learning is both profound and important, and he is good at recording. He has written 15 volumes of "Outline of the History of the State and the Court" and 70 volumes of "Classes of Literature." He is good at writing narratives, easy-going and warm-hearted, and has become a family of his own.

古文：其他所著文，有《松厅章疏》五卷、《春风亭笔记》二卷；《辽金纪年》、《黄河原委》，未及脱稿云。
现代文：有诗稿七卷，文稿三十卷。其他作品有《松厅章疏》五卷，《春风亭笔记》二卷。其《辽金纪年》及《黄河原委》惜未完稿。
English: There are seven volumes of poems and 30 volumes of manuscripts. Other works include five volumes of "Song of the Pine Hall" and two volumes of "Notes of the Spring Pavilion." His "Year of the Liao Jin Dynasty" and "Yellow River Original Committee" are unfinished.

