古文：二十有六年春，王二月辛卯，卫甯喜弑其君剽。
现代文：二十六年春季，周历二月辛卯日，卫国的甯喜杀掉了自己国家的君主。
English: In the spring of the twenty-sixth year, on the second day of the second month of the lunar calendar, He Xi, the defender of the country, killed the monarch of his country.

古文：卫孙林父入于戚以叛。
现代文：卫国的孙林父逃进戚地，并拥兵叛乱。
English: Sun Lin's father, who was defending the country, fled to a relative's land and supported the soldiers' rebellion.

古文：甲午，卫侯衎复归于卫。
现代文：甲午日，卫献公重新回到卫国。
English: On the afternoon of the second day, Wei Xiangong returned to the defense of the country.

古文：夏，晋侯使荀吴来聘。
现代文：夏季，晋侯派遣荀吴来鲁国聘问。
English: In the summer, the prince of Jin dispatched Zou Wu to Lu to ask questions.

古文：公会晋人、郑良霄、宋人、曹人于澶渊。
现代文：襄公与晋国人、郑国良霄、宋国人、曹国人在澶渊会面。
English: Prince Xiang met with the people of Jin, Zheng, Liangxiao, Song, and Cao in Yuyuan.

古文：秋，宋公杀其世子痤。
现代文：秋季，宋公杀掉了他的太子痤。
English: In the autumn, Song Gong killed his son Zhou.

古文：晋人执卫甯喜。
现代文：晋国人抓住了卫国的甯喜。
English: The people of Jin captured the imperial cormorant.

古文：八月壬午，许男甯卒于楚。
现代文：八月壬午日，许国国君在楚国去世。
English: On the afternoon of August, Xu Guo Guojun passed away in Chu.

古文：冬，楚子、蔡侯、陈侯伐郑。
现代文：冬季，楚子、蔡侯、陈侯出兵攻打郑国。
English: In winter, Chu Tzu, Cai Hou and Chen Hou sent troops to attack Zheng Guo.

古文：葬许灵公。
现代文：安葬许灵公。
English: The funeral of Xu Linggong is over.

古文：二十六年春，秦伯之弟鍼如晋修成，叔向命召行人子员。
现代文：二十六年春季，秦景公的弟弟鍼去到晋国重温盟约，叔向命令召唤行人子员。
English: In the spring of the twenty-sixth year, Qin Jinggong's younger brother Acupuncture went to Jin to review the covenant, and his uncle summoned the pedestrian to the order.

古文：行人子朱曰： 朱也当御。 
现代文：行人子朱说： 朱是值班的。 
English: Zhu, a pedestrian, said: "Zhu is on duty.

古文：三云，叔向不应。
现代文：说了三次，叔向不答理。
English: After saying this three times, the uncle did not reply.

古文：子朱怒曰： 班爵同，何以黜朱于朝？ 
现代文：子朱生气，说： 职位级别相同，为什么在朝廷上不用朱？ 
English: Zi Zhu became angry and said, "The position level is the same, why not use Zhu in the imperial court?"

古文：抚剑从之。
现代文：拿着剑跟上去。
English: Take your sword and follow me.

古文：叔向曰： 秦、晋不和久矣！
现代文：叔向说： 秦国和晋国不和睦已经很久了。
English: Uncle Xiang said: Qin and Jin have been at odds for a long time.

古文：今日之事，幸而集，晋国赖之。
现代文：今天的事情，幸而成功，晋国依靠着它。
English: Today's event, fortunately, was a success, and Jin is counting on it.

古文：不集，三军暴骨。
现代文：不成功，就要打仗。
English: If that doesn't work, we go to war.

古文：子员道二国之言无私，子常易之。
现代文：子员沟通两国的话没有私心，您却常常违背原意。
English: It is selfless for students to communicate between the two countries, but you often go against the original intention.

古文：奸以事君者，吾所能御也。 
现代文：用邪恶来事奉国君的人，我是能够抵抗的。 
English: I can resist a man who uses treachery to serve his sovereign.

古文：拂衣从之。人救之。
现代文：提起衣服跟上去，被别人止住了。
English: He picked up his clothes and followed them, but was stopped by others.

古文：平公曰： 晋其庶乎！
现代文：晋平公说： 晋国差不多要大治了吧！
English: Jinping Gong said, "Jin Province is almost on the verge of a major revolution!

古文：吾臣之所争者大。 
现代文：我的臣下所争执的是大问题。 
English: What my lieutenants are arguing about is a matter of state.

古文：师旷曰： 公室惧卑，臣不心竞而力争，不务德而争善，私欲已侈，能无卑乎？ 
现代文：师旷说： 公室的地位怕要下降。臣下不在心里竞争而用力量来争夺，不致力于德行而争执是非，个人的欲望太大，公室的地位能不下降吗？ 
English: Shigeaki said: The status of the office is in danger of declining. Subordinates do not compete in their hearts but use their strength to compete, do not devote themselves to virtue but argue about right and wrong, personal desires are too great, can the status of the office not decline?

古文：卫献公使子鲜为复，辞。
现代文：卫献公派子鲜为自己谋求再登君位，子鲜辞谢。
English: Wei Xianguo sent Zixian to seek re-ascension to the throne for himself, and Zixian thanked him.

古文：敬姒强命之。对曰： 君无信，臣惧不免。 
现代文：他们的母亲敬姒一定要子鲜去，子鲜回答说： 国君没有信用，下臣害怕不能免于祸难。 
English: Their mother, Jingyao, insisted that Zixiang go. Zixiang replied, "The sovereign has no trust, and the vassal is afraid of being exposed to disaster."

古文：敬姒曰： 虽然，以吾故也。 
现代文：敬姒说： 尽管这样，为了我的缘故，你还是去干吧！ 
English: Jingyao said: In spite of this, for my sake, you should still do it!

古文：许诺。
现代文：子鲜答应了。
English: Han Yu Qui agreed.

古文：初，献公使与甯喜言，甯喜曰： 必子鲜在，不然必败。 
现代文：当初，献公派人和宁喜谈这件事，宁喜说： 一定要子鲜在场。不这样，事情必然失败。 
English: At first, the officials sent someone to talk to Ning Xi about the matter. Ning Xi said, "Zixiang must be present. Otherwise, the matter will inevitably fail."

古文：故公使子鲜。
现代文：所以献公派遣，子鲜。
English: That's why it's important to send children to school.

古文：子鲜不获命于敬姒，以公命与甯喜言曰： 苟反，政由甯氏，祭则寡人。 
现代文：子鲜没有得到敬姒的指示，就把献公的命令告诉宁氏，说： 如果回国，政权由宁氏主持，祭祀则由我主持。 
English: Zixian did not receive any instructions from Jingyao, so he told Ning the order of the offering, saying, "If you return to China, Ning will preside over the government, and I will preside over the sacrificial rites."

古文：甯喜告蘧伯玉，伯玉曰： 瑗不得闻君之出，敢闻其入？ 
现代文：宁喜告诉蘧伯玉。蘧伯玉说： 瑷没有能听到国君的出走，岂敢听到他的进入？ 
English: Ning Xi told Zou Bo-yu. Zou Bo-yu said: "You have not been able to hear the sovereign's departure, how dare you hear his entry?

古文：遂行，从近关出。
现代文：于是蘧伯玉就起程，从近处的城门出走。
English: So he left the country through the nearest border crossing.

古文：告右宰穀，右宰穀曰： 不可。
现代文：宁喜告诉右宰穀。右宰穀说： 不行。
English: Ning Xi told Ujaegoku. Ujaegoku said, "No.

古文：获罪于两君，天下谁畜之？ 
现代文：得罪了两个国君，天下谁能收容你？ 
English: If you offend two sovereigns, who in the world can accommodate you?

古文：悼子曰： 吾受命于先人，不可以贰。 
现代文：宁喜说： 我在先人那里接受了命令，不能三心二意。 
English: Ning Xi said: I have received orders from my predecessors, and I cannot be half-hearted.

古文：穀曰： 我请使焉而观之。 
现代文：右宰穀说： 我请求出使去观望一下。 
English: Uzaikoku said, "I request an envoy to come and take a look."

古文：遂见公于夷仪。
现代文：于是就在夷仪进见献公。
English: As a result, he presented himself to the emperor.

古文：反曰： 君淹恤在外十二年矣，而无忧色，亦无宽言，犹夫人也。
现代文：回来，说： 国君逗留在外已十二年了，却没有忧愁的样子，也没有宽容的话，还是那样一个人。
English: He came back and said, "Kokunin has been away for twelve years, but he has not shown any signs of sadness, nor has he spoken any words of tolerance. He is still the same person.

古文：若不已，死无日矣。 悼子曰： 子鲜在。 
现代文：如果不停止原复君计划，我们离死就没有几天了。 宁喜说： 有子鲜在那里。 
English: If we don't stop the original plan to restore the emperor, we won't have more than a few days left before we die. Ning Xi said, "There's a newborn there."

古文：右宰穀曰： 子鲜在，何益？
现代文：右宰穀说： 子鲜在那里，有什么用处？
English: Uzaikoku said, "What's the use of going to a place where there are children?"

古文：多而能亡，于我何为？ 
现代文：至多不过他自己逃亡，又能为我们做些什么呢？ 
English: The best he can do is escape, but what can he do for us?

古文：悼子曰： 虽然，弗可以已。 
现代文：宁喜说： 尽管这样，不能停止了。
English: Ning Xi said: Despite this, we can't stop.

古文：孙文子在戚，孙嘉聘于齐，孙襄居守。
现代文：孙文子在戚地，孙嘉去齐国聘问，孙襄留守在都城家里。
English: Sun Wenzi was at his relatives' place, Sun Jia went to Qi Province to ask questions, and Sun Xiang stayed at home in the capital.

古文：二月庚寅，甯喜、右宰穀伐孙氏，不克。
现代文：二月初六日，宁喜、右宰穀进攻孙氏，没有取胜。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, Ningxi and Uzaigul attacked the Sun clan, but did not win.

古文：伯国伤。
现代文：孙襄受伤。
English: Sun Xiang was injured.

古文：甯子出舍于郊。
现代文：宁喜退出城住在郊外。
English: Ning Xi quit the city to live in the suburbs.

古文：伯国死，孙氏夜哭。
现代文：孙襄死了，孙家的人在夜里号哭。
English: Sun Xiang died, the people of the Sun family cried in the night.

古文：国人召甯子，甯子复攻孙氏，克之。
现代文：城里的人们召唤宁喜，宁喜再次攻打孙氏，攻克了。
English: The people in the city summoned Ning Xi, and Ning Xi once again attacked and defeated Sun.

古文：辛卯，杀子叔及大子角。
现代文：初七日，杀死了卫侯剽和太子角。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he killed Wei Houyao and Taizi Cape.

古文：书曰： 甯喜弑其君剽。 言罪之在甯氏也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说： 宁喜弑其君剽 ，这是说罪过在宁氏。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that: Ning Xiqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqianqian.

古文：孙林父以戚如晋。
现代文：孙林父以戚邑去投靠晋国。
English: Sun Lin's father went to Jin Province to seek refuge with relatives.

古文：书曰： 入于戚以叛。 罪孙氏也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 入于戚以叛 ，这是归罪于孙氏。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that he betrayed his relatives, which was attributed to the Sun clan.

古文：臣之禄，君实有之。
现代文：臣下的俸禄，实在是为国君所有的。
English: The salary of a vassal is really all that the sovereign has.

古文：义则进，否则奉身而退，专禄以周旋，戮也。
现代文：合于道义就往前进，不合于道义就保全身子引退。把俸禄作为私有，并以此和人打交道，应该受到诛戮。
English: It is moral to advance, but it is immoral to retire. If you treat your salary as your private property and use it to deal with others, you should be punished.

古文：甲午，卫侯入。书曰： 复归。 国纳之也。
现代文：初十日，卫献公进入都城，《春秋》记载说 复归 ，这表示本国人让他回来。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wei Xianguo entered the capital city. "Spring and Autumn" recorded that he returned, which meant that the local people let him return.

古文：大夫逆于竟者，执其手而与之言。道逆者，自车揖之。逆于门者，颔之而已。
现代文：大夫在国境上迎接的，卫献公拉着他们的手跟他们说话；在大路上迎接的，卫献公从车上向他们作揖；在城门口迎接的，卫献公点点头而已。
English: When the doctor met them at the border, Wei Xiangong took them by the hand and talked to them; when he met them on the highway, Wei Xiangong waved to them from the car; when he met them at the city gate, Wei Xiangong only nodded.

古文：公至，使让大叔文子曰： 寡人淹恤在外，二三子皆使寡人朝夕闻卫国之言，吾子独不在寡人。
现代文：卫献公一到达，就派人责备太叔文子说： 寡人流亡在外边，几位大夫都使寡人早早晚晚听到卫国的消息，大夫独独不问候寡人。
English: As soon as Wei Xianguo arrived, he sent a person to reproach Taishu Fumiko, saying, "Many people are in exile outside, several doctors have made many people hear the news of the motherland sooner or later, the doctor alone does not greet many people.

古文：古人有言曰： 非所怨勿怨。 
现代文：古人有话说： 不是应该怨恨的，不要怨恨。 
English: The ancients had a saying: Do not hate what you should not hate.

古文：寡人怨矣。 
现代文：寡人可要怨恨了。 
English: There's a lot of resentment.

古文：对曰： 臣知罪矣！
现代文：太叔文子回答说： 下臣知道罪过了。
English: Uncle Fumiko replied, "A vassal knows he has sinned.

古文：臣不佞，不能负羁絏，以从扞牧圉，臣之罪一也。
现代文：下臣没有才能，不能背着马笼头马缰绳跟随君王保护财物，这是下臣的第一条罪状。
English: The first crime of a vassal was that he had no talent and could not follow the king on horseback to protect the king's property.

古文：有出者，有居者。臣不能贰，通外内之言以事君，臣之罪二也。
现代文：有人在国外，有人在国内，下臣不能三心二意，传递里外的消息来事奉君王，这是下臣的第二条罪状。
English: There are people abroad and people at home. A vassal cannot be half-hearted and pass on information from home and abroad to serve the monarch. This is the second crime of a vassal.

古文：有二罪，敢忘其死？ 
现代文：有两条罪状，岂敢忘记一死？ 
English: With two counts, how can you forget one death?

古文：乃行，从近关出。
现代文：于是就出走，从近处的城门出国。
English: So he ran away, leaving the country through a nearby city gate.

古文：公使止之。
现代文：卫献公派人阻止了他。
English: Guardsmen stopped him.

古文：卫人侵戚东鄙，孙氏愬于晋，晋戍茅氏。殖绰伐茅氏，杀晋戍三百人。
现代文：卫国侵袭戚地的东部边境，孙氏向晋国控告，晋国派兵戍守茅氏，殖绰进攻茅氏杀了晋国守兵三百个人。
English: When the eastern border of the motherland invaded the relatives' land, the Sun clan complained to the Jin dynasty, the Jin dynasty sent soldiers to defend the Mao clan, and the Sui dynasty attacked the Mao clan and killed 300 Jin dynasty guards.

古文：孙蒯追之，弗敢击。
现代文：孙蒯追赶殖绰，不敢攻击。
English: Sun Yat-sen chased Xuanqiao and dared not attack him.

古文：文子曰： 厉之不如！ 
现代文：孙文子说： 你连恶鬼都不如。 
English: Sun Wenzi said, "You are not even as good as an evil spirit."

古文：遂从卫师，败之圉。
现代文：孙蒯就跟上卫军，在圉地打败了他们。
English: Sun Yat-sen kept up with the guards and defeated them in Shantou.

古文：雍鉏获殖绰。
现代文：雍鉏俘虏了殖绰。
English: Yongzheng captured Shuangchao.

古文：复愬于晋。
现代文：孙氏再次向晋国控告。
English: Mr. Sun once again filed a complaint with the State of Jin.

古文：郑伯赏入陈之功。
现代文：郑简公赏赐攻入陈国有功劳的人。
English: Zheng Jiangong gave awards to those who had made great achievements in conquering Chen Province.

古文：三月甲寅朔，享子展，赐之先路、三命之服，先八邑。
现代文：三月初一日，设享礼招待子展，赐给他先路和三命车服，然后再赐给他八个城邑。
English: On the first day of March, he set up a ceremony to invite his son to the exhibition, and gave him the first road and three life jackets, and then gave him eight cities.

古文：赐子产次路、再命之服，先六邑。
现代文：赐给子产次路和再命车服，然后再赐给他六个城邑。
English: And he gave him the second road and the second coat of mail, and he gave him six cities.

古文：子产辞邑，曰： 自上以下，降杀以两，礼也。
现代文：子产辞去城邑，说： 从上而下，礼数以二的数目递降，这是规定。
English: The children of Israel went out of the city, and said, This is the ordinance of the law, That the number of the months shall be from the first even unto the second.

古文：臣之位在四，且子展之功也。臣不敢及赏礼，请辞邑。 
现代文：下臣的地位在第四，而且这是子展的功劳，下臣不敢受到赏赐的礼仪，请求辞去城邑。 
English: The status of the vassal is the fourth, and this is the merit of Zichan, the etiquette that the vassal does not dare to be rewarded, and asks to resign from the town.

古文：公固予之。乃受三邑。
现代文：郑简公坚决要给他，他就接受了三个城邑。
English: Zheng Jiangong resolutely wanted to give it to him, and he accepted three cities and towns.

古文：公孙挥曰： 子产其将知政矣！
现代文：公孙挥说： 子产恐怕将要主持政事了。
English: Gongsun Wei said, "I'm afraid Zibo is going to preside over political affairs."

古文：让不失礼。 
现代文：谦让而不失去礼仪。 
English: Concede without losing decorum.

古文：晋人为孙氏故，召诸侯，将以讨卫也。
现代文：晋国人为了孙氏的缘故，召集诸侯，准备讨伐卫国。
English: The Jin people, for the sake of the Sun clan, gathered the lords and prepared to fight for the defense of the country.

古文：夏，中行穆子来聘，召公也。
现代文：夏季，中行穆子来鲁国聘问，这是为了召请鲁襄公。
English: In the summer, the middle-ranking Mu Zi came to Lu to ask questions, this was in order to summon Lu Xiang.

古文：楚子、秦人侵吴，及雩娄，闻吴有备而还。
现代文：楚康王、秦国人联兵侵袭吴国，到达雩娄，听到吴国有了准备而退回，就乘机入侵郑国。
English: King Chukang and the people of Qin jointly invaded the State of Wu, and arrived in Yunnan. When they heard that the State of Wu had made preparations and returned, they took the opportunity to invade the State of Zheng.

古文：遂侵郑，五月，至于城麇。郑皇颉戍之。出与楚师战，败。
现代文：五月，到达城虞。郑国的皇颉在城麇戍守，出城，和楚军作战，战败。
English: In May, he arrived at the outskirts of the city. Zheng's imperial eunuch guarded the city, went out of the city, fought with the Chu army, and was defeated.

古文：穿封戌囚皇颉，公子围与之争之。正于伯州犁。
现代文：穿封戌俘虏了皇颉，公子围和他争功，要伯州犁主持公正。
English: Wearing the imperial seal, he captured the imperial eunuch, and the nobles around him competed with him, and asked Bozhou to preside over justice.

古文：伯州犁曰： 请问于囚。 
现代文：伯州犁说： 请问一下俘虏。 
English: Bozhou Yao said, "Please ask the captives."

古文：乃立囚。
现代文：于是就让俘虏站在前面。
English: So they made the prisoner stand in front.

古文：伯州犁曰： 所争，君子也，其何不知？ 
现代文：伯州犁说： 所争夺的对象便是您，您是君子，有什么不明白的？ 
English: Bozhou Yao said: The object of competition is you, you are a gentleman, what do you not understand?

古文：上其手，曰： 夫子为王子围，寡君之贵介弟也。 
现代文：举起手，说： 那一位是王子围，是寡君的尊贵的弟弟。 
English: Raising his hand, he said, "That one is a prince, the distinguished younger brother of a monarch."

古文：下其手，曰： 此子为穿封戌，方城外之县尹也。
现代文：放下手，说： 这个人是穿封戌，是方城山外边的县尹。
English: He lowered his hand and said, "This man is wearing a seal, and he is County Yin from the outskirts of Fangcheng Mountain.

古文：谁获子？ 
现代文：谁俘虏您了？ 
English: Who took you prisoner?

古文：囚曰： 颉遇王子，弱焉。 戌怒，抽戈逐王子围，弗及。
现代文：俘虏说： 颉碰上王子，抵抗不住， 穿封戌发怒，抽出戈追赶王子围，没有追上。
English: The captive said: "When the dragonfly met the prince, it couldn't resist, it flew into a rage, and chased the prince around, but couldn't catch him.

古文：楚人以皇颉归。
现代文：楚国人带着皇颉回去。
English: The people of Chu returned with the imperial scepter.

古文：印堇父与皇颉戍城麇，楚人囚之，以献于秦。
现代文：印堇父和皇颉一起留守在城麇，楚国人囚禁印堇父，把他献给秦国。
English: Injun's father and the emperor stayed together in the citadel. The people of Chu imprisoned Injun's father and dedicated him to Qin.

古文：郑人取货于印氏以请之，子大叔为令正以为请。
现代文：郑国人在印氏那里拿了财货向秦国请求赎回印堇父，子太叔正做令正，为他们提出请求赎回的话。
English: The Zheng people took the wealth and goods from the Ying clan and requested the Qin state to redeem the father of the Ying clan, the uncle of the son was doing the order, and they made a request for redemption.

古文：子产曰： 不获。
现代文：子产说： 这样是不能得到印堇父的。
English: The son said, "This is not the way to get my father's seal."

古文：受楚之功而取货于郑，不可谓国。秦不其然。
现代文：秦国接受了楚国奉献的俘虏，却在郑国拿财物，不能说合于国家的体统，秦国不会这样做的。
English: Qin accepted the prisoners offered by Chu, but took the property in Zheng. This cannot be said to be in line with the national ethos. Qin would not do this.

古文：若曰： 拜君之勤。
现代文：如果说 拜谢君王帮助郑国。
English: If anything, King Baisei helped Zheng Guo.

古文：郑国微君之惠，楚师其犹在敝邑之城下。 其可。 
现代文：如果没有君王的恩惠，楚军恐怕还在敝邑城下 ，这才可以。 
English: If it were not for the king's favor, the Chu army would probably still be under the city of Zouyi.

古文：弗从，遂行。
现代文：子太叔不听，就动身了。
English: The great-uncle didn't listen and left.

古文：秦人不予。更币，从子产而后获之。
现代文：秦国人不给，把财物改为其他礼品，按照子产的话去说，然后得到了印堇父。
English: Qin people do not give, change the property to other gifts, follow the words of the children, and then get the father of the seal.

古文：六月，公会晋赵武、宋向戌、郑良霄、曹人于澶渊以讨卫，疆戚田。
现代文：六月，鲁襄公和晋国赵武、宋国向戌、郑国良霄、曹国人在澶渊会见，以讨伐卫国，划正戚地的疆界。
English: In June, Prince Lu Xiang met with Zhao Wu of Jin, Xiang Yu of Song, Liang Xiao of Zheng, and Cao Guozhong in Shanyuan to fight for the defense of the country and to draw up the borders of the relatives.

古文：取卫西鄙懿氏六十以与孙氏。
现代文：占领了卫国西部边境懿氏六十邑给了孙氏。
English: Sixty counties of the Min clan, which occupied the western border of the motherland, were given to the Sun clan.

古文：赵武不书，尊公也。
现代文：《春秋》对赵武不加记载，这是由于尊重鲁襄公。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not record Zhao Wu, this is due to respect for Lu Xiang.

古文：向戌不书，后也。
现代文：对向戌不加记载，这是由于他到迟了。
English: There is no record of Xiangyao because he arrived late.

古文：郑先宋，不失所也。于是卫侯会之。
现代文：记载郑国在宋国之前，是由于郑国人如期到达。
English: The record of Zheng before Song is due to the fact that the Zheng people arrived on schedule.

古文：晋人执甯喜、北宫遗，使女齐以先归。
现代文：当时卫献公参加了会见。晋国人拘捕了宁喜、北宫遗，让女齐带了他们先回去。
English: At that time, Wei Xianguo attended the meeting. The Jin people arrested Ningxi and Bei Gongyi, and let Nianqi take them back first.

古文：卫侯如晋，晋人执而囚之于士弱氏。
现代文：卫献公去到晋国，晋国人抓了他关闭在士弱家里。
English: Wei Xianguo went to Jin Province, and the people of Jin Province arrested him and locked him up in the house of a weak scholar.

古文：秋七月，齐侯、郑伯为卫侯故，如晋，晋侯兼享之。
现代文：秋季，七月，齐景公、郑简公为了卫献公的缘故去到晋国，晋平公同时设享礼招待他们。
English: In the autumn, in July, Qi Jing Gong and Zheng Jian Gong went to Jin Province for the sake of Wei Xian Gong. At the same time, Jin Ping Gong held a ceremony to invite them.

古文：晋侯赋《嘉乐》。
现代文：晋平公赋《嘉乐》这首诗。
English: The poem "Jia Le" was composed by Jinping Gongfu.

古文：国景子相齐侯，赋《蓼萧》。
现代文：国景子做齐景公的相礼者，赋《蓼萧》这首诗。
English: Guo Jingzi was Qi Jinggong's suitor, and he wrote the poem "Bao Xiao."

古文：子展相郑伯，赋《缁衣》。
现代文：子展做郑简公的相礼者，赋《缁衣》这首诗。
English: Zou Zhan was the matchmaker of Zheng Jiangong, and wrote the poem "Clothed in Blue."

古文：叔向命晋侯拜二君曰： 寡君敢拜齐君之安我先君之宗祧也，敢拜郑君之不贰也。 
现代文：叔向要晋平公向两位国君下拜，说： 寡君谨敢拜谢齐国国君安定我国先君的宗庙，谨敢拜谢郑国国君没有二心。 
English: Uncle Xiang wanted Prince Jinping to bow down to the two sovereigns, saying: You dare to bow down to the Qizhi sovereign and stabilize the ancestral temple of our forefather, and you dare to bow down to the Zheng sovereign.

古文：国子使晏平仲私于叔向曰： 晋君宣其明德于诸侯，恤其患而补其阙，正其违而治其烦，所以为盟主也。
现代文：国景子派晏平仲私下对叔向说： 晋国国君在诸侯之中宣扬他的明德，担心他们的忧患而补正他们的过失，纠正他们的违礼，而治理他们的动乱，因此才能作为盟主。
English: Guo Jingzi sent Zou Pingzhong to say to his uncle in private: Jin Guo Guo preached his virtue among the princes, worried about their sorrows and corrected their faults, corrected their violations, and managed their turmoil, so he could be the leader.

古文：今为臣执君，若之何？ 
现代文：现在为了臣下而逮了国君，怎么办？ 
English: Now that the sovereign has been arrested for the sake of his subjects, what is to be done?

古文：叔向告赵文子，文子以告晋侯。
现代文：叔向告诉赵文子，赵文子把这些话告诉晋平公。
English: The uncle told Zhao Wenzi, and Zhao Wenzi told these words to Jin Ping.

古文：晋侯言卫侯之罪，使叔向告二君。
现代文：晋平公举出卫献公的罪过，派叔向告诉齐、郑二国国君。
English: Prince Jinping pointed out the sin of making a military offering to the emperor, and sent his uncle to tell Emperor Qi and Emperor Zheng of the two countries.

古文：国子赋《辔之柔矣》，子展赋《将仲子兮》，晋侯乃许归卫侯。
现代文：国景子赋《辔之柔矣》这首诗，子展赋《将仲子兮》这首诗，晋平公于是就允许让卫献公回国。
English: Guo Jingzifu wrote the poem "之柔矣" and Zenshan wrote the poem "将仲子兮." Therefore, Jinping allowed Wei Xiang to return to the country.

古文：叔向曰： 郑七穆，罕氏其后亡者也。子展俭而壹。 
现代文：叔向说： 郑穆公的后代七个家族，罕氏大概是最后灭亡的，因为子展节俭而用心专一。 
English: Uncle Xiang said, "Of the seven families descended from Zheng Mu Gong, the Han family was probably the last to perish, because the sons were frugal and single-minded.

古文：初，宋芮司徒生女子，赤而毛，弃诸堤下。
现代文：当初，宋国的芮司徒生了女儿，皮肤红而且长着毛，就把她丢在堤下。
English: At the beginning, the Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's

古文：共姬之妾取以入，名之曰弃。
现代文：共姬的侍妾把她拣进宫来，命名叫做弃。
English: The attendants and concubines of Kyohei took her into the palace and named her Kyohei.

古文：长而美。
现代文：长大了很漂亮。
English: She grew up to be very beautiful.

古文：平公入夕，共姬与之食。
现代文：宋平公向共姬问候晚安，共姬让他吃东西。
English: Song Ping Gong said good night to Gong Ji, and Gong Ji gave him something to eat.

古文：公见弃也而视之，尤。
现代文：平公见了弃，细看，觉得漂亮极了。
English: When Ping Gong saw the abandoned house, he took a closer look and thought it was very beautiful.

古文：姬纳诸御，嬖，生佐。
现代文：共姬就把她送给平公做侍妾，受到宠爱，生了佐。
English: Kyohei gave her to TAIRA no Okimi as a concubine, and she became a favorite and gave birth to Asa.

古文：恶而婉。
现代文：佐长得难看，但性情和顺。
English: Sasaga is ugly, but he has a gentle disposition.

古文：大子痤美而很，合左师畏而恶之。
现代文：太子痤长得漂亮，但心里狠毒，向戌对他又害怕又讨厌。
English: Prince Xuan is good-looking, but vicious at heart. Xuan Xuan is both scared and disgusted by him.

古文：寺人惠墙伊戾为大子内师而无宠。
现代文：寺人惠墙伊戾做太子的内师而不受宠信。
English: The temple's priest, Hyewon Ihyo, became the prince's tutor, but was not popular.

古文：秋，楚客聘于晋，过宋。
现代文：秋季，楚国的客人到晋国聘问，经过宋国。
English: In autumn, guests from Chu went to Jin Province to ask questions, passing through Song Province.

古文：大子知之，请野享之。
现代文：太子和楚国的客人原来相识，请求在野外设宴招待他，平公让他去了。
English: The prince and the guest from the state of Chu had known each other previously, and requested that a banquet be held in the open to entertain him. Ping Gong allowed him to go.

古文：公使往，伊戾请从之。公曰： 夫不恶女乎？ 
现代文：伊戾请求跟从太子。平公说： 他不讨厌你吗？ 
English: Iya begged to follow the prince. Heiko said, "Doesn't he hate you?"

古文：对曰： 小人之事君子也，恶之不敢远，好之不敢近。敬以待命，敢有贰心乎？
现代文：伊戾回答说： 小人事奉君子，被讨厌不敢远离，被喜欢不敢亲近，恭敬地等待命令，岂敢有三心二意呢？
English: Yixuan replied, "A minor should serve a gentleman. If he is disliked, he should not stay away from him. If he is liked, he should not get close to him. He should respectfully wait for orders. How dare he have second thoughts?"

古文：纵有共其外，莫共其内。臣请往也。 
现代文：太子那里即使有人在外边服务，却没有人在里边服务，下臣请求前去。 
English: Even if there are people serving outside the prince, there is no one serving inside, so the vassal asks him to come.

古文：遣之。
现代文：平公就派他去了。
English: Taira no Kimi sent him away.

古文：至，则欿，用牲，加书征之，而骋告公曰： 大子将为乱，既与楚客盟矣。 
现代文：到那里，就挖坑，用牺牲，把盟书放在牲口上，并且检查一遍，驰马回来报告平公，说 太子将要作乱，已经和楚国的客人结盟了。 
English: When they got there, they dug a pit, used a sacrifice, put the covenant on the animal, and checked it over. They returned on horseback to report to Ping Gong that the prince was about to start a riot and had already allied with the guests from the state of Chu.

古文：公曰： 为我子，又何求？ 
现代文：宋平公说： 已经是我的继承人了，还谋求什么？ 
English: Song Ping Gong said, "You are already my successor, what are you seeking for?

古文：对曰： 欲速。 
现代文：伊戾回答说： 想快点即位。 
English: Yili replied, "I want to be enthroned quickly."

古文：公使视之，则信有焉。
现代文：平公派人去视察，果然有这回事。
English: Ping Gong sent someone to inspect, and sure enough, this happened.

古文：问诸夫人与左师，则皆曰： 固闻之。 公囚大子。
现代文：向夫人和左师询问，他们都说： 的确听到过。 
English: When I asked my wife and my left-hand man, they both said that they had indeed heard it.

古文：大子曰： 唯佐也，能免我。 
现代文：宋平公囚禁了太子。太子说： 只有佐能够使我免于祸难。 
English: Song Pingguo imprisoned the prince. The prince said, "Only Zhao can save me from disaster."

古文：召而使请，曰： 日中不来，吾知死矣。 
现代文：召请佐并让他向平公请求，说： 到中午还不来，我知道应该死了。 
English: He summoned Zuo and asked him to plead with Ping Gong, saying, "If you don't come by noon, I know I should die."

古文：左师闻之，聒而与之语。
现代文：左师向戌听到了，就和佐说个不停。
English: When Zuo Shi listened to Xiang Yao, he talked incessantly with Zao.

古文：过期，乃缢而死。
现代文：过了中午，太子就上吊死了。
English: After noon, the prince hanged himself.

古文：佐为大子。
现代文：佐被立为太子。
English: Sa was made crown prince.

古文：公徐闻其无罪也，乃亨伊戾。
现代文：宋平公慢慢地听到痤没有罪，就把伊戾烹杀了。
English: When Song Ping Gong slowly heard that Yao was not guilty, he killed Yi Yao.

古文：左师见夫人之步马者，问之，对曰： 君夫人氏也。 
现代文：左师见到夫人的溜马人，就问他是什么人。溜马人说： 我是君夫人家的人。 
English: When the left-hand master saw his wife's journeyman, he asked him who he was. The journeyman said, "I'm from your wife's family."

古文：左师曰： 谁为君夫人？
现代文：左师说： 谁是君夫人？
English: The left teacher said, "Who is your wife?"

古文：余胡弗知？ 
现代文：我为什么不知道？ 
English: Why didn't I know?

古文：圉人归，以告夫人。
现代文：溜马的人回去，把这话报告夫人。
English: Go back and tell that to your wife.

古文：夫人使馈之锦与马，先之以玉，曰： 君之妾弃，使某献。 
现代文：夫人派人送给左师锦和马，先送去玉，说 国君的侍妾弃让我送给您的。 
English: My wife sent someone to give the left brocade and horse to the left master, and sent the jade first, saying, "Let me give it to you because the Emperor's concubine abandoned me."

古文：左师改命曰： 君夫人。 而后再拜稽首受之。
现代文：左师改换口气说： 君夫人 ，然后再拜叩头接受了。
English: The left-hand instructor changed his tone and said, "Madam," and then bowed and accepted.

古文：郑伯归自晋，使子西如晋聘，辞曰： 寡君来烦执事，惧不免于戾。使夏谢不敏。 
现代文：郑简公从晋国回来，派子西去到晋国聘问，致辞说： 寡君来麻烦执事，害怕不敬而不免于有罪，特派夏前来表示歉意。 
English: Zheng Jian Gong returned from Jin Province and sent Zixi to Jin Province to ask questions. He said in his speech, "The widower came to trouble the deacon. He was afraid of being disrespectful, but he was not exempt from guilt. He sent Xia to apologize.

古文：君子曰： 善事大国。 
现代文：君子说： 郑国善于事奉大国。 
English: The gentleman said, "Zheng Guo is good at serving a big country.

古文：初，楚伍参与蔡太师子朝友，其子伍举与声子相善也。
现代文：当初，楚国的伍参和蔡国的太师子朝友好，他的儿子伍举和声子也互相友好。
English: At first, Wu Zhan of Chu was friendly with Dai Shizi of Cai, and his son Wu He and Xiangzi were also friendly with each other.

古文：伍举娶于王子牟，王子牟为申公而亡，楚人曰： 伍举实送之。 
现代文：伍举娶了王子牟的女儿。王子牟为申公而逃亡，楚国人说： 伍举确实护送了他。 
English: Wu Jia married the daughter of Wuzhimou, who fled to appeal to the emperor, and the people of Chu said, "Wu Jia did escort him."

古文：伍举奔郑，将遂奔晋。
现代文：伍举逃亡到郑国，准备乘机再到晋国。
English: Wu Qiu fled to Zheng and prepared to take the opportunity to go to Jin.

古文：声子将如晋，遇之于郑郊，班荆相与食，而言复故。声子曰： 子行也！
现代文：声子打算去到晋国，在郑国郊外碰到了他，把草铺在地上一起吃东西，谈到回楚国去的事，声子说： 您走吧，我一定让您回去。 
English: Sonoko was planning to go to Jin Province, and met him on the outskirts of Zheng Province. They spread grass on the ground and ate together. When they talked about going back to Chu Province, Sonoko said, "Go ahead, I'll definitely let you go back."

古文：吾必复子。 及宋向戌将平晋、楚，声子通使于晋。还如楚，令尹子木与之语，问晋故焉。且曰： 晋大夫与楚孰贤？ 
现代文：等到宋国的向戌准备调解晋国和楚国的关系，声子出使到晋国，回到楚国，令尹子木和他谈话，询问晋国的情况，而且说： 晋国的大夫和楚国的大夫谁更贤明？ 
English: When Xiang Zang of Song prepared to mediate the relationship between Jin and Chu, Sheng Zi sent an envoy to Jin and returned to Chu, asked Yin Zi Mu to talk to him, inquired about the situation in Jin, and said: Who is wiser, the doctor of Jin or the doctor of Chu?

古文：对曰： 晋卿不如楚，其大夫则贤，皆卿材也。
现代文：声子回答说： 晋国的卿不如楚国，晋国的大夫是贤明的，都是当卿的人材。
English: Shoko replied, "The nobles of Jin Province are not as good as those of Chu Province. The doctors of Jin Province are wise, and they are all qualified to be nobles.

古文：如杞、梓、皮革，自楚往也。
现代文：好像杞木、梓木、皮革，都是楚国运去的。
English: It seems that camphor wood, azuki wood, and leather were all transported from Chu.

古文：虽楚有材，晋实用之。 
现代文：虽然楚国有人才，晋国却实在使用了他们。 
English: Although Chu had talent, Jin really used them.

古文：子木曰： 夫独无族姻乎？ 
现代文：子木说： 他们没有同宗和亲戚吗？ 
English: Ziki said, "Don't they have the same family and relatives?"

古文：对曰： 虽有，而用楚材实多。
现代文：声子回答说： 虽然有，但使用楚国的人材确实多。
English: Shoko replied: Although there are, there are indeed many people who use Chu.

古文：归生闻之： 善为国者，赏不僭而刑不滥。 
现代文：归生听说：善于为国家做事的，赏赐不过分，而刑罚不滥用。
English: Reincarnation heard: good at doing things for the country, the reward is not excessive, and the punishment is not abusive.

古文：赏僭，则惧及淫人；刑滥，则惧及善人。
现代文：赏赐过分，就怕及于坏人；刑罚滥用，就怕牵涉好人。
English: Excessive reward is afraid of involving bad people; abuse of punishment is afraid of involving good people.

古文：若不幸而过，宁僭无滥。
现代文：如果不幸而过分了，宁可过分，不要滥用。
English: If it is unfortunate and excessive, it is better to be excessive than to abuse.

古文：与其失善，宁其利淫。
现代文：与其失掉好人，宁可利于坏人。
English: Rather than lose a good person, it is better to benefit a bad person.

古文：无善人，则国从之。
现代文：没有好人，国家就跟着受害。
English: If there are no good people, the country will suffer.

古文：《诗》曰： 人之云亡，邦国殄瘁。 
现代文：《诗》说， 这个能人不在，国家就遭受灾害 ，这就是说没有好人。
English: "Poetry" said: The death of a wise man, the country is exhausted and damaged.

古文：无善人之谓也。故《夏书》曰： 与其杀不辜，宁失不经。 惧失善也。
现代文：所以《夏书》说： 与其杀害无辜的人，宁可对罪人失于刑罚 ，这就是怕失掉好人。
English: Therefore, the "Summer Book" said: "Rather than killing innocent people, it is better to lose punishment to sinners, which is the fear of losing good people."

古文：《商颂》有之曰： 不僭不滥，不敢怠皇，命于下国，封建厥福。 
现代文：《商颂》有这样的话说， 不过分不滥用，不敢懈怠偷闲，向下国发布命令，大大地建立他的福禄 。
English: "Merchant's Song" has such a saying, but it is not abusive, dare not slack off, issue orders to the next country, and greatly build his fortune.

古文：此汤所以获天福也。
现代文：这就是汤所以获得上天赐福的原因。
English: This is why the soup is so blessed.

古文：古之治民者，劝赏而畏刑，恤民不倦。
现代文：古代治理百姓的人，乐于赏赐而怕用刑罚，为百姓担扰而不知疲倦。
English: In ancient times, those who governed the people were willing to reward but afraid to punish, and they never tired of disturbing the people.

古文：赏以春夏，刑以秋冬。
现代文：在春天、夏天行赏，在秋季、冬季行刑。
English: Rewarded in spring and summer, executed in autumn and winter.

古文：是以将赏为之加膳，加膳则饫赐，此以知其劝赏也。
现代文：因此，在将要行赏的时候就为它增加膳食，加膳以后可以把剩菜大批赐给下面，由于这样而知道他乐于赏赐。
English: Therefore, when it is time to reward, increase the meal for it. After adding the meal, you can give a large amount of leftovers to the next, because of this, you know that he is willing to reward.

古文：将刑为之不举，不举则彻乐，此以知其畏刑也。
现代文：将要行刑的时候就为它减少膳食，减了膳食就撤去音乐，由于这样而知道他怕用刑罚。
English: When he was about to be executed, they reduced his rations, and when the rations were reduced, they took away the music, because they knew that he was afraid of the punishment.

古文：夙兴夜寐，朝夕临政，此以知其恤民也。
现代文：早起晚睡，早晚都亲临办理国事，由于这样而知道他为百姓操心。
English: He goes to bed early and rises late, and attends to state affairs in person morning and night. Because of this, we know that he is concerned about the people.

古文：三者，礼之大节也。
现代文：这三件事，是礼仪的大关键。
English: These three things are the key to etiquette.

古文：有礼无败。
现代文：讲求礼仪就不会失败。
English: If you ask for etiquette, you won't fail.

古文：今楚多淫刑，其大夫逃死于四方，而为之谋主，以害楚国，不可救疗，所谓不能也。
现代文：现在楚国滥用刑罚，楚国的大夫逃命到四方的国家，并且做别国的主要谋士，来危害楚国，至于不可救药了，这就是说的滥用刑罚不能容忍。
English: Now, the state of Chu is abusing criminal punishment. The doctor of Chu is fleeing for his life to countries in the four directions, and is acting as the main adviser of other countries to endanger the state of Chu. As for the irremediable, this is to say that the abuse of criminal punishment cannot be tolerated.

古文：子仪之乱，析公奔晋。晋人置诸戎车之殿，以为谋主。
现代文：子仪的叛乱，析公逃亡到晋国，晋国人把他安置在晋侯战车的后面，让他作为主要谋士。
English: After Ziyi's rebellion, Sekigong fled to Jin. The people of Jin placed him in the back of a Jin war chariot and made him their chief strategist.

古文：绕角之役，晋将遁矣，析公曰： 楚师轻窕，易震荡也。
现代文：绕角那次战役，晋国人将要逃走，析公说： 楚军不厚重，容易被震动。
English: In the battle around the corner, the Jin people were about to flee, the analyst said: the Chu army is not heavy, it is easy to be shaken.

古文：若多鼓钧声，以夜军之，楚师必遁。 
现代文：如果同时敲打许多鼓发出大声，在夜里全军进攻，楚军必然会逃走。 
English: If the whole army attacked at night, beating many drums loudly at the same time, the Chu army would inevitably flee.

古文：晋人从之，楚师宵溃。
现代文：晋国人听从了，楚军夜里崩溃。
English: The Jin people obeyed, and the Chu army collapsed in the night.

古文：晋遂侵蔡，袭沈，获其君；败申、息之师于桑隧，获申丽而还。
现代文：晋国于是就侵入蔡国，袭击沈国，俘虏了沈国的国君，在桑隧打败申国和息国军队，俘虏了申丽而回国。
English: Jin then invaded Cai, attacked Shen, captured Shen's sovereign, defeated Shen's and Shu's armies at Sangcheng, captured Shen Li and returned to China.

古文：郑于是不敢南面。
现代文：郑国在那时候不敢向着南方的楚国。
English: At that time, Zheng Guo did not dare to go south to Chu Guo.

古文：楚失华夏，则析公之为也。
现代文：楚国丧失了中原，这就是析公干出来的。
English: Chu lost the Central Plains, and this is what happened.

古文： 雍子之父兄谮雍子，君与大夫不善是也。雍子奔晋。晋人与之鄐，以为谋主。
现代文： 雍子的父亲的哥哥诬陷雍子，国君和大夫不为他们去调解，雍子逃亡到晋国，晋国人将鄐地给了他，让他作为主要谋士。
English: The elder brother of Yasuko's father framed Yasuko, the sovereign and the doctor did not go to mediate for them, Yasuko fled to Jin, the people of Jin gave him the land and let him be the main adviser.

古文：彭城之役，晋、楚遇于靡角之穀。
现代文：彭城那次战役，晋国、楚国在靡角之谷相遇。
English: In the battle of Pengcheng, Jin and Chu met in the valley of Meizhou.

古文：晋将遁矣。雍子发命于军曰： 归老幼，反孤疾，二人役，归一人，简兵蒐乘，秣马蓐食，师陈焚次，明日将战。 
现代文：晋国人将要逃走了，雍子对军队发布命令说： 年纪老的和年纪小的都回去，孤儿和有病的也都回去，兄弟两个服役的回去一个。精选徒兵，检阅车兵，喂饱马匹，让兵士吃饱，军队摆开阵势，焚烧帐篷，明天将要决战。 
English: The Jin people were about to flee, and Yongzi issued an order to the troops: "The old and the young should all go back, the orphans and the sick should also go back, and the two brothers who are in service should go back one by one. Select the best apprentices, inspect the chariots, feed the horses, and let the soldiers have enough to eat. The troops should set up their positions and burn the tents. Tomorrow there will be a decisive battle."

古文：行归者而逸楚囚，楚师宵溃。
现代文：让该回去的走开，并且故意放走楚国俘虏，楚军夜里崩溃。
English: Let those who should go back go away, and deliberately let go of the Chu prisoners, the Chu army collapsed in the night.

古文：晋降彭城而归诸宋，以鱼石归。
现代文：晋国降服了彭城而归还给宋国，带了鱼石回国。
English: Jin conquered Pengcheng and returned it to Song, taking the fish and stone back with him.

古文：楚失东夷，子辛死之，则雍子之为也。
现代文：楚国失去东夷，子辛为此战而阵亡，这都是雍子所谋划的。
English: Chu lost Dongyi, and Zixin was killed in the battle. This was all planned by Yongzi.

古文： 子反与子灵争夏姬，而雍害其事，子灵奔晋。晋人与之邢，以为谋主。扞御北狄，通吴于晋，教吴叛楚，教之乘车，射御，驱侵，使其子狐庸为吴行人焉。
现代文： 子反和子灵争夺夏姬而阻碍子灵的婚事，子灵逃亡到晋国，晋国人将邢地给了他，让他作为谋士，抵御北狄，让吴国和晋国通好，教吴国背叛楚国，教他们坐车、射箭、驾车作战，让他的儿子狐庸做了吴国的行人。
English: The son, on the other hand, fought with the son's soul to win over Xia Ji and hindered the son's marriage. The son fled to Jin. The people of Jin gave him the land of Shantou, let him serve as a counselor to resist Bei Di, let Wu and Jin get along well, teach Wu to betray Chu, teach them to fight by car, archery, and driving, and let his son Fooyong become a pedestrian in Wuxi.

古文：吴于是伐巢，取驾，克棘，入州来。楚罢于奔命，至今为患，则子灵之为也。
现代文：吴国在那时候时进攻巢地、占取驾地、攻下棘地、进入州来，楚国疲于奔命，到今天还是祸患，这就是子灵干出来的。
English: At that time, Wu attacked the nest, occupied the driving ground, captured the thorny ground, and entered the state. Chu was exhausted and exhausted, and it is still a disaster to this day. This is what Ziling did.

古文：若敖之乱，伯贲之子贲皇奔晋。晋人与之苗，以为谋主。
现代文：若敖的叛乱，伯贲的儿子贲皇逃亡到晋国，晋国人封给他苗地，让他作为主要谋士。
English: In the event of the rebellion of the Hokkes, the son of the Hokkes, Emperor Shao, fled to Jin, and the people of Jin gave him seedling land and let him serve as the main strategist.

古文：鄢陵之役，楚晨压晋军而陈，晋将遁矣。
现代文：鄢陵那次战役，楚军早晨逼近晋军并摆开阵势，晋国人就要逃走了。
English: In the battle of Fuling, the Chu army approached the Jin army in the morning and set up a position. The Jin people were about to flee.

古文：苗贲皇曰： 楚师之良，在其中军王族而已。若塞井夷灶，成陈以当之，栾、范易行以诱之，中行、二郤必克二穆。
现代文：苗贲皇说： 楚军的精锐在于他们中军的王族而已，如果填井平灶，摆开阵势以抵挡他们，栾、范用家兵引诱楚军，中行和郤锜、郤至一定能够战胜子重、子辛。
English: Emperor Miao Wei said: The elite of the Chu army is only the royal family of their middle army. If they fill in the wells and lay out the positions to resist them, and Fan and Fan use their family soldiers to lure the Chu army, the middle line and Fan and Fan will definitely be able to defeat Zi Chong and Zi Xin.

古文：吾乃四萃于其王族，必大败之。 
现代文：我们就用四军集中对付他们的王族，一定能够把他们打得大败。 
English: We will use four armies to deal with their royal family, and we will surely be able to defeat them.

古文：晋人从之，楚师大败，王夷师熸，子反死之。
现代文：晋国人听从了，楚军大败，君王受伤，军队士气不振，子反为此而死。
English: The Jin people obeyed, the Chu army was defeated, the king was injured, the army was demoralized, and the son died for this.

古文：郑叛吴兴，楚失诸侯，则苗贲皇之为也。 
现代文：郑国背叛，吴国兴起，楚国失去诸侯，这就是苗贲皇干出来的。 
English: The betrayal of Zheng Guo, the rise of Wu Guo, and the loss of princes in Chu Guo were all the work of Emperor Miao Wei.

古文：子木曰： 是皆然矣。 
现代文：子木说： 阁下所说的都是那样的。 
English: Zogi said, "Everything you said is like that.

古文：声子曰： 今又有甚于此。
现代文：声子说： 现在又有比这厉害的。
English: Shoko said, "Nowadays, there is something even more powerful than this."

古文：椒举娶于申公子牟，子牟得戾而亡，君大夫谓椒举： 女实遣之！ 
现代文：椒举娶了申公子牟的女儿，子牟得罪而逃亡。国君和大夫对椒举说： 实在是你让他走的。 
English: Choju married the daughter of Shin Chikamaru, and Chikamaru committed a crime and fled. The sovereign and the doctor said to Choju, "You really let him go."

古文：惧而奔郑，引领南望曰： 庶几赦余！ 
现代文：椒举害怕而逃亡到郑国，伸长了脖子望着南方，说： 也许可以赦免我。 
English: He was so afraid that he fled to Zheng and craned his neck to look southward, saying, "Perhaps I can be pardoned."

古文：亦弗图也。
现代文：但是我们也不存希望。
English: But we are not hopeful.

古文：今在晋矣。
现代文：现在他在晋国了。
English: Now he is in Jin Province.

古文：晋人将与之县，以比叔向。
现代文：晋国人将要把县封给他，以和叔向并列。
English: The people of Jin Province are going to give him the county title, so that he will be on a par with his uncle.

古文：彼若谋害楚国，岂不为患？ 
现代文：他如果要危害楚国，难道不是祸患？ 
English: If he wants to harm the state of Chu, isn't he a scourge?

古文：子木惧，言诸王，益其禄爵而复之。
现代文：子木听了这些很恐惧，对楚康王说了，楚康王提高了椒举的官禄爵位而让他官复原职。
English: Ziki was horrified to hear this, and told King Chu Kang, who raised the official's salary to a knighthood and reinstated him.

古文：声子使椒鸣逆之。
现代文：声子让椒鸣去迎接椒举。
English: The vocalist let the chorus go to meet the chorus.

古文：许灵公如楚，请伐郑，曰： 师不兴，孤不归矣！ 
现代文：许灵公去到楚国，请求进攻郑国，说： 不发兵，我就不回去了。 
English: Xu Linggong went to Chu and requested to attack Zheng, saying, "If you don't send troops, I won't go back."

古文：八月，卒于楚。
现代文：八月，许灵公死在楚国。
English: In August, Xu Linggong died in Chu.

古文：楚子曰： 不伐郑，何以求诸侯？ 
现代文：楚康王说： 不攻打郑国，怎么能求得诸侯？ 
English: King Chu Kang said, "Without attacking Zheng Guo, how can we win the lordships?"

古文：冬十月，楚子伐郑。
现代文：冬季，十月，楚康王攻打郑国，郑国人准备抵御。
English: In winter, in October, King Chu Kang attacked Zheng Guo, and the Zheng Guo people prepared to resist.

古文：郑人将御之，子产曰： 晋、楚将平，诸侯将和，楚王是故昧于一来。
现代文：子产说： 晋国将要和楚国讲和，诸侯将要和睦，楚康王因此冒昧来这一趟。
English: Zi Yuan said, "The State of Jin is going to make peace with the State of Chu, and the princes are going to be reconciled. That is why King Chu Kang has dared to come here."

古文：不如使逞而归，乃易成也。
现代文：不如让他称心回去，就容易讲和了。
English: It would be easier to make peace if he could go back to his heart's content.

古文：夫小人之性，衅于勇，啬于祸，以足其性而求名焉者，非国家之利也。
现代文：小人的本性，一有空子就凭血气之勇，在祸乱中有所贪图，以满足他的本性而追求虚名，这不符合国家的利益，怎么可以听从？ 
English: It is the nature of the villain to take advantage of any opportunity, to be greedy in the midst of calamity, to satisfy his nature and pursue a false name. This is not in the interests of the country. How can we obey?

古文：若何从之？ 子展说，不御寇。十二月乙酉，入南里，堕其城。
现代文：子展高兴了，就不抵御敌人，十二月初五日，楚军进入南里，拆毁城墙。
English: On the 5th day of December, the Chu army entered Nanli and demolished the city wall.

古文：涉于乐氏，门于师之梁。
现代文：从乐氏渡过洧水，进攻师之梁的城门。
English: From Leshi across Surabaya, the gate of the attacker's beam.

古文：县门发，获九人焉。
现代文：放下内城的闸门，俘虏了九个不能进城的郑国人。
English: They lowered the gates of the inner city and captured nine Zheng Guo people who could not enter the city.

古文：涉于氾而归，而后葬许灵公。
现代文：楚国人渡过汜水回国，然后安葬许灵公。
English: The people of Chu passed through Surabaya to return to the country, and then buried Xu Linggong.

古文：卫人归卫姬于晋，乃释卫侯。
现代文：卫国人把卫姬送给晋国，晋国这才释放了卫献公。
English: The defenders of the country sent Wei Ji to Jin, and Jin released Wei Xianguo.

古文：君子是以知平公之失政也。
现代文：君子因此而知道晋平公失去了治国的常道。
English: As a result, the nobles knew that Emperor Jinpyeong had lost the normal way of governing the country.

古文：晋韩宣子聘于周。
现代文：晋国的韩宣子在成周聘问，周灵王派人请问明来意。
English: Han Xuan Zi of Jin Province asked Cheng Zhou for advice, and Zhou Ling Wang sent someone to ask for his opinion.

古文：王使请事，对曰： 晋士起将归时事于宰旅，无他事矣。 
现代文：韩宣子回答说： 晋国的士起前来向宰旅奉献贡品，没有别的事情。 
English: Han Xuan Zi replied, "There is no other reason for the soldiers of Jin to come and pay tribute to Zai Lu.

古文：王闻之曰： 韩氏其昌阜于晋乎！
现代文：周天子听到了，说： 韩氏恐怕要在晋国昌盛了吧！
English: Zhou Tianzi heard this and said: I'm afraid Mr. Han is going to prosper in Jin!

古文：辞不失旧。 
现代文：他的辞令仍和过去一样。 
English: His rhetoric remains the same as before.

古文：齐人城郏之岁，其夏，齐乌馀以廪丘奔晋。袭卫羊角，取之。遂袭我高鱼。
现代文：齐国人在郏地筑城的那一年，夏季，齐国的乌馀带着廪丘逃亡到晋国，袭击卫国的羊角，占取了这地方，就乘机侵袭我国的高鱼。
English: In the summer of the year when the people of Qi built the city in Shantian, the rest of the people of Qi fled to Jin with the Shantian Hill, attacked the Sheep's Horn of the defender country, occupied this place, and took the opportunity to invade the high fish of our country.

古文：有大雨，自其窦入，介于其库，以登其城，克而取之。
现代文：正逢下大雨，齐军从城墙的排水孔进入城中，走到城里的武器库，取出了甲胄装备士兵，然后登上城墙，攻克并占领了高鱼。
English: It was raining heavily when the Qi army entered the city from the drainage hole of the city wall, walked to the city's weapons depot, took out the armor and equipment soldiers, and then climbed the city wall, defeated and occupied Gao Yu.

古文：又取邑于宋。
现代文：又占取了宋国的城邑。
English: They also occupied the cities and towns of Song.

古文：于是范宣子卒，诸侯弗能治也，及赵文子为政，乃卒治之。
现代文：当时范宣子已经死了，诸侯不能惩治乌馀。等到赵文子执政以后，才终于把他惩治了。
English: At that time, Fan Xuan Zi had already died, and the lords could not punish Wu Yu. It was not until after Zhao Wen Zi came to power that he was finally punished.

古文：文子言于晋侯曰： 晋为盟主，诸侯或相侵也，则讨而使归其地。
现代文：赵文子对晋平公说： 晋国作为盟主，诸侯有人互相侵犯，就要讨伐他。让他归还侵夺的土地。
English: Zhao Wenzi said to Jinping Gong: Jin, as the commander-in-chief, if any of the lords encroach on each other, it is necessary to fight him. Let him return the occupied land.

古文：今乌馀之邑，皆讨类也。而贪之，是无以为盟主也。
现代文：现在乌馀的城邑，都是侵夺来的，属于应该讨伐之列，而我们贪图它，这就没有资格作盟主了。
English: Now, the remaining cities and towns have all been taken by force. They belong to the category that should be fought against, but we covet them, and we are no longer qualified to be commanders.

古文：请归之！ 
现代文：请归还给诸侯。 
English: Please return it to the lords.

古文：晋侯使往。
现代文：晋平公说： 好。
English: Jin Ping Gong said: Good.

