古文：灵王城陈、蔡、不羹，使仆夫子晳问于范无宇，曰： 吾不服诸夏而独事晋何也，唯晋近我远也。
现代文：楚灵王修筑陈国、蔡国、不羹的城墙，派子皙去询问范无宇，说： 我不能使中原各国归附，它们只事奉晋国，是什么原因呢？
English: King Chuling built the walls of the states of Chen, Cai, and Nian, and sent his son Yao to inquire of Fan Mewu, saying, "I cannot make the Central Plains countries accede, they only serve the State of Jin. What is the reason for this?"

古文：今吾城三国，赋皆千乘，亦当晋矣。
现代文：只是因为晋国离它们近而我国离它们远。现在我修筑三国的城墙，它们各出一千辆战车，也相当于晋国了。
English: Just because Jin is close to them and we are far away from them. Now I am building the walls of the three countries, each of which produces a thousand chariots, which is also equivalent to Jin.

古文：又加之以楚，诸侯其来乎？ 
现代文：再加上楚国的兵力，诸侯们该来归附了吧？ 
English: Add to that the military power of the state of Chu, and the lords should have annexed it, right?

古文：对曰： 其在志也，国为大城，未有利者。
现代文：范无宇回答说： 书籍上记载说，国家修建大城，没有什么好处。
English: Fan Muyu replied, "It is recorded in books that there is no benefit for a country to build a big city.

古文：昔郑有京、栎，卫有蒲、戚，宋有萧、蒙，鲁有弁、费，齐有渠丘，晋有曲沃，秦有徵、衙。
现代文：以前郑国有京城、栎城，卫国有蒲城、戚城，宋国有萧城、蒙城，鲁国有弁城、费城，齐国有渠丘城，晋国有曲沃城，秦国有徵城、衙城。
English: In the past, Zhengzhou had the capital city and Shicheng, Wei had the Pu city and Qicheng, Song had the Xiao city and Mengcheng, Lu had the Bencheng and Philadelphia, Qi had the Quqiu city, Jin had the Quwo city, and Qin had the Zhengcheng and Shicheng.

古文：叔段以京患庄公，郑几不克，栎人实使郑子不得其位。
现代文：叔段因为京城而给郑庄公制造忧患，郑国几乎不能战胜他，栎人傅瑕使郑子丢掉了君位。
English: Uncle Duan caused trouble for Zheng Zhuang Gong because of the capital city. Zheng Guo could hardly defeat him. Zheng Zi lost his position as ruler because of Uncle Duan's incompetence.

古文：卫蒲、戚实出献公，宋萧、蒙实弑昭公，鲁弁、费实弱襄公，齐渠丘实杀无知，晋曲沃实纳齐师，秦徵、衙实难桓、景，皆志于诸侯，此其不利者也。
现代文：卫国蒲城、戚城的邑主驱逐了卫献公，宋国萧城、蒙城的邑主杀害了宋昭公，鲁国弁城、费城的邑主削弱了鲁襄公的势力，齐国渠丘的邑主杀死了公孙无知，晋国曲沃的邑主被齐军接纳而作乱，秦国徵城、衙城的邑主侵逼秦桓公和秦景公，这些在各诸侯国都有记载，都是不利的例子。
English: The lord of the town of Pucheng and Qicheng in the defense of the country expelled Wei Xian Gong, the lord of the town of Xiaocheng and Mengcheng in the Song Dynasty killed Song Zhaogong, the lord of the capital of the State of Lu and Philadelphia weakened the power of Lu Xianggong, the lord of the town of Quqiuqiu in the State of Qi killed Gongsun Wuzhong, the lord of the town of Quwo in the State of Jin was accepted by the Qi army and caused a disturbance, and the lord of the town of the State of Qin requisitioned the town of Qicheng and invaded and forced Qin H

古文： 且夫制城邑若体性焉，有首领股肱，至于手拇毛脉，大能掉小，故变而不勤。
现代文： 而且修筑城邑就像人的身体一样，有头和四肢，一直到手指、毛发和血脉，大的部位能调动小的部位，所以行动起来不劳累。
English: Moreover, building a city is like a human body, with a head and limbs, right down to the fingers, hair and blood vessels. Large parts can move small parts, so it is not tiring to move.

古文：地有高下，天有晦明，民有君臣，国有都鄙，古之制也。
现代文：地势有高低，天气有阴晴，人分君臣，国家有国都和边邑，这是自古以来的制度。
English: The system has been in place since ancient times, with different geographical locations, different weather conditions, different rulers and ministers, and different capitals and border towns.

古文：先王惧其不帅，故制之以义，旌之以服，行之以礼，辩之以名，书之以文，道之以言。
现代文：先王怕有人不遵守它，所以用德义来制约它，用服饰来彰显它，用礼仪来推行它，用名号来分辨它，用文字记载它，用语言表述它。
English: The ancients were afraid that some people would not abide by it, so they used virtue to restrict it, used clothing to highlight it, used etiquette to promote it, used names to distinguish it, recorded it in writing, and expressed it in language.

古文：既其失也，易物之由。
现代文：及至丧失了它，就是因为改变了尊卑秩序的缘故。
English: And to the extent that it has been lost, it is because the order of superiority and inferiority has changed.

古文：夫边境者，国之尾也，譬之如牛马，处暑之既至，蝱䗽之既多，而不能掉其尾，臣亦惧之。
现代文：边境地区，是国家的尾部，譬如牛马，处暑到了，牛虻就聚集得越来越多，导致无法摆动尾巴了，我也害怕国家会这样。
English: The border area is the tail of the country, like a cow and a horse. When it gets hot, the calves gather more and more, making it impossible to swing the tail. I'm also afraid that the country will be like this.

古文：不然，是三城也，岂不使诸侯之心惕惕焉。 
现代文：否则，这三座城岂不能使诸侯的心感到害怕呢。 
English: Otherwise, will not these three cities terrify the hearts of the princes?

古文：子晳复命，王曰： 是知天咫，安知民则？
现代文：子皙回报楚灵王，灵王说： 这人只是稍微懂得天道，哪里知道治民的法则呢？
English: Zixuan replied to King Chuling, and King Ling said, "This man only knows a little about the heavenly way, but where does he know the rules for governing the people?

古文：是言诞也。 
现代文：这些话真是虚妄。 
English: These words are really nonsense.

古文：右尹子革侍，曰： 民，天之生也。知天，必知民矣。
现代文：右尹子革在旁陪侍，说： 百姓是上天生的，懂得天道，必然也懂百姓。
English: Right Yin Ziga accompanied by his attendants, said: The people are born on the top, understand the heavenly way, and inevitably understand the people.

古文：是其言可以惧哉！ 
现代文：对于他的这些话应该警惕呀！ 
English: We should be wary of his words!

古文：三年，陈、蔡及不羹人纳弃疾而弑灵王。
现代文：过了三年，陈国、蔡国和不羹的人接纳了弃疾，杀死了楚灵王。
English: After three years, Chen Guo, Cai Guo and other people accepted the abandonment disease and killed King Chuling.

