古文：昭阳作噩，一年。
现代文：昭阳作噩，一年。
English: Shoyang was ill for a year.

古文：世祖武皇帝下永明十一年
现代文：齐武帝永明十一年
English: The 11th year of Emperor Yongming of Qiwu

古文：春，正月，以骠骑大将军王敬则为司空，镇军大将军陈显达为江州刺史。
现代文：春季，正月，南齐任命骠骑大将军王敬则为司空，任命镇军大将军陈显达为江州刺史。
English: In the spring and the first month of the year, Nanzhi appointed the cavalry general Wang Jing as the deputy commander, and appointed the town army general Chen Xianda as the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：显达自以门寒位重，每迁官，常有愧惧之色，戒其子勿以富贵陵人；而诸子多事豪侈，显达闻之，不悦。
现代文：陈显达总认为自己出身寒门，却担任这么显要的官职，所以，每次升官时，他都面带恐惧，表情羞愧，并且告诫他的儿子，不要依仗自己富贵尊荣而欺凌他人。但是，他的儿子们却常常追求豪华奢侈，陈显达听说后，非常不高兴。
English: Chen Xianda always thought that he was from a poor family, but he held such an important official position. Therefore, every time he was promoted, he was afraid, ashamed, and warned his son not to bully others based on his wealth and honor. However, his sons often pursued luxury. Chen Xianda was very unhappy when he heard this.

古文：子休尚为郢府主簿，过九江。显达曰： 麈尾蝇拂是王、谢家物，汝不须捉此！ 
现代文：他的儿子陈休尚担任郢府主簿的官职，途经九江，陈显达说： 麈尾、蝇拂，这些都是王家、谢家那样的人使用的东西，你不需要拿着它。 
English: His son, Chen Xiu Shang, held the official post of the chief accountant of the Government of the Republic of China. Passing through Jiujiang, Chen Xianda said: "The iris, the fly whisk, these are things that people like the Wang family and the Xie family use. You don't need to hold it.

古文：即取于前烧之。
现代文：说完，就把这些东西拿过来，当着儿子的面烧掉了。
English: After saying this, he took these things and burned them in front of his son.

古文：初，上于石头造露车三千乘，欲步道取彭城。
现代文：当初，武帝在石头城制造了三千辆没有篷帐的车辆，打算从陆路攻取彭城。
English: At first, Emperor Wu built three thousand vehicles without tents in Stone Town, intending to conquer Pengcheng by land.

古文：魏人知之，刘昶数泣诉于魏主，乞处边戍，招集遗民，以雪私耻。
现代文：北魏得知了这一情况。刘昶多次在北魏孝文帝面前哭泣、诉说，乞求派他到边界地带戍守，招收仍然怀念刘宋的百姓，向南齐报仇雪耻。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty learned about this, and Liu Bei repeatedly cried and pleaded in front of the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen, begging him to send him to the border area to recruit people who still remembered Liu Song, and to take revenge on Nanqi.

古文：魏主大会公卿于经武殿，以议南伐，于淮、泗间大积马刍。
现代文：孝文帝在经武殿招集文武官员，讨论南伐的事情，并在淮河、泗水之间贮备了很多喂马的草料。
English: Emperor Xiaowen called together civil and military officials at Jingwu Palace to discuss the Southern Expedition, and stored a lot of grass to feed horses between the Huaihe River and the Surabaya River.

古文：上闻之，以右卫将军崔慧景为豫州刺史以备之。
现代文：武帝听说了这一消息，任命右卫将军崔慧景为豫州刺史，防备北魏的入侵。
English: Emperor Wu heard the news and appointed the right guard general, Cui Huijing, to write the history of Yuzhou to prevent the invasion of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏遣员外散骑侍郎邢峦等来聘。
现代文：北魏派员外散骑侍郎邢峦等人来访。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent scouts and horsemen to visit, including the samurai Rong Zhou.

古文：峦，颖之孙也。
现代文：邢峦是邢颖的孙子。
English: Zhai is the grandson of Zhaiying.

古文：丙子，文惠太子长懋卒。
现代文：丙子，文惠太子萧长懋去世。
English: Xiao Changyao, the Prince of Wenhui, passed away.

古文：太子风韵甚和，上晚年好游宴，尚书曹事分送太子省之，由是威加内外。
现代文：萧长懋仪态风韵都很温和，武帝晚年喜欢游乐欢宴，就将尚书各曹的事务交给萧长懋处理，因此，萧长懋威望著称全国。
English: Xiao Changyu's manners and demeanor were very gentle. In his later years, Emperor Wu liked to have fun and feast, so he entrusted the affairs of Shang Shujiao to Xiao Changyu. Therefore, Xiao Changyu was famous throughout the country.

古文：太子性奢靡，治堂殿、园囿过于上宫，费以千万计，恐上望见之，乃傍门列修竹；凡诸服玩，率多僭侈。
现代文：萧长懋生性奢侈豪华，他修建自己的殿堂、花园，远远超过了武帝的宫殿，建筑费用都要以千万计算，他害怕武帝看见，就沿着殿门，种植了一排排修长的竹子。各种服饰、玩物，萧长懋大多都奢侈过分。
English: Xiao Changyu was born extravagant and luxurious. He built his own palace and garden, which far exceeded the palace of Emperor Wu. The construction costs were calculated in tens of millions. He was afraid that Emperor Wu would see it, so he planted rows of slender bamboo along the palace gate. All kinds of clothing, toys, Xiao Changyu are mostly extravagant.

古文：启于东田起小苑，使东宫将吏更番筑役，营城包巷，弥亘华远。
现代文：他请求武帝让他在东田建造一个小规模养禽畜的林苑，让东宫的将士们轮番充当修筑的工匠，营造城墙，围住街巷，伸展辽远，异常华丽。
English: He asked Emperor Wu to let him build a small-scale poultry farm in Dongtian, and let the generals of the East Palace take turns as craftsmen to build, build walls, surround streets and lanes, stretch far and wide, and are extremely gorgeous.

古文：上性虽严，多布耳目，太子所为，人莫敢以闻。
现代文：武帝性情虽然严厉，到处都有自己的耳目，但是，太子萧长懋的所作所为，却没有人敢告诉他。
English: Although Emperor Wu had a stern disposition and had his eyes and ears everywhere, no one dared to tell him what Prince Xiao Changtao had done.

古文：上尝过太子东田，见其壮丽，大怒，收监作主帅；太子皆藏之，由是大被诮责。
现代文：一次，武帝曾偶然路过东田，看见那里的建筑非常壮观华丽，于是，勃然大怒，下令逮捕监作主帅。萧长懋听说后，马上把他们全都藏了起来，为此，萧长懋受到严厉斥责。
English: Once, Emperor Wu happened to pass by Dongtian and saw that the buildings there were very spectacular and gorgeous, so he flew into a rage and ordered the arrest of the head coach. Xiao Changyao heard about it and immediately hid them all, for which Xiao Changyao was severely reprimanded.

古文：又使嬖人徐文景造辇及乘舆御物；上尝幸东宫，匆匆不暇藏辇，文景乃以佛像内辇中，故上不疑。
现代文：萧长懋又让自己宠爱的人徐文景制造皇帝专用的辇车和其他专用物件。武帝曾经亲临东宫，萧长懋没来得及将辇车收藏起来，徐文景急中生智，就赶快把一尊佛像放在辇车里，所以，武帝也就没有怀疑。
English: Emperor Wu once visited the East Palace in person. Xiao Changyu did not have time to collect the carriage, but Xu Wenjing quickly put a Buddha statue in the carriage. Therefore, Emperor Wu did not have any doubts.

古文：文景父陶仁谓文景曰： 我正当扫墓待丧耳！ 
现代文：徐文景的父亲徐陶仁曾经对徐文景说： 我现在正在打扫墓地，等待为你办丧事！ 
English: Xu Tao Ren, the father of Xu Wenjing, once said to Xu Wenjing: I am now cleaning the cemetery, waiting to do the funeral for you!

古文：仍移家避之。
现代文：徐陶仁将全家搬走，躲开徐文景远远的。
English: Xu Tao Ren moved the whole family away and hid far away from Xu Wenjing.

古文：后文景竟赐死，陶仁遂不哭。
现代文：后来，徐文景真的被下令自杀，徐陶仁并没有为此而哭泣。
English: Later, Xu Wenjing was really ordered to commit suicide, but Xu Tao Ren did not cry about it.

古文：及太子卒，上履行东宫，见其服玩，大怒，敕有司随事毁除。
现代文：太子萧长懋去世时，武帝有一天步行到了东宫，看见了萧长懋过去的那些奢华的服饰、玩物，极为愤怒，下令有关部门随即全都毁掉。
English: When Prince Xiao Changyu died, Emperor Wu walked to the East Palace one day, saw the luxurious clothes and toys of Xiao Changyu's past, was extremely angry, and ordered the relevant departments to immediately destroy them all.

古文：以竟陵王子良与太子善，而不启闻，并责之。
现代文：武帝认为，竟陵王萧子良平时和萧长懋关系最好，可他却没有把这些报告给自己，因此，他同时责备了萧子良。
English: Emperor Wu believed that Xiao Ziliang, the King of the Mausoleum, actually had the best relationship with Xiao Changyu in ordinary times, but he did not report these to himself. Therefore, he also blamed Xiao Ziliang.

古文：太子素恶西昌侯鸾，尝谓子良曰： 我意中殊不喜此人，不解其故，当由其福薄故也。 
现代文：太子萧长懋平时一直讨厌西昌侯萧鸾，他曾经对萧子良说： 我心里特别不喜欢这个人，不知道这是什么缘故，该是他福份浅吧。 
English: Prince Xiao Changyu had always disliked the Xichang lord Xiao Yu. He once said to Xiao Ziliang, "In my heart, I particularly dislike this person. I don't know what the reason is. Maybe it's because of his poor fortune."

古文：子良为之救解。
现代文：萧子良替萧鸾解释辩白。
English: Xiao Ziliang explained and defended Xiao Yao.

古文：及鸾得政，太子子孙无遗焉。
现代文：等到后来萧鸾夺取政权后，就将萧长懋的子孙全都杀了，没留一个。
English: Later, after Xiao Yu seized power, he killed all of Xiao Changyu's descendants, leaving none.

古文：二月，魏主始耕藉田于平城南。
现代文：二月，北魏孝文帝开始在平城城南主持扶犁耕田典礼。
English: In February, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty began to preside over the Fuxi Farming Ceremony in the south of Pingcheng.

古文：雍州刺史王奂恶宁蛮长史刘兴祖，收系狱，诬其构扇山蛮，欲为乱，敕送兴祖下建康；奂于狱中杀之，诈云自经。
现代文：雍州刺史王奂讨厌宁蛮长史刘兴祖，将刘兴祖逮捕入狱。
English: Wang Xi, the governor of Yongzhou, hated Liu Xingzu, the governor of Ningxia, and arrested and imprisoned Liu Xingzu.

古文：上大怒，遣中书舍人吕文显、直阁将军曹道刚将斋仗五百人收奂，敕镇西司马曹虎从江陵步道会襄阳。
现代文：诬陷刘兴祖造谣煽动山中蛮族，打算发动叛乱。武帝命令王奂把刘兴祖押送到建康处理，王奂却在狱中害死了刘兴祖，谎称他是上吊自杀。武帝极为愤怒，派中书舍人吕文显和直阁将军曹道刚，率领武装的禁卫军五百人前去雍州逮捕王奂。命令镇西司马曹虎从江陵出发，由陆路北上，与吕文显和曹道刚率领的军队在襄阳会师。
English: Emperor Wu ordered Wang Qi to send Liu Xingzu to Jiankang to be dealt with, but Wang Qi killed Liu Xingzu in prison, falsely claiming that he had hanged himself. Emperor Wu was extremely angry and sent Lu Wenxian, a scholar, and Cao Daogang, a general from Zhigang, to lead 500 armed guards to Yongzhou to arrest Wang Qi. He ordered the town of Xi Sima Cao Hu to leave Jiangling and travel north by land to meet the army led by Lu Wenxian and Cao Daogang in Xiangyang.

古文：奂子彪，素凶险，奂不能制。
现代文：王奂的儿子王彪，平日凶狠险诈，连王奂都管不了。
English: Wang Yao's son, Wang Biao, is usually vicious and treacherous. Even Wang Yao can't control him.

古文：长史殷睿，奂之婿也。谓奂曰： 曹、吕来，既不见真敕，恐为奸变，正宜录取，驰启闻耳。 
现代文：长史殷睿是王奂的女婿，他对王奂说： 曹道刚和吕文显来到这里，我们没有看到皇帝真正的诏书，恐怕这是什么阴谋诡计，我们正好逮捕他们，然后，再骑马去建康向皇上报告。 
English: Changshi Yinrui was Wang Yao's son-in-law. He said to Wang Yao: Cao Daogang and Lu Wenxian came here, we didn't see the emperor's real edict, I'm afraid this is some kind of conspiracy, we just happened to arrest them, and then we rode to Jiankang to report to the emperor.

古文：奂纳之。
现代文：王奂接受了殷睿的建议。
English: Wang Yao accepted Yin Rui's suggestion.

古文：彪辄发州兵千馀人，开库配甲仗，出南堂，陈兵，闭门拒守。
现代文：于是，王彪就派出一千多名雍州州府内的将士，打开武器库，给每人发放一套铠甲兵器，然后，走出南堂，分配兵力，关闭城门死守雍州城。
English: As a result, Wang Biao sent more than a thousand soldiers from the Yongzhou prefectural government, opened the arsenal, issued a set of armored weapons to each person, and then went out of the South Hall, allocated troops, closed the gate and defended Yongzhou City.

古文：奂门生郑羽叩头启奂，乞出城迎台使，奂曰： 我不作贼，欲先遣启自申；正恐曹、吕辈小人相陵藉，故且闭门自守耳。 
现代文：王奂的学生郑羽，向王奂叩头，请求王奂到城外迎接朝廷派来的官员，王奂说： 我并没有叛乱，打算预先派人去建康向皇上申诉。正是害怕遭到曹道刚和吕文显等一些奸诈小人的欺凌侮辱、随意践踏，因此，暂时关闭城门，自我防守罢了。 
English: Zheng Yu, a student of Wang Xuan, bowed to Wang Xuan and asked Wang Xuan to go outside the city to meet the officials sent by the imperial court. Wang Xuan said: I did not rebel, I planned to send someone to Jiankang to appeal to the emperor in advance. It was precisely because I was afraid of being bullied, insulted and trampled on by some treacherous villains such as Cao Daogang and Lu Wenxian that I temporarily closed the city gate in self-defense.

古文：彪遂出，与虎军战，兵败，走归。
现代文：王彪于是走出城门，和曹虎率领的军队作战，结果被打败，逃回城里。
English: Wang Biao then went out of the city gate and fought with the army led by Cao Hu. As a result, he was defeated and fled back to the city.

古文：三月，乙亥，司马黄瑶起、宁蛮长史河东裴叔业于城内起兵，攻奂，斩之，执彪及弟爽、弼、殷睿，皆伏诛。
现代文：三月，乙亥，司马黄瑶起和宁蛮长史河东人裴叔业在雍州城内发动兵变，进攻王奂，并斩杀了他，逮捕了王彪及王彪的弟弟王爽、王弼和殷睿，全部斩首。
English: In March, Yi Hai, Sima Huang Rongqi, and Ning Banzhong, a man with a long history in the east of the river, Pei Shuye, launched a mutiny in the city of Yongzhou, attacked Wang Yao, and killed him, arrested Wang Biao and Wang Biao's brother Wang Shuang, Wang Yao and Yin Rui, and beheaded them all.

古文：彪兄融、琛死于建康，琛弟秘书丞肃独得脱，奔魏。
现代文：王彪的哥哥王融、王琛在建康被处死，只有王琛的弟弟、秘书丞王肃得以逃脱，投奔了北魏。
English: Wang Biao's elder brothers, Wang Rong and Wang Yao, were executed in Jiankang. Only Wang Yao's younger brother, secretary Wang Su, was able to escape and fled to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：夏，四月，甲午，立南郡王昭业为皇太孙，东宫文武悉改为太孙官属，以太子妃琅邪王氏为皇太孙太妃，南郡王妃何氏为皇太孙妃。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲午，武帝立南郡王萧昭业为皇太孙，太子宫内的文武官属，全都改为太孙的官属。武帝又封太子妃琅邪人王氏为皇太孙太妃，南郡王妃何婧英为皇太孙妃。
English: In the summer, in April, on the afternoon of the first day of the month, Emperor Wu designated Wang Xiao Zhaoye of Nan County as the grandchild of the emperor, and all the civil and military officials in the princess's womb were changed to the official subordinates of the grandchild of the emperor. Emperor Wu also made the prince's wife, the wicked Wang Shi, the grandchild of the emperor, and the grandchild of the emperor, the granddaughter of the emperor, the granddaughter of the emperor, the granddaughter of the emperor.

古文：妃戢，之女也。
现代文：何婧英是何戢的女儿。
English: He Jianying is the daughter of He Yao.

古文：魏太尉丕等请建中宫，戊戌，立皇后冯氏。
现代文：北魏太尉拓跋丕等人，请求孝文帝正式册封皇后。戊戌，册封冯清为皇后。
English: Northern Wei Taifeng Tuobao and others petitioned Emperor Xiaowen to officially crown her as empress. Wuyao crowned Feng Qing as empress.

古文：后，熙之女也。
现代文：冯皇后是冯熙的女儿。
English: Empress Feng is the daughter of Feng Xi.

古文：魏主以《白虎通》云： 王者不臣妻之父母 ，下诏令太师上书不称臣，入朝不拜；熙固辞。
现代文：孝文帝根据《白虎通》上说： 君王不可以把妻子的父母作为臣属 ，下诏命令太师冯熙呈递奏章时，不再称臣，进入朝廷不用叩拜，但冯熙对此坚决辞谢。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said according to the "White Tiger" that: The king should not treat his wife's parents as his vassals. He issued an edict ordering Grand Master Feng Xi to no longer call himself a vassal when presenting a musical composition, and to enter the imperial court without bowing. However, Feng Xi firmly declined to do so.

古文：光城蛮帅征虏将军田益宗帅部落四千馀户叛，降于魏。
现代文：光城蛮人首领、征虏将军田益宗率领自己部落四千多户人家反叛，向北魏投降。
English: The leader of the Guangcheng barbarians, the conscript general Tian Yuesong, led more than 4,000 families of his tribe to rebel and surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：五月，壬戌，魏主宴四庙子孙于宣文堂，亲与之齿，用家人礼。
现代文：五月，壬戌，北魏孝文帝在宣文堂摆设酒席，宴请太武帝以下四代皇帝的子孙，亲自和他们在一起谈年龄，论辈份，用对待家里人的礼节对待他们。
English: In May, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty held a banquet in the Xuanwen Hall, inviting the descendants of the four generations of emperors from the Taiwu Emperor onward. He met with them in person to discuss their ages and generations, and treated them with the etiquette of family members.

古文：甲子，魏主临朝堂，引公卿以下决疑政，录囚徒。帝谓司空穆亮曰： 自今朝廷政事，日中以前，卿等先自论议；日中以后，朕与卿等共决之。 
现代文：甲子，孝文帝来到金銮殿，接见公卿以下官员，裁决政务上姷囊赡盐侍猓蟛榧窃厍舴傅陌妇怼⑽牡鄱运究漳铝了担骸按酉衷诳迹院蟪廷上的政务，在中午以前，由你们自己先商量讨论，中午过后，朕和你们一块儿讨论裁决。 
English: First son, Emperor Xiaowen came to the Golden Pavilion, met with officials below the nobility, and made a ruling on the government affairs. Before noon, you should first discuss and discuss, and after noon, I will discuss the ruling with you.

古文：丙子，以宜都王铿为南豫州刺史。
现代文：丙子，南齐任命宜都王萧铿为南豫州刺史。
English: Nanzi has appointed Yidu Wang Xiaojun as the prefect of South Henan Province.

古文：先是庐陵王子卿为南豫州刺史，之镇，道中戏部伍为水军；上闻之，大怒，杀其典签，以铿代之。
现代文：在这之前，曾任命庐陵王萧子卿为南豫州刺史，但萧子卿在前往任所的途中，把自己率领的军队假扮成水军模样取乐，武帝听说后，极为愤怒，下令杀了萧子卿的典签，又另派萧铿前往南豫接替萧子卿。
English: Prior to this, Xiao Ziqing, the King of Fuling, had been appointed as the chief historian of South Henan Province. However, when Xiao Ziqing was on his way to the office, he disguised the army he was leading as a naval force for fun. Upon hearing this, Emperor Wu was extremely angry and ordered Xiao Ziqing's signature to be killed. He also sent Xiao Ziqing to South Henan Province to succeed Xiao Ziqing.

古文：子卿还第，上终身不与相见。
现代文：萧子卿返回自己的家里，武帝直到去世，也不和他相见。
English: Xiao Zicheng returned to his home, and Emperor Wu did not see him again until his death.

古文：襄阳蛮首雷婆思等帅户千馀求内徙于魏，魏人处之沔北。
现代文：襄阳蛮酋长雷婆思等人，率领一千多户居民向北魏投降，请求迁移到北魏境内居住，北魏把他们安置在沔水以北。
English: Xiangyang barbarian chieftain Lei Bo Si and others, led more than a thousand residents to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty and requested to move to live in the territory of the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Northern Wei Dynasty placed them north of Surabaya.

古文：魏主以平城地寒，六月雨雪，风沙常起，将迁都洛阳；恐群臣不从，乃议大举伐齐，欲以胁众。
现代文：魏孝文帝因为平城气候寒冷，夏季六月时还在下雪，而且经常狂风大作，飞沙漫天，所以，准备把京都迁到洛阳。但他又担心文武官员们不同意，于是，提议大规模进攻南齐，打算以这种名义胁迫大家。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowen was preparing to move Kyoto to Luoyang because of the cold weather in Pingcheng, where it was still snowing in the summer in June, and there were often violent winds and flying sand. However, he was worried that the civil and military officials would not agree, so he proposed a large-scale attack on Nanqi, intending to coerce everyone in this name.

古文：斋于明堂左个，使太常卿王谌筮之，遇 革 ，帝曰：  汤、武革命，顺乎天而应乎人。 
现代文：在明堂南厢东边的偏殿斋戒之后，让太常卿王谌占卜，得到 革卦 ，孝文帝说：  商汤王和周武王进行变革，是适应上天之命，顺应百姓之心的。 
English: After fasting in the hall on the east side of the south wing of the Ming Hall, Emperor Xiaowen said: Shang Tang Wang and Zhou Wu Wang carried out reforms to adapt to the mandate of Heaven and to conform to the hearts of the people.

古文：吉孰大焉！ 
现代文：没有比这更吉祥的了。 
English: Nothing could be more auspicious.

古文：群臣莫敢言。
现代文：文武官员没有人敢说什么。
English: No one from the education and military affairs officials dared to say anything.

古文：尚书任城王澄曰： 陛下弈叶重光，帝有中土；今出师以征未服，而得汤、武革命之象，未为全吉也。 
现代文：尚书、任城王拓跋澄说： 陛下继承几代累积下来的大业，并使之发扬光大，拥有了中原土地，而如今却要讨伐还没有臣服的对象，在这时得到了商汤王和周武王变革的象辞，恐怕这并不全是吉利。 
English: Shangshu and Rencheng Wang Tuoba said: His Majesty inherited the great cause accumulated over several generations, and carried it forward, owned the Central Plains land, but now he has to fight the object that has not yet been submitted. At this time, he got the metaphor of the reform of Shang Tang Wang and Zhou Wu Wang. I'm afraid this is not all good luck.

古文：帝厉声曰： 繇云： 大人虎变 ，何言不吉！ 
现代文：孝文帝立刻严厉地说： 繇辞说： 大人物实施老虎一样的变革 ，你为什么要说这不吉利呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen immediately said sternly: Quotation said: Great men carry out reforms like tigers, why do you say this is unlucky?

古文：澄曰： 陛下龙兴已久，何得今乃虎变！ 
现代文：拓跋澄说： 陛下作为飞龙兴起已经很久了，怎么到今天又实施如同老虎一样的变革？ 
English: Tuoba said, "It has been a long time since Your Majesty emerged as a flying dragon. How is it possible that you are still implementing changes like a tiger?

古文：帝作色曰： 社稷我之社稷，任城欲沮众邪！ 
现代文：孝文帝立刻发怒说： 国家，是我的国家，任城王打算要阻止大家吗？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen immediately became angry and said, "The country is my country. Is Ren Shiwang planning to stop everyone?

古文：澄曰： 社稷虽为陛下之有，臣为社稷之臣，安可知危而不言！ 
现代文：拓跋澄说： 国家虽然是陛下所有，而我是国家的臣属，怎么可以明知危险而不说出来呢？ 
English: Tuoba said: Although the country is owned by His Majesty, and I am a subject of the country, how can I know the danger and not speak out?

古文：帝久之乃解，曰： 各言其志，夫亦何伤！ 
现代文：孝文帝过了很长时间才缓和了气色，说： 每个人都该说出自己的看法，这又有什么关系！ 
English: It took a long time for Emperor Xiaowen to soften his tone and say: Everyone should express their own opinion, what does it matter!

古文：既还宫，召澄入见，逆谓之曰： 向者《革卦》，今当更与卿论之。
现代文：孝文帝回到皇官，立刻召见拓跋澄，劈头就说： 刚才关于 革卦 的事，现在要进一步和你讨论一下。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen returned to the imperial office, he immediately summoned Tuoba Cheng and said at once, "I would like to discuss with you further about the matter of Ge Gua just now.

古文：明堂之忿，恐人人竞言，沮我大计，故以声色怖文武耳。
现代文：在明堂上，我之所以大发脾气，是因为害怕大家争先恐后地发言，破坏了我一个大的决策，所以，我就声色俱厉，以此吓唬那些文武官员罢了。
English: In public, the reason why I lost my temper was because I was afraid that everyone would rush to speak and ruin a big decision for me, so I just made a lot of noise to scare those civil and military officials.

古文：想识朕意。 
现代文：我想，你会了解朕的用心。 
English: I think you will understand my intentions.

古文：因屏人，谓澄曰： 今日之举，诚为不易。
现代文：于是命令左右侍从退下，对拓跋澄说： 今天我所要做的这件事，确实是很不容易的。
English: He then ordered his attendants to step back and said to Tuoba: "What I am about to do today is really very difficult.

古文：但国家兴自朔土，徙居平城；此乃用武之地，非可文治。
现代文：我们国家是在北方疆土上建立起来的，后来又迁都到平城。但是，平城只是用武力开疆拓土的地方，而不宜进行治理教化。
English: Our country was established in the northern territory, and later the capital was moved to Pingcheng. However, Pingcheng is just a place to open up the territory by force, and it is not appropriate to carry out governance and enlightenment.

古文：今将移风易俗，其道诚难，朕欲因此迁宅中原，卿以为何如？ 
现代文：现在，我打算进行改变风俗习惯的重大变革，这条路走起来确实困难，朕只是想利用大军南下征伐的声势，将京都迁到中原，你认为怎么样？ 
English: Now, I intend to carry out a major reform to change customs and habits. This road is really difficult to walk. I just want to take advantage of the momentum of the army's southward conquest and move Kyoto to the Central Plains. What do you think?

古文：澄曰： 陛下欲卜宅中土，以经略四海，此周、汉之所以兴隆也。 
现代文：拓跋澄说： 陛下您打算把京都迁到中原，用以扩大疆土，征服四海，这一想法也正是以前周王朝和汉王朝兴盛不衰的原因。 
English: Tuoba said: Your Majesty, you plan to move Kyoto to the Central Plains to expand the territory and conquer the four seas. This idea is also the reason why the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty flourished.

古文：帝曰： 北人习常恋故，必将惊扰，奈何？ 
现代文：孝文帝说： 北方人习惯留恋于旧有的生活方式，那时，他们一定会惊恐骚动起来，怎么办？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "Northerners are used to clinging to the old way of life. At that time, they will surely panic and riot. What should we do?

古文：澄曰： 非常之事，故非常人之所及。
现代文：拓跋澄回答说： 不平凡的事，原来就不是平凡的人所能做得了的。
English: Tuoba replied, "Extraordinary things cannot be done by ordinary people.

古文：陛下断自圣心，彼亦何所能为！ 
现代文：陛下的决断，是出自您圣明的内心，他们又能有什么办法呢？ 
English: Your Majesty's decision comes from your sacred heart. What can they do?

古文：帝曰； 任城，吾之子房也！ 
现代文：孝文帝高兴地说： 任城王真是我的张子房呀！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said happily: Ren Chengwang is really my Zhang Zifu!

古文：六月，丙戌，命作河桥，欲以济师。
现代文：六月，丙戌，北魏孝文帝下令在黄河上修筑大桥，准备让南下大军由桥上渡过黄河。
English: In June, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty ordered the construction of a bridge over the Yellow River to prepare for the army to cross the Yellow River from the bridge.

古文：秘书监卢渊上表，以为： 前世承平之主，未尝亲御六军，决胜行陈之间；岂非胜之不足为武，不胜有亏威望乎！
现代文：秘书监卢渊上书，认为： 以前太平时代的君主，从来没有过亲自统率大规模军队作战，在双方交战阵地上决一胜负的，还不是因为胜利了并不足以显示勇敢，而失败了则会使自己的威望受到损失吗？
English: Lu Yuan, the superintendent of secretaries, wrote a letter, saying: Before the Taiping era, there had never been a monarch who personally led a large-scale army in battle and decided the outcome of the battle on both sides. Was it not because victory was not enough to show bravery, while defeat would cause his prestige to be lost?

古文：昔魏武以弊卒一万破袁绍，谢玄以步兵三千摧苻秦，胜负之变，决于须臾，不在众寡也。 
现代文：以前，曹操统率一万名疲惫不堪的士卒打败了袁绍，谢玄率领三千名步兵，摧毁了苻坚的大军，胜利与失败的变化，决定于转眼的工夫，而不在于人数多少。 
English: In the past, Cao Cao led ten thousand exhausted soldiers to defeat Yuan Shao, and Xie Xuan led three thousand infantrymen to destroy the great army of Yu Jian. The changes in victory and defeat are determined by the time of the blink of an eye, not by the number of people.

古文：诏报曰： 承平之主，所以不亲戎事者，或以同轨无敌，或以懦劣偷安。
现代文：孝文帝下诏回答说： 太平时代的君主，之所以不亲自统率军队作战，有的是因为天下已经统一，不再存在敌人；有的是因为懦弱卑怯，苟且偷安。
English: Emperor Xiaowen replied: The reason why the monarch of the Taiping era did not personally lead the army into battle was partly because the world had been unified and there was no longer an enemy, and partly because of cowardice and cowardice.

古文：今谓之同轨则未然，比之懦劣则可耻，必若王者不当亲戎，则先王制革辂，何所施也？
现代文：现在说是天下已经统一、太平，实际上并不是这样；与懦弱卑劣的人相比，又是十分可耻的。如果太平时期的君主一定不应该亲自统率军队作战，那么，古代的君王特别制造的战斗时使用的革车，又会有什么用呢？
English: Now it is said that the world has been unified and peaceful, but in fact it is not so; compared with the cowardly and despicable people, it is very shameful. If the monarch in peacetime must not personally lead the army to fight, then what is the use of the leather chariot specially made by the ancient kings for use in battle?

古文：魏武之胜，盖由仗顺，苻氏之败，亦由失政；岂寡必能胜众，弱必能制强邪！ 
现代文：曹操之所以能取得胜利，是因为他依仗名正言顺。苻坚之所以失败了，其根源也是由于他失德无道。怎么能是人数少就一定能战胜人数多，力量弱就一定能战胜力量强的呢？ 
English: The reason why Cao Cao was able to achieve victory was because he relied on his reputation for honesty. The reason why He Jian failed was also due to his lack of morality. How can it be that a small number of people can definitely defeat a large number of people, and a weak force can definitely defeat a strong force?

古文：丁未，魏主讲武，命尚书李冲典武选。
现代文：丁未，孝文帝讲论武事，命令尚书李冲负责选拔将官。
English: Ding Wei, Emperor Xiaowen lectured on martial arts, and ordered Shangshu Li Chong to be responsible for selecting generals.

古文：建康僧法智与徐州民周盘龙等作乱，夜，攻徐州城，入之；刺史王玄邈讨诛之。
现代文：南齐建康僧侣法智和徐州平民周盘龙等人一起发动叛乱，乘夜进攻徐州城，突入城中。徐州刺史王玄邈率军前来讨伐，杀了法智和周盘龙。
English: Nanqi Jiankang monk Fa Zhi and Xuzhou civilian Zhou Pan Long and others launched a rebellion together, attacked Xuzhou city at night, and entered the city. Xuzhou prince Wang Xuanqin led the army to fight, and killed Fa Zhi and Zhou Pan Long.

古文：秋，七月，癸丑，魏立皇子恂为太子。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸丑，孝文帝立皇子拓跋恂为太子。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Xiaowen made Prince Tuoba the crown prince.

古文：戊午，魏中外戒严，发露布及移书，称当南伐。
现代文：戊子，北魏实行戒严管制，发表正式文告，并将文告转交各地，宣称要南伐。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei implemented martial law control, issued an official announcement, and forwarded the announcement to various regions, claiming to start the Southern Expedition.

古文：诏发扬、徐州民丁，广设召募以备之。
现代文：齐武帝立刻下诏，发动扬州、徐州男子入伍，同时在各地大肆征兵买马，用以防备北魏大军的入侵。
English: Emperor Qiwu immediately issued an edict, mobilizing men from Yangzhou and Xuzhou to enlist in the army, while at the same time recruiting soldiers and buying horses all over the country to prevent the invasion of the Northern Wei army.

古文：中书郎王融，自恃人地，三十内望为公辅。
现代文：中书郎王融依仗自己才能和门第，不到三十岁就打算作公辅。
English: Chushiro Wang Rong relied on his own talent and disciples, and planned to become a public assistant before the age of thirty.

古文：尝夜直省中，抚案叹曰： 为尔寂寂，邓禹笑人！ 
现代文：他有一次在宫中值夜，自己手抚桌子，叹息说： 竟然孤寂到如此地步，被邓禹所耻笑啊！ 
English: Once, when he was on duty at night in the palace, he stroked the table with his hand and said with a sigh, "How can I be so lonely, and be laughed at by Deng Yu!"

古文：行逢硃雀桁开，喧湫不得进，捶车壁叹曰： 车前无八驺，何得称丈夫！ 
现代文：有一次，他路过朱雀桥，正赶上朱雀桥打开浮桥，行人车马不能前进，喧闹拥挤，王融就用手捶打车厢，叹息说： 车前没有八个骑兵开道，怎么能称得上是大丈夫！ 
English: Once, when he was passing the Suzaku Bridge, he was just in time for the Suzaku Bridge to open the pontoon bridge, the pedestrian carriages could not move forward, the noise was crowded, Wang Rong hit the carriages with his handkerchief, sighing and saying: If there are not eight cavalrymen in front of the car, how can it be called okay!

古文：竟陵王子良爱其文学，特亲厚之。
现代文：竟陵王萧子良喜爱王融的文才，所以，对他特别优厚亲热。
English: In fact, King Xiao Ziliang loved Wang Rong's literary talent, so he was particularly fond of him.

古文：融见上有北伐之志，数上书奖劝，因大习骑射。
现代文：王融发现武帝有北上征伐的意思，于是，他多次上书，鼓动催促，并因此努力学习骑马射箭。
English: Wang Rong discovered that Emperor Wu had the intention of conquering the north, so he wrote several times, encouraged and urged, and therefore worked hard to learn horse riding and archery.

古文：及魏将入寇，子良于东府募兵，版融宁朔将军，使典其事。
现代文：北魏大军即将前来进犯时，萧子良就在东府开始招兵买兵，任命王融为宁朔将军，让他主持这件事。
English: When the Northern Wei army was about to attack, Xiao Ziliang began to recruit soldiers in Dongfu and appointed Wang Rong as the general of Ningshuo to preside over the matter.

古文：融倾意招纳，得江西伧楚数百人，并有干用。
现代文：王融尽力去招收人马，招集了几百名长江以西古楚国地区的武人，他们每个人都很有才干，可以担当重任。
English: Wang Rong tried his best to recruit men and women, and gathered several hundred warriors from the Yangtze River to the west of ancient Chu, each of whom was very talented and could take on important tasks.

古文：会上不豫，诏子良甲仗入延昌殿侍医药；子良以萧衍、范云等皆为帐内军主。
现代文：正赶上武帝身体不舒服，他命令萧子良全副武装去延昌殿，为他服侍医药。萧子良就任命萧衍、范云等人都担任帐内军主。
English: Just as Emperor Wu fell ill, he ordered Xiao Ziliang to go to Yanchang Palace in full armor to serve him as a doctor. Xiao Ziliang then appointed Xiao Yan, Fan Yun and others to serve as commanders of the army.

古文：戊辰，遣江州刺史陈显达镇樊城。
现代文：戊辰，派江州刺史陈显达镇守樊城。
English: Wuchen, Paizhou, Jiangsu, Chen Xianda, Zhenguo, and Qiancheng.

古文：上虑朝野忧遑，力疾召木府奏正声伎。
现代文：武帝恐怕他的病情会引起朝廷内和民间的担忧恐惧，所以，又强挺着，征召皇家乐队进宫演奏正统雅乐。
English: Emperor Wu was afraid that his illness would cause concern and fear in the court and among the people, so he summoned the royal orchestra to the palace to play orthodox classical music.

古文：子良日夜在内，太孙间日参承。
现代文：萧子良日日夜夜守在禁宫，皇太孙萧昭业每隔一天就要进来问安、侍奉。
English: Xiao Ziliang kept watch at the Forbidden City day and night, and the Emperor's grandson Xiao Zhaoye had to come in every other day to say hello and serve.

古文：戊寅，上疾亟，暂绝；太孙未入，内外惶惧，百僚皆已变服。
现代文：戊寅，武帝病势加重，一时气闷晕倒。这时皇太孙萧昭业还没有入宫，宫内宫外人人惶恐不安，文武百官也都穿上了丧服。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu's condition worsened and he fainted from exhaustion. At this time, Emperor Wu's grandson Xiao Zhaoye had not yet entered the palace, and everyone inside and outside the palace was in a state of fear and anxiety. Hundreds of civil and military officials also donned mourning clothes.

古文：王融欲矫诏立子良，诏草已立。
现代文：王融打算假传圣旨，命萧子良继承王位，他已将诏书草稿写好。
English: Wang Rong planned to falsify the imperial edict and order Xiao Ziliang to succeed to the throne. He had already prepared a draft of the edict.

古文：萧衍谓范云曰： 道路籍籍，皆云将有非常之举。
现代文：萧衍对范云说： 民间已是议论纷纷，都说宫内可能要发生不一般的情况。
English: Xiao Yan said to Fan Yun: People are already talking about it, saying that there may be unusual circumstances in the palace.

古文：王元长非济世才，视其败也。 云曰： 忧国家者，唯有王中书耳。 
现代文：王融并不是治理国家的人才，他眼看着就要出事了。 范云说： 忧国忧民的人，也只有王融一人了。 
English: Wang Rong is not a talented person to govern the country, he is about to have an accident. Fan Yun said: Wang Rong is the only one who is worried about the country and the people.

古文：衍曰： 忧国，欲为周、召，欲为竖刁邪？ 
现代文：萧衍说： 忧国忧民，是想要当周公、召公呢，还是想当齐桓公死后的竖刁呢？ 
English: Xiao Yan said, "If you are worried about the country and the people, do you want to be Zhou Gong or Zhao Gong, or do you want to be the pillar after the death of Qi Kuan Gong?"

古文：云不敢答。
现代文：范云不敢回答。
English: Fan Yun did not dare to answer.

古文：及太孙来，王融戎服绛衫，于中书省阁口断东宫仗不得进。
现代文：等到萧昭业入宫，王融已是全副武装，穿着红色战服，站在中书省厅前要道，截住东宫卫队不让他们进入。
English: By the time Xiao Zhaoye entered the palace, Wang Rong was already fully armed, wearing a red combat uniform, standing on the main road in front of the Chinese Book Ministry, intercepting the East Palace Guards and preventing them from entering.

古文：顷之，上复苏，问太孙所在，因召东宫器甲皆入，以朝事委尚书左仆射西昌侯鸾。
现代文：过了一会儿，武帝醒转过来，问皇太孙萧昭业在哪里，于是召东宫卫队全部入宫，武帝把国家大事全部托付给了尚书左仆射、西昌侯萧鸾。
English: After a while, Emperor Wu woke up, turned around and asked the imperial grandson Xiao Zhaotong where he was, so he called all the East Palace Guards to enter the palace. Emperor Wu entrusted all the national events to Shang Shuxu Zuozhuai and Xichang Hou Xiaoqi.

古文：俄而上殂，融处分以子良兵禁诸门。
现代文：不一会儿，武帝就去世了。王融采取紧急措施，命令萧子良的军队接管宫城各门。
English: In a short time, Emperor Wu died. Wang Rong took emergency measures and ordered Xiao Ziliang's army to take over all the gates of Miyagi.

古文：鸾闻之，急驰至云龙门，不得进，鸾曰： 有敕召我！ 
现代文：萧鸾得到消息后，立刻上马飞奔到云龙门，但被守在那里的卫士挡住，不让他进去，萧鸾说： 皇上有诏令，让我晋见。 
English: After Xiao Yao got the news, he immediately got on his horse and galloped to the Yunlong Gate, but he was blocked by the guards there and was not allowed to enter. Xiao Yao said, "The emperor has issued an edict, let me see him."

古文：排之而入，奉太孙登殿，命左右扶出子良；指麾部署，音响如钟，殿中无不从命。
现代文：接着，他推开卫士，直接闯了进去，马上拥戴皇太孙萧昭业登基即位，命令左右侍从把萧子良搀扶出金銮殿。萧鸾指挥和安排警卫戒备，声音洪亮如钟，殿内所有的官员侍从，没有一个不听他的命令的。
English: Next, he pushed aside the guards and went straight in. He immediately embraced the Emperor's grandson, Xiao Zhaoye, on his accession to the throne, and ordered the attendants on his right and left to escort Xiao Ziliang from the Golden Pavilion. Xiao Ziliang commanded and arranged for the guards to be on alert, and his voice was as loud as a bell. All the officials and attendants in the hall did not disobey his orders.

古文：融知不遂，释服还省，叹曰： 公误我！ 
现代文：王融知道自己的计划不能实现，也就只好脱下战服，返回中书省，叹息着说： 萧子良耽误了我。 
English: Wang Rong knew that his plan could not be realized, so he had no choice but to take off his uniform and return to the Chinese Literature Department, sighing and saying: Xiao Ziliang delayed me.

古文：由是郁林王深怨之。
现代文：从此以后，萧昭业对王融深为怨恨。
English: Since then, Xiao Zhaoye has harbored a deep grudge against Wang Rongru.

古文：遗诏曰： 太孙进德日茂，社稷有寄。
现代文：武帝遗诏说： 皇太孙的品德一天比一天高尚，国家也就有所寄托了。
English: Emperor Wu said in his last will and testament: The moral character of the great-grandson of the emperor is becoming more and more noble day by day, and the country has also placed its trust in him.

古文：子良善相毘辅，思弘治道，内外众事，无大小悉与鸾参怀，共下意！
现代文：萧子良要努力尽心辅佐皇太孙，考虑如何治理国家的大计，对于朝廷内外各种事情，无论是大是小，都要和萧鸾一起商量裁决，一起提出意见。
English: Xiao Ziliang should try his best to assist the great-grandson of the emperor, consider how to govern the country's overall plan, and for all kinds of things inside and outside the imperial court, whether large or small, should discuss the ruling with Xiao Ziliang and put forward opinions together.

古文：尚书中事，职务根本，悉委右仆射王晏、吏部尚书徐孝嗣；军旅之略，委王敬则、陈显达、王广之、王玄邈、沈文季、张瑰、薛渊等。 
现代文：尚书省的事务，是政务的根本；将它全都交给右仆射王晏、吏部尚书徐孝嗣处理。军事方面的大计，委托给王敬则、陈显达、王广之、王玄邈、沈文季、张、薛渊等人。 
English: The affairs of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy were the foundation of government affairs; it was all entrusted to the right-hand man, Sha Wangqi, and the official of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy, Xu Xiaozhi. The military plans were entrusted to Wang Jingzhe, Chen Xanda, Wang Guangzhi, Wang Xuanqin, Shen Wenzhi, Zhang, Xue Yuan and others.

古文：世祖留心政事，务总大体，严明有断，郡县久于其职，长吏犯法，封刃行诛。
现代文：武帝在世时，对国家政治事务十分用心，总揽全局，严明果断，郡守县令都能长期任职，地方长官触犯法令，就封缄钢刀，派人执行诛杀。
English: When Emperor Wu was alive, he was very attentive to national political affairs, comprehensively grasped the overall situation, and was strict and decisive. County governors and county magistrates could serve for a long time. If local governors violated the law, they would seal the steel knife and send someone to carry out the killing.

古文：故永明之世，百姓丰乐，贼盗屏息。
现代文：所以，在南齐永明时代，老百姓生活富足，祥和安乐，盗贼不敢横行。
English: Therefore, in the Yongming era of Nanqi, the people lived a prosperous life, peaceful and happy, and thieves did not dare to run rampant.

古文：然颇好游宴，华靡之事，常言恨之，未能顿遣。
现代文：不过，武帝非常喜欢游乐饮宴，虽然对于奢华靡烂的生活，他经常说很痛恨，但是他自己也并没能避免。
English: However, Emperor Wu was very fond of entertainment and banquets. Although he often said that he hated the luxurious and decadent life, he himself could not avoid it.

古文：郁林王之未立也，众皆疑立子良，口语喧腾。
现代文：郁林王萧昭业还没有登基即位时，大家都怀疑可能要册立萧子良，一时之间，传言很多。
English: When Yu Lin Wang Xiao Zhaoye had not yet ascended to the throne, everyone suspected that Xiao Ziliang might be enthroned. For a while, there were many rumors.

古文：武陵王晔于众中大言曰： 若立民，则应在我；立嫡，则应在太孙。 
现代文：武陵王萧晔曾经在大庭广众之下大声说： 如果选择辈分高的继承王位，就应该是我；如果选择嫡系继承王位，那么，就应该是皇太孙。 
English: Wuling King Xiaohui once said loudly in front of a large audience: If you choose a high-ranking heir to the throne, it should be me; if you choose a direct heir to the throne, then it should be the emperor's grandson.

古文：由是帝深凭赖之。
现代文：为此，萧昭业对萧晔深加信赖。
English: For this reason, Xiao Zhaoye has deep trust in Xiao Yu.

古文：直阁周奉叔、曹道刚素为帝心膂，并使监殿中直卫；少日，复以道刚为黄门郎。
现代文：直将军周奉叔和曹道刚二人，平时就是萧昭业的心腹，于是，命令二人同时主管殿中值班宿卫。过了几天，又任命曹道刚为黄门郎。
English: General Zhou Fengxiu and Cao Daogang, two of Xiao Zhaoye's closest confidants, were ordered to supervise the guards on duty in the palace at the same time. A few days later, Cao Daogang was appointed Huangmenlang.

古文：初，西昌侯鸾为太祖所爱，鸾性俭素，车服仪从，同于素士，所居官名为严能，故世祖亦重之。
现代文：当初，西昌侯萧鸾深受文帝的宏爱，萧鸾生性节俭朴素，他所乘坐的车马、所穿的衣服，以及他的仪仗随从，和平常人家一样。他对所担任的官崐职都能胜任，号称严厉能干，所以，武帝对他也很重视。
English: At first, Emperor Wen loved the Xichang lord Xiao Wei deeply. Xiao Wei was born with a frugal and simple nature. The car and horse he rode in, the clothes he wore, and his entourage were the same as ordinary people. He was competent in his official positions and was known to be strict and capable. Therefore, Emperor Wu also attached great importance to him.

古文：世祖遗诏，使竟陵王子良辅政，鸾知尚书事。
现代文：武帝留下遗诏让竟陵王萧子良辅政，萧鸾做知尚书事。
English: Emperor Wu left a last will and testament to let Xiao Ziliang, the king of Jingling, assist in politics, and Xiao Zang to do scholarly affairs.

古文：子良素仁厚，不乐世务，乃更推鸾，故遗诏云 事无大小，悉与鸾参怀 ，子良之志也。
现代文：萧子良平素仁义宽厚，不喜欢处理朝廷各种各样的事务，于是，就特别推荐萧鸾。所以遗诏上说 朝廷内外各种事情，无论是大是小，都要和萧鸾一起商讨决定 ，这是萧子良的主张。
English: Xiao Ziliang was benevolent and generous, and did not like to deal with all kinds of affairs of the imperial court, so he especially recommended Xiao Wei. Therefore, the will said that all kinds of things inside and outside the imperial court, whether large or small, should be discussed and decided together with Xiao Wei, which was Xiao Ziliang's idea.

古文：帝少养于子良妃袁氏，慈爱甚著。
现代文：萧昭业从小是由萧子良的妃子袁氏抚养大的，袁氏对他非常慈爱关心。
English: Xiao Zhaoye was raised from a young age by Xiao Ziliang's concubine Yuan, who was very loving and concerned about him.

古文：及王融有谋，遂深忌子良。
现代文：王融阴谋立萧子良以后，萧昭业对萧子良也就深为忌恨起来。
English: After Wang Rong conspired to set up Xiao Ziliang, Xiao Zhaoye also deeply resented Xiao Ziliang.

古文：大行出太极殿，子良居中书省，帝使虎贲中郎将潘敞领二百人仗屯太极西阶以防之。
现代文：武帝的遗体移到太极殿时，萧子良住在中书省，于是，萧昭业就派虎贲中郎将潘敞率领二百名士卒驻守在太极殿西阶，严防不测。
English: When Emperor Wu's body was moved to the Taiji Hall, Xiao Ziliang was living in Zhongshu Province. Therefore, Xiao Zhaoye sent the Vice-Minister of the State Council of the People's Republic of China to guard the western steps of the Taiji Hall with 200 dignitaries under the command of Pan Pan.

古文：既成服，诸王皆出，子良乞停至山陵，不许。
现代文：等到武帝的遗体装入棺木，各位亲王都走出宫中后，萧子良请求能允许他在这儿等到下葬那天再离开，未被应允。
English: After Emperor Wu's body had been placed in the coffin and all the princes had left the palace, Xiao Ziliang's request that he be allowed to wait here until the day of the funeral before leaving was not granted.

古文：壬午，称遗诏，以武陵王晔为卫将军，与征南大将军陈显达并开府仪同三司；尚书左仆射、西昌侯鸾为尚书令；太孙詹事沈文季为护军。
现代文：壬午，萧昭业声称奉武帝的遗诏，任命武陵王萧晔为卫将军，和征南大将军陈显达一同为开府仪同三司，尚书左仆射、西昌侯萧鸾为尚书令，太孙詹事沈文季为护军。
English: In the morning of the 13th day of the 7th month, Xiao Zhaoye claimed that he had appointed Wuling Wang Xiao Jie as the general of the imperial guard according to the last will and testament of Emperor Wu, and appointed Chen Xianda, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, as the general of the imperial guard, Shang Shuxi Zuopu Jie, Xichang Hou Xiao Jie as the general of the imperial guard, and the great-grandson of Zhan Zhi Shen Wenzhi as the military escort.

古文：癸未，以竟陵王子良为太傅；蠲除三调及众逋，省御府及无用池田、邸治。
现代文：癸未，又任命竟陵王萧子良为太傅。下令免除三种征调，对老百姓以前所欠的赋税也一律免除。
English: Soon after, he also appointed Xiao Ziliang, the King of Ling, as Taifu, and ordered that three kinds of levies and transfers be exempted, and that all taxes previously owed by the common people be exempted.

古文：减关市征税。先是，蠲原之诏，多无事实，督责如故。
现代文：减省皇室各府、署和不使用的田庄、水池、宅第、冶炼铸造场，减少关卡税收。在这以前，虽然也有免除赋税的诏令，但它也不过是一纸空文，朝廷大多没有真正实施，还像以前一样严加征收。
English: Before this, although there was also a royal decree exempting taxes, it was just a piece of paper. The imperial court did not really implement most of it, and levied taxes as strictly as before.

古文：是时西昌侯鸾知政，恩信两行，众皆悦之。
现代文：现在，西昌侯萧鸾当权执政，他恩德和信用一同实施，所以，老百姓都非常高兴。
English: Now, Xichang Hou Xiaoqi is in power, and his benevolence and credit are implemented together, so the people are very happy.

古文：魏山阳景桓公尉元卒。
现代文：北魏山阳景桓公尉元去世。
English: Shanyang Jingshan Public Lieutenant Yuan of the Northern Wei Dynasty passed away.

古文：魏主使录尚书事广陵王羽持节安抚六镇，发其突骑。
现代文：孝文帝派录尚书事、广陵王拓跋羽，手持皇帝的符节前去安抚六镇，并征调六镇的突击骑兵。
English: Emperor Xiaowen sent Shang Shujing and Guangling Wang Tuobao, armed with the emperor's symbols, to pacify the six towns, and conscripted the assault cavalry of the six towns.

古文：丁亥，魏主辞永固陵；己丑，发平城，南伐，步骑三十馀万；使太尉丕与广陵王羽留守平城，并加使持节。
现代文：丁亥，孝文帝叩别永固陵。已丑，孝文帝亲自率领三十多万步、骑兵，从平城出发，大规模向南征伐。命令太尉拓跋丕和广陵王拓跋羽留在平城镇守，并加授使持节。
English: Dinghai, Emperor Xiaowen bid farewell to Yonggu Mausoleum. It was ugly. Emperor Xiaowen personally led more than 300,000 infantry and cavalry to set out from Pingcheng for a large-scale southward campaign. He ordered Lieutenant Tuobao and Guangling Wang Tuobao to stay in Pingcheng to guard, and awarded them the Envoy Festival.

古文：羽曰： 太尉宜专节度，臣正可为副。 
现代文：拓跋羽说： 太尉最好全权负责管理，臣可以做他的副手。 
English: Tuoba said, "It is best for the captain to take full responsibility for management, and the minister can be his deputy."

古文：魏主曰： 老者之智，少者之决，汝无辞也。 
现代文：孝文帝说： 年纪大的人有经验，能深谋远虑，年纪轻的人有气魄，遇事坚决果断，所以，你不要推辞了。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "Older people have experience and foresight, while younger people have courage and are resolute in the face of adversity. Therefore, you should not refuse.

古文：以河南王干为车骑大将军、都督关右诸军事，又以司空穆亮、安南将军卢渊、平南将军薛胤皆为干副，众合七万出子午谷。
现代文：任命河南王拓跋干为车骑大将军、都督关右诸军事，司空穆亮、安南将军卢渊、平南将军薛胤三人都担任拓跋干的副手，率领各路人马共七万人，从子午谷南下。
English: He appointed Wang Tuobaogang of Henan Province as the general of cavalry and cavalry and the military governor of Guanzhou, and Siku Mu Liang, Annan General Lu Yuan, and Pingnan General Xue Yin all served as Tuobaogang's deputy, leading a total of 70,000 people from all walks of life southward from the Meridian Valley.

古文：胤，辩之曾孙也。
现代文：薛胤是薛辩的曾孙。
English: Xue Tan is the great-grandson of Xue Yuan.

古文：郁林王性辩慧，美容止，善应对，哀乐过人；世祖由是爱之。
现代文：南齐郁林王生性聪明，反应迅速，容貌清秀，举止高雅，善于应对，无论是悲哀还是欢乐，都比别人强烈。因此，武帝很宠受他。
English: Nanqi Yulin Wang is intelligent by nature, quick to react, handsome, elegant, and good at coping, whether it is sad or happy, it is stronger than others. Therefore, Emperor Wu is very fond of him.

古文：而矫情饰诈，阴怀鄙慝，与左右群小共衣食，同卧起。
现代文：但是，他善于伪装矫饰，表面善良，内心却是阴狠卑鄙，他跟左右一些恶劣的小人混在一起，衣食不分，就连睡觉也挤在一块儿。
English: However, he is good at camouflage and affectation. On the surface he is kind, but inside he is dark and despicable. He mingles with some vile villains on the right and left. They do not care about food and clothing, and even sleep together.

古文：始为南郡王，从竟陵王子良在西州，文惠太子每禁其起居，节其用度。
现代文：萧昭业担任南郡王时，跟随叔父、竟陵王萧子良一起住在西州。文惠太子萧子懋经常管束他的生活起居，限制他的花销费用。
English: When Xiao Zhaoye served as the King of Nan County, he lived in Xizhou with his uncle, the King of Jingling, Xiao Ziliang. The Prince of Wenhui, Xiao Ziliang, often controlled his life and restricted his expenses.

古文：王密就富人求钱，无敢不与。
现代文：他就偷偷向富有人家要钱，没有人敢不给他。
English: He secretly asked rich people for money, and no one dared to refuse him.

古文：别作钥钩，夜开西州后阁，与左右至诸营署中淫宴。
现代文：自己还另外制造了一把钥匙，夜里私自打开西州州府后门，和左右侍从一起到各个军营去荒淫欢宴。
English: He also made another key, and in the night, he secretly opened the back door of the Xizhou prefectural government, and went to various military camps with the attendants to have a wild feast.

古文：师史仁祖、侍书胡天翼相谓曰： 若言之二宫，则其事未易；若于营署为异人所殴及犬物所伤，岂直罪止一身，亦当尽室及祸。
现代文：他的老师史仁祖和侍书胡天翼商议说： 如果我们把这件事报告给皇上或皇太子，事情就不会那么容易解决了。如果在军营中被别人打了，或者被狗什么的咬伤了，岂只是我们本身要获罪，我们全家都要被牵连进去。
English: His teacher, Shi Renzo, and his aide-de-camp, Hu Tianyi, discussed the matter and said, "If we report this matter to the emperor or the crown prince, the matter will not be resolved so easily. If we were beaten by others in the military camp, or were bitten by a dog or something, wouldn't we only be guilty, and our whole family would be implicated?"

古文：年各七十，馀生岂足吝邪！ 
现代文：我们俩都年已七十，哪里还吝惜自己以后的岁月！ 
English: We are both in our seventies, how can we begrudge ourselves the years to come!

古文：数日间，二人相继自杀，二宫不知也。
现代文：于是，几天之内，史仁祖和胡天翼都先后自杀，但武帝和太子却不知道。
English: As a result, within a few days, Shirenzu and Hu Tianyi both committed suicide, but Emperor Wu and the crown prince did not know about it.

古文：所爱左右，皆逆加官爵，疏于黄纸，使囊盛带之，许南面之日，依此施行。
现代文：萧昭业对他所宠爱的左右侍从，都预先封爵任官，写在黄纸上，让这些人装在口袋里，随身携带，答应在他登基即位的时候，就照此执行。
English: Xiao Zhaoye had all of his favorite attendants, both left and right, knighted and appointed in advance, written on yellow paper, and asked these people to put them in their pockets and carry them with them. He promised to do so when he ascended to the throne.

古文：侍太子疾及居丧，忧容号毁，见者呜咽；裁还私室，即欢笑酣饮。
现代文：萧昭业在侍奉太子养病及后来守丧期间，面带忧愁，悲泣哀号，甚至毁坏了身体，看见他的人也都被他的行为感动得哭泣起来。
English: While serving the crown prince to recover from illness and later during the funeral, Xiao Zhaoye wore a sad face, wept and wailed, and even ruined his body. Those who saw him were moved to tears by his actions.

古文：常令女巫杨氏祷祀，速求天位。
现代文：可是，一返回自己家里，就立刻笑逐颜开，大吃大喝起来。
English: However, as soon as he returned to his own home, he immediately burst into laughter and began to eat and drink.

古文：及太子卒，谓由杨氏之力，倍加敬倍。
现代文：他经常命令女巫杨氏替他向上天祈祷，祈祷祖父和父亲快点死去。
English: He often ordered the witch, Ms. Yang, to pray to heaven for him, praying that his grandfather and father would die soon.

古文：既为太孙，世祖有疾，又令杨氏祷祀。
现代文：太子去世时，萧昭业认为是借杨氏巫祝的力量的结果，于是，更加敬重信任杨氏。
English: When the prince died, Xiao Zhaoye thought that it was the result of the power of the Yang clan's magic wish, so he trusted Yang more respectfully.

古文：时何妃犹在西州，世祖疾稍危，太孙与何妃书，纸中央作一大喜字，而作三十六小喜字绕之。
现代文：等到被封为皇太孙以后，武帝有病，他又命令杨氏向上天祈祷。此时，他的正室何婧英还留在西州，武帝的病开始严重时，太孙给何婧英写信，就在信纸中间写了一个大喜字，又围绕着大喜字，在旁边写了三十六个小喜字。
English: After he was named the Emperor's grandson, Emperor Wu was ill, and he ordered Mr. Yang to pray to the heavens. At this time, his legal wife, He Xingying, was still in Xizhou. When Emperor Wu's illness began to be serious, the grandson wrote a letter to He Xingying. He wrote a big happy character in the middle of the letter paper, and around the big happy character, he wrote thirty-six small happy characters next to it.

古文：侍世祖疾，言发泪下。
现代文：侍奉武帝的病时，他每说一句话，眼泪忍不住往下流。
English: When he served Emperor Wu during his illness, whenever he spoke a word, tears could not help but flow down his face.

古文：世祖以为必能负荷大业，谓曰： 五年中一委宰相，汝勿措意；五年外勿复委人。
现代文：所以，武帝认为他一定能够承担起国家大业，就对他说： 我死之后，五年之内，国家大事先全部托付给宰相，你不要过问。五年之后，你再亲自处理，不再交给别人。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu thought that he would definitely be able to undertake the great cause of the country, so he said to him: After my death, within five years, I will first entrust all national affairs to the prime minister, you should not ask questions. After five years, you will deal with it personally, and will no longer hand it over to others.

古文：若自作无成，无所多恨。 
现代文：如果你自己执政没有干出什么成就来，也没有什么可遗憾的。 
English: If you don't achieve great success, there is no more resentment.

古文：临终，执其手曰： 若忆翁，当好作！ 
现代文：临去世之前，武帝又拉着他的手说： 如果还想念你祖父的话，你就应该好好干。 
English: Before he died, Emperor Wu took him by the hand and said, "If you still miss your grandfather, you should work hard."

古文：遂殂。
现代文：说完，就去世了。
English: And with that, he died.

古文：大敛始毕，悉呼世祖诸伎，备奏众乐。
现代文：武帝的遗体刚刚放入棺内，还没有安葬，萧昭业就将武帝的所有歌舞伎都叫来，让他们一个接一个地演奏各种音乐。
English: Emperor Wu's body had just been placed in the coffin and had not yet been buried, when Xiao Zhaoye called in all of Emperor Wu's kabuki actors and had them perform various pieces of music one after the other.

古文：即位十馀日，即收王融下廷尉，使中丞孔稚珪奏融险躁轻狡，招纳不逞，诽谤朝政。
现代文：萧昭业登基即位刚十几天，就逮捕了王融，交付给廷尉审判，命令中丞孔稚控告王融阴险、浮躁、轻率、狡黠，招降纳叛没有成功，又随便批评攻击朝廷。
English: Just a dozen days after Xiao Zhaoye ascended to the throne, he arrested Wang Rong and handed him over to a court lieutenant for trial. He ordered Vice Admiral Kong Zhi to accuse Wang Rong of being insidious, impetuous, imprudent, and cunning. He did not succeed in recruiting and accepting rebels, and he also criticized and attacked the imperial court.

古文：融求援于竟陵王子良，子良忧惧，不敢救。遂于狱赐死，时年二十七。
现代文：王融向竟陵王萧子良求救，萧子良又忧又怕，不敢去求，于是，萧昭业命令王融在狱中自杀，这年王融二十七岁。
English: Wang Rong asked for help from King Xiao Ziliang of Jingling. Xiao Ziliang was worried and afraid, and did not dare to ask for help. Therefore, Xiao Zhaoye ordered Wang Rong to commit suicide in prison. Wang Rong was 27 years old at the time.

古文：初，融欲与东海徐勉相识，每托人召之。
现代文：当初，王融打算结识东海人徐勉，经常托人请徐勉到健康见面。
English: At first, Wang Rong planned to get to know the East China Sea man Xu Mian, and often asked someone to ask Xu Mian to meet him in good health.

古文：勉谓人曰： 王君名高望促，难可轻衣裾。 
现代文：徐勉对别人说： 王融的名望很高，但轻浮狂躁，很难和他坦诚相待，荣辱与共。 
English: Xu said to others: Wang Rong's reputation is very high, but he is frivolous and manic. It is difficult to be honest with him and share the honor and disgrace.

古文：俄而融及祸。勉由是知名。
现代文：不久，王融大祸及身，而徐勉也因此而出了名。
English: Soon after, Wang Rong met with a great misfortune, and Xu Ren became famous as a result.

古文：太学生会稽魏准，以才学为融所赏；融欲立子良，准鼓成其事。
现代文：太学生会稽人魏准因为才能和学问都很高，所以深得王融赏识。当时，王融打算拥戴萧子良登基即位，魏准就鼓动王融做成这件事。
English: Wei Jun, the auditor of the Tai Students' Union, was highly appreciated by Wang Rong because of his talent and knowledge. At that time, Wang Rong planned to support Xiao Ziliang's accession to the throne, and Wei Jun encouraged Wang Rong to do this.

古文：太学生虞羲、丘国宾窃相谓曰： 竟陵才弱，王中书无断，败在眼中矣。 
现代文：太学生虞羲和丘国宾二人私下里议论说： 竟陵王萧子良才能弱，王融又没有决断能力，他们的失败就在眼前。 
English: The too-students, Yu Yao and Qiu Guobin, said to each other privately, "In fact, Ling Wang's ability is weak, Wang Zhongshu can't make a decision, and failure can be seen."

古文：及融诛，召准入舍人省诘问，惶惧而死，举体皆青，时人以为胆破。
现代文：王融被杀后，萧昭业又把魏准召到中书省盘问，魏准竟因为极度惊慌恐惧而吓死了，他整个身子都是青色的，当时，人们都认为他的胆被吓破了。
English: After Wang Rong was killed, Xiao Zhaoye summoned Wei Zheng to the People's Republic of China to be interrogated. Wei Zheng actually died of extreme panic and fear. His whole body was blue. At that time, people thought that his courage had been broken.

古文：壬寅，魏主至肆州，见道路民有跛、眇者，停驾慰劳，给衣食终身。
现代文：壬寅，北魏孝文帝抵达肆州，看见路上老百姓有腿瘸眼瞎的，就立刻让马车停下，慰问安抚这些人，又供给他们终生的衣食。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Wuzhou, and when he saw people on the road who were lame and blind, he immediately stopped the carriage, comforted and pacified these people, and provided them with food and clothing for life.

古文：大司马安定王休执军士为盗者三人，以徇于军，将斩之。
现代文：大司马、安定王拓跋休逮捕了三名偷盗的士卒，把他们绑起来到各个军营中游行示众，然后就要将他们斩首。
English: The chief steward, Wang Tuoba Hui, arrested three thieving soldiers, tied them up and paraded them through the barracks before beheading them.

古文：魏主行军遇之，命赦之，休不可，曰： 陛下亲御六师，将远清江表，今始行至此，而小人已为攘盗，不斩之，何以禁奸！ 
现代文：孝文帝御驾巡视军营经过这里，下令赦免，拓跋休认为不能这样做，他说： 陛下亲自统领六军，将要远征江南，而如今我们刚刚走到这里，这些奸诈小人就开始偷盗抢劫，不斩了他们，我们怎么能禁止人们做坏事呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen passed by here on his inspection tour of the military camp and ordered a pardon, but Tuoba Xiu thought that this could not be done. He said, "His Majesty personally commanded the Six Armies and is going on an expedition to the south of the Yangtze River, but now that we have just come here, these treacherous villains have begun to steal and rob. Without killing them, how can we prohibit people from doing bad things?

古文：帝曰： 诚如卿言。
现代文：孝文帝说： 的确像你所说的那样。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: It is indeed as you said.

古文：然王者之体，时有非常之泽。
现代文：不过，君王的本体，有时常有意外的恩泽。
English: However, the king's body, sometimes there is often an unexpected blessing.

古文：三人罪虽应死，而因缘遇朕，虽违军法，可特赦之。 
现代文：这三人犯了这样的罪，虽然理应被处死，可是，命运使他们遇到了朕，即便他们违犯了军事法令，也可以特别赦免他们。 
English: These three men have committed a crime for which they deserve to die, but fate has brought them to me, and even though they have violated military law, I can grant them a special pardon.

古文：既而谓司徒冯诞曰： 大司马执法严，诸君不可不慎。 
现代文：接着，又对司徒冯诞说： 大司马拓跋休执行法令严肃认真，你们以后不能不小心谨慎地做事。 
English: Next, he also said to Szeto Fengsheng, "Chief Magistrate Ma Tuopahu is serious about enforcing the law. You must not do things carelessly in the future.

古文：于是军中肃然。
现代文：军队的纪律也为此森严起来。
English: As a result, discipline in the army has also become stricter.

古文：臣光曰： 人主之于其国，譬犹一身，视远如视迩，在境如在庭。
现代文：臣司马光曰：人主和国家的关系，就好像是同一个躯体，看远处就好像在看近处，在边境就好像是在朝廷里。
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said: "The relationship between the people and the state is like the same body. Looking at the distance is like looking at the near, and at the border is like being in the imperial court.

古文：举贤才以任百官，修政事以利百姓，则封域之内无不得其所矣。
现代文：推举贤能之才，充任各种官职；修明政治，为百姓谋求福利，在自己疆界内的百姓就没有不各得其所的。
English: It is the duty of the State to promote the talents and talents of the people, and to appoint them to various posts. It is the duty of the State to improve the political system, and to seek the welfare of the people. There is no place for the people within its own borders.

古文：是以先王黈纩塞耳，前旒蔽明，欲其废耳目之近用，推聪明于四远也。
现代文：因此，以前的君王总是用丝棉堵住耳朵、用帽穗遮住眼睛，目的就是想不让自己耳朵、眼睛只听近处的声音、只看眼前的东西，而把自己的听力和视力推到遥远的四面八方。
English: Therefore, the former monarchs always plugged their ears with silk cotton and covered their eyes with hat brims, in order not to let their ears and eyes only listen to the sounds nearby and see only what is in front of them, but to push their hearing and vision to distant places.

古文：彼废疾者宜养，当命有司均之于境内，今独施于道路之所遇，则所遗者多矣。
现代文：那些残疾有病的人，自然应该抚养，但更应该命令有关部门把这种恩泽普及到全国境内所有残疾有病人员的身上去。如今，只是对在路上遇见的几个人施舍一下，那么，被遗漏的就太多了。
English: Of course, those who are disabled or sick should be supported, but it is even more important to order the relevant departments to spread this grace to all disabled and sick people in the country. Today, it is only a matter of giving alms to a few people you meet on the road, so there are too many who are left out.

古文：其为仁也，不亦微乎！
现代文：所施的这种仁爱不也是太轻微了吗？
English: Is not this kindness too light?

古文：况赦罪人以桡有司之法，尤非人君之体也。
现代文：更何况，赦免犯罪的人，却破坏了有关部门颁布的法令，这更不是君王应该做的事。
English: What's more, it's not what a king should do to pardon someone who has committed a crime, but who has broken a decree issued by the relevant authorities.

古文：惜也！孝文，魏之贤君，而犹有是乎！
现代文：可惜啊，孝文帝是北魏的贤明君主，却还有这些不足！
English: What a pity, Emperor Xiaowen was a wise ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, but he still had these shortcomings!

古文：戊申，魏主至并州。
现代文：戊申，孝文帝抵达并州。
English: Emperor Wushin and Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Wenzhou.

古文：并州刺史王袭，治有声迹，境内安静，帝嘉之。
现代文：并州刺史王袭在当地很有声誉和成绩，州内平安宁静，孝文帝对他极为赞许。
English: And the prefect of Shishi Wangai has a great reputation and achievements in the local area, the prefecture is safe and quiet, and Emperor Xiaowen highly praised him.

古文：袭教民多立铭置道侧，虚称其美；帝闻而问之，袭对不以实。
现代文：王袭下令全州百姓在道路两旁，竖起很多石碑，虚假地赞美王袭的德政。孝文帝听说后，就查问王袭，但王袭回答时却不说实话。
English: Wang Zai ordered the people of the whole state to erect many stone monuments on both sides of the road, falsely praising Wang Zai's German policy. After hearing this, Emperor Xiaowen questioned Wang Zai, but Wang Zai did not tell the truth when answering.

古文：帝怒，降袭号二等。
现代文：孝文帝很生气，将王袭的称号贬降了两级。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was very angry and downgraded Wang Zai's title by two levels.

古文：九月，壬子，魏遣兼员外散骑常侍勃海高聪等来聘。
现代文：九月，壬子，北魏派遣兼员外散骑常侍勃海人高聪等人来访。
English: In September, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched Gao Cong, a part-time foreign straggler and a regular attendant of the Bohai people, to visit Renzi.

古文：丁巳，魏主诏车驾所经，伤民秋稼者，亩给谷五斛。
现代文：丁巳，孝文帝下诏，规定皇帝乘车所经过的地方，如果给百姓秋季庄稼造成了损害，对每亩被毁坏的田地要发给五斛稻谷，作为补偿。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict, stipulating that if the autumn crops of the people were damaged in the places where the emperor passed by car, they should be paid five mu of rice per mu of destroyed fields as compensation.

古文：辛酉，追尊文惠太子为文皇帝，庙号世宗。
现代文：辛酉，南齐追尊文惠太子为文皇帝，庙号世宗。
English: Xinzhuang, Nanchi, and other regions of China honored Prince Wen Hui as the Wen Emperor, and he was given the temple name of Shizong.

古文：世祖梓宫下渚，帝于端门内奉辞，辒辌车未出端门，亟称疾还内。
现代文：武帝的棺木要在东府前秦淮河上船，萧昭业在皇城端门恭奉送别，丧车还没有走出端门，就立刻声称自己有病，回宫去了。
English: Emperor Wu's coffin was to be put on a boat on the Qinhuai River in front of Dongfu, and Xiao Zhaoye gave his farewell at the imperial gate. The funeral car had not yet left the gate, so he immediately claimed that he was ill and went back to the palace.

古文：裁入阁，即于内奏胡伎，鞞鐸之声，响震内外。
现代文：他刚刚踏进宫内，就在殿内演奏起了胡人的音乐，皮鼓、铜铃之声响彻皇宫内外。
English: No sooner had he set foot in the palace than the music of the hussars began to play in the hall. The sound of leather drums and brass bells resounded throughout the palace and beyond.

古文：丙寅，葬武皇帝于景安陵，庙号世祖。
现代文：丙寅，在景安陵将武帝的棺木下葬，庙号世祖。
English: He Yin, who buried Emperor Wu's coffin in the Jing'an Mausoleum, was the founder of the temple.

古文：戊辰，魏主济河；庚午，至洛阳；壬申，诣故太学观《石经》。
现代文：戊辰，北魏孝文帝渡过黄河；庚午，抵达洛阳；壬申，又前往以前的太学观看《石经》。
English: Wu Chen, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen crossed the Yellow River; Geng Wu, arrived in Luoyang; Jinshin, and went to the former Taishuang to watch "The Stone Sutra."

古文：乙亥，邓至王像舒彭遣其子旧朝于魏，且请传位于旧；魏主许之。
现代文：乙亥，邓至王像舒彭，派他的儿子像旧到北魏朝廷晋见，请求允许他把王位传给自己的儿子像旧，孝文帝批准。
English: Emperor Yihai, the son of Emperor Deng, sent his son Emperor Xiaowen to the Northern Wei court to ask permission to pass the throne to his son Emperor Xiaowen. Emperor Xiaowen approved.

古文：魏主自发平城至洛阳，霖雨不止。丙子，诏诸军前发。
现代文：孝文帝从平城出发，直到抵达洛阳，天一直下雨，没有停过，丙子，诏令各路大军继续向南进发。
English: Emperor Xiaowen set out from Pingcheng until he arrived at Luoyang. It rained all the time and did not stop. He ordered all the armies to continue heading south.

古文：丁丑，帝戎服，执鞭乘马而出。
现代文：丁丑，孝文帝身穿战服，手持马鞭，骑马出发。
English: Ding Ugly, Emperor Xiaowen dressed in a battle uniform, holding a whip, riding a horse.

古文：群臣稽颡于马前。
现代文：文武官员赶紧拦住马头，不断叩拜。
English: The civil and military officials quickly stopped the horse's head and continued to bow.

古文：帝曰： 庙算已定，大军将进，诸公更欲何云？ 
现代文：孝文帝说： 作战计划已经决定，各路大军将要继续前进，你们还想要说什么呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "The battle plan has been decided, and all armies will continue to advance. What else do you want to say?"

古文：尚书李冲等曰： 今者之举，天下所不愿，唯陛下欲之。
现代文：尚书李冲等人说： 我们现在的行动，全国上下都不愿意，只有陛下一个人想实现它。
English: Shangshu, Li Chong and others said: Our current actions are not wanted by the whole country, only His Majesty wants to achieve it.

古文：臣不知陛下独行，竟何之也！
现代文：臣不知道陛下一个人走，将要到什么地方去。
English: The minister did not know where his majesty would go if he went alone.

古文：臣等有其意而无其辞，敢以死请！ 
现代文：我们有一心报国效忠皇上的心愿，却无法表达出来，只好冒死向陛下请求。 
English: We have a desire to serve the country and be loyal to the emperor, but we can't express it, so we have to risk our lives to plead with His Majesty.

古文：帝大怒曰： 吾方经营天下，期于混壹，而卿等儒生，屡疑大计；斧钺有常，卿勿复言！ 
现代文：孝文帝勃然大怒，说： 我现在正要征服外邦，希望统一天下，治理国家，可你们这些文弱书生，却多次怀疑这一重大决策。杀人用的斧钺有它们使用的地方，你们不要再多说什么！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen flew into a rage and said, "I am now about to conquer foreign countries, hoping to unify them and govern the country, but you weak-willed scholars have repeatedly doubted this momentous decision. Axes and machetes for killing people have their place of use, so don't say anything more!"

古文：策马将出，于是安定王休等并殷勤泣谏。
现代文：说完，又纵马要走，这时，安定王拓跋休等人一齐来好言劝谏，流泪阻止。
English: After saying this, he was about to leave, at which time, Wang Tuobahu and the others came together to offer good advice and to stop him from shedding tears.

古文：帝乃谕群臣曰： 今者兴发不小，动而无成，何以示后！
现代文：孝文帝又告诉大家说： 这一次，我们出动军队的规模不小，出动而没有什么成就，我们将来拿什么让后人看？
English: Emperor Xiaowen also told everyone, "This time, the scale of our dispatched troops is not small, and there are no achievements from the dispatch. What will we show future generations?

古文：朕世居幽朔，欲南迁中土；苟不南伐，当迁都于此，王公以为何如？
现代文：朕世世代代居住在幽朔，一直想要南迁到中原。如果我们不再向南征伐，那么，我们就应该把京都迁到这里，你们认为这样做怎么样？
English: I have been living in Yushaku for generations, and I have always wanted to move south to the Central Plains. If we no longer go south, then we should move Kyoto here. What do you think?

古文：欲迁者左，不欲者右。 
现代文：同意迁都的人站在左边，不同意迁都的人站在右边。 
English: Those who agree with moving the capital stand on the left, while those who disagree stand on the right.

古文：安定王休等相帅如右。南安王桢进曰：  成大功者不谋于众。 
现代文：南安王拓跋桢靠近孝文帝说：  干成大事业的人，并不向众人征询意见。 
English: Nan'an King Tuobao, who was close to Emperor Xiaowen, said: "Those who accomplish great things do not seek advice from others.

古文：今陛下苟辍南伐之谋，迁都洛邑，此臣等之愿，苍生之幸也。 
现代文：如今，陛下如果放弃向南征伐的计划，将京都迁到洛邑，这正是我们所希望的，是老百姓的幸运。 
English: Now, if His Majesty abandons his plan to march south and relocates Kyoto to Luoyang, this is exactly what we hope for, it will be good luck for the people.

古文：群臣皆呼万岁。
现代文：文武百官都高呼万岁。
English: All the civil and military officials shouted "long live."

古文：时旧人虽不愿内徙，而惮于南伐，无敢言者；遂定迁都之计。
现代文：当时，鲜卑人虽然不愿意向南迁移，但是又害怕再向南征伐，所以，也就没有人敢说些什么。北魏的迁都大计，于是确定了下来。
English: At that time, although the Xianbei people did not want to move south, they were afraid to march south again, so no one dared to say anything. The plan to move the capital of the Northern Wei Dynasty was thus confirmed.

古文：李冲言于上曰： 陛下将定鼎洛邑，宗庙宫室，非可马上行游以待之。
现代文：李冲对孝文帝说： 陛下将要迁都洛邑，可是，皇家祖庙和皇宫、府宅都要重新建造，我们不能只骑在马上走来走去，等待它们建成。
English: Li Chong said to Emperor Xiaowen: Your Majesty is going to move the capital to Luoyang, but the royal ancestral temple, palace and mansion will all have to be rebuilt. We can't just ride around on horses and wait for them to be built.

古文：愿陛下暂还代都，俟群臣经营毕功，然后备文物、鸣和鸾而临之。 
现代文：希望陛下暂时回到代都，等到文武百官把这一切事情做好之后，陛下再备齐仪仗，在宁静祥和的銮铃声中莅临新的京都。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will temporarily return to the capital, and wait until the civil and military officials have completed all these things, and His Majesty will then prepare for the ceremonial battle and come to the new Kyoto in the quiet and peaceful sound of the gongs.

古文：帝曰： 朕将巡省州郡，至鄴小停，春首即还，未宜归北。 
现代文：孝文帝说： 朕正要到各个州郡巡查，现在正好可以利用这个机会，先到邺城，暂作停留，明年一开春就返回，而不应该先回北方。 
English: Xiaowen Di said: I am about to go on inspection to various states and counties. Now I can take advantage of this opportunity to go to Handan City first, stay for a while, and return as soon as next spring, instead of returning to the north first.

古文：乃遣任城王澄还平城，谕留司百官以迁都之事，曰： 今日真所谓革也。
现代文：于是，派遣任城王拓跋澄返回平城，向留守在那里的官员们宣布迁都的情况，对任城王说： 如今才是 革卦 上真正的 革 ，你要把事情办好。 
English: As a result, he sent the king of the city, Tuoba Cheng, back to Pingcheng, and announced the situation of the relocation of the capital to the officials who remained there. He said to the king of the city, "Now is the real time of change, you have to do things well."

古文：王其勉之！ 帝以群臣意多异同，谓卫尉卿、镇南将军于烈曰： 卿意如何？ 
现代文：由于文武官员的意见并不一致，孝文帝就对卫尉卿、镇南将军于烈说： 你是怎么想的呢？ 
English: Since the opinions of the civil and military officials did not coincide, Emperor Xiaowen said to the Captain of the Guards, General Zhenan Yu Lie: What do you think?

古文：烈曰： 陛下圣略渊远，非愚浅所测。
现代文：丁烈回答说： 陛下圣明的谋略，是为了国家长远的利益，这不是愚昧、肤浅的人所能预测得到的。
English: Ding Rong replied, "Your Majesty's holy and wise strategy is for the long-term benefit of the country. It is not something that can be predicted by a foolish and shallow person.

古文：若隐心而言，乐迁之与恋旧，适中半耳。 
现代文：但如果推测大家的心意，愿意迁都的人和依恋故土的人，正好各占一半。 
English: However, if we were to guess everyone's intentions, those who are willing to move the capital and those who are attached to their native land account for exactly half each.

古文：帝曰： 卿既不唱异，即是肯同，深感不言之益。 
现代文：孝文帝说： 你既然没有公开说自己反对，那就是表示认同了，我深感到你不说话的好处。 
English: Xiaowen Di said: Since you have not publicly said that you are against it, it means that you agree with it. I deeply feel the benefit of not speaking.

古文：使还镇平城，曰： 留台庶政，一以相委。 
现代文：于是，派于烈回到平城镇守，说： 留守在朝廷里的一切事情，全都托付给你了。 
English: Therefore, he sent Yu Lie to return to Pingcheng to be the governor, saying, "I have entrusted you with all the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：烈，栗磾之孙也。
现代文：于烈是于栗的孙子。
English: Yu Rong is the grandson of Yu Liang.

古文：先是，北地民支酉聚众数千，起兵于长安城北石山，遣使告梁州刺史阴智伯，秦州民王广亦起兵应之，攻执魏刺史刘藻，秦、雍间七州民皆响震，众至十万，各守堡壁以待齐救。
现代文：在这之前，北地平民支酉聚集了几千人，在长安城城北石山发起武装暴动，并派使者向南齐梁州刺史阴智伯报告。秦州平民王广也聚众起来响应支酉，进攻并抓获了北魏秦州刺史刘藻。于是，秦州、雍州之间七州的平民都受到震动，响应人数多达十万，他们分别据守在城堡里，等待南齐派兵救援。
English: Prior to this, several thousand Northern Qin civilians gathered in Shikotsu to launch an armed uprising in North Shishan, Chang'an City, and sent an emissary to report to the Southern Qin Liang State. Qin State civilian Wang Guang also gathered to respond to Shikotsu, attacked and captured the Northern Wei Qin State's Shikotsu Liu Mo. As a result, the civilians of the seven states between Qin State and Yongzhou were shaken, and the number of responders was as high as one hundred thousand. They were kept separately in the castle, waiting for Nanzhi to send soldiers for rescue.

古文：魏河南王干引兵击之，干兵大败；支酉进至咸阳北浊谷，穆亮与战，又败；阴智伯遣军主席德仁等将兵数千与相应接。
现代文：北魏河南王拓跋干率领大军袭击，结果大败。支酉率领军队乘胜进军到咸阳北边的浊谷，司空穆亮又与支酉大战，结果也大败。南齐梁州刺史阴智伯派遣军主席德仁等人率领几千名将士，前来接应支酉、王广。
English: In Northern Wei and Southern Henan, Wang Tuobao led a large army to attack and suffered a crushing defeat. Shikun led a victorious army to march to Shidani in the north of Xianyang. Siku Mu Liang also fought with Shikun and suffered a crushing defeat. In Southern Qi, Liangzhou Zhishi Yin Zhibo dispatched army chairman De Ren and others led thousands of soldiers to meet Shikun and Wang Guang.

古文：酉等进向长安，卢渊、薛胤等拒击，大破之，降者数万口。
现代文：支酉等人又率军向长安挺进，北魏安南将军卢渊、平南将军薛胤等人奋起抗击，大败支酉，有几万人投降。
English: Shikun and others also led the army to advance to Chang'an, and Northern Wei General Lu Yuan and Pingnan General Xue Yan and others rose up to resist, defeating Shikun, and tens of thousands of people surrendered.

古文：渊唯诛首恶，馀悉不问，获酉、广，并斩之。
现代文：卢渊只杀了几个首要分子，其他人全不予以追究。并捕获了支酉、王广，将二人同时斩首。
English: Lu Yuan only killed a few leading members, and did not pursue the others at all. He also captured Shizhao and Wang Guang, and beheaded them both at the same time.

古文：冬，十月，戊寅朔，魏主如金墉城，征穆亮，使与尚书李冲、将作大匠董尔经营洛都。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊寅朔，孝文帝前往金墉城，召回穆亮，命令他和尚书李冲、将作大匠董尔一起负责营建新都洛阳。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Wu Yinshuo and Emperor Xiaowen went to Jinyuan City, recalled Mu Liang, and ordered him to be responsible for the construction of the new capital Luoyang together with Shangshu Li Chong and the great master Dong Er.

古文：己卯，如河南城；乙酉，如豫州；癸巳，舍于石济。
现代文：己卯，前往河南城。乙酉，前往豫州。癸巳，在石济住宿。
English: Jiwu, went to Henan City. Yiwu, went to Yuzhou. Jasmine, stayed in Shijie.

古文：乙未，魏解严，设坛于滑台城东，告行庙以迁都之意。
现代文：乙未，下令北魏境内解除戒严，在滑台城东边兴筑祭台，向随行的祖宗牌位禀告迁都的想法。
English: He ordered martial law to be lifted in Northern Wei territory, built an altar on the east side of Slidai City, and announced the idea of moving the capital to the accompanying ancestor plaque.

古文：大赦。
现代文：下令实行大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：起滑台宫。
现代文：兴筑滑台宫。
English: The construction of the Slidai Palace begins.

古文：任城王澄至平城，众始闻迁都，莫不惊骇。
现代文：任城王拓跋澄回到平城，大家刚刚听到要迁都时，没有不感到震惊的。
English: When the king of the city, Tuoba Cheng, returned to Pingcheng, everyone was shocked to hear that the capital was to be moved.

古文：澄援引古今，徐以晓之，众乃开伏。
现代文：于是，拓跋澄引经据典，慢慢地解释开导，让大家明白这样做的好处，最后，大家终于接受了。
English: As a result, Tuoba Zhen cited the scriptures, slowly explained the enlightenment, let everyone understand the benefits of doing so, and finally, everyone finally accepted.

古文：澄还报于滑台，魏主喜曰： 非任城，朕事不成。 
现代文：拓跋澄回到滑台向孝文帝汇报了这一情况，孝文帝高兴地说： 没有任城王，朕的事就办不成。 
English: Tuoba Cheng returned to the slide to report the situation to Emperor Xiaowen. Emperor Xiaowen said happily: "Without being the king of the city, I can't do my job well.

古文：壬寅，尊皇太孙太妃为皇太后；立妃为皇后。
现代文：壬寅，萧昭业尊皇太孙太妃王氏为皇太后，立正室何婧英为皇后。
English: Ren Yin, Xiao Zhaoye revered the emperor's great-great-grandson, Prince Taifei, as the empress dowager, and appointed his lawful wife, He Yingying, as the empress.

古文：癸卯，魏主如鄴城。
现代文：癸卯，孝文帝前往邺城。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaowen left for Shicheng.

古文：王肃见魏主于鄴，陈伐齐之策。
现代文：王肃在邺城晋见孝文帝，向他陈述讨伐南齐的策略。
English: Wang Su met Emperor Xiaowen in Shicheng Jin and explained to him the strategy of fighting against Nanqi.

古文：魏主与之言，不觉促席移晷。
现代文：孝文帝和他谈着谈着，不知不觉地把自己的座位往前移，以便听得更仔细些，时间不知不觉地过去了很久。
English: Emperor Xiaowen chatted with him, unconsciously moving his seat forward so that he could listen more carefully. Time passed imperceptibly.

古文：自是器遇日隆，亲旧贵臣莫能间也。
现代文：从那以后，孝文帝对王肃的器重和待遇一天比一天隆厚，无论是亲信故旧、还是重臣，都无法离间这君臣二人之间的关系。
English: From then on, Emperor Xiaowen's esteem and treatment of Wang Su became more and more lavish day by day. No matter whether he was a close friend or a senior vassal, the relationship between the two princes and vassals could not be separated.

古文：魏主或屏左右与肃语，至夜分不罢，自谓君臣相得之晚。
现代文：孝文帝有时就让左右侍从退下，单独和王肃谈话，谈到半夜，仍不停止，他自认为和王肃相见太晚了。
English: Emperor Xiaowen sometimes asked his attendants to step back and talked to Wang Su alone. When it came to midnight, he still did not stop. He thought it was too late to meet with Wang Su.

古文：寻除辅国将军、大将军长史。
现代文：不久，任命王肃为辅国将军、大将军长史。
English: Soon after, Wang Su was appointed as the auxiliary general of the country and the grand general of Changshi.

古文：时魏主方议兴礼乐，变华风，凡威仪文物，多肃所定。
现代文：这时，孝文帝正打算推广使用礼仪和雅乐，将鲜卑人传统的风俗习惯，改变成和汉人的一样，所以，只要是展示帝王威严仪容的文物制度，大多都让王肃来确定。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowen was planning to promote the use of etiquette and elegant music, and change the traditional customs and habits of the Xianbei people to be the same as the Han people. Therefore, as long as the cultural relics system to display the emperor's dignified appearance, most of them were determined by Wang Su.

古文：乙巳，魏主遣安定王休帅从官迎家于平城。
现代文：乙巳，孝文帝派安定王拓跋休率领侍从官员，到平城迎接眷属。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowen sent Wang Tuoba to lead the officials to welcome the family members to Pingcheng.

古文：辛亥，封皇弟昭文为新安王，昭秀为临海王，昭粲为永嘉王。
现代文：辛亥，南齐萧昭业封皇弟萧昭文为新安王，萧昭秀为临海王，萧昭粲为永嘉王。
English: In Xinhai, Xiao Zhaowen's younger brother Xiao Zhaowen, who was crowned emperor in Nanqi, became the king of Xin'an, Xiao Zhaoxiu became the king of Linhai, and Xiao Zhaohui became the king of Yongjia.

古文：魏主筑宫于鄴西，十一月，癸亥，徙居之。
现代文：孝文帝在邺城城西兴建皇宫，十一月，癸亥，搬入新皇宫。
English: Emperor Xiaowen built the imperial palace in the west of the city of Fucheng, and moved into the new imperial palace in November.

古文：御史中丞江淹劾奏前益州刺史刘悛、梁州刺史阴智伯赃货巨万，皆抵罪。初，悛罢广、司二州，倾赀以献世祖，家无留储。
现代文：御史中丞江淹，弹劾前益州刺史刘悛、梁州刺史阴智伯二人，指娍厮翘拔矍凭尥颍及绰芍巫铩畛酰蹉诒幻獬恪⑺径荽淌肥保将全部家产都变卖了，回来全部献给武帝，所以，他家里一点儿积蓄也没有。
English: In the middle of the imperial history, Liu Ye, the former governor of Yizhou, and Yin Zhibo, the former governor of Liangzhou, were impeached. They were accused of having sold all the family property to Huibao, and returning to dedicate it to Emperor Wu. Therefore, his family did not have any savings.

古文：在益州，作金浴盆，馀物称是。
现代文：在益州时，刘悛曾制作黄金的浴盆，其他物品也与此相称。
English: While in Yizhou, Liu Wei once made a gold bathtub, and other items are also commensurate with this.

古文：及郁林王即位，悛所献减少。
现代文：郁林王即位后，刘悛进献的东西减少了。
English: After King Yulin ascended to the throne, Liu Ye's gifts decreased.

古文：帝怒，收悛付廷尉，欲杀之；西昌侯鸾救之，得免，犹禁锢终身。
现代文：萧昭业很生气，就将刘悛逮捕，交给廷尉判罪，打算杀了他。幸亏西昌侯萧鸾的说情相救，才使他免于一死，但仍然还是决定对他终身监禁，不许做官。
English: Xiao Zhaoye was very angry, so he arrested Liu Hui, handed him over to the imperial lieutenant for sentencing, and planned to kill him. Fortunately, Xichang Hou Xiao Hui's plea for help saved him from death, but he still decided to imprison him for life and not allow him to work as an official.

古文：悛，勔之子也。
现代文：刘悛是刘的儿子。
English: Liu Wei is Liu Wu's son.

