古文：席书，字文同，遂宁人。
现代文：席书，字文同，四川遂宁人。
English: Seated writing, same characters, from Suining, Sichuan.

古文：弘治三年进士。
现代文：弘治三年进士。
English: Koji was promoted to junior high school in his third year.

古文：授郯城知县。入为工部主事，移户部，进员外郎。
现代文：授职郯城知县，后来进入朝中当工部主事，又改任户部主事，升员外郎。
English: He was awarded the post of Shicheng Zhixian, and later entered the court as the head of the engineering department, and was also appointed as the head of the household department, and was promoted to the position of foreign minister.

古文：十六年，云南昼晦地震，命侍郎樊莹巡视，奏黜监司以下三百余人。
现代文：十六年，云南发生日食、地震，朝廷命令侍郎樊莹前往视察，经奏准罢免了三百多名监司以下的官吏。
English: Sixteen years ago, a solar eclipse and an earthquake occurred in Yunnan. The imperial court ordered the chamberlain Gong Ying to go to inspect, and after approval, more than three hundred officials below the supervisor were dismissed.

古文：书上疏言： 灾异系朝廷，不系云南。如人元气内损，然后疮疡发四肢。
现代文：席书上书说 ：灾异的来由在于朝廷，不因为云南自己，就如同人元气内伤，然后四肢才长出疮疤一样。
English: "The cause of the calamity lies in the imperial court, not because of Yunnan itself, just like a person's vitality is wounded, and then the limbs grow scars," it said.

古文：朝廷，元气也。云南，四肢也。
现代文：朝廷是国家的元气所藏之处，云南只是四肢而已。
English: The imperial court is the place where the vitality of the country is hidden, and Yunnan is just a limb.

古文：岂可舍致毒之源，专治四肢之末？
现代文：怎么能撇开生成毒气的根源不管而专门去医治四肢上的小毛病呢？
English: How is it possible to treat a minor ailment of the limbs, regardless of the source of the gas?

古文：今内府供应数倍往年，冗食官数千，投充校尉数万，斋醮寺观无停日，织造频烦，赏赉逾度；皇亲夺民田，宦官增遣不已；大狱据招词不敢辩，刑官亦不敢伸；大臣贤者未起用，小臣言事谪者未复；文武官传升，名器大滥。
现代文：现在内府所要求的供应量比以前大了几倍，吃闲饭的冗官有几千人，投机而做校尉的有几万人，请佛道设坛求福的活动连无虚日，织造一事不停地烦扰百姓，各种赏赐超越了应有的限量；皇亲吞并百姓的田地，宦官又不停地派出为官；大案有了本人的招供都不敢法办，刑官也不敢申诉；贤能的大臣闲住在家不加委任，因谏诤被贬的下级官员也未予复职；文武官员可以传子接班，由此使等级名分乱作一团。
English: The amount of supplies required by the government is now several times greater than before. There are thousands of redundant officials who eat idle food, and tens of thousands of schoolmasters who speculate and act as schoolmasters. The activities of setting up a Buddhist altar to seek blessings have never been in vain. The weaving has constantly bothered the people, and various rewards have exceeded the proper limit. The emperor's relatives have swallowed up the fields of the people, and eunuchs have been continuously sent to serve as officials. If there is a major case with their own confession, they do not dare to go to court, and the executioner does not dare to appeal. The virtuous minister lives idly at home without

古文：灾异之警，偶泄云南，欲以远方外吏当之，此何理也？
现代文：灾异给我们的警告偶然在云南出现，想拿远方的当地官吏来抵罪，这是什么道理呢？
English: What is the reason that the warning of the calamity to us by chance appears in Yunnan, and they want to blame the local officials from far away?

古文：汉遣八使巡行天下，张纲独曰： 豺狼当道，安问狐狸。 
现代文：汉朝时一次朝廷要派八个使臣外出巡行天下，张纲却说： 豺狼正当道，怎么去向狐狸问罪？ 
English: Once during the Han Dynasty, the imperial court wanted to send eight envoys to go out and tour the world, but Zhang Gang said: "The wolf is justified, how can you go and ask the fox for punishment?"

古文：今樊莹职巡察，不能劾戚畹、大臣，独考黜云南官吏，舍本而治末。
现代文：现在樊莹充当巡察，没能力弹劾外戚和大臣，却去考核、罢免云南的地方官吏，真是舍本治末。
English: Now Gong Ying is acting as an inspector, unable to impeach relatives and ministers, but to assess and dismiss local officials in Yunnan, it is really a waste of time.

古文：乞陛下以臣所言弊政，一切厘革。
现代文：我请求陛下把我所说的这些弊端全部予以革除！
English: I ask Your Majesty to eliminate all the evils I have mentioned!

古文：他大害当祛，大政当举者，悉令所司条奏而兴革之。 
现代文：其他有什么大的弊端应当革除的，或是有什么大事应该举办的，命令各有关部门列举上奏，该举办的举办，该革除的革除。 
English: If there are any other major drawbacks that should be eliminated, or any major events that should be held, the relevant departments should be ordered to enumerate the list, the organization of the event, the elimination of the elimination.

古文：时不能用。
现代文：当时孝宗没有采用他的主张。
English: The recommendation was not implemented.

古文：武宗时，历河南佥事、贵州提学副使。
现代文：武宗时，席书先后担任过河南佥事、贵州提学副使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuzong, Shi Shu served successively as Henan Anji and Guizhou Vice Minister of Education.

古文：时王守仁谪龙场驿丞，书择州县子弟，延守仁教之，士始知学。
现代文：当时王守仁被贬任龙场驿丞，席书选取州县子弟，请守仁教育他们，由此这个地方的年青人才懂得爱好学问。
English: At that time, Wang Shou-Ren was demoted to the position of Longchang Shun-Ren, and the secretary selected the children from Shou County and asked Shou-Ren to educate them, so that the young people in this place would know how to enjoy learning.

古文：屡迁福建左布政使。
现代文：经几次升迁，他又做了福建左布政使。
English: After several promotions, he became the top political envoy of Fujian Province.

古文：宁王宸濠反，急募兵二万讨之。
现代文：宁王宸濠造反时，他紧急召募了二万士兵前往讨伐。
English: When Ning Wangtao rebelled, he urgently recruited twenty thousand soldiers to go to the crusade.

古文：至则贼已平，乃返。
现代文：到江西时反贼已被平定，他于是返回去了。
English: When he arrived in Jiangxi Province, the rebels had been subdued, so he returned to Tsing.

古文：寻以右副都御史巡抚湖广。
现代文：不久，以右副都御史的名义前往巡抚湖广。
English: Soon, in the name of the right vice-governor of the capital, he went to the governor of Hukang.

古文：中官李镇、张旸假进贡及御盐名敛财十余万，书疏发之。
现代文：宦官李镇、张假借进贡和御用食盐为名搜括了十余万钱，席书上书揭发了他们。
English: The eunuchs Li Zhen and Zhang Huan collected more than one hundred thousand yuan in the name of the tribute and the royal salt, and they were exposed in the report.

古文：嘉靖元年改南京兵部右侍郎。
现代文：嘉靖元年，他改任南京兵部右侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：江南北大饥，奉命振江北。令州县十里一厂，煮糜哺之，全活无算。
现代文：长江南北那年大闹饥荒，他奉命到江北赈济灾民，命令各州县每十里设一个难民篷，煮稀粥供应难民，使无数人得以生存。
English: In that year, there was a great famine in the north and south of the Yangtze River. He was ordered to go to the north of the river to help the victims. He ordered all prefectures and counties to set up a refugee tent every ten miles, cook porridge and supply refugees, so that countless people could survive.

古文：初，书在湖广，见中朝议 大礼 未定，揣帝向张璁、霍韬，献议言： 昔宋英宗以濮王第十三子出为人后，今上以兴献王长子入承大统。
现代文：当初，席书还在湖广时，看到朝廷讨论 大礼 ，还没有定论，他揣摩世宗向着张璁、霍韬一边，就提出自己的意见说： 过去宋英宗作为濮王的第十三个儿子过继给仁宗当了太子，现今皇上是以兴献王长子的身份入宫来继承王位。
English: At first, when Seishu was still in Hukang, he saw that the imperial court was discussing the grand gift, but there was no conclusion yet. He guessed that Sejong was on the side of Zhang Ye and Huo Ye, and put forward his own opinion, saying: In the past, Song Yingzong, as the thirteenth son of King Yao, became the crown prince for Rinzong. Nowadays, the emperor enters the palace as the eldest son of Prince Xingxian to inherit the throne.

古文：英宗入嗣在衮衣临御之时，今上入继在宫车晏驾之后。
现代文：英宗的过继在仁宗当政期间，现在皇上即位是在武宗逝世之后。
English: Emperor Yingzong's succession took place during the reign of Emperor Nanzong, but the current Emperor ascended to the throne after Emperor Wuzong's death.

古文：议者以陛下继统武宗，仍为兴献帝之子，别立庙祀，张璁、霍韬之议未为非也。
现代文：议论的人以为陛下继承武宗的王位，但仍然是兴献帝的儿子，应另为兴献帝立庙祭祀。张璁、霍韬的意见是无可非议的。
English: The commentators thought that His Majesty had succeeded to the throne of Emperor Wuzong, but was still the son of Emperor Xikang, and that a temple should be built for Emperor Xikang. Zhang Ye and Huo Ye's opinion was beyond reproach.

古文：然尊无二帝。
现代文：但是最尊贵的皇帝不能有两个。
English: But there cannot be two most honored emperors.

古文：陛下于武宗亲则兄弟，分则君臣。
现代文：陛下对武宗说来亲戚关系是兄弟，等级名分却是君臣。
English: According to His Majesty, the relationship of kinship to Emperor Wuzong was that of brothers, but the rank was that of princes and ministers.

古文：既奉孝宗为宗庙主，可复有他称乎？
现代文：既然把孝宗供奉为宗庙中的神主，还能有别的什么称号吗？
English: Since the filial piety is worshiped as the god of the ancestral temple, can there be any other title?

古文：宜称曰 皇考兴献王 ，此万世不刊之典。
现代文：对亲生父亲，称为 皇考兴献王 ，这是千秋万代不可改变的经典。
English: For the biological father, known as the "Emperor's Examination", this is an unchangeable classic for thousands of generations.

古文：礼臣三四执奏，未为失也。
现代文：礼臣再三坚持己意上奏，并没有错。
English: There is nothing wrong with the minister repeatedly insisting on his own will to play.

古文：然礼本人情，陛下尊为天子，慈圣设无尊称，可乎？
现代文：但是礼应以人情为根基，陛下作为尊贵的天子，亲生父母假如没有尊称又怎么行呢？
English: But etiquette should be based on human feelings. Your Majesty, as a noble son of heaven, what would your biological parents do if they didn't have a title?

古文：故尊所生曰帝后，上慰慈闱，此情之不能已也。
现代文：所以尊崇亲生父母为帝、后，告慰双亲，这是不可抑制的感情。
English: Therefore, it is an irrepressible emotion to revere one's own parents as emperor and empress, and to console both parents.

古文：盖别以庙祀则大统正而昭穆不紊，隆以殊称则至爱笃而本支不沦，尊尊亲亲，并行不悖。至慈圣宜称皇母某后，不可以兴献加之。
现代文：为现在考虑，应当定兴献王的尊称为 皇考兴献帝 。另外在宫廷中间为兴献王立庙，逢年过节祭祀过太庙以后，仍旧用天子之礼在宫廷中祭祀兴献王，这或许是处理这个问题的一种方式吧。 
English: For the present, it should be considered that the honorific title of Xingxian Wang should be fixed as "Crown Examination Xingxian Emperor." In addition, a temple was built for Xingxian Wang in the middle of the court, and after the annual festival was held in the ancient temple, it was still used to sacrifice Xingxian Wang in the court with the gift of heaven. This may be a way to deal with this problem.

古文：献，谥也，岂宜加于今日？ 议既具，会中朝竞诋张璁为邪说，书惧不敢上，而密以示桂萼，萼然其议。
现代文：这个奏议写好后，正好朝中大臣竞相攻击张璁的意见为邪说，席书害怕，不敢往上呈交，但私下里给桂萼看过，桂萼同意他的意见。
English: After this report was written, it was just the time for the ministers of the DPRK and China to compete to attack Zhang Ye's opinion as a heresy. The secretary was afraid and did not dare to submit it, but he privately read it to Gui Caly, and Gui Caly agreed with his opinion.

古文：三年正月，萼具疏并上之。
现代文：三年正月，桂萼写了一篇奏疏连同席书这一篇一起交了上去。
English: In the first month of the third year, Gui Cale wrote a piece of recitation and handed it over together with the book.

古文：帝大喜，趣召入对。
现代文：世宗看过很高兴，催着召他进京问话。
English: Sejong was very pleased to see him, and urged him to come to Beijing for an interview.

古文：无何，诏改称献帝为本生皇考，遂寝召命。
现代文：不久，诏书传下，改称献帝为本生皇考，就停止了对他的召见。
English: Soon after, an imperial edict was issued, renaming Emperor Xian as Emperor Bensheng, and the summoning of Emperor Bensheng was stopped.

古文：会礼部尚书汪俊以争建庙去位，特旨用书代之。
现代文：正好礼部尚书汪俊因为争论建庙一事免职，世宗就传下特别诏书让席书接替他。
English: Just as the ceremonial secretary Wang Jun was dismissed because of a dispute over the construction of a temple, Shizong issued a special edict to replace him.

古文：故事，礼部长贰率用翰林官。
现代文：按照往常的惯例，礼部一个尚书两个侍郎大都任用翰林官。
English: According to the usual practice, the etiquette department, a courtier, and two attendants are mostly appointed by the forest officer.

古文：是时廷臣排异议益力，书进又不由廷推，因交章诋书，至訾其振荒无状，多侵渔。
现代文：这个时候满朝大臣正在起劲地排斥不同意见，席书的升迁又没有经过朝廷公举，因此大家纷纷上书攻击席书，直至诋毁他在江北赈济灾荒时不成样子，私人侵占了很多钱财。
English: At this time, the Manchurian minister was vigorously rejecting dissenting opinions, and the promotion of the secretary had not been publicly announced by the court. Therefore, everyone wrote letters to attack the secretary, until he was slandered for not being able to help the disaster in the north of the river, and private individuals appropriated a lot of money.

古文：书亦屡辞新命，并录上《大礼考议》，且乞遣官勘振荒状。
现代文：席书自己也一再辞谢这个任命，又抄录他写的《大礼考议》递了上去，并且请派遣官员去检察他赈济灾荒的情况。
English: Shi Shi himself also repeatedly declined the appointment, and also copied and submitted the "Dai Lai Cao Wei" he wrote, and asked to send officials to inspect the situation of his disaster relief.

古文：帝为遣司礼中官，户、刑二部侍郎，锦衣指挥往勘，而趣书入朝益急。
现代文：世宗为此派司礼中官，户、刑二部侍郎，锦衣指挥前往检察，一面更急切地催他入朝。
English: To this end, Sejong sent the Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the attendants of the Household and the Second Department of Justice, and the commander of the brocade to inspect, while more urgently urging him to enter the imperial court.

古文：比至德州，则廷臣已伏阙哭争，尽系诏狱。
现代文：等他走到德州，就听说朝中大臣在宫门外跪地哭谏，全部被关进了诏狱。
English: When he got to Texas, he heard that the ministers of the two Koreas were kneeling and crying outside the palace gate, and they were all put in the imperial prison.

古文：书驰疏言： 议礼之家，名为聚讼。
现代文：席书飞章上书说 ：议礼的学者们，一贯有名地聚说纷纭。
English: The fly-on-the-wall inscription reads: "The scholars of debate have always been famous for bringing together divergent opinions.

古文：两议相持，必有一是。
现代文：两种意见相对立，必定有一对，有一错。
English: If two opinions oppose each other, there must be a couple, there must be a mistake.

古文：陛下择其是者，而非者不必深较。
现代文：陛下选用对的意见，而对不正确的意见也不要太计较。
English: Your Majesty, choose the right opinions, and don't worry too much about the incorrect ones.

古文：乞宥其愆失，俾获自新。 
现代文：请宽恕那些人的过错，让他们改过自新好了！ 
English: Please forgive the mistakes of those people and let them reform!

古文：不允。
现代文：世宗没同意。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：其年八月入朝，帝慰劳有加。
现代文：那年八月席书入朝后，世宗格外地加以慰劳。
English: After the imperial edict was issued in August of that year, Shizong went to extraordinary lengths to console the emperor.

古文：逾月乃会廷臣大议，上奏曰：
现代文：过了一个月，朝廷组织大臣们进行大讨论，席书递上奏章说：
English: After a month, the imperial court organized the ministers to have a big discussion, and the secretary handed in a report saying:

古文：三代之法，父死子继，兄终弟及，自夏历汉二千年，未有立从子为皇子者也。
现代文： 夏、商、周三代的办法是父亲死了，儿子即位，哥哥死了，弟弟接续，从夏朝到汉朝两千年里，没有过把侄儿立为太子的。
English: Xia, Shang, and the three dynasties were established by the following method: the father died, the son ascended the throne, the elder brother died, and the younger brother succeeded. In the two thousand years from the Xia Dynasty to the Han Dynasty, there was never a nephew appointed as the crown prince.

古文：汉成帝以私意立定陶王，始坏三代传统之礼。
现代文：汉成帝根据个人的好恶立定陶王，才破坏了三代传承王位的典礼。
English: It was only when Emperor Hancheng established King Dingtao according to his personal likes and dislikes that he destroyed the ceremony of three generations of succession to the throne.

古文：宋仁宗立濮王子，英宗即位，始终不称濮王为伯。
现代文：宋仁宗立濮王的儿子为太子，英宗即位后，也始终没有把濮王称作伯父。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, he never referred to Emperor Gong as his uncle.

古文：今陛下生于孝宗崩后二年，乃不继武宗大统，超越十有六年上考孝宗，天伦大义固已乖悖。
现代文：现在陛下出生于孝宗逝世两年以后，竟然不说是继承武宗的王位，而要间隔十六年往上去把孝宗作为父亲，这样伦理、大义就都差错无余了。
English: Now that His Majesty was born two years after the death of Takamune, he is not only said to have succeeded to the throne of Takemune, but to have taken Takamune as his father after an interval of sixteen years. This is completely wrong in terms of ethics and justice.

古文：又未尝立为皇子，与汉、宋不同。
现代文：况且您又未曾被立为太子，与汉、宋的情况也不相同。
English: Moreover, you have never been made crown prince, and the situation is not the same as that of the Han and Song dynasties.

古文：自古天子无大宗、小宗，亦无所生、所后。
现代文：自古以来天子没有大宗、小宗的区分，也没有亲生、过继的不同。
English: Since ancient times, there has been no distinction between major and minor sons of Heaven, and no difference between natural and adopted sons.

古文：《礼经》所载，乃大夫士之礼，不可语于帝王。
现代文：《礼经》中所记载的是大夫、士人的礼节，不能运用于帝王。
English: The etiquette recorded in the "Book of Etiquette" is the etiquette of doctors and scholars, and cannot be applied to the emperor.

古文：伯父子侄皆天经地义，不可改易。
现代文：伯父子侄的关系如天经地义，不能改变。
English: The relationship between uncle and nephew is natural and cannot be changed.

古文：今以伯为父，以父为叔，伦理易常，是为大变。
现代文：现在以伯为父，以父为叔，改变正常的伦理，这还是少有的稀奇事呢。
English: It is a rare and extraordinary thing to change the normal ethics with a great-grandfather as a father and a father as an uncle.

古文：夫得三代传统之义，远出汉、唐继嗣之私者，莫若《祖训》。
现代文： 能体现三代王位传承的大义，并超出汉、唐入继王位全靠私人好恶的办法，莫过于我朝的《祖训》了。
English: There is nothing that can embody the great righteousness of the three-generation succession to the throne, and surpass the Han and Tang dynasties in which succession to the throne was entirely dependent on personal likes and dislikes, than the "Ancestral Teachings" of my dynasty.

古文：《祖训》曰 朝廷无皇子，必兄终弟及。 
现代文：《祖训》说 ：朝廷如果没有太子，哥哥死后，一定要让弟弟继位。 
English: "The Ancestor's Teaching" says: If there is no crown prince in the imperial court, when the elder brother dies, the younger brother must succeed to the throne.

古文：则嗣位者实继统，非继嗣也。
现代文：这样说来，继位的人实际上是接续王统，而不是过继给人当儿子。
English: In this way, the person who succeeds to the throne is actually the successor to the throne, not the adopted son.

古文：伯自宜称皇伯考，父自宜称皇考，兄自宜称皇兄。
现代文：伯父自然应该称为皇伯考，父亲自然应该称为皇考，哥哥自然应称为皇兄。
English: The uncle should naturally be called Emperor Bercow, the father should naturally be called Emperor Bercow, the brother should naturally be called Emperor Bercow.

古文：今陛下于献帝、章圣已去本生之称，复下臣等大议。
现代文：现在陛下已经把献帝、章圣尊称中 本生 两字去掉，又交给我们大家讨论。
English: Now, His Majesty has removed the two words "honest" from the names "Kentii" and "Zhang Sheng Rong" and left them for us all to discuss.

古文：臣书、臣璁、臣萼、臣献夫及文武诸臣皆议曰：世无二首，人无二本。
现代文：我和张璁、桂萼、献夫及其他文武大臣都讨论说：世上没有两样真理，一人没有两个父亲。
English: I discussed with Zhang Ye, Gui Caly, Xianfu and other ministers of culture and armed forces and said: There are no two truths in the world, and no one has two fathers.

古文：孝宗皇帝，伯也，宜称皇伯考。
现代文：孝宗皇帝是您的伯父，应称为皇伯考。
English: Emperor Xiaozong is your uncle and should be called Emperor Bercow.

古文：昭圣皇太后，伯母也，宜称皇伯母。
现代文：昭圣皇太后是您的伯母，应称为皇伯母。
English: The Empress Dowager Shoshen is your aunt, and should be called your imperial aunt.

古文：献皇帝，父也，宜称皇考。
现代文：献皇帝是您的父亲，应称为皇考。
English: Emperor Xian is your father, you should call him Emperor Xuan.

古文：章圣皇太后，母也，宜称圣母。
现代文：章圣皇太后是您的母亲，应称为圣母。
English: The Holy Empress Dowager Zhang is your mother. She should be called the Holy Mother.

古文：武宗仍称皇兄，庄肃皇后宜称皇嫂。
现代文：武宗仍旧称为皇兄，庄肃皇后应称为皇嫂。
English: Emperor Wuzong is still referred to as the emperor's brother, and Empress Zhuangsu should be referred to as the empress's sister.

古文：一遵《祖训》，允合圣经。复三代数千年未明之典礼，洗汉、宋悖经违礼之陋习，非圣人其孰能之。
现代文：我们十分希望陛下能遵行孝宗皇帝仁爱万物的美德，牢记昭圣太后拥立陛下的功绩，今后更加孝敬他们，始终不要中断，这样皇家的伦理、王位两个方面就都得到了正确处理。 
English: We very much hope that Your Majesty can follow the virtue of Emperor Xiaozong's benevolence and love for all things, remember the merits of Empress Shosheng's support for Your Majesty, pay more respect to them in the future, and never interrupt them, so that the two aspects of royal ethics and the throne have been handled correctly.

古文：议上，诏布告天下，尊称遂定。
现代文：这篇奏议递上后，世宗诏令布告全国，对兴献王的尊称到这时终于确定下来了。
English: After this report was submitted, King Sejong issued an imperial edict to announce to the whole country. At this time, the honorific title of King Heungcheon was finally determined.

古文：帝既加隆所生，中外献谀希恩者纷然遝至。
现代文：世宗隆重地尊崇自己的亲生父母以后，朝廷内外献媚邀功的人接踵而来。
English: After Shizong solemnly revered his own biological parents, people inside and outside the imperial court came one after another to flatter and solicit his services.

古文：锦衣百户随全、光禄录事钱子勋既以罪褫，希旨请迁献帝显陵梓宫北葬天寿山。
现代文：锦衣百户随全、光禄录事钱子勋以前因罪被削职，现在迎合世宗心思上书请把献帝在显陵的灵柩迁葬到天寿山。
English: In the past, Qian Zixun was demoted for his crimes, but now he is pandering to Shizong's heart by writing a letter to request that the coffin dedicated to the emperor in the imperial mausoleum be moved to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：工部尚书赵璜等斥其谬，帝复下廷议。
现代文：工部尚书赵璜等斥责了这个建议的荒谬，世宗却又交给大臣们讨论。
English: Shangshu Zhao Wei of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and others rebuked the absurdity of this suggestion, but Shizong left it to the ministers to discuss.

古文：书乃会廷臣上言： 显陵，先帝体魄所藏，不可轻动。
现代文：席书于是召集大臣们上书说 ：显陵是先帝遗体和魂灵安处的地方，不能轻易动它。
English: The secretariat then summoned the ministers to submit a letter saying: the imperial mausoleum is a place where the body and soul of the former emperor are at peace, and it cannot be easily moved.

古文：昔高皇帝不迁祖陵，文皇帝不迁孝陵。
现代文：过去高皇帝没有迁移过祖陵，文皇帝也没有迁移孝陵。
English: In the past, Emperor Gao did not move the ancestral mausoleum, and Emperor Wen did not move the filial mausoleum.

古文：全等谄谀小人，妄论山陵，宜下法司按问。 
现代文：随全等是谄谀的小人，敢随便谈论皇陵的事，应该交给法司问罪。 
English: Zhuquan et al. are shameless villains who dare to casually talk about the imperial mausoleum. They should be handed over to the legal department for investigation.

古文：帝报曰： 先帝陵寝在远，朕朝夕思望，不胜哀痛，其再详议以闻。 
现代文：世宗批复说 ：先帝的陵墓在远处，我日夜牵挂，难过得受不了。希望你们再作详细讨论，然后打报告上来！ 
English: Sejong replied, "The mausoleum of the former emperor is far away, I am worried day and night, I can't stand the sadness. I hope you will have a detailed discussion and then make a report!"

古文：书复集众议，极言不可，乃已。
现代文：席书又召集大家讨论，极力上书说不行，这才作罢。
English: The chairperson called everyone together again to discuss the matter, and they tried their best to write a letter saying that it was not possible, and that was the end of it.

古文：书以 大礼 告成，宜有以答天下望，乃条新政十二事以献，帝优旨报焉。
现代文：席书认为 大礼 告成，应该采取措施满足一下天下百姓的希望，于是列举了十二条刷新政治的建议递呈上去，世宗以赞赏的口吻做了批复。
English: Sejong believed that the grand ceremony was a success and that measures should be taken to satisfy the hopes of the people around the world. He then listed twelve proposals for refreshing politics and submitted them. Sejong replied with appreciation.

古文：大同军变，杀巡抚张文锦，毁总兵官江桓印，而出故帅朱振于狱，令代桓。
现代文：大同发生兵变，杀死了巡抚张文锦，毁坏了总兵官江桓的大印，从监狱中放出原先的将领朱振，让他代替江桓。
English: A mutiny broke out in Datong, the governor Zhang Wenjin was killed, the general officer Jiang Huan's seal was destroyed, and the former general Zhu Zhen was released from prison to replace Jiang Huan.

古文：帝因而命之，谕礼部铸新印。
现代文：世宗迁就叛乱士兵，就此任命朱振做总兵官，指示礼部铸造新印。
English: Shizong accommodated the rebellious soldiers, appointed Zhu Zhen as the chief military officer, and instructed the ceremonial department to cast a new seal.

古文：书持不可，请讨之，与政府忤。
现代文：席书坚持反对意见，与内阁大臣发生冲突。
English: The presiding officer persisted in his objection and came into conflict with the cabinet minister.

古文：时执政者费宏、石珤、贾咏，书心弗善也，乃力荐杨一清、王守仁入阁，且曰： 今诸大臣皆中材，无足与计天下事。
现代文：当时的阁员是费宏、石王缶、贾泳，席书心里不喜欢他们，于是极力推荐杨一清、王守仁入阁，并且说 ：现在朝中的大臣都才能平平，没有可以与陛下共商军国大事的人。
English: The cabinet members at that time were Fei Hong, Shi Wang Can and Jia Yong. The secretary did not like them in his heart, so he strongly recommended Yang Iqing and Wang Shouren to join the cabinet, and said, "Nowadays, the ministers of the central government can only be mediocre, and there is no one who can discuss military and national affairs with His Majesty."

古文：定乱济时，非守仁不可。 
现代文：平定天下祸乱，成就一代功业，非用王守仁不可。 
English: To pacify the world's calamities and achieve a generation of achievements, it is necessary to use Wang Shuren.

古文：帝曰： 书为大臣，当抒猷略，共济时艰，何以中材自诿。 
现代文：世宗说： 席书作为大臣，应当提出不寻常的策略出来和我一起渡过现在的难关才是，怎么能以才能一般来推诿呢？ 
English: Sejong said: As a minister, Seishu should come up with an unusual strategy to get through the current difficulties with me. How can you use talent as an excuse?

古文：守仁迄不获柄用。
现代文：守仁最终没能到朝中掌权。
English: In the end, Morihito was not able to take power in the middle of the dynasty.

古文：四年，光禄寺丞何渊请建世室，祀献皇帝于太庙。
现代文：四年，光禄寺丞何渊请建世室，以便在太庙中祭祀献皇帝。
English: In the fourth year, He Yuan, the abbot of the Guanglu Temple, asked Jian Shishu to make a sacrifice to the emperor in the Great Temple.

古文：帝命礼官集议，书等上议； 《王制》： 天子七庙，三昭三穆 。
现代文：世宗传令礼官一起讨论，席书等递上奏议说： 按照《王制》的规定， 天子的宗庙有七座，太祖之下左右各设三座，共七代 。
English: Sejong Chuan ordered the etiquette officials to discuss together, and the chairmen and others submitted a report saying: According to the provisions of the "Royal System," there are seven ancestral temples of the Son of Heaven, and three temples are set up on the right and left under the great ancestor, for a total of seven generations.

古文：周以文、武有大功德，乃立世室，与后稷庙皆百世不迁。
现代文：周朝时因为文王、武王建立过伟大的功勋，才在宗庙里为他们另立世室，与后稷的庙一起都百代不许迁移。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, because King Wen and King Wu had established great merits, they set up a separate family for them in the ancestral temple, and together with the temple of Houyi, they were not allowed to move for hundreds of generations.

古文：我太祖立四亲庙，德祖居北，后改同堂异室。
现代文：我们明太祖为四代祖宗设了庙，德祖的庙在北边，后来改为一庙之中另开房间祭祀。
English: Our ancestors of the Ming Dynasty built a temple for the four generations of ancestors. The temple of the ancestors of the Taoist was in the north, and later it was changed to a temple with a separate room for worship.

古文：议祧则以太祖拟文世室，太宗拟武世室。
现代文：讨论祭祀远祖时就把太祖比作文王设立世室，太宗比作武王也设立世室。
English: When discussing the worship of distant ancestors, it is said that the great-great-grandfather established a family compared to the king of composition, and the great-great-grandfather also established a family compared to the king of martial arts.

古文：今献皇帝以藩王追崇帝号，何渊乃欲比之太祖、太宗，立世室于太庙，甚无据。 
现代文：现在献皇帝是以藩王身份追加的皇帝称号，何渊竟想把他和太祖、太宗相比，在太庙里设立世室，这很没根据。 
English: Presently, 献皇帝 is an additional title of the emperor in the capacity of the lord of the domain. He Yuan actually wants to compare him with the great-grandfather and the great-grandfather, and set up a family in the great-temple, which is very unfounded.

古文：不报。
现代文：世宗没有做什么批复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：顷之，张璁特奏上，力言不可，书亦三疏如璁议。
现代文：不久，张璁也递上专门的奏章，极力说不行，席书也多次上书，和张璁的意见一致。
English: Not long after, Zhang Ye also submitted a special report, saying that it was not possible. The report was also submitted several times, and it was in line with Zhang Ye's opinion.

古文：帝遣中官即其家谕之，书复密疏切谏。
现代文：世宗派宦官到他家里当面教他同意，席书又递上机密奏章严词劝阻。
English: The world sect sent a eunuch to his home in person to teach him to agree, and handed him a confidential report to sternly dissuade him.

古文：帝不悦，责以畏众饰奸。
现代文：世宗很有些不高兴，批评席书，说他害怕闲话，文过饰非。
English: Sejong was a little upset, criticizing the seat book, saying that he was afraid of gossip, and that the book was not fair.

古文：乃议别立祢庙，而世室之议竟寝。
现代文：然后才决定另为献皇帝设立祢室，关于设立世室的讨论终于结束了。
English: It was only then that it was decided to set up a separate Imperial Household for the emperor, and the discussion on the establishment of the Imperial Household was finally over.

古文：五年秋，章圣太后将谒世庙，礼官议不合。
现代文：五年秋天，章圣皇太后打算晋见世庙，礼官认为这样做不合乎礼制。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year, Empress Dowager Zhang Sheng planned to visit the World Temple, but the etiquette officer thought that this was not in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：书以目眚在告，上言： 母后谒庙，事出创闻，礼官实无所据，惟圣明裁酌。
现代文：当时席书因害眼疾请假在家，上书说： 母后晋见世庙的事是一个创举，礼官实际上也没有什么根据反对，全凭陛下自己决定就是了。
English: At that time, the chief clerk was at home on leave due to an eye disease, and the letter said: The matter of the Empress Dowager's visit to the world temple is a pioneering act. In fact, there is no reason for the etiquette official to oppose it. It is entirely up to His Majesty to decide.

古文：且世庙既成，宜有肆赦之典，请尽还议礼遣戍诸臣。
现代文：另外，世庙已经修建成了，应该有大赦天下的诏令了，我请求陛下把过去讨论 大礼 时贬官、充军的大臣们全部召回来吧！
English: In addition, the world temple has been built, and there should be a decree of amnesty for everyone. I ask His Majesty to recall all the ministers who were demoted and conscripted in the past.

古文：所谓合万国之欢心以祀先王，此天子大孝也。 
现代文：古人所说的联合万国的欢心来祭奠先王，是天子对先王最大的孝心啊。 
English: What the ancients called the joy of uniting all nations to pay tribute to the former king is the greatest filial piety of the Son of Heaven to the former king.

古文：报闻。
现代文：世宗回答知道，但没实行。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：书以议礼受帝知，倚为亲臣。
现代文：席书因为讨论 大礼 一事受到世宗信任，被提拔为亲近的大臣。
English: Seishu was trusted by the Sejong and was promoted to a close minister because he discussed the matter of the grand ceremony.

古文：初进《大礼集议》，加太子太保，寻以《献帝实录》成，进少保。
现代文：当初进呈《大礼集议》，已加官太子太保，不久后因为《献帝实录》成书，升为少保。
English: At first, he submitted "Dali Collection Discussion" and was promoted to crown prince and grand tutor. Soon after, he was promoted to junior tutor because of the publication of "Kentai Record."

古文：眷顾隆异，虽诸辅臣莫敢望。
现代文：世宗对他特别眷恋、照顾，即使几个内阁大臣也没法和他攀比。
English: Sejong was particularly fond of him and took care of him, even if several cabinet ministers could not compete with him.

古文：而书得疾不能视事，屡疏乞休，举罗钦顺自代，帝辄慰留不允。
现代文：可是席书得病后不能办事，多次上书请求退休，举荐罗钦顺接替自己，世宗每次都安慰、挽留他，不准他退休。
English: However, after the secretary fell ill and was unable to work, he repeatedly sent letters requesting retirement, recommending Luo Qin Shun to succeed him, and Shizong consoled and retained him every time and did not allow him to retire.

古文：其后疾笃，请益力，诏加武英殿大学士，赐第京师，支俸如故。
现代文：后来病重，更加坚决要求退休，世宗传令给他加官武英殿大学士，在京城赏他一处住宅，并且和在任时一样支取官俸。
English: Later, when he became seriously ill, he became even more adamant in his request to retire, and Shizong ordered that he be promoted to the post of Grand Master of the Imperial Household Agency, that he be awarded a residence in the capital, and that he receive an official salary as he did when he was in office.

古文：甫闻命而卒。
现代文：席书刚刚接到这个命令就死掉了。
English: Seishu died just after receiving this order.

古文：赠太傅，谥文襄，任一子尚宝丞，异数也。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为太傅，谥文襄，任用他一个儿子做尚宝丞，这是少有的待遇呢。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed upon him the title of Taifu, 文襄, and appointed one of his sons as Shangbao Rong, which is a rare treatment.

古文：书遇事敢为，性颇偏愎。
现代文：席书遇事敢作敢为，但性情很偏颇，刚愎自用。
English: Seishu is a daredevil in the face of adversity, but he has a very biased nature and is too stubborn for his own good.

古文：初，长沙人李鉴为盗，知府宋卿论之死。
现代文：早先，长沙人李鉴作了盗贼，知府宋卿判他死刑。
English: Earlier, Changsha resident Li Jian was convicted of theft, and the prefectural government sentenced him to death.

古文：书方巡抚湖广，发卿赃私，因劾卿故入鉴罪。
现代文：席书当时正巡抚湖广，揭发宋卿贪赃受贿，就上书弹劾宋卿有意把李鉴定为死罪。
English: At that time, the magistrate was inspecting Hukang, exposing Song Ching's corruption and bribery, and impeached Song Ching for intentionally making Li Jianren a capital crime.

古文：帝遣大臣按，不如书言。
现代文：世宗派大臣下去检察，并不像席书所说的那样。
English: The fact that a secular minister went to the procuratorate is not the same as what Seishu said.

古文：而书时已得幸，乃命逮鉴入京再讯。
现代文：当时席书已经进京并受到世宗宠信，于是就命令把李鉴逮来京城再次审讯。
English: At that time, Shi Shu had already entered Beijing and was favored by Shizong, so he ordered Li Jian to be arrested and brought to Beijing for another trial.

古文：书遂言： 臣以议礼犯众怒，故刑官率右卿而重鉴罪，请敕法司辨雪。 
现代文：席书这时上书说 ：我因为讨论 大礼 一事触犯了大家的怒火，所以刑官们大多偏向宋卿，把李鉴的罪加重惩办，请陛下传令要法司审问后给他昭雪。 
English: At this time, the secretary wrote a letter saying: I have offended everyone's anger because of the discussion of the grand ceremony, so most of the executioners are biased towards Song Qing, increasing the punishment of Li Jian's crime, and asking His Majesty to issue a summons to the legal department for interrogation and then give him punishment.

古文：词连篆，并系治谪外，篆得夷陵判官。世宗嗣位，复故官，未上卒。
现代文：等法司审讯后报上情况，和当初并无不同，世宗很不同意席书的意见，但还是把李鉴特别减免死刑，发配充军了事。
English: When the situation was reported after the trial by the Justice Department, it was no different from that at the beginning. Shizong strongly disagreed with the opinion of the magistrate, but still gave Li Jian special relief from the death penalty and sent him to the army.

古文：予祭，赠光禄少卿。霍韬，字渭先，南海人。
现代文：其他如包庇陈，排挤费宏等，席书都无所顾忌地实践自己的意志，受到当时社会舆论的指责。霍韬，字渭先，广东南海人。
English: Others, such as sheltering Chen and ousting Fei Hong, practiced their own will without scruples and were criticized by public opinion at the time.

古文：举正德九年会试第一。谒归成婚，读书西樵山，经史淹洽。
现代文：考中正德九年会试的第一名后，提名候补，就返回家乡结婚，然后在西樵山刻苦读书，对经史等学问融会贯通。
English: After winning the first place in the nine-year examination of Zhengde Middle School, he nominated a candidate, returned to his hometown to get married, and then studied hard in Xishuoshan, and mastered the integration of culture such as history and literature.

古文：世宗践阼，除职方主事。
现代文：世宗即位后，任用他做了职方主事。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he was appointed as the head of the staff.

古文：杨廷和方柄政，韬上言： 阁臣职参机务，今止票拟，而裁决归近习。
现代文：当时杨廷和还在执政，霍韬上书说： 内阁大臣的职务是参与机要事务的，现在却只是拟定文书，对军政大事的裁决权归属于宦官。
English: At that time, Yang Tinghe was still in power, and Huo Gan wrote: The post of cabinet minister is to participate in important affairs, but now it is only to draft documents, and the decision-making power of military and political events belongs to eunuchs.

古文：辅臣失参赞之权，近习起干政之渐。
现代文：内阁大臣失去了参与议定的权力，宦官出现了干预政治的苗头。
English: Cabinet ministers lost the power to participate in negotiations, and eunuchs appeared to meddle in politics.

古文：自今章奏，请召大臣面决施行，讲官、台谏，班列左右，众议而公驳之。
现代文：从今以后的奏章，请陛下把大臣召集来当面决定以后施行，讲官、台谏也排列左右，大家共同商议，或赞成或反对，事情公开办理。
English: From now on, for the performance of the Song of Songs, Your Majesty is requested to convene the ministers to decide in person, and then implement the decision. The lecterns and podiums are also arranged to the right and left, and everyone can discuss together whether to approve or disapprove, and the matter will be handled openly.

古文：宰相得取善之名，内臣免招权之谤。 
现代文：这样内阁大臣就有了去恶取善的声望，宦官也避免了别人对他们揽权的批评。 
English: In this way, cabinet ministers gained a reputation for doing what is right, and eunuchs avoided criticism of their power-grabbing.

古文：因言锦衣不当典刑狱，东厂不当预朝议，抚按兵备官不当以军功授秩荫，兴府护卫军不当尽取入京概授官职，御史谢源、伍希儒赴难有功不当罢黜，平逆藩功自安庆、南昌外，不当滥叙。
现代文：进而说到锦衣卫不应当掌管刑罚，东厂不应当参与朝廷中的事务讨论，抚按兵备官不应当凭军功晋级、荫封，兴王府的护卫军不应当全部召来京城授予官职，御史谢源、伍希儒以身赴难有功无罪不应罢免，平定宸濠叛乱的功绩除安庆、南昌以外不应当滥评。
English: Furthermore, it was said that the brocade guards should not be in charge of criminal punishment, the east factory should not participate in the discussion of affairs in the imperial court, the military officers should not be promoted or eclipsed on the basis of military merit, the escort troops of the Xingwangfu should not all be called to the capital to be awarded official positions, the goshi Xieyuan and Wu Xiru should not be dismissed for their achievements, and the achievements of suppressing the rebellion should not be abused except for Anqing and Nanchang.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：世宗高兴地听取了他的意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：及 大礼 议起，礼部尚书毛澄力持考孝宗，韬私为《大礼议》驳之。
现代文：等到关于 大礼 的争论开始后，礼部尚书毛澄坚决认为世宗应该称孝宗为考，霍韬私下写了一篇《大礼议》反驳这种观点。
English: After the debate on the Great Rite began, Shang Shuxu Mao Cheng of the Rite Department firmly believed that Shizong should call Xiaozong as a test, and Huo Yao privately wrote a "Great Rite Proposal" to refute this view.

古文：澄贻书相质难，韬三上书极辨其非。
现代文：毛澄写信给霍韬质问他，霍韬多次写信给毛澄，极力论说毛澄的错误。
English: Mao Cheng wrote to Huo Gan to question him, and Huo Gan wrote to Mao Cheng many times, insisting that it was Mao Cheng's mistake.

古文：已，知澄意不可回，其年十月上疏曰：
现代文：过后，他认识到毛澄的意见无法转变，就在那年十月递上奏章说：
English: Later, he realized that Mao Cheng's opinion could not be changed, and in October of that year, he submitted a report saying:

古文：按廷议谓陛下宜以孝宗为父，兴献王为叔，别择崇仁王子为献王后，考之古礼则不合，质之圣贤之道则不通，揆之今日之事体则不顺。
现代文： 按大臣们议定，认为陛下应当称孝宗为父，兴献王为叔，另外选崇仁王的一个儿子做献王的后裔。这种观点，根据古礼考较是不适合的，根据圣贤之道来比照是说不通的，根据现在的事实来考虑是名实不相随的。
English: According to the ministers' agreement, it was thought that His Majesty should call Emperor Xiaozong as his father, Emperor Hezheng as his uncle, and also choose one of Emperor Chongren's sons to be the descendant of Emperor Hezheng. According to the ancient etiquette, this view was not suitable, according to the wisdom of the sages, it was incoherent, and according to the current facts, it was inconsistent with the facts.

古文：考《仪礼·丧服》章云 斩衰为所后者 。又云 为人后者，为其父母报 。
现代文： 查《仪礼·丧服》篇说 ：过继给人做后裔就给人穿最重的丧服斩衰。 
English: According to the "Rituals, Funeral Costumes" article: If you adopt someone as a descendant, you will have to wear the heaviest funeral clothes.

古文：是于所后者，盖无称为父母之说，而于本生父母又无改称伯叔父母之云也。
现代文：又说： 过继给人做后裔，要替自己的父母进行报祭。 这里对过继的对象，好像没有称他们为父母的意思，对于亲生父母也没有改称伯、叔父母的说法。
English: He also said, "An adoptee is a descendant, and he should make offerings for his parents." There does not seem to be any intention to call the adoptees parents, nor is there any suggestion to change the names of the biological parents to uncle and aunt.

古文：汉儒不明其义，谬为邪说曰 为人后者为之子 。
现代文：汉儒不懂《丧服》篇的意思，炮制谬论说什么 过继给人就是人家的儿子 。
English: Han Ru did not understand the meaning of the "funeral clothes" passage, and concocted a fallacy to say that a person who is adopted is someone else's son.

古文：果如其言，则汉宣帝当为昭帝后矣。
现代文：果真像他们所说，那么汉宣帝应当是昭帝的儿子。
English: If it is as they say, then Emperor Han Xuan should be the son of Emperor Zhao.

古文：然昭帝从祖也，宣帝从孙也，孙将谓祖为父，可乎？
现代文：但是事实上昭帝是从祖，宣帝是从孙，孙子难道可以称祖为父？
English: But in fact, Emperor Zhao is from the ancestor, Emperor Xuan is from the grandson, can the grandson call the ancestor his father?

古文：唐宣宗当为武宗后矣，然武宗侄也，宣宗叔也，叔反谓侄为父，可乎？
现代文：唐宣宗应当是武宗的后裔了，但是事实上武宗是侄儿，宣宗是叔父，叔父反过来称侄儿为父，可以吗？
English: Tang Xuan Zong should be a descendant of Wu Zong, but in fact, Wu Zong is a nephew, Xuan Zong is an uncle, and the uncle, in turn, calls the nephew his father, is that okay?

古文：吴诸樊兄弟四人以国相授受，盖迭相为后矣，是兄弟自具高曾祖考也，而可乎？
现代文：吴诸樊兄弟四个把国家依次传承，大概可以说是互为后继人了，这样说兄弟四个一是高祖，一是曾祖，一是祖父，一是考，可以吗？
English: Wu Zhu Rong's four brothers successively inherited the country, and can probably be said to be each other's successors. Is it okay to say that the four brothers are Gao Zu, Zeng Zu, Grandpa, and Gao?

古文：故曰考之古礼则不合也。
现代文：所以说这种观点，根据古礼考较是不适合的。
English: Therefore, this view is not suitable according to the ancient etiquette.

古文：天下者，天下之天下，非一人所得私也。
现代文： 天下是天下所有的人的天下，不是一个人的私产。
English: The world is the world of all people, not the private property of one person.

古文：宋人之告其君曰： 仁宗于宗室中特简圣明，授以大业，陛下所以负扆端冕，富有四海，子孙万世相承，皆先帝之德。 
现代文：宋朝人对他们的英宗皇帝说： 仁宗从宗室亲人中特别选择您，把国家传给您，您能身穿龙袍头戴王冠，拥有天下，并传给子孙万代，都是先皇帝的恩惠。 
English: The people of the Song Dynasty said to their Emperor Yingzong: "Renzong specially chose you from among the relatives of the imperial family to pass on the country to you. You can wear a dragon robe and a crown, own the world, and pass it on to your children and grandchildren for generations. All of these are the blessings of the first emperor.

古文：盖谓仁宗以天下授英宗，宜舍本生父母而以仁宗为父母也。
现代文：意思大概是说仁宗把天下传给英宗，英宗应该放弃亲生父母而把仁宗作为父母。
English: The meaning is probably that Rinzong passed the world to Yingzong, and Yingzong should give up his own parents and take Rinzong as his parents.

古文：臣以圣贤之道观之，孟子言舜为天子，瞽瞍杀人，皋陶执之，舜则窃负而逃，是父母重而天下轻也。
现代文：我运用圣贤之道来看，孟子说舜当天子，假如他父亲瞽瞍杀了人，皋陶把他捉了，舜就会偷偷背了父亲出逃，这样说来应该以父母为重，而以天下为轻。
English: I use the wisdom of the sages to see that Mencius said that if his father killed someone and Tao caught him, Tao would secretly flee with his father. In this way, parents should be given more weight, and the world should be given less weight.

古文：若宋儒之说，则天下重而父母轻矣。
现代文：照宋儒所说，就是天下重而父母轻了。
English: According to Song Confucius, the world is heavy and parents are light.

古文：故曰求之圣贤之道则不通也。
现代文：所以说这种观点，根据圣贤之道来比照是说不通的。
English: Therefore, this view cannot be said to be based on the wisdom of the sages.

古文：武宗嗣孝宗历十有六年，考宗非无嗣也。
现代文： 武宗继承孝宗坐了十六年天下，孝宗并不是没有后继者。
English: Takemune succeeded Takamune and ruled the country for 16 years. Takamune was not without successors.

古文：今强欲陛下重为孝宗之嗣，何为也哉？
现代文：现在硬要陛下再给孝宗做后继者，到底图个什么呢？
English: Now he wants His Majesty to make a successor for Takamune, what is he up to?

古文：夫陛下为孝宗子矣，谁为武宗子乎？
现代文：陛下可以给孝宗当儿子，又有谁来给武宗当儿子呢？
English: Your Majesty can give a son to Takamune, but who will give a son to Takemune?

古文：孝宗有两嗣子矣，武宗独无嗣子，可乎？
现代文：孝宗有两个接班人和儿子，武宗却没有接班人，没有儿子，行吗？
English: Xiaozong has two successors and a son, but Wuzong has no successor and no son, is that okay?

古文：臣子于君父一也，既不忍孝宗之无嗣，独忍武宗之无嗣乎？
现代文：大臣对于君主和对于父亲是一样的，既不忍心看到孝宗没有后继者，又怎么忍心看到武宗没有接班人呢？
English: The minister felt the same way about the monarch as he did about his father. He couldn't bear to see Takamune without a successor, but how could he bear to see Takemune without a successor?

古文：若曰武宗以兄，固得享弟之祀，则孝宗以伯，独不得享侄之祀乎？
现代文：如果武宗是哥哥，本来就有资格享受弟弟的祭祀，那么孝宗是伯父，难道没资格享受侄儿的祭祀吗？
English: If Buson was an older brother, he would have been eligible to enjoy the younger brother's sacrifice, but if Takamune was an uncle, wouldn't he be eligible to enjoy the nephew's sacrifice?

古文：既可越武宗直继孝宗矣，独不可并越孝宗直继宪宗乎？
现代文：既然可以越过武宗往上继承孝宗的皇位，难道就不可以一并连孝宗也越过往上直接继承宪宗的皇位？
English: Since it is possible to pass over Bu Zong to inherit the throne of Xiaozong, shouldn't it also be possible for Xiaozong to pass over and directly inherit the throne of Kenzong?

古文：武宗无嗣，无可如何矣。
现代文：武宗没有儿子，这已是无可奈何的事了。
English: It was inevitable that he would not have a son.

古文：孝宗有嗣，复强继其嗣，而绝兴献之嗣，是于孝宗无所益，而于兴献不大有损乎？
现代文：孝宗有儿子，又强要再为他过继一个，绝掉兴献王的后裔，这是不是对孝宗没什么帮助而对兴献王大有损失的事？
English: Xiaozong has a son, and he insists on adopting another one for him, eliminating the descendants of Heixian Wang. Is this not a matter of little help to Xiaozong and great loss to Heixian Wang?

古文：故曰揆之今日之事体则不顺也。
现代文：所以说这种观点，根据现在的事实来考虑是名实不相随的。
English: Therefore, this view, considered in the light of current facts, is not consistent with reality.

古文：然臣下之为此议也，其故有三：曰前代故事之拘也，曰不忘孝宗之德也，曰避迎合之嫌也。
现代文： 不过我提出这种意见有三点原因：一是破除前代故事给人的拘束；二是不忘孝宗的恩德；三是避免迎合陛下心意嫌疑。
English: However, there are three reasons why I put forward this opinion: one is to break the shackles of the previous generation's stories; the second is not to forget the benevolence of filial piety; the third is to avoid the suspicion of catering to His Majesty's will.

古文：今陛下既考孝宗矣，尊兴献王以帝号矣，则将如斯而已乎？
现代文：现在陛下已经把孝宗称为考，又把兴献王尊崇为帝，事情就这样算完了吗？
English: Now that your majesty has proclaimed the Emperor to be the Emperor, and the Emperor to be the Emperor, is this the end of the matter?

古文：臣窃谓帝王之相继也，继其统而已矣，固不屑屑于父子之称也。
现代文：我私下认为帝王之间的继承，只是继承王位而已，本来就不必斤斤计较父子的称呼。
English: Privately, I think that the succession between emperors is just the succession to the throne, and there is no need to care about the title of father and son.

古文：惟继其统，则不惟孝宗之统不绝，即武宗之统亦不绝矣。
现代文：只有继承王位，才能使孝宗的谱系不绝，就连武宗的谱系也不绝。
English: Only by inheriting the throne can the lineage of the filial line be unbroken, and even the lineage of the warrior line be unbroken.

古文：然则如之何而可乎？
现代文：但是仅仅如此吗？不。
English: But is that all? No.

古文：惟陛下于兴献王得正父子之称，以不绝天性之恩。于国母之迎，得正天子之母之礼。
现代文：这样陛下对兴献王还可以改正父子之称号，不断绝兴献王天生的大恩；对于国母的欢迎，也能改正为对天子的母亲应有的礼仪。
English: In this way, His Majesty can also correct the title of father and son for King Heungseong, and continue to bless the great gift of King Heungseong; the welcome for the mother of the country can also be corrected as the proper etiquette for the mother of the heavenly son.

古文：复于昭圣太后、武宗皇后处之有其道，事之尽其诚，则于尊尊亲亲两不悖矣。
现代文：假如再对昭圣太后、武宗皇后能用正确的方式对待，尽心中的诚意来侍奉，那么尊敬尊贵的人，亲爱亲近的人，这两条就都没有违误了。 
English: If you can treat Empress Shoshen and Empress Wuzong in the right way and serve them with all your sincerity, then there will be no violation of the two articles of respecting the distinguished people and loving the close ones.

古文：帝得疏喜甚，迫群议不遽行。
现代文：世宗接到这篇奏疏后心中很高兴，迫于大臣们的舆论压力不敢马上实施。
English: After receiving this report, Sejong was very happy, but under pressure from public opinion, the ministers did not dare to implement it immediately.

古文：而朝士咸指目韬为邪说。韬意不自得，寻谢病归。
现代文：可是朝廷中大臣们都指责霍韬炮制邪说，霍韬心中不自在，很快就告病回家去了。
English: However, the middle ministers of the imperial court all accused him of concocting evil theories. Uneasy in his heart, he soon fell ill and went home.

古文：嘉靖三年，帝议尊崇所生益急，两诏召韬。
现代文：嘉靖三年，世宗更加急切地要尊崇自己的亲生父母，两次发布诏书召霍韬进京。
English: In the third year of Jiajing, Shizong was even more eager to honor his own parents, and twice issued an imperial edict to summon Huo Xi to Beijing.

古文：韬辞疾不赴，驰疏言：今日大礼之议，两端而已。曰崇正统之大义也，曰正天伦之大经也。
现代文：霍韬用生病为理由推辞，不肯赴京，飞章上奏说： 现在关于 大礼 的争议，无非争两个方面：一是尊崇王位正统的大道理，二是要纠正人伦关系的大准则。
English: He used his illness as a reason to refuse to go to Beijing. He wrote on the flyleaf: The current controversy over the grand salute has two aspects: one is to respect the principle of the legitimacy of the throne, and the other is to correct the principle of interpersonal relationships.

古文：徒尊正统，其弊至于利天下而弃父母；徒重天伦，其弊至于小加大而卑逾尊。
现代文：只尊崇王位正统，弊端在于有利于国家却抛弃了父母；只重视天伦，弊端是使地位本来低的凌驾于尊贵之上。
English: Only respect and reverence the legitimacy of the throne, the drawback is that in favor of the country but abandoned his parents; only pay attention to Tianren, the drawback is to make the status of the original low above the noble.

古文：故臣谓陛下宜称孝宗曰皇伯考，献帝曰皇考。
现代文：所以我认为陛下应该称孝宗为皇伯考，献帝为皇考，这是应加分别的人伦关系。
English: Therefore, I think that His Majesty should refer to Emperor Xiaozong as "Imperial Examination" and Emperor Xian as "Imperial Examination." This is a human relationship that should be distinguished.

古文：此天伦之当辨者也。尊崇之议，则姑在所缓，此大统之当崇者也。
现代文：尊崇亲生父母的讨论，姑且可以往后放一放，这是因为王位正统应该优先尊崇。我认为陛下对昭圣皇太后，所用的礼仪等级虽然崇高，但势头越来越轻微了。
English: The discussion of honoring one's biological parents can be put on the back burner, because the legitimacy of the throne should be honored first. I think that the level of etiquette used by His Majesty for Empress Dowager Akihito, although lofty, is losing momentum.

古文：愿陛下以臣等建议之情，上启圣母曰，昭圣皇太后实大统嫡宗，至尊无对，伏愿圣母时自谦抑，示尊敬至意。
现代文：陛下对待自己母亲，名号虽然还没有尊贵到极点，但势头越来越重要了。大臣们所以不依不饶要您尊崇嫡系，以昭圣皇太后为母亲，大概是为了防范陛下将来的过失，并用以作为报效孝宗皇帝应尽的本分。希望陛下把我们提此建议的衷情禀告圣母，就说昭圣皇太后事实上是正统、嫡亲，她的地位尊贵无比，希望圣母能经常谦退一些，对昭圣表示尊敬的意思。
English: Your Majesty's treatment of his mother, although the name has not yet been honored to the extreme, but the momentum is becoming more and more important. The ministers therefore do not hesitate to ask you to honor the direct line, with the Empress Dowager Shosho as the mother, presumably in order to prevent future mistakes of Your Majesty, and to use it as a duty to be performed by the Emperor. I hope that Your Majesty will tell the Virgin Mary the sincerity of our suggestion, saying that the Empress Dowager Shosho is in fact an orthodox, legitimate relative, and her status is incomparably noble. I hope that the Virgin Mary can often step back and show respect for Shosho.

古文：庄肃皇后母仪天下十六年，圣母接见之仪，不可轻忽，凡正旦、贺寿，圣母每致谦让不敢纳之意。俾宫闱大权一归昭圣，而圣母若无与焉，则天下万世称颂懿德与天无极。
现代文：庄奉皇后当了十六年的国母，圣母接见她的礼仪不可轻忽，凡是元旦、贺寿，圣母要经常表现出谦让、不敢接受庄奉大礼的意思，让宫廷内部的大权全归昭圣皇太后掌握，圣母像不参与的样子，那么天下人和后代人就会称颂圣母的美德，就像称颂老天一样没有停止的那一天了。 
English: As the mother of the nation for sixteen years, the Virgin Mary's reception of her is not to be taken lightly. On New Year's Day and the anniversary of her death, the Virgin Mary must always show humility, not daring to accept the meaning of the solemn offering, and let the power within the court be entirely in the hands of the Holy Empress Dowager. If the Virgin Mary does not participate, then the world and future generations will praise the virtues of the Virgin Mary, just like the day when she did not stop praising God.

古文：万一圣母意犹未喻，亦得归罪臣等，加赐诛斥，然后委曲申请，务得允从，庶宗统正而嫌隙消，天下万世无所非议，此臣愚虑者二也。帝深嘉其忠义，趣令趋朝。
现代文：世宗深深赞扬他奏疏中表现出来的忠诚，就催促他回到朝廷去。
English: The Sejong deeply praised the loyalty he had shown in his retirement, and urged him to return to the imperial court.

古文：明年擢少詹事兼侍讲学士。
现代文：第二年，提拔他为少詹事兼侍讲学士。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the post of junior clerk and assistant lecturer.

古文：韬固辞。且请令六部长贰、翰林、给事、御中俱调外任，练政体；监司、守令政绩卓异，即擢卿丞，有文学者擢翰林；举贡入仕皆得擢翰林，升部院，不宜困资格。
现代文：霍韬坚决推辞，并且请求诏令六部尚书、侍郎、翰林、给事中、御史都应该出任地方官职，以便他们熟悉政治局势；监司、守令政绩突出的，就应提拔为卿丞，有文才、学识的提拔为翰林官；科举、贡选入官的都可以提为翰林，进入部院，不应该局限于资格。
English: Huo Gan firmly refused, and requested that the six departments of Shangshu, Zhilang, Hanlin, Genshizhong, and Goshi should be appointed as local officials, so that they could be familiar with the political situation; supervisors and guards with outstanding political achievements should be promoted to chengzheng, and those with literary talent and knowledge should be promoted to Hanlin officials; those who entered the government through imperial examinations and tributary elections could be promoted to Hanlin, and those who entered the ministry should not be limited to qualifications.

古文：帝不允辞，趣令赴职。下其奏于有司，悉格不用。
现代文：世宗不允许他的推辞，催派他上任，把他的奏议下发给有关部门讨论，结果全部被废置，没有采用。
English: The Sejong did not allow his resignation, urged him to take office, and sent his proposal to the relevant departments for discussion. As a result, it was all scrapped and not adopted.

古文：六年，还朝，命直经筵日讲。
现代文：六年，霍韬回到朝廷里，世宗命令他到经筵前值勤，担任日讲官。
English: Six years later, when Ho Th returned to the imperial court, King Sejong ordered him to be on duty in front of the throne as the Japanese lecturer.

古文：韬自以南音力辞日讲，请撰《古今政要》及《诗书直解》以进。
现代文：霍韬因为自己的南方口音竭力推辞，请求让他撰写《古今政要》及《诗书直解》，然后进呈。
English: Because of his southern accent, Huo Yao tried his best to refuse and asked him to write "Ancient and Modern Political Figures" and "Straightforward Explanation of Poetry" and then submit them.

古文：帝褒许之。
现代文：世宗表示赞许。
English: Sejong expressed his approval.

古文：其年九月迁詹事兼翰林学士，韬复固辞，言： 自杨荣、杨士奇、杨溥以及李东阳、杨廷和颛权植党，笼翰林为属官，中书为门吏，故翰林迁擢不由吏部，而中书至有进秩尚书者。
现代文：那年九月，世宗提拔他做詹士兼翰林学士，霍韬又极力推辞，说： 从杨荣、杨士奇、杨溥直到李东阳、杨廷和都把握权柄，培植党羽，把翰林笼络来做下属，中书做幕僚，所以翰林的升任不经过吏部，而中书甚至有升官做到尚书的。
English: In September of that year, Shizong promoted him to the post of Janzhi and Hanlin Baccalaureate, but Huo Yao strenuously declined, saying: From Yang Rong, Yang Shiqi, Yang Hui to Li Dongyang, Yang Tinghe, they all seized power, cultivated party feathers, made Hanlin subordinate, and made Zhongshu a staff member. Therefore, Hanlin's promotion did not go through the cadre department, and Zhongshu was even promoted to Shangshu.

古文：臣尝建议，谓翰林去留，尽属吏部，庶不阴倚内阁为腹心，内阁亦不阴结翰林为羽翼。
现代文：我曾经建议把翰林任免的权力归属吏部，以期他们不暗中投靠内阁，做内阁大臣的心腹；内阁也无法暗中勾结翰林做他们的羽翼。
English: I once suggested that the power of appointing and removing Hanlin should be assigned to the cadre department, so that they would not secretly rely on the cabinet and be the confidant of the cabinet minister; the cabinet could not secretly collude with Hanlin to be their wings.

古文：且欲京官补外以均劳逸，议未即行，躬自蹈之，而又躐居学士徐缙上，何愧如之。 
现代文：并且想把京官调补地方上做官，以便劳逸均平。我的建议还没采用，我自己就先登翰林之门，而且又忝居学士徐缙之上，该有什么比这还难为情的？ 
English: And I want to replace the Beijing officials with local officials, so that work and life are equal. My suggestion has not yet been adopted, I myself first ascended to the gate of Hanlin, and I live above the bachelor Xu Wei, what should be more embarrassing than this?

古文：帝优诏不允。
现代文：世宗颁诏嘉奖，但不允许他辞让。
English: The Sejong issued a posthumous commendation, but did not allow him to resign.

古文：明年四月进礼部右侍郎。
现代文：第二年四月，世宗又升用他为礼部右侍郎。
English: In April of the following year, Sejong promoted him to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：韬力辞，且举康海、王九思、李梦阳、魏校、颜木、王廷陈、何瑭自代，帝不允。再辞，乃允之。
现代文：霍韬极力辞让，并且推荐康海、王九思、李梦阳、魏校、颜木、王廷陈、何塘替换自己，世宗不允许，他两次推辞，才得到允准。
English: He tried his best to refuse, and recommended Kanghai, Wang Jiu Si, Li Mengyang, Wei Xie, Yan Mu, Wang Ting Chen, and He Tang to replace him. Shizong did not allow it, and he had to refuse twice before he was allowed.

古文：六月， 大礼 成，超拜礼部尚书，掌詹事府事。
现代文：六月 ，大礼 议定，破格任命他为礼部尚书，主管詹事府的事务。
English: In June, the grand ceremony was agreed upon, and he was appointed as the ceremonial secretary, in charge of the affairs of Zhan Prefecture.

古文：韬因言翰林院修书迁官、日讲荫子、及巡抚子弟荫武职之非，而以为己不能力挽，不可随众趋。
现代文：霍韬于是上书说翰林院编书升官、日讲荫子以及巡抚子弟荫封为武官的不恰当，然后说自己虽然不能挽救这些错失，但不愿跟随大流。
English: Huo Wei then wrote a letter saying that the promotion of Hanlin Academy's editor-in-chief, Nicholai Yingzi, and the governor's son Yingfeng as military attaché were inappropriate, and then said that although he could not save these mistakes, he did not want to follow the mainstream.

古文：且称给事中陈洸冤，荐监生陈云章才可用。
现代文：并且言称给事中陈受了冤屈，推荐国子监学生陈云章有才干，可以任用做官。
English: He also said that Chen Yunzhang, a student of the National Supervision of Children's Education, was talented and could be appointed as an official.

古文：帝优诏褒答，不允辞。
现代文：世宗颁诏称赞了他，但不许他推让。
English: The Sejong issued an edict praising him, but forbade him to make concessions.

古文：韬复奏曰： 今异议者谓陛下特欲尊崇皇考，遂以官爵饵其臣，臣等二三臣苟图官爵，遂阿顺陛下之意。
现代文：霍韬又上书说 ：现在持不同政见的人们以为陛下只是想尊崇自己的父王，就拿官职、爵位来诱引自己的臣下；我们两三个人只是苟且贪图高官显爵，所以迎合了陛下的心思。
English: "Nowadays, people who hold dissident views think that Your Majesty just wants to honor his father, the king, and uses official posts and peerages to lure his subjects; the two or three of us are just greedy for high-ranking officials and peerages, so we have pandered to Your Majesty's wishes.

古文：臣尝自慨，若得礼定，决不受官，俾天下万世知议礼者非利官也。
现代文：我曾经慷慨地对自己发过誓：如果 大礼 最后定下来，我决不接受加官，让天下人和后代人看到讨论 大礼 的大臣并不是图谋私利的官员。
English: I once generously swore to myself: If the grand gift is finally settled, I will never accept a promotion, so that the world and future generations can see that the minister who discusses the grand gift is not an official who seeks personal gain.

古文：苟疑议礼者为利官，则所议虽是，彼犹以为非，何以塞天下口？ 
现代文：假使让人们怀疑讨论 大礼 的大臣是图谋私利的官员，那么由这些人议定的 大礼 即使正确，人家也还是认为不正确，怎么才能使人不说呢？ 
English: If people suspect that the ministers who discuss the gift are self-serving officials, then even if the gift negotiated by these people is correct, it will still be considered incorrect. How can people not talk about it?

古文：因固辞不拜，帝犹不允。三辞，乃允之。
现代文：因此他坚持辞让不肯就职，世宗还是不允许，经再三推辞，世宗最后同意了他。
English: Therefore, he insisted on resigning and refused to take office, but Sejong still did not allow it. After repeated refusals, Sejong finally agreed with him.

古文：韬先后荐王守仁、王琼诸人，帝皆纳用。
现代文：霍韬先后推荐过王守仁、王琼等人，世宗都采纳了他的意见。
English: Huo Gan had recommended Wang Shuren, Wang Qiong and others successively, and Shizong had adopted his opinions.

古文：尝因灾异陈时弊十余事，多议行。
现代文：他又曾因为灾异的发生上书陈述十多条革除弊政的意见，大多经讨论被实施。
English: Because of the occurrence of disasters, he once submitted a letter stating more than ten opinions on the elimination of maladministration, most of which were implemented after discussion.

古文：张璁、桂萼之罢政也，韬谓言官陆粲等受杨一清指使，两疏力攻一清，夺其职，而璁、萼召还。
现代文：张璁、桂萼被免除职务时，霍韬上书说谏官陆粲等人是受杨一清指使的，他两次上书猛烈攻击一清，结果一清被削职，而张璁、桂萼被召了回来。
English: When Zhang Qian and Gui Qian were relieved of their duties, Huo Qian wrote a letter saying that the eunuch Lu Qian and others were ordered by Yang Iqing. He twice wrote a letter to fiercely attack Iqing. As a result, Iqing was removed from his post, while Zhang Qian and Gui Qian were recalled.

古文：帝从夏言议，将分祀天地，建二郊，韬极言其非。
现代文：世宗听取夏言的建议，将分开来祭祀天和地，修建两座郊祀台，霍韬极力说这样子不对。
English: Sejong listened to Natsugen's suggestion and decided to hold separate sacrifices for heaven and earth, building two suburban shrines, but Hoo-yeon was adamant that this was wrong.

古文：帝不悦，责韬罔上自恣。
现代文：世宗不高兴了，批评他蒙骗君上，自以为是。
English: Sejong was not happy, criticizing him for deceiving the emperor and being self-righteous.

古文：言亦疏辨，力诋韬。
现代文：夏言也上书替自己辩护，猛力抨击霍韬。
English: Xia Yan also wrote a letter to defend himself and vigorously attacked Huo Tong.

古文：韬素护前自遂，见帝怒，不敢辨，乃遗言书，痛诋之，复录其书送法司。
现代文：霍韬一贯注意保持以前的印象，以便自我施展，现在看到世宗生了气，就不敢辩解了，却送给夏言一封信，把他痛痛地抨击了一番，又把那封信抄录一份送交法司。
English: Huo Yan always paid attention to maintaining the previous impression in order to exert himself. Now that he saw that Shizong was angry, he did not dare to defend himself. Instead, he sent a letter to Xia Yan, bitterly attacked him, and sent a copy of the letter to the Legal Department.

古文：言怒，疏陈其状，且劾韬无君七罪，并以其书进呈。
现代文：夏言恼了，上书对世宗讲了这件事，并且揭发了霍韬目无君主的七条罪行，连带霍韬的来信一起交了上去。
English: Annoyed, Xia Yan told Sejong about the matter in the letter, and exposed the seven crimes of the monarchless, and handed it over together with the letter from the monarch.

古文：帝大怒，责韬谤讪君上，丑正怀邪，遂下都察院狱。
现代文：世宗大为恼火，批评霍韬诽谤、嘲笑君上，心术不正，丑化好人，就把他关进了都察院的监狱。
English: Sejong was very angry. He criticized Ho for slandering and ridiculing the prince, for being mentally dishonest, and for making a good man look bad. So he locked him up in the prison of the Duza Academy.

古文：韬从狱中上书祈哀，璁亦再申救，帝皆不纳。
现代文：霍韬自己从狱中上书哀求宽恕，张璁也两次上书救他，世宗都不听。
English: Huo Gan himself wrote a letter from prison begging for forgiveness, Zhang Ye also wrote a letter twice to save him, but Shizong did not listen.

古文：南京御史邓文宪言，宜察韬心，容其戆，且天地分祀是置父母异处，郊外亲蚕是废内外防闲。
现代文：南京御史邓文宪上书说应该看到霍韬的善良愿望，包涵他的戆直，并且说把天和地分开来祭祀等于是把父母安置在不同的地方，让后妃到郊外亲自养蚕就是废除了男女、内外之间应有的防范。
English: Deng Wenxian, the imperial historian of Nanjing, wrote in a letter that the good wishes of Huo Xi should be seen, including his uprightness, and said that to separate heaven and earth for sacrifice is equivalent to placing parents in different places, and to let the empress go to the suburbs to raise silkworms in person is to abolish the precautions that should be taken between men and women, inside and outside.

古文：帝怒，谪之边方。
现代文：世宗恼了，把他贬官到远方。
English: Sejong was annoyed and demoted him to a distant post.

古文：韬系狱逾月，帝终念其议礼功，令输赎还职。
现代文：霍韬在监狱中关了一个多月，世宗最后想到了他当初议定 大礼 的功劳，就让他捐输资财赎罪还职。
English: He was held in prison for more than a month. Finally, Sejong thought of his contribution to the grand gift, and asked him to donate money to atone for his crime and return to work.

古文：寻以母丧归。
现代文：不久他因为母亲去世回乡去了。
English: He soon returned to his hometown after his mother's death.

古文：广东佥事龚大稔讦韬及方献夫居乡不法事，大稔反被逮削籍。
现代文：广东佥事龚大稔后来上书攻击霍韬和方献夫在家乡干下的违法事件，龚大稔反倒被逮捕，削了官籍。
English: After the Guangdong incident, Zou Dajuan later wrote a letter attacking the illegal activities of Huo Zhou and Fang Xianfu in his hometown. On the contrary, Zou Dajuan was arrested and stripped of his official registration.

古文：十二年，韬起历吏部左、右侍郎。
现代文：十二年，霍韬复出，先后做过吏部左、右侍郎。
English: In the twelfth year, Hou Yi made a comeback, and successively served as the left and right attendant of the cadre department.

古文：时部事多主于尚书，两侍郎率不预。
现代文：当时吏部的事情大多都由尚书做主，两个侍郎一般无法干预。
English: At that time, most of the affairs of the cadre department were handled by Shang Shu, and the two attendants were generally unable to intervene.

古文：韬争于尚书汪鋐，侍郎始获参部事。
现代文：霍韬向尚书汪钅宏争取，侍郎才获得了参议部事的机会。
English: Huo Jian fought for Wang Jianhong, the secretary, and it was he who won the opportunity to become a member of the Senate.

古文：韬素刚愎，屡与鋐争，鋐等亦严惮之。
现代文：霍韬一向刚愎自用，多次与汪钅宏争斗，汪钅宏等人也很惧怕他。
English: He had always been a strong-willed person and had fought with Wang Binghong many times. Wang Binghong and others were also very afraid of him.

古文：既而鋐罢，帝久不置尚书，以韬掌部事。
现代文：不多久汪钅宏罢官，世宗长期不另外任命尚书，就让霍韬主持吏部的事务。
English: Not long after, Wang Jianhong was dismissed from his post, and Shizong, who had not appointed a new secretary for a long time, asked Huo Jian to preside over the affairs of the personnel department.

古文：阁臣李时传旨，用鸿胪卿王道中为顺天府丞。
现代文：内阁大臣李时有一次传达世宗的意思，要任用鸿胪卿王道中为顺天府丞。
English: The cabinet minister, Li Shih, once conveyed the intention of Shizong to appoint Wang Daozhong as Shuntianfu Rong.

古文：韬言： 辅臣承天语无可疑，然臣等犹当奏请，用杜矫伪。 
现代文：霍韬说： 内阁大臣得到过皇上指示，这本没什么可疑的，但是我们还是应当再行奏请，以便杜绝弄虚作假。 
English: "There is nothing suspicious in the fact that a cabinet minister has received an instruction from the emperor, but we should still send another request in order to prevent deception," said Huo Wei.

古文：因守故事，列道中及应天府丞郭登庸二人名上。
现代文：于是按照惯例，开列道中和应天府丞郭登庸两个人的名字，让世宗审定。
English: As a result, in accordance with the usual practice, the names of two people, Daozhong and Guo Dengyong, were listed, and let Shizong verify them.

古文：帝为停韬俸四月，相等亦停二月。
现代文：世宗喜欢他办事照规矩来，就任用了登庸，把道中改任大理少卿。过了很久，世宗让霍韬出任南京礼部尚书去了。
English: Shizong liked that he did things according to the rules. He appointed Deng Yong to the post, and changed Daozhong to Dali Shaoqing. After a long time, Shizong appointed Huo Wei to the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：韬既与言交恶，及言柄用，韬每欲因事陷之。
现代文：霍韬前已和夏言结了怨，等夏言掌权以后，霍韬常常想找些事来陷害他。
English: He had previously had a grudge with Xia Yan. After Xia Yan came to power, he often tried to frame him.

古文：上言： 顷吏部选刘文光等为给事中，寻忽报罢，人皆曰阁臣抑之。
现代文：一次他上书说 ：不久前吏部打算推举刘文光等人做给事中，没几天忽然又宣布作废了，大家都说是内阁大臣压了他们。
English: He once wrote: Not long ago, the Ministry of Public Administration planned to nominate Liu Wenguang and others to do something, but a few days later suddenly announced that it was cancelled. Everyone said that the cabinet minister had suppressed them.

古文：给事中李鹤鸣考察谪官，寻复故，人皆曰贿得。
现代文：给事中李鹤鸣在考核时被贬了官，没有几天又官复原职，大家都说是经过行贿得来的。
English: In this case, Li Heming was demoted during the assessment, and was reinstated a few days later. Everyone said that it was obtained through bribery.

古文：宜谕吏部毋受当事颐指，使天下知威福出朝廷，而大臣有李林甫、秦桧者，不得播弄于左右。 
现代文：陛下应该告诫吏部官员，叫他们不要受执政暗中指使，好让天下人看到恩惠和刑罚都在朝廷掌握中，大臣中间即使有李林甫、秦桧那样的人，也不能够在皇上身边随意捣鬼。 
English: His majesty should admonish the officials of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, telling them not to be secretly guided by the government, so that the people of the world can see that favors and punishments are under the control of the imperial court, and even if there are people like Li Linfu and Qin Hui among the ministers, they can't mess around with the emperor at will.

古文：其意为言发也。
现代文：他的话是针对夏言而说的。
English: His words were directed at Natsugen.

古文：于是鹤鸣上疏自白，并摭韬居乡不法诸事。
现代文：于是鹤鸣上书自我表白，并列举了霍韬居住在家乡时干下的许多违法事件。
English: As a result, Henming self-confessed in a letter and enumerated many illegal incidents committed by Huo Wei when he was living in his hometown.

古文：帝两置之。
现代文：世宗把两边都搁下不问。
English: The emperor ignored both sides.

古文：无何，韬劾南京御史龚湜、郭本。
现代文：没过多久，霍韬弹劾南京御史龚、郭本。
English: It didn't take long for Ho Đình to impeach the governor of Nanking, Guobeng.

古文：湜等自辨，亦劾韬。帝并置不问。
现代文：龚蔔等为自己辩解的同时也上书弹劾霍韬，世宗又一次搁下，对双方都不追究。
English: While Zou et al. defended themselves, they also submitted a letter to impeach Huo Zou, and once again, Shizong shelved it, and neither side was investigated.

古文：十八年简补宫僚，命韬以太子少保、礼部尚书协掌詹事府事。
现代文：十八年，朝廷选拔东宫官员时，任命霍韬以太子少保、礼部尚书的官衔掌管詹事府的事务。
English: In the 18th year, when the imperial court was selecting officials for the East Palace, they appointed H Đình Thc as a minor official in charge of the affairs of the Department of Ceremonies.

古文：疏辞加秩，且诋大臣受禄不让，晋秩不辞，或有狐鼠钻结，阴固宠权，怨气召灾。实有所自。
现代文：霍韬上书辞谢给自己的晋升，并且批评说有些大臣接受俸禄不肯谦让，晋升官职也不推辞，其中难免有拉帮结派祸国殃民的奸人，暗中巩固自己的权威。百姓的怨气引来天灾，在人事方面实际上是有原由的。
English: In his resignation letter, Huo Gan thanked for his promotion, and criticized that some ministers were not willing to accept the salary and did not refuse to be promoted. Among them, it was inevitable that there would be a group of traitors who would do harm to the country and the people to secretly consolidate their authority. The people's resentment was caused by natural disasters, and there was actually a reason in terms of personnel.

古文：其意亦为言发。
现代文：他的意思还是针对夏言而发的。
English: His intention was still directed at Natsugen.

古文：既屡击言不胜，最后见郭勋与言有隙，乃阴比勋，与共齮龁言。
现代文：他自己屡次攻击夏言不能取胜，最后见郭勋与夏言有矛盾，就暗中勾结郭勋，和他一道谄害夏言。
English: He himself repeatedly attacked Xia Yan and could not win. Finally, when he saw that Guo Xun and Xia Yan had a conflict, he secretly colluded with Guo Xun and worked with him to harm Xia Yan.

古文：时中外讹言帝复南幸，韬因显颂勋，言： 六飞南狩时，臣下多纳贿不法。
现代文：当时朝廷内外风言四起说世宗又要南巡，霍韬借此上书明显地赞颂郭勋，说： 上次陛下南巡时，跟随的大臣大多都收受贿赂、不守法度。
English: At that time, there were rumors both inside and outside the imperial court that Shizong wanted to go on a southern tour again. Using this as a pretext, Hoh Rong wrote a letter explicitly praising Guo Xun, saying, "During the last southern tour of His Majesty, most of the ministers who followed him accepted bribes and did not abide by the law.

古文：文官惟袁宗儒，武官惟郭勋不受馈。
现代文：文官只有袁宗儒，武官只有郭勋没有接受馈赠。
English: Only Yuan Zongru, a civilian official, and Guo Xun, a military attaché, did not accept gifts.

古文：今讹言复播，宜有以禁戢之。 
现代文：现在谣言又兴起来，应该采取一定办法加以制止。 
English: Now the rumours are on the rise again, and something should be done to stop them.

古文：帝既下诏安群情，乃诘韬曰： 朕昨南巡，卿不在行，受贿事得自何人？
现代文：世宗在颁布诏书稳定人心以后，才责问霍韬说： 我前次南巡你又没跟着，别人受贿的事你从哪儿听说的？
English: After Sejong issued the edict to stabilize people's hearts, he scolded Ho, saying, "You didn't come with me on my last southern inspection tour. Where did you hear about others taking bribes?

古文：据实以奏。 
现代文：你如实给我奏上来。 
English: Play it for me as it is.

古文：韬对，请问诸郭勋。
现代文：霍韬回答时请世宗向郭勋询问此事。
English: When answering, Huo Gan asked Shizong to ask Guo Xun about the matter.

古文：帝责其支词，务令指实。
现代文：世宗批评他支吾其辞，务必要他切实指出来。
English: Sejong criticised him for being evasive, and urged him to spell it out.

古文：韬窘，乃言： 扈从诸臣无不受馈遗、折取夫隶直者，第问之夏言，令自述。
现代文：霍韬走投无路了，只好说： 随从大臣们无不接收馈赠、亏损直性的仆役，这事只要问夏言就可以了。
English: When he was at a loss, he had no choice but to say, "The ministers' followers all accept gifts and direct servants, just ask Xia Yan about it."

古文：至各官取贿实迹，勋具悉始末，当不欺。
现代文：至于各人收取贿赂的实际情况，郭勋都整个知道，应该不是骗人。
English: As for the actual situation of each person receiving bribes, Guo Xun knew the whole story, it should not be a deception.

古文：如必欲臣言，请假臣风宪职，循途按之，当备列以奏。 
现代文：如果一定要我说，请让我担任都察院的职务，顺藤摸瓜进行追查，我一定详细地列出来奏上。 
English: If I must say, please let me hold the post of the Central Investigating Agency, I will definitely list out everything in detail.

古文：章下所司。
现代文：他的奏章被下发给有关部门。
English: His report has been sent to the relevant authorities.

古文：韬惧不当帝旨，寻赴京，列所遇进鲜船内臣贪横状，帝亦不问。
现代文：霍韬怕自己的奏议不合世宗的意思，很快就赶到了北京，上书述说进贡鲜货的船上宦官贪婪、横暴的事情，世宗也不加查问。
English: Fok Yat, fearing that his petition would not meet with the approval of the Sejong, soon arrived in Beijing. He wrote a letter describing the greed and violence of the eunuchs on the ship that brought in the tribute of fresh goods. The Sejong did not investigate.

古文：明年十月卒于官，年五十有四。
现代文：第二年十月，霍韬死在任上，终年五十四岁。
English: In October of the following year, Ho Chi Minh died in office, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：赠太子太保，谥文敏。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为太子太保，谥文敏。
English: The Imperial Court posthumously bestowed him as the Crown Prince's bodyguard, Zou Wenmin.

古文：韬学博才高，量褊隘，所至与人竞。
现代文：霍韬学问广博，本领很大，但肚量狭窄，所到之处总是与人争斗。
English: The fawn has extensive knowledge and great ability, but its stomach is narrow, and it always fights with people wherever it goes.

古文：帝颇心厌之，故不大用。
现代文：世宗心中很有点厌恶他，所以没有太重用他。
English: Sejong was a bit disgusted with him in his heart, so he didn't use him much.

古文：先后多所建白，亦颇涉国家大计。
现代文：不过霍韬前前后后有过很多奏议，其中很有一些同国家大计有关。
English: However, there have been many appeals before and after the collapse, many of which are related to the national plan.

古文：且尝荐 大礼 大狱得罪诸臣，及废籍李梦阳、康海等。
现代文：并且他还推荐过 大礼 一案被治罪的大臣们和被除了名的李梦阳、康海等。
English: Moreover, he also recommended the ministers who were convicted in the case of Dari and Li Mengyang and Kanghai, who were exonerated.

古文：在南都，禁丧家宴饮，绝妇女入寺观，罪娼户市良人女，毁淫祠，建社学，散僧尼，表忠节。
现代文：在南都做官时，他禁止守丧的人家设宴饮酒，不许妇女出家当尼姑、道姑，惩办娼户买良家的女子，拆毁多余的祠堂庙宇，兴建社学，遣散和尚、尼姑，表彰忠臣烈士等。
English: When he was an official in Nanto, he prohibited mourners from holding feasts and drinking alcohol, forbade women from becoming nuns and Taoist nuns, punished prostitutes who bought good homes, demolished superfluous ancestral halls and temples, built social studies, dismissed monks and nuns, and commended loyal martyrs.

古文：既去，士民思之。
现代文：他离开以后，当地士绅、百姓还思念他呢。
English: After he left, the local gentry and people still miss him.

古文：始与璁、萼结，既而比郭勋。
现代文：霍韬开始与张璁、桂萼结交，不久又与郭勋拉扯。
English: He began to make friends with Zhang Xuan and Gui Caly, and soon fell in love with Guo Xun.

古文：举进士出毛澄门下，素执弟子礼，议礼不合，遂不复称为座主。
现代文：他在毛澄主考时中进士，素来向毛澄行弟子之礼，由于在 大礼议 中意见不一致，于是再也不称毛澄为恩师了。
English: He became a member of the junior high school at the time of Mao Cheng's examination, and had always paid tribute to Mao Cheng as a disciple. However, due to the disagreement in the grand eulogy, he no longer called Mao Cheng his mentor.

古文：故其去吏部也，善类多思之。
现代文：等到他主考己丑会试，也不认唐顺之等人为门生。
English: He did not even recognize Tang Shunzhi and others as his protégés until he was the examiner of his own examination.

古文：隆庆初，复官，予祭葬，谥恭肃。
现代文：他在议论大礼时，抨击司马光，以致追论不可将司马光列入孔庙陪祀。
English: When he was discussing the Great Rite, he criticized Sima Guang, so much so that he argued that Sima Guang should not be included in the Confucius Temple.

古文：黄宗明，字诚甫，鄞人。
现代文：霍韬就是这样不顾公论，自以为是。黄宗明，字诚甫，浙江鄞县人。
English: This is how Huo Jian disregarded public opinion and became self-righteous. Huang Zongming, also known as Cheng Fu, was from Jixian County, Zhejiang Province.

古文：正德九年进士。
现代文：正德九年进士。
English: Zhengde entered the priesthood nine years ago.

古文：除南京兵部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：初任南京兵部主事，升员外郎。
English: He was the first head of the Nanjing Military Department and was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：尝从王守仁论学。
现代文：他曾经跟着王守仁研究学问。
English: He once studied with Wang Shouren.

古文：宁王宸濠反，上江防三策。
现代文：宁王宸濠造反时，他曾递交过关于长江防务的三篇策论。
English: When Ning Wangtao rebelled, he submitted three policy papers on the defense of the Yangtze River.

古文：武宗南征，抗疏谏，寻请告归。
现代文：武宗要亲自南征，他抗言上书劝阻，不久请假回乡去了。
English: Wu Zong wanted to personally go to the south, he protested and wrote a letter to dissuade him, and soon took a leave of absence to return to his hometown.

古文：嘉靖二年，起南京刑部郎中。
现代文：嘉靖二年，朝廷又起用他为南京刑部郎中。
English: In the second year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the imperial court appointed him as the vice-director of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：张璁、桂萼争 大礼 ，自南京召入都，未上。
现代文：张璁、桂萼与朝臣争论 大礼 ，从南京应召入都，尚未上路。
English: Zhang Xuan and Gui Calyx argue with the courtier Dare, summoned from Nanjing to the capital, has not yet embarked on the road.

古文：三年四月，璁、萼、黄绾及宗明联疏奏曰： 今日尊崇之议，以陛下与为人后者，礼官附和之私也。以陛下为入继大统者，臣等考经之论也。
现代文：三年四月，张璁、桂萼、黄绾和宗明四人联名上书说： 现在关于尊崇献帝的讨论，以为陛下是给别人过继当儿子的意见，是礼官附和权臣的私意；以为陛下是入继王位的天子，这是我们考证经典而得出的结论。
English: In April of the third year, four people, Zhang Qian, Gui Qian, Huang Qian and Zong Ming, jointly signed a letter saying: The current discussion on the veneration of the emperor is that the majesty is to give others the opinion of being a son, which is the personal intention of the etiquette officer and the powerful minister; that the majesty is the son of heaven who succeeds to the throne, which is the conclusion drawn from our examination of the classics.

古文：人之言曰，两议相持，有大小众寡不敌之势。
现代文：人们说，这两种意见的对立，议论者有官位大小、人数多寡不等的气势。
English: It is said that these two opinions are in opposition, and the number of commentators varies according to the size of the post and the number of people.

古文：臣等则曰，惟理而已。
现代文：我们就说，我们只认正理而已。
English: Let's say we're just being reasonable.

古文：大哉舜之为君，视天下悦而归己，犹草芥也，惟不顺于父母，如穷人无所归。
现代文：舜作为君主多么伟大啊！但他把天下人高兴服从自己看得如同草芥一般，只是不孝顺自己的父母，就感到如同穷人无家可归一样不安。
English: How great he was as a monarch! But he regarded the people of the world who gladly obeyed him as nothing more than straw and mustard, but if he did not show filial piety to his parents, he felt as uneasy as if he were poor and homeless.

古文：今言者徇私植党，夺天子之父母而不顾，在陛下可一日安其位而不之图乎？
现代文：现在朝廷里议论的人徇私结党，剥夺天子的父母而不顾惜，在陛下您能有一天安坐宝位而不考虑这件事吗？
English: Now, in the imperial court, the people who are talking about it have formed their own party, depriving the parents of the son of heaven without mercy. In your majesty, can you one day sit in the throne without considering this matter?

古文：此圣谕令廷臣集议，终日相视莫敢先发者，势有所压，理有所屈故也。
现代文：这也是您指示朝臣集中议论大家整天眼瞪眼、没人敢先发言的道理，他们是势有所压，理有所屈呀。
English: This is also the reason why you have instructed your courtiers to concentrate on the discussion, with everyone staring at each other all day long, and no one daring to speak first. They are under pressure and have to give in.

古文：臣等大惧欺蔽因循，终不能赞成大孝。
现代文：我们真害怕朝廷里形成蒙蔽皇上，因循守旧的局面，最终不能帮助陛下成全孝道。
English: We are really afraid that a situation will be created in the imperial court that will deceive the emperor and follow the old situation, and ultimately we will not be able to help His Majesty fulfill his filial duty.

古文：陛下何不亲御朝堂，进百官而询之曰： 朕以宪宗皇帝之孙，孝宗皇帝之侄，兴献帝之子，遵太祖兄终弟及之文，奉武宗伦序当立之诏，入承大统，非与为人后者也。
现代文：陛下为什么不亲临朝堂，召见百官问话说： 朕以宪宗皇帝孙子，孝宗皇帝侄子，兴献帝儿子的身份，遵照太祖皇帝兄终弟及的明文，接受武宗颁发的按辈份、排行我该立为天子的诏书，然后入宫继承王位，并不是过继给人当儿子的。
English: Why didn't His Majesty come to the Imperial Court in person, summon a hundred officials and ask them: "I, as the grandson of Emperor Gensong, the nephew of Emperor Xiaozong, and the son of Emperor Xingxian, in accordance with the explicit document of the great-grandfather emperor's brothers and brothers, accept the imperial decree issued by Emperor Wuzong that I should be the son of Heaven according to my generation and ranking, and then enter the palace to inherit the throne.

古文：前者未及详稽，遽诏天下，尊孝宗皇帝为皇考，昭圣太后为圣母，而兴献帝后别加本生之称，朕深用悔艾。
现代文：上一次我没来得及仔细考究，就马上发布诏书通告全国，尊称孝宗皇帝为皇考，昭圣太后为圣母，而兴献帝、后另外加称 本生 字样，朕深感后悔。
English: Last time, I didn't have time to study it carefully, so I immediately issued an imperial decree to the whole country, calling Emperor Xiaozong the imperial examination, proclaiming the holy empress as the holy mother, and dedicating the emperor, and adding the word "Bensheng" to the latter. I deeply regret this.

古文：今当明父子大伦，继统大义，改称孝宗为皇伯考，昭圣为皇伯母，而去本生之称，为皇考恭穆献皇帝，圣母章圣皇太后，此万世通礼。
现代文：现在应该体现父子间的伦理，继承王位的道理，改称孝宗为皇伯考，昭圣太后为皇伯母，去掉 本生 字样，称兴献帝、后为皇考恭穆献皇帝、圣母章圣皇太后，这才是万世可行的大礼。
English: Now it is time to reflect the ethics between father and son, the principle of succession to the throne, rename the emperor as Emperor Bercow, the empress dowager as the empress dowager, remove the word "Bensheng," and call the emperor as Emperor Xing, the empress dowager as Empress Guanmu, and the empress dowager as Empress Dowager of the Holy Mother of God, which is a feasible gift for all ages.

古文：尔文武廷臣尚念父子之亲，君臣之义，与朕共明大伦于天下。 
现代文：你们文武大臣假如还考虑父子间的亲情、君臣间的大义的话，就与朕一起明大伦于天下。 
English: If you, ministers of culture and armed forces, also consider the kinship between father and son, and the great righteousness between monarch and vassal, then you will join me in making the world a better place.

古文：如此，在朝百工有不感泣而奉诏者乎，更以此告于天下万姓，其有不感泣而奉诏者乎，此即《周礼》询群臣询万民之意也。 
现代文：这样，在朝的百官还有不感动得落泪不接受诏书的吗？再把这些布告天下百姓，百姓会有不感动得落泪不接受诏书的吗？这也就是《周礼》所说向群臣咨询向万民咨询的意思。 
English: In this way, are there still a hundred officials in the government who are not moved to tears and do not accept the edict? And then they announce these proclamations to the people of the world, will the people not be moved to tears and not accept the edict? This is what "Zhou Li" said about consulting the ministers and consulting the people.

古文：奏入，帝大悦，卒如其言。
现代文：这篇奏疏递进去，世宗非常高兴，结果像他们所说的那样办了。
English: Sejong was very happy when the essay was handed in, and it turned out just as they said.

古文：宗明亦遂蒙帝眷。
现代文：宗明从此也就得到世宗的眷爱。
English: Zongming has been loved by the world ever since.

古文：明年出为吉安知府，迁福建盐运使。
现代文：第二年就出任吉安知府，后又升为福建盐运使。
English: The following year, he was appointed to Ji'an Prefecture, and later he was promoted to Fujian Salt Transport Envoy.

古文：六年召修《明伦大典》，以母忧归。
现代文：六年召入朝中编撰《明伦大典》，因为母亲死了，他回家守丧。
English: Six years later, he was called to North Korea to compile "Ming Lun Da Dian," because his mother died and he went home to attend the funeral.

古文：服阕，征拜光禄卿。
现代文：三年后除下孝服，就被征召回朝，担任光禄卿。 
English: Three years later, he removed his filial piety and was called back to the imperial court to serve as the Minister of Finance.

古文：十一年擢兵部右侍郎。
现代文：十一年，宗明升任兵部右侍郎。
English: In the eleventh year, Munemitsu was promoted to the position of Hyobu right hand man.

古文：其冬，编修杨名以劾汪鋐下诏狱，词连同官程文德，亦坐系。
现代文：这年冬天，编修杨名因为弹劾汪钅宏被关进诏狱，供词牵涉到同事程文德，文德也因此被逮捕。
English: This winter, editor Yang Ming was jailed for impeaching Wang Binghong. The confession implicated his colleague Cheng Wende, who was also arrested.

古文：诏书责主谋者益急。
现代文：世宗的诏书更急切地想要他们供出主谋来。
English: The imperial edict of the Sejong was even more anxious for them to provide the mastermind.

古文：宗明抗疏救，且曰： 连坐非善政。
现代文：宗明抗言上书搭救他们，并且说道： 连坐并不是什么善政。
English: Zongming protested and wrote a letter to save them, saying, "Sitting together is not good governance.

古文：今以一人妄言，必究主使，廷臣孰不惧？
现代文：现在因为一个胡说几句话，就一定要追查主谋，这样朝廷中的大臣哪个不害怕？
English: Now, because of a few nonsense words, we must track down the mastermind, so which minister in the court is not afraid?

古文：况名搒掠已极，当严冬或困毙，将为仁明累。 
现代文：况且杨名已被拷打到极点了，时逢严冬，如果他被打死，岂不是有害于陛下的仁德和明智。 
English: Moreover, Yang Ming has been tortured to the extreme, and in the winter, if he is beaten to death, would it not be harmful to His Majesty's benevolence and wisdom.

古文：帝大怒，谓宗明即其主使，并下诏狱，谪福建右参政。
现代文：世宗大为恼火，说宗明就是主谋，把他也关进诏狱，后来贬出去当了福建右参政。
English: Shizong was very angry and said that Zongming was the mastermind. He was also put in the imperial prison. Later, he was expelled and became a right-wing politician in Fujian.

古文：帝终念宗明议礼功，明年召拜礼部右侍郎。
现代文：世宗最后还是想到宗明讨论 大礼 时的功劳，第二年召他回朝做了礼部右侍郎。
English: In the end, Sejong remembered Munemitsu's contribution when discussing the grand ceremony, and called him back to the Imperial Court the following year to serve as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：辽东兵变，捶辱巡抚吕经。
现代文：辽东发生兵变，把巡抚吕经给捶辱了一顿。
English: A mutiny occurred in Liaodong, and the inspector Lv Jing was humiliated.

古文：而帝务姑息，纳镇守中官王纯等言，将逮经。
现代文：但是世宗一意姑息，听信镇守中官王纯等人的话，打算逮捕吕经。
English: However, Shizong was inclined to be lenient, and heeded the words of Wang Chun, the vice-commander of the town guard, and others, and planned to arrest Lü Jing.

古文：宗明言： 前者辽阳之变，生于有激。
现代文：宗明说 ：上一次辽阳兵变，是因为有所引发。
English: Zongming said: The last Liaoyang mutiny was triggered by something.

古文：今重赋苛徭悉已厘正，广宁复变，又谁激之？
现代文：现在重赋苛徭都已得到纠正，广宁又发生兵变，这又有什么会引发它呢？
English: Now that the heavy-handedness has been corrected and there has been a mutiny in Guangning, what will trigger it?

古文：法不宜复赦。
现代文：按理不应该又赦免他们的罪罚。
English: By rights, they should not be pardoned.

古文：请令新抚臣韩邦奇勒兵压境，扬声讨罪，取其首恶，用振国威，不得专事姑息。 
现代文：请传令新任巡抚韩邦奇驻兵压境，扬言讨伐，捕捉那些首犯，用以弘扬国家的威严，不能一味姑息。 
English: Please order the new governor Han Bangqi to station troops to suppress the border, threaten to fight, capture those first offenders, and use them to promote the majesty of the country. They cannot be tolerated.

古文：帝不从，经卒被逮。
现代文：世宗不听他的劝告，吕经最后被逮捕了。
English: Sejong did not listen to his advice, and Luching was eventually arrested.

古文：宗明寻转左侍郎，卒于官。
现代文：宗明不久后改当礼部左侍郎，死于任上。
English: Soon after, Muneaki was transferred to the position of Reibu Sasajiro, and died in office.

古文：初，议礼诸臣恃帝恩眷，驱驾气势，恣行胸臆。
现代文：当初，议礼的几个大臣依仗世宗的恩遇和宠爱，气势凌人，为所欲为。
English: At first, a few ministers who were in charge of the ceremonial relied on the favors and favor of the Shizong to dominate others and do whatever they wanted.

古文：宗明虽由是骤显，持论颇平，于诸人中独无畏恶之者。
现代文：宗明虽然也是由此突然间显贵起来的，但他对人、对事所持看法比较平允，在这几个人中只有他不被大家畏惧、讨厌。
English: Although Zongming also suddenly rose to prominence as a result of this, his views on people and things are relatively calm, and he is the only one of these people who is not feared and hated by everyone.

古文：黄绾，字宗贤，黄岩人，侍郎孔昭孙也。
现代文：黄绾，字宗贤，浙江黄岩人，是侍郎孔昭的孙子。
English: Huang Qi, Zha Zongxian, Zhejiang Huangyan, is the grandson of the servant of Kong Zhao.

古文：承祖荫官后府都事。
现代文：他继承祖父的封荫做了后府都事的官职。
English: He inherited his grandfather's title and took up the post of post-prefectural governor.

古文：尝师谢铎、王守仁。
现代文：他曾经跟谢铎、王守仁学习过。
English: He once studied with Xie Jun and Wang Shouren.

古文：嘉靖初，为南京都察院经历。
现代文：嘉靖初年，他担任南京都察院的经历。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, he served as an inspector of the Southern Kyoto Inquisition.

古文：张璁、桂萼争 大礼 ，帝心向之。
现代文：张璁、桂萼上书争议 大礼 ，世宗心向着他们。
English: Zhang Ye and Gui Calypso's controversial book launch is a great honor, and Sejong's heart goes out to them.

古文：三年二月，绾亦上言曰： 武宗承孝宗之统十有六年，今复以陛下为孝宗之子，继孝宗之统，则武宗不应有庙矣。
现代文：三年二月，黄绾也上书说： 武宗继承孝宗的皇位坐了十六年，现在再把陛下当作孝宗的儿子，继承孝宗的皇位，那么武宗岂不是不应该有庙了吗？
English: In February of the third year, Huang Qi also wrote: Emperor Wuzong succeeded Emperor Xiaozong and sat on the throne for sixteen years, and now he regards His Majesty as the son of Emperor Xiaozong and the heir to the throne of Emperor Xiaozong, so shouldn't Emperor Wuzong have a temple?

古文：是使孝宗不得子武宗，乃所以绝孝宗也。由是，使兴献帝不得子陛下，乃所以绝兴献帝也。
现代文：这样子使孝宗不能够把武宗当儿子，就是使孝宗绝了后，由此又使兴献帝不能把陛下当作自己的儿子，就又使兴献帝绝了后。
English: In this way, he made it impossible for Takamune to have Takemune as his son, that is, after Takamune's death, he made it impossible for Emperor Heizei to have His Majesty as his son, that is, after Emperor Heizei's death.

古文：不几于三纲沦，九法棨哉！ 
现代文：这岂不近似于废除了三纲，破坏了九法吗？ 
English: Isn't this akin to abolishing the Three Principles and destroying the Nine Laws?

古文：奏入，帝大喜，下之所司。
现代文：奏章递进后，世宗非常高兴，把它下发给有关部门。
English: After the score was handed in, Sejong was very happy and sent it to the relevant department.

古文：其月，再上疏申前说。
现代文：这个月里边，他又上书一次重申前边的意见。
English: This month, he wrote again to reiterate his previous opinion.

古文：俄闻帝下诏称本生皇考，复抗疏极辨。
现代文：不久听说世宗发布诏书把献帝称为本生皇考，他又一次抗言上书极力争辩。
English: Soon after, he heard that Sejong had issued an imperial edict calling the offering of the emperor to the emperor a test of the emperor's character, and he once again wrote a letter of protest, arguing strenuously.

古文：又与璁、萼及黄宗明合疏争， 大礼 乃定。
现代文：后来又同张璁、桂萼及黄宗明联名上书争辩， 大礼 才决定下来。
English: Later, he argued with Zhang Xuan, Gui Caly and Huang Zongming in a joint letter, and only then did they decide to come down.

古文：绾自是大受帝知。
现代文：黄绾由此很受世宗的信任。
English: As a result, Huang Qi was highly trusted by Shizong.

古文：及明年，何渊请建世室，绾与宗明斥其谬。
现代文：到了第二年何渊奏请为献帝修建世庙时，黄绾和宗明驳斥了他建议的错误。
English: In the second year, when He Yuanzhang asked to build a world temple to offer to the emperor, Huang Qi and Zongming refuted the error of his suggestion.

古文：寻迁南京刑部员外郎，再谢病归。
现代文：不久他升任南京刑部员外郎，又请病假回家了。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department member, and he went home on sick leave.

古文：帝念其议礼功，六年六月召擢光禄少卿，预修《明伦大典》。
现代文：后来世宗想起他议定 大礼 的功劳，就在六年六月召他回京并提升为光禄少卿，参加编写《明伦大典》。
English: Later, Sejong remembered the merit of the grand gift he had agreed upon, and in June of the sixth year, he called him back to Beijing and promoted him to the rank of Koroku shojo, to participate in the compilation of the Ming Lun Daiten.

古文：王守仁中忌者，虽封伯，不给诰券岁禄；诸有功若知府邢珣、徐琏、陈槐，御史伍希儒、谢源，多以考察黜。
现代文：王守仁受到别人的忌妒，所以虽然被封为伯爵，却不发他诰命、铁券和岁禄；手下有功的人如知府刑王旬、徐琏、陈槐，御史伍希儒、谢源等，大多因为考评被罢黜。
English: Wang Shouren was envied by others, so although he was made an earl, he was not given his life, iron certificate and reward; those who had meritorious work under him, such as the governor Wang Shun, Xu Wei, Chen Wei, Goshi Wuxi Ru, Xie Yuan, etc., were mostly dismissed for evaluation.

古文：绾讼之于朝，且请召守仁辅政。
现代文：黄绾向朝廷作了上诉，并且请求召守仁来朝辅佐世宗治国。
English: Huang Xuan appealed to the imperial court and requested that Shuren be summoned to assist the Sase clan in governing the country.

古文：守仁得给赐如制，珣等亦叙录。
现代文：守仁这下就按规定得到了封赏，刑王旬等人也得以论功录用。
English: This time, Morihito received the award in accordance with the regulations, and Chihwang Jun and others were also able to be hired on merit.

古文：绾寻迁大理左少卿。
现代文：黄绾不久升任大理左少卿。
English: Huang Qi was soon promoted to Dali Zuo Shaoqing.

古文：其年十月，璁、萼逐诸翰林于外，引己所善者补之，遂用绾为少詹事兼侍讲学士，直经筵。
现代文：那年十月，张璁、桂萼把翰林们赶到地方上去了，用自己所喜欢的人来增补，就任命黄绾为少詹事兼侍讲学士，到经筵前值勤。
English: In October of that year, Zhang Qian and Gui Qian drove the Hanlin people to the local area and supplemented them with people they liked. They appointed Huang Qian as a minor official and a lecturer, and he was on duty in front of the Great Hall of the People.

古文：以任子官翰林，前此未有也。
现代文：像他这样以任子入官而做到翰林，还是以前没有过的事。
English: It has never happened before that a young man has been appointed to a government post and has been able to rise to the top.

古文：明年，《大典》成，进詹事。
现代文：第二年，《大典》编写成书，黄绾升为詹士。
English: The following year, "The Great Text" was compiled into a book, and Huang Qi was promoted to Janzhi.

古文：锦衣佥事聂能迁者，初附钱宁得官，用登极诏例还为百户。
现代文：锦衣佥事聂能迁当初追随钱宁当了这个官，后来按照世宗即位诏书的条例改当锦衣百户。
English: At the beginning, the official in charge of the brocade was Channing, but later, in accordance with the edict of the enthronement of King Sejong, he became the official in charge of the brocade for 100 households.

古文：后附璁、萼议 大礼 ，且交关中贵崔文，得复故职。
现代文：后来他追随张璁、桂萼讨论 大礼 ，并且交结宫廷中身份很高的宦官崔文，又恢复了原职。
English: Later, he followed Zhang Ye and Gui Calyx to discuss the grand gift, and met with the eunuch Cui Wen, who had a high status in the court, and resumed his original position.

古文：《大典》成，诸人皆进秩，能迁独不与，大恨。嘱罢闲主事翁洪草奏，诬王守仁贿席书得召用，词连绾及璁。
现代文：《大典》成书后，大家都升了级别，偏他没份，能迁很恼火，就嘱托赋闲在家的主事翁洪写了奏章交上去，诬告王守仁是贿赂了席书才得到召用的，话中牵扯到黄绾和张璁。
English: After the "Grand Text" was written, everyone rose in rank, but he did not have a share, and he was very annoyed that he could not move. On the instructions of the idle boss, Weng Hong, he wrote a play and handed it in, falsely accusing Wang Shuren of bribing the secretary to get the call, and the words involved Huang Qi and Zhang Qi.

古文：绾疏辨，且乞引避。
现代文：黄绾上书作辩解的同时，又请求离职避嫌。
English: At the same time that Huang Qi wrote a letter to defend himself, he also requested to leave his post to avoid reproach.

古文：帝优旨留之，而下能迁法司，遣之戍，洪亦编原籍为民。
现代文：世宗语气亲切地挽留他，而把能迁交给法司问罪，罚他去充了军，翁洪也被编入原籍做了小百姓。
English: The tone of the Sejong cordially retained him, but transferred him to the legal department to ask for punishment, and punished him to fill the army. Weng Hong was also incorporated into the original family and became a commoner.

古文：绾与璁辈深相得。
现代文：黄绾和张璁等人结交得很深。
English: Huang Qi and Zhang Qi and others have a deep friendship.

古文：璁欲用为吏部侍郎，且令典试南京，并为杨一清所抑，又以其南音不令与经筵。
现代文：张璁想任命他做吏部侍郎，并让他到南京去主考，都被杨一清给压了下来，又因为他的南方口音不让他参加经筵。
English: Zhang Ye wanted to appoint him as an attendant of the cadre department, and let him go to Nanjing to take the main examination. Both were suppressed by Yang Iqing, and because of his southern accent, he was not allowed to participate in the examination.

古文：绾大恚，上疏丑诋一清而不斥其名。
现代文：黄绾大为恼火，上书恶毒攻击一清，而不提他的名字。
English: Huang Qi was very angry and wrote a vicious attack on Iqing without mentioning his name.

古文：帝心知其为一清也，以浮词责之。
现代文：世宗心里知道他是指的一清，就用套话批评了他。
English: Knowing in his heart that he was referring to I Ching, Sejong criticized him with a cliché.

古文：其年十月，出为南京礼部右侍郎，遍摄诸部印。
现代文：那年十月，他调到南京去做了礼部右侍郎，掌管着各部的大印。
English: In October of that year, he was transferred to Nanjing to become the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, in charge of the Great Seal of each department.

古文：十二年召拜礼部左侍郎。
现代文：十二月就召回朝当上礼部左侍郎。
English: In December, he was called back to work as the left-hand man of the upper echelon of the etiquette department.

古文：初，绾与璁深相结。
现代文：当初黄绾和张璁结交得很深。
English: At first, Huang Qi and Zhang Qi were very close.

古文：至是，夏言长礼部，帝方向用，绾乃潜附之，与璁左。
现代文：到这时，夏言当礼部尚书，世宗正向着他呢，黄绾于是暗中追随夏言，与张璁相矛盾。
English: At this time, Xia Yan was the ceremonial head, and the world was looking to him. Therefore, Huang Qi secretly followed Xia Yan, contradicting Zhang Ye.

古文：其佐南礼部也，郎中邹守益引疾，诏绾核实。
现代文：他在南京礼部任副职的时候，郎中邹守益称病告退，朝廷传令让黄绾核实。
English: When he held the deputy post in the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, his son-in-law, Guo Shouyi, announced his retirement due to illness, and the imperial court ordered Huang Qi to verify this.

古文：久不报，而守益竟去。
现代文：后来朝廷好长时间没有给守益批复，守益就擅自离任而去了。
English: Later, the imperial court did not give approval to Shoueki for a long time, and Shoueki left his post without authorization.

古文：吏部尚书汪鋐希璁指，疏发其事，诏夺守益官，令鋐覆核，鋐遂劾绾欺蔽。璁调旨削三秩，出之外。
现代文：现在吏部尚书汪钅宏承张璁的口风上书揭发了这件事，世宗传令削了守益的官职，让汪钅宏对此事再加核实，汪钅宏就弹劾说黄绾在蒙骗皇上，张璁就请到圣旨把黄绾贬官三级，调出京外。
English: Now, the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Wang Jianhong, following the dictum of Zhang Jian, published a letter exposing this matter. Shizong's order reduced the official post of guarding interests, and asked Wang Jianhong to further verify this matter. Wang Jianhong impeached Huang Jian and said that Huang Jian was deceiving the emperor. Zhang Jian was invited to the Holy Will to demote Huang Jian to the third level and transfer him outside Beijing.

古文：会礼部请祈谷导引官，帝留绾供事。
现代文：恰好这时礼部奏请选择求告谷神的导引官，世宗就把黄绾留下来供事。
English: Just at this time, the ritual section asked the participants to choose a guide who would appeal to the god of the valley, and Shizong left Huang Qi to serve.

古文：鋐于是再疏攻绾，且掇及他事，帝复命调外。
现代文：汪钅宏于是又上书攻击黄绾，并且又抬出黄绾其他一些事来，世宗又传令把他调出去。
English: Wang Qianhong then wrote a letter attacking Huang Qi, and also brought up some other things about Huang Qi, and Shizong ordered him to be transferred out.

古文：绾上疏自理，因诋鋐为璁鹰犬，乞赐罢黜以避祸。
现代文：黄绾上书为自己辩白，就此攻击汪钅宏，说他是张璁的鹰犬，请世宗罢免了自己，让自己好去避祸。
English: Huang Qi wrote a letter to defend himself, and then attacked Wang Binghong, saying that he was Zhang Ye's hawk dog, and asked Shizong to remove himself, so that he could avoid disaster.

古文：帝终念绾议礼功，仍留任如故。
现代文：世宗到底还是想到他议定 大礼 的功劳，所以就一如既往，留下了他。
English: In the end, Sejong still thought of the merit of his agreed-upon gift, so, as always, he kept him.

古文：绾自是显与璁贰矣。
现代文：从此开始，黄绾就明显地与张璁敌对起来了。
English: From that time on, Huang Qi was clearly hostile to Zhang Qi.

古文：初，大同军变，杀总兵官李瑾，据城拒守。
现代文：早先大同发生了兵变，杀死总兵官李瑾，据城坚守。
English: Earlier, a mutiny took place in Datong, killing the commander-in-chief, Li Yan, but the city held firm.

古文：总制侍郎刘源清、提督郤永议屠之。城中恟惧，外勾蒙古为助，塞上大震。
现代文：总制侍郎刘源清、提督谷阝永打算屠城，城中军民又恨又怕，就对外勾结蒙古来相助，塞上形势非常紧张。
English: General Liu Yuanqing and Admiral Gu Bingyong planned to slaughter the city. The soldiers and civilians in the city hated and feared them, so they colluded with Mongolia to help. The situation was very tense.

古文：巡抚潘倣急请止兵，源清怒，驰疏力诋倣。
现代文：巡抚潘仿赶忙请求朝廷停止用兵，源清恼了，飞章上书极力诋毁潘仿。
English: Governor Pan Fom hurriedly requested the imperial court to stop using soldiers. Yuan Qing was annoyed, and he tried his best to discredit Pan Fom in a letter.

古文：璁及廷议并右源清，绾独言非策。
现代文：张璁和朝廷的意见都向着源清，黄绾偏上书说用兵不是办法。
English: Zhang Xuan and the imperial court's opinions were all directed at Yuan Qing, and Huang Xuan was inclined to write that the use of soldiers was not a solution.

古文：及源清罢，侍郎张瓒往代。
现代文：等源清被免职后，侍郎张瓒前往接任。
English: After Isagen Kiyoshi was dismissed from his post, his chamberlain, Zhang Ye, took over.

古文：未至，而郎中詹荣等已定乱。
现代文：他还没到，郎中詹荣等人已平定了叛乱。
English: Before he arrived, his vassal Zhan Rong and others had already quelled the rebellion.

古文：叛卒未尽获，军民疮痍甚，代王请遣大臣绥缉之。
现代文：叛乱士兵还没有全部抓获，大同军民受到的创伤很严重，代王请朝廷派遣大臣去安抚百姓，缉拿罪犯。
English: The rebel soldiers had not all been captured, and the wounds suffered by the Datong soldiers and civilians were very serious. The acting king asked the court to send a minister to pacify the people and arrest the criminals.

古文：疏下礼部，夏言以为宜许，而极诋前用兵之谬，语侵璁。
现代文：他的奏章下到礼部讨论，夏言认为应该答应他的要求，并且极力批评以前用兵的不当，言辞之间把张璁也攻击了一番。
English: His musical composition was brought to the ceremonial department for discussion. Xia Yan thought that his request should be granted, and he strongly criticized the improper use of soldiers in the past. Between his words, he also attacked Zhang Ye.

古文：璁怒，力持不欲遣。
现代文：张璁恼了，坚决压着不想派人。
English: Zhang Yao was annoyed and resolutely refused to send someone.

古文：帝委曲谕解之，乃特以命绾，且令察军情，勘功罪，得便宜行事。
现代文：世宗婉转地做了解释和指示，然后就特意任命黄绾办这件差事，并命令黄绾考察军队的情况，考评官员的功过，允许他见机行事。
English: Shizong gently explained and instructed, and then specially appointed Huang Qi to handle this errand, and ordered Huang Qi to inspect the situation of the army, evaluate the merits of the officials, and allow him to act opportunistically.

古文：绾驰至大同，宗室军民牒诉官军暴掠者以百数，无告叛军者。
现代文：黄绾走马来到大同，宗室、军民状告官军杀人抢掠的有一百多起，却没有状告叛军的。
English: Huang Qi rode his horse to Datong. There were more than a hundred cases of relatives, soldiers and civilians suing the government army for killing and looting, but no one sued the rebel army.

古文：绾一无所问，以安其心。
现代文：黄绾对这些案件一起也不加过问，用以安定军心。
English: Huang Qi did not question any of these cases, in order to stabilize the morale of the army.

古文：有为叛军使蒙古归者，绾执戮之，反侧者复相煽。
现代文：有替叛军出使蒙古返回的人，黄绾把他们抓起来杀掉了，这下已经投诚的叛军又煽动起来。
English: There were people who had been sent by the rebels on behalf of Mongolia to return, but Huang Qi arrested and killed them. At this time, the rebels who had already surrendered were incited again.

古文：绾大集军民，晓以祸福。
现代文：黄绾把当地军民都召集起来，对他们讲清了利害关系。
English: Huang Qi gathered the local soldiers and civilians together and explained to them the stakes.

古文：罹害者陈牒，绾佯不问，而密以牒授给振官，按里核实，一日捕首恶数十人。
现代文：受害者前来投诉，黄绾假装不予追究，暗中却把状纸交给负责分发救援物资的官吏，暗地里核实，然后一天之中抓到十几名首恶分子。
English: The victims came to complain, Huang Qi pretended not to be investigated, but secretly handed the paper to the officials responsible for distributing relief supplies, secretly verified, and then caught more than a dozen villains in one day.

古文：卒尚钦杀一家三人，惧不免，夜鸣金倡乱，无应者，遂就擒。
现代文：一个叫尚钦的士兵杀了一家三口人，害怕自己躲不过，就在夜里敲锣鼓动造反，没人响应他，他自己就给抓了起来。
English: A soldier named Shangqin killed a family of three. Afraid that he could not hide, he banged a gong in the night to incite rebellion. No one responded to him, and he was arrested himself.

古文：绾复图形购首恶数人，军民乃不复虞诖误。
现代文：黄绾又画了几名首恶分子的头像贴出去悬赏捕捉他们，大同军民这才不担心受到株连。
English: Huang Qi also drew the headshots of several chief villains and posted them out to offer a reward to catch them. This made the Datong soldiers and civilians not worry about being attacked by the company.

古文：遂令有司树木栅，设保甲四隅，创社学，教军民子弟，城中大安。
现代文：从此以后，黄绾责成有关部门在城外树木栅，在四个城角地带建立保甲制度，又创办社学，教育军民子弟，城中的局势大为稳定了。
English: From then on, Huang Qi ordered the relevant departments to set up a tree fence outside the city, establish a armor protection system in the four corners of the city, and establish a social school to educate military and civilian children. The situation in the city was very stable.

古文：还朝，列上文武将吏功罪，极诋源清、永。
现代文：回朝以后，黄绾向世宗汇报了大同的文武将吏的功过，极力抨击源清和谷阝永。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Huang Qi reported to Shizong about the merits and demerits of Datong's literati and military generals, and vigorously attacked Yuan, Qing and Gu.

古文：绾以劳增俸一等，璁及兵部庇源清，阴抑绾。
现代文：黄绾因为此番功劳被提加一级俸禄。张璁及兵部包庇源清，暗中压黄绾。
English: Huang Qi was awarded a first-class salary because of this achievement. Zhang Qi and the military department covered up Yuan Qing and secretly suppressed Huang Qi.

古文：绾累疏论，帝亦意向之，源清、永卒被逮。
现代文：黄绾一次次上书评理，世宗也心向着他，源清、谷阝永终于被逮捕了。
English: Huang Qi repeatedly submitted books for review, and Shizong also had his heart set on him. Yuan Qing and Gu Yingyong were finally arrested.

古文：绾寻以母忧归。
现代文：不久以后黄绾因母亲死掉回家守丧去了。
English: Soon after, Huang Qi went home to mourn the death of his mother.

古文：十八年，礼官以恭上皇天上帝大号及皇祖谥号，请遣官诏谕朝鲜。
现代文：十八年，礼官因为给皇天上帝及皇祖加了尊号和谥号，请求派遣官员去通告朝鲜。
English: In the 18th year, the etiquette officer requested that officials be sent to inform North Korea because they had given the honorific and nickname to the emperor, the god and the emperor's ancestor.

古文：时帝方议讨安南，欲因以觇之，乃曰： 安南亦朝贡之国，不可以迩年叛服故，不使与闻。
现代文：当时世宗正打算讨伐安南，想乘这个机会窥探安南的情况，就说 ：安南也是给我们朝贡的国家，不能因为近年来背叛我们就不让他们知道。
English: At that time, Sejong was planning to attack Annan, and he wanted to take this opportunity to spy on Annan's situation, so he said: Annan is also a country that pays tribute to us, and we can't let them know because they have betrayed us in recent years.

古文：其择大臣有学识者往。 
现代文：希望选择一个有学识的大臣前去。 
English: I hope they will choose a learned minister to go forward.

古文：廷臣屡以名上，皆不用。
现代文：朝臣屡次推荐人，世宗都不用。
English: Ason repeatedly recommended people, and Sejong didn't have to.

古文：特起绾礼部尚书兼翰林学士为正使，谕德张治副之。
现代文：最后特别起用黄绾以礼部尚书兼翰林学士的身份担任正使，谕德张治为副职。
English: In the end, Huang Qi was specially appointed to serve as the chief envoy in the capacity of a scholar of etiquette and etiquette, and Zhang Zhi was appointed to the deputy post.

古文：帝方幸承天，趣绾诣行在受命。
现代文：世宗当时在承天视察，就催促黄绾到行宫来接受任务。
English: At that time, Shizong was inspecting in Chengdu and urged Huang Qi to go to the palace to accept the task.

古文：绾惮往，至徐州先驰使奏疾不能前，致失期。
现代文：黄绾害怕到安南去，所以到徐州就先派人骑马前往说自己生病不能前往，以至于未能如期上任。
English: Huang Qi was afraid to go to Annan, so he first sent someone to Xuzhou on horseback to say that he was sick and could not go, so that he could not take office as scheduled.

古文：帝责绾不驰赴行在，而舟诣京师为大不敬，令陈状，已而释之。
现代文：世宗批评他不骑马到行宫来，而乘船到京城去是大不敬的行为，让他说明原委，过后也就放了他一马。
English: The Sejong criticized him for not riding his horse to the palace, but taking a boat to the capital was a very disrespectful act, and asked him to explain the reason, after which he was released.

古文：绾数陈便宜，请得节制两广、云、贵重臣，遣给事御史同事，吏、礼、兵三部择郎官二人备任使。
现代文：黄绾几次请求方便，要求能节制两广、云、贵的重臣，派给事御史做同事，吏、礼、兵三部各选两名郎官听他使唤。
English: Huang Xuan asked several times for convenience, demanding that he could restrain the two broad, cloud and expensive senior vassals, and sent Zhigong Shi to be a colleague, and selected two vassals from the three departments of officials, etiquette and soldiers to listen to his call.

古文：帝悉从之。
现代文：世宗都听从了他。
English: All the emperors agreed.

古文：最后为其父母请赠，且援建储恩例请给诰命如其官。
现代文：最后黄绾又替自己的父母请求追赠，并且要援用设立太子时的开恩条例，按所追赠的官名颁发给他诰命。
English: Finally, Huang Qi also requested a posthumous gift for his parents, and invoked the Kain Ordinance at the time of the establishment of the prince, according to the posthumous official name awarded to him.

古文：帝怒，褫尚书新命，令以侍郎闲住，使事亦竟寝。
现代文：世宗恼了，剥夺了他才当上的尚书，让他以侍郎身份回家闲住着，出使安南的事最后停了下来。
English: Sejong was annoyed, deprived him of the prestigious title of Shoshu, let him go home as a waiter and stay idle, and the matter of sending Annan finally stopped.

古文：久之，卒于家。
现代文：黄绾在家住了很久以后才死掉。
English: Some time later, Chen Bozhi passed away at home.

古文：绾起家任子，致位卿贰。
现代文：黄绾从荫庇的恩典起家，官做到副部级。
English: Huang Qi started from the grace of the shade, and the official reached the vice-ministerial level.

古文：初附张璁，晚背璁附夏言，时皆以倾狡目之。
现代文：最初他依附张璁，后来又背叛张璁追随夏言，当时人们都把他看作一个阴险、狡诈的人。
English: At first he adhered to Zhang Ye, and later betrayed Zhang Ye to follow Xia Yan. At that time, people regarded him as a sinister and cunning person.

