古文：博弈之道，贵乎谨严。
现代文：围棋之道，贵在谨严。
English: In the way of Go, you should be prudent.

古文：高者在腹，下者在边，中者占角，此棋家之常然。
现代文：一流棋手占据腹地，三流棋手占据边缘，二流棋手占据四角，这是棋手们遵循的常规。
English: First-class players occupy the hinterland, third-class players occupy the edge, and second-class players occupy the four corners. This is the routine followed by the players.

古文：法曰﹕宁输数子，勿失一先。
现代文：其法则是：宁愿输掉几颗棋子，也不要失去先手。
English: The rule is: I'd rather lose a few pieces than lose my first move.

古文：有先而后，有后而先。
现代文：有看起来是先手而实际上落后的，有看起来是后手而实际上占先的。
English: There are those who seem to be ahead but are actually behind, and those who seem to be behind but are actually ahead.

古文：击左则视右，攻后则瞻前。
现代文：攻击左边则照顾到右边，攻击后边则照顾到前边。
English: Attacking from the left takes care of the right, attacking from behind takes care of the front.

古文：两生勿断，皆活勿连。
现代文：如果对手两块棋都是活棋，则不要去断他，如果自己都是活棋则不必相连。
English: If both of your opponent's pieces are live, do not break them. If both of your own pieces are live, you do not have to connect them.

古文：阔不可太疏，密不可太促。
现代文：棋势应开阔，但不可太稀疏；棋路应严密，但不可太局促。
English: The chess position should be open, but not too sparse; the chess path should be tight, but not too cramped.

古文：与其恋子以求生，不若弃子而取势，与其无势而强行，不若因之而自补。
现代文：与其舍不得丢子而求活，不如丢子而取得大局的优势。与其漫无目标地勉强行棋，不如顺其自然地自行补救。
English: Instead of being reluctant to lose and trying to survive, it is better to lose and gain the advantage of the overall situation. Instead of playing aimlessly and reluctantly, it is better to remedy it naturally.

古文：彼众我寡，先谋其生。
现代文：当对手子多而自己的子少时，先考虑活棋的问题。
English: When there are many opponents but few of one's own children, first consider the problem of live chess.

古文：我众彼寡，务张其势。
现代文：当自己的子多而对手子少时，一定要抓住时机扩展大局的优势。
English: When you have more children than rivals, you must seize the opportunity to expand your overall advantage.

古文：善胜者不争，善阵者不战。善战者不败，善败者不乱。
现代文：善于局部较量的人不争求，善于列阵的人并不在局部较量，善于作战的人不会失败，善于失败的人即使失败也不会溃乱。
English: Those who are good at local competition do not compete, those who are good at lining up do not compete locally, those who are good at fighting will not fail, and those who are good at failing will not collapse even if they fail.

古文：夫棋始以正合，终以奇胜。必也，四顾其地，牢不可破，方可出人不意，掩人不备。
现代文：围棋这门技艺，开始时按常规形成态势，而最终要用对方意想不到的方法来取胜，所以一定要在确信自己的棋没有漏洞、牢不可破的前提下，才能出于对手的意料之外，乘其不备，突然袭击。
English: In the art of Go, at the beginning, a situation is formed according to the rules, but in the end, the opponent must use unexpected methods to win. Therefore, it is necessary to be sure that there are no loopholes in one's own game and that it is unbreakable, in order to take advantage of the opponent's unexpectedness and surprise attack.

古文：凡敌无事而自补者，有侵袭之意也。弃小而不救者，有图大之心也。
现代文：凡是对手无缘无故地自行补救时，就表明他意在进犯突袭；放弃局部的棋子不救时，就表明他意在争夺大局的优势。
English: Whenever an opponent self-remedies without any reason, it shows that he intends to attack and raid; when he abandons local pieces without saving, it shows that he intends to compete for the overall advantage.

古文：随手而下者，无谋之人也。
现代文：随手投子的人，那是没有谋略的棋手。
English: A person who throws the dice at random is a player without a strategy.

古文：不思而应者，取败之道也。
现代文：不假思索而仓促应对，这是走向失败的路。
English: Reacting in haste without thinking is a recipe for failure.

古文：诗云﹕ 惴惴小心，如临于谷。 
现代文：〈诗·小雅·小宛〉： 小心谨慎，又害怕，又发愁，好像脚下是万丈深谷一般。 
English: (Poetry · Xiaoya · Xiaowan): Careful and cautious, afraid and worried, as if there is a deep valley at your feet.

