古文：帝谓懿曰： 公孙渊将何计以待君？ 
现代文：起，止，一共八年。魏纪六魏明帝景初二年春季，正月，明帝从长安召回司马懿，命他率军四万人讨伐辽东。
English: It lasted for a total of eight years. In the spring and the first month of the second year of the sixth year of the Wei Dynasty, Emperor Ming summoned Sima Qian from Chang'an and ordered him to lead an army of 40,000 men to fight in Liaodong.

古文：对曰： 渊弃城豫走，上计也；据辽东拒大军，其次也；坐守襄平，此成禽耳。 
现代文：参预谋议的大臣有的认为四万兵员太多，军费难以提供。明帝说： 四千里远征讨伐，虽说要出奇制胜，但也应当依靠实力，不应斤斤计较军费。 明帝对司马懿说： 公孙渊放弃守城先行逃走，是上策；据守辽东抗拒大军，是中策；如死守襄平，必被生擒。 
English: Some of the ministers at the pre-meeting thought that 40,000 soldiers were too many, and it would be difficult to provide the military expenses. Emperor Ming said, "The expeditionary campaign of 4,000 miles, although it is necessary to win by surprise, should also rely on strength, and military expenses should not be carefully considered." Emperor Ming said to Sima Yi, "It is the best policy for Gongsunyuan to abandon the defense of the city and flee first; it is the middle policy for the defense of Liaodong to resist the large army; if he defends Xiangping, he will be captured alive."

古文：帝曰： 然则三者何出？ 
现代文：明帝说： 那么，三者中他将采用哪一种？ 
English: Emperor Ming said: So, which one of the three will he use?

古文：对曰： 唯明智能审量彼我，乃豫有所割弃。
现代文：回答说： 只有明智的人，才能审慎度量敌我双方的力量，才会预先有所舍弃。
English: He replied: "Only a wise man can prudently measure the strength of both the enemy and ourselves, and only then can he give up something in advance."

古文：此既非渊所及，又谓今往孤远，不能支久，必先拒辽水，后守襄平也。 
现代文：这既不是公孙渊的才智所能达到的，他又会认为我军是孤军远征，不能支持长久，一定是先在辽水抗拒，然后退守襄平。 
English: This is not what Gongsun Yuan's intelligence can achieve, and he will think that our army is a lone expedition and cannot be supported for a long time. It must first resist in Liao Shui and then retreat to Xiangping.

古文：帝曰： 还往几日？ 
现代文：明帝说： 往返需多少天？ 
English: Mingdi said, "How many days will it take to go back and forth?"

古文：对曰： 往百日，攻百日，还百日，以六十日为休息，如此，一年足矣。 
现代文：回答说： 进军一百天，攻战一百天，返回一百天，以六十天作为休息日，这样的话，一年足够了。 
English: And he answered, A hundred days to go forth, and a hundred days to come, and a hundred days to return, and threescore days for a sabbath: so a year is fulfilled.

古文：公孙渊闻之，复遣使称臣，求救于吴。
现代文：公孙渊听到消息，再次源遣使节称臣，向吴国求救。
English: When Sun Yuan heard the news, he once again sent an envoy to appeal to Wu for help.

古文：吴人欲戮其使，羊道曰： 不可，是肆匹夫之怒而捐霸王之计也，不如因而厚之，遣奇兵潜往以要其成。
现代文：吴国打算杀掉来使，羊说： 不可，这是发泄匹夫一时怒气，而破坏称霸称王的大计，不如就势厚待他，然后派遣奇兵暗中前往，以胁迫公孙渊归附。
English: The State of Wu planned to kill the messenger, but the sheep said, "No, this is a scheme to vent the temporary anger of the peer and to destroy the hegemony of the king. It would be better to treat him generously, and then send a miracle soldier secretly to coerce Gongsunyuan to join."

古文：若魏伐不克，而我军远赴，是恩结遐夷，义形万里；若兵连不解，首尾离隔，则我虏其傍郡，驱略而归，亦足以致天之罚，报雪曩事矣。 
现代文：如果魏讨伐不能取胜，而我军远赴救难，便与远方夷族结下恩情，大义表现于万里之外。如果双方交战难解难分，辽东前方、后方分隔，那么我们就在它边陲郡县，驱逐劫掠而归，也足以表达上天的惩罚，对往事报仇雪恨了。 吴王说： 好！ 
English: If Wei's crusade fails to win, and our army goes far away to rescue the distressed, it will forge a relationship of grace with the distant Yi people, and the great righteousness will be manifested thousands of miles away. If the two sides are at war and cannot be separated, and Liaodong is separated from the front and the rear, then we will return to the border of Liaodong County, expel the looting and plunder, which is also enough to express the punishment of heaven, and avenge the past. King Wu said: Good!

古文：吴主曰： 善！ 乃大勒兵谓渊使曰： 请俟后问，当从简书，必与弟同休戚。 
现代文：于是大规模地集结部队，并对公孙渊来使说： 请回去等候音信，我们遵从来函吩咐，一定和老弟休戚与共！ 
English: Therefore, they massed troops on a large scale, and said to Gongsun Yuan, the envoy: "Please go back and wait for news. We have obeyed the order in the letter, and we will definitely stand by our brother!"

古文：又曰：司马懿所向无前，深为弟忧之。 
现代文：又说： 司马懿所向无敌，我深为老弟担忧。 
English: He also said, "I am deeply worried about my brother, as Sima Yi is becoming invincible.

古文：帝问于护军将军蒋济曰： 孙权其救辽东乎？ 
现代文：明帝向护军将军蒋济问道： 孙权会救援辽东吗？ 
English: Emperor Ming asked the general of the escort army, Jiang Ji: Will Sun Quan rescue Liaodong?

古文：济曰： 彼知官备已固，利不可得，深入则非力所及，浅入则劳而无获；权虽子弟在危，犹将不动，况异域之人，兼以往者之辱乎！
现代文：蒋济说： 孙权知道我们戒备严密，不可能从中渔利，援军深入则力所不及，不深入势必徒劳无功；即使是儿子、兄弟处于那种危险境地，孙权都不会出动，何况是异域他国之人，加之以前还被羞辱过。
English: Jiang Ji said: Sun Quan knows that we are on high alert and cannot take advantage of it. If the reinforcements go deep, they will be beyond our strength. If they do not go deep, it will be in vain. Even if his son and brother were in such a dangerous situation, Sun Quan would not move out, let alone a person from a foreign country, and he had been humiliated before.

古文：今所以外扬此声者，谲其行人，疑之于我，我之不克，冀其折节事己耳。
现代文：如今所以向外宣扬出兵救辽，不过是欺骗辽东来使，使我们产生疑惧，一旦我们不能攻克，希望公孙渊向他臣服而已。
English: Therefore, the current propaganda of sending troops to save Liao is nothing more than deceiving the Liaodong envoy, causing us to have doubts. If we cannot conquer, we only hope that Gongsunyuan will submit to him.

古文：然沓渚之间，去渊尚远，若大军相守，事不速决，则权之浅规，或得轻兵掩袭，未可测也。 
现代文：可是沓渚县离公孙渊所在地相距还远，如果大军受到阻碍，相持不下，战斗不能速决，那么孙权的临时决策，或者轻兵突袭，就不可预料了。 
English: However, Kunzhu County is still far away from the location of Gongsun Yuan. If the large army is hindered, unable to hold together, and the battle cannot be resolved quickly, then Sun Quan's temporary decision-making, or light-army raids, cannot be anticipated.

古文：帝问吏部尚书卢毓： 谁可为司徒者？ 
现代文：明帝问吏部尚书卢毓说： 谁可以担任司徒？ 
English: Emperor Ming asked the head clerk, Shangshu Lu, "Who can serve as a tutor?"

古文：毓荐处士管宁。帝不能用，更问其次，对曰： 敦笃至行，则太中大夫韩暨；亮直清方，则司隶校尉崔林；贞固纯粹，则太常常林。 
现代文：卢毓推荐处士管宁，明帝不采用，又问其次的人选，卢毓答道： 敦厚忠诚的是太中大夫韩暨，耿直高洁的是司隶校尉崔林，忠贞纯朴的是太常常林。 
English: Lu Wei recommended the clerk Guan Ning, Ming Di did not adopt, and asked the next candidate, Lu Wei replied: The dutiful and loyal one is the Vice-Middle Doctor Han Ji, the upright and honorable one is the Sergeant Lieutenant Cui Lin, and the loyal and simple one is the too often Lin.

古文：二月，癸卯，以韩暨为司徒。
现代文：二月，癸卯，任命韩暨担任司徒。
English: In February, Zou Yu appointed Han Ji as a disciple.

古文：汉主立皇后张氏，前后之妹也。
现代文：汉王立张氏为皇后，是前皇后的妹妹。
English: Han Wang appointed Zhang as empress, who was the younger sister of the former empress.

古文：立王贵人子璿为皇太子，瑶为安定王。
现代文：立王贵人的儿子刘为皇太子，刘瑶为安定王。
English: Liu, the son of the king-maker, is the crown prince, and Liu Ye is the king of stability.

古文：大司农河南孟光问太子读书及情性好尚于秘书郎郤正，正曰： 奉亲虔恭，夙夜匪解，有古世子之风；接待群僚，举动出于仁恕。 
现代文：蜀大司农河南人孟光向秘书郎王询问太子读书情况及性情爱好，正说： 侍奉双亲虔诚恭敬，日日夜夜毫不怠懈，有古代世子的风范；接待群臣，举措出以仁义宽恕之心。 
English: Meng Guang, a farmer from Henan Province and Shu Daishi, asked the secretary, Lang Wang, about the prince's reading status and temperament. He said, "He serves his parents piously and respectfully, day and night without slacking, and has the demeanor of an ancient man; he receives many courtiers, and takes the initiative to be kind and forgiving.

古文：光曰： 如君所道，皆家户所有耳；吾今所问，欲知其权略智调何如也。 
现代文：孟光说： 如您所说，都是每家子弟所具备的。我今天要问的，是想知道他的权略智谋如何？ 
English: Meng Guang replied: As you said, it is something that every family has. What I am asking now is to understand his strategic wisdom and ability to respond to emergencies.

古文：正曰： 世子之道，在于承志竭欢，既不得妄有施为，智调藏于胸怀，权略应时而发，此之有无，焉可豫知也！ 
现代文：正说： 作为世子的大义，在于继承君父的志向，尽心使父母欢乐。既不能随便有所作为，就把智谋深藏在胸怀之内，权略顺应时势发挥，是否具备这些，怎么可以预先知道呢？ 
English: He was saying: The great virtue of being a child of the world lies in inheriting the ambition of one's monarch father and doing one's best to make one's parents happy. If you can't do anything casually, how can you know in advance whether you have the wisdom to hide it deep in your heart and the power to act according to the situation?

古文：光知正慎宜，不为放谈，乃曰： 吾好直言，无所回避。
现代文：孟光知道正讲话谨慎合宜，不敢放开畅谈，便说： 我喜欢直言，没有什么避讳。
English: Meng Guang knew that it was prudent and appropriate to speak, and did not dare to talk freely, so he said: I like to speak frankly, there is nothing to avoid.

古文：今天下未定，智意为先，智意自然，不可力强致也。
现代文：如今天下未定，智谋最为重要，智谋是先天秉性，不可用力强迫求得。
English: If you are undecided today, wisdom is the most important. Wisdom is innate and cannot be forced.

古文：储君读书，宁当效吾等竭力博识以待访问，如博士探策讲试以求爵位邪！
现代文：太子读书，怎么可以效法我们博学强记以备咨询，象博士探策讲试一样以谋求一官半职呢？
English: Prince reading, how can emulate our erudite memorize to prepare for consultation, like a Ph.D. exploration lecture to seek a half-time job?

古文：当务其急者。 
现代文：应当在最急需的方面下功夫。 
English: This is the most urgent thing that should be done.

古文：正深谓光言为然。
现代文：正深感孟光言之有理。
English: Yu Zheng believes that Meng Guang's words are very accurate.

古文：正，俭之孙也。
现代文：正是俭的孙子。
English: He is the grandson of Jian.

古文：吴人铸当千大钱。
现代文：吴国铸造可当一千的大钱。
English: Wuzhou's mint can mint as much as a thousand yuan.

古文：夏，四月，庚子，南乡恭侯韩暨卒。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚子，南乡恭侯韩暨去世。
English: In the summer, in April, Geng Zi, Nanxiang Gong Hou Han Ji passed away.

古文：庚戌，大赦。
现代文：庚戌，魏大赦天下。
English: Geng Xuan, Chen Dynasty amnesty to the world.

古文：六月，司马懿军至辽东，公孙渊使大将军卑衍、杨祚将步骑数万屯辽隧，围堑二十馀里。
现代文：六月，司马懿大军到达辽东，公孙渊命大将军卑衍、杨祚统率步、骑兵数万人驻扎在辽隧，围城挖掘了长达二十余里的壕沟。
English: In June, Sima Qian's army arrived in Liaodong. Led by the great generals Gongsun Yuan and Yang Hui, tens of thousands of cavalry were stationed in Liaocheng, digging a trench of more than 20 miles around the besieged city.

古文：诸将欲击之，懿曰： 贼所以坚壁，欲老吾兵也，今攻之，正堕其计。
现代文：魏军将领们想要攻城，司马懿说： 敌人所以坚守壁垒不肯决战，是打算拖死我军，现在攻打他们，正中其计。
English: When the Wei generals wanted to attack the city, Sima Yu said, "The reason why the enemy is holding on to the ramparts and refusing to fight a decisive battle is that they intend to drag our army to death. Attacking them now is exactly their plan."

古文：且贼大众在此，其巢窟空虚。直指襄平，破之必矣。 
现代文：而且敌人主力在此，他们的老巢必定空虚，我军直指襄平，必能攻破。 
English: Moreover, the enemy's main force is here. Their lair must be empty. Our army is pointing straight at Xiangping and will be able to break through.

古文：乃多张旗帜，欲出其南，衍等尽锐趣之。
现代文：于是，打出许多战旗，佯作要向南方出动，卑衍等率全部精锐部队随之向南。
English: As a result, many battle flags were raised, and all the elite troops were ordered to march to the south.

古文：懿潜济水，出其北，直趣襄平；衍等恐，引兵夜走。
现代文：司马懿率军暗中渡过辽河，向北挺进，直扑襄平。卑衍等大为惊恐，率军连夜撤回。
English: Sima Qian secretly crossed the Liao River with his army and advanced to the north, directly attacking Xiangping. Pei Yan and others were greatly alarmed, and withdrew with his army overnight.

古文：诸军进至首山，渊复使衍等逆战，懿击，大破之，遂进围襄平。
现代文：魏各路大军进抵首山，公孙渊再命卑衍等迎战。司马懿迎击，大败卑衍，遂进军包围襄平。
English: The great armies of Wei all the way arrived at Shoushan, Gongsunyuan and Biyan fought. Sima Yi counterattacked, defeated Biyan, and then marched to encircle Xiangping.

古文：秋，七月，大霖雨，辽水暴涨，运船自辽口径至城下。
现代文：秋季，七月，连降大雨，辽河暴涨，运粮船队从辽口直抵城下。
English: In autumn, in July, continuous heavy rain fell, the Liao River surged, and the grain fleet arrived directly from Liaokou to the city.

古文：雨月馀不止，平地水数尺。三军恐，欲移营，懿令军中： 敢有言徙者斩！ 
现代文：大雨下了一个多月不停，平地水深数尺，魏三军恐惧，打算迁移营垒，司马懿下令军中： 有敢说迁营者斩！ 
English: Heavy rain fell for more than a month without stopping, the water on the flat ground was several feet deep, the Wei three armies were afraid and planned to move the camp, Sima Qian ordered the army: If you dare to say that you are moving the camp, behead you!

古文：都督令史张静犯令，斩之，军中乃定。
现代文：都督令史张静违抗命令，被斩，军心这才安定。
English: The governor ordered Shi Zhang Jing to violate the military order and was beheaded, and the military spirit settled down.

古文：贼恃水，樵牧自若，诸将欲取之，懿皆不听。
现代文：敌人依仗水势，砍柴放牧依然如故，将领们想要俘获他们，司马懿都不准许。
English: The enemy relies on the water potential, cutting wood and grazing is still the same, the generals want to capture them, Sima Yu is not allowed.

古文：司马陈珪曰： 昔攻上庸，八部俱进，昼夜不息，故能一旬之半，拔坚城，斩孟达。
现代文：司马陈说： 从前攻打上庸，八支部队同时进发，日夜不停，所以能用十六天时间攻下坚城，斩杀孟达。
English: Sima Chen said: In the past, when attacking Shangyong, eight troops advanced at the same time, day and night, so it took 16 days to capture Jiancheng and kill Mengda.

古文：今者远来而更安缓，愚窃惑焉。 
现代文：这次远征而来，反而更安闲迟缓，我私下感到疑惑。 
English: I don't understand why it's so much more relaxed and easygoing when you come from far away.

古文：懿曰： 孟达众少而食支一年，将士四倍于达而粮不淹月；以一月图一年，安可不速！
现代文：司马懿说： 孟达兵少但存粮可支撑一年，我军将士四倍于孟达，但粮食不能支持一个月。以一个月攻打一年，怎么可以不快速？
English: Sima Yi said: Mengda has fewer soldiers, but its grain reserves can support one year. Our army has four times more soldiers than Mengda, but it cannot support grain for one month. How can we attack one year in one month without speed?

古文：以四击一，正令失半而克，犹当为之，是以不计死伤，与粮竞也。
现代文：以四个兵士攻击一个敌人，即使丧失一半而能够攻克，都应当去做，所以不顾死伤地强攻，是与粮食竞争啊！
English: If you attack an enemy with four soldiers, even if you lose half of them and are able to defeat them, you should do it, so regardless of death or injury, it is a competition with grain!

古文：今贼众我寡，贼饥我饱，水雨乃尔，功力不设，虽当促之，亦何所为！
现代文：如今敌众我寡，敌饥我饱，何况雨水如此之大，功力不能施展，虽然应当速战速决，又能干什么呢？
English: Now that my enemies are few and my enemies are hungry, not to mention that the rain is so heavy that I can't exert my strength, what can I do, although I should make a quick decision?

古文：自发京师，不忧贼攻，但恐贼走。
现代文：自打从京师出发，不担心敌人进攻，只恐怕敌人逃走。
English: Since the departure of the Beijing Division, they are not worried about the Kleptocratic Army attacking, but are afraid of the Kleptocratic Army fleeing.

古文：今贼粮垂尽而围落未合，掠其牛马，抄其樵采，此故驱之走也。
现代文：如今敌人粮食就要耗尽，可是我们的包围还没完成，抢掠他们的牛马，抄袭他们的樵夫，这是故意逼迫他们逃走。
English: Now the enemy is about to run out of food, but our encirclement is not yet complete, robbing their cattle and horses, copying their woodcutters, this is deliberately forcing them to flee.

古文：夫兵者诡道，善因事变。
现代文：用兵是一种诡诈的行为，要善于随机应变。
English: The use of soldiers emphasizes the art of deception, and is good at changing at any time.

古文：贼凭众恃雨，故虽饥困，未肯束手，当示无能以安之。
现代文：敌人凭仗人多，倚仗雨大，虽然饥饿窘困，还不肯束手投降，应当显示出我们无能以便使他们安心。
English: The bandits depend on a large number of people and heavy rain, so although they are hungry and tired, they do not want to go to bed, we should show our inability to reassure them.

古文：取小利以惊之，非计也。 
现代文：如果因贪图小利使他们惊吓逃跑，这不是好的计策。 
English: It's not a good idea to startle them for a quick profit.

古文：朝廷闻师遇雨，咸欲罢兵。
现代文：朝中听说大军遇雨，一致打算退兵。
English: Hearing that the large army had been caught in the rain, the two Koreas unanimously decided to withdraw.

古文：帝曰： 司马懿临危制变，禽渊可计日待也。 
现代文：明帝说： 司马懿有能力临危控制事变，捉住公孙渊指日可待。 
English: Mingdi said: Sima Yi has the ability to control events in a crisis, and catching Gongsun Yuan is just around the corner.

古文：雨霁，懿乃合围，作土山地道，楯橹钩冲，昼夜攻之，矢石如雨。
现代文：雨止，司马懿随即合拢包围圈，高堆土山，深挖地道，用干、橹车、钩梯、冲车，日夜攻城，射箭与石密集如雨。
English: After the rain stopped, Sima Yu immediately closed the encirclement, piled up the soil, dug deep tunnels, used trucks, forklifts, hook ladders, and rush trucks, and attacked the city day and night. Archery and stones were as dense as rain.

古文：渊窘急，粮尽，人相食，死者甚多，其将杨祚等降。
现代文：公孙渊窘迫危急，粮食已尽，以至人与人互相格杀残食，死亡极多，部将杨祚等投降。
English: Gongsunyuan was in dire straits, food was exhausted, and people were killing each other for leftover food. There were many deaths, and the commander Yang Xuan and others surrendered.

古文：八月，渊使相国王建、御史大夫柳甫请解围却兵，当君臣面缚。
现代文：八月，公孙渊派遣相国王建、御史大夫柳甫请求解围退兵，如果同意，君臣定当自缚面降。
English: In August, Gongsunyuan dispatched his minister, King Jian, and his chief historian, Liu Fu, to request that the siege be lifted and the troops be withdrawn. If they agreed, the princes and ministers agreed to surrender voluntarily.

古文：懿命斩之，檄告渊曰： 楚、郑列国，而郑伯犹肉袒牵羊迎之。
现代文：司马懿命斩来使，用檄文通知公孙渊说： 楚国和郑国地位相等，可是郑伯还光着脊背牵羊出城迎降。
English: Sima made a last-ditch effort to send an envoy and sent a message to Gongsun Yuan saying, "The status of Chu and Zheng is equal, but Zheng Bo still led the sheep out of the city bare-back to meet the emperor.

古文：孤天子上公，而建等欲孤解围退舍，岂得礼邪！
现代文：我是天子的上公，而王建等想要我解围后退，难道不失礼吗？
English: I am the father-in-law of the son of heaven, and Wang Jian and others want me to retreat, isn't it disrespectful?

古文：二人老耄，传言失指，已相为斩之。
现代文：这二个老糊涂，传话失去意指，已被我杀掉。
English: I've killed the two old fools who lost the signal.

古文：若意有未已，可更遣年少有明决者来！ 
现代文：如还有请降之意，就另派年轻有明快决断的人前来。 
English: If they still want to surrender, they should send someone else who is young and decisive.

古文：渊复遣侍中卫演乞克日送任，懿谓演曰： 军事大要有五：能战当战，不能战当守，不能守当走；馀二事，但有降与死耳。
现代文：公孙渊又派侍中卫演，请求指定日期，派送人质。司马懿对卫演说： 军事大要有五条，能战则战，不能战就当坚守，不能坚守就当逃走。剩下的两条路，就只有投降和死了。
English: Gongsun Yuan also sent an attendant, Zhongwei Yuan, to request a specific date for the hostages to be sent. Sima Yi said to Wei Yuan: There are five rules in military affairs. If you can fight, then fight. If you can't fight, then stand firm. If you can't stand firm, then run away. The only two ways left are to surrender and die.

古文：汝不肯面缚，此为决就死也，不须送任！ 
现代文：公孙渊不肯自缚面降，这是决心去死，不必送来人质！ 
English: Gongsun Yuan did not want to surrender, he was determined to die, there was no need to send a hostage!

古文：任午，襄平溃，渊与子修将数百骑突围东南走，大兵急击之，斩渊父子于梁水之上。
现代文：壬午，襄平城败溃，公孙渊和儿子公孙带领数百骑兵从东南突围逃走，魏军急忙追击，在梁水岸边斩杀了公孙渊父子。
English: In the afternoon of the ninth day of the ninth month, Xiangping City was defeated. Gongsun Yuan and his son Gongsun Zhuo led hundreds of cavalrymen to break out from the southeast and fled. The Wei army hurriedly pursued and killed Gongsun Yuan and his son on the shore of Liangshui.

古文：懿既入城，诛其公卿以下及兵民七千馀人，筑为京观。辽东、带方、乐浪、玄菟四郡皆平。
现代文：司马懿既已进入襄平城；诛杀城中公卿以下官吏及兵民七千余人，积尸封土，筑成大坟，辽东、带方、乐浪、玄菟四郡全部平定。
English: Sima Yi had already entered Xiangping City; he killed more than seven thousand officials and soldiers in the city, including nobles, sealed the bodies and built a large grave. Liaodong, Bokfang, Lelang and Xuanzang counties were all pacified.

古文：渊之将反也，将军纶直、贾范等苦谏，渊皆杀之，懿乃封直等之墓，显其遗嗣，释渊叔父恭之囚。
现代文：公孙渊将要反叛时，将军纶直、贾范等苦苦劝阻，都被公孙渊诛杀。司马懿于是堆土加高纶直等人的坟墓，显扬他们的子弟，释放了为朝廷所立而被公孙渊囚禁的叔父。
English: When Gongsun Yuan was about to rebel, Generals Gongzhi and Jia Fan tried hard to dissuade him, but they were all killed by Gongsun Yuan. Sima Yu then piled up the graves of Gao Gongzhi and others, glorified their sons, and released his uncle, who had been imprisoned by Gongsun Yuan for being appointed by the imperial court.

古文：中国人欲还旧乡者，恣听之。
现代文：中原人想要返回故里，听任自便。
English: If the Central Plains people want to return to their homeland, they are free to do so.

古文：遂班师。
现代文：然后班师。
English: Then the class teacher came out.

古文：初，渊兄晃为恭任子在洛阳，先渊未反时，数陈其变，欲令国家讨渊；及渊谋逆，帝不忍市斩，欲就狱杀之。
现代文：最初，公孙渊的哥哥公孙晃作为公孙恭的人质住在洛阳，公孙渊还未反叛时，公孙晃几次报告公孙渊的变故，打算让魏出兵讨伐。到公孙渊图谋叛逆，明帝不忍心把公孙晃在街市斩首，打算下狱处决。
English: At first, Gongsun Yuan's brother Gongsun Akira lived in Luoyang as a hostage of Gongsun Qiong. When Gongsun Yuan had not yet rebelled, Gongsun Akira reported Gongsun Yuan's defection several times, intending to have Wei send troops to fight. When Gongsun Yuan attempted to rebel, the Ming emperor could not bear to have Gongsun Akira beheaded in the market, and planned to execute him in prison.

古文：廷尉高柔上疏曰： 臣窃闻晃先数自归，陈渊祸萌，虽为凶族，原心可恕。
现代文：廷尉高柔上书说： 我私下听说公孙晃以前多次自动归附，报告公孙渊已萌生祸心，他虽然是凶犯宗族，但是推究其本心，是可以宽恕的。
English: The courtier Gao Rong wrote, "I have heard privately that Gongsun Akira had voluntarily surrendered many times before, reporting that Gongsun Yuan had developed evil intentions. Although he is from a family of criminals, it is forgivable to investigate his true intentions.

古文：夫仲尼亮司马牛之忧，祁奚明叔向之过，在昔之美义也。
现代文：从前，孔丘曾经明察司马牛的忧虑，祁奚曾经指明叔向没有过失，这都是古代的美好义行。
English: Zhongni solved Sima Niu's worries, and Zou understood Uncle Xiang's mistake, which was a wonderful benevolence in the past.

古文：臣以为晃信有言，宜贷其死；苟自无言，便当市斩。
现代文：我认为公孙晃确实在先前有过举报，应免他一死；如果他本来没有告发，应应当在街市上斩首示众。
English: I think Gongsun Akira should be spared from death because he did report the crime in the past. If he did not report the crime, he should be publicly beheaded in the market.

古文：今进不赦其命，退不彰其罪，闭著囹圄，使自引分，四方观国，或疑此举也。 
现代文：如今是进不赦免其性命，退又不公开其罪状，只是紧闭狱门，命他自杀，天下各地，或许会怀疑我们的做法。 
English: If he is not pardoned for his capital crime, if his crime is not revealed, if he is kept in prison, and if he commits suicide by his own fault, then some countries in the world will question such a move.

古文：帝不听，竟遣使赍金屑饮晃及其妻子，赐以棺衣，殡敛于宅。
现代文：明帝不采纳，竟派遣使节带着搀有金屑的酒让公孙晃和他的妻子儿女饮下，然后赏赐棺木丧衣，埋葬在公孙晃的住宅。
English: Emperor Ming did not accept it, and sent an envoy with a bottle of wine sprinkled with gold dust for Gongsun Aro and his wife and children to drink, and then gave them a coffin and burial clothes and buried them in Gongsun Aro's house.

古文：九月，吴改元赤乌。
现代文：九月，吴改年号为赤乌。
English: In September, Wu changed his name to Chao Wu.

古文：吴步夫人卒。
现代文：吴步夫人去世。
English: Mrs. Wu Bu passed away.

古文：初，吴主为讨虏将军，在吴，娶吴郡徐氏。
现代文：起初，吴王任讨虏将军，驻守吴郡，娶吴郡人徐氏。
English: At first, Wu Wang was appointed as a general to fight against the captors, stationed in Wu County, and married a man from Wu County, Mr. Xu.

古文：太子登所生庶贱，吴主令徐氏母养之。
现代文：太子孙登生母出身卑贱，吴王命徐氏抚养。
English: The prince's grandchild Deng Sheng was born to a humble mother, and was raised by Wu Wang Mingshu.

古文：徐氏妒，故无宠。
现代文：徐氏十分嫉妒，所以失宠。
English: Xu was so jealous that he fell out of favour.

古文：及吴主西徙，徐氏留处吴。
现代文：等到吴王向西迁移，徐氏仍留住在吴郡。
English: When the King of Wu moved to the west, Mr. Xu remained in Wu County.

古文：而临淮步夫人宠冠后庭，吴主欲立为皇后，而群臣议在徐氏，吴主依违者十馀年。
现代文：这时，临淮人步夫人在后宫最受宠爱，吴王打算立为皇后，可是群臣议论应立徐氏，吴王犹豫不决，拖延了十几年。
English: At this time, Mrs. Lin Huai Renbu was the most favored in the harem, and King Wu planned to make her the empress. However, the courtiers debated whether to make Xu the empress, and King Wu hesitated and delayed for more than ten years.

古文：会步氏卒，群臣奏追赠皇后印绶，徐氏竟废，卒于吴。
现代文：恰好步氏去世，群臣奏请追赠步夫人皇后印信、绶带。徐氏竟被废，在吴郡去世。
English: Just as Mr. Bu died, a group of courtiers requested that the queen's seal letter and sash be presented to Mrs. Bu. Mr. Xu was actually abolished and died in Wuxu County.

古文：吴主使中书郎吕壹典校诸官府及州郡文书，壹因此渐作威福，深文巧诋，排陷无辜，毁短大臣，纤介必闻。
现代文：吴王让中书郎吕壹主管各官府及州郡公文，吕壹因此渐渐作威作福起来，援引法律条文进行狡诈的诋毁，排斥陷害无辜，诽谤朝廷大臣，连细微小事也禀闻吴王。
English: King Wu put Lu Yi, the chief scribe, in charge of the official documents of all government offices and prefectures and counties. As a result, Lu Yi gradually became a tyrant, invoking legal provisions to cunningly slander, repel and frame the innocent, slander the imperial minister, and even the smallest things were known to King Wu.

古文：太子登数谏，吴主不听，群臣莫敢复言，皆畏之侧目。
现代文：太子孙登屡次规劝，吴王都不接受，群臣不敢再表示意见，对吕壹都深怀恐惧，侧目而视。
English: Prince's son and grandson Deng repeatedly exhorted, but King Wu did not accept, and the ministers did not dare to express their opinions. They were deeply afraid of Lü Yidu and looked sideways at him.

古文：壹诬白故江夏太守刁嘉谤讪国政，吴主怒，收嘉，系狱验问。
现代文：吕壹诬告前江夏太守刁嘉诽谤讥讽朝政，吴王大怒，逮捕了刁嘉，下狱审问。
English: Lu Yi falsely accused the former Empress Dowager of Jiangxia, Gong Jia, of slandering and mocking the imperial government. King Wu was furious, arrested Gong Jia, and sent him to prison for interrogation.

古文：时同坐人皆怖畏壹，并言闻之。侍中北海是仪独云无闻，遂见穷诘累日，诏旨转厉，群臣为之屏息。仪曰： 今刀锯已在臣颈，臣何敢为嘉隐讳，自取夷灭，为不忠之鬼！
现代文：当时被牵连的人都畏惧吕壹，都说听到过刁嘉诽谤之词，只有侍中北海人是仪一人说没有听到过，于是被连日穷追诘问，诏书也越发严厉，群臣都为他捏着一把汗，是仪说： 如今刀锯已经架在脖颈上，我怎敢为刁嘉隐瞒，自取杀身灭门之祸，成为不忠的鬼魂？
English: At that time, the people who were implicated were afraid of Lü Yi. They all said that they had heard the slanderous words of Gong Jia. Only one of the attendants, Bei Haiteng, Yi Yi, said that he had not heard them. Therefore, he was pursued and questioned day after day. The edict also became more and more severe. The courtiers were all sweating for him. It was Yi Yi who said: Now that the sword and saw have been placed on his neck, how can I dare to hide it for Gong Jia, take the calamity of killing myself, and become a disloyal ghost?

古文：厄以闻知当有本末。 
现代文：只是要说听到、了解此事，必须有头有尾。 
English: It's just to say that to hear and understand this matter, there must be a beginning and an end.

古文：据实答问，辞不倾移，吴主遂舍之；嘉亦得免。
现代文：是仪据实回答审问，供辞不改，吴王于是放了他，刁嘉也被免罪。
English: Yi answered the interrogation truthfully and did not change his confession, so King Wu released him, and Gong Jia was also exonerated.

古文：上大将军陆逊、太常潘濬忧壹乱国，每言之，辄流涕。
现代文：上大将军陆逊、太常潘浚忧虑吕壹祸乱国政，一谈到这件事，就止不住流泪。
English: When talking about the incident, he could not stop shedding tears.

古文：壹白丞相顾雍过失，吴主怒，诘责雍。
现代文：吕壹指控丞相顾雍有过失，吴王大怒，责问顾雍。
English: Lü Yi accused the chancellor Gu Yong of negligence, Wu Wang was furious and questioned Gu Yong.

古文：黄门侍郎谢肱语次问壹： 顾公事何如？ 
现代文：黄门侍郎谢在闲谈时问吕壹： 顾公之事如何？ 
English: Huangmen waiter Lang Xie asked Lu Yi in a casual conversation: What about the matter of concern for the public?

古文：壹曰： 不能佳。 
现代文：吕壹答： 不能乐观。 
English: Lu Yi: I cannot be optimistic.

古文：肱又问： 若此公免退，谁当代之？ 
现代文：谢又问： 如果此公被免，应当是谁代替他？ 
English: Xie also asked: If this official is pardoned, who should replace him?

古文：壹良久曰： 君语近之也。 
现代文：吕壹没回答。谢说： 莫非是潘浚？ 
English: It took Lu Yi a long time to say: What you said is close.

古文：肱曰： 潘太常常切齿于君，但道无因耳。
现代文：吕壹答： 你的话差不多。 谢又说： 潘浚常常对你恨得咬牙切齿，只是没有机会讲罢了。
English: Lu Yi replied: Your words are almost the same. Xie also said: Pan Jun often hates you so much that he grinds his teeth, but he just doesn't have a chance to talk about it.

古文：今日代顾公，恐明日便击君矣！ 
现代文：今日他如接替顾公，恐怕明日就会打击你了。 
English: If he takes over from Gu Gong today, I'm afraid he'll hit you tomorrow.

古文：壹大惧，遂解散雍事。
现代文：吕壹万分恐惧，亲自去建业，打算尽辞极谏。
English: Out of fear, Lu Yi stopped the censorship and house arrest of Gu Yong.

古文：潘濬求朝，诣建业，欲尽辞极谏。
现代文：到达后，听说太子孙登已经多次揭发吕壹，而不被接受。
English: After arriving, he heard that the prince's grandson Deng had repeatedly exposed Lü Yi, but was not accepted.

古文：至，闻太子登已数言之而不见从，濬乃大请百寮，欲因会手刃杀壹，以身当之，为国除患。壹密闻知，称疾不行。
现代文：潘浚于是宴请文武百官，打算在席间亲手杀死吕壹，再以性命抵罪，为国除害。吕壹得到密报，声称有病不去赴宴。
English: Pan Jun then invited hundreds of civil and military officials to the banquet, intending to kill Lü Yi with his own hands during the banquet, and then use his life to atone for the crime and eliminate the harm to the country. Lü Yi received a secret report, claiming that he was ill and would not go to the banquet.

古文：西陵督步骘上疏曰： 顾雍、陆逊、潘濬，志在竭诚，寝食不宁，念欲安国利民，建久长之计，可谓心膂股肱社稷之臣矣。
现代文：西陵督步骘上书说： 顾雍、陆逊、潘浚志在竭诚报国，睡觉吃饭都不安宁，思虑着怎样安国利民，建立国家的长治久安之计，可以说是君王的心腹和肢体，国家的重臣了。
English: Gu Yong, Lu Xun and Pan Junzhi were devoted to serving the country. They slept and ate restlessly, thinking about how to keep the country safe and benefit the people, and how to establish a long-term peace and stability of the country. It can be said that they were the king's heart, stomach and limbs, and the senior ministers of the country.

古文：宜各委任，不使他官监其所司，课其殿最。
现代文：应当对他们分别委以重任，不要让其他官员监督他们主管的工作，考核他们的政绩等次。
English: They should be entrusted with important tasks separately, and other officials should not be allowed to supervise the work they are in charge of, evaluate their political performance, and so on.

古文：此三臣思虑不到则已，岂敢欺负所天乎！ 
现代文：这三位大臣思虑不到的事情就算了，岂敢欺骗辜负君王呢？ 
English: Even if these three ministers could think of nothing else, how could they dare to deceive and betray the king?

古文：左将军硃据部曲应受三万缗，工王遂诈而受之。
现代文：左将军朱据的部曲应领受三万钱，工匠王遂将钱诈骗冒领。
English: General Zuo Zhu was supposed to receive 30,000 yuan for his work, but the craftsman Wang swindled the money.

古文：壹疑据实取，考问主者，死于杖下；据哀其无辜，厚棺敛之，壹又表据吏为据隐，故厚其殡。
现代文：吕壹怀疑朱据实际将钱私取，拷问朱据部下主事的军吏，将他打死在棍棒之下。朱据哀伤他无辜屈死，丰厚地为他入殓安葬。吕壹又上表说朱据军吏为朱据隐瞒，所以朱据为他厚葬。
English: Lu Yi suspected that Zhu Zuo had actually stolen the money, tortured the military official who was in charge of Zhu Zuo's subordinates, and beat him to death with a club. Zhu Zuo mourned his innocent death and buried him richly. Lu Yi also said that Zhu Zuo's military officials were hiding Zhu Zuo, so Zhu Zuo was buried for him.

古文：吴主数责问据，据无以自明，藉草待罪；数日，典军吏刘助觉，言王遂所取。
现代文：吴王屡次责问朱据，朱据无法表明自己清白，只好搬出家门，坐卧在草席上听候定罪。几天后，典军吏刘助发觉此事，说钱被王遂取走。
English: Wu Wang repeatedly questioned Zhu Zhen. Zhu Zhen was unable to prove his innocence, so he had to move out of the house and sit on a straw mat to await conviction. A few days later, the military officer Liu Zui discovered the matter and said that the money was taken away by Wang.

古文：吴主大感寤，曰： 硃据见枉，况吏民乎！ 
现代文：吴王深有感触，省悟地说： 朱据尚被冤枉，何况小小吏民呢！ 
English: Wu Wang was deeply moved and said thoughtfully: Zhu Jianguo was still wronged, not to mention the petty officials and people!

古文：乃穷治壹罪，赏助百万。
现代文：于是深究吕壹罪责，赏赐刘助钱百万钱。
English: As a result, the criminal responsibility of Lü Yi was thoroughly investigated, and Liu Jiu was awarded one million yuan.

古文：丞相雍至廷尉断狱，壹以囚见。雍和颜色问其辞状，临出，又谓壹曰： 君意得无欲有所道乎？ 
现代文：丞相顾雍到廷尉审理和判决案件，吕壹以阶下囚身分相见，顾雍面色温和地审问他的口供，临走出时，又对吕壹说： 您是否还有什么要讲的？ 
English: Gu Yong, the minister of justice, came to the court to hear and judge the case. Lu Yi met him as a prisoner. Gu Yong gently interrogated his confession. When he left, he said to Lu Yi: Do you have anything else to say?

古文：壹叩头无言。
现代文：吕壹叩头无语。
English: Lv Yibin is not happy.

古文：时尚书郎怀叙面詈辱壹，雍责叙曰： 官有正法，何至于此！ 
现代文：当时尚书郎怀叙当面责骂羞辱吕壹，顾雍责备怀叙说： 官府有正常的法律，为什么要这样！ 
English: At that time, Shang Shulang Huaixiu scolded and humiliated Lu Yi in person, Gu Yong scolded Huaixiu and said: The government has normal laws, why is it like this!

古文：有司奏壹大辟，或以为宜加焚裂，用彰元恶。吴主以访中书令会稽阚泽，泽曰： 盛明之世，不宜复有此刑。 
现代文：有关部门奏请处以吕壹死刑，有的认为应加以焚烧、车裂之刑，以表明他是罪魁祸首，吴王就此事请问中书令会稽人阚泽，阚泽说： 盛明之世，不宜再有此刑。 
English: Relevant departments petitioned for the death penalty to be imposed on Lu Yi. Some believed that he should be burned and his car should be smashed to show that he was the culprit. King Wu asked Heze, the auditor of the Chinese Academy of Letters, about this matter. Heze said: In the age of Shengming, it is no longer appropriate to have this punishment.

古文：吴主从之。
现代文：吴王听从了他的意见。
English: King Wu followed his advice.

古文：壹既伏诛，吴主使中书郎袁礼告谢诸大将，因问时事所当损益。
现代文：吕壹既已处死，吴王让中书郎袁礼向诸位大将道歉，同时询问他们对时事兴革的意见。
English: Since Lü Yi had already been executed, the King of Wu asked Zhong Shulang Yuan Li to apologize to the generals and ask their opinions on the current situation of the revolution.

古文：礼还，复有诏责诸葛瑾、步骘、硃然、吕岱等曰： 袁礼还云： 与子瑜、子山、义封、定公相见，并咨以时事当有所先后，各自以不掌民事，不肯便有所陈，悉推之伯言、承明。
现代文：袁礼返回后，又有诏书责备诸葛瑾、步骘、朱然、吕岱等说： 袁礼回来后说： 与诸葛瑾、步骘、朱然、吕岱相见，同时向他们询问时事先后安排的意见，各人都以不掌民事为由，不肯当即发表意见，全推给陆逊、潘浚。
English: After Yuan Li's return, there was another imperial edict blaming Zhuge Liang, Bu Liang, Zhu Ran and Lv Yu, saying: After Yuan Li's return, he said: When he met Zhuge Liang, Bu Liang, Zhu Ran and Lv Yu and asked them for their opinions, which had been arranged in advance, they all refused to express their opinions immediately on the grounds that it was not a civil matter, and they all recommended Lu Xun and Pan Jun.

古文：伯言、承明见礼，泣涕恳恻，辞旨辛苦，至乃怀执危怖，有不自安之心。 
现代文：陆逊、潘浚见到袁礼，流泪不止，态度诚恳痛切，辞意辛酸痛苦，甚至心怀危惧，有一种感觉不安全的神情。 
English: After the bowing and prostration, they shed tears and weep, their words are earnest, the meaning of the words is hard, they are worried about the affairs in their hearts, and they are uneasy.

古文：闻之怅然，深自刻怪！
现代文：我听了不禁怅然，内心深感困惑。
English: I couldn't help but be stunned and deeply puzzled.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：夫惟圣人能无过行，明者能自见耳。
现代文：天下只有圣人才能无过，只有聪明人才能自察。
English: Only a saint can be without fault, and only a wise person can self-examine.

古文：人之举厝，何能悉中！
现代文：普通人的举止行动，怎么可能全部正确？
English: How is it possible for ordinary people to behave and act all right?

古文：独当己有以伤拒众意，忽不自觉，故诸君有嫌难耳。
现代文：自以为是而有伤害抵触众意的地方，一时忽视而没有觉察，所以使各位心存疑忌畏难了。
English: Self-righteous and hurtful, contrary to the will of the people, momentarily ignored and not noticed, so that you have doubts and fears.

古文：不尔，何缘乃至于此乎 与诸君从事，自少至长，发有二色，以谓表里足以明露，公私分计足用相保，义虽君臣，恩犹骨肉，荣福喜戚，相与共之。
现代文：不然的话，有什么缘由至于这样？和各位共事，从年少至年长，如今头发已经花白，自以为表里都可以和诸位坦诚相见，公私情分足以互保；大义上我们是君臣关系，但恩情上犹如骨肉至亲，荣耀、福分、喜乐、悲戚，都共同分享和承受。
English: Otherwise, what is the reason for this? I have worked with you all, from young to old, and now my hair has turned gray. I think I can be honest with you on the surface, and the public and private feelings are enough to protect each other. In principle, we are a monarch-subordinate relationship, but in terms of gratitude, we are like flesh and blood, glory, fortune, joy, and sorrow, all shared and endured together.

古文：忠不匿情，智无遗计，事统是非，诸君岂得从容而已哉！
现代文：忠臣不应该隐瞒实情，智士不应该保留谋略，不论事情是非如何，各位怎么可以袖手旁观，自得悠闲呢？
English: A loyal subject should not conceal the truth, a wise man should not keep a strategy, no matter what the case is, how can you stand by idly?

古文：同船济水，将谁与易！
现代文：我们是同舟共济，还有谁能替代？
English: We are in the same boat, who else can replace us?

古文：齐桓有善，管子未尝不叹，有过未尝不谏，谏而不得，终谏不止。
现代文：古代齐桓公有善行，管仲没有不赞叹；有过失，没有不直言规劝；如不被采纳，则永不休止地规劝。
English: In ancient times, the Qihuankong had good deeds, and Guanzhong did not fail to praise them; there was no fault, and there was no direct exhortation; if it was not accepted, it would never stop exhorting.

古文：今孤自省无桓公之德，而诸君谏诤未出于口，仍执嫌难。以此言之，孤于齐桓良优，未知诸君于管子何如耳！ 
现代文：如今我自知没有齐桓公的德行，可是各位不肯开口直言规劝，仍然采取避嫌畏难的态度，就这一点而言，我比齐桓公还好一点，不知各位比起管仲来又是如何？ 
English: Now I know that I do not have the virtue of Prince Qi Huan, but you all refuse to speak out and advise, and still take the attitude of avoiding difficulties. In this respect, I am a little better than Prince Qi Huan. I don't know how you are compared to Guanzhong?

古文：冬，十一月，壬午，以司空卫臻为司徒，司隶校尉崔林为司空。
现代文：冬季，十一月，壬午，魏任命司空卫臻担任司徒，司隶校尉崔林担任司空。
English: In the winter, in November, at noon, Wei appointed Sikyong Weizhen as the leading disciple, and Sikyong Lieutenant Colonel Cui Lin as the leading disciple.

古文：十二月，汉蒋琬出屯汉中。
现代文：十二月，蜀蒋琬出兵驻扎在汉中。
English: In December, Shu Chiang Kai-shek stationed troops in Hanzhong.

古文：乙丑，帝不豫。
现代文：乙丑，魏明帝患病。
English: Second Ugly, Wei Mingdi fell ill.

古文：辛巳，立郭夫人为皇后。
现代文：辛巳，魏立郭夫人为皇后。
English: Soon, Mrs. Wei Liguo became the empress.

古文：初，太祖为魏公，以赞令刘放、参军事孙资皆为秘书郎。
现代文：最初，太祖还是魏公时，任命赞令刘放、参军事孙资同时担任秘书郎。
English: In the beginning, when the great-grandfather was still Wei Gong, he appointed Liu Fang, a general, and Sun Zi, a military officer, as his secretary.

古文：文帝即位，更命秘书曰中书，以放为监，资为令，遂掌机密。
现代文：文帝即位，改称秘书为中书，任命刘放担任中书监，孙资担任中书令，两人掌管机密。
English: Emperor Wen ascended the throne, changed the name of the secretary to Zhongshu, appointed Liu Fang as the Supervisor of Zhongshu, Sun Zi as the Secretary of Zhongshu, and the two of them were in charge of confidential information.

古文：帝即位，尤见宠任，皆加侍中、光禄大夫，封本县侯。
现代文：明帝即位，两人尤其受到恩宠信任，都加任侍中、光禄大夫，封为本县侯。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended the throne, the two of them were especially favored and trusted. They were both appointed to the posts of chamberlain and doctor of the imperial household, and were given the title of marquis of the county.

古文：是时，帝亲览万机，数兴军旅，腹心之任，皆二人管之；每有大事，朝臣会议，常令决其是非，择而行之。
现代文：这时，明帝亲自处理日常政务，屡次出兵，中枢筹划都由他俩掌管；每有国家大事，朝臣集会议事，经常让他俩决断是非，择定而行。
English: At this time, Emperor Ming personally handled the day-to-day government affairs, repeatedly dispatched troops, and the central planning was controlled by the two of them. Whenever there was a national event or a gathering of courtiers, they often let the two of them decide what was right and wrong and make a choice.

古文：中护军蒋济上疏曰： 臣闻大臣太重者国危，左右太亲者身蔽，古之至戒也。
现代文：中护军蒋济上书说： 我听说大臣权力太重，国家就有危险，左右过于亲近，耳目必受蒙蔽，这是古代最大的戒鉴。
English: "I have heard that if a minister has too much power, the country will be in danger, and if the left and right are too close, the ears and eyes will be deceived. This is the biggest warning in ancient times.

古文：往者大臣秉事，外内扇动；陛下卓然自览万机，莫不祗肃。
现代文：以前大臣掌事，内外动摇不安；陛下识见高明，亲自处理国事，无不肃然安定。
English: In the past, ministers were in charge, and there was instability both at home and abroad; His Majesty is highly perceptive, personally handles state affairs, and is remarkably stable.

古文：夫大臣非不忠也，然威权在下，则众心慢上，势之常也。
现代文：大臣不是不忠，只是权威下移，人们对君王就一定怠慢，这是情势发展的必然。
English: The minister is not disloyal, but if the power and authority are in the hands of the subordinates, then the people will despise the superiors in their hearts, which is a normal situation.

古文：陛下既已察之于大臣，愿无忘于左右。
现代文：陛下既然已经对大臣有所明察，希望不要忘记左右亲信造成的流弊。
English: Since Your Majesty has already made a clear observation of the minister, I hope that you will not forget the corruption caused by the cronies.

古文：左右忠正远虑，未必贤于大臣，至于便辟取合，或能工之。
现代文：左右亲信的忠心和谋略，未必胜于大臣，至于逢迎诌媚、阿谀奉承，有的却极其擅长。
English: The loyalty and strategy of close confidants may not be better than that of ministers, but as for flattery, some are extremely good at it.

古文：今外所言，辄云中书。虽使恭慎，不敢外交，但有此名，犹惑世俗。况实握事要，日在目前，傥因疲倦之间，有所割制，众臣见其能推移于事，即亦因时而向之。
现代文：如今外面议论，动辄就说 中书 ，虽然让他们恭敬谨慎，不敢对外交往，然而仅有这个名义，就可以迷惑世俗，何况实际掌握国家要事，整日侍奉在眼前；倘若趁着陛下疲倦之时，有所剖断，窃弄权威，大臣见他们能影响国事，也就会顺势转而趋向他们。
English: Nowadays, people outside the palace often talk about the "Chinese book," although they should be respectful and cautious and not dare to make foreign contacts. However, this name alone can confuse the world, not to mention the fact that they actually grasp the important affairs of the country and serve in front of them all day long. If they take advantage of the time when His Majesty is tired, make a cut and steal authority, and the minister sees that they can influence national affairs, they will also follow the trend and move towards them.

古文：一有此端，私招朋援，臧否毁誉，必有所兴，功负赏罚，必有所易，直道而上者或壅，曲附左右者反达，因微而入，缘形而出，意所狎信，不复猜觉。
现代文：一旦有此弊端，私结成朋党，褒贬毁誉就会兴起，功过赏罚必定颠倒，走正路向上的或许会被阻塞，而曲意逢迎左右近侍的却能显贵，他们抓住空子就钻，看到迹象就干，陛下亲信他们，也就不再猜疑。
English: Once there is this drawback, self-made friends will form a party, praise and blame will rise, merit and reward and punishment must be reversed, and the right path may be blocked, but those who are close to the left and right can be distinguished. They catch the loophole and drill, see the signs and dry, and His Majesty trusts them and no longer doubts.

古文：此宜圣智所当早闻，外以经意，则形际自见；或恐朝臣畏言不合而受左右之怨，莫适以闻。
现代文：这按理是应该让陛下早早听到了解，用心留意，则左右近侍的形迹自然暴露。有人担心朝廷大臣会害怕进言不妥而受左右近臣的怨恨，因而不敢上报陛下和他们对抗。
English: According to this theory, His Majesty should have heard the solution early on, and if he paid close attention, the traces of the close attendants on both sides would naturally be exposed. Some people are worried that the ministers of the Imperial Court will be afraid of speaking improperly and being resented by the close attendants on both sides, so they will not dare to report to His Majesty and confront them.

古文：臣窃亮陛下潜神默思，公听并观，若事有未尽于理而物有未周于用，将改曲易调，远与黄、唐角功，近昭武、文之绩，岂牵近习而已哉！
现代文：我认为陛下静神沉思，垂听舆论全面观察，如果事物有不尽合理或是不合于用的，就要改换曲调，远可以和黄帝、唐尧的功劳相等，近可以使武帝、文帝的政绩发扬，岂止是不受左右控制而已！
English: I think that His Majesty should meditate, listen to the public opinion and make a comprehensive observation. If things are unreasonable or not suitable for use, it is necessary to change the tune. It is far from being equal to the merits of the Yellow Emperor and Tang Dynasty, and it is nearly possible to promote the political achievements of Emperor Wu and Emperor Wen. It is more than just not being controlled by the left and right!

古文：然人君不可悉任天下之事，必当有所付；若委之一臣，自非周公旦之忠，管夷吾之公，则有弄机败官之敝。
现代文：可是君王不可能独自承担天下的全部事情，必当有所托付。如果委任一个臣属，除非有周公旦的忠心，管仲的公道，否则就有弄权败官的弊病。
English: However, it is impossible for the king to undertake all the affairs of the world alone, and something must be entrusted. If a subject is appointed, unless he has the loyalty of Zhou Gongdan and the fairness of Guanzhong, he will have the evil of power-grabbing.

古文：当今柱石之士虽少，至于行称一州，智效一官，忠信竭命，各奉其职，可并驱策，不使圣明之朝有专吏之名也！ 
现代文：当今之世，栋梁之才虽然很少，但德行能称职于一州，才智可效力于一官，忠信尽力，各奉其职的人，还是可供驱策的，不要使圣明之朝出现恶吏专权的丑名！ 
English: In today's world, although there are very few pillars of talent, but virtue can be competent in a state, talent can serve in an office, loyalty can do their best, and each person who serves their duties can still be driven. Don't make the Holy Morning appear the ugly name of the tyranny of evil officials!

古文：帝不听。
现代文：明帝不接受。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：及寝疾，深念后事，乃以武帝子燕王宇为大将军，与领军将军夏侯献、武卫将军曹爽、屯骑校尉曹肇、骁骑将军秦朗等对辅政。
现代文：到明帝病重卧床，深虑后事，才任命武帝之子燕王曹宇担任大将军，与领军将军夏侯献、武卫将军曹爽、屯骑校尉曹肇、骁骑将军秦朗等共同辅政。
English: It was only when Emperor Ming was seriously ill in bed and deeply concerned about the future that Emperor Wu's son, Yan Wang Cao Yu, was appointed to the post of general and jointly assisted the government with the leading army general Xia Hou Xian, Wu Wei general Cao Shuang, cavalry captain Cao Zhao, and cavalry general Qin Lang.

古文：爽，真之子；肇，休之子也。
现代文：曹爽是曹真之子，曹肇是曹休之子。
English: Cao Shuang is the son of Cao Zhen, Cao Zhao is the son of Cao Xiu.

古文：帝少与燕王宇善，故以后事属之。
现代文：明帝年少时与燕王曹宇亲近友好，所以把后事嘱托给他。
English: When Emperor Ming was young, he was close to and friendly with Yan Wang Cao Yu, so he entrusted the succession to him.

古文：刘放、孙资久典机任，献、肇心内不平；殿中有鸡栖树，二人相谓曰： 此亦久矣，其能复几！ 
现代文：刘放、孙资长久地掌管国家机要，夏侯献、曹肇心中忿忿不平。殿中有一只鸡飞上树，两人互相说： 这也太久了，看他们还能活几天！ 
English: Liu Fang and Sun Zi have been in charge of the state apparatus for a long time, and Xia Houchen and Cao Zhao are resentful. There is a chicken flying up a tree in the palace, and the two say to each other: This is too long, see if they can still live for a few days!

古文：放、资惧有后害，阴图间之。
现代文：刘放、孙资怕有后患，私下想加以离间。
English: Liu Fang and Sun Zi were afraid of the consequences and secretly wanted to separate them.

古文：燕王性恭良，陈诚固辞。帝引放、资入卧内，问曰： 燕王正尔为？ 
现代文：燕王曹宇性情恭顺温和，诚恳地坚决推辞，明帝让刘放、孙资进入卧室问道： 燕王正是如此吗？ 
English: Yan Wang Cao Yu's disposition was courteous and gentle, and he earnestly and resolutely refused. Emperor Ming let Liu Fang and Sun Zi enter the bedroom and asked: Is this the case with Yan Wang?

古文：对曰： 燕王实自知不堪大任故耳。 
现代文：刘放、孙资答道： 燕王实际是自知不能承担重任，所以这样。 
English: Liu Fang and Sun Zi replied: In fact, Yan Wang knew that he could not bear the heavy responsibility, so he did this.

古文：帝曰： 谁可任者？ 
现代文：明帝问： 谁可以承担？ 
English: The emperor asked: Who can take on this task?

古文：时惟曹爽独在帝侧，放、资因荐爽，且言： 宜召司马懿与相参。 
现代文：当时只有曹爽一人在旁，刘放、孙资顺势推荐曹爽，并且说： 应当召回司马懿参与。 
English: At that time, only Cao Shuang was present. Liu Fang and Sun Zi recommended Cao Shuang and said: Sima Yu should be recalled to participate.

古文：帝曰： 爽堪其事不？ 
现代文：明帝问： 曹爽能承担这件大事吗？ 
English: Emperor Ming asked: Can Cao Shuang undertake this great task?

古文：爽流汗不能对。
现代文：曹爽汗流满面，紧张得不能回答。
English: Cao Shuang sweats profusely and is too nervous to answer.

古文：放蹑其足，耳之曰： 臣以死奉社稷。 
现代文：刘放暗中踩他的脚，耳语说： 快说以死奉社稷。 
English: Liu Huan stepped on his foot in the dark and said in a whisper, "Speak quickly, serve the society with death."

古文：帝从放、资言，欲用爽、懿，既而中变，敕停前命；放、资复入见说帝，帝又从之。
现代文：明帝听从刘放、孙资建议，打算任用曹爽、司马懿，不久中途又改变，下令停止先前的任命。刘放、孙资再次入见游说明帝，明帝再度听从他们的意见。
English: The Ming emperor listened to the advice of Liu Fang and Sun Zi and intended to appoint Cao Shuang and Sima Yu, but soon changed his mind and ordered to stop the previous appointment. Liu Fang and Sun Zi once again visited the emperor to explain that the Ming emperor once again listened to their opinions.

古文：放曰： 宜为手诏。 
现代文：刘放说： 最好亲自写下诏书。 
English: Liu Fang said: It is best to write down the edict in person.

古文：帝曰： 我困笃，不能。 
现代文：明帝说： 我疲乏极了，不能写。 
English: Ming Di said, "I'm too tired to write."

古文：放即上床，执帝手强作之，遂赍出，大言曰： 有诏免燕王宇等官，不得停省中。 
现代文：刘放随即上床，把着明帝的手勉强写下诏书，遂拿着出宫大声说： 有诏书免去燕王曹宇等的官职，不得在宫中滞留。 
English: Liu Fang immediately went to bed, took Emperor Ming's hand and reluctantly wrote down the edict, and then took it out of the palace and said in a loud voice: There is an edict exempting Yan Wang Cao Yu and others from official duties, and they must not stay in the palace.

古文：皆流涕而出。
现代文：曹宇等流泪而出。
English: Cao Yu and others burst into tears.

古文：甲申，以曹爽为大将军。帝嫌爽才弱，复拜尚书孙礼为大将军长史以佐之。
现代文：甲申，任命曹爽担任大将军，明帝嫌曹爽才能不足，又任命尚书孙礼担任大将军长史辅助他。
English: Gao Shin appointed Cao Shuang as the grand general. Emperor Ming thought that Cao Shuang's talent was insufficient, and appointed Shang Shusunli as the grand general to assist him.

古文：是时，司马懿在汲，帝令给使辟邪赍手诏召之。
现代文：这时，司马懿正在汲县，明帝派遣给使辟邪，带着手诏前去召司马懿。
English: At this time, Sima Yi was in Kuching County. Emperor Ming dispatched an envoy to drive out the evil and went to summon Sima Yi with a handwritten edict.

古文：先是，燕王为帝画计，以为关中事重，宜遣懿便道自轵关西还长安，事已施行。
现代文：开始，燕王替明帝筹划，认为关中事关重大，应让司马懿走小道从轵关向西回到长安，事情已经施行。
English: At the beginning, Yan Wang made a plan for Emperor Ming. He thought that the situation in Guanzhong was very important and that Sima Ye should be allowed to take the path from Shiguan to the west back to Chang'an. The plan has been implemented.

古文：懿斯须得二诏，前后相违，疑京师有变，乃疾驱入朝。
现代文：司马懿不久又接到第二封诏书，前后矛盾，怀疑京师发生变故，于是急速入朝。
English: Sima Yi soon received a second imperial edict, which was contradictory, and suspected that there had been a change in the capital, so he rushed to the imperial court.

古文：烈祖明皇帝下景初三年
现代文：景初三年春季，正月，司马懿回到京师，入见明帝。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Jingchu era, in the first month of the year, Sima Yi returned to Beijing and met Emperor Ming.

古文：春，正月，懿至，入见，帝执其手曰： 吾以后事属君，君与曹爽辅少子。死乃可忍，吾忍死待君，得相见，无所复恨矣！ 
现代文：明帝拉着他的手说： 我把后事嘱托给您，您要与曹爽一起辅佐幼子。死岂是可以忍住的，我强忍着不死是为等待您。能够与您相见，再无遗恨了。 
English: Emperor Ming took him by the hand and said, "I entrust the future to you. You should work with Cao Shuang to support the young son. Death can be endured. I'm waiting for you by not dying. I can meet you, and I have no regrets."

古文：乃召齐、秦二王以示懿，别指齐王芳谓懿曰： 此是也，君谛视之，勿误也！ 
现代文：于是召来齐王曹芳、秦王曹询拜见司马懿，又指着齐王曹芳对司马懿说： 就是他了，您仔细看看，不要看错！ 
English: He then summoned Qi Wang Cao Fang and Qin Wang Cao Zhen to pay homage to Sima Yao, and pointed to Qi Wang Cao Fang and said to Sima Yao: "That's him, take a closer look, don't make a mistake!

古文：又教齐王令前抱懿颈。懿顿首流涕。
现代文：又教齐王曹芳上前抱住司马懿的脖颈，司马懿叩头流泪。
English: He also taught Qi Wang Cao Fang to come forward and hug Sima Yi's neck, and Sima Yi bowed his head and shed tears.

古文：是日，立齐王为皇太子。帝寻殂。
现代文：这一天，立齐王曹芳为皇太子，明帝旋即去世。
English: On this day, King Cao Fang of Qi was enthroned as crown prince, and Emperor Ming immediately passed away.

古文：帝沈毅明敏，任心而行，料简功能，屏绝浮伪。
现代文：明帝深沉刚毅，聪明敏捷，但纵情任性。能够择别官吏的事功和能力，排除虚浮不实。
English: Emperor Ming was a man of deep fortitude, clever and agile, but indulgent and capricious. He was able to select the merits and abilities of officials, eliminating the false and the false.

古文：行师动众，论决大事，谋臣将相，咸服帝之大略。
现代文：每次发兵出征，讨论决定大事，谋臣将相，全都佩服明帝的远大谋略。
English: Every time the troops were sent out, the major events were discussed and decided, and the advisors and generals were consulted, everyone admired Emperor Ming's far-reaching strategy.

古文：性特强识，虽左右小臣，官簿性行，名迹所履，及其父兄子弟，一经耳目，终不遗忘。
现代文：记忆力极强，虽然只是左右卑微小官，但档案中所记有关的禀性行为、主要事迹和经历，及家中父兄子弟的情况，一经过目，终身不忘。
English: He has a very strong memory. Although he was only a lowly minor official, he will never forget the sexual behavior, major deeds and experiences recorded in the file, and the situation of his brothers and sisters in the family.

古文：孙盛论曰：闻之长老，魏明帝天姿秀出，立发垂地，口吃少言，而沈毅好断。
现代文：孙盛论曰：听长辈说，魏明帝容貌英秀出众，站立时长发垂地，有些口吃，话语不多，但性格沉着刚毅而有决断。
English: Sun Sheng said: "Listening to the elders, Wei Mingdi has a distinguished appearance, long hair hanging down when standing, some stuttering, not many words, but a calm, strong and decisive personality.

古文：初，诸公受遗辅导，帝皆以方任处之，政自己出。
现代文：起初，各位大臣接受遗诏辅政，魏明帝把他们都派出去镇守地方，朝政则由自己亲自处理。
English: At first, the ministers accepted the imperial edict to assist the government, and Emperor Wei Ming sent them all out to guard the localities, while the government was handled by himself.

古文：优礼大臣，开容善直，虽犯颜极谏，无所摧戮，其君人之量如此之伟也。
现代文：对大臣优待礼敬，心胸开阔，喜爱爽直，即使大臣当面冒犯批评，也不折辱诛杀，他的君主度量是如此宽宏。
English: He treats ministers with courtesy, is open-minded, and likes to be straightforward. Even if a minister is offended by criticism in person, he will not be offended. His monarch is so broad-minded.

古文：然不思建德垂风，不固维城之基，至使大权偏据，社稷无卫，悲夫！
现代文：可是他不考虑建立恩德，使风范流传后世，不巩固曹氏宗室作为基础，至使大权旁落，社稷无人保卫，可悲！
English: However, he did not consider establishing benevolence, so that the style would be passed down to future generations, and did not consolidate the Cao family as the foundation, so that the great power fell by the wayside, and the society was left unprotected, pathetic!

古文：太子即位，年八岁；大赦。
现代文：太子曹芳即位，时年八岁。大赦天下。
English: Crown Prince Cao Fang ascended the throne at the age of eight. He was granted amnesty.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后，加曹爽、司马懿侍中，假节钺，都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
现代文：尊称皇后为皇太后，给曹爽、司马懿加封侍中官职，授符节、黄钺，为都督中外诸军事、录尚书事。
English: The empress was given the title of empress dowager, Cao Shuang and Sima Qian were given the posts of vice-commanders, and were awarded the insignia and the yellow ribbon. They were also appointed as military governors and recorders.

古文：诸所兴作宫室之役，皆以遗诏罢之。
现代文：各处修建宫殿的劳役，都以遗诏的名义罢除。
English: According to the last emperor's last will and testament, the construction of all kinds of palaces is to be stopped.

古文：爽、懿各领兵三千人更宿殿内，爽以懿年位素高，常父事之，每事咨访，不敢专行。
现代文：曹爽、司马懿各自领兵三千人轮流在宫内宿卫，曹爽因司马懿年纪已大，地位一向很高，经常把他当作父辈侍奉，每有事情必去拜访咨询，不敢独断专行。
English: Cao Shuang and Sima Yi each led three thousand soldiers to take turns in the palace as guards. Cao Shuang, because Sima Yi is old and has always had a high status, often treats him as a servant of his parents. Whenever there is a matter, he must visit and consult, and dare not act arbitrarily.

古文：初，并州刺史东平毕轨及邓飏、李胜、何晏、丁谧皆有才名而急于富贵，趋时附势，明帝恶其浮华，皆抑而不用。
现代文：最初，并州刺史东平人毕轨及邓、李胜、何晏、丁谧都有才名，但急于富贵，趋炎附势，明帝厌恶他们虚浮不实，都加抑制而不录用。
English: In the beginning, Dongping people who followed the track and Deng, Li Sheng, He Yao, and Ding Yao all had talent, but they were eager to become rich and powerful. Emperor Ming detested their vanity and insincerity, and they were all suppressed and not hired.

古文：曹爽素与亲善，及辅政，骤加引擢，以为腹心。
现代文：曹爽一向与他们亲近友好，到掌权辅政，马上引荐提升，成为心腹。
English: Cao Shuang has always been close and friendly with them. When he came to power, he immediately promoted them and became a confidant.

古文：晏，进之孙；谧，斐之子也。
现代文：何晏是何进的孙子，丁谧是丁斐之子。
English: He Yao is the grandson of He Jin, and Ding Yao is the son of Ding Fei.

古文：晏等咸共推戴爽，以为重权不可委于人。
现代文：何晏等都共同推戴曹爽，认为大权不能托付给别人。
English: They all support Cao Shuang and believe that power cannot be entrusted to others.

古文：丁谧为爽画策，使爽白天子发诏，转司马懿为太傅，外以名号尊之，内欲令尚书奏事，先来由己，得制其轻重也。爽从之。
现代文：丁谧替曹爽出谋划策，让曹爽禀告皇帝发布诏书，改任司马懿为太傅，外表上用虚名使他尊贵，实际上打算让尚书主事，上奏先由曹爽过目，以便控制轻重缓急，曹爽听从其计。
English: Ding Rong made a plan for Cao Shuang. He asked Cao Shuang to tell the emperor to issue an imperial edict and to appoint Sima Yu as the grand tutor. On the surface, he used a false name to make him noble. In fact, he planned to let Shang Shu take the lead. Cao Shuang would have a look at the report first in order to control the priorities. Cao Shuang followed his plan.

古文：二月，丁丑，以司马懿为太傅，以爽弟羲为中领军，训为武卫将军，彦为散骑常侍、侍讲，其馀诸弟皆以列侯侍从，出入禁闼，贵宠莫盛焉。
现代文：二月，丁丑，任命司马懿担任太傅，曹爽弟曹羲担任中领军，曹训担任武卫将军，曹彦担任散骑常侍、侍讲，其余兄弟都以列侯身分侍从，出入宫廷禁地，尊贵宠信没有超过他们的了。
English: In February, Ding Wuxi appointed Sima Qian as Taifu, Cao Shuang's younger brother Cao Qian as the middle leader of the army, Cao Xun as the general of the armed forces, Cao Yan as the rider of the cavalry and the speaker, and the rest of the brothers as retainers, entering and leaving the restricted area of the palace. The honorable favorite did not exceed them.

古文：爽事太傅，礼貌虽存，而诸所兴造，希复由之。
现代文：曹爽侍奉太傅，外表仍恭敬有礼，但各项决定很少再经他认可。
English: Cao Shuang is still respectful and courteous on the outside, but his decisions are rarely approved by him.

古文：爽徙吏部尚书卢毓为仆射，而以何晏代之，以邓飏、丁谧为尚书，毕轨为司隶校尉。晏等依势用事，附会者升进，违忤者罢退，内外望风，莫敢忤旨。
现代文：曹爽让吏部尚书卢毓为仆射，而让何晏取而代之。任命邓、丁谧担任尚书，毕轨担任司隶校尉，何晏等依仗曹爽势力用事，迎合的人升官进职，违抗的人罢黜斥退，朝廷内外都看风向行事，不敢违抗他们的意旨。
English: Cao Shuang made the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Lu Wei, a subordinate, and let He Xuan take his place. He appointed Deng and Ding Wei as the head of the personnel department, and He Xuan as the first lieutenant of the subordinate department. He Xuan and others relied on Cao Shuang's power to do things. Those who catered to them were promoted to higher posts, and those who resisted were dismissed. Both inside and outside the imperial court saw the wind direction and did not dare to defy their will.

古文：黄门侍郎傅嘏谓爽弟羲曰： 何平叔外静而内躁，銛巧好利，不念务本，吾恐必先惑子兄弟，仁人将远而朝政废矣！ 
现代文：黄门侍郎傅嘏对曹爽的兄弟曹羲说： 何晏外表文静而内心浮躁，巧取好利，不求务本，我恐怕他一定先诱惑你们兄弟，仁人志士将远远离去，而朝政将要荒废了。 
English: Huangmen waiter Fu Yao said to Cao Shuang's brother Cao Yao: "He is calm on the outside but impetuous on the inside. He takes advantage of others and does not care about the bottom line. I'm afraid he will tempt your brothers first. People with noble ideals will be far away, and the government will be in ruins."

古文：晏等遂与嘏不平，因微事免嘏官。
现代文：何晏等于是对傅嘏心怀不满，因细微小事免去他的官职。
English: What is tantamount to harboring dissatisfaction with Fu Xuan and dismissing him from his official post for minor matters.

古文：又出卢毓为廷尉，毕轨又枉奏毓免官，众论多讼之，乃复以为光禄勋。
现代文：又让卢毓从尚书省出来任为廷尉，但毕轨又上奏诬诌，卢毓被免官，舆论多为卢毓辩冤，才又任命他为光禄勋。
English: He also allowed Lu Xun to be appointed as a courtier from Shangshu Province, but after a while, he was accused of malfeasance, Lu Xun was dismissed, and the public opinion was mostly for Lu Xun to defend his wrongdoings, before he was appointed as a Guanglu Hon.

古文：孙礼亮直不挠，爽心不便，出为扬州刺史。
现代文：孙礼耿直不屈，曹爽感到不利，就让孙礼出京担任扬州刺史。
English: Sun Li was unyielding, and Cao Shuang felt unfavorable, so he let Sun Li go to Beijing to serve as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：三月，以征东将军满宠为太尉。
现代文：三月，任命征东将军满宠担任太尉。
English: In March, he was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：夏，四月，吴督军使者羊道击辽东守将，俘人民而去。
现代文：夏季，四月，吴国督军使者羊率军攻击辽东守将，劫掠当地百姓而归。
English: In the summer, in April, the emissary of the Wu Governor's army, Yang, led an army to attack the Liaodong governor, plundered the local people and returned.

古文：汉蒋琬为大司马，东曹掾犍为杨戏，素性简略，琬与言论，时不应答。
现代文：蜀国蒋琬担任大司马，东曹掾犍为人杨戏，平素性情简慢，言语不多，蒋琬与他谈话，时时不作回答。
English: Chiang Kai-shek of Shu served as the chief steward, and Dong Cao Pi was the leading actor. He was simple and slow, and did not speak much. When Chiang Kai-shek talked to him, he always did not answer.

古文：或谓琬曰： 公与戏语而不应，其慢甚矣！ 
现代文：有人对蒋琬说： 您与杨戏谈话他竟不回答，太怠慢了。 
English: Someone said to Chiang Kai-shek: When you were talking to Yang Xue, he didn't answer, he was too negligent.

古文：琬曰： 人心不同，各如其面，面从后言，古人所诫。
现代文：蒋琬说： 人的心意不同，就像各人的面孔不同一样，当面顺从，背后议论，是古人所警诫的。
English: Jiang Wei said: People's minds are different, just as people's faces are different. The ancients warned that people should obey in front of others and talk behind their backs.

古文：戏欲赞吾是邪，则非其本心；欲反吾言，则显吾之非，是以默然，是戏之快也。 
现代文：杨戏想要赞同我对，但不是他的本意；想要反对我的话，就显出我的不对，所以沉默不语，这是杨戏表里一致的地方。 
English: Yang Xiu wants to agree with me, but it is not his intention; if he wants to oppose me, it will show that I am wrong, so he is silent. This is a consistent place in Yang Xiu's table.

古文：又督农杨敏尝毁琬曰： 作事愦愦，诚不及前人。 
现代文：另外，督农场敏曾经毁谤蒋琬说： 办事糊涂，实在不如前任。 
English: In addition, the superintendent of the farm, Min, once slandered Chiang Kai-shek, saying, "He does things in a muddled way and is really not as good as his predecessor."

古文：或以白琬，主者请推治敏，琬曰： 吾实不如前人，无可推也。 
现代文：有人把话告诉蒋琬，主事官请求追查惩治杨敏，蒋琬说： 我确实不如前任，没有什么要追查的。 
English: Someone told Jiang Yu, the responsible official, about this and asked him to investigate Yang Min's misconduct. Jiang Yu said, "I'm really not as good as my predecessors, there's no need to investigate."

古文：主者乞问其愦愦之状，琬曰： 苟其不如，则事不理，事不理，则愦愦矣。 
现代文：主事官请他说说糊涂表现在什么地方，蒋琬说： 既然不如前任，事情就不应该处理，事情不应该处理，就是糊涂了。 
English: The chief officer asked him to say where the confusion manifested itself, Jiang Wei said: Since it is not as good as the predecessor, the matter should not be dealt with, the matter should not be dealt with, it is confused.

古文：后敏坐事系狱，众人犹惧其必死，琬心无适莫，敏得免重罪。
现代文：后来，杨敏因犯事入狱，众人还担心他必被处死，蒋琬对他不抱成见，杨敏得以免治重罪。
English: Later, Yang Min was jailed for the crime, and many people feared that he would be executed. Jiang Wei did not hold any prejudice against him, and Yang Min was able to avoid punishment for the serious crime.

古文：秋，七月，帝始亲临朝。
现代文：秋季，七月，魏帝开始亲临朝政。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Wei began to attend the court in person.

古文：八月，大赦。
现代文：八月，大赦天下。
English: In August, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：冬，十月，吴太常潘濬卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，吴国太常潘浚去世。
English: In the winter, in October, the Empress Dowager Panjun of Wu passed away.

古文：吴主以镇南将军吕岱代濬，与陆逊共领荆州文书。
现代文：吴王任命镇南将军吕岱接替潘浚，与陆逊共管荆州文书。
English: The king of Wu appointed the Zhenan general Lv Ying to succeed Pan Jun, and jointly administered the Jingzhou Instrument with Lu Xun.

古文：岱时年已八十，体素精勤，躬亲王事，与逊同心协规，有善相让，南士称之。
现代文：吕岱时年已经八十，身体一直很健康，为官专心勤奋，亲自处理政事，与陆逊同心协力，事情办好时两人互相推让，南方人士对他们非常称道。
English: Lv Ying was already 80 years old at the time. He had always been in good health. He was dedicated and diligent in his work as an official. He handled political affairs personally and worked together with Lu Xun. When things were done well, the two pushed each other. People in the south highly praised them.

古文：十二月，吴将廖式杀临贺太守严纲等，自称平南将军，攻零陵、桂阳，摇动交州诸郡，众数万人，吕岱自表辄行，星夜兼路，吴主遣使追拜交州牧，及遣诸将唐咨等络绎相继，攻讨一年，破之，斩式及其支党，郡县悉平。
现代文：十二月，吴将廖式杀临贺郡太守严纲等，自称平南将军，攻陷零陵、桂阳，煽动交州各郡，聚众数万人。吕岱上表后立即前往平乱，连夜兼程，吴王派遣使节在后追赶，任命吕岱为交州牧，并派遣将领唐咨等率兵增援，前后相继，讨伐攻打了一年，终于平息叛乱，杀了廖式及其党羽，各郡县全部平定。
English: In December, Wu sent Liao Shi to kill Lin He County's grand marshal Yan Gang and others, claiming to be the general of Pingnan, and invaded the counties of Luling and Guiyang, inciting the counties of Jiaozhou to gather tens of thousands of people. Lv Shi immediately went to quell the turmoil after the table was raised, and traveled overnight. The king of Wu sent envoys to catch up, appointed Lv Shi as the pastor of Jiaozhou, and sent generals such as Tang Zhe to lead reinforcements. They went back and forth, fighting and fighting for a year, and finally quelled the rebellion, killed Liao Shi and his

古文：岱复还武昌。
现代文：吕岱又返回武昌。
English: Lv Ying returned to Wuchang.

古文：吴都乡侯周胤将兵千人屯公安，有罪，徙庐陵；诸葛瑾、步骘为之请。
现代文：吴国都乡侯周胤率兵一千人驻防公安县，犯了罪，被放逐到庐陵。诸葛瑾、步骘为他求情。
English: Wuzhongdu Township marquis Zhou Yan led a thousand soldiers to garrison the public security county, committed a crime, and was banished to Fuling. Zhuge Yao and Bu Yao pleaded for him.

古文：吴主曰： 昔胤年少，初无功劳，横受精兵，爵以侯将，盖念公瑾以及于胤也。
现代文：吴王说： 以前周胤年幼，开始并无功劳，平白地领受精兵，封以侯爵，全都是思念周瑜才对他宠爱的。
English: King Wu said, "Previously, Zhou Yintao was young and had no merit at the beginning. He received soldiers and marquesses for nothing. It was only because he missed Zhou Yu that he loved him.

古文：而胤恃此，酗淫自恣，前后告谕，曾无悛改。
现代文：但周胤依仗恩宠，酗酒荒淫，恣意放纵，前后多次告诫，没有改悔。
English: But Zhou Ying, relying on the grace, drunkenness, debauchery, wanton indulgence, repeatedly admonished, did not repent.

古文：孤于公瑾，义犹二君，乐胤成就，岂有已哉！
现代文：我对周瑜的情义同你们二位一样，乐于看到周胤有所成就，岂有终止？
English: My feelings for Zhou Yu are the same as you two, I am happy to see Zhou Yins achievements, will there be an end?

古文：迫胤罪恶，未宜便还，且欲苦之，使自知耳。
现代文：可是迫于周胤罪恶太重，不应该现在让他回来，我还想让他尝点苦头，使他能自己了解自己。
English: In view of the fact that Zhou Yin's crimes are too serious, it is not appropriate to immediately restore his title, and he should also be made to suffer some hardships to make him understand the past.

古文：以公瑾之子，而二君在中间，苟使能改，亦何患乎！ 
现代文：就凭他是周瑜的儿子，又有你们二位在中间，假如他能改正，还有什么担忧呢？ 
English: As the son of a public official, and with you two making excuses, what is there to worry about, if it can be changed?

古文：瑜兄子偏将军峻卒，全琮请使峻子护领其兵。
现代文：周瑜的侄子偏将军周峻去世，全琮请求让周峻的儿子周护接领周峻部队。
English: Zhou Yu's nephew, General Zhou Jun, died, and Quanzhang requested that Zhou Jun's son, Zhou Jun, take over Zhou Jun's army.

古文：吴主曰： 昔走曹操，拓有荆州，皆是公瑾，常不忘之。
现代文：吴王说： 从前击败曹操、吞并荆州，全是周瑜的功劳，我常记不忘。
English: King Wu said, "The defeat of Cao Cao and the annexation of Jingzhou in the past were all the work of Zhou Yu. I will never forget it.

古文：初闻峻亡，仍欲用护。
现代文：起初听说周峻去世，便打算任用周护。
English: At first, when he heard that Zhou Jun had passed away, he planned to appoint Zhou You.

古文：闻护性行危险，用之适为作祸，故更止之。
现代文：后听说周护性情凶狠，任用他恰恰是让他去闯祸，所以改变了主意。
English: Later, he heard that Zhou Guo had a ferocious temper, and his appointment was precisely to let him get into trouble, so he changed his mind.

古文：孤念公瑾，岂有已哉！ 
现代文：我思念周瑜，岂有终止！ 
English: I miss Zhou Yu, is there no end!

古文：十二月，诏复以建寅之月为正。
现代文：十二月，魏帝下诏恢复以建寅之月为正月。
English: In December, Emperor Wei issued an edict restoring the month of Jianyin as the first month of the year.

古文：邵陵厉公上
现代文：魏邵陵厉公正始元年
English: Wei Shaolingli in the first year of justice

古文：烈祖明皇帝下正始元年春，旱。
现代文：春季，发生旱灾。
English: In the spring, there is a drought.

古文：越巂蛮夷数叛汉，杀太守，是后太守不敢之郡，寄治安定县，去郡八县馀里。
现代文：蜀国越郡蛮夷常有叛乱，杀死太守，以至后来的太守不敢到郡治中就职，而在安定县寄住治事，距郡治八百余里。
English: The barbarians in Yue County of Shu often rebelled and killed the governor, so that the later governor did not dare to take office in the county government, but stayed in Anding County to govern, more than 800 miles away from the county government.

古文：汉主以巴西张嶷为越巂太守，嶷招慰新附，诛讨强猾，蛮夷畏服，郡界悉平，复还旧治。
现代文：汉后主任命巴西人张嶷担任越太守，张嶷招降安抚新归附的夷人，征讨诛杀强悍狡黠的夷人，各部落于是敬畏顺服，郡内全部平定，郡府又迁回原址。
English: The emperor of the Han Dynasty appointed the Brazilian Zhang Ye as the governor of Yue; Zhang Ye tried to appease the newly annexed barbarians by persuading them to surrender, and fought and killed the strong and cunning barbarians. As a result, all tribes feared and obeyed, the county was completely pacified, and the county seat was moved back to its original location.

古文：冬，吴饥。
现代文：冬季，吴国发生饥荒。
English: In the winter, famine broke out in Wu.

古文：烈祖明皇帝下正始二年
现代文：正始二年
English: Two years from now

古文：春，吴人将伐魏。
现代文：春季，吴国将要讨伐魏。
English: In the spring, the State of Wu will launch a campaign against Wei.

古文：零陵太守殷札言于吴主曰： 今天弃曹氏，丧诛累见，虎争之际而幼童涖事。
现代文：零陵太守殷札对吴王说： 如今上天废弃曹氏，丧事凶杀不断出现。当此猛虎争斗之际，而让一个孩子临政。
English: The guardian of the tomb, Yin Zha, said to King Wu, "Nowadays, God has abandoned the Cao clan, and the deaths and murders continue to occur. On the occasion of this fierce tiger fight, a child is put in charge of the government.

古文：陛下身自御戎，取乱侮亡，宜涤荆、扬之地，举强羸之数，使强者执戟，羸者转运。西命益州，军于陇右，授诸葛瑾、硃然大众，直指襄阳，陆逊、硃桓别征寿春，大驾入淮阳，历青、徐。
现代文：陛下应当亲自统率大军，夺取乱国，征服衰世，尽出荆州、扬州的人力、物力，调查丁壮和老弱的人数，让丁壮执戟上阵，老弱转运物资；在西方让蜀汉在陇右驻屯；命诸葛瑾、朱然率领大军直指襄阳；陆逊、朱桓另外出征寿春；陛下御驾进军淮河以北，进攻青州、徐州。
English: His Majesty should personally lead a large army, seize the chaotic country, conquer the decline of the world, make full use of the manpower and material resources of Jingzhou and Yangzhou, investigate the number of Ding Zhuang and the old and weak, let Ding Zhuang go into battle, and let the old and weak transfer materials; in the west, let Shu Han stay in Shujiu; command Zhu Gejun and Zhu Ran to lead the army straight to Xiangyang; Lu Xun and Zhu Huan will also go to Shuchun; His Majesty will drive into the north of the Huaihe River and attack Qingzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：襄阳、寿春，困于受敌，长安以西，务御蜀军，许、洛之众，势必分离，掎角并进，民必内应。
现代文：襄阳、寿春被我们围困，长安以西要全力防御蜀军，许昌、洛阳的军队势力要分散，我们多方牵制，同时进军，民众一定响应。
English: Xiangyang and Shuchun are besieged by us. To the west of Chang'an, we should make every effort to defend the Shu army. The military forces of Xu Chang and Luoyang should be dispersed. We should restrain them from many sides and march in at the same time. The people will definitely respond.

古文：将帅对向，或失便宜，一军败绩，则三军离心。
现代文：到时将帅交战，只要有一处指挥失当，一军战败，则三军军心涣散。
English: At that time, the generals will fight, as long as there is a command failure and one army is defeated, the three armies will be scattered.

古文：便当秣马脂车，陵蹈城邑，乘胜逐北，以定华夏。
现代文：我们正好备马整车，攻陷城邑，乘胜追击，平定华夏。
English: We just prepared a horse-drawn carriage, captured the city, pursued the victory, and subdued Huaxia.

古文：若不悉军动众，循前轻举，则不足大用，易于屡退，民疲威消，时往力竭，非上策也。 
现代文：如果我们不出动全部大军，只是象以前一样出动少量部队，则不足以完成大事，容易屡屡败退，民众疲沓，军威消失，时间过去，力量耗竭。这不是上策。 
English: If we do not move the whole army, but only move a small number of troops as before, it is not enough to accomplish great things, it is easy to repeatedly lose, the people are tired, the military prestige disappears, the time has passed, and the strength is exhausted. This is not the best policy.

古文：吴主不能用。
现代文：吴王没有接受。
English: Wu Wang did not accept.

古文：夏，四月，吴全琮略淮南，决芍陂，诸葛恪攻六安，硃然围樊，诸葛瑾攻柤中。
现代文：夏季，四月，吴国全琮进击淮南，掘开芍陂堤岸，诸葛恪攻打六安，朱然围困樊城，诸葛瑾攻打中。
English: In the summer, in April, Wuzhong Quanzhang invaded Huainan, dug up the dike, Zhuge Ke attacked Lu'an, Zhu Ran besieged Shicheng, and Zhuge Ke was in the middle of the attack.

古文：征东将军王凌、扬州刺史孙礼与全琮战于芍陂，琮败走。
现代文：魏征东将军王凌、扬州刺史孙礼与全琮在芍陂交战，全琮败逃。
English: The Wei general Wang Ling and the Yangzhou general Zhishisunli fought against Quanzhang in the Battle of Quanzhang, and Quanzhang was defeated and fled.

古文：荆州刺史胡质以轻兵救樊，或曰： 贼盛，不可迫。 
现代文：荆州刺史胡质派出轻装部队救援樊城，有人说： 敌人强盛，不能靠近。 
English: Jingzhou Jishi Hu Jian dispatched light-armored troops to rescue Lucheng. Some people said: The enemy is strong and cannot be approached.

古文：质曰： 樊城卑兵少，故当进军为之外援，不然，危矣。 
现代文：胡质说： 樊城城墙低矮，守军又少，所以应当强行进军作为外援，不然，樊城就危险了。 
English: Hu Qian said: The city wall of Handan is low and the defenders are few. Therefore, it is necessary to forcibly march in as foreign aid. Otherwise, Handan will be in danger.

古文：遂勒兵临围，城中乃安。
现代文：于是率军逼近吴国围城部队，城中军心始安。
English: He and his soldiers approached the heavy siege, and only settled down after the city was informed.

古文：五月，吴太子登卒。
现代文：五月，吴国太子孙登去世。
English: In May, Sun Deng, the crown prince of Wu, passed away.

古文：吴兵犹在荆州，太傅懿曰： 柤中民夷十万，隔在水南，流离无主，樊城被攻，历月不解，此危事也，请自讨之。 
现代文：吴国部队仍留在荆州，太傅司马懿说： 中汉民和夷人有十万之多，隔在沔水南岸，流离逃亡，无家可归，樊城被围，已过一个多月还没解除，这是危急之势，请派我亲自前去征讨。 
English: The troops of the State of Wu still remained in Jingzhou, and Grand Master Sima Yu said: There are as many as one hundred thousand Chinese, Han, and Yi people, separated on the south bank of Surabaya, displaced and homeless, and the siege of Surabaya has not been lifted for more than a month. This is a critical situation. Please send me personally to collect.

古文：六月，太傅懿督诸军救樊；吴军闻之，夜遁。
现代文：六月，太傅司马懿率领各军救援樊城，吴军听到消息后，连夜遁逃。
English: In June, Grand Master Sima Yu led the army to rescue Handan City. After hearing the news, the Wu army fled overnight.

古文：追至三州口，大获而还。
现代文：司马懿率军追到三州口，获大量物资和俘虏而归。
English: Sima Qian led the army to the Sanshou entrance, and returned with a large amount of supplies and prisoners.

古文：闰月，吴大将军诸葛瑾卒。
现代文：闰五月，吴国大将军诸葛瑾去世。
English: In late May, Zhuge Liang, the general of Wu Guoda University, passed away.

古文：瑾长子恪先已封侯，吴主以恪弟融袭爵，摄兵业，驻公安。
现代文：诸葛瑾的长子诸葛恪先前已被封侯，吴王让诸葛恪弟弟诸葛融承袭父亲的爵位，统率父亲的部队，驻扎在公安县。
English: Zhuge Yao's eldest son Zhuge Jia had already been given the title of prince. King Wu allowed Zhuge Jia's younger brother Zhuge Rong to inherit his father's title, command his father's troops, and be stationed in the public security county.

古文：汉大司马蒋琬以诸葛亮数出秦川，道险，运粮难，卒无成功。乃多作舟船，欲乘汉、沔东下，袭魏兴、上庸。
现代文：蜀国大司马蒋琬认为诸葛亮屡次出兵秦川，由于道路险阻，转运粮食困难，最终也没有成功，于是大量制造船舰，打算利用汉水、沔水顺流东下，袭击魏兴、上庸。
English: The Grand Master of Shu, Ma Jiangqi, believed that Zhuge Liang repeatedly sent troops to the Qin River, but ultimately did not succeed due to road hazards and difficulties in transporting grain. Therefore, he made a large number of ships, intending to use Han Water and Surabaya Water to go eastward along the river, and attack Wei Xing and Shangyong.

古文：会旧疾连动，未时得行。
现代文：正逢蒋琬旧病连续发作，没能及时配合吴国行动。
English: It coincided with a series of attacks of his old illness, and he was not able to carry it out in time.

古文：汉人咸以为事有不捷，还路甚难，非长策也，汉主遣尚书令费祎、中监军姜维等喻指。
现代文：大家都认为这样一旦不能取胜，撤退极其困难，不是上策。汉后主派遣尚书令费、中监军姜维等向蒋琬说明大家意见。
English: Everyone agreed that if victory could not be won in this way, it would be extremely difficult to retreat, and it was not the best strategy. The Emperor of Han dispatched Shang Shufu, Jiang Wei, and others to explain their opinions to Chiang Kai-shek.

古文：琬乃上言： 今魏跨带九州，根蒂滋蔓，平除未易。
现代文：蒋琬于是上书说： 如今魏的势力已横跨九州，蒂蔓延成长，铲除不易。
English: Chiang Kai-shek then wrote: "Nowadays, Wei's influence has spread across Kyushu. It is spreading and growing, and it is not easy to eradicate.

古文：若东西并力，首尾掎角，虽未能速得如志，且当分裂蚕食，先摧其支党。
现代文：如果吴国和西蜀齐心合力，首尾夹击，虽然不能迅速实现宏图大志，暂且也可分割其力量，蚕食其国土，摧垮其边陲。
English: If the two countries of Wu and Shu work together to form a cornered situation, although they cannot quickly achieve the goal of success, they can still erode Wei's division and destroy his party.

古文：然吴期二三，连不克果。
现代文：然而与吴国二三次约定同时进军，都未能实现。
English: However, the two or three simultaneous marches agreed upon with Wu failed to materialize.

古文：辄与费祎等议，以凉州胡塞之要，进退有资，且羌、胡乃心思汉如渴，宜以姜维为凉州刺史。
现代文：我与费等商议，认为凉州是胡人边塞要地，进退都有依赖，而且当地羌人、胡人都如饥似渴地想着归顺我朝，最好让姜维担任凉州刺史。
English: I discussed with Fei et al. and thought that Liangzhou is the Hu people's border fortress, and both advance and retreat are dependent on it. Moreover, the local Xiong people and Hu people are eager to submit to our dynasty. It is best to let Jiang Wei serve as Liangzhou's chief historian.

古文：若维征行，御制河右，臣当帅军为维镇继。
现代文：如果姜维征讨能够控制河西，我将率军继进，作他的后援。
English: If Jiang Wei's campaign is able to control Hexi, I will lead the army to follow and support him.

古文：今涪水陆四通，惟急是应，若东北有虞，赴之不难，请徙屯涪。 
现代文：如今涪县水路陆路四通八达，足以应付紧急情况，如果东方、西方发生危险，前去救援都不困难，请把大本营迁到涪县驻屯。 
English: Nowadays, the waterways and land routes of Handan County are well connected, which is enough to cope with emergencies. If there is danger in the east or west, it is not difficult to go to the rescue, please move the base camp to the garrison of Handan County.

古文：汉主从之。
现代文：汉后主采纳了这一建议。
English: The empress dowager of the Han Dynasty accepted this suggestion.

古文：朝廷欲广田畜谷于扬、豫之间，使尚书郎汝南邓艾行陈、项已东至寿春。艾以为： 昔太祖破黄巾，因为屯田，积谷许都以制四方。
现代文：魏打算在扬州、豫州之间开荒垦田，积蓄粮谷，令尚书郎汝南人邓艾到陈县、项县以东至寿春一带巡视，邓艾认为： 从前太祖大破黄巾施行屯田，在许都囤积粮谷用来制胜四方。
English: Wei planned to open barren ploughed fields between Yangzhou and Yuzhou to accumulate grain, and ordered Shang Shulang, a man from Yunnan, Deng Ai, to inspect the area from Chen County and Xiang County east to Shuchun. Deng Ai believed that: In the past, the Great Ancestor broke the yellow scarf to carry out the occupation of fields, and hoarded grain in Xudu to win the four directions.

古文：今三隅已定，事在淮南，每大军出征，运兵过半，功费巨亿。
现代文：如今三边都已平定，军事行动集中在淮河以南，每次大军出征，转运军粮的兵士占了一半，耗费多亿。
English: Now that all three sides have been pacified, military operations are concentrated south of the Huai River. Every time a large army goes to war, half of the soldiers transporting military food are soldiers, costing more than a billion.

古文：陈、蔡之间，土下田良，可省许昌左右诸稻田，并水东下，令淮北屯二万人，淮南三万人，什二分休，常有四万人且田且守；益开河渠以增溉灌，通漕运。
现代文：陈县、蔡县一带土地平坦肥沃，可以减少许昌附近稻田，把水并入河道向东灌溉，命令淮河以北二万人，淮河以南三万人，十分之二轮流休息，常驻的四万人边屯田边防守。宜多挖河渠增加灌溉，开通漕运。
English: The land around Chen County and Cai County is flat and fertile, which can reduce the number of rice fields near Xuchang. The water can be merged into the river to irrigate to the east. Twenty thousand people north of the Huaihe River and thirty thousand people south of the Huaihe River are ordered to take two-tenths of a turn to rest, and the permanent forty thousand people are on the defensive side of the field. It is advisable to dig more canals to increase irrigation and open rowing transport.

古文：计除众费，岁完五百万斛以为军资，六、七年间，可积三千万斛于淮上，此则十万之众五年食也。
现代文：除去全部开支，总计每年可获五百万斛作为军费。六七年内，可在淮河土地上积蓄二千万斛，这就是十万大军五年的粮食。
English: Excluding all expenses, a total of up to 5 million baht can be obtained each year as military expenses. Within 67 years, 20 million baht can be accumulated on the land of the Huaihe River, which is the five-year grain for the 100,000-strong army.

古文：以此乘吴，无不克矣。 
现代文：以此雄厚基础攻吴，无往而不胜。 
English: With this solid foundation to attack Wu, there is no way but to win.

古文：太傅懿善之。
现代文：太傅司马懿认为妥善。
English: Grandmaster Sima Xi thought it was appropriate.

古文：是岁，始开广漕渠，每东南有事，大兴军众，泛舟而下，达于江、淮，资食有储而无水害。
现代文：这一年，开始扩开漕渠。以后每次东南方出现战事，遂大举出兵，乘舟而下，直抵长江、淮河，军费、粮食都绰绰有余，并且消除了水患。
English: In the same year, the expansion of the canal began. After that, every time there was a war in the southeast, they would send troops in large numbers and go down by boat to the Yangtze River and the Huai River. The military expenses and grain were more than enough, and the flood was eliminated.

古文：管宁卒。
现代文：管宁去世。
English: Guanning passed away.

古文：宁名行高洁，人望之者，邈然若不可及，即之熙熙和易。
现代文：管宁名声极大，行为高洁，是人们仰慕的人。看上去好象不可接近，但与他在一起，却感到和乐平易。
English: Guanning is a man of great renown, of impeccable manners, and of great admiration. He may seem unapproachable, but it is easy to feel at home with him.

古文：能因事导人于善，人无不化服。
现代文：他擅长随事诱导人们行善，人们无不受到感化，由衷敬服。
English: He is good at inducing people to do good, and people are all impressed and sincerely admire him.

古文：及卒，天下知与不知，闻之无不嗟叹。
现代文：到死时，天下不管认识他还是不认识他的，无不哀叹。
English: At the time of his death, no matter whether the world knew him or not, everyone was filled with regret.

古文：烈祖明皇帝下正始三年
现代文：正始三年
English: The first three years

古文：春，正月，汉姜维率偏军自汉中还住涪。
现代文：春季，正月，蜀国姜维率领偏师从汉中回到涪县驻防。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Jiang Wei of Shu led the division from Hanzhong back to the garrison in Jixian.

古文：吴主立其子和为太子，大赦。
现代文：吴王立儿子孙和为太子，大赦天下。
English: Wu Wangli's son, Sun He, became the crown prince and was pardoned by the world.

古文：三月，昌邑景侯满宠卒。
现代文：三月，昌邑景侯满宠去世。
English: In March, Changyi Jinghong Manchong passed away.

古文：秋，七月，乙酉，以领军将军蒋济为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月，乙酉，任命领军将军蒋济担任太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July, the general leading the army, Jiang Ji, was appointed captain.

古文：吴主遣将军聂友、校尉陆凯将兵三万击儋耳、珠崖。
现代文：吴王派遣将军聂友、校尉陆凯率军三万人攻打儋耳、珠崖。
English: King Wu dispatched General Shen You and Captain Lu Kai with an army of 30,000 men to attack the cities of Kunlun and Zhuliang.

古文：八月，吴主封子霸为鲁王。
现代文：八月，吴王封儿子孙霸为鲁王。
English: In August, Sun Ba, the son of Wu Wangfeng, became the King of Lu.

古文：霸，和母弟也，宠爱崇特，与和无殊。
现代文：孙霸是孙和的胞弟，受到特别的宠爱，与孙和没有差别。
English: Sun Ba was Sun He's younger brother, and he was especially loved. There was no difference between him and Sun He.

古文：尚书仆射是仪领鲁王傅，上疏谏曰： 臣窃以为鲁王天挺懿德，兼资文武，当今之宜，宜镇四方，为国籓辅。宣扬德美，广耀威灵，乃国家之良规，海内所瞻望。
现代文：尚书仆射是仪兼任鲁王傅，上书规劝说： 我私下认为鲁王天资卓越，又有美德，文武双全，当今之计应让他镇守四方，作为辅助朝廷的屏藩，宣扬美德，广布威望，才是国家的良策，举国上下的希望。
English: Shangshu's attendant Zhao Jie concurrently served as Lu Wangfu, and wrote a letter to persuade him: I privately believe that Lu Wang is an excellent talent, and has virtue, both literary and military. Today's plan should let him guard the four directions, as an auxiliary of the imperial court of Pinghan, promote virtue, and widely spread prestige. This is the country's good policy, and the hope of the whole country.

古文：书三、四上，吴主不听。
现代文：而且太子和亲王之间，应该有所差别，用以端正上下秩序，显明教化的根本。 
English: Moreover, there should be a difference between the crown prince and the prince, which should be used to rectify the order of the upper and lower ranks, and reveal the fundamentals of education.

古文：烈祖明皇帝下正始四年
现代文：上书三四次，吴王都不理睬。正始四年
English: Three or four times, the king of Wu ignored the petition.

古文：春，正月，帝加元服。
现代文：春季，正月，魏帝行加冠礼。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, the Wei Emperor performed the coronation ceremony.

古文：吴诸葛恪袭六安，掩其人民而去。
现代文：吴国诸葛恪率军袭击六安，劫掠当地百姓而归。
English: Zhuge of the State of Wu led an army to attack Lu'an, plundered the local people and returned home.

古文：夏，四月，立皇后甄氏，大赦。
现代文：夏季，四月，魏立皇后甄氏，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, Wei Li, the Empress of Wei, granted a general amnesty to the whole world.

古文：后，文昭皇后兄俨之孙也。
现代文：甄皇后是文昭皇后兄长甄俨的孙女。
English: Empress Zhen is the granddaughter of Empress Wenzhao's elder brother Zhen Yao.

古文：五月，朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：五月，朔，出现日食，为日全食。
English: In May, New Year's Eve, a solar eclipse occurred, a total solar eclipse.

古文：冬，十月，汉蒋琬自汉中还住涪，疾益甚，以汉中太守王平为前监军、镇北大将军，督汉中。
现代文：冬季，十月，蜀国蒋琬从汉中返回涪县居住，病情更加严重，任命汉中太守王平担任前监军、镇北大将军，督领汉中。
English: In winter, in October, Jiang Wei of Shu returned from Hanzhong to live in Jixian County, and his condition became more serious. He appointed Wang Ping, the governor of Hanzhong, as the former supervisor of the army, the general of Zhenbei, and the leader of Hanzhong.

古文：十一月，汉主以尚书令费祎为大将军、录尚书事。
现代文：十一月，汉后主任命尚书令费担任大将军、录尚书事。
English: In November, the emperor of the Han Dynasty appointed Shang Shulingfei as the general and recorded Shang Shuling's affairs.

古文：吴丞相顾雍卒。
现代文：吴丞相顾雍去世。
English: Wu Zheng's minister Gu Yong passed away.

古文：吴诸葛恪远遣谍人观相径要，欲图寿春。
现代文：吴诸葛恪派遣暗探，观察山川地要，准备攻打寿春。
English: Wu Zhuge Ke dispatched spies to observe the mountains and rivers and prepare to attack Shuchun.

古文：太傅懿将兵入舒，欲以攻恪，吴主徙恪屯于柴桑。
现代文：太傅司马懿率军进入舒县，打算由此进攻诸葛恪。吴王调移诸葛恪在柴桑驻屯。
English: Grandmaster Sima Yu led the army into Shu County, intending to attack Zhuge Keqiao. Wu Wang transferred Zhuge Keqiao to be stationed in Chaisang Luo.

古文：步骘、硃然各上疏于吴主曰： 自蜀还者，咸言蜀欲背盟，与魏交通，多作舟船，缮治城郭。
现代文：步骘、朱然分别上书给吴王说： 从蜀地归来的人，都说蜀国打算背弃盟约，正在大量制作船舰，修缮城池。
English: Bu Qian and Zhu Ran separately wrote to the king of Wu, saying: Those who have returned from Shu have all said that Shu intends to renege on the treaty, and is making a large number of ships and repairing the city.

古文：又，蒋琬守汉中，闻司马懿南向，不出兵乘虚以掎角之，反委汉中，还近成都。
现代文：还有，蒋琬驻守汉中，听说司马懿南下，不但不出兵，乘虚进行夹击，反而放弃汉中，回到成都附近。
English: In addition, Chiang Kai-shek was stationed in Hanzhong, and it was rumored that Sima Qian went to the south, but instead of sending troops and taking advantage of the situation, he gave up Hanzhong and returned to the vicinity of Chengdu.

古文：事已彰灼，无所复疑，宜为之备。 
现代文：事情已经十分明显，无可置疑，应多加戒备。 
English: It's already obvious, there's no need to doubt, and you should be prepared for it.

古文：吴主答曰： 吾待蜀不薄，聘享盟誓，无所负之，何以致此！
现代文：吴王回答说： 我对待蜀国不薄，聘问宴享，结盟明誓，没有辜负他们的地方，怎么能变成这样？
English: King Wu replied, "I have treated the State of Shu fairly, invited them to banquets, made alliances with them, and vowed to live up to their expectations. How could things turn out like this?

古文：司马懿前来入舒，旬日便退。
现代文：司马懿大军前来进入舒县，十日便撤退了。
English: Sima Qian's large army entered Shu County and withdrew on the 10th.

古文：蜀在万里，何知缓急而便出兵乎？
现代文：蜀在万里之外，怎么会知道司马懿用兵是快是慢而就贸然出兵呢？
English: How could Shu, thousands of miles away, know whether Sima Yi would be quick or slow to use troops and then rush to send troops?

古文：昔魏欲入汉川，此间始严，亦未举动，会闻魏还而止，蜀宁可复以此有疑邪！
现代文：从前，魏打算进入汉川，这中间我们也是严阵以待，没有举师动众，随后听到魏已回军才算结束，怎么可以再以此怀疑蜀汉呢？
English: Once upon a time, Wei planned to enter Hanchuan. In the meantime, we also waited in a tight line, did not raise a division to move the crowd, and then heard that Wei had returned to the army before it was over. How can we doubt Shu Han with this?

古文：人言苦不可信，朕为诸君破家保之。 
现代文：传言实在不可信，我愿以家族破败而为诸位担保。 
English: Other people's words cannot be trusted. I will do my best to protect it for you.

古文：征东将军、都督扬、豫诸军事王昶上言： 地有常险，守无常势。
现代文：征东将军及都督扬、豫诸军事王昶上书说： 地势的险阻固定不变，防守的形势却变化无常。
English: The general of the Eastern Expedition and the military governor of Yang and Yuzhu, Wang Qi, wrote: The perilous obstacles of the terrain are fixed and unchanging, but the defensive situation is changeable.

古文：今屯宛去襄阳三百馀里，有急不足相赴。 
现代文：如今驻屯的宛县，距离襄阳三百余里，遇有紧急情况，来不及赴援。 
English: Now stationed in Wan County, more than three hundred miles from Yangyang, in the event of an emergency, it is too late to go to the rescue.

古文：遂徙屯新野。
现代文：于是移驻在新野县。
English: As a result, they moved to Shinno County.

古文：宗室曹冏上书曰： 古之王者，必建同姓以明亲亲，必树异姓以明贤贤。
现代文：皇族曹上书说： 古代帝王，必定任用同姓皇族，以表明亲近亲族，也必定任用异性大臣，以表明尊重贤能。
English: The imperial family Cao Shangshu said: Ancient emperors must appoint imperial family members with the same surname to show their closeness to relatives, and must also appoint ministers of the opposite sex to show respect for virtue.

古文：亲亲之道专用，则其渐也微弱；贤贤之道偏任，则其敝也劫夺。
现代文：只采用亲近亲族的办法治国，随着它的浸蚀，皇权就会渐渐衰弱；只采用尊重贤能的办法治国，随着它的把持，皇权就会被夺取。
English: If the country is governed only by the method of closeness to relatives, the imperial power will gradually weaken as it erodes; if the country is governed only by the method of respect for virtue, the imperial power will be seized as it takes hold.

古文：先圣知其然也，故博求亲疏而并用之，故能保其社稷，历经长久。
现代文：先圣了解这种必然趋势，所以对于皇族和非皇族广泛求取，同时并用，因而能够保有社稷，历时长久。
English: The first saint understood this inevitable trend, so for the royal family and non-royal family, he sought widely and used them at the same time, thus being able to keep the community seal, which lasted for a long time.

古文：今魏尊尊之法虽明，亲亲之道未备，或任而不重，或释而不任。
现代文：如今魏尊重贤能的法律虽已严明，亲近亲族的办法还不完备，或者任而不重用，或者放置不任用。
English: Today, although the law of Wei respecting merit has been made clear, the method of getting close to relatives is still incomplete, or it is left without reuse, or it is left without use.

古文：臣窃惟此，寝不安席，谨撰合所闻，论其成败曰：昔夏、商、周历世数十，而秦二世而亡。
现代文：我私下思虑这些，睡觉都不能安宁，谨对所听到的加以陈述，议论它的成败得失。古代夏、商、周历经数十世代，而秦只传到二世即归灭亡，为什么？
English: I think about these things in private, I can't sleep peacefully, I would like to state what I heard and discuss its success or failure. In ancient times, Xia, Shang and Zhou passed through dozens of generations, while Qin was only passed down to the second generation and then died out. Why?

古文：何则？三代之君与天下共其民，故天下同其忧；秦王独制其民，故倾危而莫救也。
现代文：夏商周三代的君王与各封国共同管理万民，所以出现危险而没人相救。
English: The emperor of the third generation of Xia merchants and the feudal states jointly managed the people, so there was danger and no one to rescue.

古文：秦观周之弊，以为小弱见夺，于是废五等之爵，立郡县之官，内无宗子以自毘辅，外无诸侯以为籓卫，譬犹芟刈股肱，独任胸腹。观者为之寒心，而始皇晏然自以为子孙帝王万世之业也，岂不悖哉！
现代文：秦王朝看到周王朝的衰败，认为是弱小的封国终会被吞夺，于是废除五等爵，建立郡县制，朝廷内没有皇族子弟辅佐，朝廷外没有诸侯屏卫，好象一个人割掉四肢独由胸腹支撑，旁观者为之寒心，可秦始皇还安然自得，认为是为子孙创立了帝王的万世之业，岂不荒谬！
English: The Qin Dynasty saw the decline of the Zhou Dynasty and thought that the small feudal state would eventually be swallowed up. Therefore, it abolished the five-ranked peerage and established the county system. There were no royal children as assistants in the court, and there were no princes outside the court. It was as if a person had cut off his limbs and was supported only by his chest and abdomen. Onlookers were chilled by this. However, the First Emperor of Qin was still at ease, thinking that he had created the emperor's eternal career for his descendants. Isn't that absurd!

古文：故汉祖奋三尺之剑，驱乌集之众，五年之中，遂成帝业。
现代文：所以汉高祖奋起三尺之剑，以乌合之众起兵，五年之中，成就了帝王之业。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gaozu raised his three-feet sword and raised an army with the rabble. In five years, he achieved the cause of the emperor.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：伐深根者难为功，摧枯朽者易为力，理势然也。
现代文：因为拔除盘根错节难以成功，摧枯拉朽容易得力，这是事理之必然。
English: Because it is difficult to succeed in removing the tangled roots and knots, it is easy to succeed in destroying the withering and pulling the rotten, which is the inevitable of the matter.

古文：汉监秦之失，封殖子弟；及诸吕擅权，图危刘氏，而天下所以不倾动者，徒以诸侯强大，盘石胶固故也。
现代文：汉朝看到秦朝的失误，于是大封皇族子弟。等到诸吕擅权，危害刘氏皇族，而天下却没有发生动摇，其原因仅仅在于诸侯力量强大，有如粘在一起的磐石一样稳固。
English: The Han Dynasty saw the mistakes of the Qin Dynasty, so it gave the imperial family a large amount of power. When Zhu Lü assumed power and endangered the Liu royal family, the world did not shake, and the reason for this was simply that the princes were powerful and as solid as a rock.

古文：然高祖封建，地过古制，故贾谊以为欲天下之治安，莫若众建诸侯而少其力；文帝不从。
现代文：然而汉高祖分封诸侯建立藩国，封地面积超过古代规定，所以贾谊认为要想天下得到治理安定，不如广建诸侯国而减少诸侯势力，汉文帝没有采纳。
English: However, the founder of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gao, divided the fiefs among the princes to establish a feudal state, and the area of the fief exceeded the ancient regulations. Therefore, Jia Yi thought that if the world wanted to be governed and stabilized, it would be better to build a wide range of princes and reduce the power of the princes. Emperor Hanwen did not adopt this idea.

古文：至于孝景，猥用晁错之计，削黜诸侯，遂有七国之患。
现代文：到了汉景帝，由于采用晁错的计策，削减封国领土，于是爆发了七国之乱。
English: When Emperor Han Jing came to power, the Seven Kingdoms War broke out as a result of his erroneous policy of reducing the territory under his control.

古文：盖兆发高帝，衅钟文、景，由宽之过制，急之不渐故也。
现代文：征兆出现在汉高帝时，祸患聚集于文帝、景帝之时，是由于开始宽厚得超过规定，而后来削减时又太急切的缘故。
English: When the signs appeared in the time of Emperor Han Gao, and the disasters gathered in the time of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, it was due to the fact that the beginning was more generous than the regulations, and later it was too urgent to cut back.

古文：所谓 末大必折，尾大难掉 ，尾同于体，犹或不从，况乎非体之尾，其可掉哉！
现代文：所谓： 末大必折，尾大难掉 ，尾巴与身子同属一体，有时也不顺从，便何况不是属于一体的尾巴，岂能摆得动？
English: The so-called: the tail must be folded, the tail is difficult to get off, the tail and the body are one and the same, sometimes it does not obey, let alone the tail that does not belong to one, can it swing?

古文：武帝从主父之策，下推恩之令，自是之后，遂以陵夷，子孙微弱，衣食租税，不预政事。
现代文：汉武帝采纳主父偃的计策，颁布让诸侯自己可以分封子弟的推恩令，自此以后，封国力量由此衰败，子孙微弱，除了收取租税维持衣食生活外，不能参予国政。
English: Emperor Hanwu adopted his father's strategy and issued an edict allowing the lords to appoint their own sons and daughters as vassals. From then on, the power of the vassal state waned, and the sons and daughters were weak, unable to participate in national politics except for collecting taxes to maintain their food and clothing.

古文：至于哀、平，王氏秉权，假周公之事而为田常之乱，宗室王侯，或乃为之符命，颂莽恩德，岂不哀哉！
现代文：到了哀帝、平帝时，王莽掌权，借着周公之事，重演田常之乱，封国诸侯中，有的甚至制造天赐祥瑞，歌颂王莽恩德，岂不令人悲哀？
English: When the time came to mourn Emperor Xian and Emperor Ping, Wang Mang was in power. Through the Zhou Gong Incident, the Tian Chang Rebellion was reenacted. Among the feudal lords, some even created heaven-sent auspiciousness and praised Wang Mang's benevolence. Isn't that sad?

古文：由斯言之，非宗子独忠孝于惠、文之间而叛逆于哀、平之际也，徒权轻势弱，不能有定耳。
现代文：由此说来，并不是皇族子弟偏偏在惠帝、文帝之际忠孝双全，而在哀帝、平帝之际就变成叛逆，是权力轻微，势力薄弱，不能平定祸乱而已。
English: From this, it is not that the sons of the imperial family are loyal and filial at the time of Emperor Hui and Emperor Wen, but that they become rebellious at the time of Emperor Wei and Emperor Ping. It is that their power is slight and their influence is weak, and they are unable to quell the calamity.

古文：赖光武皇帝挺不世之姿，擒王莽于已成，绍汉嗣于既绝，斯岂非宗子之力也！
现代文：幸赖光武皇帝发扬不世的英姿，在王莽做了皇帝后仍能将他擒获，使汉代皇族子嗣在将要灭绝之时得以延续，岂不是皇族子弟的力量！
English: Emperor Guangwu was fortunate to carry forward his immortal heroic stature. After Wang Mang became emperor, he was still able to capture him, so that the Han dynasty royal children could continue when they were about to be extinct. Isn't that the power of the royal children!

古文：而曾不监秦之失策，袭周之旧制，至于桓、灵，阉宦用事，郡孤立于上，臣弄权于下；由是天下鼎沸，奸宄并争，宗庙焚为灰烬，宫室变为榛薮。太祖皇帝龙飞凤翔，扫除凶逆。大魏之兴，于今二十有四年矣。
现代文：可是以后，又不能借鉴秦王朝的教训，不知道承袭周王朝的旧制，到了汉桓帝、汉灵帝时，宦官执政，君王孤立于上，大臣弄权于下，于是天下大乱，奸人并争，宗庙被烧成灰烬，宫室变成荒草树丛。 太祖皇帝龙飞凤翔，扫除凶逆，大魏兴起，至今已有二十四年了。
English: Later, however, they failed to learn from the lessons of the Qin Dynasty and did not know how to inherit the old system of the Zhou Dynasty. When Emperor Han Huan and Emperor Han Ling came to power, the eunuchs ruled, the king was isolated at the top, and the ministers wielded power at the bottom. As a result, there was great turmoil in the world, with treachery and strife, the ancestral temple was burned to ashes, and the palace became a thicket of weeds and trees. It has been twenty-four years since the great-grandfather Emperor Long Fei Feng Xiang swept away the evil and the Great Wei Dynasty arose.

古文：观五代之存亡而不用其长策，睹前车之倾覆而不改于辙迹。
现代文：观察五代的存亡原因，而不采用他们的治国良策；目睹前车之倾覆，却不改变车道。
English: Observe the reasons for the survival of the five generations, but do not adopt their good governance policies; witness the overturn of the front car, but do not change the lane.

古文：子弟王空虚之地，君有不使之民；宗室窜于闾阎，不闻邦国之政；权均匹夫，势齐凡庶。
现代文：皇家子弟空有虚名而实无封地，封国之君空有百姓而不能役使；皇族成员迁居在大街小巷，不知道国家大政方针；权力如一介小民，势力同寻常百姓。
English: The royal children have empty names but no real fiefdoms, the princes of the fiefs have empty people but cannot serve them; members of the royal family move to the streets and do not know the country's major policies; power is like a small people, and power is like ordinary people.

古文：内无深根不拔之固，外无盘石宗盟之助，非所以安社稷，为万世之业也。
现代文：内无盘根错节的稳固，外无磐石般诸侯结盟相助，这是不能够使国家安定，成就万世大业的。
English: It is not possible to make the country stable and achieve the great cause of the world without the solidity of the intertwined roots inside and the assistance of the alliance of the princes like a rock outside.

古文：且今之州牧、郡守，古之方伯、诸侯，皆跨有千里之土，兼军武之任，或比国数人，或兄弟并据；而宗室子弟曾无一人间厕其间，与相维制，非所以强干弱枝，备万一之虞也。
现代文：况且现在的州牧、郡守，与古代的方伯、诸侯一样，都拥有千里之地，身兼军队要职，有的一家数人担任高官，有的兄弟同时占据要职；而皇族子弟竟无一人跻身于其间，与他们互相牵制，这不是使主干强大、枝梢微弱、防备万一的办法。
English: Moreover, today's provincial governors and county governors, like the ancient governors and princes, have thousands of miles of land, and they also hold important military positions. Some families have several high-ranking officials, and some brothers hold important positions at the same time. However, none of the royal children are among them, and they control each other. This is not a way to make the main stem strong, the branches weak, and to be prepared in case of emergency.

古文：今之用贤，或超为名都之主，或为偏师之帅；而宗室有文者必限小县之宰，有武者必致百人之上，非所以劝进贤能、褒异宗室之礼也。
现代文：如今所谓任用贤能，或提拔到著名城市为长，或担任一军统帅；可是皇族子弟有文才的，必只限于当一个小县县宰，有武略的，必只限于当一个只管百人的小官，这不是奖励进取，任用贤能，褒奖优待皇族子弟的礼法。
English: Nowadays, the so-called appointment of merit, or promotion to a famous city as the leader, or serving as the commander of an army; but the royal children with literary talent, must be limited to being the governor of a small county, and those with military strategy, must be limited to being a minor official in charge of a hundred people. This is not a reward for enterprise, appointment of merit, reward and preferential treatment of the royal children.

古文：语曰： 百足之虫，至死不僵 ，以其扶之者众也。
现代文：俗语说 百足之虫，至死不本僵 ，这是因为扶持它身体的脚众多的缘故。
English: As the saying goes, a hundred-legged insect is never stiff until it dies, because of the many legs that support its body.

古文：此言虽小，可以譬大。
现代文：这句话说的虽是小虫，但可以比喻国家大事。
English: Although this sentence is a small insect, it can be likened to a national event.

古文：是以圣王安不忘危，存不忘亡，故天下有变而无倾危之患矣。 
现代文：所以，圣明的君王在安定时不忘记危乱，存时不忘记亡，即使天下发生变故，也不会有覆灭的灾难了。 
English: Therefore, the kings of the holy light do not forget the danger when they are stable, and do not forget the death when they exist. Even if there is a change in the world, there will be no catastrophe.

古文：冏冀以此论感寤曹爽，爽不能用。
现代文：曹希望以这番议论使曹爽有所感动而省悟，曹爽不采纳。
English: Cao hoped that this discussion would move Cao Shuang and make him reflect, but Cao Shuang did not accept it.

古文：烈祖明皇帝下正始五年
现代文：正始五年
English: The First Five Years

古文：春，正月，吴主以上大将军陆逊为丞相，其州牧、都护、领武昌事如故。
现代文：春季，正月，吴王任命上大将军陆逊担任丞相，原担任的州牧、都护、领武昌事等官职继续兼任。
English: In the spring, in the first month, King Wu appointed General Lu Xun as the prime minister, and he continued to serve concurrently in his previous posts as the provincial governor, the protector of the capital, and the military governor.

古文：征西将军、都督雍、凉诸军事夏侯玄，大将军爽之姑子也。
现代文：征西将军及都督雍、凉诸军事夏侯玄，是大将军曹爽姑母之子。
English: The general of the Western Expedition and the military governor of Yong and Liang Provinces, Xia Houxuan, was the son of the great general Cao Shuang's aunt.

古文：玄辟李胜为长史，胜及尚书邓飏欲令爽立威名于天下，劝使伐蜀；太傅懿止之，不能得。
现代文：夏侯玄征召李胜担任长史，李胜与尚书邓打算让曹爽在天下树立威名，劝他伐蜀。太傅司马懿劝止他们，没能止住。
English: Xia Houxuan conscripted Li Sheng to serve as Long History, Li Sheng and Shang Shudang planned to let Cao Shuang establish a prestigious name in the world, and advised him to attack Shu. Taifu Sima Yan advised them to stop, but they could not stop.

古文：三月，爽西至长安，发卒十馀万人，与玄自骆谷入汉中。
现代文：三月，曹爽西行至长安，发兵十余万人，与夏侯玄一起从骆口进入汉中。
English: In March, Cao Shuang traveled west to Chang'an, dispatched more than 100,000 soldiers, and together with Xia Houxuan, entered Hanzhong from Luokou.

古文：汉中守兵不满三万，诸将皆恐，欲守城不出以待涪兵。
现代文：汉中守军不足三万人，将领们都很恐慌，打算坚守城池不出兵迎战，等待涪县的救援。
English: Hanzhong's defending army was less than thirty thousand, and the generals were panicking, intending to hold on to the city and not go to war, waiting for rescue from Jixian.

古文：王平曰： 汉中去涪垂千里，贼若得关，便为深祸，今宜先遣刘护军据兴势，平为后拒；若贼分向黄金，平帅千人下自临之，比尔间涪军亦至，此计之上也。 
现代文：王平说： 汉中距离涪县将近一千里，敌人如果攻占了关城，便成为深灾大祸，应该先派遣刘护军占据兴势，我在后面拒敌。如果敌人分兵向黄金攻击，我率领一千人亲自迎战，周旋之间，涪县援军便会到达，这是上策。 
English: Wang Ping said: Hanzhong is nearly a thousand miles away from Jixian. If the enemy captures Guancheng, it will be a great disaster. Liu's escort should be sent first to occupy the momentum, and I should resist the enemy behind. If the enemy's detachment attacks the gold, I will lead a thousand people to face the battle in person. During the turnaround, Jixian's reinforcements will arrive, which is the best strategy.

古文：诸将皆疑，惟护军刘敏与平意同，遂帅所领据兴势，多张旗帜，弥亘百馀里。
现代文：将领们都持怀疑，只有护军刘敏与王平意见相同，便率所领部队占据兴势，并漫山遍野插上战旗，连绵一百余里。
English: The generals were all skeptical. Only Liu Min, the escort, shared the same opinion as Wang Ping. He led the troops to occupy the momentum, and planted battle flags all over the mountains, stretching for more than a hundred miles.

古文：闰月，汉主遣大将军费祎督诸军救汉中，将行，光禄大夫来敏诣祎别，求共围棋；于时羽檄交至，人马擐甲，严驾已讫，祎与敏对戏，色无厌倦。
现代文：闰三月，汉后主派遣大将军费统领各军救赴汉中，将出发时，光禄大夫来敏来到费住所送别，请求一起下一局围棋。此时，战地文书交错送到，士兵战马都已披挂铠甲，出动命令已经下达，可是费与来敏对奕，仍面无厌倦。
English: In the intercalary month of March, the queen of the Han Dynasty sent the general Fei Quan to lead the army to rescue Han Zhong. When they were about to leave, the Guanglu doctor Lai Min came to Fei's residence to see them off and ask for the next game of Go. At this time, the battlefield documents were delivered in a staggered manner, the soldiers' war horses were already wearing armor, and the dispatch order had been issued, but Fei and Lai Min were still tired of each other.

古文：敏曰： 向聊观试君耳。君信可人，必能办贼者也。 
现代文：来敏说： 我是故意考验您的，您确实令人满意，一定可以退敌。 
English: Limin said, "I am testing you on purpose. You are indeed satisfactory, and you can certainly defeat the enemy."

古文：夏，四月，丙辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙辰朔，出现日食。
English: In the summer, in April, the spring equinox, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：大将军爽兵距兴势不得进，关中及氐、羌转输不能供，牛马骡驴多死，民夷号泣道路，涪军及费祎兵继至。
现代文：大将军曹爽率领部队到达兴势后受到抵抗，不能前进。关中以及氐、羌部落转运的军粮供给不上，牛马骡驴大量死亡，当地百姓在路边哀号哭泣，涪县大军及费部队相继到达。
English: Major General Cao Shuang and his troops encountered resistance and were unable to advance after reaching the rising tide. The supply of military rations transported by Guanzhong and Yao and Yao tribes could not be supplied, a large number of cattle, horses and donkeys died, local people wailed and cried on the side of the road, and the large army from Ya County and Fei troops arrived one after another.

古文：参军杨伟为爽陈形势，宜急还，不然，将败。
现代文：参军杨伟向曹爽分析形势，认为应当紧急撤还，不然将大败。
English: Yang Wei, who joined the army, analyzed the situation to Cao Shuang and believed that it should be urgently withdrawn, otherwise it would be a big defeat.

古文：邓飏、李胜与伟争于爽前。伟曰： 飏、胜将败国家事，可斩也！ 
现代文：邓、李胜与杨伟在曹爽面前争执起来，杨伟说： 邓、李胜将败坏国家大事，应该斩首！ 
English: Deng, Li Sheng and Yang Wei quarreled in front of Cao Shuang. Yang Wei said: Deng and Li Sheng will corrupt national affairs, they should be beheaded!

古文：爽不悦。
现代文：曹爽大为不快。
English: Cao Shuang was very unhappy.

古文：太傅懿与夏侯玄书曰： 《春秋》责大德重。
现代文：太傅司马懿给夏侯玄去信说： 《春秋》大义，对大臣重臣要求严而施恩重。
English: Grand Master Sima Yu sent a letter to Xia Hou Xuan, saying: "Spring and Autumn" is a great virtue, and it is necessary to be strict with ministers and senior ministers, but also to be kind to them.

古文：昔武皇帝再入汉中，几至大败，君所知也。
现代文：从前武皇帝第二次进入汉中，几乎大败，你是知道的。
English: The former Emperor Wu entered the Han Dynasty for the second time and was almost defeated, as you know.

古文：今兴势至险，蜀已先据，若进不获战，退见邀绝，覆军必矣，将何以任其责！ 
现代文：如今兴势地形十分险要，蜀军已率先占据，如果进攻，敌人不应战，退却又被阻截，全军必然覆灭，你将承担什么责任？ 
English: Now the terrain is very dangerous, the Shu army has taken the lead. If the enemy attacks, the enemy should not fight, retreat and be intercepted, the whole army will inevitably be destroyed. What responsibility will you bear?

古文：玄惧，言于爽；五月，引军还。
现代文：夏侯玄恐惧，对曹爽说了上面的话。
English: Xia Houxuan was afraid and said the above words to Cao Shuang.

古文：费祎进据三岭以截爽，爽争险苦战，仅乃得过，失亡甚众，关中为之虚耗。
现代文：五月，率领大军退还，费进军占据三岭阻截曹爽，曹爽争险夺关进行苦战，仅只得以逃出，失散伤亡甚重，关中地区为这次行动白白耗费了大量人力、物力。
English: In May, he led a large army back and occupied Sanling at great expense to intercept Cao Shuang. Cao Shuang fought a hard battle to capture Guanzhong, but only managed to escape with heavy casualties. Guanzhong area spent a lot of manpower and material resources in vain for this operation.

古文：秋，八月，秦王询卒。
现代文：秋季，八月，秦王曹询去世。
English: In the autumn, in August, Qin King Cao Zhen passed away.

古文：冬，十二月，安阳孝侯崔林卒。
现代文：冬季，十二月，安阳孝侯崔林去世。
English: In the winter, in December, Anyang Xiaohou Cui Lin passed away.

古文：是岁，汉大司马琬以病固让州职于大将军祎，汉主乃以祎为益州刺史，以侍中董允守尚书令，为祎之副。
现代文：这一年，蜀国大司马蒋琬因病坚持将州职辞让给大将军费，汉后主遂任命费担任益州刺史，侍中董允担任尚书令，作为费的副手。
English: In that year, the Grand Secretary of Shu State, Ma Jiangyu, insisted on ceding the state post to General Fei due to illness. The Han Emperor then appointed Fei to serve as the governor of Yizhou, and the chamberlain, Dong Yun, to serve as the secretary, as Fei's deputy.

古文：时战国多事，公务烦猥，祎为尚书令，识悟过人，每省读文书，举目暂视，已究其意旨，其速数倍于人，终亦不忘。
现代文：当时蜀正值征战多事之秋，公务繁杂细碎，费担任尚书令，见识过人，每审阅公文，略望一眼，便已知道其中主要意思，速度超过常人几倍，并且过目不忘。
English: At that time, Shu was conscripted into the war, and it was an eventful autumn. He had to deal with complicated and detailed official duties. He had to spend a lot of money to serve as a shangshi, and he knew people. Whenever he reviewed official documents and glanced at them, he already knew the main meaning. He was several times faster than ordinary people, and he would not forget what he had read.

古文：常以朝晡听事，其间接纳宾客，饮食嬉戏，加之博弈，每尽人之欢，事亦不废。
现代文：经常在早晨和傍晚听取大家意见，处理公事，中间接待宾客，饮食娱乐，还要作博奕之戏，每次都能使人尽兴快乐，公事也不荒废。
English: In the morning and in the evening, I often listen to everyone's opinions, deal with business, receive guests in the middle, eat and entertain, and also play games. I can make people happy every time, and business is not wasted.

古文：及董允代祎，欲斅祎之所行，旬日之中，事多愆滞。
现代文：等到董允接替费，想要效法费行为，十天之中，很多事情都被耽误。
English: When it comes to the succession fee for directors and the imitation fee, many things have been delayed in the past ten days.

古文：允乃叹曰： 人才力相远若此，非吾之所及也！ 
现代文：董允于是叹息说： 人的才力相差如此之大，不是我能赶得上的！ 
English: Dong Yun then sighed and said: The difference in people's talents is so great, I can't catch up!

古文：乃听事终日而犹有不暇焉。烈祖明皇帝下正始六年
现代文：于是整天听取意见处理公务，还是没有空闲。正始六年
English: As a result, he spent all day listening to opinions and dealing with official business, and still had no free time.

古文：春，正月，以票骑将军赵俨为司空。
现代文：春季，正月，任命票骑将军赵俨担任司空。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, he appointed General Zhao Jun, a ticket rider, to serve as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：吴太子和与鲁王同宫，礼秩如一，群臣多以为言，吴主乃命分宫别僚；二子由是有隙。
现代文：吴国太子孙和与鲁王孙霸同住一宫，礼仪和俸禄完全一样，群臣对此颇有议论。吴王于是命令两人分宫居住，僚属也加区别。
English: The descendants of the Dauphin of the State of Wu and the King of Lu, Sun Ba, lived together in the same palace. The etiquette and the salary were exactly the same, and the courtiers had a lot to say about this. The King of Wu then ordered the two to live in separate palaces, and there was also a distinction made between colleagues and dependents.

古文：卫将军全琮遣其子寄事鲁王，以书告丞相陆逊，逊报曰： 子弟苟有才，不忧不用，不宜私出以要荣利；若其不佳，终为取祸。
现代文：由此，兄弟之间产生了感情上的裂痕。卫将军全琮让儿子全寄侍奉鲁王，写信告诉丞相陆逊，陆逊回答说： 你的儿子如果真有才干，不必担忧不被任用，不宜出任私门幕职，邀取荣华。
English: As a result, there was an emotional rift between the brothers. Wei general Quanzhang sent his son Quanzhang to serve King Lu and wrote a letter to the prime minister Lu Xun. Lu Xun replied: "If your son is really talented, you don't have to worry about not being appointed, it's not appropriate to serve as a private shogun and invite Ronghua.

古文：且闻二宫势敌，必有彼此，此古人之厚忌也。 
现代文：如果才力不佳，最终也会招来灾祸；况且听说两宫势均力敌，必定各要党羽，这是古人最避忌的。 
English: Moreover, it is said that the two houses are evenly matched, and these children will inevitably form a gang for each other. This is a very taboo thing for the ancients.

古文：寄果阿附鲁王，轻为交构。
现代文：全寄果然攀附鲁王，轻率地与之结交。
English: Zeng Yixing really clung to King Lu and made friends with him rashly.

古文：逊书与琮曰： 卿不师日磾而宿留阿寄，终为足下门户致祸矣。 
现代文：陆逊写信给全琮说：你不学汉朝金日严格对待儿子，反而庇护阿寄，最终会为你的家门招来灾祸。 
English: Lu Xun wrote to Quanzhang saying: If you do not learn from the Han Dynasty to treat your son strictly, but instead shelter Ah Ying, you will eventually bring disaster to your family.

古文：琮既不纳逊言，更以致隙。
现代文：全琮不仅不回答陆逊，反而与陆逊发生了裂痕。
English: Quanzhang not only did not answer Lu Xun, but also had a rift with Lu Xun.

古文：鲁王曲意交结当时名士。
现代文：鲁王一心要结交当时知名人士。
English: Lu Wang was determined to make friends with famous people at that time.

古文：偏将军硃绩以胆力称，王自至其廨，就之坐，欲与结好。
现代文：偏将军朱绩以有胆力著称，鲁王亲自到他的官署，挨近他坐下，想要与他结好。
English: Zhu Rong, a general, was known for his courage. Lu Wang personally went to his office, sat down next to him, and wanted to make friends with him.

古文：绩下地住立，辞而不当。
现代文：朱绩走下座位站在一旁，推辞不敢承当。
English: Zhu Rong stepped down from his seat and stood to one side, not daring to refuse.

古文：绩，然之子也。
现代文：朱绩是朱然的儿子。
English: Zhu Rong is the son of Zhu Ran.

古文：于是自侍御、宾客，造为二端，仇党疑贰，滋延大臣，举国中分。吴主闻之，假以精学，禁断宾客往来。
现代文：从那时起，从侍从到宾客，形成对立的两派，仇视敌党，猜忌贰心，逐渐蔓延到朝廷大臣，全国分为两派，吴王听说后，借口让他俩专心学习，断绝与宾客的往来。
English: From then on, from the servants to the guests, two opposing factions were formed, hatred of the enemy party, suspicion and hatred, gradually spreading to the ministers of the court, and the whole country was divided into two factions. After hearing this, King Wu gave them an excuse to concentrate on their studies and cut off contact with the guests.

古文：督军使者羊道上疏曰： 闻明诏省夺二宫备卫，抑绝宾客，使四方礼敬不复得通，远近悚然，大小失望。
现代文：督军使者羊上书说： 听说陛下公开颁诏剥夺两宫的卫队，断绝了宾客，使四方礼敬再不能表达，远远近近为之震惊，大大小小感到失望。
English: Yang Shangshuo, the military governor's emissary, said in a letter: I heard that His Majesty publicly issued an edict to deprive the guards of the two palaces, cut off the guests, so that the four parties could no longer express their respect. I was shocked by it from far and near, and felt disappointed in large and small.

古文：或谓二宫不遵典式，就如所嫌，犹宜补察，密加斟酌，不使远近得容异言。
现代文：有的说这是由于两宫不遵守法典礼仪。即使确如所怀疑的那样，也应多加补救，严密斟酌，不让外人说三道四。
English: Some say that this is due to the fact that the two palaces do not comply with the legal ceremony. Even if it is true as suspected, it should be remedied more, carefully considered, and not let outsiders say anything.

古文：臣惧积疑成谤，久将宣流，而西北二隅，去国不远，将谓二宫有顺之愆，不审陛下何以解之！ 
现代文：我恐怕猜疑积多变成毁谤，时间一长，必将四处流传，西方和北方，距离我国不远，将说两宫有不能调和的过错，不知陛下将如何解释？ 
English: I am afraid that my suspicions will turn into slander, and as time goes on, it will spread everywhere. The West and the North, not far from our country, will say that the two palaces have irreconcilable faults. I don't know how His Majesty will explain it.

古文：吴主长女鲁班适左护军全琮，少女小虎适骠骑将军硃据。
现代文：吴王的长女鲁班嫁给左护军全琮，小女小虎嫁给骠骑将军朱据。
English: The eldest daughter of King Wu, Luban, married the left guard, Quanzhang, and the little girl, Xiaohu, married the cavalry general, Zhu Zhu.

古文：全公主与太子母王夫人有隙，吴主欲立王夫人为后，公主阻子；恐太子立怨己，心不自安，数谮毁太子。
现代文：全公主鲁班与太子孙和的母亲王夫人有隔阂，吴王想要立王夫人为皇后，公主加以阻止。后又恐怕太子即位后怨恨自己，心里感到不安，便多次毁谤太子。
English: Princess Zhen Ruban had a rift with Lady Wang, the mother of the prince's children and grandchildren. King Wu wanted to make Lady Wang the empress, but the princess stopped him. Later, after the prince ascended the throne, I'm afraid she resented herself and felt uneasy in her heart, so she repeatedly slandered the prince.

古文：吴主寝疾，遣太子祷于长沙桓王庙，太子妃叔父张休居近庙，邀太子过所居。
现代文：吴王病重在床，派遣太子去长沙桓王孙策祭庙祈祷。太子妃的叔父张休在庙附近住家，邀请太子顺便来家坐坐。
English: Wu Wang was seriously ill in bed and sent the prince to pray at the Huan Wang Sun Ce Festival Temple in Changsha. Zhang Xiu, the uncle of the princess, lived near the temple and invited the prince to drop by.

古文：全公主使人觇视，因言 太子不在庙中，专就妃家计议 ，又言 王夫人见上寝疾，有喜色 ，吴主由是发怒。
现代文：全公主派人监视，因而报告说： 太子不在庙中，只去了妃家商议事情 ，又说， 王夫人看到陛下病重卧床，而有喜色 。
English: Princess Zhen sent someone to keep watch, and thus reported: The prince was not in the temple, but only went to the princess's house to discuss the matter, and also said that the queen was happy to see her majesty seriously ill in bed.

古文：夫人以忧死，太子宠益衰。
现代文：吴王于是发怒，王夫人因忧虑而死，对太子的宠爱更为衰减。
English: King Wu then became angry, and Lady Wang died of worry, and her affection for the prince waned even more.

古文：鲁王之党杨竺、全寄、吴安、孙奇等共谮毁太子，吴主惑焉。
现代文：鲁王的党羽杨竺、全寄、吴安、孙奇等一起诬陷毁谤太子，吴王感到迷惑。
English: King Lu's followers, Yang Hui, Quanzhang, Wu An, Sun Qi, and others framed and slandered the crown prince, and King Wu was puzzled.

古文：陆逊上疏谏曰： 太子正统，宜有盘石之固；鲁王籓臣，当使宠佚有差。彼此得所，上下获安。 
现代文：陆逊上书规劝说： 太子是正统，应该有坚如磐石的稳定地位，鲁王是藩国之臣，对他宠爱俸禄应当有所差别，彼此各得其所，上下才能安定。 
English: Lu Xun wrote a letter to persuade: the prince is orthodox and should have a rock-solid stable position, the king of Lu is a vassal of the domain, and his favorite salary should be different, each has its place, and the upper and lower levels can be stable.

古文：书三四上，辞情危切；又欲诣都，口陈嫡庶之义。吴主不悦。
现代文：连续上书三四次，辞情激切，还要去京师，当面陈述嫡庶的大义，吴王不快。
English: He wrote three or four times in succession, his words were passionate, and he also had to go to Beijing to personally present his legitimate son's great righteousness. King Wu was displeased.

古文：太常顾谭，逊之甥也，亦上疏曰： 臣闻有国有家者，必明嫡庶之端，异尊卑之礼，使高下有差，等级逾邈；如此，则骨肉之恩全，觊觎之望绝。
现代文：太常顾谭是陆逊的外甥，也上书说： 我听说无论是国还是家，一定要明确嫡庶的区别，使尊卑之礼各不相同，高下有别，等级不可超越。只有这样，内肉的恩情才能保全，夺嫡的邪念才可断绝。
English: Gu Tan, who was Lu Xun's nephew, also wrote: "I have heard that whether it is a country or a family, it is necessary to make a clear distinction between the heir and the heir, so that the honors are different, the high and the low are different, and the level cannot be surpassed. Only in this way can the innermost feelings of gratitude be preserved, and the evil thoughts of taking the heir can be cut off.

古文：昔贾谊陈治安之计，论诸侯之势，以为势重虽亲，必有逆节之累，势轻虽疏，必有保全之祚。
现代文：从前贾谊陈述治安之策，议论诸侯的形势，认为势力太重虽是亲族也必有叛逆的危险，势力轻微虽然疏远，也必有保全的福分。
English: In the past, Jia Yi would present security policies, discuss the situation of princes, and believe that even if the power is too heavy, there must be a danger of rebellion, and even if the power is light and distant, there must be a blessing of preservation.

古文：故淮南亲弟，不终飨国，失之于势重也；吴芮疏臣，传祚长沙，得之于势轻也。
现代文：所以淮南王虽是文帝的亲弟弟，但没能终身享受他的封邑俸养，是失之于势力太重；吴芮是疏远的臣僚，世代在长沙做官享福，是得益于势力轻微。
English: Therefore, although King Huainan was the younger brother of Emperor Wen, he was not able to enjoy his fief salary for life because he was too powerful; Wu Xi was an estranged minister, and he enjoyed the prosperity of being an official in Changsha for generations because of his weak power.

古文：昔汉文帝使慎夫人与皇后同席，袁盎退夫人之位，帝有怒色；及盎辨上下之义，陈人彘之戒，帝既悦怿，夫人亦悟。
现代文：从前汉文帝让慎夫人与皇后并坐，袁盎让慎夫人座位后退，文帝面有怒色；等到袁盎谈论起上下尊卑大义，陈说戚夫人被砍成人彘的警戒，文帝已然面有喜色，慎夫人也醒悟。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty asked Lady Shen to sit with the empress, and Yuan Ang asked Lady Shen to move her seat back, and Emperor Wen was angry; when Yuan Ang started to talk about the principles of superiority and inferiority, and Chen said that Lady Qi had been beheaded as a warning, Emperor Wen was already happy, and Lady Shen also woke up.

古文：今臣所陈，非有所偏，诚欲以安太子而便鲁王也。 
现代文：今天我所陈述的，并不偏袒任何一方，实在是打处稳定太子并便利鲁王。 
English: Presenting these things to his vassals now is not a selfish act, but a genuine attempt to keep the crown prince stable and benefit the king of Lu!

古文：由是鲁王与谭有隙。
现代文：由此，鲁王与顾谭有了隔阂。
English: As a result, Lu Wang and Gu Tan became estranged.

古文：芍陂之役，谭弟承及张休皆有功；全琮子端、绪与之争功，谮承、休于吴主，吴主徙谭、承、休于交州，又追赐休死。
现代文：芍陂之战，顾谭的弟弟顾承和张休都立有功劳。全琮的儿子全端、全绪与他们争功，向吴王诬诌顾承、张休，吴王贬顾承、张休到交州，又追赐张休自尽。
English: Gu Tan's younger brothers, Gu Cheng and Zhang Xiu, both distinguished themselves in the Battle of Yunnan. Quanzhang's sons, Quanzhang and Quanzhou, competed with them for merit, and falsely accused Gu Cheng, Zhang Xiu, Gu Cheng and Zhang Xiu to the King of Wu, who sent Gu Cheng and Zhang Xiu to Jiaozhou, and forced Zhang Xiu to commit suicide.

古文：太子太傅吾粲请使鲁王出镇夏口，出杨竺等不得令在京师，又数以消息语陆逊；鲁王与杨竺共谮之，吴主怒，收粲下狱，诛。数遣中使责问陆逊，逊愤恚而卒。
现代文：太子太傅吾粲请求派鲁王出镇夏口，逐出杨竺等人，不要让他们留在京师，又多次向陆逊通报消息。鲁王与杨竺一起诬陷吾粲，吴王大怒，拘捕吾粲下狱处死，屡次派遣中使责问陆逊，陆逊愤懑而死。
English: Prince Daifu Wu Xi requested that Lu Wang be sent out of the town of Xiakou, that Yang Xi and others be expelled, and that they not be allowed to stay in Beijing Division, and repeatedly informed Lu Xun of the news. Lu Wang and Yang Xi together framed Wu Xi, Wu Wang was furious, arrested and imprisoned Lu Xun to death, and repeatedly dispatched the envoy to interrogate Lu Xun, Lu Xun died in anger.

古文：其子抗为建武校尉，代领逊众，送葬东还，吴主以杨竺所白逊二十事问抗，抗事事条答，吴主意乃稍解。
现代文：陆逊的儿子陆抗担任建武校尉，代管陆逊的部队，送葬东行回吴郡。吴王又拿杨竺指控陆逊的二十件事一一质问陆抗，陆抗一件一件地作出回答，吴王怒意才稍稍化解。
English: Lu Xun's son, Lu Antai, served as Jianwu's lieutenant, in charge of Lu Xun's troops, and sent the funeral procession eastward back to Wu County. The king of Wu also questioned Lu Antai about the twenty things Yang Xuan accused Lu Xun of, and Lu Antai answered one by one, and the king of Wu's anger was slightly resolved.

古文：夏，六月，都乡穆侯赵俨卒。
现代文：夏季，六月，都乡穆侯赵俨去世。
English: In the summer, in June, the mayor of the capital town, Zhao Wei, passed away.

古文：秋，七月，吴将军马茂谋杀吴主及大臣以应魏，事泄，并党与皆族诛。
现代文：秋季，七月，吴国将军马茂图谋杀害吴王及大臣以降魏，事情泄漏，马茂和他的党羽都被诛杀。
English: In the autumn, in July, the general of the State of Wu, Ma Maotu, murdered and killed the King of Wu and his ministers, and after the Wei Dynasty, the matter was leaked, and Ma Mao and his followers were killed.

古文：八月，以太常高柔为司空。
现代文：八月，任命太常高柔担任司空。
English: In August, Taizheng Gaorong was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：汉甘太后殂。
现代文：蜀甘太后去世。
English: The Empress Dowager Shugang passed away.

古文：吴主遣校尉陈勋将屯田及作士三万人，凿句容中道，自小其至云阳西城，通会市，作邸阁。
现代文：吴王派遣校尉陈勋统率屯田部队及工匠三万人，开凿句容山道，从小其直到云阳西城，开通集市，以会商旅，并修建了存储粮物的邸阁。
English: Wu Wang dispatched Lieutenant Chen Xun Tong to lead the field troops and 30,000 artisans to excavate the Jurong Mountain Road, from Xiaoji to Yunyang West City, to open the market, to hold a business trip, and to build a mansion to store grain.

古文：冬，十一月，汉大司马琬卒。
现代文：冬季，十一月，蜀大司马蒋琬去世。
English: In the winter, in November, Shu Daishi Ma Jiangyao passed away.

古文：十二月，汉费祎至汉中，行围守。
现代文：十二月，蜀费抵达汉中，巡视戍边军队。
English: In December, Shu Fei arrived in Hanzhong to inspect the border troops.

古文：汉尚书令董允卒；以尚书吕乂为尚书令。
现代文：蜀尚书令董允去世，任命尚书吕担任尚书令。
English: Shu Shang Shuling Dong Yun passed away and appointed Shang Shuling Lü as Shang Shuling.

古文：董允秉心公亮，献可替否，备尽忠益，汉主甚严惮之。
现代文：董允心地正直无私，诤言进谏，竭尽忠心。汉王对他非常敬畏。
English: Dong Yun's heart is honest and selfless, his words are persuasive, and he is loyal to the best of his ability. Han Wang is very much in awe of him.

古文：宦人黄皓，便僻佞慧，汉主爱之。
现代文：宦官黄皓，关于花言巧语，逢迎献媚，汉王对他十分宠爱。
English: As for the eunuch Huang Qi, the Han King was very fond of him because of his flattering words and flattery.

古文：允上则正色规主，下则数责于皓。
现代文：董允对上则严肃地规劝汉王，对下则多次指责黄皓。
English: On the other hand, Dong Yun seriously advised Han Wang against the former, and repeatedly criticized Huang Qi against the latter.

古文：皓畏允，不敢为非，终允之世，皓位不过黄门丞。
现代文：黄皓畏惧董允，不敢胡作非为，直到董允去世时，黄皓的官位不过黄门丞。
English: Huang Qi was afraid of Dong Yun and did not dare to do anything wrong. Until the death of Dong Yun, Huang Qi's official rank was only Huang Men Rong.

古文：费祎以选曹郎汝南陈祗代允为侍中，祗矜厉有威容，多技艺，挟智数，故祎以为贤，越次而用之。
现代文：费任命选曹郎汝南人陈祗接替董允担任侍中，陈祗端庄威严，多才多艺，很有心计，所以费认为他是贤能，越级提拔任用。
English: Fei appointed Cao Lang Runan Chen Qi to succeed Dong Yun as an attendant. Chen Qi was dignified, versatile, and resourceful, so Fei considered him to be a capable person and promoted him to a higher rank.

古文：祗与皓相表里，皓始预政，累迁至中常侍，操弄威柄，终以覆国。
现代文：陈祗与黄皓内外勾结，黄皓才开始参予政事，多次升迁至中常侍，操弄权柄，终于断送了蜀国。
English: Chen Qi colluded with Huang Qi both inside and outside the country. Huang Qi only began to participate in political affairs, was repeatedly promoted to the position of middle-ranking attendant, manipulated power, and finally destroyed Shu.

古文：自陈祗有宠，而汉主追怨董允日深，谓为自轻，由祗阿意迎合而皓浸润构间故也。
现代文：自从陈祗受到宠信，汉后主追怨董允日渐加深，认为董允轻视他，这是由于陈祗阿谀迎合及黄皓不断离间的缘故。
English: Since Chen Yao was favored, the Han empress's grudge against Dong Yun gradually deepened, believing that Dong Yun despised him, which was due to Chen Yao's pandering and Huang Yao's constant separation.

