古文：為器同物者，其小大、短長、廣夾必等。
现代文：制作同一器物，其大小、长短和宽度必须相同。
English: When making the same object, its size, length and width must be the same.

古文：為計，不同程者毋同其出。
现代文：计帐时，不同规格的产品不得列于同一项内出帐。
English: When billing, products of different specifications may not be listed in the same item.

古文：縣及工室聽官為正衡石贏〈羸〉、斗用、升，毋過歲壺〈壹〉。
现代文：县和工室由有关官府校正其衡器的权、斗桶和升，至少每年应校正一次。
English: Counties and workshops shall calibrate the weights, buckets and liters of their measuring instruments by the relevant government agencies, and shall be calibrated at least once a year.

古文：有工者勿為正。
现代文：本身有校正工匠的，则不必代为校正。
English: If you have a calibration craftsman, you do not have to do the calibration on your behalf.

古文：試即正。
现代文：这些器物在领用时就要加以校正。
English: These utensils must be calibrated before use.

古文：邦中之及公事官舍，其公，而有死亡者，亦令其徒、舍人任其，如從興戍然。
现代文：在都邑服徭役和因有官府事务居于官舍，如借用官有器物，借者死亡，应令服徭的徒或其舍人负责，和参加屯戍的情形一样。
English: In the case of those who served as civil servants in the capital and lived in government housing due to government affairs, if they borrowed government-owned items and the borrower died, the person who served them or the person who gave them away should be held responsible, just as in the case of those who participated in the civil service.

古文：公甲兵各以其官名刻久之，其不可刻久者，以丹若書之。
现代文：官有武器均应刻记其官府的名称，不能刻记的，用丹或漆书写。
English: All official weapons should be inscribed with the name of their government. If it cannot be inscribed, it should be written in red ink or lacquer.

古文：其百姓甲兵，必書其久，受之以久。
现代文：百姓领用武器，必须登记武器上的标记，按照标记收还。
English: If civilians take weapons, they must register the marks on the weapons and return them according to the marks.

古文：入而而毋久及非其官之久也，皆沒入公，以齎律責之。
现代文：缴回所领武器而上面没有标记和不是该官府标记的，均没有归官，并依《齐律》责令赔偿。
English: Those who returned the weapons they received without marking or without the mark of the authority did not return to the authority, and were ordered to pay compensation in accordance with the "Qi Ruo."

古文：公器官□久，久之。
现代文：官有器物由官府加上标记。
English: Government-owned objects are marked by the government.

古文：不可久者，以久之。
现代文：不能刻记的，用漆书标记。
English: If you can't engrave it, mark it with a black marker.

古文：其或公器，歸之，久必乃受之。
现代文：有借用官有器物的，归还时，标记相符才能收还。
English: If there is borrowed official property, when returning it, the mark must match before it can be returned.

古文：敝而糞者，靡其久。
现代文：器物破旧而加处理的，应磨去上面的标记。
English: If the equipment is old and has been treated, the mark on it should be removed.

古文：官輒告器者曰：器敝久恐靡者，遝其未靡，謁更其久。
现代文：官府应告知借用器物的人：器物用旧而恐标记磨减的，要趁标记尚未磨减，报请重新标记。
English: The government should inform the person who borrows the utensil: if the utensil is old and the mark is worn off, take advantage of the mark that has not been worn off and report it for re-marking.

古文：其久靡不可智者、令齎賞。
现代文：器物的标记已经磨减或无法辨识的，令以钱财赔偿。
English: If the markings on the property have been worn away or are unrecognizable, the court shall order monetary compensation.

古文：器者，其事已及免，官輒收其，弗亟收者有罪。
现代文：借用器物的，其事务已完和免除时，官府应即收回所借器物，不及时收回的有罪。
English: In the case of borrowed equipment, when its business has been completed and exempted, the government should immediately recover the borrowed equipment, and it is guilty of not recovering it in time.

古文：其者死亡、有罪毋責也，吏代賞。
现代文：如借用者死去或犯罪而未将器物追还，由吏代为赔偿。
English: If the borrower dies or commits a crime and does not recover the property, the officials will compensate on his behalf.

古文：毋擅公器，者擅公器者有罪，毀傷公器及□者令賞。
现代文：不得擅自借用官有器物，凡擅借官有器物的有罪，毁损官有器物和的令之赔偿。
English: It is forbidden to borrow official property without authorization. Anyone who borrows official property without authorization will be guilty of damaging official property and will be ordered to pay compensation.

