古文：华军之战，魏不胜秦。
现代文：在华阳两军交战时，魏国没有战胜秦国。
English: When the two armies of Huayang fought, Wei did not defeat Qin.

古文：明年。将使段干崇割地而讲。
现代文：第二年，魏王派段干崇去向秦国割地求和。
English: In the second year, the Wei king sent Duan Gansong to sue for peace from Qin.

古文：孙臣谓魏王曰： 魏不以败之上割，可谓善用不胜矣；而秦不以胜之上割，可谓不能用胜矣。
现代文：孙臣对魏王说： 魏国不因战败而在当时割地，可以说善于应付失败的局面；而秦国不因取胜而在当时要求割地，可以说不善于利用取胜的时机。
English: Sun Zhen said to the king of Wei: If Wei did not demand land division at that time because of defeat, it could be said that it was good at coping with the situation of defeat; but if Qin did not demand land division at that time because of victory, it could be said that it was not good at taking advantage of the opportunity to win.

古文：今处期年乃欲割，是群臣之私而王不知也。
现代文：现在等了一年又想割地，这是群臣怀有私心而君王却没有发现。
English: Now, after waiting for a year, they want to divide the land again. This is because the courtiers are selfish and the king has not found out.

古文：且夫欲玺者，段干子也，王因使之割地；欲地者，秦也，而王因使之受玺。
现代文：况且想得到秦国印玺的是段千崇，大王却派他去割让土地；想要得到土地的是秦国，而大王却让秦国授予段千崇印玺。
English: Moreover, it was Duan Qianlong who wanted to get the Qin seal, but the great king sent him to cede the land; it was Qin who wanted to get the land, but the great king had Qin grant Duan Qianlong the seal.

古文：夫欲玺者制地，而欲地者制玺，其势必无魏矣!
现代文：想要得到印玺的掌管土地，想要得到土地的掌管印玺，这种形势发展下去魏国一定会灭亡。
English: If you want to get the printing money to control the land, if you want to get the printing money to control the land, if this situation continues, Wei will surely perish.

古文：且夫奸臣固皆欲以地事秦。
现代文：再说奸臣本来就想用土地去事奉秦国。
English: Moreover, the treacherous vassal originally wanted to use the land to serve Qin.

古文：以地事秦，譬犹抱薪而救火也，薪不尽，则火不灭。
现代文：用土地去服事秦国，犹如抱薪柴去救火，薪柴不烧尽火不会熄灭。
English: Using land to serve Qin is like carrying firewood to put out a fire. If the firewood does not burn out, the fire will not go out.

古文：今王之地有尽，而秦之求无穷，是薪火之说也。 魏王曰： 善。
现代文：大王的土地总会有割尽的时候，而秦国的贪婪没有止境，这同抱薪救火的说法是一致的。 魏王说： 对。
English: There will always be a time when the land of the great king is exhausted, and the greed of the Qin state has no end, which is consistent with the saying of holding a salary to save a fire.

古文：虽然，吾已许秦矣，不可以革也。 
现代文：虽然如此，我已经答应秦国了，不可以更改了。 
English: In spite of this, I have already promised Qin, and I can't change it.

古文：对曰： 王独不见夫博者之用枭邪?
现代文：孙臣回答说： 大王难道没见过赌博的人使用枭子吗？
English: Sun Qian replied, "Hasn't the great king seen gamblers using dice?

古文：欲食则食，欲握则握。
现代文：想吃子就吃子，想握在手里就握在手里。
English: If you want to eat it, eat it. If you want to hold it in your hand, hold it in your hand.

古文：今君劫于群臣而许秦，因曰不可革，何用智之不若枭也! 魏王曰： 善。 
现代文：现在您受到群臣的胁迫而答应了秦国，就说不可更改，为什么您运用智谋还不如赌博时运用枭骰呢？ 魏王说： 好吧。 
English: Now that you have been coerced by your courtiers and have agreed to enter Qin, why don't you use your wits as well as your wits when gambling? Wei Wang said, "Okay."

古文：乃案其行。
现代文：于是阻止了段千崇出使秦国。
English: As a result, Duan Qian Chong was prevented from sending an envoy to Qin.

