古文：骊姬生奚齐，其娣生卓子。
现代文：骊姬生了奚齐，她妹妹生了卓子。
English: Rong Ji gave birth to Rong Qi, and her sister gave birth to Zhuo Zi.

古文：公将黜太子申生而立奚齐。
现代文：晋献公打算废黜太子申生而改立奚齐为太子。
English: Jin Xianguo planned to depose Prince Shen Sheng and install Prince Xizhi instead.

古文：里克、丕郑、荀息相见，里克曰： 夫史苏之言将及矣！
现代文：里克、丕郑、荀息三人见面时，里克说： 史苏的预言将要应验了，怎么办呢？ 
English: When Rick, Hao Zheng, and Hao Xixi met, Rick said, "Susu's prophecy is about to come true, what should we do?"

古文：其若之何？ 荀息曰： 吾闻事君者，竭力以役事，不闻违命。
现代文：荀息说： 我听说臣事国君的人，应该尽力为之办事，没听说可以违抗君命的。
English: Hao Xiu said: I have heard that those who serve the sovereign should do their best, but I have not heard that they can disobey the sovereign's order.

古文：君立臣从，何贰之有？ 
现代文：国君定了的事臣子理应服从，怎么可以有二心呢？ 
English: How can there be double-mindedness when the sovereign has decreed that the ministers should obey?

古文：丕郑曰： 吾闻事君者，从其义，不阿其惑。
现代文：丕郑说： 我听说臣事国君的人，只能服从正确的决定，不可屈从他的错误。
English: Zou Zheng said: I have heard that a person who is a vassal of the sovereign can only obey the correct decision, and must not succumb to his mistakes.

古文：惑则误民，民误失德，是弃民也。
现代文：国君的错误会影响民众，民众跟着一起犯错误而丢失德行，无异于抛弃民众。
English: The mistakes of the sovereign affect the people, and the people make mistakes together and lose virtue, which is tantamount to abandoning the people.

古文：民之有君，以治义也。义以生利，利以丰民，若之何其民之与处而弃之也？
现代文：民众所以要有国君，是用来确定上下之间礼义的，礼义是用来生利的，利是用来丰裕民众的。怎么可以与民众共处却要抛弃他们呢？
English: The reason why the people need a sovereign is to determine the etiquette between the upper and lower classes, etiquette is used to make profit, and profit is used to enrich the people. How can you coexist with the people but abandon them?

古文：必立太子。 
现代文：一定要让国君立申生为太子才对。 
English: It's only right to have the country's ruler, Prince Shosho, become the crown prince.

古文：里克曰： 我不佞，虽不识义，亦不阿惑，吾其静也。 
现代文：里克说： 我没有才能，虽不懂得义，但也不会屈从国君的错误，我将保持沉默。 
English: Rick said: I have no talent, although I do not understand justice, but I will not succumb to the mistakes of the sovereign, I will remain silent.

古文：三大夫乃别。
现代文：三位大夫于是告别了。
English: The three doctors then said goodbye.

古文：蒸于武公，公称疾不与，使奚齐莅事。
现代文：冬天祭祀武宫祖庙时，献公称病未去参加，而派奚齐主持祭事。
English: During the winter sacrifice to the ancestral temple of the Imperial Palace, he was not able to attend due to illness, but he was sent to preside over the festival.

古文：猛足乃言于太子曰： 伯氏不出，奚齐在庙，子盍图乎！ 
现代文：猛足为此对太子申主说： 不让长子出面，却由奚齐在祖庙主持，你怎么考虑自身地位的安固呢？ 
English: For this reason, Mengfei said to the prince petitioner: If you do not allow the eldest son to come forward, but presided over by Ruqi in the ancestral temple, how do you consider the security of your position?

古文：太子曰： 吾闻之羊舌大夫曰： 事君以敬，事父以孝。 
现代文：太子说： 我听羊舌大夫说过： 要以恭敬臣事国君，要以孝顺服侍父亲。 
English: The prince said, "I heard Dr. Sheep's Tongue say, 'You must treat the sovereign with respect and serve your father with filial piety.'

古文：受命不迁为敬，敬顺所安为孝。
现代文：接受君命坚定不移叫做恭敬，按照父亲的意愿去行动叫做孝顺。
English: Unwavering acceptance of the king's command is called reverence, and acting in accordance with the father's wishes is called filial piety.

古文：弃命不敬，作令不孝，又何图焉？
现代文：违抗君命就是不敬，擅自行动就是不孝，我又能为自己考虑什么呢？
English: To disobey the king's order is to be disrespectful, to act without permission is to be unfilial, what else can I consider for myself?

古文：且夫间父之爱而嘉其贶，有不忠焉；废人以自成，有不贞焉。
现代文：况且离间父亲的爱却还享受他的赏赐，那就是不忠了；废了别人来成全自己，那就是不贞了。
English: Moreover, to forsake the Father's love, and yet receive his reward, is infidelity; to forsake another to gratify the self, is unchastity.

古文：孝、敬、忠、贞，君父之所安也。
现代文：孝、敬、忠、贞，是君父肯定的好品德。
English: Filial piety, respect, loyalty, and chastity are the virtues affirmed by your father.

古文：弃安而图，远于孝矣，吾其止也。 
现代文：抛弃这些好品德而考虑自己的地位，就远离了孝，我只有静待命运的安排了。 
English: If I abandon these virtues and consider my own status, I will be far away from filial piety, and I can only wait for fate to arrange things.

