古文：成皇帝讳衍，字世根，明帝长子也。
现代文：成皇帝名司马衍，字世根，是明帝司马绍的长子。
English: Emperor Cheng was named Sima Yan, the eldest son of Ming Emperor Sima Shao.

古文：太宁三年三月戊辰，立为皇太子。
现代文：太宁三年三月初二，立为皇太子。
English: On the second day of the third month of the third year of Taining, he became crown prince.

古文：闰月戊子，明帝崩。
现代文：闰八月二十五日，明帝驾崩。
English: On the 25th day of leap August, Emperor Ming died.

古文：己丑，太子即皇帝位，大赦，增文武位二等，赐鳏寡孤老帛，人二匹，尊皇后庾氏为皇太后。
现代文：二十六日，太子即皇帝位，大赦天下，增加文武百官的爵位二等，赐给鳏寡孤老布帛，每人二匹，尊奉皇后庾氏为皇太后。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the prince, that is, the emperor, pardoned the whole world, increased the second-class titles of the hundreds of civil and military officials, and gave the widows and orphans of the old cloth, two per person, honoring the Empress Dowager as the Empress Dowager.

古文：秋九月癸卯，皇太后临朝称制。
现代文：九月初九，皇太后临朝代行皇帝职权。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month of the ninth month, the Empress Dowager Lin Dynasty assumed the duties of the emperor.

古文：司徒王导录尚书事，与中书令庾亮参辅朝政。
现代文：司徒王导录尚书事，与中书令庾亮共同参辅朝政。
English: According to the Guidebook of King Szeto, he was still involved in the affairs of letters, and he participated in the government of the dynasty together with Liang Liang, who was in charge of Chinese letters.

古文：以抚军将军、南顿王宗为骠骑将军，领军将军、汝南王祐为卫将军。
现代文：任抚军将军、南顿王司马宗为骠骑将军，领军将军、汝南王司马卫将军。
English: Appointed the general of the army, Nantong King Sima Zong was the general of the cavalry, the general of the leading army, and the general of the Southern Kingdom Sima Wei.

古文：辛丑，葬明帝于武平陵。
现代文：十一日，把明帝安葬在武平陵。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Mingdian was buried in Wuping Mausoleum.

古文：冬十一月癸巳朔，日有蚀之。广陵相曹浑有罪，下狱死。
现代文：十一月初一，有日蚀。广陵相曹浑有罪，下狱而死。
English: On the first day of November, there was a solar eclipse. Guangling consort Cao Hun was found guilty and died in prison.

古文：咸和元年春二月丁亥，大赦，改元，大酺五日，赐鳏寡孤老米，二人斛，京师百里内复一年。
现代文：咸和元年春二月二十七，大赦天下，改用新年号，大宴饮五天，赐给鳏寡孤老米谷，每人二斛，京师百里以内免除一年的徭役赋税。
English: On the 27th day of the 2nd month of the spring of the first year of the Heian period, the emperor pardoned the whole country, changed the New Year's Day to the New Year's Day, held a grand banquet for five days, and gave the widows and orphans in the old rice valley two rupees each, and exempted the tax of one year's service tax within 100 miles of Beijing.

古文：夏四月，石勒遣其将石生寇汝南，汝南人执内史祖济以叛。
现代文：四月，石勒派其将领石生侵犯汝南，汝南人抓住内史祖济叛乱。
English: In April, Shiller sent his general Shisheng to invade the south of the Ryukyus, and the people of the south of the Ryukyus seized the rebellion of Neishi Zuji.

古文：甲子，尚书左仆射邓攸卒。
现代文：初五，尚书左仆射邓攸死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Shangshu's left-hand man, Deng You, died.

古文：五月，大水。
现代文：五月，发大水。
English: In May, there was a big flood.

古文：六月癸亥，使持节、散骑常侍、监淮北诸军事、北中郎将、徐州刺史、泉陵公刘遐卒。
现代文：六月初五日，使持节、散骑常侍、监淮北诸军事、北中郎将、徐州刺史、泉陵公刘遐死。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, Liu Zhen, the commander of Huaibei Military, the commander of North China, the governor of Xuzhou, and the governor of Quanling died.

古文：癸酉，以车骑将军郗鉴领徐州刺史，征虏将军郭默为北中郎将、假节、监淮北诸军。
现代文：十五日，以车骑将军郗鉴领徐州刺史，征虏将军郭默为北中郎将、假节、监淮北诸军。
English: On the fifteenth day, the history of Xuzhou was led by the cavalry general Zou Jian, and the conscript general Guo Miao was the general of the north, the false festival, and the supervisor of the north Huai army.

古文：刘遐部曲将李龙、史迭奉遐子肇代遐位以距默，临淮太守刘矫击破之，斩龙，传首京师。
现代文：刘遐的部曲将李龙、史迭拥戴刘遐的儿子刘肇代替刘遐职位，以此抗拒郭默，临淮太守刘矫击败了他们，将李龙斩首，把首级传到京城。
English: Liu Hui's subordinates, Li Long and Shi Di, supported Liu Hui's son, Liu Zhao, to replace Liu Hui's position, in order to resist Guo Mo. Liu Jia, the deputy governor of Huai, defeated them, beheaded Li Long, and sent the head to Beijing.

古文：秋七月癸丑，使持节、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史、平南将军、观阳伯应詹卒。
现代文：七月二十五，使持节、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史、平南将军、观阳县侯应詹死。
English: On July 25th, on the occasion of the Jizhi Festival, the military governor of Jiangzhou, the governor of Jiangzhou, the general of Pingnan and the marquis of Guanyang County Yingzhan died.

古文：八月，以给事中、前将军、丹阳尹温峤为平南将军、假节、都督，江州刺史。
现代文：八月，以给事中、前将军、丹扬尹温峤为平南将军、假节、都督，任江州刺史。
English: In August, Danyang Yin Wenjun, a former general, was appointed as the general of Pingnan, the governor of Lushi, and the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：九月，旱。
现代文：九月，大旱。
English: In September, there was a drought.

古文：李雄将张龙寇涪陵，执太守谢俊。
现代文：李雄的将领张龙侵扰涪陵，捉住了太守谢俊。
English: Li Xiong's general Zhang Long invaded Fuling and captured the governor Xie Jun.

古文：冬十月，封魏武帝玄孙曹励为陈留王，以绍魏。
现代文：十月，封魏武帝的玄孙曹劢为陈留王，以承继魏国。
English: In October, Cao Pi, the great-great-grandson of Emperor Wu of Wei, was named Chen Liu Wang to succeed the State of Wei.

古文：丙寅，卫将军、汝南王祐薨。
现代文：初十，卫将军、汝南王司马死。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wei general and Runan king Sima died.

古文：己巳，封皇弟岳为吴王。
现代文：十三日，封皇弟司马岳为吴王。
English: On the 13th, the emperor's younger brother Sima Yue was crowned King of Wu.

古文：车骑将军、南顿王宗有罪，伏诛，贬其族为马氏。
现代文：车骑将军、南顿王司马宗有罪，伏法被诛，贬其家族为马氏。
English: The cavalry general, Nantong Wang Sima Zong, was found guilty, arrested, and his family was denounced as the Ma clan.

古文：免太宰、西阳王羕，降为弋阳县王。
现代文：罢免太宰、西阳王司马，贬为弋阳县王。
English: Dazai and Xiyang King Sima was removed from office and demoted to King of Xiyang County.

古文：庚辰，赦百里内五岁以下刑。
现代文：二十四，大赦京师百里以内判五年以下徒刑之人。
English: Twenty-four, amnesty for those sentenced to less than five years of imprisonment within 100 kilometers of Beijing.

古文：是月，刘曜将黄秀、帛成寇酂，平北将军魏该帅众奔襄阳。
现代文：这个月，刘曜的将领黄秀、帛成侵犯赞阝地，平北将军魏该率领众人奔往襄阳。
English: This month, Liu You's generals Huang Xiu and Ruicheng invaded Zanhuang, and Pingbei's general Wei Gui led everyone to Xiangyang.

古文：十一月壬子，大阅于南郊。
现代文：十一月二十六日，在南郊大阅兵。
English: On November 26th, a large military parade was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：改定王侯国秩，九分食一。
现代文：改定王侯的封国爵秩，规定每九分抽一分赋税。
English: Revised the feudal peerage rank of princes, stipulating that one point of tax should be deducted for every nine points.

古文：石勒将石聪攻寿阳，不克，遂侵逡遒、阜陵。加司徒王导大司马、假黄钺、都督中外征讨诸军事以御之。
现代文：石勒的将领石聪进攻寿阳，没攻下，于是侵扰逡遒、阜陵，加封司徒王导为大司马、假黄钺、都督中外征讨诸军事以抵御他。
English: Shi Le's general, Shi Cong, attacked Shouyang, but failed to capture it, so he invaded Fuxing and Fuling, and sent troops to oppose him by enlisting Wang Du, the governor of Sidu, as the grand steward, Guo Huang, and the governor of the capital.

古文：历阳太守苏峻遣其将韩晃讨石聪，走之。
现代文：历阳太守苏峻派遣其将领韩晃讨伐石聪，把他赶走了。
English: Su Jun, the governor of Liyang, sent his general Han Xiao to attack Shicong and drive him away.

古文：时大旱，自六月不雨，至于是月。
现代文：当时天下大旱，从六月不下雨，直到这个月。
English: At the time, there was a severe drought, with no rain from June until this month.

古文：十二月，济岷太守刘闿杀下邳内史夏侯嘉，叛降石勒。
现代文：十二月，济磚太守刘杀了下邳内史夏侯嘉，反叛并投降了石勒。
English: In December, Liu, the governor of Jizhili, killed Xia Houjia, a member of the Lower Yunnan Shi, who rebelled and surrendered to Shile.

古文：梁王翘薨。
现代文：梁王司马翘死。
English: Liang Wang Sima is dead.

古文：二年春正月，宁州秀才庞遗起义兵，攻李雄将任回、李谦等，雄遣其将罗恆、费黑救之。
现代文：咸和二年正月，宁州秀才庞遗兴起义兵，进攻李雄的将领任回、李谦等人，李雄派他的将领罗恒、费黑救援。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Heian period, Ningzhou scholar Pang Yi raised a volunteer army and attacked Li Xiong's generals Hui, Li Qian and others. Li Xiong sent his generals Luo Heng and Fei Hei to rescue.

古文：宁州刺史尹奉遣裨将姚岳、硃提太守杨术援遗，战于台登，岳等败绩，术死之。
现代文：宁州刺史尹奉派手下副将姚岳、朱提的太守杨术援助庞遗，在台登作战，姚岳等战败，杨术战死。
English: Yin Bong, the governor of Ningzhou, sent his lieutenant general Yao Yue and the eunuch Yang Shu, the governor of Zhuti, to help. They fought in Taitung, Yao Yue and others were defeated, and Yang Shu died in battle.

古文：三月，益州地震。
现代文：三月，益州地震。
English: In March, there was an earthquake in Iksu.

古文：夏四月，旱。
现代文：四月，大旱。
English: In April, there was a drought.

古文：己未，豫章地震。
现代文：初五，豫章地震。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Yuzhang earthquake occurred.

古文：五月甲申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：五月初一，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of May, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丙戌，加豫州刺史祖约为镇西将军。
现代文：初三，加封豫州刺史祖约为镇西将军。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he was promoted to Zhenxi general.

古文：戊子，京师大水。
现代文：初五，京师发大水。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the capital of China, Beijing, was flooded.

古文：冬十月，刘曜使其子胤侵枹罕，遂略河南地。
现代文：十月，刘曜派他的儿子刘胤侵犯木包罕，于是攻占黄河以南地区。
English: In October, Liu You sent his son Liu Yan to invade Mubo Han, thus conquering the area south of the Yellow River.

古文：十一月，豫州刺史祖约、历阳太守苏峻等反。
现代文：十一月，豫州刺史祖约、历阳太守苏峻等反叛。
English: In November, the governor of Yuzhou, Zhishu Zuyo, and the governor of Liyang, Su Jun, rebelled.

古文：十二月辛亥，苏峻使其将韩晃入姑孰，屠于湖。
现代文：十二月初一，苏峻派他的将领进入姑孰，在于湖屠杀。
English: On the first day of December, Su Shun sent his generals into Guzheng to massacre the people in the lake.

古文：壬子，彭城王雄、章武王休叛，奔峻。
现代文：初二，彭城王司马雄、章武王司马休叛乱，投奔苏峻。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Pengcheng Wang Sima Xiong and Zhangwu Wang Sima Xiu rebelled and joined Su Jun.

古文：庚申，京师戒严。
现代文：初十，京师戒严。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, martial law was declared in Kyoto.

古文：假护军将军庾亮节为征讨都督，以右卫将军赵胤为冠军将军、历阳太守，使与左将军司马流帅师距峻，战于慈湖，流败，死之。
现代文：任护军将军庾亮假节为征讨都督，以右卫将军赵胤为冠军将军、历阳太守，让他们与左将军司马流一起率兵抵御苏峻，在慈湖交战，司马流战败而死。
English: He appointed the general of the escort army, Zou Liang, to be the governor of the capital on the occasion of the holiday, with the right guard general Zhao Yan as the champion general and Liyang as the governor, and let them lead the troops together with the left general Sima Liu to resist Su Jun and fight in Cihu. Sima Liu was defeated and died.

古文：假骁骑将军钟雅节，帅舟军，与赵胤为前锋，以距峻。
现代文：任骁骑将军钟雅假节，率领水军，与赵胤为前锋，以抵御苏峻。
English: He appointed the cavalry general Zhong Yafu to lead the navy, with Zhao Yan as the vanguard, to resist Su Jun.

古文：丙寅，徒封琅邪王昱为会稽王，吴王岳为琅邪王。
现代文：十六日，徙封琅王牙王司马昱为会稽王，吴王司马岳为琅王牙王。
English: On the 16th day of the month, King Sima Yi, the king of Shandong, was enthroned as the king of the association, and King Sima Yue, the king of Wu, was crowned as the king of Shandong.

古文：辛未，宣城内桓彝及峻战于芜湖，彝军败绩。
现代文：二十一日，宣城内史桓彝与苏峻在芜湖作战，桓彝的军队大败。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Xuancheng's Shi Huanqian and Su Jun fought in Wuhu, and Huanqian's army was soundly defeated.

古文：军骑将军郗鉴遣广陵相刘矩帅师赴京师。
现代文：车骑将军郗鉴派广陵相刘矩率兵奔赴京师。
English: The cavalry general Zou Jian sent the Guangling official Liu Rui and his soldiers to Beijing.

古文：三年春正月，平南将军温峤帅师救京师，次于寻阳，遣督护王愆期、西阳太守邓岳、鄱阳太守纪睦为前锋。
现代文：咸和三年正月，平南将军温峤率兵救援京师，驻扎在寻阳，派遣督护王愆期、西阳太守邓岳、鄱阳太守纪睦为前锋。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Heian period, Pingnan General Wen Kun led the troops to rescue the Beijing Division, stationed in Xuanyang, and dispatched the overseer Wang Shou, Xiyang Governor Deng Yue, and Xiyang Governor Ji Mu as forwards.

古文：征西大将军陶侃遣督护龚登受峤节度。
现代文：征西大将军陶侃派督护龚登接受温峤节度辖制。
English: The general of the Western Conquest, Tao Kan, sent the governor, Guo Xudeng, to accept the jurisdiction system of Wenqi Jiedu.

古文：钟雅、赵胤等次慈湖，王愆期、邓岳等次直渎。
现代文：钟雅、赵胤等驻扎在慈湖，王愆期、邓岳等驻扎在直渎。
English: Zhongya, Zhao Yan and others were stationed in Cihu, while Wang Xizhi, Deng Yue and others were stationed in Zhuozhu.

古文：丁未，峻济自横江，登牛渚。
现代文：二十八日，苏峻从横江过渡，登上牛渚。
English: On the 28th, Su Jun made the transition from the Yokoe River and boarded the Ushi Nagisa.

古文：二月庚戌，峻至于蒋山。
现代文：二月初一，苏峻到达蒋山。
English: On the first day of February, Su Jun arrived in Mount Jiang.

古文：假领军将军卞壸节，帅六军，及峻战于西陵，王师败绩。
现代文：朝廷任领军将军、汝南王司马祐为卫将军卞壶假节，率领六军，与苏峻在西陵交战，王师大败。
English: The leading general of the imperial court, King Sima Yu of Yunnan, led the Six Armies and fought against Su Jun in Xiling, and was defeated by Wang Shi.

古文：丙辰，峻攻青溪栅，因风纵火，王师又大败。
现代文：初七，苏峻攻打青溪栅，趁风放火，王师又大败。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Su Jun attacked Qingxi Grate, taking advantage of the wind to set fire, and Wang Shi was defeated again.

古文：尚书令、领军将军卞壸，丹阳尹羊曼，黄门侍郎周导，庐江太守陶瞻并遇害，死者数千人。
现代文：尚书令、领军将军卞壶，丹阳尹羊曼，黄门侍郎周导，庐江太守陶瞻都遇害，死了几千人。
English: Shang Shuling, the leading general Zou Jiao, Danyang Yin Yangman, Huangmen waiter Zhou Du, and the governor of the Li River, Tao Zhan, were all killed, and several thousand people died.

古文：庾亮又败于宣阳门内，遂携其诸弟与郭默、赵胤奔寻阳。
现代文：庾亮又在宣阳门内失败，便携带他的弟弟以及郭默、赵胤逃奔寻阳。
English: Zou Liang failed again at the gate of Xuanyang, so he took his younger brother, Guo Mo and Zhao Yan and fled to look for Xuanyang.

古文：于是司徒王导、右光禄大夫陆晔、荀崧等卫帝于太极殿，太常孔愉守宗庙。
现代文：于是司徒王导、右光禄大夫陆晔、荀崧等人在太极殿护卫天子，太守孔愉守护宗庙。
English: As a result, King Siddhartha, the doctor of the Right-Hand Path, Lu Yao, Yao, and others guarded the heavenly son in the Taiji Hall, and the daimyō, Kong You, guarded the ancestral temple.

古文：贼乘胜麾戈接于帝座，突入太后后宫，左右侍人皆见掠夺。
现代文：苏峻等贼众乘胜挥戈接近帝宫，冲入太后的后宫，左右侍从都被掠夺。
English: Su Jun and other thieves took advantage of the victory to approach the imperial palace, rushed into the harem of the empress dowager, and the attendants on both sides were plundered.

古文：是时太官唯有烧余米数石，以供御膳。
现代文：这时太官只有用剩余的几石米谷烧饭以供御膳。
English: At this time, the eunuch only had to use the remaining few kilos of rice to cook rice for the meal.

古文：百姓号泣，响震都邑。
现代文：百姓号啕大哭，声响震动都邑。
English: The people wailed loudly, and the whole city was shaken.

古文：丁巳，峻矫诏大赦，又以祖约为侍中、太尉、尚书令，自为骠骑将军、录尚书事。
现代文：初八，苏峻假诏大赦天下，又以祖约为侍中、太尉、尚书令，自任骠骑将军、录尚书事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Su Jun issued a fake edict of amnesty to the whole country. He also used his ancestor as an aide-de-camp, lieutenant, and official secretary, and appointed himself as a cavalry general and recorded official correspondence.

古文：吴郡太守庾冰奔于会稽。
现代文：吴郡太守庾冰逃奔到会稽。
English: The governor of Wu County, Bing Bing, fled to the auditorium.

古文：三月丙子，皇太后庾氏崩。
现代文：三月二十二，皇太后庾氏驾崩。
English: On March 22nd, Empress Dowager Shun passed away.

古文：夏四月，石勒攻宛，南阳太守王国叛，降于勒。
现代文：四月，石勒进攻宛地，南阳太守王国反叛，投降石勒。
English: In April, when Shile attacked the destination, Nanyang rebelled and surrendered to Shile.

古文：壬申，葬明穆皇后于武平陵。
现代文：二十四日，把明穆皇后葬在武平陵。
English: On the 24th, Empress Mingmu was buried in Wuping Mausoleum.

古文：五月乙未，峻逼迁天子于石头，帝哀泣升车，宫中恸哭。
现代文：五月十八，苏峻威逼天子迁往石头城，天子悲哀哭泣着上车，宫中恸哭。
English: On May 18th, Su Junwei forced Tianzi to move to Stone Town. Tianzi sadly cried as he got on the bus, and the palace cried.

古文：峻以仓屋为宫，遣管商、张瑾、弘徽寇晋陵，韩晃寇义兴。
现代文：苏峻以仓屋为王宫，派管商、张健、弘徽侵犯晋陵，韩晃侵犯义兴。
English: Su Jun used the warehouse as a royal palace, and sent the steward, Zhang Jian, and Honghui to invade Jin's tomb, and Han Xing to invade Yixing.

古文：吴兴太守虞潭与庚冰、王舒等起义兵于三吴。
现代文：吴兴太守虞谭与庾冰、王舒等在三吴发起义兵。
English: Wu Xingta guard Yu Tan, together with Yu Bing, Wang Shu and others, launched a volunteer army in Sanwu.

古文：丙午，征西大将军陶侃、平南将军温峤、护军将军庾亮、平北将军魏该舟军四万，次于蔡洲。
现代文：二十九日，征西大将军陶侃、平南将军温峤、护军将军庾亮、平北将军魏该率水军四万，驻扎在蔡州。
English: On the 29th, the general of the Western Expedition, Tao Kan, the general of the Southern Expedition, Wen Xuan, the general of the Defensive Expedition, Zou Liang, and the general of the Northern Expedition, Wei Jia, led a naval force of 40,000 and stationed in Caizhou.

古文：六月，韩晃攻宣城，内史桓彝力战，死之。
现代文：六月，韩晃进攻宣城，内史桓彝奋力作战而死。
English: In June, Han Xiao attacked Xuancheng, and Naishi Huan Yao died in the fierce battle.

古文：壬辰，平北将军、雍州刺史魏该卒于师。
现代文：十五日，平北将军、雍州刺史魏该死在军中。
English: On the fifteenth day, the general of Pingbei and the general of Yongzhou, Shi Wei, died in the army.

古文：庐江太守毛宝攻贼合肥戍，拔之。
现代文：庐江太守毛宝进攻戍守合肥之贼，攻占了合肥。
English: Mao Bao, the governor of the Minjiang River, attacked the thieves of Hefei, and captured Hefei.

古文：秋七月，祖约为石勒将石聪所攻，众溃，奔于历阳。
现代文：七月，祖约被石勒将领石聪攻击，兵众溃散，逃到历阳。
English: In July, Zuyo was attacked by Shile general Shi Cong, and the soldiers scattered and fled to Liyang.

古文：石勒将石季龙攻刘曜于蒲坂。
现代文：石勒的将领石季龙在蒲坂进攻刘曜。
English: Shi Le's general Shi Jilong attacked Liu You in Pusaka.

古文：八月，曜及石季龙战于高候，季龙败绩，曜遂围石生于洛阳。
现代文：八月，刘曜与石季龙在高侯作战，石季龙大败，刘曜于是把石生围困在洛阳。
English: In August, Liu You and Shi Jilong fought in Gaohou. Shi Jilong was defeated, and Liu You then besieged Shi Sheng in Luoyang.

古文：九月戊申，司徒王导奔于白石。
现代文：九月初三，司徒王导逃到白石。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, King Sitoru fled to Shiroishi.

古文：庚午，陶侃使督护杨谦攻峻于石头。
现代文：二十五日，陶侃让督护杨谦进攻据守石头城的苏峻。
English: On the 25th, Tao Kan let Yang Qian, the overseer and protector, attack Su Jun, the defender of Stone Town.

古文：温峤、庾亮阵于白石，竟陵太守李阳距贼南偏。
现代文：温峤、庾亮在白石列阵，竟陵太守李阳抵御贼兵南边的偏师。
English: Wen Xuan and Yao Liang were arrayed on the white stone, and Li Yang, the governor of the imperial mausoleum, defended himself against the south side of the robber soldiers.

古文：峻轻骑出战，坠马，斩之，众遂大溃。
现代文：苏峻率轻骑出战，坠下马来，被斩首，于是其众溃散。
English: Su Jun Rong lightly rode into battle, fell off his horse, was beheaded, and his people dispersed.

古文：贼党复立峻弟逸为帅。
现代文：贼党又立苏峻的弟弟苏逸为主率。
English: The kleptocrats also appointed Su Jun's younger brother, Su Yat, as the main leader.

古文：前交州刺史张琏据始兴反，进攻广州，镇南司马曾勰等击破之。
现代文：先前的交州刺史张琏占据始兴反叛，进攻广州，镇南司马曾勰等击败了他。
English: The previous Jiaozhou chief Zhang Zeng occupied Shixing, attacked Guangzhou, and was defeated by Zhenan Sima Zeng and others.

古文：冬十月，李雄将张龙寇涪陵，太守赵弼没于贼。
现代文：十月，李雄的将领张龙进犯涪陵，太守赵弼为贼所杀。
English: In October, Li Xiong's general Zhang Long broke into the imperial mausoleum, and the governor Zhao Wei was killed by the thieves.

古文：十二月乙未，石勒败刘曜于洛阳，获之。
现代文：十二月二十一日，石勒在洛阳击败刘曜，活捉了他。
English: On December 21, Shiller defeated Liu You in Luoyang and captured him alive.

古文：是岁，石勒将石季龙攻氐帅蒲洪于陇山，降之。
现代文：这一年，石勒的将领石季龙在陇山进攻氐族主帅蒲洪，蒲洪投降。
English: In the same year, Shi Le's general Shi Jilong attacked the leader of the Yao tribe, Pu Hong, in Shaoshan. Pu Hong surrendered.

古文：四年春正月，帝在石头，贼将匡术以苑城归顺，百官赴焉。
现代文：咸和四年正月，天子在石头城，贼将匡术献苑城投降，百官奔到那里。
English: In the first month of the 4th year of the Heian period, the Son of Heaven was in Stone Town, and the thief surrendered the Conqueror's Art to Garden City. Hundreds of officials rushed there.

古文：侍中钟雅、右卫将军刘超谋奉帝出，为贼所害。
现代文：侍中钟雅、右卫将军刘超谋划奉天子出城，被贼杀害。
English: The chamberlain Zhong Ya and the right guard general Liu Chao planned to leave the city to worship the Son of Heaven, but were killed by thieves.

古文：戊辰，冠军将军赵胤遣将甘苗讨祖约于历阳，败之，约奔于石勒，其将牵腾帅众降。
现代文：二十五日，冠军将军赵胤派遣甘苗到历阳征讨祖约，击败祖约，祖约投奔石勒，他的将领牵腾率众投降。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the champion general Zhao Yan sent Gan Miao to Liyang to conquer Zuyo, defeated Zuyo, Zuyo went to Shile, and his generals led the crowd to surrender.

古文：峻子硕攻台城，又焚太极东堂、秘阁，皆尽。
现代文：苏峻的儿子苏硕进攻台城，又焚烧太极殿东堂、秘阁，都化为灰烬。
English: Su Jun's son, Su Shuo, attacked Taicheng and burned the East Hall of the Taiji Temple and the Secret Pavilion to ashes.

古文：城中大饥，米斗万钱。
现代文：城中大饥，一斗米值万钱。
English: There was great famine in the city, and a barrel of rice was worth thousands of dollars.

古文：二月，大雨霖。
现代文：二月，天降大雨。
English: In February, it rained heavily.

古文：丙戌，诸军攻石头。
现代文：十三日，各路大军进攻石头。
English: On the 13th, large armies from all directions attacked the stone.

古文：李阳与苏逸战于柤浦，阳军败。
现代文：李阳与苏逸在木且蒲交战，李阳兵败。
English: Li Yang and Su Yat fought in Mucchi Pu, Li Yang was defeated.

古文：建威长史滕含以锐卒击之，逸等大败。
现代文：建威长史滕含率精兵进攻，苏逸等人大败。
English: Jian Wei, Chang Sheng and other elite soldiers attacked, and Su Yi and others were soundly defeated.

古文：含奉帝御于温峤舟，群臣顿首号泣请罪。
现代文：滕含护卫天子到温峤的船上，群臣叩头，痛哭流涕地请罪。
English: Tenghan escorted Tianzi to the ship of Wenqi, and the courtiers bowed their heads and pleaded guilty with tears.

古文：弋阳王羕有罪，伏诛。
现代文：弋阳王司马有罪，伏法被杀。
English: Wang Sima of Shenyang was found guilty and killed.

古文：丁亥，大赦。
现代文：十四日，大赦天下。
English: On the 14th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：时兵火之后，宫阙灰烬，以建平园为宫。
现代文：时值兵火之后，宫阙已成灰烬，便以建平园为宫。
English: After the war, the palace was reduced to ashes, and Jianping Garden was built as a palace.

古文：甲午，苏逸以万余人自延陵湖将入吴兴。
现代文：二十一日，苏逸率一万多人从延陵湖将要进入吴兴。
English: On the 21st, Su Yizhong led more than 10,000 people from Yanling Lake to enter Wuxing.

古文：乙未，将军王允之及逸战于溧阳，获之。
现代文：二十二日，将军王允之与苏逸在溧阳交战，活捉了他。
English: On the 22nd, General Wang Yunzhi fought with Su Yat-sen in Shenyang and captured him alive.

古文：壬寅，以湘州并荆州。
现代文：二十九日，把湘州并到荆州。
English: On the 29th, Xiangzhou was merged into Jingzhou.

古文：刘曜太子毗与其大司马刘胤帅百官奔于上邽，关中大乱。
现代文：刘曜的太子刘熙与大司马刘胤率百官逃到上圭阝，于是关中大乱。
English: Liu Xi, the prince of Liuyang, and Ma Liuyin, the chief secretary, led hundreds of officials to flee to Shangguiyu, and there was a big riot in Guanzhong.

古文：三月壬子，以征西大将军陶侃为太尉，封长沙郡公；车骑将军郗鉴为司空，封南昌县公；平南将军温峤为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，封始安郡公。
现代文：三月初十，任征西大将军陶侃为太尉，封为长沙郡公；车骑将军郗鉴为司空，封为南昌县公；平南将军温峤为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，封为始安郡公。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month of the year, the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, Tao Kan, was appointed as the first lieutenant and was appointed as the public official of Changsha County; the general of the cavalry and cavalry, Xuan Jian, was appointed as the secretary of the Air Force and was appointed as the public official of Nanchang County; the general of the Pingnan Army, Wen Xuan, was appointed as the general of the cavalry and cavalry, and the general of the Kaifu Army and the three divisions were appointed as the public official of Shi'an County.

古文：其余封拜各有差。
现代文：其余百官封爵拜官各有差等。
English: The remaining hundred officials were knighted or appointed, with varying degrees of success.

古文：庚午，以右光禄大夫陆晔为卫将军、开府仪同三司，复封高密王纮为彭城王。
现代文：十六日，任右光禄大夫陆晔为卫将军、开府仪同三司。又封高密王司马为彭城王。
English: On the 16th, the doctor of Uguanglu, Lu Hao, was appointed as the general of Wei, and the three officers of Kaifu Yi and Gaomi Wang Sima were appointed as the king of Pengcheng.

古文：以护军将军庾亮为平西将军、都督扬州之宣城江西诸军事、假节，领豫州刺史，镇芜湖。
现代文：任护军将军庾亮为平西将军，都督扬州的宣城长江以西诸军事、假节，领豫州刺史，镇守芜湖。
English: He was appointed as the general of the garrison of Pingxi, the military commander of Xuancheng west of the Yangtze River, the governor of Yangzhou, the leader of the false festival, the leader of the history of Yuzhou, and the town guard of Lugu Lake.

古文：夏四月乙未，骠骑将军、始安公温峤卒。
现代文：四月二十三日，骠骑将军、始安公温峤病死。
English: On April 23rd, the general of the imperial cavalry, Prince Shi'an, died of illness.

古文：秋七月，有星孛于西北。
现代文：七月，彗星在西北出现。
English: In July, the comet appeared in the northwest.

古文：会稽、吴兴、宣城、丹阳大水。
现代文：会稽、吴兴、宣城、丹扬发大水。
English: Cui Jing, Wu Xing, Xuancheng, and Danyang are all in trouble.

古文：诏复遭贼郡县租税三年。
现代文：诏书免除遭到贼兵侵扰的各郡县三年租税。
English: The imperial edict exempted counties and counties that had been invaded by bandits from paying taxes for three years.

古文：八月，利曜将刘胤等帅众侵石生，次于雍。
现代文：八月，刘曜的将领刘胤等率众侵扰石生，驻扎在雍。
English: In August, Liu Yang's general Liu Yin and others led the crowd to invade Shisheng and stationed in Yong.

古文：九月，石勒将石季龙击胤，斩之，进屠上邽，尽灭刘氏，坑其党三千余人。
现代文：九月，石勒的将领石季龙攻击刘胤，杀了他，进而屠杀上圭阝，尽灭刘氏之族，坑杀其同党三千多人。
English: In September, Shi Le's general Shi Jilong attacked Liu Yin and killed him, and then slaughtered Shang Gui Yao, annihilating the Liu clan and killing more than three thousand of his party members.

古文：冬十月，庐山崩。
现代文：十月，庐山崩塌。
English: In October, Mount Lushan collapsed.

古文：十二月壬辰，右将军郭默害平南将军、江州刺史刘胤，太尉陶侃帅众讨默。
现代文：十二月二十四日，右将军郭默杀害平南将军、江州刺史刘胤，太尉陶侃率兵征讨郭默。
English: On December 24th, the right-wing general Guo Mei killed the general Pingnan and the governor of Jiangzhou Liu Yin, and the lieutenant Tao Kan led the soldiers to recruit Guo Mei.

古文：是岁，天裂西北。
现代文：这一年，西北边的天空破裂。
English: This year, the sky in the northwest cracked.

古文：五年春正月己亥，大赦。
现代文：咸和五年正月初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of Xianhe, the general amnesty began.

古文：癸亥，诏除诸将任子。
现代文：二十五日，下诏让诸将子弟因父兄功绩可保任官职。
English: On the 25th, an edict was issued allowing the sons and sons of generals to retain their official posts because of their father's and brother's achievements.

古文：二月，以尚书陆玩为尚书左仆射，孔愉为右仆射。
现代文：二月，任尚书陆玩为尚书左仆射，孔愉为右仆射。
English: In February, Ren Shangshu Lujuan was appointed as Shangshu's left-handed archer, and Kong Yu as his right-handed archer.

古文：夏五月，旱，且饥疫。
现代文：五月，大旱，外加饥荒瘟疫。
English: In May, drought, famine and pestilence set in.

古文：乙卯，太尉陶侃擒郭默于寻阳，斩之。
现代文：十九日，太尉陶侃在寻阳捉住郭默斩首。
English: On the 19th, Lieutenant Tao Kan captured Guo Mei and beheaded him while he was searching for the sun.

古文：石勒将刘徵寇南沙，都尉许儒遇害，进入海虞。
现代文：石勒的将领刘征侵犯南沙，都尉许儒被害，刘征进入海虞。
English: Shihle's general Liu Zheng invaded Nansha, captain Xu Ru was killed, and Liu Zheng entered the sea.

古文：六月癸巳，初税田，亩三升。
现代文：六月二十八日，开始抽田税，每亩收三升。
English: On June 28th, the rice-pulling tax was raised to three liters per mu.

古文：秋八月，石勒僭即皇帝位，使其将郭敬寇襄阳。
现代文：八月，石勒僭位为皇帝，使其将领郭敬进犯襄阳。
English: In August, Shi Le was enthroned as emperor, and his generals led Guo Jing to invade Xiangyang.

古文：南中郎将周抚退归武昌，中州流人悉降于勒。
现代文：南中郎将周抚退归武昌，中州流散之人全部投降石勒。
English: Nan Zhong Lang retreated Zhou Fu to Wuchang, and all the people scattered in Zhongzhou surrendered to Shile.

古文：郭敬遂寇襄阳，屯于樊城。
现代文：郭敬于是毁襄阳，屯扎在樊城。
English: As a result, Guo Jing destroyed Yangyang and resettled in Lucheng.

古文：九月，造新宫，始缮苑城。
现代文：九月，建造新宫，开始修整苑城。
English: In September, the construction of the new palace and the renovation of the garden city began.

古文：甲辰，徒乐成王钦为河间王，封彭城王纮子浚为高密王。
现代文：初十，改封乐成王司马钦为河间王，封彭城王司马的儿子司马俊为高密王。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Sima Qin, the king of Lecheng, was changed to the king of Hebei, and Sima Jun, the son of Sima, the king of Pengcheng, was changed to the king of Gaomi.

古文：冬十月丁丑，幸司徒王导第，置酒大会。
现代文：十月十四日，天子来到司徒王导府第，设酒宴大会臣僚。
English: On October 14th, the heavenly son came to the headquarters of King Stutts, and held a banquet for the ministers of the General Assembly.

古文：李雄将李寿寇巴东、建平，监军毌丘奥、太守杨谦退归宜都。
现代文：李雄的将领李寿侵犯巴东、建平，监军毋丘奥、太守杨谦退归宜都。
English: Li Xiong's general Li Shou invaded Badong and Jianping, the supervisors of the army fled to Chuo, and the governor Yang Qian retreated to Yidu.

古文：十二月，张骏称臣于石勒。
现代文：十二月，张骏向石勒称臣。
English: In December, Zhang Xuan declared his allegiance to Shi Le.

古文：六年春正月癸巳，刘徵复寇娄县，遂掠武进。
现代文：咸和六年正月初一，刘徵又进犯娄县，并掠夺武进。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of the Heian period, Liu Zheng again invaded Min County and plundered Wujin.

古文：乙未，进司空郗鉴都督吴国诸军事。
现代文：初三，晋升司空郗鉴都督吴国诸军事。
English: In the third year of his junior high school, he was promoted to the post of the military governor of the State of Wu.

古文：戊午，以运漕不继，发王公已下千余丁，各运米六斛。
现代文：二十六日，因漕运接继不上，派王公以下千余家丁，各运六斛米。
English: On the 26th, due to the fact that the rowing transport could not be continued, more than a thousand households under Wang Gong were sent, each carrying six ounces of rice.

古文：二月己丑，以幽州刺史、大单于段辽为骠骑将军。
现代文：闰正月二十七日，任幽州刺史，大单于段辽为骠骑将军。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the leap year, he was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou, and Dasan became the cavalry general of Duanliao.

古文：三月壬戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月初一，有日蚀出现。
English: On the first day of March, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：癸未，诏举贤良直言之士。
现代文：二十二日，下诏要求举荐贤良直言之士。
English: On the 22nd, he issued an edict calling for the promotion of virtuous and forthright people.

古文：夏四月，旱。
现代文：四月，大旱。
English: In April, there was a drought.

古文：六月丙申，复故河间王颙爵位，封彭城王植子融为乐成王，章武王混子珍为章武王。秋七月，李雄将李寿侵阴平，武都氐帅杨难敌降之。
现代文：六月初七，恢复故河间王司马的爵位。封章武王司马混的儿子司马珍为章武王。七月，李雄的将领李寿侵犯阴平，武都氐族主帅杨难敌向他投降了。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of June, the title of the late King Sima of Kawama was restored. Sima Zhen, the son of King Sima of Zhangwu, was named King of Zhangwu. In July, Li Xiong's general Li Shou invaded Yinping, and Yang Nanchong, the leader of the Wudu Yi tribe, surrendered to him.

古文：八月庚子，以左仆射陆玩为尚书令。
现代文：八月十二日，任左仆射陆玩为尚书令。
English: On August 12th, Ren Zuofu was ordered by Shang Shuling to shoot and play.

古文：七年春正月辛未，大赦。
现代文：咸和七年正月十五，大赦天下。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the seventh year of the Hamon era, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：三月，西中郎将赵胤、司徒中郎匡术攻石勒马头坞，克之。
现代文：三月，西中郎将赵胤、司徒中郎匡术攻克了石勒的马头坞。
English: In March, Nishichiro defeated Zhao Tan and Sito Chungro Kuwaju to capture the horse dock in Shile.

古文：勒将韩雍寇南沙及海虞。
现代文：石勒的将领韩雍侵犯南沙和海虞。
English: Shihle's general Han Yong invaded the Nansha and Haiyu.

古文：夏四月，勒将郭敬陷襄阳。
现代文：四月，石勒的将领郭敬攻陷襄阳。
English: In April, Guo Jing, the general of Shile, invaded Xiangyang.

古文：五月，大水。
现代文：五月，发大水。
English: In May, there was a big flood.

古文：秋七月丙辰，诏诸养兽之属，损费者多，一切除之。
现代文：七月初三，诏令各种养禽兽之类，多有耗费，一律废除。
English: On the third day of the seventh lunar month, the edict was issued to abolish all kinds of animal husbandry.

古文：太尉陶侃遣子平西参军斌与南中郎将桓宣攻石勒将郭敬，破之，克樊城。
现代文：太尉陶侃派遣他的儿子平西参军陶斌与南中郎将桓宣进攻石勒的将领郭敬，大破敌军，攻克樊城。
English: Captain Tao Kan dispatched his son Ping Xi to join the army Tao Bin and Nan Zhong Rong to attack the general Guo Jing of Shile, defeating the enemy army and conquering Shicheng.

古文：竟陵太守李阳拔新野、襄阳，因而戍之。
现代文：竟陵太守李阳攻下新野、襄阳，于是戍守在那里。
English: After all, Li Yang, the governor of the imperial mausoleum, conquered Xinyo and Xiangyang, so he stayed there.

古文：冬十一月壬子朔，进太尉陶侃为大将军。诏举贤良。
现代文：十一月初一，晋封太尉陶侃为大将军。下诏举荐贤良。
English: On the first day of November, Lieutenant Tao Kan was promoted to the rank of general. The following edict recommended him for promotion.

古文：十二月庚戌，帝迁于新宫。
现代文：十二月二十九日，天子迁到新宫。
English: On December 29, the emperor moved to the new palace.

古文：八年春正月辛亥朔，诏曰： 昔犬贼纵暴，宫室焚荡，元恶虽翦，未暇营筑。
现代文：咸和八年正月初一，帝诏说： 从前贼寇放纵暴虐，宫室被焚毁，元凶虽已翦除，但还来不及营建。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of Xianhe, the emperor said: In the past, thieves and robbers indulged in violence, the palace was burned, and although the culprit was eliminated, it was too late to build.

古文：有司屡陈，朝会逼狭，遂作斯宫，子来之劳，不日而成。
现代文：有司屡次陈奏朝会地方狭窄，于是建造了这座宫殿，臣民竭力效忠，不久就落成。
English: Yushi repeatedly told the imperial court that the place was too narrow, so he built this palace, and the subjects tried their best to be loyal, and it was soon completed.

古文：既获临御，大飨群后，九宾充诞，百官象物。
现代文：既已迁居，大宴群臣，九宾充盈宫庭，百官如龙凤灵物。
English: Having already moved in, a grand banquet of courtiers, nine guests fill the palace courtyard, and hundreds of officials are like dragons and phoenixes.

古文：知君子勤礼，小人尽力矣。
现代文：因此知君子勤勉于礼，小人竭尽心力了。
English: Therefore, know that the gentleman is diligent in courtesy, and the villain has made every effort.

古文：思蠲密纲，咸同斯惠，其赦五岁刑以下。 
现代文：于是想捐除细密法网，共同享此德惠，赦免五年以下徒刑的罪人。 
English: Therefore, he wanted to donate to remove the fine legal network, jointly enjoy this virtue and benefit, and pardon the criminals sentenced to less than five years of imprisonment.

古文：令诸郡举力人能举千五百斤以上者。
现代文：命令各郡推举能举起一千五百斤以上的大力士。
English: ordered all counties to nominate wrestlers who can lift more than fifteen hundred pounds.

古文：丙寅，李雄将李寿陷宁州，刺史尹奉及建宁太守霍彪并降之。
现代文：十六日，李雄的将领李寿攻陷宁州，刺史尹奉与建宁太守霍彪一并投降。
English: On the 16th, Li Xiong's general Li Shou captured Ningzhou, and Yin Bong surrendered together with the governor of Jianning, Huo Biao.

古文：癸酉，以张骏为镇西大将军。
现代文：二十三日，任张骏为镇西大将军。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Ye was appointed as the general of Zhenxi.

古文：丙子，石勒遣使致赂，诏焚之。
现代文：二十六日，石勒派使者送来货物，诏令将它焚烧掉。
English: On the 26th, Shiller sent an emissary to deliver the goods, and ordered that they be burned.

古文：夏四月，诏封故新蔡王弼弟邈为新蔡王。
现代文：四月，下诏封已故新蔡王司马弼的弟弟司马邈为新蔡王。
English: In April, Sima Ye, the younger brother of the late new Cai Wang Sima Ye, was crowned the new Cai Wang.

古文：以束帛征处士寻阳翟汤、会稽虞喜。
现代文：用束帛之礼征召寻阳的翟汤、会稽的虞喜两个处士。
English: With the courtesy of a bunch of bamboo shoots, two clerks are summoned, the sun-seeker, Yu Tang, and the auditor, Yu Xi.

古文：五月，有星陨于肥乡。
现代文：五月，有星在肥乡陨落。
English: In May, a star fell in Feixiang.

古文：麒麟、驺虞见于辽东。
现代文：麒麟、驺虞在辽东出现。
English: Kirin and Shougu appeared in Liaodong.

古文：乙未，车骑将军、辽东公慕容廆卒，子皝嗣位。
现代文：初三，车骑将军、辽东公慕容磒死，其子慕容皇光继位。
English: On the third day of the first month, the chariot and cavalry general, Liaodong Gong Murong, died, and his son Murong Wangguang succeeded to the throne.

古文：六月甲辰，抚军将军王舒卒。
现代文：六月二十六日，抚军将军王舒死。
English: On June 26, the general of the Fuzhou army, Wang Shu, died.

古文：秋七月戊辰，石勒死，子弘嗣伪位，其将石聪以谯来降。
现代文：七月二十一日，石勒死，儿子石弘继伪职之位，他的将领石聪献谯投降。
English: On July 21, Ishihiro died of strangulation, and his son, Ishihiro, succeeded to the post. His general, Ishitsugu, surrendered.

古文：冬十月，石弘将石生起兵于关中，称秦州刺史，遣使来降。
现代文：十月，石弘的将领石生在关中起兵，称为秦州刺史，派使来投降。
English: In October, Ishihiro's general, Ishio, raised an army in Guanzhong, known as Qinzhou Jishi, and sent an envoy to surrender.

古文：石弘将石季龙攻石朗于洛阳，因进击石生，俱灭之。
现代文：石弘的将领石季龙在洛阳进攻石朗，趁机进攻石生，都被消灭。
English: Shi Hong's general, Shi Jilong, attacked Shi Lang in Luoyang and took the opportunity to attack Shi Sheng. Both were wiped out.

古文：十二月，石生故部将郭权遣使请降。
现代文：十二月，石生先前的部将郭权派使请求投降。
English: In December, Shisheng's previous commander Guo Quan sent an envoy to request surrender.

古文：九年春正月，陨石于凉州二。
现代文：咸和九年正月，凉州落下两颗陨石。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Xianhe, two meteorites fell in Liangzhou.

古文：以郭权为镇西将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：任郭权为镇西将军、秦州刺史。
English: He appointed Guo Quan as the general of Zhenxi and Qinzhou as the general of Shishi.

古文：二月丁卯，加镇西大将军张骏为大将军。
现代文：二月二十三日，加封镇西大将军张骏为大将军。
English: On February 23rd, Zhang Ye, the West General of Jafeng Town, was promoted to the rank of General.

古文：三月丁酉，会稽地震。
现代文：三月二十四日，会稽地震。
English: On March 24th, there was an earthquake.

古文：夏四月，石弘将石季龙使石斌攻郭权于郿，陷之。
现代文：四月，石弘的将领石季龙派石斌攻打地的郭权，攻陷地。
English: In April, Shi Hong's general Shi Jilong sent Shi Bin to attack Guo Quan and capture the land.

古文：六月，李雄死，其兄子班嗣伪位。
现代文：六月，李雄死，他兄长的儿子李班继承伪位。
English: In June, Li Xiong died, and his elder brother's son Li Ban succeeded to the pseudo-throne.

古文：乙卯，太尉、长沙公陶侃薨。
现代文：十三日，太尉、长沙公陶侃死。
English: On the 13th day, Lieutenant, Changsha Gong Tao Kan died.

古文：大旱，诏太官撤膳；省刑，恤孤寡，贬费节用。
现代文：天下大旱，诏令太官减少御膳，省刑法，恤孤寡，节俭费用。
English: There was a great drought in the country, and the emperor ordered the eunuchs to reduce the number of meals, the provincial criminal law, the pension for widows and orphans, and the cost of frugality.

古文：辛末，加平西将军庾亮都督江、荆、豫、益、梁、雍六州诸军事。
现代文：二十九日，加封平西将军庾亮都督江、荆、益、梁、雍等六州诸军事。
English: On the 29th, Qafeng Pingxi's general Zou Liang led the military forces from six states, including Dujiangyan, Jing, Yixing, Liang and Yong.

古文：秋八月，大雩。
现代文：八月，大行求雨之祭。
English: In August, the festival of praying for rain is held.

古文：自五月不雨，至于是月。
现代文：从五月不下雨直到这个月。
English: It doesn't rain from May until this month.

古文：九月戊寅，散骑常侍，卫将军、江陵公陆晔卒。
现代文：九月初八，散骑常侍、卫将军、江陵公陆晔死。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the year, the straggler, the general of the imperial guard, and the prince of Gangneung died.

古文：冬十月，李雄子期弑李班而自立，班弟玝与其将焦会、罗凯等并来降。
现代文：十月，李雄的儿子李期杀掉李班而自立，李班的弟弟李王午与他的将领焦哙、罗凯等都来投降。
English: In October, Li Xiong's son Li Ji killed Li Ban and became independent. Li Ban's brother Li Wangwu and his generals Jiao Wei and Luo Kai all surrendered.

古文：十一月，石季龙弑石弘，自立为天王。
现代文：十一月，石季龙杀死石弘，自立为天王。
English: In November, Shi Jilong killed Shi Hong and declared himself emperor.

古文：十二月丁卯，以东海王冲为车骑将军，琅邪王岳为骠骑将军。
现代文：十二月二十八日，任东海王司马冲为车骑将军，琅王牙王司马岳为骠骑将军。
English: On December 28th, Wang Sima Chong of the East China Sea was appointed as the chariot and cavalry general, and Wang Zha Wang Sima Yue was appointed as the horse and cavalry general.

古文：兰陵人硃纵斩石季龙将郭祥，以彭城来降。
现代文：兰陵人朱纵把石季龙的将领郭祥斩首，率彭城前来投降。
English: Lanling man Zhu Zheng beheaded Shi Jilong's general Guo Xiang and led Pengcheng to surrender.

古文：咸康元年春正月庚午朔，帝加元服，大赦，改元，增文武位一等，大酺三日，赐鳏寡孤独不能自存者米，人五斛。
现代文：咸康元年正月初一，天子加冠，大赦天下，改变年号，文武百官增位一等，大宴饮三天，赐给鳏寡孤独不能养活自己的人米谷，每人五斛。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Xiankang, the Son of Heaven was crowned, the world was pardoned, the year was changed, a hundred civil and military officials were promoted to the first class, a grand banquet was held for three days, and the widows and widowers who were alone and could not feed themselves were given rice grains, five baht each.

古文：二月甲子，帝亲释奠。
现代文：二月二十六日，天子亲自设爵于神前祭祀。
English: On the 26th of February, the Son of Heaven himself was enthroned in front of the shrine.

古文：扬州诸郡饥，遣使振给。
现代文：扬州各郡大饥，派使者赈给。
English: The counties of Yangzhou were very hungry and sent emissaries to bring food.

古文：三月乙酉，幸司徒府。
现代文：三月十七日，天子驾幸司徒府。
English: On March 17th, the heavenly messenger came to Shuto-fu.

古文：夏四月癸卯，石季龙寇历阳，加司徒王导大司马、假黄钺、都督征讨诸军事，以御之。
现代文：四月初六，石季龙侵犯历阳，加封司徒王导为大司马、假黄钺、都督征讨诸军事，以此抵御敌军。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the year, Shi Jilong invaded Liyang, and Wang Du, the governor of Jiefu Province, was enlisted into the military as the grand steward, the false Huang Di, and the governor, in order to resist the enemy army.

古文：癸丑，帝观兵于广莫门，分命诸将，遣将军刘仕救历阳，平西将军赵胤屯慈湖，龙骧将军路永戍牛渚，建武将军王允之戍芜湖。
现代文：十六日，天子在广阳门前阅兵，分命诸将，派将军刘仕救援历阳，平西将军赵胤驻扎慈湖，龙骧将军路永戍守牛渚，建武将军王允之戍守芜湖。
English: On the 16th, Tianzi held a military parade in front of Guangyang Gate and dispatched generals, sending General Liu Si to rescue Liyang, Pingxi General Zhao Yan stationed at Cixi Lake, Longyu General Lu Yongqin to guard Niuzhu, and Jianwu General Wang Yunzhi to guard Lugu Lake.

古文：司空郗鉴使广陵相陈光帅众卫京师，贼退向襄阳。
现代文：司空郗鉴派广陵相陈光率众保卫京师，贼兵撤退奔回襄阳。
English: Sikyong Jian dispatched Guangling Xiang Chen to lead the people to defend the capital, and the bandits retreated back to Xiangyang.

古文：戊午，解严。
现代文：二十一日，解除戒严。
English: On the 21st, martial law was lifted.

古文：石季龙将石遇寇中庐，南中郎将王国退保襄阳。
现代文：石季龙的将领石遇侵犯中庐，南中郎将王国退兵保卫襄阳。
English: Shi Jilong's general Shi encountered the encroaching Zhongyi, and Nan Zhongro withdrew his troops from the kingdom to defend Xiangyang.

古文：秋八月，长沙、武陵大水。
现代文：八月，长沙、武陵发大水。
English: In August, floods hit Changsha and Wuling.

古文：束帛徵处士翟汤、郭翻。
现代文：用束帛礼征召处士翟汤和郭翻。
English: With a bunch of bowls of soup and Guo Fu, the officers were called up.

古文：冬十月乙未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十月初一，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of October, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：是岁，大旱，会稽余姚尤甚，米斗五百价，人相卖。
现代文：这一年，天大旱，会稽、余姚特别厉害，一升米值五百钱，人们互相卖妻子儿女。
English: This year, there was a severe drought, and the cities of Huizhi and Yuyao were particularly hard-hit. One liter of rice was worth 500 yuan, and people sold their wives and children to each other.

古文：二年春正月辛巳，彗星见于奎。以吴国内史虞潭为卫将军。
现代文：咸康二年正月十八，彗星在奎宿出现，任吴国内史虞潭为卫将军。
English: On the 18th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Hamkang, a comet appeared in Kweiju, and Wu's domestic scholar Yu Tan became the general of Wei.

古文：二月，算军用税米，空悬五十余万石，尚书谢褒巳下免官。
现代文：二月，计算军队使用的税米，亏空五十余万石，尚书谢褒以下皆被免官。
English: In February, after calculating the tax rice used by the army, the deficit was more than half a million koku, and everyone from Shang Shu to Xie Bo was dismissed.

古文：辛亥，立皇后杜氏，大赦，增文武位一等。
现代文：十九日，立杜氏为皇后，大赦天下，文武百官增位一等。
English: On the 19th, the Duke and Duchess were proclaimed empresses, the country was amnestied, and one hundred civil and military officials were promoted to the first class.

古文：庚申，高句骊遣使贡方物。
现代文：二十八日，高句骊派使臣进贡当地产物。
English: On the 28th, Goguryeo envoys paid tribute to the local products.

古文：三月，旱，诏太官减膳，免所旱郡县繇役。
现代文：三月，大旱，诏令太官减御膳，免除受旱各郡县的徭役。
English: In March, when there was a severe drought, the emperor ordered the eunuchs to reduce their meals and exempt them from the labor of the counties affected by the drought.

古文：戊寅，大雩。
现代文：十六日，大行求雨之祭。
English: On the sixteenth day, a large procession to pray for rain.

古文：夏四月丁巳，皇后见于太庙。
现代文：四月二十六日，皇后在太庙拜见。
English: On April 26th, the Empress paid her respects at the Great Temple.

古文：雨雹。
现代文：下冰雹。
English: The hail is falling.

古文：秋七月，扬州会稽饥，开仓振给。
现代文：七月，扬州、会稽大饥，官府开仓赈给。
English: In July, Yangzhou, the auditor general was starving, and the government opened a warehouse to feed them.

古文：冬十月，广州刺史邓岳遣督护王随击夜郎，新昌太守陶协击兴古，并克之。
现代文：十月，广州刺史邓岳派督护王随攻击夜郎，新昌太守陶协攻击兴古，都攻下来了。
English: In October, the Guangzhou ruler Deng Yue sent the governor Wang Guorong to attack Yelang, and the Xinchang governor Tao Xie attacked Xinggu. Both were defeated.

古文：诏曰： 历观先代，莫不褒崇明祀，宾礼三恪。
现代文：诏书说： 历观前代，没有谁不褒扬推崇重大祭祀，礼遇前代三王朝的子孙。
English: The edict said: Looking back on the previous generation, there is no one who does not praise and respect the great sacrifices, and treat the descendants of the previous three dynasties with courtesy.

古文：故杞宋启土，光于周典；宗姬侯卫，垂美汉册。
现代文：所以夏禹商纣的后代封为杞国、宋国，光耀于周朝典籍；周王室的后代封为卫侯，永垂汉朝史册。
English: Therefore, the descendants of Xia Yu Shangyu were given the titles of Shao and Song, and they shined in the classics of the Zhou Dynasty; the descendants of the Zhou royal family were given the titles of Wei Hou, and they will forever remain in the history of the Han Dynasty.

古文：自顷丧乱，庶邦殄悴，周汉之后，绝而莫继。
现代文：近来因丧乱，众邦困苦，周代、汉代的后代，灭绝而没有人继承。
English: Recently, due to the turmoil, the states are suffering, the descendants of the Zhou and Han dynasties are extinct and there is no successor.

古文：其祥求卫公、山阳公近属，有履行修明，可以继承其祀者，依旧典施行。 
现代文：要详细寻求卫公、山阳公的近属，如有能履行节操修治明德，可以继承宗祀的人，依照旧典施行。 
English: It is necessary to search in detail for close relatives of Wei Gong and Sanyang Gong, and if there are people who can carry out the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline.

古文：新作硃雀浮桁。
现代文：在朱雀新建并船而成的浮桥。
English: A newly built pontoon bridge in Suzaku.

古文：十一月，遣建威将军司马勋安集汉中，为李期将李寿所败。
现代文：十一月，派建威将军司马勋安顿汉中，被李期的将领李寿击败。
English: In November, he sent General Jianwei Sima Xun to settle in Han and was defeated by General Li Shou.

古文：三年春正月辛卯，立太学。
现代文：咸康三年正月初四，建立太学。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of Xiankang, he established Taigaku.

古文：夏六月，旱。
现代文：六月，天旱。
English: In June, there was a drought.

古文：冬十一月丁卯，慕容皝自立为燕王。
现代文：十月十四日，慕容皇光自立为燕王。
English: On October 14th, Murong Wangguang declared himself the King of Swallows.

古文：四年春二月，石季龙帅众七万，击段辽于辽西，辽奔于平岗。
现代文：咸康四年二月，石季龙率七万兵众，在辽西进攻段辽，段辽逃到平岗。
English: In February of the 4th year of Xiankang, Shi Jilong led 70,000 soldiers to attack Liao in the west of Liao, and Liao fled to Pinggang.

古文：夏四月，李寿弑李期。僭即伪位，国号汉。
现代文：四月，李寿杀了李期，僭号即伪位，立国号为汉。
English: In April, Li Shou killed Li Ji, and the posthumous name was changed to Han.

古文：石季龙为慕容皝所败，癸丑，加皝征北大将军。
现代文：石季龙被慕容皇光击败，初三，加封慕容皇光为征北大将军。
English: Shi Jilong was defeated by Murong Wangguang, and in the third year of junior high school, Murong Wangguang was awarded the title of General of the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：五月乙未，以司徒王导为太傅、都督中外诸军事，司空郗鉴为太尉，征西将军庾亮为司空。
现代文：五月十六日，任司徒王导为太傅，都督朝庭内外诸军事，司空郗鉴为太尉，征西将军庾亮为司空。
English: On the 16th of May, Wang Dao, who was appointed as the King's Magistrate, became the Taifu, the military governor both inside and outside the court, Jian Jian as the captain, and Jian Liang, the general of the Western Expedition, as the Jian Jian.

古文：六月，改司徒为丞相，以太傅王导为之。
现代文：六月，把司徒之职改为丞相，以太傅王导担任。
English: In June, the post of the steward was changed to the chancellor, and Ether Fu Wang Du assumed the post.

古文：秋八月丙午，分宁州置安州。
现代文：七月二十八日，从宁州划分出安州。
English: On July 28, Anzhou was separated from Ningzhou.

古文：五年春正月辛丑，大赦。
现代文：咸康五年正月二十五日，大赦天下。
English: On the 25th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of Hamkang, the general amnesty began.

古文：三月乙丑，广州刺史邓岳伐蜀，建宁人孟彦执李寿将霍彪以降。
现代文：二月二十，广州刺史邓岳讨伐蜀地，建宁人孟彦捉住了李寿的将领霍彪来投降。
English: On February 20, Meng Yan of Jianning captured the general of Li Shou, Huo Biao, to surrender.

古文：夏四月辛未，征西将军庾亮遣参军赵松击巴郡、江阳，获石季龙将李闳、黄桓等。
现代文：四月二十七日，征西将军庾亮派参军赵松攻击巴郡、江阳，俘虏石季龙的将领李闳、黄植等人。
English: On April 27th, Zhao Song, the general of the Western Conquest, sent his troops to attack Ba County and Jiangyang, and captured the generals of Shi Jilong, Li Kun and Huang Zhi.

古文：秋七月庚申，使持节、侍中、丞相、领扬州刺史、始兴公王导薨。
现代文：七月十八日，使持节、侍中、丞相、领扬州刺史、始兴公王导死。
English: On July 18th, Emissary Ji Jie, chamberlain, chancellor, leader Yangzhou Shishi, and Prince Shixing died.

古文：辛酉，以护军将军何充录尚书事。
现代文：十九日，任护军将军何充录尚书事。
English: On the 19th, the general in charge of the garrison, He Zhengtu, recorded his report.

古文：八月壬午，复改丞相为司徒。
现代文：八月初十，又将丞相改名为司徒。
English: On the tenth day of August, he also changed his name from "Josei" to "Seto."

古文：辛酉，太尉、南昌公郗鉴薨。
现代文：某日，南昌公郗鉴死。
English: One day, Nanchang Gongjun Zongjian died.

古文：九月，石季龙将夔安、李农陷沔南，张貉陷邾城，因寇江夏、义阳，征虏将军毛宝、西阳太守樊俊、义阳太守郑进并死之。
现代文：九月，石季龙的将领夔安、李农攻陷沔南，张貉攻陷邾城，趁势侵犯江夏、义阳，征虏将军毛宝、西阳太守樊俊、义阳太守郑进都战死。
English: In September, Shi Jilong's generals, Gong An and Li Nong, took the lead in the invasion of southern Anhui, and Zhang Ye took the lead in the invasion of Lucheng, taking advantage of the situation to invade Jiangxia and Yiyang. The captured generals, Mao Bao, Xiyang governor Gong Jun, and Yiyang governor Zheng Jin all died in the battle.

古文：夔安等进围石城，竟陵太守李阳距战，破之，斩首五千余级。
现代文：夔安等进而围攻石城，竟陵太守李阳拒敌作战，攻破敌军，斩首五千余级。
English: Huanan and others then besieged Shicheng, and Li Yang, the governor of the imperial mausoleum, refused to fight the enemy, defeated the enemy army, and beheaded more than five thousand people.

古文：安乃退，遂略汉东，拥七千余家迁于幽冀。
现代文：夔安才撤退，于是侵略汉东，掳七千多家迁到幽州、冀州。
English: It was only after the withdrawal of Yan'an that they invaded the Hantong and took more than seven thousand people captive and moved them to Yuzhou and Jizhou.

古文：冬十二月丙戌，以骠骑将军、琅邪王岳为司徒。
现代文：十二月十六日，任骠骑将军、琅王牙王司马岳为司徒。
English: On December 16th, he was appointed as the cavalry general and the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the horse.

古文：李寿将李奕寇巴东，守将劳扬战败，死之。
现代文：李寿的将领侵犯巴东，守将劳扬战败而死。
English: Li Shou's generals invaded Badong, and guard general Laoyang was defeated and died.

古文：六年春正月庚子，使持节、都督江豫益梁雍交广七州诸军事、司空、都亭侯庾亮薨。
现代文：咸康六年正月初一，使持节、都督江、豫、益、梁、雍、交、广七州诸军事、司空、都亭侯庾亮死。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of Xiankang, Jizhixi, the governor of Jiangsu, Yu, Yi, Liang, Yong, Jiaotong, the military of the seven provinces of Guangxi, Si Kuo, and Du Ting Houyi died.

古文：辛亥，以左光禄大夫陆玩为司空。
现代文：十二日，任左光禄大夫陆玩为司空。
English: On the 12th, he was appointed to the post of Doctor of the Left Guanglu and the post of Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：二月，慕容皝及石季龙将石成战于辽西，败之，献捷于京师。
现代文：二月，慕容皇光与石季龙的将领石成在辽西交战，击败石成，向京师报捷。
English: In February, Murong Wangguang and Shijilong's general Shicheng fought in western Liao Province, defeating Shicheng and reporting the victory to the Beijing division.

古文：庚辰，有星孛于太微。
现代文：十一日，彗星出现在太微星座。
English: On the 11th, the comet appeared in the Taimu constellation.

古文：三月丁卯，大赦。
现代文：三月二十九日，大赦天下。
English: On March 29th, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：以车骑将军、东海王冲为骠骑将军。
现代文：以车骑将军、东海王司马冲为骠骑将军。
English: The chariot-riding general, the East Sea king Sima Chong, is the horse-riding general.

古文：李寿陷丹川，守将孟彦、刘齐、李秋皆死之。
现代文：李寿攻陷丹川，守将孟彦、刘齐、李秋都战死。
English: Li Shou captured Tanchuan, and the defenders Meng Yan, Liu Qi, and Li Qiu all died in the battle.

古文：秋七月乙卯，初依中兴故事，朔望听政于东堂。
现代文：七月十八日，开始依照中兴旧制，于初一、十五在东堂听政。
English: On July 18th, in accordance with the old ZTE system, they began to listen to the government in the East Hall on the first and fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：冬十月，林邑献驯象。
现代文：十月，林邑献上驯服的大象。
English: In October, Lin Yip presented a tame elephant.

古文：十一月癸卯，复琅邪，比汉丰沛。
现代文：十一月初七，免除琅王牙郡赋税徭役，与汉代的丰、沛二邑相同。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the first month of the year, the tax and service of Wangya County was exempted, which was the same as that of Feng and Pei in the Han Dynasty.

古文：七年春二月甲子朔，日有蚀之，己卯，慕容皝遣使求假燕王章玺，许之。
现代文：咸康七年二月初一，有日蚀。十六日，慕容皇光派使要求代理燕王的印章玉玺，得到同意。
English: There was a solar eclipse on the first day of the second month of the seventh year of the Ham Kang. On the 16th, Emperor Murong sent an envoy to request the seal jade urn of the acting King Yan, which was approved.

古文：三月戊戌，杜皇后崩。
现代文：三月初五，杜皇后死。
English: On March 5th, Empress Du passed away.

古文：夏四月丁卯。葬恭皇后于兴平陵。
现代文：四月初五，把恭皇后葬在兴平陵。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth lunar month, Queen Gong was buried in the Xingping Mausoleum.

古文：实编户，王公已下皆正土断白籍。
现代文：核实编户人口，王公以下都实行侨居户口编入所在郡县并予以专门登记。
English: After verifying the population of the registered households, Wang Gong and his subordinates all implemented the implementation of the registration of the overseas residents' household registration into the county and county in which they are located and specially registered.

古文：秋八月辛酉，骠骑将军、东海王冲薨。
现代文：八月初一，骠骑将军、东海王司马冲死。
English: On the first day of August, the general of the imperial cavalry, the East Sea King Sima Chong, died.

古文：九月，罢太仆官。
现代文：九月，罢免太仆官职。
English: In September, he was removed from the post of eunuch.

古文：冬十二月癸酉，司空、兴平伯陆玩薨。
现代文：十二月十四，司空、兴平伯爵陆玩死。
English: On December 14th, Siku and Count Xingping died.

古文：除乐府杂伎。
现代文：废乐府杂伎。
English: Wasted Lefu Zogi.

古文：罢安州。
现代文：废除安州。
English: Ann State is abolished.

古文：八年春正月己未朔，日有蚀之。乙丑，大赦。
现代文：咸康八年正月初一，有日蚀。初七，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of Xiankang, there was a solar eclipse. On the seventh day of the first month, there was a general amnesty.

古文：三月，初以武悼杨皇后配飨武帝庙。
现代文：三月，开始以武悼杨皇后配享武帝庙。
English: In March, they began to commemorate Empress Yang with martial arts and enjoy the Wudi Temple.

古文：夏六月庚寅，帝不豫，诏曰： 朕以眇年，获嗣洪绪，托于王公之上，于兹十有八年。
现代文：六月初五，天子身体不适，下诏说： 我从幼年时起继承洪业，托身于王公之上，到今一十八年。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, the heavenly son was not feeling well, and he said: I have been inheriting Hongye since I was a child, and I have been relying on the prince for eighteen years.

古文：未能阐融政道。翦除逋昆，夙夜战兢，匪遑宁处。
现代文：未能开创和睦的政道，翦灭灾祸，日夜战战兢兢，来不及安居。
English: Unable to create a harmonious political path and eliminate disasters, they live in fear day and night. It is too late to live in peace.

古文：今遘疾殆不兴，是用震悼于厥心。
现代文：现在遭遇疾病恐不能康复，因此内心十分惊悸悲痛。
English: Now that I am suffering from an illness, I am afraid that I will not be able to recover, so my heart is very shocked and sad.

古文：千龄眇眇，未堪艰难。
现代文：千岁遥远，不能忍受其艰难。
English: A thousand years away, unable to bear its hardships.

古文：司徒、琅邪王岳，亲则母弟，体则仁长，君人之风，允塞时望。
现代文：司徒、琅王牙王司马岳，按亲疏关系则是同母之弟，仁德长厚，有人君之风，盛享当时的声望。
English: According to the relationship of kinship, Sitoru and Sima Yue, the King of the Dragon King, were the younger brothers of the same mother. They were benevolent, had the manners of princes, and enjoyed great popularity at that time.

古文：肆尔王公卿士，其辅之！
现代文：你们各位王公卿士，要辅佐他！
English: All of you princes and princesses, support him!

古文：以祗奉祖宗明祀，协和内外，允执其中。
现代文：以供奉祖宗明祀，协和朝廷内外，言行符合中正之道。
English: In order to worship the ancestor Zongming, and to be in harmony with the imperial court and beyond, the words and deeds are in line with the middle and correct way.

古文：呜呼，敬之哉！
现代文：唉！要恭敬啊！
English: Alas! be respectful!

古文：无坠祖宗之显命。 
现代文：不要毁坠祖宗的美好命令。 
English: Don't ruin the beautiful order of our ancestors.

古文：壬辰，引武陵王晞、会稽王昱、中书监庾冰、中书令何充、尚书令诸葛恢并受顾命。
现代文：初六，引进武陵王司马晞、会稽王司马昱、中书监庾冰、中书令何充、尚书令诸葛恢一并接受遗命。
English: On the sixth day of the junior high school year, Wuling Wang Simak, Wang Simak, the inspector of the association, the supervisor of the Chinese book, Zhibing, the director of the Chinese book, He Chong, and the director of the Chinese book, Zhu Ge, all accepted the last will and testament.

古文：癸巳，帝崩于西堂，时年二十二，葬兴平陵，庙号显宗。
现代文：初七，天子在西堂驾崩，享年二十二岁，葬在兴平陵，庙号显宗。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Tenshi died in the West Hall at the age of twenty-two, and was buried in the Xingping Mausoleum, with the temple name Xianzong.

古文：帝少而聪敏，有成人之量。
现代文：成帝年幼时聪明，有成人的器量。
English: When Emperor Cheng was young, he was smart and had the maturity of an adult.

古文：南顿王宗之诛也，帝不之知，及苏峻平，问庾亮曰： 常日白头公何在？ 
现代文：南顿王司马宗伏诛时，成帝不知道，等苏峻谋反平息之后，成帝问庾亮： 往日那个白头公在哪里？ 
English: When the king of Nantong, Sima Zong, was put to death, Emperor Cheng did not know. After Su Shun's rebellion had subsided, Emperor Cheng asked Zhaoliang, "Where is the old Baotou Prince?"

古文：亮对以谋反伏诛，帝泣谓亮曰： 舅言人作贼，便杀之，人言舅作贼，复若何？ 
现代文：庾亮回答因谋反被杀。成帝对庾亮哭着说： 舅舅说别人作贼，就把他杀了，别人如果说舅舅作贼，又该怎么办？ 
English: Hao Liang replied that he was killed for plotting rebellion. Cheng Di said to Hao Liang in tears: "If my uncle said that someone else was a thief, he would be killed. If someone else said that my uncle was a thief, what should I do?

古文：亮惧，变色。
现代文：庾亮害怕得连脸都变了色。
English: Zhao Liang was so scared that his face even changed color.

古文：庾怿尝送酒于江州刺史王允之，允之与犬，犬毙，惧而表之。
现代文：庾怿曾经给江州刺史王允之送酒，允之喂狗，狗被毒死，恐惧地上表奏明。
English: He once gave wine to Wang Yunzhi, the governor of Jiangsu Province, and fed his dog to Yunzhi. The dog was poisoned to death, and his fear was evident on the surface.

古文：帝怒曰： 大舅已乱天下，小舅复欲尔邪？ 
现代文：成帝大怒道： 大舅已经祸乱天下，小舅又如此吗？ 
English: Emperor Cheng said angrily, "My great uncle has already caused havoc in the world, will my younger brother do the same?

古文：怿闻，饮药而死。
现代文：庾怿听说后饮药而死。
English: After hearing the news, Zhai drank medicine and died.

古文：然少为舅氏所制，不亲庶政。
现代文：然而年少被舅舅限制，不能亲理各种政事。
English: However, he was restricted by his uncle at a young age and could not personally handle various political affairs.

古文：及长，颇留心万机，务在简约，常欲于后园作射堂，计用四十金，以劳费乃止。
现代文：等到年长后，很留心国家大事，力求简约，曾经想在后园作一个射堂，计算要用四十金，因耗费财物而停止。
English: When he got older, he paid close attention to national affairs and strived for simplicity. He once wanted to build a shooting gallery in his backyard, but stopped because of the expense.

古文：雄武之度，虽有愧于前王；恭俭之德，足追踪于住烈矣。
现代文：成帝雄壮威武的器度，虽然比不上前代帝王；但恭敬节俭的美德，就足以追踪前代英烈了。
English: Although Emperor Cheng Rong's majestic and powerful demeanor is not comparable to that of previous emperors, the virtue of respect and frugality is enough to trace the heroes of previous generations.

古文：康皇帝讳岳，字世同，成帝母弟也。
现代文：康皇帝，名司马岳，字世同，是成帝的同母之弟。
English: Emperor Kang, also known as Emperor Ma Yue, is the younger half-brother of Emperor Cheng.

古文：咸和元年封吴王，二年徙封琅邪王；九年拜散骑常侍，加骠骑将军，咸康五年迁侍中、司徒。
现代文：咸和元年封为吴王，二年追封为琅邪王；九为为散骑常侍，加骠骑将军；咸康五年升任侍中、司徒。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Hamgyong was given the title of King of Wu; two years later, he was given the title of King of Sin; nine years later, he was given the title of a knight-errant and a general; and in the fifth year of the Heian period, Hamgyong was promoted to the position of a chamberlain and a steward.

古文：八年六月庚寅，成帝不豫，诏以琅邪王为嗣。
现代文：八年六月庚寅，成帝身体不适，颁诏以琅邪王为继承人。
English: In June of the eighth year, Emperor Go-In, Emperor Cheng was unwell, and issued an imperial edict naming King Gongye as his successor.

古文：癸巳，成帝崩。
现代文：癸已，成帝去世。
English: Emperor Chengxing has passed away.

古文：甲午，即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：甲午，康帝即位，大郝天下。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Emperor Kangxi ascended to the throne.

古文：诸屯戍文武及二千石官长，不得辄离所局而来奔赴。
现代文：在各地屯兵驻守的方武将领和地方郡守官长，不可擅离职守前来奔丧。
English: Fangwu generals and heads of local county garrisons who have garrisons stationed in various regions are not allowed to leave the garrison without permission and come to the funeral.

古文：己亥，封成帝子丕为琅邪王，奕为东海王。
现代文：已亥，封成帝这子司马丕为琅邪王，马马奕为东海王。
English: Already, Emperor Fengcheng's son Sima Yi is the king of evil, and Ma Ma Yi is the king of the East Sea.

古文：时帝谅阴不言，委政于庾冰、何充。
现代文：当时康帝正处居丧期间不能多言，委托庾冰、何充处理政务。
English: At that time, Emperor Kang was in the period of mourning and could not say much, entrusting Yao Bing and He Chong to handle government affairs.

古文：秋七月丙辰，葬成皇帝于兴平陵。
现代文：秋七月丙辰，把成皇帝安葬在兴平陵。
English: Emperor Cheng was buried in the Xingping Mausoleum in the autumn and July.

古文：帝亲奉奠于西阶，既发引，徒行至阊阖门，升素舆，至于陵所。
现代文：康帝亲自在西边祭奠，灵车启行后，康帝徒步至阊阖门，登上素色舆车，直到陵园。
English: Kandy himself held a memorial service on the west side. After the hearse set off, Kandy walked to the main gate, boarded the plain-colored public car, and drove to the cemetery.

古文：己未，以中书令何充为骠骑将军。
现代文：已未，以中书令何充为骠骑将军。
English: It has not yet been decided whether He Zongcheng will be appointed as general of the cavalry.

古文：八月辛丑，彭城王纮薨。
现代文：八月辛丑，彭城王司马纮去世。
English: In August, Pengcheng Wang Simayu passed away.

古文：以江州刺史王允之为卫将军。
现代文：任江洲刺史王允之为卫将军。
English: He was appointed as the general of Jiangsu Province.

古文：九月，诏琅邪国及府史进位各有差。
现代文：九月，诏令琅邪国及府吏增进官位各有等级不同。
English: In September, the imperial edict was issued to promote officials to various ranks.

古文：冬十月甲午，卫将军王允之卒。
现代文：冬十月甲午，卫将军王允之去世。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of October in winter, Guard General Wang Yunzhi passed away.

古文：十二月，增文武位二等。
现代文：十二月，文官武将增位二等。
English: In December, the ranks of civil officers and military commanders were raised to the second class.

古文：壬子，立皇后褚氏。
现代文：壬子，立褚氏为皇后。
English: Imoko, the Empress of the Tatehata clan.

古文：建元元年春正月，改元，振恤鳏寡孤独。
现代文：建元元年春正月，改年号，振济鳏寡孤独。
English: In the first month of spring of the first year of Jianyuan, the year name was changed, and Zhenji was widowed and lonely.

古文：三月，以中书监庾冰为车骑将军。
现代文：三月，任命中书监庾冰为车骑将军。
English: In March, Zou Bing, China's chief librarian, was appointed to the post of general of the cavalry.

古文：夏四月，益州刺史周抚、西阳太守曹据伐李寿，败其将恆于江阳。
现代文：夏四月，益州刺史周抚、西阳太守曹据讨伐李寿，在江阳打败了李寿部将李恒。
English: In the summer of April, Zhou Fu of Yizhou and Cao Cao of Xiyang fought against Li Shou and defeated Li Heng of Li Shou in Jiangyang.

古文：五月，旱。
现代文：五月，天旱。
English: In May, there was a drought.

古文：六月壬午，又以束帛征处士寻阳翟汤、会稽虞喜。
现代文：六月壬午，又以束帛为礼微召处士寻阳人翟汤、会稽人虞喜。
English: In the afternoon of June, officials were also invited to seek yang people to make soup, and the auditor Yu Xi was invited to make soup with bamboo shoots.

古文：有司奏，成帝崩一周，请改素服，御进膳如旧。
现代文：有关部门奏报，成帝去世已有一周，请改去素服，皇宫进膳如同往常。
English: Relevant departments reported that it had been a week since the death of Emperor Chengdu. Please change to plain clothes. The Imperial Palace will be open for meals as usual.

古文：壬寅，诏曰： 礼之降杀，因时而寝兴，诚无常矣。
现代文：壬寅，诏称： 礼仪的降减，因时而兴，实无常规。
English: Ren Yin said: The reduction of etiquette is due to the times, and there is really no rule.

古文：至于君亲相准，名教之重，莫之改也。
现代文：至于君主遵守的准则，是正名实份的礼教核心，无人可以改变。
English: As for the principle of the monarch's observance, it is the core of proper etiquette, and no one can change it.

古文：权制之作，盖出近代，虽曰适事，实弊薄之始。
现代文：权宜之制，大概出自近代，虽说适合，其实是轻视败坏礼教的开端。
English: The expedient system, probably from modern times, although suitable, is actually the beginning of despising corrupt etiquette.

古文：先王崇之，后世犹怠，而况因循，又从轻降，义弗可矣。 
现代文：先王尊崇的事，后世尚有懈怠，何况因循守旧，又从轻边减，这是在义理上所不允许的。 
English: It is logically impermissible for future generations to be lax in honoring the things that were revered by the previous king, let alone to follow the old ways and take them lightly.

古文：石季龙帅众伐慕容皝，皝大败之。
现代文：石季龙带领士兵进攻慕容皝，幕容皝打败了他们。
English: Shi Jilong led the soldiers to attack Murong Yao, and Makong Yao defeated them.

古文：秋七月，石季龙将戴开帅众来降。
现代文：秋七月，石季龙部将戴开帅众来降。
English: In autumn and July, Shiji dragon club will wear open shoes and come down.

古文：丁巳，诏曰： 慕容皝摧殄羯寇，乃云死没八万余人，将是其天亡之始也。
现代文：丁巳，颁诏： 慕容皝摧毁羯寇，称死者有八万余人，这大概是上天灭亡期族的始兆。
English: Ding Si, issued an edict: Murong Xuan destroyed the Qiang Qiao, saying that the dead were more than eighty thousand people, which was probably the first sign of the destruction of the Qiang Qiao.

古文：中原之事，宜加筹量。
现代文：中原之事，应多加筹划。
English: In the case of Nakahara, more planning should be done.

古文：且戴开已帅部党归顺，宜见慰劳。
现代文：再者戴开带领部下归顺，见受到慰劳。
English: Furthermore, Dai led his subordinates to surrender and was consoled.

古文：其遣使诣安西、骠骑，咨谋诸军事。 
现代文：请派人到安西将军、骠骑将军处，商议诸军事。 
English: Please send someone to General Anxi and General Xie to discuss military matters.

古文：以辅国将军、琅邪内史桓温为前锋小督、假节，帅众入临淮，安西将军庾翼为征讨大都督，迁镇襄阳。
现代文：以辅国将军、琅邪内史桓温为前锋小督、假节，率领士众进入临淮，安西将军庾翼任征讨大都督，移守襄阳。
English: With the general of the Auxiliary Provinces, Shih Kuan-Wen of the Yangtze Dynasties as the vanguard, and Xiao Guo and Fu Jie leading the soldiers into Linhuai, General Anxi was appointed as the grand governor of the conquest and moved to Xiangyang.

古文：庚申，晋陵、吴郡灾。
现代文：庚申，晋陵、吴郡灾荒。
English: Goshun, Jinling, and Wuzhong County were hit by natural disasters.

古文：八月，李寿死，子势嗣伪位。
现代文：八月，李寿死了，其子李势继承其位。
English: In August, Li Shou died, and his son Li Xiang succeeded him.

古文：石季龙使其将刘宁攻陷狄道。
现代文：石季龙派部将刘宁攻陷狄道。
English: Shi Jilong's faction captured Liu Ning from Di Dao.

古文：冬十月辛巳，以车骑将军庾冰都督荆江司雍益梁六州诸军事、江州刺史，以骠骑将军何充为中书监、都督扬豫二州诸军事、扬州刺史、录尚书事，辅政。
现代文：冬十月辛巳，以车骑将军庾冰都督荆、江、司、雍、益、梁六州诸军事、江州刺史，任骠骑将军何充为中书监、都督扬、豫二州诸军事、扬州刺史、录尚书事，辅佐执政。
English: In the winter and October, the general riding a chariot and horse was appointed as the military governor of Jing, Jiang, Si, Yong, Yi and Liang of the six states and the chief historian of Jiangzhou, and the general riding a chariot and horse was appointed as the chief librarian of the Middle Kingdom, the military governor of Yang, the military governor of the two states of Henan and Yangzhou, the chief historian of Yangzhou, the chief historian of the six states and the chief historian of Jiangzhou, and the assistant governor.

古文：以琅邪内史桓温都督青徐兗三州诸军事、徐州刺史，褚裒为卫将军、领中书令。
现代文：任琅邪内史桓温都督青、徐、兖三州诸军事、徐州刺史，褚裒任卫将军、并中书令。
English: He was appointed as the military governor of the three states of Qing, Xu, and Han, the military governor of Xuzhou, the military governor of Xizhou, the general of Wei, and the commander of the Chinese army.

古文：十一月己巳，大赦。
现代文：十一月己巳，大赦。
English: In November, the amnesty came to an end.

古文：十二月，石季龙侵张骏，骏使其将军谢艾拒之，大战于河西，季龙败绩。
现代文：十二月，石季龙侵犯张骏，张骏派其将军谢艾抵抗，在河西激战，季龙大败。
English: In December, Shi Jilong invaded Zhang Ye, Zhang Ye sent his general Xie Ai to resist, and fought a fierce battle in Hexi. Ji Long was defeated.

古文：十二月，高句骊遣使朝献。
现代文：十二月，高句骊遣派使使者朝贡。
English: In December, Gao Juxuan sent an envoy to bring tribute.

古文：二年春正月，张骏遣其将和驎、谢艾讨南羌于阗和，大破之。
现代文：二年春正月，张骏遣其将和驎、谢艾到阗和讨伐南羌，大胜。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, Zhang Xuan sent his generals He Jie and Xie Ai to Jiuyuan to fight against Nan Jiuyuan and won a great victory.

古文：二月，慕容皝及鲜卑帅宇文归战于昌黎，归众大败，奔于漠北。
现代文：二月，慕容皝同鲜卑帅首领宇文归在昌黎交战，宇文归部大败，逃往大漠以北。
English: In February, Murong Yao fought with the leader of the army, Uwen Gui, in Changli. Uwen Gui suffered a crushing defeat and fled to the north of the desert.

古文：四月，张骏将张瓘败石季龙将王擢于三交城。
现代文：四月，张骏部将张瓘于三交城打败石季龙部将王擢。
English: In April, Zhang Xibe defeated Shi Jilong and promoted Wang to the position of vice-premier in Sanjiao City.

古文：秋八月丙子，进安西将军庾翼为征西将军。
现代文：秋八月丙子，进升安西将军庾翼为征西将军。
English: In the autumn and August, he was promoted to the general of Anxi Province and became the general of Western Conquest.

古文：庚辰，持节、都督司雍梁三州诸军事、梁州刺史、平北将军、竟陵公桓宣卒。
现代文：庚辰，持节、都督司、雍、梁三州诸军事、梁州刺史、平北将军、竟陵公桓宣去世。
English: Geng Chen, Jixi, the governor of the capital, Yong, Liang, the military commanders of the three states, Liang Zhou, the general of Pingbei, and the general of Jingling passed away.

古文：丁巳，以卫将军褚裒为特进、都督徐兗二州诸军事、兗州刺史，镇金城。
现代文：闰八月丁巳，以卫将军褚裒为特进、都督徐、兖二州诸军事、兖州刺史，镇金城。
English: At the end of August, with the Wei general Zou as the special advance, the governor Xu, the military of the two states Zou, the history of the state Zou, and the town of Jincheng.

古文：九月，巴东太守杨谦击李势将申阳，走之，获其将乐高。
现代文：九月，巴东太守杨谦攻打李势和李势将申阳，李势军败逃，抓到了他的将领乐高。
English: In September, Yang Qian, the governor of Badong, attacked Li Xiang and Li Xiang's general Shenyang. Li Xiang's army was defeated and fled, and his general Lego was captured.

古文：丙申，立皇子聃为皇太子。
现代文：丙申，立皇子司马聃为皇太子。
English: According to Hsin, the prince Sima Yi was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：戊戌，帝崩于式乾殿。
现代文：戊戌，康帝于式乾殿去世。
English: Emperor Kang died at the Imperial Palace.

古文：时年二十三，葬崇平陵。
现代文：当年二十三岁，葬在崇平陵。
English: He was 23 years old at the time and was buried in the Chongping Mausoleum.

古文：初，成帝有疾，中书令庾冰自以舅氏当朝，权侔人主，恐异世之后，戚属将疏，乃言国有强敌，宜立长君，遂以帝为嗣。
现代文：当初，成帝身患疾病，中书令庾冰自以娘舅的身份执掌大权，权势与皇帝不相上下，担心更换朝代之后，亲戚关系将会疏远，便称国家面临强敌，应立年龄稍大的君主，于是立康帝为继承人。
English: At first, Emperor Cheng fell ill, and the Emperor's edict ordered Yu Bing to assume power as the uncle of the emperor. The emperor's power was on a par with that of the emperor. Fearing that after the replacement of the dynasty, the relationship between relatives would become estranged, he said that the country was facing a strong enemy, and that a slightly older monarch should be appointed. Therefore, Emperor Kang was appointed as the heir.

古文：制度年号，再兴中朝，因改元曰建元。
现代文：想改年号，以国中兴，因而改年号为建元。
English: He wanted to change the era name to Guozhongxing, so he changed the era name to Jianyuan.

古文：或谓冰曰： 郭璞谶云 立始之际丘山倾 ，立者，建也；始者，元也；丘山，讳也。 
现代文：有人对庚冰说： 郭璞谶书预言 立始之际丘山倾 ，立是 建 ；始是 元 ；丘山是名。 
English: Someone said to Geng Bing: Guo Yanshu predicted that at the time of the beginning, the hills would be tilted, and the standing would be built; the beginning would be the source; and the hills would be the name.

古文：冰瞿然，既而叹曰： 如有吉凶，岂改易所能救乎？ 
现代文：庚冰很惊讶，接着感叹道： 如果有吉凶，岂是改年号所能挽救的？ 
English: Geng Bing was very surprised, and went on to lament: If there is good luck or bad luck, can changing the year be saved?

古文：至是果验云。
现代文：至此果然应验。
English: So far, the dream has come true.

古文：史臣曰：肆虐滔天，岂伊朝夕。
现代文：史臣曰：肆虐滔天，岂在朝夕。
English: Shichen said, "Is it morning or evening when the sky is raging?"

古文：若乃详刑不怨，庶情犹仰，又可以见逆顺之机焉。
现代文：如若断狱审慎而无人怨恨，众心尚存敬仰，又可以由此窥见逆顺的重要。
English: If the prison break is prudent and there is no resentment, and the hearts of the people still have respect, we can also see the importance of the ups and downs.

古文：成帝因削弱之资，守江淮之地，政出渭阳，声乖威服。
现代文：成帝凭着已削弱的力量，守江淮之地，政令出自舅氏，不能以威力慑服海内。
English: Emperor Cheng used his weakened strength to defend the land between the Yangtze River and the Huai River. The order came from his uncle, and he could not use his power to deter the invasion.

古文：凶徒既纵，神器阽危，京华元敖之资，宫室类咸阳之火。
现代文：歹徒纵恣，社稷濒危，京城没有敖庾那样的财富，宫室遭到咸阳似的大火。
English: Criminals are running amok, society is in danger, the capital does not have the same wealth as Kyoto, and the imperial palace was destroyed by a fire similar to the one that destroyed Kyoto.

古文：桀犬吠尧。封狐嗣乱，方诸后羿，曷若斯之甚也。
现代文：桀犬吠尧，恶人如封狐作乱，与后羿时相比，那时岂有如此之甚。
English: Compared to the post-war period, when dogs barked and evil-doers such as foxes wreaked havoc, how different things were back then.

古文：反我皇驾，不有晋文之师，系于苞桑，且赖陶公之力。
现代文：皇舆归返，没有晋文似的军队，使王朝根深蒂固，还须仰赖陶公之力。
English: After the return of the emperor, there was no army like the Jin Dynasty, so the dynasty was deeply rooted, and it had to rely on the power of Tao Gong.

古文：古之侯服，不幸臣家，天子宣游，则避宫北面，闻诸遗策，用为恆范。
现代文：古代王侯，不临臣家，天子出游四方，则避开正殿北面而坐，听从前人遗留的方略，用作长久的典范。
English: In ancient times, princes did not visit the homes of their subjects, and the emperor traveled in all directions. Instead, they avoided the main hall and sat to the north, following the strategy left behind by their predecessors, which was used as a long-term model.

古文：显宗于王导之门，敛衣前拜，岂鲁公受玉之卑乎！
现代文：显宗于王导门下，整衣前拜，岂不如鲁公受玉般谦卑!
English: Isn't it better for Lu Gong to be as humble as a pearl, than to live under Wang Du and bow before getting dressed?

古文：帝亦克俭于躬，庶能激扬流弊者也。赞曰：惟皇夙表，余舅为毗。
现代文：皇帝如能躬行俭约，才能整治时弊。赞曰：皇帝经常表示，舅氏为我之佐。
English: The emperor can only rectify the ills of the times if he is able to live frugally. Zhan said: The emperor often said that his uncle was my assistant.

古文：勤于致寇，拙于行师。
现代文：勤于招致寇虏，拙于出师反击。
English: He was diligent in inviting the invaders, but he failed to counterattack.

古文：火及君屋，兵缠帝帷。
现代文：烈火殃及皇宫，兵戈危及帝位。
English: Fires engulfed the imperial palace, and warfare threatened the imperial throne.

古文：石头之驾，海内含悲。
现代文：石头成帝去世，海内同含悲心。
English: When Emperor Shih Tzu died, the whole country was filled with compassion.

古文：康后天资，居哀礼缛。
现代文：康帝以天之助，居哀犹以繁礼。
English: Kandy with the help of heaven, the mourning still with the formalities.

古文：坠典方兴，降龄奚促。
现代文：遣业方将再兴，辞世何其仓促。
English: The dismissed party will be reborn, how hasty the death.

