古文：凡行军越过山险而阵，必依附山谷，一则利水草，一则附险固，以战则胜。
现代文：凡是行军作战，跨越险峻山岭地带而安营布阵时，必须依托山涧谷地，一是可得水草之利，二是可以凭险固守。
English: Whenever marching in battle, crossing the steep mountain ranges and setting up camp, it is necessary to rely on the valleys of the mountains. On the one hand, it is possible to obtain the benefits of water and grass, and on the other hand, it is possible to hold fast by relying on danger.

古文：法曰： 山依谷。 
现代文：这样，与敌交战就能取胜。
English: In this way, we can win the battle with the enemy.

古文：后汉将马援为陇西太守，三绛羌与塞外诸种为寇，杀长吏。
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 部队在山地行军作战，必须沿着山谷行进，依托谷地设阵。 东汉将领马援出任陇西太守的时候，三降羌以及与其勾结的塞外诸族，他们并作乱为寇，塞外诸族勾结作乱为寇，杀了长吏。
English: As it is said in the Art of War: "Forces marching to battle in the mountains must march along the valley and set up a line of battle relying on the valley." When the Eastern Han Dynasty general Ma Yuan served as the governor of Western Gansu, he and the foreign ethnic groups that colluded with him, they also made disturbances and robberies, and the foreign ethnic groups colluded to make disturbances and robberies, and killed the officials.

古文：援将四千余人击之，至氐道县。
现代文：马援亲率部队四千余人进行反击，追击至氏道县境。
English: More than 4,000 troops led by Ma Yankui counterattacked and chased them to the county border.

古文：羌在山上，援军据便地，夺其水草，不与战，羌遂穷困。
现代文：当时，羌兵驻扎在山上，马援率军占据山下有利地形，切断了羌兵的水源草地，采取围而不打的战法。
English: At that time, the Xiongnu soldiers were stationed on the mountain, and the horse reinforcement army occupied the favorable terrain under the mountain, cut off the water source and grassland of the Xiongnu soldiers, and adopted the siege without fighting.

古文：羌师数十万户亡出塞外，诸种万余人悉降。
现代文：羌兵很快便处于穷途末路，其首领被迫率领数十万户羌人逃往塞外，而其它部族万金人全部归降马援。
English: The Xiongnu soldiers were soon at their wit's end, and their leader was forced to lead hundreds of thousands of Xiongnu people to flee outside of Serbia, while all of the other tribes' millionaires surrendered to Ma'an.

古文：羌不知依谷之利，而取败焉。
现代文：羌兵由于不懂得依托山谷安营布阵的好处，所以遭到了失败。
English: The Xiongnu soldiers failed because they did not know the advantage of setting up camp in the valley.

