古文：吴人于江碛要害处，并以铁锁横截之；又作铁锥，长丈余，暗置江中，以逆拒舟舰，濬作大筏数十，方百余步，令善水者以筏先行，遇铁锥，锥辄着筏而去，又作大炬，灌以麻油，遇锁燃炬烧之，须臾熔液断绝，舟行无碍。
现代文：原文晋朝时吴人在长江中水浅有沙石的险要之处，设置铁锁链以拦截对方的船只；另外再用长一丈多的铁锥，暗暗放置在江水之中以阻挡船舰的通行。王濬命令建造了数十只竹筏，百余步见方，又找了善于游水的士兵，划着竹筏作先锋，遇到铁锥，铁锥叉在竹筏上面，顺江漂流而去，接着又要人准备火把，淋上油脂，看到铁链就点上火把，不久就将铁链烧熔化了，于是船舰得以通行无阻。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, the Wu people set up iron chains in the Yangtze River at critical points where the water was shallow and there was sand and stone, and set up iron chains to intercept each other's ships. In addition, they used iron cones that were much longer and were placed in the dark in the river water to block the passage of ships. Wang Xi ordered the construction of dozens of bamboo rafts, more than a hundred paces apart, and found soldiers who were good at swimming, paddled bamboo rafts as pioneers, encountered iron cones, iron cones forked on top of bamboo rafts, and drifted away along the river. Next, people were asked to prepare torches,

古文：晋王尽有河北，以铁锁断德胜口，筑河南、北为两城，号 夹寨 。
现代文：五代时期，晋王李存勖占领了河北之地以后，就用铁锁截断德胜口，并在河的南北两侧各筑一座城，号称 夹寨 。
English: During the Five Dynasties period, after the Jin king Li Cunxu occupied the land of Hebei, he cut off De Shengkou with an iron lock and built a city on both sides of the north and south of the river, known as Jizhai.

古文：王彦章受命至滑州，置酒大会，阴遣人具舟于杨村，命甲士六百人，皆持巨斧，载冶者，具鞴炭，乘流而下。
现代文：王彦章奉命到滑州以后，先是故意让人设置酒席大宴将领，暗中却派人在杨村准备舟船，命令六百士兵手持大斧，载着冶炼工匠和炉炭等设备，乘风顺流而下。
English: After Wang Yanzhang was ordered to go to Slanting, he first deliberately had people set up a banquet for the generals, but secretly sent people to Yangcun to prepare a boat and ordered six hundred soldiers to carry smelting craftsmen and charcoal and other equipment down the river.

古文：舟兵举火熔锁，因以巨斧斩断浮桥，而彦章引兵急击南城，遂破之。
现代文：王彦章和将领喝酒喝到一半的时候，便故意装作喝醉吐了满身，借口要换衣服，暗中却率领千名精兵，沿着河一直抵达德胜口，船上的士兵点火烧熔锁链，再接着用大斧砍断浮桥。这时王彦章率兵急攻南城，最后大败晋王。
English: When Wang Yanzhang and his generals were halfway through drinking, they deliberately pretended to be drunk and vomited all over themselves, under the pretext of changing clothes, but secretly led a thousand elite soldiers along the river all the way to Deshengkou. The soldiers on the ship ignited the molten chain, and then cut the pontoon bridge with a large axe. At this time, Wang Yanzhang led the soldiers to attack Nancheng in a hurry, and finally defeated Jin Wang.

