古文：郑会王穆邵进李太尉军士五原将校范令卿汤氏子士人甲李简竹季贞陆彦
现代文：郑会王穆邵进李太尉军士五原将校范令卿汤氏子士人甲李简竹季贞陆彦
English: Zheng He Wang Mu Shao Jin Li Tai Leutnant Sergeant Wu Yuan Officer Fan Lingqing Tang Zi Shi Ren Jia Li Jian Zhu Ji Zhen Lu Yan

古文：郑会
现代文：郑会
English: Zheng Hui

古文：荥阳郑会，家在渭南，少以力闻。
现代文：荥阳有位郑会，家住渭水南岸，少年时凭着力气大而闻名。
English: There is a member of the Zheng Association in Shenyang, who lives on the south bank of Surabaya. When he was a boy, he was famous for his strength.

古文：唐天宝末，禄山作逆，所在贼盗蜂起，人多群聚州县。
现代文：唐代天宝末年，安禄山作乱，所到之处盗贼蜂拥而起，百姓们大多数聚居在州县城里。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty's Tenpo era, Anlu Mountain was in turmoil, and thieves swarmed everywhere they went. Most of the common people lived in prefectural and county towns.

古文：会恃其力，尚在庄居，亲族依之者甚众。
现代文：郑会依仗自己的力气，仍住在乡下，亲戚中有很多人都依靠他。
English: Zheng Relying on his own strength, he still lives in the countryside, and many of his relatives rely on him.

古文：会恒乘一马，四远觇贼，如是累月。
现代文：郑会经常骑着一匹马，四处寻找盗贼，偷偷地站在远处观察。
English: Zheng would often ride around on a horse looking for thieves, secretly standing at a distance to observe.

古文：后忽五日不还，家人忧愁。然以贼劫之故，无敢寻者。
现代文：就这样过了好几个月。后来，他忽然五天没有回来，家人十分忧愁，都认为是被盗贼劫持的缘故，也不敢去寻找。
English: This went on for several months. Later, he suddenly did not return for five days, and his family was very sad. They all thought it was because he had been kidnapped by thieves, and they did not dare to look for him.

古文：其家树上，忽有灵语，呼阿奶，即会妻乳母也。
现代文：他家的树上，忽然有人说话，呼喊 阿奶 。阿奶是郑会妻子的奶娘。
English: On the tree of his home, someone suddenly spoke, calling out for Ah Niu. Ah Niu is the wet nurse of Zheng Hui's wife.

古文：家人惶惧藏避。
现代文：家里人惶恐不安，都躲藏起来。
English: Panicked, the family went into hiding.

古文：又语云： 阿奶不识会耶？
现代文：树上又传来说话声： 阿奶不认识郑会了吗？
English: A voice came from the tree again, saying, "Doesn't Ayu know Zheng He?"

古文：前者我往探贼，便与贼遇，众寡不敌，遂为所杀。
现代文：前些日子我去监视强盗，和盗贼相遇，寡不敌众，被他们杀害了。
English: A few days ago, I went to watch for robbers. I was outnumbered by the thieves, and they killed me.

古文：我以命未合死，频诉于冥官，今蒙见允，已判重生。
现代文：可我认为自己命不该死，屡次向冥府的官们申诉，现承蒙恩准，已经判我重生。
English: However, I believe that I do not deserve to die. I have repeatedly appealed to the officials of Hades, and now, with their gracious permission, I have been sentenced to rebirth.

古文：我尸在此庄北五里道旁沟中，可持火来，及衣服往取。 
现代文：我的尸体在这个庄子北边五里道旁沟中，可以拿着火和衣服来取。 
English: My body is in the ditch beside Wuli Road on the north side of this village. You can take fire and clothes to retrieve it.

古文：家人如言，于沟中得其尸，失头所在。
现代文：家人象他说的那样，在水沟中找到了郑会的尸体，但头却不见了。
English: Family members found Zheng's body in a ditch, just as he said, but the head was gone.

古文：又闻语云： 头北行百余步，桑树根下者也。
现代文：又听树上说： 头就在北面一百多步远的桑树根下。
English: He also heard the tree say: The head is more than a hundred paces to the north, under the roots of a mulberry tree.

古文：到舍，可以穀树皮作线，挛之。
现代文：回到家之后，可以用穀树皮作线，缝上它。
English: When you get home, you can use the bark to make thread and sew it on.

古文：我不复来矣。
现代文：我不再来了，争取别出差错。 
English: I'm not coming back. Try not to make any mistakes.

古文：努力勿令参差。 
现代文：说完，象鬼那样叫了一声就走了。
English: After saying this, he gave a scream like a ghost and left.

古文：言讫，作鬼啸而去。家人至舍，依其挛凑毕，体渐温。数日，乃能视。
现代文：家人把头找回家，照他说的办法缝连完毕，身体渐渐温暖，几天就能看见东西了。
English: His family members took the head home and sewed it back together the way he told them to. His body gradually warmed up and he was able to see in a few days.

古文：恒以米饮灌之，百日如常
现代文：经常用米汤喂他，百日之后便一切照常了。
English: They often fed him with rice soup, and after 100 days, everything was back to normal.

古文：王穆
现代文：王穆
English: Wang Mu

古文：太原王穆，唐至德初，为鲁旻部将，于南阳战败，军马奔走。
现代文：太原有个王穆，唐代至德初年任鲁旻的部将。他在南阳战败了，军卒战马四处奔跑。
English: There was a Wang Mu in Taiyuan, a general who served as Lu Xun's subordinate in the first year of the Tang Dynasty. He was defeated in Nanyang, and the war horses ran everywhere.

古文：穆形貌雄壮，马又奇大，贼骑追之甚众。
现代文：王穆体貌魁伟强健，马又异常高大。
English: Wang Mu's physique is powerful and strong, and his horse is unusually tall.

古文：及，以剑自后砟穆颈，殪而陨地。筋骨俱断，唯喉尚连。
现代文：不少贼兵骑着马追他，追上之后，用剑从后面砍向王穆的脖颈，筋骨全断了，只剩喉咙还连着，当即就死过去落到地上。
English: Many soldiers on horseback chased him, and after catching up with him, they cut Wang Mu's neck from behind with a sword. The bones and sinews were completely broken, and only his throat was still attached. He died instantly and fell to the ground.

古文：初冥然不自觉死，至食顷乃悟，而头在脐上，方始心惋。
现代文：开始，他迷迷糊糊不知道自己已经死了，过一顿饭工夫才醒悟。当头落到肚脐上时，心中一阵凄惋。
English: At first, he was confused and didn't know he was dead, and it took him a meal to wake up. When his head landed on his navel, he felt terrible.

古文：旋觉食漏，遂以手力扶头，还附颈，须臾复落，闷绝如初，久之方苏。
现代文：旋即，觉得食物从脖颈漏出，就用手扶着头，把它按回脖颈上，一会儿又掉下来，昏闷气绝象刚才一样。
English: Instantly, feeling that food was leaking from his neck, he put his hand on his head, pushed it back onto his neck, and a moment later it fell off again, as drowsy as before.

古文：正颈之后，以发分系两畔，乃能起坐，心亦茫然，不知自免。
现代文：过了好久，他才苏醒过来，把头正在颈上，将头发系在两边，就能够坐起来。此刻，他心也茫然，不知自己能否免灾。
English: After a long time, he came to his senses, put his head on his neck, tied his hair on both sides, and was able to sit up. At this moment, his mind was also at a loss, and he didn't know if he could avoid the disaster.

古文：而所乘马，初不离穆。
现代文：而他的马，怎么也不离去。
English: His horse, however, would not leave.

古文：穆之起，亦来止其前。
现代文：见他坐起，那马也走过来站在他的面前。
English: And when he was set down, the horse came and stood before him.

古文：穆扶得立，左膊发解，头坠怀中，夜后方苏。
现代文：王穆扶着它能够站立起来。系在左膊上的头发松开了，头又坠落怀中，半夜后才苏醒。
English: Wang Mu was able to stand up holding it. The hair tied to his left shoulder became loose, and his head fell back into his arms. He woke up after midnight.

古文：系发正首之后，穆心念，马卧方可得上，马忽横伏穆前，因得上马。
现代文：再次系发，正头之后，王穆心想，这马躺下我才能够上去呵，那马忽然就横卧在他面前。
English: Wang Mu thought to himself, "I can only go up if this horse lies down," and the horse suddenly lay down in front of him.

古文：马亦随之起，载穆东南行。
现代文：于是他上得马去，马也随他而起，驮着他往东南走。
English: So he got on his horse and rode off, and the horse followed him, leading him southeast.

古文：穆两手附两颊，马行四十里，穆麾下散卒十余人群行，亦便路求穆。见之，扶寄村舍。
现代文：他两手托着两颊，骑马走了四十里。王穆部下十多个散兵一起奔来，也从便道到这里寻找王穆，相见之后，扶他去村舍寄住。
English: He held his cheeks in his hands and rode for forty miles. Wang Mu's subordinates, more than a dozen foot soldiers, came running together. They also came here from the road to look for Wang Mu. After they met, they helped him go to the village to stay.

古文：其地去贼界四十余里，众心恼惧。
现代文：此地距离敌人四十多里，众人心里又恼怒又害怕，随即用马驮王穆回到鲁旻的队伍。
English: Here, more than forty miles away from the enemy, the people were both angry and afraid, and immediately returned to Lulu's team with the horse King Mu.

古文：遂载还昊军。军城寻为贼所围。
现代文：鲁军所住之城不久被敌人围困。
English: The city where the Russian troops lived was soon besieged by the enemy.

古文：穆于城中养病，二百余日方愈，绕颈有肉如指，头竟小偏。
现代文：王穆在城中养病，二百多天才痊愈。环绕着他的脖颈有一条肉檩子，象手指那么宽，头竟然稍稍偏斜。
English: Wang Mu recuperated in the city, and it took him more than 200 days to recover. Around his neck was a meat hook, as wide as a finger, and his head was slightly tilted.

古文：旻以穆名家子，兼身殉王事。差摄南阳令。寻奏叶令。岁余，迁临汝令。
现代文：鲁旻觉得王穆系名家子弟，又以身殉职而未死，就派他任南阳县令，不久奏报他任叶县令，一年多后，迁任临汝县令。
English: Lu Wei felt that Wang Mu was the son of a famous family, and he died in the line of duty without dying, so he appointed him as the Nanyang County magistrate, and soon reported that he was appointed as the Ye County magistrate, and more than a year later, he was transferred to the Lin Ru County magistrate.

古文：秩满，摄枣阳令。
现代文：任满，又摄任枣阳县令，死在了任上。
English: After his term of office expired, he was appointed as Zaoyang County magistrate, and died in office.

古文：卒于官。邵进
现代文：邵进
English: Shao Jin

古文：唐大历元年，周智光为华州刺史，劫剥行侣，旋欲谋反。
现代文：唐代大历元年，周智光任华州刺史，抢劫行旅钱物，不久即想谋反。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Zhou Zhiguang was appointed as the governor of Huazhou, robbed traveling money, and soon wanted to rebel.

古文：遣吏邵进，潜往京，伺朝廷御伐之意。
现代文：他派遣手下官吏邵进，暗暗地到了京城，侦探朝廷有无防范、讨伐他的意向。
English: He sent his subordinate official, Shao Jin, secretly to the capital, and the detective inquired whether the imperial court had any intention to prevent or fight him.

古文：进归告曰： 朝廷无疑公之心。 
现代文：邵进回来告诉周智光说： 朝廷没有怀疑你的迹象。 
English: Shao Jin came back and told Zhou Zhiguang: The imperial court has no suspicion of you.

古文：光怒，以其叶朝廷而绐于已，遽命斩之。
现代文：周大怒，认为他这是讨好朝廷欺骗自己，立即令人把他杀了。
English: Zhou flew into a rage, believing that he had deceived himself in order to please the court, and immediately had him killed.

古文：既而甚悔，速遣送其首付妻儿。
现代文：周智光过后很后悔，立即派人把邵进的头送给他的妻儿。
English: After Zhou Zhiguang passed away, he regretted very much and immediately sent someone to give Shao Jin's head to his wife and children.

古文：妻即以针纫颈，俄顷复活，以药傅之，然犹惧智光，使人告光曰： 进本蒲人，今欲归葬。 
现代文：妻子把他的头缝到脖颈上，不久就活了，将药涂在伤口上。但邵进还是惧怕周智光，让人告诉周智光说： 邵进本来是蒲地人，现在想回去埋葬。 
English: His wife stitched his head to his neck and soon he was alive, applying medicine to the wound. But Shao Jin was still afraid of Zhou Zhiguang, and had someone tell Zhou Zhiguang: Shao Jin was originally from Putian, and now he wants to go back and be buried.

古文：光亦赒赙之。
现代文：周智光无奈，便送些丧葬钱物。
English: Reluctantly, Zhou Zhiguang sent some funeral money.

古文：既至蒲，浃旬，其疮平愈，乃改姓他游。
现代文：邵进回到蒲地十二天，他的伤口便平复愈合，于是改名换姓漫游四方。
English: Twelve days after Shao Jin returned to Puti, his wound was healed, so he changed his name and wandered around.

古文：后三十年，崔颙为宋州牧，晨衙，有一人投刺，曰： 敕吏。 
现代文：三十年后，崔颙任宋州州牧，早晨升堂时，有一个人投名帖说，他是皇宫的敕吏。
English: Thirty years later, when Cui Jun was appointed as the prefect of Songzhou, when he went to church in the morning, there was a post saying that he was the eunuch of the imperial palace.

古文：颙召见。
现代文：崔颙召见了他，他就是邵进。
English: Cui Wei summoned him, he is Shao Jin.

古文：讯其由，进曰： 明公昔为周智光从事。 
现代文：询问其来由，邵进说： 你当年是周智光的从事吧？ 
English: When asked why, Shao Jin said: You used to work for Zhou Zhiguang, didn't you?

古文：因叙其本末。
现代文：于是便讲述过去的一些事情。
English: He then recounted some of the events of the past.

古文：颙乃省悟，与缣帛，揖之而去。
现代文：崔颙方才省悟，赏给一些绢帛，邵进揖拜之后离去。
English: It was only when Cui Gan realized what had happened that he rewarded some baboons, and Shao Jin went away after paying homage.

古文：李太尉军士
现代文：李太尉军士
English: Lieutenant Sergeant Lee

古文：长安里巷说，朱泚乱时，李太尉军中有一卒，为乱兵所刃，身颈异处。
现代文：长安里巷传说，朱泚在京城作乱时，李太尉军队中有一个小卒被乱兵所杀，身颈异处。
English: According to the legend of Chang'an Lane, when Zhu Xi made a disturbance in Beijing, there was a small soldier in the army of Lieutenant Li who was killed by the disorderly soldiers, and his neck was in a different place.

古文：凡七日，忽不知其然而自起。但觉胪骨称硬，咽喉强于昔时，而受刃处痒甚。
现代文：过了七天，忽然不知怎么回事他自己又站了起来，只觉得胪骨稍有些硬，咽喉比过去强直，而遭刀砍的地方很痒。
English: After seven days, he suddenly found himself on his feet again for no apparent reason. He only felt that his shin was a little stiff, his throat was firmer than before, and the place where he had been slashed was itchy.

古文：行步无所苦，扶持而归本家。
现代文：行走没有什么痛苦，人们扶持他回到家中。
English: He is walking without pain and is being helped home.

古文：妻儿异之，讯其事，具说其所体与颈分之时，全不悟其害，亦无心记忆家乡。
现代文：老婆孩子都很惊怪，问这是怎么回事，他全都说了。当身体和头颈分离时，他全然不觉被杀，也无心回忆家乡。
English: His wife and children were very surprised and asked what had happened. He told them everything. When his body was separated from his head and neck, he was killed completely unconscious and had no intention of remembering his hometown.

古文：忽为人驱入城门，被引随兵死数千计。
现代文：就记得忽然被驱赶进一座城门，同时被赶去的士卒死了好几千。
English: I remember being suddenly driven into a city gate. At the same time, several thousand tax collectors were driven away and died.

古文：至其东面，有大局署。见绿衣长吏凭几，点籍姓名而过。
现代文：到了城东面，有一个大署衙，只见绿衣长吏靠在桌子上，点录姓名而过。
English: When I got to the east of the city, there was a large police station, and I saw the green-clad officers leaning on the table and taking names.

古文：次呼其人，便云： 不合来。 
现代文：按顺序喊到他的名字时，他便说： 我不该来。 
English: When his name was called out in order, he said: I shouldn't have come.

古文：乃呵责极切，左右逐出令还。见冥司一人，髡桑木如臂大，其状若浮沤钉。
现代文：就被狠狠地呵责训斥一顿，左右将他赶出去，又把他喊回来。 这时只见一个冥司，拿着一根削得光光的桑木棒，像胳膊那么长，形状如门钉。
English: He was severely scolded and reprimanded, and he was driven out to the right and to the left, and he was called back again.At this time, only a dead man was seen, holding a shaved mulberry stick, as long as an arm, shaped like a door nail.

古文：牵其人头身断处。如令勘合，则以桑木钉自脑钉入喉，俄而便觉。
现代文：他牵住我头身断绝处，对合在一起，然后用桑木钉从脑部钉进咽喉。
English: He took hold of my head and body at the severed point, joined them together, and then used a mulberry nail to drive it from my brain into my throat.

古文：再见日月。不甚痛楚。
现代文：不久我就苏醒过来，重又见到了日月星辰，不很痛苦。 
English: Soon I woke up and saw the sun, moon and stars again, not very painful.

古文：妻儿因是披顶发而观，则见隆高处一寸已上，都非寻常。
现代文：妻儿于是分开他的头发察看，就见受伤处隆起一寸多高，的确和往常不同。
English: His wife and son then separated his hair and examined it, and saw that the injured area had a bump more than an inch high, which was indeed different from usual.

古文：皮里桑木黄文存焉，人或谓之粉黛。
现代文：皮里桑木纹还存在，有人说是粉黛之色。
English: Pirisang wood grain still exists, some say it is the color of pink.

古文：元和中，温会有宗人守清，为邠镇之权将，忽话此事，守清便呼之前出。乃云，是其麾下甲马士耿皓，今已七十余，膂力犹可支数夫。
现代文：元和年间，温会有个同宗叫守清，任分镇权将。一次他忽然说起这件事，守清就喊一个人到前面来，说这位是部下甲马士耿皓，现在已经七十多岁了，体力还可以抵挡几个武夫。
English: During the Yuan and Wu dynasties, there was a member of the same family named Shou Qing, who was appointed as the town's governor. Once he suddenly mentioned this matter, Shou Qing called a person to the front, saying that this was his subordinate, Geng Yao, who is now more than seventy years old, and his physical strength can withstand several warriors.

古文：会因是亲睹其异。五原将校
现代文：温会亲眼看见了他的异常之处一一原来，他就是那个死而复生的小士卒。五原将校
English: Wen Hui saw with his own eyes what was unusual about him - in fact, he was the young soldier who had come back from the dead.

古文：五原遣将校往扬子，请衣赐。
现代文：五原派遣一个校官去扬州，这校官请求赐衣物。
English: Gohara sent a school official to Yangzhou, who asked for clothing.

古文：校有所知，能承顾问。
现代文：他在当地有熟人，能够办好可托之事。
English: He has local acquaintances and is able to do things well.

古文：院官与之欵曲，顾见项上有一肉环围绕，瘢痕可惧。
现代文：到后，扬州院官给予他殷勤接待，并看见他颈上有一道肉环围绕着，疤痕明晰可怕。
English: After his arrival, the Yangzhou academician gave him a gracious reception and saw that he had a ring of flesh around his neck, the scar was clear and terrible.

古文：院官与之熟，因诘其所来，具对。
现代文：院官和他很熟悉，便问其来由。
English: The abbot knew him well and asked him why.

古文：昔岁巡边，其众五六百，深犯榆塞。
现代文：他把发生的事说了：好多年前巡视边境，他率部下五六百人，深入到榆塞一带，遭受胡虏的突然袭击。
English: He told the story of what happened: many years ago, he was patrolling the border, he led five or six hundred of his subordinates, deep into the area of Yansai, and was suddenly attacked by the Khuriks.

古文：遭虏骑掩袭，众数千，悉是骑兵。此五百短兵，全军陷殁。积尸为京观，其身首已异矣。
现代文：对方有好几千人，全是骑兵，寡不敌众，带去的五百步兵全死掉了，尸体堆积得象小山那么高，他也落了个身首异处。
English: He was outnumbered by several thousand men, all cavalry, and the five hundred infantry he had brought with him were all dead, the bodies piled as high as a hill, and he had lost his head.

古文：至日入。但魂魄觉有呵喝，状若官府一点巡者。至某，官怒曰： 此人不合死，因何杀却？ 
现代文：到太阳下山后，他的魂听到呵喝之声，一个象官府中点巡官的人，来到他跟前，怒道： 这个人不该死，为什么杀他？ 
English: When the sun went down and his soul heard the howling, a man who looked like a mid-level government inspector came to him and angrily said: This man does not deserve to die, why kill him?

古文：胥者扣头求哀。
现代文：胥吏叩头哀求。
English: The bailiffs bowed their heads in supplication.

古文：官曰： 不却活，君须还命。 
现代文：那官说： 不把他复活，你就得偿命。 
English: The officer said, "If you don't bring him back to life, you will forfeit your life."

古文：胥曰： 活得。 
现代文：吏胥说： 能活。 
English: The magistrate said, "He can live."

古文：遂许之，良久而喝回，又更约束： 须速活，勿误死者。 
现代文：当官的点点头，过一会儿又呵喝胥吏道： 你要快点使他复活，不要耽误死者。 
English: The official nodded his head, and after a while shouted at the magistrate: "Hurry up and bring him back to life, don't delay the dead."

古文：胥厉声唱诺。
现代文：胥吏大声答应着。
English: The bailiff loudly agreed.

古文：某头安在项上，身在三尺厚叶上卧。头边有半碗稀粥，一张折柄匙，插在碗中。
现代文：将我的头安到颈项上，我的身子躺在三尺厚的树叶上，头边有半碗稀粥，一把断把羹匙插在碗中。
English: I rested my head on my neck, my body on a three-foot-thick pile of leaves, with half a bowl of gruel at my head and a broken spoon in the bowl.

古文：某能探手取匙，抄致口中，渐能食。即又迷闷睡著。
现代文：我能够伸手拿羹匙，舀饭送到嘴里，渐渐能吃饭了，就又迷迷糊糊睡着了。
English: I was able to reach for a spoon and bring the risotto to my mouth. Gradually, I was able to eat, and then I drifted off to sleep.

古文：眼开，又见半碗粥，匙亦在中。
现代文：当我再睁开眼时，又见半碗粥，碗里还是放着羹匙。
English: When I opened my eyes again, I saw half a bowl of porridge, with a spoon still in the bowl.

古文：如此六七日，能行，策杖却投本处。
现代文：这样一连过了六七天。能够行走了，我就拄着拐杖回到原处。
English: This went on for six or seven days. When I was able to walk, I returned to my original place on crutches.

古文：荏苒今日，其瘢痕是也。
现代文：光阴很快就到了现在，我的疤痕就是这么来的。
English: Time soon flew by and that's how I got my scar.

古文：范令卿
现代文：范令卿
English: Lord Mayor of London

古文：隋文帝开皇二年，汴州浚义县功曹范钦子令卿，在家与族人文志校书，竞工拙。
现代文：隋文帝开皇二年，汴州浚义县功曹范钦之子范令卿，在家里与文志勘校书籍，比赛高低，结果打起架来。
English: In the second year of the reign of the Sui Emperor, Fan Lingqing, the son of Gong Cao Fan Qin in Jiuyi County, Luzhou, was at home with the literature survey books, the competition was high and low, and the result was a fight.

古文：令卿以手反击文志，鼻血出不止，因即殒。
现代文：令卿用手反击文志，打得他鼻血不止，因之当即死去。
English: Lingqing fought back against Wenshi with his hands, causing his nose to bleed profusely. As a result, he died immediately.

古文：文志父乃执令卿，以绳悬缢于屋梁，移时气绝。
现代文：文志的父亲捉住令卿，用绳子把他悬吊在房梁上，一会儿就断气了。
English: Wenshi's father caught him and hung him on the beam of the house with a rope. He died in an instant.

古文：文志父母恐令卿却活，复用布重绞之。
现代文：文志父母怕令卿再活过来，用布条勒了又勒。
English: Wen Zhi's parents were afraid that Ling Xing would come back to life, so they used a cloth to keep him alive.

古文：死经三日，令卿却苏，文志长逝。
现代文：令卿死了三天之后却又复活了，文志则终于死去了。
English: Lingqing died three days later but came back to life, while Wen Zhi finally died.

古文：汤氏子
现代文：汤氏子
English: Tang Shi Zi

古文：汤氏子者，其父为乐平尉。
现代文：汤氏子的父亲任乐平县尉。
English: Ms. Tang's father was a lieutenant of Leping County.

古文：令李氏，陇西望族。素轻易，恒以吴人狎侮，尉甚不平。
现代文：县令李氏，是陇西的名门贵族，平素轻浮随便，常常以狎昵侮辱别人取乐。县尉对此忿忿不平。
English: The county magistrate, the Li clan, was a famous aristocrat in western Shaanxi Province. They were usually frivolous and careless, and often made fun of others by insulting them. The county magistrate was angry about this.

古文：轻为令所猥辱，如是者已数四，尉不能堪。某与其兄，诣令纷争。
现代文：他被县令随便侮辱多次，实不堪忍受。汤氏子和哥哥到县令处争辩，县令又打又骂，喊左右将他们拽下。
English: He was insulted many times by the county magistrate, which was really unbearable. Mr. Tang and his brother went to the county magistrate's office to argue, and the county magistrate beat and scolded them, shouting and pulling them down.

古文：令格骂，叱左右曳下，将加捶楚，某怀中有剑，直前刺令，中胸不深，后数日死。
现代文：刚要施刑，汤氏子怀中有剑，拔出便刺中县令胸部，不深。几天以后，县令死了。
English: Just before the execution, Tang Shi Zi had a sword in his arms and pulled out a piece of paper to stab the county magistrate in the chest, but not deeply. A few days later, the county magistrate died.

古文：令家人亦击某系狱。
现代文：他的家人也击打汤氏子，并将其关进监狱。
English: His family also beat Mr. Tang and put him in jail.

古文：州断刑，令辜内死，当决杀。将入市，无悴容。
现代文：州里判刑，令年内处死。当行刑那天，把他带到刑场，汤氏子的脸上没有愁容。
English: The state sentenced him to death within the year. When he was taken to the execution site on the day of the execution, there was no sadness on Mr. Tang's face.

古文：有善相者云： 少年有五品相，必当不死。若死，吾不相人矣。 
现代文：有个善于看相的人说： 这少年有五品官的相，定当不死；假如他死了，我今后就不给人相面了。 
English: A person who is good at reading faces said, "This young man has the face of a five-rank official, so he is sure not to die. If he dies, I won't give anyone a face from now on."

古文：施刑之人，加之以绳，决毕气绝。牵曳就狱，至夕乃苏。狱卒白官，官云： 此手杀人，义无活理。 
现代文：行刑的人用绳子缠住他的脖子，把他勒断气之后拉回监狱，到晚上就复活了。狱卒向狱官报告，狱官说： 这是个杀人犯，没有让他活的道理。 
English: The executioner wrapped a rope around his neck, strangled him and dragged him back to the prison, where he revived in the evening. The jailer reported to the warden, who said: "This is a murderer, there is no reason to let him live."

古文：令卒以绳缢绝。其夕三更，复苏。
现代文：他命令狱卒用绳子把他吊死，不料三更时又活了。
English: He ordered his jailers to hang him with a rope, but he survived after three hours.

古文：卒又缢之，及明复苏。
现代文：狱卒再吊，天亮又活了。
English: The jailer hanged him again, and in the morning he was alive again.

古文：狱官以白刺史，举州叹异。
现代文：狱官向刺史报告，全州上下惊叹不已。
English: The warden reports to the chief, and the entire state is stunned.

古文：而限法不可。呼其父，令自毙之。
现代文：但为维护法律尊严非杀不可，喊来其父，让他亲手将儿子处死。
English: But in order to uphold the dignity of the law, he had to kill, so he called his father and asked him to kill his son with his own hands.

古文：及于州门，对众缢绝。
现代文：其父在州的城门上当众行刑。
English: His father was publicly executed at the gates of the state.

古文：刺史哀其终始，命家收之。
现代文：刺史自始至终对他很同情，让家人收尸。
English: Tashi sympathized with him from start to finish and allowed his family to collect his body.

古文：及将归第，复活。因葬空棺，养之暗室。久之无恙。
现代文：等把他的尸体抬回家之后，他又复活了，因而埋的是空棺材，将他养在暗室，多少年都平安无事。
English: After his body was brought home, he came back to life, so he was buried in an empty coffin, raised in a dark room, and remained safe for many years.

古文：乾元中，为全椒令卒。
现代文：唐代乾元年间，他是在任全椒县令时死的。
English: During the Qianyuan period of the Tang Dynasty, he died while serving as the county magistrate of Quanzhe County.

古文：士人甲
现代文：士人甲
English: Shiren A

古文：晋元帝世，有甲者，衣冠族姓，暴病亡，见人将上天，诣司命，司命更推校，算历未尽，不应枉召。
现代文：晋元帝时有个某甲，出身士绅家庭。一天得急病死了，被人带上天去，拜见司命。司命又推究校验，计算某甲的寿历没尽，不应该冤枉召来。
English: At the time of Emperor Jin Yuan, there was a certain A, who was from a gentry family. One day, he suddenly fell ill and died. He was taken up to heaven to meet the ruler. The ruler also investigated the verification and calculated that the life history of a certain A was not exhausted, and he should not be wrongfully summoned.

古文：主者发遣令还。
现代文：管事的下令将其遣返。
English: The officer ordered him to be repatriated.

古文：甲尤脚痛，不能行，无缘得归。
现代文：某甲患脚病特别疼，不能走，没法回去。
English: A person with a foot disease is particularly painful, can't walk and can't go back.

古文：主者数人共愁，相谓曰： 甲若卒以脚痛不能归，我等坐枉人之罪。 
现代文：管事的几个人都挺发愁，商量说： 某甲假如因为脚病最后不能回去，我们就得承担冤枉他人的罪名。 
English: Several people in charge were very worried, and discussed: If a certain A can't go back because of his foot disease, we will have to bear the guilt of wronging others.

古文：遂相率具白司命。
现代文：于是一起向司命汇报。
English: So they reported to the magistrate together.

古文：司命思之良久，曰：适新召胡人康乙者，在西门外。此人当遂死，其脚甚健，易之，彼此无损。
现代文：司命想了很久，说： 方才新召来的胡人康乙，在西门外住，这个人应当立即死，他的脚很健康，让他们二人换脚，彼此都没有什么损失。 
English: The prefect thought for a long time and said, "Kang Yi, the new Wu person who has just been summoned, lives outside the West Gate. This person should die immediately. His feet are very healthy. Let the two of them switch feet. Both of them have nothing to lose.

古文：主者承教出，将易之。
现代文：管事的接受了这个命令，回来就要给他们换脚。
English: The steward accepted the order and came back to change their feet.

古文：胡形体甚丑，脚殊可恶，甲终不肯。
现代文：那胡人形体丑陋，脚更难看，某甲怎么也不肯换。
English: The body of the Nahu doll is ugly, the feet are even uglier, and a certain person is not willing to change.

古文：主者曰。君若不易，便长决留此耳。
现代文：管事的说： 你假如不换脚，就得长留此间了。 
English: The manager said, "If you don't change your feet, you'll have to stay here for a long time."

古文：不获已，遂听之。
现代文：某甲不得已，只好服从。
English: As a last resort, A had no choice but to obey.

古文：主者令二并闭目，倏忽，二人脚已各易矣。
现代文：管事的让他俩闭上眼睛，很快，他们的脚就换了过来。
English: The steward told them both to close their eyes, and soon they were on their feet.

古文：仍即遣之，豁然复生，具为家人说。
现代文：某甲当即被遣送回来，忽然间就活了。他一一向家人说了。
English: A was immediately sent back and suddenly came back to life. He told his family members everything.

古文：发视，果是胡脚，丛毛连结，且胡臭。
现代文：脱鞋一看，果然是双胡人脚，丛生的毛连结着，而且有胡臭气。
English: When I took off my shoes, I saw that they were indeed the feet of a double-whiskered man, with clumps of hair tied together, and they stank of whiskers.

古文：甲本士，爱玩手足。而忽得此，了不欲见。
现代文：某甲本来是读书人，爱玩手脚，但忽得这样一双脚，却一点也不想看。
English: A certain A was originally a reader, fond of playing with his hands and feet, but suddenly got such a pair of feet, but did not want to look at all.

古文：虽获更活，每惆怅，殆欲如死。
现代文：虽然获得再生，却常惆怅慨叹，几乎想死。
English: Although he is reborn, he often laments and almost wants to die.

古文：旁人见识此胡者，死犹未殡，家近在茄子浦。
现代文：旁人中有认识那个胡人的，说他还没有出殡，家住附近茄子浦。
English: One of the bystanders knew the bearded man and said that he had not yet been buried and that he lived in nearby Eggplant Pool.

古文：甲亲往视胡尸。果见其脚著胡体。
现代文：某甲亲自去看那胡人尸体，果然看见自己的脚附在他的身上。
English: So-and-so went to see the Hu man's corpse in person, and indeed saw his own foot attached to his body.

古文：正当殡敛。对之泣。
现代文：正要殡殓，亲属们对着尸体哭。
English: At the time of the funeral, relatives wept over the body.

古文：胡儿并有至性。每节朔。儿并悲思。驰往，抱甲脚号啕。
现代文：胡人的儿子对父亲很有感情，每当初一过节时，由于悲思过度，他都要跑到某甲家，抱住他的脚号啕大哭。
English: Hu's son had a lot of feelings for his father. Whenever the first day of the Chinese New Year passed, he would run to a certain A's house, hold his footstool and wail because he was too sad.

古文：忽行路相逢，便攀援啼哭。
现代文：走路时偶然相遇，胡儿也要拽住他啼哭。
English: They met by chance while walking, and Hu'er wanted to hold him and cry.

古文：为此每出入时，恒令人守门，以防胡子。
现代文：因此，某甲每次出入家时，总要让人守住门，以防胡儿。
English: Therefore, whenever a certain A goes out of the house, he always has someone guard the door to prevent theft.

古文：终身憎秽，未曾娱视。
现代文：某甲一辈子厌恶那双脏脚，未曾高兴地看过。
English: So-and-so has hated those dirty feet his whole life and has never been happy to see them.

古文：虽三伏盛署，必复重衣，无暂露也。
现代文：即使在三伏盛夏，也定要穿好几层衣服，不让它露出来。
English: Even in the height of summer in Sanfu, you must wear several layers of clothing to prevent it from showing.

古文：李简
现代文：李简
English: Li Jian

古文：唐开元末，蔡州上蔡县南里村百姓李简，痫病卒。
现代文：唐代开元末年，蔡州上蔡县南里村百姓李简，患癫痫病死去，埋葬十多天后。
English: At the end of the first century of the Tang Dynasty, Li Jian, a villager from Nanli Village, Shangcai County, Caizhou, died of epilepsy and was buried more than ten days later.

古文：瘗后十余日，有汝阳县百姓张弘义，素不与李简相识，所居相去十余舍，亦因病，经宿却活。
现代文：汝阳县有个百姓叫张弘义，与李简素不相识，且相距三百多里，也因病而死，过了一宿又活了。
English: There was a commoner in Ruyang County named Zhang Hongyi, who did not know Li Jiansu and lived more than three hundred miles away from him. He also died of illness, but after one night he was alive again.

古文：不复认父母妻子，且言我是李简，家住上蔡县南李村，父名亮。遂径往南李村，入亮家。
现代文：他不再认识父母妻子，并说我是李简，家住上蔡县南李村，父亲名亮，然后径直走到南李村，进了李亮家。
English: He no longer knew his parents and wife, and said that I was Li Jian, I lived in Nan Li Village, Shangcai County, my father was famous, and then I went straight to Nan Li Village and entered Li Liang's house.

古文：亮惊问其故，言方病时，梦二人着黄，赍帖见追。
现代文：李亮惊讶地询问这是怎么回事，张弘义说自己刚病时，梦见两个穿黄衣裳的人，送来一张帖子就跟他们走了。
English: Li Liang was surprised and asked what was going on. Zhang Hongyi said that when he was just ill, he dreamed of two people wearing yellow clothes. He sent them a postcard and went with them.

古文：行数十里，至大城，署曰 王城 。
现代文：走了几十里，到了一座大城市，题名 王城 。
English: After walking for dozens of miles, they arrived at a large city called Wangcheng.

古文：引入一处，如人间六司院。
现代文：他被引入一处，象人间的六司官衙，留他住了几天。
English: He was taken to a place that resembled a six-branch magistrate's mansion, where he stayed for a few days.

古文：留居数日，所勘责事，委不能对。
现代文：所追查的一些事，他实在不能回答。
English: Some of the things that have been pursued, he really can't answer.

古文：忽有一人自外来，称错追李简，可即放还。
现代文：一天，忽然从外面走进一个人，说是错捉了李简，应该立即放回去。
English: One day, a man suddenly walked in from outside and said that he had caught Li Jian by mistake and that she should be released immediately.

古文：有一吏曰： 李身坏，别令托生。 
现代文：有一吏说： 李简的身体腐坏了，让他到别处托生吧。 
English: One official said: Li Jian's body is rotten, let him go somewhere else to give birth.

古文：一时忆念父母亲族，不欲别处受生，因请却复本身。
现代文：李简一时想念父母亲族，不想到别处托生，因此请求恢复本身。
English: For a moment, Li Jian missed her parents and relatives and did not want to go elsewhere to give birth, so she asked to be reinstated.

古文：少顷，见领一人至，通曰： 追到杂职汝阳张弘义。 
现代文：不一会，看见领进一个人，通判说： 汝阳张弘义被捉拿到了。 
English: After a while, seeing a person being led in, the judge said: Ruyang Zhang Hongyi has been caught.

古文：吏又曰： 张弘义身幸未坏，速令李简托其身，以尽余年。 
现代文：那吏又说： 幸亏张弘义的身体没坏，快让李简托他的身体复活，借以享受余年。 
English: The official also said, "Fortunately, Zhang Hongyi's body is not bad. Let Li Jian revive his body to enjoy his remaining years."

古文：遂被两吏扶却出城。但行甚速，渐无所知，忽若梦觉。
现代文：于是，李简便被两吏搀出那座城，但走得极快，他渐渐失去知觉，忽然又象作梦醒来。
English: As a result, Li Jian was taken out of the city by two officials, but he walked very fast. He gradually lost consciousness and suddenly woke up as if in a dream.

古文：见人环泣，及屋宇，都不复认。
现代文：见不少人围坐而哭，还有那些屋宇，自己都不认识。
English: I saw a lot of people sitting around and crying. I didn't even recognize the buildings.

古文：亮问其亲族名氏，及平生细事，无不知也。
现代文：李亮问他亲族名氏，以及李简的平生小事，他没有不知道的。
English: Li Liang asked him the names of his relatives, as well as the trivia of Li Jian's life, he did not know.

古文：先解竹作，因息入房，索刀具，破蔑盛器。
现代文：李简原是蔑匠，于是到内室休息时，他就找来刀具，破开竹蔑编盛器。
English: Li Jian was originally a cutter, so when he went to the inner room to rest, he would find tools to break open the bamboo cutter.

古文：语音举止，信李简也，竟不返汝阳。
现代文：言谈举止，都使人确信是李简。他竟然再也没有回汝阳去。
English: Everything he said and did convinced people that he was Li Jian. He never went back to Ruyang.

古文：时段成式三从叔父，摄蔡州司户，亲验其事。
现代文：当时段成式的堂叔，任蔡州司户，亲自查验了这件奇事。
English: At that time, Duan Chengxing's uncle, named Caizhou Shihou, personally verified this miracle.

古文：昔扁鹊易鲁公扈、赵齐婴之心，及寝，互返其室，二室相咨。以是稽之，非寓言矣。
现代文：用这个历史事件来考究，李简的事也不是假造的。
English: With this historical event to study, Li Jian's story is not fake.

古文：竹季贞
现代文：竹季贞
English: Takekisada

古文：陈蔡间，有民竹季贞，卒十余年矣。
现代文：陈蔡两县之间，有个居民叫竹季贞，死十多年了。
English: Between the two counties of Chen Cai, there is a resident named Zhu Qizhen, who has been dead for more than ten years.

古文：后里人赵子和亦卒，数日忽寤，即起驰出门。
现代文：后来村里人赵子和也死了，过了几天又忽然苏醒，立即起身跑出门去。
English: Later, Zhao Zi, a villager, also died. A few days later, he suddenly woke up and immediately got up and ran out the door.

古文：其妻子惊，前讯之。子和曰： 我竹季贞也，安识汝。
现代文：其妻惊讶地拦住他询问，子和说： 我是竹季贞，哪里认识你？
English: Surprised, his wife stopped him and asked, "I'm Take Kijo, where do I know you from?"

古文：今将归吾家。 
现代文：我要回自己家去。 
English: I'm going back to my house.

古文：既而语音非子和矣，妻子遂随之。
现代文：连语音都不是赵子和的了。妻子就跟着他到了竹季贞家。
English: Even the voice was not Zhao Zi's. His wife followed him to the house of Zhu Ji Zhen.

古文：至季贞家，见子和来，以为狂疾，骂而逐之。
现代文：竹家人见赵子和来了，以为他疯了，骂着驱赶他。
English: When the Bamboo family saw Zhao Zi coming, they thought he was crazy and scolded him and drove him away.

古文：子和曰： 我竹季贞，卒十一年，今乃归。何拒我耶？ 
现代文：子和说： 我是竹季贞，死十一年了，现在又回来了，为什么要赶我走？ 
English: Zowa said, "I am Takeji Zhen, I have been dead for eleven years, and now I have returned. Why did you chase me away?"

古文：其家聆其语，果季贞也。验其事，又季贞也。
现代文：竹家人听他的说话声，果然是竹季贞的；又通过一些事情验证，一点不错。
English: Bamboo family members listened to his voice, and it was indeed Bamboo Ji Zhen; and through some verification, it was good.

古文：妻子俱骇异，诘之，季贞曰： 我自去人世，迨今且一纪。居冥途中，思还省妻孥，不一日忘。
现代文：竹妻和孩子们十分骇怕，追问他，他说： 我从离开人世，至今将近十二年，在阴曹地府里总想回来看看老婆孩子，一天也没有忘。
English: Takeshi's wife and children were horrified, and he questioned him, saying, "Since I passed away, almost twelve years now, I always wanted to come back to see my wife and children in the house of the devil, and I haven't forgotten a single day.

古文：然冥间每三十年，即一逝者再生，使言罪福。
现代文：然而，那里每隔三十年，才能让一个死者复活，让他到人间来宣讲善恶和福祸之事。
English: There, however, it is only possible every thirty years to bring a dead man back to life, so that he can preach to the world about good and evil, and good and evil.

古文：昨者吾所请案据，得以名闻冥官。
现代文：昨天我请求管案子的人，想使自己的名字被冥官知道，并愿意为我复活。
English: Yesterday I asked the person in charge of the case, who wanted to make his name known to the infernal officer, to resurrect me.

古文：愿为再生者，既而冥官谓我曰： 汝宅舍坏久矣，如何？ 
现代文：一会儿冥官对我说： 你的身体腐烂很久了，怎么办？ 
English: After a while, the netherworld official said to me: Your body has been rotting for a long time, what should you do?

古文：案据白曰： 季贞同里赵子和者，卒数日，愿假其尸与季贞之魂。 
现代文：管案子的人禀报说： 他的同乡赵子和刚死几天，我想让他借尸还魂。 
English: The person in charge of the case said: His fellow countryman Zhao Zi has just died a few days ago, I want him to borrow the body to return the soul.

古文：冥官许之。
现代文：冥官准许了。
English: The necromancer has given permission.

古文：即遣使送我于赵氏之舍，我故得归。 
现代文：那管案子的人立即把我送到赵子和家，我这才能活转过来。 
English: The person in charge of the case immediately sent me to Zhao Zi's home so that I could be brought back to life.

古文：因话平昔事，历然可听，妻子方信而纳之。
现代文：接着说起平生往事，都清清楚楚的，妻才相信而且收留了他。
English: Then he told me his life story, which was so clear that my wife believed him and took him in.

古文：自是季贞不食酒肉，衣短粗衣，行乞陈蔡汝郑间。缗帛随以修佛，施贫饿者。
现代文：从此季贞不吃酒肉，穿粗布短衣，行乞在陈蔡和汝郑等县之间，得到的钱帛随时用来修造佛寺，施舍给贫饿的人。
English: From then on, Ji Zhen did not eat meat or drink alcohol, wore a coarse cloth short coat, and begged between Chen Cai and Ru Zheng counties. The money she received was used to build a Buddhist temple and give alms to the poor and hungry.

古文：一还家，至今尚存。
现代文：他时而回一次家，到现在还活着。
English: He came home now and then, and he's still alive.

古文：陆彦
现代文：陆彦
English: Rudihiko

古文：余杭人陆彦，夏月死十余日，见王。
现代文：余杭人陆彦，在夏天死了十多日后，拜见冥王。
English: Lu Yan, a resident of Hangzhou, visited Hades more than ten days after he died in the summer.

古文：云： 命未尽，放归。 
现代文：冥王说： 这个人寿命没尽，放他回去吧。 
English: Hades said: This man's life is not over, let him go back.

古文：左右曰： 宅舍亡坏不堪，时沧州人李谈新来，其人合死，王曰： 取谈宅舍与之。 
现代文：左右的人说，他的躯壳完全腐烂了。
English: Those around him said his body was completely decomposed.

古文：彦遂入谈柩中而苏。
现代文：陆彦就进入李谈的棺材中苏醒过来。
English: Lu Yan entered Li Dan's coffin and woke up.

古文：遂作吴语，不识妻子。具说其事。
现代文：说话的口音是吴语，不认识妻子，一一讲了还阳的事。
English: He spoke with a Wuxu accent, did not know his wife, and talked about returning the yang one by one.

古文：遂向余杭，访得其家。
现代文：随即，他回到余杭，寻访到他的家，妻子却也不认他。
English: He immediately returned to Yuhang and visited his home, but his wife did not recognize him.

古文：妻子不认，具陈由来，乃信之。
现代文：待一一陈述经过后，她才相信。
English: It took a series of statements for her to believe.

