古文：苏味道李师旦霍献可袁守一崔泰之陆余庆孙彦高出使御史韩琬赵仁奖姜师度成敬奇石惠泰冯光震李谨度三秽阳滔常定宗张玄靖
现代文：苏味道李师旦霍献可袁守一崔泰之陆余庆孙彦高出使御史韩琬赵仁奖姜师度成敬奇石惠泰冯光震李谨度三秽阳滔常定宗张玄靖
English: Su taste Li Shi Dang Huo dedicated to Yuan Shou, Cui Tai's Lu, Yu Qing, Sun Yan high, so that the master of history, Han Wei, Zhao Ren Award, Jiang Shi Du Cheng, Jing Qi, Shi Hui, Tai Feng, Guang Zhen, Li Zhi Du, San Zi, Yang Tao, Chang Ding Zong, Zhang Xuan Jing

古文：苏味道
现代文：苏味道
English: Su taste

古文：唐苏味道初拜相，有门人问曰：天下方事之殷，相公何以燮和？
现代文：唐代人苏味道刚刚被任命为宰相时，他的门客问道：天下医生们开的药方子有那么多，药物的搭配又那么复杂，请问相公这其中调和配方的原理是什么？
English: When Su Fang, a Tang Dynasty person, had just been appointed as the prime minister, his protégé asked: There are so many prescriptions prescribed by doctors around the world, and the combination of drugs is so complicated. What is the principle of reconciling the formulas?

古文：味道无言，但以手摸床棱而已。
现代文：苏味道一声不出，只是用手摸着床的框棱。
English: Su didn't say a word, just rubbed the edges of the bed with her hands.

古文：时谓模棱宰相也。
现代文：因而那时都称他为模棱宰相。
English: That's why they called him the ambiguous prime minister back then.

古文：李师旦
现代文：李师旦
English: Li Shidan

古文：唐李师旦，新丰人也，任会稽尉。
现代文：唐朝的李师旦，是新丰人，任会稽县尉。
English: Li Shidan of the Tang Dynasty was a Xinfeng person, and was appointed as a county inspector.

古文：国忌日废务，饮酒唱歌杖人，为吏所讼。
现代文：在国忌日的时候，是要停止一切公务和活动的，可他竟饮酒唱歌还用木棍打人，因而被小官吏们告发。
English: On the National Day of Mourning, he was supposed to stop all official duties and activities, but he actually drank alcohol, sang songs and beat people with a wooden stick, so he was denounced by minor officials.

古文：御史苏味道按之，俱不承引。
现代文：御史苏味道来审理此案时，他一概不承认。
English: He did not admit to any of this when he was brought before the court.

古文：味道历而谓曰：公为官，奈何不守法，而违犯若是？
现代文：苏味道严励地对他说：你身为官员，怎么能不守法规，而要这样去违犯呢？
English: Su Gui said to him in a stern tone: As an official, how can you not abide by the law, but want to violate it in this way?

古文：将罪之，师旦请更问，乃叹曰：饮酒法所不禁，况饮药酒耶。
现代文：快要定罪的时候，李师旦请求重新问一下，他颇有感叹地说道：法律并没有规定禁止饮酒，何况我饮的药酒。
English: When he was about to be convicted, Li Shidan asked to be re-examined. He said with a sigh: The law does not prohibit drinking alcohol, let alone the medicinal liquor I drank.

古文：挽歌乃是哀思。
现代文：我唱挽歌那恰是表达我的哀思。
English: I sing a dirge to express my sorrow.

古文：挞人吏事缘急速。
现代文：打人是因为作为官员办事要加快速度。
English: They beat people because, as officials, they need to speed up their work.

古文：侍御何谴为？
现代文：请问侍御史我有什么罪过呢？
English: Excuse me, waiter, what crime have I committed?

古文：味道曰：此反白为黑汉，不能绳之。
现代文：苏味道说道：这真是个反白为黑的汉子，看来是不能定罪了。
English: "This is a man who is anti-white and anti-black, and it seems that he can't be convicted," Su Yi said.

古文：霍献可
现代文：霍献可
English: Fokkenko

古文：唐霍献可，贵乡人也。
现代文：唐代人霍献可，是贵乡人。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the people of Huo Xianke were noble villagers.

古文：父毓，岐州司法。
现代文：他的父亲名霍毓，任岐州司法。
English: His father's name was Huo Wei, and he was a judge in Qizhou.

古文：献可有文学，好诙谐，累迁至侍御史左司员外。
现代文：霍献可有一定的文化水平，喜好开玩笑，官至侍御史左司员外。
English: Huo Xian may have a certain level of culture, a penchant for joking, and be an official other than a chamberlain.

古文：则天法峻，多不自保，竞希旨以为忠。
现代文：武则天的法规是很严酷的，许多人都不能自保其身，都争相求旨让她认为对她忠心。
English: Wu Zetian's regulations are very harsh, many people are unable to protect themselves, and they are all competing to make her think that they are loyal to her.

古文：献可头触玉阶，请杀狄仁杰、裴行本。
现代文：霍献可就曾经头触玉阶上，请求处死狄仁杰、裴行本。
English: Huo Xianke was once at the top of the ladder, requesting the execution of Di Renjie and Pei Xingben.

古文：裴即献可堂舅也。
现代文：裴行本是献可的堂舅。
English: Pei Xingben is Xingke's cousin.

古文：既损额，以绿帛裹于巾下，常令露出，冀则天以为忠。
现代文：献可额顶叩破后，就用绿帛头巾缠盖在上面，可是还要将伤口常常露在外面，为的是希望武则天能看到并让她知道效忠。
English: After the forehead of the offering can be smashed, it is wrapped in a green skullcap and covered with it, but the wound is often exposed, in the hope that Wu Zetian can see and let her know loyalty.

古文：时人比之李子慎，子慎。
现代文：当时人们都把霍献可比作李子慎。李子慎是个什么人呢？
English: At that time, people compared Huo Xian to Li Zishen. Who was Li Zishen?

古文：则天朝诬告其舅，加游击将军。
现代文：武则天朝时，李曾诬告自己的舅舅，因此加授给游击将军官衔。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian, Li had falsely accused his uncle, and as a result, he gave the guerrilla general a higher rank.

古文：母见其著绯衫，以面覆床，涕泪不胜曰：此是汝舅血染者耶！
现代文：李的母亲看见他穿上红色官服，把脸埋在床上，痛哭流涕喊道：这红袍是用你舅舅的血染成的啊！
English: When Li's mother saw him put on his red official uniform and bury his face in the bed, she cried and cried: "This red robe is dyed with your uncle's blood!

古文：袁守一
现代文：袁守一
English: Yuan Shouyi

古文：唐袁守一性行浅促，时人号为料斗凫翁鸡，任万年尉。
现代文：唐代人袁守一见识浅薄，只顾眼前，当时人们称他为料斗凫翁鸡，任万年县尉。
English: Yuan Shou, a man of the Tang Dynasty, had a shallow vision and only looked at the present. At that time, people called him a hawker, and he was appointed as a county official for ten thousand years.

古文：雍州长史窦怀贞每欲鞭之。乃于中书令宗楚客门，饷生菜，除监察。
现代文：雍州长史窦怀贞多次想要鞭挞他，于是投于中书令宗楚客门下，常送给他生菜，任命他作监察御史。
English: Yong governor Shi Dou Huai Zhen repeatedly wanted to whip him, so he threw himself under the tutelage of Zhongshu Ling Zong Chu, often gave him lettuce, and appointed him as an inspector of imperial history.

古文：怀贞未之知也。贞高揖曰：驾欲出，公作如此检校。
现代文：怀贞不知道他与宗楚客的关系，便高高拱手为礼道：宗楚客可能要背离朝廷，你应该作些查核。袁守一立刻将此事检举。
English: Huai Zhen did not know about his relationship with Zong Chu, so he raised his hand and gave the etiquette: Zong Chu may want to deviate from the imperial court, you should make some checks. Yuan Shouyi immediately reported the matter.

古文：袁守一即弹之。月余，贞除左台御史大夫。守一请假，不敢出，乞解。
现代文：过了一个多月，窦怀贞被任命为右台御史大夫，袁守一便告假在家，不敢出来。并乞求希望和解。
English: After more than a month, Dou Huai Zhen was appointed as the doctor of the Right Division of History, and Yuan Shou immediately took a leave of absence at home, not daring to come out, and begged for hope and reconciliation.

古文：贞呼而慰之，守一兢惕不已。
现代文：窦怀贞把他叫来安慰他，袁守一竟吓得战战兢兢惊恐不已。
English: Dou Huai Zhen called him to comfort him, but Yuan Shou was so scared that he was trembling with fear.

古文：楚客知之，为除右台御史，于朝堂抗衡于贞曰：与公罗师。
现代文：宗楚客知道这些事后，有一次为任命右台御史之事，在朝堂上与窦怀贞对抗起来，他说：与公罗师！
English: Knowing these facts, Zong Chuk once confronted Dou Huai Zhen in the imperial court for the appointment of Udaishi. He said, "With Gong Luo Shi!

古文：罗师者，市郭儿语，无交涉也。
现代文：罗师，是城里孩子们常说的话，意思是互不交涉。
English: Luo Shi, is what the children in the city often say, meaning not to negotiate with each other.

古文：无何，客以反诛，守一以其党，配流端州。
现代文：没过多久，宗楚客因谋反罪被诛杀，袁守一也因是其同党，被发配流放端州。
English: Not long after, Zong Chuk was killed for plotting treason, and Yuan Shouyi was also exiled to Danzhou for being a member of the same party.

古文：崔泰之
现代文：崔泰之
English: Choi Taizhi

古文：唐黄门侍郎崔泰之哭特进李峤诗曰：台阁神仙地，衣冠君子乡。
现代文：唐朝门下省有个黄门侍郎崔泰之在哭特进李峤的诗中写道：台阁神仙地，衣冠君子乡。
English: Cui Tai Zhi, a Yellow Gate waiter in a province under the Tang Dynasty, wrote in a poem: "Taiguan is a fairyland, a gentleman's township.

古文：昨朝犹对坐，今日忽云亡。
现代文：昨朝犹对坐，今日忽云亡。
English: Yesterday morning, we were sitting opposite each other, and today, suddenly, we're both dead.

古文：魂随司命鬼，魄逐见阎王。
现代文：魂随司命鬼，魄逐见阎王。
English: The soul follows the spirit of the one who holds the power of life, and one by one they go to hell.

古文：此时罢欢笑，无复向朝堂。
现代文：此时罢欢笑，无复向朝堂。
English: At this point, the laughter stops and there is no going back to the hall.

古文：陆余庆
现代文：陆余庆
English: Lu Yuqing

古文：唐尚书右丞陆余庆转洛州长史，其子嘲之曰：陆余庆，笔头无力嘴头硬，一朝受辞讼，十日判不竟。
现代文：唐朝时，尚书右丞陆余庆转任洛州长史，他的儿子嘲讽他写道：陆余庆，笔头无力嘴头硬。一朝受辞讼，十日判不竟。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Lu Yueqing, a famous writer, was transferred to the post of governor of Luo Province. His son mocked him and wrote: "Lu Yueqing, his pen is weak and his mouth is hard. One day, he accepted the resignation, but on the tenth day, the decision was not finalized.

古文：送案褥下。
现代文：然后把这首讽刺歌谣放在案几旁的坐褥下面。
English: He then placed the satirical song on the edge of the case, under the seat cushion.

古文：余庆得而读之曰：必是那狗！
现代文：陆余庆得到看完后道：一定是那狗干的！
English: After Lu Yuqing finished watching, he said, "The dog must have done it!"

古文：逐鞭之。
现代文：便追出去鞭挞他。
English: They chased him outside and beat him.

古文：孙彦高
现代文：孙彦高
English: Sun Yat-sen

古文：周定州刺史孙彦高，被突厥围城数十重，不敢诣厅，文符须征发者，于小窗接入，锁州宅门。
现代文：周朝孙彦高任定州刺史时，被突厥人围城数十层，孙彦高吓得不敢到厅堂去办理公务，有来办理文符书函须征集人力物资事宜的，都是从小窗户把他接进来，州署的大门紧锁着。
English: When Sun Yat-sen was appointed governor of Dingzhou in the Zhou Dynasty, he was besieged by the Turks for dozens of floors. Sun Yat-sen was so scared that he did not dare to go to the hall to handle official business. When he came to handle matters of letters and letters that required the collection of human resources and materials, he was brought in through a small window. The gate of the state office was tightly locked.

古文：及贼登垒，乃入柜中藏，令奴曰：牢掌钥匙，贼来索，慎勿与。
现代文：等到突厥人开始登上城墙时，他便藏进柜子里。命令家奴道：一定要牢牢地掌握好钥匙，敌人来索取，千万不能给。
English: When the Turks began to climb the city walls, he hid in a cupboard and ordered his servants: "Make sure you hold on to the key. If the enemy comes to take it, don't give it to them."

古文：昔有愚人，入京选，皮袋被贼盗去。其人曰：贼偷我袋，将终不得我物用。
现代文：过去有个愚蠢的人，到京城参选，可是装东西的皮袋被贼盗去，那个人道：贼虽然偷去我的袋子，可是终将不会得到我的东西去用。
English: In the past, there was a stupid man who went to the capital to run for election, but the leather bag containing his things was stolen by a thief. The man said: Although the thief stole my bag, he will not get my things to use.

古文：或问其故，答曰：钥匙今在我衣带上，彼将何物开之。
现代文：有人问其缘故，他说：钥匙现在还挂在我的衣带上，他拿什么去打开锁呀！
English: When asked why, he said: "The key is still on my belt, what's he going to use to open the lock?

古文：此孙彦高之流也。
现代文：这人与孙彦高都是一路人物。
English: This man and Sun Yat-sen are the same person.

古文：出使御史
现代文：出使御史
English: The history of the envoy

古文：唐御史出使，久绝滋味。
现代文：唐朝时御史被派出去办案，是不准吃肉荤的，常常是很长时间未尝有滋味的菜肴。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, when the imperial historian was sent out to investigate a case, he was not allowed to eat meat stew, which was often a dish that did not taste good for a long time.

古文：至驿，或窃脯腊置于食，伪叱侍者撤之，侍者去而后徐食。
现代文：因此每到驿站，就有人偷来各种肉干放到饭菜里，然后假装发怒把侍候的人打发出去，等侍候的人一走便慢慢地吃起来。
English: Therefore, every time I go to the station, someone steals all kinds of dried meat and puts it in the meal, and then pretends to be angry and sends the waiter out. When the waiter leaves, I slowly start to eat.

古文：此往往而有，殊失举措也。
现代文：此事常常发生，这种举动是很失当的。
English: It happens all the time, and it's not a good thing to do.

古文：尝有御史，所留不多，不觉侍者见之。对曰：干肉驿家颇有，请吏留。
现代文：曾有个御史，碗里没敢多放，不小心被侍候的人看见了，说道：肉干驿站里有很多，请你多放些。
English: Once upon a time, there was a chief steward who dared not put more meat in the bowl, but was accidentally seen by a waiter, who said: "There is a lot of meat in the meat drying station, please put more."

古文：御史深自愧焉。
现代文：御史深感惭愧。
English: Goshiro is deeply ashamed.

古文：亦有膳者烂煮肉，以汁作羹，御史伪不知而食之。
现代文：也有给他们作饭的人把肉煮得稀烂，然后把煮肉汤给他们做成羹喝。御史也假装不知道就喝了。
English: There were also people who cooked for them and cooked the meat until it was too thin, and then made soup out of the boiled meat for them to drink. Mishi pretended not to know and drank it.

古文：或羹中遇肉，乃责庖人。或值新庖人，未闲应答，但谢日罗漏，言以罗滤之漏也。
现代文：有的羹中遇上了肉，便责备几句厨师，有的遇上新厨，没空应答，只是道歉说罗漏了，说是在用罗过滤的时候漏下来的。
English: In some cases, when meat was found in the soup, the chef was scolded with a few words, and in some cases, when a new chef was found, there was no time to respond, only to apologize that the broth had leaked, saying that it had leaked while filtering with the broth.

古文：神龙中，韩琬与路元壳、郑元父充判官，至莱州，亲睹此事，相顾而笑。
现代文：神龙年间，韩琬、路元壳、郑元父当判官时，他们到莱州，都亲眼见过此事，也都是相顾而笑。
English: During the years of the Holy Dragon, when Han Xuan, Lu Yuanshui, and Zheng Yuanfa were judges, they came to Laizhou, saw the matter with their own eyes, and smiled at each other.

古文：仆射魏元忠时任中丞，谓琬之曰：元忠任监察，至驿，干肉鸡子并食之，未亏于宪司之重，盖盗之深失国士体。
现代文：仆射魏元忠当时还任御史中丞，他对韩琬说：我在任监察御史时，到了驿站，于内、鸡蛋都吃过，也未使宪司的重任受到损失，而这样的偷盗行为实在是失去了国士们的体面。
English: Wei Yuanzhong, Wei Yuanzhong's manservant, was still serving as the vice-chairman of the Imperial Historian's Office at the time, and he said to Han Yu: "When I was in charge of supervising the Imperial Historian's Office, I went to the post office, and I ate all the eggs in the house, and I did not cause the heavy responsibility of the Registrar to be lost, and such stealing behavior really lost the dignity of the statesmen.

古文：魏公之言当矣，但不食不窃，岂不美欤。韩琬
现代文：魏元忠的话是恰当的，但是如果不吃也不窃，凯不更完美！韩琬
English: Wei Yuanzhong's words are appropriate, but if you do not eat or steal, you are not more perfect!

古文：唐韩琬与张昌宗、王本立，同游太学。博士姓张，即昌宗之从叔，精五经，懵于时事。
现代文：唐朝时，韩琬、张昌宗、王本立一起在太学学习，有个授课的博士姓张，是张昌宗的从叔。此人精通五经，但是对世事很糊涂。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Han Xuan, Zhang Changzong and Wang Benli studied together at Taixue. There was a doctor surnamed Zhang who was Zhang Changzong's uncle. This man was well versed in the Five Classics, but he was very confused about the world.

古文：畜一鸡，呼为勃公子，爱之不已。
现代文：他养了一只鸡，起名叫勃公子，对它十分宠爱。
English: He raised a chicken, named Bo Gongzi, and was very fond of it.

古文：每讲经，辄集于学徒中。
现代文：每次来讲课，总是把鸡放在学生之中。
English: Every time I give a lecture, I always put the chicken among the students.

古文：或攫破书，比逐之，必被嗔责曰：此有五德，汝何轻之？
现代文：有时候抓破了学生的书，等到赶它，就会被张博士责怪道：此有五德。你为何轻视？
English: Sometimes he would scratch a student's book and when he caught it, he would be scolded by Dr. Zhang, saying, "This has five virtues. Why do you despise it?

古文：昌宗尝为此鸡被杖。
现代文：昌宗还曾因这只鸡被杖责过。
English: Changzong was also caned for this chicken.

古文：本立与琬，颇不平之，曰：腐儒不解事，为公杀此鸡。
现代文：王本立和韩琬对这事都觉得很不公平，说：腐儒不明事理，我们一定为你杀了这只鸡！
English: Both Wang Benli and Han Qianlu felt that this was very unfair, and said: "Huru is unreasonable, we must kill this chicken for you!"

古文：张生素取学徒回残食料。
现代文：张博士平时都是拿学生们剩余的饭菜作饲料。
English: Dr Zhang usually uses the students' leftover food as feed.

古文：本立以业长，乃见问合否。
现代文：王本立因是业长，先去问过这样是不是合适。
English: Since Wang Benli is the head of the department, he asked whether it was appropriate to do so.

古文：本立曰：明文案即得。
现代文：王本立说：明天就可以立文案。
English: Wang Benli said, "We can submit the proposal tomorrow."

古文：张生喜，每日受之，皆立文案。
现代文：张博士很高兴，每天接受了谁的食料，都写在文案上。
English: Dr. Zhang was so happy that he wrote down the names of the people whose food he received every day.

古文：他曰，张生请假，本立举牒，数鸡罪，杀而食之。及张生归学，不见鸡，惊曰：吾勃公子何在？
现代文：有一天，张博士告假不在，王本立举起文案，历数鸡的罪状，然后杀而吃掉，等到张生回来，发现鸡没了，惊呼：我的勃公子在哪里？
English: One day, when Dr. Zhang was absent on leave, Wang Benli held up the copy, counted the chicken's crimes, then killed and ate it. When Zhang Sheng returned, he found that the chicken was gone, exclaiming: Where is my boy?

古文：左右报本立杀之，大怒云：索案来，索案来。
现代文：左右告诉他让王本立给杀了，他大怒，道：把文案拿来！把文案拿来！
English: He was furious and said, "Bring me the copy! Bring me the copy!"

古文：见数鸡之罪，曰：纵如此，亦不合死。
现代文：他看见文案上历数的鸡的罪状，道：纵然如此，也不应当杀死啊？
English: He saw the crime of counting chickens on the copy and said: Even so, shouldn't they be killed?

古文：本立曰：鸡不比人，不可加笞杖，正合杀。
现代文：王本立道：鸡不像人，不能杖罚，正应当杀。
English: Wang Benli said, "Chickens are not like humans. They cannot be punished with a cane. They should be killed."

古文：张以手再三拍案曰：勃公子，有案时，更知何道。
现代文：张博士的手不住地拍着文案道：勃公子呀，有了这文案时，更加知道杀你是什么道理！
English: Dr. Zhang patted the copywriter's hand tirelessly and said, "Bo, with this copywriter, I know even better what the reason for killing you is!

古文：当时长安，以有案，动曰为实。
现代文：当时在长安，很讲有案作根据，只要有案可查，就说是事实。
English: At that time in Chang'an, it was very important to have a case as a basis, and as long as there was a case to investigate, it was said to be a fact.

古文：故知耽玩经史者，宜详时事。
现代文：由此可知，沉溺于经史的人，也应该悉知世事。
English: From this it can be seen that those who indulge in history should also be well informed about world affairs.

古文：不然，何古人号为愚儒、朴儒、腐儒、竖儒耶？
现代文：不然，为什么古人把他们的号称作愚儒、朴儒、腐儒、竖儒呢？
English: Otherwise, why did the ancients call their names "stupid man," "simple man," "rotten man" and "hollow man"?

古文：亦可贻诫子弟。
现代文：这也可以遗留下来告诫后人。
English: This can also be left as a legacy to admonish future generations.

古文：赵仁奖
现代文：赵仁奖
English: Zhao Ren Award

古文：唐赵仁奖，河南人也，得贩于殖业坊王戎墓北，善歌《黄獐》，与宦官有旧。
现代文：唐朝时有个人叫赵仁奖，河南人，在殖业坊王戎墓北做小买卖，很善于唱一首名叫《黄獐》的歌曲。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Zhao Renshu, a native of Henan Province, who ran a small business in the north of the Wang Rong Tomb in the Suye Workshop. He was very good at singing a song called "Huangpi."

古文：因所托附，景龙中，乃负薪诣阙，遂得召见。云：负薪助国家调鼎。
现代文：他与一宦官有老交情，因他有所托附，在那人的帮助下，于景龙年间，他便背负柴草到了皇帝的殿堂，于是得到召见，皇上道：负薪是愿为帮助治理国家效力，有宰臣之心。
English: He had an old friendship with a eunuch, because he had something to rely on. With the help of that person, in the years of Jinglong, he carried firewood and straw to the emperor's palace, so he was summoned. The emperor said: I am willing to help govern the country. I have the heart of a vassal.

古文：即日台拜焉。
现代文：当天便任职于御史台。
English: On the same day, he took up a post at the Imperial History Channel.

古文：睿宗朝，左授上蔡丞。
现代文：到睿宗朝，被降职任命为上蔡县丞。
English: In the reign of Emperor Ruizong, he was demoted and appointed to the post of Shangcai County magistrate.

古文：使于京，访寻台中旧列，妄事欢洽。
现代文：出使到京城时，去拜访台中的老同事，胡乱行事，到处欢聚。
English: When he was sent to Beijing, he went to visit his old colleagues in Taichung, behaved erratically, and partied everywhere.

古文：御史倪若水谓杨茂直曰：此庸汉，亡为傝茸。
现代文：御史倪若水对杨茂直说：这纯属是个庸谷之人，胡作非为而又卑劣无能。
English: Ni Ruoshui said to Yang Maozhi: "This is purely a mediocre person. He is a scoundrel and incompetent.

古文：乃奏之，中书令姚崇曰：此是《黄獐》汉耶。
现代文：于是上书弹劾。中书令姚崇说：这个人就是会唱《黄獐》的那个人。
English: Therefore, a letter of impeachment was issued. The letter ordered Yao Chong to say: This person is the one who can sing "Huang Qi."

古文：授当州悉当尉，驰驿发遣。
现代文：再改任当州悉当县尉，把他立即派送出去。
English: He was then reassigned to Dangzhou Sittang County Lieutenant and sent out immediately.

古文：仁奖在台，既无余能，唯以《黄獐》自炫。
现代文：赵仁奖在御史台任职其间，没有别的能力，唯独以会唱《黄獐》而自我炫耀。
English: During his tenure at the History Channel, Zhao Ren Award had no other ability but to flaunt himself by being able to sing "Huangpi."

古文：宋务先题之曰：赵奖出王戎幕下，入朱博台中。
现代文：宋务先曾写他道：赵仁奖出自王戎的 幕府 下，进入朱门台院之中。
English: Song Wuxian once wrote that the Zhao Ren Award came from Wang Rong's shogunate and entered Zhu Mendei Academy.

古文：舍彼负薪，登兹列柏。
现代文：是舍得自背柴草这样的劳役之举，才登上此御史台。
English: Only those who are willing to do the hard work of carrying firewood on their backs can ascend to this historical platform.

古文：行人不避騝马，坐客唯听《黄獐》。
现代文：行路时人们不避他的马，坐下时人们都来听他的《黄獐》歌。
English: People do not avoid his horse when walking, and when sitting down, people come to listen to his "Huangpi" song.

古文：时崔宣一使于都，仁奖附书于家，题云：西京赵御史书。
现代文：当时崔宣一正巧到京城去，赵仁奖便让他给家捎了一封信，那信封上写道：西京赵御史书。
English: At that time, Cui Xuanyi happened to be in Beijing, and Zhao Ren Award asked him to write a letter to his family. The envelope said: West Beijing Zhao's History Book.

古文：附到洛州殖业坊王戎墓北第一铺。付妻一娘。
现代文：附到洛州殖业坊王戎墓北第一铺，付妻一娘。
English: Attached to the first shop of the north of the Wang Rong Tomb of the Luozhou Breeding Workshop, with a wife and a daughter.

古文：宣一以书示朝士。
现代文：崔宣一曾把信给朝官们看过。
English: Cui Xuanyi once showed the letter to the imperial officials.

古文：初其左授上蔡，潘好礼自上蔡令拜御史，仁奖赠诗曰：令乖騝马去，丞脱绣衣来。
现代文：当初赵仁奖降职授上蔡丞时，潘好礼正好由上蔡县令调任为御史，仁奖赠诗道：令乘湜騝马去，丞脱绣衣来。
English: At first, when the Zhao Ren Award was downgraded to Cai Zheng, Pan Hao Li was just transferred from the Cai County Order to the Imperial History, and the Cai Ren Award was given to the poet: The order went by horse, and Cai Zheng took off his embroidered clothes.

古文：当时讶之，或以为假手。
现代文：当时看到此诗很觉惊讶，有人认为是借他人之手而写。
English: I was surprised to see this poem at the time. Some people thought it was written by someone else.

古文：仁奖初拜监察，谢朝贵，但云：有幸把公马足。
现代文：仁奖初任监察御史时，去道谢朝中权贵，只是说：有幸握住了你的马足。
English: When he was first appointed as inspector of imperial history, he went to thank the dignitaries of the dynasty, only to say: I had the honor of holding your horse's foot.

古文：时朝士相随。遇一胡负两束柴，曰：此胡合拜殿中。
现代文：当时有朝士们相随同往，恰遇一个胡人背着两捆柴草走过来，一朝士说：这个胡人应当授以殿中御中。
English: At that time, some court nobles were walking along, and they happened to meet a goose carrying two bundles of firewood. One court noble said, "This goose should be given the title of Imperial Prince."

古文：或问其由，答曰：赵仁奖负一束而拜监察，此负两束，固合授殿中。
现代文：有人问他什么理由，他答道：赵仁奖背了一捆柴草便授以监察御史，此人背了两捆，当然应授殿中。
English: Someone asked him what the reason was, and he replied: "The Zhao Ren Award winner carried a bundle of firewood and grass and was awarded the title of Inspector of History. This person carried two bundles, so of course he should be awarded the Hall of Fame."

古文：姜师度
现代文：姜师度
English: Jiang Shidu

古文：唐姜师度好奇诡。
现代文：唐朝人姜师度，喜好办些离奇古怪的事。
English: Jiang Shidu, a Tang Dynasty scholar, liked to do some bizarre and eccentric things.

古文：为沧州刺史，兼按察，造枪车运粮，开河筑堰，州县鼎沸。
现代文：在他任沧州刺史兼按察史时，下令制造上面篱笆围子的车运输粮食，开凿河道，修筑堤坝。一时间州属各县混乱不堪。
English: When he served as the chief historian of Cangzhou and the inspector of history, he ordered the construction of a wagon to transport grain, excavate river channels, and build dams. For a time, the counties belonging to the state were in chaos.

古文：于鲁城界内，种稻置屯，穗蟹食尽，又差夫打蟹。
现代文：他又在鲁城县内开垦水田种稻，结果稻穗都被旁蟹吃尽，只好又差遣大批民工去打蟹，折腾苦了老百姓。
English: He also reclaimed paddy fields in Lucheng County to grow rice. As a result, the rice ears were all eaten up by crabs, so he had to send a large number of migrant workers to catch crabs, which made the common people suffer.

古文：苦之，歌曰：鲁地一种稻，一概被水沫。年年索蟹夫，百姓不可活。
现代文：当时流传一首歌谣：鲁地一种稻，一概被水没，年年索蟹夫，百姓不可活。
English: At that time, a folk song was circulated: a kind of rice in Ludi was completely submerged in water, and people had to search for crabs year after year. People could not live.

古文：又为陕州刺史，以永丰仓米运将，别征三钱，计以为费。
现代文：又：他在任陕州刺史时，要运走永丰县粮仓的米，每户在另征钱三贯，合起来作为运费。
English: Also: when he was appointed to write the history of Shaanxi Province, he wanted to transport the rice from the grain silos in Yongfeng County, and each household collected money three times, together as shipping costs.

古文：一夕忽云得计，立注楼，从仓建槽，直至于河，长数千丈。而令放米，其不快处，具大把推之，米皆损耗，多为粉末。
现代文：有一天忽然说得到妙计，于是建起注楼，并从粮仓开始建糟，一直建到河边，有数千丈长，让从粮库往下放米，有流动不快的地方，便安排人力往前推。米损耗很多，很多变成粉末。
English: One day, it was suddenly said that a brilliant plan had been found, so the pouring building was built, and the silos were built from the grain silos to the riverside, with thousands of lengths, so that rice could be put down from the grain silos, and if there was an unpleasant flow, manpower was arranged to push it forward. A lot of rice was lost, and a lot of it turned into powder.

古文：兼风激扬，凡一函失米百石，而动即千万数。
现代文：加上大风吹扬，大概传送一糟子损失米上百石，动不动就上千万。
English: Coupled with the high winds blowing, it is likely to transmit a mess of losses of more than a hundred kilos of rice, and tens of millions of kilos at any time.

古文：遣典庾者偿之，家产皆竭。
现代文：他命令掌管的人赔偿，他们的家产很快就抵偿光了。
English: He ordered those in charge to pay compensation, and their assets were soon exhausted.

古文：复遣输户自量，至有偿数十斛者。
现代文：后来他又令操作传送的人家自己计算该赔偿多少，至使有的人家赔偿数十斛的。
English: Later, he ordered the people who operated the transfer to calculate the amount of compensation themselves, so that some people compensated dozens of baht.

古文：甚害人，方停之。
现代文：因此事太坑害人，才停了下来。
English: That's why it took so long to stop.

古文：成敬奇
现代文：成敬奇
English: Cheng Jingqi

古文：唐成敬奇有俊才，天策中，诣阙自陈，请日试文章三十道。
现代文：唐朝人成敬奇有一定的才能，天策年间，他便自己到朝堂向皇帝陈述本人有才学，请求一天之内考他文章三十题。
English: Cheng Jingqi of the Tang Dynasty had a certain talent. During the reign of Tian Zhe, he went to the imperial court to tell the emperor that he had a talent for learning, and requested that he be tested on thirty articles in one day.

古文：则天乃命王勃试之，授校书郎，累拜监察大理正，与紫微令姚崇连亲。
现代文：武则天命王勃考他，被任命为校书郎，后来连续升到监察大理正，与中书令姚崇结了亲。
English: Wu Zetian was examined by the King of Destiny and was appointed as the school scribe. Later, he was successively promoted to the position of inspector, and became a relative of the Chinese scribe Yao Chong.

古文：崇尝有疾，敬奇造宅省焉，对崇涕泪。
现代文：有一次姚崇有了病，成敬奇到家中去探望，对着姚崇涕泪横流。
English: Once, when Yao Chong fell ill, Cheng Jingqi went to visit him at home, and burst into tears.

古文：怀中置生雀数从，乃一一持出，请崇手执之而后释。
现代文：他怀中放着几只活鸟，于是他一一掏出，请姚崇用手握住然后再放飞。
English: He had several live birds in his arms, so he pulled them out one by one and asked Yao Chong to hold them in his hand before releasing them.

古文：祝云：愿令公速愈也。
现代文：并祝颂道：愿令公速愈也！
English: He also said in his eulogy: May the public order be speeded up!

古文：崇勉从之。
现代文：姚崇勉强听从了。
English: Yao Chong reluctantly obeyed.

古文：既出，崇鄙其谀媚，谓子弟曰：此泪从何而来？
现代文：不久成敬奇走了，姚崇很鄙视他的阿谀谄媚，对子弟们说：他的泪从何而来？
English: Soon after Cheng Jingqi left, Yao Chong despised his flattery and said to his children: Where did his tears come from?

古文：自兹不复礼也。
现代文：从此不再以礼仪相待他。
English: From now on, we will no longer treat him with courtesy.

古文：石惠泰
现代文：石惠泰
English: Shi Huitai

古文：唐岐王府参军石惠泰，与监察御史李全交诗曰：御史非长任，参军不久居。
现代文：唐朝时，岐王府参军石惠泰在给监察御史李全交的诗中写道：御史非长任，参军不久居。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Shi Hui-tai, a member of the army from Qi Wangfu, wrote in a poem to Li Quanzhong, the overseer of the imperial court: "The imperial court does not have a long-term appointment, and it is not long to join the army."

古文：待君迁转后，此职还到余。
现代文：待君迁转后，此职还到余。
English: After your transfer, this post is still vacant.

古文：因竞放牒往来，全交为之判十余纸以报之，乃假手于拾遗张九龄。
现代文：由于可借助经常有文书案卷往来之便，李全交给他写了十几篇批评文章回报他，并假借说出自于拾遗张九龄之手。
English: With the help of frequent correspondence, Li Quan gave him more than a dozen critical articles to write back to him, and pretended to be Zhang Jiuling's hand in picking up the pieces.

古文：冯光震
现代文：冯光震
English: By Feng Guangzhen

古文：唐率府兵曹参军冯光震入集贤院，校文选。
现代文：唐朝时，东宫率府兵曹参军冯光震进入集贤院，让他校注《文选》。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Feng Guangzheng, a member of the Eastern Palace Guards who joined the army at the head of a prefectural petty officer, entered Shixian Academy and asked him to proofread the Selected Works.

古文：尝注蹲鸱云：蹲鸱者，今之芋子，即是著毛萝卜也。
现代文：有一次，他在注解蹲鸱一词时写道：蹲鸱者，今称之为芋子，就是长毛的萝卜。
English: On one occasion, commenting on the term squatting toad, he wrote: Squatting toad, now called a potato, is a long-haired radish.

古文：萧令闻之，拊掌大笑。
现代文：萧令听说这件事，拍掌大笑。
English: When Xiao Ling heard about this, he clapped his hands and laughed.

古文：李谨度
现代文：李谨度
English: Li Jindu

古文：唐御史中丞李谨度，宋璟引致之。
现代文：唐朝时有个御史叫李谨度，是由宋璟引荐的。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was an imperial historian named Li Zhendu, who was introduced by Song Tao.

古文：遭母丧，不肯举发哀。
现代文：他的母亲去世，他却不肯哀悼奔丧。
English: When his mother died, he refused to mourn.

古文：讣到，皆匿之。
现代文：直到尚书省的文书发到御史台，他才哀哭。
English: He did not weep until Shang Shushu's document was sent to the Imperial History Museum.

古文：官僚苦其无用，令本贯瀛州，申谨度母死，尚书省牒御史台，然后哭。其庸猥皆此类也。
现代文：他们都是这样一些卑俗猥劣的人！
English: They are all such vulgar and indecent people!

古文：三秽
现代文：三秽
English: The Three Filth

古文：唐王怡为中丞，宪台之秽；姜晦为常选侍郎，吏部之秽；崔泰之为黄门侍郎，门下之秽；号为京师三秽。
现代文：唐朝时，王怡任御史中丞，是御史台最丑恶的人。姜晦任主管铨选的侍郎，是吏部最丑恶的人。崔泰之任黄门侍郎，是门下省最丑恶的人。当时这三人被称之为京师三秽。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Wang Yi was appointed as the vice-chairman of the imperial history department, and he was the ugliest person in the imperial history department. Jiang Yu was appointed as the attendant of the chief of the imperial history department, and he was the ugliest person in the administration department. Cui Tai was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and he was the ugliest person in the subordinate province. At that time, these three people were called the three filth of Beijing.

古文：阳滔
现代文：阳滔
English: Yang Tao

古文：唐阳滔为中书舍人。
现代文：唐朝时，阳滔曾担任过中书舍人。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Yang Tao once served as a scholar.

古文：时促命制敕，令史持库钥他适，无旧本捡寻，乃斫窗取得之。
现代文：有一次，急令他抄制诏书，可是拿着库房钥匙的令史去了别处，取不出旧的稿本参考，于是就斫断窗框进去取出来。
English: On one occasion, he was urgently ordered to copy the imperial edict, but he took the key to the storeroom and went elsewhere. He could not take out the old manuscript reference, so he broke through the window frame and took it out.

古文：时人号为斫窗舍人。
现代文：当时人们称之为斫窗舍人。
English: At that time, people called him a window-sitter.

古文：常定宗
现代文：常定宗
English: Jōjō sect

古文：唐国子祭酒辛弘智诗云：君为河边草，逢春心剩生。
现代文：唐朝时，有个国子祭酒辛弘智写诗道：君为河边草，逢春心剩生。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a national son festival wine Xin Hongzhi wrote a poem: You are a riverside grass, and you have a spring in your heart.

古文：妾如台上镜，照得始分明。
现代文：妾如台上镜，照得始分明。
English: A concubine, like a stage mirror, shines brightly.

古文：同房学士常定宗，为改始字为转字，遂争此诗。
现代文：同房的学士常定宗，只因为将其中的始字改为转字，就要争夺这首诗。
English: His roommate, the bachelor Chang Dingzong, had to compete for the poem just because he changed the first letter of it to a transliteration.

古文：皆云我作。
现代文：两人都说是自己写的。
English: Both say they wrote it themselves.

古文：乃下牒，见博士罗道宗，判云：昔五字定表，以理切称奇。
现代文：于是写下了讼状，博士罗道宗裁断道：过去五个字是衡定的标准，以说理深刻为奇。
English: Dr. Luo Daozong then wrote a complaint, and the judge said: "The last five words are the standard of measurement, and it is surprising that the reasoning is profound.

古文：今一言竞诗，取词多为主。诗归弘智，转还定宗。
现代文：今天一个字就要夺诗，取字数多的为诗的主人，诗归属弘智， 转 字还给定宗。
English: Today, one word is to win a poem, the owner of the poem is the one who takes the most words, the poem belongs to Hongzhi, and the turn of the word is given to the sect.

古文：以状牒知，任为公验。
现代文：将此状文发放周知，任凭公众验证。
English: This statement will be distributed to the public and will be subject to public verification.

古文：张玄靖
现代文：张玄靖
English: Zhang Xuanjing

古文：唐张玄靖，陕人也，自左卫仓曹拜监察，性非敦厚。
现代文：唐朝时，有个叫张玄靖的，陕州人，自左卫仓曹升任为监察御史，此人并不忠厚老实。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Zhang Xuanjing, a native of Shaanxi Province, who was promoted from the position of Zuo Wei Cang Cao to the position of Inspector General of History. This man was not loyal and honest.

古文：因附会慕容宝节而迁。
现代文：由于追随巴结慕容宝节而得到升迁。
English: He was promoted because he followed the Ba Jie Muryong treasure festival.

古文：时有两张监察，号玄靖为小张。
现代文：当时台中有两个张监察，因而称玄靖为小张。
English: At that time, there were two Zhang supervisors on the platform, so they called Xuanzang a minor Zhang.

古文：初入台，呼同列长年为兄，及选殿中，则不复兄矣。
现代文：他刚到御史台时，称呼同事们年长的为兄，等升为殿中御史，就不再称兄了。
English: When he first arrived at the Imperial Historian's Office, he called his older colleagues "brother," but after he was promoted to Imperial Historian, he stopped calling them "brother."

古文：宝节既诛，颇不自安，复呼旧列为兄，监察杜文范，因使还，会郑仁恭方出使，问台中事意，恭答曰：宝节败后，小张复呼我曹为兄矣。
现代文：后来当慕容宝节获罪被杀，他很不自安，于是又称察院的老同事为兄。监察御史杜文范刚刚出差回来，赶上郑仁恭正要出差，他问仁恭最近台中有什么值得一提的事，仁恭道：宝节败落后，小张又呼我辈为兄了。
English: Later, when Murong Bao Jie was convicted and killed, he was very uneasy, so he also called an old colleague of the procuratorate as his elder brother. Supervisor Gu Shi Du Wen Fan had just returned from a business trip and caught up with Zheng Rengong who was about to leave on a business trip. He asked Rengong if there was anything worth mentioning in Taichung recently. Rengong said: After the defeat of Bao Jie, Xiao Zhang called us all as his elder brother.

古文：时人以为谈笑。
现代文：当时人们都以此为谈笑的材料。
English: At the time, people laughed about it.

