古文：高季兴，字贻孙，陕州硖石人也。
现代文：高季兴，字贻孙，陕州硖石人。
English: Gao Jixing, also known as Gao Sun, was born in Shaanxi Province.

古文：本名季昌，及后唐庄宗即位，避其庙讳改焉。
现代文：本名季昌，到后唐庄宗李存勖即位后，为回避庄宗的庙讳 庄 而改 昌 名为 兴 。
English: His real name was Ji Chang, but he changed his name to Xing after the enthronement of Li Cunxu of the Later Tang Dynasty Zhuangzong in order to avoid the taboo of the Zhuangzong temple.

古文：幼隶于汴之贾人李七郎，梁祖以李七郎为子，赐姓，名友让。
现代文：小时在汴州商人李七郎家中做事，梁太祖以李七郎为养子，赐李七郎姓朱，名友让。
English: He worked for an hour at the home of Li Shichiro, a merchant in Zhangzhou. Liang Taizu adopted Li Shichiro as his son and gave him the surname Zhu.

古文：梁祖尝见季兴于仆隶中，其耳面稍异，命友让养之为子。
现代文：梁太祖曾经看见高季兴寄身于仆隶之中，他的耳朵和面相与他人有些不同，就命朱友让收养他做儿子。
English: Liang Taizu once saw Gao Jixing lurking among the servants. His ears and face were somewhat different from others, so he ordered Zhu You to adopt him as his son.

古文：梁祖以季兴为牙将，渐能骑射。
现代文：梁太祖以高季兴为牙将，高季兴慢慢地学会了骑马射箭。
English: Liang Taizu used Gao Jixing as a dentist, and Gao Jixing slowly learned to ride a horse and shoot arrows.

古文：唐天复中，昭宗在岐下，梁祖围凤翔日久，众议欲班师，独季兴谏止之，语在《梁祖纪》中。
现代文：唐朝天福年间，唐昭宗李晔被迫驾驻岐下，梁太祖包围凤翔时日已久，大家都说要撤军回去，只有高季兴劝谏阻止，这件事记载在《太祖本纪》中。
English: During the Tianfu era of the Tang Dynasty, Li Xi of the Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty was forced to stay in Qishan, and Liang Taizu had been besieging Fengxiang for a long time. Everyone said that they wanted to withdraw, but only Gao Ji Xing persuaded him to stop. This event is recorded in the "Ancestral Records."

古文：既而竟迎昭宗归京，以季兴为迎銮毅勇功臣、检校大司空、行宋州刺史。
现代文：不久终于将唐昭宗迎回京城长安，昭宗赐高季兴为迎銮毅勇功臣、检校大司空、代理宋州刺史。
English: Soon, Tang Zhaozong was finally welcomed back to the capital Chang'an. Zhaozong gave Gao Jixing the title of Ying Xuan Yi Yong Hero, the chief inspector of the school, and the representative of Songzhou Jishi.

古文：从梁祖平青州，改知宿州事，迁颍州防御使，梁祖令复姓高氏，擢为荆南兵马留后。
现代文：后跟随梁太祖平定青州，改为主持宿州事务，迁任颍州防御使，梁太祖令他恢复他的原姓高氏，擢升为荆南兵马留后。
English: After that, he followed Liang Taizu to subdue Qingzhou, and was transferred to preside over Suizhou affairs, and was transferred to the post of defense envoy of Zhangzhou. Liang Taizu ordered him to restore his original surname Gao, and was promoted to Jingnan soldiers and horses.

古文：荆州自唐乾符之后，兵火互集，井邑不完，季兴招辑离散，流民归复，梁祖嘉之，乃授节钺。
现代文：荆州从唐僖宗乾符年以后，战火交集，市井城邑破败不全，高季兴招聚流离失散的人民，逃亡在外的人民回归故土恢复旧业，梁太祖嘉奖高季兴，就授给他符节和斧钺。
English: After the Qianfu Year of the Emperor Jianzong of the Tang Dynasty, Jingzhou was caught in the crossfire of war, the cities and towns were ruined and incomplete, Gao Jixing gathered the displaced and dispersed people, the people who had fled abroad returned to their homeland to resume their old business, and Liang Taizu awarded Gao Jixing with a festival and an axe.

古文：梁开平中，破雷彦恭于朗州，加平章事。
现代文：梁太祖开平年间，高季兴在朗州打败雷彦恭，被加封为平章事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Liang Dynasty, Gao Jixing defeated Lei Yanqong in Lanzhou, and was awarded the title of Pingzhang.

古文：荆南旧无外垒，季兴始城之，遂厚敛于民，招聚亡命，自后僭臣于吴、蜀，梁氏稍不能制焉，因就封渤海王。
现代文：荆南城以前没有外城墙，高季兴开始修筑外城墙，于是向人民征收沉重的赋税，招聚亡命党徒，从此以后高季兴就不守本份而擅自向吴国、蜀国称臣，梁太祖渐渐不能控制他，就因便封他为渤海王。
English: Jingnan City did not have an outer city wall before, Gao Jixing began to build an outer city wall, so he levied heavy taxes on the people and recruited exiled party members. From then on, Gao Jixing did not keep his duty and claimed to be a vassal to the State of Wu and the State of Shu without authorization. Liang Taizu gradually could not control him, so he made him the king of Erhai.

古文：尝攻襄州，为孔勍所败。
现代文：高季兴曾经进攻襄州，被孔京力打败。
English: Gao Jixing once attacked Yangzhou and was defeated by Kong Jingli.

古文：及庄宗定天下，季兴来朝于洛阳，加兼中书令，时论多请留之，郭崇韬以方推信义于华夏，请放归籓，季兴促程而去。
现代文：到后唐庄宗平定天下，高季兴到洛阳朝拜称臣，被加封为兼中书令，当时很多人都请求庄宗扣留他，郭崇韬认为朝廷正向华夏推行信用道义，请求庄宗放他回到藩镇，高季兴急行离去。
English: After the arrival of Tang Zhuangzong, he pacified the world. Gao Jixing went to Luoyang to pay homage to Zhuangzong and was awarded the title of vice-chancellor. At that time, many people asked Zhuangzong to detain him. Guo Chongyi believed that the court was promoting credit morality to China and asked Zhuangzong to let him return to the town. Gao Jixing left in a hurry.

古文：至襄州，酒酣，谓孔勍曰： 是行有二错：来朝一错，放回二错。 
现代文：到襄州，酒喝到酣畅时，对孔京力说： 这一趟有二错：我去朝拜是一错，他们放回我是二错。 
English: When he arrived in Xiangzhou and drank until he was drunk, he said to Kong Jingli, "This trip has two mistakes: I made a mistake by going to the temple, and they made a mistake by letting me go back.

古文：洎至荆南，谓宾佐曰： 新主百战方得河南，对勋臣夸手抄《春秋》；又竖手指云： 我于指头上得天下。 
现代文：及到荆南时，高季兴对宾僚将佐们说 ：新立国的皇上百战之后才拥有了黄河以南，对功勋大臣夸耀他曾亲手抄录《春秋》；又竖起手指说： 我从手指头上得到天下。 
English: When he reached Jingnan, Gao Jixing said to his guests and generals: "The south of the Yellow River was only possessed after the hundred battles of the newly founded country. He boasted to the Minister of Merit that he had copied "Spring and Autumn" with his own hands. He also raised his finger and said: "I got the world from my finger."

古文：如此则功在一人，臣佐何有！
现代文：像这样那就是功劳全在他一人了，哪里还有大臣的辅佐之功！
English: As such, the credit goes to him alone, without any help from the minister!

古文：且游猎旬日不回，中外之情，其何以堪，吾高枕无忧矣。 
现代文：而且皇上外出游乐狩猎十天半月都不回，朝廷内外的人心，将怎么忍受得了，我可高枕无忧了。 
English: Moreover, the Emperor does not return from his pleasure hunting for ten days and a half months. People's hearts both inside and outside the Imperial Court will not be able to bear it. I can rest easy.

古文：乃增筑西面罗城，备御敌之具。
现代文：于是增修加固西面相连的城池，以做抵御敌人的准备。
English: As a result, additional repairs and reinforcement of the connected castle mounds on the west side were carried out in preparation for resisting the enemy.

古文：时梁朝旧军多为季兴所诱，由是兵众渐多，跋扈之志坚矣。
现代文：这时梁朝的旧军大多被高季兴招诱，因此士卒逐渐增多，飞扬跋扈的志向坚定了。
English: At this time, most of the old troops of the Liang Dynasty were lured by Gao Ji Xing, so the number of soldiers gradually increased, and the ambition to fly high became firm.

古文：明年，册拜南平王。
现代文：第二年，被册封为南平王。
English: The following year, he was canonized as the King of Nanping.

古文：魏王继岌平蜀，尽选其宝货浮江而下，船至峡口，会庄宗遇祸，季兴尽邀取之。
现代文：魏王李继岌平定蜀国后，选尽蜀国的珠宝财货从长江用船运载而下，船到峡口时，正逢上庄宗遇祸被害，高季兴拦截船只全部抢走珠宝财货。
English: After Wei King Li had successfully pacified Shu, he selected the best of Shu's jewelry and goods to be transported down from the Yangtze River by ship. When the ship arrived at the mouth of the gorge, Shangzhuangzong was hit by a disaster, and Gaojixing intercepted the ships and took away all the jewelry and goods.

古文：明宗即位，复请夔、峡为属郡，初俞其请，后朝廷除刺史，季兴上言，称已令子弟权知郡事，请不除刺史。
现代文：唐明宗李嗣源即位，高季兴又请求将夔州、峡州划为自己的属郡，皇上开始答应了他的请求，后来朝廷任命刺史，高季兴上书朝廷说已经派子弟们临时主持夔、峡二郡事务，请求不要再任命刺史。
English: Tang Mingzong Li Siyuan ascended to the throne, Gao Jixing also requested that the two counties of Zhangzhou and Xiaozhou be designated as his own. The emperor initially agreed to his request. Later, the court appointed Jishi. Gao Jixing wrote to the court that he had sent his sons to temporarily preside over the affairs of the two counties of Zhangzhou and Xiaozhou, and requested that Jishi not be appointed again.

古文：不臣之状既形，诏削夺其官爵。
现代文：不臣服的情状已经明显了，明宗诏令剥夺他的官爵。
English: His insubordination was already evident, and he was stripped of his title by Imperial edict.

古文：天成初，命西方鄴兴师收复三州，又遣襄州节度使刘训总兵围荆南，以问其罪，属霖潦，班师。
现代文：明宗天成初年，命令西方邺起兵收复荆南、夔、峡三州，又派襄州节度使刘训统率部队包围了伪荆南国，以讨伐高季兴的罪行，正遇上下大雨，只好撤军回师。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Tiancheng ordered the Western Han Dynasty to raise an army to recapture the three states of Jingnan, Fen and Qiao, and also sent the Xiangzhou Sect to have Liu Huning lead an army to encircle the pseudo-Jingnan country to fight the crimes of Gao Jixing. When it was raining heavily, the army had to withdraw back to the division.

古文：三年冬，季兴病脚气而卒。
现代文：天成三年冬天，高季兴犯脚气病去世。
English: In the winter of Tiancheng Year 3, Gao Jixing died of beriberi.

古文：其子从诲嗣立，累表谢罪，请修职贡。
现代文：他的儿子高从诲即位，接连上表认罪，请求恢复对朝廷的职责和贡赋。
English: When his son Gao Congchu ascended the throne, he repeatedly confessed his guilt and requested to resume his duties and tribute to the imperial court.

古文：由是复季兴官爵，谥曰武信。
现代文：因此恢复高季兴的官爵，谥为武信。
English: Therefore, Gao Jixing's official title was restored, and Wu Xin was promoted.

古文：从诲，初仕梁，历殿前控鹤都头、鞍辔库副使、左军巡使、如京使、左千牛大将军、荆南衙内都指挥使，领濠州刺史，改归州刺史，累官至检校太傅。
现代文：高从诲，开始时在后梁做官，历任殿前控鹤都头、鞍辔库副使、左军巡使、如京使、左千牛大将军、荆南牙内都指挥使，代理濠州刺史，历官至检校太傅。
English: Gao Zongyun, at the beginning he worked as an official in Houliang, successively serving as the head of the palace front, the deputy envoy of the Antao Bank, the left-wing military envoy, such as the Beijing envoy, the general of the left thousand cattle, and the Jing Nanjia, all commanding envoys, acting as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the officials to the inspection of the school.

古文：初，季兴之将叛也，从诲常泣谏之，季兴不从。
现代文：当初，在高季兴将要反叛时，高从诲总是哭着劝谏他，高季兴不听。
English: At first, when Gao Jixing was about to rebel, Gao Zongyao always cried and advised him, but Gao Jixing did not listen.

古文：天成三年冬，季兴薨，从诲乃上表谢罪，复修职贡。
现代文：后唐明宗天成三年，高季兴去世，高从诲就上表朝廷谢罪。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Tiancheng after the Tang and Ming Dynasties, Gao Jixing passed away, and Gao Congyao went to the imperial court to apologize.

古文：明宗嘉之，寻命起复，授荆南节度使、兼待中。
现代文：明宗表彰他，随即令他除去丧服任职，授任荆南节度使、兼侍中。
English: Emperor Mingzong commended him, and then ordered him to remove his mourning clothes, and appointed him as Jingnan's ceremonial envoy and chamberlain.

古文：长兴三年，加检校太尉。
现代文：长兴三年，加封检校太尉。
English: After three years in Changxing, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：应顺中，封南平王。
现代文：闵帝应顺年间，封为南平王。
English: Emperor Shun was enthroned as Nanping King in the following year.

古文：清泰初，加检校太师。
现代文：末帝清泰初年，加封检校太师。
English: In the first year of the late Emperor Qin Tai, Jafeng was promoted to the rank of inspector of schools.

古文：晋天福中，加守中书令。
现代文：后晋高祖天福年间，加封守中书令。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Tenfu, he was promoted to Gaokao and given the title of Keeper of the Great Seal.

古文：六年，襄州安从进反，王师攻讨，从诲馈军食以助焉，诏书褒美，寻加守尚书令，从诲上章固让，朝廷遣使敦勉，竟不受其命。
现代文：天福六年，襄州安从进造反，朝廷派兵攻讨，高从诲赠军粮以助王师，朝廷诏令嘉扬他，立即加封守尚书令，高从诲上奏章坚决推让，朝廷派使者劝说他，最后还是没有接受任命。
English: In the sixth year of Tianfu, Yangzhou Ancong advanced and rebelled, the imperial court sent troops to fight against him, Gao Congzheng gave military rations to help Wang Shi, the imperial edict commended him, immediately sealed the imperial edict, Gao Congzheng resolutely pushed the imperial edict, the imperial court sent an envoy to persuade him, and finally did not accept the appointment.

古文：时有术士言从诲年命有厄，宜退避宠禄故也。
现代文：因为当时有术数之士说高从诲这年有厄运，应当退避恩宠爵禄。
English: Because at that time, there were magicians who said that it was bad luck to be a high follower in that year, and it was necessary to avoid the grace of the peerage.

古文：及契丹入汴，汉高祖起义于太原，间道遣使奉贡，密有祈请，言俟车驾定河、汴，愿赐郢州为属郡，汉祖依违之。
现代文：到契丹人攻入汴京消灭了后晋，后汉高祖在太原建立国号，高从诲派使者从小道奉上贡礼，暗中向高祖祈请，说待高祖平定黄河、汴州一带后，请高祖将郢州划为自己的属郡，高祖没有明确答复。
English: After the Khitan invaded and destroyed the Later Jin Dynasty in Beijing and the Later Han Dynasty in Taiyuan, Gaozong sent an emissary to pay tribute to Gaozong secretly. He asked Gaozong to designate Zhangzhou as his own county after Gaozong had conquered the Yellow River and Zhangzhou. Gaozong did not give a clear answer.

古文：及入汴，从诲致贡，求践前言，汉高祖不从。
现代文：到高祖进入汴京后，高从诲又送上贡礼，请求答复以前的要求，高祖不答应。
English: After Gaozhu entered Beijing, Gaozong again sent tribute and asked for a reply to the previous request, but Gaozhu did not agree.

古文：从诲怒，率州兵攻郢州，旬日，为刺史尹实所败，自是朝贡不至。
现代文：高从诲大怒，便率领州兵攻打郢都，十来天后，被郢州刺史尹实打败，从此不再向朝廷进贡。
English: Gao Congyu was so angry that he led the National Guard to attack the capital city of Handan. After more than ten days, he was defeated by Yin Shi, the governor of Handan. From then on, he would no longer pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：从诲东通于吴，西通于蜀，皆利其供军财货而已。
现代文：高从诲又向东通好吴国，向西通好蜀国，都是以求得提供军援财货而已。
English: Gao Congchu also eastward to Wuzhou, westward to Shu, all in order to provide military aid, wealth and goods.

古文：末年，以镇星在翼、轸之分，乃释罗纨，衣布素，饮食节俭，以禳灾咎。
现代文：晚年，因为镇星移到与荆南分野相应的轸翼位置，高从诲脱去罗纨衣服，穿上俭朴的衣服，节俭饮食，以禳除灾祸。
English: In his later years, as Zhenxing moved to a higher position corresponding to that of Jingnan, Gao Zhen took off his rustic clothes, put on simple clothes, and ate frugally in order to eliminate the calamity.

古文：寻令人祈托襄州安审琦，请归朝待罪，朝廷亦开纳之。
现代文：并立即令人请托襄州安审琦，请求归顺朝廷听任处置，朝廷也对他网开一面。
English: He was immediately ordered to petition the Tozhang State Security Court, requesting that he submit to the court's disposition. The court also turned a blind eye to him.

古文：汉乾祐元年冬十一月，以疾薨于位。
现代文：汉乾佑元年冬十一月，因病在任上去世。
English: Han Qianyou passed away in the winter of November of the first year of his reign due to illness.

古文：诏赠尚书令，谥曰文献。
现代文：诏令追赠为尚书令，谥号叫文献。
English: The posthumous issue of the Imperial Edict was called the Imperial Edict of Letters, and the posthumous issue was called the Imperial Edict of Literature.

古文：子保融嗣，位至荆南节度使、守太傅、中书令，封南平王。
现代文：儿子高保融即位，位至荆南节度使、守太傅、中书令，封南平王。
English: Gao Baorong's son Gao Baorong ascended to the throne, and was appointed Jingnan's ceremonial envoy, Shou Taifu, Chushirei, and given the title Nanping Wang.

古文：皇朝建隆元年秋卒。
现代文：大宋建隆元年秋天去世。
English: Jianlong of the Great Song Dynasty died in the autumn of the first year.

古文：谥曰贞懿。
现代文：谥号叫贞懿。
English: Her posthumous name is Zhengrong.

古文：其诸将之倚任者，则有王保义。
现代文：其众将中深受倚重的，则有王保义。
English: Among his generals, Wang Baoyi is the most trusted.

古文：保义本姓刘，名去非，幽州人。
现代文：王保义本来姓刘，名去非，幽州人。
English: Wang Baoyi was originally surnamed Liu, but his name was changed to Yuzhou.

古文：少为县吏，粗暴无行，习骑射，敢斗击。
现代文：小时任县吏，粗暴而无品行，熟习骑马射箭，勇于搏斗攻击。
English: He was a county magistrate for a short time. He was rude and unprincipled. He was good at horseback riding and archery, and had the courage to fight and attack.

古文：刘仁恭之子守奇善射，惟去非许以为能。
现代文：刘仁恭的儿子刘守奇善于射箭，只承认刘去非有才能。
English: Liu Shouqi, the son of Liu Renkong, is good at archery. He only admits that Liu Shouli has talent.

古文：守奇以兄守光夺父位，亡入契丹，又自契丹奔太原，去非皆从之。
现代文：刘守奇因为哥哥刘守光夺了父亲的位置，便逃到契丹，又从契丹逃往太原，刘去非都跟着他。
English: Liu Shouqi fled to Khitan and from Khitan to Taiyuan because his brother Liu Shouguang usurped his father's position. Liu followed him everywhere.

古文：庄宗之伐燕也，守奇从周德威引军前进，师次涿州，刺史姜行敢登陴固守，去非呼行敢曰： 河东小刘郎领军来为父除凶，尔何敢拒！ 
现代文：庄宗讨伐北燕时，刘守奇跟随周德威带着军队前进，部队到达涿州，涿州刺史姜行敢登城固守，刘去非对姜行敢大声说 ：河东小刘郎领军来为他父亲铲除凶贼，你怎么胆敢抗拒！ 
English: When Zhuang Zong was fighting against Beiyan, Liu Shouqi followed Zhou Dewei and advanced with the army. The troops reached Zhangzhou. Zhangzhou's leader, Jiang Xingxiang, dared to go to the city to defend himself. Liu Defei said loudly to Jiang Xingxiang: "Hedong Xiao Liu Lang led the army to eradicate the thieves for his father. How dare you resist!"

古文：守奇免胄劳之，行敢遥拜，即开门迎降。
现代文：刘守奇取下头盔问候姜行敢，姜行敢就在城墙上遥拜刘守奇，立即打开城门迎接投降。
English: Liu Shouqi took off his helmet to greet Jiang Xingang. Jiang Xingang bowed to Liu Shouqi on the city wall and immediately opened the city gate to welcome the surrender.

古文：德威害其功，密告庄宗，言守奇心不可保。
现代文：周德威嫉妒刘守奇不战而下涿州的功劳，密告庄宗，说刘守奇不可靠。
English: Zhou Dewei was jealous of Liu Shouqi's achievement of going to Zhangzhou without a fight, and tipped off Zhuangzong, saying that Liu Shouqi was unreliable.

古文：庄宗召守奇还计事，行次土门，去非说守奇曰： 公不施寸兵下涿郡，周公以得非己力，必有如簧之间，太原不宜往也。
现代文：庄宗使人召回刘守奇商量事情，走到土门时，刘去非劝说刘守奇说 ：您不费一兵一卒便降伏了涿郡，周将军因为不是出于自己的功劳，必有巧舌离间，太原不能去啊！
English: Zhuangzong called Liu Shouqi back to discuss the matter. When they reached the gate, Liu went to persuade Liu Shouqi and said, "You surrendered Qi County without spending a single soldier. Since General Zhou did not do it on his own, he must have a clever tongue. Taiyuan can't go!"

古文：公家于梁，素有君臣之分，宜往依之，介福万全矣。 
现代文：您家与梁朝，一向有君臣的关系，应投奔归附于梁朝，才有大福以保万全啊！ 
English: Your family and the Liang Dynasty have always had a relationship of monarch and vassal. You should rush to attach to the Liang Dynasty, and only then will you have the great blessing of being fully protected!

古文：守奇乃奔梁，梁以守奇为沧州留后，以去非为河阳行军司马。
现代文：刘守奇于是投奔梁朝，梁朝以刘守奇为沧州留后，以刘去非为河阳行军司马。
English: Liu Shouqi then went to the Liang Dynasty. After the Liang Dynasty left Cangzhou with Liu Shouqi, Liu went to Hebei as the leader of the marching army.

古文：时谢彦章移去非为郢州刺史。
现代文：当时谢彦章调刘去非任郢州刺史。
English: At that time, Xie Yanzhang transferred Liu Zhili to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：及庄宗平河、洛，去非乃弃郡归高季兴，为行军司马，仍改易姓名。
现代文：到庄宗平定河、洛一带后，刘去非便丢下郢州归顺高季兴，任行军司马，又改姓换名。
English: After arriving in the areas of Zhuangzong, Pingdinghe and Luo, Liu left Zhangzhou and went to Shun Gao Jixing. He was appointed as the commander of the marching army and changed his surname.

古文：自是季兴父子倚为腹心，凡守籓规画，出兵方略，言必从之。
现代文：从此高季兴父子把他当作心腹，举凡守土规划，出兵方略，言听计从。
English: From then on, Gao Jixing and his son treated him as a confidant, made plans to defend the country, planned to send troops, and followed his advice.

古文：盖以写其高尚之趣也。马殷，字霸图，许州鄢陵人也。
现代文：乾佑元年夏天，高从诲奏请任刘去非为武泰军节度留后，仍任荆南行军司马，加封检校太尉。后来刘去非在江陵去世。
English: In the summer of the first year of the Qianyu era, after Gaozong Yuxo asked Liu Gangfei to stay for the festival of the Wuchai Army, he still served as the Sima of the Jingnan Marching Army and the captain of the sealing inspection. Later, Liu Gangfei died in Gangneung.

古文：少为木工，及蔡贼秦宗权作乱，始应募从军。
现代文：马殷，字霸图，许州鄢陵人，小时做木匠，当蔡州贼寇秦宗权作乱时，才应募参军。
English: Ma Yin, also known as Zhaotu, a native of Xuzhou and Fuling, worked as a carpenter for a short time. He was recruited into the army when the Caizhou bandits invaded the Qin Dynasty and caused a disturbance.

古文：初，随孙儒渡淮，陷广陵。
现代文：开始，跟随孙儒渡过淮河，攻陷广陵。
English: At the beginning, he followed Sun Ru across the Huai River and attacked Guangling.

古文：及儒败于宣州，殷随别将刘建峰过江西，连陷洪、鄂、潭、桂等州，建峰尽有湖南之地，遂自为潭帅。
现代文：当孙儒在宣州被击败时，马殷跟随另一位将领刘建峰攻略江西，接连攻下洪、鄂、潭、桂等州，刘建峰全部占有了湖南地界，就自立为潭州统帅。
English: When Sun Ru was defeated in Xuanzhou, Ma Yin followed another general, Liu Jianfeng, to attack Jiangxi, and successively attacked Hong, E, Tan, Gui and other states. Liu Jianfeng occupied all of Hunan's territory and became the commander of Tanzhou.

古文：顷之，建峰为部下所杀，潭人推行军司马张佶为帅。
现代文：不久，刘建峰被部下杀害，潭州人推举行军司马张佶当统帅。
English: Soon after, Liu Jianfeng was killed by his subordinates, and the people of Tanzhou promoted the military secretary Ma Zhangye to be the commander.

古文：时殷方统兵攻邵州，佶曰： 吾才不及马殷。 
现代文：当时马殷正领兵进攻邵州，张佶说 ：我的才能比不上马殷。 
English: At that time, Ma Yin was leading the troops to attack Shaozhou. Zhang Ye said, "My talent is no match for Ma Yin."

古文：即牒殷付以军府事。
现代文：就发文给马殷将潭州军府事务交付给他。
English: In response to the letter sent to Ma Yin, the affairs of the Tanzhou Military Government were handed over to him.

古文：殷自邵州还军，犒劳将士，诛害建峰者数十人，自为留后。
现代文：马殷从邵州凯旋，犒劳将士，诛杀了杀害刘建峰的几十个人，自己当潭州留后。
English: Ma Yin returned from Shaozhou in triumph, worked hard, killed dozens of people who killed Liu Jianfeng, and stayed behind in Dangzhou.

古文：久之，朝廷命为湖南节度使，遂有潭、衡七州之地。
现代文：过了很久，朝廷任命他为湖南节度使，于是就拥有了潭、衡等七州的地盘。
English: After a long time, the imperial court appointed him as the Hunan Festival envoy, so he owned the territory of seven states such as Tan and Heng.

古文：唐天复中，杨行密急攻江夏，杜洪求援于荆南，成汭举舟师援之。
现代文：唐昭宗天福年间，杨行密急攻江夏，杜洪向荆南求援，成派水军支援杜洪。
English: During the Tang Zhaozong Tianfu years, Yang Xing urgently attacked Jiangxia, Du Hong asked Jing Nan for help, and sent a naval force to support Du Hong.

古文：时澧朗节度使雷彦恭乘汭出师，袭取荆州，载其宝货，焚毁州城而去。
现代文：这时澧朗节度使雷彦恭乘成出兵之机，袭击占领了荆州，用车子装上他的宝物财货，烧毁了荆州城而离去。
English: At this time, the Qing Lang Festival made Lei Yanqong take advantage of the opportunity to send troops, attacked and occupied Jingzhou, loaded his treasures and goods with a car, burned Jingzhou City and left.

古文：彦恭东连行密，断江、岭行商之路，殷与高季兴合势攻彦恭于澧朗。
现代文：雷彦恭向东联合吴国杨行密，截断江汉间水陆运输道路，马殷与荆南高季兴联合兵力在澧朗进攻雷彦恭。
English: Lei Yanqong allied with Wu Guo Yang Xingmi to the east, cutting off the water and land transportation road between Jiangsu and Han. Ma Yin and Jingnan Gao Jixing's joint forces attacked Lei Yanqong in Fulang.

古文：数年，擒之，尽有其地，及以张佶为朗州节度使，由是兵力雄盛。
现代文：几年后，抓获了他，全部占有了他的土地，于是以张佶当朗州节度使，从此兵力强盛。
English: A few years later, he was captured and all of his land was seized, so he sent Zhang Xuan to the Langzhou Festival, and from then on, the army was strong.

古文：殷于梁贞明中，为时姑息，所求皆允，累官至守太师、兼中书令，封楚王。
现代文：马殷在梁代贞明年间，为时势姑息纵容，他所要求的都予以满足，接连升官到守太师、兼中书令，封为楚王。
English: During the reign of Liang Daizhen, Ma Yin tolerated the situation and met all his demands. He was successively promoted to the position of Shou Taishi, concurrently to the position of Zhong Shuling, and crowned as the King of Chu.

古文：又上章请依唐秦王故事，乃加天策上将军之号。
现代文：又上奏章请求依照唐代秦王李世民的前例，加封天策上将军的称号。
English: He also wrote a petition asking for the title of Tianze Shangzheng to be added to his title in accordance with the precedent of Li Shimin, the King of Qin in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：又请官位内添制置静江、武平、宁远等军事，皆从之。
现代文：又请求在官职管辖范围内增加掌管静江、武平、宁远等地军事的权力，都依从了他。
English: He also requested to increase the power to control the military in Jingjiang, Wuping, Ningyuan and other places within the scope of official jurisdiction, and they all obeyed him.

古文：既封楚王，仍请依唐诸王行台故事，置诸天官幕府，有文苑学士之号，知诏令之名，总制二十余州，自署官吏，征赋不供，民间采茶，并抑而买之。
现代文：已经被封为楚王，还要求依照唐代各王行台的先例，设置天官幕府，有文苑学士的名称和知诏令的名号，总共控制二十多州，自行任命官吏，征收赋税不纳贡，民间采茶，均压价收购。
English: He had already been crowned the King of Chu, and he also demanded that, in accordance with the precedents of the kings of the Tang Dynasty, a celestial official shogunate should be set up, with the name of the scholar and the name of the edict, with a total control of more than 20 states, with officials appointed by themselves, with taxes levied but no tribute paid, and with tea picked by the people and purchased at a low price.

古文：又自铸铅铁钱，凡天下商贾所赍宝货入其境者，只以土产铅铁博易之无余，遂致一方富盛，穷极奢侈，贡奉朝廷不过茶数万斤而已。于中原卖茶之利，岁百万计。
现代文：又自行铸造铅铁钱币，凡各地商人带有宝物财货来到他的楚国境内的，马殷只用楚国土产和钱币与他们交易，使他们带来的财宝一点不剩，于是使得楚地一方富庶强盛，极尽挥霍奢侈，而贡奉给朝廷的不过几万斤茶叶而已，到中原卖茶叶获得的赢利，一年以百万计算。
English: He also minted lead and iron coins on his own. When merchants from various regions came to his territory of Chu with treasures and goods, Ma Yin only traded with them with the products of the Chu territory and coins, so that there was nothing left of the treasures they brought. As a result, the Chu side became rich and powerful, spending extravagantly, while the tribute to the imperial court was only tens of thousands of kilos of tea, and the profit gained by selling tea to the Central Plains was calculated in millions a year.

古文：唐同光初，首修职贡，复授太师、兼尚书令、楚王。
现代文：后唐同光初年，首次修改官职赋贡，又授与马殷太师、兼尚书令、楚王等官职。
English: In the first year of Emperor Tongguang of the Later Tang Dynasty, the official tribute was revised for the first time, and Ma Yin Taishi, concurrently Shang Shuling, King of Chu and other official positions were awarded.

古文：天成初，加守尚书令。
现代文：天成初年，加封守尚书令。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, the order to keep the seal was added.

古文：初，马氏举族为江南所俘，朗州无帅，众乃推列校马光惠为武平军留后，光惠署言为副使。
现代文：长兴二年十一月十日，死在官位上，时年七十八岁。明宗听到后，停止上朝三天，谥号叫武穆。刘言，本为朗州牙将。当初，伪楚国马氏皇族被江南南唐所俘时，朗州没有主帅，大家便推举列校马光惠为武平军留后，马光惠任刘言为副使。
English: On November 10 of the second year of Changxing, he died in office, at the age of seventy-eight. After hearing Mingzong, he stopped going to the court for three days, and his nickname was Wu Mu. Liu Yan was originally the commander of Langzhou. At the beginning, when the imperial family of the Ma clan of the pseudo-Chu State was captured by the South of the Yangtze River, Langzhou did not have a commander, and everyone nominated the listed school Ma Guanghui as the Wu Ping Army. After staying, Ma Guanghui appointed Liu Yan as the deputy envoy.

古文：既而光惠耽荒僭侈，军情不附，遂行废黜，以言代光惠为留后。
现代文：后来马光惠荒淫奢侈过度，军心不拥戴他，便废掉他，以刘言代马光惠为留后。
English: Later, Ma Guanghui was too extravagant, and the military did not support him, so he was abolished, and Liu Yan replaced Ma Guanghui.

古文：时周广顺二年秋也。言既立，北则遣使奉表于周太祖，东亦上章于江南李景，求正授旄钺，景未之许。
现代文：这时是后周广顺二年秋，刘言任留后之后，一方面向北方派遣使者向周太祖奉表称臣，一方面又向东给南唐李景上奏，请求正式授任他为节度使，李景没答应他。
English: At this time, it was the autumn of the second year of Zhou Guangshun. After Liu Yan's appointment, on the one hand, he sent an envoy to the north to pay homage to Zhou Taizu, and on the other hand, he appealed to Li Jing of the Southern Tang Dynasty in the east, requesting that he be officially appointed as the festival envoy. Li Jing did not agree to him.

古文：时边镐据湖南，潜遣人赍金帛说诱武陵谿洞诸蛮，欲合势以攻朗州。
现代文：这时边镐占据湖南，暗中派人带着金银布帛诱使武陵溪洞的蛮族，想合兵以攻朗州。
English: At this time, Bentham occupied Hunan and secretly sent people with gold and silver cloth to entice the barbarians of Wuling Cave to join forces to attack Langzhou.

古文：会李景降伪诏，征言赴金陵，言惧，不从伪命，以其年冬十月三日，与其节度副使王进逵、行军司马何敬真、都指挥使周行逢等同领舟师以袭潭州。
现代文：遇上李景下达伪诏，征召刘言前往金陵，刘言害怕，不听从李景诏令，在当年冬十月三日，与他的节度副使王进逵、行军司马何敬真、总指挥使周行逢等共同率领水军袭击潭州。
English: When Li Jing issued a false edict, Liu Yan was summoned to Jinling. Liu Yan was afraid and disobeyed Li Jing's edict. On October 3 of that winter, he led the naval force to attack Tanzhou together with his deputy ambassador Wang Jinjun, marching secretary Ma He Jingzhen, and chief commander envoy Zhou Xingfeng.

古文：九日，攻拔益阳寨，杀淮军数千人。
现代文：九日，攻占益阳寨，杀死淮南军士数千人。
English: On the 9th, they captured Yiyang Village, killing thousands of Huainan sergeants.

古文：十三日，至潭州城下。
现代文：十三日，到达潭州城下。
English: On the 13th, they arrived at the foot of the city of Tanzhou.

古文：是夕，边镐领其部众弃城东走，进逵、敬真遂入据其城。
现代文：当夜，边镐领着他的部下弃城东逃，王进逵、何敬真便进占潭州城。
English: That night, Bentham led his men to abandon the city and flee to the east. Wang Jinlun and He Jingzhen then entered the city of Zhan Tanzhou.

古文：言乃遣牙将张崇嗣奉表于周太祖，且言潭州兵戈之后，焚烧殆尽，乞移使府于朗州，从之。
现代文：刘言又派牙将张崇嗣向周太祖奉上表章，说潭州在经历战火之后，焚烧殆尽，请允许将潭州州府移向朗州，周太祖答应了。
English: Liu Yan also sent Zhang Chongzhi to Zhou Taizu to present him with a badge, saying that Tanzhou was burned to the ground after the war, please allow the Tanzhou provincial capital to be moved to Lanzhou, and Zhou Taizu agreed.

古文：诏升朗州为大都督府，在潭州之上。
现代文：诏令升朗州为大都督府，地位在潭州之上。
English: The imperial edict elevated Lanzhou to the status of a major governor's office, which is higher than that of Tanzhou.

古文：广顺三年春正月，制以言为检校太师、同平章事、朗州大都督，充武平军节度使，制置武安、静江等军事；又以王进逵为武安军节度使，何敬真为静江军节度使，并检校太尉；以周行逢领集州刺史，充武安军节度行军司马。
现代文：广顺三年正月，周太祖诏令任刘言为检校太师、同平章事、朗州大都督、兼武平军节度使，统领武安军、静江军。又以王进逵为武安军节度使，何敬真为静江军节度使，兼武安军节度行军司马。不久，刘言派何敬真南攻广州贼寇，何敬真失去法度控制，逃回潭州，被王进逵所杀。
English: In the first month of the third year of Guangshun, Zhou Taizhu ordered Liu Yan to be appointed as the chief inspector of schools, the chief of Tongping, the governor of Langzhou, and the commander of the Wu'an Army and the Jingjiang Army. He also appointed Wang Jinjun as the commander of the Wu'an Army, He Jingzhen as the commander of the Jingjiang Army, and He Jingzhen as the commander of the Wu'an Army. Soon, Liu Yan sent He Jingzhen south to attack the Guangzhou bandits, He Jingzhen lost control of the law, fled back to Tanzhou, and was killed by Wang Jinjun.

古文：其年秋，进逵奏： 刘言与淮贼通连，差指挥使郑珓部领兵士，欲并当道，郑珓为军众所执，奔入武陵，刘言寻为诸军所废，臣已至朗州安抚讫。 
现代文：同年秋天，王进逵上奏说： 刘言与南唐逆贼相通，派指挥使郑王交带领兵士，想吞并本道，郑王交被军士挟持，逃往武陵，刘言旋即被众军所废，臣已到朗州安抚完毕。 
English: In the autumn of the same year, Wang Jinjun wrote: Liu Yan was in communication with the Southern Tang rebels, and he sent a commander to ask Zheng Wang Jia to lead the soldiers and wanted to annex this province. Zheng Wang Jia was held hostage by the sergeant and fled to Wuling. Liu Yan Jia was immediately abolished by the army, and the minister had gone to Langzhou to pacify the situation.

古文：周太祖诏刘言宜勒归私第，委王进逵取便安置。
现代文：周太祖诏令刘言罢职回家，由王进逵酌情安置。
English: Zhou Taizhu ordered Liu Yan to resign and return home, and Wang Jinyu resettled him at his own discretion.

古文：言寻遇害，朝廷乃正授进逵朗州节制。
现代文：刘言不久就遇害，朝廷便正式任王进逵为朗州节制。
English: Liu Yan was killed soon after, and the imperial court officially appointed Wang Jinyu as the governor of Lanzhou.

古文：显德元年秋，制以武安军节度副使周行逢为鄂州节度使，权知潭州军府事，加检校太尉。
现代文：显德元年秋，诏令以武安军节度副使周行逢为鄂州刺史，临时主持潭州军府事务，加封检校太尉。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the Xiande era, Zhou Xingfeng, the deputy envoy of the Wu'an Army, was appointed as the official historian of Ezhou, temporarily presided over the affairs of the Tanzhou Military Prefecture, and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：三年春正月，世宗将伐淮甸，诏进逵率兵入江南界。
现代文：三年春正月，周世宗准备攻伐淮南，诏令王进逵领兵进入南唐境内。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, Zhou Shizong was preparing to attack Huainan, and he ordered Wang Jinyu to lead the army into the territory of Southern Tang.

古文：二月，进逵准诏而行，仍遣部将潘叔嗣领兵五千为先锋。
现代文：二月，王进逵遵令进军，并派部将潘叔嗣率领五千士兵为先锋。
English: In February, Wang Jinyu marched in accordance with the order, and sent the general Pan Shushi to lead five thousand soldiers as the vanguard.

古文：行及鄂州界，叔嗣回戈以袭朗州。
现代文：走到鄂州地界，潘叔嗣反戈攻击朗州。
English: When they reached the border of Ezhou, Pan Shushi rebelled and attacked Lanzhou.

古文：进逵闻之，倍道先入武陵，叔嗣遽攻其城，进逵败，为叔嗣所杀。
现代文：王进逵知悉后，倍道兼行，先进入武陵，潘叔嗣急攻其城，王进逵失败，被潘叔嗣所杀。
English: After Wang Jinjun learned of this, he went to Wuling first, and Pan Shushi attacked the city. Wang Jinjun failed and was killed by Pan Shushi.

古文：遣人诣潭州请周行逢至朗州，斩叔嗣于市。
现代文：派人到潭州请周行逢到朗州，在大街上处死潘叔嗣。
English: Send someone to Tanzhou to ask Zhou Xingfeng to come to Lanzhou and execute Pan Shushi on the street.

古文：其年秋七月，制以行逢为朗州大都督，充武平军节度使，加兼侍中。
现代文：同年秋七月，诏令以周行逢为朗州大都督，兼武平军节度使，加封侍中。
English: In the autumn and July of the same year, the imperial decree named Zhou Xingfan as the grand governor of Lanzhou, and also the military envoy of the armed forces of the Qing Dynasty. He was also awarded the title of attendant.

古文：自是潭、朗之地，遂为行逢所有。
现代文：从此潭州、朗州之地，尽为周行逢拥有。
English: From this place of Tanzhou and Langzhou, it is the best place to travel around.

古文：皇朝建隆初，就加中书令。
现代文：大宋建隆初年，加封周行逢为中书令。
English: In the first year of Jianlong of the Great Song Dynasty, Jafeng Zhouxing was appointed as a middle-ranking official.

古文：四年，行逢卒，三军立其子保权为帅。
现代文：四年，周行逢去世，三军拥立他的儿子周保权为统帅。
English: Four years later, Zhou Xingfan died, and his son Zhou Baoquan was appointed commander of the three armies.

古文：未几，朗军乱，求救于朝廷。
现代文：不久，朗州军变，向朝廷求救。
English: Soon after, the Lanzhou army mutinied and appealed to the imperial court for help.

古文：及王师平定荆、湖，保权入朝，由是湖湘之地尽为王土矣。
现代文：当王师平定荆、湖后，周保权进入朝廷，从此湖湘之地便尽为朝廷疆土了。
English: After Wang Shi conquered Jing and Hubei, Zhou Baoquan entered the imperial court, and from then on, the land of Hubei became the territory of the imperial court.

古文：钱，杭州临安县人。
现代文：钱繬，杭州临安县人。
English: Qian Qi, from Lin'an County, Hangzhou.

古文：少拳勇，喜任侠，以解仇报怨为事。
现代文：小时勇猛，喜欢行侠仗义，以报复仇怨为能事。
English: He is brave at all times, likes to be chivalrous and righteous, and is capable of avenging grudges.

古文：唐乾符中，事于潜镇将董昌为部校。
现代文：唐僖宗乾符年中，服事潜地镇将董昌任部校。
English: In the middle of the Qianfu year of the Tang Dynasty, Dong Chang was appointed as the head of the school.

古文：属天下丧乱，黄巢寇岭表，江、淮之盗贼群聚，大者攻州郡，小者剽闾里，董昌聚众，恣横于杭、越之间，杭州八县，每县召募千人为一都，时谓之 杭州八都 ，以遏黄巢之冲要。
现代文：正逢天下大乱，黄巢寇犯岭南，长江、淮河一带盗贼啸聚成群，大的攻击州郡，小的剽掠乡里，董昌聚集部众，恣意横行于杭州、越州之间，杭州八县，每县招募一千人为一都，当时称之为 杭州八都 ，以遏制黄巢的进攻。
English: At the time of the world's great turmoil, the Yellow Nest bandits in the south of the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River gathered in droves. The big bandits attacked the counties, the small bandits plundered the townships, and the Dongchang bandits gathered. They arbitrarily rampaged between Hangzhou and Yuezhou, the eight counties of Hangzhou, and recruited one thousand people in each county. At that time, it was called the Hangzhou Eight Cities, in order to curb the attack of the Yellow Nest.

古文：时有刘汉宏者，聚徒据越州，自称节度使，攻收邻郡；润州牙将薛朗逐其节度使周宝，自称留后。
现代文：这时有刘汉宏，聚集徒党占据越州，自称为节度使，攻占相邻州郡；润州牙将薛朗赶走他的节度使周宝，自称为留后。
English: At this time, there was Liu Hanhong, who gathered the clique to occupy Yuezhou, calling himself the commander-in-chief, and conquered the neighboring counties; Renzhou Fang drove Xue Lang away from his commander-in-chief, Zhou Bao, and called himself to stay behind.

古文：唐僖宗在蜀，诏董昌讨伐，昌以军政委，率八都之士进攻越州，诛汉宏，回戈攻润州，擒薛朗。
现代文：唐僖宗在蜀地，诏令董昌讨伐刘汉宏、薛朗，董昌将军政交给钱繬，率领八都兵士进攻越州，诛杀刘汉宏；回戈进攻润州，活捉薛朗。
English: In Shudi, Tang Xizong ordered Dong Chang to fight Liu Hanhong and Xue Lang. Dong Chang handed over the generalship to Qian Ye and led the soldiers from the eight capitals to attack Yuezhou and kill Liu Hanhong. He returned to attack Rongzhou and captured Xue Lang alive.

古文：江、浙平，董昌为浙东节度使、越州刺史，表代己为杭州刺史。
现代文：江、浙平定，董昌任浙东节度使、越州刺史，上表推荐钱繬代替自己做杭州刺史。
English: Jiangsu and Zhejiang Pingding, Dong Chang was appointed as the East Zhejiang Festival Commissioner, and Yuezhou stabbed history, the above table recommended Qian Qi to do Hangzhou stabbing history instead of himself.

古文：唐景福中，朝廷以李钅延为浙江西道镇海军节度使。
现代文：唐景福年间，朝廷以李钅延任浙江西道镇海军节度使。
English: During the reign of Tang Jingfu, the imperial court appointed Li Qianyan as the naval festival envoy of West Daozhen, Zhejiang.

古文：时孙儒、杨行密交乱，淮海烟尘数千里，常率师以为防捍，孙儒据宣州，不敢侵江、浙，由是勋名日著。
现代文：这时孙儒、杨行密交互作乱，淮海烟火战尘几千里，钱繬经常带兵防守捍卫，孙儒盘踞宣州，不敢侵犯江、浙，由此钱繬功勋名声日益显赫。
English: At this time, Sun Ru and Yang Xingmi were wreaking havoc with each other. The fireworks in the Huaihai Sea created thousands of miles of dust. Qian Ye often led troops to defend and defend. Sun Ru, who was stationed in Xuanzhou, did not dare to encroach on Jiangsu and Zhejiang. As a result, Qian Ye's reputation for meritorious service became increasingly prominent.

古文：久之，李钅延终不至治所，朝廷以为镇海军节度，仍移润州军额于杭州为治所，又立威胜军于越州，董昌为节度使。
现代文：很久后，李钅延最后不去上任，朝廷以钱繬做镇海军节度使，又将润州军队番号移并于杭州军队，又在越州建立威胜军，以董昌为节度使。
English: After a long time, Li Yuyan finally did not take office, and the imperial court appointed Qian Ye as the naval festival envoy, and transferred the number of the Runzhou army to the Hangzhou army, and established the Wei Sheng army in Yuezhou, with Dong Chang as the festival envoy.

古文：昌渐骄贵，自言身应符谶，又为妖人王百艺所诳，僭称尊号，乃于越州自称罗平国王，年号大圣，伪命为两浙都将。
现代文：董昌逐渐骄横显贵，自以为应当与图谶言相应，被妖人王百艺所骗，僭称尊号，就在越州自称为罗平国王，年号叫大圣，任钱繬为伪两浙都将。
English: Dong Chang gradually became arrogant and ostentatious. He thought that he should be corresponding with Tu Xuan. He was deceived by the demon king Bai Yi and pretended to be a noble. In Yuezhou, he pretended to be King Luoping. His era name was Da Sheng. He pretended to be the ruler of both Zhejiang Provinces.

古文：不受命，以状闻，唐昭宗命讨昌。
现代文：钱繬不接受伪职，将情况报告朝廷，唐昭宗命钱繬讨伐董昌。
English: Qian Ye did not accept the fake post and reported the situation to the imperial court. Tang Zhaozong ordered Qian Ye to fight against Dong Chang.

古文：乾宁四年，率浙西将士破越州，擒昌以献，朝廷嘉其功，赐铁券，又除宰臣王溥为威胜军节度。
现代文：乾宁四年，钱繬率浙西将士攻破越州，活捉董昌献给朝廷，朝廷嘉奖他的功劳，赐给钱繬永纪其功的铁券，又任宰臣王溥为威胜军节度使。
English: In the fourth year of Qianning, Qian Ye led the western Zhejiang soldiers to break through Yuezhou, captured Dong Chang alive and presented him to the imperial court. The imperial court commended his service, gave Qian Ye the iron certificate of his service, and appointed the vice-minister Wang Ye as the festival envoy of the victorious army.

古文：而两浙士庶拜章，请以兼杭、越二镇，朝廷不能制，因而授之，改威胜军为镇东，乃兼镇海、镇东两籓节制。
现代文：而两浙的士兵百姓拜奉奏章，请求朝廷以钱繬兼任杭、越两镇节度使，朝廷不能制抑，因而任命钱繬，改越州威胜军为镇东军，钱繬就兼任镇海、镇东两处镇节使。
English: However, the soldiers and common people of the two Zhejiang Provinces bowed to the Song of Songs and requested the imperial court to appoint Qian Ye as the envoy to the festivals of Hang and Yue. The imperial court could not restrain him, and thus appointed Qian Ye to change the Yuezhou Victory Army into the Zhendong Army, and Qian Ye to concurrently serve as the envoy to the festivals of Zhenhai and Zhendong.

古文：既兼两镇，精兵三万，而杨行密连岁兴戎，攻苏、湖、润等州，欲兼并两浙，累为所败，亦为行密侵盗数州，而所部止一十三州而已。
现代文：钱繬已兼任两镇节度使，有三万精兵，而吴国杨行密连年兴兵，进攻苏、湖、润等州，想兼并两浙，屡次被钱繬打败，杨行密也侵占了几州，而钱繬所统辖的仅十三州而已。
English: Qian Qian had also served as the envoy of the two towns, with thirty thousand elite soldiers, while Yang Xingmi of the State of Wu had raised an army year after year, attacked the states of Su, Hubei, and Run, and wanted to annex the two Zhe, but was repeatedly defeated by Qian Qian. Yang Xingmi also occupied several states, while Qian Qian only controlled thirteen states.

古文：天复中，大将许再思、徐绾叛，引宣州节度使田頵谋袭杭州。
现代文：天复年间，钱繬大将许再思、徐绾反叛，带着宣州节度使田君页阴谋袭击杭州。
English: During the Tenpō era, General Qianlong Xu rethought and rebelled against Xu Ying, and took the Xuanzhou Festival to make Tian Junshi plot to attack Hangzhou.

古文：田頵等率师掩至城下，激厉军士，一战败之，生擒徐绾，田頵遁走。
现代文：田君页等率领部队扑到杭州城下，钱繬激励将士，交战一次就打败了他，活捉了徐绾，田君页逃走。
English: Tian Junzhe and others led the troops to the foot of Hangzhou Castle. Qian Rong inspired the soldiers, defeated him in a single battle, captured Xu Rong alive, and Tian Junzhe fled.

古文：于临安故里兴造第舍，穷极壮丽，岁时游于里中，车徒雄盛，万夫罗列。
现代文：钱繬在临安故乡兴造房屋，极尽壮丽，年节时到故乡走走，车骑随从威武壮观，成万的人排成队列。
English: Qian Ye built a house in his hometown of Lin'an, which is extremely magnificent. During the Chinese New Year, he went to his hometown for a walk. The cars and bicycles were spectacular, and tens of thousands of people lined up.

古文：其父宽每闻至，走窜避之，即徒步访宽，请言其故。
现代文：他的父亲钱宽每当听到钱繬回家，便走开躲着他，钱繬就步行去找父亲，请他说明缘故。
English: Whenever his father Qian Guang heard Qian Ye coming home, he would walk away to avoid him. Qian Ye walked to his father and asked him to explain the reason.

古文：宽曰： 吾家世田渔为事，未尝有贵达如此，尔今为十三州主，三面受敌，与人争利，恐祸及吾家，所以不忍见汝。 
现代文：钱宽说 ：我们家历代以种田打鱼为业，还没有富贵显达像你这样的，你现在是十三州的主人，三面受敌，与人争利，恐怕灾祸将降临我家，所以不愿见你。 
English: Qian Guang said, "Our family has been engaged in farming and fishing for generations. There has never been anyone as rich and illustrious as you. You are now the master of thirteen states, facing enemies on three sides and competing with others for profits. I am afraid that disaster will befall my family, so I do not want to see you."

古文：泣谢之。
现代文：钱繬涕泣受教。
English: Money can't buy education.

古文：于唐昭宗朝，位至太师、中书令、本郡王，食邑二万户。
现代文：钱繬在唐昭宗朝，官位升到太师、中书令、本郡王，食邑两万户。
English: In the Zhaozong Dynasty of the Tang Dynasty, Qian Ye was promoted to the official rank of Taishi, Chushirei, King of this county, and had 20,000 households.

古文：梁祖革命，以为尚父、吴越国王。
现代文：梁太祖革除唐朝天命登上帝位，以钱繬为尚父、吴越国王。
English: Liang Taizhong, in addition to the Tang Dynasty, ascended to the throne of heaven, with Qian Ye as his father, the king of Wu Yue.

古文：梁末帝时，加诸道兵马元帅。
现代文：梁末帝时，加封为各道兵马元帅。
English: When Liang was the last emperor, he was awarded the title of marshal of soldiers and horses of each province.

古文：同光中，为天下兵马都元帅、尚父、守尚书令，封吴越国王，赐玉册、金印。
现代文：同光年中，任天下兵马都元帅、尚父、守尚书令，封为吴越国王，赐给玉册、金印。
English: In the same year, he was appointed marshal of the world's armies and horses, Shang father, Shou Shang Shuling, crowned as the king of Wu Yue, and given the jade book and gold seal.

古文：初，庄宗至洛阳，厚陈贡奉，求为国王，及玉册诏下，有司详议，群臣咸言： 玉简金字，惟至尊一人，钱人臣，不可。
现代文：当初，后唐庄宗到洛阳，钱繬贡上丰富的礼物，请求仍做吴越国王，当玉册诏令下达，有关部门详细议定，各位臣子都说： 玉简金字，只有皇上一人才能享有，钱繬是人臣，不能给他。
English: At the beginning, after Tangzhuang moved to Luoyang, Qianlong made a rich gift of tribute and requested to remain the king of Wuyue. When the edict of the Jade Book was issued and the relevant departments agreed in detail, all the courtiers said: "The gold letters of the Jade Book can only be enjoyed by the emperor, Qianlong is a courtier and cannot be given to him."

古文：又本朝己来，除四夷远籓，羁縻册拜，或有国王之号，而九州之内亦无此事。 
现代文：又本朝建朝以来，除四方夷狄远方藩族，为安抚笼络他们而赐以玉册拜以官爵，有的有国王的名号，而九州之内没有这种事。 
English: Moreover, since the establishment of the present dynasty, in order to appease and entice the distant clans, except for the four-sided barbarians, they have been given the title of "Gyokusho" and given the title of "Kanzeki," and some have the title of "King," but there is no such thing in Kyushu.

古文：郭崇韬尤不容其僭，而枢密承旨段徊，奸幸用事，能移崇韬之意，曲为陈情，崇韬僶俯从之。
现代文：郭崇韬更不容许钱繬越位号称国王，而枢密承旨段回，奸佞行事，能改变郭崇韬的心意，绕着弯子为钱繬说情，郭崇韬勉强听从了他。
English: Moreover, Guo Chongyi did not allow Qian Qian to step over the line and claim to be the king. However, acting as a traitor, he could change Guo Chongyi's mind and plead for Qian Qian around the bend. Guo Chongyi reluctantly obeyed him.

古文：乃以镇海、镇东军节度使名目授其子元瓘，自称吴越国王，命所居曰宫殿，府署曰朝廷，其参佐称臣，僭大朝百僚之号，但不改年号而已。
现代文：钱繬于是将镇海、镇东军节度使让给他的儿子钱元瓘，自称为吴越国王，将居住的地方叫宫殿，办公官府叫朝廷，其辅佐他的臣子，都僭称后唐百官的名号，只是不改变年号而已。
English: Qian Rong then ceded the Zhenhai and Zhendong military festivals to his son Qian Yuan Rong, who called himself the king of Wuyue. He called the place where he lived the palace, and the government office the imperial court. The courtiers who assisted him were called the post-Tang centurions, but they did not change the year.

古文：伪行制册，加封爵于新罗、渤海，海中夷落亦皆遣使行封册焉。
现代文：颁发诏册，对新罗、渤海施加封爵，对东海岛屿上的民族部落也都派遣使者进行册封。
English: He issued imperial edicts, conferred knighthoods on Silla and Bohai, and sent emissaries to the ethnic tribes on the islands of the East China Sea.

古文：明宗即位之初，安重诲用事，尝与重诲书，云 吴越国王致书于某官执事 ，不叙暄凉，重诲怒其无礼。
现代文：明宗即位初年，安重诲主管国事，钱繬曾经写给安重诲书信，说： 吴越国王谨致书于某官执事。 不予问候寒暄，安重诲恨他没有礼貌。
English: In the first year of Emperor Mingzong's reign, when An Chong Li was in charge of state affairs, Qian Ye once wrote a letter to An Chong Li, saying: King Wu Yue wrote a letter to a certain official, but he did not send greetings, and An Chong Li regretted that he was not polite.

古文：属供奉官乌昭遇使于两浙，每以朝廷事私于吴人，仍目为殿下，自称臣，谒行舞蹈之礼。
现代文：恰逢供奉官乌昭遇出使到两浙，常常将朝廷私事告诉吴人，又视钱繬为殿下，自称臣子，谒见钱繬时行舞蹈的礼节。
English: At the same time, Wu Zhao, a tributary official, was sent to the two Zhejiang provinces. He often told the Wu people about the private affairs of the imperial court. He also regarded Qian Ye as his royal highness and called himself a courtier. It was the etiquette to dance when he saw Qian Ye.

古文：及回，副使韩玫具述其事，重诲因削元帅、尚父、国王之号，以太师致仕。
现代文：当回来后，副使韩玫详细讲述乌昭遇的事，安重诲因而削除钱繬元帅、尚父、吴越国王的称号，令以太师之职辞官退隐。
English: When he came back, Vice-Envoy Han Mei recounted in detail what had happened to Wu Zhao, and the title of Marshal Qian Ye, Shang father, and King Wu Yue was removed, and the post of ether master was retired.

古文：钱珝冠公侯之位，统吴越之封，宜示异恩，俾当缛礼，其钱珝宜赐不名。鸑在杭州垂四十年，穷奢极贵。
现代文：过后很久，钱繬的儿子钱元瓘等上表陈情。这时吴国贼寇进攻逼近荆南，明宗怀疑钱繬与他们共同作恶，就颁布诏令责问他，钱元瓘等又派使者从淮南小道进京上表，力陈戮力本朝、尽心体国的忠诚，明宗嘉奖他，于是颁布诏令又重授钱繬为天下兵马都元帅、尚父、吴越国王。不久，又诏令恩赐钱繬上表时可不称自己本名。钱繬在杭州近四十年，极尽奢华富贵。
English: A long time later, Qian Qian's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan'

古文：钱塘江旧日海潮逼州城，鸑大庀工徒，凿石填江，又平江中罗刹石，悉起台榭，广郡郭周三十里，邑屋之繁会，江山之雕丽，实江南之胜概也，鸑学书，好吟咏。
现代文：以前钱塘江海涛逼近州城，钱繬大力役使民工徒吏，开凿石块填江砌堤，又铲平了江中的罗刹石，修起亭台楼榭，拓宽外城周围三十里，房屋的繁华稠密，江山的雕饰美丽，确实是江南胜景。钱繬爱读书，喜欢吟咏诗词歌赋。
English: In the past, when the Qiantang River neared the provincial capital, Qianlong made great efforts to make migrant workers apprentices, excavated stones to fill the river and build a dike, and leveled the Rocha stone in the river, built pavilions and towers, and widened the outer city by thirty miles. The prosperity of the houses is dense, and the carvings of the mountains and rivers are beautiful. It is indeed a scenic spot in the south of the river. Qianlong loves to read, and likes to sing poems and songs.

古文：江东有罗隐者，有诗名，闻于海内，依鸑为参佐。
现代文：江东有叫罗隐的人，以诗歌闻名海内，依附钱繬做参佐。
English: In the East of the Yangtze River, there was a man named Luo Ying, who was famous for his poetry at home, and who was attached to Qian Ye as a councillor.

古文：鸑尝与隐唱和，隐好讥讽，尝戏为诗，言鸑微时骑牛操鸑事，鸑亦怡然不怒，其通恕也如此。
现代文：钱繬曾经与罗隐以诗唱和，罗隐喜欢讥讽，曾开玩笑作诗，提起钱繬卑微时骑牛放牧和操棍斗殴的事，钱繬也和悦而不生气，其通达宽谅能做到这样。
English: Qian Ye used to make peace with Luo Ying through poetry. Luo Ying liked to be sarcastic, used to joke and write poetry, and mentioned Qian Ye's humble life of cattle herding and stick fighting. Qian Ye was also amiable and not angry. His ability to forgive could do this.

古文：鸑虽季年荒恣，然自唐朝，于梁室，庄宗中兴已来，每来扬帆越海，贡奉无阙，故中朝亦以此善之。
现代文：钱繬虽然晚年荒唐任意，但从唐朝，到梁代，以及庄宗中兴以来，常常驾起帆船越过大海，贡奉朝廷没有中断，所以朝中也因此善待他。
English: Although Qian Ye's later years were absurd and arbitrary, from the Tang Dynasty, to the Liang Dynasty, and since Zhuang Zong Zhongxing, he often sailed across the sea and paid tribute to the court without interruption, so the court also treated him well.

古文：鸑以长兴三年三月二十八日薨，年八十一。
现代文：钱繬在长兴三年三月二十八日去世，年八十一岁。
English: Qian Ye passed away on March 28th, 1993 in Changxing, at the age of 81.

古文：制曰： 故天下兵马都元帅、尚父、吴越国王钱鸑，累朝元老，当代勋贤，位已极于人臣，名素高于简册。赠典既无其官爵，易名宜示其优崇，宜令所司定谥，以王礼葬，仍赐神道碑。 
现代文：明宗诏令说： 已故天下兵马都元帅、尚父、吴越国王钱繬，是历朝元老，当代功勋高贤，已经位极人臣，一向名高简册，追赠则没有再高的官爵可用，改名则应表示优遇崇敬，当令有关部门议定谥号，以王的礼仪安葬，再赐给神道碑。 
English: The Ming Emperor's edict said: The late Qian Qian, Marshal of the world's armies and horses, the father of Shang, and King of Wu Yue, was a veteran of all the dynasties, a contemporary meritorious person, and already a very high-ranking minister. He has always been a high-profile person. There is no higher official title that can be used for posthumous gifts, and changing his name should be a sign of preferential treatment and reverence. The relevant departments should agree on a nickname, bury him with the king's etiquette, and then give him a Shinto monument.

古文：谥曰武肃。
现代文：谥号叫武肃。
English: Its nickname is Wushu.

古文：鸑初事董昌，时年甫壮室，性尚刚烈。
现代文：钱繬刚服事董昌时，年青力壮，性格刚烈。
English: When Qian Yugang served Dong Chang, he was young and strong, with a strong character.

古文：时有儒士谒于主帅，已进刺矣，见鸑稍怠，鸑怒，投之罗刹江，及典谒者将召，鸑诈云： 客已拂衣去矣。 
现代文：当时有位儒生拜见主帅董昌，已经递上名片了，见到钱繬时稍有不恭，钱繬即大怒，把他扔到罗刹江中，当传达者准备叫儒生进来时，钱繬欺骗说： 客人已经拂袖而去了。 
English: At that time, a Confucian scholar came to see the head coach, Dong Chang, and had already handed over his business card. When he saw Qian Ye, he was a little disdainful. Qian Ye was furious and threw him into the Lhasa River. When the messenger was about to call the Confucian scholar in, Qian Ye lied and said, "The guest has already left."

古文：及为帅时，有人献诗云： 一条江水槛前流。 
现代文：当他做了主帅时，有人献上诗说： 一条江水槛前流。 
English: When he became manager, someone wrote a poem saying: A river flows forward.

古文：鸑不悦，以为讥己，寻害之。
现代文：钱繬不高兴，以为是讥刺自己，接着就把那人杀害了。
English: Qian Ye was not happy, he thought he was mocking himself, and then he killed the man.

古文：迨于晚岁，方爱人下士，留心理道，数十年间，时甚归美。
现代文：到了晚年，才亲爱别人礼贤下士，留心道德礼义，数十年间，人们很称誉他。
English: It was only in his later years that he came to be loved by others as a virtuous corporal, mindful of moral propriety. For decades, people praised him.

古文：鸑尤恃崇盛，分两浙为数镇，其节制署而后奏。
现代文：钱繬特别依恃位高势大，将两浙分为几个州镇，各节度使先任命再上奏。
English: The Qianlong Emperor in particular was very powerful and divided the two Zhejiang Provinces into several prefectures and towns. Each festival was first appointed and then performed.

古文：左右前后皆兒孙甥侄，轩陛服饰，比于王者，两浙里俗咸曰 海龙王 。
现代文：在他左右都是儿子孙子外甥侄子，车骑宫殿衣服饰物，可跟皇朝相比，两浙民间都叫他 海龙王 。
English: Around him are sons, grandsons, nieces and nephews, riding palace clothes and ornaments. Compared to the imperial dynasty, the people of Zhejiang call him the Sea Dragon King.

古文：梁开平中，浙民上言，请为鸑立生祠，梁太祖许之，令翰林学士李琪撰生祠堂碑以赐之，至今蒸黎飨之，子孙保之，斯亦近代之名王也。
现代文：梁代开平年间，两浙人民上书，请求为钱繬建立生前祭祀的祠堂，梁太祖应允了他们，令翰林学士李琪撰生祠堂碑赐给他，至今民间百姓祭祀他，子孙纪念他，他也是近世有名望的王呢。
English: During the Kaiping era of the Liang Dynasty, the people of the two Zhejiang provinces petitioned for the establishment of an ancestral hall for Qian Ye to be dedicated in his lifetime. Liang Taizu agreed to their request and had the scholar of Hanlin, Li Qizhi, give him a monument for his ancestral hall. To this day, the common people worship him and his descendants commemorate him. He was also a famous and respected king in modern times.

古文：元瓘，第五子也。
现代文：钱元瓘，是吴越国王钱繬的第五个儿子。
English: Qian Yuanlu is the fifth son of Qianlu, the king of Wuyue.

古文：起家为盐铁发运巡官，表授尚书金部朗中，赐金紫。
现代文：开始时任盐铁发运巡官，钱繬上表推荐他任尚书金部郎中，赐给金玉紫衣。
English: At the beginning, he was an inspector of salt and iron shipments. Qian Ye recommended him to be a member of Shangshu's gold department, and gave him a golden purple robe.

古文：天复中，本州裨校许再思等为乱，构宣州节度使田頵，頵领兵奄至，击败再思，与頵通和。
现代文：天复年间，杭州裨校许再思等人作乱，勾结宣州节度使田君页，田君页领兵突然杀来，钱繬打败了许再思，与田君页讲和。
English: During the year of Tianfu, Hangzhou Fu School Xu Zhaisi and others made a disturbance, and colluded with Xuanzhou Festival to make Tian Junzhe, Tian Junzhe's leader, suddenly killed, Qian Ye defeated Xu Zhaisi and made peace with Tian Junzhe.

古文：頵要盟于，遍召诸子问之曰： 谁能为吾为田氏之婿者？ 
现代文：田君页要同钱繬结盟，钱繬把所有的儿子都叫来，问他们说： 谁能为我去做田家的女婿？ 
English: Tian Junshi wanted to make an alliance with Qian Ye. Qian Ye called all his sons and asked them, "Who can be Tian's son-in-law?"

古文：例有难色，时元瓘年十六，进曰： 惟大王之命。 
现代文：儿子们都露出为难的神色，当时钱元瓘年仅十六岁，上前说： 我全听从大王吩咐。 
English: The sons all looked puzzled. At that time, Qian Yuan was only sixteen years old. He stepped forward and said, "I am all obeying the great king's order."

古文：由是就亲于宣州。
现代文：因此就去宣州成亲。
English: Therefore, they went to Xuanzhou to get married.

古文：唐天祐初，承制累迁检校尚书左仆射、内衙都指挥使，数年之间，伐叛御寇，大著勋绩。
现代文：唐朝天祐初年，钱元瓘承诏接连升为检校尚书左仆射、内牙将指挥使，几年之间，讨伐叛乱抗击贼寇，大立功勋。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Qian Yuan Rong Zheng Zhao was successively promoted to the position of inspector of schools, left-hand gunner, and commander-in-chief. For several years, he fought the rebellion and resisted the bandits, and made great contributions.

古文：梁贞明四年夏，大举伐吴，以元瓘为水战诸军都指挥使。
现代文：后梁贞明四年夏，钱繬大举讨伐吴国，以钱元瓘为水战各军都指挥使。
English: In the summer of the fourth year after Liang Zhenming, Qian Yu waged a large-scale campaign against the State of Wu, with Qian Yuanzhang as the commander of all the armies in the water battle.

古文：战棹抵东洲，吴人以舟师拒战，元瓘为火筏顺风扬灰以岔之，白昼如雾，吴师迷方，遂败之，擒军使彭彦章并军校七十余人，得战舰四百只。
现代文：战船抵达东州时，吴人以水军迎战，钱元瓘在筏子上顺风点火扬起灰烟以做掩护，吴军迷失方向，于是被打败，活捉了军使彭彦章以及军校七十多人，获得战船四百艘。
English: When the warship arrived in Dongzhou, the Wu people met the war with the navy. Qian Yuanjun lit a fire on the raft with the wind and raised gray smoke to cover it. The Wu army lost its direction and was defeated. They captured the envoy Peng Yanzhang and more than 70 people from the military school alive, and obtained 400 warships.

古文：吴人知不可校，通好于，以功奏授镇海军节度副使、检校司徒。
现代文：吴人知道不能与之对抗，便向钱繬讲和。因功上奏朝廷任钱元瓘为镇海军节度副使、检校司徒。
English: The people of Wu knew that they could not fight against them, so they made peace with Qian Yu. As a reward for his efforts, the imperial court appointed Qian Yuanzhang as the deputy envoy of the naval festival of the town and the inspector of the school.

古文：梁末，迁清海军节度使、检校太傅、同平章事。
现代文：后梁末年，迁任清海军节度使、检校太傅、同平章事。
English: In the last years of his life, Hou Liang was transferred to the post of the Qing Navy's festival envoy, school inspector, and peer.

古文：后唐同光初，加检校太师、兼中书令、镇东等军节度观察处置等使。
现代文：后唐同光初年，加封检校太师、兼中书令、镇东等军节度使、观察使、处置使等。
English: In the first year after the Tang Dynasty, Tongguang was additionally appointed as the inspector of the seal, the vice-commander of the middle school, the commander of the eastern garrison, the observer, the disposer and so on.

古文：时自为天下兵马都元帅、尚父、守尚书令、吴越国王，及为太师致仕，元瓘累贡章疏，乞复旧号，唐明宗许之。
现代文：这时钱繬任天下兵马都元帅、尚父、守中书令、吴越国王，到钱繬以太师职位退休时，钱元瓘接连上奏，请求恢复旧号，唐明宗应允了他。
English: At this time, Qian Rong served as marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, Shang father, Shou Zhong Shuling, and Wu Yue King. When Qian Rong retired from the position of ether division, Qian Yuan Rong successively played up and requested to restore the old name. Tang Mingzong agreed to him.

古文：既年高，欲立嗣，召诸子使各论功，请让于元瓘。
现代文：这时钱繬年岁已高，想定继承人，叫来儿子们让他们各自论功，都请求让位给钱元瓘。
English: At this time, Qian Rong was already old, and the supposed heir called his sons to let them discuss their respective merits, and they all asked to give way to Qian Rong.

古文：及病笃，召将吏谓之曰： 余病不起，兒皆愚懦，恐不能为尔帅。与尔辈决矣，帅当自择。 
现代文：到钱繬病重时，召来将官对他们说： 我的病将不会好，儿子们都愚昧懦弱，恐怕不能做你们的主帅，我要与你们永别了，你们当自己挑选出主帅。 
English: When Qian Ye was gravely ill, he summoned the generals and said to them, "My illness will not get better. My sons are all stupid and weak. I am afraid I cannot be your general. I will say goodbye to you forever. You should choose your own general."

古文：将吏号泣言曰： 大令公有军功，多贤行仁孝，已领两镇，王何苦言及此！ 
现代文：将官们号哭着说 ：大令公有军功，品行贤德又有仁义孝道，已经主管两处藩镇，大王何苦这样说呢！ 
English: The generals cried and said, "Great generals have military merit, moral virtue and benevolence and filial piety, and have been in charge of two provinces and towns. Why does the great king have to say such a thing!

古文：曰： 此渠定堪否？ 
现代文：钱繬说： 你们认为他可以吗？ 
English: Qian Ye said: Do you think he can do it?

古文：曰： 众等愿奉贤帅。 
现代文：将官们说： 我们都愿奉他为主帅。 
English: The generals said: We are all willing to serve him as head coach.

古文：即出符钥数篚于前，谓元瓘曰： 三军言尔可奉，领取此。 
现代文：钱繬于是令人搬出几筐符节、钥匙等放在前面，对钱元瓘说： 三军都说你可奉立，把这些都拿去。 
English: Qian Rong then had people carry out several baskets of symbols, keys, etc. and put them in front of him, saying to Qian Yuan Rong: The three armies have all said that you can stand up, take them all.

古文：薨，遂袭父位。
现代文：钱繬去世，钱元瓘便继承了父亲的位置。
English: Qian Rong passed away, Qian Yuan Rong inherited his father's position.

古文：唐长兴四年，遣将作监李纮起复元瓘官爵，又命户部侍郎张文宝授兼尚书令。
现代文：后唐长兴四年，朝廷派将作监李纮在钱元瓘服丧满期后拜封他官爵，又命户部侍郎张文宝授钱元瓘兼任尚书令。
English: Four years after the Tang and Changxing Dynasties, the imperial court sent Li Xi, who had been a prisoner, to invest Qianyuan with a title of nobility after the expiration of Qianyuan's term of service. He also ordered Zhang Wenbao, the household attendant, to bestow Qianyuan with the title of Shang Shuling.

古文：清泰初，封吴王。
现代文：清泰初年，被封为吴王。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, he was named the King of Wu.

古文：二年，封越王。
现代文：二年，被封为越王。
English: Two years later, he was crowned King of Yue.

古文：天福元年，赐金印。
现代文：天福元年，赐给他黄金印玺。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, he was given a gold seal.

古文：三年，封吴越国王。
现代文：三年，封他为吴越国王。
English: Three years later, he was crowned King of Wuyue.

古文：五年，加天下兵马元帅。
现代文：五年，加封为天下兵马元帅。
English: Five years later, he was awarded the title of Generalissimo.

古文：六年，授天下兵马都元帅。
现代文：六年，任天下兵马都元帅。
English: For six years, he served as marshal of the world's armies and horses.

古文：其年夏有疾，秋府署灾，焚之一空，乃移于他所，其焰皆随而发焉，元瓘因惊悸发狂，以是岁八月二十四日薨，年五十五岁。
现代文：那年夏天钱元瓘生病，秋天官府起火灾，被焚烧一空，钱元瓘于是搬往别处，而火苗追着他燃烧，钱元瓘因而惊悸发狂，在该年八月二十四日去世，享年五十五岁。
English: In the summer of that year, Qian Yuanzhang fell ill. In the autumn, a fire broke out in the government office, which was completely destroyed. Qian Yuanzhang then moved to another place, and the flames followed him. Qian Yuanzhang was shocked and went mad. He died on August 24 of that year, at the age of 55.

古文：谥曰文穆。
现代文：谥号为文穆。
English: His nickname was Wenmu.

古文：元瓘幼聪敏，长于抚驭，临戎十五年，决事神速，为军民所附，然奢僭营造，甚于其父，故有回禄之灾焉。
现代文：钱元瓘小时就聪明，长于安抚统治别人，征战十五年，决断英明迅速，深受军民拥戴，然而超越本位营造宫室，比他父亲更进一步，所以招致天降火灾。
English: Qian Yuanzhang was clever at an early age, good at appeasing and ruling others, went to war for fifteen years, made wise and quick decisions, and was deeply loved by the military and the people. However, he went beyond the standard to build a palace room, going further than his father, so he invited fire from the sky.

古文：元瓘有诗千篇，编其尤者三百篇，命曰《锦楼集》，浙中人士皆传之。
现代文：钱元瓘有诗千首，编集其中优秀者共三百首，命名为《锦楼集》，浙江一带人们都广为传诵。
English: Qian Yuanlu has a thousand poems, compiling a total of three hundred of which are outstanding, named "Jinlou Collection," and are widely recited by people around Zhejiang.

