古文：平丘之会，晋昭公使叔向辞昭公，弗与盟。
现代文：诸侯在平丘盟会时，晋昭公派叔向责备鲁昭公，不让他参加盟会。
English: When the lords were at the Pingqiu League, Jin Zhaokong sent his uncle to scold Lu Zhaokong and not allow him to participate in the league.

古文：子服惠伯曰： 晋信蛮、夷而弃兄弟，其执政贰也。
现代文：子服惠伯说： 晋国听信蛮夷邾、莒的话而抛弃了兄弟的鲁国，他们的执政者有二心呀。
English: Zifu Huibo said: "Jin Province has abandoned the brotherly Lu Province by listening to the words of barbarians and barbarians. Their rulers are of two minds."

古文：贰心必失诸侯，岂唯鲁然？
现代文：有二心必然会失去诸侯的信赖，又何止只是失去鲁国的信赖呢？
English: Having two hearts will inevitably lose the trust of the princes, and how much more than just losing the trust of Lu?

古文：夫失其政者，必毒于人，鲁惧及焉，不可以不恭。必使上卿从之。 
现代文：一个国家的政策出现了失误，必然是要加害其他的国家的，鲁国害怕受到强大的经过的侵害，不得不对晋国恭敬，应该派上卿去晋国谢罪。 
English: If one country's policy makes a mistake, it is bound to harm other countries. Russia is afraid of being encroached upon by powerful countries and has to show respect to Jin. It should send a high-ranking official to Jin to apologize.

古文：季平子曰： 然则意如乎！
现代文：季平子说： 这样的话就应该我去啦！
English: Kihirako said, "In that case, I should go!"

古文：若我往，晋必患我，谁为之贰？ 
现代文：只是如果我去，晋国一定会找我的麻烦，谁愿意跟从我一起去呢？ 
English: It's just that if I go, I'm sure to get into trouble in Jin. Who would want to go with me?

古文：子服惠伯曰： 椒既言之矣，敢逃难乎？
现代文：子服惠伯说： 既然是我出的主意，还能逃避危难吗？
English: Zifu Huibo said, "Since it was my idea, can I still escape the danger?"

古文：椒请从。 
现代文：请让我跟随您一起吧。 
English: Please let me go with you.

古文：晋人执平子。
现代文：晋国人逮捕了季平子。
English: The Jin people arrested Ji Pingzi.

古文：子服惠伯见韩宣子曰： 夫盟，信之要也。
现代文：子服惠伯去见韩宣子，说： 诸侯盟会，是信义将其连结在一起。
English: Zifu Huibo went to see Han Xuan Zi and said: "The alliance of principalities is bound together by loyalty.

古文：晋为盟主，是主信也。
现代文：晋国作为盟主，是主持信义于天下的。
English: As the leader of the alliance, Jin presided over the rise of faith and righteousness in the world.

古文：若盟而弃鲁侯，信抑阙矣。
现代文：倘若诸侯盟会而不让鲁国国君参加，那信义就有欠缺了。
English: If the princes' alliance does not allow the prince of Lu to participate, then there is a lack of loyalty.

古文：昔栾氏之乱，齐人间晋之祸，伐取朝歌。
现代文：过去栾盈发动内乱，齐国乘晋国发生祸乱，攻占了朝歌。
English: In the past, Shanying launched a civil war, Qigong took advantage of the disaster in Jin, and seized the morning song.

古文：我先君襄公不敢宁处，使叔孙豹悉帅敝赋，踦跂毕行，无有处人，以从军吏，次于雍渝，与邯郸胜击齐之左，掎止晏莱焉，齐师退而后敢还。
现代文：我国的先君鲁襄公不敢袖手旁观，派叔孙豹统帅全国的兵甲，包括腿脚有缺陷的残疾人都一起入伍，没有一个人呆在家中，全部随军出征。到达雍渝一带后，与邯郸胜大夫一起攻打齐国的左军，牵制并俘虏了齐国的晏莱，直到齐军从晋国撤退后才敢率军回国。
English: Our country's forefather, King Lu Xiang, did not dare to stand idly by. He sent his uncle and grandson, the Leopard, to be the commander of the entire country's military armour. All the disabled people, including those with defective legs and feet, enlisted in the army together. No one stayed at home, they all went to war with the army. After arriving in the area of Yongyu, together with Dr. Xuan Sheng, they attacked the left army of Qi, restrained and captured the Bailai of Qi, and did not dare to lead the army back to the country until the Qi army withdrew from Jin.

古文：非以求远也，以鲁之密迩於齐，而又小国也；齐朝驾则夕极于鲁国，不敢惮其患，而与晋共其忧，亦曰： 庶几有益于鲁国乎！ 
现代文：我说这些并不是为了表白鲁国过去的功劳，而是因为鲁国紧邻齐国，又相对弱小；早晨从齐国驾车晚上就能到达鲁国，但鲁国不敢怕齐国的侵害，而决心与晋国共命运，还是说： 只有这样才能有益于鲁国！ 
English: I am not saying this to praise the past achievements of the State of Lu, but because the State of Lu is close to the State of Qi and is relatively small. You can drive from the State of Qi in the morning to the State of Lu in the evening. However, the State of Lu is not afraid of the encroachment of the State of Qi, but is determined to share the fate with the State of Jin, or to say: Only in this way can it benefit the State of Lu!

古文：今信蛮、夷而弃之，夫诸侯之勉于君者，将安劝矣？
现代文：现在晋国听信邾、莒之言而抛弃鲁国，对那些尽力于晋国的诸侯，要怎么解释呢？
English: Now that Jin listens to the words of Xing and Shun and abandons Lu, how should it be explained to those lords who have done their best for Jin?

古文：若弃鲁而苟固诸侯，群臣敢惮戮乎？
现代文：如果晋国抛弃了鲁国仍然可以牢固地团结诸侯，那么我们又怎么敢怕死呢？
English: If Jin has abandoned Lu, but can still firmly unite the princes, then how dare we be afraid of death?

古文：诸侯之事晋者，鲁为勉矣。
现代文：在事奉晋国的诸侯中，鲁国是最尽力的。
English: Among the lords who served the State of Jin, the State of Lu was the most capable.

古文：若以蛮、夷之故弃之，其无乃得蛮、夷而失诸侯之信乎？
现代文：如果因为邾、莒两国的缘故而抛弃鲁国，那恐怕会得到邾、莒而失去各诸侯的信任吧？
English: If one abandons the State of Lu for the sake of  and, then one will probably gain  and  and lose the trust of all the lords, right?

古文：子计其利者，小国共命。 
现代文：你不妨考虑一下利害得失再作决定，我们鲁国一定恭敬从命。 
English: You may wish to consider the pros and cons before making a decision. We, the Russian people, will respectfully obey your order.

古文：宣子说，乃归平子。
现代文：韩宣子对子服惠伯的分析心悦诚服，于是放季平子回国。
English: Han Xuan Zi was pleased with Zifu Huibo's analysis, so he let Ji Ping Zi return to China.

