古文：大统初，追赠胶州刺史。
现代文：赵刚，字缯庆，河南洛阳人。
English: Zhao Gang, surnamed Yuqing, from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：刚少机辩，有干能，起家奉朝请，累迁金紫光禄大夫，领司徒府从事中郎，加阁内都督。及孝武与齐神武构隙，刚密奉旨，召东荆州刺史冯景昭。未及发，而神武已逼洛阳，孝武西迁。
现代文：他从小机敏，有口辩，富有才干。奉朝请入仕、任阁内都督。孝武帝与高欢构隙成仇，他密奉朝旨召集东荆州刺史冯景昭前来勤王，没有来得及出发，高欢已率军逼进洛阳，孝武帝被迫西迁。
English: He was an astute, eloquent and talented person from an early age. He was invited to serve by the emperor and served as the governor of the cabinet. Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Gao Huan formed a rift and became enemies. He closely followed the imperial order to summon Feng Jing Zhao, the governor of East Jing Province, to come and worship the king. Before he could leave, Gao Huan had led the army into Luoyang, and Emperor Gao Huan was forced to move west.

古文：景昭集府僚文武，议其去就，司马冯道和请据州待北方处分。
现代文：冯景昭召集幕僚和文武官员商量下一步的去就，司马冯道和请求占据本州以等待北面双方的形势发展，再作决定。
English: Feng Jingzhao gathered his staff and military and civilian officials to discuss the next step. Sima Fengdao requested to occupy Honshu to wait for the development of the situation between the two sides in the north before making a decision.

古文：刚抽刀投地曰： 公若为忠臣，可斩道和。
现代文：赵刚抽出佩刀扔在地上，对冯景昭说： 你如果是忠臣，应该将冯道和斩首。
English: Zhao Gang took out his sword and threw it on the ground, saying to Feng Jingzhao, "If you are a loyal subject, you should behead Feng Daowu."

古文：如欲从贼，可见杀！ 
现代文：如果想归顺高欢，可将我杀死！ 
English: If you want to go to heaven, kill me!

古文：景昭感悟，遂率众赴关右。
现代文：冯景昭深受感动，便率军驰向关中。
English: Feng Jingzhao was deeply moved and led his army to Guanzhong.

古文：属侯景逼穰城，东荆州人杨欢等起兵应景，以其众邀景昭于路。
现代文：侯景率叛军进逼穰城，东荆州人杨欢等起兵响应，杨欢率领他的部下在路途上截击冯景略。
English: Hou Jing led the rebels into the besieged city of Handan. Yang Huan, a native of East Jingzhou, led his men to intercept Feng Jingliao on the way.

古文：景昭战败，刚遂没于蛮。
现代文：景略战败，赵刚被蛮人俘获。
English: In a strategic defeat, Zhao Gang was captured by the barbarians.

古文：后自赎免，乃见东魏东荆州刺史李魔怜，劝令归关西。
现代文：后来他因自赎被放出，便去见东魏的东荆州刺史李魔怜，劝他归顺西魏。
English: Later, he was released due to self-redemption, so he went to see the East Wei's East Jingzhou assassin Li Maoli, and persuaded him to join the West Wei.

古文：魔怜纳之，使刚至并州，密观事势。
现代文：李魔怜采纳了他的意见，派赵刚到并州，暗中观察那里的形势。
English: Li Maoli adopted his opinion and sent Zhao Gang to Bianzhou to secretly observe the situation there.

古文：神武引刚内宴，因令刚赉书申敕荆州。
现代文：高欢请赵刚参加朝廷的宴会，并命他带书信慰问荆州官吏。
English: Gao Huan invited Zhao Gang to attend the imperial banquet, and ordered him to take a letter of condolence to the officials of Jingzhou.

古文：刚还报魔怜，仍说魔怜斩杨欢等，以州归西。魔怜乃使刚入朝。
现代文：赵刚归来报告给李魔怜，仍劝说魔怜杀死杨欢等人，率全州归附西魏，魔怜派他到朝廷陈奏。
English: Zhao Gang returned to report to Li Maoliang, still persuaded Maoliang to kill Yang Huan and others, and led the whole state to join the West Wei Dynasty. Maoliang sent him to the imperial court to perform.

古文：大统初，刚于灞上见周文，具陈关东情实。
现代文：大统初年，他在灞上见到宇文泰，详细陈述关东的情况。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he met with Yu Wentai on the balcony and gave a detailed account of the situation in Kanto.

古文：周文嘉之，封阳邑县子。
现代文：宇文泰对他大加赞赏，封他为阳邑县子。
English: Yu Wentai praised him greatly and named him the best son of Yangyi County.

古文：论复东荆州功，进爵临汝县伯。
现代文：根据他收复东荆州的功劳，又晋升爵位为临汝县伯。
English: According to his achievements in recovering East Jingzhou, he was promoted to the peerage of Linru County.

古文：初，贺拔胜、独孤信以孝武西迁之后，并流寓江左。
现代文：当初，贺拔胜、独孤信因孝武帝西迁之后，都流落在长江一带。
English: At first, He Baxing and Du Guoxin were both exiled to the Yangtze River area after moving west due to Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：至是，刚言于魏文帝，请追而复之。
现代文：这时，赵刚奏报给魏文帝，请求将他们找回并恢复职务。
English: At this time, Zhao Gangsuo reported to Wei Wendi, requesting to find them back and resume their duties.

古文：乃以刚为兼给事黄门侍郎，使梁魏兴，赉移书与其梁州刺史杜怀宝等。
现代文：朝廷便命他为兼给事黄门侍郎，出使南梁的魏兴，送文书给梁朝的梁州刺史杜怀宝等人。
English: The imperial court then ordered him to be the attendant of the Yellow Gate, to send Wei Xing from Nanliang, and to send documents to Liangzhou Sisi Duhuai Bao and others from the Liang Dynasty.

古文：即与刚盟歃，受移送建康，仍遣人随刚报命。
现代文：杜怀宝与赵刚歃血结盟，接受文书，并送到京城建康。又派人随赵刚到西魏朝廷复命。
English: Du Huai Bao and Zhao Gang forged an alliance, accepted the document, and sent it to Jiankang in Beijing. He also sent someone to follow Zhao Gang to the West Wei court to resume his life.

古文：是年，又诏刚使三荆，听在所便宜从事。
现代文：这一年，朝廷又命他出使三荆，所到之处允许他相机行事。
English: In the same year, the imperial court ordered him to travel to the Three Thorns, and he was allowed to take his camera with him wherever he went.

古文：使还，称旨，进爵武成县侯，除大丞相府帐内都督。
现代文：归来后朝廷十分满意，给他晋升爵位为武成县侯，任命为大丞相府帐内都督。
English: After his return, the imperial court was very satisfied and gave him a promotion to the rank of marquis of Wucheng County and appointed him as the highest-ranking official in the chancellery of the Grand Council of State.

古文：复使魏兴，重申前命。
现代文：他又一次出使南梁的魏兴，重新申述过去的使命。
English: He once again sent Wei Xing from Nanliang to retell the past mission.

古文：寻而梁人礼送贺拔胜、独孤信等。
现代文：不久，梁朝按礼节将贺拔胜、独孤信等人送回。
English: Soon after, Liang Chao sent He Baxing, Du Guoxin and others back according to etiquette.

古文：顷之，御史中尉董绍进策，请图梁汉，以绍为行台、梁州刺史。
现代文：这时候，御史中尉董绍向朝廷建议图取梁朝的汉地，朝廷命董绍为行台、梁州刺史。
English: At this time, the Imperial Lieutenant of History, Dong Shao, proposed to the imperial court to draw the Han Dynasty of the Liang Dynasty, and the imperial court ordered Dong Shao to be the guidebook and Liang Zhou to be the historian.

古文：刚以为不可，而朝议已决，遂出军。
现代文：赵刚认为不应出兵，而朝议已经决定，大军只得出发。
English: Zhao Gang believed that troops should not be dispatched, but the North Korean deliberation had already decided that the large army should only be dispatched.

古文：师还，刚别破侯景前驱于南陆，复获其郡守二人。
现代文：董绍终于无功而还，被免为庶人。赵刚被任命为颍川郡太守。他在南陆打败侯景的先锋部队，又俘获他的两名太守。
English: Zhao Gang was appointed the governor of Beichuan County. He defeated Hou Jing's vanguard troops in Nanlu and captured two of his governors.

古文：时有流言，传刚东叛，神武因设反间，声遣迎接。
现代文：这时有流言蜚语，传说赵刚投降东魏。高欢因而进行离间，声言要派兵接应他。
English: At this time, there was a rumor that Zhao Gang had surrendered to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and Gao Huan separated from him, saying that he would send soldiers to meet him.

古文：刚乃率骑袭其丁坞，拔之，周文知刚无贰，乃加赉焉。
现代文：赵刚便率领骑兵袭击东魏的丁坞，并将其攻克。宇文泰知道他不会背叛，便加重封赏。
English: Zhao Gang led the cavalry to attack Ding Dock in the Eastern Wei Dynasty and conquered it. Knowing that he would not betray, Wu Wentai increased the reward.

古文：除营州刺史，进爵为公。
现代文：任他为营州刺史，晋爵为公。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Yingzhou and promoted to the peerage.

古文：渭州人郑五丑构逆，与叛羌傍乞铁勿相应。令刚往镇之。
现代文：渭州人郑五丑叛乱，与背叛西魏的羌人傍乞铁匆相呼应，朝廷命赵刚前往镇压。
English: The rebellion of Zheng Wuxiu, a native of Zhangzhou, echoed the rebellion of the Xiang people, who betrayed the Western Wei Dynasty, and the imperial court ordered Zhao Gang to suppress it.

古文：将发，魏文帝引见内寝，举觞属刚曰： 昔侯景在东，为卿所困。
现代文：即将出发，魏文帝在内宫接见他，举起酒杯对他说： 过去侯景在东部叛乱，被你围困。
English: When he was about to leave, Emperor Weiwen met him in the Inner Court, raised his glass and said to him: In the past, Hou Jing rebelled in the east and was besieged by you.

古文：黠羌小丑，岂足劳卿谋虑也？ 
现代文：羌人狡黠小丑，怎么值得你认真对待呢？ 
English: How can you take a conniving, scheming clown seriously?

古文：时五丑已克定夷镇，所在立栅。
现代文：这时郑五丑已攻取定夷镇，到处树立栅栏。
English: At this time, Zheng Wuqiu had already captured Dingyi Town and set up fences everywhere.

古文：刚至，并攻破之，散其党与。
现代文：赵刚率军到达后，将他的据点全部打破，解散了他的党羽。
English: After Zhao Gang arrived with his army, he broke all of his strongholds and disbanded his party.

古文：加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，入为光禄卿。
现代文：郑五丑西逃，投奔傍乞铁匆。赵刚挥军西进，攻破傍乞铁匆设立的广宁郡。
English: Zheng Wuxiu fled westward and went to Pancheng. Zhao Gang led the army westward and broke through Guangning County, which was hastily established by Pancheng.

古文：六官建，拜膳部中大夫。
现代文：朝廷命宇文贵等人继续西讨，命赵刚代行渭州刺史的职务。
English: The imperial court ordered Yu Wengui and others to continue the Westernization, and ordered Zhao Gang to perform the duties of the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：周孝闵帝践祚，进爵浮阳郡公，出为利州总管。
现代文：孝闵帝称帝建周，赵刚被晋升爵位为浮阳郡公，出为利州总管。
English: Emperor Xiaojun called Emperor Jian Zhou, and Zhao Gang was promoted to the title of Duke of Fuyang County and appointed as the general manager of Lishu.

古文：沙州氐恃险逆命，刚再讨复之。
现代文：沙州的氐族依恃地理险要，抗拒朝廷。
English: The Yi people of Shazhou clung to the geographical peril and resisted the imperial court.

古文：方州生獠，自此始从赋役。
现代文：赵刚率兵讨伐，将他们降服。方州一带的生獠从此开始向朝廷缴纳赋税。
English: Zhao Gang led the troops in a crusade and subdued them. From then on, the peasants in the Fangzhou area began to pay taxes to the imperial court.

古文：刚以信州滨江负阻，乃表请讨之。
现代文：他认为信州濒临长江，地势险要阻隔，便上表请求讨伐。
English: He believed that Shinshu was on the edge of the Yangtze River and that the terrain was dangerous to block, so he requested a crusade.

古文：诏刚率利、沙等十四州兵往经略焉。
现代文：朝廷命他率利、沙等十四州兵马前往经略。
English: The imperial court ordered him to lead the troops of the Fourteen Provinces, including Lili and Sha, to the capital.

古文：王悦，字众喜，京兆蓝田人也。
现代文：又加授他为渠州刺史。他刚到渠州，地方首领惧怕他的军威，相继降服。后因病去世。王悦，字众泰，京兆蓝田人。
English: He was also awarded the title of "History of Quzhou." He had just arrived in Quzhou, and local leaders were afraid of his military power and surrendered one after another. He later died of illness. Wang Yue, surnamed Zhongtai, was from Lantian, Beijing.

古文：少有气干，为州里所称。
现代文：从小就有才干，因而被乡里所称赞。
English: He was praised by the village for his talent since childhood.

古文：周文初定关陇，悦率募乡里从军。屡有战功。
现代文：宇文泰刚平定关陇一带，他招募乡人从军，率领他们投奔宇文泰，多次立下战功。
English: As soon as Uwentai conquered the area around Dingguanlu, he recruited villagers to join the army and led them to fight for Uwentai, winning many victories.

古文：大统元年，除相府刑狱参军。封蓝田县伯。
现代文：大统元年，他任相府刑狱参军，封爵为蓝田县伯。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he served as the Minister of the Penitentiary and joined the army, and was knighted as the Count of Lantian.

古文：四年，东魏将侯景攻围洛阳，周文赴援，悦又率乡里千余人从军至洛阳。
现代文：大统四年，东魏将领侯景围攻洛阳，宇文泰率军救援，王悦率领乡兵一千多人跟随大军到洛阳。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Reunification, the Eastern Wei general Hou Jing besieged Luoyang, Yu Wentai led the army to rescue, Wang Yue led more than a thousand villagers to follow the army to Luoyang.

古文：将战之夕，悦罄其行资，市牛飨战士。
现代文：即将开战的前一天晚上，他拿出自己所有的东西，买牛犒劳战士。
English: On the eve of the impending war, he took out all his belongings to buy oxen for the soldiers.

古文：悦所部尽力。斩获居多。
现代文：他率领的人马尽力奋战，斩获敌人最多。
English: The men and horses he led fought as hard as they could and made the most of the enemy.

古文：迁大行台右丞，转左丞。
现代文：他迁升为大行台右丞，又转为左丞。
English: He was promoted to Daigodai Ujo, and then to Sojo.

古文：久居管辖，颇获时誉。
现代文：大统十三年，侯景献出河南投降西魏，请求派兵援应。
English: In the 13th year of the Great Reunification, Hou Jing surrendered Henan Province to the Western Wei Dynasty and requested the dispatch of troops.

古文：十三年，侯景据河南来附，仍请兵为援，周文先遣韦法保、贺兰愿德等帅众助之。悦言于周文曰： 侯景之于高欢，始则笃乡党之情，末乃定君臣之契，位居上将，职重台司，论其分义，有同鱼水。
现代文：宇文泰先派韦法保、贺兰愿德等人率众前往援助。王悦对他说 ：侯景与高欢，开始两人有深厚的同乡情谊，后来又确定了君臣关系。侯景位至上将，肩负台司的重任。论起他们的情分，如同鱼水。
English: Wu Wentai first sent Wei Fa Bao, He Lan Jian De and others to go to the aid. Wang Yue said to him: Hou Jing and Gao Huan, at the beginning, the two had a deep hometown friendship, and later established a monarch-servant relationship. Hou Jing was the highest-ranking general, shouldering the heavy responsibility of the Taiji. Talking about their feelings, it was like fish water.

古文：今欢始死，景便离贰，岂不知君臣之道有违，忠义之礼不足？
现代文：现在高欢才死，他便叛离，难道不知道这样有违于君臣之道，有背于忠义之礼？
English: Now that Gao Huan has just died, he has defected. Doesn't he know that this is contrary to the way of the sovereign and the vassal, and to the ritual of loyalty?

古文：盖其图既大，不恤小嫌。
现代文：大概是他的谋图远大，不拘泥于这些小的礼节。
English: It was probably his grand design, not to be constrained by these small proprieties.

古文：然尚能背德于高氏，岂肯尽节于朝廷？
现代文：然而，他既然能背叛高氏，怎么肯忠于我们的朝廷！
English: However, since he can betray Gao, how can he be loyal to our imperial court!

古文：今若益之以势，援之以兵，非唯侯景不为池中之物，亦恐朝廷贻笑将来也。 
现代文：今天如果扩大他的声势，派兵救助他，不但侯景不愿作被困在池中的蛟龙，也恐怕朝廷被将来的人所嘲笑。 
English: Today, if he were to expand his influence and send soldiers to rescue him, not only would Hou Jing not want to be the dragon trapped in the pond, but I am afraid that the court would be ridiculed by future people.

古文：周文纳之，乃遣追法保等，而景寻叛。
现代文：宇文泰采纳了他的意见，便派人将韦法保等人追回。
English: Uwentai accepted his opinion and sent someone to retrieve Wei Fabao and the others.

古文：后拜京兆郡守、散骑常侍，迁大行台尚书。从达奚武征梁汉。
现代文：侯景果然不久背叛西魏投降南梁。他跟从达奚武征讨南梁汉地。
English: Hou Jing soon betrayed the Western Wei Dynasty and surrendered Nanliang. He followed Dajin Wu to conquer Nanliang Han.

古文：军出，武令悦说其城主杨贤，悦乃贻之书，贤于是遂降。
现代文：军队出发后，达奚武命他劝说城主杨贤，他给杨贤写了一封书信，杨贤于是投降。
English: After the departure of the army, Dadu Wu ordered him to persuade the lord of the city, Yang Xian. He wrote a letter to Yang Xian, and Yang Xian surrendered.

古文：悦又白武云： 白马冲要，是必争之地。
现代文：他又对达奚武说： 白马地处要冲，是必争之地。
English: He also said to Dagongwu: "Baima is the place to rush, it is the place to fight.

古文：今城守寡弱，易可图也。
现代文：现在守城的梁军又少又弱，容易图取。
English: Now the Liang army defending the city is few and weak, and it is easy to take.

古文：若蜀兵更至，攻之实难。 
现代文：如果蜀兵到来，再攻就难了。 
English: If the Shu soldiers arrive, it will be difficult to attack again.

古文：武然之，即令悦率轻骑径趣白马。
现代文：达奚武同意他的看法，立即派他率轻骑直趋白马。
English: Daduangwu agreed with him and immediately sent him to ride the white horse.

古文：悦示其祸福，梁将深悟，遂以城降。
现代文：王悦向守将陈述了利害；梁将省悟，献城投降。
English: Wang Yue told the commander what was at stake; Liang would come to his senses and surrender the city.

古文：时梁武陵王萧纪果遣其将任珍奇，欲先据白马。行次关城，闻其已降，乃还。
现代文：这时梁朝的武陵王萧纪果然派他的将领任珍奇想先占据白马，行至关城，听说白马守将已经投降，只得回来。
English: At this time, Xiao Ji, the King of Wuling of the Liang Dynasty, sent his general Zhenqi to occupy Baima first, and went to Guzheng. He heard that the governor of Baima had surrendered, but had to return.

古文：及梁州平，周文即以悦行刺史事。
现代文：梁州平定后，宇文泰命王悦代行刺史职务。
English: After Liangzhou was pacified, Wu Wentai ordered Wang Yue to perform the duties of assassinating history.

古文：废帝二年，徵还本任。
现代文：废帝二年，他以仪同的职务归还故乡。
English: Two years after the dethronement of the emperor, he returned to his hometown with the same duties.

古文：属改行台为中外府，尚书员废，悦以仪同领兵还乡里。
现代文：他久居显赫的官职，这次回来后心中怏怏不满，因而凌驾于乡亲之上，失掉了宗族乡党的感情。
English: He held a prominent official position for a long time, and after returning this time, he was dissatisfied with his heart, so he overrode the villagers and lost the feelings of the clan and the village party.

古文：为度所执，所部众军亦被囚虏，送诣丹阳。
现代文：他的长子王康倚仗他过去的威望，便骄纵无度，为所欲为。所部军人结婚，他常非理凌辱。
English: His eldest son, Wang Kang, relied on his past prestige and became arrogant and indulgent, doing whatever he wanted. When soldiers from his department got married, he was often unreasonable and insulting.

古文：居数月，忧愤发病卒。
现代文：军人们控告，王悦和王康都被免官除名，被发配到边远的地方。
English: The soldiers complained that both Wang Yue and Wang Kang were removed from their posts and sent to remote areas.

古文：子乐嗣。杨，字显进，正平高凉人也。
现代文：周孝闵帝即位，按照朝廷规定恢复了他的官职。保定元年，他在官位上去世。他性情节俭，不经营家产，虽官位显要，却家徒四壁。
English: Emperor Zhou Xiaoxuan ascended the throne and restored his official position in accordance with the provisions of the imperial court. In the first year of Baoding, he died in his official position. He was frugal by nature and did not manage his family property. Although his official position was important, his family was poor.

古文：祖贵、父猛，并为县令。
现代文：杨檦，字显进，正平高凉人。
English: Yang Mi, Zha Xian Jin, Zheng Ping Gao Liang Ren.

古文：少豪侠，有志气。
现代文：从小就豪爽任侠，胸怀大志。
English: Ever since he was a child, he has been a brave knight with a great ambition.

古文：魏孝昌中，尔硃荣杀害朝士，大司马、城阳王元徽逃难投，藏而免之。
现代文：魏孝昌时，朱荣大肆杀害朝臣，大司马、城阳王元徽逃难投奔他，他把元徽藏起来才免于一死。
English: During the Wei and Xiaochang dynasties, Zhu Rong killed a number of courtiers, and the grand steward Ma and the king of Chengyang, Yuan Hui, fled to him. He only escaped death by hiding Yuan Hui.

古文：孝庄帝立，徽乃出，复为司马。
现代文：孝庄帝即皇帝位，元徽才出来，又任司马。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang, that is, the emperor, only came out of the original emblem, and also served as Sima.

古文：由是以义烈，擢拜伏波将军、给事中。
现代文：杨檦因此以侠义壮烈出名，被提拔为伏波将军、给事中。
English: As a result, Yang Hui became famous for his chivalry and bravery, and was promoted to General of Fubo Province.

古文：元颢入洛，孝庄北度太行。
现代文：元颢入据路阳，孝庄帝被迫北上太行山躲避。
English: When Yuan Shao marched into Luyang, Emperor Xiaozhuang was forced to flee north to Mount Taihang.

古文：进都督、平东将军、太中大夫。
现代文：朱荣带着孝庄帝讨伐元颢，军至马渚，杨檦备下船只让大军渡过黄河。
English: Zhu Rong took Emperor Xiaozhuang to fight against Yuan Shao, and the army went to Mazhu, and Yang Shao prepared ships to let the army cross the Yellow River.

古文：从孝武入关，进爵为侯，加抚军将军、银青光禄大夫。
现代文：元颢被平定，他被封爵为肥如县伯，又加封镇远将军等职衔。他跟从孝武帝西入关中，晋爵为侯。
English: The Yuan Dynasty was subdued, and he was knighted as Fuzhou County Mayor, and also given the title of Zhenyuan General. He followed Emperor Xiaowu into the West Gate, and was promoted to marquis.

古文：时东魏迁鄴，周文欲知其所为，乃遣间行诣鄴以观察之。
现代文：这时东魏迁都邺城，宇文泰想知道他们的意图，便派杨檦秘密到邺城访察。
English: At this time, the Eastern Wei Dynasty moved the capital to Handan City. Wanting to know their intentions, Yu Wentai sent Yang Jiao to secretly visit Handan City.

古文：使还称旨，授通直散骑常侍、车骑将军。
现代文：归来后很使宇文泰满意，朝廷授予他通直散骑常侍等职。
English: After his return, Uwentai was very satisfied, and the imperial court awarded him the position of a regular attendant for horseback riding.

古文：稽胡恃险不宾，屡行钞窃，以兼黄门侍郎，往慰抚之。
现代文：稽胡倚仗地势险要不对西魏朝贡，并不断抢掠骚扰边民，朝廷命杨檦兼黄门侍郎前往安抚慰问。
English: The imperial court ordered Yang Xuan, the Yellow Gate's steward, to go to appease and offer condolences, as he was worried that the situation would not be conducive for the Western Wei Dynasty to pay tribute, and he was constantly robbing and harassing the border residents.

古文：颇有权略，能得边情，诱化酋梁，多来款附，乃有随树入朝者。
现代文：他颇有谋略权术，很能体察边情，劝诱化导胡人首领自动归附，甚至有人跟着他一块到朝廷来。
English: He was quite skillful in strategy and power, and was very capable of perceiving the situation on the border, persuading and inducing the leaders of the Hu people to automatically adhere to him, and even some people followed him to the imperial court.

古文：时弘农为东魏守，从周文攻拔之。
现代文：这时弘农被东魏占据，他跟随宇文泰将弘农攻克。
English: At this time, Hongnong was occupied by the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and he followed Yu Wentai to conquer Hongnong.

古文：然自河以北，犹附东魏。
现代文：然而黄河以北仍归东魏所有。
English: However, everything north of the Yellow River still belonged to the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：父猛先为邵郡白水令，与其豪右相知，请微行诣邵郡，举兵以应朝廷。
现代文：他的父亲杨猛过去曾任绍郡白水县县令，他与当地的豪强地主关系密切，请求暗中到绍郡联络，以举兵响应朝廷。
English: In the past, his father Yang Meng served as the county magistrate of Baishui County, Shao County. He had a close relationship with the local powerful landowners and asked them to secretly contact Shao County to raise troops in response to the imperial court.

古文：周文许之，遂行。
现代文：宇文泰同意，他便出发。
English: He agreed and set off.

古文：与土豪王覆怜等阴谋举事，密相应会，内外俱发，遂拔邵郡，禽郡守程保及县令四人，并斩之。
现代文：他与土豪王覆怜等阴谋举事，秘密联络，内外一起爆发，攻克绍郡，擒拿东魏太守程保和县令四名，全部斩首。
English: He conspired with the local tyrant Wang Zhulian and other conspiracies, made secret contacts, and broke out both at home and abroad, conquered Xiaoshuo County, captured four East Wei guards Cheng Bao and county magistrates, and beheaded them all.

古文：众议推行郡事，以因覆怜成事，遂表覆怜为邵郡守。
现代文：众人推举杨檦任太守。他认为只有依靠王覆怜事情才得以成功，便上表奏请求命王覆怜为太守。
English: Yang Xuan was elected by the people as the de facto ruler. He believed that only by relying on Wang Zhaerui could he succeed, so he made a formal request for Wang Zhaerui to become the de facto ruler.

古文：以功授大行台左丞，仍率义徒更为经略。
现代文：他因立功被授予大行台左丞，仍然率领义兵经营攻防事务。
English: For his meritorious service, he was awarded the title of Daigandai Zuojo, and still led the volunteer soldiers in offensive and defensive affairs.

古文：遂移据东雍州。周文以有谋略，堪委边任，乃表行建州事。
现代文：他因此派出间谍去诱说东魏城堡守将，旬月之间，正平、河北、南汾、二绛、建州、太宁等城池都有人请求作为内应的，西魏军队乘势进攻，将这些地方拿下。朝廷命他代行正平郡太守职务，左丞职务不变。
English: As a result, he sent spies to seduce the East Wei castle warden, and between June and September, people in Zhengping, Hebei, Nanxun, Erqun, Jianzhou, Taining and other cities and towns all requested that the West Wei army take advantage of the situation to attack and take these places. The court ordered him to perform the duties of Zhengping County Warden on his behalf, and the duties of the left jockey remained unchanged.

古文：时建州远在敌境，然威恩夙著，所经之处，多赢粮附之。
现代文：宇文泰认为他很有谋略，能够担当守卫边境的重任，便上表让他代理建州刺史。建州远处敌境之中，然而由于杨檦恩信和威望早已出名，所以，所到之处，人们大多带上粮草归附他。
English: Yu Wentai thought that he was very resourceful and could take on the important task of guarding the border, so he asked him to act as a proxy for the history of Jianzhou. Jianzhou is far away in the enemy territory, but because Yang Jian's credit and prestige have long been famous, so wherever he went, people mostly brought grain and grass to him.

古文：比至建州，众已一万。
现代文：到达建州时，已有一万之众。
English: By the time they reached Jianzhou, there were already ten thousand people.

古文：东魏州刺史车折于洛出兵逆战，击败之。
现代文：东魏的建州刺史车折于洛出兵抵抗，杨檦将他打败。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty's Jianzhou stabbing history vehicle turned to Luo to send troops to resist, and Yang Hui defeated him.

古文：又破其行台斛律俱于州西，大获甲仗及军资，以给义士。
现代文：他又在州西打败东魏的行台斛律俱，缴获敌人大量的衣甲兵器和其他军资，他将这些物品全都发给了追随而来的义士。
English: He also defeated the Eastern Wei army in the west of the state, and seized a large number of armor weapons and other military equipment from the enemy. He distributed all of these items to the followers.

古文：由是威名大振。
现代文：因此他的声名大振。
English: That's why he's so famous.

古文：东魏遣太保尉景攻陷正平，复遣行台薛修义与斛律俱相会，于是敌众渐盛。
现代文：东魏派太保尉景攻陷正平，又派行台薛修义与斛律俱的兵马汇合，于是敌人势力逐渐强盛。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty sent Tai Bao Jing to attack and capture Zhengping, and also sent Tai Xue Xiu Yi to join forces with the soldiers and horses of Zhao Ligu. As a result, the enemy forces gradually became stronger.

古文：以孤军无援，且腹背受敌，谋欲拔还，复恐义徒背叛，遂伪为周文书，遣人若从外送来者，云已遣军四道赴援。
现代文：他因孤军无援，而且腹背受敌，准备撤兵。但又害怕原先追随他的义士们背叛，便伪造了一封宇文泰的书信，派人扮装成使者从外面送来，说朝廷已派大军分四路前来增援。
English: He prepared to withdraw his troops because he was alone and helpless, and because he had suffered at the hands of the enemy. However, he was afraid that the loyalists who had originally followed him would betray him, so he forged a letter from Uwentai and sent someone dressed as an emissary from outside, saying that the imperial court had sent a large army in four directions to reinforce him.

古文：因令人漏泄，使所在知之。
现代文：故意让人把消息泄漏出去，让所有的人都知道。
English: To deliberately leak the news so that everyone would know.

古文：又分士人义酋，令各领所部四出钞掠，拟供军费。
现代文：又让当地的土人和酋长领兵四处抢掠，好像在为大军筹集军费。
English: He also let the local natives and chiefs loot everywhere, as if they were collecting military expenses for a large army.

古文：分遣讫，遂于夜中拔还邵郡。
现代文：分配完毕，他在晚上拔寨退还绍郡。
English: After the distribution was completed, he withdrew the village in the evening and returned it to Shao County.

古文：朝廷嘉其权以全军。既授建州刺史。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖他靠智谋保全了军队，命他为建州刺史。
English: The imperial court commended him for preserving the army by his wisdom and ordered him to write the history of the founding of the state.

古文：时东魏以正平为东雍州，遣薛荣祖镇之。
现代文：这时东魏在正平设置东雍州，派薛荣祖镇守。
English: At this time, the Eastern Wei Dynasty set up Dongyang Prefecture in Zhengping and sent Xue Rongzu to guard the town.

古文：乃先遣奇兵，急攻汾桥。
现代文：杨檦先派一支奇兵急攻汾桥。
English: Yang Xuan first sent a strange soldier to attack the bridge.

古文：荣祖果尽出城中战士，于汾桥拒守。
现代文：薛荣祖果然出动全部守城战士去把守汾桥。
English: Xue Rongzu sent out all the defenders of the city to guard the bridge.

古文：其夜，从他道济，遂袭克之。
现代文：当夜，杨檦从别的道路渡河进攻州城，一举攻克。
English: That night, Yang Hui crossed the river from another road to attack the state capital and conquered it in one fell swoop.

古文：及齐神武围玉壁，别令侯景趣齐子岭。
现代文：他晋升为骠骑将军。高欢攻打玉壁，命侯景攻占齐子岭。
English: He was promoted to the general of the cavalry. Gao Huan attacked the Jade Wall, and Mihou Jing captured the Qi Ziling.

古文：恐入寇邵郡，率骑御之。
现代文：杨檦恐怕侯景侵犯绍郡，率领骑兵前来抵御。
English: Yang Hui feared that Hou Jing would invade Shao County, so he led his cavalry to resist.

古文：景远闻至，斫木断路者六十余里，犹惊而不安，遂退还河阳，其见惮如此。
现代文：侯景远远地听说杨檦即将来到，连忙砍伐树木横断道路六十余里，但仍然惊恐不安，又退还河阳。齐军就是这样惧怕杨檦。
English: Hearing from afar that Yang Hui was about to arrive, Hou Jing hurriedly cut down trees more than sixty miles across the road, but he was still frightened and uneasy, and returned to Heyang. This is how the Qi army feared Yang Hui.

古文：十二年，进授大都督，加晋、建二州诸军事。
现代文：大统十二年，朝廷进授他为大都督，加封为晋、建二州诸军事。
English: In the 12th year of the Great Reunification, the imperial court promoted him to the position of grand governor, and he was awarded the title of Jin and built two military states.

古文：又于邵郡置邵州，以为刺史，率所部兵镇之。
现代文：他又率军攻破蓼坞，抓获东魏将军李显。大统十六年，西魏军讨伐东魏，命他为大行台尚书，率领义军作为先驱先攻入敌境，占据敌兵的四个据点。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, the West Wei army fought against the East Wei, and he was ordered to write a grand march and lead the Yi army as a pioneer into the enemy territory, occupying four enemy strongholds.

古文：保定四年，迁少师。
现代文：因敌军坚壁不出，朝廷便命他撤还。保定四年，他迁任为少师。
English: Due to the fact that the enemy troops did not retreat, the imperial court ordered him to withdraw. Four years later, he was transferred to the position of junior division commander.

古文：其年，大军围洛阳，诏出轵关。
现代文：这年，北周军围攻洛阳，朝廷命他率军出轵关东援。
English: That year, the Northern Zhou army besieged Luoyang, and the imperial court ordered him to lead the army to aid Guandong.

古文：然自镇东境二十余年，数与齐人战，每常克获，以此遂有轻敌之心。
现代文：他自认为镇守东部边境二十多年，多次与齐军作战，每战必胜，因此产生了轻敌思想。
English: He believed that he had been guarding the eastern border for more than 20 years, had fought against the Qi army many times, and had won every battle. As a result, he developed the idea of a light enemy.

古文：时洛阳未下，而深入敌境，又不设备。
现代文：当时洛阳没有攻克，他却深入敌境，又不作任何准备。
English: At that time, Luoyang was not conquered, but he went deep into the enemy territory without making any preparations.

古文：齐人奄至，大破军。
现代文：齐军突然攻来，将他的军队打得大败。
English: The Qi army suddenly attacked and defeated his army.

古文：以众败，遂降于齐。
现代文：他看到军队溃散，向齐军投降。
English: He saw the army break up and surrender to the Qi army.

古文：功名寥落，良可嗟矣！《易》曰： 师出以律，否臧凶。 
现代文：他建功立业时，颇有慷慨壮烈的志向；可是军队失败后，便投降敌兵以保全性命，人们因此都鄙视他。
English: He was generous and ambitious when he was making his mark, but despised when his army was defeated and he surrendered to the enemy to save his life.

