古文：许靖字文休，汝南平舆人。
现代文：许靖字文休，汝南郡平舆县人。
English: Xu Jingzhi Wenzhu, from Pingyu County, Runan County.

古文：少与从弟劭俱知名，并有人伦臧否之称，而私情不协。
现代文：他年少的时候就和堂弟许邵一起为人所知，都有喜好品评人物的名声，但两人私下感情不和。
English: When he was young, he and his cousin, Xu Shao, were both known as people who liked to comment on people, but the two did not get along in private.

古文：劭为郡功曹，排摈靖不得齿叙，以马磨自给。
现代文：许邵担任郡里的功曹，排斥许靖，并让他没有被任用，许靖只好为人赶马磨粮来供养自己。
English: Xu Shao served as the county's meritorious person, ostracized Xu Jing, and let him not be appointed, Xu Jing had to catch horses and grind grain to support himself.

古文：颍川刘翊为汝南太守，乃举靖计吏，察孝廉，除尚书郎，典选举。
现代文：颍川人刘翊担任汝南太守，就举荐许静担任计吏，并推举他为孝廉，担任尚书郎，主管选举之事。
English: Liu Wei, a native of Luochuan, served as the governor of Runan, recommended Xu Jing to serve as a treasurer, and recommended him to serve as a filial son, as Shang Shuro, in charge of the election.

古文：灵帝崩，董卓秉政，以汉阳周毖为吏部尚书，与靖共谋议，进退天下之士，沙汰秽浊，显拔幽滞。
现代文：汉灵帝去世后，董卓专政，让汉阳人周毖担任吏部尚书，让他跟许靖共同商议，升迁或调配天下官员，淘汰清除腐败的官吏，并提拔怀才失意的能人。
English: After the death of Han Lingdi, the dictatorship of Dong Zhuo appointed Zhou Qi, a native of Hanyang, as the secretary of the personnel department, and let him and Xu Jing jointly discuss the promotion or transfer of officials around the world, the elimination of corrupt officials, and the promotion of talented people who were disappointed.

古文：进用颍川荀爽、韩融、陈纪等为公、卿、郡守，拜尚书韩馥为冀州牧，侍中刘岱为兖州刺史，颍川张咨为南阳太守，陈留孔伷为豫州刺史，东郡张邈为陈留太守，而迁靖巴郡太守，不就，补御史中丞。
现代文：于是他提拔任用了颍川人刘爽、韩融、陈纪等担任公、卿、郡守，并任命尚书韩馥担任冀州牧，侍中刘岱担任衮州刺史，颍川人张咨担任南阳太守，陈留人孔伷担任豫州刺史，东郡人张邈担任陈留太守，而许靖本人被提升为巴郡太守，但他没有赴任，被改任为御史中丞。
English: As a result, he promoted and appointed Liu Shuang, Han Rong, Chen Ji, and others from Luanchuan to serve as court officials, nobles, and county governors, and appointed Shangshu Han Rong as the pastor of Jizhou, the attendant Liu Rong as the governor of Luanchuan, Zhang Zhao from Luanchuan as the governor of Nanyang, Kong Rong from Chen County as the governor of Yuzhou, Zhang Rong from Dong County as the governor of Chen County, and Xu Jing himself was promoted to the governor of Ba County, but he did not go to the post and was reappointed as the vice-governor of

古文：馥等到官，各举兵还向京都，欲以诛卓。
现代文：韩馥等人到官后都各自举兵反攻京城，想要诛杀董卓。
English: After Han Zheng and others came to power, they each raised an army to counterattack the capital and wanted to kill Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓怒毖曰： 诸君言当拔用善士，卓从君计，不欲违天下人心。而诸君所用人，至官之日，还来相图。
现代文：董卓怒斥周毖说： 你们说应当选用能人异士，我听从你们的建议，不想违背天下人之心，但你们所选用的人到任之时就转而攻打我。
English: Dong Zhuo angrily rebuked Zhou Qi, saying, "You said that we should choose a capable person. I listened to your advice and did not want to go against the hearts of the people of the world, but when the person you chose took office, you turned against me.

古文：卓何用相负！ 
现代文：我为什么要用这些背叛我的人！ 
English: Why would I use these people who betrayed me!

古文：叱毖令出，於外斩之。
现代文：于是喝令将周毖推出，在城外斩杀。
English: As a result, they shouted for Zhou Qi to be pushed out and killed outside the city.

古文：靖从兄陈相玚，又与伷合规，靖惧诛，奔伷。
现代文：许靖的堂兄许玚是陈国国相，又和许伷共同谋划，许靖担心受株连，就逃奔到孔伷那里。
English: Xu Jing's cousin Xu Yao was Chen Guo Guo's minister of state, and he and Xu Yao plotted together. Xu Yao was worried about being implicated, so he fled to Kong Yao.

古文：伷卒，依扬州刺史陈祎。
现代文：孔伷去世后，与靖又依靠扬州刺史陈祎。
English: After the death of Confucius, he and Jing again relied on Yangzhou scholar Chen Xuan.

古文：祎死，吴郡都尉许贡、会稽太守王朗素与靖有旧，故往保焉。
现代文：陈祎去世后，吴郡都尉许贡、会稽太守王朗向来跟许靖有交情，所以前来保护许靖。
English: After Chen Yao's death, Wu County Lieutenant Xu Gong and Wang Lang, the inspector-general of the party, had always been friends with Xu Jing, so they came to protect Xu Jing.

古文：靖收恤亲里，经纪振赡，出於仁厚。
现代文：许靖收养抚恤亲族乡里，经常救济他们，都是出于仁厚之心。
English: Xu Jing adopted and supported relatives in his hometown, often helping them out, all out of a heart of kindness.

古文：孙策东渡江，皆走交州以避其难，靖身坐岸边，先载附从，疏亲悉发，乃从后去，当时见者莫不叹息。
现代文：孙策东渡长江，很多人都逃奔到交州躲避战乱，许靖亲自坐在岸边，让随从的人先乘船离开，亲属族人都出发后，自己才在后面跟随，当时看到的人没有不感叹的。
English: When Sun Ce crossed the Yangtze River to the east, many people fled to Jiaozhou to escape the war. Xu Jing personally sat on the shore and let his followers leave by boat first. After his relatives and relatives left, he followed behind. There was nothing he did not admire.

古文：既至交阯，交阯太守士燮厚加敬待。
现代文：到了交趾郡，交趾太守士燮对许靖厚加款待。
English: When he arrived in Koji County, Koji Taishu Shizuku extended hospitality to Xu Jinghou.

古文：陈国袁徽以寄寓交州，徽与尚书令荀彧书曰： 许文休英才伟士，智略足以计事。自流宕已来，与群士相随，每有患急，常先人后己，与九族中外同其饥寒。
现代文：陈国任袁徽也身处胶州，袁徽向尚书令荀彧写信说： 许文休，有雄才伟略，他的智谋足以参与国家政事，自从他流落以来，跟各士人交往，每当有忧患急事，都先人后己。
English: Chen Guoren and Yuan Hui were also in Jiaozhou. Yuan Hui wrote to Shang Shuling, saying: Xu Wenzhu is a man of great talent and strategy. His wisdom is enough to participate in national politics. Since he was exiled, he has been in contact with people from all walks of life. Whenever there is an emergency, he is the first to help others.

古文：其纪纲同类，仁恕恻隐，皆有效事，不能复一二陈之耳。 
现代文：他跟族中内外的人一同忍受饥寒，以人伦纲常对待同类，仁义宽厚有恻隐之心，做事很有成效，只是不能一一陈述他的事情罢了。 
English: He endured hunger and cold together with people inside and outside the tribe, treated his fellow human beings with human ethics, was benevolent, generous and compassionate, and was very effective in his work. However, he was unable to present his case one by one.

古文：钜鹿张翔衔王命使交部，乘势募靖，欲与誓要，靖拒而不许。靖与曹公书曰：
现代文：钜鹿郡的张翔奉王命出使交州，想凭着自己的权势征召许靖，想要和他定下盟约，许靖拒绝没有答应，并给曹操写信说：
English: Zhang Xiang of Elk County sent an envoy to Jiaozhou at the king's behest. He wanted to recruit Xu Jing with his own power, and wanted to make a covenant with him. Xu Jing refused and did not agree, and wrote to Cao Cao:

古文：世路戎夷，祸乱遂合，驽怯偷生，自窜蛮貊，成阔十年，吉凶礼废。
现代文：世事艰难，祸乱频生，我苟且偷生，逃窜到蛮夷之地已经十年了，来往礼数断绝。
English: Life is hard, disasters are frequent, I've been living a clandestine life, I've been running away to the wilderness for ten years, and the number of visits has been cut off.

古文：昔在会稽，得所贻书，辞旨款密，久要不忘。
现代文：过去在会稽时收到您的来信，其中言辞恳切，久久不能忘怀。
English: In the past, I received a letter from you at the time of the audit, in which the words are sincere and can not be forgotten for a long time.

古文：迫於袁术方命圮族，扇动群逆，津涂四塞，虽县心北风，欲行靡由。
现代文：当时迫于袁术抗拒王命，煽动逆党，阻隔四方道路，我虽然心向北面，但无法动身前往。
English: At that time, Yuan Shou was forced to resist the king's order, incite the anti-party, and block the four-way road. Although my heart was heading north, I couldn't leave.

古文：正礼师退，术兵前进，会稽倾覆，景兴失据，三江五湖，皆为虏庭。
现代文：适逢大军撤退，袁术大军前进，会稽郡被颠覆，景兴郡失守，三江五湖，都落入敌军之手。
English: At the time of the retreat of the great army, Yuan Shue's army advanced, Cui County was overthrown, Jingxing County was lost, and the three rivers and five lakes all fell into the hands of the enemy.

古文：临时困厄，无所控告。便与袁沛、邓子孝等浮涉沧海，南至交州。
现代文：当时处境困顿，无法向您禀告，于是就和袁沛、邓子孝等人乘船渡过沧海，往南到了交州。
English: At that time, I was in a difficult situation and could not report to you, so I took a boat with Yuan Pei, Deng Zi Xiao and others to cross the sea of vicissitudes and went south to Jiaozhou.

古文：经历东瓯、闽、越之国，行经万里，不见汉地，漂薄风波，绝粮茹草，饥殍荐臻，死者大半。
现代文：经过东瓯、闽、越各国，行程有万里之遥，不见汉朝国土，一路漂泊风波，粮草断绝，靠草根续命路上饿死之人大半。
English: After passing through the countries of Dongguan, Handan and Yue, the journey is thousands of miles away, and the land of the Han Dynasty is not seen. All the way, they are drifting in the storm, the grain and grass are cut off, and most of the people starve to death on the way to continue their lives by relying on the grassroots.

古文：既济南海，与领守儿孝德相见，知足下忠义奋发，整饬元戎，西迎大驾，巡省中岳。
现代文：渡过南海之后，我与兼任郡守的儿孝德相见，足下忠义奋发整顿军队，往西迎接圣上，巡视中土。
English: After crossing the South China Sea, I met the filial son who was also the county governor, and I loyally worked hard to rectify the army, went west to meet the saint, and toured the Middle Earth.

古文：承此休问，且悲且憙，即与袁沛及徐元贤复共严装，欲北上荆州。
现代文：得知这一消息，我心中又悲又喜，随即与袁沛和徐元贤等人再次整顿行装，想要北上荆州。
English: Upon learning this news, my heart was sad and happy, and I immediately reorganized with Yuan Pei and Xu Yuanxian and others, wanting to go north to Jingzhou.

古文：会苍梧诸县夷、越蜂起，州府倾覆，道路阻绝，元贤被害，老弱并杀。
现代文：正值苍梧各县的少数民族纷纷起兵，颠覆州府，道路阻隔，元贤被杀害，我家中的老弱之人都被杀害。
English: It was the time when ethnic minorities in all counties of Gansu Province raised their armies one after another, subverted the state capitals, blocked roads, killed the Yuanxian, and killed the old and weak people in my family.

古文：靖寻循渚岸五千馀里，复遇疾疠，伯母陨命，并及群从，自诸妻子，一时略尽。
现代文：我沿着河岸行走了五千多里，又遇上瘟疫，伯母丧命，还感染到了随行人员，从他们到他们的妻子儿女，一时都死伤殆尽。
English: I walked more than five thousand miles along the riverbank, and encountered the plague, my aunt died, and the entourage was infected, from them to their wives and children, all dead and wounded.

古文：复相扶侍，前到此郡，计为兵害及病亡者，十遗一二。
现代文：大家互相扶持，到了交趾郡，统计被乱兵杀害以及因病而逝的人，只剩下十分之一二。
English: Everyone supported each other, and by the time we got to Koji County, the statistics of those who were killed by the soldiers and those who died from illness were only 1/2.

古文：生民之艰，辛苦之甚，岂可具陈哉！
现代文：百姓的命运艰难，辛苦非常，哪里能具体的陈述呢？
English: The fate of the people is hard, very hard, where can I get a specific statement?

古文：惧卒颠仆，永为亡虏，忧瘁惨惨，忘寝与食。
现代文：我担心突然病倒在异乡，永远成为逃亡的罪人，心中忧心惨怛，废寝忘食。
English: I'm afraid of suddenly falling ill in a foreign country, forever becoming a fugitive sinner, my heart is worried and miserable, and I can't sleep or eat.

古文：欲附奉朝贡使，自获济通，归死阙庭，而荆州水陆无津，交部驿使断绝。
现代文：想要随着朝觐天子的使节进贡，使自己走上获救的道路，返回朝廷，死在故里，但荆州的水路道路都被阻隔，交州联系中原的驿站也断绝。
English: He wanted to pay tribute to the envoys of the Son of Heaven of the Pilgrimage, set himself on the road to be rescued, return to the imperial court, and die in his hometown, but the waterways of Jingzhou were blocked, and the stations that connected Jingzhou with the Central Plains were cut off.

古文：欲上益州，复有峻防，故官长吏，一不得入。
现代文：我想前往益州，又有严密的关卡防守，过去汉朝的官吏都不能入境。
English: I want to go to Yizhou, and there are strict checkpoints. In the past, officials of the Han Dynasty could not enter the country.

古文：前令交阯太守士威彦，深相分讬於益州兄弟，又靖亦自与书，辛苦恳恻，而复寂寞，未有报应。
现代文：以前让交趾太守士彦威，深深拜托益州的兄弟，我也曾经给他们亲自写信，言辞恳切，但回复很少，没有回应。
English: In the past, I had asked the brothers in Yizhou to pray for me, and I had also written to them in person, with sincere words, but there were few replies and no response.

古文：虽仰瞻光灵，延颈企踵，何由假翼自致哉？
现代文：虽然我思念朝廷恩泽，翘首盼望，又怎么能插上翅膀而飞回呢。
English: Although I miss the favor of the imperial court and hope for it, how can I fly back with wings?

古文：知圣主允明，显授足下专征之任，凡诸逆节，多所诛讨，想力竞者一心，顺从者同规矣。
现代文：我知道主上圣明公允，显耀的任命您掌管征讨大事，所有谋逆叛乱的人大多被诛杀征讨，想要奋力竞逐的都一心归附，顺从王命的人都殊途同归。
English: I know that the Lord is holy and just, and that He has gloriously appointed you to be in charge of the campaign. All those who plotted against the rebellion were mostly killed in the campaign. Those who wanted to compete were all one-hearted, and those who obeyed the king's order were all the same.

古文：又张子云昔在京师，志匡王室，今虽临荒域，不得参与本朝，亦国家之藩镇，足下之外援也。若荆、楚平和，王泽南至，足下忽有声命於子云，勤见保属，令得假途由荆州出，不然，当复相绍介於益州兄弟，使相纳受。
现代文：此外张子云过去在京都，志向在于匡扶朝廷，现在虽然身处荒蛮之地，不能参与朝政，但也是国家的藩镇，您的外援，如果荆、楚平定安和，主上的恩德惠及南方，您只需要有命令传给紫云，劝他归附，就能得他借道从荆州出来，否则，我就将他介绍给益州的兄弟，让他们接纳他。
English: In addition, Zhang Ziyun used to be in Kyoto, and his ambition was to support the imperial court. Now, although he is in a barbaric place and cannot participate in imperial politics, he is also a state town. Your foreign aid, if Jing and Chu Ping are at peace, and the Lord's grace benefits the south, you only need to have an order passed to Ziyun and persuade him to join, and you can get him out of Jingzhou. Otherwise, I will introduce him to the brothers in Yizhou and let them accept him.

古文：倘天假其年，人缓其祸，得归死国家，解逋逃之负，泯躯九泉，将复何恨！
现代文：如果老天能赐予我多活几年，我能延缓遭受祸乱，得以回归国家，解除逃亡之罪，那么即使身葬九泉，又有什么怨恨呢？
English: If God can grant me a few more years of life, I can delay the suffering of calamity, be able to return to the country, and absolve the sin of escape, then even if I am buried, what is the grudge?

古文：若时有险易，事有利钝，人命无常，陨没不达者，则永衔罪责，入於裔土矣。
现代文：如果时局艰险，世事危及，人命变幻无常，我不能活着返回，那将永远背着罪名，葬身于他乡了。
English: If the situation is difficult, the world is in danger, and people's lives are fickle, and I can't return alive, then I will always bear the blame and be buried in another country.

古文：未详虎贲所出也。今日足下扶危持倾，为国柱石，秉师望之任，兼霍光之重。五侯九伯，制御在手，自古及今，人臣之尊未有及足下者也。
现代文：过去齐太公吕望辅佐周朝，持黄钺掌握征伐大全，博陆侯霍光辅佐汉室，率虎贲军担任警卫之事。现在您匡扶朝廷，作为朝廷的栋梁，肩负吕望、霍光两者的职责重任，国家五侯九伯都在您的管理之中，从古到今，没有像您这么地位尊贵的臣子。
English: In the past, Qi Taigong Lvang assisted the Zhou Dynasty, held the Yellow Turban to master the conquest of the whole country, Bolu Hou Hokwang assisted the Han Dynasty, and led the Tiger Army to serve as a guard. Now you are supporting the imperial court, as the pillar of the imperial court, shouldering the heavy responsibilities of both Lvang and Hokwang. The five provinces and nine counties of the country are under your management. From ancient times to the present, there has been no dignified vassal like you.

古文：夫爵高者忧深，禄厚者责重，足下据爵高之任，当责重之地，言出於口，即为赏罚，意之所存，便为祸福。
现代文：但爵位高，则忧虑深厚，俸禄丰厚就责任重大，您有着高官厚禄，身处责任重大的地位，一句话说出就是对他人的赏罚，您的意念所到之处，就关系天下的祸福。
English: But if your title is high, then your worries are deep. If your salary is rich, then your responsibilities are great. If you are a high-ranking official, you are in a position of great responsibility. If you say one word, it is a reward or punishment to others. Wherever your thoughts go, it is a matter of the world's misfortune and blessing.

古文：行之得道，即社稷用宁；行之失道，即四方散乱。
现代文：您行事符合道义，那天下会安宁，如果失去道义，那天下就会散乱。
English: If you act morally, the world will be peaceful. If you act immorally, the world will be chaotic.

古文：国家安危，在於足下；百姓之命，县於执事。
现代文：国家的安危就在于您的意念中，百姓的性命就在于您的行事中。
English: The safety of the country lies in your thoughts, and the lives of the people lie in your actions.

古文：自华及夷，颙颙注望。
现代文：从中原到蛮夷之地，大家都在仰望着您。
English: Everyone is looking up to you, from the Central Plains to the Wild West.

古文：足下任此，岂可不远览载籍废兴之由，荣辱之机，弃忘旧恶，宽和群司，审量五材，为官择人？
现代文：您处于如此显赫的地位，怎么能不深读古籍所记载的国家兴衰的缘由，百姓荣辱的原因，以便能忘记旧日的恩仇，对朝中百官宽厚仁和，考察人才，为官职选拔能人呢？
English: You are in such a prominent position, how can you not read deeply the reasons for the rise and fall of the country recorded in ancient books, the reasons for the people's honor and disgrace, so that you can forget the old days of favor and enmity, be generous and benevolent to the hundreds of officials in the DPRK and China, investigate talents, and select capable people for official positions?

古文：苟得其人，虽雠必举；苟非其人，虽亲不授。
现代文：如果能得到贤人，即使是自己的仇人，也应该举荐；如果不适合，虽然是自己的亲信也不授予官职。
English: If you can get a wise man, even if he is your enemy, you should recommend him; if he is not suitable, you should not give him an official post, even if he is your close friend.

古文：以宁社稷，以济下民，事立功成，则系音於管弦，勒勋於金石，愿君勉之！为国自重，为民自爱。 
现代文：这样才能安定天下，恩泽百姓，事业成功，人们将您的功绩谱成乐章，刻在钟鼎之上，希望您好好勉励，为国家尊重自身，为百姓爱护自己。 
English: Only in this way can the world be stable, the people be benefited, and the cause be successful. People will compose your achievements into music and engrave them on the bell tower. I hope you will encourage yourself, respect yourself for the country, and love yourself for the people.

古文：翔恨靖之不自纳，搜索靖所寄书疏，尽投之于水。
现代文：刘翔怨恨许靖不接受自己的任命，就将许靖寄给曹操的书信搜查出来，全部都扔到水中。
English: Liu Xiang resented Xu Jing for not accepting his appointment, so he searched out the letters Xu Jing sent to Cao Cao and threw them all into the water.

古文：后刘璋遂使使招靖，靖来入蜀。
现代文：后来刘璋就派使者招揽许靖，许靖就来到蜀地。
English: Later, Liu Bei sent an envoy to recruit Xu Jing, and Xu Jing came to Shu.

古文：璋以靖为巴郡、广汉太守。南阳宋仲子於荆州与蜀郡太守王商书曰： 文休倜傥瑰玮，有当世之具，足下当以为指南。 
现代文：刘璋任命许靖为巴郡、广汉太守，南阳人宋仲子在荆州跟给蜀郡太守王商写信说： 许文休风流倜傥，身材魁梧，有当世之才，您应该以他为榜样。 
English: Liu Bei appointed Xu Jing as the governor of Ba County and Guanghan, and Song Zhongzi, a native of Nanyang, wrote to Wang Shang, the governor of Shu County, in Jingzhou, saying: Xu Wenshu is elegant, handsome, and talented. You should follow his example.

古文：建安十六年，转在蜀郡。
现代文：建安十六年，许靖调任到蜀郡。
English: In the 16th year of Jianan, Xu Jing was transferred to Shu County.

古文：十九年，先主克蜀，以靖为左将军长史。
现代文：建安十九年，刘备攻克蜀地，任命许靖为左将军长史。
English: In the 19th year of Jian'an, Liu Bei conquered Shu and appointed Xu Jing as the left general and chief historian.

古文：先主为汉中王，靖为太傅。
现代文：刘备自封汉中王时，许靖为太傅。
English: When Liu Bei proclaimed himself the King of Han, Xu Jing became the Taifu.

古文：及即尊号，策靖曰： 朕获奉洪业，君临万国，夙宵惶惶，惧不能绥。百姓不亲，五品不逊，汝作司徒，其敬敷五教，在宽。
现代文：等到刘备登基，就册封许靖说： 朕得以承继大统，君临四方，但日夜忧心忡忡，担心国家不能平定，百姓不能亲附，五德不彰，你作为司徒应该谨慎地施行教化，使其发扬光大。
English: When Liu Bei ascended to the throne, he wrote to Xu Jing: I was able to succeed to the throne and reign in all directions, but I was worried day and night, worried that the country could not be pacified, the people could not be attached, and the five virtues could not be promoted. As a scholar, you should carefully carry out enlightenment and make it flourish.

古文：君其勖哉！
现代文：你要好好勉励啊！
English: You have to work hard!

古文：秉德无怠，称朕意焉。 
现代文：不断的施加恩德，才符合我的心意。 
English: Constantly exerting benevolence is in line with my heart.

古文：靖虽年逾七十，爱乐人物，诱纳后进，清谈不倦。
现代文：许靖虽然年过七十，但喜爱人才，举荐后生，清谈不倦。
English: Although he is over seventy years old, Xu Jing likes talented people, recommends young talent, and never tires of clear talk.

古文：丞相诸葛亮皆为之拜。
现代文：丞相诸葛亮等人的授官仪式都是由他主持。
English: He presided over the investiture ceremonies of chancellor Zhuge Liang and others.

古文：章武二年卒。子钦，先靖夭没。钦子游，景耀中为尚书。
现代文：许靖在章武二年去世，他的儿子许钦在他之前已经去世，许钦的儿子许游在景耀年间担任尚书。
English: Xu Jing died in the second year of Zhangwu, his son Xu Qin had died before him, and Xu Qin's son Xu You served as Shangshu during the reign of King Jingwu.

古文：始靖兄事颍川陈纪，与陈郡袁涣、平原华歆、东海王朗等亲善，歆、朗及纪子群，魏初为公辅大臣，咸与靖书，申陈旧好，情义款至，文多故不载。
现代文：起初许靖以兄长之礼侍奉颍川人陈纪，跟陈郡人袁涣、平原郡的华歆，东海郡的王朗等人关系友好，华歆、王朗以及陈纪的儿子陈群在魏朝初年曾担任公辅大臣，他们都跟许靖有书信来往，叙述往日情谊，情谊真挚恳切，因为文字太多，所以没有记载。
English: At first, Xu Jing served Chen Ji, a native of Beichuan, with the courtesy of an elder brother, and had friendly relations with Yuan Qi, a native of Chen County, Hua Yao, a native of Pingyuan County, and Wang Lang, a native of Donghai County. Hua Yao, Wang Lang, and Chen Qi's son Chen Qun had served as assistant ministers in the first year of the Wei Dynasty. They all had written letters to and from Xu Jing, describing their past friendship. The friendship was sincere, but because there were too many words, it was not recorded.

古文：麋竺字子仲，东海朐人也。
现代文：糜竺，字义仲，东海郡朐县人。
English: Yizhong, also known as Yizhong, was from Yizhong County, Donghai County.

古文：祖世货殖，僮客万人，赀产钜亿。
现代文：他的祖辈世代经商，家中僮仆上万，资产极为丰厚。
English: His ancestors have been in business for generations, the family has tens of thousands of servants, and the assets are extremely rich.

古文：后徐州牧陶谦辟为别驾从事。谦卒，竺奉谦遗命，迎先主於小沛。
现代文：后来徐州牧陶谦征召他为别驾从事，陶谦去世后，糜竺就遵守陶谦遗命，到小沛迎接刘备。
English: Later, Xuzhou Mu Tao Qian conscripted him to engage in driving. After Tao Qian's death, Zou complied with Tao Qian's last wish and went to Xiaopei to meet Liu Bei.

古文：建安元年，吕布乘先主之出拒袁术，袭下邳，虏先主妻子。
现代文：建安元年，吕布趁着刘备出兵抗击袁术之时，攻击下邳，俘虏了刘备的妻子儿女。
English: In the first year of Jian'an, Lv Bu took advantage of Liu Bei's dispatch of troops to fight against Yuan Shu, attacked the Lower Yangtze River, and captured Liu Bei's wife and children.

古文：先主转军广陵海西，竺於是进妹於先主为夫人，奴客二千，金银货币以助军资；于时困匮，赖此复振。
现代文：刘备率军转到广陵郡的海西县，糜竺就将自己的妹妹进献给刘备做夫人，同时献上奴仆两千人，以及许多金银货币以作为军资。刘备当时情况困窘，都是依赖这些财富得以重新振作。
English: When Liu Bei's army was transferred to Haixi County, Guangling County, Zou presented his sister to Liu Bei as his wife, as well as two thousand slaves, and a lot of gold and silver coins as military funds. Liu Bei was in a difficult situation at the time, and he relied on these riches to rejuvenate himself.

古文：后曹公表竺领嬴郡太守，竺弟芳为彭城相，皆去官，随先主周旋。
现代文：后来曹操上表举荐糜竺兼任嬴郡太守，糜竺的弟弟糜芳担任彭城国相，两人都辞去官职，跟随刘备辗转各地。
English: Later, Cao Cao made a recommendation on the table that Yu Yu also served as the governor of Yu County, and Yu Yu's brother Yu Fang served as the minister of state of Pengcheng. Both of them resigned from their official positions and followed Liu Bei around the country.

古文：先主将適荆州，遣竺先与刘表相闻，以竺为左将军从事中郎。
现代文：刘备将要到荆州，派糜竺先去与刘表联络，任命糜竺为左将军从事中郎。
English: Liu Bei was about to go to Jingzhou. He sent Yu to contact Liu Bei first, and appointed Yu as the left general to be the middle man.

古文：益州既平，拜为安汉将军，班在军师将军之右。
现代文：益州平定之后，刘备任命糜竺为安汉将军，地位在军师将军之上。
English: After the subjugation of Yizhou, Liu Bei appointed Zou as the general of Anhan, a position higher than the general of division.

古文：竺雍容敦雅，而幹翮非所长。
现代文：糜竺雍容华贵温柔优雅，但谋略才干不是他的所长。
English: His bearing is graceful, gentle and elegant, but he is not good at strategizing.

古文：是以待之以上宾之礼，未尝有所统御。然赏赐优宠，无与为比。
现代文：所以刘备以上宾之礼对待他，但不让他统率军队，然而赏赐丰厚，非常宠信，没有人能与之相比。
English: Therefore, Liu Bei treated him as a guest, but did not allow him to lead the army. However, he was richly rewarded and very favored, and no one could compare to him.

古文：芳为南郡太守，与关羽共事，而私好携贰，叛迎孙权，羽因覆败。
现代文：糜芳担任南郡太守时，与关羽共事，但私下感情不和，糜芳就背叛刘备转而迎接孙权，关羽因此兵败身亡。
English: When Yu Fang served as the governor of Nan County, he worked with Guan Yu, but they did not get along in private. Yu Fang betrayed Liu Bei to meet Sun Quan, and Guan Yu was defeated and killed.

古文：竺面缚请罪，先主慰谕以兄弟罪不相及，崇待如初。
现代文：糜竺就将自己反绑双手前来向刘备请罪，刘备劝慰他说兄弟的罪名罪责，不与他相关，仍然像过去一样对待他。
English: He tied his hands behind his back and came to Liu Bei to plead guilty. Liu Bei consoled him by saying that his brother's guilt was not related to him and still treated him as before.

古文：竺惭恚发病，岁馀卒。
现代文：但糜竺因为惭愧愤恨而生病，一年多后就去世了。
English: But because of her shame and resentment, Yan fell ill and died more than a year later.

古文：子威，官至虎贲中郎将。
现代文：他的儿子糜威做官到虎贲中郎将。
English: His son, Haowei, rose to the rank of vice-commander of the Tiger Regiment.

古文：威子照，虎骑监。
现代文：糜威的儿子糜照，担任虎骑监。
English: Hao Wei's son, Hao Zhao, served as the tiger riding inspector.

古文：自竺至照，皆便弓马，善射御云。
现代文：他们家从糜竺到糜照，都熟悉弓马，善于骑射。
English: Their families, from Handan to Handan, are all familiar with bows and arrows, and are good at riding and shooting.

古文：孙乾字公祐，北海人也。
现代文：孙乾字公祐，北海郡人。
English: Sun Qian Zi Gong Yu, from Beihai County.

古文：先主领徐州，辟为从事，后随从周旋。
现代文：刘备兼任徐州牧时，征召孙乾为从事，后来他一直跟随刘备辗转各地。
English: When Liu Bei concurrently held the position of Xuzhou herdsman, he enlisted Sun Qian to work for him. Later, he followed Liu Bei around the country.

古文：先主之背曹公，遣乾自结袁绍，将適荆州，乾又与麋竺俱使刘表，皆如意指。
现代文：刘备叛离曹操，派孙乾和袁绍联络，准备前往荆州，孙乾又跟糜竺一起出使见刘表，他每次都能按照刘备的想法行事。
English: Liu Bei defected from Cao Cao, sent Sun Qian to contact Yuan Shao and prepare to go to Jingzhou. Sun Qian also sent an envoy to see Liu Bei together with Yao. He could act according to Liu Bei's idea every time.

古文：后表与袁尚书，说其兄弟分争之变，曰： 每与刘左将军、孙公祐共论此事，未尝不痛心入骨，相为悲伤也。 
现代文：后来刘表给袁尚写信，说他们兄弟之间的纷争变化，说： 每次跟刘左将军、孙公祐一起谈论这件事，没有不痛彻心扉，互相感到悲伤。 
English: Later, Liu Biao wrote to Yuan Shang about the changes in the dispute between their brothers, saying: Every time I talk about this matter with General Liu Zuo and Sun Gongyu, there is no pain in my heart, and we feel sad for each other.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：孙乾被刘表器重到这种程度。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：先主定益州，乾自从事中郎为秉忠将军，见礼次麋竺，与简雍同等。
现代文：刘备平定益州后，孙乾从从事中郎升任为秉忠将军，受到的礼遇仅次于糜竺，跟简雍相等。
English: After Liu Bei's subjugation of Yizhou, Sun Qian was promoted from a middle-ranking official to a high-ranking official, receiving the same courtesy as Jian Yong.

古文：顷之，卒。
现代文：不久，孙权就去世了。
English: There are biographies of Dangun and Dangodozhi.

古文：简雍字宪和，涿郡人也。
现代文：简雍字宪和，涿郡人。
English: Jian Yong Zi Xian He, a resident of Jixian County.

古文：少与先主有旧，随从周旋。
现代文：年少时就跟刘备有交情，跟随刘备辗转各地。
English: When he was young, he befriended Liu Bei and followed Liu Bei around the country.

古文：先主至荆州，雍与麋竺、孙乾同为从事中郎，常为谈客，往来使命。
现代文：刘备到了荆州，简雍跟糜竺、孙乾一同担任从事中郎，经常作为说客，出使各地。
English: Liu Bei arrived in Jingzhou, and Jian Yong, together with Zhai and Sun Qian, served as a middle man, often as a lobbyist, sent to various places.

古文：先主入益州，刘璋见雍，甚爱之。
现代文：刘备进入益州，刘璋见到简雍，非常喜爱。
English: Liu Bei entered Yizhou, Liu Bei saw Jian Yong, and was very fond of him.

古文：后先主围成都，遣雍往说璋，璋遂与雍同舆而载，出城归命。
现代文：后来刘备围攻成都，派简雍前往游说刘璋，刘璋就跟简雍同车而坐，出城归降。
English: Later, Liu Bei besieged Chengdu and sent Jian Yong to lobby Liu Bei. Liu Bei rode in a car with Jian Yong and left the city to surrender.

古文：先主拜雍为昭德将军。
现代文：刘备任命简雍为昭德将军。
English: Liu Bei appointed Jian Yong as General Zhao De.

古文：优游风议，性简傲跌宕，在先主坐席，犹箕踞倾倚，威仪不肃，自纵適；诸葛亮已下则独擅一榻，项枕卧语，无所为屈。
现代文：简雍悠闲自在，高谈阔论，性情倨傲，行为不检，即使刘备在座，他依然伸脚侧身，没有威仪，任意妄为。他跟诸葛亮之下的人在一起时，就一个人占据一张坐榻，手枕着脖子躺着和人说话，不因为任何人而屈服。
English: Janyong is laid-back and comfortable, talks a lot, has a proud temperament, and behaves inappropriately. Even if Liu Bei is present, he still stretches his feet sideways, has no dignity, and behaves arbitrarily. When he is with people under Zhuge Liang, he occupies a couch by himself, lies with his hand on his neck and talks to people, and does not give in because of anyone.

古文：时天旱禁酒，酿者有刑。
现代文：当时天旱粮食歉收，所以禁止饮酒，酿酒的人会遭受刑罚。
English: At that time, the grain harvest was poor due to drought, so alcohol was prohibited, and those who brewed alcohol would be punished.

古文：吏於人家索得酿具，论者欲令与作酒者同罚。
现代文：吏役从一户人家中搜出了酿酒的器具，商议的人想要让他和酿酒的人受同样惩罚。
English: The bailiff had found brewing equipment in a man's house, and the negotiators wanted him to face the same punishment as the brewer.

古文：雍与先主游观，见一男女行道，谓先主曰： 彼人欲行淫，何以不缚？ 
现代文：简雍跟刘备一同游玩，看到一男女走在路上，他就对刘备说： 这两个人想要行淫乱之事，为什么不将他们绑起来？ 
English: Jian Yong and Liu Bei were playing together. When he saw a man and a woman walking on the road, he said to Liu Bei, "These two people want to commit adultery. Why not tie them up?"

古文：先主曰： 卿何以知之？ 
现代文：刘备说： 你怎么知道呢？ 
English: Liu Bei said: How do you know?

古文：雍对曰： 彼有其具，与欲酿者同 先主大笑，而原欲酿者。
现代文：简雍回答说： 他们有淫乱的工具，跟想要酿酒的人一样。 刘备大笑，就宽恕了想要酿酒的人。
English: Jian Yong replied: They have the tools of fornication, just like those who want to brew wine. Liu Bei laughed loudly and forgave those who wanted to brew wine.

古文：雍之滑稽，皆此类也。伊籍字机伯，山阳人。
现代文：简雍的风趣幽默，大概都是像这样的事。尹籍，字机伯，山阳郡人。
English: Jian Yong's humour is probably all about things like this. Yin Zi, Zhi Ji Bo, Shanyang County.

古文：少依邑人镇南将军刘表。先主之在荆州，籍常往来自讬。
现代文：年少时依附同乡镇的镇南将军刘表，刘备在荆州时，尹籍经常前来想要依附刘备。
English: When he was young, he followed Liu Bei, the general of Zhenan Township. When Liu Bei was in Jingzhou, Yin Zi often came to try to follow Liu Bei.

古文：表卒，遂随先主南渡江，从入益州。
现代文：刘表去世后，他就随刘备往南渡过长江，进入益州。
English: After Liu Biao's death, he followed Liu Bei to the south to cross the Yangtze River and enter Yizhou.

古文：益州既定，以籍为左将军从事中郎，见待亚於简雍、孙乾等。
现代文：益州平定后，刘备任命尹籍为左将军从事中郎，对待他仅次于简雍孙乾等人。
English: After the pacification of Yizhou, Liu Bei appointed Yin Qi as the left general to engage in the middle, treating him second only to Jian Yong Sun Qian and others.

古文：遣东使於吴，孙权闻其才辩，欲逆折以辞。
现代文：刘备派他出使东吴，孙权得知他的才干，想要用言辞侮辱他。
English: Liu Bei sent him to Dongwu, and Sun Quan learned of his talent and wanted to insult him verbally.

古文：籍適入拜，权曰： 劳事无道之君乎？ 
现代文：尹籍刚上殿拜见，孙权就说： 侍奉没有道义的主上很辛劳吧？ 
English: As soon as Yin Qi went up to the hall to pay his respects, Sun Quan said: "Is it hard to serve a master who has no morals?

古文：籍既对曰： 一拜一起，未足为劳 籍之机捷，类皆如此，权甚异之。
现代文：尹籍就回答说： 不过是一拜一起，称不上辛劳。 尹籍的随机应变，大多像这种情况，孙权也对他感到惊奇。
English: Yin Zi replied: "It's just a day's work, it can't be called hard work. Yin Zi's random contingency is mostly like this, Sun Quan was also surprised by him.

古文：后迁昭文将军，与诸葛亮、法正、刘巴、李严共造蜀科；蜀科之制，由此五人焉。
现代文：后来尹籍升任为昭文将军，与诸葛亮、法正、刘巴、李严等人一起制定《蜀科》；《蜀科》中的条例律令，都是出自这五人之手。
English: Later, Yin Quan was promoted to General Zhaowen, and worked with Zhuge Liang, Fa Zheng, Liu Ba, Li Yan and others to formulate "Shu Ke"; the regulations and decrees in "Shu Ke" were all from the hands of these five people.

古文：秦宓字子敕，广汉绵竹人也。
现代文：秦宓，字子敕，广汉郡绵竹人。
English: Qin Zang, Zi Zang, Guanghan County Mianzhu people.

古文：少有才学，州郡辟命，辄称疾不往。
现代文：他年少时就很有才学，州郡里征召任命他，他都称病没有前往。
English: He was very talented when he was young. When he was called up by the state and county to be appointed, he said he was ill and did not go.

古文：奏记州牧刘焉，荐儒士任定祖曰： 昔百里、蹇叔以耆艾而定策，甘罗、子奇以童冠而立功，故书美黄发，而易称颜渊，固知选士用能，不拘长幼，明矣。
现代文：秦宓上书给益州牧刘焉，举荐士人任订祖说： 过去百里奚、蹇叔在年迈之时依然为秦国制定国策，甘罗、子奇在年少时期就建立功勋，所以《尚书》称赞年高之人，《易经》称赞颜渊，就能知道选拔人才，录用贤人，不拘于年龄，这是很明确的。
English: Qin Hui wrote a letter to Liu Yan, the patriarch of Yizhou, recommending him as a scholar, saying: "In the past, Bai Lijun and Jian Shu still formulated national policies for Qin when they were old, and Gan Luo and Zi Qi built merits when they were young. Therefore, "Shang Shu" praised the elderly, and "Yi Jing" praised Yan Yuan, so they could know how to select talents and recruit sages, regardless of age. This is very clear.

古文：乃者以来，海内察举，率多英隽而遗旧齿，众论不齐，异同相半，此乃承平之翔步，非乱世之急务也。
现代文：很久以来，国家选拔人才，大多注重年轻英勇之士而遗漏德高望重之人，大家对此的评价不一，肯定否定各有一半，这是太平时期的缓步而行，而不是战乱时代的紧急事务。
English: For a long time, the country has been selecting talents, mostly focusing on young heroes and omitting those who are highly respected. Everyone's evaluation of this is mixed, and half of them definitely deny it. This is a slow pace in peacetime, not an urgent matter in times of war.

古文：夫欲救危抚乱，脩己以安人，则宜卓荦超伦，与时殊趣，震惊邻国，骇动四方，上当天心，下合人意；天人既和，内省不疚，虽遭凶乱，何忧何惧！
现代文：想要扶危济困，平定祸乱，修养自身，以评定他人，就应当超凡绝伦，与流俗不同，震惊邻国，惊动四方，上承天意，下顺民心，天人和顺，自己问心无愧，那即使遭遇祸乱，又有什么担忧呢？
English: If you want to help the poor and needy, calm down the calamity, cultivate yourself, and evaluate others, you should be extraordinary, different from the mainstream, shock the neighbors, alarm the four directions, inherit the will of heaven, follow the people's heart, follow the heavenly people, and have a clear conscience. So even if you encounter calamity, what is there to worry about?

古文：昔楚叶公好龙，神龙下之，好伪彻天，何况於真？
现代文：过去楚国叶公好龙，神龙从天而下，叶公的喜好是假，尚且能感动天地，更何况是真情呢？
English: In the past, the god of Chu, Ye Gong, favored dragons, and divine dragons descended from the sky. Ye Gong's preferences were false, yet they could move heaven and earth, not to mention his true feelings.

古文：今处士任安，仁义直道，流名四远，如令见察，则一州斯服。
现代文：现在处士任安讲求道义，行为正直，声名远播，如果对他进行考察举荐，那全州的人都会服从。
English: Now, Officer Ren'an is preaching morality, behaving honestly, and his reputation is spreading far and wide. If he is investigated and recommended, then everyone in the state will obey.

古文：昔汤举伊尹，不仁者远，何武贡二龚，双名竹帛，故贪寻常之高而忽万仞之嵩，乐面前之饰而忘天下之誉，斯诚往古之所重慎也。
现代文：过去商汤选拔伊尹，不仁德的人就远离，何武举荐二龚，双双名垂青史，所以贪恋寻常的高度而忽视了万仞高的山岳，满足于眼前的装饰而忘记天下的声名，这是古往今来都要慎重的。
English: In the past, merchants selected Yi Yin, and those who were not benevolent would stay away, and those who were not benevolent would stay away, and those who were not benevolent would stay away, and those who were not benevolent would stay away, and those who were benevolent would stay away, and those who were benevolent would stay away, and those who were benevolent would stay away, and those who were benevolent would stay away, and those who were benevolent would stay away, and those who were benevolent would stay away.

古文：甫欲凿石索玉，剖蚌求珠，今乃随、和炳然，有如皎日，复何疑哉！
现代文：如果想要凿石取玉，剖蚌求珠，如今隋侯珠和和氏璧依然光彩照人，有如明亮的太阳，还有什么怀疑的呢？
English: If you want to chisel a stone to get a bead, cut a beak to find a bead, nowadays, the Sui, Hou, Zhu and He dynasties are still shining brightly, like a bright sun, what doubt is there?

古文：诚知昼不操烛，日有馀光，但愚情区区，贪陈所见 
现代文：我确实知道白天不需秉烛，因为太阳有光明，但还是将自己的愚见冒昧的表达出来。
English: I do know that I don't need to carry a candle during the day, because the sun is bright, but I still express my foolishness.

古文：刘璋时，宓同郡王商为治中从事，与宓书曰： 贫贱困苦，亦何时可以终身！
现代文：刘璋担任益州牧时，秦宓的同郡人王商担任治州从事，给秦宓写信说： 贫贱困苦，什么时候才能过完这样的人生！
English: When Liu Ye served as the pastor of Yizhou, Wang Shang, a fellow county resident of Qin Ye, served as the governor of Yizhou. He wrote to Qin Ye, saying, "Poor and destitute, when will I be able to end such a life!

古文：卞和衒玉以耀世，宜一来，与州尊相见。 
现代文：卞和怀着美玉向世人炫耀，你应该过来跟州牧相见。 
English: If you want to show off your beauty to the world, you should come and meet Shoumu.

古文：宓答书曰： 昔尧优许由，非不弘也，洗其两耳；楚聘庄周，非不广也，执竿不顾。
现代文：秦宓回复说： 过去尧帝厚待许由，不是不够恩遇，但许由却在颖水边清洗耳朵，楚王聘请庄周，礼数不是不够周到，但庄周却垂钓不顾。
English: Qin Hui replied: In the past, Emperor Qian was generous to Xu Rong, which was not enough of a favor, but Xu Rong cleaned his ears at the edge of the Ying River. King Chu hired Zhuo Zhou. The number of courtesies was not thoughtful enough, but Zhuo Zhou ignored fishing.

古文：易曰 确乎其不可拔 ，夫何衒之有？
现代文：《易经》说 这意志确实不可转移 ，有什么值得炫耀的呢？
English: The I Ching says that this will is truly inalienable, so what is there to show off?

古文：且以国君之贤，子为良辅，不以是时建萧、张之策，未足为智也。
现代文：况且以国君的贤明，您作为贤良的辅佐，不在这时提出像萧何、张良这样的计策，也算不上明智。
English: Moreover, with the wisdom of the sovereign and you as a wise assistant, it would not be wise not to put forward such strategies as Xiao He and Zhang Liang at this time.

古文：仆得曝背乎陇亩之中，诵颜氏之箪瓢，咏原宪之蓬户，时翱翔於林泽，与沮、溺之等俦，听玄猿之悲吟，察鹤鸣於九皋，安身为乐，无忧为福，处空虚之名，居不灵之龟，知我者希，则我贵矣。
现代文：我可以在田地中顶着烈日工作，诵读颜渊的箪食壶浆，歌咏原宪的简陋门户，时常在山林间漫步，跟长沮、桀溺等人一样，在山林间听到猿猴哀鸣，在深泽听到仙鹤的鸣啼，以安身立命，无忧无虑，抛弃虚名，绝意龟兆，知道我的人很少，这就是我看重的地方。
English: I can work in the fields under the scorching sun, recite the gnawing pottery of Yan Yuan, sing the humble portals of the original constitution, often walk among the mountains and forests, and, like the long-depressed and drowning people, hear the monkey's wailing in the mountains and forests, and the cranes' chirping in the deep water. I can live in peace, without worries, abandon my false name, and never give up hope. Few people know me. This is what I value.

古文：斯乃仆得志之秋也，何困苦之戚焉！ 
现代文：现在是我得意的时候，怎么会有贫贱困苦的哀戚呢？
English: Now, when I'm at my best, how can there be any pity for the poor and needy?

古文：后商为严君平、李弘立祠，宓与书曰： 疾病伏匿，甫知足下为严、李立祠，可谓厚党勤类者也。
现代文：后来王商为严君平、李弘建立祠庙，秦宓给他写信说： 我因病隐居在外，得知您为严、李二君建立祠庙，真可以说是对同类人的厚待呀。
English: Later, Wang Shang built an ancestral temple for Yan Junping and Li Hongzhu. Qin Yu wrote to him, "I have been living in seclusion due to illness. I learned that you built an ancestral temple for Yan and Li Erjun. It can truly be said to be a kind treatment for people of the same kind."

古文：观严文章，冠冒天下，由、夷逸操，山岳不移，使扬子不叹，固自昭明。
现代文：看严君平的文章，冠绝天下，许由、伯夷的超凡节操，像高山一样不可动摇，即使扬雄没有赞叹，也能名扬四海。
English: Looking at Yan Junping's article, the world's best, Xu Yu and Bo Yi's extraordinary discipline, like a mountain, is unshakable. Even if Yang Xiong does not admire, he can be famous all over the world.

古文：如李仲元不遭法言，令名必沦，其无虎豹之文故也，可谓攀龙附凤者矣。
现代文：如果李仲元没有遇上法言，他的名声一定会沉沦，这是因为他的文章没有华丽的文采，可以说她是一个攀龙附凤靠他人而得名的人。
English: If Li Zhongyuan hadn't encountered Dogen, his reputation would surely sink. This is because his article doesn't have gorgeous writing. It can be said that she is a person who climbs the dragon and phoenix and gets her name from others.

古文：如扬子云潜心著述，有补於世，泥蟠不滓，行参圣师，于今海内，谈咏厥辞。
现代文：而扬子云潜心著书立说，对世间有益，出淤泥而不染，行动以圣人为师，现在天下之人都在诵读他的文章。
English: Yang Ziyun, on the other hand, devoted himself to writing and said that it was beneficial to the world, that it was possible to get out of the mud without getting stained, and that his actions were inspired by a saint. Now, people all over the world are reading his articles.

古文：邦有斯人，以耀四远，怪子替兹，不立祠堂。
现代文：国家有这样的人能照耀四方，但奇怪您没有为他建立祠堂。
English: The country has such a person who can shine in all directions, but it is strange that you have not built a shrine for him.

古文：蜀本无学士，文翁遣相如东受七经，还教吏民，於是蜀学比於齐、鲁。
现代文：蜀地本来就缺少文人学士，文翁派司马相如前往东方学习七经，返回蜀地教授官吏百姓，于是蜀地的学问才能跟齐鲁之地相比。
English: Shu originally lacked literati bachelors. The literati sent Sima Xiangru to the East to study the Seven Classics, and he returned to Shu to teach officials and common people. As a result, the learning ability of Shu is comparable to that of Qilu.

古文：故地里志曰： 文翁倡其教，相如为之师。 
现代文：所以《地里志》说： 文翁倡导教化，司马相如作为师者。 
English: Therefore, the "Di Li Zhi" said: Wen Weng advocated enlightenment, and Sima Xiangru was his teacher.

古文：汉家得士，盛於其世；仲舒之徒，不达封禅，相如制其礼。
现代文：汉家得到贤人，所以非常强盛，董仲舒之类，不明白封禅礼仪，司马相如就制定了这一礼节。
English: The Han family gained sages, so they were very powerful. Dong Zhongshu and others did not understand the seal ceremony, and Sima Xiangru established this etiquette.

古文：夫能制礼造乐，移风易俗，非礼所秩有益於世者乎！
现代文：能制礼作乐，移风易俗，难道不适用礼节来规范行为而对世人有益吗？
English: Is it not beneficial to the world to apply etiquette to regulate behavior and to be able to make etiquette and music and to change customs?

古文：虽有王孙之累，犹孔子大齐桓之霸，公羊贤叔术之让。
现代文：虽然他有卓王孙的事拖累，但就像孔子推崇齐桓公的霸业，公羊高称赞叔术的谦让。
English: Although he was dragged down by the matter of Zhuo Wangsun, just as Confucius admired the domineering career of Qi Huan Gong, the ram highly praised the gentleness of Uncle Xiu.

古文：仆亦善长卿之化，宜立祠堂，速定其铭 
现代文：我也认为司马相如的教化很好，应该为他建立祠堂，并迅速写好铭文。
English: I also think that Sima Xiangru's enlightenment is very good. An ancestral hall should be built for him, and the inscription should be written quickly.

古文：先是，李权从宓借战国策，宓曰： 战国从横，用之何为？ 
现代文：在这之前，李算向秦宓借战国策，秦宓说： 战国的纵横之策，读它有什么用呢？ 
English: Prior to this, Li Shan borrowed the national war policy from Qin Hui. Qin Hui said: What is the use of reading the national war policy?

古文：权曰： 仲尼、严平，会聚众书，以成春秋、指归之文，故海以合流为大，君子以博识为弘。 
现代文：李权说： 孔子、严君平，汇集各书才集成《春秋》、《老子指归》，所以大海因会和江流得以阔大，君子以博学多闻而得以宏大。 
English: Li Quan said: Confucius and Yan Junping collected all the books to compile "Spring and Autumn" and "The Return of Lao Zi," so the sea was able to expand due to the meeting and the flow of the river, and the gentleman was able to expand due to his erudition and knowledge.

古文：宓报曰： 书非史记周图，仲尼不采；道非虚无自然，严平不演。
现代文：秦宓回复说： 书籍除了正史和周朝文献外，孔子都没有采纳，道法除了虚无自然外，严君平都没有推演。
English: Qin Yu replied, "Confucius did not adopt any books except for the official history and the Zhou dynasty literature, and Yan Junping did not deduce any Daoist teachings except for nothingness and nature.

古文：海以受淤，岁一荡清；君子博识，非礼不视。
现代文：大海因为接受江河而蓄积泥沙，每年都要涤清；君子博学多闻，但不符合礼仪的都不。
English: The sea accumulates mud and sand because it receives the rivers, and it must be cleaned every year; gentlemen are well-read, but not those who do not meet the etiquette.

古文：今战国反覆仪、秦之术，杀人自生，亡人自存，经之所疾。
现代文：现在《战国策》反复记载，张仪、苏秦的谋略权术，杀人以自生，亡人以自成，这是经典古籍所痛恨的。
English: Now, "Strategy of Warring States" repeatedly records that Zhang Yi and Su Qin's strategy of power, killing people with self-birth, and dead people with self-made, is hated by classic ancient books.

古文：故孔子发愤作春秋，大乎居正，复制孝经，广陈德行。
现代文：所以孔子发愤作《春秋》，讲述圣贤正道，又著作《孝经》，广泛的宣扬德行。
English: Therefore, Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" in anger, telling about the righteous path of the sages, and also wrote "The Book of Filial Piety" to widely promote virtue.

古文：杜渐防萌，预有所抑，是以老氏绝祸於未萌，岂不信邪！
现代文：杜绝防范恶意的萌芽，所以老子主张要在祸患没有萌发之前就遏制，难道不对吗？
English: Eliminate the prevention of the germination of maliciousness, so Lao Zi advocated that the scourge should be contained before it germinated, isn't that right?

古文：成汤大圣，睹野鱼而有猎逐之失，定公贤者，见女乐而弃朝事，若此辈类，焉可胜陈。
现代文：商汤是大圣人，看到郊野之鱼就想到沉迷打猎的过失，鲁定公是贤人，看到女乐歌舞就荒废政事，像这样的事，怎么能数得清呢？
English: Shangtang was a great sage. When he saw the fish in the countryside, he thought of indulging in hunting. Luding was a wise man. When he saw women's music and dance, he abandoned politics. How can you count such things?

古文：道家法曰： 不见所欲，使心不乱。 
现代文：道家道法说： 不看到自己想要的东西，才能使心中不乱。 
English: Taoism says: Not seeing what you want is the only way to keep your mind calm.

古文：是故天地贞观，日月贞明；其直如矢，君子所履。
现代文：所以，天地纯正守一，日月正直光明；他们的正直如同箭矢，这是君子所效法的。
English: Therefore, heaven and earth are one and the same, the sun and the moon are honest and bright; their honesty is like an arrow, which is imitated by a gentleman.

古文：洪范记灾，发於言貌，何战国之谲权乎哉！ 
现代文：《洪范》中记载灾祸，往往从人的言行风貌出发，和战国的阴谋权术有什么相关呢？ 
English: The disasters recorded in "Hong Fan" are often based on people's words and deeds. How are they related to the conspiracy and power tactics of the Warring States period?

古文：或谓宓曰： 足下欲自比於巢、许、四皓，何故扬文藻见瑰颖乎？ 
现代文：有人对秦宓说： 你想要自比为巢父、许由、商山四皓，为什么故意宣扬自己的华丽文采呢？ 
English: Someone said to Qin Zhe: You want to compare yourself to the nest father, Xu You, and Shangshan Si Yao, why do you deliberately promote your own gorgeous literature?

古文：宓答曰： 仆文不能尽言，言不能尽意，何文藻之有扬乎！
现代文：秦宓回答说： 我的文章不能完整表述意思，言不能尽意，有什么文采可以宣扬呢？
English: Qin Hui replied: My article can't fully express the meaning, the words can't do their best, what kind of literature can I promote?

古文：昔孔子三见哀公，言成七卷，事盖有不可嘿嘿也。
现代文：过去孔子三次拜见鲁哀公，做了《三朝记》七篇，这是因为有些事不能保持沉默。
English: In the past, Confucius visited Lu Aigong three times and wrote seven "Three Dynasties," because some things cannot be kept silent.

古文：接舆行且歌，论家以光篇；渔父咏沧浪，贤者以耀章。
现代文：接舆一边走一边歌咏，评论家认为这是光辉灿烂的诗篇，渔父歌咏沧浪之水，贤人们认为这是闪耀的辞章。
English: The critics think it is a brilliant poem, the fishermen think it is the water of vicissitudes, and the sages think it is a sparkling phrase.

古文：此二人者，非有欲於时者也。
现代文：这两人不是想要在当时有所欲求。
English: The two didn't want to be picky at the time.

古文：夫虎生而文炳，凤生而五色，岂以五采自饰画哉？天性自然也。
现代文：老虎生来带有文采，凤凰有五彩颜色，难道它们的色彩是自己画来装饰自己吗？只是天性自然罢了。
English: Tigers are born with elegance, and phoenixes are multi-colored. Are their colors painted by themselves to decorate themselves? It's just nature.

古文：盖河、洛由文兴，六经由文起，君子懿文德，采藻其何伤！
现代文：《河图》、《洛书》由于文采而显扬，六经因为文辞华美得以传承，君子将文辞德行看作美好，文采辞藻有什么妨害呢？
English: "Hetao" and "Luo Shu" are famous for their literary excellence. The Six Classics have been passed down because of the beauty of their words. A gentleman regards the virtue of words as beautiful. What hinders the beauty of words?

古文：以仆之愚，犹耻革子成之误，况贤於己者乎！ 
现代文：以我的愚见，尚且已革子成反对文采的过失为耻，更何况是比我贤能的人呢？ 
English: How much more should those who are wiser than I be ashamed of my stupidity, which has degenerated into a crime against literature?

古文：先主既定益州，广汉太守夏侯纂请宓为师友祭酒，领五官掾，称曰仲父。
现代文：刘备平定益州后，广汉太守夏侯纂请秦宓担任师友祭酒，兼任五官掾，称为仲父。
English: After Liu Bei had subdued Yizhou, the governor of Guanghan Province, Xia Houzan, asked Qin Zang to serve as the master and friend of the sacrificial wine, and also served as the five officials, known as the matchmaker.

古文：宓称疾，卧在第舍，纂将功曹古朴、主簿王普，厨膳即宓第宴谈，宓卧如故。
现代文：秦宓称病躺在家中，夏侯纂带领功曹古朴、主簿王普，带着酒宴到秦宓家中，秦宓依然躺在床上。
English: Qin Yu said that he was ill and lying at home. Xia Houzo led Gong Cao Guopu and Wang Pu, the chief secretary, to Qin Yu's home with a wine banquet. Qin Yu was still lying in bed.

古文：纂问朴曰： 至於贵州养生之具，实绝馀州矣，不知士人何如馀州也？ 
现代文：夏侯纂问古朴说： 说道益州的养生之道，实在是比其他州好很多，不知道文人才时跟其他州郡相比怎么样呢？ 
English: Xia Houzan asked Guo Pu, saying, "It is true to say that the health regimen of Daoyi County is much better than that of other counties, but how does it compare with that of other counties?

古文：朴对曰： 乃自先汉以来，其爵位者或不如馀州耳，至於著作为世师式，不负於馀州也。
现代文：古朴回答说： 自从西汉以来，益州的官职爵位或许比不上其他州郡，但在著书立说，做世人榜样的方面，不比其他州郡差。
English: Gupo replied: Since the Western Han Dynasty, Yizhou's official titles may not be as high as other counties, but it is no worse than other counties in terms of writing and setting an example for the world.

古文：严君平见黄、老作指归，扬雄见易作太玄，见论语作法言，司马相如为武帝制封禅之文，于今天下所共闻也。 
现代文：严君平读黄老之道，撰写《老子指归》，扬雄阅读《易经》而作《太玄》，读《论语》而作《法言》，司马相如为汉武帝制作封禅的文书，是当今天下有目共睹的。 
English: Yan Jun read Huang Lao Dao and wrote "Lao Zi Zhiguo," Yang Xiong read "I Ching" and wrote "Tai Xuan," read "Analects" and wrote "Dogma," and Sima Xianglu produced the seal of Zen for Emperor Han, which is obvious to all today.

古文：纂曰： 仲父何如？ 
现代文：夏侯纂说： 仲父如何呢？ 
English: Xia Houzan said, "What about the stepfather?

古文：宓以簿击颊，曰： 愿明府勿以仲父之言假於小草，民请为明府陈其本纪。
现代文：秦宓用笏版拍着自己的脸，说： 希望您不要认为我的话不够谦虚，希望能为您讲一讲本州的源流。
English: Qin Yu patted his face with a tablet and said, "I hope you don't think my words are not humble enough. I hope to tell you about the origin of Honshu."

古文：蜀有汶阜之山，江出其腹，帝以会昌，神以建福，故能沃野千里。
现代文：蜀地有汶阜山，长江的源头就从在这一山中，天地使他得到昌隆，神明使他有所福祉，所以能有千里沃土。
English: There is Mount Wenfu in Shunde. The source of the Yangtze River is in this mountain. Heaven and earth made it prosperous, and the gods made it prosperous, so it can have fertile soil.

古文：淮、济四渎，江为其首，此其一也。
现代文：江、河、淮、济四条河流，长江作为首位，这是其一。
English: Jiang, He, Huai, Ji four rivers, Yangtze River as the first, this is the first.

古文：禹生石纽，今之汶山郡是也。
现代文：大禹在石纽出生，就是现在的文山郡。
English: Dayu was born in Shinui, which is now Wenshan County.

古文：昔尧遭洪水，鲧所不治，禹疏江决河，东注于海，为民除害，生民已来功莫先者，此其二也。
现代文：过去尧帝遭到洪水，鯀没有能治理，大禹就疏通江河，使它们东流入海，为百姓消除祸害，生民以来没有比这个更大的功劳了，这是其二。
English: In the past, Emperor Zhao suffered from floods, which Zhao failed to control, and Dayu dredged the rivers and let them flow eastward into the sea to eliminate the scourge for the people. There has been no greater achievement for the people than this. This is the second.

古文：天帝布治房心，决政参伐，参伐则益州分野，三皇乘祗车出谷口，今之斜谷是也。
现代文：天帝通过房、心、参、伐的形象来决断政事，参、伐两星是益州分野，三皇乘衹车出谷口的地方，就是现在的斜谷。
English: Heavenly Emperors used the images of Fang, Xin, Sang and Falu to decide political affairs. The two stars of Sang and Falu were in the Yizhou area, and the place where the Three Emperors took the carriage out of the valley mouth was the present valley.

古文：此便鄙州之阡陌，明府以雅意论之，何若於天下乎？ 
现代文：这就是本州的始末，您可以好好评论，比天下其他地方怎么样呢？ 
English: That's how it is in our state. You can comment on it. How is it different from the rest of the world?

古文：於是纂逡巡无以复答。
现代文：于是夏侯纂犹豫没有回答。
English: As a result, Xia Houzao hesitated and did not answer.

古文：益州辟宓为从事祭酒。
现代文：益州征召秦宓担任从事祭酒。
English: Qin Hui was called up by Yizhou to be in charge of making sacrificial wine.

古文：先主既称尊号，将东征吴，宓陈天时必无其利，坐下狱幽闭，然后贷出。
现代文：刘备登基之后，想要东征吴国，秦宓向刘备陈述天时不利，战争没有胜算，因此被关押下狱，后来被宽恕释放。
English: After Liu Bei ascended to the throne, he wanted to march eastward to the State of Wu. Qin Hui told Liu Bei that the time was unfavorable and the war had no chance of success. As a result, he was imprisoned and later pardoned and released.

古文：建兴二年，丞相亮领益州牧，选宓迎为别驾，寻拜左中郎将、长水校尉。吴遣使张温来聘，百官皆往饯焉。
现代文：建兴二年，丞相诸葛亮兼任益州牧，选拔秦宓迎接他为州别驾，不久又受命他为左中郎将、长水校尉，东吴派使者张温前来交往，朝中百官都前去践行。
English: In the second year of Jianxing, the chancellor Zhuge Liang also served as the pastor of Yizhou, and selected Qin Zang to welcome him as the provincial governor. Soon after, he was ordered to be the left middle-ranking officer, the captain of Changshui, and the East Wu sent the envoy Zhang Wen to come to communicate. Hundreds of officials from the North and the Middle Kingdom came to practice.

古文：众人皆集而宓未往，亮累遣使促之，温曰： 彼何人也？ 
现代文：众人到齐后，秦宓没有到，诸葛亮多次派人前去催促，张温说： 这是什么人？ 
English: After everyone arrived, Qin Yu did not arrive, Zhuge Liang repeatedly sent people to urge, Zhang Wen said: Who is this person?

古文：亮曰： 益州学士也。 
现代文：诸葛亮说： 是益州的学士。 
English: Zhuge Liang said: He is a bachelor from Yizhou.

古文：及至，温问曰： 君学乎？ 
现代文：秦宓到了之后，张温问他： 你学习吗？ 
English: After Qin Hui arrived, Zhang Wen asked him: Do you study?

古文：宓曰： 五尺童子皆学，何必小人！ 
现代文：秦宓说： 五尺高的小孩都学习，何必轻视人呢？ 
English: Qin Yu said: Five-foot-tall children all study, so why should they despise others?

古文：温复问曰： 天有头乎？ 
现代文：张温又问说： 天有尽头吗？ 
English: Zhang Wen also asked: Is there an end to the world?

古文：宓曰： 有之。 温曰： 在何方也？ 宓曰： 在西方。
现代文：秦宓说： 有。 张温说： 在什么地方？ 秦宓说： 在西方。
English: Qin Yu said: Yes. Zhang Wen said: Where? Qin Yu said: In the west.

古文：诗曰： 乃眷西顾。
现代文：《诗经》有说： 于是眷恋西望。 
English: There is a saying in the Book of Songs, "So I fell in love with Saibō."

古文：以此推之，头在西方。 温曰： 天有耳乎？ 
现代文：由此推断，天的尽头在西方。 张温说： 天有耳朵吗？ 
English: From this, it is deduced that the end of the sky is in the west.Zhang Wen said: Does the sky have ears?

古文：宓曰： 天处高而听卑，诗云： 鹤鸣于九皋，声闻于天。
现代文：秦宓说： 天在高处能听到细小的事情，《诗经》说： 鹤鸟在九皋鸣叫，声音能上达天庭。 
English: Qin Hui said: The sky can hear small things at high altitudes. "The Book of Songs" said: The cranes sing in the nine heavens, and the sound can reach the heavenly court.

古文：若其无耳，何以听之？ 温曰： 天有足乎？ 
现代文：如果上天没有耳朵，用什么来听呢？ 张温说： 天有脚吗？ 
English: If heaven has no ears, how can it hear? Zhang Wen said: Does heaven have feet?

古文：宓曰： 有。诗云： 天步艰难，之子不犹。
现代文：秦宓说： 有，《诗经》说： 上天的步履艰难，那人不可靠。 
English: Qin Yu said, "Yes, the "Song of Songs" says, "The pace of heaven is difficult, and that person is not reliable."

古文：若其无足，何以步之？ 温曰： 天有姓乎？ 宓曰： 有。 温曰： 何姓？ 宓曰： 姓刘。 
现代文：如果天没有脚，怎么行走呢？ 
English: If the sky has no feet, how can it walk?

古文：温曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：张温问： 天有姓吗？ 
English: Zhang Wen asked: Does heaven have a surname?

古文：答曰： 天子姓刘，故以此知之。 
现代文：秦宓说： 有姓。 张温说：  姓什么？ 
English: Qin Yu said, "I have a surname." Zhang Wen said, "What surname?"

古文：温曰： 日生於东乎？ 
现代文：秦宓说： 姓刘。 张温问： 你怎么知道？ 
English: Qin Yu said: My surname is Liu. Zhang Wen asked: How do you know?

古文：宓曰： 虽生于东而没於西。 
现代文：秦宓回答说： 天子姓刘，所以知道天姓刘。 
English: Qin Yu replied, "God's surname is Liu, so I know God's surname is Liu.

古文：答问如响，应声而出，於是温大敬服。
现代文：张温说： 太阳是从东边升起吗？ 秦宓回答： 虽然从东边升起，但却在西边落下。 
English: Zhang Wen said: Does the sun rise in the east? Qin Zhe replied: Although it rises in the east, it sets in the west.

古文：宓之文辩，皆此类也。
现代文：他们的问答犹如山中的回音，应声而出，于是张温对秦宓非常佩服。
English: Their questions and answers are like echoes in the mountains, echoing out, so Zhang Wen is very impressed with Qin Yu.

古文：迁大司农，四年卒。
现代文：秦宓的文采辩才大都像这类事。秦宓升任为大司农，在建兴四年去世。
English: Most of Qin Hui's literary works are like this. Qin Hui was promoted to the position of the Chief Secretary of Agriculture, and died four years after the construction.

古文：初宓见帝系之文，五帝皆同一族，宓辨其不然之本。
现代文：当初，秦宓看到记叙帝王世系的文献，发现五帝都出自同一部族，秦宓探究这一说法错误的根源。
English: At first, Qin Hui saw a document describing the lineage of emperors and found that the five emperors were all from the same tribe. Qin Hui explored the source of this erroneous statement.

古文：又论皇帝王霸豢龙之说，甚有通理。
现代文：又论证了帝王王霸养龙的说法，都很有道理。
English: It also proves that the saying of Emperor Wangba raising dragons is very reasonable.

古文：谯允南少时数往谘访，纪录其言於春秋然否论，文多故不载。
现代文：谯周年轻时，年少时多次前往秦宓拜访，将秦宓的言论记述在春秋然否论中，因文字太多，所以没有记录在此。
English: When he was young, Zhai Zhou visited Qin Yu several times when he was young, and recorded Qin Yu's remarks in the Spring and Autumn Annulment, but because there are too many words, there is no record here.

古文：评曰：许靖夙有名誉，既以笃厚为称，又以人物为意，虽行事举动，未悉允当，蒋济以为 大较廊庙器 也。
现代文：评曰：许靖素来有名声，既然以笃实忠厚出名，又以品评人物为意，虽然言行举止不是全都恰当，蒋济也认为 是朝廷的栋梁之材 。
English: The commentary said: Xu Jing has always been famous. Since he is famous for his faithfulness and loyalty, he is also interested in evaluating people. Although his words and deeds are not all appropriate, Jiang Ji also believes that he is a pillar of the imperial court.

古文：麋竺、孙乾、简雍、伊籍，皆雍容风议，见礼於世。
现代文：糜竺、孙乾、简雍、尹籍都雍容典雅有风范，在当时都很有都讲求礼节。
English: Zhai, Sun Qian, Jian Yong, and Yin Zhi were all elegant and elegant, and they were very polite at that time.

古文：秦宓始慕肥遯之高，而无若愚之实。然专对有馀，文藻壮美，可谓一时之才士矣。
现代文：秦宓最开始仰慕隐居不仕的清高，但没有大智若愚的才干，但专对回答有余，文采辞藻华美，也可称得上是一时的才士。
English: At the very beginning, Qin Yu admired the reclusive Qing Gao, but he did not have the talent of great wisdom, but he had more than enough answers, and his words were beautiful, and he could also be called a temporary talent.

