古文：李蔚卢渥韩定辞姚岩杰狄归昌杜荀鹤
现代文：李蔚卢渥韩定辞姚岩杰狄归昌杜荀鹤
English: Li Weilu wows South Korea with speech, Yao Yan, Jie Di, Quichang, Du Fenhe leads

古文：武臣有文曹景宗高昂贺若弼李密高崇文王智兴高骈罗昭威赵延寿
现代文：武臣有文曹景宗高昂贺若弼李密高崇文王智兴高骈罗昭威赵延寿
English: Wu Wenshu have literati Jing Zong Gao, He Ruoqi, Li Mi Gao, Chongwen Wang Zhi Xing, Gao Yao, Zhao Zhaowei, Zhao Yan Shou

古文：李蔚
现代文：李蔚
English: Li Wei

古文：唐丞相李蔚镇淮南日，有布素之交孙处士，不远千里，径来修谒。
现代文：唐朝丞相李蔚镇守淮南时，和他素有布衣之交的孙处士不远千里，来拜访他。
English: When Li Wei Zhen, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, was guarding Huainan, he and Sun Zhengzhi, who was known to have a friend in cloth, came thousands of miles to visit him.

古文：蔚浃月留连。
现代文：李蔚便陪孙处士住个十天半月。
English: Li Wei stayed with the official for ten days and a half months.

古文：一日告发，李敦旧分，游河祖送，过于桥下，波澜迅激，舟子回跋，举蒿溅水，近坐饮妓，湿衣尤甚。
现代文：这一天，孙处士要走，李蔚为了两人的旧情，在游船上设宴为他饯行。船过桥下，波浪起伏，船也颠波旋转，船家在举蒿撑船时溅起一些河水，打湿了坐在旁边陪酒姬女的衣服。
English: On this day, Mr. Sun wanted to leave, and Li Wei, for the sake of the old love between the two of them, held a banquet for him on the cruise ship. The ship passed under the bridge, the waves were undulating, the ship was also tossing and turning, and the boatman splashed some river water when he raised the anchor, wetting the clothes of the hostess who was sitting next to him.

古文：李大怒，令擒舟子，荷于所司。
现代文：李蔚发怒了，把船家抓起来，关押在衙门里。
English: Li Wei got angry, arrested the boatman and detained him in the lock.

古文：处士拱而前曰：因兹宠饯，是某之过，敢请笔砚，略抒荒芜。
现代文：孙处士向前拱了拱手说：这宴会是为我举行的，发生这事是我的过错。请把笔砚拿来，略抒我的歉疚之情。
English: Mr. Sun reached forward and said, "This banquet was held for me. It was my fault that this happened. Please bring me a pen and tell me a little bit about how sorry I am."

古文：李从之，乃以柳枝词曰：半额微黄金缕衣，玉搔头袅凤双飞。
现代文：李蔚吩咐人准备了笔砚，孙处士写了一首《柳枝词》：半额微黄金缕衣，玉搔头袅凤双飞。
English: Li Wei ordered someone to prepare a quill, and Sun Zhenzhi wrote a poem "Willow Branch Words": half-premium micro-golden wisp, jade skull, double-winged phoenix.

古文：从教水溅罗裙湿，还道朝来行雨归。
现代文：从教水溅罗裙湿，还到朝来行雨归。
English: From the teaching water splashing Luo skirt wet, but also to the morning rain.

古文：李览之，释然欢笑，宾从皆赞之。
现代文：李蔚看完很高兴，气也消了。在座的宾客随从也很称赞，又叫歌姬演唱这首词。
English: Li Wei was very happy and relieved after watching it. The attendants of the guests present also praised it, and asked her to sing the song.

古文：命伶人唱其词，乐饮至暮，舟子赦罪。
现代文：饮酒娱乐一直到晚间，船家也放出来了。
English: Boaters were also out in force, drinking and partying well into the evening.

古文：更有李嵘献诗云：鸡树烟含瑞气凝，凤池波待玉山澄。
现代文：在座的李嵘也献了一首诗：鸡树烟含瑞气凝，凤池波待玉山澄。
English: Li Wei, who was also present, also presented a poem: "Chicken tree smoke contains sweet condensation, phoenix pond wave waits for Jade Mountain clear."

古文：国人久依东关望，拟筑沙堤到广陵。
现代文：国人久依东关望，拟筑沙堤到广陵。
English: The Chinese have been looking eastward for a long time and plan to build a sand dike to Guangling.

古文：后果入相。
现代文：后来，他果然当了宰相。
English: Later, he did indeed become prime minister.

古文：卢渥
现代文：卢渥
English: Rouvois

古文：唐左丞相卢渥，轩冕之盛，近代无比，伯仲四人咸居显列。
现代文：唐朝左丞相卢渥，他的穿戴服饰、乘坐的车子都是豪华无比的。他们弟兄四人的官职也都很显赫。
English: Lu Wo, the Tang Dynasty's left-hand minister, wore clothes and rode in cars of unparalleled luxury. All four of his brothers also held high-ranking government posts.

古文：乾符初，母忧服阕。渥自前中书舍人拜陕府观察使。
现代文：僖宗乾符年初，卢渥因为母亲去世服丧期满后，由中书舍人授陕府观察使。
English: At the beginning of the year of Emperor Xizong of the Qianfu Dynasty, Luwo was awarded the title of Shaanxi Provincial Observer by the Chinese Academy of Letters after the period of mourning for his mother's death had expired.

古文：又旬日，其弟绍自前长安令除给事中。又旬日，弟沆自前集贤校理除左拾遗。
现代文：过了十几天，他弟弟卢绍由长安令被任命为给事中，又过十几天，他弟弟卢沆由集贤校理任命为左拾遗。
English: A dozen days later, his younger brother, Lu Shao, was appointed by the Chang'an government to be in charge of affairs, and another dozen days later, his younger brother, Lu Yao, was appointed by the Ji Xian schoolmaster to be left to pick up the remains.

古文：又旬日，弟沼自畿尉迁监察御史。
现代文：又过十几天，他弟弟卢沼从畿尉升为监察御史。
English: A dozen days later, his younger brother, Lunuma, was promoted from lieutenant to inspector.

古文：诏书叠至，士族荣之。
现代文：诏书频传，家族很荣耀。
English: The family is very proud of the frequent transmission of the imperial edict.

古文：及赴任陕郊，洛城自居守分司朝臣以下，互设祖筵，遮于行路，洛城为之一空。都人观者肩望击毂，盛于清明洒扫之日。
现代文：卢渥去陕赴任时，东都洛阳的各衙门互相宴请，洛阳城为之一空，城中观看的人，肩擦肩，车碰车，超过清明节洒扫时的情景。
English: When Luwo went to Shaanxi to take office, all the palaces of Luoyang, the eastern capital, held banquets for each other. Luoyang City was empty. People watching in the city rubbed shoulders, and cars bumped into each other. It was a scene that exceeded the Qingming Festival.

古文：自临都驿以至于行，凡五十里，连翩不绝。有白须传卒，鸣指叹曰：老人为驿吏垂五十年，阅事多矣，而未曾见祖送之盛有如此者。
现代文：从洛阳开始，五十里内车马不断，有一个白须驿卒，很有感慨地说：我当驿吏近五十年，经历的事很多，从未见到过这么盛大的欢送场面。
English: Starting from Luoyang, the procession continued for fifty miles. A white-bearded official said with great emotion: "I have been a bailiff for nearly fifty years and have experienced many things. I have never seen such a grand send-off scene.

古文：时士流窃语，以此日在家者为耻。
现代文：一些市民窃窃私语，认为这样的日子呆在家里不出来是个耻辱。
English: Some citizens whisper that it's a shame to be stuck at home on a day like this.

古文：渥有题嘉祥驿诗曰：交亲荣饯洛城空，善戏戎装上将同。
现代文：卢渥有一首《题嘉祥驿》诗，诗中写道：交亲荣饯洛城空，善戏戎装上将同。
English: Luwo has a poem "Ji Jia Xiang Yu" which says: "Being a good friend brings glory to the sky of Luo City, and being a good actor is equivalent to being a general in the army."

古文：星使自天丹诏下，雕鞍照地数程中。
现代文：星使自天丹诏下，雕鞍照地数城中。
English: The Star Envoy, under the command of Emperor Tiandan, carved saddles in several cities.

古文：马嘶静谷声偏响，旆映清山色更红。
现代文：马嘶静谷声偏响，旆映晴山色更红。
English: The sound of horses neighing in the quiet valley is louder, and the mountain scenery is redder.

古文：到后定知人易化，满街棠树有遗风。
现代文：到后定知人易化，满街棠树有遗风。
English: After his arrival, Ding's acquaintances became easier to find, and the streets were full of tangos.

古文：诗版后为易定帅王存尚书碎之。
现代文：这首诗刻版印刷后，被易定师王存尚书给撕毁了。
English: After this poem engraving plate was printed, it was torn up by Yi Ding Shi Wang Cun Shang Shu.

古文：韩定辞
现代文：韩定辞
English: Han Dingzhi

古文：唐韩定辞为镇州王镕书记。
现代文：唐时，韩定辞在镇州王镕手下任书记，他去拜访燕帅刘仁恭，住在宾馆。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Han Ding resigned from his position as secretary under Zhenzhou Wang Qian. He went to visit Yan Shuai Liu Rengong and stayed at a hotel.

古文：聘燕帅刘仁恭，舍于宾馆，命试幕客马或延接。马有诗赠韩曰：燧林芳草绵绵思，尽日相携陟丽谯。别后巏嵍山上望，羡君时复见王乔。
现代文：燕帅命府中的幕客马或去迎接，马或向韩定辞赠诗一首：燧林芳草绵绵思，尽日相携陟丽谯。别后巏嵍山上望，羡君时复见王乔。
English: Yan Shuai told the shogunate guests in the palace that they could either go to meet the horse, or the horse could give a poem to Han Dingzhi: Yulin's fragrant grass is full of thoughts, and all day long it is accompanied by beautiful flowers. After parting, he looked up the mountain, and when he saw Wang Qiao, he was envious.

古文：或诗虽清秀，然意在徵其学问。
现代文：马或的诗虽然很清秀，但他的意思是想用这首诗来证明自己有学问。
English: Although Ma Kai's poem is very beautiful, he meant that he wanted to use this poem to prove that he had knowledge.

古文：韩亦于座上酬之曰：崇霞台上神仙客，学辨痴龙艺最多。
现代文：韩定辞也酬答了一首：崇霞台上神仙客，学辨痴龙艺最多。
English: Han Dingzhi also replied with a poem: "The immortal guest on the stage of Chongxia has learned the most about the art of distinguishing between fools and dragons."

古文：盛德好将银笔术。丽词堪与雪儿歌。
现代文：盛德好将银笔术，丽词堪于雪儿歌。
English: Shengde is good at silver penmanship, and her beautiful words are worthy of Cher's songs.

古文：座内诸宾靡不钦讶称妙句，然亦疑其银笔之僻也。
现代文：座中的宾客都很钦佩赞赏他的诗句很绝妙，也怀疑他用银笔典故太生僻。
English: The guests at the banquet were full of admiration, appreciating the brilliance of his poetry, but also doubting that his use of silver pen allusions was too eccentric.

古文：他日，或复持燕帅之命，答聘常山，亦命定辞接于公馆。
现代文：又一日，马或奉燕帅之命，去回访常山，也让韩定辞去公馆迎接。
English: Another day, Ma, or by order of Yan Shuai, went back to visit Changshan, and also let Han Ding leave the mansion to meet him.

古文：时有妓转转者，韩之所眷也。每当酒席，或频目之。
现代文：当时有一名姬女叫转转，是韩定辞平时很喜欢的人，在宴会时，马或经常注视她。
English: At that time, there was a concubine named Zu Zu, whom Han Dingji usually liked very much. During the banquet, Ma often watched her.

古文：韩曰：昔爱晋文公分季隗于赵衰，孙伯符辍小乔于公瑾，盖以色可奉名人。但虑倡姬不胜贤者之顾，愿垂一咏，俾得奉之。
现代文：韩定辞说：当年晋文公将季隗嫁给赵衰，孙伯符将小乔嫁给公瑾，都是以美人配名人，但令人疑虑的是一个歌姬能不能得到名人的关注，我愿为你写一首诗。
English: Han Dingzhi said, "Back in those days, Jinwen Gong married Ji Yao to Zhao Zhen, and Sun Bofu married Xiao Qiao to Gong Yao, both of them were celebrities with beautiful women, but it is doubtful whether a singer can get the attention of celebrities. I would like to write a poem for you."

古文：或援笔，文不停缀，作转转之赋。其文甚美，咸钦其敏妙。遂传于远近。
现代文：马或拿来笔，韩定辞便一挥而就作《转转赋》，文辞很美，人们钦佩他才思敏捷，构思巧妙，很快地传播开了。
English: Han Dingji could take a pen and write "Zhu Zhu Fu" with just a wave of his hand. The writing was beautiful, people admired his quick wit and ingenious ideas, and the book quickly spread.

古文：或从容问韩以雪儿银笔之事，韩曰：昔梁元帝为湘东王时，好学著书。
现代文：马或很从容地问韩定辞：雪儿银笔是怎么回事。韩说：从前，梁元帝为湘东王时，不但好学，而且自己著书。
English: Ma Kai calmly asked Han Dingjie: "What happened to Xue Er's silver pen?" Han said: "Once upon a time, when Emperor Liang Yuan was the king of eastern Hunan, he was not only eager to learn, but also wrote books himself.

古文：常记录忠臣义士及文章之美者，笔有三品。或以金银雕饰，或用斑竹为管。
现代文：他常记录一些忠臣义士和文章好的人的事迹，他的笔分三等，有的用金银装饰，有的用斑竹做笔杆。
English: He often recorded the deeds of some loyal subjects and people who were good at writing. His pens were of three kinds, some were decorated with gold and silver, and some were made of bamboo.

古文：忠孝全者用金管书之，德行清粹者用银笔书之，文章赡丽者以斑竹书之。
现代文：忠孝两全的人他用饰金的笔写，品德高尚的用饰银笔写，文章好的用斑竹笔写，这事便从湘东传到各地。
English: A man of both loyalty and filial piety, he wrote with a gold-decorated pen, a man of high moral character wrote with a silver-decorated pen, and a good writer wrote with a spotted bamboo pen. This story spread from eastern Hunan to all parts of the country.

古文：故湘东之誉，振于江表雪儿者，李密之爱姬，能歌舞，每见宾僚文章，有奇丽入意者，即付雪儿叶音律以歌之。
现代文：雪儿，是李密的爱姬，能歌善舞，每当看到宾客和幕僚中有好文章，合他的心意时，他就叫雪儿配上乐曲歌唱。
English: Cher, who was Li Mi's beloved, could sing and dance well. Whenever he saw a guest or staff member with a good article that suited his heart, he would ask Cher to sing along with the music.

古文：又问痴龙出自何处？
现代文：马或又问痴龙出自何处？
English: Where did the horse, or should I say the dragon, come from?

古文：定辞曰：洛下有洞穴，曾有人误堕于穴中。因行数里，渐见明旷。见有宫殿人物凡九处。又见有大羊。羊髯有珠，人取而食之，不知何所。
现代文：定辞说，洛水附近有一个大洞穴，曾有人失误落入穴中，在穴中走了好几里路，渐渐感到宽阔明亮，见到九处宫殿、人烟的地方，又看到大羊，羊胡子上有珠子，那人把珠子吃了，却不知是什么地方。
English: There is a large cave near Luoshui. Someone once fell into the hole by mistake. He walked several miles in the hole and gradually felt broad and bright. He saw nine palaces, crowded places, and saw a large sheep with beads on its mustache. The man ate the beads, but he did not know where.

古文：后出以问张华曰：此地仙九馆也。大羊者，名曰痴龙耳。
现代文：他出来后问张华，张华说，这个地仙九馆，大羊名叫痴龙。
English: After he came out, he asked Zhang Hua. Zhang Hua said, "This Hall of Nine Immortals is called the Dragon Palace.

古文：定辞复问或，巏嵍之山，当在何处？
现代文：定辞又问马或，巏嵍山在什么地方？
English: He then asked Ma or, where is Lushan?

古文：或曰：此隋君之故事，何谦光而下问。
现代文：马或方是说：这是随君的故事，你一定知道，何必这样谦虚来问我？
English: Ma or Fang said: This is your story, you must know, why do you have to be so modest to ask me?

古文：由是两相悦服，结交而去。
现代文：从此，两人彼此心悦诚服，结交为好朋友。
English: From then on, the two men liked each other and became good friends.

古文：姚岩杰
现代文：姚岩杰
English: Yao Yanjie

古文：姚岩杰，梁公元崇之裔孙也。
现代文：姚岩杰，是梁公姚元崇的孙子。
English: Yao Yanjie is the great-great-grandson of Liang Gong Yao Yuan Chong.

古文：童卯聪悟绝伦，弱冠博通坟典。慕班固、司马迁为文，时称大儒。
现代文：童年时就特别聪明，二十岁以后，他博览典籍，非常仰慕班固、司马迁的文章，被人们称为大儒。
English: In his childhood, he was particularly clever. After the age of 20, he was well-versed in classic books and greatly admired the articles of Ban Gu and Sima Qian. He was known as a great scholar.

古文：常以诗酒放逸江左，尤肆凌忽前达，旁若无人。
现代文：他以饮酒赋诗，放荡不羁而闻名江东一带，尤其是对一些显贵人物，他也肆意凌辱，旁若无人。
English: He was famous for his drinking and debauchery in the east of the Yangtze River, especially for some dignitaries, and he also insulted everyone.

古文：唐乾符中，颜标典鄱阳郡，鞠场公宇初构。请岩杰纪其事。文成，灿然千余言。标欲刊去一二字，岩杰大怒，标不能容。时已勒石，遂命覆碑于地，磨于其文。
现代文：唐僖宗乾符中期，颜标主官鄱阳郡，郡府房屋、球场初建，他请岩杰撰文用以刻碑记事，文章写成后，竟达千余言之多，颜标想删去一两个字，岩杰大怒，颜标不能容忍，但是已经刻字立碑，他命人将碑推倒，磨掉碑文。
English: In the middle of the Qianfu period of the Tang Dynasty, Yan Biao, the chief officer of Fenyang County, the county seat, and the construction of the house and the stadium began. He asked Iwajie to write an article to inscribe the monument. After the article was written, it was more than a thousand words. Yan Biao wanted to delete one or two words. Iwajie was furious. He could not tolerate Yan Biao. However, he had already inscribed the monument. He ordered someone to tear down the monument and erase the inscription.

古文：岩杰以一篇纪之曰：为报颜公识我么，我心唯只与天和。
现代文：岩杰为了此事写过一首诗：为报颜公识我么，我心唯只与无和。
English: Iwajie wrote a poem about this: "Do you know me for publicity? My heart is only for peace and harmony."

古文：眼前俗物关情少，醉后青山入梦多。
现代文：眼前俗物关情少，醉后青山入梦多。
English: People care less about vulgar things in front of their eyes, and dream more about the mountains after getting drunk.

古文：田子莫嫌弹铗恨，宁生休唱饭牛歌。
现代文：田子莫嫌弹铗恨，宁生休唱饭牛歌。
English: Tian Zi Mo does not want to play hatred, but would rather sing a cow song.

古文：圣朝若为苍生计，也合公车到薜萝。
现代文：圣朝若为苍生计，也合公车到薜萝。
English: If the Holy Church is one's livelihood, then taking the bus to Diao Luo is also a good choice.

古文：卢肇牧歙州，岩杰在婺源，先以著述寄肇。肇知其使酒，以手书褒美，赠以束帛。
现代文：卢肇掌管歙州时，岩杰在婺源，岩杰把他的文章寄给卢肇，卢肇知道他酒后很放纵，便写信对他的文章进行了褒奖，并赠给他一些布匹。
English: When Lu Zhao was in charge of Zhangzhou, Iwanjie was in Luyuan. Iwanjie sent his article to Lu Zhao. Lu Zhao knew that he was very indulgent after drinking, so he wrote a letter praising his article and gave him some cloths.

古文：辞云：兵火之后，郡中凋弊，无以迎逢大贤。
现代文：他的信中有这样几句：兵火之后，郡中凋敝，无以迎逢大贤。
English: In his letter, there are a few sentences like this: After the war, the county was devastated, and there was no way to meet the great man.

古文：岩杰复以长笺激之，肇不得已，迓至郡斋，待如公卿礼。
现代文：岩杰又写了一封长信激卢肇，没办法，只好把岩杰迎到郡中，待以厚礼。
English: Iwajie also wrote a long letter to Lu Zhao. There was nothing he could do, so he had no choice but to welcome Iwajie to Guizhong and offer him a generous gift.

古文：既而日肆傲睨轻视于肇。
现代文：然而他却一天天地放肆傲慢起来，并轻视卢肇。
English: However, he became more and more arrogant day by day and despised Lu Zhao.

古文：肇常以篇咏夸于岩杰曰：明月照巴天，岩杰大笑曰：明月照一天，奈何独言巴天耶？
现代文：卢肇曾经在岩杰面前吟道：明月照巴天。岩杰大笑说：明月照一天，怎么能说八天呢？
English: Lu Zhao once chanted in front of Iwajie: "The bright moon shines brightly." Iwajie laughed and said: "The bright moon shines for one day, how can it be eight days?"

古文：肇渐不得意。
现代文：卢肇渐渐对他不满意，但是没有办法。
English: Lu Zhao gradually became dissatisfied with him, but there was nothing he could do.

古文：无何，会于江亭。时蒯希逸在席，卢请目前取一事为酒令，尾有乐器之名。
现代文：有一次，他们在江亭饮宴，当时蒯希逸在座，卢肇请大家用眼前一事为酒令，句尾必须有一乐器名。
English: Once, when they were having a banquet in Jiangting, Lu Zhao invited everyone to use the thing in front of them as a toast. At the end of the sentence, there must be a musical instrument name.

古文：肇令曰：远望渔舟。不阔尺八。
现代文：卢肇行令说：远望渔舟，不阔尺八。
English: Lu Zhaozhong's marching order said, "Looking far and wide for a fishing boat is not enough for a shakuhachi."

古文：岩杰遽饮酒一器，凭栏呕哕。
现代文：岩杰便喝了一杯酒，依着栏杆装做呕吐的样子。
English: Iwanjie then drank a glass of wine and leaned against the railing pretending to vomit.

古文：须臾，即席，还令曰：凭栏一吐，已觉空喉。
现代文：一会儿回到席上，还令说：凭栏一吐，已觉空喉。
English: After a while, he came back to the table and said, "If you vomit, you have an empty throat."

古文：其侮慢倨傲如此。
现代文：他的傲慢态度竟达到如此地步。
English: This man is so flippant and arrogant.

古文：狄归昌
现代文：狄归昌
English: Di Guichang

古文：唐僖宗幸蜀，有词人于马嵬驿题诗云：马嵬烟柳正依依，重见鸾舆幸蜀归。
现代文：唐僖宗李儇去四川，途经马嵬坡，有一位诗人在马嵬驿题写了一首诗：马嵬烟柳正依依，重见鸾舆幸蜀归。
English: A poet wrote a poem on the subject of the horse-drawn carriage: "The horse-drawn carriage is on the way to Sichuan, passing through the horse-drawn carriage, and the horse-drawn carriage is on the way back."

古文：泉下阿蛮应有语，这回休更泥杨妃。
现代文：泉下阿蛮应有语，这回休更泥杨妃。
English: Quanxiao Aman should have a speech, this time more muddy Yangfei.

古文：不出名氏，人仰奇才。
现代文：这首诗没署姓名，人们仰慕诗人的才华。
English: The poem is not signed and people admire the poet's talent.

古文：杜荀鹤
现代文：这首诗就是侍郎狄归昌作的。
English: This poem was written by the chamberlain, Di Guichang.

古文：唐杜荀鹤尝吟一联诗云：旧衣灰絮絮，新酒竹篘篘。
现代文：杜荀鹤唐时，杜荀鹤曾吟一联诗：旧衣灰絮絮，新酒竹篘篘。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Cuckoo Cranes chanted a series of poems: Old clothes and ashes, new wine and bamboo shoots.

古文：或话于韦庄，庄曰：我道印将金锁锁，帘用玉钩钩。
现代文：有人把这联诗对韦庄说了，韦庄说，我对以：印将金锁锁，帘用玉钩钩。
English: Someone told this couplet to Wei Zhuang. Wei Zhuang said, "I use: seal with a gold lock, and use a jade hook for the curtain."

古文：庄后西蜀为相。
现代文：韦庄后来到西蜀任了宰相。
English: Wei Zhuang later came to West Shu and was appointed prime minister.

古文：武臣有文
现代文：武臣有文
English: Takechi Arifumi

古文：曹景宗
现代文：曹景宗
English: Cao Jingzong

古文：梁曹景宗累立军功。
现代文：前梁武帝萧衍时，曹景宗屡立战功。
English: When the former Liangwu Emperor Xiao Yan was in power, Cao Jingzong repeatedly achieved military feats.

古文：天监初，徵为右卫将军。
现代文：天监初年升为右卫将军，后来又大破魏军，名声大振。
English: At the beginning of the year, the overseer of heaven was promoted to the general of the right guard, and later he defeated the Wei army and became famous.

古文：后破魏军振旅，帝于华光殿宴饮联句。
现代文：武帝在华光殿设宴庆贺，席间联句助兴。
English: Emperor Wu held a banquet to celebrate the occasion at the Hua Guang Palace, and a couplet between the tables added to the fun.

古文：左仆射沈约赋韵，景宗不得韵，意色不平，启求赋诗。
现代文：左仆射沈约和无赋韵，曹景宗没有联上，心里不太服气，他又请求作诗。
English: The left-hand servant shoots a shady contract and no rhyme, Cao Jingzong does not connect, he is not convinced, and he asks to write a poem.

古文：帝曰：卿伎能甚多，人才英拔，何必止在一诗。
现代文：武帝说，你的技能很多啊，人的学识才华，不是一首诗能表现出来的。
English: Emperor Wu said, "You have many skills. A person's knowledge and talent cannot be expressed in a poem.

古文：景宗已醉，求作不已。
现代文：景宗已经喝醉了，再三要求作诗。
English: Jingzong was already drunk and repeatedly asked to write a poem.

古文：诏令赋竞病两字。
现代文：武帝让他用竞病两字为韵。
English: Emperor Wu asked him to use the two characters for the rhyme.

古文：景宗便操笔而成曰：去时儿女悲，归来笳鼓竞，借问行路人，何如霍去病？
现代文：景宗拿起笔来写道：去时儿女悲，归来笳鼓竞。借问行路人，何如霍去病。
English: Gyeongjong picked up his pen and wrote: "When I go, my children are sad, but when I return, they are beating drums. If you ask a passer-by, how can I go to the hospital?

古文：帝欣不已，于是进爵为公。
现代文：武帝非常高兴，他由爵升为公。
English: Emperor Wu was very happy. He was promoted from peer to prince.

古文：高昂
现代文：高昂
English: Gao Rong

古文：北齐高昂字敖曹，胆力过人，姿彩殊异。
现代文：高昂，北齐人，字敖曹，胆量大，身材魁伟，不同一般人。
English: Gao Gao, the North Qi people, the word Yu Cao, great courage, great stature, different from ordinary people.

古文：其父次同，为求严师教之。
现代文：他父亲高次同，希望他成才，寻求严师对他进行教育。
English: His father, Gao Zhidong, hoped that he would become talented and sought a strict teacher to educate him.

古文：昂不遵师训，专事驰骋。
现代文：可高昂却不遵从老师的教导，不受约束，专好骑射。
English: He may be tall, but he does not follow the teacher's instruction, is not bound, and is good at riding and shooting.

古文：每言男儿当横行天下，自取富贵，谁能端坐读书，作老博士也。
现代文：他常说：好男儿志在天下，富贵要由自己去争取，怎能只知读书，作一个书呆子？
English: He often said: Good men's aspirations are all over the world, richness should be fought for by oneself, how can you only know how to read and be a nerd?

古文：其父以其昂藏敖曹，故名字之。
现代文：他的父亲根据他的性格作为的特点，给他起名高昂，字敖曹，用以互补。
English: His father named him Gao Gao (高昂) according to the characteristics of his character and actions, and used the character 曹 (曹) as a complement.

古文：东魏末，齐神武起义，昂倾意附之，因成霸业，除侍中司徒，兼西南道大都督。
现代文：东魏末年的时候，齐国神武起义，高昂积极参加，成就了自己的大业，任侍中司徒，又兼任西南道大都督。
English: At the end of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Gao An actively participated in the Qinwu Uprising in Qi Province and achieved his great career. He served as an attendant in the middle, and also served as the governor of Southwest Province.

古文：而敖曹酷好为诗，雅有情致，时人称焉。
现代文：高昂非常喜欢诗，而且很有兴致写诗，受到人们的称赞。
English: Gao'ang is very fond of poetry, and is very interested in writing poetry, which has been praised by people.

古文：常从军，与相州刺史孙腾作《行路难》曰：卷甲长驱不可息，六日六夜三度食。
现代文：他常和军队一起行动，他曾和相州刺史孙腾合作《行路难》一诗：卷甲长驱不可息，六日六夜三度食。
English: He often acted together with the army. He once collaborated with Songzhou poet Sun Teng on the poem "The Difficulty of the Road": "I can't get enough of rolling armor, I eat three meals a day for six days and six nights."

古文：初时言作虎牢停，更被处置河桥北。
现代文：初时言作虎牢停，更被处置河桥北。
English: At the beginning, it was said that it would be stopped, and it was even disposed of in the north of Heqiao.

古文：回首绝望便萧条，悲来雪涕还自抑。
现代文：回首绝望便萧条，悲来雪涕还自抑。
English: When I look back, I'm depressed with despair, I'm overcome with sadness, and I can't control myself.

古文：又有征行诗曰：珑种千口羊，泉连百壶酒。
现代文：他还写有《征行诗》：珑种千口羊，泉连百壶酒。
English: He also wrote the "Marching Poem": "A thousand sheep of a thousand kinds, a hundred pots of wine in the spring."

古文：朝朝围山猎，夜夜迎新妇。
现代文：朝朝围山猎，夜夜迎新妇。
English: In the morning, they hunt around the mountain, and in the evening, they welcome the bride.

古文：顷之，其弟季式为齐州刺史，敖曹发驿以劝酒。乃赠诗曰：怜君忆君停欲死，天上人间无可比。
现代文：不久，他弟弟高季式为齐州刺史，他在驿站中设酒送行，并为其弟赠诗一首：怜君忆君停欲死，天上人间无可比。
English: Soon after, his younger brother Gao Jixi became the history of Qizhou. He set up a liquor store in the station to see him off, and presented his brother with a poem: "Pity you, remember you, stop wanting to die, there is no comparison between heaven and earth."

古文：走马海边射游鹿，偏坐石上弹鸣雉。
现代文：走马海边射游鹿，偏坐石上弹鸣雉。
English: Walking horses, shooting stags on the seashore, sitting on the side of a rock, playing gongs.

古文：昔时方伯愿三公，今日司徒羡刺史。
现代文：昔时方伯愿三公，今日司徒羡刺史。
English: In the past, Fang Bo was willing to be the third prince, but today, he is the envy of history.

古文：访可任者，高颖荐弼有文武才干，拜总管，委以平陈之事，若弼欣然以为己任。
现代文：高颖推荐贺若弼文武双全，他任了总管。皇帝把灭陈之事委任给他，他欣然接受。
English: Gao Ying recommended He Ruoqi and Wenwu Shuangquan, and he was appointed as the general manager. The emperor entrusted the matter of Chen's death to him, and he gladly accepted.

古文：与寿州总管源雄并为重镇。
现代文：他和寿州总管源雄同时镇守边境。
English: He and the governor of Shoushu, Geng Xiong, guarded the border at the same time.

古文：若弼遗诗曰：交河骠骑幕，合浦伏波营。
现代文：他曾有一首诗写道：交河骠骑幕，合浦伏波营。
English: He once wrote a poem: "Crossing the river, riding the curtain, going to the camp of Fuba."

古文：勿使麒麟上，无我二人名。
现代文：勿使麒麟上，无我二人名。
English: Don't make Kirin, there are no two of me.

古文：献平陈十策，称上旨。
现代文：他又向皇上进献了平陈十策，皇上很满意。
English: He also presented the Emperor with Ping Chen's Ten Measures, and the Emperor was very satisfied.

古文：开皇九年，大举伐陈，以若弼为行军总管，俘陈叔宝。
现代文：隋文帝开皇九年，大举伐陈，贺若弼任行军总管，俘虏了陈后主陈叔宝。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Sui, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty carried out a large-scale felling of Chen. He Ruoqi served as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops and captured Chen Shubao, the head of Chen Huan.

古文：李密
现代文：李密
English: Li Mi

古文：大业中，佐杨玄感起兵。
现代文：隋时，李密是蒲山公李宽的儿子。
English: At the time of the Sui Dynasty, Li Mi was the son of Busan Gong Li Kuan.

古文：及玄感败，密间行入关，亡抵平原。贼帅郝孝德不礼之，遭饥馑，至削树皮而食。
现代文：初时授他亲卫大都督，他不喜欢这个官职，便称病回家，大业九年时，他参与杨玄感起兵反隋，兵败之后，他逃入关内，流亡到平原，叛军将领郝孝德没有接待他。他经常挨饿，以至于削树皮充饥。
English: At the beginning, he was awarded the title of Grand Protector. He didn't like this official position, so he said he was sick and went home. When he was nine years old, he participated in Yang Xuanxuan's anti-Sui uprising. After the defeat, he fled to Guanai and exiled to the plains. The rebel general Zou Xiaode did not receive him. He often went hungry, so much so that he shaved tree bark to satisfy his hunger.

古文：乃诣睢阳，舍于村中，变名姓称刘知远，聚徒教授。经数月，不得志。
现代文：到了睢阳，住在乡村，改名换姓叫刘知远。曾当了几个月的教书先生，很不得志。
English: After arriving in Shenyang and living in the countryside, he changed his name to Liu Zhiyuan. He had been a teacher for a few months and was very discouraged.

古文：乃为五言诗曰：金风飏秋节，玉露凋晚林。
现代文：他曾写了一首五言诗：金风飏秋节，玉露凋晚林。
English: He once wrote a five-character poem: The golden wind blows the autumn festival, the jade dew withers the evening forest.

古文：此夕穷途士，郁陶伤寸心。
现代文：此夕穷途士，郁陶伤寸心。
English: This evening, poor and destitute, Yu Tao was heartbroken.

古文：眺听良多感，慷慨独沾襟。
现代文：眺听良多感，慷慨独沾襟。
English: It's a lot to take in, and the generosity is overwhelming.

古文：沾襟何所为，怅然怀古意。
现代文：沾襟何所为，怅然怀古意。
English: No matter what he does, he seems to be nostalgic.

古文：秦俗犹未平，汉道将何冀。
现代文：秦俗犹未平，汉道将何冀。
English: The Qin customs are still not level, and the Han way will be no better.

古文：樊哙市井屠，萧何刀笔吏。
现代文：樊哙市井屠，萧何刀笔吏。
English: Ichii Tu, Xiao Ho Dao's clerk.

古文：一朝时运合，万古传名谥。
现代文：一朝时运合，万古传名谥。
English: As luck is in the morning, fame is in the afternoon.

古文：寄言世上雄，虚生真可愧。
现代文：寄言诗上雄，虚生真可愧。
English: It's a shame to be born in vain.

古文：诗成，泣下数行。
现代文：诗写成后，他落下了几行热泪。
English: After the poem was written, he shed a few lines of tears.

古文：义宁元年，密僣据洛口，会群盗百万，筑坛称魏公。
现代文：隋恭帝义宁元年，他占据洛口，聚众百万，自称魏公。
English: In the first year of the Sui Emperor Yining, he occupied Lokou, gathered millions of people, and called himself Wei Gong.

古文：建元二年，密自巩洛，鼓行伐隋，兵败归唐，授光禄卿。
现代文：建元二年时，李密又从巩洛出兵伐隋，兵败后归唐，授光禄卿。
English: In the second year of the first century, Li Mi also sent troops from Gonglu to fight against the Sui Dynasty. After the defeat, he returned to the Tang Dynasty and was awarded the title of Guangluqing.

古文：高崇文
现代文：高崇文
English: Gao Chongwen

古文：唐相高崇文本蓟门之骁将也，以讨刘辟功，授西川节度使。一旦大雪，诸从事吟赏有诗。崇文遽至饮席，笑曰：诸君自为乐，殊不见顾鄙夫，鄙夫武人，亦有一咏雪诗。
现代文：唐朝宰相高崇文，是蓟门的一员勇敢的将军，因讨伐刘辟有功，授他西川节度使，一天，府中的从事们在一起赏雪吟诗，高崇文突然来到席间，笑着说：你们在这里娱乐，也不告诉我，我虽是一介武夫，也有一首咏雪诗。
English: Gao Chongwen, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, was a member of the imperial court and a brave general. He was given the title of the West River Festival envoy for his service in fighting Liu Bei. One day, the officials in the palace were together to appreciate the snow chant. Gao Chongwen suddenly came to the table and said with a smile, "You are entertaining here, but you don't tell me that even though I am a warrior, I also have a snow chant."

古文：乃口占曰：崇文崇武不崇文，提戈出塞旧从军。
现代文：他口中念道：崇文崇武不崇文，提戈出塞旧从军。
English: He recited from his mouth: "If you don't respect literature, you don't respect martial arts. Tigo is a former military man.

古文：有似胡儿射飞雁，白毛空里落纷纷。
现代文：有似胡儿射飞雁，白毛空里落纷纷。
English: It's like a hu'er shoots a goose, and white feathers fall into the sky.

古文：诗多中的，皆谓北齐敖曹之比。
现代文：诗意中肯，大家把他比作北齐将高昂。
English: Poetic and pertinent, everyone likened him to the Northern Qi general Gao Lang.

古文：太尉骈，即其孙也。
现代文：太尉高骈，是他的孙子。
English: Captain Gao Jun is his grandson.

古文：王智兴
现代文：王智兴
English: Wang Zhixing

古文：唐侍中王智兴，初为徐州节度使，武略英特，有命世之誉。幕府既开，所辟皆是名士。
现代文：唐朝侍中王智兴，初为徐州节度使，文韬武略，很负盛名，在幕府初建时，他招纳了很多知名人士。
English: Wang Zhixing, an attendant of the Tang Dynasty, was initially an envoy to the Xuzhou Festival, a scholar and a military strategist, and was very famous. When the bakufu was first built, he recruited many famous people.

古文：一旦从事于使院会饮，与宾朋赋诗。
现代文：一天，幕府中的从事们在使院中宴饮，和宾朋们赋诗。
English: One day, officials of the shogunate were having a banquet at the Imperial Household Agency, and were reciting poetry with their guests.

古文：顷之达于王。王乃召护军俱至。
现代文：一会儿，王智兴知道了，王智兴便和护军一起来到宴会上。
English: After a while, Wang Zhixing knew, and Wang Zhixing came to the banquet with the escort.

古文：从事因屏去翰墨，但以杯盘迎接。
现代文：从事们见他来了，便撤去了笔墨，又摆上了酒菜迎接。
English: When the people in charge saw him coming, they removed the pen and ink and put out the food and wine to welcome him.

古文：良久问之曰：适闻判官与诸贤作诗，何得见某而罢？
现代文：呆了一会儿他才问道：方才听说判官和你们作诗，怎么看我来了就停止了？
English: He paused for a moment before asking, "I just heard that the judge and you were writing poems. How come I stopped when I got here?"

古文：遽令却取笔砚，以彩笺数幅陈席上。
现代文：马上又叫人取来了笔砚，把一些彩笺放在桌上。
English: Immediately, someone fetched the pencils and put some colored pencils on the table.

古文：王曰：某韬钤发迹，未尝留心章句。今日陪奉英髦，不免亦陈愚恳。
现代文：众宾客正在疑惑，他和大家一起举杯喝酒，并说；我本来是想看你们作诗的，并不是来为了喝酒。
English: The guests are wondering as he raises a glass with them and says, I came to see you write poetry, not to drink.

古文：于是引纸援毫，顷刻而就云：三十年来老健儿，刚被郎官遣作诗。
现代文：小吏也把彩笺放到他面前，从事都让他作一首诗，王智兴说：我是靠用兵打仗起家的，对诗词文章很少留心，今天和各位名士在一起，我就不怕献丑了。于是展纸提笔，一会就写完一首：三十年来老健儿，刚被郎官遣作诗。
English: Wang Zhixing said, "I started my career by fighting in the army. I paid little attention to poetry and prose. Today, with all of you celebrities, I'm not afraid to make a fool of myself. So I took out a piece of paper, picked up a pen, and finished writing a poem in no time. I've been a veteran for thirty years, and I've just been sent by my stepfather to write a poem."

古文：江南花柳从君咏，塞北烟尘我自知。
现代文：江南花柳从君咏，塞北烟尘我自知。
English: I know for myself that the Jiangnan willow comes from Junyi, and the northern willow comes from Soot.

古文：四座览之，惊叹无已。
现代文：四座宾客看到后，都很惊讶、赞叹。
English: After seeing the four guests, they were all surprised and amazed.

古文：时文人张祜亦预此筵。监军谓元曰：观兹盛事，岂得无言？
现代文：当时文人张祜也在座，监军对张祜说：你看到了这种场面，能没有话说么？
English: At that time, the writer Zhang Ye was also present, and the supervisor said to Zhang Ye: You saw this scene, can you not say anything?

古文：祜即席为诗以献云：十年受命镇方隅，孝节忠规两有余。
现代文：张祜便即席献诗：十年受命镇方隅，孝节忠规两有余。
English: Zhang Yibin offered a poem on the spot: in the past ten years, I have been ordered to be diligent, and I have more than two filial piety.

古文：谁信将坛嘉政外，李陵章句右军书。
现代文：谁信将坛嘉政外，李陵章句右军书。
English: Who believes will be outside the altar of Jia Zheng, Li Ling chapter and sentence right army book.

古文：智兴览之笑曰：褒饰之词，可谓过当矣。
现代文：王智兴看完笑着说：你对我褒奖得有点过头了。
English: After watching, Wang Zhixing said with a smile: You have praised me a little too much.

古文：左右或言曰：书生之徒，务为谄侫。
现代文：他左右有人说：这些读书人，就会谄媚。
English: Some people around him said, "These readers will be charming."

古文：智兴叱之曰：有人道我恶，汝辈又肯否？
现代文：王智兴训斥了那些人说：有人若是说我坏，你们又能怎么说？
English: Wang Zhixing reprimanded those people, saying: "If someone says I am bad, what can you say?

古文：唐高骈幼好为诗，雅有奇藻，属情赋咏，横绝常流，时秉笔者多不及之。
现代文：张秀才是国内知名人士，叫国内人听说了这事，还以为我智兴只愿听好话似的。他把张祜留住了好些日子，临走时，还赠送他一千匹绢。
English: Zhang Xiu is a famous person in China, so that people in China heard about this and thought that I only wanted to hear good things about Zhixing. He kept Zhang Xiu for several days, and when he left, he also gave him a thousand horses.

古文：故李氏之季，言勋臣有文者，骈其首焉。
现代文：高骈唐朝的高骈，幼年时就喜欢写诗，词藻奇丽，感情饱满，才华横溢。在李氏王朝后期，要说武臣当中文章好的，高骈是第一个。
English: Gao Wei of the Tang Dynasty liked to write poems when he was young, his words were beautiful, full of emotion, and full of talent. In the latter part of the Li Dynasty, Gao Wei was the first samurai to write well.

古文：集遇乱多亡，今其存者盛传于时。
现代文：他的诗集因为战乱，大部分都散佚了。留下来的，直到现在还在流传。
English: Most of his poetry collections were destroyed during the war, but those that survived are still in circulation today.

古文：其自赋《言怀诗》曰：恨乏平戎策，惭登拜将坛。
现代文：他的一首感怀诗写道：恨乏平戎策，惭登拜将坛。
English: One of his inspirational poems reads: "Hate the lack of a peaceful military policy, be ashamed to worship the generals."

古文：手持金钺重，身挂铁衣寒。
现代文：手持金钺重，身挂铁衣寒。
English: Holding a golden scepter in his hand, he is cold in an iron suit.

古文：主圣匡扶易，恩深报效难。
现代文：主圣匡扶易，恩深报效难。
English: The Lord St. Kuang is easy to help, but hard to repay.

古文：三边犹未静，何敢便休官。
现代文：三边犹未静，何敢便休官。
English: The three sides are still not calm, how dare they resign.

古文：《二女庙诗》云：帝舜南巡去不还，二妃幽怨水云间。
现代文：《二女庙》诗：帝舜南巡去不还，二妃幽怨水云间。
English: The poem of "Two Women's Temples": Emperor Xuan went to the south and did not return, and the second empress was filled with bitterness.

古文：当时珠泪垂多少，直到而今竹尚斑。
现代文：当时珠泪垂多少。直到而今竹尚斑。
English: How many tears fell at that time. Until now, bamboo is still mottled.

古文：又《咏雪》云：六月花飘入户时，坐看修竹变琼枝。
现代文：又有《咏雪》诗：六月花飘入户时，坐看修竹变琼技。
English: There is also a poem from "Snowmelt": When the June flowers come into the house, sit and watch the bamboo grow.

古文：逡巡好上高楼望，盖尽人间恶路歧。
现代文：逡巡好上高楼望，盖尽人间恶路岐。
English: A good look at the skyscraper, covering all the bad roads.

古文：又《听歌》诗：公子邀欢月满楼，佳人揭调唱伊州。
现代文：《听歌》诗：公子邀欢月满楼，佳人揭调唱伊州。
English: "Listening to the Song" poem: the prince invites the moon to the mansion, and the beautiful woman sings the song of Izhou.

古文：便从席上秋风起，直到萧关水尽头。
现代文：便从席上秋风起，直到萧关水尽头。
English: The autumn wind blows from the top of the table until the end of the meal.

古文：又《寄僧筇竹杖诗》云：坚轻筇竹枝，一杖有九节。
现代文：《寄僧筇竹杖诗》坚轻筇竹杖，一杖有九节。
English: "Hanging Monk Holding a Bamboo Cane Poem" is a strong and light bamboo cane, one cane has nine knots.

古文：寄与沃州僧，闲步秋山月。
现代文：寄与沃州僧，闲步秋山月。
English: Send a monk from the canton of Vaud to stroll through the autumn moon.

古文：罗昭威
现代文：罗昭威
English: Luo Zhaowei

古文：梁邺王罗昭威世为武人，有胆决，喜尚文学，雅好儒生。于厅所之侧，别立学舍，招延四方游士，置于其间，待以恩礼。
现代文：梁邺王罗昭威，武人世家出身，有胆识，喜欢文学。他喜欢结交读书人，在他的住所旁建立学舍，招请四方游学之士住在这里，以厚礼相待。
English: Luo Zhaowei, the King of Liangyao, came from a warrior family, had courage, and liked literature. He liked to make friends with readers, built a schoolhouse next to his residence, invited scholars from all over the world to live here, and treated them with courtesy.

古文：每旦视事之暇，则与诸儒讲论经义。
现代文：每天公事之余，便和这些四方来的读书人讲经论道。
English: Every day, in addition to his official duties, he gave sermons to these readers from all over the country.

古文：聚书万余卷，于学舍之侧，建置书楼，纵儒士随意观览，己亦孜孜讽诵。当时蕃牧之中，最获文章之誉。
现代文：他收集了一万多卷书，在学舍旁又建置了书楼，让这些读书人随意阅览。他自己也孜孜不倦地阅读，在诸王之中，他的文章最好。
English: He collected more than ten thousand volumes and built a library next to the schoolhouse, so that these readers could read at will. He also read tirelessly himself, and his articles were the best among the kings.

古文：每命幕客作四方书檄，小不称旨，坏裂抵弃，自襞笺起草，下笔成文。
现代文：他命他的幕客们作四方书檄，稍有不满意的，他便撕碎抛弃，他自己展纸起草，挥笔成文。
English: He ordered his guests to make four-sided calligraphy, and if they were not satisfied, he tore them up and threw them away, and he himself unfolded the paper and wrote it down with a pen.

古文：虽无藻丽之风，幕客多所不及。又僻于七言诗，每歌酒宴会，池亭游览，廉不赋咏，题之屋壁。
现代文：他的文章，没有词藻华丽之风，幕客多数不如他，他偏爱七言诗，每当歌酒宴会，池亭游览时，都要吟诗，题写在墙壁上。
English: His articles lack the ornate style of poetry, and most of his guests are not as good as him. He prefers seven-character poems. Whenever there is a song and wine banquet or a tour of a pond pavilion, he must chant poems and inscribe them on the walls.

古文：江南有罗隐者，为两浙钱镠幕客，有文学。
现代文：江南有个叫罗隐的人，他在两浙钱镠府中当幕客，很有文才。
English: There was a man named Luo Ying in Jiangnan Province. He was a guest of the two Zhejiang Qianye prefectures and was very talented in literature.

古文：昭威特遣使币交聘，申南阮之敬。
现代文：罗昭威特意派人去用厚金相聘，并表明自己的敬慕之情。
English: Luo Zhaowei deliberately sent someone to hire him with a lot of money, and expressed his admiration.

古文：隐悉以所著文章诗赋，酬寄昭威。昭大倾慕之，乃目其所为诗曰罗江东。
现代文：罗隐便把他的文章诗赋，都寄给了他，罗昭威读后更加倾慕，并认为罗隐的诗压倒江东一带，可以称为罗江东。
English: Luo Yin then sent him all of his articles and poems. Luo Zhaowei admired them even more after reading them, and thought that Luo Yin's poems overwhelmed the area east of the Yangtze River and could be called Luo Yangtze River East.

古文：今邺中人士，有讽诵者。
现代文：现在梁朝中的人士，经常有人吟诵。
English: People in Liang's high school now often recite the poem.

古文：尝自为太厅记，亦微有可观。
现代文：罗昭威曾经自己写过《大厅记》，也有一些可读之处。
English: Luo Zhaowei once wrote "Hall of Records" himself, and there are some things to read.

