古文：杜鹏举河东县尉妻三卫李湜叶净能王昌龄张嘉佑
现代文：杜鹏举河东县尉妻三卫李湜叶净能王昌龄张嘉佑
English: Du Pengzhi, the first lieutenant of Hedong County, his wife, Sanwei, Li Xuanye, Chinneng, Wang Changling, Zhang Jiayu

古文：杜鹏举
现代文：杜鹏举
English: Du Penghu

古文：景龙末，韦庶人专制。
现代文：唐代中宗末年，韦后专权。
English: In the last years of the Middle Zong Dynasty in the Tang Dynasty, the exclusive power of the Empress Dowager Wei began.

古文：故安州都督赠太师杜鹏举，时尉济源县，为府召至洛城修籍。
现代文：已故太师杜鹏举获安州都督的名号。当时，杜鹏举在济源县任县尉，被州府召进洛阳城整理古籍。
English: The late Grand Master Du Penghu was given the title of Anzhou Governor. At that time, Du Penghu served as a county officer in Jiyuan County and was summoned to Luoyang City by the state government to sort out ancient books.

古文：一夕暴卒，亲宾将具小殓。
现代文：一天夜里，他突然亡故，亲戚朋友准备为他沐浴更衣，他的夫人出面阻止。
English: One night, he died suddenly. Relatives and friends prepared to bathe and dress him, but his wife intervened.

古文：夫人尉迟氏，敬德之孙也，性通明强毅。
现代文：他的夫人姓尉迟，是尉迟敬德的孙女，性格通达开明且坚强刚毅。
English: His wife's surname was 尉迟, and she was the granddaughter of 尉迟敬德. She was open-minded and strong-willed.

古文：曰：公算术神妙，自言官至方伯，今岂长往耶？
现代文：她说：我的丈夫平时神机妙算，自己说能够成为诸侯领袖那样的官，今天怎么会死呢？
English: She said: "My husband was always a very clever man. He said that he could become an official like the leader of the princes. How could he die today?

古文：安然不哭。
现代文：她泰然自若甚至没有哭。
English: She was so composed she didn't even cry.

古文：洎二日三夕，乃心上稍温，翌日徐苏。
现代文：过了两日三夜，杜鹏举的心窝有了热气；第二天天亮时终于苏醒过来。
English: After two days and three nights, Du Pengju's heart was warmed; he finally woke up at dawn the next day.

古文：数日方语云：初见两人持符来召，遂相引徽安门出。
现代文：几天之后，他才对人们说出梦中情景。开始，只见两个人拿着符节来召他，于是他在他们的引导下从徽安门走了出去。
English: It took a few days for him to tell people about the dream. At first, two people came to call him with symbols, and he walked out of the Hui'an Gate under their guidance.

古文：门隙容寸，过之尚宽。
现代文：那门缝只有一寸多，走过时却觉得很宽。
English: The door gap is just over an inch, but I feel very wide when I walk past it.

古文：直北上邙山，可十余里，有大坑，视不见底。
现代文：他们一直向北上了邙山，大约走出十余里地，见到一个大洞，深不见底。
English: They went all the way north to Shaoshan, walked about ten miles, and saw a big hole, bottomless.

古文：使者令入，鹏举大惧。
现代文：那两位使者让杜鹏举进去，他颇为恐惧。
English: The two emissaries asked Du Peng to lift them in, and he was quite frightened.

古文：使者曰：可闭目。
现代文：使者们说，你可以闭上眼睛。
English: The messengers said you can close your eyes.

古文：执手如飞，须臾足已履地。
现代文：他们拉着他的手，如同飞翔一般，一会儿脚已着地。
English: They took him by the hand as if he were flying, and in a moment his feet were on the ground.

古文：寻小径东行，凡数十时，天气昏惨，如冬凝阴。
现代文：沿着小道向东走，一共行了几十里，天空变得昏昏惨惨，如冬季里凝固般的阴天。
English: Walking east along the trail, for a total of dozens of miles, the sky became gloomy and miserable, like a frozen cloudy day in winter.

古文：遂至一廨，墙宇宏壮。
现代文：随即来到一座官府前，只见那城墙和屋宇十分宏伟壮观。
English: Then I came to a government office and saw that the walls and buildings were very grand and magnificent.

古文：使者先入。
现代文：两位使者先走了进去。
English: The two emissaries went in first.

古文：有碧衣官出，趋拜颇恭，既退引入。
现代文：一会儿，有位穿绿衣服的官员走了出来，十分恭敬地向杜鹏举迎拜，然后退到一旁引他入府。
English: After a while, an official dressed in green came out, bowed to Du Peng very respectfully, and then stepped aside to usher him into the house.

古文：碧衣者踞坐案后，命鹏举前，旁有一狗。
现代文：这位穿绿衣服的官员坐在案桌后，让杜鹏举走上前去，他的身旁有一只狗。
English: The official, dressed in green, sits behind a desk and tells Du Peng to walk forward, holding a dog by his side.

古文：人语云：误姓名同，非此官也。
现代文：有人对绿衣官员说：错了错了，虽然同姓同名，但要请的不是这位官员呵！
English: Someone said to the official in green: "Wrong, wrong. Although we have the same surname and the same name, it's not the official we want to invite!"

古文：笞使者，改符令去。
现代文：绿衣官员令人用板子笞打使者，然后改了符节让他们下去。
English: The green-clad official ordered them to beat the envoys with a board, and then changed the symbols to make them go down.

古文：有一马，半身两足，跳梁而前曰：往为杜鹏举杀，今请理冤。
现代文：这时，有一匹半个身子、两条腿的残马，腾跃跳动挪到前面，说：当年我被杜鹏举杀死，今天请大人作主，为我申冤。
English: At this time, there was a half-sized, two-legged remnant horse, which pranced and jumped to the front, saying: "That year I was killed by Du Penghu, today I ask adults to be the master and seek justice for me."

古文：鹏举亦醒然记之，诉云：曾知驿，敕使将马令杀，非某所愿。
现代文：杜鹏举也清醒过来想起了那件事，申诉说：我曾经当过驿夫，遵敕命将马杀死，这并不是我自愿的呀！
English: Du Penghu also came to his senses and recalled the incident, complaining: "I was once a woodcutter, and I killed a horse according to my orders. This was not something I did voluntarily!

古文：碧衣命吏取按，审然之，马遂退。
现代文：绿衣官让小吏拿出案卷，审视起来，那匹残马随即退下。
English: The green-clothed officer asked the minor official to take out the case file, examine it, and the horse immediately withdrew.

古文：旁见一吏，挥手动目，教以事理，意相庇脱。
现代文：旁边，走出一个小吏，朝杜鹏举挥手挤眼，教他应付此事的办法，那意思是想庇护于他，使他得到解脱。
English: Beside him, a minor official came out and waved his hand at Du Peng and squeezed his eyes, telling him how to deal with the matter, which meant that he wanted to shelter him and help him get relief.

古文：所证既毕，遂揖之出。碧衣拜送门外。云：某是生人，安州编户。
现代文：案子审理完了，杜鹏举朝绿衣官员揖拜后走出来；绿衣官员也还礼送到门外，说；我是生人，户籍在安州。
English: After the trial was over, Du Peng bowed to the green-clad official and came out. The green-clad official also sent a gift outside the door, saying: I am a stranger, my household registration is in Anzhou.

古文：少府当为安州都督，故先施敬，愿自保持。
现代文：将来，你能做安州都督，因此我先向你施礼，希望你好自为之。
English: In the future, you can be the governor of Anzhou, so I will bow to you first. I hope you can do it on your own.

古文：言讫，而向所教之吏趋出，云：姓韦名鼎，亦是生人。
现代文：说完，便把那位教杜鹏举应付办法的小吏喊出来，说他姓韦名鼎，亦是个生人，住在京都长安的务本坊。
English: Having said that, he called out the minor official who taught Du Penghu how to cope, saying that his surname was Wei Mingting, he was also a stranger, and he lived in Wubenbo, Chang'an, Kyoto.

古文：在上都务本坊，自称向来有力，祈钱十万。
现代文：他自称家中一向颇有财力，祈告要十万钱。
English: He claimed that his family had always had a lot of money and asked for 100,000 yuan.

古文：鹏举辞不能致。
现代文：杜鹏举与他推辞不能相送。
English: Du Penghu and his resignation cannot be sent together.

古文：鼎云：某虽生人，今于此用纸钱，易致耳。
现代文：韦鼎说：我虽然是生人，今天在这里用冥间的纸钱，容易收到呵。
English: Wei Ding said: Although I am a stranger, I used paper money from the underworld here today. It was easy to receive.

古文：遂许之。
现代文：杜鹏举遂应允下来去他家通知。
English: He agreed to Hou Jing's request.

古文：亦嘱云：焚时愿以物籍之，幸不著地，兼呼韦鼎，某即自使人受。
现代文：韦鼎嘱咐说，烧纸的时候，希望能用什么东西装着，不要让它着地，一边烧一边喊我的名字，我当即派人去取。
English: Wei Ding instructed that when burning paper, I hope to use something to carry it, do not let it land, and call my name while burning, I immediately send someone to fetch it.

古文：鼎又云：既至此，岂不要见当家簿书。
现代文：韦鼎又说：你既然来到此地，难道不想看看你们家的簿册和文书吗？
English: Wei Ding also said: Since you have come here, don't you want to look at your family's books and documents?

古文：遂引入一院，题云户部。
现代文：随即领杜鹏举来到一个院内，门口写着：户部字样。
English: Du Penghu was then led to a hospital, where the words "Home Office" were written on the door.

古文：房廊四周，簿帐山积。
现代文：这里房间和走廊上，簿册帐本等物堆积如山。
English: Here, in the rooms and corridors, books, ledgers and the like are piled high.

古文：当中三间，架阁特高，覆以赤黄帏帕，金字榜曰《皇籍》。
现代文：当中的三间房子里，阁板搭得相当之高，覆盖着红黄色的帏幔和帕布，镶金的榜上写着皇籍二字。
English: In three of the houses, the attic is quite high, covered with red and yellow felt and parchment, with the word "Imperial" inscribed on a gold-plated plaque.

古文：余皆露架，往往有函，紫色盖之。
现代文：其余的架子全露在外面，往往是用紫色的封套盖着。
English: The rest of the shelves are bare, often covered with purple covers.

古文：韦鼎云：宰相也。
现代文：韦鼎说：这些都是宰相呵。
English: Wei Ding said: These are all prime ministers.

古文：因引诣杜氏籍，书笺云《濮阳房》。
现代文：接着，韦鼎领他来到杜氏家族的籍册旁，只见册签上写着濮阳房三个字，上面有四个紫色的封套。
English: Next, Wei Ding led him to the register of the Du family. He saw that the register was signed with the three words "Shuyang House" and had four purple envelopes on it.

古文：有紫函四，发开卷，鹏举三男，时未生者，籍名已具。
现代文：打开卷册，只见上面写着杜鹏举有三个儿子，当时还有没生下来的，籍册上却也有名字。
English: Opening the book, I saw that it said that Du Penghu had three sons, but they were not born at that time, but there were also names in the book.

古文：遂求笔，书其名于臂。
现代文：杜鹏举立即要来一支笔，把他们的名字写在了胳膊上。
English: Du Peng immediately asked for a pen and wrote their names on his arm.

古文：意愿踟蹰，更欲周览。
现代文：他本想再徘徊一会儿，将四周的籍册都看一看。
English: He would have liked to linger a little longer, looking at the registers all around him.

古文：韦鼎云：既不住，亦要早归。
现代文：韦鼎说：你既然不想在这里住下，那就干脆早点回去吧。
English: Wei Ding said: Since you don't want to live here, then just go back earlier.

古文：遂引出，令一吏送还。
现代文：随即把杜鹏举领出来，让一名小吏送他回家。
English: Du Peng was then lifted up and led out, and a minor official was sent to take him home.

古文：吏云：某苦饥，不逢此便，无因得出。
现代文：小吏说：我十分饥饿，不大方便，不能送你了。
English: The little clerk said, "I'm very hungry, and it's not very convenient, so I can't take you."

古文：愿许别去，冀求一食。
现代文：希望你准许我不去，好好吃一顿饱饭。
English: I hope you'll forgive me if I don't go. I want to eat a full meal.

古文：但寻此道，自至其所，留之不可。
现代文：只要沿着这条道，你自己就可以回到家，千万别留下来。
English: Just follow this road and you will be able to get home yourself. Don't stay behind.

古文：鹏举遂西行。
现代文：杜鹏举随即向西而行。
English: Du Penghu immediately headed west.

古文：道左忽见一新城，异香闻数里。
现代文：走着走着，道旁忽然闪出一座新城，异常的香气散发出来，几里之外就能够闻到。
English: As we walked, a new city suddenly appeared on the side of the road, emitting an unusual aroma that could be smelled from several miles away.

古文：环城皆甲士持兵。
现代文：城的四周全是拿着兵器、穿着盔甲的兵士。
English: All around the city were soldiers carrying weapons and wearing armor.

古文：鹏举问之，甲士云：相王于此上天子，有四百天人来送。
现代文：杜鹏举上前询问，兵士说：相王李旦在这里当上了天子，现有四百个神仙来送他。
English: Du Peng raised his hand to inquire, and the soldier said: "Here, the king of sorcery, Li Dan, has become the Son of Heaven, and there are now four hundred immortals to see him off.

古文：鹏举曾为相王府官，忻闻此说。
现代文：杜鹏举曾经在相王府中做过官，听他这样一说十分欣喜。
English: Du Penghu had once served as an official in the king's court, and was very pleased to hear him say this.

古文：墙有大隙，窥见分明，天人数百，围绕相王。满地彩云，并衣仙服，皆如画者。
现代文：城墙有道大缝子，杜鹏举看得非常清楚。天上的神仙一共有好几百人，紧紧围绕在相王周围，他们穿着仙衣，脚下一片彩霞，全跟画上画的一样。
English: There is a large slit in the city wall, and Du Penghu can see it very clearly. There are hundreds of celestial immortals in total, tightly surrounding the King of Soul. They are dressed in fairy clothes, and there is a bright haze under their feet. They are all the same as in the picture.

古文：相王前有女人，执香炉引。
现代文：相王的前面有几位女子，端着香炉在前引路。
English: There are several women in front of the king, leading the way with incense burners.

古文：行近窥谛，衣裙带状似剪破，一如雁齿状。
现代文：走到近前，杜鹏举仔细窥视，只见那几位女子的衣服和裙带像剪开了似的，都如同雁齿的形状。
English: When he came closer, Du Penghu peered closely and saw that the women's clothes and corsets looked like they had been cut off, and they all looked like the shape of goose teeth.

古文：相王戴一日，光明辉赫，近可丈余。
现代文：相王头顶一轮太阳，光芒万丈，明亮辉煌，离他只有一丈多高。
English: On the top of the king's head is a round sun, radiant, bright and brilliant, only a few feet away from him.

古文：相王后凡有十九日，垒垒成行，大光明皆如所戴。
现代文：相王身后一共还有十九轮太阳，重叠成行，赫赫耀眼，全跟他头顶的那轮一样。
English: There are a total of nineteen suns behind the king, overlapping in a row, dazzling, all the same as the one above his head.

古文：须臾。有绨骑来迎。
现代文：一会儿，有穿厚绸袍的甲士骑马来迎接相王。
English: A moment later, a warrior in a thick silk robe rode up to meet the king.

古文：甲土令鹏举走，遂至故道，不觉已及徽安门。
现代文：这时，穿盔甲的士兵让杜鹏举赶紧走。他随即回到原来那条路上，不知不觉到了徽安门。
English: At this time, the soldier in armor told Du Penghe to hurry up and leave. He then returned to the original road and unknowingly arrived at the Hui'an Gate.

古文：门闭闲过之，亦如去时容易。
现代文：大门关着，只好从门缝里钻，想不到竟跟出来时那么容易。
English: With the gate closed, I had to drill through a crack in the door, and I couldn't believe how easy it was to get out.

古文：为群犬遮啮。行不可进。
现代文：一群狗拦住去路，不停地咬，使他行进不得。
English: A pack of dogs blocked his path and kept biting him, making it impossible for him to walk.

古文：至家，见身在床上，跃入身中，遂寤。
现代文：好不容易回到家，只见自己的身子还躺在床上呢。他的灵魂刚扑到身体上，随即醒来。
English: When he finally got home, he found himself still in bed. His soul had just landed on his body when he woke up.

古文：臂上所记，如朽木书，字尚分明。
现代文：看看胳膊上记的儿子的名字，如同画在朽木上一样，但还看得清楚。
English: Look at the son's name on his arm, like it's painted on rotten wood, but you can still see it.

古文：遂焚纸钱十万，呼赠韦鼎。
现代文：当即，他烧了十万纸钱，一边一烧一边说是送给韦鼎的。
English: Immediately, he burned one hundred thousand paper money, saying that it was given to Wei Ding as he burned it.

古文：心知卜代之数，中兴之期，遂以假故，来谒睿宗。
现代文：心里计算着李氏中兴的日期。他借一个理由来拜谒睿宗。
English: Calculating the date of Li's enthronement in his mind, he borrowed a reason to pay homage to Zhu Ruizong.

古文：上握手曰：岂敢忘德？
现代文：睿宗握着他的手说：怎么敢忘记你的恩德呢？
English: Ruizong held his hand and said, "How dare you forget your kindness?"

古文：寻求韦鼎，适卒矣。
现代文：于是寻访韦鼎，不巧他刚刚死去。
English: So they went looking for Wei Ding. Unfortunately, he had just died.

古文：及睿宗登极，拜右拾遗。词云：思入风雅，灵通鬼神。
现代文：到睿宗登基之后，拜杜鹏举为右拾遗，并为他题词道：思入风雅，灵通鬼神。
English: After Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, Bai Dupeng held it up as a right-hand relic, and inscribed it for him, saying, "Thinking about elegance, being able to communicate with ghosts and gods."

古文：敕宫人妃主数十，同其妆服。
现代文：睿宗下令让几十个宫娥妃子，一同化妆舞蹈。
English: Ruizong ordered dozens of concubines to make up and dance together.

古文：令视执炉者。
现代文：并让杜鹏举看那位手拿鑪的那个人。
English: He also asked Du Peng to point out the person holding the handcuffs.

古文：鹏举遥识之，乃太平公主也。
现代文：杜鹏举远远就认出来了，她就是太平公主呵。
English: Du Penghu recognized her from far away, she was the Taiping Princess.

古文：问裙带之由，其公主云：方熨龙衮，忽为火迸，惊忙之中，不觉爇带，仓惶不及更服。
现代文：他上前问她的衣服是怎么搞的，太平公主说：刚刚熨好的龙袍，忽然被火烧了，惊慌匆忙之中，不知不觉裙带也点着了，仓惶之中便没有来得及换衣服。
English: He came forward to ask her what had happened to her clothes, and Princess Taiping said: "My dragon robe, which had just been ironed, was suddenly set on fire, and in my panic and haste, I unknowingly set my maiden dress on fire, and in my panic I didn't have time to change my clothes.

古文：公主唏嘘陈贺曰：圣人之兴，固自天也。
现代文：太平公主感叹不已地上前祝贺其兄道：圣人的兴达，一般都是来自于天上呵！
English: Princess Taiping sighed as she stepped forward to congratulate her brother: The enlightenment of saints usually comes from heaven!

古文：鹏举所见，先睿宗龙飞前三年。
现代文：杜鹏举所看见的，是在睿宗皇帝登基前三年。
English: What Du Penghu saw was three years before Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne.

古文：故鹏举墓志云：及睿宗践祚，阴骘祥符。
现代文：因此，他的墓志铭上写道：待睿宗即位时，恰与他在阴间所见一致。
English: Therefore, the epitaph on his tombstone reads: "When Ta Ruizong ascended the throne, it was exactly the same as what he saw in the underworld."

古文：启圣期于化元，定成命于幽数。
现代文：他在阴间就知道皇帝登基的日子，真是定天命于幽冥之间。
English: He knew the day of the emperor's ascension to the throne in the underworld, and it was truly a predestined destiny between darkness and light.

古文：后果为安州都督。
现代文：后来，他果然成为安州都督。
English: Later, he became the governor of Anzhou.

古文：又一说，鹏举得释，复入一院，问帘下者为谁，曰：魏元忠也。
现代文：又还有这样一种说法。杜鹏举被解脱之后，又进了一个院子，他问帘下坐着的人是谁，回答说是魏元忠呵。
English: There is another story. After Du Penghu was released, he went into a courtyard again. He asked who the person sitting under the curtain was, and answered that it was Wei Yuanzhong.

古文：有顷，敬挥至，下马，众接拜之。
现代文：有顷，敬挥到了，跳下马来，众人上前迎拜。
English: All of a sudden, when the waving arrived, everyone jumped off their horses and came forward to pay homage.

古文：云是大理卿对推事。
现代文：说是掌管审判的大理寺卿对推事。
English: It is said that Lord Daliji, who is in charge of the trial, is the judge.

古文：见武三思著枷、韦温、宗楚客、赵履温等著锁，李峤露头散腰立。闻元忠等云：今年大计会。
现代文：他看见武三思戴着刑伽，韦温、宗楚客、赵履温等人戴着锁链，还看见李峤光着脑袋，连腰带也没有扎呆呆地站在那儿，并听魏元忠等人说：今年大聚会呀！
English: He saw Wu Sanshi wearing a torture device, Wei Wen, Zong Chu Ke, Zhao Li Wen and others wearing chains, and also saw Li Xuan standing there with his head shaved and without a belt, listening to Wei Yuan Zhong and others saying, "This year's big party!

古文：果至六月，诛逆韦，宗赵韦等并斩，峤解官归第，皆如其言。
现代文：果然到了六月，韦后被杀，宗楚客、赵履温和韦温也一并被斩，李峤被罢官归家，全都跟他说的一样。
English: Sure enough, in June, Wei Hou was killed, Zong Chu Ge, Zhao Li Wen and Wei Wen were also beheaded, and Li Xuan was dismissed and returned home, all of which were the same as he said.

古文：河东县尉妻
现代文：河东县尉妻
English: The wife of the captain of Hedong County

古文：景云中，河东南县尉李某，妻王氏，有美色，著称三辅。
现代文：唐人睿宗景云年间，南边河东县县尉李某的妻子王氏，颇有几分姿色，在陕西中部地区出了名。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingyun, Wang, the wife of Li Mou, a county official in the southern county of Hedong, was famous in the central region of Shaanxi.

古文：李朝趋府未归，王妆梳向毕，焚香闲坐，忽见黄门数人，御犊车，自云中下至堂所，王氏惊问所以。
现代文：李某早晨去州府办公事尚未回来，王氏梳妆完了，正焚香闲坐时，忽然看见有好几个黄门侍郎，赶着小牛车，从云朵里下到房前站定。
English: One morning, Mr. Li had not yet returned from his business trip to the state capital. Mr. Wang had finished putting on his makeup and was sitting idly burning incense when he suddenly saw several Yellow Gate attendants, driving a calf cart, descend from the clouds to stand in front of the house.

古文：答曰：华山府君，使来奉迎。
现代文：王氏惊恐地上前询问他们要干什么，回答说：我们是华山府君派来迎接你的，你不想去也得去。
English: Frightened, Mr. Wang stepped forward and asked what they wanted to do. They replied, "We were sent by the governor of Huashan Prefecture to meet you. If you don't want to go, you have to go."

古文：辞不获放，仓卒欲去，谓家人曰：恨不得见李少府别。
现代文：急忙就要把她带走。王氏对家人说：遗憾的是没有看到李县尉，不能和他告别了！
English: Mr. Wang said to his family, "Unfortunately, I didn't see Lieutenant Li County, so I can't say goodbye to him!"

古文：挥泪而行，死于阶侧。
现代文：她挥泪而行，转身死在台阶旁边。
English: She walked away in tears and turned to die at the foot of the steps.

古文：俄而彩云捧车浮空，冉冉遂灭。
现代文：俄顷，彩云驾起小牛车，缓缓升起，腾空而去。
English: Suddenly, Caiyun drove up the calf cart, slowly rose, and took off.

古文：李自州还，既不见妻，抚尸号恸，绝而复苏者数四。
现代文：李某从州府回来，便摇晃着她的尸体号啕恸哭。他一连哭死过去好几次，都被喊醒了。
English: When Li returned from the state capital, he shook her corpse and wailed. He cried himself to death several times and was woken up.

古文：少顷，有人诣门，自言能活夫人。
现代文：过了一会儿，有人进门来，说自己能够把夫人救活。
English: Moments later, someone came to the door and said he could save her life.

古文：李罄折拜谒，求见卫护。其人坐床上，觅朱书符。朱未至，因书墨符飞之。
现代文：李某把腰弯到最大限度向他拜谒，求他救护，那人坐到榻上，找红颜料画符，没有找到；于是便用墨汁画了一道符，抛了出去。
English: Li bowed down to him as much as possible and begged him for help. The man sat on the bed and looked for red paint symbols, but couldn't find any. So he drew a symbol with ink and threw it out.

古文：须臾未至，又飞一符。笑谓李曰：无苦，寻常得活。
现代文：有顷，未见效果，他又画了一道符抛了出去，笑着对李某说：不要担心，一会儿她就能活过来。
English: Suddenly, seeing no effect, he drew another sign and threw it out, saying to Li Mou with a smile: Don't worry, she'll come back to life in a moment.

古文：有顷而王氏苏。
现代文：有顷，王氏终于苏醒过来。
English: Suddenly, Mr. Wang finally woke up.

古文：李拜谢数十，竭力赠遗。
现代文：李某向那人连拜几十下，并尽其所能赠送不少礼品。
English: Mr. Li bowed to the man for dozens of times, and did his best to give away many gifts.

古文：人大笑曰：救灾恤患，焉用物乎？
现代文：那人大笑一声说：救灾除患，还用得着这些东西吗？
English: The man burst out laughing and said, "Do you still need these things for disaster relief?

古文：遂出门不见。
现代文：随即一出门就不见踪影。
English: He disappeared as soon as he left the house.

古文：王氏既悟，云：初至华山，见王，王甚悦。列供帐于山椒，与其徒数人欢饮。
现代文：王氏醒悟了，说：我刚到华山见到府君，他很高兴，把帷帐置于山顶，和他手下一些人畅饮起来。
English: Mr. Wang came to his senses and said, "I just came to Huashan to see Fuchun. He was very happy, put the curtain on the top of the mountain, and had a drink with some of his men.

古文：宴乐毕，方申缱绻，适尔杯酌，忽见一人，乘黑云至，云：太一令唤王夫人。
现代文：酒宴舞乐结束之后，他正要与我缠绵喝交杯酒时，忽然只见一个人乘着黑云而来，说道： 天神让我来找王夫人。
English: After the wine banquet and dance, he was about to linger with me and drink a glass of wine, when he suddenly saw a person coming on a black cloud, saying: "The angels told me to come to Mrs. Wang."

古文：神犹从容，请俟毕会。
现代文：府君还很从容镇定，让他等婚礼完毕之后再说。
English: Fuchun remained calm and composed, and told him to wait until after the wedding.

古文：寻又一人乘赤云，大怒曰：太一问华山何以辄取生人妇？
现代文：旋即，又有一个人乘着红云而至，大怒道： 天神问华山府君为什么要娶活人的妻子呢？
English: Suddenly, another person arrived on a red cloud and said angrily, "The sky god asked Huashanfukun, 'Why do you want to marry the wife of a living person?'

古文：不速送还，当有深谴。
现代文：不快点送回去，必受严惩！ 
English: If you don't send them back soon, you will be severely punished!

古文：神大惶惧，便令送至家。
现代文：府君十分惶恐害怕，便派人把我送回了家。
English: Fuchun was very panicked and scared, so he sent someone to take me back home.

古文：三卫
现代文：三卫
English: Sanwei

古文：开元初，有三卫自京还青州，至华岳庙前，见青衣婢。衣服故恶。来白云：娘子欲见。
现代文：唐玄宗开元初年，有个当三卫的官员从长安回青州。到华山岳庙前，看见一个青衣婢女，衣衫破烂不堪，上来对他说道：我们娘子想见你一面。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, an official of the Three Guards returned to Qingzhou from Chang'an. When he arrived in front of Huashan Mountain Temple, he saw a maid in a blue dress, her clothes in tatters, who came up to him and said, "Our daughter would like to see you."

古文：因引前行。
现代文：于是在前面引路，来到一位夫人面前。
English: So he led the way in front of a lady.

古文：遇见一妇人，年十六七，容色惨悴。
现代文：她十六七岁，脸色憔悴，神情黯然。
English: She was sixteen or seventeen years old, with a haggard face and a gloomy expression.

古文：曰：己非人，华岳第三新妇，夫婿极恶。
现代文：她对三卫说：实话告诉你吧，我本不是人呵。我现在是华山府君的第三个儿子的娘子，丈夫十分凶恶。
English: She said to Sanwei, "To tell you the truth, I am not a human being. I am now the daughter of the third son of Huashanfukun, and my husband is very vicious.

古文：家在北海，三年无书信，以此尤为岳子所薄。
现代文：我的家住在北海，三年没有得到书信了。因为这个，我特别被华山府君的儿子看不起。
English: My family lives in the North Sea, and I haven't received a letter in three years. Because of this, I am particularly despised by the son of Huashan Fuchun.

古文：闻君远还，欲以尺书仰累，若能为达，家君当有厚报。
现代文：听说你自远处还家，想捎封书信回去，劳驾你了！如果能把书信送到，家父必有重谢。
English: I heard that you came home from far away and wanted to return with a sealed letter. Thank you! If you can deliver the letter, my father will be very grateful.

古文：遂以书付之。
现代文：随即，把书信交给了他。
English: Immediately, I handed him the letter.

古文：其人亦信士也，问北海于何所送之，妇人云：海池上第二树，但扣之，当有应者。
现代文：三卫也是位讲信义的人呵，当即就问在北海的什么地方才能把信送到。夫人说；你找到海边的第二棵树，只要用力一敲，就会有人出来的。
English: Sanwei was also a man of faith. He immediately asked where in the North Sea he could deliver the letter. His wife said, "If you find the second tree by the sea, just knock hard and someone will come out."

古文：言讫诀去。
现代文：说罢告别而去。
English: Say goodbye and leave.

古文：及至北海，如言送书。
现代文：三卫来到北海，照那夫人所说的去送信。
English: Sanwei came to the North Sea and sent the letter as the lady said.

古文：扣树毕，忽见朱门在树下，有人从门中受事，人以书付之。
现代文：敲完了海边的第二棵树，忽然看见树下有一道红门，有人从门中探出头来问他何事。
English: After knocking on the second tree on the seashore, he suddenly saw a red door under the tree. Someone poked his head out of the door to ask him what was going on.

古文：入顷之，出云：大王请客入。
现代文：他把书信交给了守门人。守门人进去片刻，便出来说：大王请客人进去。
English: He gave the letter to the doorkeeper, who went in for a moment, then came out and said, "Your Majesty, please let your guest come in."

古文：随行百余步，后入一门，有朱衣人，长丈余，左右侍女数千百人。
现代文：三卫跟着他走了一百多步，又进了一道门。迎面看见一个穿红衣服的人，一丈多高，周围的侍女成千上百。
English: Sanwei followed him for more than a hundred paces and entered another door. He saw a man in a red robe face to face, towering over him, surrounded by hundreds of maids.

古文：坐毕，乃曰：三年不得女书。
现代文：穿红衣服的人请三卫坐下后，便说：三年没有得到女儿的书信了！
English: After the man in red asked Sanwei to sit down, he said, "I haven't received a letter from my daughter in three years!

古文：读书大怒，曰：奴辈敢尔！
现代文：他看完书信，大怒说：这奴才的胆子也太大了！
English: After reading the letter, he angrily said, "This rascal is too daring!

古文：乃传教，召左右虞侯。
现代文：于是传令召左右虞候上殿。
English: As a result, a summons was issued to summon the right and left statesmen to come to the palace.

古文：须臾而至，悉长丈余，巨头大鼻，状貌可恶。
现代文：不一会儿，二位虞候奉命赶到，他们都一丈多高，巨头大鼻子，相貌十分丑陋可怕。
English: Not long after, the two magistrates were ordered to arrive. They were both very tall, with huge noses, and very ugly and scary-looking.

古文：令调兵五万，至十五日，乃西伐华山，无令不胜。
现代文：大王命令他们调集五万兵马，到十五日那天，向西进军讨伐华山。一定要取胜。
English: The great king ordered them to mobilize fifty thousand soldiers and horses, and by the fifteenth day, march westward to fight Huashan. They must win.

古文：二人受教走出。乃谓三卫曰：无以上报。命左右取绢二疋赠使者。
现代文：二位虞候领命走出来，又对三卫说：没有什么报答你的，大王让我们拿二疋绢布赠送给你。
English: The two elder statesmen came out to receive the order, and said to Sanwei, "There is nothing to reward you with. Your Majesty, let us present you with two pieces of cloth."

古文：三卫不说，心怨二疋之少也。
现代文：三卫不大高兴，心想这二疋绢布也太少了吧？
English: Sanwei is not very happy, thinking that these two pieces of cloth are too few, right?

古文：持别，朱衣人曰：两绢得二万贯，方可卖，慎无贱与人也。
现代文：握别时，大王说：两疋绢布给两万贯，你才能卖，千万不要降价卖给人家呵。
English: When parting, the great king said: "You can only sell two reams of cloth for twenty thousand yuan. Don't sell it to anyone at a lower price."

古文：三卫既出，欲验其事，复往华阴。
现代文：三卫走上岸来，想验证一下这件事，便又向华山走去。
English: When Sanwei came ashore, he wanted to verify the matter, so he went to Huashan again.

古文：至十五日，既暮，遥见东方黑气如盖。稍稍西行，雷震电掣，声闻百里。
现代文：到了十五日这天傍晚，他远远看见东边黑云如车篷一般，缓缓西行，电闪雷鸣，百里之内都可以听到。
English: On the evening of the fifteenth day, he saw in the distance a dark cloud in the east, like a car hood, slowly moving westward, lightning and thunder, which could be heard within a hundred miles.

古文：须臾，华山大风折树，自西吹云，云势益壮，直至华山。
现代文：一会儿，华山上刮起狂风，把大树都折断了。从西边吹来乌云，那乌云越来越浓，直奔华山而去。
English: After a while, a fierce wind blew over Huashan, breaking all the big trees. Dark clouds blew from the west, and the dark clouds became thicker and thicker, heading straight for Huashan.

古文：雷火喧薄，遍山涸赤，久之方罢。
现代文：雷火喷射不已，遍山一片通红，连山泉都烤干了。
English: Lightning and fire continued to spray, the whole mountain was red, and even the mountain springs were dry.

古文：及明，山色焦黑。
现代文：闹了很长时间方才罢休。
English: It went on for a long time before it stopped.

古文：三卫乃入京卖绢。
现代文：等到第二天天亮时，只见山色由翠绿变成了焦黑。
English: By dawn the next day, the mountain had turned from emerald green to charred black.

古文：买者闻求二万，莫不嗤骇，以为狂人。
现代文：见状，三卫就进京城去卖绢布。买主们一听说要二万贯钱，没有不吃惊并嘲笑的，认为他是个疯子。
English: Seeing the notice, Sanwei went to the capital to sell cocoons. When the buyers heard that he wanted 20,000 yuan, they were surprised and laughed, thinking that he was a madman.

古文：后数日，有白马丈夫来买，直还二万，不复踌躇，其钱先已锁在西市。
现代文：几天之后，有位骑白马的汉子来买，毫不犹豫，一下子就给了他二万贯钱。这笔钱早就在西市里锁着呢。
English: A few days later, a man on a white horse came to buy it, and without hesitation, he immediately gave him twenty thousand yuan. This money had already been locked in Xicheng.

古文：三卫因问买所用。丈夫曰：今以渭川神嫁女，用此赠遗。
现代文：三卫便问他买这绢布干什用，汉子说：今天，渭川之神嫁女儿，我想用它送礼。
English: Sanwei then asked him to buy this piece of cloth for something, and the man said, "Today, the god of the Li River is marrying his daughter, and I want to use it to give a gift."

古文：天下唯北海绢最佳，方欲令人往市，闻君卖北海绢，故来尔。
现代文：天底下只有北海的绢布为最好，刚才派人已去市场转了一圈。听说你在卖北海的绢布，我所以就来了。
English: Only North Sea cocoons are the best under the sun. Just now, I sent someone to the market to take a look around. I heard you were selling North Sea cocoons, so I came.

古文：三卫得钱，数月货易毕，东还青土，行至化阴，复见前时青衣云：娘子故来谢恩。
现代文：三卫得到了二万贯钱，几个月之内，他又用这钱做了几笔买卖。东归回青州时，行到华山脚下，又看见当初那个青衣婢女，向他说道：我们娘子向你谢恩来了！
English: Sanwei got twenty thousand yuan, and within a few months, he used the money to make several deals. When he returned to Qingzhou, he went to the foot of Huashan Mountain, and saw the maid in blue, and said to him, "Our daughter thanks you!

古文：便见青盖犊车，自山而下，左右从者十余辈。
现代文：这时，只见一辆带篷的小牛车自山而下，左右跟着十几个随从。
English: At this time, I only saw a small ox cart with a canopy coming down from the mountain, followed by about a dozen followers.

古文：既至下车，亦是前时女郎，容服炳焕，流目清眄，迨不可识。
现代文：来到跟前下车，走出一个人，又是当初那位年轻的夫人。她服饰一新，容光焕发；目光顾盼，清澈有神。
English: When I got to the front of the car, someone got out, and it was the young lady from before. Her clothes were brand new, her face was radiant, and her eyes were bright and clear.

古文：见三卫，拜乃言曰：蒙君厚恩，远报父母。
现代文：三卫望着她都有点认不出来了。她见到三卫，便拜谢说道：蒙你的厚恩，把我的书信送给了远方的父母。
English: When she saw Sanwei, she thanked him and said, "Thanks to your kindness, I was able to send my letter to my parents who live far away.

古文：自闹战之后，恩情颇深，但愧无可仰报尔。
现代文：自开战之后，我们夫妻间的感情有了好转，且日见深厚。
English: Since the beginning of the war, the feelings between my husband and I have improved and have become more profound.

古文：然三郎以君达书故，移怒于君，今将五百兵，于潼关相候。
现代文：惭愧的是没有什么报答于你呵。另外，我的丈夫由于你送书信的原因，迁怒于你，今天派出五百兵马，正在潼关等着你呢！
English: I am ashamed that I have nothing to repay you with. In addition, my husband is angry with you because of the reason you sent the letter. Today, he sent five hundred soldiers and horses, and they are waiting for you in Shaoguan!

古文：君若往，必为所害，可且还京，不久大驾东幸，鬼神惧鼓车，君若坐于鼓车，则无虑也。
现代文：你如果再往前走，必然遇害，可以暂且回到长安。不久，皇帝将去东方巡幸，鬼神都害怕鼓车，你如果坐在鼓车上，就不用担心了。
English: If you go any further, you will certainly be killed, and you can temporarily return to Chang'an. Soon, the emperor will go on a tour of the East, and ghosts and gods are afraid of the drum car. If you sit on the drum car, you don't have to worry.

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：说完，她便不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：三卫大惧，即时还京。
现代文：三卫大吃一惊，十分恐惧，立即回到长安。
English: Startled and terrified, Sanwei immediately returned to Chang'an.

古文：后数十日，会玄宗幸洛，乃以钱与鼓者，随鼓车出关，因得无忧。
现代文：几十天之后，正赶上玄宗皇帝去洛阳巡幸，他就用钱买通了推鼓车的人，随鼓车出了潼关，果然没有遇害。
English: Dozens of days later, just as Emperor Xuanzong was about to leave for Luoyang on a sightseeing tour, he used the money to bribe the man who was driving the drum car. The man left Shaoguan with the drum car and was not killed.

古文：李湜
现代文：李湜
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：赵君李湜，以开元中，谒华岳庙。
现代文：赵郡有个人叫李湜，他于唐玄宗开元年间去拜谒华岳庙。
English: In Zhao County, there was a man named Li Xuan, who went to worship at the Temple of Heaven in the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang.

古文：过三夫人院，忽见神女悉是生人，邀入宝帐中，备极欢洽。
现代文：经过三夫人院时，忽然看见那几位神女全活了，并把他邀请到宝帐里，尽情欢乐，且十分和睦融洽。
English: When he passed by the Third Lady's Residence, he suddenly saw that the goddesses were all alive, and invited him to the treasure house, where they had a good time and were in perfect harmony.

古文：三夫人迭与结欢，言终而出。
现代文：三位夫人依次与他交欢，结束之后才从院中走出。
English: The three women had sex with him one after the other, and only after it was over did they leave the hospital.

古文：临诀谓湜曰：每年七月七日至十二日，岳神当上计于天。至时相迎，无宜辞让。
现代文：临别时，三位夫人对他说：每年七月七日到十二日，庙神都上天去筹划事情，到时候我们在此迎候你，千万不要推辞。
English: At the time of parting, the three ladies said to him: Every year from July 7th to 12th, the temple gods go up to heaven to plan things. At that time, we will be here to welcome you. Don't refuse.

古文：今者相见，亦是其时，故得尽欢尔。
现代文：今天咱们相会，也是在庙神上天的日子，因此才能尽情欢乐呵。
English: Today, when we meet, it is also the day when the god of the temple ascended to heaven, so we can enjoy ourselves to the full.

古文：自尔七年，每悟其日，奄然气尽。家人守之，三日方悟。
现代文：从此一连七年，每逢庙神上天之日临近时，李湜就会忽然气绝，家人守在身边，三天之后才能醒来。
English: Since then, for seven years in a row, whenever the day of the temple god's ascension approached, Li Yao would suddenly lose his breath, and his family would stay by his side until he woke up three days later.

古文：说云：灵帐瑇筵，绮席罗荐。
现代文：醒来之后他说：宝帐内备好了包括海龟在内的酒菜，地上衬垫着绮丽的席子。
English: After waking up, he said: "The treasure chest is ready with wine and vegetables, including turtles, and the floor is covered with a beautiful mat.

古文：摇月扇以轻暑，曳罗衣以纵香。
现代文：三位夫人摇动着月扇以消暑气，拖曳着丝裙任香味四处飘散。
English: The three ladies waved the moon fan to dispel the heat, dragging silk skirts to let the fragrance waft around.

古文：玉珮清冷，香风斐亹。
现代文：她们身上的玉珮闪着清凉的光，香风很浓烈。
English: The jade bracelets on their bodies shine with a cool light, and the fragrance is very strong.

古文：候湜之至，莫不笑开星靥，花媚玉颜。
现代文：她们都在等待着我。我到了之后，她们都扬起笑脸，玉颜如花一般娇媚。
English: They were all waiting for me. When I arrived, they were all smiling, their faces as lovely as flowers.

古文：叙离异则涕零，论新观则情洽。
现代文：谈起离别之情，她们都热泪盈眶；说到重逢的喜悦，盛情则更加融洽，难舍难分。
English: When it comes to the feeling of parting, they are all in tears; when it comes to the joy of reunion, they are more harmonious and inseparable.

古文：三夫人皆其有也。湜才伟于器，尤为所重。
现代文：我的才华高于我的容貌，这一点尤其被她们看重。
English: My talent is higher than my looks, which is especially valued by them.

古文：各尽其欢清。
现代文：我与她们各尽欢情。
English: I'm happy with both of them.

古文：及还家，莫不惆怅呜咽，延景惜别。
现代文：待等回到家中，便惆怅地哭泣起来。那情景，怎不使我依依惜别？
English: When I got home, I burst into tears. Why didn't that scene make me want to say goodbye?

古文：湜既寤，形貌流浃，辄病十来日而后可。
现代文：每次他醒来之后，形貌憔悴，汗流浃背，总是病个十来天才能好。
English: Every time he wakes up, he's gaunt and sweaty, and he's always sick for ten days or so before he's better.

古文：有术者见湜云：君有邪气。
现代文：有位法师见到李湜后说：你身上有邪气呵。
English: A sorcerer said after seeing Li Lan: "You have evil in you."

古文：为书一符。
现代文：便为他画了一道符，带在身上。
English: So she drew a symbol for him and wore it on her body.

古文：后虽相见，不得相近。
现代文：后来，他虽然还能够看到那三位夫人，却不能相近相亲。
English: Later, although he could still see the three ladies, he could not get close to them.

古文：二夫人一姓王一姓杜，骂云：酷无行，何以带符为？
现代文：一位姓王的和一位姓杜的两位夫人骂道：你冷酷而又缺德，为什么要带符前来？
English: A lady surnamed Wang and a lady surnamed Du scolded: You are cold and immoral, why do you come with a badge?

古文：小夫人姓萧，恩义特深，涕泣相顾，诫湜三年勿言。言之非独损君，亦当损我。
现代文：那位最小的夫人姓萧，与李湜恩义深厚，望着他哭泣不止，并告诫他说：你三年之内不要把此事说出去，否则不仅要损害你自己，也会伤害我们。
English: The youngest lady, surnamed Xiao, who was deeply grateful to Li Qian, looked at him and wept, and warned him: "Don't talk about this matter within three years, otherwise you will not only harm yourself, but also hurt us."

古文：湜问以官，云：合进士及第，终小县令。
现代文：李湜问自己能不能当官，她说：你应该以中进士及第，但最终只能当个小县令而已。
English: Li Wei asked if she could be an official. She said, "You should be a junior high school student, but in the end, you can only be a county magistrate."

古文：皆如其言。
现代文：后来，全跟她说的一样。
English: The fate of all these people is the same as what Fang Anyu said.

古文：叶净能
现代文：叶净能
English: Leaf-cleaning ability

古文：开元初，玄宗以皇后无子，乃令叶净能道士，奉章上玉京天帝，问：皇后有子否？
现代文：唐代开元初年，由于王皇后没有生儿子，玄宗皇帝便让叶净能道士写一奉章，呈送天帝起居的玉京，问皇后今生有没有儿子。
English: In the first year of the first century of the Tang Dynasty, since Queen Wang did not have a son, Emperor Xuanzong asked the Taoist priest Ye Chien Neng to write a hongzhang and present it to the Emperor of Heaven, asking if the Queen had a son in this life.

古文：久之章下，批云无子，迹甚分明。
现代文：过了好长时间，奉章批复下来，上写：无子。那字迹十分清楚。
English: After a long time, a letter of approval came down, and on it was written: "No children." The handwriting was very clear.

古文：王昌龄
现代文：王昌龄
English: Wang Changling

古文：开元中，琅琊王昌龄，自吴抵京国。
现代文：唐代开元年间，琅琊郡的王昌龄从吴郡返回京城。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Changling of Ya County returned to Beijing from Wu County.

古文：舟行至马当山，属风便，而舟人云：贵识至此，皆令谒庙。
现代文：船行到马当山时，被大风吹得东摇西晃不能行进。于是，船的主人说：有贵人来到了这里！
English: When the ship was sailing to Mt. Madang, it was blown about by a strong wind and could not sail. So, the owner of the ship said, "A nobleman has come here!"

古文：昌龄不能驻，亦先有祷神之备。见舟人言，乃命使赍酒脯纸马，献于庙，及草履致于夫人。
现代文：让所有的人都去庙里拜谒。王昌龄不想下船，但先前也做好了祈祷神灵的准备，就对船的主人说：快派人把酒肉纸马献到庙上，送给庙神，再送一双草鞋给庙神的夫人。
English: Wang Changling did not want to get off the boat, but he had previously prepared to pray to the gods, so he said to the owner of the boat: Quickly send someone to offer the horse to the temple and give it to the temple god, and then send a pair of sandals to the temple god's wife.

古文：题诗云：青骢一匹昆仑牵，奏上大王不取钱。
现代文：然后，他题了一道诗：青骢一匹昆仑牵，奏上大王不取钱。
English: Then, he recited a poem: A young mule pulls a horse of Kunlun, and when it is played, the king does not take money.

古文：直为猛风波滚骤，莫怪昌龄不下船。
现代文：直为猛风波滚骤，莫怪昌龄不下船。
English: With the storm rolling in, it's no wonder Changling can't get off the boat.

古文：读毕而过。
现代文：读罢这首诗，船便顺利而过。
English: After reading the poem, the boat sailed smoothly.

古文：当市草履时，兼市金错刀一副，贮在履内。至祷神时，忘取之。
现代文：当初王昌龄买草鞋时，同时还买了一把金错刀，放在了鞋内；向神祝祷时，忘了把错刀拿出来，随草鞋一并献了上去。
English: At first, when Wang Changling bought a pair of straw sandals, he also bought a fake gold knife and put it in the shoe. When he prayed to God, he forgot to take out the fake knife and offered it together with the straw sandals.

古文：昌龄至前程，求错刀子，方转其误。
现代文：王昌龄向前走了一段，想拿错刀，这才知道有误。
English: Wang Changling walked forward for a while, trying to pick up the wrong knife, only to realize that he had made a mistake.

古文：又行数里，忽有赤鲤鱼，可长三尺。跃入昌龄舟中。
现代文：又向前行了几里地，忽然有一条三尺来长的红鲤鱼从水面跃起，蹦到王昌龄坐的船上。
English: A few miles further on, a three-foot-long red snapper leapt out of the water and onto Wang Changling's boat.

古文：呼使者烹之。既剖腹，得金错刀，宛是误送庙中者。
现代文：王昌龄喊仆人烹了它，结果剖开鱼腹一看，里面有把金错刀，仿佛是误献到庙上的那把。
English: Wang Changling called his servant to cook it. As a result, when he cut open the fish's belly, he saw that there was a golden sword inside, as if it had been given to the temple by mistake.

古文：张嘉祐
现代文：张嘉祐
English: Zhang Jiayu

古文：开元中，张嘉祐为相州刺史。
现代文：唐代开元年间，张嘉祐任相州刺史，刺史的住宅一直闹鬼。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Jia Yu served as the chief historian of Xiangzhou. The residence of the chief historian has always been haunted.

古文：使宅旧凶，嘉祐初至，便有鬼祟回祐家，备极扰乱。
现代文：张嘉祐刚搬进去不久，便有鬼魂在他家徘徊，受尽了惊扰。
English: Not long after Zhang Jiayu moved in, a ghost began to haunt his house. He was completely taken aback.

古文：祐不之惧。
现代文：张嘉祐并不害怕。
English: Zhang Jiayu is not afraid.

古文：其西院小厅铺设，及他食物，又被翻倒。
现代文：一次，听说西院小厅的陈设及食物又被鬼弄得一塌糊涂，他便赶过去察看。
English: Once, when he heard that the furnishings and food in the small hall of the West Courtyard had been made a complete mess by ghosts, he hurried over to take a look.

古文：嘉佑往观之。见一女子。
现代文：这时，见到了一位陌生女子。
English: At this time, I saw a strange woman.

古文：嘉佑问女郎何神。女云：己是周故大将军相州刺史尉迟府君女。
现代文：张嘉祐问女子是哪里来的神仙，那女子说：我是南北朝时北周已故大将军相州刺史尉迟府君的女儿。
English: Zhang Jiayu asked the woman where she came from. The woman said: "I am the daughter of the late great general of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, Northern Zhou Dynasty, Xiangzhou Jishi Fei Chi Fu Jun."

古文：家有至屈，欲见使君陈论。
现代文：我家有莫大的冤屈，想向大人陈述。
English: My family has a huge grievance and would like to present it to the adults.

古文：嘉佑曰：敬当以领。
现代文：张嘉祐说：我应当恭恭敬敬地聆听。
English: Zhang Jiayu said, "I should listen respectfully."

古文：有顷而至，容服魁岸，视瞻高远。
现代文：他进屋有顷又走了出来，刚换上官服，仪表堂堂，目光也显得高远有神。
English: He entered the house for a moment and then walked out. He had just changed into his official uniform, his appearance was magnificent, and his eyes also appeared far-reaching and inspired.

古文：先致敬于嘉祐，祐延坐，问之曰：生为贤人，死为明神。
现代文：那女子先上前向他致礼，他请女子入坐后，问道：你生前为贤德之人，死后应作贤明之鬼。
English: He invited the woman to sit down and asked her: "You were a virtuous person when you were alive. When you die, you should become a virtuous ghost."

古文：胡为宵窣幽瞑，恐动儿女，遂令此州，前后号为凶阙，何为正直而至是耶？
现代文：可你总在昏暗的夜晚胡闹，吓得孩子不敢动弹，结果使全州的人都称这里为凶宅，这样做你还有什么正直善良可言呢？
English: But you've been screwing around in the dark of night, scaring the kids out of their wits, causing the whole state to call this place the Murder House, and what do you have to be honest and good about?

古文：云：往者周室作殚，杨坚篡夺，我忝周之臣子，宁忍社稷崩殒。
现代文：那女子说：从前北周将尽，被杨坚篡夺政权。我等愧为周室旧臣，怎忍社稷如此崩溃？
English: The woman said, "Once upon a time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty was over, and Yang Jian usurped power. I am ashamed to be an old minister of the Zhou Dynasty. How can society collapse like this?"

古文：所以欲全臣节，首倡大义，冀乎匡复宇宙，以存太祖之业。
现代文：所以想保全为臣的气节，率先倡导忠于旧制之大义，寄希望于挽救将亡之国，使宇文太祖开创的大业得以延续。
English: Therefore, he wanted to preserve his dignity as a vassal, take the lead in advocating loyalty to the old system, and hope to save the dying country, so that the great cause created by Uwen Taizu could be continued.

古文：韦孝宽周室旧臣，不能闻义而举，反受杨坚衔勒，为其所用。
现代文：韦孝宽也是西周的旧臣，不但未能响应我父的倡导而行动，反被杨坚用官禄收买，死心踏地为之效力。
English: Wei Xiaokuan was also an old vassal of Xi Zhou. Not only did he fail to act in response to my father's advocacy, but he was bribed by Yang Jian with his official salary and worked for him wholeheartedly.

古文：以一州之众，当天下累益之师。精诚虽欲贯天，四海竟无救助。
现代文：我们一州军民，抵挡天下累战皆捷的兵马，尽管精诚团结，浩气贯天，但全国竟无一人援助，相州城很快就陷落了。
English: We, the military and civilians of one state, resisted the world's most successful soldiers and horses, and despite our sincere unity and generosity, no one in the whole country came to our aid, and the city of Sangju soon fell.

古文：寻而失守，一门遇害，合家六十余口骸骨，在此厅下。
现代文：我们被满门杀害，全家六十多口人的遗骨，就埋在这厅下面。
English: We were murdered in front of everyone, and the remains of more than sixty members of our family are buried under this hall.

古文：日月既多，幽怨愈甚，欲化别不可。
现代文：时间越长，幽怨越重，想将它化解却不可能。
English: The longer the time, the heavier the resentment, but it is impossible to resolve it.

古文：欲白于人，悉皆惧死。
现代文：我们早就想向人诉说，然而那些人都被我们吓死了。
English: We wanted to tell people for a long time, but they were scared to death of us.

古文：无所控告至此，明公幸垂顾盼。
现代文：有冤无处诉，就这样一直等到现在。今天，幸遇大人垂怜顾视，实在是感激不尽。
English: There is no recourse for grievances, so I waited until now. Today, I am truly grateful to have been treated with compassion and consideration by an adult.

古文：若沉骸倘得不弃，幽魅有所招立，则虽死之日，犹生之年。
现代文：如果我们这些沉年遗骨不被抛弃荒野，我们这些幽魂能得到个栖身之处的话，我们便会把死的那天当成自己生日的。
English: If our mortal remains are not abandoned to the wilderness, if our ghosts are given a place to rest, we will consider the day of our death to be our birthday.

古文：嘉佑许诺。
现代文：张嘉祐应允下来。
English: Zhang Jiayu agreed.

古文：他日，出其积骸，以礼葬于厅后。
现代文：几天之后，他令人掘出遗骨，礼葬于厅后，并将那厅堂改成了庙。
English: A few days later, he had his remains exhumed and buried behind the hall, and turned the hall into a temple.

古文：便以厅为庙，岁时祷祠焉。
现代文：每年过年时都要祭祀并祈祷一番。
English: Every year at the time of the Chinese New Year, there are sacrifices and prayers.

古文：祐有女八九岁，家人欲有所问，则令启白，神必有应。
现代文：张嘉祐有个八九岁的女儿，家里人有什么事要问，就让她进庙诉说，每次都能得到鬼魂的答复。
English: Zhang Jiayu has an 89-year-old daughter. If her family has any questions, they let her go to the temple to tell them. Every time, she can get an answer from the ghost.

古文：神欲白嘉祐，亦令小女出见。
现代文：鬼魂想找张嘉祐说话，也让她的小女儿出面。
English: The ghost wanted to talk to Zhang Jiayou, and also asked her little daughter to come forward.

古文：以为常也。
现代文：就这样，她便习以为常。
English: That's how she got used to it.

古文：其后嘉祐家人有所适，神必使阴兵送出境。
现代文：从此以后，张嘉祐家中有人出门办事，那神灵必定派阴兵护送出门。
English: From then on, if anyone in Zhang Jiayu's family went out to do business, the deity would certainly send Yin soldiers to escort them out.

古文：兵还，具白送至某处。其西不过河阳桥。
现代文：阴兵回来后，都要报告送到什么地方当然，最西面也不能越过河阳桥。
English: After the Yin soldiers returned, they had to report to a certain place. Of course, the westernmost side could not cross the Heyang Bridge.

