古文：陈婴者，东阳人。少脩德行，箸称乡党。
现代文：陈婴是东阳县人，从小就注意加强道德品行的修养，在乡里中很有名望。
English: Chen Ying is from Dongyang County. Since he was a child, he paid attention to strengthening the cultivation of moral conduct. He is very famous in the village.

古文：秦末大乱，东阳人欲奉婴为主，母曰： 不可！
现代文：秦代未年，天下大乱，东阳人想拥护陈婴做首领，陈母对陈婴说： 不行！
English: In the last year of the Qin Dynasty, the world was in turmoil. Dongyang people wanted to support Chen Ying as the leader. Chen's mother said to Chen Ying: "No!

古文：自我为汝家妇，少见贫贱，一旦富贵，不祥！
现代文：自从我做了你家的媳妇后，从年轻时起就遇到你家贫贱，一旦暴得富贵，不吉利。
English: Since I became the daughter-in-law of your family, I have encountered your family's poverty since I was young. Once I became rich, it was unlucky.

古文：不如以兵属人：事成，少受其利；不成，祸有所归。 
现代文：不如把军队交给别人。事成了，可以稍为得些好处；失败了，灾祸自有他人承担。 
English: It is better to hand over the army to others. If things work out, you can get some benefits; if they fail, the disaster will be borne by others.

古文：汉元帝宫人既多，乃令画工图之，欲有呼者，辄披图召之。
现代文：汉元帝的宫女既然很多，于是就派画工去画下她们的模样，想要召唤她们时，就翻看画像按图召见。
English: Since Emperor Hanyuan had many concubines, he sent painters to paint their likenesses. When he wanted to summon them, he would flip through the images and summon them by clicking on the pictures.

古文：其中常者，皆行货赂。
现代文：宫女中相貌一般的人，都贿赂画工。
English: The average-looking members of the court bribed the artists.

古文：王明君姿容甚丽，志不苟求，工遂毁为其状。
现代文：王昭君容貌非常美丽，不愿用不正当的手段去乞求，画工就丑化了她的容貌。
English: Wang Zhaojun has a very beautiful face. Unwilling to use improper means to beg, the artist disfigured her face.

古文：后匈奴来和，求美女于汉帝，帝以明君充行。
现代文：后来匈奴来媾和，向汉元帝求赐美女，元帝便拿昭君当做皇族女嫁去。
English: Later, the Xiongnu came to make peace and asked the Han Emperor Yuan for a beautiful woman. The Emperor Yuan then took Zhaojun as an imperial daughter and married her.

古文：既召见而惜之。但名字已去，不欲中改，于是遂行。
现代文：召见以后又很舍不得她，但是名字已经告诉了匈奴，不想中途更改，于是昭君终于去了匈奴。
English: After being summoned, she was very reluctant, but she had already told the Xiongnu her name and did not want to change it midway, so Zhaojun finally went to the Xiongnu.

古文：汉成帝幸赵飞燕，飞燕谗班婕妤祝诅，于是考问。
现代文：汉成帝很宠爱赵飞燕，飞燕诬陷班婕妤祈求鬼神加祸于她，于是拷问班婕妤。
English: Han Chengdi was very fond of Zhao Feiyan. Feiyan framed Ban Rong and prayed to ghosts and gods to harm her, so he tortured Ban Rong.

古文：辞曰： 妾闻死生有命，富贵在天。
现代文：班的供词说： 我听说死生由命运来决定，富贵随天意去安排。
English: Ben's confession said: I've heard that life and death are decided by fate, and wealth is arranged by providence.

古文：脩善尚不蒙福，为邪欲以何望？
现代文：做好事尚且不一定得福，起邪念又想得到什么呢！
English: It is not necessary to be blessed to do good deeds, but what do you want to get with evil thoughts?

古文：若鬼神有知，不受邪佞之诉；若其无知，诉之何益？
现代文：如果鬼神有知觉，就不会接受那种邪恶谄佞的祷告；如果鬼神没有知觉，向它祷告又有什么好处！
English: If the ghost god is conscious, it will not accept that kind of evil prayer; if the ghost god is not conscious, what good is it to pray to it!

古文：故不为也。 
现代文：所以我是不做这种事的。 
English: That's why I don't do it.

古文：魏武帝崩，文帝悉取武帝宫人自侍。
现代文：魏武帝曹操死后，文帝曹丕把武帝的宫女全都留下来侍奉自己。
English: After the death of Wei Emperor Cao Cao, Emperor Cao Pi kept all of Emperor Wu's concubines to serve himself.

古文：及帝病困，卞后出看疾。太后入户，见直侍并是昔日所爱幸者。
现代文：到文帝病重的时候，他母亲卞后去看他的病；卞太后一进内室，看见值班、侍奉的都是从前曹操所宠爱的人。
English: When Emperor Wen was gravely ill, his mother went to see him. When the empress dowager entered the inner room, she saw that all the attendants and servants on duty were once Cao Cao's favorites.

古文：太后问： 何时来邪？ 
现代文：太后就问她们： 什么时候过来的？ 
English: The Empress Dowager asked them: When did you come here?

古文：云： 正伏魄时过。 
现代文：她们说： 正在招魂时过来的。 
English: They said, "He came just as we were summoning the spirits."

古文：因不复前而叹曰： 狗鼠不食汝余，死故应尔！ 
现代文：太后便不再往前去，叹息道： 狗鼠也不吃你吃剩的东西，确是该死呀！ 
English: The Empress Dowager stopped moving forward and sighed, "Dogs and mice won't eat your leftovers, damn it!

古文：至山陵，亦竟不临。
现代文：一直到文帝去世，太后竟也不去哭吊。
English: Up until the death of Emperor Wen, the empress dowager did not even cry.

古文：赵母嫁女，女临去，敕之曰： 慎勿为好！ 
现代文：赵母嫁女儿，女儿要出门时，她告诫女儿说： 千万不要做好事！ 
English: When Zhao's mother married her daughter and her daughter was about to leave home, she admonished her daughter: "Don't do anything good!

古文：女曰： 不为好，可为恶邪？ 
现代文：女儿问道： 不做好事，可以做坏事吗？ 
English: My daughter asked, "If you don't do good, can you do bad?"

古文：母曰： 好尚不可为，其况恶乎？ 
现代文：母亲说： 好事尚且不能做，何况是坏事呢！ 
English: My mother said, "You can't do a good thing, let alone a bad thing!"

古文：许允妇是阮卫尉女，德如妹，奇丑。
现代文：许允的妻子是卫尉卿阮共的女儿，阮德如的妹妹，长相特别丑。
English: Xu Yun's wife is the daughter of Guards Lieutenant General Nguyn Quang, sister of Nguyn Đc R, and she is particularly ugly.

古文：交礼竟，允无复入理，家人深以为忧。
现代文：新婚行完交拜礼，许允不可能再进新房去，家里人都十分担忧。
English: After the newlyweds had finished paying their respects, Xu Yun could no longer go into the new house, and his family was very worried.

古文：会允有客至，妇令婢视之，还答曰： 是桓郎。 
现代文：正好有位客人来看望许允，新娘便叫婢女去打听是谁，婢女回报说： 是桓郎。 
English: Just as a guest came to visit Xu Yun, the bride asked her maid to find out who it was. The maid replied, "It's Kanro."

古文：桓郎者，桓范也。
现代文：桓郎就是桓范。
English: Kanro is Kanban.

古文：妇云： 无忧，桓必劝入。 
现代文：新娘说： 不用担心，桓氏一定会劝他进来的。 
English: The bride said, "Don't worry, Huan will surely persuade him to come in."

古文：桓果语许云： 阮家既嫁丑女与卿，故当有意，卿宜察之。 
现代文：桓范果然劝许允说： 阮家既然嫁个丑女给你，想必是有一定想法的，你应该体察明白。 
English: Kuan Fan really persuaded Xu Yun and said: Since Ruan Jia married an ugly woman to you, he must have had a certain idea. You should understand this.

古文：许便回入内。既见妇，即欲出。
现代文：许允便转身进入新房，见了新娘，即刻就想退出。
English: Xu Yun then turned around to enter the new house, saw the bride, and immediately wanted to leave.

古文：妇料其此出，无复入理，便捉裾停之。 许因谓曰： 妇有四德，卿有其几？ 
现代文：新娘料定他这一走再也不可能进来了，就拉住他的衣襟让他留下。许允便问她说； 妇女应该有四种美德，你有其中的那几种？ 
English: The bride thought that he would not be able to come in again, so she took him by the scruff of the neck and let him stay. Xu Yun asked her: A woman should have four virtues, which ones do you have?

古文：妇曰： 新妇所乏唯容尔。
现代文：新娘说： 新妇所缺少的只是容貌罢了。
English: The bride said, "All that's missing is the face."

古文：然士有百行，君有几？ 
现代文：可是读书人应该有各种好品行，您有几种？ 
English: But readers should have all kinds of virtues. How many do you have?

古文：许云： 皆备。 
现代文：许允说： 样样都有。 
English: Xu Yun said, "We have everything.

古文：妇曰： 夫百行以德为首，君好色不好德，何谓皆备？ 
现代文：新娘说： 各种好品行里头首要的是德，可是您爱色不爱德，怎么能说样样都有！ 
English: The bride said: Virtue is the first and foremost in all good deeds, but if you do not love virtue, how can you say that you have everything!

古文：允有惭色，遂相敬重。
现代文：许允听了，脸有愧色，从此夫妇俩便互相敬重。
English: Xu Yun listened, his face was ashamed, and from then on, the couple respected each other.

古文：许允为吏部郎，多用其乡里，魏明帝遣虎贲收之。
现代文：许允担任吏部郎的时候，大多任用他的同乡，魏明帝知道后，就派虎贲去逮捕他。
English: When Xu Yun served as an official, most of his fellow townsmen were appointed. After Emperor Wei Ming learned of this, he sent Tigress to arrest him.

古文：其妇出诫允曰： 明主可以理夺，难以情求。 
现代文：许允的妻子跟出来劝诫他说： 对英明的君主只可以用道理去取胜，很难用感情去求告。 
English: Xu Yun's wife came out to admonish him, "You can only win over a wise monarch with reason, it is difficult to appeal to him with emotion.

古文：既至，帝核问之。
现代文：押到后，明帝审查追究他。
English: After he was detained, the Ming Dynasty censored and prosecuted him.

古文：允对曰：  举尔所知。 臣之乡人，臣所知也。
现代文：许允回答说： 孔子说 提拔你所了解的人 ，臣的同乡，就是臣所了解的人。
English: Xu Yun replied: Confucius said, "Promote those whom you understand, a minister's fellow countrymen are those whom the minister understands."

古文：陛下检校为称职与不？若不称职，臣受其罪。 
现代文：陛下可以审查、核实他们是称职还是不称职，如果不称职，臣愿受应得的罪。 
English: His Majesty can examine and verify whether they are competent or incompetent, and if they are incompetent, they will be punished.

古文：既检校，皆官得其人，于是乃释。
现代文：查验以后，知道各个职位都用人得当，于是就释放了他。
English: After the inspection, knowing that all positions are staffed properly, he was released.

古文：允衣服败坏，诏赐新衣。
现代文：许允穿的衣服破旧，明帝就叫赏赐新衣服。
English: Xu Yun's clothes were worn out, so Emperor Ming ordered that he be given new clothes.

古文：初，允被收，举家号哭。阮新妇自若云： 勿忧，寻还。 
现代文：起初，许允被逮捕时，全家都号哭，他妻子阮氏却神态自若，说： 不要担心，不久就会回来。 
English: At first, when Xu Yun was arrested, the whole family cried, but his wife, Ruan, looked confident and said, "Don't worry, I'll be back soon."

古文：作粟粥待，顷之允至。
现代文：并且煮好小米粥等着他。一会儿，许允就回来了。
English: And cooked millet porridge to wait for him. A moment later, Xu Yun returned.

古文：许允为晋景王所诛，门生走入告其妇。
现代文：许允被晋景王杀害了，他的门生跑进来告诉他的妻子。
English: Xu Yun was killed by King Jinjing, and his protégé ran in to tell his wife.

古文：妇正在机中，神色不变，曰： 蚤知尔耳！ 
现代文：他的妻子正在织布机上织布，听到消息，神色不变，说： 早就知道会这样的呀！ 
English: His wife was weaving on the loom when she heard the news. She looked unchanged and said: "I knew it would happen!

古文：门人欲藏其儿，妇曰： 无豫诸儿事。 
现代文：门生想把许允的儿子藏起来，许允妻子说： 不关孩子们的事。 
English: The protégé wanted to hide Xu Yun's son, and Xu Yun's wife said, "It's not about the children."

古文：后徙居墓所，景王遣钟会看之，若才流及父，当收。
现代文：后来全家迁到许允的墓地里住，景王派大将军府记室钟会去看他们，并吩咐说，如果儿子的才能流品比得上他父亲，就应该逮捕他们。
English: Later, the whole family moved to live in Xu Yun's cemetery. King Gyeongbokgung sent the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office.

古文：儿以咨母。母曰： 汝等虽佳，才具不多，率胸怀与语，便无所忧。
现代文：许允的儿子知道这些情况，去和母亲商量，母亲说： 你们虽然都不错，可是才能不大，可以怎么想就怎么和他谈，这样就没有什么可担心的。
English: Xu Yun's son knew these circumstances and went to consult with his mother. His mother said, "Although you are both good, you are not very talented. You can talk to him in any way you want, so there is nothing to worry about."

古文：不须极哀，会止便止。
现代文：也不必哀伤过度，钟会不哭了，你们就不哭。
English: There's no need to be overly sad. If the bell doesn't cry, you won't cry.

古文：又可少问朝事。 
现代文：又可以稍为问及朝廷的事。 
English: You can also ask a few questions about the Imperial Court.

古文：儿从之。
现代文：她儿子照母亲的吩咐去做。
English: Her son did as his mother asked.

古文：会反以状对，卒免。
现代文：钟会回去后，把情况回报景王，许允的儿子终于免祸。
English: After the bell returned, he reported the situation to King Gyeongbokgung, and Xu Yun's son was finally spared.

古文：王公渊娶诸葛诞女。入室，言语始交，王谓妇曰： 新妇神色卑下，殊不似公休！ 
现代文：王公渊娶诸葛诞的女儿为妻，进入新房，夫妻刚刚开始交谈，王公渊就对妻子说： 新妇神态不高贵，很不像你父亲公休。 
English: Wang Gongyuan married the daughter of Zhuge Zhao and moved into a new house. As soon as the couple began to talk, Wang Gongyuan said to his wife: "The bride does not have a noble demeanor, very unlike your father.

古文：妇曰： 大丈夫不能仿佛彦云，而令妇人比踪英杰！ 
现代文：他妻子说： 大丈夫不能像你父亲彦云，却要求妇人和英雄豪杰并驾齐驱！ 
English: His wife said: "A good husband cannot be like your father, Hikone, but he demands that a woman and a hero go hand in hand!"

古文：王经少贫苦，仕至二千石，母语之曰： 汝本寒家子，仕至二千石，此可以止乎！ 
现代文：王经年少时家境贫苦，后来做官做到二千石的职位时，他母亲对他说： 你本来是贫寒人家的子弟，现在做到二千石这么大的官，这就可以止步了吧！ 
English: When Wang Jing was a young man, his family was poor. Later, when he became an official and reached a position of 2,000 koku, his mother said to him: You were originally the son of a poor family, but now you have become an official of 2,000 koku, so you can stop!

古文：经不能用。
现代文：王经不能采纳母亲的意见。
English: Wang Jing could not accept his mother's opinion.

古文：为尚书，助魏，不忠于晋，被收。
现代文：后来担任尚书，帮助魏朝，对晋司马氏不忠，被逮捕了。
English: Later, he served as Shang Shu, helped the Wei Dynasty, and was disloyal to Jin Sima, and was arrested.

古文：涕泣辞母曰： 不从母敕，以至今日！ 
现代文：当时他流着泪辞别母亲说： 没有听从母亲的教导，以至有今天！ 
English: At that time, he tearfully said goodbye to his mother and said: I didn't listen to my mother's teaching, and that's how I am today!

古文：母都无戚容，语之曰： 为子则孝，为臣则忠。有孝有忠，何负吾邪？ 
现代文：他母亲一点愁容也没有，对他说： 做儿子就能够孝顺，做臣子就能够忠君；现在你有孝有忠，有什么对不起我呢！ 
English: His mother did not look sad at all, and said to him, "Being a son means you can be filial, and being a vassal means you can be loyal to the sovereign; now that you have filial piety and loyalty, why should I feel sorry for you!

古文：山公与嵇、阮一面，契若金兰。
现代文：山涛和嵇康、阮籍见了一次面后，就相投情谊。
English: After seeing each other for the first time, Shantao fell in love with Yu Kang and Ruan Ji.

古文：山妻韩氏，觉公与二人异于常交，问公。
现代文：山涛的妻子韩氏，发现山涛和两人的交情不一般，就问山涛。
English: Shantao's wife, Han, found that Shantao's friendship with the two of them was unusual, so she asked Shantao.

古文：公曰： 我当年可以为友者，唯此二生耳！ 
现代文：山涛说： 我这里可以看成朋友的，只有这两位先生罢了！ 
English: Shantao said: I can be considered a friend here, only these two gentlemen!

古文：妻曰： 负羁之妻亦亲观狐、赵，意欲窥之，可乎？ 
现代文：他的妻子说： 僖负羁的妻子也曾亲自观察过狐偃和赵衰，我也想偷偷的观察一下他们，可以吗？ 
English: His wife said, "My wife has observed the fox cub and Zhao Zhen in person. I would like to observe them secretly, is that OK?"

古文：他日，二人来，妻劝公止之宿，具酒肉。夜穿墉以视之，达旦忘反。
现代文：有一天，他们两人来了，山涛的妻子就劝山涛留他们住下来，并且准备好酒肉；到夜里，就在墙上挖个洞来察看他们，看到天亮也忘了回去。
English: One day, when the two of them arrived, Shantao's wife persuaded Shantao to let them stay and prepared wine and meat. At night, she dug a hole in the wall to watch them, and when dawn came, she forgot to go back.

古文：公入曰： 二人何如？ 
现代文：山涛进来问道： 这两个怎么样？ 
English: Shantao came in and asked, "What about these two?"

古文：妻曰： 君才致殊不如，正当以识度相友耳。 
现代文：他妻子说： 您的才能、情趣根本比不上他们，只能靠见识、气度和他们结交罢了。 
English: His wife said, "Your talents and tastes are nothing compared to theirs, and you can only make friends with them through your insight and grace."

古文：公曰： 伊辈亦常以我度为胜。 
现代文：山涛说： 他们也常常认为我的气度优越。 
English: Shantao said: They also often think that I have a superior temperament.

古文：王浑妻钟氏生女令淑，武子为妹求简美对而未得。
现代文：王浑的妻子钟氏生了个容貌美丽、品德善良的女儿，王武子想给妹妹挑选一个好的夫婿，一直都没有找到。
English: Wang Hun's wife, Zhong Shi, gave birth to a daughter who was beautiful and virtuous. Wang Wu Zi wanted to choose a good husband for his sister, but he never found one.

古文：有兵家子，有俊才，欲以妹妻之，乃白母，曰： 诚是才者，其地可遗，然要令我见。 
现代文：有个军人的儿子，才能出众，武子想把妹妹嫁给他，就向母亲说明。他母亲说： 如果确实是有才能，对他的门第可以不计较，可是要让我看一看。 
English: There was a soldier's son who had outstanding talent. When Takeko wanted to marry his sister to him, he explained to his mother. His mother said, "If he really has talent, I don't care about his family, but let me take a look."

古文：武子乃令兵儿与群小杂处，使母帷中察之。
现代文：武子便叫那个军人的儿子和平民百姓混在一起，让母亲在帷幕里观察他。
English: Takeko then asked the soldier's son to mingle with the civilians and let his mother watch him from behind a curtain.

古文：既而，母谓武子曰： 如此衣形者，是汝所拟者非邪？ 武子曰： 是也。 
现代文：事后他母亲对武子说： 穿着这么样的衣服、长着这么样的相貌的，就是你所考虑的那个人吗？ 武子说： 是的。 
English: Afterwards, his mother said to Takeko, "Is this the person you were thinking of, dressed like this, looking like this?" Takeko said, "Yes."

古文：母曰： 此才足以拔萃，然地寒，不有长年，不得申其才用。
现代文：他母亲说： 这个人，才能足以拔尖儿，可是门第寒微，如果没有高寿，就不能发挥他的才能。
English: His mother said, "This man is talented enough to reach the top, but his family is poor. If he doesn't live to a ripe old age, he won't be able to use his talent.

古文：观其形骨，必不寿，不可与婚。 
现代文：可是看他的形貌气质，一定不能长寿，不能和他结亲。 
English: However, judging from his appearance and temperament, he will not live long and cannot be married.

古文：武子从之。
现代文：武子依从了母亲的意见。
English: Takeko followed her mother's advice.

古文：兵儿数年果亡。
现代文：几年后，那个军人的儿子果然死了。
English: A few years later, the soldier's son did die.

古文：贾充前妇，是李丰女。丰被诛，离婚徙边。
现代文：贾充的前妻是李丰的女儿，在李丰被杀后，离了婚流放到边远地区。
English: Jia Chong's ex-wife is the daughter of Li Feng. After Li Feng was killed, she was divorced and exiled to a remote area.

古文：后遇赦得还，充先已取郭配女。
现代文：后来遇到大赦得以回来，可是贾充早先已经娶了郭配的女儿。
English: He was later able to return after an amnesty, but Jia Chong had already married Guo Ping's daughter.

古文：武帝特听置左右夫人。
现代文：晋武帝特别准许他两个妻子都留下，分别为左夫人和右夫人。
English: Emperor Jinwu specially allowed both of his wives to stay behind, the Left Lady and the Right Lady.

古文：李氏别住外，不肯还充舍。
现代文：李氏另外住在外面，不肯回到贾充的住宅。
English: Mr. Li also lives outside and refuses to return to Jia Chong's house.

古文：郭氏语充： 欲就省李。 充曰： 彼刚介有才气，卿往不如不去。 
现代文：郭氏告诉贾充说，想去探望李氏，贾充说： 她性格刚强正直，很有才华，你去不如不去。 
English: Guo told Jia Chong that he wanted to visit Li. Jia Chong said, "She has a strong and honest personality and is very talented. You might as well go."

古文：郭氏于是盛威仪，多将侍婢。
现代文：郭氏于是带了一个规模盛大的仪仗队伍和随从，还带了很多侍婢去。
English: Mr. Guo then brought a large-scale ceremonial team and entourage, and also brought a lot of servants.

古文：既至，入户，李氏起迎，郭不觉脚自屈，因跪再拜。
现代文：到了李氏家，进入内室，李氏站起迎接，郭氏不觉腿脚自然弯屈，便跪下行再拜礼。
English: When he arrived at Li's house and entered the inner room, Li stood up to greet him. Guo did not notice that his legs and feet naturally bent, so he knelt down and bowed again.

古文：既反，语充，充曰： 语卿道何物？ 
现代文：回家后，告诉了贾充，贾充说： 我告诉你什么来着！ 
English: After returning home, he told Jia Chong, and Jia Chong said, "I'll tell you what!

古文：贾充妻李氏作女训，行于世。
现代文：贾充的妻子李氏写了《女训》一书，流传当代。
English: Jia Chong's wife, Ms. Li, wrote a book called "Women's Discipline," which has been passed down to the present day.

古文：李氏女，齐献王妃，郭氏女，惠帝后。
现代文：李氏的女儿是齐献王王妃；郭氏的女儿是晋惠帝的皇后。
English: The daughter of Li was the princess of Qiqian Wang; the daughter of Guo was the empress of Jin Hui.

古文：充卒，李、郭女各欲令其母合葬，经年不决。
现代文：贾充死后，李氏、郭氏的女儿各自都想让自己的母亲和贾充合葬，连年也解决不了。
English: After Jia Chong's death, the daughters of Mr. Li and Mr. Guo each wanted to have their mother and Jia Chong buried together, and they couldn't solve the riddle for years.

古文：贾后废，李氏乃祔，葬遂定。
现代文：后来贾后被废，李氏才能合葬，葬事终于确定下来。
English: Later, Jia Hou was abolished, so that the Li clan could be buried together, and the funeral was finally determined.

古文：王汝南少无婚，自求郝普女。
现代文：汝南内史王湛年轻时没人提亲，便自己提出向郝普的女儿求亲。
English: When Ru Nan Neishi Wang Zhan was young, no one mentioned a relative, so he proposed to Zheng Pu's daughter.

古文：司空以其痴，会无婚处，任其意，便许之。
现代文：他父亲王昶因为他痴呆，一定无处求婚，便随他的心意，答应了他。
English: His father, Wang Qi, because of his dementia, must have nowhere to propose marriage, so he agreed to his heart's desire.

古文：既婚，果有令姿淑德。
现代文：婚后，郝氏果真美貌贤淑。
English: After her marriage, she became a beautiful and virtuous woman.

古文：生东海，遂为王氏母仪。
现代文：后来生了王承，终于成了王家母亲们的典范。
English: Later, she gave birth to Wang Cheng, who eventually became a role model for royal mothers.

古文：或问汝南何以知之？曰： 尝见井上取水，举动容止不失常，未尝忤观。以此知之。 
现代文：有人问王湛怎么了解她的，王湛说： 我曾经看见她上水井打水，举止仪容不失常态，也没有不顺眼的地方，因此了解了她。 
English: When someone asked Wang Zhan how he knew her, Wang Zhan said, "I once saw her go to the well to draw water. Her demeanor did not deviate from the norm, and there was nothing that was not pleasing to the eye, so I got to know her.

古文：王司徒妇，钟氏女，太傅曾孙，亦有俊才女德。
现代文：司徒王浑的妻子是钟家的女儿，太傅钟繇的曾孙女，也有超群的文才、女性的美德。
English: The wife of Stow Wanghun is the daughter of the Zhong family, the great-granddaughter of the great-grandfather Zhong Yao, and also has outstanding literary talent and female virtue.

古文：钟、郝为娣姒，雅相亲重。
现代文：钟氏和郝氏是妯娌，两人非常亲密又互相敬重。
English: Mr. Zhong and Mr. Zou are twins, and the two are very close and respect each other.

古文：钟不以贵陵郝，郝亦不以贱下钟。
现代文：钟氏并不因为自己门第高贵而欺负郝氏，郝氏也不因为自己门第卑微而屈从钟氏。
English: The Zhong clan did not bully the Zou clan because of their noble lineage, and the Zou clan did not bow to the Zhong clan because of their lowly lineage.

古文：东海家内，则郝夫人之法。京陵家内，范钟夫人之礼。
现代文：在王承一家里，都恪守郝夫人的规矩，在王浑一家里，都遵从钟夫人的礼法。
English: In Wang Cheng's family, they all abide by Lady Zou's rules, and in Wang Hun's family, they all follow Lady Zhong's etiquette.

古文：李平阳，秦州子，中夏名士。于时以比王夷甫。
现代文：平阳太守李重是秦州刺史李景的儿子，是中原名士，在当时，人们把他和名望很高的王夷甫并称。
English: Li Chong, the governor of Pingyang, was the son of Li Jing, the governor of Qin. He was a famous person in Central Plains. At that time, people called him Wang Yifu, who was very famous.

古文：孙秀初欲立威权，咸云： 乐令民望不可杀，减李重者又不足杀。 
现代文：起初孙秀想树立自己的威望和权力，到处说： 乐令众望所归，不可杀，不如李重的人又不值得杀。 
English: At first, Sun Xiu wanted to establish his own prestige and power, and he said everywhere: "Music is highly respected and should not be killed, and people who are not as good as Li Chong are not worth killing."

古文：遂逼重自裁。
现代文：于是就逼李重自杀。
English: So they forced Li Chong to commit suicide.

古文：初，重在家，有人走从门入，出髻中疏示重。重看之色动，入内示其女，女直叫 绝 。了其意，出则自裁。
现代文：事先，李重在家，有人从门外跑进来，从发髻里拿出一封信给李重看；李重看了就脸上变色，拿到内室给他女儿看，他女儿只是喊叫说： 完了 ，李重明白她的意思，出来就自杀了。
English: In advance, Li Chung was at home, someone ran in from outside the door, took out a letter from the hairpin to show Li Chung; Li Chung looked at it and his face changed color, took it to the inner room to show his daughter, his daughter just shouted and said: That's it, Li Chung understood what she meant, came out and committed suicide.

古文：此女甚高明，重每咨焉。
现代文：李重这个女儿见解非常高明，李重遇事经常跟她商量。
English: Li Chong's daughter is very insightful, and Li Chong often consults with her in times of need.

古文：周浚作安东时，行猎，值暴雨，过汝南李氏。
现代文：周浚任安东将军时，外出打猎，正碰上下暴雨，就去探望汝南李氏。
English: When Zhou Jun was General Anton, he was out hunting, and when it was raining heavily, he went to visit the Runan Li clan.

古文：李氏富足，而男子不在。
现代文：李氏家境富有，只是男人不在家。
English: The Li family is wealthy, but the man is not at home.

古文：有女名络秀，闻外有贵人，与一婢于内宰猪羊，作数十人饮食，事事精办，不闻有人声。
现代文：这家有个女儿，名叫络秀，听说外面来了贵人，就和一个婢女在后院杀猪宰羊，准备几十人的饮食，事事都做得很精到，却没听见有人声。
English: The family had a daughter named Luo Xiu. When she heard that a dignitary was coming from outside, she and a servant girl slaughtered pigs and sheep in the backyard and prepared food for dozens of people. Everything was done very efficiently, but they did not hear anyone.

古文：密觇之，独见一女子，状貌非常，浚因求为妾。父兄不许。
现代文：周浚觉得奇怪，就去偷看一下，只看见一个女子，相貌不同一般；过后，周浚就请求娶她为妾，女方的父兄不答应。
English: Zhou Jun thought it was strange, so he went to take a peek, only to see a woman with an ordinary appearance. Later, Zhou Jun asked to marry her as a concubine, but the woman's father and brother did not agree.

古文：络秀曰： 门户殄瘁，何惜一女？
现代文：络秀说： 我们家门第衰微，为什么舍不得一个女儿！
English: Luo Xiu said, "Our family is declining, why can't we have a daughter?"

古文：若连姻贵族，将来或大益。 
现代文：如果和贵族连姻，将来也许好处很大。 
English: If you marry into the aristocracy, you may reap great benefits in the future.

古文：父兄从之。
现代文：父兄就顺从了她。
English: So they obeyed her.

古文：遂生伯仁兄弟。
现代文：后来生了周伯仁几兄弟。
English: Later, Zhou Boren gave birth to several brothers.

古文：络秀语伯仁等： 我所以屈节为汝家作妾，门户计耳！
现代文：络秀对伯仁兄弟说： 我降低身分给你家做妾的原因，只是为我家门第作想罢了。
English: Luo Xiu said to the Bo Ren brothers: The reason why I lowered my status to be a concubine for your family is just because I want to be the first in my family.

古文：汝若不与吾家作亲亲者，吾亦不惜余年。 
现代文：你们如果不肯和我家做亲戚，我也不会吝惜晚年！ 
English: If you don't want to be related to my family, I won't begrudge you your old age!

古文：伯仁等悉从命。由此李氏在世，得方幅齿遇。
现代文：伯仁兄弟全都听从母亲的吩咐，因此，李氏在生前，得到公正的礼遇。
English: The Baoren brothers all obeyed their mother's orders, so Mr. Li received fair treatment during his lifetime.

古文：陶公少有大志，家酷贫，与母湛氏同居。
现代文：陶侃年少时就有大志，家境却非常贫寒，和母亲湛氏住在一起。
English: When he was young, Tao Kan had a great ambition, but his family was very poor. He lived with his mother, Ms. Zhan.

古文：同郡范逵素知名，举孝廉，投侃宿。
现代文：同郡人范逵一向很有名望，被举荐为孝廉，有一次到陶侃家找••地方住宿。
English: Fan Qi, a fellow county resident, has always been very famous. He was recommended as a filial son and once went to Tao Kan's home to look for a place to stay.

古文：于时冰雪积日，侃室如悬磬，而逵马仆甚多。
现代文：当时，冰雪满地已经多日了，陶侃家一无所有。可是范逵车马仆从很多。
English: At that time, the land had been covered with snow and ice for several days, and the Tao Kan family had nothing. However, Fan Ye had many servants.

古文：侃母湛氏语侃曰： 汝但出外留客，吾自为计。 
现代文：陶侃的母亲湛氏对陶侃说： 你只管到外面留下客人，我自己来想办法。 
English: Mr. Zhan, Tao Kan's mother, said to Tao Kan, "You just go outside and leave the guests, I'll figure it out myself."

古文：湛头发委地，下为二髲，卖得数斛米，斫诸屋柱，悉割半为薪，锉诸荐以为马草。
现代文：湛氏头发很长，拖到地上，她剪下来做成两条假发，换到几担米。又把每根柱子都削下一半来做柴烧，把草垫子都剁了做草料喂马。
English: Ms. Zhan's hair is long and drags on the ground. She cuts it into two wigs to make a few piles of rice. She also cuts each pillar in half to make firewood, and cuts the grass mats to make hay to feed the horses.

古文：日夕，遂设精食，从者皆无所乏。
现代文：到傍晚，便摆上了精美的饮食，随从的人也都不欠缺。
English: In the evening, there was a fine meal on the table, and there was no shortage of attendants.

古文：逵既叹其才辩，又深愧其厚意。
现代文：范逵既赞赏陶侃的才智和口才，又对他的盛情款待深感愧谢。
English: Fan Qi not only appreciated Tao Kan's talent and eloquence, but also felt deeply grateful for his hospitality.

古文：明旦去，侃追送不已，且百里许。
现代文：第二夭早晨，范逵告辞，陶侃送了一程又一程，快要送到百里左右。
English: On the morning of the second day, Fan Qi said goodbye, and Tao Kan sent him one trip after another, and he was about to be sent about a hundred miles.

古文：逵曰： 路已远，君宜还。 
现代文：范逵说： 路已经走得很远了，您该回去了。 
English: Fan Ye said: The road has gone very far, you should go back.

古文：侃犹不返，逵曰： 卿可去矣！
现代文：陶侃还是不肯回去。范逵说： 你该口去了。
English: Tao Kan still refused to go back. Fan Ye said: You should have spoken up.

古文：至洛阳，当相为美谈。 
现代文：我到了京都洛阳，一定给你美言一番。 
English: I've arrived in Kyoto Luoyang, I'll be sure to give you some kind words.

古文：侃迺返。
现代文：陶侃这才回去。
English: It was only then that Tao Kan went back.

古文：逵及洛，遂称之于羊啅、顾荣诸人，大获美誉。
现代文：范逵到了洛阳，就在羊晫、顾荣等人面前称赞陶佩，使他广泛地得到了好名声。
English: When Fan Qi arrived in Luoyang, he praised Tao Pei in front of Yang Qi, Gu Rong and others, making him widely known.

古文：陶公少时，作鱼梁吏，尝以坩饷母。
现代文：陶侃年轻时做监管鱼梁的小吏，曾经送去一罐腌鱼给母亲。
English: When he was young, Tao Kan, who worked as a minor official supervising fish traps, once sent a can of eel to his mother.

古文：母封付使，反书责侃曰： 汝为吏，以官物见饷，非唯不益，乃增吾忧也。 
现代文：他母亲把腌鱼封好交给来人带回去，并且回封信责备陶侃说： 你做官吏，拿公家的东西送给我，这不只没有好处，反而增加了我的忧虑。 
English: His mother sealed the eel and gave it to someone to take it back, and wrote back to rebuke Tao Kan, saying, "You, as a government official, taking public property and giving it to me, is not only unhelpful, but has increased my anxiety.

古文：桓宣武平蜀，以李势妹为妾，甚有宠，常著斋后。
现代文：桓温平定了蜀地，娶李势的妹妹做妾，很宠爱她，总是把她安置在书斋后住。
English: Kuan Wen conquered Shu, married Li Xiang's sister as a concubine, loved her very much, and always put her in the study to live.

古文：主始不知，既闻，与数十婢拔白刃袭之。
现代文：公主起初不知道，后来听说了，就带着几十个婢女提着刀趁她不备去杀她。
English: The princess did not know at first, but when she heard about it later, she took dozens of maidservants armed with knives and took advantage of her unpreparedness to kill her.

古文：正值李梳头，发委藉地，肤色玉曜，不为动容。
现代文：到了那里，正遇见李氏在梳头，头发垂下来铺到地上，肤色像白玉一样光采照人，并没有因为公主到来而表情有变。
English: When I got there, I found Mr. Li combing his hair, his hair hanging down to the ground, his skin color shining like white jade, and his expression did not change because of the arrival of the princess.

古文：徐曰： 国破家亡，无心至此。今日若能见杀，乃是本怀。 
现代文：她从容不迫他说道： 我国破家亡，并不情愿到这里来；今天如果能被杀而死，这倒是我的心愿。 
English: She did not hesitate to force him to say: Our country is ruined, and I do not want to come here; if I could be killed and die today, that would be my wish.

古文：主惭而退。
现代文：公主很惭愧，就退出去了
English: The princess was ashamed and withdrew

古文：庾玉台，希之弟也。希诛，将戮玉台。
现代文：庾玉台是庾希的弟弟；庾希被杀以后，将要杀玉台。
English: Gong Yutai is Gong Xi's younger brother; after Gong Xi is killed, he will kill Gong Yutai.

古文：玉台子妇，宣武弟桓豁女也。徒跣求进，阍禁不内。
现代文：玉台的儿媳妇，是桓温弟弟桓豁的女儿，她心急得光着脚去求见桓温，掌门官挡着不让进去。
English: Yutai's daughter-in-law, who is the daughter of Kuan-Wen's brother Kuan-Hui, was so anxious that she went barefoot to see Kuan-Wen, but the gatekeeper blocked her from entering.

古文：女厉声曰： 是何小人？
现代文：她大声斥责说： 这是哪个奴才！
English: "What a slave!" she exclaimed.

古文：我伯父门，不听我前！ 
现代文：我伯父的家。竟敢不让我进去！ 
English: My uncle's house. How dare they not let me in!

古文：因突入，号泣请曰： 庾玉台常因人脚短三寸，当复能作贼不？ 
现代文：说着便冲了进去，哭喊着请求说： 庚玉台的一只脚短了三寸，常常要扶着人才能走路，这还会谋反吗？ 
English: As he spoke, he rushed in, crying and pleading, "One of Geng Yutai's feet is three inches short, and he often has to hold on to people to walk. Will this lead to rebellion?

古文：宣武笑曰： 婿故自急。 
现代文：桓温笑着说： 侄婿自然会着急。 
English: Kuan Wen smiled and said, "Naturally, my nephew will be worried."

古文：遂原玉台一门。
现代文：终于赦免了庾玉台这一家。
English: Gong Yutai's family was finally pardoned.

古文：谢公夫人帏诸婢，使在前作伎，使太傅暂见，便下帏。
现代文：谢安的妻子刘夫人挂起帷幕围着众婢女，叫她们在自己面前表演歌舞，也让谢安看了一会，便放下了帷幕。
English: Lady Liu, Xie An's wife, hung a curtain around all the maidservants and asked them to perform a song and dance in front of her. She also let Xie An watch for a while and then lowered the curtain.

古文：太傅索更开，夫人云： 恐伤盛德。 
现代文：谢安要求再打开帷幕，夫人说： 恐怕会损害你的美德。 
English: When Xie An asked for the curtain to be opened again, his wife said, "I'm afraid it will damage your virtue."

古文：桓车骑不好箸新衣。
现代文：车骑将军桓冲不喜欢穿新衣服。
English: The chariot and cavalry general Kanchong does not like to wear new clothes.

古文：浴后，妇故送新衣与。车骑大怒，催使持去。
现代文：有一次洗完澡，他妻子故意叫仆人送去新衣服给他，桓冲大怒，催仆人把衣服拿走。
English: Once, after taking a bath, his wife deliberately asked the servant to send him new clothes. He flew into a rage and urged the servant to take away the clothes.

古文：妇更持还，传语云： 衣不经新，何由而故？ 
现代文：他妻子又叫人再拿回来，并且传话说： 衣服不经过新的，怎么能变成旧的呢？ 
English: His wife asked someone to take it back again, and sent a message saying: "How can clothes become old without going through a new process?

古文：桓公大笑，箸之。
现代文：桓冲听了大笑，就穿上了新衣。
English: When Kanchon heard the laughter, he put on a new suit.

古文：王右军郗夫人谓二弟司空、中郎曰： 王家见二谢，倾筐倒庋；见汝辈来，平平尔。
现代文：右军将军王羲之妻子郗夫人对两个弟弟说： 王家见谢家兄弟来，恨不得把所有东西都翻出来款待人家；见你们来，不过平平常常罢了。
English: Mrs. Zou, the wife of the Right Army General Wang Hui, said to the two brothers: When the Wang family sees the Xie brothers come, they can't help but turn everything over to entertain others; when they see you, it's just business as usual.

古文：汝可无烦复往。 
现代文：你们可以不必再去了。 
English: You don't have to go any further.

古文：王凝之谢夫人既往王氏，大薄凝之。既还谢家，意大不说。
现代文：王凝之妻子谢夫人到王家后，非常轻视凝之；回到谢家后，心里非常不高兴。
English: After Wang Rong's wife, Madame Xie, came to the Wang family, she despised Wang Rong very much; after returning to the Xie family, she was very unhappy.

古文：太傅慰释之曰： 王郎，逸少之子，人材亦不恶，汝何以恨乃尔？ 
现代文：太傅谢安安慰、开导她说： 王郎是逸少的儿子，人品和才学也不错，你为什么竟不满意到这个地步？ 
English: Father-in-law Xie An consoled and enlightened her: "Wang Lang is a rare son, his character and talent are also good, why are you not satisfied to this point?

古文：答曰： 一门叔父，则有阿大、中郎。群从兄弟，则有封、胡、遏、末。
现代文：谢夫人回答说： 同一家的叔父里头，就有阿大、中郎这样的人物；本家兄弟，就有封、胡、遏、未这样的人物。
English: Mrs. Xie replied, "Among the uncles of the same family, there are such people as A Dai and Zhong Lang; among the brothers of the same family, there are such people as Feng, Hu, Jie and Wei.

古文：不意天壤之中，乃有王郎！ 
现代文：没想到天地之间，竟有王郎这种人！ 
English: I didn't think there was such a person as Wang Lang between heaven and earth!

古文：韩康伯母，隐古几毁坏，卞鞠见几恶，欲易之。
现代文：韩康伯母亲平日靠着的那张旧小桌子坏了，卞鞠看见小桌破旧了，就想换掉它。
English: The old small table that Han Kangbo's mother leaned against on weekdays was broken. Seeing that the small table was worn out, Zou Yu wanted to replace it.

古文：答曰： 我若不隐此，汝何以得见古物？ 
现代文：韩母回答说： 我如果不倚着这个，你又怎么能见到古物！ 
English: Han's mother replied, "If I don't lean on this, how can you see antiques?"

古文：王江州夫人语谢遏曰： 汝何以都不复进，为是尘务经心，天分有限。 
现代文：江州刺史王凝之夫人问谢遏道： 你为什么一点也不再长进？是一心注意世俗杂务，还是天资有限？ 
English: The wife of Wang Xunzhi, the governor of Jiangzhou, asked Xie Jian: Why do you no longer grow at all? Is it because you pay attention to mundane chores, or is it because your talent is limited?

古文：郗嘉宾丧，妇兄弟欲迎妹还，终不肯归。
现代文：郗嘉宾死了，他妻子的兄弟想把妹妹接回去，她却始终不肯返回娘家。
English: Zou Jiabin died, and his wife's brother wanted to take his sister back, but she still refused to return to her daughter's home.

古文：曰： 生纵不得与郗郎同室，死宁不同穴！ 
现代文：说： 活着虽然不能和郗郎同居一室，死了岂可不和他同葬一穴！ 
English: She said, "Even though I cannot live in the same room with my husband while I am alive, when I die, I want to be buried with him!"

古文：谢遏绝重其姊，张玄常称其妹，欲以敌之。
现代文：谢遏非常推重自己的姐姐谢道韫，张玄常常称赞自己的妹妹，想使她和谢遏姐姐并列。
English: Xie Daming put a lot of emphasis on his sister, Xie Daojun. Zhang Xuan often praised his sister, wanting to put her on the same level as Xie Daming.

古文：有济尼者，并游张、谢二家。人问其优劣？
现代文：有个尼姑叫济尼，和张、谢两家都有交往，别人问她这两个人的高下。
English: There is a nun named Jini, who has had dealings with both the Zhang and Xie families. Others asked her about the high and low points of these two people.

古文：答曰： 王夫人神情散朗，故有林下风气。顾家妇清心玉映，自是闺房之秀。 
现代文：她回答说： 王夫人神态风度潇洒爽朗，确实有隐士的风采和气度；顾家媳妇心地清纯，洁白光润，自然是妇女中的优秀者。 
English: She replied: Mrs. Wang's demeanor is chic and cheerful, and she really has the style and grace of a recluse; Gu Jia's daughter-in-law is pure in heart, pure and bright, and is naturally the best among women.

古文：王尚书惠尝看王右军夫人，问： 眼耳未觉恶不？ 
现代文：尚书王惠曾经去看望过右军将军王羲之的夫人，问她说： 眼睛、耳朵还没有觉得不好吧？ 
English: Shangshu Wang Hui once visited the wife of the right-wing general Wang Xizhi, and asked her: "Don't your eyes and ears feel bad yet?

古文：答曰： 发白齿落，属乎形骸；至于眼耳，关于神明，那可便与人隔？ 
现代文：她回答说： 头发白了，牙掉了，这是属于身体的衰老；至于视力和听力，关系到精神，哪能就阻碍和别人交往呢！ 
English: She replied: "Gray hair and lost teeth are part of the aging process of the body, but sight and hearing are related to the spirit, so how can they prevent us from socializing with others?"

古文：韩康伯母殷，随孙绘之之衡阳，于阖庐洲中逢桓南郡。
现代文：韩廉伯的母亲殷氏，随着孙子韩绘之到衡阳去，途中在阖庐洲上遇见南郡公桓玄。
English: Han Lianbo's mother, Yin, went to Hengyang with her grandson, Han Baizhi. On the way, she met Nanshun Gonghuanxuan on Zhouzhou.

古文：卞鞠是其外孙，时来问讯。
现代文：桓玄的长史卞鞠是殷氏的外孙，当时也来问安。
English: Kuan Xuan's great-great-great-grandson, who was a grandson of the Yin family, also came to say hello.

古文：谓鞠曰： 我不死，见此竖二世作贼！ 
现代文：殷氏对卞鞠说： 我不死，就看到了这小子两代人做乱臣贼子！ 
English: Yin said to Xiamaru, "If I don't die, I'll see this boy become a ruffian thief for two generations!"

古文：在衡阳数年，绘之遇桓景真之难也，殷抚尸哭曰： 汝父昔罢豫章，徵书朝至夕发。汝去郡邑数年，为物不得动，遂及于难，夫复何言？ 
现代文：在衡阳住了几年，绘之在桓景真的叛乱中被害，殷氏抚尸痛哭道： 你父亲以前免去豫章太守时，征调他的文书早晨到了，他傍晚就上路；你免官已经几年了，却为着别人不能动身，终于遭难，这还能说什么呢！ 
English: He had lived in Hengyang for several years, and was killed in the rebellion of Huan Jingsin. As he stroked his father's corpse, he wept bitterly, "Your father used to be exempted from the post of Yuzhang Taishou, and his clerks were conscripted. When morning came, he would be on his way in the evening. You have been exempted from the post for several years, but you cannot leave because of others, and finally you are in trouble. What else can you say?

