古文：于高张于志宁，字仲谧，京兆高陵人。
现代文：于志宁别名仲谧，京兆高陵县人。
English: Yu Shining, alias Zhong Yao, is from Gaoling County, Beijing.

古文：曾祖谨，有功于周，为太师、燕国公。
现代文：曾祖父名谨，为北周立有功劳，授太师官衔，封燕国公爵号。
English: His great-grandfather was well-known for his services to Northern Zhou, and was awarded the title of grandmaster and the title of Duke of Yan.

古文：父宣道，仕隋至内史舍人。
现代文：父亲名宣道，在隋朝官至内史舍人。
English: His father's name was Xuan Dao, and he was an official in the Sui Dynasty.

古文：大业末，志宁调冠氏县长，山东盗起，弃官归。
现代文：炀帝大业末年，于志宁被委任为冠氏县长，山东发生暴乱，他撇下官职回家了。
English: In the last years of Emperor Qian's reign, Yu Zhining was appointed as the head of Guanxi County. When riots broke out in Shandong, he left his post and returned home.

古文：高祖入关，率群从迎谒长春宫，诏授渭北道行军元帅府记室，与殷开山参谋议。
现代文：高祖李渊进了关中，于志宁带领随从的人们到长春宫迎接拜见，诏令授予渭北道行军元帅府记室，和殷开山参与谋议。
English: The great-grandfather Li Yuan entered Guanzhong, and Yu Zhining led his followers to Changchun Palace to greet him. The imperial edict granted the marching marshal's office of North Gansu Province to the marching marshal's office, and Yin Kaishan participated in the deliberation.

古文：薛仁杲平，识褚亮于囚虏中，迁天策府中郎、文学馆学士，引亮与同列。
现代文：薛仁杲被消灭后，他在囚禁的俘虏里认出了褚亮，升任天策府中郎、文学馆学士，推荐褚亮当了自己的同事。
English: After Xue Rincun was eliminated, he recognized Gong Liang in the imprisoned prisoners, and was promoted to the vice-governor of Tianzefu and the bachelor of the Literature Museum, and recommended Gong Liang as his colleague.

古文：贞观三年，为中书侍郎。
现代文：太宗贞观三年，任中书侍郎。
English: Taizong Zhenguan served as a junior secretary for three years.

古文：太宗尝宴近臣，问： 志宁安在？ 
现代文：太宗李世民有一次设宴款待亲近的朝臣，问： 于志宁在哪儿？ 
English: Emperor Taizong Li Shimin once held a banquet to entertain close courtiers and asked: Where is Yu Shining?

古文：有司奏： 敕召三品，志宁品第四。 
现代文：主管官吏禀奏： 敕令召见三品以上官员，于志宁是第四品。 
English: The official in charge said, "The imperial edict calls for officials with three or more pins, and Yu Shining is the fourth pins.

古文：帝悟，特诏预宴，因加散骑常侍、太子左庶子、黎阳县公。
现代文：太宗明白过来了，特地诏令他参加宴会，当即授予他散骑常侍、太子左庶子、黎阳县公官职爵号。
English: When Emperor Taizong came to understand, he specifically ordered him to attend the banquet, and immediately awarded him the title of Sanzhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizh.

古文：是时议立七庙，君臣请以凉武昭王为始祖，志宁以凉非王业所因，独建议违之。
现代文：这时研究建立供奉皇家七代祖先的七庙，朝臣们都请求把凉武昭王李詗作为始祖，于志宁认为凉武昭王不是开创大唐帝业的根基，只他一个人的意见跟大家不同。
English: At this time, the establishment of seven temples dedicated to the seven-generation ancestors of the royal family was being studied. The courtiers all requested that Li Xi, King of Liwu Zhao, be made the founder. Yu Shining believed that King of Liwu Zhao was not the foundation of the founding of the Great Tang Empire. Only his opinion was different from everyone else.

古文：帝诏功臣世袭刺史，志宁奏： 古今异时，慕虚名，遗实患，非久安计。 
现代文：太宗诏令功臣们世代继承刺史官爵，于志宁禀奏： 如今和古代时势不一样，分封制使人们爱慕虚浮的名位，给后代造成实在的祸患，这不是使江山社稷永久安定的办法。 
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict ordering meritorious officials to succeed to the title of Shishi Guanzhong for generations, and Yu Zhining recited: Nowadays, the situation is not the same as in ancient times. The system of subdividing fiefs has caused people to cherish fictitious titles and created a real calamity for future generations. This is not the way to make the country and society permanently stable.

古文：帝皆从之。
现代文：太宗都采纳了。
English: Taizong all adopted it.

古文：尝谓志宁曰： 古者太子既生，士负之，即置辅弼。
现代文：太宗曾对于志宁说 ：在古代太子一出生，还需要人背的时候，就安排大臣辅佐。
English: Emperor Taizong once said to Shining: In ancient times, as soon as a crown prince was born, when there was still a need for a deputy, he would arrange for an assistant minister.

古文：昔成王以周、召为师傅，日闻正道，习以成性。
现代文：西周成王姬诵以周公姬旦、召公姬为老师，每天耳濡目染的是精当的道理、准则，反复熟悉就成了他的本性。
English: West Zhou Cheng Wang Qian recited Zhou Gong Qian, Zhao Gong Qian as a teacher, every day his ears were drenched with the principles and standards of precision, and repeated familiarity became his nature.

古文：今太子幼，卿当辅以正道，无使邪僻启其心。
现代文：现在太子年纪小，您应当用精当的道理、准则辅导他，不让邪门歪道诱惑他的心灵。
English: Now that the crown prince is young, you should use proper principles and standards to guide him, and not let evil tempt his heart.

古文：勉之，官赏可不次得也。 
现代文：努力办好这事，官职赏赐是可以破格获得的。 
English: If you work hard to do this well, the rewards of office can be obtained in an unprecedented way.

古文：太子承乾数有过恶，志宁欲救止之，上《谏苑》以讽。
现代文：太子承乾屡犯罪过，于志宁想阻止他，呈递《谏苑》婉言劝说。
English: Prince Cheng Qian had committed many crimes, and Yu Shining wanted to stop him, so he submitted "Guan Yuan" to persuade him gently.

古文：帝见大悦，赐黄金十斤、绢三百匹。
现代文：太宗看到这事非常高兴，赏赐给他黄金十斤、绢帛三百匹。
English: Emperor Taizong was very pleased to see this and rewarded him with ten catties of gold and three hundred yakitori.

古文：俄兼詹事，以母丧免，有诏起复本官，固请终丧，帝遣中书侍郎岑文本敦譬曰： 忠孝不两立，今太子须人教约，卿强起，为我卒辅道之。 
现代文：很快兼任太子詹事，因为要替母亲服丧才免去了职务，太宗诏令提前复职，于志宁坚持请求服丧满期，太宗派遣中书侍郎岑文本敦促开导说 ：为国尽忠和为母尽孝无法同时做到，现在太子等待人去教导约束，您勉强复职吧，替我完成辅导他的任务。 
English: Soon, he also served as Prince Zhanji, because it was necessary to serve his mother's funeral before he was relieved of his duties. The Emperor issued an edict to reinstate him ahead of schedule. Yu Shining insisted on requesting the completion of the funeral service. The Emperor dispatched the secretary to urge the guide to say: "It is impossible to be loyal to the country and filial to the mother at the same time. Now the prince is waiting for someone to teach and restrain. You can reluctantly reinstate him, and complete the task of mentoring him for me."

古文：志宁乃就职。
现代文：于志宁这才复职。
English: Only then was Yu Shining reinstated.

古文：时太子以农时造曲室，累月不止，又好音乐过度。
现代文：太子在农忙季节建造深邃的密室，一连几个月不停工，还过度地爱好歌舞。
English: The prince built a deep secret room during the busy farming season, and did not stop working for months on end. He was also excessively fond of singing and dancing.

古文：志宁谏，以为 今东宫乃隋所营，当时号为侈丽，岂容复事磨砻彩饰于其间？
现代文：于志宁劝谏，认为： 现在的东宫是隋朝建造的，那时人们就说它奢侈豪华，哪能容许在这些东西上再进行雕凿装饰？
English: Yu Zhining advised Yu, saying: The present East Palace was built in the Sui Dynasty. At that time, people said that it was luxurious. How can it be allowed to carve and decorate these things?

古文：丁匠官奴皆犯法亡命，钳凿槌杵，往来出入，监门、宿卫、直长、千牛不得苛问。
现代文：服役的工匠和没收进官府的奴隶都是违犯法律禁令逃亡在外的人，他们带着钳子凿子锤子木棒，来往进出，监门、宿卫、直长、千牛等警卫人员不能盘问。
English: The craftsmen in service and the slaves confiscated into the government offices are all people who have violated the legal ban and fled abroad. They come and go with pliers, chisels, hammers, and wooden sticks. The guards such as the guards at the prison gate, the guards, the captain, and the thousand cows cannot interrogate them.

古文：爪牙在外，厮役在内，其可无忧乎？
现代文：武士在宫外，奴隶在宫内，怎不令人担心呢？
English: A warrior outside the palace, a slave within it, why should this not be a cause for concern?

古文：又宫中数闻鼓声，太乐伎儿辄留不出，往年口敕丁宁，殿下可不思之？ 
现代文：另外，东宫里头多次响起鼓声，乐官乐工动不动就留在宫里不让出去，前几年皇上的口谕告诫，殿下能不想想吗？ 
English: In addition, the drums have sounded many times in the East Palace, and the music officials and musicians stay in the palace and do not let them go out. A few years ago, the emperor's mouthpiece warned that His Royal Highness should think about it.

古文：太子不纳。
现代文：太子不听。
English: Prince Chengxian did not listen.

古文：而左右多任宦官，志宁复谏曰： 奄官者，体非全气，专柔便佞，托亲近为威权，假出纳为祸福。
现代文：他身边的侍从多数由宦官充任，于志宁又劝谏说 ：宦官，身心都不健全，善于使用温顺阿谀逢迎，靠着受宠作威作福，凭借上传下达制造祸患。
English: Most of the attendants around him were eunuchs, and Yu Zhining also advised him: "Eunuchs are not sound of mind and body. They are good at using docile flattery, relying on being favored to do good, and creating disasters by virtue of their arrogance."

古文：故伊戾败宋，易牙乱齐，赵高亡秦，张让倾汉。近高齐任邓长颙为侍中，陈德信为开府，内预宴私，外干朝政，齐卒颠覆。
现代文：所以春秋时宋国的太子痤被伊戾陷害致死，齐桓公的宠臣易牙等人立无亏为太子，使齐国大乱，赵高杀死了秦始皇的长子扶苏，秦二世胡亥使秦朝灭亡，灵帝时的宦官张让使东汉分崩离析。近代的北齐任命邓长为侍中，陈德信为开府仪同三司，在内参与皇家家宴，在外干预朝廷政务，北齐终究被颠覆。
English: Therefore, in the Spring and Autumn Period, the prince of the Song Dynasty, Yao, was framed to death by Ili, and Qi Kuan's favorite minister, Yi Ya, and others were appointed as princes, causing chaos in Qi. Zhao Gao killed the eldest son of Qin Shi Huang, Fu Su. Qin II, Hu Hai, caused the Qin Dynasty to perish. The eunuch Zhang Zhan, who was the spiritual emperor, caused the Eastern Han Dynasty to fall apart. The modern North Qi appointed Deng Chang as an attendant, and Chen Deshin as Kaifu Yi Tong San Si. They participated in the royal banquet and intervened in the affairs of the imperial court

古文：今殿下左右前后皆用寺人，轻忽高班，陵轹贵仕，品命失序，经纪不立，行路之人咸以为怪。 
现代文：现在殿下周围任用的全是宦官，轻慢高级官员，欺压显贵朝臣，任官品级混乱，法度秩序废弛，连毫不相干的人都觉得奇怪。 
English: Right now, His Highness is surrounded by eunuchs, insolent high-ranking officials, bullying and oppressing high-ranking courtiers, chaotic officials, and law and order chaos. Even people who have nothing to do with him find it strange.

古文：太子益不悦。
现代文：太子更加不高兴。
English: The prince was even more displeased.

古文：东宫仆御旧得番休，而太子不听，又私引突厥，与相狎比。
现代文：东宫的车夫侍从依照惯例应该轮流休假，但太子不遵照执行，还私下引进突厥人，和他们互相亲近纠缠。
English: According to the usual practice, the carriage attendants of the East Palace should take turns to take a vacation, but the prince did not comply with the implementation, and also privately introduced the Turks and entangled them with each other.

古文：志宁怀不能言，上疏极言曰： 窃见仆寺司驭，爰及兽医，自春迄夏，不得番息。
现代文：于志宁控制不住自己的情绪，呈递谏疏极力陈词说 ：我见仆从车夫，直到兽医，从春季到夏季，不能轮流休息。
English: Unable to control his emotions, Yu Shining made a strong statement, saying, "I see that from the spring to the summer, the drivers and veterinarians can't take turns to rest.

古文：或家有慈亲，以阙温清，或室有幼弱，以亏抚养，殆非恕爱之意。
现代文：有的人父母健在，没人伺候，有的人儿女幼小，没人抚养，大概不是宽厚仁爱的心肠。
English: Some people's parents are alive, no one is waiting for them, some people's children are young, no one is raising them, probably not a generous and benevolent heart.

古文：又突厥达哥支等，人状野心，不可以礼教期，不可以仁信待。
现代文：另外，突厥的达哥支等人，人面兽心，不能对礼仪教化做指望，不能用仁爱真诚来对待。
English: In addition, the Turkic Dago branch and others, human-like animal mind, can not hope for etiquette education, can not be treated with benevolence and sincerity.

古文：狎而近之，无益令望，有损盛德。
现代文：亲近他们，对美名没有益处，对大德会有损害。
English: To be close to them is not good for one's reputation, but bad for one's virtue.

古文：况引内閤中，使常亲近，人皆震骇，而殿下独安此乎？ 
现代文：何况把他们引进妇女居住的内室，让他们经常亲密接近，别人都震惊害怕，而殿下对这些都心安理得吗？ 
English: Moreover, to bring them into the inner chamber, where the women are, and to have them constantly in close proximity, so that the others are shocked and frightened, and His Royal Highness is at peace with all this?

古文：太子大怒，遣张师政、纥干承基往刺之。
现代文：太子大为恼怒，派张师政、纥干承基去刺杀他。
English: The crown prince was very angry and sent Zhang Shizheng and Gan Chengji to assassinate him.

古文：二人者入其第，见志宁憔然在苫塊中，不忍杀，乃去。
现代文：这两个人潜进他的住宅，看到于志宁疲倦地枕着土块睡在草垫上，不忍心刺杀，就离开了。
English: The two men sneaked into his house, saw that Yu Shining was sleeping on a straw mat with a lump of soil as a pillow, and could not bear to kill him, so they left.

古文：太子败，帝知状，谓曰： 闻公数谏，承乾不听公，故至此。 
现代文：李承乾的太子身份被废除，太宗了解实际情况，说道： 听说您多次劝谏，承乾不听您的，所以到了这个地步。 
English: Li Chengxian's status as crown prince was abolished. Taizong understood the actual situation and said: I heard that you have repeatedly persuaded him, Chengxian did not listen to you, so it has come to this point.

古文：是时宫臣皆罪废，独志宁蒙劳勉。
现代文：这时东宫属吏都获罪免官，惟独于志宁因辛苦努力而得到宽待。
English: At this time, the officials of the Eastern Palace were all convicted and removed from office, but only Zhining was treated leniently for his hard work.

古文：晋王为皇太子，复拜左庶子，迁侍中，加光禄大夫，进封燕国公，监脩国史。
现代文：晋王李治立为皇太子，又任命于志宁为太子左庶子，升任侍中，授予光禄大夫，提高封号为燕国公，主持编撰本朝历史。
English: The Jin king, Li Zhilin, was made crown prince, and Yu Zhining was appointed as the prince's left illegitimate son, promoted to attendant, awarded the title of Guanglu doctor, raised the title to Yan Guogong, and presided over the compilation of the history of this dynasty.

古文：永徽二年，洛阳人李弘泰诬告太尉长孙无忌反，有诏不待时斩之。
现代文：高宗永徽二年，洛阳人李弘泰诬告太尉长孙无忌谋反，诏令可以即时斩首。
English: In the second year of Gao Zong Yonghui, Luoyang resident Li Hongtai falsely accused the captain's eldest son of plotting a rebellion, and the order was issued to behead him immediately.

古文：志宁以为： 方春少阳用事，不宜行刑，且诬谋非本恶逆，请依律待秋分乃决。 
现代文：于志宁认为 ：正值春天是少阳象数当令，不适宜执行死刑，再说诽谤言论不是十恶不赦的大罪，请按法律等到秋分以后再判决。 
English: Yu Shining believes that spring is the time when the number of young people is at its peak, and it is not appropriate to carry out the death penalty. In addition, defamatory speech is not a heinous crime, so please wait until after the autumn equinox according to the law.

古文：从之。
现代文：高宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：衡山公主既公除，将下嫁长孙氏。
现代文：衡山公主在因公除去为太宗皇帝服丧的丧服后，准备嫁给长孙家。
English: Princess Hengshan is preparing to marry the eldest grandson of Emperor Taizong after removing her mourning clothes.

古文：志宁以为： 《礼》，女十五而笄，二十而嫁，有故，二十三而嫁，固知遇丧须终三年。
现代文：于志宁认为 ：《周礼》规定，女子十五岁举行成年簪礼，二十岁出嫁，发生变故，二十三岁出嫁，这就可知遇上服丧必须服满三年时间。
English: Yu Shining thought: "The Weekly Ritual" stipulates that a woman should hold a coming-of-age ceremony at the age of fifteen, get married at the age of twenty, and get married at the age of twenty-three, which means that in the event of a funeral, she must serve three years.

古文：《春秋》，鲁庄公如齐纳币，母丧未再期而图婚，二家不讥，以其失礼明也。
现代文：《春秋》记载，鲁庄公派人到齐国送聘礼，为母亲服丧不满两年就要求结婚，鲁、齐两国不谴责，是因为不合礼仪太明显了。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Lu Zhuang sent a person to Qi Province to present an engagement gift, and asked for marriage less than two years after his mother's funeral. Lu and Qi did not condemn the two countries because it was too obvious that the etiquette was not right.

古文：今议者云 公除从吉 ，此汉文创制，为天下百姓耳。
现代文：眼下舆论说是 因公除去丧服就可穿上吉服 ，这是西汉文帝创立的规矩，只是替天下百姓着想而已。
English: At the moment, the public opinion is that the mourning clothes can be put on after removing the mourning clothes, which is a rule created by the Western Han Emperor, but it is only for the sake of the people of the world.

古文：公主身服斩衰，服可以例除，情不可以例改。
现代文：衡山公主是服重丧，丧服可以按照先例去掉，孝心不能按照先例改变。
English: Princess Hengshan is in mourning, mourning clothes can be removed according to precedent, filial piety cannot be changed according to precedent.

古文：心丧成婚，非人情所忍。 
现代文：心中悼念太宗时结婚，不是人们的情感能容忍的。 
English: Marrying while mourning Taizong in one's heart is not something people can tolerate emotionally.

古文：于是诏公主待服除乃婚。
现代文：高宗于是诏令衡山公主等服丧期满以后再结婚。
English: Gao Zong then issued an edict ordering Princess Hengshan to wait until the mourning period was over before marrying.

古文：拜尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品。
现代文：授予于志宁尚书左仆射官职、同中书门下三品头衔。
English: He was awarded the title of Shining Shangshu Zuofu Shingan Rong, and the title of the third grade of Shingun Middle School.

古文：顷之，兼太子少师。
现代文：不久，兼任太子少师。
English: Soon, he also served as a junior teacher for the Crown Prince.

古文：四年，陨石十八于冯翊，高宗问曰： 此何祥也？
现代文：永徽四年，有十八颗陨石坠落到同州，高宗询问说 ：这是什么征兆？
English: In the fourth year of Yonghui, eighteen meteorites fell to the same state. Gaozong asked: What is this a sign of?

古文：朕欲悔往脩来以自戒，若何？ 
现代文：我要以悔改以前的过失、修养以后的德行来警戒自己，怎么样？ 
English: What if I want to guard myself with the faults before repentance and the virtues after cultivation?

古文：志宁对： 《春秋》： 陨石于宋五。 
现代文：于志宁回答 ：《春秋》记载 ：有五颗陨石坠落在宋国。 
English: Yu Zhining replied: "Spring and Autumn" records: five meteorites fell in Song.

古文：内史过曰： 是阴阳之事，非吉凶所生。 
现代文：姓过的内史说： 这是自然现象，不是产生吉凶的根源。 
English: This is a natural phenomenon, not the root cause of good or bad luck, said Neishi.

古文：物固有自然，非一系人事。
现代文：事物本来有自身的规律，和人事没有一点关系。
English: Things have their own laws, which have nothing to do with personnel.

古文：虽然，陛下无灾而戒，不害为福也。 
现代文：虽是这样，陛下在没有灾害的情况下也警戒自己，对造福是没有妨害的。 
English: In spite of this, His Majesty takes precautions even when there is no calamity, and there is no obstacle to benefiting others.

古文：俄迁太傅。
现代文：很快升任太傅。
English: He was soon promoted to Taifu.

古文：尝与右仆射张行成、中书令高季辅俱赐田，志宁奏： 臣家自周、魏来，世居关中，赀业不坠。
现代文：曾和右仆射张行成、中书令高季辅一起得到高宗赏赐的土地，于志宁禀奏： 我家从北周、北魏以来世代居住在关中，家产没有失去。
English: Yu Zhining recited: My family has lived in Guanzhong for generations since the Northern Zhou Dynasty and the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the family property has not been lost.

古文：今行成、季辅始营产土，愿以臣有余赐不足者。 
现代文：张行成、高季辅如今才开始经营田产，希望把赐给我的土地赐给不足的人。 
English: Zhang Xingcheng and Gao Jifu have just started farming, and I hope to give the land I have been given to those who are in need.

古文：帝嘉之，分其田以与二人。
现代文：高宗赞赏他的美德，把赐给他的土地分赐给了张行成、高季辅。
English: Gaozong appreciated his virtue and gave the land allotted to him to Zhang Xingcheng and Gao Jifu.

古文：显庆四年，以老乞骸骨，诏解仆射，更拜太子太师，仍同中书门下三品。
现代文：显庆四年，因为年老请求退休，诏令免去尚书左仆射职务，改授太子太师官职，保留同中书门下三品头衔。
English: In the fourth year of Xianqing, because of the request to retire due to old age, the imperial edict exempted Shang Shu from the position of left-hand shooting, re-awarded the position of prince and teacher, and retained the title of the third grade under the same middle school.

古文：王皇后之废，长孙无忌、褚遂良固争不见从，志宁不敢言。
现代文：高宗废除王皇后时，长孙无忌、褚遂良坚决劝阻不被采纳，于志宁不敢说话。
English: When Gao Zong abolished the empress dowager, the eldest grandson Mujie and Zou Suiliang resolutely dissuaded him from being adopted, and Yu Shining did not dare to speak.

古文：武后以其不右己，衔之，后因杀无忌，坐免官，出为荥州刺史，改华州，听致仕。
现代文：武则天皇后认为他不替自己帮忙，心怀不满，后来因此杀掉长孙无忌时，于志宁获罪撤职，离京任荣州刺史，改任华州刺史，批准他退休。
English: Empress Wu Zi thought that he did not help himself and was dissatisfied. Later, when he killed his eldest grandson, Yu Shining was convicted and removed from his post. He left Beijing to serve as the governor of Rongzhou and was appointed governor of Huazhou, and his retirement was approved.

古文：卒，年七十八，赠幽州都督，谥曰定。
现代文：去世时，七十八岁，追认为幽州都督，谥号为 定 。
English: At the time of his death, he was seventy-eight years old. He was later regarded as the governor of Yuzhou and his posthumous name was Ding.

古文：后追复左光禄大夫、太子太师。
现代文：后来补救恢复左光禄大夫头衔、太子太师官职。
English: Later, the title of Doctor of the Left Guanglu was restored, and the position of Prince and Grand Master was restored.

古文：志宁爱宾客，乐引后进，然多嫌畏，不能有所荐达也，为士议所少。
现代文：于志宁对宾客接待热情，对后辈乐于推荐，但是猜疑戒心太多，没有因他推荐而显贵的人，受到官场舆论的轻视。
English: Yu Shining is enthusiastic about receiving guests and is happy to recommend to the younger generation, but he is too suspicious and wary, and there is no dignified person because of his recommendation, and he is despised by official public opinion.

古文：凡格式、律令、礼典，皆与论譔，赏赐以巨万。
现代文：凡是法规、法令、礼仪制度，他都参与研究起草，得到的赏赐数额巨大。
English: He participated in the research and drafting of all laws, decrees, and etiquette systems, and received a huge amount of rewards.

古文：初，志宁与司空李勣修定《本草》并图，合五十四篇。
现代文：当初，于志宁和司空李责力修改订正《神农本草经》，并绘制标本图画，合并为五十四篇。
English: At first, Yu Zhining and Siku Li were responsible for revising and revising the Shennongbon Sutra, and drawing specimen pictures, which were combined into fifty-four articles.

古文：帝曰： 《本草》尚矣，今复修之，何所异邪？ 
现代文：皇上问 ：《神农本草经》流传很久远了，现在重新修订，有哪些不同呢？ 
English: The emperor asked: "The Shennongbon Sutra" has been passed down for a long time, and now it has been revised. What are the differences?

古文：对曰： 昔陶弘景以《神农经》合杂家《别录》注铭之，江南偏方，不周晓药石，往往纰缪，四百余物，今考正之，又增后世所用百余物，此以为异。 帝曰： 《本草》、《别录》何为而二？ 
现代文：于志宁回答说： 南梁陶弘景把《神农本草经》和杂家的《别录》合在一起，进行注解题名，江南的民间药方，对药物学并不完全通晓，往往出现错误，四百多种药物，现在进行了考核修正，还增加了后代使用的药物一百多种，这些就是不同于《神农本草经》的内容。 皇上说： 《本草》、《别录》为什么是两部药书？ 
English: Yu Zhining replied: Nanliang Tao Hongjing combined the "Shen Nong Ben Cao" and the miscellaneous "Bell" together, annotated the title, the folk medicine of the south of the Yangtze River, was not fully familiar with pharmacology, and errors often occurred. More than 400 kinds of drugs have now been evaluated and corrected, and more than 100 kinds of drugs used by future generations have been added. These are the contents different from the "Shen Nong Ben Cao." The emperor said: "Why are the "Bell" and "Bell" two pharmacopoeias?

古文：对曰： 班固唯记《黄帝内外经》，不载《本草》，至齐《七录》乃称之。
现代文：于志宁回答说 ：东汉班固的《汉书·艺文志》只收录了《黄帝内、外经》，没有收录《神农本草经》，到了南齐阮孝绪的《七录》才收录了它。
English: Yu Zhining replied, "The East Han Dynasty Ban Gu's "Hanshu, Yingwenshi" only included "Huangdi Nei, Gao Jing," and did not include "Shennong Ben Cao Jing," and it was only included in Nanqi Ruan Xiaoxu's "Seven Records."

古文：官给轜车，归葬于乡。子正业，仕至中书舍人。
现代文：人们认为神农尝药来拯救生命，而黄帝以前的没有记载，把认识的传给后代，到黄帝的医药官桐君、雷公才记录在书中，但是写的郡县，多半是汉代的名称，怀疑是张仲景、华佗改写了它的原文。《别录》，是曹魏、晋朝以来，吴普、李当的药物笔记，它叙述的花叶形状颜色，主药从药互相配合，以《神农本草经》为纲进行叙述，所以陶弘景把它们编写在一起。 皇上说 ：好。 这本书于是广为流传。
English: It is believed that Shennong tasted the medicine to save lives, but Huangdi did not record it before, and passed on the knowledge to future generations. It was recorded in the book by the Yellow Emperor's medical officer Tong Jun and Lei Gong. However, the counties and counties written were mostly the names of the Han Dynasty, and it is suspected that Zhang Zhongjing and Hua Wei rewrote the original text. "Partial Record" is the drug notes of Cao Wei and Jin Dynasty, Wu Pu and Li Dang. It describes the shape and color of flowers and leaves, and the main drug from the drug to each other. It is described with "Shennong's Herbal." Therefore,

古文：坐善上官仪，贬岭表。
现代文：于志宁有个曾孙名休烈。
English: Yu Shining has a great-grandson named Xu Rong.

古文：张行成，字德立，定州义丰人。
现代文：张行成别名德立，定州义丰人。
English: Zhang Xingcheng is also known as De Li and Dingzhou Yifeng.

古文：少师事刘炫，炫谓门人曰： 行成体局方正，廊庙才也。 
现代文：年轻时把刘炫当作老师敬重，刘炫对门客说 ：张行成仪态气质稳重正直，是将相人才。 
English: When he was young, he respected Liu Xiang as a teacher. Liu Xiang said to his customers: Zhang Xiangcheng has a stable and honest temperament, and is a talented general.

古文：隋大业末，察孝廉，为谒者台散从员外郎。
现代文：隋炀帝大业末年，被举荐为秀才，任谒者台散从员外郎。
English: In the last years of Emperor Sui's reign, he was recommended as a talented person, and the person who appointed him was Taisan, a subordinate of Gairo.

古文：后为王世充度支尚书。
现代文：后来任王世充的度支尚书。
English: Later, Wang Shizhong was appointed to the position of Duzhi Shangshu.

古文：世充平，以隋资补谷熟尉。
现代文：王世充失败后，张行成凭着隋朝的资历被委任为谷熟县尉。
English: After the failure of Wang Shichong, Zhang Xingcheng was appointed as Guju County Lieutenant with the qualifications of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：家贫，代计吏集京师，擢制举乙科，改陈仓尉。
现代文：他家境贫寒，代替掌管计簿的官吏留在京城，参加朝廷殿试中乙科进士，改任陈仓县尉。
English: His family was poor, so he stayed in the capital in place of the official in charge of the account book, took part in the imperial court's junior high school entrance examination, and was appointed Chencang County Lieutenant.

古文：高祖谓吏部侍郎张锐曰： 今选吏岂无才用特达者？
现代文：高祖李渊对吏部侍郎张锐说 ：如今候选官吏中难道没有才干特别通达高深的？
English: Li Yuan, the founder of Gaozhou, said to Zhang Rui, the steward of the cadre department, "Nowadays, aren't there any talents among the candidate officials that are particularly profound?

古文：朕将用之。 
现代文：我要重用他。 
English: I'm going to reuse him.

古文：锐言行成，调富平主簿，有能名。
现代文：张锐介绍了张行成，调任富平县主簿，获得有才的名声。
English: Zhang Rui introduced Zhang Xingcheng, who was transferred to the main book of Fuping County and gained a reputation for talent.

古文：召补殿中侍御史，纠劾严正。
现代文：召回朝廷任殿中侍御史，揭发弹劾官吏的过失刚直不屈。
English: He recalled the imperial court's appointed palace attendants, and exposed and impeached the official's misconduct.

古文：太宗以为能，谓房玄龄曰： 古今用人未尝不因介绍，若行成者，朕自举之，无先容也。 
现代文：太宗李世民认为他有才干，对房玄龄说 ：从古到今使用人才不曾不靠别人介绍，像张行成，我自己推荐他，不必事先介绍。 
English: Tai Zong Li Shimin thought he was talented, and said to Fang Xuanling: From ancient times to the present, I have never used talent without being introduced by others. Like Zhang Xicheng, I recommend him myself, without prior introduction.

古文：尝侍宴，帝语山东及关中人，意有同异。
现代文：有一次陪同太宗宴饮，太宗谈论山东人和关中人，言语之间对他们各有褒贬。
English: On one occasion, when he accompanied Taizong to a banquet, Taizong talked about the people of Shandong and Guanzhong, praising and criticizing each of them.

古文：行成曰： 天子四海为家，不容以东西为限，是示人以隘矣。 
现代文：张行成说 ：国君把天下当作自己的家庭，不应在东边西边之间划分界线，您今天是向天下臣民表明了心胸狭窄。 
English: Zhang Xingcheng said, "The sovereign regards the world as his own family, and should not draw a line between the East and the West. You have shown your narrow-mindedness to the subjects of the world today."

古文：帝称善，赐名马一、钱十万、衣一称。
现代文：太宗说好，赐给他名马一匹、钱十万、衣服一套。
English: Emperor Taizong agreed and gave him a famous horse, 100,000 yuan and a set of clothes.

古文：自是有大政事，令与议焉。
现代文：从此有了重大政务，让他参与商议。
English: Since then, there have been major government affairs, let him participate in the discussion.

古文：累迁给事中。
现代文：连续升任为给事中。
English: Successively promoted to sergeant.

古文：帝尝谓群臣： 朕为人主，兼行将相事，岂不是夺公等名？
现代文：太宗有一次对朝臣们讲 ：我当国君，兼做将相的工作，岂不是抢了您诸位的声誉？
English: On one occasion, Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers, "When I was the ruler of the country and also did the work of the commander-in-chief, did I not rob you of your reputation?

古文：舜、禹、汤、武得稷、蒐、伊、吕而四海安，汉高祖有萧、曹、韩、彭而天下宁，兹事朕皆兼之。 
现代文：虞舜、夏禹、商汤、周武王得到了后稷、殷契、伊尹、吕尚就四海稳定，汉高祖有了萧何、曹参、韩信、彭越就天下太平，我是帝王将相的事都包下来了。 
English: When Yu Qi, Xia Yu, Shang Tang, and Zhou Wu Wang got Hou Qi, Yin Qi, Yi Yin, and Lushan, the four seas were stable. When Han Gao Zu got Xiao He, Cao San, Han Xin, and Peng Yue, the world was peaceful. I, the emperor, have everything under control.

古文：行成退，上疏曰： 有隋失道，天下沸腾，陛下拨乱反正，拯人涂炭，何周、汉君臣所能比数。
现代文：张行成退朝，呈递奏疏说 ：隋朝无道，天下群情激愤，陛下治理乱世恢复安定，把百姓从苦难之中拯救出来，哪里是周朝、汉朝的君主臣子能相提并论的。
English: Zhang Xingcheng retired from the imperial court and presented a report saying: The Sui Dynasty had no path, the world was enraged, His Majesty ruled the chaotic world, restored stability, and saved the people from suffering. Where are the monarchs and courtiers of the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty that can be compared?

古文：虽然，盛德含光，规模宏远。
现代文：虽是这样，但大德含而不露，气概广大开阔。
English: Although this is the case, his great virtue is implicit, and his spirit is broad and open.

古文：左右文武诚无将相材，奚用大庭广众与之量校，损万乘之尊，与臣下争功哉？ 
现代文：陛下身边的文武官员实在是没有将相的才能，哪里用得着在广庭大众之中跟他们比较高低，损害大国君主的尊严，和臣子争功劳呢？ 
English: The civil and military officials around His Majesty really do not have the talent to match his appearance. What is the use of comparing one's height with theirs among the general public, undermining the dignity of the great monarch, and competing with courtiers for credit?

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：太宗赞许采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：转刑部侍郎、太子少詹事。
现代文：张行成改任刑部侍郎、太子少詹事。
English: Zhang Xingcheng was reappointed as the attendant of the Department of Criminal Law and the young prince.

古文：太子驻定州监国，谓曰： 吾乃送公衣锦过乡邪！ 
现代文：太宗亲征高丽时，太子驻守定州代为处理国政，对张行成说： 我这是护送您衣锦还乡啊！ 
English: When Emperor Taizong personally led an expedition to Korea, the crown prince stayed in Dingzhou to handle the affairs of state on Emperor Taizong's behalf. He said to Zhang Xingcheng, "I'm escorting you back to your hometown!"

古文：令有司祠其先墓。
现代文：命令主管官吏到他祖先的墓地上祭奠。
English: He ordered the officials in charge to pay homage at his ancestor's grave.

古文：行成荐里人魏唐卿、崔宝权、马龙驹、张君劼皆以学行闻，太子召见，以其老不可任以事，厚赐遣之。
现代文：张行成向太子介绍了学识品行闻名的同乡魏唐卿、崔宝权、马龙驹、张君吉力，太子召见了他们，因为他们年事已高，不能担任公务，给予了丰厚的赏赐后让他们走了。
English: Zhang Xingcheng introduced to the prince the well-known fellow townsmen Wei Tangqing, Cui Baoquan, Ma Longquan and Zhang Junjili. The prince invited them because they were too old to serve in the civil service. He gave them a rich reward and let them go.

古文：太子使行成诣行在，帝见悦甚，赐劳尤渥。
现代文：太子派张行成到太宗的行营拜望，太宗见了高兴得不得了，赏赐慰劳特别优厚。
English: The prince sent Zhang Xingcheng to visit Taizong's encampment. Taizong was overjoyed to see him and rewarded him with a particularly generous reward.

古文：还为河南巡察大使，称旨，检校尚书左丞。
现代文：回来之后任河南巡察大使，符合太宗旨意，升为检校尚书左丞。
English: After returning, he served as Henan's inspection ambassador, which was in line with the emperor's intention, and was promoted to inspector of schools.

古文：是岁，帝幸灵州，诏皇太子从。
现代文：这年，太宗巡视灵州，诏令皇太子陪同。
English: That year, Emperor Taizong made an inspection tour of Lingzhou, accompanied by the crown prince.

古文：行成谏曰： 皇太子宜留监国，对百寮日决庶务，既为京师重，且示四方盛德。 
现代文：张行成劝谏说 ：皇太子应该留守京城代为处理朝政，督率百官每天决断各种政务，既把京城看得重要，还向天下显示大德。 
English: Zhang Xingcheng advised: "The crown prince should stay in Beijing as a deputy to deal with the imperial government, supervise and lead hundreds of officials to decide on various government affairs every day, not only regard Beijing as important, but also show great virtue to the world."

古文：帝以为忠。
现代文：太宗认为这是忠言。
English: Emperor Taizong thought that this was a loyal advice.

古文：迁侍中、兼刑部尚书。
现代文：张行成升任侍中、兼任刑部尚书。
English: Zhang Xingcheng was promoted to the position of chamberlain, and concurrently held the post of secretary of the Department of Criminal Law.

古文：高宗即位，封北平县公，监脩国史。
现代文：高宗李治登上帝位，封张行成为北平县公，主持编撰本朝历史。
English: Gao Zong Li Zhi ascended to the throne, and Feng Zhang Xing became the governor of Peiping County and presided over the compilation of the history of this dynasty.

古文：时晋州地震不息，帝问之，对曰： 天，阳也，君象；地，阴也，臣象。
现代文：当时晋州地震不停，高宗询问这事的征兆，张行成回答说： 天，是阳，君主的象征；地，是阴，臣子的象征。
English: At that time, the earthquake in Jinzhou was incessant. Gaozong inquired about the signs of this event. Zhang Xingcheng replied: Heaven is the yang, the symbol of the monarch; earth is the yin, the symbol of the vassal.

古文：君宜动，臣宜静。
现代文：君主应当像天体一样运行，臣子应当像大地一样静止。
English: The monarch should move like a celestial body, and the courtiers should be as still as the earth.

古文：今静者顾动，恐女谒用事，人臣阴谋。
现代文：现在应当静止的反而运动，恐怕有人通过宫廷宠信的女子请求嘱托来左右朝政，大臣秘密图谋不轨。
English: Now it should be motion instead of stillness. I'm afraid that someone is trying to influence the imperial government by requesting a commission from a woman who is a favorite of the court. The minister is secretly plotting something untoward.

古文：又诸王、公主参承起居，或伺间隙，宜明设防闲。
现代文：还有各亲王、公主参见侍候问安，有人会窥测可乘之机，应当明确设置防范措施。
English: There are also princes and princesses to see waiting for greetings, some people will spy on the opportunity, and preventive measures should be clearly set up.

古文：且晋，陛下本封，应不虚发，伏愿深思以杜未萌。 
现代文：再说晋州，是陛下原来的封地，应当不让空着发生变故，希望深思熟虑，在还没有出现苗头之前就进行杜绝。 
English: Moreover, as Jinzhou is His Majesty's original fiefdom, we should not allow vacancy to occur, and we hope that we will deliberate and put an end to it before any signs appear.

古文：帝然之，诏五品以上极言得失。
现代文：高宗认为是这样，诏令五品以上官员尽情评论朝政得失。
English: Gao Zong believed that this was the case, and officials above the fifth grade of the imperial edict commented on the gains and losses of the imperial government as much as possible.

古文：俄拜尚书左仆射、太子少傅。
现代文：不久授予他尚书左仆射、太子少傅官衔。
English: Soon, he was awarded the official titles of Shangshu Zuofu Jie and Prince Xiaofu.

古文：永徽四年，自三月不雨至五月，行成惧，以老乞身，制答曰： 古者策免，乖罪己之义。
现代文：永徽四年，从三月到五月一直不下雨，张行成害怕了，以年老为理由请求退休，高宗行文答复说： 古人上书要求免官，违背自责的本意。
English: In the fourth year of Yonghui, it did not rain from March to May. Zhang Xingcheng was afraid and asked for retirement on the grounds of old age. Gaozong Xingwen replied: The ancients wrote a letter asking for dismissal, which was against the intention of self-condemnation.

古文：此在朕寡德，非宰相咎。 
现代文：这是由于我德行太少，不是您的罪过。 
English: This is due to my lack of virtue, not your fault.

古文：乃赐宫女、黄金器，敕勿复辞。
现代文：还赐给他宫女、黄金器物，叫他不要再提辞职的话。
English: He also gave him a concubine, gold objects, and told him to stop talking about resigning.

古文：行成固请，帝曰： 公，朕之旧，奈何舍朕去邪？ 
现代文：张行成坚决请求退休，高宗说： 您是我的老臣，怎么能撇下我就走呢？ 
English: Zhang Xingcheng firmly requested to retire, Gaozong said: You are my old minister, how can you leave me?

古文：泫然流涕。
现代文：泪水直流。
English: The tears are flowing.

古文：行成惶恐，不得已复视事。
现代文：张行成惊慌恐惧，不得已又主持政务。
English: Zhang Xingcheng panicked and feared, and had no choice but to preside over government affairs.

古文：未几，卒于尚书省舍，年六十七。
现代文：没有多久，死在尚书省的官署里，享年六十七岁。
English: Not long after, he died at the age of sixty-seven in the government office of Shangshu Province.

古文：诏九品以上就第哭。
现代文：高宗诏令九品以上官员登门哀悼。
English: Gao Zongzhao ordered officials of nine grades and above to come to mourn.

古文：比敛，三遣使赐内衣服，尚宫宿其家护视。
现代文：入殓时，三次派遣使者赏赐宫中衣服，宫中女官尚宫守在他家里督理丧事。
English: When he entered the imperial palace, he sent three emissaries to reward the clothes in the palace, and the palace's lady-in-waiting, Shang Gongshu, supervised the funeral at his home.

古文：赠开府仪同三司、并州都督，祭以少牢，谥曰定。
现代文：追认为开府仪同三司、并州都督，用一只羊的少牢规格举行祭奠，谥号为 定 。
English: It is believed that the Kaifu ceremony, together with the three divisions and the state governor, will be held with a sheep's small size, and the nickname is fixed.

古文：弘道元年，诏配享高宗庙廷。
现代文：弘道元年，朝廷诏令在高宗祠庙里设置张行成的灵位享受祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Hongdao era, the Imperial Court issued a decree to set up Zhang Xingcheng's spiritual position in the Gaozong Temple to enjoy the ritual.

古文：族子易之、昌宗。
现代文：他有两个同族侄儿：张易之、张昌宗。
English: He has two nephews from the same family: Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong.

古文：易之幼以门廕仕，累迁尚乘奉御。
现代文：张易之尚在少年时代就靠祖辈的功勋当官，连续升为尚乘奉御。
English: Zhang Yizhizhong became an official in his boyhood thanks to the merits of his ancestors, and was successively promoted to Shang Rongbong.

古文：既冠，颀皙美姿制，音技多所晓通。
现代文：到了二十岁，身材修长，皮肤白皙，姿态优美，音乐技艺多数通晓。
English: By the age of twenty, the body is slender, the skin is fair, the posture is graceful, and most people are familiar with musical skills.

古文：武后时，太平公主荐其弟昌宗，得侍。
现代文：武则天皇后执政时，太平公主推荐他的弟弟张昌宗，得到侍奉武后的机遇。
English: When Empress Wu Zetian was in power, Princess Taiping recommended his younger brother Zhang Changzong, who was given the opportunity to serve Empress Wu.

古文：昌宗白进易之材用过臣，善治炼药石。
现代文：张昌宗向武后介绍说张易之才干超过自己，善于炼制药物。
English: Zhang Changzong introduced to Empress Wu that Zhang Yi's talent exceeded his own, and he was good at refining drugs.

古文：即召见，悦之。
现代文：武后立即召见，很喜欢他。
English: Empress Wu immediately summoned him and liked him very much.

古文：兄弟皆幸，出入禁中，傅硃粉，衣纨锦，盛饰自喜。
现代文：兄弟两人都得到宠爱，出入宫廷，修饰打扮，衣着华丽，极力整治得逗入怜爱。
English: Both brothers were favored, they went in and out of the court, they were well groomed, dressed in gorgeous clothes, and they were so well groomed that they were loved.

古文：即日拜昌宗云麾将军、行左千牛中郎将，易之司卫少卿，赐甲第，帛五百段，给奴婢、橐它、马牛充入之。
现代文：召见当天就任命张昌宗为云麾将军，行使左千牛中郎将职务，张易之为司卫少卿，赐给住宅一处，绢帛五百段，大量的男仆女婢、骆驼、牛马供他使用。
English: On the day of the summoning, Zhang Changzong was appointed as the general of Yunnan Province, exercising the position of the left thousand cattle middle-man, and Zhang Yi was appointed as the junior secretary of Swei, and was given a residence with 500 square meters, a large number of male and female servants, camels, cattle and horses for his use.

古文：不数日，进拜昌宗银青光禄大夫，赐防閤，同京官朝朔望；追赠父希臧为襄州刺史，母韦、母臧并封太夫人，尚宫问省起居。
现代文：没几天，提升张昌宗为银青光禄大夫，赐给防阁官员担任警卫，和朝臣们一样每月初一、十五朝见武后；追认他的父亲张希臧为襄州刺史，母亲韦氏、臧氏一起封为太夫人，宫中女官尚宫每天去看望请安。
English: Within a few days, Zhang Changzong was promoted to Yin Qing Guanglu Doctor, given to the cabinet defense officials to serve as guards, and met with the Empress Dowager on the first and fifteenth mornings of each month, just like the courtiers; his father, Zhang Xizhen, was recognized as the prince of Xiangzhou, and his mother, Wei and Zou, were jointly named the grand duchess, and the court lady Shang Gong visited every day to ask for peace.

古文：诏尚书李迥秀私侍臧。
现代文：诏令尚书武迥秀同臧氏秘密往来。
English: He ordered Shang Shumu Shuxiu to have secret dealings with the Zou clan.

古文：昌宗兴不旬日，贵震天下。
现代文：张昌宗进宫任职不到十天半月，权势震惊天下。
English: Zhang Changzong entered the palace for less than ten days and a half months, and his power shocked the world.

古文：诸武兄弟及宗楚客等争造门，伺望颜色，亲执辔棰，号易之为 五郎 ，昌宗 六郎 。
现代文：武家的各个兄弟以及宗楚客等人抢着上门，讨好巴结，亲自替他牵马递鞭，称张易之为 五郎 ，张昌宗为 六郎 。
English: Various brothers of the samurai family as well as Zong Chu guests and others rushed to the door to curry favor with him, personally leading the horse and handing him the whip, calling Zhang Yi as Goro, and Zhang Changzong as Rokuro.

古文：又加昌宗右散骑常侍。
现代文：又任命张昌宗为右散骑常侍。
English: He also appointed Zhang Changzong as the right rider.

古文：圣历二年，始置控鹤府，拜易之为监。
现代文：武则天圣历二年，开始设置控鹤府，任命张易之为府监。
English: In the second year of the Wuzetian calendar, he began to set up the Controlled Crane Office and appointed Zhang Yiqin as the superintendent.

古文：久之，更号奉宸府，以易之为令。
现代文：过了很久改叫奉宸府，任命张易之为府令。
English: After a long time, the name was changed to Fengye Prefecture, and Zhang Yi was appointed as the governor.

古文：乃引知名士阎朝隐、薛稷、员半千为供奉。
现代文：于是引荐知名人士阎朝隐、薛稷、员半千担任供奉。
English: As a result, well-known figures such as Yan Chaoying and Xue Qi were recommended, and half a thousand people served as worshippers.

古文：后每燕集，则二张诸武杂侍，摴博争道为笑乐，或嘲诋公卿，淫蛊显行，无复羞畏。
现代文：武后每当宴饮聚会，那么张易之、张昌宗和武家兄弟就一同侍候，用掷骰赌博比本领取乐，有时嘲笑诋毁公侯卿相，公开地干迷乱疯狂的事，不再有什么羞耻畏惧。
English: Whenever the Empress Wu had a banquet, Zhang Yizhi, Zhang Changzong and the samurai brothers would wait together. They would gamble with dice to win, sometimes mocking and slandering the princes and princes, and openly doing crazy and crazy things. They no longer had any shame or fear.

古文：时无检轻薄者又谄言昌宗乃王子晋后身，后使被羽裳、吹箫、乘寓鹤，裴回庭中，如仙去状，词臣争为赋诗以媚后。
现代文：当时无德轻浮的人又讨好地说张昌宗是周灵王的太子仙人王子晋转胎，武后让他穿上羽衣、吹着洞箫、乘上假鹤，在庭院来回飞翔，好像是仙人骑鹤升天的样子，侍从的文人抢着以这为题吟诗讨好武后。
English: At that time, the wicked and frivolous people also flatteringly said that Zhang Changzong was the prince of Zhou Ling Wang, the fairy prince Jin, and the Empress Wu had him wear a feather coat, blow a gong, ride a fake crane, and fly back and forth in the courtyard, as if he were a fairy riding a crane to the sky. The attendants of the literati rushed to sing a poem to please the Empress Wu.

古文：后知丑声甚，思有以掩覆之，乃诏昌宗即禁中论著，引李峤、张说、宋之问、富嘉谟、徐彦伯等二十有六人譔《三教珠英》。
现代文：武后得知丑闻传得厉害，想出办法掩盖，便诏令张昌宗就在宫中撰写文章，带着李峤、张说、宋之问、富家谟、徐彦伯等二十六人撰述《三教珠英》。
English: When Empress Wu learned that the scandal had spread far and wide, she thought of a way to cover it up, and ordered Zhang Changzong to write an article in the palace, taking 26 people including Li Qian, Zhang Xian, Song Zhiwen, Fujia Moo, and Xu Yanbo to write "Three Teachings of Zhuying."

古文：加昌宗司仆卿、易之麟台监，权势震赫。
现代文：任命张昌宗为司仆卿、张易之为麟台监，权势显赫。
English: Zhang Changzong was appointed as the Secretary of the Servant, and Zhang Yiqing as the Supervisor of Lintai, with great power.

古文：皇太子、相王请封昌宗为王，后不听，迁春官侍郎，封鄴国公，易之恒国公，实封各三百户。
现代文：皇太子、相王请求封张昌宗为王，武后不同意，改任他为春官侍郎，封他为邺国公，张易之为恒国公，各获收纳三百户租税的实封。
English: At the request of the crown prince and the king's son-in-law, Zhang Changzong was made the king, but Empress Wu did not agree, and he was appointed as the attendant of the crown prince, he was appointed as the prince of Shandong Province, and Zhang Yi was appointed as the prince of Hengduan Province, and each of them received a sealed tax receipt for 300 households.

古文：后既春秋高，易之兄弟专政，邵王重润与永泰郡主窃议，皆得罪缢死。
现代文：武后年事已高，张易之兄弟独揽朝政大权，邵王李重润和永泰郡主暗地非议，都被判处绞刑。
English: Empress Wu was very old. Zhang Yi's brothers monopolized the political power of the dynasty. Shao Wang Li Chongrun and Princess Yongtai secretly criticized each other and were both sentenced to death by hanging.

古文：御史大夫魏元忠尝劾奏易之等罪，易之诉于后，反诬元忠与司礼丞高戬约曰： 天子老，当挟太子为耐久朋。 
现代文：御史大夫魏元忠曾经弹劾禀奏张易之等人的罪行，张易之向武后申诉，反而诬告魏元忠与司礼丞高戬相约说： 天子年老，应该挟持太子做个能长久保持友谊的朋友。 
English: Historian Wei Yuanzhong once impeached Zhang Yi for the crimes of others, and Zhang Yi complained to Empress Wu. Instead, he falsely accused Wei Yuanzhong of colluding with Sireicheng Gao, saying: The emperor is old, and he should hold the prince as a friend who can maintain friendship for a long time.

古文：后问： 孰为证左？ 
现代文：武后问： 谁是证人？ 
English: Wu Hou asked: Who is the witness?

古文：易之曰： 凤阁舍人张说。 
现代文：张易之说： 凤阁舍人张说。 
English: Zhang Yizhi said: "Phoenix Pavilion is the home of the people," Zhang said.

古文：翌日庭辩，皆不雠，然元忠、说犹皆被逐。
现代文：第二天在朝廷辩论，都无证据，但是魏元忠、张说都被驱逐。
English: The next day at the court debate, there was no evidence, but Wei Yuanzhong and Zhang said that they were all expelled.

古文：其后易之等益自肆，奸赃狼藉，御史台劾奏之，乃诏宗晋卿、李承嘉、桓彦范、袁恕己参鞫，而司刑正贾敬言窥望后旨，奏昌宗强市，罪当赎，诏曰可。
现代文：此后张易之等人更加放肆，贪赃枉法，御史台弹劾禀奏，诏令宗晋卿、李承嘉、桓彦范、袁恕己审查，但司刑正贾敬言观察武后心意，禀奏张昌宗强行购买他人货物，罪刑判为赔偿财物，诏令说行。
English: After that, Zhang Yizhi and others were more presumptuous, and the corruption and embezzlement law, the impeachment of the Imperial Historian's Office, and the edict of Emperor Zongjin, Li Chengjia, Huan Yanfan, and Yuan Shuxi were reviewed. However, the magistrate Zhengjia respectfully observed the intention of Empress Wu, and the edict of Emperor Zhang Changzong forcibly purchased other people's goods. The crime and punishment were sentenced as compensation property, and the edict was carried out.

古文：承嘉、彦范进曰： 昌宗赃四百万，尚当免官。 
现代文：李承嘉、桓彦范进言说 ：张昌宗贪占赃款四百万，还应该罢官。 
English: Li Chengjia and Huan Yanfan said that Zhang Changzong had embezzled 4 million yuan and should be removed from office.

古文：昌宗大言曰： 臣有功于国，不应免官。 
现代文：张昌宗张扬说 ：我对国家立有功劳，不应该罢官。 
English: Zhang Changzong Zhang Yang said: I have contributed to the establishment of the country, and I should not be dismissed.

古文：后问宰相，内史令杨再思曰： 昌宗主炼丹剂，陛下饵之而验，功最大者也。 
现代文：武后向宰相们咨询，内史令杨再思说： 张昌宗主持炼制药物，陛下吞服很有效验，是个功劳最大的人。 
English: Wu Hou consulted with the prime ministers, and Yang Zai Si, the secretary of internal history, said: Zhang Changzong presided over the refining of drugs, and his majesty's swallowing was very effective, and he was a person of the greatest merit.

古文：即诏释之，归罪其兄昌仪、同休，皆贬官。
现代文：立即诏令释放了他，把罪行推到他的哥哥张昌仪、张同休身上，都降了职。
English: He was immediately released by imperial edict, and the crimes were blamed on his brother Zhang Changyi and Zhang Tongxiu, who were both demoted.

古文：已而后久疾，居长生院，宰相不得进见，惟昌宗等侍侧。
现代文：后来武后长久生病，居住在长生院，宰相们都不能进去拜见，只有张昌宗等人在她身边侍候。
English: Later, Empress Wu fell ill for a long time and lived in Chosei-in. The prime ministers were not allowed to visit her, only Zhang Changzong and others waited at her side.

古文：昌宗恐后不讳，祸且及，乃引支党日夜与谋为不轨事。
现代文：张昌宗担心武后死了，灾祸就要到来，就带领同伙日日夜夜一起商议干不法的事。
English: Zhang Changzong was worried that Wu Hou had died and a calamity was about to come, so he led his associates to discuss doing illegal things day and night.

古文：然小人疏险，道路皆知之，至有榜其事于衢左者。
现代文：但是小人疏忽邪恶，连与此无关的人们都知道了，甚至有人在交通要道旁边张贴传单张扬这些事。
English: But the villain's carelessness and evil are known even to people who have nothing to do with it, and some people even put up flyers next to major roads to publicize these things.

古文：左台御史中丞宋璟亟请按摄，后阳许璟，俄诏璟外按幽州都督屈突仲翔，更敕司刑卿崔神庆问状。
现代文：左台御史中丞宋瞡多次请求审查拘捕，武后表面答应宋瞡，很快诏令宋瞡离京审查幽州都督屈突仲翔，改令司刑卿崔神庆查问案情。
English: Zuodai goshi chujo Song Xi repeatedly requested a review of the arrest, Wu Hou ostensibly agreed to Song Xi, and soon ordered Song Xi to leave Beijing to review Yuzhou governor Qu Duzhongxiang, and ordered criminal chief Cui Shenqing to investigate the case.

古文：神庆妄奏云： 昌宗应原。 
现代文：崔神庆胡乱禀奏说 ：张昌宗应当宽免。 
English: Choe Son Gyeong said, "Zhang Changzong should be pardoned."

古文：璟执奏 昌宗法当斩 。
现代文：宋瞡坚持禀奏说 ：张昌宗依照法律应当斩首。 
English: Song Tao insisted that Zhang Changzong should be beheaded according to the law.

古文：后不答，左拾遗李邕进曰： 璟之言，社稷计也，愿可之。 
现代文：武后不同意，左拾遗李邕进言说： 宋瞡的话，是为江山社稷着想，希望批准。 
English: Wu Hou did not agree, and Zuo Gui Li Yao said: Song Yao's words are for the sake of the Jiangshan community and hope to be approved.

古文：后终不许。
现代文：武后始终不同意。
English: Wu Hou always disagreed.

古文：神龙元年，张柬之、崔玄等率羽林兵迎皇太子入，诛易之、昌宗于迎仙院，及其兄昌期、同休、从弟景雄皆枭首天津桥，士庶欢踊，脔取之，一夕尽。
现代文：中宗神龙元年，张柬之、崔玄日韦等人率领羽林军迎接皇太子李显进宫，到迎仙院处死了张易之、张昌宗，他们的哥哥张昌期、张同休、伯叔弟弟张瞡雄都在天津桥斩首示众，万民欢欣雀跃，将他们的尸体一块块地割下来拿走，一个晚上就割光了。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhongzong, Zhang Kammanzhi, Cui Xuan Rongwei and others led the Wu Lin Army to welcome the crown prince Li Xian into the palace. Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong were executed at Yingxian Courthouse. Their brother Zhang Changji, Zhang Tongxiu, and uncle brother Zhang Xiong were all beheaded on Tianjin Bridge. The people were overjoyed. Their bodies were cut down piece by piece and taken away, and they were all cut down in one night.

古文：坐流贬者数十人。
现代文：获罪流放贬官的几十人。
English: Dozens of those found guilty were exiled.

古文：天宝九载，昌期女上表自言，杨国忠助之，诏复易之兄弟官爵，赐同休一子官。
现代文：天宝九年，张昌期的女儿自己呈递奏表申诉，杨国忠替她帮忙，玄宗李隆基诏令恢复张易之兄弟的官职爵号，给张同休的一个儿子赐予官职。
English: In the ninth year of Tianbao, Zhang Changji's daughter herself submitted a petition for appeal, Yang Guozhong helped her, and Xuanzong Li Longji ordered to restore Zhang Yi's brother's official title and give an official post to one of Zhang Tongxiu's sons.

