古文：人君唯毋听寝兵，则群臣宾客莫敢言兵。
现代文：人君只要听信废止军备的议论，群臣宾客便不敢讲求军事。
English: As long as people listen to the abolition of armaments, the guests will not dare to talk about the military.

古文：然则内之不知国之冶乱，外之不知诸侯强弱，如是则城郭毁坏，莫之筑补；甲弊兵簓，莫之修缮。
现代文：那么，既不知国内的情况是太平还是动乱，又不知国外的诸侯是强大还是虚弱。这样城郭就毁坏，无人筑补；盔甲、兵器就破败，无人修缮了。
English: So, not knowing whether the domestic situation is peaceful or turbulent, and not knowing whether the foreign lords are strong or weak, the castle was destroyed and no one repaired it; the armor and weapons were ruined and no one repaired them.

古文：如是则守圉之备毁矣，辽远之地谋，边竟之士修，百姓无圉敌之心。故曰， 寝兵之说胜，则险阻不守。 
现代文：这样也就使国防的设备归于毁灭了。远方的国土失落，边境的战士偷惰，百姓也将丧失御敌的斗志。所以说： 寝兵之说胜，则险阻不守。 
English: In this way, the equipment of national defense will also be destroyed. The distant land will be lost, the soldiers on the border will be lazy, and the people will lose the fighting spirit against the enemy. Therefore, it is said: If the sleeper soldiers claim victory, they will not defend the danger.

古文：人君唯毋听兼爱之说，则视天下之民如其民，视国如吾国。
现代文：人君只要听信泛爱人类的议论，就会把天下的民众都看成他自己的人，把别的国家都看成自己的国。
English: As long as the prince listens to the discourse of universal love for mankind, he will regard the people of the world as his own people, and all other countries as his own country.

古文：如是则无并兼攘夺之心，无覆军败将之事。
现代文：这样就没有兼并争夺别国的心机，也没有战败敌军敌将的事迹。
English: In this way, there is no opportunity for annexation to compete for the hearts of other countries, and there is no record of defeating enemy generals.

古文：然则射御勇力之士不厚禄，覆军杀将之臣不贵爵，如是则射御勇力之士出在外矣。
现代文：那么，射敌和车战的勇士没有厚禄，消灭敌军敌将的功臣没有贵爵，这些射敌和车战的勇士就要投奔外国去了。
English: Then, the warriors who shot the enemy and the chariot battle did not have a rich reward, and the heroes who eliminated the enemy's enemy did not have a peerage. These warriors who shot the enemy and the chariot battle would have to go abroad.

古文：我能毋攻人可也，不能令人毋攻我。
现代文：自己不攻打别人是可以做得到的、但不能管住人家不攻打自己。
English: You can manage without attacking others, but you can't manage without attacking yourself.

古文：彼求地而予之，非吾所欲也，不予而与战，必不胜也。
现代文：敌国要求割地给他们，自然不是我们所满意的，不割地而与之战斗，又一定打不赢。
English: The enemy country's demand that we should give them a piece of land is naturally not satisfactory to us. If we fight them without a piece of land, we will certainly not win.

古文：彼以教士，我以驱众；彼以良将，我以无能，其败必覆军杀将。
现代文：人家用经过训练的士兵，我们用临时征集的乌合之众；人家用良将，我们用无能之辈。其败局一定是军士覆亡而将领被杀。
English: People use trained soldiers, we use the rabble of temporary recruits; people use good generals, we use incompetents. The defeat must be that the sergeant is killed and the general is killed.

古文：故曰： 兼爱之说胜，则士卒不战。 
现代文：所以说： 兼爱之说胜，则士卒不战。 
English: Therefore, he said, "If you both want to win, then you should not fight."

古文：人君唯无好全生，则群臣皆全其生，而生又养。
现代文：人君只要专好全生保命，群臣也就都来全生保命，而大讲养生之道。
English: As long as people are dedicated to preserving their lives throughout their lives, ministers will also come to preserve their lives throughout their lives, and talk about the way to maintain health.

古文：生养何也？
现代文：什么叫做养生呢？
English: What is a health regimen?

古文：曰：滋味也，声色也，然后为养生。
现代文：回答说：饮食滋味，声色享受，然后归结为保养生命就是了。
English: He said: "It's all about eating well, enjoying yourself and then it comes down to preserving life.

古文：然则从欲妄行，男女无别，反于禽兽。
现代文：那么，纵欲妄行，男女无别，就要返回到禽兽状态。
English: Then, indulgence, men and women are no different, it is necessary to return to the animal state.

古文：然则礼义廉耻不立，人君无以自守也。
现代文：那么，礼义廉耻就立不起来，人君就不肯自我约束了。
English: Then, courtesy, honesty and integrity will not stand up, and people will not be willing to self-discipline.

古文：故曰： 全生之说胜，则廉耻不立。 
现代文：所以说： 全生之说胜，则廉耻不立。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If you can tell the truth your whole life long, then you are not a dishonest person.

古文：人君唯无听私议自贵，则民退静隐伏，窟穴就山，非世间上，轻爵禄而贱有司。
现代文：人君只要听信私立异说清高自贵的议论，人们就将要退身静处而隐匿行踪，窟居洞府而远就深山，反对世俗而对抗君上，看轻爵禄而无视官吏了。
English: As long as people listen to the private dissent, clear and high-minded arguments, people will retreat to a quiet place and hide their whereabouts, live in caves and caves and far away in the mountains, oppose the world and confront the prince, look down on the peerage and ignore the officials.

古文：然则令不行禁不止。
现代文：那么，君主对于他们简直是令不能行而禁不能止。
English: The sovereign, then, for them is simply imperious.

古文：故曰： 私议自贵之说胜，则上令不行。 
现代文：所以说： 私议自贵之说胜，则上令不行。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If the private discussion is self-serving, then it is not possible to issue an order.

古文：人君唯无好金玉货财，必欲得其所好，然则必有以易之。
现代文：人君只要喜好金玉财货，而且一定要得到它们，那么就必须有条件同它们交换。
English: As long as people like precious stones and goods, and they must get them, then they must have conditions to exchange with them.

古文：所以易之者何也？
现代文：用什么来换取呢？
English: In exchange for what?

古文：大官尊位，不然则尊爵重禄也。
现代文：只好用大官尊位，不然就是用高爵重禄。
English: You just have to use the dignity of a high-ranking official, otherwise you will be rewarded with a high rank.

古文：如是则不肖者在上位矣。
现代文：这样，不贤之辈就要在上面掌权了。
English: In this way, the wicked will come to power above.

古文：然则贤者不为下，智者不为谋，信者不为约，勇者不为死。
现代文：那么，贤者将不肯甘为属下，智者将不肯设谋献策，信实的人将不肯相约办事，勇敢的人将不来效死。
English: Then, the wise will not be willing to be subordinates, the wise will not be willing to devise and offer advice, the faithful will not be willing to work together, and the brave will not be willing to die.

古文：如是则驱国而捐之也。故曰： 金玉货财之说胜，则爵服下流。 
现代文：这样就等于把国家拿出来抛弃掉了。所以说： 金玉货财之说胜，则爵服下流。 
English: This is tantamount to taking the country out and abandoning it. Therefore, it is said: If gold and jewels are more important than wealth, then a knight's robe is indecent.

古文：人君唯毋听群徒比周，则群臣朋党，蔽美扬恶。
现代文：人君只听信结交朋党的议论，群臣就要搞朋党活动，讲话蔽美扬恶，那么，君主就无法了解情况的真假。
English: If people only listen to the opinions of their friends and colleagues, and the ministers have to engage in the activities of their friends and colleagues, and their speeches are full of flattery and malice, then the monarch will not be able to understand the truth or falsity of the situation.

古文：然则国之情伪不见于上。如是则朋党者处前，寡党者处后。
现代文：这样就形成有朋党的活跃在台前，党羽少的被挤到台后。
English: As a result, some of the party's supporters are active in front of the stage, while the party's less active members are squeezed behind the stage.

古文：夫朋党者处前，贤、不肖不分，则争夺之乱起，而君在危殆之中矣。
现代文：有朋党的人们在台前活动，贤者与不贤者就将无法分清，争夺的祸乱就要发生，而君主就将处在危险境地。
English: If there are people of the same party in front of the stage, the wise and the unwise will be indistinguishable, the scourge of competition will occur, and the monarch will be in a dangerous situation.

古文：故曰： 群徒比周之说胜，则贤、不肖不分。 
现代文：所以说： 群徒比周之说胜，则贤、不肖不分。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If a group of disciples is better than Zhou Zhou, then it does not matter if they are virtuous or not.

古文：人君唯毋听观乐玩好，则败。
现代文：人君只要听信观乐玩好的议论，就会导致失败。
English: As long as people listen to the good talk of faith, it will lead to failure.

古文：凡观乐者，宫室、台池，珠玉、声乐也。
现代文：凡观乐之事，不外是宫室、台池、珠玉与声乐之类。
English: All the things of Guanle are nothing more than the palace, the pool, the jewels and the vocal music.

古文：此皆费财尽力伤国之道也。
现代文：这都是浪费钱财、消耗民力、伤害国家的事情。
English: These are all things that waste money and resources, consume people's energy, and harm the country.

古文：而以此事君者，皆奸人也。
现代文：而用这些东西事奉君主的都是奸臣。
English: And those who use these things to serve the monarch are traitors.

古文：而人君听之，焉得毋败？
现代文：君主若是听信他们。怎么能够不败亡？
English: If the monarch listens to them, how can he not be defeated?

古文：然则府仓虚，蓄积竭；且奸人在上，则壅遏贤者而不进也。
现代文：那么，府库空虚了，积畜枯竭了，而且奸臣掌权，阻碍着贤者不得进用了。
English: Well, the treasury is empty, the livestock is exhausted, and the treacherous vassals are in power, hindering the sages from using it.

古文：然则国适有患，则优倡侏儒起而议国事矣。
现代文：那么，一旦国家有难，优伶丑角之流就都起来议决国事了。
English: So, as soon as the country is in difficulty, the elite clowns all rise up to discuss national affairs.

古文：是驱国而捐之也。
现代文：这也就等于把整个国家拿出来抛弃掉了。
English: This is tantamount to taking out the entire country and abandoning it.

古文：故曰： 观乐玩好之说胜，则奸人在上位。 
现代文：所以说： 观乐玩好之说胜，则奸臣在上位。 
English: Therefore, it is said that if the entertainment is good, then the treacherous vassal is superior.

古文：人君唯毋听请谒任誉，则群臣皆相为请。
现代文：人君只要听信请托保举的议论，群臣就都来互相拉拢请托。
English: As long as people listen to the argument of asking for a bailout, the ministers will all come to pull each other together.

古文：然则请谒得于上，党与成于乡。
现代文：那么，请托之风在上面发展，结党之事也就在乡中完成。
English: So, please support the development of the wind above, and the formation of the party will also be completed in the township.

古文：如是则货财行于国，法制毁于官，群臣务佼而不求用，然则无爵而贵，无禄而富。
现代文：这样，财货礼物在国内到处通行，法律制度也就在官府遭到破坏。群臣都努力发展私交而不求为国效力；那么，无爵位也可以成为贵者，无俸禄也可以发财致富。
English: In this way, gifts of goods and money were given everywhere in the country, and the legal system was destroyed in the government. The ministers all worked hard to develop personal relationships without seeking to serve the country; then, without a title, you can also become a nobleman, and without a salary, you can also get rich.

古文：故曰： 请谒任举之说胜，则绳墨不正。 
现代文：所以说： 请谒任举之说胜，则绳墨不正。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "If you are not allowed to choose the winner, then the ink is not right."

古文：人君唯无听谄谀饰过之言，则败。
现代文：人君只要听信阿谀奉承、掩饰过错的议论，就会导致失败。
English: As long as people believe in flattery and cover-ups, they will fail.

古文：奚以知其然也？
现代文：为什么是这样呢？
English: How can you be so sure?

古文：夫谄臣者，常使其主不悔其过不更其失者也，故主惑而不自知也，如是则谋臣死而谄臣尊矣。
现代文：谄媚之臣是常常使君主不知悔过又不知改过的，所以君主受迷惑而自己尚不觉察。这样，就导致谋臣死亡而谄臣高升了。
English: A flattering vassal often causes the monarch to be unrepentant and unreformed, so the monarch is confused and does not yet realize it. In this way, it leads to the death of the adviser and the rise of the vassal.

古文：故曰： 谄谗饰过之说胜，则巧佞者用。 
现代文：所以说： 谄谗饰过之说胜，则巧佞者用。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "If you can say it better than others, you are a good speaker."

