古文：马祖常马祖常，字伯庸，世为雍古部，居净州天山。
现代文：马祖常字伯庸，先祖世代为雍古部，居住在净州天山。
English: Mazu Changzha Boyong, whose ancestors were from Yongkube, lives in Jingshou Tianshan.

古文：有锡里吉思者，于祖常为高祖，金季为凤翔兵马判官，以节死赠恒州刺史，子孙因其官，以马为氏。
现代文：高祖锡里吉思，在金代为凤翔兵马判官，尽忠金朝，死后赠恒州刺史。子孙世袭为官，以马为姓氏。
English: Gao Zu Sirigis, in the Jin Dynasty, was the judge of Fengxiang Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and was loyal to the Jin Dynasty. After his death, he gave Hengzhou Shishi. His descendants were hereditary officials, with Ma as their surname.

古文：曾祖月合乃，从世祖征宋，留汴，掌馈饷，累官礼部尚书。
现代文：曾祖月合乃，随世祖征宋，留于汴京，掌管粮饷，官至礼部尚书。
English: Zengzu Yuefeng, who followed the ancestor to conquer the Song Dynasty, stayed in Beijing and was in charge of grain and grain, and was in charge of official and ceremonial affairs.

古文：父润，同知漳州路总管府事，家于光州。
现代文：父马润，为同知漳州路总管府事，家在光州。
English: His father, Ma Run, is the head of the provincial government in Bozhou Road, Tongzhi, and his home is in Gwangju.

古文：天子承天地祖宗之重，当极调摄，至于酒醴，近侍进御，当思一献百拜之义。 
现代文：祖常七岁时就好学，得钱就买书，长大后学习更加勤奋。一四川儒生张须立在仪真讲学，祖常去拜为师，学习中提出疑问数十条，须立非常器重。延初年，元朝实行科举制度，祖常应试，无论乡试、会试皆中第一名，廷试第二名，授应奉翰林文字，拜监察御史。
English: When he was seven years old, Zu was always eager to learn, and when he had money, he would buy books. When he grew up, he was more diligent in his studies. Zhang Shuling, a Confucian scholar from Sichuan, lectured on etiquette. Zu often went to pay homage to his teacher. During his studies, he asked dozens of questions, which were very important to him. In the first year of Yan, when the imperial examination system was implemented in the Yuan Dynasty, Zu often took the examination. He ranked first in both the township examination and the meeting examination, and second in the court examination. He was awarded the Feng Hanlin script, and paid homage

古文：英宗为皇太子，又上书请慎简师傅。
现代文：仁宗在位日久，常在东宫饮酒过度，祖常敢于上书劝谏皇上临朝理政。英宗为皇太子，祖常又上书请皇上慎重延聘师傅。
English: Ninsong had been on the throne for a long time, and often drank too much in the East Palace. Zu often dared to write to the emperor to advise him to take over the government. Yingzong was the crown prince, and Zu often wrote to the emperor to carefully recruit a teacher.

古文：于是奸臣铁木迭儿为丞相，威权自恣。祖常知其盗观国史，率同列劾奏其十罪，仁宗震怒，黜罢之。
现代文：奸臣铁木迭儿为丞相，作威作福，专横跋扈，祖常知道他偷看国史，与同僚弹劾其十大罪状，仁宗大怒，将铁木迭儿罢职。
English: The treacherous vassal, Tiemu Die'er, was the prime minister. He was arrogant and domineering. Zou often knew that he had peeked into the national history. He and his colleagues impeached him on ten charges. Enraged, Rinzong dismissed Tiemu Die'er from his post.

古文：秦州山移，祖常言： 山不动之物，今而动焉，由在野有当用不用之贤，在官有当言不言之佞，故致然尔。 
现代文：传闻秦山移动，祖常藉此上书说： 山本不动之物，如今移动，必定是在朝外有当用不用之贤人，在朝为官者有当言不言之佞臣。 
English: When it was rumored that Mount Qin had been moved, the ancestor often used this as a pretext to write: Yamamoto's immovable object, now moved, must have been used by wise men outside the court, and officials in the court must have been trusted vassals.

古文：疏闻，大臣皆家居待罪。
现代文：皇帝看后令大臣们都居家等候审查治罪。
English: When the emperor saw this, he ordered his ministers to stay at home and wait for the review and punishment.

古文：祖常荐贤拔滞，知无不言。
现代文：祖常荐举贤能，弹劾那些不贤无能者，知无不言。
English: Ancestors often recommend to promote the virtuous, impeach those who are not virtuous and incompetent, and say nothing.

古文：俄改宣政院经历，月余辞归，起为社稷署令。
现代文：不久，改任宣政院经历，仅月余就辞官返乡，后又起用为社稷署令。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the State Council, and after only a month, he resigned and returned to his hometown. Later, he was appointed as the director of the Social Security Administration.

古文：亡何，奸臣复相，左迁开平县尹，因欲中伤之，遂退居光州。久之，奸臣既死，乃除翰林待制。
现代文：又不久，奸臣复相位，贬祖常为开平县尹，后退居故里光州，直到奸臣死后，才被召还任翰林待制。
English: Not long after that, the traitor was reinstated and was often referred to as Yin of Kaiping County. He then retreated to his hometown of Gwangju, and was only recalled to the position of Hanlin to wait until the traitor's death.

古文：泰定建储，擢典宝少监、太子左赞善。
现代文：泰定年间确立皇太子，升祖常为典宝少监、太子左赞善。
English: The crown prince was established during the Taidai era, and the ascended ancestor was often the junior overseer of treasures and the prince Zuozanzen.

古文：寻兼翰林直学士，除礼部尚书。
现代文：不久又兼翰林直学士，任礼部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was also awarded the degree of Hanlin Zhi Gao, and was appointed as a member of the etiquette department.

古文：丁祖母忧，起为右赞善，复除礼部尚书，寻辞归。
现代文：其祖母寿终，祖常辞官归家服丧。后起任右赞善，仍为礼部尚书。不久辞官回乡。
English: At the end of his grandmother's life, his father-in-law resigned and went home to mourn. Later, he was appointed as Uzanzen, still being a ceremonial official. He soon returned to his hometown as a retired official.

古文：天历元年，召为燕王内尉，仍入礼部，两知贡举，一为读卷官，时称得人。
现代文：天历元年，朝廷召祖常任燕王内尉，但仍入礼部任职，两次主持贡举考试，一次为读卷官，当时人们都认为他称职。
English: In the first year of the calendar, the imperial court appointed Zuo as a permanent lieutenant of Yan Wang, but he still served in the ceremonial department, twice presided over the tribute examination, and once was a reading officer. At that time, people thought he was competent.

古文：升参议中书省事，参定亲郊礼仪，充读册祝官，拜治书侍御史，历徽政副使，迁江南行台中丞。
现代文：升参议中书省事，参加制定亲郊礼仪充读册祝官，拜治书侍御史，后历任徽政副使、江南行台中丞。
English: He was a member of the Council of Elders, participated in the formulation of the pro-suburban etiquette, read the book and congratulated the officials, and served as a member of the Council of Elders, and later successively served as Vice-Minister of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and as a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：元统元年，召议新政，赐白金二百两、钞万贯。
现代文：元统元年，召回朝参议新政，赐白金二百两、钞万贯。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he recalled the North Korean councillors for a new policy, and gave them 200 taels of platinum and a large number of banknotes.

古文：山东廉访司言孔氏讼事，以事关名教不行，按者亦引去。
现代文：以后又历任同知徽政院事、御史中丞。帝念他有病，特诏令他免于朝拜礼。
English: After that, he successively held the posts of Tongzhi Hui Seonginji (Councillor of the Privy Council) and Mishi Chujo (Minister of History). The emperor was concerned that he was ill and ordered him not to go to the morning prayer.

古文：除枢密副使，顷之，辞职归光州。
现代文：祖常在执法时，务必坚持原则。委任为枢密副使，不久就辞职归光州。
English: Zu often insisted on principle when enforcing the law. He was appointed as a Privy Vice-Minister and soon resigned to return to Gwangju.

古文：复除江南行台中丞，又迁陕西行台中丞，皆以疾不赴。
现代文：以后任他为江南行台中丞，又调任陕西行台中丞，都因病未赴任。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Jiangnan Gangtai Junior Middle Officer, and he was also transferred to the Shaanxi Gangtai Junior Middle Officer, but he did not take up the post due to illness.

古文：至元四年卒，年六十，赠摅忠宣宪协正功臣、河南行省右丞、上护军、魏郡公，谥文贞。
现代文：至元四年卒，年六十，赠摅忠宣宪协正功臣、河南行省右丞、上护军、魏郡公，谥 文贞 。
English: He was 60 years old when he graduated in the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty. He was awarded the titles of Zou Zhong Xuan Xie Zheng Gong Zhen, Henan Xing Zhou Yu Zheng, Shang Guo Jun, Wei Guo Gong, and Zou Wen Zhen.

古文：祖常立朝既久，多所建明。
现代文：祖常在朝任官时间长久，多有建树。
English: Ancestors often served as officials in the imperial court for a long time, with many achievements.

古文：尝议：今国族及诸部既诵圣贤之书，当知尊诸母以厚彝伦。
现代文：曾说：今蒙古族及诸部既学圣贤之书，当知尊敬父母以崇尚人伦。
English: He once said, "Nowadays, the Mongolian people and all other ethnic groups have learned the book of sages, and they should know how to respect their parents and respect human ethics.

古文：又议：将家子弟骄脆，有孤任使，而庶民有挽强蹶张老死草野者，当建武学、武举，储材以备非常。
现代文：又说：将家子弟骄傲，有负国家重任，而庶民有能挽强弓者却老死于民间，应建立武学，实行武举考试，储备人才以备非常之用。
English: He also said: It is necessary to establish martial arts, implement martial arts examinations, and reserve talents to prepare for emergencies.

古文：时虽弗用，识者韪之。
现代文：这些意见虽未被当局者采纳，但有见识的人无不赞同。
English: Although these views have not been adopted by the authorities, they are shared by those with insight.

古文：祖常工于文章，宏赡而精核，务去陈言，专以先秦两汉为法，而自成一家之言。
现代文：祖常的文章写得好，气势磅礴，言简意赅，无陈辞滥调，专以先秦两汉文章为榜样而又自成一家之言。
English: Zu Chang's article is well written, impressive, concise, without clichés, using the pre-Qin and Han Dynasty articles as a model and becoming a family of its own.

古文：尤致力于诗，圆密清丽，大篇短章无不可传者。
现代文：尤善于写诗。其诗文无论大篇短章无有不可传读者。
English: He is particularly good at writing poetry. No matter how long or short a poem is, there is no way it cannot be passed on to readers.

古文：有文集行于世。尝预修《英宗实录》，又译润《皇图大训》、《承华事略》，又编集《列后金鉴》、《千秋记略》以进，受赐优渥。
现代文：有文集行于世，曾参加修纂《英宗实录》，译有《皇图大训》、《承华事略》，编集有《列后金鉴》、《千秋记略》等书，进呈皇帝，受优厚赏赐。
English: He participated in the compilation of "The True Record of the Yingzong," translated "Imperial Map" and "A Brief History of China," and compiled "The Golden Book of the Line" and "A Brief History of the Thousand Autumns," which were presented to the emperor and received a generous reward.

古文：文宗尝驻跸龙虎台，祖常应制赋诗，尤被叹赏，谓中原硕儒唯祖常云。
现代文：文宗在龙虎台时，祖常应诏写赋做诗，被皇帝赞赏不已，认为中原大儒只有马祖常一人。
English: When Wenzong was in Longhu Square, Zu Chang wrote poems in response to the imperial edict and was highly praised by the emperor, who believed that only Mazu Chang was a great scholar of the Central Plains.

古文：巎巎巎巎字子山，康里氏。
现代文：巎巎字子山，姓康里氏，自幼学习儒家典籍，学识渊博，能言善辩。
English: Zishan, surnamed Kangri, has been studying Confucian classics since childhood. He is very knowledgeable and can speak well.

古文：父不忽木，自有传。祖燕真，事世祖，从征有功。巎巎幼肄业国学，博通群书，其正心修身之要得诸许衡及父兄家传。
现代文：毕生历任承直郎、集贤待制、兵部郎中、秘书监丞、同佥太常礼仪院事、监察御史、河东廉访副使、秘书太监、侍仪使、中书右司郎中、集贤直学士、江南行台治书侍御史、礼部尚书、监群玉内司、领会同馆事尚书、经筵官等职。在任经筵官期间还兼为奎章阁学士院承制学士、奎章阁学士院大学士、翰林院学士承旨，主持起草皇帝诏令及编修国史，提调宣文阁崇文监。
English: Throughout his life, he held the following positions: Jianzhong Niro, Jixian Wait System, Hyobu Niro Junior, Secretary Jianzhong, Tongdang Taizhong Rites and Ceremonies Academician, Supervisor Jianzhong, Hedong Liangqiao Vice-Envoy, Secretary Jianzhong, Chamberlain Jianzhong, Chinese Calligraphy Right Secretary Jianzhong Junior, Jianzhong Taizhong Rites and Ceremonies Academician Jianzhong, Rites and Ceremonies Vice-Minister, Supervisor Jianzhong, Secretary Supervisor Jianzhong, Tongdang Taizhong Rites and

古文：长袭宿卫，风神凝远，制行峻洁，望而知其为贵介公子。
现代文：其一生最主要的职务是充任经筵官，主持为皇帝讲解经史子集和圣贤格言。
English: The most important duty of his life was to serve as a eunuch of the sutra, presiding over the interpretation of the subset of the history of the sutra and the maxims of the sages for the emperor.

古文：其遇事英发，掀髯论辨，法家拂士不能过之。始授承直郎、集贤待制，迁兵部郎中，转秘书监丞。奉命往核泉舶，芥视珠犀，不少留目。
现代文：顺帝即位后，欲铲除朝中权奸，改革政治，巎巎劝顺帝多学治国之道，并为之详细耐心讲解《四书》、《五经》中有关治国安邦的道理，直到皇帝心领神会为止。尤其好讲解柳宗元的《梓人传》及张商英的《七臣论》，特别是《七臣论》，皇帝身边臣僚听了又惊恐，又嫉恨，但又不敢露于形色。
English: After Emperor Shun ascended the throne, he wanted to root out the North Korean and Chinese traitors, reform politics, and urge Emperor Shun to learn more about the way of governing the country. For this, he patiently explained in detail the principles of governing the country and the state in the "Four Books" and "Five Classics" until the emperor could understand them. It was especially good to explain Liu Zongyuan's "Zi Ren Ren" and Zhang Shangying's "Seven Ministers Theory," especially "Seven Ministers Theory." The ministers around the emperor were frightened and jealous, but they did not dare to show it.

古文：改同佥太常礼仪院事，拜监察御史，升河东廉访副使。
现代文：顺帝爱画，巎巎进呈郭忠恕的《比干图》，并解释说，商纣王因不听忠臣比干之言，致使国家灭亡。
English: Emperor Shun loved painting, and he read "Bi Gan Tu" by Guo Zhanzhong, and explained that King Shangdi caused the downfall of the country because he did not listen to the words of his loyal vassal Bi Gan.

古文：帝察其真诚，虚己以听。特赐只孙燕服九袭及玉带楮币，以旌其言。
现代文：有天顺帝看了徽宗的画，连声称好，巎巎进谏说 ：宋徽宗多才多艺，唯独当皇帝无能，宋朝为金所灭，他自己为金所俘，都是他无能做皇帝所致。皇帝最主要的才能就是当好皇帝，其他都是次要的。 巎巎敢于直言进谏。
English: One day, Emperor Shun saw Huizong's painting, and even said that it was good, and Hao Jinjun said: Song Huizong was multi-talented, but only when the emperor was incompetent, the Song Dynasty was destroyed by Kim, and he himself was captured by Kim, all of which were caused by his inability to be an emperor. The emperor's most important talent was to be a good emperor, and the others were secondary.

古文：巎巎尝谓人曰： 天下事在宰相当言，宰相不得言则台谏言之，台谏不敢言则经筵言之。
现代文：他常说 ：国家政事宰相应该发表意见，宰相不敢讲，御史谏官应该讲，谏官们不讲，则经筵官应当讲。
English: He often said: the Prime Minister should express his opinion, the Prime Minister does not dare to speak, the Eunuchs should speak, the Eunuchs do not speak, the Eunuchs should speak.

古文：备位经筵，得言人所不敢言于天子之前，志愿足矣。 
现代文：我身为经筵官，能够在皇帝面前讲出别人不敢讲的话，也就心满意足了。 
English: As a eunuch, I am satisfied to be able to say what others dare not say in front of the emperor.

古文：故于时政得失有当匡救者，未尝缄默。
现代文：所以凡有利于治国安民意见，他都从不讳言地进谏。
English: Therefore, he never shies away from any opinions that are conducive to the governance of the country and the safety of the people.

古文：大臣议罢先朝所置奎章阁学士院及艺文监诸属官。
现代文：如每遇天变民灾，他就进言于皇帝。大臣建议撤去先朝所设的奎章阁学士院及艺文监诸机构及其官员。
English: Whenever there was a natural disaster, he would advise the emperor. The minister recommended the removal of the Kuizhang Academy and the art and literature supervision institutions and their officials established by the previous government.

古文：巎巎进曰： 民有千金之产，犹设家塾，延馆客，岂有堂堂天朝，富有四海，一学房乃不能容耶？ 
现代文：巎巎认为不妥，进谏说： 平民中有千金户者，还在家设立私塾，请师教育子弟，哪有我堂堂天朝，富有四海，还不能容许设一学堂的道理。 
English: Zou thought it was not appropriate, and Jin Zou said, "There are people with a million-dollar household who still set up a private school at home and ask a teacher to educate their children. There is no reason why I, who am as rich as heaven and earth, should not be allowed to set up a school."

古文：帝闻而深然之。即日改奎章阁为宣文阁，艺文监为崇文监，存设如初，就命巎巎董治。又请置检讨等职十六员以备进讲。
现代文：皇帝非常同意这个意见，于是只把奎章阁改为宣文阁，把艺文监改为崇文监，并命巎巎监督管理，又请设检讨官十六人为皇帝进讲，也被批准了。
English: The emperor was very much in agreement with this opinion, so he only changed Kuizhangge to Xuanwenge, changed the art and literature inspector to Chongwenge, and ordered the supervision and management, and also requested the establishment of 16 reviewers for the emperor to lecture, which was also approved.

古文：巎巎曰： 世祖以儒足以致治，命裕宗学于赞善王恂。
现代文：当时，科举停考，在巎巎建议下恢复了。他还建议及时修纂辽、金、宋三史及诏表彰唐代刘、宋代邵雍的道德正直。
English: At that time, the imperial examination was suspended, but it was resumed under the suggestion of Yu Yu. He also suggested that the three histories of Liao, Jin, and Song be revised in a timely manner, and that the moral integrity of Liu of the Tang Dynasty and Shao Yong of the Song Dynasty be commended.

古文：今秘书所藏裕宗仿书，当时御笔于学生之下亲署御名习书谨呈，其敬慎若此。
现代文：这些建议都被采纳。巎巎德高望重，身居高位，但酷爱儒士，所以四方士大夫都仰慕他，纷纷投入他的门下。有些依仗权势的达官对巎巎说 ：孔孟之道有什么好，值得这样酷爱。 
English: All of these suggestions were accepted. Zhai was highly respected and held a high position, but he loved Confucianism, so the four great masters of Confucianism all admired him and threw themselves at his feet. Some powerful officials said to Zhai, "What is so good about the way of Confucius and Men that it deserves such adoration?"

古文：世祖尝暮召我先人坐寝榻下，陈说《四书》及古史治乱，至丙夜不寐。
现代文：巎巎回答说 ：世祖认为孔孟之道足以经邦治世，曾夜间召我先人在卧房，为他讲说《四书》及古史中治乱之道，至深夜不眠。
English: Zou replied, "The ancestor thought that the way of Confucius and Mencius was enough to rule the country and the world. He once called my ancestors to his bedroom at night and told them about the "Four Books" and the way to control chaos in ancient history. He couldn't sleep until late at night.

古文：世祖喜曰： 朕所以令卿从许仲平学，正欲卿以嘉言入告朕耳，卿益加懋敬以副朕志。 
现代文：世祖非常高兴地说 ：朕之所以令你从许仲平学习，正是要求你们以治国安邦之道进告我。 
English: The founder was very pleased and said, "The reason why I asked you to learn from Xu Zhongping is precisely to ask you to approach me in the way of governing the country.

古文：今汝言不爱儒，宁不念圣祖神宗笃好之意乎？
现代文：今天你们不爱儒士，难道也不想想圣祖神宗爱好儒学的深刻意义吗？
English: Today, you don't love Confucianism. Don't you think about the profound significance of Confucianism's love for the Holy Ancestors?

古文：且儒者之道，从之则君仁、臣忠、父慈、子孝，人伦咸得，国家咸治；违之则人伦咸失，家国咸乱。
现代文：而且遵循儒家之道，则必然是君仁、臣忠、父慈、子孝，国家得到治理；反之人伦全失，国家遭乱。
English: Moreover, if one follows the way of Confucianism, it is inevitable that the country will be governed according to the principles of benevolence, loyalty, fatherly kindness, and filial piety; on the other hand, people's integrity will be completely lost and the country will be in turmoil.

古文：儒者或身若不胜衣，言若不出口，然腹中贮储有过人者，何可易视也。 达官色惭。
现代文：你们要乱自己的家，我管不了，但不可以轻儒学之言而乱国家。 这些权势达官听后满面惭色。
English: You want to mess up your own home, I can't control that, but you can't mess up the country with the words of Confucianism.

古文：既而出拜江浙行省平章政事。明年，复以翰林学士承旨召还。
现代文：不久，巎巎受任为浙江行省平章政事，翌年又奉诏还京为翰林学士承旨。
English: Soon after, Zou was appointed as the governor of Pingzhang Province of Zhejiang Province, and the following year he returned to Beijing as the Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：时中书平章阙员，近臣欲有所荐用，以言觇帝意。帝曰： 平章已有其人，今行半途矣。 
现代文：当时中书平章缺员，近臣想推荐他们的人选，顺帝说： 平章一职我已拟定人选，现正在途中。 
English: At that time, there was a vacancy for the post of Pingzhang in Zhongshu, and close ministers wanted to recommend their candidates. Shun Di said: I have drafted a candidate for the post of Pingzhang, and I am on my way.

古文：自当自当，蒙古人也。
现代文：所指的是巎巎，近臣也就不敢再荐别人了。
English: What you are referring to is shen, and the close vassal would not dare to recommend anyone else.

古文：英宗时，由速古儿赤擢监察御史。
现代文：巎巎到京任七日因病去世，时至正五年五月八日，终年五十一岁。谥文忠。自当，蒙古族人，英宗时由速古儿赤升监察御史。
English: He died of illness on the seventh day after his arrival in Beijing, which was on May 8 of the same year, at the age of fifty-one. He was a Mongolian, and was supervised by Akasaka Yukiko at the time of enthronement.

古文：录囚大兴县，有以冤事系狱者，其人尝见有橐驼死道傍，因舁至其家醢之，置数瓮中。
现代文：在大兴县检案情，其中有被冤枉而关押者。此人曾见有骆驼死于道旁，便拿回家腌于瓮中。
English: In the Daxing County procuratorial case, there was a wrongfully detained person who had seen a camel die on the side of the road and took it home to bury it.

古文：会官橐驼被盗，捕索甚亟，乃执而勘之，其人自诬服。
现代文：恰巧当时官府骆驼被盗，搜捕甚急，不问明实情将此人抓去审问，屈打成招。
English: Coincidentally, a government camel was stolen at that time, and the manhunt was very urgent. The man was arrested and interrogated without asking for the facts, and the beating was carried out.

古文：自当审其狱辞，疑为冤，即以上御史台。
现代文：自当审阅其供词，疑为冤案，上报御史台。
English: The court reviewed his confession, suspected it to be a case of injustice, and reported it to the Imperial History Channel.

古文：台臣以为赃既具，是特御史畏杀人耳，不听，改委他御史谳之，竟处死。
现代文：台臣认为人赃俱在，只是自当怕杀人罢了，不听取他的意见，朝廷另派人去审理，将犯人处死。
English: The court did not listen to his opinion, and the court sent someone else to try the case and put the prisoner to death.

古文：后数日，辽阳行省以获盗闻，冤始白，人以是服其明。
现代文：几天后，辽阳行省捕获了真正盗骆驼的人，死者沉冤才得昭雪。因此人们佩服自当之英明。
English: A few days later, Liaoyang Province caught the real camel thief, and the dead man was vindicated. Therefore, people admire the wisdom of the self-proclaimed.

古文：泰定二年，扈从至上都，纠言参知政事杨庭玉赃罪，不报，即纳印还京师。
现代文：泰定二年，扈驾至上都，弹劾参知政事杨廷玉贪赃罪，由于御史台不将他的劾奏上报朝廷，因而交印回京。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the impeachment of Yang Tingyu, a political advisor to the governor, for the crime of corruption was carried out in the capital. Since the Imperial History Channel did not report his impeachment to the imperial court, it was returned to Beijing.

古文：帝遣使追之，俾复任。
现代文：皇帝闻知，遣使追回，官复原职。
English: Emperor Wen Zhi sent an envoy to recover the money, and the official was reinstated.

古文：即再上章劾庭玉，竟如其言。
现代文：他再上表弹劾杨廷玉，终将他惩处。
English: He went on to impeach Yang Tingyu and finally punished him.

古文：以劾奏平章政事秃满迭儿入怯薛之日，英宗被弑，必预闻其谋，不省，乃赐秃满迭儿黄金系腰，自当遂辞职。
现代文：又弹劾平章政事秃满迭儿，说他入怯薛军之日英宗被刺，必事先知道这场刺杀的阴谋。朝廷不仅不追查，反而赐秃满迭儿黄金腰带。自当便辞去御史之职，后改任工部员外郎。
English: He also impeached Pingzhang government official Bald Man Di'er, saying that since Yingzong was stabbed on the day he joined the army of Emperor Xue, he must have known about the assassination plot in advance. The court not only did not investigate, but instead gave Bald Man Di'er a gold belt. He immediately resigned from his position as imperial historian, and later became the foreign minister of the Ministry of Labor.

古文：改工部员外郎，中书省委开混河，自当往视之，以为水性不常，民力亦瘁，难以成功，言于朝，河役乃罢。
现代文：中书省委任他开凿浑河，自当去视察，发现水不常有，徒费民力，难以成功，报告朝廷，该工程乃罢。
English: He was commissioned by the Ministry of Literature to excavate the Hunhe River. He went to inspect it on his own. He found that the water was infrequent, that it was a waste of manpower, and that it was difficult to succeed. He reported to the imperial court that the project was over.

古文：会次三皇后殂，命工部撤行殿车帐，皆新作之。自当未即兴工。
现代文：三皇后死，皇帝命工部废除原行殿车帐，要全做新的，而自当迟迟不肯按时兴工。
English: After the death of the three empresses, the emperor ordered the Ministry of Works to abolish the original line of palace carriages and to make all new ones, but they were reluctant to start work on time.

古文：尚书曰： 此奉特旨，员外有误，则罪归于众矣。 
现代文：工部尚书对他说 ：此是奉朝廷特旨，你员外郎若犯错误，则会归罪于我们大家。 
English: Shang Shu of the Ministry of Works told him, "This is a special order from the imperial court. If your foreign minister makes a mistake, it will be blamed on all of us."

古文：自当曰： 即有罪，我独任之。 
现代文：自当说： 有罪我一人承担。 
English: He should say to himself: I alone bear the guilt.

古文：未几，帝果问成否。省臣乃召自当责问之。自当请自入对。
现代文：不久，皇帝问新做车帐成否，中书省召自当责问，自当要求自己去向皇帝说明。
English: Not long after, the emperor asked whether the newly-made bill of lading was a success, and the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature summoned itself to ask, and asked itself to explain to the emperor.

古文：既见帝，奏曰： 皇后行殿车帐尚新，若改作之，恐劳民费财。且先皇后无恶疾，居之何嫌。
现代文：见皇帝奏道： 皇后行殿车帐还新，若改做恐劳民伤财。且先皇后无恶疾，住此车帐无碍。
English: The emperor said, "The carriage of the empress is still new, and if it is changed, it will hurt the people's wealth. Moreover, the empress has no malignancy, and it is no problem to live in this carriage.

古文：必欲舍旧更新，则大明殿乃自世祖所御，列圣嗣位岂皆改作乎？ 
现代文：如果必要舍旧更新，则大明殿是世祖住的地方，后来嗣位的历代皇帝岂不是都要改做吗？ 
English: If it is necessary to abandon the old and renew, then the Great Ming Palace is the place where the ancestors lived, and later the successive emperors of the throne will have to change it.

古文：帝大悦，语省臣曰； 国家用人，当择如自当者，庶不误大事。 
现代文：皇帝听后大喜，对大臣说 ：国家用人，当像自当这样的人，这才可能不误大事。 
English: When the emperor heard this, he was overjoyed and said to the minister, "The state employs people, and when people like Zidan are employed, only then can great things happen."

古文：特赐上尊、金币，迁吏部员外郎。
现代文：特赐上尊、金币，并调任吏部员外郎。
English: He was specially given the title of Shoson, gold coins, and was transferred to the position of a member of the administrative department, Wairo.

古文：帝欲加号太后曰太皇太后，命朝堂议之。自当独曰： 太后称太皇太后，于典礼不合。 
现代文：皇帝欲加太后为太皇太后，命朝臣议论，自当认为不可 ：太后称太皇太后于典章规定不合。 
English: The emperor wanted to make the empress dowager the grand empress dowager, and ordered courtiers to discuss it, but they thought it was impossible: calling the empress dowager the grand empress dowager was not in accordance with the regulations.

古文：众皆曰： 英宗何以加皇太后号曰太皇太后？ 
现代文：众人都说 ：英宗何以能加皇太后为太皇太后？ 
English: Everyone said, "How could Emperor Yingzong make the Empress Dowager the Grand Empress Dowager?"

古文：自当曰： 英宗孙也，今上子也，太皇太后之号孙可以称之，子不可以称之也。 
现代文：自当说 ：英宗是皇太后的孙，当今皇上是皇太后之子，太皇太后之号孙可以称，子不可以称。 
English: He should have said, "Yingzong is the grandchild of the empress dowager, and the current emperor is the son of the empress dowager. The grandchild of the empress dowager can be called, but the son cannot be called.

古文：议遂定。
现代文：皆按自当的意见议定。
English: The matter was settled.

古文：迁中书客省使，俄改同佥宣政院事。
现代文：后改自当为中书客省使，不久又改同佥宣政院事。
English: Later, he was appointed as the provincial envoy of Chinese calligraphers, and soon after that, he was appointed as a member of the Xuancheng Academy of Political Science.

古文：文宗即位，除中书左司郎中。
现代文：文宗即位，任自当为中书左司郎中。
English: When Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, he appointed himself to the position of Chushu Sasiro Junior High School.

古文：有使持诏自江浙还，言行省臣意若有不服者。
现代文：有位朝廷使臣持诏自江浙回来，说江浙行省对文宗有不服之意。
English: An imperial envoy returned from Jiangsu and Zhejiang with an imperial edict, saying that Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces were not satisfied with Wenzong.

古文：帝怒，命遣使问不敬状，将悉诛之。
现代文：帝怒，要问江浙行省不敬之罪，全诛杀。
English: Enraged by the emperor, he wanted to ask Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces about the crime of disrespect, and kill them all.

古文：自当言于丞相燕帖木儿曰： 皇帝新即位，云南、四川且犹未定，乃以使臣一言杀行省大臣，恐非盛德事。
现代文：自当知道后对丞相燕帖不儿说 ：皇帝新即位，云南、四川也还未平定，听一使臣之言而杀行省大臣，恐不是好事。
English: When he found out, he said to the prime minister, Yan Tebru, "The emperor is newly enthroned, and Yunnan and Sichuan have not yet been pacified. To listen to the words of an envoy and kill a provincial minister is probably not a good thing."

古文：况江浙豪奢之地，使臣或不得厌其所需，则造言以陷之耳。 
现代文：况江浙是繁华之地，或者是使臣的要求没得到满足而造谣陷害亦未可知。 
English: In addition, Jiangsu and Zhejiang are prosperous places, or the envoy's request was not met and it is not known how the rumor was set up.

古文：燕帖木儿以言于帝，事乃止。
现代文：燕帖木儿将此话转奏文宗，诛杀行省大臣这件事就不再提了。
English: Yan Timur transcribed these words into a poem, and the matter of assassinating the provincial minister was no longer mentioned.

古文：既而升参议中书省事。
现代文：升自当为参议中书省事。
English: As a member of the House of Councillors, he is expected to keep a low profile.

古文：燕帖木儿议封太保伯颜王爵，众论附之。自当独不言。
现代文：燕帖木儿要封太保伯颜的王爵，其他人都附和，唯自当不言。
English: Yan Tiemu'er wants to make Taibo Boyan a royal baron, and everyone else agrees, except for himself.

古文：燕帖木儿问故，自当曰： 太保位列三公，而复加王封，后再有大功，将何以处之？
现代文：燕帖木儿问他何故，自当说： 太保已是位列三公，而再加王号，以后再有大功者将如何对待。
English: Yan Tiemu'er asked him why, and he said, "Tai Bao is already ranked as one of the Three Princes, and with the addition of the title of King, how will he be treated if he does great deeds in the future?"

古文：且丞相封王，出自上意，今欲加太保王封，丞相宜请于上。
现代文：且丞相封王是出自皇上的旨意，今要封太保为王，丞相应请示皇上。
English: Moreover, it was the emperor's will to make the prime minister the king, and now he wanted to make the vice-premier the king, so he asked the emperor accordingly.

古文：王爵非中书选法也。 
现代文：封王爵不是中书选任官吏。 
English: A peerage is not an elected official.

古文：遂罢其议。
现代文：于是封伯颜王爵事作罢。
English: So let's call it a day.

古文：拜治书侍御史。
现代文：拜自当为治书侍御史。
English: Pray to yourself to be the one to write the history books.

古文：初，文宗在集庆潜邸，欲创天灵寺，令有司起民夫。
现代文：早先文宗在集庆为太子时，欲建立天灵寺，令官府征调民夫。
English: Earlier, when Emperor Wenzong was crowned as crown prince, he wanted to build a Tenryu-ji Temple, so he ordered the government to recruit and transfer a villager.

古文：江南行台监察御史亦乞剌台言曰： 太子为好事，宜出钱募夫，若欲役民，则朝廷闻之非便也。 
现代文：江南行台监察御史亦乞剌台认为不当而未办。现在文宗即位，把行台监察御史都召回朝廷为监察御史，而打算罢黜亦乞剌台一人。
English: Now that Emperor Wenzong has ascended the throne, he has recalled all the inspectors to the imperial court to serve as inspectors, and plans to dismiss one of them.

古文：自当遂称疾不从行。文宗在舟中，顾谓台臣曰： 自当终不满朕此游耶？ 
现代文：自当进谏道： 当陛下为太子时，御史亦乞剌台尽心尽力，这是忠臣，今无罪而将他罢官，这不好向天下交待。 
English: Zi Dang Jin Xuan Dao: When Your Majesty was crown prince, Your Excellency also begged Xuan Tai to do his best, this is a loyal subject, now he is not guilty and dismisses him, this is not good to tell the world.

古文：台臣尝奏除目，文宗以笔涂一人姓名，而缀将作院官闾闾之名。
现代文：于是任亦乞剌台为湖南御史。文宗要游西湖，自当谏阻，文宗不听，自当托病不随行。御史台的臣僚上奏一个拜官授职人员的名单，文宗勾去一人，补将作院官闾闾。
English: As a result, Ren also begged Xingtai to be the imperial historian of Hunan. Wenzong wanted to travel to the West Lake, but he was resisted, Wenzong did not listen, and he did not accompany the imperial historian. The ministers of the imperial historian's office submitted a list of candidates for the post of official, and Wenzong took one person away, and the vice-minister became the imperial official.

古文：自当言： 闾闾为人诙谐，惟可任教坊司，若以居风纪，则台纲扫地矣。 
现代文：自当以为不妥，他说： 闾闾为人诙谐，在教坊司任职还可以，若任他为监察官，则御史台的纲纪扫地了。 
English: He thought it was inappropriate, saying: "He is a witty person, he can still serve as a teacher, but if he is appointed as an inspector, then the history department's discipline will be swept away.

古文：文宗乃止。
现代文：文宗采纳他的意见。
English: Wenzong adopted his opinion.

古文：已而出为陕西行台侍御史。
现代文：不久自当出任陕西行御史台御史。
English: Soon after, he became the official historian of Shaanxi Province.

古文：顺帝初，除福建都转运盐使。
现代文：顺帝即位，任自当为福建都转运盐使。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, Ren Zi was appointed as the envoy to transport salt to Fujian.

古文：先是，自当为左司郎中时，泰定帝尝欲以河间、江浙、福建盐引六万赐中书参议撒迪，自当执不可，仅以福建盐引二万赐之。
现代文：在此以前，自当任左司郎中时，泰定帝曾打算把河间、江浙、福建的盐六万引赐中书参议撒迪，自当坚持不可，只以福建盐二万引赐撒迪。
English: Prior to this, when he was the middle-ranking left-hand sergeant, Emperor Taiding had planned to bestow 60,000 salt from Hema, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Fujian on Sadi, the Chinese scholar-councillor, but he had to insist on only 20,000 salt from Fujian being bestowed on Sadi.

古文：至是，自当复建言盐引宜尽资国用以纾民力。
现代文：现在，自当再建议，官盐应作为国用，以减轻人民的负担。
English: Now, I would like to suggest that government salt should be used by the state to reduce the burden on the people.

古文：时撒迪方为御史大夫，不以为怨，数遣人省自当母于京师所居。
现代文：这时，撒迪方任御史大夫，并不忌恨过去不拨给他六万引盐的事，而是多次派人去看望自当留居京师的老母。
English: At this time, Sadikata assumed the post of Imperial Historian, and did not resent the fact that he had not been allocated sixty thousand salt, but repeatedly sent people to visit his mother, who was supposed to stay in Beijing.

古文：既而丁母忧，居间久之，复起为浙西肃政廉访使。
现代文：母亲去世后，自当辞职回家守丧，后起用为浙西肃政廉访使。
English: After his mother's death, Zi Dang resigned and went home to attend the funeral. Later, he was appointed as a visiting envoy of the West Zhejiang Anti-Corruption Campaign.

古文：时有以驸马为江浙行省丞相者，其宦竖恃公主势，坐杭州达鲁花赤位，令有司强买民间物，不从辄殴之。
现代文：这时有位驸马为江浙行省丞相，其宦官仗主人之势，坐在杭州达鲁花赤位上，命官府强买民间货物，不从者就捶打。
English: At this time, there was a horse-drawn carriage for the Jiangsu and Zhejiang provincial chancellor, whose eunuchs were the masters of the situation, sitting on the red seat of Hangzhou Daluhua, ordering the government to forcefully buy folk goods, and beating those who did not comply.

古文：有司来白自当，自当即逮之械以令众，自是丞相府无敢为民害者。
现代文：官府告诉自当，自当将这些仗势欺人的宦官关押起来，从此以后丞相府中再没有敢于害民者。
English: The government told Zidane that they should have imprisoned the eunuchs who had taken advantage of the situation, and from then on, no one in the prime minister's office dared to harm the people.

古文：寻召为同佥枢密院事。
现代文：不久，召自当还朝任同佥枢密院事。
English: Soon after, he was summoned to serve as a peer of the Privy Council.

古文：寻复为治书侍御史、同知经筵事。
现代文：又不久任治书侍御史、同知经筵事。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of secretary to the governor of Shizuoka Prefecture and to the post of secretary to the governor of Shizuoka Prefecture.

古文：宁夏人有告买买等谋害太师伯颜者，伯颜委自当与中书、枢密等官往宁夏鞫问，无其情，乃以诬罔坐告者罪。
现代文：宁夏有人告买买等要谋害太师伯颜，伯颜委任自当与中书、枢密等官去宁夏审问，并无其事，将诬告者判罪。
English: In Ningxia, some people accused Maibai and others of plotting to kill Grand Master Baoyan. Baoyan appointed himself to go to Ningxia with officials from the Chinese Academy of Letters and the Privy Council to interrogate them. There was nothing to it, and the false accusers were convicted.

古文：自当历事四朝，官自从仕郎累转至通奉大夫，常衎洁在位，刚介弗回，终始一节，有古遗直之风。
现代文：伯颜怒。自当说： 太师之所以令我等人去调查，是本着国法。如果要治我们三人的罪，我实际是主事人，应治我一人的罪就行了。 
English: He should have said, "The reason why the Grand Master ordered me and others to investigate is based on the law of the land. If he wants to punish the sins of the three of us, I am actually the person in charge, and he should only punish the sins of one of me.

古文：然卒以是忤权贵而不复柄用，君子皆惜焉。阿荣
现代文：伯颜无话可说，但贬自当为知徽政院事。自当历任四朝大臣，从仕郎至通奉大夫，为人刚直不阿，有古人坦然之遗风，然始终因忤逆权贵而未受到重用，令人惋惜。
English: There is nothing to say about Bo Yan, but she deems herself to be a member of the Privy Council of the State of Hebei. Ever since she served as a minister of the four dynasties, from servant to doctor, she has been a forthright person. There is a legacy of the ancient people's calmness, but it is regrettable that she has not been reused because she is rebellious and powerful.

古文：阿荣，字存初，怯烈氏。
现代文：阿荣，字存初，姓怯烈氏。
English: A Rong, at the beginning of the word's existence, surnamed Wu Rong.

古文：父按摊，中书右丞。
现代文：其父按摊为中书右丞。
English: His father was appointed to the post of Chushujujo.

古文：阿荣幼事武宗，备宿卫，累迁官，为湖南道宣慰副使。
现代文：阿荣自幼就侍奉武宗，加入宿卫禁军，后官至湖南道宣慰副使。
English: A Rong served Emperor Wuzong since he was a child, joined the Imperial Guard, and later served as a vice envoy to Hunan Province.

古文：温迪罕奉使宣抚湖南，事无大小，悉以委之。
现代文：温迪罕为湖南宣抚使。事无大小都交阿荣主持办理。
English: Wendy Han is the chief envoy of Hunan. All matters big and small are handled by A Rong.

古文：会列郡岁饥，阿荣分其廪禄为粥，以食饿者，仍发粟赈之，所活甚众。广西寇起，众皆汹惧。阿荣镇之以静，督有司治兵守其境，寇不敢入。
现代文：当时各郡发生饥荒，阿荣把自己的俸禄拿一部分买米煮粥，赈济饥民。广西寇起，大家都惶惶不安，阿荣却很镇静，督促官府整军防守，故寇不敢入。
English: At that time, famine occurred in various counties, and A Rong took part of his salary to buy rice porridge to feed the hungry. When the Guangxi army invaded, everyone was panicked, but A Rong was very calm and urged the government to protect the army, so the army did not dare to enter.

古文：迁湖广行省左右司郎中，召佥会福院事，寻除吏部尚书。
现代文：后调任湖广行省左右司郎中，又召回朝任佥会福院事，不久又任吏部尚书。
English: Afterward, he was transferred to the middle of the left and right secretary of the Huguangxing Province, and recalled to the imperial court to serve as the secretary of the Confucius Institute, and soon he was appointed as the secretary of the cadre department.

古文：泰定初，出为湖南宣慰使，改浙东道宣慰使都元帅，以疾辞。
现代文：泰定初年，出任湖南宣慰使，后改为浙东道宣慰使都元帅，因病辞职。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taiding, he was appointed as the Hunan Marshal of Consolation, later changed to the Zhejiang Marshal of Consolation, and resigned due to illness.

古文：天历初，复起为吏部尚书，寻参议中书省事。
现代文：天历初年，阿荣被起用为吏部尚书，不久任参议中书省事。
English: In the first year of the calendar, A Rong was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department, and soon he was appointed as the counselor of the senate.

古文：二年，拜中书参知政事、知经筵事。
现代文：二年，拜中书参知政事、知经筵事。
English: In the second year, Bai Zhongshu was appointed to the post of prefect of politics and the post of prefect of education.

古文：进奎章阁大学士、荣禄大夫、太禧宗禋院使，都典制神御殿事。
现代文：晋升为奎章阁大学士、荣禄大夫、太禧宗院使，总管神御殿事。
English: He was promoted to Keizhangge University scholar, honorary doctor, Taishi Soin envoy, and head of the Shinto shrine.

古文：文宗眷遇之甚，而阿荣亦尽心国政，知无不言。
现代文：文宗对他非常赞赏，阿荣也尽心于国事，知无不言。
English: Wenzong appreciated him very much, and A Rong also devoted himself to state affairs and knew everything.

古文：久之，心忽郁郁不乐，谒告南归武昌。至元元年卒。
现代文：但久而久之，阿荣忽郁郁不乐，辞官南归于武昌，至元元年卒。
English: However, over time, Ah Rong became depressed and unhappy. He resigned his post and returned to Wuchang in the south, and graduated in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：初，阿荣闲居，以文翰自娱，博究前代治乱得失，见其会心者，则扼腕曰： 忠臣孝子国家之宝，为奇男子烈丈夫者固不当如是耶！ 
现代文：原先，阿荣闲居时以文章自娱，博览群书，研究前代政治之治乱得失，有所体会时便不禁叹息道 ：忠臣孝子乃国家之宝，为奇男子烈丈夫难道不应当如此吗？ 
English: Originally, A Rong used to amuse himself with articles, read books, and study the gains and losses of the previous generation of politics when he was idle. When he experienced it, he couldn't help but sigh: A loyal son is a national treasure, isn't it supposed to be like that for a manly husband?

古文：日与韦布之士游，所至山水佳处，鸣琴赋诗，日夕忘返。
现代文：每天与一些布衣隐士们交游，游山玩水，弹琴做诗，日落忘返。
English: Every day, I mingle with some cloth-clad hermits, walk in the mountains and play in the water, play the piano and write poetry, and forget the sunset.

古文：尤深于数学，逆推事成败利不利及人祸福寿夭贵贱，多奇中。
现代文：尤精于术数之学，能推算出事之成败、利和不利以搜集人之祸福、寿命之长短、地位之贵贱等，往往说中。
English: It is often said that they are particularly adept at the study of magic numbers, and can calculate the success or failure, advantages and disadvantages of events to collect people's misfortunes and blessings, the length of life, the status of the status, etc.

古文：天历三年春，策士于廷。
现代文：天历三年春在朝廷会考策论。
English: In the spring of the third year of the lunar calendar, the imperial court will review the policy.

古文：阿荣与虞集会于直庐，慨然兴叹，语集曰： 更一科后科举当辍，辍两科而复，复则人材彬彬大出矣。 
现代文：与虞集相遇，颇有感慨地对他说 ：今年科考一次，以后会停考，两年后再恢复，那时人才倍出。 
English: When he met Yu Ji, he said to him with great emotion, "This year, there will be a science examination, but it will be suspended in the future. It will be resumed in two years, and then the number of talented people will double."

古文：又叹曰： 荣不复见之矣，君犹及见之。 
现代文：又说： 那时我是看不到了，你还可见。 
English: He also said: "I couldn't see it at the time, but you can see it now.

古文：集应曰： 得士之多，幸如存初言。
现代文：虞集说： 但愿能像存初所说的那样，人才倍出。
English: Yu Ji said: I hope we can double the number of talented people, as I said at the beginning.

古文：今文治方兴，未必有中辍之理。
现代文：今国家文治方兴，未必会中止科举。
English: Now that the country's literature is on the rise, it is unlikely that the examination will be suspended.

古文：存初国家世臣，妙于文学，以盛年登朝，在上左右，斯文属望。
现代文：存初为国家世臣，精于文学，年青时就入朝为官，朝中上下左右都对你抱有希望。
English: At the beginning of his life, he was a national statesman, proficient in literature, and entered the court as an official when he was young.

古文：集老且衰，见亦何补耶！ 阿荣又叹曰： 数当然耳。 
现代文：我衰老了，即或那时再见科考又有何用。 阿荣说 ：这是气数该如此。 
English: I'm getting old, so what's the use of seeing the scientist again at this time or that time.A Rong said: This is the number of qi, it should be like this.

古文：集问何以知之，弗答。
现代文：问他何以知道，他默不回答。
English: When asked how he knew, he did not answer.

古文：后三年卒。
现代文：三年后阿荣卒。
English: Three years later, Ah Rong graduated.

古文：元统三年，科举果罢，至正元年始复，如其言。
现代文：元统三年果然中止科举，至正元年才恢复，正如阿荣所预言。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial examinations were indeed suspended, only to be resumed in the first year of the Zhengyuan, just as A Rong had predicted.

古文：小云石海涯小云石海涯，家世见其祖《阿里海涯传》。
现代文：小云石海涯，其家世见其祖父《阿里海涯传》。
English: Xiao Yunshi Haiya, his family history saw his grandfather "Ali Haiya Biography."

古文：其父楚国忠惠公，名贯只哥，小云石海涯遂以贯为氏，复以酸斋自号。
现代文：父为楚国忠惠公，名贯只哥，所以小云石海涯以贯氏为姓，自号 酸斋 。
English: His father was a loyal subject of the State of Chu, and his only brother was named Guan. Therefore, Xiao Yunshi Haiya took Guan as his surname and called himself "Sourdough."

古文：或挽强射生，逐猛兽，上下峻阪如飞，诸将咸服其趫捷。
现代文：小云石海涯十二三岁时，臂力过人，能挽强弓射猛虎，善骑马，诸将都钦佩其矫捷的骑术。
English: When Xiao Yunshi Haiya was 12 or 13 years old, he had superior arm strength, could bend a bow and shoot a fierce tiger, and was good at riding a horse. All generals admired his agile riding skills.

古文：稍长，折节读书，目五行下。吐辞为文，不蹈袭故常，其旨皆出人意表。
现代文：长大后改变原来好武的志愿，转而读书习文，一目五行，语言文雅，无陈词滥调，其文思常出人意外。
English: After growing up, he changed his original desire to be good at martial arts and turned to reading and studying literature. He has five lines at a glance, his language is elegant, there are no clichés, and his thoughts are often surprising.

古文：初，袭父官为两淮万户府达鲁花赤。
现代文：小云石海涯原袭父官为两淮万户府达鲁花赤，镇守永州。
English: Xiao Yunshi originally came from Haiya, and his father was the second governor of Wanhu Prefecture, and the town guard of Yongzhou.

古文：稍暇，辄投壶雅歌，意所畅适，不为形迹所拘。
现代文：他治军极严，军纪严肃。闲暇时就去游乐，随心所欲，不拘礼节。
English: He rules the army very strictly, military discipline is serious. In his spare time, he goes to play, as he pleases, without regard for etiquette.

古文：一日，呼弟忽都海涯语之曰： 吾生宦情素薄，顾祖父之爵不敢不袭，今已数年矣，愿以让弟，弟幸勿辞。 
现代文：有天，对其弟忽都海涯说： 我对做官素无志愿，只是因为祖、父的爵位我不敢不承袭，如今已经数年了，愿将官爵让给你，你不要推辞。 
English: One day, he said to his younger brother, Hu Duhaiya: I have no desire to be an official, but because I dare not not inherit the title of my father and grandfather, it has been several years now, I am willing to give the title to you, you should not refuse.

古文：仁宗践祚，上疏条六事：一曰释边戍以修文德，二曰教太子以正国本，三曰设谏官以辅圣德，四曰表姓氏以旌勋胄，五曰定服色以变风俗，六曰举贤才以恢至道。书凡万余言，未报。
现代文：说罢就把身边所带的黄金虎符佩戴在弟弟身上，自己北行去拜姚燧为师。姚燧见他文章谨严，诗歌慷慨激昂，认为是一大奇才。仁宗为太子时，听说小云石海涯把爵位让给弟弟，对宫臣说： 将相家子弟中有如此之贤的吗？ 很快被选为英宗府中的说书秀才。仁宗登基后，他上书提出六条建议，包括提倡道德，淳化风俗，教育太子，设置谏官，表扬功臣，荐举贤才等，共万言，但有关廷臣并未呈交皇帝。
English: As soon as he said that, he put the golden tiger emblem he was carrying on his younger brother's body and went north to worship Yao Zheng as his teacher. Yao Zheng saw his rigorous writing and impassioned poetry and considered him to be a great genius. When Emperor Nizong was crown prince, he heard that Xiao Yunshi Haiya had passed the title of nobility to his younger brother and said to a palace retainer, "Is there such a genius among the children of the same family?" He was soon selected as a storytelling genius in Emperor Yingzong's court. After Emperor Nizong ascended to the throne, he submitted a letter with six suggestions, including

古文：乃称疾辞还江南，卖药于钱唐市中，诡姓名，易服色，人无有识之者。
现代文：以后拜为翰林侍读学士、中奉大夫、知制诰、同修国史。在议论科举考试时，他提出了许多好的意见，忽然觉得今朝选拔官吏，自己去与人争高低，将会为后人议论，便托病辞官回江南，在钱塘市中卖药，并改名易姓，更换服装，无人认识。
English: In the future, Bai will be Hanlin's bachelor's degree student, junior doctor, intellectual, and fellow student of national history. When discussing the subject examination, he put forward many good opinions. Suddenly, he felt that this morning he would select officials, compete with others for high and low, and will discuss for future generations. He took the sick officer back to the south of the Yangtze River, sold medicine in Qiantang City, changed his name and surname, and changed his clothes. No one knew him.

古文：偶过梁山泺，见渔父织芦花为被，欲易之以。
现代文：一日偶过梁山泺，见一渔夫织芦花为被，便把绸缎换取渔夫芦花被。
English: One day, when he was passing by Liangshan, he saw a fisherman knitting a reed quilt, so he exchanged the silk for the fisherman's reed quilt.

古文：渔父疑其为人，阳曰： 君欲吾被，当更赋诗。 
现代文：渔夫怀疑他是凡人，故意说 ：君欲吾被，当赋诗一首。 
English: The fisherman suspected that he was mortal, and deliberately said, "If you want to be loved by me, you must write a poem."

古文：遂援笔立成，竟持被去。
现代文：小云石海涯立即赋诗一首，写完持被而去。
English: Xiao Yunshi Haiya immediately composed a poem and left with the quilt.

古文：人间喧传芦花被诗。
现代文：人们盛传他的芦花被诗。
English: It is said that his poem was inspired by the reed flower.

古文：其依隐玩世多类此。
现代文：他还有许多隐居放荡的故事。
English: He also has many tales of reclusive debauchery.

古文：晚年为文日邃，诗亦冲淡。
现代文：晚年文章更加深邃，诗也淡泊。
English: In his later years, his essays were more profound, but his poetry was also lackluster.

古文：草隶等书，稍取古人之所长，变化自成一家，所至士大夫从之若云，得其片言尺牍，如获拱璧。
现代文：草书、隶书取古人之所长，变化自成一家。来向他求诗文、求书法的士大夫如云，得其片言尺牍，如获至宝。
English: Cursive and cursive calligraphy were the forefathers of the ancients, and they have changed into a family. The scholars and doctors who came to ask him for poetry and calligraphy were like clouds, and they got his fragmentary shakuhachi, like getting the most precious treasure.

古文：其视死生若昼夜，绝不入念虑，攸攸若欲遗世而独立云。
现代文：他对生死也看得淡然，如同昼夜变化一样，绝无有所顾念，认为死只不过是飘飘然像羽毛离地升天一样。
English: He was indifferent to life and death, like the change of day and night, without any consideration, believing that death was just a fluttering like a feather rising from the ground.

古文：泰定元年五月八日卒，年三十九。
现代文：泰定元年五月八日逝世，年仅三十九岁。
English: He passed away on May 8th, 1981, at the age of 39.

古文：赠集贤学士、中奉大夫、护军，追封京兆郡公，谥文靖。
现代文：赠集贤学士、中奉大夫、护军，追封京兆郡公，谥文靖。
English: He was awarded the title of scholar, middle-ranked doctor, and military escort, and was given the title of governor of Jingzhao County.

古文：泰不华泰不华，字兼善，伯牙吾台氏。
现代文：有文集若干卷、《直解孝经》一卷流行于世。泰不华，字兼善，本姓伯牙吾台氏。
English: There are several volumes of anthologies, and one volume of "Straight Interpretation of the Filial Piety Sutra" is popular in the world.

古文：初名达普化，文宗赐以今名，世居白野山。
现代文：初名达普化，文宗赐他现在名字。先祖世居于白野山。
English: His first name was Dapu, and he was given his current name by Emperor Wenzong. His ancestors lived in Mount Paektu for generations.

古文：父塔不台，入直宿卫，历仕台州录事判官，遂居于台。
现代文：父塔不台入宫为宿卫，后任台州录事判官，全家迁于台州。
English: The whole family moved to Taizhou after his father, who entered the imperial palace as a palace guard and later served as the judge of the Taizhou Record, died.

古文：家贫，好读书，能记问。
现代文：泰不华家贫，好读书，集贤待制周仁荣教养他。
English: Tai Fuhua was born into a poor family, he was good at reading, and he was educated by Zhou Rong Rong.

古文：集贤待制周仁荣养而教之。
现代文：十七岁在江浙科举乡试中考第一名。
English: At the age of seventeen, he won the first place in the Jiangsu-Zhejiang Science Township Examination.

古文：年十七，江浙乡试第一。明年，对策大廷，赐进士及第，授集贤修撰，转秘书监著作郎，拜江南行台监察御史。时御史大夫脱欢怙势贪暴，泰不华劾罢之。
现代文：第二年在朝廷考策论，赐进士及第，授集贤修撰，后转任秘书监著作郎，又拜江南行台监察御史。当时御史大夫脱欢，仗势贪暴，被泰不华弹劾罢官。
English: In the following year, he was awarded the title of "Honorary Doctor" and "Honorary Professor" in the Imperial Court's examination of policy theories. He was also awarded the title of "Writing Scholar" and "Writing Scholar" in the award ceremony. Later, he was transferred to the post of secretary-supervisor-author, and he was also appointed to the post of "Supervisor of the Southern Yangtze River." At that time, Dr. Goshi had an extramarital affair, was corrupt, and was impeached and removed from office by Tai Buhua.

古文：文宗建奎章阁学士院，擢为典签，拜中台监察御史。
现代文：文宗建奎章阁学士院，升他为典签，拜中台监察御史。
English: Wenzong Jiankui Zhangge Academy, he was promoted to be a signer, and he supervised the history of Zhongtai.

古文：顺帝即位，加文宗后太皇太后之号，大臣燕铁木儿、伯颜皆列地封王。
现代文：顺帝即位，加文宗皇后以 太皇太后 之称号，对大臣燕铁木儿、伯颜皆赐地封王。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, Empress Gavanzong bestowed the title of Grand Empress Dowager on the ministers Yantie Muer and Bo Yan.

古文：泰不华率同列上章言： 婶母不宜加徽称，相臣不当受王土。 
现代文：泰不华与同朝官员上书说 ：婶母不宜加美好称号，相臣不当受土封王。 
English: Tai Buhua wrote a letter to officials of the same dynasty, saying, "It is not appropriate to give a beautiful title to an aunt, and it is not proper for a minister to receive the title of a prince."

古文：太后怒，欲杀言者。
现代文：太后怒，要杀掉说这番话的人。
English: The Empress Dowager was so angry that she wanted to kill the person who said this.

古文：泰不华语众曰： 此事自我发之，甘受诛戮，决不敢累诸公也。 
现代文：泰不华对同僚说： 此事是我发起的，我甘愿受戮，决不连累诸公。 
English: Tai Buhua said to his colleagues: I initiated this matter, I am willing to suffer, and I will never be a burden to the public.

古文：已而太后怒解曰： 风宪有臣如此，岂不能守祖宗之法乎？ 
现代文：后来太后息怒，反而说 ：台谏官中有这样的人，我怎能不遵守祖宗成法？ 
English: Later, the empress dowager calmed her anger, saying instead, "There are such people among the eunuchs of Taiwan, how can I not follow the law of my ancestors?"

古文：赐金币二，以旌其直。
现代文：赐泰不华金彩缎二匹以表彰其耿直忠贞。
English: He was awarded two gold-painted horses in recognition of his loyalty.

古文：出佥河南廉访司事，俄移淮西。继迁江南行御史台经历，辞不赴，转江浙行省左右司郎中。
现代文：后出任佥河南廉访司事，很快又调往淮西，既而调任江西行御史台经历，由于他辞不赴任，改为江浙行省左右司郎中。
English: After that, he served as the visiting secretary of the Henan Province, and was soon transferred to Huaxi. Although he was transferred to the Jiangxi Provincial History Station, because he did not resign, he was changed to the middle secretary of the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial History Station.

古文：浙西大水害稼，会泰不华入朝，力言于中书，免其租。
现代文：浙西大水灾，泰不华入京极力说服中书省免浙西租税。
English: After the great floods in western Zhejiang, Tai Buhua went to Beijing and tried his best to persuade the People's Republic of China to exempt tax from western Zhejiang.

古文：擢秘书监，改礼部侍郎。
现代文：升秘书省监，后改任礼部侍郎。
English: He rose to the position of secretary and supervisor of the ministry, and was later appointed as a chamberlain of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：至正元年，除绍兴路总管。
现代文：至正元年，授绍兴路总管。
English: In the first year of the year, he was appointed as the head of Shaoxing Road.

古文：革吏弊，除没官牛租，令民自实田以均赋役。
现代文：在此任上，他革除吏弊，取消没官牛租，令百姓自报田地面积以便使他们的赋役负担公平合理。
English: In this position, he eliminated bureaucratic inefficiencies, abolished the unofficial cattle rent, and made the people self-report the area of the field in order to make their service burden fair and reasonable.

古文：行乡饮酒礼，教民兴让，越俗大化。召入史馆，与修辽、宋、金三史，书成，授秘书卿。
现代文：还改革江浙一带风俗。奉诏回朝，入史馆，参与纂修辽、宋、金三史。书成之后，授他为秘书卿。
English: He also reformed the customs of the Jiangsu and Zhejiang regions. He returned to the North with an imperial edict, entered the history museum, and participated in the compilation of the three histories of Liao, Song, and Jin. After the book was completed, he was awarded the title of secretary.

古文：升礼部尚书，兼会同馆事。
现代文：后又升礼部尚书兼会同馆事。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Department of Etiquette and Literature and became a member of the same library.

古文：黄河决，奉诏以珪玉白马致祭河神。
现代文：黄河决口，泰不华奉诏用圭玉白马致祭河神。
English: At the mouth of the Yellow River, Tai Bo-Hua made an offering to the river god with a white horse.

古文：竣事上言： 淮安以东，河入海处，宜仿宋置撩清夫，用辊江龙铁扫，撼荡沙泥，随潮入海。 
现代文：事毕上书言 ：淮安以东之黄河入海处，最好仿效宋朝置 撩清夫 ，用辊江龙铁帚搅混沙泥，使随潮入海。 
English: After the event, he wrote: At the point where the Yellow River enters the sea to the east of Huai'an, it is best to follow the example of the Song Dynasty and set up a seaman to mix the sand and mud with the dragon iron raft of the Li River, so that it will enter the sea with the tide.

古文：朝廷从其言，会用夫屯田，其事中废。
现代文：朝廷听从他的建议，但因当时征发民夫屯田，这件事被迫中止。
English: The imperial court followed his suggestion, but was forced to suspend the matter due to the requisition of Tonden from the people at that time.

古文：八年，台州黄岩民方国珍为蔡乱头、王伏之仇逼，遂入海为乱，劫掠漕运粮，执海道千户德流于实。
现代文：至正八年，台州黄岩民方国珍被蔡乱头、王伏之逼得入海为寇，劫掠海运粮食，捕俘海道千户德流于实。
English: In the eighth year of the Taizhou era, Huangyan Minfang Guozhen was forced by Cai Rantou and Wang Fuzhi to enter the sea as a pirate, plundered seaborne grain, and captured the roadway Chihou De Lv Yushi.

古文：事闻，诏江浙参政朵儿只班总舟师捕之。
现代文：此事上报朝廷，诏令江浙参政朵儿只班统领水军追捕。
English: The matter was reported to the imperial court, which ordered Jiang Zhe to send a party to lead the navy in pursuit.

古文：追至福州五虎门，国珍知事危，焚舟将遁，官军自相惊溃，朵儿只班遂被执。
现代文：追至福州五虎门，方国珍知事情危急，焚舟准备逃跑。但这时官军却自相惊怕溃散，朵儿只班反被方国珍所捕。
English: Pursued to Fuzhou Wuhu Gate, Fang Guozhen knew that the situation was critical, and the boat was ready to escape. But at this time, the government army was afraid of each other and broke up. However, it was captured by Fang Guozhen.

古文：国珍迫其上招降之状，朝廷从之，国珍兄弟皆授之以官，国珍不肯赴，势益暴横。
现代文：国珍迫使朵儿只班上书朝廷招安。朝廷答应，并授国珍兄弟为官。国珍不肯赴任，且其势力更加横暴。
English: Guo Zhen forced Doer to write to the imperial court to seek peace. The imperial court agreed and appointed Guo Zhen's brother as an official. Guo Zhen refused to take the post, and his power became even more violent.

古文：九年，诏泰不华察实以闻，既得其状，遂上招捕之策，不听。
现代文：至正九年，诏令泰不华去调查实情。泰不华把事情查实之后，上书献招安之策，但朝廷未采纳。
English: In the ninth year of the Heian period, Tai Bo-wah was ordered to investigate the truth. After Tai Bo-wah verified the matter, he submitted a letter to offer a safe recruitment policy, but the court did not accept it.

古文：寻除江东廉访使，改翰林侍读学士、知制诰同修国史。
现代文：不久，任泰不华为江东廉访使，后改任翰林侍读学士、知制诰同修国史。
English: Not long after, Ren Taiwu was appointed as a visiting envoy to Jiangdong Province, and later he was appointed as an attendant bachelor of Hanlin and a scholar of national history.

古文：已而出为都水庸田使。
现代文：不久出任都水庸田使。
English: He was soon appointed to the position of Dousui Yongtang envoy.

古文：十年十二月，国珍复入海，烧掠沿海州郡。
现代文：十年十二月，方国珍再度入海为寇，烧掠沿海州郡。
English: In December of the tenth year, Fang Guozhen once again entered the sea as a thief, and burned and plundered the coastal counties.

古文：十一年二月，诏孛罗帖木儿为江浙行省左丞，总兵至庆元。
现代文：十一年二月，诏令孛罗帖木儿为江浙行省左丞，统兵至庆元。
English: In February of the 11th year of the Heian period, it was decreed that Luo Tsmu'er would serve as the left-hand man of Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces and lead the unified army to Qingyuan.

古文：以泰不华谂知贼情状，迁浙东道宣慰使都元帅，分兵于温州，使夹攻之。
现代文：因泰不华熟知方国珍情形，故调他任浙东道宣慰使都元帅，领兵于温州与孛罗帖木儿夹攻方国珍。
English: Because Tai was not familiar with the situation of Guozhen in Zhifang, he was appointed as the marshal of the capital of Zhejiang and led the troops to attack Guozhen in Wenzhou.

古文：未几，国珍寇温，泰不华纵火筏焚之，一夕遁去。
现代文：国珍攻温州，泰不华用火筏焚烧方国珍的船只，方国珍连夜逃走。
English: Guozhen attacked Wenzhou, Taiwuhua burned Fang Guozhen's ships with fire, and Fang Guozhen fled overnight.

古文：既而孛罗帖木儿密与泰不华约以六月乙未合兵进讨。孛罗帖木儿乃以壬辰先期至大闾洋，国珍夜率劲卒纵火鼓噪，官军不战皆溃，赴水死者过半。
现代文：不久，孛罗帖木儿密与泰不华约定于六月十八日合兵进讨，孛罗帖木儿于六月十五日先期至大闾洋，国珍夜间率劲兵纵火，杀声连天，官军不战皆溃，赴水淹死者过半数，孛罗帖木儿也被捕。
English: Soon after, Luo Tiemuer and Tai Buhua made an agreement to march together on June 18th. Luo Tiemuer went to the Pacific Ocean in the early hours of June 15th. Guo Zhen led the soldiers to set fire at night, and the killing continued for days. The government army was defeated without a fight. More than half of those who drowned went to the water, and Luo Tiemuer was also arrested.

古文：泰不华闻之痛愤，辍食数日。
现代文：泰不华闻讯痛恨不已，至数日不食。
English: Tai Buhua hated the news so much that he did not eat for several days.

古文：朝廷弗之知，复遣大司农达识帖木迩等至黄岩招之。
现代文：朝廷还不知道，又派大司农达识帖木迩等到黄岩来招安。
English: Unbeknownst to the imperial court, he also sent the grand secretary, Nonda Zhi, to wait for Huangyan to invite peace.

古文：国珍兄弟皆登岸罗拜，退止民间小楼。
现代文：方国珍兄弟皆上岸拜见朝廷使者。
English: The Fang Guozhen brothers all went ashore to meet the imperial envoy.

古文：是夕，中秋月明，泰不华欲命壮士袭杀之，达识帖木迩适夜过泰不华，密以事白之，达识帖木迩曰： 我受诏招降耳，公欲擅命耶？ 
现代文：当晚，中秋月明，泰不华欲命壮士袭杀方国珍兄弟，达识帖木迩恰在此夜来泰不华处，泰不华向他说明秘密袭杀方氏兄弟的计划。达识帖木迩说 ：我是奉诏来招降的，你要自行其是吗？ 
English: On the evening of the mid-autumn moon, Tai Bo-hwa's desperate soldiers attacked and killed Fang Guozhen's brothers. It was on this night that Dazhi Te Mucao came to Tai Bo-hwa's place. Tai Bo-hwa explained to him the secret plan to attack and kill Fang's brothers. Dazhi Te Mucao said, "I came with an edict to invite them to surrender. Do you want to do it on your own?"

古文：事乃止。
现代文：因此袭杀之事就不进行了。
English: As a result, the attack did not take place.

古文：檄泰不华亲至海滨，散其徒众，拘其海舟兵器，国珍兄弟复授官有差。
现代文：命泰不华亲至海滨，解散国珍的兵卒，没收他们海船和兵器，国珍兄弟各授官职。
English: Fearing for his life, Guozhen went to the seashore, disbanded Guozhen's soldiers, confiscated their ships and weapons, and appointed each of Guozhen's brothers to an official post.

古文：既而迁泰不华台州路达鲁花赤。
现代文：泰不华调任台州路达鲁花赤。
English: Tai Buhua transferred to Taizhou Ludaruhana Red.

古文：十二年，朝廷征徐州，命江浙省臣募舟师守大江，国珍怀疑，复入海以叛。
现代文：至正十二年，朝廷征徐州，命江浙行省募水军守大江。国珍怀疑是针对他们的，再叛元入海。
English: In the twelfth year of the Heian period, the imperial court enlisted Xuzhou and ordered Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces to recruit naval forces to guard the Dajiang River. Guozhen suspected that it was against them, and then rebelled into the sea.

古文：泰不华自分以死报国，发兵扼黄岩之澄江，而遣义士王大用抵国珍，示约信，使之来归。
现代文：泰不华表示甘愿以死报国，发兵扼守黄岩之澄江，另派义士王大用去方国珍那里表示信义，劝他们归降。
English: Tai Buhua expressed his willingness to die for the country, sent troops to guard the Huangyan River, and sent the righteous Wang Dayong to Fang Guozhen to express his loyalty and persuade them to surrender.

古文：时十二年三月庚子也。
现代文：国珍更加怀疑，扣留了王大用，派小船二百只袭击海门，入州港，进犯马鞍山等地。
English: Guozhen was even more suspicious. He detained Wang Dayong and sent 200 small boats to attack Haimen, Yuzhou Port, Maanshan and other places.

古文：僮名抱琴，及临海尉李辅德、千户赤盏、义士张君璧皆死之。
现代文：泰不华对众人说： 我本一书生，显任要职，真怕所学不能用。今守海隅，贼降叛无常，请大家助我剿捕，胜是众之功，若败我以死报国。 
English: Tai Buhua said to the crowd, "I am a scholar, and I have been appointed to an important post. I am afraid that I cannot use what I have learned. I am currently guarding the corner of the sea. Thieves surrender and rebels are fickle. I would like to ask everyone to help me capture them. Victory is the work of everyone. If I am defeated, I will serve my country with my death."

古文：泰不华既没，除江浙行省参知政事，行台州路达鲁花赤事，不及闻命已。
现代文：大家都表示愿随他出兵征剿。泰不华率水军乘潮进军，与方国珍大战，阵亡，年四十九岁。这是正至十二年三月间的事。泰不华殉难，朝廷尚不得而知，仍授他为江浙行省参知政事、行台州路达鲁花赤事。
English: Everyone expressed their willingness to follow him to send out soldiers for conscription. Tai Buhua led the navy to march with the tide, and fought with Fang Guozhen, and died at the age of forty-nine. This was between March and April of the 12th. Tai Buhua was martyred, the court is still unknown, and he was still awarded the title of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Governor for political affairs, and Taizhou Governor for political affairs.

古文：后三年，追赠荣禄大夫、江浙行省平章政事、柱国，封魏国公，谥忠介，立庙台州，赐额崇节。
现代文：至正十五年，追赠荣禄大夫、江浙行省平章政事、柱国，封魏国公，谥忠介，在台州为之立庙纪念，赐匾额《崇节》。
English: In the 15th year of the Taizhou era, Dr. Ronglu, the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provinces, was posthumously awarded the title of Pingzhang, the pillar of the state, the title of Wei Guoguo, and the title of Zou Zhongsu, and a temple was built in Taizhou to commemorate him, and he was awarded the title of "Chongjie."

古文：泰不华尚气节，不随俗浮沉。
现代文：泰不华注重气节，不随俗沉浮。
English: Taiwuhua pays attention to temperament, and does not follow the ups and downs of the world.

古文：太平为台臣劾去相位，泰不华独饯送都门外。
现代文：太平为台臣被弹劾而罢相，泰不华为之饯行，送至都门外。
English: Taiping was impeached for being a Taiwanese minister and resigned. Tai refused to go along with it and was sent out of the capital.

古文：尝重类《复古编》十卷，考正讹字，于经史多有据云。
现代文：太平劝他止步，不要为他受牵连。泰不华说： 士为知己死，还怕什么祸吗！ 
English: Taiping advised him to stop, and not to be entangled for him. Tai Buhua said: A scholar dies for his friend, what more is there to fear?

古文：余阙余阙，字廷心，一字天心，唐兀氏，世家河西武威。
现代文：后虽被当时的宰相排斥，但人们没有说他的不是。他善写篆书隶书，其字温润苍劲。曾重纂《复古编》十卷，根据经史考证讹字。余阙，字廷心，又字天心，唐兀族人，先世居河西武威。
English: Although he was later ostracized by the prime minister at the time, people did not say that he was not. He was good at writing 書隶書, and his characters were warm and vigorous. He re-compiled the "Retro Edition" ten volumes, and according to historical evidence, he wrote 字. Yu, 字廷心, and 字天心. He was a member of the Tang dynasty Yi people, and lived in Hexi and Wuwei.

古文：父沙剌臧卜，官庐州，遂为庐州人。
现代文：父沙剌臧卜，在庐州为官，因而成为庐州人。
English: His father, Sha Zangbu, was an official in Zhangzhou, and thus became a Zhangzhou native.

古文：少丧父，授徒以养母，与吴澄弟子张恒游，文学日进。
现代文：余阙年少就丧父，以收授门徒来赡养母亲，平时与吴澄弟子张恒交游，文学造诣日进。
English: Yu Xi lost his father at a young age, and supported his mother by recruiting disciples. In ordinary times, he made friends with Zhang Heng, a disciple of Wu Cheng, and his literary accomplishments increased day by day.

古文：元统元年，赐进士及第，授同知泗州事，为政严明，宿吏皆惮之。
现代文：元统二年，赐进士及第，授同知泗州事。余阙在任职期间，为政严明，新旧官吏都谨慎从事。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was given the title of Jinzhi and Dai, and the title of Tongzhi and Zhengzhou. During his tenure, Yu Xi was strict in politics, and both new and old officials were cautious.

古文：俄召入，应奉翰林文字，转中书刑部主事。以不阿权贵，弃官归。
现代文：在泗州不久，奉诏回京，授翰林文字，后又转任中书刑部主事，因不阿谀权贵而弃官归家。
English: Not long after arriving in Zhangzhou, he returned to Beijing with an imperial edict and was awarded the Hanlin script. Later, he was transferred to be the head of the Criminal Law Department of the Chinese Academy of Letters, but he resigned from the post and returned home because he did not respect the powerful.

古文：寻以修辽、金、宋三史召，复入翰林，为修撰。拜监察御史，改中书礼部员外郎，出为湖广行省左右司郎中。
现代文：不久朝廷修辽、金、宋三史，余阙奉诏再入翰林院为修撰，后拜监察御史，改中书礼部员外郎，出任湖广行省左右司郎中。
English: Soon after, the imperial court ordered the three histories of Liao, Jin, and Song to be compiled, and Yuxuan was ordered to re-enter the Hanlin Academy to compile the histories. Later, he supervised the histories, became a member of the middle school's etiquette department, and served as a member of the left and right departments of the Huguangxing Province.

古文：会莫徭蛮反，右丞沙班当帅师，坚不往，无敢让之者。
现代文：莫徭蛮反元，朝廷命右丞沙班率军去镇压，但他坚持不肯去，无人敢责备他。
English: The imperial court ordered Ujo Shaban to lead an army to suppress the rebellion, but he refused to go, and no one dared to reproach him.

古文：阙曰： 右丞当往，受天子命为方岳重臣，不思执弓矢讨贼，乃欲自逸邪！
现代文：余阙说： 右丞应当去，你受天子之命为方面重臣，不愿出兵讨贼，是想图安逸吗？
English: Yu Yao said: Ujo should go. You are ordered by the Son of Heaven to be the chief minister of the region, and you are unwilling to send troops to deal with the thieves. Are you trying to be at ease?

古文：右丞当往。 
现代文：右丞当往。 
English: Ujo should go.

古文：沙班曰： 郎中语固是，如刍饷不足何？ 
现代文：沙班说： 郎中的话固然是对的，但粮草不足怎么办？ 
English: Shaban said: Of course, what my brother-in-law said is right, but what about the shortage of grain and grass?

古文：阙曰： 右丞第往，此不难致也。 
现代文：阙曰 ：右丞放心地去，粮草的事并不难。 
English: He said, "Ujo, go with confidence, the matter of grain and grass is not difficult.

古文：阙下令趣之，三日皆集，沙班行。
现代文：他下令三日备齐，沙班出师。
English: He gave the order to prepare for three days, and Shaban set out.

古文：复以集贤经历召入。迁翰林待制。出佥浙东道廉访司事。
现代文：接着召余阙为集贤经历，又调任翰林待制，出任佥浙东道廉访司事。
English: Next, he summoned Yu Yu for his experience in collecting sages, and transferred him to the position of waiting system of Hanlin, and appointed him as the visiting secretary of the host of Zhe.

古文：丁母忧，归庐州。
现代文：因母亲去世，回庐州服丧。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he went back to Bozhou to pay his respects.

古文：盗起河南，陷郡县。
现代文：河南反元势力兴起，攻陷郡县。
English: The anti-Yuan forces in Henan Province rose up and invaded many counties.

古文：至正十二年，行中书于淮东，改宣慰司为都元帅府，治淮西，起阙副使、佥都元帅府事，分兵守安庆。
现代文：至正十二年，行中书省设于淮东，改宣慰司为都元帅府治理淮西，起任阙为副使、佥都元帅府事，分兵守安庆。
English: In the twelfth year of the Ming Dynasty, the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy was set up in Huadong, the Propaganda and Consolation Department was changed to the Generalissimo's Office to govern Huaxi, and the Vice-Minister and Generalissimo of the Generalissimo's Office were appointed, and a detachment of soldiers guarded Anqing.

古文：于时南北音问隔绝，兵食俱乏，抵官十日而寇至，拒却之。
现代文：当时南北音信隔绝，乏兵乏食，余阙赴任仅十日反元义军就来进攻，被击退。
English: At that time, North and South Korea were cut off from each other, there was a shortage of soldiers and food, and only ten days after Yu Han took office, the anti-Yuan rebels attacked and were repulsed.

古文：乃集有司与诸将议屯田战守计，环境筑堡寨，选精甲外捍，而耕稼于中。
现代文：为解决乏兵乏食之忧，他召集官吏和诸将商议屯田与战守之计，决定在周围建立堡寨，选精兵御敌于城外，屯田于辖区之内。
English: In order to solve the problem of the shortage of soldiers and food, he called together officials and generals to discuss the settlement and defense plan, and decided to build a fortress around the area, select elite soldiers to resist the enemy outside the city, and settle the settlement within the jurisdiction.

古文：属县灊山八社，土壤沃饶，悉以为屯。
现代文：所属飅山县八社，土地肥沃，均用来屯田。
English: The eight shrines belonging to Lushan County, with fertile land, were all used as military camps.

古文：明年，春夏大饥，人相食，乃捐俸为粥以食之，得活者甚众。
现代文：第二年，大闹春荒，人相食，余阙将其俸禄用来买米施粥，赈济灾民。
English: The following year, there was a great disturbance caused by the spring famine, and people were eating each other. Yu Han used his salary to buy rice porridge to help the victims.

古文：民失业者数万，咸安集之。
现代文：有数万百姓失业，均得到安置。
English: Tens of thousands of people have lost their jobs and all of them have been resettled.

古文：请于中书，得钞三万锭以赈民。
现代文：他请求中书省拨钞三万锭，赈济灾民。
English: He asked the Ministry of Education to allocate 30,000 baht to help the victims.

古文：俄升都元帅。
现代文：升为同知副都元帅。
English: He was promoted to Tongzhi Vice-Marshal.

古文：广西猫军五万从元帅阿思兰沿江下抵庐州，阙移文谓苗蛮不当使之窥中国，诏阿思兰还军。
现代文：至正十四年秋天旱，反元义军占据石荡湖，余阙出兵讨平，命百姓于该湖中捕鱼而交纳鱼租。
English: In the autumn of the 14th year of the Taisho era, the anti-Yuan rebels occupied Shiwang Lake, and Yu Han sent troops to settle the dispute. He ordered the people to fish in the lake and pay fish rents.

古文：猫军有暴于境者，即收杀之，凛凛莫敢犯。
现代文：十五年夏大雨，江水上涨，屯田被淹，经抢救才使秋粮有收，得粮三万斛。阙在治军之余，注意兴修水利。
English: After fifteen years of heavy summer rains, rising river water and flooded fields, it was only through rescue that the autumn grain was collected, and the grain was 30,000 baht. In addition to governing the army, pay attention to the construction of water conservancy.

古文：时群盗环布四外，阙居其中，左提右挈，屹为淮一保障。
现代文：不久升为都元帅。广西猫军五万人随元帅阿思兰沿长江至庐州，余阙认为不应当让猫军入内地，朝廷诏令阿思兰退回原地。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Metropolitan Marshal. Fifty thousand people of the Guangxi Cat Army followed Marshal Athlan along the Yangtze River to Zhangzhou. Yu Yu believed that the Cat Army should not be allowed to enter the mainland, and the imperial court ordered Athlan to return to the original place.

古文：论功，拜江淮行省参知政事，仍守安庆，通道于江右，商旅四集。
现代文：当时反元势力四面兴起，余阙提调各路军马，确保江淮，论功，拜江淮行省参知政事，仍镇安庆。
English: At that time, the anti-Yuan forces were on the rise in all directions, and Yu Xi raised and transferred soldiers and horses from all directions to ensure that the Jianghuai, the discussion of merits, the worship of the Jianghuai, and the participation of the Jianghuai in the political affairs of the province were still in Anqing.

古文：池州赵普胜帅众攻城，连战三日败去。未几又至，相拒二旬始退，怀宁县达鲁花赤伯家奴战死。
现代文：池州反元义军赵普胜率众来攻城，连战三日败走，不久又来攻，两军相持二十天才退走，怀宁县达鲁花赤伯家奴战死。
English: Chizhou anti-Yuan rebel army Zhao Pusheng led the crowd to attack the city, lost three days in a row, soon attacked again, the two armies held each other for twenty days and retreated, and Daluhua Red Uncle of Huaining County died in battle.

古文：十七年，赵普胜同青军两道攻我，拒战一月余，竟败而走。
现代文：至正十七年，赵普胜同青军两路进攻，余阙与他们相持月余，赵等败走。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Taisho era, Zhao Pusheng and the Qing army attacked in two directions, Yu Ying held out with them for more than a month, and Zhao and others were defeated.

古文：秋，拜淮南行省左丞。
现代文：是年秋，拜余阙为淮南行省左丞。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Bai Yuxuan became the left senator of Huainan Province.

古文：安庆倚小孤山为藩蔽，命义兵元帅胡伯颜统水军戍焉。
现代文：安庆以小孤山为屏障，余阙命义军元帅胡伯颜统水军戍守。
English: Anqing took the small lonely mountain as a barrier, and the remaining rebel marshal Hu Boyan led the navy to defend it.

古文：十月，沔阳陈友谅自上游直捣小孤山，伯颜与战四日夜不胜，急趣安庆。
现代文：十月，沔阳陈友谅自上游直捣小孤山，胡伯颜抗战四天四夜不能胜，陈友谅军直趋安庆。
English: In October, Chen You Yue's troops from the upstream of Fenyang went straight to the small lonely mountain, Hu Boyan's resistance war lasted for four days and four nights, and Chen You Yue's troops went straight to Anqing.

古文：贼追至山口镇，明日癸亥，遂薄城下。
现代文：追至山口镇，十一月三日至安庆城下。
English: They were chased to Yamaguchi Town, and from November 3 to the town of Anqing.

古文：阙遣兵扼于观音桥。
现代文：余阙派兵扼守观音桥。
English: Yu Yu sent soldiers to guard the Guanyin Bridge.

古文：俄饶州祝寇攻西门，阙斩却之。
现代文：忽然饶州祝寇攻西门，为阙击退。
English: Suddenly, the Raozhou Zhuqo attacked the West Gate, but were repulsed.

古文：乙巳，贼乘东门，红旗登城，阙简死士力击，贼复败去。
现代文：十一月五日，陈友谅等由东门登城，余阙拼力抵抗，敌退去。
English: On November 5th, Chen Youzhen and others entered the city from the east gate. The remaining troops fought hard to resist, and the enemy retreated.

古文：庚戌，复来攻我，金鼓声震地。阙分诸将各以兵捍贼，昼夜不得息。
现代文：八日，陈、祝两军合力攻东西二门，又被击退。十日，又攻，金鼓声震天地，阙分兵把守，昼夜不息。
English: On the eighth day, Chen and Zhu's two armies jointly attacked the two gates of the east and west, and were repulsed. On the tenth day, they attacked again, the sound of golden drums shook the heavens and earth, and the soldiers of the division guarded day and night.

古文：癸卯，贼益生兵攻东门。
现代文：十八年正月初四，敌增兵攻东门。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the 18th year, the enemy increased troops to attack the east gate.

古文：丙午，普胜军东门，友谅军西门，祝寇军南门，群盗四面蚁集，外无一甲之援。
现代文：初七，反元义军四集，普胜攻东门，友谅攻西门，祝寇攻南门，安庆城外，余阙无一援兵，西门形势尤其危急。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the anti-Yuan rebels attacked the east gate, the friends attacked the west gate, the invaders attacked the south gate, and Anqing was outside the city. There was not a single reinforcement, and the situation at the west gate was particularly critical.

古文：其城陷之日，则至正十八年正月丙午也。
现代文：阙身先士卒提戈抗敌，士卒并拼死力战。战争激烈，余阙身受创十余。日中城陷，余阙知大势已去，便引刀自杀。
English: He was the first to fight against the enemy, and he fought hard. The war was fierce, and he was injured more than ten times. The castle fell in the middle of the day, and when he knew that the situation was over, he committed suicide with a sword.

古文：阙号令严信，与下同甘苦，然稍有违令，即斩以徇。
现代文：阙之妻耶卜氏，子德生、女福童皆投井死。同殉难诸将守臣共十八人。余阙治军号令森严，与下级同甘共苦，如军士稍有违令者即处斩。
English: Yao's wife, Yeb, son, and daughter-in-law, all died in the well. A total of eighteen generals and retainers were also martyred. Yao's command of the army was strict, and he shared the hardships with his subordinates. If a soldier slightly violated the order, he would be beheaded.

古文：阙尝病不视事，将士皆吁天求以身代，阙闻，强衣冠而出。
现代文：阙每因病不能视事，将士皆为他祈祷，甚至愿以身代他病死。阙闻知勉强而出。
English: Whenever he was unable to attend to matters due to illness, the generals all prayed for him, and were even willing to die of illness on his behalf.

古文：当出战，矢石乱下如雨，士以盾蔽阙，阙却之曰： 汝辈亦有命，何蔽我为！ 
现代文：每次出战，当箭石乱下如雨时，军士们执盾牌为他挡蔽，余阙说： 你们也有命，为何为我挡箭。 
English: Every time he went out to fight, when the arrows rained down like rain, the soldiers held shields to shield him. Yu Xi said: You also have lives, why shield me?

古文：故人争用命。稍暇，即注《周易》，帅诸生谒郡学会讲，立军士门外以听，使知尊君亲上之义，有古良将风烈。
现代文：平时有空闲，即注《周易》，率诸生到郡学会讲，令军士立门外听讲，使他们也知尊君亲上之义，确有古良将之风度。
English: In his free time, that is, according to "Zhou Yi," he led all the students to the county academic society to speak, and made the sergeants stand outside the door to listen to the speech, so that they also knew the meaning of respect for the emperor, and indeed had the demeanor of a good general.

古文：或欲挽阙入翰林，阙以国步危蹙，辞不往，其忠国之心，盖素定也。
现代文：其文有气魄，诗体崇尚江右风格，推崇鲍照、谢灵运、徐陵、庾信等大文学家。其篆书、隶书亦古雅可传于世。
English: His writings are full of spirit, and his poetic style is in the style of Jiang Yu. He is a great admirer of great writers such as Baozhao, Xie Lingyun, Xuling, and Yuxin. His poems and essays are also ancient and can be passed down to the world.

古文：卒时年五十六。
现代文：余阙死时年方五十六岁。
English: He was 56 years old at the time of his death.

古文：事闻，赠阙摅诚守正清忠谅节功臣、荣禄大夫、淮南江北等处行中书省平章政事、柱国，追封豳国公，谥忠宣。
现代文：朝廷赠摅诚守正清忠谅节功臣、荣禄大夫、淮南江北等处行中书省平章政事、柱国，追封豳国公，谥忠宣。
English: The imperial court presented him with the titles of meritorious vassal, honorable doctor, and pillar of the north of the Huainan River, and he was awarded the title of "Governor of the State" and the title of "Prophet of the People."

古文：初，阙既死，贼义之，求尸塘中，具棺敛葬于西门外。
现代文：余阙阵亡，尸体落入清水塘中。义军将他打捞起来，具棺木葬于安庆西门外。
English: Yu Han was killed in battle and his body fell into a clear water pond. The rebels salvaged him and buried him in a wooden coffin outside the west gate of Anqing.

古文：及安庆内附，大明皇帝嘉阙之忠，诏立庙于忠节坊，命有司岁时致祭云。
现代文：后大明皇帝嘉奖余阙之忠，诏立庙于 忠节坊 ，命当地官府每年去祭奠。
English: After the Ming Dynasty, the emperor commended the loyalty of Yu Xi and ordered the local government to hold a memorial service every year.

