古文：孙子曰：智不足，将兵，自恃也。
现代文：孙膑说： 智谋不足的人统兵，只不过是自傲。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: It is nothing but arrogance to lead an army without sufficient wisdom and strategy.

古文：勇不足，将兵，自广也。
现代文：勇气不足的人统兵，只能自己为自己宽心。
English: Those who lack courage can only be relieved by themselves.

古文：不知道，数战不足，将兵，幸也。
现代文：不懂兵法，又没有一定实战经验的人统兵，那就只能靠侥幸了。
English: If a person who does not understand the art of war and does not have a certain amount of actual combat experience leads the troops, then it can only be by chance.

古文：夫安万乘国，广万乘王，全万乘之民命者，唯知道。
现代文：若要保证一个万乘大国的安宁，扩大万乘大国的统辖范围，保全万乘大国百姓的生命安全，那就只能依靠懂得用兵规律的人了。
English: If you want to ensure the tranquility of a great country, expand the jurisdiction of a great country, and protect the lives and safety of the people of a great country, then you can only rely on people who know the rules of using soldiers.

古文：知道者，上知天之道，下知地之理，内得其民之心，外知敌之情，阵则知八阵之经，见胜而战，弗见而诤，此王者之将也。
现代文：所谓懂得用兵规律的人，那就是上知天文，下知地理，在国内深得民心。对外要熟知敌情，布阵要懂得八种兵阵的要领，预见到必胜而出战，没有胜利的把握则避免出战。
English: The so-called people who understand the rules of using soldiers are those who know astronomy and geography well and have won the hearts of the people at home. To the outside world, they should be familiar with the enemy's situation, understand the essentials of the eight kinds of array, foresee victory and go to war, and avoid going to war without the certainty of victory.

古文：孙子曰：用八阵战者，因地之利，用八阵之宜。
现代文：只有这样的人才是足当重任的将领。 孙膑说： 用八种兵阵作战的将领，要善于利用地形条件，选用合适的阵势。
English: Only such a person can be a commander with heavy responsibilities. Sun Yat-sen said: "A general who fights with eight kinds of battle lines should be good at taking advantage of terrain conditions and selecting a suitable position.

古文：用阵三分，诲阵有锋，诲锋有后，皆侍令而动。
现代文：布阵时要把兵分为三部分，每阵要有先锋，先锋之后要有后续兵力，所有军兵都要等待将令才能行动。
English: When setting up a line of battle, the soldiers should be divided into three parts, each line should have a vanguard, after the vanguard there should be a follow-up force, and all soldiers should wait for the general's order to act.

古文：斗一，守二。
现代文：用三分之一的兵力出击，用三分之二的兵力守卫。
English: Attack with one-third of your force, defend with two-thirds of your force.

古文：以一侵敌，以二收。
现代文：用三分之一的兵力攻破故阵，用三分之二的兵力完成歼敌任务。
English: Use one-third of the troops to break through the old line, and use two-thirds of the troops to complete the task of destroying the enemy.

古文：敌弱以乱，先其选卒以乘之。
现代文：敌军兵力弱而且阵势混乱时，就先进精兵去攻击敌军。
English: When the enemy forces are weak and the position is chaotic, they will advance elite soldiers to attack the enemy forces.

古文：敌强以治，先其下卒以诱之。
现代文：敌军强大而且阵势严谨时，就先用一些弱兵去诱敌。
English: When the enemy army is strong and the position is strict, first use some weak soldiers to lure the enemy.

古文：车骑与战者，分以为三，一在于右，一在于左，一在于后。
现代文：用战车和骑兵出战时，把兵力分为三部分，一部分在右侧，一部分在左侧，一部分断后。
English: When you go out to battle with chariots and horsemen, divide the army into three parts, one part on the right, one part on the left, and one part behind.

古文：易则多其车，险则多其骑，厄则多其弩。
现代文：地势平坦的地方用战车，地势险阻的地方则多用骑兵，地势狭窄险要的地方多用弓弩手。
English: Where the terrain is flat, chariots are used, where the terrain is dangerous, cavalry is used, and where the terrain is narrow and dangerous, archers are used.

古文：险易必知生地、死地，居生击死。
现代文：但无论在险阻还是平坦的地方，都必须先弄清楚，哪里是生地，哪里是险地，要占据生地，把敌军置之死地而后消灭。 
English: However, no matter whether it is a dangerous obstacle or a flat place, we must first figure out where the ground is and where the dangerous place is. We must occupy the ground, put the enemy army to death and then destroy it.

