古文：颜渊喟然叹曰： 仰之弥高，钻之弥坚。 
现代文：颜渊感叹说： 仰慕老师的学问崇高无比，越钻研它越觉得艰深。 
English: Yan Yuan said with admiration: The more you look up to the teacher's teaching, the more sublime it feels; the more you delve into it, the more you can appreciate its solidity and depth.

古文：此言颜渊学於孔子，积累岁月，见道弥深也。
现代文：这是说颜渊向孔子学习，随着时间的推移，就发现学问越加艰深。
English: This is to say that Yan Yuan learned from Confucius, and with the passage of time, he found that the knowledge became more and more difficult.

古文：《宣汉》之篇，高汉於周，拟汉过周，论者未极也。
现代文：在《宣汉篇》中，把汉代的地位放在周代之上，把汉代比拟超过了周代，但论述的人还没有把话说尽。
English: In the "Proclamation of the Han Dynasty," the status of the Han Dynasty was placed above the Zhou Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty was compared to the Zhou Dynasty, but the person who discussed it had not yet finished speaking.

古文：恢而极之，弥见汉奇。
现代文：如果充分论述把话说尽，更能看到汉代的功业杰出。
English: If we fully discuss and exhaust the words, we can better see the outstanding achievements of the Han Dynasty.

古文：夫经熟讲者，要妙乃见；国极论者，恢奇弥出。
现代文：对经书反复熟读，才能发现其中精微的道理；对一个朝代越是充分论述，它的杰出之处就越显著。
English: Only by repeatedly reading the scriptures can we discover the subtle truth; the more fully a dynasty is discussed, the more prominent it is.

古文：恢论汉国在百代之上，审矣。
现代文：对汉代充分加以论述，它的地位在历代之上，就很清楚了。
English: When the Han Dynasty is fully discussed, its status above all previous dynasties becomes very clear.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：怎样来证明这一点呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：黄帝有涿鹿之战；尧有丹水之师；舜时有苗不服；夏启有扈叛逆；高宗伐鬼方三年克之。周成王管、蔡悖乱，周公东征。
现代文：黄帝时在涿鹿山发生了战争，尧时在丹水流域动用了军队，舜时派兵征服有苗，夏启时有扈氏发生叛乱，殷高宗讨伐鬼方，三年才战胜它，周成王时管叔、蔡叔发动叛乱，周公为平叛而东征。
English: In the time of the Yellow Emperor, there was a war in the Elk Mountain; in the time of the Zhou Emperor, troops were used in the Dan River valley; in the time of the Zhou Emperor, troops were sent to conquer the Miao Dynasty; in the time of the Xiaqi Dynasty, there was a rebellion by the Zhou Dynasty; in the time of the Yin Gaozong Dynasty, there was a crusade against the evil side, and it took three years to defeat it; in the time of the Zhou Dynasty, Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai launched a rebellion, and Zhou Gong went to the east to suppress the rebellion.

古文：前代皆然，汉不闻此。
现代文：前代都发生了这类事情，汉朝没有听说有这类事情发生。
English: This kind of thing happened in previous generations, but the Han Dynasty never heard of it happening.

古文：高祖之时，陈犭希反，彭越叛，治始安也。
现代文：汉高祖时，陈狶反汉，彭越谋反，是因为汉朝统治刚刚安定下来。
English: At the time of the founding of the Han Dynasty, Chen Xi was anti-Han and Peng Yue was plotting a rebellion, because the Han Dynasty had just settled down.

古文：孝景之时，吴、楚兴兵，怨晃错也。
现代文：汉景帝时，吴、楚等国起兵叛乱，是因为怨恨晁错。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Jing, Wu, Chu and other countries revolted because of resentment.

古文：匈奴时扰，正朔不及，无荒之地，王功不加兵，今皆内附，贡献牛马。
现代文：过去匈奴经常侵扰汉朝，不奉行汉朝历法，对自古以来边远荒僻的地区，君王建立功业不使用武力，现在全都归顺了汉朝，向汉朝贡献牛马。
English: In the past, the Xiongnu often invaded the Han Dynasty, did not follow the Han Dynasty calendar, and did not use force to establish a kingdom in remote and desolate areas since ancient times. Now they have all submitted to the Han Dynasty and contributed cattle and horses to the Han Dynasty.

古文：此则汉之威盛，莫敢犯也。
现代文：这就是因为汉朝的威力盛大，没有谁敢来侵犯。
English: This is because the power of the Han Dynasty was so great that no one dared to invade it.

古文：纣为至恶，天下叛之。
现代文：殷纣王罪大恶极，天下人都背叛了他。
English: King Yin Xuan's crime was so heinous that the whole world betrayed him.

古文：武王举兵，皆愿就战，八百诸侯，不期俱至。
现代文：武王起兵讨伐他，各诸侯国都自愿参战，八百诸侯事先并没有约定就全都来了。
English: King Wu raised an army to fight him, and all the states voluntarily joined the war. Eight hundred states came without prior agreement.

古文：项羽恶微，号而用兵，与高祖俱起，威力轻重，未有所定，则项羽力劲。
现代文：项羽的罪恶比纣轻微些，号称善于用兵打仗，与汉高祖同时起兵，当时群雄声威的大小力量的强弱，还没有定局，而项羽的势力要稍强些。
English: Xiang Yu's crime was less serious than that of Yan, and he was reputed to be good at using soldiers to fight. He raised an army at the same time as Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty. At that time, the size and strength of the army was still undecided, but Xiang Yu's power was slightly stronger.

古文：折铁难於摧木，高祖诛项羽，折铁；武王伐纣，摧木。
现代文：折铁比断木困难。汉高祖消灭项羽，好比折铁；周武王讨伐纣王，好比断木。
English: It is more difficult to break iron than to break wood. Han Gao Zu's elimination of Xiang Yu is like breaking iron; Zhou Wu Wang's crusade against Shao Wang is like breaking wood.

古文：然则汉力胜周多矣。
现代文：这样说来汉朝的威力大大超过了周代。
English: In this way, the power of the Han Dynasty greatly exceeded that of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：凡克敌一则易，二则难。
现代文：一般说来，战胜一个敌人容易，战胜两人敌人就困难。
English: Generally speaking, it is easy to defeat one enemy, but difficult to defeat two enemies.

古文：汤、武伐桀、纣，一敌也；高祖诛秦杀项，兼胜二家，力倍汤、武。
现代文：成汤、周武王分别讨伐夏桀、殷纣，战胜的只是一个敌人；汉高祖灭亡秦朝消灭项羽，同时战胜两家敌人，力量超过成汤、周武王一倍。
English: Cheng Tang and King Zhou Wu separately fought against Xia Yao and Yin Yao, defeating only one enemy; the death of the Han Emperor Gao Zu, the destruction of the Qin Dynasty, the elimination of Xiang Yu, and the defeat of two enemies at the same time, the strength exceeds Cheng Tang and King Zhou Wu twice.

古文：武王为殷西伯，臣事於纣，以臣伐，夷、齐耻之，扣马而谏，武王不听，不食周粟，饿死首阳。
现代文：周武王作为殷代西方诸侯的领袖，以臣子身份侍奉纣王。作为一个臣子而去讨伐君王，伯夷、叔齐认为这是可耻的，牵住周武王的马进行规劝，周武王不听他们的劝告，他们不吃周朝的粮食，饿死在首阳山。
English: King Zhou Wu, as the leader of the western princes of the Yin Dynasty, served King Gong as a vassal. As a vassal, he went to fight the king. Bo Yi and Uncle Qi thought it was shameful. They held King Zhou Wu's horse to persuade him. King Zhou Wu did not listen to their advice. They did not eat the grain of the Zhou Dynasty and starved to death on Shouyang Mountain.

古文：高祖不为秦臣，光武不仕王莽，诛恶伐无道，无伯夷之讥，可谓顺於周矣。
现代文：高祖不是秦朝的臣子，光武帝不在王莽手下做官，他们诛杀的是恶人，讨伐的是无道的君王，没有伯夷这类人的规劝，可以说比周武王讨伐纣王更名正言顺了。
English: Gaozu was not a vassal of the Qin Dynasty, and Emperor Guangwu did not serve under Wang Mang. They fought and killed the wicked, and fought against the wicked kings. They did not seek the advice of people like Bo Yi. It can be said that they were more righteous than King Zhouwu's fight against the wicked kings.

古文：丘由易以起高，渊洿易以为深。
现代文：土丘容易增高，潭池容易加深。
English: Mounds are easily raised and pools are easily deepened.

古文：起於微贱，无所因阶者难；袭爵乘位，尊祖统业者易。
现代文：出身微贱，毫无依靠凭借的人取得天下就很难；承袭封爵，借助官位，能借重和继承祖先基业的人取得天下就容易。
English: It is difficult for a man who comes from a humble background and has nothing to rely on to gain the world; it is easy for a man who inherits a knighthood and uses his official position to gain the world and inherit the inheritance of his ancestors.

古文：尧以唐侯入嗣帝位，舜以司徒因尧授禅，禹以司空缘功代舜，汤由七十里，文王百里，为西伯，武王袭文王位。
现代文：尧以唐侯的身份继承了帝位，舜以司徒的职位通过尧禅让帝位给他，禹以司空的职位凭借治水之功接替舜当了君王，商汤从七十里的辖地起家，周文王从百里的封地发展，周武王是西方诸侯的首领，继承了文王的爵位因此而取得天下。
English: Zou inherited the imperial throne as the prince of Tang, Zou gave him the imperial throne as the prince of Shifu through the practice of Zen meditation, and Yu Yixiguo succeeded Zou as the king of Shifu by virtue of his water-control work. Shang Tang started from the jurisdiction of seventy miles, and King Zhou Wen developed from the fief of one hundred miles. King Zhou Wu was the leader of the Western princes, and inherited the title of King Wen and thus gained the world.

古文：三郊五代之起，皆有因缘，力易为也。
现代文：唐、虞、夏、商、周取得天下，都有所承袭和凭借，有了权力就容易做到这一点。
English: Tang, Yu, Xia, Shang and Zhou gained the world, all inherited and relied on, and it is easy to do this with power.

古文：高祖从亭长提三尺剑取天下，光武由白水奋威武，海内，无尺土所因，一位所乘，直奉天命，推自然。
现代文：汉高祖从一个亭长手提三尺剑夺取天下，光武帝从白水乡奋起声威武力称帝海内。他们没有一寸封地可以因袭，没有一官半职可以凭借，只不过是奉了天命，出于自然。
English: Henkel's ancestor conquered the world with a three-foot sword from a pavilion warden, and Emperor Guangwu rose up from Baishu Town to claim the imperial territory by force. They did not have an inch of fiefdom to attack, nor an official post to rely on, but they were just following the mandate of heaven and nature.

古文：此则起高於渊洿，为深於丘山也。
现代文：这就好比从潭池的基础上去加高，从土丘的高度上去挖深。
English: It's like raising a pond from the bottom and digging deeper from the top of a mound.

古文：比方五代，孰者为优？
现代文：和唐、虞、夏、商、周五代相比，哪一个的条件更优越呢？
English: Compared with the Tang, Yu, Xia, Shang and Zhou dynasties, which one has better conditions?

古文：传书或称武王伐纣，太公《阴谋》，食小兒以丹，令身纯赤，长大，教言殷亡。
现代文：传书上有的记载周武王征伐纣王这件事，说太公望玩弄阴谋，用朱砂喂小孩儿吃，使小孩儿的身体完全变成红色，小孩儿长大以后，教他们说 殷朝要灭亡了 。
English: There is a record of King Zhou Wu's conquest of the Qin Dynasty in the book of biography. It says that King Zhou played with the plot and fed the children with cinnabar to make the children's bodies completely red. When the children grew up, he told them that the Yin Dynasty was about to perish.

古文：殷民见兒身赤，以为天神，及言殷亡，皆谓商灭。
现代文：殷朝的老百姓看到小孩儿全身发红，认为他们是天神，等到小孩儿说 殷朝要灭亡了 ，大家都认为商朝真要灭亡了。
English: The common people of the Yin Dynasty saw the children turn red and thought that they were gods. When the children said that the Yin Dynasty was going to perish, everyone thought that the Shang Dynasty was really going to perish.

古文：兵至牧野，晨举脂烛，奸谋惑民，权掩不备，周之所讳也，世谓之虚。
现代文：周武王的军队到达牧野，清晨就点燃火把去袭击敌人。使用诡计迷惑老百姓，玩弄阴谋去偷袭毫无准备的人，这是周朝所忌讳的，世上的人也说这些都是谣传。
English: The army of King Zhou Wu arrived at the pasture, lit torches in the morning to attack the enemy, used tricks to confuse the people, and played with conspiracies to attack unprepared people. This is a taboo of the Zhou Dynasty, and people in the world also say that these are rumors.

古文：汉取天下，无此虚言。
现代文：汉朝取得天下，却没有这一类谣言。
English: When the Han Dynasty conquered the world, there were no such rumours.

古文：《武成》之篇言，周伐纣，血流浮杵。
现代文：《尚书》中的《武成》篇，记载周武王讨伐殷纣王时，血流成河把杵都漂起来了。
English: The "Bu Cheng" chapter in the "Shang Shu" records that when King Zhou Wu fought against King Yin Qi, the blood flowed into a river and the cormorants all floated.

古文：以《武成》言之，食兒以丹，晨举脂烛，殆且然矣。
现代文：根据《武成》篇的记载来说，用朱砂喂小孩儿吃，清晨点燃火把袭击敌人，大概真是如此了。
English: According to the records of the "Wucheng" article, feeding children with cinnabar and lighting torches to attack the enemy in the morning is probably true.

古文：汉伐亡新，光武将五千人，王莽遣二公将万人战於昆阳，雷雨晦冥，前後不相见。
现代文：汉朝讨伐新朝，光武帝率领五千人，王莽派遣王寻、王邑率领百万人，在昆阳决战，当时大雷雨中天色昏暗，前后的人互相看不见。
English: The Han Dynasty fought the New Dynasty, Emperor Guangwu led five thousand men, Wang Mang sent Wang Xun, and Wang Yip led a million men to fight a decisive battle in Kunyang. At that time, the sky was dark in a thunderstorm, and people in front and behind could not see each other.

古文：汉兵出昆阳城，击二公军，一而当十，二公兵散。
现代文：汉兵冲出昆阳城，以一人抵挡十人，王寻、王邑的军队被冲散。
English: The Han soldiers rushed out of Kunyang City, with one person resisting ten people. Wang Huan and Wang Yip's army was dispersed.

古文：天下以雷雨助汉威敌，孰与举脂烛以人事谲取殷哉？
现代文：天用降雷雨的方式帮助汉军向敌人逞威，周武王点燃火把袭击敌人靠人为的欺诈取代殷朝怎么能与它相比呢？
English: Heaven used thunder and rain to help the Chinese army gain the upper hand against the enemy. Zhou Wu Wang lit torches to attack the enemy and replaced the Yin Dynasty with artificial fraud. How can it be compared with it?

古文：或云： 武王伐纣，纣赴火死，武王就斩以钺，悬其首於大白之旌。 
现代文：有的记载说： 周武王讨伐纣王，纣王投入火中自焚而死，周武王到纣王自焚的地方去用钺把纣王的头砍了下来，又把纣王的头悬挂在大白旗的杆上。 
English: Some records say: King Zhou Wu fought against King Gong, King Gong set himself on fire and died. King Zhou Wu went to the place where King Gong set himself on fire, cut off King Gong's head with a pickaxe, and hung King Gong's head on the pole of a large white flag.

古文：齐宣王怜衅钟之牛，睹其色之觳觫也。
现代文：齐宣王可怜用来祭钟的牛，是因为看到牛的神情恐惧战栗。
English: Qixuan Wang felt sorry for the cow used to sacrifice the bell, because he was scared and shivered when he saw the cow's expression.

古文：楚庄王赦郑伯之罪，见其肉袒而形暴也。
现代文：楚庄王赦免了郑襄公的罪，是因为看到他肉袒而暴露了形体。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang pardoned Zheng Xianggong's crime because he saw his flesh and exposed his body.

古文：君子恶，不恶其身。
现代文：君子痛恨恶人，并不痛恨他的躯体。
English: A gentleman hates a scoundrel, not his body.

古文：纣尸赴於火中，所见凄怆，非徒色之觳觫，袒之暴形也。
现代文：纣王的尸体投入火中，看到的是一片凄惨情景，不仅仅是神情的恐惧战栗，肉袒的暴露形体而已。
English: The corpse of the skull king was thrown into the fire, and what I saw was a gruesome scene, not just a look of fear and trembling, but a fleshy exposed body.

古文：就斩以钺，悬乎其首，何其忍哉！
现代文：武王去用钺砍头，把纣王的头割下挂起来，多么残忍啊！
English: King Wu went to chop off his head with a pickaxe, cut off the pickaxe king's head and hung it up, how cruel!

古文：高祖入咸阳，阎乐诛二世，项羽杀子婴，高祖雍容入秦，不戮二尸。
现代文：汉高祖进入咸阳城时，阎乐已杀了秦二世，项羽杀了子婴，汉高祖从容不迫地进入秦都咸阳，不残害二世和子婴两人的尸体。
English: When Han Gao Zu entered Xianyang City, Yan Le had already killed Qin II and Xiang Yu had killed the infant. Han Gao Zu entered the Qin capital Xianyang without hesitation and did not mutilate the bodies of Qin II and the infant.

古文：光武入长安，刘圣公已诛王莽，乘兵即害，不刃王莽之死。
现代文：光武帝进入长安，刘圣公已杀了王莽，他率领士兵来到王莽被杀的地方，但却不伤害王莽的死尸。
English: Emperor Guangwu entered Chang'an. Liu Sheng Kung had already killed Wang Mang. He led the soldiers to the place where Wang Mang was killed, but did not harm Wang Mang's dead body.

古文：夫斩赴火之首，与贳被刃者之身，德虐孰大也？
现代文：砍下投火自焚者的头，同饶过被杀者的尸体相比，谁的恩德大，谁的暴虐深呢？
English: Compared with cutting off the heads of those who set fire to themselves and sparing the bodies of those who were killed, whose kindness is greater and whose tyranny is deeper?

古文：岂以羑里之恨哉？以人君拘人臣，其逆孰与秦夺周国，莽鸩平帝也？
现代文：难道是周武王因为父亲周文王曾被囚禁在羑里而对纣王怨恨太深的缘故吗？纣王作为君王而囚禁他的臣下周文王，纣王的倒行逆施，比起秦国消灭周朝和王莽毒死汉平帝来，哪个罪轻，哪个罪重呢？
English: Could it be that King Zhou Wu held a deep grudge against King Qian because his father, King Zhou Wen, had been imprisoned in Qianli? As a king, King Qian imprisoned his vassal, King Qianwen. King Qianwen's perfidy was worse than Qin's annihilation of the Zhou Dynasty and Wang Mang's poisoning of Emperor Hanping. Which crime was more serious?

古文：邹伯奇论桀、纣之恶不若亡秦，亡秦不若王莽。
现代文：邹伯奇论定桀、纣的罪恶比不上秦朝，秦朝的罪恶比不上王莽。
English: Zou Boqi argued that the evil of the Qin Dynasty was not as great as that of the Qin Dynasty, and the evil of the Qin Dynasty was not as great as that of Wang Mang.

古文：然则纣恶微而周诛之痛，秦、莽罪重而汉伐之轻，宽狭谁也？
现代文：既然如此那么纣王的罪恶轻而周武王惩罚他过重，秦朝、王莽的罪恶重而汉朝惩罚得却太轻，谁宽宏大量，谁心胸狭窄呢？
English: Since this is the case, then the sins of the king of Qin are light and the king of Zhou Wu punishes him too heavily, the sins of the Qin dynasty and the king of Wang Mang are heavy but the Han dynasty is punished too lightly. Who is magnanimous and who is narrow-minded?

古文：高祖母妊之时，蛟龙在上，梦与神遇；好酒饮，酒舍负仇，及醉留卧，其上常有神怪；夜行斩蛇，蛇妪悲哭；与吕后俱之田庐，时自隐匿，光气暢见，吕后辄知；始皇望见东南有天子气。及起，五星聚於东井。
现代文：高祖与吕后一起到乡下去居住，有时他独自隐藏在山野之中，会有光气很明显的出现，所以吕后往往知道他隐藏在哪里。秦始皇望见东南方有天子气出现。等到刘邦兴起攻入咸阳之时，五星正好聚集在东井这一方。
English: Gao Zu went to the countryside to live with Lü Guo. Sometimes he would hide alone in the mountains and fields, and the light would appear very clearly, so Lü Guo often knew where he was hiding. Qin Shihuang saw the son of heaven appear in the southeast. By the time Liu Bang rose up to invade Xianyang, the five stars had just gathered in this side of Dongjing.

古文：楚望汉军，云气五色。
现代文：项羽的军队望见刘邦的军队，有五色云气围绕。
English: The troops of Xiang Yu could see the troops of Liu Bang, surrounded by five-colored clouds.

古文：光武且生，凤皇集於城，嘉禾滋於屋。
现代文：光武帝将要出生的时候，凤凰停落在济阳城，嘉禾生长在庭院中。
English: When Emperor Guangwu was about to be born, the phoenix stopped in Jiyang City, and Jiahe grew in the courtyard.

古文：皇妣之身，夜半无烛，空中光明。
现代文：刘秀的母亲分娩时，半夜里没有点烛，室中却自然明亮。
English: When Liu Xiu's mother gave birth, there were no candles in the middle of the night, but the room was naturally bright.

古文：初者，苏伯阿望舂陵气，郁郁葱葱。
现代文：当初，苏伯阿望见舂陵乡的云气，极为旺盛。
English: At first, Su Boa's vision of the clouds in Fuling Township was very strong.

古文：光武起过旧庐，见气憧憧上属於天。
现代文：光武帝兴起后，路过旧居，看见云气摇曳不定上接于天。
English: After the rise of Emperor Guangwu, he passed by his former residence and saw the clouds wavering and wavering in the sky.

古文：五帝、三王初生始起，不闻此怪。
现代文：商汤将兴起的时候，有天神牵着衔着金钩的白狼进入他的宫廷。
English: When Shang Tang was about to rise, a sky god led a golden-hooked white wolf into his court.

古文：尧母感於赤龙，及起，不闻奇佑。
现代文：后稷的母亲因为踩了巨人的脚印而怀孕生了稷。周文王将兴起的时候，得到赤雀衔来的天书。
English: Houyi's mother became pregnant and gave birth to a calf because she stepped on the footprints of a giant. When King Zhouwen was about to be born, he received a heavenly message from the baby bird.

古文：禹母吞薏苡，将生，得玄圭；契母咽燕子；汤起白狼衔钩；後稷母履大人之迹；文王起得赤雀；武王得鱼、乌：皆不及汉太平之瑞。
现代文：周武王将伐纣，遇到白鱼和赤乌的祥瑞。
English: King Zhou Wu will be felling oysters, encountering the auspiciousness of white fish and red oyster.

古文：黄帝、尧、舜凤皇一至。
现代文：以上这些都不如汉代天下太平的祥瑞。黄帝、尧、舜在位的时候，凤凰只出现过一次。
English: All of the above are not as good as the peaceful Xiang Rui in the Han Dynasty. When the Yellow Emperor, Emperor Xuan and Emperor Yao were on the throne, the phoenix only appeared once.

古文：凡诸众瑞，重至者希。
现代文：一般说来各种祥瑞重复出现的很少见。
English: Generally speaking, it is rare to see all kinds of auspicious and unlucky occurrences repeatedly.

古文：汉文帝黄龙、玉桮。
现代文：汉文帝时出现黄龙、玉杯。
English: Huanglong and jade cups appeared during the reign of Emperor Hanwen.

古文：武帝黄龙、麒麟、连木。
现代文：汉武帝时出现黄龙、麒麟、连木。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwu, Huanglong, Qilin and Lianmu appeared.

古文：宣帝凤皇五至，麒麟、神雀、甘露、醴泉、黄龙、神光。
现代文：汉宣帝时凤凰五次出现，麒麟、神雀、甘露、醴泉、黄龙、神光也出现过。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Xuan, the phoenix appeared five times, and the unicorn, the divine sparrow, the nectar, the spring, the yellow dragon, and the divine light also appeared.

古文：平帝白雉、黑雉。
现代文：汉平帝时出现白雉、黑雉。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanping, the white wolf and the black wolf appeared.

古文：孝明麒麟、神雀、甘露、醴泉、白雉、黑雉、芝草、连木、嘉禾，与宣帝同，奇有神鼎黄金之怪。
现代文：汉明帝时出现麒麟、神雀、甘露、醴泉、白雉、黑雉、芝草、连木、嘉禾，与汉宣帝时同样的奇瑞，又有神鼎、黄金出现的怪事。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Ming, there appeared the unicorn, the divine sparrow, the nectar of nectar, the spring of nectar, the egret, the black egret, the grasshopper, the linden tree, and the jiahe. It was the same miracle as at the time of Emperor Han Xuan, but there were also strange things such as the divine tripod and gold.

古文：一代之瑞，累仍不绝。此则汉德丰茂，故瑞佑多也。
现代文：一个朝代的祥瑞，多次频繁不断地出现，这就是汉代功德美盛，所以祥瑞就多。
English: The auspiciousness of a dynasty appears repeatedly, frequently and continuously. This is the merit of the Han Dynasty, so there are many auspiciousnesses.

古文：孝明天崩，今上嗣位，元二之间，嘉德布流。
现代文：汉明帝死后，当今皇上继承帝位，在建初元年二年之间，美德遍及全国。
English: After the death of Emperor Han Ming, the current emperor succeeded to the throne. In the first two years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, virtue spread throughout the country.

古文：三年，零陵生芝草五本。
现代文：建初三年，零陵郡长了五棵灵芝草。
English: In the first three years of construction, five Ganoderma lucidum plants sprouted in Luling County.

古文：四年，甘露降五县。
现代文：建初四年，甘露普降达五个县。
English: In four years, Kamloops was reduced to a five-county region.

古文：五年，芝复生六，黄龙见，大小凡八。
现代文：建初五年，灵芝草又生了六棵；黄龙出现，大小共计八条。
English: In the first five years of construction, the Ganoderma lucidum grass gave birth to six more trees; the yellow dragon appeared, with a total size of eight.

古文：前世龙见不双，芝生无二，甘露一降。而今八龙并出，十一芝累生，甘露流五县。德惠盛炽，故瑞繁夥也。
现代文：前代有龙出现不会成双，灵芝草不会长两棵，甘露只降一次，而现在八条龙同时出现，十一棵灵芝草先后长出来，甘露遍及五个县，汉章帝的功德恩惠昌盛，所以祥瑞极多。
English: In the previous generation, there would not be a pair of dragons, two Ganoderma lucidum plants would not grow, and the nectar would only fall once, but now there are eight dragons at the same time, eleven Ganoderma lucidum plants have grown successively, the nectar has spread to five counties, and the merits of Emperor Zhang of Han are flourishing, so there are a lot of auspicious.

古文：自古帝王，孰能致斯？
现代文：自古以来的帝王，谁能招来这样多的祥瑞呢？
English: The emperor since ancient times, who can bring so much happiness?

古文：儒者论曰 王者推行道德，受命於天。 
现代文：俗儒议论说： 统治天下的人因为提倡和奉行道德，所以从上天承受了当帝王的 命 。 
English: Confucianism says: Those who rule the world have received the mandate from heaven to be emperors because they advocate and practice morality.

古文：《论衡》《初》以为王者生禀天命，性命难审，且两论之。
现代文：《论衡·初禀》篇中认为统治天下的人生来就承受了天命。关于 性 和 命 的问题很难弄清楚。
English: In the "On the Balance and the Beginning," it is believed that those who rule the world are born with a predestined destiny. Questions about sex and life are difficult to clarify.

古文：酒食之赐，一则为薄，再则为厚。
现代文：姑且把上述两种不同的说法都论述一下。赏赐酒食，给一次就称为薄，给两次就称为厚。
English: Allow me to discuss both of the above-mentioned two different ways of saying. If you give food and wine as a reward, giving it once is called thin, and giving it twice is called thick.

古文：如儒者之言，五代皆一受命，唯汉独再，此则天命於汉厚也。
现代文：按照俗儒的说法，唐、虞、夏、商、周五代都只承受了一次天命，唯独汉朝两次承受了天命，这就是天命对于汉朝优厚了。
English: According to the laymen's saying, the Tang, Yu, Xia, Shang and Jiajing dynasties all received the Mandate of Heaven only once, but the Han Dynasty received the Mandate of Heaven twice, which is the Mandate of Heaven for the Han Dynasty.

古文：如审《论衡》之言，生禀自然，此亦汉家所禀厚也。
现代文：如果确实像《论衡》所说的那样，人的 性命 是承受了气而自然形成的，这也说明汉朝承受的气是特别优厚的。
English: If it is true, as stated in "On Balance," that a person's life is formed naturally by absorbing qi, this also indicates that the qi absorbed by the Han Dynasty was particularly rich.

古文：绝而复属，死而复生。
现代文：因为帝系断了又重新接续下去，这和人死了之后又重新活过来是一样的。
English: Because the imperial line is broken and continues again, this is the same as when a person dies and comes back to life.

古文：世有死而复生之人，人必谓之神。
现代文：世上如果有死而复生的人，人们一定认为他是神。
English: If there is a man in the world who has died and come back to life, people must think he is a god.

古文：汉统绝而复属，江武存亡，可谓优矣。
现代文：汉朝世代相传的帝位断绝了又重新接续下去，光武帝恢复保存了已经灭亡了的朝代，可以说承受的气是特别优厚的了。
English: The imperial throne of the Han Dynasty, which had been passed down from generation to generation, was interrupted and then resumed. Emperor Guangwu restored and preserved the dynasty that had already perished. It can be said that the spirit to bear it was particularly generous.

古文：武王伐纣，庸、蜀之夷佐战牧野。
现代文：周武王讨伐纣王，庸、蜀这些部族，在牧野协助作战。
English: Zhou Wu Wang fought against Shao Wang, and the tribes of Yong and Shu assisted in the fighting in Makino.

古文：成王之时，越常献雉，倭人贡暢。
现代文：周成王的时候，越常人进献野鸡，倭人进贡畅草。
English: During the reign of King Zhoucheng, the Yue people offered pheasants, while the Wa people offered grass carp.

古文：幽、历衰微，戎狄攻周，平王东走，以避其难。
现代文：幽王、厉王时周朝国势衰弱，犬戎入侵周朝，周平王往东迁徙，以避开犬戎入侵的灾难。
English: During the reigns of Yu Wang and Li Wang, the Zhou Dynasty was in a weak state, the Zhou Dynasty was invaded by the Injun Emperors, and King Zhou Ping migrated to the east to avoid the disaster of the Injun Emperors' invasion.

古文：至汉，四夷朝贡。
现代文：到了汉代，四方各族朝见贡礼。
English: In the Han Dynasty, all ethnic groups in the four directions paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：孝平元始元年，越常重译，献白雉一、黑雉二。
现代文：汉平帝元始元年，越常辗转翻译进献一只白野鸡，两只黑野鸡。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hanping's reign, a white pheasant and two black pheasants were presented.

古文：夫以成王之贤，辅以周公，越常献一，平帝得三。
现代文：凭周成王的贤明，又有周公辅佐，越常才进献一只野鸡，而汉平帝却得了三只。
English: Thanks to the wisdom of King Zhou Cheng and Zhou Gong's assistant, only one pheasant was presented, while Emperor Han Ping received three.

古文：後至四年，金城塞外羌良愿等献其鱼盐之地，愿内属汉，遂得西王母石室，因为西海郡。
现代文：后来到了元始四年，金城郡塞外的羌豪良愿等部族，贡献了他们养鱼产盐的地方，愿意内附，归属汉朝，于是汉朝得到了西王母的石宫殿，因此而设置了西海郡。
English: Later, in the first four years of the Yuan Dynasty, the Zhaogang, Liangwang and other tribes outside of Jincheng County contributed their fish-breeding and salt-producing areas to the Han Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty obtained the stone palace of the Queen of the West, thus setting up the West Sea County.

古文：周时戎狄攻王，至汉内属，献其宝地。
现代文：周代时犬戎进攻周幽王，到了汉代却愿意内附，归属汉朝，献出他们的宝地。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, the Xiong Rong attacked the Zhou Yu Wang, but in the Han Dynasty, they were willing to annex, belong to the Han Dynasty, and give up their treasure.

古文：西王母国在绝极之外，而汉属之。
现代文：西王母国在极边远的地方，而汉朝统辖了它。
English: Xi Wang's motherland was in a very remote place, and the Han Dynasty ruled it.

古文：德孰大？
现代文：周代与汉代相比，功德哪一个大？
English: Compared with the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty, which one has more merits?

古文：壤孰广？
现代文：疆域哪一个的宽广呢？
English: Which one's territory is wider?

古文：方今哀牢、鄯善、诺降附归德，匈奴时扰，遣将攘讨，获虏生口千万数。
现代文：当今哀牢、鄯善、婼羌投降内附服从汉朝统治，匈奴经常侵扰，派遣将领防御讨伐，活捉俘虏以千万计。
English: Today, Laiwu, Shanshan, and Shijiazhuang have all surrendered and submitted to the rule of the Han Dynasty. The Xiongnu often invade, send generals to defend, and capture tens of thousands of prisoners alive.

古文：夏禹倮入吴国，太伯采药，断发文身。
现代文：夏禹到了吴国随俗裸体。太伯逃往吴越地区采药，剪短头发，身刺花纹。
English: When Xia Yu arrived in Wuxi, he was unclothed. Tai Bo fled to the Wu Yue region to collect medicine, cut his hair short, and tattooed his body.

古文：唐、虞国界，吴为荒服，越在九夷，罽衣关头，今皆夏服、褒衣、履舄。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜时代的疆域，吴还在荒服之列，越还在九夷之列，穿的还是贯头的罽衣，当今都换上了中原一带的服装，宽袍大袖并穿上了鞋子。
English: In the territory of the Tang Dynasty and the Yu Dynasty, Wu was still in the ranks of the barbarian clothing, and the more it was in the ranks of the Nine Emperors, the more it was worn. Nowadays, it has been replaced by the clothing of the Central Plains, the wide robe with large sleeves and the shoes.

古文：巴、蜀、越■、郁林、日南、辽东、乐浪，周时被发椎髻，今戴皮弁；周时重译，今吟《诗》、《书》。
现代文：巴、蜀、越雋、郁林、日南、辽东、乐浪诸郡的人，在周代还在披散头发或盘成椎形发髻，当今都戴上了皮帽。
English: People in Ba, Shu, Yuexuan, Yulin, Nichinan, Liaodong and Lelang counties, who in the Zhou Dynasty still wore their hair loose or in a cone-shaped bun, now wear a fur hat.

古文：《春秋》之义，君亲无将，将而必诛。
现代文：按照《春秋》上的道理，对于君王和父母不能有犯上作乱的企图，有犯上作乱的企图，一定要被诛杀。
English: According to the principles of "Spring and Autumn," the king's closest relatives are not allowed to plot against him, and if they do, they must be killed.

古文：广陵王荆迷於巫，楚王英惑於客，事情列见。孝明三宥，二王吞药，周诛管、蔡，违斯远矣！
现代文：广陵王刘荆受妖巫迷惑，楚王刘英受侠客迷惑，谋反的事情一件件明摆着，虽然汉明帝再三赦免他们的死罪，但广陵王和楚王还是服毒自杀了。周公诛灭管叔、蔡叔，与汉明帝的做法相比差得太远了。
English: Guangling King Liu Jing was bewitched by witches and wizards, and Chu King Liu Ying was bewitched by knights and knights, and it was clear that they were plotting rebellion. Although Emperor Han Ming repeatedly pardoned their capital crimes, Guangling King and Chu King still committed suicide by taking poison. Zhou Gongyi's extermination of Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai was too far from Emperor Han Ming's practice.

古文：楚外家许氏与楚王谋议，孝明曰： 许有属於王，欲王尊贵，人情也。 
现代文：楚王刘英的外家许氏参与了楚王反叛的阴谋，汉明帝说： 许氏与楚王有亲属关系，希望楚王更加尊贵，这是人之常情。 
English: King of Chu Liu Ying's outside family, Mr. Xu, participated in the conspiracy of King of Chu's rebellion. Han Mingdi said: Mr. Xu is related to King of Chu and hopes that King of Chu will be more honorable. This is a common human feeling.

古文：圣心原之，不绳於法。
现代文：圣王的心宽恕了这件事，不用法律来惩罚他们。
English: The king's heart forgave the matter, and he did not punish them according to the law.

古文：隐强侯传悬书市里，诽谤圣政；今上海，犯夺爵土。
现代文：隐强侯阴傅在街市上悬挂文书，诽谤君王的政治，当今皇帝恩德如海，免去了剥夺他的爵位和封地的罪。
English: The current emperor, Ende Ruhai, pardoned the crime of depriving him of his title and fief by hanging up documents in the market and slandering the king's politics.

古文：恶其人者，憎其胥余。
现代文：怨恨一个人，就连他家的奴婢也怨恨。
English: He that hateth his brother hateth his brother also.

古文：立二王之子，安楚、广陵，强弟员嗣祀阴氏。
现代文：封刘荆、刘英的儿子为侯，让他们仍然安享楚和广陵的封地，让隐强侯阴傅的弟弟阴员继承爵位，延续阴氏的祭祀。
English: The sons of Liu Jing and Liu Ying were made princes, so that they could still enjoy the fiefdoms of Chu and Guangling, and the younger brother of the powerful prince Yin Fu, Yin Jian, was allowed to inherit the title and continue the sacrifices of the Yin clan.

古文：二王，帝族也，位为王侯，与管、蔡同。
现代文：广陵王和楚王，是皇帝的宗族，封为王侯，与管叔、蔡叔相同。
English: Guangling Wang and Chu Wang are the emperor's family line, and are titled as princes, the same as Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai.

古文：管、蔡灭嗣，二王立後，恩已褒矣。
现代文：管叔和蔡叔绝了后代，广陵王和楚王却封了后人，帝王的恩德已经够大的了。
English: Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai have no descendants, but the Guangling King and the King of Chu have sealed their descendants. The emperor's benevolence is already great enough.

古文：隐强，异姓也，尊重父祖，复存其祀。
现代文：隐强侯阴傅是异姓王侯，帝王尊贵他的前辈，所以又延续了阴氏祖先的祭祀。
English: Yingqiang Hou Yin Fu is a prince with a different surname, the emperor respected his predecessors, so he continued the sacrifice of the ancestors of the Yin clan.

古文：立武庚之义，继禄父之恩，方斯羸矣。
现代文：当年周武王封武庚的恩义，让禄父继续拥有封地的恩德，和汉朝相比较就差得多了。
English: Compared to the Han Dynasty, the gratitude of King Zhou Wu to King Wu Geng in that year, so that his father could continue to have a fiefdom, was much worse.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：并为帝王，举兵相征，贪天下之大，绝成汤之统，非圣君之义，失承天之意也。
现代文：周武王与殷纣王同是帝王，派兵互相征讨，贪图天下之大，灭了商汤建立起来的帝统，这不是圣君应做的事情，违反了承受天命的本意。
English: Zhou Wu Wang and Yin Xi Wang were both emperors. They sent troops to fight each other, coveted the world's greatness, and destroyed the imperial system established by Shang Tang. This is not what a saint should do, and it violates the intention to bear the fate of heaven.

古文：隐强，臣子也。汉统自在，绝灭阴氏，无损於义，而犹存之，惠滂沛也。
现代文：隐强侯只是一个臣子，汉朝的帝统本来就存在，绝灭了阴氏，在道义上没有什么损害，然而仍就延续了阴氏，汉朝的恩惠是很深厚的。
English: Hin Qiang Hou was just a vassal. The imperial system of the Han Dynasty had already existed, the Yin Dynasty had been eliminated, and there was no moral damage. However, the Yin Dynasty still continued, and the grace of the Han Dynasty was very profound.

古文：故夫雨露之施，内则注於骨肉，外则布於他施。
现代文：所以帝王恩惠的布施，对内倾注于自己的亲属，对外则遍施于别的家族。
English: Therefore, the emperor's bounty was poured into his own relatives internally, while it was lavished on other families externally.

古文：唐之晏晏，舜之烝烝，岂能逾此！
现代文：唐尧十分温和，虞舜十分淳厚，怎么能超过汉朝的这种恩德呢？
English: Tang Xuan was very gentle, and Guo Xuan was very kind. How could they surpass the grace of the Han Dynasty?

古文：欢兜之行，靖言庸回，共工私之，称荐於尧。
现代文：驩兜的品行，花言巧语阳奉阴违，共工和他有私交，在尧的面前赞美推荐他。
English: He praised and recommended him in front of his co-workers, who had a personal relationship with him.

古文：三苗巧佞之人，或言有罪之国。
现代文：三苗是个巧言令色，谄媚奉承的人，有人又说他是一个对尧、舜有罪的诸侯国。
English: Sanmiao was a smooth talker and a flatterer, and some people said that he was a vassal state that was guilty of slander.

古文：鲧不能治水，知力极尽。
现代文：鲧不能治理好洪水，而自己的才智和力量却耗尽了。
English: The earthworm is unable to control the flood, and its intelligence and strength are exhausted.

古文：罪皆在身，不加於上，唐、虞放流，死於不毛。
现代文：罪恶都在自身，对君王没有侵害，唐、虞流放他们，让他们死在荒远的地方。
English: The crimes were all their own, they did not infringe on the king, Tang and Gu exiled them and let them die in a desolate place.

古文：怨恶谋上，怀挟叛逆。考事失实，误国杀将，罪恶重於四子。
现代文：刘荆、刘英心怀怨恨阴谋犯上，怀有仇恨企图叛乱，审理案件不顾事实，危害朝廷杀害大将，罪恶比驩兜、共工、三苗、鲧更重。
English: Liu Jing and Liu Ying harbored grudges and conspired to commit crimes, harbored hatred and attempted rebellion, tried cases regardless of the facts, endangered the imperial court, and killed generals. Their crimes were more serious than those of Zhaodou, Tongluo, Sanmiao, and Zou.

古文：孝明加恩，则论徙边，今上宽惠，还归州里。
现代文：汉明帝施以恩德，只是定罪把他们流放到边远地区；当今皇帝宽大为怀，施加恩惠，又把他们释放回家乡。
English: Emperor Han Ming did them a favor by convicting them and exiling them to a remote area; the current emperor was lenient and granted them a favor and released them back to their hometown.

古文：开辟以来，因莫斯大。
现代文：自从开天辟地以来，帝王的恩惠没有比这个更大的了！
English: Since the dawn of time, there has never been a greater boon from the emperor!

古文：晏子曰： 钩星在房、心之间，地其动乎！ 
现代文：晏子说： 钩星运行到房宿与心宿之间，大概要地震了吧？ 
English: Zou Zi said: The hook star runs between the room and the heart, so it's probably an earthquake, right?

古文：夫地动天时，非政所致。
现代文：地震，是自然运行到一定时序的必然变化，不是政治所造成的。
English: Earthquakes are an inevitable change in the natural movement to a certain time sequence, not caused by politics.

古文：皇帝振畏，犹归於治，广征贤良，访求过阙。
现代文：皇帝自己震动畏惧，尚且归罪于自己统治得不好，广泛征召贤良人才，要求臣民指出自己的过失。
English: The emperor himself was trembling with fear, and yet he blamed himself for not ruling well. He called in a wide range of talented people and asked his subjects to point out his mistakes.

古文：高宗之侧身，周成之开匮，廑力能逮此。
现代文：殷高宗谨慎行道，周成王开匮悔过，仅仅能赶得上这一点。
English: Yin Gao is cautious, Zhou Chengwang is remorseful, and can only catch up with this.

古文：谷登岁平，庸主因缘以建德政，颠沛危殆，圣哲优者，乃立功化。
现代文：谷物丰收年岁太平，平庸的君王可以借此树立德政；社会动荡危险，只有圣贤中的杰出人物才能建立功德教化。
English: The grain harvest is plentiful, the year is peaceful, and the mediocre king can establish a virtuous government; social turmoil is dangerous, and only the outstanding figures among the sages can establish merit education.

古文：是故微病恆医皆巧，笃剧扁鹊乃良。
现代文：因此，遇到小病，一般医生都成了高手，碰上重病才能显示出扁鹊是名医。
English: Therefore, in the event of a minor illness, the average doctor has become a master, and in the event of a serious illness, it is only possible to show that the doctor is a famous doctor.

古文：建初孟年，无妄气至，岁之疾疫也，比旱不雨，牛死民流，可谓剧矣。
现代文：建初初年，自然灾变出现，这是年成的疾疫，连年大旱不下雨，耕牛死亡老百姓流亡他乡，可以说是很厉害的灾害了。
English: In the first year of construction, a natural disaster occurred. This was an annual epidemic. For years, there was a drought without rain. Cattle died and people fled to other towns. It can be said that this was a very serious disaster.

古文：皇帝敦德，俊乂在官，第五司空，股肱国维，转谷振赡，民不乏饿，天下慕德，虽危不乱。
现代文：皇帝道德淳厚，贤能的人居官任职，司空第五伦，是皇帝的得力辅佐，国家的栋梁，调运粮食救济供养百姓，老百姓不困乏饥饿，天下都仰慕朝廷的恩德，国家虽然危急但是不混乱。
English: The emperor is a moral and virtuous person, and there are capable people serving as officials. Siku, the fifth emperor, is the emperor's rightful assistant, the pillar of the country, transporting grain relief to feed the people. The people are not poor and hungry. The world admires the benevolence of the imperial court. Although the country is in crisis, it is not chaotic.

古文：民饥於谷，饱於道德，身流在道，心回乡内。
现代文：老百姓虽然吃不上粮食，但对皇帝的恩德却很满意。人虽然在道路上流亡，心却向往着朝廷。
English: Although the common people could not eat food, they were very satisfied with the emperor's kindness. Although people were exiled on the road, their hearts yearned for the imperial court.

古文：以故道路无盗贼之迹，深幽迥绝无劫夺之奸，以危为宁，以困为通，五帝、三王，孰能堪斯哉？
现代文：所以道路上没有盗贼的踪迹，最偏僻、边远的地方也没有拦路抢劫的坏人。把危险转变为安宁，把困难转变为顺利，五帝、三王哪一个能比得上这样的功德啊！
English: Therefore, there are no traces of thieves on the road, and there are no bad people in the remotest and most remote places to stop road robbery. Transforming danger into tranquility, and difficulties into smoothness, which one of the Five Emperors and Three Kings can match such merits!

