古文：范子因王稽入秦，献书昭王曰： 臣闻明主莅正，有功者不得不赏，有能者不得不官；劳大者其禄厚、功多者其爵尊，能治众者其官大。
现代文：范雎通过王稽的帮助来到秦国，他向秦昭王献书说： 臣听说贤明的国君主政，有功劳的必然得到奖赏，有能力的一定授予官职；功劳大的俸禄就多，战功多的爵位就高，能治理民众的担任的官职就大。
English: Fan Qi came to Qin through the help of Wang Qi. He presented a book to Qin Zhao Wang and said: "The minister heard that the country's monarchy is wise, and those who have merit will inevitably be rewarded, and those who are capable will certainly be awarded official positions; those with great merit will receive more salaries, those with more war merit will receive higher titles, and those who can govern the people will hold greater official positions.

古文：故不能者不敢当其职焉，能者亦不得蔽隐。
现代文：没有才能的人就不会让他任职，有能力的人绝不会被埋没。
English: A man of no talent will not be given a post, a man of ability will not be buried.

古文：使以臣之言为可，则行而益利其道；若将弗行，则久留臣无为也。
现代文：如果大王觉得臣的话说得对，就请大王依照这些执行，臣自信这些有利于国家政治。如果认为我的话不对，那臣即使久留于秦也没有什么作用。
English: If the great king thinks that what the minister said is right, he should ask the great king to carry it out. The minister is confident that these are conducive to national politics. If he thinks that my words are wrong, then the minister will have no effect even if he stays in Qin for a long time.

古文：语曰： 人主赏所爱而罚所恶。
现代文：谚语道： 一般的君王总是对喜欢的人奖赏，对厌恶的人施以惩罚。
English: As the saying goes: The average ruler always rewards those he likes and punishes those he dislikes.

古文：明主则不然，赏必加于有功，刑必断于有罪。 
现代文：贤明的君主却不是这样，总是奖赏有功的人，惩罚有罪的人。 
English: Wise monarchs, on the other hand, always reward the meritorious and punish the guilty.

古文：今臣之胸不足以当椹质，要不足以待斧钺，岂敢以疑事尝试于王乎?
现代文：现在，我的胸膛挡不住杀人用的垫板，我的腰板抵不住利斧，我怎敢拿毫无把握的计策上献给大王呢？
English: Now, my chest cannot withstand the killing pad, my waist cannot withstand the axe, how can I dare to offer the great king a strategy that I have no idea about?

古文：虽以臣为贱而轻辱臣，独不重任臣者后无反复于王前耶!
现代文：臣虽鄙贱不足以闻，大王又难道会认为举荐臣的人胆敢欺诈大王吗？
English: Although a vassal is not despicable enough to be heard, would the great king think that the person who recommended the vassal dared to deceive the great king?

古文： 臣闻周有砥厄，宋有结绿，梁有悬黎，楚有和璞。此四宝者，工之所失也，而为天下名器。
现代文： 臣听说，周之砥卮、宋之结绿、魏之悬黎、楚之和璞，都是为璞所遮的美玉，虽然最初的时候工匠不能辩别，可是它们最终成为天下有名的宝器。
English: The minister heard that the Zhou jade, the Song jade, the Wei jade, the Chu jade and the Zhai jade were all gems covered by enamel. Although the craftsmen could not distinguish them at first, they eventually became famous treasures in the world.

古文：然则圣王之所弃者，独不足以厚国家乎?
现代文：既然这样，那么圣王所遗弃的人难道对国家就没有用途吗？
English: That being the case, is there no use for the country in abandoning those whom the holy king has abandoned?

古文： 臣闻善厚家者，取之于国；善厚国者，取之于诸侯。
现代文：臣听说善于治家的，就要取之于国；善于治国的，就要取之于诸侯。
English: It is said that if a vassal is good at governing his family, he will be taken to the country; if he is good at governing the country, he will be taken to the provinces.

古文：天下有明主，则诸侯不得擅厚矣。
现代文：正因为天下有明君贤主，各诸侯国才不可能独据贤士。
English: It is precisely because there are wise princes and wise men in the world that it is impossible for each state to have its own wise men.

古文：是何故也?为其凋荣也。
现代文：究其原因，在于昏庸的诸侯们空有眼珠，不能识才，以致让人才流失。
English: The reason for this is that the dim-witted lords have empty eyes and cannot recognize talent, resulting in a brain drain.

古文：良医知病人之死生，圣主明于成败之事，利则行之，害则舍之，疑则少尝之，虽尧、舜、禹、汤复生，弗能改已!
现代文：正如医术高明的医生能预测生死一样，贤明的君主能够洞察事情的成败，有利就实行，有害就放弃，疑惑不定就不妨尝试一下。这是尧、禹、汤等圣主也无法改变的通则。
English: Just as a skilled doctor can predict life and death, a wise monarch can see through the success or failure of a matter, implement what is beneficial, abandon what is harmful, and if in doubt, give it a try. This is a general rule that cannot be changed by gods such as Gan, Yu, and Tang.

古文：语之至者，臣不敢载之于书；其浅者又不足听也。
现代文： 至关重要的言语，臣不敢写在这里；而一些肤浅的话语又不值一说。
English: Words of vital importance I dare not write here; and some superficial words are not worth saying.

古文：意者，臣愚而不阖于王心耶？已其言臣者，将贱而不足听耶!
现代文：臣内心惴惴不安，也许是臣的愚味无知，使言语不符合大王心意，或者是因为臣出生贫寒，不足以听信。
English: If a vassal's heart is uneasy, it may be due to the vassal's stupidity and ignorance that his words do not meet the great king's intention, or it may be because the vassal was born poor and is not good at listening.

古文：非若是也，则臣之志，愿少赐游观之间，望见足下而入之。 
现代文：如果不是这些原因，那么我的意思是，希望大王能稍微腾出一点游览观赏的时间，我将当面进言。 
English: If it is not for these reasons, then I mean, I hope the king can free up a little time for sightseeing, and I will speak in person.

