古文：吴允诚，蒙古人。名把都帖木儿，居甘肃塞外塔沟地，官至平章。
现代文：吴允诚，蒙古人，名叫把都帖木儿，居住甘肃塞外一个名叫塔沟的地方，官任到平章。
English: Wu Yuncheng, a Mongolian, named Putu Timur, lived in a place called Tagou outside Gansu, and was appointed to Pingzhang.

古文：永乐三年，与其党伦都儿灰率妻子及部落五千、马驼万六千，因宋晟来归。
现代文：永乐三年，他与党羽伦都儿灰率领妻儿以及部落五千、马驼一万六千匹，因宋晟的招安来归附。
English: In the third year of Yongle, he and his followers led his wife and children, as well as five thousand tribes and sixteen thousand horses and camels, because of Song Tao's recruitment.

古文：帝以蒙古人多同名，当赐姓别之。
现代文：皇上因蒙古人多同名，应赐给他们姓名以示区别。
English: Since most Mongolians have the same name, the emperor should give them names to show the difference.

古文：尚书刘俊请如洪武故事，编为勘合。
现代文：尚书刘俊请照洪武时期的惯例，把他们编为用勘合调遣的队伍。
English: Shangshu Liu Jun, please follow the practice of the Hongwu period, and make them a team of dispatching with Kenghe.

古文：允诚得赐姓名，授右军都督佥事。
现代文：允诚得赐给姓名，授予右军都督佥事。
English: Yuncheng was given a name, and the Right Army was given the title of "captain."

古文：伦都儿灰亦赐姓名柴秉诚，授后军都督佥事。
现代文：伦都儿灰也被赐姓名为柴秉诚，授予后军都督佥事。
English: Lentu's son Ash was also given the surname Chai Bingcheng, and was awarded the post of military governor.

古文：余授官赐冠带，给畜产钞币有差。使领所部居凉州耕牧。
现代文：其他人或且授官，赐给冠带，或且赐给畜产钞币不等，让他们统领所部，居住在凉州游牧。
English: Others were given positions of authority, crowns and sashes, or livestock money, allowing them to rule the province and live as nomads in Liangzhou.

古文：晟以招徕功，封西宁侯。
现代文：宋晟以招徕之功，被封为西宁侯。
English: As a result of his success in luring them, Song Tao was made the lord of Xining.

古文：自是降附者益众，边境日安，由允诚始。
现代文：此后来降附的人更多，边境日益安宁，这都是从吴允诚开始的。
English: Since then, more people have joined, and the border has become increasingly peaceful. It all started with Wu Yuncheng.

古文：七年往亦集乃觇敌，擒哈剌等二十余人，进都督同知。
现代文：七年，允诚往亦集乃侦察敌情，擒获哈剌等二十余人，进升为都督同知。
English: In the seventh year, Yuncheng also gathered to reconnoiter the enemy situation, captured more than 20 people such as Harun, and was promoted to the same rank as the governor.

古文：明年从出塞，败本雅失里，进右都督。
现代文：第二年他随从皇上出塞，击败本雅失里，进升为右都督。
English: The following year, he followed the emperor out of the citadel, defeated Benya Chul-ri, and was promoted to the right-hand governor.

古文：寻进左都督。
现代文：不久进升为左都督。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Left Governor.

古文：与中官王安追阔脱赤，至把力河获之。
现代文：他与宦官王安追击阔脱赤，到把力河时抓住了他。
English: He and the eunuch Wang An chased after Kuo Deqing and caught him when they reached the Lihe River.

古文：封恭顺伯，食禄千二百石，予世券。
现代文：封他为恭顺伯，食禄一千二百石，给予世袭诰券。
English: He was given the title of Gong Shun Bo, a stipend of 1,200 koku, and a hereditary stipend.

古文：允诚三子：答兰、管者、克勤。
现代文：允诚有三个儿子：答兰、管者、克勤。
English: Yuncheng had three sons: Du Lan, Guan Zi, and Keqin.

古文：允诚与二子从军，留其妻及管者居凉州。
现代文：允诚与两个儿子从军，留下妻子和管者住在凉州。
English: Yuncheng and his two sons joined the army, leaving his wife and housekeeper behind in Liangzhou.

古文：番人虎保等诱胁允诚众，欲叛去。
现代文：番人虎保等人引诱胁迫允诚的部众，想反叛而去。
English: The guards, Tiger Bao and others, lured and coerced Yuncheng's subordinates to rebel and leave.

古文：允诚妻与管者谋，召部将都指挥保住、卜颜不花等擒其党，诛之。
现代文：允诚的妻子和管者商定，召来部将都指挥保住、卜颜不花等人擒住了虎保的党羽，将他们诛杀。
English: Yuncheng's wife and the steward agreed that the summoned officers would all be commanded and protected, and Bu Yanfuhua and others would capture the party members of the Tiger Guards and kill them.

古文：帝喜，降敕奖之，赐缣钞羊米甚厚，授管者指挥佥事。
现代文：皇上很高兴，颁敕令嘉奖，赐给大量缣钞羊米，授予管者为指挥佥事。
English: The emperor was very pleased, and he awarded a grand prize, gave a large amount of barley rice, and awarded the steward as a conductor.

古文：保住赐姓名杨效诚，授指挥佥事。
现代文：保住赐姓名为杨效诚，授予指挥佥事。
English: He kept his given name, Yang Xucheng, and was awarded the title of conductor.

古文：鞑靼可汗鬼力赤遇弑，其下多溃。
现代文：鞑靼可汗鬼力赤遭弑杀，他的部下多溃散。
English: The Tatar khan, Khilik, was killed in battle, and many of his subordinates were dispersed.

古文：答兰与别立哥请出塞自效，有功。
现代文：答兰与别立哥请出塞主动效力，有功。
English: A.Lan and B.L.G. please take the initiative and work hard.

古文：琮坐激变，且临阵先退，下狱论死。谪戍边，爵除。薛斌，蒙古人，本名脱欢。
现代文：皇上征讨瓦剌，允诚父子都从征。回师后，仍命他居住在凉州防备边境。允诚去世后，赠国公，谥忠壮。薛斌，蒙古人，本名脱欢。
English: When the emperor levied taxes on the Varangians, both Unshing and his son joined the army. After his return, he was still ordered to live in Liangzhou to guard the border. After Unshing's death, he was given the title of the country's ruler, Zou Zhongzang. Xue Bin, a Mongolian, was his real name.

古文：父薛台，洪武中归附，赐姓薛，累官燕山右护卫指挥佥事。
现代文：父薛台，洪武年间归附，赐姓薛，累任燕山右护卫指挥佥事。
English: Father Xue Tai, who was attached to Hongwu during the Hongwu era, was given the surname Xue and served as the commander of the right escort of Yanshan.

古文：斌嗣职，从起兵，累迁都督佥事。
现代文：薛斌承袭父职，随从成祖起兵，累升为都督佥事。
English: Xue Bin inherited his father's position, followed Cheng Zu to raise an army, and was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：从北征有功，进都督同知。
现代文：后来随从北征有功，升为都督同知。
English: Later, he followed the Northern Expedition and was promoted to the same rank as the governor.

古文：永乐十八年封永顺伯，禄九百石，世指挥使。
现代文：永乐十八年，被封为永顺伯，食禄九百石，世袭指挥使。
English: In the 18th year of Yongle, he was named Yongshun Bo, with a stipend of 900 koku, and became a hereditary commander.

古文：斌卒，子寿童方五岁。从父贵引见仁宗，立命嗣伯，赐名绶。
现代文：薛斌死时，他的儿子寿童才五岁，叔父薛贵带他去见仁宗，立即命他承袭伯爵，赐名为绶。
English: When Xue Bin died, his son Shoudong was only five years old. His uncle Xue Gui took him to see Ren Zong and immediately ordered him to succeed the count, giving him the name Zou.

古文：长，骁勇善战。
现代文：他长大后，骁勇善战。
English: When he grew up, he was brave and good at fighting.

古文：正统十四年秋，与成国公朱勇等遇敌于鹞儿岭。
现代文：正统十四年秋，他与成国公朱勇等人在鹞儿岭遇上敌人。
English: In the autumn of the 14th year of orthodoxy, he and Zhu Yong, the prince of Chengguo, encountered the enemy in Jialing.

古文：军败，弦断矢尽，犹持空弓击敌。
现代文：部队战败，他弓断箭尽，但还持着空弓击敌。
English: His troops were defeated and his bow and arrows were exhausted, but he still attacked the enemy with an empty bow.

古文：敌怒，支解之。
现代文：敌人愤怒，将他肢解。
English: Enraged, the enemy dismembered him.

古文：勋子玺乃嗣指挥使，如券文。
现代文：过后知道他本是蒙古人，便说道： 这是我们同类，是应该这样勇健。 为他相互哭泣。谥武毅。
English: Afterward, when they found out that he was originally Mongolian, they said, "This is our kind of person, he should be so brave. We cried for him. He is so brave."

古文：贵，本名脱火赤，斌之弟。
现代文：薛贵，本名脱火赤，薛斌的弟弟。
English: Xue Gui, whose real name is Xue Fei Chia, is Xue Bin's younger brother.

古文：以舍人从燕王起兵，屡脱王于险。积官都指挥使。
现代文：他以舍人随从成祖起兵，多次救成祖脱险，任到都指挥使。
English: He followed Cheng Zu with his subordinates to raise an army, saved Cheng Zu from danger many times, and commanded the envoy.

古文：再从北征，进都督佥事。
现代文：他又随从皇上北征，进升为都督佥事。
English: He also followed the emperor on the Northern Expedition and was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：永乐二十年封安顺伯，禄九百石。
现代文：永乐二十年被封为安顺伯，食禄九百石。
English: Yongle was given the title of Anshunbo for twenty years, with a stipend of nine hundred koku.

古文：寻召见，悯其病，封忠勤伯。食禄千一百石。
现代文：宣德元年进封侯爵，加食禄三百石，给予世袭诰券。
English: In the first year of Xuande, he was promoted to marquis, given a stipend of 300 koku, and given a hereditary ticket.

古文：寻卒。
现代文：去世后，赠滨国公，谥忠勇。
English: He died soon after.

古文：吴成，辽阳人，初名买驴。
现代文：吴成，辽阳人，初名买驴。
English: Wu Cheng, from Liaoyang, was born with the name "buy a donkey."

古文：父通伯，元辽阳行省右丞。
现代文：父亲吴通伯，是元朝辽阳行省右丞。
English: His father, Wu Tongbo, was the governor of Liaoyang in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：太祖时，观童来降，通伯父子与俱。
现代文：太祖时期，通伯父子随观童一起来归降。
English: During the great-grandfather period, Uncle Tong and his son came to surrender together with Guan Tong.

古文：买驴更今姓名，充总旗，数从大军出塞。
现代文：买驴改为现名，充任总旗，多次随从大军出塞。
English: He bought a donkey and changed it to its current name, served as the general flag, and accompanied the army out of the fortress many times.

古文：建文元年授永平卫百户。
现代文：建文元年，他被授予永平卫百户。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, he was awarded the Yongpingwei hundred households.

古文：降燕，从战皆有功，三迁都指挥佥事，始知名。
现代文：后来投降燕王，随从作战，都有功，三次升级，任为都指挥佥事，从此开始出名。
English: Later, Yan Wang surrendered and followed the battle, all of which were meritorious. He was promoted three times, and was assigned to command anecdotes. From then on, he became famous.

古文：南军闻吴买驴名，多于阵上指目之。
现代文：南军一听说吴买驴的名字，多在阵上用手指着他。
English: As soon as the Southern Army heard the name of the donkey bought by Wu, they mostly pointed at him during the battle.

古文：设伏淝河，进兵小河，合战齐眉山，攻败灵璧军，皆殊死斗，功多。
现代文：他设伏兵于淝河、进兵小河、合战齐眉山，击败灵璧的部队，每一仗都是殊死拼杀，功劳很多。
English: He set an ambush at the Minhe River, marched into a small river, and fought the Qi Meishan Mountain, defeating the brilliant troops. Each battle was a desperate fight, with a lot of merit.

古文：成祖即位，授都指挥使。
现代文：成祖即位后，他被授予都指挥使。
English: After the enthronement of Cheng Zu, he was awarded the title of Metropolitan Commander.

古文：从征本雅失里。疾战，本雅失里以七骑遁。
现代文：他从征本雅失里时，速战，本雅失里率七名骑兵遁逃。
English: When he was defeated in the campaign against Ben Ya, he led seven cavalrymen to escape in a quick battle.

古文：从征阿鲁台，合朱荣兵为前锋，追至阔湾海。
现代文：从征阿鲁台时，他联合朱荣的部队作为前锋，追到阔湾海。
English: When he was conscripted to Arutai, he joined Zhu Rong's troops as a forward and chased them to Kuo Wanhai.

古文：召还，进都督佥事。
现代文：他被召回，进升为都督佥事。
English: He was recalled and promoted to the post of governor.

古文：又三从出塞。
现代文：此后他还三次随从皇上出塞。
English: After that, he also accompanied the emperor to the capital three times.

古文：洪熙元年进左都督。
现代文：洪熙元年，他进升为左都督。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he was promoted to the left governor.

古文：从阳武侯薛禄征大松岭，为前锋，有功，增禄米。
现代文：随从阳武侯薛禄征伐大松岭时，他担任前锋，立有功劳，得以增加禄米。
English: When he accompanied Yangwu marquis Xue Lu to conquer Dasongling, he served as a forward, and was able to increase the amount of rice.

古文：宣宗初，以成尝宿卫东宫，录旧劳，封清平伯，禄千一百石，予世券。
现代文：宣宗初年，因吴成曾保卫东宫，给他记旧劳，封为清平伯，食禄一千一百石，给予世袭诰券。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, because Wu Cheng had defended the East Palace, he was awarded the title of Qingping Bo, with a stipend of 1,100 koku, and was given a hereditary ticket.

古文：从征乐安，复与薛禄为前锋。
现代文：随从皇上征乐安时，他又与薛禄担任前锋。
English: When he followed the emperor to recruit Le'an, he and Xue Luo served as forwards.

古文：事定，出守备兴和。
现代文：事态平息后，他出去守备兴和。
English: After the situation calmed down, he went out to keep the peace.

古文：成好畋猎而不修武备。寇伺其出猎，卒入城，掠其妻孥以去。
现代文：吴成喜欢打猎而不修武备，敌寇趁他出去打猎时，闯进城中，将他的妻子儿女抢掠而去。
English: Wu Cheng liked to hunt without armament. When he went out to hunt, the enemy robbers broke into the city and robbed his wife and children.

古文：帝闻之，置不罪。
现代文：皇上听说后，不向他问罪。
English: When the Emperor heard of this, he did not bring charges against him.

古文：宣德三年从巡北边，有斩捕功。明年封顺义伯，禄八百石。
现代文：不久阿鲁台入京朝贡，把他的家人还了回来。三年，皇上北征，他随行，在宽河击败贼人，进封为侯爵，食禄不变。八年，他去世。
English: Soon after, Arutai paid tribute to the imperial court in Beijing and brought his family back. Three years later, he accompanied the emperor on the Northern Expedition, defeated the bandits in Kuanhe, was made a marquis, and his stipend remained unchanged. He died eight years later.

古文：卒，子忠嗣，为指挥佥事。金忠者，蒙古王子也先土干也。素桀黠，为阿鲁台所忌。
现代文：赠渠国公，谥壮勇。金忠，也就是蒙古王子也先土干。他素来狡猾，遭阿鲁台忌恨。
English: Jin Zhong, also known as the Mongolian prince, was the first to do so. He was always cunning and was hated by Arutai.

古文：永乐二十一年，成祖亲征漠北，至上庄堡，率妻子部属来降。
现代文：永乐二十一年，成祖亲征漠北，到达上庄堡时，他率妻儿和部属来归降。
English: In the 21st year of Yongle, Cheng Zu personally explored the north of the desert. When he arrived at Shangzhuang Fort, he led his wife and children and subordinates to surrender.

古文：时六师深入，寇已远遁。帝方耻无功，见其来归，大喜。赐姓名，封忠勇王，赐冠带织金袭衣，命坐列侯下。辍御前珍羞赐之，复赐金银宝器。
现代文：当时六师深入，敌人已经远逃，皇上正耻于此行无功，见他来归顺，非常高兴，赐给姓名，封为忠勇王，赐给冠带和织金袭衣，命他坐在列侯之下，还让他到御座前来赐给他珍馐。
English: At that time, the six divisions were deep in, the enemy had already fled far away, the emperor was ashamed of the ineffectiveness of this trip, and he was very happy to see him surrender. He gave him a name, crowned him as a loyal king, gave him a crown and a gold-woven cloak, ordered him to sit under the prince, and also asked him to come to the throne to give him a precious scepter.

古文：忠大喜过望。
现代文：金忠大喜过望。
English: Kim Jong-un was overjoyed.

古文：班师在道，忠骑从，数问寇中事，眷宠日隆。
现代文：班师途中，金忠骑马随从，皇上多次问他敌寇那边的事，对他的宠爱日隆。
English: On the way to the class, Kim Jong Un rode with his entourage. The emperor asked him many times about the situation on the other side of the enemy's encroachment, and his affection for him grew.

古文：明年，忠请为前锋，讨阿鲁台自效。
现代文：第二年，金忠请求任前锋，讨伐阿鲁台自效。
English: In the second year, Jin Zhong asked to be appointed as a forward, and the crusade against Alutai was self-fulfilling.

古文：帝初不许。会大同、开平警报至，诸将请从忠言。
现代文：皇上初时不允许，正好大同、开平警报传到，将领们请求听从金忠的意见。
English: The emperor did not allow it at the beginning, just as the Datong and Kaiping alarms were transmitted, the generals requested to listen to the opinion of Jinzhong.

古文：帝复出塞，忠与陈懋为前锋。而阿鲁台闻王师复出，仓皇渡答兰纳木儿河遁去。
现代文：皇上又出塞，金忠与陈懋为前锋，而阿鲁台听说王师复出，仓皇渡过答兰纳木河逃走。
English: The emperor left the fortress again, with Jin Zhong and Chen Qi as the forwards, and when Arutai heard that Wang Shi had returned, Cang Wang crossed the Dalanamu River and fled.

古文：忠、懋至河不见寇，抵白邙山，卒无所遇，乃班师。
现代文：金忠、陈懋到河边时不见敌人，又进抵白邙山，仍没有遇上敌人，便班师。
English: When Jinzhong and Chen Qi arrived at the river, they did not see the enemy. When they arrived at Mount Baiyao, they still did not encounter the enemy, so they set out.

古文：仁宗嗣位，加太子太保，并支二俸。
现代文：仁宗继位后，加封他为太子太保，支给二职俸禄。
English: After Ninsong's succession, he was additionally appointed as the Crown Prince's bodyguard and was paid a second-class salary.

古文：宣德三年亲征兀良哈，败寇于宽河。
现代文：宣德三年，皇上亲征兀良哈，在宽河击败敌寇。
English: In the third year of Xuande, the emperor personally conquered Qiliangha and defeated the enemy corsairs in the wide river.

古文：忠与把台请自效，帝许之。
现代文：金忠和把台请求自效，皇上答应了。
English: The Emperor agreed to Kim Chung-wha's request to take over the throne.

古文：或言不可遣，帝曰： 去留任所欲耳。
现代文：有人说不能派他们去，皇上说： 去留随他们便吧。
English: When it was said that they could not be sent, the Emperor said, "Let them go and stay wherever they like."

古文：朕有天下，独少此二人邪。 
现代文：朕有天下，难道独少了这两人吗？ 
English: I have the whole world, is it possible that only these two people are missing?

古文：二人获数十人、马牛数百来献。
现代文：两人获得数十人、马牛数百来献给皇上。
English: The two of them received dozens of people and hundreds of horses and oxen to present to the emperor.

古文：帝喜，命中官酌以金卮，遂赐之。
现代文：皇上很高兴，命宦官用金卮斟好酒，然后赐给他。
English: The emperor was delighted and ordered the eunuch to pour the wine with a golden spoon and then give it to him.

古文：弘治中卒。
现代文：第二年加封他为太保。六年秋，他去世。
English: In the following year, he was given the additional title of Taiho. In the autumn of the sixth year, he passed away.

古文：无子，爵绝。李英，西番人。
现代文：皇上命有关官员给他治丧葬。李英，西番人。
English: The emperor ordered the relevant officials to give him a proper funeral.

古文：父南哥，洪武中率众归附，授西宁州同知，累功进西宁卫指挥佥事。
现代文：父亲南哥，洪武年间率领部众来归附，被授予西宁州同知，积功升为西宁卫指挥佥事。
English: During the Hongwu era, his father, Nango, led the troops to annexation, and was awarded the title of Xining State Tongzhi, and was promoted to the post of Xining Military Commander.

古文：英嗣官。
现代文：李英承袭该职。
English: Li Ying succeeded to the post.

古文：永乐十年，番酋老的罕叛，英击之。讨来川，俘斩三百六十人。
现代文：永乐十年，番人头领老的罕反叛。李英攻打他，讨伐来川，俘虏和斩杀三百六十人。
English: In the tenth year of Yongle, the head of the guards led a rare rebellion. Li Ying attacked him, fought against Lai Chuan, and captured and beheaded 360 people.

古文：夜雪，贼遁，追尽获之，进都指挥佥事。
现代文：晚上下雪，贼人逃走，李英追上去把他们都抓获了，进升为都指挥佥事。
English: It snowed in the evening, the thieves fled, Li Ying caught up with them and captured them all.

古文：番僧张答里麻者，通译书。成祖授以左觉义。
现代文：番僧张答里麻会译书，成祖授予他左觉义。
English: Zhang Deli, the chief monk of the translation of the Mahayana sect, was awarded Zuo Jue Rong by Cheng Zu.

古文：居西宁，恣甚。以计取西番贡使资，纳逋逃，交通外域，肆恶十余年。
现代文：他住在西宁，很骄纵，用计骗取西番朝贡使者的钱财，收留逃亡之徒，交通外国，肆行作恶十余年。
English: He lived in Xining and was very arrogant. He used schemes to swindle money and property from tributary envoys from the Western Han Dynasty, took in fugitives, communicated with foreign countries, and rampantly committed evil for more than ten years.

古文：英发其事，磔死，籍其家。
现代文：李英揭发了他的行为，结果他被肢解，还被抄了家。
English: Li Ying exposed his actions, as a result of which he was dismembered and his home was ransacked.

古文：西陲快之。
现代文：西陲人心大快。
English: The people of Xidi are ecstatic.

古文：末年，中官乔来喜、邓诚等使西域，道安定、曲先，遇贼见杀，掠所赍金币。
现代文：永乐末年，宦官乔来喜、邓诚等人出使西域，途经安定、曲先，遇贼被杀，所带的金币被抢。
English: At the end of Yongle's reign, eunuchs Qiao Laixi, Deng Cheng and others were sent to the Western Regions. They passed through the provinces of Anping and Quxian, but were killed by thieves and robbed of their gold coins.

古文：仁宗玺书谕赤斤、罕东及安定、曲先，诘贼主名。而敕英与土官指挥康寿等进讨。
现代文：仁宗传玺书谕告赤斤、罕东和安定、曲先等处，查问贼主姓名，而敕令李英和土官指挥康寿等人进兵讨伐。
English: Rinzong passed the edict to Chakkin, Handong, Anding and Quqian and inquired about the names of the thieves, and ordered Li Ying and the local commander Kang Shou and others to march into battle.

古文：英诇知安定指挥哈三孙散哥、曲先指挥散即思实杀使者，遂率兵西入。
现代文：李英探知安定指挥哈三孙散哥、曲先指挥散即思实是杀害使者的人，便率兵西进。
English: Li Ying led his troops westward after detecting that the stable commander, Hasan's third grandson, Sango, and the commander of Quxian, Sanzho, were the ones who killed the messenger.

古文：贼惊走。追击，逾昆仑山，深入数百里。至雅令阔，与安定贼遇，大败之，俘斩千一百余人，获马牛杂畜十四万。
现代文：他追击贼人，越过昆仑山，深入数百里，到雅令阔时，与安定贼人相遇，把他们打得大败，俘虏和斩获一千一百余人，获得马牛杂畜十四万。
English: He chased the bandits, crossed the Kunlun Mountains, and went hundreds of miles deep. When he reached Yaling, he encountered the Anding bandits, defeated them, captured and killed more than eleven hundred people, and obtained one hundred and forty thousand horses and cattle.

古文：曲先贼闻风远遁，安定王桑尔加失夹等惧，诣阙谢罪。
现代文：曲先之贼闻风远逃，安定王桑尔加失夹等人害怕了，上朝廷谢罪。
English: The thief who was ahead of the curve heard the wind and fled far away, and the stable king, Sanga, lost his grip, and others were afraid, and the imperial court apologized.

古文：宣宗嘉英功，遣使褒谕，宴劳之，令驰驿入朝。
现代文：宣宗嘉奖李英的功劳，设宴慰劳他，令他乘驿车入朝。
English: Emperor Xuanzong commended Li Ying's service, held a banquet to console him, and sent him to the imperial court in a carriage.

古文：既至，擢右府左都督，赐赉加等。
现代文：李英到后，被升为右军都督府左都督，赐予加等。
English: After Li Ying's arrival, he was promoted to the right-wing military governor of the left-wing military governor of the right-wing military governor, and was given a promotion.

古文：宣德二年封会宁伯，禄千一百石，并封南哥如子爵。
现代文：宣德二年，封他为会宁伯，食禄一千一百石，并封南哥为子爵。
English: In the second year of Xuande, he was given the title of Ningbo, with a stipend of 1,100 koku, and his elder brother was made a viscount.

古文：英恃功而骄，所为多不法。
现代文：李英恃功骄横，所作所为多不法。
English: Li Yingtao was arrogant about his achievements, and his actions were mostly illegal.

古文：宁夏总兵官史昭奏英父子有异志。
现代文：宁夏总兵官史昭上奏李英父子有异志。
English: Li Ying, the son of the commander-in-chief of Ningxia, Shi Zhao, had a different idea.

古文：南哥上章辩。
现代文：南哥上书辩解。
English: Nang'er wrote a letter to defend himself.

古文：赐敕慰谕之。
现代文：皇上赐敕书安慰他。
English: The emperor gave him an imperial edict to comfort him.

古文：英家西宁，招逋逃七百余户，置庄垦田，豪夺人产，复为兵部及言官所劾。
现代文：李英在西宁的家，招纳逃亡者七百余户，设置庄院，开垦田地，豪夺他人财产，又被兵部和言官弹劾。
English: At her home in Xining, Li Ying recruited more than seven hundred families of fugitives, set up a manor house, reclaimed fields, plundered other people's property, and was impeached by the Ministry of Military Affairs and the spokesman.

古文：帝宥英，追逃者入官。
现代文：皇上宽宥了李英，而将逃亡者追回，没入官家。
English: The emperor pardoned Li Ying, but the fugitive was recaptured and disappeared into officialdom.

古文：七年，西宁指挥祁震子成当袭父职。庶兄监藏，英甥也，欲夺之。
现代文：七年，西宁指挥祁震的儿子祁成应当承袭父职，他的庶兄监藏，是李英的外甥，想夺取该职。
English: Seven years ago, the son of Xining commander Yu Zhen, Yu Cheng, was supposed to inherit his father's post. His brother-in-law Guanzang, the nephew of Li Ying, wanted to seize the post.

古文：成从祖太平携成赴京辩。
现代文：祁成的从祖父祁太平带着祁成赴京申辩。
English: Rongcheng's grandfather Yu Taiping took Rongcheng to Beijing to plead his case.

古文：英遣人篡取太平及其义儿杖之，义儿竟死。
现代文：李英派人非法抓取太平和他的义子，进行杖打，他的义子竟被打死。
English: Li Ying sent people to illegally seize Taiping and his son-in-law and beat them with canes. His son-in-law was actually beaten to death.

古文：成化中，哈密为土鲁番所并，求救于朝。诏文与右通政刘文往甘肃经略之，无功而还。
现代文：言官纷纷弹劾李英，并提到他先前的罪行，于是将李英投进诏狱，削夺爵位，判了死罪。正统二年，他才获释。
English: The magistrates impeached Li Ying one after another and mentioned his previous crimes, so they threw Li Ying into the imperial prison, stripped him of his title and sentenced him to death. He was only released after two years of probation.

古文：弘治初卒。
现代文：后来又渐渐给他俸禄。
English: Later, he gradually gave him a salary.

古文：正德初赠高阳伯。毛胜，字用钦，初名福寿，元右丞相伯卜花之孙。
现代文：不久他去世。毛胜，字用钦，初名福寿，元朝右丞相伯卜花之孙。
English: He died soon after. Mao Sheng, nicknamed Qin, first name Fu Shou, was the grandson of the former imperial secretary Bo Buhua.

古文：伯父那海，洪武中归附，以 靖难 功至都指挥同知，无子。
现代文：伯父那海，洪武年间归附，后来以参加 靖难 之功升到都指挥同知。
English: Uncle Naha, who became a vassal during the Hongwu years, later rose to the rank of commander and confidant with his participation in the Korean War.

古文：胜父安太嗣为羽林指挥使，传子济，无子，胜嗣。
现代文：他没有儿子，毛胜的父亲安太继承为羽林指挥使，传给儿子济，济没有儿子，毛胜继承他的职位。
English: He had no son, and Mao Sheng's father, An Tai, succeeded him as the commander of the Yulin Military Region and passed it on to his son, Ji. Ji had no son, and Mao Sheng inherited his position.

古文：论济征北功，进都指挥使。
现代文：给济记征北之功时，毛胜进升为都指挥使。
English: For his contribution to the Northern Expedition, Mao Sheng was promoted to the post of capital commander.

古文：尝逃归塞外，寻复自还。
现代文：他曾逃回塞外，不久又自己回来了。
English: He had fled back to Serbia, but soon returned on his own.

古文：正统七年以征麓川功，擢都督佥事。
现代文：正统七年，他以征讨麓川之功，升为都督佥事。
English: In the seventh year of his reign, he was promoted to the post of governor-general for his work in conquering the Luchuan River.

古文：靖远伯王骥请选在京番将舍人，捕苗云南。
现代文：靖远伯王骥请挑选在京的番将和留居的番人，调他们到云南去镇压苗人。
English: Jingyuan Bo Wangya, please select the guards in Beijing and the guards who stay, and transfer them to Yunnan to suppress the Miao people.

古文：乃命胜与都督冉保统六百人往。
现代文：皇上于是命毛胜和都督冉保统率六百人前往。
English: Therefore, the emperor sent six hundred people led by the governor Ran Baoding and the governor Mao Sheng.

古文：已，再征麓川，即命二人充左右参将。
现代文：后来，再征麓川，即命两人充任左右参将。
English: Later, after the re-enlistment of Luchuan, two people were appointed to serve as left and right attendants.

古文：贼平，进都督同知。
现代文：贼乱被平息后，毛胜升为都督同知。
English: After the Thieves' Revolt was quelled, Mao Sheng was promoted to the same rank as the governor.

古文：十四年夏，也先谋入寇，胜偕平乡伯陈怀等率京军三万镇大同。
现代文：十四年夏，也先图谋入侵，毛胜偕同平乡伯陈怀等率京军三万镇守大同。
English: In the summer of the 14th year, they also tried to invade first, and Mao Shengkun, together with Pingxiang Bo Chenhuai and others, led the Beijing army of 30,000 to defend Datong.

古文：怀遇寇战殁，胜脱还。
现代文：陈怀在与敌人交战中战死，毛胜逃脱回来。
English: Chen Huai was killed in battle with the enemy, while Mao Sheng escaped and returned.

古文：以武清伯石亨荐，景帝进胜左都督，督三千营操练。
现代文：后来因武清伯石亨的推荐，景帝升毛胜为左都督，总督三千营操练。
English: Later, on the recommendation of Wu Qingbo Shi Heng, Jing Emperor promoted Mao Sheng to the left governor, the governor of the three thousand battalion drill.

古文：贵州苗大扰，诏胜往讨。
现代文：贵州苗人严重骚扰，诏令毛胜前往讨伐。
English: Guizhou Miao people were seriously harassed, and Mao Sheng was ordered to go to the crusade.

古文：未行而也先逼京师。
现代文：他还没有动身，也先已经逼近京师。
English: He has not yet set off, but has already approached the capital.

古文：胜御之彰义门北，击退之。
现代文：毛胜在彰义门之北抵御，击退敌人。
English: Mao Sheng defended the north of the Changyi Gate and repelled the enemy.

古文：越二日，引兵西直门外，解都督孙镗围。
现代文：过了两天，他领兵到西直门外，解除了都督孙镗之围。
English: Two days later, he led his troops to the outskirts of Xizhimen and lifted the siege of the governor Sun Yat-sen.

古文：明日，都督武兴战殁于彰义门，寇乘胜进。
现代文：第二天，都督武兴在彰义门战死，敌寇乘胜推进。
English: The next day, the governor of the capital, Wu Xing, was killed in battle at the Changyi Gate, and the enemy corsairs took advantage of the victory to advance.

古文：胜与都御史王竑急援之，寇遂引却。
现代文：毛胜与都御史王急忙赶去增援，敌寇于是退走。
English: Mao Sheng and the governor of the capital, Shi Wang, hurried to send reinforcements, and the enemy bandits retreated.

古文：胜追袭至紫荆关，颇有斩获。
现代文：毛胜一直追击到紫荆关，斩杀和俘虏不少。
English: Mao Sheng chased them all the way to Bauhinia Pass, killing and capturing many.

古文：事定，乃命以左副总兵统河间、东昌降夷赴贵州。
现代文：事态平息之后，便命他以左副总兵之职统率河间、东昌两地投降的夷人赴贵州。
English: After the situation calmed down, he was ordered to go to Guizhou as the left deputy commander-in-chief to lead the surrendering barbarians from Kawama and Dongchang.

古文：贼首韦同烈据香垆山作乱，胜与总兵梁珤、右副总兵方瑛等从总督王来分道夹击。
现代文：贼人首领韦同烈占据香垆山作乱，毛胜与总兵梁王缶、右副总兵方瑛等随从总督王来分道夹击。
English: The leader of the thieves, Wei Tonglian, occupied Mount Xiangfan and caused a disturbance. Mao Sheng and the general soldier Liang Wang Can, the right deputy general soldier Fang Ying and others followed the governor Wang Lai to split the road.

古文：胜进自重安江，大破之。
现代文：毛胜从重安江进兵，大破贼人。
English: Mao Sheng entered the army from the Chong'an River and became a great thief.

古文：会师山下，环四面攻之。
现代文：各路在山下会师，四面环攻。
English: They all joined forces at the foot of the mountain and attacked from all directions.

古文：贼窘，缚同烈降。
现代文：贼人势穷，绑缚韦同烈出来投降。
English: The bandits were outnumbered and outgunned, and Wei Tong Rong surrendered.

古文：还讨湖广巴马诸处反贼，克二十余寨，擒贼首吴奉先等百四十人，斩首千余级，封南宁伯，予世券。
现代文：毛胜回来时又讨伐湖广巴马等地的反贼，攻克二十余寨，擒获贼首吴奉先等一百四十人，斩首一千余级，被封为南宁伯，给予世袭诰券。
English: When Mao Sheng returned, he again fought against the anti-thieves in Hukangbama and other places, conquered more than 20 villages, captured 140 people including the head of the thieves, Wu Bongxian, and beheaded more than 1,000 people. He was awarded the title of Nanningbo and given a hereditary certificate.

古文：疏请更名，从之。
现代文：他上疏请求改名，皇上同意了。
English: He petitioned the emperor to change his name, and the emperor agreed.

古文：移镇腾冲。金齿芒市长官刀放革潜结麓川遗孽思卜发为变，胜设策擒之。
现代文：他移镇腾冲，金齿芒市长官刀放革暗中勾结麓川遗孽思卜发作乱，毛胜用计擒住了他。
English: He moved the town of Tengchong, the mayor of Jinzha Meng wielded his official sword and secretly colluded with the Luchuan relics to create chaos, and Mao Sheng caught him with a trick.

古文：巡按御史牟俸劾其贪暴不法数十事，且言胜本降人，狡猾难制，今又数通外夷，恐贻边患。
现代文：巡按御史牟俸弹劾他贪婪残暴等数十件不法事，并且说他本是投降过来的人，狡猾难制，现在又多次交通外夷，恐怕会贻患边疆。
English: He was impeached for dozens of illegal acts, including greed and brutality, by the Inspector-General of History, and said that he was originally a person who surrendered, cunning and difficult to control, and now he has repeatedly communicated with foreigners, and I am afraid that he will plague the frontier.

古文：弘治初协守南京，传爵至明亡乃绝。焦礼，字尚节，蒙古人。
现代文：皇上诏令巡抚核实，但最后并没向他问罪。天顺二年，他去世。赠侯爵，谥庄毅。焦礼，字尚节，蒙古人。
English: The Emperor's edict was verified by an inspector, but in the end no charges were brought against him. He died two years after Tianshun. He was given the titles of Marquis, Zou Zhuangyi, Jiao Li, Byte Shang Jie, and Mongolian.

古文：父把思台，洪武中归附，为通州卫指挥佥事。
现代文：父亲把思台，洪武年间归附，任通州卫指挥佥事。
English: His father annexed Shidai during the Hongwu era and appointed Tongzhou Wei as commander.

古文：子胜嗣，传至义荣，无子，以胜弟谦嗣，累功至都指挥同知。
现代文：儿子胜承袭，传到义荣，他没有儿子，便以胜的弟弟谦承袭，积功升到都指挥同知。
English: His son, Sheng Sheng, inherited it and passed it on to Yirong. As he did not have a son, Sheng Sheng's younger brother, Qian Sheng, inherited it.

古文：卒，子管失奴幼，谦弟礼借袭其职，备御辽东。
现代文：谦去世后，儿子管失奴年幼，他的弟弟焦礼借袭他的职位，备御辽东。
English: After the death of Qian, his son Guanzhong was still young, and his younger brother Jiao Li took over his position and became the ruler of Liaodong.

古文：宣德初，礼当还职。
现代文：宣德初年，焦礼应当还职。
English: In the first year of Xuande, Jiao Li should return to work.

古文：宣宗念礼守边劳，命居职如故，别授管失奴指挥使。
现代文：宣宗念他守边有劳，命他照旧留任，另任管失奴为指挥使。
English: Xuan Zong thought that he was too tired to guard the border and ordered him to remain in office as before, and also appointed Guan Zhushu as the commander.

古文：礼寻以年劳，累进都指挥同知。
现代文：焦礼不久以长年劳累升为都指挥同知。
English: Jiaoli soon rose through years of hard work to become a well-known conductor.

古文：正统中，积功至右都督。
现代文：正统年间，他积功任为右都督。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, he made great achievements and was appointed as the right-hand governor.

古文：英宗北狩，景帝命充左副总兵，守宁远。
现代文：英宗被俘时，景帝命他充任左副总兵，守宁远。
English: When Yingzong was captured, Emperor Jing ordered him to serve as the left deputy general and guard Ningyuan.

古文：未几，也先逼京城，诏礼率师入卫。
现代文：不久，也先逼近京城，诏令焦礼率部队入京保守。
English: Soon, they also approached the capital first, and the emperor ordered Jiao Li to lead the troops into the capital and keep them there.

古文：寇退还镇。
现代文：敌寇退走后，他回到镇守之地。
English: After the enemy raiders retreated, he returned to the town to defend it.

古文：景泰四年，贼二千余骑犯兴水堡，礼击走之。
现代文：景泰四年，贼人二千余骑侵犯兴水堡，焦礼将他们击退。
English: In the fourth year of King Taejo, more than two thousand thieves invaded Xingshui Fort, and Jiao Li repulsed them.

古文：玺书奖励，进左都督。
现代文：皇上颁玺书奖励他，升他为左都督。
English: The emperor rewarded him with an imperial edict, elevating him to the rank of left-wing governor.

古文：英宗复辟，以礼守边有功，召入觐。封东宁伯，世袭，赐赉甚厚。遣还镇。
现代文：英宗复辟后，因焦礼守边有功，召他入京朝见，封他为东宁伯，世袭，赐予很丰厚，然后遣他回到镇守之地。
English: After the restoration of the Yingzong, because of the merits of Jiao Li, he was called to the imperial court in Beijing, and he was given the title of Dongningbo, which was hereditary and very rich, and then he was sent back to the land of the town guard.

古文：兵部以礼年垂八十，不可独任，奏遣都指挥邓铎协同守备。
现代文：兵部因焦礼已年近八十，不能让他独任一方，便上奏派都指挥邓铎协同守备。
English: The military department was nearly eighty years old because of Jiao Li, and could not let him be the only one, so they sent troops under the command of Deng Xuan to jointly defend.

古文：居无何，礼奏铎欺侮，请更调。
现代文：没多久，焦礼上奏说邓铎欺负和侮辱他，请求改调。
English: Not long after, Jia Li said that Deng Yao had bullied and insulted him, and asked for a change.

古文：命都指挥张俊代铎。
现代文：皇上命都指挥张俊取代邓铎。
English: Zhang Jun, commander of the imperial capital, replaced Deng Wei.

古文：天顺七年卒于镇。
现代文：天顺七年，他在驻镇之地去世。
English: In the seventh year of Tianshun, he died in the place where he was stationed.

古文：传爵至明亡乃绝。毛忠，字允诚，初名哈喇，西陲人。
现代文：毛忠，字允诚，初名哈喇，西陲人。
English: Mao Zhong, first name Yongsheng, first name Hara, Xidi people.

古文：曾祖哈喇歹，洪武初归附，起行伍为千户，战殁。
现代文：曾祖父哈喇歹，洪武初年归附，从一名士卒升到千户，后来战死。
English: Hongwu's great-grandfather, Haragane, became a vassal in the first year of Hongwu's annexation, rising from one soldier to a thousand households, and later died in battle.

古文：祖拜都从征哈密，亦战殁。
现代文：祖父拜都从征哈密时，也战死。
English: Grandfather Baidu also died in battle during the conquest of Hami.

古文：父宝以骁勇充总旗，至永昌百户。
现代文：父亲宝因骁勇而充任总旗，任到永昌百户。
English: Father Bao was appointed as the general banner due to his bravery, and was appointed to Yongchang hundred households.

古文：忠袭职时，年二十。膂力绝人，善骑射。
现代文：毛忠袭职时，已经二十岁，臂力过人，善于骑射。
English: When Mao Zhong assumed his duties, he was already twenty years old, with superior arm strength and good at riding and shooting.

古文：常从太宗北征。
现代文：他曾随从太宗北征。
English: He once accompanied Emperor Taizong on the Northern Expedition.

古文：宣德五年征曲先叛寇，有功。
现代文：宣德五年，征讨曲先叛寇时，有功。
English: In the fifth year of Xuande's reign, he played a significant role in the campaign against the rebel Song Dynasty.

古文：八年征亦不剌山，擒伪少师知院。
现代文：八年，征讨亦不剌山，他擒获伪少师知院。
English: Eight years later, the campaign was successful and he was awarded the Pseudo-Junior Teacher's Training College.

古文：九年出脱欢山，十年征黑山寇，皆擒其酋。
现代文：九年出兵脱欢山，十年征讨黑山之寇，都擒获了他们的首领。
English: In the ninth year, troops were dispatched to get rid of Mt. Huan, and in the tenth year, the invaders of Montenegro were defeated, and their leaders were captured.

古文：各进一官，历指挥同知。
现代文：他先后各得升一官，历任指挥同知。
English: He was promoted one rank after another, and he knew all the previous conductors.

古文：正统三年，从都督蒋贵征朵儿只伯，先登陷阵，大获，擢都指挥佥事。
现代文：正统三年，他随从都督蒋贵征讨朵儿只伯，为首陷阵，俘获极多，升为都指挥佥事。
English: During the three years of orthodoxy, he followed the viceroy Chiang Kai-shek to enlist the help of Duol Tuba. He was the first to fall into the trap, captured a great number of people, and was promoted to the commander of the capital.

古文：十年以守边劳，进同知，始赐姓。
现代文：十年，他以守边之劳，进升为同知，并得到皇上赐姓。
English: Ten years later, he was promoted to the same rank and given a surname by the emperor.

古文：明年，从总兵官任礼收捕沙洲卫都督喃哥部落，徙之塞内，进都指挥使。
现代文：第二年随从总兵官任礼收捕沙洲卫都督喃哥的部落，将他们迁到塞内，毛忠进升为都指挥使。
English: In the second year, he followed the general officer Ren Li to collect and capture the tribe of Shazhou Weidu, and moved them to Sene. Mao Zhong was promoted to the capital commanding envoy.

古文：十三年率师至罕东，生絷喃哥弟伪祁王锁南奔并其部众，擢都督佥事，始赐名忠。
现代文：十三年他率兵到罕东，生擒喃哥的弟弟伪祁王锁南奔和他的部众，他被升为都督佥事，这时才得赐名为忠。
English: In the thirteenth year, he led an army to Handong, and gave birth to the younger brother of Fan Ge, the pseudo-Shi Wang Zonanben, and his followers. He was promoted to the position of the governor of the capital, and only then was he given the name Zhong.

古文：寻充右参将，协守甘肃。
现代文：不久他充任右参将，协助守甘肃。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of right-hand adjutant general, helping to defend Gansu.

古文：景泰初，侍郎李实使漠北，还言忠数遣使通瓦剌。
现代文：景泰初年，侍郎李实出使漠北，回来后说毛忠多次派使者交通瓦剌。
English: In the first year of Jingtai, Li Si, the chamberlain, sent an envoy to the north of the country. After returning, he said that Mao Zedong had repeatedly sent envoys to Jiao Tong.

古文：诏执赴京。
现代文：诏令把他抓到京师。
English: The imperial edict arrested him and sent him to the capital.

古文：既至，兵部论其罪，请置大辟。
现代文：他到达后，兵部审判了他的罪行，请求处以大辟之刑。
English: When he arrived, the military tried him for his crimes and asked for the death penalty.

古文：景帝不许。
现代文：景帝不允许。
English: Emperor Jing did not allow it.

古文：请贬官，发福建立功。
现代文：兵部请将他贬官，发往福建立功。
English: The military department requested that he be demoted and sent to Fu Jiu Gong.

古文：乃遣之福建，而官秩如故。令甘肃守臣徙其家属京师。
现代文：皇上于是遣他到福建，但他的官阶照旧，令甘肃守臣将他的家属迁到京师。
English: The emperor then sent him to Fujian, but his official rank remained the same, so he ordered the governor of Gansu to move his family to Beijing.

古文：初，忠之征沙漠也，获番僧加失领真以献。英宗赦不诛。后逃之瓦剌，为也先用。憾忠，欲陷之。遂宣言忠与也先交通，而朝廷不察也。
现代文：当初毛忠从征沙漠时，曾获得番僧加失领真献给朝廷，英宗赦免了他而不诛杀，后来他逃到瓦剌，为也先所用，恨毛忠，想陷害他，便宣传说毛忠与也先交通，而朝廷不察，所以把他遣到福建。
English: At the beginning, when Mao Zhong was conscripted to the desert, he was given a monk's belt and a lost collar to present to the imperial court. Emperor Yingzong pardoned him and did not kill him. Later, he fled to Wuxi, which was also used by the imperial court. They hated Mao Zhong and wanted to frame him, so they spread the rumor that Mao Zhong had been in communication with the imperial court, but the imperial court did not notice, so they sent him to Fujian.

古文：英宗在塞外独知之，比复辟，即召还。
现代文：英宗在塞外却知道此事，所以他复辟后，即把毛忠召回。
English: However, Emperor Yingzong knew about this while he was out of the country, so he recalled Mao Zhong Samo after the restoration.

古文：而忠在福建亦屡有斩馘功，乃擢都督同知，充左副总兵，镇守甘肃。
现代文：而毛忠在福建也屡有斩首之功，于是升他为都督同知，充任左副总兵，镇守甘肃。
English: However, Mao Zhong also had the merit of beheading many times in Fujian, so he was promoted to the same rank as the governor and served as the left deputy commander-in-chief and the town guard of Gansu.

古文：陛见，慰谕甚至，赐玉带、织金蟒衣。
现代文：接见他时，对他安慰备至，赐给玉带、织金蟒衣。
English: When he received him, he comforted him and gave him a jade belt and a gold-woven robe.

古文：天顺二年，寇大入甘肃，巡抚芮钊劾奏诸将失事罪。
现代文：天顺二年，贼寇大部队入侵甘肃，巡抚芮钊上奏弹劾诸将领误事之罪。
English: In the second year of Tianshun, a large force of thieves and robbers invaded Gansu, and the governor issued a proclamation to impeach the generals for the crime of making a mistake.

古文：部议忠功足赎罪，置不问。
现代文：部里的意见认为毛忠功足以赎罪，对他置而不问。
English: The ministry's opinion was that Mao Zhonggong was enough to atone for the crime, and no questions were asked about him.

古文：三年以镇番破贼功，进左都督。
现代文：三年，他以在镇番破贼之功，进升为左都督。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to Governor of Zuo Province for his role in breaking up thieves in the town of Ban.

古文：五年，孛来以数万骑分掠西宁、庄浪、甘肃诸道，入凉州。
现代文：五年，孛来以数万骑兵分别抢掠西宁、庄浪、甘肃等道，进入凉州。
English: In five years, Lai Lai with tens of thousands of cavalrymen separately robbed Xining, Zhuanglang, Gansu and other roads and entered Liangzhou.

古文：忠鏖战一日夜，矢尽力疲。贼来益众，军中皆失色。
现代文：毛忠鏖战一昼夜，矢尽力疲，而敌人来得更多，军中将士都失色。
English: Mao Zhongxuan fought for a day and a night, the arrows were exhausted, and the enemy came more, the lieutenant generals and soldiers were discolored.

古文：忠意气弥厉，拊循将士，复殊死斗。
现代文：毛忠意志更坚，他安抚将士，又殊死搏斗。
English: Mao Zhong's will was stronger. He pacified the soldiers and fought to the death.

古文：贼见终不可胜，而援军亦至，遂解去。忠竟全师还。
现代文：贼寇见终不可胜，而官军援军也到了，便撤兵而去，毛忠竟得全师而还。
English: The bandits saw that they could not win in the end, and when reinforcements from the government army arrived, they withdrew. Mao Zhong was able to save his entire division.

古文：七年，永昌、凉州、庄浪塞外诸番屡为边患。忠与总兵官卫颖分讨之。
现代文：七年，永昌、凉州、庄浪塞外各番人多次制造边患，毛忠与总兵官卫颖分头讨伐。
English: In the seventh year, the guards of Yongchang, Liangzhou, and Zhuanglang repeatedly created border troubles, and Mao Zhong and the chief military officer Wei Ying fought separately.

古文：忠先破巴哇诸大族。
现代文：毛忠先击破了巴哇等大族。
English: Mao Zhong first defeated the Bawa and other large tribes.

古文：其昝咂、马吉思诸族，他将不能下者，忠复击破之。
现代文：昝咂、马吉思等族，别的将领攻不下的，毛忠又将其击破。
English: Other generals such as Xing, Magis and other clans could not be attacked, and Mao Zhong defeated them.

古文：论功，忠止增禄百石，而颖乃得世券。忠以为言，遂封伏羌伯。
现代文：论功时，毛忠只得增加禄米一百石，而卫颖却得世袭诰券，毛忠向朝廷提出意见，遂得封为伏羌伯。
English: When the merits were discussed, Mao Zhong only had to increase the lumens by one hundred koku, while Wei Ying received hereditary vouchers. Mao Zhong made suggestions to the imperial court, and was awarded the title of Fuxinbo.

古文：成化四年，固原贼满四据石城反。
现代文：成化四年，固原贼人满四占据石城造反。
English: In the fourth year of Chenghua, the four-man band of Guyuan thieves occupied Shicheng and rebelled.

古文：诏忠移师讨之，与总督项忠等夹攻贼巢。
现代文：诏令毛忠移师讨伐，与总督项忠等人夹攻贼人巢穴。
English: He ordered Mao Zhong to transfer his division to fight, and together with Governor Xiang Zhong and others, they attacked the den of thieves.

古文：忠由木头沟直抵炮架山下，多所斩获，贼稍却。
现代文：毛忠由木头沟直抵炮架山下，多有斩杀和俘获。
English: Mao Zhong went straight from the wood ditch to the bottom of the gun mount. He was often killed or captured.

古文：冒矢石连夺山北、山西两峰，而项忠等军亦克山之东峰。及石城东、西二门，贼大窘，相对哭。
现代文：贼人稍稍退却，毛忠亲冒矢石连夺山北、山西两峰。而项忠等军也攻克了山的东峰，进到石城的东、西二门。贼人处境非常窘迫，相对号哭。
English: The bandits retreated slightly, and Mao Zhong personally took the initiative to conquer the two peaks in the north and west of the mountain. And Xiang Zhong's army also conquered the eastern peak of the mountain and entered the east and west two gates of Shicheng. The bandits were in a very difficult situation and cried.

古文：忽昏雾起，他哨举烟掣军，贼遂并力攻忠。
现代文：突然起了浓雾，别的哨点起烟火报警，牵制了毛忠的部队，贼人于是并力攻击毛忠。
English: Suddenly, a thick fog arose, and other sentries set off fireworks to alert the police, holding back Mao Zhong's troops. The thieves then joined forces to attack Mao Zhong.

古文：忠力战不已，为流矢所中，卒，年七十五。
现代文：毛忠力战不已，被流矢射中而死，终年七十五岁。
English: Mao Zhongli fought tirelessly, was shot by a stray arrow and died at the age of seventy-five.

古文：从子海、孙铠前救忠，亦死。
现代文：从子海、孙子铠前来救他，也死。
English: Zi Hai and Sun Zi Yao came to save him, but they also died.

古文：忠为将严纪律，善抚士。
现代文：毛忠为将严申纪律，善抚士卒。
English: Mao Zhong was a strict disciplinarian and a good nurse.

古文：万历中，掌中军府事垂二十年。
现代文：他死后，西陲人为他吊哭的相望于道。事情传到朝廷，赠给他侯爵，谥武勇，给予世袭诰券。
English: After his death, the Xidi people were in tears for him. The matter was reported to the imperial court, which presented him with the title of marquis, the title of "martial valor," and gave him a hereditary ticket.

古文：又再传而明亡。和勇，初名脱脱孛罗，和宁王阿鲁台孙也。
现代文：弘治年间，听从有关官员的意见，在兰州建忠义坊，以表彰他的故里。又因巡抚许进的建议，在甘州城东建武勇祠，春秋致祭。和勇，初名脱脱孛罗，和宁王阿鲁台之孙。
English: During the Hongzhi era, he listened to the opinions of relevant officials and built Zhongyi Square in Lanzhou to commend his hometown. Also, due to the suggestion of the governor Xu Jin, he built Wuyong Shrine in the eastern part of Ganzhou City to hold a festival in spring and autumn. He Yong, whose first name was De De Luo, was the grandson of the King of Ning, Arutai.

古文：阿鲁台既为瓦剌脱欢所杀，子阿卜只俺穷蹙，款塞来归。
现代文：阿鲁台被瓦剌部首领脱欢杀死后，他的儿子阿卜只俺势穷，叩塞门前来归附。
English: After Arutai was killed by the leader of the Wahhabi faction, his son, Abdulai, came to join him.

古文：宣宗授以左都督，赐第京师。
现代文：宣宗任命他为左都督，并在京师赐给他宅第。
English: Emperor Xuanzong appointed him as the left governor and gave him a mansion in Beijing.

古文：卒，勇袭指挥使，带俸锦衣卫，积功至都督佥事。
现代文：他去世后，和勇承袭为指挥使，带俸在锦衣卫，积功升到都督佥事。
English: After his death, he was succeeded by He Yong as the commander of the envoys, with a salary in Jinbei, and his achievements rose to the rank of governor.

古文：天顺元年诏加同知，赐姓名。
现代文：天顺元年，诏令加封他为同知，赐给姓名。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, the imperial edict added him as a confidant and gave him a name.

古文：久之以两广多寇，命充游击将军，统降夷千人往讨。
现代文：后来因两广多寇，命他充任游击将军，统领归降的夷人一千名前征讨伐。
English: Later, due to two large-scale raids, he was ordered to act as a guerrilla general and lead a thousand surrendered barbarians to fight.

古文：时总兵颜彪无将略，贼势愈炽。
现代文：当时总兵颜彪没有将略，贼势更盛。
English: At that time, General Yan Biao did not lose the battle, and the bandits were more powerful.

古文：广西巡抚吴祯杀降冒功，得优赏。
现代文：广西巡抚吴祯杀死投降的人来冒功，获得优厚的赏赐。
English: The governor of Guangxi, Wu Gan, took credit for killing those who surrendered and received a generous reward.

古文：彪效之，亦杀平民报捷。
现代文：颜虎也仿效他，杀害平民来报捷。
English: Yanhu also followed his example, killing civilians to gain advantage.

古文：朝廷进彪官，勇亦进右都督。既而师久无功，言官劾文武将吏之失事者。
现代文：朝廷给颜彪升官，和勇也进升为右都督，后来师久无功，言官弹劾误事的文武将吏。
English: The imperial court gave Yan Biao a promotion, and He Yong was also promoted to the right-hand governor, and later, after a long period of inaction, the speaker impeached the erroneous literary and military officials.

古文：诏停勇俸，充为事官。
现代文：诏令停发和勇的俸禄，让他充任事官。
English: The imperial edict suspended Wo Yong's salary and let him serve as an official.

古文：成化初，赵辅、韩雍征大藤峡贼，诏勇以所部从征。
现代文：成化初年，赵辅、韩雍征讨大藤峡之贼，诏令和勇率所部从征。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Zhao Fu and Han Yong were enlisted to fight the thieves of Dafuji Gorge, and the Imperial Order and the Department of Courage were enlisted.

古文：其冬，贼大破，进左都督，增禄百石。
现代文：这年冬，贼人大败，和勇进升为左都督，增加禄米一百石。
English: In the winter of that year, the bandits were soundly defeated, and He Yongjin was promoted to the post of Left Governor, receiving an additional one hundred koku of rice.

古文：三年召督效勇营训练。
现代文：三年，召他回来总督效勇营训练。
English: Three years later, he was called back by the governor to serve in a training camp.

古文：寻上言： 大藤峡之役，臣与赵辅同功。
现代文：不久他上书说： 大藤峡之战，臣与赵辅同功。
English: Soon he wrote: In the battle of the Great Fuji Gorge, my father and Zhao Fu made the same contribution.

古文：辅还京，余贼复叛。
现代文：赵辅回京后，余贼又叛。
English: After Zhao Fu returned to Beijing, the remaining thieves rebelled again.

古文：臣亲捣贼巢，絷其魁，诛其党，还被掠男女四千人。
现代文：臣亲捣贼人巢穴，抓获其首领，诛其党徒，夺回被掠去的男女四千人。
English: His vassals raided the den of thieves, captured their leader and his henchmen, and recaptured the four thousand men and women who had been robbed.

古文：今辅已封伯，而臣止进秩，惟陛下怜察。 
现代文：现在赵辅已经封伯，而臣只得晋级，唯望陛下怜察。 
English: Now that Zhao Fu has been ennobled, and his vassal has only been promoted, I hope His Majesty will take pity on him.

古文：宪宗以勇再著战功，特封靖安伯。
现代文：宪宗因和勇再立战功，特封他为靖安伯。
English: Because of his valor and courage, he was awarded the title of Jing Anbo.

古文：十年卒。
现代文：十年，他去世。
English: Ten years later, he died.

古文：谥武敏，世袭指挥使。
现代文：谥武敏，世袭指挥使。
English: Hao Wu-min, hereditary commander.

古文：勇性廉谨。
现代文：和勇个性廉洁恭谨。
English: He Yong is honest and respectful.

古文：在两广时，诸将多营私渔利，勇独无所取。
现代文：在两广时，将领们多营私渔利，唯有和勇一无所取。
English: In the two Guangxi Dynasties, the generals made a lot of private profits, but He Yong made nothing.

古文：时论称之。
现代文：当时舆论多称赞他。
English: At that time, the public opinion mostly praised him.

古文：罗秉忠，初名克罗俄领占，沙州卫都督佥事困即来子也。
现代文：罗秉忠，初名克罗俄领占，沙洲卫都督佥事困即来之子。
English: Luo Bingzhong, whose first name means "Croatian-Russian leader," was the son of Shazhou Weidong, the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：兄喃哥既袭父职，英宗复命秉忠为指挥使，协理卫事。
现代文：哥哥喃哥承袭父职后，英宗又命秉忠为指挥使，协助处理卫事。
English: After his elder brother, Murakami, succeeded to his father's post, Yingzong also ordered Bingzhong to be the commander and assist him in dealing with the defense affairs.

古文：既而喃哥率千二百人内徙，诏居之东昌、平山二卫，给田庐什器，所以抚恤甚厚。
现代文：后来喃哥率一千二百人内迁，诏令把他们安置在东昌、平山二卫，发给田舍什器，对他们的抚恤很丰厚。
English: Later, Dr. Murakami led 1,200 people to move in, and the imperial edict placed them in Dongchang and Pingshan Erwei, and gave them rice cookers, and the pension for them was very rich.

古文：喃哥卒，秉忠为都指挥使，代领其众。
现代文：喃哥死后，秉忠为都指挥使，代领喃哥的部众。
English: After the death of Murakami, Bingzhong was appointed as the commander of the capital and led Murakami's subordinates.

古文：英宗北狩，塞上多警。
现代文：英宗被俘时，边塞多有警报。
English: At the time of Yingzong's capture, there were multiple alarms on the border.

古文：朝议恐降人乘机为变，欲徙之南方。
现代文：朝廷意见恐怕归降的人趁机为变，想将他们迁到南方。
English: The imperial court feared that the capitulators would take advantage of the situation and try to move them to the south.

古文：会贵州苗乱，都督毛福寿南征，即擢秉忠都督佥事，率所部援剿。
现代文：正好贵州苗人作乱，都督毛福寿南征，便升秉忠为都督佥事，率领所部增援剿贼。
English: Just as the Miao people of Guizhou made a disturbance, the governor Mao Fushou went on a southern expedition. He promoted Bingzhong to the position of governor and led the headquarters to reinforce the bandits.

古文：积战功至左都督。
现代文：秉忠积战功升为左都督。
English: He was promoted to the post of Left Governor for his distinguished war service.

古文：天顺初，始赐姓名。
现代文：天顺初年，始赐给他姓名。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was first given a name.

古文：曹钦之反，番官多从之者。
现代文：曹钦反叛时，番官多追随他。
English: When Cao Qin rebelled, the guards mostly followed him.

古文：秉忠亦坐下狱，籍其家。
现代文：秉忠也被判入狱，抄了家。
English: Bingzhong was also sentenced to prison, and his home was confiscated.

古文：久之，上章自辩，乃得释。
现代文：后来，他上书为自己辩解，这才获释。
English: He was later released after writing a letter defending himself.

古文：成化初，尚书程信讨山都掌蛮，秉忠以游击将军从。
现代文：成化初年，尚书程信讨伐山都掌蛮，秉忠以游击将军身份随行。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Shang Shucheng wrote letters to protest against mountain logging, and accompanied the march as a guerrilla general.

古文：既抵永宁，分兵六道。
现代文：抵达永宁后，分兵六路。
English: After arriving in Yongning, the detachment marched six miles.

古文：秉忠由金鹅江进，大破之。
现代文：秉忠由金鹅江进兵，大破敌人。
English: Bingzhong marched from the Golden Goose River and defeated the enemy.

古文：论功，封顺义伯。
现代文：论功，封他为顺义伯。
English: On the basis of merit, he was awarded the title of Shunyi Bo.

古文：十六年卒。
现代文：十六年，他去世。
English: Sixteen years later, he died.

古文：谥荣壮，子孙世指挥使。
现代文：谥荣壮，子孙世袭指挥使。
English: Zou Rongzhuang, the descendant of a hereditary commander.

