古文：呼韩邪单于归庭数月，罢兵使各归故地，乃收其兄呼屠吾斯在民间者立为左谷蠡王，使人告右贤贵人，欲令杀右贤王。
现代文：呼韩邪单于回到王庭几个月后，停止战事让大家回到自己原来的地方去，召来自己做老百姓的哥哥呼屠吾斯，立他为左谷蠡王，又派人告知右贤的贵人，想让他们杀了右贤王。
English: A few months after Huan Yidan returned to the royal court, he stopped the war and let everyone return to their original places. He summoned his brother, Houtu Gus, who was a commoner, and appointed him as the king of Zuo Valley, and sent someone to tell the nobles of Uxian that he wanted them to kill Uxian.

古文：其冬，都隆奇与右贤王共立日逐王薄胥堂为屠耆单于，发兵数万人东袭呼韩邪单于。
现代文：那年冬天，都隆奇与右贤王共同拥立曰逐王莲置堂为垦昼里于，出动军队几万人向东攻打呼韩邪单于。
English: In the winter of that year, Du Longqi and Uxian Wang jointly set up the "Chie Wang Lian Ji Tong" in the afternoon, and dispatched tens of thousands of troops to the east to attack Han Yixian.

古文：呼韩邪单于兵败走，屠耆单于还，以其长子都涂吾西为左谷蠡王，少子姑瞀楼头为右谷蠡王，留居单于庭。
现代文：呼韩邪单于的军队溃败逃跑了，屠耆单于回到了匈奴王庭，立自己的长子都涂吾西为左谷蠡王，立自己的小儿子姑瞀楼头为右谷蠡王，把他们留在单于王庭。
English: The army of Han Xizan Yu was routed and fled. Tu Yuanzhang returned to the court of the Xiongnu king and set up his eldest son Tu Wuxi as the king of Zuo Valley and his youngest son Gu Xi Lou Tou as the king of Zuo Valley, leaving them alone in the royal court.

古文：明年秋，屠耆单于使日逐王先贤掸兄右奥鞬王为乌藉都尉各二万骑，屯东方以备呼韩邪单于。
现代文：第二年秋天，屠耆单于任命日逐王先贤掸的哥哥右奥鞑王为乌藉都尉，让二人分别率领二万骑兵，驻扎在束边以防备呼韩邪单于。
English: In the autumn of the following year, on the day of his appointment, Tu Youxuan promoted Wang Xianxuan's elder brother, Ou Ou Xianwang, to the rank of lieutenant-governor, and had the two of them separately lead 20,000 cavalrymen and station them in Shoubian in preparation for summoning Han Xianxuan.

古文：是时，西方呼揭王来与唯犁当户谋，共谗右贤王，言欲自立为乌藉单于。
现代文：这时，西部的呼揭王来和唯犁当户谋划，一起向屠耆单于进谗言，诋毁右贤王，说他想自立为乌藉单于。
English: At this time, King Huuchai of the West and King Wei of the East plotted together to slander King Ugyen of the West, saying that he wanted to become independent from King Ugyen.

古文：屠耆单于杀右贤王父子，后知其冤，复杀唯犁当户。
现代文：于是屠耆单于便杀了右贤王父子，后来屠耆单于知道了右贤王是被冤枉了，就又把唯犁当户杀了。
English: As a result, Tu Youyou single-handedly killed King Uxian and his son. Later, when Tu Youyou single-handedly learned that King Uxian had been wronged, he killed King Uxian.

古文：于是呼揭王恐，遂畔去，自立为呼揭单于。
现代文：因此呼揭王十分害怕，便背叛屠耆单于逃走了，并自立为呼揭单于。
English: Therefore, King Huo Jie was very afraid, so he betrayed Tu Youyou and ran away, and became King Huo Jie himself.

古文：右奥鞬王闻之，即自立为车犁单于。
现代文：右奥鞑王听说了，便自立为车辈单于。
English: Right after hearing about it, Okubo Wang became self-employed as a driver.

古文：乌藉都尉亦自立为乌藉单于。
现代文：乌藉都尉也自立为乌藉单于。
English: Captain Wu Rong also stood up for Wu Rong alone.

古文：凡五单于。
现代文：这样匈奴便有了五个单于。
English: In this way, the Xiongnu had five separate states.

古文：屠耆单于自将兵东击车犁单于，使都隆奇击乌藉。
现代文：屠耆单于亲自率兵向东攻打车犁单于，派都隆奇去攻打乌藉单于。
English: Tu Youyou personally led the troops to the east to attack Chechen Youyou, and sent Du Longqi to attack Wu Rong You.

古文：乌藉、车犁皆败，西北走，与呼揭单于兵合为四万人。
现代文：乌藉单于、车辈单于都被打败了，向西北逃去，与呼揭单于的军队会合，共有四万人。
English: Wu Eryan and Xue Eryan were both defeated and fled to the northwest to join Hu Rui's army of 40,000 men.

古文：乌藉、呼揭皆去单于号，共并力尊辅车犁单于。
现代文：乌藉王与呼揭王都去掉了自己的单于称号，共同合力辅佐车犁单于。
English: Both Wu Rong Wang and Huo Jie Wang have removed their titles and work together to support the car.

古文：屠耆单于闻之，使左大将、都尉将四万骑分屯东方，以备呼韩邪单于，自将四万骑西击车犁单于。
现代文：屠耆单于听说了，便派左大将、都尉率四万骑兵分别驻扎在东部，以防备呼韩邪单于，星昼里王自己亲自率领四万骑兵向西攻打车犁单于。
English: When Tu Youyou heard of this, he dispatched General Zuo and Lieutenant Quan with 40,000 cavalry to be stationed in the east, in case of war with Han, and personally led 40,000 cavalry to the west to attack Cheju and Quan.

古文：车犁单于败，西北走，屠耆单于即引西南，留闟敦地。
现代文：车犁单于被打败，向西北逃去，屠耆单于便率军队向西南走，屯驻在盟敦这个地方。
English: Che Kunlun was defeated and fled to the northwest, while Tu Youyou led his army to the southwest and settled in Mengdong.

古文：其明年，呼韩邪单于遣其弟右谷蠡王等西袭屠耆单于屯兵，杀略万余人。
现代文：第二年，呼韩邪单于派自己的弟弟右谷蠡王等人率兵向西袭击屠耆单于屯驻在阖敦的军队，杀掠一万多人。
English: In the following year, Huan Yidan Yu sent his younger brother, Ugu Xuan Wang, and others to attack Tu's army stationed in Shandong, killing and plundering more than ten thousand people.

古文：屠耆单于闻之，即自将六万骑击呼韩邪单于，行千里，未至嗕姑地，逢呼韩邪单于兵可四万人，合战。
现代文：屠耆单于听说了，便亲自率领六万骑兵去攻打呼韩邪单于，走了有近千里路，还没到！蛐地方，便与呼韩邪单于的近四万军队遭遇了。
English: When Tu Youyou heard of this, he personally led sixty thousand cavalry to attack and defeat Hwanghan's nearly forty thousand troops. He had traveled nearly a thousand miles and had not yet reached the place where he encountered Hwanghan's nearly forty thousand troops.

古文：屠耆单于兵败，自杀。
现代文：双方交战，屠耆单于兵败自杀。
English: The two sides engaged in battle, and Tu Youyou single-handedly committed suicide in defeat.

古文：都隆奇乃与屠耆少子右谷蠡王姑瞀楼头亡归汉，车犁单于东降呼韩邪单于。
现代文：趟隆童便与屠耆单于的小儿子右谷蠡王姑瞀楼头一起逃走，归降了龃，车犁单于向东投降了呼韩邪单壬。
English: Tong Long Tong then fled together with the youngest son of Tu Han Shan Yu, Ugu Xuan Wang Gu Xuan Lou Tou, and returned to the capital. Che Xuan Yu surrendered to the east, calling for Han Ye and Shan Ren.

古文：呼韩邪单于左大将乌厉屈与父呼速累乌厉温敦皆见匈奴乱，率其众数万人南降汉。
现代文：呼韩邪单于的左大将旦区厘与父亲呼邀累盅聂温整看到包扭这么混乱，便率领部众几万人向南投降了连翘。
English: General of the Left, Tang Guoli, who was calling for Han Ye and Shan Yu, and his father were calling for Lai Ye and Wen Zheng, when they saw the chaos, they led tens of thousands of people to the south and surrendered to Lien Gao.

古文：封乌厉屈为新城侯，乌厉温敦为义阳侯。
现代文：还塑封乌厘昼为新城侯，封盅厘温錾为盏屋堡。
English: He also sealed Uli Rong as the new lord of the city, and sealed Uli Wenzhong as Zhenya Castle.

古文：是时，李陵子复立乌藉都尉为单于，呼韩邪单于捕斩之，遂复都单于庭，然众裁数万人。
现代文：这时奎陆的儿子又拥立昼藉都尉为单于，呼韩邪单于派人捕杀了他们，于是呼韩邪单于又回到了匈奴王庭，然而部众却衹有几万人。
English: At this time, Queluz's son also set up the captain of the day to be alone, and sent a man to kill them, so he returned to the Xiongnu royal court, but there were tens of thousands of people.

古文：屠耆单于从弟休旬王将所主五六百骑，击杀左大且渠，并其兵，至右地，自立为闰振单于，在西边。
现代文：屠耆单于的表弟休旬王率领自己手下的五六百骑兵，攻打并杀死了左大且渠，吞并了他的军队，到达了右地，自立为闰振单于，居住在匈奴西部。
English: Tu Youyou's cousin Hu Shun Wang led five or six hundred cavalry under his command, attacked and killed Zuo Daqi Qu, absorbed his army, arrived at Zuoji, and established himself as Yue Zhen Shanyu, living in the west of the Huns.

古文：其后，呼韩邪单于兄左贤王呼屠吾斯亦自立为郅支骨都侯单于，在东边。
现代文：后来，呼韩邪单于的哥哥左贤王呼屠吾斯也自立为郅支骨都侯单于，居住在包塑束部。
English: Later, Han Zidan Yu's elder brother Zuo Xian Wang Hu Tu Gus also established himself as a vassal lord of Zidan Yu, living in Baoshu Bund.

古文：其后二年，闰振单于率其众东击郅支单于。
现代文：二年以后，闰振单于率领部众向东攻打郅支单于。
English: Two years later, Yue Zhen Shan Yu led the troops to attack the east.

古文：郅支单于与战，杀之，并其兵，遂进攻呼韩邪。呼韩邪破，其兵走，郅支都单于庭。
现代文：郅支单于迎战闰振单于，杀了他，吞并了他的部队，然后就向呼韩邪单于进攻，军队败走，郅支单于建都王庭。
English: The Han dynasty fought against Ye Zhen, killed him and absorbed his troops, and then attacked the Han dynasty. The army was defeated, and the Han dynasty built the capital Wangting.

古文：呼韩邪之败也，左伊秩訾王为呼韩邪计，劝令称臣入朝事汉，从汉求助，如此匈奴乃定。
现代文：呼韩邪被攻破，呼韩邪单于败走的时候，左伊秩訾王替哩整巫里王谋划，劝他向龃称臣，去侍奉选天子，从而从还塑那裹求得帮助，这样才能安定包躯。
English: When the evil of calling Han was defeated, and the evil of calling Han was defeated and fled, Zuo Yi, the King of Chichibu, plotted to rectify the King of Wuxi, and persuaded him to call himself a vassal to Han, to serve the Chosen Son of Heaven, and thus to seek help from Han, so that he could stabilize his body.

古文：呼韩邪议问诸大臣，皆曰： 不可。
现代文：呼韩邪单于与大臣们商议，向他们询问，大臣们都说： 不能这样做。
English: Calling Han and Yidan to consult with the ministers and ask them questions, the ministers all said, "We can't do that."

古文：匈奴之俗，本上气力而下服役，以马上战斗为国，故有威名于百蛮。
现代文：我们匈奴人的习俗，向来是崇尚勇敢、力量，而轻视向他人称臣服侍他人，凭在战马上与人争战来建立自己的国家，所以在众多少数民族中有着崇高的威望。
English: The custom of our Huns has always been to praise bravery and strength, and to despise calling others to serve others, and to build their own country by fighting with people on war horses, so they have a high prestige among many minority peoples.

古文：战死，壮士所有也。
现代文：战死沙场，这是壮士的豪举。
English: To die on the battlefield is a heroic act.

古文：今兄弟争国，不在兄则在弟，虽死犹有威名，子孙常长诸国。汉虽强，犹不能兼并匈奴，奈何乱先古之制，臣事于汉，卑辱先单于，为诸国所笑！
现代文：现在你们兄弟争夺君位，胜利者不是哥哥就是弟弟，就是战死了也还留下了雄威的好名声，你们的子孙也还可以在各国中称雄，做他们的君长，汉朝即使十分强盛，也还不能够兼并匈奴，我们怎么能搅乱祖上定下的制度，向汉朝称臣，玷污先单于的名声，被各国所嘲笑呢！
English: Now your brothers are competing for the throne, and the winner is either a brother or a younger brother, and even if he dies in battle, he will still leave behind a good reputation of grandeur. Your children and grandchildren can still be champions in various countries and be their monarchs. Even if the Han Dynasty is very powerful, it is still unable to annex the Huns. How can we disrupt the system established by our ancestors, claim to be a vassal of the Han Dynasty, tarnish the reputation of the first Han Dynasty, and be ridiculed by various countries?

古文：虽如是而安，何以复长百蛮！ 左伊秩訾曰： 不然。
现代文：就是我们这样做了，安定了匈奴，又怎么能再称雄各少数民族，做他们的君长？ 左伊秩訾说： 你们说的不对。
English: Just because we have done this and stabilized the Huns, how can we continue to dominate the ethnic minorities and be their rulers? Zuo Yi Chicheng said: What you say is not right.

古文：强弱有时，今汉方盛，乌孙城郭诸国皆为臣妾。
现代文：那时强，这时弱，不可同曰而语，现在汉朝正在兴盛的时候，西域那些筑城而居的国家一一比如像乌孙那样，都向汉朝称臣。
English: At that time strong, at that time weak, cannot be said to be the same. Now, when the Han Dynasty is flourishing, those countries in the western region that build cities and live in them, like the Uson, are all claiming to be the vassals of the Han Dynasty.

古文：自且鞮侯单于以来，匈奴日削，不能取复，虽屈强于此，未尝一日安也。
现代文：自从且千侯单于以来，匈奴国土逐日侵削，我们却无力恢复，虽然勉强还在这儿逞强，却没有一天安静子过。
English: Since then, the Huns have been encroaching on our land day by day, but we have not been able to recover. Although we are still here, we have not had a single day of peace.

古文：今事汉则安存，不事则危亡，计何以过此！ 
现代文：现在的情势是：如果我们臣事汉朝，就能平安生存，否则衹有灭亡。还有什么好计策能超过这个！ 
English: The current situation is: if we submit to the Han Dynasty, we will be able to survive in peace, otherwise we will perish. What other good strategy can surpass this!

古文：诸大人相难久之。呼韩邪从其计，引众南近塞，遣子右贤王铢娄渠堂入侍。
现代文：那些匈奴大臣辩论了许久，最后呼韩邪单于听从了左伊秩訾王的建议，率领部众向南走，接近汉朝边塞，派自己的儿子右贤王铢娄渠堂入朝侍奉汉天子。
English: Those Xiongnu ministers debated for a long time, and finally called Han Yishan to listen to the suggestion of Zuo Yi Chizhong Wang, led the members to go south, close to the Han Dynasty border fortress, and sent his son Uxian Wang Qianqudang into the court to serve Han Tianzi.

古文：郅支单于亦遣子右大将驹于利受入侍。
现代文：而郅支单于也派儿子右大将驹于利受入侍汉天子。
English: However, Emperor Xizang also sent his son, the Grand Marshal of the Right, Emperor Xizang Yuli, to serve Han Tianzi.

古文：是岁，甘露元年也。
现代文：这年是苴雳元年。
English: This year is the first year of the Year of the Rooster.

古文：明年，呼韩邪单于款五原塞，愿朝三年正月。
现代文：第二年，呼韩邪单于到达了五原塞，希望在三年正月来朝拜汉天子。
English: In the second year, he arrived at Wuhuan Pass, hoping to worship Han Tianzi in the first month of the third year.

古文：汉遣车骑都尉韩昌迎，发过所七郡郡二千骑，为陈道上。
现代文：汉朝派车骑都尉韩昌前去迎接，命令呼韩邪单于要经过的七个郡出动二千骑兵，布置在路旁担任警卫。
English: The Han Dynasty sent the cavalry captain Han Chang to meet them, and ordered him to call Han Yidan to dispatch two thousand cavalry in the seven counties to be passed. They were placed on the side of the road to serve as guards.

古文：单于正月朝天子于甘泉宫，汉宠际殊礼，位在诸侯王上，赞谒称臣而不名。
现代文：呼韩邪单于正月在苴皇宫朝见选天子，龃天子以特殊隆重的礼节相待，单于地位在诸侯王之上，单于参见朝拜时衹称 臣 ，不用自报姓名。
English: In the first month of the year, Han Zidan met the Chosen Son of Heaven in the morning at the Imperial Palace. The Chosen Son of Heaven treated him with special ceremonial etiquette. Because of his status, Han Zidan was above the princes and kings, and because of his status, Han Zidan was referred to as a vassal when he visited the Imperial Palace. Han Zidan did not have to give his name.

古文：赐以冠带衣裳、黄金玺戾绶、玉具剑、佩刀、弓一张、矢四发、棨戟十、安车一乘、鞍勒一县、马十五匹、黄金二十斤、钱二十万、衣被七十七袭、锦绣绮縠杂帛八千匹、絮六千斤。
现代文：还塑天子赐给壁韩邪单于还翘的官服，还赐给他饰以戾草染绶带的黄金玺，用玉装饰剑鼻的宝剑，佩刀一把，弓一张、箭十二支，带罩衣的戟十杆，安车一辆，马鞍、马辔一套，十五匹马，二十斤黄金，钱二十万，衣被七十七套，锦绣绮缎以及杂帛共八千匹，粗丝棉六千斤。
English: He also gave him a golden scepter with an eelgrass-dyed ribbon, a sword with a beak decorated with jade, a sword, a bow, twelve arrows, ten hoops with a hood, a carriage, a saddle, a set of stirrups, fifteen horses, twenty pounds of gold, two hundred thousand dollars, seventy-seven sets of bedding, eight thousand brocades and chiffons, and six thousand pounds of coarse cotton.

古文：礼毕，使使者道单于先行，宿长平。
现代文：朝礼完毕之后，派使者引导单于先行，住在长平。
English: After the morning ceremony, he sent an emissary to guide the monks to live in Changping.

古文：上自甘泉宿池阳宫。
现代文：皇帝从甘泉宫到了池阳宫，住在那裹。
English: Emperor Xuan rested from Ganquan to Chiyang Palace.

古文：上登长平，诏单于毋谒，其左右当户之群臣皆得列观，及诸蛮夷君长王侯数万，咸迎于渭桥下，夹道陈。
现代文：皇帝登上长平山坡，韶令单子不要来拜谒，左、右当户那些大臣都被允许列队参见，还有各蛮夷部落的首领干侯有几万人，都在渭桥下迎接皇帝，夹道排列。
English: When the emperor ascended the hillside of Changping, the emperor ordered all officials not to come to pay homage to him. The ministers of the left and right households were allowed to line up to see him. There were also tens of thousands of leaders of barbarian tribes, all lined up under the bridge to greet the emperor.

古文：上登渭桥，咸称万岁。
现代文：皇帝登上渭桥，人们都山呼万岁。
English: The emperor boarded the Long Bridge, welcoming the crowd with a chorus of "Long live!

古文：单于就邸，留月余，遣归国。
现代文：单于住在馆驿，停留了有一个多月，天子派他回国。
English: He stayed in the pavilion alone for more than a month, but God sent him back home.

古文：单于自请愿留居光禄塞下，有急保汉受降城。
现代文：单于自己请求希望能允许自己留下来屯住在光禄塞下，有危急情况时可以保卫汉朝的受降城。
English: He only asked to be allowed to stay and live in Guanglu, so that he could defend the Han Dynasty's fallen city in an emergency.

古文：汉遣长乐卫尉高昌侯董忠、车骑都尉韩昌将骑万六千，又发边郡士马以千数，送单于出朔方鸡鹿塞。
现代文：汉朝派长乐卫尉高昌侯董忠、车骑都尉韩昌率领一万六千骑兵，又出动成千的边塞州郡的人马，护送呼韩邪单于出朔方城的鸡鹿塞。
English: The Han Dynasty sent Changle Guards Lieutenant Gao Chang Hou Dong Zhong and Chariot and Cavalry Captain Han Chang, leading 16,000 cavalrymen, and dispatched thousands of men and horses from the border county of Caizhou to escort Han Yidan in the Chicken and Deer Pass of the Fangcheng City of Deshaku.

古文：诏忠等留卫单于，助诛不服，又转边谷米糒，前后三万四千斛，给赡其食。
现代文：天子命令董忠等人就留在那裹保卫单于，帮助他讨伐叛逆不服的人，又前后转运了三万四千斛粮米到边塞，送给匈奴人吃。
English: Tianzi ordered Dong Zhong and the others to stay there to defend Shan Yu, help him fight the rebels, and transported thirty-four thousand catties of grain and rice back and forth to the border fortress for the Huns to eat.

古文：是岁，郅支单于亦遣使奉献，汉遇之甚厚。
现代文：这年，郅支单于也派使者到汉朝进贡献礼，汉朝对待使者十分优厚。
English: In the same year, Emperor Xizang also sent an envoy to the Han Dynasty to pay tribute. The Han Dynasty treated the envoy very generously.

古文：明年，两单于俱遣使朝献，汉待呼韩邪使有加。
现代文：第二年，两位单于都派使者入汉朝晋见皇帝，贡献礼品，汉朝对待呼韩邪单于的使者更加优厚一些。
English: In the following year, both men sent envoys to the Han Dynasty to meet the emperor and offer gifts. The Han Dynasty treated the envoys from Han and Yan more generously.

古文：明年，呼韩邪单于复入朝，礼赐如初，加衣百一十袭，锦帛九千匹，絮八千斤。
现代文：第二年，呼韩邪单于又入朝晋见选天子，连天子仍像当初那样优礼相加，赏赐如旧，并增加了一百一十套衣服，锦帛九千匹，粗丝棉八千斤。
English: In the second year, when Huan Yidan again entered the court to see the selection of the emperor, even the emperor was still as courteous as before, and the rewards were the same as before, and an additional one hundred and ten sets of clothes, nine thousand brocades, and eight thousand pounds of coarse silk cotton.

古文：以有屯兵，故不复发骑为送。
现代文：因为已经有军队驻扎在匈奴，所以没有再派军队护送。
English: Since there were already troops stationed in the Hun, no further military escort was sent.

古文：始，郅支单于以为呼韩邪降汉，兵弱不能复自还，即引其众西，欲攻定右地。
现代文：起初郅支单于以为呼韩邪单于投降了汉朝，兵力单薄，不会再回来了，便率领军队向西进发，想攻打平定右地。
English: At first, he thought that the Han Dynasty had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, and the troops were thin and would not return, so he led the army to the west and wanted to attack and pacify the right.

古文：又屠耆单于小弟本侍呼韩邪，亦亡之右地，收两兄余兵得数千人，自立为伊利目单于，道逢郅支，合战，郅支杀之，并其兵五万余人。
现代文：另外，屠耆单于的小弟弟本来是侍奉呼韩邪单于的，现在也逃到了右地，收集两位兄长的部众，得到几千人，自立为伊利目单于，在路上碰上了郅支单于，双方交战，郅支单于打败并杀掉了伊利目单于，吞并了他的军队有五万多人。
English: In addition, the younger brother of Tu Youyou Shanyu, who was originally a servant of Han Youyou Shanyu, has also fled to the right, gathered the followers of the two brothers, gained several thousand people, stood up for Yili Shanyu, encountered Yu Shi Shanyu on the road, the two sides fought, Yu Shi Shanyu defeated and killed Yili Shanyu, and absorbed his army of more than 50,000 people.

古文：闻汉出兵、谷助呼韩邪，即遂留居右地。
现代文：听说汉朝出兵出粮帮助呼韩邪单于，便索性留下来，屯居在右地了。
English: Hearing that the Han Dynasty had sent troops and grain to help invade Han and Shan, he immediately stayed and settled in the right place.

古文：自度力不能定匈奴，乃益西近乌孙，欲与并力，遣使见小昆弥乌就屠。
现代文：郅支单于考虑到自己的力量还不能乎定匈奴，便进一步向西走，接近乌孙国，想与乌孙联合，派使者去见小昆弥乌就屠。
English: Considering that his own strength was not enough to defeat the Xiongnu, Gong Zhizan went further west, closer to the Wusun Kingdom. He wanted to unite with the Wusun and sent an envoy to meet and kill Xiao Kunmiwu.

古文：乌就屠见呼韩邪为汉所拥，郅支亡虏，欲攻之以称汉，乃杀郅支使，持头送都护在所，发八千骑迎郅支。
现代文：乌就屠见呼韩邪单于受到汉朝礼遇与帮助，郅支单于则是逃亡奔走，便想攻击郅支，迎合汉朝，便杀了郅支的使者，把头送到汉朝西域都护那裹，出动八千骑兵迎击郅支。
English: Seeing that Han Zidan was receiving courtesy and help from the Han Dynasty, and Gong Zidan was running away, Wu wanted to attack Gongzhi and cater to the Han Dynasty, so he killed Gongzhi's envoy, sent his head to the western region of the Han Dynasty to guard it, and dispatched eight thousand cavalry to attack Gongzhi.

古文：郅支见乌孙兵多，其使又不反，勒兵逢击乌孙，破之。
现代文：郅支单于见乌孙兵多，自己的使者又没能回来，便率军队迎击乌孙，打败了乌孙。
English: Seeing the large number of U.S. soldiers, and his own envoys not being able to return, he led his army to meet the U.S. soldiers and defeated them.

古文：因北击乌揭，乌揭降。
现代文：趁机向北攻击乌揭，乌揭投降了。
English: He took the opportunity to attack Wu Jie in the north, and Wu Jie surrendered.

古文：发其兵西破坚昆，北降丁令，并三国。
现代文：又派自己的军队向西攻破了坚昆，向北打败了丁令，吞并了这三个国家。
English: He also sent his army to break through Jiankun in the west, defeated Dingling in the north, and annexed these three countries.

古文：数遣兵击乌孙，常胜之。
现代文：郅支单于多次派军队攻打乌孙国，经常得胜。
English: Zou Zhizan repeatedly sent troops to attack the Wusun Kingdom, and often won.

古文：坚昆东去单于庭七千里，南去车师五千里，郅支留都之。
现代文：坚昆东距单于王庭七千里，南距车师五千里，郅支留在那裹，并在那裹建都。
English: Jiankun is seven thousand miles away from Wangting in the east, and five thousand miles away from Cheji in the south. Jiankun stayed there and built the capital there.

古文：元帝初即位，呼韩邪单于复上书，言民众困乏。
现代文：元帝刚刚即位，呼韩邪单于又上书汉天子，说包趣人民很贫乏困顿。
English: The Yuan Emperor had just ascended to the throne, and he called Han Xizan and Shuhan Tianzi, saying that the Baotou people were very poor and needy.

古文：汉诏云中、五原郡转谷二万斛以给焉。
现代文：型下诏命令云中郡、五原郡转运二万斛谷物供给包塑。
English: He ordered Yunzhong County and Wuhuan County to transport 20,000 bags of grain to supply plastic bags.

古文：郅支单于自以道远，又怨汉拥护呼韩邪，遣使上书求侍子。
现代文：郅支单于因为自己的居住地离汉朝道路遥远，又对汉朝支持帮助呼韩邪单于十分怨恨，便派使者到锤目上书，要求接回入侍的儿子。
English: Because his place of residence was far away from the road of the Han Dynasty, and because he was very resentful of the Han Dynasty's support and help to the Han Dynasty, he sent an envoy to Hammamet to request the return of his son.

古文：汉遣谷吉送之，郅支杀吉。
现代文：选塑派主造送他回去，竖支单于却杀了谷吉。
English: The master craftsman of the plastic-making school sent him back, but the executioner killed Guji.

古文：汉不知吉音问，而匈奴降者言闻瓯脱皆杀之。
现代文：汉朝不知道谷吉的音讯，匈奴来汉朝投降的人报告说，曾经听瓯脱的匈奴人说谷吉已被杀了。
English: The Han Dynasty did not know the news of Guji, and the Huns who came to the Han Dynasty to surrender reported that they had heard the Huns say that Guji had been killed.

古文：呼韩邪单于使来，汉辄簿责之甚急。
现代文：呼韩邪单于派使者来朝见，汉朝总是十分着急地发文书责求谷吉的音讯。
English: The Han dynasty was always in a hurry to send an envoy to the DPRK to demand information about Guji.

古文：明年，汉遣车骑都尉韩昌、光禄大夫张猛送呼韩邪单于侍子，求问吉等，因赦其罪，勿令自疑。
现代文：第二年，汉朝派车骑都尉韩昌、光禄大夫张猛护送呼韩邪单于入侍的儿子回匈奴，又打听谷吉等人的消息，并宣布赦免匈奴的罪过，以免他们担心汉朝会讨伐自己。
English: In the second year, the Han Dynasty sent the cavalry captain Han Chang and the Guanglu doctor Zhang Meng to escort the son of Han Yidan, who had entered the service, back to the Xiongnu, and inquired about the news of Guji and others, and announced the pardon of the Xiongnu's sins, so that they would not worry that the Han Dynasty would fight against themselves.

古文：昌、猛见单于民众益盛，塞下禽兽尽，单于足以自卫，不畏郅支。
现代文：韩昌、张猛看到匈奴部众人丁兴旺，塞下禽兽都被猎尽，单于的力量已经足以保卫自己，不再害怕郅支。
English: Han Chang and Zhang Meng saw that all the people in the Xiongnu Department were thriving, and all the animals were hunted down. The strength alone was enough to defend themselves, and they were no longer afraid of the Xiongnu.

古文：闻其大臣多劝单于北归者，恐北去后难约束，昌、猛即与为盟约曰： 自今以来，汉与匈奴合为一家，世世毋得相诈相攻。
现代文：韩、张二人听说不少匈奴大臣劝单于回到原来居住的北方去，担心匈奴北归以后不好管辖，韩昌、张猛就与单于订立盟约，说： 从今往后，汉朝与匈奴就是一家人了，世世代代不许互相欺骗、互相攻击。
English: Han Chang and Zhang Meng both heard that many Xiongnu ministers advised Shan Yu to return to the north where he had originally lived, fearing that the Xiongnu would not be well governed after returning to the north. Han Chang and Zhang Meng then signed a covenant with Shan Yu, saying: From now on, the Han Dynasty and the Xiongnu are one family, and for generations to come, they must not deceive or attack each other.

古文：有窃盗者，相报，行其诛，偿其物；有寇，发兵相助。
现代文：有盗窃抢掠对方的事发生，双方要互相通报，惩罚为盗的人，赔偿损失的财物；有敌人侵犯时，要出兵互相救助。
English: If there is theft or looting of the other side, both sides should inform each other, punish the thief, and compensate for the lost property; if there is an enemy encroachment, they should send troops to help each other.

古文：汉与匈奴敢先背约者，受天不祥。
现代文：汉朝与匈奴如果谁敢先背叛盟约，愿意接受上天的惩罚。
English: The Han Dynasty and the Xiongnu are willing to accept the punishment of heaven if anyone dares to betray the covenant first.

古文：令其世世子孙尽如盟。 
现代文：让他们的后代子子孙孙都像盟约上说的那样，遭到灾难。 
English: Let their posterity, their children, and their children's children, be destroyed, according to the covenant.

古文：昌、猛与单于及大臣俱登匈奴诺水东山，刑白马，单于以径路刀金留犁挠酒，以老上单于所破月氏王头为饮器者共饮血盟。
现代文：韩昌、张猛与呼韩邪单于以及他手下的大臣一起登上匈奴的诺水束山，杀了白马，单于用径路刀和金留犁搅和掺马血的酒，用老上单于破杀的月氏王的头颅做酒杯，一起饮血酒为盟。
English: Han Chang and Zhang Meng, together with Han Zidan and his ministers, ascended the Noushui Mountain of the Xiongnu, killed the white horse, mixed the horse blood wine with the road knife and the gold ingot, and made the wine cup with the head of the Moon King, who was killed by the old man, and drank the blood wine together.

古文：昌、猛还奏事，公卿议者以为： 单于保塞为藩，虽欲北去，犹不能为危害。
现代文：韩昌、张猛回到汉朝后报告这事，大臣们议论说 单于已经答应我们愿意做藩属保护边塞，即使想回到北方去，也并不对汉朝构成威胁与妨害。
English: Han Chang and Zhang Meng reported the matter after returning to the Han Dynasty, and the ministers argued that just because we had promised to protect the border fortress, even if we wanted to go back to the north, it did not pose a threat or hindrance to the Han Dynasty.

古文：昌、猛擅以汉国世世子孙与夷狄诅盟，令单于得以恶言上告于天，羞国家，伤威重，不可得行。
现代文：韩昌、张猛擅自行事，拿汉朝世代子孙的未来与匈奴赌咒立盟，使得单于能够用恶言恶语告诉上天，使汉朝蒙受羞辱，有损国威，绝不能这样做。
English: Han Chang and Zhang Meng did things on their own, gambling with the future of the descendants of the Han Dynasty and the Huns to establish an alliance, making it possible for them to tell the heavens with evil words, causing the Han Dynasty to suffer humiliation and damaging national prestige. This must not be done.

古文：宜遣使往告祠天，与解盟。
现代文：应该派使者前去上告于天，与匈奴解除前盟。
English: An envoy should be sent to appeal to heaven to dissolve the alliance with the Huns.

古文：昌、猛奉使无状，罪至不道。 
现代文：韩昌、张猛奉命出使，不成体统，罪行至为大逆不道。 
English: Han Chang and Zhang Meng were ordered to send envoys, which was unseemly, and their crimes amounted to high treason.

古文：上薄其过，有诏昌、猛以赎论，勿解盟。
现代文：皇帝减轻他们的罪过，下诏对韩昌、张猛可以赎罪论处，不解除与匈奴的盟约。
English: The emperor mitigated their sins, and issued an edict that Han Chang and Zhang Meng could atone for their sins, and would not be released from the treaty with the Xiongnu.

古文：其后呼韩邪竟北归庭，人众稍稍归之，国中遂定。
现代文：后来呼韩邪单于终于回到北方的单于王庭去了，匈奴人渐渐归附于他，国内安定下来了。
English: Later, Han Xidan finally returned to the north and went to Wangting. The Xiongnu people gradually attached themselves to him, and the country settled down.

古文：郅支既杀使者，自知负汉，又闻呼韩邪益强，恐见袭击，欲远去。
现代文：郅支单于杀了汉朝的使者，自己也明白辜负了汉朝，又听说呼韩邪益强盛，担心遭到袭击，想往远方迁徙。
English: He killed the emissary of the Han Dynasty. He also knew that he had failed the Han Dynasty. He also heard that the Han Dynasty was strong. He was afraid of being attacked and wanted to migrate far away.

古文：会康居王数为乌孙所困，与诸翕侯计，以为匈奴大国，乌孙素服属之，今郅支单于困厄在外，可迎置东边，使合兵取乌孙以立之，长无匈奴忧矣。
现代文：正巧这时康居王因为屡次被乌孙国围困，与手下的翕侯们商量，认为匈奴是强大的国家，乌孙国一向附属于它，现在郅支单于流落困顿在外，可以迎接他来，居住在束部，双方合力攻破乌孙，让郅支单于在那裹称王，这样便永远没有来自匈奴的忧患了。
English: At that time, King Kangju, who had been repeatedly besieged by the Wusun Kingdom, discussed with his subordinate warlords that the Huns were a powerful country, and the Wusun Kingdom had always been attached to it. Now, the Huns were stranded in exile, and it was possible to welcome him and live in Sokube. The two sides worked together to defeat the Wusun and let the Huns claim the throne there. In this way, there would never be any worries from the Huns.

古文：即使使至坚昆通语郅支。
现代文：便派使者到坚昆把这些话告诉了郅支单于。
English: He then sent an emissary to Jiankun to convey these words to Zou Zhizan.

古文：郅支素恐，又怨乌孙，闻康居计，大说，遂与相结，引兵而西。
现代文：郅支单于常常担心受到呼韩邪的侵袭，又怨恨乌孙，听到康居王的计谋，十分高兴，于是便与康居联合，率军队向西进发。
English: Gong Zhizan was often worried about being attacked by the evil spirits of the Han Dynasty, and he also resented Wu Sun. He was very happy to hear the schemes of King Kangju, so he united with Kangju and led the army to the west.

古文：康居亦遣贵人，橐它驴马数千匹，迎郅支。
现代文：康居也派贵人带着几千匹骆驼、驴、马，去迎接郅支。
English: Kangju also sent dignitaries with thousands of camels, donkeys, and horses to greet the Xizhi.

古文：郅支人众中寒道死，余财三千人到康居。
现代文：郅支的部众不少人在路上冻饿而死，最后才剩了三千人到达康居。
English: Many members of the Min branch died of cold and hunger on the way, and only three thousand remained to reach Kangju.

古文：其后，都护甘延寿与副陈汤发兵即康居诛斩郅支，语在《延寿、汤传》。
现代文：后来，都护甘延寿与副都护陈汤出动军队到康居诛杀了郅支单于，这些记载在甘延寿、陈汤的传记中。
English: Later, the governor of the capital, Gan Yan Shou, and the deputy governor, Chen Tang, sent troops to Kangju to kill Zou Zhishan, which is recorded in the biographies of Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang.

古文：郅支既诛，呼韩邪单于且喜且惧，上书言曰： 常愿谒见天子，诚以郅支在西方，恐其与乌孙俱来击臣，以故未得至汉。
现代文：郅支单于被杀后，呼韩邪单于又高兴又害怕，向选天子上书说： 我常常希望能够去拜见陛下，实在是因为郅支单于居住在西方，我担心他会与墨瑟一起来攻打我，因此才没能去朝见天子。
English: After Gong Zhichan was killed, he called Han Xizan in both joy and fear, and wrote to the chosen one: I often wish I could go to see your majesty, it is because Gong Zhichan lives in the west, I am afraid that he will attack me together with Moses, so I could not go to see the emperor.

古文：今郅支已伏诛，愿入朝见。 
现代文：现在歪睦已伏罪被杀，希望允许我入朝拜见。 
English: Now that Kakomu has been killed in an ambush, I hope that I will be allowed to go to the Imperial Palace to pay my respects.

古文：竟宁元年，单于复入朝，礼赐如初，加衣服锦帛絮，皆倍于黄龙时。
现代文：竟宁元年，呼韩邪单于又来到汉朝，汉朝对他的礼遇和赏赐还像以前一样，并增加衣服、锦帛、粗丝棉的赏赐，都比黄龙年问增加一倍。
English: In the first year of King Ning, Huan Yidan Yu came to the Han Dynasty again. The Han Dynasty treated him with the same courtesy and reward as before, and increased the reward of clothes, brocade, and coarse silk cotton, all of which doubled compared to the Yellow Dragon Year.

古文：单于自言愿婿汉氏以自亲。
现代文：单于自己说愿意做汉朝的女婿，以亲近汉朝。
English: He only said that he was willing to be the son-in-law of the Han Dynasty in order to be close to the Han Dynasty.

古文：元帝以后宫良家子王墙字昭君赐单于。
现代文：汉元帝把后宫仆人的良家女子王墙字昭君赐给单于为妻。
English: Emperor Han Yuan gave Wang Wan Zi Zhaojun, a good-natured woman who was a servant in the harem, to Sanyu as his wife.

古文：单于欢喜，上书愿保塞上谷以西至敦煌，传之无穷，请罢边备塞吏卒，以休天子人民。
现代文：单于十分高兴，向天子上书，说自己愿意保护上谷以西至敦煌的汉朝边塞，并永远传下去，请天子撤回边塞上守卫的官吏士兵，好让天子的臣民得以休养生息。
English: Just because he was very happy, he wrote a letter to the emperor, saying that he was willing to protect the Han Dynasty border fortress west of Shangguan to Dunhuang, and to pass it on forever. He asked the emperor to withdraw the officials and soldiers guarding the border fortress, so that the emperor's subjects could rest and recuperate.

古文：天子令下有司议，议者皆以为便。
现代文：天子把这事下交给大臣们商议，主管大臣们都认为这样做十分便利。
English: The emperor referred the matter to the ministers for discussion, and the ministers in charge all found it very convenient to do so.

古文：郎中侯应习边事，以为不可许。
现代文：郎中令侯应熟谙边塞之事，认为不能这样答应匈奴。
English: His brother-in-law, the marquis, should be familiar with the matter of border fortifications, and he thought that he could not promise the Xiongnu in this way.

古文：上问状，应曰：
现代文：漠元帝询问他其中缘故，侯应回答说：
English: Emperor Mo Yuan asked him why, and Hou Ying answered:

古文：周、秦以来，匈奴暴桀，寇侵边境，汉兴，尤被其害。
现代文： 自从周、秦以来，匈奴就十分凶暴桀骛，侵扰边塞，汉朝建立后，尤其受害严重。
English: Ever since the Zhou and Qin dynasties, the Xiongnu had been very violent, invading border fortresses. After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, they suffered particularly badly.

古文：臣闻北边塞至辽东，外有阴山，东西千余里，草木茂盛，多禽兽，本冒顿单于依阻其中，治作弓矢，来出为寇，是其苑囿也。
现代文：我听说我们北边的边塞一直到辽东，外面是阴山山脉，东西长有一千多里，草木茂盛，禽兽众多。这裹本来是冒顿单于凭恃的地方，他在裹面打造弓箭，训练军队，进出阴山来侵扰我们，阴山便是他们养禽兽的苑囿。
English: I heard that our northern border fortress extends all the way to the east of Liaodong Province. Outside is the Qinshan Mountains, which are more than a thousand miles long from east to west, with lush vegetation and numerous animals. This was originally a place where people ventured to live alone. He made bows and arrows, trained troops, and came in and out of the Qinshan Mountains to harass us. The Qinshan Mountains were their breeding grounds for animals and birds.

古文：至孝武世，出师征伐，斥夺此地，攘之于幕北。
现代文：到了孝武皇帝的时候，派兵攻打、夺取了遣块地方，把他们驱赶到大漠以北。
English: When it came to the time of Emperor Xiaowu, he sent troops to attack and seize the settlement areas, and drove them to the north of the desert.

古文：建塞徼，起亭隧，筑外城，设屯戍以守之，然后边境得用少安。
现代文：筑起边界要塞，建起哨所小路，修起塞外城池，设置了军队驻守在那裹，然后边境上才因此稍稍安定下来。
English: The border fortifications were built, the post roads were built, the outer fortifications were built, the troops were stationed there, and only then did the border settle down a little.

古文：幕北地乎，少草木，多大沙，匈奴来寇，少所蔽隐，从塞以南，径深山谷，往来差难。
现代文：大漠以北地势平坦，草木稀少，多是沙石，匈奴来侵袭时，没什么可做隐蔽的。从边塞往南的地方，深山小路，来往艰难。
English: The terrain north of the desert is flat, with sparse vegetation and mostly sand and stone. When the Xiongnu invade, there is nothing to hide behind. From the border fortress to the south, the mountain paths are difficult to travel.

古文：边长老言匈奴失阴山之后，过之未尝不哭也。
现代文：边境上的老年人说匈奴人自从失去阴山之后，每次经过时没有不哭的。
English: Elderly people on the border say that the Huns have not stopped crying every time they pass since they lost Yin Mountain.

古文：如罢备塞戍卒，示夷狄之大利，不可一也。
现代文：现在如果我们撤回守卫边塞的士兵，把这么好的有利条件展示给他们，这是不能这样做的第一条。
English: Now, if we withdraw the soldiers guarding the frontier fortress and present them with such favourable conditions, this is the first thing that cannot be done.

古文：今圣德广被，天覆匈奴，匈奴得蒙全活之恩，稽首来臣。
现代文：现今皇帝您普施恩泽，您的恩德像上天一样笼盖着匈奴，匈奴人蒙汉朝救命之恩，才前来叩首称臣。
English: Today, Your Imperial Majesty, You have bestowed Your grace upon us. Your benevolence has enveloped the Xiongnu people like the heavens. The Xiongnu people were saved by the Han Dynasty, and only then did they come to bow their heads and praise You.

古文：夫夷狄之情，困则卑顺，强则骄逆，天性然也。
现代文：那些匈奴人的性情，是在危难的时候便谦卑恭顺，强盛的时候就骄横悖逆，这是他们的天性使然。
English: It is the nature of those Huns to be humble and submissive in times of danger, and to be arrogant and rebellious in times of strength.

古文：前以罢外城，省亭隧，今裁足以候望通烽火而已。
现代文：前些时候汉朝已经撤销了塞外城池，削减了驻守哨卡要路的军队，现在的人数才够观望情况、点烽火通信罢了。
English: Some time ago, the Han Dynasty had already abolished the outposts and reduced the number of troops stationed at key checkpoints. Now, the number of troops is only enough to wait and see the situation and establish communication.

古文：古者安不忘危，不可复罢，二也。
现代文：古人就说要居安思危，汉军不能再撤，这是第二条。
English: The ancients said that we should live in peace and mind the danger, and the Chinese army can no longer withdraw. This is the second article.

古文：中国有礼义之教、刑罚之诛，愚民犹尚犯禁，又况单于，能必其众不犯约哉！
现代文：中原有礼义方面的教育，有刑罚做为惩罚的手段，一些愚民还是敢犯法违禁，又何况单于，能一定做到不让他的部众违反盟约吗？
English: Zhongyuan has the education of etiquette, has the penalty as the means of punishment, some stupid people still dare to violate the law, and what's more, can it be done to prevent his subordinates from violating the covenant?

古文：三也。自中国尚建关梁以制诸侯，所以绝臣下之凯欲也。
现代文：这是第三条，从开始中国就重视修建关隘来控制诸侯，这样是为了断绝臣子的非分之想。
English: This is the third article. From the beginning, China has attached importance to the construction of passes to control the lords, in order to break the vassal's ill-will.

古文：设塞徼，置屯戍，非独为匈奴而已，亦为诸属国降民，本故匈奴之人，恐其思旧逃亡，四也。
现代文：建起边界要塞，设置驻守的军队，不衹是为了防备匈奴，也是为了有那些附属国和归降的人，他们有的本来是匈奴人，我们担心他们会思念故里而逃跑，这是第四条。
English: The construction of border fortresses and the stationing of troops is not only for the purpose of guarding against the Huns, but also for the sake of those dependent countries and those who have surrendered. Some of them were originally Huns, and we fear that they will miss their homeland and flee. This is Article 4.

古文：近西羌保塞，与汉人交通，吏民贪利，侵盗其畜产、妻子，以此怨恨，起而背畔，世世不绝。
现代文：近世西羌保护汉朝的边塞，与汉朝人交往，一些官吏、百姓贪图小利，去侵袭、抢夺人家的牲畜、财产和妻儿，因此引起西羌人的怨恨，起来背叛汉朝，这样的情况世代不断。
English: In modern times, Xidi protected the Han Dynasty's border fortress and interacted with the Han Dynasty people. Some officials and people were greedy for small profits and attacked and robbed other people's livestock, property, and wives and children, thus causing the resentment of Xidi people and rising up to betray the Han Dynasty. This situation has been going on for generations.

古文：今罢乘塞，则生嫚易分争之渐，五也。
现代文：现在撤销了边塞的保卫军队，那么慢慢地必然会导致互相侮辱欺凌，这是第五条。
English: Now that the troops guarding the border fortress have been withdrawn, it will inevitably lead to mutual insults and bullying, which is the fifth article.

古文：往者从军多没不还者，子孙贫困，一旦亡出，从其亲威，六也。
现代文：以前参军去匈奴作战的人有不少失落在那裹没有回来，他们的子孙很贫困，一旦逃出去了，去跟随他们的亲人，也不回来了，这是第六条。
English: Those who joined the army to fight the Huns in the past lost a lot and did not return. Their children and grandchildren were very poor. Once they escaped, they followed their relatives and did not return. This is the sixth article.

古文：又边人奴婢愁苦，欲亡者多，曰 闻匈奴中乐，无奈候望急何！ 
现代文：另外，边塞上给人做奴婢的人十分愁苦，想要逃走的人很多，听说匈奴那里很好，祇是哨兵看得很紧，没有办法。
English: In addition, the people who work as slaves on the border are very sad, there are many people who want to escape, I heard that the Huns are very good there, but the sentries are watching very closely, there is no way.

古文：然时有亡出塞者，七也。
现代文：然而也还不时有逃出边塞的，这是第七条。
English: However, from time to time there are also people who escape from the border fortress. This is the seventh article.

古文：盗贼桀黠，群辈犯法，如其窘急，亡走北出，则不可制，八也。
现代文：强盗小偷十分狡猾，常成群结伙犯法为盗，如果他们被逼急了，逃出北边的关塞，就没法约束惩罚他们了，这是第八条。
English: Robbers and thieves are very cunning. They often break the law and steal in groups. If they are in a hurry and escape from the northern checkpoint, there is no way to restrain and punish them. This is Article 8.

古文：起塞以来百有余年，非皆以土垣也，或因山岩石，木柴僵落，溪谷水门，稍稍平之，卒徒筑治，功费久远，不可胜计。臣恐议者不深虑其终始，欲以一切省徭戍，十年之外，百岁之内，卒有它变，障塞破坏，亭隧灭绝，当更发屯缮治，累世之功不可卒复，九也。
现代文：我担心商议此事的大臣不仔细地考虑事情的前前后后，衹想以现时的情况和目前的计较就减少徒隶和守卫的士兵。十年以后，百年之内，一旦有紧急变故，城池关塞已经毁坏，哨卡小路被湮没，只好再出动人马去驻扎修缮，几代积累而成的东西是不可能一下子修复的，这是第九条。
English: I am worried that the ministers who are deliberating on this matter will not carefully consider the pros and cons of the matter, and think that with the current situation and current plans, they will reduce the number of soldiers and guards. Ten years later, within a hundred years, in the event of an emergency, the city gates have been destroyed, the sentry path has been destroyed, and it is necessary to send more men and horses to station and repair. It is impossible to repair what has been accumulated over several generations at once. This is Article 9.

古文：如罢戍卒、省候望，单于自以保塞守御，必深德汉，请求无已。小失其意，则不可测。
现代文：如果我们撤回守卫的士兵，减少了望哨，单于便会自以为为汉朝保卫守御边塞，觉得对汉朝有莫大的功劳，便会发生不可知晓的祸端。
English: If we withdraw the soldiers guarding the border and reduce the number of watchtowers, only to think that we are protecting the border fortress for the Han Dynasty and feel that we have done great service to the Han Dynasty, an unknown calamity will occur.

古文：开夷狄之隙，亏中国之固，十也。
现代文：这样为匈塑开方便之门，削弱我国守卫力量的稳固，这是不能这样做的第十条。
English: This would open a convenient door for Hungary and weaken the stability of our country's defense force, which is prohibited by Article 10.

古文：非所以永持至安，威制百蛮之长策也。
现代文：因此，这不是永远保持边塞安定，控制其他少数民族国家的上等计策。 
English: Therefore, it is not the best strategy to keep the border fortress stable forever and control other ethnic minority countries.

古文：对奏，天子有诏： 勿议罢边塞事。 
现代文：侯应的对答上奏皇帝后，皇帝下诏说： 不要讨论撤销边防的事了。 
English: After Hou Ying's reply was reported to the emperor, the emperor issued an edict saying: Don't discuss the matter of revoking the border defense.

古文：使车骑将军口谕单于曰： 单于上书愿罢北边吏士屯戍，子孙世世保塞。
现代文：并派车骑将军许嘉向单于传达口谕，说： 单于上书说希望汉朝撤回守卫北部边塞的官吏士兵，让匈奴人来世代保卫。
English: He also sent the cavalry general Xu Jia to send a message to Shan Yu, saying: Shan Yu wrote a letter saying that he hoped the Han Dynasty would withdraw the officials and soldiers guarding the northern border fortress and let the Huns defend it for generations to come.

古文：单于乡慕礼义，所以为民计者甚厚，此长久之策也，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：单于崇尚礼义，你这样为百姓着想十分好，这也是选旬和好的长久之计，我十分赞赏。
English: In addition to upholding etiquette, it is very good of you to think of the people in this way. This is also a good long-term strategy for selecting the best season, and I very much appreciate it.

古文：中国四方皆有关梁障塞，非独以备塞外也，亦以防中国奸邪放纵，出为寇害，故明法度以专众心也。
现代文：我国的四面边界都有关桥梁，并不是单单要防备塞外，也是为了防备我国的强盗坏人猖獗，跑出边塞去为害匈奴，所以才申明法度，以惩戒众心。
English: There are bridges on all four sides of the border of our country. It is not just to guard against intruders, but also to guard against the rampant bandits in our country, who run out of the border to harm the Xiongnu. Therefore, it is necessary to affirm the law to discipline the hearts of the people.

古文：敬谕单于之意，朕无疑焉。
现代文：我已明白单于的心意，这毫无疑心。
English: I know what it's like to be single, there's no doubt about that.

古文：为单于怪其不罢，故使大司马车骑将军嘉晓单于。 
现代文：我担心单于怪我不撤边防，所以派大司马车骑将军许嘉去告诉单于其中缘故。 
English: I was worried that it was my fault for not withdrawing the border guards, so I sent General Xu Jia in a large carriage to tell him the reason.

古文：单于谢曰： 愚不知大计，天子幸使大臣告语，甚厚！ 
现代文：单于称谢说： 我不了解天子的深远思虑，多亏天子派大臣来告诉我，我十分感谢。 
English: He only said in appreciation, "I do not understand the far-reaching thoughts of the Son of Heaven. Thanks to the Son of Heaven for sending a minister to tell me, I am very grateful."

古文：初，左伊秩訾为呼韩邪画计归汉，竟以安定。
现代文：当初，左伊秩訾王替呼韩邪单于出谋划策，让他归顺汉朝，后来匈奴终于因此而安定来。
English: At first, the king of Zuoying Chichibu called Han Yidan to come up with a plan to make him submit to the Han Dynasty, and later the Xiongnu finally stabilized because of this.

古文：其后或谗伊秩訾自伐其功，常鞅鞅，呼韩邪疑之。
现代文：后来有人谗毁伊秩訾自我炫耀功绩，经常不高兴，心怀不满，呼韩邪便对他有了怀疑。
English: Later, someone tried to ruin him for his self-aggrandizement. He was often unhappy and disgruntled, and Hou Hanxiu became suspicious of him.

古文：左伊秩訾惧诛，将其众千余人降汉，汉以为关内侯，食邑三百户，令佩其王印绶。
现代文：左伊秩訾王怕被杀掉，便率领自己手下的一千多人投降了汉朝，汉朝让他做丁关内侯，食邑三百户，让他还佩戴原来王的印绶。
English: Zuoying Chichibu Wang was afraid of being killed, so he led more than a thousand of his subordinates to surrender to the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty made him the governor of Dingguan, with 300 households, and made him wear the original king's seal.

古文：及竟宁中，呼韩邪来朝，与伊穆訾相见，谢曰： 王为我计甚厚，令匈奴至今安宁，王之力也，德岂可忘！
现代文：到了竟宁年间，呼韩邪单于到汉朝来拜见汉天子，遇见了左伊秩訾王，单于谢罪说： 王爷您当初替我谋划，恩义深厚，使我们匈奴到今天还安定宁静，这些都是王爷您的功劳啊，您的仁德我怎么能忘记？
English: When it came to the Jongning era, Huan Yidan went to the Han Dynasty to visit Han Tianzi and met Zuo Yi Chizhong Wang. He said to Xie Sin: "Prince, you planned for me in the beginning, you were deeply grateful, and you have kept our Xiongnu stable and tranquil to this day. All of this is thanks to you, Prince. How can I forget your kindness?"

古文：我失王意，使王去不复顾留，皆我过也。
现代文：是我做错了，失去王爷的青睐，使得王爷离去，不愿再留在匈奴，这些都是我的过错。
English: I made a mistake, lost the prince's favor, caused the prince to leave, did not want to stay in Xiongnu, these are all my fault.

古文：今欲白天子，请王归庭。 
现代文：现在我想跟天子说说，请您回匈奴王庭。 
English: Now I would like to say to the Son of Heaven, please return to the court of the Hun king.

古文：伊秩訾曰： 单于赖天命，自归于汉，得以安宁，单于神灵，天子之晁也，我安得力！
现代文：伊秩訾说道： 单于您靠了上天的安排，自己归顺汉朝，匈奴得以安宁，单于神明，是天子的福佑，我有什么功劳！
English: Ippitsu said, "You alone relied on God's arrangement and surrendered yourself to the Han Dynasty, and the Xiongnu were able to live in peace. You alone relied on the gods and were blessed by the Son of Heaven. What do I have to show for it?

古文：既已降汉，又复归匈奴，是两心也。
现代文：现在我既然已经投降了汉朝，如果又回归匈奴，就是三心二意了。
English: Now that I have already surrendered to the Han Dynasty, if I return to the Xiongnu, it will be half-hearted.

古文：愿为单于侍使于汉，不敢听命。 
现代文：我愿意做您的使臣，留在汉朝，如果让我回去，恕不听命。 
English: I am willing to be your envoy and stay in the Han Dynasty. If you ask me to go back, I will not obey.

古文：单于固请不能得而归。
现代文：单于又一再坚决请求，终不能使左伊秩訾王回心转意，便回匈奴去了。
English: Repeated and resolute entreaties alone were not enough to change the king's mind, and he returned to the Huns.

古文：王昭君号宁胡阏氏，生一男伊屠智牙师，为右日逐王。
现代文：王昭君的封号是宁胡辟氏，生了一个儿子名叫伊屠智牙师，被立为右日逐王。
English: Wang Zhaojun's seal name was Ning Hubai, and she gave birth to a son named I Tu Zhi, a dentist, who was made the rightful king.

古文：呼韩邪立二十八年，建始二年死。
现代文：呼韩邪单于在位二十八年，建始二年死去。
English: Huan Yadsan died in the 28th year of his reign, two years after the founding.

古文：始，呼韩邪嬖左伊秩訾兄呼衍王女二人。
现代文：起初呼韩邪单于很宠爱左伊秩訾哥哥呼衍王的两个女儿。
English: At first, Han Xizan was very fond of Zuo Yi's elder brother Huyan Wang's two daughters.

古文：长女颛渠阏氏，生二子，长曰且莫车，次曰囊知牙斯。
现代文：大女儿是颛渠板氏，生了两个儿子，大儿子叫且莫车，二儿子叫囊知牙斯。
English: The eldest daughter is Ms. Minqiu Ban, who gave birth to two sons, the eldest son is called Kimo Che, and the second son is called Cang Zhi Ya Si.

古文：少女为大阏氏，生四子，长曰雕陶莫皋，次曰且糜胥，皆长于且莫车，少子咸、乐二人，皆小子囊知牙斯。
现代文：呼衔王的二女儿是大辟氏，生了四个儿子，老大叫雕陶莫皋，老二叫且麋胥，都比且莫车年纪大；二个小儿子是咸、乐，都比囊知牙斯小。
English: The second daughter of King Huo Liang belonged to the Dabi clan and had four sons. The eldest was named Zhi Dao Mo Jie and the second was named Qi Jie, both of whom were older than Qi Jie Mo Jie. The two youngest sons were Xian and Le, both of whom were younger than Zhaozhi Das.

古文：又它阏氏子十余人。
现代文：还有其他辟氏生的儿子有十多个。
English: There are more than a dozen other sons of Pi.

古文：颛渠阏氏贵，且莫车爱。
现代文：颛渠板氏尊贵，且莫车也受单于宠爱。
English: Gongquanban is an honorable man, and Mo Che is also a favorite of singles.

古文：呼韩邪病且死，欲立且莫车，其母颛渠阏氏曰： 匈奴乱十余年，不绝如发，赖蒙汉力，故得复安。
现代文：呼韩邪单于病得快要死了，想让且莫车继位，他母亲颛渠辟氏说： 匈奴混罱了十多年了，这种状况像头发一样不能断绝，幸亏靠了汉朝的帮助，匈奴才得以安定，现在国内平定的时间还不长，百姓打仗死伤很多。
English: Han Xizan cried out that he was sick and was about to die, and he wanted to be succeeded by Quimoc. His mother, Zou Quibi, said: "The Xiongnu has been confused for more than ten years, and this situation cannot be broken like hair. Fortunately, thanks to the help of the Han Dynasty, the Xiongnu was able to stabilize. Now the time for domestic peace is not long, and there are many people killed and injured in the war.

古文：今平定未久，人民创艾战斗，且莫车年少，百姓未附，恐复危国。
现代文：且莫车年纪还小，老百姓未能归心于他，如果让他即位，恐怕会再次使匈奴处于险境。
English: Moreover, Moche is still young, and the people have not been able to warm up to him. If he is allowed to take the throne, I am afraid that it will once again put the Xiongnu in danger.

古文：我与大阏氏一家共子，不如立雕陶莫皋。 
现代文：我与左题压是亲姊妹，生的儿子都一样，不如立雕陶莫皋为单于。 
English: I and Zuo Tiebin are sisters, and we have the same son. It's better to be alone than to be alone.

古文：大阏氏曰： 且莫车虽少，大臣共持国事，今舍贵立贱，后世必乱。 
现代文：太挝压说： 目莫车虽然年纪小，有大臣们帮着处理国家大事，如果现在舍弃尊贵的，拥立卑贱的，恐怕以后还会出乱子。 
English: Taaosu said: Although Mengroche is young, there are ministers to help deal with national affairs. If you abandon the noble and support the lowly now, I'm afraid there will be trouble in the future.

古文：单于卒从颛渠阏氏计，立雕陶莫皋，约令传国与弟。
现代文：呼韩邪单于最后还是听从了颛渠板氏的建议，立雕陶莫皋为单于，立下约令，要他将来把国家传给弟弟。
English: In the end, Huo Han and Xidan still followed the advice of Xuan Quanban. They set up a statue of Tao Mopu for Xuan Yu, and made a covenant for him to pass the country to his brother in the future.

古文：呼韩邪死，雕陶莫皋立，为复株累若鞮单于。
现代文：呼韩邪死后，雕陶莫皋即位，称为复株案若千单于。
English: After the death of Huan Zi, the sculptor Tao Miao ascended to the throne, known as the replanting case.

古文：复株累若鞮单于立，遣子右致卢儿王醯谐屠奴侯入侍，以且糜胥为左贤王，且莫车为左谷蠡王，囊知牙斯为右贤王。
现代文：复株案若千单于即位后，派儿子右致卢儿王醯谐屠奴侯到龃侍奉天子，任命目。麋胥为左贤王，任命旦皇垩为左谷蠡王，囊知牙斯为右贤王。
English: According to the reinstatement case, after the enthronement of Emperor Rokusen, he sent his son, Emperor Ju Zhaozong, to King Lu Er, and sent his son, Emperor Wanying, to serve the son of heaven, and appointed him as the king of the left virtue, Emperor Tang Zhaozong as the king of the left virtue, and Emperor Cang Zhias as the king of the right virtue.

古文：复株累单于复妻王昭君，生二女，长女云为须卜居次，小女为当于居次。
现代文：复株案单于又以玉旦驴为妻子，生了两个女儿，大女儿云是须卜居次，二女儿是当于居次。
English: In the case of reincarnation, Yu also married a donkey and gave birth to two daughters. The eldest daughter, Yun, was second to Subu, and the second daughter was second to Yu.

古文：河平元年，单于遣右皋林王伊邪莫演等奉献朝正月。
现代文：河平元年，单于派右皋林王伊邪莫演等人来汉朝进献贡品，参加正月朝拜。
English: In the first year of the Heping era, Shanyu sent Wang Yizhimoyuan and others to the Han Dynasty to offer tribute and participate in the New Year's morning worship.

古文：既罢，遣使者送至蒲反。
现代文：大朝完毕，汉朝派使者护送伊邪莫演等人到了蒲反。
English: After the end of the Great Northern War, the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to escort Yi Yao, Mo Yuan and others to Bagan.

古文：伊邪莫演言： 欲降，即不受我，我自杀，终不敢还归。 
现代文：伊邪莫演说： 我想投降汉朝。如果不答应我，我就自杀，怎么我也不回匈奴了。 
English: I want to surrender to the Han Dynasty. If you don't agree, I'll commit suicide. I'm not going back to the Xiongnu.

古文：使者以闻，下公卿议。议者或言宜如故事，受其降。
现代文：汉朝使者回来报告，天子把这事交给大臣们讨论商议，有的人说应该像以前那样，接受投降的人。
English: The envoy of the Han Dynasty came back with a report, and the emperor handed the matter over to the ministers for discussion and deliberation. Some people said that it should be the same as before, accepting those who surrender.

古文：光禄大夫谷永、议郎杜钦以为： 汉兴，匈奴数为边害，故设金爵之赏以待降者。
现代文：光禄大夫谷永、议郎杜钦认为 汉朝建立以来，匈奴屡次犯边为害，所以我们才设立封爵位赏金钱的厚遇，招徕投降的匈奴人。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the Xiongnu have repeatedly crossed the border into harm's way, so we set up a knighthood to reward money and invite the surrendering Xiongnu.

古文：今单于诎体称臣，列为北藩，遣使朝贺，无有二心，汉家接之，宜异于往时。
现代文：现在单于十分卑顺，向汉朝称臣，被列为北部的藩国，派使者到汉朝朝拜祝贺，没有二心，因此汉朝对待投降的人，应该与以往有所不同。
English: Now, the Han Dynasty treats those who surrender differently from the past, as it is nothing but very humble, claiming to be a vassal of the Han Dynasty, being classified as a northern feudal state, and sending envoys to the Han Dynasty to pay homage and congratulate.

古文：今既享单于聘贡之质，而更受其逋逃之臣，是贪一夫之得而失一国之心，拥有罪之臣而绝慕义之君也。
现代文：现在既然我们接受了单于忠诚的聘问与贡品，却又接受他们叛逃的大臣，这样做是贪求得一人，却失去一国人的忠心，礼遇支持有罪的臣子，而抛弃向慕仁义的国君。
English: Now that we have accepted the tribute and tribute of the loyal alone, and have received the ministers of their defection, it is a case of coveting a man, and losing the loyalty of a nation; of favouring the guilty subjects, and abandoning the king to the mercy of justice.

古文：假令单于初立，欲委身中国，未知利害，私使伊邪莫演诈降以卜吉凶，受之亏德沮善，令单于自疏，不亲边吏；或者设为反间，欲因而生隙，受之适合其策，使得归曲而直责。
现代文：假如是因为单于刚刚即位，想亲近汉朝，到汉朝来朝拜，而不知道汉朝的态度如何，对自己是好是坏，暗地裹派伊邪莫演来假投降，看看将来的吉凶如何，如果我们接受了投降的人，那便破坏了善行，于德有亏，使单于自己疏远我们，不亲近我们边塞上的官吏；或者是有人使反问之计，想藉此在我们之间制造嫌隙，如果我们接受了投降的人，就正好中了他的计策，使匈奴人能够指责我们做得不对，责备我们理亏。
English: If it is because you have just ascended the throne and want to be close to the Han Dynasty, come to the Han Dynasty to worship, but you do not know what the attitude of the Han Dynasty is, whether it is good or bad for you, secretly send the evil person to fake surrender and see what the future is like, if we accept the person who surrenders, it will destroy the good deed, which is bad for Germany, so that you alienate us from yourself and do not get close to the officials on our border, or if someone uses the trick of cross-examination to create a rift between us, if we accept the person who surrenders, we just hit his trick, so that

古文：此诚边境安危之原，师旅动静之首，不可不详也。
现代文：这实在就是导致我们边境安危与否的根源，军队出动与否的起始，是不能掉以轻心的。
English: This is indeed the root cause of whether our border is safe or not, and the beginning of whether or not the military will be dispatched cannot be taken lightly.

古文：不如勿受，以昭日月之信，抑诈谖之谋，怀附亲之心，便。 
现代文：不如不接受归降的人，向匈奴昭示我们如曰月般不可变异的信用，抑制欺诈奸邪的阴谋，爱护那归附亲近汉朝的人，造才是便利之策。 
English: It would be better for those who do not accept the surrender to show the Xiongnu our trust, which is as immutable as the moon, to suppress the conspiracy of fraud and treachery, and to love those who are close to the Han Dynasty.

古文：对奏，天子从之。
现代文：天子听了他们二人的对答，听从了他们的建议。
English: Tianzi listened to their answers and followed their advice.

古文：遣中郎将王舜往问降状。
现代文：并派遣中郎将王舜前去询问归降人的情况。
English: He also dispatched a middle-ranking official to bring Wang Yao forward to inquire about the situation of the returnees.

古文：伊邪莫演曰： 我病狂妄言耳。 
现代文：伊邪莫演说： 那是我犯了狂病，胡说一气罢了。 
English: Yizhimo said, "It's just that I've gone mad and I'm talking nonsense."

古文：遣去。
现代文：汉朝便派他回去了。
English: The Han Dynasty sent him back home.

古文：归到，官位如故，不肯令见汉使。
现代文：伊邪莫演回到匈奴后，官位与原来一样，并且不肯让他再见汉朝使者。
English: After Yizhimo returned to the Xiongnu, his official position was the same as before, and he refused to let him see the Han Dynasty emissary again.

古文：明年，单于上书愿朝。河平四年正月，遂入朝，加赐锦绣缯帛二万匹，絮二万斤，它如竟宁时。
现代文：第二年，复株宗单于上书皇帝，希望在河乎四年正月来朝拜漠天子，之后便入朝拜见，汉朝额外赏赐给他锦绣缯帛两万匹，粗丝棉两万斤，其他赏赐如竞宁年间一样。
English: In the second year, Fuzhou Zong Shan asked Emperor Shangshu to come to pay homage to the Son of the Desert God in the first month of the fourth year of the Heian period. After that, he went to pay homage to the emperor. The Han Dynasty additionally rewarded him with 20,000 horses of brocade embroidery and 20,000 catties of coarse silk cotton. The other rewards were the same as those given during the Qunning period.

古文：复株累单于立十岁，鸿嘉元年死。
现代文：复株余单于在位十年，鸿嘉元年死去。
English: Yu Shan died in the tenth year of his reign and Hong Jia in the first year of his reign.

古文：弟且糜胥立，为搜谐若鞮单于。
现代文：传位给弟弟且麋胥，称为搜谐若千单子。
English: It was passed down to his younger brother, Katsushika, and is known as the Sohon Wakasen Monzu.

古文：搜谐单于立，遣子左祝都韩王朐留斯侯入侍，以且莫车为左贤王。
现代文：搜谐单于即位后，派儿子左祝都韩王朐留斯侯入朝侍奉汉天子，任命且莫车为左贤王。
English: After his enthronement, he sent his son Zuo Zhuodu Han Wang Qilius into the imperial court to serve Han Tianzi, and appointed him as Zuo Xian Wang.

古文：搜谐单于立八岁。元延元年，为朝二年发行，未入塞，病死。
现代文：搜谐单于在位八年后，元延元年为到汉朝参加第：二年正月的大朝，从匈奴出发，还没进入边塞就得病死了。
English: After eight years on the throne, Yuan Enlian came to the Han Dynasty in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty to participate in the Second Great Dynasty in the first month of the second year. Starting from the Xiongnu, he died of illness before entering the border fortress.

古文：弟且莫车立，为车牙若鞮单于。
现代文：他的弟弟且莫车继位为单于，造就是车牙若千单于。
English: His younger brother and successor to the throne, Mochie, is also single, which makes him as rare as chariot teeth.

古文：车牙单于立，遣子右於涂仇掸王乌夷当入侍，以囊知牙斯为左贤王。
现代文：车牙单于即位后，派儿子右于涂仇掸王乌夷当入朝侍奉汉王子。任命囊知牙斯为左贤王。
English: After Che Zha Shan ascended the throne, he sent his son Zu to the court of King Wu Yi to enter the imperial court to serve the Prince of Han. He appointed Cang Zhi Ya Si as Zu Xian Wang.

古文：车牙单于立四岁，绥和元年死。
现代文：车牙单于在位四年，绥和元年死去。
English: Che Danzan reigned for four years and died in the first year of the Heian period.

古文：弟囊知牙斯立，为乌珠留若鞮单于。
现代文：传位给弟弟囊知牙斯，称为乌珠留若千单于。
English: He passed the position to his younger brother, Tsutsujigas, known as the Black Pearl.

古文：乌珠留单于立，以第二阏氏子乐为左贤王，以第五阏氏子舆为右贤王，遣子右股奴王乌鞮牙斯入侍。汉遣中郎将夏侯藩、副校尉韩容使匈奴。
现代文：乌珠留单于即位后，立与第二板氏生的儿子乐为左贤王，立与第五板氏生的儿子舆为右贤王，派儿子右股奴王乌千牙斯入朝侍奉汉天子，汉朝派中郎将夏侯藩、副校尉韩容出使匈奴。
English: After the enthronement of Wuzhuludao, Le, the son born to the second board clan, became Zuoxian Wang, and Myu, the son born to the fifth board clan, became Uxian Wang. He sent his son, Zuoxian Wang, to the imperial court to serve Han Tianzi, and the Han Dynasty sent Zhongro to the Xia Hou Clan and Vice-Colonel Han Rong to the Xiongnu.

古文：时帝舅大司马票骑将军王根领尚书事，或说根曰： 匈奴有斗入汉地，直张掖郡，生奇材木，箭竿就羽，如得之，于边甚饶，国家有广地之卖，将军显功，垂于无穷。 
现代文：当时皇帝的舅父大司马骠骑将军王根主管尚书省事务，有人劝说王根说： 匈奴有一座陡峭挺拔的高山接近汉朝的地方，面对着张掖郡，山上生长奇异的木材，添上鸶羽非常适合做箭竿。如果我们能够得到它，可以富饶边塞，国家可以收到扩展土地的实利，将军您也可以显示功绩，永远流传下去。 
English: At that time, the emperor's uncle, General Wang Gen, who was in charge of the affairs of Shangshu Province, was persuaded to say: The Xiongnu has a steep mountain close to the Han Dynasty. Facing Zhangye County, there is a strange wood growing on the mountain, which is very suitable for making arrows. If we can get it, we can enrich the border, the country can receive the real benefit of expanding the land, and the general can also show his merits and pass them down forever.

古文：根为上言其利，上直欲从单于求之，为有不得，伤命损威。
现代文：王根向皇帝说了要这座山的好处，皇帝也正想向单于要这座山，衹是怕匈奴不答应，有损皇帝的尊严。
English: Wang Gen told the emperor about the benefits of this mountain, and the emperor also wanted to ask for this mountain, but he was afraid that the Xiongnu would not agree, which would undermine the dignity of the emperor.

古文：根即但以上指晓藩，令从藩所说而求之。
现代文：王根就把皇帝的意思告诉丁夏和吴藩，让他以个人的身份向单于要求。
English: Wang Gen told Ding Xia and the Wu clan about the emperor's intention, and asked him to comply with the request in his personal capacity.

古文：藩至匈奴，以语次说单于曰： 窃见匈奴斗入汉地，直张掖郡。汉三都尉居塞上，士卒数百人塞苦，候望久劳。
现代文：夏侯藩到了匈奴，等待时机拿话劝告单于说： 我见到匈叹有一座峭拔的山峰连接并进入汉朝地方，面对着张掖郡，汉朝有三个都尉率领几百士兵驻扎在墓上，十分寒苦，值班当哨长久辛劳。
English: When Xia Hou Han arrived in Xiongnu, he waited for the right time to give advice to Shan Yu and said: "I saw that there is a steep mountain in Xiongnu that connects and enters the Han Dynasty area, facing Zhangye County. In the Han Dynasty, there were three captains leading hundreds of soldiers stationed on the tomb. It was very cold and the guard duty was long and arduous.

古文：单于宜上书献此地，直断阏之，省两都尉士卒数百人，以复天子厚恩，其报必大。 
现代文：单于您应该上书漠天子，贡献出这块地方，直接送给边吏，这样会省去汉朝守卫的两个都尉和几百士兵，以报答漠天子对匈奴的厚恩，汉朝的回报必定十分厚重。 
English: You alone should write to Mu Tianzi, donate this piece of land, and give it directly to the border officials. This will save two captains and hundreds of soldiers from the Han Dynasty guards. In return for Mu Tianzi's kindness to the Xiongnu, the Han Dynasty's return must be very heavy.

古文：单于曰： 此天子诏语邪，将从使者所求也？ 
现代文：单于问道： 这是汉天子的诏令呢，还是使者您的请求呢？ 
English: Dai Yu asked: Is this the edict of Han Tianzi, or is it your messenger's request?

古文：藩曰： 诏指也，然藩亦为单于画善计耳。 
现代文：夏侯藩说： 这是天子的旨意，不过我也是为单于您着想，出个好主意罢了。 
English: Xia Houhan said, "This is God's will, but I also came up with a good idea just for your sake."

古文：单于曰： 孝宣、孝元皇帝哀怜父呼韩邪单于，从长城以北匈奴有之。
现代文：单于说道： 孝宣皇帝、孝元皇帝可怜我父亲呼韩邪单于，答应长城以北归匈奴。
English: Shan Yu said: Emperor Xiao Xuan and Emperor Xiao Yuan pity my father, call Han Ye Shan Yu, and promise to return north of the Great Wall to the Xiongnu.

古文：此温偶駼王所居地也，未晓其形状所生，请遣使问之。 
现代文：他们要的这块地方是温偶騌王居住的地方，我不知道那裹生长些什么、是什么样子，请让我派使者去询问一下。 
English: This place they want is where the warm-hearted dragonfly king lives. I don't know what grows there or what it looks like. Please let me send an emissary to inquire.

古文：藩、容归汉。
现代文：夏侯藩、韩容回到汉朝。
English: Han Rong returned to the Han Dynasty from Xia Hou Domain.

古文：后复使匈奴，至则求地。
现代文：后来二人又出使到匈奴，到那裹就向单于要那块地方。
English: Later, the two men were sent to Xiongnu, and when they got there, they asked for that place.

古文：单于曰： 父兄传五世，汉不求此地，至知独求，何也？
现代文：单于说： 我父亲、哥哥相传已有五代，汉朝也不要这块地方，衹是到我做单于了才来要，是为什么呢？
English: Zai Yu said: My father and brother have been passed down for five generations, and the Han Dynasty did not want this place. It was only after I became Zai Yu that I came to want it. Why?

古文：已问温偶駼王，匈奴西边诸侯作穹庐及车，皆仰此山材木，且先父地，不敢失也。 
现代文：我已派人问过温偶騌王，匈奴西部诸侯国做毡帐和车辆，都要靠这座山上的木材。况且它是匈奴先辈留下的地方，我不敢丢失。 
English: I have already sent someone to ask King Wenqiu. The western Hunnic kingdoms depend on the wood from this mountain for their accounts and vehicles. Moreover, it is a place left by the Hun ancestors, and I dare not lose it.

古文：藩还，迁为太原太守。
现代文：夏侯藩回来后，升迁为太原太守。
English: After the return of the Xia Hou clan, he was promoted to the position of Taiyuan governor.

古文：单于遣使上书，以藩求地状闻。
现代文：单于派使者来汉朝上书，把夏侯藩向匈奴索要土地的情况告诉皇帝。
English: He simply sent an envoy to the Han Dynasty to submit a letter, telling the emperor about the situation of the Xia Hou Clan's request for land from the Xiongnu.

古文：诏报单于曰： 藩擅称诏从单于求地，法当死，更大赦二，今徙藩为济南太守，不令当匈奴。 
现代文：汉天子下诏报知单于说： 夏侯藩擅自假托天子诏旨向单于索要土地，按法应当处死，经过两次大赦，现在把夏侯藩迁为济南太守，不让他再驻扎在面向匈奴的地方。 
English: Han Tianzi issued an edict to inform Shan Yu that: Xia Hou Clan had claimed land from Shan Yu without permission, and should be put to death according to the law. After two amnesties, the Xia Hou Clan was now transferred to the governor of Jinan, and he was no longer allowed to be stationed in a place facing the Huns.

古文：明年，侍子死，归葬。
现代文：第二年，单于入朝侍奉的儿子死了，归葬匈奴。
English: In the following year, his son, who had entered the imperial service, died and was buried with the Xiongnu.

古文：复遣子左於駼仇掸王稽留昆入侍。
现代文：单于又派儿子左于騌仇掸王稽留昆入朝侍奉。
English: However, he also sent his son to serve in the court of his enemy, King Keiryu Kun.

古文：至哀帝建平二年，乌孙庶子卑援疐翕侯人众入匈奴西界，寇盗牛畜，颇杀其民。
现代文：到哀帝建平二年，乌孙国的庶子卑援寅翕侯的部众入侵匈奴西部边界，抢夺牛羊牲畜，杀了不少匈奴人。
English: In the second year of Emperor Jianping's reign, the hordes of the bastard son of the Wusun Kingdom, Beiyuan Tingyu, invaded the western border of the Huns, robbed cattle, sheep and livestock, and killed many Huns.

古文：单于闻之，遣左大当户乌夷泠将五千骑击乌孙，杀数百八，略千余人，驱牛畜去。
现代文：单于听说后，派左大当户乌夷泠率领五千骑兵攻击乌孙国，杀死了几百人，掳掠了一千多人，把牛羊赶回去了。
English: After hearing about it, he sent Wu Yixuan, a leading leftist official, to attack Wusun with five thousand cavalry, killed several hundred people, captured more than one thousand people, and drove the cattle and sheep back.

古文：卑援疐恐，遣子趋逯为质匈奴。
现代文：卑援意害怕了，派儿子趋逯到匈奴做人质。
English: Peasants were afraid and sent their sons to the Huns as hostages.

古文：单于受，以状闻。
现代文：单于接受了，把情况报告了汉朝。
English: He simply accepted and reported the situation to the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉遣中郎将丁野林、副校尉公乘音使匈奴，责让单于，告令还归卑援疐质子。
现代文：汉朝派中郎将丁野林、副校尉公乘音出使匈奴，责备单于，告诉他要把卑援章做人质的儿子送回去。
English: The Han Dynasty sent a middle-ranking official, Ding Yulin, and a vice-captain, Gong Chengyin, to the Xiongnu to reprimand Shan Yu and tell him to send back his son, who was a hostage.

古文：单于受诏，遣归。
现代文：单于接受了诏令，把人放回去。
English: They just accepted the edict and sent the people back.

古文：建平四年，单于上书愿朝五年。
现代文：建平四年，单子上书希望能参加五年正月的大朝。
English: In the fourth year of Jianping, he wrote on the list that he hoped to participate in the Great Morning of the first month of the fifth year.

古文：时哀帝被疾，或言匈奴从上游来厌人，自黄龙、竟宁时，单于朝中国辄有大故。
现代文：当时哀帝正患病，有的大臣说匈奴人从中国的上游来，会带来祸祟，自从黄龙、竟宁年以来，单于每次到中国来朝拜后都会有皇帝国戚亡故。
English: At that time, Emperor Yei was ill, and some ministers said that the Huns coming from the upper reaches of China would bring misfortune. Since the time of Huanglong and Chongning, every time an emperor came to China to pay homage, an imperial relative would die.

古文：上由是难之，以问公卿，亦以为虚费府帑，可且勿许。
现代文：皇帝因此感到很为难，就这事向大臣们征求意见，大臣们也认为如果让单于来朝拜，衹会空费钱财，可以暂且不要答应单于的要求。
English: The emperor therefore felt very embarrassed and asked the ministers for advice on this matter. The ministers also thought that if they let Shanyu come to worship and spend money, they could temporarily not agree to Shanyu's request.

古文：单于使辞去，未发，黄门郎扬雄上书谏曰：
现代文：单于的使者告辞要回匈奴了，还没有走，黄门郎扬雄上书皇帝劝谏说：
English: The envoy from Shan Yu had to return to the Xiongnu to say goodbye, but before he left, Huangmen Lang Yang Xiong wrote to the emperor to advise him:

古文：臣闻《六经》之治，贵于未乱；兵家之胜，贵于未战。
现代文：我听说《六经》上谈论的治国之道，推崇在没有混乱之前就进行治理；军事家对于胜利，推崇在没有交战之前就已经战胜敌人。
English: I have heard that the way of governing a country discussed in the Six Classics is to govern before there is chaos, and that the way of winning a war is to defeat the enemy before there is a battle.

古文：二者皆微，然而大事之本，不可不察也。
现代文：这两种说法的道理都十分精妙，然而处理国家大事的根本原则，却不能不明察。
English: Both of these arguments are very subtle, but the fundamental principle of handling national affairs cannot be overlooked.

古文：今单于上书求朝，国家不许而辞之，臣愚以为汉与匈奴从此隙矣。
现代文：现在单子上书要求朝见陛下，陛下不允许而予以推辞，我愚昧地认为汉朝与匈奴从此便要发生矛盾了。
English: Now I have written a letter requesting to see Your Majesty, but Your Majesty does not allow it and rejects it. I foolishly believe that the Han Dynasty and the Xiongnu will be in conflict from now on.

古文：本北地之狄，五帝所不能臣，三王所不能制，其不可使隙甚明。
现代文：本来北方那些少数民族，就是五帝也不能让他们臣服，三王也不能有效地控制，因而不能使我们的关系出现裂痕是很明显的事。
English: Originally, those ethnic minorities in the north could not be subjugated by the Five Emperors, nor could they be effectively controlled by the Three Emperors. Therefore, it is very obvious that we cannot cause a rift in our relations.

古文：臣不敢远称，请引秦以来明之。以秦始皇之强，蒙恬之威，带甲四十余万，然不敢窥西河，乃筑长城以界之。
现代文：我不敢说得太远，请允许我援引秦朝以来的事例加以说明：凭秦始皇的强盛，蒙恬的威猛，统率带甲之士四十多万，然而却不敢窥视西河，衹是筑起了长城做为分界。
English: I don't dare to go too far. Please allow me to cite an example from the Qin Dynasty to illustrate: With the strength of Qin Shi Huang and the might of the Mongols, he led more than 400,000 soldiers, but he didn't dare to look into the West River. Instead, he built the Great Wall as a boundary.

古文：会汉初兴，以高祖之威灵，三十万众困于平城，士或七日不食。
现代文：正当汉朝刚刚建立，凭高祖皇帝的圣威，三十多万军队被围困在平城，有的人七天都没吃饭。
English: When the Han Dynasty had just been established, more than three hundred thousand troops were besieged in Pingcheng by the will of Emperor Gaozhu. Some people did not eat for seven days.

古文：时奇谲之士石画之臣甚众，卒其所以脱者，世莫得而言也。
现代文：当时高祖身边有许多奇谲善变的谋士、善于谋划的臣子，然而高祖等人最后才所以得以逃脱，却是靠了人们不愿说的方法。
English: At that time, Gaozu was surrounded by many eccentric and mercurial advisers and courtiers who were good at planning. However, Gaozu and others were able to escape in the end, but it was by means that people did not want to talk about.

古文：又高皇后尝忿匈奴，群臣庭议，樊哙请以十万众横行匈奴中，季布曰： 哙可斩也，妄阿顺指！ 
现代文：另外高皇后也曾经对匈奴十分气愤，召集大臣们在朝廷商议，樊呛请求率领十万骑兵攻打，横行匈奴。季布却说： 应该杀了樊啥，这么愚妄地阿谀奉承皇后的旨意！ 
English: In addition, Empress Gao was also very angry with the Xiongnu, summoned the ministers to discuss in the imperial court, and requested to lead a hundred thousand cavalry to attack the rampant Xiongnu. However, Qibou said: You should kill me, so foolishly flattering the queen's will!

古文：于是大臣权书遗之，然后匈奴之结解，中国之忧平。
现代文：于是由大臣们予以权变，顺着来信的言辞写了回信，然后与匈奴的矛盾才解决了，威胁中国的忧患才得以平息。
English: Therefore, the ministers made a coup d'état and wrote a reply in accordance with the words of the letter, and then the conflict with the Xiongnu was resolved, and the troubles threatening China were calmed down.

古文：及孝文时，匈奴侵暴北边，候骑至雍甘泉，京师大骇，发三将军屯细柳、棘门、霸上以备之，数月乃罢。
现代文：到了孝文帝时，匈奴入侵北部边境，探马一直到了雍甘泉，京城震动，皇帝派三位将军率军分别驻扎在邹柳、棘门、霸上以防备匈奴，几个月后匈奴才退去。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowen, the Huns had invaded the northern border, the survey horses had reached Yongganquan, and the capital was shaken. The emperor sent three generals to lead the army and stationed them separately in Qiliu, Spiked Gate, and Baxian to guard against the Huns. The Huns only retreated a few months later.

古文：孝武即位，设马邑之权，欲诱匈奴，使韩安国将三十万众徼于便地，匈奴觉之而去，徒费财劳师，一虏不可得见，况单于之面乎！
现代文：孝武皇帝即位，在马邑设谋埋伏，想诱歼匈奴，派韩安国率领三十万军队在边地截击，匈奴发觉后退去了，汉朝白白浪费了资财，军队的辛劳也白费一场，一个匈奴人也没有见到，何况是单于！
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, plotted an ambush in Ma'iyu, wanted to lure and annihilate the Huns, and sent Han An Guo to lead three hundred thousand troops to intercept the Huns at the border. The Huns retreated after they were discovered. The Han Dynasty wasted resources and money in vain. The army's hard work was also wasted. Not a single Hun was seen, and what's more, it was alone!

古文：其后深惟社稷之计，规恢万载之策，乃大兴师数十万，使卫青、霍去病操兵，前后十余年。
现代文：后来孝武皇帝深切思虑国家大计，规划宏大长远的方案，于是大批地出动军队几十万人，派卫青、霍去病统率，前后征战十多年。
English: Later, Emperor Xiaowu thought deeply about the national plan and planned a grand and long-term plan, so he dispatched hundreds of thousands of troops in large numbers, sent Weiqing and Huo to the front, and fought for more than ten years.

古文：于是浮西河，绝大幕，破寘颜，袭王庭，穷极其地，追奔逐北，封狼居胥山，禅于姑衍，以临翰海，虏名王贵人以百数。
现代文：于是汉军渡过西河，越过大沙漠，攻破真颜，袭击单于王庭，到达了匈奴最远的地方，追歼败逃的敌人，在狼居胥山上设坛祭天，在姑衍山上祭地，到达了瀚海才回来，掳获的匈奴王公贵人数以百计。
English: Therefore, the Han army crossed the West River, crossed the great desert, broke through the true face, attacked the single in the royal court, reached the farthest place of the Xiongnu, chased and defeated the fleeing enemy, set up the altar on the Wolf's Lair Mountain, and the shrine on the Guyan Mountain, and only returned when they reached the vast sea. The number of captured Xiongnu nobles was in the hundreds.

古文：自是之后，匈奴震怖，益求和亲，然而未肯称臣也。
现代文：从此之后，匈奴人感到十分震惊恐怖，更迫切地要求与汉朝和亲，然而也还是不肯向汉朝称臣。
English: After that, the Huns felt very shocked and terrified, and more urgently demanded to be reconciled with the Han Dynasty, but still refused to bow to the Han Dynasty.

古文：且夫前世岂乐倾无量之费，役无罪之人，快心于狼望之北哉？
现代文：况且前朝皇帝难道愿意花费无数的钱粮让无罪的人去当差从军，攻打到狼望之北才感到高兴？
English: Besides, is the former emperor willing to spend countless money and grain to let innocent people go to work as soldiers and attack the north of the wolf's hope to feel happy?

古文：以为不一劳者不久佚，不暂费者不永宁，是以忍百万之师以摧饿虎之喙，运府库之财填卢山之壑而不悔也。
现代文：是认为不彻底辛劳一次就不能得到长久的平安逸乐，不暂时费人费力打败匈奴就没有长久的安宁，所以才忍心出动百万军队，冒如同饿虎裹拔牙那样的危险，前去攻打匈奴；如同拿去填塞卢山山壑那样，把国家府库积累的钱粮运去打仗而不后悔。
English: They thought that they could not obtain long-term peace and happiness without hard work, and that there would be no long-term peace without temporarily expending manpower and effort to defeat the Xiongnu. Therefore, they had the courage to send out a million troops to attack the Xiongnu, risking the danger of pulling out their teeth like a hungry tiger. They did not regret sending the money and grain accumulated by the national treasury to the war, as if they were filling the mountains and ridges of Lu.

古文：至本始之初，匈奴有桀心，欲掠乌孙，侵公主，乃发五将之师十五万骑猎其南，而长罗侯以乌孙五万骑震其西，皆至质而还。
现代文：到本始初年，匈奴又生桀骛不驯！之心，想攻掠乌孙国，危害嫁到那裹的汉朝公主，于是汉朝出动五位将军率领十五万骑兵攻打匈奴的南部，长罗侯率乌孙国五万骑兵攻打匈奴的西部，都是按预先约定到期限就回来了。
English: In the first year of this period, the Xiongnu became restless and wanted to attack and plunder the Wusun Kingdom and endanger the Han Dynasty princess who was married there. Therefore, the Han Dynasty dispatched five generals and led 150,000 cavalry to attack the southern part of the Xiongnu, and the Long Luo Prince led 50,000 cavalry of the Wusun Kingdom to attack the western part of the Xiongnu. All of them returned within the pre-agreed time limit.

古文：时鲜有所获，徒奋扬威武，明汉兵若雷风耳。
现代文：当时各路人马所获甚少，衹不过是发武扬威，表明漠军如迅雷巨风那样威猛罢了。
English: At that time, few men and horses were obtained from all directions, and it was nothing more than a display of military prowess, indicating that the desert army was as powerful as a thunderstorm.

古文：虽空行空反，尚诛两将军。
现代文：虽然是空手而去，空手而归，还是伤了两位将军。
English: Although he left empty-handed and returned empty-handed, he still wounded two generals.

古文：故北狄不服，中国未得高枕安寝也。
现代文：所以北方的匈奴如果不臣服，那么中国就永远不能高枕无忧。
English: Therefore, if the Xiongnu in the north do not submit, then China will never be able to sleep well.

古文：逮至元康、神爵之间，大化神明，鸿恩溥洽，而匈奴内乱，五单于争立，日逐、呼韩邪携国归化，扶伏称臣，然尚羁縻之，计不颛制。
现代文：等到元康、神爵年间，皇帝神明，国家大治，恩泽广施，而匈奴却发生内乱，五个单于争位，逐王、呼韩邪单于率部众投归文明之邦，向汉天子俯伏称臣，然而天子还是衹施行笼络、怀柔政策，认为还是不适宜把他们当做臣子与奴仆对待。
English: In the years of Yuan Kang and Jingjue, the emperor was a god, the country was governed well, and favors were given widely, but the Xiongnu had a civil war. The five dynasties fought for the throne, chased the king, called for Han, and led the people to return to the civilized country, and bowed down to Han Tianzi and called themselves his vassals. However, Tianzi still carried out the policy of entrapment and conciliation, and thought that it was not appropriate to treat them as vassals and slaves.

古文：自此之后，欲朝者不距，不欲者不强。
现代文：从此以后，匈奴单于有要来朝拜的不予拒绝，有不想来的也不勉强。
English: From then on, the Xiongnu did not refuse anyone who wanted to come to worship, nor did they force anyone who did not want to come.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：外国天性忿鸷，形容魁健，负力怙气，难化以善，易隶以恶，其强难诎，其和难得。
现代文：匈奴人生性桀惊不驯，身体魁伟，凭恃自己的力气大，很难用仁善教化他们，却容易习于为恶，他们的倔强难以屈服，他们的和顺却是难得可贵。
English: The Xiongnu people are stubborn and unruly by nature. Their bodies are huge, and they are strong by their own strength. It is difficult to educate them with benevolence and kindness, but it is easy to get used to doing evil. Their stubbornness is difficult to give in to, but their obedience is rare and valuable.

古文：故未服之时，劳师远攻，倾国殚货，伏尸流血，破坚拔敌，如彼之难也；既服之后，尉荐抚循，交接赂遗，威仪俯仰，如此之备也。
现代文：因此，在他们没有臣服的时候，不惜出动军队到远方去攻打他们，全国拿出财力支持战争，死伤军卒，攻破城池，打败敌人，那是多么艰难；在他们臣服之后，对他们慰问安抚，使者往来，给钱给物，恩威并施，如此的完备。
English: Therefore, when they did not surrender, how difficult it was to send troops to fight them in faraway places, and the whole country provided financial support for the war, killed and wounded soldiers, broke through the city, and defeated the enemy; after they surrendered, they were comforted and pacified, sent messengers, gave money and goods, and bestowed grace and favor, so complete.

古文：往时尝屠大宛之城，蹈乌桓之垒，探姑缯之壁，藉荡姐之场，艾朝鲜之旃，拔两越之旗，近不过旬月之役，远不离二时之劳，固已犁其庭，扫其闾，郡县而置之，云彻席卷，后无余灾。
现代文：以往的时候，我们也曾攻拔大宛国的城池，踏上乌桓的堡垒，探看姑缯的军垒，践踏荡姐的地方，斩拔朝鲜、两越的军旗，征服这些地方花费的时间，短的不过十天半月，长的不过半年，必然已经在其庭中耕地，扫清了他们的里门，在那裹设郡置县，如云撤去，如席卷起，干净完全，再也没有后患。
English: In the past, we had also attacked the cities of the great destination countries, stepped on the fortresses of the Wuhuan, explored the military fortresses of the Guzhen, trampled on the places of the swinging sisters, cut off the military flags of North Korea and the two Vietnams, and the time spent to conquer these places, short but ten and a half months, long but half a year, must have cultivated the land in their yard, cleared their inner gate, and set up counties and counties there, such as cloud removal, such as sweeping up, clean and complete, and there is no aftereffect.

古文：唯北狄为不然，真中国之坚敌也。三垂比之悬矣，前世重之慈甚，未易可轻也。
现代文：衹有匈奴的情况不一样，真是中国的劲敌，其他三面边境的情势与此相比差得远了，前朝皇帝也更是十分重视，不是可以掉以轻心的。
English: The situation with the Xiongnu is not the same, it is really China's strong enemy. The situation on the other three sides of the border is far worse than this. The former emperor also attaches great importance to it. It is not something to be taken lightly.

古文：今单于归义，怀款诚之心，欲离其庭，陈见于前，此乃上世之遗策，神灵之所想望，国家虽费，不得已者也。
现代文：现在单于向慕仁义，有至诚的心意，想离开王庭，到汉天子面前朝见，这是前世流传下来的方略，是先帝神灵所希望的事情，国家虽然要破费些钱财，也是不得已的事情。
English: Now, it is only Xiang Muren Yi who has a sincere desire to leave the royal court and meet the emperor in front of Han Tianzi. This is a strategy that has been passed down from previous generations. It is something that the gods of the former emperor hoped for. Although the country has to spend some money, it is also a matter of necessity.

古文：奈何距以来厌之辞，疏以无日之期，消往昔之恩，开将来之隙！
现代文：怎么能用会带来祸祟的话予以拒绝，用没有期限的日子去疏远他，断绝了往日的恩义，造成将来矛盾的起端！
English: How can you reject him with words that will bring disaster, alienate him with days that have no expiration date, sever the gratitude of the past, and cause the beginning of contradictions in the future!

古文：夫款而隙之，使有恨心，负前言，缘往辞，归怨于汉，因以自绝，终无北面之心，威之不可，谕之不能，焉得不为大忧乎！
现代文：现在慢待他，疏远他，使他怀恨在心，背叛丫以前说的话，使单于用往昔我们说过的和好的话来埋怨我们，因此自绝于汉朝，最后再也不肯有臣服之心，不可用暴力压服，又不能用好话使他明白，怎能不成为我们的大忧患！
English: Now wait for him, alienate him, make him hold a grudge, betray the words I said before, make him use the good and kind words we said in the past to complain about us, so he denies himself to the Han Dynasty, and finally he is no longer willing to have a submissive heart, can not use violence to suppress, and can not use kind words to make him understand, how can he not become our great sorrow!

古文：夫明者视于无形，聪者听于无声，诚先于未然，即蒙恬、樊哙不复施，棘门、细柳不复备，马邑之策安所设，卫、霍之功何得用，五将之威安所震？
现代文：眼明的人能在近乎没有形状的时候看到东西，耳尖的人能在近乎没有声音的情形下听到些什么，如果真能在事情还没有发生以前就已预先料到了，那么蒙恬、樊啥就不再有用，棘门、细柳不再设防，马邑那样的计策还在哪裹设伏？卫青、霍去病那样的功绩又有什么用？去乌孙的五位将军那样的雄威又去震惊谁去？
English: Clear-sighted people can see things when there is almost no shape, and people with sharp ears can hear things when there is almost no sound. If it is really possible to anticipate things before they happen, then the veil and the cocoon will no longer be useful, the thorn gate and the willow will no longer be fortified, and where are the strategies like Ma's? What is the use of the exploits like Wei Qing and Huo Cao? Who will be shocked by the grandeur like the five generals who went to the Wusun?

古文：不然，一有隙之后，虽智者劳心于内，辩者毂击于外，犹不若未然之时也。
现代文：不然的话，一旦两国有了矛盾之后，即使有足智多谋的谋士在朝廷内劳神费心，出谋划策；有能言善辩的说客整日在外奔走游说，说客多得常互相撞车，也还是不如在事情还没有发生之前就预做准备。
English: Otherwise, once there is a conflict between the two countries, even if there are resourceful advisers in the imperial court who work hard and make suggestions; if there are eloquent lobbyists who run around and lobby all day, and if there are so many lobbyists that they often crash into each other, it is still better to prepare in advance before things happen.

古文：且往者图西域，制车师，置城郭都护三十六国，费岁以大万计者，岂为康居、乌孙能逾白龙堆而寇西边哉？
现代文：况且以往我们谋取西域，控制车师，建设城郭，设置都护，统领保护三十六国，一年花费的钱财数以百万计，难道是为了害怕康居、乌孙越过白龙堆而侵掠西部边境？
English: Moreover, in the past, we sought to gain the western region, controlled the chariots, built the castle, set up the capital protection, commanded the protection of the thirty-six countries, and spent millions of money and wealth a year. Is it because of the fear of Kangju and Wusun crossing the White Dragon Mound and plundering the western border?

古文：乃以制匈奴也。
现代文：是为了制服匈奴啊。
English: It was to subdue the Huns.

古文：夫百年劳之，一日失之，费十而爱一，臣窃为国不安也。
现代文：百年的劳苦功绩，一天之内就全部丧失掉，花费了十钱却吝惜一钱，我真为国家担忧不安。
English: One hundred years of hard work and achievement, all lost in one day, spent ten dollars but begrudged one dollar, I'm really worried about the country.

古文：唯陛下少留意于未乱未战，以遏边萌之祸。
现代文：希望陛下能稍微考虑一下事情没有混乱、没有发生战争以前该采取的策略，从而遏制边境上就要萌生的灾祸。
English: It is to be hoped that His Majesty will give some thought to the tactics to be adopted before things get out of hand and war breaks out, so as to check the impending disaster on the frontier.

古文：书奏，天子寤焉，召还匈奴使者，更报单于书而许之。
现代文：奏章土达，皇帝看过之后明白过来了，派人召回了匈奴使者，再次答覆了单于的来信，允许单于入朝拜见。
English: After reading the play, the emperor came to his senses, sent someone to recall the Hun envoy, replied to Shan Yu's letter again, and allowed Shan Yu to visit the imperial court.

古文：赐雄帛五十匹，黄金十斤。
现代文：赏赐给扬雄帛五十匹，黄金十斤。
English: Yang Xiong was rewarded with fifty stallions and ten catties of gold.

古文：单于未发，会病，复遣使愿朝明年。
现代文：正巧单于还没有出发便病了，又派使者来说希望能在明年来入朝晋见。
English: It just so happened that he fell ill before he had even set off, and sent an envoy to say that he hoped to be able to see the Emperor in the following year.

古文：故事，单于朝，从名王以下及从者二百余人。
现代文：过去的旧例足，单于来朝拜，允许自名王以下以及侍从的人二百多人跟随入朝。
English: The old practice in the past was to allow more than 200 people, including the king and his attendants, to come to the imperial court.

古文：单于又上书言： 蒙天子神灵，人民盛壮，愿从五百人入朝，以明天子盛德。 
现代文：单于又上书皇帝说： 承蒙天子神灵保佑，匈奴人民强壮众多，希望能允许我带五百人去朝见天子，以昭明天子的盛大仁德。 
English: In the letter, the emperor said, "Thanks to the blessings of the gods of the heavenly son, the Hun people are strong and numerous, and I hope to be allowed to take five hundred people to see the heavenly son in the morning to show the great benevolence of the heavenly son."

古文：上皆许之。
现代文：皇帝全都答应了单于的要求。
English: The emperor agreed to all of Duan Yu's demands.

古文：元寿二年，单于来朝，上以太岁厌胜所在，舍之上林苑蒲陶宫。
现代文：元寿二年，单于来汉朝晋见，皇上因为主凶兆的太岁和可以诅咒制人的厌胜在那裹的缘故，便让单于住在上林苑蒲陶宫。
English: In the second year of Yuan Shou's life, Shan Yu came to the Han Dynasty to see Jin Luo. The emperor, because of his old age and the fact that he was cursed with a strong dislike of winning, let Shan Yu live in Shanglinyuan Putuo Palace.

古文：告之以加敬于单于，单于知之。
现代文：并派人告知单于，这是对他表示的格外尊重，单于也明白了。
English: He also sent someone to tell Zhan Yu that this was an expression of special respect for him, and Zhan Yu also understood.

古文：加赐衣三百七十袭，锦绣缯帛三万匹，絮三万斤，它如河平时。
现代文：这次单于来朝，皇帝增加给的赏赐物有三百七十套衣服，三万匹锦绣缯帛，三万斤粗丝棉，其他赏赐与河平年间一样。
English: In this visit alone, the emperor gave 370 sets of clothes, 30,000 pairs of brocade embroidered socks, and 30,000 catties of coarse silk cotton. Other gifts were the same as those given during the Heping years.

古文：既罢，遣中郎将韩况送单于。
现代文：正月大朝完后，汉朝派中郎将韩况护送单于回匈奴。
English: After the New Year's Day ceremony, the Han Dynasty sent a middle brother to escort Han Kuo back to the Xiongnu.

古文：单于出塞，到休屯井，北度车田卢水，道里回远。
现代文：单于出了边塞，到达休屯井，向北渡过车田卢水，道路曲折遥远。
English: Just out of the border fortress, arrived at Xutunjing, northward across Chechnya Lushui, the road twists and turns far away.

古文：况等乏食，单于乃给其粮，失期不还五十余日。
现代文：韩况等粮食短缺，单于就供给他们，过了期限五十多天韩况等人才回来。
English: There was a shortage of grain for Han Zhou and others, so they were supplied with grain only. After more than 50 days, Han Zhou and others returned.

古文：初，上遣稽留昆随单于去，到国，复遣稽留昆同母兄右大且方与妇入待。
现代文：当初，皇帝派稽留昆跟随单于一起回去，单于回到王庭后，又派稽留昆同自己的娘舅右大且方及妻子入朝侍奉天子。
English: At first, the emperor sent Qiliu Kun to accompany Shan to go back together. After Shan returned to the royal court, he also sent Qiliu Kun with his maternal uncle Uda and Fang and his wife to enter the imperial court to serve the emperor.

古文：还归，复遣且方同母兄左日逐王都与妇人侍。
现代文：这次朝拜回去后，又派右大且方的同母哥哥左曰逐王都及妻子入朝侍奉。
English: After returning from this visit to the Imperial Court, he sent his older half-brother, Uda, and younger half-brother, Zuo, to serve the Imperial Court together with his wife.

古文：是时，汉平帝幼，太皇太后称制，新都侯王莽秉政，欲说太后以威德至盛异于前，乃风单于令遣王昭君女须卜居次云入侍太后，所以常赐之甚厚。
现代文：这个时候，汉平帝年纪小，太皇太后临朝称制，新都侯王莽主持朝政，王莽想藉称颂太后威德至盛来取悦于太后，便让人从侧面告诉单于，要他派王昭君的女儿须卜居次云入朝侍奉皇太后，用来赏赐的东西十分丰厚。
English: At this time, Emperor Hanping was young, the empress dowager was in charge of the imperial court, and the new capital lord Wang Mang presided over the imperial government. Wang Mang wanted to please the empress dowager by praising the empress dowager, so he had someone tell Shan Yu from the side that he should send Wang Zhaojun's daughter, Subu Jiuyun, to the imperial court to serve the empress dowager. The things he used to reward her were very rich.

古文：会西域车师后王姑句、去胡来王唐兜皆怨恨都护校尉，将妻子人民亡降匈奴，语在《西域传》。
现代文：正巧这时西域的车师后王句姑、去胡来王唐兜二人都怨恨都护校尉，率领妻儿部众逃走，归降了匈奴，事情记载在《西域传》裹。
English: Coincidentally, it was at this time that the drivers of the western region, Queen Wang Jugu and King Tangdap, both of whom resented the tutelary captain, led their wives and children to flee and surrendered to the Xiongnu, and the matter was recorded in "The Legend of the Western Region."

古文：单于受置左谷蠡地，遣使上书言状曰： 臣谨已受。 
现代文：单于接受了投降的人，把他们安置在左谷蠡地方，派使者上书汉朝报告情况说： 我已全部接受下了。 
English: Except for those who accepted the surrender, he placed them in the Zuoyuan area, and sent an envoy to the Han Dynasty to report the situation, saying: I have accepted them all.

古文：诏遣中郎将韩隆、王昌、副校尉甄阜、侍中谒者帛敞、长水校尉王歙使匈奴，告单于曰： 西域内属，不当得受，今遣之。 
现代文：朝廷诏令派中郎将韩隆和王昌、副校尉甄阜、侍中谒者帛敞、长水校尉王歙出使匈奴，告知单于说： 西域归属汉朝管辖，单于不应当接受投降的人，要你放回他们。 
English: The imperial court sent Han Long and Wang Chang, Vice-Lieutenant Yan Fu, Vice-Lieutenant Gao Jiao, and Vice-Lieutenant Changshui Wang Yao as envoys to the Xiongnu. They told the Xiongnu: "The Western Regions belong to the jurisdiction of the Han Dynasty, and those who should not accept surrender should be returned to you."

古文：单于曰： 孝宣、孝元皇帝哀怜，为作约束，自长城以南天子有之，长城以北单于有之。
现代文：单于说： 孝宣皇帝、孝元皇帝哀怜我们，与我们约定，从长城以南归汉朝天子所有，从长城往北归单于所有。
English: "Emperor Xiaoxuan and Emperor Xiaoyuan took pity on us and made an agreement with us that from the south of the Great Wall, the Han Dynasty would belong to the Son of Heaven, and from the Great Wall to the north, the Han Dynasty would belong to the Son of Heaven.

古文：有犯塞，辄以状闻；有降者，不得受。
现代文：如果有侵扰边塞的，要互相通报情况；有来投降的，不得接受。
English: If there is an intrusion into the border, they should inform each other of the situation; if there is a surrender, it must not be accepted.

古文：臣知父呼韩邪单于蒙无量之恩，死遗言曰： 有从中国来降者，勿受，辄送至塞，以报天子厚恩。 此外国也，得受之。 
现代文：我的父亲呼韩邪单于蒙受汉朝无量的大恩大德，临死时留下话说： 如果有从中原来投降的人，不许接受，要把他送回边塞，送还汉朝，以报答漠天子的厚恩，而这次投降来的人是长城以外的国家的人，我可以接受。 
English: My father called Han Zidan because of the immeasurable great kindness he received from the Han Dynasty, and when he was about to die, he left a message saying: If there are people from the Middle Kingdom who surrender, do not accept them, send them back to the border fortress and return them to the Han Dynasty to repay the kindness of the Heavenly Father, and this time the people who surrender are from countries outside the Great Wall, I can accept them.

古文：使者曰： 匈奴骨肉相攻，国几绝，蒙中国大恩，危亡复续，妻子完安，累世相继，宜有以报厚恩。 
现代文：汉朝使者说： 当初匈奴骨肉亲人之间互相攻击，国家几乎绝减，承蒙中国的大恩，扶助单于，使危亡的匈奴得以延续下来，家室妻儿得以保全平安，世代相传，对汉朝的大恩，匈奴应该有所报答。 
English: The emissary of the Han Dynasty said: At the beginning, the Huns and their relatives attacked each other, and the country was almost reduced to nothing. Thanks to the great kindness of China, the Huns were able to continue the endangered Huns, and their families, wives and children were able to maintain peace, passed down from generation to generation. The Huns should repay the great kindness of the Han Dynasty.

古文：单于叩头谢罪，执二虏还付使者。
现代文：单于听后，对使者磕头谢罪，把归降的两个王爷抓来交给了汉朝使者。
English: After listening to the envoys, he bowed his head and apologized to the envoys, and captured the two princes who had surrendered and handed them over to the Han Dynasty envoys.

古文：诏使中郎将王萌待西域恶都奴界上逆受。
现代文：汉朝诏令派中郎将王萌到西域的恶都奴边界上迎接并接受归还的人。
English: The Han Dynasty issued an edict to send Wang Meng to the west to meet and accept the returned people.

古文：单于遣使送到国，因请其罪。
现代文：单于派使者护送到汉朝，并向皇帝请求饶恕罪过。
English: He simply sent an envoy to escort him to the Han Dynasty and asked the emperor to forgive his sins.

古文：使者以闻，有诏不听，会西域诸国王斩以示之。
现代文：使者报告朝廷，朝廷下诏不予饶恕，并会集西域各国国王，杀了句姑和唐兜，昭示其罪。
English: The envoy reported to the imperial court that the imperial court would not grant forgiveness, and would gather the kings of the Western Regions to kill Gu Gu and Tang Diao to show their guilt.

古文：乃造设四条：中国人亡入匈奴者，乌孙亡降匈奴者，西域诸国佩中国印绶降匈奴者，乌桓降匈奴者，皆不得受。
现代文：重新制定了四条规约：中国人逃入匈奴的、乌孙国逃亡归降匈奴的人、佩戴中国印绶由汉朝任命的一些西域国家投降匈奴的人、乌桓国投降匈奴的人，匈奴都不得接受。
English: Four regulations were re-enacted: the Huns were not allowed to accept Chinese who had fled to the Huns, those from the Wusun Kingdom who had fled and surrendered to the Huns, those who had surrendered to the Huns from some Western countries appointed by the Han Dynasty wearing Chinese seals, and those who had surrendered to the Huns from Wuhu.

古文：遣中郎将王骏、王昌、副校尉甄阜、王寻使匈奴，班四条与单于，杂函封，付单于，令奉行，因收故宣帝所为约束封函还。
现代文：汉朝派中郎将王骏和王昌、副校尉甄阜和王寻出使匈奴，向单于颁布四条规约，规约与玺书混封在一函之内，交给了单于，要求他奉行，并就此收回以前汉宣帝与匈奴制定的规约，装在信函中回来了。
English: The Han Dynasty sent a middle-man to find Wang Xuan and Wang Chang, and vice-captain Zhenfu and Wang to send an envoy to the Xiongnu, and issued four statutes to the Xiongnu, and the statutes were mixed with the imperial edict in a letter, and handed it to the Xiongnu, asking him to comply, and then withdrew the statutes previously established by Emperor Han Xuan and the Xiongnu, and returned in a letter.

古文：时，莽奏令中国不得有二名，因使使者以风单于，宜上书慕化，为一名，汉必加厚赏。
现代文：当时王莽奏请皇帝后批准，命令中国人不许有两个字的名字，并派使者去匈奴用托词婉言劝说单于，应该上书朝廷，追求汉朝文明教化，衹用一个字的名字，汉朝一定会加倍赏赐。
English: At that time, Wang Mangso asked the emperor for approval, ordered the Chinese people not to have two-character names, and sent an envoy to the Xiongnu to use pretexts to persuade them that they should write to the court and pursue Han Dynasty civilization and enlightenment. If they use a one-character name, the Han Dynasty will definitely double the reward.

古文：单于从之，上书言： 幸得备藩臣，窍乐太平圣制，臣故名囊知牙斯，今谨更名曰知。 
现代文：单于听从了使者的劝告，上书朝廷说： 我有幸成为汉朝的外臣，喜爱汉朝的太平圣明的礼制。我原来的名字是囊知牙斯，现在我愿意把名字改为知。 
English: Heeding the advice of the envoy, he wrote a letter to the imperial court, saying: "I am privileged to be a foreign minister of the Han Dynasty, and I like the Han Dynasty's Taiping Shengming ceremonial system. My original name was Cang Zhijas, and now I would like to change my name to Zhi.

古文：莽大说，白太后，遣使者答谕，厚赏赐焉。
现代文：王莽十分高兴，告诉丫太后，派使者去予以答覆，赏赐十分丰厚。
English: Wang Mang was very happy and told the Empress Dowager to send an emissary to reply, and he was rewarded very richly.

古文：汉既班四条，后护乌桓使者告乌桓民，毋得复与匈奴皮布税。
现代文：汉朝颁布与匈奴的四条规约后，后护乌桓的使者告诉乌桓的百姓，不要再向匈奴交纳皮布税。
English: After the Han Dynasty promulgated the Four Articles of Agreement with the Xiongnu, the emissary of Wuhuan, the guardian of Wuhuan, told the people of Wuhuan not to pay any more taxes to the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴以故事遣使者责乌桓税，匈奴人民妇女欲贾贩者皆随往焉。
现代文：匈奴按旧例派使者去乌桓征税，匈奴一些想做买卖的贩子及妇女都随使者一起去了。
English: The Xiongnu sent an envoy to Wuhuan to collect taxes according to the old custom. Some of the Xiongnu traders and women who wanted to do business went with the envoy.

古文：乌桓距曰： 奉天子诏条，不当予匈奴税。 
现代文：乌桓的人拒绝说： 我们听从漠天子的诏令，不许我们向匈奴纳税。 
English: The people of Wuhuan refused, saying: We obey the edict of the Emperor of the Desert, and we are not allowed to pay taxes to the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴使怒，收乌桓酋豪，缚到悬之。
现代文：匈奴使者十分愤怒，把乌桓的首领收捕，吊了起来。
English: The Xiongnu envoy was very angry and arrested the leader of the Wuhuan and hung him up.

古文：酋豪昆弟怒，共杀匈奴使及其官属，收略妇女马牛。
现代文：首领的弟弟生气了，一起杀了匈奴的使者以及跟随来的官员，把来贩卖东西的妇女和他们的牛马扣留没收。
English: The leader's brother became angry and together they killed the Hun envoy and the officials who had come with him, detained the women who had come to sell things and confiscated their horses and cattle.

古文：单于闻之，遣使发左贤王兵入乌桓责杀使者，因攻击之。
现代文：单于听说了，派使者去命令左贤王出兵攻入乌桓，指责他们杀了匈奴使者，并攻打他们。
English: Upon hearing of this, he sent an envoy to order Zuoxian Wang to send troops to invade Wuhuan, accusing them of killing the Xiongnu envoy and attacking them.

古文：乌桓分散，或走上山，或东保塞。
现代文：乌桓被打散，有人跑上了山，有人到束边去凭堡垒自保。
English: The Wuhuan were dispersed, some ran up the mountain, others went to Sokubei to protect themselves with the fortress.

古文：匈奴颇杀人民，驱妇女弱小且千人去，置左地，告乌桓曰： 持马畜皮布来赎之。 
现代文：匈奴杀了不少人，把乌桓的近千名妇女、老人、小孩驱赶走了，把他们留置在左地，派人告诉乌桓说： 拿马匹畜皮和布匹来赎你们的人。 
English: The Xiongnu killed many people, drove away nearly a thousand women, old people, and children from Wuhuan, left them on the left, and sent someone to tell Wuhuan: Take animal skins and cloth to ransom your people.

古文：乌桓见略者亲属二千余人持财畜往赎，匈奴受，留不遣。
现代文：乌桓派被抢去的人的亲属二千多人带着财物、牲畜去赎人，匈奴接受了财物，把人也扣留了。
English: Wu Huan sent more than two thousand relatives of the people who had been robbed to ransom the people with property and livestock. The Xiongnu accepted the property and detained the people.

古文：王莽之篡位也，建国元年，遣五威将王骏率甄阜、王飒、陈饶、帛敞、丁业六人，多赍金帛，重遗单于，谕晓以受命代汉状，因易单于故印。
现代文：王莽篡夺了汉朝江山，建国元年，派五威将军王骏率领甄阜、王飒、陈饶、帛敞、丁业六个人，带着许多金银、布帛，送给单子，向单于通报王莽受命于天，代替汉室的情况，并换回单于原来的玺印。
English: Wang Mang usurped the Han Dynasty and the country. In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wang Mang sent the general of the Five Great Powers, Wang Xi, led by six people, Zhenfu, Wang Xi, Chen Rao, Zang Cang and Ding Ye, with a lot of gold, silver and cloth, to present it to Shan Zi, to inform Shan Zi that Wang Mang was ordered by heaven to replace Han Zi, and to return Shan Zi to the original seal.

古文：故印文曰 匈奴单于玺 ，莽更曰 新匈奴单于章 。
现代文：原来的玺印文是 匈奴单于玺 ，王莽更换做 新匈奴单于章 。
English: The original seal script was 匈奴单于, but Wang Mang replaced it with the new 匈奴单于章.

古文：将率既至，授单于印绂，诏令上故印拔。
现代文：将军们到了匈奴后，代表朝廷授给单于玺印和绶带，并宣韶命令单于把原来的玺印绶带交上来。
English: After the generals arrived in Xiongnu, on behalf of the imperial court, they conferred the imperial seal and sash on Shan Yu, and issued an order to Shan Yu to hand over the original imperial seal and sash.

古文：单于再拜受诏。
现代文：单于二次叩拜，接受诏书。
English: It only takes two prostrations to receive the imperial edict.

古文：译前，欲解取故印绂，单于举掖授之。
现代文：翻译走上前来，想解下原来的玺印绶带，单于举起胳膊让他解。
English: The translator came forward and wanted to untie the original stamped umbilical cord, so I just raised my arm and let him untie it.

古文：左姑夕侯苏从旁谓单于曰： 未见新印文，宜且勿与。 
现代文：这时左姑夕侯苏在旁边对单于说： 还没有见到新的玺印文字，应当暂且别给他。 
English: At this time, Zuo Jiu Hou Su said to Shan Yu on the side: "You haven't seen the new seal script yet, you shouldn't give it to him for the time being."

古文：单于止，不肯与。
现代文：单于就放下胳膊不让摘了。
English: I just put my arm down and didn't let them pick it up.

古文：请使者坐穹庐，单于欲前为寿。五威将曰： 故印绂当以时上。 单于曰： 诺。 
现代文：单于请使者在毡帐落坐，单于想走上前去为皇上祝贺长寿，五威将军王骏说： 原来的玺印与绶带应当按时交上来。 单于说： 好吧。 
English: Just because he wanted to invite the envoy to sit on the throne, just because he wanted to walk forward to congratulate the emperor on his long life, the Five Dynasties General Wang Wei said: The original seal and ribbon should be handed over on time.

古文：复举掖授译。
现代文：就又举起胳膊让翻译来解取。
English: He raised his arm again for the translator to interpret.

古文：苏复曰： 未见印文，且勿与。 
现代文：左姑夕侯苏又说道： 还没看见玺印文字，暂且别给他。 
English: Zuo Jiu Hou Su also said, "If you haven't seen the seal yet, don't give it to him yet."

古文：单于曰： 印文何由变更！ 
现代文：单于回答道： 印文怎么会变呢！ 
English: Tai Yu replied: How can the characters be changed!

古文：遂解故印绂奉上，将率受。
现代文：于是便解下原来的玺印绶带呈送上去，将军们接受了。
English: So he untied the original seal ribbon and presented it to the generals, who accepted it.

古文：著新绂，不解视印，饮食至夜乃罢。
现代文：单于佩戴上新的印绶，也不解下来看看玺印，一直吃喝到夜裹才散席。
English: Just put on the new seal, do not take it off to look at the seal, and do not eat or drink until the evening.

古文：右率陈饶谓诸将率曰： 乡者姑夕侯疑印文，几令单于不与人。
现代文：右将军陈饶对其他将军们说： 刚才左姑夕侯对印文有怀疑，差点儿不让单于把旧玺印交给我们。
English: Right General Chen Rao said to the other generals: Just now, Zuo Jiu Hou had doubts about the seal, and almost did not allow the old seal to be handed over to us.

古文：如令视印，见其变改，必求故印，此非辞说所能距也。
现代文：如果他让单于看了玺印，见到印文变了，一定会来要原来的印，这样的话我们便没法用言辞予以拒绝。
English: If he lets you look at the seal and sees that the seal has changed, he will definitely come to ask for the original seal, so we can't use words to refuse it.

古文：既得而复失之，辱命莫大焉。
现代文：既已得到故玺，又再次失去，太有辱使命。
English: It's too humiliating to have won and lost again.

古文：不如椎破故印，以绝祸根。 
现代文：不如毁掉原来的印玺，断绝这个祸根。 
English: It is better to destroy the original seal and cut off this evil root.

古文：将率犹与，莫有应者。
现代文：将军们都很犹豫不决，没有人应和。
English: The generals are very hesitant, no one wants to make peace.

古文：饶，燕士，果悍，即引斧椎坏之。
现代文：陈饶，是燕地人，果敢骁勇，就拿起斧子砍坏了旧玺印。
English: Chen Rao, a native of Yanji, was so bold that he picked up an axe and chopped down the old seal.

古文：明日，单于果遣右骨都侯当白将率曰： 汉赐单于印，言 玺 ，不言 章 ，又无 汉 字。
现代文：第二天，单于果然派右骨都侯当来对将军们说： 汉朝赏赐给单于玺印，上面用 玺 字，不用 章，字，而且那旧印上没有 汉 字。
English: The next day, the right-hand man of the Han Dynasty, who had been appointed as the right-hand man of the Han Dynasty, came to the generals and said, "The Han Dynasty rewarded me with a seal with the character, not the character 章, and there was no Chinese character on the old seal.

古文：诸王已下乃有 汉 ，言 章 。
现代文：衹有王以下的印才有 汉，字、 章 字。
English: Only the seals below the king have Chinese characters, Chinese characters, and Chinese characters.

古文：今即去 玺 加 新 ，与臣下无别。
现代文：现在的印上面去掉了 玺 字，加上了 新 字，这便与臣子没有什么区别了。
English: The current seal has had the  character removed and a new 字 added, which makes it no different from a vassal.

古文：愿得故印。 
现代文：单于希望能得到原来的玺印。 
English: I just hope I can get the original seal.

古文：将率示以故印，谓曰： 新室顺天制作，故印随将率所自为破坏。
现代文：将军们把原来的印拿给他看，对他说： 新王朝顺天承运，允许我们这些将帅随意破坏旧玺印。
English: The generals showed him the original seal and said to him, "The new dynasty will be carried forward by the heavens, allowing us generals to destroy the old seal at will."

古文：单于宜承天命，奉新室之制。 
现代文：单于您应当顺应天意，奉行新莽王室的礼制。 
English: You alone should conform to the will of heaven and follow the new royal etiquette.

古文：当还白，单于知已无可奈何，又多得赂遗，即遣弟右贤王舆奉马牛随将率入谢，因上书求故印。
现代文：右骨都侯当回去报告了单于事情的经过，单于知道已是无可奈何，况且又得了不少金银，于是便派弟弟、右贤王舆带着马牛等礼物随新朝将帅入朝称谢，并上书朝廷要求得到像原来那样的玺印。
English: The right-hand man of the capital had to go back and report on the course of events, knowing that there was nothing he could do, and moreover, he had gained a lot of gold and silver, so he sent his brother, the right-hand man of the king, with gifts such as horses and cattle, to the new emperor to thank him, and sent a letter to the imperial court to request a seal like the original one.

古文：将率还到左犁汗王咸所居地，见乌桓民多，以问咸。
现代文：将帅们回到了左犁汗王咸居住的地方，看见有许多乌桓的百姓，便问咸这是怎么回事。
English: The generals returned to the place where Zuo Han Wang Xian lived, saw many dark-skinned people, and asked Xian what was going on.

古文：咸具言状，将率曰： 前封四条，不得受乌桓降者，亟还之。 
现代文：咸详细谈了事情的经过，将帅们说： 前边我们与匈奴有过四项规约，不许匈奴接受乌桓投降的人，赶快把他们送还。 
English: Xian talked in detail about the course of events, and the generals said: In the past, we had four treaties with the Xiongnu, and the Xiongnu were not allowed to accept those who surrendered to the Wuhuan, so we had to send them back immediately.

古文：咸阳： 请密与单于相闻，得语，归之。 
现代文：左犁汗王说： 请让我偷偷地跟单于说一下，得了回话。
English: Zuo Gan Wang said: Please let me secretly talk to Shan Yu, and I got a reply.

古文：单于使咸报曰： 当从塞内还之邪，从塞外还之邪？ 
现代文：就放他们回去。 后来单于派左犁汗王回报说： 这些投降的人是应当从塞内送还，还是从塞外送还呢？ 
English: Later, the king of Zaozhuang, who had sent the soldiers alone, replied: "Should these surrendering soldiers be sent back from within Tibet, or from outside Tibet?"

古文：将率不敢颛决，以闻。
现代文：将帅们不敢擅自决定，把事报告朝廷。
English: The generals did not dare to make an arbitrary decision and report the matter to the imperial court.

古文：诏报，从塞外还之。
现代文：朝廷下诏，要他们从塞外送还。
English: The imperial court decreed that they should be sent back from Serbia.

古文：单于始用夏侯藩求地有距汉语，后以求税乌桓不得，因寇略其人民，衅由是生，重以印文改易，故怨恨。
现代文：单于起初因为夏侯藩向匈奴索要土地自己拒绝了，后来因为向乌桓征税不成，于是就侵掠乌桓的部众，矛盾由此产生，再加上印文被改变，所以很怨恨。
English: At first, because the Xia Hou Clan demanded land from the Xiongnu, he refused, and later, because he could not collect taxes from the Wuhuan, he invaded and plundered the Wuhuan's followers. This created a conflict, and the seal was changed, so there was a lot of resentment.

古文：乃遣右大且渠蒲呼卢訾等十余人将兵众万骑，以护送乌桓为名，勒兵朔方塞下。
现代文：于是派右大且渠蒲呼卢訾等十多人率领一万骑兵，以护送乌桓被俘的人为名，驻军在朔方边塞下。
English: As a result, he sent more than ten people, including Uda and Qu Puhu Lu, who led ten thousand cavalry, to escort Wu Huan's captives, and the troops were stationed at the border of Shuo.

古文：朔方太守以闻。
现代文：朔方太守向朝廷报告了此事。
English: Governor-General Shuo Fang reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：明年，西域车师后王须置离谋降匈奴，都护但钦诛斩之。
现代文：第二年，西域的车师后王须置离图谋投降匈奴，都护但钦诛杀了他。
English: In the second year, the western region's driver, Hou Wang Shouji, attempted to surrender to the Huns, and the tutelary, Dan Qin, killed him.

古文：置离兄狐兰支将人众二千余人，驱畜产，举国亡降匈奴，单于受之。
现代文：置离的哥哥狐兰支率领部众二千多人，驱赶着牲畜，全国逃亡投降了匈奴，单于接受了。
English: The estranged brother, Foxtel, led more than two thousand people in the leadership of the branch, drove the livestock, fled across the country and surrendered to the Xiongnu, only to be accepted.

古文：狐兰支与匈奴共入寇，击车师，杀后成长，伤都护司马，复还入匈奴。
现代文：狐兰支与匈奴一起入侵，攻打车师，杀了后成的首领，杀伤了都护司马，又回匈奴去了。
English: Foxtel and the Huns invaded together, attacked the chariot division, killed the leader of the latter, killed and wounded the tutelary horse, and went back to the Huns.

古文：时，戊己校尉史陈良、终带、司马丞韩玄、右曲候任商等见西域颇背叛，闻匈奴欲大侵，恐并死，即谋劫略吏卒数百人，共杀戊己校尉刀护，遣人与匈奴南犁汗王南将军相闻。
现代文：当时戊己校尉史陈良和终带、司马丞韩玄、右曲侯任商等人见西域许多人背叛中原，又听说匈奴要大举入侵，担心会被一起杀死，就共同商议，劫持了官吏、士兵几百人，一起杀死了戊己校尉刀护，派人通知匈奴南犁汗王南将军。
English: At that time, Wu Zi's Captain Shi Chen Liang and the last band, Sima Zi Han Xuan, and Zuo Qu Hou Ren Shang saw that many people in the western region betrayed the Central Plains, and heard that the Huns were going to invade in a big way, and feared that they would be killed together, so they discussed together, kidnapped hundreds of officials and soldiers, killed Wu Zi's Captain Sword Guard together, and sent someone to inform the Huns' General Nan Xuan Wang Nan.

古文：匈奴南将军二千骑入西域迎良等，良等尽胁略戊己校尉吏士男女二千余人入匈奴。
现代文：匈奴南将军率二千骑兵进入西域迎接陈良等人，陈良等人把戊己校尉属下的官吏士兵男女共二千多人悉数劫持到匈奴。
English: General Xiong Nuan led two thousand cavalry into the western region to meet Chen Liang and others. Chen Liang and others abducted more than two thousand male and female officers and soldiers under the command of Captain Wu Ji to Xiong Nuan.

古文：玄、商留南将军所，良、带径至单于庭，人众别置零吾水上田居。
现代文：韩玄、任商留在了南将军那裹，陈良、终带直接到了单于王庭，带去的人另外安置在零吾水边种田。
English: Han Xuan and Ren Shang stayed in General Nan's entourage, Chen Liang and his entourage eventually went directly to Shan Yu Wangting, and the people they took with them were placed in the fields at the edge of the water.

古文：单于号良、带曰乌桓都将军，留居单于所，数呼与饮食。
现代文：单于赐号陈良、终带，叫做乌桓都将军，把他们留在单于王庭，屡次把他们召来饮酒吃饭。
English: He gave them the title of Chen Liang and the last one was called Wuhuan Tongjun. He left them alone in the royal court and repeatedly invited them to drink and eat.

古文：西域都护但钦上书言匈奴南将军右伊秩訾将人众冠击诸国。
现代文：西域都护但钦向朝廷上书，报告匈奴的南将军右伊秩訾率兵入侵西域诸国。
English: The protector of the Western Regions, Dang Qin, sent a letter to the imperial court, reporting that the Huns' Southern General Ui Chichibu and his soldiers had invaded the countries of the Western Regions.

古文：莽于是大分匈奴为十五单于，遣中郎将蔺苞、副校尉戴级将兵万骑，多赍珍宝至云中塞下，招诱呼韩邪单于诸子，欲以次拜之。
现代文：于是王莽把匈奴的单于封号数目大大增加，达到十五个，派中郎将蔺苞、副校尉戴级率领一万骑兵，带着许多珍珠宝器到了云中郡的边塞旁，通过引诱手段把呼韩邪单于的几个儿子招来，想依次封他们为单于。
English: Therefore, Wang Mang greatly increased the number of the Xiongnu's single and sealed number to fifteen, sent the middle-ranked general Zou and the second-ranked lieutenant Dai to lead ten thousand cavalrymen, and took many pearls and treasures to the border fortress of Yunzhong County. By means of enticement, he invited several sons of Huan Ye's single and sealed, and wanted to seal them as single and sealed in turn.

古文：使译出塞诱呼右犁汗王咸、咸子登、助三人，至则胁拜咸为孝单于，赐安车鼓车各一，黄金千手，杂缯千匹，戏戟十；拜助为顺单于，赐黄金五百斤；传送助、登长安。
现代文：派翻译到边塞外诱招右犁汗王咸、咸的儿子登、助等三人，到后就强迫他接受孝单于的封号，并赏赐给他安车、鼓车各一辆，黄金一千斤，杂缯一千匹，带旗的戏戟十杆；封他儿子助为顺单于，赏赐给黄金五百斤；派驿车送助、登到长安。
English: An interpreter was sent to lure three people out of the frontier fortress, including the Right Uyghur Khan Wang Haman and Haman's sons Deng and Su, and then forced him to accept the title of filial son, and rewarded him with a horse-drawn carriage and a drum carriage, each with a thousand pounds of gold, a thousand horses, and ten poles with flags; his son Su was awarded five hundred pounds of gold; and a horse-drawn carriage was sent to escort him to Chang'an.

古文：莽封苞为宣威公，拜为虎牙将军；封级为扬威公，拜为虎贲将军。
现代文：王莽又封蔺苞为宣威公，任命为虎牙将军；封戴级为扬威公，任命为虎贲将军。
English: Wang Mang was also given the title of Xuan Wei Gong and appointed as General Hu Ya; he was also given the title of Yang Wei Gong and appointed as General Hu Ya.

古文：单于闻之，怒曰： 先单于受汉宣帝恩，不可负他。
现代文：单于听到这些事，愤怒地说： 先单于受汉宣帝的恩遇，对汉朝不能背负。
English: Upon hearing these things, he angrily said, "Just because I was favored by Emperor Han Xuan, I can't bear the Han Dynasty.

古文：今天子非宣帝子孙，何以得立？ 
现代文：现在的天子不是宣帝的子孙，怎么做了天子？ 
English: The current heavenly son is not a descendant of Emperor Xuan, so how did he become a heavenly son?

古文：遣左骨都侯、右伊秩訾王呼卢訾及左贤王乐将兵入云中益寿塞，大杀吏民。
现代文：派左骨都侯、右伊秩訾王呼卢訾以及左贤王乐率兵入侵云中郡的益寿塞，杀了许多官吏和百姓。
English: He sent soldiers led by Zuo Bin Duhou, Zuo Yizhichun Wang Hulun and Zuo Xian Wang Le to invade Yuzhousi in Yunnan County, killing many officials and civilians.

古文：是岁，建国三年也。
现代文：这一年是建国三年。
English: This year marks the third anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：是后，单于历告左右部都尉、诸边王，入塞寇盗，大辈万余，中辈数千，少者数百，杀雁门、朔方太守、都尉，略吏民畜产不可胜数，缘边虚耗。
现代文：此后，单于多次派左右部都尉、边塞上的那些封王侵入边塞杀掠，规模大的有一万多人，中等规模的有几千人，少的几百人，杀了雁门、朔方的太守和都尉，劫掠官吏、百姓和牲畜财产不可胜数，边塞上因而大为虚弱。
English: After that, he repeatedly sent the captains of the left and right armies and the soldiers of the frontier fortress to invade and plunder the frontier fortress. There were more than ten thousand people in the large scale, several thousand people in the medium scale, and a few hundred people in the small scale. They killed the geese gate, the governor of Shuo and the captain, and plundered countless officials, people and livestock property. The frontier fortress was therefore very weak.

古文：莽新即位，怙府库之富欲立威，乃拜十二部将率，发郡国勇士，武库精兵，各有所屯守，转委输于边。
现代文：王莽刚做天子，想凭恃国家府库的富有建立自己的威望，便封了十二部将帅，出动各郡县封国的勇士，拿出武器库的精良兵器，命他们各自驻扎在一方，逐渐向边塞输送。
English: As soon as Wang Mang became emperor, he wanted to establish his prestige by taking advantage of the wealth of the Yunnan national treasury, so he sealed twelve generals and fielded warriors from all counties and counties to seal the country, took out the fine weapons from the arsenal, ordered them to be stationed on one side, and gradually transported them to the frontier fortress.

古文：议满三十万众，贲三百日粮，同时十道并出，穷追匈奴，内之于丁令，因分其地，立呼韩邪十五子。
现代文：计划等达到三十万人的规模，带足够三百天吃的粮食，分十路同时出击，对匈奴穷追猛打，把他们赶到丁令去，并划分匈奴的地盘，立呼韩邪的十五个儿子为单于。
English: The plan called for 300,000 men, with enough grain to last 300 days, to attack simultaneously in ten directions, pursue the Xiongnu, drive them to Dingling, and divide the Xiongnu's territory, leaving Han Zhe's fifteen sons alone.

古文：莽将严尤谏曰：臣闻匈奴为害，所从来久矣，未闻上世有必征之者也。
现代文：王莽的大将严尤劝谏他说： 我听说匈奴为害中原，从开始到现在已经很久了，没听说前代一定要去征伐的事。
English: Wang Mang's general Yan Yu advised him: "I have heard that the Xiongnu have harmed the Central Plains. It has been a long time since the beginning, and I have not heard that the previous generation must go to the conquest.

古文：后世三家周、秦、汉征之，然皆未有得上策者也。
现代文：后代的周、秦、漠三朝去征伐了，然而没有一朝称得上是得上等策略的。
English: The three succeeding dynasties of Zhou, Qin and Mu went to conquer, but no dynasty can be said to have the best strategy.

古文：周得中策，汉得下策，秦无策焉。
现代文：周朝可以说是得中策，汉朝得下策，秦朝就是毫无策略了。
English: It can be said that the Zhou Dynasty got the middle strategy, the Han Dynasty got the bottom strategy, and the Qin Dynasty had no strategy.

古文：当周宣王时，猃允内侵，至于泾阳，命将征之，尽境而还。
现代文：在周宣王的时候，殓允向内地入侵，到达了泾阳，周宣王派将军前去征伐，攻到边境就回来了。
English: At the time of King Zhou Xuan, Qinyong invaded the inland and arrived in Fenyang. King Zhou Xuan sent a general to go to the front to fight, and when he reached the border, he returned.

古文：其视戎狄之侵，譬犹蚊虻之螫，驱之而已。
现代文：周朝对待戎狄的入侵，就好像对待蚊虻咬人一样，赶跑就算了。
English: The Zhou dynasty treated the invasion of the Yong Di as if it were a mosquito bite, and just ran away.

古文：故天下称明，是为中策。
现代文：所以天下人都称赞这是明智之举，这是中策。
English: That's why people around the world praised this as a wise move, as a middle-of-the-road policy.

古文：汉武帝选将练兵，约贲轻粮，深入远戍，虽有克获之功，胡辄报之，兵连祸结三十余年，中国罢耗，匈奴亦创艾，而天下称武，是为下策。
现代文：汉武帝选拔将领，训练士兵，约好少带粮食，轻装深入匈奴，把匈奴赶得远远的，虽然获胜，俘获不少，匈奴却总是予以报复，兵连祸接三十多年，结果中国疲惫虚耗，匈奴也深受创伤，天下人把这称为武勇，这是下策。
English: Emperor Hanwu selected generals, trained soldiers, agreed to bring less grain, lightly loaded into the Xiongnu, drove the Xiongnu far away, although he won and captured a lot, the Xiongnu always retaliated, the soldiers were plagued for more than 30 years. As a result, China was exhausted and exhausted, and the Xiongnu was also deeply traumatized. People around the world called this bravery, which was the next strategy.

古文：秦始皇不忍小耻而轻民力，筑长城之固，延袤万里，转输之行，起于负海，疆境既完，中国内竭，以丧社稷，是为无策。
现代文：秦始皇不肯忍受匈奴入侵的小耻辱，轻易征用百姓，修筑坚固的长城，绵延上万里，运输砖石，从海边建起，长城沿边境建完了，中国国力也衰竭了，并因此丢掉了社稷江山，这便是无策了。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang refused to bear the small humiliation of the invasion of the Huns, easily requisitioned the people, built a strong Great Wall, stretching for tens of thousands of miles, transported masonry, built from the coast, the Great Wall was built along the border, China's national strength was exhausted, and thus lost Shifang Jiangshan, which was hopeless.

古文：今天下遭阳九之厄，比年饥馑，西北边犹甚。
现代文：现在中原各地遭受大旱灾，几年来都发生饥荒，西北边境尤其受害严重。
English: At present, all parts of the Central Plains are suffering from severe drought, and famine has been occurring for several years. The northwest border has been particularly badly affected.

古文：发三十万众，具三百日粮，东援海代，南取江淮，然后乃备。
现代文：如果我们出动三十万军队，准备好够三百天用的粮草，向东面搜求于海代之地，向南面征取于江淮之地，然后才能完备。
English: If we dispatch 300,000 troops, prepare enough grain and grass to last for 300 days, search the land of Haidai to the east, and conquer the land of Jianghuai to the south, then we will be complete.

古文：计其道里，一年尚未集合，兵先至者聚居暴露，师老械弊，势不可用，此一难也。
现代文：考虑一下要走的路程，一年时间还不能集合起来，先开到的军队屯聚在一起，暴露在野外，军队疲惫，枪械损坏，必定没有战斗力而不可再用，这是第一个难处。
English: Consider the distance to be covered, the fact that it will take a year to assemble the troops, the fact that the first troops to arrive are huddled together and exposed in the open, the fact that the troops are exhausted, the guns are damaged, and they must have no combat effectiveness and cannot be used again. This is the first difficulty.

古文：边既空虚，不能奉军粮，内调郡国，不相及属，此二难也。
现代文：边境上已经十分空虚，不能供应军粮，在内地各郡县封国征集，又供应不上去，这是第二个难处。
English: The second difficulty is that the frontiers are already quite empty and cannot supply war food, and the provinces and counties in the interior are requisitioned and cannot supply it.

古文：计一人三百日食，用糒十八斛，非牛力不能胜；牛又当自赍食，加二十斛，重矣。
现代文：计算一下用粮数，一个人三百天需要粮食十八斛，不用牛是担负不了的；牛又要吃草料，也要带上，又得加上二十斛，已是十分沉重了。
English: Calculate the amount of grain needed. A person needs 18 quintals of grain for 300 days, which is too much to carry without a cow. The cow also needs to eat grass, which must be brought along, and 20 quintals must be added, which is already very heavy.

古文：胡地沙卤，多乏水草，以往事揆之，军出未满百日，牛必物故且尽，余粮尚多，人不能负，此三难也。
现代文：匈奴地方多是沙地，又缺水缺草，按过去的经验推测，军队出动还不满一百天，牛一定会快死光了，剩了的粮食还有很多，人又背不动，这是第三个难处。
English: Hun areas are mostly sandy land, and lack water and grass. According to past experience, it is estimated that the army has been deployed for less than a hundred days, the cattle will surely die out, there is still a lot of grain left, and people are not moving. This is the third difficulty.

古文：胡地秋冬甚寒，春夏甚风，多赍釜鍑薪炭，重不可胜，食糒饮水，以历四时，师有疾疫之忧，是故前世伐胡，不过百日，非不欲久，势力不能，此四难也。
现代文：匈奴那裹秋冬季十分寒冷，春夏季常刮大风，衹有多带大锅木炭才能应付，然而又嫌太重，不可担负。吃干粮、喝白水，从而度过一年四季，军队有发生瘟疫的危险，所以前代攻打匈奴，不过一百天，不是不想延长时间，是情况不允许，力量达不到，这是第四方面的难处。
English: The Huns were very cold in autumn and winter, and it was often windy in spring and summer. They had many large pots of charcoal to cope with, but they were too heavy to carry. They ate dry grain and drank white water to get through the four seasons of the year. The army was at risk of plague. Therefore, the previous generation attacked the Huns, but for a hundred days, not because they did not want to extend the time, but because the situation was not allowed, and the strength was not up to it. This is the fourth difficulty.

古文：辎重自随，则轻锐者少，不得疾行，虏徐遁逃，势不能及，幸而逢虏，又累辎重，如遇险阻，衔尾相随，虏要遮前后，危殆不测，此五难也。
现代文：粮草辎重跟随着军队，必然减少轻锐部队的数量，不能迅速行军，匈奴慢慢就能逃去，必然追不上他们，即使有幸与匈奴人遭遇，我们又有辎重粮草拖累。如果碰到狭路险径，行军时只好马首连马尾，拉长队伍。如果匈奴人截断我们，前后袭击我们，那危险真不可预料，这是第五个难处。
English: Even if we are fortunate enough to encounter the Huns, we will still be weighed down by the weight of grain and grass. If we encounter a narrow and dangerous path, we will have to march with our horses' heads and tails together to make a long line. If the Huns cut us off and attack us back and forth, the danger is truly unpredictable. This is the fifth difficulty.

古文：大用民力，功不可必立，臣伏忧之。
现代文：大肆征用百姓，打败匈奴的军功却不一定能够获得，我感到十分担忧。
English: I am very worried that the military exploits of defeating the Huns will not necessarily be able to be obtained through the large-scale requisition of people.

古文：今既发兵，宜纵先至者，令臣尤等深入霆击，且以创艾胡虏。
现代文：现在既然朝廷已经出动军队，就应当让先到达的军队出击，让我和别的将军率军队深入匈奴，迅速攻击他们，使匈奴受到损失与创伤。 
English: Now that the imperial court has dispatched troops, it should let the first arriving troops attack, let me and other generals lead the troops deep into the Huns, quickly attack them, and cause the Huns to suffer losses and injuries.

古文：莽不听尤言，转兵谷如故，天下骚动。
现代文：王莽不听从严尤的建议，还像开始那样调兵运粮，结果搅得全国一片混乱。
English: Wang Mang did not listen to Yan You's suggestion, but still sent troops to transport grain as he did in the beginning. As a result, the whole country was thrown into chaos.

古文：咸既受莽孝单于之号，驰出塞归庭，具以见胁状白单于。
现代文：匈奴右犁汗王咸接受了王莽孝单于的封号后，跑出边塞回到王庭，把被胁迫的情况仔细地告诉了单于。
English: After Wang Mangxiao and Wang Xian received the seal of Wang Mangxiao and Wang Xian from Wang Mangxiao and Wang Xian, Wang Xian ran out of the frontier fortress and returned to Wangting, and carefully told Wang Mangxiao and Wang Xian about the situation of being coerced.

古文：单于更以为于粟置支侯，匈侯贱官也。
现代文：单于更换他的官职，让他做了于粟置支侯，这是匈奴低贱的官职。
English: Instead of just changing his official position, he made him a vassal of the Sogu, which was a low-ranking official position for the Xiongnu.

古文：后助病死，莽以登代助为顺单于。
现代文：后来咸的儿子助病死了，王莽让他的另一个儿子登代替助做顺单王。
English: Later, Haman's son Suke died of illness, and Wang Mang let his other son Deng replace Suke as Shunlan Wang.

古文：厌难将军陈钦、震狄将军王巡屯云中葛邪塞。
现代文：厌难将军陈钦，震狄将军王巡驻扎在云中郡的葛邪塞。
English: General Chen Qin, who was disgusted, and General Wang Jun, who was shocked, were stationed in Ge Yaxi, Yunzhong County.

古文：是时，匈奴数为边寇，杀将率吏士，略人民，驱畜产去甚众。
现代文：这时，匈奴多次入侵边塞，杀死将帅士兵，抢掠走百姓人口，赶走了许多牲畜。
English: At this time, the Huns repeatedly invaded the border fortress, killed the generals and soldiers, plundered the civilian population, and drove away many livestock.

古文：捕得虏生口验问，皆曰孝单于咸子角数为寇。
现代文：后来抓到了匈奴俘虏审问，都说孝单于咸的儿子角多次率军入侵。
English: Later, Hun prisoners were captured and interrogated, and all of them said that Xiaodan Yu repeatedly led the army to invade the son of Haman.

古文：两将以闻。
现代文：陈、王二位将军把情况报告了朝廷。
English: Two generals, Chen and Wang, reported the situation to the imperial court.

古文：四年，莽会诸蛮夷，斩咸子登于长安市。
现代文：建国四年，王莽会集各少数民族首领，在长安市斩杀了咸的儿子登。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wang Mang gathered the leaders of various ethnic minorities and killed Xian's son Deng in Chang'an.

古文：初，北边自宣帝以来，数世不见烟火之警，人民炽盛，牛马布野。及莽挠乱匈奴，与之构难，边民死亡系获，又十二部兵久屯而不出，吏士罢弊，数年之间，北边虚空，野有暴骨矣。
现代文：当初的时候，北部边境从宣帝以来，几代没有见过烽火，没经过战事，百姓人口旺盛，牛马遍野，等到王莽搅动了匈奴，与匈奴结仇，边境上的人民或死亡、或被掳走；再加上王莽征集的十二部兵马长久驻扎在这裹，而不出击，将士疲惫，几年之间，北部边境就空了，原野上可见到暴露的白骨。
English: At the beginning, the northern border had not seen a bonfire for several generations since Emperor Xuan, and had not experienced war. The population was booming, and there were cattle and horses everywhere. When Wang Mang stirred up the Huns and made war with the Huns, the people on the border either died or were taken away. In addition, the twelve soldiers and horses collected by Wang Mang were stationed here for a long time without attacking, and the soldiers were tired. In a few years, the northern border was empty, and exposed bones could be seen on the plain.

古文：乌珠留单于立二十一岁，建国五年死。
现代文：乌珠留单于在位二十一年，建国五年死去。
English: Emperor Wuzhu died in the 21st year of his reign, five years after the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：匈奴用事大臣右骨都侯须卜当，即王昭君女伊墨居次云之婿也。
现代文：匈奴执政的大臣右骨都侯须卜当，就是王昭君女儿伊墨居次云的女婿。
English: The right-hand man of the Hunnic ruling minister, Hou Subtang, was the son-in-law of Wang Zhaojun's daughter, Yimoji Ziyun.

古文：云常欲与中国和亲，又素与咸厚善，见咸前后为莽所拜，故遂越舆而立咸为乌累若鞮单于。
现代文：云经常希望能与中国和亲，平常又与咸关系很好，她看到咸前后受到王莽的任命，于是便越过舆，立咸为乌累若千单王。
English: Yun often hoped to make peace with China, and usually had a good relationship with Haman. She saw that Haman was appointed by Wang Mang before and after, so she crossed the line and made Haman the king.

古文：乌累单于咸立，以弟舆为左谷蠡王。
现代文：乌累单于咸即位后，让弟弟舆做了左谷蠡王。
English: After Urezan ascended to the throne in Haman, he made his younger brother, Myou, the king of the Zuotani clan.

古文：乌珠留单于子苏屠胡本为左贤王，以弟屠耆阏氏子卢浑为右贤王。
现代文：乌珠留单于的儿子苏屠胡本来是左贤王，让弟弟屠耆辟氏的儿子卢浑做右贤王。
English: Su Tuhu, the son of Wuzhulu who was left to Shanyu, was originally the left-hand king, and his brother, Lu Hun, the son of Tu Bingbi, was made the right-hand king.

古文：乌珠留单于在时，左贤王数死，以为其号不祥，更易命左贤王曰 护于 。护于之尊最贵，次当为单于，故乌珠留单于授其长子以为护于，欲传以国。
现代文：乌珠留单于活着的时候，被封为左贤王的人屡次死去，于是以为这个封号不吉祥，于是把左贤王的封号改为 护于 ：护于是匈奴最尊贵的官职，按次序以后是要做单于的，所以乌珠留单于把护于的封号赐给自己的长子，想把国家传给他。
English: When Wu Zhu was still alive, people who had been given the title of Zuo Xian Wang died many times. Therefore, he thought that this title was not auspicious, so he changed the title of Zuo Xian Wang to "Guard": Guard is the most honorable official position of the Xiongnu, and it should be done in the following order. Therefore, Wu Zhu only wanted to give the title of Guard to his eldest son, and wanted to pass the country to him.

古文：咸怨乌珠留单于贬贱己号，不欲传国，及立，贬护于为左屠耆王。
现代文：咸怨恨乌珠留单于当初贬低自己的封号，不想把国家传给自己。等咸做了单于，就把护于贬为左屠耆王。
English: Xian resented the fact that Wu Zhu, who was left alone at the beginning, belittled his title and did not want to pass the country on to himself. When Xian did the same, he belittled Guo Yu as the King of Zuo Tuo.

古文：云、当遂劝咸和亲。
现代文：云和须卜当就劝咸与中原和亲。
English: Yun and Subutang advised Han to make peace with Zhongyuan.

古文：天凤元年，云、当遣人之西河虏猛制虏塞下，告塞吏曰欲见和亲侯。
现代文：天凤元年，云、须卜当派人到西河郡虎猛县的制虏塞下，告诉关塞上的官吏说想会见和亲侯。
English: In the first year of Tianfeng, Yun and Subutang sent a person to Xihe County, Tohmang County, and told the officials at the checkpoint that they wanted to meet with their relatives.

古文：和亲侯王歙者，王昭君兄子也。
现代文：和亲侯王歙是王昭君哥哥的儿子。
English: Wang Zhaojun is the son of Wang Zhaojun's elder brother, Prince Wang Yao.

古文：中部都尉以闻。
现代文：中部都尉上报朝廷。
English: Lieutenant Chubu reported to the Imperial Court.

古文：莽遣歙、歙弟骑都尉展德侯飒使匈奴，贺单于初立，赐黄金衣被缯帛，绐言侍子登在，因购求陈良、终带等。
现代文：王莽便派王歙和他的弟弟骑都尉展德侯王飒出使匈奴，祝贺单于新登大位，赏赐给黄金、衣被、缯帛，欺骗单于说他入侍的儿子登还在中原，并给钱要求单于把陈良、终带等人交给朝廷。
English: Wang Mang then sent Wang Xuan and his younger brother, the cavalry captain Zhan Dehu Wang Xuan, to send an envoy to the Xiongnu, to congratulate Zidan on his new accession to the throne, to reward him with gold, quilts and brocades, to deceive Zidan that his son, Zidan, was still in the Central Plains, and to demand money only to hand Chen Liang, the last band and others over to the imperial court.

古文：单于尽收四人及手杀校尉刀护贼芝音妻子以下二十七人，皆械槛付使者，遣厨唯姑夕王富等四十人送歙、飒。
现代文：单于把陈良等四人全部抓来，还有杀死校尉刀护的贼人芝音的妻儿以下共二十七人，全部捆好关在囚车裹交给了使者，并派厨唯姑夕王富等四十人护送王歙、王飒回朝。
English: In addition to arresting all four of Chen Liang and others, there were a total of 27 people, including the wife and children of the thief Zhiyin, who killed the captain's sword guard, all of whom were bundled up and wrapped in a prison cart and handed over to the envoy. Forty people, including the cook Yuyu Wangfu, were sent to escort Wang Yao and Wang Yao back to the imperial court.

古文：莽作焚如之刑，烧杀陈良等，罢诸将率屯兵，但置游击都尉。
现代文：王莽制作了焚如之刑，烧杀了陈良等人，把驻扎在边塞的将帅及士兵撤回原地，衹设置游击都尉。
English: Wang Mang made the punishment of burning, burned Chen Liang and others, withdrew the generals and soldiers stationed in the border fortress to the original place, and set up a guerrilla captain.

古文：单于贪莽赂遗，帮外不失汉故事，然内利寇掠。
现代文：单于贪求王莽送的财宝，所以外表上仍按汉朝时的旧例行事，但暗地裹却喜欢侵掠边塞以得利。
English: He was only greedy for the treasure sent by Wang Mang, so outwardly he still followed the old practice of the Han Dynasty, but secretly he liked to plunder the border for profit.

古文：又使还，知子登前死，怨恨，寇虏从左地入，不绝。
现代文：并且使者回到匈奴后，单于知道儿子登以前已经被王莽杀死了，十分怨恨，便派兵从左地入侵，掳掠不绝。
English: And after the envoy returned to the Xiongnu, simply because he knew that his son Deng had been killed by Wang Mang, he was very resentful, so he sent soldiers to invade from the left and plundered endlessly.

古文：使者问单于，辄曰： 乌桓与匈奴无状黠民共为寇入塞，譬如中国有盗贼耳！
现代文：王莽的使者责问单于，匈奴人总是回答说： 乌桓与匈奴的奸黠之民一起结伙入侵边塞，就好像中国有盗贼一样！
English: When Wang Mang's envoys asked questions, the Huns always replied: "Wu Huan and the treacherous people of the Huns banded together to invade the border fortress, just as if there were thieves in China!"

古文：咸初立持国，威信尚浅，尽力禁止，不敢有二心。 
现代文：单于咸刚刚即位，主持国政，威信还不高，费尽全力去禁止这类事情，并不敢有二心。 
English: Han Solo had just ascended the throne, presided over state affairs, and his prestige was not high. He did his best to prohibit such things, and did not dare to have second thoughts.

古文：天凤二年五月，莽复遣歙与五威将王咸率伏黯、丁业等六人，使送右厨唯姑夕王，因奉归前所斩侍子登及诸贵人从者丧，皆载以常车。
现代文：天凤二年五月，王莽又派王歙与五威将军王咸，率领伏黯、丁业等六人，护送右厨唯姑夕王回匈奴。同时把以前斩杀的单于的儿子登，以及被害的跟随登的匈奴贵人的灵柩奉还匈奴，都用常车装载。
English: In May of the second year of Tianfeng, Wang Mang also sent Wang Qian and Wuwei General Wang Xiancang, led by six people including Fu Qian and Ding Ye, to escort the right-hand cook Yu Yu Wang back to the Xiongnu. At the same time, the coffin of the son of Yan Yu, who had previously been killed, and the coffin of the Xiongnu nobles who had been killed following Deng, were returned to the Xiongnu. They were all loaded with regular cars.

古文：至塞下，单于遣云、当子男大且渠奢等至塞迎。
现代文：到了塞下，单于派云、须当的儿子大且渠奢等人到边塞迎接。
English: When they arrived at the settlement, Sanyu Paiyun, Sudang's son Daqichucu and others went to the border settlement to meet them.

古文：咸等至，多遗单于金珍，因谕说改其号，号匈奴曰 恭奴 ，单于曰 善于 ，赐印绶。
现代文：王咸等人到王庭以后，送给单于许多金宝珍珠，并劝说单于改变国号，改匈奴为 恭奴 ，改单于为 善于 ，赏赐给印绶。
English: After Wang Xian and others arrived at the royal court, they gave many precious pearls to Shanyu, and persuaded Shanyu to change the country's name, to change Xiongnu to Gongnu, and to be good at printing money.

古文：封骨都侯当为后安公，当子男奢为后安侯。
现代文：封骨都侯须卜当为后安公，封须卜当的儿子奢为后安侯。
English: The heir to the estate, Subutai, was to become the lord of Houan, and the son of Subutai was to become the lord of Houan.

古文：单于贪莽金币，故曲听之，然寇盗如故。
现代文：单于贪求王莽的金银珠宝，所以都委曲听从了，然而还像以前一样侵掠寇盗。
English: They only coveted Wang Mang's gold and silver jewelry, so they all obeyed, but they still plundered and robbed as before.

古文：咸、歙又以陈良等购金付云、当，令自差与之。
现代文：王咸、王歙又把朝廷购求陈良等人的金钱交给云和须卜当，让他们分别赐给下级。
English: Wang Xian and Wang Yao also gave the money of Chen Liang and others to Yun and Subutang, so that they could give it to their subordinates.

古文：十二月，还入塞，莽大喜，赐歙钱二百万，悉封黯等。
现代文：十二月份王咸等回到塞内，王莽十分高兴，赏赐给王歙钱二百万，伏黯等人都被封官。
English: In December, Wang Xian and others returned to Senai. Wang Mang was very happy and rewarded Wang Qian with two million yuan. Fu Qian and others were all banned.

古文：单于咸立五岁，天凤五年死，弟左贤王舆立，为呼都而尸道皋若鞮单于。
现代文：乌累若千单于咸在位五年，天凤五年死去，他的弟弟左贤王舆继位，称为呼都而尸道皋若千单于。
English: Wule Ruoqian was on the throne in Haman for five years, Tianfeng died in five years, his brother Zuoxian Wangyu succeeded to the throne, known as Hudu, and the corpse was buried in Ruoqian Ruoqian.

古文：匈奴谓孝曰 若鞮自呼韩邪后，与汉亲密，见汉谥帝为 孝 ，慕之，故皆为 若鞮 。
现代文：匈奴称呼 孝 为 若千 。自呼韩邪单于之后，匈奴与汉朝关系亲密，看到汉朝皇帝的谧号称为 孝 ，十分羡慕，所以单于都加上 若千 。
English: The Xiongnu called Xiao as "Wakasen." After calling themselves Han Yazan, the Xiongnu had a close relationship with the Han Dynasty. They were very envious when they saw that the Han Dynasty emperor's nickname was called "Xiao," so they added "Wakasen" to every name.

古文：呼都而尸单于舆既立，贪利赏赐，遣大且渠奢与云女弟当于居次子醯椟王俱奉献至长安。
现代文：呼都而尸单于舆继位后，贪图王莽的金银赏赐，派大且渠奢与云的妹妹当于居次的儿子醯椟王一起到长安向王莽奉献贡品。
English: After the succession of Emperor Wu to the throne, he coveted Wang Mang's gold and silver reward, and sent his elder and younger sister to Chang'an to offer tribute to Wang Mang together with his second son, King Yao.

古文：莽遣和亲侯歙与奢等俱至制虏塞下，与云、当会，因以兵迫胁，将至长安。
现代文：王莽派和亲侯王歙与匈奴大且渠奢一起到达制虏塞下，与云、须卜当约请相会，然后便以武力相胁迫，把他们带到了长安。
English: Wang Mangpai and Prince Wang Yao arrived at the fortress together with the Xiongnu Daqiqiao, met Yun and Subutang by appointment, and then forced them by force and brought them to Chang'an.

古文：云、当小男从塞下得脱，归匈奴。
现代文：云和须卜当的小儿子从塞下逃走了，回到了匈奴。
English: Yun and Subutang's youngest son escaped from the camp and returned to the Xiongnu.

古文：当至长安，莽拜为须卜单于，欲出大兵以辅立之。
现代文：须卜当到了长安，王莽拜他为须单于，想出动大军辅佐他在匈奴做单于。
English: When Subbu arrived in Chang'an, Wang Mang worshipped him as the only one, and wanted to dispatch a large army to assist him in doing the only one in Xiongnu.

古文：兵调度亦不合，而匈奴愈怒，并入北边，北边由是坏败。
现代文：但是王莽的军队却调动不起来，而遣也更惹恼了匈奴，各部一起向北部边境入侵，北部边塞因此破败不堪。
English: However, Wang Mang's army could not be mobilized, and the Huns were even more annoyed by the dispatch. All the ministries invaded the northern border together, and the northern border fortress was devastated.

古文：会当病死，莽以其庶女陆逮任妻后安公奢，所以尊宠之甚厚，终为欲出兵立之者。
现代文：这时正巧须当病死了，王莽把自己庶出的女儿陆逯任嫁给后安公奢做妻子，对他十分尊宠，目的终究还是为了想出兵扶立他做单于。
English: At this time, Wang Mang died of illness, and Wang Mang married his illegitimate daughter, Lu Xun Ren, to Hou An Gongxu as his wife. He had great respect for him, and his ultimate goal was to send troops to support him.

古文：会汉兵诛莽，云、奢亦死。
现代文：逭时正好汉兵攻杀王莽，云、奢也一起被杀死了。
English: At that time, the Chinese soldiers attacked and killed Wang Mang, and Yun and Saka were also killed together.

古文：更始二年冬，汉遗中郎将归德侯飒、大司马护军陈遵使匈奴，授单于汉旧制玺绶，王侯以下印绶，因送云、当余亲属贵人从者。
现代文：更始二年冬天，汉朝派中郎将归德侯飒、大司马护军陈遵出使匈奴，授给单于汉朝原来式样的玺绶，授给王侯以下的人印绶，同时把跟从云和须当来中原的、没死而剩下的亲属、全送回匈奴。
English: In the winter of the second year of the Heian period, the Han Dynasty sent Zhongro (middle-ranking official) Gui De Hou Tuo, and Chen Zun, the chief of the Horse Guards, to the Xiongnu, to grant the Han Dynasty's original style of the imperial seal, to grant the imperial seal to the people below the prince, and to send all the relatives who had not died but had followed Yun and Suda to the Central Plains back to the Xiongnu.

古文：单于舆骄，谓遵、飒曰： 匈奴本与汉为兄弟，匈奴中乱，孝宣皇帝辅立呼韩邪单于，故称臣以尊汉。
现代文：单于舆十分骄横，对陈遵、王飒说： 匈奴与汉朝本来是兄弟，匈奴中间的时候发生内乱，孝宣皇帝帮助呼韩邪单于登位，所以我们向汉朝称臣，以示尊敬。
English: Zheng Yu was very arrogant and said to Chen Zun and Wang Xi: The Xiongnu and the Han Dynasty were originally brothers. When there was a civil war between the Xiongnu and the Han Dynasty, Emperor Xiaoxuan helped to call Han and Zheng Yu to the throne. Therefore, we called ourselves the Han Dynasty's vassals to show our respect.

古文：今汉亦大乱，为王莽所篡，匈奴亦出兵击莽，空其边境，令天下骚动思汉，莽卒以败而汉复兴，亦我力也，当复尊我！ 
现代文：现在汉朝也发生了内乱，皇位被王莽篡夺，我们匈奴也出兵攻打了王莽，使他边境空虚，使汉朝百姓骚动，人心思汉，使王莽终于失败而汉朝得以复兴，造也是靠了我们匈奴的力量，汉朝应当重新尊敬我们！ 
English: Now civil unrest has also occurred in the Han Dynasty. The imperial throne was usurped by Wang Mang. We Huns also sent troops to attack Wang Mang, emptying his borders, causing the Han Dynasty people to riot, and people to think of Han. Wang Mang finally failed and the Han Dynasty was revived. It was also built by the power of us Huns. The Han Dynasty should respect us again!

古文：遵与相牚距，单于终持此言。
现代文：陈遵与单于抗拒辩论，单于一直坚持这样的说法。
English: Chen Zunhe refused to participate in the debate and insisted on saying this.

古文：其明年夏，还。
现代文：第二年夏天，王飒、陈遵回到汉朝。
English: In the summer of the following year, Wang Qi and Chen Zun returned to the Han Dynasty.

古文：会赤眉入长安，更始败。
现代文：这时正好赤眉军攻入长安，刘玄失败了。
English: At this time, the Red Eyebrows invaded Chang'an, and Liu Xuan was defeated.

古文：赞曰：《书》戒 蛮夷猾夏 ，《诗》称 戎狄是膺 ，《春秋》 有道守在四夷 ，久矣，夷狄之为患也！
现代文：赞曰：《书经》告诫 蛮夷少数民族扰乱中原 ，《诗经》称赞 勇敢地面对戎狄 ，《春秋》上说 有道之君四边的少数民族也拥护 ，夷狄为害中原由来已久。
English: Praise: "The Book of Songs" admonishes barbarian ethnic minorities to disturb the Central Plains, "The Book of Songs" praises bravely facing the army of Di, "Spring and Autumn" says that the ethnic minorities on all sides of the country also support the prince of virtue, and the harm of the Central Plains caused by the barbarians has a long history.

古文：故自汉兴，忠言嘉谋之臣曷尝不运筹策相与争于庙堂之上乎？
现代文：所以自从汉朝建立，那些忠言直谏、计谋深远的大臣们，何尝不是费尽心机，出谋划策，在朝廷上争论如何对付夷狄？
English: Therefore, since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, those ministers who are loyal, straightforward, and far-sighted, why not make every effort, make plans, and argue in the court about how to deal with the Yidi?

古文：高祖时则刘敬，吕后时樊哙、季布，孝文时贾谊、朝错，李武时王恢、韩安国、朱买臣、公孙弘、董仲舒，人持所见，各有同异，然总其要，归两科而已。
现代文：高祖时有刘敬，吕后时有樊啥、季布，孝文帝时有贾谊、晁错，孝武帝时有王恢、韩安国、朱买臣、公孙弘、董仲舒，人们坚持己见，有相同的，有不同的，然而归纳起来，也就是两种意见。
English: At the time of Emperor Gao, there was Liu Jing; at the time of Empress Lu, there was Zhi Wei and Ji Bu; at the time of Emperor Xiaowen, there was Jia Yi and Zheng Er; at the time of Emperor Xiaowu, there was Wang Hui, Han An Guo, Zhu Bai Sheng, Gongsun Hong, and Dong Zhongshu. People adhere to their own opinions, some are the same, some are different, but summed up, they are two kinds of opinions.

古文：缙绅之儒则守和亲，介胄之士则言征伐，皆偏见一时之利害，而未究匈奴之终始也。
现代文：缙绅儒士坚持与匈奴和亲，披甲戴胄的武士则坚持讨伐攻打匈奴，都是衹顾某一时期有利或有害的偏执之见，却没有深入考察匈奴白始至终的历史。
English: The gentlemanly Confucians insisted on making peace with the Huns, while the armored warriors insisted on fighting and attacking the Huns. All of them ignored the prejudices that were beneficial or harmful in a certain period, but they did not thoroughly investigate the history of the Huns from beginning to end.

古文：自汉兴以至于今，旷世历年，多于春秋，其与匈奴，有修文而和亲之矣，有用武而克伐之矣，有卑下而承事之矣，有威服而臣畜之矣，诎伸异变，强弱相反，是故其详可得而言也。
现代文：从汉朝建立直到现在，经历了很多年代，比《春秋》纪年还多，汉朝与匈奴的关系，既有崇尚文治而实行和亲的时候，也有使用武力征伐战斗的时候；既有谦卑恭顺侍奉匈奴的时候，也有用武力征服而把他们当臣子奴才对待的时候。有屈有伸，变化不同，或我强、或你弱，地位相反，所以我们可以谈论一下其中详情。
English: From the establishment of the Han Dynasty until now, many years have passed, more than the "Spring and Autumn" period. The relationship between the Han Dynasty and the Xiongnu, there are times of advocating the rule of law and practicing friendship, and there are times of using force to conquer and fight; there are times of humbly and obediently serving the Xiongnu, and there are times of conquering by force and treating them as a vassal slave. There are ups and downs, changes are different, or I am strong, or you are weak, the status is opposite, so we can talk about the details.

古文：昔和亲之论，发于刘敬。
现代文：以往提倡与匈奴和亲的言论，是由刘敬开始的。
English: In the past, it was Liu Jing who started the rhetoric of advocating reconciliation with the Xiongnu.

古文：是时，天下初定，新遭平城之难，故从其言，约结和亲，赂遗单于，冀以救安边境。
现代文：当时天下刚刚安定，汉朝刚经历了在平城被匈奴围困的灾难，所以皇帝听从丫他的建议，与匈奴商议和亲，送给单于金银粮棉，希望能够使边境安定。
English: At that time, the world had just been stabilized, and the Han Dynasty had just experienced the disaster of being besieged by the Huns in Pingcheng. Therefore, the emperor listened to his advice, negotiated a reconciliation with the Huns, and gave them gold, silver, grain and cotton, hoping to stabilize the border.

古文：孝惠、高后时遵而不违，匈奴寇盗不为衰止，而单于反以加骄倨。
现代文：孝惠帝、高后的时候听从匈奴，不敢违抗，匈奴的侵掠却一点儿也没减少或停止，而单于反而更加骄狂。
English: When Emperor Xiao Hui and Empress Gao were young, they listened to the Xiongnu and did not dare to resist, but the Xiongnu's invasion and plunder did not decrease or stop at all, but only became more arrogant.

古文：逮至孝文，与通关市，妻以汉女，增厚其赂，岁以千金，而匈奴数背约束，边境屡被其害。
现代文：到了孝文帝时，舆匈奴互通贸易，开放边境市场，把汉朝公主嫁给单子，增加送给匈奴的财物，每年要花一千金子，匈奴却屡次违反和约，汉朝边境屡遭侵害。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowen, it cost a thousand gold to exchange trade with the Xiongnu, open the border market, marry the Han princess to the list, and increase the property given to the Xiongnu. However, the Xiongnu repeatedly violated the peace treaty, and the Han Dynasty border was repeatedly violated.

古文：是以文帝中年，赫然发愤，遂躬戎服，亲御鞍马，从六郡良家材力之士，驰射上林，讲习战陈，聚天下精兵，军于广武，顾问冯唐，与论将帅，喟然叹息，思古名臣。
现代文：所以文帝到了中年以后，发愤圆强，亲自穿起戎装，骑上战马，率领六郡的精壮勇猛的战士，在上林苑练习骑马射箭，演练战阵，调集天下的精兵强将，驻扎在广武城。文帝向冯唐询问，和他谈论将帅，感叹思慕古代的名臣。
English: Therefore, after reaching middle age, Emperor Wen became enraged, personally put on military uniforms, rode a war horse, led the powerful and brave soldiers of six counties, practiced horseback archery in Shanglinyuan, practiced battle formations, mobilized the world's elite soldiers, and stationed in Guangwu City. Emperor Wen asked Feng Tang, talked with him about generals, and sighed and thought about famous ministers in ancient times.

古文：此则和亲无益，已然之明效也。
现代文：因此与匈奴和亲毫无益处，已然是十分明了的了。
English: Therefore, it is quite clear that there is no benefit in making peace with the Huns.

古文：仲舒亲见四世之事，犹复欲守旧文，颇增其约。
现代文：董仲舒亲眼见到了汉初四朝的那些事情，却还是想遵从过去的章程，大大增重与匈奴的规约。
English: Dong Zhongshu saw with his own eyes the events of the four dynasties at the beginning of the Han Dynasty, but he still wanted to follow the past regulations and greatly increase the importance of the regulations with the Xiongnu.

古文：以为： 义动君子，利动贪人。如匈奴者，非可以仁义说也，独可说以厚利，结之于天耳。
现代文：他认为 仁义能够感动君子，利益能够鼓动贪婪的小人，像匈奴人那样的，是不能用宣教仁义来使他们明白的，衹能用厚利金钱使他们高兴，和他们向天发誓，结下盟约。
English: He thought that benevolence and righteousness could move the nobles, and profit could encourage the greedy villains. Like the Xiongnu, it was not possible to preach benevolence and righteousness to make them understand, but it was possible to make them happy with rich money, and swear to the sky and make a covenant with them.

古文：故与之厚利以没其意，与盟于天以坚其约，质其爱子以累其心，匈奴虽欲展转，奈失重利何，奈欺上天何，奈杀爱子何！
现代文：所以应该多送给他们金银财物以消弭他们凶暴的攻击意识，与他们对天盟誓从而使双方缔结的盟约更牢固，让单于的爱子来汉朝做人质从而使他下决心时受到牵累。即使匈奴想要辗转边塞，攻击汉朝，也没有办法不顾及到要失去金钱厚利、会欺骗上天、爱子会被杀死，从而无法举措。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to give them more gold, silver and property to eliminate their ferocious sense of aggression, swear with them to heaven to make the covenant concluded between the two sides more solid, and let Yan Yu's beloved son come to the Han Dynasty as a hostage so that he will be affected when he makes up his mind. Even if the Huns want to bypass the border and attack the Han Dynasty, there is no way to ignore the fact that they will lose money and profits, will deceive the heavens, and the beloved son will be killed, so they cannot take action.

古文：夫赋敛行赂不足以当三军之费，城郭之固无以异于贞士之约，而使边城守境之民父兄缓带，稚子咽哺，胡马不窥于长城，而羽檄不行于中国，不亦便于天下乎！ 
现代文：为向匈奴送礼而征收的钱财，比不上出动三军征伐匈奴所花费的军费；防御匈奴的坚固的城郭的效用，与派行为贞正的人与匈奴订立的盟约的效用也没有什么两样。而这样做，却能够使边塞城池中防卫边境的人们解下铵甲，得以轻松，使他们的孩子能够平安地吃饭。使匈奴的骑兵不再窥视侵袭汉朝的长城，刀枪弓箭不再在中原流行，对于天下人民来说不是很便利的事情吗！ 
English: The money and wealth levied to send gifts to the Huns is nothing compared to the military expenses spent on dispatching three armies to conquer the Huns; the effect of defending the Huns' strong fortresses is no different from the effect of the covenant concluded between the righteous and the Huns. And doing so, it can make the people who defend the border in the border fortresses disarm their armor, make it easy, and allow their children to eat safely. So that the Huns' cavalry will no longer peek at the Great Wall that invades the Han Dynasty, and swords, guns, and bows and arrows will no longer be popular in the Central Plains, isn't it a

古文：察仲舒之论，考诸行事，乃知其未合于当时，而有阙于后世也。
现代文：然而考察一下，董住堑的言论，与当时的事实情势比较一下，就会知道他说的那些在当时是不合时宜的，对后世来说也有不正确的地方。
English: However, if you examine Dong Jiuyong's remarks and compare them with the actual situation at that time, you will know that what he said was inappropriate at that time, and there are also incorrect things for future generations.

古文：当孝武时，虽征伐克获，而士马物故亦略相当；虽开河南之野，建朔方之郡，亦弃造阳之北九百余里。
现代文：在孝武帝的时候，虽然攻打匈奴，所获甚多，然而士兵、战马死去的数目与获得的也大致差不多；虽然开辟了河套以南的原野，建筑了朔方郡，可是也抛弃了造阳以北的地方九百多里。
English: During the time of Emperor Xiaowu, although he gained a great deal by attacking the Xiongnu, the number of soldiers and horses that died was roughly the same as that gained; although he opened up the fields south of Hetao and built Shuofang County, he also abandoned more than nine hundred miles north of Zhao Yang.

古文：匈奴人民每来降汉，单于亦辄拘留汉使以相报复，其桀骜尚如斯，安肯以爱子而为质乎？
现代文：匈奴的百姓时时来投降汉朝，单于也总是扣留汉朝使者做为报复，他们桀骛不驯的性格还是原来那样，又怎么肯把自己的爱子交给汉朝做人质呢？
English: The people of the Xiongnu surrendered to the Han Dynasty from time to time, but always detained the Han Dynasty's envoys as revenge. Their rebellious character was still the same as before, so how could they give their beloved son to the Han Dynasty as a hostage?

古文：此不合当时之言也。
现代文：造就是董仲舒言论不合当时时宜的地方。
English: This is where Dong Zhongshu's remarks were out of step with the times.

古文：若不置质，空约和亲，是袭孝文既往之悔，而长匈奴无已之诈也。
现代文：如果不能做到让匈奴人来做人质，和亲的盟约就是白纸一张，这就重犯了孝文帝过去的错误，而助长匈奴没完没了的欺诈行为。
English: If the Huns could not be made to serve as hostages, the peace treaty would be a blank sheet of paper, which would repeat the past mistakes of Emperor Xiaowen and encourage the Huns to commit endless frauds.

古文：夫边城不选守境武略之臣，修障隧备塞之具，厉长戟劲弩之械，恃吾所以待边寇而务赋敛于民，远行货赂，割剥百姓，以奉寇雠。
现代文：不选拔能够保卫国境的武将驻守边境上的城池；不修亭障、筑小路，准备保卫边塞的手段；不把长戟磨锋利、把劲弓准备好，使我们有所凭藉、有所依靠，却一味向百姓横征暴敛，跑丫好远去赂遣匈奴，剥夺百姓的财产，去送给我们的敌人。
English: They do not select military commanders capable of defending the border and station them in the cities on the border; they do not repair pavilions, build small roads, and prepare the means to defend the border fortress; they do not sharpen the long beak and prepare the strong bow, so that we have something to rely on, but they are blindly collecting from the people, running far away to bribe the Huns, depriving the people of their property, and giving it to our enemies.

古文：信甘言，守空约，而几胡马之不窥，不已过乎！
现代文：相信虚假的好话，信守空无一用的盟约，却期望匈奴人不来入侵，这不也太过分了吧！
English: Isn't it too much to expect the Huns not to invade, after believing in false promises and abiding by a worthless treaty?

