古文：桓公问管子曰： 梁聚谓寡人曰： 古者轻赋税而肥籍敛，取下无顺于此者矣。 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 梁聚对我讲： 古时候实行轻税而薄征，这算是税收政策中最适宜而易行的了。 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong and said: Liang Ju told me: In ancient times, the implementation of light tax and light levy was the most appropriate and feasible tax policy.

古文：梁聚之言如何？ 
现代文：梁聚的意见如何？ 
English: What is Liang Ju's opinion?

古文：管子对曰： 梁聚之言非也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 梁聚的话不对。
English: Guanzhong replied: Liangzhu's words are not right.

古文：彼轻赋税则仓廪虚，肥籍敛则械器不奉。
现代文：轻赋税则国家仓凛空虚，薄征收则兵器工具不足。
English: If the tax is light, the country is empty, and if the tax is light, the country is short of weapons and tools.

古文：械器不奉，而诸侯之皮币不衣；仓廪虚则倳贱无禄。
现代文：兵器、工具不足则皮、帛不能出口，国家仓凛空虚则战士低贱无禄。
English: If weapons and tools are in short supply, hides and skins cannot be exported. If the country is in a state of panic, soldiers are low-ranking and receive no pay.

古文：外，皮币不衣于天下；内，国倳贱。
现代文：对外，皮货和丝帛不能输出于天下各国；对内，国家的战士又处境低贱。
English: Externally, furs and silks could not be exported from all over the world; internally, the country's soldiers were in a lowly position.

古文：梁聚之言非也。
现代文：梁聚的话显然是错误的。
English: Liang Ju's words are obviously wrong.

古文：君有山，山有金，以立币，以币准谷而授禄，故国谷斯在上，谷贾什倍。
现代文：国君有山，山中产铜，可用铜铸造钱币。如能用钱币折算粮食发放全国俸禄，粮食就全都囤集在国家手里，粮价可上涨十倍。
English: The sovereign has mountains, and the mountains produce copper, which can be used to mint coins. If it were possible to convert grain into coins and distribute a national stipend, all grain would be concentrated in the hands of the state, and grain prices could rise tenfold.

古文：农夫夜寝蚤起，不待见使，五谷什倍。
现代文：农民晚睡早起，不用驱使就可以成十倍地增加产量。
English: Farmers go to bed late and get up early, and they can increase production tenfold without being driven.

古文：士半禄而死君，农夫夜寝蚤起，力作而无止；彼善为国者，不曰使之，使不得不使；不曰贫之，使不得不用。
现代文：这样一来，战士只要有从前一半的粮食俸禄，就可以为国效命；农民又晚睡早起而努力耕作不止。所以，善于主持国家的人，不必直接用言语驱使百姓，而百姓不得不为所驱使；不必直接用言语利用百姓，而百姓不得不为所利用。
English: In this way, soldiers can serve the country as long as they have half of the previous grain salary; farmers sleep late and get up early and work hard. Therefore, those who are good at presiding over the country do not have to directly use words to drive the people, but the people have to be driven; do not have to directly use words to use the people, but the people have to be used.

古文：故使民无有不得不使者。
现代文：这样，使百姓没有不为他所用、为他所使的。
English: So that the people have nothing to do with him or with anything that he has made.

古文：夫梁聚之言非也。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：梁聚的意见是错误的。 桓公说： 好。 
English: Liang Ju's opinion was wrong, and Kan Gong said, "Okay."

古文：桓公又问于管子曰， 有人教我，谓之请士。曰： 何不官百能？  
现代文：桓公又问管仲说： 有一个名叫请士的人对我说：何以不对各种有才能的人进行管束？ 
English: Prince Kan also asked Guan Zhong, saying, "A man named Guan Shi said to me, 'Why don't you control all kinds of talented people?'

古文：管子对曰： 何谓百能？ 
现代文：管仲说： 何谓管束有才能的人？ 
English: Guanzhong said: What is the meaning of controlling talented people?

古文：桓公曰： 使智者尽其智，谋士尽其谋，百工尽其巧。
现代文：桓公说： 就是为了使智者全部拿出智慧，谋士全部拿出谋略，百工全部拿出技巧。
English: King Kuan said, "This is so that the wise men can fully display their wisdom, the counselors can fully display their strategies, and the craftsmen can fully display their skills."

古文：若此则可以为国乎？ 
现代文：这样做，就可以治国么？ 
English: If we do this, will we be able to govern?

古文：管子对曰： 请士之言非也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 请士的话是错误的。
English: Guanzhong replied, "What the solicitor said is wrong.

古文：禄肥则士不死，币轻则士简赏，万物轻则士偷幸。
现代文：俸禄轻，士人就不肯死难；币值低，士人就轻视奖赏；物价低，谋生易，士人就苟且偷生。
English: If the salary is light, the scholar will not be willing to die; if the value of the currency is low, the scholar will despise the reward; if the price is low and it is easy to make a living, the scholar will steal a living.

古文：三怠在国，何数之有？
现代文：国家有此三种怠情现象，还有什么办法呢？
English: There are these three kinds of laziness in the country. What else can be done?

古文：彼谷十藏于上，三游于下，谋士尽其虑，智士尽其知，勇士轻其死。
现代文：如果把粮食的七成操纵在国家手里，只让三成在下面流通，谋士就可以用尽他们的谋略，智士就可以用尽他们的智慧，勇士也就不惜生命了。
English: If seventy percent of the grain is controlled by the state, and only thirty percent is allowed to circulate below, the advisers can exhaust their strategies, the sages can exhaust their wisdom, and the warriors will not spare their lives.

古文：请士所谓妄言也。不通于轻重，谓之妄言。 
现代文：请士的话是错误言论，因为不懂得轻重之术，就只能叫作错误的言论。 
English: The words of the solicitor are erroneous statements, because they do not know the art of gravity, they can only be called erroneous statements.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 昔者周人有天下，诸侯宾服，名教通于天下，而夺于其下。何数也？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 从前周朝享有天下，诸侯宾服，名教行于天下，然而竟被下面篡夺了。
English: Kuan Gong asked Guanzhong, "From before, the Zhou Dynasty enjoyed the whole world, the princes were honored guests, and the famous teachings were spread all over the world. However, it was usurped from below.

古文：管子对曰： 君分壤而贡入，市朝同流。
现代文：下面是用的什么办法呢？ 管仲回答说： 国君在不同地区得到贡物，是放在市场上自由买卖的。
English: What was the next step? Guanzhong replied: The sovereign received tributes from different regions, and they were placed on the market and traded freely.

古文：黄金，一策也；江阳之珠，一策也；秦之明山之曾青，一策也。
现代文：这样，利用黄金买卖是一个办法，利用江阳之珠买卖是一个办法，利用秦地明山所产的曾青是一个办法。
English: In this way, using gold to buy and sell is one way, using Jiangyang beads to buy and sell is one way, and using Zeng Qing produced by Qin Di Mingshan is one way.

古文：此谓以寡为多，以狭为广，轨出之属也。 
现代文：这叫作以少变多，以小变大，也属于轻重之数的范围。 
English: This is called changing from less to more, from small to large, and also belongs to the range of light and heavy numbers.

古文：桓公曰： 天下之数尽于轨出之属也？ ： 今国谷重什倍而万物轻，大夫谓贾之： 子为吾运谷而敛财。 
现代文：桓公说： 天下的理财方法全属于轻重之术么？ 管仲说： 例如现在粮价上升十倍而其他物资价格尚低，大夫便把商入找来说： 请替我贩卖粮食而收购其他物资。 
English: Kan Gong said, "Are all the financial management methods in the world just tricks?" Guanzhong said, "For example, now that the price of grain has risen tenfold while the prices of other materials are still low, the doctor will look for merchants and say, 'Please sell grain for me and buy other materials.'

古文：谷之重一也，今九为余。
现代文：如果粮食原价为一，这就有九倍盈利。
English: If the original price of grain is one, this is nine times the profit.

古文：谷重而万物轻，若此，则国财九在大夫矣。
现代文：由于粮贵而其他物资尚贱，这样，大夫就买进来九倍的物资。
English: Since grain is dear and other goods are cheap, the doctor thus buys nine times more goods.

古文：国岁反一，财物之九者皆倍重而出矣。
现代文：待粮价恢复原状，又把这九倍的物资加价销出去。
English: Wait for the grain price to return to its original state, and then sell the ninefold increase in the price of materials.

古文：财物在下，币之九在大夫。
现代文：货物推销到民间，九倍的货币又进入大夫之手。
English: The goods are sold to the public, and nine times the money ends up in the doctor's hands.

古文：然则币谷羡在大夫也。
现代文：结果钱、粮的赢余收入都归大夫了。
English: As a result, the surplus income of money and grain all went to the doctor.

古文：天子以客行，令以时出。
现代文：天子成了客位，大夫却随时出头露面。
English: The son of heaven has become a guest, but the doctor shows up at any time.

古文：熟谷之人亡，诸侯受而官之。
现代文：精通粮食业务的官员外逃，被别国诸侯接纳为官。
English: Officials skilled in the grain business fled abroad and were accepted as officials by the lords of other countries.

古文：连朋而聚与，高下万物以合民用。
现代文：他们结聚朋党，操纵物价，包揽市场民用。
English: They gathered their cronies, manipulated prices, and monopolized the market for civilian use.

古文：内则大夫自还而不尽忠，外则诸侯连朋合与，熟谷之人则去亡，故天子失其权也。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：就国内说，大夫自谋私利而不肯尽忠；就国外说，诸侯串通结聚朋党。精通粮食业务的官员则外逃。所以天子便丧失了他的政权。 桓公说： 讲得好。 
English: Domestically speaking, the doctor pursued his own interests and refused to be loyal; abroad speaking, the lords colluded to form a crony party, and the officials who were well versed in grain business fled abroad. Therefore, the emperor lost his political power. Huan Gong said, "Well said."

古文：桓公又问管子曰： 终身有天下而勿失，为之有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公又问管仲说： 保证终身享有天下而不失。有办法做到么？ 
English: Kan also asked Guanzhong, "Is there any way to ensure that I can enjoy the world for life without losing it?"

古文：管子对曰： 请勿施于天下，独施之于吾国。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 这办法不要先在普天下实行，只可先在本国实行。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "This method should not be implemented all over the world first, it can only be implemented in our country first."

古文：桓公曰： 此若言何谓也？ 
现代文：桓公说： 这话是什么意思？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "What does that mean?

古文：管子对曰： 国之广狭、壤之肥墝有数，终岁食余有数。
现代文：管仲回答说： 国内土地的大小和土壤的肥瘠是有定数的，全年粮食的消费和剩余也有定数。
English: Guanzhong replied: The size of the land and the fertility of the soil in China are fixed, and the consumption and surplus of grain throughout the year are also fixed.

古文：彼守国者，守谷而已矣。
现代文：主持国政的，只需经营好粮食就行。
English: Those who preside over state affairs only need to manage grain well.

古文：曰：某县之壤广若干，某县之壤狭若干，则必积委币，于是县州里受公钱。
现代文：也就是说，无论某县的土地多大，也无论某县多小，都必须有一笔货币贮备。在该县州里向农民贷放公款。
English: That is to say, no matter how big the land in a county is, and no matter how small a county is, there must be a reserve of money.

古文：泰秋，国谷去参之一，君下令谓郡、县、属大夫里邑皆籍粟入若干。
现代文：到了大秋，粮价下降三分之一，国君便下令通告郡县属大夫管辖的里邑都来向政府交售粮食。
English: By late autumn, grain prices had fallen by one-third, and the sovereign ordered that all counties and counties under the jurisdiction of the doctor should come to sell grain to the government.

古文：谷重一也，以藏于上者，国谷三分则二分在上矣。
现代文：粮价与时价相同，为国家把粮食贮藏起来。结果，国内粮食如果算作三分，有二分掌握在国家手里。
English: The grain price is the same as the current price, and the grain is stored for the state. As a result, if domestic grain is counted as three points, two points are in the hands of the state.

古文：泰春，国谷倍重，数也。
现代文：翌年春天，粮价成倍上涨，就是因为此法。
English: In the spring of the following year, grain prices doubled because of this law.

古文：泰夏，赋谷以市櫎，民皆受上谷以治田土。
现代文：夏天，便把粮食按市价发放民间，此时百姓正需要粮食经营农事。
English: In summer, the grain will be distributed to the people at market prices. At this time, the people are in need of grain for farming.

古文：泰秋，田： 谷之存予者若干，今上敛谷以币。 民曰： 无币以谷。 
现代文：到了大秋，就对农民说： 过去存在你手里的粮食是多少，现在国家要求折成钱数归还。 百姓说： 手里无钱只好还粮。 
English: When autumn came, they said to the peasants, "How much grain did you have in the past, and now the state is demanding that you return it in the form of money?"

古文：则民之三有归于上矣。
现代文：结果农民剩下的十分之三的粮食又归国家了。
English: As a result, three-tenths of the grain remaining to the peasants went back to the state.

古文：重之相因，时之化举，无不为国策。
现代文：这样，利用粮价的上涨，掌握季节的变化，无不是国家的理财之道。
English: In this way, taking advantage of the rise in grain prices and grasping the changes in the seasons is nothing but the country's way of financial management.

古文：君用大夫之委，以流归于上。君用民，以时归于君。
现代文：君主取用大夫的存粮，是通过流通拿到国家手里的；取用百姓的粮食，是通过季节价格变化拿到手里的。
English: The monarch's use of the doctor's stored grain is obtained through circulation in the hands of the state; the use of the people's grain is obtained through seasonal price changes.

古文：藏轻，出轻以重，数也。
现代文：囤积低价的粮食，再用高价卖出去，这都是有效的办法。
English: It is an effective method to hoard low-priced grain and then sell it at a higher price.

古文：则彼安有自还之大夫独委之？
现代文：这样做，哪里还容有自谋私利的大夫独自囤粮食呢？
English: In this way, where is there room for a self-serving doctor to get food on his own?

古文：彼诸侯之谷十，使吾国谷二十，则诸侯谷归吾国矣；诸侯谷二十，吾国谷十，则吾国谷归于诸侯矣。
现代文：至于各诸侯国的粮食，如果他们的粮价是十，我们是二十，那么各诸侯国的粮食就流归我国了。如果他们是二十，我们是十，我们的粮食就流归各诸侯国了。
English: As for grain from the principalities, if their grain price is ten and ours is twenty, then the grain from the principalities will go to our country; if theirs is twenty and ours is ten, then our grain will go to the principalities.

古文：故善为天下者，谨守重流，而天下不吾泄矣。
现代文：所以，善治天下者，必须严守高价流通政策，各诸侯国就无法泄散我国的粮食。
English: Therefore, those who govern the world well must strictly adhere to the high-price distribution policy, and the various states will not be able to distribute our grain.

古文：彼重之相归，如水之就下。
现代文：粮食流向高价的地方，就象水往低处流一样。
English: Grain flows to where prices are high, just as water flows to where they are low.

古文：吾国岁非凶也，以币藏之，故国谷倍重，故诸侯之谷至也。
现代文：我们国家并不是发生灾荒，而是投放货币加以囤积，使粮价加倍提高，所以各诸侯国的粮食就来到了。
English: Our country did not suffer from a famine, but invested money and hoarded it, causing grain prices to double. As a result, grain from all the principalities arrived.

古文：是藏一分以致诸侯之一分。
现代文：这就是我们藏一分就可以吸取各诸侯国的一分。
English: This means that if we hide one point, we can absorb one point from each vassal state.

古文：利不夺于天下，大夫不得以富侈。
现代文：财利不致被外国所夺，大夫也不能占有粮食过多。
English: Profits and profits will not be seized by foreign countries, and doctors will not be able to take possession of too much grain.

古文：以重藏轻，国常有十国之策也。
现代文：这种 以重藏轻 的政策，使国家可以常保十个财政年度的收入。
English: This policy of saving more and storing less enables the state to secure income for ten fiscal years.

古文：故诸侯服而无正，臣櫎从而以忠，此以轻重御天下之道也，谓之数应。 
现代文：所以诸侯服从而不会发生征战，本国臣子也服从而尽其忠心。这就是以轻重之术驾御天下的办法，谓之为理财方法的实效。 
English: Therefore, the lords obeyed so that there would be no war, and the country's subjects also obeyed so that they would be loyal. This is the method of ruling the world with light and heavy skills, which is called the actual effect of the financial management method.

古文：桓公问管子曰： 请问国会。 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 请问国家的统计理财工作。 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong and said: I would like to ask you about the country's statistical and financial work.

古文：管子对曰： 君失大夫为无伍，失民为失下。
现代文：管仲回答说： 国君对大夫经济失去了解，等于没有部属；对百姓经济失去了解，等于没有基础。
English: Guanzhong replied: If the sovereign loses understanding of the doctor economy, it is equivalent to having no subordinates; if it loses understanding of the people's economy, it is equivalent to having no foundation.

古文：故守大夫以县之策，守一县以一乡之策，守一乡以一家之策，守家以一人之策。 桓公曰： 其会数奈何？ 
现代文：掌握大夫经济情况要根据一个县的调查计算，掌握县要根据一个乡的调查计算，掌握乡要根据一个家庭的调查计算。 桓公说： 其统计理财方法如何？ 
English: Mastering the doctor's economic situation should be calculated according to a county survey, mastering the county should be calculated according to a township survey, and mastering the township should be calculated according to a family survey.Hankong said: What is its statistical financial management method?

古文：管子对曰： 币准之数，一县必有一县中田之策，一乡必有一乡中田之策，一家必有一家直人之用。
现代文：管仲回答说： 货币流通的标准数量，在一个县须有适合于该县土地的调查数字，在一乡须有适合于该乡土地的调查数字，在一家必须有适合于一家人口用度的数字。
English: Guanzhong replied: For the standard quantity of money circulation, in a county, there must be a survey number suitable for the land in the county, in a township, there must be a survey number suitable for the land in the township, and in a family, there must be a number suitable for the population of a family.

古文：故不以时守郡为无与，不以时守乡为无伍。 桓公曰： 行此奈何？ 
现代文：所以不及时掌握郡的经济情况就等于无人相与，不及时掌握县的经济情况就等于没有部属。 桓公说： 怎样实行？ 
English: Therefore, if you do not grasp the county's economic situation in time, it is equal to no one. If you do not grasp the county's economic situation in time, it is equal to no subordinates. Huan Gong said: How to implement?

古文：管子对曰： 王者藏于民，霸者藏于大夫，残国亡家藏于箧。 
现代文：管仲回答道： 成王业的藏富于民，成霸业的藏富于大夫，败国亡家则是把财富收藏在箱子里。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "Those who succeed in becoming kings hide their wealth from the people, those who succeed in becoming tyrants hide their wealth from the doctors, and those who fail in conquering a country hide their wealth in boxes."

古文：桓公曰： 何谓藏于民？ ： 请散，栈台之钱，散诸城阳；鹿台之布，散诸济阴。
现代文：桓公说： 何谓藏富于民？ 管仲说： 请拿出栈台所存的钱币，贷放在城阳一带；拿出鹿台的钱币，贷放在济阴一带。
English: Guanzhong said: Please take out the money stored in the warehouse and lend it to the area around Chengyang; take out the money from Ludao and lend it to the area around Jiyin.

古文：君下令于百姓曰： 民富君无与贫，民贫君无与富。故赋无钱布，府无藏财，赀藏于民。 
现代文：国君还向百姓下令说： 百姓富君主不会穷，百姓穷君主不会富，因此国家不向百姓征收钱币，府库也不积累钱财，把财富都藏在百姓手里。 
English: The sovereign also issued an order to the people, saying: The people rich and the monarch will not be poor, and the people poor and the monarch will not be rich. Therefore, the state does not collect coins from the people, and the government treasury does not accumulate money and wealth, but hides the wealth in the hands of the people.

古文：岁丰，五谷登，五谷大轻，谷贾去上岁之分，以币据之，谷为君，币为下。
现代文：等到年景丰收，五谷丰登。粮价大降，比上年降低一半，就要用这笔贷款收购，使粮食归国家，货币散在民间。
English: Wait until the year's harvest is bountiful and grain is plentiful. Grain prices have fallen sharply, down by half compared to last year, it is necessary to use this loan to purchase, so that grain belongs to the state and money is scattered among the people.

古文：国币尽在下，币轻，谷重上分。
现代文：这样因钱币都投在民间，币值下跌，粮价则上升一半。
English: In this way, because all the money was invested in the private sector, the value of the currency fell, while grain prices rose by half.

古文：上岁之二分在下，下岁之二分在上，则二岁者四分在上，则国谷之一分在下，谷三倍重。
现代文：上年的粮食有两分在下，下年的粮食有两分在上，两年有四分粮食在上。则只有一分在民间流通，粮价可继续上涨到三倍。
English: Last year's grain was two points below, next year's grain was two points above, and two years ago there was four points of grain above. Only one point was in private circulation, and grain prices could continue to rise up to three times.

古文：邦布之籍，终岁十钱。
现代文：国家按人口征税，每户一年才收十钱，如每家都向政府买粮。
English: The state levies taxes according to the population, and each household only receives ten yuan a year, for example, if each household buys grain from the government.

古文：人家受食，十亩加十，是一家十户也。
现代文：把每十亩地产粮食加价十钱，就可以从一户得到相当于十户的人口税收入。
English: If every ten mu of real estate grain is increased by ten yuan, it will be possible to obtain the equivalent of ten households' population tax income from one household.

古文：出于国谷策而藏于币者也。
现代文：这正是来自粮食销售政策和利用货币的作用。
English: This is exactly what comes from the grain marketing policy and the use of money.

古文：以国币之分复布百姓，四减国谷，三在上，一在下。复策也。
现代文：然后用国家所掌握的货币的半数，再次发放于百姓，分粮食为四分，使之三分在国家，一分在民间，就又形成此项政策的再一次反复。
English: Then, with half of the currency controlled by the state, it was again distributed to the people, and the grain was divided into four parts, so that three parts were in the state and one part in the people, forming another repetition of this policy.

古文：大夫聚壤而封，积实而骄上，请夺之以会。 
现代文：至于大夫，由于他封地多，囤积粮而对抗君主，也请用统计理财方法来剥夺他。 
English: As for the doctor, since he has many fiefs and hoards grain and opposes the monarch, please also use statistical financial management methods to deprive him.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓夺之以会？ 
现代文：桓公说： 何谓用统计理财方法来剥夺？ 
English: Huan Gong said: What is the use of statistical financial management methods to deprive?

古文：管子对曰： 粟之三分在上，谓民萌皆受上粟，度君藏焉。
现代文：管仲回答说： 统计有四分之三的粮食掌握在国家手里时，就通知百姓都来买粮，按照君主之所藏尽量出卖。
English: Guanzhong replied, "When it was calculated that three-fourths of the grain was in the hands of the state, the people were told to buy grain and sell as much as possible according to the monarch's hoard.

古文：五谷相靡而重去什三，为余以国币谷准反行，大夫无什于重。
现代文：粮价就会互相影响而跌价十分之三。剩下的粮食以货币收购，粮价按跌落回来的标准，大夫也就无法抬高粮价了。
English: Grain prices will be affected by each other and the price will fall by three-tenths. The remaining grain will be purchased with money, and the grain price will be according to the standard of falling back, and the doctor will not be able to raise the grain price.

古文：君以币赋禄，什在上。
现代文：国君发放俸禄也用钱而不用粮，全部粮食就都被国家掌握起来。
English: The sovereign used money instead of grain to pay salaries, and all grain was controlled by the state.

古文：君出谷，什而去七。君敛三，上赋七，散振不资者，仁义也。
现代文：最后国君把其中十分之七的粮食拿出来，也就是留三成，贷出七成，赈济贫民，也是一种仁义的举动。
English: In the end, the sovereign took out seven-tenths of the grain, that is, he kept 30 percent and lent out 70 percent to help the poor, which was also a benevolent act.

古文：五谷相靡而轻，数也；以乡完重而籍国，数也；出实财，散仁义，万物轻，数也。
现代文：这样，采取措施使粮价跌落，是对付大夫的一个办法；靠乡的市场管住粮价，而对大夫所住的城市进行收取，是对付大夫的又一个办法；投出粮食与物资，既博得仁义之名，又平抑其他物资价格，是对付大夫的最后一个办法。
English: In this way, taking measures to make grain prices fall is one way to deal with the doctor; the market in the countryside controls grain prices, and collecting from the city where the doctor lives is another way to deal with the doctor; throwing grain and materials, both to win the name of benevolence and to suppress the prices of other materials, is the last way to deal with the doctor.

古文：乘时进退。
现代文：一切都要掌握时机而决定进退。
English: Everything has to be opportunistic and decided on the fly.

古文：故曰：王者乘时，圣人乘易。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：所以说：成王业者善于掌握时机，称圣人的善于掌握变化。 桓公说： 好。 
English: Therefore, it is said that a kingmaker is good at grasping opportunities, and a sage is good at grasping changes.

古文：桓公问管子曰： 特命我曰： 天子三百领，泰啬。而散大夫准此而行。 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 特告诉我： 把天子的葬衣定为三百件，固然太吝啬了，但要想削减大夫财富，则可以照此而行。 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong and said: Tell me specifically: It is too stingy to set the godson's funeral clothes at three hundred pieces, but if you want to reduce the doctor's wealth, you can do so.

古文：此如何？ 
现代文：这项使大夫散财厚葬的主意如何？ 
English: What about this idea of making doctors pay for funerals?

古文：管子曰： 非法家也。
现代文：管仲说： 这不是法家的办法。
English: Guanzhong said: This is not a legal way.

古文：大夫高其垄，美其室，此夺农事及市庸，此非便国之道也。
现代文：让大夫把坟墓修得很高，把墓室修得很美，必然侵夺农事和市场上的佣工，不是利国之道。
English: It is not the way to benefit the country to let the doctor build the tomb very high and the burial chamber very beautiful. It is bound to encroach on the farm work and the helpers at the market.

古文：民不得以织为绡而貍之于地。
现代文：百姓死后也不可用彩帛作为覆棺之物，而埋于地下。
English: After the death of a commoner, it is not allowed to use a colored coffin to cover the coffin, but to bury it underground.

古文：彼善为国者乘时徐疾而已矣。
现代文：善于治国的人，只需掌握市场时机而采取有缓有急的措施，就可以控制大夫了。
English: Those who are good at governing the country can control the doctor simply by grasping the market opportunity and taking urgent measures.

古文：谓之国会。 
现代文：这叫作运用国家的统计理财工作。 
English: It's called using the country's statistical and financial work.

古文：桓公问管子曰： 请问争夺之事何如？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 请问国家的争夺之事是怎样出现的？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong: How did the competition for the country come about?

古文：管子曰： 以戚始。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 是从宗戚开始的。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "It started with my relative."

古文：桓公曰： 何谓用戚始？ 
现代文：醒公说： 何谓由宗戚开始？ 
English: Xing Gong said: What does it mean to start with a relative?

古文：管子对曰： 君人之主，弟兄十人，分国为十；兄弟五人，分国为五。
现代文：管仲回答说： 一国的国君，生下弟兄十人，就分封为十个国家；生弟兄五人，就分封为五个国家。
English: Guanzhong replied, "When the sovereign of a country gives birth to ten brothers, his territory is divided into ten countries; when he gives birth to five brothers, his territory is divided into five countries.

古文：三世则昭穆同祖，十世则为祏。
现代文：他们传了三代以后，彼此仅是同族同祖的关系而已。
English: After three generations, they are nothing more than cousins.

古文：故伏尸满衍，兵决而无止。
现代文：传了十代以后，仅是祖宗牌位放在一起的关系而已。所以争夺起来闹得伏尸满地，用兵决斗不止。
English: After ten generations have passed, it is only the relationship between the positions of the ancestor cards that are put together. Therefore, when they fight, they make a lot of noise, and there are more and more duels between soldiers.

古文：轻重之家复游于其间。
现代文：轻重家们还从中乘机谋利。
English: The big players are also taking advantage of the opportunity to make a profit.

古文：故曰：毋予人以壤，毋授人以财。
现代文：所以说：不可把土地分封于人，不可把财富资源授让于人。
English: Therefore, it is said: it is not allowed to assign land to others, and it is not allowed to assign wealth resources to others.

古文：财终则有始，与四时废起。
现代文：财富资源是终而复始的生产消费，随四时运动而发展消灭的。
English: Wealth resources are end-to-end production and consumption, and are developed and eliminated with the four-hour movement.

古文：圣人理之以徐疾，守之以决塞，夺之以轻重，行之以仁义，故与天壤同数，此王者之大辔也。 桓公问管子曰： 请问币乘马。 
现代文：圣人总是统一用号令的缓急来掌握它，统一用政策的开闭来控制它，用轻重理财之术来夺取它，用仁义之道来支配它。所以，能够与天地共同长久不败，这正是一统天下君主的大权。 桓公问管仲说； 请问关于货币的计算筹划。 
English: The sages have always grasped it in a unified way with the priority of the command, controlled it with the opening and closing of the policy, seized it with the weight of the financial management, and ruled it with the way of benevolence and righteousness. Therefore, to be able to remain undefeated for a long time together with heaven and earth, this is the great power of the monarch who rules the world.

古文：管子对曰： 始取夫三大夫之家，方六里而一乘，二十六人而奉一乘。
现代文：管仲回答说： 当初是三夫为一家的生产单位，占用六里见方的土地，出兵车一辆，配备二十七人。
English: Guanzhong replied: At the beginning, it was a production unit of three people, occupying a land of six square miles, with one troop-carrying vehicle and equipped with 27 people.

古文：币乘马者，方六里，田之美恶若干，谷之多寡若干，谷之贵贱若干，凡方六里用币若干，谷之重用币若干。
现代文：所谓货币的计算筹划，就是以六里见方的土地为单位，计算其好地瘠地各有多少，产粮多少，粮价高低多少，六里见方土地需要货币多少，以及就其粮食价格来计算应需要货币多少。
English: The so-called calculation and planning of money is to take the land of six square miles as a unit, calculate how much land is well cultivated, how much grain is produced, how high and low the grain price is, how much money is needed for six square miles of land, and how much money should be needed to calculate its grain price.

古文：故币乘马者，布币于国，币为一国陆地之数。谓之币乘马。 
现代文：因此，货币的计算筹划，就是把这个需要量推算于全国，使货币的数字与全国的土地数量相适应，这就叫作货币的计算筹划。 
English: Therefore, the calculation and planning of money is to calculate this demand across the country and make the number of money correspond to the amount of land across the country. This is called the calculation and planning of money.

古文：桓公曰： 行币乘马之数奈何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 货币计算筹划的理财方法，应该怎样实行？ 
English: Kankong said: How should the financial management method of currency calculation and planning be implemented?

古文：管子对曰： 士受资以币，大夫受邑以币，人马受食以币，则一国之谷资在上：币赀在下。
现代文：管仲回答说： 士的俸禄用货币支付，大夫封邑的租税也用货币，官府的人夫、马匹等一切开支也用货币支付，这样，粮食就全部留存在国家手里，货币就散布在民间流通。
English: Guanzhong replied, "The salary of a scholar is paid in money, the tax of a doctor is also paid in money, and all expenses such as the manpower and horses of the government are also paid in money. In this way, the grain is all kept in the hands of the state, and the money is distributed in the circulation of the people.

古文：国谷什倍，数也。万物财物去什二，策也。
现代文：粮价上涨十倍左右，就是因为此法；其他物资因粮贵而降价二成左右，也是这项政策的结果。
English: Grain prices rose about tenfold as a result of this law, and other commodities fell by about 20% due to the high cost of grain, which was also a result of this policy.

古文：皮革、筋角、羽毛、竹箭、器械、财物，苟合于国器君用者，皆有矩券于上。
现代文：然后就对皮革、筋角、羽毛、竹箭、器械及其他财物，如合乎国器规格和君主需用的，都订立收购合同。
English: Then a purchase contract is signed for the leather, sinew, feathers, bamboo arrows, instruments and other property, such as those that meet the specifications of the national instrument and those needed by the monarch.

古文：君实乡州藏焉，曰： 某月某日，苟从责者，乡决州决 。
现代文：国君的粮食本来就是贮藏在各乡各州的。于是就发出通告说： 某月某日，凡与国家有合同的债务关系的，即可在本乡本州就近解决。 
English: The emperor's grain was originally stored in various townships and prefectures, so he issued a notice saying, "On a certain day of a certain month, all debts contracted with the state may be settled in the nearest township or prefecture."

古文：故曰：就庸一日而决。
现代文：这就是说，雇用车马人夫运物领粮只需一天时间就可以办完。
English: That is to say, it only takes one day to hire a driver to transport goods and receive grain.

古文：国策出于谷轨，国之策货，币乘马者也。
现代文：国家理财政策，固然是出于粮食的统计，但国家谋取上述物资，也是货币计算筹划的作用。
English: Of course, the national financial management policy is based on grain statistics, but the state's pursuit of the above-mentioned materials is also the role of monetary calculation and planning.

古文：今刀布藏于官府，巧币、万物轻重皆在贾人，彼币重而万物轻，币轻而万物重，彼谷重而。
现代文：如今，钱币虽然贮藏在官府，但巧法使用货币和操纵物价的都是商人。市场上凡币值上升则物价下降，币值下降则物价上升，粮价上升金价下降。
English: Today, although the coins are stored in government offices, it is the merchants who skillfully use the currency and manipulate prices. In the market, when the value of the currency rises, the price falls, when the value of the currency falls, the price rises, when the price of grain rises, the price of gold falls.

古文：人君操谷、币金衡，而天下可定也。
现代文：人君能掌握好粮食、货币、黄金的平衡关系，天下的经济秩序就可以安定了。
English: If everyone can master the balance between grain, currency and gold, the world's economic order will be stable.

古文：此守天下之数也。 
现代文：这也是控制天下的一种办法。 
English: It's also a way to control the world.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 准衡、轻重、国会，吾得闻之矣。
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 平准之法，轻重之术以及国家的统计理财，我都知道了。
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong and said: I know the method of leveling, the weighting and the national statistical and financial management.

古文：请问县数。 
现代文：请问利用祭祀的理财方法。 
English: I would like to ask you about the financial management method of using religious services.

古文：管子对曰： 狼牡以至于冯会之日，龙夏以北至于海庄，禽兽羊牛之地也，何不以此通国策哉？ 
现代文：管仲回答说： 从狼牡到冯会口，从龙夏以北到海庄，是禽兽牛羊生长的好地方，何不利用这个条件来贯彻国家理财之策呢？ 
English: Guanzhong replied: "From Wolongpo to Fenghuikou, from the north of Longxia to Haizhuang, it is a good place for the growth of animals, cattle and sheep. Why not take advantage of this condition to implement the national financial management policy?

古文：桓公曰： 何谓通国策？ 
现代文：桓公说： 何谓贯彻理财之策？ 
English: Kanko said: What is the implementation of the financial management plan?

古文：管子对曰： 冯市门一吏书赘直事。
现代文：管仲回答说： 在冯会口这类牧场设一官吏，负责记载牛羊繁育并查管牧养事务。
English: Guanzhong replied: In the pastures such as Fenghuikou, an official should be set up to record the breeding of cattle and sheep and investigate the pastoral affairs.

古文：若其事唐谀圉牧食之人养视不失捍殂者，去其都秩，与其县秩。
现代文：若是从事牧养的官员，照料牛马没有折损死亡的，就从 都 一级提升为县级。
English: Officials engaged in animal husbandry who take care of cattle and horses without injury or death will be promoted from the first level of the capital to the county level.

古文：大夫不乡赘合游者，谓之无礼义，大夫幽其春秋，列民幽其门、山之祠。
现代文：若是查到大夫不肯提供种牛种马配种繁殖的，就叫作目无祭祀礼仪，禁止他春秋两季用牛羊进行祭袍。
English: If a doctor is found to be unwilling to provide breeding cattle and stallions for cross-breeding, it is called a no-sacrifice etiquette, and he is prohibited from using cattle and sheep for ceremonial robes in spring and autumn.

古文：冯会、龙夏牛羊牺牲月价十倍异日。
现代文：一般百姓有此行为的，禁止他祭把门神与山神。由于加强管理，冯会、龙夏一带牛羊的月价将比往日上涨十倍。
English: Ordinary people who engage in this behavior are prohibited from worshiping door gods and mountain gods. As a result of strengthening management, the monthly price of cattle and sheep in the Fenghui and Longxia areas will increase tenfold compared to the past.

古文：此出诸礼义，籍于无用之地，因扪牢策也。
现代文：这项政策，是从祭把礼仪出发的，取得收入于山林无用之地的，垄断牛羊市场的政策。这正是对国家理财政策的 贯彻 。 
English: This is a policy of monopolizing the cattle and sheep market, deriving income from useless land in the mountains and forests. It is the implementation of the national financial management policy.

古文：谓之通。 桓公问管子曰： 请问国势。 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 请问国内的地势问题。 
English: When Kan Gong asked Guanzhong, he said, "I would like to ask you about the topography of the country."

古文：管子对曰： 有山处之国，有氾下多水之国，有山地分之国，有水泆之国，有漏壤之国。
现代文：管仲回答说： 有山区，有低洼多水地区，有山陵平原各占一半的地区，有常年溢水为害的地区，有土壤漏失水分的地区。
English: Guanzhong replied: There are mountainous areas, low-lying areas with a lot of water, areas where mountainous plains each account for half, areas where water overflows all year round, and areas where soil loses water.

古文：此国之五势，人君之所忧也。
现代文：这五种不利地势，是人君所忧虑的事。
English: These five unfavorable situations are the things that people are worried about.

古文：山处之国常藏谷三分之一，氾下多水之国常操国谷三分之一，山地分之国常操国谷十分之三，水泉之所伤，水泆之国常操十分之二，漏壤之国谨下诸侯之五谷，与工雕文梓器以下天下之五谷。
现代文：山区尚可贮备粮食三分之一，低洼多水地区尚可贮备粮食三分之一，山陵平原对开的地区尚可贮备粮食的十分之三，被水泉伤害，常年溢水地区尚可贮备粮食十分之二，唯有土壤漏失水分的地区，就只好努力掌握外国粮食。
English: Mountainous areas can still store one-third of grain, low-lying areas with a lot of water can still store one-third of grain, areas away from mountainous plains can still store three-tenths of grain, and areas damaged by springs can still store two-tenths of grain, and areas with perennial overflow can still store two-tenths of grain. Only in areas where the soil loses water, they have to work hard to master foreign grain.

古文：此准时五势之数也。 桓公问管子曰： 今有海内，县诸侯，则国势不用已乎？ 
现代文：发展手工业的精美木器生产来掌握各诸侯国的粮食，这就是准时解决五种不良地势问题的办法。 桓公问管仲说： 如海内统一，控制了天下诸侯，解决地势的政策就不用了么？ 
English: Developing the production of fine woodware for handicrafts in order to control the grain of the various principalities is the way to solve the five kinds of bad terrain problems in time. Huan Gong asked Guanzhong: If the country is unified and the principalities of the world are controlled, will the policy of solving the terrain be unnecessary?

古文：管子对曰： 今以诸侯为公州之饰焉，以乘四时，行扪牢之策。以东西南北相彼，用平而准。
现代文：管仲回答说： 现今还是诸侯掌握天下各州的余财，还要利用季节的变化，实行操纵市场的办法，使东西南北相补助，为取得一致而加以调节。
English: Guanzhong replied: Nowadays, the lords still hold the surplus wealth of all the states in the world, and they also need to take advantage of seasonal changes and implement market manipulation methods to make the east and west subsidize the north and south, and adjust them to achieve consistency.

古文：故曰：为诸俟，则高下万物以应诸侯；遍有天下，则赋币以守万物之朝夕，调而已。
现代文：所以说：在诸侯分立条件下，则直接掌握物资贵贱来对付各诸侯国；在天下统一的条件下，则利用货币掌握物价涨落，使之调平就是了。
English: Therefore, it is said that under the condition of the separation of the lords, it is necessary to directly control the precious and base materials to deal with the lordships; under the condition of the unification of the world, it is necessary to use the currency to control the fluctuation of prices and make it even.

古文：利有足则行，不满则有止。
现代文：东西充足则使之调出，不足则制止之。
English: If there is enough of something, it will be transferred out, and if there is not enough, it will be stopped.

古文：王者乡州以时察之，故利不相倾，县死其所。
现代文：统一天下的君主按时视察各乡、各州的经济情况，故百姓谋求财利不至于互相倾轧，生活极为稳定。
English: The monarch under unification inspected the economic situation of each township and each prefecture on time, so the people's pursuit of financial gain did not lead to mutual rivalry, and their lives were extremely stable.

古文：君守大奉一，谓之国簿。 
现代文：国君则掌握大局奉行利出一孔的政策，这叫作国家整体的经济统计谋算。 
English: The sovereign, on the other hand, grasps the overall situation and pursues the policy of making a profit, which is called the economic statistical calculation of the country as a whole.

