古文：十六年，公作二军，公将上军，太子申生将下军以伐霍。
现代文：公元前年，晋献公组建上、下两军。献公统领上军，太子申生统领下军去进攻霍国。
English: In the year before the Common Era, Jin Xianguo formed the upper and lower armies. Xianguo led the upper army, and Prince Shen Sheng led the lower army to attack Huo.

古文：师未出，士言于诸大夫曰： 夫太子，君之贰也。
现代文：军队出发前，士对诸位大夫说： 太子，是国君的继承人。
English: Before the departure of the army, Shi Yan said to the doctors: Prince, is the heir to the sovereign.

古文：恭以俟嗣，何官之有？
现代文：恭敬地等着继承君位，怎么能有官位？
English: How can there be an official position while respectfully waiting to inherit the throne?

古文：今君分之土而官之，是左之也。
现代文：现在国君分封给他土地，还给他安排了官职，这是把他当外人看待啊。
English: Now the sovereign has allotted him land and arranged an official position for him. This is treating him like an outsider.

古文：吾将谏以观之。 
现代文：我要向国君进谏来了解他的态度。 
English: I'll have to speak to the King to find out what he thinks.

古文：乃言于公曰： 夫太子，君之贰也，而帅下军，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：于是对献公说： 太子，是国君的继承者，而您却让他去统领下军，恐怕不合宜吧？ 
English: Therefore, he said to Xian Gong: Prince, you are the successor of the sovereign, and yet you let him lead the army, I'm afraid it's not appropriate, is it?

古文：公曰： 下军，上军之贰也。
现代文：献公说： 下军，就是上军的副职。
English: Xiang Gong said: "Leaving the army is the vice-position of joining the army."

古文：寡人在上，申生在下，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：我统领上军，申生统领下军，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: I led the first army, Shen Sheng led the second army, isn't that okay?

古文：士对曰： 下不可以贰上。 
现代文：士回答说： 下不可以作为上的副职。 
English: The scholar replied, "The lower cannot be the deputy of the upper."

古文：公曰： 何故？ 
现代文：献公问： 这是为什么？ 
English: Kan said, "Why is that?

古文：对曰： 贰若体焉，上下左右，以相心目，用而不倦，身之利也。
现代文：回答说： 正副职的关系就像人的四肢一样，分成上下和左右，用来辅助心和目，所以才能经久使用而不劳倦，给身体带来好处。
English: Answer: The relationship between the two functions is like that of human limbs, which are divided into up and down and left and right, and are used to assist the heart and eyes, so that they can be used for a long time without fatigue and bring benefits to the body.

古文：上贰代举，下贰代履，周旋变动，以役心目，故能治事，以制百物。
现代文：上肢的左右手交替举物，下肢的左右脚交替走步，轮流变化，用来服务于心和目，人所以才能做事，节制百物。
English: The left and right hands of the upper limbs alternate in lifting objects, and the left and right feet of the lower limbs alternate in walking, changing in turn, to serve the heart and eyes, which is why people can do things and control everything.

古文：若下摄上，与上摄下，周旋不动，以违心目，其反为物用也，何事能治？
现代文：如果下肢去引持上肢，或者上肢去引持下肢，就不能正常地轮流变换，破坏了与心和目的协调，那人就反而要被百物牵制，什么事情能做成？
English: If the lower limbs lead the upper limbs, or the upper limbs lead the lower limbs, it is not possible to take turns in a normal way, and the coordination with the heart and purpose is destroyed. Instead, the person will be held back by a hundred things. What can be done?

古文：故古之为军也，军有左右，阙从补之，成而不知，是以寡败。
现代文：所以古代组建的军队，有左军有右军，缺了可以及时补上，列成阵势后敌方不知道有缺口，所以很少失败。
English: Therefore, the army formed in ancient times, with the left army and the right army, can make up for the shortage in time. After the formation of the formation, the enemy does not know that there is a gap, so it rarely fails.

古文：若以下贰上，阙而不变，败弗能补也。
现代文：如果以下军作为上军的副职，一旦出现缺口就不能变动补充，失败了也不能补救。
English: If the following army is created as the deputy position of the army, once there is a gap, it can not be changed and supplemented, and it can not be remedied if it fails.

古文：变非声章，弗能移也。
现代文：没有表示进退的旗鼓指挥，军队是不能移动的。
English: An army cannot move without a leader who signals the advance and retreat.

古文：声章过数则有衅，有衅则敌入，敌入而凶，救则不暇，谁能退敌？
现代文：旗鼓的变化超过了规定的数目就会出现队形的空隙，有了空隙敌军就会乘虚而入，敌军突入后，形势就不吉利，想挽回失败已来不及了，谁还能击退敌军呢？
English: If the number of changes exceeds the prescribed number, there will be a gap in the formation. If there is a gap, the enemy will take advantage of it. After the enemy rushes in, the situation is not auspicious. It is too late to save the defeat. Who can repel the enemy?

古文：敌之如志，国之忧也。
现代文：敌军一旦得逞，是国家的忧患啊。
English: Once the enemy succeeds, it is the sorrow of the country.

古文：可以陵小，难以征国。
现代文：所以变乱军制，只能侵凌小国，难以征服大国。
English: Therefore, changing the military system can only invade small countries, and it is difficult to conquer large countries.

古文：君其图之！ 
现代文：请国君三思！ 
English: I hope you will give it some thought.

古文：公曰： 寡人有子而制焉，非子之忧也。 
现代文：献公说： 我有儿子，并且已经为他编制了下军，用不着你担心。 
English: "I have a son, and I have already prepared for him to join the army, so you don't need to worry," the devotee said.

古文：对曰： 太子，国之栋也。
现代文：士力谏说： 太子，是国家的栋梁。
English: Shi Yan Liguo said: The prince is the pillar of the country.

古文：栋成乃制之，不亦危乎？ 
现代文：栋梁已成，却让他带兵，不也危险吗？ 
English: Isn't it dangerous to let him lead the troops when he has already become a pillar?

古文：公曰： 轻其所在，虽危何害？ 
现代文：献公说： 减轻他的责任，虽然有危险，会有什么害处？ 
English: What would be the harm in relieving him of his duty, even if it were dangerous?

古文：士出语人曰： 太子不得立矣。
现代文：士出来告诉众人说： 太子不能继承君位了。
English: Officials came out to tell the crowd: The crown prince can no longer succeed to the throne.

古文：改其制而不患其难，轻其任而不忧其危，君有异心，又焉得立？
现代文：国君改变了他的职位却不考虑他的困难，减轻了他的责任却不担心他的危险，国君既已存异心，太子又怎能继承呢？
English: The sovereign changed his position without considering his difficulties, relieved him of his responsibilities without worrying about his danger. Since the sovereign has a different intention, how can the prince succeed?

古文：行之克也，将以害之；若其不克，其因以罪之。
现代文：他此行若能伐霍成功，将会因为得民心而被害；若不成功，也会因此而获罪。
English: If he succeeds in this trip, he will be harmed by winning the people's hearts; if he does not succeed, he will be punished for it.

古文：虽克与否，无以避罪。
现代文：无论成功与否，都没有办法躲避罪责。
English: Whether successful or not, there is no way to escape culpability.

古文：与其勤而不入，不如逃之。
现代文：与其辛辛苦苦出力而得不到国君的满意，还不如逃离晋国的好。
English: Instead of working hard and not getting the satisfaction of the sovereign, it is better to escape from Jin.

古文：君得其欲，太子远死，且有令名，为吴太伯，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：这样国君得遂其愿，太子也避开了死亡的危险，而且将获得美名，做吴太伯，不也很好吗？ 
English: In this way, the sovereign has achieved his wish, the prince has also avoided the danger of death, and will receive a good name, to be Wu Tai Bo, is not it also very good?

古文：太子闻之，曰： 子舆之为我谋，忠矣。
现代文：太子听到士的议论后说： 子舆为我考虑，可谓是忠心耿耿了。
English: After listening to Shi Yan's argument, the prince said, "My son has been very loyal to me.

古文：然吾闻之：为人子者，患不从，不患无名；为人臣者，患不勤，不患无禄。
现代文：但是我听说：做儿子的，怕不顺从父亲的命令，不怕没有美名；做臣子的，怕不辛勤事奉国君，不怕得不到俸禄。
English: But I have heard it said that if you are a son, you are afraid of not obeying your father's orders, and you are afraid of not having a good reputation; if you are a courtier, you are afraid of not working hard to serve the sovereign, and you are afraid of not getting a salary.

古文：今我不才而得勤与从，又何求焉？
现代文：如今我没有才能却得到跟随君父征伐的机会，还能要求什么呢？
English: Now I have no talent, but I have the opportunity to follow my father's expedition, what else can I ask for?

古文：焉能及吴太伯乎？ 
现代文：我又怎么能比得上吴太伯呢？ 
English: How can I be compared to Wu Taibing?

古文：太子遂行，克霍而反，谗言弥兴。
现代文：太子于是率军出征，打败了霍国回来，诽谤他的谗言更多了。
English: The prince then led the army to go to war, defeated the Ho country and came back, and there were more slanderous remarks about him.

