古文：纪纲，临邑人，为诸生。
现代文：纪纲，临邑人。是个生员。
English: Ji Gang, a resident of Linyi, is a freshman.

古文：燕王起兵过其县，纲叩马请自效。
现代文：燕王起兵经过他的县时，纪纲迎叩马前，请让他效力。
English: When Yan Wang raises an army and passes through his county, please let him be effective before the discipline program welcomes the horse.

古文：王与语，说之。
现代文：王爷与他相互交谈，很喜欢他。
English: The prince conversed with him and liked him very much.

古文：纲善骑射，便辟诡黠，善钩人意向。
现代文：纪纲善骑射，奸诈狡猾，善于探取他人意向。
English: Discipline is good at riding and shooting, treacherous and cunning, and good at exploring other people's intentions.

古文：王大爱幸，授忠义卫千户。
现代文：王爷非常喜欢他，授他为忠义卫千户。
English: The prince liked him very much and gave him the title of "loyal guardian of thousands of households."

古文：既即帝位，擢锦衣卫指挥使，令典亲军，司诏狱。
现代文：登上皇位后，又升他为锦衣卫指挥使，令他统领亲军，掌管诏狱。
English: After ascending to the throne, he was promoted to the commanding officer of the Imperial Guards, which made him the commander of his family's army and in charge of the Imperial Prison.

古文：都御史陈瑛灭建文朝忠臣数十族，亲属被戮者数万人。
现代文：都御史陈瑛诛灭建文帝朝的忠臣数十族，亲属被杀的有数万人。
English: The imperial governor Chen Yingqin exterminated dozens of loyal vassals of the Jianwen Dynasty, and tens of thousands of relatives were killed.

古文：纲觇帝旨，广布校尉，日摘臣民阴事。
现代文：纪纲探知皇上旨意，便广布校尉，每天刺探臣民的阴事。
English: When Ji Gang discovered the emperor's will, he sent Lieutenant Guangbu to spy on his subjects every day.

古文：帝悉下纲治，深文诬诋。帝以为忠，亲之若肺腑。擢都指挥佥事，仍掌锦衣。
现代文：皇上全都交给纪纲处理，纪纲于是对这些人痛加诬陷和诋毁，皇上以为他忠诚，把他视为肺腑之亲，升他为都指挥佥事，仍执掌锦衣卫。
English: The emperor handed them all over to Ji Gang to deal with. Ji Gang then slandered and slandered these people. The emperor thought that he was loyal and regarded him as a close relative. After he was promoted, he was in charge of all affairs and was still in charge of Jin Yi Wei.

古文：纲用指挥庄敬、袁江，千户王谦、李春等为羽翼，诬逮浙江按察使周新，致之死。
现代文：纪纲用指挥庄敬、袁江，千户王谦、李春等人为羽翼，诬陷并逮捕浙江都察使周新，致他死命。
English: Ji Gang used conductors Zhuang Jing, Yuan Jiang, Qianhu Wang Qian, Li Chun and others as wings to frame and arrest Zhou Xin, the inspector general of Zhejiang Province, resulting in his death.

古文：帝所怒内侍及武臣下纲论死，辄将至家，洗沐好饮食之，阳为言，见上必请赦若罪，诱取金帛且尽，忽刑于市。
现代文：皇上所恨的宦官和武臣，都交由纪纲判死罪，过后纪纲常将这些人带到家中，让他们洗沐好后饮食招待，并假装对他们说，见到皇上一定请求宽宥他们的罪过，等到把他们的金帛诱取将尽时，突然把他们押到市场诛杀。
English: The eunuchs and courtiers whom the emperor hated were all sentenced to death by Ji Gang. Afterward, Ji Gang would often take these people to his home, have them wash and bathe, and entertain them with food and drink, and pretend to say to them that when he saw the emperor, he would certainly ask for forgiveness for their sins. When he was almost finished luring their gold ingots, he suddenly pushed them to the market to fight and kill them.

古文：数使家人伪为诏，下诸方盐场，勒盐四百余万。
现代文：纪纲多次指使家人伪造诏书，传到各地盐场，勒取盐四百余万斤。
English: Ji Guan repeatedly ordered his family members to forge imperial edicts, which were sent to salt mines across the country, stealing more than four million catties of salt.

古文：还复称诏，夺官船二十、牛车四百辆，载入私第，弗予直。
现代文：回来时又称有诏令，夺用官船二十艘、牛车四百辆，载入他的私宅，不给报酬。
English: When he came back, he also claimed to have a royal edict to seize twenty official ships and four hundred ox carts and take them to his private residence without compensation.

古文：构陷大贾数十百家，罄其资乃已。
现代文：他又陷害数十家大商，榨尽他们的资财才罢休。
English: He also set up dozens of big businessmen and squeezed all their resources before giving up.

古文：诈取交址使珍奇。
现代文：他还诈取交趾使者的珍奇。
English: He also defrauded a fellow emissary.

古文：夺吏民田宅。
现代文：他夺占官民田宅。
English: He seized the homes of government officials and commoners.

古文：籍故晋王、吴王，乾没金宝无算。
现代文：抄原晋王、吴王的家，他隐没的金银财宝无数。
English: He copied the homes of the original Jin kings and Wu kings, and his hidden gold and silver treasures are countless.

古文：得王冠服服之，高坐置酒，命优童奏乐奉觞，呼万岁，器物僣乘舆。
现代文：他得到藩王的冠服，穿戴好后置酒高坐，命优童奏乐，给他敬酒，欢呼万岁，僭用帝王所用的器物。
English: He was given the crown robe of the king of the domain, put it on, set the wine high, ordered the good boy to play music, gave him a toast, cheered, and used the utensils used by the emperor.

古文：欲买一女道士为妾，都督薛禄先得之，遇禄大内，挝其首，脑裂几死。
现代文：他想买一位女道士为妾，都督薛禄先把她弄到了，后来纪纲在大内碰到薛禄，便打裂了他的头，使他几乎死去。
English: He wanted to buy a female Taoist as a concubine. The governor Xue Luo got her first. Later, Ji Gang met Xue Luo in the Inner Court and cracked his head, causing him to almost die.

古文：恚都指挥哑失帖木不避道，诬以冒赏事，捶杀之。
现代文：他恨都指挥哑失帖木不给他让道，便诬陷他冒功领赏，将他打死。
English: He hated the commanding dumb loser Tetsuki for not giving way to him, so he framed him for accepting the award and beat him to death.

古文：腐良家子数百人，充左右。
现代文：他阉割良家子弟数十人，充当左右侍候之人。
English: He castrated dozens of children from good families and served as an attendant.

古文：诏选妃嫔，试可，令暂出待年，纲私纳其尤者。
现代文：皇上下诏选妃嫔，选试通过后，纪纲令她们暂时出宫，等到了年龄后再送入，而他却私自将最美的纳为妾。
English: Emperors selected concubines by imperial edict. After passing the selection test, the Emperor ordered them to temporarily leave the palace and wait until they were old enough to be sent in, but he secretly took the most beautiful one as a concubine.

古文：吴中故大豪沈万三，洪武时籍没，所漏赀尚富。
现代文：原吴中大富豪沈万三，洪武年间被抄没，但所漏的资财还很多。
English: Former Wu Zhongda millionaire Shen Wanzang was confiscated during the Hongwu era, but much of the stolen wealth still remains.

古文：其子文度蒲伏见纲，进黄金及龙角、龙文被、奇宝异锦，愿得为门下，岁时供奉。
现代文：他的儿子沈文度匍伏拜见纪纲，进献黄金和龙角、龙文被、奇宝异锦，愿得做他的门下，岁时供奉。
English: His son, Shen Wendu, prostrated himself before the syllabus, offering gold and dragon horns, dragon-patterned quilts, and rare and exotic brocades. He was willing to be his disciple, and offered it when he was old.

古文：纲乃令文度求索吴中好女。
现代文：纪纲于是令他索求吴中漂亮女子。
English: The syllabus then ordered him to solicit a beautiful woman from Wu Zhong.

古文：文度因挟纲势，什五而中分之。
现代文：沈文度便挟着纪纲的权势，与他五五分赃。
English: Shen Wenda wielded the power of discipline, and he had a fifty-fifty split with him.

古文：纲又多蓄亡命，造刀甲弓弩万计。
现代文：纪纲还多蓄养亡命之徒，制造刀甲弓弩以万计。
English: The syllabus also contains more provisions for the maintenance of outlaws and the manufacture of swords, armor, bows and arrows.

古文：端午，帝射柳，纲属镇抚庞瑛曰： 我故射不中，若折柳鼓噪，以觇众意。 
现代文：端午节时，皇上去射柳，纪纲嘱咐镇抚使庞瑛说： 我故意射不中，你去折下柳枝。鼓噪说中了，试试众人的心意如何。 
English: During the Dragon Boat Festival, the emperor went out to shoot willows, and the discipline program instructed the governor to tell Pang Ying: I deliberately missed the shot, you go and break off the willow branch. If the drum is noisy, try to see what the will of the people is.

古文：瑛如其言，无敢纠者。
现代文：庞瑛照他的话去做了，竟没有人敢纠正。
English: Pang Ying did as he said, and no one dared to correct him.

古文：纲喜曰： 是无能难我矣。 
现代文：纪刚高兴地说 ：已没有什么能难住我了。 
English: Ji Gang said happily, "Nothing can stop me now."

古文：遂谋不轨。
现代文：遂图谋不轨。
English: So he tried to cheat.

古文：十四年七月，内侍仇纲者发其罪，命给事、御史廷劾，下都察院按治，具有状。
现代文：十四年七月，仇恨纪纲的某个官员揭发了他的罪状，皇上命给事中、御史在朝廷上弹劾纪纲，交都察院审理，查出他确有这些罪状。
English: In July 14th, an official of the Hate Discipline Program revealed his charges. The Emperor ordered the Emperor to impeach the Discipline Program in the Imperial Court and submit it to the Capital Procuratorate for trial, and it was found that he did indeed have these charges.

古文：即日磔纲于市，家属无少长皆戍边，列罪状颁示天下。
现代文：即日将纪纲押到市场肢解。他的家属不分老少全部遣去戍边，并开列他的罪状颁示天下。
English: On the same day, Ji Gang was taken to the market and dismembered. All his family members, both young and old, were sent to Fuzhou, and his charges were listed and presented to the world.

古文：其党敬、江、谦、春、瑛等，诛谴有差。
现代文：他的党羽庄敬、袁江、王谦、李春、庞瑛等人，或诛或遣不等。
English: His followers, such as Zhuo Jing, Yuan Jiang, Wang Qian, Li Chun, and Pang Ying, are either in power or in exile.

古文：门达，丰润人。
现代文：门达，丰润人。
English: Menda, a man of wealth.

古文：袭父职为锦衣卫百户。
现代文：承袭父职为锦衣卫百户。
English: Inheriting his father's position, he became the head of 100 brocade clothing stores.

古文：性机警沉鸷。
现代文：他个性机警沉鸷。
English: His personality is alert and persistent.

古文：正统末，进千户，理镇抚司刑。
现代文：正统末年，他进升为千户，审理镇抚司刑狱。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, he was promoted to the rank of chihoushi (thousand households) and became the judge of the town magistrate's prison.

古文：久之，迁指挥佥事，坐累解职。
现代文：后来，他升任指挥佥事，因受牵连被撤职。
English: Later, he was promoted to commander of the Anecdote, but was removed from his post for being implicated.

古文：景泰七年复故官，佐理卫事兼镇抚理刑。
现代文：景泰七年他得复官，佐理锦衣卫事务兼镇抚司刑狱。
English: In the seventh year of Jing Tai's reign, he was reinstated to the post of prison warden.

古文：天顺改元，与 夺门 功，进指挥同知。
现代文：天顺改元后，他以参与 夺门 之功，进升为指挥同知。
English: After the reform of the Yuan Dynasty in Tianshun, he was promoted to the position of conductor with the merit of participating in the capture of the gate.

古文：旋进指挥使，专任理刑。
现代文：不久进升指挥使，专任理刑官。
English: He was soon promoted to commanding officer and full-time correctional officer.

古文：千户谢通者，浙江人也，佐达理司事，用法仁恕，达倚信之。
现代文：千户谢通是浙江人，辅佐门达处理镇抚司事务，他用法宽仁，门达很倚信他。
English: Qianhu Xie Tong is from Zhejiang. He assisted Menda in dealing with the affairs of the town's governor. He is very generous with his time, and Menda trusts him very much.

古文：重狱多平反，有罪者以下禁狱为幸，朝士翕然称达贤。
现代文：这时期重案多得平反，有罪的人以被下到禁狱为幸，朝中士大夫一致称赞门达贤明。
English: During this period, many serious crimes were rehabilitated, the guilty were fortunate to be sent to prison, and the sergeant doctors unanimously praised the guru as wise.

古文：然是时英宗虑廷臣党比，欲知外事，倚锦衣官校为耳目，由是逯杲得大幸，达反为之用。
现代文：但这时期英宗顾虑外臣结党营私，所以想知道外面的事，倚仗锦衣卫官校为耳目，由此逯杲大受宠幸，门达反被他利用。
English: However, during this period, Emperor Yingzong was concerned about foreign ministers forming a party to fight against him, so he wanted to know what was going on outside and relied on the Jin clothing and guards as his eyes and ears. As a result, he was greatly favored and his mentors were used by him.

古文：逯杲者，安平人也，以锦衣卫校尉为达及指挥刘敬腹心，从 夺门 。
现代文：逯杲是安平人，他以锦衣卫校尉成为门达和指挥刘敬的心腹，随从 夺门 。
English: Zou is from Anping. He became the mentor and the confidant of the conductor Liu Jing with the help of Captain Jin Rongwei.

古文：帝大治奸党，杲缚锦衣百户杨瑛，指为张永亲属，又执千户刘勤于朝，奏其讪上，两人并坐诛。
现代文：皇上大治奸党时，逯杲绑住锦衣卫百户杨瑛，说他是张永的亲属，他还在朝廷上抓住刘勤，上奏说他诽谤皇上，结果这两人都被诛杀。
English: When the emperor was cracking down on traitors, he tied up Yang Ying, a member of the Jin Yi Wei Hundred Households, saying that he was a relative of Zhang Yong. He also caught Liu Qin at the court and reported that he had slandered the emperor. As a result, both of them were killed.

古文：用杨善荐，授本卫百户。以捕妖贼功，进副千户。
现代文：逯杲得杨善的推荐，被授予锦衣卫百户，后以捕妖贼之功，进升为副千户。
English: He won the recommendation of Yang Shan and was awarded the prize of 100 households of Jin Yi Wei. Later, he was promoted to the second thousand households with the achievement of catching the thief.

古文：又用曹吉祥荐，擢指挥佥事。
现代文：又得曹吉祥的推荐，升为指挥佥事。
English: He was also recommended by Cao Jixiang and promoted to the position of conductor.

古文：帝以杲强鸷，委任之，杲乃摭群臣细故以称帝旨。
现代文：皇上因逯杲倔强勇猛，很重用他，逯杲于是刺取群臣的细小过失来迎合皇上的旨意。
English: Because of his stubbornness and bravery, the emperor made great use of him, and he then picked up the minor faults of his courtiers to meet the emperor's will.

古文：英国公张懋、太平侯张瑾、外戚会昌侯孙继宗兄弟并侵官田，杲劾奏，还其田于官。
现代文：英国公张懋、太平侯张瑾、外戚会昌侯孙继宗兄弟都侵夺官田，逯杲上奏弹劾，迫使他们还田于官。
English: The British official Zhang Xuan, the Taiping marquis Zhang Xuan, and the maternal relatives association Chang Hou and Sun Jizong brothers all seized government-owned land, and were impeached, forcing them to return the land to the government.

古文：懋等皆服罪，乃已。
现代文：张懋等人都服罪，这才罢休。
English: Zhang Ye and the others all pleaded guilty, and that was the end of it.

古文：石亨恃宠不法，帝渐恶之，杲即伺其阴事。
现代文：石亨仗着受皇上宠爱而不法，皇上渐渐厌恶了他，逯杲即刺探石亨的阴事。
English: Shih-heng could not help being favored by the emperor, and the emperor gradually detested him, so he began to probe Shih-heng's shady dealings.

古文：亨从子彪有罪下狱，命杲赴大同械其党都指挥朱谅等七十六人。
现代文：石亨的侄子石彪有罪入狱，逯杲受命赴大同押解他的党羽都指挥朱谅等七十六人。
English: Shi Heng's nephew, Shi Biao, was found guilty and sent to prison, and Zou was ordered to go to Datong to escort his seventy-six followers under the command of Zhu Jun.

古文：杲因发彪弟庆他罪，连及者皆坐，杲进指挥同知。
现代文：逯杲趁机揭发石彪的弟弟石庆别的罪行，牵连到的人都被判罪，逯杲升为指挥同知。
English: Zou took the opportunity to expose the other crimes of Shi Biao's younger brother, Shi Qing. All those implicated were convicted and promoted to the same rank as the commander.

古文：明年复奏亨怨望，怀不轨，亨下狱死。
现代文：第二年他又上奏石亨怨望不满，心怀不轨，石亨被下狱而死。
English: The next year, he played on Shiheng's resentment and discontent, and Shiheng was sent to prison and died.

古文：有诏尽革 夺门 功，达、杲言臣等俱特恩，非以亨故。
现代文：有诏书说全部革去 夺门 之功，门达、逯杲说： 臣等都是特恩，并非是因石亨之故得以起用。 
English: There is an imperial edict saying that all the achievements of seizing the gate should be taken away, and the gatekeepers and guards said: The vassals are all great talents, and it is not because of Shi Heng that they were appointed.

古文：帝优诏留任，以杲发亨奸，益加倚重。
现代文：皇上颁优诏让他们留任，而因逯杲揭发石亨的奸状，更加倚重他。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to allow them to remain in office, and because they had exposed Shi Heng's treachery, they placed more importance on him.

古文：杲益发舒，势出达上。
现代文：逯杲势力进一步膨胀，已出于门达之上。
English: The puppet forces have further expanded and have surpassed the puppet masters.

古文：白遣校尉侦事四方，文武大吏、富家高门多进伎乐货贿以祈免，亲藩郡王亦然。
现代文：他上奏要派校尉四处刺探，文武大吏、富家高门多向他进献妓乐货财，以求获免，连亲藩郡王也不例外。
English: He reported that he wanted to send lieutenants to spy everywhere, and many high-ranking officials and rich people came to him to offer prostitutes, goods and money in order to be exempted, even the pro-Han county king was no exception.

古文：无贿者辄执送达，锻炼成狱。
现代文：没有送来贿赂的人逯杲就抓住交给门达，严刑逼供成狱。
English: Those who did not send bribes were seized and handed over to Menda, and were severely punished and forced to go to prison.

古文：天下朝觐官大半被谴，逮一人，数大家立破。
现代文：天下朝觐官员大半遭到谴责，一人被逮捕，数个大家立即破产。
English: Most of the world's hajj officials were condemned, one was arrested, and several immediately went bankrupt.

古文：四方奸民诈称校尉，乘传纵横，无所忌。
现代文：四方一些奸民诈称是校尉，乘坐驿车纵横不法，无所顾忌。
English: Some crooks in all four directions fraudulently claimed to be school lieutenants and rode around illegally in stolen cars. They had no scruples.

古文：鼓城伯张瑾以葬妻称疾不朝，而与诸公侯饮私第。
现代文：彭城伯张瑾借葬妻称病不上朝，而与诸公侯在家中饮酒。
English: Pengcheng Count Zhang Ye borrowed his wife's funeral to say that he would not go to the imperial court due to illness, but drank alcohol with the princes at home.

古文：杲劾奏，几得重罪。
现代文：逯杲上奏弹劾，张瑾几乎获重罪。
English: After the impeachment, Zhang Ye was almost convicted of a felony.

古文：杲所遣校尉诬宁府弋阳王奠壏母子乱，帝遣官往勘，事已白，靖王奠培等亦言无左验。
现代文：逯杲所派的校尉诬陷宁府弋阳王朱奠监母子乱伦，皇上派官前往调查，事已查清，靖王朱奠培等人也说此事没有证据。
English: The colonel sent by the emperor falsely accused the superintendent of Ningfu Fenyang Wang Zhu Dian Rong of incest between mother and son. The emperor sent an officer to investigate, and the matter was clarified. Jing Wang Zhu Dian Pei and others also said that there was no evidence of the matter.

古文：帝怒责杲，杲执如初，帝竟赐奠壏母子死。
现代文：皇上怒责逯杲，逯杲却坚持自己的意见，结果皇上竟将朱奠监母子赐死。
English: The emperor scolded him angrily, but he insisted on his own opinion. As a result, the emperor actually put Zhu Dianjun's mother and son to death.

古文：方舁尸出，大雷雨，平地水数尺，人咸以为冤。
现代文：正抬尸出来时，天降雷雨，平地水深数尺，人们都认为冤枉。
English: When the body was being carried out, there was a thunderstorm and the water was several feet deep. People thought it was an accident.

古文：指挥使李斌尝构杀弘农卫千户陈安，为安家所诉，下巡按御史邢宥覆谳，石亨嘱宥薄斌罪。
现代文：指挥使李斌曾陷害杀死弘农卫千户陈安，被陈安家人投诉，皇上交由巡按御史邢宥复审，石亨嘱咐邢宥减轻李斌的罪行。
English: Li Bin, the commanding officer, had framed and killed Chen An, a member of the Hongnongwei thousand households. Chen An's family members complained, and the emperor ordered the inspector to review the case. Shi Heng ordered the inspector to mitigate Li Bin's crime.

古文：至是，校尉言： 斌素藏妖书，谓其弟健当有大位，欲阴结外番为石亨报仇。 
现代文：至此有个校尉说 ：李斌一向藏有妖书，说他的弟弟李健应当有大位，想暗中勾结外番为石亨报仇。 
English: At this point, a school lieutenant said: Li Bin had always kept a book of spells, saying that his brother Li Jian should have a high rank, and he wanted to secretly collude with another person to avenge Shi Heng.

古文：杲以闻，下锦衣狱，达坐斌谋反。
现代文：逯杲将此事上报，将李斌投进锦衣卫监狱，门达判李斌犯了谋反之罪。
English: Zhai reported the matter to the authorities, who threw Li Bin into the Jinyiwei Prison. The authorities found Li Bin guilty of plotting against the state.

古文：帝两命廷臣会讯，畏杲不敢平反。
现代文：皇上两次命廷臣会审，他们都怕逯杲而不敢平反。
English: The emperor twice ordered the courtiers to hold a trial, but they were afraid of being punished and did not dare to rehabilitate themselves.

古文：斌兄弟置极刑，坐死者二十八人。
现代文：李斌兄弟被处以极刑，牵连而死的有二十八人。
English: The Li Bin brothers were sentenced to death. Twenty-eight people were implicated in their deaths.

古文：杲本由石亨、曹吉祥进，讦亨致死，复奏吉祥及其从子钦阴事，吉祥、钦大恨。
现代文：逯杲本由石亨、曹吉祥得以进用，他先攻击石亨致死，又上奏曹吉祥和其侄子曹钦的阴事，曹吉祥、曹钦非常恨他。
English: Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang were the first to use it. He first attacked and killed Shi Heng, and then reported the sinister activities of Cao Jixiang and his nephew Cao Qin. Cao Jixiang and Cao Qin hated him very much.

古文：五年七月，钦反，入杲第斩之，取其首以去。
现代文：五年七月，曹钦造反，冲进逯杲家中杀了他，取下他的首级而去。
English: In July of the fifth year, Cao Qin rebelled, stormed into Zou's home, killed him, took off his head and left.

古文：事平，赠杲指挥使，给其子指挥佥事俸。
现代文：事态平息后，赠逯杲为指挥使，给他的儿子指挥佥事的俸禄。
English: After the situation calmed down, he gave his son a salary for commanding the army and his son a salary for commanding the army.

古文：时达已掌卫事，仍兼理刑。
现代文：当时门达已执掌锦衣卫事务，仍兼理刑官。
English: At that time, Menda was already in charge of brocade clothing and hygiene affairs, and still concurrently served as a criminal officer.

古文：杲被杀，达以守卫功，进都指挥佥事。
现代文：逯杲被杀后，门达以守卫之功，进升为都指挥佥事。
English: After Zhai was killed, Menda was promoted to the post of commander of the capital with the merit of guarding.

古文：初，杲给事达左右，及得志恣甚。
现代文：当初，逯杲在门达左右供事，到他得志时便非常放肆。
English: At the beginning, Zou worked around Menda, and when he became successful, he was very arrogant.

古文：达怒，力逐之。
现代文：门达很愤怒，极力将他逐出。
English: Menda was furious and tried to expel him.

古文：杲旋复官，欲倾达，达惴惴不敢纵。
现代文：逯杲不久复官，便想排挤门达，门达惴惴不安，不敢妄为。
English: Soon after his reinstatement, he wanted to oust the menda, but the menda was uneasy and did not dare to act rashly.

古文：杲死，达势遂张。
现代文：逯杲死后，门达势力便发展了起来。
English: After Xing's death, Menda forces began to develop.

古文：欲踵杲所为，益布旗校于四方。
现代文：他想仿逯杲之所为，进一步广布旗校于四方。
English: He wanted to emulate the actions of Gong and further spread the banner in the four directions.

古文：告讦者日盛，中外重足立，帝益以为能。
现代文：由此告发的人日多，中外官民重足而立，皇上更以为门达能干。
English: As a result, more and more people came forward to denounce him. Chinese and foreign officials and people stood up, and the emperor even thought that the snitch was competent.

古文：外戚都指挥孙绍宗及军士六十七人冒讨曹钦功，达发其事。
现代文：外戚都指挥孙绍宗和军士六十七人冒讨伐曹钦之功，门达揭发此事。
English: Sun Shaozong and sixty-seven military officers were ordered by their relatives to attack Cao Qin, and they were ordered to expose the matter.

古文：绍宗被责让，余悉下狱。
现代文：孙绍宗被斥责，其他的都被下狱。
English: Sun Shaozong was reprimanded and the others were sent to prison.

古文：盗窃户部山西司库金，巡城御史徐茂劾郎中赵昌、主事王珪、徐源疏纵。
现代文：盗贼偷窃户部山西司的库金，巡城御史徐茂弹劾郎中赵昌、主事王王圭、徐源疏于防范。
English: Thieves stole the treasury of the Shanxi Division of the Household Department, and the inspector of the city, Xu Mao, impeached his son-in-law, Zhao Chang, the director, Wang Gui, and Xu Yuan for being negligent in prevention.

古文：达治其事，皆下狱谪官。
现代文：门达治理此事，把他们都投进监狱，贬了官。
English: Menda handled the matter, threw them all in jail, and demoted them.

古文：达以囚多，狱舍少，不能容，请城西武邑库隙地增置之，报可。
现代文：门达因囚犯多而狱舍少，无法容纳，便请在城西的武邑库空地增建牢房，他的报告被批准了。
English: Menda was unable to accommodate the large number of prisoners due to the small number of prison cells, so he asked for additional cells to be built in the open space of the Buyeo warehouse in the west of the city, and his report was approved.

古文：御史樊英、主事郑瑛犯赃罪。给事中赵忠等报不以实。
现代文：御史樊英、主事郑英犯贪污罪，给事中赵忠等人不以实报。
English: Gu Shi and Zheng Ying, the manager, were found guilty of corruption, but Zhao Zhong and others involved in the case did not give a true account.

古文：达劾其徇私，亦下狱谪官。
现代文：门达弹劾他徇私情，赵忠也被下狱贬官。
English: Menda impeached him for indulging in personal affairs, and Zhao Zhong was also sent to prison and demoted.

古文：给事中程万里等五人直登闻鼓，有军士妻醖冤，会斋戒不为奏。
现代文：给事中程万里等五人值班守登闻鼓，有个军士的妻子来诉冤，正值斋戒，程万里等人不为她上奏。
English: In the middle of the matter, there were five people on duty, such as Cheng Wanli, who were on duty to listen to the drums. There was a sergeant's wife who came to complain. She was fasting at the time, and Cheng Wanli and others did not play for her.

古文：达劾诸人蒙蔽，诏下达治。
现代文：门达弹劾这些人蒙蔽皇上，诏令交由门达处理。
English: Menda impeached these people for deceiving the emperor, and the edict was handed over to Menda to deal with.

古文：已，劾南京户部侍郎马谅，左都御史石璞，掌前府忻城伯赵荣，都督同知范雄、张斌老聩，皆罢去。
现代文：过后，门达又弹劾南京户部侍郎马谅、左都御史石璞、掌南京府忻城伯赵荣、都督同知范雄、张斌年老昏聩，使他们都被罢免。
English: Later, Menda also impeached Ma Ren, the chamberlain of the household of Nanjing, Shizhao Shi, the governor of the left capital, Zhao Rong, the governor of Nanjing, Fan Xiong, and Zhang Bin, who was old and feeble, so that they were all dismissed.

古文：裕州民奏知州秦永昌衣黄衣阅兵。
现代文：裕州百姓上奏知州秦永昌穿黄衣阅兵。
English: The people of Yuzhou asked Chizhou Qin Yongchang to wear yellow for the military parade.

古文：帝怒，命达遣官核，籍其赀，戮永昌，榜示天下。
现代文：皇上大怒，命门达派官调查，抄没其财产，并诛杀秦永昌，榜示天下。
English: The emperor was furious, and sent an official to investigate, confiscate his property, and kill Qin Yongchang, setting an example for the world.

古文：并逮布政使侯臣、按察使吴中以下及先后巡按御史吴琬等四人下狱，臣等停俸，琬等谪县丞。
现代文：他还逮捕布政使侯臣、按察使吴中以下以及前后巡按御史吴琬等四人入狱，侯臣等人被罚俸，吴琬等人被贬为县丞。
English: He also arrested four people, including the Bu Zheng envoy Hou Chen, the inspector Wu Zhong Rong and his subordinates, and the inspector Wu Yao, who were jailed before and after. Hou Chen and the others were fined, and Wu Yao and the others were demoted to county magistrate.

古文：御史李蕃按宣府，或告蕃擅挞军职，用军容迎送。
现代文：御史李蕃按察宣府，有人告发李蕃擅自鞭打军职人员，用军容迎送。
English: After inspecting the Xuanwu government, someone reported that Li Gan had whipped military personnel without authorization and greeted them with military attire.

古文：御史杨琎按辽东，韩琪按山西，校尉言其妄作威福。
现代文：御史杨按察辽东，韩琪按察山西，校尉说他们妄作威福。
English: Gu Shi Yang inspected Liaodong, Han Qi inspected Shanxi, and the captain said that they were being arrogant.

古文：皆下达治，蕃、琪并荷校死。
现代文：这些人都交由门达处理，李蕃、韩琪被戴枷锁而死。
English: These people were all handed over to be dealt with by the guards, and Li Yao and Han Qi were shackled and died.

古文：陕西督储参政娄良，糊广参议李孟芳，陕西按察使钱博，福建佥事包瑛，陕西佥事李观，四川巡按田斌，云南巡按张祚，清军御史程万钟及刑部郎中冯维、孙琼，员外郎贝钿，给事中黄甄，皆为校尉所发下狱。
现代文：陕西督储参政娄良、湖广参议李孟芳、陕西按察使钱博、福建佥事包瑛、陕西佥事李观、四川巡按田斌、云南巡按张祚、清军御史程万钟和刑部郎中冯维、孙琼、员外郎贝钿、给事中黄甄，都被校尉所告发而下狱。
English: Shaanxi Vice-governor and councillor Gong Liang, Hukang councillor Li Mengfang, Shaanxi deputy inspector Qian Bo, Fujian deputy inspector Bao Ying, Shaanxi deputy inspector Li Guan, Sichuan patrol officer Tian Bin, Yunnan patrol officer Zhang Qi, Qing military governor Cheng Wanzhong, and the vice-ministers of the criminal department Feng Wei, Sun Qiong, the vice-minister of foreign affairs Bei Qi, and the vice-minister of foreign affairs Huang Zhen, were all denounced by the lieutenant and sent to prison.

古文：瑛守官无玷，不胜愤，自缢死，其他多遣戍。
现代文：包瑛守官清白，不胜愤怒，自缢而死，其他人多被遣戍。
English: The governor of Baoying was innocent, but he was so angry that he hanged himself. Most of the others were exiled.

古文：湖广诸生马云罪黜，诈称锦衣镇抚，奉命葬亲，布政使孙毓等八人咸赙祭。
现代文：湖广生员马云犯罪被废黜，他诈称锦衣卫锦抚，奉命葬亲，布政使孙毓等八人都送来财物助祭。
English: Ma Yun, a resident of Hukang, was deposed for crime. He falsely claimed to be a brocade guardian, was ordered to bury relatives, and sent eight people, including the political envoy Sun Qian, to help the priest.

古文：事觉，法司请逮问，卒不罪云。
现代文：事情被发觉之后，法司请逮捕审问，但终不加罪给马云。
English: After the matter was discovered, the Department of Justice requested that Ma be arrested for questioning, but ultimately did not add any charges against him.

古文：达初欲行督责之术，其同列吕贵曰： 武臣不易犯，曹钦可鉴也。
现代文：门达初时想行督责之术，他的同僚吕贵说： 武臣不易侵犯，曹钦的结局可以为鉴。
English: At the beginning, Menda wanted to perform the art of supervision. His colleague Lü Gui said, "A warrior is not easy to encroach upon. Cao Qin's ending can be used as a model."

古文：独文吏易裁耳。 
现代文：只有文臣才易于裁决。 
English: Only civil servants are easy to adjudicate.

古文：达以为然，故文吏祸尤酷。
现代文：门达同意他的看法，所以文臣所受的祸害尤为酷烈。
English: Menda agreed with him, so the calamity that befell Wenshen was particularly severe.

古文：都指挥袁彬恃帝旧恩，不为达下。
现代文：都指挥袁彬仗着皇上旧恩，不肯居门达之下。
English: Yuan Bin, the commander of both armies, took advantage of the emperor's old favor and refused to live under his tutelage.

古文：达深衔之，廉知彬妾父千户王钦诓人财，奏请下彬狱，论赎徒还职。
现代文：门达深恨他，他访知袁彬的妾父千户王钦骗人财物，便奏请将袁彬下狱，判自赎徒刑还职。
English: Menda hated him deeply. When he learned that Yuan Bin's father-in-law, Qianhu Wangqin, had swindled people out of their money and property, he asked Yuan Bin to be released from prison and was sentenced to redeem himself and return to work.

古文：有赵安者，初为锦衣力士役于彬，后谪戍铁岭卫，赦还，改府军前卫，有罪，下诏狱。
现代文：有个叫赵安的，最初作为锦衣卫力士给袁彬办事，后被贬戍铁岭卫，被赦回后，改做府军前卫，因有罪被下到诏狱。
English: There was a man named Zhao An, who initially worked for Yuan Bin as a brocade-clad guardsman. Later, he was demoted to an iron ridge guard. After he was pardoned, he became a vanguard of the provincial army. For his crime, he was sent to the imperial prison.

古文：达坐安改补府军由彬请托故，乃复捕彬，搒掠，诬彬受石亨、曹钦贿，用官木为私第，索内官督工者砖瓦，夺人子女为妾诸罪名。
现代文：门达判赵安改补府军是由于袁彬请托的缘故，于是再次逮捕袁彬，进行拷打，诬陷袁彬受石亨、曹钦的贿赂，用官家木材建私宅，向督工的宦官索要砖瓦，以及夺人子女为妾等罪名。
English: Menda judged that Zhao An's reform of the army was due to Yuan Bin's request, so he arrested Yuan Bin again, tortured him, framed Yuan Bin as being bribed by Shi Heng and Cao Qin, built a private house with official timber, demanded bricks and tiles from the eunuch supervising the work, and took people's children as concubines.

古文：军匠杨埙不平，击登闻鼓为彬讼冤，语侵达，诏并下达治。
现代文：军匠杨埙不平，击登闻鼓为袁彬诉冤，言语连及门达，诏令并交门达审理。
English: The military engineer Yang Xuan complained, beat the drum for Yuan Bin to sue for grievances, and his words were reported to the gatekeeper, and the edict was submitted to the gatekeeper for trial.

古文：当是时，达害大学士李贤宠，又数规己，尝谮于帝，言贤受陆瑜金，酬以尚书。
现代文：当时，门达忌妒大学士李贤受宠，又多次规劝自己，便曾在皇上面前诬陷他，说李贤接受陆瑜的黄金，为他求取尚书一职。
English: At that time, Menda was envious of the favored status of the university scholar Li Xian, and repeatedly persuaded himself to frame him in front of the emperor, saying that Li Xian accepted Lu Yu's gold and sought a post as a scholar for him.

古文：帝疑之，不下诏者半载。
现代文：皇上怀疑了，有半年不下诏书。
English: The emperor became suspicious and did not issue an imperial edict for half a year.

古文：至是，拷掠埙，教以引贤，埙即谬曰： 此李学士导我也。 
现代文：至此，门达拷打杨埙，教他引出李贤，杨埙即谎称 ：这是李学士教我干的。 
English: At this point, Menda tortured Yang Zhen and taught him to induce Li Xian. Yang Zhen then falsely claimed: this is what Li Baoxuan taught me to do.

古文：达大喜，立奏闻，请法司会鞫埙午门外。
现代文：门达非常高兴，立即上奏皇上，请求法司在午门外会审杨埙。
English: Menda was very happy and immediately appealed to the emperor, requesting the legal department to try Yang Qi outside the afternoon gate.

古文：帝遣中官裴当监视。
现代文：皇上派宦官裴当监视。
English: The emperor sent eunuch Bae to keep watch.

古文：达欲执贤并讯，当曰： 大臣不可辱。 
现代文：门达想抓住李贤一起审讯，裴当说： 大臣不可辱！ 
English: When Menda wanted to arrest Li Xian and interrogate him, Pei Dang said: "Ministers should not be humiliated!"

古文：乃止。
现代文：门达这才罢了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：及讯，埙曰： 吾小人，何由见李学士，此门锦衣教我。 
现代文：到审讯时，杨埙说： 我不过是个小人物，怎能见到李学士？这都是门锦衣教我。 
English: At the time of the trial, Yang Wei said: I am just a small person, how can I see Li Baozhong?

古文：达色沮不能言，彬亦历数达纳贿状，法司畏达不敢闻，坐彬绞输赎，埙斩。
现代文：门达气色沮丧，话都说不出来，袁彬也历数门达纳贿的情状。法司害怕门达而不敢上报，结果仍判袁彬绞刑，输财赎死，杨埙论斩。
English: Menda looked depressed and couldn't say a word, and Yuan Bin also experienced several situations of bribery. The law was afraid of Menda and didn't dare to report it. As a result, Yuan Bin was still sentenced to death by hanging, and Yang Xi was beheaded.

古文：帝命彬赎毕调南京锦衣，而禁锢埙。
现代文：皇上命袁彬赎完后调到南京锦衣卫，而禁锢杨埙。
English: The emperor ordered Yuan Bin to be transferred to Nanjing Jin Yi Wei after the redemption, and Yang Xi was imprisoned.

古文：明年，帝疾笃，达知东宫局丞王纶必柄用，预为结纳。
现代文：第二年，皇上病重，门达知道东宫局丞王纶必得掌权用事，便预先与他结纳。
English: In the second year, the emperor was seriously ill, and Menda knew that Wang Xi, the secretary of the East Palace Bureau, would have to take power, so he made a deal with him in advance.

古文：无何，宪宗嗣位，纶败，达坐调贵州都匀卫带俸差操。
现代文：不久，宪宗即位，王纶败，门达被判调到贵州都匀卫，带俸差操。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xianzong ascended to the throne, Wang Xizong was defeated, and Menda was sentenced to be transferred to Guizhou Duyunwei, with pay and discipline.

古文：甫行，言官交章论其罪。
现代文：他将出发时，言官纷纷上疏弹劾他的罪行。
English: As he prepares to leave, officials are lining up to impeach him for his crimes.

古文：命逮治，论斩系狱，没其赀巨万，指挥张山同谋杀人，罪如之。
现代文：皇上命将他逮捕治罪，判处斩刑，关进狱中，抄没他的资财数万。指挥张山因同谋杀人，也判了同样的罪行。
English: The emperor ordered to arrest and punish him, sentenced him to beheading, put him in prison, and confiscated tens of thousands of his assets. The commander Zhang Shan was also sentenced for the same crime for being an accomplice to murder.

古文：子序班升、从子千户清、婿指挥杨观及其党都指挥牛循等九人，谪戍、降调有差。
现代文：他的儿子序班门升、侄子千户门清、女婿指挥杨观和他的党羽都指挥牛循等九人，都被遣戍或降职。
English: His son Zouban Meng Sheng, his nephew Qianhu Meng Qing, his son-in-law commander Yang Guan and his followers all commanded Niu Xuru and other nine people, all of whom were dismissed or demoted.

古文：后当审录，命贷达，发广西南丹卫充军，死。
现代文：后当审录，皇上命宽恕门达，发往广西南丹卫充军。死。
English: After being interrogated, the emperor pardoned Menda and sent him to the Danwei army in southwestern Guangxi. He died.

古文：李孜省，南昌人。
现代文：李孜省，南昌人。
English: From Lize Province, Nanchang.

古文：以布政司吏待选京职，赃事发，匿不归。
现代文：他以布政司吏待选京职，因贪赃事发而藏匿不归。
English: He was a political secretary waiting to be elected to the Beijing post, but he went into hiding because of the corruption scandal.

古文：时宪宗好方术，孜省乃学五雷法，厚结中官梁芳、钱义，以符箓进。
现代文：当时宪宗喜好方术，孜省于是学五雷法，厚结宦官梁芳、钱义，靠符得以进用。
English: At that time, Emperor Xianzong was fond of Fangshu, so the province of Ze learned the Five Thunder Laws, and the officials Liang Fang and Qian Yi, who were thick-skinned, were able to use it by relying on the symbols.

古文：成化十五年，特旨授太常丞。
现代文：成化十五年，皇上特旨授他为太常寺丞。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Juche era, the emperor gave him the title of Taejoji no jo.

古文：御史杨守随、给事中李俊等劾孜省赃吏，不宜典祭祀，乃改上林苑监丞。
现代文：御史杨守随、给事中李俊等人弹劾孜省是脏吏，不宜掌管祭祀，于是改任他为上林苑监丞。
English: Yang Shuxu, the governor of Shishi Province, was impeached by Li Jun and others for being a dirty official and unfit to be in charge of religious services, so he was reassigned as the superintendent of Shanglin Yuan.

古文：日宠幸，赐金冠、法剑及印章二，许密封奏请。
现代文：孜省日益受宠，受赐金冠、法剑以及印章两枚，并许他密封奏请。
English: Cizhou was increasingly favored, and was given a gold crown, a magic sword, and two seals, and was allowed to seal his request.

古文：益献淫邪方术，与芳等表里为奸，渐干预政事。
现代文：孜省进一步献上淫邪的方术，与梁芳等人表里为奸，逐渐干预政事。
English: The province of Cixi further presented the method of adultery, conspired with Liang Fang and others, and gradually intervened in political affairs.

古文：十七年，擢右通政，寄俸本司，仍掌监事。
现代文：十七年，他升任右通政，寄俸通政司，仍掌上林苑监事务。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was promoted to the post of Utsusho-sei, the post of the secretary of Utsusho-sei, and was still in charge of forest and garden supervision.

古文：同官王昶轻之，不加礼。
现代文：同官王日永轻视他，不以礼相待。
English: His co-ruler, King Nichinaga, despised him and did not treat him with courtesy.

古文：孜省谮昶，左迁太仆少卿。
现代文：孜省诬陷他，使他被降为太仆寺少卿。
English: Cizhou Province framed him, causing him to be demoted to the rank of Daju-ji Shaoqing.

古文：故事，寄俸官不得预郊坛分献，帝特以命孜省。
现代文：按惯例，寄俸官不得参预郊坛分献，皇上却特命准孜省这么做。
English: According to the usual practice, the contributors are not allowed to participate in the pre-feast offering, but the emperor specifically ordered the province to do so.

古文：廷臣惩昶事，无敢执奏者。
现代文：廷臣鉴于王日永的遭遇，没有人敢上奏阻止。
English: In view of what happened to Wang Rongyong, no one dared to interfere.

古文：初，帝践位甫逾月，即命中官传旨，用工人为文思院副使。
现代文：当初，皇上即位刚过一个月，即命宦官传圣旨，用工役人员任文思院副使。
English: At first, just a month after the Emperor ascended to the throne, he ordered eunuchs to transmit the imperial edict, and appointed construction workers as deputy envoys of Wensi Academy.

古文：自后相继不绝，一传旨姓名至百十人，时谓之传奉官，文武、僧道滥恩泽者数千。
现代文：以后这种事相继不绝，一传旨姓名常达一百人，当时称之为传奉官，文武官员、僧人道士滥得恩泽的达数千人。
English: Since then, this kind of thing has not ceased, with the number of names passed down often reaching a hundred. At that time, there were thousands of people who were called missionaries, civil and military officials, monks, and humanitarians.

古文：邓常恩、赵玉芝、凌中、顾玒及奸僧继晓辈，皆尊显，与孜省相倚为奸，然权宠皆出孜省下。
现代文：邓常恩、赵玉芝、凌中、顾王工以及奸僧继晓之辈，都得尊显，与孜省相倚为奸，但他们的权力和受宠程度都在孜省之下。
English: Deng Chang'en, Zhao Yuzhi, Lingzhong, Gu Wanggang, and the generation of the rascally monk Sui Xiao were all honored and supported by the province, but their power and favorability were below that of the province.

古文：居二年，进左通政。
现代文：两年之后，孜省升为左通政。
English: Two years later, Cixi Province was elevated to Zuotong Province.

古文：给事中王瑞、御史张稷等交劾之。
现代文：给事中王瑞、御史张稷等人纷纷弹劾他。
English: Wang Rui, Mishi Zhang Ye and others impeached him one after another.

古文：乃贬二秩，为本司左参议，他贬黜者又十二人。
现代文：于是将孜省贬官二等，任本司左参议，其他被贬被废的还有十二人。
English: As a result, the governor of Cixi Province was demoted to the second grade and appointed as a left-wing councillor of this department. Twelve other people were also demoted and abolished.

古文：盖特借以塞中外之望，孜省宠固未尝替也。
现代文：此举大概是特地为了堵住中朝人士的怨望情绪，而孜省的受宠实没有减低分毫。
English: This move was probably made specifically in order to stop the resentment of the Chinese and North Korean people, and the favor of Cizhou did not decrease at all.

古文：顷之，复迁左通政。
现代文：不久，孜省又升为左通政。
English: Soon, Cizhou Province was elevated to the top of the left-hand politics.

古文：二十一年正月，星变求言。
现代文：二十一年正月，有星变，皇上要大臣提意见。
English: In the first month of the twenty-first year, there was a change in the stars, and the emperor asked the minister for advice.

古文：九卿大臣、给事御史皆极论传奉官之弊，首及孜省、常恩等。
现代文：九卿大臣、给事御史都极论传奉官之弊，首先就提到孜省和邓常恩等人。
English: The Minister of the Nine Kyeong, who gave a lecture on the evils of being a government official, first mentioned the province of Ze and Deng Chang'en.

古文：帝颇感悟，贬孜省上林监丞，令吏部录冗滥者名凡五百余人。
现代文：皇上颇有悟，贬孜省为上林苑监丞，令吏部抄送上五百余名冗滥官职。
English: The emperor was quite enlightened and demoted the province to the position of Shanglin Court Supervisor, and ordered the personnel department to send copies of more than five hundred redundant officials.

古文：帝为留六十七人，余皆斥罢，中外大说。
现代文：皇上只留下六十七人，其他全部斥罢，朝中内外都非常高兴。
English: The emperor left only sixty-seven people, rejecting all the others, and both inside and outside the country were very happy.

古文：孜省缘是恨廷臣甚，构逐主事张吉、员外郎彭纲，而益以左道持帝意。
现代文：孜省因此非常恨廷臣，便陷害并逐出主事张吉、员外郎彭纲，而补以迎合皇上心意的左道官员。
English: As a result, Cixi Province hated the courtiers very much, so they framed and expelled Zhang Ji, the main man, and Peng Gang, a foreign official, and replaced them with officials from the Left who catered to the emperor's wishes.

古文：其年十月，再复左通政，益作威福。
现代文：这一年十月，孜省再次就任左通政，更加作威作福。
English: In October of the same year, Zhe again took office as the governor of Zuotong Province, and became even more arrogant and benevolent.

古文：构罪吏部尚书尹旻及其子侍讲龙。
现代文：他陷害吏部尚书尹及其儿子侍讲尹龙，使他们都得了罪。
English: He framed the official Shang Shu Yin and his son, the assistant lecturer Yin Long, and they were all convicted.

古文：又假扶鸾术言江西人赤心报国，于是致仕副都御史刘敷、礼部郎中黄景、南京兵部侍郎尹直、工部尚书李裕、礼部侍郎谢一夔，皆因之以进。
现代文：他又借扶鸾术说江西人赤心报国，于是退休的副都御史刘敷、礼部郎中黄景、南京兵部侍郎尹直、工部尚书李裕、礼部尚书谢一夔，都因此而得以进用。
English: He also said that the people of Jiangxi were eager to serve the country, so the retired vice-governor Liu Shiki, vice-governor Huang Jing, vice-governor Yin Zhi, vice-governor Li Yu and vice-governor Xie Yijun were all promoted.

古文：间采时望，若学士杨守陈、倪岳，少詹事刘健，都御史余子俊，李敏诸名臣，悉密封推荐。
现代文：他也间或收取当时名望较高的人像学士杨守陈、倪岳，少詹事刘健，都御史余子俊、李敏等名臣，他都密封进行推荐。
English: He also occasionally received the then highly prestigious portrait of academicians Yang Shou Chen, Ni Yue, Shao Zhan Zhi Liu Jian, and eminent ministers such as Duo Shi Yu Zijun and Li Min, all of which he sealed for recommendation.

古文：搢绅进退，多出其口，执政大臣万安、刘吉、彭华从而附丽之。
现代文：缙绅进退，多出于其口，执政大臣万安、刘吉、彭华从而也依附于他。
English: The ruling ministers Wan'an, Liu Ji, and Peng Hua thus also depended on him.

古文：通政边镛为佥都御史，李和为南京户部侍郎，皆其力也。
现代文：通政边镛任佥都御史，李和任南京户部侍郎，都是他一人之力。
English: He was the only one who had the power to appoint Tongzheng Bianchi as the Metropolitan Historian, and Li He as the Household Attendant of Nanjing.

古文：所排挤江西巡抚闵珪、洗马罗璟、兵部尚书马文升、顺天府丞杨守随，皆被谴，朝野侧目。
现代文：受他排挤的江西巡抚闵皀、洗马罗瞡、兵部尚书马文升、顺天府丞杨守随，都遭皇上谴责，朝野侧目。
English: He ousted the governor of Jiangxi, Shima Luo, the military commander Shoshu Ma Wensheng, and the governor of Shuntenfu, Yang Shouzu, all of whom were condemned by the emperor and looked down on by the court.

古文：吏部奏通政使缺，即以命孜省，而右通政陈政以下五人，递进一官。
现代文：吏部奏通政使出缺，皇上即命孜省任通政使，而右通政陈政以下五人，都递进一官。
English: There was a vacancy in the cadre department for the political envoy, and the emperor immediately ordered the provincial government to appoint a political envoy, and the five people below the right political envoy Chen Zheng were all promoted to one post.

古文：时张文质方以尚书掌司事，通政故未尝缺使也。
现代文：当时张文质正以尚书衔掌通政司事，通政司实际上没有缺通政使。
English: At that time, Zhang Wenzhi was holding the title of Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs actually did not lack diplomatic envoys.

古文：已，复擢礼部右侍郎，掌通政如故。
现代文：后来，又升孜省为礼部右侍郎，仍掌通政司。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, still holding the post of Secretary of State.

古文：常恩，临江人，因中官陈喜进。
现代文：邓常恩，临江人，通过宦官陈喜得以进用。
English: Deng Chang'en, a native of Linjiang, was able to enter the service through the eunuch Chen Xi.

古文：玉芝，番禺人，因中官高谅进。
现代文：赵玉芝，番禺人，通过宦官高谅得以进用。
English: Zhao Yuzhi, a resident of Panyu, was able to enter the service through the eunuch Gao Tong.

古文：并以晓方术，累擢太常卿。
现代文：他们都懂得方术，累升为太常寺卿。
English: All of them knew how to play the hoshu, and they were promoted to the position of Taijoji-kyo.

古文：玉芝丁母忧，特赐祭葬，大治茔域，制度逾等。
现代文：赵玉芝遭母丧时，皇上特赐祭葬，大治坟茔，所用制度超过了其等级。
English: When Zhao Yuzhi was mourned by his mother, the emperor specially granted a funeral and a large cemetery, and the system used exceeded its level.

古文：玒、中不知何许人。
现代文：顾王工、凌中不知是何许人。
English: I don't know who Gu Wanggong and Lingzhong are.

古文：玒以扶鸾术，累官太常少卿，丧母赐祭，且给赠诰。
现代文：顾王工靠着扶鸾术，累升到太常寺少卿，他的母亲去世时皇上赐祭葬，还赠给诰命。
English: Gu Wanggong was promoted to Shaoqing of Taizhoji Temple by virtue of his ability to hold a plough. When his mother died, the emperor gave him a ceremonial burial, and also gave him the gift of immortality.

古文：故事，四品未三载无给诰赐祭者，宪宗特予之。
现代文：按惯例，任四品官不到三年的不给赠诰命和赐祭，皇上特许给他了。
English: According to the usual practice, an official of the Fourth Rank who has been in office for less than three years will not be given the gift of life or the gift of sacrifice. The emperor gave him special permission.

古文：吏部尚书尹旻因请并赠其父。
现代文：吏部尚书尹还请一并赠他父亲。
English: The head of the personnel department, Shang Shuyun, also asked his father to give him a gift.

古文：未几，进本寺卿。其二子经、纶，亦官太常少卿。
现代文：不久，顾王工升为本寺卿，他的两个儿子顾经和顾纶，也官任太常寺少卿。
English: Soon after, Gu Wang Gong was promoted to be the chief priest of this temple, and his two sons, Gu Jing and Gu Yao, were also appointed as junior chief priests of Taizho-ji Temple.

古文：中以善书供事文华殿，不数年为太常卿。
现代文：凌中因擅长书写，供事于文华殿，没几年便升为太常寺卿。
English: Since Lingzhong was good at writing, he served at the Palace of Literature, and after a few years, he was promoted to Lord of Taizhoji Temple.

古文：逾月，以谏官言，降寺丞。
现代文：过了一个月，因谏官的议论，把他降为寺丞。
English: A month later, because of the eunuch's arguments, he was demoted to the position of temple chancellor.

古文：孜省以星变贬，常恩亦贬本寺丞，而玉芝、玒、中并如故。
现代文：孜省因星变被贬，邓常恩也被贬为本寺丞，而赵玉芝、顾王工、凌中任职如故。
English: Cixi was demoted due to the star change, Deng Chang'en was also demoted to the chief priest of this temple, while Zhao Yuzhi, Gu Wang Gong and Ling Zhong remained in office.

古文：孜省复通政，常恩亦复太常卿。
现代文：孜省恢复通政使之职后，邓常恩也恢复太常寺卿。
English: After Tongzheng was reinstated in Cizhou Province, Deng Chang'en was also reinstated as the head of Taizhong Temple.

古文：有李文昌者，试术不效，杖五十，斥还。
现代文：有个叫李文昌的，所进的方术试验不灵，被杖打五十而斥还。
English: There was a man named Li Wenchang, who failed in his square technique test and was beaten with a cane.

古文：岳州通判沈政以绘事夤缘至太常少卿，请敛天下货财充内府。
现代文：岳州通判沈政以绘画技巧爬到太常寺少卿，请聚敛天下货财充于内府。
English: Yuezhou Tongzhan Shen Zheng climbed to the Shaoqing of Taizhong Temple with painting skills, please gather the world's goods and wealth to fill the inner palace.

古文：帝怒，下狱，杖谪广西庆远通判。
现代文：皇上发怒了，把他投进监狱，杖打后贬到广西庆远府任通判。
English: The emperor was enraged and threw him into prison. He was beaten with a cane and sent to Qingyuan in Guangxi Province for trial.

古文：人颇以为快。
现代文：人们颇为快意。
English: People were pretty excited.

古文：然群奸中外蟠结，士大夫附者日益多。
现代文：但当时群奸中外盘结，依附他们的士大夫日益增多。
English: However, at that time, the gangsters were entangled from inside and outside, and the number of officials who depended on them was increasing.

古文：进士郭宗由刑部主事，以篆刻为中人所引，擢尚宝少卿，日与市井工技伍，趋走阙廷。
现代文：进士郭宗由一名刑部主事，靠篆刻技术得宦官引荐，升为尚宝司少卿，他每天与市井工技之人为伍，奔走于宫廷。
English: Guo Zong was promoted from the head of the criminal investigation department, who was recommended by eunuchs thanks to his carving skills, to the junior secretary of the imperial treasure department. He was in the company of craftsmen from the city every day, rushing around the court.

古文：兵科左给事中张善吉谪官，因秘术干中官高英，得召见，因自陈乞复给事中，士论以为羞。
现代文：兵科左给事中张善吉被贬官，用秘术向宦官高英求情，得到召见，便趁机自请恢复给事中官衔，士大夫舆论都认为羞耻。
English: Zhang Zenki was demoted in the military affairs, and he used secret techniques to plead with the eunuch Gao Ying. When he was summoned, he took the opportunity to voluntarily restore the official title in the matter. The public opinion of the scholar-officials thought it was shameful.

古文：大学士万安亦献房中术以固宠。
现代文：大学士万安也献上房中术来固宠。
English: College student Wan'an also presented a middle-of-the-room trick to keep the pet.

古文：而诸杂流加侍郎、通政、太常、太仆、尚宝者，不可悉数。
现代文：而那些杂流人物被加封为侍郎、通政、太常、太仆、尚宝的，不可胜数。
English: And those miscellaneous figures who were given additional titles such as chamberlain, secretary of state, grand chamberlain, great servant, and great treasure are too numerous to count.

古文：宪宗崩，孝宗嗣位，始用科道言，尽汰传奉官，谪孜省、常恩、玉芝、玒、中、经戍边卫。
现代文：宪宗驾崩后，孝宗即位，才开始采纳科道官员的建议，全部裁汰传奉官，贬谪孜省、邓常恩、赵玉芝、顾王工、凌中、顾经等人，遣去戍守边卫。
English: After the death of Emperor Xianzong and the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, he began to adopt the suggestions of the officials of the Science and Technology Bureau, dismissing all the envoys, and dismissing the border guards of Ganzi Province, Deng Chang'en, Zhao Yuzhi, Gu Wanggong, Lingzhong, Gu Jing and others.

古文：又以中官蒋琮言，逮孜省、常恩、玉芝等下诏狱，坐交结近侍律斩，妻子流二千里。
现代文：又以宦官蒋琮的建议，逮捕孜省、常恩、玉芝等人，投进诏狱，以交结贴身宦官之罪判他们斩刑，妻儿流放到两千里之外。
English: At the suggestion of the eunuch Chiang Kai-shek, he arrested Tsze, Chang'en, Yuzhi and others, threw them into the imperial prison, sentenced them to beheading for the crime of associating with eunuchs, and exiled their wives and children two thousand miles away.

古文：诏免死，仍戍边。
现代文：皇上下诏免其死罪，仍戍边。
English: The Emperor's edict exempted him from the death penalty, but he was still pardoned.

古文：孜省不胜搒掠，瘐死。
现代文：孜省不胜拷打，死于狱中。
English: He was brutally tortured and died in prison.

古文：继晓，江夏僧也。
现代文：继晓，江夏僧人。
English: The next morning, the monks of Jiangxia were gone.

古文：宪宗时，以秘术因梁芳进，授僧录司左觉义。
现代文：宪宗时期，他以秘术通过梁芳得以进用，被授予僧录司左觉义。
English: During the Kenzong period, he was able to use secret techniques through Liang Fang and was awarded the title of Zuo Jueyi, the chief of the Recorder's Office.

古文：进右善世，命为通元翊教广善国师。
现代文：后升为右善世，被任命为通元翊教广善国师。
English: Later, he was promoted to U Sonsei, and was appointed as the Grand Master of Tongyuan Sect and Guang Son Sect.

古文：日诱帝为佛事，建大永昌寺于西市，逼徙民居数百家，费国帑数十万。
现代文：他每天引诱皇上做佛事，在西市建大永昌寺，逼迁民居数百家，耗费国库钱财数十万。
English: He lured the emperor to do Buddhist activities every day, built the Grand Yongchang Temple in Xicheng, forced the relocation of hundreds of residences, and spent hundreds of thousands of yuan from the national treasury.

古文：员外郎林俊请斩芳、继晓以谢天下，几得重谴。
现代文：员外郎林俊请求斩梁芳、继晓以谢天下，几乎受到严厉责备。
English: Lin Jun, a member of the Foreign Affairs Office, was almost severely reprimanded for his request to behead Liang Fang and Zhi Xiao to thank the world.

古文：继晓虞祸及，乞归养母，并乞空名度牒五百道，帝悉从之。
现代文：继晓担心灾祸及身，请求归家养母，并请求空名度牒五百份，皇上都听从了。
English: Next morning, fearing that the calamity would affect her, she asked to return home and be raised by her mother. She also asked for 500 copies of the Imperial edict, which the Emperor complied with.

古文：帝初即位，即以道士孙道玉为真人。
现代文：皇上初即位时，即以道士孙道玉为真人。
English: When the emperor ascended the throne at the beginning of his reign, he took the Taoist priest Sun Daoyu as the real person.

古文：其后西番僧劄巴坚参封万行庄严功德最胜智慧圆明能仁感应显国光教弘妙大悟法王西天至善金刚普济大智慧佛，其徒劄实巴、锁南坚参、端竹也失皆为国师，锡诰命。
现代文：后来西番僧人扎巴坚参被封为万行庄严功德最胜智慧圆明能仁感应显国光教弘妙大悟法王西天至善金刚普济大智慧佛，他的徒弟扎实巴、锁南坚参、端竹也失都被封为国师，赐给诰命。
English: Later, Zhaba Jiansan, a monk from Xifan, was awarded the title of "Worthy Monk of the World," "Supreme Wisdom," "Perfect Wisdom," "Magnificent Enlightenment," "Great Enlightenment," and "Great Wisdom Buddha." His disciples, Zhasiba, Zhonan Jiansan, and Duan Zhu, were also awarded the title of "Master of the State" and given long lives.

古文：服食器用，僣拟王者。出入乘梭舆，卫卒执金吾仗前导，锦衣玉食几千人。
现代文：他们的服食器用，都比拟于王者，出入乘坐棕舆，卫卒拿着金吾杖做前导，锦衣玉食者几乎有一千人。
English: Their eating and drinking utensils are all comparable to those of kings. They enter and leave the palace on palmtrees, with the guards leading the way with gold and jade staffs. There are almost a thousand people who eat jade and brocade.

古文：取荒冢顶骨为数珠，髑髅为法碗。
现代文：他们取荒冢中人骨的顶骨做念珠，骷髅做法碗。
English: They took the top bones of human bones from the wasteland to make prayer beads, and then made bowls.

古文：给事中魏元等切谏，不纳。
现代文：给事中魏元等人恳切劝谏，皇上不听。
English: Wei Yuan and others earnestly advised him, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：寻进劄实巴为法王，班卓儿藏卜为国师，又封领占竹为万行清脩真如自在广善普慧弘度妙应掌教翊国正觉大济法王西天圆智大慈悲佛，又封西天佛子答刂失藏卜、劄失坚参、乳奴班丹、锁南坚参、法领占五人为法王，其他授西天佛子、大国师、国师、禅师者不可胜计。
现代文：不久进封扎实巴为法王，班卓儿藏卜为国师，又封领占竹为万行清修真如自在广善普慧弘度妙应掌教翊国正觉大济法王西天圆智大慈悲佛，又封西天佛子扎失藏卜、扎失坚参、乳奴班丹、锁南坚参、法领占五人为法王，其他被授予西天佛子、大国师、国师、禅师的不可胜计。
English: Soon after, Zasiba was enthroned as the Karmapa, Banjore Zangpo as the national teacher, Zamtake was enthroned as the Buddha of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the Great Compassion of the

古文：羽流加号真人、高士者，亦盈都下。
现代文：羽流被加以真人、高士之号的，也充积于京师。
English: The plume, which has been given the names of real people and high-ranking officials, has also accumulated in Beijing.

古文：大国师以上金印，真人玉冠、玉带、玉珪、银章。
现代文：大国师以上赐给金印，真人赐给玉冠、玉带、玉王圭、银章。
English: Daikokushi and above are given gold seals, and real people are given a jade crown, a jade belt, a jade king's seal, and a silver seal.

古文：继晓尤奸黠窃权，所奏请立从。
现代文：继晓尤其奸猾，盗弄威权，他所奏请的，皇上立即依从。
English: Cui Xiao was particularly cunning, stealing authority. The emperor immediately complied with his request.

古文：成化二十一年，星变，言官极论其罪，始勒为民，而诸番僧如故。
现代文：成化二十一年，有星变，言官极力论奏继晓之罪，皇上才将他勒令为民，但各番僧仍没有动及。
English: In the 21st year of Chenghua, there was a change in the stars, and the magistrate tried his best to talk about the crime of playing Jixiao, and the emperor ordered him to become a citizen, but the monks still did not move.

古文：孝宗初，诏礼议汰。
现代文：孝宗初年，下诏令礼官讨论裁汰僧道官员。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaozong, the etiquette officials were ordered to discuss the punishment of the officials of the Buddhist priesthood.

古文：礼官言诸寺法王至禅师四百三十七人，刺麻诸僧七百八十九人。
现代文：礼官说各寺从法王到禅师有四百三十七人，喇嘛僧人七百八十九人。
English: The etiquette official said that there are 437 people in each temple from the Karmapa to the Zen master, and 789 lamas and monks.

古文：华人为禅师及善世、觉义诸僧官一百二十人，道士自真人、高士及正一演法诸道官一百二十三人，请俱贬黜。
现代文：华人做禅师以及善世、觉义等僧官的有一百二十人，道士从真人、高士到正一演法等道官有一百二十三人，请求将他们全部贬斥和黜退。
English: There are one hundred and twenty Chinese monks who are Zen masters, as well as officials such as Zen Sect and Enlightenment, and there are one hundred and twenty-three Taoist priests, from Shennong, Gaozhi, to Zhengyi Yuenpo, and other Taoist officials. We request that all of them be denounced and expelled.

古文：诏法王、佛子递降国师、禅师、都纲，余悉落职为僧，遣还本土，追夺诰敕、印章、仪仗诸法物。真人降左正一，高士降左演法，亦追夺印章及诸玉器。
现代文：有诏书将法王、佛子递降为国师、禅师、都纲，其余的全部落职为僧，遣还本土，追夺所赐的诰敕、印章和仪仗等法物；真人降为左正一，高士降为左演法，也追夺印章和各种玉器。
English: There was an imperial edict to demote the Karmapa and the Buddha's son successively to the position of the statesman, the Zen master, and the tutelary deity, and to demote all the rest to the position of the monk, send them back to the mainland, and seize the bestowal of the imperial scepter, seal, and ceremonial objects; to demote the real person to the position of Zuozhenyi, and the high priest to the position of Zuoyengfa, and to seize the seal and various jade objects.

古文：僧录司止留善世等九员，道录司留正一等八员，余皆废黜。
现代文：僧录司只留下善世等九名，道录司留下正一等八名，其余全部废黜。
English: There were only nine people left in the office of the record keeper, such as Zenshi, and eight people left in the office of the record keeper, such as Zheng, and all the rest were dismissed.

古文：而继晓以科臣林廷玉言，逮治弃市。
现代文：而继晓因科臣林廷玉的意见，被逮捕治罪，押往市场处死，暴尸街头。
English: However, following the opinion of Lin Tingyu, a scholar of science, Xiao Xiao was arrested and punished, sent to the market to be executed, and his corpse was found in the street.

古文：江彬，宣府人。
现代文：江彬，宣府人。
English: Jiang Bin, a native of Xuanfu.

古文：初为蔚州卫指挥佥事。
现代文：初任蔚州卫指挥佥事。
English: An anecdote about the first commander of the Ulsan garrison.

古文：正德六年，畿内贼起，京军不能制，调边兵。
现代文：正德六年，畿内闹贼，京军不能制服，便调遣边兵。
English: In the sixth year of Zhengde, the Kinai region was in turmoil, and the Beijing army could not be subdued, so the border soldiers were dispatched.

古文：彬以大同游击隶总兵官张俊赴调。
现代文：江彬以大同游击的身份隶属于总兵官张俊开赴畿内。
English: Jiang Bin went to the Kinai region as a Datong guerrilla under the general officer Zhang Junkai.

古文：过蓟州，杀一家二十余人，诬为贼，得赏。
现代文：经过蓟州时，他杀一家老小二十余人，将他们诬陷为贼，获得了奖赏。
English: While passing through Zhangzhou, he killed more than 20 members of a family, framing them as thieves, and received a reward.

古文：后与贼战淮上，被三矢，其一著面，镞出于耳，拔之更战。
现代文：后来他与贼人在淮河上交战，被射中三箭，其中一箭正中门面，箭簇从耳朵中露出，江彬拔出再战。
English: Later, he and the thief fought on the Huai River. He was shot with three arrows, one of which was in the middle of the door, the arrow cluster was exposed from the ear, and Jiang Bin pulled out to fight again.

古文：武宗闻而壮之。
现代文：武宗听说后觉得他很壮勇。
English: After hearing about it, Bu Zong thought he was very brave.

古文：七年，贼渐平，遣边兵还镇大同、宣府。
现代文：七年，贼人逐渐被平息，于是将边兵遣返大同、宣府。
English: In the seventh year, the bandits were gradually subdued, so the frontier soldiers were repatriated to Datong and Xuanfu.

古文：军过京师，犒之，遂并宣府守将许泰皆留不遣。
现代文：部队经过京师时，皇上犒劳将士，并将江彬和宣府守将许泰留下，不遣返驻地。
English: When the troops passed through the Beijing division, the emperor commended the soldiers for their hard work, and left Jiang Bin and Xu Tai, the governor of Xuanfu, without returning to the garrison.

古文：彬因钱宁得召见。
现代文：江彬通过钱宁得到皇上召见。
English: Jiang Bin was summoned by the emperor through Channing.

古文：帝见其矢痕，呼曰： 彬健能尔耶！ 
现代文：皇上见到他的箭痕，惊呼道： 江彬竟是如此壮健啊！ 
English: When the emperor saw his arrow marks, he exclaimed: Jiang Bin is so strong!

古文：彬狡黠强很，貌魁硕有力，善骑射，谈兵帝前，帝大说，擢都指挥佥事，出入豹房，同卧起。
现代文：江彬狡黠凶狠，身材魁梧，高大有力，精于骑射。他在皇上面前谈兵，皇上很高兴，将他升为都指挥佥事，准他出入豹房，同吃同睡。
English: Jiang Bin was cunning and ferocious. He was a big man, tall and powerful, and good at riding and shooting. He talked with soldiers in front of the emperor. The emperor was very pleased and promoted him to the position of capital commander. He was allowed to go in and out of the leopard's house, eat and sleep together.

古文：尝与帝弈不逊，千户周骐叱之。
现代文：他曾与皇上下棋，争胜不让，千户周骐叱骂他。
English: He once played chess with the emperor, and refused to concede defeat. Chifu Zhouyi scolded him.

古文：彬陷骐搒死，左右皆畏彬。
现代文：江彬便陷害周骐，将他打死，左右的人因此都害怕他。
English: Jiang Bin then framed Zhou Qi and beat him to death, so people on both sides were afraid of him.

古文：彬导帝微行，数至教坊司；进铺花毡幄百六十二间，制与离宫等，帝出行幸皆御之。
现代文：江彬引导皇上微服出行，多次到教坊司；他又进献一百六十二间铺花地毯的帐幕，制作得跟离宫差不多，皇上每次出行都到那儿去住。
English: Jiang Bin guided the emperor's micro-clothes to travel and repeatedly went to the teacher's office; he also donated one hundred and sixty-two flower-carpeted tents, made almost like the Imperial Palace, where the emperor went to live every time he traveled.

古文：宁见彬骤进，意不平。
现代文：钱宁见江彬青云直上，内心不平。
English: Channing felt uneasy when she saw Jiang Bin's youthful appearance.

古文：一日，帝捕虎，召宁，宁缩不前。
现代文：一天，皇上捕老虎，叫钱宁，钱宁委缩不前。
English: One day, the emperor caught a tiger and called Channing. Channing shrank back.

古文：虎迫帝，彬趋扑乃解。
现代文：老虎已逼近皇上，江彬奔去扑击才得以解困。
English: The tiger had already approached the emperor, and Jiang Bin had to run to attack it before he was able to free himself.

古文：帝戏曰： 吾自足办，安用尔。 
现代文：皇上开玩笑说 ：我自己足以办了，还用得着你？ 
English: The Emperor joked: "I can manage on my own, why do I need you?"

古文：然心德彬而嗛宁。
现代文：不过内心还是感激江彬而恨钱宁。
English: But inside, she was still grateful to Jiang Bin and hated Channing.

古文：宁他日短彬，帝不应。
现代文：钱宁后来陷害江彬，皇上不理会。
English: Channing later framed Jiang Bin, but the emperor ignored it.

古文：彬知宁不相容，顾左右皆宁党，欲籍边兵自固，固盛称边军骁悍胜京军，请互调操练。
现代文：江彬知道钱宁容不下自己，左右又都是钱宁的党羽，便想凭借边防兵来巩固自己的地位。他于是向皇帝称赞边军远比京军骁勇强悍，请求互相调换进行操练。
English: Jiang Bin knew that Channing could not tolerate him, and Channing's followers were on both sides, so he wanted to consolidate his position with the help of border guards. He then praised the border troops to the emperor as being far more courageous and powerful than the Beijing army, and requested that they be exchanged for each other for training.

古文：言官交谏，大学士李东阳疏称十不便，皆不听。
现代文：言官纷纷谏阻，大学士李东阳上疏称这样做有十大不便，皇上都不听。
English: The officials resisted one after another, and the university scholar Li Dongyang casually said that there were ten inconveniences in doing so, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：于是调辽东、宣府、大同、延绥四镇军入京师，号外四家，纵横都市。
现代文：于是将辽东、宣府、大同、延绥四镇的军队调入京师称为外四家，纵横于都市。
English: As a result, the armies of Liaodong, Xuanfu, Datong and Yancheng were transferred to Beijing, and they were called the Outer Four Houses, which stretched across the city.

古文：每团练大内，间以角戏。帝戎服临之，与彬联骑出，铠甲相错，几不可辨。
现代文：每次在内宫团练，间或进行摔跤游戏，皇上身穿戎服亲临现场，与江彬联骑而出，两人铠甲相错，几乎不可分辨。
English: Every time there is a group training in the inner palace, and occasionally a wrestling game, the emperor comes to the scene wearing a military uniform, and rides out with Jiang Bin. The two men's armor is wrong, almost indistinguishable.

古文：八年命许泰领敢勇营，彬领神威营。
现代文：八年命许泰领敢勇营，江彬领神威营。
English: In the eighth year, Xu Tai was ordered to lead the brave camp, and Jiang Bin led the brave camp.

古文：改太平仓为镇国府，处边兵。
现代文：改太平仓为镇国府，用来安置边防兵。
English: The Taiping warehouse was converted into a town government office and used to house border guards.

古文：建西官厅于奋武营。赐彬、泰国姓。
现代文：在奋武营建西官厅。赐给江彬、许泰国姓。
English: The western government office was built in Tengwuying. Jiang Bin and Xu Thai were given surnames.

古文：越二年，迁都督佥事。
现代文：过了两年，江彬升为都督佥事。
English: Two years later, Jiang Bin was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：彬荐万全都指挥李琮、陕西都指挥神周勇略，并召侍豹房，同赐姓为义儿。
现代文：江彬推荐万全都指挥李琮、陕西都指挥神周有勇有谋，皇上都召他们到豹房侍奉，并赐给姓氏，认作义儿。
English: Jiang Bin recommended that Li Qian, the commander of all armies, and Shen Zhou, the commander of all armies in Shaanxi, should be brave and resourceful. The emperor called them all to serve in the Leopard Room, and gave them surnames, recognizing them as righteous sons.

古文：毁积庆、鸣玉二坊民居，造皇店酒肆，建义子府。
现代文：拆毁积庆、鸣玉二坊的民居，建造皇店酒肆和义子府。
English: Demolish the houses of Jie Qing and Ming Yu 2nd, and build the Imperial Liquor Store and Yizi House.

古文：四镇军，彬兼统之。
现代文：四镇的军队，江彬都一并统领。
English: The armies of the four towns were all led by Jiang Bin.

古文：帝自领群阉善射者为一营，号中军。
现代文：皇上自领善于射击的阉官，组建为一营，号为中军。
English: The emperor selected eunuchs who were good at shooting and organized them into a battalion, called the Chinese Army.

古文：晨夕驰逐，甲光照宫苑，呼噪声达九门。
现代文：他们早晚策马驱驰，甲胄之光照耀宫苑，呼噪之声达于九门。
English: In the morning and in the evening they drive their horses, the light of their armor shines in the palace courtyard, and the noise of their hoofbeats reaches the nine gates.

古文：帝时临阅，名过锦。
现代文：皇上时常亲临阅兵，名为过锦。
English: The emperor often attended military parades in person, which were called "passing the brocade."

古文：诸营悉衣黄罩甲，泰、琮、周等冠遮阳帽，帽植天鹅翎，贵者三翎，次二翎。
现代文：各营士卒都穿着黄衣罩上铠甲，许泰、李琮、神周等人戴着遮阳帽，帽上插着天鹅翎，尊贵的有三支，其次有两支。
English: The soldiers of each battalion wore armour over their yellow coats, and Xu Tai, Li Yao, Shen Zhou and others wore sunshade caps with swan beaks on them. There were three swan beaks for the noble ones, and two for the others.

古文：兵部尚书王琼得赐一翎，自喜甚。
现代文：兵部尚书王琼被赐给一支翎，他自己非常高兴。
English: He was very happy when he was given a scepter.

古文：彬既心忌宁，欲导帝巡幸远宁。
现代文：江彬既然心里顾忌钱宁，便想引导皇上出宫巡车，以远离钱宁。
English: Since Jiang Bin was afraid of Channing, he wanted to guide the emperor's carriage out of the palace to get away from Channing.

古文：因数言宣府乐工多美妇人，且可观边衅，瞬息驰千里，何郁郁居大内，为廷臣所制。
现代文：他因此多次对皇上说宣府的乐工多是美妇人，而且在那里可以看到边境纠纷，瞬息之间可跑出千里之外，何必郁郁居在禁宫之中，被廷臣所控制。
English: As a result, he repeatedly told the emperor that most of the musicians at the Xuanwu were beautiful women, and that border disputes could be seen there, and that he could run thousands of miles away in the blink of an eye, so why stay depressed in the Forbidden Palace and be controlled by courtiers.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：皇上表示认同。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：十二年八月，急装微服出幸昌平，至居庸关，为御史张钦所遮，乃还。
现代文：十二年八月，皇上急忙穿上便服前往昌平，到居庸关，被御史陈钦阻拦，这才返回。
English: In August of the twelfth year, the emperor hurriedly put on civilian clothes and went to Changping. He went to Juyongguan and was stopped by the imperial historian Chen Qin and only then did he return.

古文：数日，复夜出。
现代文：过了几天，他又趁晚上出去。
English: A few days later, he went out again in the evening.

古文：先令太监谷大用代钦，止廷臣追谏者。
现代文：先令太监谷大用取代陈钦，阻止追来劝谏的廷臣。
English: The shilling eunuch Gu Da replaced Chen Qin and stopped the courtiers who came to persuade him.

古文：因度居庸，幸宣府。
现代文：皇上于是过了居庸关，来到宣府。
English: The emperor then passed through Juyong Pass and came to Xuanwu.

古文：彬为建镇国府第，悉辇豹房珍玩、女御实其中。
现代文：江彬为皇上建镇国府，将豹房的珍玩美女全部运来，充实其中。
English: Jiang Bin built the town of Guofu for the emperor, and brought all the rare and beautiful women from the Leopard Room to enrich it.

古文：彬从帝，数夜入人家，索妇女。
现代文：江彬随从皇上，多次晚上闯入百姓家，索要妇女。
English: Jiang Bin followed the emperor and repeatedly broke into people's homes at night to solicit women.

古文：帝大乐之，忘归，称曰家里。未几，幸阳和。
现代文：皇上乐而忘返将那里称作家里，不久，皇上到阳和。
English: The emperor was so happy that he forgot to go back and called the writer there. Soon, the emperor came to Yanghe.

古文：迤北五万骑入寇，诸将王勋等力战。
现代文：迤北有五万骑兵入寇，王勋等将领全力抗战。
English: Fifty thousand cavalrymen invaded northern Gansu, and Wang Xun and other generals fought back with all their might.

古文：至应州，寇引去。斩首十六级，官军死数百人，以捷闻京师。
现代文：到应州时，敌寇引兵退走，此战共斩首十六个，而官军也死了数百人，但却当作胜仗向京师奏捷。
English: When they arrived at Yingzhou, the enemy raiders led the troops to retreat. In this battle, a total of sixteen were beheaded, while the government army also killed hundreds of people, but it was hailed as a victory to the Beijing division.

古文：帝自称威武大将军朱寿，又自称镇国公，所驻跸称军门。
现代文：皇上自称为威武大将军朱寿，又自称镇国公，他所驻扎的地方称为军门。
English: The emperor called himself Zhu Shou, the great and mighty general, and also called himself Zhen Guogong, and the place where he was stationed was called the military gate.

古文：中外事无大小，白彬乃奏，或壅格至二三岁。
现代文：中外事情无论大小，都要先报告江彬然后才上奏皇上，有的甚至还滞留两三年。
English: No matter how big or small a matter is in China or abroad, it must first be reported to Jiang Bin before it is reported to the emperor. Some even stay for two or three years.

古文：廷臣前后切谏，悉置不省。
现代文：廷臣前后恳切劝谏，皇上都不理。
English: Courtier after courtier urged him earnestly, but the emperor ignored them.

古文：十三年正月还京，数念宣府。
现代文：十三年正月回京后，皇上还多次怀念宣府。
English: After returning to Kyoto in the first month of the thirteenth year, the emperor also visited the Imperial Palace several times.

古文：彬复导帝往，因幸大同。
现代文：江彬便又引导皇上前往，顺便到了大同。
English: Jiang Bin then led the emperor to Datong.

古文：闻太皇太后崩，乃还京发丧。
现代文：得知太皇太后逝世，才回京发丧。
English: It was only after learning of the death of the Grand Empress Dowager that they returned to Beijing to mourn.

古文：将葬，如昌平，祭告诸陵，遂幸黄花、密云。
现代文：将要下葬时，皇上到昌平祭告各个皇陵，遂后便临幸黄花、密云。
English: When he was about to be buried, the emperor went to Changping to pay homage to the various imperial tombs, after which he went to see Huanghua and Miyun.

古文：彬等掠良家女数十车，日载以随，有死者。
现代文：江彬等人抢掠几十车良家妇女，每天车载相随，有的竟死了。
English: Jiang Bin and others robbed dozens of well-to-do women, accompanying them by car every day, and some of them even died.

古文：永平知府毛思义忤彬，下狱谪官。典膳李恭疏请回銮，指斥彬罪。
现代文：永平知府毛思义忤逆江彬，被下狱贬官，典膳李恭上疏请求皇上回京，并指责江彬的罪行。
English: The Yongping prefect, Mao Siyi, rebelled against Jiang Bin and was sent to prison and demoted, and the ceremonial meal, Li Gong Shangsu, asked the emperor to return to Beijing and accused Jiang Bin of the crime.

古文：未及止，彬逮恭死诏狱。
现代文：还没来得及上呈，就被江彬逮捕，死于诏狱之中。
English: Before he could submit it, he was arrested by Jiang Bin and died in prison.

古文：帝驻大喜峰口，欲令朵颜三卫花当、把儿孙等纳质宴劳，御史刘士元陈四不可，不报。帝既还，下诏称总督军务威武大将军总兵官朱寿统率六军，而命彬为威武副将军。
现代文：皇上驻扎在大喜峰口，下诏自称总督军务威武大将军总兵官朱寿统率六军，而命江彬为威武副将军。
English: The emperor was stationed at the mouth of the Daxi Peak, and issued an edict proclaiming himself to be the governor of the military affairs, General Weiwu, and General Zhu Shou, who led the six armies, and appointed Jiang Bin as Vice-General Weiwu.

古文：录应州功，封彬平虏伯；子三人，锦衣卫指挥；泰，安边伯；琮、周，俱都督。
现代文：记应州功，封江彬为平虏伯，他的三个儿子为锦衣卫指挥；许泰为安边伯，李琮、神周为都督。
English: According to the state records, Feng Jiangbin was the governor of Pingru, his three sons were the commanders of Jin and Wei, Xu Tai was the governor of Anbian, and Li Xi and Shen Zhou were the governors of the capital.

古文：升赏内外官九千五百五十余人，赏赐亿万计。
现代文：还升赏内外官员九千五百五十余名，赏赐以亿万计。
English: He also rewarded more than 9,550 officials at home and abroad, awarding hundreds of millions of yuan.

古文：彬又导帝由大同渡黄河，次榆林，至绥德，幸总兵官戴钦第，纳其女。
现代文：江彬又引导皇上从大同渡过黄河，到榆林，再到绥德，驾临总兵官戴钦的家，娶他的女儿。
English: Jiang Bin also led the emperor from Datong to cross the Yellow River, to Yulin, and then to Shunde, to the home of the general officer Dai Qin, to marry his daughter.

古文：还，由西安历偏头关，抵太原，大徵女乐，纳晋府乐工杨腾妻刘氏以归。
现代文：回来时，由西安经偏头关，到太原，大量征召歌妓，将晋府乐工杨腾的妻子刘氏娶了回来。
English: When he came back, he went from Xi'an to Taiyuan through the first pass, and recruited a large number of prostitutes to marry Liu, the wife of Yang Teng, a musician from Jinfu.

古文：彬与诸近幸皆母事之，称曰刘娘娘。
现代文：江彬和其他皇上宠幸的人都把她当作母亲来侍奉，称她为刘娘娘。
English: Jiang Bin and other favorites of the emperor served her as a mother and called her Liu Niang Niang.

古文：初，延绥总兵官马昂罢免，有女弟善歌，能骑射，解外国语，嫁指挥毕春，有娠矣。
现代文：当初，延绥总兵官马昂被罢免，他有个妹妹善于唱歌，会骑射，还懂外国话，嫁给指挥毕春，已经怀孕了。
English: At the beginning, Yancheng general officer Ma'an was dismissed. He had a younger sister who was good at singing, could ride and shoot, knew foreign languages, was married to the commander Bi Chun, and was already pregnant.

古文：昂因彬夺归，进于帝，召入豹房，大宠。
现代文：马昂靠着江彬将她夺了回来，献给皇上，被召入豹房，大受宠爱。
English: With the help of Jiang Bin, Ma'an won her back and offered her to the emperor. She was called to the Leopard Room and was greatly loved.

古文：传升昂右都督，弟炅、昶并赐蟒衣，大珰皆呼为舅，赐第太平仓。
现代文：皇上传命升马昂为右都督，他的弟弟马炅、马日永并得赐蟒衣，阉官们都称他为舅舅。皇上还在太平仓赐给他府第。
English: The emperor promoted Maon to the post of right-hand governor, and his younger brothers, Ma Jun and Ma Rongyong, were also given imperial robes. The eunuchs all called him uncle. The emperor also gave him a mansion in Taiping.

古文：给事、御史谏，不应。
现代文：给事中、御史谏阻，皇上不理。
English: During the negotiations, the Emperor ignored Mishi's resistance.

古文：尝幸昂第，召其妾。
现代文：皇上曾临幸马昂的家，召他的妾。
English: The emperor once visited the house of Maon and summoned his concubine.

古文：昂不听，帝怒而起。
现代文：马昂不答应，皇上大怒而去。
English: Maon did not agree, and the emperor flew into a rage.

古文：昂复结太监张忠进其妾杜氏，遂传升炅都指挥，昶仪真守备。
现代文：马昂于是勾结太监张忠将他的妾杜氏进献给皇上，皇上便传命升马炅为都指挥，马日永为义真守备。
English: Maan then colluded with the eunuch Zhang Zhong to offer his concubine, Du Shi Jin, to the emperor, who then passed on the order to promote Ma Xuan to the command of the capital, and Ma Rongyong to guard Yizhen.

古文：昂喜过望，又进美女四人谢恩。
现代文：马昂大喜过望，又进献四名美女作为谢恩。
English: Maang was overjoyed and presented four beautiful women as thanks.

古文：及是，纳钦女，皆彬所导也。
现代文：到这时，皇上又娶戴钦的女儿，这都是江彬所引导。
English: At this time, the emperor also married the daughter of Dai Qin, all of which was led by Jiang Bin.

古文：十四年正月自太原还至宣府，命彬提督十二团营。
现代文：十四年正月皇上从太原回到宣府，命江彬提督十二团营。
English: In the first month of the 14th year, the emperor returned to Xuanfu from Taiyuan and ordered Admiral Jiang Bin to lead the 12th regiment.

古文：帝东西游幸，历数千里，乘马腰弓矢，涉险阻，冒风雪，从者多道病，帝无倦容。
现代文：皇上东西游幸，走了数千里地，跨战马，腰弓矢，涉险阻，冒风雪，随从的人大多病于途中，而他却毫无倦容。
English: The emperor traveled happily from east to west, walked thousands of miles, straddled war horses, bowed and arrowed, bumped into dangers, and braved wind and snow. Most of his followers were sick on the way, but he was never tired.

古文：及还京，复欲南幸。
现代文：到回京后，他又想南幸。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he wanted to visit Nanko again.

古文：刑部主事汪金疏陈九不可，且极言酣酒当戒，帝不省。
现代文：刑部主事汪金上疏陈述有九个理由不宜南幸，并且极力劝皇上不要酗酒，皇上不理。
English: The head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Wang Jin Shangsuo, stated that there were nine reasons why Nan Xing was not suitable, and strongly advised the emperor not to drink alcohol, but the emperor ignored him.

古文：廷臣百余人伏阙谏，彬故激帝怒，悉下狱，多杖死者。
现代文：廷臣一百余人拜伏在宫门劝谏，江彬故意激怒皇上，将他们全部投进监狱，许多人被杖死。
English: More than a hundred courtiers prostrated themselves at the palace gate to persuade him. Jiang Bin deliberately angered the emperor and threw them all into prison. Many of them were beaten to death.

古文：彬亦意沮，议得寝。
现代文：而江彬也心意沮丧，此议方得停息。
English: But Jiang Bin was also frustrated, and the motion had to be suspended.

古文：会宁王宸濠反，彬复赞帝亲征，下令谏者处极刑。命彬提督赞画机密军务，并督东厂锦衣官校办事。
现代文：正好宁王朱宸濠反叛，江彬又赞同皇上亲征。皇上下令对谏阻者处以极刑，命江彬提督赞画机密军务，并督领东厂和锦衣卫官校办事。
English: It just so happened that King Zhu Xi of Ning rebelled, and Jiang Bin agreed with the Emperor's personal enlistment. The Emperor's order was to impose capital punishment on those who obstructed, and ordered Admiral Jiang Bin to praise the confidential military affairs, and to supervise the East Factory and the Jin Yi Guards Officer School.

古文：是时，张锐治东厂，钱宁治锦衣，彬兼两人之任，权势莫与比，遂扈帝以行。
现代文：那时，张锐治理东厂，钱宁治理锦衣卫，江彬现在兼两人之任，权势无人可比，便扈从皇上出征。
English: At that time, Zhang Rui was in charge of the East Factory, Channing was in charge of Jin Yi Wei, and Jiang Bin was now in charge of both of them. Their power was incomparable, and they were dispatched from the emperor.

古文：寻止宁，令董皇店役，不得从。
现代文：不久阻止钱宁，令他管理皇店仆役，不得随从皇上。
English: He soon stopped Channing and ordered him to manage the servants of the imperial household and not to follow the emperor.

古文：八月发京师。
现代文：八月从京师出发。
English: In August, he set off from Kyoto.

古文：彬在途，矫旨辄缚长吏，通判胡琮惧，自缢死。
现代文：江彬在途中时，常假传圣旨捆绑长官吏卒。通判胡琮害怕，自缢而死。
English: When Jiang Bin was on his way, he often falsely preached the holy will and tied up the officials. The judge Hu Yao was afraid and hanged himself to death.

古文：十二月至扬州，即民居为都督府，遍刷处女、寡妇，导帝渔猎。
现代文：十二月到达扬州，就着民居设都督府，江彬普遍搜刮处女、寡女，引导皇上渔猎女色。
English: Arriving in Yangzhou in December, he set up the governor's office in a private residence. Jiang Bin generally searched for virgins and widows, guiding the emperor to hunt and fish for women.

古文：以刘姬谏，稍止。
现代文：因刘姬劝谏，才稍稍收敛。
English: It was only because of Liu Ji's persuasion that the situation calmed down a little.

古文：至南京，又欲导帝幸苏州，下浙江，抵湖、湘。
现代文：到了南京，又想引导皇上行幸苏州，下浙江，到湖、湘。
English: When he arrived in Nanjing, he also wanted to guide the emperor to Suzhou, Lower Zhejiang, Hubei and Hunan.

古文：诸臣极谏，会其党亦劝沮，乃止。
现代文：大臣们极力谏阻，恰巧他的党羽也谏阻，这才罢了。
English: The ministers tried their best to oppose it, and it just so happened that his party also opposed it, but that was all.

古文：当是时，彬率边兵数万，跋扈甚。
现代文：当时，江彬率领边防兵数万人，非常跋扈。
English: At that time, Jiang Bin led tens of thousands of border guards and was very powerful.

古文：成国公朱辅为长跪，魏国公徐鹏举及公卿大臣皆侧足事之。
现代文：成国公朱辅对他长跪，魏国公徐鹏举及公卿大臣都侧足奉事他。
English: Zhu Yu, the prince of Chengguo, knelt at his feet, while the prince of Wei, Xu Penghu, and the ministers of the nobility served him.

古文：惟参赞尚书乔宇、应天府丞寇天叙挺身与抗，彬气稍折。
现代文：只有参赞尚书乔宇、应天府丞寇天叙挺身对抗，江彬的锐气稍受挫折。
English: Only Counsellors Shang Shujiao Yu and Ying Tianfu Zhe and Guo Tianxiu stood up to fight, and Jiang Bin's spirit suffered a slight setback.

古文：十五年六月幸牛首山。
现代文：十五年六月皇上临幸牛首山。
English: In June of the fifteenth year, the emperor went to the top of Mt.

古文：诸军夜惊，言彬欲为逆，久之乃定。
现代文：各军夜间受惊，说江彬想谋逆，许久才安定下来。
English: All the armies were frightened at night, saying that Jiang Bin wanted to plot a rebellion, and it took a long time to settle down.

古文：时宸濠已就擒，系江上舟中，民间数讹传将为变。
现代文：当时朱宸濠已被擒获，关在江上船中，民间多次谣传将有变乱。
English: At that time, Zhu Xi had been captured and locked up in a boat on the river, and there were many rumors among the people that there would be turmoil.

古文：帝心疑，欲归。
现代文：皇上起了疑心，想回去。
English: The emperor became suspicious and wanted to go back.

古文：闰八月发南京。
现代文：闰八月从南京出发。
English: We set off from Nanjing in August.

古文：至清江浦，渔积水池，帝舟覆被溺，遂得疾。
现代文：到清江浦时，渔夫在水池上牵麻绳，皇上因坐船倾覆而落水，并因此生了病。
English: When they arrived at Qingjiangpu, a fisherman was pulling a rope across a pool. The emperor fell into the water when his boat capsized, and he became ill as a result.

古文：十月，帝至通州。
现代文：十月，到通州。
English: In October, to Tongzhou.

古文：彬尚欲劝帝幸宣府，矫旨召勋戚大臣议宸濠狱。
现代文：江彬还想劝皇上到宣府，假传圣旨召勋戚大臣来讨论朱宸濠一案。
English: Jiang Bin also wanted to persuade the emperor to go to Xuanfu and summon the Minister of the Order to discuss Zhu Xi's case.

古文：又上言： 赖镇国公朱寿指授方略，擒宸濠逆党申宗远等十五人，乞明正其罪。 
现代文：他又上书说 ：赖镇国公朱寿出谋划策，擒获朱宸濠的逆党申宗远等十五人，请求申正他们的罪名。 
English: He also wrote: Lai Zhen Guogong Zhu Shou led a plot to capture 15 people, including Zhu Xi's rival Shen Zongyuan, and requested that their crimes be rectified.

古文：乃下诏褒赐镇国公，岁加彬禄米百石，荫一子锦衣千户。
现代文：皇上于是下诏褒奖镇国公，每年给江彬增加禄米一百石，庇荫一个儿子为锦衣卫千户。
English: The emperor then issued an imperial edict praising Zhen Guogong, giving Jiang Bin an annual increase of one hundred koku of rice, and protecting one son from the thousand households of Jin Yi Wei.

古文：会帝体惫甚，左右力请乃还京。
现代文：正好皇帝身体非常疲惫，在左右的极力请求之下回京。
English: It was just that the emperor was very tired and returned to Beijing at the strong request of the left and right.

古文：彬犹矫旨改团练营为威武团练营，自提督军马，令泰、周、琮等提督教场操练。
现代文：江彬还假传圣旨将团练营改为威武团练营，由自己提督军马，命令许泰、神周、李琮等人提督教场操练。
English: Jiang Bin also falsely transmitted the holy will to change the regimental training camp to the mighty martial arts regimental training camp, and ordered Xu Tai, Shen Zhou, Li Wei and other admirals to train at the admiral's training ground.

古文：及帝崩，大学士杨廷和用遗命，分遣边兵，罢威武团练营。
现代文：到皇上逝世时，大学士杨廷和利用遗命，将边防兵遣返，罢威武团练营。
English: At the time of the emperor's death, Yang Tinghe, a university scholar, used his last days to repatriate the border guards and set up a military training camp.

古文：彬内疑，称疾不出，阴布腹心，衷甲观变，令泰诣内阁探意。
现代文：江彬内心犯疑，称病不出，暗中布置心腹，内穿甲衣静观变动，命令许泰到内阁试探意向。
English: Jiang Bin had doubts in his heart, said that he would not get sick, secretly arranged his inner circle, wore a coat inside and watched the changes, and ordered Xu Tai to go to the cabinet to test his intentions.

古文：廷和以温语慰之，彬稍安，乃出成服。
现代文：杨廷和温语安慰他，江彬稍稍心安，便穿上丧服出门。
English: Yang Ting and Wen Yu comforted him. Jiang Bin felt a little relieved and put on his mourning clothes to go out.

古文：廷和密与司礼中官魏彬计，因中官温祥入白太后，请除彬。
现代文：杨廷和秘密与司礼监宦官魏彬计议，通过宦官温祥进宫禀告太后，请求除掉江彬。
English: Yang Ting secretly discussed the matter with Wei Bin, eunuch and ceremonial supervisor, and through eunuch Wen Xiang went into the palace to inform the empress dowager, requesting that Jiang Bin be removed.

古文：会坤宁宫安兽吻，即命彬与工部尚书李鐩入祭。彬礼服入，家人不得从。
现代文：正好坤宁宫要安装兽吻，便命江彬和工部尚书李钅遂入宫祭祀，江彬穿着礼服而入，家人不得跟从。
English: Just as Kunning Palace was about to install the animal kiss, Jiang Bin and Shangshu Li of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce were ordered to enter the palace for the sacrifice. Jiang Bin entered wearing a ceremonial dress, and his family members were not allowed to follow.

古文：事竟将出，中官张永留彬、鐩饭，太后遽下诏收彬。
现代文：事完后将要出宫，宦官张永留江彬和李钅遂吃饭，太后马上下诏收捕江彬。
English: After the event was over, the eunuchs Zhang Yongliu Jiangbin and Li Shuxu were about to leave the palace. They had dinner, and the empress dowager immediately issued an edict to arrest Jiangbin.

古文：彬觉，亟走西安门，门闭。
现代文：江彬发觉后，急忙跑到西安门，门不开。
English: After Jiang Bin found out, he hurried to Xi'an Gate, but the door would not open.

古文：寻走北安门，门者曰： 有旨留提督。 
现代文：随即跑到北安门，守门人说： 有圣旨留下提督。 
English: He then ran to the Bei'an Gate, where the gatekeeper said, "It is the emperor's will to leave an admiral behind."

古文：彬曰： 今日安所得旨？ 
现代文：江彬说： 今天哪来的圣旨？ 
English: Jiang Bin said, "Where did today's sacred decree come from?"

古文：排门者。
现代文：要推开守门人。
English: You have to push the doorman.

古文：门者执之，拔其须且尽。
现代文：守门人抓住他，把他的胡须都拔光了。
English: The doorman grabbed him and pulled out all his whiskers.

古文：收者至，缚之。
现代文：收捕的人来到后，将他捆了起来。
English: When the arresting officers arrived, they tied him up.

古文：有顷，周、琮并缚至，骂彬曰： 奴早听我，岂为人擒！ 
现代文：过了一会儿，神周、李琮也被绑来了，他们骂江彬道： 你要是早听我的，岂能被人家所擒！ 
English: After a while, Shen Zhou and Li Qian were also tied up. They scolded Jiang Bin: "If you had listened to me earlier, you wouldn't have been beaten up by others!"

古文：世宗即位，磔彬于市，周、琮与彬子勋、杰、鳌、熙俱斩，绘处决图，榜示天下，幼子然及妻、女俱发功臣家为奴。
现代文：世宗即位后，将他绑赴市场肢解，神周、李琮和江彬的儿子勋、杰、鏊、熙都被斩首，并画下处决图，张榜昭示天下。他的幼子然以及妻子女儿，都被发给功臣家为奴。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he was bound and taken to the market to be dismembered. Shen Zhou, Li Lan, and Jiang Bin's sons, Xun, Jie, Yao, and Xi, were all beheaded, and the execution plans were drawn up and displayed to the world. His young son Ran, as well as his wife and daughter, were all sent to a meritorious family as slaves.

古文：夤缘贵近，减死徙边 马昂亦罢，炅等戍边。钱宁，不知所出，或云镇安人。
现代文：当时京师久旱，这时下起了大雨。抄江彬的家，得黄金七十柜、白金二千二百柜，其他珍宝不可胜计。钱宁，不知所出，有人说他是镇安人。
English: At that time, there was a long drought in Beijing, and at that time it rained heavily. He went to the home of Jiang Bin, and obtained seventy chests of gold, and two thousand two hundred chests of platinum, and countless other precious treasures. Channing, I don't know where he came from, but some people say that he was from Zhen'an.

古文：幼鬻太监钱能家为奴，能嬖之，冒钱姓。
现代文：他从小就被卖到太监钱能家为奴，钱能很爱他，他便冒了钱姓。
English: He was sold as a child to the eunuch Qian Neng as a slave. Qian Neng loved him very much, so he assumed Qian Neng's surname.

古文：能死，推恩家人，得为锦衣百户。
现代文：钱能死后，皇上推恩给他的家人，钱宁得任为锦衣卫百户。
English: After Qian Neng's death, the emperor extended his grace to his family, and Qian Neng was appointed as the best-dressed of a hundred households.

古文：正德初，曲事刘瑾，得幸于帝。
现代文：正德初年，钱宁依从于刘瑾，得以见爱于皇上。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, Qian Ning obeyed Liu Bei and was able to fall in love with the emperor.

古文：性猬狡，善射，拓左右弓。
现代文：他个性狡猾，善于射箭，能左右开弓。
English: He has a cunning personality, is good at archery, and can open the bow left and right.

古文：帝喜，赐国姓，为义子，传升锦衣千户。
现代文：皇上很高兴，赐给他国姓收为义子，传令升他为锦衣卫千户。
English: The emperor was very pleased, and gave him the surname of his country as his son-in-law, and ordered him to be promoted to the highest rank.

古文：瑾败，以计免，历指挥使，掌南镇抚司。
现代文：刘瑾败后，他使用计谋得以免罪，历升为指挥使，掌南镇抚司。
English: After Liu Xuan's defeat, he used trickery to be exonerated, and was promoted to the post of commanding officer, in charge of the Southern Town Fusiliers.

古文：累迁左都督，掌锦衣卫事，典诏狱，言无不听，其名刺自称皇庶子。
现代文：他又累升为左都督，执掌锦衣卫事务，主管诏狱，皇上对他言无不听，他的名片还自称是皇庶子。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the post of Left Governor, in charge of brocade, clothing and hygiene affairs, and in charge of the imperial prison. The emperor listened to him, and his business card claimed that he was the emperor's illegitimate son.

古文：引乐工臧贤、回回人于永及诸番僧，以秘戏进。
现代文：他引荐乐工臧贤、回回人于永以及各个番僧，以秘戏获得进用。
English: He introduced the musicians Juxian, Huaihuangren and Yu Yong, as well as various monks, to the secret play.

古文：请于禁内建豹房、新寺，恣声伎为乐，复诱帝微行。
现代文：他请在禁宫内设豹房和新的寺庙，恣意为声妓之乐，还引诱皇上微服出行。
English: He asked to set up a leopard room and a new temple in the Forbidden City, arbitrarily for the music of the courtesan, and also lured the emperors to travel.

古文：帝在豹房，常醉枕宁卧。
现代文：皇上在豹房时，常醉枕着钱宁睡觉。
English: When the emperor was in the Leopard Room, he would often sleep with a drunk Channing on his pillow.

古文：百官候朝，至晡莫得帝起居，密伺宁，宁来，则知驾将出矣。
现代文：百官等着上朝，到下午四五点还不见皇上起来，暗中刺探钱宁，钱宁一来，则知道皇上圣驾将要出来了。
English: Hundreds of officials waited for the Emperor to arrive, and by four or five o'clock in the afternoon they had not yet seen the Emperor get up, secretly spying on Channing. When Channing arrived, he knew that the Emperor was about to come out.

古文：太监张锐领东厂缉事，横甚，而宁典诏狱，势最炽，中外称曰 厂、卫 。
现代文：太监张锐统领东厂侦缉事务，非常残暴，而钱宁主管诏狱，势力最盛，中外人士称之为 厂、卫 。
English: Zhang Rui, the eunuch, was in charge of the investigation of the East Factory, which was very brutal, while Channing was in charge of the Imperial Prison, which was the most powerful. Chinese and foreigners call it the Factory and the Guard.

古文：司务林华、评事沈光大皆以杖系校尉，为宁所奏，逮下锦衣狱，黜光大，贬华一级。
现代文：司务林华、评事沈光大都因杖打拘捕校尉，被钱宁论奏，逮入锦衣卫监狱，沈光大被黜退，林华被降一级。
English: The secretary Lin Hua and the commentator Shen Guang were mostly arrested for beating the school captain with a cane. They were discussed by Channing and arrested into the Jinwei Prison. Shen Guang was forced to retire, and Lin Hua was downgraded to the first grade.

古文：锦衣千户王注与宁暱，挞人至死，员外郎刘秉鉴持其狱急。
现代文：锦衣卫千户王注和钱宁亲昵，他打人致死，员外郎刘秉鉴将此案抓得很急。
English: Jinling Wei Qianhuang Note and Channing intimacy, he beat a man to death, the officer's brother Liu Bingjian caught the case very quickly.

古文：宁匿注于家，而属东厂发刑部他事。
现代文：钱宁将王注藏在家中，而嘱咐东厂揭发刑部别的事情。
English: Channing hid Wang Zhushi at home, and ordered the East Factory to expose the criminal department's other affairs.

古文：尚书张子麟亟造谢宁，立释注，乃已。
现代文：刑部尚书张子麟急忙登门向钱宁谢罪，立即放过王注，这才罢了。
English: The head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Zhang Zilin, hurried to the door to thank Qian Ning for the crime and immediately released Wang Zhu. That was all.

古文：厂卫校卒至部院白事，称尚书子麟辈曰老尊长。
现代文：厂卫校卒到各部院汇报事情，称尚书张子麟之辈为老尊长。
English: The guards of the factory school went to the various ministries and academies to report the situation, saying that the generation of Shangshu Zhang Zilin was the old patriarch.

古文：太仆少卿赵经初以工部郎督乾清宫工，乾没帑金数十万。
现代文：太仆寺少卿赵经当初以工部郎中身份监督乾清宫工程，吞没库金数十万。
English: Zhao Jing, the junior secretary of the Taipu Temple, initially supervised the Qianqing Palace project as a junior member of the Ministry of Works, swallowing up hundreds of thousands of treasury funds.

古文：经死，宁佯遣校尉治丧，迫经妻子扶榇出，姬妾、帑藏悉据有之。
现代文：赵经死后，钱宁假装派遣校尉去治丧，逼迫赵经的妻子扶梓出殡，他的其他姬妾、家藏财物全被钱宁占有。
English: After Zhao Jing's death, Channing pretended to send a captain to the funeral and forced Zhao Jing's wife, Fuzi, to attend the funeral. His other concubines and family belongings were all taken by Channing.

古文：中官廖常镇河南，其弟锦衣指挥鹏肆恶，为巡抚邓庠所劾，诏降级安置。
现代文：宦官廖堂镇守河南，他的弟弟锦衣卫指挥廖鹏肆意作恶，被巡抚邓庠弹劾，诏令将他降级安置。
English: The eunuch Liao Tong, the commander of Henan Province, and his younger brother, the commander of Jin Yi Wei, Liao Peng, committed wanton evil and were impeached by the governor Deng Xiao, who ordered his demotion and resettlement.

古文：鹏惧，使其嬖妾私事宁，得留任。
现代文：廖鹏害怕了，派他的爱妾暗中侍候钱宁，才得以留任。
English: Frightened, Liao Peng sent his beloved concubine to secretly wait for Channing so that he could remain in office.

古文：宁子永安，六岁为都督。
现代文：钱宁的儿子永安，六岁时就被任为都督。
English: Channing's son, Yong An, was appointed governor of the capital at the age of six.

古文：养子钱杰、钱靖等，俱冒国姓，授锦衣卫官。
现代文：他的养子钱杰、钱靖等人，都冒国姓，被授予锦衣卫官员。
English: His adopted sons, Qian Jie, Qian Jing and others, all assumed the surname of the country and were awarded the title of Jin Rongwei officials.

古文：念富贵已极，帝无子，思结强藩自全。
现代文：他心念自己富贵已极，而皇上无子，便想勾结强大的藩王以求自全。
English: He thought that he was extremely rich, and the emperor had no son, so he wanted to collude with powerful lords to seek self-perfection.

古文：为宁王宸濠营复护卫，又遣人往宸濠所，有异谋。
现代文：他为宁王朱宸濠设法恢复护卫，又派人前往朱宸濠住所，有异谋。
English: He tried to restore the escort for Zhu Xi, the king of Ning, and sent someone to Zhu Xi's residence.

古文：又令宸濠数进金银玩好于帝。
现代文：他还叫朱宸濠多次进献金银玩好之物给皇上。
English: He also asked Zhu Xi to donate gold and silver toys to the emperor several times.

古文：谋召其世子司香太庙，为入嗣地。
现代文：他图谋召宁王的世子入太庙司香，为入继皇位做准备。
English: He plotted to call King Ning's heir into the imperial temple to prepare for his succession to the throne.

古文：又以玉带、彩纻附其典宝万锐归，诈称上赐。
现代文：他又将玉带、彩交给朱宸濠的典宝万锐带回去，诈称是皇上赐给。
English: He also took back the jade belt and the amulet that he had given to Zhu Xi, falsely claiming that they had been given to him by the emperor.

古文：凡宸濠所遣私人行贿京师，皆主伶人臧贤家，由宁以达帝左右。
现代文：凡是朱宸濠派到京师行贿的私人，都住到伶人臧贤家，通过钱宁通达于皇上左右。
English: All the private individuals sent by Zhu Xi to Beijing to pay bribes lived in the homes of the Xiongren and Xianxian families, and through Channing they were able to get close to the emperor.

古文：宸濠反，帝心疑宁。
现代文：朱宸濠造反，皇上怀疑钱宁。
English: Zhu Xi rebelled, and the emperor suspected Channing.

古文：宁惧，白帝收宸濠所遣卢孔章，而归罪贤，谪戍边，使校尉杀之途以灭口，又致孔章瘐死，冀得自全。
现代文：钱宁害怕了，便报告皇上收捕了朱宸濠所派的卢孔章，而归罪于臧贤，将臧贤贬官并遣去戍边，随后他又派校尉在途中将其杀死以灭口，还将孔章弄死于监狱之中，企图保全自己。
English: Channing was afraid, so he reported that the emperor arrested Lu Kongzhang, who was sent by Zhu Rong, and blamed it on Yu Xian. He demoted Yu Xian and sent him to Fuzhou. Then he sent a lieutenant to kill him on the way to silence him. He also killed Kongzhang in prison in an attempt to protect himself.

古文：然卒中江彬计，使董皇店役。
现代文：但他最后还是中了江彬之计，被派去总理皇店工役。
English: However, he eventually fell for Jiang Bin's scheme and was sent to work as a clerk at the Prime Minister's official residence.

古文：彬在道，尽白其通逆状。
现代文：江彬在路上全部将他通逆的情况报告了皇上。
English: On the way, Jiang Bin reported to the emperor all the circumstances of his defection.

古文：帝曰： 黠奴，我固疑之。 
现代文：皇上说： 这狡猾的奴才，我早就怀疑他。 
English: The emperor said, "This cunning servant, I have long suspected him.

古文：乃羁之临清，驰收其妻子家属。
现代文：于是将他拘禁在临清，驰入京师收系他的妻儿家属。
English: As a result, he was detained in Linqing and taken to Beijing to be reunited with his wife and children.

古文：帝还京，裸缚宁，籍其家，得玉带二千五百束、黄金十余万两、白金三千箱、胡椒数千石。
现代文：皇上回京时，将钱宁裸身绑住，抄了他的家，获得玉带二千五百束、黄金十余万两、白金三千箱、胡椒数千石。
English: When the emperor returned to Beijing, he tied Channing up naked, ransacked his house, and obtained 2,500 bundles of jade, more than 102,000 ounces of gold, 3,000 cases of platinum, and thousands of kilos of pepper.

古文：世宗即位，磔宁于市。
现代文：世宗即位后，将他押到市场分尸。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he was dragged to the market and his body was dismembered.

古文：养子杰等十一人皆斩，子永安幼，免死，妻妾发功臣家为奴。
现代文：他的养子钱杰等十一人都被斩首，儿子钱永安因年幼，得免死，妻妾被发给功臣家为奴。
English: His adopted son Qian Jie and eleven others were beheaded, his son Qian Yong An was spared death because he was young, and his wife and concubine were sent to a meritorious family as slaves.

古文：陆炳，其先平湖人。
现代文：陆炳，祖先是平湖人。
English: Lu Yao, ancestor of the Pinghu people.

古文：祖墀，以军籍隶锦衣卫为总旗。
现代文：他的祖父陆墀，以军籍隶属于锦衣卫，任总旗。
English: His grandfather, Lu Wei, was a member of the Jinling Garrison and served as the commander-in-chief.

古文：父松，袭职，从兴献王之国安陆，选为仪卫司典仗。
现代文：父亲陆松，承袭父职，跟从兴献王到他的封国安陆，被选为仪卫司典仗。
English: His father, Lu Song, who inherited his father's position and followed Xing Xian Wang to his fiefdom of Anlu, was chosen to be the ceremonial guard.

古文：世宗入承大统，松以从龙恩，迁锦衣副千户。
现代文：世宗入承皇位大统后，陆松以随从龙恩，被升为锦衣卫副千户。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Lu Song was promoted to vice-chief of the thousand households of Jin, Yi and Wei as a follower of Long En.

古文：累官后府都督佥事，协理锦衣事。
现代文：后来累升到后府都督佥事，协理锦衣卫事务。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of the governor of Houfu, and became the assistant manager of Jin clothing and hygiene affairs.

古文：世宗始生，松妻为乳媪，炳幼从母入宫中。
现代文：世宗刚出生时，陆松的妻子做乳娘，所以陆炳从小就随母亲进入宫中。
English: When Sejong was just born, Lu Song's wife was a wet nurse, so Lu Hao followed his mother into the palace from a young age.

古文：稍长，日侍左右。
现代文：稍稍长大后，便每天侍奉在世宗左右。
English: After he grew up a little, he began to serve around Sejong every day.

古文：炳武健沉鸷，长身火色，行步类鹤。
现代文：陆炳健壮勇猛，身材高大，肤色火红，走路像鹤。
English: Lu Wei is robust and brave, tall, with a fiery red complexion and walks like a crane.

古文：举嘉靖八年武会试，授锦衣副千户。
现代文：他考中嘉靖八年武会试，被授予锦衣卫副千户。
English: He passed the 8th year of the Jiajing Middle School Examination, and was awarded the rank of Vice-Commander of the Jinling Garrison.

古文：松卒，袭指挥佥事。寻进署指挥使，掌南镇抚事。
现代文：陆松死后，他承袭为指挥佥事，不久进升代理指挥使，执掌南镇抚司事务。
English: After the death of Lu Song, he succeeded as the commanding officer, and was soon promoted to the acting commanding officer, in charge of the affairs of the Southern Town Fusiliers.

古文：十八年从帝南幸，次卫辉。夜四更，行宫火，从官仓猝不知帝所在。
现代文：十八年他随从皇上南幸，到达卫辉时，夜四更行宫起火，随从官员仓猝之间不知皇上所在。
English: In the 18th year, he followed Emperor Nankin, and when he arrived at Weihui, the palace caught fire on the 4th day of the 4th month at night, and the officials did not know where the emperor was.

古文：炳排闼负帝出，帝自是爱幸炳。
现代文：陆炳撞开门户，背出皇上，皇上从此爱幸陆炳。
English: Lu Xun pushed open the portal and revealed the emperor. The emperor loved Lu Xun from then on.

古文：屡擢都指挥同知，掌锦衣事。
现代文：陆炳屡升为都指挥同知，执掌锦衣卫事务。
English: Lu Wei has repeatedly been promoted to the top of the city command, and is in charge of brocade clothing and health affairs.

古文：帝初嗣位，掌锦衣者朱宸，未久罢。
现代文：皇上初即位时，掌锦衣卫的是朱宸，不久他被罢免。
English: When the emperor ascended the throne at the beginning of his reign, it was Zhu Xi who was in charge of the wardrobe, but he was soon dismissed.

古文：代者骆安，继而王佐、陈寅，皆以兴邸旧人掌锦衣卫。
现代文：取代他的是骆安，继而是王佐、陈寅，他们都因是兴王府旧人得掌锦衣卫。
English: He was replaced by Luo An, followed by Wang Zuo and Chen Yin, all of whom were awarded the title of clothing guard because they were former members of the Xingwangfu.

古文：佐尝保持张鹤龄兄弟狱，有贤声。
现代文：王佐曾止住张鹤龄兄弟一案，有贤明的名声。
English: Wang Zuo once stopped the Zhang Hailing brothers' case, and has a reputation for wisdom.

古文：寅亦谨厚不为恶。
现代文：陈寅也谨厚不为恶。
English: Chen Yin is also cautious.

古文：及炳代寅，权势远出诸人上。
现代文：到陆炳取代陈寅后，权势远出诸人之上。
English: After Lu Wei replaced Chen Yin, his power far exceeded that of other people.

古文：未几，擢署都督佥事。
现代文：不久，他被升为代理都督佥事。
English: Soon, he was promoted to acting governor of Anji.

古文：又以缉捕功，擢都督同知。
现代文：又以缉捕之功，升为都督同知。
English: He was also promoted to the same rank as the governor for his efforts in arresting and apprehending criminals.

古文：炳骤贵，同列多父行，炳阳敬事之，徐以计去其易己者。
现代文：陆炳骤然显贵，他的同僚多是父辈，陆炳表面上很尊敬他们，却逐步用计除去那些轻视他的人。
English: Lu Yao is suddenly distinguished, his colleagues are mostly fathers, Lu Yao respects them on the surface, but gradually removes those who despise him.

古文：又能得阁臣夏言、严嵩欢，以故日益重。
现代文：他又能得阁臣夏言、严嵩的欢心，所以日益得以重用。
English: He was also able to win the favor of the courtier Xia Yan, who was very strict, so he was increasingly used.

古文：尝捶杀兵马指挥，为御史所纠，诏不问。
现代文：他曾棒杀兵马指挥，被御史弹劾，皇上下诏不问。
English: He was once the commander of the stick-and-shooters, was impeached by the Emperor, and the Emperor did not question the edict.

古文：言故暱炳，一日，御史劾炳诸不法事，言即拟旨逮治。
现代文：夏言本与陆炳亲近，一天，御史弹劾陆炳各种不法之事，夏言即起草圣旨要将陆炳逮捕治罪。
English: Nia Yan was close to Lu Yao. One day, the Emperor impeached Lu Yao for various illegal things, and Nia Yan drafted a sacred edict to arrest and punish Lu Yao.

古文：炳窘，行三千金求解不得，长跪泣谢罪，乃已。
现代文：陆炳势窘，便以三千两黄金行贿夏言以求解脱，不得，便长跪哭泣谢罪，夏言这才罢了。
English: When Lu Xuan was in a difficult situation, he offered Xia Yan a bribe of three thousand two gold coins in order to free himself. When he was unable to do so, he kneeled down and wept for his sins. Xia Yan was all he had.

古文：炳自是嫉言次骨。
现代文：陆炳从此对夏言恨之入骨。
English: From then on, Lu Yao harbored a deep hatred for Xia Yan.

古文：及嵩与言构，炳助嵩，发言与边将关节书，言罪死。
现代文：到严嵩与夏言争权时，陆炳便帮助严嵩，揭发夏言与边防将领通关节的事，夏言被判死罪。
English: When Yan Song and Xia Yan were fighting for power, Lu Wei helped Yan Song by exposing the affair between Xia Yan and the border guard general. Xia Yan was sentenced to death.

古文：嵩德炳，恣其所为，引与筹画，通赇赂。
现代文：严嵩感激陆炳，便任由陆炳妄为，还引他来一起筹划，通贿赂。
English: Yan Song was grateful to Lu Yao, so he allowed Lu Yao to act like a madman, and also brought him to plan and bribe together.

古文：后仇鸾得宠，陵嵩出其上，独惮炳。
现代文：后来仇鸾得宠，凌驾于严嵩之上，但独怕陆炳。
English: Later, he was favored by his enemies and was superior to Yan Song. However, he was afraid of Lu Yao.

古文：炳曲奉之，不敢与钧礼，而私出金钱结其所亲爱，得鸾阴私。
现代文：陆炳曲意奉承他，不敢与他抗礼，而后私出金钱交结仇鸾所亲爱的人，得知了仇鸾的阴私。
English: Lu Xunqu flattered him and did not dare to oppose him, and then he secretly paid money to make friends with the person he loved, and learned of the sinister intentions of the enemy.

古文：及鸾病亟，炳尽发其不轨状。
现代文：到仇鸾病重时，陆炳全部揭发了他不轨的情状。
English: When his enemy was gravely ill, Lu Yao exposed all of his wrongdoings.

古文：帝大惊，立收鸾敕印，鸾忧惧死，至剖棺戮尸。
现代文：皇上大惊，立即收回给仇鸾的敕印，仇鸾忧惧而死，但还是被剖棺戮尸。
English: The emperor was so shocked that he immediately withdrew the imperial seal that had been given to his enemy. The enemy died of fright, but his coffin was still opened and his body dissected.

古文：炳先进左都督，录擒哈舟儿功，加太子太保。
现代文：陆炳先已进升为左都督，后来给他记擒获哈舟儿立功，被进封为太子太保。
English: Lu Xun had been promoted to the left governor, and later he was awarded the title of crown prince.

古文：以发鸾密谋，加少保兼太子太傅，岁给伯禄。
现代文：以揭发仇鸾的密谋，被加封为少保兼太子太傅，每年给予伯爵的俸禄。
English: For exposing the enemy's plot, he was given the additional titles of Junior Protector and Crown Prince, and was given an earl's salary every year.

古文：三十三年命入直西苑，与严嵩、朱希忠等侍修玄。
现代文：三十三年他受命入西苑当值，与严嵩、朱希忠等人侍奉皇上修炼玄功。
English: In 333, he was ordered to be on duty in the West Court, serving the emperor and cultivating the occult with Yan Song, Zhu Xizhong and others.

古文：三十五年三月赐进士恩荣宴。
现代文：三十五年三月赐给进士恩荣宴。
English: In March of the thirty-fifth year, a banquet was given to the new recruits.

古文：故事，锦衣列于西。帝以炳故，特命上坐，班二品之末。
现代文：按惯例，锦衣卫列席在西边，皇上因陆炳之故，特命锦衣卫上坐，排在二品官之末。
English: According to the usual practice, Kamui Wei was seated on the west side, but the Emperor specially ordered Kamui Wei to sit on the top because of Lu Yao, and he was at the end of the second grade officials.

古文：明年疏劾司礼中官李彬侵盗工所物料，营坟墓，僣拟山陵，与其党杜泰三人论斩，籍其赀，银四十余万，金珠珍宝无算。
现代文：第二年陆炳上疏弹劾司礼监宦官李彬侵盗施工场材料，营造坟墓，其规格僭拟于皇陵，结果李彬和他的党羽杜泰等三人被判斩刑，财产被抄没，得白银四十余万两，金珠珍宝无数。
English: In the second year, Li Bin, the eunuch of the Impeachment Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, stole materials from the construction site and built a tomb, the specifications of which were copied from the imperial mausoleum. As a result, Li Bin and his henchman Du Tai and three others were sentenced to beheading, their property was confiscated, and they received more than 400,000 taels of silver and countless gold and precious stones.

古文：寻加炳太保兼少傅，掌锦衣如故。
现代文：不久加封陆炳为太保兼少傅，仍掌锦衣卫。
English: He was soon given the additional titles of Taiho and Shoshofu (Junior Master of the Palace Guards) and remained in charge of the palace guards.

古文：三公无兼三孤者，仅于炳见之。
现代文：从来没见过三公兼任三孤的，至此仅见于陆炳。
English: I've never seen the three princes who also serve as the three orphans, so far I've only seen them in Lu'an.

古文：炳任豪恶吏为爪牙，悉知民间铢两奸。
现代文：陆炳用豪恶官吏为爪牙，连民间细小的奸状也全部探知。
English: Lu Yao used arrogant and evil officials as his minions, and even detected all the petty treachery of the common people.

古文：富人有小过辄收捕，没其家。
现代文：富有之人犯有小过即被收捕，还被抄家。
English: Wealthy people have been arrested for minor offenses and their homes have been raided.

古文：积赀数百万，营别宅十余所，庄园遍四方，势倾天下。
现代文：他积下的资财达数百万，营造的住宅有十余所，庄园遍四方，权势倾天下。
English: He amassed a fortune of millions, built more than a dozen residences, had estates in all directions, and wielded power all over the world.

古文：时严嵩父子尽揽六曹事，炳无所不关说。
现代文：当时严嵩父子全部掌握了六部事权，陆炳无所不对他们汇报。
English: At that time, Yan Song and his son were in charge of all six ministries, and Lu Yao reported to them on everything.

古文：文武大吏争走其门，岁入不赀，结权要，周旋善类，亦无所吝。
现代文：文武大官都争相奔走于其门，他每年的收入无法计算，他在交结权要人物，与善类周旋时，也从不吝惜。
English: His annual income is incalculable, and he is never stingy when dealing with important people and good-hearted people.

古文：帝数起大狱，炳多所保全，折节士大夫，未尝构陷一人，以故朝士多称之者。
现代文：皇上多次制造大案，陆炳常保护一些人，折节对待士大夫，不曾陷害一人，因此朝中人士多称赞他。
English: The emperor repeatedly made big cases, Lu Xun often protected some people, treated scholars and doctors with care, and never framed anyone, so people in the DPRK praised him more.

古文：二十九年卒官。
现代文：三十九年他在任上去世。
English: He died in office thirty-nine years later.

古文：赠忠诚伯，谥武惠，祭葬有加，官其子绎为本卫指挥佥事。
现代文：赠给他忠诚伯，谥号武惠，祭葬加等，还任命他的儿子陆绎为本卫指挥佥事。
English: He was given the title of "loyal brother," the posthumous name "Wu Hui" and the title of "sacrificial and funerary," and his son Lu Yu was appointed as the chief conductor of the Hongwei Orchestra.

古文：隆庆初，用御史言，追论炳罪，削秩，籍其产，夺绎及弟太常少卿炜官，坐赃数十万，系绎等追偿，久之赀尽。
现代文：隆庆初年，穆宗采纳御史的意见，追论陆炳之罪，削去他的官阶，抄没他的财产，夺陆绎和其弟太常寺少卿陆炜的官衔，判陆炳贪污数十万并将陆绎等人关押起来，令他们赔偿，不久他们财物丧尽。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, Mu Zong adopted the opinion of the imperial historian, pursued Lu Yu's crime, reduced his official rank, confiscated his property, took away Lu Yu's and his brother Taizhong Temple Shaoqing Lu Yu's official titles, sentenced Lu Yu to embezzle hundreds of thousands of yuan, and imprisoned Lu Yu and others to make them pay compensation, and soon they lost all their property.

古文：万历三年，绎上章乞免。
现代文：万历三年，陆绎上书请求免罪。
English: After three years, Lu Yizhong wrote a letter requesting to be exonerated.

古文：张居正等言，炳救驾有功，且律非谋反叛逆奸党，无籍没者；况籍没、追赃，二罪并坐，非律意。
现代文：张居正等人说，陆炳救驾有功，而且法律规定非谋反叛逆奸党之徒，不抄没家产；况且抄家和追赃二罪并坐，不合法律。
English: Zhang Juzheng and others said that there was merit in Lu Wei's rescue, and that the law stipulates that those who conspire to rebel and betray the party shall not be deprived of their family property; moreover, it is not in accordance with the law to seize the family and pursue the crime simultaneously.

古文：帝悯之，遂获免。
现代文：皇上怜悯他，陆绎遂得免罪。
English: The emperor took pity on him, and Lu Yuanzhang was exonerated.

古文：邵元节，贵谿人，龙虎山上清宫道士也。
现代文：邵元节，贵溪人。是龙虎山上清宫的道士。
English: Shao Yuanjie, a native of Guixi, was a Taoist monk at the Qing Palace on Longhu Mountain.

古文：师事范文泰、李伯芳、黄太初，咸尽其术。
现代文：他拜范文泰、李伯芳、黄太初为师，全部学到了他们的道术。
English: He studied under Fan Wentai, Li Bofang, and Huang Taifu, and learned all of their techniques.

古文：宁王宸濠召之，辞不往。
现代文：宁王朱宸濠召他去，他推辞不往。
English: King Zhu Xi of Ning invited him to go, and he did not refuse.

古文：世宗嗣位，惑内侍崔文等言，好鬼神事，日事斋醮。
现代文：世宗即位后，被宦官崔文等人言语所惑，喜好鬼神之事，每天做斋醮。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he was confused by the words of eunuch Choi Man and others. He was fond of the things of ghosts and gods, and he would fast every day.

古文：谏官屡以为言，不纳。
现代文：谏官屡次劝说，他都不听。
English: The eunuch repeatedly tried to persuade him, but he would not listen.

古文：嘉靖三年，徵元节入京，见于便殿，大加宠信，俾居显灵宫，专司祷祀。
现代文：嘉靖三年，皇上征邵元节入京，在便殿接见他，对他大加宠信，让他住在显灵宫专管祈祷祭祀。
English: In the third year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the emperor entered Beijing on the Shao Yuan Festival, received him in the hall, and greatly favored him, letting him live in the Xianling Palace to be in charge of prayer and sacrifice.

古文：雨雪愆期，祷有验，封为清微妙济守静修真凝玄衍范志默秉诚致一真人，统辖朝天、显灵、灵济三宫，总领道教，锡金、玉、银、象牙印各一。
现代文：下雪错过时节，邵元节祈祷有应验，被封为清微妙济守静修真凝玄衍范志默秉诚致一真人，统辖朝天、显灵、灵济三宫，总领道教，赐给金、玉、银、象牙印章各一枚。
English: Snowing missed the season, Shao Yuan's prayer was fulfilled, and he was sealed as a person of purity, subtlety, benevolence, meditation, sincerity, and sincerity. He presided over the three palaces of heaven, spirit, and benevolence, and was the general leader of Taoism. He was given a gold, jade, silver, and ivory seal.

古文：六年乞还山，诏许驰传。
现代文：六年，邵元节请求回山，诏令允许他乘坐邮车驰归。
English: In the sixth year, Shao Yuanjie requested to return to the mountain, and the imperial edict allowed him to return by mail train.

古文：未几，趋朝。
现代文：不久，邵元节上朝廷。
English: Soon, Shao Yuan's festival was celebrated at the imperial court.

古文：有事南郊，命分献风云雷雨坛。
现代文：有事在南郊祭祀，皇上命他分别献祭风云雷雨坛。
English: When there was a religious service to be held in the southern suburbs, the emperor ordered him to make a separate offering to the wind and thunder and rain altar.

古文：预宴奉天殿，班二品。
现代文：皇上预先设宴奉天殿，邵元节列班于二品官中。
English: The emperor set up a banquet in advance for the imperial court, and Shao Yuanjie was lined up in the second grade officials.

古文：赠其父太常丞、母安人，并赠文泰真人，赐元节紫衣玉带。
现代文：赠他的父亲为太常寺丞，母亲为安人，一并赠给文泰真人之号，赐给邵元节紫衣玉带。
English: He was given his father's name of Taizhongji, and his mother's name of Anren. He was also given the name of Wen Tai Zhenren and the purple jade belt of Shao Yuan Jie.

古文：给事中高金论之，帝下金诏狱。
现代文：给事中高金论奏他，皇上将高金投进诏狱。
English: In the middle of the matter, Gao Jin argued with him, and the emperor threw Gao Jin into the imperial prison.

古文：敕建真人府于城西，以其孙启南为太常丞，曾孙时雍为太常博士。
现代文：皇上敕令在城西建真人府，以邵元节的孙子启南为太常寺丞，曾孙时雍为太常寺博士。
English: The emperor ordered the construction of Jianzhenfu in the west of the city, with Shao Yuanjie's grandson Qinan as the president of Taizhong Temple, and great-grandson Shi Yong as the doctor of Taizhong Temple.

古文：岁给元节禄百石，以校尉四十人供洒扫，赐庄田三十顷，蠲其租。
现代文：每年给邵元节食禄一百石，以四十名校尉供洒扫，赐给庄田三十顷，免除其租税。
English: Every year, he gave Shao Yuan a stipend of one hundred koku, forty lieutenants to sweep the streets, and thirty hectares of land to Shoda, exempting him from taxes.

古文：又遣中使建道院于贵谿，赐名仙源宫。
现代文：又派宦官使者到贵溪建道院，赐名叫仙源宫。
English: He also sent eunuch emissaries to Guixi to build a Taoist monastery, which was given the name Xianyuan Palace.

古文：既成，乞假还山。
现代文：修成之后，邵元节请假回山。
English: After completing the course, he took a leave of absence to return to the mountain on Shao Yuan Festival.

古文：中途上奏，言为大学士李时弟员外旼所侮。
现代文：中途他上奏说被大学士李时的弟弟员外李侮辱。
English: Halfway through, he reported that he had been insulted by his younger brother, a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the National People's Congress.

古文：时上章引罪，旼下狱获谴。
现代文：李时上书引罪，李被下狱，受到谴责。
English: Li was convicted in a written indictment, sent to prison, and reprimanded.

古文：比还朝，舟至潞河，命中官迎入，赐蟒服及 阐都辅国 玉印。
现代文：后来邵元节还朝，行到潞河时，皇上命宦官将他迎接入宫，赐给蟒服和 阐教辅国 玉印。
English: Later, when Shao Yuan was still in the morning on Shaohe, the eunuch was ordered by the emperor to welcome him into the palace and give him the imperial robe and the imperial seal.

古文：先是，以皇嗣未建，数命元节建醮，以夏言为监礼使，文武大臣日再上香。
现代文：原先，因为皇位继承人未立，皇上多次命邵元节建醮，以夏言为监礼使，文武大臣每天两次上香。
English: Originally, because the heir to the throne had not yet been appointed, the emperor repeatedly ordered Shao Yuanjie to build a pavilion, with Xia Yan as the ceremonial envoy, and the Minister of Education and Culture to burn incense twice a day.

古文：越三年，皇子叠生，帝大喜，数加恩元节，拜礼部尚书，赐一品服。
现代文：过了三年，皇子接连出生，皇上大喜，多次给邵元节加恩，拜他为礼部尚书，赐给一品官服。
English: After three years, the prince was born one after another, and the emperor was overjoyed. He repeatedly gave Shao Yuanjie grace, worshiped him as a ceremonial official, and gave him a piece of official clothing.

古文：孙启南、徒陈善道等咸进秩，赠伯芳、太初为真人。
现代文：他的孙子启南、徒弟陈善道等人都得晋级，赠李伯芳、黄太祖为真人。
English: His grandson Qinan, his apprentice Chen Zendao and others were promoted, and Li Bofang and Huang Taizu were awarded the title of real person.

古文：帝幸承天，元节病不能从。
现代文：皇上临幸承天府，邵元节因病不能跟从。
English: Emperor Rinchenchen Dorjee Rinpoche was unable to attend Shao Yuanjie's enthronement due to illness.

古文：无何死，帝为出涕，赠少师，赐祭十坛，遣中官锦衣护丧还，有司营葬，用伯爵礼。
现代文：皇上临幸承天府，邵元节因病不能跟从。不久邵元节死，皇上为之流涕，赠他为少师，赐祭十坛，派宦官和锦衣卫官员护丧回去，有关官员为他治丧，用伯爵之礼。
English: The emperor was fortunate enough to succeed to the heavenly capital, but Shao Yuanjie was unable to follow due to illness. Shao Yuanjie died soon after, and the emperor mourned for him, presented him as a young teacher, gave him ten altars, sent eunuchs and brocade-wearing officials to escort the funeral back, and the relevant officials mourned for him and used the count's salute.

古文：礼官拟谥荣靖，不称旨，再拟文康。
现代文：礼官拟上谥号叫荣靖，皇上不满意，他们再拟上文康。
English: The etiquette officer suggested the posthumous name Rongjing, but the emperor was not satisfied, so they came up with the posthumous name Biao Kang.

古文：帝兼用之，曰文康荣靖。
现代文：皇上合起来用，叫文康荣靖。
English: The emperor combined the two and called him Wen Kang Rongjing.

古文：启南官至太常少卿。
现代文：启南官任到太常少卿。
English: Kai Nankan was appointed to Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：善道亦封清微阐教崇真卫道高士。
现代文：陈善道也被封为清微阐教崇真卫道高士。
English: Chen Zendao was also named a high-ranking scholar of the Pure Land Buddhism.

古文：隆庆初，削元节称谥。
现代文：隆庆初年，削去邵元节的官阶和谥号。
English: In the first year of Longqing, the official ranks and titles of Shao Yuan Festival were removed.

古文：陶仲文，初名典真，黄冈人。
现代文：陶仲文，初名典真，黄冈人。
English: Tao Zhongwen, first name Dengzhen, Huanggang people.

古文：尝受符水诀于罗田万玉山，与邵元节善。
现代文：他曾在罗田万玉山受教符水诀，与邵元节交好。
English: He was once taught the water trick on Mount Mandama in Luotian and befriended Shao Yuanjie.

古文：嘉靖中，由黄梅县吏为辽东库大使。
现代文：嘉靖年间，仲文由黄梅县吏任辽东库大使。
English: During the Jiajing period, Zhongwen was appointed as the ambassador of Liaodong Library by the officials of Huangmei County.

古文：秩满，需次京师，寓元节邸舍。
现代文：任满后，他在京师等候依资历补缺，住在邵元节官邸中。
English: After the end of his term, he lived in the official residence of Shao Yuanjie while waiting for the Beijing division to fill the vacancy according to his qualifications.

古文：寓节年老，宫中黑眚见，治不效，因荐仲文于帝。
现代文：邵元节年纪已老，宫中有黑眚出现，邵元节治无效，便向皇上推荐仲文。
English: Shao Yuanjie was already old, there were black flies in the palace, Shao Yuanjie was ineffective, so he recommended Zhongwen to the emperor.

古文：以符水噀剑，绝宫中妖。
现代文：仲文用符水喷剑，绝了宫中妖气。
English: Zhongwen sprayed his sword with water to drive away the evil spirits in the palace.

古文：庄敬太子患痘，祷之而瘥，帝深宠异。
现代文：庄敬太子患水痘，仲文祈祷即愈，由此皇上非常宠爱他。
English: Prince Zhuang Jian suffered from chicken pox, and he got better as soon as he prayed, which made the emperor very fond of him.

古文：十八年南巡，元节病，以仲文代。
现代文：十八年皇上南巡，邵元节有病，仲文取代他随同前往。
English: In the eighteenth year of the emperor's southern tour, Shao Yuanjie was ill, and Zhongwen accompanied him instead.

古文：次卫辉，有旋风绕驾，帝问： 此何祥也？ 
现代文：行到卫辉时，有旋风环绕圣驾，皇上问： 这是什么兆头？ 
English: When going to Weihui, there was a whirlwind around the saint, and the emperor asked: What is this sign?

古文：对曰： 主火。 
现代文：仲文说 ：主有火灾。 
English: Nakafumi said, "There's a fire.

古文：是夕行宫果火，宫人死者甚众。
现代文：当晚行宫果然失火，宫人死亡的很多。
English: That evening, the palace did indeed catch fire, and many people died in the palace.

古文：帝益异之，授神霄保国宣教高士，寻封神霄保国弘烈宣教振法通真忠孝秉一真人。
现代文：皇上更加看重他，授他为神霄保国宣教高士，不久封他为神霄保国弘烈宣教振法通真忠孝秉一真人。
English: The emperor valued him even more, awarding him the title of Shenshao Guo Guo Maru Missionary Senior Officer, and soon he was awarded the title of Shenshao Guo Guo Maru Heroic Missionary, and the title of Zhen Fotong Zhen Zhong Xiao Bing Yi Jin Ren.

古文：明年八月欲令太子监国，专事静摄。
现代文：第二年八月皇上想令太子监国，自己专事静修。
English: In August of the following year, the emperor wanted to remove the crown prince from his position as overseer of the country and devote himself exclusively to meditation.

古文：太仆卿杨最疏谏，杖死，廷臣震慑。
现代文：太仆寺卿杨最上疏劝谏，被杖死，廷臣震慑。
English: Yang, the highest-ranking servant of the Emperor, was beaten to death with a cane, shocking the courtiers.

古文：大臣争谄媚取容，神仙祷祀日亟。
现代文：大臣争相谄媚，以博取皇上欢心，而神仙祈祷便日甚一日了。
English: The ministers vied with each other to win the emperor's favor by being charming, while the immortals became more and more popular day by day.

古文：以仲文子世同为太常丞，子婿吴浚、从孙良辅为太常博士。
现代文：皇上任仲文的儿子世同为太常寺丞，女婿吴浚、从孙良辅为太常博士。
English: When the emperor ascended to the throne, Zhongwen's son, Shidong, became the president of the Taizhong Temple, and his son-in-law, Wu Jun, became the doctor of the Taizhong Temple from Sun Liangyu.

古文：帝有疾，既而瘳，喜仲文祈祷功，特授少保、礼部尚书。
现代文：皇上有病，不久痊愈，心喜仲文祈祷之功，特授他为少保、礼部尚书。
English: The emperor was ill, but soon recovered. He was especially awarded the title of Shobo (Junior Protector) and the title of Shosho (Master of Ceremonies) for his contribution to the prayers of Shinkichi Chumon.

古文：久之，加少傅，仍兼少保。
现代文：后来，加封为少傅，仍兼少保。
English: Later, he was given the title of shofu (Junior Master) and still served as shoho (Junior Warden).

古文：仲文起筦库，不二岁登三孤，恩宠出元节上。
现代文：仲文由一名管仓库的小吏起家，不到两年便位登三孤，所受恩宠出于邵元节之上。
English: Zhongwen started his career as a clerk in charge of a warehouse. Less than two years later, he was promoted to the third grade. He was favored on Shao Yuan Festival.

古文：乃请建雷坛于乡县，祝圣寿，以其徒臧宗仁为左至灵，驰驿往，督黄州同知郭显文监之。
现代文：于是他请在家乡黄冈县建雷坛，祝祷圣寿，以他的徒弟臧仁为左至灵，乘驿车驰往，督察黄州同知郭显文监工。
English: So he asked his hometown Huanggang County to build a mine altar to celebrate the saint's life, with his apprentice Yanren as the left-hand spirit, and drove to the inspector of Huangzhou and the supervisor of Guo Xianwen.

古文：工稍稽，谪显文典史，遣工部郎何成代，督趋甚急，公私骚然。
现代文：工程稍有延误，便贬郭显文为典史，派工部郎何成取代他，督催得更急，公私骚然。
English: When there was a slight delay in the project, Guo Xianwen was relegated to history. He was replaced by the head of the engineering department, He Cheng, who was more urgent in his supervision, and was turbulent in his private and public life.

古文：御史杨爵、郎中刘魁言及之。
现代文：御史杨爵、郎中刘魁上书论及此事。
English: Prince Shi Yangzhe and his son-in-law Liu Kui discussed the matter in a book.

古文：给事中周怡陈时事，有 日事祷祠 语。
现代文：给事中周怡上书论时事，其中有 每天从事祈祷祭祀 一语。
English: In the letter, Zhou Yi wrote about current affairs, including engaging in daily prayer and worship.

古文：帝大怒，悉下诏狱，拷掠长系。
现代文：皇上大怒，把他们全部投进诏狱，拷打并长期关押。
English: The emperor was furious and threw them all into the imperial prison, where they were tortured and imprisoned for a long time.

古文：吏部尚书熊浃谏乩仙，即命削籍。
现代文：吏部尚书熊浃谏止乩仙，皇上立命削去他的官籍。
English: Shang Shuxiong, the head of the personnel department, was removed from his official status by the emperor.

古文：自是，中外争献符瑞，焚修、斋醮之事，无敢指及之者矣。
现代文：此后，中外争相进献符瑞，对焚修、斋醮之事，再没有人敢提意见了。
English: Since then, China and other countries have been competing to advance the offering of Zhu Rui, and no one dares to raise an opinion on the matter of incineration and fasting.

古文：帝自二十年遭宫婢变，移居西内，日求长生，郊庙不亲，朝讲尽废，君臣不相接，独仲文得时见；见辄赐坐，称之为师而不名。
现代文：皇上从二十年遭宫婢谋害之变后，移居到西内，每天祈求长生，郊庙之祭他都不亲临，朝讲尽废，君臣不相接触，唯有仲文得时常见到他。皇上每次见仲文都赐坐，称他为师而不称其名。
English: After twenty years of being plotted against by the palace maids, the emperor moved to the west, where he prayed for eternal life every day. He did not attend the suburban temple festival in person, his speeches to the emperor were useless, and he did not have contact with the emperor and his ministers. Only Zhongwen could see him from time to time. Every time the emperor saw Zhongwen, he gave him a seat and called him his teacher without mentioning his name.

古文：心知臣下必议己，每下诏旨多愤疾之辞，廷臣莫知所指。
现代文：皇上心知臣下必定议论自己，所以每次下诏，多是愤疾之辞，廷臣都不知道是何意。
English: The emperor knew in his heart that his subjects would talk about him, so every time he issued an edict, it was mostly an angry speech, and the courtiers didn't know what he meant.

古文：小人顾可学、盛端明、朱隆禧辈，皆缘以进。
现代文：小人顾可学、盛端明、朱隆禧之辈，都以方术得以进用。
English: Dwarfs such as Gu Kegui, Sheng Dua Ming and Zhu Rongxi were all able to use the technique.

古文：其后，夏言以下冠香叶冠，积他衅至死。而严嵩以虔奉焚修蒙异眷者二十年。
现代文：其后，夏言不戴香叶冠，被加上别的罪过整死，而严嵩因虔诚奉焚修得皇上异宠达二十年。
English: After that, Xia Yan did not wear the crown of fragrant leaves, and was punished to death for other sins, while Yan Song was favored by the emperor for twenty years because of his piety.

古文：大同获谍者王三，帝归功上玄，加仲文少师，仍兼少傅少保。
现代文：大同抓获间谍王三，皇上归功于上玄，加封仲文为少师，仍兼少傅和少保。
English: Datong captured the spy Wang San, the emperor attributed it to Shang Xuan, and Jafeng Zhongwen was a minor teacher, but he was also a minor tutor and a minor bodyguard.

古文：一人兼领三孤，终明世，惟仲文而已。
现代文：一人兼领三孤，终明一代，仅仲文一人而已。
English: One person is also in charge of the three orphans, the last generation of the Ming Dynasty, only Zhongwen is the only one.

古文：久之，授特进光禄大夫柱国兼支大学士俸，荫子世恩为尚宝丞。
现代文：后来，授他为特进光禄大夫、柱国，兼支给大学士俸禄，庇荫他的儿子世恩为尚宝丞。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of "Special Prize for Outstanding Contribution to the Country" and "Special Prize for Outstanding Contribution to the Country," as well as the "College Scholarship" and the patronage of his son, Shien, known as "Shang Baozheng."

古文：复以圣诞加恩，给伯爵俸，授其徒郭弘经、王永宁为高士。
现代文：后又以逢圣诞加恩，给他伯爵的俸禄，授予他的徒弟郭弘经、王永宁为高士。
English: Later, he gave his apprentice, Guo Hongjing, and Wang Yongning high ranks with the Christmas bonus of a count's salary.

古文：时都御史胡缵宗下狱，株连数十人。
现代文：当时都御史胡缵宗入狱，株连数十人。
English: At that time, the governor of the capital, Hu Yanzong, was jailed, and dozens of his followers were imprisoned.

古文：二十九年春，京师灾异频见，帝以咨仲文。
现代文：二十九年春，京师灾异频繁出现，皇上询问仲文。
English: In the spring of the 29th year, the emperor asked Zhongwen about the frequent occurrence of disasters in Beijing.

古文：封言虑有冤狱，得雨方解。
现代文：仲文回答说怕有冤狱，得雨才能消灾。
English: Zhongwen replied that he was afraid of unjust imprisonment, and that it would take rain to eliminate the disaster.

古文：俄法司上缵宗等爰书，帝悉从轻典，果得雨。
现代文：不久法司上呈胡缵宗等人的判决书，皇上全部从轻治罪，天果然下了雨。
English: Soon after, the magistrate presented the verdict of Hu Yanzong and others to the emperor, who punished all of them with light sentences, and it did indeed rain.

古文：乃以平狱功，封仲文恭诚伯，岁禄千二百石，弘经、永宁封真人。
现代文：于是以平狱之功，封仲文为恭诚伯，岁禄一千二百石，郭弘经、王永宁也被封为真人。
English: As a result, Zhongwen was awarded the title of Gongshenbo for his contribution to the peaceful imprisonment, with a yearly salary of 1,200 koku, and Guo Hongjing and Wang Yongning were also awarded the title of real person.

古文：仇鸾之追戮也，下诏称仲文功，增禄百石，荫子世昌国子生。
现代文：追戮仇鸾时，下诏称赞仲文之功，增给俸禄一百石，庇荫儿子世昌为国子监生。
English: When he was hunting down his enemies, he praised Zhongwen's work in the following edict, increased his salary by one hundred koku, and named his son, Shichang, as the son of the provincial governor.

古文：三十二年，仲文言： 齐河县道士张演建大清桥，浚河得龙骨一，重千斤。
现代文：三十二年，仲文说： 齐河县道士张演升建大清桥，疏浚河道时得一块龙骨，重一千斤。
English: In the 32nd year, Zhongwen said: Zhang Yansheng, a Taoist from Qihe County, built the Great Qing Bridge, and when he dredged the river, he obtained a keel weighing one thousand pounds.

古文：又突出石沙一脉，长数丈，类有神相。 
现代文：又突出石沙一脉，长数丈，像是有神相。 
English: There is also a line of stone and sand protruding from it, several meters long, as if it had a divine appearance.

古文：帝即发帑银助之。
现代文：皇上即发库银资助他。
English: The emperor immediately issued treasury money to support him.

古文：时建元岳湖广太和山，既成，遣英国公张溶往行安神礼，仲文偕顾可学建醮祈福。
现代文：当时在湖广太和山建元岳，建成后，皇上派英国公张溶前往行安神之礼，仲文偕同顾可学建醮祈福。
English: At that time, Lake Guangda and Mount Jianyuan were at the same place. After the construction was completed, the emperor sent the British official Zhangye to perform the worship of the god of peace. Zhongwen and his colleagues could learn to pray for Jianyuan.

古文：明年，圣诞，加恩，荫子锦衣百户。
现代文：第二年皇上圣诞时，给仲文加恩，庇荫儿子为锦衣卫百户。
English: In the second year of the emperor's reign, at Christmas, he gave gifts to 100 households.

古文：帝益求长生，日夜祷祠，简文武大臣及词臣入直西苑，供奉青词。
现代文：皇上更祈求长生，日夜祷祭，挑选文武大臣入西苑当值，供奉青词。
English: The emperor also prayed for eternal life, held a day and night prayer festival, and selected the minister of literature and armed forces to be on duty in the West Courtyard to offer the Youth Sermon.

古文：四方奸人段朝用、龚可佩、蓝道行、王金、胡大顺、蓝田玉之属，咸以烧炼符咒荧惑天子，然不久皆败，独仲文恩宠日隆重，久而不替，士大夫或缘以进。
现代文：四方奸人段朝用、龚可佩、蓝道行、王金、胡大顺、蓝田玉之流，都以烧炼符咒荧惑天子，但不久皆败，只有仲文恩宠日隆，久而不衰，不少士大夫都靠他得以进用。
English: The four traitors, Chou En, Chou Kepai, Lan Tao Xing, Wang Jin, Hu Dashun, and Lan Tian Yulong, all used incense charms to bewitch the heavenly son, but soon they were all defeated. Only Zhong Wen's grace lasted for a long time, and many scholars were able to use it.

古文：又创二龙不相见之说，青宫虚位者二十年。
现代文：他又创二龙不相见之说，致使皇朝长达二十年不立太子。
English: He also created the myth of the two dragons not seeing each other, which led to the imperial dynasty not appointing a crown prince for twenty years.

古文：三十五年，上皇考道号为三天金阙无上玉堂都仙法主玄元道德哲慧圣尊开真仁化大帝，皇妣号为三天金阙无上玉堂总仙法主玄元道德哲慧圣母天后掌仙妙化元君，帝自号灵霄上清统雷元阳妙一飞玄君，后加号九天弘教普济生灵掌阴阳功过大道思仁紫极仙翁一阳真人元虚玄应开化伏魔真忠孝帝君，再号太上大罗天仙紫极长生圣智昭灵统元证应玉虚总掌五雷大真人玄都境万寿帝君。
现代文：三十五年，皇上上皇考道号为三天金阙无上玉党都仙法王玄元道德哲慧圣尊开真仁化大帝，皇妣号为三天金阙无上玉堂总仙法主玄元道德哲慧圣母天后掌仙妙化元君，皇上自号灵霄上清统雷元阳妙一飞玄真君，后来又加号九天弘教普济生灵掌阴阳功过大道思仁紫极仙翁一阳真人元虚玄应开化伏魔忠孝帝君，再号太上丈罗天仙紫极长生圣智昭灵统元证应玉虚总掌五雷大真人玄都境万寿帝君。
English: Thirty-five years ago, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three days, the emperor's imperial examination path number was three

古文：明年，仲文有疾，乞还山，献上历年所赐蟒玉、金宝、法冠及白金万两。
现代文：第二年，仲文有病，请求回山，献上历年所赐的蟒玉、金宝、法冠和一万两白金。
English: In the second year, when Zhongwen was ill, he asked to return to the mountain and present the jade, gold, Dharma crown and ten thousand two hundred taels of platinum that had been given to him over the years.

古文：既归，帝念之不置，遣锦衣官存问，命有司以时加礼，改其子尚宝少卿世恩为太常丞兼道录司右演法，供事真人府。
现代文：他回去后，皇上很怀念他，派锦衣卫官员去慰问，命有关官员经常给他加礼，改任他的儿子尚宝少卿世恩为太常寺丞兼道录右演法，供事于真人府。
English: After his return, the emperor missed him very much and sent officials from the Imperial Household Agency to offer condolences. He ordered the relevant officials to give him regular presents, and his son, Shang Bao Shaoqing Shien, was appointed as the chief priest of Taizhong Temple and the right-hand man of the Daojing Fa, and served in the Zhenren Palace.

古文：仲文得宠二十年，位极人臣。然小心慎密，不敢恣肆。
现代文：仲文得宠二十年，位极人臣，但他小心谨慎，不敢肆意妄为。
English: Zhongwen had been favored for twenty years and was an extremely high-ranking official, but he was cautious and did not dare to act recklessly.

古文：三十九年卒，年八十余。
现代文：三十九年仲文去世，享年八十余岁。
English: In 1939, Zhongwen passed away at the age of 80.

古文：帝闻痛悼，葬祭视邵元节，特谥荣康惠肃。
现代文：皇上得知后非常悲痛，仿邵元节之例赐给葬祭，特谥为荣康惠肃。
English: After learning of this, the emperor was very sad. The example of imitating Shao Yuan Festival was given to the funeral ceremony, and the special eulogy was for Rong Kang Hui Su.

古文：隆庆四年十月，高拱柄国，尽反徐阶之政，乃宥金等死，编口外为民。顾可学，无锡人。
现代文：世恩后来任太常寺卿。隆庆元年判他和王金伪造药物之罪，下狱判了死罪。仲文的官阶谥号也被追削。顾可学，无锡人。
English: Shien was later appointed as the head of Taiji Temple. In the first year of the Longqing era, he and Wang Jin were convicted of counterfeiting drugs and sentenced to death. Zhongwen's official rank and title were also chased away. Gu Ke Xue, a Wuxi native.

古文：举进士，历官浙江参议。
现代文：考中进士，历任浙江参议。
English: He passed the middle school entrance examination and served as a councillor of Zhejiang Province.

古文：言官劾其在部时盗官帑，斥归，家居二十余年。
现代文：言官弹劾他在部里任职时盗用官银，被斥归，在家呆了二十余年。
English: The magistrate impeached him for embezzling government funds while serving in the ministry. He was banished and stayed at home for more than 20 years.

古文：瞷世宗好长生，而同年生严嵩方柄国，乃厚贿嵩，自言能炼童男女溲为秋石，服之延年。
现代文：他窥探到皇上好长生，而与他同年中进士的严嵩正掌国政，于是他厚贿严嵩，自称能将童男女的尿液炼成秋石，吃了它可以延年。
English: He spied on the emperor, who wished to live forever, and Yan Song, a young scholar of the same year as him, was in charge of state affairs, so he bribed Yan Song, claiming to be able to refine the urine of boys and girls into autumn stone, and eat it to prolong life.

古文：嵩为言于帝，遣使赍金币就其家赐之。
现代文：严嵩为他转告皇上，皇上遣使者到他家赐给金币。
English: Yan Song told the emperor for him, and the emperor sent an envoy to his home to give him gold coins.

古文：可学诣阙谢，遂命为右通政。
现代文：可学上朝谢恩，遂被任命为右通政。
English: He was able to learn from Chosha Shane, and was then appointed to Utsunomiya.

古文：嘉靖二十四年超拜工部尚书，寻改礼部，再加至太子太保。
现代文：嘉靖二十四年将他超升为工部尚书，不久改到礼部，再加封为太子太保。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Jiajing, he was promoted to the Ministry of Works, soon changed to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and then crowned as the Crown Prince.

古文：时盛端明亦以方术承帝眷，可学独扬扬自喜，请属公事，人咸畏而恶之。
现代文：当时盛端明也以方术受到皇上宠爱，可学却独自得意扬扬，请托公事，人们都害怕而厌恶他。
English: At that time, Sheng Duangming was also favored by the emperor as a square art, but he could learn alone and was proud of it. He was asked to do business, and people were afraid and disgusted with him.

古文：帝惑乩仙言，手诏问礼部： 古用芝入药，今产何所？ 
现代文：皇上被乩仙之言所迷惑，颁手诏问礼部说 ：古代用灵芝入药，如今它产于何地？ 
English: The emperor was puzzled by the hermit's words and, handing over the imperial edict, asked the etiquette department, "In ancient times, reishi was used as a medicine. Where is it produced today?"

古文：尚书吴山博引《本草》、《黄帝内经》、《汉旧仪》、王充《论衡》、《瑞命记》，言： 历代皆以芝为瑞，然服食之法未有传，所产地亦未敢预拟。 
现代文：尚书吴山博引《本草》、《黄帝内经》、《汉旧仪》，王充的《论衡》、《瑞命记》，说 ：历代都以灵芝为祥瑞之兆，但服食之法却未见传下来，其产地臣也不敢乱说。 
English: Shangshu Wu Shanbo, citing "Honcao," "Yellow Emperor's Inner Classic," "Han and Old Rituals," and Wang Chong's "Discussion on Balance" and "Sui's Life Record," said: All dynasties have used Ganoderma lucidum as a sign of auspiciousness, but the method of eating and drinking has not been passed down, and the minister of the place of its origin does not dare to say anything.

古文：乃诏有司采之五岳及太和、龙虎、三茅、齐云、鹤鸣诸山。
现代文：皇上于是诏令有关官员到五岳和太和山、龙虎山、三茅山、齐云山、鹤鸣山等地去采。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered the relevant officials to go to Mt. Wudu, Mt. Taiwa, Mt. Longhu, Mt. Sanmao, Mt. Qiyun, Mt. Crane and other places to mine.

古文：无何，宛平民献芝五本。
现代文：不久，宛平百姓献上五支灵芝。
English: Soon, the people of Wanping presented five reishi mushrooms.

古文：帝悦，赉银币。
现代文：皇上很高兴，赐给银币。
English: The Emperor was delighted and gave him a silver coin.

古文：自是，来献者接踵。
现代文：此后，来献者不绝。
English: Since then, there has been a steady stream of devotees.

古文：时又采银矿、龙涎香，中使四出，论者咸咎可学。
现代文：当时又开采银矿、龙涎香，为此派宦官使者四出，议论者多归咎于可学。
English: At that time, silver mines and ambergris were also being mined, and envoys of eunuchs were sent out for this purpose. Most commentators blame this on the apprenticeship system.

古文：可学寻以年老乞休。
现代文：可学不久以年老请退休。
English: You can learn soon, but please retire when you are old.

古文：卒，赐祭葬，谥荣僖。
现代文：他去世后，赐给祭葬，谥号荣僖。
English: After his death, he was given a ceremonial funeral, and his posthumous name was Rongcheng.

