古文：◎英宗前纪
现代文：英宗前纪
English: Early Anglo-Saxon period

古文：英宗法天立道仁明诚敬昭文宪武至德广孝睿皇帝，讳祁镇，宣宗长子也。
现代文：英宗法天立道仁明诚敬昭文宪武至德广孝睿皇帝，名叫朱祁镇，宣宗长子。
English: The eldest son of Emperor Xuanzong, who was called Zhu Yuzhen, was a disciple of Emperor Yingzong, who was a disciple of Emperor Daozhen, a disciple of Emperor Mingzheng, a disciple of Emperor Zhao, and a disciple of Emperor Deguang.

古文：母贵妃孙氏。
现代文：其母贵妃孙氏。
English: His mother was Guifei Sun.

古文：生四月，立为皇太子，遂册贵妃为皇后。
现代文：生于四月，立为皇太子，于是，册立贵妃孙氏为皇后。
English: Born in April, he was made crown prince, and therefore, Sun, the noble consort, was made empress.

古文：宣德十年春正月，宣宗崩，壬午，即皇帝位。
现代文：宣德十年正月，宣宗死。十日，朱祁镇即皇帝位。
English: In the first month of the 10th year of Xuande's reign, Xuanzong died. On the 10th day, Zhu Xi Zhen became emperor.

古文：遵遗诏大事白皇太后行。
现代文：遵从宣宗遗诏，天下大事由皇太后协助处理。
English: In accordance with Emperor Xuanzong's last will and testament, the empress dowager assisted in handling the major affairs of state.

古文：大赦天下，以明年为正统元年。
现代文：大赦天下，以第二年为正统元年。
English: The country was amnestied, with the second year being the first year of orthodoxy.

古文：始罢午朝。
现代文：开始停止午间朝贺。
English: Start to stop midday morning greetings.

古文：丁亥，尚书蹇义卒。
现代文：十五日，尚书蹇义死。
English: On the 15th, Shang Shuxuan died.

古文：辛丑，户部尚书黄福参赞南京守备机务。
现代文：二十九日，户部尚书黄福辅助南京守备机要事务。
English: On the 29th, the head of the household, Shangshu Huangfu, assisted Nanjing in the preparation of important matters.

古文：二月戊申，尊皇太后为太皇太后。
现代文：二月六日，尊奉皇太后为太皇太后。
English: On February 6, the Empress Dowager was enthroned as the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：庚戌，尊皇后为皇太后。
现代文：八日，尊皇后为皇太后。
English: On the 8th, His Majesty the Empress became the Empress Dowager.

古文：辛亥，封弟祁钰为郕王。
现代文：九日，封其弟朱祁钰为成阝王。
English: On the 9th, he appointed his brother Zhu Xi as the King of Chengdu.

古文：甲寅，罢诸司冗费。
现代文：十二日，罢免各官裁减开支。
English: On the 12th, officials were dismissed to cut expenses.

古文：三月戊寅，放都坊司乐工三千八百余人。
现代文：三月六日，释放教坊司乐工三千八百余人。
English: On March 6, more than 3,800 music teachers were released.

古文：辛巳，罢山陵夫役万七千人。
现代文：九日，停止山陵夫役一万七千人。
English: On the 9th, 17,000 people left the service.

古文：丙申，谕三法司，死罪临决。三覆奏然后加刑。
现代文：二十四日，谕旨三法官，裁决死罪，必须三次复奏然后执行。
English: On the 24th, the three judges issued an order, ruling that the death penalty must be repeated three times and then carried out.

古文：夏四月壬戌，以元学上吴澄从祀孔子庙庭。
现代文：四月二十一日，将元朝学士吴澄顺祭于孔子庙庭。
English: On April 21, Wu Chengshun, a scholar of the Yuan Dynasty, was enshrined in the courtyard of the Confucius Temple.

古文：丁卯，以久旱考察布、按二司及府州县官。
现代文：二十六日，因久旱考察布政、按察二司及各府州县官。
English: On the 26th, due to the long drought, the inspection of Bu Zheng, the inspection of the two departments and the prefectural and county officials.

古文：戊辰，遣给事中、御史捕畿南、山东、河南、淮安蝗。
现代文：二十七日，派给事中、御史捕捉畿南、山东、河南、淮安蝗虫。
English: On the 27th, they sent Zhongzheng and Gishi to catch locusts in South China, Shandong, Henan and Huai'an.

古文：五月壬午，户部言浙江、苏、松荒田税粮减除二百七十七万余石，请加覆核。
现代文：五月十一日，户部进言浙江、苏、松荒田税粮减除二百七十七万余石，请求加强核查。
English: On May 11th, the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development proposed that the tax on grain in Zhejiang, Suzhou, and Songpan should be reduced by more than 2.77 million koku, and requested that verification be strengthened.

古文：帝以核实必增额为民患。不许。
现代文：英宗认为增加复查必定增加百姓负担，没准许。
English: Yingzong believed that increasing the review would certainly increase the burden on the people, and did not allow it.

古文：六月丁未，令天下瘗暴骸。
现代文：六月七日，命天下掩埋外露尸骨。
English: On June 7th, he died and his bones were buried outside.

古文：辛酉，葬章皇帝于景陵。
现代文：二十一日，葬章皇帝于景陵。
English: On the twenty-first day, the funeral ceremony for the emperor took place at the Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：秋七月丙子，免山西夏税之半。
现代文：七月七日，免山西夏税一半。
English: On July 7, half of the Shanxi summer tax will be exempted.

古文：八月丙午，减光禄寺膳夫四千七百余人。
现代文：八月七日，减少光禄寺饮食民夫四千七百余人。
English: On August 7, the number of catering staff at Koroku-ji Temple was reduced by more than 4,700.

古文：九月壬辰，诏督漕总兵及诸巡抚官，岁以八月至京会廷臣议事。
现代文：九月二十四日，诏督漕总兵及各巡抚官，每年八月到京师与朝廷大臣商议大事。
English: On September 24th, the commander-in-chief of the imperial army and the governors-general of the imperial army went to Beijing every August to discuss important matters with the ministers of the imperial court.

古文：是月，王振掌司礼监。
现代文：这月，王振掌管司礼监。
English: This month, Wang Zhen was put in charge of the chief proctor.

古文：冬十月壬寅，遣使谕阿台朵儿只伯。
现代文：十月四日，派使者告诉阿台朵儿只伯。
English: On October 4th, a messenger was sent to tell Adeidor what had happened.

古文：辛亥，诏天下卫所皆立学。
现代文：十三日，下诏天下卫所设立学校。
English: On the 13th, it was announced that a school would be established at the World Health Organization.

古文：十一月戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月一日，有日食。
English: On November 1, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：十二月壬子，阿台朵儿只伯犯凉州镇番，总兵官陈懋败之于黑山。
现代文：十二月十五日，阿台朵儿只伯侵犯凉州镇番，被总兵官陈懋于黑山击败。
English: On December 15th, Adeidor just violated the town guard of Liangzhou and was defeated by the general officer Chen Yu in Montenegro.

古文：是年，琉球中山、暹罗、日本、占城、安南、满剌加、哈密、瓦剌入贡。
现代文：这一年，琉球中山、暹罗、日本、占城、安南、满剌加、哈密、瓦剌入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Siam, Japan, Jamsung, Annam, Manchukuo, Hami, and Wajima paid tribute to the North.

古文：正统元年春正月丙戌，罢铜仁金场。
现代文：正统元年正月十日，停开铜仁金场。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the first year of the orthodox era, the Tongren gold field was shut down.

古文：庚寅，发禁军三万人屯田畿辅。
现代文：十四日，派禁军三万人在京城附近屯田。
English: On the 14th, 30,000 imperial troops were sent to Tonden near the capital.

古文：三月己巳，赐周旋等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月三日，赐周旋等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 3rd, there were differences in the names, ranks, and origins of the new recruits.

古文：乙亥，御经筵。
现代文：九日，听群臣讲经论史。
English: On the 9th, he listened to ministers lecture on scripture and history.

古文：夏四月丁酉朔，享太庙。
现代文：四月一日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the first day of April, the ritual at Taimyo ceased.

古文：五月丁卯，阿台朵儿只伯寇肃州。
现代文：五月二日，阿台朵儿只伯侵犯肃州。
English: On May 2nd, Adeidor just invaded Suizhou.

古文：壬辰，设提督学校官。
现代文：二十七日，设提督学校官员。
English: On the 27th, an admiral school official was appointed.

古文：秋八月甲戌，右都督蒋贵充总兵官，都督同知赵安副之，帅师讨阿台朵儿只伯。
现代文：八月十一日，右都督蒋贵任总兵官，都督同知赵安为副将，率军征讨阿台朵儿只伯。
English: On August 11th, the right-wing governor Jiang Gui was appointed as the chief military officer, and the governor Zhao An was appointed as the vice-general, and led the army to enlist the help of Adeidor Tubo.

古文：九月癸卯，遣侍郎何文渊、王佐，副都御史朱与言督两淮、长芦、浙江盐课。
现代文：九月十一日，派侍郎何文渊、王佐，副都御史朱与言监督两淮、长芦、浙江盐课。
English: On September 11, he sent his attendants, He Wenyuan and Wang Zuo, and his vice-governor, Zhu Yogan, to supervise the two Huai, Changlu and Zhejiang salt classes.

古文：钦差巡盐自此始。
现代文：钦差巡盐从此开始。
English: This is the start of the salt patrol.

古文：庚申，封黎利子麟为安南国王。
现代文：二十八日，封黎利之子黎麟为安南国王。
English: On the 28th, the son of Lili, Lilin, was crowned King of Annam.

古文：冬十一月乙卯，诏京官三品以上举堪任御史者，四品及侍从言官举堪任知县者，各一人。
现代文：十一月二十四日，下诏在京三品以上官员推举能胜任御史一职之人，四品及侍从言官推举能胜任知县之人各一人。
English: On November 24th, the following edict was issued: in Beijing, the officials with three or more pins were to nominate a person who would be qualified to hold the post of Imperial Historian, and the officials with four pins and an attendant were to nominate a person who would be qualified to hold the post of Zhixian.

古文：免湖广被灾税粮。
现代文：湖广遭灾，免除税粮。
English: Hukang suffered from the disaster, exempted from tax grain.

古文：十二月丁丑，以边议稽缓，下兵部尚书王骥、侍郎邝野于狱，寻释之。
现代文：十二月十六日，因边境奏议迟缓，下兵部尚书王骥、侍郎邝聎于狱，不久释放。
English: On December 16th, due to the delay of the border report, the lower military commander, Shang Shouwang, and his attendant were imprisoned and soon released.

古文：乙酉，湖广、贵州总兵官萧授讨广西蒙顾十六洞贼，平之。
现代文：二十四日，湖广、贵州总兵官萧授征讨广西蒙顾十六洞贼人，很快平定贼乱。
English: On the 24th, General Xiao Zhu, the military commander of Huguang and Guizhou, summoned the Guangxi Monggu Sixteen-Dong bandits and quickly quelled the banditry.

古文：是年，琉球中山、爪哇、安南、乌斯藏、占城、瓦剌入贡。
现代文：这一年，琉球中山、爪哇、安南、乌斯藏、占城、瓦剌入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Java, Annan, Utsunomiya, Oshiro, and Wajima paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：遣宣德时来贡古里、苏门答剌十一国使臣还国。
现代文：遣返宣德年间来进贡的古里、苏门答剌等十一国使者回国。
English: Emissaries from eleven countries, including Guri and Sumedang, who had come to pay tribute during the Xuande era, returned to China.

古文：二年春正月甲午，宣宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：正统二年正月四日，宣宗神牌附祭于太庙。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Zhengrun era, the Shengzong Shengpai festival was held in the Great Temple.

古文：己亥，大同总兵官方政、都指挥杨洪会宁夏、甘肃兵出塞讨阿台朵儿只伯。
现代文：九日，大同总兵官方政、都指挥杨洪与宁夏、甘肃兵一起出塞征讨阿台朵儿只伯。
English: On the 9th day of the month, Yang Hong, the commander of the Datong General Army, together with soldiers from Ningxia and Gansu, went to Tibet to fight against Ataidor Zhubo.

古文：三月甲午，录囚。
现代文：三月四日，审查囚犯。
English: On March 4th, the prisoners were examined.

古文：戊午，御史金敬抚辑大名及河南、陕西逃民。
现代文：二十八日，御史金敬安抚安置大名及河南、陕西逃亡农民。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Jinjing appeased and resettled feudal lords and fugitive peasants from Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：夏四月，免河南被灾田粮。
现代文：四月，免除河南受灾税粮。
English: In April, Henan was exempted from the disaster-affected grain tax.

古文：五月庚寅，兵部尚书王骥经理甘肃边务。
现代文：五月一日，兵部尚书王骥经理甘肃边境事务。
English: On May 1st, the manager of Gansu border affairs of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Shangshu Wangjun, left.

古文：壬寅，刑部尚书魏源经理大同边务。
现代文：十三日，刑部尚书魏源经理大同边境事务。
English: On the 13th, the manager of the criminal department, Shangshu Weiyuan, was transferred to the Datong border affairs.

古文：丁未，免陕西平凉六府旱灾夏税。
现代文：十八日，免陕西平凉六府旱灾税粮。
English: On the 18th, six prefectures of Pingliang in Shaanxi Province were exempted from the drought tax grain.

古文：六月乙亥，以宋胡安国、蔡沈、真德秀从祀孔子庙庭。
现代文：六月十七日，将宋朝胡安国、蔡沈、真德秀附祭于孔子庙庭。
English: On June 17th, the Song Dynasty's Hu'an Guo, Cai Shen and Zhen Dexiu were enshrined in the Confucius Temple.

古文：庚辰，副都御史贾谅、侍郎郑辰振河南、江北饥。
现代文：二十二日，副都御史贾谅、侍郎郑辰赈济河南、江北饥荒。
English: On the 22nd, the vice-governor of the capital, Jia Jun, and his attendant, Zheng Chen, brought famine to Henan and Jiangbei.

古文：冬十月甲子，镇守甘肃左副总兵任礼充总兵官，都督蒋贵、都督同知赵安为左、右副总兵，兵部侍郎柴车，佥都御史曹翼、罗亨信参赞军务，讨阿台朵儿只伯。
现代文：十月八日，镇守甘肃左副总兵任礼任总兵官，都督蒋贵、都督同知赵安为左、右副总兵，兵部侍郎柴车、佥都御史曹翼、罗亨信辅助军务，征讨阿台朵儿只伯。
English: On October 8th, the town guard of Gansu was appointed as the left deputy commander-in-chief and the ceremonial commander-in-chief, the governor of Gansu, Jiang Gui, and the governor of Gansu, Zhao An, were appointed as the left and right deputy commanders-in-chief, and the attendants of the military department, Chai Che, the governor of Gansu, Cao Ying, and Luo Hengxin, assisted in military affairs, and recruited Adeidor Tubo.

古文：兵部尚书王骥、太监王贵监督之。
现代文：兵部尚书王骥、太监王贵监督。
English: The military commander, Shang Shuxuan, and the eunuch, Wang Gui, supervised the procession.

古文：十一月乙巳，振河南饥，免税粮。
现代文：十一月十九日，赈济河南饥馑，免税粮。
English: On November 19th, starving people in Henan Province of Fujian Province received tax-free grain.

古文：是年，琉球中山、撒马儿罕、暹罗、土鲁番、瓦剌、哈密入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球中山、撒马儿罕、暹罗、土鲁番、瓦剌、哈密入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Samarkand, Siam, Turpan, Wajima, and Hami paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：三年春三月己亥，京师地震。
现代文：正统三年三月十五日，京师地震。
English: On March 15th, the third year of the Heian period, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：辛丑，振陕西饥。
现代文：十七日，陕西饥荒。
English: On the 17th, famine broke out in Shaanxi.

古文：夏四月乙卯，王骥、任礼、蒋贵、赵安袭击阿台朵儿只伯，大破之，追至黑泉还。
现代文：四月二日，王骥、任礼、蒋贵、赵安袭击阿台朵儿只伯，大败阿台朵儿只伯，追到黑泉后返回。
English: On April 2, Wang Qian, Ren Li, Jiang Gui, and Zhao An attacked and defeated Adeidor Jubei. They chased him to Heiquan and then returned.

古文：癸未，立大同马市。
现代文：三十日，设立大同马市。
English: On the 30th, Datong Horse Market was established.

古文：六月癸酉，以旱谳中外疑狱。
现代文：六月二十一日，因天旱判定朝中内外疑难未决案件。
English: On June 21st, due to the drought, it was determined that there were unresolved cases in and out of the DPRK.

古文：乙亥，都督方政、佥事张荣同征南将军黔国公沐晟、右都督沐昂，讨麓川叛蛮思任发。
现代文：二十三日，都督方政、佥事张荣与征南将军黔国公沐晟、右都督沐昂征讨麓川叛蛮思任发。
English: On the 23rd, the provincial governors Fang Zheng and Anji Zhang Rong marched out with the Southern Expeditionary General Guo Guoguang and the right-wing provincial governor Muang to conquer the Luchuan Rebellion.

古文：秋七月癸未，下礼部尚书胡濙于狱。
现代文：七月一日，下礼部尚书胡氵荧于狱。
English: On July 1, Hu Yufu, a member of the lower etiquette department, was sent to prison.

古文：辛卯，下户部尚书刘中敷于狱。
现代文：九日，户部尚书刘中敷被下狱。
English: On the 9th, the head of the household, Liu Zhongshiki, was released from prison.

古文：寻俱释之。
现代文：不久全部获释。
English: They were all released shortly afterwards.

古文：八月乙亥，以陕西饥，令杂犯死囚以下输银赎罪，送边吏易米。
现代文：八月二十三日，因陕西饥荒，命令杂犯死罪以下囚犯纳银赎罪，护送边境官吏交换大米。
English: On August 23rd, due to the famine in Shaanxi Province, he ordered the death row prisoners to pay money to atone for their sins and escort the border officials to exchange rice.

古文：九月癸巳，蠲两畿、湖广逋赋。
现代文：九月十二日，免两畿、湖广欠交赋税。
English: On September 12th, tax arrears in the two provinces of Gyeonggi and Gwangju were exempted.

古文：冬十月癸丑，再振陕西饥。
现代文：十月二日，再次赈救陕西饥荒。
English: On October 2nd, the famine in Shaanxi Province was once again averted.

古文：十二月丙辰，下刑部尚书魏源、右都御史陈智等于狱。
现代文：十二月六日，刑部尚书魏源、右都御史陈智等被投入监狱。
English: On December 6, Wei Yuan of the Criminal Investigation Department and Chen Zhi of the Right Capital Investigation Department were sent to prison.

古文：是年，榜葛剌贡麒麟，中外表贺。
现代文：这年，榜葛剌进贡麒麟，朝中内外上表祝贺。
English: This year, Bonggeju entered the tribute of Kirin, and was congratulated on the table inside and outside the DPRK.

古文：进罗琉球中山、暹罗、占城、瓦剌入贡。
现代文：琉球中山、暹罗、占城、瓦剌入朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu Nakayama, Siam, Zhancheng, and Wafang paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：四年春正月壬午，方政破麓川蛮于大寨，追至空泥，败没。
现代文：正统四年正月三日，方政在大寨攻破麓川蛮，追到空泥全军覆灭。
English: On the third day of the first month of the fourth year of the Zhengde era, Fang Zheng broke through the foot of the River Man in Dazhai and chased the whole army to ruin.

古文：二月丁巳，总兵官萧授平贵州计砂叛苗。
现代文：二月八日，总兵官萧授平定贵州计砂叛苗。
English: On February 8th, General Xiao Zhu, the Commander-in-Chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, arrived in Guizhou to quell the guerrillas.

古文：闰月辛丑，释魏源、陈智等，复其官，并宥弃交阯王通、马骐罪。
现代文：闰二月二十三日，释放魏源、陈智等人，恢复其官职，并宽免放弃交趾的王通、马骥罪行。
English: On February 23rd, Wei Yuan, Chen Zhi and others were released and restored to their official positions, and Wang Tong and Ma Jun, who had abandoned their comrades, were pardoned.

古文：三月己酉诏赦天下。
现代文：三月一日，下诏赦免天下。
English: On March 1, the imperial edict of amnesty was issued.

古文：壬子，赐施槃等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：四日，赏赐施等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On the fourth day, there were differences in the rewards given to those who were awarded the highest ranks and ranks, as well as those who came from different backgrounds.

古文：庚申，废辽王贵烚为庶人。
现代文：十二日，废辽王贵火合为庶人。
English: On the twelfth day, the waste Liao Wang Guibao was merged into a commoner.

古文：丁卯，黔国公沐晟卒于军。
现代文：十九日，黔国公沐晟死于军中。
English: On the 19th day of the month, Prince Mu Xi died in the army.

古文：癸酉，增南京及在外文武官军俸廪。
现代文：二十五日，增加南京及在外官员俸禄粮食。
English: On the 25th, the salary of officials in Nanjing and abroad was increased.

古文：夏五月庚戌，右都督沐昂为征南将军，充总兵官，讨思任发。
现代文：五月三日，右都督沐昂任征南将军，充任总兵官，征讨思任发。
English: On May 3, Muang, the right-hand governor, was appointed as the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, and served as the chief military officer.

古文：丁卯，录中外囚。
现代文：二十日，审查中外囚犯。
English: On the 20th, Chinese and foreign prisoners were reviewed.

古文：六月乙未，京师地震。
现代文：六月十九日，京师地震。
English: On June 19th, the Beijing Earthquake occurred.

古文：丁酉，以京畿水灾祭告天地，谕群臣修省。
现代文：二十一日，因京畿水灾而祭告天地，告诉群臣修身反省。
English: On the 21st, due to the floods in Gyeonggi, he made an announcement to the world, telling his ministers to improve themselves and reflect.

古文：戊戌，下诏宽恤，求直言。
现代文：二十二日，下宽恤诏令，征求直言。
English: On the 22nd, he issued an edict of clemency to solicit candid opinions.

古文：秋七月庚戌，免两畿、山东、江西、河南被灾税粮。
现代文：七月四日，免两畿、山东、江西、河南受灾税粮。
English: On July 4, the disaster-affected tax grain in the two Kis, Shandong, Jiangxi and Henan provinces was exempted.

古文：壬申，汰冗官。
现代文：二十六日，淘汰冗官。
English: On the 26th, redundant officials were eliminated.

古文：八月戊戌，增设沿海备倭官。
现代文：八月二十三日，增设沿海防备倭寇官员。
English: On August 23rd, officials for coastal defense against Japanese piracy were added.

古文：己亥，京师地震。
现代文：二十四日，京师地震。
English: On the 29th, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：冬十二月丁丑，都督同知李安充总兵官，佥都御史王翱参赞军务，讨松潘祈命族叛番。
现代文：十二月三日，都督同知李安任总兵官，佥都御史王翱辅佐军务，征讨松藩祈命簇叛乱番人。
English: On December 3, the governor of the capital, Tongzhi Li'an, was appointed as the chief military officer, and the governor of the capital, Wang Qianfu, was appointed as the assistant of military affairs to recruit the guards of the rebellion in Songpan.

古文：是年，琉球、占城、安南、瓦剌、榜葛剌、满剌加、哈密入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球、占城、安南、瓦剌、榜葛剌、满剌加、哈密入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Ryukyu, Zhancheng, Annan, Wafang, Pangge, Manchukuo, and Hami paid tribute to the North.

古文：五年春正月己未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正统五年正月十六日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of orthodoxy, a grand festival took place in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：二月乙亥，侍讲学士马愉、侍讲曹鼐入阁预机务。
现代文：二月二日，侍讲学士马愉、侍讲曹鼐入文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: On February 2nd, Ma Yu, an assistant lecturer, and Cao Yu, an assistant lecturer, came to Wen Yuange to participate in important affairs.

古文：甲申，佥都御史张纯、大理少卿李畛振抚畿内流民。
现代文：十一日，佥都御史张纯、大理少卿李畛安抚赈济畿内流民。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhang Chun, the Grand Historian of Gyeongju, and Li Yean An, the Junior Minister of Dalian, came to the aid of the exiles in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：三月戊申，建北京宫殿。
现代文：三月六日，建北京宫殿。
English: On March 6, the Beijing Palace was built.

古文：夏四月壬申，免山西逋赋。
现代文：四月一日，减免山西欠交赋税。
English: On April 1, Shanxi's tax arrears will be reduced and exempted.

古文：丙戌，祈命族番降。
现代文：十五日，祈命簇番投降。
English: On the fifteenth day, they prayed for their lives and surrendered.

古文：五月，征麓川，参将张荣败绩于芒市。
现代文：五月，征麓川，参将张荣在芒市失败。
English: In May, Zhang Rong, the general in charge of conquering the Luchuan River, failed in Mang City.

古文：六月丁丑，免两畿被来田粮。
现代文：六月七日，免两畿遭灾田粮。
English: On June 7th, the rice fields in the two Kansai regions were spared from the disaster.

古文：戊寅，录囚。
现代文：八日，审查囚犯。
English: On the eighth day, the prisoners were examined.

古文：秋七月辛丑遣刑部侍郎何文渊等分行天下，修备荒之政。
现代文：七月一日，派刑部侍郎何文渊等分别巡行天下，整治备荒政事。
English: On July 1st, He Wenyuan, a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department, and others were sent to patrol the country to rectify and prepare for the turbulent political situation.

古文：壬寅，杨荣卒。
现代文：二日，杨荣死。
English: On the second day, Yang Rong passed away.

古文：八月乙未，令各边修举荒政。
现代文：八月二十六日，命各边境整治备荒政事。
English: On August 26th, he ordered all borders to be rectified and preparations made for a state of emergency.

古文：九月壬寅，蠲云南逋赋。
现代文：九月三日，免云南欠交赋税。
English: On September 3, Yunnan was exempted from tax arrears.

古文：冬十一月壬寅，振浙江饥。
现代文：十一月三日，赈救浙江饥荒。
English: On November 3rd, the famine relief in Zhejiang began.

古文：壬子，免苏、松、常、镇、嘉、湖水灾税粮。
现代文：十三日，免苏、松、常、镇、嘉、湖州遭水灾后税粮。
English: On the 13th, tax grain was exempted from Su, Song, Chang, Zhen, Jia and Huzhou after floods.

古文：丁巳，广西僧杨行祥伪称建文帝，械送京师，锢锦衣卫狱死。
现代文：十八日，广西僧人杨行祥假称是建文帝，被押送到京师，囚禁在锦衣卫狱中而死。
English: On the 18th, Yang Xiangxiang, a monk from Guangxi, pretended to be Emperor Jianwen. He was sent to Beijing and died in the Jinwei Prison.

古文：乙丑，沐昂讨平师宗叛蛮。
现代文：二十六日，沐昂征讨并平定师宗叛蛮。
English: On the 26th, Muang subdued and defeated the rebellion of Shizong.

古文：十二月壬午，免南畿浙江、山东、河南被灾税粮。
现代文：十二月十四日，免南畿、浙江、山东、河南遭灾税粮。
English: On December 14th, the disaster-hit grain in Nanki, Zhejiang, Shandong and Henan was exempted from the tax.

古文：是年，占城、琉球中山、哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，占城、琉球中山、哈密、乌斯藏来朝进贡。
English: In this year, Jamsil, Ryukyu Nakayama, Hami, and Usuzo came to pay tribute.

古文：六年春正月己亥朔，日当食，不见，礼官请表贺，不许。
现代文：正统六年正月一日，应该有日食，但看不见。礼官请求上表祝贺，不许。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of orthodoxy, there should be a solar eclipse, but it cannot be seen.

古文：庚戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 13th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：乙卯，以庄浪地屡震，躬礼郊庙，遣使祭西方岳镇。
现代文：十七日，因庄浪多次地震，亲自去郊庙祭祀，还派遣使者祭祀西方岳、镇。
English: On the 17th, due to multiple earthquakes in Zhuanglang, he personally went to the suburb temple to offer sacrifices, and also sent an emissary to offer sacrifices to Xidagatake and the town.

古文：大举征麓川，定西伯蒋贵为平蛮将军，都督同知李安、佥事刘聚副之，兵部尚书王骥总督军务。
现代文：大举进攻麓川，定西伯蒋贵为平蛮将军，都督同知李安、佥事刘聚为副将，兵部尚书王骥总督军务。
English: He attacked Luchuan in a big way, with Ding Xi Bo, Jiang Gui as the general, the governor Tongzhi, Li An, and An Zhi, Liu Ju, as vice-generals, and the military commander, Shang Shuxu, as the military governor.

古文：三月庚子，下兵部侍郎于谦于狱。
现代文：三月三日，兵部侍郎于谦被下狱。
English: On March 3, Yu Qian was released from prison.

古文：夏四月甲午，以灾异遣使省天下疑狱。
现代文：四月二十八日，因灾害异常派使臣察看天下未决案件。
English: On April 28th, due to the unusual disaster, envoys were sent to inspect the pending cases around the world.

古文：五月甲寅，刑部侍郎何文渊、大理卿王文录在京刑狱，巡抚侍郎周忱、刑科给事中郭瑾录南京刑狱。
现代文：五月十九日，刑部侍郎何文渊、大理卿王文审查在京师刑狱案件。巡抚侍郎周忱、刑科给事中郭瑾审查南京刑狱案件。
English: On May 19th, He Wenyuan and Wang Wen of the Criminal Investigation Department reviewed the punishment prison cases in Beijing, and Zhou Zhen, the inspector, and Guo Yao of the Criminal Investigation Department reviewed the punishment prison cases in Nanjing.

古文：释于谦为大理少卿。
现代文：释放于谦为大理少卿。
English: Yu Qian was released as Dali Shaoqing.

古文：秋七月丁未，振浙江、湖广饥。
现代文：七月十三日，赈济浙江、湖广饥荒。
English: On July 13th, famine broke out in Fujian, Zhejiang, and Guangxi.

古文：冬十月丁丑，户部尚书刘中敷，侍郎吴玺、陈瑺荷校于长安门，旬余释还职。
现代文：十月十四日，户部尚书刘中敷，侍郎吴玺、陈王常受刑于长安门，十五天后释放还职。
English: On October 14th, the head of the household, Shangshu Liu Zhongshiki, and the attendants Wu Xi and Chen Wang Chang were punished at Chang'an Gate. Fifteen days later, they were released and returned to duty.

古文：庚寅，免畿内被灾税粮。
现代文：二十七日，免畿内受灾税粮。
English: On the 27th, disaster-affected tax grain in the Kinai region was exempted.

古文：十一月甲午朔，乾清、坤宁二宫，奉天、华盖、谨身三殿成，大赦。
现代文：十一月一日，乾清、坤宁二宫，奉天、华盖、谨身三殿落成，大肆赦免。
English: On November 1st, the Qianqing, Kunning Second Palace, Bongtian, Huagai, and Jishin Three Temples were completed, and were widely pardoned.

古文：定都北京，文武诸司不称行在。
现代文：定都城北京。文武百官不称行在了。
English: The permanent capital is Beijing. A hundred civil and military officials do not call it a row.

古文：癸卯，王骥拔麓川上江寨。
现代文：十日，王骥攻下麓川上江寨。
English: On the 10th, Wang Yao captured the village of Kawakami Jiazhai at the foot of the mountain.

古文：癸丑，免河南、山东及凤阳等府被灾税粮。
现代文：二十日，免河南、山东及凤阳等府受灾税粮。
English: On the 20th, the disaster-affected grain in Henan, Shandong and Fengyang was exempted from tax.

古文：闰月甲戌，复下刘中敷、吴玺、陈瑺于狱。
现代文：闰十一月十一日，再下刘中敷、吴玺、陈王常于狱中。
English: On the 11th day of the 11th month, Liu Zhongzhi, Wu Gan, and Chen Wangchang were in prison again.

古文：逾年，释中敷为民，玺、瑺戍边。
现代文：过了一年，释放刘中敷为平民，吴玺、陈王常戍边。
English: A year later, Liu Zhongshiki was released as a civilian, and Wu Gan and Chen Wang Changshu were released.

古文：十二月，王骥克麓川，思任发走孟养。
现代文：十二月，王骥攻克麓川，思任发败逃于孟养。
English: In December, Wang Hui conquered the Luchuan River, but was defeated and fled to Mengyang.

古文：丁未，班师。
现代文：十五日，回师。
English: On the fifteenth day, I returned to my teacher.

古文：右副总兵李安攻余贼于高黎贡山，败绩。
现代文：左副总兵李安进攻余下贼人于高黎贡山，溃败。
English: Left Vice-Commander-in-Chief Li An attacked the remaining bandits on Gaoligong Mountain and was routed.

古文：是年，占城、瓦剌、哈密入贡。
现代文：这年，占城、瓦剌、哈密入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Zhancheng, Wajie and Hami paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：七年春正月甲戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正统七年正月十二日，在京城南郊大加祭祀。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the 7th year of the Zheng He era, a large-scale ritual was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：二月庚申，如天寿山。
现代文：二月二十九日，到天寿山。
English: February 29th, to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：三月甲子，还宫。
现代文：三月三日回宫。
English: He returned to the Imperial Palace on March 3.

古文：乙亥，免陕西屯粮十之五。
现代文：十四日，免陕西屯田粮食十分之五。
English: On the 14th, five-tenths of the grain in the Shaanxi tonden was exempted.

古文：戊寅，赐刘俨等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十七日，赐刘俨等进士及第，出身各有差别。
English: On the seventeenth day, Liu Ye and others were promoted to the first and second ranks, with different origins.

古文：夏四月甲午，振陕西饥。
现代文：四月四日，赈济陕西饥荒。
English: On April 4, the famine in Shaanxi Province of Fujian Province began.

古文：是月，免山西、河南、山东被灾税粮。
现代文：这月，免山西、河南、山东遭灾税粮。
English: This month, Shanxi, Henan and Shandong were exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：五月壬申，论平麓川功，进封蒋贵为侯，王骥靖远伯。
现代文：五月十三日，论平定交趾功劳，进封蒋贵为侯，王骥为靖远伯。
English: On May 13th, on the subject of the contribution to the pacification of warring parties, Chiang Kai-shek was appointed as the mayor, and Wang Hui as the mayor of Jingyuan.

古文：戊寅，立皇后钱氏。
现代文：十九日，立皇后钱氏。
English: On the 19th, the Qian dynasty was established.

古文：丁亥，倭陷大嵩所。
现代文：二十八日，倭寇攻陷大嵩所。
English: On the 28th, the Japanese invaded and occupied Dasong.

古文：六月壬子，户部侍郎焦宏备倭浙江。
现代文：六月二十三日，户部侍郎焦宏在浙江防备倭寇。
English: On June 23, Jiao Hong, an attendant of the Household Division, was sent to Zhejiang to guard against Japanese pirates.

古文：秋七月丙寅，振陕西饥民，赎民所鬻子女。
现代文：七月八日，赈济陕西饥民，赎回贫民所卖去的子女。
English: On July 8th, the starving people in Shaanxi Province were given food, and the children who had been sold by the poor were redeemed.

古文：八月壬寅，复命王骥总督云南军务。
现代文：八月十五日，又命王骥总督云南军务。
English: On August 15th, he also appointed Wang Qian as the military governor of Yunnan.

古文：九月甲戌，陕西进嘉禾，祀臣请表贺，不许。
现代文：九月十七日，陕西进献嘉禾，礼臣请求上表祝贺，英宗不许。
English: On September 17th, Shaanxi presented Jiahe, and the courtiers asked for congratulations from the table, but Yingzong did not allow it.

古文：冬十月壬辰，兀良哈犯广宁。
现代文：十月五日，兀良哈攻陷广宁。
English: On October 5, Ailiangha captured Guangning.

古文：乙巳，太皇太后崩。
现代文：十八日，太皇太后死。
English: On the 18th, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：十二月，葬诚孝昭皇后于献陵。
现代文：十二月，葬诚孝昭皇后于献陵。
English: In December, the funeral of Empress Chengcheng Xiao Zhao was held at the mausoleum.

古文：是年，占城、瓦剌、哈密、琉球中山、安南、爪哇、土鲁番、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，占城、瓦剌、哈密、琉球中山、安南、爪哇、土鲁番、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Jamsil, Wajin, Hami, Ryukyu Nakayama, Annan, Java, Turuban, and Ussuko paid tribute to the North.

古文：八年春正月丁卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正统八年正月十一日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 8th year of Xuande, the grand festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月己丑，汰南京冗官。
现代文：二月三日，淘汰南京冗官。
English: On February 3, Nanjing redundant officials were eliminated.

古文：戊戌，淮王瞻墺来朝。
现代文：十二日，淮王朱瞻土奥前来朝觐。
English: On the twelfth day, Huai Wang Zhu Zhan Tuo came to the imperial court.

古文：丙午，荆王瞻堈来朝。
现代文：二十日，荆王朱瞻土冈前来朝觐。
English: On the 20th, the king of Jing, Zhu Zhan, came to Tonggang for the morning meal.

古文：夏五月己巳，复命平蛮将军蒋贵、王骥帅师征麓川思任发子思机发。
现代文：五月十五日，又命平蛮将军蒋贵、王骥率军征讨麓川思任发之子思机发。
English: On the 15th of May, he also ordered the generals Jiang Gui and Wang Xi to lead the army to attack the sons of Luchuan Shirenfa and Shichifat.

古文：戊寅，雷震奉天殿鸱吻，敕修省。
现代文：二十四日，雷电震动奉天殿上鸱吻，命群臣修身反省。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the thunder and lightning shook the upper eaves of the temple, and the ministers were forced to reflect on their lives.

古文：壬午，大赦。
现代文：二十八日，大肆赦免。
English: On the 16th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：六月丁亥，侍讲刘球陈十事，下锦衣卫狱，太监王振使指挥马顺杀之。
现代文：六月四日，侍讲刘球上述十件大事，被下锦衣卫狱。太监王振指示指挥马顺杀害刘球。
English: On June 4th, Liu Qiu, the keynote speaker of the above-mentioned ten major events, was imprisoned. Eunuch Wang Zhen instructed Ma Shun to kill Liu Qiu.

古文：甲辰，下大理少卿薛瑄于狱。
现代文：二十一日，大理少卿薛王宣被下狱中。
English: On the 21st, Dali Shaoqing Xue Wangxuan was released from prison.

古文：秋七月戊午，祭酒李时勉荷校于国子监门三日。
现代文：七月五日，祭酒李时勉在国子监门口受刑三天。
English: On July 5th, Li Shimin was sentenced to three days in prison at the gate of the National Children's Prison.

古文：九月甲子，思机发请降。
现代文：九月十三日，思机发请求投降。
English: On September 13th, Si Chuan sent a request for surrender.

古文：冬十一月，宣宗废后胡氏卒。
现代文：十一月，宣宗废除之皇后胡氏死。
English: In November, the Empress Hu, who proclaimed the abolition of Buddhism, died.

古文：十二月癸未，免山东复业民税粮二年。
现代文：十二月三日，免山东归业平民税粮二年。
English: On December 3rd, returning Shandong civilians were exempted from grain tax for two years.

古文：丙戌，驸马都尉焦敬荷校于长安右门。
现代文：六日，驸马都尉焦敬受刑于长安右门。
English: On the 6th, Captain Jiao Jing was sentenced at the right gate of Chang'an.

古文：是年，占城、安南、瓦剌、哈密、爪哇入贡。
现代文：这年，占城、安南、瓦剌、哈密、爪哇入朝进贡。
English: In the same year, Zhangcheng, Annan, Waju, Hami and Java paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：九年春正月甲寅，右都御史王文巡延安、宁夏边。
现代文：正统九年正月四日，右都御史王文巡视延安、宁夏边境。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the 9th year of the Juche era, Wang Wen, the Governor of the Right Capital, went on a tour of Yan'an and the Ningxia border.

古文：辛酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the fifteenth day, in the southern suburbs, a grand ritual was held.

古文：辛未，成国公朱勇，兴安伯徐亨，都督马亮、陈怀，同太监僧保、曹吉祥、刘永诚、但住分道讨兀良哈。
现代文：二十一日，成国公朱勇，兴安伯徐亨，都督马亮、陈怀，同太监僧保、曹吉祥、刘永诚、但住分道并进征讨兀良哈。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhu Yong, the Duke of Chengguo, Xu Heng, the Mayor of Xing'an, Ma Liang, and Chen Huai, as well as the eunuchs Seng Bao, Cao Jixiang, Liu Yongcheng, and Danzhu, marched together to investigate Qiliangha.

古文：二月丙午，王骥击走思机发，俘其孥以献。
现代文：二月十六日，王骥击退思机发，俘虏他的儿子献给英宗。
English: On February 16th, Wang Xi fought off the attack and captured his son to offer to Yingzong.

古文：召骥还。
现代文：召王骥回京。
English: Wang Yao was summoned back to Beijing.

古文：三月辛亥朔，新建太学成，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：三月初一日，新建的太学落成，隆重祭奠先师孔子。
English: On the first day of March, the newly built Taigaku was completed, and a grand ceremony was held to pay tribute to the forerunner of Confucius.

古文：甲子，朱勇等师还。
现代文：十四日，朱勇等回师。
English: On the 14th, Zhu Yong and others returned to the division.

古文：杨士奇卒。
现代文：杨士奇死。
English: Yang Shiji died.

古文：乙丑，叙征兀良哈功，封陈怀平乡伯，马亮招远伯，成国公朱勇等进秩有差。
现代文：十五日，讨论征讨兀良哈功劳，封陈怀平乡伯，马亮为招远伯，成国公朱勇等各加俸禄不等。
English: On the 15th, it was discussed to solicit the merits of Gong Liangha, and Chen Huai Ping was awarded the title of township magistrate, Ma Liang was awarded the title of distant magistrate, and Chengguogong Zhu Yong was awarded the title of provincial magistrate.

古文：夏四月丙戌，翰林学士陈循直文渊阁，预机务。
现代文：四月七日，翰林学士陈循入值文渊阁，参与机要事务。
English: On April 7th, Chen Xuling, a scholar of Hanlin, went to Wenyuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：丁亥，振沙州及赤斤蒙古饥。
现代文：八日，赈救长沙及赤斤蒙古饥荒。
English: On the 8th,  came to the rescue of Changsha and the Mongolian famine.

古文：五月己未，命法司录在京刑狱，刑部侍郎马昂录南京刑狱。
现代文：五月十日，命法官审查在京师刑事案件。刑部侍郎马昂审查南京刑案。
English: On May 10, a judge was appointed to review the criminal case in Beijing. Ma'an, the head of the criminal department, reviewed the Nanjing criminal case.

古文：六月壬午，振湖广、贵州蛮饥。
现代文：六月四日，赈济湖广、贵州蛮人饥荒。
English: On June 4th, the barbarian famine broke out in Hunan, Fujian and Guizhou.

古文：秋七月己酉，下驸马都尉石璟于狱。
现代文：七月二日，下驸马都尉石王景于狱中。
English: On July 2nd, Shih Wang Jing, a lieutenant of the Lower Yunnan Province, was released from prison.

古文：处州贼叶宗留资福安银矿，杀福建参议竺渊。
现代文：处州贼人叶宗留盗窃福安银矿，捕杀福建参议竺渊。
English: Ye Zonglu, a thief from Wenzhou, stole the Fu'an silver mine and killed the Fujian senator Zou Yuan.

古文：癸丑，免河南被灾税粮。
现代文：六日，免河南遭灾税粮。
English: On the 6th, Henan was exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：闰月戊寅，复开福建、浙江银场。
现代文：闰七月一日，再开福建、浙江银场。
English: On July 1, the Fujian and Zhejiang silver markets will reopen.

古文：甲申，瘗暴骸。
现代文：七日，掩埋外露尸骨。
English: Seven days later, the exposed bones were buried.

古文：壬寅，雷震奉先殿鸱吻。
现代文：二十五日，雷电震动奉天殿上鸱吻。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the thunder and lightning shook the upper eaves of the Temple of Heaven.

古文：八月庚戌，免陕西被灾税粮，赎民所鬻子女。
现代文：八月四日，免陕西遭灾税粮，赎回百姓所卖去的子女。
English: On August 4, Shaanxi was exempted from the disaster tax grain, and the children sold by the people were redeemed.

古文：甲戌，敕边将备瓦剌也先。
现代文：二十八日，告诫边将防备瓦剌也先。
English: On the 28th, the border guards were also warned to be on the lookout for corrugated iron.

古文：九月丁亥，靖远伯王骥、右都御史陈镒经理西北边备。
现代文：九月十二日，靖远伯王骥、右都御史陈镒经理西北边防守备。
English: On September 12th, Jingyuan Bo Wangyao, the manager of the right capital, Chenyao, prepared to defend the northwest.

古文：冬十月丙午朔，日有食之。庚午，兀良哈贡马谢罪。
现代文：十月初一日，有日食。二十五日，兀良哈进贡马匹以谢罪。
English: On the first day of October, there was a solar eclipse. On the 25th, Ailangha brought in tribute horses to express gratitude.

古文：是年，两畿、山东、河南、浙江、湖广大水，江河皆溢。
现代文：这年，两畿、山东、河南、浙江、湖广涨大水，江河大水四溢。
English: This year, the two provinces of Gyeonggi, Shandong, Henan, Zhejiang and Hukang were flooded, with rivers overflowing.

古文：暹罗、琉球中山、瓦剌、安南、乌斯藏、满剌加入贡。
现代文：暹罗、琉球中山、瓦剌、安南、乌斯藏、满剌加入朝进贡。
English: Siam, Ryukyu Nakayama, Wajian, Annan, Wuzang, and Manchukuo joined in the tribute to the North.

古文：十年春正月丙戊，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正统十年正月十二日，大祭天地于京城南部。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the 10th year of orthodoxy, the grand festival was held in the southern part of the capital.

古文：戊子，诏举智勇之士。
现代文：十四日，下诏推举有智谋勇敢之人。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued to nominate the wisest and bravest.

古文：二月丁巳，京师地震。
现代文：二月十三日，京师地震。
English: On February 13th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：己未，免陕西逋赋。
现代文：十五日，免陕西欠交赋税。
English: On the 15th, Shaanxi was exempted from tax arrears.

古文：丙寅，兀良哈贡马，请贷犯边者罪，不许。
现代文：二十二日，兀良哈进贡马匹，请求宽恕侵犯边境之罪，英宗不许。
English: On the 22nd, Ailiangha brought tribute horses and asked for forgiveness for the crime of violating the border, but Yingzong did not allow it.

古文：夏四月甲辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：二十八日，到天寿山。三月三日，回宫。七日，思机发入朝进贡谢罪。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：庚申，诏所在有司饲逃民复业及流移就食者。
现代文：十七日，下诏有关官吏给归业逃民及流民饭吃。
English: On the 17th, the relevant officials ordered the returning refugees and displaced people to eat.

古文：六月乙丑，振陕西饥。免田租三之二。
现代文：六月二十三日，赈济陕西饥荒，免除田租三分之二。
English: On June 23rd, Shaanxi Province was exempted from paying two-thirds of its farm rent.

古文：秋七月乙未，减粜河南、怀庆仓粟、济山、陕饥。
现代文：七月二十四日，减价出卖河南、怀庆仓库里的粮食，以赈济山、陕饥荒。
English: On July 24th, grain in warehouses in Henan and Huaiqing was sold at reduced prices, leading to famine in Shanxi and Shanxi.

古文：八月癸丑，免湖广旱灾秋粮。
现代文：八月十二日，免湖广旱灾秋粮。
English: On August 12th, the autumn grain harvest was exempted from the drought in Guangxi.

古文：丙辰，免苏、松、嘉、湖十四府州水灾秋粮。
现代文：十五日，免苏、松、嘉、湖十四府州遭水灾秋粮。
English: On the 15th, the 14 prefectures of Su, Song, Jia and Hubei were exempted from the flood.

古文：冬十月戊辰，侍读学士苗衷为兵部侍郎，侍讲学士高谷为工部侍郎，并入阁预机务。
现代文：十月二十八日，侍读学士苗衷为兵部侍郎，侍讲学士高谷为工部侍郎，一起入值文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: On October 28th, Miao Zhen, a bachelor of attendance, was appointed as the attendant of the military department, and Takaya, a bachelor of attendance and lecturer, was appointed as the attendant of the engineering department, and they were both assigned to Wenyu Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：十二月丙辰，缅甸获思任发，斩其首送京师。
现代文：十二月十七日，缅甸抓获思任发杀其头送到京师。
English: On December 17th, Myanmar captured Siyon and sent his head to Beijing.

古文：壬戌，输河南粟振陕西饥。
现代文：二十三日，运送河南粮食赈救陕西饥荒。
English: On the 23rd, it transported grain from Henan to relieve the famine in Shaanxi.

古文：广西总兵官安远侯柳溥讨平庆远叛蛮。
现代文：广西总兵官安远侯柳溥平定庆远叛蛮。
English: Guangxi's military commander Anyuan Hou Liuqian pinned down Qingyuan's rebellion.

古文：是年，琉球中山、哈密、亦力把里、安南、占城、满剌加、锡兰山、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球中山、哈密、亦力把里、安南、占城、满剌加、锡兰山、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Hami, Yirikotori, Annan, Zhancheng, Manchukuo, Mount Ceylon, Samarkand, and Ussuri paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十一年春正月己卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正统十一年正月十一日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the eleventh day of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of orthodoxy, a great festival will take place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：庚辰，予太监王振等弟侄世袭锦衣卫官。
现代文：十二日，授与太监王振等弟侄世袭锦衣卫官职。
English: On the 12th, the eunuch Wang Zhen and other brothers and nephews were awarded the hereditary Jin clothing guard post.

古文：二月辛酉，异气见华盖、奉天殿，遣官祭告天地。
现代文：二月二十三日，华盖、奉天殿出现异常气体，派官吏祭告天地。
English: On February 23rd, abnormal gas appeared in the Huagai and Bongtian halls, and officials were dispatched to warn the world.

古文：癸亥，诏恤刑狱。
现代文：二十五日，下诏体恤刑狱。
English: On the 25th, he was released on compassionate grounds.

古文：三月戊辰，下户部尚书王佐、刑部尚书金濂、右都御史陈镒等于锦衣卫狱，寻释之。
现代文：三月一日，下户部尚书王佐、刑部尚书金濂、右都御史陈镒等于锦衣卫狱，不久释放。
English: On March 1, Shangshu Wangzu of the Lower Household Division, Shangshu Jinjun of the Criminal Division, and Chenjun of the Right Metropolitan Division were taken to Jinbei Prison, and were soon released.

古文：壬申，御史柳华督福建、浙江、江西兵讨矿贼。
现代文：五日，御史柳华带领福建、浙江、江西兵征讨矿贼。
English: On the 5th, Governor Shi Liuhua led troops from Fujian, Zhejiang, and Jiangxi to round up the miners.

古文：癸酉，如天寿山。
现代文：六日，到天寿山。
English: On the 24th, to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：庚辰，还宫。
现代文：十三日，回宫。
English: On the 18th, the emperor returned to the imperial palace.

古文：夏六月丙辰，京师地震。
现代文：六月二十日，京师地震。
English: On June 20th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：秋七月癸酉，增市廛税钞。
现代文：七月七日，增加买卖东西的店铺税钞。
English: On July 7th, an increase in the shop tax bill for buying and selling things.

古文：庚辰，杨溥卒。
现代文：十四日，杨溥死。
English: On the 14th, Yang Xuan died.

古文：八月戊戌，免湖广被灾秋粮。
现代文：八月三日，免湖广受灾税粮。
English: On August 3rd, tax-free grain was distributed to the areas affected by the disaster.

古文：庚申，下吏部尚书王真等于狱，寻释之。
现代文：二十五日，户部尚书王直被下狱，不久释放。
English: On the 25th, the head of the household, Shang Shou Wang Zhi, was sent to prison and soon released.

古文：九月辛巳，广西瑶叛，执化州知州茅自得，杀千户汪义。
现代文：九月十六日，广西瑶人反叛，捉拿化州知州茅自得，杀千户汪义。
English: On September 16th, the Xiongnu people of Guangxi rebelled, captured Huazhou, Chizhou and Mao Zedong, and killed Qianhuangyi.

古文：冬十月甲寅，遣给事中、御史分赉诸边军士。
现代文：十月二十日，派给事中、御史分别赏赐各边境将士。
English: On October 20th, Emperor Taizong and Emperor Go-Shi awarded each border soldier separately.

古文：十一月壬申，减殊死以下罪。
现代文：十一月八日，减轻殊死以下罪行。
English: On November 8th, he received a commutation of his sentence to life in prison.

古文：是年，琉球中山、暹罗、安南、爪哇、回回哈密、占城、亦力把里、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球中山、暹罗、安南、爪哇、回回、哈密、占城、亦力把里、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Siam, Annan, Java, Hui Hui, Hami, Zhancheng, Yili Teli, Samarkand, and Usuko paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：十二年春正月癸酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正统十二年正月十日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the 12th year of orthodoxy, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：三月癸亥，如天寿山。
现代文：三月一日，到天寿山。
English: March 1st, to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：庚午，还宫。
现代文：八日回宫。
English: On the 13th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：丙子，免杭嘉、湖被灾秋粮。
现代文：十四日，免杭、嘉、湖州水灾秋粮。
English: On the 14th, the floods in Hangzhou, Jia and Huzhou were averted.

古文：夏四月丁巳，免苏、松、常、镇被灾秋粮。
现代文：四月二十六日，免苏、松、常、镇江遭灾秋粮。
English: On April 26, Su, Song, Chang and Zhenjiang were exempted from the autumn grain.

古文：五月己亥，大理少卿张骥振济宁及淮、扬饥。
现代文：五月九日，大理少卿张骥赈济济宁及淮、扬州饥荒。
English: On May 9, Dali Shaoqing Zhang Xizhi Jining and Huai and Yangzhou famine occurred.

古文：秋七月甲辰，敕各边练军备瓦剌。
现代文：七月十四日，命令各边将练兵防备瓦剌。
English: On the 14th of July, he ordered all sides to train their soldiers to be prepared for war.

古文：八月庚申朔，日有食之。九月乙未，马榆卒。
现代文：八月初一日。有日食。九月六日，马愉死。
English: On the first day of August, there was a solar eclipse. On September 6, Ma Yuxing died.

古文：是年，琉球中山、安南、占城、瓦剌、爪哇、哈密、暹罗入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球中山、安南、占城、瓦剌、爪哇、哈密、暹罗入朝进贡。
English: In that year, the Ryukyu Islands of Nakayama, Annan, Chamseong, Bago, Java, Hami, and Siam paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十三年春正月丁酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正统十三年正月十日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the 13th year of orthodoxy, a grand festival will take place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：三月戊子，诏责孟养宣慰司献思机发。
现代文：三月三日，下诏责备孟养宣慰司献思机发。
English: On March 3, the following edict was issued to reprimand the Mengyang Publicity and Consolation Department.

古文：壬寅，赐彭时等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十七日，赐彭时等进士及第，出身各有差别。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, he bestowed upon Peng Shih and others the title of "Candidate" and "Vice-President," each with a different origin.

古文：王骥仍总督军务，都督同知宫聚为平蛮将军，充总兵官，帅师讨思机发。
现代文：王骥仍然总督军务，都督同知宫聚为平蛮将军，充任总兵官，率兵讨征思机发。
English: Wang Qian was still the governor of military affairs, and the governor of the capital and the palace gathered as a general, served as the chief military officer, and led the soldiers to discuss ideas.

古文：夏四月，免浙江、江西、湖广被灾秋粮。
现代文：夏四月，免浙江、江西、湖广遭灾税粮。
English: In April, Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Hunan provinces were exempted from grain tax.

古文：五月丙戌，遣使捕山东蝗。
现代文：五月二日，派使者捕捉山东蝗虫。
English: On May 2, an envoy was sent to catch the Shandong locusts.

古文：甲辰，刑部侍郎丁铉抚辑河南、山东灾民。
现代文：二十日，刑部侍郎丁铉抚慰、安置河南、山东灾民。
English: On the 20th, Ding Rong, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, comforted and resettled the victims in Henan and Shandong.

古文：秋七月乙酉，河决大名，没三百余里，遣使蠲振。
现代文：七月一日，大名附近黄河决堤，淹没三百多里，派使臣赈济。
English: On July 1, the Yellow River broke through the dike near the daimyo, flooding more than three hundred miles, and sent envoys to help.

古文：己酉河决河南、没曹、濮、东昌，溃寿张沙湾，坏运道，工部侍郎王永和治之。
现代文：二十五日，河南黄河决堤，淹没曹、濮、东昌。寿张沙湾溃堤，冲坏运输线路，工部侍郎王永和负责治理。
English: On the 25th, the Yellow River in Henan broke through the dike, flooding Cao, Handan and Dongchang. Shou Zhangsha Bay broke through the dike, damaging the transportation line. Wang Yonghe, the secretary of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, was responsible for the management.

古文：八月乙卯，福建贼邓茂七作乱。
现代文：八月二日，福建贼邓茂七作乱。
English: On August 2nd, the Fujian bandit Deng Shoushi started a riot.

古文：甲戌，命御史丁瑄捕之。
现代文：二十一日，命令御史丁王宣搜捕邓茂七。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he ordered the king to issue a proclamation to search for and arrest Deng Shouzhi.

古文：冬十一月丙戌，宁阳侯陈懋充总兵官，保定伯梁珤、平江伯陈豫副之，太监曹吉祥、王瑾提督火器，刑部尚书金濂参赞军务，讨邓茂七。
现代文：十一月四日，宁阳侯陈懋充任总兵官，保定伯梁王缶、平江伯陈豫为副帅，太监曹吉祥、王瑾监督火器，刑部尚书金濂辅助军务，征讨邓茂七。
English: On November 4th, Ningyang marquis Chen Wei was appointed as the chief military officer, Baoding Baoliang Wang Can and Pingjiang Baoliang Chen Yu were appointed as vice-commanders, eunuchs Cao Jixiang and Wang Wei supervised firearms, the criminal department Shangshu Jinyu assisted military affairs, and Deng Maoqi was recruited.

古文：甲辰，处州贼流劫金华诸县。
现代文：二十二日，处州贼流动抢劫金华各县。
English: On the 22nd, thieves from all over the state robbed every county in Jinhua.

古文：庚戌，永康侯徐安备倭山东。
现代文：二十八日，永康侯徐安防备山东倭寇。
English: On the 28th, Yongkang Hou Xu'an prepared to defend against Shandong Wokou.

古文：十二月庚午，广东瑶贼作乱。
现代文：十二月十八日，广东瑶人作乱。
English: On December 18th, the people of Guangdong went on a rampage.

古文：是年，琉球中山、安南、占城入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球中山、安南、占城前来朝贡。
English: In that year, the Ryukyu kingdoms of Nakayama, Annan, and Zhancheng came to pay tribute.

古文：瓦剌贡使三千人，赏不如例，遂构衅。
现代文：瓦剌前来朝贡的使臣达三千人，赏赐没按以前的惯例，于是结怨。
English: There were three thousand envoys who came to pay tribute to the court, but the reward was not given according to the previous practice, so there was resentment.

古文：十四年春正月申午，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正统十四年正月十三日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 14th year of orthodoxy, a grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：乙巳，免浙江、福建银课。
现代文：二十四日，免浙江、福建银课。
English: On the 24th, Zhejiang and Fujian silver courses were exempted.

古文：二月丁巳，御史丁瑄、指挥刘福击斩邓茂七于延平。
现代文：二月六日，御史丁王宣、指挥刘福击败并斩杀邓茂七于延平。
English: On February 6, Prince Ding Wangxuan and commander Liu Fu defeated and killed Deng Shouqi in Yanping.

古文：己巳，王骥破思机发于金沙江，又破之鬼哭山，班师。
现代文：十八日，王骥相继在金沙江、鬼哭山大破思机发，尔后班师。
English: On the 18th day, Wang Hui successively broke his mind in Jinsha River and Devil's Cry Mountain, and then became a team leader.

古文：辛未，指挥佥事徐恭元总兵官，讨处州贼叶宗留，工部尚书石璞参赞军务。
现代文：二十日，指挥佥事徐恭充任总兵官，征讨处州贼叶宗留，工部尚书石璞辅助军务。
English: On the 20th, the commander, Anji Xu Gongchong, was appointed as the chief military officer, the commanding officer, Ye Zongrui, was assigned to the provincial command, and the engineering department, Shangshu Shihong, was assigned to the auxiliary military affairs.

古文：三月戊子，如天寿山，癸巳，还宫。
现代文：三月八日，到天寿山。十三日回宫。
English: On March 8th, he went to Tianshou Mountain. On the 13th, he returned to the palace.

古文：夏四月庚戌，处州贼犯崇安，杀都指挥吴刚。
现代文：四月一日，处州贼侵犯崇安，杀都指挥吴刚。
English: On April 1st, the bandits from Wenzhou invaded Chong'an and killed Wu Gang, the commander of the capital.

古文：壬戌，湖广、贵州苗贼大起，命王骥讨之，乙丑，遣御史十三人同中官督福建、浙江银课。
现代文：十三日，湖广、贵州苗贼大起，命令王骥镇压。十六日，派御史十三人同中官监督福建、浙江银课。
English: On the 13th, the seedlings thieves in Hukang and Guizhou rose up and ordered Wang Qi to suppress them. On the 16th, he sent 13 officials to supervise the Fujian and Zhejiang silver class.

古文：五月丙戌，陈懋击破沙县贼。
现代文：五月七日，陈懋攻破沙县盗贼。
English: On May 7th, Chen Yu attacked and defeated the thieves in Sha County.

古文：壬辰，旱，太监金英同法司录囚。
现代文：十三日，天旱，太监金英同法官审查囚犯。
English: On the 13th, due to the drought, the eunuch Kim Young and the judge reviewed the prisoners.

古文：己亥，侍读学士张益直文渊阁，预机务。
现代文：二十日，侍读学士张益入值文渊阁，参与军国大事。
English: On the 20th, Zhang Yixing, a bachelor's student, entered the Wenyuan Pavilion and participated in the military affairs.

古文：庚子，巡按福建御史汪澄弃市，并杀前巡按御史柴文显。
现代文：二十一日，巡按福建御史汪澄斩首弃市示众。还杀前任巡按御史柴文显。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wang Cheng, the governor of Fujian Province, beheaded and abandoned the city to demonstrate to the public. He also killed his predecessor, the governor of Fujian Province, Chai Wenxian.

古文：六月庚戌，靖州苗犯辰溪，都指挥高亮战死。
现代文：六月二日，靖州苗侵犯辰溪，都指挥高亮战死。
English: On June 2nd, the Jingzhou Miao invaded the Chenxi River, and the commander Gao Liang died in the battle.

古文：丙辰，南京谨身诸殿灾。
现代文：八日，南京谨身诸殿发生火灾。
English: On the 8th, a fire broke out in the Great Hall of the People in Nanjing.

古文：甲子，修省，诏河南、山西班军番休者尽赴大同、宣府。
现代文：十六日，修身反省。下诏河南、山西轮留休假的军士全部开赴大同、宣府。
English: On the 16th, after self-cultivation and self-reflection, all the military personnel from Henan and Shanxi who were on leave went to Datong and Xuanfu.

古文：乙丑，西宁侯宋瑛总督大同兵马。
现代文：十七日，西宁侯宋瑛总督大同兵马。
English: On the 17th, the governor of Xining, Song Ying, marched with the soldiers.

古文：己巳，赦天下。
现代文：二十一日，诏赦天下。
English: On the 21st, the Emperor pardoned everyone.

古文：戊寅，平乡伯陈怀，驸马都尉井源，都督王贵、吴克勤，太监林寿，分练京军于大同、宣府，备瓦剌。
现代文：三十日，平乡伯陈怀、驸马都尉井源、都督王贵、吴克勤、太监林寿，分别在大同、宣府训练京师军队，防备瓦剌来犯。
English: On the 30th, the Pingxiang peasant Chen Huai, the horse cavalryman Jingyuan, the governor Wang Gui, Wu Keqin, and the eunuch Lin Shou, respectively in Datong and Xuanfu, trained the Beijing division army to guard against the Varangian invaders.

古文：秋七月己丑，瓦剌也先寇大同，参将吴浩战死，下诏亲征。
现代文：七月十一日，瓦剌也先侵掠大同，参将吴浩战死。英宗下诏亲自出征。
English: On July 11th, the Varangians also invaded and plundered Datong, and General Wu Hao died in the battle. Emperor Yingzong personally went to war.

古文：吏部尚书王直帅群臣谏，不听。
现代文：吏部尚书王直率群臣进谏，英宗不听。
English: Shoshuo, the head of the administrative department, and his forthright group of vassals entered the capital, but Yingzong did not listen.

古文：癸巳，命郕王居守。
现代文：十五日，命成阝王居守京师。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he was ordered to serve as the king's palace guard.

古文：是日，西宁侯宋瑛、武进伯朱冕与瓦剌战于阳和，败没。
现代文：当天，西宁侯宋瑛、武进伯朱冕与瓦剌兵战于阳和，官军败没。
English: On the same day, Xining Hou Song Ying, Wujin Bo Zhu Guan and Varangian soldiers fought in Yanghe, and the government army was defeated.

古文：甲午，发京师。
现代文：十六日，英宗从京师出发。
English: On the 16th, Yingzong set off from Beijing.

古文：乙未，次龙虎台。军中夜惊。
现代文：十七日，到龙虎台，军中深夜惊恐。
English: On the 17th, when they arrived at Longhu Square, the soldiers panicked in the middle of the night.

古文：丁酉，次居庸关。
现代文：十九日，暂住居庸关。
English: On the 19th, he temporarily lived in Yongguan.

古文：辛丑，次宣府。
现代文：二十三日，到宣府。
English: On the 23rd, he went to Xuanfu.

古文：群臣屡请驻跸，不许。
现代文：各位使臣多次请求驻兵休整，英宗不许。
English: The envoys repeatedly asked the garrison to take a rest, but Emperor Yingzong would not allow it.

古文：丙午，次阳和。
现代文：二十八日，到阳和。
English: On the 28th, he arrived in Yanghe.

古文：八月戊申，次大同。
现代文：八月一日，兵临大同。
English: On August 1st, the soldiers marched into Datong.

古文：镇守太监郭敬谏，议旋师。
现代文：镇守大同太监郭敬进谏，主张回师。
English: The town warden, Datong Eunuch Guo Jingjin, came up with the idea of sending him back.

古文：己酉，广宁伯刘安为总兵官，镇大同。
现代文：二日，广宁伯刘安为总兵官，镇守大同。
English: On the second day, Guangningbo Liu An became the chief military officer and the town guard of Datong.

古文：庚戌，师还。
现代文：三日，回师。
English: On the third day, I went back to school.

古文：丁巳，次宣府。
现代文：十日，到宣府。
English: On the 10th, I went to Xuanfu.

古文：庚申，瓦剌兵大至，恭顺侯吴克忠、都督吴克勤战没，成国公朱勇、永顺伯薛绶救之，至鹞儿岭遇伏，全军尽覆。
现代文：十三日，瓦剌兵大举来犯，恭顺侯吴克忠、都督吴克勤战死，成国公朱勇、永顺伯薛绶率兵救援，到鹞儿岭遇到伏兵，全军覆灭。
English: On the 13th, the Varangian soldiers came in large numbers to commit crimes. Gongshun Hou Wu Kezhong and the governor Wu Keqin died in battle. Chengguo Gong Zhu Yong and Yongshun Bo Xuejun led the soldiers to rescue. They encountered an ambush in Jialing, and the whole army was destroyed.

古文：辛酉，次土木，被围。
现代文：十四日，在土木堡被围。
English: On the 14th, they were surrounded in the earthen fort.

古文：壬戌，师溃，死者数十万。
现代文：十五日，官军溃败，数十万人战死。
English: On the 15th, the government army was defeated, and hundreds of thousands of people were killed.

古文：英国公张辅，奉宁侯陈瀛，驸马都尉并源，平乡伯陈怀，襄城伯李珍，遂安伯陈埙，修武伯沈荣，都督梁成、王贵，尚书王佐、邝野，学士曹鼐、张益，侍郎丁铉、王永和，副都御史邓棨等，皆死，帝北狩。
现代文：英国公张辅，泰宁侯陈瀛，驸马都尉井源，平乡伯陈怀，襄城伯李珍，遂安伯陈埙，修武伯沈荣，都督梁成、王贵，尚书王佐、邝聎，学士曹鼐、张益，侍郎丁铉、王永和，副都御史邓蓕等全部战死。
English: The British official Zhang Fu, the Tainin lord Chen Hui, the imperial equerry Jing Yuan, the Pingxiang peer Chen Hui, the Xiangcheng peer Li Zhen, the Sui amber peer Chen Hui, the Xiuwu peer Shen Rong, the provincial governors Liang Cheng, Wang Gui, Shangshu Wang Zuo, Zou, the scholar Cao Hui, Zhang Yi, the attendant Ding Hui, Wang Yonghe, and the vice-governor of the capital, Deng Hui, all died in the battle.

古文：甲子，京师闻败，群臣聚器于朝，侍讲徐珵请南迁，兵部侍郎于谦不可。
现代文：英宗被俘北去。十七日，京师听说前线失败，群臣在朝廷大哭，侍讲徐王呈请求南迁，兵部侍郎于谦不许。
English: On the 17th, the Beijing division heard that the front line had been defeated, the courtiers cried loudly in the imperial court, the attendant Xu Wang requested to move south, and the attendant Yu Qian did not allow it.

古文：乙丑，皇太后命郕王监国。
现代文：十八日，皇太后命成阝王监国。
English: On the 18th, the empress dowager ordered the crown prince to supervise the country.

古文：戊辰，帝至大同。
现代文：二十一日，英宗到大同。
English: On the 21st, Ying Zong arrived in Datong.

古文：己巳，皇太后命立皇子见深为皇太子。
现代文：二十二日，皇太后命令立皇子朱见深为皇太子。
English: On the 22nd, the empress dowager ordered that Prince Zhu Mingshen be appointed crown prince.

古文：辛未，帝至威宁海子。
现代文：二十四日，英宗到威宁海子。
English: On the 24th, Ying Zong went to Weininghaizi.

古文：甲戌，至黑河。
现代文：二十七日，到黑河。
English: On the 27th, to Heihe.

古文：九月癸未，郕王即位，遥尊帝为太上皇帝。
现代文：九月六日，郕王即皇位，遥尊英宗为太上皇帝。
English: On September 6th, Shao Wang ascended the throne, and Emperor Yingzong was enthroned.

