古文：一概明日
现代文：一概明日
English: Everything will be ready tomorrow.

古文：有避债者，偶以事出门，恐人见之，乃顶一笆斗而行。
现代文：有个躲避债务的人，偶然有事要出门，害怕人看见他，就戴着一顶斗笠帽走路。
English: There was a man who avoided debts, and when he had occasion to go out, he was afraid that people would see him, so he walked around wearing a cone hat.

古文：为一债家所识，弹其斗曰： 嘶约如何？ 姑应曰： 明日。 
现代文：但还是被一个债主认出来了，债主就用手弹着躲债的人的斗笠说： 你答应还的债准备什么时候还？ 欠债人姑且应付他说： 明天。 
English: But he was still recognized by a creditor, who flicked his hand at the duel hat of the person hiding the debt and said: When are you going to repay the debt you promised to repay? The debtor said: Tomorrow.

古文：已而雨大作，斗上点击无算。其人慌甚，乃曰： 一概明日。 
现代文：这时，下起了暴雨，雨点接连不断地敲击他头上的斗笠。那个人非常慌张，就说： 全都明天。 
English: At this time, it started to rain heavily, and the raindrops kept hitting the cone on his head. The man was very panicked and said, "It will all be over tomorrow."

古文：忘了下米
现代文：忘了下米
English: Forgot to put the rice down

古文：一人问造酒之法于酒家。
现代文：有个人向酒家请教酿酒的方法。
English: A man asked a winemaker for advice on how to make wine.

古文：酒家曰： 一斗米，一两曲，加二斗水。相掺和，酿七日，便成酒。 
现代文：酒家说： 一斗米，一两曲，加二斗水，相掺和，酿造七天，便成了酒。 
English: The winemaker said: "One bucket of rice, one or two pieces, add two buckets of water, mix together, brew for seven days, and it becomes wine.

古文：其人善忘，归而用水二斗，曲一两，相掺和，七日而尝之，犹水也，乃往诮酒家，谓不传与真法。
现代文：那个人好忘事，回来后，用水二斗，曲一两相掺和，七天后一尝，还是水呀。于是就到酒家那里，说人家没传给他酿酒的真正方法。
English: The man was forgetful, and when he came back, he mixed two measures of water with one or two measures of vinegar, and when he tasted it seven days later, it was still water. So he went to the brewer and said that the true method of making wine had not been passed down to him.

古文：酒家曰： 尔等不循我法耳。 
现代文：酒家说： 你肯定是没按我说的办。 
English: The bartender said, "You sure didn't do what I told you to do."

古文：其人曰： 我循尔法，用二斗水，一两曲。 
现代文：那个人说： 我按你的办法，用了二斗水，一两曲。 
English: The man said, "I did it your way, using two buckets of water and one or two songs.

古文：酒家曰： 可有米么？ 
现代文：酒家问： 放了米没有？ 
English: The sommelier asked: Have you released the rice?

古文：其人俯首思曰： 是我忘记下米。 
现代文：那个人拍拍头，想想说： 呀，我忘记下米啦！ 
English: The man patted his head and thought about saying: Ah, I forgot to make the rice!

古文：健忘
现代文：健忘
English: Forgetfulness

古文：苏人相遇于途，一人问曰： 尊姓？ 曰： 姓张。 
现代文：有两个苏州人在路上相遇了。一个人问： 请问贵姓？ 答： 姓张。 
English: Two Suzhou people met on the road. One person asked: What is your last name? Answer: Zhang.

古文：又问： 尊号？ 
现代文：又问： 请问尊号？ 
English: He also asked, "May I have your honorific title?"

古文：曰： 东桥。 
现代文：答： 东桥。 
English: A: East Bridge.

古文：又问： 尊居？ 
现代文：又问： 住在哪儿？ 
English: He also asked: Where do you live?

古文：曰： 阊门外。 
现代文：答： 阊门外。 
English: A: Out of the gate.

古文：问者点头曰： 是阊门外张东桥。 
现代文：问的人点头说： 你就是阊门外的张东桥。 
English: The person who asked nodded and said: You are Zhang Dongqiao outside the gate.

古文：张骇曰： 公缘何晓得我？ 
现代文：姓张的非常惊讶地问： 相公怎么认识我？ 
English: Surprised, Mr. Zhang asked: How did my father-in-law know me?

古文：问者曰： 方才都是你自说的。 
现代文：问的人说： 你自己刚才说的呀！ 
English: The questioner said: You just said it yourself!

古文：不吃亏
现代文：不吃亏
English: Don't lose out

古文：某甲性迂拙，一日出外省戚，适门外有一车，与他讲价，因嫌价贵，宁愿步行，拟在中途雇车，价必稍廉。
现代文：甲某是个傻瓜，性情愚笨。一天他外出看亲戚，正好门外就有一辆车，跟车夫讲价，嫌太贵，宁愿自己走，打算在半路雇车，想来价钱一定便宜。
English: A is a simpleton with a stupid disposition. One day, he went out to see his relatives, and there was a car just outside the door. He bargained with the driver, but it was too expensive, so he preferred to go by himself. He planned to hire a car halfway, thinking that the price would be cheaper.

古文：不料走了半天，车少人稀，行将半路时，方见一车，索价反昂，某甲喃喃自语道： 还是归去雇车，较为便宜。 
现代文：没想到走了半天，车少人稀。走到一半路时，才看见一辆车，要价反而更高。甲某喃喃自语道： 还是回去雇车，比较便宜。 
English: Unexpectedly, after walking for half a day, the cars were few and far between. When I got halfway, I saw a car, but the asking price was higher. A muttered to himself: I'll go back and hire a car, it's cheaper.

古文：言罢，反奔回家，雇车复往。
现代文：说完，他返回家，然后雇车又走。
English: With that, he returned home, then hired a car and left.

古文：大丈夫
现代文：大丈夫
English: It's okay.

古文：一人被其妻殴打，无奈钻在床下，其妻曰： 快出来。 
现代文：有个人被他的妻子殴打，没有办法便钻到床底下，他的妻子说： 快出来。 
English: One man was beaten by his wife and had no choice but to crawl under the bed. His wife said: Come out.

古文：其人曰： 丈夫说不出去，定不出去。 
现代文：这个人说： 大丈夫说话算数，说不出去，就不出去。 
English: This person said, "It's okay to speak your mind. If you can't speak your mind, you can't go out."

古文：引马入窑
现代文：引马入窑
English: Leading the horse into the kiln

古文：东道索祭文，训蒙师穷迫无措。乃骑东道马，急走荒郊，寻一瓦窑，忙下马奔入避之。
现代文：主人请先生给写篇祭文，先生写不出来，就骑了主人的马，急急忙忙逃到荒郊野外，找到一个瓦窑，慌慌张张下马跑进里面躲了起来。
English: His master asked him to write an offering, but he couldn't figure it out, so he rode his master's horse, hurriedly fled to the wilderness, found a tile kiln, panicked, dismounted and ran inside to hide.

古文：其马踯躅不肯入，蒙师在窑中急骂曰： 你若会作祭文，便在外面立，我是不敢出头矣。 
现代文：那匹马却犹豫着不肯进窑去，先生在窑中气急败坏地骂道： 如果你会作祭文，就在外面站着，我是不敢再露面了。 
English: But the horse hesitantly refused to go into the kiln, and the master scolded him angrily in the kiln: "If you can make an offering, just stand outside, I dare not show my face again."

古文：瞎子吃鱼
现代文：瞎子吃鱼
English: Blind man eats fish

古文：众瞎子打平仗吃鱼，钱少鱼小，鱼小人多，只好用大锅熬汤，大家尝尝鲜味而已。
现代文：几个瞎子合伙买鱼，钱少只能买到很小的鱼，鱼小人又很多，只好用大锅熬汤喝，大家尝尝鲜味罢了。
English: A few blind men buy fish in partnership. With less money, they can only buy very small fish, and there are many small fish, so they have to use a large pot to boil soup, and everyone has to taste the umami.

古文：瞎子没吃过鱼，活的就往锅里扔，小鱼蹦在锅外，而众瞎不知也。
现代文：瞎子没吃过鱼，鱼还是活的，就往锅里扔，小鱼就蹦到了锅的外边，可是瞎子却不知道。
English: The blind man had not eaten any fish, so he threw the fish, which was still alive, into the pot. The little fish jumped out of the pot, but the blind man did not know that.

古文：大家围在锅前，齐声赞曰： 好鲜汤！
现代文：大家围在锅前，都称赞说： 这汤真鲜！这汤真鲜！ 
English: Everyone gathered around the pot and praised: This soup is really fresh! This soup is really fresh!

古文：好鲜汤！ 谁知那鱼在地上蹦，蹦在瞎子脚上，呼曰： 鱼没在锅内，大家都要鲜死了。 
现代文：谁知那条鱼在地上蹦，蹦到了一个瞎子的脚面上。瞎子大喊着说： 鱼还没有放在锅里。 几个瞎子感叹地说： 阿弥陀佛，幸亏鱼在锅外，若在锅内，大家都要鲜死了。 
English: Who knows, that fish jumped on the ground and landed on the foot of a blind man. The blind man shouted, "The fish hasn't been put in the pot yet." Several blind men sighed and said, "Amitabha, fortunately the fish is outside the pot, if it was inside the pot, everyone would be dead."

古文：痴疑生
现代文：痴疑生
English: The Dumb and Dumber

古文：一秀才痴而多疑，夜在家曾读暗处，俟其妻过，突出拥之。
现代文：从前有个秀才，又呆又多疑。有一天夜里，他在家里暗处读书，等到她的妻子从旁边经过时，他突然跑出来抱住妻子。
English: Once upon a time, there was a scholar who was shy and suspicious. One night, he was reading in the dark at home, and when his wife passed by, he suddenly ran out and hugged her.

古文：妻惊惧大骂，秀才喜曰： 吾家出一贞妇矣。 
现代文：妻子惊叫着拒绝，而且大吵大骂，秀才高兴地说： 我家出了个贞洁妇女呀。 
English: The wife screamed and refused, and they quarreled and swore. The scholar said happily: My family has produced a chaste woman.

古文：尝看史书，至不平处，必拍案切齿，一日，看秦桧杀岳武穆，不觉甚怒，拍桌大骂不休。
现代文：他在看史书时，读到不平的地方，一定会拍桌子咬牙痛恨。一天，他看到秦桧杀岳飞，不觉又生气，拍桌子大骂不止。
English: When he was reading history books, he read about the uneven places, he would surely hate the table and bite his teeth. One day, when he saw Qin Zheng killing Yuefei, he was unconsciously angry and cursed the table.

古文：其妻劝之曰： 家中只有十张桌，君已碎其八矣，何不留此桌吃饭也。 
现代文：他的妻子劝他说： 家里只有十张桌子，夫君已经拍坏了八张，你为什么不留下这张桌子吃饭用呢？ 
English: His wife said to him, "There are only ten tables in our house, and your husband has broken eight of them. Why don't you use this table for dining?"

古文：秀才叱之曰： 你或与秦桧通奸耶？ 
现代文：秀才斥责妻子说： 你莫不是与秦桧通奸了？ 
English: Xiu Cai scolded his wife, saying: Didn't you commit adultery with Qin Hui?

古文：遂痛打其妻。
现代文：于是就把他的妻子痛打了一顿。
English: He then beat his wife severely.

古文：我有马足
现代文：我有马足
English: I've got club feet

古文：一富翁不通文，有借马者，致信于富翁云： 偶欲他出，祈假骏足一乘。 
现代文：有个富翁不通文墨，有个借马的人，给他写信道： 偶尔有事需要外出，想借骏足一乘。 
English: There was a rich man who was illiterate. A man who had borrowed a horse wrote to him, "Occasionally, I need to go out for something, and I would like to borrow a donkey for a ride.

古文：翁大怒曰： 我就有两只脚，如何借得人？
现代文：富翁非常生气地说： 我就只有两只脚，怎么能够借给别人呢？
English: The rich man was very angry and said, "I only have two feet, how can I lend them to someone else?"

古文：我的朋友最多，都要借起来，还要把我大卸八块呢？ 
现代文：我的朋友最多，如果都要借起来，还不把我大卸八块？ 
English: I have the most friends. If they all want to borrow money, won't they take a big chunk out of me?

古文：友在旁解曰： 所谓骏足者，马足也。 
现代文：有个朋友在旁边解释说： 所谓骏足，就是马足呀。 
English: A friend nearby explained: "The so-called lame foot is a horse's foot.

古文：翁益怒曰： 我的足是马足，他的腿是驴腿，他的头是狗头。 
现代文：富翁更加生气地骂道： 我的足是马足，他的腿是驴腿，他的头是狗头。 
English: The rich man became even more angry and cursed: My feet are horse feet, his legs are donkey legs, and his head is a dog's head.

古文：可要开刀
现代文：可要开刀
English: But it needs to be done.

古文：甲乙二人，各用一仆，甲仆性极灵敏，善于拍马，开出口来，都是吉利言语。乙仆性甚愚鲁，说出话来，每每不吉，主人屡次教导他终不见效。
现代文：甲乙两个人，各用一个仆人。甲的仆人非常灵敏，善于拍马，说出话来，都是吉祥语、好听的话；乙的仆人很愚笨，说出话来，往往都是不吉利、难听的话，主人多次教导他，他总是没什么改变。
English: Two people, A and B, each use a servant. A's servant is very sensitive, good at patting horses, and says words that are auspicious and pleasant; B's servant is very stupid, and says words that are often unlucky and unpleasant. The master has taught him many times, and he always has nothing to change.

古文：一日，乙携仆往甲处贺喜，饮酒时适在同席。
现代文：一天，乙带着仆人到甲处贺喜，喝酒时正好在一张桌子上。
English: One day, B took his servant to A's place to congratulate him, and happened to be at a table when he was drinking.

古文：甲醉时，甲仆上前问曰： 主人可要开饭否？ 
现代文：甲喝醉时，甲的仆人就机灵地上前问道： 主人是不是可以开饭了？ 
English: When A was drunk, A's servant shrewdly stepped forward and asked: Is it possible for the master to prepare dinner?

古文：主人点头答应。
现代文：主人点头答应了。
English: The owner nodded and agreed.

古文：乙归，即以甲仆之言，命蠢仆学习，蠢仆遵命。
现代文：乙回家后，就拿甲的仆人说的话，让自己的仆人学习，愚仆便按主人的要求办了。
English: When B came home, he took the words of A's servant and asked his servant to study them. The stupid servant did as his master asked.

古文：一日，乙欲剃头，命仆呼理发匠至，既至，仆乘机欲行拍马，乃上前禀主人曰： 理发匠已来，主人可要开刀否？ 
现代文：一个狡猾的人正好路过这里，看到这种情况，问清了原因，就说： 这笔账本来是非常难算的，没有别的办法，我就帮你们平分吧，我替你们先拿走一分，怎么样？ 
English: A cunning person happened to be passing by, saw the situation, asked the reason, and said: This bill is very difficult to calculate, there is no other way, I'll help you divide it equally, I'll take one point for you first, how about it?

古文：真神人也二呆子相遇于路，忽拾钱三百，二人分来分去，苦不能均，此二百，则彼一百，此一百，则彼二百，扰攘半晌，莫能决，各怒甚。一黠者过，询其故，曰： 此账本极难分派，无已，在下且作陈平，代输一筹可乎？ 
现代文：于是就装到自己口袋里一百，给两个愚蠢的人各分一百。
English: So he put a hundred in his pocket and gave a hundred to each of the two foolish men.

古文：乃纳己囊一百，二呆子各与一百，分毕，二呆子大惊曰： 先生真神人也，我等二人尚分不均，不料先生作三人分之，且易易也。 
现代文：分完之后，两个愚蠢的人非常吃惊地感叹说： 先生真是神人哪！我们俩怎么分也不平均，不料先生作三个人分它，却很容易就分好了。 
English: After the division, the two stupid people were very surprised and lamented: "The teacher is really a man of God! No matter how we divide it, we are not equal. But when the teacher divided it into three people, it was easy to divide it."

古文：再三称谢而去。
现代文：于是再三道谢而去。
English: So I thanked him again and again and left.

古文：燃衣
现代文：燃衣
English: Burning clothes

古文：一最性急，一最性缓，冬日围炉聚饮。
现代文：一人性子特急，一人性子特慢，冬天两人围着火炉饮酒。
English: One person is an express train, one person is a slow train, and in winter, two people drink alcohol around the stove.

古文：曰： 火烧君裳。 其人遂曳衣而起，怒曰： 既然如此，何不早说？ 性缓者曰： 外人道君性急，不料果然。 
现代文：性急的人衣服被炉火所燃，性慢的人看到后从容地说道： 恰有一事，看见它已经很久，想说恐怕你性急，不说又恐怕对你不利，那么是说还是不说呢？ 性急的人问他何事，性慢的人说： 火烧着了你的衣裳。 性急的人拉衣起来，恼怒道： 既然是这样，为什么不早说？ 性慢的人说： 外人说你性急，果然如此。 
English: The quick-tempered man's clothes were burned by the fire, the slow-tempered man saw it and calmly said: There is just one thing, it has been a long time since I saw it, I want to say that I'm afraid you're impatient, if I don't say it, I'm afraid it will be bad for you, so should I say it or not? The quick-tempered man asked him what it was, the slow-tempered man said: The fire burned your clothes. The quick-tempered man pulled up his clothes and said angrily: If that's the case, why didn't you say something earlier? The slow-

古文：卖弄
现代文：卖弄
English: Showing off

古文：一亲家新置一床，穷工极丽。自思： 如此好床，不使亲家一见，枉自埋没。 乃装有病，偃卧床中，好使亲家来望。
现代文：有个亲家新置一床，穷工极丽，自己想如此好床，如不让亲家一看，实在妄自埋没，于是假装患病，仰卧床中，好使亲家前来探望。
English: A relative had a new bed made, the workmanship was superb, he wanted such a good bed, if he didn't let his relatives have a look at it, he really buried himself, so he pretended to be ill, lying on his back in bed, so that his relatives could come to visit.

古文：那边亲家做得新裤一条，亦欲卖弄，闻病欣然往探。
现代文：正巧那边亲家做了一条新裤也要卖弄，听说亲家病了，欣然前往探视。
English: It just so happened that a relative over there had made a pair of new trousers to show off. When he heard that his relative was ill, he gladly went to visit.

古文：即至，以一足架起，故将衣服撩开，使裤现出在外，方问曰： 亲翁所染何症，而清减至此？ 
现代文：到了亲家后，把一只脚架起，故意将衣服撩开，使裤子显现于外。探视的亲家问： 亲翁患了何病而愁闷到这种地步？ 
English: After arriving at his relatives' home, he set up a scaffold and deliberately pried open his clothes to reveal his trousers. The visiting relatives asked: What illness did his relative suffer from that made him so depressed?

古文：病者曰： 小弟的贱恙，却像与亲翁的心病一般。 
现代文：装病的亲家说： 小弟的病和您的心病一样。 品茶
English: The relatives of the malingerer said: My little brother's illness is the same as your heart disease.

古文：品茶乡下亲家进城探望。城里亲家，待以松萝泉水茶。
现代文：乡下亲家进城探望城里亲家，城里亲家用松萝泉水茶招待。
English: The relatives from the countryside come to the city to visit the relatives in the city, and the relatives in the city are invited to tea with pineapple spring water.

古文：乡人连声赞曰： 好！好！ 
现代文：乡下亲家连声称赞道： 好，好！ 
English: Relatives in the countryside said approvingly: Good, good!

古文：亲翁以为彼能格物，因问曰： 亲家说好，是茶叶好，还是水好？ 
现代文：城里亲家以为他善于识别好坏，于是问道： 亲家说好，是说茶叶好，还是说水好？ 
English: His relatives in the city thought that he was good at distinguishing between good and bad, so they asked: When relatives say good, do they mean good tea or good water?

古文：乡人答曰： 热得有趣。 
现代文：乡下亲家回答道： 是热得好。 
English: The villager replied, "Yes, it's very hot."

古文：佛像
现代文：佛像
English: Buddha statue

古文：乡下亲家到城里亲家书房中，将文章揭看，摇首不已。
现代文：乡下亲家到城里亲家书房中，将文章翻看了许多，摇头不已。
English: When the relatives from the countryside came to the study of the relatives in the city, they looked over the article a lot and shook their heads.

古文：亲家说： 亲翁无有不得意的么？ 
现代文：城里亲家说： 亲翁，没有得意的吗？ 
English: The relatives in the city said, "Brother-in-law, aren't you lucky?

古文：答云： 正是，看了半日，并没有一张佛像在上面。 
现代文：乡下亲家回答说： 正是，看了半天，上面没有一张佛像。 固执
English: The villager replied, "That's right, after looking at it for half a day, there isn't a single Buddha statue on it.

古文：固执一父子性刚，平素不肯让人。
现代文：有父子俩性子极犟，平素不肯让人。
English: Both father and son are extremely stubborn and will never let anyone get close to them.

古文：一日，父留客饭，命子入城买肉。
现代文：一天父亲留客人吃饭，让儿子进城买肉。
English: One day, the father kept a guest for dinner and let his son go into town to buy meat.

古文：子买讫，将出城门，值一人对面而来，各不相让，遂挺立良久。
现代文：儿子买肉后刚要出城门，正碰上一个人对面走来，各不相让，于是二人对立起来。
English: My son was just about to leave the city gate after buying meat, when he ran into a man on the other side of the street. They didn't give in to each other, so the two of them stood up against each other.

古文：父寻至见之，对子曰： 你快持肉去，待我与他对立着。 
现代文：过了很长时间，父亲找到这里，见此，对儿子说： 你快拿肉回家去，让我和他对立在这里。 
English: And it came to pass after many days, that the father looked for the young cow, and when he saw her, he said unto his son, Get meat, and get thee home; for I have a quarrel with him here.

古文：应急
现代文：应急
English: Emergency response

古文：主人性急，仆有犯过，连呼家法不至，咆噪愈甚。
现代文：主人性急，有一天仆人有了过失，主人连连喊家人拿板子，可是半天也没有拿来，主人更加生气。
English: The master was anxious. One day, the servant made a mistake. The master shouted at his family to bring the board, but they didn't bring it for half a day. The master was even more angry.

古文：仆人曰： 相公莫恼，请先打两个巴掌应一应急。 
现代文：仆人说： 相公勿恼，请先打两个巴掌应一应急吧！ 
English: The servant said: "Don't worry, comrade, please slap two hands first in case of an emergency!"

古文：掇桶
现代文：掇桶
English: 桶

古文：一人留友夜饮，其人蹙额坚辞。
现代文：有个人留朋友吃饭，朋友紧皱眉头坚持要走。
English: A man asked a friend to stay for dinner. The friend frowned and insisted on leaving.

古文：友究其故，曰： 实不相瞒，贱荆性情最悍，尚有杩子桶未倒。若归迟，则受累不浅矣。 
现代文：主人追问其原因，友回答说： 实不相瞒，我老婆十分厉害，家里有便桶未倒，如果回去晚了，将要受苦不堪矣。 
English: When the host asked the reason, the friend replied, "To tell you the truth, my wife is very strong. We have an upright toilet at home. If I go back late, I will suffer a lot."

古文：其人攘臂而言曰： 大丈夫岂有此理，把我便 其妻忽出，大喝曰： 把你便怎么？ 
现代文：主人挥臂说道： 大丈夫岂有此理，如果是我的话 主人的妻子突然闯出来大声喝斥道： 如果是你怎么样？ 
English: The master waved his arm and said, "Is it all right, husband, if it's me?" The master's wife suddenly burst out and shouted, "What if it's you?"

古文：其人即双膝跪下曰： 把我便掇了就走。 
现代文：主人马上双膝跪下说： 如果是我立刻去倒。 
English: The owner immediately got down on his knees and said, "If it were me, I would have collapsed immediately."

古文：请下操
现代文：请下操
English: Please fuck off

古文：一武弁怯内，而带伤痕。同僚谓曰： 以登坛发令之人，受制于一女子，何以为颜？ 
现代文：有个武官怕老婆，而且身上带有伤痕，同僚对他说： 凭你登坛发号施令之人，却受制于一个女子，有什么脸面？ 
English: There was a military attaché who was afraid of his wife and had scars on his body. A colleague said to him: "What kind of face would you have, a man who gives orders from the rostrum, but is controlled by a woman?

古文：弁曰： 积弱所致，一时整顿不起。 
现代文：武官说： 长期软弱所造成的，一时振作不起来。 
English: The military attaché said: It was caused by long-term weakness, and I couldn't cheer up for a while.

古文：同僚曰： 刀剑士卒，皆可以助兄君威。候其咆哮时，先令军士披挂，枪戟林立，站于两旁，然后与之相拒。
现代文：同僚说： 刀剑士卒可以助兄威，等她发威时，先令军士披挂，枪戟林立站于两旁，然后与她对抗，她慑于军威，敢不降服。 
English: Colleagues said: "A swordsman can help a brother, and when she threatens, a shilling-wearing sergeant, with a forest of guns standing on both sides, then confronts her. She is intimidated by military power and dares not surrender.

古文：彼慑于军威，敢不降服！ 弁从之。及队伍既设，弓矢既张。其妻见之，大喝一声曰： 汝装此模样，欲将何为？ 
现代文：武官听从了同僚的建议。等到队伍摆好阵势，弓箭已经拉开，武官的老婆看见后，大喝一声道： 你装此模样，想要干什么？ 
English: The military attaché followed his colleague's advice. When the team was in position and the bows and arrows had been drawn, the military attaché's wife saw them and shouted: "What are you trying to do, pretending like this?

古文：弁闻之，不觉胆落。急下跪曰： 并无他意，请奶奶赴教场下操。 
现代文：武官听了，不由得差点吓破胆，急忙跪下说： 并无别的意思，请奶奶赴教练场指导。 
English: Hearing this, the military attaché was almost scared out of his wits. He hurriedly knelt down and said, "I didn't mean anything else. I asked my grandma to go to the training ground to guide me.

古文：虎势
现代文：虎势
English: The tiger is rising

古文：有被妻殴者，往诉其友，其友教之曰： 兄平昔懦弱惯了，须放些虎势出来。 
现代文：有个人遭妻打，到朋友家诉说，朋友教导他说： 你平日懦弱惯了，必须放出虎威来。 
English: A man was beaten by his wife and went to a friend's house to complain. The friend said to him, "You are used to being a coward. You must unleash your strength."

古文：友妻从屏后闻之，喝曰： 做虎势便怎么？ 
现代文：朋友的妻子从屏风后听到此话，喝道： 放虎威能怎么样？ 
English: My friend's wife heard this from behind the screen and said, "How can you let the tiger loose?

古文：友惊跪曰： 我若做虎势，你就是李存孝。 
现代文：朋友十分惊恐，跪下说： 我如果做虎威，你就是李存孝。 
English: Terrified, my friend knelt down and said, "If I were a tiger, you would be Li Cunxiao."

古文：访类
现代文：访类
English: Class visits

古文：有惧内者，欲访其类，拜十弟兄。
现代文：有个怕老婆的人，打算访其同类，结拜十个弟兄。
English: There was a misogynist who wanted to visit his kindred and marry ten brothers.

古文：城中已得九人，尚缺一个，因出城访之。
现代文：城里已寻得九人，还缺一个，于是出城寻找。
English: They had already found nine people in the city and were still missing one, so they left the city to search.

古文：见一人掇马桶出。众齐声曰： 此必是我辈也。 
现代文：看见一人出来拿着马桶，众人齐声道： 这人必是我们的同类。 
English: When they saw a man come out holding a toilet, they all said in unison: This man must be our kindred spirit.

古文：相见道相访之意。其人摇手曰： 我在城外做第一个倒不好，反来你城中做第十个。 
现代文：于是相见道明结拜之意，那人摆手说： 我在城外做第一个都不情愿，反来你城中做第十个？ 
English: Then the man waved his hand and said: "I don't want to be the first one out of town, but the tenth one in your city?

古文：吐绿痰
现代文：吐绿痰
English: Spitting green phlegm

古文：两惧内者，皆以积忧成疾。一吐红痰，一吐绿痰。因赴医家疗治。
现代文：有两个怕老婆的，都因长期忧愁患病，一个吐红痰，一个吐绿痰，于是去医生那里治疗。
English: There were two misogynists, both suffering from long-term depression, one spitting red phlegm, one spitting green phlegm, so they went to the doctor for treatment.

古文：医者曰： 红痰从肺出，犹可医。绿痰从胆出，不可医。归治后事可也。 
现代文：医生说： 红痰从肺里出，还能医治；绿痰从胆出，不能医治了，回去准备后事吧。 
English: The doctor said: Red phlegm comes out of the lungs and can still be cured; green phlegm comes out of the gallbladder and cannot be cured. Go back and prepare for the aftermath.

古文：其人问由胆出之故。对曰： 惊破了胆，故吐绿痰。胆既破了，如何医得。 
现代文：吐绿痰的人问绿痰从胆出的缘故，医生说： 惊破了胆，因此吐绿痰，胆已经破了，如何能医治得了。 
English: The man who was spitting green phlegm asked why the green phlegm was coming from his gallbladder. The doctor said, "I burst my gallbladder, that's why I'm spitting green phlegm. My gallbladder is already ruptured, how can I heal it?"

古文：理旧恨
现代文：理旧恨
English: Rationalizing Old Hatred

古文：一怕婆者，婆既死，见婆像悬于柩侧。因理旧恨以拳打之。
现代文：有个人怕老婆，老婆死了，看见老婆的遗像悬挂在棺材一侧，因思旧恨用拳打其遗像。
English: There was a man who was afraid of his wife. His wife had died, and when he saw her portrait hanging on the side of the coffin, he punched it out of spite.

古文：忽风吹轴动，忙缩手大惊曰： 我是取笑作耍。 
现代文：忽然风吹使遗像稍微动了一下，该人不由得缩回手十分吃惊，说： 我是开玩笑和你闹着玩呢！ 
English: Suddenly, a gust of wind caused the effigy to move slightly, and the man couldn't help but draw back his hand in surprise, saying: "I was just joking with you!

古文：敕书
现代文：敕书
English: 書 grow

古文：一官置妾，畏妻，不得自由。
现代文：一官纳了一妾，但惧怕大老婆，不得自由。
English: An official has taken a concubine, but he is afraid of his wife and cannot be free.

古文：怒曰： 我只得奏一本去。 
现代文：有一天，当官的发怒说： 我只好向皇帝奏一本了。 
English: One day, the official said angrily, "I have to play a piece for the emperor."

古文：乃以黄秋裹绫历一册，从外擎回，谓妻曰： 敕旨在此。 
现代文：不多久，拿着一本黄历，从外面跑回来，对妻子说： 圣旨在此。 
English: Not long after, he ran back from outside with a yellow calendar and said to his wife: "The saint is heading this way."

古文：妻颇畏惧。
现代文：妻子听了十分害怕。
English: My wife was very scared.

古文：一日夫出，私启视之。见正月大、二月小，喜云： 原来皇帝也有大小。 
现代文：有一天丈夫外出，妻子打开黄历偷看，见上面写着正月大、二月小，高兴地说： 原来皇帝也有大小老婆。 
English: One day when the husband was out, the wife opened the yellow calendar and peeked inside. She saw that it said the first month was big and the second month was small. She said happily, "Originally, the emperor also had a big and small wife."

古文：看三月大、四月小，倒分得均匀。
现代文：看到三月大、四月小，说： 倒分得均匀。 
English: When he saw the March large and April small, he said, "The inversion is evenly divided."

古文：至五月大、六月小、七月大、八月大，乃数月小。乃大怒云： 竟有这样不公道的皇帝，凉爽天气，竟被她占了受用，如何反把热天都派与我。 
现代文：看到五月大、六月小、七月大、八月大，以后数月小，便大怒说： 竟然有这样不公道的皇帝，凉爽的日子竟全部分给小老婆享用，为何反把大热的日子分给我！ 
English: When she saw the big ones in May, the small ones in June, the big ones in July, the big ones in August, and the small ones a few months later, she flew into a rage and said, "How can there be such an unfair emperor, who lets his little wife enjoy all the cool days, but gives me the hot days!

古文：吃梦中醋
现代文：吃梦中醋
English: Eating vinegar in a dream

古文：一惧内者，忽于梦中失笑。
现代文：有个惧怕老婆的人，突然在睡梦中笑起来。
English: A man who was afraid of his wife suddenly started laughing in his sleep.

古文：妻摇醒曰： 汝梦见何事而得意若此？ 
现代文：妻子摇醒他问道： 你梦见何事而这样得意？ 
English: His wife woke him up and asked, "What did you dream about that you're so happy about?"

古文：夫不能瞒。乃曰： 梦娶一妾。 
现代文：丈夫不敢隐瞒，回答说： 梦到娶了一妾。 
English: The husband, not daring to conceal it, answered: I dreamed of marrying a concubine.

古文：妻大怒，罚跪床下。起寻家法杖之。
现代文：妻子大怒，罚他跪在床下，使用家法用杖揍他。
English: Enraged, his wife ordered him to kneel under the bed and beat him with a cane according to the family custom.

古文：夫曰： 梦幻虚情，如何认做实事？ 
现代文：丈夫说： 梦幻虚情，如何当做实事。 
English: The husband said: "Dreams and illusions, how can they be taken seriously?"

古文：妻曰： 别样梦许你做，这样梦却不许你做的。 
现代文：妻子说： 别样的梦许你做，这样的梦却不许你做。 
English: My wife said: You are allowed to have other dreams, but you are not allowed to have this one.

古文：夫曰： 以后不做就是了。 
现代文：丈夫说： 以后不做就是了。 
English: My husband said, "Just don't do it anymore."

古文：妻曰： 你在梦里做，我如何得知。 
现代文：妻子说： 你在梦里做，我怎么能知道。 
English: My wife said, "You do it in your dreams, how can I know?"

古文：夫曰： 既然如此，待我夜夜醒到天明，再不敢睡就是了。 
现代文：丈夫说： 既然如此，待我夜夜醒到天明，再不睡就是了。 
English: The husband said, "In that case, I'll just stay awake until dawn and never sleep again."

古文：葡萄架倒
现代文：葡萄架倒
English: The vine is upside down.

古文：有一吏惧内，一日被妻挝碎面皮。
现代文：有个官吏怕老婆，一天被妻子抓破脸皮。
English: There was an official who was afraid of his wife. One day, his wife scratched his face.

古文：明日上堂，太守见而问之。吏权词以对曰： 晚上乘凉，葡萄架倒下，故此刮破了。 
现代文：第二天上堂，太守见了问他脸皮怎么破的，官吏搪塞说： 晚上乘凉，葡萄架倒下，因此刮破了。 
English: The next day, when he went to court, the daimyō saw him and asked him how his face was broken. The official prevaricated and said, "It was cold at night, and the racks of grapes fell down, so they were broken."

古文：太守不信。曰： 这一定是你妻子挝碎的，快差皂隶拿来。 
现代文：太守不信，说： 这一定是你妻子抓破的，快派差役捉来。 
English: Tai Shou didn't believe him and said, "This must have been scratched by your wife. Send an officer to catch it."

古文：不意奶奶在后堂潜听，大怒抢出堂外。太守慌谓吏曰： 你且暂退，我内衙葡萄架也要倒了。 
现代文：不料太守的老婆在后堂偷听，十分恼怒地跳出堂外，太守慌忙对官吏说： 你先暂时退下，我内衙葡萄架也要倒了。 
English: Unexpectedly, the wife of the daimyo was eavesdropping in the back hall, and she jumped out of the hall in great anger. The daimyo hurriedly said to the officials, "If you step back for a moment, my grape trellis will fall down."

古文：捶碎夜壶
现代文：捶碎夜壶
English: Chop chop night jug

古文：有病其妻之吃醋者，而相诉于友。谓： 凡买一婢，即不能容。必至别卖而后已。 
现代文：有个人对其老婆好吃醋十分苦恼，告诉给朋友，说每次买婢女，自己的老婆都不能容纳，最终卖掉才心满意足。
English: One man was so distressed by his wife's jealousy that he told a friend that every time he bought a maid, his wife could not contain her, and he was only satisfied when he finally sold her.

古文：一友曰： 贱荆更甚，岂但婢不能容，并不许置一美仆，必至逐去而后已。 
现代文：一个朋友说： 我那老婆更厉害，不但婢女不能容纳，并且不许添置一个美仆，必赶走才罢休。 
English: A friend said, "My wife is more powerful than I am. Not only can I not accommodate a maid, but I am not allowed to have a beautiful servant. I have to drive her away before I can stop."

古文：旁又一友曰： 两位老兄劝你罢，像你老嫂还算贤慧。只看我房下，不但不容婢仆，且不许擅买夜壶，必至捶碎而后已。 
现代文：旁边又一朋友说： 两位大哥息怒，两位老嫂还算贤慧，看我那老婆，不但不容婢仆，并且不许擅买夜壶，否则必捶碎才罢休。 
English: Next to him, another friend said: "The two elder brothers have calmed down, and the two sisters-in-law are still wise. Look at my wife. Not only is she not allowed to have a maid, but she is also not allowed to buy a chamber pot without permission. Otherwise, she will have to give in.

古文：手硬
现代文：手硬
English: Hand-tough

古文：有相士对人谈相云： 男手如枪，女手如姜。一生吃不了米饭，穿不了衣裳。 
现代文：有个相面的先生对人谈相说： 男手如枪，女手如姜，一生吃不了的米饭，穿不了的衣裳。 
English: There is a gentleman with a face-to-face conversation with people: men are like guns, women are like ginger, rice that can't be eaten for a lifetime, clothes that can't be worn.

古文：一人喜曰： 若是这等说，我房下是个有造化的。 
现代文：一个人听后高兴地说： 如果是这样，那么我老婆是个有造化的。 
English: One person said happily, "If that's the case, then my wife is a created being."

古文：人问： 何以见得？ 答曰： 昨晚在床上，嫌我不能尽兴，被她打了一掌，今日还是辣渍渍的。 
现代文：别人问他 为何这样说 ，那个人回答说： 昨晚在床上，嫌我不能尽兴，被她打了一掌，今天还辣渍渍的。 
English: When asked why he said this, the man replied: "Last night in bed, I couldn't enjoy myself, she slapped me, and today I'm covered in spicy stains."

古文：呆郎
现代文：呆郎
English: Stupid

古文：一婿有呆名。
现代文：某人的女婿素有呆名。
English: Someone's son-in-law has a reputation for being an idiot.

古文：舅指门前杨竿问曰： 此物何用？ 
现代文：舅舅指着门前的杨竿问道： 此物有何用？ 
English: My uncle pointed to the pole in front of the door and asked, "What is the use of this thing?"

古文：婿曰： 这树大起来，车轮也做得。 
现代文：女婿说： 这树大起来，车轮也做得。 
English: The son-in-law said, "The tree has grown and the wheels have been made.

古文：舅喜曰： 人言婿呆，皆耍也。 
现代文：舅舅高兴地说： 别人说女婿呆，都是有意耍弄人。 
English: The uncle said happily, "People say that my son-in-law is stupid, but they are just playing a trick on me.

古文：及至厨下，见研酱擂盆。婿又曰： 这盆大起来，石臼也做得。 
现代文：等到进了厨房，看见研酱擂盆，女婿又说： 这盆大起来，石臼也做得。 
English: When he got into the kitchen and saw the sauce ladle, his son-in-law said, "This ladle is bigger than the stone mortar.

古文：适岳母撒一屁，婿即应声曰： 这屁大起来，霹雳也做得。 
现代文：恰巧岳母放了一屁，女婿马上应声道： 这屁大起来，霹雳也做得。 
English: Coincidentally, the mother-in-law farted, and the son-in-law immediately replied, "This fart is big, and so is the toad."

古文：呆子
现代文：呆子
English: Stupid

古文：一呆子性极痴，有日同妻至岳家拜门，设席待之，席上有生柿水果，呆子取来，连皮就吃。其妻在内窥见，只叫得 苦呀 。
现代文：有个呆子极为痴傻。有一天呆子同妻子到岳父家拜访。岳父家设宴招待，席中有生柿水果，呆子拿起来，连皮就吃。其妻在里边看见，叫道： 苦呀。 
English: There was a blockhead who was extremely stupid. One day, the blockhead and his wife went to visit his father-in-law's house. His father-in-law's house was hosting a banquet, and there was fresh persimmon fruit at the table. The blockhead picked it up and ate it with the skin on. His wife saw it inside and exclaimed, "This is bitter."

古文：呆子听见，忙答曰： 苦倒不苦，惹得满口涩得紧着哩。 
现代文：呆子听见，马上答道： 苦倒不苦，只是弄得满嘴太涩了。 赞马
English: When the blockhead heard this, he immediately replied, "It's not painful at all, it's just that my mouth is too dry.

古文：赞马一杭人有三婿，第三者甚呆。
现代文：一个杭州人有三个女婿，三女婿甚呆。
English: A Hangzhou man has three sons-in-law, and the three sons-in-law are very dull.

古文：一日丈人新买一马，命三婿题赞。要形容马之快疾，出口成文，不拘雅俗。
现代文：一天，岳父新买了一匹马，让三个女婿题诗赞颂，要形容马跑得快，出口成文，不拘雅俗。
English: One day, his father-in-law bought a new horse and asked his three sons-in-law to write a poem praising the horse, describing it as fast, elegant, and easy to ride.

古文：长婿曰： 水面搁金针，丈人骑马到山阴。
现代文：长婿说： 水面搁金针，丈人骑马到山阴。
English: The eldest son-in-law said, "Put a gold pin on the surface of the water, and my father-in-law will ride to the shade of the mountain."

古文：骑去又骑来，金针还未沉。 
现代文：骑去又骑来，金针还未沉。 
English: Riding back and forth, the golden needle has not yet sunk.

古文：岳丈赞好。
现代文：岳父称赞作得好。
English: My father-in-law said it was well done.

古文：次及二婿曰： 火上放鹅毛，丈人骑马到余姚。
现代文：二婿说： 火上放鹅毛，丈人骑马到余姚。
English: The second son-in-law said: Put goose feathers on the fire, and the father-in-law rode to Yuyao.

古文：骑去又骑来，鹅毛尚未焦。 
现代文：骑去又骑来，鹅毛尚未焦。 
English: Riding back and forth, the goose feathers are not yet scorched.

古文：再次轮到三婿，呆子沉吟半晌，苦无搜索。忽丈母撒一响屁，呆子曰： 有了。
现代文：之后轮到三婿，呆子沉吟半晌，作不出来，忽然岳母放一响屁，呆子说： 有了。
English: After that, it was the third son-in-law's turn. The blockhead mumbled for a while, but couldn't get it out. Suddenly, his mother-in-law let out a loud fart, and the blockhead said, "That's it.

古文：丈母撒个屁，丈人骑马到诸暨。
现代文：丈母撒个屁，丈人骑马到诸暨。
English: My mother-in-law farted, my father-in-law rode to Zhuji.

古文：骑去又骑来，孔门犹未闭。 
现代文：骑去又骑来，孔门犹未闭。 
English: I rode back and forth, but the gate was still not closed.

古文：乃以纸裹数块，纳之腰间带归，谓妻曰： 汝父家有佳味，我特携来啖汝。 
现代文：携冻水有个呆女婿到岳父家，被留吃饭，碰巧吃冻水美味，于是用纸包起数块，放入腰间带回家里。对妻子说： 你娘家有美味，我特意携带回来给你吃。 
English: A stupid son-in-law came to his father-in-law's house with frozen water and was left to eat. He happened to eat frozen water delicacies, so he wrapped up a few pieces with paper, put them in his waistband and took them home. He said to his wife: Your mother's house has delicacies, I specially brought them back for you to eat.

古文：索之腰中，已消融矣。惊曰： 奇，如何撒出一脬尿，竟自逃走了。 
现代文：说着到腰间去取，冻水已经融化了，呆子大吃一惊道： 奇怪，怎么撒了一泡尿，竟然自己逃走了。 
English: When he went to fetch it from his waist, the frozen water had already melted, and the blockhead was taken aback and said, "It's strange, how did you pee in a puddle and then run away by yourself?"

古文：不道是你
现代文：不道是你
English: No, it's you

古文：新郎愚蠢，连朝不动，新人只得与他亲吻一嘴。其夫大怒，往诉岳母。
现代文：新郎十分愚蠢，结婚后数日毫无动作，新娘只好亲了他一口，新郎大怒，到岳母那去告状。
English: The groom was so stupid that he didn't do anything for days after the wedding, so the bride had to kiss him. The groom was furious and went to his mother-in-law to complain.

古文：曰： 不要恼她，或者不道是你罗。 
现代文：岳母说： 不要恼她，她可能不知道是你哩。 
English: My mother-in-law said: "Don't annoy her, she might not know it's you."

古文：丈母不该
现代文：丈母不该
English: Mother-in-law shouldn't sing

古文：女婿见丈人拜揖，遂将屁股一挖。
现代文：有个女婿见岳父拜揖，便在岳父屁股上抠了一把。
English: When a son-in-law saw his father-in-law bowing, he slapped his father-in-law's bottom.

古文：丈人大怒。婿云： 我只道是丈母罗。 
现代文：岳父大怒，女婿说： 我以为是岳母呢。 
English: The father-in-law was furious, and the son-in-law said, "I thought it was my mother-in-law."

古文：隔了一夜，丈人将婿责之曰： 畜生，我昨晚整整思量了一夜，就是丈母，你也不该。 
现代文：隔了一夜，岳父责怪女婿说： 畜生，我昨晚整整思量了一夜，就是岳母你也不该。 
English: After one night, the father-in-law blamed his son-in-law and said: "Bloody hell, I spent the whole night thinking about it last night, and you shouldn't either, mother-in-law.

古文：事发觉
现代文：事发觉
English: Finding the facts

古文：一人奔走仓皇，友问 何故而急骤若此？ 
现代文：有个人仓皇奔走，朋友问是什么缘故急促至此。
English: A man was running around in a hurry, and his friend asked why he was in such a hurry.

古文：答曰： 我十八年前干差了一事，今日发觉。 
现代文：那人回答说： 我十八年前干错了一件事，今天才发觉。 
English: The man replied, "I did something wrong eighteen years ago, and I just found out about it today.

古文：问： 毕竟何事？ 
现代文：友问： 到底是什么事？ 
English: Friend: What's going on?

古文：乃曰： 小女出嫁。 
现代文：那人回答说： 小女出嫁。 
English: And he said, A maiden shall be married.

古文：父各爨
现代文：父各爨
English: Fathers and Sons

古文：有父子同赴席，父上座，而子径就对席者。
现代文：有父子俩同赴一席，父亲就上座，而儿子径直坐于对面。
English: A father and son go to the same table, the father takes a seat, and the son sits directly opposite.

古文：同席疑之，问： 上席是令尊否？ 
现代文：同席的人疑惑不解，问道： 上座那个人是不是你的父亲？ 
English: People at the table were puzzled and asked: Is that man in the audience your father?

古文：曰： 虽是家父，然各爨久矣。 
现代文：儿子回答道： 虽是家父，但各自烧火煮饭已经很久了。 
English: The son replied, "Even though I am the father of the family, it has been a long time since we cooked on our own.

古文：烧令尊
现代文：烧令尊
English: Burn the Reverend

古文：一人远出，嘱其子曰： 有人问你令尊，可对以家父有事出外，请进拜茶。 
现代文：有个人出远门，嘱咐其儿子说： 如有人问你令尊，你可以回答说家父有事出外，并请进屋里拜茶。 
English: A man who was on a long journey told his son: "If anyone asks you about your father, you can reply that he is away on business and invite him in for tea.

古文：又以其呆恐忘也，书纸付之。
现代文：接着那个人又想到其子呆笨，怕他忘记，于是又把说的话写在一张纸条上交给儿子。
English: Then the man, thinking that his son was stupid and afraid that he would forget, wrote down what he had said on a piece of paper and gave it to his son.

古文：子置袖中，时时取看。
现代文：其子把纸条放在袖中。父亲走后，儿子经常把纸条拿出来察看。
English: His son put the note in his sleeve. After his father left, his son often took the note out and examined it.

古文：至第三日，无人问者，以纸无用，付之灯火。
现代文：到了第三天，仍然无人来访。其子认为纸条已无用处，便投进灯火中烧了。
English: On the third day, there was still no one to visit. His son thought the note was useless, so he threw it into the lamp and burned it.

古文：第四日忽有客至。问： 令尊呢？ 
现代文：第四天突然有客人来访，问道： 令尊呢？ 
English: On the fourth day, a guest suddenly came to visit and asked: Where is your father?

古文：觅袖中纸不得，因对曰： 没了。 
现代文：其儿子寻觅袖中纸条没有找到，于是回答说： 没了。 
English: His son searched for the note in his sleeve and couldn't find it, so he replied: "It's gone."

古文：客惊曰： 几时没的？ 
现代文：客人大吃一惊，问道： 几时没的？ 
English: The guest was taken aback and asked, "How long has it been gone?"

古文：答曰： 昨夜已烧过了。 
现代文：其子回答道： 昨天夜里已经烧了。 
English: His son replied, "It burned down last night."

古文：子守店
现代文：子守店
English: Nursery

古文：有呆子者，父出门令其守店。
现代文：有个呆子，其父亲出门让他守店。
English: There was an idiot whose father sent him out to look after the shop.

古文：忽有买货者至，问： 尊翁有么？ 
现代文：突然来了一个买货的，问道： 尊翁有么？ 
English: Suddenly, a shopper came and asked, "Do you have a son-in-law?"

古文：答曰： 无。 
现代文：呆子回答说： 没有。 
English: The blockhead replied: No.

古文：又问： 尊堂有么？ 
现代文：又问： 尊堂有么？ 
English: He also asked: Is there a hall of fame?

古文：子懊怒曰： 谁知你夫妇两人，都是要卖的。 
现代文：呆子回答说： 也没有。 呆子的父亲回来了解此事后，责怪儿子说； 尊翁是我，尊堂是你母亲，怎么能说没有。 儿子恼怒道： 谁知你俩都是要卖的。 
English: The blockhead replied, "Neither." The blockhead's father came back to find out about this and blamed his son, saying, "How can you say no when your father is me and your mother is your mother?" The son became angry and said, "Who knows, you both are for sale."

古文：活脱话
现代文：活脱话
English: Live and let live

古文：父戒子曰： 凡人说话放活脱些，不可一句说煞。 
现代文：父亲告诫儿子说： 人不管说什么话都要说得活脱些，不能把话说死。 
English: The father admonished his son, "No matter what you say, you have to say it in a way that makes you feel alive. You can't talk yourself to death."

古文：子问如何活脱时，适有邻家来借物件。父指而教之曰： 比如这家来借东西，看人打发，不可竟说多有，不可竟说多无；也有家里有的，也有家里无的，这便活脱了。 
现代文：儿子问如何才能把话说活脱，正好邻居家来借东西，父亲便以邻居来借东西教导说： 比如这家来借东西，看人打发对待，不可直说有很多，也不可以直说没多少；有时说家里有，有时便说家里无，这样说便活脱了。 
English: The son asked how he could get the words out of his mouth. It just so happened that a neighbor came to borrow something, so his father used the neighbor to borrow something to teach him: For example, when this family comes to borrow something, to see how others treat it, you can't say that you have a lot, and you can't say that you don't have much; sometimes you say that you have it at home, and sometimes you say that you don't have it at home, so you can get rid of it.

古文：子记之。
现代文：儿子把父亲的话牢记在心。
English: The son took his father's words to heart.

古文：他日，有客到门问： 令尊在家否？ 
现代文：一天，有客人到家问道： 令尊在家没有？ 
English: One day, a guest came to the house and asked: Is your father at home?

古文：答曰： 我也不好说多，也不好说少；其实也有在家的，也有不在家的。 
现代文：儿子回答道： 我不好说多，也不好说少；其实也有在家的，也有不在家的。 
English: The son replied, "It's not for me to say more or less; in fact, there are those who are at home and those who are not.

古文：母猪肉
现代文：母猪肉
English: suckling pig meat

古文：有卖猪母肉者，嘱其子讳之。
现代文：有个卖母猪肉的人，嘱咐儿子要避忌说是母猪肉。
English: A man who sells sow meat told his son to avoid calling it sow meat.

古文：已而买肉者至，子即谓曰： 我家并非母猪肉。 
现代文：不久来了一个买肉的，儿子对那人说道： 我家卖的不是母猪肉。 
English: Soon a meat buyer came, and the son said to the man: My family does not sell sow meat.

古文：其人觉之，不买而去。
现代文：买肉人一听此话便察觉了，不买走了。
English: On hearing this, the buyer of the meat became aware of this and did not buy it.

古文：父曰： 我已吩咐过，如何反先说起？ 
现代文：父亲十分生气说： 我已经嘱咐过你，为何反先提起？ 
English: The father was very angry and said: I have already told you, why did you bring it up first?

古文：怒而挞之。
现代文：接着揍了儿子一顿。
English: He then beat up his son.

古文：少顷又一买者至，问曰： 此肉皮厚，莫非母猪肉乎？ 
现代文：不一会又来了一个买肉的问道： 此肉皮厚，怕是母猪肉吧？ 
English: After a while, another meat buyer came and asked: This meat is thick-skinned, I'm afraid it's sow meat?

古文：子曰： 何如？
现代文：儿子说： 怎么样？
English: My son said, "How was it?

古文：难道这句话，也是我先说起的？ 
现代文：难道这句话，也是我先说起的？ 
English: Did I say this sentence first?

古文：望孙出气
现代文：望孙出气
English: Mochisun lets out his anger

古文：一不肖子常殴其父，父抱孙不离手，爱惜愈甚。
现代文：有个人不孝，经常殴打自己的父亲，而他的父亲却抱孙子不离手，疼爱更甚。
English: There was an unfilial person who often beat up his own father, while his father held his grandson in his arms and loved him even more.

古文：人问之曰： 令郎不孝，你却钟爱令孙。
现代文：别人问道： 你的儿子不孝，你却疼爱孙子，为什么？ 
English: Others asked: Your son is not filial, but you love your grandson, why?

古文：何也？ 答曰： 不为别的，要抱他大来，好替我出气。 
现代文：老人回答说： 不为别的，要抱他长大，好替我出气。 
English: The old man replied, "If for nothing else, I want to hold him as he grows up, so that he can be angry on my behalf."

古文：买酱醋
现代文：买酱醋
English: Buy soy sauce and vinegar

古文：祖付孙钱二文买酱油、醋，孙去而复回，问曰： 哪个钱买酱油？
现代文：有个老人给孙子二文钱让他买酱油醋，孙子去后又返回来，问道： 哪个钱买酱油？
English: An old man gave his grandson two pennies to buy soy sauce and vinegar. After the grandson left, he came back and asked, "Which money should I use to buy soy sauce?"

古文：哪个钱买醋？ 
现代文：哪个钱买醋？ 
English: Which money buys vinegar?

古文：祖曰： 一个钱酱油，一个钱醋。
现代文：爷爷说： 一个钱买酱油，一个钱买醋。
English: Grandpa said: One money to buy soy sauce, one money to buy vinegar.

古文：随分买，何消问得？ 去移时，又复转问曰： 哪个碗盛酱油？
现代文：难道这还要问吗？ 孙子走了不多时，再次返回来问道： 哪个碗盛酱油？
English: Does this even need to be asked? Not long after the grandson left, he came back again and asked: Which bowl contains soy sauce?

古文：哪个碗盛醋？ 
现代文：哪个碗盛醋？ 
English: Which bowl contains vinegar?

古文：祖怒其痴呆，责之。
现代文：爷爷一听，生气孙子太痴呆，便对孙子进行责罚。
English: Upon hearing this, the grandfather became angry that his grandson was too demented and punished him.

古文：适子进门，问以何故，祖告之。子遂自去其帽，揪发乱打。
现代文：正巧赶上儿子进来，问是什么缘故，老人如实相告，儿子一听便脱掉帽子，揪住自己头发乱打。
English: He just happened to catch up with his son when he came in and asked him why. The old man told him the truth, and his son took off his hat, grabbed his hair and beat him.

古文：父曰： 你敢是疯子？ 
现代文：老人说： 你难道是疯子吗？ 
English: The old man said, "Are you crazy?

古文：子曰： 我不是疯，你打得我的儿子，我难道打不得你的儿子？ 
现代文：儿子回答说： 我不是疯子，你打得我的儿子，我难道打不得你的儿子？ 
English: The son replied: "I'm not crazy, you can beat my son, can't I beat your son?"

古文：劈柴
现代文：劈柴
English: Chopping firewood

古文：父子同劈一柴，父执柯，误伤子指。子骂曰： 老乌龟，汝眼瞎耶？ 
现代文：父子二人同劈一根木头，父亲持斧子，误伤儿子手指，儿子骂道： 老乌龟，你眼睛瞎了吗？ 
English: A father and son were splitting a log together. The father was holding an axe and accidentally injured his son's finger. The son scolded: "Old turtle, are your eyes blind?

古文：孙在旁见祖被骂，意甚不平。遂曰： 狗肏出的，父亲可是骂得的么？ 
现代文：孙子在旁见爷爷被骂，甚感不平，于是喊道： 狗肏出来的，父亲难道是可以骂的吗？ 
English: When his grandson saw his grandfather being scolded, he felt very uneasy, so he shouted: "Can a father be scolded by a dog?

古文：悟到
现代文：悟到
English: Satoru arrives

古文：一富家儿不爱读书，父禁之书馆。
现代文：有个富人的儿子不爱读书，富人硬把儿子禁闭在书房中。
English: There was a rich man's son who didn't like to read. The rich man locked him up in the study.

古文：一日父潜伺窥其动静，见其子开卷吟哦。忽大声曰： 我知之矣。 
现代文：一天，富人窥视其动静，见儿子开卷吟诵，突然大叫道： 我知道了。 
English: One day, the rich man spied on his activities and saw his son opening a scroll and chanting. Suddenly, he shouted, "I know."

古文：父意其有所得，乃喜而问曰： 我儿理会了什么？ 
现代文：富人认为儿子读书有所得，便十分高兴地问道： 我儿领会了什么？ 
English: The rich man thought that his son had gained something from reading, and asked with great pleasure: What did my son understand?

古文：子曰： 书不可不看，我一向只道书是写成的，原来是刻板印就的。 
现代文：儿子回答说： 书不可不看，我过去一向认为书是写成的，原来是刻板印成的。 
English: My son replied, "You must read books. I used to think that books were written, but it turns out that they are printed in block letters.

古文：藏锄
现代文：藏锄
English: Tibetan mastiff

古文：夫在田中耦耕，妻唤吃饭。夫乃高声应曰： 待我藏好锄头，便来也。 
现代文：丈夫在田间耕作，妻子招呼他吃饭，丈夫大声回答道： 等我藏好锄头便来。 
English: The husband was working in the field. His wife beckoned him to come and eat. The husband replied loudly, "I'll come when I've hidden the steamed bread."

古文：及归，妻戒夫曰： 藏锄宜密，你既高声，岂不被人偷去？ 
现代文：丈夫归来后，妻子告诫丈夫道： 藏锄头应秘密进行，你高声叫喊，岂不要被别人偷去。 
English: After her husband's return, his wife admonished him, "Hiding steamed buns should be done secretly. If you shout loudly, don't let others steal them."

古文：因促之往看，锄果失矣。
现代文：边说边催促丈夫去看，丈夫一看锄头果然丢失了。
English: While talking, she urged her husband to take a look, and when he did, the steamed buns were gone.

古文：因急归，低声附其妻耳云： 锄已被人偷去了。 
现代文：于是急忙返回，低声附在妻子耳边说： 锄头已经被人偷去了。 
English: So he hurried back and whispered in his wife's ear: "The steamed bread has been stolen."

古文：较岁
现代文：较岁
English: older than

古文：一人新育女，有以两岁儿来议亲者。
现代文：有个人刚生下一个女儿，便有以两岁儿子来议亲的。
English: One man had just given birth to a daughter when his two-year-old son came to propose marriage.

古文：其人怒曰： 何得欺我！
现代文：那个人大怒说： 为什么要欺辱我。
English: The man angrily said, "Why are you bullying me?

古文：吾女一岁。他子两岁。若吾女十岁，渠儿二十岁矣。
现代文：我女儿一岁，他的儿子两岁；如果我女儿十岁时，那么他的儿子就二十岁了。
English: My daughter is one and his son is two; if my daughter is ten, then his son is twenty.

古文：安得许此老婿！ 
现代文：怎能许配给如此老婿。 
English: How can such an old man be allowed to rule.

古文：妻谓夫曰： 汝算差矣！
现代文：妻子对丈夫说： 你算差了！
English: The wife said to her husband, "You're worse off!

古文：吾女今年虽一岁，等到明年此时，便与彼儿同庚，如何不许？ 
现代文：我们女儿今年虽是一岁，但等到明年，便与他的儿子同岁，为什么不许？ 
English: Although our daughter is one year old this year, she will be the same age as his son next year, why not?

古文：拾簪
现代文：拾簪
English: Picking strawberries

古文：一人在枕边拾得一簪，喜出望外，诉之于友。友曰： 此不是兄的，定是尊嫂的，何喜之有？ 
现代文：有个人在枕边拾到一簪，喜出望外，便告诉了朋友，朋友说： 它不是你的，就必定是你老婆的，何喜之有？ 
English: One man was overjoyed when he found a dragonfly on his pillow and told a friend. The friend said, "If it's not yours, it must be your wife's. What's there to be happy about?"

古文：其人答曰： 便是，不是弟的，又不是房下的，所以造化。 
现代文：那人答道： 正因为不是我的，又不是我老婆的，所以有福分。 
English: The man replied, "Just because it's not mine and it's not my wife's, it's a blessing.

古文：认鞋
现代文：认鞋
English: Shoe recognition

古文：一妇夜与邻人有私，夫适归，邻人逾窗而出。
现代文：有个妇女夜里与邻居私通，丈夫正好回来，邻居跳窗跑走。
English: A woman had a one-night stand with a neighbour. When her husband came home, the neighbour jumped out of the window and ran away.

古文：夫攫得一鞋，骂妻不已。
现代文：丈夫夺取一只鞋，大骂妻子不已。
English: The husband snatches a shoe and berates his wife.

古文：因枕鞋而卧，谓妻曰： 且待天明，认出此鞋，与汝算账！ 
现代文：丈夫枕着那只鞋躺下，对妻子说： 等到天亮时，认出此鞋是谁的，再跟你算账。 
English: The husband lay down with the shoe under his pillow and said to his wife, "Wait until morning to find out who this shoe belongs to, and then I will settle accounts with you."

古文：妻乘其睡熟，以夫鞋易去之。
现代文：妻子乘丈夫睡熟时，用丈夫的鞋子换去原来的鞋。
English: When the wife fell asleep with her husband, she used his shoes to replace the original shoes.

古文：夫晨起复骂，妻使认鞋。见是自己的，乃大悔曰： 我错怪你了，原来昨夜跳窗的倒是我。 
现代文：丈夫早晨起来又骂，妻子让他认鞋，丈夫见是自己的，于是十分后悔地说： 我错怪你了，原来昨天晚上跳窗的是我。 
English: The husband got up in the morning and cursed again. The wife asked him to identify the shoes. The husband saw that they were his own, so he said with great regret: I was wrong to blame you. It was me who jumped out of the window last night.

古文：记酒
现代文：记酒
English: Sake tasting

古文：有觞客者，其妻每出酒一壶，即将锅煤画于脸上记数。
现代文：有个人劝客人饮酒，其妻子每拿出一壶酒，就将锅底灰在脸上画一下。
English: One man urged his guests to drink, and his wife drew the bottom of the pot on her face every time she took out a pot of wine.

古文：主人索酒不已。童子曰： 少吃几壶罢，家主婆脸上，看看有些不好看了。 
现代文：主人一再要酒，仆童说： 老爷少喝几壶吧，你老婆的脸，实在有些不好看了。 
English: The master repeatedly asked for wine, and the servant boy said: Master, drink a few jugs less, your wife's face is really a bit ugly.

古文：杀妻
现代文：杀妻
English: Wife-killing

古文：夫妻相骂，夫恨曰： 臭娼妇，我明日做了皇帝，就杀了你。 
现代文：有夫妻二人对骂，丈夫怨恨道： 臭娼妇，我明日做了皇帝，就杀你。 
English: A husband and wife scolded each other, and the husband grudgingly said, "Stinky whore, if I become emperor tomorrow, I will kill you."

古文：妇日夜忧泣不止。
现代文：妇人听了日夜忧伤哭泣不止。
English: The woman wept inconsolably day and night.

古文：邻女解之曰： 哪有此事，不要听他。 
现代文：邻女规劝她说： 哪里会有此事，不要听他的。 
English: A neighbour advised her: "Wherever this happens, don't listen to him.

古文：妇曰： 我家这个臭乌龟倒从不说谎的，自养的儿女，前年说要卖，当真的旧年都卖去了。 
现代文：妇人说： 我家这个臭乌龟倒是从不说谎的，自己亲生的儿女，前年说要卖，去年当真卖掉了。 
English: The woman said, "This stinking turtle in my family never lies. He said he was going to sell his own children last year, but he actually sold them last year."

古文：呆算
现代文：呆算
English: Calm down

古文：一人家费纯用纹银，或劝以倾销八九成杂用，当有便宜。
现代文：有个人家里支出全用纯银，银匠劝他把纯银熔铸成八成银，那样会有便宜。
English: There was a man who spent all his money on sterling silver at home. The silversmith advised him to have the sterling silver melted and cast into 80% silver, which would be cheaper.

古文：其人取元宝一锭，托熔八成。
现代文：那人取出一锭元宝，让银匠熔为八成银。
English: The man took out a hoard of gold and asked the silversmith to melt it down into 80% silver.

古文：或素知其呆也，止倾四十两付之，而利其余。
现代文：银匠平素知道他很呆，只用了四十两熔铸，其余的留了起来，铸后给了呆子。
English: The silversmith knew plainly that he was stupid. He only used forty-two to melt and cast, and kept the rest. After casting, he gave it to the idiot.

古文：其人问： 元宝五十两，为何反倾四十？ 
现代文：呆子问： 元宝五十两，为什么只熔铸四十？ 
English: The idiot asked: The original treasure is fifty-two yuan, why only smelt forty?

古文：答曰： 五八得四十。 
现代文：银匠回答说： 五八得四十。 
English: The silversmith answered, "Fifty-eight times forty."

古文：其人遽曰： 吾为公误矣，用此等银反无便宜。 
现代文：呆子于是说道： 我误听了你的话，原来用此等银子反无便宜。 
English: The blockhead then said: I misheard you. Originally, there was no cheap way to use this kind of money.

古文：代打
现代文：代打
English: Substitute

古文：有应受官责者，以银三钱雇邻人代往，其人得银，欣然愿替。
现代文：有个应受官府责罚的人，用三钱银子雇了一个邻居代替前往，邻居得到银子，欣然同意代替前往。
English: A man who should have been punished by the authorities hired a neighbor for three silver coins to go instead. The neighbor received the money and readily agreed to go instead.

古文：既见官，官喝打三十，方受数杖，痛极。因私出所得银，尽贿行杖者，得稍从轻。
现代文：等见到官员后，官员吆喝打三十大板，刚挨数杖，十分疼痛，于是偷偷拿出得到的三钱银子，全部贿赂给行杖的人，板子打得才轻了些。
English: After seeing the officials, the officials shouted and beat thirty large boards, just got a few sticks, very painful, so they secretly took out the three pieces of silver they got, all bribed to the people with sticks, and the boards were lighter.

古文：其人出谢前人曰： 蒙公赐银救我性命，不然几乎打杀。 
现代文：邻居挨打后出了官府对雇他的那个人说： 多亏你赐给我三钱银子，救了我的命，不然几乎被打死！ 
English: After his neighbor was beaten, he came out of the government office and said to the man who had hired him: "Thanks to you, you gave me three pieces of silver and saved my life, otherwise I would have almost been beaten to death!"

古文：试试看
现代文：试试看
English: Give it a try

古文：新妇与新郎无缘，临睡即踢打，不容近身。
现代文：新妇与新郎无缘分，一到睡时就踢打，不让近身。
English: The bride and groom are inseparable. As soon as they go to sleep, they kick and hit each other and do not let anyone get close to them.

古文：郎诉之父，父曰： 毕竟你有不是处，所以如此。 
现代文：新郎告诉了父亲，父亲说： 肯定你有不是的地方，所以才这样。 
English: The groom told his father, who said: "You must be in the wrong place, that's why."

古文：子曰： 若不信，今晚你去睡一夜试试看。 
现代文：儿子说： 你若不信，今天晚上你睡一夜试试看。 
English: My son said, "If you don't believe me, try sleeping one night tonight."

古文：靠父膳
现代文：靠父膳
English: On my father's table

古文：一人廿岁生子，其子专靠父膳，不能自立。
现代文：有个人二十岁时生的儿子，其儿子成人后仍然靠父亲养活不能自立。
English: A man had a son who was born when he was 20 years old. When he became an adult, his son still depended on his father for support and could not support himself.

古文：一日算命云： 父寿八十，儿寿六十二。 
现代文：一天算命先生对其父子说： 父亲寿命八十岁，儿子寿命六十二岁。 
English: One day the fortune-teller said to the father and son: The father will live for eighty years, the son for sixty-two years.

古文：其子大哭曰： 这两年叫我如何过得去？ 
现代文：儿子听了大哭起来： 剩下的两年让我怎么活得过去呢？ 
English: Hearing this, my son burst into tears: How am I going to make it through the remaining two years?

古文：觅凳脚
现代文：觅凳脚
English: Looking for the foot of the stool

古文：乡间坐凳，多以现成树丫叉为脚者。
现代文：乡间坐的凳子，大多是用现成的树杈做凳子腿。
English: Most of the stools used in the countryside are made of ready-made tree stumps.

古文：一脚偶坏，主人命仆往山中觅取。
现代文：一天有条凳腿坏了，主人让仆人到山里去寻取。
English: One day, a leg of a stool broke, and the master asked his servant to go to the mountains to look for it.

古文：仆持斧出，竟日空回，主人责之。答曰： 丫叉尽有，都是朝上生，没有向下生的。 
现代文：仆人拿着斧子走了，到了晚上空手而归。主人责备仆人，仆人回答说： 树杈极多，但都是朝上长的，没有朝下长的。 
English: The servant went away with the axe, and in the evening he came back empty-handed. The master reproved the servant, and the servant replied: "There are many thorns, but they all grow upwards, not downwards."

古文：访麦价
现代文：访麦价
English: Wheat prices soar

古文：一人命仆往枫桥打听麦价。仆至桥，闻有呼 吃扯面 者，以为不要钱的，连吃三碗径走。卖面者索钱不得，批其颊九下。
现代文：有个人让仆人到枫桥去打听麦子的价格，仆人到枫桥后，听到有喊吃扯面的，以为不要钱，接连吃了三碗就要走，卖扯面的索要面钱没有得到，便打了他九个耳光。
English: A man asked his servant to go to Maple Bridge to inquire about the price of wheat. After the servant arrived at Maple Bridge, he heard someone shouting to eat noodles, thought that he did not need money, ate three bowls in succession and was about to leave. When he did not get the money he asked for to sell noodles, he slapped him nine times.

古文：急归谓主人曰： 麦价打听不出，面价吾已晓矣。 
现代文：仆人急忙返回对主人说： 麦子的价格没有打听出来，但面价我已经晓得了。 
English: The servant hurried back to his master and said, "I haven't found out the price of the wheat, but I know the face value."

古文：主问： 如何？ 
现代文：主人问： 价格是多少？ 
English: The host asked, "What's the price?"

古文：答曰： 扯面每碗要三个耳光。 
现代文：仆人回答说： 扯面每碗要三个耳光。 
English: The servant replied, "For each bowl of noodles, you need three slaps."

古文：卧锤
现代文：卧锤
English: Crouching Hammer

古文：一人睡在床上，仰面背痛，俯卧肚痛，侧困腰痛，坐起臀痛，百医无效。
现代文：有个人睡在床上，仰卧背痛，俯卧肚痛，侧躺腰痛，坐起屁股痛，求治数医无效。
English: There is a person sleeping on the bed, supine back pain, prone stomach pain, side-lying back pain, sitting up butt pain, seeking treatment from several doctors is ineffective.

古文：或劝其翻床。
现代文：有人劝他翻翻床。
English: He was advised to turn over his bed.

古文：及翻动，见褥底铁秤锤一个，垫在下面。
现代文：待翻动床时，发现褥底下垫着一个秤砣。懒活
English: When he was about to turn over the bed, he found a scale under his armpit.

古文：懒活有极懒者，卧而懒起，家人唤之吃饭，复懒应。
现代文：有个极懒的人，躺着懒得起，家里的人招呼他吃饭，又懒得应声。
English: There was a very lazy man, who was too lazy to lie down, and when his family invited him to dinner, he was too lazy to eat.

古文：良久，度其必饥，乃哀恳之。徐曰： 懒吃得。 
现代文：过了好久，家里人揣度他一定饿了，便恳求他吃饭，懒人缓慢地说： 懒得吃。 
English: After a long time, the family members guessed that he must be hungry and begged him to eat. The lazy man said slowly, "I'm too lazy to eat."

古文：家人曰： 不吃便死，如何使得？ 
现代文：家里人说： 不吃便要饿死，怎能使得？ 
English: The family member said, "If you don't eat, you will starve to death. How can you do that?"

古文：复摇首漫曰： 我亦懒活矣。 
现代文：懒人又摇头懒洋洋地答道： 我也懒得活了。 
English: The lazy man shook his head and replied lazily: "I'm too lazy to live."

古文：白鼻猫
现代文：白鼻猫
English: White-nosed cat

古文：一人素性最懒，终日偃卧不起，每日三餐亦懒于动口，恹恹绝粒，竟至饿毙。
现代文：有个人性情一向十分懒惰，整天睡卧不起，每日三餐也懒于动口，渐渐精神不振断绝了饭食，竟至饿死。
English: There is a person who has always been very lazy, can't sleep all day, and is too lazy to eat three meals a day. Gradually, he lost his spirit and stopped eating, and even starved to death.

古文：冥王以其生前性懒，罚去轮回变猫。
现代文：冥王因他生前性情懒惰，罚其去变猫。
English: Hades punished him for being lazy in his previous life and told him to change into a cat.

古文：懒者曰： 身上毛片，愿求大王赏一全体黑身，单单留一白鼻，感恩实多。 
现代文：懒人说： 身上皮毛，愿求大王赏给一个全身黑色，唯独留一个白鼻子，我将十分感谢您。 
English: The lazy man said, "If you have fur on your body, please ask the king to give you a black body, but leave a white nose. I will be very grateful to you."

古文：王问何故。
现代文：冥王问其是何原因？
English: The Dark Lord asked him what was the reason?

古文：答曰： 我做猫躲在黑地里，鼠见我白鼻，认做是块米糕，贪想偷吃，凑到嘴边，一口咬住，岂不省了无数气力。 
现代文：懒人答道： 我做猫躲在黑地里，老鼠见到我的白鼻子，以为是块米糕，便会贪想偷吃，待它们凑到嘴边时，我便可一口咬住，岂不省了许多力气。 
English: The lazy man replied, "I am like a cat hiding in a dark place. When mice see my white nose, they think it is a piece of rice cake, so they want to steal it. When they come close to my mouth, I can bite them, which saves a lot of effort."

古文：衣软
现代文：衣软
English: 衣软

古文：一乡人穿新浆布衣入城。因出门甚早，衣为露水打湿。及至城中，怪其顿软。
现代文：有个农夫穿着新浆的衣服进城，因为出门太早，衣服被露水打湿，等到了城里，衣服绵软，十分惊疑。
English: There was a farmer who went to the city in new clothes, because he went out too early, his clothes were wet with dew. When he got to the city, his clothes were soft and he was very surprised.

古文：事毕出城，衣为日色曝干，又硬如故。
现代文：办完事从城里出来，衣服被日光晒干，又硬挺如前。
English: After the job is done, they leave the city, their clothes dry in the sun and are as stiff as before.

古文：归谓妻曰： 莫说乡下人进城再硬不起来，连乡下人的衣服进城都会绵软起来。 
现代文：农夫回到家后对妻子说： 不要说乡下人进城硬不起来，就是乡下人的衣服进了城里也会绵软起来。 
English: When the farmer got home, he said to his wife, "Don't say that country people can't get hard when they go to the city. Even country people's clothes get soft when they go to the city."

古文：椅桌受用
现代文：椅桌受用
English: Chairs and tables are used

古文：乡民入城赴席，见椅桌多悬桌围坐褥。
现代文：乡下人进城赴宴，见桌子有围布，椅子有坐褥。
English: When country people go to the city for a banquet, they see that the table has a tablecloth and the chairs have cushions.

古文：归谓人曰： 莫说城里人受用，连城里的椅桌都是极受用的。 
现代文：回乡后对他人说： 不用说城里人多么会享受，就是城里的桌椅都是极会享受的。 
English: After returning to his hometown, he said to others: It goes without saying how much people in the city can enjoy, that is, the tables and chairs in the city are extremely enjoyable.

古文：人问其故，答曰： 桌子穿了绣花裙，椅子都是穿销金背心的。 
现代文：他人问其缘故，乡下人回答说： 桌子穿了绣花裙，椅子都是穿烫金背心的。 
English: When others asked the reason, the villager replied: "The table is dressed in an embroidered dress, and the chairs are dressed in a golden waistcoat.

古文：咸蛋
现代文：咸蛋
English: Salted egg cream

古文：甲乙两乡人入城，偶吃腌蛋。
现代文：甲乙两乡下人进城，偶然吃咸鸭蛋。
English: A and B, two people from the countryside, came to the city and happened to eat salted duck eggs.

古文：甲骇曰： 同一蛋也，此味独何以咸？ 
现代文：甲吃惊地说： 都是一样的鸭蛋，为何唯独这些是咸蛋呢？ 
English: Surprised, A said, "They are all the same duck eggs. Why are these the only salted eggs?"

古文：乙曰： 我知之矣，决定是腌鸭哺的。 
现代文：乙回答说： 我知道是怎么回事，肯定是腌鸭子下的蛋。 
English: B replied: "I know what it is, it must be the eggs laid by the mallard duck.

古文：看戏
现代文：看戏
English: Watching a play

古文：有演《琵琶记》者，而找《关公斩貂蝉》者。乡人见之泣曰： 好个孝顺媳妇，辛苦了一生，竟被那红脸蛮子害了。 
现代文：有个戏班子演完《琵琶记》后，又接着演《关公斩貂蝉》，乡下人看了哭泣说： 好个孝顺的媳妇辛苦了一生，竟被那红脸蛮子害死了。 
English: After a troupe had performed "The Tale of the Pipa," they went on to perform "The Execution of Guan Gong," and the villagers wept as they watched: A good and dutiful daughter-in-law had worked hard all her life, only to be killed by that red-faced brute.

古文：演戏
现代文：演戏
English: Acting lessons

古文：有演《琵琶记》者，找戏是《荆钗逼嫁》。忽有人叹曰： 戏不可不看，极是长学问的，今日方知蔡伯喈的母亲就是王十朋的丈母。 
现代文：有个戏班子演完《琵琶记》后，接着又演《荆钗逼嫁》，忽然有人慨叹说： 戏不可不看，看戏是极长学问的，今天才晓得蔡伯喈的母亲就是王十朋的丈母。 
English: After a troupe had performed "The Tale of the Pipa," they then went on to perform "The Forced Marriage of Jing Xuan." Suddenly, someone sighed and said, "You must see the play. Watching the play requires a great deal of knowledge. It was only today that I learned that Cai Biao's mother was the mother-in-law of Wang Shifeng."

古文：祛盗
现代文：祛盗
English: 盗

古文：一痴人闻盗入门，急写 各有内外 四字，贴于堂上。
现代文：有个痴子听见小偷进了屋门，急忙写了 各有内外 四个字，贴在堂上。
English: An idiot heard a thief enter the door and hurriedly wrote four words, each with an inside and an outside, and posted them on the door.

古文：闻盗已登堂，又写 此路不通 四字，贴于内室。
现代文：接着听见小偷已登堂，又写 此路不通 四字，贴于内室。
English: Then, hearing that the thief had entered the church, he wrote, "This road is impassable," and posted it in the inner room.

古文：闻盗复至，乃逃入厕中。
现代文：之后小偷又到，便逃入厕所。
English: The thief then returned and fled into the toilets.

古文：盗踪迹及之，乃掩厕门咳嗽曰： 有人在此！ 
现代文：小偷到了厕所跟前，痴子拽住厕所门咳嗽说： 有人在此。 
English: When the thief got to the toilet, the thief pulled the toilet door, coughed and said: "Someone's here."

古文：复跌
现代文：复跌
English: Collapsing

古文：一人偶扑地，方爬起复跌。
现代文：有个人偶然摔了一跤，刚爬起来又跌倒了。
English: A man accidentally fell down, got up and fell down again.

古文：乃曰： 啐！
现代文：于是那个人懊悔道： 唉！
English: So the man said regretfully: Alas!

古文：早知还有此一跌，便不起来也罢了。 
现代文：早知还要摔一跤，我便不会起来了！ 
English: If I'd known I was going to fall, I wouldn't have got up!

古文：缓踱
现代文：缓踱
English: Slow clap

古文：一人善踱，行步甚迟，日将晡矣，巡夜者于城外见之，问以何往。曰： 欲至府前。 
现代文：有个人好慢慢地走，行走极迟缓。日将黄昏，巡夜的人在城外看到那人行走甚慢，问他要到什么地方去，那人回答说： 要到官府前面。 
English: There was a man who liked to walk slowly, very slowly. It was dusk, and the night watchman outside the city saw the man walking very slowly and asked him where he wanted to go. The man replied: "To the front of the government office."

古文：巡夜者即指犯夜，擒捉送官。
现代文：巡夜的人立即指责他违犯了夜间禁止行走的规定，便捉拿他要送于官府。
English: The night watchman immediately accused him of violating the rule prohibiting walking at night, and he was arrested and taken to the government office.

古文：其人辩曰： 天色甚早，何为犯夜？ 
现代文：那人争辩说： 天色甚早，为什么说我违犯了夜规？ 
English: The man argued: It's very early in the morning, why do you say I'm breaking the rules?

古文：曰： 你如此踱法，踱至府前，极早也是二更了。 
现代文：巡夜的人答道： 你这样慢慢地走法，等走到官府前面，最早也要到二更天了。 
English: The night watchman replied, "If you walk slowly like this, by the time you get to the front of the government office, it will be two more days at the earliest."

古文：出辔头
现代文：出辔头
English: Out of the stew

古文：有酷好乘马者，被人所欺，以五十金买驽马一匹。
现代文：有个酷爱乘马的人，被人欺骗，用五十两黄金买了一匹劣马。
English: There was a man who loved to ride horses, but he was deceived and bought a bad horse for fifty-two gold pieces.

古文：不堪鞭策，乃雇舟载马，而身跨其上。
现代文：由于经不起劣马的折磨，于是雇了一只船载马，而自己骑在马上。
English: Unable to endure the torture of a bad horse, he hired a boat to carry the horse and rode it himself.

古文：既行里许，嫌其迟慢。谓舟人曰： 我买酒请你，与我快些摇，我要出辔头哩。 
现代文：走了约一里地后，该人嫌船行走迟缓，便对划船的人说道： 你给我摇快些，我买酒请你喝，我已经要长出辔头了！ 
English: After walking for about a mile, the man complained that the boat was too slow and said to the rower: "Shake it faster for me, I'll buy you a drink, I'm going to grow a bald head!"

古文：铺兵
现代文：铺兵
English: The soldiers' barracks

古文：铺司递紧急公文，官恐其迟，拨一马骑之，其人赶马而行。人问其 如此急事，何不乘马？ 
现代文：有个邮差递送紧急公文，当官的恐怕他走得慢，拨一匹马让他骑。邮差赶着马走，别人问他 如此急事，怎么不骑马？ 
English: A postman was delivering an urgent letter. The official was afraid he was going too slowly, so he ordered a horse for him to ride. The postman drove the horse away, and someone asked him, "If it's so urgent, why don't you ride a horse?"

古文：答曰： 六只脚走，岂不快于四只。 
现代文：邮差回答说： 六只脚跑，岂不比四只更快！ 
English: The postman replied: "Don't six legs run faster than four?"

古文：鹅变鸭
现代文：鹅变鸭
English: The goose turns into a duck

古文：有卖鹅者，因要出恭，置鹅在地。
现代文：有个卖鹅的，因要上厕所，便把鹅放在地上。
English: A goose seller had to go to the toilet, so he put the goose on the ground.

古文：登厕后，一人以鸭换去。
现代文：在其上厕所时，有个人用鸭将鹅换走。
English: While he was on the toilet, someone swapped the duck for a goose.

古文：其人解毕出视，曰： 奇哉！
现代文：那人便完出来一看，叹息说： 奇怪！
English: When the man came out, he sighed and said, "How strange!

古文：才一时不见，如何便饿得恁般黑瘦了。 
现代文：才一会儿不见，怎么就饿得这样黑瘦了。 
English: I haven't seen you for a while, why are you so thin and hungry?

古文：帽当扇
现代文：帽当扇
English: Hat as a fan

古文：有暑月戴毡帽而出者，歇大树下乘凉，即脱帽以当扇，扇讫谓人曰： 今日若不戴此帽出来，几乎热杀。 
现代文：有个人在盛夏戴着毡帽外出，由于戴帽太热，便歇息在大树下乘凉，该人摘下毡帽当扇子扇，扇罢对他人说： 今天要不戴此帽出来，几乎热死我。 
English: A man went out in the height of summer wearing a felt hat. As it was too hot to wear the hat, he rested under a big tree to cool off. The man took off the felt hat and used it as a fan. He said to others, "If I don't wear this hat today, I'll almost die from the heat."

古文：买海蛳
现代文：买海蛳
English: Buying sea bream

古文：一人见卖海蛳者，唤住要买，问： 几多钱一斤？ 卖者笑曰： 从来海蛳是量的。 
现代文：有个人看见卖海蛳的，叫住要买，问： 多少钱一斤？ ，卖海蛳的人说： 海蛳从来都是量的。 
English: A man saw a seagull seller, stopped to buy, and asked: How much is a kilo? The seagull seller said: Seagulls are always in quantity.

古文：其人喝曰： 这难道不晓得！问你几多钱一尺？ 
现代文：那个人嚷道： 谁不晓得，我是问你多少钱一尺？ 
English: The man shouted: Who doesn't know, I'm asking you how much a foot is?

古文：澡堂漱口
现代文：澡堂漱口
English: Rinse mouth in bathhouse

古文：有人在澡堂洗浴，掬水入口而漱之。
现代文：有个人在澡堂里洗澡，捧了一捧水吸到嘴里漱口。
English: A man was taking a shower in the bathhouse. He took a handful of water, sucked it into his mouth and rinsed his mouth.

古文：众各攒眉相向，恶其不洁。
现代文：众人挤眉对视，对其不干净十分厌恶。
English: Everyone looked at each other with furrowed brows, disgusted by its uncleanliness.

古文：此人贮水于手曰： 诸公不要愁，待我漱完之后，吐出外面去。 
现代文：那人捧水在手说： 诸位不要忧虑，待我漱完之后，便把水吐到外面去。 
English: Holding water in his hand, the man said, "Don't worry everyone, when I've finished rinsing, I'll spit the water out.

古文：何往
现代文：何往
English: Where to go

古文：一人禀性呆蠢不通文墨，途遇一友，友问曰： 兄何往？ 
现代文：有个人十分呆蠢，不通文墨。有一天此人外出，路上遇到一位友人，友人问道： 你何往？ 
English: There was a very stupid man who did not know how to read and write. One day he was out and met a friend on the road. The friend asked, "Where are you going?"

古文：此人茫然不答。
现代文：呆子茫然未做回答，但记住了 何往 二字。
English: The blockhead did not answer at all, but he remembered two words.

古文：乃记 何往 二字，以问人，人知其呆，故为戏之曰： 此恶语骂兄耳。 
现代文：呆子问他人道：  何往 是什么意思？ 那人知道他呆蠢，便有意开玩笑说：  何往 是骂你的话。 
English: The man knew that he was stupid, so he deliberately joked and said, "What do you mean by cursing you?

古文：其人含怒而别。
现代文：呆子含怒而别。
English: Fools leave in anger.

古文：次日复遇前友，问： 兄何往？ 
现代文：第二天，呆子又见那位友人，友人又说： 你何往？ 
English: The next day, the blockhead saw his friend again, and the friend said, "Where are you going?"

古文：此人遂愤然曰： 我是不何往，你倒要何往哩！ 
现代文：呆子一听愤然道： 我是不 何往 ，你倒要 何往 哩！ 
English: Upon hearing this, the blockhead angrily said, "I'm not going anywhere, but where do you want to go!"

古文：呆执
现代文：呆执
English: Stubbornness

古文：一人问大辟。
现代文：有个人被判死刑。
English: One person was sentenced to death.

古文：临刑，对刽子手曰： 铜刀借一把来动手，我一生服何首乌的。 
现代文：临行前，他对刽子手说： 借一铜刀来动手，我一辈子服用何首乌的。 
English: Before leaving, he said to the executioner: "If you lend me a copper sword to start with, I will use it for the rest of my life.

古文：信阴阳
现代文：信阴阳
English: Faith, Yin and Yang

古文：有平素酷信阴阳者，一日被墙压倒，家人欲亟救。
现代文：有个平素酷信阴阳的人，一天墙倒把他砸在下面，家人要赶紧救他出来。
English: There was a man who was a firm believer in yin and yang. One day, a wall knocked him down, and his family had to rush to get him out.

古文：其人伸出头来曰： 且慢，待我忍着，你去问问阴阳，今日可动得土否？ 
现代文：那人伸出头来道： 且慢，我先忍着，你们去问问阴阳先生，今天是否可以动土？ 
English: The man stuck out his head and said, "Wait a minute, I'll be patient. Go and ask Mr. Yin and Yang if it's possible to move the earth today."

古文：热翁腿
现代文：热翁腿
English: Hot leg wax

古文：一老翁冬夜醉卧，置脚炉于被中，误热其腿，早起骂乡邻曰： 我老人家多吃了几杯酒睡着了，便自不知，你们这班后生竟不来叫醒一声，难道烧人臭也不晓得？ 
现代文：有个老头冬夜喝醉了酒，在被子里放了一个暖脚炉后就躺下了，早晨起来发现脚炉烫伤了大腿，于是骂乡邻道： 我老人家多吃了几杯酒睡着了，不能察觉脚炉烫着大腿，可是你们这些晚辈竟不来喊一声把我叫醒，难道烧得人臭也不晓得？ 
English: An old man got drunk on a winter's night, put a foot warmer under his quilt and lay down. When he woke up in the morning, he found that the foot warmer had burned his thighs, so he scolded his neighbors: My old man had a few more glasses of wine and fell asleep, unable to notice that the foot warmer was burning his thighs, but you young people didn't even come to wake me up with a shout. Isn't it burning so badly that you don't even know?

古文：合着靴
现代文：合着靴
English: Wearing matching shoes

古文：有兄弟共买一靴，兄日着以拜客赴宴，弟不甘服。亦每夜穿之，环行室中，直至达旦。
现代文：有对兄弟合买了一双靴子。白天哥哥穿着靴子拜客赴宴，弟弟不甘心，便每天夜里穿上靴子，在屋里绕着圈走，直到天明。
English: A pair of brothers bought a pair of boots together. During the day, the older brother wore the boots to a banquet, but the younger brother was not satisfied, so he put on the boots every night and walked around the house until dawn.

古文：俄而靴敝，兄再议合买，弟曰： 我要睡矣。 
现代文：不久靴子坏了，哥哥跟弟弟商量再买一双靴子，弟弟说： 我要睡觉。 
English: Soon after, the boots broke. The older brother and the younger brother discussed buying another pair of boots. The younger brother said, "I want to sleep."

古文：教象棋
现代文：教象棋
English: Teaching chess

古文：两人对弈象棋，旁观者教不置口。其一大怒，挥拳击之，痛极却步。
现代文：有两人下象棋，一个旁观的人教导不停，其中一个下棋的十分恼怒，便挥舞拳头揍那个旁观教导的人。
English: Two people were playing chess, and a bystander kept teaching. One of the players was so angry that he shook his fist at the bystander.

古文：右手摸脸，左手遥指曰： 还不上士！ 
现代文：那人被打得十分疼痛，连连后退，右手捂着脸，左手比划说： 还不快上士！ 
English: The man was beaten so painfully that he kept retreating, covering his face with his right hand, and gesturing with his left hand: "I'm still not happy, Sergeant!

古文：发换糖
现代文：发换糖
English: Change sugar

古文：一呆子见有以发换糖者，谬谓凡物皆可换也。
现代文：有个呆子见有人用头发换糖，便错误地认为不管什么东西都可以换。
English: When some idiot sees someone using their hair to exchange sugar, they mistakenly think that anything can be exchanged.

古文：晨起袖中藏发一绺以往，遇酒肆即入饱餐。
现代文：有一天早晨起来后，在袖子里装了一绺头发出外，遇到酒馆儿便进去饱餐起来。
English: After getting up one morning, he put a steamed bun in his sleeve and went out. When he came across a pub, he went in and had a full meal.

古文：餐毕，以发与之，肆佣皆笑。其人怒曰： 他人俱当钱用，到我偏用不得耶！ 
现代文：餐后，呆子拿出头发交给酒馆儿，肆佣们大笑起来，呆子恼怒道： 别人的头发都可当钱用，轮到我为何偏不能用！ 
English: After the meal, the blockhead took out his hair and handed it to the bartender. The bartenders burst out laughing. The blockhead, exasperated, said, "Other people's hair can be used as money, why can't I use it in my turn!"

古文：争辩良久，肆佣因发乱打。其人徐理发曰： 整绺的与他偏不要，反在我头上来乱抢。 
现代文：呆子和肆佣争辩了很长时间，肆佣揪住呆子的头发乱打，呆子缓缓梳理自己的头发说： 整绺的给他偏不要，反在我头上来乱抢。 
English: The blockhead and the ruffian argued for a long time. The ruffian grabbed the blockhead's hair and beat it wildly. The blockhead slowly combed his own hair and said, "Don't give him a neat comb. Instead, mess around with my head."

