古文：○周法尚
现代文：○周法尚
English: ○ Zhou Fa Shang

古文：周法尚，字德迈，汝南安成人也。
现代文：周法尚字德迈，汝南安成人。
English: Zhou Fa Shang Zi Demai, Ru Nan An adult.

古文：祖灵起，梁直閤将军、义阳太守、庐桂二州刺史。
现代文：祖父周灵起，梁国直阁将军、义阳太守、庐桂二州刺史。
English: Grandfather Zhou Lingqi, General Liang Guo Zhaogu, Yiyang Dazhong, Zou Gui Erzhou Zhi Shi.

古文：父炅，定州刺史、平北将军。
现代文：父亲周炅，定州刺史、平北将军。
English: His father was Zhou Qi, the son of Dingzhou Zhishi and the son of General Pingbei.

古文：法尚少果劲有风概，好读兵书。
现代文：周法尚小时就果敢勇毅，有气概，好读兵书。
English: When Zhou Fa was still a child, he was courageous, courageous, and good at reading military books.

古文：年十八，为陈始兴王中兵参军，寻加伏波将军。
现代文：十八岁，任陈国始兴王的中兵参军，不久授为伏波将军。
English: At the age of eighteen, he joined the army as a middle-ranking soldier of Chen Guo Shi Xing Wang, and was soon promoted to General Fubao.

古文：其父卒后，监定州事，督父本兵。
现代文：其父死后，他监管定州事，管他父亲生前的兵。
English: After his father's death, he oversaw the affairs of Dingzhou and managed his father's soldiers.

古文：数有战功，迁使持节、贞毅将军、散骑常侍，领齐昌郡事，封山阴县侯，邑五千户。
现代文：数有战功，升任使持节、贞毅将军、散骑常侍，兼管齐昌郡事，封为山阴县侯，食邑五千户。
English: He had many military exploits, and was promoted to the posts of envoy, general of Zhengyi, and horseback riding attendant. He was also in charge of the county affairs of Qichang, and was appointed as the prefect of Sanyin County, with 5,000 households in the county.

古文：以其兄武昌县公法僧代为定州刺史。
现代文：让他兄长武昌县公周法僧代任定州刺史。
English: Let his elder brother, Wuchang County's Gongzhou Law Monk, be appointed as the representative of Dingzhou.

古文：法尚与长沙王叔坚不相能，叔坚言其将反。
现代文：周法尚与长沙王陈叔坚关系不好，叔坚说他将要谋反。
English: Zhou Fa still had a bad relationship with the king of Changsha, Chen Shujian. Shujian said he was going to rebel.

古文：陈宣帝执禁法僧，发兵欲取法尚。
现代文：陈宣帝抓了周法僧，发兵想抓周法尚。
English: Emperor Chen Xuan captured Zhou Faxang, and sent troops to capture Zhou Faxang.

古文：其下将吏皆劝之归北，法尚犹豫未决。
现代文：法尚的部下都劝他到北方去，法尚犹豫不决。
English: His subordinates all advised him to go to the north, but Fa Shang hesitated.

古文：长史殷文则曰： 乐毅所以辞燕，良由不犹已。
现代文：长史殷文则说： 乐毅所以离开燕国，实在因为不得已。
English: Changshi Yinwen said: Le Yi left Yan Guo for this reason, because it was really unavoidable.

古文：事势如此，请早裁之。 
现代文：事已如此，请早作决断。 
English: That being the case, please make an early decision.

古文：法尚遂归于周。
现代文：法尚就归顺了北周。
English: Fa Shang submitted to Bei Zhou.

古文：宣帝甚优宠之，拜开府、顺州刺史，封归义县公，邑千户。
现代文：周宣帝很优待他，授他开府、顺州刺史，封为归义县公，食邑千户。
English: Emperor Zhou Xuan treated him very favourably, bestowing him with the title of the founder of the capital and the history of Shunzhou, the title of the governor of Guiyi County, and the title of the head of a thousand households.

古文：赐良马五匹，女妓五人，彩物五百段，加以金带。
现代文：赐他良马五匹，女乐五人，纟采物五百段，加上金带。
English: He gave him five fine horses, five female singers, five hundred pieces of plunder, and a gold belt.

古文：陈将樊猛济江讨之，法尚遣部曲督韩明诈为背己，奔于陈，伪告猛曰： 法尚部兵不愿降北，人皆窃议，尽欲叛还。
现代文：陈国将领樊猛渡江讨伐他，他派部曲督韩明假装背叛他投奔陈军，骗樊猛说： 周法尚的部队不想投降北周，人人都在私下议论，都想回来。
English: Chen Guo's general Yan Meng crossed the river to fight against him. He sent his commander Han Ming, pretending to betray him, to join Chen's army. He lied to Yan Meng and said: Zhou Fashang's troops do not want to surrender to Bei Zhou. Everyone is talking in private and wants to come back.

古文：若得军来，必无斗者，自当于阵倒戈耳。 
现代文：如得军来，他们必无战斗力，自然会在阵前倒戈。 
English: If the army comes, they will have no fighting power, and will naturally defect before the battle.

古文：猛以为然，引师急进。
现代文：樊猛以为然，率兵急进。
English: Fierce thought so, and led the troops into a headlong rush.

古文：法尚乃阳为畏惧，自保于江曲。
现代文：周法尚于是假装惧怕，自保于长江。
English: Zhou Fashang pretended to be afraid and took refuge in the Yangtze River.

古文：猛陈兵挑战，法尚先伏轻舸于浦中，又伏精锐于古村之北，自张旗帜，迎流拒之。
现代文：樊猛陈兵挑战，法尚先埋伏轻舟在浦中，又埋伏精兵于古村之北，自张旗帜，逆流抵抗敌军。
English: Challenged by the fierce Chen soldiers, the Fa first ambushed the light boat in Puzhong, and then ambushed the elite soldiers in the north of the ancient village, raising their own flag and resisting the enemy army against the current.

古文：战数合，伪退登岸，投古村，猛舍舟逐之，法尚又疾走。行数里，与村北军合，复前击猛。
现代文：几次交战，法尚假装登岸，投向古村。樊猛弃船追赶，法尚又猛跑，跑了几里，与村北部队会合，又转而上前进攻樊猛。
English: After several battles, Fashang pretended to go ashore and rushed to the ancient village. He abandoned the ship and chased after the enemy. Fashang ran hard, ran a few miles, met with the troops from the north of the village, and then advanced to attack the enemy.

古文：猛退走赴船，既而浦中伏舸取其舟楫，建周旗帜。
现代文：樊猛退走往船上去，但浦中的伏兵已把他们的船都搞走了，树上了北周的旗帜。
English: They beat a hasty retreat and went to the ship, but the ambushers in Uraku had already taken away all their ships, and the trees were festooned with flags of the Northern Circuit.

古文：猛于是大败，仅以身免，虏八千人。
现代文：樊猛于是大败，仅仅自己逃脱了，被俘虏八千人。
English: He was soundly defeated, and escaped with only himself and eight thousand prisoners.

古文：高祖为丞相，司马消难作乱，阴遣上开府段珣率兵阳为助守，因欲夺其城。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相后，司马消难作难造反，他偷偷地派上开府段王旬率兵假装帮周法尚守城，想就此夺城。
English: After Sui Gaozu became the Northern Zhou Dynasty's prime minister, Sima Qian could not resist the temptation to rebel. He secretly sent Wang Jun and his soldiers to Kaifu to pretend to help Zhou Fa still defend the city, hoping to capture the city.

古文：法尚觉其诈，闭门不纳，珣遂围之。
现代文：法尚发觉了他们的诈谋，闭门不纳，段王旬于是围城。
English: Fashang discovered their deception, closed the door and did not accept, and Duan Wangjun then besieged the city.

古文：于时仓卒，兵散在外，因率吏士五百人守拒二十日。
现代文：当时很仓猝，士兵散在城外，法尚因此率兵士五百人拒守二十天。
English: At that time it was very sudden, soldiers were scattered outside the city, so Fashang led five hundred soldiers and refused to defend the city for twenty days.

古文：外无救援，自度力不能支，遂拔所领，弃城遁走。
现代文：外无援兵，他估计力不能支，于是带领余部弃城逃走。
English: With no outside reinforcements, he decided that he could not hold out, so he led the rest of the army to abandon the city and flee.

古文：消难虏其母弟及家累三百人归于陈。
现代文：司马消难俘虏了他的母亲和弟弟及家中僮仆三百人投奔陈国去。
English: Sima Qianlong took his mother and younger brother captive, and three hundred household servants fled to Chen Province.

古文：高祖受禅，拜巴州刺史，破三鵶叛蛮于铁山，复从柱国王谊击走陈寇。
现代文：高祖受北周禅让后，授法尚巴州刺史，在铁山击破三亚鸟叛蛮，又随柱国王谊打走陈国贼寇。
English: After Gao Zu was ceded by the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was given the title of Shangbazhou, broke the rebellion of the Sanya birds in the Iron Mountain, and followed the pillar of the king's friendship to drive away the thieves and robbers of the Chen Kingdom.

古文：迁衡州总管四州诸军事，改封谯郡公，邑二千户。
现代文：他升任衡州总管、四州诸军事，改封为谯郡公，食邑二千户。
English: He rose to the post of Hengzhou general manager, Shishu military commander, and changed his title to Gong County official, catering to more than two thousand households.

古文：后上幸洛阳，召之，及引见，赐金钿酒钟一双，彩五百段，良马十五匹，奴婢三百口，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：后来皇上巡幸洛阳，召他，到引见皇上时，皇上赐他金钿酒锺一双，纟采缣五百段，良马十五匹，奴婢三百口，给鼓吹一部。
English: Later, the emperor went on a tour of Luoyang and summoned him. When he was introduced to the emperor, the emperor gave him a pair of golden gongs, five hundred pieces of ploughshares, fifteen fine horses, three hundred slaves and maidservants, and a trumpet.

古文：法尚固辞，上曰： 公有大功于国，特给鼓吹者，欲令公乡人知朕之宠公也。 
现代文：法尚坚持推辞，皇上说： 你对国家有大功，特别给你一部鼓吹，是想让你的乡亲们知道我很宠爱你。 
English: Fashang persisted in his refusal, and the emperor said: "You have done a great service to the country, and I especially want to give you a piece of propaganda to let your fellow villagers know that I love you very much.

古文：固与之。
现代文：一定要给他。
English: You've got to give it to him.

古文：岁馀，转黄州总管。
现代文：过了一年多，转任黄州总管。
English: After more than a year, he was transferred to the post of Huangzhou general manager.

古文：上降密诏，使经略江南，伺候动静。
现代文：皇上降下密诏，让他经略江南，伺候动静。
English: The emperor issued a secret edict, ordering him to bypass the southern part of the river and wait for movement.

古文：及伐陈之役，以行军总管隶秦孝王，率舟师三万出于樊口。
现代文：伐陈战争打响后，他以行军总管身份，隶属于秦孝王，率水军三万出于樊口。
English: After the Battle of Jiaocheng broke out, he served as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops and was subordinate to Qin Xiao Wang. He led 30,000 sailors out of Hekou.

古文：陈城州刺史熊门超出师拒战，击破之，擒超于阵。
现代文：陈国城州刺史熊门超出兵拒战。法尚打败他们，在阵前活捉了熊门超。
English: Chen Guoshengzhou stabbed Xiongmen outnumbered soldiers and refused to fight. Fashang defeated them and captured Xiongmen Chao before the battle.

古文：转鄂州刺史，寻迁永州总管，安集岭南，赐缣五百段，良马五匹，仍给黄州兵三千五百人为帐内。
现代文：转任鄂州刺史，不久升任永州总管，安抚岭南。赐他缣纟采五百段，良马五匹，仍给黄州兵三千五百人为其帐内近侍。
English: He was transferred to the post of Ezhou chief historian, and was soon promoted to the post of Yongzhou chief administrator to pacify Lingnan. He was given five hundred dan of rice and five good horses, and still gave three thousand five hundred soldiers from Huangzhou to serve as his close attendants.

古文：陈桂州刺史钱季卿、南康内史柳璇、西衡州刺史邓暠、阳山太守毛爽等前后诣法尚降。
现代文：陈国的桂州刺史钱季卿、南康内史柳王睿、西衡州刺史邓詗、阳山太守毛爽等，先后到法尚处投降。
English: Chen Guizhou's Qian Jiqing, South Kangnai's Liu Wangrui, West Hengzhou's Deng Qi, and Yangshan's Mao Shuang surrendered to the Legal Affairs Bureau.

古文：陈定州刺史吕子廓据山洞反，法尚引兵逾岭，子廓兵众日散，与千馀人走保岩险，其左右斩之而降。
现代文：陈国的定州刺史吕子廓占据山洞谋反，法尚率兵到岭南，吕子廓的兵众一天天散去，只和一千多人逃走守险，其左右杀了他而投降。
English: Chen's Dingzhou vassal, Lv Zi Kuo, occupied a cave and plotted a rebellion. Fa Shang led his troops to Lingnan. Lv Zi Kuo's troops dispersed day by day. He only escaped with more than a thousand people to avoid danger. His right and left killed him and surrendered.

古文：赐彩五百段，奴婢五十口，并银甕宝带，良马十匹。
现代文：赐他缣纟采五百段，奴婢五十口，和银瓮、宝带，良马十匹。
English: And he gave him five hundred talents of silver, and fifty maidservants, and silver vessels, and cords, and ten good horses.

古文：十年，寻转桂州总管，仍为岭南安抚大使。
现代文：开皇十年，转任桂州总管，仍担任岭南安抚大使。
English: Ten years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was transferred to the post of Governor-General of Guizhou and still served as the Lingnan Pacification Ambassador.

古文：后数年入朝，以本官宿卫。
现代文：几年后入朝，以本官身份当宿卫。
English: A few years later, he entered the imperial court and served as a palace guard in his official capacity.

古文：赐彩三百段，米五百石，绢五百匹。
现代文：赐他缣纟采三百段，米五百石，绢五百匹。
English: And he gave him three hundred measures of barley, five hundred measures of rice, and five hundred yoke of oxen.

古文：未几，桂州人李光仕举兵作乱，令法尚与上柱国王世积讨之。
现代文：不久，桂州人李光仕举兵作乱，皇上令法尚与上柱国王世积讨敌。
English: Soon, Li Guangshi, a Guizhou native, raised an army to start a riot, and the emperor ordered Fa Shang to fight the enemy with the upper pillar kings.

古文：法尚驰往桂州，发岭南兵，世积出岳州，征岭北军，俱会于尹州。
现代文：法尚飞奔桂州，调岭南兵；王世积出岳州，调岭北兵，在尹州相会。
English: Fa Shang flew to Guizhou and transferred soldiers to the south of Lingling; Wang Shijie flew to Yuezhou and transferred soldiers to the north of Lingling, and they met in Yinzhou.

古文：光仕来逆战，击走之。
现代文：李光仕来迎战，法尚、世积打败了他。
English: Li Guangshi came to fight, and Fa Shang and Shizhe defeated him.

古文：世积所部多遇瘴，不能进，顿于衡州，法尚独讨之。
现代文：王世积所部多遇瘴气，不能前进，驻在衡州，法尚部独自讨敌。
English: Wang Shijie's division was often frustrated and unable to advance. It was stationed in Hengzhou, while Fa Shang's division fought the enemy on its own.

古文：光仕帅劲兵保白石洞，法尚捕得其弟光略、光度，大获家口。
现代文：李光仕率劲旅保住白石洞，法尚捕得他弟弟光略、光度，大获家人。
English: Li Guangzhi led a vigorous journey to save Shiroishi Cave, and Fa Shang caught his brother Guangli and Guangda, greatly benefiting his family.

古文：其党有来降附，辄以妻子还之。
现代文：光仕的余党有来投降的，就把妻儿还给他。
English: When the remaining partisans came to surrender, they gave him back his wife and children.

古文：居旬日，降者数千人。
现代文：过了十天，投降的几千人。
English: After ten days, several thousand surrendered.

古文：法尚捕兵列阵，以当光仕，亲率奇兵，蔽林设伏。
现代文：法尚派兵列阵，以挡光仕。他自己亲率奇兵，在树林中埋伏。
English: Fa Shang sent a line of soldiers to block the light. He himself led the soldiers and ambushed them in the woods.

古文：两阵始交，法尚驰击其栅，栅中人皆走散，光仕大溃，追斩之。
现代文：两阵刚交战，法尚冲过去攻击光仕的军营，军营中的人都逃散了，光仕部溃逃，法尚追斩了他。
English: The two armies had just clashed, Fa Shang rushed over to attack Guang Shigu's camp, the people in the camp fled, Guang Shigu fled, and Fa Shang chased and killed him.

古文：赐奴婢百五十口，黄金百五十两，银百五十斤。
现代文：皇上赐法尚奴婢一百五十口，黄金一百五十两，白银一百五十斤。
English: The emperor gave Fashang one hundred and fifty slaves, one hundred and fifty-two ounces of gold, and one hundred and fifty pounds of silver.

古文：仁寿中，遂州獠叛，复以行军总管讨平之。
现代文：仁寿中，遂州獠反叛，他又以行军总管身份讨平他们。
English: In Renshou, Suizhou Han rebelled, and he fought against them as the commander-in-chief.

古文：巂州乌蛮叛，攻陷州城，诏令法尚便道击之。
现代文：辒州的乌蛮反叛，攻陷州城，下诏令法尚作主攻击。
English: The rebels in Zhangzhou rebelled violently and captured the city of Zhangzhou. The emperor ordered that Fa Shang should lead the attack.

古文：军将至，贼弃州城，散走山谷间，法尚捕不能得。
现代文：法尚军将到，贼人抛弃州城，逃散到山谷之间，法尚无法捕捉。
English: The French army will arrive, the thieves abandon the state capital, flee to the valley, and the law can't catch them.

古文：于是遣使慰谕，假以官号，伪班师，日行二十里。
现代文：于是派使者去安慰他们，给他们一些官号，假装班师，一天走二十里。
English: So he sent an envoy to comfort them, gave them some official titles, pretended to be a team leader, and walked twenty miles a day.

古文：军再舍，潜遣人觇之，知其首领尽归栅，聚饮相贺。
现代文：官军再次扎营时，法尚偷偷派人侦察，知道叛军首领全归军营，聚在一起饮酒庆贺。
English: When the government army encamped again, Fashang secretly sent someone to reconnoitre, and learned that the rebel leaders had all returned to the camp and gathered together to drink and celebrate.

古文：法尚选步骑数千人，袭击破之，获其渠帅数千人，虏男女万馀口。
现代文：法尚挑步兵骑兵几千人，袭击破敌，俘虏其首领、部下几千人，男女人口一万多。
English: Fashang picked up several thousand infantry and cavalry, attacked and defeated the enemy, captured several thousand of their leaders and subordinates, and more than ten thousand men and women.

古文：赐奴婢百口，物三百段，蜀马二十匹。
现代文：朝廷赐法尚奴婢百口，缣纟采三百段，蜀马二十匹。
English: The imperial court bestowed on Fa Shang 100 slaves and maidservants, 300 mandarin ducks, and 20 horses.

古文：军还，检校潞州事。
现代文：部队回来，他检校潞州事。
English: When the troops came back, he went to inspect the school.

古文：炀帝嗣位，转云州刺史。
现代文：炀帝继位后，法尚转任云州刺史。
English: After Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, Fashang was transferred to the post of Yunnan Provincial Historian.

古文：后三岁，转定襄太守，进位金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：三年后，转任定襄太守，升任金紫光禄大夫。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the post of Dingxiang governor and promoted to the post of Jinziguanglu doctor.

古文：时帝幸榆林，法尚朝于行宫。
现代文：当时炀帝巡幸榆林，法尚在行宫朝见炀帝。
English: At that time, Emperor Gong was on a tour of Yulin, and Fa Shang went to see Emperor Gong in the morning.

古文：内史令元寿言于帝曰： 汉武出塞，旍旗千里。
现代文：内史令元寿对炀帝说： 汉武帝出塞，旌旗千里。
English: According to the internal history, Yuan Shou said to Emperor Gao: Emperor Hanwu came out of the fortress and carried his banner thousands of miles.

古文：今御营之外，请分为二十四军，日别遣一军发，相去三十里，旗帜相望，钲鼓相闻，首尾连注，千里不绝。
现代文：现在御营之外，请分为二十四军，每天派一军出发，相距三十里，旗旗相望，战鼓相闻，首尾相连，千里不绝。
English: Now, in addition to the imperial camp, please divide it into twenty-four armies, and send one army out every day, thirty miles apart, flags facing each other, drums of war sounding, side by side, thousands of miles apart.

古文：此亦出师之盛者也。 
现代文：这也是出兵的盛大场面啊！ 
English: This is also the grand scene of the troop deployment!

古文：法尚曰： 不然，兵亘千里，动间山川，卒有不虞，四分五裂。
现代文：法尚说： 不然，部队连绵上千里，动不动就被山川阻隔，突然有什么不测之事，就会四分五裂。
English: Fashang said, "Otherwise, the troops would stretch for thousands of miles, be constantly separated by mountains and rivers, and suddenly, if something unexpected happened, they would be torn apart.

古文：腹心有事，首尾未知，道阻且长，难以相救。
现代文：腹心有事，首尾不知，道路险阻而且漫长，难以互相救援。
English: A confidant is in trouble, the outcome is unknown, the road is dangerous and long, and it is difficult to rescue each other.

古文：虽是故事，此乃取败之道也。 
现代文：虽然这是汉武故事，也是自取失败的办法。 
English: Although this is a martial arts story, it is also a self-defeating approach.

古文：帝不怿曰： 卿意以为如何？ 
现代文：炀帝不高兴，说： 你以为如何？ 
English: Hao Di was not happy and said, "What do you think?

古文：法尚曰： 结为方阵，四面外距，六宫及百官家口并住其间。
现代文：法尚说： 结为方阵，四面外距。六宫和百官家属都住在阵里头。
English: Fashang said, "Let's form a phalanx, with four sides at a distance from each other. Six palaces and hundreds of officials' families will live in the middle of the phalanx."

古文：若有变起，当头分抗，内引奇兵，出外奋击，车为壁垒，重设钩陈，此与据城理亦何异！
现代文：如有变故，自当分头抗敌，内引奇兵，出外奋击，车为壁垒，重设钩陈。这与据城之理有何不同？
English: If there is a change of circumstances, it is necessary to fight against the enemy from the beginning, to attract extraordinary soldiers, to go out and fight, to use the car as a barrier, and to re-set the hook. How is this different from the principle of the city?

古文：若战而捷，抽骑追奔，或战不利，屯营自守。
现代文：如果打了胜仗，可抽出骑兵追击敌人；如果作战不利，也可安营自守。
English: If the battle is won, the cavalry can be drawn out to pursue the enemy; if the battle is unfavorable, they can also camp and defend themselves.

古文：臣谓牢固万全之策也。 帝曰： 善。 
现代文：我说这是牢固万全之策。 炀帝说： 好！ 
English: I said that this was a solid and all-round solution. Emperor Gong said: Good!

古文：因拜左武卫将军，赐良马一匹，绢三百匹。
现代文：因此授他左武卫将军，赐他良马一匹，绢帛三百匹。
English: Therefore, he was given the title of General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, a fine horse, and three hundred donkeys.

古文：明年，黔安夷向思多反，杀将军鹿愿，围太守萧造，法尚与将军李景分路讨之。
现代文：次年，黔安夷向思多造反，杀了将军鹿愿，包围了太守萧造。法尚与将军李景分路讨敌。
English: The following year, Yan Anyi rebelled against Siduo, killed the general Ru Gan, and surrounded the governor Xiao Zou. Fa Shang and the general Li Jing went their separate ways to fight.

古文：法尚击思多于清江，破之，斩首三千级。
现代文：法尚在清江打破向思多军，斩首三千多级。
English: Fa Shang broke the multi-army of Xiang Si in Qingjiang and beheaded more than three thousand people.

古文：还，从讨吐谷浑，法尚别出松州道，逐捕亡散，至于青海。
现代文：还京后，随炀帝征讨吐谷浑。法尚另出松州道，追捕逃亡者，一直追到青海。
English: After returning to Beijing, he went with Emperor Qian to collect and punish Tuyagun. He also went to Songzhou Road to hunt down the fugitive, and chased him all the way to Qinghai.

古文：赐奴婢一百口，物二百段，马七十匹。
现代文：赐他奴婢一百人，布帛二百段，良马七十匹。
English: And he gave him a hundred menservants, and maidservants, and two hundred measures of fine linen, and seventy good horses.

古文：出为敦煌太守，寻领会宁太守。
现代文：出京为敦煌太守，不久任会宁太守。
English: He went to Beijing as the governor of Dunhuang and was soon appointed governor of Ning.

古文：辽东之役，以舟师指朝鲜道，会杨玄感反，与将军宇文述，来护兒等破之。
现代文：辽东战争爆发后，他率水军直指朝鲜道。刚好杨玄感造反，法尚与将军宇文述、来护儿等打败叛军。
English: After the outbreak of the Liaodong War, he led the navy straight to the Korean Peninsula. Just as Yang Xuan felt like rebelling, Fa Shang defeated the rebels with the generals Yu Wenshu and Lai Guo Er.

古文：以功进右光禄大夫，赐物九百段。
现代文：他因功升任右光禄大夫，赐物九百段。
English: For his service, he was promoted to Ukokoroku-dokufu, receiving 900 dan.

古文：时有齐郡人王薄、孟让等举兵为盗，众十馀万，保长白山。
现代文：当时，齐郡人王薄、孟让等举兵为盗，有十几万人，依保长白山。
English: At that time, Wang Bo, Meng Zhan and other people from Qi County raised an army to steal, with more than one hundred thousand people, including Baoshan.

古文：频战，每挫其锐。
现代文：法尚屡与其战，屡挫其锐。
English: The law has repeatedly fought against it and repeatedly defeated it.

古文：赐奴婢百口。
现代文：炀帝赐他奴婢百口。
English: Emperor Qian gave him a hundred slaves.

古文：明年，复临沧海，在军疾甚，谓长史崔君肃曰： 吾再临沧海，未能利涉，时不我与，将辞人世。
现代文：次年，再临沧海，在军中病重，对长史崔君肃说： 我再临沧海，不能涉海，时不我与，我将辞别人世。
English: The following year, when he was seriously ill in the army, he said to his superior, Choi Jun So: "If I go to the Canghai Sea again, I won't be able to go into the sea. If I don't, I'll die."

古文：立志不果，命也如何！ 
现代文：我的大志未能实现，这是我的命，我怎么办啊！ 
English: My ambition has not been realised, this is my life, what am I going to do!

古文：言毕而终，时年五十九。
现代文：言毕而终，时年五十九岁。
English: He died at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：赠武卫大将军，谥曰僖。
现代文：追赠他为武卫大将军，谥号叫 僖 。
English: He was posthumously given the title of General Wuwei, and his posthumous name was Zeng.

古文：有子六人。
现代文：有六个儿子。
English: They had six sons.

古文：长子绍基，灵寿令，少子绍范，最知名。
现代文：长子周绍基，灵寿县令；小儿子周绍范，最有名。
English: The eldest son, Zhou Shaoqi, was the ruler of Lingshou County; the youngest son, Zhou Shaofan, was the most famous.

古文：○李景
现代文：○李景
English: ○ Li Jing

古文：李景，字道兴，天水休官人也。
现代文：李景字道兴，天水休官人。
English: Li Jingzhe Daoxing, Tianshui Xiu official.

古文：父超，周应、戎二州刺史。
现代文：父亲李超，北周的应、戎二州刺史。
English: His father, Li Chao, was in charge of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and the Emperor of the Two Provinces.

古文：景容貌奇伟，膂力过人，美须髯，骁勇善射。
现代文：李景容貌奇伟，膂力过人，美须髯，骁勇善射。
English: Li Jing's appearance is magnificent, his strength is superior, his beauty is exquisite, and he is brave and good at shooting.

古文：平齐之役，颇有力焉，授仪同三司。
现代文：平定北齐，他颇有功劳，授为仪同三司。
English: For his contribution to the pacification of North Qi, he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order of the Third Division.

古文：以平尉迥，进位开府，赐爵平寇县公，邑千五百户。
现代文：因平定尉迟迥之功，升为开府，赐爵平寇县公，食邑一千五百户。
English: He was promoted to Kaifu (governor) and given the title of Count of Pingko County for his contribution to suppressing the rebellion. He had 1,500 households.

古文：开皇九年，以行军总管从王世积伐陈，陷陈有功，进位上开府，赐奴婢六十口，物千五百段。
现代文：开皇九年，他以行军总营身份，随王世积讨伐陈国，他冲锋陷阵，立有战功，升为上开府，赐奴婢六十口，缣纟采一千五百段。
English: In the ninth year of the emperor's reign, as the head of the marching battalion, he joined Wang Shijie in the campaign against the State of Chen. He charged into the battle, achieved military merit, was promoted to Shangkaifu, and was given sixty slaves and one thousand five hundred dan.

古文：及高智慧等作乱江南，复以行军总管从杨素击之。别平仓岭，还授鄜州刺史。
现代文：高智慧等人在江南造反作乱，他又以行军总管身份随杨素讨伐，另外平定仓岭，还京后授他州刺史。
English: Gao Zhizhong and others rebelled in the south of the Yangtze River, and he followed Yang Su to fight as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops. In addition, he pacified Cangling, and after returning to Beijing, he was awarded the history of other prefectures.

古文：十七年，辽东之役，为马军总管。
现代文：开皇十七年，辽东战争中，他任骑兵总管。
English: In the 17th year of the Emperor's reign, during the Liaodong War, he served as the cavalry commander-in-chief.

古文：及还，配事汉王。
现代文：回朝后，调他侍奉汉王杨谅。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was transferred to serve the Han King Yang Jun.

古文：高祖奇其壮武，使袒而观之，曰： 卿相表当位极人臣。 
现代文：高祖惊奇于他的壮武，让他袒衣而观之，说： 从你的相貌来看，你会位极人臣。 
English: Gaozu was surprised at his prowess, and asked him to take off his clothes and look at him. He said, "From your appearance, you would make an excellent courtier."

古文：寻从史万岁击突厥于大斤山，别路邀贼，大破之。
现代文：不久，他随史万岁在大斤山攻击突厥人。他别路拦击贼人，大破突厥军。
English: Soon after, he attacked the Turks with Shi Wanying on Dajin Mountain. He blocked the path of the bandits and defeated the Turkish army.

古文：后与上明公杨纪送义成公主于突厥，至恆安，遇突厥来寇。
现代文：后来，他和上明公杨纪送义成公主到突厥去，到了恒安，遇突厥人来犯。
English: Later, he and Shangming Gong Yang Ji sent Princess Yicheng to Turkey, and when they arrived in Heng'an, they were attacked by Turks.

古文：时代州总管韩洪为虏所败，景率所领数百人援之。
现代文：当时代州总管韩洪被突厥打败，李景率领几百人援救他。
English: When Han Hong, the then-governor of the province, was defeated by the Turks, Li Jing led several hundred people to rescue him.

古文：力战三日，杀虏甚众，赐物三千段，授韩州刺史。
现代文：力战三天，杀死很多突厥人。赐他缣纟采三千段，授他为韩州刺史。
English: He fought bravely for three days and killed many Turks. He was awarded three thousand dan and awarded the title of "Korean historian."

古文：以事王故，不之官。
现代文：因为他侍奉汉王的缘故，不赴韩州到任。
English: Because he served the King of Han, he did not go to Korea to take office.

古文：仁寿中，检校代州总管。
现代文：仁寿年间，检校代州总管。
English: During his life, he served as the state's chief inspector of schools.

古文：汉王谅作乱并州，景发兵拒之。
现代文：汉王杨谅在并州造反，李景发兵抵抗。
English: Han King Yang Peng rebelled in the annexation of the state, and Li Jing sent troops to resist.

古文：谅遣刘暠袭景，战于城东。
现代文：杨谅派刘嵩袭击李景，战于城东。
English: Yang Jun sent Liu Song to attack Li Jing and fought in the east of the city.

古文：升楼射之，无不应弦而倒。
现代文：他上楼射敌，无不应弦而倒。
English: He went upstairs to shoot the enemy, but fell down.

古文：选壮士击之，斩获略尽。
现代文：然后挑选壮士进击，差不多把官军杀死、俘虏光了。
English: He then selected able-bodied men to attack, almost killing the government troops and taking no prisoners.

古文：谅复遣岚州刺史乔钟葵率劲勇三万攻之。
现代文：杨谅又派岚州刺史乔钟葵率劲旅三万人攻城。
English: Yang Yuanzhong also sent Zhangzhou Zishi Qiao Zhong Kwai to attack the city with a strong force of 30,000 people.

古文：景战士不过数千，加以城池不固，为贼冲击，崩毁相继。
现代文：李景部下不过几千人，加上城池不固，被反贼冲击，城墙一处处相继被摧垮。
English: Li Jing's subordinates were only a few thousand people, and the city was not strong, it was attacked by anti-thieves, and the city walls were destroyed one after another.

古文：景且战且筑，士卒皆殊死斗，屡挫贼锋。
现代文：李景一边作战一边筑城，士兵都殊死作战，屡屡挫败反贼。
English: Li Jing built the city while fighting, and the soldiers fought desperately, repeatedly defeating the anti-thieves.

古文：司马冯孝慈、司法参军吕玉并骁勇善战，仪同三司侯莫陈乂多谋画，工拒守之术。
现代文：司马冯孝慈、司法参军吕玉，都骁勇善战，仪同三司侯莫陈足智多谋，工于拒敌守城之术。
English: Sima Feng Xiao Ci, Lyu Yu, who joined the army for justice, were both brave and good at war. Yi Tong and the three magistrates were resourceful and worked on the art of resisting the enemy and defending the city.

古文：景知将士可用，其后推诚于此三人，无所关预，唯在阁持重，时出抚循而已。
现代文：李景知道将士可用，其后对这三个推心置腹，无所隐晦，他呆在阁里持重考虑，时时出去安抚将士，看看情况而已。
English: Li Jing knew that the generals could be used, and after that, he put his heart and soul into these three suggestions, and did not hide anything. He stayed in the cabinet and considered them seriously, and went out to appease the generals from time to time, just to see the situation.

古文：月馀，朔州总管杨义臣以兵来援，合击，大破之。
现代文：过了一个多月，朔州总管杨义臣率兵来援，两下合力，大破叛军。
English: After more than a month, Yang Yixin, the governor of Shuozhou, came to the rescue with his soldiers, and the two joined forces to defeat the rebels.

古文：先是，景府内井中甃上生花如莲，并有龙见，时变为铁马甲士。
现代文：此前，李景府中的井里的上，生长出莲花状的花朵，并有龙出现，时时变为铁马甲士。
English: Previously, lotus-shaped flowers had grown on the top of the well in the middle of Li Jingfu, and a dragon had appeared, changing from time to time into an iron horse.

古文：又有神人长数丈见于城下，其迹长四尺五寸。
现代文：又有神人，身高几丈出现在城下，其脚印有四尺五寸长。
English: There is also a godman, several meters tall, who appears at the foot of the castle. His footprints are four feet and five centimeters long.

古文：景问巫，对曰： 此是不祥之物，来食人血耳。 
现代文：李景问巫术之士，回答说： 这是不祥之物，来吃人血罢了。 
English: When Li Jing asked the sorcerer what it was, he replied, "It's an ominous thing, it's just come to eat human blood."

古文：景大怒，推出之。
现代文：李景大怒，把他推了出去。
English: Li Jing was furious and pushed him out.

古文：旬日而兵至，死者数万焉。
现代文：过了上十天，叛军来了，死者有几万。
English: After ten days, the rebels arrived, and tens of thousands of people died.

古文：景寻被征入京，进位柱国，拜右武卫大将军，赐缣九千匹，女乐一部，加以珍物。
现代文：李景随即被征调入长安，升任柱国，授为右武卫大将军，赐他缣纟采九千段，女乐一部，外加奇珍之物。
English: Li Jing was immediately conscripted and transferred to Chang'an, promoted to Zhu Guo, and was awarded the title of General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards. He was given a collection of nine thousand pieces of jewelry, a piece of female music, and other rare items.

古文：景智略非所长，而忠直为时所许，帝甚信之。
现代文：李景的智慧谋略不怎么样，但忠诚正直被时人赞许，皇上很信任他。
English: Li Jing's wisdom and strategy were not good, but his loyalty and honesty were praised by the people of the time, and the emperor trusted him very much.

古文：击叛蛮向思多，破之，赐奴婢八十口。
现代文：他攻击反叛的蛮子向思多，打破叛军，赐奴婢八十口。
English: He attacked the rebel barbarian Xiang Siduo, defeated the rebels, and gave eighty slaves.

古文：明年，击吐谷浑于青海，破之，进位光禄大夫。赐奴婢六十口，缣二千匹。
现代文：次年，在青海攻击吐谷浑，打败吐谷浑，因此升任光禄大夫，赐奴婢六十个，缣纟采二千匹。
English: The following year, he attacked and defeated Tu Gu Hun in Qinghai. As a result, he was promoted to the post of Guanglu Doctor, and was given sixty slaves and two thousand yakitori.

古文：五年，车驾西巡，至天水，景献食于帝。
现代文：大业五年，炀帝西幸，到了天水，李景给炀帝敬献食物。
English: After five years of hard work, it was fortunate for Emperor Gong that Li Jing came to Tianshui to offer food to Emperor Gong.

古文：帝曰： 公，主人也。 
现代文：炀帝说： 你是这儿的主人。 
English: Hao Di said: You are the master here.

古文：赐坐齐王暕之上。
现代文：赐他坐在齐王杨日柬之上。
English: Grant him to sit on the throne of the king of Qi, Yang, Nichi and Kam.

古文：至陇川宫，帝将大猎，景与左武卫大将军郭衍俱有难言，为人所奏。
现代文：到了陇川宫，炀帝将痛痛快快打猎，李景与左武卫大将军郭衍都有表示为难的话，被人上告。
English: When they arrived at the Luchuan Palace, Emperor Gao was about to go hunting. Li Jing and Zuo Wei General Guo Yan both said that if they were in trouble, they would be sued.

古文：帝大怒，令左右Ξ之，竟以坐免。
现代文：炀帝大怒，令左右把他抬起来往地下摔，竟然因此免官。
English: Emperor Xuan was so angry that he ordered everyone to lift him up and throw him to the ground. As a result, he was relieved of his duties.

古文：岁余，复位，与宇文述等参掌选举。
现代文：过了一年多，官复原职，与宇文述等人参与掌管选拔官员的事务。
English: After more than a year, the official was reinstated and participated in the affairs of selecting officials with Yu Wenshu and others.

古文：明年，攻高丽武厉城，破之，赐爵苑丘侯，物一千段。
现代文：次年，进攻高丽的武厉城，打破该城，赐爵苑丘侯，缣纟采一千段。
English: The following year, he attacked Wuling City in Goryeo, defeated the city, was given the title of Duke of Yuanqiu, and was awarded a thousand dan.

古文：八年，出浑弥道。
现代文：大业八年，率部出浑弥道。
English: After eight years of hard work, he was promoted to Gunma-do.

古文：九年，复出辽东。
现代文：九年，再出辽东。
English: Nine years later, he returned to Liaodong.

古文：及旋师，以景为殿。
现代文：班师回朝时，让李景所部殿后。
English: When the class teacher returned to the imperial court, he asked Li Jing to stay behind.

古文：高丽追兵大至，景击走之。
现代文：高丽追兵大至，李景打跑了他们。
English: Goryeo chased the soldiers so hard that Li Jing ran away from them.

古文：赉物三千段，进爵滑国公。
现代文：赐他缣纟采三千段，晋爵位为滑国公。
English: He was awarded three thousand dan and promoted to the rank of prince.

古文：杨玄感之反也，朝臣子弟多预焉，而景独无关涉。
现代文：杨玄感造反时，朝廷大臣及其子弟大多参预其事，而李景与此无关。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, most of the ministers of the imperial court and their children were involved, but Li Jing had nothing to do with this.

古文：帝曰： 公诚直天然，我之梁栋也。 
现代文：炀帝说： 你诚实正直，出自本性，你是我的栋梁啊！ 
English: Hao Di said: You are honest and upright, by nature, you are my pillar!

古文：赐以美女。
现代文：赐给他美女。
English: Give him a beautiful woman.

古文：帝每呼李大将军而不名，其见重如此。
现代文：炀帝每每叫他 李大将军 ，而不叫他的名字，他就是这样被看重。
English: Emperor Gao always called him "General Li" instead of his real name, and that's how he was valued.

古文：十二年，帝令景营辽东战具于北平，赐御马一匹，名师子吉。
现代文：大业十二年，炀帝命令李景在北平营造将用于辽东战争的器具，赐给他御马一匹，名叫 狮子驹 。
English: In the twelfth year of Daye, Emperor Yao ordered Li Jing to build equipment in Beiping that would be used in the Liaodong War, and gave him a royal horse, named Lion.

古文：会幽州贼杨仲绪率众万馀人来攻北平，景督兵击破之，斩仲绪。
现代文：碰上幽州反贼杨仲绪率部一万多人来进攻北平，李景率部打败反贼，斩了杨仲绪。
English: When encountering the Yuzhou anti-thieves, Yang Zhongxu led more than ten thousand people to attack Beiping, and Li Jing defeated the anti-thieves and beheaded Yang Zhongxu.

古文：于时盗贼蜂起，道路隔绝，景遂召募，以备不虞。
现代文：那时盗贼蜂起，道路隔断，李景于是招募兵马，以备不测。
English: At that time, the thieves revolted and the road was cut off, so Li Jing recruited soldiers and horses to prepare for the unexpected.

古文：武贲郎将罗艺与景有隙，遂诬景将反。
现代文：武贲郎将罗艺与李景有矛盾，于是诬告李景谋反。
English: Takehiro thought that Luo Yi was in conflict with Li Jing, so he falsely accused Li Jing of plotting a rebellion.

古文：帝遣其子慰谕之曰： 纵人言公窥天阙，据京师，吾无疑也。 
现代文：炀帝派人送来他的儿子，并安慰他说： 纵然有人说你想谋反，想占据京师，我也不会怀疑你。 
English: Emperor Qian sent someone to bring his son back and comforted him, saying, "Even if someone says that you are plotting a rebellion and want to occupy Beijing, I will not doubt you.

古文：后为高开道所围，独守孤城，外无声援，岁馀，士卒患脚肿而死者十将六七，景抚循之，一无离叛。
现代文：李景后被高开道所包围，独守孤城，外无援兵。过了一年多，士卒得脚肿病而死的快到十分之六、七，李景安抚他们，没有一个背叛他而离去的。
English: After more than a year, Li Jing was surrounded by Gao Kaido and had to defend the isolated city alone, with no outside reinforcements. After more than a year, six or seven out of ten of his soldiers had swollen feet and died. Li Jing pacified them, and none of them betrayed him and left.

古文：辽东军资多在其所，粟帛山积，既逢离乱，景无所私焉。
现代文：辽东战争要用的军用物资大多在他这里，粮食、布帛堆积如山，又遭到丧难，李景一点都没有把这些物资化为己有。
English: Most of the military supplies to be used in the Liaodong War were in his possession. Grain and cloth were piled up like a mountain, and they were lost. Li Jing did not take possession of these materials at all.

古文：及帝崩于江都，辽西太守邓暠率兵救之，遂归柳城。
现代文：到炀帝在江都被害后，辽西太守邓曰高率兵救他，他于是回到了柳城。
English: After Emperor Gao was killed in the Yangtze River, the Western Governor of Liaoning Province, Deng Xiaoping, sent soldiers to rescue him. He then returned to Liucheng.

古文：后将还幽州，在道遇贼，见害。
现代文：后来，他将回到幽州去，在路上遇上贼人，被害。
English: Later, he would go back to Yuzhou, encounter a thief on the road, and was killed.

古文：契丹、靺轲素感其恩，闻之莫不流涕，幽、燕人士于今伤惜之。
现代文：契丹、革末革曷一向感戴他的恩典，听说他被害，没有不伤心落泪的。幽州、燕州的人士，到现在仍然为他痛惜伤心。
English: Khitan and Kemmu Kecheng have always felt his grace, and when they heard that he had been killed, they could not help but shed tears. People in Yuzhou and Yanzhou still mourn for him.

古文：有子世谟。
现代文：有儿子名叫李世谟。
English: He has a son named Lee Se-moo.

