古文：小司马之职，掌凡小祭祀。会同、飨射、师田、丧纪，掌其事，如大司马之法。
现代文：小司马的职责掌管凡小祭祀、小会同、小飨礼、小射礼、小征伐、小田猎、小丧事，都负责掌管其事，如同大司马掌管有关事项之法。
English: The responsibilities of the small steed are in charge of small rituals, small gatherings, small ceremonies, small shooting ceremonies, small campaigns, small hunting, and small funerals, and are responsible for managing their affairs, just as the big steed is in charge of the relevant matters.

古文：军司马，阙。
现代文：军司马，阙。
English: The secretary of the army, Ma, is crying.

古文：舆司马阙。
现代文：舆司马阙。
English: Public opinion is divided.

古文：行司马阙。
现代文：行司马阙。
English: Gyoji Mazen is singing.

古文：司勋掌六乡赏地之法，以等其功。
现代文：司勋掌管六乡赏赐土地的法则，以赏赐的多少体现功劳的大小。
English: Shihun presided over the law of awarding land in the six townships, and the size of the reward reflected the size of the merit.

古文：王功曰勋，国功曰功，民功曰庸，事功曰劳，治功曰力，战功曰多。
现代文：辅成王业之功日叫做勋，保全国家之功叫做功，有利民生之功叫做庸，勤劳定国之功叫做劳，为国制法之功叫做力，战功叫做多。
English: The merit of supporting the king's career is called "Honor," the merit of preserving the country is called "Merit," the merit of benefiting the people's livelihood is called "Medium," the merit of working hard to establish the country is called "Labor," the merit of establishing the country is called "Strength," and the merit of war is called "Much."

古文：凡有功者，铭书于王之大常，祭於大烝，司勋诏之。
现代文：凡有功劳的人，就书写他的名字和功劳在王的大常旗上死后就在冬季祭祀宗庙时让他配食，司勋向神报告他的功劳。
English: All those who have merit should write their names and merits on the king's banner, and when they die, let them serve food during the winter sacrifice at the ancestral temple, and report their merits to the gods.

古文：大功，司勋藏其贰。
现代文：大功劳，由司勋收藏功劳簿的副本。
English: For his great service, Shihun collected a copy of the service record book.

古文：掌赏地之政令。
现代文：掌管有关征收所赏赐田地的赋役的政令。
English: The decree governing the expropriation of allotment land.

古文：凡赏无常，轻重眡功。
现代文：凡赏赐田地的多少没有一定，赏赐的轻重依据功劳的大小。
English: There is no limit to the amount of land that can be awarded, and the importance of the award depends on the amount of merit.

古文：凡颁赏地，三之一食，唯加田无国正。
现代文：凡所颁赐的赏地，国家收取三分之一的租税。只有加赐的田地国家不征税。
English: The state collects a one-third tax on all land grants. Only land grants are exempt from tax.

古文：马质掌质马。马量三物，一曰戎马，二曰田马，三曰驽马，皆有物贾，纲恶马。
现代文：马质掌管评估马的价值以成交，衡量和购买三种马：一是戎马，二是田马，三是驽马，都有一定的毛色和价格。
English: Horse quality control evaluates the value of horses by trading, measuring and purchasing three types of horses: one is a military horse, the second is a field horse, and the third is a thoroughbred horse, all of which have a certain coat color and price.

古文：凡受马于有司者，书其齿毛与其贾。
现代文：用大绳拴系悍劣的马加以驯养。凡从马质那里领受马的，记录马的年齿、毛色与马价。
English: Anyone who receives a horse from a horse breeder should record the horse's age, coat color, and price.

古文：马死，则旬之内更，旬之外入马耳，以其物更，其外否。马及行，则以任齐其行。
现代文：如果马死了，是在十天之内死的就要原价赔偿，十天之外死的就要将马耳上缴以便验证死马的毛色，依照死马的皮肉骨骼的价格加以偿还，二十天以上死的就不赔偿了。
English: If the horse dies, if it dies within ten days, the original price will be compensated. If it dies after ten days, the horse's ears will be handed over in order to verify the dead horse's coat color, and will be reimbursed according to the price of the dead horse's skin, flesh and bones. If it dies more than twenty days, there will be no compensation.

古文：若有马讼，则听之。
现代文：马将远行，就要告诉领取马的人根据马的任载能力调剂马的负担和行程。
English: If the horse will travel far, it is necessary to tell the person who receives the horse to adjust the horse's burden and travel according to the horse's carrying capacity.

古文：禁原蚕者。
现代文：如果有因买卖马而而争讼的，就受理听断。
English: If there is a dispute over the sale and purchase of horses, it will be accepted for hearing.

古文：量人掌建国之法。
现代文：禁止一年两次养蚕，以免伤马。
English: It is forbidden to raise silkworms twice a year, so as not to injure horses.

古文：以分国为九州，营国城郭，营后宫，量市朝道巷门渠。
现代文：量人掌管营建国家的法则，划分天下的国家为九州，丈量将营建之国的国都的城郭，丈量国君的宫室，丈量市、朝、道路、里巷、宫门和沟渠。
English: Measuring people is in charge of the law of building a country, dividing the countries of the world into Kyushu, measuring the castle of the capital of the country to be built, measuring the prince's palace, measuring the city, morning, road, alley, palace gate and ditch.

古文：造都邑，亦如之。
现代文：营建采邑也这样做。
English: The same applies to the construction of mining towns.

古文：营军之垒舍，量其市朝州涂，军社之所里。
现代文：丈量驻军处的壁垒、营房，丈量军中的市、朝、市、朝周围的道路和军社所在之处。
English: Measure the barriers and barracks of the garrison, measure the city, the morning, the city, the roads around the morning and the location of the military company in the army.

古文：邦国之地与天下之涂数，皆书而藏之。
现代文：各诸侯国的土地和天下的道路数，都记载而加以收藏。
English: The land of each vassal state and the number of roads around the world are recorded and collected.

古文：凡祭祀，飨宾，制其従献脯燔之数量，掌丧祭奠之俎实。
现代文：凡祭祀或用飨礼招待宾客，确定随同献酒时献上的干肉或烤肉的多少和长短。
English: When making a sacrifice or inviting guests to a banquet, determine the quantity and length of the dried meat or grilled meat to be offered with the libation.

古文：凡宰祭、与郁人受斝历而皆饮之。
现代文：掌管设大遣奠的牲肉和从葬于墓的牲肉。凡举行祭祀，同郁人一起接受王举以授给的最后一辈酒而都饮下。
English: He is in charge of the animal meat for the memorial service and the animal meat buried in the tomb. Anyone who holds a sacrifice will drink the last generation of wine given by the king together with the mourners.

古文：小子掌祭祀羞羊肆、羊殽、肉豆，而掌珥于社稷，祈于五祀。
现代文：小子掌管祭祀时进献豚解的羊牲、体解的羊牲、盛于豆的切肉。掌管对新建成的社稷坛的衅礼，对新建成的宫室的五祀的衅礼。
English: The boy is in charge of the sacrificial animals that are offered at the time of the ritual, such as the pig, the sheep, and the meat. He is in charge of the defiance of the newly built altar, and the defiance of the newly built palace.

古文：凡沈、辜、侯、禳，饰其牲，衅邦器及军器。
现代文：凡举行埋沈、胡辜、侯禳之祭，负责洗刷所用的牲。
English: The person in charge of washing the sacrificial animals used in the Buri-Sin, Hu-Kuhn, and Hou-Hao festivals.

古文：凡师田，斩牲以左右徇陈。
现代文：用牲血涂新制成的邦器和军事器械。凡出征或田猎，斩杀牲以巡示左右军阵。
English: Newly-made state weapons and military equipment were painted with animal blood. Anyone who went out to fight or hunted in the fields would slaughter animals to demonstrate the left and right army lines.

古文：祭祀，赞羞，受撤焉。
现代文：祭祀时，协助进献祭品，祭祀完毕接受所彻下的祭品。
English: At the time of the sacrifice, assist in the offering of the sacrifice, and when the sacrifice is complete, accept the entire offering.

古文：羊人掌羊牲。
现代文：羊人掌管羊牲。
English: The shepherd is in charge of the sheep.

古文：凡祭祀，饰羔。
现代文：凡举行祭祀，就洗刷羔羊。
English: Whenever there is a sacrifice, the lamb is washed.

古文：祭祀，割羊牲，登其首。
现代文：祭祀时，宰杀羊牲，将羊头拿上堂献入室中。
English: At the time of the sacrifice, the sheep are slaughtered and the sheep's head is brought into the hall to be offered.

古文：凡祈珥，共其羊牲。
现代文：凡举行衅庙礼，供给所需的羊牲。
English: Wherever a subversive temple ceremony is held, the necessary sheep and cattle should be provided.

古文：宾客，共其法羊。
现代文：接待宾客，供给按礼法所当供给的羊。
English: To receive guests, and to offer the sheep according to the law.

古文：凡沈、辜、侯、禳、衅、积，共其羊牲。
现代文：凡举行沈埋、船辜、侯禳、衅祭和积柴燔烟之祭，供给所需的羊牲。
English: Provide the necessary sheep and cattle for the burial, shipwreck, horse-drawn carriage, fire-sacrifice, and wood-pile smoke-sacrifice.

古文：若牧人无牲，则受布于司马，使其贾买牲而共之。
现代文：如果牧人那里没有符合要求的羊牲，就从司马那里领取钱，派手下的贾人去购买羊牲而供给所需。
English: If the herdsmen do not have the required livestock, they collect money from Sima and send their Jia people to buy the livestock and supply what is needed.

古文：司爟掌行火之政令。四时变国火，以救时疾，季春出火，民咸従之。
现代文：司爟掌管用火的政令，四季变更国中用以取火的木材，来防救时气造成的疾病。
English: Priests controlled the use of fire by decree, and the wood used to light fires in the four-season-changing country was used to prevent diseases caused by seasonal air.

古文：季秋内火，民亦如之。时则施火令。
现代文：春三月开始用火烧陶冶炼，民众都跟着烧陶治炼，秋九月熄灭陶冶的火，民众也这样做，到时候就施行可以放火烧荒的命令。
English: In the spring and March, people began to burn pottery to purify it. In the autumn and September, the fire of pottery was extinguished, and the people did the same. At that time, the order to set fire to the wasteland was implemented.

古文：凡祭祀，则祭爟。
现代文：凡祭祀，在祭祀结束时就行祭燧礼。
English: At the end of every ritual, a ritual rite is performed.

古文：凡国失火，野焚莱，则有刑罚焉。
现代文：凡国中有失火的，或有擅自放火烧野草的，就有刑罚加以惩处。
English: If there is a fire in any land, or if a man sets fire to the grass of the field, he will be punished.

古文：掌固掌修城郭、沟池、树渠之固，颁其士、庶子及其众庶之守，设其饰器，分其财用，均其稍食，任其万民，用其材器。
现代文：掌固掌管修筑城郭、沟池和篱落等阻固，分派士、庶子和役徒守卫任务，设置兵甲等防守器械，分拨守卫所需的财物合理发给守卫者食粮，可以根据需要役使民众，征用他们的材物器械。
English: The commander-in-chief was in charge of the construction of fortifications, ditches, and fences, assigning soldiers, bastards, and servants to guard tasks, setting up defensive equipment such as armor, allocating the property needed for the guards, and rationally distributing food to the guards. He could serve the people as needed and requisition their materials and equipment.

古文：凡守者受法焉，以通守政，有移甲，与其役，财用唯是得通，与国有司帅之，以赞其不足者。
现代文：凡守卫者都从掌固那里接受约束的法纪，而使守卫所需财物器械得以调度流通，但必须是有必要调动的兵甲役徒和财物，只有这一部分才能够流通，并与有关官吏率领着，以帮助守备薄弱的地方。
English: All the guards receive the binding legal discipline from the commander, so that the property and equipment required by the guards can be dispatched and circulated, but it must be necessary to mobilize the armored personnel and property. Only this part can be circulated and led by the relevant officials to help guard the weak places.

古文：昼三巡之；夜亦如之；夜三鼜以号戒。
现代文：白天耍三次巡视守卫处。夜里也这样做，夜里还要三次敲击鼜鼓并发出注意警戒的呼号。
English: During the day, they patrol the guardhouse three times. They do the same at night, and at night they also strike the gong three times and issue a call for attention and vigilance.

古文：若造都邑则治其固与其守法。
现代文：凡建造都邑，就为之修筑阻固，并颁授守卫之法。
English: Whenever a capital city is built, fortifications are built for it, and a code of guarding is issued.

古文：凡国都之竟有沟树之固，郊亦如之。
现代文：凡王国和都邑的边境处，都开有沟渠和沿沟栽种的树木作为阻固，都城的四郊也是这样。
English: On all the borders of the kingdom and the capital, there were ditches and trees planted along the ditches as a barrier, as well as on the outskirts of the capital.

古文：民皆有职焉，若有山川，则因之。
现代文：民众都有守卫和修筑阻固的职责。如果境内有山河，就借以修筑为阻固。
English: If there are mountains and rivers in the territory, they should be protected by construction.

古文：司险掌九州之图，以周知其山林、川泽之阻，而达其道路。
现代文：司险掌管九州的地图，以遍知各州的山林、川泽的险阻，而开通其间的道路。
English: The insurance company is in charge of the map of Kyushu, and opens the roads between the states by knowing the mountains, forests, and dangerous obstacles in each state.

古文：设国之五沟、五涂，而树之林以为阻固，皆有守禁，而达其道路。
现代文：在国都郊野之地设置五沟、五途，而种植林木，作为阻固，阻固处都设有守禁，而使道路通达。
English: In the countryside of the national capital, five ditches and five roads were set up, and trees were planted as obstacles. The obstacles were guarded, and the roads were made accessible.

古文：国有故，则藩塞阻路而止行者，以其属守之，唯有节者达之。
现代文：国家有变故，就设藩篱阻塞道路而禁止行人，用下属守卫要害处，只有持旌节的人才可通行。
English: When there is a change of government, a fence is set up to block the road and prohibit pedestrians, subordinates are used to guard the key points, and only those who keep the fast are allowed to pass.

