古文：君之适长殇，车三乘；公之庶长殇，车一乘；大夫之适长殇，车一乘。
现代文：诸侯的嫡子，如果是在十六岁到十九岁之间夭折，在葬礼中可用遣车三辆。诸侯的庶子，如果在十六岁到十九岁之间夭折，只可用遣车一辆，大夫的嫡子如果也是在这个年龄段夭折，所用的遣车也是一辆。
English: If the legitimate son of a vassal died between the ages of sixteen and nineteen, three cars could be used for the funeral. If the illegitimate son of a vassal died between the ages of sixteen and nineteen, only one car could be used for the funeral. If the legitimate son of a doctor also died in this age group, one car could be used for the funeral.

古文：公之丧，诸达官之长，杖。
现代文：诸侯去世，凡是由国君直接任命的卿、大夫、士，应服斩衰持丧杖。
English: Upon the death of a feudal lord, all the nobles, doctors, and officials who were directly appointed by the sovereign were required to take up the cudgels.

古文：君于大夫，将葬，吊于宫；及出，命引之，三步则止。
现代文：国君对于大夫的丧事，在大夫将葬的时候，要先到殡宫吊丧。等到柩车出来，要命随从执纬拉车，往前拉三步就停下来。
English: For the doctor's funeral, when the doctor is about to be buried, the sovereign must first go to the funeral home. When the funeral car comes out, he must follow the driver to pull the car, pull forward three steps and stop.

古文：如是者三，君退；朝亦如之，哀次亦如之。
现代文：像这样一拉一停三次，国君才离开。在孝子奉枢朝庙时，国君也是这种礼数。
English: Just like this, the sovereign had to pull up and stop three times before leaving. This is the same number of times the sovereign had to pull up when his son was serving as the center of the temple.

古文：五十无车者，不越疆而吊人。
现代文：在柩车经过孝子居丧的临时住所时，国君也是这种礼数。
English: When the carriage passes by the temporary residence of the bereaved son, the sovereign is also the number of this kind of ceremony.

古文：季武子寝疾，蟜固不说齐衰而入见，曰： 斯道也，将亡矣；士唯公门说齐衰。 
现代文：五十岁以上而没有车的人，不必大老远地越境去吊丧。季武子卧病，娇固不脱掉孝服就去他家探视，并向他说明： 我的这种作法，现在快绝迹了、可按照正礼，士也只有进入公门才脱去孝服。 
English: If you are over 50 and don't have a car, you don't have to cross the border to go to the funeral. Ji Wuzi was ill, so I went to his house to visit him without taking off the filial piety, and explained to him: My way of doing things is almost extinct now, but in accordance with proper etiquette, a scholar should only take off his filial piety when entering a public place.

古文：武子曰： 不亦善乎，君子表微。 
现代文：季武子佯表同意地说： 你这样做不是很好吗！
English: Ji Takeko said in agreement, "Isn't it great that you're doing this!

古文：及其丧也，曾点倚其门而歌。
现代文：等到季武子去世了，曾点就倚在他家门上唱歌，表示自己也是按照正礼而行。
English: When Ji Takeko passed away, Zeng Dotsu leaned on the door of his house and sang, saying that he was also following proper etiquette.

古文：大夫吊，当事而至，则辞焉。
现代文：大夫来吊士，如果正当主人忙于大小殡硷之事的时候，就派人向大夫说明，此刻未能出迎，请他稍待片刻。
English: When the doctor comes to the undertaker, if the owner is busy with a large or small funeral, he will send someone to explain to the doctor that he is unable to meet him at this time, and ask him to wait for a moment.

古文：吊于人，是日不乐。
现代文：在向人吊丧的那一天，整天都不奏乐。
English: On the day of his death, no music was played all day.

古文：妇人不越疆而吊人。
现代文：妇人无外事，所以不必越境去吊丧。
English: The woman had nothing else to do, so there was no need to cross the border to mourn.

古文：行吊之日不饮酒食肉焉。
现代文：吊丧的那天，不可以喝酒吃肉。
English: On the day of the funeral, it is forbidden to drink alcohol or eat meat.

古文：吊于葬者必执引，若从柩及圹，皆执绋。
现代文：在出葬时去吊丧，一定要帮助拉柩车；如果跟着柩车到墓扩，都要执沸帮助下葬。
English: When attending a funeral, you must help to pull the hearse; if you follow the hearse to the grave, you must help to bury it.

古文：丧，公吊之，必有拜者，虽朋友州里舍人可也。
现代文：客死异国，如果地主国的国君来吊，虽然身边没有亲人为丧主，但也一定要有人出来代表丧主拜谢，即令是死者的朋友、同乡、寄寓的房东也可以。
English: When a guest dies in a foreign country, if the sovereign of the host country comes to visit, although there are no relatives around to mourn the deceased, someone must come out to offer thanks on behalf of the bereaved, even if it is the deceased's friend, countryman, or landlord.

古文：吊曰： 寡君承事。 
现代文：国君的介说： 敝国的国君想要点协助治丧的事干。 
English: The king's representative said, "The king of this country wants to do something to help with the mourning.

古文：主人曰： 临。 
现代文：那位丧主的代表则回答： 辱蒙大驾光临。 
English: The representative of the bereaved replied: "It's a great honour to be here.

古文：君遇柩于路，必使人吊之。
现代文：国君在路上遇到柩车，要派人过去慰问。
English: The sovereign encountered a broken-down car on the road and wanted to send someone to offer his condolences.

古文：大夫之丧，庶子不受吊。
现代文：大夫的丧事，庶子不能做丧主而接受慰问。
English: In the doctor's funeral, the son-in-law cannot be the mourner and receive condolences.

古文：妻之昆弟为父后者死，哭之适室，子为主，袒免哭踊，夫入门右，使人立于门外告来者，狎则入哭；父在，哭于妻之室；非为父后者。
现代文：妻子的兄弟，而且又是岳父的继承人死了，就在自己的正寝哭他，让自己的儿子为丧主，袒露左臂，去冠而戴免，号哭跳跃。自己则进去站在门的右边，并派人立于门外，向闻哭来吊的人说明死者为谁。只有特别要好的人，才进入庭前哭吊。如果父亲健在，就不敢哭于正寝，而要哭于妻的寝室。
English: When his wife's brother, who was also the heir of his father-in-law, died, he wept for him in his bed. He made his son bare his left arm in mourning, take off his crown and wear it again, and cry and jump. He himself went in and stood on the right side of the door, and sent someone to stand outside the door and explain to those who were crying and hanging around who the dead man was. Only those who were particularly good went into the courtyard to cry and hang. If the father was alive, he would not dare to cry in bed, but would cry in his wife's bedroom.

古文：哭诸异室。有殡，闻远兄弟之丧，哭于侧室；无侧室，哭于门内之右；同国，则往哭之。
现代文：如果死者不是岳父的继承人，就在别的房间哭他。家里有丧事，正停枢待葬，如果此时听到异国远房兄弟之丧，就要在偏房哭他；没有偏房的人家，就在门内的右侧哭他；如果死于国内，就应赶往他的灵堂去哭。
English: If the deceased is not the heir of the father-in-law, cry for him in another room. If there is a funeral in the family, it is pausing for burial. If at this time you hear the funeral of a distant brother from a foreign country, you should cry for him in the side room; if there is no side room, cry for him on the right side of the door. If he died in the country, you should rush to his shrine to cry.

古文：子张死，曾子有母之丧；齐衰而往哭之。
现代文：子张死的时候，曾子正好在为母亲服丧的热孝之中，于是就穿着齐衰去哭子张。
English: When Zi Zhang died, Zeng Zi was in the midst of mourning for his mother, so he put on his uniform and went to cry for Zi Zhang.

古文：或曰： 齐衰不以吊。 
现代文：有人批评说： 你正穿齐衰孝服，不应去吊朋友。 
English: Some people criticized: You are wearing the uniform of filial piety, you should not hang up your friends.

古文：曾子曰： 我吊也与哉？ 
现代文：曾子辩解说： 难道我是去吊丧吗？
English: Zengzi defended himself by saying, "Did I really go to the funeral?

古文：有若之丧，悼公吊焉，子游摈，由左。
现代文：我是去哭朋友呀。 有若死时，悼公亲自去吊丧，子游作为丧礼中的司仪，由左方上下。
English: I went to cry for my friend. When someone died, the mourners went to the funeral in person, and Ziyu served as the master of ceremonies in the funeral, from the left up and down.

古文：齐谷王姬之丧，鲁庄公为之大功。
现代文：王姬去世了，齐国向鲁国报丧，鲁庄公为之服大功。
English: When Wang Ji passed away, the State of Qi mourned to the State of Lu, for which the Prince of Lu Zhuang rendered great services.

古文：或曰： 由鲁嫁，故为之服姊妹之服。 
现代文：有人说： 王姬是经由鲁国出嫁的，所以为她服姊妹的丧服―大功。 
English: Some people said: Wang Ji was married through Lu, so it was a great achievement for her to wear her sister's mourning dress.

古文：或曰： 外祖母也，故为之服。 
现代文：又有人说： 王姬是庄公的外祖母，所以才为之服大功。 
English: Another said: "Wang Ji is Zhuang Gong's grandmother, that's why she deserves so much credit.

古文：晋献公之丧，秦穆公使人吊公子重耳，且曰： 寡人闻之：亡国恒于斯，得国恒于斯。
现代文：晋献公去世后，秦穆公派人去慰问逃难在狄的公子重耳，且捎话说： 敝国国君听说，丢掉君位总是在这个时刻，而得到君位也总是在这个时刻。
English: After the death of Jin Xian Gong, Qin Mu Gong sent someone to pay condolences to the prince who had fled and was in Di's ear, and said: "I heard that the prince of this country always lost his title at this time, and he always gained his title at this time.

古文：虽吾子俨然在忧服之中，丧亦不可久也，时亦不可失也。
现代文：虽然您现在正在恭敬地丁忧服丧之中，但是服丧也不可太久，机不可失，请您考虑一下此事！ 
English: Although you are now respectfully mourning, but mourning can not be too long, the opportunity can not be lost, please consider this matter!

古文：孺子其图之。 
现代文：重耳把这些情况告诉了舅犯。
English: Chong Er told these circumstances to his uncle.

古文：以告舅犯，舅犯曰： 孺子其辞焉；丧人无宝，仁亲以为宝。
现代文：舅犯说： 您还是婉言谢绝的好。逃亡在外的人没有什么可宝贵的东西，要说有的话，那就是热爱父亲的精神。
English: The brother-in-law said, "You'd better politely decline. People who run away have nothing precious. If they have anything, it's the spirit of loving their father."

古文：父死之谓何？
现代文：父亲去世意味着什么？
English: But what does his father's death mean?

古文：又因以为利，而天下其孰能说之？
现代文：那是天塌般的凶祸。反而趁此机会谋取私利，这样做怎么能向天下人解说清楚呢？
English: That was a disaster of epic proportions. Instead, they took advantage of the opportunity to seek personal gain. How can this be explained to the world?

古文：孺子其辞焉。 
现代文：您还是婉言谢绝的好。 
English: You'd better politely decline.

古文：公子重耳对客曰： 君惠吊亡臣重耳，身丧父死，不得与于哭泣之哀，以为君忧。
现代文：于是公子重耳对来使说： 承蒙贵国国君派足下来慰向出亡在外的臣子，我流亡在外，而父亲死了，不能星夜奔回国内在灵位前哭泣，以抒发内心的悲哀，以至于使贵国国君为我担忧。
English: So the prince listened attentively to the envoy and said, "Thanks to your country's sovereign, who sent his foot to comfort the exiled vassal, I am in exile, and my father is dead, and I cannot rush back to the country at night to cry in front of the shrine to express my inner sadness, so that your country's sovereign is worried about me.

古文：父死之谓何？
现代文：可是，父亲去世意味着什么呢？
English: But what does his father's death mean?

古文：或敢有他志，以辱君义。 
现代文：那是天塌般的变故。此时此刻，怎么敢有自私自利之心，从而拈辱贵国国君的厚谊呢？ 
English: That was a cataclysmic turn of events. At this moment, how dare you have the selfishness to humiliate the friendship of your country's sovereign?

古文：稽颡而不拜，哭而起，起而不私。
现代文：说完以后，只叩头表示丧父之悲，而不敢像丧主那样向来使表示拜谢。
English: When he had finished, he only bowed his head to show his grief at the loss of his father, but did not dare to offer his thanks as he had always done.

古文：子显以致命于穆公。
现代文：然后哭着站立起来，站起来后也不再和使者私下说任何话。
English: And she stood up weeping, and when she stood up, she did not speak to the angel in private any more.

古文：穆公曰： 仁夫公子重耳！
现代文：使者子显向穆公复命。穆公说： 公子重耳真仁厚啊！
English: The messenger Zixian gave his life for Mu Gong. Mu Gong said: "He is so kind and considerate!

古文：夫稽颡而不拜，则未为后也，故不成拜；哭而起，则爱父也；起而不私，则远利也。 
现代文：他只叩头而不拜谢，可见他不是以继承人自居，所以没有完成整套行礼动作。哭着站起来，就像孝子要攀辕不让柩车启动，可见他是很爱其父的。站起来以后就不再和使者私下说话，可见他完全没有乘机谋利的念头。 
English: He only bowed and did not give thanks, which shows that he did not regard himself as the heir, so he did not complete the whole set of bowing movements. He stood up crying, like a filial son who wanted to climb the pole to prevent the carriage from starting, which shows that he loved his father very much. After he stood up, he no longer spoke privately with the messenger, which shows that he had no idea of taking advantage of the opportunity to make a profit.

古文：帷殡，非古也，自敬姜之哭穆伯始也。
现代文：殡时木把帷帐掀起而哭，并非古制，而是从敬姜哭其丈夫穆伯开始的。
English: It is not an old custom to lift the curtain and cry during a funeral, but it began with Jing Jiang crying for her husband, Mubei.

古文：丧礼，哀戚之至也。
现代文：守父母之丧期间，孝子的心情是极其悲哀的。
English: During the mourning of his parents, the filial son's mood was extremely sad.

古文：节哀，顺变也；君子念始之者也。
现代文：用种种礼节来节制他的悲哀，就是为了顺着他悲哀的感情，使他逐渐适应这种剧变。
English: All manner of etiquette was employed to temper his grief, in order to make him gradually adapt himself to this upheaval, in accordance with his sad feelings.

古文：复，尽爱之道也，有祷祠之心焉；望反诸幽，求诸鬼神之道也；北面，求诸幽之义也。
现代文：这都是由于君子念及生他养他的父母的缘故：念及生育之恩，如何不悲！念及自己乃是父母之遗体，敢不节哀顺变！
English: This is all due to the reason that a gentleman thinks about his parents who gave birth to him and raised him: thinking about the grace of birth, how not to be sad! Thinking that he is the remains of his parents, dare not to be sad!

古文：拜稽颡，哀戚之至隐也；稽颡，隐之甚也。
现代文：招魂这件事，是充分表现孝子热爱父母的一种形式，就像他们病危时的祈祷五祀那样，千方百计，想要他们起死回生。
English: Conjuring spirits is a form of fully expressing the filial son's love for his parents. Just like the five rites of prayer when they are critically ill, they will do everything possible to bring them back to life.

古文：饭用米贝，弗忍虚也；不以食道，用美焉尔。
现代文：盼望父母从幽暗的地方回来，这是祈求鬼神的方法。
English: Hoping for your parents to return from a dark place is a way of praying to the gods.

古文：铭，明旌也，以死者为不可别已，故以其旗识之。
现代文：招魂时向着北方呼叫，就是向幽暗中祈求的意思。拜谢吊客与叩头，都是悲哀中极痛苦的表现；而二者之中，尤以叩头的痛苦更甚。
English: To call out to the north in a requiem is to call out to the dark; both the hanger and the kowtow are expressions of great pain in grief; but of the two, the kowtow is the more painful.

古文：爱之，斯录之矣；敬之，斯尽其道焉耳。
现代文：饭含，用生米和贝壳，这是不忍心让死者空口；不用活着的人吃的熟食，是采用自然生成的米贝不腐烂的含义。
English: Rice-containing, using uncooked rice and seashells, this is the meaning of not being able to let the dead speak; cooked food that does not need to be eaten by the living, is the meaning of using naturally produced rice shells that do not rot.

古文：重，主道也，殷主缀重焉；周主重彻焉。
现代文：铭，是一种用写有姓名的旌旗以表明是何人之枢的东西。
English: An epitaph is something that uses a banner with a person's name written on it to indicate who they are.

古文：奠以素器，以生者有哀素之心也；唯祭祀之礼，主人自尽焉尔；岂知神之所飨，亦以主人有齐敬之心也。辟踊，哀之至也，有算，为之节文也。
现代文：因为死者的形貌已不复可见，所以用明族来作标志。因为爱他，所以将他的姓名写到铭上；因为敬他，所以对铭的制作严守规格一丝不苟。
English: Because the appearance of the deceased was no longer visible, the Ming people were used as a symbol. Because they loved him, his name was written on the inscription; because they respected him, the production of the inscription strictly adhered to the specifications.

古文：袒、括发，变也；愠，哀之变也。
现代文：重，和后来的神主牌的作用是一样的。
English: Heavy, and later the role of the main god card is the same.

古文：去饰，去美也；袒、括发，去饰之甚也。
现代文：殷人做了神主，就将重和主连在一起；而周人作了神主，就将重埋掉了。
English: When Yin became the god master, he connected Chong with the lord; when Zhou became the god master, he buried Chong.

古文：有所袒、有所袭，哀之节也。
现代文：葬前的祭奠，使用的是质朴无华的撰具，这是因为孝子的悲哀也是毫无掩饰的。
English: The pre-funeral eulogy used simple, unadorned props, because the filial son's grief was also undisguised.

古文：弁绖葛而葬，与神交之道也，有敬心焉。
现代文：只有葬后的吉祭，孝子才尽其敬神之心，使用经过文饰的撰具。
English: Only at the post-funeral auspicious festival did the filial children do their best to worship God, using decorated utensils.

古文：周人弁而葬，殷人冔而葬。
现代文：不必问神灵是否果真享用祭品，孝子只不过是表现其严肃恭敬的心情而已。
English: There is no need to ask whether the deities really enjoy the sacrificial offerings, the filial son is just showing his serious and respectful mood.

古文：歠主人、主妇室老，为其病也，君命食之也。
现代文：号哭时捶胸顿足 ，这是悲痛至极的表现；但却规定了一定的次数，这是为了使孝子有所节制，不可乱来。
English: When crying, he beats his chest and stomps his feet, which is the ultimate expression of grief; however, a certain number of times is prescribed, this is to keep the filial son restrained and not to be disorderly.

古文：反哭升堂，反诸其所作也；主妇入于室，反诸其所养也。反哭之吊也，哀之至也反而亡焉，失之矣，于是为甚。
现代文：解开上衣露出左臂，去掉异缅而改用麻束发，这是孝子在形貌服饰上的变化。心情忧郁，这是孝子悲哀感情的变化。除去修饰，就是除去华美。露出左臂，用麻束发，这是除去修饰的极端表现。但有时要露出左臂，也有时要掩好上衣，这也是为了节制悲哀。
English: Untying the coat to reveal the left arm, removing the cross-hairs and replacing it with a hair band, this is the change in the filial son's appearance and clothing. The mood is melancholy, this is the change in the filial son's sad feelings. Removing the decoration is to remove the beauty. Exposing the left arm, using the hair band, this is the extreme manifestation of removing the decoration. But sometimes you have to expose the left arm, and sometimes you have to cover the coat, which is also to control the sadness.

古文：殷既封而吊，周反哭而吊。孔子曰： 殷已悫，吾从周。 
现代文：戴着缠有葛续的爵弃举行葬礼，这是和神明交往的礼节。所以周人戴着爵弃行葬礼，殷人戴着寻行葬礼。
English: It is the etiquette of dealing with the gods to hold funerals while wearing a cloak that is wrapped around one's neck. Therefore, Zhou people wear a cloak for funerals, and Yin people wear a cloak for funerals.

古文：葬于北方北首，三代之达礼也，之幽之故也。
现代文：在亲人去世三天之后，应该设法让主人、主妇和总管喝些稀粥，因为他们由于悲哀过度已经有三天水浆不入口了，担心他们病倒。
English: Three days after the death of a relative, one should try to get the master, the mistress, and the chief steward to drink some gruel, because they have been unable to drink water for three days due to excessive grief, and they are afraid that they will fall ill.

古文：既封，主人赠，而祝宿虞尸。
现代文：对于大夫以上之家，国君要下令他们必须进食。
English: For households with more than one doctor, the sovereign will order that they must eat.

古文：既反哭，主人与有司视虞牲，有司以几筵舍奠于墓左，反，日中而虞。葬日虞，弗忍一日离也。是月也，以虞易奠。
现代文：送葬以后返回祖庙号哭，主人是升堂而哭，也就是回到死者生前遇到冠、婚等事的行礼之处而哭；主妇则是入室而哭，也就是回到死者生前进行馈食供养之处而哭。
English: After the funeral, they return to the ancestral temple to cry. The master cries when he ascends the hall, that is, he cries when he returns to the place where the deceased met the coronation, wedding and other ceremonies before his death; the housewife cries when she enters the house, that is, she cries when she returns to the place where the deceased was fed and provided for before his death.

古文：卒哭曰成事，是日也，以吉祭易丧祭，明日，祔于祖父。
现代文：孝子等人返哭时，亲友都要前来慰问，因为这是孝子最悲哀的时刻。回来以后，看不到亲人，的任何踪影了，亲人是永远消失了，有感于此，所以悲痛至极。
English: When the filial son and others come back crying, relatives and friends should come to offer condolences, because this is the saddest moment for the filial son. After returning, they can't see any trace of their relatives, and they are gone forever. They feel this, so they are extremely sad.

古文：其变而之吉祭也，比至于祔，必于是日也接不忍一日末有所归也。殷练而祔，周卒哭而祔。孔子善殷。
现代文：在将丧祭变成吉祭，一直到举行衬祭的过程中，一定要一天接着一天地进行，这是因为孝子不忍心死者的灵魂有一天无所归依的缘故殷人在周年练祭以后才举行柑祭，周人则在卒哭以后就举行柑祭孔子认为殷人的做法较好。
English: In the process of changing the funeral rite into a auspicious rite, all the way to the holding of the lining rite, it must be carried out one day after another. This is because the filial son cannot bear to have the soul of the deceased have nowhere to turn one day. Therefore, the Yin people only held the citrus festival after the annual training festival, and the Zhou people held the citrus festival after the crying. Confucius thought that the practice of the Yin people was better.

古文：君临臣丧，以巫祝桃茢执戈恶之也；所以异于生也。
现代文：国君去吊唁臣子之丧时，要让巫执桃枝扫除不祥；让卫士执戈保卫。之所以这样做之气，所以和对待活人的礼数不同。
English: When the sovereign goes to mourn the death of a vassal, he should have the witches sweep away the ominous; let the guards defend. The reason for doing this is that the number of courtesies is different from that of the living.

古文：丧有死之道焉。先王之所难言也。
现代文：办丧事数，这却是先王不便子说明的了。
English: The number of funerals, however, was explained by the late King Nakaseko.

古文：丧之朝也，顺死者之孝心也，其哀离其室也，故至于祖考之庙而后行。
现代文：祝执答帚，以避邪、是厌恶死人的凶邪另有对待死人的礼在丧礼中，葬前要先朝祖庙，这是顺从死者 出必告 的孝心。死者对即将离开故居感到悲哀，所以先到祖考之庙一一辞别而后启行。
English: In the funeral rites, before the burial, it is necessary to visit the ancestral temple first, which is the filial piety of obeying the deceased. The deceased was sad about leaving the former residence, so he first went to the ancestral temple to say goodbye and then set off.

古文：殷朝而殡于祖，周朝而遂葬。
现代文：殷人是在朝庙以后就将枢殡于祖庙，周人则是朝庙以后就出葬。
English: Yin people are buried in the ancestral temple after the temple, and Zhou people are buried after the temple.

古文：孔子谓：为明器者，知丧道矣，备物而不可用也。
现代文：孔子认为，用明器殉葬的人，是真正懂得办丧事的道理的，器物倒也齐备，就是中看而不中用。
English: Confucius believed that a person who died and was buried with bright utensils truly understood the principle of conducting a funeral, but the utensils were also well-equipped, that is, they were just for show and not for use.

古文：哀哉！
现代文：多么让人痛心呀！
English: It's pathetic.

古文：死者而用生者之器也。不殆于用殉乎哉。
现代文：死人而用活人的器物，那岂不近于用活人来殉葬吗？
English: To make use of the dead in the service of the living, is that not akin to using the living in the service of the dead?

古文：其曰明器，神明之也。
现代文：之所以把殉葬的器物叫做明器，意思就是把死者当作神明来看待的。
English: These funerary utensils are called "Clear utensils," which means that the deceased is worshipped as a god.

古文：涂车刍灵，自古有之，明器之道也。
现代文：用泥土做成的车，用茅草札成的人，自古就有，这就是明器的来龙去脉。
English: Cars made of mud and people made of thatch have been around since ancient times. This is the story of the candlestick.

古文：孔子谓为刍灵者善，谓为俑者不仁殆于用人乎哉！
现代文：孔子认为，发明用备灵的人，是个心地善良的人，而发明用俑的人则是个不仁的人。用假人殉葬，岂不接近于用活人殉葬吗？
English: Confucius believed that the person who invented the coffin was a kind-hearted person, while the person who invented the coffin was an unkind person. Wouldn't using a dummy to be buried be close to using a living person to be buried?

古文：穆公问于子思曰： 为旧君反服，古与？ 子思曰： 古之君子，进人以礼，退人以礼，故有旧君反服之礼也；今之君子，进人若将加诸膝，退人若将队诸渊，毋为戎首，不亦善乎！
现代文：鲁穆公向子思请教说： 大夫光明正大地离开故国，故国对他仍然以礼相待，在这种情况下，故国国君死了，大夫奔回故国为旧君服齐衰三月，这是古来就有的礼节吗？ 子思说： 古代的国君，在用人时是以礼相待，在不用人时也是以理相待，所以才有为旧君反服之礼。现在的国君，需要用人时，就像要把人家抱到怀里，亲热得无以复加，不需要用人时，就像要把人家推入深渊，必欲置之死地。
English: Rumu asked Zi Si: "The doctor left his home country fairly and squarely, and his home country still treated him with courtesy. Under these circumstances, the king of his home country died, and the doctor ran back to his home country to serve the old king. Is this an ancient etiquette?" Zi Si said: "Ancient kings, when they employed people, treated them with courtesy, and when they did not employ people, they also treated them with reason, which is why they were able to serve the old king in return. The current king, when he needs to employ people, is like to hold people in his arms, the intimacy is immeasurable, when he does not

古文：又何反服之礼之有？ 悼公之丧，季昭子问于孟敬子曰： 为君何食？ 
现代文：这样对待臣子，臣子不带领他国军队前来讨伐就不错了，哪里还谈得上为旧君反服呢？ 鲁悼公去世时，季昭子问孟敬子说： 为国君服丧，应该吃啥样的饭？ 
English: Treating a vassal like this, it would be a good thing if the vassal did not lead the army of another country to the crusade, where else can we talk about rebelling for the old king? When Lu Weiguo died, Ji Akiko asked Meng Keizi: What kind of meal should I eat to mourn for the king?

古文：敬子曰： 食粥，天下之达礼也。
现代文：敬子说： 应该喝稀粥，这是天下通行的做法。
English: Keiko said, "You should drink thin gruel. This is a common practice all over the world."

古文：吾三臣者之不能居公室也，四方莫不闻矣，勉而为瘠则吾能，毋乃使人疑夫不以情居瘠者乎哉？
现代文：但是我们仲孙、叔孙、季孙三家欺凌国君是出了名的，四方无人不晓。要我勉强喝粥，使身体变得消瘦，也不是办不到，但是那样做岂不更加使人怀疑我们的消瘦并非出自内心的悲哀吗，那又何苦呢！所以我还是照常吃饭。 
English: But our great-great-grandchildren, great-great-grandchildren, and great-great-grandchildren are famous for bullying the sovereign, and no one in the four directions is unaware of it. It is not impossible to force me to drink porridge and make my body thin, but wouldn't that make people even more suspicious that our thinness is not from our inner sadness? What a hardship! So I still eat as usual.

古文：我则食食。 卫司徒敬子死，子夏吊焉，主人未小敛，绖而往。
现代文：卫国的司徒敬子死了，子夏前去吊丧，当时主人还没有举行小敛，他就戴着纽进去了。
English: The patron saint of the country, Stuto Keishi, died, and his son Natsuma went to mourn. At that time, the master had not yet held a small retreat, and he went in wearing a necklace.

古文：子游吊焉，主人既小敛，子游出，绖反哭，子夏曰： 闻之也与？ 
现代文：而子游前去吊丧，却是穿着常服。在主人行过小敛之后，子游就连忙出去，戴上续以后才返回号哭。
English: However, Ziyu went to the funeral, but he was wearing his regular clothes. After his master passed away, Ziyu hurriedly went out, and only returned crying after putting on the cape.

古文：曰： 闻诸夫子，主人未改服，则不绖。 
现代文：子夏就问子游： 你这种作法是听到有谁这样讲过吗？ 子游说： 听老师讲过，在主人没有改服以前，吊客不应戴经。
English: Zixia asked Ziyu: Did you hear anyone talking about this practice? Ziyu said: Listen to the teacher, before the owner has changed, the hanger should not wear a sutra.

古文：曾子曰： 晏子可谓知礼也已，恭敬之有焉。 
现代文：竺曾子说： 晏子可以说是一个知礼的人了，礼的要害不过是个恭敬，而这一点晏子并不缺乏。 
English: Zeng Zeng Zi said: Zeng Zi can be said to be a person who knows etiquette. The key to etiquette is nothing but respect, and Zeng Zi does not lack this.

古文：有若曰： 晏子一狐裘三十年，遣车一乘，及墓而反；国君七个，遣车七乘；大夫五个，遣车五乘，晏子焉知礼？ 
现代文：有若说： 晏子一件狐皮袍子穿了三十年，办理其父丧事时，只用一辆遣车，随葬器物也少，所以很快就葬毕返回。按规矩来说，国君遣奠所取牲体是七包，遣车也就应是七辆；大夫是五包 遣车应是五辆。晏子全不照规矩来办，怎么能说他是一个知礼的人？ 
English: It was once said: "A mule wore a fox-skin robe for thirty years. When his father's funeral was held, only one cart was used, and there were few funerary objects, so he was quickly buried and returned. According to the rules, the body of the animal taken by the sovereign was seven bags, and the cart should be seven; the doctor was five bags, and the cart should be five. The mule did not follow the rules at all, so how can he be said to be a polite person?"

古文：曾子曰： 国无道，君子耻盈礼焉。
现代文：曾子说： 在国家尚未治理好的时候，君子以照搬礼数的规定为耻。
English: Zeng Zi said: When the country is not yet well governed, a gentleman would be ashamed to copy the regulations on the number of courtesies.

古文：国奢，则示之以俭；国俭，则示之以礼。 
现代文：在国人奢侈成风时，君子就应作个节俭的表率；在国人节俭成风时，君子就应作出按照丰数办事的表率。 
English: When the people of a country become extravagant, a gentleman should set an example of frugality; when the people of a country become frugal, a gentleman should set an example of acting according to the abundance.

古文：国昭子之母死，问于子张曰： 葬及墓，男子、妇人安位？ 
现代文：国昭子的母亲去世了，向子张请教说： 出葬到墓地后，男子和妇人应该怎祥就位？ 
English: Guo Akiko's mother passed away, and she asked Zhang for advice: How should a man and a woman take their places after being buried in a cemetery?

古文：子张曰： 司徒敬子之丧，夫子相，男子西乡，妇人东乡。 
现代文：子张说： 司徒敬子的丧事，是我的老师做司仪，男子和妇人分站墓道两边，男子面向西，妇人面向东。 国昭子说： 啊！
English: Zi Zhang said, "My teacher acted as master of ceremonies for the funeral of Stutte Keiko, with men and women standing on both sides of the cemetery path, the men facing west and the women facing east." Guo Akiko said, "Ah!

古文：曰： 噫！毋。 曰： 我丧也斯沾。
现代文：别这样 接着又说： 我办丧事的时候，会有许多宾客来观礼。
English: Don't be like that. Then he said, "When I hold a funeral, many guests will come to watch.

古文：尔专之，宾为宾焉，主为主焉妇人从男子皆西乡。 
现代文：司仪由你来当，但是要宾客和宾客在一起，主人一方和主人一方在一起，主人这边的妇人就跟在男子后面一律面向西。 
English: It is up to you to be the host, but the guests should be together with the guests, the host's side with the host's side, and the woman on the host's side should always face west behind the man.

古文：穆伯之丧，敬姜昼哭；文伯之丧，昼夜哭。
现代文：穆伯死时，敬姜作为妻子光在白天哭。文伯死时，敬姜作为母亲昼夜都哭。
English: When Mu Bo died, Jing Jiang, as his wife, cried all day. When Wen Bo died, Jing Jiang, as his mother, cried all day and night.

古文：孔子曰： 知礼矣。 
现代文：孔子评论说： 她真是个懂礼的人。 
English: Confucius commented: She is really a polite person.

古文：文伯之丧，敬姜据其床而不哭，曰： 昔者吾有斯子也，吾以将为贤人也，吾未尝以就公室；今及其死也，朋友诸臣未有出涕者，而内人皆行哭失声。
现代文：文伯去世的时候，敬姜靠着他的床暂停哭声，说： 从前我有这个儿子，看他颇有才艺，想着将来会成为二一个贤人，所以也就从来没有到他办公的地方去观察。现在他死了，朋友众臣中没有为他掉泪的，倒是他的妻妾等人为他痛哭失声。
English: When Wen Bo died, Jing Jiang leaned against his bed and paused to weep, saying, "Once upon a time, I had this son. Seeing that he was quite talented, I thought that he would become a wise man in the future, so I never went to his office to observe. Now that he is dead, none of his friends and ministers shed tears for him, but his wives and concubines cried for him.

古文：斯子也，必多旷于礼矣夫！ 
现代文：如此看来，这个孩子，在接人待物之礼方面一定多有荒废。 
English: From this perspective, this child must have a lot of waste in terms of receiving gifts.

古文：季康子之母死，陈亵衣。
现代文：季康子的母亲去世了，在陈列小敛所用衣袅时，连内衣也陈列出来了。
English: Ji Kangzi's mother passed away, and when displaying the clothes used by Xiao Yan, even her underwear was displayed.

古文：敬姜曰： 妇人不饰，不敢见舅姑，将有四方之宾来，亵衣何为陈于斯？ 
现代文：敬姜说： 妇人不打扮，不敢见公婆，何况现在是外面的客人将要来到，怎么把内衣也陈列在这里呢？ 
English: Jingjiang said, "If a woman doesn't dress up, she won't dare to meet her in-laws. Besides, guests from outside are coming now. How can she display her underwear here?"

古文：命彻之。
现代文：于是下令撤去内衣。
English: He then ordered the removal of the underwear.

古文：有子与子游立，见孺子慕者，有子谓子游曰： 予壹不知夫丧之踊也，予欲去之久矣。
现代文：有子和子游在一块儿站着，看见一个小孩子在哭哭啼啼地寻找父母。有子对子游说： 我一向不知道为什么丧礼中有顿足的规定，我早就想废除这条规定。
English: Standing together, Ariko and Ziyu saw a small child crying and looking for his parents. Ariko said to her son, "I've always wondered why there's a foot-stomping rule at funerals. I've long wanted to abolish this rule."

古文：情在于斯，其是也夫？ 子游曰： 礼：有微情者，有以故兴物者；有直情而径行者，戎狄之道也。
现代文：现在看来，孝子抒发悲哀思慕的感情应该就和这孩子一样，只要是发自内心，可以想怎么哭就怎么哭，还要什么规定呢！ 子游说： 礼的种种规定，有的是用来约束感情的，有的是借外在的事物以引发人们内在的感清的。
English: Now it seems that filial sons and daughters should express their feelings of sorrow and yearning in the same way as this child, as long as it is from the heart, they can cry as much as they want, what more do they need? Zhou said: Various rules of etiquette, some are used to restrain feelings, some are borrowed from external things to trigger people's inner feelings.

古文：礼道则不然，人喜则斯陶，陶斯咏，咏斯犹，犹斯舞，舞斯愠，愠斯戚，戚斯叹，叹斯辟，辟斯踊矣。
现代文：如果没有统一的规定，谁想怎么着就怎么着，那是野蛮民族的作法。
English: If there is no uniform regulation, anyone can do whatever they want, which is the practice of barbarian nations.

古文：品节斯，斯之谓礼。
现代文：如果依礼而行则不然。
English: Not if you act with decorum.

古文：人死，斯恶之矣，无能也，斯倍之矣。
现代文：人们遇到可喜之事就感到开心，感到开心就想唱歌。
English: People feel happy when they encounter something gratifying, and when they feel happy, they want to sing.

古文：是故制绞衾、设蒌翣，为使人勿恶也。
现代文：唱歌还不尽兴，就摇动身体。摇动身体还不过瘾，就跳舞。
English: If singing isn't fun, shake your body. If shaking your body isn't fun, dance.

古文：始死，脯醢之奠；将行，遣而行之；既葬而食之，未有见其飨之者也。
现代文：疯狂地舞过之后又产生慑怒之心，有了慑怒之心就会感到悲戚，悲戚则导致感叹。
English: After dancing madly, there is a deterrent of anger, and with a deterrent of anger, there will be sadness, and sadness will lead to lamentation.

古文：自上世以来，未之有舍也，为使人勿倍也。
现代文：光感叹还觉得发泄得不够，于是就捶胸。捶胸还不够味，那就要顿足了。
English: Light exclamation still feels that venting is not enough, so they beat their chests. Beating their chests is not enough, then they have to stomp their feet.

古文：故子之所刺于礼者，亦非礼之訾也。 
现代文：将这种种感情和行动加以区别和节制，这就叫做礼。人一死，就要被人厌恶；而且死人没有任何行为能力，人们就要背弃他。
English: To distinguish and restrain these kinds of feelings and actions is called etiquette. When a person dies, he is detested; moreover, a dead person has no ability to act, and people will turn their backs on him.

古文：吴侵陈，斩祀杀厉，师还出竟，陈太宰嚭使于师。
现代文：所以，制作绞余以掩盖尸体，设置萎霎以为棺饰，就是为了使人不感到讨厌。
English: Therefore, it is in order not to make people feel disgusting to make twine to cover the body and set withers to decorate the coffin.

古文：夫差谓行人仪曰： 是夫也多言，盍尝问焉；师必有名，人之称斯师也者，则谓之何？ 太宰嚭曰： 古之侵伐者，不斩祀、不杀厉、不获二毛；今斯师也，杀厉与？其不谓之杀厉之师与？ 曰： 反尔地，归尔子，则谓之何？ 
现代文：行人仪这样提出问题后，大宰豁回答说： 古代的军队在侵伐敌国时，不砍伐敌国社坛的树木，不杀害对方染病的百姓，不俘获头发斑白的老年人。而现在贵国的军队，不是在杀害患病的百姓吗，那岂不要被人称作杀害患病百姓的军队了吗？ 又问： 如果我们归还侵占的土地，送回俘虏的百姓，你们又将如何评论呢？ 
English: After the question was raised by the pedestrians, the grand vizier replied: When invading an enemy country, the ancient army did not cut down the trees of the enemy's social platform, did not kill the people of the other side who were infected with diseases, and did not capture the gray-haired elderly. And now your country's army is not killing sick people, so shouldn't it be called the army of killing sick people? Also asked: If we return the occupied land and return the captured people, what will you comment on?

古文：曰： 君王讨敝邑之罪，又矜而赦之，师与，有无名乎？ 
现代文：回答说： 贵国国君因为敝国有罪而兴师讨伐，现在又悯怜敝国而加以赦免，这样的仁义之师，何愁没有美名呢？ 
English: He replied, "Your sovereign, who raised an army to fight because your country was guilty, and now has mercy on your country and pardoned it, why should such a teacher of righteousness not have a good name?"

古文：颜丁善居丧：始死，皇皇焉如有求而弗得；及殡，望望焉如有从而弗及；既葬，慨焉如不及其反而息。
现代文：颜丁在居丧时，把什么时候该有什么样的悲哀神情掌握得很好：在亲人刚去世时矿是六神无主的样子，好像热切希望亲人死而复生但又办不到；到了行殡礼时，感到依恋难舍，好像要追随亲人而去而又办不到的样子。到了下葬以后，感到怅然若有所失，好像担心亲人的灵魂来不及和他一道回家，因而走走停停地有所期待。
English: When Yan Ding is in mourning, she has a good grasp of when to have what kind of sad look: when a relative has just died, the mine looks like it has no owner, as if it fervently hopes that the relative will die and come back to life, but it can't be done; when the funeral ceremony is performed, she feels attached to it, as if she wants to follow the relative and can't do it. After the burial, she feels lost, as if she is worried that the soul of the relative will not be able to go home with him, so she has expectations.

古文：子张问曰： 《书》云： 高宗三年不言，言乃欢。 
现代文：子张问道： 《尚书》上说： 殷高宗在三年居丧期间，专心守孝，不发一言一语。
English: Zizhang asked: "Shangshu" said: "During the three-year mourning period, Yin Gaozong concentrated on filial piety and did not utter a single word.

古文：有诸？ 仲尼曰： 胡为其不然也？
现代文：等他除服后一开口讲话，人们就感到非常喜悦。 确有此事吗？ 孔子说： 怎么会没有此事呢！
English: As soon as he spoke after taking off his uniform, people were overjoyed. Is this really true? Confucius said, "How could it not be true!"

古文：古者天子崩，王世子听于冢宰三年。 
现代文：要知道，古时候，凡天子驾崩，太子就把国事交付宰相三年，由宰相代为治理，所以可以没有一句话涉及国事。 
English: You know, in ancient times, whenever the emperor died, the crown prince would hand over state affairs to the prime minister for three years, and the prime minister would take over the governance, so there can be no word involving state affairs.

古文：知悼子卒，未葬；平公饮酒，师旷、李调侍，鼓钟。
现代文：智悼子死了，尚未入葬，晋平公就自个儿喝起酒来了，另有了师旷、李调作陪，而且击钟奏乐。
English: Ji Weizi died, and before he was buried, Jin Ping Gong drank wine by himself, and was accompanied by Shi Kuang and Li Zhe, and played bells.

古文：杜蒉自外来，闻钟声，曰： 安在？ 
现代文：杜赘从外面进来，听到钟声，就问侍卫说： 国君在哪里？ 
English: When the cuckoo came in from outside and heard the bells ringing, he asked the guards: "Where is the sovereign?"

古文：曰： 在寝。 
现代文：回答说： 在正寝 。
English: And he said, While I slept.

古文：杜蒉入寝，历阶而升，酌，曰： 旷饮斯。 又酌，曰： 调饮斯。 
现代文：杜赘就急匆匆地往正寝走去，一步两个台阶地登上堂去，倒了一杯酒，说： 旷，把这杯酒喝下去！ 又倒了一杯酒，说： 调，把这杯酒喝下去！ 
English: So the cuckoo hurriedly went to bed, climbed the stairs two steps at a time, poured out a glass of wine, and said, "Babe, drink this glass of wine!" and poured out another glass of wine, and said, "Honey, drink this glass of wine!"

古文：又酌，堂上北面坐饮之。降，趋而出。
现代文：然后又倒了一杯，在堂上向北面坐着自己喝了，然后下堂，快步走了出去。
English: Then he poured another glass, sat in the hall facing north, drank it himself, and then left the hall and walked briskly out.

古文：平公呼而进之曰： 蒉，曩者尔心或开予，是以不与尔言；尔饮旷何也？ 
现代文：平公喊住了他，命他进来，说： 赘，刚才我以为你或许是存心启发我，所以没和你说话。
English: Ping Gong stopped him, ordered him to come in, and said, "Hey, just now I thought you might be trying to inspire me, so I didn't talk to you.

古文：曰： 子卯不乐；知悼子在堂，斯其为子卯也大矣。旷也大师也，不以诏，是以饮之也。 
现代文：现在我要问你：你为什么要命令师旷喝酒呢？ 师旷说： 子曰和卯日，这两天是国君忌讳的日子，不敢奏乐，以自警惕。
English: Now I would like to ask you: Why did you order Shigeaki to drink? Shigeaki said, "Son's Day and Father's Day, these two days are days that are taboo for the sovereign. Don't you dare to play music, be on your guard.

古文： 尔饮调何也？ 曰： 调也君之亵臣也，为一饮一食，忘君之疾，是以饮之也。 
现代文：现在知悼子停枢在堂，这比国君忌你有讳的子卯之日更加要紧，怎么能够饮酒奏乐呢？大师，不把这层道理向您报告，所以罚他喝酒。 
English: Now, knowing that the mourner is still in the hall, which is even more important than the day when the sovereign forbids you to have a shameless son, how can you drink and play music? Master, if he does not report this truth to you, then punish him with drinking.

古文： 尔饮何也？ 
现代文：师旷身为掌乐的平公又问：又为什么命令李调喝酒呢？ 
English: Teacher bare-chested for palm music, Ping Gong also asked: And why did you order Li Ting to drink?

古文：曰： 蒉也宰夫也，非刀匕是共，又敢与知防，是以饮之也。 
现代文：杜赘答道： 李调是您宠爱的臣子，责任规劝君过，但却贪于吃喝，全然不顾国君的违礼之失，所以罚他喝酒。 
English: Du Juan replied, "Li Jing is your favorite vassal. It is his duty to dissuade you from doing wrong, but he is greedy for food and drink, completely disregarding the prince's breach of etiquette, so he punished him with drinking.

古文：平公曰： 寡人亦有过焉，酌而饮寡人。 
现代文：平公又间： 那么你为什么要让自己喝酒呢？ 
English: Ping Gong Matame: Then why do you let yourself drink?

古文：杜蒉洗而扬觯。公谓侍者曰： 如我死，则必无废斯爵也。 
现代文：杜赘答道： 我是为您服务的宰夫，提供膳羞才是我的本分，现在竟敢越职谏净国君的过失，所以也应当自罚一杯。 平公说： 寡人也有过失，倒杯酒来，也应该罚我一杯。 
English: Dudu replied, "I am your servant, and it is my duty to provide you with food, but now I have dared to go beyond my duty and clean up the fault of the sovereign, so I should also punish myself with a cup."

古文：至于今，既毕献，斯扬觯，谓之杜举。
现代文：于是杜贾将酒杯洗过，倒了一杯酒，举起来递给平公。
English: So Dujia washed the wine glass, poured a glass of wine, held it up and handed it to Heigong.

古文：公叔文子卒，其子戍请谥于君曰： 日月有时，将葬矣。
现代文：平公饮毕，对左右侍从说： 即使我死以后，也不要扔掉这只酒杯。 
English: After drinking, Ping Gong said to the attendants: Even after I die, don't throw away this wine glass.

古文：请所以易其名者。 君曰： 昔者卫国凶饥，夫子为粥与国之饿者，是不亦惠乎？
现代文：从那时到现在，凡是向所有的人都献过酒后，再举起酒杯递给国君的动作，就被叫做 杜举 。公叔文子去世后，他的儿子戍向国君请求赐予溢号，说： 大夫三月而葬，现在葬期临近，请您赐给亡父一个溢号以便日后称呼。 
English: From that time to the present, the action of raising a glass of wine to the sovereign after offering it to everyone is called "duju." After the death of Uncle Fumiko, his son Shun asked the sovereign for a posthumous name, saying, "Dr. Fumiko was buried in March, and now the funeral is approaching, please give your deceased father a posthumous name so that he can be called in the future."

古文：昔者卫国有难，夫子以其死卫寡人，不亦贞乎？
现代文：卫灵公说： 从前卫国遇到凶年饥荒，夫子施粥碉济饥民，这不是爱民乐施的表现吗，正与《溢法》的 惠 字相合。
English: Wei Ling Gong said: From the time when the former Qing Dynasty encountered a terrible famine, the masters gave porridge to feed the starving people. Isn't this a manifestation of love for the people and charity, which is in line with the "excess" of the "Law."

古文：夫子听卫国之政，修其班制，以与四邻交，卫国之社稷不辱，不亦文乎？
现代文：从前卫国发生内乱，夫子拚死保卫我，这不正合着《溢法》上的 贞，字吗？夫子主持卫国国政，根据礼数的规定，当尊者尊，当卑者卑，以之与四邻交往，使卫国的声望没有受到沾辱，这不是正合着《溢法》上的 文 字吗？
English: When there was a civil war in the former Japanese protectorate, Fuzi fought to the death to protect me. Isn't this consistent with the word "chastity" in the "Law of Abundance"? Fuzi presided over the national defense and state affairs. According to the rules of etiquette, the honorable should be honored and the lowly should be humiliated. He used this to interact with his four neighbors so that the reputation of the protectorate would not be tarnished. Isn't this consistent with the words in the "Law of Abundance"?

古文：故谓夫子。 
现代文：所以，我们可以用 贞惠文子 作为夫子的溢号。 
English: Therefore, we can use 貞惠文子 as the prefix of 夫子.

古文：石骀仲卒，无适子，有庶子六人，卜所以为后者。
现代文：卫国大夫石骑仲死了，没有嫡子，只有六个庶子，所以只好用占卜的方法来决定谁做继承人。
English: The guardian of the country, Shi Jizhong, died without a legitimate son, only six illegitimate children, so he had to use divination to decide who would be the heir.

古文：曰： 沐浴、佩玉则兆。 
现代文：卜人说： 要先洗发洗身，然后佩戴上玉，甲骨上才会显示吉兆。 
English: The wise man said, "You must first wash your hair and body, and then put on the beads. Only then will the oracle bone show good omens."

古文：五人者皆沐浴、佩玉；石祁子曰： 孰有执亲之丧而沐浴、佩玉者乎？ 
现代文：其中的五人都连忙洗发洗身，佩戴上玉。而石祁子却说： 哪里有居父之丧而可以沐浴佩玉的道理呢？ 
English: Five of them were in a hurry to wash their hair and body and put on the jade. However, Shih Tzu said, "Where is the reason why one can bathe in jade after the death of one's father?"

古文：不沐浴、佩玉。
现代文：唯独他不洗发洗身，不佩玉。
English: Except that he doesn't wash his hair or his body, and he doesn't wear jewelry.

古文：石祁子兆。卫人以龟为有知也。
现代文：说来也怪，龟兆却显示出石祁子应该做继承人。因此，卫国人都以为龟兆很灵验。
English: Strangely enough, the sign of the turtle indicated that the stone dove should be the successor. Therefore, the defenders of the country thought that the sign of the turtle was very effective.

古文：陈子车死于卫，其妻与其家大夫谋以殉葬，定，而后陈子亢至，以告曰： 夫子疾，莫养于下，请以殉葬。 
现代文：陈子车客死于卫国，他的妻子和管家计划用活人殉葬，已经确定了殉葬的人选，就在这时候陈子亢来到了。他们把有关殉葬的事告诉了子亢，说： 夫子有病，没有人在地下侍候他，我们想用活人来殉葬。 
English: Chen Zixuan's coachman died in the defense of the country. His wife and housekeeper planned to use a living person for the funeral. They had already decided on the candidate for the funeral. At this time, Chen Zixuan arrived. They told Zixuan about the funeral and said: "My husband is ill, no one is waiting for him underground, we want to use a living person for the funeral."

古文：子亢曰： 以殉葬，非礼也；虽然，则彼疾当养者，孰若妻与宰？得已，则吾欲已；不得已，则吾欲以二子者之为之也。 
现代文：子亢说： 用活人殉葬，是违礼行为。尽管如此，如果一定要有人在地下侍候他养病，谁也没有他的妻子和管家合适。
English: Zixuan said, "It is a violation of etiquette to use a living person for a funeral. Nevertheless, if someone must wait for him underground to recover, no one is suitable for his wife and housekeeper.

古文：于是弗果用。子路曰： 伤哉贫也！
现代文：如果能取消这个计划，我也愿意取消；如果不能取消这个计划，那么我想就用你们两人殉葬吧。 
English: If it is possible to cancel this plan, I am also willing to cancel it; if it is not possible to cancel this plan, then I would like to use both of you to die.

古文：生无以为养，死无以为礼也。 
现代文：这样一来，殉葬的计划也就流产了。子路说： 贫穷真叫人伤心啊！
English: As a result, the funeral plan was aborted. Zilu said: "Poverty is really sad!

古文：孔子曰： 啜菽饮水尽其欢，斯之谓孝；敛首足形，还葬而无椁，称其财，斯之谓礼。 
现代文：父母在世时没有什么可以供养，父母去世后，又没有东西可以按规矩办丧事。 孔子说： 生前，尽管是粗茶淡饭，但只要总是让父母高高兴兴精神愉快，这就可以说是做到孝顺了。
English: When the parents were alive, there was nothing to support them, and after the death of the parents, there was nothing to carry out the funeral according to the rules.Confucius said: During his lifetime, although it was poor tea and light meals, as long as he always made his parents happy and happy, this can be said to be filial.

古文：卫献公出奔，反于卫，及郊，将班邑于从者而后入。
现代文：死后，尽管所有的衣袅仅够掩藏尸体，而且是敛罢立即就葬，有棺而无撑，但只要是根据自己的财力尽力办事，也就可以说是合乎丧礼的要求了。 
English: After death, although all the coffins are only enough to hide the body, and they are buried immediately, there is a coffin but no support, but as long as they do their best according to their own financial resources, they can be said to meet the requirements of the funeral.

古文：柳庄曰： 如皆守社稷，则孰执羁靮而从；如皆从，则孰守社稷？
现代文：卫献公被逐逃亡，后来终于返回卫国复位，来到城郊，献公想先分封采地给随从他逃亡的众臣，然后入城。追随他逃亡的大史柳庄说： 如果大家都在国内留守社樱，那么还会有谁马前马后地追随您逃亡？
English: Wei Xianguo was forced to flee, and later he finally returned to defend the country and restore the throne, and came to the outskirts of the city. He wanted to first divide the fiefs to the courtiers who had fled with him, and then enter the city. The great historian Liu Zhuang, who followed his escape, said: If everyone stays in the country, then who will follow you to escape?

古文：君反其国而有私也，毋乃不可乎？ 
现代文：如果大家都追随您逃亡，那么还会有谁留守社授？您刚一回国就有偏心，恐怕不太好吧！ 
English: If everyone follows you to escape, who will be left behind to teach social studies? As soon as you return to your country, you will be biased, and I'm afraid that's not a good thing!

古文：弗果班。
现代文：封赏的事最终没有办成。
English: In the end, the reward was not awarded.

古文：卫有大史曰柳庄，寝疾。
现代文：卫国有个大史叫柳庄，卧病在床。
English: There is a great historian in the defense of the country called Liu Zhuang, who is ill in bed.

古文：公曰： 若疾革，虽当祭必告。 
现代文：卫君说： 如果病情危急，即使是在我主持祭祀时也要立即向我报告。 
English: Wei Jun said, "If you are critically ill, you should report to me immediately, even if I am leading a religious service."

古文：公再拜稽首，请于尸曰： 有臣柳庄也者，非寡人之臣，社稷之臣也，闻之死，请往。 
现代文：柳庄果然在卫君主持祭祀时去世了，卫君接到报告，就拜了两拜，叩头，然后向祭祀中的尸请求说： 有个臣子叫柳庄的，他不仅是我个人的臣子，也是国家的贤臣，刚才得到他去世的消息，请求您让我现在就去。 
English: Liuzhuang died while Wei Jun was presiding over the ritual. Upon receiving the report, Wei Jun bowed twice, prostrated, and then asked the body in the ritual to say: There is a vassal called Liuzhuang, he is not only my personal vassal, but also a national wise man. I just got the news of his death and ask you to let me go now.

古文：不释服而往，遂以襚之。与之邑裘氏与县潘氏，书而纳诸棺，曰： 世世万子孙，无变也。 
现代文：卫君没有脱掉祭服就赶往柳庄家，于是就把身上穿的祭服脱下赠给死者，还将裘氏邑和潘氏县封给柳庄作采邑，又把这种封赏写成誓约放进棺里。誓约上写道： 世世代代子子孙孙，万代相传永不改变！ 
English: Without taking off his ceremonial robes, Wei Jun rushed to Liu Zhuang's house, whereupon he took off the ceremonial robes he was wearing and presented them to the deceased. He also granted Qiu and Pan counties to Liu Zhuang as ceremonial counties, and placed this award in the coffin in the form of an oath. The oath read: "For generations, for generations, for generations, for generations, it will never change!"

古文：陈干昔寝疾，属其兄弟，而命其子尊已曰： 如我死，则必大为我棺，使吾二婢子夹我。 
现代文：陈乾昔卧病在床，自知余日不多，于是就向他的兄弟交待后事，并命令他的儿子尊己说： 如果我死了，一定要给我做个大棺材，好让我的两个妾分躺在我的两边。 
English: Chen Qian was sick in bed and knew his days were numbered, so he told his brother what had happened and ordered his son to say: "If I die, be sure to make me a big coffin so that my two concubines can lie on either side of me."

古文：陈干昔死，其子曰： 以殉葬，非礼也，况又同棺乎？ 
现代文：陈乾昔死了以后，他的儿子说： 用活人殉葬，本来就不合礼，何况还要躺在同一棺材里呢？ 
English: After Chen Kian's death, his son said: "It is not proper to use a living person for a funeral, and what's more, to lie in the same coffin?

古文：弗果杀。
现代文：最终没有杀父妾以殉葬。
English: In the end, he did not kill his father and concubine and was buried as a martyr.

古文：仲遂卒于垂；壬午犹绎，万入去龠。
现代文：仲遂死于齐国的垂。
English: Zhong Sui died at the foot of Mount Qi.

古文：仲尼曰： 非礼也，卿卒不绎。 季康子之母死，公输若方小，敛，般请以机封，将从之，公肩假曰： 不可！
现代文：壬午，噩耗已经传来，可鲁宣公并没有停止绎祭，只不过是在舞蹈时只保留了没有声音的武舞，去掉了有乐器声音的文舞而已。孔子说： 这样做是违礼的。大臣死，绎祭就应该停止。 季康子的母亲去世了，年幼的公输若作为匠师主持下葬，公输般建议用他新设计的机械来下棺。主人正要答应时，公肩假却说： 不行！
English: At noon, the bad news had already come. Kelu Xuanguo did not stop the funeral ceremony, but only kept the martial dance without sound during the dance, and removed the dance with musical instrument sound. Confucius said: Doing so is against etiquette. The minister died, and the funeral ceremony should be stopped. Ji Kangzi's mother died, and if the young Gongba presided over the funeral as a craftsman, Gongba suggested using his newly designed machinery to lower the coffin. When the master was about to agree, Gongba said: No!

古文：夫鲁有初，公室视丰碑，三家视桓楹。
现代文：下棺的工具鲁国有先例：国君比照天子，使用四块丰碑；仲孙、叔孙、季孙三家比照国君，使用四根木柱。般！
English: There is a precedent for the tools used to lower the coffin: the sovereign is compared to the son of heaven, using four monuments; the three great-grandchildren, great-great-grandchildren, and great-great-grandchildren are compared to the sovereign, using four wooden pillars.

古文：般，尔以人之母尝巧，则岂不得以？
现代文：你用别人的母亲来试验你的技巧，难道是不得已吗？
English: Do you have to test your skills on other people's mothers?

古文：其母以尝巧者乎？
现代文：如果你不借此机会来试验你的技巧，就会感到难受吗？
English: Do you feel bad if you don't take this opportunity to test your skills?

古文：则病者乎？
现代文：你怎么这样不懂礼呢！ 
English: How can you be so rude!

古文：噫！ 
现代文：最终没有按照他的建议办。
English: In the end, his suggestion was not acted upon.

古文：弗果从。
现代文：鲁国与齐国在郎交战。
English: The war between Lu and Qi continued.

古文：战于郎，公叔禺人遇负杖入保者息，曰： 使之虽病也，任之虽重也，君子不能为谋也，士弗能死也。不可！
现代文：公叔禺人遇见背着兵器到堡垒中休息而叹息，说： 百姓负担的摇役够辛苦了，交纳的赋税也够繁重了，但是大臣们不能为国家出谋划策，战士又不能为国牺牲，这是不可以的。
English: Uncle Xuan sighed when he saw the soldiers carrying their weapons back to the fortress for a rest, and said, "It is hard enough to carry the burden of the people, and it is heavy enough to pay taxes, but it is unacceptable that ministers cannot make plans for the country, and soldiers cannot sacrifice for the country.

古文：我则既言矣。 
现代文：我既然这样讲了，我就要努力做到。 
English: Now that I've said that, I'm going to do my best.

古文：与其邻童汪踦往，皆死焉。
现代文：于是就和邻居的少年汪畸一同奔赴战场，二人都战死在战场上。
English: So he rushed to the battlefield together with a neighbor boy, Wang Qi, and both of them died on the battlefield.

古文：鲁人欲勿殇童汪踦，问于仲尼。
现代文：鲁国人想不用童子的丧礼而用成人的丧礼对待汪跨，但因没有先例，就向孔子请教。
English: The Lu people wanted to treat Wang Chuan with an adult funeral instead of a boy's funeral, but since there was no precedent, they asked Confucius for advice.

古文：仲尼曰： 能执干戈以卫社稷，虽欲勿殇也，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 他能拿起武器来捍卫国家，即使不用童子的丧礼来办他的丧事，不也可以吗？ 
English: Confucius said: He can take up arms to defend the country, even if he does not use the boy's funeral to hold his funeral, can he not?

古文：子路去鲁，谓颜渊曰： 何以赠我？ 
现代文：子路要离开鲁国，对颜渊说： 临别之际，你有什么话送我呢？ 
English: When Zilu was about to leave Lu, he said to Yan Yuan: On the occasion of parting, what would you like to say to me?

古文：曰： 吾闻之也：去国，则哭于墓而后行；反其国，不哭，展墓而入。 
现代文：颜渊说： 我听说，要离开故国，应该先到祖坟上哭某一番再动身；返回故国，就不必哭了，只要到坟上巡视一圈就可以入城。 
English: Yan Yuan said: I've heard that if you want to leave your home country, you should first go to the ancestral grave and cry for a certain amount of time before leaving; when you return to your home country, you don't have to cry, as long as you go to the grave and make a tour, you can enter the city.

古文：谓子路曰： 何以处我？ 
现代文：说罢，颜渊又对子路说： 您给我留下什么话让我安身无咎呢？ 
English: Having said that, Yan Yuan said to Zilu, "What words do you have left for me to absolve myself of blame?"

古文：子路曰： 吾闻之也：过墓则式，过祀则下。 
现代文：子路说： 我听说，经过墓地就应凭轼致敬，经过社坛就应下车致敬。 
English: Zi Lu said: I heard that when passing a cemetery, you should salute with a gong, and when passing a community center, you should get off the bus and salute.

古文：工尹商阳与陈弃疾追吴师，及之。
现代文：工尹商阳和陈弃疾同乘一辆战车追赶吴军，很快地就追上了。
English: Industrialist Yin Shangyang and Chen Qizhi, both in a chariot, chased the Wu army and soon caught up with it.

古文：陈弃疾谓工尹商阳曰： 王事也，子手弓而可。 手弓。 子射诸。 
现代文：陈弃疾对工尹商阳说： 我们可是肩负着国王的使命，您现在可以把弓拿在手里了。 
English: Chen Jiaozi said to the worker Yin Shangyang, "We are shouldering the mission of the king. You can now hold the bow in your hand."

古文：射之，毙一人，韔弓。
现代文：工尹商阳这才握弓在手。
English: It was only then that Gong Yin Shangyang held the bow in his hand.

古文：又及，谓之，又毙二人。
现代文：陈弃疾又对他说： 您可以向敌人放箭了！ 
English: Chen Guozhi also said to him, "You can now shoot arrows at the enemy!"

古文：每毙一人，掩其目。
现代文：工尹商阳这才射了一箭，射死一人，然后把弓又装入袋子。
English: Industrialist Yin Shangyang then shot an arrow, killing one person, and then put the bow back in the bag.

古文：止其御曰： 朝不坐，燕不与，杀三人，亦足以反命矣。 
现代文：又追上了敌人，陈弃疾又对他说了以上的话，工尹商阳这才又射杀了二人。每射杀一人，他都闭上眼睛，不忍心看。
English: He caught up with the enemy again, and after Chen Shouqi said the above words to him, Gong Yin Shangyang shot two more people. Every time he shot someone, he closed his eyes and couldn't bear to look.

古文：孔子曰： 杀人之中，又有礼焉。 
现代文：他让驾车的停止追赶，说： 我们都是朝见国君没有座位，国君设宴没有席位的贱士，杀死三个敌人，也完全可以交差了。 
English: He ordered the driver to stop the pursuit, saying: "We are all low-ranking officials who have no seat at the table to see the king, and no seat at the king's banquet. If we kill three enemies, we can also cross the street."

古文：诸侯伐秦，曹桓公卒于会。
现代文：孔子说： 就是在杀人时，也还是有礼节的。 诸侯联合起来讨伐秦国，曹宣公在联军会合时去世。
English: Confucius said: Even in killing, there is still etiquette. Princes united to fight against Qin, Cao Xuan Gong died at the meeting of the allied forces.

古文：诸侯请含，使之袭。
现代文：诸侯要求按照礼节为曹君饭含，而曹人却让诸侯为曹君的尸体穿衣。
English: The lords requested that Cao Jun's meal be included in accordance with etiquette, but Cao Man let the lords dress Cao Jun's corpse.

古文：襄公朝于荆，康王卒。
现代文：鲁襄公到楚国访问，正碰上楚康王去世。
English: Prince Lu Xiang was on a visit to the State of Chu when King Chu Kang passed away.

古文：荆人曰： 必请袭。 
现代文：楚人说： 请鲁君务必为康王的尸体穿衣。 
English: The Chu people said: Please ask Lu Jun to dress the body of King Kang.

古文：鲁人曰： 非礼也。 
现代文：鲁国方面回答： 这样做是违礼的。 
English: The Russian side replied: Doing so is a violation of etiquette.

古文：荆人强之。巫先拂柩。荆人悔之。
现代文：楚国方面坚持非这样做不可，于是襄公就让巫先用桃枝在灵枢上来回拂拭，以祛除凶邪，而后才为尸体穿衣。
English: Chu insisted that this had to be done, so Xiang Gong let the witch first use a peach branch to wipe back and forth on the spiritual center to remove the evil, and then dress the corpse.

古文：滕成公之丧，使子叔、敬叔吊，进书，子服惠伯为介。
现代文：楚国人一看这是君临臣丧之礼，后悔也来不及了。滕成公去世，鲁国派子叔敬叔去吊丧，并且呈交鲁君慰间的礼品单，又派子服惠伯作他的副手。
English: When the people of Chu saw this, they thought it was the funeral of a king and his vassals, and it was too late to regret. When Teng Chenggong died, the State of Lu sent Uncle Zi to pay his respects, and presented him with a gift list of condolences, and also sent Zifu Huibo as his deputy.

古文：及郊，为懿伯之忌，不入。
现代文：到了滕国郊外，正碰上惠伯的叔父鳃伯的忌日，敬叔就想改日进城。
English: When he arrived at the outskirts of Tengguo, he was on the day of the death of Huibo's uncle Zibo. Uncle Jing wanted to enter the city on a different day.

古文：惠伯曰： 政也，不可以叔父之私，不将公事。 
现代文：惠伯说： 我们来吊丧是公事，不可因为叔父的私忌就耽误公事。 
English: Huibo said, "We are here to mourn, it is a business matter, we should not delay the business because of my uncle's private grief.

古文：遂入。
现代文：于是就进城了。
English: And he went in.

古文：哀公使人吊蒉尚，遇诸道。辟于路，画宫而受吊焉。
现代文：赘尚出葬亲人，鲁哀公派人去吊丧，在半道上碰着了，赘尚就让开道，在地上画了一个殡宫的平面图，然后就位接受慰间。
English: When Gong Shang went to bury his relatives, Lu Aikong sent someone to attend the funeral. When they bumped into each other halfway, Gong Shang gave way, drew a plan of the funeral hall on the ground, and then took his place to receive the condolences.

古文：曾子曰： 蒉尚不如杞梁之妻之知礼也。
现代文：曾子说： 赘尚的这种作法，还不如祀梁之妻的作法懂礼呢。
English: Zeng Zi said, "This way of worshipping Yang Shang is not as good as the way of worshiping Liang's wife.

古文：齐庄公袭莒于夺，杞梁死焉，其妻迎其柩于路而哭之哀，庄公使人吊之，对曰： 孺子穔之丧，哀公欲设拨，问于有若，有若曰： 其可也，君之三臣犹设之。 
现代文：您的仲孙、叔孙、季孙三家大夫还使用拨呢，您的儿子有何不可。 颜柳说： 天子的殡车，是车辕上画着龙，车周围又积木似停，再加上覆棺的罩子；诸侯的殡车，只加上棺罩。
English: Your great-grandson, great-great-grandson, great-great-grandson, and great-great-grandson are still using the dial, so why shouldn't your son? Yan Liu said: Tianzi's hearse is a hearse with a dragon painted on the handle, with blocks around it, and a coffin cover; the lords' hearse only has a coffin cover.

古文：颜柳曰： 天子龙輴而椁帱，诸侯輴而设帱为榆沈故设拨；三臣者废輴而设拨，窃礼之不中者也，而君何学焉！ 
现代文：因为他们的殡车是榆木做的，很沉重，所以才特地设拨拉车。三家大夫不敢用天子、诸侯的殡车，却又使用了只有天子、诸侯才可使用的拨，这是盗用天子、诸侯之礼又走了样，您何必效法他们呢？ 
English: Because their hearse was made of birch wood and was very heavy, they had a specially designed pulley. The three doctors did not dare to use the funerary carriage of the emperor and the princes, but they used the pulley that only the emperor and the princes could use. This was stealing the honor of the emperor and the princes, and it was wrong. Why should you follow their example?

古文：悼公之母死，哀公为之齐衰。
现代文：悼公的母亲去世了，哀公为她服齐衰。
English: Lai Kung's mother passed away, and Lai Kung was heartbroken for her.

古文：有若曰： 为妾齐衰，礼与？ 
现代文：有子感到奇怪，就带有讽刺的口吻问道： 为妾服齐衰，这符合礼的规定吗？ 
English: Feeling strange, Ariko asked in a sarcastic tone, "Is it proper to wear a concubine's dress?"

古文：公曰： 吾得已乎哉？
现代文：哀公说： 我这也是没有办法呀！
English: Aiko said, "There's nothing I can do about it!

古文：鲁人以妻我。 
现代文：鲁国人都把她看成是我的妻子。 
English: The people of Lu see her as my wife.

古文：季子皋葬其妻，犯人之禾，申祥以告曰： 请庚之。 
现代文：季子皋埋葬他的妻子时，踏坏了他人田地里的禾苗，申祥把情况告诉了他，并且说： 建议赔偿人家。 
English: When Ji Zixuan was burying his wife, he trampled down the seedlings in someone else's field. Shen Xiang told him the situation and said, "I suggest that you compensate the other family."

古文：子皋曰： 孟氏不以是罪予，朋友不以是弃予，以吾为邑长于斯也。买道而葬，后难继也。 
现代文：子皋说： 孟氏不因为这么一点小事责备我，朋友也不因为这么一点小事而抛弃我，由于我是本邑的长官，就算我同意赔偿，买路而葬，只怕此例一开，后人难以照办呀。 
English: Zixuan said: Meng did not blame me for such a small thing, and my friends did not abandon me for such a small thing. Since I am the chief of this town, even if I agree to pay compensation, buy a road and bury it, I am afraid that once this case is opened, it will be difficult for future generations to follow suit.

古文：仕而未有禄者：君有馈焉曰献，使焉曰寡君；违而君薨，弗为服也。
现代文：已经担任一定官职而尚未领取傣禄的人，如果国君送东西给他，不能说是 赐 ，而要称作 献 ；使者向他传达君命，还得称国君为 寡君 ；如果离开该国而国君去世了，他也不必为国君服丧。
English: For a person who has already held a certain official position and has not yet received a stipend, if the sovereign sends him something, it cannot be said to be a gift, but to be called a gift; if an envoy conveys the sovereign's order to him, he must also call the sovereign a widower; if he leaves the country and the sovereign dies, he does not have to mourn for the sovereign.

古文：虞而立尸，有几筵。
现代文：从虞祭开始才设尸，才几案、席子齐备。
English: From the beginning of the Yu Festival, the corpse was set up, and only a few cases and mats were prepared.

古文：卒哭而讳，生事毕而鬼事始已。
现代文：卒哭以后才开始讳称死者之名，因为以活人对待他的礼到此结束，而以鬼神对待他的礼从此开始。
English: Only after weeping did he begin to conceal the name of the deceased, because the ceremony of treating him as a living person ended here, and the ceremony of treating him as a ghost began here.

古文：既卒哭，宰夫执木铎以命于宫曰： 舍故而讳新。 
现代文：在卒哭过后，宰夫就手摇木铎在宫中高声宣布二, 日的名讳已经取消了，新的名讳已经开始了。 
English: After the crying, Zayu waved a wooden stake in the palace and announced loudly, "The name of the day has been canceled, and a new name has begun."

古文：自寝门至于库门。
现代文：从路门一直喊到库门。
English: They shouted from the road gate to the kitchen gate.

古文：二名不偏讳，夫子之母名征在；言在不称征，言征不称在。
现代文：两个字的名，不必都避讳。例如，孔夫子的母亲名叫 微在 ，说 在 字时就不再说 微 ，说 微 字时就不再说 在 。
English: For example, Confucius's mother's name was Wei Zi, and when she said "Wu Zi," she no longer said "Wu Zi," and when she said "Wu Zi," she no longer said "Wu Zi."

古文：军有忧，则素服哭于库门之外，赴车不载橐韔。
现代文：军队打了败仗，国君要率领群臣头戴搞冠到库门外痛哭。回来报告战败消息的车上的战士都不应把武器装入袋中，以表示还要报仇雪恨的决心。
English: When the army is defeated, the sovereign should lead a group of courtiers wearing crowns to cry bitterly outside the gate of the treasury. The soldiers in the car who come back to report the news of defeat should not put their weapons in their bags, to show their determination to take revenge.

古文：有焚其先人之室，则三日哭。故曰： 新宫火，亦三日哭。 
现代文：如果宗庙被烧毁了，就要哭三天。所以《春秋》上说： 新建的宗庙失火了，成公哭了三夫。 
English: If the ancestral temple is burned down, it is necessary to cry for three days. Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" said: The newly built ancestral temple caught fire, and Chenggong cried three times.

古文：孔子过泰山侧，有妇人哭于墓者而哀，夫子式而听之。
现代文：孔子从泰山旁边路过，看见一个妇人在墓前哭得很伤心，就停下了车，俯身凭轼专注地倾听。
English: When Confucius passed by Mount Tai and saw a woman weeping in front of the tomb, he stopped his car and leaned down to listen attentively.

古文：使子路问之曰： 子之哭也，壹似重有忧者。 
现代文：然后让子路去问那位妇人： 听您的哭声，好像接二连三遭到不幸似的。 
English: Then let Zi Lu go and ask the woman: Listen to your cries, it's as if you've suffered misfortune after misfortune.

古文：而曰： 然，昔者吾舅死于虎，吾夫又死焉，今吾子又死焉。 
现代文：妇人住了哭声回答道， 不错。过去我的公爹被老虎咬死了，接着我的丈夫又被老虎咬死了，最近我的儿子也被老虎咬死了。 
English: The woman stopped crying and replied, "Yes, in the past my father-in-law was killed by a tiger, then my husband was killed by a tiger, and recently my son was killed by a tiger.

古文：夫子曰： 何为不去也？ 
现代文：夫子问道： 那么为什么不离开这里呢？ 
English: Her husband asked, "Then why don't you leave here?"

古文：曰： 无苛政。 
现代文：妇人答道： 因为此地没有繁重的摇役和赋税。 
English: The woman replied: Because there are no burdensome taxes and duties here.

古文：夫子曰： 小子识之，苛政猛于虎也。 
现代文：夫子对学生们说。 你们要记住，繁重的摇役和赋税，比老虎还要厉害阿！ 
English: You must remember that the onerous wagons and taxes are more powerful than tigers, he told the students.

古文：鲁人有周丰也者，哀公执挚请见之，而曰不可。
现代文：鲁国有个叫周丰的人，鲁哀公带了见面礼要去拜访他，周丰礼貌地表示不剪当。
English: There is a man called Zhou Feng in the State of Lu. Lu Aigong is going to visit him with a meeting gift. Zhou Feng politely said that it was inappropriate.

古文：公曰： 我其已夫！ 
现代文：哀公说： 我岂能就此拉倒吗？ 
English: Lai Gong said, "Can I fall down like this?"

古文：使人问焉，曰： 有虞氏未施信于民而民信之，夏后氏未施敬于民而民敬之，何施而得斯于民也？ 
现代文：于是就派人去请教，说： 有虞氏并未教导百姓诚信而百姓却诚信他，夏后氏并未教导百姓敬重而百姓却敬重他，他们用的什么办法才让老百姓做到了这一步呢？ 
English: So he sent someone to ask for advice, saying: "Yu Yue did not teach the people to be honest, but the people were honest with him. Xia Hou did not teach the people to respect, but the people respected him. What methods did they use to get the people to do this?

古文：对曰： 墟墓之间，未施哀于民而民哀；社稷宗庙之中，未施敬于民而民敬。
现代文：周丰回答说： 在废墟坟墓当中，你不教导百姓悲哀百姓也会自然而然地悲哀。在社樱宗庙之中，你不教导百姓肃敬百姓也会自然而然地肃敬。
English: Zhou Feng replied, "Among the ruins and tombs, if you don't teach the people to mourn, the people will naturally mourn. Among the Sakura ancestral temple, if you don't teach the people to respect, the people will naturally respect."

古文：殷人作誓而民始畔，周人作会而民始疑。
现代文：殷人盛行立誓，而百姓却开始背叛；周人盛行会盟，而百姓却开始起疑。
English: Yin prevailed in the oath, but the people began to betray; Zhou prevailed in the alliance, but the people began to doubt.

古文：茍无礼义忠信诚悫之心以莅之，虽固结之，民其不解乎？ 
现代文：如果你自己首先不是用礼义忠信诚厚之心对待百姓，虽执意把百姓团结到一起，百姓难道就不会离散吗？ 
English: If you yourself do not first treat the people with courtesy, loyalty, and sincerity, although you insist on uniting the people together, will the people not be dispersed?

古文：丧不虑居，毁不危身。
现代文：力、丧事花钱，无论如何不能打出卖祖居的主意。
English: In any case, the idea of selling the ancestral home cannot be sold by force, mourning and spending money.

古文：丧不虑居，为无庙也；毁不危身，为无后也。
现代文：为丧事憔悴，无论如何不能走到危害性命的地步依托之处，后者则是担心断了香火前者是担心祖宗的神灵没有
English: The latter is worried about the broken incense burner, while the former is worried about the absence of the ancestral deities.

古文：延陵季子适齐，于其反也，其长子死，葬于嬴博之间。
现代文：延陵季子到齐国访间，在回国的路上，他的大儿子死了，就准备葬在赢邑和博邑之间。
English: When Yanling Ji Zi was on a visit to Qi, his eldest son died on the way back, and he was prepared to be buried between Yingwu and Boyu.

古文：孔子曰： 延陵季子，吴之习于礼者也。 
现代文：孔子说： 延陵季子是吴国最懂得礼的人。 
English: Confucius said: Yanling Jizi is the most polite person in the State of Wu.

古文：往而观其葬焉。
现代文：于是就前往观摩延陵季子如何操办葬礼。
English: So they went to see how Yanling Qizi conducted the funeral.

古文：其坎深不至于泉，其敛以时服。
现代文：只见墓坑的深度还没掘到有泉水的地方，敛时用的也是平时穿的衣服。
English: It is only to be seen that the depth of the grave pit has not yet been excavated to the place where there is spring water, and the clothes that are usually worn are also used.

古文：既葬而封，广轮掩坎，其高可隐也。
现代文：下葬以后又积土成坟，坟的宽度长度正好和墓坑相当；坟的高度，一般人都可以垂手按住坟顶。
English: After the burial, the soil accumulates into a grave. The width and length of the grave is exactly the same as that of the grave pit. The height of the grave, the average person can hold the top of the grave with their hands.

古文：既封，左袒，右还其封且号者三，曰： 骨肉归复于土，命也。
现代文：积土成坟之后，他袒露左臂，向左绕着坟头转了三圈，并且一边号哭一边高喊： 骨肉又回归土地，这是自然的规律。
English: After accumulating the earth into a grave, he bared his left arm and circled the grave head three times to the left, crying and shouting: "Flesh and bones return to the earth, this is the law of nature."

古文：若魂气则无不之也，无不之也。 
现代文：至于神魂精气，那是无所不在的，无所不在的。 
English: As for the divine spirit, it is omnipresent, omnipresent.

古文：而遂行。
现代文：这样做过以后就又重新上路了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：孔子曰： 延陵季子之于礼也，其合矣乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 延陵季子的做法，应该是合乎礼的吧。 
English: Confucius said, "Yanling Jizi's behavior should be proper.

古文：邾娄考公之丧，徐君使容居来吊含，曰： 寡君使容居坐含进侯玉，其使容居以含。 
现代文：郑娄在为定公办丧事时，徐国国君派容居来吊丧，并行饭含之礼。容居以天子所遣使者的口气说道： 敝国国君派我来跪着行饭含之礼，致送侯爵所含的玉璧。现在请让我来行饭含之礼。 
English: When Zheng He was holding a funeral for Ding Gong, Xu Guo Jun sent Rong Ju to attend the funeral and give a meal and a gift. Rong Ju said in the tone of a messenger sent by the Son of Heaven: "King Rong Guo Jun sent me to kneel and give a meal and gift the marquis's gift. Now please let me give a meal and gift."

古文：有司曰： 诸侯之来辱敝邑者，易则易，于则于，易于杂者未之有也。 
现代文：郑娄的接待人员说： 劳驾各国诸侯屈尊来到敝国，如果派臣子来，我们就以臣礼相待；如果国君亲来，我们就以君礼相待。
English: Zheng Yi's reception staff said: "We are honored to have princes from all over the world come to our country. If they send their vassals, we will treat them with courtesy; if the sovereign comes, we will treat them with courtesy.

古文：容居对曰： 容居闻之：事君不敢忘其君，亦不敢遗其祖。
现代文：派来的是臣子却企图得到国君的礼遇，这是从来没有的事。 容居无所收敛地回答说： 鄙人听说，作为臣子就不敢忘掉国君，作为子孙就、不敢忘掉祖先。
English: It was never the case that a courtier was sent to try to get the courtesy of the sovereign.Ryohei replied without restraint, "I heard that as a courtier, you dare not forget the sovereign, and as a descendant, you dare not forget your ancestors.

古文：昔我先君驹王西讨济于河，无所不用斯言也。
现代文：过去我们的先君驹王对西方进行讨伐，还渡过了黄河，他一贯都是用这种口气讲话的。
English: In the past, our forefather, King Zhao, waged a crusade against the West and even crossed the Yellow River. He always spoke in this tone.

古文：容居，鲁人也，不敢忘其祖。 
现代文：鄙人虽然鲁钝，但也不敢忘掉祖先是怎么讲话的。 
English: Although I am a rude person, I dare not forget how my ancestors spoke.

古文：子思之母死于卫，赴于子思，子思哭于庙。
现代文：子思的母亲在父亲死后改嫁到卫国，现在去世了，派人来向子思报丧，子思就到家庙去哭。
English: Zisi's mother, who had remarried after her father's death and moved to the old country, has now passed away. She sent someone to inform Zisi of her death, and Zisi went to the family temple to cry.

古文：门人至曰： 庶氏之母死，何为哭于孔氏之庙乎？ 
现代文：他的弟子见到了，说： 人家姓庶的死了母亲，为什么您却跑到孔氏的家庙来哭？ 
English: When his disciple saw this, he said, "Why did you run to Kong's family temple to cry for your dead mother, who was a commoner?

古文：子思曰： 吾过矣，吾过矣。 
现代文：子思说。 我错了！我错了！ 
English: Zisi said. I was wrong! I was wrong!

古文：遂哭于他室。
现代文：就连忙跑到别的房间去哭。
English: She even ran to another room to cry.

古文：天子崩，三日祝先服，五日官长服，七日国中男女服，三月天下服。
现代文：天子去世以后，第三天，祝首先手持丧杖；第五天，百官手持丧杖；第七天，瓷内的庶民穿上当穿的丧服；三月，诸侯及其大夫各服应服之服。
English: After the death of the heavenly son, on the third day, the first thing to do is to hold the funeral staff; on the fifth day, the officials hold the funeral staff; on the seventh day, the common people in the porcelain wear the funeral clothes they should wear; in March, the princes and their doctors each wear the clothes they should wear.

古文：虞人致百祀之木，可以为棺椁者斩之；不至者，废其祀，刎其人。
现代文：虞人负责从瓷内所有神社的社树中挑选最适宜于作棺掉者，把它们砍伐下来。对于不肯献出木材的地方，要把当地的社神废掉，杀掉当地的长官。
English: The yakuza was responsible for selecting the most suitable shrines for coffins from all the shrines in the porcelain and cutting them down. For places that did not want to donate wood, the local shrine gods were to be scrapped and the local officials killed.

古文：齐大饥，黔敖为食于路，以待饿者而食之。
现代文：齐国发生严重的饥荒，黔敖在路边造饭，以备施舍给过路的饥民。
English: There was a severe famine in the country of Qi, and the baboons made rice on the roadside in preparation for giving alms to the starving people passing by.

古文：有饿者蒙袂辑屦，贸贸然来。
现代文：有一个饥民，无力地垂着双手：走路一瘸一拐的，一副无精打采的样子走了过来。
English: A starving man, his hands hanging limply: he walked with a limp, with a listless air.

古文：黔敖左奉食，右执饮，曰： 嗟！
现代文：黔敖左手端着饭，右手端着汤，用可怜的口气喊道： 喂！吃吧！ 
English: The stork held the meal in her left hand and the soup in her right, and called out in a pitiful tone: "Come on! Eat it!

古文：来食。 扬其目而视之，曰： 予唯不食嗟来之食，以至于斯也。 
现代文：那个饥民瞪起眼睛望着他，说： 本人正是由于不吃这种没有好声好气的饭才落到这步田地的。 
English: The hungry man stared at him and said: It is precisely because I don't eat this tasteless food that I ended up in this field.

古文：从而谢焉；终不食而死。
现代文：黔敖听了连忙表示道歉，但那饥民还是坚持不吃，因而饿死了。
English: After listening, the baboon quickly apologized, but the hungry man still insisted on not eating, so he died of starvation.

古文：曾子闻之曰： 微与？
现代文：曾子听说了这件事，说： 这恐怕不大对吧？
English: Zengzi heard about this and said, "I'm afraid that's not true, is it?"

古文：其嗟也可去，其谢也可食。 
现代文：人家没有好声好气地叫吃，你当然可以拒绝；但是人家既然道了歉，也就可以吃了。 
English: Of course, you can refuse to eat if someone doesn't cheerfully shout for you to eat, but since they've apologized, you can eat.

古文：邾娄定公之时，有弒其父者。
现代文：掷娄定公在位的时候，有子杀其父的事情发生。
English: During the reign of Emperor Dezong, a son killed his father.

古文：有司以告，公瞿然失席曰： 是寡人之罪也。 
现代文：有关官员将此事报告给定公，定公惊骇地离开了席位，说： 这和寡人的没有教育好也有关系。 
English: The officials concerned reported the matter to Ding Gong, who left his seat in shock, saying: "This has something to do with the fact that many people do not have a good education.

古文：曰： 寡人尝学断斯狱矣：臣弒君，凡在官者杀无赦；子弒父，凡在宫者杀无赦。
现代文：又说： 我曾学过怎样审断这种案子：如果是臣杀其君，那么，凡是国家的官员无论其职位大小，都有权利把他杀掉，决不宽恕；如果是子杀其父，那么，凡是家庭成员无论其辈分高低，都有资格把他杀掉，决不宽恕。
English: He also said: I have learned how to judge such a case: if a vassal kills his prince, then any state official, regardless of his position, has the right to kill him and never forgive; if a son kills his father, then any family member, regardless of their generation, has the right to kill him and never forgive.

古文：杀其人，坏其室，洿其宫而猪焉。
现代文：不仅要把凶手杀掉，还要拆毁凶手的住室，将其地基挖成个大坑，然后再灌满水。
English: Not only should the murderer be killed, but the murderer's house should be demolished, its foundation dug into a large pit, and then filled with water.

古文：盖君逾月而后举爵。 
现代文：国君也得过了这个月以后才能举杯喝酒。 
English: The sovereign has to wait until after this month to raise a glass of wine.

古文：晋献文子成室，晋大夫发焉。
现代文：晋国赵文子的新居落成，晋国的大夫都去参加落成典礼。
English: The new residence of Zhao Wenzi of Jin Province was completed, and the doctors of Jin Province all went to attend the inauguration ceremony.

古文：张老曰： 美哉轮焉！
现代文：张老致辞说： 这高大的新居多么漂亮呀！
English: Zhang Lao said in his speech: How beautiful this tall new house is!

古文：美哉奂焉！
现代文：这灿烂的新居多么漂亮呀！
English: How beautiful is this splendid new house!

古文：歌于斯，哭于斯，聚国族于斯。 
现代文：从此以后，主人就可以在这里祭祀奏乐，在这里居丧哭泣，在这里和僚友及族人聚会宴饮了。 
English: From then on, the owner could perform sacrifices and play music here, mourn and weep here, and gather and feast with friends and relatives here.

古文：文子曰： 武也得歌于斯，哭于斯，聚国族于斯，是全要领以从先大夫于九京也。 
现代文：文子致答辞说： 我能在这里祭祀奏乐，在这里居丧哭泣，在这里和僚友族人聚会宴饮，这表明我将善终，有资格进入九原的祖坟。 
English: In his reply, Fumiko said, "The fact that I can perform a ritual and play music here, mourn and weep here, and gather and feast with my friends and relatives here, indicates that I will have a good death and am qualified to enter the ancestral grave in Jiuhara."

古文：北面再拜稽首。
现代文：说完后就朝北面再拜叩头表示感谢。
English: After saying this, he bowed his head to the north to express his gratitude.

古文：君子谓之善颂善祷。
现代文：懂礼的君子说，他们一个善于赞美，一个善于祈福。
English: One of them is good at praising, and the other is good at praying.

古文：仲尼之畜狗死，使子贡埋之，曰： 吾闻之也：敝帷不弃，为埋马也；敝盖不弃，为埋狗也。
现代文：孔子养的看家狗死了，让子贡拖出去埋掉，还吩咐说： 我听说过，破旧的帷慢不要丢掉，因为可以用来埋马；破旧的车盖也不要丢掉，因为可以用来埋狗。
English: Confucius's dog died, and he had the dowry dragged out and buried. He also said, "I have heard that you should not throw away a worn-out curtain, because it can be used to bury a horse; and you should not throw away a worn-out car cover, because it can be used to bury a dog.

古文：丘也贫，无盖；于其封也，亦予之席，毋使其首陷焉。 路马死，埋之以帷。
现代文：我很穷，没有破旧的车盖，但你在埋狗的时候，也得用一张席子裹着，不要让它的头直接埋在土里。 
English: I'm poor, I don't have a worn-out car cover, but when you bury a dog, you have to wrap it in a mat, don't let it bury its head directly in the ground.

古文：季孙之母死，哀公吊焉，曾子与子贡吊焉，阍人为君在，弗内也。
现代文：至于为国君驾车的马死了，埋的时候得用帷慢裹好。季孙的母亲去世了，鲁哀公前去吊丧。曾子和子贡也去吊丧，但守门人因为哀公在里面，不让他们进去。
English: As for the dead horse that drove the carriage for the sovereign, it had to be wrapped in a curtain when it was buried. Ji Sun's mother passed away, and Lu Aiguo went to pay his respects. Zeng Zi and Zigong also went to pay their respects, but the gatekeeper would not let them in because they were mourning for their grandfather.

古文：曾子与子贡入于其厩而修容焉。
现代文：曾子和子贡就进到马房里把自己的仪容修饰了一番，然后再去。
English: Zeng Zi and Zigong went into the stable, preened themselves, and then left.

古文：子贡先入，阍人曰： 乡者已告矣。 
现代文：子贡先进去，守门人说： 刚才已经往里通报了。 
English: Zigong went in first, and the gatekeeper said: "You have just been notified.

古文：曾子后入，阍人辟之。
现代文：曾子后进去，守门人则已经把路让开。
English: Zengzi went in after him, but the gatekeeper had already made way.

古文：涉内溜，卿大夫皆辟位，公降一等而揖之。
现代文：二人走到寝门的屋檐下，卿大夫都连忙让位，哀公也从昨阶上走下一个台阶，作揖，请他们就位。
English: The two of them walked to the eaves of the bedroom door. Sir and Doctor both hurriedly gave up their seats, and Aiko took the next step up from the previous step, made a sign, and invited them to sit down.

古文：君子言之曰： 尽饰之道，斯其行者远矣。 
现代文：君子议论这件事情说： 尽力修饰仪容的作法，对达到自己的目的是很有作用的。 
English: A gentleman discussed this matter and said: The practice of trying to beautify one's appearance is very effective in achieving one's goal.

古文：阳门之介夫死，司城子罕入而哭之哀。
现代文：宋国都城阳门的一个卫士死了，司城子罕到他家去吊丧，哭得很伤心。
English: One of the guards at the Yangmen Gate of the Song capital died, and Shicheng Zihan went to his home to mourn, crying very sad.

古文：晋人之觇宋者，反报于晋侯曰： 阳门之介夫死，而子罕哭之哀，而民说，殆不可伐也。 
现代文：晋国潜伏在宋国的一个探子侦探到这种情况，就回国向晋侯报告说： 阳门的一个小小卫士死了，而子罕这样的大官亲自临吊，哭得很伤心，这种作法很得民心，恐怕宋国不是好欺负的。 
English: A scout detective from Jin who was hiding in Song reported back to Jin that a small guard from Yangmen had died, while a high-ranking official like Zihan had hanged himself, weeping bitterly. This kind of action was very popular, and I'm afraid Song wasn't a bully.

古文：孔子闻之曰： 善哉觇国乎！
现代文：孔子听说了这件事，说： 这个探子真会刺探国情啊！
English: When Confucius heard about this, he said, "This spy is really good at spying on the state of the country!"

古文：《诗》云：虽微晋而已，天下其孰能当之。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 凡是邻里有了灾祸；都要尽力去帮助他们。 
English: The Book of Psalms says, "If there is a calamity in the neighborhood, do your best to help."

古文：鲁庄公之丧，既葬，而绖不入库门。士、大夫既卒哭，麻不入。
现代文：宋国正是做到了这一点，所以育岂但是晋国不敢欺负宋国，普天之下也找不出一个敢和宋国为敌的国家。 办鲁庄公的丧事时，下葬以后，阂公就除去了孝服，吉服返回宫内，正君臣之位，以防权臣继续作乱。
English: Song did just that, so Yushan and Jin did not dare to bully Song, and there was not a country in the world that dared to be an enemy of Song. When the funeral of Lu Zhuangguo was held, after the burial, Yingguo removed his filial piety and returned to the palace in the position of a righteous ruler and subject, in order to prevent the ruler and subject from continuing to make trouble.

古文：孔子之故人曰原壤，其母死，夫子助之沐椁。
现代文：而士大夫们在卒哭以后也脱去了孝服，吉服进宫上班。孔子有个老朋友叫原壤，他的母亲去世了，孔子帮助他修治撑材。
English: Confucius had an old friend named Yuan Jia, whose mother had passed away, and Confucius helped him repair the supporting material.

古文：原壤登木曰： 久矣予之不托于音也。 
现代文：原壤敲着撑材说： 我已经很久没有用唱歌来表达内心的感情了！ 
English: "It's been a long time since I've used singing to express my inner feelings," says Haraso, tapping on the support material.

古文：歌曰： 狸首之斑然，执女手之卷然。 
现代文：于是唱道： 这撑材的文理就像狸头上的花纹那样漂亮，我真想握着你的手来表达我内心的喜悦。 
English: Then he sang: "The texture of this material is as beautiful as the patterns on the head of a raccoon dog. I really want to hold your hand to express my inner joy."

古文：夫子为弗闻也者而过之，从者曰： 子未可以已乎？ 夫子曰： 丘闻之：亲者毋失其为亲也，故者毋失其为故也。 
现代文：孔子装作没听见的样子就走过去了，孔子的随从却说： 此人这般无礼，您还不和他绝交吗？ 孔子说： 我听说，亲人总任是亲人，老朋友总归是老朋友。 
English: Confucius passed by, pretending not to hear, but Confucius' attendant said, "This man is so rude, haven't you broken off relations with him?" Confucius said, "I've heard that relatives are always relatives, and old friends are always old friends.

古文：赵文子与叔誉观乎九原。文子曰： 死者如可作也，吾谁与归？ 
现代文：赵文子和叔誉一道在九原巡视，文子说： 这墓地中埋葬的死者如果能够复活，你最赞成和爱戴他们中的哪一位？ 
English: Zhao Wenzi and his uncle were on a tour of Jiuhara together. Wenzi said, "If the dead buried in this cemetery could be resurrected, which one of them would you most approve of and love?"

古文：叔誉曰： 其阳处父乎？ 
现代文：叔誉答道： 大概是阳处父吧？ 
English: Shuwa replied, "It's probably Yang's stepfather, right?

古文：文子曰： 行并植于晋国，不没其身，其知不足称也。  其舅犯乎？ 
现代文：文子说： 阳处父在晋国身为大傅，却刚强而无计谋，不得善终，他的智慧叫人不敢恭维， 叔誉又说： 那么舅犯可以吗？ 
English: Wen Zi said, "Yang Zifu was a great chef in Jin Province, but he was strong and unscrupulous, and he did not have a good end. His wisdom made people afraid to compliment him. Shu Yu also said, "So, is it okay to be a criminal?"

古文：文子曰： 见利不顾其君，其仁不足称也。
现代文：文子说： 舅犯在考虑自己的利益时就不顾及国君，他的仁爱也叫人不敢恭维。
English: Fumiko said: My uncle did not consider the sovereign when considering his own interests, and his benevolence is beyond praise.

古文：我则随武子乎，利其君不忘其身，谋其身不遗其友。 
现代文：我最赞许和爱戴的人是随武子，他既能为国君利益考虑，也能兼顾个人利益；他既能为自己打算，又不忘掉朋友。 
English: The person I admire and love the most is the son-in-law. He is able to consider the interests of the country as well as his personal interests. He is able to think for himself without forgetting his friends.

古文：晋人谓文子知人。
现代文：晋国人都认为文子的评价很恰当。
English: The people of Jin Province all think that Fumiko's evaluation is very appropriate.

古文：文子其中退然如不胜衣，其言吶吶然如不出诸其口；所举于晋国管库之士七十有余家，生不交利，死不属其子焉。
现代文：文子的身体柔弱得好像连衣服都驮不动，讲起话来迟钝缓慢得像难以出口。他为晋国举荐的管理仓库的官员多达七十余人，但在他生前却从来不和他们在钱财上有交往，死后也不把孩子托付给他们。
English: Fumiko's body was so weak that it seemed as if he couldn't even hold on to his clothes, and his speech was slurred and slow, as if he couldn't get the words out. There were more than seventy officials in charge of warehouses that he recommended to Jin Province, but he never had any financial dealings with them during his lifetime, nor did he entrust his children to them after his death.

古文：叔仲皮学子柳。
现代文：叔仲皮平时教他的子子柳学习。
English: Uncle Zhongpi usually teaches his son Liu to study.

古文：叔仲皮死，其妻鲁人也，衣衰而缪绖。
现代文：仲叔皮去世了，他的儿媳妇虽然是个粗人，但也知为公公服齐衰纠经。
English: Zhong Shupi passed away. Although his daughter-in-law was a vulgar person, she was also known as a public servant.

古文：叔仲衍以告，请繐衰而环绖，曰： 昔者吾丧姑姊妹亦如斯，末吾禁也。 
现代文：叔仲衍以为不当著此丧服，就把他自己的想法告诉给侄儿子柳，让子柳督促她改穿缚衰环续，并且说： 从前我为去世的姑姑、姊妹就是穿这种丧服，也没有人阻止我不让穿。 
English: Uncle Zhongyan thought it was inappropriate to wear this mourning dress, so he told his thoughts to his nephew Liu, and let Zi Liu urge her to change her dress, and said: I used to wear this kind of mourning dress for my deceased aunt and sister, and no one stopped me from wearing it.

古文：退，使其妻繐衰而环绖。
现代文：子柳回到家里，就叫他的妻子改服缚衰和环纽。
English: When Zoryu got home, he told his wife to change her dress and tie the knot.

古文：成人有其兄死而不为衰者，闻子皋将为成宰，遂为衰。
现代文：成邑有个人，他的哥哥死了却不愿为哥哥穿孝服，后来听说子皋将要来当邑宰，怕被怪罪，这才连忙穿上孝服。
English: There was a man in Chengyuan. His brother died, but he didn't want to wear the filial piety for his brother. Later, he heard that Zi Yan was going to be the mayor of Chengyuan, but he didn't want to be blamed, so he quickly put on the filial piety.

古文：成人曰： 蚕则绩而蟹有匡，范则冠而蝉有緌，兄则死而子皋为之衰。 
现代文：当地人就编了首歌谣讽刺此人，唱词是： 蚕儿会吐丝，而螃蟹有筐子；蜂儿有帽子，而蝉儿有冠带子。是哥哥死了，却为地方长官穿孝衣。 
English: Locals made up a song to satirize this person. The lyrics are: Silkworms can spit silk, but crabs have baskets; bees have hats, but cicadas have crowns. My brother is dead, but I wear filial piety for the local governor.

古文：乐正子春之母死，五日而不食。
现代文：乐正子春的母亲去世了，他一连五天没有进食，超过礼的规定两天。
English: Le Zi Chun's mother passed away, and he didn't eat for five days in a row, which was two days over the limit.

古文：曰： 吾悔之，自吾母而不得吾情，吾恶乎用吾情！ 
现代文：事过之后，他说： 我真后悔越礼行事。连办我母亲丧事我还不守礼的规定，那么还有什么事情上我会依礼而行呢？ 
English: Afterwards, he said: "I really regret overstepping the mark. If I don't follow the rules at my mother's funeral, what else am I going to follow?

古文：岁旱，穆公召县子而问然，曰： 天久不雨，吾欲暴尫而奚若？ 
现代文：天气干旱，穆公把县子召来请教说： 天久不雨，我想把有残疾的人拉到烈日底下去晒，不知尊意如何？ 
English: The weather is dry, Mu Gong called the county to ask for advice and said: It hasn't rained for a long time, I want to pull people with disabilities into the scorching sun, I don't know, what's your opinion?

古文：曰： 天久不雨，而暴人之疾子，虐，毋乃不可与！ 
现代文：县子说： 天久不雨，乃暴晒有残疾的人以求雨，这种作法太不人道了，恐怕不可以吧？ 
English: The prefectural governor said: It hasn't rained for a long time, but people with disabilities are braving the sun in search of rain. This practice is too inhumane. I'm afraid it's not allowed?

古文： 然则吾欲暴巫而奚若？ 
现代文：穆公又说： 那么暴晒女巫如何？ 
English: Mu Gong also said: So how about exposing witches?

古文：曰： 天则不雨，而望之愚妇人，于以求之，毋乃已疏乎！ 
现代文：县子说： 天不下雨，而寄希望穆诸于愚蠢的妇人，用这种方式求雨，不是也太不切合实际了吗？ 
English: The county magistrate said, "If it does not rain, it is unrealistic to hope for rain from a foolish woman. Isn't it unrealistic to pray for rain in this way?

古文： 徙市则奚若？ 
现代文：公又说：侯去世， 那么罢市又如何？ 
English: The public prosecutor also said: Hou passed away, so what about the strike?

古文：曰： 天子崩，巷市七日；诸侯薨，巷市三日。
现代文：县子说： 天子去世，罢市七日；罢市三日。
English: Guanzi said: Tianzi passed away, the seven-day strike; the three-day strike.

古文：为之徙市，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：用罢市的办法求雨，还不失为可行的办法。 
English: Using the strike method to ask for rain is also a feasible method.

古文：孔子曰： 卫人之祔也，离之；鲁人之祔也，合之，善夫！ 
现代文：孔子说： 卫人的合葬，是夫妇各自一个墓穴，中间有土相隔。
English: Confucius said: The guard's joint burial is a grave for a husband and wife, separated by soil.

