古文：扩廓帖木儿，沈丘人。
现代文：扩廓帖木儿，沈丘人。
English: Sprawling Timur, a native of Shengqiu.

古文：本王姓，小字保保，元平章察罕帖木儿甥也。
现代文：本姓王，小名保保，元朝平章察罕帖木儿的外甥。
English: His real surname is Wang, his nickname is Bao Bao, and he is the nephew of the former Emperor Pingzhang Chakhan Timur.

古文：察罕养为子，顺帝赐名扩廓帖木儿。
现代文：察罕将他收为养子，顺帝赐名为扩廓帖木儿。
English: Cahan adopted him as an adopted son, and Shundi gave him the name Zhankuang Timur.

古文：汝、颍盗起，中原大乱，元师久无功。
现代文：汝、颍盗贼四起，中原大乱，元军久无战功。
English: There were four robberies, the Central Plains War broke out, and the Yuan Army had no military achievements for a long time.

古文：至正十二年，察罕起义兵，战河南、北，击贼关中、河东，复汴梁，走刘福通，平山东，降田丰，灭贼几尽。
现代文：至正十二年，察罕兴起义兵，战于黄河南北，进击关中、河东贼寇，收复汴梁，逼走刘福通，平定山东，招降田丰，将贼寇消灭殆尽。
English: In the twelfth year of Zha Han, the volunteers rose up and fought in the north and south of the Yellow River. They attacked Guanzhong and the Kleptocrats in the east of the river, recaptured Yiliang, forced Liu Fudong to leave, pacified Shandong, subdued Tianfeng, and wiped out the Kleptocrats.

古文：既而总大军围益都，田丰叛，察罕为王士诚所刺，事具《元史》。
现代文：不久又总领大军围攻益都，田丰反叛，察罕被王士诚所刺，事载《元史》。
English: Not long after, the general led the army to besiege and attack the capital, Tianfeng rebelled, and Chahan was stabbed by Wang Shicheng, as recorded in the Yuan History.

古文：察罕既死，顺帝即军中拜扩廓太尉、中书平章政事、知枢密院事，如察罕官。
现代文：察罕死后，顺帝即在军中授扩廓为太尉、中书平章政事、知枢密院事，也就是察罕的官职。
English: After Chahan's death, Emperor Shun expanded the ranks of the military middle ranks to include Taijun, Zhongshu Pingzhang Zhengji, Zhihuixiinji, which were Chahan's official positions.

古文：帅兵围益都，穴地而入，克之。
现代文：扩廓率军围攻益都，穴地而入，将它攻克。
English: The expansion rate of the army besieged and attacked the capital, entered the hole, and conquered it.

古文：执丰、士诚，剖其心以祭察罕，缚陈猱头等二十余人献阙下。
现代文：捉拿田丰、王士诚，挖出其心，祭拜察罕，并将陈猱头等二十余人绑献朝廷。
English: He captured Tanatoyo and Wang Shicheng, dug out their hearts, worshipped Chahan, and tied up more than 20 people, including Chen Shantou, and presented them to the imperial court.

古文：东取莒州，山东地悉定。
现代文：扩廓又率军东取莒州，山东全部平定。
English: He expanded his territory and led his army eastward to take Bozhou, and all of Shandong was pacified.

古文：至正二十二年也。
现代文：当时是至正二十二年。
English: That was 22 years ago.

古文：初，察罕定晋、冀，孛罗帖木儿在大同，以兵争其地，数相攻，朝廷下诏和解，终不听。
现代文：当初，察罕平定晋、冀，孛罗帖木儿正在大同，率军争夺察罕之地，多次互相攻击，朝廷下诏令其和解，两人始终不听。
English: At the beginning, Chahan, Dingjin, Ji, and Miro Timur were in Datong, leading their armies to fight for the land of Chahan, attacking each other many times. The imperial court ordered them to reconcile, but the two never listened.

古文：扩廓既平齐地，引军还，驻太原，与孛罗构难如故。
现代文：扩廓平定齐地后，引军返回，驻扎太原，与孛罗仇怨如故。
English: After the expansion was settled, the army was brought back and stationed in Taiyuan, and the enmity between the two countries remained.

古文：会朝臣老的沙、秃坚获罪于太子，出奔孛罗，孛罗匿之。
现代文：当时正巧朝臣老的沙、秃坚因触犯太子获罪，逃奔孛罗，孛罗将两人藏匿起来。
English: At that time, it just so happened that the old courtiers Sa and Bald Jian were convicted of offending the prince and fled to Jiao Luo, who hid the two of them.

古文：诏削孛罗官，解其兵柄。
现代文：朝廷下诏剥夺孛罗的官职，解除其兵权。
English: The imperial court issued an edict depriving Jairo of his official position and removing him from military service.

古文：孛罗遂举兵反，犯京师，杀丞相搠思监，自为左丞相，老的沙为平章，秃坚知枢密院。
现代文：孛罗于是举兵造反，进犯京师，杀死丞相搠思监，自称左丞相，老的沙为平章，秃坚主持枢密院。
English: Jairo then raised an army and rebelled, attacked the imperial division, killed the chancellor, Yu Shizhong, called himself the left chancellor, the old sand was Pingzhang, and Bald Jian presided over the Privy Council.

古文：太子求援于扩廓，扩廓遣其将白锁住以万骑入卫，战不利，奉太子奔太原。
现代文：太子向扩廓求援，扩廓乃派遣其将领白锁住率领万名骑兵入京护卫，战而不利，陪同太子逃往太原。
English: The prince asked for help from the shogunate. The shogunate sent its general Bai Menghu and 10,000 cavalry to escort the prince into the capital. When the war turned out to be unfavorable, the prince fled to Taiyuan.

古文：逾年，扩廓以太子令举兵讨孛罗，入大同，进薄大都。
现代文：一年过后，扩廓以太子之令举兵声讨孛罗，进入大同，逼近大都。
English: A year later, at the order of the expansionist Emperor Taizi, troops were raised to fight against Luo, entering Datong and approaching the capital.

古文：顺帝乃袭杀孛罗于朝。
现代文：顺帝才在朝廷袭杀孛罗。
English: Emperor Shun attacked and killed Jiro in the imperial court.

古文：扩廓从太子入觐，以为太傅、左丞相。
现代文：扩廓跟随太子入宫觐见，被封为太傅、左丞相。
English: Zeng Kuo followed the crown prince into the imperial court and was appointed as the grand steward and the secretary of the left.

古文：当是时，微扩廓，太子几殆。
现代文：那个时候，如果没有扩廓，太子几乎被杀。
English: At that time, if there was no enlargement, the prince was almost killed.

古文：扩廓功虽高，起行间，骤至相位，中朝旧臣多忌之者。
现代文：扩廓功劳虽大，但他起于行伍，突然升至丞相之位，朝中旧臣大多妒忌他。
English: Although his contribution to the expansion of the military was great, he began his career in the army and suddenly rose to the position of chancellor. Most of the old vassals in the imperial court envied him.

古文：而扩廓久典军，亦不乐在内，居两月，即请出治兵，南平江、淮。
现代文：而扩廓长期统领军队，也不喜欢在朝中任职，两个月后，扩廓请求前去统率军队，往南平定江、淮。
English: However, Zeng Kuo, who had been commanding the army for a long time, did not like to serve in the DPRK and China. Two months later, Zeng Kuo asked Zeng Kuo to go and lead the army to the south of Pingding River and Huai River.

古文：诏许之，封河南王，俾总天下兵，代皇太子出征，分省中官属之半以自随。
现代文：顺帝下诏同意其请求，封他为河南王，命其领天下大军，代替皇太子出征，并派一半省中官属跟随扩廓。
English: Emperor Shun agreed to his request, made him the king of Henan, ordered him to lead the world's largest army, to go to war in place of the crown prince, and sent half of the province's middle-ranking officials to follow the expansion.

古文：卤簿甲仗互数十里，军容甚盛。
现代文：出征军队横贯数十里，军容十分威严。
English: The marching troops stretched for dozens of miles, and their appearance was very dignified.

古文：时太祖已灭陈友谅，尽有江、楚地，张士诚据淮东、浙西。
现代文：当时太祖已灭亡陈友谅，尽有江、楚之地，张士诚占据淮东、浙西。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather had already passed away, and Zhang Shicheng occupied Huaidong and West Zhejiang.

古文：扩廓知南军强，未可轻进，乃驻军河南，檄关中四将军会师大举。
现代文：扩廓知道南军强大，不可轻易进攻，于是驻军河南，派人传递檄文征召关中四位将军前来会师大举进攻。
English: Knowing that the Southern Army was strong and could not easily attack, Zeng Kuo stationed troops in Henan and sent a messenger to pass on the imperial edict to recruit four generals from Guanzhong to come and join the division in a large-scale attack.

古文：四将军者，李思齐、张思道、孔兴、脱列伯也。
现代文：四位将军即李思齐、张思道、孔兴、脱列伯。
English: The four generals are Li Siqi, Zhang Sidao, Kong Xing, and Delibe.

古文：思齐，罗山人，与察罕同起义兵，齿位略相埒。
现代文：李思齐，罗山人，与察罕一同发动义兵，两人年龄、地位大致相等。
English: Li Sizi, a native of Lushan, and Cahan launched the volunteer army together. The two are roughly the same age and status.

古文：得檄大怒曰： 吾与若父交，若发未燥，敢檄我耶！ 
现代文：他收到扩廓的檄文后大怒道： 我与你父相交之时，你还乳臭未干，现在却敢征召我？ 
English: After he received the enlarged obituary, he flew into a rage: When I was dating your father, you were still a baby, and now you dare to conscript me?

古文：令其下一甲不得出武关。
现代文：命其部下一兵一卒都不能出武关。
English: He ordered that not a single soldier under his command should leave Wuguan.

古文：思道等亦皆不听调。
现代文：张思道等也都不听调遣。
English: Zhang Sidao and others also do not listen to the dispatch.

古文：扩廓叹曰： 吾奉诏总天下兵，而镇将不受节制，何讨贼为！ 
现代文：扩廓叹道 ：我奉诏总领天下之兵，而镇将却不受节制，我怎么去讨伐贼寇呢？ 
English: Widening his eyes, he sighed, "I am the commander-in-chief of the world's soldiers, but the town will not be restrained. How can I fight the bandits?"

古文：乃遣其弟脱因帖木儿以一军屯济南，防遏南军，而自引兵西入关，攻思齐等。
现代文：于是派遣其弟脱因帖木儿率一军驻屯济南，防范南军，而自己则引兵往西入关，进攻李思齐。
English: He then dispatched his younger brother, Tuyin Timur, with an army stationed in Jinan to guard against the Southern Army, while he himself led his troops westward into the pass to attack Li Siqi.

古文：思齐等会兵长安，盟于含元殿旧基，并力拒扩廓。
现代文：李思齐等会师长安，于含元殿旧址立盟，合力抵抗扩廓。
English: Li Siqi and other members of the Chang'an Association formed an alliance at the former site of the Hongyuan Hall to jointly resist the expansion.

古文：相持经年，数百战未能决。
现代文：两军相持一年，交战数百次，仍不分胜负。
English: The two armies have been at each other's throats for a year, have fought hundreds of times, and are still evenly matched.

古文：顺帝使使谕令罢兵，专事江、淮。
现代文：顺帝派遣使臣谕令扩廓罢兵，专攻江、淮。
English: Emperor Shun dispatched envoys and ordered the expansion of troops, focusing on the Yangtze River and Huai River.

古文：扩廓欲遂定思齐等，然后引军东。
现代文：扩廓则想平定李思齐等，然后引军向东。
English: Zengaku wanted to subdue Li Siqi and others, and then lead the army to the east.

古文：乃遣其骁将貊高趋河中，欲出不意捣凤翔，覆思齐巢穴。
现代文：于是派其骁将貊高直趋河中，意欲出其不意直捣凤翔，倾覆李思齐的巢穴。
English: So he sent his dragonfly to fly high and straight into the river, intending to surprise Fengxiang and overturn Li Sizi's nest.

古文：貊高所将多孛罗部曲，行至卫辉，军变，胁貊高叛扩廓，袭卫辉、彰德据之，罪状扩廓于朝。
现代文：貊高所率大多为孛罗的部众，行至卫辉时，军队叛变，胁持貊高叛离扩廓，袭据卫辉、彰德，并向朝廷揭发扩廓的罪状。
English: Most of the troops led by Zeng Gao were subordinates of Zhao Luo. When they marched to Wei Hui, the army mutinied, threatened Zeng Gao to break away from Zeng Hui, attacked Wei Hui and Zhang De, and exposed Zeng Hui's crimes to the imperial court.

古文：初，太子之奔太原也，欲用唐肃宗灵武故事自立。扩廓不可。
现代文：当初，太子投奔太原，想采用唐肃宗灵武旧事自立为帝，扩廓不同意。
English: At first, the prince went to Taiyuan and wanted to use the Tang Sui spiritual martial arts to become emperor, but the emperor did not agree to the expansion.

古文：及还京师，皇后谕指令以重兵拥太子入城，胁顺帝禅位。
现代文：待到返回京城时，皇后谕令扩廓率领重兵护卫太子入城，胁迫顺帝禅位。
English: When he returned to the capital, the empress ordered him to lead a large army to escort the crown prince into the city and force him to meditate.

古文：扩廓未至京三十里，留其军，以数骑入朝。
现代文：扩廓却在离京三十里之地，留下其军，率领数名骑兵入朝觐见。
English: However, Zeng Gu was thirty miles away from Beijing, leaving his army behind and leading several cavalrymen to the imperial court.

古文：由是太子衔之，而顺帝亦心忌扩廓。
现代文：于是太子怀恨在心，而顺帝也疑心扩廓。
English: As a result, the prince held a grudge, and Emperor Shun was suspicious.

古文：廷臣哗言扩廓受命平江、淮，乃西攻关中，今罢兵不奉诏，跋扈有状。
现代文：廷臣纷纷指责扩廓受命平定江、淮，却西攻关中，受命罢兵，却不遵从诏令，可谓专横跋扈。
English: The courtiers accused Zhang Guo of being ordered to pacify Dingjiang and Huai, but in the process of attacking the West, he was ordered to strike, but he did not comply with the edict, which can be described as arbitrary.

古文：及貊高奏至，顺帝乃削扩廓太傅、中书左丞相，令以河南王就食邑汝南，分其军隶诸将；而以貊高知枢密院事兼平章，总河北军，赐其军号 忠义功臣 。
现代文：貊高的奏章上达朝廷后，顺帝于是剥夺扩廓太傅、中书左丞相之职，命他以河南王的身份住在汝南县城，将其部众分属诸将；而命貊高主管枢密院事务，兼任平章，总领河北军队，赐其军名为 忠义功臣 。
English: After Xing Gao's report was submitted to the imperial court, Emperor Shun stripped him of the posts of Zengku Taifu and Censorial Secretary of the Left, and ordered him to live in Runan County as the king of Henan, and to subordinate his subordinates to the generals; and ordered Xing Gao to be in charge of the affairs of the Privy Council, and concurrently to serve as Pingzhang, the commander of the Hebei army, and gave his army the name of "loyal and meritorious soldiers."

古文：太子开抚军院于京师，总制天下兵马，专备扩廓。
现代文：太子在京城开设抚军院，总领天下兵马，专门防备扩廓。
English: The prince opened the Fuzhou Military Academy in Beijing, leading the world's soldiers and horses, specifically to prevent expansion.

古文：扩廓既受诏，退军泽州，其部将关保亦归于朝。
现代文：扩廓受诏之后，退军泽州，其部将关保也归附朝廷。
English: After receiving the imperial edict to expand its territory, the army withdrew to Zezhou, and its headquarters, Guanbao, was also annexed to the imperial court.

古文：朝廷知扩廓势孤，乃诏李思齐等东出关，与貊高合攻扩廓，而令关保以兵戍太原。
现代文：朝廷知道扩廓此时已势孤力单，于是诏令李思齐等往东出关，与貊高合攻扩廓，而命关保率军戍守太原。
English: The imperial court knew that at this time, the Shingaku was all-powerful, so it ordered Li Siqi and others to go east and attack the Shingaku together with Ying Gao, while Guan Bao led the army to defend Taiyuan.

古文：扩廓愤甚，引军据太原，尽杀朝廷所置官吏。
现代文：扩廓十分气愤，引军占据太原，将朝廷所设官吏全部杀死。
English: Enraged, he led an army to occupy Taiyuan and killed all the officials appointed by the imperial court.

古文：于是顺帝下诏尽削扩廓官爵，令诸军四面讨之。
现代文：于是顺帝下诏削去扩廓所有官爵，并命诸军四面征讨。
English: As a result, Emperor Shun issued an edict to expel all officials and nobles, and ordered the armies to attack on all sides.

古文：是时明兵已下山东，收大梁。
现代文：这时明军已经攻下山东，收复大梁。
English: At this time, the Ming army had already conquered Shandong and recovered the girders.

古文：梁王阿鲁温，察罕父也，以河南降。脱因帖木儿败走，余皆望风降遁，无一人抗者。
现代文：梁王阿鲁温，察罕之父，以河南投降明军，脱因帖木儿战败逃走，其他将领均望风披靡，或降或逃，没有一人敢于抵抗。
English: Liang Wang Aruwin, the father of Chahan, took the lead in surrendering to the Ming army in Henan Province and fled because of Timur's defeat. The other generals were either defeated or fled, and no one dared to resist.

古文：既迫潼关，思齐等仓皇解兵西归，而貊高、关保皆为扩廓所擒杀。
现代文：明军逼近潼关，李思齐等仓惶率军西返，而貊高、关保都被扩廓所擒杀。
English: The Ming army approached Shaoguan, Li Siqi and others led the army back to the west in a panic, and Shaogao and Guanbao were killed by the expansion.

古文：顺帝大恐，下诏归罪于太子，罢抚军院，悉复扩廓官，令与思齐等分道南讨。
现代文：顺帝大为恐慌，下诏归罪于太子，停设抚军院，完全恢复扩廓的官职，命他与李思齐等分道南征。
English: Emperor Shun was greatly alarmed. He issued an edict blaming the crime on the prince, suspended the military academy, fully restored the expanded official position, and ordered him and Li Siqi to separate the southern expedition.

古文：诏下一月，明兵已逼大都，顺帝北走。
现代文：下诏一月后，明军已逼近大都，顺帝北逃。
English: One month after the following edict, the Ming army had approached the capital, Shunde fled north.

古文：扩廓入援不及，大都遂陷，距察罕死时仅六年云。
现代文：扩廓入援不及，大都失陷，距离察罕死时仅只六年。
English: It was only six years from the time of Chahan's death.

古文：明兵已定元都，将军汤和等自泽州徇山西。
现代文：明军已经平定元都，将军汤和等自泽州巡行山西。
English: The Ming army has already subdued the Yuan capital, and General Tang He and others are marching from Zezhou to Shanxi.

古文：扩廓遣将御之，战于韩店，明师大败。
现代文：扩廓遣将抵御，双方战于韩店，明军大败。
English: The two sides fought in Hanten, and the Ming army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：会顺帝自开平命扩廓复大都，扩廓乃北出雁门，将由保安径居庸以攻北平。
现代文：适逢顺帝自开平命扩廓收复大都，扩廓于是北出雁门，将由保安取道居庸进攻北平。
English: At the right time, Emperor Shun took the initiative to expand his territory and recapture most of the capital. Therefore, he expanded his territory to the north of the Wild Goose Gate and attacked Beiping from the direction of Jiyong.

古文：徐达、常遇春乘虚捣太原，扩廓还救。
现代文：徐达、常遇春乘虚直捣太原，扩廓率军回救。
English: Xu Da, often in the spring, took the initiative to attack Taiyuan, and led the army back to the rescue.

古文：部将豁鼻马潜约降于明。
现代文：其部将豁鼻马暗中向明军约降。
English: His unit secretly negotiated a surrender to the Ming army.

古文：明兵夜劫营，营中惊溃。
现代文：明军趁夜劫营，营中将士惊恐四散。
English: The Ming army took advantage of the night to rob the camp, and the soldiers in the camp scattered in fear.

古文：扩廓仓卒以十八骑北走，明兵遂西入关。
现代文：扩廓仓促之间率领十八名骑兵向北逃走，明军于是往西入关。
English: He hastily led eighteen cavalrymen to flee to the north, and the Ming army then entered the pass to the west.

古文：思齐以临洮降。
现代文：李思齐以临洮而降。
English: Li Siqi went down with Linyi.

古文：思道走宁夏，其弟良臣以庆阳降，既而复叛，明兵破诛之。
现代文：张思道逃往宁夏，其弟张良臣以庆阳投降，不久复叛，明军将他击杀。
English: Zhang Sidao fled to Ningxia, his brother Zhang Liangchen surrendered in Qingyang, but soon rebelled, and the Ming army killed him.

古文：于是元臣皆入于明，唯扩廓拥兵塞上，西北边苦之。
现代文：于是元朝大臣均入归明朝，唯独扩廓拥兵塞上，西北边疆深受其苦。
English: As a result, the ministers of the Yuan Dynasty all returned to the Ming Dynasty, but the expansion of the military was stopped, and the northwest frontier suffered from it.

古文：洪武三年，太祖命大将军徐达总大兵出西安，捣定西。
现代文：洪武三年，太祖命大将军徐达总领大军出西安，直捣定西。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the great ancestor general Xu Da led the army out of Xi'an and went straight to Dingxi.

古文：扩廓方围兰州，趋赴之。
现代文：扩廓当时正围攻兰州，于是赶赴定西。
English: At that time, the expansion was besieging Lanzhou, so he rushed to Dingxi.

古文：战于沈儿峪，大败，尽亡其众，独与妻子数人北走，至黄河，得流木以渡，遂奔和林。
现代文：与明军战于沈儿峪，扩廓大败，部众尽亡，仅与妻儿数人向北而逃，到达黄河时，获得流木而渡，于是逃奔和林。
English: He fought against the Ming army at Shen'erqiao, suffered a crushing defeat, and all his followers were killed. He fled north with only his wife and a few children. When he reached the Yellow River, he was able to cross it with a piece of driftwood, so he fled to He Lin.

古文：时顺帝崩，太子嗣立，复任以国事。
现代文：当时顺帝已死，太子即位，重新将国事委任扩廓。
English: At that time, Emperor Shun was already dead, and the crown prince ascended to the throne and expanded the scope of state affairs.

古文：逾年，太祖复遣大将军徐达、左副将军李文忠、征西将军冯胜将十五万众，分道出塞取扩廓。
现代文：一年之后，太祖再次派大将军徐达、左副将军李文忠、征西将军冯胜率十五万大军，分道出塞攻取扩廓。
English: A year later, Emperor Taizu once again sent a 150,000-strong army led by General Xu Da, Left Vice-General Li Wenzhong, and General Feng Sheng of the Western Expeditionary Force to break out of the fortress and capture the outpost.

古文：大将军至岭北，与扩廓遇，大败，死者数万人。
现代文：大将军徐达到达岭北，与扩廓遭遇，徐达军大败，死亡数万人。
English: The great general Xu reached the north of Darling, encountered the expansion, Xu's army was defeated, and tens of thousands of people died.

古文：刘基尝言于太祖曰： 扩廓未可轻也。 
现代文：刘基曾经劝说过太祖 ：扩廓不可轻视。 
English: Liu Ji once persuaded Taizu: "Expanding your horizons should not be taken lightly."

古文：至是帝思其言，谓晋王曰： 吾用兵未尝败北。
现代文：现在太祖想起刘基的话，对晋王说道 ：我用兵从未败北。
English: Now the great-grandfather remembered Liu Ji's words and said to the Jin king: I have never been defeated by soldiers.

古文：今诸将自请深入，败于和林，轻信无谋，致多杀士卒，不可不戒。 
现代文：而今诸将自请率军深入，败于和林，我轻信其言，没有周密谋划，致使死亡许多士兵，不可不戒啊。 
English: But now the generals have invited themselves to lead the army deeper into the country and have been defeated by Warim. I must admit that I was gullible and did not make a careful plan, resulting in the death of many soldiers.

古文：明年，扩廓复攻雁门，命诸将严为之备，自是明兵希出塞矣。
现代文：第二年，扩廓复攻雁门，太祖命诸将严密防备，从此之后明军很少出塞。
English: In the second year, he expanded his territory and attacked the Wild Goose Gate. The great-grandfather ordered his generals to be on high alert, and from then on, the Ming army rarely left the city.

古文：其后，扩廓从其主徙金山，卒于哈剌那海之衙庭，其妻毛氏亦自经死，盖洪武八年也。
现代文：其后，扩廓跟随其主迁徙金山，死于哈剌那海之衙庭，其妻毛氏也上吊而死，当时是洪武八年。
English: After that, Zhan Guo followed his master to migrate to Jinshan, and died in the courtyard of the Hachina Sea. His wife Mao also died by hanging. It was the eighth year of Hongwu.

古文：初，察罕破山东，江、淮震动。
现代文：当初，察罕攻破山东，江、淮为之震动。
English: At first, Chahan conquered Shandong, and Jiangsu and Huaiyin were shaken.

古文：太祖遣使通好。
现代文：太祖派遣使者前去通好。
English: The great-grandfather sent an emissary to make contact.

古文：元遣户部尚书张昶、郎中马合谋浮海如江东，授太祖荣禄大夫、江西等处行中书省平章政事，赐以龙衣御酒。
现代文：元朝派遣户部尚书张永日、郎中马合谋由海路前往江东，授太祖为荣禄大夫、江西等处行中书省平章政事，赐予龙衣御酒。
English: The Yuan Dynasty dispatched the head of the household, Shang Shuxi Zhang Yongri, and his son-in-law, Ma Gangli, to travel by sea to the east of the Yangtze River, conferred the title of "Honorary Doctor" on the great-grandfather, and the title of "Governor of the Central Shuxi Province" on the governor of Jiangxi Province, and bestowed the title of "Dragon's Robe of Wine."

古文：甫至而察罕被刺，太祖遂不受，杀马合谋，以张昶才，留官之。
现代文：两人刚到江东，察罕被刺身亡，太祖于是拒绝封赐，杀死马合谋，因张永日有才，太祖便将他留下，并任命官职。
English: The two of them had just arrived in the east of the Yangtze River when Chahan was stabbed to death. The great-great-grandfather refused to grant the title and killed Ma Heping. Because Zhang Yongri was talented, the great-great-grandfather kept him and appointed him to an official post.

古文：及扩廓视师河南，太祖乃复遣使通好，扩廓辄留使者不遣。
现代文：当扩廓率军驻扎河南时，太祖又派使者前去通好，扩廓总是扣留使者。
English: When the army led by Zhang Guo was stationed in Henan, the great-grandfather sent an envoy to negotiate, but Zhang Guo always detained the envoy.

古文：凡七致书，皆不答。
现代文：太祖一共七次致信，扩廓均不予答复。
English: The great-grandfather sent a total of seven letters, but received no reply.

古文：既出塞，复遣人招谕，亦不应。
现代文：出塞之后，太祖又派人前去招降，扩廓也不应答。
English: After getting out of the jam, the great-grandfather sent someone forward to invite the surrender, but there was no reply.

古文：最后使李思齐往。
现代文：最后，太祖派李思齐前往。
English: Finally, the great-grandfather sent Li Siqi to go.

古文：始至，则待以礼。
现代文：李思齐到后，扩廓以礼相待。
English: After Li Sizi arrived, he extended his courtesy to her.

古文：寻使骑士送归，至塞下，辞曰： 主帅有命，请公留一物为别。 
现代文：随即派骑兵送其返回，到达塞下时，骑兵告辞说： 主师有命，请公留下一物作别。 
English: The cavalry was then sent to escort him back. When they arrived at the bottom of the dam, the cavalry said in farewell: "Master, your life is at stake. Please leave something for your farewell."

古文：思齐曰： 吾远来无所赍。 
现代文：李思齐说道： 我远道而来，无所携带。 
English: Li Sizi said: I have come a long way and have nothing to carry.

古文：骑士曰： 愿得公一臂。 
现代文：骑兵则说 ：愿得公一只手臂。 
English: The cavalryman said, "May I have an arm."

古文：思齐知不免，遂断与之。
现代文：李思齐知道难以避免，于是砍断一臂交给他们。
English: Li Sizi knew it was unavoidable, so he cut off one of his arms and gave it to them.

古文：还，未几死。
现代文：李思齐回来之后，不久便死去了。
English: Li Siqi died soon after his return.

古文：太祖以是心敬扩廓。
现代文：太祖因此从心里敬重扩廓。
English: As a result, the great-great-grandfather had a deep respect for shengaku.

古文：一日，大会诸将，问曰： 天下奇男子谁也？ 
现代文：一天，太祖大会诸将，问道： 谁是天下奇男子？ 
English: One day, the great-grandfather gathered all the generals and asked: Who is the most extraordinary man in the world?

古文：皆对曰： 常遇春将不过万人，横行无敌，真奇男子。 
现代文：诸将均答道： 常遇春率军不过万人，却能横行无敌，真是奇男子啊。 
English: All the generals replied, "It is a strange man indeed who leads an army of no more than ten thousand men, yet is invincible.

古文：帝知不可夺，洪武九年十二月命有司送出塞，令从故主于和林。
现代文：太祖笑道： 遇春虽为人杰，我得而为臣。我却不能将王保保收为臣子，此人才是奇男子。 
English: The great-grandfather laughed, "Although Yu Chun is a great man, I have to be his vassal. However, I cannot accept Wang Bao Bao as my vassal. This man is an extraordinary man."

古文：陈友定，一名有定，字安国，福清人，徙居汀之清流。
现代文：太祖后来册封其妹为秦王妃。陈友定，又名有定，字国安，福清人，后迁居汀之清流。
English: The great-grandfather later anointed his sister as Qin Wangfei. Chen Youding, also known as Youding, was born in Guo'an, Fuqing, and later moved to Juting.

古文：世业农。
现代文：世代务农。
English: Generations of farming.

古文：为人沉勇，喜游侠。乡里皆畏服。
现代文：为人沉着勇敢，是一位轻生重义、救人危难的游侠之士，深受乡亲们的敬服。
English: Calm and brave, he is a ranger who is serious about saving lives and rescuing people in danger, and is deeply respected by the villagers.

古文：至正中，汀州府判蔡公安至清流募民兵讨贼，友定应募。
现代文：至正年中，汀州府判蔡公安到清流招募民兵讨伐贼寇，陈友定应募前往。
English: By the middle of the year, the Tingzhou government ordered Cai Public Security to recruit militia to fight the bandits, and Chen Youming agreed to go.

古文：公安与语，奇之，使掌所募兵，署为黄土砦巡检。
现代文：蔡公安与他交谈之后，对他另眼相待，命他负责所招募的民兵，任命他为黄土砦巡检。
English: After talking with him, Cai Public Security treated him differently, ordered him to be in charge of the recruited militia, and appointed him to patrol the Loess Fort.

古文：以讨平诸山寨功，迁清流县尹。
现代文：因讨平诸山寨之功，陈友定升为清流县尹。
English: Chen Youding was promoted to the top of Qingliu County because of his achievements in leveling all the imitations.

古文：陈友谅遣其将邓克明等陷汀、邵，略杉关。
现代文：陈友谅派遣其部将邓克明等攻陷汀、邵，夺取杉关。
English: Chen Youzhen dispatched his subordinate general, Deng Keming, to attack Ding and Shao and capture Sugiguan.

古文：行省授友定汀州路总管御之。
现代文：行省授陈友定为汀州路总管以御敌。
English: The provincial government designated Chen You as the general manager of Tingzhou Road to oppose the enemy.

古文：战于黄土，大捷，走克明。
现代文：与邓克明战于黄土，大获全胜，赶走邓克明。
English: He fought with Deng Keming on the Loess Plateau and won a complete victory, driving Deng Keming away.

古文：逾年，克明复取汀州，急攻建宁。
现代文：一年后，邓克明又攻取汀州，猛攻建宁。
English: A year later, Deng Keming also captured Tingzhou and stormed Jianning.

古文：守将完者帖木儿檄友定入援，连破贼，悉复所失郡县。
现代文：建宁守将完者帖木儿征召陈友定入援，陈友定连破贼寇，收复所有失陷郡县。
English: Jianning called up Chen Youding to come to his aid, and Chen Youding broke up the bandits and recovered all the lost counties.

古文：行省上其功第一，进参知政事。
现代文：行省上奏称其功劳第一，进升他为参知政事。
English: The provincial report said that his merit was the first, and he was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：已，置分省于延平，以友定为平章，于是友定尽有福建八郡之地。
现代文：不久，朝廷于延平设置分省，以陈友定为平章，于是陈友定全部占有福建八郡之地。
English: Soon after, the imperial court set up a sub-province in Yanping, and designated Chen Youding as Pingzhang. As a result, Chen Youding occupied all of Fujian's eight counties.

古文：友定以农家子起佣伍，目不知书。
现代文：陈友定是一农家子弟，出身于行伍，目不识丁。
English: Chen Youding is a farmer's son. He was born in the army and is illiterate.

古文：及据八郡，数招致文学知名士，如闽县郑定、庐州王翰之属，留置幕下。
现代文：占据八郡之后，多次招揽文学知名人士，如闽县郑定、庐州王翰之辈，留在幕下。
English: After occupying eight counties, he repeatedly invited famous literary figures, such as Zheng Ding of Zhang County and Wang Han of Zhangzhou, to stay behind the curtain.

古文：粗涉文史，习为五字小诗，皆有意理。
现代文：陈友定粗涉文史书籍，学习写作五字小诗，诗中却都富有意境和道理。
English: Chen Youding read books on literary history and learned to write five-character poems, but his poems were full of meaning and reason.

古文：然颇任威福，所属违令者辄承制诛窜不绝。
现代文：但陈友定独揽威权，专行赏罚，部属中凡有违令者全都要按例被杀或被贬。
English: However, Chen Youding monopolized the power of authority, and only gave rewards and punishments. Any subordinate who violated the order would be killed or demoted as usual.

古文：漳州守将罗良不平，以书责之曰： 郡县者，国家之土地。官司者，人主之臣役。而廥廪者，朝廷之外府也。
现代文：漳州守将罗良为此不平，写信指责道 ：郡县是国家的土地，官吏是君主的臣仆，而郡县仓廪则是朝廷的外地仓库。
English: Luo Liang, the governor of Zhangzhou, complained about this and wrote a letter saying: counties are the land of the country, officials are the vassals of the monarch, and county warehouses are the warehouses of the imperial court.

古文：今足下视郡县如室家，驱官僚如圉仆，擅廥廪如私藏，名虽报国，实有鹰扬跋扈之心。
现代文：而足下将郡县当作自己的家，将属下当作奴仆驱使，将官府仓廪当作私家仓库，名为报国，实有逞威天下、专横跋扈之心。
English: However, he treats the county as his own home, drives his subordinates as slaves, and treats the government warehouse as a private warehouse, called Hokkoku, and really has a strong will to dominate the world and a domineering heart.

古文：不知足下欲为郭子仪乎，抑为曹孟德乎？ 
现代文：不知足下想做郭子仪呢，还是曹孟德呢？ 
English: Do you want to be Guo Zi Yi, or Cao Mengde?

古文：友定怒，竟以兵诛良。
现代文：陈友定见信大怒，竟派兵诛杀罗良。
English: Chen Youding was so enraged by the letter that he sent soldiers to kill Loliang.

古文：而福清宣慰使陈瑞孙、崇安令孔楷、建阳人詹翰拒友定不从，皆被杀。
现代文：而福清宣慰使陈瑞孙、崇安令孔楷、建阳人詹翰拒绝服从陈友定，也都被杀。
English: However, Fu Qing's proclamation caused Chen Ruisun, Chong'an's commander Kong Kai, and Jianyang's commander Zhanhanhan to refuse to obey Chen Youding, and they were all killed.

古文：于是友定威震八闽，然事元未尝失臣节。
现代文：于是陈友定威震八闽，但他为元朝效力，未曾丧失臣节。
English: As a result, Chen Youding was shaken eight times, but he was effective for the Yuan Dynasty and never lost his vassalage.

古文：是时张士诚据浙西，方国珍据浙东，名为附元，岁漕粟大都辄不至。
现代文：这时张士诚占据浙西，方国珍占据浙东，名义上归附元朝，但每年运往大都的漕米，经常不见到达。
English: At this time, Zhang Shicheng occupied western Zhejiang and Fang Guozhen occupied eastern Zhejiang. They were nominally attached to the Yuan Dynasty, but the pails of rice that were shipped to the capital every year often did not arrive.

古文：而友定岁输粟数十万石，海道辽远，至者尝十三四。
现代文：而陈友定每年输送粟米数十万石，因海路遥远，能到达大都的经常只有十分之三、四。
English: Chen Youding, on the other hand, transports hundreds of thousands of kilos of corn every year. Due to the long distance by sea, only three or four out of ten can reach the capital.

古文：顺帝嘉之，下诏褒美。
现代文：顺帝下诏对他予以褒奖。
English: Emperor Shun gave him a commendation.

古文：太祖既定婺州，与友定接境。
现代文：太祖平定婺州后，与陈友定相邻。
English: After the Great Ancestor conquered Bozhou, it was adjacent to Chen Youding.

古文：友定侵处州。
现代文：陈友定侵犯处州。
English: Chen Youding violated the state.

古文：参政胡深击走之，遂下浦城，克松溪，获友定将张子玉，与朱亮祖进攻建宁，破其二栅。
现代文：参政胡深将其击走，然后攻下浦城，攻克松溪，俘获陈友定部将张子玉，又与朱亮祖一起进攻建宁，破其二栅。
English: Hu Sheng, a member of the Chinese Politburo, drove him away, and then captured Pucheng, conquered Songxi, captured Chen Youding, Zhang Ziyu, and attacked Jianning with Zhu Liangzu, breaking its two gates.

古文：友定遣阮德柔以兵四万屯锦江，绕出深后，断其归路，而自帅牙将赖政等以锐师搏战，德柔自后夹击。
现代文：陈友定派遣阮德柔率军四万驻屯锦江，绕到胡深军后，断其归路，而自率牙将赖政等以精锐之师展开搏击战，阮德柔则从后夹击。
English: Chen Youding dispatched Nguyn De Ru with an army of 40,000 stationed in Jinjiang, and after bypassing Hu Shenshan's army, he cut off its return route, while the self-led general Lai Zheng and others launched a fight with an elite division, while Nguyn De Ru attacked from behind.

古文：深兵败，被执死。
现代文：胡深兵败，被俘而死。
English: Hu Sheng was defeated and died in captivity.

古文：太祖既平方国珍，即发兵伐友定。
现代文：太祖平定方国珍后，马上发兵讨伐陈友定。
English: After the great ancestor conquered Fang Guozhen, he immediately sent troops to fight Chen Youding.

古文：将军胡廷美、何文辉由江西趋杉关，汤和、廖永忠由明州海道取福州，李文忠由浦城取建宁，而别遣使至延平，招谕友定。
现代文：将军胡廷美、何文辉由江西直趋杉关，汤和、廖永忠由明州海路攻取福州，李文忠由浦城攻取建宁，而另派使者前往延平，招降陈友定。
English: Generals Hu Tingmei and He Wenhui marched from Jiangxi straight to Sugiguan, Tang He and Liao Yongzhong captured Fuzhou by the Mingzhou sea route, Li Wenzhong captured Jianning from Pucheng, and sent an envoy to Yanping to recruit Chen Youding.

古文：友定置酒大会诸将及宾客，杀明使者，沥其血酒瓮中，与众酌饮之。
现代文：陈友定摆设酒宴，大会诸将及宾客，杀死明使者，将其血沥入酒坛，与众人酌饮。
English: Chen Youding held a banquet, and the generals and guests of the assembly killed the Ming envoy, licked his blood into the wine vat, and drank it with everyone.

古文：酒酣，誓于众曰： 吾曹并受元厚恩，有不以死拒者，身磔，妻子戮。 
现代文：值酒酣之时，陈友定当众发誓说 ：我们大家同受元朝厚恩，若有不以死拒敌者，将受磔刑，并杀其妻儿。 
English: At the time of the banquet, Chen Youding publicly swore: "We all share the kindness of the Yuan Dynasty. If there is anyone who does not resist the enemy with death, he will be beaten and his wife and children will be killed."

古文：遂往视福州，环城作垒。
现代文：陈友定随即到福州巡视，环城而垒。
English: Chen Youding then went on a tour of Fuzhou, circling the city.

古文：距垒五十步，辄筑一台，严兵为拒守计。
现代文：距垒五十步外，则筑成一台，严阵以待。
English: If the barricade is fifty paces away, they form a line and wait.

古文：已而闻杉关破，急分军为二，以一军守福，而自帅一军守延平，以相掎角。
现代文：不久，陈友定获悉杉关失陷，急忙将军队一分为二，命一军驻守福州，而自率一军防守延平，互为犄角。
English: Soon, Chen Youding learned that Sugiguan had fallen, and he quickly divided the army into two, ordering one army to be stationed in Fuzhou, while his own army defended Yanping, and they were at loggerheads with each other.

古文：及汤和等舟师抵福之五虎门，平章曲出引兵逆战败，明兵缘南台蚁附登城。
现代文：当汤和等率水师抵达福州五虎门时，平章曲出引军迎战失败，明军沿南台纷纷登城而入。
English: When the sailors led by Tang He and others arrived at the Fuzhou Five Tigers Gate, Ping Zhangqu failed to lead the army into battle, and the Ming army entered the city along the Nantai.

古文：守将遁去，参政尹克仁、宣政使朵耳麻不屈死，佥院柏帖木儿积薪楼下，杀妻妾及二女，纵火自焚死。
现代文：守将逃跑，参政尹克仁、宣政使朵耳麻拒降而死，佥院柏帖木儿在楼下堆积柴火，杀死妻妾及二个女儿之后，放火自焚而死。
English: The commander-in-chief fled, Yin Keren, a politician, and Do Er Ma, a propagandist, died after refusing to surrender, and Puyuan Bai Ti Muer piled up firewood downstairs, killed his wife and two daughters, and then set fire to himself and died.

古文：廷美克建宁，汤和进攻延平。
现代文：胡廷美攻克建宁，汤和进攻延平。
English: Hu Tingmei conquers Jianning, Tang He attacks Yanping.

古文：友定欲以持久困之，诸将请出战，不许。
现代文：陈友定想要持久困守，诸将则请求出战，陈友定不同意。
English: Chen Youding wanted to hold out for a long time, the generals requested to go to war, but Chen Youding did not agree.

古文：数请不已，友定疑所部将叛，杀萧院判。
现代文：诸将仍不断地请求，陈友定怀疑部将要叛变，便处死萧院判。
English: The generals continued to plead, and Chen Youding suspected that the troops would mutiny, so he was sentenced to death by the Xiao Yuan.

古文：军士多出降者。
现代文：许多士兵因而出城投降。
English: As a result, many soldiers left the city and surrendered.

古文：会军器局灾，城中礮声震地，明师知有变，急攻城。
现代文：正巧军器局发生火灾，城中炮声震地，明军获悉城中有变，趁机发动猛烈进攻。
English: Coincidentally, a fire broke out in the Ordnance Bureau, and the sound of cannons in the city shook the ground. The Ming army learned that there was a change in the city and took the opportunity to launch a fierce attack.

古文：友定呼其属诀曰： 大事已去，吾一死报国，诸君努力。 
现代文：陈友定向其部属诀别道 ：大势已去，我只有以死报国，诸君继续努力啊。 
English: Chen You bade farewell to his subordinates, saying: The tide has turned, I can only serve my country with my death, you should continue to work hard.

古文：因退入省堂，衣冠北面再拜，仰药死。
现代文：然后退入省堂，衣冠整齐，面向北面两拜之后，吞药自杀。
English: Then he retreated into the provincial hall, neatly dressed, facing north, and after two prostrations, he committed suicide by swallowing pills.

古文：所部争开城门纳明师。
现代文：所部将士争相打开城门接纳明军。
English: The officers and men of the headquarters scrambled to open the gate to receive the Ming army.

古文：夜分自经死。其亲藩死事最烈者，有云南梁王。
现代文：明军入城之后，奔去看陈友定，发现他仍未断气，便将他抬出水东门，正巧遇上大雷雨，陈友定苏醒过来，然后被戴上械锁送往京城。陈友定入宫拜见，太祖指责他。
English: After the Ming army entered the city, they rushed to see Chen Youding and found that he had not yet breathed his last, so they carried him out of the east gate of the water. It just so happened that there was a big thunderstorm. Chen Youding woke up and was then put on a mechanical lock and sent to the capital. Chen Youding went to the palace to visit, and the great-grandfather rebuked him.

古文：梁王把匝剌瓦尔密，元世祖第五子云南王忽哥赤之裔也。
现代文：陈友定厉声说道 ：国破家亡，要杀就杀，不必多言。 太祖于是将他与其子陈海一起处死。梁王把匝剌瓦尔密，是元世祖第五子云南王忽哥赤的后代。
English: Chen Youding said in a strong voice, "If the country breaks up and the family is destroyed, if you want to kill, kill, no need to say more." The grandfather then put him to death together with his son Chen Hai. Liang Wang put Yu Valmi, a descendant of the fifth son of the original ancestor, Yunnan King Hu Gocha.

古文：封梁王，仍镇云南。
现代文：受封梁王，仍镇守云南。
English: He was given the title of Liang Wang, but still remained in charge of Yunnan.

古文：顺帝之世，天下多故，云南僻远，王抚治有威惠。
现代文：顺帝之时，天下多事，云南地处偏远，梁王抚治，既有威望，且有实绩。
English: At the time of Emperor Shun, there were many things going on in the world. Yunnan was far away, and Liang Wang Fuzhi had both prestige and achievements.

古文：至正二十三年，明玉珍僣号于蜀，遣兵三道来攻，王走营金马山。
现代文：至正二十三年，明玉珍在蜀僭称皇帝，分兵三路进攻云南，梁王撤走，驻扎金马山。
English: In the 23rd year of the Zhengde era, Ming Yuzhen proclaimed himself emperor in Shuxi, and sent troops to attack Yunnan in three directions. Liang Wang withdrew and was stationed in Mount Jinma.

古文：明年以大理兵迎战，玉珍兵败退。
现代文：第二年率大理军队迎战，明玉珍军兵败而退。
English: The next year, the Dali army entered the battle, and the Ming and Jade Army was defeated and retreated.

古文：久之，顺帝北去，大都不守，中国无元尺寸地，而王守云南自若；岁遣使自塞外达元帝行在，执臣节如故。
现代文：久而久之，顺帝北逃，大都失守，中原已无元朝寸尺之地，而梁王仍在云南驻守自如；每年派遣使者自塞外前去元帝行在所，保持臣节如故。
English: Over time, Emperor Shun fled to the north and lost most of his territories. The Central Plains no longer had anything to do with the Yuan Dynasty, while King Liang was still stationed in Yunnan. Every year, emissaries were sent from outside of Tibet to visit the Yuan Emperor and maintain the vassalage as before.

古文：未几，明师平四川，天下大定。
现代文：不久，明军平定四川，天下大定。
English: Soon after, the Ming army subdued Sichuan, and the country was stabilized.

古文：太祖以云南险僻，不欲用兵。
现代文：太祖因云南地势险要，又相隔遥远，不想用兵。
English: The great-grandfather did not want to use troops because Yunnan was in a precarious situation and far away.

古文：明年正月，北平守将以所得王遣往漠北使者苏成来献，太祖乃命待制王祎赍诏偕成往招谕。
现代文：第二年正月，北平守将将所俘梁王派往漠北的使者苏成献送太祖，太祖于是命待制王携带诏书，偕同苏成前去招降梁王。
English: In the first month of the second year, the governor of Peking sent Liang Wang, who had been captured, to Su Cheng, the envoy to the desert north, to present him to the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather then ordered the king to carry the imperial edict and go with Su Cheng to recruit Liang Wang.

古文：王待祎以礼。
现代文：梁王对王以礼相待。
English: King Liang treated Wang with courtesy.

古文：会元嗣君遣使脱脱来征饷，脱脱疑王有他意，因胁以危语。
现代文：正巧元朝嗣君派使臣脱脱前来征饷，脱脱怀疑梁王另有他意，因此对他进行恐吓和威胁。
English: It just so happened that the former heir to the throne of the Yuan Dynasty sent an envoy to Liang Wang to recruit him. Liang Wang suspected that Liang Wang had other intentions, so he intimidated and threatened him.

古文：王遂杀祎而以礼敛之。
现代文：梁王于是杀死王，以礼殓葬。
English: King Liang then killed the king and buried him with great ceremony.

古文：逾三年，太祖复遣湖广参政吴云偕大军所获云南使臣铁知院等往。
现代文：三年过后，太祖又派遣湖广参政吴云偕同大军所获云南使臣铁知院等前往。
English: Three years later, the great-grandfather sent Wu Yunyao, a member of the Hukang political party, to Yunnan together with a large number of envoys from Yunnan, including Tiezhiin.

古文：知院以己奉使被执，诱云改制书绐王。云不从，被杀。
现代文：铁知院因为自己奉命出使而被俘，因此引诱吴云更改诏书哄骗梁王，吴云不从而被杀。
English: Tie Zhi Yuan was captured because he was sent by order, so he lured Wu Yun to change the edict and deceive Liang Wang, so that Wu Yun would not be killed.

古文：王闻云死，收其骨，送蜀给孤寺。
现代文：梁王获悉吴云去世，便收其尸骨，送往蜀之给孤寺。
English: When Liang Wang learned of Wu Yun's death, he collected his bones and sent them to Shu to the lonely temple.

古文：太祖知王终不可以谕降，乃命傅友德为征南将军，蓝玉、沐英为副，帅师征之。
现代文：太祖知道梁王始终不可以招降，便命傅友德为征南将军，蓝玉、沐英为副将军，率军征讨。
English: The great-grandfather knew that Liang Wang could never surrender, so he appointed Fu Youde as the general of the Southern Expedition, and Lan Yu and Mu Ying as the vice-generals to lead the army of the Southern Expedition.

古文：洪武十四年十二月下普定。
现代文：洪武十四年十二月明军攻下普定。
English: In December of the 14th year of Hongwu, the Ming army captured Puding.

古文：王遣司徒平章达里麻率兵驻曲靖。
现代文：梁王派司徒平章达里麻率军驻守曲靖。
English: Liang Wang sent Sitou Pingzhang Darima to garrison Qujing with his army.

古文：沐英引军疾趋，乘雾抵白石江。
现代文：沐英率军迅速靠近，乘着浓雾，抵达白石江。
English: The army led by Mu Ying quickly approached and arrived at the Baishijiang River through thick fog.

古文：雾解，达里麻望见大惊。
现代文：雾散之后，达里麻见此情形，大惊失色。
English: After the fog dissipated, Darima was shocked to see this.

古文：友德等率兵进击，达里麻兵溃被擒。
现代文：傅友德等率军进击，达里麻兵溃被擒。
English: Fu Youde and others led the army to attack, and Darima was defeated and captured.

古文：先是，王以女妻大理酋段得功，尝倚其兵力，后以疑杀之，遂失大理援。
现代文：在此之前，梁王将女儿许配大理酋长段得功为妻，曾经依靠他的兵力，后因疑心而处死段得功，于是失去大理之援。
English: Prior to this, Liang Wang married his daughter to Dali chieftain Duan Derong as his wife. He once relied on his military strength, but later executed Duan Derong due to suspicion, thus losing Dali's support.

古文：至是达里麻败，失精甲十余万。
现代文：现在达里麻战败，丧失精兵十余万。
English: Now Darima has been defeated, losing more than one hundred thousand elite soldiers.

古文：王知事不可为，走普宁州之忽纳砦，焚其龙衣，驱妻子赴滇池死。
现代文：梁王知道抵挡不住，便逃往普宁州的忽纳砦，焚毁龙衣，驱赶妻儿投滇池而死。
English: Liang Wang knew that he could not resist, so he fled to Kunna Fort in Puning State, burned his dragon robe, drove his wife and children into a pond, and died.

古文：遂与左丞达的、右丞驴儿夜入草舍，俱自经。
现代文：然后与左丞达的、右丞驴儿夜入草屋，都上吊而死。
English: Then, he and his left-handed and right-handed children went to a grass hut at night and hanged themselves.

古文：太祖迁其家属于耽罗。
现代文：太祖将其家属迁居耽罗。
English: The great-grandfather moved his family to Tamro.

