古文：齐宣王问曰： 人皆谓我毁明堂。
现代文：齐宣王问孟子说： 他人都建议我拆毁明堂，究竟是拆好还是不拆好呢？ 
English: Qi Xuanwang asked Mencius, "Others have suggested that I demolish the Ming Hall. Is it better to demolish it or not?

古文：毁诸？已乎？ 
现代文：孟子回答说： 明堂是施行王政的殿堂。
English: Mencius replied, "The Ming Hall is the hall of royal government.

古文：孟子对曰： 夫明堂者，王者之堂也。王欲行王政，则勿毁之矣。 
现代文：大王如果想施行王政，就请不要拆毁它吧。 宣王说： 关于王政说给我听听吗？ 
English: If the great king wants to reign, let him not tear it down, said King Xuan: "Shall I tell you about reigning?"

古文：王曰： 王政可得闻与？ 对曰： 昔者文王之治岐也，耕者九一，仕者世禄，关市讥而不征，泽梁无禁，罪人不孥。
现代文：孟子回答说： 以前周文王治理岐山的时候，对耕田的人只抽九分之一的税，做官的人给予世代承袭俸禄，关卡和市场仅稽查而不征税，在湖泊里捕鱼没有禁令，对犯罪者处罚不牵连妻儿。
English: Mencius replied, "In the past, when King Zhou Wen governed Qishan, he only levied one-ninth of the tax on those who cultivated the fields, and those who worked as officials were given a salary inherited from generation to generation. The checkpoints and markets were only inspected but not taxed. There was no ban on fishing in the lakes, and the punishment of offenders did not involve their wives and children.

古文：老而无妻曰鳏。老而无夫曰寡。老而无子曰独。幼而无父曰孤。
现代文：年老没有妻子的人叫做鳏夫；年老没有丈夫的人叫做寡妇；年老没有儿女的人叫做独；年幼失去父亲的人叫做孤。
English: An old man without a wife is called a widower; an old man without a husband is called a widow; an old man without children is called a widower; a young man who has lost his father is called an orphan.

古文：此四者，天下之穷民而无告者。
现代文：这四种人是天下最穷苦无靠的人。
English: These four types of people are the poorest and most helpless people in the world.

古文：文王发政施仁，必先斯四者。
现代文：文王实行仁政，一定要优先考虑到他们。
English: As King Moon implements benevolent policies, they must be given priority.

古文：诗云： 哿矣富人，哀此茕独。  王曰： 善哉言乎！ 
现代文：《诗经·小雅·正月》说： 富有的人过得不错，最可怜的是那些无依无靠的孤人。 宣王说： 说得好呀！ 
English: "Shijing, Xiaoya, Shogetsu" said: Rich people live well, the most pitiful are those who are helpless and alone.Xuan Wang said: Well said!

古文：曰： 王如善之，则何为不行？ 
现代文：孟子说： 大王如果认为说得好，那为什么不这样施行呢？ 
English: Mencius said, "If the emperor thinks that what you say is good, then why doesn't he implement it in this way?

古文：王曰： 寡人有疾，寡人好货。 
现代文：宣王说： 我有个毛病，我喜爱钱财。 
English: King Xuan said, "I have a problem. I like money.

古文：对曰： 昔者公刘好货；诗云： 乃积乃仓，乃裹糇粮，于橐于囊。
现代文：孟子说： 从前公刘也喜爱钱财。《诗经·大雅·公刘》说： 收割粮食装满仓，备好充足的干粮，装进大大小小的口袋中。
English: Mencius said: Once upon a time, Gong Liu also loved money. "Shijing·Daya·Gong Liu" said: Harvest grain to fill the storehouse, prepare enough dry grain, and put it into large and small pockets.

古文：思戢用光。
现代文：紧密团结争荣光，张弓带箭齐武装。
English: Closely united to fight for glory, armed with bows and arrows.

古文：弓矢斯张，干戈戚扬，爰方启行。 
现代文：盾戈斧铆拿手上，开始动身向前方。 
English: With shield and axe in hand, he started to walk forward.

古文：故居者有积仓，行者有裹粮也，然后可以爰方启行。
现代文：所以，要做到留下的人仓里有积谷，出征的人囊橐里有干粮，这样军队才可以出发。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to ensure that those who stay behind have grain in their storehouses, and those who go to war have dry grain in their sacks, so that the army can set off.

古文：王如好货，与百姓同之，于王何有？ 
现代文：大王如果喜爱钱财，能想到老百姓也喜爱钱财，这对施行王政有什么影响呢？ 
English: If the great king loves money, can he think that the common people also love money, and what effect will this have on the implementation of the royal government?

古文：王曰： 寡人有疾，寡人好色。 
现代文：宣王说： 我还有个毛病，我喜爱女色。 
English: King Xuan said: I still have a problem, I like women.

古文：对曰： 昔者大王好色，爱厥妃。
现代文：孟子回答说： 从前周太王也喜爱女色，非常宠爱他的妃子。
English: Mencius replied, "Once upon a time, King Zhou Taixuan was also fond of women, and was very fond of his concubine.

古文：诗云： 古公亶父，来朝走马，率西水浒，至于岐下。
现代文：《诗经·大雅·绵》说： 周太王古公亶父，一大早驱驰快马。沿着西边的河岸，一直走到岐山下。
English: "Shijing · Daya · Mian" said: Zhou Taigong's father, Zhou Taigong, drove a fast horse early in the morning. Along the west bank of the river, he went all the way to the foot of the mountain.

古文：爰及姜女，聿来胥宇。 
现代文：带着妻子姜氏女，勘察地址建新居。 
English: He and his wife, Jiang Shijie, surveyed addresses to build a new home.

古文：当是时也，内无怨女，外无旷夫。
现代文：那个时候，没有找不到丈夫的女子，也没有找不到妻子的光棍。
English: At that time, there was no woman who could not find a husband, and there was no bachelor who could not find a wife.

古文：王如好色，与百姓同之，于王何有？ 
现代文：大王如果喜爱女色，也能满足老百姓这方面的需求，这对施行王政有什么影响呢？ 
English: If the great king likes women, he can also meet the needs of the people in this regard, what impact does this have on the implementation of the monarchy?

