古文：阿术阿术，兀良氏，都帅兀良合台子也。
现代文：阿术，姓兀良氏，都元帅兀良合台之子，沉着机敏，有勇有谋。
English: Ah Shiu, surnamed Gong Liang, was the son of the Grand Marshal Gong Liang Hetai. He was calm, quick-witted, brave and resourceful.

古文：沉几有智略，临阵勇决，气盖万人。宪宗时，从其父征西南夷，率精兵为候骑，所向摧陷，莫敢当其锋。
现代文：宪宗时，随父征西南夷，率精兵为斥候，所向无敌。
English: At the time of Emperor Xianzong, he followed his father to conquer the southwestern barbarians, leading elite soldiers as scouts, and was invincible.

古文：九月，自宿卫将军拜征南都元帅，治兵于汴。
现代文：平大理，降交趾，均有战功，事见《兀良合台传》。世祖即位后，阿术执掌宿卫。中统三年，参加平叛李王有功，拜征南都元帅。
English: Both Ping Dari and Qian Jiao Zi had war exploits, as seen in the "An Liang Houtai Biography." After the ancestor ascended to the throne, Ah Shu was in charge of the guards. In the three years of Central Unification, he participated in the counter-rebellion against King Li, and was awarded the title of Nandu Marshal.

古文：复立宿州。至元元年八月，略地两淮，攻取战获，军声大振。
现代文：至元元年八月，攻占两淮，军声大振。
English: By August of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the two Huai were occupied, and the military was in full swing.

古文：四年八月，观兵襄阳，遂入南郡，取仙人、铁城等栅，俘生口五万。
现代文：四年八月，进军襄阳、南郡，夺取仙人、铁城等寨，俘人口五万。
English: In August of the same year, they marched into Xiangyang and Nan County, captured the villages of Xianren and Tiecheng, and took 50,000 prisoners.

古文：诸将从之。明日，宋兵果趋新堡，大破之，杀溺生擒五千余人，获战船百余艘。
现代文：回师途中，在襄、樊间遭到伏击，阿术用计大败宋军，斩敌万余人。五年，在汉水两岸筑鹿门、新城等堡，使援襄宋兵不能前进。六年七月，连日大雨，汉水大涨，宋将夏贵、范文虎相继率兵来援襄阳，阿术大败宋军，杀、溺、生擒共五千余人，缴获战船百余艘。
English: On the way back to his division, he was ambushed between Xiang and Shan. With his strategy, Ah Shou defeated the Song army and killed more than ten thousand enemies. In five years, he built the Deer Gate, Xincheng and other fortresses on both sides of the Han River, making it impossible for the Song soldiers to advance. In July of the sixth year, when it rained heavily for days and the Han River rose sharply, Song generals Xia Gui and Fan Wenhu successively led soldiers to aid Xiangyang. Ah Shou defeated the Song army, killed, drowned and captured a total of more than five thousand people and more than one hundred warships.

古文：于是治战船，教水军，筑圆城，以逼襄阳。
现代文：接着修治战船，教练水军，建筑圜城，以威胁襄阳。
English: Next, he repaired the warship, trained the navy, and built a fortified city to threaten Xiangyang.

古文：文虎复率舟师来救，来兴国又以兵百艘侵百丈山，前后邀击于湍滩，俱败走之。
现代文：范文虎再率水军来解襄阳之围，来兴国率百艘战舰攻百丈山，均被阿术击败于湍滩。九年三月，元军攻破樊城外城。
English: Fan Wenhu again led the navy to break the siege of Xiangyang, and Lai Xingguo led a hundred warships to attack Baizhang Mountain, both of which were defeated by Ahshu in Fengtan. In March of the ninth year, the Yuan army broke through the city outside Fencheng.

古文：先是，襄、樊两城，汉水出其间，宋兵植木江中，联以铁锁，中造浮梁，以通援兵，樊恃此为固。
现代文：宋副将张顺、张贵率船百只，满载军衣，自上游支援襄阳。阿术挥军攻击，顺战死，贵逃入襄阳城内。
English: Zhang Shun and Zhang Gui, vice-commanders of the Song Dynasty, led a hundred ships, loaded with military uniforms, to support Xiangyang from upstream. A Shou waved his army to attack, died in the battle, and Gui fled into Xiangyang city.

古文：至是，阿术以机锯断木，以斧断锁，焚其桥，襄兵不能援。
现代文：不久，张贵乘船顺流东下，又遭阿术与元帅刘整的伏兵袭击。张贵被擒，其余战死。是年九月，加阿术为同平章事。
English: Not long after, Zhang Gui took a boat to travel east along the river and was ambushed by Ah Shiu and Marshal Liu Zhengyi. Zhang Gui was captured, while the others were killed in battle. In September of the same year, Ah Shiu and Zhang Gui were at war.

古文：十二月，遂拔樊城。襄守将吕文焕惧而出降。
现代文：十二月，阿术攻克樊城，宋襄阳守将吕文焕出降。
English: In December, Ah Jiu conquered Lucheng, and Song Xiangyang's commander, Lü Wenhuan, surrendered.

古文：十年七月，奉命略淮东。抵扬州城下，宋以千骑出战，阿术伏兵道左，佯北，宋兵逐之，伏发，擒其骑将王都统。
现代文：十年七月，阿术奉命进军淮东，抵扬州城下，宋军以千骑出战，阿术以伏兵袭击，擒宋将王都统。十一年正月，入朝与参政阿里海牙奏请伐宋。
English: In July of the 10th year, Ah Ju was ordered to march into Huaidong and arrived at the city of Yangzhou. The Song army went to war with a thousand horsemen, Ah Ju attacked with ambushes, and defeated the Song general Wang Du. In the first month of the 11th year, he entered the DPRK with the participation of Ali Hague in politics.

古文：不若取黄家湾堡，东有河口，可由其中拖船入湖，转以下江为便。 
现代文：世祖允准，于是奉诏与丞相伯颜、参政阿里海牙一同领兵伐宋。三月，晋升为平章政事。
English: The patriarch consented, and so, by imperial decree, he led the army to fight the Song Dynasty together with the chancellor, Bo Yan, and the politician, Ali Haiga. In March, he was promoted to the post of minister of state.

古文：从之，遂舍攻郢而去。行大泽中，忽宋骑兵千人突至。时从骑才数十人，阿术即奋槊驰击。所向畏避，追斩五百余级，生擒其将赵、范二统制。
现代文：于是阿术不攻郢城，而改行于大泽中。忽然，宋骑兵千骑突然追来，而阿术才数十骑，他们奋力反击，斩杀宋军五百余人，生擒赵、范二统制。
English: Suddenly, a thousand Song cavalry suddenly chased after them, while only a few dozen Ahshu rode. They fought back and killed more than five hundred Song soldiers, and Zhao and Fan were captured alive.

古文：进攻沙洋、新城，拔之。前次复州，守将翟贵迎降。
现代文：元军攻克沙洋、新城，前军已抵复州，守将翟贵开城投降。
English: The former army conquered Keshahang and Xincheng, the former army has arrived in Fuzhou, and the garrison surrendered Xinggui Kaicheng.

古文：时夏贵锁大舰扼江、汉口，两岸备御坚严。
现代文：宋将夏贵以大舰扼守江、汉河口，两岸也防御甚严。
English: Song Emperor Xia Gui guarded the mouth of the Han River and the Yangtze River with large ships, and both sides of the river were heavily defended.

古文：阿术用军将马福计，回舟沦河口，穿湖中，从阳罗堡西沙芜口入大江。
现代文：阿术采用属将马福之计，回舟沦河口，穿越湖中，从阳逻堡西沙芜口入长江。
English: Ah-shu used the trick of a horse-drawn carriage to return the boat to the estuary, cross the lake, and enter the Yangtze River from the Yangluo Fort Xisha estuary.

古文：十二月，军至阳罗堡，攻之不克。
现代文：十二月，元军至阳逻堡，但攻之不下。
English: In December, the Yuan army reached Yangluo Fort, but could not attack it.

古文：阿术谓伯颜曰： 攻城，下策也。若分军船之半，循岸西上，对青山矶止泊，伺隙捣虚，可以得志。 
现代文：阿术对伯颜说 ：攻城是下策，若分一半水军沿岸西上，泊驻青山矶对岸，伺机乘虚进攻，可以取胜。 
English: Ah Shu said to Bo Yan, "The next step is to attack the city. If half of the naval forces go west along the coast, stay on the opposite side of the Qing Mountains, and wait for an opportunity to attack, they can win."

古文：从之。
现代文：伯颜同意这一战略。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：夏贵闻阿术飞渡，大惊，引麾下兵三百艘先遁，余皆溃走，遂拔阳罗堡，尽得其军实。
现代文：夏贵闻知阿术飞渡长江，大惊，率所领兵舰三百艘先逃，其余溃散，元军攻下阳逻堡。
English: When Xia Gui heard that Ah Jiu had flown across the Yangtze River, he was shocked. He led 300 warships to flee first. The rest scattered, and the Yuan army captured Yangluo Fort.

古文：伯颜议师所向，或欲先取蕲、黄，阿术曰： 若赴下流，退无所据，上取鄂、汉，虽迟旬日，师有所依，可以万全。 
现代文：伯颜召集诸将讨论下步进军方略，有人认为应先取蕲州、黄州。阿术则认为 ：若赴下流，退无所据，上取鄂州、汉阳，虽迟十天左右，但有根据地，此为万全之计。 
English: Bo Yan called the generals to discuss the next step in the military strategy. Some people thought that Zhangzhou and Huangzhou should be taken first. Ah Shu believed that if you go downstream, there is no basis for retreating, and if you go up to Ezhou and Hanyang, although it is about ten days late, but there is a basis, this is a perfect plan.

古文：己未，水陆并趋鄂、汉，焚其船三千艘，烟焰涨天，汉阳、鄂州大恐，相继皆降。
现代文：至元十一年十二月十九日，元军水陆并进，直趋鄂州、汉阳，焚宋船三千艘，火光照天，汉、鄂两城大为恐慌，相继投降。
English: On December 19, the Yuan army marched on land and sea, heading straight for Ezhou and Hanyang, burning 3,000 Song ships and lighting up the sky with fire. The Han and Hubei capitulated in panic.

古文：十二年正月，黄、蕲、江州降。
现代文：至元十二年正月，黄州、蕲州、江州相继投降。
English: In the first month of the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Huangzhou, Zhangzhou and Jiangzhou surrendered one after another.

古文：阿术率舟师趋安庆，范文虎迎降。
现代文：阿术率水军趋安庆，宋将范文虎降。
English: The naval forces with high skill and efficiency tended to Anqing, while the Song Dynasty reduced Fan Wenhu.

古文：阿术曰： 若释似道而不击，恐已降州郡今夏难守，且宋无信，方遣使请和，而又射我军船，执我逻骑。
现代文：大军至池州，宋丞相贾似道率重兵拒守芜湖，同时派宋京来求和。伯颜本想停止进军，阿术认为： 若不攻贾似道，恐那些已降的州郡今夏就难保住。而且宋朝不讲信义，方来求和，而又射我军船，逮捕我巡逻骑兵。
English: When the large army reached Chizhou, Song Zheng, Sang Jia Li Dao and their heavy troops refused to defend Wuhu, and at the same time sent Song Jing to sue for peace. Bo Yan originally wanted to stop the advance, but Ah Shu thought: If we don't attack Jia Li Dao, I'm afraid that those states and counties that have fallen will be difficult to keep this summer. Moreover, the Song Dynasty didn't talk about sincerity, they came to sue for peace, and shot our military ship and arrested my patrol cavalry.

古文：今日惟当进兵，事若有失，罪归于我。 
现代文：现在只有进兵，若有所失，罪责由我承担。 
English: Right now, there is only the enlistment. If there are any mistakes, I will take the blame.

古文：二月辛酉，师次丁家洲，遂与宋前锋孙虎臣对阵。
现代文：元军进至丁家洲，与宋军前锋孙虎臣对阵。
English: The Yuan army marched into Dingjiazhou and faced off against the Song army's vanguard, Sun Huchen.

古文：夏贵以战舰二千五百艘横亘江中，似道将兵殿其后。
现代文：夏贵以战舰二千五百艘封锁江面，贾似道将兵为后盾。
English: Xia Gui blockaded the river with two thousand five hundred warships, backed by Jia Xiangdao's soldiers.

古文：时已遣骑兵夹岸而进，两岸树炮，击其中坚，宋军阵动，阿术挺身登舟，手自持柂，突入敌阵，诸军继进，宋兵遂大溃。以上详见《伯颜传》。
现代文：两军大战，宋军大溃，详见《伯颜传》。
English: The great war between the two armies, the great defeat of the Song Army, is described in detail in the "Biography of Bo Yan."

古文：世祖以宋重兵皆驻扬州，临安倚之为重，四月，命阿术分兵围守扬州。
现代文：世祖见宋朝重兵皆驻扬州，临安依此为屏障。四月，命阿术分兵围扬州。
English: The patriarch saw that all the heavy soldiers of the Song Dynasty were stationed in Yangzhou, and Lin'an was used as a barrier. In April, the army of the Ming and Qin Dynasties surrounded Yangzhou.

古文：宋都统姜才领步骑二万来攻栅，敌军夹河为阵，阿术麾骑士渡河击之，战数合，坚不能却。众军佯北，才逐之，遂奋而回击，万矢雨集，才军不能支，擒其副将张林，斩首万八千级。
现代文：四月十九日，元军至真州，在珠金砂打败宋军，斩首二千余级。大军抵扬州后，在瓜洲造战船军械，从真州运粮。宋都统姜才领步骑军二万来攻，双方大战，姜才军抵抗不住败却。其副将张林被擒，损军一万八千余人。
English: On April 19, the Yuan army reached Zhenzhou, defeated the Song army at Zhu Jinsha, and beheaded more than two thousand. After the army arrived in Yangzhou, it built warships and ordnance in Guazhou and transported grain from Zhenzhou. The Song general Jiang Cai led a cavalry force of twenty thousand to attack, and the two sides fought a great war, but Jiang Cai's army could not resist and was defeated. His deputy general Zhang Lin was captured, and more than eighteen thousand troops were lost.

古文：七月庚午，宋两淮镇将张世杰、孙虎臣以舟师万艘驻焦山东，每十船为一舫，联以铁锁，以示必死。
现代文：十二年七月初一日，宋两淮镇将张世杰、孙虎臣拥有战船万艘，驻焦山东，每十船为一舫，用铁锁相连。
English: On the first day of July in the 12th year of the Song Dynasty, the two Huai towns of Zhang Shijie and Sun Huchen owned 10,000 warships and stationed them in Jiao Shandong. Every ten ships were linked by an iron lock.

古文：阿术登石公山，望之，舳舻连接，旌旗蔽江，曰： 可烧而走也。 
现代文：阿术登石公山观察后说 ：可用火攻。 
English: After observing the stone-climbing public mountain, Ah Jiu said: It can be attacked with fire.

古文：遂选强健善射者千人，载以巨舰，分两翼夹射，阿术居中，合势进击，继以火矢烧其蓬樯，烟焰涨天。
现代文：于是选强健善射军士千人，乘巨舰分两翼夹攻，阿术居中进击，以火箭射烧，火焰漫天，宋兵战船行驶不便，前军赴水溺死，后军逃散。
English: As a result, Yan Qiangjian shot a thousand soldiers and officers, attacked with a giant ship divided into two wings, Ah Shu attacked in the middle, fired with rockets, the sky was full of flames, the Song soldiers' warships were inconvenient to drive, the front army drowned in the water, and the rear army fled.

古文：宋兵既碇舟死战，至是欲走不能，前军争赴水死，后军散走。追至圌山，获黄鹄白鹞船七百余艘，自是宋人不复能军矣。十月，诏拜中书左丞相，仍谕之曰： 淮南重地，李庭芝狡诈，须卿守之。 
现代文：追至图山，缴获黄鹄船七百余艘。从此宋军一蹶不振。十月，诏拜阿术为中书左丞相，仍命他屯守淮南以对付狡诈的李庭芝。
English: They chased them to Tushan and captured more than seven hundred ships of the Yellow Horde. From then on, the Song army suffered a setback. In October, Emperor Baizhu, as the Minister of the Left Division of the Central Military Commission, still ordered him to stay in Huainan to deal with the cunning Li Tingzhi.

古文：时诸军进取临安，阿术驻兵瓜洲，以绝扬州之援。
现代文：大军进取临安，阿术驻兵瓜洲以断绝扬州援军。
English: The large army advanced to Lin'an, and the A art garrisoned Guazhou to cut off reinforcements from Yangzhou.

古文：伯颜所以兵不血刃而平宋者，阿术控制之力为多。
现代文：伯颜之所以能兵不血刃而灭宋朝。阿术在爪洲控制宋扬州援军起了很大的作用。
English: The reason why Bo Yan was able to destroy the Song Dynasty without bloodshed. Ah Shu played a great role in controlling the Song Yangzhou reinforcements in Jaw Chau.

古文：十三年二月，夏贵举淮西诸城来附。
现代文：十三年二月，夏贵将淮西诸城献降。
English: In February of the thirteenth year, Xia Gui surrendered the cities in western Huai.

古文：阿术谓诸将曰： 今宋已亡，独庭芝未下，以外助犹多故也。
现代文：阿术对众将说： 今宋已亡，唯李庭芝尚未讨平，因为外面援助他的力量很多。
English: Ah Shu said to the crowd: Now Song has passed away, but Li Tingzhi has not been leveled, because there are many forces outside to help him.

古文：若绝其声援，塞彼粮道，尚恐东走通、泰，逃命江海。 
现代文：如果断绝其援兵，堵塞其粮道，还要防他东走通州、泰州，逃往江海。 
English: If we cut off his reinforcements and block his food supply, we must also prevent him from going east to Tongzhou and Taizhou and fleeing to the Jianghai River.

古文：乃栅扬之西北丁村，以扼其高邮、宝应之馈运；贮粟湾头堡，以备捍御；留屯新城，以逼泰州。
现代文：于是在扬州西北丁村屯兵扼守，阻断其来自高邮、宝应的粮道；屯粮于湾头堡，做长期防御；驻兵新城以威胁泰州。
English: So they garrisoned Dingcun in the northwest of Yangzhou to block the grain route from Gaoyou and Baoying; they garrisoned grain in Bay Head Fort for long-term defense; and they garrisoned Xincheng to threaten Taizhou.

古文：如丁村烽起，当首尾相应，断其归路。 
现代文：又派千户伯颜察儿率骑兵三百以增加湾头的兵力，告诫他们要防备李庭芝从陆路进攻。
English: He also sent Qianhu Boyancha'er and 300 cavalrymen to increase the number of troops at the head of the bay, and warned them to beware of Li Tingzhi's attack by land.

古文：六月甲戌，姜才知高邮米运将至，果夜出步骑五千犯丁村栅。
现代文：六月十一日，宋军姜才知高邮运米将至，夜间以步骑军五千进犯丁村。
English: On June 11th, the Song army led by Jiang Cai Zhi Gao was on its way to deliver rice to Ding village. During the night, 5,000 cavalry marched into Ding village.

古文：扬、泰既下，阿术申严士卒，禁暴掠。
现代文：至晓，伯颜察儿前来支援，所将者都是阿术的精兵，宋兵望风而逃。
English: At dawn, Bo Yancha'er came to help. The commanders were all elite soldiers of the Art of War, and the Song soldiers fled at the sight of the wind.

古文：有武卫军校掠民二马，即斩以徇。
现代文：元军追杀宋骑兵四百，步兵幸免于死者不到百人。二十九日，李庭芝留朱焕守扬州，自己同姜才逃入泰州。
English: The Yuan army chased and killed four hundred Song cavalrymen, and less than a hundred infantrymen survived. On the 29th, Li Tingzhi stayed in Zhuhuan to guard Yangzhou, and he and Jiang Cai fled to Taizhou.

古文：两淮悉平，得府二、州二十二、军四、县六十七。
现代文：七月十二日，扬州朱焕降。二十二日，泰州宋将孙良臣降，李庭芝、姜才被擒，斩于扬州市。
English: On July 12, Yangzhou Zhu Huan abdicated. On the 22nd, Taizhou Song abdicated Sun Liangcheng, and Li Tingzhi and Jiang Cai were arrested and beheaded in Yangzhou.

古文：九月辛酉，入见世祖于大明殿，陈宋俘。
现代文：扬、泰攻下后，阿术严禁士卒抢掠。两淮平定，得府二、州二十二、军四、县六十七。九月三十日，入朝拜见世祖于大明殿。
English: After conquering Yang and Tai, Ah Shou strictly forbade his soldiers from looting. He conquered two provinces, twenty-two prefectures, four armies, and sixty-seven counties. On September 30, he entered the imperial court to pay homage to his ancestor at the Daming Hall.

古文：家贫，尝躬耕，舍耒叹曰： 大丈夫当立功朝廷，何至效细民事畎亩乎！ 
现代文：世祖论功行赏，封阿术泰兴县二千户。至元二十三年，阿术受命北伐叛王昔剌木等。阿里海牙，畏兀儿族人，聪敏，有胆识谋略。家中贫寒，以种田为业，曾抚锄叹息说 ：大丈夫当立功朝廷，为何作为小民而耕田种地。 
English: According to the Ancestor's discourse on the reward for meritorious deeds, two thousand households in Taixing County were given to Ah Xiu. By the 23rd year of the Yuan Dynasty, Ah Xiu was ordered to go to the north to rebel against the king of Xizang and so on. Ali Haiga, a member of the Hui tribe, was intelligent and had the courage to devise strategies. His family was poor and farmed the land, and he once sighed and said: "It's okay to make meritorious deeds for the imperial court, why should I farm the land as a commoner?"

古文：去，求其国书读之，逾月，又弃去。
现代文：后弃耕求学，有人把他推荐给世祖。
English: After giving up farming to study, someone recommended him to Shizuo.

古文：用荐者得事世祖于潜邸。世祖即位，渐见擢用，由左右司郎中迁参议中书省事。
现代文：世祖即位后日渐擢用，由左右司郎中升参议中书省事。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, he was gradually promoted, and the left and right ministers were promoted to the position of councillor.

古文：至元二年，立诸路行中书省，进佥河南行省事。
现代文：至元二年建立各路行中书省，晋升阿里海牙为佥河南行省事。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Ministry of Books was established, and Ali Haiga was promoted to the position of the provincial governor of the Southern Henan Province.

古文：五年，命与元帅阿术、刘整取襄阳，又加参知政事。
现代文：至元五年，阿里海牙与元帅阿术、刘整攻取襄阳，围城五年未下。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Ali Haiga, together with marshals Ah Shu and Liu He, captured Yangyang and besieged the city for five years.

古文：始，帝遣诸将，命毋攻城，但围之，以俟其自降。乃筑长围，起万山，包百丈、楚山，尽鹿门，以绝之。
现代文：九年三月，只攻下樊城外城。阿里海牙认为襄阳与樊城唇齿相依，宜先攻下樊城，襄阳可不攻而得。
English: In March of the ninth year, only the outer city of Lucheng was conquered. Ali Hague believed that Xiangyang and Lucheng were interdependent, and it was better to conquer Lucheng first, and Xiangyang could be won without attacking.

古文：文焕狐疑未决。又折矢与之誓，如是者数四，文焕感而出降。
现代文：十年正月，蒙军用炮猛攻樊城，阿里海牙发水军焚毁襄樊浮桥，使襄军不能援助樊城，樊城被攻下。樊城既下，襄阳孤立无援，知府吕文焕不得已而开城投降。
English: In the first month of the 10th year, the Mongolian military artillery stormed Shicheng, Ali Hague's naval force burned the floating bridge of Xiangfan, so that the Xiangfan army could not assist Shicheng, and Shicheng was captured. After Shicheng, Xiangyang was isolated without assistance, and the prefect Lvwenhuan had no choice but to surrender Kaesong.

古文：遂与入朝。帝以文焕为昭勇大将军、侍卫亲军都指挥使、襄汉大都督；阿里海牙行荆湖等路枢密院事，镇襄阳。
现代文：世祖授吕文焕为昭勇大将军、侍卫亲军都指挥使、襄汉大都督；以阿里海牙主持荆湖等路枢密院事，镇守襄阳。
English: Lu Wenhuan was awarded the title of Grand General Zhaoyong, and his bodyguards were given the title of Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Army and Governor of Xianghan; Ali Haiga presided over the Privy Council of Jinghu Road and guarded Xiangyang.

古文：阿里海牙进行省右丞，赏钞二百锭。
现代文：阿里海牙奏请大军乘胜顺流长驱，继续进军。世祖采纳，命伯颜、阿术统帅征南大军，阿里海牙晋升行省右丞。
English: Ali Haigas invited the army to take advantage of the victory and drive down the river to continue the march. Adopted by the ancestor, the life of Bo Yan, the commander of the South Korean army, Ali Haigas was promoted to the provincial right-hand man.

古文：十一年九月，会师襄阳，遂破郢州及沙洋、新城。
现代文：十一年九月，元军会师襄阳，随后破郢州、沙洋、新城。
English: In September of the 11th year, the former military association defeated Xiangyang, and then defeated Luzhou, Shayang and Xincheng.

古文：十二月，师出沙芜口。宋制置夏贵守诸隘，甚固。
现代文：十二月出沙芜口，阿里海牙麾兵攻武矶堡，宋制置夏贵败走庐州，都统程鹏飞败于江中，宣抚朱祀孙逃往江陵，鄂州张晏然开城投降，程鹏飞亦率其军降元。
English: In December, the Battle of Shaqiao took place, Ali Haig's troops attacked Wuye Fort, the Song Dynasty's Xia Gui was defeated and fled to Zhangzhou, Cheng Pengfei was defeated in the middle of the river, Zhu Xi's son fled to Jiangling, Zhang Rong of Huzhou surrendered, and Cheng Pengfei also led his army to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：阿里海牙集鄂民，宣上德惠，禁将士毋侵掠。
现代文：伯颜遣阿里海牙戍守鄂州。阿里海牙在鄂州宣扬皇上恩德，禁将士掳掠。
English: Bo Yan sent Ali Hague to defend Ezhou. In Ezhou, Ali Hague preached the emperor's benevolence and banned the capture of soldiers.

古文：其下恐惧，无敢取民之菜者，民大悦。遣人徇寿昌、信阳、德安诸郡，皆下。进徇江陵。
现代文：遣军攻取寿昌、信阳、德安，进军江陵。
English: The dispatched troops captured Shuchang, Xinyang, De'an, and marched into Gangneung.

古文：十有二年春三月，与安抚高世杰兵遇巴陵，命张荣实捣其中坚，解汝楫率诸翼兵左右角之。世杰败走，追降之于桃花滩。
现代文：十二年三月，他与宋安抚使高世杰战于巴陵，世杰败走。
English: In March of the 12th year, he and Song Anpu sent Gao Shijie to fight in Baling. Shijie was defeated and left.

古文：遂下岳州。
现代文：又攻克岳州。
English: He also conquered Yuezhou.

古文：四月，至沙市，城不下，纵火攻之，沙市立破，宣抚朱礻异孙、制置高达恐即以城降。
现代文：四月以火攻沙市，立破，宣抚朱祀孙、制置高达惊恐不已，均降。
English: In April, they attacked Shaxi City with fire, and the city was destroyed, and the proclamation of Zhu Xi's grandson was made, and the establishment was so frightened that it was reduced.

古文：乃决隍水，部分诸将，以炮攻之，破其木堡。流矢中胸，疮甚，督战益急，夺其城。
现代文：以后郢、归、峡、常德、澧、随、辰、沅、靖、复、均、房、施、荆门相继归顺。世祖闻捷大喜，对近臣说： 伯颜征东，阿里海牙孤军戍鄂，朕不放心，如今平定荆南，东征之师无后患矣。 命廉希宪守江陵，促阿里海牙迅速返鄂州。阿里海牙招降潭州守臣李芾，不降，便移兵长沙，夺取湘阴。
English: In the future,, 歸, 峡, 常德,, 随, 辰,, 靖, 复, 均, 房, 施, and 荆门 successively surrendered. The ancestor was overjoyed to hear of the victory and said to his close vassal: "I am not at ease, now that Bo Yan has conquered the East, and Ali Hague is a lone soldier in Hubei, there is no future for me. I hope that the Constitution will protect Jiangling, and urge Ali Hague to quickly return to Ezhou. Ali Hague recruited Li Qian, the governor of Tanzhou, but he did not

古文：潭人复作月城以相拒。
现代文：十月，元军至潭州，再招李芾投降，又不降。
English: In October, the Yuan army went to Tanzhou, and then recruited Li Xi to surrender, but he did not surrender.

古文：凡攻七十日，大小数十战。
现代文：于是攻城，连攻七十天，大小数十战，阿里海牙虽受重创，仍奋力督战，十三年正月攻下潭州。
English: As a result, the city was besieged for 70 days in a row, and there were dozens of battles, large and small. Although Ali Hague suffered heavy losses, he still fought hard to supervise the battle, and in the first month of the 13th year, he conquered Tanzhou.

古文：十有三年春正月，芾力屈，及转运使钟蜚英、都统陈义皆自杀，其将刘孝忠以城降。
现代文：宋转运使钟蜚英、都统陈义皆自杀，守将刘孝忠降。
English: Song Zengyun made Zhong Xingying and Du Tong Chen Yi both commit suicide, and the commander Liu Xiaotong surrendered.

古文：诸将欲屠之，阿里海牙曰： 是州生齿数百万口，若悉杀之，非上谕伯颜以曹彬不杀意也，其屈法生之。 
现代文：诸将要进行屠杀，阿里海牙制止说： 该州人民数百万，若尽杀戮，是违背皇上指示伯颜效曹彬不杀人之初衷。 
English: When some of them were about to carry out the massacre, Ali Haiga stopped them, saying, "If you kill millions of people in this state, you will be going against the emperor's instruction to Cao Bin not to kill people.

古文：既及其总制黄文政、总管张虎以残兵突围走，执之。
现代文：还开仓发粮与饥民。又遣人占领彬、全、道、桂阳、永、衡、武冈、宝庆、袁、韶、南雄诸郡，这些地方的百姓都称颂阿里海牙秉承皇帝好生之德，不杀掳，所过秋毫无犯。
English: He also opened storehouses to distribute grain to the hungry. He also sent people to occupy Bin, Quan, Dao, Guiyang, Yong, Heng, Wukan, Baoqing, Yuan, Handan, and Nanxiong counties. The people in these places praised Ali Haiga for upholding the emperor's virtue of a good life, not killing or kidnapping, and not committing any crimes.

古文：阿里海牙以静江民易叛，非潭比，不重刑之，则广西诸州不服，因悉坑之，斩既于市。
现代文：只有静江守臣、宋经略使马不降。河里海牙多次派人去说服，使者都被马杀害，阿里海牙只得挥兵进攻，十一月城破。阿里海牙认为，静江民易叛，不同于潭州，不用重刑则广西诸州不服，因将城中百姓尽坑杀，斩马于市。
English: Only the governor of Jingjiang and Song Jingliao kept the horse from surrendering. Huari Hague repeatedly sent people to persuade Zhuge Liang, and the envoys were all killed by the horse. Ali Hague had no choice but to attack with troops, and the city was defeated in November. Ali Hague believed that the people of Jingjiang were easy to rebel, unlike Tanzhou, and the states of Guangxi would not be satisfied without severe punishment, so he killed all the people in the city and beheaded the horse in the city.

古文：分遣万户脱温不花徇宾、融、柳、钦、横、邕、庆远，齐荣祖徇郁林、贵、廉、象，脱邻徇浔、容、藤、梧，皆下之。
现代文：接着分遣万户脱温不花夺占宾、融、柳、钦、横、邕、庆远等地，齐荣祖夺占郁林、贵、廉、象，脱邻夺占浔、容、藤、梧等地。
English: Next, they dispatched tens of thousands of families to take over Bin, Rong, Liu, Qin, Heng, Yao, Qingyuan and other places, Qirong ancestors to take over Yulin, Guizhou, Lian and Zhao, and neighbors to take over Yao, Rong, Wisteria, Wu and other places.

古文：特磨王侬士贵、南丹州牧莫大秀，皆奉表求内附，奏官其降官如潭州。以兵戍静江、昭、贺、梧、邕、融，乃还潭。
现代文：特磨王侬士贵、南丹州牧莫大秀，也都奉表归附。又派兵戍守静江、昭、贺、梧、邕、融诸地，自己回到潭州坐镇。
English: Wang Nonshi Gui of the Special Military Region and Mu Moda Xiu of the Southern Danzhou Region were also added to the list. They also sent soldiers to guard Jingjiang, Zhao, He, Wu, Handan and Rong provinces, and returned to Tanzhou to stay in the town.

古文：既而宋二王称制海中，雷、琼、全、永与潭属县之民文才喻、周隆、张虎、罗飞咸起兵应之，舒、黄、蕲相继亦起，大者众数万，小者不下数千。
现代文：宋益王赵曰正、广王赵籨相继在海岛中称帝，雷州、琼州、金州、永州及潭州属县人民文才喻、周隆、张虎、罗飞都起兵响应，舒、黄、蕲等地人民也相继而起，大者众数万人，小者不下数千。
English: Song Yi Wang Zhao Zhaozheng and Guang Wang Zhao Qian successively proclaimed the emperor in the island, the people of the counties of Leizhou, Qiongzhou, Jinzhou, Yongzhou and Tanzhou, including Wensai Yu, Zhou Long, Zhang Hu and Luo Fei, responded by raising an army, and the people of Shu, Huang and Handan also rose up one after another, with tens of thousands of big people and thousands of small people.

古文：诏命讨之，且略地海外。阿里海牙既定才喻等，至雷州，使人谕琼州安抚赵与珞降，不听。
现代文：阿里海牙先平定文才喻等，再至雷州，使人去琼州招降赵舆珞。
English: Ali Hague first pacified Dingwen Caiyu, and then went to Leizhou to make people go to Qiongzhou to recruit Zhao Muxun.

古文：八蕃罗甸、卧龙、罗蕃、大龙、退蛮、卢蕃、小龙、石蕃、方蕃、洪蕃、程蕃，并置安抚以镇之。十八年，奏请徙省鄂州。
现代文：赵舆珞不听。阿里海牙亲率兵航海五百里，捕杀赵与珞、冉安国、黄之纪，平定琼州之南宁、万安、吉阳。降八蕃罗甸的蛮族，置宣慰司以镇抚八蕃罗甸、卧龙、罗蕃、大龙、遏蛮、卢蕃、小龙、石蕃、方蕃、洪蕃、程蕃。十八年，奏请迁行省治所于鄂州。
English: Zhao Muxun did not listen. Ali Haiga personally led the soldiers to sail five hundred miles, captured and killed Zhao and Zou, Ran An Guo, Huang Zhiji, and pacified Nanning, Wan'an and Jiyang in Qiongzhou. The barbarians who fell to Yao Rodya, set up a propaganda and consolation department to pacify Yao Rodya, Wolong, Luo Rodya, Dalong, Jian Rodya, Luo Rodya, Xiao Long, Shih Rodya, Fang Rodya, Hong Rodya and Cheng Rodya. In 18 years, the request was made to relocate

古文：所定荆南、淮西、江西、海南、广西之地，凡得州五十八，峒夷山獠不可胜计。
现代文：所平定之荆南、淮西、江西、海南、广西共五十八州，西南各民族之地不可胜计。
English: Jingnan, Huaxi, Jiangxi, Hainan and Guangxi, which have been pacified, total 58 states, and there are countless places of various ethnic groups in the southwest.

古文：大率以口舌降之，未尝专事杀戮。
现代文：大多是劝降，未曾专行杀戮。
English: For the most part, it was a matter of persuading them to surrender, without ever killing them.

古文：又其取民悉定从轻赋，民所在立祠祀之。
现代文：对新归降地方的百姓，轻徭薄赋，人民感激，立祠纪念。
English: For the people of the newly returned places, the people are grateful, and the memorial of the founding of the ancestral hall is the best.

古文：二十三年，入朝，加光禄大夫、湖广行省左丞相；卒，年六十。
现代文：至元二十三年回朝，加光禄大夫、湖广行省左丞相。年六十而卒。
English: In the 23rd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he returned to China and became the doctor of Jia Guanglu and the minister of the left of the provincial government. He died at the age of 60.

古文：赠开府仪同三司、上柱国，封楚国公，谥武定。
现代文：赠开府仪同三司、上柱国，封楚国公，谥 武定 。
English: He presented the ceremony of opening the government to the three departments, Shangzhu Province, Fuchu Province, and Zang Wuding.

古文：至正八年，进封江陵王。
现代文：至正八年进封江陵王。
English: He became the King of Gangneung in the eighth year of the Taisho era.

古文：子忽失海牙，湖广行中书省左丞；贯只哥，江西行中书省平章政事。
现代文：第二年凯旋。继又西征，行至哈剌霍州病逝，年五十四岁，追封河南王。
English: He made a triumphant return the following year. Following another westward expedition, he traveled to Harbin and Huzhou, where he died of illness at the age of fifty-four, having been crowned the king of Henan.

古文：相威相威，国王速浑察之子也。性弘毅重厚，不饮酒，寡言笑。喜延士大夫，听读经史，谕古今治乱，至直臣尽忠、良将制胜，必为之击节称善。
现代文：相威，国王速浑察之子，禀性厚道稳重，抱负远大，意志坚强，好与士大夫往来，听他们讲经论史及古今治乱，听到直臣尽忠，良将取胜，必拍手称善。
English: Sui Wei, the son of King Hohunca, has a steady and virtuous temperament, high aspirations, and a strong will. He is good at interacting with scholars and officials, listening to their lectures on history and the management of past and present turmoil. When he hears that his direct vassals are loyal and good generals win, he will clap his hands and praise them.

古文：以故临大事，决大议，言必中节。
现代文：故每逢重大事情，其议论都恰当精深。
English: Therefore, whenever there is a major event, its discussion is appropriate and profound.

古文：至元十一年，世祖命相威总速浑察元统弘吉剌等五投下兵从伐宋。由正阳取安丰，略庐，克和，攻司空山，平野人原。
现代文：至元十一年，世祖命相威随大军伐宋。相威由正阳取安丰，夺庐州，克和州，攻司空山，平定野人原，经安庆渡江东下，与伯颜会师于润州。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the ancestor's mission was to follow the great army to fight the Song Dynasty. The mission was to take Anfeng from Zhengyang, capture Bozhou, Khezhou, attack the empty mountain, pacify the wild man's plain, pass through Anqing to the east of the river, and meet with Bo Yan in Runzhou.

古文：道安庆，渡江东下，会丞相伯颜兵于润州，分三道并进，相威率左军，参政董文炳为副，部署将校，申明约束。江阴、华亭、澉浦、上海悉望风款附，吏民按堵如故。
现代文：元军分三路，相威率左军，参政董文炳为副将，江阴、华亭、澉浦、上海相继归降。
English: The Yuan army was divided into three parts, with the left army led by Xiang Wei, and the politician Dong Wenyu as vice-general. The leaders of Jiangyin, Huating, Weipo and Shanghai were successively demoted.

古文：进屯盐官，伯颜已驻师临安城下，得宋幼主降表。相威乃移兵瓜洲，与阿术兵合。
现代文：伯颜驻军临安，相威至瓜洲与阿术合兵一处。
English: Bo Yan garrisoned in Lin'an, and went to Guazhou to join forces with Ah Shu.

古文：临扬州，都统姜才以兵二万攻扬子桥，率诸将击败之。
现代文：围攻扬州时，宋都统姜才率兵二万攻扬子桥，相威率诸将击退。
English: When besieging Yangzhou, the Song Emperor Jiang Cai led twenty thousand soldiers to attack the Yangtze Bridge, and they were repulsed.

古文：十三年夏，驿召相威。
现代文：十三年夏，相威应召回朝，授金虎符、征西都元帅，命领兵镇守西土。
English: In the summer of the thirteenth year, he was recalled to the imperial court, awarded the Golden Tiger Badge, made marshal of the Western Expedition, and ordered to lead the troops to guard the West.

古文：十七年，有旨命相威检核阿里海牙、忽都帖木儿等所俘三万二千余口，并放为民。
现代文：至元十四年，召回朝拜江南诸道行台御史大夫。相威奏陈并行省、削冗官、招流民复业、公田召佃、仍减租税等十五事，世祖皆采纳。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Dr. Gangtai, the chief historian of the Southern Dynasties, was recalled from his post. The patriarchs all adopted 15 measures, such as the abolition of parallel ministries, the elimination of redundant officials, the reinstatement of exiled people, the establishment of public fields, and the continued reduction of taxes.

古文：十八年，右丞范文虎、参政李庭以兵十万航海征倭。
现代文：十六年，相威奉旨与知枢密院博罗审理平章阿合马诸违法事。
English: Sixteen years later, the Privy Council of Boroughs and Boroughs, acting on the advice of the Privy Council, tried the illegalities of Pingzhang Ahma.

古文：七昼夜至竹岛，与辽阳省臣兵合。
现代文：十七年，奉旨检核阿里海牙及忽都帖木儿等所俘三万二千余人，均释放为民。
English: In the seventeenth year, more than thirty-two thousand people who were captured by Ali Haiga and Kudu Timur, etc., were ordered to be examined and released as citizens.

古文：欲先攻太宰府，迟疑不发。八月朔，飓风大作，士卒十丧六七。帝震怒，复命行省左丞相阿塔海征之。一时无敢谏者。相威遣使入奏曰： 倭不奉职贡，可伐而不可恕，可缓而不可急。
现代文：十八年，右丞范文虎、参政李庭统兵十万航海征日本，无功，世祖大怒，又命行省左丞相阿塔海发兵再征，无人敢谏阻，相威冒死遣使入奏道 ：倭不纳贡，可讨伐而不可饶恕，但出兵可缓而不可急。
English: In the 18th year, the right-hand man Fan Wenhu and the politician Li Ting led 100,000 soldiers to sail to Japan, to no avail. The ancestor was furious, and ordered the left-hand man of the province, Atahai, to send troops for re-enlistment. No one dared to oppose him, and he risked his life to send troops to Japan.

古文：向者师行迫期，战船不坚，前车已覆，后当改辙。
现代文：以前出师太急，战船不坚，前车已覆，后可为鉴。
English: In the past, the division was too hasty, the warship was not strong, the front wheel was overturned, and the latter can be used as an example.

古文：十九年，又奏阿里海牙占降民一千八百户为奴，阿里海牙以为征讨所得，有旨： 果降民也，还之有司；若征讨所得，令御史台籍其数以闻，量赐有功者。 
现代文：为今之计，应是预修战船，训练士卒，耀武扬威，使彼闻之而自做防御，然后我迟迟不出兵，等到彼国疲怠之时，我们出其不意，乘风速往，可一举而下，此是万全之策。 
English: For now, the plan should be to pre-train the warship, train the soldiers, show off, let them hear it and defend themselves, and then I will not be late, and when the other country is tired, we will surprise them, ride the wind, and go down in one fell swoop. This is a perfect plan.

古文：阿里海牙又自陈其功比伯颜，当赐养老户，御史滕鲁瞻劾之，阿里海牙自辨，有旨遣使赴行台逮问。
现代文：世祖听后才停止征讨日本。又陈请皇太子以中书令领抚军监国，选正人端士在皇太子左右进行保卫。世祖都同意了。十九年，有人奏报阿里海牙自恃有功，强占降民一千八百户为奴，御史滕鲁瞻弹劾，阿里海牙辩护。朝廷派人去行御史台审问滕鲁瞻的罪。
English: It was only after listening to the emperor that the emperor stopped soliciting Japan. Chen also asked the crown prince to appoint a military overseer to supervise the country, and to choose the right person to defend the crown prince. The emperor agreed. In nineteen years, someone reported that Ali Hague had done a good deed, occupied one thousand and eight hundred households of the people as slaves, impeached Emperor Stenrugia, and defended Ali Hague. The court sent someone to the imperial court to investigate the crime of Emperor Stenrugia.

古文：相威曰： 为臣敢尔欺诳邪，滕御史何罪。 
现代文：相威说 ：为臣子的敢于欺君吗，滕御史弹劾阿里海牙有何罪？ 
English: Ai Weiwei said: If a courtier dares to deceive the emperor, what is Teng Yishi's crime in impeaching Ali Hague?

古文：即驰奏，使者竟归。
现代文：派赴行台的人只得回朝。
English: Those who were sent to Taiwan had to return to China.

古文：二十年，以疾请入觐，进译语《资治通鉴》，帝即以赐东宫经筵讲读。
现代文：二十年，因病回朝拜见皇帝，进呈蒙语《资治通鉴》，世祖赐给太子经筵讲读。
English: Twenty years later, due to illness, he returned to the court to pay homage to the emperor, and presented the Mongolian "Capitalism General Guide," which was given to the prince by the patriarch to read.

古文：拜江淮行省左丞相。
现代文：同年，拜江淮行省左丞相。
English: In the same year, Bai Jianghuaixing became the Minister of the Left of the province.

古文：二十一年，启行。四月，卒于蠡州，年四十四。
现代文：二十一年启程，四月卒于蠡州，终年四十四岁。
English: He set off in 1921, and died in April in Ganzhou, at the age of 44.

古文：讣闻，帝悼惜不已。
现代文：世祖哀悼不已。
English: The patriarch is in deep mourning.

古文：尝侍左右，掌尚方马畜，岁时挏马乳以进，色清而味美，号黑马乳，因目其属曰哈剌赤。
现代文：土土哈，其祖先本武平北折连川按答罕山部族，其国号曰钦察，土土哈祖先世为钦察国王，传至忽鲁速蛮归附于太宗。
English: Tutuha, whose ancestors hailed from the Binwuping North Orlian River Uttarakhand Mountain Tribe, has the country name of Chincha. Tutuha's ancestors were the kings of Chincha, and it is said that they were quickly annexed by Emperor Taizong.

古文：土土哈，班都察之子也。
现代文：忽鲁速蛮之子班都察随宪宗征麦怯斯，随世祖征大理、伐宋。土土哈为班都察之子。
English: Bantucha, the son of Kuru Hayamaru, followed the teachings of the founder of the Jurchen Sect, Mokgus, and followed the teachings of the founder of the Jurchen Sect, Dali, to the Song Dynasty. Tutuha was the son of Bantucha.

古文：土土哈率兵讨之，败其将脱儿赤颜于纳兰不剌，邀诸部以还。
现代文：中统元年，父子二人均随世祖北征，俱立功受赏。班都察死后，土土哈承袭父职为宫中禁卫。至元十四年，诸王脱脱木、失烈吉叛乱，土土哈率兵征讨，打败其将脱儿赤颜于纳兰不剌。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, both father and son were awarded for their contribution to the Northern Expedition. After the death of Bantu Zha, Duto Ha inherited his father's position as a palace guard. In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, when the kings of the world were defeated in the Jiajing Rebellion, Duto Ha led the army to fight, and defeated them.

古文：应昌部族只儿瓦台构乱，脱脱木引兵应之，中途遇土土哈，将战，先获其候骑数十，脱脱木乃引去，遂灭只儿瓦台。追脱脱木等至秃兀剌河，三宿而后返。
现代文：应昌部族只儿瓦台叛乱，脱脱木起兵应援，中途遇土土哈。土土哈俘其斥候骑兵数十，脱脱木逃走，土土哈灭掉只儿瓦台，追脱脱木至秃兀剌河而还。
English: In response to the rebellion of the Chang tribe, only the Wattei rebelled, and the Wotegi raised an army to support them. Halfway there, they met the Tutu-Ha. The Tutu-Ha captured dozens of their scout cavalry, the Wotegi fled, the Tutu-Ha destroyed the Wotei, and pursued the Wotegi to the Vulture River, but the Tutu-Ha survived.

古文：请以所部哈剌赤屯田畿内，诏给霸州文安县田四百顷，益以宋新附军人八百，俾领其事。
现代文：不久，又在斡欢河击败脱脱木，夺回所掠去的大帐。后来世祖把这大帐作为最高贵奖赏赐给他。十五年，大军北征，土土哈奉诏率钦察骁骑千人从行，把失烈吉赶过金山，擒扎忽台等，击败宽折哥，缴获大量羊马辎重，受世祖嘉奖。十九年，授昭勇大将军、同知太仆院事。
English: Not long after, he defeated Zhu Degu and recaptured the plundered big ledger in Zhu Huanhe. Later, the patriarch gave this big ledger to him as the most valuable award. In the 15th year, the Northern Expedition of the Great Army, led by Tu Tu Ha Bong Zhao and accompanied by a thousand horsemen, drove the lost hero Ji through Jinshan, Zha Hu Tai and so on, defeated the brother of Guang Rui, captured a large number of sheep and horses, and was commended by the patriarch. In the 19th year, he was awarded the title of General Zhaoyong and the same title of the Great Servant of the Emperor.

古文：二十一年，赐金虎符，并赐金貂、裘帽、玉带各一，海东青鹘一，水硙壹区，近郊田二千亩，籍河东诸路蒙古军子弟四千六百人隶其麾下。
现代文：二十年，改同知卫尉院事，兼管群牧司，给霸州文安县田四百顷，将宋新归附的军队八百人交他统领。二十一年，赐金虎符、近郊田二千亩及金貂、裘帽、玉带等物，将河东诸路蒙古军子弟四千六百人隶属其麾下。
English: In the 20th year, he was changed to Tongzhiweiweijunjun, concurrently in charge of the herdsmen, and was given four hundred hectares of land in Bozhou Wen'an County, and eight hundred troops attached to Song Xin were placed under his command. In the 21st year, he was given the Golden Tiger Badge, two thousand mu of land near the suburbs, as well as gold brooches, fur hats, jade belts and other items, and subordinated four thousand six hundred Mongolian soldiers to his command.

古文：二十二年，拜镇国上将军、枢密院副使。
现代文：二十二年，拜镇国上将军、枢密院副使。
English: In 1922, Baizhen was promoted to general and vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：二十三年，置钦察亲军卫，遂兼都指挥使，听以宗族将吏备官属。海都兵犯金山，诏与大将朵儿朵怀共御之。
现代文：二十三年，设置钦察亲军卫，以土土哈兼其都指挥使。海都进犯金山，朝廷命土土哈与大将军朵儿朵怀共同抵御。
English: In 233, a pro-Qinzha military guard was set up, with the commander of the army and the commander of the navy. The capital attacked the Jinshan Mountain, and the court ordered the local people and the general to jointly resist.

古文：二十四年，宗王乃颜叛，阴遣使来结也不干、胜剌哈，为土土哈所执，尽得其情以闻。
现代文：二十四年，宗王乃颜反叛，暗中派人来勾结也不干、胜剌哈，为土土哈所逮捕。土土哈先后平定也不干、哈儿鲁、也铁哥的叛乱。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, King Soen rebelled, secretly sent people to collude with Nikan and Shoseiha, and was arrested by Tutuha. Tutuha successively quelled the rebellion of Nikan, Haruru, and Tetsugo.

古文：二年秋，诸王附海都者率众来归，边民惊扰，身至玉龙罕界，馈饷安集之，导诸王岳木忽等入朝。
现代文：朝廷将钦察、康里地方自反叛者归来的军民以及钦察之散于安西的诸王部下，均交土土哈统领。土土哈奉诏随皇孙成宗抚军于北方，追杀叛王乃颜的余党，诛杀叛王兀塔海。二十五年诸王也只里受到叛王火鲁哈孙的攻击，土土哈随皇孙援救，击败兀鲁灰及叛王哈丹，收编辽左诸部。二十六年，随皇孙晋王征海都。
English: The imperial court handed over the military and civilians who returned from the rebels in Chincha and Kangri regions, as well as the subordinates of the kings scattered in Anxi from Chincha, to the rulers of Tutuha. Tutuha was ordered to follow the army of the emperor's grandson Cheng Zongfu in the north, chase the remaining party of the traitor Wang Naiyan, and kill the traitor Wang Xitahai. In the 25th year, the kings were only attacked by the traitor King Huaru Hassun, and Tutuha followed the emperor's grandson to rescue, defeat Jilu Ash and the traitor King Hardan, and collect the various parts of Liao Zu

古文：帝解御衣以赐，又赐金五十两、银千五百两、钞五万贯、轿舆各一。
现代文：二十九年秋，土土哈巡视金山，俘海都之户三千余至和林。奉诏进取乞里吉思。三十一年，成宗即位，召至京师。
English: In the autumn of the 29th year, Tsuchidoha inspected Jinshan, captured more than three thousand households in the capital and went to Warim. He ordered the capture of Qirigis. In the 31st year, Chengzong ascended to the throne and was summoned to Beijing.

古文：大德元年正月，拜银青荣禄大夫、上柱国、同知枢密院事、钦察亲军都指挥使，奉命还北边。
现代文：成宗即位后，元贞元年，命土土哈镇守北方。大德元年正月，拜银青荣禄大夫、上柱国、同知枢密院事、钦察亲军都指挥使，仍镇守北部边疆。
English: After the enthronement of Chengzong, in the first year of the Yuan Zhen, he ordered the town of Tu Tu Ha to guard the north. In the first month of the first year of the Great Germany, Bai Yin Qing Ronglu Doctor, Shangzhu Guo, Tongzhi Privy Councillor, and Qincha pro-army were commanding envoys, still guarding the northern border.

古文：二月，至宣德府，卒，年六十一。
现代文：二月在宣德卒，年六十一。
English: Xuan De passed away in February, at the age of 61.

古文：赠金紫光禄大夫、司空，追封延国公，谥武毅，后加封升王。
现代文：赠金紫光禄大夫、司空，追封延国公，谥 武毅 ，后加封升王。
English: Dr. Ziguanglu and Dr. Kuo were awarded gold, and Yan Guoguo and Zou Wuyi were posthumously awarded the title of Prince of Yan Province, and then the title of Prince of Zhengzhou.

古文：子八人，其第三子曰床兀儿。
现代文：有子八人，第三子名床兀儿。
English: They have eight children, the third of whom is a toddler.

古文：床兀儿初以大臣子奉诏从太师月儿鲁行军，战于百塔山，有功，拜昭勇大将军、左卫亲军都指挥使。
现代文：床兀儿，土土哈之第三子。奉诏随太师月儿鲁与海都叛军战于百搭山，有功，拜昭勇大将军、左卫亲军都指挥使。
English: Shoko, the third son of Tsuchiharu, accompanied Grand Master Yueerlu to fight against the rebels in Baidu Mountain. He achieved great success, and commanded both General Bai Zhaoyong and the Left Guards.

古文：大德元年，袭父职，领征北诸军帅师逾金山，攻八邻之地。
现代文：大德元年，承袭其父亲职位，率领北征诸军越过金山，攻八邻之地。
English: In the first year of the Great German Empire, he inherited his father's position and led the Northern Expeditionary Force to cross the Jinshan Mountains and attack the eight neighboring lands.

古文：八邻之南有答鲁忽河，其将帖良台阻水而军，伐木栅岸以自庇，士皆下马跪坐，持弓矢以待我军，矢不能及，马不能进。
现代文：八邻之南有答鲁忽河，其将帖良台以该河为屏障，并沿河竖立木栅，士卒皆下马持弓箭等待蒙古军到来。而蒙军的箭射不到对岸，马也过不了河。
English: In the south of the eight neighborhoods, there is the Taluhu River, which will use the river as a barrier for Teliangdae, and erect wooden fences along the river. The soldiers all dismounted and waited for the Mongolian army to arrive with bows and arrows. The Mongolian army's arrows could not reach the opposite bank, and the horses could not cross the river.

古文：床兀儿命吹铜角，举军大呼，声震林野。
现代文：床兀儿则命吹铜角，全军大喊大叫，声震山林。
English: The bedbugs blew brass horns, the whole army shouted, and the sound shook the mountain forest.

古文：其众不知所为，争起就马。
现代文：对岸敌军不知是怎么回事，都争相上马。
English: I don't know what happened to the enemy troops on the opposite bank, but they all scrambled to mount their horses.

古文：于是麾师毕渡，氵勇水拍岸，木栅漂散，因奋师驰击，追奔五十里，尽得其人马庐帐。
现代文：于是床兀儿麾军渡河，河水起浪，把敌军木栅漂散。床兀儿率师奋击，追杀五十里，俘获敌军人马帐幕。
English: Therefore, the army of the Bedouins crossed the river, the river water swelled, and the enemy troops were scattered. The Bedouins and their division fought hard, chased and killed fifty miles, and captured the enemy soldiers' horse tent.

古文：还次阿雷河，与海都所遣援八邻之将孛伯军遇。
现代文：回军至阿雷河，与海都所遣援助八邻的孛伯军相遇。
English: Returning to the Are River, they encountered the Zibo Army, which had been sent by the capital to aid its eight neighbors.

古文：河之上有高山，孛伯阵于山上，马不利下驰。
现代文：阿雷河上游有高山，孛伯军屯驻于山上，马不便下跑。
English: There are high mountains in the upper reaches of the Are River. The Zibo army is stationed on the mountain, and it is inconvenient for horses to run down.

古文：床兀儿麾军渡河蹙之，其马多颠踬，急击败之，追奔三十余里，孛伯仅以身免。
现代文：床兀儿麾师渡河进攻，孛伯军战马下山迎战多跌倒，因此被床兀儿军击败。床兀儿追击三十余里，孛伯只身逃脱。
English: Zibo's division crossed the river to attack, and Zibo's army was defeated by Zibo's army. Zibo pursued Zibo for more than 30 miles, and Zibo escaped alone.

古文：二年，北边诸王都哇、彻彻秃等潜师袭火儿哈秃之地。
现代文：大德二年，北边诸王都哇、彻彻秃等，偷袭火儿哈秃之地。
English: In the second year of Dadu, all the kings in the north, such as Duwa and Utterly Bald, secretly attacked the land of Fire and Bald.

古文：其地亦有山甚高，敌兵据之。
现代文：该地有高山，为敌兵所据。
English: The area has high mountains and is a stronghold for enemy soldiers.

古文：床兀儿选勇而善步者，持挺刃四面上，奋击，尽覆其军。
现代文：床兀儿选勇猛而善于步战的士兵，持刀棍四面向上奋击，敌全军覆没。
English: The Bedouins selected brave soldiers who were good at foot combat. They fought with swords and clubs on all sides, and the entire enemy army was wiped out.

古文：三年，入朝，成宗亲解御衣赐之，慰劳优渥，拜镇国上将军、佥枢密院事、钦察亲军都指挥使、太仆少卿。
现代文：大德三年，床兀儿回朝，成宗亲解自己身上的衣裳赐给他，优加慰劳，拜镇国上将军、佥枢密院事、钦察亲军都指挥使、太仆寺少卿。
English: In the third year of Dade's reign, when the bedridden child returned to the imperial court, Chengzong Jianlu gave him the clothes he was wearing as a consolation gift. He paid homage to Zhen Guo Shangzheng, Zou Privy Councillor, Qincha Qianjun, commander of the army, and Taipu Temple Shaoqing.

古文：复还边。
现代文：仍回边疆屯驻。
English: They are still stationed back in the border areas.

古文：是时武宗在潜邸，领军朔方，军事必咨于床兀儿。
现代文：这时武宗为太子，领军于北方，凡军事必咨询床兀儿。
English: At this time, Emperor Wuzong was the crown prince, leading the army in the north, and every military must consult the emperor.

古文：及战，床兀儿尝为先。
现代文：每有战事，床兀儿总是为先锋。
English: In every battle, the bed bugs are always in the vanguard.

古文：四年秋，叛王秃麦、斡鲁思等犯边，床兀儿迎敌于阔客之地。及其未阵，直前搏之，敌不敢支，追之，逾金山乃还。
现代文：四年秋，叛王秃麦、斡鲁思等侵犯边境，床兀儿在阔客之地迎战，乘敌军阵势还未布置好，便直至敌军前挑战，敌军抵挡不住，退却，床兀儿一直追过金山而还。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year, the traitors, including Bald Wheat and Good Ruth, invaded the border, and the bed bugs fought in the land of the rich guests. They took advantage of the enemy's position before it was arranged, and challenged the enemy's front. The enemy could not resist and retreated, and the bed bugs kept chasing the Jinshan Mountain and returned.

古文：五年，海都兵越金山而南，止于铁坚古山，因高以自保。床兀儿急引兵败之。
现代文：五年，海都兵越过金山南进至铁坚古山，居高临下。床兀儿急领兵击败了海都军。
English: In the fifth year, the capital city soldiers crossed the Jinshan Mountain and marched south to the Tiejian Ancient Mountain, where they held a high command. The soldiers led by Bedouin quickly defeated the capital city soldiers.

古文：复与都哇相持于兀儿秃之地。床兀儿以精锐驰其阵，左右奋击，所杀不可胜计，都哇之兵几尽。
现代文：又与都哇相持于兀儿秃，床兀儿以精锐骑兵冲其阵，左右夹击，杀敌不可胜计，都哇之兵几乎损失殆尽。
English: He also stood with Duwah at the battlements, and the bedridden Duwah led his elite cavalry into battle, clamping down on the left and right, killing the enemy beyond all reckoning, and the Duwah's soldiers were almost completely destroyed.

古文：武宗亲视其战，乃叹曰： 何其壮耶！
现代文：武宗亲观其战，连声称赞说： 多么豪壮！
English: Wu Zong personally watched his fight, and even said: "How magnificent!

古文：力战未有如此者。 
现代文：从未见过这样勇猛的战斗。 
English: I've never seen such a spirited fight.

古文：事闻，诏遣御史大夫秃只等即赤讷思之地集诸王军将问战胜功状，咸称床兀儿功第一。
现代文：捷报至京师，成宗遣御史大夫秃只等立即到赤纳思之地，召集诸王军将领了解战胜敌军的功劳，都认为床兀儿的功第一。
English: After the victory was reported to the Beijing division, Chengzong immediately sent the imperial historian Dr. Bal to the place of Akanasi to gather the generals of the king's army to understand the merits of defeating the enemy army. They all thought that the contribution of the bed was the first.

古文：且前与土土哈战既弗能胜，今与其子床兀儿战又无功，惟天惟祖宗意可见矣。
现代文：遣使者将功劳簿进呈皇帝，成宗再次以自己御衣遣使赐与床兀儿。大德七年秋，床兀儿入朝，成宗对他说： 卿在北部边疆，累建大功，就是用黄金把你全身都装饰起来，也不足以完全表示朕的心意。 
English: The envoy presented the book of merits to the emperor, and Chengzong once again sent an envoy in his own robes to present it to the emperor. In the autumn of the seventh year of the Great German Empire, when the emperor entered the imperial court, Chengzong said to him: "Sir, in the northern borderland, you have accumulated great achievements. Even if you decorate your whole body with gold, it is not enough to fully express my heart's desire.

古文：不若遣使请命罢兵，通一家之好，使吾士民老者得以养，少者得以长，伤残疲惫者得以休息，则亦无负太祖之所望于我子孙者矣。 
现代文：拜他为骠骑卫上将军、枢密院副使、钦察亲军都指挥使、太仆寺少卿，赐其军万人，钞四千万贯。大德七年，诸王都哇、察八儿、明里帖木儿等共同商议，认为都是太祖的子孙，相互残杀，是自毁祖宗基业，且战而无功，不如遣使罢兵，相互和好，使士民老者得以赡养，少者得以成长，伤残疲惫者得到休息，不辜负太祖对子孙的希望。遣使到朝廷求和，成宗允准。
English: In the seventh year of Dade's reign, the kings Duwa, Chabal, Mingli, Timur, and others discussed together and agreed that they were all descendants of the great-grandfather, killing each other was self-destruction of the ancestral inheritance, and the war was fruitless. It would be better to send soldiers to strike and make peace with each other, so that the elderly could be supported, the young could grow, and the injured and exhausted could rest, and live up to the great-grandfather's hope for his descendants. The envoys were sent to the imperial court to make peace, and Chengzong agreed.

古文：使至，帝许之。于是明里帖木儿等罢兵入朝，特为置驿以通往来。
现代文：于是明里帖木儿等罢兵入朝，并特设驿道驿站与朝廷通往来。
English: As a result, Mingli, Timur, and others marched into the imperial court, and a special railway station was built to provide access to the imperial court.

古文：十年，拜荣禄大夫、同知枢密院事，寻拜光禄大夫、知枢密院事，钦察左卫指挥、太仆少卿皆如故。
现代文：十年，拜床兀儿为荣禄大夫、同知枢密院事，不久又拜为光禄大夫、知枢密院事，仍为钦察左卫指挥、太仆寺少卿。
English: In ten years, Bai Jie Er was the doctor of honor, the secretary of the Privy Council of Tongzhi, and soon he was the doctor of honor, the secretary of the Privy Council of Tongzhi, and he was still the commander of Qin Chazawei and the junior secretary of Taipu Temple.

古文：贪宠过当，臣实不敢。 
现代文：成宗崩时，武宗正在浑麻出之海上，床兀儿请武宗速回朝即皇位，以副天下之望。
English: At the time of Chengzong's death, Emperor Wuzong was out on the sea, and the bedridden child asked Emperor Wuzong to return to the imperial throne as soon as possible, as he was the hope of the world.

古文：帝顾左右曰： 他人不知辞此。 
现代文：武宗即位，加拜床兀儿为平章政事，仍兼枢密、钦察左卫、太仆寺的原来职务。回防边疆，又封为容国公，授银印。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, Kabai Jocheng was appointed to the government post of Pingzhang, and still held the original posts of Privy Councilor, Qincha Zuwei, and Taipu Temple. He returned to the frontier, and was given the title of Rongguogong and the Silver Seal.

古文：别命有司置马轿赐之，俾得乘至殿门下。
现代文：至大二年入朝，加封句容郡王，改授金印，准许他乘马轿至殿门下。
English: In the second year of his sophomore year, he entered the imperial court, was given the additional title of King of Gu Rong County, was awarded a gold seal, and was allowed to ride a horse-drawn carriage to the palace gate.

古文：仁宗即位，入朝，特授光禄大夫、平章政事、知枢密院事、钦察亲军都指挥使、左卫亲军都指挥使、太仆少卿。
现代文：仁宗即位，召床兀儿入朝特授光禄大夫、平章政事、知枢密院事、钦察亲军都指挥使、左卫亲军都指挥使、太仆寺少卿。
English: When Emperor Ninsong ascended to the throne, he summoned Chojeongyeol to the imperial court to be specially conferred the titles of doctor of the Guanglu school, minister of state of Pingzhang, minister of the Privy Council, commander of the Jincha clan army, commander of the Zuoying clan army, and junior minister of the Taepu-ji Temple.

古文：延祐元年，败叛王也先不花等军于亦忒海迷失之地，遣使入报，赐以尚服。二年，败也先不花所遣将也不干、忽都帖木儿于赤麦干之地。
现代文：延元年，床兀儿在亦忒海迷失地方击败叛王也先不花等军，遣使入朝报捷。二年又在赤麦干地方击败也先不花所遣之也不干、忽都帖木儿，追逐出境。
English: In the first year of Yan, the Bedouins defeated the rebels in the lost places of the Bohai Sea and sent them to the imperial court to report the victory. In the second year, they defeated the rebels in the Red Wheat Dry Land and chased Timur out of the country.

古文：追出其境，至铁门关，遇其大军于紥亦儿之地，又败之。
现代文：至铁门关遇敌大军于札亦儿，又将他们击败。
English: At the Iron Gates, the enemy army encountered Yu Zhaier and defeated them.

古文：四年，帝念其功而悯其老，召入商议中书省事，知枢密院事。
现代文：四年，帝念其功而怜悯年老，召入朝商议中书省事，知枢密院事。
English: In the fourth year, the emperor, thinking of his merits and taking pity on his old age, summoned him to the imperial court to discuss the affairs of the cabinet and the privy council.

古文：至治二年卒，年六十三。
现代文：至治二年卒，年六十三岁。
English: After two years of treatment, he is 63 years old.

古文：后累封扬王。
现代文：后封为扬王。
English: His posthumous name was Yang Wang.

