古文：赵知礼，字齐旦，天水陇西人也。
现代文：赵知礼字齐旦，天水郡陇西人。
English: Zhao Zhili is a native of Shaanxi Province, Tianshui County.

古文：父孝穆，梁候官令。
现代文：父亲趟孝穆，梁代候官令。
English: His father, Wabi Xiaomu, was the successor to Liang.

古文：知礼涉猎文史，善隶书。
现代文：赵知礼涉猎文史，擅长隶书。
English: Zhao Zhili dabbles in literary history, and is good at inscriptions.

古文：高祖之讨元景仲也，或荐之，引为记室参军。
现代文：高祖讨伐元景仲时，有人推荐他，被引为记室参军。
English: When Gaozu fought against Yuan Jingshong, someone recommended him to join the army.

古文：知礼为文赡速，每占授军书，下笔便就，率皆称旨。
现代文：赵知礼撰文迅捷，每次授写军书，下笔便成，且都能符合旨意。
English: Zhao Zhili's writing is swift. Every time he is assigned to write a military report, the next stroke is easy and can meet the intention.

古文：由是恒侍左右，深被委任，当时计划，莫不预焉。
现代文：由此他常侍于左右，深受信任，当时的计策谋划，他无不参预其中。
English: As a result, he was often on the right and left, and was deeply trusted. He was deeply involved in the strategies and plans of the time.

古文：知礼亦多所献替。
现代文：趟知礼也较多静言进谏。
English: There are also more words of wisdom and more words of wisdom.

古文：高祖平侯景，军至白茅湾，上表于梁元帝及与王僧辩论述军事，其文并知礼所制。
现代文：高祖平定侯景，军队进到白茅湾，奏表给梁元帝，并与王僧辩论述军事，逭些奏书文章都由赵知礼所写。
English: Gaozhu subdued Houjing, the army entered Baimao Bay, the report was sent to Emperor Liang Yuan, and the military was discussed with the royal monk. All of the articles in the report were written by Zhao Zhili.

古文：侯景平，授中书侍郎，封始平县子，邑三百户。
现代文：平定侯景后，赵知礼被授予中书侍郎，封始平县子，食邑三百户。
English: After subduing Houjing, Zhao Zhili was awarded the title of "Chushushushijiro" and was given the title of "Fangshi Pingxianzi" with more than 300 households.

古文：高祖为司空，以为从事中郎。
现代文：高祖任司空，赵知礼被任命为从事中郎。
English: Gao Zu was appointed as the second-in-command, and Zhao Zhili was appointed as the middle-manager.

古文：高祖入辅，迁给事黄门侍郎，兼卫尉卿。
现代文：高祖入辅王室，赵知礼改任给事黄门侍郎，兼卫尉卿。
English: Gao Zu entered the auxiliary royal family, and Zhao Zhili was reassigned to the post of Huangmen Chamberlain and Lieutenant of the Guards.

古文：高祖受命，迁通直散骑常侍，直殿省。
现代文：高祖受命，赵知礼改任通直散骑常侍，值殿省。
English: Gaozu was ordered, and Zhao Zhili was reappointed as Tsunzhi Sanzhiyi's equerry, and assigned to the Ministry of the Throne.

古文：寻迁散骑常侍，守太府卿，权知领军事。
现代文：不久改任散骑常侍，守太府卿，权知领军事。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of straggling equerry, governor-general, and military leader.

古文：天嘉元年，进爵为伯，增邑通前七百户。
现代文：天嘉元年，赵知礼进爵为伯，增邑到七百户。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, Zhao Zhili was ennobled and increased to seven hundred households.

古文：王琳平，授持节、督吴州诸军事、明威将军、吴州刺史。
现代文：王琳被平定，授赵知礼持节、督吴州诸军事、明威将军、吴州刺史。
English: Wang Lin was subdued and awarded the Zhao Zhili Holding Festival, the military governor of Wuzhou, General Ming Wei, and the history of Wuzhou.

古文：知礼沈静有谋谟，每军国大事，世祖辄令玺书问之。
现代文：赵知礼沉静有谋略，每有军国大事，世担就会下玺书问他。
English: Zhao Zhili is quiet and has a strategy. Whenever there is a major military event, the world will ask him about it.

古文：秩满，为明威将军、太子右卫率。
现代文：任期满，任明威将军、太子右卫率。
English: At the end of his term of office, he was appointed as General Mingwei and Prince Uwei.

古文：迁右卫将军，领前军将军。
现代文：改任右卫将军，领前军将军。
English: He was reassigned to the post of General of the Right Division, leading the vanguard.

古文：六年卒，时年四十七。
现代文：丢台六年死，其时四十七岁。
English: He died six years after losing power, at the age of 47.

古文：诏赠侍中，谥曰忠。
现代文：皇上下韶赠侍中，谧号为盅。
English: He was given the title of the Emperor's courtier, and his posthumous name was Zeng.

古文：子允恭嗣。
现代文：儿子赵垒苤继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Zhao Yuanyuan.

古文：蔡景历，字茂世，济阳考城人也。
现代文：蔡景历，字茂世，济阳考城人。
English: Cai Jinglian, surnamed Mao Shixing, was born in Jiyang Kaocheng.

古文：祖点，梁尚书左民侍郎。
现代文：祖父蔡点，梁尚书左民侍郎。
English: His grandfather, Cai Dian, was Liang Shangshu's personal attendant.

古文：父大同，轻车岳阳王记室参军，掌京邑行选。
现代文：父亲基去回，轻车垦腥王记室参军，掌管京城行选。
English: When his father Ji went back, he joined the army and took charge of the capital election.

古文：景历少俊爽，有孝行。
现代文：蔡景历少时英俊豪爽，有孝顺行为。
English: Cai Jinglian was handsome and brave when he was young, and had filial piety.

古文：家贫好学，善尺牍，工草隶。
现代文：家境贫困，但好学，擅长写信札，工于草书隶书。
English: His family was poor, but he was eager to learn. He was good at writing letters on cards, and was good at cursive handwriting.

古文：解褐诸王府佐，出为海阳令，为政有能名。
现代文：出仕为诸王府佐，出任海阳令，为政有能干之名。
English: He served as the assistant of the royal palace and the commander of the navy, and was known as a capable politician.

古文：侯景乱，梁简文帝为景所幽，景历与南康嗣王萧会理谋，欲挟简文出奔，事泄见执，贼党王伟保护之，获免。
现代文：侯景叛乱，梁简文帝被侯景所幽禁，蔡景历同南康嗣王萧会理谋划，想挟持简文帝出逃，结果事情泄露，被扣执，贼党王伟保护他，使他得以获免。
English: Houjing rebellion, Emperor Liang Jianwen was imprisoned by Houjing, Cai Jinglian and King Xiao of Southern Kangxi conspired to escape with Emperor Jianwen. As a result, the matter was leaked and he was detained. The thief Wang Wei protected him and he was released.

古文：因客游京口。
现代文：于是他便客游京口。
English: So he took a casual trip to the capital.

古文：侯景平，高祖镇硃方，素闻其名，以书要之。
现代文：侯景之乱平定，高祖镇守朱方，素闻蔡景历之名，便写信邀请他。
English: After the Houjing Rebellion was quelled, Gao Zu, the town guard of Zhu Fang, who had heard of Cai Jingli, wrote a letter to invite him.

古文：景历对使人答书，笔不停缀，文不重改。
现代文：蔡景历当着高祖使者的面即回信，下笔不停，只字不改。
English: Cai Jingli replied to the letter in the presence of the emissary of Gao Zu. He kept writing and did not change a word.

古文：曰：蒙降札书，曲垂引逮，伏览循回，载深欣畅。
现代文：信裹说：幸蒙赐我书信，委曲垂问引进之事，我反复拜读，深感欢欣舒畅。
English: The letter said: I was fortunate to receive a letter from the committee inquiring about the introduction of the piece. I read it over and over again, feeling deeply happy and comfortable.

古文：窃以世求名骏，行地能致千里，时爱奇宝，照车遂有径寸。
现代文：我私下以为，世上求名马，此马要能行千里，时人爱奇宝，此宝要能光照车而明车轮的直径尺寸。
English: I secretly thought that the world's famous horse, this horse must be able to travel thousands of miles, when people love Qibao, this treasure should be able to illuminate the car and reveal the diameter size of the wheel.

古文：但《云》、《咸》斯奏，自辍《巴渝》，杞梓方雕，岂盼樗枥。
现代文：但是《云》、《咸》曲奏，《巴渝》曲自然停止，杞梓这样的优质木材已雕，难道还会要樗欐那样不能成材的树木。
English: However, the playing of "Yun," "Ham" and "Baju" naturally stopped. If such high-quality wood has been carved, would it be necessary to chop down trees that cannot be used as lumber?

古文：仰惟明将军使君侯节下，英才挺茂，雄姿秀拔，运属时艰，志匡多难，振衡岳而绥五岭，涤赣源而澄九派，带甲十万，强弩数千，誓勤王之师，总义夫之力，鲸鲵式剪，役不逾时，氛雾廓清，士无血刃。
现代文：敬仰您英明将军使君侯节下，英才挺茂，雄姿秀拔，运筹于艰难时世，志在匡合多难的天下，振兴衡、岳，安抚五岭，荡涤泼源，澄清九派，带兵甲十万，强弓手数千，宣誓为王事效力的军队，汇总勇义之夫的力量，剪除凶恶，行役不超时，廓清氛雾，士兵不血刃。
English: Admire your wise generals and emperors under the Prince's Day, the talents are strong, the stature is excellent, the operations are in a difficult time, the world is in a difficult world, revitalize Heng, Yue, pacify Wuling, cleanse the source, clarify the nine factions, bring 100,000 soldiers, thousands of strong archers, swear to be the king's army, summarize the strength of the brave men, cut off the evil, do not exceed the time limit, clear the atmosphere, and the soldiers do not have blood.

古文：虽汉诛禄、产，举朝实赖绛侯，晋讨约、峻，中外一资陶牧，比事论功，彼奚足算。
现代文：虽然汉朝诛杀吕禄、吕产两人，举朝上下是依赖绛侯，晋朝讨伐祖约、苏峻两人，裹外都靠了陶牧，按事论功，他们如何足道。
English: Although the Han Dynasty killed Lulu and Lushan, the two people who raised the dynasty up and down depended on Yan Hou, and the two people who fought Zujo and Su Jun in the Jin Dynasty relied on Tao Mu, according to the merits of the matter, and how they walked.

古文：加以抗威兗服，冠盖通于北门，整旆徐方，咏歌溢于东道，能使边亭卧鼓，行旅露宿，巷不拾遗，市无异价，洋洋乎功德政化，旷古未俦，谅非肤浅所能殚述。
现代文：加上抗威兖国，声誉通于北门，出兵征战徐地，凯歌充溢于束道，能使边亭息鼓，军队露宿，道不拾遣，市无异价，洋洋啊功德政绩教化，此乃旷古未有、无人可匹比，衹是非我肤浅之辈所能尽述。
English: In addition to resisting the intimidation of the country, the reputation of the north gate, the dispatch of troops to fight slowly, the songs of praise abound in the bund road, which can make the edge of the pavilion calm down, the army is sleeping rough, the road does not pick up, the city is no different, and the merits of the government performance are taught. This is unprecedented in ancient times, no one can match it, and the superficial generation can do their best to describe it.

古文：是以天下之人，向风慕义，接踵披衿，杂遝而至矣。
现代文：所以天下之人，向往风化而敬慕义气，相继随从袒露衣襟，众人纷杂而来了。
English: Therefore, people all over the world, yearning to be civilized and admiring the spirit of loyalty, have successively followed the lead of Lu Lu, and people have come from all over.

古文：或帝室英贤，贵游令望，齐、楚秀异，荆、吴岐嶷。
现代文：有帝室中的英贤，贵族中的令望，齐、楚之地的秀异之才，荆、吴之地的聪慧之人。
English: There are eminent persons in the imperial court, distinguished persons in the aristocracy, outstanding talents in the lands of Qi and Chu, and clever people in the lands of Jing and Wu.

古文：武夫则猛气纷纭，雄心四据，陆拔山岳，水断虬龙，六钧之弓，左右驰射，万人之剑，短兵交接，攻垒若文鸯，焚舰如黄盖，百战百胜，貔貅为群。
现代文：武夫则猛气纷纭，雄心据四方，陆地可拔山岳，水中可断蛟龙，强力之弓，左右驰射，万人之剑，短兵交接，攻打堡垒犹如文鸯，焚烧船舰如同黄盖，百战百胜，可与猛兽为群。
English: The warriors, on the other hand, are full of vigor, ambitious in all directions, can pull up mountains on land, can break dragons in water, powerful bows, shoot left and right, swords of ten thousand people, short soldiers, attack fortresses as if they were papier-mâché, burn ships like yellow covers, win a hundred battles, and can be a group with ferocious beasts.

古文：文人则通儒博识，英才伟器，雕丽晖焕，摛掞绚藻，子云不能抗其笔，元瑜无以高其记，尺翰驰而聊城下，清谈奋而嬴军却。
现代文：文人乃通儒博识，英才伟器，雕饰华丽光彩焕发，执笔为文词藻绚丽，子云不能与其文笔相比，元瑜的文章没有他的水平高，他的书信传布可使聊城下，他的清谈昂奋可使嬴军退。
English: A man of letters is a man of profound knowledge and a great talent. His carvings are gorgeous and radiant. His penmanship is brilliant. Ziyun cannot be compared to his penmanship. Yuan Yu's articles are not as high-level as his. His letters can make people talk about the city, and his clear talk can make the Han army retreat.

古文：复有三河辩客，改哀乐于须臾，六奇谋士，断变反于倏忽。
现代文：又有三河辩客，即刻间可改哀乐，六奇谋士，短时内可判断变反。
English: There are also the Three Rivers Debaters, who can instantly change mourning music, and the Six Wondrous Counsellors, who can judge changes within a short time.

古文：治民如子贱，践境有成，折狱如仲由，片辞从理。
现代文：治理百姓犹如子贱，入境便有成，判决狱案如同仲由，片言只语即能服理。
English: To govern the common people is to treat them as inferior, to enter a country is to succeed, to judge a prison case is to act as a mediator, and to be able to serve justice is to speak only a few words.

古文：直言如毛遂，能厉主威，衔使若相如，不辱君命。
现代文：率直而言如同毛遂，能使主人之威更为严厉，接受使命犹如相如，决不会有辱君命。
English: To put it bluntly, just like the hair, it can make the master's authority more severe, accept the mission as if it were the same, and will never humiliate the king's life.

古文：怀忠抱义，感恩徇己，诚断黄金，精贯白日，海内雄贤，牢笼斯备。
现代文：怀忠抱义，感恩徇己，忠诚可断黄金，精诚可贯日月，海内的英雄贤士，都已聚合完备。
English: Loyalty and righteousness, gratitude and selflessness, loyalty and gold, sincerity and the sun and moon, heroes and sages at sea, have all been gathered and perfected.

古文：明将军彻鞍下马，推案止食，申爵以荣之，筑馆以安之，轻财重气，卑躬厚士，盛矣哉！
现代文：英明的将军卸鞍下马，推桌停食，申理爵位而使他们荣耀，建筑馆合以使他们安定，轻财富，重节气，谦恭厚待将士，将一定兴盛一定兴盛!
English: Wise generals dismount, push the table and stop eating, claim knighthoods to make them glorious, build buildings to make them stable, light wealth, heavy solar terms, and humbly and respectfully wait for soldiers, will surely prosper!

古文：盛矣哉！抑又闻之，战国将相，咸推引宾游，中代岳牧，并盛延僚友，济济多士，所以成将军之贵。
现代文：又听说，战国将相，都推举引荐宾客从游，中代的封疆大吏，同时广泛延请幕僚朋友，使人才济济，从而成就了将军的显贵。
English: It was also heard that the Warring States generals and consuls-general all recommended and introduced guests from the Middle Ages, and at the same time extensively invited staff members and friends to make talents abound, thus achieving the grandeur of the general.

古文：但量能校实，称才任使，员行方止，各尽其宜，受委责成，谁不毕力。
现代文：祇要能量才核实，按才能派任职位，方圆行止，各尽其所能，受委任责其成，谁会不毕尽其力。
English: Only energy is required for verification, and positions are assigned according to ability, and all parties should do their best, and those who are appointed should do their best, and those who are not should do their best.

古文：至如走贱，亡庸人耳。
现代文：至于我这微贱之人，衹不过是一庸人而已。
English: As for me, a lowly person, I am nothing but a mediocrity.

古文：秋冬读书，终惭专学，刀笔为吏，竟阙异等。
现代文：秋冬时读书，终惭祇是专学，刀笔为吏，毕竟缺少异等条件。
English: When studying in autumn and winter, in the end, it is only special education, and the knife and pen are the officials. After all, there is a lack of unequal conditions.

古文：衡门衰素，无所闻达，薄宦轻资，焉能远大。
现代文：隐居陋屋布衣素食，无所闻达，鄙薄官宦，看轻资产，怎么可能前程远大。
English: A recluse who lives in a shabby house, wears rags, eats vegetarian food, knows nothing, despises officials, and looks down on assets, how can he have a great future?

古文：自阳九遘屯，天步艰阻，同彼贵仕，溺于巨寇，亟邻危殆，备践薄冰。
现代文：自从厄运屯聚，天子举步艰难，同那些贵族仕宦一样，几乎溺命于巨寇之手，极为危险，全如同踩在薄冰之上。
English: Since the bad luck has gathered, Tianzi has had a hard time walking, like those aristocrats, almost drowning in the hands of the giant, extremely dangerous, all like stepping on thin ice.

古文：今王道中兴，殷忧启运，获存微命，足为幸甚，方欢饮啄，是谓来苏。
现代文：如今王道中兴，隐忧去除，开启运命，获存微命，实足为幸运，方能欢饮啄食，如同招致复苏。
English: Now that the royal road is flourishing, hidden worries have been removed, fortunes have been opened, and petty lives have been preserved, it is indeed fortunate to be able to eat and drink happily, as if to bring about recovery.

古文：然皇銮未反，宛、洛芜旷，四壁固三军之馀，长夏无半菽之产，遨游故人，聊为借贷，属此乐土，洵美忘归。
现代文：然而皇车未返，宛、洛荒芜空旷，四围固然有三军之余，漫长的夏天却无半点粮食之产，到远方朋友处一游，暂时借贷一些，居此乐土，实在美而忘归。
English: However, the imperial carriage did not return, and Wan and Luo were deserted and empty. Although there were three armies around, there was no grain production in the long summer. I visited distant friends and temporarily borrowed some money. I lived in this paradise, which was really beautiful and unforgettable.

古文：窃服高义，暂谒门下，明将军降以颜色，二三士友假其馀论，菅蒯不弃，折简赐留，欲以鸡鹜厕鸳鸿于池沼，将移瓦砾参金碧之声价。
现代文：我私怀高义，暂时拜谒将军门下，明将军您赐我以厚遇，一些士友假以余论，不弃鄙草，下书简赐留我，要把鶸骛留在鸳鸯鸿雁所居的池塘，把瓦砾移为如同金碧的声价。
English: I have a high sense of justice, temporarily bowing to the general's door, knowing that you have given me a warm welcome. Some judges and friends have not abandoned the grass, but have left me with a letter to leave the dragonfly in the pond where the geese live, and move the rubble to be like a golden price.

古文：昔折胁游秦，忽逢盼采，檐簦入赵，便致留连，今虽羁旅，方之非匹，樊林之贲，何用克堪。
现代文：昔虞卿曲胁游秦国，忽逢有人盼采，远行进入赵国，便留连不去，今我虽也在羁旅之中，然而与虞卿无法相比，藩篱之林中的龟，再怎么动也没用。
English: Once upon a time, Yu Qing Qu Guo traveled to Qin, but when someone was looking for gold, he traveled to Zhao and stayed there. Now, although I am also on a journey, I cannot be compared to Yu Qing Guo, a turtle in the forest of the fence, and it is useless to move.

古文：但眇眇纤萝，凭乔松以自耸，蠢蠢轻蚋，托骖尾而远骛。
现代文：但是，渺渺纤细的藤萝，可以凭藉高大的乔松而自耸，蠢蠢欲动的小蚋虫，可以藉托骏马的尾巴而远行。
English: However, the infinitesimally slender lily of the valley can raise itself up with the help of the tall Scots pine, and the small ladybug, which moves with great agility, can travel far away by holding the tail of a horse.

古文：窃不自涯，愿备下走，且为腹背之毛，脱充鸣吠之数，增荣改观，为幸已多。
现代文：我不自量力，愿为足下之走卒，且成为腹背之毛，聊充鸣吠之数，增加荣光而有所改观，那就够荣幸了。
English: I do not measure myself, I am willing to be a pawn underfoot, and become the hair on the back of the abdomen, talk about the number of barking, increase glory and make a difference, that is honor enough.

古文：海不厌深，山不让高，敢布心腹，惟将军览焉。
现代文：海不会厌深，山不会让高，敢向您吐露心腹之言，恭请将军一览。
English: The sea will not be bored, the mountain will not be high, dare to confide in you, respectfully invite the general to take a look.

古文：高祖得书，甚加钦赏。
现代文：高祖获得书信，倍加钦佩赞赏。
English: Gaozu received the letter with admiration and appreciation.

古文：仍更赐书报答，即日板征北府中记室参军，仍领记室。
现代文：于是又赐书信报答，当授为征北府中记室参军，仍领记室。
English: As a result, he was also given a letter of reward, and when he was assigned to join the army as a recorder of the Northern Expeditionary Force, he still received the recorder.

古文：衡阳献王昌时为吴兴郡，昌年尚少，吴兴王之乡里，父老故人，尊卑有数，高祖恐昌年少，接对乖礼，乃遣景历辅之。
现代文：衡阳献王陈昌此时为吴兴郡太守，陈昌年纪还小，吴兴是王的乡里，父老及朋友，都尊卑有别，高祖恐怕陈昌年纪小，接人待物上有失礼节，于是派蔡景历辅助他。
English: At this time, Chen Chang, the king of Hengyang, was the governor of Wuxing County. Chen Chang was still young, and Wuxing was Wang's hometown. Fathers and sons and friends had different levels of respect. Gao Zu was afraid that Chen Chang was young, and it was impolite to receive someone, so he sent Cai Jingli to assist him.

古文：承圣中，授通直散骑侍郎，还掌府记室。
现代文：承圣年中，授蔡景历通直散骑侍郎，仍掌府记室。
English: In the year of his consecration, Cai Jinglian was awarded the title of Zanzhi Zanzhi, still in charge of the Government Records Office.

古文：高祖将讨王僧辩，独与侯安都等数人谋之，景历弗之知也。
现代文：高祖将要讨伐王僧辩，祇与侯安都等几人谋划，蔡景历不知此事。
English: Gao Zu was going to fight Wang Sangfen, and several people including Zi and Hou Andu were planning to do so, but Cai Jingli did not know about it.

古文：部分既毕，召令草檄，景历援笔立成，辞义感激，事皆称旨。
现代文：策划部署完毕，召蔡景历起草檄文，他提笔即成，辞义感人激奋，所述皆能符合旨意。
English: After the planning and deployment was completed, Cai Jinglian was summoned to draft the obituary, and he wrote it immediately. The words were moving and exciting, and everything said was in line with the will.

古文：僧辩诛，高祖辅政，除从事中郎，掌记室如故。
现代文：王僧辩被杀，直祖辅政，蔡景历任从事中郎，掌记室照旧。
English: Wang Sangye was killed, the direct ancestor of Fu Zheng, Cai Jing successively engaged in the middle, and the recording room remained as before.

古文：绍泰元年，迁给事黄门侍郎，兼掌相府记室。
现代文：叁睦元年，改任给事黄门侍郎，兼掌相府记室。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was reassigned to the post of Yellow Gate Attendant, and also in charge of the Office of the Prime Minister.

古文：高祖受禅，迁秘书监，中书通事舍人，掌诏诰。
现代文：高祖受禅，蔡景历改任秘书监，中书通事舍人，掌韶诰。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen, Cai Jingli was appointed as the secretary supervisor, the Chinese calligrapher was dismissed, and the palms of his hands were chopped.

古文：永定二年，坐妻弟刘淹诈受周宝安饷马，为御史中丞沈炯所劾，降为中书侍郎，舍人如故。
现代文：丞定二年，因妻弟塑瞳诈受眉宜圭饷马事牵连，被御史中丞沈炯弹劾，降职为中书侍郎，舍人照旧。
English: In the second year of the Joseon Dynasty, he was implicated in a horse race because his wife's younger brother had cheated on his wife. He was impeached by the Grand Historian, the Middle Joseon Emperor, and demoted to the position of the Secretary of the Middle Historian, but remained loyal to his wife.

古文：三年，高祖崩，时外有强寇，世祖镇于南皖，朝无重臣，宣后呼景历及江大权、杜棱定议，乃秘不发丧，疾召世祖。
现代文：丞室三年，直担崩，其时外有强寇，世祖镇守在直照，朝廷没有重臣，宣后召蔡景历及江大举、丝蕉定议，决定秘而不发丧，迅速召世祖还朝。
English: In the third year of the reign of the emperor, the direct heir died. At that time, there were strong foreign invaders, the ancestor was in direct control, and the imperial court had no senior vassals. After the announcement, Cai Jingli and Jiang Daju and the silk plant were summoned, and the decision was made not to mourn secretly, and the ancestor was quickly summoned to return to the court.

古文：景历躬共宦者及内人，密营敛服。
现代文：蔡景历亲自与宦官及宫女秘密准备殡殓之服。
English: Cai Jingli himself, together with eunuchs and concubines, secretly prepared the funeral clothes.

古文：时既暑热，须治梓宫，恐斤斧之声或闻于外，仍以蜡为秘器。
现代文：其时天气已经很热，必须治办棺材，恐怕斧凿之声会传到外面，于是以蜡为秘器。
English: At that time, the weather was already very hot, and the coffin had to be prepared. I was afraid that the sound of the axe would be heard outside, so I used wax as a secret weapon.

古文：文书诏诰，依旧宣行。
现代文：文书诏诰，仍照旧宣读发布。
English: The document was read aloud and released as before.

古文：世祖即位，复为秘书监，舍人如故。
现代文：世祖登位，蔡景历又为秘书监，舍人依旧。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, Cai Jingli became the secretary-supervisor, and the position remained vacant.

古文：以定策功，封新豊县子，邑四百户。
现代文：由于定策有功，封蔡景历新丰题王，食邑四百户。
English: Due to the success of the decision-making, Cai Jingli, the new king of Fengqi, has 400 households in the food village.

古文：累迁散骑常侍。
现代文：又改任散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted several times, and rose to the rank of straggler.

古文：世祖诛侯安都，景历劝成其事。
现代文：世祖杀堡堂都，基墓历劝成其事。
English: The founder of the world killed the capital of the castle, and the foundation of the tomb calendar persuaded him to do so.

古文：天嘉三年，以功迁太子左卫率，进爵为侯，增邑百户，常侍、舍人如故。
现代文：天嘉三年，因功改任太子左卫率，进爵为侯，增邑百户，常侍、舍人照旧。
English: In the third year of Tianjia, he was promoted to the position of the Prince of the Left Division of the Guards for his meritorious service. He was ennobled as a marquis, his territory increased by a hundred households, and his attendants and retainers remained the same.

古文：六年，坐妻兄刘洽依倚景历权势，前后奸讹，并受欧阳武威饷绢百匹，免官。
现代文：天嘉六年，因妻兄刘洽依仗他的权势前后奸淫讹诈等事牵连，同时又接受欧阳武威饷绢百匹，被免去官职。
English: Six years ago, Tianjia was removed from his official position because his wife's brother, Liu Cai, was implicated in adultery, blackmail and other things while relying on his power, and at the same time accepted hundreds of horses from Ouyang Wuwei.

古文：废帝即位，起为镇东鄱阳王谘议参军，兼太府卿。
现代文：废帝登位，起用蔡景历为镇束鄱阳王谘议参军，兼太舟卿。
English: When the deposed emperor ascended the throne, he appointed Cai Jingli as the adviser to the king of Shanyang to advise him to join the army, and also as Taizhouqing.

古文：华皎反，以景历为武胜将军、吴明彻军司。
现代文：华皎反叛，命蔡景历为武胜将军、吴明彻军司。
English: Huayu rebelled and ordered Cai Jingli to be General Wu Sheng and Wu Mingche to be the military commander.

古文：皎平，明彻于军中辄戮安成内史杨文通，又受降人马仗有不分明，景历又坐不能匡正，被收付治。
现代文：华皎被平定，吴明彻在军中擅自杀了安成内史杨文通，同时受降人马匹兵器不分明，蔡景历又因不能将这些事匡正而受连累，被收禁治罪。
English: Huayuan was pacified, Wu Mingcher committed suicide in the army, and Yang Wentong, a member of the Ancheng Inner Court, and Cai Jingli were arrested and punished for failing to rectify the situation.

古文：久之，获宥，起为镇东鄱阳王谘议参军。
现代文：好久以后，才获宽赦，起用为镇束鄱阳王谘议参军。
English: It was not until much later that he was pardoned and appointed to serve as an adviser to King Benyang.

古文：高宗即位，迁宣惠豫章王长史，带会稽郡守，行东扬州府事。
现代文：高宗登位，改任宣惠豫章王长史，兼带会稽郡太守，行东扬州府事。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and was appointed as Xuan Hui, Yu Zhang, Wang Changshi, and concurrently as the county magistrate of Hefei County, conducting the affairs of the East Yangzhou prefecture.

古文：秩满，迁戎昭将军、宣毅长沙王长史、寻阳太守，行江州府事，以疾辞，遂不行。
现代文：任期满，改任戎昭将军、宣毅长沙王长史、寻阳太守，行江州府事，因疾病辞却，便不行。
English: At the end of his term of office, he can be reappointed as General Rong Zhao, Xuan Yi Changsha Wang Changshi, and Huan Yang Dazhu, and carry out the affairs of Jiangsu Province, but if he resigns due to illness, it is not possible.

古文：入为通直散骑常侍、中书通事舍人，掌诏诰，仍复封邑。
现代文：后入朝为通直散骑常侍、中书通事舍人，掌韶诰，仍恢复封邑。
English: After entering the imperial court, he became a regular attendant of the imperial cavalry and a secretary of the Chinese imperial court, but he still retained his fief.

古文：迁太子左卫率，常侍、舍人如故。
现代文：又改任太子左卫率，常侍、舍人照旧。
English: He was also reassigned to the position of the Prince's Left Bodyguard, but his duties as a regular attendant and retainer remained the same.

古文：太建五年，都督吴明彻北伐，所向克捷，与周将梁士彦战于吕梁，大破之，斩获万计，方欲进图彭城。
现代文：太建五年，都督吴明彻北伐，所向披靡，与北周将领梁士彦战于吕梁，大败之，斩首俘获万计，正欲进军囤谋彭城。
English: In the fifth year of the Tai Jian period, the governor Wu Ming led the Northern Expedition and was victorious. He fought against the Northern Zhou general Liang Shihyan in Luliang and was defeated. He was decapitated and captured. He was about to march into Zhimou Pengcheng.

古文：是时高宗锐意河南，以为指麾可定，景历谏称师老将骄，不宜过穷远略。
现代文：此时高宗锐意进取河南，以为军旗指向即可平定，蔡景历进谏，说军队疲劳，将领骄傲，不宜过分图远谋。
English: At this time, Gao Zong was determined to advance into Henan, thinking that the military banner could be leveled by pointing upwards. Cai Jinglian advanced into the mountains, saying that the army was tired, the generals were proud, and it was not appropriate to go too far.

古文：高宗恶其沮众，大怒，犹以朝廷旧臣，不深罪责，出为宣远将军、豫章内史。
现代文：高宗憎恶他沮丧众人之心，大怒，但还是看在他是朝廷旧臣，不深究罪责，让他出为宣速将军、豫章内史。
English: Gaozong detested him, frustrated the hearts of the people, and was furious, but he still regarded him as an old court official and did not deeply investigate his guilt, and let him appear as Xuanfeng General and Yuzhang Naishi.

古文：未行，为飞章所劾，以在省之日，赃污狼藉，帝令有司按问，景历但承其半。
现代文：尚未行，被匿名诬告文书弹劾，告他在官署之时，贪污受贿，名声不检，高宗命令有司按察查问，蔡景历祇承认其中一半。
English: He was impeached by an anonymous false accusation document, accusing him of corruption and bribery when he was in the government office, and his reputation was not in order. Gaozong ordered a department to investigate, and Cai Jingli only admitted half of them.

古文：于是御史中丞宗元饶奏曰： 臣闻士之行己，忠以事上，廉以持身，苟违斯道，刑兹罔赦。
现代文：于是御史中丞宗元饶上奏道： 臣听说士之行事，以忠事上，以廉律身，如果违背此道，刑罚加于身而不能赦免。
English: As a result, Mishi Chujo Sogen Rao made the following speech: "Minister, I have heard that a scholar's actions should be based on loyalty and integrity. If you violate this principle, you will be punished and cannot be pardoned.

古文：谨按宣远将军、豫章内史新豊县开国侯景历，因藉多幸，豫奉兴王，皇运权舆，颇参缔构。
现代文：现宣远将军、豫章内史新丰县开国侯蔡景历，凭多幸机遇，参与兴王，有关皇运权舆大事，他颇多参与营造。
English: Cai Jinglian, the current Xuanyuan general and the founder of Xinfeng County in the History of Yuzhang, took advantage of the opportunity to participate in the construction of Xingwang. He participated in the construction of many important events related to the imperial transportation.

古文：天嘉之世，赃贿狼藉，圣恩录用，许以更鸣，裂壤崇阶，不远斯复。
现代文：天嘉之时，他贪污受贿名声不检，圣上恩准录用，允许他改弦更鸣，封邑高阶，不久又恢复原样。
English: At the time of Tian Jia, he had a reputation for corruption and bribery. Sheng Shang En was allowed to hire him, allowed him to change the chords and sing more, and gave him a higher rank. He soon returned to his original position.

古文：不能改节自励，以报曲成，遂乃专擅贪污，彰于远近，一则已甚，其可再乎？
现代文：但他不能改节自励，以报答曲成之恩，仍然专擅贪污，名播远近，一次已足够了，难道还可再次吗?
English: But he can't change his ways to repay the favor of Qu Chengrun. He is still good at corruption and famous broadcasting. Once is enough. Can he do it again?

古文：宜置刑书，以明秋宪。
现代文：宜置以刑书，以明宪章法律。
English: It is advisable to use the Penal Code as a guide and the Charter as the law.

古文：臣等参议，以见事免景历所居官，下鸿胪削爵土。
现代文：臣等参议，以所见事免去蔡景历的所居官，交付鸿胪，削去爵土。
English: The vassals and councillors decided to remove Cai Jingli's official residence from him, hand him over to the emperor, and cut off his peerage.

古文：谨奉白简以闻。 
现代文：谨恭奉奏章听闻。 
English: I humbly submit to the music.

古文：诏曰 可。 
现代文：高宗下诏 可 。
English: Gao Zong issued an edict.

古文：于是徙居会稽。
现代文：于是蔡景历移居会稽。
English: As a result, Cai Jingli's emigration was stopped.

古文：及吴明彻败，帝思景历前言，即日追还，复以为征南鄱阳王谘议参军。
现代文：到吴明彻失败，高宗想到蔡景历此前所说，当日追传他回还，又任他为征南鄱阳王谘议参军。
English: After Wu Mingcher's defeat, Gaozong thought of Cai Jingli's previous statement that he would send him back on the same day, and also appointed him to advise the king of the south to join the army.

古文：数日，迁员外散骑常侍，兼御史中丞，复本封爵，入守度支尚书。
现代文：数日后，改任员外散骑常侍，兼御史中丞，恢复原先的封爵，入为守度支尚书。
English: A few days later, he was reassigned to the position of non-commissioned officer, horseback rider, and imperial secretary, restored his original knighthood, and was awarded the title of Shudo Shishangshu.

古文：旧式拜官在午后，景历拜日，适值舆驾幸玄武观，在位皆侍宴，帝恐景历不豫，特令早拜，其见重如此。
现代文：旧式拜官一般在午后，蔡景历拜官那天，正值高宗驾临玄武观，在位诸官都侍奉陪宴，高宗怕蔡景历不能参加，特命令他提早拜官，足见高宗对他的看重。
English: On the day of Cai Jingli's visit, it was time for Gaozong to arrive at the Xuanwu Temple. All the reigning officials were serving the banquet. Gaozong was afraid that Cai Jingli would not be able to attend, so he ordered him to visit the temple early. This shows Gaozong's importance to him.

古文：是岁，以疾卒官，时年六十。
现代文：此年，蔡景历因疾病死于官任上，其时六十岁。
English: In the same year, Cai Jingli died of illness in office, at the age of sixty.

古文：赠太常卿，谥曰敬。
现代文：赠太常卿，谧号敬。
English: He was given the title of Tai Chang Ching.

古文：十三年，改葬，重赠中领军。
现代文：太建十三年，改葬，重赠中领军。
English: After 13 years of construction, the leader of the Central Army was re-buried and re-gifted.

古文：祯明元年，配享高祖庙庭。
现代文：祯明元年，配享高祖庙庭。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, they were allotted the garden of Gao Zu Temple.

古文：二年，舆驾亲幸其宅，重赠景历侍中、中抚将军，谥曰忠敬，给鼓吹一部，并于墓所立碑。
现代文：祯明二年，皇帝亲自驾临其宅第，重赠蔡景历侍中、中抚将军，谧号忠敬，赐给鼓吹一部，并在墓所立下碑石。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, the emperor himself came to his residence and re-gifted Cai Jingli, the general of the middle-ranking and middle-ranking officials, the honorary title of loyalty, and gave a part of it to the preacher, and set up a stone at the tomb.

古文：景历属文，不尚雕靡，而长于叙事，应机敏速，为当世所称。
现代文：蔡景历撰文，不崇尚雕凿华丽，而长于叙事，应对机敏神速，为当世所称道。
English: As a writer, Cai Jingli does not advocate ornate carving, but is good at narration, coping with agility and speed, which is praised by the world.

古文：有文集三十卷。
现代文：有文集三十卷传世。
English: Thirty volumes of the anthology have been handed down to posterity.

古文：刘师知，沛国相人也。
现代文：刘师知，沛国相人。
English: Liu Shizhi, Pei Guo Xiangren.

古文：家世素族。
现代文：家庭世代为普通氏族。
English: Generations of families belong to ordinary clans.

古文：祖奚之，齐晋安王谘议参军，淮南太守，有能政，齐武帝手诏频褒赏。
现代文：祖父刘奚之，北齐晋安王谘议参军，淮南太守，能于政事，齐武帝亲下韶书多次赞赏褒扬他。
English: His grandfather Liu Yanzhi, the Northern Qi Jinan King, advised him to join the army, the Huainan Empress Dowager, was able to do politics, and Emperor Qiwu personally praised and commended him many times.

古文：父景彦，梁尚书左丞、司农卿。
现代文：父亲刘景彦，梁代尚书左丞、司农卿。
English: His father, Liu Jingyan, was the second son of Liang Dynasty's Shangshu Zuo and the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：师知好学，有当世才。
现代文：刘师知好学，有当世之才。
English: Teacher Liu is eager to learn and has a talent for the modern world.

古文：博涉书史，工文笔，善仪体，台阁故事，多所详悉。
现代文：博览书生，工于文笔，善于仪礼体制，台合中的种种过往之事，他都十分了解。
English: He is a well-read student, good at writing, good at the ceremonial system, and he is very familiar with all kinds of past events in Taiwan.

古文：梁世历王府参军。
现代文：梁代任王府参军。
English: Liang was appointed as the king's representative to join the army.

古文：绍泰初，高祖入辅，以师知为中书舍人，掌诏诰。
现代文：绍泰初年，高祖入朝为辅，命刘师知为中书舍人，掌诏诰。
English: In the first year of Shao Tai, Gao Zu entered the imperial court as an auxiliary, and ordered Liu Shizhi to be the scribe of the middle school, and to hold the imperial scepter.

古文：是时兵乱之后，礼仪多阙，高祖为丞相及加九锡并受禅，其仪注并师知所定焉。
现代文：此时正是兵乱之后，礼仪多阙失，高祖为丞相，加九锡，并受禅，礼仪注意事项等都由刘师知所定。
English: It was at this time, after the war, that most of the etiquette was lost. Gao Zu was the prime minister of the Joseon Dynasty, and he taught Zen. The etiquette precautions were all determined by Liu Shizhi.

古文：高祖受命，仍为舍人。
现代文：高祖受命，刘师知仍为舍人。
English: Gao Zu was appointed, but Liu Shizhi remained reluctant.

古文：性疏简，与物多忤，虽位宦不迁，而委任甚重，其所献替，皆有弘益。
现代文：刘师知性格粗疏简略，与事物多逮逆，虽然官位不改，但所受委任很重，他所作静言进谏，都很有裨益。
English: Liu Shizhi's character is coarse and concise, and he is often at odds with things. Although he does not change his official position, his appointment is very heavy, and his quiet speech is very useful.

古文：及高祖崩，六日成服，朝臣共议大行皇帝灵座侠御人所服衣服吉凶之制，博士沈文阿议，宜服吉服。
现代文：到直担崩，六日成服，朝廷大臣们共同商议大行皇帝灵位侠御人所穿衣服吉凶的制度，博士边塞因提议，应穿吉服。
English: After the death of Emperor Taizong and the completion of the funeral ceremony on the 6th, the ministers of the imperial court jointly discussed the system of auspicious and inauspicious clothes to be worn by the Emperor Taizong's spiritual emissaries. Dr. Bian Sein suggested that they should wear auspicious clothes.

古文：师知议云： 既称成服，本备丧礼，灵筵服物，皆悉缟素。
现代文：刘面翅提议说： 既然称成服，本是备丧礼，灵位筵席上所穿衣服，都该是白色丧服。
English: Liu Mianling suggested, "Since it is a ceremonial dress, it is originally a funeral preparation, and the clothes worn at the spiritual banquet should be white funeral clothes.

古文：今虽无大行侠御官事，按梁昭明太子薨，成服侠侍之官，悉著縗斩，唯著铠不异，此即可拟。
现代文：今日虽然没有大行侠御官的事，但按照凿伐昭明太子薨，成服侍御之官，全都穿丧服，惟独穿锁甲的人不同，这就可以参照。
English: Today, although there is no grand procession of chivalrous officials, but according to the chiseling of Zhao Ming, the crown prince, into the service of the officials, they all wear mourning clothes, but the people who wear locking armor are different, which can be referred to.

古文：愚谓六日成服，侠灵座须服縗绖。 
现代文：我认为六成服，侍御灵位的人必须穿丧服。 
English: I think that 60% of the time, those who serve the dead must wear mourning clothes.

古文：中书舍人蔡景历亦云： 虽不悉准，按山陵有凶吉羽仪，成服唯凶无吉，文武侠御，不容独鸣玉珥貂，情礼二三，理宜縗斩 。
现代文：中书舍人蔡景历也说： 虽然没有明确的准则，但按照山陵有凶吉的仪礼，成服惟凶无吉，文武侠御者，不容许独穿佩有玉珥的貂服，情礼如此，理应穿丧服。 
English: Cai Jinglian, a scholar of Chinese classics, also said: Although there is no clear standard, according to the etiquette of the mountains and hills, there is no good luck, only bad luck, and it is not allowed for a warrior to wear a dress with a jade necklace alone. Such is the etiquette, it is natural to wear mourning clothes.

古文：中书舍人江德藻、谢岐等并同师知议。
现代文：中书舍人江德藻、谢岐等都赞同刘师知的提议。
English: Jiang Demao, Xie Qi, and others who are interested in Chinese calligraphy agree with Liu Shicheng's proposal.

古文：文阿重议云 检晋、宋《山陵仪》： 灵舆梓宫降殿，各侍中奏。 
现代文：沈文阿又提议说： 翻阅晋、宋时的《山陵仪》载： 灵车棺材降临殿上，各侍中奏。 
English: Shen Wen'a also proposed: "Read the "Mountain Mausoleum" of the Jin and Song dynasties: the hearse and coffin came down to the hall, and all the attendants played.

古文：又《成服仪》称： 灵舆梓宫容侠御官及香橙。 又检《灵舆梓宫进止仪》称： 直灵侠御吉服，在吉卤簿中。 
现代文：又《成服仪》称： 灵车棺材容许侠御官及香橙，又翻阅《灵舆梓宫进止仪》称： 值灵侠御穿吉服，在吉仪仗队中。
English: Also, "Coming-of-age ceremony" said: the hearse coffin allows the chivalrous officer and the fragrant orange to enter, and the "Coming-of-age ceremony" said: the chivalrous knight on duty wears auspicious clothing and is in the auspicious ceremony guard.

古文：又云： 梓宫侠御衰服，在凶卤簿中。 
现代文：又载： 棺材侠御穿丧服，在凶仪仗队中。 
English: And again: The coffin knight is dressed in mourning clothes, in the fierce honor guard.

古文：是则在殿吉凶两侠御也。 
现代文：造就是在殿有吉凶两侠御的规矩。 
English: Therefore, there is a rule of good luck and bad luck in the palace.

古文：时以二议不同，乃启取左丞徐陵决断。
现代文：此时因为双方提议不同，便启请左丞徐陵决断。
English: At this time, because the proposals of the two sides were different, they asked Zu Rong and Xu Ling to make a decision.

古文：陵云： 梓宫祔山陵，灵筵祔宗庙，有此分判，便验吉凶。
现代文：徐陵说： 棺材拊于山陵，灵位筵席拊于宗庙，有此分别判断，便可验之以吉凶。
English: Xu Ling said: The coffin is placed in the mountain mausoleum, and the spiritual seat is placed in the ancestral temple. Judging this separately, it can be verified as lucky or unlucky.

古文：按山陵卤簿吉部伍中，公卿以下导引者，爰及武贲、鼓吹、执盖、奉车，并是吉服，岂容侠御独为縗鸑邪？
现代文：按《山陵卤簿》吉部伍中，公卿以下导引的人，带及武贲、鼓吹、执盖、奉车，都是吉服，哪容许侠御独穿丧服?
English: According to "The Book of Mountains and Tombs," the people who were guided by nobles in the Yoshibe class, including nobles, were all dressed in auspicious clothing, including armor, drums, shields, and chariots. Who would allow a knight to wear only mourning clothes?

古文：断可知矣。
现代文：此便断然可知了。
English: That much is clear.

古文：若言公卿胥吏并服縗苴，此与梓宫部伍有何差别？
现代文：若说公卿胥吏都穿丧服，造与棺材的部曲行伍者有什么区别?
English: If it is said that court nobles and officials all wear mourning clothes, what is the difference between a funeral procession and a coffin procession?

古文：若言文物并吉，司事者凶，岂容衽绖而奉华盖，縗衣而升玉辂邪？
现代文：如说文物都要吉，而司事的人凶，难道容许穿丧服而奉帝王伞盖，穿丧服而升帝王之车吗?
English: If the cultural relics are all auspicious, but the officials are evil, is it permissible to wear mourning clothes and hold the emperor's umbrella, and wear mourning clothes and ascend the emperor's car?

古文：同博士议。 
现代文：我赞同博士的提议。 
English: I agree with the proposal of dr.

古文：师知又议曰： 左丞引梓宫祔山陵，灵延祔宗庙，必有吉凶二部，成服不容上凶，博士犹执前断，终是山陵之礼。
现代文：刘师知又提议说： 左丞相引棺材拊于山陵，灵位筵席拊于宗庙，必然有吉凶二部，成服不容上凶，博士还是坚持以前的决断，终究是山陵之礼。
English: Liu Shizhi also proposed that: the coffin led by Zuo Zheng should be placed in the mausoleum, and the spiritual seat should be placed in the ancestral temple. There must be two parts of good luck and bad luck, and the dress should not be on the bad side. The doctor still adhered to the previous decision, after all, it was a mausoleum ceremony.

古文：若龙驾启殡，銮舆兼设，吉凶之仪，由来本备，准之成服，愚有未安。
现代文：如果龙驾出殡，皇车兼设，吉凶的礼仪，本来就已具备了，以成服为准，我有所不安。
English: If the dragon is driving out of the funeral, the royal car is also set up, and the etiquette of good luck and bad luck is already available, I am somewhat uneasy.

古文：夫丧礼之制，自天子达。
现代文：丧礼的制度，白天子已达。
English: The system of funerals is outdated.

古文：按王文宪《丧服明记》云： 官品第三，侍灵人二十。
现代文：按王文宪《丧服明记》载： 官品第三，侍灵人二十。
English: According to Wang Wenxian's "Funeral Apparel Record," the following was recorded: the third official dress, and twenty attendants.

古文：官品第四，下达士礼，侍灵之数，并有十人。
现代文：官品第四，下达士礼，侍灵之数，并有十人。
English: The fourth official award, the number of attendants, and there are ten people.

古文：皆白布袴褶，著白绢帽。
现代文：他们都是穿白布衣服，戴白绢帽。
English: They were all dressed in white cloth and wore white felt hats.

古文：内丧女侍数如外，而著齐縗。
现代文：内丧女侍数目同外侍一样，而都穿缉边缝齐的丧服。
English: The number of maids of honour is the same as the number of ushers, but they all wear a full-length dress.

古文：或问内外侍灵是同，何忽縗服有异？
现代文：有人间内外侍灵者都一样，为何丧服有差异?
English: If there are the same attendants both inside and outside, why are there differences in funeral attire?

古文：答云，若依君臣之礼，则外侍斩，内侍齐。
现代文：答道，如按君臣之礼，那么外侍是丧服不缝衣旁和下边，内侍是丧服缉边缝齐。
English: She replied that according to the etiquette of monarchs and ministers, then the outer attendant is a mourning dress without seams on the sides and bottom, and the inner attendant is a mourning dress with seams all around.

古文：顷世多故，礼随事省。
现代文：近来世道多变，礼仪便随事而省。
English: In recent times, manners have changed a lot, and etiquette has become less important.

古文：诸侯以下，臣吏盖微，至于侍奉，多出义附，君臣之节不全，縗冠之费实阙，所以因其常服，止变帽而已。
现代文：诸侯以下的臣吏都微不足道，至于侍奉，多出于义附，君臣的礼节不全，丧帽的费用实缺，所以便因袭常服，衹是变换帽子而已。
English: As for the servants, they are mostly out of loyalty, the etiquette of the monarchs and ministers is not complete, and the cost of losing the hat is really lacking, so it is just a change of hat due to the attack of the regular clothes.

古文：妇人侍者，皆是卑隶，君妾之道既纯，服章所以备矣。 
现代文：妇人的侍者，都是卑微的奴隶，君妾的道既然纯正，穿衣服的章法也就具备了。 
English: A woman's attendants are all lowly slaves. Since the way of the prince and concubine is pure, the rules for wearing clothes are also available.

古文：皇朝之典，犹自不然，以此而推，是知服斩。
现代文：皇朝的典章，还有不同，以此类推，可以知道是穿不缝衣旁和下边的丧服。
English: There are also differences in the imperial regalia, for example, it can be known that the mourning clothes are worn next to and under the seamless garment.

古文：彼有侍灵，则犹侠御，既著白帽，理无彤服。
现代文：那儿有侍灵者，就犹如侠御，既戴白帽，照理不会穿朱红色的衣服。
English: If there are attendants there, they are like knights. They wear white hats, but not scarlet robes.

古文：且梁昭明《仪注》，今则见存，二文显证，差为成准。
现代文：而且梁代昭明《仪注》，现在还见存，二文均有显证，差不多可成为准则。
English: Moreover, Liang Dai Zhaoming's "Commentary on Etiquette" is still extant, and there is clear evidence in both texts, which can almost become a standard.

古文：且礼出人情，可得消息。
现代文：况且礼出于人情，可以得到消息。
English: Moreover, out of courtesy, information can be obtained.

古文：凡人有丧，既陈延几，繐帷灵屏，变其常仪，芦箔草庐，即其凶礼。
现代文：凡人有丧事，既陈设了筵席机制，摆了总帷与灵屏，变化原来的常规礼仪，用芦箔与草庐，即是凶礼。
English: Ordinary people have funerals, and since the table mechanism has been set up, the general curtain and the spirit screen have been placed, the original routine etiquette has been changed, with reed foil and straw straw, that is, the evil ritual.

古文：堂室之内，亲宾具来，齐斩麻缌，差池哭次，玄冠不吊，莫非素服。
现代文：堂室之内，亲人与宾客都来了，穿各种形式的丧服，哭的次序不齐，黑色冠者不吊，无不是丧服。
English: Inside the church hall, relatives and guests have come, wearing various forms of mourning clothes, crying in different order, black crowns are not hanging, all are mourning clothes.

古文：岂见门生故吏，绡縠间趋，左姬右姜，红紫相糅？
现代文：哪有见门生旧吏，穿丝绸服装而来，左是姬右是妾，红色与紫色相糅合?
English: Where have you seen the protégés of the old officials, wearing silk clothing, the left is the concubine, the right is the concubine, and the red and purple are intertwined?

古文：况四海遏密，率土之情是同，三军缟素，为服之制斯一。
现代文：何况四海之内为皇帝驾崩，普遍的情感是相同的，三军服丧，穿丧服之制应是一致的。
English: What's more, since the emperor has passed away, the general feeling is the same across the four seas. The three armies will wear mourning clothes, and the system of wearing mourning clothes should be the same.

古文：逐使千门旦启，非涂垩于彤闱，百僚戾止，变服粗于硃，而耀金在列，鸣玉节行，求之怀抱，固为未惬，准以礼经，弥无前事。
现代文：于是使千门早晨开启，不涂白粉于红色宫闱，百官来到，变穿粗服为大红官袍，且队列中金光闪耀，佩戴的玉饰发声而行，此种情状求之于怀抱，固然不合心意，准之以礼经，从无此等事。
English: Thus, thousands of doors are opened in the morning, white powder is not painted on the red palanquin, hundreds of officials come, change into coarse clothes to big red robes, and the gold shines in the queue, and the jade jewelry worn makes a sound. This kind of situation is sought in the bosom, although it is not the intention, it is allowed by the etiquette, and there is never such a thing.

古文：岂可成服之仪，譬以山陵之礼？
现代文：怎么可以拿成服之仪，来譬之以山陵之礼?
English: How can you compare the ceremony of a completed dress to the ceremony of a tomb?

古文：葬既始终已毕，故有吉凶之仪，所谓成服，本成丧礼，百司外内，皆变吉容，侠御独不，何谓成服？
现代文：葬礼的过程既然已结束，所以有吉凶的仪礼之别，所谓成服，本是成丧礼，百司外与内，都变为吉容，侠御独独不这样，哪裹可说是成服?
English: Since the funeral process has ended, there is a distinction between auspicious and inauspicious rituals. The so-called ceremonial dress is originally a funeral dress. Both the outside and the inside are transformed into auspiciousness. If it is not so, how can it be said to be a ceremonial dress?

古文：若灵无侠御则已，有则必应縗服。 
现代文：如灵位没有侠御就算了，有侠御就必须穿丧服。 
English: If there is no knight in the spiritual position, it does not matter, if there is a knight, he must wear mourning clothes.

古文：谢岐议曰： 灵延祔宗庙，梓宫祔山陵，实如左丞议。
现代文：谢岐提议说： 灵位筵席拊于宗庙，棺材拊于山陵，实如左丞相所议。
English: Xie Qi proposed: "The funeral service should be held in the ancestral temple, and the coffin should be placed in the mountain mausoleum, just as Zuo Rongxian suggested.

古文：但山陵卤簿，备有吉凶，从灵舆者仪服无变，从梓宫者皆服苴縗。
现代文：但是，山陵仪仗队，都有吉凶之分，从灵车的人仪服不变，从棺材的人都穿丧服。
English: However, the mountain and mausoleum guard of honor has both good and bad points. From the hearse, the person's ceremonial clothes remain unchanged, and from the coffin, people wear mourning clothes.

古文：爰至士礼，悉同此制，此自是山陵之仪，非关成服。
现代文：至于士礼，全同于此种制度，这自然是山陵的仪礼，与成服没有关系。
English: As for the etiquette, it is all the same as this system, which is naturally the etiquette of the mountains and has nothing to do with clothing.

古文：今谓梓宫灵扆，共在西阶，称为成服，亦无卤簿，直是爰自胥吏，上至王公，四海之内，必备縗绖，案梁昭明太子薨，略是成例，岂容凡百士庶，悉皆服重，而侍中至于武卫，最是近官，反鸣玉纡青，与平吉不异？
现代文：今天说棺材灵屏，都在西阶，称为成服，也没有仪仗队，应当是从小官到王公，四海之内都必须备丧服。像梁代昭明太子薨，即是现成的例子，哪能容许士人庶民都穿重丧之服，而侍中到武卫，尤其是近官，倒反而穿佩玉饰的华丽服装，与平时的吉礼无异?
English: Today, the coffin shrouds are all on the west steps, known as the finished clothes, and there is no guard of honor. It should be from the minor official to the prince, within the four seas must be prepared funeral clothes. Like the Liang Dynasty, Prince Zhao Ming, that is, a ready-made example, which can allow the nobles and commoners to wear mourning clothes, and the attendants to the guards, especially the officials, but instead wear gorgeous clothes decorated with jade, no different from the usual auspicious?

古文：左丞既推以山陵事，愚意或谓与成服有殊。
现代文：左丞相既然推之以山陵的事，我以为或许是说与成服不一样。
English: Since Minister Zuo pushed the matter of the mountain mausoleum, I thought that perhaps it was different from the clothing.

古文：若尔日侠御，文武不异，维侍灵之人，主书、宣传、齐干、应敕，悉应不改。 
现代文：如果当天侠御同文武百官不一样，那么侍灵的人，主书、宣传、齐干、应敕的人，都应不改。 
English: If there is a difference between the chivalry and martial arts officials on the same day, then the attendants of the spirit, the main writers, the propagandists, the coordinators, and the attendants should not change.

古文：蔡景历又议云： 侠御之官，本出五百，尔日备服居庐，仍于本省，引上登殿，岂应变服貂玉、若别摄馀官，以充簪珥，则尔日便有不成服者。
现代文：蔡景历又提议说： 侠御宫，本出五百，当天穿戴好丧服待于屋中，仍在本省被引上登殿，岂可改变成穿貂玉之服?如另外兼摄其他官，从而佩戴簪珥之饰，那么当日便有不成服的人了。
English: Cai Jinglian also proposed: "For the Palace of Chivalry, out of the original five hundred, on the day of wearing the funeral clothes to stay in the house, still in the province to be brought to the palace, can it be changed to wear the dress of the emeralds? If you also take pictures of other officials, thus wearing the ornaments of the emeralds, then there will be people who are not satisfied with the dress on that day.

古文：山陵自有吉凶二议，成服凶而不吉，犹依前议，同刘舍人。 
现代文：山陵自有吉凶二议，成服凶而不吉，还是应按照前议，我赞同刘盒人的意见。 
English: Mountains and mausoleums have their own fortunes and misfortunes. It is better to follow the previous suggestion. I agree with Liu Boxing's opinion.

古文：德藻又议云： 愚谓祖葬之辰，始终永毕，达官有追赠，须表恩荣，有吉卤簿，恐由此义，私家放斅，因以成俗。
现代文：丝堕趸又提议说： 我认为祖葬的时辰，其始终已经完毕，达官有追赠，须表以恩荣，有吉仪仗队，恐怕即由此义，私家都模仿学之，因而成了习俗。
English: "I think that the time of ancestor burial has always been over, and the dignitaries have a posthumous gift, must show honor, and have a good luck honor guard. I am afraid that in this sense, private families have imitated and learned from it, and thus it has become a custom.

古文：上服本变吉为凶，理不应犹袭纨绮。
现代文：上服本是变吉为凶，理不应还穿绸缎服装。
English: Wearing silk and satin should not be confused with wearing silk and satin.

古文：刘舍人引王卫军《丧仪》及检梁昭明故事，此明据已审，博士、左丞乃各尽事衷，既未取证，须更询详，宜谘八座、詹事、太常、中丞及中庶诸通袁枢、张种、周弘正、弘让、沈炯、孔奂。 
现代文：刘舍人引用王卫军《丧仪》和梁伐昭明太子故事，这明显的证据已足以审视，博士、左丞相是各尽自己的衷心，既然没有什么取证，就应再详细问询，可向八座、詹事、太常、中丞及中庶诸通袁枢、张种、周弘正、至递、边堕、壬速咨询。 
English: Liu Sheren quoted Wang Weijun's "Funeral Rites" and the story of Prince Liangfa Zhaoming, which is clear evidence enough to examine. The doctor and the left minister are each doing their best. Since there is no evidence, you should inquire in detail. You can consult with the eight, Zhanji, Taizhong, middle and junior high school students, such as Yuan Zu, Zhang Zhe, Zhou Hongzheng, Zhisheng, Bian Pu, and Nanzhai.

古文：时八座以下，并请： 案群议，斟酌旧仪，梁昭明太子《丧成服仪注》，明文见存，足为准的。
现代文：此时八座以下同时请求： 按照大家所议，斟酌参考旧仪，梁昭塱主王《丧成服仪注》，明文现存，足可为准。
English: At this time, the following eight concurrent requests: In accordance with everyone's discussion, we should carefully refer to the old ceremony, King Liang Zhaohui's "Note on the Funeral Service," which is clearly extant and can be used as a reference.

古文：成服日，侍官理不容犹从吉礼。
现代文：成服那天，侍官理不该仍从吉礼。
English: On the day of graduation, the attendant should not still be from the auspicious.

古文：其葬礼分吉，自是山陵之时，非关成服之日。
现代文：那些葬礼分吉，自是在山陵之时，不关成服。
English: Those funerals, even when they are in the mountains, are not complete.

古文：愚谓刘舍人议，于事为允。 
现代文：我们以为刘盒厶的提议，适合于此事。 
English: We believe that Liu Yingtao's proposal is suitable for this matter.

古文：陵重答云： 老病属纩，不能多说，古人争议，多成怨府，傅玄见尤于晋代，王商取陷于汉朝，谨自三缄，敬同高命。
现代文：徐陵又答道： 我年老病重，不能多说，古人有争议，多成怨家，傅宝在置伐受指责，王直在龃被陷害，我自应闭，恭敬听从高命。
English: Xu Ling also replied: I am old and seriously ill, I can't say more, the ancients had disputes, most of them became bitter enemies, Fu Bao was accused of setting up a camp, Wang Zhi was framed in Shandong, I should shut up and respectfully obey the high command.

古文：若万一不死，犹得展言，庶与朝贤更申扬搉。 
现代文：如我万一不死，还得申言，希望与朝廷贤人再次伸张商榷。 
English: If by any chance I do not die, I have to say that I hope to have discussions with the wise men of the imperial court again.

古文：文阿犹执所见，众议不能决，乃具录二议奏闻，从师知议。
现代文：沈文阿也还坚执己见，众人之议无法决断，于是只好详绿双方之议上奏，最后依从刘师知的提议。
English: Shen Wen'a also persisted in his opinion, and the opinions of everyone could not be decided, so he had no choice but to listen to the opinions of both sides, and finally follow Liu Shihai's proposal.

古文：寻迁鸿胪卿，舍人如故。
现代文：不久改任鸿胪卿，舍人照旧。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Hongyuqing, and continued to work as before.

古文：天嘉元年，坐事免。
现代文：天嘉元年，因事牵连被免职。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, he was removed from his post due to implication.

古文：初，世祖敕师知撰《起居注》，自永定二年秋至天嘉元年冬，为十卷。
现代文：当初，世担命型魉翅撰写《起居注》，自丞童二年秋到丢台元年冬，共十卷。
English: In the beginning, the world's guardian of human life, Zou Ying, wrote "A Note on Living," a total of ten volumes from the autumn of his second year to the winter of his first year.

古文：起为中书舍人，复掌诏诰。
现代文：被起用为中书舍人，又掌韶诰。
English: He was employed as a teacher of Chinese calligraphy, and also as a carpenter.

古文：天康元年，世祖不豫，师知与尚书仆射到仲举等入侍医药。
现代文：天康元年，世祖不适，刘师知与尚书仆射型倥垒等人入宫侍服医药。
English: In the first year of Tian Kang, when the founder of the dynasty was not feeling well, Liu Shizhi and Shang Shuxu's servant, Jia Jia, and others entered the palace to serve medicine.

古文：世祖崩，预受顾命。
现代文：世担崩，他预受顾命。
English: With the world on the brink of collapse, his life was in his hands.

古文：及高宗为尚书令，入辅，光大元年，师知与仲举等遣舍人殷不佞矫诏令高宗还东府，事觉，于北狱赐死。
现代文：到高宗为尚书令，入宫辅助，丝太元年，刘翅迦舆到乸!等派舍人垦丕堡伪颁韶书命产塞回还塞卢，事情被发觉，刘师知在北狱被赐死。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Gao, Gao Zong issued an imperial edict, and Liu Yingjia, who was an aide to Emperor Gao in his entry into the palace, sent a false imperial edict to the emperor to return Liu Shizhi to Xilu. The matter was discovered, and Liu Shizhi was sentenced to death in the Northern Prison.

古文：父达，梁太学博士。
现代文：泌，会稽郡业人。父亲腿，龇太学博士。
English: His father was a doctor of Chinese medicine, and his mother was a nurse.

古文：岐少机警，好学，见称于梁世。
现代文：谢些少年机警，好学，被称誉于梁代。
English: Xie Xie was a quick-witted boy, eager to learn, and was praised in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：为尚书金部郎，山阴令。
现代文：任尚书金部郎，旦壁令。
English: He was appointed to the post of Shosho Kinburo (Minister of the Ministry of Finance) and Tanchikei.

古文：侯景乱，岐流寓东阳。
现代文：谴叛乱时，谢岐流寓于束匮。
English: At the time of the rebellion, Xie Qi's lineage resided in Sokang.

古文：景平，依于张彪。
现代文：腿被平定，泌依附于曲。
English: The leg is subdued, the secretion adheres to the melody.

古文：彪在吴郡及会稽，庶事一以委之。
现代文：锤在及盒擅，各种事务一并委之于谢岐。
English: The hammer is good at the hammer and the box is good at the box, and all kinds of affairs are entrusted to Xieqi.

古文：彪每征讨，恒留岐监郡，知后事。
现代文：张彪每次征讨，常留谢岐监督郡内，知后方之事。
English: Zhang Biao always stayed in Xieqi to supervise the affairs of the county and the Chihuahua side.

古文：彪败，高祖引岐参预机密，以为兼尚书右丞。
现代文：张彪败，高祖引谢岐参预机密，任命他为兼尚书右丞。
English: Zhang Biao was defeated, Gao Zu quoted Xie Qishan pre-secrecy and appointed him as concurrently Shang Shujuo.

古文：时军旅屡兴，粮储多阙，岐所在干理，深被知遇。
现代文：其时军事行动屡次兴发，粮食储备多缺，谢岐处处妥善办理，深受赏识。
English: At that time, military operations repeatedly occurred, grain reserves were often lacking, and thanks were given for the proper handling of everything, which was deeply appreciated.

古文：永定元年，为给事黄门侍郎、中书舍人，兼右丞如故。
现代文：永定元年，任给事黄门侍郎、中书舍人，兼右丞照旧。
English: In the first year of the Yongding era, he was appointed to the position of Huangmen waiter, middle school teacher, and U.S.A. as before.

古文：天嘉二年卒，赠通直散骑常侍。
现代文：天嘉二年去世，赠通直散骑常侍。
English: Tian Jia passed away in the second year of his reign, and was given the title of Zhi Xuan Ji Changzhi.

古文：岐弟峤，笃学，为世通儒。
现代文：谢岐弟谢崤，专心好学，是当世的通儒。
English: Xie Qi's younger brother, Xie Yao, was a dedicated student and a modern-day Confucian scholar.

古文：史臣曰：高祖开基创业，克定祸乱，武猛固其立功，文翰亦乃展力。
现代文：史臣曰：直担开创基业，平定祸乱，勇猛武将固然立了功，文翰之人也出了不少力。
English: Shichen said: Directly responsible for creating the foundation, calming the calamity, the brave generals certainly made contributions, and the literate people also made a lot of efforts.

古文：赵知礼、蔡景历早识攀附，预缔构之臣焉。
现代文：赵翅搂、墓基历很早即知攀附，是参预营造之臣。
English: Zhao Yingqin and Tomb Keeper knew very early that they would be attached, and they were the vassals who participated in the construction.

古文：刘师知博涉多通，而暗于机变，虽欲存乎节义，终陷极刑，斯不智矣。
现代文：型面知博涉广通，却不识机变，虽想存名于节义，却最终陷于极刑，此乃不聪明的表现。
English: It is an unintelligent performance to know a lot about a wide range of things, but do not know how to change, and although you want to keep your name in the meaning, you end up in capital punishment.

