古文：诗曰： 衣锦尚絅 ，恶其文之著也。
现代文：《诗经》说： 内穿锦缎，外罩麻衣。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Wear brocade on the inside, and linen on the outside."

古文：故君子之道，暗然而日章；小人之道，的然而日亡。
现代文：这是为了避免锦衣花纹大显露，所以，君子的道深藏不露而日益彰明；小人的道显露无遗而日益消亡。
English: This is in order to prevent the brocade pattern from being revealed, so the gentleman's way is deeply hidden and increasingly revealed; the villain's way is fully revealed and increasingly disappears.

古文：君子之道，淡而不厌、简而文、温而理。知远之近，知风之自，知微之显。可与入德矣。
现代文：君子的道，平淡而从不厌倦，简朴而内有文采，温和而有条理，懂得远从近开始的道理，懂得风气有源头的道理，懂得微小的事物一定会显露的道理，这样，就可以进入道德的境界了。
English: The way of a gentleman is plain and never tiresome, simple and inwardly poetic, gentle and methodical, understanding the principle of starting from far and near, understanding the principle of the origin of customs, and understanding the principle that small things will certainly be revealed. In this way, you can enter the realm of morality.

古文：诗云： 潜虽伏矣，亦孔之昭。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 潜藏虽然很深，但依然清晰可见。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Although the lurking is very deep, it is still clearly visible.

古文：故君子内省不疚，无恶于志。
现代文：所以君子自我反省没有愧疚，没有恶念头存于心志之中。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should introspect himself without feeling guilty.

古文：君子之所不可及者，其唯人之所不见乎。
现代文：君子的德行之所以高于一般人，大概就是在这些不被人看见的地方吧？
English: The reason why the virtue of a gentleman is higher than that of an ordinary person is probably in these invisible places, isn't it?

古文：诗云： 相在尔室，尚不愧于屋漏。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 看你独自在室内的时候，也能无愧于神明。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Look, when you are alone in the room, you can be worthy of the gods.

古文：故君子不动而敬，不言而信。
现代文：所以，君子就是在没做什么事的时候，也能表现出他的恭敬，就是在没有对人说什么的时候也是信实的。
English: Therefore, a gentleman can show his respect even without action, and his loyalty even without words.

古文：诗曰： 奏假无言，时靡有争。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 默默无声地祈祷，现在不再有纷争。 
English: The Book of Psalms says: Pray in silence, for there is no strife now.

古文：是故君子不赏而民劝，不怒而民威于鈇钺。
现代文：所以，君子不用赏赐，老百姓也会互相对勉；不用发怒，老百姓也会像看到刀斧刑具一样畏惧。
English: Therefore, without rewarding the gentleman, the people will be encouraged, without anger, the people will be more afraid than seeing the spade.

古文：诗曰： 不显惟德，百辟其刑之。 
现代文：《诗经》说， 大大地弘扬美好德行，诸侯百官们都来效法。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "Greatly promote good morals, and hundreds of officials will follow your example."

古文：是故君子笃恭而天下平。
现代文：所以，君子笃实恭敬就能使天下太平。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: I remember the virtues of King Wen, but I do not proclaim them.

古文：诗云： 予怀明德，不大声以色。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 我怀有光明的品德，不用厉声厉色。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: I have a bright character, I don't need to be harsh.

古文：子曰： 声色之于以化民，末也。 诗曰： 德輶如毛。 
现代文：孔子说： 用厉声厉色去教育老百姓，是最拙劣的行为。 《诗经》说： 德行轻如毫毛。 
English: Confucius said: "It is the most unskillful act to educate the common people with harsh words and harsh actions." "The Book of Songs" said: "Virtue is as light as a feather."

古文：毛犹有伦。 上天之载，无声无臭。 
现代文：轻如毫毛还是有物可比拟。 上天所承载的，既没有声音也没有气味。 
English: Light as a feather, it is still a thing to be compared. What is carried by the heavens has neither sound nor smell.

古文：至矣。
现代文：这才是最高的境界啊！
English: This is the highest level!

