古文：圣王之立法也，其赏足以劝善，其威足以胜暴，其备足以必完。
现代文：圣明的君主确立的法治，赏赐足以鼓励善行，威严足以制服暴乱，措施足以保证法制完全贯彻下去。
English: The rule of law, established by a saintly monarch, has rewards enough to encourage good deeds, majesty enough to subdue riots, and measures enough to ensure that the rule of law is fully implemented.

古文：治世之臣，功多者位尊，力极者赏厚，情尽者名立。
现代文：太平盛世的臣子，功劳多的地位尊贵，竭尽能力的人得到优厚的赏赐，尽心尽忠的人名声得以树立。
English: The courtier of the Taiping and prosperous times, the status of honorable with many merits, the person who has exhausted his ability has received a generous reward, and the reputation of the person who has devoted his heart to loyalty has been established.

古文：善之生如春，恶之死如秋，故民劝极力而乐尽情，此之谓上下相得。
现代文：好的事物就像春天的草木一样蓬勃生长，坏的事物就像秋叶枯萎凋谢，所以民众奋勉竭力，乐于尽忠，这就叫君臣相宜。
English: Good things grow vigorously like spring plants, and bad things wither like autumn leaves, so the people work hard and are willing to be loyal, which is why it is suitable for kings and ministers.

古文：上下相得，故能使用力者自极于权衡，而务至于任鄙；战士出死，而愿为贲、育；守道者皆怀金石之心，以死子胥之节。
现代文：君臣相宜，所以能使出力的人自觉地服从法度竭尽全力，务求能像大力士任鄙那样；战士们出生入死，情愿像勇士孟贲、夏育那样；维护法治的人都怀有忠贞之心，抱定伍子胥尽忠守节那样的献身精神。
English: Therefore, it is appropriate for the king and the ministers to make those who can make efforts consciously obey the laws and do their best to be able to be like the strongman Renmei; soldiers are born and die, and they would like to be like the warriors Meng Qi and Xia Yu; people who uphold the rule of law have a loyal heart and hold the dedication spirit like the loyalty festival.

古文：用力者为任鄙，战如贲、育，中为金石，则君人者高枕而守己完矣。
现代文：出力的人都愿意成为像任鄙那样的力士，战士们都愿意向孟贪、夏育，维护法治的人都心如金石，做君主的就可以高枕无忧而确保国家政权的原则也就完备了。
English: The people who exert power are willing to become wrestlers like Ren Zhen, the soldiers are willing to fight against Meng Qian and Xia Yu, and the people who safeguard the rule of law are like precious stones. As a monarch, you can rest easy and the principle of ensuring state power is complete.

古文：古之善守者，以其所重禁其所轻，以其所难止其所易。故君子与小人俱正，盗跖与曾、史俱廉。
现代文：古代善于守道的君主，用重刑禁止轻罪，用人们不敢违反的法令制止人们容易犯的罪行，所以君子和小人都安分守法，盗跖这样的贪鄙者与曾参、史这样的廉正之士都同样廉洁。
English: In ancient times, emperors, who were good at keeping the law, used heavy sentences to prohibit minor crimes, and used laws that people did not dare to violate to stop crimes that people were likely to commit. Therefore, both gentlemen and villains obeyed the law, and those who were greedy, such as thieves, were just as clean as those who were honest, such as Zeng Zheng and Shi Zheng.

古文：何以知之？
现代文：怎么知道是这样的呢？
English: How do you know this?

古文：夫贪盗不赴溪而掇金，赴溪而掇金则身不全；贲、育不量敌则无勇名，盗跖不计可则利不成。
现代文：贪婪的盗贼不去深涧拾金，因为去深涧拾金，身体就难以保全。孟贲、夏育不估量敌人的力量，就得不到勇武的名声；盗跖不预计可行性，就不可能成功。
English: Greedy thieves do not go deep to find gold, because to go deep to find gold, it is difficult to preserve the body. Meng Qi and Xia Yu do not estimate the strength of the enemy, they do not get the reputation of bravery; thieves do not expect feasibility, it is impossible to succeed.

古文：明主之守禁也，贲、育见侵于其所不能胜，盗跖见害于其所不能取，故能禁贲、育之所不能犯，守盗跖之所不能取，则暴者守愿，邪者反正。
现代文：明君掌握禁令，孟贲、夏育在不该取胜的地方取胜，就要受到制裁；盗历在不该窃取的地方去窃取，就要受到惩罚；所以能禁止孟贲、夏育在不该取胜的地方取胜，防止盗跖在不该窃取的地方窃取。这样一来，凶猛的人就得小心了，为非作歹的人也得改邪归正。
English: Ming Jun has the ban in his hands. If Meng Xuan and Xia Yu win in a place where they should not win, they will be sanctioned. If a thief steals in a place where he should not steal, he will be punished. Therefore, he can prohibit Meng Xuan and Xia Yu from winning in a place where they should not win, and prevent thieves from stealing in a place where they should not steal. In this way, ferocious people have to be careful, and those who do evil have to be reformed.

古文：大勇愿，巨盗贞，则天下公平，而齐民之情正矣。
现代文：新梦德人小心谨慎了，大盗贼正派了，天下就会公正太平，民众的思想也就归于正道了。
English: If the people of Xinmende are careful and prudent, and the big thieves are decent, the world will be just and peaceful, and the people's thoughts will return to the right path.

古文：人主离法失人，则危于伯夷不妄取，而不免于田成、盗跖之祸。
现代文：君主背离法治失掉人心，即使遇上像伯夷那样清廉的人也会出现危险，更难避免田成、盗跖这类人的祸害了。
English: If the monarch deviates from the rule of law and loses the hearts of the people, even if he encounters someone as incorruptible as Bo Yi, there will be danger, and it will be even more difficult to avoid the scourge of people like Tiancheng and Zhaojun.

古文：何也？
现代文：为什么？
English: What is it for?

古文：今天下无一伯夷，而奸人不绝世，故立法度量。
现代文：当下天下没有一个伯夷，而奸诈的人确实不断出现，所以要确立法律制度。
English: At present, there is not a single traitor in the world, and treacherous people are indeed constantly emerging, so it is necessary to establish a legal system.

古文：度量信则伯夷不失是，而盗跖不得非；法分明则贤不得夺不肖，强不得侵弱，众不得暴寡。
现代文：坚决按照法制标准办事，那么，不但伯夷不会改变好行为，而且盗跃也就不能为非作歹了。法制分明，贤人不能攫取不贤的人，强大的不能侵扰弱小的，人多的不能欺负人少的。
English: If one resolutely acts in accordance with the standards of the legal system, then not only will he not change his good behavior, but he will not be able to do evil by stealing. The legal system is clear, the wise cannot capture the unwise, the powerful cannot intrude on the weak, and the many cannot bully the few.

古文：托天下于尧之法，则贞士不失分，奸人不侥幸。
现代文：把天下置于尧的法令管制中，忠贞的人就不会失去本分，奸邪的人就难存侥幸心理。
English: If the whole world is placed under the control of strict laws and regulations, those who are loyal will not lose their duty, and those who are treacherous will not have a chance.

古文：寄千金于羿之矢，则伯夷不得亡，而盗跖不敢取。
现代文：把干金置于后羿的神箭保护下，伯夷就不会丢失了，盗跖也不敢窃取了。
English: Put the dry gold under the protection of the sacred arrows of Houyi, Bo Yi will not be lost, and thieves will not dare to steal.

古文：尧明于不失奸，故天下无邪；羿巧于不失发，故千金不亡。
现代文：尧懂得不放过坏人，所以天下没有奸邪；拜技艺高超、箭不虚发，所以干金不会丢失。
English: The dragonfly knows not to let bad people go, so there is no evil in the world; the dragonfly is highly skilled, the arrow is not false, so the dry gold will not be lost.

古文：邪人不寿而盗跖止。
现代文：这样一来，奸人就活不长了，盗跖也不敢再活动了。
English: In this way, the traitor will not live long, and the thief will not dare to move again.

古文：如此，故图不载宰予，不举六卿；书不著子胥，不明夫差。孙、吴之略废，盗跖之心伏。
现代文：这样一来，乱臣贼子，暴君贤臣，就都不会出现了。所以书籍里就不会记载宰予，不会提到六卿，也不会记载伍子胥，不会提到夫差了，孙武、吴起的谋略就会被废弃，盗跖的贼心也会被收伏。
English: In this way, the ruffian thief, the tyrant wise minister, will not appear. Therefore, the books will not record the slaughter, will not mention the six nobles, will not record Wu Zixuan, will not mention the husband is poor, the strategy of Sun Wu and Wu Zhi will be abandoned, and the thief's heart will be subdued.

古文：人主甘服于玉堂之中，而无瞋目切齿倾取之患；人臣垂拱手金城之内，而无扼腕聚脣嗟唶之祸。
现代文：君主在王宫里过着甘食美衣的生活，再不会结下怒目切齿的仇恨，遭到篡权颠覆的灾难；臣下在都城中垂衣拱手，无忧无虑，再不会遭到意外的灾祸，激起强烈的怨恨。
English: The monarch in the royal palace lives a life of indulgent food and beautiful clothes, and will no longer bear the hatred of angry eyes and teeth, and suffer the disaster of usurpation and subversion; the vassals in the capital will be carefree, and will no longer be subjected to unexpected disasters, and arouse strong resentment.

古文：服虎而不以柙，禁奸而不以法，塞伪而不以符，此贲、育之所患，尧、舜之所难也。
现代文：制服老虎而不用笼子，禁止奸邪而不用刑法，杜绝虚假而不用符信，这是孟贲、夏育感到担心的，也是尧、舜感到为难的。
English: Subduing tigers without using cages, prohibiting adultery without using criminal law, and eliminating falsehood without using truthfulness are what Meng Wei and Xia Yu are worried about, and what Yao and Yao are puzzled about.

古文：故设柙非所以备鼠也，所以使怯弱能服虎也；立法非所以备曾、史也，所以使庸主能止盗跖也；为符非所以豫尾生也，所以使众人不相谩也。
现代文：所以设下笼子，不是用来防备老鼠的，而是为了使怯懦的人也能制服老虎；立下法度，不是用来防备曾参、史绍的，而是为了使庸君也能禁止盗跖；制作符信，不是用来防备尾生的、而是为了使大家不再互相欺诈。
English: Therefore, cages are set up, not to prevent mice, but to enable the cowardly to subdue tigers; laws are set up, not to prevent Zengsang and Shishao, but to enable the yokozuna to prohibit stealing; and characters are made, not to prevent being cheated, but to prevent everyone from cheating each other.

古文：不恃比干之死节，不幸乱臣之无诈也；恃怯之所能服，握庸主之所易守。
现代文：不要只依靠比干那样的誓死效忠，也不要幻想乱臣会不行欺诈；而要依靠能使怯懦的人制服老虎的笼子，把握住能使庸君容易保住政权的法令。
English: Don't rely only on the oath of loyalty like Bi Gan, and don't fantasize that the chaotic minister won't be able to cheat; but rely on the tiger's cage that can make the cowardly person subdue, and grasp the decree that can make the tyrant easily retain power.

古文：当今之世，为人主忠计，为天下结德者，利莫长于此。
现代文：处在现在这个时代，为君主尽忠思虑，为天下造福的法宝，再没有比上述这些更符合长远利益了。
English: In the current era, there is no magic weapon that is more loyal and thoughtful to the monarch and beneficial to the world than the above-mentioned.

古文：故君人者无亡国之图，而忠臣无失身之画。
现代文：所以做君主的没有亡国的前途，忠臣没有杀身的危险。
English: Therefore, being a monarch has no future of ruining the country, and loyal subjects have no danger of killing themselves.

古文：明于尊位必赏，故能使人尽力于权衡，死节于官职。
现代文：知道尊法必赏，所以能使人们根据法制竭尽全力，誓死忠于职守。
English: Knowing that respect for the law will be rewarded, it can make people do their best in accordance with the legal system and pledge their loyalty to their duties.

古文：通贲、育之情，不以死易生；惑于盗跖之贪，不以财易身；则守国之道毕备矣。
现代文：纵有孟贲、夏育一样勇猛的脾气，人们也不敢轻易地去送死；纵受盗跖一样贪心的迷惑，人们也不会为了财物去丧生；达到了这样的境界，确保政权稳固的原则就算完备无缺了。
English: Even if people have the same courageous temper as Meng Xuan and Xia Yu, they will not dare to die easily; even if they are deceived by greed like the thief, people will not lose their lives for the sake of property; when this state is reached, the principle of ensuring the stability of the regime is complete.

