古文：壬申三月十四日自宁海发骑骑马出发，四十五里，宿岔路口。
现代文：壬申年三月十四日从宁海县骑马出发，走了四十五里，在岔路口住宿。
English: On March 14th in the year of Jinshin, he rode from Ninghai County, traveled forty-five miles, and stayed at the fork in the road.

古文：其东南十五里为桑洲驿，乃台郡道也；西南十里松门岭，为入天台道。
现代文：岔路口东南十五里为桑州释，是去台州府的路；西南十里到松门岭，是进天台山的路。
English: Fifteen miles southeast of the fork in the road is Sangzhou Road, which is the road to Taizhou Prefecture; ten miles southwest to Songmenling is the road into Tiantai Mountain.

古文：十五日渡水母溪，登松门岭，过玉爱山，共三十里，饭于筋竹岭庵，其地为宁海、天台界。
现代文：十五日渡过水母溪，攀登松门岭，越过玉爱山，一共走了三十里，在筋竹岭庵吃饭，这里是宁海县和天台县的分界处。
English: On the 15th, I crossed the Jellyfish Creek, climbed the Songmen Ridge, and crossed the Jade Love Mountain. I walked a total of 30 miles, and had dinner at the Si Zhu Ling An. This is the dividing point between Ninghai County and Tiantai County.

古文：陟山冈三十余里，寂无人烟，昔弥陀庵亦废。
现代文：登山冈三十多里，一路上空无人烟，从前的弥陀庵也荒废了。
English: More than thirty miles up the mountain, there was no one on the road, and the former Midao hermitage was also abandoned.

古文：下一岭，丛山杳冥中，得村家，瀹茗è煮饮石上。
现代文：下了一道岭，在幽深的丛山中找到一户农家，煮茶让我们坐在石上饮。
English: After descending a ridge, we found a farmhouse deep in the mountains. They made tea and we sat on a rock to drink it.

古文：又十余里，逾岭而入天封寺。
现代文：又走了十多里，翻越山岭进入天封寺。
English: I walked more than ten miles and climbed over the mountains to enter Tenpo-ji Temple.

古文：寺在华顶峰下，为天台幽绝处。
现代文：天封寺在华顶峰下，是天台山最幽静的地方。
English: At the foot of Huading Peak, Tianfeng Temple is the quietest place on Tiantai Mountain.

古文：却骑下马，同僧无馀上华顶寺，宿净因房，月色明莹。
现代文：下了马，和僧人无徐一同登上华顶寺，在净因和尚的房中住宿，这天晚上月光十分明亮晶莹。
English: I got off the horse and went up to Huading Temple with the monk Wuxu, and stayed in the room of the monk Jingyin. The moonlight was very bright and sparkling that evening.

古文：其地去顶尚三里，余乘月独上，误登东峰之望海尖，西转，始得路至华顶。
现代文：华顶寺距离峰顶还有三里，我趁着月光独自上顶，误登上东边的望海尖山峰，往西转，才找到路登上华顶峰峰顶。
English: Huading Temple is still three miles away from the peak, I took advantage of the moonlight to go to the top alone, mistakenly climbed the east peak of the peak, and turned west to find a way to climb the peak of Huading Peak.

古文：归寺已更余矣。
现代文：返回到华顶寺时已经一更多了。
English: When I returned to Huading Temple, it was already one more.

古文：十六日五鼓，乘月上华顶，观日出。
现代文：十六日五更夭时，趁着月光登上华顶峰，观看日出。
English: On the sixteenth day of the fifth month, I took advantage of the moonlight to climb to the peak of Hua and watch the sunrise.

古文：衣履尽湿，还炙衣寺中。
现代文：衣服鞋子都湿透了，返回寺中烤干。
English: His clothes and shoes were soaked, and he returned to the temple to dry them.

古文：从寺右逾一岭，南下十里，至分水岭。
现代文：顺着华顶寺右边翻越一座岭，往南下十里，来到分水岭。
English: Along the right side of Huading Temple, climb over a ridge, go south for ten miles, and come to the watershed.

古文：岭西之水出石梁，岭东之水出天封。
现代文：分水岭西边的水从石梁流出，东边的水从天封寺流出。
English: The water on the west side of the watershed flows out from the stone beam, and the water on the east side flows out from the Tianfeng Temple.

古文：循溪北转，水石渐幽。
现代文：沿着溪水往北转，水渐渐深了，岩石渐渐陡了。
English: Turning north along the stream, the water got deeper and the rocks got steeper.

古文：又十里，过上方广寺，抵昙花亭，观石梁奇丽，若初识者。
现代文：又走十里，经过上方广寺，到达昙花亭，观赏奇丽的石梁景观，仿佛第一次看到似的新奇。
English: Walk another ten miles, pass Shangfanggong Temple, arrive at the Flower Pavilion, and enjoy the beautiful landscape of stone beams, as if seeing something new for the first time.

古文：十七日仍出分水岭，南十里，登察岭。岭甚高，与华顶分南北界。
现代文：十七日仍然从分水岭出去，往南走十里，登上察岭，察岭很高，和华顶峰分别形成南北界线。
English: On the 17th, I still went out from the watershed, walked ten miles southward, and ascended the Cha-ling. The Cha-ling is very high, and it forms the north-south boundary line with the Huading Peak.

古文：西下至龙王堂，其地为诸道交会处。
现代文：往西下到龙王堂，这里是各条道路交会的地方。
English: Go west to the Dragon King Hall. This is where all roads meet.

古文：南十里，至寒风阙。
现代文：往南走十里，到寒风网。
English: Walk ten miles south to the cold wind net.

古文：又南下十里，至银地岭，有智者塔已废。
现代文：又往南下十里，到银地岭，这里的智者塔已经被废弃了。
English: Ten miles further south, at Silver Ridge, the Wise Men's Tower has been abandoned.

古文：左转得大悲寺，寺旁有石，为智者拜经台。
现代文：往左转，进入大悲寺，寺旁边有块岩石，传说是智者大师的拜经台。
English: Turn left to enter the Great Compassion Temple. There is a rock next to the temple, which is said to be the prayer platform of the wise master.

古文：寺僧恒如为炊饭，乃分行囊从国清下至县，余与仲昭兄以轻装东下高明寺。
现代文：寺里的僧人恒如为我们做饭吃，于是分出行李，让其他人从国清寺下到天台县，我和族兄徐仲昭便得以轻装往东下高明寺。
English: The monk in the temple, Heng Ru, cooked and ate for us, so he separated the luggage and let the others go down from Guoxing Temple to Tiantai County, and my brother Xu Zhong Zhao and I were able to travel east to Gaoming Temple.

古文：寺为无量讲师复建，右有幽溪。溪侧诸胜曰圆通洞、松风阁、灵响岩。
现代文：高明寺是无量法师重建的，寺右有幽溪，幽溪两岸有圆通洞、松风阁、灵响岩等风景名胜。
English: Gaoming Temple was rebuilt by countless masters. There is a quiet creek on the right of the temple, and there are scenic spots such as Yangtong Cave, Songfeng Pavilion, and Lingxing Rock on both sides of the creek.

古文：十八日仲昭坐圆通洞，寺僧导余探石笋之奇。
现代文：十八日徐仲昭在圆通洞坐着。寺里的僧人带我去探寻奇异的石笋峰。
English: On the 18th day, Xu Zhongzhao was sitting in the round tunnel. The monks of the temple took me to explore the strange Shijiazhuang peak.

古文：循溪东下，抵螺溪。
现代文：沿幽溪往东下，来到螺溪。
English: Along the creek to the east, came to the snail.

古文：溯溪北上，两崖峭石夹立，树巅飞瀑纷纷。
现代文：溯流往北上，两岸悬崖峭石耸立，树梢、崖顶上瀑布纷纷。
English: Following the stream northwards, cliffs and crags rise up on both banks, and waterfalls cascade over the treetops and cliff tops.

古文：践石蹑流，七里，山回溪坠，已到石笋峰底，仰面峰莫辨，以右崖掩之也。
现代文：踩着崖石沿溪流前进，七里，山峦曲折环绕、溪水顺山势往下泻，已经到了石笋峰底，抬头却看不清石笋峰，因为右边的崖壁挡住了视线。
English: Stepping on the cliff, I advanced along the stream for seven miles, winding around the mountains, and the stream flowed down the mountain. I had already reached the bottom of the cliff peak, but I could not see the cliff peak clearly, because the cliff wall on the right blocked the line of sight.

古文：从崖侧逾隙而下，反出石笋之上，始见一石矗立涧中，涧水下捣其根，悬而为瀑，亦水石奇胜处也。
现代文：从崖壁边的缝隙中穿越而下，反而走出到石笋峰上面，于是看到一块岩石矗立在山涧中，涧中的水往下冲捣岩石根部，然后腾空而起形成瀑布，也是一处水石奇异的胜境。
English: From the cliff edge through the gap and down, but went out to the top of the stalagmites, and then saw a rock standing in the mountains, the water rushing down the roots of the rock, and then rise up to form a waterfall, is also a water stone strange landscape.

古文：循溪北转，两崖愈峭，下汇为潭，是为螺蛳潭、上壁立而下渊深。
现代文：沿着溪水往北转，两岸的崖壁越来越陡，崖壁下面有水汇积成潭，这就是螺狮潭，上面崖石壁立，而下面则深不可测。
English: Turning north along the stream, the cliff walls on both sides are getting steeper and steeper. Below the cliff walls, water has accumulated into a pool, which is the Conch Pond. The cliffs above are stone walls, while the bottom is unfathomable.

古文：攀崖侧悬藤，踞石遥睇其内。
现代文：从崖石侧边攀援悬挂的藤条而上，盘坐在崖石上远远地看螺狮潭内。
English: Climb up the hanging rattan cane from the side of the cliff, sit on the cliff and look at the snail pond in the distance.

古文：潭上石壁，中劈为四岐，若交衢然。潭水下薄，不能窥其涯涘ì水边。
现代文：潭上的石壁从中间分成四块，裂隙像交叉的道路一样，而潭水往裂隙下流，看不到潭的边际。
English: The stone wall on the pool is divided into four pieces from the middle, the cracks are like intersecting roads, and the pool water flows down to the cracks, and the edge of the pool cannot be seen.

古文：最内两崖之上，一石横嵌，俨若飞梁。
现代文：最里边的两块崖石上，横嵌着一块石头，很像悬空的桥梁。
English: On the innermost two cliff stones, there is a stone embedded across, much like a suspended bridge.

古文：梁内飞瀑自上坠潭中，高与石梁等。
现代文：横石内瀑布从崖石上坠落到潭中，瀑布的高度和石梁相等。
English: Cross-rock waterfall falls from the cliff to the pool. The height of the waterfall is equal to that of the stone beam.

古文：四旁重崖回映，可望而不可即，非石梁所能齐也。
现代文：四周山崖层峦叠嶂盘绕映衬，可望而不可即，这景致却不是石梁风景所能比的。
English: Surrounded by mountains and cliffs, the scenery is incomparable to that of Shilang.

古文：其上有 仙人鞋 ，在寒风阙之左，可逾岭而至。
现代文：听说上面有 仙人鞋 的名胜，在寒风网的左边，翻过岭就可以去。
English: It is said that there is a famous place called "Sage's Shoes" on the top, and you can go there by climbing over the ridge on the left side of the cold wind net.

古文：雨骤，不成行，还憩松风阁。
现代文：天突然下起了大雨，没去成，返回松风阁休息。
English: It suddenly started to rain heavily, but he did not go home and returned to the Pine Breeze Pavilion to rest.

古文：二十日抵天台县。
现代文：二十日到达天台县。
English: On the 20th, they arrived in Tiantai County.

古文：至四月十六日自雁宕返，乃尽天台以西之胜。
现代文：到四月十六日从雁宕山返回来时，才遍游了天台山西部的胜景。
English: It was not until April 16th, when he returned from Mt. Gantang, that he traveled all over the western scenic spots of Mt. Tiantai.

古文：北七里，至赤城麓，仰视丹霞层亘，浮屠佛塔标其巅，兀立于重岚攒翠间。
现代文：往北走七里，来到赤城山麓，抬头仰望，一层层红色的山崖，山顶上挺拔的佛塔，突立在层层云霞和茂密的树木中。
English: Walk seven miles north to the foot of the Akagi Mountains and look up at the layers of red cliffs and the towering stupa on the top of the mountain, protruding through the layers of clouds and dense trees.

古文：上一里，至中岩，岩中佛庐新整，不复似昔时凋敝。
现代文：往上行一里，来到中岩，岩上的佛寺重新修过，不再像从前那样破旧衰败。
English: Go up one mile and come to the middle rock. The Buddhist temple on the rock has been rebuilt and is no longer as dilapidated as before.

古文：时急于琼台、双阙，不暇再蹑上岩，遂西越一岭，由小路七里，出落马桥。
现代文：此时我急于去琼台、双网，来不及再攀登上岩，于是往西越过一座岭，沿着小路走了七里，出到落马桥。
English: At this time, I was in a hurry to go to Qiongtai and Shuangwang, and I didn't have time to climb the rock again, so I crossed a ridge to the west, walked seven miles along the path, and came out to Lok Ma Bridge.

古文：又十五里，西北至瀑布山左登岭。五里，上桐柏山。
现代文：又走十五里，往西北来到瀑布山，从左边登岭，走五里，登上桐柏山。
English: Walk another fifteen miles, northwest to Waterfall Mountain, climb the ridge from the left, walk five miles, and climb Tongbai Mountain.

古文：越岭而北，得平畴一围，群峰环绕，若另辟一天。
现代文：翻越山岭往北走，看到有一片平地，平地四周群峰环绕，仿佛是另外开辟的一块天地。
English: Climbing over the mountains to the north, I saw a flat land, surrounded by peaks, as if it were another world.

古文：桐柏宫正当其中，惟中殿仅存，夷、齐即伯夷、叔齐二石像尚在右室，雕琢甚古，唐以前物也。
现代文：桐柏宫就位于这片平地正中，但只剩下中殿了，伯夷、叔齐的两尊石像还存放在右室中，雕刻风格古朴，是唐朝以前的遗物。
English: Tongbai Palace is located in the middle of this flat land, but only the middle hall is left. The two stone statues of Bo Yi and Shu Qi are still stored in the right room. The carving style is quaint and is a relic from before the Tang Dynasty.

古文：黄冠久无住此者，群农见游客至，俱停耕来讯，遂挟一人为导。
现代文：已经很长时间没有道士在这里住了，一群农民看见有游客来，都停止耕种前来讯问，于是拉住其中一人当向导。
English: It had been a long time since a Taoist had lived here, and when a group of farmers saw the tourists coming, they all stopped farming and came to ask questions, so they hired one of them as a guide.

古文：西三里，越二小岭，下层崖中，登琼台焉。
现代文：往西走三里，越过两座小岭，下到层叠的山崖中，就登上了琼台。
English: I walked three miles to the west, crossed two small ridges, descended into the cascading cliffs, and ascended Qiongtai.

古文：一峰突瞰重坑，三而俱危崖回绕。
现代文：一座山峰突起来俯瞰深坑，三面都盘绕着陡峭的崖石。
English: A mountain juts up overlooking the pit, with steep cliffs on three sides.

古文：崖右之溪，从西北万山中直捣峰下，是为百丈崖。
现代文：崖石右侧的溪水，从西北边万山之中直冲峰下，这峰名百丈崖。
English: The stream on the right side of the cliff stone rushes straight down the peak from the middle of the mountains on the northwest side. This peak is called the Baizhang Cliff.

古文：崖根涧水至琼台脚下，一泓深碧如黛，是名百丈龙潭。
现代文：崖底的涧水流到琼台脚下，一池清水又深又绿，这就叫百丈龙潭。
English: The brackish water at the bottom of the cliff flows to the foot of Qiong Tai, and a pool of clear water is deep and green, which is called Baizhang Longtan.

古文：峰前复起一峰，卓立如柱，高与四围之崖等，即琼台也。
现代文：百丈崖前又耸起一座山峰，犹如柱子似的高高耸立，高度和四周的山崖相同，这就是琼台了。
English: In front of the Baizhang cliff, another mountain peak rises, towering like a pillar, the same height as the surrounding cliffs. This is Qiongdao.

古文：台后倚百丈崖，前即双阙对峙，层崖外绕，旁绝附丽。
现代文：琼台背靠百丈崖，前面则和双胭对峙，层叠的山崖向外环绕，琼台四周没有任何依附物。
English: The back of Qiong Tai is close to the Baizhang Cliff, while the front faces the Shuangtao. The cascading cliffs surround it from the outside, and there are no objects attached to the Qiong Tai.

古文：登台者从北峰悬坠而下，度坳脊处咫尺，复攀枝仰陟而上，俱在削石流沙间。
现代文：登琼台的人要从北峰悬坠而下，越过看似近在咫尺的山坳山脊，再攀援树枝、抬头往上升登，完全是在陡峭的岩石和流沙之间攀登，儿乎没有落脚的地方。
English: To climb Mount Qiongdao, climbers have to rappel down from the north peak, cross the ridges of the mountains that seem to be so close, climb the branches of trees, and climb upwards. The climb is entirely between steep rocks and quicksand, and there is almost no place to land.

古文：趾无所着也。从台端再攀历南下，有石突起，窟其中为龛，如琢削而就者，曰仙人坐。
现代文：顺着琼台边缘第二次攀爬过去往南下，有一块突起的岩石，岩石中间凹陷进去，如同专门雕琢劈削的神完一样，取名仙人座。
English: After the second climb along the edge of Qiongdao, there is a protruding rock to the south, with a depression in the middle of the rock, just like a specially carved and chiseled god, named Cinderella.

古文：琼台之奇，在中悬绝壑，积翠四绕。
现代文：琼台的奇异之处，就在于悬空在十分陡峻的壑谷中，四周环绕着茂密的树木。
English: The strangeness of Qiong Tai lies in the fact that it hangs in a very steep valley, surrounded by thick trees.

古文：双阙亦其外绕中对峙之崖，非由涧底再上，不能登也。
现代文：双胭也是琼台外围之中和琼台对峙的山崖，不从涧底再上，也不能登上去。
English: Shuangtao is also a mountain cliff in the periphery of Qiongdao that faces Qiongdao. It cannot be climbed without going up from the bottom of Shuangdao.

古文：忆余二十年前，同云峰自桃源来，溯其外涧入，未深穷其窟奥。
现代文：回想起二十年前，我和云峰和尚一齐从桃源过来，溯双网的外涧而入，没能深入穷探这里的神奇奥妙。
English: Looking back on twenty years ago, Yunfeng Monk and I came from Taoyuan together, tracing the outside of the double net and entering it, but we were unable to explore the magic and mystery here.

古文：今始俯瞰于崖端，高深俱无遗胜矣。
现代文：这一次才得以从崖顶上俯瞰，高处、深处的景色都没有遗漏了。
English: Only this time I was able to look down from the top of the cliff, and I didn't miss the view of the heights and depths.

古文：饭桐柏宫，仍下山麓，南从小径渡溪，十里，出天台、关岭之官道。
现代文：在桐柏宫吃饭后，仍然下到山麓，往南顺小路走，渡过溪流，走十里，出到天台县、关岭的大路上。
English: After eating at Tongbai Palace, I still went down to the foot of the mountain, walked along the Nanshun Trail, crossed the stream, walked ten miles, and went out to the highway in Tiantai County and Guiling.

古文：复南入小径，隙行十里，路左一峰兀立若天柱，问知为青山茁。
现代文：又往南走小路，在狭窄的山缝中走了十里，小路左侧有一座山峰像天柱般高高耸立，间后才知道名青山茁。
English: Then I walked south along the path, and walked ten miles through a narrow mountain crevice. On the left side of the path, there was a mountain that stood as tall as a pillar. It was only later that I learned of the famous Qingcheng Mountain.

古文：又溯南来之溪十里，宿于坪头潭之旅舍。
现代文：又溯南边流来的溪水走了十里，在坪头潭的旅舍住宿。
English: They also walked ten miles along the stream flowing from the south, and stayed at a hostel in Pingtoutan.

古文：十七日由坪头潭西南八里，至江司陈氏。
现代文：十七日从坪头潭往西南行八里，到江司陈家。
English: On the 17th, he traveled eight miles southwest from Pingtoutan to the Chen family in Jiangxi Province.

古文：渡溪左行，又八里，南折入山。
现代文：渡过溪水往左走，又八里，往南转进山。
English: Cross the stream and walk to the left, another eight miles, turn south into the mountains.

古文：陟小岭二重，又六里，重溪回合中，忽石岩高峙，其南即寒岩，东即明岩也。
现代文：登了两座小岭，又走六里，在盘绕回环的道道溪水之间，忽见岩石高高耸立，南边的就是寒岩，东边的就是明岩。
English: After climbing two small hills and walking six miles, I suddenly saw the rock towering high between the winding channels of the stream. To the south is Cold Rock, and to the east is Bright Rock.

古文：令僮先驰，炊于明岩寺，余辈遂南向寒岩。
现代文：让仆人朝前快走，到明岩寺做饭。我们一行人则往南去寒岩。
English: I told the servants to go ahead and cook dinner at Myeongam Temple, while my party headed south to Kangam.

古文：路左俱悬崖盘列，中有一洞岈然。
现代文：道路左边全是陡崖盘绕排列，崖中有一个很高大的洞。
English: On the left side of the road there are steep cliffs all coiled up, and there is a very large hole in the cliff.

古文：洞前石兔蹲伏，口耳俱备。
现代文：洞前蹲伏着石兔，石兔的嘴和耳朵都是完整的。
English: A stone rabbit crouches in front of the cave. The rabbit's mouth and ears are intact.

古文：路右即大溪萦回，中一石突出如擎盖，心颇异之。
现代文：道路右边则是大溪曲折环流，当中突起一块岩石形状像举着的盖子，我心里感到很诧异。
English: On the right side of the road is the meandering circulation of the creek, in which a rock shaped like a raised lid protrudes. I was very surprised.

古文：既入寺，向僧索龙须洞灵芝石，即此也。
现代文：进入寒岩寺后，向僧人询问龙须洞、灵芝石，就是刚才所看到的洞、石了。
English: After entering Kangyan Temple, I asked the monks about Longxu Cave and Lingzhi Stone, which were the caves and stones I had just seen.

古文：寒岩在寺后，宏敞有余，玲珑未足。
现代文：寒岩在寺背后，岩上的洞宏伟宽敞有余，小巧玲珑不足。
English: The cold rock is behind the temple, and the cave on the rock is more than grand and spacious, but not so small and exquisite.

古文：由洞右一上，视鹊桥而出。
现代文：从洞右的一个洞穴上去，观览鹊桥后出来。
English: Go up from a cave on the right side of the cave, look at the bridge and come out.

古文：由旧路一里，右人龙须洞。
现代文：顺原路走一里，往右进入龙须洞。
English: Walk one mile along Shun Yuan Road and turn right to enter Longsu Cave.

古文：路为莽棘所翳遮掩，上跻里许，如历九霄。
现代文：道路被荒草、荆棘所遮蔽，往上攀登一里左右，犹如上了九重天。
English: The road was obscured by weeds and thorns, and climbing up for a mile or so was like ascending to the ninth heaven.

古文：其洞圆耸明豁，洞中斜倚一石，颇似雁宕之石梁，而梁顶有泉中洒，与宝冠之芭蕉洞如出一冶。
现代文：龙须洞洞顶圆耸，明亮空阔，洞口斜靠着一块岩石，很像雁宕山的石梁，只是石梁顶上有泉水从正中飞洒下来，和宝冠寺的芭蕉洞好像同出一辙。
English: The top of Longxu Cave is round, bright and spacious. The mouth of the cave leans against a rock, much like the stone beam of the Wild Goose Mountain. However, at the top of the stone beam, there is a spring water spilling down from the middle. It seems to be the same as the Basho Cave of Baokuan Temple.

古文：下山，仍至旧路口，东溯小溪，南转入明岩寺。
现代文：下山，仍然走到原路路口，往东溯小溪而上，往南转进明岩寺。
English: Going down the mountain, I still walked to the intersection of the original road, followed the creek to the east, and turned south to Mingyan Temple.

古文：寺在岩中，石崖四面环之，止东面八寸关通路一线。
现代文：明岩寺在岩石正中，四面石崖环绕，只有东面八寸关有一条线一样狭窄的通道。
English: In the middle of the rock, surrounded by cliffs on all sides, only the east side of Myeongam-sa Temple has a narrow passage.

古文：寺后洞窈窕非一，洞右有石笋突起，虽不及灵芝之雄伟，亦具体而微精细小巧矣。
现代文：寺后的山洞景物美好的地方不止一处，洞右有石笋突起，石笋虽然赶不上灵芝石那么雄伟，但形态也是很得体、很精致的。
English: There is more than one place where the cave scenery behind the temple is beautiful. On the right side of the cave, there is a stalagmite protruding. Although the stalagmite is not as majestic as the reishi stone, the shape is also very decent and delicate.

古文：饭后，由故道骑而驰三十里，返坪头潭。
现代文：饭后，顺原路骑马急行三十里，返回坪头潭。
English: After the meal, Shunyuan Road riding an express thirty miles, back to the pingduotan.

古文：又北二十五里，过大溪，即西从关岭来者，是为三茅。
现代文：又往北走二十五里，渡过大溪，就是从西边关岭过来的路，这里名三茅。
English: Twenty-five miles further north, across the Daxi River, is the road from Guanling in the west, where Sanmao is famous.

古文：又北五里，越小涧二重，直抵北山下，人护国寺宿焉。
现代文：又往北走五里，越过两道小涧，直达北山下，到护国寺中住宿。
English: I walked another five miles to the north, crossing two small streams, straight to the foot of the North Mountain, and stayed in the middle of the Hokoku-ji Temple.

古文：十八日晨，急诣赶赴桃源。
现代文：十八日早晨，急着赶到桃源。
English: On the morning of the 18th, I hurried to Taoyuan.

古文：桃源在护国东二里，西去桐柏仅八里。
现代文：桃源在护国寺东边二里处，往西距离桐柏宫只有八里。
English: Taoyuan is two miles east of the National Guard Temple, and only eight miles west of Tongbai Palace.

古文：昨游桐柏时，留为还登万年之道，故选寒、明。
现代文：昨天游览桐柏宫时，留下桃源作为返回去登万年寺时顺路游的地方，所以先去寒岩和明岩。
English: When I toured Tongbai Palace yesterday, I left Taoyuan as a place to visit on my way back to climb Wanyuan Temple, so I went to Cold Rock and Ming Rock first.

古文：及抵护国，知其西有秀溪，由此入万年，更可收九里坑之胜，于是又特趋桃源。
现代文：等到了护国寺，才知道护国寺西边有秀溪，沿着秀溪进万年寺，还可以观赏九里坑名胜，于是又专门奔赴桃源。
English: It was not until I arrived at the Jogokuji Temple that I learned that on the west side of the Jogokuji Temple, there is a rivulet of the Xiu River. Along the Xiu River, you can enter the Wanyuan Temple, and you can also see the Jiulikeng Scenic Spot, so I made a special trip to Taoyuan.

古文：初由涧口入里许，得金桥潭。
现代文：刚从涧口往里走了一里左右，便到金桥潭。
English: I just walked about a mile from the mouth of the river and arrived at Jinqiao Lake.

古文：由此而上，两山愈束，翠壁穹崖，层累曲折，一溪介其中。
现代文：从金桥潭往上走，两边的山挨得越来越近，苍翠的绝壁、弯隆高耸的悬崖，层层叠叠，曲折盘绕，一条溪水从中穿过。
English: Walking up from Jinqiao Lake, the mountains on both sides are getting closer and closer, the verdant cliffs, the towering cliffs, layer upon layer, twists and turns, and a stream passes through.

古文：溯之，三折而溪穷，瀑布数丈，由左崖泻溪中。
现代文：溯溪流而上，转了三次，走到溪水尽头，数丈高的瀑布从左边的悬崖上冲泻到溪中。
English: Follow the stream upstream, turn around three times, and walk to the end of the stream. A several-meter-high waterfall cascades from the cliff on the left into the stream.

古文：余昔来瀑下，路穷莫可上，仰视穹崖北峙，溪左右双鬟诸峰娟娟攒立，岚翠交流，几不能去。
现代文：我从前来到瀑布下面时，道路断绝，不能上去，抬头仰望，弯隆的悬崖峙立在北边，溪流左右两边，双鬓等众山峰妩媚地簇拥而立，山中的云雾和青翠的树木互相交融，几乎让人不忍离去。
English: When I came to the bottom of the waterfall, the road was cut off, I couldn't go up, I looked up, the steep cliffs stood on the north side, the streams on both sides, the double peaks and other peaks stood in a charming cluster, the clouds in the mountains and the green trees blended with each other, and it was almost impossible to leave.

古文：今忽从右崖丛莽中，寻得石径层叠，遂不及呼仲昭，冒雨拨棘而上。
现代文：这一次忽然从右边崖石间的荒草丛中，找到一条石块堆砌的小路，于是来不及招呼徐仲昭，冒雨拨开荒草荆棘而上。
English: This time, he suddenly found a stone-piled path from the scrub between the rocks on the right side of the cliff, so he couldn't wait to call out to Xu Zhongzhao, and in the rain, he pushed away the weeds and thorns and climbed up.

古文：磴级既尽，复叠石横栈，度崖之左，已出瀑上。
现代文：一级级石阶走完了，又堆砌石块横接栈道，登到左边的崖石上，便出到瀑布上面了。
English: After completing the stone steps, I piled up the stones to cross the footpath, climbed to the cliff on the left, and came out on top of the waterfall.

古文：更溯之入，直抵北岩下，蹊磴俱绝，两瀑自岩左右分道下。
现代文：又溯瀑布水深入进去，直达北岩下，溪水、石阶都断了，两股瀑布从岩石左右分流而下。
English: The water of the waterfall also went deep into it, reaching under the north rock. The stream and the stone steps were broken, and two waterfalls flowed down from the left and right of the rock.

古文：遥睇岩左犹有遗磴，从之，则向有累石为桥于左瀑上者，桥已中断，不能度。
现代文：遥望岩石左边还残留有石阶，从石阶上走过去，则是从前堆砌石块搭桥的左瀑布上面，桥已经断了，不能过去。
English: There are still stone steps left on the left side of the rock. If you walk over the stone steps, you will be on top of the left waterfall where the bridge was built. The bridge is broken and cannot be crossed.

古文：睇瀑之上流，从东北夹壁中来，止容一线，可践流而入。
现代文：遥望瀑布上游，从东北狭窄的崖壁中流来，壁缝窄得如同一线，可以踩着水流而入。
English: In the upper reaches of Yanwang Waterfall, the water flows from the narrow cliff wall in the northeast. The wall is so narrow that you can step into the water.

古文：计其胜不若右岩之瀑，乃还，从大石间向西北上跻，抵峡窟下，得重潭甚厉，四面俱直薄迫近峡底，无可缘陟。
现代文：估计里边的景物比不上右边岩石的瀑布，于是返回去，从大石块中往西北方攀登，到达峡窟下，看到一个十分阴森的深潭，四周的崖壁直逼峡底，无路可以攀缘。
English: He estimated that the scenery inside was not as good as the waterfall on the right side of the rock, so he returned, climbed northwest from the large stones, reached the bottom of the canyon, and saw a very gloomy deep pool. The cliff walls around him reached the bottom of the canyon, and there was no way to climb.

古文：第从潭中西望，见石峡之内复有石峡，瀑布之上更悬瀑布，皆从西北杳冥深远而不可见的地方中来，至此缤纷乱坠于回崖削壁之上，岚光掩映，石色欲飞。
现代文：只能从潭中往西远看，见石峡里边还套着石峡，瀑布上面另外悬挂着瀑布，潭水全都从西北幽暗的山中流来，流到这里后乱纷纷地坠落在曲折盘旋的悬崖峭壁上，在雾气和阳光的掩映之下，呈现出岩石欲飞的景色。
English: It is only possible to look far to the west from the pool, and see that there is a stone gorge inside the stone gorge, and there is another waterfall hanging above the waterfall. The pool water all flows from the dark mountains in the northwest, and after flowing here, it falls in disorder on the twisting cliff cliffs. Under the cover of fog and sunlight, it presents a rocky landscape.

古文：久之，还出层瀑下。
现代文：过了很久，返回去，出到层层瀑布下面。
English: After a long time, go back, go out under the waterfall.

古文：仲昭以觅路未得，方独坐观瀑，遂同返护国。
现代文：徐仲昭因为没找到路，正独自坐着观赏瀑布，于是一同返回护国寺。
English: Unable to find his way, Xu Zhongzhao was sitting alone watching the waterfall, so they returned to the National Guard Temple together.

古文：闻桃源溪口，亦有路登慈云、通元二寺，入万年，路较近；特以秀溪胜，故饭后仍取秀溪道。
现代文：听说桃源的溪口，也有路上到慈云寺、通元寺，再去万年寺，路程较近；只是因为秀溪风光独特，所以饭后仍然取道去秀溪。
English: I heard that at the mouth of the creek in Taoyuan, there is also a road to Ciyun Temple, Tongyuan Temple, and then to Wanyuan Temple, which is closer. However, because of the unique scenery of Xiuxi, I still take the road to Xiuxi after dinner.

古文：西行四里，北折入溪，溯流三里，渐转而东向，是为九里坑。
现代文：往西行四里，往北转进溪水流域，溯溪流走了三里，渐渐地转向东走，这里名九里坑。
English: Go west for four miles, turn north into the river basin, follow the stream for three miles, and gradually turn east. This place is called the Nine Mile Pit.

古文：坑既穷，一瀑破东崖下坠，其上乱峰森立，路无可上。
现代文：九里坑尽头处，有一股瀑布劈开东崖往下坠落，上面乱峰森林般的耸立，没有路通上去。
English: At the end of the nine-mile pit, there is a waterfall splitting the east cliff and falling down. Above it, there is a forest of jagged peaks, and there is no way up.

古文：由西岭攀跻，绕出其北，回瞰瀑背，石门双插，内有龙潭在焉。
现代文：沿着西岭攀登，绕到瀑布北面，回头观看瀑布背面，两块岩石像门一样插立在那里，里边有龙潭。
English: Climb along the West Ridge, go around to the north of the waterfall, and look back at the back of the waterfall, where two rocks stand like a door, with Longtan inside.

古文：又东北上数里，逾岭，山坪忽开，五峰围拱，中得万年寺，去护国三十里矣。
现代文：又往东北攀登数里，越过岭，山中忽然辟开一块平地，五座山峰围着平地拱立，中间是万年寺，这里距离护国寺有三十里。
English: After climbing a few more miles to the northeast and crossing the ridge, a flatland suddenly opened up in the mountains. Five peaks surrounded the flatland. In the middle was Wanyuan Temple, which was thirty miles away from the National Guard Temple.

古文：万年为天台西境，正与天封相对，石梁当其中。
现代文：万年寺在天台山的西境，正好和天封寺相对，石梁瀑布位于两寺之中。
English: Mannen-ji Temple is on the western edge of Tiantai Mountain, just opposite Tenpu Temple, and Shiliang Waterfall is located between the two temples.

古文：地中古杉甚多。
现代文：万年寺中古杉很多。
English: There are many old cedars in Mannen-ji Temple.

古文：饭于寺。
现代文：在寺中吃饭。
English: Eat at the temple.

古文：又西北三里，逾寺后高岭。
现代文：又往西北走三里，翻越寺后的高岭。
English: I walked another three miles to the northwest, crossing the high ridge behind the temple.

古文：又向西升陟岭角者十里，乃至腾空山。
现代文：又往西攀登岭角十里，于是到腾空山。
English: I climbed another ten miles to the west of the ridge, and arrived at Tengkuang Mountain.

古文：下牛牯岭，三里抵麓。
现代文：朝牛枯岭下去，三里到达山脚。
English: Go down the Asagiu Mountains and walk three miles to the foot of the mountain.

古文：又西逾小岭三重，共十五里，出会墅。
现代文：又往西越过三道小岭，一共走了十五里，出到会墅。
English: He also crossed three small hills to the west, and walked a total of fifteen miles to the villa.

古文：大道自南来，望天姥山在内，已越而过之，以为会墅乃平地耳。
现代文：大路从南边伸来，看到天姥山在内的众多山峰，都已经穿越而过，以为会墅就是平地了。
English: The main road stretches from the south, and when you see the many peaks, including Tianba Mountain, you have already passed through, thinking that the villa is flat land.

古文：复西北下三里，渐成溪，循之行五里，宿班竹旅舍。
现代文：又往西北下了三里，山水渐渐汇成溪流，沿着溪岸走五里，在斑竹的旅舍住宿。
English: I walked another three miles to the northwest, where the landscape gradually merged into a stream. I walked five miles along the riverbank and stayed at the Bamboo Hostel.

古文：天台之溪，余所见者：正东为水母溪；察岭东北，华顶之南，有分水岭，不甚高；西流为石梁，东流过天封，绕摘星岭而东，出松门岭，由宁海而注于海。
现代文：天台山的溪流，我所看见的有：正东面的是水母溪；察岭东北，华顶峰南边，有分水岭，不太高；水母溪往西流形成石梁瀑布，往东流过天封寺，绕着摘星岭往东流，流出松门岭，从宁海县注入大海。
English: The streams of Tiantai Mountain that I have seen are as follows: Jellyfish Creek is directly to the east; northeast of Chaling, south of Huading Peak, there is a watershed, not too high; Jellyfish Creek flows westward to form Shiliang Waterfall, flows eastward past Tianfeng Temple, flows eastward around Zhi Xingling, flows out of Songmenling, and flows into the sea from Ninghai County.

古文：正南为寒风阙之溪，下至国清寺，会寺东佛陇之水，由城西而入大溪者也。
现代文：正南面是寒风网的溪流，往下流到国清寺，和寺东佛陇的水会合，从天台县城西流入大溪。
English: Directly to the south is the stream of the cold wind network, which flows down to the Guoxing Temple, and meets the water of the temple's eastern stupa, and flows into the creek from the west of Tiantai County.

古文：国清之东为螺溪，发源于仙人鞋，下坠为螺蛳潭，出与幽溪会，由城东而入大溪者也；又东有楢溪诸水，余屐未经。
现代文：国清寺东边是螺溪，溪水发源于仙人鞋，往下坠入螺蜘潭，再流出去与幽溪会合，从县城东南流入大溪；东边还有槽溪等水，我的足迹没有去到。
English: To the east of the Guoxing Temple is the Conch Creek. The water of the creek originates from the Cuckoo's Foot, falls down into the Conch Pond, and then flows out to meet the Silent Creek, and flows into the Big Creek from the southeast of the county seat; there is also the Trough Creek and other water to the east, but my footprints did not go there.

古文：国清之西，其大者为瀑布水，水从龙王堂西流，过桐柏为女梭溪，前经三潭，坠为瀑布，则清溪之源也；又西为琼台、双阙之水，其源当发于万年寺东南，东过罗汉岭，下深坑而汇为百丈崖之龙潭，绕琼台而出，会于青溪者也；又西为桃源之水，其上流有重瀑，东西交注，其源当出通元左右，未能穷也；又西为秀溪之水，其源出万年寺之岭，西下为龙潭瀑布，西流为九里坑，出秀溪东南而去。
现代文：国清寺的西边，大的是瀑布水，水顺着龙王堂往西流，流过桐柏山时名女梭溪，往前流经三个水潭，然后坠落下去形成瀑布，是清溪的上源，再往西边还有琼台、双网的溪水，这溪应当是发源于万年寺东南，往东流过罗汉岭，注入深坑而汇集成百丈崖的龙潭，潭水环绕琼台流出，和青溪会合；再往西是桃源的溪水，溪水上游有双重瀑布，东西交汇而流，源头应当在通元寺左右，没能穷究；再往西边是秀溪水，秀溪水发源于万年寺所在的岭，往西流下去为龙潭瀑布，再往西流为九里坑，流到秀溪后往东南流去。
English: On the west side of Guoqing Temple, the largest is the waterfall water. The water flows westward along the Dragon King Hall. When it flows through Tongba Mountain, it flows through three pools and then falls down to form a waterfall. It is the upper source of the clear stream. Further to the west, there are Qiongdao and Shuangnetsu streams. This stream should originate from the southeast of Wanyuan Temple, flow eastward through Luohanling, inject into the deep pit and merge into the Longtan of Baizhang Cliff. The pool water surrounds Qiongdao and flows out to meet Qingxi. Further to the west is the stream of Taoyuan.

古文：诸溪自青溪以西，俱东南流入大溪。
现代文：各条溪水从青溪以西，都往东南注入大溪。
English: All streams flow from the west of Qingxi into the southeast of Daxi.

古文：又正西有关岭、王渡诸溪，余屐亦未经；从此再北有会墅岭诸流，亦正西之水，西北注于新昌；再北有福溪、罗木溪，皆出天台阴即天台山北面，而西为新昌大溪，亦余屐未经者矣。
现代文：另外，正西面的关岭、王渡等溪流，我的足迹也没到达；从这里再往北有会墅岭的各条溪流，也是正西面的河流，往西北流入新昌县；再往北有福溪、罗木溪，都发源于天台山北面，然后往西流汇成新昌大溪，也是我没有到过的地方。
English: In addition, the streams such as Guanling and Wangdu in the west did not reach my footprints; from here to the north, there are the streams of Villa Ridge, which are also the rivers in the west, flowing into Xinchang County in the northwest; and further north, there are Fuxi Creek and Luo Mu Creek, which all originate in the north of Tiantai Mountain, and then flow westward into Xinchang Creek, which is also a place I have not been to.

