古文：韩文公自御史贬阳山，新旧二《唐史》，皆以为坐论宫市事。
现代文：韩文公自监察御史贬到阳山，新旧两部《唐书》都认为是因为论宫市得罪。
English: Han Wenkong was demoted to Yangshan from inspector of imperial history, and both the old and new "Tang Shu" were considered to be because of offending the court.

古文：按公《赴江陵途中诗》，自叙此事甚详，云： 是年京师旱，田亩少所收。
现代文：按文公《赴江陵途中诗》看，他自叙原因很详细，他说： 这年京师大旱，田地不收。
English: According to Wen Gong's "Poem on the Way to Gangneung," his self-description of the reasons is very detailed. He said: This year, Beijing suffered a drought, and the fields were not harvested.

古文：有司恤经费，未免烦诛求。传闻闾里间，赤子弃渠沟。
现代文：官吏只顾向百姓勒索，百姓连孩子也养不起，弃在水沟里。
English: The officials only care about extorting money from the people. The people can't even afford to raise their children, so they abandon them in the gutter.

古文：我时出衢路，饿者何其稠！适会除御史，诚当得言秋。拜疏移閤门，为忠宁自谋。
现代文：我亲眼看到饥饿的人群拥挤在大道上，当时我刚刚被任命为监察御史，实在是我应当直言进谏的时候我写好奏疏时，想为国尽忠就不能为个人打算。
English: I saw with my own eyes the hungry crowds thronging the boulevards when I had just been appointed Inspector of the Imperial Household Agency. It is true that I should have been forthright when I wrote my report, but if I want to be loyal to the country, I cannot be loyal to myself.

古文：上陈人疾苦，无令绝其喉。下言畿甸内，根本理宜优。积雪验丰熟，幸宽待蚕麰。
现代文：我在奏疏前面陈述酷吏剥削、人民苦难，要求让百姓存活下去，在奏疏后面提出京师是国家根本，对京师的百姓要加倍体恤，眼下的瑞雪预兆明年的丰收，请宽限到明年蚕熟麦收时再收租税。
English: At the front of the report, I stated the cruel exploitation of officials and the suffering of the people, and demanded that the people be allowed to survive. At the back of the report, I proposed that Beijing Division is the foundation of the country, and the people of Beijing Division should be doubly sympathetic. The current snow is a harbinger of next year's bumper harvest. Please be patient until next year's silkworm and wheat harvest.

古文：天子恻然感，司空叹绸缪。
现代文：天子看了奏疏感到悲伤，司空也叹息应早作安排。
English: Tianzi felt sad after watching the recital, and Siku also sighed that arrangements should have been made earlier.

古文：谓言即施设，乃反迁炎洲。 
现代文：我一心以为朝廷将采取应急措施没想到反把我放逐到南方。 
English: I fully expected that the imperial court would take emergency measures, but what I didn't expect was to be banished to the south.

古文：皇甫湜作公神道碑云： 关中旱饥，人死相枕藉。
现代文：皇甫湜为他作的神道碑写道： 关中大旱饥荒，饿拜遍地、官吏仍苛索万姓以求恩宠。
English: The Shinto monument made for him by the Empress Dowager Fu Xi wrote: Great drought and famine in Guanzhong, starvation everywhere, government officials still demanding favors from everyone.

古文：吏刻取恩，先生列言天下根本，民急如是，请宽民徭而免田租，专政者恶之，遂贬。 
现代文：先生上疏说京师为天下根本，京师百姓遭灾如此严重，请求朝廷放宽瑶役，免去田租。执政者为此很憎恶他，便将他贬贬諦下去。 
English: He said that the capital was the foundation of the world, and that the people of the capital had suffered so severely that he asked the imperial court to relax the land tax and waive the land rent. The rulers hated him for this, and they continued to belittle him.

古文：然则不因论宫市明甚。
现代文：这样看文公之被贬不因论宫市事是很明白的。
English: In this way, it is very clear that Wen Gong was not demoted because of the palace affairs.

古文：碑又书三事云： 公为河南令，魏、郓、幽、镇各为留邸，贮潜卒以槖罪亡，公将擿其禁，断民署吏，俟旦发，留守尹大恐，遽止之，是后郓邸果谋反，将屠东都，以应淮、蔡。
现代文：神道碑又写了三件事说： 文公任河南令时，魏州、郡州、幽州、镇州四藩镇各设留守藩邸，蓄养暗中调来的士兵并窝藏逃犯，意图不轨，文公要揭发他们的违法行为，便布署官吏，事先自断他们与人民的往来，等天明就公布，留守官员十分害怕，立即停上活动。这件事后那州留邸果然谋反，还妄图血洗东都，以响应淮西叛乱。
English: The Shinto monument also wrote three things: When Wen Gong was the governor of Henan Province, he set up a residence in each of the four provinces of Weizhou, Guizhou, Yuzhou and Zhenzhou to keep secretly transferred soldiers and hide fugitives. The intention was not good. Wen Gong wanted to expose their illegal acts, so he dispatched officials and cut off their contacts with the people in advance. It was announced at dawn. The officials who stayed behind were very afraid and immediately stopped their activities. After this incident, the residence in Nanzhou actually plotted a rebellion, and also tried to wash Dongdu in blood in response to the Huaixi rebellion.

古文：及从讨元济，请于裴度，须精兵千人，间道以入，必擒贼。
现代文：等到文公跟随统帅裴度任行军司马征讨淮西吴元济叛乱时，曾建议裴度，派精兵千人从小路进入蔡州，必能擒拿吴元济。
English: When Wen Gong followed the commander Pei Du as he was marching with his army to investigate the rebellion of Wu Yuanji in Huaxi, he suggested to Pei Du that he should send a thousand soldiers to enter Caizhou from a small road, and they would surely be able to capture Wu Yuanji.

古文：未及行，李愬自文城夜入，得元济。
现代文：裴度未及采行，李想已自文城提兵雪夜入蔡州，果然擒得吴元济。
English: Before Baidu was adopted, Li Xiang had brought troops from Wencheng to enter Caizhou in the snowy night, and successfully defeated Wu Yuanji.

古文：三军之士，为公恨。
现代文：三军谋略之士，无不为文公惋惜。
English: The strategists of the three armies all felt sorry for Wenkong.

古文：复谓度曰： 今借声势，王承宗可以辞取，不烦兵矣。
现代文：文公又对裴度说：如今凭借平定淮西的声势，镇州王承宗可用言辞说服，不必使用兵力了。
English: Wen Gong also said to Pei Du: Now, with the momentum of pacifying Huaixi, Zhenzhou Wang Chengzong can be persuaded by words, and there is no need to use troops.

古文：得柏耆，口授其词，使耆执笔书之，持以入镇州，承宗遂割德、棣二州以献。 李翱作公行状，所载略同。而《唐书》并逸其事，且以镇州之功，专归柏耆，岂非未尝见湜文集乎？
现代文：于是找到了布衣拍者。亲自口授了致王承宗书信，叫柏耆执笔写下来后，带上书信进入镇州晓喻王承宗，王摄于兵威，就上表请割德、棣二州献上，表示服从中央朝廷 李翱作文公行状，所记载的与上述事迹大致相同，新旧《唐书》也都未记载此事，而且把收服镇州，一概归功于柏者，岂不是未曾见皇甫湜的文集吗？
English: He personally dictated a letter to Wang Chengzong and asked Bao Jie to write it down. He then took the letter to Zhenzhou, where he met Wang Chengzong and Wang Zhe in the military parade. On the table, he asked to present the official document of the Central Court, which was written by Li Jie, to show his obedience to the Central Court. What was recorded was roughly the same as the above-mentioned events. Both the old and new "Tang Shu" did not record the matter. Moreover, those who attributed the conquest of Zhenzhou to Bao Jie had never seen the collection of Emperor Fuxi's writings.

古文：《资治通鉴》亦仅言耆以策干愈，愈为白度，为书遣之耳。
现代文：《资治通鉴》亦仅仅说柏耆以计策进见韩愈，韩愈替他宾告裴度，写了一封信派柏耆前去镇州去了。
English: "Zizhi Tongjian" also only said that Baojun schemed his way into Han Yu's presence, Han Yu told Baidu about his guest, wrote a letter and sent Baojun to Zhenzhou.

