古文：赵弘智，洛州新安人。
现代文：赵弘智，洛州新安人。
English: Zhao Hongzhi, from Xin'an, Luzhou.

古文：后魏车骑大将军肃孙。
现代文：北魏车骑大将军赵肃的孙子。
English: He is the grandson of the Northern Wei chariot general Zhao Su.

古文：父玄轨，隋陕州刺史。
现代文：父亲赵玄轨，为隋朝陕州刺史。
English: His father, Zhao Xuanlu, was a historian of the Sui Dynasty in Shaanxi.

古文：弘智早丧母，事父以孝闻。
现代文：弘智早年丧母，以奉事父亲孝顺闻名。
English: Hongzhi lost his mother at an early age and was known for his filial obedience to his father.

古文：学通《三礼》、《史记》、《汉书》。
现代文：勤于治学，精通《三礼》、《史记》、《汉书》。
English: He was diligent in his studies and was well versed in the "Three Rites," "History" and "Chinese Classics."

古文：隋大业中，为司隶从事。
现代文：隋朝大业年间，为司隶从事。
English: During the Sui Dynasty and the reign of King Taejo, he worked as a clerk.

古文：武德初，大理卿郎楚之应诏举之，授詹事府主簿。
现代文：武德初，大理卿郎楚之应诏命举荐他，授官詹事府主簿。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Wu De, he was recommended by Emperor Dalian's son-in-law, Emperor Longchu, and was awarded the title of Zhan Shifu's chief secretary.

古文：又预修《六代史》。
现代文：曾参与修撰《六代史》。
English: He participated in the compilation of "Six Generations of History."

古文：初，与秘书丞令狐德棻、齐王文学袁朗等十数人同修《艺文类聚》，转太子舍人。
现代文：开始时即与秘书丞令狐德、齐王文学袁郎等十多人共同撰写大型类书《艺文类聚》，后转任太子舍人。
English: At the very beginning, he co-wrote the large-scale book "Artistic Literature Collection" with more than ten people, including the secretary Zhao Lingfude and the king of literature Yuan Rong, and then he was transferred to the position of the prince's assistant.

古文：贞观中，累迁黄门侍郎，兼弘文馆学士。
现代文：贞观年间，转任黄门侍郎，兼弘文馆学士。
English: During the Zhenguan years, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter, and also became a scholar of the Hongwen Museum.

古文：以疾出为莱州刺史。
现代文：因病出京为官任莱州刺史。
English: Due to illness, he left Beijing to serve as the official governor of Laizhou.

古文：弘智事兄弘安，同于事父，所得俸禄，皆送于兄处。
现代文：弘智奉事哥哥弘安，如同侍奉父亲一样，所得到的俸禄都送到哥哥手中。
English: Hongzhi served his brother, Hongan, just as he had served his father, and the salary he received went to his brother.

古文：及兄亡，哀毁过礼。
现代文：到哥哥去世时，他悲哀得形销骨立超过礼仪。
English: By the time of his brother's death, he was grief-stricken beyond measure.

古文：事寡嫂甚谨，抚孤侄以慈爱称。
现代文：他侍奉寡嫂也很谨慎周到，抚养侄儿以慈爱著称。
English: He also served his widowed sister-in-law very carefully and thoughtfully, and was known for raising his nephew with love.

古文：稍迁太子右庶子。
现代文：随即迁任太子右庶子。
English: He was immediately transferred to the position of the Prince's right illegitimate son.

古文：及宫废，坐除名。
现代文：到东宫太子位被废时，获罪除名。
English: When the position of crown prince of the Eastern Court was abolished, he was convicted and removed from the list.

古文：寻起为光州刺史。
现代文：不久起用为光州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as Gwangju's chief historian.

古文：永徽初，累转陈王师。
现代文：永徽初，转任陈王师。
English: At the beginning of Yonghui, he was transferred to Chen Wang Shi.

古文：高宗令弘智于百福殿讲《孝经》，召中书门下三品及弘文馆学士、太学儒者，并预讲筵。
现代文：高宗下令让弘智在百福殿讲授《孝经》，召来中书门下三品官及弘文馆学士、太学儒生，一道参与讲解经义。
English: Gao Zong ordered Hong Zhi to give a lecture on "The Filial Piety Sutra" at Baifu Hall, and invited three officials from the Chinese Academy of Letters, a scholar from the Chinese Academy of Letters, and a Confucian scholar from the Chinese Academy of Arts to participate in the lecture.

古文：弘智演暢微言，备陈五孝。
现代文：弘智阐发畅叙经义的通达幽微之言，备陈天子、诸侯、卿大夫、士人、庶人等五种人的孝行。
English: Hongzhi expounded the profound and subtle words of the scripture, and prepared five kinds of filial piety for Chen Tianzi, princes, noble doctors, scholars, and commoners.

古文：学士等难问相继，弘智酬应如响。
现代文：学士们连续不断地进行问难，弘智则应答如流。
English: The bachelors continuously asked questions, and Hongzhi answered them fluently.

古文：高宗怡然曰： 朕颇耽坟籍，至于《孝经》，偏所习睹。
现代文：高宗很高兴地说： 我很专心研习古代典籍，至于《孝经》，更是偏爱反复翻阅。
English: Gao Zong said happily: I am very dedicated to studying ancient classics, and as for the Filial Piety Sutra, I prefer to read it over and over again.

古文：然孝之为德，弘益实深，故云 德教加于百姓，刑于四海，是知孝道之为大也。 
现代文：而孝作为一种道德，加以弘扬的话，意义确实深远，所以说： 以道德教化施加于百姓，作为治理天下的法典。 由此可知孝道所以重要的原因了。 
English: But filial piety as a kind of morality, if it is promoted, has a far-reaching significance. Therefore, it is said that moral education should be imposed on the people as a code to govern the world. From this, we can see why filial piety is important.

古文：顾谓弘智： 宜略陈此经切要者，以辅不逮。 
现代文：并对弘智说： 应该概略地陈述孝经的要领，以辅助有所不及的地方。 
English: He also said to Hongzhi: It is necessary to outline the essentials of the Filial Piety Sutra, and to supplement it where it falls short.

古文：弘智对曰： 昔者天子有诤臣七人，虽无道不失其天下。
现代文：弘智回答说： 从前皇帝有直言谏诤的臣子七人，虽然暴虐无德政而不失天下。
English: Hongzhi replied, "Once upon a time, the emperor had seven outspoken courtiers, who, although they were tyrannical and unprincipled, did not lose the respect of the world.

古文：微臣颛愚，愿以此言奏献。 
现代文：小臣愚昧，愿意将此言进献皇上。 
English: The junior minister was foolish and was willing to present this to the emperor.

古文：帝甚悦，赐彩绢二百匹、名马一匹。
现代文：高宗很高兴，赐给他彩绢二百匹、名马一匹。
English: Gaozong was very pleased and gave him two hundred painted horses and one famous horse.

古文：则天临朝，为酷吏所陷，配流岭南，寻卒。
现代文：不久转任国子祭酒，仍为崇贤馆学士。永徽四年去世，享年八十二岁，谥号为宣。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Kuniko Matsuri sake brewer, and was still a scholar at the Chongxian Hall. He died in Yonghui four years later, at the age of 82, and his posthumous name was Xuan.

古文：裴守真，绛州稷山人也。
现代文：有文集二十卷。裴守真，绛州稷山县人。
English: There are 20 volumes of anthologies. Pei Shouzhen, a native of Lushan County, Zhangzhou.

古文：后魏冀州刺史叔业六世孙也。
现代文：北魏冀州刺史裴叔业六世孙。
English: He is the sixth-generation grandson of Northern Wei Jizhou poet Shi Pei Shuhei.

古文：父慎，大业中为淮南郡司户。
现代文：父亲裴腘，大业年间为淮南郡司户。
English: His father, Pei Jun, was the county magistrate of Huainan County during the Ta Ying period.

古文：属郡人杨琳、田瓚据郡作乱，尽杀官吏。以慎素有仁政，相诫不许惊害，仍令人护送慎及妻子还乡。
现代文：适逢淮南郡人杨琳、田瓒依凭本郡造反，尽杀官吏，因为裴腘平素施行仁政，便互相告诫不许惊吓杀害他，还派人护送裴腘和他的妻子儿女回乡。
English: At the right time, Yang Lin and Tian Huiyi, residents of Huainan County, rebelled against their county and killed all the officials. Because Pei Xuan had always practiced benevolent politics, they warned each other not to scare and kill him. They also sent someone to escort Pei Xuan and his wife and children back to their hometown.

古文：贞观中，官至酂令。
现代文：贞观年间，官职做到赞阝县令。
English: During Zhenguan's reign, the highest-ranking official post was that of county magistrate.

古文：守真早孤，事母至孝。及母终，哀毁骨立，殆不胜丧。
现代文：裴守真幼年丧父，侍奉母亲极为孝顺，到母亲去世时，他因悲哀而骨瘦如柴，几乎不能忍受丧母的痛苦。
English: Pei Shouzhen lost his father at a young age and served his mother with great filial piety. By the time of his mother's death, he was so thin with grief that he could hardly bear the pain of losing his mother.

古文：复事寡姊及兄甚谨，闺门礼则，士友所推。
现代文：他奉事寡居的姐姐以及兄长也很恭谨，所遵闺门礼法的情形，被士人朋友们推崇。
English: His widowed sister and brother-in-law were also very respectful, and the girl's door etiquette they followed was highly respected by their scholar friends.

古文：初举进士，及应八科举，累转乾封尉，属永淳初关中大饥，守真尽以禄俸供姊及诸甥，身及妻子粗粝不充，初无倦色。
现代文：开始时考中进士，后应制举考试入仕，转任乾封县县尉。碰到永淳初关中遭遇大饥荒，守真把他的俸禄全部给了姐姐和众外甥。自己和妻子儿女则连粗粮糙米还填不饱肚子，却始终没有厌倦的意思。
English: At the beginning, he was promoted to the junior high school entrance examination, and later he was promoted to the senior high school entrance examination, and then he was transferred to the county lieutenant of Qianfeng County. When he encountered the great famine in the middle of the Yong Chun era, Shou Zhen gave all his salary to his sister and his nephews. He and his wife and children could not even fill their stomachs with coarse brown rice, but they never got tired of it.

古文：寻授太常博士。
现代文：不久授官太常博士。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Taijo hakase.

古文：守真尤善礼仪之学，当时以为称职。
现代文：守真尤其善长礼仪之学，当时都认为他的才能很称职。
English: Shoujin was particularly good at the study of etiquette, and his talent was considered very competent at the time.

古文：高宗时封嵩山，诏礼官议射牲之事，守真奏曰：据《周礼》及《国语》，郊祀天地，天子自射其牲。
现代文：高宗时封嵩山筑坛祭天。诏命礼官商议有关射杀牲畜的事宜，守真奏禀道： 根据《周礼》及《国语》来看，到郊外祭祀天地，古代确是天子亲自射杀祭祀用牲畜。
English: At the time of Emperor Gao Zong, Mount Songshan was fenced off and a altar was built to worship Heaven. The imperial edict ordered the etiquette officials to discuss the matter of shooting the livestock, and Shuzhen played a role: According to the "Weekly Rituals" and "National Language," it is true that in ancient times, the Son of Heaven himself shot the livestock for sacrifice when he went to the suburbs to worship Heaven and Earth.

古文：汉武唯封太山，令侍中儒者射牲行事。
现代文：汉武帝只封了泰山，他是命令侍中儒官射杀牲畜来祭天。
English: Emperor Hanwu only sealed Mount Tai, he ordered the attendant Confucian official to shoot livestock to sacrifice to the heavens.

古文：至于余祀，亦无射牲之文。
现代文：至于其余的祭祀，也没有射杀牲畜的文字记载。
English: As for the rest of the sacrifices, there is no written record of the shooting of livestock.

古文：但亲舂射牲，虽是古礼，久从废省。
现代文：只是君王亲自动手射杀牲畜，虽是古礼，长时间以来已简省废除了。
English: However, although it was an ancient rite for the king to shoot livestock with his own hands, it has been abolished for a long time.

古文：据封禅祀礼曰：未明十五刻，宰人以鸾刀割牲，质明而行事。
现代文：据封禅祭祀天地的礼仪来看，天亮前三四个小时，宰人用有铃的鸾刀斩杀牲畜，待天亮时进行祭祀。
English: According to the etiquette of the Fuzan ritual, three to four hours before dawn, the slaughterer uses a sickle with a bell to slaughter the livestock, and the ritual is performed at dawn.

古文：比鸾驾至时，宰牲总毕，天皇唯奠玉酌献而已。
现代文：等到皇帝的车驾到达祭祀地点，宰杀牲口的事已全部完毕，皇上只需用玉器祭奠，酌酒以献神罢了。
English: By the time the emperor's chariot arrived at the sacrificial site, the slaughtering of the animals had been completed, and the emperor only needed to make a ritual offering with jade and drink wine as an offering to the gods.

古文：今祀前一日射牲，事即伤早；祀日方始射牲，事又伤晚。
现代文：如今若于祭祀前一天射杀牲畜，行事失之于过早；若祭祀那天才开始射牲，事情又有损于太晚。
English: Today, if the shooting of livestock begins the day before the sacrifice, it is too early; if the shooting of livestock begins on the day of the sacrifice, it is too late.

古文：若依汉武故事，即非亲射之仪，事不可行。
现代文：如果依照汉武帝的先例，就不是天子亲自射牲的礼仪，射牲的事不可行。 
English: If you follow the precedent of Emperor Hanwu, it is not the etiquette of the Son of Heaven personally shooting the animal, and the shooting of the animal is not feasible.

古文：又《神功破阵乐》、《功成庆善乐》二舞，每奏，上皆立对。守真又议曰：窃唯二舞肇兴，讴吟攸属，赞九功之茂烈，叶万国之欢心。
现代文：又有《神功破阵乐》、《功成庆善乐》二部舞乐每次演奏时，皇帝都要面对着站立，守真对这事又议论道： 这两部舞乐开始兴起时，讴歌盛世长久百代相续，赞美六府三事功业的盛大辉煌，与万国民众之心相谐和。
English: In addition, there are two dance pieces, "Divine Achievement Breakthrough Music" and "Achievement Celebration Music," and every time they are performed, the emperor has to stand facing the audience. Shuzhen also discussed this matter: When these two dance pieces began to emerge, they were sung for hundreds of generations, praising the grand splendor of the three works of the Six Prefectures and harmonizing with the hearts of the people of all nations.

古文：义均《韶》、《夏》，用兼宾祭，皆祖宗盛德，而子孙享之。
现代文：其意义与《韶》、《夏》之乐相同，兼用作接待宾客以及祭祀的礼仪，都是祖宗盛德，而子孙享用的意思。
English: Its meaning is the same as the music of "Summer" and "Summer," and it is also used for the reception of guests and the etiquette of sacrifice. It means that the ancestors were prosperous, and the descendants enjoyed it.

古文：详览传记，未有皇王立观之礼。
现代文：详细阅览各种传记，并没有皇帝君主站立观赏的礼节。
English: The detailed reading of various biographies does not have the etiquette of the emperor and monarch standing up to watch.

古文：况升中大事，华夷毕集，九服仰垂拱之安，百蛮怀率舞之庆。
现代文：何况帝王祭天上告成功这样的大事，中外人士毕集，全国民众仰望垂衣拱手而治的安康，外国使臣怀着向往朝拜天子的庆典。
English: What's more, the success of the Emperor's Birthday Festival is such a big event that people from home and abroad gather, the people of the whole country look up to the well-being of the emperor, and foreign envoys look forward to the celebration of worshiping the emperor.

古文：甄陶化育，莫匪神功，岂于乐舞，别申严敬。
现代文：所有推行教化长育万物的事，没有什么不是神灵的功绩，岂能在乐舞方面，特别地表明严肃敬畏之意？
English: All the things that promote enlightenment and nurture all things, there is nothing that is not the merit of the gods, can it be in the music and dance, in particular, to show serious reverence?

古文：臣等详议，奏二舞时，天皇不合起立。
现代文：我们这些臣子仔细商议过了，觉得演奏二部舞乐时，天皇不应当起立。 
English: We, the courtiers, after careful deliberation, feel that the Emperor should not stand up when the two pieces of dance music are played.

古文：时并从守真议。
现代文：当时大家都同意守真的意见。
English: At that time, everyone agreed to be honest.

古文：会高宗不豫，事竟不行。
现代文：恰逢高宗生病，事情就未能实行。
English: When Gao Zong fell ill, the matter could not be carried out.

古文：及高宗崩，时无大行凶仪，守真与同时博士韦叔夏、辅抱素等讨论旧事创为之，当时称为得礼之中。
现代文：及高宗去世，当时没有大行丧礼仪式，守真与同时的博士韦叔夏、辅抱素等人对过去的先例加以讨论创制一种丧礼仪式，当时人认为很符合于礼。
English: At the time of Gaozong's death, there was no grand funeral ceremony. Shuzhen and his contemporaries, Dr. Wei Shuxia, Fu Bao Su, and others discussed the precedents of the past to create a funeral ceremony that was considered to be in line with the ceremony.

古文：守真天授中为司府丞，则天特令推究诏狱，务存平恕，前后奏免数十家。
现代文：守真天授年间为司府丞，武则天特别任命他重新审理奉武则天诏命关押的犯人的案子，他坚持公平仁恕之心，前后上奏章免去数十人的罪行。
English: During the reign of Shuzhen Tenzhu, he was the prefectural magistrate, and Wu Zetian specially appointed him to re-examine the case of the criminal who was imprisoned on the orders of Wu Zetian. He insisted on fairness and mercy, and excused dozens of people's crimes.

古文：由是不合旨，出为汴州司录，累转成州刺史。
现代文：因为这样做的结果不合则天旨意，他被贬为汴州司录，后转任成州刺史。
English: Because the result of doing so was not in accordance with the will of heaven, he was relegated to the record of Zhangzhou, and then transferred to the record of Chengzhou.

古文：为政不务威刑，甚为人吏所爱。
现代文：守真施政不追求威严重刑，很被百姓官吏所喜爱。
English: The policy of "keeping the truth" and not pursuing the most severe punishment is very popular with the people and officials.

古文：俄转宁州刺史，成州人送出境者数千人。
现代文：不久转任宁州刺史，成州人送他离任送出境的有数千人。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Ningzhou chief historian, and thousands of people from Chengdu sent him out of the country.

古文：长安中卒。
现代文：守真长安年间去世。
English: Morizane died in the Nagano era.

古文：子子余，事继母以孝闻。
现代文：裴守真的儿子裴子余，侍奉继母以孝行闻名。
English: Pei Shoujin's son, Pei Zi Yu, served his stepmother and was known for his filial piety.

古文：举明经，累补鄠县尉。
现代文：考中明经科入仕，后补官县县尉。
English: In the middle of the examination, he entered the service of Ming Jingke, and later became a county officer.

古文：时同列李朝隐、程行谌皆以文法著称，子余独以词学知名。
现代文：当时他的同事李朝隐、程行谌都以写法令条文著称，子余独以文章学问知名。
English: At that time, his colleagues Li Chaoying and Cheng Xingyao were both famous for writing laws and regulations, and Zi Yu Du was famous for his articles on culture.

古文：或问雍州长史陈崇业，子余与朝隐、行谌优劣，崇业曰： 譬如春兰秋菊，俱不可废也。 
现代文：有人问雍州长史陈崇业，子余与朝隐、行谌谁优谁劣，崇业说： 好比春兰和秋菊，都不可偏废。 
English: When someone asked the governor of Yongzheng, Chen Chongye, who is superior and inferior to Ziyu, Chaoying, and Xingyao, Chongye said: It is like the spring orchid and the autumn chrysanthemum, both should not be wasted.

古文：子余以为官户承恩，始为蕃户，又是子孙，不可抑之为贱，奏劾其事。
现代文：景龙年间，为左台监察御史。当时泾州、岐州二州有隋代番户的子孙数千家，司农卿赵履温上奏章，提出将他们全部没收为官户奴婢，用来做赏赐的人口，赏给位尊受宠幸的人。
English: At that time, there were thousands of descendants of Sui dynasty vassal households in Luzhou and the two prefectures of Qizhou. Zhao Liwen, the Secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, proposed to confiscate all of them as slaves of government officials, to be used as a reward population, to be awarded to those who were favored by the emperor.

古文：时履温依附宗楚客等，与子余廷对曲直。子余词色不挠，履温等词屈，从子余奏为定。开元初，累迁冀州刺史。政存宽惠，人吏称之。
现代文：子余则认为因犯罪而没入官府服杂役的官户，受到皇帝恩泽遇赦宥才成为番户，这些人又是番户的子孙，不可贬抑为贱民，上奏章检举了这件事。开元初，转任冀州刺史，为政宽厚仁惠，百姓官吏都称赞他。
English: Zi Yu, on the other hand, believed that because of their crimes, they were not included in the official households of the government to perform miscellaneous services, and only became vassals by the emperor's grace and pardon. These people were also the descendants of vassals, and could not be reduced to untouchables. Shang Songzhang reported this matter. At the beginning of the first century, he was transferred to the post of Jizhou historian, and the people and officials praised him for his leniency and benevolence.

古文：又为岐王府长史，加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：后又任歧王府长史，加官银青光禄大夫。
English: Later, he also served as the chief historian of King Bi, and was promoted to the post of silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：十四年卒，谥曰孝。
现代文：开元十四年去世，谥号为孝。
English: He died in the fourteenth year of the first century, and his posthumous name was Takashi.

古文：卒后，少子伊衡，以妾为妻，费散田宅，仍列讼诸兄，家风替矣。
现代文：子余居官清廉宽简，与诸位兄弟相亲相爱。他兄弟六人，都有志向与操守。
English: His six brothers are all ambitious and virtuous, and he and his brothers love each other dearly.

古文：崔沔，京兆长安人，周陇州刺史士约玄孙也。
现代文：二弟巨卿，为卫尉卿；另一个弟弟耀卿，另外有传。崔沔，京兆长安县人，北周陇州刺史崔士约的玄孙。
English: His second younger brother, Juqing, was Weifeiqing; his other younger brother, Yaoqing, is also said to have been Cui Yao, a native of Jingzhao and Chang'an County, and the great-great-grandson of Northern Zhou's statesman Cui Shiyou.

古文：自博陵徙关中，世为著姓。
现代文：先祖从博陵迁居陕西后，世代为望族。
English: After the ancestors moved from Boling to Shaanxi, they became a respected family for generations.

古文：父皑，库部员外郎、汝州长史。
现代文：父亲崔皑，为库部员外郎、汝州长史。
English: His father, Cui Wei, was the second son of a treasurer and the son of a governor.

古文：沔淳谨，口无二言，事亲至孝，博学有文词。
现代文：崔沔敦厚恭谨，口中从无二话，侍奉父母很孝顺，学问广博善于写文章。
English: Choe Son Doong is polite and courteous. He never says a word out of place. He is very dutiful in serving his parents. He is well-read and good at writing articles.

古文：初应制举，对策高第。
现代文：开始应制举考试时，对策高中。
English: At the beginning of the entrance examination, the countermeasures are high school.

古文：俄被落第者所援，则天令所司重试，沔所对策，又工于前，为天下第一，由是大知名。
现代文：不久被落第的人援引议论，武则天就命令主考官重新考核，崔沔所回答的策问，比前次的更加精工，为天下第一，从此大为知名。
English: Soon after, Wu Zetian ordered the chief examiner to re-evaluate the questions, and the questions answered by Cui Gan were more precise than the previous ones, ranking first in the world. From then on, they became well-known.

古文：再转陆浑主簿。
现代文：后转任陆浑县主簿。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of the chief bookkeeper of Lukhun County.

古文：秩满调迁，吏部侍郎岑羲深赏重之，谓人曰： 此今之郄诜也。 
现代文：任职期满待调任迁官时，吏部侍郎岑羲非常赏识看重他，对人说： 这人是当今的郄诜。 
English: At the end of his term of office, when he was about to be transferred to a new post, the secretary of the personnel department highly appreciated and valued him, saying to people: This person is today's.

古文：特表荐擢为左补阙，累迁祠部员外郎。
现代文：特为上表举荐提拔为左补阙，后转任祠部员外郎。
English: He was specially recommended and promoted to the left assistant priest for the above table, and then transferred to the member of the ancestral hall, Wairo.

古文：沔为人舒缓，讷于造次，当官正色，未尝挠沮。
现代文：崔沔为人从容谦和，急遽间不能以言词自我表达，为官端直严肃，未曾屈从沮丧。
English: Cui Rong is a calm and gentle person, unable to express himself in words in a hurry, a straightforward and serious official, and has never succumbed to depression.

古文：睿宗时，征拜中书舍人。
现代文：睿宗时，征召授官中书舍人。
English: At the time of Ruizong, there was a call for the appointment of middle school students.

古文：时沔母老疾在东都，沔不忍舍之，固请闲官，以申侍养，由是改为虞部郎中。
现代文：当时崔沔的母亲年老患病住在东都洛阳，崔沔不忍离母而去，坚决请求担任职务清简的闲官，以尽奉养母亲之责，因此改授虞部郎中。
English: At that time, Cui Yao's mother was old and ill and lived in Luoyang, the eastern capital. Cui Yao could not bear to leave his mother, and he firmly requested to serve as an idle official with simple duties in order to fulfill the responsibility of supporting his mother. Therefore, he was re-taught to be the middle son of Yu Bu.

古文：无何，检校御史中丞。
现代文：不久，授官检校御史中丞。
English: Soon, he was promoted to vice-president of the school.

古文：时监察御史宋宣远，恃卢怀慎之亲，颇犯法，沔举劾之。
现代文：其时监察御史宋宣远，依仗与卢怀慎的亲近，屡屡触犯刑法，崔沔加以检举揭发。
English: At that time, Song Xuanyuan, the superintendent of history, repeatedly violated the criminal law, relying on his closeness to Lu Huaixin, and was reported and exposed by Cui Gan.

古文：又姚崇之子光禄少卿彝，留司东都，颇通宾客，广纳贿赂，沔又将按验其事。
现代文：还有姚崇的儿子光禄少卿姚彝，为东都留守，与宾客交往频繁，广为收受贿赂，崔沔又要审查这件事。
English: There is also Yao Chong's son, Guanglu Shaoqing Yao Tong, who stays away from Dongdu, frequently interacts with guests, and widely accepts bribes. Cui Tong also wants to review this matter.

古文：姚、卢时在政事，遽荐沔有史才，转为著作郎，其实去权也。
现代文：姚崇、卢怀慎当时执掌政事，马上举荐崔沔有史才，转而授官著作郎，其实是夺去他的权柄。
English: At that time, Yao Chong and Lu Huaixin were in charge of political affairs. They immediately recommended that Cui Shizhen, a man of historical talent, be promoted to the post, but in fact they deprived him of his power.

古文：开元七年，为太子左庶子。
现代文：开元七年，任太子左庶子。
English: In the seventh year of the first year of the year, he was appointed the prince's left illegitimate son.

古文：母卒，哀毁逾礼，常于庐前受吊，宾客未尝至于灵座之室，谓人曰： 平生非至亲者，未尝升堂入谒，岂可以存亡而变其礼也。 
现代文：母亲去世，他悲哀瘦损超出礼仪，常在倚庐前接受吊唁，宾客不曾进入安放灵座牌位的房子里。他对人说： 生平并非至亲的人，未曾升堂入室谒见，岂能因生死存亡而改变礼节呢。 
English: When his mother died, he was sad and thin beyond the etiquette, he often received condolences before the funeral, guests never entered the house where the memorial plaque was placed. He said to people: People who are not close relatives in life, have not entered the hall to see, can they change the etiquette because of life and death?

古文：中书令张说数称荐之。
现代文：中书令张说屡次称赞并举荐他。
English: Zhang said he has repeatedly praised and recommended him.

古文：服阕，拜中书侍郎。
现代文：为母服丧期满，授官中书侍郎。
English: As the mourning period for his mother's death was over, he was promoted to junior secretary.

古文：或谓沔曰： 今之中书，皆是宰相承宣制命。
现代文：有人对崔沔说： 今日的中书省，都是宰相承奉宣谕拟订命令。
English: Someone said to Cui Wei: Today's China's book ministries are all the result of the prime minister's order.

古文：侍郎虽是副贰，但署位而已，甚无事也。 沔曰： 不然。
现代文：侍郎虽然是中书省的副长官，却只是徒设职位而已，完全没有什么事。 崔沔说： 并非如此。
English: Although the chamberlain is the vice-governor of the Ministry of Chinese Literature, it is just an artificial position, and there is absolutely nothing wrong with it.Cui Wei said: This is not the case.

古文：设官分职，上下相维，各申所见，方为济理。
现代文：设官分有不同职位，上下要互相配合，各申己见，才是成事之理。
English: Officials are divided into different positions, and it is necessary for the upper and lower levels to cooperate with each other. It is only by expressing one's own views that things can be accomplished.

古文：岂可俯默偷安，而为怀禄士也！ 
现代文：哪能驯服听命默默无闻而偷生，成为留恋官爵的人呢！ 
English: Who can tame those who obey orders to live in obscurity and secretly become people who yearn for a peerage?

古文：自是每有制敕及曹事，沔多所异同，张说颇不悦焉。
现代文：从此每当有拟订诏敕或其他官署里的事时，崔沔常有不同的意见，张说为此很不高兴。
English: From then on, whenever there was a drafting of the edict or other matters in the government department, Cui Gan often had different opinions, Zhang said that he was very unhappy for this reason.

古文：寻出为魏州刺史，奏课第一，征还朝廷，分掌吏部十铨事。
现代文：不久被贬为魏州刺史，后因考核政绩为第一，被征召回到朝廷，分工执掌吏部十铨事。
English: Soon he was relegated to the position of Wei Zhou's chief historian, and later he was called back to the imperial court to be in charge of the division of labor in the personnel department.

古文：以清直，历秘书监、太子宾客。
现代文：因清廉正直，历任秘书监、太子宾客。
English: Due to its honesty, successive secretaries have been invited as guests of the crown prince.

古文：二十四年，制令礼官议加笾豆之数及服制之纪。
现代文：开元二十四年，诏命礼官议论增加祭祀用笾豆数目以及服丧制度的法度准则。
English: In the 24th year of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the etiquette officials to discuss increasing the number of peas used for sacrifices and the legal guidelines for the mourning system.

古文：陛下运稽古之明，特降别敕，一依古礼。
现代文：太常卿韦纟舀奏请增加宗庙的祭奠，每座灵位各增放到十二个笾豆。
English: Please increase the offering of the ancestral temple, and each shrine should be increased to twelve peas.

古文：事符典故，人知向方，式固宗盟，社稷之福。
现代文：外祖父母的丧服加到服期九个月的大功服，舅氏的丧服加到服期五个月的小功服，为堂姨、堂舅、舅母服丧请袒衣免冠以示哀思。
English: The mourning clothes of grandparents are added to the nine-month period of service, the mourning clothes of uncles are added to the five-month period of service, and the mourning clothes of aunts, uncles and aunts are removed to show their sorrow.

古文：更图异议，窃所未详。
现代文：当时皇上又命令百官对韦纟舀的意见可行与否详加讨论。
English: At that time, the emperor also ordered the officials to discuss in detail whether Wei Xuan's opinion was feasible or not.

古文：时职方郎中韦述、户部郎中杨伯成、礼部员外郎杨冲昌、监门兵曹刘秩等，亦建议与沔相符。
现代文：崔沔仔细地阐述了自己不同的主张。其时职方郎中韦述、户部郎中杨伯成、礼部员外郎杨冲昌、监门兵曹刘秩等人，也提出与崔沔相同的建议。
English: Choe Son elaborated on his different ideas. At that time, the following people also proposed the same ideas as Choe Son: the vice-chairman of the office, Wei Soo, the vice-chairman of the household department, Yang Boseong, the vice-chairman of the etiquette department, Yang Chongchang, and the guard sergeant, Liu Chizhi.

古文：俄又令中书门下参详为定。
现代文：不久又诏命中书门下省参照这些意见详加研究定夺。
English: Soon after, the emperor ordered the provincial government to make a detailed study and decision with reference to these opinions.

古文：于是宗庙之典，笾豆每座各加至六，亲姨、舅为小功，舅母加缌麻，堂姨至袒免，余依旧定，乃下制施行焉。
现代文：于是宗庙祭祀大典，每座灵位的笾豆数各加到六个，亲姨舅的丧服为五个月丧期的小功服，舅母丧服为服期三个月的缌麻服，堂姨丧服增至袒衣免冠以示哀思，其余的依照以前的定制，然后下诏施行。
English: As a result, for the grand ceremony of the ancestral temple, the number of peas for each shrine was increased to six, the funeral dress of the uncle was a small work dress with a five-month mourning period, the aunt's funeral dress was a nettle dress with a three-month mourning period, and the cousin's funeral dress was increased to a gown without a crown to show sorrow. The rest was in accordance with the previous custom, and then the following edict was implemented.

古文：累转库部员外郎，以疾，固辞不堪繁剧，转为太子洗马。
现代文：崔沔既善长于《仪礼》等礼经，朝廷每有疑惑难解的不同议论，都依靠他进行决断。
English: Since Cui Gan was good at the "Rite" and other rituals, the imperial court relied on him to make decisions whenever there were doubts and difficult discussions.

古文：卒，年五十余。
现代文：开元二十七年去世，享年六十七岁，追赠礼部尚书。
English: He passed away on the 27th day of the first month of the year, at the age of 67, and was posthumously awarded the Sho Sho Sho award.

古文：张琇者，蒲州解人也。
现代文：张琇，蒲州解县人。
English: Zhang Qi, a native of Puzhou Jie County.

古文：父审素，为巂州都督，在边累载。
现代文：父亲张审素，为州都督，呆在边境多年。
English: His father, Zhang Xiusu, was the provincial governor and had stayed at the border for many years.

古文：俄有纠其军中赃罪，敕监察御史杨汪驰传就军按之。
现代文：后有人检举审素在军中有贪赃的罪行，诏命监察御史杨汪乘驿站车马急行赶往军中审查这件事。
English: After some people reported the crime of corruption in the army, the emperor ordered the inspector Yang Wang to rush to the army to investigate the matter.

古文：汪在路，为审素党与所劫，对汪杀告事者，胁汪令奏雪审素之罪。
现代文：杨汪在路途中被张审素的同党所劫持，当着杨汪的面杀了检举的人，胁迫杨汪上奏章为张审素洗雪罪名。
English: On the way, Yang Wang was kidnapped by Zhang Xiusu's fellow party members, who killed the person who reported the case in front of Yang Wang and coerced Yang Wang to write a report accusing Zhang Xiusu of whitewashing.

古文：俄而州人翻杀审素之党，汪始得还。
现代文：不久蒲州人反过来杀掉了审素的同党，杨汪才得以返回。
English: Soon after, the people of Puzhou in turn killed Qiusu's fellow party members, and only then was Yang Wang able to return.

古文：至益州，奏称审素谋反，因深按审素，构成其罪。斩之，籍没其家。
现代文：到了益州，杨汪上书称张审素谋反，于是苛刻地审查张审素，构成他的罪行，把他杀了，抄没了他的家产入官。
English: When he arrived in Yizhou, Yang Wang wrote a letter saying that Zhang Xiusu was plotting a rebellion, so he harshly examined Zhang Xiusu, constituted his crime, killed him, and confiscated his family's property to pay the officials.

古文：琇与兄瑝，以年幼坐徙岭外。
现代文：张琇与哥哥张王皇，因年幼仅被罚流放岭南。
English: Zhang Xuan and his brother Zhang Wanghuang were only exiled to Lingnan due to their young age.

古文：寻各逃归，累年隐匿。
现代文：不久两人分别逃回，长年隐藏起来。
English: Soon the two fled back separately and hid for many years.

古文：汪后累转殿中侍御史，改名万顷。
现代文：杨汪后来转任殿中侍御史，改名为万顷。
English: Later, Yang Wang was transferred to the post of attendant of the palace, and his name was changed to Wan He.

古文：开元二十三年，瑝、琇候万顷于都城，挺刃杀之。
现代文：开元二十三年，张王皇、张琇在京城守候到杨万顷，拔刀把他杀了。
English: In the 23rd year of the Heian period, Zhang Wanghuang and Zhang Ye waited for Yang Wanha in the capital and killed him with a drawn sword.

古文：瑝虽年长，其发谋及手刃，皆琇为之。
现代文：张王皇虽为年长的，而首谋及动手杀人，都是张琇干的。
English: Although Zhang Wanghuang was older, it was Zhang Ye who masterminded and carried out the murder.

古文：既杀万顷，系表于斧刃，自言报仇之状。
现代文：杀了杨万顷后，张琇把表状系在刀刃上，自己说明报仇的情况。
English: After killing Yang Wanhao, Zhang Ye tied a watch on the blade of his sword and explained the circumstances of his revenge.

古文：便逃奔，将就江外，杀与万顷同谋构父罪者。
现代文：然后逃跑，准备赶到江南，杀掉与杨万顷同谋罗织父亲罪名的人。
English: Then he ran away, preparing to rush to the south of the Yangtze River to kill those who conspired with Yang Wanhao to frame his father.

古文：行至汜水，为捕者所获。
现代文：走到汜水，被追捕的人所俘获。
English: He walked to Surabaya and was captured by his pursuers.

古文：时都城士女，皆矜琇等幼稚孝烈，能复父仇，多言其合矜恕者。
现代文：当时京城里的男女老少，都同情张琇兄弟年纪幼小而行孝刚烈，能报父仇，多数认为应予怜悯宽恕。
English: At that time, men, women and children in Beijing all sympathized with the Zhangye brothers, who were young and could take revenge on their father. Most of them thought that they should be pitied and forgiven.

古文：中书令张九龄又欲活之。
现代文：中书令张九龄也想让他们活下来。
English: Zhang Jiuling also wanted them to survive.

古文：裴耀卿、李林甫固言： 国法不可纵报仇。 
现代文：裴耀卿、李林甫坚持说： 国法不能纵容复仇。 
English: Pei Yaoqing and Li Linfu insisted: The national law cannot condone revenge.

古文：上以为然，因谓九龄等曰： 复仇虽礼法所许，杀人亦格律具存。
现代文：皇帝同意这种意见，便对张九龄等人说： 复仇虽然为礼法所容许，杀了人也有刑法律令俱在。
English: The emperor agreed with this opinion and said to Zhang Jiuling and others: Although revenge is permitted by etiquette and law, killing someone is also punishable by law.

古文：孝子之情，义不顾命，国家设法，焉得容此！
现代文：孝子的情意，守义而不顾性命，然国家设立法令，又哪能容忍杀人！
English: Filial piety, righteousness and disregard for life, yet the state has enacted laws and decrees, and how can it tolerate murder!

古文：杀之成复仇之志，赦之亏律格之条。
现代文：杀了张琇兄弟仍可成就他们复仇的志向，赦免他们就会有损刑法律令的庄严。
English: Killing the Zhangye brothers can still fulfill their desire for revenge, and pardoning them would undermine the solemnity of the criminal law.

古文：然道路谊议，故须告示。 
现代文：然而民众喧哗议论影响很大，所以必须告示天下。 
English: However, public clamor has a great impact, so it must be announced to the world.

古文：乃下敕曰： 张瑝等兄弟同杀，推问款承。律有正条，俱各至死。
现代文：于是颁发诏敕道： 张王皇兄弟共同杀人，经推究审问已从实招供，法律有治罪条文，两人都各犯死罪。
English: Therefore, an edict was issued: Zhang Wanghuang's brothers jointly committed homicide, after investigation and interrogation, they have confessed to the facts, the law has criminal provisions, and both of them have committed capital crimes.

古文：近闻士庶，颇有谊词，矜其为父复仇，或言本罪冤滥。
现代文：近来听说士大夫及百姓中，很有些喧哗议论，同情他们为父复仇，有的说本来所定治罪条文枉曲过分。
English: Recently, I have heard that there is a lot of uproar among the scholars and the people, sympathizing with them to avenge their father, and some said that the original sentence was too excessive.

古文：但国家设法，事在经久，盖以济人，期于止杀。
现代文：然而国家设立法令，行事在于久长，是用以帮助人们的，希望制止杀人。
English: However, the state has set up an ordinance, long overdue, to help people and hopefully stop the killings.

古文：各申为子之志，谁非徇孝之夫，展转相继，相杀何限！
现代文：各人都要表明为人子的心意，谁又不是遵守孝道的大丈夫，若如此反复不绝，互相杀戮哪有了结。
English: Everyone should show his or her intention to be a good son or daughter, and it doesn't matter who isn't able to observe filial piety. If this happens over and over again, there will be no end to killing each other.

古文：咎由作士，法在必行；曾参杀人，亦不可恕。
现代文：皋陶做士大夫，法令在于必行；曾参杀人，也不可饶恕。
English: Zou Tao is a doctor, so the law must be enforced; if he was involved in a murder, he cannot be pardoned.

古文：不能加以刑戮，肆诸市朝，宜付河南府告示决杀。 
现代文：对张琇兄弟不宜施加酷刑处死，于市井上陈尸示众；而宜交河南府出告示加以处决。 
English: Zhang Ye's brothers should not be tortured to death, and their corpses should be publicly displayed in the city of Inoue; instead, they should be executed according to the notice issued by Henan Province.

古文：瑝、琇既死，士庶咸伤愍之，为作哀诔，榜于衢路。
现代文：张王皇、张琇死后，百姓士大夫都怜悯伤悼他们，为他们写作哀祭文章，张贴在大路边。
English: After the death of Zhang Wanghuang and Zhang Ye, the people's scholars and doctors all pitied and mourned them, wrote mourning articles for them, and posted them on the roadside.

古文：崔衍，左丞伦之子。
现代文：市民们为他们集资在他们被处死的地方修了一口义井，并把张王皇、张琇安葬在洛阳市东北的北邙山上，又恐怕杨万顷家的人来掘墓，一起修了好几个疑惑人的坟墓。当时的人伤悼他们竟如此深情。崔衍，左丞崔伦的儿子。
English: The citizens raised funds to build a well of righteousness for them at the place where they were executed, and buried Zhang Wanghuang and Zhang Qian on Beilun Mountain in the northeast of Luoyang City. I am afraid that the Yang Wanhe family came to dig the grave, and together they built several suspicious graves. The people at the time mourned them so deeply. Cui Yan, the son of Zuo Cui Lun.

古文：继母李氏，不慈于衍。
现代文：继母李氏对崔衍不慈惠。
English: Her stepmother, the Li family, was not kind to Cui Yan.

古文：衍时为富平尉，伦使于吐蕃，久方归，李氏衣弊衣以见伦。
现代文：崔衍做富平县尉时，崔伦出使到吐藩去，很长时间才回家，李氏穿着破衣服来见崔伦。
English: When Cui Yan was a lieutenant of Fuping County, Cui Lun was dispatched to Tufan. It took him a long time to get home. Mr. Li came to see Cui Lun in tattered clothes.

古文：伦问其故，李氏称： 自伦使于蕃中，衍不给衣食。 
现代文：崔伦问她怎么会这样，李氏声称： 从你出使吐蕃以后，崔衍就不供给衣食费用。 
English: When Cui Lun asked her how this could be, Ms. Li claimed: Since you have been sent to Tibet, Cui Yan has not provided food and clothing expenses.

古文：伦大怒，召衍责诟，命仆隶拉于地，袒其背，将鞭之。
现代文：崔伦听后极为愤怒，召唤崔衍前来大加责骂，命令仆人把他推倒在地上，袒露他的上身，准备鞭打他。
English: After hearing this, Cui Lun was extremely angry, summoned Cui Yan to come and scold him, and ordered the servant to push him to the ground, expose his upper body, and prepare to whip him.

古文：衍涕泣，终不自陈。
现代文：崔衍流着泪，始终不自行申辩。
English: With tears streaming down her face, Cui Yan refused to defend herself.

古文：伦弟殷，闻之趋往，以身蔽衍，杖不得下。
现代文：崔伦的弟弟崔殷，听说这种情况后赶紧前来，用身体遮蔽崔衍，木杖不能落下。
English: After hearing about the situation, Cui Yan, Cui Ren's younger brother, hurried to cover Cui Yan with his body. The cane could not fall.

古文：因大言曰： 衍每月俸钱，皆送嫂处，殷所具知，何忍乃言衍不给衣食！ 
现代文：崔殷随即大声说道： 崔衍每个月的俸钱都送到嫂嫂的手上，这些情况我知道，怎么还忍心说崔衍不供给衣食！ 
English: Cui Yin immediately said loudly: Cui Yan's monthly salary is sent to her sister-in-law's hand, I know these circumstances, how can I bear to say that Cui Yan does not provide food and clothing!

古文：伦怒乃解。
现代文：崔伦的怒气这才消解了。
English: It was only then that Trillian's anger subsided.

古文：由是伦遂不听李氏之谮。
现代文：从此崔伦便不听李氏的谗言。
English: From then on, Choe Ryong did not listen to Lee's criticism.

古文：及伦卒，衍事李氏益谨。
现代文：到崔伦去世后，崔衍侍奉李氏更加恭谨。
English: After Choe Ryun's death, Choe Yan became more respectful in serving the Lee clan.

古文：李氏所生子郃，每多取子母钱，使其主以契书征负于衍。
现代文：李氏所生的儿子崔，常常借很多高利贷，却让债主拿着借据去找崔衍索取欠债款。
English: Mr. Li's son, Cui, often borrowed a lot of usurious loans, but let the creditor take the IOU and go to Cui Yan to collect the debt.

古文：衍岁为偿之，故衍官至江州刺史，而妻子衣食无所余。
现代文：崔衍每年都要为崔偿还欠债，所以尽管他官做到了江州刺史，而妻子儿女的衣食用度没有宽裕过。
English: Cui Yan has to pay off debts for Cui every year, so although he has made history in Jiangsu Province, his wife and children's clothing consumption has not been generous.

古文：后历苏、虢二州刺史。
现代文：后来历任苏州、虢州二州刺史。
English: Later successively served as the governor of Suzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：虢居陕、华二州之间，而税重数倍。
现代文：虢州在陕州、华州之间，而赋税要比两州重好多倍。
English: Ganzhou is between Shaanxi and Huazhou, and the tax is many times heavier than the two states.

古文：其青苗钱，华、陕之郊，亩出十有八；而虢之郊，每征十之七。
现代文：所收青苗钱，华州、陕州郊外亩产十成可拥有八成；而虢州郊外，常常要征收到十成里的七成。
English: Of the seedlings money received, Huazhou and the suburbs of Shaanxi can have 80% of the 10% per mu yield; while the suburbs of Ganzhou often have to collect 70% of the 10%.

古文：衍乃上其事。时裴延龄领度支，方务聚敛，乃绐衍以前后刺史无言者。
现代文：崔衍于是上书谈论这件事，当时裴延龄兼任度支，正极力聚敛钱财，便欺骗崔衍说前后的刺史都没有说到这点。
English: Cui Yan then wrote a letter to discuss the matter. At that time, Pei Yanling, who was also in charge of the provincial branch, was trying his best to collect money. He deceived Cui Yan and said that the previous and subsequent histories did not mention this.

古文：衍又上陈人困，曰： 臣所治多是山田，且当邮传冲要，属岁不登，颇甚流离。
现代文：崔衍又上书陈述本州民众困窘的情形道： 我所治理的地方多是山田，而且正当驿站传舍冲要之地，连年谷物欠收，民众流转离散严重。
English: Cui Yan also submitted a letter stating the plight of the people of the state, saying: Most of the places I govern are Yamada, and they are rightfully important places for resettlement. Grain harvests have been missing for years, and people have been seriously displaced.

古文：旧额赋租，特望蠲减。
现代文：过去所定赋税数额，特望予以减免。
English: The amount of tax determined in the past is expected to be reduced and exempted.

古文：臣伏见比来诸郡论百姓间事，患在长吏因循不为申请，不诣实，不患朝廷不矜放。
现代文：我看到近来各郡谈论百姓中的事，都担心长官因循守旧，不为民众申诉请托，不务实，而不担心朝廷不予体恤解脱。
English: Recently, I have seen counties talking about the people's affairs, and they are all worried that the officials are following the old ways, not seeking permission for the people's complaints, not being pragmatic, and not worried that the imperial court will not be compassionate and relieved.

古文：有以不言受谴者，未有言而获罪者。
现代文：只有因不说明真情而受谴责的，没有说明情况反而获罪的。
English: Only those who were condemned for not clarifying the truth were found guilty of not clarifying the situation.

古文：陛下拔臣牧大郡，委臣抚疲民，臣所以不敢顾望，苟求自安，敢罄狂瞽，上干圣览。 
现代文：陛下选拔为臣治理大郡，委派臣下抚恤疲困的民众，臣下所以不敢瞻前顾后而苟活自安，而敢于罄尽狂悖不明的见解，上书干犯圣上玉览。 
English: His majesty selected him as a vassal to govern a large county, and appointed his vassals to care for the weary people. Therefore, his vassals did not dare to look ahead and behind and live in peace, but dared to go all out against unclear opinions, and wrote to the emperor.

古文：帝以衍词理切直，乃特敕度支，令减虢州青苗钱。
现代文：皇上因崔衍言词事理恳切耿直，便特地敕命度支，命令他减少虢州的青苗钱。
English: Because Cui Yan's words and deeds were sincere, the emperor ordered him to reduce the amount of money for young seedlings in Zhangzhou.

古文：迁宣歙池观察使，政务简便，人颇怀之。
现代文：转任宣州、歙州、池州观察使，政务简便，人们都很怀念他。
English: He was transferred to the post of Xuanzhou, Zhangzhou and Chizhou observation envoy. His government affairs were simple, and people miss him very much.

古文：其所择从事，多得名流。
现代文：他所选择的从事官员，多为名流。
English: The officials he has chosen to work with are mostly celebrities.

古文：时有位者待宾僚率轻傲，衍独加礼敬，幕中之士，后多显达。
现代文：当时有地位的人对待宾客幕僚都很轻视傲慢，崔衍独加礼敬，他幕府中的人士，后来多显贵通达。
English: At that time, people of status treated the guests and staff with contempt and arrogance, and Cui Yan was treated with courtesy and respect. He was a person in the shogunate, and later he was more distinguished and knowledgeable.

古文：贞元中，天下好进奉以结主恩，征求聚敛，州郡耗竭，韦皋、刘赞、裴肃为之首。
现代文：贞元年间，天下人喜好进贡钱财以赢得君主的恩宠，因而极力征求聚敛，州郡都被搜刮殆尽，韦皋、刘赞、裴肃是其中为首的。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, the people of the world preferred to pay tribute money to win the favor of the monarch, so they tried their best to collect it. The states and counties were all raided, with Wei Wei, Liu Zan, and Pei Su being the first.

古文：赞死而衍代其位。衍虽不能骤革其弊，居宣州十年，颇勤俭，府库盈溢。
现代文：刘赞死后崔衍代理了他的职务，崔衍虽然不能立即革除聚敛弊政，而他在宣州十年，很勤勉节俭，使得府库充盈。
English: After Liu Zan's death, Cui Yan took over his duties. Although Cui Yan could not immediately get rid of the evil policy of concentration, he was very diligent and frugal in Xuanzhou for ten years, making the treasury full.

古文：及穆赞代衍，宣州岁馑，遂以钱四十二万贯代百姓税，故宣州人不至流散。
现代文：到穆赞代替崔衍为刺史时，宣州发生饥荒，于是拿出四十二万贯钱代缴了百姓的赋税，所以宣州人不至于四处流散。
English: When Mu Zan replaced Cui Yan as chief historian, a famine occurred in Xuanzhou, so he took out 420,000 yuan to pay the people's taxes on behalf of the people, so Xuanzhou people would not be scattered everywhere.

古文：贞元二十一年，诏加工部尚书。
现代文：贞元二十一年，诏命加官工部尚书。
English: In the 21st year of the Zhengyuan era, the imperial edict was issued to increase the number of officials in the Ministry of Industry.

