古文：郑鲜之、裴松之、何承天
现代文：裴松之，字世期，河东闻喜人。
English: Pei Songzhi, the name of the era, is a famous person in Hedong.

古文：父珪，正员外郎。
现代文：父亲裴王圭，做过正员外郎。
English: His father, Pei Wang Gui, worked as an official foreign trade official.

古文：松之年八岁，学通《论语》、《毛诗》。
现代文：松之八岁时就通晓了《论语》、《毛诗》。
English: At the age of eight, Matsu became familiar with "Analects" and "Mao Poems."

古文：博览坟籍，立身简素。
现代文：他博览古书，立身处世简朴。
English: He is a connoisseur of old books and lives a simple life.

古文：庶可以防遏无征，显彰茂实，使百世之下，知其不虚，则义信于仰止，道孚于来叶。 
现代文：二十岁时做了殿中将军，此官是直接保护皇帝安全的。晋孝武帝在太元年间挑选名人作参谋顾问，开始选用的琅王牙人王茂之和会稽人谢车酋都是南方和北方的望族。松之的舅舅庾楷在江陵，打算带着松之西行，作新野太守，因为事情难办而中止。
English: At the age of twenty, he became a palace general, an official who directly protected the safety of the emperor. Emperor Jin Xiaowu selected famous people as staff advisers in the first year of the Taiyuan era. Wang Maozhi and Xie Chechu, who were initially selected, were both from the south and the north. Matsuyoshi's uncle, Shunkai, was in Gangneung and planned to take Matsuyoshi west to become the Shinno daimyo, but the plan was aborted because it was difficult to carry out.

古文：由是并断。高祖北伐，领司州刺史，以松之为州主簿，转治中从事史。
现代文：义熙初年，松之作了吴兴故鄣县令，因为政绩显著，于是又被调入京城作尚书祠部郎。宋高祖北伐，兼任司州刺史，让松之作了州主簿，后又调松之为治中从事史。
English: In the first year of Yixi, Song Gao, the founder of the Northern Expedition of the Song Dynasty, also served as the chief historian of the state, and asked Song Zhi to be the chief historian of the state. Later, Song Zhi was transferred to Jizhong to engage in history.

古文：既克洛阳，高祖敕之曰： 裴松之廊庙之才，不宜久尸边务，今召为世子洗马，与殷景仁同，可令知之。 
现代文：攻克洛阳后，高祖说： 裴松之是朝廷人才，不应该长久主持边务，现召他为世子洗马，与殷景仁相同，可派人去告诉他。 
English: After conquering Luoyang, Gao Zu said: Pei Songzhi is a talent of the imperial court, he should not preside over the border affairs for a long time, now he is called to wash the horse for the world, the same as Yin Jingren, he can send someone to tell him.

古文：于时议立五庙乐，松之以妃臧氏庙乐亦宜与四庙同。
现代文：在商议建立五庙的时候，松之认为妃子臧氏的庙乐也应该与其他四庙相同。
English: When discussing the establishment of the Five Temples, Matsuzhi thought that the temple music of the Himiko clan should also be the same as that of the other four temples.

古文：除零陵内史，征为国子博士。
现代文：松之被任命为零陵内史，召为国子博士。
English: Matsuyuki was appointed as the director of the Imperial mausoleum's internal history, and was called to the post of Kuniko doctor.

古文：谨依事为书以系之后。 
现代文：宋太祖元嘉三年，司徒徐羡之等人被诛杀，太祖派遣大使，巡行天下。
English: In the third year of the reign of the Song Emperor Yuan Jia, Szu Xu Enzhi and others were killed, and the Emperor sent an ambassador to travel around the world.

古文：松之甚得奉使之议，论者美之。转中书侍郎、司冀二州大中正。
现代文：通直散骑常侍袁渝、司徒左西掾孔邈出使扬州，尚书三公郎陆子真和起部甄法崇出使荆州，松之出使湘州。松之后又任中书侍郎和司、冀两州的大中正。
English: Zongzhi Sanzhong and Zangzhi Zongzhi Yuan Yu and Zangzhi Zongzhi Szeto and Zangzhi Zongzhi Gong were sent to Yangzhou, Zangzhi Sanzhong and Zangzhi Zangzhi Lu Zizhen and Zangzhi Zengfa Chong were sent to Jingzhou, and Zangzhi Matsu was sent to Xiangzhou. After Matsu, Zangzhi Zangzhi and Zangzhi Zangzhi Lu Zizhen and Zangzhi Zangzhi Matsu were sent to Yangzhou, Zangzhi Sanzhong and Z

古文：上使注陈寿《三国志》，松之鸠集传记，增广异闻，既成奏上。
现代文：皇上叫他注解陈寿的《三国志》，松之把传记聚集一起，增加了许多新奇的内容，完成后奉给皇上。
English: The emperor asked him to annotate Chen Shou's "History of the Three Kingdoms," and he gathered together the biographies and added many new and unusual contents. After completion, he presented them to the emperor.

古文：上善之，曰： 此为不朽矣！ 
现代文：皇上很高兴，说： 这是不朽之作啊。 
English: The emperor was delighted and said, "This is an immortal work."

古文：出为永嘉太守，勤恤百姓，吏民便之。
现代文：松之出京任永嘉太守，他关心爱护百姓，官民相处得十分融洽。
English: When Matsunaga came to Beijing, he was appointed Yongjia Taishou. He was concerned about and cared for the people, and the government and the people got along very well.

古文：入补通直为常侍，复领二州大中正。
现代文：后又入补通直散骑常侍，仍兼任司、冀两州的大中正。
English: Later, he was appointed as a regular attendant of Zhaotong Zhizangjie, and still concurrently served as the secretary and the vice-president of the two provinces of Hebei.

古文：寻出为南琅邪太守。
现代文：不久又出任南琅王牙太守。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Governor of Nanluo Wangya.

古文：松之所著文论及《晋纪》，骃注司马迁《史记》，并行于世。何承天，东海郯人也。
现代文：元嘉十四年，松之辞去琅王牙太守一职，被任为中散大夫，不久任国子博士，又提升为太中大夫，国子博士如旧。接替何承天撰写国史，还没有来得及写，在元嘉二十八年，就去世了，享年八十岁。
English: In the 14th year of Yuan Jia, Song Zhi resigned from the position of Shao Wang Ya Daju, and was appointed as Dr. Zhong San, and soon as Dr. Guo Zi, and was promoted to Dr. Taizhong, and Dr. Guo Zi remained the same. He succeeded He Cheng Tian in writing the national history, but before he could write it, he died in the 28th year of Yuan Jia, at the age of 80.

古文：从祖伦，晋右卫将军。承天五岁失父，母徐氏，广之姊也，聪明博学，故承天幼渐训议，儒史百家，莫不该览。
现代文：何承天，东海郯城人，叔伯祖父何伦，是西晋时右尉将军，何承天五岁时父亲就去世了，母亲徐氏，是徐广的姐姐，生性聪慧学识广博，所以何承天小时候便开始接受教义，经史百家，没有不详尽通习的。
English: He Chengtian, a resident of Shicheng in the East China Sea, whose great-uncle and grandfather, He Lun, was a right lieutenant general in the Western Jin Dynasty. His father died when He Chengtian was five years old, and his mother, Ms. Xu, was the elder sister of Xu Guang. She was naturally intelligent and knowledgeable. Therefore, He Chengtian began to accept the teachings when he was a child. He had studied hundreds of histories, and there was nothing he did not study in detail.

古文：叔父肹为益阳令，随肹之官。
现代文：其叔父何月兮是益阳县令，他跟随何月兮一起去任所。
English: His uncle, He Yueshi, was the county magistrate of Yiyang County, and he followed He Yueshi to his post.

古文：隆安四年，南蛮校尉桓伟命为参军。时殷仲堪、桓玄等互举兵以向朝廷，承天惧祸难未已，解职还益阳。
现代文：晋隆安四年，南蛮校尉桓伟任命何承天为参军，当时殷仲堪、桓玄等人相继举兵反抗朝廷，何承天惧怕祸乱不息，遂弃职还于益阳。
English: In the fourth year of Jin Longan, Nanban Captain Huan Wei appointed He Chengtian to join the army. At that time, Yin Zhongkan, Huan Xuan and others successively raised an army to resist the imperial court. He Chengtian was afraid of continuous calamity, so he resigned in Yiyang.

古文：义旗初，长沙公陶延寿以为其辅国府参军，遣通敬于高祖，因除浏阳令，寻去职还都。抚军将军刘毅镇姑孰，版为行参军。
现代文：起义之初，长沙公陶延寿任命何承天为他的辅国府参军，派人通报以尊奉宋高祖，于是任命何承天为浏阳县令，不久他便离职还于京都，抚军将军刘毅镇守姑孰城，授官何承天为兼代参军。
English: At the beginning of the uprising, Changsha Gongtao Yanshou appointed He Chengtian as his assistant governor to join the army, sent someone to inform him to honor Song Gao Zu, and then appointed He Chengtian as Liuyang County Governor. Soon after, he left his post and returned to Kyoto. Liu Yi, the general of the Fuzhou army, guarded Gushan City, and He Chengtian was also appointed to join the army.

古文：毅尝出行，而鄢陵县史陈满射鸟，箭误中直帅，虽不伤人，处法弃市。
现代文：刘毅曾经外出行走，鄢陵信史陈满用弓箭射鸟，箭误中了值勤的将领，虽然没有射死人，但是处以弃市之刑。
English: Liu Yi once went out for a walk, Fuling Xin Shi Chen Man used a bow and arrow to shoot birds, and the arrow hit the general on duty by mistake. Although he did not shoot anyone, he was sentenced to abandon the city.

古文：承天议曰： 狱贵情断，疑则从轻。昔惊汉文帝乘舆马者，张释之劾以犯跸，罪止罚金。
现代文：何承天提议说： 官司应重视实情断决，有疑问则从轻处理，先前使汉文帝刘恒所乘之马受惊的人，张释之以犯跸之罪名弹劾，而处罚也只到罚金，这是为什么呢？
English: He Chengtian proposed that: the court should attach importance to the determination of the facts, and if there is any doubt, it should be treated lightly. The person who had previously frightened the horse of the Han Emperor Liu Heng was impeached by Zhang Xie on the charge of committing a crime, and the punishment was only a fine. Why is this?

古文：何者？明其无心于惊马也。故不以乘舆之重，加以异制。今满意在射鸟，非有心于中人。按律过误伤人，三岁刑，况不伤乎？
现代文：因为明白他无意惊动帝王之马，所以不以惊驾的重罚施加于他，而是施加以不同的条例，现在陈满的本意在于射鸟，不是有意射人，按照法律，因过失误伤人命的，判三年刑，何况还没有伤人呢？
English: Since it was clear that he had no intention of scaring the emperor's horse, he did not impose a heavy fine on him, but imposed different regulations. Now Chen Man's intention was to shoot birds, not to shoot people. According to the law, those who injure people's lives due to negligence are sentenced to three years in prison, let alone those who have not injured anyone?

古文：微罚可也。 
现代文：只轻微处罚一下就行了。 
English: A light punishment is enough.

古文：出补宛陵令。赵惔为宁蛮校尉、寻阳太守，请为司马。
现代文：何承天被补任为宛陵县令，赵忄炎为宁蛮校尉、寻阳太守，拜请何承天为司马。
English: He Chengtian was appointed as the governor of Wanling County, Zhao Bingyan was appointed as the captain of Ningban and the governor of Xuanyang, and He Chengtian was appointed as the secretary.

古文：寻去职。
现代文：不久何承天离职。
English: Ho Chung-tin left office soon after.

古文：高祖以为太尉行参军。
现代文：宋高祖刘裕以何承天为太尉行参军。
English: Song Gao's ancestor Liu Yu enlisted in the army as a lieutenant.

古文：高祖讨刘毅，留诸葛长民为监军。长民密怀异志，刘穆之屏人问承天曰： 公今行济否云何？ 
现代文：高祖讨伐刘毅，留下诸葛长民为监军，诸葛长民私自怀有异心，刘穆之偷偷问何承天说： 宋公此次出行能否成功呢？ 
English: Gao Zu fought against Liu Yi, leaving Zhuge Changmin as the overseer of the army. Zhuge Changmin privately harbored dissent. Liu Muzhi secretly asked He Chengtian: Can Song Gong succeed in this trip?

古文：承天曰： 不忧西不时，别有一虑尔。公昔年自左里还入石头，甚脱尔，今还，宜加重复。 
现代文：何承天回答说： 不担心无法判决，我还有另外一丝担忧，宋公以前从左里城回到石头城，多高兴啊，这次回来，只不过是再重复一次罢了。 
English: He Chengtian replied, "I'm not worried about not being able to reach a verdict. I have another worry. Song Gong used to come back to Stone Town from Zuoli Town. How happy he was. This time, he's just coming back to repeat the same thing.

古文：穆之曰： 非君不闻此言。顷日愿丹徒刘郎，恐不复可得也。 
现代文：刘穆之说： 不是你说我还听不到这话，近来，渴望像丹徒刘郎那样，恐怕也不能够了。 
English: Liu Muzhi said, "It's not that you said I can't hear it yet. Recently, I've been longing to be like Dantou Liu Lang, and I'm afraid it's not enough.

古文：除太学博士。义熙十一年，为世子征虏参军，转西中郎中军参军，钱唐令。
现代文：随后，何承天被任命为太学博士，义熙十一年，何承天为世子征虏参军，随后迁职为西中郎中军参军，钱塘县令。
English: Subsequently, He Chengtian was appointed as a Doctor of Taixue, and in the eleventh year of Yixi, He Chengtian was conscripted into the army as a descendant, and then transferred to join the army as West Zhonglang, Qiantang County.

古文：高祖在寿阳，宋台建，召为尚书祠部郎，与傅亮共撰朝仪。
现代文：宋高祖刘裕在寿阳，宋台建立，召何承天为尚书祠部郎，与傅亮一起共同撰修朝仪。
English: Liu Yu, the ancestor of Song Gao, established Song Dynasty in Shouyang and Song Dynasty in Taiwan. He summoned He Chengtian to be the minister of Shangshu Shrine, and together with Fu Liang, they jointly wrote the morning ceremony.

古文：永初末，补南台治书侍御史。
现代文：永初末年委任何承天为南台治书侍御史。
English: At the beginning and at the end of the year, any successor to Nantai will be the history of Nantai.

古文：谢晦镇江陵，请为南蛮长史。时有尹嘉者，家贫，母熊自以身贴钱，为嘉偿责。
现代文：谢晦镇守江陵，拜请何承天为南蛮长史，当时有一个叫尹嘉的人，家境贫寒，其母亲熊氏以自己为典质替尹嘉偿还债务。
English: At that time, there was a man named Yin Jia who was from a poor family. His mother, Xiong Zhi, used herself as a guarantor to pay off Yin Jia's debts.

古文：坐不孝当死。承天议曰： 被府宣令，普议尹嘉大辟事，称法吏葛滕签，母告子不孝，欲杀者许之。
现代文：尹嘉因不孝获罪当处死刑，何承天提议说： 根据官府宣布的法令，全面考查尹嘉大辟罪之事，符合法吏葛滕的规范。
English: Yin Jia was sentenced to death for the crime of being unfilial. He Chengtian proposed that: According to the decree announced by the government, a comprehensive examination of Yin Jia's crime is in line with the norms of the legal official Ge Teng.

古文：法云，谓违犯教令，敬恭有亏，父母欲杀，皆许之。其所告惟取信于所求而许之。
现代文：母亲控告儿子不肖，并要求杀掉他是允许的，法令说，违反触犯教义法令，在尊重恭顺方面有不足，父母要求杀掉他，都是允许的，对被控告人的处罚只有依据控告人的要求来做。
English: It is permissible for a mother to accuse her son of misbehavior and demand that he be killed, the decree said, and it is permissible for a parent to demand that he be killed, and the punishment of the accused can only be based on the request of the accuser.

古文：谨寻事原心，嘉母辞自求质钱，为子还责。嘉虽亏犯教义，而熊无请杀之辞。熊求所以生之而今杀之，非随所求之谓。
现代文：慎重探求这件事的原委，尹嘉的母亲陈述说自己愿意做典质换钱，为儿子还债，尹嘉虽然因为恭顺不至而触犯教义，但是其母却没有请求杀掉尹嘉，熊氏用还债使他生存下来，而现在却要杀掉他，这就没有顺从所求人的要求。
English: The original committee carefully explored this matter. Yin Jia's mother stated that she was willing to exchange money for money to pay off her son's debt. Although Yin Jia violated the teachings because he did not obey, his mother did not ask to kill Yin Jia. Xiong used debt repayment to keep him alive, but now he wants to kill him. This is not obeying the request of the requested person.

古文：始以不孝为劾，终于和卖结刑，倚旁两端，母子俱罪，滕签法文，为非其条。
现代文：此事开始以不孝为理由而控告，终止于由出卖而判罪，从这事两方面看，母亲和儿子都受了罚，葛滕所依据的法律，没有这条款，尹嘉生存下来意义很大，依理却难以申辩。
English: The matter began with a complaint on the grounds of unfilial piety, and ended with a conviction for betrayal. From both aspects of this matter, the mother and son were punished. The law on which Gethen is based, without this clause, Yin Jia's survival is of great significance, but it is difficult to argue.

古文：嘉所存者大，理在难申，但明教爰发，矜其愚蔽。夫明德慎罚，文王所以恤下；议狱缓死，《中孚》所以垂化。
现代文：明白教义然后阐发，怜悯他因愚昧而受蒙蔽。明晓德义慎重处罚，文王以此体恤下民；商议牢狱赦免死刑，中孚于是流传苍生。
English: He understood the doctrine and then expounded it, pitying him for being blinded by his ignorance. Knowing the virtue and carefully punishing, King Wen felt sorry for the people; he negotiated to pardon the death penalty in prison, and Zhongfu was passed down to the next generation.

古文：言情则母为子隐，语敬则礼所不及。今舍乞宥之评，依请杀之条，责敬恭之节，于饥寒之隶，诚非罚疑从轻，宁失有罪之谓也。愚以谓降嘉之死，以普春泽之恩；赦熊之愆，以明子隐之宜。则蒲亭虽陋，可比德于盛明；豚鱼微物，不独遗于今化。 
现代文：说到实情那么母亲为儿子痛苦，说到恭敬那么是没达到礼仪的，现在放弃乞求宽恕的要求，依照被杀头的条例，用尊敬恭顺的法度，施加于有饥寒之患的贫民，确实不是惩罚重罪而宽容轻微的，甚至可以抛开有罪之名，我认为免除尹嘉的死刑，似以春天的恩泽普照万物的恩情。赦免熊氏的过失，用以表明为儿子受苦是合宜的，那么，蒲亭虽然简陋，却可以同圣明比德，豚鱼虽是微物，却流传到今日。 
English: When it comes to the truth, then the mother is suffering for her son, when it comes to respect, then it is not up to the etiquette, now give up the request for forgiveness, according to the regulations of the beheading, with respect and obedience, imposed on the poor who suffer from hunger and cold, is indeed not a punishment for serious crimes, but tolerates minor ones, and can even put aside the name of guilt, I think that exempting Yin Jia from the death penalty is like the grace of spring to shine on all things. Pardoning Xiong's fault, to show that it is appropriate to suffer for his son, then, although Putin is simple, it can be

古文：事未判，值赦，并免。
现代文：尹嘉之事没有判决，恰逢大赦，得以释免。
English: There was no verdict in the case of Yin Jia, which coincided with an amnesty, and he was released.

古文：晦进号卫将军，转咨议参军，领记室。
现代文：谢晦荐举何承天为卫将军，后迁职咨议参军，兼做记室。
English: Xie Yu recommended that He Chengtian be promoted to General Wei, after which he was transferred to join the army, and also worked as a secretary.

古文：元嘉三年，晦将见讨，其弟黄门郎爵密信报之，晦问承天曰： 若果尔，卿令我云何？ 
现代文：宋元嘉三年，谢晦将被讨伐，他的弟弟黄门郎谢嚼用密信通报于他，谢晦问何承天说： 如果真是这样，你叫我如何呢？ 
English: In the third year of Song Yuan Jia's reign, Xie Hui would be attacked. His brother Huangmen Lang Xie Jia sent him a secret letter to inform him. Xie Hui asked He Zheng Tian, "If this is really the case, what would you call me?"

古文：承天曰： 以王者之重，举天下以攻一州，大小既殊，逆顺又异，境外求全，上计也。
现代文：何承天说： 以君王的尊贵，举天下之兵攻打一州，大小既不相同，方向也不一样，逃到境外以求自保，这是上计。
English: He Chengtian said: With the dignity of a king, to raise the armies of the world to attack a state, the size is not the same, the direction is not the same, to flee abroad to seek self-preservation, this is the top plan.

古文：其次，以腹心领兵戍于义阳，将军率众于夏口一战，若败，即趋义阳以出北境，其次也。 
现代文：其次派遣亲信带领兵士驻扎义阳，将军你率领部队在夏口交锋，如果战败了，就奔向义阳然后往北部边境出逃，这是次计。 
English: Second, send cronies to lead the soldiers stationed in Yiyang. General, you will lead the troops to fight in Xiakou. If you are defeated, you will run to Yiyang and then flee to the northern border. This is the plan.

古文：晦良久曰： 荆楚用武之国，兵力有余，且当决战，走不晚也。 
现代文：谢晦沉吟良久说： 荆楚是适于征战的城郭，兵师财力充足，应该决战，逃走也还不晚。 
English: Xie Yu pondered for a long time and said: Jingchu is a castle suitable for war, the soldiers have sufficient financial resources, it should be a decisive battle, and it is not too late to escape.

古文：使承天造立表檄。晦以湘州刺史张邵必不同己，欲遣千人袭之；承天以为邵意趋未可知，不宜便讨。
现代文：命令何承天拟造征讨檄文，谢晦认为湘州刺史张邵与自己不是同道之人，准备派遣一千人马去偷袭他。何承天认为不知道张邵的意图趋向，不宜随便征讨。
English: He ordered He Chengtian to draft a requisitioning document. Xie Yu believed that Zhang Shao, the Xiangzhou assassin, was not the same person as himself, and was preparing to send a thousand horses to attack him. He Chengtian believed that he did not know Zhang Shao's intentions, and it was not appropriate to requisition.

古文：时邵兄茂度为益州，与晦素善，故晦止不遣兵。
现代文：当时张邵的哥张茂度为益州县令，与谢晦一向友好，所以谢晦受何承天的劝阻中止了派兵。
English: At that time, Zhang Shao's brother Zhang Maodu was the county magistrate of Yizhou, and he had always been friendly with Xie Yu. Therefore, Xie Yu was dissuaded from sending troops.

古文：前益州刺史萧摹之、前巴西太守刘道产去职还江陵，晦将杀之，承天尽力营救，皆得全免。
现代文：是时益州前任刺史萧摹之，巴西前任太守刘道产离官还于江陵，谢晦想杀掉他们，何承天竭力营救，所有的人得以幸免。
English: It was the former governor of Yizhou, Xiao Jizhi, and the former governor of Brazil, Liu Daozhong, who were still in Jiangling. Xie Yu wanted to kill them, but He Chengtian tried his best to rescue them. All the people were spared.

古文：晦既下，承天留府不从。及到彦之至马头，承天自诣归罪，彦之以其有诚，宥之，使行南蛮府事。
现代文：谢晦被攻克，何承天留在城府中不随行，等到到彦之到马头时，何承天戴罪晋见，到彦之因为他有诚意，宽恕了他，命他兼作南蛮府事。
English: When Xie Yu was conquered, He Zheng Tian stayed in the capital and did not accompany him. When he arrived at Ma Tou, He Zheng Tian apologized and forgave him because of his sincerity, and ordered him to serve the Southern Barbarian government affairs.

古文：七年，彦之北伐，请为右军录事。及彦之败退，承天以才非军旅，得免刑责。以补尚书殿中郎，兼左丞。
现代文：元嘉七年，到彦之出师北伐，拜请何承天为右军录事，等到到彦之战败溃退，何承天因才能不适于军旅，得以免除刑罚，而任命为尚书殿中郎，并兼左丞。
English: In the seventh year of Yuan Jia, when Zuiko's division left for the Northern Expedition, He Chengten was asked to record for the right army. When Zuiko was defeated and retreated, He Chengten was exempted from punishment because his talent was not suitable for military travel, and was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household and also as the Left Junior Secretary.

古文：吴兴余杭民薄道举为劫。制同籍期亲补兵。道举从弟代公、道生等并为大功亲，非应在补谪之例，法以代公等母存为期亲，则子宜随母补兵。
现代文：吴兴余杭人薄道举有补兵之祸，依照法律须是同籍的其月亲补充军队，薄道举的堂弟薄代公、薄道生都是大功亲，不应在补充的条例之内，法律以薄代公的母亲活着为期亲，那么儿子应跟随母亲补充军队。
English: Wu Xingyu, a resident of Hangzhou, said that it was a misfortune for a person of the same nationality as his cousins to raise troops. According to the law, the cousins of a person of the same nationality who raised troops should be the ones to replenish the army. The cousins of a person of the same nationality who raised troops should not be included in the supplementary regulations. According to the law, if the mother of a person of the same nationality is still alive, the son should follow his mother to replenish the army.

古文：承天议曰： 寻劫制，同籍期亲补兵，大功不在此例。妇人三从，既嫁从夫，夫死从子。
现代文：何承天提议说： 探究补兵这一制度，同籍期亲补充军队，大功亲不在此条例之内，妇女从者有三，出嫁了顺从丈夫，丈夫死了，顺从儿子。
English: He Chengtian proposed: "Explore the system of replenishing the army. Parents of the same nationality can replenish the army. Great-achieving relatives are not included in this regulation. There are three kinds of women, married ones obey their husbands, husbands die, and sons obey their sons.

古文：今道举为劫，若其叔尚存，制应补谪，妻子营居，固其宜也。
现代文：现在薄道举为补兵所患，如果他的叔父还活着，按法制应补充前往，妻子儿子居军营，本来是极合适的事。
English: If his uncle is still alive, according to the legal system, he should go to supplement, and his wife and son should live in the military camp, which would have been a very appropriate thing.

古文：但为劫之时，叔父已没，代公、道生并是从弟，大功之亲，不合补谪。今若以叔母为期亲，令代公随母补兵，既违大功不谪之制，又失妇人三从之道。
现代文：但他为补兵所患之时其叔父已经不在了，薄代公、薄道生又是堂弟，属于大功亲，不应该补充前往，现在如果以叔母为期亲，命令薄代公随母亲补充军队，既违背了大功亲不应补充前往的制度，又背离了妇女三从的道义。 
English: However, his uncle was no longer there at the time when he suffered from the disease. Bo Dai Gong and Bo Daosheng were cousins, and belonged to the Great Meritorious Relatives, and should not go to supplement the army. Now, if Bo Dai Gong is ordered by his aunt to accompany his mother to supplement the army, it will not only violate the system that the Great Meritorious Relatives should not go to supplement the army, but also deviate from the morality of women's three follies.

古文：由于主者守期亲之文，不辨男女之异，远嫌畏负，以生此疑，惧非圣朝恤刑之旨。谓代公等母子并宜见原。 
现代文：由于主管此事的官员死守期亲的文告，不分辨男女之间的区别，嫌远了同时又害怕负担，才生出了这个疑窦，又害怕这不是朝廷慎用刑法的原旨，最后，何承天将薄代公母子一起宽恕了。
English: Because the official in charge of this matter adhered to the announcement of the parents-to-be, did not distinguish the difference between men and women, was reluctant and at the same time afraid of the burden, this suspicion arose, and was afraid that this was not the original intention of the court to use the criminal law prudently. Finally, He Chengtian pardoned the Bo generation mother-in-law and son together.

古文：故司徒掾孔邈奏事未御，邈已丧殡，议者谓不宜仍用邈名，更以见官奏之。承天又议曰： 既没之名不合奏者，非有它义，正嫌于近不祥耳。
现代文：已故司徒孔邈有奏说没被进用，孙邈已下葬。议论的人说不应该仍用孔邈的名字，而应用现任官的名义去启奏，何承天又提议说： 已经死了的人的名字不适合启奏，没有其他含义，只是嫌他对现在不吉祥罢了。
English: The late scholar Kong Xi's name was said not to have been used, and Sun Yat-sen had already been buried. Some people said that the name of Kong Xi should not still be used, but the name of the current official should be used for the opening ceremony. He Cheng-tien also proposed: The name of a dead person is not suitable for the opening ceremony, there is no other meaning, but it is just that he is not auspicious for the present.

古文：奏事一却，动经岁时，盛明之世，事从简易，曲嫌细忌，皆应荡除。 
现代文：启奏之事一经拖延，动辄要经过几年几月，盛明的世道，凡事应该从简，细微的避嫌和忌讳，都应该消除。 
English: Once the opening ceremony is delayed, it will often take several years and months. In a flourishing world, everything should be simplified, and minor aversions and taboos should be eliminated.

古文：承天为性刚愎，不能屈意朝右，颇以所长侮同列，不为仆射殷景仁所平，出为衡阳内史。昔在西与士人多不协，在郡又不公清，为州司所纠，被收系狱，值赦免。
现代文：何承天本性刚直，不能曲意逢迎上司，常以自己所长轻慢同行，为仆射殷景仁所不满，出任为衡阳内史，以前在西部与官员大多不融洽，在郡里又不太公正清廉，被州司举发，拘禁于牢狱，遇到大赦得免。
English: He inherits Heaven's nature of rigidity, cannot bend to the will of his superiors, often treats his superiors as contemptible peers, is dissatisfied with his subordinates, and serves as Hengyang's internal historian. Previously, he did not get along with most officials in the west, and was not very fair and honest in the county. He was punished by the prefectural governor, detained in prison, and was pardoned in the face of amnesty.

古文：十六年，除著作佐郎，撰国史。承天年已老，而诸佐郎并名家年少，颍川荀伯子嘲之，常呼为奶母。承天曰： 卿当云凤凰将九子，奶母何言邪！ 
现代文：元嘉十六年，任命为著作佐郎，编撰国史，何承天年事已高，而其他佐郎都出自名门且年轻有为，颍川荀伯子讥讽何承天，常把他称作乳母，何承天说： 你应当说凤凰生了九个儿子，乳母又有什么可说的呢！ 
English: In the 16th year of the Yuan Jia, He Zhengten was appointed as the scribe and compiler of the national history. He Zhengten was very old, while the other scribes were all from famous families and were young and active. Shuchuan Zangbozi ridiculed He Zhengten, often calling him a nanny. He Zhengten said: You should say that the phoenix gave birth to nine sons, what can the nanny say?

古文：寻转太子率更令，著作如故。
现代文：不久迁职，为太子率更令，著作佐郎不变。
English: He was soon transferred to a different post and given the title of crown prince, but his writings remained unchanged.

古文：时丹阳丁况等久丧不葬，承天议曰： 礼所云还葬，当谓荒俭一时，故许其称财而不求备。
现代文：当时丹阳丁况等人死了很久却还没安葬，何承天提议说： 按礼制，所谓还葬即速葬，应该说荒年歉收只是一时，所以准许他量财行事而不求完善。
English: At that time, Danyang Dingzhou and others had been dead for a long time but had not been buried. He Chengtian proposed: According to the etiquette, the so-called burial is a quick burial. It should be said that the poor harvest in the year of famine was only temporary, so he was allowed to make money without seeking perfection.

古文：丁况三家，数年中，葬辄无棺榇，实由浅情薄恩，同于禽兽者耳。
现代文：丁况等三家，数十年里，只要安葬就没有棺材，确实是由于恩情浅薄，与禽兽无异。
English: Ding situation and other three families, for decades, as long as there is no coffin for burial, it is indeed due to shallow kindness, no different from animals.

古文：窃以为丁宝等同伍积年，未尝劝之以义，绳之以法。
现代文：我私自认为丁况等人同住在一起多年，却没有用道义进行规劝，以法律进行责罚。
English: I personally think that Ding Jiao and others have been living together for many years, but they have not used morality to persuade and the law to punish.

古文：十六年冬，既无新科，又未申明旧制，有何严切，欻然相纠。或由邻曲分争，以兴此言。
现代文：元嘉十六年冬，没有新颁法令，又没有申明旧的制度，有什么严格的，突然互相揭发，有的由邻人辩解，正与此案相同。
English: In the winter of the 16th year of Yuan Jia, there was no new decree issued, and there was no affirmation of the old system. What was strict was suddenly revealed to each other, and some were defended by neighbors, just like this case.

古文：如闻在东诸处，此例既多，江西淮北尤为不少。若但谪此三人，殆无整肃。
现代文：如果是在东部许多地方听到这种事情很多，长江以西淮河之北也不少，如果只惩罚这三人，就大概起不到整肃之效。
English: If this kind of thing is heard a lot in many places in the east, and north of the Huaihe River west of the Yangtze River, if only these three people are punished, it will probably not have a rectifying effect.

古文：开其一端，则互相恐动，里伍县司，竞为奸利。
现代文：如果只开一个头，那么就可能一齐行动，里伍县司、竞相为私利而循情。
English: If you only open one head, then it is possible to act together, Liwu County Division, competing for self-interest and following the situation.

古文：财赂既逞，狱讼必繁，惧亏圣明烹鲜之美。
现代文：财物贿赂一旦盛行，官司案情必然混乱，恐怕损害了圣主的治国之道了。
English: Once financial and material bribery is prevalent, the legal proceedings will inevitably be chaotic, and I am afraid that it will damage the Lord's way of governing the country.

古文：臣愚谓况等三家，且可勿问，因此附定制旨，若民人葬不如法，同伍当即纠言，三年除服之后，不得追相告列，于事为宜。 
现代文：我认为丁况等三家，暂且可不再过问，依据这事附带规定制理的方案，如果人们安葬不符合法律，同住的人应当立即揭发，三年除服之后，则不加追究，这样较为适宜。 
English: I think it is more appropriate that the three companies, including Dingpu, can no longer be questioned for the time being, according to the plan of the incidental stipulation system, if people's burial does not comply with the law, the people who live together should be immediately exposed, and after three years of retirement, they will not be investigated.

古文：十九年，立国子学，以本官领国子博士。皇太子讲《孝经》，承天与中庶子颜延之同为执经。
现代文：元嘉十九年，设立了国子学，何承天以本职领国子博士，皇太子讲授《孝经》，何承天与中庶子颜延之一起为他手执书经，从师授业。
English: In the 19th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the study of the sons of the state was established. He Zheng Tian led the sons of the state as a doctor, and the crown prince taught the "Filial Piety Sutra." He Zheng Tian and his middle child Yan Yan together held the sutra in his hand and taught from the teacher.

古文：顷之，迁御史中丞。时索虏侵边，太祖访群臣威戎御远之略，承天上表曰：
现代文：不久，迁为御史中丞，当时北魏侵扰边境，宋太祖向群臣征求威慑戎敌抵御入侵的策略，何承天上书说：
English: Soon, he was transferred to the position of Imperial Historian, when the Northern Wei Dynasty invaded the border, Song Taizu asked his ministers for a strategy to deter and resist the invasion of the enemy. He Cheng Tianshu wrote:

古文：伏见北籓上事，虏犯青、兗，天慈降鉴，矜此黎元，博逮群策，经纶戎政，臣以愚陋，预闻访及。窃寻猃狁告难，爰自上古，有周之盛，南仲出车，汉氏方隆，卫、霍宣力。虽饮马瀚海，扬旍祁连，事难役繁，天下骚动，委兴负海，赀及舟车。凶狡倔强，未肯受弱，得失报复，裁不相补。
现代文： 我就北边藩镇侵扰之事上书朝廷，强虏侵犯青州、兖州，皇上仁慈，怜悯百姓，广泛征集众人的智慧，治理国家军政，我以我愚昧浅陋，事先得到皇上的咨询，我私下考查过猃狁犯难起自上古，有周之时欣欣向荣，南仲却出师迎敌；汉室之初，兴隆盛世，卫、霍用力，虽然饮马于瀚海，树旗于祁连，战事艰难繁杂，普天之下极不安定，运输量太大，财物装满车船，无奈狂虏凶狠狡黠冥顽不化，势力没有削弱，成败结果，总的说来是没有益处的。
English: I wrote to the imperial court about the intrusion of the northern provinces and towns. The invaders invaded Qingzhou and Zhangzhou. The emperor was kind and compassionate to the people, and widely collected the wisdom of the people to govern the country's military and political affairs. I thought I was stupid and shallow, and received the emperor's consultation in advance. I privately examined the criminals since ancient times. There was a time when Zhou flourished, but Nanzhong came out to meet the enemy. At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, prosperity flourished, Wei and Hoh were vigorous. Although the horse was in the open sea, the tree flag was in Qilian, the war was difficult and complicated,

古文：宣帝末年，值其乖乱，推亡固存，始获稽服。
现代文：汉宣帝趁着他们背离混乱，推翻旧的使其灭亡，巩固新的使其存在，才使得他们臣服。
English: Han Xuan Di took advantage of their departure from chaos, overthrew the old to make it perish, and consolidated the new to make it exist, only to make them submit.

古文：自晋丧中原，戎狄侵扰，百余年间，未暇以北虏为念。
现代文：自从晋朝丧失中原以来，戎敌侵略骚扰，一百多年里，却没有空闲以北虏为忧患。
English: Since the Jin Dynasty lost the Central Plains, it has been harassed by the enemy's invasion for more than a hundred years, but it has not been idle to worry about the Northern Ruins.

古文：大宋启祚，两耀灵武，而怀德畏威，用自款纳。
现代文：大宋之初，日月圣灵普照武帝，因而胡虏感念大宋之德害怕大宋之威，所以大宋之用度自然是进贡。
English: At the beginning of the Great Song Dynasty, the Sun, the Moon, and the Holy Spirit were all shining on Emperor Wu. As a result, the Khurus were impressed by the virtue of the Great Song Dynasty and afraid of the might of the Great Song Dynasty. Therefore, the use of the Great Song Dynasty was naturally a tribute.

古文：陛下临御以来，羁縻遵养，十余年中，贡译不绝。去岁三王出镇，思振远图，兽心易骇，遂生猜惧，背违信约，深构携隙。贪祸恣毒，无因自反，恐烽燧之警，必自此始。
现代文：自从陛下执政以来，这种与他族的联系遵循教养，十几年里，贡物仍然不断，去年三王外出镇守，考虑振兴王室志谋远大，然而禽兽之心易起，于是产生猜测恐惧，背弃信约，深深结合之后因怨争而背离，贪恋祸乱恣肆毒害，没有理由地内讧，恐怕战火的征兆，一定是从这里开始的。
English: Since His Majesty came to power, this connection with his people has been nurtured. For more than a dozen years, the tributes have continued. Last year, the three kings went out to guard the town, considering the revitalization of the royal family. The ambition is great, but the hearts of animals are easily aroused, so there is speculation and fear, reneging on promises, deviating from grievances after deep integration, greedy for disaster and wanton harm, infighting for no reason. I am afraid that the signs of war must have started here.

古文：臣素庸懦，才不经武，率其管窥，谨撰《安边论》。意及浅末，惧无可采。
现代文：我一向平庸懦弱，无才整治武备，直言我狭小之见，只是撰写了《安边论》，意见浅薄，恐怕无可取之处，如果能得以在朝廷商讨，辨别检验其对错。
English: I have always been mediocre and weak, with no ability to improve military preparedness. To be honest, I have a narrow view. I just wrote "The Anbian Theory." My opinions are shallow, and I am afraid there is nothing to be gained. If I can discuss them in the imperial court, I will be able to distinguish and test the rights and wrongs.

古文：若得询之朝列，辨核同异，庶或开引群虑，研尽众谋，短长毕陈，当否可见。其论曰：
现代文：希望或许能够开拓群臣的思虑，仔细研究众人的谋略，优劣已展示，是否可以指出来呢，其论如是说：
English: Hope may be able to open up the thoughts of the ministers, carefully study the strategies of the people, the pros and cons have been shown, whether it can be pointed out, its theory is as follows:

古文：汉世言备匈奴之策，不过二科，武夫尽征伐之谋，儒生讲和亲之约，课其所言，互有远志。
现代文： 汉代所说的防备匈奴的策略，只不过两种：武将竭尽征讨的谋略，文臣力求和睦相亲的礼约。考查这两者，各有其长远意图。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there were only two kinds of strategies for the prevention of the Huns: the warlord's strategy of exhaustive conquest, and the scholar's protocol of striving for harmony and affinity. Examining these two, each has its long-term intention.

古文：加塞漠之外，胡敌掣肘，必未能摧锋引日，规自开张。
现代文：侵犯塞漠之外，胡敌留难牵制，必然不能破敌，筹划自己的扩张，应当像以前冀地人民，归化者众多。
English: Beyond the encroachment of the Western Desert, Hu's enemies remain difficult to contain, and it is inevitable that they cannot defeat the enemy, and plan their own expansion. It should be like the people of Hebei in the past, and there are many naturalized people.

古文：当由往年冀土之民，附化者众，二州临境，三王出籓，经略既张，宏图将举，士女延望，华、夷慕义。故昧于小利，且自矜侈，外示余力，内坚伪众。今若务存遵养，许其自新，虽未可羁致北阙，犹足镇静边境。
现代文：二州之兵压境，三王出征藩镇，筹划将被张扬伟念将要实现，民众引颈盼望，华、夷仰慕正义。如果贪溺于小利，且自己傲慢放纵，那么向外展示富足的财力，在内却依靠不忠信的军队，现在如果一定遵守教义，允许他们改过自新，虽然不一定可以使他们归顺朝廷，但一定可以使边关和平宁静。
English: The armies of the two states are pressing on the frontier, the three kings are marching to the towns of the three provinces, the plan will be carried forward, the great idea will be realized, the people are eager for hope, and the haves and the have-nots are admiring justice. If they are greedy for small profits, and they are arrogant and self-indulgent, then they will show their wealth to the outside world, but inside they will rely on the unfaithful army. Now, if they must abide by the doctrine and allow them to reform, although they may not be able to make them submit to the court, but they can certainly make the border peaceful and quiet.

古文：然和亲事重，当尽庙算，诚非愚短，所能究言。
现代文：然而和睦相亲事关重大，应根据朝廷制定的克敌谋略。
English: However, the reconciliation of the relatives is of great importance, and it should be based on the strategy to defeat the enemy formulated by the imperial court.

古文：若追踪卫、霍瀚海之志，时事不等，致功亦殊。
现代文：这确实不是微臣的浅薄所能言尽的，如果追溯卫、霍战于瀚海的志向，时事不同，导致功绩也不一样。
English: This is indeed not something that can be said with the superficiality of a minor vassal. If we trace back the aspirations of Wei and Hoh to fight in the vast sea, the current events are different, leading to different achievements.

古文：寇虽习战未久，又全据燕、赵，跨带秦、魏，山河之险，终古如一。
现代文：敌人虽然演习战事日久，又占据燕赵之地，连结秦魏之表，地形险峻，亘古如此。
English: Although the enemy has been practicing war for a long time, it still occupies the land of Yan Zhao, linking the Qin and Wei dynasties, and the terrain is precipitous, which has been the case for a long time.

古文：自非大田淮、泗，内实青、徐，使民有赢储，野有积谷，然后分命方、召，总率虎旅，精卒十万，使一举荡夷，则不足稍勤王师，以劳天下。
现代文：自己应该大肆畋猎，练兵于淮水、泗水，在内充实青州、徐州，使人民有充足的储备，四野有堆积的粮食，然后分别派遣方、召，统率雄师，精兵十万，使这一举动扫尽平坦，那么就用不着使国家军队辛苦，人民劳累了。
English: He should hunt wildly, train soldiers in Huai Shui and Surabaya, enrich Qingzhou and Xuzhou from within, so that the people have sufficient reserves, and the four fields have accumulated grain, and then separately dispatch the party, call, command and lead a strong division, and 100,000 elite soldiers, so that this move is completely smooth, then there is no need to make the national army work hard, and the people are tired.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为何这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：今遗黎习乱，志在偷安，非皆耻为左衽，远慕冠冕，徒以残害剥辱，视息无寄，故繦负归国，先后相寻。
现代文：现在北方百姓大都适应了动乱，有意于苟且偷安，不再以外族统治为耻辱，极度渴求仕宦，只是残害生灵掠夺侮辱把人看得毫无依靠，所以背着襁褓归附国家的人，先后络绎不绝，胡虏既不能进行战事较量又不能遵循事理，攻打城池掠夺地盘。
English: Now, most of the people in the north have adapted to the turmoil, are interested in maintaining peace and stability, no longer regard foreign rule as a disgrace, and are extremely eager to serve the country. However, they see people as unreliable because of the destruction of lives, plunder, and humiliation. Therefore, the people who have attached themselves to the country with shackles on their backs have been incessant. The hooligans can neither fight nor follow the facts, and attack the city and plunder the territory.

古文：虏既不能校胜循理，攻城略地，而轻兵掩袭，急在驱残，是其所以速怨召祸，灭亡之日。
现代文：并且精锐之师偷袭，慌乱之中驱除了羸弱，这是他遭受抱怨招致祸乱的原因，也是它灭亡的时候。
English: And the Master of the Elite made a surprise attack, and in the confusion drove out the Weakling, which was the cause of the calamity he was complaining about, and the time of its demise.

古文：今若遣军追讨，报其侵暴，大翦幽、冀，屠城破邑，则圣朝爱育黎元，方济之以道。
现代文：现在如果派遣军队追杀，报复其侵略的暴行，大肆翦杀幽州冀州之民，攻城破县，然后圣明的朝廷怜惜抚育百姓，救助他们以道义。
English: Now, if troops are sent to hunt down and avenge the atrocities of its aggression, kill the people of Yuzhou and Jizhou in large numbers, and attack cities and counties, then the Holy Ming Dynasty will pity and nurture the people and help them with morality.

古文：若但欲抚其归附，伐罪吊民，则骏马奔走，不肯来征，徒兴巨费，无损于彼。复奇兵深入，杀敌破军，苟陵患未尽，则困兽思斗，报复之役，将遂无已。
现代文：如果只是安抚使其归附，讨伐有罪之人，怜悯人民，那么就像良马四奔，不为征用，只是白耗巨资，对敌方却没有丝毫损害，另外出奇兵深入腹地掩杀击破敌军，如果碰上困难而没有达到，就要像被囚困的野兽仍想搏斗一样，那么报复之战，将会无休无止。
English: If you just appease them, fight the guilty, and have mercy on the people, then it will be like a good horse running around, not for requisition, but wasting huge amounts of money, but not doing any damage to the enemy. In addition, a special soldier will go deep into the hinterland to cover and defeat the enemy army. If you encounter difficulties and fail to achieve, you must be like a trapped beast that still wants to fight. Then the war of revenge will be endless.

古文：斯秦、汉之末策，轮台之所悔也。
现代文：那秦汉之争的最后教训，是在于轮台的遗憾。
English: The final lesson of the dispute between the Qin and Han dynasties lies in the regret of the turntable.

古文：安边固守，于计为长。
现代文： 安定固守边关，应从长计议。
English: Stable and firm border protection should be discussed from a long-term perspective.

古文：臣以安边之计，备在史策，李牧言其端，严尤申其要，大略举矣。
现代文：我以为安边的策略，史书上阐述得已很完备了。李牧开了头，严尤申明其要点，重要的策略已经提出来了。
English: I thought that Anbian's strategy had been fully elaborated in the history book. Li Mu started to explain the main points, and the important strategy had been put forward.

古文：曹、孙之霸，才均智敌，江、淮之间，不居各数百里。
现代文：曹操、孙权争霸，在才能智慧上势均力敌，长江淮水之间，没人居住地各有几百里。
English: Cao Cao and Sun Quan competed for supremacy. They were equal in talent and wisdom. Between the Yangtze River and the Huai Shui River, there were hundreds of miles of uninhabited land.

古文：魏舍合肥，退保新城，江陵移民南涘，濡须之戍，家停羡溪。及表陵之屯，民夷散杂，晋宣王以为宜从江南以北岸，曹爽不许，果亡柤中，此皆前代之殷鉴也。
现代文：而魏国舍弃了合肥，退却保守新城，吴筑城于江陵，将民众迁移到靠南的水边，濡须之战，人民停息在羡溪，说到驻扎襄阳，民众分散杂乱，晋宣王认为应该迁徙到沔南，以充实淮水以北的地区，曹爽不赞同此意，果然被消灭在籸中。
English: However, Wei abandoned Hefei and retreated to the conservative Xincheng, Wu built a city in Jiangling, and moved the people to the water's edge to the south. In the Battle of Wushu, the people stopped in Qianxi. When it came to stationing in Xiangyang, the people were scattered and disorderly. King Jin Xuan believed that they should migrate to the south of Fujian to enrich the area north of Huai Shui. Cao Shuang did not agree with this intention, and was indeed eliminated in Shanzhong.

古文：何者？
现代文：为何呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：斥候之郊，非畜牧之地，非耕桑之邑。故坚壁清野，以俟其来，整甲缮兵，以乘其敝。虽时有古今，势有强弱，保民全境，不出此涂。
现代文：放哨的远郊，是不适畜牧牛羊的地方；辗转作战的地方，是不适大兴农事的地方，所以巩固军备清除旷野，等待侵兵前来，整饬兵器、等待其疲敝，虽然时间有古今之分，势力有强弱之别，但是保护人民和国家完整，超不出这种途径。
English: The outlying suburbs, where sentries are posted, are unsuitable places for cattle and sheep herding; the places where war is waged are unsuitable for large-scale farming. Therefore, it is impossible to go beyond the means of consolidating armaments, clearing the wilderness, waiting for invaders to come, rectifying weapons, and waiting for them to wear out. Although the time is ancient and modern, and the forces are different in strength and weakness, this is the only way to protect the people and the integrity of the country.

古文：要而归之有四：一曰移远就近；二曰浚复城隍；三曰纂偶车牛；四曰计丁课仗。良守疆其土田，骁帅振其风略。
现代文：其要纲归纳有四点：一为移远就近；二为修复城防；三为聚集战车和耕牛；四为统计人数考查兵器优良的守卫者界定其国土，骁勇的将领振兴其风采。
English: There are four points to summarize its main outline: one is to move from far to near; the second is to repair the city defense; the third is to gather chariots and oxen; the fourth is to count the number of people, examine weapons, excellent guards define their land, and courageous generals revitalize their style.

古文：搜猎宣其号令，俎豆训其廉耻。县爵以縻之，设禁以威之。徭税有程，宽猛相济。比及十载，民知义方。然后简将授奇，扬旌云朔，风卷河冀，电扫嵩恆，燕弧折却，代马摧足，秦首斩其右臂，吴蹄绝其左肩，铭功于燕然之阿，飨徒于金微之曲。
现代文：然后通过打猎宣扬其号令，通过祭祀教诫其廉耻，悬赏官爵以吸引他，设制禁令以威慑他，徭役赋税应该有规范，宽松和严格相互结合，等到十年，人民都明晓行事所应遵循的法律制度，然后简略发出命令出师远征，在云朔高扬战旗，如狂风席卷黄河冀州，如闪电扫过嵩山恒山，在燕地满挽雕弓，于代地快马加鞭，在秦地首先砍断他的右臂，在吴地用马蹄踢断他的左肩，铭刻功勋在燕然山山陵之上，犒赏士卒在金微之乐曲里。
English: Then, by means of hunting, proclaim his orders, by means of sacrifice, admonish his shamelessness, by means of offering rewards to officials and nobles to attract him, by means of prohibitions to deter him, by means of taxes, which should be standardized, relaxed and strictly combined with each other. By the end of ten years, the people all knew the legal system they should follow, and then issued a brief order to send out an expeditionary force. In Yunshuo, the battle flag was hoisted high, as if a strong wind swept across the Yellow River and Jizhou, as if lightning swept Mount Song and Mount Heng. In Yan, the bow was fully carved, and in

古文：寇虽乱亡有征，昧弱易取，若天时人事，或未尽符，抑锐俟机，宜审其算。
现代文： 敌寇虽然显示出离乱流亡易于征伐，愚昧孱弱容易攻取，如果天时人事还没有完全符合，则应隐藏锋芒等待时机，慎重考查其策略。
English: Although the enemy bandits have shown that it is easy to conquer when they are scattered and exiled, and easy to capture when they are stupid and weak, if the personnel is not fully in line with the time, they should hide the edge, wait for the opportunity, and carefully examine their strategy.

古文：若边戍未增，星居布野，勤惰异教，贫富殊资，疆场之民，多怀彼此，虏在去就，不根本业，难可驱率，易在振荡。
现代文：如果边关防守没有加强，兵卒散乱如星布于四野，勤劳懒惰持有不同政教，贫穷富裕拥有不同财物，边境人民，怀有不同心思，因俘获而取留，不留意本来职业，驱动率领不易，扫除涤荡不难。
English: If the border defense is not strengthened, the soldiers are scattered like stars in the four fields, the industrious and lazy have different political and religious beliefs, the poor and the rich have different wealth, the border people have different thoughts, are retained due to capture, do not pay attention to their original occupation, it is not easy to drive and lead, and it is not difficult to sweep away.

古文：又狡虏之性，食肉衣皮，以驰骋为仪容，以游猎为南亩，非有车舆之安，宫室之卫。
现代文：又根据狡猾的敌人的生活习惯，吃兽肉穿兽皮，以驰骋为容止仪表，把放牧当成农事，没有车舆的安逸、城郭的保护，顶风冒雨，却不认为辛劳，在草丛中露宿，这是其生活习性。
English: Also, according to the living habits of the cunning enemy, they eat animal meat and wear animal skins, use galloping as a tolerance instrument, regard grazing as an agricultural matter, do not have the comfort of carts and the protection of castles, brave the wind and rain, but do not consider it hard work, and sleep in the grass. This is their living habit.

古文：栉风沐雨，不以为劳；露宿草寝，维其常性；胜则竞利，败不羞走，彼来或骤，而此已奔疲。
现代文：如果他们胜利了，则竞相争利，如果失败了，也不以逃跑为耻辱。他们开发得急促，然而到此地却已疲惫了，况且今年春天越过济水，且已得到了好处。
English: If they win, they will compete for profits, and if they fail, they will not be ashamed to run away. They have developed rapidly, but they are tired here, and they have crossed the water this spring and have benefited.

古文：且今春逾济，既获其利，乘胜忸忄犬，未虞天诛，比及秋末，容更送死。
现代文：顺着胜利的习惯，没料到却该受天诛灭，等到秋天之末，那更是送死。
English: Following the habit of victory, without expecting it, but should be annihilated by the heavens, and wait until the end of autumn, it is even sent to death.

古文：猋骑蚁聚，轻兵鸟集，并践禾稼，焚爇闾井，虽边将多略，未审何以御之。
现代文：敌寇到来之时，捷劲的骑兵如蝼蚁一样聚拢，精锐的兵士像鸟一样汇集，践踏禾粟庄稼，焚烧村落，虽然驻守边关的将帅足智多谋，不知道将用什么办法抵御敌人？
English: When enemy raiders arrive, the swift horsemen gather like ants, and the elite soldiers gather like birds, trampling grain crops and burning villages. Although the general stationed at the border is handsome and resourceful, I don't know what methods will be used to resist the enemy?

古文：若盛师连屯，废农必众，驰车奔驲，起役必迟，散金行赏，损费必大，换土客戍，怨旷必繁。
现代文：如果广大的军队聚集在一起驻防，则必然破坏农事；驿车四处奔走混乱不堪，则打仗时行动必定迟缓；用散乱的金银进行赏赐，其耗费必然庞大；用客籍代替土籍驻守，日子久了，必然嗟怨四起。
English: If a vast army is gathered together and garrisoned, it is bound to disrupt agricultural activities; if wagons are running around in a chaotic manner, it is bound to be sluggish in battle; if scattered gold and silver are used to reward, it is bound to be expensive; if guests are used instead of locals to garrison, after a long time, there are bound to be grudges.

古文：孰若因民所居，并修农战，无动众之劳，有捍卫之实，其为利害，优劣相县也。
现代文：如果谁在农民的居住地，农事战事一起治理，没有兴师动众的辛劳，却得到了防卫保护的结果，这是好是坏，优缺点显而易见。
English: If someone manages agricultural affairs and military affairs together in a farmer's place of residence, without the hard work of inspiring the masses, but obtains the result of defense and protection, this is good or bad, and the advantages and disadvantages are obvious.

古文：一曰移远就近，以实内地。
现代文： 一为移远就近，以充实内地。
English: One is to move from far to near in order to enrich the inland.

古文：今青、兗旧民，冀州新附，在界首者二万家，此寇之资也。
现代文：现在青州兖州旧民，冀州新归附之人，在边关的有二万家。
English: At present, the old residents of Qingzhou and Ganzhou and the new residents of Jizhou live in 20,000 homes in the border areas.

古文：今悉可内徙，青州民移东莱、平昌、北海诸郡，泰山以南，南至下邳，左沭右沂，田良野沃，西阻兰陵，北扼大岘，四塞之内，其号险固。
现代文：这就是敌寇的财资，现在他们全部可以向内地迁徙，青州之地的人民迁移到东莱、平昌、北海等县，兖州冀州之地的人民移迁到泰山之南，南移自下邳，左移至沭水，右移至沂水。所至之地田野肥沃，向西阻隔兰陵，向北扼制大岘，四境之内，确实称作险峻坚固。
English: This is the wealth of the invaders. Now they can all migrate to the inland. The people of Qingzhou can migrate to Donglai, Pyeongchang, Beihai and other counties. The people of Jizhou can migrate to the south of Mount Tai. They can migrate south from the Lower Yangtze River, left to the Yangtze River and right to the Yangtze River. The land is fertile. To the west, it is separated by Lanling. To the north, it is separated by Dalat. Within the four borders, it is truly called steep and rugged.

古文：民性重迁，暗于图始，无虏之时，喜生咨怨。
现代文：人民本性难于迁徙，明白这点才能开始筹划，在没有敌寇之时，喜欢产生嗟叹埋怨。
English: The nature of the people is difficult to migrate, and only when they understand this can they begin to plan. When there is no enemy, they like to complain.

古文：今新被钞掠，余惧未息，若晓示安危，居以乐土，宜其歌抃就路，视迁如归。
现代文：现在刚被劫掠余下的惊惧还没有平息，如果能让其明白现在所处之安危，且将居住乐土，那么他们应当欢呼雀跃，歌颂在路旁，把迁徙看成回家。
English: Now, the terror of those who have just been plundered has not yet subsided, and if they can be made to understand that they are now safe and will live in a happy land, then they should cheer, sing songs on the roadside, and see migration as a homecoming.

古文：二曰浚复城隍，以增阻防。
现代文： 二为重新修复城防，以增强阻挡防御的能力。
English: The second is to re-repair the city defenses to enhance the ability to block the defense.

古文：旧秋冬收敛，民人入保，所以警备暴客，使防卫有素也。
现代文：秋冬时节收割完毕，人民进入城堡，用以防备盗贼，使防御有素。
English: After the autumn and winter harvest, the people enter the castle to guard against thieves and make the defense better.

古文：古之城池，处处皆有，今虽颓毁，犹可修治。粗计户数，量其所容，新徙之家，悉著城内，假其经用，为之闾伍，纳稼筑场，还在一处。妇子守家，长吏为师，丁夫匹妇，春夏佃牧。寇至之时，一城千室，堪战之士，不下二千，其余羸弱，犹能登陴鼓噪。
现代文：古代的城池，随处可见，现在虽然颓败废弃了，但还是可以修缮，先粗略统计户数，估计其所容纳的人，新迁移来的人家，也住在城里，给予他常有的待遇，使其成为乡人，收获庄稼修筑禾场，女人孩子守护家里，县官治理军队，平民男女春种夏猎，秋冬入城，敌寇到来之时，一城有一千户，能够征战的人不会少于二千，剩下的羸弱之人，还能够登上城墙呐喊助威，充分准备围困侵略之敌。
English: Ancient cities can be seen everywhere, and now, although they have been destroyed and abandoned, they can still be repaired. First, a rough count of the number of households is made to estimate the number of people they accommodate. Newly migrated families also live in the city. They are given the usual treatment so that they can become villagers, harvest crops and build hayfields, women and children guard the home, county officials govern the army, civilians and men hunt in spring and summer, and enter the city in autumn and winter. When the enemy comes, there are one thousand households in a city, and there will be no less than two thousand people who can fight. The remaining weak people can also climb the city wall to shout encouragement

古文：十则围之，兵家旧说，战士二千，足抗群虏三万矣。
现代文：兵家的观点说，像这样的兵士二千人，完全可以抵御三万侵敌。
English: According to the soldiers' point of view, two thousand soldiers like this can completely resist thirty thousand invaders.

古文：三曰纂偶车牛，以饰戎械。
现代文： 三为聚集战车和耕牛，用以治理武备。
English: The third was to gather chariots and oxen to govern the army.

古文：计千家之资，不下五百耦牛，为车五百两。参合钩连，以卫其众。
现代文：聚集千家的资产，不会少于五百对耕牛，做成战车五百辆，每三辆车用带钩连接，以保护众人。
English: Gather the assets of a thousand families, not less than five hundred pairs of oxen, make five hundred chariots, and connect every three vehicles with a hook to protect everyone.

古文：设使城不可固，平行趋险，贼所不能干。既已族居，易可检括。号令先明，民知夙戒。
现代文：假设城池已不能坚守，不论经受平安还是危险，贼兵都不能干预，并且聚集居住，也便于查验整治，号令严明，人民也知道训诫。
English: Assuming that the city can no longer be held, whether it is safe or dangerous, the bandits can not intervene, and gather to live, it is also easy to check and rectify, the command is clear, and the people also know the exhortation.

古文：有急征发，信宿可聚。
现代文：如果有紧急征战发生，连续两夜可以聚集。
English: If there is an emergency conscription, they can gather for two consecutive nights.

古文：四曰计丁课仗，勿使有阙。
现代文： 四为统计人数考核兵器，不能有遗漏。
English: Fourth, there must be no omissions in the number of nuclear weapons.

古文：千家之邑，战士二千，随其便能，各自有仗，素所服习，铭刻由己，还保输之于库，出行请以自卫。
现代文：人丁有千家的城邑，有战士二千，根据他们的特长，各有自己的兵器，平时多加操练，并刻上自己的姓名，还给长官存放到军库，外出征战则请求用以战斗。
English: A man may have a thousand cities and towns, and two thousand soldiers. According to their specialty, each has his own weapon. In peacetime, they practice more, and inscribe their names. They return them to their commanders and store them in the military warehouse. When they go out to fight, they ask to use them in battle.

古文：弓干利铁，民不办得者，官以渐充之，数年之内，军用粗备矣。
现代文：优良的弓箭，锐利的兵器，若人民没有配备的，则官府逐渐予以补充，这样一来，几年之内，军事装备已大致完善了。
English: Fine bows and arrows, sharp weapons, if the people are not equipped, the government will gradually supplement them, so that within a few years, military equipment has been roughly perfected.

古文：臣闻军国异容，施于封畿之内；兵农并修，在于疆场之表。攻守之宜，皆因其习，任其怯勇。山陵川陆之形，寒暑温凉之气，各由本性，易则害生。
现代文： 我听说国家和军队分明法度，实行于京都一带以内；军事和农事一起治理，在疆场之外进攻防守等战事，都靠其平时操练，任凭其勇敢怯懦，山地丘陵河流陆地等地形，冷热温凉等气候，都是遵循其自身的规律。
English: I have heard that the state and the army have clear regulations, which are implemented within the Kyoto area; military and agricultural affairs are governed together, and warfare such as attack and defense outside the battlefield depends on their peacetime training, regardless of their bravery and cowardice, and the terrain such as mountains, hills, rivers, and land, and the climate such as hot and cold, all follow their own laws.

古文：是故戍申作师，远屯清济，功费既重，嗟怨亦深。
现代文：若想改变则弊端遂起，正因为这样，所以驻防申地作难，埋怨源自任期已满。现在如果以吴荆精锐的队伍远驻在清水济水，耗资巨大，抱怨也深重。
English: If you want to change, the drawbacks will arise. It is precisely because of this that it is difficult to stop and appeal, and the complaints come from the fact that the term of office has expired. Now, if the Wu Jing elite team is stationed in Shimizu to provide water, the cost is huge, and the complaints are also heavy.

古文：以臣料之，未若即用彼众之易也。
现代文：以我估计，不如就利用那地方的人民便利。
English: In my estimation, it is better to take advantage of the people of that place.

古文：管子治齐，寄令在民；商君为秦，设以耕战。终申威定霸，行其志业，非苟任强，实由有数。
现代文：管仲治理齐国，寄予厚望在于民众；商君辅助秦国，治理农事和战事，最后申明其威严，成就其霸业，实现其志向，不是任务沉重，而是心中有数。
English: It is not a heavy task for the merchants to administer the Qin State, and they have high expectations from the people. The merchants assisted the Qin State, administered agriculture and warfare, and finally affirmed their majesty, achieved their hegemony, and realized their aspirations.

古文：梁用走卒，其邦自灭；齐用技击，厥众亦离。
现代文：梁国任用差役，其国家就消亡了；齐国运用武力治理，人民就离散了。
English: Liang Guo appointed officials, and his country disappeared; Qi Guo used force to govern, and the people dispersed.

古文：汉、魏以来，兹制渐绝，搜田非复先王之礼，治兵徒逞耳目之欲，有急之日，民不知战，至乃广延赏募，奉以厚秩，发遽奔救，天下骚然。
现代文：自从汉朝魏朝以来，这种制度就灭亡了，畋猎没有恢复先王的法度，治理军队只是按照亲信之人的意图，一旦有战事告急之日，人民不熟悉战争，以至于广泛招集招募悬赏，并给以优厚的俸禄，一旦事发则四处奔逃求救，天下混乱。
English: Since the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty, this system has perished. Hunting did not restore the law of the former king. The army was governed only according to the intention of the trusted people. In the event of an emergency, the people were not familiar with the war, so they were widely recruited, offered rewards, and given generous salaries. In the event of an incident, they fled everywhere to seek help. The world was in chaos.

古文：方伯刺史，拱手坐听，自无经略，唯望朝廷遣军，此皆忘战之害，不教之失也。
现代文：刺史方伯等大小官员，垂手坐听，没有丝毫谋略，只希望朝廷派兵援救，这都是疏略战备的危害，没有教导的过失。
English: The officials, big and small, such as Zhang Shifangbo, sat with their hands folded, did not have the slightest strategy, and only hoped that the imperial court would send troops to rescue them. This was all the harm of skimping on the preparation for war, and the fault of not teaching.

古文：今移民实内，浚治城隍，族居聚处，课其骑射，长吏简试，差品能不，甲科上第，渐就优别，明其勋才，表言州郡。如此则屯部有常，不迁其业。
现代文：现在将民众内移以充实内御，重新治理城防，聚居一起，考核战术，长官简单考核，差品能否，甲科上第，渐渐变得优秀，明晓其才能，向州郡陈述，象这样则聚集有恒定的地方，不改变其志向，在内保护衰老弱小，在外与仕宦联系，朋友同行都一向安定，同忧共喜，感情由于亲友而巩固，六艺因为战事而确立。
English: Now the people are moved inside to enrich the inner government, re-govern the city defense, live together, assess tactics, simple assessment of the commander, whether the goods are poor, A-level science, gradually become excellent, know their talents, report to the county, like this, gather in a constant place, do not change their aspirations, protect the old and weak inside, contact with the officers outside, friends and colleagues have always been stable, share the same worries and joys, feelings are consolidated due to relatives and friends, and the six arts are established due to the war.

古文：内护老弱，外通官涂，朋曹素定，同忧等乐，情由习亲，艺因事著，昼战见貌足相识，夜战闻声足相救，斯教战之一隅，先哲之遗术。论者必以古城荒毁，难可修复。今不谓顿便加功，整丽如旧，但欲先定民，营其闾术，墉壑存者，因而即之，其有毁缺，权时栅断。
现代文：像这样白天打仗可见相貌就能够辨认，夜里打仗只听见声音就能互相援救，这就是治理战事的一个例子，先辈遗留下来的道理。对这种治理战事的策略提出异议的人大都是因为古城已荒废颓败，很难修复，现在不是说要整顿完善，扩大规模，整饬得如同往昔，只是要求先让人民安顿下来，聚居于乡道，城墙沟壑还存在的，就将就一下，如果有倒塌断缺的，根据时机连接或者断开。
English: In this way, when fighting in the daytime, you can see and recognize each other's faces, and when fighting at night, you can only hear voices and help each other. This is an example of managing the war, a principle left by our ancestors. Most people who object to this strategy of managing the war are because the ancient city has been deserted and decayed, and it is difficult to repair. Now it is not about rectifying and perfecting, expanding the scale, and rectifying as in the past. It is just a requirement to let the people settle down and live together in the countryside. If the city walls and ravines still exist, they will be destroyed. If there is a collapse, they will be

古文：足以御彼轻兵，防遏游骑，假以方将，渐就只立。
现代文：这样就足以抵御其精锐之师，防备阻截飙骑，如果这一切实施，其任务就完成了。
English: That would be enough to fend off its elite division, guard against interception and rushing, and if all that comes to fruition, its mission will be complete.

古文：车牛之赋，课仗之宜，攻守所资，军国之要，今因民所利，导而率之。
现代文：关于战车耕牛的建议，考查兵器的事宜，这是国家进攻防守的依靠，国家军队的关键，现在为了人民利益，引导率领他们。
English: With regard to the proposal on the chariot ploughing oxen and the matter of inspecting weapons, this is the reliance of the country's attack and defense, the key of the national army, and now, for the benefit of the people, guide and lead them.

古文：耕农之器，为府库之宝，田蚕之氓，兼城之用，千家总倍旅之兵，万户具全军之众，兵强而敌不戒，国富而民不劳，比于优复队伍，坐食廪粮者，不可同年而校矣。
现代文：耕田农桑的设备，是国家之宝，耕田养蚕的农夫，同时起守卫城池的作用，千家联合起来，有数倍的兵员，万家聚合一起，有全部军队的士兵，军事强大而不害怕敌寇，国家殷富而人民却不劳累，比起重新扩编队伍、坐食国禄有好处，不可以同日而语矣。
English: The equipment for cultivating farmland and mulberry fields is a national treasure. The farmer who cultivates farmland and raises silkworms also plays the role of guarding the city pond. Thousands of families are united, there are several times the number of soldiers, thousands of families are gathered together, there are soldiers of all armies. The military is strong and not afraid of the enemy, the country is rich and the people are not tired. It is better than re-expanding the ranks and eating the national income. It is not possible to speak the same day.

古文：今承平未久，边令弛纵，弓竿利铁，既不都断，往岁弃甲，垂二十年，课其所住，理应消坏。
现代文： 现在安定已久，边关条例疏漏，弓箭利铁都没有禁绝，往年废弃的兵甲，将近二十年，考查其所住，按常理说应该销毁损坏了。
English: Now it has been stable for a long time, border regulations have been omitted, bows and arrows have not been banned, and the military armor abandoned in previous years has been damaged for nearly 20 years, and it should be destroyed according to common sense.

古文：谓宜申明旧科，严加禁塞，诸商贾往来，幢队挟藏者，皆以军法治之。
现代文：现在说应该重新申明旧的制度，严格禁止出入边关，像商人贸易往来，在举旗先导的队伍中藏匿的人，都以军法加以处置。
English: Now it is said that the old system should be re-affirmed, the entry and exit of the border should be strictly prohibited, such as the trade and commerce of merchants, and those who hide in the procession of flag-raising leaders should be dealt with by military law.

古文：又界上严立关候，杜废间蹊。
现代文：在边界上严格设立关卡，堵绝废止小道。
English: Strict checkpoints will be set up at the border to block off illegal trails.

古文：城保之境，诸所课仗，并加雕镌，别造程式。
现代文：城堡之内，每个地方都应检查兵器，并加以雕刻姓名，另外制定法规。
English: Inside the castle, weapons should be checked everywhere, and names should be engraved, and regulations should be made.

古文：若有遗镞亡刃，及私为窃盗者，皆可立验，于事为长。
现代文：如果有遗弃的箭镞和丢失的兵刀，和私自偷盗的人，都可以立即检验，对事情有好处。
English: If there are abandoned arrowheads and lost swords, and people who steal from themselves, they can be checked immediately, which is good for things.

古文：又钜野湖泽广大，南通洙、泗，北连青、齐，有旧县城，正在泽内。宜立式修复旧堵，利其埭遏，给轻舰百艘。寇若入境，引舰出战，左右随宜应接，据其师津，毁其航漕。
现代文：另外钜野之地湖泊宽阔，向南沟通洙水泗水，向北连接青州、齐地，并有旧的城郭处在湖内，应该立即修复旧的城墙，比用坝堵水有利，并供给轻快的战船百艘，敌寇如果侵入境内，则引船出战，左右随时接应，占据入侵之师的码头，破坏其运粮的船只。
English: In addition, the lakes in the Wasteland are wide. To the south, it is connected to Surabaya and Surabaya, and to the north, it is connected to Qingzhou and Qi, and there are old fortresses in the lake. The old city wall should be repaired immediately. It is more advantageous than blocking the water with a dam, and it is necessary to supply a hundred light warships. If the enemy invades the territory, it will lead the ships to fight, and it will receive them at any time, occupy the pier of the invading division, and destroy its grain-carrying ships.

古文：此以利制车，运我所长，亦微彻敌之要也。
现代文：这样有利于制造战车，充分发挥我们的优势，这也是防御敌寇的要领呀。 
English: This is conducive to making chariots and giving full play to our advantages, which is also the key to defending against enemy pirates.

古文：承天素好弈棋，颇用废事。太祖赐以局子，承天奉表陈谢，上答： 局子之赐，何必非张武之金邪！ 
现代文：何承天向来喜欢下棋，对正事常有损害，宋太祖以弈具赏赐给他，何承天上表陈述谢意说： 赏赐弈具很好，为什么一定要像张武那样赏金呢？ 
English: He Chengtian always liked to play chess, and his play was often detrimental to business affairs. Song Taizu rewarded him with a game tool. He Chengtian said, "It is good to reward a game tool. Why do you have to reward money like Zhang Wu?"

古文：承天又能弹筝，上又赐银装筝一面。承天与尚书左丞谢元素不相善，二人竞伺二台之违，累相纠奏。
现代文：何承天还善于弹筝，皇上又赏赐他用银装饰的筝一面，何承天与尚书左丞谢元一向关系不好，二人互相窥伺对方辖台的过失，几次互相上书弹劾。
English: He Zhengtian was also good at playing the kite, and the emperor rewarded him with a silver-decorated kite. He Zhengtian and Shang Shuzhong Xieyuan always had a bad relationship. The two of them spied on each other's mistakes, and several times impeached each other.

古文：太尉江夏王义恭岁给资费钱三千万，布五万匹，米七万斛。
现代文：太尉江夏王义恭一年给何承天资产：钱币三千万，布帛五万匹，粮米七万斛。
English: The captain Jiang Xia Wang Yigong gave He Chengtian assets: thirty million coins, fifty thousand pieces of cloth, and seventy thousand catties of grain and rice.

古文：义恭素奢侈，用常不充，二十一年，逆就尚书换明年资费。
现代文：义恭一向铺张，用度经常不够。元嘉二十一年转向尚书要求索取第二年资费。
English: In the 21st year, Yuan Jia turned to Shang Shu to ask for the second year's tuition fee.

古文：而旧制出钱二十万，布五百匹以上，并应奏闻，元辄命议以钱二百万给太尉。事发觉，元乃使令史取仆射孟顗命。
现代文：旧制度规定支出钱币二十万，布帛五百匹以上，应向朝廷启奏。谢元则提出以钱币二百万给太尉，事情败露后，谢元于是命令杀了仆射孟靑。
English: The old system stipulated that the expenditure of 200,000 coins and more than 500 cloth ponies should be reported to the imperial court. Xie Yuan proposed to give two million coins to the captain. After the matter was revealed, Xie Yuan then ordered the killing of Meng Yao.

古文：元时新除太尉咨议参军，未拜，为承天所纠。上大怒，遣元长归田里，禁锢终身。元时又举承天卖茭四百七十束与官属，求贵价。
现代文：后谢元新任太尉咨议参军，还没正式授命，被何承天揭发了，皇上大怒，贬谪谢元归乡，且禁锢终身，谢元这时又揭发何承天卖绫茭四百七十束给官属，索取高价。
English: Later, Xie Yuan, a newly-appointed captain of the army, who had not yet been officially commissioned, was exposed by He Chengtian. The emperor was furious, and punished Xie Yuan to return to his hometown and was imprisoned for life. At this time, Xie Yuan also exposed that He Chengtian sold 470 bunches of strawberries to officials and demanded a high price.

古文：承天坐白衣领职。
现代文：何承天被贬为布衣。
English: He Chengtian was reduced to a rag.

古文：元字有宗，陈郡阳夏人，临川内史灵运从祖弟也。以才学见知，卒于禁锢。
现代文：谢元，字有宗，陈郡阳夏人，临川内史谢灵运族祖的弟弟，以学识才智闻名，死于禁锢。
English: Xie Yuan, surnamed Yuzong, from Yangxia, Chen County, the younger brother of Linchuanai Shi Xie Lingyun, a famous scholar, died in custody.

古文：二十四年，承天迁廷尉，未拜，上欲以为吏部，已受密旨，承天宣漏之，坐免官。卒于家，年七十八。
现代文：元嘉二十四年，何承天迁职为廷尉，还没有授命，皇上准备任他为吏部，已下达了密令，何承天泄密，因此被免官，死在家中，享年七十八岁。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Yuan Jia, He Chengtian was transferred to the post of court lieutenant, but had not yet been given an order. The emperor was preparing to appoint him as a cadre, and had issued a secret order. He Chengtian leaked the secret, so he was dismissed and died at home, at the age of seventy-eight.

古文：先是，《礼论》有八百卷，承天删减并合，以类相从，凡为三百卷，并《前传》、《杂语》、《纂文》、论并传于世。
现代文：原来的《礼论》有八百卷，何承天删减合并，以门类相从，共有三百卷。此外还有《前传》、《杂语》、《纂文》、《论》等流传于世。
English: The original "Commentary on Etiquette" has eight hundred volumes, which have been combined and abridged by successive dynasties, according to the categories, for a total of three hundred volumes. In addition, "Prequel," "Miscellaneous," "Codification," "Commentary" and so on have been passed down to the world.

古文：又改定《元嘉历》，语在《律历志》。
现代文：另外，还改修订了《元嘉历》，这在《律历》中有记载。
English: In addition, the "Yuan Jiali" was also revised, which is recorded in the "Ritsuryo."

