古文：韩公仲相。齐、楚之交善秦。
现代文：韩国的公仲做了相国，当时齐、楚邦交和睦亲善。
English: South Korea's Gongzhong became a sister country. At that time, Qi and Chubang had friendly relations.

古文：秦、魏遇，且以善齐而绝齐乎楚。
现代文：秦王、魏王在边境上不期而遇，将要用亲善齐国的策略来断绝齐国同楚国的邦交。
English: The kings of Qin and Wei met unexpectedly on the border, and they were going to use the strategy of friendship with Qi to break off the diplomatic relations between Qi and Chu.

古文：王使景鲤之秦，鲤与于秦、魏之遇。
现代文：适逢楚王派景鲤出使秦国，景鲤参与了秦王、魏王的会见。
English: At the right time, King Chu dispatched King Jing Kun to Qin. King Jing Kun participated in the meeting between King Qin and King Wei.

古文：楚王怒景鲤，恐齐以楚遇为有阴于秦、魏也，且罪景鲤。
现代文：楚王恼怒景鲤，担心齐国会认为楚国参与了秦王、魏王的会见，暗中同秦、魏有来往，准备降罪于景鲤。
English: King Chu was angry with King Jing, worried that the Qing Dynasty would think that the State of Chu had participated in the meeting between King Qin and King Wei, secretly had dealings with Qin and Wei, and was preparing to punish King Jing.

古文：为谓楚王曰： 臣贺鲤之与于遇也。
现代文：有人为景鲤对楚王说： 臣下向您祝贺景鲤参与了秦王、魏王的会见。
English: Someone said to King Chu on behalf of Jingyao: Your vassal congratulates you on Jingyao's participation in the meeting between the Qin and Wei kings.

古文：秦、魏之遇也，将以合齐、秦而绝齐于楚也。
现代文：秦王、魏王会面，将要用联合齐、秦的策略来断绝齐国同楚国的邦交。
English: When the Qin and Wei kings meet, they will use the strategy of uniting Qi and Qin to break off diplomatic relations between Qi and Chu.

古文：今鲤与于遇，齐无以信魏之合己于秦而攻于楚也，齐又畏楚之有阴于秦、魏也，必重楚。
现代文：现在景鲤参与了秦王、魏王的会见，齐国没有相信魏国联合秦国进攻楚国的理由，齐国又惧怕楚国暗中与秦国、魏国有来往，一定会更加尊重楚国。
English: Now that Jingyao has participated in the meeting between the Qin and Wei kings, Qi has no reason to believe that Wei and Qin jointly attacked Chu. Qi is also afraid of Chu's secret dealings with Qin and Wei, and will certainly respect Chu more.

古文：故鲤之与于遇，王之大资也。
现代文：所以景鲤参与秦王、魏王的会面，是大王重要的凭借。
English: Therefore, it was an important advantage for the great king that Jingyao took part in the meeting between the Qin and Wei kings.

古文：今鲤不与遇，魏之绝齐于楚明矣。
现代文：现在如果景鲤没参与秦王、魏王的会见，魏国想断绝齐国和楚国邦交的行动已经表现得很清楚了。
English: Now, if Jingyao did not participate in the meeting between the Qin and Wei kings, the action of Wei to sever the diplomatic relations between Qi and Chu has been very clear.

古文：齐、楚信之，必轻王，故王不如无罪景鲤，以视齐于有秦、魏，齐必重楚，而且疑秦、魏于齐。 王曰： 诺。 
现代文：齐国听信了秦国、魏国，一定会轻视大王，因此大王不如不降罪景鲤以表示齐国有秦国、魏国的支持，齐国一定会重视楚国，而且会使秦国、魏国怀疑楚国同齐国有牢固的联盟。 楚王说： 好吧。 
English: After listening to Qin and Wei, Qi would certainly despise the great king. Therefore, it would be better for the great king to show the support of Qin and Wei, the two states of Qi, by not pardoning Jing Xi. Qi would certainly attach importance to Chu, and would make Qin and Wei doubt the strong alliance between Chu and Qi. King Chu said, "Okay."

古文：因不罪而益其列。
现代文：于是没有阵罪景鲤并且提升了他的官位。
English: As a result, there were no charges against him and he was promoted to a higher rank.

