古文：翼子豹，字仲干。
现代文：房豹，字仲干。
English: "Fangpan" is the Chinese character for leopard.

古文：体貌魁岸，美音仪。
现代文：身体魁梧，容貌伟岸，声音洪亮，仪表堂堂。
English: He's got a big body, great looks, a booming voice, and a great appearance.

古文：年十七，州辟主簿。
现代文：十七岁时，州官征辟他为主簿。
English: At the age of seventeen, he was drafted by the state.

古文：王思政入据颍川，慕容绍宗出讨，豹为绍宗开府主簿兼行台郎中。
现代文：王思政占据颍川，慕容绍宗出兵讨伐，房豹任慕容绍宗的开府主簿，兼行台郎中。
English: Wang Sizheng occupied Fenchuan, Murong Shaosong sent troops to fight, Fang Bao served as Murong Shaosong's chief accountant and concurrently acted as his assistant.

古文：绍宗自云有水厄，遂于战舰中浴，并自投于水，冀以厌当之。
现代文：绍宗说自己有水中的灾难，便在战舰中洗浴，并自己跳入水中，希望用这种方法代替将要遇到的厄运。
English: Saying that he had a water calamity, Shaozong took a bath in the warship and jumped into the water himself, hoping to use this method to replace the bad luck he would encounter.

古文：豹白绍宗曰： 夫命也在天，岂人理所能延保。
现代文：房豹对他说： 命在于天，难道是人理所能延长保护的吗？
English: The leopard said to him, "Life depends on the heavens. Is it humanly possible to extend protection?

古文：公若实有水厄，非禳辟所能却；若其实无，何禳之有。
现代文：您如果真的有水中的灾难，不是祈祷能排除的。如果您实在没有，何必再去祈祷呢？
English: If you really have a disaster in the water, it is not prayer that can eliminate it. If you really do not, why do you have to pray again?

古文：今三军之事，在于明公，唯应达命任理，以保元吉。
现代文：现在统率三军的重任全在你的身上，惟有达观知命，顺乎情理，以保存您的大福大吉。
English: Now, the heavy responsibility of leading the three armies is entirely on you. The only thing you have to do is to be mindful of your life and follow reason in order to preserve your great fortune.

古文：方乃乘船入水，云以防灾，岂如岸上指麾，以保万全也。 
现代文：方才乘船入水，说为了防灾，怎么能像在岸上指挥能够保证您绝对的安全呢？ 
English: You have just entered the water by boat, and you say that in order to prevent disasters, how can you guarantee your absolute safety by commanding the boat as if you were on shore?

古文：绍宗笑曰： 不能免俗，为复尔耳。 
现代文：慕容绍宗笑着说： 我不能脱免俗套啊，所以才这样做。 
English: Murong Shaozong said with a smile: I can't break free from the stereotype, that's why I'm doing this.

古文：未几而绍宗遇溺，时论以为知微。
现代文：不久，慕容绍宗被水淹死，人们议论认为房豹洞悉人生的奥妙。
English: Soon after, Murong Shaosong was drowned, and people began to speculate that the leopard had discovered the secret of life.

古文：清河中，除谒者仆射，拜西河太守。
现代文：齐武成帝河清年间，房豹被授为谒者仆射，任西河太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qiwu Chenghe in the Qing Dynasty, Fangtao was awarded the title of "devil's minion" and was appointed governor of the West River.

古文：地接周境，俗杂稽胡，豹政贵清静，甚著声绩。
现代文：西河与北周接壤，过去与稽胡混杂。房豹为政贵在清静无为，因而有显著的成绩和崇高的声誉。
English: The West River borders the northern periphery, and in the past it was mixed with the Jihu River. As a dignitary, the leopard was quiet and inactive, and thus it had remarkable achievements and a lofty reputation.

古文：迁博陵太守，亦有能名。
现代文：他调任博陵太守，也有很高的声望。
English: He was appointed the governor of Boling and had a high reputation.

古文：又迁乐陵太守，风教修理，称为美政。
现代文：又调至乐陵任太守，治理政事注重风化教育，被称为善政。
English: He was also transferred to the position of Le Ling Ren Taizhou, and the governance of political affairs focused on moral education, which was called good governance.

古文：郡濒海，水味多咸苦。
现代文：乐陵濒临大海，水味大多咸苦。
English: Leling is close to the sea, and the water tastes mostly salty and bitter.

古文：豹命凿一井，遂得甘泉，遐迩以为政化所致。
现代文：房豹下令开凿了一口井，便得到甘美的泉水，远近都认为是他良好的政风化育所致。
English: The house leopard ordered a well to be dug and obtained luscious spring water, which was considered to be the result of his good political upbringing.

古文：豹罢归后，井味复咸。
现代文：房豹被罢职离开后，井水又变成咸的。
English: After the landlord was dismissed and left, the well water turned salty again.

古文：齐灭，遂还本乡，丘园自养。
现代文：北齐灭亡，房豹回到家乡耕种田园，自食其力。
English: After the demise of Beiqi, the leopards returned to their hometowns to farm the fields and earn their own living.

古文：频被征命，固辞以疾。
现代文：多次被朝廷征用，都以有病为理由坚决推辞。
English: He was requisitioned by the imperial court several times, but he always refused on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：每牧守初临，必遣致礼，官佐邑宰皆投刺申敬。
现代文：地方长官初上任，一定派人向他致礼。那些下级官吏也送来名帖表达敬意。
English: When a local governor took office for the first time, someone was sure to send him a gift. Those lower-level officials also sent a postcard to express their respect.

古文：终于家，无子，以兄熊子彦诩嗣。
现代文：他死在家中，没有儿子，由哥哥房熊的儿子房彦诩继嗣。
English: He died at home, without a son, and was succeeded by his brother, Fusakuma's son, Fusahiko.

古文：彦询所赠总诗，今见载《总集》。
现代文：房彦诩明辨是非，广有学识，被授为殿中御史，出任千乘、益都两县的县令，有仁爱恩惠的政风。
English: Fang Yanyan distinguished between right and wrong, had a wide range of knowledge, was awarded the title of palace historian, and served as the county magistrate of the two counties of Chihsien and Yiwu. He had a benevolent and benevolent political style.

古文：彦谦早孤，不识父，为母兄鞠养。
现代文：彦谦早年就成为孤儿，不认识自己的父亲，被母亲的兄长收养。
English: Orphaned at an early age, Hikohken did not know his father and was adopted by his mother's brother.

古文：长兄彦询，雅有清鉴，以彦谦天性颖悟，每奇之，亲教读书。
现代文：哥哥彦询颇有鉴别能力，认为彦谦天性聪明颖悟，每每对他感到惊奇，便亲自教他读书。
English: His elder brother, Yan Xun, was quite discerning. He thought that Yan Qian was naturally clever and insightful. Whenever he was surprised, he personally taught him to read.

古文：年七岁，诵数万言，为宗党所异。
现代文：七岁时，他已能背诵数万字的书籍，宗亲们都感到很惊异。
English: At the age of seven, he was able to recite tens of thousands of words from books, which surprised his relatives.

古文：十五出后叔父子贞，事所继有逾本生。
现代文：十五岁那年，过继给叔父房子贞，侍奉继父继母像亲生父母一样。
English: At the age of 15, she was adopted by her uncle, serving her stepfather and stepmother as if they were her own parents.

古文：子贞哀之，抚养甚厚。
现代文：子贞怜爱他，对他抚养十分优厚。
English: Zizhen loved him and raised him very well.

古文：后丁继母忧，勺饮不入口者五日。
现代文：继母去世，他五天不吃不喝。对待伯父房豹，也尽心尽力。
English: After his stepmother passed away, he didn't eat or drink for five days. He also did his best to treat his uncle, Fangtao.

古文：事伯父豹，竭尽心力，每四时珍果，弗敢先尝。
现代文：四季的时鲜果品，伯父没有吃，自己就不敢先尝。
English: Uncle didn't eat the seasonal fresh fruit, so he didn't dare to try it first.

古文：遇期功之戚，必蔬食终礼，宗从取则焉。
现代文：遇到丧葬，他必定蔬食素餐，恪守礼节，宗族们都效法他。
English: When it comes to funerals, he always eats a vegetarian meal and observes proper etiquette. His family members all follow his example.

古文：其后受学于博士尹琳，手不释卷，遂通涉《五经》。
现代文：以后受教于博士尹琳，手不释卷，贯通了《五经》。
English: Later, he was taught by Dr. Yin Lin and studied the Five Classics.

古文：解属文，雅有词辩，风概高人。
现代文：讲解和写作，颇有口才和文才，风度超过常人。
English: In explanation and writing, he is quite eloquent and literate, and his demeanor surpasses that of an ordinary person.

古文：年十八，属齐广宁王孝珩为齐州刺史，辟为主簿。
现代文：十八岁那年，齐广宁王高孝珩为齐州刺史，征用他为主簿。
English: At the age of eighteen, Qi Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojun became the chief historian of Qi, and he was requisitioned as the main book.

古文：时禁网疏阔，州郡之职，尤多纵弛。
现代文：当时，纲纪松弛，州郡的官员大多放纵自为。
English: At that time, discipline was lax, and state and county officials were mostly self-indulgent.

古文：及彦谦在职，清简守法，州境肃然，莫不敬惮。
现代文：彦谦到任后，清静简洁，执行法度，州境之内，上下肃然，官吏百姓无不敬畏。
English: After Yan Qian took office, he was calm and concise, enforced the law, and within the state, he was solemn, and the officials and the people were in awe of him.

古文：及周师入鄴，齐主东奔，以彦谦为齐州中从事。
现代文：北周的军队进入邺城，北齐君主向东逃跑，任彦谦为齐州中从事。
English: The army of Northern Zhou entered Lucheng, the monarch of Northern Qi fled to the east, and Ren Yanqian was engaged in the middle of Qizhou.

古文：彦谦痛本朝倾覆，将纠率忠义，潜谋匡辅，事不果而止。
现代文：彦谦痛惜本朝灭亡，准备召集忠义之士，暗中密谋恢复旧业，事情没有成功而停止。
English: Hiko hen regretted the demise of this dynasty, prepared to convene loyalists, secretly plotted to restore the old business, but things did not succeed and stopped.

古文：齐亡，归于家。
现代文：北齐灭亡，彦谦回到家里。
English: Bei Qi perished, and Yan Qian returned home.

古文：周武帝遣柱国辛遵为齐州刺史，为贼帅辅带剑所执。
现代文：周武帝宇文邕派柱国辛遵任齐州刺史，辛遵被盗贼首领辅带剑捉获。
English: Emperor Wu of Zhou dispatched his vassal Sin Zun to record the history of the state of Qizhou. Sin Zun was caught by the leader of the thieves, who also brought a sword.

古文：彦谦以书谕之，带剑惭惧，送遵还州，诸贼并各归首。
现代文：彦谦写信劝谕辅带剑，带剑畏惧惭愧，将辛遵送回齐州，各路盗贼都归顺自首。
English: Yan Qian wrote a letter to him, advising him to take a sword with him, to be afraid and ashamed to take a sword, and to send Xin Zong back to Qizhou. All the thieves surrendered.

古文：及隋文受禅之后，遂优游乡曲，誓无仕心。
现代文：隋文帝称帝之后，房彦谦在乡里悠闲自得，发誓再也不愿做官。
English: After Emperor Sui Wen declared himself emperor, Fang Yanqian took it easy in the countryside and vowed never to be an official again.

古文：开皇七年，刺史韦艺固荐之，不得已而应命。
现代文：开皇七年，刺史韦艺坚持举荐他，不得已他才答应。
English: In the first seven years of the emperor's reign, Zhishui Weiyi insisted on recommending him, but he had no choice but to agree.

古文：吏部尚书卢恺一见重之，擢授承奉郎，俄迁监察御史。
现代文：吏部尚书卢恺一见面就很看重他，破格授予他承奉郎，不久调任监察御史。
English: As soon as he met Lu Wei, the head of the personnel department, he valued him very highly. He was exceptionally awarded the position of a servant, and was soon transferred to the position of inspector of history.

古文：后属陈平，奉诏安抚泉、括等十州。
现代文：后来南陈被平定，他奉命安抚泉州、括州等十州。
English: Later, Nan Chen was subdued, and he was ordered to pacify Quanzhou, Guanzhou and other ten prefectures.

古文：以衔命称旨，赐物百段、米百石、衣一袭、奴婢七口。
现代文：因完成使命颇受文帝称许，赏赐给他布帛一百匹，米一百石，衣服一套，奴婢七人。
English: Emperor Wen praised him highly for accomplishing his mission and rewarded him with one hundred pieces of cloth, one hundred stones of rice, one set of clothes, and seven slaves.

古文：迁秦州总管录事参军。
现代文：又迁任秦州总管录事参军。
English: He was also transferred to the post of Qinzhou chief record keeper and joined the army.

古文：因朝集时，左仆射高颎定考课。
现代文：朝臣上朝时，左仆射高赹决定考核官吏们的政绩。
English: When the courtier ascended to the throne, his left-hand man, Emperor Gaozong, decided to evaluate the political achievements of the officials.

古文：彦谦谓颎曰： 《书》称三载考绩，黜陟幽明。
现代文：房彦谦对高赹说 ；《书经》上说三年对官吏考核一次，以提拔优异的，黜退庸劣者。
English: Fang Yanqian said to Gao Yao; "Scripture" said that officials should be evaluated once every three years to promote those who are excellent and reject those who are inferior.

古文：唐、虞以降，代有其法，黜陟合理，褒贬无亏，便是进必得贤，退皆不肖。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜以后各代都有自己的法度，降免和提拔都能合理，表扬和批评都不缺少。
English: After Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan, each generation has its own laws, and the reduction, exemption and promotion can be reasonable, and there is no shortage of praise and criticism.

古文：如或舛谬，法乃虚设。
现代文：于是，提拔一定能得到贤能的人，罢免的都是无才无德的小人。
English: As a result, the promotion is certain to get a virtuous person, the dismissal is a talentless villain.

古文：比见诸州考校，执见不同，进退多少，参差不类。
现代文：如果执行谬误，法规就等于虚设。看看各州的考核，执行的情况各不相同，进用和汰减的多少，数目都不一样。
English: If the implementation is faulty, the law is a sham. Look at the assessment of each state, the implementation situation is different, and the number of additions and subtractions is different.

古文：况复爱憎肆意，致乖平坦。清介孤直，未必高第；卑谄巧官，翻居上等。
现代文：更何况长官对下级或爱或憎，任意凭感情用事，使得那些乖巧刁钻的人仕途却很平坦；清廉正派，孤傲耿直的，未必能够高升；卑膝献媚，刁钻取巧者，反而居于上等。
English: What's more, superiors use their feelings to manipulate subordinates, whether they love or hate them, so that the career of those who are good at cheating is very flat; those who are honest and upright and arrogant may not be able to rise higher; those who are subservient and flatter, and those who are good at cheating, live in the upper class.

古文：真伪混淆，是非瞀乱。
现代文：真假混淆，是非颠倒。
English: Truth and falsehood are confused, and rights and wrongs are reversed.

古文：宰贵既不精练，斟酌取舍，曾经驱使者，多以蒙识获成；未历台省者，皆为不知被退。
现代文：达官显要如不严格挑选，认真取舍，那些被他们提拔任命的下级官吏，就会多数是靠蒙混投机获得成功的；没有经过政府批准的，都不知道自己不被选拔的原因。
English: If high-ranking officials and dignitaries are not rigorously selected and carefully selected, those lower-level officials promoted and appointed by them will mostly succeed by muddling speculation; without government approval, they do not know why they are not selected.

古文：又四方悬远，难可详悉，唯准量人数，半破半成。徒计官员之少多，莫顾善恶之众寡。
现代文：另外，天下四方距离遥远，很难做到详细考核，惟有弄清人数，一半黜退，一半保留，只计算官员数量的多少，不要管他好坏的多少。
English: In addition, the distance between the four corners of the world is far away, and it is difficult to make a detailed assessment. However, it is necessary to clarify the number of people, half of which are retired and half are retained, and only count the number of officials, regardless of how good or bad they are.

古文：俗求允当，其道无由。
现代文：想求得公允恰当，实在没有办法。
English: There is no way to be fair and appropriate.

古文：明公鉴达幽微，平心遇物，今年考校，必无阿枉，脱有前件数事，未审何以裁之？
现代文：您洞察幽微，公平待物，现在所考核的，一定没有受冤枉的。假如出现了前面说的那几件事，不知道您怎么处理？
English: Your insight is subtle, you treat things fairly, and what you are evaluating now must not have been wronged. If those few things mentioned earlier occur, do you know how to deal with them?

古文：唯顾远布耳目，精加采访。褒秋毫之善，贬纤介之恶。非直有光至道，亦足标奖贤能。 
现代文：只希望您广泛地布置耳目，认真了解下面官吏的情况，表扬他们细小的成绩，批评他们轻微的过失，不但是非曲直分明，大道得行，而且也足能够奖励贤能清俊之士。 
English: I only hope that you will have your ears and eyes wide open, earnestly understand the situation of the officials below, praise their small achievements, and criticize their minor mistakes. Not only are the rights and wrongs clear, the road is feasible, but it is also enough to reward the virtuous and handsome.

古文：词气侃然，观者属目。
现代文：说时语气慷慨，引起旁观者的注目。
English: He spoke in a generous tone, attracting the attention of onlookers.

古文：颎为之动容，深见嗟赏。
现代文：高赹也为之动容，长长感叹赞赏。
English: Gao Yao was also moved by it and was full of admiration.

古文：因历问河西、陇右官人景行，彦谦对之如响。
现代文：因而询问他河西、陇右一带官员的清形，彦谦声音洪亮，对答如流。
English: Therefore, he inquired about the appearance of officials in the west of the river and the right side of the river. Hikokeni's voice was loud and his answers were fluent.

古文：颎谓诸州总管、刺史曰： 与公言，不如独共秦州考使语。 
现代文：高赹对各州总管、刺史说 ：与你们谈话，不如单独同房彦谦谈话。 
English: Takahata said to the governor of each prefecture, Satoshi, "It would be better to talk to Fusa alone than to talk to you."

古文：后数日，颎言于帝，帝弗能用。
现代文：以后数日，高赹将彦谦的意见告诉给文帝，文帝竟没有采纳。
English: A few days later, Gao Jun told Emperor Wen of Yan Xian's opinion, but Emperor Wen did not accept it.

古文：以秩满，迁长葛县令，甚有惠化，百姓号为慈父。
现代文：因在秦州任职期满，他调任为长葛县令。很有惠政，百姓都称他为慈父。
English: Due to the expiration of his term of office in Qinzhou, he was transferred to Changge County. He was very benevolent, and the people called him a loving father.

古文：仁寿中，帝令持节使者巡行州县，察长吏能不。以彦谦为天下第一，超授鄀州司马。
现代文：仁寿年间，文帝命使臣持节巡行各州县察看官吏能力的大小，认为彦谦为天下第一，提拔他为都州司马。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenzhou, Emperor Wen ordered his envoys to go on a festival tour of all prefectures and counties to inspect the ability of officials. They believed that Yan Qian was the best in the world and promoted him to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：吏人号哭相谓曰： 房明府今去，吾属何用生为！ 
现代文：长葛县的官吏百姓号啕大哭，互相诉说： 房明府现在离去，我们还活个什么！ 
English: The officials and people of Changge County wailed loudly and cried, telling each other: "Fangming Prefecture is leaving now, what will we live for!

古文：其后百姓思之，立碑颂德。
现代文：以后百姓们思念他，立碑歌颂他的功德。
English: Afterwards, the people thought about him and erected a monument to praise his merits.

古文：鄀州久无刺史，州务皆归彦谦，名有异政。
现代文：都州长久没有刺史，州中政务都归房彦谦管理，也同样政绩卓异。
English: The governor of the capital has not been in office for a long time, and the state's central government affairs are under the management of Fang Yanqian, and his political achievements are also outstanding.

古文：内史侍郎薛道衡，一代文宗，位望清显。所与交结，皆海内名贤。
现代文：内史侍郎薛道衡为一代文宗，名望清雅显著，交结的都是海内名人贤士。
English: Naishi's steward, Xue Daoheng, was a member of the Wenzong generation, with a reputation for refinement and elegance. He associated with many famous people and sages in China.

古文：重彦谦为人，深加友敬。
现代文：他十分看重房彦廉的为人，对彦谦极为友爱和敬重。
English: He thinks highly of Fusa Hikikado as a person, and is extremely friendly and respectful towards Hikikado.

古文：及为襄州总管，辞翰往来，交错道路。
现代文：道衡任襄州总管，与彦谦书信往来不断，双方的信使常常在路途上交错而过。
English: Daoheng was the governor of Xiangzhou, and he and Yanqian corresponded constantly. Messengers from both sides often crossed each other's paths.

古文：炀帝嗣位，道衡转牧番州，路经彦谦所，留连数日，屑涕而别。
现代文：炀帝继位，道衡又转任番州，途径彦谦的住所，留连多日，最后洒泪而别。
English: Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, and Daoheng was transferred to Fanzhou. He went to Yanqian's residence, stayed there for several days, and finally bade farewell with tears.

古文：黄门侍郎张衡亦与彦谦相善。
现代文：黄门侍郎张衡也与房彦谦相友善。
English: Huangmen waiter Zhang Heng is also friendly with Fusa Hiko Atsushi.

古文：于时帝营东都，穷极侈丽，天下失望。
现代文：当时，炀帝正大肆营建东都洛阳，宫殿都极其华丽，令天下人大失所望。
English: At that time, Emperor Gao was building the eastern capital Luoyang on a large scale, and the palaces were extremely gorgeous, which greatly disappointed people around the world.

古文：又汉王构逆，罹罪者多。
现代文：再则，汉王杨谅反叛，被牵连获罪的人很多。
English: On the other hand, the Han king Yang Peng rebelled, and many people were implicated and convicted.

古文：彦谦见衡当涂而不能匡救，书谕之曰：
现代文：彦谦见张衡当政而又不能匡救时弊，便写信告诫他，说：
English: Seeing that Zhang Heng had become a politician but was unable to remedy the ills of the times, Yan Qian wrote a letter to him, saying:

古文：窃闻赏者所以劝善，刑者所以惩恶。
现代文： 我听说奖赏可以劝善，处罚可以惩恶。
English: I've heard that reward can encourage good, and punishment can punish evil.

古文：故疏贱之人，有善必赏；尊贤之戚，犯恶必刑。
现代文：所以就是对于那些地位卑贱的人，有了善事也一定给予奖赏；对于地位高，有才能的人，有了过错也一定要惩罚。
English: Therefore, even for those who are lowly in status, they must be rewarded for their good deeds; for those who are high in status and talented, they must be punished for their mistakes.

古文：未有罚则避亲，赏则遗贱者也。
现代文：不应该惩罚避开自己的亲友，奖赏遗漏了卑贱的人。
English: One should not punish those who shun their relatives and friends, and reward those who omit the lowly.

古文：今国家祗承灵命，作人父母，刑赏曲直，升闻于天，夤畏照临，亦宜谨肃。
现代文：现在，国家恰好承受美好的命运，天子有如百姓的父母，赏罚奖惩，是非曲直，上天都可以知道，就是处在很远的地方，皇天也能够照临，所以，应该谨慎严肃。
English: Now, the country just happens to bear a good fate, the heavenly son is like the parents of the people, reward and punishment, reward and punishment, right and wrong, heaven can know, even if it is far away, the emperor can also come, so we should be cautious and serious.

古文：羊舌宁不爱弟，廷尉非苟违君，俱以执法无私，不容轻重。
现代文： 至于并州的谋反事件，须要查清辨明。如果杨谅确实因为皇帝的诏命没有传达到他那里，他考虑到国家面临危难，调集兵力，聚众起事，并不算违犯朝廷法纪，则应当体谅他的本意，再讨论对他的处罚。
English: As for the incident of plotting to annex the state, it must be clarified and identified. If Yang Peng is indeed because the emperor's edict did not reach him, he considered that the country was facing a crisis, mobilized troops, and gathered people to rise up, and did not violate the court's legal discipline, then he should understand his intention and then discuss his punishment.

古文：且圣人大宝，是曰神器，苟非天命，不可妄得。
现代文：这样，上可以符合圣上兄弟友爱的心意，下可以解除百姓们疑惑的念头。 圣人认为最珍贵的东西，就是皇帝的宝座。如果上天不送给你，谁都不能轻意得到。
English: In this way, the above can conform to the intention of the fraternal love of the holy brothers and sisters, and the below can relieve the doubts of the people. The most precious thing that the saints think of is the emperor's throne. If heaven does not give it to you, no one can get it lightly.

古文：故蚩尤、项籍之骁勇，伊尹、霍光之权势，李老、孔丘之才智，吕望、孙武之兵术，吴、楚连盘石之据，产、禄承母弟之基，不应历运之兆，终无帝主之位。
现代文：所以像蚩尤、项籍那样骁勇善战，伊尹、霍光那样有权有势，老子、孔子那样才智绝伦，吕望、孙武那样深谙兵术，吴、楚连结，有着磐石般的屏障，都没有能够取得帝位。
English: Therefore, as Qiu You and Xiang Zhi were brave and good at war, as Yi Yin and Huo Guang were powerful and influential, as Lao Zi and Confucius were brilliant, as Lü Wang and Sun Wu were profound in military skills, and as Wu and Chu were connected by a rock-like barrier, they were not able to obtain the imperial throne.

古文：况乎蕞尔一隅，蜂扇蚁聚，杨谅之愚鄙，群小之凶慝，而欲凭陵畿甸，觊幸非望者哉。
现代文：更何况小小的一隅，有如蜜蜂翅膀的扇动，蚂蚁的聚集，杨谅的愚笨，群小们的凶恶，想进犯京城辅地，真是妄想啊！
English: What's more, a small corner, like the fanning of a bee's wings, the gathering of ants, the stupidity of Yang Peng, the viciousness of a group of kids, wanting to invade the capital's ancillary land, is really a delusion!

古文：开辟以降，书契云及，帝皇之迹，可得而详。
现代文： 自开天辟地以来，都有文字记载。帝王的言语行迹，后人可以详细知晓。
English: Since the creation of the world, there have been written records. The words and deeds of emperors can be known in detail by later generations.

古文：自非积德累仁，丰功厚利，孰能道洽幽显，义感灵祗？
现代文：如果不积累道德和仁爱之心，为国家建丰功，为百姓谋厚利，谁能够使自己的威望让天人共知，精神感动神灵？
English: If you do not accumulate morality and benevolence, build great achievements for the country, and seek great benefits for the people, who can make their prestige known to everyone, and their spirit move the gods?

古文：是以古之哲王，昧旦丕显，履冰在念，御朽兢怀。
现代文：所以，古代圣哲的帝王，黎明即起，操劳国事，兢兢业业，如履冰上，如怀抱朽烂，小心谨慎。
English: Therefore, the emperors of the ancient sages, starting at dawn, work hard at state affairs, work hard, like walking on ice, like embracing decay, and be careful.

古文：既属明时，须存謇谔，立当世之大诫，作将来之宪范，岂容曲顺人主，以爱亏刑；又使胁从之徒，横贻罪谴。忝蒙眷遇，辄写微诚，野人愚瞽，不知忌讳。
现代文：乱世的帝王骄奢荒淫，无所畏惧，凌驾于万民之上，肆意放纵私欲，史书不可一一记载。 您置身朝廷，天子以大权相托，早已把你看成心腹重臣。
English: The emperors of the chaotic world were arrogant, licentious, fearless, superior to all people, and indulged in wanton indulgence of personal desires, which cannot be recorded in history books. When you were in the imperial court, entrusted with great power by the Son of Heaven, you were already regarded as a trusted vassal.

古文：衡得书，叹息而不敢奏闻。
现代文：你既然身处政治清明之世，应当心存正直，为当世立下重要的诫律，以作为后世的宪典。
English: Since you are in a world of political clarity, you should be honest and set important commandments for the present as a constitution for the future.

古文：彦谦知王纲不振，遂去官，隐居不仕。
现代文：怎么能允许曲意顺从天子，把仁爱之心变成刑罚之举！ 张衡收到房彦谦的书信，感动得长长地叹息，又不敢奏给炀帝知道。
English: How can one allow the melody to obey the Son of Heaven and turn the heart of benevolence into a punitive act! Zhang Heng received a letter from Fang Yanqian, was moved to a long sigh, and did not dare to play it for Emperor Xuan.

古文：将结构蒙山之下，以求其志。
现代文：彦谦知道朝廷纲纪败坏，便辞去官职，隐居林下。准备在蒙山下建屋结庐，以遂退隐的志愿。
English: Knowing that the discipline of the imperial court had deteriorated, Hikoken resigned from his post and went into seclusion in the forest. He planned to build a house at the foot of Mount Mengshan to live in seclusion.

古文：会置司隶官，盛选天下知名之士。
现代文：恰逢朝廷设置司隶官，选取天下知名人士。
English: This coincided with the Imperial Court appointing officials to select world-renowned celebrities.

古文：朝廷以彦谦公方宿著，时望所归，征授司隶刺史。
现代文：朝廷认为他公正端方，声誉显著，众望所归，因此，任命他为司隶刺史。
English: The imperial court considered him to be fair-minded, reputable and popular, and therefore appointed him as a member of the imperial court.

古文：彦谦亦慨然有澄清天下之志，凡所荐举，皆人伦表式。
现代文：他也慨然有澄清天下的志向，凡是他向朝廷举荐的，都是人伦表率。
English: He was also keen to clarify the world's aspirations, and everything he recommended to the imperial court was an example of human ethics.

古文：其有弹射，当之者曾无怨言。
现代文：如有弹劾，被纠察的人也毫无怨言。
English: If there is an impeachment, the picketed people will not complain.

古文：司隶别驾刘灹陵上侮下，讦以为直，刺史惮之，皆为之拜。
现代文：司隶别驾刘火乇欺上辱下，任意攻击别人，却自以为正直。
English: Liu Huiyuan, a subordinate of Liu Huiyuan, bullied and humiliated, attacked others arbitrarily, but he thought he was honest.

古文：唯彦谦执志不挠，抗礼长揖。
现代文：刺史们都害怕他，见了他都恭恭敬敬下拜。惟有房彦谦对他不卑不亢，见面一揖而已。
English: The assassins were all afraid of him, and bowed down in respect when they saw him. However, Fusahikohken was not inferior to him, but only met him once.

古文：有识嘉之，灹亦不恨。
现代文：有见识的人都称赞他，刘火乇也不恼恨他。
English: People with insight praised him, and Liu Huan did not resent him.

古文：大业九年，从驾度辽，监扶余道军事。
现代文：大业九年，彦谦跟随炀帝到辽东，负责监察扶余道的军事。
English: In the ninth year of Daye, Yan Qian followed Emperor Gong to Liaodong and was responsible for supervising the military of Fuyu Province.

古文：其后隋政渐乱，莫不变节，彦谦直道守常，颇为执政者所嫉。出为泾阳令，终于官。
现代文：后来，隋朝政治逐渐混乱，朝臣们大多改变节操。彦谦坚守正道，有如平常，颇为执政的权要嫉恨，将他调出京城，任泾阳县县令，死在任上。
English: Later, the politics of the Sui Dynasty gradually became chaotic, and most of the courtiers changed their principles. Yan Qian firmly adhered to the right path, as usual, quite jealous of the power to govern, transferred him out of Beijing, served as the county magistrate of Fenyang County, and died in office.

古文：彦谦居家，每子侄定省，常为讲说督勉之，亹癖不倦。
现代文：彦谦在家乡居住时，子侄们来问安，他常给他们讲解处世的道理，督促勉励他们一番。
English: When Yanqian was living in his hometown, his sons and nephews came to say hello. He often explained to them the principles of dealing with the world, and urged and encouraged them.

古文：家有旧业，资产素殷，又前后居官所得俸禄，皆以周恤亲友，家无余财。
现代文：态度恳切勤勉，不知疲倦。家中有祖上留下的旧业，资产素来殷厚，加上他前后做官所得的俸禄，都用来接济亲戚朋友，所以家中没有多余的钱财。
English: His attitude is earnest, diligent and tireless. There are old businesses left behind by his ancestors in the family, and the assets have always been rich. In addition, the salary he earned while working as an official has been used to help relatives and friends, so there is no extra money in the family.

古文：车服器用，务存素俭。
现代文：他乘坐的车马，穿戴的衣服，使用的家具，都务必简朴省俭。
English: The chariots and horses he rides, the clothes he wears, and the furniture he uses must all be simple and frugal.

古文：自少及长，一言一行，未尝涉私。
现代文：从少年到成年，一言一行，从不涉及私人的事情。
English: From a boy to an adult, every word and action is recorded, never involving personal matters.

古文：虽致屡空，怡然自得。
现代文：虽然屡次导致钱囊羞涩，却怡然自得。
English: Although it has repeatedly led to cash-pocket shyness, it is pleased with itself.

古文：尝从容独笑，顾谓其子玄龄曰： 人皆因禄富，我独以官贫。
现代文：曾从容独自发笑，对他的儿子房玄龄说： 别人都因俸禄致富，我却独因做官而贫困。
English: Laughing to himself, he once said to his son, Fong Xuanling, "Other people are rich because of their salaries, but I am poor because of my position as an official."

古文：所遗子孙，在于清白耳。 
现代文：所留给子孙的，只有清白啊！ 
English: All that is left for our children and grandchildren is innocence!

古文：所有文笔，恢廓闲雅，有古人之深致。
现代文：他所写的文章，气派宏大，风格闲雅，有古人的深意。
English: The articles he wrote were grand in scale and elegant in style, with the profound meaning of the ancients.

古文：又善草隶，人有得其尺牍者，皆宝玩之。
现代文：又擅长写隶字，人们如果能得到他的书信，都珍藏展玩。
English: He was also good at writing calligraphy, and people treasured his letters if they could get them.

古文：太原王劭、北海高构、莜县李纲、中山郎茂、郎颖、河东柳彧、薛孺，皆一时知名雅澹之士，彦谦并与为友。
现代文：太原的王劭、北海的高构、县的李纲、中山的郎茂、郎颖、河东的柳、薛孺，都是一时著名的高雅清俊人物，彦谦都与他们结交为友。
English: Wang Qian of Taiyuan, Gao Jie of the North Sea, Li Gang of the county, Lang Mao and Lang Ying of Zhongshan, Liu and Xue Yao of Hedong were all famous elegant and handsome figures at the time, and Yan Qian made friends with them.

古文：虽冠盖成列，而门无杂宾。
现代文：他家里虽然高朋云集，冠盖相望，而却没有一个行为卑下的客人。
English: Although his family is full of high-ranking friends who look up to each other, there is not a single guest who behaves despicably.

古文：体资文雅，深达政务，有识者咸以远大许之。
现代文：他举止文雅，十分通达政务，有见识的人都用行为远大赞许他。
English: He was well-mannered, well-versed in government affairs, and well-informed people praised him greatly for his actions.

古文：初，开皇中平陈之后，天下一统，论者咸云将致太平。
现代文：当初，隋文帝平定南陈之后，天下归为一统，论者都说天下将要太平。
English: At first, after Emperor Sui and Emperor Wen had pacified Nancheng, the whole world was unified, and the commentators all said that the world would be peaceful.

古文：彦谦私谓所亲赵郡李少通曰： 主上性多忌克，不纳谏诤。
现代文：彦谦却私下里对他所亲近的赵郡人李少通说 ：皇上性情疑忌峻刻，不采纳别人的建议。
English: However, Hikohi privately told Li Shao-tong, a man from Zhao County who was close to him, that the Emperor's temperament was suspicious and he would not accept the advice of others.

古文：太子卑弱，诸王擅威。
现代文：太子懦弱平庸，诸王在各地擅作威福。
English: Princes are cowardly and mediocre, and kings are doing their best to bully people in various regions.

古文：在朝惟行苛酷之政，未弘远大之体，天下虽安，方忧危乱。 
现代文：朝廷只实行苛刻严酷的政治，没有表现出恢宏远大的气魄。天下虽然安定，我却忧虑动乱就要到来。 
English: The imperial court only practices harsh and harsh politics, and does not show a grand and ambitious spirit. Although the world is stable, I am worried that turmoil is coming.

古文：少通初谓不然。
现代文：李少通听了不以为然。
English: Li Shao Tong was not impressed.

古文：义云小字陀兒，少粗侠。
现代文：等到仁寿和大业之际，他的话果然都被验证。毕义云，小名瞓儿。
English: By the time of his benevolent life and great career, his words have been verified. Bi Yiyun, Xiaomei Ya'er.

古文：家在兗州北境，常劫掠行旅，州里患之。
现代文：少年粗犷豪侠，家住在兖州北部，常常打劫来往的行人，州里的人都把他当成祸患。
English: The young rough-hewn hero, whose family lives in the northern part of Zhangzhou, often robs passing pedestrians. People in Zhangzhou regard him as a scourge.

古文：晚方折节从官，累迁尚书都官郎中。
现代文：年纪很大才强自克制，改恶从善，出来做官，升至尚书都官郎中。
English: He was too old to exercise self-restraint, changed evil for good, came out to be an official, and rose to be one of the most senior officials in Shangshu.

古文：性严酷，事多干了。
现代文：他的性情严酷刚烈，事情处理得大多干练果断。
English: His temperament is stern and inflexible, and he deals with most things efficiently and decisively.

古文：齐文襄作相，以为称职，令普勾伪官，专以车辐考掠，所获甚多，然大起怨谤。
现代文：齐神武帝高欢做东魏的丞相，认为毕义云很称职，命他捉拿非法骗取职位的假官，他专门用车轴般粗的木棒拷打他们，获得了大量罪证。
English: Emperor Qishenwu Gao Huan, who was the prime minister of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, believed that Bi Yiyun was very competent and ordered him to catch the fake officials who illegally defrauded positions. He specially tortured them with a wooden stick as thick as a car axle and obtained a large amount of criminal evidence.

古文：曾为司州吏所讼，云其有所减截，并改换文书。
现代文：然而，也引起很多人的怨恨诽谤，曾被司州的官吏控告，说他杀人灭口，侵吞这些人的财物，并偷偷改换了有关的文书。
English: However, he has also aroused the resentment and slander of many people. He was once sued by officials in Jizhou, saying that he killed people, devoured their property, and secretly changed the relevant documents.

古文：文襄以其推伪，众人怨望，并无所问。
现代文：高欢认为义云察举伪官，难免不引起众人的怨恨，并不追问。
English: Gao Huan thought that if Yiyun investigated the appointment of fake officials, it would inevitably not arouse the resentment of many people, and did not pursue the matter.

古文：乃拘吏，数而斩之。
现代文：义云有所依恃，拘捕了一些官吏，列举他们的罪状，并将他们斩首。
English: Yiyun had a hunch, arrested some officials, listed their crimes, and beheaded them.

古文：因此锐情讯鞫，威名日盛。
现代文：因此，锐意刑讯审问，威名日渐增加。
English: As a result, the reputation of those who insist on torture and interrogation is increasing day by day.

古文：文宣受禅，除书侍御史，弹射不避勋亲。
现代文：齐文宣帝高洋称帝，任毕义云为书侍御史。对于勋臣国戚，他也照样弹劾。
English: Emperor Qibun proclaimed Gaoyang as emperor and appointed Bi Yiyun as his secretary. He also impeached the relatives of the honored subjects of the state.

古文：累选御史中丞，绳劾更切。
现代文：多次升迁，任御史中丞，对官吏的要求和奏劾更加认真严厉。
English: He was promoted several times and appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, and he became more serious and strict in his demands and complaints against officials.

古文：然豪横不平，频被怨讼。
现代文：然而，却引起了豪强权要们的不满，多次被他们诬告。
English: However, he aroused the discontent of the powerful and influential people, and was repeatedly falsely accused by them.

古文：前为汲郡太守翟嵩启列：义云从父兄僧明负官债，先任京畿长史，不受其属，立限切征，由此挟嫌，数遣御史过郡访察，欲相推绳。
现代文：先是被汲郡太守翟嵩弹劾，说他的从兄毕僧明拖欠官债。僧明原先任京城地区的长史，不受翟嵩的统属，限时命僧明还债，因此挟嫌报复。并多次派御史去访察，想因此牵连义云。
English: First, he was impeached by the governor of Kyu County, Jang Song, who said that his brother, Bi Sang Myong, had defaulted on the official debt. Jang Myong, who was originally in charge of the capital region, was not subordinate to Jang Song, and he was given a time limit to repay the debt, so he was suspected of retaliation. He also sent Jang Myong to visit several times, hoping to implicate Yiyun.

古文：又坐私藏工匠，家有十余机织锦，并造金银器物，乃被禁止。寻见释，以为司徒左长史。
现代文：后来，义云又因家里私藏工匠坐罪。他家有十多张织锦的织机，并私自打造金银器物，便被拘禁，不久释放，任司徒左长史。
English: Later, Yiyun was also convicted of concealing artisans in his family. His family had more than ten brocade looms, and he also made gold and silverware himself. He was detained and soon released, and his career as a scholar was cut short.

古文：尚书左丞司马子瑞奏弹义云，称： 天保元年四月，窦氏皇姨祖载日，内外百官赴第吊省；义云唯遣御史投名，身遂不赴。
现代文：尚书左丞司马子瑞奏劾毕义云，声称 ：天保元年四月，窦氏皇姨将要埋葬的那一天，朝廷百官都到她的府第吊唁哀悼，毕义云却只派一位御史去投递自己的名帖，并没有赴丧致哀。
English: Ma Zirui, secretary of the Left Division of Shangshu, appealed to Bi Yiyun, saying: In April of the first year of the Tenpo era, on the day that Dou's aunt was to be buried, hundreds of officials from the imperial court came to her residence to offer condolences. However, Bi Yiyun only sent one official historian to deliver his famous letter, and did not go to the funeral to offer condolences.

古文：又义云启云： 丧妇孤贫。
现代文：再则，义云自称：妻子死后生活孤单清寒。
English: On the other hand, Yiyun claimed that after his wife's death, he lived a lonely and cold life.

古文：后娶李世安女为妻。
现代文：后来，娶李世安的女儿为妻。
English: Later, he married the daughter of Li Shiyan.

古文：世安身虽父服未终，其女为祖已就平吉，特乞暗迎，不敢备礼。 
现代文：李世安替父亲守孝未完，他的女儿就办婚事，所以，特别乞请悄悄迎娶，不敢大肆操办。
English: Li Shian did not complete his filial duty for his father before his daughter got married, so he especially asked her to get married quietly and not to make a big deal of it.

古文：及义云成婚之夕，众礼备设，克日拜阁；鸣驺清路，盛列羽仪；兼差台吏二十人，责其鲜服，侍从车后。
现代文：等到他成婚那天晚上，各种礼仪摆设都很齐备，在限定时间迎娶，有骏马开路，盛大的仪仗排列在路上。又派官府的二十名吏役，穿着鲜艳的衣服，跟随在新娘乘坐的车子后面。
English: On the evening of his wedding, all the ceremonial trappings were in place: a time-limited wedding, a horse-drawn carriage procession, a grand ceremonial procession lined up on the road, and twenty government officials in brightly colored robes following behind in the bride's carriage.

古文：直是苟求成婚，诬罔干上。
现代文：真是越礼强求成婚，有违礼教，干犯皇室。
English: It's really impolite to propose marriage, it's against etiquette, and it's a crime against the imperial family.

古文：义云资产宅宇，足称豪室，忽通孤贫，亦为矫诈。
现代文：毕义云家的资产房宅，足可以称作豪门巨室。忽然与家境贫穷的人家通婚，完全是矫情钓誉。
English: The asset house of Bi Yiyun's family can be called a huge mansion. Suddenly marrying someone from a poor family is completely an affectation.

古文：又驾幸晋阳，都坐判： 拜起居表，四品以下五品以上，令预前一日赴南都署表；三品以上，临日署讫。 
现代文：再则，皇帝的车驾到晋阳，朝廷规定：参拜皇帝的起居，官吏四品以下五品以上的，提前一天到南都报到；三品以上的，当天到南都报到。
English: Furthermore, when the emperor's car drove to Jinyang, the imperial court stipulated: to visit the emperor's residence, officials with four or less and five or more products should report to Nandu one day in advance; with more than three products, they should report to Nandu on the same day.

古文：义云乃乖例，署表之日，索表就家先署，临日遂称私忌不来。 
现代文：毕义云却违犯成例，报到的那一天，将文表拿到家里签署。参拜起居时，又声称是自己家的忌日而不参加。 
English: Bi Yiyun, however, broke the law. On the day he reported to the authorities, he took the form to his home to sign. When he went to pay his respects, he claimed that it was the anniversary of his family's death and did not attend.

古文：于是诏付廷尉科罪。
现代文：于是，朝廷下诏将他交付廷尉治罪。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered that he be handed over to a court official to be punished.

古文：寻敕免推。
现代文：不久，下令免予追究。
English: Soon after, an order was issued to drop the case.

古文：子瑞又奏弹义云事十余条，多烦碎，罪止罚金，不至除免。
现代文：司马子瑞又弹劾他其他事情十多条，大多琐碎细微，判罪只限于罚金，不至于免职。
English: Sima Zirui also impeached him for more than a dozen other things, most of which were trivial and minor. The conviction was limited to a fine and did not result in dismissal.

古文：子瑞从兄消难为北豫州刺史。义云遣御史张子阶诣州采风闻，先禁其典签家客等。
现代文：司马子瑞的从兄司马消难任北豫州刺史，毕义云派御史张子阶到北豫州察访他的传闻影响。
English: Sima Zirui was influenced by the rumor that his elder brother Sima Qian could not be appointed as the governor of North Henan Province, and Zhang Zikai, the governor of Baiyun Province, visited him in North Henan Province.

古文：消难危惧，遂叛入周。时论归罪义云，云其规报子瑞。
现代文：张子阶先拘禁了他的掌管文书的典签和家客数人，司马消难十分害怕，便叛逃到北周。人们议论这件事，归罪于毕义云，说他是为了报复司马子瑞。
English: Zhang Zikai first detained his chief clerk and several of his family members, and Sima Qianhan was so afraid that he defected to Beizhou. People talked about this and blamed Bi Yiyun, saying that he was trying to take revenge on Sima Zirui.

古文：事亦上闻。
现代文：事情也报告给了文宣帝。
English: The matter was also reported to Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：尔前宴赏，义云常预，从此后集见稍疏，声望大损。
现代文：原来皇帝宴赏，都让毕义云参加，从此以后，渐被疏远，声望大大降低。
English: Originally, the emperor's banquets were all attended by Bi Yiyun. Since then, he has gradually been alienated and his reputation has been greatly reduced.

古文：乾明初，子瑞迁御史中丞。
现代文：乾明初年，司马子瑞升任御史中丞。
English: In the first year of Emperor Qianming, Sima Zirui was promoted to the post of Goshi Chujo.

古文：郑子默正被任用，义云之姑即子默祖母，遂除度支尚书，摄左丞。
现代文：郑子默正被朝廷重用，毕义云的姑母即是郑子默的祖母。所以义云受他保护，任度支尚书，兼左丞。
English: Zheng Ziming was heavily used by the imperial court, and Bi Yiyun's aunt was Zheng Ziming's grandmother. Therefore, Yiyun was protected by him, and he was appointed to be the chancellor and also the secretary of the left.

古文：子默诛后，左丞便解。
现代文：郑子默被处死后，毕义云左丞的职务也被解除。
English: After Zheng Ziming was executed, Bi Yiyun Zuo was also relieved of his duties.

古文：孝昭赴晋阳，高元海留鄴，义云深相依附。
现代文：孝昭帝高演至晋阳，高元海留住邺城，毕义云深深地依附于他。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi went as far as Jinyang, Gao Yuanhai retained Lucheng, and Bi Yiyun was deeply attached to him.

古文：知其信向释氏，常随之听讲，为此款密，无所不至。
现代文：知道他信佛，便常常跟随他去寺院听讲。为了密切和他的关系，义云无所不用。
English: Knowing that he believed in Buddhism, she often followed him to the temple to listen to his lectures. In order to maintain a close relationship with him, Yiyun did everything she could.

古文：及孝昭大渐，顾命武成。
现代文：到了孝昭帝病重，遗诏让武成帝高湛继位。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhao became seriously ill, he issued a posthumous edict that Emperor Wucheng should be succeeded by Emperor Gaozhan.

古文：高归彦至都，武成犹致疑惑。
现代文：文襄帝高澄的族弟高归彦到京城，武成帝对他疑忌重重。
English: Gao Guihang, the younger brother of Emperor Gaozhen, came to the capital. Emperor Wu Rongcheng was very suspicious of him.

古文：元海遣犊车迎义云入北宫参审，遂与元海等劝进。
现代文：高元海派牛车接毕义云到北宫计议，便与高元海等劝高湛早日即位。
English: Gao Yuanhai sent an ox-drawn carriage to take Bi Yiyun to the North Palace to discuss the matter, and then, together with Gao Yuanhai and others, advised Gao Zhan to ascend the throne as soon as possible.

古文：仍从幸晋阳，参预时政。
现代文：毕义云随武成帝至晋阳，参与朝政。
English: Bi Yiyun followed Emperor Wu Cheng to Jinyang and participated in imperial politics.

古文：寻除兗州刺史，给后部鼓吹，即本州也。
现代文：不久，出任兖州刺史，给予后部鼓吹的待遇，送他至本州上任。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and he was given the treatment of a propagandist and sent to his home state to take office.

古文：轩昂自得，意望铨衡之举，见诸人自陈，逆许引接。
现代文：义云气宇轩昂，洋洋自得。劝武成帝即位的功劳，见人都要陈说一遍，并表示愿意向朝廷引见他们。
English: He was full of pride and self-satisfaction. He asked everyone to tell him about the merits of persuading Emperor Wucheng to ascend the throne, and expressed his willingness to introduce them to the imperial court.

古文：又言离别暂时，非久在州。
现代文：还说与皇帝离别是暂时的，自己不会长时间在兖州任职。
English: He also said that his separation from the emperor was temporary and that he would not stay in Zhangzhou for a long time.

古文：先有铙吹，至于按部行游，两部并用。
现代文：在州内云游，先是用铙鼓吹。按部行游时，两部军乐都一齐并用。
English: When traveling around the state, the first thing to do is to play the gongs. When traveling step by step, the two pieces of military music are used together.

古文：犹作书与元海，论叙时事。
现代文：他还写信给高元海，议论朝廷内的事情。
English: He also wrote to Gao Yuanhai to discuss matters within the imperial court.

古文：元海入内，不觉遗落，给事中李孝贞得而奏之。
现代文：高元海到皇宫，不小心将信失落。给事中李孝贞拾到并送给了武成帝。
English: Gao Yuanhai went to the imperial palace and accidentally lost the letter. Li Xiaozhen picked it up and gave it to Emperor Wu Cheng.

古文：为此，元海渐疏，孝贞因是兼中书舍人。
现代文：为此，高元海逐渐被武成帝疏远，李孝贞因此被提拔为中书舍人。
English: For this reason, Gao Yuanhai was gradually alienated by Emperor Wucheng, and Li Xiaozhen was therefore promoted to the top of Chinese scholars.

古文：又高归彦起逆，义云在州私集人马，并聚甲仗，将以自防，实无他意，为人密启。
现代文：高归彦谋叛，毕义云在兖州暗中集结兵马，聚集武器，准备防卫，实在没有别的意思，却被人密奏朝廷。
English: Gao Guihang plotted to rebel, and Bi Yiyun secretly assembled soldiers and horses in Zhangzhou, gathered weapons, and prepared to defend himself. It really had no other meaning, but it was secretly played to the imperial court.

古文：及归彦被擒，又列其朋党专擅，为此追还。
现代文：等到高归彦被擒获，追问他的朋党，涉及到了毕义云。
English: When Gao Guihiko was captured and his friends were interrogated, Bi Yiyun was implicated.

古文：武成犹录其往诚，竟不加罪，除兼七兵尚书。
现代文：武成帝仍记着他劝进的忠诚，竟没有给他治罪，任他为七兵尚书。
English: Emperor Wucheng still remembered the loyalty of his persuasion, and did not punish him, but allowed him to remain as a soldier for seven years.

古文：义云性豪纵，颇以施惠为心。
现代文：毕义云性情豪爽放达，颇好施舍别人。
English: Bi Yiyun has a generous nature and is good at giving to others.

古文：累世本州刺史，家富于财，士之匮乏者，多有拯济。
现代文：累世任州刺史的职务，家中富足，广有资财。读书人中有生活贫困的，他大多给予接济。
English: He has served as the state's chief historian for many years. His family is wealthy and has a wide range of assets. If there are readers who live in poverty, he mostly gives them financial assistance.

古文：及贵，恣情骄侈，营造第宅宏壮，未几而成。
现代文：等他做了官，却尽情过着骄奢淫逸的生活。建造宏丽壮观的府第，不长时间就落成。
English: When he became an official, he lived a luxurious life to the full. He built a magnificent palace, which was completed in a short time.

古文：闺门秽杂，声遍朝野。
现代文：其中男女混杂的秽闻传遍朝野上下。
English: Among them, obscene rumors of mixed gender spread all over the morning and evening.

古文：为郎时，与左丞宋游道因公事忿竞。游道廷辱之，云： 《雄狐》之诗，千载为汝。 
现代文：任郎官时，曾与左丞宋游道因为公事发生分岐，两人忿怒争论，宋游道在朝堂上辱骂他说： 《雄狐》一诗，就因为你才流传千载。 
English: When he was a vassal, he had a disagreement with the left-hand man, Song Youdao, over a business matter, and the two had an angry argument. Song Youdao insulted him in the morning hall, saying: "Youthful Fox" is a poem, and it is because of you that it has been passed down for thousands of years.

古文：义云一无所答。
现代文：毕义云听了一句话也答不出来。
English: After listening to a sentence, Bi Yiyun couldn't answer.

古文：然酷暴残忍，非人理所及。
现代文：他的性格凶暴残忍，非一般的人情常理所能推及。
English: His character is ferocious and cruel, beyond the scope of ordinary human reason.

古文：为家尤甚，子姓仆隶，恆疮痍遍体。
现代文：在家里残酷更甚，子侄奴仆，经常被打得遍体伤痕。
English: At home, the cruelty is even worse, with sons and nephews often being beaten until they have scars all over their bodies.

古文：有孽子善昭，性至凶顽，与义云侍婢奸通。
现代文：他有一个很坏的儿子叫毕善昭，性情十分凶狠顽劣。经常与他的女婢通奸。
English: He had a very bad son called Bi Shan Zhao, who was very vicious and bad tempered. He often committed adultery with his maid.

古文：搒掠无数，为其著笼头，系之庭树，食以刍秣，十余日乃释之。
现代文：许多下人都遭受他的拷打，他还逼着这些人像牲畜一样戴上笼头，拴在院中的树上，让他们吃草料，折磨十多天才释放。
English: Many of his subordinates were tortured by him. He also forced these people to wear cages like cattle, chained them to trees in the courtyard, made them eat grass, and tortured them for more than ten days before releasing them.

古文：夜中，义云被贼害，即善昭所佩刀也，遗之于善昭庭中。
现代文：一天夜晚，毕义云被人杀害，凶器就是毕善昭的佩刀，失落在他的院子中。
English: One night, Bi Yiyun was murdered. The murder weapon was Bi Shan Zhao's sword, which was lost in his yard.

古文：善昭闻难奔哭。家人得佩刀，善昭怖，便走出，投平恩墅舍。
现代文：他听说父亲遇难，赶去痛哭，家人得到他的佩刀，他因害怕逃出，藏在平恩郊外的房舍里。
English: When he heard that his father had been killed, he went to mourn, his family received his saber, and he hid in a house on the outskirts of Ping'an, afraid to escape.

古文：旦日，武成令舍人是兰子暢就宅推之。
现代文：天亮后，武成帝命舍人兰子畅到毕义云家里了解案情。
English: After dawn, Emperor Wu Cheng gave his life to save Lanzi and went to Bi Yiyun's home to understand the case.

古文：尔前，义云新纳少室范阳卢氏，有色貌。
现代文：这之前，义云新娶了范阳卢氏女为妾，颇有姿色。
English: Prior to this, Yiyun Xin married Fan Yang Lu's concubine, who was quite beautiful.

古文：皇始初，道武平中山，纂举室南奔，家于济阴。
现代文：兰子畅怀疑是卢氏的奸夫杀了义云，准备拷打卢氏。
English: Lan Zichang suspected that Lu's husband had killed Yiyun and was preparing to torture Lu.

古文：及在无盐，仕宋为兗州刺史。
现代文：卢氏交待是善昭干的。便将善昭逮捕，关押在临漳监狱，准备斩首示众。
English: Lu confided in him that it was Zenzhao who did it. Zenzhao was arrested and detained in Linyi Prison, where he was prepared to be beheaded in public.

古文：既败，子景义入魏。
现代文：邢邵上奏章说 ：这是大逆不道的事情，义云又是朝廷重臣，不可以张扬。 
English: Zou Shao Shangso Zhang said, "This is an act of high treason, and Yiyun is also a high-ranking court official. It should not be publicized."

古文：羊祉，字灵祐，太山钜平人，晋太仆卿琇之六世孙也。
现代文：便在狱中将善昭斩首，尸体扔在了漳河中。羊祉，字灵祐，太山钜平人，晋朝太仆卿羊臔的六代孙子。
English: He beheaded Zenzhao in prison and threw his body into the Li River. He was the sixth generation grandson of Yang Zhi, Zhi Ling Yu, Taishan Zou Pingren, and Jin Dynasty's Taifuqing Yang Zi.

古文：父规之，宋任城令。
现代文：父亲羊规之，刘宋时任任城县令。
English: His father was Yang Guizhi, and Liu Song was the county magistrate at the time.

古文：太武南讨，至邹山，规之与鲁郡太守崔邪利及其属县徐逊、爱猛之等俱降，赐爵钜平子，拜雁门太守。
现代文：太武帝南讨，军队进至邹山，羊规之与鲁郡太守崔邪利，以及其属县官吏徐逊、爱猛之等人一起投降，规之被赐爵为钜平子，任雁门太守。
English: Emperor Taowu marched south, and the army entered Shaoshan. Yang Guizhi surrendered together with Lu County Governor Cui Yali, and his subordinate county officials Xu Xun, Ai Mengzhi, and others. Guizhi was given the title of Zou Pingzi and became the governor of Ganmen.

古文：祉性刚愎，好刑名。
现代文：羊祉性情刚烈自信，喜好刑名。
English: Sheep have a strong and self-confident character and like to be punished.

古文：为司空令、辅国长史，袭爵钜平子。
现代文：任司空令、辅国长史，继承父亲的爵位为钜平子。
English: He was appointed as Tsukurei, Assistant to the Governor of the Province, and succeeded his father's peerage as Tsukuda Heishi.

古文：侵盗公资，私营居宅，有司按之，抵死。
现代文：他由于侵吞公款，营造私宅，被有司查处，应当判处死罪。
English: He should be sentenced to death for embezzling public funds and building a private house, for which he was investigated and punished by a judge.

古文：孝文特恕远徙。
现代文：孝文帝特别饶恕他不死，发配到边远的地方。
English: Emperor Xiaowen specially spared him from death and sent him to a remote place.

古文：后还。
现代文：后来回家。
English: Then he went home.

古文：景明初，为将作都将，加左军将军。
现代文：景明初年，任将作都将，加封为左军将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingming, he was appointed as the general of the Left Army.

古文：四年，持节为梁州军司，讨叛氐。
现代文：景明四年，持朝廷节杖任梁州军司，讨伐叛乱的氐族。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of King Jingming, he held the imperial scepter and served as the military governor of Liangzhou to fight the rebellious Yi people.

古文：正始二年，王师伐蜀，以祉假节龙骧将军、益州刺史，出剑阁而还。
现代文：正始二年，朝廷派军队攻讨蜀地，以羊祉为假节龙骧将军、益州刺史，攻取剑阁而还。
English: At the beginning of the second year, the imperial court sent troops to attack Shu, using sheep welfare as a fake festival, Longjing General, Yizhou stabbed history, captured Jiange and returned.

古文：又以本将军为秦、梁二州刺史，加征虏将军。
现代文：又以本将军的职衔任秦、梁二州的刺史，加封为征虏将军。
English: He also appointed Qin and Liang Erzhou's chief historian with the title of this general, and added the title of conscript general.

古文：天性酷忍，又不清洁，坐掠人为奴婢。为御史中尉王显所弹，免。
现代文：羊祉生性残忍，又不廉洁，掠夺百姓为自己的奴婢，被御史中尉王显弹劾，被朝廷免罪。
English: Sheep herder, cruel by nature and not honest, plundered the people as his slaves. He was impeached by the imperial lieutenant Wang Xian and exonerated by the imperial court.

古文：高肇执政，祉复被起为光禄大夫，假平南将军、持节，领步骑三万，先驱趣涪。
现代文：高肇执掌朝政，羊祉又被起用为光禄大夫，任平南将军、持节，率步军骑兵三万，先行向涪城进发。
English: Gao Zhao was in charge of the imperial government, and Yang Zhi was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, appointed as the general of Pingnan, held the festival, led the infantry cavalry of thirty thousand, and advanced to Lucheng.

古文：未至，宣武崩，班师。
现代文：没有到达地方，宣武帝驾崩，羊祉率军返回。
English: Without reaching the place, Emperor Xuanwu died, and the army led by Yang Zhi returned.

古文：夜中引军，山有二径，军人迷而失路，祉便斩队副杨明达，枭首路侧。
现代文：夜晚行军，山上有两条路，兵士迷失方向而走错了路，羊祉将队副杨明达斩首，将头颅挂在路旁。
English: While marching at night, there were two roads on the mountain. The soldiers lost their way and went the wrong way. Yang Mingda, the deputy commander, was beheaded and his head was hung on the side of the road.

古文：为中尉元昭所劾，会赦免。
现代文：中尉元昭弹劾羊祉的暴行，他又被赦免。
English: Lieutenant Yuan Zhao was impeached for the atrocities against the shepherds, and he was pardoned.

古文：后加平北将军，未拜而卒。赠安东将军、兗州刺史。
现代文：以后，加封为平北将军，没有拜受职务就去世了，朝廷追赠他为安东将军、兖州刺史。
English: Later, he was given the title of Pingbei General, but he died without taking up the post. The imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of General Anton and Zhangzhou Historian.

古文：太常少卿元端、博士刘台龙议谥曰： 祉志存埋轮，不避强御；及赞戎律，熊武斯裁；仗节抚籓，边夷识德，化沾殊类，襁负怀仁。
现代文：太常少卿元端、博士刘台龙讨论羊祉的谥号说： 羊祉的志向始终坚贞不渝，不畏惧强权；参赞戎机，勇武果断；受命抚边，夷族感恩戴德，人民大受感化，无论老幼都怀念他的仁爱。
English: Too often, Shaoqing Yuanduan and Dr. Liu Tailong discussed the nickname of Sheep Welfare and said: Sheep Welfare's ambition has always been steadfast, not afraid of power; the military advisor, brave and decisive; when ordered to pull the edge, the barbarians are grateful, the people are greatly inspired, and both the old and the young miss his benevolence.

古文：谨依谥法，布德行刚曰景，宜谥为景。 
现代文：按照赐谥的规定，布施德义，行为果决称为景，应该谥号为 景 。 
English: According to the provisions of the imperial edict, the most virtuous deed is called the scene, and the nickname should be "scene."

古文：侍中侯刚、给事黄门侍郎元纂等驳曰： 臣闻唯名与器，弗可妄假。
现代文：侍中侯刚、给事黄门侍郎元纂等人驳斥说 ；我们听说惟有名号和标志名号的器物，不能随便送人。
English: Servant-in-chief Hou Gang, Huangmen servant-master Gencang and others refuted that; we heard that only the famous name and logo name of the goods, can not casually send people.

古文：定谥准行，必当其迹。
现代文：确定谥号的标准，一定要和他的事迹相符合。
English: The criteria for determining the nickname must be consistent with his deeds.

古文：按祉志性急酷，所在过威，布德罕闻，暴声屡发。
现代文：羊祉性情暴烈严酷，所在的地方威猛过甚，而很少听说布德施仁。
English: Sheepherds have a violent and harsh temperament, and they live in a very fierce place, but they rarely hear of Bud Shiren.

古文：而礼官虚述，谥之为景，非直失于一人，实毁朝则。
现代文：礼官却不实事求是，谥号为 景 ，不但使正直在他一个人身上丧失，而实则使朝廷的法度遭到破坏。
English: The etiquette officer, however, did not seek truth from facts and used his nickname as a cover, which not only caused the loss of honesty in him alone, but actually caused the destruction of the imperial court's rule of law.

古文：请还付外，准行更量虚实。 
现代文：请求交给外臣商议，根据标准重新确定谥号。 
English: The request was submitted to the foreign minister for discussion, and the nickname was re-determined according to the standard.

古文：灵太后令曰： 依驳便议。 
现代文：灵太后下令说 ：根据他们驳斥的意见，重新议定。 
English: The Empress Dowager Ling ordered: According to their refuted opinions, renegotiate.

古文：元端、台龙上言： 窃惟谥者行之迹，状者迹之称。
现代文：元瑞和刘台龙又奏请说： 听说谥号是道德的表现，事状是行为表现的名称。
English: Yuan Rui and Liu Tairong also said: I heard that the nickname is a moral performance, and the state of affairs is the name of the performance.

古文：然尚书铨衡是司，厘品庶物，若状与迹乖，应抑而不受，录其实状，然后下寺，依谥法准状科上。
现代文：然而，尚书负责铨选人才，裁量品物，如果他的行为与事迹乖违，应该裁下来而不接受，再记录他的真实行状，交有关部司，按照赐赠谥号的标准衡量。
English: However, Shangshu is responsible for selecting talent, discretionary goods, if his behavior and deeds are contrary, it should be cut down and not accepted, then record his true behavior, submit to the relevant departments, and measure according to the standard of awarding the nickname.

古文：岂有舍其行迹，外有所求，去状去称，将何所准。
现代文：怎么能丢开他的事迹，另外寻找根据？丢下他的事，去掉他的名号，将以什么做标准？ 
English: How can we discard his deeds and look for another basis? What will be the standard for discarding his deeds and removing his name?

古文：诏册褒美，无替伦望。
现代文：灵太后同意他们的意见。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling agreed with them.

