古文：◎后妃一太祖光献翼圣皇后，名孛儿台旭真，弘吉剌氏，特薛禅之女也。
现代文：太祖光献翼圣皇后，名孛儿台旭真，姓弘吉剌氏，特薛禅之女。
English: The holy empress of the Great Ancestor Light Offering Wings, the famous child Tai Xu Zhen, surnamed Hong Jizhe, the daughter of Te Xue Zen.

古文：特薛禅与子按陈从太祖征伐有功，赐号国舅，封王爵，以统其部族。
现代文：特薛禅与其子按陈随太祖征讨有功，赐号国舅，封王爵，仍统领其部族。
English: Te Xue Zen and his son were awarded the title of "uncle of the country" and given the title of "royal peer" according to Chen Sui Taizu. They still led their tribe.

古文：至元二年，追谥钦淑皇后。
现代文：太祖有旨： 生女为皇后，生男为公主驸马，世代如此。 
English: The great-grandfather had a rule: the firstborn daughter was to be the queen, the firstborn son was to be the prince's groom, and so on down the generations.

古文：宪宗贞节皇后，名忽都台，弘吉剌氏，特薛禅孙忙哥陈之女也，蚤崩，后妹也速儿继为妃。
现代文：世祖至元二年十二月追谥 光献翼圣皇后 。册文中说： 光献皇后禀性温和，深谋远虑，才德兼备。在我朝创业之初，辅助太祖朝夕求贤。 
English: In December of the 2nd year of the 1st century, the founder of the world chased the Light Offering Wing Holy Empress. The record said: The Light Offering Wing Holy Empress is gentle, foresighted and talented. At the beginning of my business, I assisted my great-grandfather in seeking virtue morning and evening.

古文：至元二年，追谥贞节皇后，升祔宪宗庙。
现代文： 谨遣摄太尉某某，奉玉册玉宝，加上尊谥曰光献翼圣皇后。 与太祖同供奉于太庙，受后代祭祀。
English: It is my honor to send the photograph of the Imperial Lieutenant So-and-so, the offering of the jade scroll and the jade treasure, together with the tribute to the Holy Empress of the Light Offering, to be offered together with the great-grandfather in the Great Temple, to be worshipped by future generations.

古文：世祖昭睿顺圣皇后，名察必，弘吉剌氏，济宁忠武王按陈之女也。
现代文：世祖昭睿顺圣皇后，名察必，姓弘吉剌氏，济宁忠武王按陈之女。
English: The ancestor Zhaorai Shunsheng Empress, known as Zhabi, surnamed Hongjishan, was the daughter of Jining Zhongwu Wang according to Chen.

古文：生裕宗。中统初，立为皇后。
现代文：生裕宗，中统初立为皇后。
English: She was born as Yuzong, and became the empress at the beginning of the Middle Kingdom.

古文：至元十年三月，授册宝，上尊号贞懿昭圣顺天睿文光应皇后。
现代文：至元十年三月受册封，上尊号 贞懿昭圣顺天睿文光应皇后 。
English: In March of the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, she was canonized and given the title of "Empress Zhenyu Zhao Sheng Shun Tianrui Wen Guangying."

古文：一日，四怯薛官奏割京城外近地牧马，帝既允，方以图进。
现代文：四怯薛官奏请划京城外附近农田为牧马场地，世祖允准，皇后想谏阻。
English: The four cowardly Xue officials requested that the farmland near the outskirts of the capital be used as a horse-breeding ground. The patriarch agreed, but the empress wanted to oppose it.

古文：后至帝前，将谏，先阳责太保刘秉忠曰： 汝汉人聪明者，言则帝听，汝何为不谏？
现代文：一天乘太保刘秉忠在帝身边，皇后故意责备刘秉忠说： 你是汉人中聪明谋臣，皇帝听从你的意见，为何不加谏阻。
English: One day, when Liu Bingzhong, the imperial bodyguard, was at the emperor's side, the empress deliberately scolded Liu Bingzhong, saying: You are a wise adviser among the Han people, the emperor listens to your opinion, why not put up resistance.

古文：向初到定都时，若以地牧马则可，今军蘸俱分业已定，夺之可乎？ 
现代文：过去初定都于此时，划农田为牧地还犹可说，如今各有定业，还侵夺农田，这合理吗？ 
English: In the past, the initial determination was made at this time, and the farmland was designated as pastureland, but it can be said that now everyone has a fixed occupation, and farmland is also encroached upon. Is this reasonable?

古文：帝默然，命寝其事。
现代文：世祖默不做声，划农田为牧场的事不了了之。
English: Emperor Zedong remained silent, and the issue of turning farmland into pastureland could not be resolved.

古文：后尝于太府监支缯帛表里各一，帝谓后曰： 此军国所需，非私家物，后何可得支？ 
现代文：察必皇后曾于太府监支用了丝绸，世祖说 ：这些东西均军国所需，非私有之物，皇后怎可任意支取？ 
English: The Empress Chabizhe had once spent silk on the grand procurator. The ancestor said, "These things are needed by the military, they are not private property. How can the Empress withdraw them at will?"

古文：其劝俭有节而无弃物，类如此。十三年，平宋，幼主朝于上都。大宴，众皆欢甚，唯后不乐。
现代文：从此以后，皇后亲率宫女进行纺织，将旧弓弦的丝织成绸缎以做衣服，宣徽院的羊皮置之无用，她取来缝为地毯，其勤俭节约如此。至元十三年平定宋朝，宋幼主到上都朝见世祖，世祖大宴群臣，众皆欢乐。
English: From then on, the empress's relatives led the palace maids in weaving, and the silk from the old bowstring was woven into silk cocoons to make clothes. The sheepskin from Xuanhuiyuan was put to no use, and she took it and sewed it into carpets. Such was her diligence and thrift. In the thirteenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Song Dynasty was conquered, and the young lord of the Song Dynasty went to Shangdu to see his ancestor. The ancestor held a grand banquet for his retainers, and everyone was happy.

古文：帝曰： 我今平江南，自此不用兵甲，众人皆喜，尔独不乐，何耶？ 
现代文：只有皇后沉默不语，世祖问她： 我今平定江南，自此以后不再兴兵打仗，大家都欣喜若狂，唯独你不高兴，是何缘故？ 
English: Only the empress remained silent. The patriarch asked her: I have now pacified the south of the Yangtze River, and from now on I will no longer raise an army to fight. Everyone is ecstatic, but you are not happy. Why?

古文：后跪奏曰： 妾闻自古无千岁之国，毋使吾子孙及此，则幸矣。 
现代文：皇后跪奏道 ：妾闻自古无千岁之国，将来能使我们子孙不像宋朝皇帝那样成为亡国之君就幸甚了。 
English: The empress knelt down and said, "We have been a thousand-year-old country since ancient times, and we are very fortunate that our descendants will not be able to become the ruler of a ruined country like the Emperor of the Song Dynasty.

古文：帝以宋府库故物各聚置殿庭上，召后视之，后遍视即去。
现代文：大殿上陈列着从宋朝府库中得来的各类珍贵物品，皇后看一遍就走了。
English: All kinds of precious items from the Song Dynasty treasury were displayed on the main hall. The empress took one look and left.

古文：帝遣宦者追问后，欲何所取。后曰： 宋人贮蓄以遗其子孙，子孙不能守，而归于我，我何忍取一物耶！ 
现代文：世祖遣宦官问皇后想要什么，皇后说： 宋朝历代皇帝贮存这许多东西留给子孙，而子孙保不住，尽归我朝，我怎忍心取走一物！ 
English: When the eunuch asked the empress what she wanted, the empress said, "All the emperors of the Song Dynasty stored up so many things to bequeath to their descendants, but I can't keep them. They all belong to my dynasty. How can I bear to take one thing away!

古文：时宋太后全氏至京，不习北方风土，后为奏令回江南。帝不允，至三奏，帝乃答曰： 尔妇人无远虑，若使之南还，或浮言一动，即废其家，非所以爱之也。
现代文：这时宋太后全氏被俘，送至大都，但不习惯北部风土，皇后多次奏请放宋太后全氏回江南，世祖始终不允，认为放他们回去，若有流言蜚语，会杀他们全家，这不是爱他们而是害他们，要爱他们，就把他们安置在京师，加以抚恤。
English: At this time, the Empress Dowager Song Quan was captured and sent to the capital, but she was not used to the northern customs. The Empress repeatedly requested that the Empress Dowager Song Quan be sent back to the south of the Yangtze River. The patriarch was always unwilling, believing that if they were allowed to go back, if there were rumors, they would kill their whole family. This was not to love them, but to harm them. If they were to be loved, they would be placed in the capital and given a pension.

古文：嗣服云初，追怀曷已。是用究成先志，式阐徽称。谨遣某官某，上尊谥曰贞慈静懿皇后，升祔于成宗皇帝殿室。
现代文：此后，皇后更加厚待宋太后。蒙古帽本无前檐，世祖常感到阳光耀眼，皇后加上前檐，世祖大喜，以后就成为蒙古帽的定式。后又为帝制衣一件，没有衣襟，没有领袖，后长前短，有两根带子，名曰 比甲 ，便于骑马射箭，当时人皆仿效之，成为时装。察必皇后禀性聪明，善于把握事业成败的契机，所以在元朝建立之初，成为世祖的左右助手。
English: After that, the empress treated the Empress Dowager Song more generously. The Mongolian hat had no front brim, and the ancestor often felt that the sun was dazzling. The empress added the front brim, and the ancestor was overjoyed. Later, it became the standard for the Mongolian hat. Later, it was a piece of imperial clothing, without a collar, without a leader, with a long front and a short back, and two straps, called Bijia, convenient for riding and archery. At that time, everyone imitated it and it became a fashion. The empress must have been smart and good at grasping opportunities for success or failure in

古文：伏惟淑灵，永伸配侑，介以景福，佑我无疆。 
现代文：至元十八年二月崩。至元三十一年四月，成宗即位，五月，追谥为 昭睿顺圣皇后 ，供奉于世祖庙祭祀。
English: She passed away in February of the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty. In April of the 31st year of the Yuan Dynasty, Chengzong ascended to the throne. In May, she was posthumously crowned as the Empress Zhaorai Shunsheng and was enshrined in the ancestral temple.

古文：卜鲁罕皇后，伯岳吾氏，驸马脱里思之女。
现代文：卜鲁罕皇后，姓伯岳吾氏，驸马脱里思之女。
English: Empress of Brukhan, surnamed Bo Yuego, the daughter of Emperor Martellus.

古文：元贞初，立为皇后。大德三年十月，授册宝。
现代文：元贞初立为皇后，大德三年十月受册封。
English: Motozane was crowned empress at the beginning of the year, and Dade received the title of nobility in October of the following year.

古文：成宗多疾，后居中用事，信任相臣哈剌哈孙，大德之政，人称平允，皆后处决。
现代文：成宗多病，皇后参预政事，信任丞相哈剌哈孙。大德年间的政治，人称平允，皆皇后决断所致。
English: Chengzong was often ill, the empress participated in pre-election politics, and trusted the prime minister, Hachihasun. The politics during the reign of the emperor, known as the Pingyong era, were all determined by the empress.

古文：京师创建万宁寺，中塑秘密佛像，其形丑怪，后以手帕蒙覆其面，寻传旨毁之。
现代文：京师建立万宁寺，寺中佛像奇形怪状，皇后先用手帕蒙其面，后又传旨毁掉。
English: A Buddhist monk from Beijing built the Manning Temple. The strangely shaped Buddha statue in the temple was first covered with a handkerchief by the empress, and then destroyed by order of the emperor.

古文：省院台臣奏上尊号，帝不允。
现代文：省、院、台臣奏请为皇帝上尊号，成宗不允。
English: The provinces, the emperor's court, and the emperor's courtiers requested that the emperor be given the title of Supreme Emperor, but Chengzong did not agree.

古文：车驾幸上都，后方自奏请。帝曰： 我病日久，国家大事多废不举，尚宁理此等事耶！ 
现代文：成宗到上都，皇后又亲自奏请，成宗说 ：我患病日久，国家大事有许多尚未办到，哪里还谈得上尊号的事！ 
English: Chengzong went to Shangdu, and the empress herself appealed to him. Chengzong said, "I have been ill for a long time, there are many national events that have not yet been carried out, where can I talk about the matter of the honorific title!"

古文：至顺元年，敕有司供明宗后宫币帛二百匹。
现代文：这件事以后就不再提了。大德十年，皇后把顺宗妃答吉及其子仁宗贬往怀州。
English: After that, the matter was no longer mentioned. In the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, Empress Dowager Cixi exiled Empress Dowager Cixi and her son Emperor Cixi to Huizhou.

古文：是年四月崩。文宗卜答失里皇后，弘吉剌氏，父驸马鲁王雕阿不剌，母鲁国公主桑哥剌吉。
现代文：第二年，成宗驾崩，当时武宗在北边，皇后怕他回京后报复她贬顺宗妃及仁宗的前怨，乃策划立安西王阿难答失里为帝。仁宗自怀州入京，清除宫内卜鲁罕皇后的亲信，诛杀安西王，以私通的罪名将皇后迁居于东安州。文宗卜答失里皇后，姓弘吉剌氏，其父为驸马鲁王阿不剌，母为鲁国公主桑哥剌吉。
English: In the second year, Chengzong died. At that time, Wu Zong was in the north, and the empress was afraid that he would return to Beijing to retaliate against her for disparaging the former grievances of the Empress Dowager and Ren Zong, and was planning to establish Anxi King Ananda as the emperor. Ren Zong entered Beijing from Waizhou, purged the palace of the close confidants of Empress Burukhan, assassinated King Anxi, and moved the empress to Dong'an on the charge of adultery. The Empress of Bu Zong, surnamed Hongji Yi, was the Empress of Bu Zang, and her father was

古文：文宗居建业，后亦在行。天历元年，文宗即位，立为皇后。
现代文：天历元年文宗即位，立为皇后。
English: In the first year of the Tenryaku era, Wenzong ascended the throne and became the empress.

古文：二年，授册宝。
现代文：二年受册封。
English: He was canonized two years later.

古文：十一月，后以银五万两助建大承天护圣寺。
现代文：同年十一月，皇后以银五万两助建大承天护圣寺。
English: In November of the same year, the empress used 50,000 taels of silver to help build the Dazhong Tianwu Holy Temple.

古文：至顺元年，以籍没张珪家田四百顷，赐护圣寺为永业。
现代文：至顺元年又以朝廷没收张皀家的田地四百顷赐予护圣寺为永业。
English: In the first year of Shun, the imperial court confiscated four hundred hectares of fields from Zhang Ye's family and gave them to the Holy Protection Temple as a permanent occupation.

古文：后与宦者拜住谋杀明宗后八不沙。
现代文：卜答失里皇后与宦官拜住谋杀明宗后八不沙。
English: The Empress and the eunuch worship the murder of Emperor Mingzong.

古文：三年八月，文宗崩于上都，后导扬末命，申帝初志，遂立明宗次子懿璘质班，是为宁宗。
现代文：天历三年八月，文宗崩于上都，卜答失里皇后宣布文宗遗诏，立明宗次子懿瞞质班为帝，这就是宁宗。
English: In August of the third year of the lunar calendar, Emperor Wenzong died in Shangdu, and the Empress of Buteulli announced the last will and testament of Emperor Wenzong and enthroned the second son of Emperor Mingzong, Yu Xizhepan, as emperor. This was Emperor Ningzong.

古文：十一月，奉玉册玉宝尊皇后为皇太后。
现代文：同年十一月，奉玉册玉玺尊卜答失里为皇太后。
English: In November of the same year, she became the empress dowager after praying to the statue of the Jade Buddha.

古文：十二月，御兴圣殿受朝贺。
现代文：十二月，皇帝在兴圣殿受百官朝贺，不久即崩。
English: In December, the emperor received the morning greetings of hundreds of officials at the Xing Temple, and died soon after.

古文：宁宗崩，大臣请立太子燕贴古思。
现代文：大臣们请立太子燕帖古思为帝。
English: The ministers invited the crown prince, Yan Zhe Gu Si, to become emperor.

古文：后曰： 天位至重，吾子尚幼，明宗长子妥欢帖睦尔在广西，今十三岁矣，理当立之。 
现代文：卜答失里皇太后说： 天子之位至关重要，吾子尚幼，明宗长子妥欢帖睦尔现在广西，今已十三岁，理当立为帝。 
English: The Empress Dowager said: "The position of the Son of Heaven is very important. My son is still young, and the eldest son of Emperor Mingzong, Tuo Huan Ti Mu'er, who is now in Guangxi, is now thirteen years old. He should be made emperor."

古文：于是奉旨迎至京师，以明年六月即位，是为顺帝。
现代文：于是遣使奉旨迎至京师，第二年六月即位，是为顺帝。
English: As a result, an envoy was sent to Beijing to welcome him, and he ascended to the throne in June of the following year, as Emperor Shun.

古文：元统元年，尊为太皇太后，仍称制临朝。
现代文：元统元年，尊皇太后为太皇太后，仍临朝代行皇帝职权。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the revered empress dowager became the great empress dowager, still acting as the emperor.

古文：至元六年六月，诏去尊号，安置东安州，寻崩。
现代文：至元六年六月，顺帝诏令削去太皇太后尊号，迁居于东安州，不久即崩。
English: In June of the 6th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Shun decreed to remove the title of Grand Empress Dowager, moved to Dong'an, and died soon after.

古文：内官往复者三，竟拒不纳，帝益贤之。
现代文：顺帝伯颜忽都皇后，姓弘吉剌氏，武宗宣慈惠圣皇后真哥侄毓德王孛罗帖木儿之女，至元三年三月立为皇后，生皇子真金，二岁夭折。
English: She was the daughter of Emperor Shun's great-granddaughter Empress Kudu, whose family name was Hongji, and Emperor Wu's great-great-granddaughter Empress Zhengyi, who was the daughter of Empress Zhengyi's great-grandnephew King Shunde's great-great-nephew King Luo, and was enthroned as empress in March of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty. She gave birth to Prince Zhengyin, who died at the age of two.

古文：帝尝问后： 中政院所支钱粮，皆传汝旨，汝还记之否？ 
现代文：伯颜忽都皇后好节俭，不妒忌，随时随地以礼法约束自己。
English: The empress is frugal, not jealous, and restrains herself with etiquette at any time and place.

古文：后对曰： 妾当用则支。
现代文：有次随帝至上京，中途帝遣宦官传谕皇后，说皇帝要到她那里过夜。
English: Once, when the emperor was on his way to the capital, he sent a eunuch to tell the empress that the emperor wanted to spend the night with her.

古文：关防出入，必己选人司之，妾岂能尽记耶？ 
现代文：皇后推辞说 ：夜晚不是圣上往来的时候。 
English: The empress said, "The night is not the time for a sacred exchange."

古文：居坤德殿，终日端坐，未尝妄逾户阈。
现代文：宦官为此往返三次，最终还是遭到拒绝，皇帝更加敬重她。皇后居坤德殿，终日衣冠整齐，行为端正，未曾出殿一步。
English: The eunuch went back and forth three times for this, but was finally rejected, and the emperor respected her even more. The empress lived in the Kunde Palace, dressed neatly all day long, behaved properly, and never left the palace.

古文：至正二十五年八月崩，年四十二。
现代文：至正二十五年八月崩，年四十二岁。
English: He died in August 1925, at the age of 42.

古文：奇氏后见其所遗衣服弊坏，大笑曰： 正宫皇后，何至服此等衣耶！ 
现代文：死后，奇氏皇后见所遗衣物，皆破旧不堪，大笑说 ：正宫皇后何至于穿这样的衣服！ 
English: After her death, the Empress of the Ki clan saw the clothes she had left behind, all of which were worn out, and laughed out loud, saying, "Why would the Empress of the Imperial Palace wear such clothes!

古文：其朴素可知。
现代文：其朴素可知。
English: Its simplicity is understandable.

古文：逾月，皇太子自冀宁归，哭之甚哀。完者忽都皇后奇氏，高丽人，生皇太子爱猷识理达腊。
现代文：顺帝完者忽都皇后，姓奇氏，高丽人，生皇太子爱猷识理达腊。
English: Shun Emperor's successor was Empress Kudu, surnamed Ki, a native of Goryeo, and her son Crown Prince Aizhong Zhelidala.

古文：家微，用后贵，三世皆追封王爵。
现代文：奇氏皇后本出身贫贱，立为皇后，其家族三世皆追封王爵。
English: Originally from a humble background, the Empress of the Ki clan was made empress, and all three generations of her family were ennobled.

古文：初，徽政院使秃满迭儿进为宫女，主供茗饮，以事顺帝。
现代文：最初，徽政院使秃满迭儿把奇氏作为宫女送来侍奉顺帝，只不过进茶送水而已。
English: At first, the Emperor's Privy Council asked Bald Man's daughter to send Qi as a concubine to serve Emperor Shun, but she only brought water for tea.

古文：后性颖黠，日见宠幸。
现代文：奇氏聪敏机灵，逐渐受到顺帝宠爱。
English: Qi's intelligence and cunning gradually endeared him to Emperor Shun.

古文：后答纳失里皇后方骄妒，数箠辱之。
现代文：答纳失里皇后忌妒她，还多次打骂她。
English: The queen was jealous of her and scolded her many times.

古文：答纳失里既遇害，帝欲立之，丞相伯颜争不可。
现代文：元统三年，答纳失里皇后因其兄御史大夫唐其势谋反伏诛而被丞相伯颜毒死于开平。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Empress Dowager Negi died of poisoning in Kaiping at the instigation of her brother, the Grand Historian Tang Qi, who was plotting a counterattack.

古文：伯颜罢相，沙剌班遂请立为第二皇后，居兴圣宫，改徽政院为资正院。
现代文：顺帝欲立奇氏为后，遭伯颜坚决阻止。伯颜罢相，沙剌班请立奇氏为第二皇后，居兴圣宫，并改徽政院为资政院。
English: Emperor Shun wanted Lichi to succeed him, but he was resolutely stopped by Bo Yan. Bo Yan retired from public life, and Shao Ban invited Lichi to become the second empress, to live in the Sacred Palace, and to change the State Council to the State Council.

古文：后无事，则取《女孝经》、史书，访问历代皇后之有贤行者为法。
现代文：奇氏为皇后，无事则学《女孝经》及史书，效法历代皇后之贤德。
English: As the empress of the Qi clan, she studied the "Female Filial Piety Sutra" and history books as a matter of course, emulating the virtues of empresses throughout the ages.

古文：四方贡献，或有珍味，辄先遣使荐太庙，然后敢食。
现代文：四方贡物中或有珍美食品，她都先派人拿去供奉太庙祖宗，然后自己才敢饮食。
English: She would first send someone to offer the temple's ancestors some of the rare foods among the tributes from the four directions, and only then would she dare to eat.

古文：至正十八年，京城大饥，后命官为粥食之。又出金银粟帛，命资正院使朴不花于京都十一门置冢，葬死者遗骼十余万，复命僧建水陆大会度之。
现代文：至正十八年，京城大闹饥荒，奇氏皇后命官府施粥饥民，又拿出金银粟帛命资政院使朴不花用以安葬死者遗骸十余万具于京都郊外，命僧人建水陆道场，打醮超度亡魂。
English: By the 18th year of the Heian period, there was a great famine in Kyoto. The Queen of the Ki clan ordered the government to give porridge to the starving people. She also took out gold and silver poppies and ordered the government to use them to bury the remains of more than 100,000 people in the suburbs of Kyoto. She also ordered the monks to build a water and land dojo to bury the souls of the dead.

古文：时帝颇怠于政治，后与皇太子爱猷识理达腊遽谋内禅，遣朴不花谕意丞相太平，太平不答。
现代文：顺帝不上朝理政，奇氏皇后与皇太子爱猷识理达腊图谋使顺帝让位于太子，遣朴不花去示意丞相太平，太平不肯表示自己的意见。
English: When Emperor Shun did not take over the administration of the government, Empress Qi and Crown Prince Aizhixue Li Daras conspired to make Emperor Shun give way to the crown prince, and sent Emperor Pu to persuade Premier Taiping, but Taiping refused to express his own opinion.

古文：复召太平至宫，举酒赐之，自申前请，太平依违而已，由是后与太子衔之。
现代文：皇后把太平丞相召进宫里，亲口向他表明自己的意图，太平仍态度暧昧，模棱两可，因此皇后与太子对太平怀怨于心。
English: The Empress summoned Taiping into the palace and personally told him of her intentions. Taiping's attitude remained vague and ambiguous, so the Empress and the Crown Prince held a grudge against Taiping.

古文：而帝亦知后意，怒而疏之，两月不见。
现代文：顺帝知道奇氏皇后的图谋后，非常忿怒，两个月不见她。
English: When Emperor Shun learned of Empress Qi's plot, he was very angry and did not see her for two months.

古文：朴不花因后而宠幸，既被劾黜，后讽御史大夫佛家奴为之辩明。
现代文：朴不花为奇氏皇后所宠信，被弹劾，撤销其资政院使之职。皇后暗示御史大夫佛家奴为他辩护，而佛家奴却要进一步弹劾朴不花。
English: As a favorite of the Empress of the Qi Dynasty, Pak Fuxa was impeached and removed from his post by the Senate. The Empress suggested that the Imperial Historian, Fo Jian Niu, defend him, but Fo Jian Niu wanted to further impeach Pak Fuxa.

古文：佛家奴乃谋再劾朴不花，后知之，反嗾御史劾佛家奴，谪居潮河。初，奇氏之族在高丽者，怙势骄横，高丽王怒，尽杀之。
现代文：奇氏知道后，嗾使御史弹劾佛家奴，把他贬谪于潮河。奇氏皇后家族在高丽恃势骄横，高丽王大怒，把他们斩尽杀绝。
English: After the Ki clan found out about this, the king of Goryeo dispatched an envoy to impeach the Buddha's servant and banish him to the Tidewater River. The Ki clan's queen's family was arrogant in Goryeo, and the king of Goryeo was furious and killed them all.

古文：二十三年，后谓皇太子曰： 汝何不为我复雠耶？ 
现代文：至正二十三年，奇氏对皇太子说： 你为何不为我报仇？ 
English: In 1923, Qi said to the crown prince, "Why don't you take revenge for me?

古文：遂立高丽王族人留京师者为王，以奇族之子三宝奴为元子。遣同知枢密院事崔帖木儿为丞相，用兵一万，并招倭兵，共往纳之。
现代文：于是另立高丽王朝于中国，以高丽王族之人在元朝京师者为王，奇氏族人之子三宝奴为王子，遣元朝同知枢密院事崔帖木儿为丞相，派出元军一万人，并招募日本人为兵，共同征讨高丽。
English: As a result, the Koryo Dynasty was established in China, with a member of the Koryo royal family serving as the king in the Yuan Dynasty, and Sambo Nu, the son of a member of the Ki clan, as the prince. Choe Chulmu, a member of the Imperial Privy Council of the Yuan Dynasty, was appointed as the prime minister, and 10,000 Yuan soldiers were dispatched, and Japanese were recruited as soldiers, to jointly conquer Korea.

古文：过鸭绿水，伏兵四起，乃大败，余十七骑而还，后大惭。
现代文：元军过鸭绿江，遭高丽军伏击，大败，只剩下十七骑逃归中国，奇氏皇后羞愧不已。
English: The Yuan army crossed the Yalu River, was ambushed by the Koryo army, and suffered a crushing defeat. Only seventeen horsemen were left to flee to China. Empress Ki was mortified.

古文：二十四年七月，孛罗帖木儿称兵犯阙，皇太子出奔冀宁，下令讨孛罗帖木儿。
现代文：二十四年七月，孛罗帖木儿举兵进攻朝廷，皇太子逃往冀宁，下令讨伐孛罗帖木儿。
English: In July of the twenty-fourth year, Miro Timur raised an army to attack the imperial court. The crown prince fled to Jining and ordered a crusade against Miro Timur.

古文：孛罗帖木儿怒，嗾监察御史武起宗言后外挠国政，奏帝宜迁后出于外，帝不答。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿大怒，嗾使监察御史武起宗弹劾奇氏皇后干扰国政，奏请皇上把她迁出宫外，顺帝默不做声。
English: Enraged, Emperor Nero sent his inspector, Emperor Shih, to impeach Empress Qi for interfering in state affairs and to ask the emperor to move her out of the palace, but Emperor Shunde remained silent.

古文：二十五年三月，遂矫制幽于诸色总管府，令其党姚伯颜不花守之。
现代文：二十五年三月，孛罗帖木儿假传圣旨，把奇氏幽禁于诸色总管府，令其党羽姚伯颜不花看守。
English: In March of the twenty-fifth year, Miao Luo and Timur falsely preached the holy will, and confined the Qi clan to the General Administration Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and ordered their party member Yao Boyan to guard the palace.

古文：四月庚寅，孛罗帖木儿逼后还宫，取印章，伪为后书召太子。
现代文：四月初二日，孛罗帖木儿逼迫奇氏皇后回宫取印，以皇后名义致书召回太子，事后仍将她送回原处幽禁。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the year, Jairo Timur forced the queen of the Qi clan to return to the palace to collect the seal, and sent a letter in the name of the queen to recall the prince, but still sent her back to her original place of confinement.

古文：后仍回幽所，后又数纳美女于孛罗帖木儿，至百日，始还宫。
现代文：皇后多次遣送美女给孛罗帖木儿，才得在被幽禁百日后还宫。
English: The empress repeatedly sent beautiful women to Miro Timur, only to have to return to the palace after a hundred days of confinement.

古文：及孛罗帖木儿死，召皇太子还京师，后传旨令廓扩帖木儿以兵拥皇太子入城，欲胁帝禅位。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿死，皇后召皇太子还京，并令扩廓帖木儿领兵拥太子入城，希图借此威胁顺帝让位。
English: When Tamerlane died, the empress summoned the crown prince to return to Beijing, and ordered the outspoken Tamerlane to lead an army to escort the prince into the city, hoping to use this to threaten Emperor Shun into abdicating.

古文：廓扩帖木儿知其意，至京城三十里外，即遣军还营，皇太子复衔之。事见《扩廓帖木儿传》。
现代文：扩廓帖木儿明了奇皇后意图，送太子至离京城三十里地方便遣军回营，皇太子对他恨之入骨，事见《扩廓帖木儿传》。
English: Zengaku Timur understood the queen's intention, sent the prince to a place thirty miles from the capital, and then sent the army back to the camp. The crown prince hated him to the bone, see "Zengaku Timur's Biography."

古文：会伯颜忽都皇后崩，十二月，中书省臣奏言，后宜正位中宫，帝不答。
现代文：伯颜忽都皇后崩，至正二十五年十二月，中书省臣奏请立奇皇后为正宫，顺帝不答。
English: Bo Yan passed away suddenly, and in December of the 25th year of the reign of Emperor Shun, the vassal of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy asked Empress Lichi to be the main palace, but Shun did not reply.

古文：又奏改资正院为崇政院，而中政院亦兼主之，帝乃授之册宝，其册文曰： 坤以承乾元，人道莫先于夫妇；后以母天下，王化实始于家邦。
现代文：又奏请改资政院为崇政院。顺帝这才册立奇氏为正宫皇后。至正二十八年，明朝太祖朱元璋北伐，攻入大都，奇皇后随顺帝逃往上都。
English: He also petitioned to change the name of the Imperial Palace to the Imperial Palace of the Sui Dynasty. Emperor Shun was the first to register the Qi clan as the Empress of the Imperial Palace. In the 28th year of the Shogunate, Emperor Shun's great-grandfather Zhu Yuanzhang's Northern Expedition invaded the capital, and Empress Qi fled to the capital with Emperor Shun.

