古文：起屠维单阏十一月，尽重光大荒落二月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起屠维单阏十一月，尽重光大荒落二月，凡一年有奇。
English: Every year is a strange one, with the beginning of the year in November, the end of the year in February, and the end of the year in March.

古文：十一月，己卯，刘武周寇浩州。
现代文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝中之上唐高祖武德二年十一月，己卯，刘武周侵犯浩州。
English: In November of the second year of the reign of Emperor Gaozhenshu, the middle-ranking emperor Gaozhu Wude, Liu Wuzhou invaded Huzhou.

古文：秦王世民引兵自龙门乘冰坚渡河，屯柏壁，与宋金刚相持。
现代文：秦王李世民乘冰冻坚硬，带兵从龙门渡过黄河，驻扎在柏壁，与宋金刚对峙。
English: Li Shimin, the king of Qin, crossed the Yellow River from Longmen on a frozen raft with his soldiers, stationed in Baiji, and confronted Song Jinguang.

古文：时河东州县，俘掠之馀，未有仓廪，人情恇扰，聚入城堡，征敛无所得，军中乏食。
现代文：当时黄河以东的州县遭抢劫后，没有粮仓，人情惧怕侵扰，聚居在城堡中，征集不到东西，军队缺粮。
English: At that time, after the counties east of the Yellow River were robbed, there was no granary, people were afraid of intrusion, they gathered in the castle, they could not collect things, and the army was short of grain.

古文：世民发教谕民，民闻世民为帅而来，莫不归附，自近及远，至者日多，然后渐收其粮食，军食以充。
现代文：李世民发布王教晓谕百姓，百姓听说李世民率军前来，无不前来归顺，由近及远，前来的人日益增加，然后唐军逐渐征收粮食，军粮因此充足。
English: Li Shimin issued a royal edict to the people, and the people heard that Li Shimin led the army to come, and they all came to submit. From near and far, the number of people who came increased day by day. Then the Tang army gradually collected grain, so the military grain was sufficient.

古文：乃休兵秣马，唯令偏裨乘间抄掠，大军坚壁不战，由是贼势日衰。
现代文：于是休兵喂马，只命非主力部队的将佐找空子抄掠，大军则坚壁不战，宋金刚的势力因此日益衰落。
English: As a result, the retreating soldiers fed the horses, and the generals who were not the main force were just looking for loopholes to plunder, while the large army did not fight. As a result, Song King Kong's power was declining day by day.

古文：世民尝自帅轻骑觇敌，骑皆四散，世民独与一甲士登丘而寝。
现代文：李世民曾经亲自带轻骑兵去侦察敌情，随从的骑兵四下分散，世民只和一名穿铠甲的士卒登上山丘睡觉。
English: Li Shimin once personally took light cavalry to reconnoiter the enemy situation. The accompanying cavalry dispersed in four directions, and the world's people climbed the hill to sleep with only one armor-clad soldier.

古文：俄而贼兵四合，初不之觉，会有蛇逐鼠，触甲士之面，甲士惊寤，遂白世民，俱上马，驰百馀步，为贼所及，世民以大羽箭射殪其骁将，贼骑乃退。
现代文：不久，敌人从四下包围了二人，开始二人毫不知觉，恰巧蛇追老鼠，碰到了甲士的脸，甲士惊醒后告诉了李世民，二人一起上马，才走了百余步，就被敌人追上，李世民用大羽箭射死了敌人的骁将，敌骑兵于是退去。
English: Soon, the enemy surrounded the two from all sides. At first, the two were completely unaware. It just so happened that the snake was chasing a mouse and bumped into the armadillo's face. The armadillo woke up and told Li Shimin. The two got on the horse together, walked more than a hundred steps, and were caught by the enemy. Li Shimin shot the enemy's captain with a large arrow, and the enemy cavalry then retreated.

古文：李世勣欲归唐，恐祸及其父，谋于郭孝恪。
现代文：李世勣想归顺唐，又怕牵连了老父，便和郭孝恪商量。
English: Li Shiyan wanted to submit to Tang, but he was afraid of implicating his father, so he discussed it with Guo Xiaoqi.

古文：孝恪曰： 吾新事窦氏，动则见疑，宜先立效以取信，然后可图也。 
现代文：郭孝恪说： 我才跟随窦建德，一做事就受猜忌，您应当先立功取得信任，然后就可以谋划归唐了。 
English: Guo Xiaoqi said: I only follow Dou Jiande, and I am suspected as soon as I do something. You should first make merit and gain trust, and then you can plan to return to Tang.

古文：世勣从之。
现代文：李世勣听从了他的劝告。
English: Lee Sedol heeded his advice.

古文：袭王世充获嘉，破之，多所俘获，以献建德，建德由是亲之。
现代文：袭击王世充的获嘉，攻陷了城池，俘虏了许多人并缴获很多东西，都献给窦建德，窦建德因此对李世勣很好。
English: The attack on Wang Shichong was successful, the castle was captured, many people were captured and many things were captured, all of which were dedicated to Dou Jiande, and Dou Jiande was therefore very good to Li Shijun.

古文：初，漳南人刘黑闼，少骁勇狡狯，与窦建德善，后为群盗，转事郝孝德、李密、王世充。
现代文：当初，漳南人刘黑闼，年轻时勇猛又狡猾，与窦建德很要好，后来当了强盗，相继跟随郝孝德、李密、王世充。
English: At first, Liu Hefei, a native of southern Anhui Province, was brave and cunning when he was young, and was very close to Dou Jiande. Later, he became a robber, and successively followed Zou Xiaode, Li Mi, and Wang Shichong.

古文：世充以为骑将，每见世充所为，窃笑之。
现代文：王世充任命他为骑将，刘黑闼每看到王世充的所作所为，常常暗地里嘲笑他。
English: Wang Shichong appointed him as his cavalry commander. Whenever Liu Heya saw what Wang Shichong was doing, he would often secretly laugh at him.

古文：世充使黑闼守新乡，李世勣击虏之，献于建德。
现代文：王世充让刘黑闼守卫新乡，李世袭击并俘虏了刘黑闼，献给窦建德。
English: Wang Shichong let Liu Heya guard Xinxiang, Li Shih attacked and captured Liu Heya, and dedicated it to Dou Jiande.

古文：建德署为将军，赐爵汉东公，常使将奇兵东西掩袭，或潜入敌境觇视虚实。黑闼往往乘间奋击，克获而还。
现代文：窦建德任命刘黑闼为将军，赐予汉东公的爵位，常常让他率奇兵四处偷袭，或者潜入敌人的境内侦察敌军的情况，刘黑闼往往乘机攻击，得胜后回军。
English: Dou Jiande appointed Liu Hefei as a general and gave him the title of the Duke of the Han Dynasty. He often let him lead a surprise attack everywhere, or sneak into the enemy's territory to investigate the situation of the enemy army. Liu Hefei often took the opportunity to attack and returned to the army after winning.

古文：十二月，庚申，上猎于华山。
现代文：十二月庚申，唐高祖在华山打猎。
English: In December of Goshun, Tang Gaozu went hunting in the Huashan Mountains.

古文：于筠说永安王孝基急攻吕崇茂，独孤怀恩请先成攻具，然后进，孝基从之。
现代文：于筠劝永安王李孝基抓紧攻击吕崇茂，独孤怀恩请求先准备好攻城器械，然后进攻，李孝基答应了他的请求。
English: Yu Diao advised the Yongan King Li Xiaoji to attack Lv Chongmao as soon as possible. Du Guowei requested that the siege equipment be prepared first, and then the attack. Li Xiaoji agreed to his request.

古文：崇茂求救于宋金刚，金刚遣其将善阳尉迟敬德、寻相将兵奄至夏县。
现代文：吕崇茂向宋金刚求援，宋金刚派遣手下将领善阳人尉迟敬德、寻相带兵很快赶到夏县。
English: Lü Chongmao appealed to Song Jingang for help, and Song Jingang dispatched his generals, including General Zenyang, Lieutenant Chi Jingde, and Seeking Phase, to quickly arrive in Xia County.

古文：孝基表里受敌，军遂大败，孝基、怀恩、筠、唐俭及行军总管刘世让皆为所虏。
现代文：李孝基腹背受敌，于是打了大败仗，李孝基、独孤怀恩、于筠、唐俭以及行军总管刘世让都作了俘虏。
English: Li Xiaoji was defeated by the enemy and suffered a great defeat. Li Xiaoji, Du Guowai En, Yu Yao, Tang Jian, and Liu Shijang, the general manager of the march, were all taken prisoner.

古文：敬德名恭，以字行。
现代文：尉迟敬德名叫尉迟恭，平素称其字敬德。
English: 尉迟敬德's name is 尉迟恭, and he is usually referred to as Jingde.

古文：上征裴寂入朝，责其败军，下吏，既而释之，宠待弥厚。
现代文：高祖征召裴寂入朝，责备他打了败仗，交给有关部门审问，不久又释放了他，对他的优宠有增无减。
English: Gaozhu conscripted Pei Zhimo into the imperial court, scolded him for fighting a losing battle, handed him over to the relevant departments for interrogation, and soon released him, increasing his favor.

古文：尉迟敬德、寻相将还浍州，秦王世民遣兵部尚书殷开山、总管秦叔宝等邀之于美良川，大破之，斩首二千馀级。
现代文：尉迟敬德、寻相就要回浍州，秦王李世民派兵部尚书殷开山、总管秦叔宝等人在美良川截击，大败尉迟敬德，杀了二千多人。
English: When the lieutenant Chi Jingde and the search party were about to return to Zhangzhou, the Qin king Li Shimin sent the military department Shangshu Yin Kaishan, the general manager Qin Shubao and others to intercept them in the Meiliang River. They defeated the lieutenant Chi Jingde and killed more than two thousand people.

古文：顷之，敬德、寻相潜引精骑援王行本于蒲坂，世民自将步骑三千，从间道夜趋安邑，邀击，大破之，敬德、相仅以身免，悉俘其众，复归柏壁。
现代文：不久，尉迟敬德、寻相又秘密带精骑往蒲反援救王行本，李世民自己率领三千步兵骑兵从小路连夜赶到安邑，截击并大败尉迟敬德。尉迟敬德、寻相二人只身逃脱，部下全部被俘，李世民又回到柏壁。
English: Soon after, Lieutenants Ji Jingde and Guan Xiang secretly rode to Putang to rescue Wang Xiben. Li Shimin himself led three thousand infantry and cavalry to rush to Anyi overnight from the back roads, intercepted and defeated Lieutenant Ji Jingde. Lieutenants Ji Jingde and Guan Xiang escaped alone, all his subordinates were captured, and Li Shimin returned to Baiji.

古文：诸将咸请与宋金刚战，世民曰： 金刚悬军深入，精兵猛将，咸聚于是。武周据太原，倚金刚为擀蔽。
现代文：各位将领都请求与宋金刚交战，李世民说： 宋金刚孤军深入，麾下集中了精兵猛将，刘武周占据太原，依仗宋金刚为屏障。
English: All generals have requested to fight with Song King Kong, Li Shimin said: Song King Kong's lone army is deep, under the command of concentrated elite soldiers, Liu Wuzhou occupies Taiyuan, relying on Song King Kong as a barrier.

古文：金刚军无蓄积，以虏掠为资，利在速战。
现代文：宋金刚的军队没有储备，靠掠夺补充军需，利于速战。
English: Song King Kong's army had no reserves, and relied on plunder to supplement military supplies, which was conducive to a quick war.

古文：我闭营养锐以挫其锋，分兵汾、隰，冲其心腹。彼粮尽计穷，自当遁走。
现代文：我们关闭营门不出，养精蓄锐，可以挫败他的锐气；分兵攻汾州、隰州，骚扰他的要害之地，他们粮尽无计可施，自然会退军。
English: If we close the camp door and do not go out, we can build up our energy and strength, which can frustrate his spirit; if we divide our troops to attack Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou and harass his key areas, they will have nothing to do, and will naturally withdraw.

古文：当待此机，未宜速战。 
现代文：我们应当等待这个机会，目前不宜速战。 
English: We should wait for this opportunity, it is not appropriate to fight a quick war at this time.

古文：永安壮王孝基谋逃归，刘武周杀之。
现代文：永安壮王李孝基谋划逃归，被刘武周杀死。
English: Yongan Zhuang Wang Li Xiaoji plotted to escape and was killed by Liu Wuzhou.

古文：李世勣复遣人说窦建德曰： 曹、戴二州，户口完实，孟海公窃有其地，与郑人外合内离；若以大军临之，指期可取。
现代文：李世勣又派人劝窦建德说： 曹、戴二州，户口充实，孟海公占据二州，与东都的郑国貌合神离，如果发大军进取二州，指日可待。
English: Li Shijun also sent someone to advise Dou Jiande, saying: Cao and Dai are from two states, their household registration is substantial, Meng Haigong occupies two states, and he is alienated from Zheng Guo, the eastern capital. If they send a large army to advance into two states, they can wait for a while.

古文：既得海公，以临徐、兗，河南可不战而定也。 
现代文：得孟海公后，再率兵逼近徐州、兖州，黄河以南可不战而定。 
English: After defeating Meng Haigong, he and his soldiers approached Xuzhou and Zhangzhou. The south of the Yellow River could be taken without a fight.

古文：建德以为然，欲自将徇河南，先遣其行台曹旦等将兵五万济河，世勣引兵三千会之。
现代文：窦建德认为这意见很对，便准备亲自领兵攻取河南，先派他的行台曹旦等人率五万兵马渡过黄河，李世带三千兵马与他们会合。
English: Dou Jiande thought that this opinion was very right, so he prepared to personally lead the troops to conquer Henan. He first sent his Gangtai Caotan and others to cross the Yellow River with fifty thousand soldiers, and Li Shih and three thousand soldiers to join them.

古文：春，正月，将军秦武通攻王行本于蒲坂。
现代文：武德三年春季正月，唐将军秦武通在蒲反攻打王行本。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Wude, the Tang general Qin Wutong attacked Wang Xingpeng in Putan.

古文：行本出战而败，粮尽援绝，欲突围走，无随之者，戊寅，开门出降。
现代文：王行本出军迎战，打了败仗，粮草已尽，没有后援，打算突围逃走，又没有跟随的人。戊寅，开城门出城投降。
English: Wang Xingbon marched out to meet the enemy, fought a losing battle, ran out of grain and grass, had no backup, planned to break out of the encirclement and escape, and had no followers. Wu Yin opened the city gate and left the city to surrender.

古文：辛巳，上幸蒲州，斩行本。
现代文：辛巳，唐高祖临幸蒲州，斩王行本。
English: It's hard to believe that Tang Gao's ancestor, Lin Shengbu, was executed.

古文：秦王世民轻骑谒上于蒲州。
现代文：秦王李世民轻骑到蒲州谒见高祖。
English: Qin King Li Shimin rode lightly to Puzhou to meet Gao Zu.

古文：宋金刚围绛州。
现代文：宋金刚包围了绛州。
English: Song King Kong encircled Zhangzhou.

古文：癸巳，上还长安。
现代文：癸巳，高祖返回长安。
English: Soon after, Gao Zu returned to Chang'an.

古文：李世勣谋俟窦建德至河南，掩袭其营，杀之，冀得其父并建德土地以归唐。
现代文：李世勣计划待窦建德到河南，便偷袭他的营地，杀窦建德，希望找回父亲并且以窦建德的地盘回归唐朝。
English: Li Shijun planned to wait for Dou Jiande to arrive in Henan, so he raided his camp and killed Dou Jiande, hoping to find his father and return to the Tang Dynasty with Dou Jiande's territory.

古文：会建德妻产，久之不至。
现代文：恰巧窦建德的妻子生产，久等不到。
English: It just so happens that Dou Jiande's wife is about to give birth.

古文：曹旦，建德之妻兄也，在河南，多所侵扰，诸贼羁属者皆怨之。
现代文：曹旦是窦建德妻子的哥哥，在河南大肆掠夺骚扰，归附的各路盗贼都愤愤不平。
English: Cao Dan is the elder brother of Dou Jiande's wife. He plundered and harassed in Henan on a large scale. Thieves from all over the country were indignant.

古文：贼帅魏郡李文相，号李商胡，聚众五千馀人，据孟津中潬；母霍氏，亦善骑射，自称霍总管。
现代文：盗贼首领魏郡人李文相，号李商胡，聚集五千多人，占据了孟津中城；他的母亲霍氏，也善于骑马射箭，自称霍总管。
English: The leader of the thieves, Li Wensiang from Wei County, called Li Shanghu, gathered more than 5,000 people and occupied the central city of Mengjin; his mother, Huo, was also good at riding and archery, and called herself Huo Shanzhang.

古文：世勣结商胡为昆弟，入拜商胡之母。
现代文：李世和李商胡结拜为兄弟，入内室拜见李商胡的母亲。
English: Li Shih and Li Shang Hu are brothers, and he went into the inner room to meet Li Shang Hu's mother.

古文：母泣谓世勣曰： 窦氏无道，如何事之！ 
现代文：霍氏流着泪对李世说： 窦氏丧失了道德信义，怎么能够侍奉他？ 
English: Mr. Huo shed tears and said to Li Shih: Mr. Dou has lost his moral integrity, how can I serve him?

古文：世勣曰： 母无忧，不过一月，当杀之，相与归唐耳！ 
现代文：李世说： 母亲不要担心，不超过一个月，我们就杀了他，一起归顺唐了！ 
English: Li Shih said: "Mother, don't worry. In less than a month, we will kill him and submit to Tang together!"

古文：世勣辞去，母谓商胡曰： 东海公许我共图此贼，事久变生，何必待其来，不如速决。 
现代文：李世告辞走后，霍氏对李商胡说： 东海公答应与我们共同杀了窦建德这贼，时间长了会发生变化，何必要等到他来，不如速战速决。 
English: After Li Shih's departure, Mr. Hu said to Li Shanghu: Donghaigong promised to work with us to kill the thief Dou Jiande. If we wait for a long time, things will change. Why wait for him to come? It's better to make a quick decision.

古文：是夜，商胡召曹旦偏裨二十三人，饮之酒，尽杀之。
现代文：当晚，李商胡召来曹旦手下的二十三位偏将，用酒把他们灌醉，然后全部杀死。
English: That night, Li Shang Hu summoned twenty-three of Cao Dan's subordinate generals, intoxicated them with wine, and then killed them all.

古文：旦别将高雅贤、阮君明尚在河北未济，商胡以巨舟四艘济河北之兵三百人，至中流，悉杀之。
现代文：曹旦的别将高雅贤、阮君明还在黄河北岸没有过河，李商胡用四艘大船运河北岸的三百士兵过河，船到河中心，将三百人全部杀光。
English: Cao Dan's lieutenants Gao Yaxian and Ruan Junming did not cross the river on the north bank of the Yellow River. Li Shanghu used four large ships to cross the river on the north bank of the canal, and the ships reached the center of the river, killing all 300 people.

古文：有兽医游水得免，至南岸，告曹旦，旦严警为备。
现代文：一位兽医游泳逃脱，到南岸，报告了曹旦，曹旦严加警戒以为防备。
English: A veterinarian swam to the south bank and reported Cao Dan, who was on high alert.

古文：商胡既举事，始遣人告李世勣。
现代文：李商胡起事后，才派人通知李世。
English: After Li Shanghu got up, he sent someone to inform Li Shih.

古文：世勣与曹旦连营，郭孝恪劝世勣袭旦，世勣未决，闻旦已有备，遂与孝恪帅数十骑来奔。
现代文：李世营地与曹旦相接，郭孝恪劝李世袭击曹旦，李世犹豫不决，听说曹旦已有防备，便和郭孝恪率数十骑兵投奔唐。
English: Li Shih's camp adjoined that of Cao Dan. Guo Xiaokou advised Li Shih to attack Cao Dan. Li Shih hesitated, but when he heard that Cao Dan was already prepared, he and Guo Xiaokou led dozens of cavalry to Tang.

古文：商胡复引精兵二千北袭阮君明，破之。
现代文：李商胡又带二千精兵，向北袭击阮君明，打败了他。
English: Li Shanghu led another two thousand elite soldiers to attack Nguyn Khánh Minh in the north and defeated him.

古文：高雅贤收众去，商胡追之，不及而还。
现代文：高雅贤收拾部众退却，李商胡追击，没有追赶上而回军。
English: Gao Yaxian gathered his troops and retreated, Li Shanghu pursued, but did not catch up and returned to the army.

古文：建德群臣请诛李盖，建德曰： 世勣，唐臣，为我所虏，不忘本朝，乃忠臣也，其父何罪！ 
现代文：窦建德的诸位大臣请求杀掉李盖，窦建德说： 世是唐臣，被我俘虏，仍不忘唐朝，这是忠臣，他父亲有什么罪？ 
English: Dou Jiande's ministers asked him to kill Li Gai Rong. Dou Jiande said, "The world is a Tang court, I was taken prisoner, but it still remembers the Tang Dynasty. This is a loyal subject. What is his father's crime?

古文：遂赦之。
现代文：于是赦免了李盖。
English: So he pardoned him.

古文：甲午，世勣、孝恪至长安。
现代文：甲午，李世、郭孝恪到达长安。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Li Shih and Guo Xiao arrived in Chang'an.

古文：曹旦遂取济州，复还洺州。
现代文：曹旦于是取得济州，之后又回到州。
English: Cao Dan then acquired Jeju and later returned to Jeju.

古文：二月，庚子，上幸华阴。
现代文：二月庚子，唐高祖临幸华阴。
English: February Geng Zi, Tang Gao's ancestor Lin Xing Hua Yin.

古文：刘武周遣兵寇潞州，陷长子、壶关。
现代文：刘武周派兵侵犯潞州，攻陷长子、壶关二县。
English: Liu Wuzhou sent troops to invade Zhangzhou, and the two counties of his eldest son, Juguan, were captured.

古文：潞州刺史郭子武不能御，上以将军河东王行敏助之。
现代文：潞州刺史郭子武不能抵御刘武周军的攻势，高祖派将军河东人王行敏援助郭子武。
English: Guo Ziwu, the governor of Zhangzhou, could not resist the offensive of Liu Wu Zhou's army, and Gao Zu sent the general Wang Xingmin from Hedong to help Guo Ziwu.

古文：行敏与子武不叶，或言子武将叛，行敏斩子武以徇。
现代文：王行敏与郭子武不和，有人说郭子武要叛唐，王行敏杀了郭子武以示众。
English: Wang Xingmin did not get along with Guo Ziwu. Some people said that Guo Ziwu wanted to rebel against the Tang Dynasty. Wang Xingmin killed Guo Ziwu to show the public.

古文：乙巳，武周复遣兵寇潞州，行敏击破之。
现代文：乙巳，刘武周又派兵侵犯潞州，被王行敏击退。
English: Soon after, Liu Wuzhou sent troops to invade Zhangzhou, but they were repulsed by Wang Xingmin.

古文：壬子，开州蛮酋冉肇则陷通州。
现代文：壬子，开州蛮冉肇则攻陷通州。
English: In Imo, the attack on Keshu was rapid, while the attack on Tongzhou was slow.

古文：甲寅，遣将军桑显和等攻吕崇茂于夏县。
现代文：甲寅，唐派遣将军桑显和等人在夏县攻打吕崇茂。
English: A Yin, Tang dispatched General Sang Xianhe and others to attack Lü Chongmao in Xia County.

古文：初，工部尚书独孤怀恩攻蒲坂，久不下，失亡多，上数以敕书诮让之，怀恩由是怨望。
现代文：当初，工部尚书独孤怀恩攻打蒲反，长期不能攻克，损失惨重，唐高祖几次下敕书责备他，于是怀恩心生怨气。
English: At the beginning, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce sent Shang Shuxu alone to attack Putang, but he could not defeat it for a long time and suffered heavy losses. Tang Gaozhu reprimanded him several times, so Wai En became resentful.

古文：上尝戏谓怀恩曰： 姑之子皆已为天子，次应至舅之子乎？ 
现代文：高祖曾经和怀恩开玩笑说： 你姑姑的儿子都做了皇帝，下面是否该轮到我舅舅的儿子当皇帝了？ 
English: Gaozu once joked with Wine: Your aunt's sons have all become emperors. Will it be my uncle's son's turn to become emperor?

古文：怀恩亦颇以此自负，或时扼腕曰： 我家岂女独贵乎？ 
现代文：怀恩颇以此自负，有时也惋惜道： 难道我们家唯独女人才尊贵吗？ 
English: Winepo is quite conceited about this, and sometimes he laments, "Is it only the women in our family who are noble?

古文：遂与麾下元君宝谋反。
现代文：于是便和手下的元君宝谋反。
English: As a result, he plotted a rebellion with his subordinate Yuan Jun Bao.

古文：会怀恩、君宝与唐俭皆没于尉迟敬德，君宝谓俭曰： 独孤尚书近谋大事，若能早决，岂有此辱哉！ 
现代文：时值怀恩、元君宝和唐俭都被尉迟敬德俘虏，君宝对唐俭说： 独孤尚书近来在谋划一件大事，如果能早些决定，哪会受这番屈辱呢！ 
English: At that time, Huai'en, Yuan Junbao, and Tang Jian were all taken prisoner by the lieutenant Qi Jingde. Junbao said to Tang Jian, "Lonely Shangshu has recently been planning a big event. If you can decide earlier, who will suffer this humiliation?"

古文：及秦王世民败敬德于美良川，怀恩逃归，上复使之将兵攻蒲坂。
现代文：待秦王李世民在美良川打败尉迟敬德，独孤怀恩便逃回唐朝，高祖重又让他带兵攻打蒲反。
English: While waiting for the Qin King Li Shimin to defeat the lieutenant Ji Jingde in the Mila River, Duolong Huai'en fled back to the Tang Dynasty, and Gao Zuan allowed him to lead troops to attack Putang.

古文：君宝又谓俭曰： 独孤尚书遂拔难得还，复在蒲坂，可谓王者不死！ 
现代文：元君宝又对唐俭说： 独孤尚书终于逃脱得以回唐，重到蒲反，这真称得上是王者不死！ 
English: Yuan Junbao also said to Tang Jian: Solitary Shang Shu finally escaped and was able to return to Tang and return to Putang. This is truly the king's immortality!

古文：俭恐怀恩遂成其谋，乃说尉迟敬德，请使刘世让还与唐连和，敬德从之，遂以怀恩反状闻。
现代文：唐俭恐怕独孤怀恩阴谋得逞，于是说服尉迟敬德，请求让刘世让回唐，与唐讲和，尉迟敬德听从了他的意见，于是通过刘世让报告了独孤怀恩谋反的情况。
English: Tang Jian was afraid that Liu Shijian's conspiracy would succeed, so he persuaded Liu Shijian to ask Liu Shijian to return to Tang and make peace with Tang. Liu Shijian listened to Liu Shijian's advice and reported the situation of Liu Shijian's rebellion through Liu Shijian.

古文：时王行本已降，怀恩入据其城，上方济河幸怀恩营，已登舟矣，世让适至。
现代文：当时王行本已经降唐，独孤怀恩进驻蒲反，高祖正过黄河准备临幸怀恩的营地，已经登上了渡船，刘世让恰好赶到。
English: At that time, Wang Xingben had already been sent to Tang, and only Huai'en was stationed in Putang. Gao Zu was crossing the Yellow River to prepare for Huai'en's camp, and had already boarded the ferry. Liu Shijang just happened to arrive.

古文：上大惊曰： 吾得免，岂非天也！ 
现代文：高祖大惊，说： 我能够免于祸事，这难道不是天意吗？ 
English: Gao Zu was shocked and said, "I can be free from evil. Isn't this the will of Heaven?

古文：乃使召怀恩，怀恩未知事露，轻舟来至；即执以属吏，分捕党与。甲寅，诛怀恩及其党。
现代文：于是召见怀恩，独孤怀恩不知道事情已经败露，驾小船来见高祖，立即被抓起来交给有关官员，又分头搜捕独孤怀恩的同党。甲寅，处决独孤怀恩及其同党。
English: So he summoned Wynn. Wynn alone did not know that the matter had been exposed. He drove a small boat to see Gaozu. He was immediately arrested and handed over to the relevant officials. They also separately searched for Wynn's accomplices. Ka Yin, executed Wynn alone and his accomplices.

古文：窦建德攻李商胡，杀之。
现代文：窦建德攻打李商胡，杀了李商胡。
English: Dou Jiande attacked and killed Li Shanghu.

古文：建德洺州劝课农桑，境内无盗，商旅野宿。
现代文：窦建德到州考查、鼓励耕织，所辖地区没有盗贼，商贾行人露宿。
English: Dou Jiande went to the state to inspect and encourage farming and weaving, there were no thieves in the area under his jurisdiction, and merchants and pedestrians were sleeping rough.

古文：突厥处罗可汗迎杨政道，立为隋王。
现代文：突厥处罗可汗迎接杨政道，立他为隋王。
English: Luo Khan of the Turkic Department greeted Yang Zhengdao and made him the King of Sui.

古文：中国士民在北者，处罗悉以配之，有众万人。
现代文：在突厥的中原官员百姓，处罗全部配给杨政道，共有一万人。
English: In the Turkic Central Plains, officials and common people were all allocated to Yang Zhengdao, a total of ten thousand people.

古文：置百官，皆依隋制，居于定襄。
现代文：杨政道设置百官，全部依照隋朝制度，居住在隋朝时的定襄郡。
English: Yang Zhengdao set up hundreds of officials, all in accordance with the Sui Dynasty system, living in Dingxiang County during the Sui Dynasty.

古文：三月，乙丑，刘武周遣其将张万岁寇浩州，李仲文击走之，俘斩数千人。
现代文：三月乙丑，刘武周派遣手下将领张万岁侵犯浩州，李仲文击退来敌，杀伤俘虏数千人。
English: In the second month of March, Liu Wuzhou sent his general Zhang Wanling to invade Huzhou, and Li Zhongwen repulsed the enemy, killing and capturing thousands of people.

古文：改纳言为侍中，内史令为中书令，给事郎为给事中。
现代文：唐改纳言为侍中，内史令为中书令，给事郎为给事中。
English: According to the Tang Dynasty reforms, Nagon was a chamberlain, Naishi was a clerk, and Zetsiro was a clerk.

古文：甲戌，以内史侍郎封德彝为中书令。
现代文：甲戌，任命内史侍郎封德彝为中书令。
English: Armour-plated, appointed Naishi chamberlain Fong Dejun to be the Chushirei.

古文：王世充将帅、州县来降者，时月相继。
现代文：王世充的将领、州县官络绎不绝地前来降唐。
English: Wang Shichong's generals and prefectural and county officials came to Tang in droves.

古文：世充乃峻其法，一人亡叛，举家无少长就戮，父子、兄弟、夫妇许相告而免之。
现代文：王世充于是加重了法律，一人叛逃，全家无论老少全部杀死，父子、兄弟、夫妻相互告发的可以免死。
English: Wang Shichong then tightened the law, one person defected, the whole family, whether old or young, was killed, and fathers, sons, brothers, and husbands and wives who denounced each other could be spared death.

古文：又使五家为保，有举家亡者，四邻不觉，皆坐诛。
现代文：又让五家结为一保，一家举家逃亡，四邻未查觉，四家均获死罪。
English: He also allowed five families to become one family, one family to escape, four neighbors to remain undetected, and all four families were sentenced to death.

古文：杀人益多而亡者益甚，至于樵采之人，出入皆有限数；公私愁窘，人不聊生。
现代文：但杀的人越多，逃亡的人也越多，以至于出城砍柴的人，出入城都有限额；上下愁怨窘迫，民不聊生。
English: But the more people were killed, the more people fled, so much so that there was a limit to the number of people who could leave the city to chop wood. People were grumpy and depressed, and they did not want to live.

古文：又以宫城为大狱，意所忌者，并其家属收系宫中；诸将出讨，亦质其家属于宫中，禁止者常不减万口，馁死者日有数十。
现代文：王世充又将宫城作为大监牢，心里忌恨的人，连家属一道囚禁在宫内；诸将如要出城作战，也要把家属留在宫内当人质，囚禁的人经常不下一万人，每天都有几十人饿死。
English: Wang Shichong also used Miyagi as a large prison, imprisoning those with hatred in their hearts together with their families in the palace. If generals wanted to leave the city to fight, they also had to leave their families in the palace as hostages. The number of prisoners was often less than ten thousand, and dozens of people died of starvation every day.

古文：世充又以台省官为司、郑、管、原、伊、殷、梁、凑、嵩、谷、怀、德等十二州营田使，丞、郎得为此行者，喜若登仙。
现代文：王世充又任命中央台省的官员为司、郑、管、原、伊、殷、梁、凑、嵩？怀、德十二州的营田使，尚书左右丞、诸曹郎官得了此任的高兴得像做了神仙。
English: Wang Shichong also appointed officials from the Chuo-Tai Province as the officials of the 12 prefectures of Si, Zheng, Quan, Yuan, Yi, Yin, Liang, Qiao, Song, Huai, and De. Shangshu, Zuo Rong, and other officials were so happy to get this appointment that they were like gods.

古文：甲申，行军副总管张伦败刘武周于浩州，俘斩千馀人。
现代文：甲申，唐行军副总管张纶在浩州打败刘武周，俘虏、斩首一千多人。
English: Jiashen, the vice-commander-in-chief of the Tang march, Zhang Jun, defeated Liu Wuzhou in Huzhou, capturing and beheading more than a thousand people.

古文：西河公张纶、真乡公李仲文引兵临石州，刘季真惧而诈降。
现代文：西河公张纶、真乡公李仲文带兵逼近石州，刘季真胆怯，假称投降。
English: The soldiers led by Xihe Gong Zhang Ye and Zhenxiang Gong Li Zhongwen approached Shizhou, but Liu Jizhen was timid and pretended to surrender.

古文：乙酉，以季真为石州总管，赐姓李氏，封彭山郡王。
现代文：乙酉，唐任命刘季真为石州总管，赐姓李，封为彭山郡王。
English: In acetylene, Tang appointed Liu Jizhen as the general manager of Shizhou, gave him the surname Li, and made him the king of Pengshan County.

古文：蛮酋冉肇则寇信州，赵郡公孝恭与战，不利。
现代文：蛮族首领冉肇则侵犯信州，赵郡公李孝恭与冉肇则交锋，失利。
English: Ran Zhao, the leader of the barbarians, invaded Shinshu. Zhao County official Li Xiaogong fought Ran Zhao and lost.

古文：李靖将兵八百，袭击，斩之，俘五千馀人；己丑，复开、通二州。
现代文：李靖率八百兵马袭击，杀了冉肇则，俘虏五千多人。己丑，唐收复开州、通州。
English: Eight hundred soldiers and horses led by Li Jing attacked, killed Ran Zhaozhe, and captured more than five thousand people. The Tang recovered Kaizhou and Tongzhou.

古文：孝恭又击萧铣东平王阇提，斩之。
现代文：李孝恭又袭击萧铣手下的东平王提，杀了他。
English: Li Xiaogang also attacked Xiao Yao's subordinate Dongping Wang Ti and killed him.

古文：夏，四月，丙申，上祠华山；壬寅，还长安。
现代文：夏季，四月丙申，唐高祖祭祀华山。壬寅返回长安。
English: In the summer, in April, Hsin, Tang Gao Zu worshiped Huashan. Ren Yin returned to Chang'an.

古文：置益州道行台，以益、利、会、鄜、泾、遂六总管隶焉。
现代文：设置益州道行台，将益、利、会？泾、遂六州总管划归益州道行台统辖。
English: Set up the Yizhou Highway Administration, and transferred the general management of the six states of Yixing, Lixi, Huizhou and Sui to the Yizhou Highway Administration.

古文：刘武周数攻浩州，为李仲文所败。
现代文：刘武周几次进攻浩州，都被李仲文打败。
English: Liu Wuzhou attacked Huzhou several times, but was defeated by Li Zhongwen.

古文：宋金刚军中食尽；丁未，金刚北走，秦王世民追之。
现代文：宋金刚的军队粮食吃光，丁未，宋金刚向北逃窜，秦王李世民带兵追击。
English: Song King Kong's army ran out of food, Ding Wei and Song King Kong fled to the north, and Qin King Li Shimin led the troops in pursuit.

古文：罗士信围慈涧，王世充使太子玄应救之，士信刺玄应坠马，人救之，得免。
现代文：罗士信围攻慈涧，王世充派太子王玄应救援慈涧，罗士信把王玄应刺下马，有人搭救，王玄应才逃脱。
English: Luo Shixin besieged Cixi, Wang Shichong sent the prince Wang Xuanying to rescue Cixi, Luo Shixin stabbed Wang Xuanying off his horse, someone rescued him, and Wang Xuanying escaped.

古文：壬子，以显州道行台杨士林为行台尚书令。
现代文：壬子，唐任命显州道行台杨士林为行台尚书令。
English: In Jinzi, Tang appointed Yang Shilin of Xianzhou Road Gang Tai as Gang Tai Shang Shuling.

古文：甲寅，加秦王世民益州道行台尚书令。
现代文：甲寅，加封秦王李世民为益州道行台尚书令。
English: Jia Yin, Qin King Li Shimin was added to Yizhou Road, and Shang Shuling was issued.

古文：秦王世民追及寻相于吕州，大破之，乘胜逐北，一昼夜行二百馀里，战数十合。
现代文：秦王李世民在吕州追上寻相，将他打得大败，并乘胜追击逃敌，一昼夜走了二百多里，打了几十仗。
English: Li Shimin, the king of Qin, caught up with his father-in-law in Luzhou, defeated him heavily, and took advantage of the victory to pursue the fleeing enemy. He walked more than two hundred miles in one day and night and fought dozens of battles.

古文：至高壁岭，总管刘弘基执辔谏曰： 大王破贼，逐北至此，功亦足矣。深入不已，不爱身乎！
现代文：到高壁岭，总管刘弘基抓住马缰绳规劝道： 大王打败敌人，追击逃敌到了这里，功劳也足够了，不断深入，就不爱惜自己吗？
English: Arriving at Gaoqiling, Liu Hongji, the chief steward, grasped the reins of the horse and advised: "The great king defeated the enemy, chased the fleeing enemy, and arrived here. The merit is enough. If you continue to go deeper, won't you spare yourself?

古文：且士卒饥疲，宜留壁于此，俟兵粮毕集，然后复进，未晚也。 
现代文：况且士兵们饥饿疲惫，应当在此停留扎营，等到兵马粮草都齐备了，然后再进击也不晚。 
English: Moreover, the soldiers are hungry and tired, they should stay here to camp, wait until the soldiers and horses are ready, and then it is not too late to attack.

古文：世民曰： 金刚计穷而走，众心离沮；功难成而易败，机难得而易失，必乘此势取之。
现代文：李世民说： 宋金刚无计可施才逃跑，军心涣散；功劳难立，失败却很容易，机会难得，失去却很容易，一定要趁此机会消灭他。
English: Li Shimin said: Song King Kong had no choice but to flee, and his military spirit was scattered; achievement is difficult, but failure is easy, opportunity is rare, but it is easy to lose, we must take this opportunity to eliminate him.

古文：若更淹留，使之计立备成，不可复攻矣。
现代文：如果我们滞留不前，让他有时间考虑对策加强防备，就不可能轻易打败他了。
English: If we do not move forward and give him time to consider countermeasures and strengthen his defenses, it will be impossible to defeat him easily.

古文：吾竭忠徇国，岂顾身乎！ 
现代文：我尽心竭力效忠国家，怎么能只顾惜自己的身体呢？ 
English: I try my best to be loyal to the country, how can I only take care of my body?

古文：遂策马而进，将士不敢复言饥。
现代文：于是打马追击，将士们也不敢再提饥饿。
English: So they gave chase, and the soldiers no longer dared to mention hunger.

古文：追及金刚于雀鼠谷，一日八战，皆破之，俘斩数万人。
现代文：唐军在雀鼠谷追上宋金刚，一天交锋八次，都打了胜仗，杀死、俘虏了几万人。
English: The Tang army caught up with Song King Kong in the Valley of the Sparrow Mice. They fought eight times a day and won all of them, killing and capturing tens of thousands of people.

古文：夜，宿于雀鼠谷西原，世民不食二日，不解甲三日矣，军中止有一羊，世民与将士分而食之。
现代文：当夜，在雀鼠谷西原宿营，李世民已经两天没有吃东西，三天没有脱下战袍了，全军只有一只羊，世民与将士们分吃了这一只羊。
English: That night, at the Nishihara camp in Sparrow Mouse Valley, Li Shimin hadn't eaten for two days and hadn't taken off his battle robe for three days. The whole army only had one sheep, and Shimin shared this one with the soldiers.

古文：丙辰，陕州总管于筠自金刚所逃来。
现代文：丙辰，唐陕州总管于筠从宋金刚手下脱身逃回唐军中。
English: Xing Chen, the head of Tang's Shaanxi Province, escaped from Song's army and fled back to the Tang army.

古文：世民引兵趣介休，金刚尚有众二万，戊午，出西门，背城布陈，南北七里。
现代文：李世民带兵赴介休，宋金刚还有二万人，出西门，背对城墙排列战阵，南北长七里。
English: Li Shimin led an army to Jiehu, Song King Kong and twenty thousand people left the West Gate and lined up against the city wall, stretching seven miles from north to south.

古文：世民遣总管李世勣等与战，小却，为贼所乘。世民帅精骑击之，出其陈后，金刚大败，斩首三千级。
现代文：李世民派总管李世出战，不利，稍稍退却，宋金刚乘机反扑，李世民率领精骑从宋金刚背后袭击，宋金刚大败，唐军杀了三千人。
English: Li Shimin sent the general manager Li Shimin to fight, unfavorable, retreating slightly, Song King Kong took the opportunity to counterattack, Li Shimin led the elite cavalry to attack from behind Song King Kong, Song King Kong was defeated, and the Tang army killed three thousand people.

古文：金刚轻骑走，世民追之数十里，至张难堡。
现代文：宋金刚骑马逃走，李世民追出几十里，来到张难堡。
English: Song King Kong fled on horseback, and Li Shimin chased him for dozens of miles to Zhangnan Fort.

古文：浩州行军总管樊伯通、张德政据堡自守，世民免胄示之，堡中喜噪且泣。
现代文：唐浩州行军总管樊伯通、张德政占据堡垒自卫，李世民摘下头盔示意堡内，堡中守军见后欢呼雀跃，高兴得流下泪来。
English: Zou Bertong, the general manager of the Tanghaozhou march, and Zhang Dezheng occupied the fortress of self-defense. Li Shimin took off his helmet and gestured inside the fort. After meeting the defenders in the fort, they cheered and cried tears of joy.

古文：左右告以王不食，献浊酒、脱粟饭。
现代文：随从告诉守军秦王还未进食，守军献上浊酒、粗米饭。
English: The attendant told the defenders that Qin Wang had not yet eaten, and the defenders offered him gourd wine and coarse rice.

古文：尉迟敬德收馀众守介休，世民遣任城王道宗、宇文士及往谕之，敬德与寻相举介休及永安降。
现代文：尉迟敬德收拾残部守介休，李世民派任城王李道宗、宇文士及前去晓谕，尉迟敬德于是和寻相以介休、永安二县降唐。
English: Li Shimin sent Li Daozong, the king of the city, and Yu Wenshi to go and speak to him, and then Li Shimin and Huxiang intervened and the two counties of Yong'an fell to Tang.

古文：世民得敬德，甚喜，以为右一府统军，使将其旧众八千，与诸营相参。
现代文：李世民得到尉迟敬德非常高兴，任命尉迟敬德为右一府统军，并让他仍然统领八千旧部，和各营相杂在一起。
English: Li Shimin was very pleased to get Lieutenant Xi Jingde, and appointed Lieutenant Xi Jingde as the right-wing unified army, and let him still command eight thousand old troops, mixed with the battalions.

古文：屈突通虑其变，骤以为言，世民不听。
现代文：屈突通恐怕尉迟敬德会反复，屡次向李世民提起，但李世民不听。
English: I'm afraid that Qu Jutong repeatedly brought up the issue to Li Shimin, but Li Shimin didn't listen.

古文：刘武周闻金刚败，大惧，弃并州走突厥。
现代文：刘武周听说宋金刚失败，大为惊恐，放弃并州逃入突厥。
English: When Liu Wu Zhou heard of Song King Kong's defeat, he was greatly alarmed and gave up and fled to Turkey.

古文：金刚收其馀众，欲复战，众莫肯从，亦与百馀骑走突厥。
现代文：宋金刚收拾残部，准备再战，但众人都不肯跟随他与唐作战，于是宋金刚也和一百多骑兵逃往突厥。
English: Song King Kong picked up the pieces and prepared to fight again, but everyone refused to follow him to fight against Tang, so Song King Kong also fled to Turkey with more than a hundred cavalry.

古文：世民至晋阳，武周所署仆射杨伏念以城降。
现代文：李世民到晋阳，刘武周任命的仆射杨伏念以晋阳城投降。
English: Li Shimin went to Jinyang, and Liu Wu Zhou's appointed lackey Yang Fucheng surrendered Jinyang City.

古文：唐俭封府库以待世民，武周所得州县皆入于唐。
现代文：唐俭封存了刘武周的仓库留待李世民处置，刘武周先后所占领的州县全部并入唐。
English: Tang Jian sealed Liu Wuzhou's warehouse and left it for Li Shimin to dispose of. All the prefectures and counties occupied by Liu Wuzhou were merged into Tang.

古文：未几，金刚谋走上谷，突厥追获，腰斩之。
现代文：不久，宋金刚打算跑回起兵初占的上谷，被突厥追上捉回，突厥腰斩了宋金刚。
English: Soon, Song King Kong planned to run back to the upper valley, which was initially occupied by the soldiers, but was caught by the Turks, who beheaded Song King Kong.

古文：岚州总管刘六儿从宋金刚在介休，秦王世民擒斩之。
现代文：去年五月投降宋金刚的唐岚州总管刘六儿跟着宋金刚在介休，秦王李世民活捉并杀了他。
English: In May last year, Liu Luer, the head of Tang Dynasty's Fujian Province, who had surrendered to Song, followed Song in retirement. Li Shimin, the king of Qin, captured and killed him.

古文：其兄季真，弃石州，奔刘武周将马邑高满政，满政杀之。
现代文：刘六儿的兄长刘季真，丢弃石州，逃奔刘武周的将领马邑人高满政，高满政杀了他。
English: Liu Jizhen, the elder brother of Liu Liuer, was killed by Gao Manzheng, the general of Ma people who abandoned Shizhou and fled Liu Wuzhou.

古文：武周之南寇也，其内史令苑君璋谏曰： 唐主举一州之众，直取长安，所向无敌，此乃天授，非人力也。
现代文：刘武周向南侵犯唐时，他的内史令苑君璋曾经规劝道： 唐主以一个州的兵力，直取长安，所向无敌，这是上天有助，不是人力。
English: When Liu Wuzhou invaded the south of the Tang Dynasty, his internal history commander Yuan Junyao once advised: The Tang Lord directly took Chang'an with the military force of one state, and he was invincible. This was God's help, not manpower.

古文：晋阳以南，道路险隘，县军深入，无继于后，君进战不利，何以自还！
现代文：晋阳以南，道路狭窄险要，孤军深入，后无援军，假如进军攻战不利，怎么回军？
English: To the south of Jinyang, the road is narrow and dangerous, the lone army is deep, and there is no reinforcement. If it is unfavorable to go into battle, how can we return to the army?

古文：不如北连突厥，南结唐朝，南面称孤，足为长策。 
现代文：不如北面联合突厥，南面与唐结交，在此一方称王称霸，才是良策。 
English: It is not as good a strategy as uniting the Turks in the north and making friends with Tang in the south, while claiming to be the king.

古文：武周不听，留君璋守朔州。
现代文：刘武周不听，留苑君璋守卫朔州。
English: Liu Wuzhou did not listen, and stayed to guard Shuozhou.

古文：及败，泣谓君璋曰： 不用君言，以至于此。 
现代文：待刘武周失败后，流着泪对君璋说： 我没有采纳您的意见，以至于到了现在这种地步。 
English: After Liu Wuzhou's defeat, he said to Junyao with tears streaming down his face, "I didn't take your advice and ended up where I am now.

古文：久之，武周谋亡归马邑，事泄，突厥杀之。
现代文：过了一段时间，刘武周策划从突厥逃回马邑，事情泄露，突厥杀了刘武周。
English: After a period of time, Liu Wuzhou planned to escape from the Turks back to Mayi, the matter leaked out, and the Turks killed Liu Wuzhou.

古文：突厥又以君璋为大行台，统其馀众，仍令郁射设督兵助镇。
现代文：突厥人任命苑君璋为大行台，统领刘武周的余部，仍然令郁射设督兵协助镇守。
English: The Turks appointed Yuan Junyao as the commander-in-chief, leading the rest of Liu Wu Zhou, and still ordered Yu Sha to set up inspectors to assist the town guard.

古文：庚申，怀州总管黄君汉击王世充太子玄应于西济州，大破之；熊州行军总管史万宝邀之于九曲，又破之。
现代文：庚申，唐怀州总管黄君汉在西济州袭击王世充的太子王玄应，重创王玄应；熊州行军总管史万宝在九曲截击王玄应，又打败了他。
English: Goshun, the general manager of Tanghwaizhou, Huang Junhan, attacked Wang Shichong's prince Wang Xuanying in Xizhou, severely injuring Wang Xuanying; the general manager of the march of Xiongzhou, Shi Wanbao, intercepted Wang Xuanying in Jiuqu, and defeated him again.

古文：辛酉，王世充陷邓州。
现代文：辛酉，王世充攻陷邓州。
English: Xin Xuan and Wang Shichong invaded Dangzhou.

古文：上闻并州平，大悦。
现代文：唐高祖听说平定了并州，非常高兴。
English: Tang Gaozu was very happy when he heard that the annexation was settled.

古文：壬戌，宴群臣，赐缯帛，使自入御府，尽力取之。
现代文：壬戌，宴请群臣，赐给缯帛，让人自己进御府，尽力自取。
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche, invite a group of courtiers to a banquet, give them gongs, let them enter the imperial palace on their own, and do their best to take them.

古文：复唐俭官爵，仍以为并州道安抚大使；所籍独孤怀恩田宅资财，悉以赐之。
现代文：又恢复了唐俭的官爵，仍然任并州道安抚大使；将官府没收的独孤怀恩的田地房屋资财，全部赏赐给了唐俭。
English: He also restored Tang Jian's official title of nobility, and still appointed him as the ambassador to pacify the state; he rewarded Tang Jian with all the fields, houses and assets confiscated by the government.

古文：世民留李仲文镇并州，刘武周数遣兵入寇，仲文辄击破之，下城堡百馀所。
现代文：李世民留李仲文镇守并州，刘武周屡次派兵侵入并州境内，都被李仲文击退，李仲文还攻克了一百多座城堡。
English: Li Shimin stayed with Li Zhongwen to guard the annexation of the state, and Liu Wuzhou repeatedly sent troops to invade the annexation of the state, all of which were repelled by Li Zhongwen. Li Zhongwen also conquered more than one hundred castles.

古文：诏仲文检校并州总管。
现代文：唐下诏以李仲文为检校并州总管。
English: Under the Tang Dynasty, Li Zhongwen was appointed as the inspector of the school and the head of the state.

古文：五月，窦建德遣高士兴击李艺于幽州，不克，退军笼火城。
现代文：五月，窦建德派高士兴在幽州袭击李艺，没有攻克，撤军到笼火城。
English: In May, Dou Jiande sent Gao Shixing to attack Li Ying in Yuzhou, but he failed to conquer Li Ying and withdrew to Jiefang.

古文：艺袭击，大破之，斩首五千级。
现代文：李艺袭击了高士兴，重创高军，斩首五千级。
English: Li Yiyi attacked Gao Shixing, hit Gao Jun hard, and beheaded five thousand.

古文：建德大将军王伏宝，勇略冠军中，诸将疾之，言其谋反，建德杀之，伏宝曰： 大王奈何听谗言，自斩左右手乎！ 
现代文：窦建德手下的大将军王伏宝勇猛机智，全军数第一，众将领嫉妒他，说他要谋反，窦建德杀了王伏宝，刑前王伏宝说： 大王怎么能够听信谗言，自己断了自己的左右手呢！ 
English: Wang Fubao, the general under Dou Jiande, was brave and resourceful. He was the number one in the whole army. The generals were jealous of him and said that he was plotting a rebellion. Dou Jiande killed Wang Fubao. Before his execution, Wang Fubao said: "How could the great king listen to insults and break his own right and left hands!"

古文：初，尉迟敬德将兵助吕崇茂守夏县，上潜遣使赦崇茂罪，拜夏州刺史，使图敬德，事泄，敬德杀之。
现代文：当初，尉迟敬德带兵帮助吕崇茂保卫夏县，唐高祖暗中派人赦免了吕崇茂的罪过，拜他为夏州刺史，让他谋取尉迟敬德，事情泄露，尉迟敬德杀了吕崇茂。
English: At the beginning, the lieutenant Qi Jingde led soldiers to help Lü Chongmao defend Xia County. Tang Gaozu secretly sent someone to pardon Lü Chongmao's sins, and asked him to write the history of Xia County, and let him find the lieutenant Qi Jingde. The matter was leaked, and the lieutenant Qi Jingde killed Lü Chongmao.

古文：敬德去，崇茂馀党复据夏县拒守。
现代文：尉迟敬德离开夏县后，吕崇茂余部又占据夏县拒守。
English: After Lieutenant Xi Jingde left Xia County, the rest of Lv Chongmao occupied Xia County and refused to defend it.

古文：秦王世民引军自晋州还攻夏县，壬午，屠之。
现代文：秦王李世民率军从晋州回师攻夏县，壬午，屠城。
English: Qin King Li Shimin led his army back from Jinzhou to attack Xia County, Renhu, and Tu Cheng.

古文：辛卯，秦王世民至长安。
现代文：辛卯，秦王李世民到长安。
English: Xinwu, Qin King Li Shimin went to Chang'an.

古文：是月，突厥遣阿史那揭多献马千匹于王世充，且求婚；世充以宗女妻之，并与之互市。
现代文：本月，突厥派遣阿史那揭多向王世充进献一千匹马，并求婚，王世充以同族之女远嫁突厥，并与突厥相互贸易。
English: This month, the Turks sent Ashina Jiddo to present a thousand horses to Wang Shicheng and propose marriage. Wang Shicheng married a Turk of the same tribe and traded with the Turks.

古文：六月，壬辰，诏以和州总管、东南道行台尚书令楚王杜伏威为使持节、总管江淮以南诸军事、扬州刺史、东南道行台尚书令、淮南道安抚使，进封吴王，赐姓李氏。
现代文：六月壬辰，唐下诏任命和州总管、东南道行台尚书令楚王杜伏威为使持节、总管江淮以南诸军事、扬州刺史、东南道行台尚书令、淮南道安抚使，晋封为吴王，赐姓李氏。
English: In June of the Ninth month of the Ninth year of the Ninth month of the Ninth year of the Ninth month of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of the Ninth year of

古文：以辅公祏为行台左仆射，封舒国公。
现代文：任命辅公为东南道行台左仆射，进封舒国公。
English: Appointed Fu Gong as the Southeastern Road Gangtai Zuopuzha, and entered the territory of Shu Guogong.

古文：丙午，立皇子元景为赵王，元昌为鲁王，元亨为鲁王。
现代文：丙午，唐立皇子李元景为赵王，李元昌为鲁王，李元亨为王。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, Li Yuanjing, the prince of Tang Dynasty, became the king of Zhao, Li Yuanchang became the king of Lu, and Li Yuanheng became the king.

古文：显州行台尚书令楚公杨士林，虽受唐官爵，而北结王世充，南通萧铣；诏庐江王瑗与安抚使李弘敏讨之。
现代文：显州行台尚书令楚公杨士林虽然接受了唐的官爵，却北面交结王世充，南面勾结萧铣，唐下诏命庐江王李瑗与安抚使李弘敏讨伐杨士林。
English: Although Yang Shilin, the Duke of Chu, accepted the official title of the Tang Dynasty, he was allied with Wang Shicheng in the north and Xiao Qi in the south. The Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering Li Xi, the King of the Yangtze River, and Li Hongmin, the pacifier, to fight against Yang Shilin.

古文：兵未行，长史田瓚为士林所忌，甲寅，瓚杀士林，降于世充，世充以瓚为显州总管。
现代文：军队还未出发，长史田瓒遭杨士林的猜忌，甲寅，田瓒杀死杨士林，投降了王世充，王世充任命田瓒为显州总管。
English: The army had not yet set out, and the long-term governor, Tian Xuan, was suspected by Yang Shilin. Ko Yin, Tian Xuan killed Yang Shilin and surrendered to Wang Shichong. Wang Shichong appointed Tian Xuan as the general manager of Xianzhou.

古文：秦王世民之讨刘武周也，突厥处罗可汗遣其弟步利设帅二千骑助唐。
现代文：秦王李世民讨伐刘武周时，突厥处罗可汗派弟弟步利设率二千骑兵协助唐军。
English: When the Qin king Li Shimin was fighting Liu Wu Zhou, the Turkic ruler Luo Khan sent his brother Bu Li with 2,000 cavalry to assist the Tang army.

古文：武周既败，是月，处罗至晋阳，总管李仲文不能制；又留伦特勒，使将数百人，云助仲文镇守，自石岭以北，皆留兵戍之而去。
现代文：刘武周失败后，当月，处罗可汗到晋阳，唐检校并州总管李仲文不能统制处罗；处罗又留下伦特勒，让伦特勒统领数百人，声称帮助李仲文镇守，从石岭关以北，都留下突厥兵戍守，然后离去。
English: After the defeat of Liu Wuzhou, that month, when Luo Khan went to Jinyang, Li Zhongwen, the head of the Tang inspection school and the state, could not control Luo; Luo also left Lentler, let Lentler command hundreds of people, claimed to help Li Zhongwen guard the town, and left Turkish soldiers to guard from the north of Shilingguan, and then left.

古文：上议击王世充，世充闻之，选诸州镇骁勇皆集洛阳，置四镇将军，募人分守四城。
现代文：唐高祖商议攻打王世充之事，王世充闻讯，从各州镇选拔骁勇，都集中到洛阳，设置四镇将军，又召募人分别守卫洛阳四城。
English: Tang Gaozhu discussed the matter of attacking Wang Shicheng. Wang Shicheng heard the news, selected warriors from all the state towns, concentrated them in Luoyang, set up four town generals, and called for recruits to guard the four cities of Luoyang.

古文：秋，七月，壬戌，诏秦王世民督诸军击世充。
现代文：秋季，七月壬戌，高祖下诏命秦王李世民统率诸军攻打王世充。
English: In the autumn, in July, Gaozhu issued an edict ordering Qin King Li Shimin to lead the army to attack Wang Shichong.

古文：陕东道行台屈突通二子在洛阳，上谓通曰： 今欲使卿东征，如卿二子何？ 
现代文：唐陕东道行台的左仆射屈突通的两个儿子都在洛阳，皇上对屈突通说： 现在想让你东征洛阳，你的两个儿子怎么办？ 
English: The two sons of Tang Shenshan's left-hand man, Jie Qiuqutong, were in Luoyang. The emperor said to Qiu Qiuqutong: Now that you want to go to Luoyang, what about your two sons?

古文：通曰： 臣昔为俘囚，分当就死，陛下释缚，加以恩礼。
现代文：屈突通回答道： 臣下我过去作为阶下囚，理当被处死的，陛下不但释放了我，还施予很多恩惠。
English: Qu Ducheng replied, "As a vassal, I used to be the lowest-ranking prisoner and deserved to be put to death. Your Majesty not only released me, but also granted me many favors.

古文：当是之时，臣心口相誓，期以更生馀年为陛下尽节，但恐不获死所耳。
现代文：那时我就在内心发誓，希望能在有生之年为陛下尽节，只是唯恐没有机会尽节捐躯罢了。
English: At that time, I swore in my heart that I hoped to be able to celebrate His Majesty's birthday in my lifetime, but I was afraid that I would not have the opportunity to die.

古文：今得备先驱，二儿何足顾乎！ 
现代文：如今有幸得以充任前锋，两个儿子又有什么值得顾惜的！ 
English: Now he is fortunate to be able to play as a striker, and there is nothing to be sorry about for his two sons!

古文：上叹曰： 徇义之士，一至此乎！ 
现代文：高祖赞叹道： 真是一位舍身取义之士，竟能做到这样！ 
English: Gaozu said admiringly, "He is truly a man who sacrificed himself for righteousness, and he can do this!

古文：癸亥，突厥遣使潜诣王世充，潞州总管李袭誉邀击，败之，虏牛羊万计。
现代文：癸亥，突厥暗中派使者赴王世充处，唐潞州总管李袭誉截击并打败了突厥使者，夺得的牛羊数以万计。
English: In the year of the boar, the Turks secretly sent an envoy to Wang Shicheng's place, and Li Xiwu, the general manager of Tangye Prefecture, intercepted and defeated the Turkish envoy, and won tens of thousands of cattle and sheep.

古文：骠骑大将军可硃浑定远告： 并州总管李仲文与突厥通谋，欲俟洛阳兵交，引胡骑直入长安。 
现代文：唐骠骑大将军可朱浑定远报告： 并州总管李仲文与突厥勾结，商定准备等洛阳唐、郑交战时，引导突厥骑兵直驱长安。 
English: Tang's cavalry general, Zhu Hundingyuan, reported: And the provincial governor, Li Zhongwen, colluded with the Turks and agreed to prepare to lead the Turkish cavalry straight to Chang'an when Luoyang, Tang and Zheng were at war.

古文：甲戌，命皇太子镇蒲坂以备之，又遣礼部尚书唐俭安抚并州，暂废并州总管府，征仲文入朝。
现代文：甲戌，唐高祖命令皇太子镇守蒲反以防备，又派礼部尚书唐俭安抚并州，暂时废除并州总管府，征召李仲文入朝。
English: Tang Gaozhu ordered the crown prince to guard the town of Pu to prevent rebellion, and sent the ceremonial department Shangshu Tang Jian to appease the annexation of the state, temporarily abolished the annexation of the state headquarters, and conscripted Li Zhongwen into the imperial court.

古文：壬午，秦王世民至新安。王世充遣魏王弘烈镇襄阳，荆王行本镇虎牢，宋王泰镇怀州，齐王世恽检校南城，楚王世伟守宝城，太子玄应守东城，汉王玄恕守含嘉城，鲁王道徇守曜仪城，世充自将战兵，左辅大将军杨公卿帅左龙骧二十八府骑兵，右游击大将军郭善才帅内军二十八府步兵，左游击大将军跋野纲帅外军二十八府步兵，总三万人，以备唐。
现代文：壬午，秦王李世民到达新安，王世充派遣魏王王弘烈镇守襄阳，荆王王行本镇守虎牢，宋王王泰镇守怀州，齐王王世恽负责洛阳南城，楚王王世伟守洛阳宝城，太子王玄应守洛阳东城，汉王王玄恕守含嘉城，鲁王王道徇守曜仪城，王世充亲自统帅作战军队，左辅大将军杨公卿统帅左龙骧二十八府骑兵，右游击大将军郭善才统帅内军二十八府步兵，左游击大将军跋野纲统帅外军二十八府步兵，总计三万人，以防备唐的进攻。
English: At noon, the Qin king Li Shimin arrived in Xin'an. Wang Shichong sent the Wei king Wang Hong Rong to guard Xiangyang, the Jing king Wang Xing to guard the Tiger's Lair, the Song king Wang Tai to guard Huai Zhou, the Qi king Wang Shizhen to guard the southern city of Luoyang, the Chu king Wang Shih Wei to guard the Luoyang treasure city, the prince Wang Xuan Ying to guard the eastern city of Luoyang, the Han king Wang Xuan Shou to guard the Jia city, and the Lu king Wang Daojun to guard the Yiyou ceremony city. Wang Shichong personally

古文：弘烈、行本，世伟之子；泰，世充之兄子也。
现代文：王弘烈、王行本是楚王王世伟的儿子；王泰是王世充哥哥的儿子。
English: Wang Hong Rong and Wang Xing Ben were the sons of the king of Chu, Wang Shih Wei; Wang Tai was the son of the brother of Wang Shichong.

古文：梁师都引突厥、稽胡兵入寇，行军总管段德操击破之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：梁师都带突厥、稽胡军队入侵唐，唐行军总管段德操打败入侵之敌，斩首一千多级。
English: Liang Shigu led the Turkic and Qinhu armies to invade the Tang Dynasty. The General Administration of the Tang Dynasty marched to defeat the invading enemy and beheaded more than a thousand people.

古文：罗士信将前锋围慈涧，王世充自将兵三万救之。
现代文：罗士信率领先头部队包围了慈涧，王世充亲自带领三万兵马救援慈涧。
English: Luo Shixin led the first troops to surround Cixi, and Wang Shichong personally led thirty thousand soldiers and horses to rescue Cixi.

古文：己丑，秦王世民将轻骑前觇世充，猝与之遇，众寡不敌，道路险扼，为世充所围。
现代文：己丑，秦王李世民亲自带领轻骑前去侦察王世充军情，突然遇到王世充的部队，双方人数相差悬殊，道路又很艰险，于是被王世充包围。
English: As a result, Qin King Li Shimin personally led the light cavalry forward to reconnoiter Wang Shicheng's military situation, and suddenly encountered Wang Shicheng's troops. The number of people on both sides was very different, and the road was very dangerous, so they were surrounded by Wang Shicheng.

古文：世民左右驰射，皆应弦而毙，获其左建威将军燕琪，世充乃退。
现代文：李世民策马飞奔并左右开弓，敌人应弦而倒，抓获了王世充手下的左建威将军燕琪，王世充于是退军。
English: Li Shimin galloped with his horse and opened his bow left and right. The enemy fell in response, capturing Wang Shicheng's general Zuo Jianwei Yan Qi. Wang Shicheng then withdrew.

古文：世民还营，埃尘覆面，军不复识，欲拒之，世民免胄自言，乃得入。
现代文：李世民返回营地，满面灰尘，部下认不出，要将他拒之门外，世民摘下头盔发话，才进了军门。
English: Li Shimin returned to the camp, his face covered with dust. His subordinates did not recognize him and wanted to turn him away. He took off his helmet and spoke before entering the military gate.

古文：旦日，帅步骑五万进军慈涧；世充拔慈涧之戍，归于洛阳。
现代文：次日，李世民率领五万步兵骑兵开赴慈涧；王世充撤除在慈涧的防守，返回洛阳。
English: The next day, Li Shimin led 50,000 infantry and cavalry to march to Cixi; Wang Shicheng removed the defense in Cixi and returned to Luoyang.

古文：世民遣行军总管史万宝自宜阳南据龙门，将军刘德威自太行东围河内，上谷公王君廓自洛口断其饷道，怀州总管黄君汉自河阴攻回洛城；大军屯于北邙，连营以逼之。
现代文：李世民派遣行军总管史万宝自宜阳向南占据伊阙龙门，派将军刘德威自太行向东包围郑河内郡，派上谷公王君廓从洛口切断郑军的粮草运输线，派遣怀州总管黄君汉从河阴进攻回洛城；唐大军驻扎在洛阳北面的北邙，连营进逼洛阳。
English: Li Shimin dispatched the head of the marching army, Shi Wanbao, from Yiyang to the south to occupy the Yili Longmen, sent General Liu Dewei from Taihang to the east to encircle Zhenghe County, sent Shangguo Gongwang Junku to cut off the grain and grass transportation line of the Zheng Army from Lokou, and sent Huang Junhan, the head of the Waizhou, to attack back to Luoyang from Heyin. The Tang army was stationed in Beilun, north of Luoyang, and the company entered Luoyang.

古文：世充洧州长史繁水张公谨与刺史崔枢以州城来降。
现代文：王世充所设洧州长史繁水人张公谨与洧州刺史崔枢以洧州城降唐。
English: Wang Shichong set up Zhang Gonggyi, the governor of Zhangzhou, and Cui Zu, the governor of Zhangzhou, to lead Zhangzhou to Tang.

古文：八月，丁酉，南宁西爨蛮遣使入贡。
现代文：八月丁酉，南宁西蛮派遣使节入贡于唐。
English: In August of Dingwu, Nanning sent an envoy to Tang to pay tribute.

古文：初，隋末蛮酋爨玩反，诛，诸子没为官奴，弃其地。
现代文：早先，隋末西蛮首领玩反叛，被诛杀，几个儿子都被没为官奴，丢失了领地。
English: Earlier, at the end of the Sui Dynasty, the leader of the Western Barbarians rebelled and was killed, and several of his sons were taken as official slaves and lost their territory.

古文：帝即位，以玩子弘达为昆州刺史，令持其父尸归葬；益州刺史段纶因遣使招谕其部落，皆来降。
现代文：唐高祖即皇帝位后，任命玩的儿子弘达为昆州刺史，命他携父亲尸骨回乡安葬；唐益州刺史段纶乘此时机派人招谕西蛮各部落，诸部落均降唐。
English: After Emperor Gaozu of the Tang Dynasty ascended the throne, he appointed his son Hongda to be the crown prince of Quanzhou and ordered him to take his father's remains back to his hometown for burial. The crown prince of Yizhou of the Tang Dynasty took advantage of this opportunity to send people to invite the barbarian tribes in the West, and all tribes were reduced to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：己亥，窦建德共州县令唐纲杀刺史，以州来降。
现代文：己亥，窦建德属下共州县令唐纲杀死刺史，以共州降唐。
English: Ji Hai, Dou Jiande subordinate Gongzhou County Tang Gang killed stabbing history, with Gongzhou down to Tang.

古文：邓州土豪执王世充所署剌史来降。
现代文：邓州当地的豪门大族捉住王世充任命的邓州刺史，前来降唐。
English: The local powerful families in Dangzhou caught the Dangzhou assassin appointed by Wang Shichong and came to overthrow the Tang Dynasty.

古文：癸卯，梁师都石堡留守张举帅千馀人来降。
现代文：癸卯，梁师都的石堡留守张举带领一千多人降唐。
English: At the same time, Liang Shidu's stone fortress left Zhangjiajie leading more than a thousand people to fall to Tang.

古文：甲辰，黄君汉遣校尉张夜叉以舟师袭回洛城，克之，获其将达奚善定，断河阳南桥而还，降其堡聚二十馀。
现代文：甲辰，唐怀州总管黄君汉派校尉张夜叉用水军袭击回洛城，攻克城池，捉住郑守将达奚善定，切断河阳南桥后回军，又收服了郑二十余处堡垒、聚落。
English: At that time, Huang Junhan, the governor of Tanghai Province, sent Lieutenant Zhang Yasha to attack back to Luo City with the water army, conquered the city pond, captured Zheng's commander Dafu Shanding, cut off the south bridge of Heyang and returned to the army, and conquered more than 20 fortresses and settlements of Zheng.

古文：世充使太子玄应帅杨公卿等攻回洛，不克，乃筑月城于其西，留兵戍之。
现代文：王世充命太子王玄应率领杨公卿等人攻回洛城，没有攻克，于是在城西修筑月城，留兵戍守。
English: Wang Shisheng gave his life to Prince Wang Xuanying, who led Yang Gongqing and others to recapture the city of Luo, but they were unable to conquer it, so they built the Moon City in the west of the city and kept the soldiers there.

古文：世充陈于青城宫，秦王世民亦置陈当之。
现代文：王世充在青城宫列阵，秦王李世民也列阵相应。
English: Wang Shichong was arrayed in the Qingcheng Palace, and the Qin King Li Shimin was also arrayed accordingly.

古文：世充隔水谓世民曰： 隋室倾覆，唐帝关中，郑帝河南，世充未尝西侵，王忽举兵东来，何也？ 
现代文：王世充隔着河水对李世民说： 隋朝灭亡，唐在关中称帝，郑在河南称雄，我王世充未曾向西侵唐，而秦王您却忽然率军东来犯郑，这是为什么？ 
English: Wang Shichong said to Li Shimin across the river: The Sui Dynasty perished, Tang was proclaimed emperor in Guanzhong, Zheng was proclaimed emperor in Henan. I, Wang Shichong, had never invaded Tang to the west, but you, King Qin, suddenly led an army to the east to invade Zheng. Why is this?

古文：世民使宇文士及应之曰： 四海咸仰皇风，唯公独阻声教，为此而来！ 
现代文：李世民让宇文士及答复道： 普天之下均仰慕皇帝的声威教化，唯独阁下阻止皇帝声教，我们就为此事而来！ 
English: Li Shimin asked Yu Wenshi and replied: The whole world admires the emperor's vocal education, but your excellency is the only one who can stop the emperor's vocal education. That's why we're here!

古文：世充曰： 相与息兵讲好，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：王世充说： 我们互相息兵讲和，不是很好吗？ 
English: Wang Shichong said, "Isn't it great that we are making peace with each other?"

古文：又应之曰： 奉诏取东都，不令讲好也！ 
现代文：宇文士及又回答： 奉诏命令我们攻取东都，没有令我们讲和。 
English: Umenshi and also answered: We were ordered by the emperor to capture Dongdu, but he did not order us to make peace.

古文：至暮，各引兵还。
现代文：到傍晚，双方各自带兵回营。
English: By late afternoon, both sides had returned to camp, each with their own soldiers.

古文：上遣使与窦建德连和，建德遣同安长公主随使者俱还。
现代文：唐高祖派人与窦建德联系，窦建德送唐高祖同母妹妹同安公主随使者一同返回长安。
English: Tang Gaozhu sent someone to contact Dou Jiande, and Dou Jiande sent Tang Gaozhu's younger sister, Princess Tongan, to accompany the envoy back to Chang'an.

古文：乙卯，刘德威袭怀州，入其外郭，下其堡聚。
现代文：乙卯，唐将军刘德威袭击怀州，进入怀州外城，攻陷外城的堡垒聚落。
English: Second, the Tang general Liu Dewei attacked Waizhou, entered the outer city of Waizhou, and captured the fortress settlements of the outer city.

古文：九月，庚午，梁师都将刘旻以华池来降，以为林州总管。
现代文：九月，庚午，梁师都的部将刘以华池县来降唐，唐任命他为林州总管。
English: In the afternoon of September, Liu Yihai, Liang Shidu's subordinate, came to Tang from Huachi County. Tang appointed him as the general manager of Linzhou.

古文：癸酉，王世充显州总管田瓚以所部二十五州来降；自是襄阳声问与世充绝。
现代文：癸酉，王世充的显州总管田瓒以所管辖的二十五个州前来降唐，从此，襄阳的王弘烈军与洛阳王世充之间断绝了消息。
English: At the same time, Wang Shichong's general manager of Hsien Province, Tian Shun, came to Tang with the twenty-five provinces under his jurisdiction. Since then, there has been no news between Wang Hong's army in Xiangyang and Luoyang's Wang Shichong.

古文：史万宝进军甘泉宫。
现代文：唐行军总管史万宝进军甘泉宫。
English: Shi Wanbao, the general manager of the Tang march, marched into Ganquan Palace.

古文：丁丑，秦王世民遣右武卫将军王君廓攻轘辕，拔之。
现代文：丁丑，秦王李世民派遣右武卫将军王君廓攻打辕，王君廓攻克辕。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Qin King Li Shimin dispatched the Right Guard General Wang Junkuo to attack and conquer Yunnan, and Wang Junkuo conquered Yunnan.

古文：王世充遣其将魏隐等击君廓，君廓伪遁，设伏，大破之，遂东徇地，至管城而还。
现代文：王世充派魏隐等将领攻击王君廓，王君廓伪装逃跑，设下埋伏，大败郑兵，于是又向东攻占到管城后回军。
English: Wang Shihong sent Wei Yin and other generals to attack Wang Junku, Wang Junku disguised himself and fled, set up an ambush, defeated Zheng soldiers, and then returned to the army after capturing the city to the east.

古文：先是，王世充将郭士衡、许罗汉掠唐境，君廓以策击却之，诏劳之曰： 卿以十三人破贼一万，自古以少制众，未之有也。 
现代文：在此之前，王世充的将领郭士衡、许罗汉进入唐境攻掠，王君廓设计击退郭、许，唐高祖下诏慰问王君郭说： 你率领十三人打败一万敌人，自古以来以少胜多，还没有过这样的先例。 
English: Prior to this, Wang Shichong's generals Guo Shiheng and Xu Luohan entered Tang territory to attack and plunder. Wang Junku was designed to repel Guo and Xu. Tang Gao Zi sent a message of condolence to Wang Junku, saying: You led thirteen people to defeat ten thousand enemies. Since ancient times, with a few to win, there has been no such precedent.

古文：世充尉州剌史时德睿帅所部杞、夏、陈、随、许、颍、尉七州来降。
现代文：王世充的尉州刺史时德睿率领所辖、夏、陈、随、许、颍、尉七州前来降唐。
English: Wang Shichong's lieutenant governor Zhang Shi, when De Rui led his subordinate, Xia, Chen, Sui, Xu, Yao, and lieutenant governors to come to Tang.

古文：秦王世民以便宜命州县官并依世充所署，无所变易，改尉州为南汴州，于是河南州县相继来降。
现代文：秦王李世民相机行事，命归附的各州县的官吏仍用王世充所任命的官员，不作变动，改尉州为南汴州，于是郑的河南郡县相继前来归附。
English: Qin King Li Shimin acted as a camera, and the officials of each state and county that were ordered to be annexed still used the officials appointed by Wang Shichong, and did not change. They changed Yizhou to Nanluozhou, so Zheng's Henan County and County came to be annexed one after another.

古文：刘武周降将寻相等多叛去。
现代文：降唐的原刘武周将领寻相等人大多又叛唐而去。
English: Most of the former Liu Wuzhou generals who led the fall of the Tang Dynasty, such as Huo Xiang, rebelled against the Tang Dynasty and left.

古文：诸将疑尉迟敬德，囚之军中。行台左仆射屈突通、尚书殷开山言于世民曰： 敬德骁勇绝伦，今既囚之，心必怨望，留之恐为后患，不如遂杀之。 
现代文：唐军诸将怀疑尉迟敬德也会叛离，将他囚禁在军中，行台左仆射屈突通、尚书殷开山向李世民进言道： 尉迟敬德骁勇绝伦，现在被囚禁，内心必然怨恨，留着恐怕会成为后患，不如索性杀了他。 
English: The Tang generals suspected that Lieutenant Qi Jingde would also defect, so they imprisoned him in the army. His left-hand man, Xie Qu Xuntong and Shang Shu Yin Kaishan, said to Li Shimin: "Lieutenant Qi Jingde is extremely brave and virtuous. He is now imprisoned, and his heart must be filled with resentment. I am afraid that keeping him will be a hindrance. It would be better to kill him outright."

古文：世民曰： 不然。敬德若叛，岂在寻相之后邪！ 
现代文：李世民说： 不然，敬德如果真要叛离，又怎么会在寻相之后呢？ 
English: Li Shimin said, "Otherwise, if Jingde really wanted to defect, how could he do it after the photo session?

古文：遽命释之，引入卧内，赐之金，曰： 丈夫意气相期，勿以小嫌介意，吾终不信谗言以害忠良，公宜体之。
现代文：马上下令放开尉迟敬德，把他带入卧室之中，赐给他金子，说： 男子汉大丈夫相互之间讲的是意气相投，不要因为一点小仇怨而介意，我最终没有相信谗言而害了忠良，您应该明白。
English: He immediately gave the order to release the lieutenant, take him into the bedroom, give him the gold, and said: "Boys, it's okay, we're talking about a kindred spirit, don't mind because of a small grudge, I didn't believe the gossip and harmed Tadayoshi, you should understand.

古文：必欲去者，以此金相资，表一时共事之情也。 
现代文：如果您一定要走，这点金子就算作路费以表这一段共事之情。 
English: If you must go, this little gold is counted as travel expenses to show this period of working together.

古文：辛巳，世民以五百骑行战地，登魏宣武陵。王世充帅步骑万馀猝至，围之。单雄信引槊直趋世民，敬德跃马大呼，横刺雄信坠马，世充兵稍却，敬德翼世民出围。
现代文：辛巳，李世民带五百骑兵巡视战区地形，登上魏宣武帝陵，王世充率领一万多步兵骑兵突然而至，包围了李世民，单雄信挺长枪直奔李世民而去，尉迟敬德跳上马大喊着横里将单雄信刺下马，王世充军稍稍后退，敬德又护卫着李世民突出包围。
English: Suddenly, Li Shimin led five hundred cavalrymen to inspect the terrain of the war zone and ascended the tomb of Emperor Wei Xuanwu. Wang Shichong led more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry suddenly arrived and surrounded Li Shimin. Shan Xiong Xin held a long gun and went straight to Li Shimin. Lieutenant Qi Jingde jumped on his horse and shouted that he would stab Shan Xiong Xin sideways. Wang Shichong's army retreated a little later, and Jingde escorted Li Shimin and surrounded him.

古文：世民、敬德更帅骑兵还战，出入世充陈，往返无所碍。
现代文：李世民、尉迟敬德重新率骑兵回击，出入王世充队伍，如入无人之境。
English: Li Shimin and Lieutenant Qi Jingde again led the cavalry to counterattack, entering and leaving Wang Shichong's team, as if entering no man's land.

古文：屈突通引大兵继至，世充兵大败，仅以身免。擒其冠军大将军陈智略，斩首千馀级，获排槊兵六千。
现代文：屈突通带领大军随后赶到，王世充军队大败，王世充只身逃脱；唐军活捉了王世充的冠军大将军陈智略，斩首一千多级，俘虏六千手持盾牌长矛的士兵。
English: Qu Zhutong led a large army and arrived later. Wang Shichong's army was defeated, and Wang Shichong escaped alone. The Tang army captured Wang Shichong's champion general Chen Zhiliu alive, beheaded more than a thousand soldiers, and captured six thousand soldiers holding shields and spears.

古文：世民谓敬德曰： 公何相报之速也！ 
现代文：李世民对尉迟敬德说： 怎么这么快就得到了您的回报？ 
English: Li Shimin said to Lieutenant Xi Jingde: How did you get your reward so quickly?

古文：赐敬德金银一箧，自是宠遇日隆。
现代文：赐给尉迟敬德一箱金银，尉迟敬德从此日见宠遇。
English: He gave Ye Xi Jingde a box of gold and silver, and Ye Xi Jingde was favored from that day on.

古文：敬德善避槊，每单骑入敌陈中，敌丛槊刺之，终莫能伤，又能夺敌槊返剌之。
现代文：尉迟敬德善于避让长矛，每次单枪匹马冲入敌阵，敌人密集的长矛刺来，却始终伤不了他，他还能夺取敌人长矛回刺过去。
English: Second-in-command Jingde was good at dodging spears. Every time he rushed into the enemy's camp single-handed, the enemy's concentrated spears stabbed him, but he could not hurt him all the time. He could also seize the enemy's spears and stab back.

古文：齐王元吉以善马槊自负，闻敬德之能，请各去刃相与校胜负，敬德曰： 敬德谨当去之，王勿去也。 
现代文：齐王李元吉颇以擅长骑马使长矛自负，听说尉迟敬德的名声，请求各自去掉枪头相互较量，一决胜负，尉迟敬德说： 敬德自当去枪头，王不必去。 
English: The king of Qi, Li Yuanji, was quite proud of his ability to ride a horse and use a spear. He had heard of the reputation of the lieutenant, Qi Jingde, and asked each of them to remove their gun butts and compete against each other to win a decisive victory. The lieutenant, Qi Jingde, said: Qi Jingde should go to the gun butts himself, the king does not have to go.

古文：既而元吉刺之，终不能中。
现代文：然后李元吉刺尉迟敬德，始终刺不中他。
English: Then Li Yuanji stabbed Lieutenant Qi Jingde, but failed to stab him.

古文：秦王世民问敬德曰： 避槊与夺槊，孰难？ 
现代文：秦王李世民问尉迟敬德： 夺矛和避矛哪个难？ 
English: Qin King Li Shimin asked Lieutenant Qi Jingde: Which is more difficult, capturing spears or avoiding spears?

古文：敬德曰： 夺槊难。 
现代文：敬德回答： 夺予难。 
English: Jingde replied: It is difficult to win.

古文：乃命敬德夺元吉槊。
现代文：于是秦王又命尉迟敬德夺齐王李元吉手中的长予。
English: So he ordered him to perform the capture of the spear in the hands of Li Yuanji.

古文：元吉操槊跃马，志在刺之，敬德须臾三夺其槊；元吉虽面相叹异，内甚耻之。
现代文：李元吉手持长矛跳上马，一心要刺中尉迟敬德，但尉迟敬德只一会儿就三次夺了李元吉手中长矛，李元吉虽然脸上一副赞叹诧异的样子，而内心却深以为耻。
English: With a spear in hand, Li Yuanji jumped onto his horse, intent on stabbing Lieutenant Chi Jingde. However, Lieutenant Chi Jingde took the spear from Li Yuanji's hand three times in just a moment. Although Li Yuanji had a look of admiration and surprise on his face, he was deeply ashamed in his heart.

古文：叛胡陷岚州。
现代文：反叛的胡人攻陷岚州。
English: The rebellious Hu people invaded and occupied Ganzhou.

古文：初，王世充以邴元真为滑州行台仆射。
现代文：当初，王世充任命邴元真为滑州行台仆射。
English: At first, Wang Shichong appointed Zou Yuanzhen as the governor of Slanting.

古文：濮州刺史杜才幹，李密故将也，恨元真叛密，诈以其众降之。
现代文：濮州刺史杜才是李密的旧部，恨邴元真背叛李密，假意率众投降邴元真。
English: It was the former Li Mi's faction that instigated the attack on Luzhou. They hated Yuancheng for betraying Li Mi, and pretended to lead the masses to surrender to Yuancheng.

古文：元真恃其官势，自往招慰，才幹出迎，延入就坐，执而数之曰： 汝本庸才，魏化置汝元僚，不建毫发之功，乃构滔天之祸，今来送死，是汝之分！ 
现代文：邴元真仗着官势，自己前往濮州招慰，杜才出门迎接邴元真并请邴元真入内就坐，捉住邴元真斥责道： 你本来是个庸才，魏公给了你很高的职位，你不曾建立一点功劳，却构成了滔天大祸，如今来此送死，正是你应得的下场！ 
English: Xuan Yuan Zhen, relying on his official position, went to Zhangzhou to solicit consolation. Du Cai went out to meet Xuan Yuan Zhen and invited Xuan Yuan Zhen to come in and sit down. He caught Xuan Yuan Zhen and scolded him: You were originally a mediocre talent. Wei Gong gave you a high position. You did not establish any merit, but constituted a tremendous disaster. Now you come here to die, which is exactly what you deserve!

古文：遂斩之，遣人赍其首至黎阳祭密墓。
现代文：于是斩了邴元真，派人带着邴元真的首级到黎阳祭奠李密墓。
English: So he beheaded Xuan Yuan Zhen and sent someone with Xuan Yuan Zhen's head to Liyang to pay homage at Li Mi's tomb.

古文：壬午，以濮州来降。
现代文：壬午，杜才以濮州降唐。
English: In the morning of the second day of the second lunar month, Du Cai took Bozhou to reduce Tang.

古文：突厥莫贺咄设寇凉州，总管杨恭仁击之，为所败，掠男女数千人而去。
现代文：突厥莫贺咄设侵犯凉州，唐总管杨恭仁迎战，被突厥打败，突厥掠夺了几千名唐朝百姓后离去。
English: The Turk Moga set out to invade Liangzhou. The Tang general Yang Guoren went to war and was defeated by the Turks. The Turks plundered several thousand Tang people and then left.

古文：丙戌，以田瓚为显州总管，赐爵蔡国公。
现代文：丙戌，唐任命田瓒为显州总管，赐爵蔡国公。
English: The Tang Dynasty appointed Tian Xuan as the general manager of Xianzhou and knighted Cai Guogong.

古文：冬，十月，甲午，王世充大将军张镇周来降。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲午，王世充手下的大将军张镇周前来降唐。
English: In the winter, in October, in the afternoon of the 1st, Zhang Zhen Zhou, a general under Wang Shichong, came to Tang.

古文：甲辰，行军总管罗士信袭王世充硖石堡，拔之。
现代文：甲辰，唐行军总管罗士信袭击并攻拔了王世充的硖石堡。
English: At that time, Luo Shixin, the general manager of the Tang marching army, attacked and conquered Wang Shichong's flint castle.

古文：士信又围千金堡，堡中人骂之。
现代文：罗士信又包围千金堡，堡中人大骂罗士信。
English: Luo Shixin also besieged Qianjin Castle, and people in the castle cursed Luo Shixin.

古文：士信夜遣百馀人抱婴儿数十至堡下，使儿啼呼，诈云 从东都来归罗总管 。既而相谓曰： 此千金堡也，吾属误矣。 
现代文：罗士信连夜派一百多人怀抱几十个婴儿到千金堡下，让婴儿啼哭呼叫，诈称 从东都来投奔罗总管 ，然后又互相说： 这是千金堡，我们搞错了。 
English: Overnight, Rossini sent more than a hundred people with dozens of babies in their arms to the bottom of the castle, let the babies cry and call, and falsely claimed that they had come from the east to attack the Luo headquarters, and then said to each other: This is the castle, we made a mistake.

古文：即去。
现代文：马上离去。
English: You need to leave now.

古文：堡中以为士信已去，来者洛阳亡人，出兵追之。
现代文：堡中人以为罗士信已经离去，来的是从洛阳逃亡出来的人，派兵出堡追赶。
English: The people in the castle thought that Luo Shixin had already left, and that the people who had escaped from Luoyang had come, and they sent soldiers out of the castle to chase them.

古文：士信伏兵于道，伺其门开，突入，屠之。
现代文：罗士信在途中设下埋伏，待千金堡门一开，猛地冲入，堡中所藏之人屠杀殆尽。
English: On the way, Luo Shixin set up an ambush, waited for the Qianjin Fort to open, rushed in, and the people hidden in the fort were slaughtered.

古文：窦建德之围幽州也，李艺告急于高开道，开道帅二千骑救之，建德兵引去，开道因艺遣使来降。
现代文：窦建德包围幽州时，李艺向高开道告急，高开道率二千骑兵救幽州，窦建德军队撤离幽州，高开道于是随李艺派遣使者降唐。
English: When Dou Jiande besieged Yuzhou, Li Yi was in a hurry to Gao Kaido. Gao Kaido dispatched two thousand cavalry to save Yuzhou, while Dou Jiande's army withdrew from Yuzhou. Gao Kaido then sent an envoy to Tang with Li Yi.

古文：戊申，以开道为蔚州总管，赐姓李氏，封北平郡王。
现代文：戊申，唐任命高开道为蔚州总管，赐他姓李，封为北平郡王。
English: Wushin, Tang appointed Gao Kaido as the governor of Ulshu, gave him the surname Li, and made him the king of Beiping County.

古文：开道有矢镞在颊，召医出之，医曰： 镞深，不可出。 
现代文：高开道的面颊上有一枚箭头，找来医生，让他拔去箭头，医生说： 箭头太深，没法拔。 
English: Gao Kaido had an arrow stuck in his cheek. He called for a doctor to remove the arrow. The doctor said, "The arrow is too deep to remove."

古文：开道怒，斩之。
现代文：高开道一生气，杀了医生。
English: Gao Kaido got angry and killed the doctor.

古文：别召一医，曰： 出之恐痛。 
现代文：另外又找来一位医生，医生回答： 要拔箭头恐怕很痛。 
English: Another doctor was called in, and the doctor replied, "I'm afraid it's very painful to pull out the arrow."

古文：又斩之。
现代文：高开道又杀了这位医生。
English: Emperor Qian then had the sender of the letter killed.

古文：更召一医，医曰： 可出。 
现代文：第三次找来一位医生，医生说： 有办法拔。 
English: The third time, a doctor was called. The doctor said, "There is a way to pull it out."

古文：乃凿骨，置楔其间，骨裂寸馀，竟出其镞；开道奏妓进膳不辍。
现代文：于是凿颊骨，钉入楔子，骨头裂开一寸多的缝，到底取出了箭头；手术时高开道依然如故地边奏乐舞边进餐。
English: So he chiseled the cheek bone, nailed it into a wedge, cracked the bone more than an inch, and finally removed the arrow; during the operation, Gao Kaido still dined while playing music and dancing.

古文：窦建德帅众二十万复攻幽州。
现代文：窦建德率领二十万兵马再次攻打幽州。
English: Dou Jiande led 200,000 soldiers and horses to attack Yuzhou again.

古文：建德兵已攀堞，薛万均、薛万彻帅敢死士百人从地道出其背，掩击之，建德兵溃走，斩首千馀级。
现代文：窦建德的士兵已经登上城堞，薛万均、薛万彻率领一百多人的敢死队从地道中出城到窦建德军背后，突然出现袭击窦军，窦建德军溃败逃走，被唐军斩首一千多级。
English: Dou Jiande's soldiers had already ascended the battlements. Xue Wanjun and Xue Wancher led a death squad of more than a hundred people out of the city through the tunnel to the back of Dou Jiande's German army, and suddenly attacked Dou Jiande's army. Dou Jiande's German army was defeated and fled, and was beheaded by the Tang army more than a thousand times.

古文：李艺兵乘胜薄其营，建德陈于营中，填堑而出，奋击，大破之，建德逐北。至其城下，攻之，不克而还。
现代文：李艺军队乘胜迫近窦建德营地，窦建德在营中列阵，填平壕沟出营奋力还击，大败李艺军，又追击逃敌到了幽州城下，攻城不克而后还军。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, Li Yi's army approached Dou Jiande's camp. Dou Jiande lined up in the middle of the camp, filled the trench and went out of the camp to fight back, defeated Li Yi's army, chased the fleeing enemy to Yuzhou city, attacked the city and then returned.

古文：李密之败也，杨庆归洛阳，复姓杨氏。
现代文：李密失败时，杨庆返回洛阳，恢复旧姓杨氏。
English: When Li Mi failed, Yang Qing returned to Luoyang and resumed the old surname Yang.

古文：及王世充称帝，庆复姓郭氏，世充以为管州总管，妻以兄女。
现代文：待王世充称帝，杨庆又恢复姓郭，王世充任命他为管州总管，把兄长的女儿嫁给他。
English: After Wang Shichong was crowned emperor, Yang Qing restored the surname Guo. Wang Shichong appointed him as the governor of Guanzhou and married his elder brother's daughter to him.

古文：秦王世民逼洛阳，庆潜遣人请降，世民遣总管李世勣将兵往据其城。
现代文：秦王李世民进逼洛阳，郭庆又暗中派人请求归顺，李世民派遣总管李世带兵前往并占据了管州城。
English: Qin King Li Shimin marched into Luoyang, and Guo Qing sent people to secretly request submission. Li Shimin dispatched the general manager Li Shimin to lead the troops to occupy Guanzhou City.

古文：庆欲与其妻偕来，妻曰： 主上使妾侍巾栉者，欲结君之心也。
现代文：郭庆打算和妻子一同归唐，他妻子说： 主上让我来服侍您，是想拴住你的心。
English: Guo Qing planned to return to Tang with his wife. His wife said, "The Lord asked me to serve you in order to win your heart."

古文：今君既辜付托，徇利求全，妾将如君何！
现代文：如今您既然辜负了主上的托付，追逐名利，保全自己，我将怎么对待您呢？
English: Now that you have betrayed the Lord's commission, pursued fame and fortune, and protected yourself, how will I treat you?

古文：若至长安，则君家一婢耳，君何用为！
现代文：假如到长安，我则不过是您家里的一个奴婢罢了，对您又有什么用！
English: If I go to Chang'an, I will be nothing more than a slave in your house, and of no use to you!

古文：愿送至洛阳，君之惠也。 
现代文：希望送我回洛阳，就是您对我的恩惠了。 
English: I hope that sending me back to Luoyang is your favor to me.

古文：庆不许。
现代文：郭庆不答应妻子的请求。
English: Guo Qing did not agree to his wife's request.

古文：庆出，妻谓侍者曰： 若唐遂胜郑，则吾家必灭；郑若胜唐，则吾夫必死。
现代文：郭庆离去，他妻子对侍者说： 如果唐最终胜了郑，我们家必然灭族；郑如果胜了唐，我丈夫定然是死罪。
English: When Guo Qing left, his wife said to the waiter: "If Tang finally defeats Zheng, our family will surely be exterminated; if Zheng defeats Tang, my husband will surely be sentenced to death.

古文：人生至此，何用生为！ 
现代文：人生至此，活着有什么用！ 
English: Life is so short, what's the use of living!

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是便自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：庚戌，庆来降，复姓杨氏，拜上柱国、郇国公。
现代文：庚戌，郭庆前来降唐，又恢复姓杨，唐拜他为上柱国，封爵郇国公。
English: Geng Yao and Guo Qing came to reduce Tang and restore the surname Yang. Tang worshiped him as a pillar state and made him a peer of the state.

古文：时世充太子玄应镇虎牢，军于宋、汴之间，闻之，引兵趣管城，李世勣击却之。
现代文：当时，王世充的太子王玄应镇守虎牢关，驻扎在荥泽与汴水之间，听说杨庆降唐，带兵开赴管城，李世击退了王玄应。
English: At that time, Wang Xuanying, the prince of Wang Shichong, was stationed between Heze and Surabaya, guarding the pass of the tiger. Hearing that Yang Qing had surrendered Tang, he led his troops to Guancheng, and Li Shichong repulsed Wang Xuanying.

古文：使郭孝恪为书说荣州刺史魏陆，陆密请降。
现代文：李世让郭孝恪写书信劝说王世充的荥州刺史魏陆，魏陆秘密地请求归顺。
English: Li Shih asked Guo Xiao to write a letter to persuade Wang Shichong's Zhangzhou assassin Wei Lu, and Wei Lu secretly requested to surrender.

古文：玄应遣大将军张志就陆征兵，丙辰，陆擒志等四将，举州来降。
现代文：王玄应派大将军张志到魏陆处征兵，丙辰，魏陆活捉张志等四员将领，举州前来投降。
English: Wang Xuan should send the general Zhang Zhi to the Wei Lu office to recruit soldiers, and the four generals including Bing Chen and Wei Lu should capture Zhang Zhi alive and come to Zhouzhou to surrender.

古文：阳城令王雄帅诸堡来降，秦王世民使李世勣引兵应之，以雄为嵩州刺史，嵩南之路始通。
现代文：郑阳城县令王雄率领诸堡来降唐。秦王李世民派李世带兵接应，任命王雄为嵩州刺史，这才打通了嵩山以南的道路。
English: Zhengyangcheng County ordered Wang Xiong to lead the fortresses to bring down the Tang Dynasty. Qin King Li Shimin sent Li Shimin to bring troops to meet him and appointed Wang Xiong as the governor of Songzhou, which opened the road south of Songshan.

古文：魏陆使张志诈为玄应书，停其东道之兵，令其将张慈宝且还汴州，又密告汴州刺史王要汉使图慈宝，要汉斩慈宝以降。
现代文：魏陆让张志伪造王玄应的信，命王玄应的东路兵马停止前进，命令将领张慈宝暂且返回汴州，又秘密通知郑汴州刺史王要汉让他杀了张慈宝，王要汉斩了张慈宝投降了唐。
English: Wei Lu asked Zhang Zhi to forge Wang Xuanying's letter, ordered Wang Xuanying's East Road soldiers and horses to stop advancing, ordered the general Zhang Cibao to temporarily return to Zhangzhou, and secretly informed Zheng Xuanzhou's assassin Wang Yaohan to let him kill Zhang Cibao. Wang Yaohan beheaded Zhang Cibao and surrendered to Tang.

古文：玄应闻诸州皆叛，大惧，奔还洛阳。
现代文：王玄应得知各州都已反叛，大为惊恐，逃回洛阳。
English: When Wang Xuan learned that all the states had rebelled, he was greatly alarmed and fled back to Luoyang.

古文：诏以要汉为汴州总管，赐爵郳国公。
现代文：唐下诏任命王要汉为汴州总管，赐爵国公。
English: Under the Tang Dynasty, Wang Yaohan was appointed the governor of Zhangzhou and given the title of prince.

古文：王弘烈据襄阳，上令金州总管府司马泾阳李大亮安抚樊、邓以图之。
现代文：王弘烈占据襄阳，唐高祖命令金州总管府司马泾阳人李大亮安抚樊州、邓州，以伺机攻取襄阳。
English: Wang Hongli occupied Yangyang, and Tang Gaozhu ordered Li Dayang, the secretary of the General Administration of Jinzhou, to pacify Ganzhou and Dengzhou and wait for an opportunity to capture Yangyang.

古文：十一月，庚申，大亮攻樊城镇，拔之，斩其将国大安，下其城栅十四。
现代文：十一月庚申，李大亮进攻并攻克樊城镇，王弘烈手下将领国大安被斩首，李大亮又攻破十四座城栅。
English: In November of Goshun, Li Dayang attacked and conquered the town of Zou, Wang Hongli's general Guo Da'an was beheaded, and Li Dayang broke through fourteen city gates.

古文：萧铣性褊狭，多猜忌。
现代文：萧铣性格狭隘，爱猜忌。
English: Xiao Yao is narrow-minded and suspicious.

古文：诸将恃功恣横，好专诛杀，铣患之，乃宣言罢兵营农，实欲夺诸将之权。
现代文：他手下的将领依仗功劳恣意骄横，又好擅自杀人，萧铣对此深感不安，于是宣布命令要裁军兴农，实际是想夺诸将的兵权。
English: The generals under his command were arbitrary and arrogant, relying on their own merits, and were also willing to commit suicide. Xiao Yu was deeply disturbed by this, so he announced an order to disarm and rejuvenate the peasantry. In reality, he wanted to seize the generals' military power.

古文：大司马董景珍弟为将军，怨望，谋作乱；事泄，伏诛。
现代文：大司马董景珍之弟是将军，心怀不满，谋划反叛。事情泄露，被杀死。
English: Chief Secretary Ma Dongjingzhen's younger brother, a general, was disgruntled and plotted a rebellion. The affair leaked out and he was killed.

古文：景珍时镇长沙，铣下诏赦之，召还江陵。
现代文：董景珍当时镇守长沙，萧铣下诏赦免了董景珍，召他返回江陵。
English: At that time, Dong Jingzhen was the town guard of Changsha. Xiao Yu pardoned Dong Jingzhen and called him to return to Gangneung.

古文：景珍惧，甲子，以长沙来降；诏峡州刺史许绍出兵应之。
现代文：董景珍惧怕，甲子，以长沙投降唐，唐诏令峡州刺史许绍出兵接应。
English: Dong Jingzhen was afraid, so he surrendered to Tang at Changsha, and Tang ordered Xiaozhou's general Xu Shao to send troops to meet him.

古文：云州总管郭子和，先与突厥、梁师都相连结，既而袭师都宁朔城，克之。
现代文：云州总管郭子和早先与突厥、梁师都互相联合结盟，后来又袭击并攻克了梁师都的宁朔城。
English: Guo Zi, the governor of Yunnan, had earlier allied with the Turks and Liang Shidu, and later attacked and conquered the Ningshuo City of Liang Shidu.

古文：又得突厥衅隙，遣使以闻，为突厥候骑所获。
现代文：又刺探到突厥裂隙，派人报告给唐，被突厥的巡逻骑兵查获。
English: He also probed into the Turkic rift and sent a report to Tang, which was seized by the Turkish patrol cavalry.

古文：处罗可汗大怒，囚其弟子升。
现代文：突厥处罗可汗非常愤怒，囚禁了郭子和之弟郭子升。
English: The Turkic Department of Luo Khan was very angry and imprisoned Guo Zixing and his brother Guo Zisheng.

古文：子和自以孤危，请帅其民南徙，诏以延州故城处之。
现代文：郭子和因为自己孤立无援，形势危急，向唐请求率领所辖百姓南迁，唐下诏将他们安置在延州旧城。
English: Guo Zi, because he was isolated and helpless, and the situation was critical, asked the Tang Dynasty to lead the people under his jurisdiction to move south, and the Tang Dynasty ordered them to settle in the old city of Yanzhou.

古文：张举、刘旻之降也，梁师都大惧，遣其尚书陆季览说突厥处罗可汗曰： 比者中原丧乱，分为数国，势均力弱，故皆北面归附突厥。
现代文：张举、刘降唐，梁师都十分恐慌，派遣他的尚书陆季览游说突厥处罗可汗说： 近来中原丧乱，分裂成几个国家，势力都不强，因此都北面称臣归附突厥。
English: Zhang Qiu, Liu Qian Tang, and Liang Shi were all very panicked. Luo Khan, who sent his Shang Shu Lu Qizhan to lobby the Turkic Department, said: Recently, the Central Plains have been in turmoil, divided into several countries, and the forces are not strong. Therefore, they all claim to be subordinate to the Turks.

古文：今定杨可汗既亡，天下将悉为唐有。
现代文：如今定杨可汗刘武周已经败亡，天下都将为唐所有。
English: Now Ding Yang Khan Liu Wu Zhou has been defeated, and the whole world will belong to Tang.

古文：师都不辞灰灭，亦恐次及可汗。不若及其未定，南取中原，如魏道武所为，师都请为乡导。 
现代文：师都躲不过覆灭，恐怕也会轮到可汗，可汗不如趁唐还未平定天下，像魏道武帝那样南下夺取中原，师都愿作向导。 
English: The Shih Tzu could not avoid being overthrown, and I am afraid it will also be the turn of the Khan. The Khan might as well take advantage of the fact that the Tang Dynasty has not yet pacified the world, and go south to seize the Central Plains like Emperor Wei Daowu. The Shih Tzu is willing to be a guide.

古文：处罗从之，谋使莫贺咄设入自原州，泥步设与师都入自延州，处罗入自并州，突利可汗与奚、、契丹、靺鞨入自幽州，会窦建德之师自滏口西入，会于晋、绛。
现代文：处罗可汗听从了他的建议，策划莫贺咄设从原州、泥步设和梁师都从延州侵唐，突利可汗与奚、契丹、诸部从幽州南下，会合窦建德的军队，从滏口向西，会师于晋、绛二州。
English: Zhenluo Khan listened to his suggestion and planned to invade the Tang Dynasty with Moga from Wonju, Mokpo and Liang from Yanzhou, and Turi Khan with Zou, Khitan and others from Yuzhou in the south to join Dou Jiande's army, and from Hekou to the west to join Jin and Zou in the two states.

古文：莫贺咄者，处罗之弟咄苾也；突利者，始毕之子什钵苾也。
现代文：莫贺咄设就是处罗可汗之弟咄；突利可汗就是始毕可汗之子什钵。
English: Moga was the younger brother of Shiloh Khan; Turi Khan was the son of Shibi Khan.

古文：处罗又欲取并州以居杨政道，其群臣多谏，处罗曰： 我父失国，赖隋得立，此恩不可忘！ 
现代文：处罗可汗又打算取并州以安置杨政道，他部下群臣大多以为不可，处罗说： 我父亲丧失了国家，靠隋朝才得立为汗，如此大恩不能忘却。 
English: Sheng Luo Khan also planned to annex the state to settle Yang Zhengdao. Most of his subordinates and ministers thought it was impossible. Sheng Luo said: My father lost the country, and he had to rely on the Sui Dynasty to become a khan. Such a great favor cannot be forgotten.

古文：将出师而卒。
现代文：处罗可汗淮备出兵时去世。
English: General Luo Khan Huai died while preparing to send troops.

古文：义成公主以其子奥射设丑弱，废之，更立莫贺咄设，号颉利可汗。
现代文：义成公主因为处罗的儿子奥射设面貌丑陋身体虚弱，废掉奥射设，改立莫贺咄设，号颉利可汗。
English: Princess Yicheng, because of the ugly appearance and frail body of her son, Oshaket, abolished Oshaket and replaced it with Moga Ushaket, also known as Uri Khan.

古文：乙酉，颉利遣使告处罗之丧，上礼之如始毕之丧。
现代文：乙酉，颉利派遣使者向唐通报了处罗去世的消息，高祖以对待始毕可汗丧事一样的礼节处理处罗可汗的丧事。
English: At the same time, Goryeo dispatched an envoy to Tang to inform the news of the death of Shiloh. Gaozhu handled the funeral of Shiloh Khan with the same etiquette as the funeral of Shiloh Khan.

古文：戊子，安抚大使李大亮取王世充沮、华二州。
现代文：戊子，唐安抚大使李大亮取得王世充的沮、华二州之地。
English: Wu Zi, Tang's pacification ambassador Li Dayang won Wang Shichong's defeat and the land of Huazhou.

古文：是月，窦建德济河击孟海公。
现代文：本月，窦建德渡过黄河攻击孟海公。
English: This month, Dou Jiande crossed the Yellow River to attack Meng Haigong.

古文：初，王世充侵建德黎阳，建德袭破殷州以报之。
现代文：当初，王世充侵占了窦建德的黎阳，窦建德便攻破殷州报复王世充。
English: At first, Wang Shichong occupied Dou Jiande's Liyang, and Dou Jiande defeated Yinzhou to retaliate against Wang Shichong.

古文：自是二国交恶，信使不通。
现代文：从此郑、夏两国关系恶化，不再互派使节通信。
English: From then on, relations between Zheng and Xia deteriorated, and they no longer sent envoys to each other.

古文：及唐兵逼洛阳，世充遣使求救于建德。
现代文：等到唐军逼近洛阳，王世充派遣使节向窦建德求救。
English: When the Tang army approached Luoyang, Wang Shichong sent an envoy to Dou Jiande for help.

古文：建德中书侍郎刘彬说建德曰； 天下大乱，唐得关西，郑得河南，夏得河北，共成鼎足之势。
现代文：窦建德的中书侍郎刘彬劝他说： 天下大乱，唐得关西，郑得河南，夏得河北，形成三足鼎立之势。
English: Liu Bin, Dou Jiande's secretary, advised him: The world is in turmoil, Tang has Kansai, Zheng has Henan, and Xia has Hebei, forming a three-pronged trend.

古文：今唐举兵临郑，自秋涉冬，唐兵日增，郑地日蹙，唐强郑弱，势必不支。郑亡，则夏不能独立矣。
现代文：如今唐起兵攻郑，从秋到冬，唐军日见增多，郑国地域日益缩小，唐强郑弱，势必不能支撑，郑灭亡，夏也不能单独存立了。
English: Now that Tang has raised an army to attack Zheng, from autumn to winter, Tang's army is increasing day by day, Zheng's territory is shrinking day by day, Tang is strong, Zheng is weak, it cannot be supported, Zheng is doomed, and Xia cannot survive alone.

古文：不如解仇除忿，发兵救之，夏击其外，郑攻其内，破唐必矣。
现代文：不如放弃仇怨，发兵救郑，夏从外袭击，郑自内反攻，一定能打败唐军。
English: It would be better to give up the grudge, send troops to rescue Zheng, attack Xia from the outside, and counterattack Zheng from within, and surely defeat the Tang army.

古文：唐师既退，徐观其变，若郑可取则取之，并二国之兵，乘唐师之老，天下可取也。 
现代文：唐军退兵后，再慢慢观察形势变化，如果郑可取就取郑，合并两国的兵力，趁唐军疲劳，可以夺取天下！ 
English: After the Tang army withdraws, then slowly observe the changes in the situation. If Zheng is preferable, take Zheng, merge the forces of the two countries, and take advantage of the fatigue of the Tang army to seize the world!

古文：建德从之，遣使诣世充，许以赴援。
现代文：窦建德听从此论，派人见王世充，答应出师援救。
English: Dou Jiande listened to this theory, sent someone to see Wang Shichong, and promised to send a division to rescue him.

古文：又遣其礼部侍郎李大师等诣唐，请罢洛阳之兵，秦王世民留之，不答。
现代文：窦建德又派遣礼部侍郎李大师等人赴唐军，请求唐停止进攻洛阳，秦王李世民留下使者，但不予答复。
English: Dou Jiande also sent Master Li, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and others to the Tang army, requesting Tang to stop attacking Luoyang, and Qin King Li Shimin to leave an envoy, but did not reply.

古文：十二月，辛卯，王世充许、亳等十一州皆请降。
现代文：十二月辛卯，王世充境内的许、亳等十一州均请求降唐。
English: In December Xinwu, Wang Shicheng's territory of Xu, Ya and other eleven states all requested to surrender to Tang.

古文：壬辰，燕郡王李艺又击窦建德军于笼火城，破之。
现代文：壬辰，唐燕郡王李艺再次在笼火城攻打窦建德的军队，并打败了夏军。
English: In Imjin, Li Yi, the king of Tangyan County, once again attacked Dou Jiande's army in the city of fire and defeated Xia Jun.

古文：辛丑，王世充随州总管徐毅举州降。
现代文：辛丑，王世充任命的随州总管徐毅举州降唐。
English: Xinxiu, Wang Shichong appointed Suizhou governor Xu Yi to lead the Suizhou to Tang.

古文：癸卯，峡州剌史许绍攻萧铣荆门镇，拔之。
现代文：癸卯，唐峡州刺史许绍进攻萧铣的荆门镇，守取该镇。
English: At the same time, Xu Shao of Tangxia attacked Jingmen Town of Xiao Wei, and successfully defended the town.

古文：绍所部与梁、郑邻接，二境得绍士卒，皆杀之，绍得二境士卒，皆资给遣之。
现代文：许绍所辖峡州与王世充的郑、萧铣的梁两国接壤，郑、梁抓获许绍的部下，全部杀死；而许绍抓获郑、梁的士兵，却发放路费全部遣返。
English: Xiaozhou, which was under the jurisdiction of Xu Shao, bordered the two countries of Wang Shichong's Zheng and Xiao Yan's Liang. Zheng and Liang captured Xu Shao's subordinates and killed them all; while Xu Shao captured Zheng and Liang's soldiers, but paid all the travel expenses to repatriate them.

古文：敌人愧感，不复侵掠，境内以安。
现代文：敌人深感羞愧，也颇受感动，不再侵犯骚扰，峡州境内得以安定。
English: The enemy was deeply ashamed, but also quite moved, no longer intruded and harassed, and the territory of Gorges was stabilized.

古文：萧铣遣其齐王张绣攻长沙，董景珍谓绣曰：  前年醢彭越，往年杀韩信 ，卿不见之乎？
现代文：萧铣派他手下的齐王张绣攻打长沙的董景珍，董景珍对张绣说： 你没见西汉高祖 去年彭越，往年杀韩信 这样诛杀功臣的事吗？
English: Xiao Yu sent his subordinate Qi Wang Zhang Xiu to attack Dong Jing Zhen in Changsha. Dong Jing Zhen said to Zhang Xiu: "Didn't you see the Western Han Dynasty Emperor Gaozu kill Han Xin last year in Pengyue and in previous years?

古文：何为相攻！ 
现代文：为什么要互相攻杀呢？ 
English: Why should they attack and kill each other?

古文：绣不应，进兵围之。
现代文：张绣不作回答，进兵包围了长沙。
English: Zhang Xiu did not reply, and the marching troops surrounded Changsha.

古文：景珍欲溃围走，为麾下所杀；铣以绣为尚书令。
现代文：董景珍打算突围，为部下杀死。萧铣任命张绣为尚书令。
English: Dong Jingzhen planned to break out of the encirclement and kill for his subordinates. Xiao Yao appointed Zhang Xiu as Shang Shuling.

古文：绣恃功骄横，铣又杀之。
现代文：张绣仗着有功，骄傲蛮横，萧铣又杀了张绣。
English: Zhang Shuxiu was a meritorious soldier, proud and insolent. Xiao Yao killed Zhang Shuxiu again.

古文：由是功臣诸将皆有离心，兵势益弱。
现代文：经过此事后，梁国的功臣及众将领都产生了离异的念头，兵力也日益衰弱。
English: After this incident, Liang Guo's meritorious soldiers and generals all had the idea of defection, and the army became increasingly weak.

古文：王世充遣其兄子代王琬、长孙安世诣窦建德报聘，且乞师。
现代文：王世充派遣兄长的儿子代王王琬与长孙安世前往窦建德处修好，并且请求出师救援。
English: Wang Shichong sent his elder brother's son, Wang Wanghong, and his eldest grandson, An Shih, to Dou Jiande's place to mend fences and ask him to come to the rescue.

古文：突厥伦特勒在并州，大为民患，并州总管刘世让设策擒之。
现代文：突厥的伦特勒在并州，是百姓的一大祸患，唐并州总管刘世让设计活捉了伦特勒。
English: The Turkic Lentler in the unified state is a great calamity for the people. Liu Shijian, the head of the unified state of the Tang Dynasty, caught the Lentler alive.

古文：上闻之，甚喜。
现代文：唐高祖闻讯非常高兴。
English: Tang Gaozu was very happy to hear the news.

古文：张道源从窦建德在河南，密遣人诣长安，请出兵攻洺州以震山东。
现代文：张道源随窦建德在河南，派人秘密赴长安，请唐出兵攻打窦建德夏国的都城州，以震慑山东地区。
English: Zhang Daoyuan followed Dou Jiande in Henan and secretly sent someone to Chang'an to ask Tang to send troops to attack Dou Jiande's capital city of Xia, in order to shock the Shandong region.

古文：丙午，诏世让为行军总管，使将兵出土门，趣洺州。
现代文：丙午，唐下诏任命刘世让为行军总管，由他统领军队出土门关，奔赴州。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Liu Shizhen was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the march, and he led the army out of the earthen gate and rushed to the state.

古文：己酉，瓜州刺史贺拔行威执骠骑将军达奚暠，举兵反。
现代文：己酉，瓜州剌史贺拔行威捉住骠骑将军达奚，起兵反叛。
English: Guazhou, Guazhou, Guazhou, Guazhou, Guazhou, Guazhou, Guazhou, Guazhou, Guazhou, Guazhou, Guazhou

古文：是岁，李子通渡江攻沈法兴，取京口。
现代文：当年，李子通渡过长江攻打沈法兴，夺取京口。
English: In that year, Li Zi Tong crossed the Yangtze River to attack Shen Faxing and captured Jingkou.

古文：法兴遣其仆射蒋元超拒之，战于庱亭，元超败死，法兴弃毘陵，奔吴郡。
现代文：沈法兴派遣他的仆射蒋元超抵抗李子通，在亭交战，蒋元超兵败身亡，沈法兴放弃毗陵，逃奔吴郡。
English: Shen Faxing sent his servant Jiang Yuanchao to resist Li Zitong and fought in the pavilion. Jiang Yuanchao was defeated and killed, and Shen Faxing abandoned Viling and fled to Wu County.

古文：于是丹杨、毘陵等郡皆降于子通。
现代文：于是丹阳、毗陵等郡都投降了李子通。
English: As a result, Danyang, Viling and other counties all surrendered to Li Zi Tong.

古文：子通以法兴府掾李百药为内史侍郎、国子祭酒。
现代文：李子通任命原沈法兴的府掾李百药为内史侍郎、国子祭酒。
English: Li Zi Tong appointed the former Shen Fa Xing's prefect Li Baiyao as Naishi waiter and Kuniko festival wine.

古文：杜伏威遣行台左仆射辅公祏将卒数千攻子通，以将军阚稜、王雄诞为副。
现代文：杜伏威派行台左仆射辅公率数千士卒攻李子通，任命将军阚棱、王雄诞为辅公的副将。
English: Du Fu Wei sent thousands of troops led by his left-hand man, Shao Fu Gong, to attack Li Zi Tong, and appointed generals Zou Ren and Wang Yuxing as Vice Generals to Fu Fu Gong.

古文：公祐渡江攻丹杨，克之，进屯溧水，子通帅众数万拒之。
现代文：辅公渡过长江攻打丹阳，攻克丹阳后进军驻扎于溧水，李子通率数万兵马拒敌。
English: Fu Gong crossed the Yangtze River to attack Danyang. After conquering Danyang, the army was stationed in Surabaya. Li Zikong led tens of thousands of soldiers and horses to resist the enemy.

古文：公祐简精甲千人，执长刀为前锋；又使千人踵其后，曰： 有退者即斩之。 
现代文：辅公挑选了一千名精兵手持长刀作前锋，又命一千人跟随在后，对这一千人说： 有退却的，立即斩首。 
English: Fu Gong selected a thousand elite soldiers armed with long swords to be the vanguard, and ordered another thousand to follow behind, saying to this thousand: If anyone retreats, behead him immediately.

古文：自帅馀众，复居其后。
现代文：自己带领其余的兵马，又在这千人的后面。
English: He himself led the rest of the soldiers and horses, and he also set out behind the thousand men.

古文：子通为方陈而前，公祐前锋千人殊死战，公祐复张左右翼以击之，子通败走，公祐逐之，反为所败，还，闭壁不出。
现代文：李子通列方阵前进，辅公的前锋部队殊死战斗，辅公又以左右翼攻击李子通的方阵，李子通兵败逃跑，辅公追逐反而被李子通所败，返回军营，坚壁不出战。
English: Li Zitong advanced in a phalanx, Fu Gong's forward troops fought to the death, Fu Gong attacked Li Zitong's phalanx with his left and right wings, Li Zitong was defeated and fled, Fu Gong chased but was defeated by Li Zitong, returned to the camp, and did not fight.

古文：王雄诞曰： 子通无壁垒，又狃于初胜，乘其无备击之，可破也。 
现代文：王雄诞说； 李子通没有营寨壁垒，又满足于小胜，我们乘他不加防备袭击，可以打败他。 
English: Wang Xiongzhao said: Li Zitong has no fortified walls, and is content with a small victory. We can defeat him by taking advantage of his unprepared attack.

古文：公祐不从。
现代文：辅公不听。
English: Fu Gong didn't listen.

古文：雄诞以其私属数百人夜出击之，因风纵火，子通大败，降其卒数千人。
现代文：王雄诞便带自己的几百名士兵于夜晚袭击李子通，乘风势放火，李子通大败，数千士卒投降。
English: Wang Yuxi then led his several hundred soldiers to attack Li Zi Tong at night, taking advantage of the wind to set fire, Li Zi Tong was defeated, and thousands of soldiers surrendered.

古文：子通食尽，弃江都，保京口，江西之地尽入于伏威，伏威徙居丹杨。
现代文：李子通粮草食尽，放弃了江都，保守京口，于是江西地区全部为杜伏威所有，杜伏威迁居丹阳。
English: Li Zi Tong ran out of grain and grass, gave up Jiangdu, and kept Jingkou. As a result, Jiangxi region was all owned by Du Fuwei, and Du Fuwei moved to Danyang.

古文：子通复东走太湖，收合亡散，得二万人，袭沈法兴于吴郡，大破之。
现代文：李子通又向东逃往太湖，收拾散兵，得二万人，在吴郡袭击沈法兴，大败沈法兴。
English: Li Zi Tong also fled eastward to Taihu Lake, collected scattered soldiers, gained twenty thousand people, attacked Shen Faxing in Wuxi County, and defeated Shen Faxing.

古文：法兴帅左右数百人弃城走，吴郡贼帅闻人遂安遣其将叶孝辩迎之，法兴中涂而悔，欲杀孝辩，更向会稽。
现代文：沈法兴带几百个亲随放弃吴郡城逃走，吴郡贼帅闻人遂安派手下将领叶孝辩迎接沈法兴，沈法兴在半路又后悔，想杀了叶孝辩，改奔令稽。
English: Shen Fa Xing fled with several hundred of his relatives after giving up the county seat of Wuxi. Wenzhen, the warlord of Wuxi County, then sent his general Ye Xiaofei to meet Shen Fa Xing. Shen Fa Xing regretted it halfway and wanted to kill Ye Xiaofei, but changed his mind.

古文：孝辩觉之，法兴窘迫，赴江溺死。
现代文：叶孝辩发觉了沈法兴的意图，沈法兴处境很窘迫，于是投江而死。
English: Ye Xiaofei discovered Shen Faoxing's intention. Shen Faoxing was in a very difficult situation, so he threw himself into the river and died.

古文：子通军势复振，帅其群臣徙都馀杭，尽收法兴之地，北自太湖，南至岭，东包会稽，西距宣城，皆有之。
现代文：李子通的兵力重新强盛起来，便将都城迁到余杭，接收了沈法兴的全部地盘，北从太湖，南到五岭，东包会稽，西至宣城，全为其所有。
English: When Li Zitong's forces became strong again, he moved the capital to Yuhang and received all of Shen Faxing's territory, from Taihu Lake in the north, to Wuling in the south, to Baohe County in the east, and to Xuancheng in the west, all of which belonged to him.

古文：广、新二州贼帅高法澄、沈宝彻杀隋官，据州，附于林士弘，汉阳太守冯盎击破之。
现代文：广州和新州的贼帅高法澄、沈宝彻杀死隋朝的州官，占据二州，归附于林士弘。隋汉阳太守冯盎打败了二人。
English: Gao Fa Cheng and Shen Bao Che, the thieving generals of Guangzhou and Xinzhou, killed the state officials of the Sui Dynasty, occupied the two states, and were attached to Lin Shihong. Feng Ang, the governor of the Sui and Hanyang Dynasties, defeated the two.

古文：既而宝彻兄子智臣复聚兵于新州，盎引兵击之。
现代文：不久，沈宝彻兄长的儿子沈智臣重新在新州纠合兵力，冯盎带兵攻打沈智臣。
English: Soon after, Shen Baocher's brother's son, Shen Zhisen, once again entangled forces in Xinzhou, and Feng Ang led his troops to attack Shen Zhisen.

古文：战始合，盎免胄大呼曰： 尔识我乎？ 
现代文：贼兵刚刚汇合，冯盎脱下头盔大声喊道： 你们认识我吗？ 
English: The bandits had just converged, when Feng Ang took off his helmet and shouted loudly: "Do you know me?

古文：贼多弃仗肉袒而拜，遂溃，擒宝彻、智臣等，岭外遂定。
现代文：贼众大多数都放下兵仗赤膊行礼，于是溃散，冯盎活捉了沈宝彻、沈智臣等人，岭南地区于是得以平定。
English: Most of the bandits put down their weapons and bowed their heads, and then dispersed. Feng Ang captured Shen Bao Che, Shen Zhichen and others alive, and the Lingnan region was thus pacified.

古文：窦建德行台尚书令恒山胡大恩请降。
现代文：窦建德的行台尚书令恒山人胡大恩请求降唐。
English: Dou Jiande's emissary Shang Shu ordered the Hengshan people to petition Hu Daen for the fall of Tang.

古文：武德四年辛巳，公元六二一年春，正月，癸酉，以大恩为代州总管，封定襄郡王，赐姓李氏。
现代文：武德四年春季，正月癸酉，唐任命胡大恩为代州总管，封为定襄郡王，赐姓李。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of Wude, on the first day of the 1st month, Tang appointed Hu Dain as the chief administrator of Daizhou, named him the king of Dingxiang County, and gave him the surname Li.

古文：代州石岭之北，自刘武周之乱，寇盗充斥，大恩徙镇雁门，讨击，悉平之。
现代文：代州石岭以北，从刘武周起兵，充斥了寇盗，李大恩将治所迁至雁门，出兵征讨，平定了所有的寇盗。
English: To the north of Shiling in Daizhou, Liu Wu Zhou raised an army and the area was filled with bandits. Li Dayen moved the government office to Ganmen, sent out troops to fight and subdued all the bandits.

古文：稽胡酋帅刘屳成部落数万，为边寇；辛巳，诏太子建成统诸军讨之。
现代文：稽胡族酋长刘成部落有数万人，是唐边境的祸患，辛巳，唐高祖下诏命太子李建成统领各路兵马讨伐稽胡。
English: There are tens of thousands of people in the tribe of Liu Cheng, the chief of the Qinhu tribe, which is a scourge on the Tang border. It is a pity that the Tang Emperor issued an edict ordering Prince Li Jiancheng to lead soldiers and horses to fight Qinhu.

古文：王世充梁州总管程嘉会以所部来降。
现代文：王世充的梁州总管程嘉会带领部下前来降唐。
English: Wang Shichong's chief of Liangzhou, Cheng Jiahui, led his subordinates to come to Tang.

古文：杜伏威遣其将陈正通、徐绍宗帅精兵二千，来会秦王世民击王世充，甲申，攻梁，克之。
现代文：杜伏威派遣将领陈正通、徐绍宗带领二千精兵，与秦王李世民会师，攻打王世充。甲申，攻克梁县。
English: Du Fuwei dispatched generals Chen Zhengtong and Xu Shaosong, leading 2,000 elite soldiers, to attack Wang Shichong and Jiaxun and conquer Liang County with the Qin King Li Shimin's division.

古文：丙戌，黔州刺史田世康攻萧铣五州、四镇，皆克之。
现代文：丙戌，黔州刺史田世康攻打萧铣的五个州、四个镇，全部攻克。
English: Tian Shikang attacked five provinces and four towns in Xiaoqi, and conquered all of them.

古文：秦王世民选精锐千馀骑，皆皁衣玄甲，分为左右队，使秦叔宝、程知节、尉迟敬德、翟长孙分将之。
现代文：秦王李世民挑选一千多精锐骑兵，全部着黑衣黑甲，分为左右队，分别由秦叔宝、程知节、尉迟敬德、翟长孙统领。
English: Qin King Li Shimin selected more than a thousand elite cavalry, all dressed in black and divided into left and right teams, respectively led by Qin Shubao, Cheng Zhisie, Yi Xi Jingde and Zou Changsun.

古文：每战，世民亲被玄甲帅之为前锋，乘机进击，所向无不摧破，敌人畏之。
现代文：每次作战，李世民都亲自披上黑甲率领他们作为先锋，乘机进击，所向披靡，令敌人畏惧。
English: In every battle, Li Shimin personally put on black armor and led them as the vanguard, taking advantage of the opportunity to attack. He was invincible and made the enemy afraid.

古文：行台仆射屈突通、赞皇公窦轨将兵按行营屯，猝与王世充遇，战不利。秦王世民帅玄甲救之，世充大败，获其骑将葛彦璋，俘斩六千馀人，世充遁归。
现代文：行台仆射屈突通、赞皇公窦轨带兵巡行营屯，突然与王世充遭遇，交战失利，秦王李世民带领黑甲队救援，王世充大败，唐军俘获王世充的骑将葛彦璋，俘虏歼灭了六千多敌人。王世充逃跑回城。
English: The footman of the procession suddenly shot, praised the emperor, and led the troops to march through the camp, and suddenly encountered Wang Shicheng and lost the battle. The Qin king Li Shimin led the black armored team to rescue, Wang Shicheng was defeated, the Tang army captured Wang Shicheng's cavalry general Ge Yanqian, and the prisoners destroyed more than six thousand enemies. Wang Shicheng fled back to the city.

古文：李靖说赵郡王孝恭以取萧铣十策，孝恭上之。
现代文：李靖向赵郡王李孝恭献十条平萧铣的计策，李孝恭将十策奏报朝廷。
English: Li Jing presented ten stratagems of Ping Xiaoqi to Li Xiaogong, the king of Zhao County, and Li Xiaogong reported the ten stratagems to the imperial court.

古文：二月，辛卯，改信州为夔州，以孝恭为总管，使大造舟舰，习水战。
现代文：二月辛卯，唐改信州为夔州，任命李孝恭为夔州总管，命他大造船舰，训练军队练习水战。
English: In February of Xinwu, the Tang Dynasty changed the name of Xinzhou to Zhangzhou, appointed Li Xiaogong as the general manager of Zhangzhou, and ordered him to build a large ship to train the army to practice naval warfare.

古文：以孝恭未更军旅，以靖为行军总管，兼孝恭长史，委以军事。
现代文：又因为李孝恭不熟悉军事，任命李靖为行军总管，兼任李孝恭的长史，将军事委任给李靖掌管。
English: In addition, because Li Xiaogang was not familiar with the military, he appointed Li Jing as the general manager of the march. He also served as Li Xiaogang's long-term secretary and delegated the military to Li Jing.

古文：靖说孝恭悉召巴、蜀酋长子弟，量才授任，置之左右，外示引擢，实以为质。
现代文：李靖劝李孝恭征召巴、蜀地区所有酋长的子弟，量才任用，安置在身边，对外显示是引用提拔，实际作为人质。
English: Li Jing advised Li Xiaogong to conscript the sons of all the chiefs in the Ba and Shu regions. They were only appointed and placed next to each other. To the outside world, it appeared that they were being promoted, but in reality, they were hostages.

古文：王世充太子玄应将兵数千人，自虎牢运粮入洛阳，秦王世民遣将军李君羡邀击，大破之，玄应仅以身免。
现代文：王世充的太子王玄应率领几千人，从虎牢运粮到洛阳，秦王李世民派遣将军李君羡截击，大败王玄应的运粮军，王玄应只身逃脱。
English: Wang Xuanying, the prince of Wang Shichong, led several thousand people to transport grain from the tiger prison to Luoyang. Qin King Li Shimin dispatched General Li Junen to intercept and defeat Wang Xuanying's grain transport army. Wang Xuanying escaped alone.

古文：世民使宇文士及奏请进围东都，上谓士及曰： 归语尔王：今取洛阳，止欲息兵。克城之日，乘舆法物，图籍器械，非私家所须者，委汝收之。其馀子女玉帛，并以分赐将士。 
现代文：李世民派宇文士及回朝上奏请求进军包围东都洛阳，高祖对宇文士及说： 回去跟你们秦王殿下说：这次攻打洛阳，不获全胜，决不收兵，攻陷东都之际，隋朝皇室的车驾仪仗、图书簿籍以及器械，除去各人所必须的，就都委托你收集起来，其他的男男女女玉器布帛，都用来分赐给将士们。 
English: Li Shimin sent Yu Wenshi and Hui Zhaozhong to appeal to Yu Wenshi and said: Go back and tell your Qin royal highnesses: This attack on Luoyang will not be a complete victory, and we will never withdraw our troops. On the occasion of the fall of the eastern capital, we entrust you with the collection of the Sui dynasty's royal chariots, books, and instruments, as well as the removal of everyone's necessities. The other men's and women's jade cloth bags are used to distribute to the soldiers.

古文：辛丑，世民移军青城宫，壁垒未立，王世充帅众二万自方诸门出，凭故马坊垣堑，临谷水以拒唐兵，诸将皆惧。
现代文：辛丑，李世民将军营转移到青城宫，尚未修好壁垒，王世充就率二万兵马从方诸门而出，凭借旧马坊的墙垣沟堑，靠近水抵御唐军，唐诸将全都惊慌。
English: Li Shimin's battalion was transferred to Qingcheng Palace, and the walls had not yet been repaired. Wang Shichong led twenty thousand soldiers and horses out of the gates of Fangzhu, relying on the walls and ravines of the old horse farm to resist the Tang army near the water. The Tang generals were all panicked.

古文：世民以精骑陈于北邙，登魏宣武陵以望之，谓左右曰： 贼势窘矣，悉众而出，徼幸一战，今日破之，后不敢复出矣！ 
现代文：李世民让精骑在北邙山列阵，自己登上北魏宣武帝陵观察郑军，对身边的人说： 贼子的处境已窘迫了，倾巢而出，想侥幸打一战，今日打败他，以后他再也不敢出战了！ 
English: Li Shimin let the elite riders line up in Beilun Mountain, and climbed onto the Northern Wei Emperor Xuanwu's tomb to observe the Zheng army. He said to the people around him: The thief's situation is already in distress, he has come out of the nest, he wants to fight a battle by chance, defeat him today, and he will never dare to go to war again!

古文：命屈突通帅步卒五千渡水击之，戒通曰： 兵交则纵烟。 
现代文：李世民命令屈突通率领五千步兵过谷水进击王世充，并告诫屈突通道： 军队一交锋立即放烟火。 
English: Li Shimin ordered Qu Jutong to lead five thousand infantry across the valley to attack Wang Shichong, and warned Qu Jutong: If there is a clash of armies, immediately let off fireworks.

古文：烟作，世民引骑南下，身先士卒，与通合势力战。
现代文：待到起烟，李世民带领骑兵向南冲击，身先士卒，与屈突通汇合兵力奋力战斗。
English: Waiting for the smoke to rise, Li Shimin led the cavalry to attack southward, leading the way, and joined forces with Qudutong to fight hard.

古文：世民欲知世充陈厚薄，与精骑数十冲之，直出其背，众皆披靡，杀伤甚众。
现代文：李世民想了解王世充军阵兵力分布情况，率几十精锐骑兵冲入敌阵，一直冲到敌阵背后，不可阻挡，杀伤很多敌人。
English: Li Shimin wanted to know the distribution of troops in Wang Shichong's army, so he led dozens of elite cavalry to rush into the enemy's line, rushing all the way to the back of the enemy's line, unstoppable, and killing many enemies.

古文：既而限以长堤，与诸骑相失，将军丘行恭独从世民，世充数骑追及之，世民马中流矢而毙。
现代文：不久因长堤所限，李世民和众骑兵走散唯有将军丘行恭跟随着李世民，几名王世充的骑兵追上来，李世民的坐骑中箭倒毙。
English: Soon, due to the limitation of the long embankment, Li Shimin and the cavalry dispersed. Only General Yau Xing Gong followed Li Shimin, and several of Wang Shichong's cavalry caught up. Li Shimin's mount was killed by an arrow.

古文：行恭回骑射追者，发无不中，追者不敢前。
现代文：丘行恭调转马头向回骑，射击追赶的郑兵，箭无虚发，追兵不敢向前。
English: He turned his horse's head and rode back, shooting at the pursuing Zheng soldiers. His arrows were flawless, and the pursuing soldiers did not dare to move forward.

古文：乃下马以授世民，行恭于马前步执长刀，距跃大呼，斩数人，突陈而出，得入大军。
现代文：于是丘行恭下马将自己的坐骑让给李世民，自己在马前步行，手执长刀跳跃大喊斩杀几人，冲出王世充军阵，得以回归唐军大部队。
English: As a result, Yau Xingyong dismounted and gave his horse to Li Shimin. He walked in front of the horse, holding a long sword, jumped and shouted to kill several people, rushed out of Wang Shichong's army, and was able to return to the Tang army.

古文：世充亦帅众殊死战，散而复合者数四，自辰至午，世充兵始退。
现代文：王世充也率领部下殊死战斗，军队几次三番打散后重又集合起来，从上午七八点钟直到中午，王世充的军队才退军。
English: Wang Shichong also led his subordinates in a desperate battle. The army was dispersed several times and then reassembled. From seven or eight in the morning until noon, Wang Shichong's army did not retreat.

古文：世民纵兵乘之，直抵城下，俘斩七千人，遂围之。
现代文：李世民挥军追击，直到城下，俘虏歼灭了七千人，于是包围了洛阳。
English: Li Shimin led his army in pursuit until they reached the outskirts of the city. The captives annihilated seven thousand people, thus encircling Luoyang.

古文：骠骑将军段志玄与世充兵力战，深入，马倒，为世充兵所擒，两骑夹持其髻，将渡洛水，志玄踊身而奋，二人俱坠马。志玄驰归，追者数百骑，不敢逼。
现代文：唐骠骑将军段志玄奋力与王世充的士卒交战，深入敌阵，坐骑倒下，段志玄被王世充的士兵俘获，两名骑兵夹着他并抓住他的发髻，准备过河，段志玄奋勇跳起，那两名骑兵都掉下马来，段志玄骑上马奔回唐军，后面有几百名骑兵追赶，但不敢靠近。
English: Tang Jun's cavalry general, Duan Zhixuan, fought hard against Wang Shichong's soldiers, went deep into the enemy lines, and his horse fell down. Duan Zhixuan was captured by Wang Shichong's soldiers. Two cavalrymen held him and grabbed his hairpin, preparing to cross the river. Duan Zhixuan bravely jumped up. The two cavalrymen both fell off their horses. Duan Zhixuan mounted his horse and ran back to the Tang army. Several hundred cavalrymen chased after him, but they did not dare to approach.

古文：初，骠骑将军王怀文为唐军斥候，为世充所获，世充欲慰悦之，引置左右。
现代文：早先，骠骑将军王怀文在唐军中任侦察敌情的斥候，被王世充俘获，王世充想笼络他，将他安置在身边。
English: Earlier, the cavalry general Wang Huaiwen, who served as a scout in the Tang army to investigate the enemy situation, was captured by Wang Shizhen. Wang Shizhen wanted to woo him and place him at his side.

古文：壬寅，世充出右掖门，临洛水为陈，怀文忽引槊刺世充，世充衷甲，槊折不能入，左右猝出不意，皆愕眙不知所为。
现代文：壬寅，王世充出右掖门，临洛水列阵，王怀文忽然举起长矛刺王世充，王世充衣内穿有护甲，长矛折断未能刺进，周围的人猝不及防，都惊呆了不知所措。
English: In Jinyin, Wang Shicheng opened the right gate, Linluo water lined up, Wang Huaiwen suddenly raised a spear to stab Wang Shicheng, Wang Shicheng was wearing armor, the spear was broken and could not be pierced, and the people around were caught off guard and were stunned.

古文：怀文走趣唐军，至写口，追获，杀之。
现代文：王怀文逃往唐军，到写口被追兵赶上，遇害。
English: Wang Huaiwen fled to the Tang army, and was chased by soldiers to Shigou, where he was killed.

古文：世充归，解去衷甲，袒示群臣曰： 怀文以槊刺我，卒不能伤，岂非天所命乎！ 
现代文：王世充回城，脱下内甲，袒露给群臣看，并说： 怀文用长矛刺我，竟没能伤我，这难道不说明天命归属于我吗！ 
English: Wang Shichong returned to the city, took off his inner armor, and showed it to the courtiers, saying, "Waiwen stabbed me with a spear, but he couldn't hurt me. Doesn't this mean that the fate of heaven belongs to me?"

古文：先是，御史大夫郑颋不乐仕世充，多称疾不预事，至是谓世充曰： 臣闻佛有金刚不坏身，陛下真是也！
现代文：先前，御史大夫郑不愿作王世充的官，总是说有病不参预政事，这时，对王世充说： 我听说佛有金刚不坏身，陛下就是这金刚不坏身。
English: Previously, Dr. Zheng did not want to be Wang Shichong's official, always saying that he was ill and did not want to participate in pre-government affairs. At that time, he said to Wang Shichong: I heard that the Buddha had a diamond that was not bad, Your Majesty is this diamond that is not bad.

古文：臣实多幸，得生佛世，愿弃官削发为沙门，服勤精进，以资陛下之神武。 
现代文：我真是很幸运，能够生于佛世，我愿意放弃官爵削发为僧，勤于修持佛道，以助您的神武。 
English: I am really very lucky to be born in the Buddha's world. I am willing to give up my official title and become a monk and diligently practice Buddhism to help you.

古文：世充曰： 国之大臣，声望素重，一旦入道，将骇物听。
现代文：王世充说： 你是国家大臣，一向声高望重，一旦进身佛门，必将惊世骇俗。
English: Wang Shichong said, "You are the Minister of State, and you have always been highly respected. Once you enter the Buddhist gate, you will surely shock the world.

古文：俟兵革休息，当从公志。 
现代文：等到战事过后，一定尊重您的志向。 
English: When the war is over, I will certainly respect your wishes.

古文：颋固请，不许。
现代文：郑再三请求，王世充不许。
English: Zheng repeatedly asked Wang Shizhen not to do it.

古文：退谓其妻曰： 吾束发从官，志慕名节，不幸遭遇乱世，流离至此，侧身猜忌之朝，累足危亡之地，智力浅薄，无以自全。
现代文：郑下朝后对他的妻子说： 我自幼年为官，一心向往名誉节操，不幸遭遇乱世，落到如此地步，身处这互相猜忌的朝廷，立足于危亡的国家，而智力有限，无法保全自身。
English: Zheng said to his wife: I have been an official since I was a child, yearning for honor and discipline. Unfortunately, I have encountered a chaotic world and have fallen to this point. I am in this mutually suspicious court, based in a country in peril, and my intelligence is limited, unable to protect myself.

古文：人生会当有死，早晚何殊？姑从吾所好，死亦无憾！ 
现代文：人生在世总有一死，早晚又有什么差别，姑且遂了我的心愿，死了也没有什么可遗憾的。 
English: Life in the world always has a death, sooner or later what is the difference, even if I have achieved my heart's desire, there is nothing to regret about death.

古文：遂削发被僧服。
现代文：于是他剃发穿上了僧服。
English: So he shaved his head and put on a monk's robe.

古文：世充闻之，大怒曰： 尔以我为必败，欲苟免邪？
现代文：王世充闻讯，大为震怒，说： 你认为我必然失败，想以此逃脱一死吗？
English: Wang Shifeng heard the news and was very angry, saying: "Do you think that I will inevitably fail, and do you want to escape death?

古文：不诛之，何以制众！ 
现代文：不杀了你，又怎么能制众！ 
English: Without killing you, how can they control the masses!

古文：遂斩颋于市。
现代文：于是在闹市中将郑斩首。
English: So he beheaded General Zheng in the middle of the city.

古文：颋言笑自若，观者壮之。
现代文：郑临刑谈笑自如，旁观者很佩服他的胆量。
English: Zheng Linjie talks and laughs freely, and onlookers admire his courage.

古文：诏赠王怀文上柱国、朔州刺史。
现代文：唐下诏赠王怀文上柱国、朔州刺史。
English: The imperial edict issued by the Tang Dynasty presented to Wang Huaiwen the top pillar of the country and the history of Shuozhou.

古文：并州安抚使唐俭密奏： 真乡公李仲文与妖僧志觉有谋反语，又娶陶氏之女以应桃李之谣。
现代文：并州安抚使唐俭秘密奏报： 真乡公李仲文与蛊惑人心的和尚志觉有谋反的言论，李仲文又娶陶氏女子以符桃李的谣言。
English: And the secret report of the state's pacification of Tang Jian: Li Zhongwen, the real townspeople, and the demagogic monk Zhixue had a rebellious speech, and Li Zhongwen married a Tao woman to match the rumor of the peach.

古文：谄事可汗，甚得其意，可汗许立为南面可汗。及在并州，赃贿狼藉。 
现代文：向突厥可汗献殷勤，很合他的心意，可汗应允立其为南面可汗；李仲文在并州，贪赃枉法收受贿赂，声名狼藉。 
English: It was to his liking that he courted the Turkic khan, and the khan agreed to make him the khan of the south; Li Zhongwen was notorious for taking bribes in the annexation of Zhuhai.

古文：上命裴寂、陈叔达、萧瑀杂鞠之。
现代文：唐高祖命裴寂、陈叔达、萧共同审讯。
English: Tang Gao's ancestors Pei Jia, Chen Shuda and Xiao were jointly interrogated.

古文：乙巳，仲文伏诛。
现代文：乙巳，李仲文被斩。
English: Soon after, Li Zhongwen was beheaded.

古文：庚戌，王泰弃河阳走，其将赵夐等以城来降。
现代文：庚戌，王泰放弃河阳逃跑，他手下的将领赵等人以河阳城降唐。
English: Geng Yao, Wang Tai abandoned Heyang and fled, and his generals Zhao and others took Heyang City to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：别将单雄信、裴孝达与总管王君廓相持于洛口，秦王世民帅步骑五千援之，至轘辕，雄信等遁去，君廓追败之。
现代文：王世充的别将单雄信、裴孝达和唐总管王君廓在洛口相持，秦王李世民率五千步骑兵援助王君廓，行到辕，单雄信等人逃遁，王君廓追上打败了他们。
English: Wang Shichong's troops pinned down Shan Xiongxin, Pei Xiaoda, and Wang Juncao, the general of Tang, in Luokou. Qin King Li Shimin led five thousand foot cavalry to aid Wang Juncao. When they reached Luokou, Shan Xiongxin and the others fled. Wang Juncao caught up with them and defeated them.

古文：壬子，延州总管段德操击刘屳成，破之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：壬子，唐延州总管段德操进攻并打败了刘成，歼敌一千多。
English: In Imzi, the Tang and Yanzhou General Administration Department attacked and defeated Liu Cheng, annihilating more than a thousand enemies.

古文：乙卯，王世充怀州刺史陆善宗以城降。
现代文：乙卯，王世充的怀州刺史陆善宗以怀州城降唐。
English: On the other hand, Lu Zhenzong, the Waizhou ruler of Wang Shichong, used Waizhou Castle to invade Tang.

古文：秦王世民围洛阳宫城，城中守御甚严，大砲飞石重五十斤，掷二百步，八弓弩箭如车辐，镞如巨斧，射五百步。
现代文：秦王李世民包围了洛阳宫城。城中王世充的防御十分严密，大炮可以射五十斤重的石头，投出二百步远，有八个弓的弩，箭杆像车辐，箭镞如同臣斧，可以射五百步远。
English: King Li Shimin of the Qin Dynasty besieged the palace city of Luoyang. The defense of King Shizhong in the city was very tight. The cannon could shoot fifty-pound stones and throw them two hundred paces away. There were eight bows, the arrow shafts were like car spokes, and the arrow shafts were like vassal axes and could shoot five hundred paces away.

古文：世民四面攻之，昼夜不息，旬馀不克。
现代文：李世民四面攻城，昼夜不停，十几天未能攻克。
English: Li Shimin besieged the city on all sides, day and night, and failed to conquer it for ten days.

古文：城中欲翻城者凡十三辈，皆不果发而死。
现代文：城中先后有十三个人想以城倒戈应唐，均没有来得及发动就被杀死。
English: There were thirteen people in the city who wanted to overthrow the Tang with the city, but they were all killed before they could start.

古文：唐将士皆疲弊思归，总管刘弘基等请班师。世民曰： 今大举而来，当一劳永逸。
现代文：唐军将士都疲惫不堪想回关中，总管刘弘基等人请求班师回朝，李世民说： 如今大举而来，应当一劳永逸。
English: The Tang soldiers were too tired to want to go back to the pass, and the general manager Liu Hongji and others requested the team to return to the North. Li Shimin said: "Now that you have come in a big way, you should leave once and for all."

古文：东方诸州已望风款服，唯洛阳孤城，势不能久，功在垂成，奈何弃之而去！ 
现代文：洛阳以东的各州已望风归服，唯有洛阳一座孤城，其势已不能持久，成功在即，怎么能放弃而回朝呢？ 
English: The states to the east of Luoyang have surrendered to the wind. Only Luoyang, a lonely city, its power can no longer be sustained, success is imminent. How can it give up and return to the imperial court?

古文：乃下令军中曰： 洛阳未破，师必不还，敢言班师者斩！ 
现代文：于是下令全军： 洛阳不破，决不回军，再有胆敢提起班师的一律斩首。 
English: Then he ordered the whole army: Luoyang will not be broken, never return to the army, and anyone who dares to raise the division will be beheaded.

古文：众乃不敢复言。
现代文：众人才不敢再提班师一事。
English: Many talented people don't dare to mention their class teacher again.

古文：上闻之，亦密敕世民使还，世民表称洛阳必可克，又遣参谋军事封德彝入朝面论形势。
现代文：高祖听说后，也下密敕让李世民还军，李世民上表说明洛阳必定可以攻克，又派参谋军事封德回朝面陈军前形势。
English: After Gaozu heard about this, he also secretly ordered Li Shimin to return to the army. Li Shimin made it clear that Luoyang could definitely be conquered, and sent a staff officer from the Military Fongde back to the North to assess the military situation.

古文：德彝言于上曰： 世充得地虽多，率皆羁属，号令所行，唯洛阳一城而已，智尽力穷，克在朝夕。
现代文：封德对皇上说： 王世充得到的地方虽然多，但都不过是略有联系的部属，实际号令所能管辖的只不过洛阳一城而已，他已经智尽力穷，克城之日就在近期之内。
English: Feng De said to the emperor: Although Wang Shichong has obtained many places, they are only slightly connected subordinates. The actual order can only govern Luoyang City. He has done his best, and the day of Luoyang City is in the near future.

古文：今若旋师，贼势复振，更相连接，后必难图！ 
现代文：现在如果回师，他的势力就会重新振作起来，再加上各地互相联合，以后想要消灭他就难了！ 
English: If he returns now, his forces will be reinvigorated, and if various regions unite with each other, it will be difficult to eliminate him in the future!

古文：上乃从之。
现代文：于是高祖听从李世民的建议。
English: The emperor listened to Jia Dongzhi's opinion.

古文：世民遣世充书，谕以祸福；世充不报。
现代文：李世民写信给王世充，晓以祸福利害，王世充没有回复。
English: Li Shimin wrote a letter to Wang Shicheng, saying that Wang Shicheng did not reply.

古文：戊午，王世充郑州司兵沈悦遣使诣左武候大将军李世勣请降。
现代文：戊午，王世充的郑州司兵沈悦派人到唐左武侯大将军李世处请降。
English: In the afternoon, Wang Shichong's Zhengzhou Sifu Shen Yue sent someone to Tang Zuowu's grand marshal Li Shide to ask him to surrender.

古文：左卫将军王群廓夜引兵袭虎牢，悦为内应，遂拔之，获其荆王行本及长史戴胄。
现代文：唐左卫将军王君廓夜晚带兵攻击虎牢，沈悦作内应，于是唐夺取了虎牢，抓获了郑国的荆王王行本及其长史戴胄。
English: Wang Junku, the general of Tang's Left Guard, attacked the Tiger's Lair at night with his soldiers, and Shen Yue responded to him. As a result, Tang captured the Tiger's Lair and captured Jing Wang Wang Xingben of Zheng and his long history of wearing the yoke.

古文：悦，君理之孙也。
现代文：沈悦是沈君理的孙子。
English: Shen Yue is the grandson of Shen Junli.

古文：窦建德克周桥，虏孟海公。
现代文：窦建德攻克了周桥，俘虏了孟海公。
English: Dou Jiande conquered Zhouqiao and captured Meng Haigong.

