古文：窦仪，字可象。蓟州渔阳人。
现代文：窦仪字可象，蓟州渔阳人。
English: The syllables of Douyi are like those of a fisherman from Zhangzhou.

古文：曾祖逊，玉田令。
现代文：其曾祖父窦逊，任过玉田令。
English: His great-grandfather, Dou Xun, served as the governor of Tamada Province.

古文：祖思恭，妫州司马。
现代文：其祖父窦思恭，任过妫州司马。
English: His grandfather Dou Sikyong was once the secretary of Zhangzhou.

古文：父禹钧，与兄禹锡皆以词学名。
现代文：其父窦禹钧，与兄禹锡都以词学闻名。
English: His father Dou Ufan and his brother Uxi are both famous for their philology.

古文：禹钧，唐天佑末起家幽州掾，历沂、邓、安、同、郑、华、宋、澶州支使判官。
现代文：禹钧，唐时天末期以幽州掾起家，历任沂、邓、安、同、郑、华、宋、澶诸州支使判官。
English: Ufan, who started his family in Yuzhou at the end of the Tang Dynasty, successively served as the judge of the Zhuzhou branch of the envoys of Zhou, Deng, An, Tong, Zheng, Hua, Song, and Zou.

古文：周初，为户部郎中，赐金紫。
现代文：后周初期，任户部郎中，赐给金紫朝服。
English: At the beginning of the second week of the month, he was appointed as a junior member of the household department and was given a gold and purple imperial robe.

古文：显德中，迁太常少卿、右谏议大夫致仕。
现代文：显德年间，升任太常少卿、右谏议大夫退休。
English: During Hende's reign, he was promoted to the position of Taijo Shokei (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs) and retired from the position of Ukyo Horyo Dokufu (Minister of the Right).

古文：仪十五能属文，晋天福中举进士。
现代文：窦仪十五岁就能写文章，后晋天福年间中进士。
English: Dou Yi was able to write articles at the age of fifteen, and later became a junior high school student during the reign of Tianfu.

古文：侍卫军帅景延广领夔州节度，表为记室。
现代文：侍卫军主将景延广兼任夔州节度，上表推荐他为记室。
English: The head of the Imperial Guards, Jing Yanguang, also served as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the above table recommends him as the recorder.

古文：延广后历滑、陕、孟、郓四镇，仪并为从事。
现代文：延广后来历任滑、陕、孟、郓四州节度，窦仪一直任从事。
English: Later, Yan Guang successively served as the governor of the four prefectures of Nanning, Shaanxi, Meng and Fujian, and has been engaged in Dou Yi.

古文：开运中，杨光远以青州叛，时契丹南侵，博州刺史周儒以城降，光远与儒遣人引契丹轻骑于马家渡渡河。
现代文：开运年间，杨光远占据青州叛乱，当时契丹正南下侵犯，博州刺史周儒出城投降，杨光远及周儒派人引契丹轻骑在马家渡渡黄河。
English: During the beginning of the campaign, Yang Guangyuan occupied the Qingzhou rebellion. At that time, the Khitan army was invading the south, the Bozhou governor Zhou Ru surrendered, and Yang Guangyuan and Zhou Ru sent people to lead the Khitan army to cross the Yellow River in the horse-drawn carriage.

古文：时延广掌卫兵，颜衎知州事，即遣仪入奏。
现代文：当时延广掌管禁军，颜絗主持政事，派遣窦仪入朝上奏。
English: At that time, Yan Guang was in charge of the imperial army, Yan Xun presided over the government affairs, and sent Dou Yi to the imperial court.

古文：仪谓执政曰： 昨与衎论事势，有所预虑，所以乘驿昼夜不息而来。
现代文：窦仪对执政大臣说： 昨天我与颜絗讨论事势，有些考虑，所以乘驿车昼夜不停赶来。
English: Dou Yi said to the ruling minister: Yesterday, I discussed the situation with Yan Qi, and I had some considerations, so I took a tuk-tuk and kept coming around the clock.

古文：国家若不以良将重兵控博州渡，必恐儒引契丹逾东岸与光远兵合，则河南危矣。 俄而儒果导契丹渡河，增置垒栅。
现代文：国家如果不派良将控制博州渡口，恐怕周儒一定会引契丹兵渡到东岸与光远会师，那样河南就危险了。 不久周儒果然引导契丹兵渡过黄河，增置栅栏。
English: If the state did not send Liang to control the Bozhou ferry port, I am afraid that Zhou Ru will definitely lead the Khitan soldiers to the east bank to join forces with Guangyuan, and then Henan will be in danger.Shortly after, Zhou Ru did indeed guide the Khitan soldiers to cross the Yellow River and install additional fences.

古文：少帝军河上，即遣李守贞等率兵万人，水陆并进，守汶阳，据要害。
现代文：少帝驻军黄河上游，派遣李守贞等人率领一万多人，水陆并进，固守汶阳，占据要害。
English: The young emperor stationed troops in the upper reaches of the Yellow River and dispatched Li Shuzhen and others to lead more than ten thousand people, marching on land and sea, holding fast to Wenyang and occupying the key.

古文：契丹果大至，击走之。
现代文：契丹兵果然攻来，李守贞部把他们打败逃走了。
English: The Khitan soldiers did indeed attack, and Li Shou Zhenbu defeated them and fled.

古文：汉初，召为左补阙、礼部员外郎。
现代文：后汉初期，召窦仪入朝任右补阙、礼部员外郎。
English: In the early days of the Later Han Dynasty, Douyi was summoned to the imperial court to serve as the Right Auxiliary Bishop and the member of the etiquette club, Wairo.

古文：周广顺初，改仓部员外郎、知制诰。
现代文：后周广顺初年，改任仓部员外郎、知制诰。
English: Later, in the first year of Zhou Guangshun, he was reassigned as a warehouse clerk, Wairo, and Chisetsuko.

古文：未几，召为翰林学士。
现代文：不久，授任翰林学士。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：周祖幸南御庄宴射，坐中赐金紫。
现代文：周太祖在南御庄宴射，席中赐给窦仪金紫朝服。
English: Zhou Taizu held a banquet at the Southern Imperial Villa, and presented Dou Yi with a gold and purple imperial robe.

古文：历驾部郎中、给事中，并充职。
现代文：历任驾部郎中、给事中，并充任别的职务。
English: Successive chauffeurs have been in the middle, in the middle of things, and in other positions.

古文：刘温叟知贡举，所取士有覆落者，加仪礼部侍郎，权知贡举。
现代文：刘温叟主持贡举，所录取的进士有人落选了，朝廷加任窦仪为礼部侍郎，暂代主持贡举。
English: Liu Wenqi presided over the tribute, and some of the admitted scholars were not elected. The imperial court appointed Dou Yi as the etiquette attendant, temporarily presiding over the tribute.

古文：仪上言： 请依晋天福五年制，废明经、童子科。
现代文：窦仪上言说 ：希望依照后晋天福五年的旧制，废除明经、童子科。
English: Dou Yi said at the top of his speech, "I hope to follow the old system of five years after ascending the throne, and abolish the study of Ming Dynasty scriptures and children's studies."

古文：进士省卷，令纳五轴以上，不得有神道碑志之类；帖经对义，有三通为合格；却复尽试。
现代文：进士省卷，要交纳五篇作品以上，不得有神道碑志之类；帖、经、对、义，有三样通过为合格；再参加殿试。
English: For the provincial examination, more than five works must be submitted, and there must be no Shinto epitaphs or the like; three works, namely, a poem, a sutra, a couplet, and a rhyme, must be passed; and then take part in the hall examination.

古文：其落第者，分为五等：以词理纰缪之甚者为第五等，殿五举；其次为第四等，殿三举；以次稍可者为第三、第二、第一等，并许次年赴举。
现代文：落第者分为五等：以词、理非常纰缪的为第五等，殿五举；其次为第四等，殿三举；以依次稍微可以的为第三、第二、第一等，允许他们都到次年赴考。
English: Those who failed were divided into five grades: those who excelled in vocabulary and reasoning were given the fifth grade, five points; those who were second were given the fourth grade, three points; and those who were slightly better were given the third, second, and first grades, allowing them to take the exam the following year.

古文：其学究，请并《周易》、《尚书》为一科，各对墨义三十道；《毛诗》依旧为一科，亦对墨义六十道。
现代文：学究科，请合并《周易》、《尚书》为一科，各回答三十道墨义题；《毛诗》依旧为一科，也回答六十道墨义题。
English: For academic subjects, please combine "Zhou Yi" and "Shang Shu" into one subject, each answering 30 questions; "Mao Shi" is still a subject, and also answers 60 questions.

古文：及第后，并减为七选集。
现代文：录取后，一并减为七选集。
English: After admission, it was reduced to seven selections.

古文：诸科举人，第一场十否，殿五举；第二、第三场十否，殿三举；二场内有九否，殿一举。
现代文：各科举人，第一场考试得了十个否的，殿五举；第二、第三场得了十个否的，殿三举；三场内得有九个否的，殿一举。
English: For each subject examination, those who got ten noes in the first examination will be promoted to the fifth grade; those who got ten noes in the second and third examinations will be promoted to the third grade; those who got nine noes in the three examinations will be promoted to the first grade.

古文：解试之官坐其罪。
现代文：送考官予以治罪。
English: The sending examiner shall be punished accordingly.

古文：进士请解，加试论一首，以五百言以上为准。 奏可。
现代文：进士请求任职，加试论策一篇，以五百字以上为准。 
English: If a candidate requests to be appointed to a post, he or she is required to write an essay of at least 500 words.

古文：俄以父病，上表解官。
现代文：皇上采纳了这一意见。不久因父亲有病，上表请求解除职务。
English: The Emperor accepted this opinion, and soon, because of his father's illness, petitioned to be relieved of his duties.

古文：世宗亲加慰抚，手封金丹，俾赐其父。
现代文：世宗亲自慰抚他，亲手赏给金丹，让他转交他的父亲。
English: Sejong personally comforted him, and personally gave the gold to Jintan so that he could give it to his father.

古文：父卒，归葬洛阳。
现代文：他的父亲去世后，归葬洛阳。
English: After his father died, he was buried in Luoyang.

古文：诏赐钱三十万，米麦三百斛。
现代文：诏令赐给他三十万钱，米麦三百斛。
English: The imperial edict gave him 300,000 yuan and 300 mu of rice and barley.

古文：终丧，召拜端明殿学士。
现代文：守丧满期，召他入朝授任端明殿学士。
English: At the end of his term of mourning, he was summoned to the imperial court to be awarded the title of Duanming palace bachelor.

古文：从征淮南，判行在三司，世宗以其饷馈不继，将罪之，宰相范质救解得免。
现代文：跟从世宗进攻南唐，任判行在三司，世宗因为他饷馈不继，打算治他的罪，宰相范质解救他才得以免罪。
English: Following Shizong's attack on Southern Tang, Ren's sentence was carried out in the Third Division. Shizong intended to punish him because he did not continue to give gifts, but he was exonerated by the Prime Minister.

古文：淮南平，判河南府兼知西京留守事。
现代文：淮南平定后，任判河南府兼知西京留守事。
English: After Huainan was pacified, he was ordered to stay in Henan and West Beijing.

古文：恭帝即位，迁兵部侍郎，充职。
现代文：恭帝即帝位，升任兵部侍郎，充任别职。
English: Emperor Kyo was enthroned, and he was promoted to the position of attendant of the military department and assigned to other positions.

古文：俄使南唐，既至，将宣诏，会雨雪，李景请于庑下拜受，仪曰： 仪获将国命，不敢失旧礼。
现代文：不久出使南唐，到了南唐，即将宣示诏命，正好下雪，李景请求在廊檐下拜受，窦仪说 ：仪接受国家使命，不敢违背旧礼。
English: Soon he was dispatched to Southern Tang. When he arrived in Southern Tang, he was about to announce the imperial edict. It happened to be snowing. Li Jing requested to be worshipped under the eaves of the corridor. Dou Yi said, "I accept the national mission and dare not violate the old rituals."

古文：傥以沾服失容，请俟他日。 景即拜命于庭。
现代文：如果以朝服受淋失容，请等到日后再拜。 
English: If you are embarrassed to wear a morning suit, please wait until later.

古文：建隆元年秋，迁工部尚书，罢学士，兼判大理寺。
现代文：李景就在庭中拜受诏命。建隆元年秋天，升任工部尚书，罢去学士职务，兼任判大理寺。
English: Li Jing bowed in court to receive the imperial edict. In the autumn of the first year of the Jianlong Dynasty, he was promoted to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, dismissed from his position as a scholar, and concurrently appointed as the judge of Dali Temple.

古文：奉诏重定《刑统》，为三十卷。
现代文：奉诏重新修定《刑统》，成了三十卷。
English: The "Code of Criminal Procedure" was revised and made into 30 volumes.

古文：会翰林学士王著以酒失贬官，太祖谓宰相曰： 深严之地，当得宿儒处之。 范质等对曰： 窦仪清介重厚，然已自翰林迁端明矣。 太祖曰： 非斯人不可处禁中，卿当谕以朕意，勉令就职。 即日再入翰林为学士。
现代文：正好翰林学士王著因酒醉失态被贬官。太祖对宰相说 ：深严之地，应当由宿旧儒臣居住。 范质等人回答说： 窦仪清介重厚，但已经从翰林选任端明殿学士了。 太祖说 ：非这个人不能居禁中，你当去表明我的心意，勉令他就职。 当天再次进入翰林任学士。
English: It just so happened that the scholar-king of Hanlin was demoted because of a drunken gaffe. The great-grandfather said to the prime minister, "A place of profound severity should be inhabited by a veteran Confucianist." The standard and others replied, "Dou Yi Qing Sui is a dignified person, but he has been selected from Hanlin to be the scholar-king of Duanming Palace." The great-grandfather said, "If this person cannot stay in confinement, you should go to show my intentions and urge him to take up the post." On the same day, he entered Hanlin again to serve as a scholar.

古文：乾德二年，范质等三相并罢。
现代文：乾德二年，范质等三位宰相都被罢免。
English: In the second year of Qiande, the three prime ministers including Ganji were all dismissed.

古文：越三日，始命赵普平章事。
现代文：过了三天，才任命赵普为平章事。
English: It took three days before Zhao Pu was appointed to the post.

古文：制书既下，太祖问翰林学士曰： 质等已罢，普敕何官当署？ 承旨陶谷时任尚书，乃建议相位不可以久虚，今尚书乃南省六官之长，可以署敕。
现代文：诏令既成，太祖问翰林学士说： 范质等人已被罢免，赵普的任命敕令哪位官员当署名。 承旨陶谷当时任尚书，于是建议相位不可以久虚，现在尚书是南省六官之长，可以署敕。
English: After the edict was issued, the great-great-grandfather asked Han Lin, a scholar, saying, "Parameters and others have been dismissed, Zhao Pu's appointment order has been issued, which official should sign the order." At the time of issuing the order, Tao Gu was in the position of Shang Shu, so he suggested that the position should not be vacant for a long time. Now, Shang Shu is the head of the six officials of the Southern Province, and he can sign the order.

古文：仪曰： 谷所陈非承平之制，皇弟开封尹、同平章事，即宰相之任。 太祖曰： 仪言是也。 即命太宗署敕赐之。
现代文：窦仪说： 陶谷的陈请并非天下承平时的制度，皇弟开封尹、同平章事，这是宰相的职务。 太祖说 ：窦仪的话正确。 就命令太宗署敕赐给赵普。
English: Douyi said, "Tao Gu's invitation to Chen is not the same as the system in peacetime, the imperial brothers Kaifeng Yin and Tongping Zhangji, this is the prime minister's duty." The great-grandfather said, "Douyi's words are correct," and ordered the Taizong Agency to give Zhao Pu.

古文：俄加礼部尚书。
现代文：不久加任窦仪为礼部尚书。
English: Soon after, Dou Yi was appointed as the head of the etiquette department.

古文：时御史台议，欲以左右仆射合为表首，太常礼院以东宫三师为表首。
现代文：当时御史台建议，想以左右仆射合为表首，太常礼院以东宫三师为表首。
English: At that time, the Imperial Historian's Office suggested that they would like to use the left and right minstrels as the head of the table, and the Imperial Household Agency would like to use the East Palace Three Divisions as the head of the table.

古文：仪援典故，以仆射合为表首者六，而谓三师无所据。
现代文：窦仪援引典故，以仆射合为表首者有六次，而以三师为表首者没有根据。
English: Dou Yi quoted the allusion that there were six times when the leader of the table was the minstrel, but there was no basis for the leader of the table to be the third division.

古文：朝议是之。
现代文：朝廷舆论赞同他的观点。
English: After discussion, the Imperial Court agreed with his opinion.

古文：四年秋，知贡举。
现代文：乾德四年秋天，主持贡举。
English: In the autumn of Qiande's fourth year, he presided over the tribute.

古文：是冬卒，年五十三，赠右仆射。
现代文：这年冬天去世，终年五十三岁，追赠右仆射。
English: He died this winter, at the age of fifty-three, and was posthumously awarded the Right Palm.

古文：仪学问优博，风度峻整。
现代文：窦仪学问渊博，治学严谨。
English: The study of Dou Yi is profound, and the study is rigorous.

古文：弟俨、侃、偁、僖，皆相继登科。
现代文：其弟窦俨、窦侃、窦翶、窦僖，都相继考中进士。
English: His younger brothers Dou Qian, Dou Qian, Dou Qian, and Dou Qian all passed the junior high school entrance examination in succession.

古文：冯道与禹钧有旧，尝赠诗，有 灵椿一株老，丹桂五枝芳 之句，缙绅多讽诵之，当时号为窦氏五龙。
现代文：冯道与禹钧有旧情，曾经赠他诗，有这样一句： 灵椿一株老，丹桂五枝芳。 大臣们常吟诵这句诗，当时号称窦氏五龙。
English: Feng Dao had an old love affair with Ufan, and once gave him a poem with the following line: "Ling Tsubaki, one stem old, Dan Gui, five branches strong." The ministers often recited this poem, which was known as Dou's Five Dragons at the time.

古文：初，周祖平兖州，议将尽诛胁从者。
现代文：当初，周太祖平定兖州，打算杀尽胁从者。
English: At first, Zhou Taizu conquered Zhangzhou and planned to kill all the followers.

古文：仪白冯道、范质，同请于周祖，皆得全活。
现代文：窦仪告诉冯道、范质，一起向周太祖请求，这些人得以免死。
English: Dou Yi told Feng Dao and Fan Quan, and together they made a request to Zhou Taizu. These people were spared from death.

古文：显德中，太祖克滁州，世宗遣仪籍其府库。
现代文：显德年间，宋太祖攻克滁州，世宗派窦仪前去登记那里的府库财产。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiande, Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty conquered Bozhou, and Dou Yi of the Shizong sect went there to register the prefectural treasury property.

古文：太祖复令亲吏取藏中绢给麾下，仪曰： 太尉初下城，虽倾藏以给军士，谁敢言者。
现代文：太祖还命令亲吏拿府库中绢分给部下，窦仪说： 太尉刚刚攻下此城，即使把库藏全部分给军士，谁敢道论呢？
English: The great-great-grandfather also ordered the officials to divide the treasure of the prefectural treasury among their subordinates. Dou Yi said: The captain has just conquered this city, even if he gives the whole treasure to the sergeant, who would dare to argue about Taoism?

古文：今既著籍，乃公帑物也，非诏不可取。 后太祖屡对大臣称仪有执守，欲相之。
现代文：现在既然库藏已经登记，就是国家财产了，没有诏令不能强取。 后来太祖多次对大臣们称赞窦仪有执守，想任他为相。
English: Now that the treasury has been registered, it is state property and cannot be taken by force without a royal decree.Later, the great-grandfather praised Dou Yi's loyalty to the ministers many times and wanted to appoint him as the prime minister.

古文：太祖尝谓宰相曰： 近朝卿士，窦仪质重严整，有家法，闺门敦睦，人无谰语，诸弟不能及。
现代文：赵普忌讳窦仪刚直，于是援引薛居正为参知政事，窦仪去世后，太祖叹息着对身边大臣说 ：天为什么这样快就夺走我的窦仪啊。 
English: Zhao Puyi did not treat Douyi as an equal, so he invoked Xue Jizheng as a political advisor. After Douyi's death, the great-grandfather sighed and said to the ministers around him, "Why did God take away my Douyi so quickly?"

古文：僖亦中人材尔，偁有操尚，可嘉也。
现代文：因为可惜尚未重用他。他的弟弟窦侃，后汉乾初期考中进士，官至起居郎。窦僖，后周广顺初期考中进士，官至左补阙。
English: Because, unfortunately, he has not been reused. His younger brother Dou Kan, after Han Qian, was promoted to junior high school in the initial examination, and was promoted to the position of Kijiro. Dou Han, after Zhou Guangshun, was promoted to junior high school in the initial examination, and was promoted to the position of Zuo Shu.

古文：吕余庆，幽州安次人，本名胤，犯太祖偏讳，因以字行。
现代文：他的儿子窦諲、窦諹、窦诰，都考中进士，窦官至都官员外郎，窦讠易官至秘书丞。吕余庆，幽州安次人，本名胤，犯太祖名讳，因此以字行世。
English: His sons Dou Xuan, Dou Xuan, Dou Xuan, all passed the junior high school entrance examination, Dou Xuan was the second son of an official in the capital, Dou Xuan was promoted to the position of secretary. Lu Yuqing, Yuzhou Anzhi, whose real name was Tan, did not know the name of his great-grandfather, so he went through life with a pen name.

古文：祖兖，横海军节度判官。
现代文：他的祖父吕兖，任横海军节度判官。
English: His grandfather, Lv Ying, was an adjudicator of the Navy Festival.

古文：父琦，晋兵部侍郎。
现代文：他的父亲吕琦，在后晋任兵部侍郎。
English: His father, Lv Ying, later rose through the ranks to become a military aide.

古文：余庆以荫补千牛备身，历开封府参军，迁户曹掾。
现代文：吕余庆因先代官爵补任千牛备身，历任开封府参军，升户曹掾。
English: Lyu Yuqing, because of the previous government officials and nobles, was appointed to the post of Qian Niu Bei, and the successors of the Kaifeng government joined the army and were promoted to Cao Wei.

古文：晋少帝弟重睿领忠武军节度，以余庆为推官。
现代文：后晋少帝的弟弟石重睿兼任忠武军节度时，任命余庆为推官。
English: Later, when the younger brother of the Young Emperor of the Jin Dynasty, Shi Chongrui, also served as the commander of the loyal troops, he appointed Yu Qing as the commander.

古文：仕汉历周，迁濮州录事参军。
现代文：从后汉到后周一直任官，升濮州录事参军。
English: He served as an official from the Later Han to the Later Zhou, and joined the army in Shengzhou.

古文：太祖领同州节制，闻余庆有材，奏为从事。
现代文：太祖任同州节制时，听说余庆的才干，上奏任命为从事。
English: When the great-grandfather was appointed as the governor of Tongzhou, he heard of Yu Qing's talent and appointed him to be engaged in Shangso.

古文：世宗问曰： 得非尝为濮州纠曹者乎？ 即以为定国军掌书记。
现代文：世宗问说 ：难道不是曾经任濮州纠曹的那个人吗？ 就任命他为定国军掌书记。
English: Sejong asked, "Isn't that the man who was once the chief prosecutor of Bozhou?" and appointed him as the secretary of the army of Dingguo.

古文：世宗尝镇澶渊，濮为属郡，故知其为人也。
现代文：世宗曾经镇守澶渊，濮州是属郡，所以知道他的为人。
English: Sejong used to be the town guard of Gapyeong, Gyeongju is a county, so I know him as a person.

古文：太祖历滑、许、宋三镇，余庆并为宾佐。
现代文：太祖历任滑、许、宋三州节度，吕余庆一直任宾佐。
English: The great-grandfather successively served as the governor of the three states of Niu, Xu and Song, and Lyu Yuqing has always served as a guest assistant.

古文：及即位，自宋、亳观察判官召拜给事中，充端明殿学士。
现代文：太祖即位后，把他从宋、亳观察判官任上召入朝，任命为给事中，充任端明殿学士。
English: After the great-grandfather ascended the throne, he was summoned to the court from the Song and Jurchen observation judges and appointed to the court, serving as a scholar of the Duanming Palace.

古文：清泰中，琦亦居是职，官秩皆同，时人荣之。
现代文：后唐清泰年间，吕琦也任此职，官阶都相同，当时人认为他家很荣幸。
English: During the post-Tang and Qing Dynasties, Lv Ying also held this post, and the official ranks were the same. At that time, people thought his family was very honored.

古文：未几，知开封府。
现代文：不久，任知开封府。
English: Soon after, Ren Zhi opened the Imperial Palace.

古文：太祖征潞及扬，并领上都副留守。
现代文：太祖征讨潞州及扬州时，他都兼任上都副留守。
English: When Emperor Taizu was conquering Zhangzhou and Yangzhou, he stayed behind as both the emperor and vice-emperor.

古文：建隆三年，迁户部侍郎。
现代文：建隆三年，升任户部侍郎。
English: In the third year of Kenryu's reign, he was promoted to the position of household steward.

古文：丁母忧。
现代文：遭母丧。
English: Every mother's death is sad.

古文：荆湖平，出知潭州，改襄州，迁兵部侍郎、知江陵府。
现代文：荆湖平定后，出朝任知潭州，改任知襄州，升任兵部侍郎、知江陵府。
English: After Jinghu was pacified, he was appointed to Chitan Prefecture, changed to Chihang Prefecture, and was promoted to the position of Hyobushirou and Chigangryong Prefecture.

古文：召还，以本官参知政事。
现代文：召他回朝，以本官参知政事。
English: He was called back to the imperial court to participate in political affairs as a vassal.

古文：蜀平，命知成都府。
现代文：攻灭南唐后，任命他为知成都府。
English: After defeating the Southern Tang Dynasty, he was appointed as the governor of Zhicheng.

古文：时盗贼四起，军士恃功骄恣，大将王全斌等不能戢下。
现代文：当时盗贼四起，军队士兵恃功骄纵，大将王全斌等人不能收敛部下。
English: At that time, thieves were rampant, army soldiers were proud of their achievements, and General Wang Quanbin and others could not restrain their subordinates.

古文：一日，药市始集，街吏驰报有军校被酒持刃夺贾人物。
现代文：一天，药市刚刚开集，街吏驰报有军校喝醉酒持刀抢夺商贩货物。
English: One day, the drug market had just opened, and the street clerk reported that a military school was drunk and holding a knife to rob merchants of goods.

古文：余庆立捕斩之以徇，军中畏伏，民用按堵。
现代文：吕余庆立即派人捕捉来杀头示众，军中畏服，百姓安宁。
English: Lyu Yuqing immediately sent someone to capture and kill the head to show the public, the army was afraid, and the people were calm.

古文：就加吏部侍郎。
现代文：加任吏部侍郎。
English: He was also appointed as a chamberlain of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：归朝，兼剑南、荆南等道都提举、三司水陆发运等使。
现代文：回到朝廷后，兼任剑南、荆南等道都提举、三司水陆发运等使。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he concurrently served as the envoy of Jian'nan, Jing'nan and other provinces, as well as the envoy of the three departments of land and water transportation.

古文：开宝六年，与宰相更知政事印，旋以疾上表求解机务，拜尚书左丞。
现代文：开宝六年，与宰相交替执掌政事印，不久因病上表请求解除处理机务之任，授任他为尚书左丞。
English: For six years, Kai Bao held the reins of government alternately with the chancellor, and soon, due to illness, he requested to be relieved of the task of handling the machinery and was appointed as Shang Shuzhong.

古文：九年，卒，年五十。
现代文：开宝九年，去世，终年五十岁。
English: He died nine years after founding Kaibao, at the age of fifty.

古文：赠镇南军节度。
现代文：追赠镇海军节度使。
English: He was posthumously named the town's naval attaché.

古文：余庆重厚简易，自太祖继领藩镇，余庆为元僚。
现代文：余庆为人厚重简约，太祖历任藩镇节度，余庆任元僚。
English: Yu Qing is a man of great simplicity. His great-grandfathers served as feudal lords, and Yu Qing served as a general.

古文：及受禅，赵普、李处耘皆先进用，余庆恬不为意。
现代文：太祖受禅即位后，赵普、李处耘都先被提升任用，余庆丝毫不在意。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, Zhao Pu and Li Shuanqian were both promoted to higher positions, but Yu Qing did not care at all.

古文：未几，处耘黜守淄州，余庆自江陵还，太祖委曲问处耘事，余庆以理辨释，上以为实，遂命参知政事。
现代文：不久，处耘被贬镇守淄州，余庆从江陵回朝，太祖委婉地向他问起处耘的事，余庆以理替他辩护解释，太祖认为符合实情，于是任命他为参知政事。
English: Soon after, Yu Qing was demoted from Jiangling to Bozhou, and Yu Qing returned to the imperial court from Jiangling. The great-grandfather gently asked him about Yu Qing, and Yu Qing defended him with an explanation. The great-grandfather thought that it was true, so he appointed him as a political advisor.

古文：会赵普忤旨，左右争倾普，余庆独辨明之，太祖意稍解，时称其长者。
现代文：正好赵普忤逆圣旨，大臣们倾轧赵普，只有余庆替赵普辩明，太祖怒意稍微缓解，当时人们称余庆为长者。
English: Just as Zhao Pu'er went against the sacred edict, the ministers lashed out at Zhao Pu. Only Yu Qing argued on behalf of Zhao Pu. Taizu's anger eased slightly. At that time, people called Yu Qing an elder.

古文：至道中，以弟端为宰相，特诏赠侍中。
现代文：至道年间，朝廷任命他的弟弟吕端为宰相，特诏追赠余庆为侍中。
English: In the years leading up to his death, the imperial court appointed his younger brother Lü Duan as prime minister, and posthumously awarded Yu Qing the title of chamberlain.

古文：刘熙古，字义淳，宋州宁陵人，唐左仆射仁轨十一世孙。
现代文：刘熙古字义淳，宋州宁陵人，是唐朝左仆射刘仁轨十一代孙子。
English: Liu Xigu Zi Yi Jun, a native of Ningling, Songzhou, was the 11th generation grandson of Liu Renlu, a left-hand man of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：祖实进，尝为汝阴令。
现代文：他的祖父刘实进，曾经任汝阴县令。
English: His grandfather, Liu Shijin, was once the county magistrate of Ruyin County.

古文：熙古年十五，通《易》、《诗》、《书》；十九，通《春秋》、子、史。
现代文：熙古十五岁时，精通《易》、《诗》、《书》；十九岁时精通《春秋》、诸子、历史。
English: At the age of fifteen, Hegu was proficient in Yi, Poetry, and Books; at the age of nineteen, he was proficient in Spring and Autumn, Various Sons, and History.

古文：避祖讳，不举进士。
现代文：避祖父的名讳，不考进士。
English: He avoided his grandfather's reputation and did not take the entrance examination.

古文：后唐长兴中，以《三传》举。
现代文：后唐长兴年间，以《三传》受到推荐。
English: During the post-Tang Changxing period, "Three Stories" was recommended.

古文：时翰林学士和凝掌贡举，熙古献《春秋极论》二篇、《演论》三篇，凝甚加赏，召与进士试，擢第，遂馆于门下。
现代文：当时翰林学士和凝掌管贡举，熙古献上《春秋极论》二篇，《演例》三篇，和凝大加赞赏，召他参加进士考试，被录取，于是把他留在门下。
English: At that time, Hanlin Baccalaureate and Gonglian were in charge of the tribute, Xigu presented two "Spring and Autumn Extremes" and three "Examples," and Gongda praised him, called him to participate in the entrance examination, was admitted, and then left him under the door.

古文：清泰中，骁将孙铎以战功授金州防御使，表熙古为从事。
现代文：后唐清泰年间，猛将孙铎因战功授任金州防御使，上表推荐熙古为从事。
English: During the post-Tang and Qing dynasty, Sun Yat-sen was awarded the title of Jinzhou Defense Envoy for his military exploits, and the above table recommended that He Guo be engaged.

古文：晋天福初，铎移汝州，又辟以随。
现代文：后晋天福初年，王铎移任到汝州，又征召他为随从。
English: In the first year of Emperor Tianfu's reign, Wang Xi was transferred to Ruzhou and recruited as an attendant.

古文：熙古善骑射，一日，有抃集戟门槐树，高百尺，铎恶之，投以瓦石不去，熙古引弓一发，贯抃于树。
现代文：熙古擅长骑射，一天，有些号鸟鸟栖集在营门前槐树上，树高百尺，王铎厌恶号鸟鸟，用瓦石投击树木没有赶走，熙古引弓一发，箭射穿号鸟背把它钉在树上。
English: He Gu was good at riding and shooting. One day, some birds were gathered on the eucalyptus tree in front of the camp gate. The tree was a hundred feet high. Wang Yao was disgusted with the birds and did not drive them away by throwing stones at the tree. He Gu took a bow and shot an arrow through the bird's back and nailed it to the tree.

古文：铎喜，令勿拔矢，以旌其能。
现代文：王铎高兴，命令不要去此箭，以表扬他的才能。
English: Wang Yao was pleased and ordered not to go to this arrow to praise his talent.

古文：后二岁，铎卒，调补下邑令。
现代文：两年后，王铎去世，朝廷调他补任下邑令。
English: Two years later, Wang Yao died, and the imperial court transferred him to the post of deputy mayor.

古文：俄为三司户部出使巡官，领永兴、渭桥、华州诸仓制置发运。
现代文：不久任三司户部出使巡官，兼任永兴、渭桥、华州诸仓制置发运。
English: He was soon appointed as the dispatching inspector of the Third Division of the Household Department, and also served as the Yongxing, Fenqiao, and Huazhou warehouses.

古文：仕汉，为卢氏令。
现代文：在后汉做官，任卢氏令。
English: He served as an official in the Later Han Dynasty, and was appointed to the post of Lu.

古文：周广顺中，改亳州防御推官，历澶州支使。
现代文：后周广顺年间，改任亳州防御推官，历任澶州支使。
English: Later, during the Zhou Guangshun years, he was appointed as the defense officer of Zhangzhou, and successively served as the Zhangzhou branch envoy.

古文：秦、凤平，以为秦州观察判官。
现代文：秦州、凤州被平定后，被任命为秦州观察判官。
English: After Qinzhou and Fengzhou were subdued, he was appointed as a Qinzhou observation judge.

古文：太祖领宋州，为节度判官。
现代文：太祖统管宋州时，熙古任节度判官。
English: When the great-grandfather was in charge of Songzhou, He Gu served as the judge of the festival.

古文：即位，召为左谏议大夫，知青州。
现代文：太祖即皇帝位后，任命他为左谏议大夫，知青州。
English: After Emperor Taizu ascended the throne, he appointed him as the doctor of the Left Division of the Council of Elders, who knew Qingzhou.

古文：车驾征惟扬，追赴行在。
现代文：皇帝征伐惟扬时，他赶赴皇帝行营。
English: When the emperor went to conquer Wei Yang, he rushed to the emperor's camp.

古文：建隆二年，受诏制置晋州榷矾，增课八十余万缗。
现代文：建隆二年，受诏制置晋州榷矾，增加税收八十多万缗钱。
English: In the second year of Emperor Jianlong's reign, the imperial edict was issued to establish Jinzhou Prefecture, increasing the tax revenue by more than 800,000 baht.

古文：乾德初，迁刑部侍郎、知凤翔府。
现代文：乾德初年，升任刑部侍郎、知凤翔府。
English: In the first year of Qiande, he was promoted to the position of the attendant of the criminal investigation department, and then to the post of Zhifeng Xiangfu.

古文：未几，移秦州。
现代文：不久，改任知秦州。
English: Soon, he was reassigned to Chihqin State.

古文：州境所接多寇患，熙古至，谕以朝廷恩信，取蕃部酋豪子弟为质，边鄙以宁。
现代文：州境边界多寇患，熙古到任后，宣谕朝廷恩德和信用，取少数民族酋长的子弟为人质，边境得以安宁。
English: The state border was plagued with bandits. After Heegoo took office, he proclaimed peace and goodwill to the imperial court, and took the sons of ethnic minority chiefs as hostages. The border was pacified.

古文：转兵部侍郎，徙知成都府。
现代文：转任兵部侍郎，改任知成都府。
English: He was transferred to the post of Hyobushirō, and then to the post of Chicheng Prefecture.

古文：六年，就拜端明殿学士。
现代文：建隆六年，就地授任端明殿学士。
English: In the sixth year of Jianlong's reign, he was awarded a bachelor's degree from Duanming Palace.

古文：丁母忧。
现代文：遭母丧。
English: Every mother's death is sad.

古文：开宝五年，诏以本官参知政事，选名马、银鞍以赐。
现代文：开宝五年，诏令他以本官参知政事，太祖选择名马、银鞍赐给他。
English: In the fifth year of Kaibao, the emperor ordered him to participate in government affairs as his own official, and the great-grandfather chose a famous horse and a silver saddle and gave it to him.

古文：岁余，以足疾求解，拜户部尚书致仕。
现代文：一年后，因脚病请求解职，授任户部尚书退休。
English: A year later, he requested to be relieved of his duties due to a foot ailment, and was given the post of household secretary to retire.

古文：九年，卒，年七十四。
现代文：开宝九年，去世，终年七十四岁。
English: He died at the age of seventy-four in the ninth year of Kaibao.

古文：赠右仆射。
现代文：追赠右仆射。
English: A right-handed free-throw followed.

古文：熙古兼通阴阳象纬之术，作《续聿斯歌》一卷、《六壬释卦序例》一卷。性淳谨，虽显贵不改寒素。
现代文：熙古兼通阴阳象纬之术，著有《续聿斯歌》一卷、《六壬卦序列》一卷，为人淳谨，虽然官位显贵不改朴素。
English: He Gu was also skilled in the art of yin and yang, and was the author of one volume of "Continuation of the Song of Lu" and one volume of "Sequence of the Six Jingas." He was an honest person, although he was a high-ranking official, he did not change his simplicity.

古文：历官十八，登朝三十余年，未尝有过。
现代文：历任十八个官职，在朝三十多年，从未有过错。
English: He has never made a mistake in more than 30 years of holding 18 government posts.

古文：尝集古今事迹为《历代纪要》十五卷。
现代文：曾经收集古今事迹著称《历代纪要》五十卷。
English: He once collected fifty volumes of the famous "Chronicles of the Past" of ancient and modern deeds.

古文：颇精小学，作《切韵拾玉》二篇，摹刻以献，诏付国子监颁行之。
现代文：非常精通小学，著《切韵拾玉》二篇，摹刻献给朝廷，诏令交付国子监颁行。
English: Very proficient in elementary school, author of "Cutting Rhymes and Picking Up Gems" in two parts, engraved for the Imperial Court, and delivered to the State Children's Supervisor for issuance.

古文：石熙载，字凝绩，河南洛阳人。
现代文：儿子名蒙正、蒙叟。石熙载字凝绩，河南洛阳人。
English: His son's names are Meng Zheng and Meng Yao. He was born in Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：周显德中，进士登第。
现代文：后周显德年间，考中进士。
English: Later, during the Zhou Xiande years, he passed the middle school entrance examination.

古文：疏俊有量，居家严谨，有礼法。
现代文：为人疏俊有度量，居家严谨，有礼法。
English: As a person, he is measured, strict at home, and has etiquette.

古文：宋初，太宗以殿前都虞候领泰宁军节制，辟为掌书记。
现代文：宋朝初期，太宗以殿前都虞候兼任泰宁军节制，征召他为掌书记。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Taizong appointed the former prefect of the palace to be the military governor of Taining, and called him to be the secretary.

古文：及尹京邑，表为开封府推官。
现代文：太宗任开封府尹时，上表推荐他为开封府推官。
English: When Emperor Taizong appointed Yin as the governor of Kaifeng, the above table recommended him as the governor of Kaifeng.

古文：授右拾遗，迁左补阙。
现代文：授任他为右拾遗，升任左补阙。
English: He was assigned to the Right Repository and promoted to the Left Repository.

古文：丁外艰，将起复，以谗出为忠武、崇义二军掌书记。
现代文：遭父丧，守丧未满三年，朝廷准备重新起用他时，因为被谗言所中出京任忠武、崇义二军掌书记。
English: After his father's death, less than three years after his death, when the imperial court was preparing to reinstate him, he was rumored to have been sent to Beijing to serve as the secretary to the commanders of the two armies, Zhongwu and Chongyi.

古文：太宗即位，复以左补阙召，同知贡举。
现代文：太宗即皇帝位后，又召他入朝任左补阙，同知贡举。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he also invited him to join the imperial court to serve as Zuo Buyeo, and paid tribute to him.

古文：时梅山洞蛮屡为寇，以熙载知潭州。
现代文：当时梅山洞蛮常常为盗，任命熙载为知潭州。
English: At that time, Meishan Cave was often robbed, and Xi Jia was appointed as the governor of Zhitan.

古文：召还，擢为兵部员外郎，领枢密直学士。
现代文：召他回朝，提升为兵部员外郎，兼任枢密直学士。
English: He was called back to the imperial court, promoted to the position of a military officer, and concurrently served as a Privy Councilor.

古文：未几，签书枢密院事，诏赐官第一区。
现代文：不久，任签书枢密院事，诏令赐给他一栋住宅。
English: He was soon appointed a privy councillor and given a house by royal decree.

古文：太平兴国四年，亲征河东，以给事中充枢密副使从行，还，迁刑部侍郎。
现代文：太平兴国四年，真宗亲自征伐河东，任命他以给事中充任枢密副使随军出征，回朝后，升任刑部侍郎。
English: In the fourth year of Taiping Xingguo, Zhenzong personally conquered the eastern part of Hedong, appointed him to serve as a privy vice-envoy to accompany the army, and after returning to the imperial court, he was promoted to the sergeant of the criminal department.

古文：五年，拜户部尚书、枢密使，以病足在告，寝疾久之未愈。
现代文：太平兴国五年，授任户部尚书、枢密使，因脚病休假，卧床不起很久未能痊愈。
English: In the fifth year of Taiping Xingguo, he was awarded the post of household secretary and privy councilor. He took a leave of absence due to a foot ailment, and was bedridden for a long time before he recovered.

古文：八年，上表求解职，诏加慰抚，授尚书右仆射。
现代文：太平兴国八年，上表请求辞职，太祖诏令抚慰他，授任尚书右仆射。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiping Restoration, the above table asked for resignation, the great-grandfather's edict consoled him and appointed him as the right-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：九年，卒，年五十七。
现代文：太平兴国九年，去世，终年五十七岁。
English: He died nine years after the Taiping Rebellion, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：赠侍中，谥元懿。
现代文：追赠侍中，赐谥号为元懿。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Genko.

古文：上为悲叹累日，且谓其事君之心，纯正无他，适当委用，而奄忽至此，深为可惜。
现代文：太宗因他的去世悲叹了好几天，并且认为他奉事君主之心，纯正无他，正当委以重任，而突然去世，实在可惜。
English: Taizong mourned his death for several days, and thought that he had served the heart of the monarch, was pure, and had been entrusted with an important task. It is a pity that he died suddenly.

古文：国朝大臣谢事而卒，车驾临视者，唯熙载焉。
现代文：当朝大臣谢事去世的，皇帝亲自看望的只有熙载一个人。
English: When Minister Xie Ji passed away, the emperor personally visited only one person, Xi Zai.

古文：熙载性忠实，遇事尽言，是非好恶，无所顾避。
现代文：熙载为人忠厚老实，遇事尽行进言，是非好恶，毫不顾忌。
English: Xi Zhao is a loyal and honest person. He will do his best to speak up in times of need, and has no likes or dislikes, and no scruples.

古文：人有善，即推荐之，时论称其长者。
现代文：人有长处，立即加以推荐，当时舆论称他为长者。
English: When the public opinion called him an elder, people immediately recommended him because of his strengths.

古文：初，微时，为养负米。
现代文：当初游学时，为了口而欠人粮食。
English: At first, when he was on a study tour, he had to beg for food.

古文：尝行嵩阳道中，遇一叟，熟视熙载曰： 真人将兴，子当居辅弼之位。 言讫不见。
现代文：曾经走在嵩阳道上，遇到一个老者，他端详着熙载说 ：真人即将出现，你应当官居辅弼大臣之位。 说完后就不见了。
English: Once, while walking on Songyang Road, I met an old man. He looked at Xizai and said, "A real person is about to appear. You should be an assistant minister." After he said this, he disappeared.

古文：及居太宗幕下，颇尽诚节。
现代文：到了太宗军中后，竭尽忠诚。
English: When he reached the middle of Taizong's army, he was loyal to the end.

古文：典枢务日，上眷注甚笃，方将倚以为相，俄遘疾不起。
现代文：掌管机要政务时，皇上对他宠爱日甚，正准备倚用他为宰相，不久卧病不起。
English: When he was in charge of important government affairs, the emperor was so fond of him that he was preparing to make him prime minister, but he soon fell ill.

古文：熙载事继母牛氏以孝闻。
现代文：熙载奉事继母牛氏以孝顺闻名。
English: He has been serving as a stepmother for a long time, and the Cow Clan is famous for its filial piety.

古文：弟熙导，牛氏前夫子，随母归石氏。
现代文：他的弟弟熙导，是牛氏前夫的儿子，随母亲到了石家。
English: His younger brother, Xi Dao, the son of Mr. Niu's ex-husband, came to Shijiazhuang with his mother.

古文：以熙载故，奏补殿直。
现代文：因为熙载的缘故，上奏补任他为殿直。
English: Because of Hisashi, he was appointed to fill the post of Tononao.

古文：从弟熙古、幼弟熙政，皆登进士第，熙载抚之如一。
现代文：他的从弟熙古、幼弟熙政，都考中进士，熙载对他们一视同仁地加以抚养。
English: His younger brother Xigu and younger brother Xizheng both passed the junior high school entrance examination, and Xizai raised them equally.

古文：熙载卒时，子中孚、中立皆幼，熙政患熙导以异姓居己上，乃诈传上旨，令己籍熙导家财，由是交讼。
现代文：熙载去世时，他的儿子中孚、中立都还年幼，熙政厌恶熙导这个异姓弟弟位居自己的上位，于是假传圣旨，命令自己登记熙导的家财，因此两人发生诉讼。
English: At the time of Xi Zai's death, his sons Zhong Fu and Zhong Zhong Lu were still young. Xi Zheng detested Xi Du, a younger brother with a different surname, who was in a higher position than him. Therefore, he forged a sacred edict and ordered himself to register Xi Du's family wealth. As a result, the two of them were involved in a lawsuit.

古文：有司归罪熙导，上召问中孚、中立，令有司再鞫得实。
现代文：有关部门把罪过归于熙导，皇上召问中孚、中立，命令有关部门再次审讯得到实情。
English: The relevant departments attributed the crime to Xi Du, and the emperor summoned Zhong Fu, neutral, and ordered the relevant departments to re-examine the case to get the truth.

古文：熙导还本姓，中孚亦养子勿问，熙政坐除名。
现代文：熙导回复本姓，中孚也是养子不予追问，熙政因罪被除名。
English: Xi Jinping replied with his real name, Zhong Fu, who is also an adopted son, was not questioned, and Xi Zheng was expelled for his crime.

古文：上素知熙载以母故育熙导甚厚，虽令还宗，而不夺其官，复以财产量给之。
现代文：皇上向来知道熙载因为继母的缘故对熙导养育甚厚，虽然让他回还宗族，而不夺去他的官职，又适量地给他一些财物。
English: The emperor always knew that Xizai had nurtured Xida very well because of his stepmother, and although he allowed him to return to the clan, he did not take away his official position and gave him some property in an appropriate amount.

古文：咸平二年八月，熙载配飨太宗庙庭。
现代文：咸平二年八月，熙载配享太宗庙廷。
English: In August of the second year of Xianping, Xizang was appointed to the Emperor's imperial court.

古文：子居简，至太子中允、集贤校理。
现代文：熙政后来官至供备副使。中孚官至尚书虞部员外郎，他的儿子名行简，考中大中祥符年间进士。
English: Hegemon later served as vice-envoy for supply and preparation. He was vice-governor of Chu-fu and vice-governor of Shang; his son, Gairo, was a member of the Ministry of Education and Culture. His son's name was Gao Jian, and he was promoted to a scholar during the middle school and junior high school examinations.

古文：李穆，字孟雍，开封府阳武人。
现代文：李穆字孟雍，开封府阳武人。
English: Li Mu Zi Meng Yong, Kaifeng Fuyang warrior.

古文：父咸秩，陕西大都督府司马。
现代文：其父李咸秩，任陕州大都督府司马。
English: His father, Li Xianchong, served as Sima, the prefectural governor of Shaanxi.

古文：穆幼能属文，有至行。
现代文：李穆年幼时就能写文章，有很高尚的行操。
English: Li Mu was able to write articles when he was young, and he had a noble conduct.

古文：行路得遗物，必访主归之。
现代文：走在路上捡得丢失的东西，一定访到失主归还他。
English: If you pick up something lost on the road, you must visit the owner to return it to him.

古文：从酸枣王昭素受《易》及《庄》、《老》书，尽究其义。
现代文：师从酸枣王昭素学习《易》及《庄子》、《老子》诸书，穷尽义理。
English: The teacher studied "Yi" and "Zhuangzi" and "Lao Zi" books from Su Zao Wang Zhaoxu, exhausting the meaning.

古文：昭素谓曰： 子所得皆精理，往往出吾意表。 且语人曰： 李生异日必为廊庙器。 以所著《易论》三十三篇授之。
现代文：昭素对他说 ：你学到的都是精理，往往有些出乎我的意想。 并且对别人说 ：李生今后一定会成为朝廷大材。 昭素把自己所著的三十三篇《易论》传授给他。
English: Shōsu said to him, "What you have learned is very profound, often beyond my imagination," and to others, "Leeson will surely become a great man of the Imperial Court in the future." Shōsu passed on to him the thirty-three chapters of "The I Ching," which he had written.

古文：周显德初，以进士为郢、汝二州从事，迁右拾遗。
现代文：后周显德初年，因考中进士任郢、汝二州从事，升任右拾遗。
English: Later, in Zhou Xiande's first year, he was promoted to the post of Right Repository of Antiquities due to the fact that he was engaged in the examination of middle school students from Ren'an and Ru'erzhou.

古文：宋初，以殿中侍御史选为洋州通判。
现代文：宋朝初期，以殿中侍御史身份选任为洋州通判。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was appointed as Yangzhou magistrate with the status of palace attendant.

古文：既至，剖决滞讼，无留狱焉。
现代文：他到州后，处理积留案件，没有一件滞留不决。
English: After he arrived in the state, he dealt with the backlog of cases, and not a single case was left undecided.

古文：移陕州通判，有司调郡租输河南，穆以本镇军食阙，不即应命，坐免。
现代文：改任陕州通判，有关部门调郡里租税送到河南，李穆因为本州缺粮，不立即应命，因此被免职。
English: He was transferred to the post of general judge of Shaanxi Province, and the relevant departments transferred the county tax to Henan Province. Li Mu did not immediately respond to the order because of the grain shortage in the province, so he was dismissed.

古文：又坐举官，削前资。
现代文：又因推举官员失误，被削去以前的资历。
English: He was also stripped of his previous qualifications due to a mistake by an election official.

古文：时弟肃为博州从事，穆将母就肃居，虽贫甚，兄弟相与讲学，意泊如也。
现代文：当时他的弟弟李肃任博州从事，李穆奉养母亲住在李肃的居处，虽然家里很贫穷，兄弟互相讲学，态度豁然淡泊。
English: At that time, his younger brother, Li Su, was engaged in Bozhou, and Li Mu's foster mother lived in Li Su's residence. Although the family was very poor, the brothers lectured to each other, and their attitude was suddenly indifferent.

古文：开宝五年，以太子中允召。
现代文：开宝五年，以太子中允一职召他入朝。
English: In the fifth year of Kaibao, he was called to the imperial court.

古文：明年，拜左拾遗、知制诰。
现代文：第二年，任左拾遗、知制诰。
English: In the second year, he was assigned to the left to collect relics, and to the right to seize relics.

古文：五代以还，词令尚华靡，至穆而独用雅正，悉矫其弊。
现代文：五代以来，词令崇尚华丽，到李穆时单独崇尚雅正，尽力矫正这个弊端。
English: Since the fifth generation, the word order has been advocating gorgeousness, and when it came to Li Mu, he alone advocated elegance and tried his best to correct this drawback.

古文：乃先召李煜入朝，以穆为使。
现代文：于是先召李煜入朝，任命李穆为使者。
English: As a result, Li Xi was summoned to the imperial court first, and Li Mu was appointed as the envoy.

古文：穆至谕旨，煜辞以疾，且言 事大朝以望全济，今若此，有死而已。 穆曰： 朝与否，国主自处之。
现代文：李穆到南唐说明旨意，李煜以疾病为借口推辞了，并且说： 事奉大国以求生存，现在如果这样做，只有死路一条了。 李穆说： 入朝与否，国主自己作主吧。
English: Li Mu went to Nantang to explain his will, but Li Xi used illness as an excuse to decline, and said: To serve a great power in order to survive, if you do so now, there is only one way to die. Li Mu said: Whether to enter the court or not, let the sovereign himself decide.

古文：然朝廷甲兵精锐，物力雄富，恐不易当其锋，宜熟思之，无自贻后悔。 使还，具言状，上以为所谕要切。
现代文：但是宋朝军队精锐，物力雄厚，恐怕不易抵挡它的兵锋，应当再三考虑成熟，不要自贻后患。 出使回朝后，详细述说出使情况，皇帝认为他的宣谕要切。
English: However, the Song Dynasty's army is elite and has strong material resources, and it may not be easy to resist its soldiers. It should consider its maturity again and again, and should not be a self-inflicted wound. After returning to the court, the envoy detailed the circumstances of the envoy, and the emperor thought that his proclamation was important.

古文：江南亦谓其言诚实。
现代文：南唐也认为他的话诚实。
English: Nantang also thought his words were honest.

古文：太平兴国初，转左补阙。
现代文：太平兴国初年，转任左补阙。
English: In the first year of the Taiping Xingguo, he was transferred to the post of left assistant magistrate.

古文：三年冬，加史馆修撰、判馆事，面赐金紫。
现代文：太平兴国三年冬天，加任史馆修撰、判馆事，当面赐给他金紫朝服。
English: In the winter of the third year of Taiping Xingguo, he was appointed as a reviewer and judge of the history museum, and he was given a gold and purple imperial robe in person.

古文：四年，从征太原还，拜中书舍人。
现代文：太平兴国四年，跟从太宗征伐太原回来，授任中书舍人。
English: In the fourth year of the Taiping Xingguo, he returned from the Taiyuan Conquest with Emperor Taizong and was appointed as a scholar.

古文：预修《太祖实录》，赐衣带、银器、缯彩。
现代文：参预修撰《太祖实录》，赏赐他衣带、银器、缯彩。
English: He participated in the preparation of "The True Record of the Great Ancestors" and was rewarded with a sash, silverware, and decorations.

古文：七年，以与卢多逊款狎，又为秦王廷美草朝辞笏记，为言者所劾，责授司封员外郎。
现代文：太平兴国七年，因为与卢多逊亲近而不庄重，又替秦王廷美草拟朝辞笏记，被言官弹劾，被贬授司封员外郎。
English: In the seventh year of the Taiping Xingguo, because he was close to Ludoson and not dignified, he also drafted the imperial rescript for Qin Wang Tingmei, was impeached by the speaker, and was demoted to the position of the secretary of the palace.

古文：八年春，与宋白等同知贡举，及侍上御崇政殿亲试进士，上悯其颜貌癯瘁，即日复拜中书舍人、史馆修撰、判馆事。
现代文：太平兴国八年春天，与宋白等人同知贡举，他在崇政殿陪侍皇上亲自考试进士，皇帝怜悯他形容憔悴，当天就授任他为中书舍人、史馆修撰、判馆事。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of the Taiping Xingguo, with Song Bai and others, he knew the tribute. He accompanied the emperor in the Su Zhengden Hall to take the examination to become a scholar in person. The emperor took pity on him and described him as a scholar. On the same day, he was appointed as a Chinese scholar, a historian, and a judge.

古文：五月，召为翰林学士。
现代文：五月，任命为翰林学士。
English: In May, he was appointed as a Hanlin Scholar.

古文：六月，知开封府，剖判精敏，奸猾无所假贷，由是豪右屏迹，权贵无敢干以私，上益知其才。
现代文：六月，任知开封府，判案精敏，奸滑之人无所逃脱，从此豪族收敛恶迹，权贵不敢以私干预政事，皇上越发知道他的才干。
English: In June, Ren Zhi opened the Fongfu, judging cases with precision, and there was no escape for those who were treacherous. From then on, the powerful clans restrained their evil deeds, the powerful did not dare to intervene in political affairs, and the emperor became more and more aware of his talent.

古文：十一月，擢拜左谏议大夫、参知政事。
现代文：十一月，提升为左谏议大夫、参知政事。
English: In November, he was promoted to Doctor of the Left Division of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and Minister of State.

古文：月余，丁母忧，未几，起复本官。
现代文：一月后，遭母丧，不久，守丧未满三年，朝廷重新起用他任本官。
English: One month later, his mother passed away, and soon after, less than three years after her death, the Imperial Court reappointed him to his post.

古文：穆三上表乞终制，诏强起之，穆益哀毁尽礼。
现代文：李穆三次上表请求守丧满制，诏令强行起复，李穆越是哀伤尽礼节。
English: Li Mu three times petitioned to observe the mourning system, and the imperial edict was forcibly revived. Li Mu was more and more sad and polite.

古文：九年正月，晨起将朝，风眩暴卒，年五十七。
现代文：太平兴国九年正月，早晨起床准备上朝，因风眩突然去世，终年五十七岁。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Taiping Xingguo, he got up in the morning to prepare for the morning, and died suddenly due to the wind, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：穆自责授员外郎，复中书舍人，入翰林，参知政事，以至于卒，不及周岁。
现代文：李穆从贬任员外郎，复任中书舍人，进入翰林院，任参知政事，以至到死，不满一年。
English: It took less than a year for Li Mu to go from being demoted from the post of deputy to the post of deputy, to being reinstated as a middle school teacher, to entering the Hanlin Academy, to serving as a member of the Council of State, and finally to his death.

古文：上闻其死，哭谓近臣曰： 穆国之良臣，朕方倚用，遽兹沦没，非斯人之不幸，乃朕之不幸也。 赠工部尚书。
现代文：太宗听说他的死讯，哭着对亲近的大臣说： 李穆是国家的良臣，我正要倚用他，却突然去世，这不是他个人的不幸，乃是我的不幸啊。 追赠工部尚书。
English: When Emperor Taizong heard the news of his death, he cried and said to his close ministers: Li Mu is a good minister of the country, I was about to rely on him, but he died suddenly, this is not his personal misfortune, it is my misfortune.

古文：穆性至孝，母尝卧疾，每动止转侧，皆亲自扶掖，乃称母意。
现代文：李穆为人至孝，他的母亲曾经有病卧床，每次动止转侧，都亲自扶掖，于是称合母亲的心意。
English: Li Mu is a person of the highest filial piety. His mother was once bedridden due to illness, and he personally held her hand every time she moved or turned over, thus fulfilling his mother's wish.

古文：初，穆坐秦王事属吏，其子惟简绐祖母以穆奉诏鞫狱台中。
现代文：当初，李穆因秦王事被交给官吏审问，他的儿子惟简骗祖母说是李穆奉诏在台省审讯案件。
English: At first, Li Mu was handed over to officials for interrogation, but his son Wei Jian lied to his grandmother and said that Li Mu was being interrogated in Taizhou.

古文：及责授为省郎，还家，亦不以白母。
现代文：被贬任省郎后，回家，也不告诉母亲。
English: After being demoted to the position of provincial governor, he returned home without telling his mother.

古文：每隔日，阳为入直，即访亲友，或游僧寺。
现代文：每隔一天，假装入宫承直，去访亲拜友，或者游历僧寺。
English: Every other day, they pretend to enter the imperial palace, visit relatives and friends, or travel to Buddhist temples.

古文：免归，暨于牵复，母终弗之知。
现代文：免职归家，直到复官，他的母亲始终不知道。
English: His mother never knew until he was reinstated.

古文：及居丧，思慕以至灭性。
现代文：居母丧期间，因思念母亲竟至灭性。
English: During her mother's funeral, she was overcome with grief for her mother.

古文：穆善篆隶，又工画，常晦其事。
现代文：李穆擅长篆隶书，又工于绘画，常隐瞒这些。
English: Li Mu is good at calligraphy and painting, but he often hides it.

古文：质厚忠恪，谨言慎行，所为纯至，无有矫饰。
现代文：为人厚道朴质忠于职守，行动言语都很谨慎，所作所为出于真心，没有矫饰。
English: He is kind, unpretentious, loyal to his duties, his actions and words are very cautious, and his actions are out of sincerity, without pretense.

古文：深信释典，善谈名理，接引后进，多所荐达。
现代文：深信佛教经典，善于谈论名理，喜欢接引后进，常常向朝廷推荐。
English: He is a firm believer in Buddhist classics, good at talking about names and principles, likes to follow up, and often recommends to the imperial court.

古文：尤宽厚，家人未尝见其喜愠。
现代文：尤其宽厚，家人从未看见过他的喜怒。
English: He was especially generous, and his family never saw him angry or happy.

古文：所著文章，随即毁之，多不留稿。
现代文：所写文章，随即毁掉，大多不留稿。
English: The articles they wrote were immediately destroyed, and most of them were not written down.

古文：子惟简，以父任将作监丞，多才艺，性冲澹，不乐仕进。
现代文：他的儿子惟简，因为父亲的官爵任将作监丞，多才多艺，性情冲和淡泊，不追求仕进。
English: His son, Wei Jian, because of his father's official title, will be appointed as superintendent, multi-talented, temperamental and indifferent, do not pursue promotion.

古文：去官家居三十余年，人多称之。
现代文：离职居家二十多年，人们都称赞他。
English: People have praised him for staying at home for more than 20 years after leaving office.

古文：真宗素闻其有履行，景德三年，诏授惟简子郯将作监主簿。
现代文：真宗一向听说他有节操，景德三年，诏令授任惟简的儿子郯为将作监主簿。
English: The True Sect had always heard that he had the virtue of self-restraint. In the third year of King Jingde's reign, the imperial decree was issued to appoint Ou Jian's son, Yu Wei, to be the supervisor of the master book.

古文：大中祥符七年冬，召惟简入对，特拜太子中允致仕，后加太常丞。
现代文：大中祥符七年冬天，召惟简入宫谈话，特地授任为太子中允退休，后来加官太常丞。
English: In the winter of the seventh year of the Great Middle Xiangfu, he summoned Wei Jian to the palace for a talk, and he was specially appointed as the Prince's middle son to retire, and later he was promoted to the position of Grand Councilor.

古文：天禧四年，卒，赐其家钱十万，仍给郯月奉终制。郯后为太子中舍。
现代文：天禧四年，去世，赐给他家钱十万，仍给郯每月俸禄让他守丧终制，郯后来任太子中舍。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of heaven, he died, and his family was given 100,000 yuan, and he was still given a monthly salary to let him keep the funeral system, and he was later appointed to the prince's middle house.

