古文：三司使班在翰林学士之上。
现代文：三司使的级别在翰林学士之上。
English: The rank of Third Division Envoy is higher than that of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：旧制，权使即与正同，故三司使结衔皆在官职之上。
现代文：按旧时体制，三司使权使公事与三司使正官职任相同，所以 三司使权使公事 的结衔， 三司使 三字在 权使公事 之上。
English: According to the old-time system, the three departments of civil affairs and the three departments of civil affairs are the same as the official positions of the three departments of civil affairs, so the title of the three departments of civil affairs and the three words of the three departments of civil affairs are above the "civil affairs."

古文：庆历中，叶道卿为权三司使，执政有欲抑道卿者，降敕时移权三司使在职下结衔，遂立翰林学士之下，至今为例。
现代文：庆历年间，叶道卿为三司使权使公事，执政官有欲压制道卿的，因而在颁降任命他的敕书时，移 三司使 三字于 权 字之下而称 权三司使 ，遂使权三司使的立班在翰林学士之下，并且至今沿用为定例。
English: During the Qinglian era, Ye Daoxing was the third secretary to delegate authority to do public affairs. The consul wanted to suppress Daoxing, so when the imperial edict was issued to demote and appoint him, he moved the third letter of the third secretary to the third letter and called it the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of the third secretary of

古文：后尝有人论列，结衔虽依旧，而权三司使初除，门取旨，间有叙学士者，然不为定制。
现代文：后来曾有人奏论此事，虽然 权三司使 的结衔未变，而权三司使新任命，閤门使传达皇帝圣旨，偶尔也有列其等级在翰林学士之上的，但不是固定的成例。
English: Later, there was a report on this matter, although the title of the Three Envoys of the Three Departments of Power remained unchanged, and the Three Envoys of Power were newly appointed, the Gate Envoys conveyed the emperor's will, and occasionally their rank was listed above the Hanlin Baccalaureate, but it was not a fixed case.

古文：宗子授南班官，世传王文正太尉为宰相日，始开此议，不然也。
现代文：宗室子弟授予南班官衔，世人传说是在王文正为宰相时开始提议的，事实不是这样。
English: The world's legend is that Wang Wenzheng began to propose it when he was the prime minister, but this is not the case.

古文：故事，宗子无迁官法，唯遇稀旷大庆，则普迁一官。
现代文：按旧时制度，宗室子弟没有升迁官阶的法规，只有遇到很少举行的盛大庆典才普遍升迁一级。
English: According to the old-time system, there was no regulation for the promotion of the official rank for the sons and daughters of the family, and they were generally promoted to the first level only when there was a grand celebration that was rarely held.

古文：景祐中，初定祖宗并配南郊，宗室欲缘大礼乞推恩，使诸王宫教授刁约草表上闻。
现代文：景祐年间，初次制定在南郊合祭天地时以太祖、太宗、真宗一起配享的制度，宗室欲借此大典礼请求推恩迁官，因而让诸王宫教授刁约起草表章报告皇上。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongsoo, a system was established for the first time in which the deities of the Southern Suburbs, Taejong, and Jeongjong were allotted together at the time of the Southern Suburbs Festival. The royal family wanted to use this grand ceremony to request the transfer of officials, so they asked the palace professors to draw up a report to the emperor.

古文：后约见丞相王沂公，公问： 前日宗室乞迁官表，何人所为？ 
现代文：事后刁约拜见宰相王沂公，沂公问日前宗室请求迁官的表章是谁起草的。
English: After the event, I made an appointment to see the Prime Minister, Wang Qigong. He asked me who had drafted the form of the request for the transfer of the family office.

古文：约未测其意，答以不知。
现代文：刁约一时猜不透他的意思，就回答说不知道。
English: For a moment, unable to fathom his meaning, she replied that she did not know.

古文：归而思之，恐事穷且得罪，乃再诣相府。
现代文：回来后刁约想这事，怕事情被追查后会造成窘迫且将得罪，于是又到宰相府拜见沂公。
English: After returning, Zou made an appointment to think about the matter, fearing that the matter would be investigated and would cause embarrassment and would offend, so he went to the Prime Minister's Office to see Zou Gong.

古文：沂公问之如前，约愈恐，不復敢隐，遂以实对。
现代文：沂公还像上次那样问他，刁约更加恐慌，不敢再隐瞒，遂如实回答。
English: Gong also asked him the same question as last time, but he was even more panicked and didn't dare to hide it anymore, so he answered truthfully.

古文：公曰： 无他，但爱其文词耳。 
现代文：沂公说： 没有其他意思，只是喜欢这表章的文词。 
English: Yan Gong said, "There is no other meaning, I just like the wording of this inscription.

古文：再三嘉奖。
现代文：并再三给以表扬。
English: And he repeatedly praised them.

古文：徐曰： 已得旨，别有措置。更数日，当有指挥。 
现代文：然后又慢慢说道： 已得皇上旨意另行安排，隔几天就会有政府的指令。 
English: Then he said slowly: It has been arranged by the emperor's will, and in a few days there will be a government order.

古文：大理法官，皆亲节案，不得使吏人。
现代文：自此遂有宗室授予南班官的成例。皇帝的近亲从开始除授位次低的将军，凡经七次升迁，即升至节度使，于是成为固定的制度。
English: Since then, there has been a precedent of the imperial family conferring the title of Southern Officer. From the beginning, the emperor's close relatives removed the generals with the lowest rank, and those who were promoted seven times were promoted to the rank of Grand Officer, thus becoming a fixed system.

古文：中书检正官不置吏人，每房给楷书一人录净而已。
现代文：宗室诸人用上千匹细绢答谢刁约，刁约推辞不敢接受。
English: The members of the family used thousands of fine horses to thank him for his promise, and they did not dare to accept his refusal.

古文：盖欲士人躬亲职事，格吏奸，兼历试人才也。
现代文：我和刁约有亲戚故旧关系，他曾出示当时所上表章的草稿给我看过。
English: He and I have a long-standing relationship as relatives, and he showed me a draft of the above-mentioned table chapter.

古文：太宗命创方团球带，赐二府文臣。
现代文：太宗命创方团毬带赏赐两府的文臣。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered the founder of the party to reward the courtiers of the two prefectures with sashes.

古文：其后枢密使兼侍中张耆、王贻永皆特赐；李用和、曹郡王皆以元舅赐；近歳宣微使王君贶以耆旧特赐。
现代文：后来枢密使兼侍中张耆、王贻永都受到特赐，李用和、曹郡王都因为是元舅而受到赏赐，近年宣徽使王君贶因为年高德昭而受特赐。
English: Later, the Privy Envoy and Chamberlain Zhang Qian and Wang Qianyong both received special gifts, Li Yinghe and Cao Guo Wang were both rewarded for being the former uncle, and in recent years, Wang Junyao was awarded a special gift for his high moral character.

古文：皆出异数，非例也。
现代文：这些都是出于特别的礼遇，并非定例。
English: These are out of special courtesy and are not a regular occurrence.

古文：近歳京师士人朝服乘马，以黪衣蒙之，谓之 凉衫 ，亦古之遗法也。
现代文：近年京城人士穿着官服乘马时，用浅黑色的衣服蒙在官服外，称为 凉衫 ，也是古代遗传下来的做法。
English: In recent years, when people in the capital wear official uniforms and ride horses, they use light black clothes to cover the official uniforms, known as cool shirts, which is also a practice inherited from ancient times.

古文：《仪礼》 朝服加景 是也。但不知古人制度章色如何耳。
现代文：这种浅黑色的衣服就是《仪礼》中的 朝服加景 ，只是不知道古人 景 的式样、颜色是怎样的。
English: This light black dress is the morning dress scene in "The Rite," but I don't know what the style and color of the ancient scene are.

古文：内外制凡草制除官，自给谏、待制以上，皆有润笔物。
现代文：掌内外制的学士和知制诰凡是起草任命官员的制书，只要被任命的是给谏、待制等五品以上的官员，起草者就都有润笔物。
English: In the case of drafting the appointment of officials, as long as more than five officials are appointed, such as those who are to be appointed, those who are to be appointed, and those who are to be appointed, the drafters will have something to write about.

古文：太宗时，立润笔钱数，降诏刻石于舍人院。每除官，则移文督之。在院官下至吏人院驺，皆分沾。
现代文：太宗时曾确定润笔的钱数，命刻于碑石上立在舍人院，每任命官员就出文书督促发放，供职舍人院的官员以至吏人和马夫都有分沾。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong, the amount of money to be paid was determined, and the order was inscribed on a stone in the Convent of the Poor. Every appointed official was required to issue a document to supervise the distribution. The officials working for the Convent of the Poor, as well as the officials and stablemen, all had a share.

古文：元丰中，改立官制，内外制皆有添给，罢润笔之物。
现代文：元丰年间改革官制，内外制官员都增加了添支钱，遂罢去润笔的钱物。
English: During the reform of the bureaucratic system in the Yuanfeng period, both domestic and foreign officials increased the amount of money they paid, and then removed the money from the money.

古文：唐制，官序未至而以他官权摄者，为直官，如许敬宗为直记室是也。
现代文：唐代制度，官品不够而以其他官职暂时代理或兼任的官员，称为直官，例如许敬宗任直记室就属此类。
English: In the Tang Dynasty system, officials who were temporarily acting or concurrently holding other official positions due to insufficient official ranks were called direct officials. For example, the direct record office of Xu Jing Zongren belonged to this category.

古文：国朝学士、舍人皆置直院。
现代文：我朝学士、舍人都设置直院。
English: In the morning, both the bachelor and the layman set up a rectory.

古文：熙宁中，復置直舍人、学士院，但以资浅者为之，其实正官也。
现代文：熙宁年间，重新设置直舍人院、直学士院，只是以资历浅的人来任职，其实是正官，而非直官。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xining, the Jinshe Renren Academy and the Jinshe Academy were re-established, but they were staffed by people with less seniority. In fact, they were regular officials, not direct officials.

古文：熙宁六年，舍人皆迁罢，阁下无人，乃以章子平权知制诰，而不除直院者，以其暂摄也。
现代文：熙宁六年，舍人都被贬官撤职，阁中无人，于是让章衡权知制诰，但不授予其直院之职，因为他是暂时兼职。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xining, all of his subordinates were demoted and removed from their posts, and there was no one left in the cabinet. Therefore, he allowed Zhang Heng to have the power of veto, but did not grant him the post of Zhi Yuan, because he was temporarily working part-time.

古文：古之兼官，多是暂时摄领；有长兼者，即同正官。
现代文：古代的兼职官员，多数是暂时兼任，如有长期兼任者，就相当于正官。
English: In ancient times, most of the part-time officials were temporarily concurrent, and if there were long-term concurrent officials, they were equivalent to full-time officials.

古文：余家藏《海陵王墓志》谢朓文，称 兼中书侍郎。 
现代文：我家藏有《海陵王墓志》，谢朓撰写的，他落款的官衔称 兼中书侍郎 。
English: My family owns "The Tomb of Hailing the King," written by Xie Qi, and his official title is "Junior Secretary."

古文：三司、开封府、外州长官升厅事，则有衙吏前导告喝。
现代文：三司、开封府、京城外州府的长官升堂理事，都有衙役在前引路吆喝。
English: The Third Division, Kaifeng Prefecture, and the director of the prefectural government outside of Beijing, Shodo, all had their overseers leading the way.

古文：国朝之制，在禁中唯三官得告：宰相告于中书，翰林学士告于本院，御史告于朝堂。
现代文：本朝制度规定，在宫禁之中只有三种官员可以吆喝通告：宰相到中书省时通告，翰林学士到翰林院时通告，御史到朝堂时通告。
English: According to the system of the present dynasty, only three kinds of officials can make an announcement during the palace ban: the prime minister can make an announcement when he comes to the Ministry of Education, the scholar of Hanlin can make an announcement when he comes to Hanlin Academy, and the historian can make an announcement when he comes to the imperial court.

古文：皆用朱衣吏，谓之 三告官 。
现代文：吆喝通告时都用穿红衣的役吏，称作 三告官 。
English: Red-robed officials, known as sanzhuo, are used to issue the notices.

古文：所经过处，阍吏以梃扣地警众，谓之 打仗子 。
现代文：在官员所经过的地方，门吏用棍杖敲地以警示众人，称作 打杖子 。
English: At the place where the official passes, the doorkeeper strikes the ground with a cane to alert the crowd, which is called beating the cane.

古文：两府、亲王，自殿门打至本司及上马处；宣微使打于本院；三司使、知开封府打于本司。
现代文：对两府、亲王，要从殿门一直打到本司或上马的地方；宣徽使打于宣徽院；三司使、开封府尹打于各自的官署。
English: For the two prefectures and the prince, it is necessary to strike from the palace gate all the way to the head office or the place where the horse is mounted; the imperial emblems are struck at the imperial emblems institute; the three imperial emblems and the imperial seal are struck at their respective government offices.

古文：近歳寺监长官亦打，非故事。
现代文：近年来，寺监长官也要打杖吆喝，这不合过去的规矩。
English: In recent years, the superintendent of the temple has also had to strike with a cane, which does not conform to the rules of the past.

古文：前宰相赴朝，亦有特旨，许张盖、打仗子者，系临时指挥。
现代文：以前宰相上朝，也有经皇帝特许，张华盖、打杖子的，那是临时性的指令。
English: In the past, when the prime minister ascended to the throne, there were also special orders from the emperor, such as Zhang Huagai and Du Jiezi, which were temporary orders.

古文：执丝梢鞭入内，自三司副使以上；副使唯乘紫丝暖座从入。
现代文：手持丝梢鞭进宫，要三司副使以上官员才可以；副使只可乘紫丝暖座跟随入内。
English: In order to enter the palace with a silk whip in hand, it is necessary to have three vice envoys and above; vice envoys can only enter the palace with a purple silk warming seat.

古文：队长持破木梃，自待制以上。
现代文：允许仪仗队长手持旧棍杖，得是待制以上的官员才可以。
English: The captain of the guard of honour is allowed to carry an old cane, but only officials above the rank of lieutenant can do so.

古文：近歳寺监长官持藤杖，非故事也。
现代文：近年来寺监长官也持藤杖，这不合过去的制度。
English: In recent years, the superintendent of the temple has also held a rattan cane, which is inconsistent with the past system.

古文：百官仪范，著令之外，诸家所记，尚有遗者。
现代文：文武百官的仪仗规则，除记入律令以外，各家所作的记载，还是有遗漏。
English: In addition to being recorded in the ritsuryo, there are still omissions in the records made by various families about the rules of etiquette for civil and military officials.

古文：虽至猥细，亦一时仪物也。
现代文：所记尽管很琐细，却也是一个时期用于礼仪的器物。
English: What is described, although very trivial, is also a ceremonial utensil of the period.

古文：都堂及寺观百官会集坐次，多出临时。
现代文：都堂及寺观百官会集时的座次，多出于临时安排。
English: The seating arrangement at the time of the gathering of the Todo and the Jikon Hyakukankai is mostly due to temporary arrangements.

古文：唐以前故事，皆不可考，唯颜真卿与左仆射定襄郡子王郭英又书云： 宰相、御史大夫、两省五品、供奉官自为一行，十二卫大将军次之，三师、三公、令仆、少师、保傅、尚书左右丞、侍郎自为一行，九卿、三监对之。
现代文：唐代以前的旧制都无法查考了，唯有颜真卿写给左仆射定襄郡王郭英义的一封书信说： 宰相、御史大夫、两省五品以上供奉官自为一行，十二卫大将军的座位在其次，三师、三公、令仆、少师、保傅、尚书左右丞、侍郎自为一行，九卿、三监的座次在他们对面。
English: The old system before the Tang Dynasty can no longer be examined, except for a letter written by Yan Zhengying to his left-hand man, Wang Guo Yingyi of Shading Xiang County, which said: The prime minister, the chief historian, and the officials of the two provinces with five or more provinces are in their own line, and the seats of the twelve guards generals are in the next line, and the three divisions, the three princes, the servants, the junior teachers, the tutors, the scholars, and the attendants are in their own line, and the seats of the nine lords and supervisors are in front of them.

古文：从古以来，未尝参错。 
现代文：自古以来，未曾错乱。 
English: Since ancient times, it has never been out of order.

古文：此亦略见当时故事，今录于此，以备阙文。
现代文：这段话大略体现了当时的旧制，今天抄录在这里，以弥补记载的遗漏。
English: This passage roughly reflects the old system at that time, and is copied here today to make up for the omissions in the record.

古文：赐 功臣 号，始于唐德宗奉天之役。
现代文：朝廷赐予臣下 功臣 的名号，始于唐德宗奉天之役时。
English: The title of "heroic vassal" bestowed by the imperial court on its vassals began during the Tang and De Zong Campaign.

古文：自后藩镇，下至从军资深者，例赐 功臣 。
现代文：从那以后，各藩镇长官以至其僚属从事和参军，凡是资历深的，都援例赐以 功臣 之号。
English: Since then, the lords of each domain and town, as well as their subordinates, have engaged in and joined the army, and anyone with seniority has been given the title of "hero."

古文：本朝唯以赐将相。
现代文：本朝只以 功臣 名号赐予将相大臣。
English: This morning, only the title of meritorious vassal was given to the minister.

古文：熙宁中，因上皇帝尊号，宰相率同列面请三四，上终不允，曰： 徽号正如卿等 功臣 ，何补名实？ 
现代文：熙宁年间，因按制度要加皇帝尊号，宰相率领同事诸大臣当面请示再三，神宗始终不答应，并说： 这种名号如同你们的 功臣 之号，对一个人的名实又有何补益？ 
English: During the reign of Emperor Xining, because the system required that the emperor's honorary title be added, the prime minister led his colleagues and ministers to make repeated requests in person. Shenzong never agreed, and said: This kind of name is like the name of your hero, what is the benefit to a person's reputation?

古文：是时吴正宪为首相，乃请止 功臣 号，从之。
现代文：其时吴正宪为宰相第一人，于是请求取消已赐给他的 功臣 之号，神宗答应了。
English: At that time, Wu Zhengxian was the first prime minister, so he asked to cancel the title of "heroic minister" that had been given to him, and Shenzong agreed.

古文：自是群臣相继请罢，遂不復赐。
现代文：自此群臣相继请求撤销 功臣 名号，遂不再赐予。
English: Since then, ministers have successively requested the revocation of the title of meritorious minister, and it will no longer be granted.

