古文：穆修，字伯长，郓州人。
现代文：穆修字伯长，郓州人。
English: Mu Xiu Zi Bo Chang, a native of Zhangzhou.

古文：幼嗜学，不事章句。
现代文：幼年即爱好读书，但不死背章句。
English: Even as a child, he loved to read, but he was never able to memorize a chapter.

古文：真宗东封，诏举齐、鲁经行之士，修预选，赐进士出身，调泰州司理参军。
现代文：宋真宗东封泰山，下诏书选举齐、鲁懂经学品行端庄之士，穆修得以参选，被赐以进士出身，调任为泰州的司理参军。
English: Song Zhenzong was given the eastern fief of Taishan, and the following imperial edict was issued for the election of Qi, Lu, a scholarly and dignified man, Mu Xiu was able to participate in the election, and was given the title of "Junshi" and transferred to join the army as the secretary of Taizhou.

古文：负才，与众龃龉，通判忌之，使人诬告其罪，贬池州。
现代文：但穆修恃才傲物，与同僚经常发生矛盾，州通判猜忌他，就暗中指使人诬告他以罪，他被贬斥池州。
English: However, Mu Xiu, who was proud of his talent, often had conflicts with his colleagues. He was suspected by the state, and he secretly accused people of falsely accusing him. He was denounced by Chizhou.

古文：中道亡至京师，叩登闻鼓诉冤，不报。
现代文：穆修中途逃跑来到京师开封，打登闻鼓喊冤，要求平反昭雪，朝廷不理睬。
English: Mu Xiu ran away halfway and came to Beijing and Kaifeng, beating the drums and shouting his grievances, demanding the rehabilitation of Zhao Xue, but the court ignored him.

古文：居贬所岁余，遇赦得释，迎母居京师，间出游匄以给养。
现代文：他在池州贬所居住了一年多，碰到大赦得释，就回乡把母亲接来一起住在京师，由于生活窘困，有时还出去乞讨以供养母亲。
English: He lived in the Chizhou Detention Center for more than a year. When he was released under the amnesty, he returned to his hometown and brought his mother to live with him in Beijing. Due to his difficult life, he sometimes went out to beg to support his mother.

古文：久之，补颍州文学参军，徙蔡州。
现代文：许久以后，他得补颍州文学参军，又徙任蔡州。
English: After a long time, he had to supplement the Bozhou Literature to join the army, and was transferred to Caizhou.

古文：明道中，卒。
现代文：宋仁宗明道中，他去世。
English: Song Renzong died when he was still a novice.

古文：修性刚介，好论斥时病，诋诮权贵，人欲与交结，往往拒之。
现代文：穆修为人性格刚强非常正直，他喜欢议论和抨击时政的弊端，又喜欢讥诮和讽刺那些有钱有势的人，遇到有人想和他交结，他往往拒人于千里之外。
English: Mu Xiu is a man of strong character and very honest. He likes to discuss and criticize the evils of current politics, and likes to mock and satirize those who are rich and powerful. When someone wants to get in touch with him, he often rejects them from thousands of miles away.

古文：张知白守亳，亳有豪士作佛庙成，知白使人召修作记，记成，不书士名。
现代文：张知白做亳州太守的时候，亳州有一豪强之士修建了一座佛庙告成，张知白派人召穆修来嘱他做记，记写成后，穆修不写上那豪士的姓名。
English: When Zhang Zhibai was the governor of Zhangzhou, a powerful man in Zhangzhou built and completed a Buddhist temple. Zhang Zhibai sent someone to summon Mu Xiu to order him to write down the name. After the record was written, Mu Xiu did not write down the name of the man.

古文：士以白金五百遗修为寿，且求载名于记，修投金庭下，俶装去郡。
现代文：豪士以白金五百两送给穆修做寿礼，并请求把姓名写在记中。穆修把他的金子掷到堂下，并准备整装离开州郡。
English: The nobleman gave Mu Xiu five hundred taels of platinum as a birthday gift and asked him to write his name in the ledger. Mu Xiu threw his gold into the hall and prepared to pack up and leave the county.

古文：士谢之，终不受，且曰： 吾宁糊口为旅人，终不以匪人污吾文也。 宰相欲识修，且将用为学官，修终不往见。
现代文：豪士再三致意，他终不接受，并且说 ：我宁愿做一个流浪汉讨饭过日子，也不愿以无义之人玷污我文章。 当时的宰相想结识穆修，并且将推荐他当学官，可是穆修却始终不愿意见他。
English: The gentleman repeatedly offered his compliments, but he did not accept them, and said, "I would rather live as a vagabond begging for food than defile my article with a wicked person." The prime minister at the time wanted to get to know Mu Xiu and would recommend him as a scholar, but Mu Xiu always refused to see him.

古文：母死，自负榇以葬，日诵《孝经》、《丧记》，不用浮屠为佛事。
现代文：穆修的母亲死了，他自己背负棺材到墓地安葬，自己日诵《孝经》、《丧记》，也不请和尚念经做佛事超度。
English: Mu Xiu's mother died, he carried the coffin to the cemetery to bury her, he recited the "Filial Piety Sutra" and "Memory of Death" every day, and he did not ask the monk to recite the sutra to do Buddhist transcendence.

古文：自五代文敝，国初，柳开始为古文。
现代文：自五代以来文风凋敝，北宋初年，柳开才开始提倡写古文。
English: Since the Five Dynasties, the literary style had been fading, and it was not until the first year of the Northern Song Dynasty that Liu Kai began to advocate writing ancient literature.

古文：其后，杨亿、刘筠尚声偶之辞，天下学者靡然从之。
现代文：往后，杨亿、刘筠都提倡声律对偶的文辞，天下的读书人都靡然追随他们。
English: Later on, both Yang Yili and Liu Xuan advocated the literature of paired vocal rhythms, and readers all over the world followed them.

古文：修于是时独以古文称，苏舜钦兄弟多从之游。
现代文：可是穆修却在这个时候独以古文著称，苏舜钦兄弟都从他游学。
English: However, Mu Xiu was famous for ancient literature at this time, and the Su Shiqin brothers all learned from him.

古文：修虽穷死，然一时士大夫称能文者必曰穆参军。
现代文：穆修虽然因贫穷而死，但是一时的士大夫只要称说会写文章的人就一定会说穆参军。
English: Although Mu Xiu died due to poverty, he was a scholar at the time. As long as he said that he could write articles, people would definitely say that Mu joined the army.

古文：庆历中，祖无择访得所著诗、书、序、记、志等数十首，集为三卷。
现代文：宋仁宗庆历中，祖无择收集到穆修所写的诗、书、序、记、志等各种体裁的文稿数十篇，共编辑成三卷。
English: In the celebration calendar of Song Renzong, the ancestor indiscriminately collected dozens of manuscripts of various genres such as poems, books, prefaces, records, and aspirations written by Mu Xiu, and edited them into three volumes.

古文：石延年，字曼卿，先世幽州人。
现代文：石延年字曼卿，他的祖先是幽州人。
English: Shi Yannian is known as Lord Man. His ancestor was from Yuzhou.

古文：晋以幽州遗契丹，其祖举族南走，家于宋城。
现代文：后晋把幽州送给契丹，他的祖父就率领全族人向南方转移，留居在宋城。
English: Later Jin gave Yuzhou to Qidan, and his grandfather led the whole clan to move to the south and stay in Songcheng.

古文：延年为人跌宕任气节，读书通大略，为文劲健，于诗最工而善书。
现代文：石延年的为人放纵不拘，崇尚气节，读书通大义，做文章劲健有力。对诗最擅长而且还善于绘画。
English: Shi Yanren is a person of indulgence, advocating temperament, reading well, writing vigorously and powerfully. He is best at poetry and is also good at painting.

古文：累举进士不中，真宗录三举进士，以为三班奉职，延年耻不就。
现代文：他屡次考进士，都不中。真宗录用三举的进士，以他为三班供职，他以这为耻辱不就。
English: He repeatedly failed to pass the entrance examination for novices. The Shinshu sect hired a novice who had passed the third grade and assigned him to work in three shifts. He considered this a disgrace.

古文：张知白素奇之，谓曰： 母老乃择禄耶？ 延年不得已就命。
现代文：张知白向来对他惊奇，因此对他说 ：你的母亲已经老了，难道你还这样挑剔禄位吗？ 石延年不得已才去就任这个职务。
English: Zhang Zhibai had always been surprised by him, so he said to him: Your mother is already old, are you still so picky about the position? Shi Yanren had no choice but to take up this position.

古文：后以右班殿直改太常寺太祝，知金乡县，有治名。
现代文：后石延年以右班殿直改任太常寺太祝，不久，又知金乡县，很有政绩。
English: Later, he was transferred to Taizhong Temple and then to Jinxiang County, where he achieved great political achievements.

古文：用荐者通判乾宁军，徙永静军，为大理评事、馆阁校勘，历光禄、大理寺丞，上书章献太后，请还政天子。
现代文：由于受人推荐，石延年得通判乾宁军，又徙永胜军，后为大理评事、馆阁校勘，历任光禄、大理寺丞，在此期间他上书章献太后，请求还政于天子。
English: As a result of being recommended by others, Shi Yanren was able to pass judgment on the Qianning Army, and then the Yongsheng Army, and later he was the Dali critic, the pavilion school inspector, and successively the Guanglu and the Dali Temple president. During this period, he wrote a letter to the empress dowager, requesting the return of power to the emperor.

古文：太后崩，范讽欲引延年，延年力止之。
现代文：太后死后，范讽想引荐他，石延年努力阻止他。
English: After the death of the Empress Dowager, Fan Lin wanted to introduce him, but Shi Yanren tried to stop him.

古文：后讽败，延年坐与讽善，落职通判海州。
现代文：后范讽失败，石延年就以所谓犯有与范讽相友善罪，降职通判海州。
English: After the banter failed, Shi Yannian was sentenced to be demoted from his post and sent to Haizhou for the so-called crime of being friendly with the banter.

古文：久之，为秘阁校理，迁太子中允，同判登闻鼓院。
现代文：许久后，起为秘阁校理，迁太子中允、同判登闻鼓院。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as a secret schoolmaster, transferred to the Prince's Junior High School, and was admitted to the Wen Drum Academy.

古文：尝上言天下不识战三十余年，请为二边之备。
现代文：石延年曾经上书皇帝，说现在全国人民不知道战争的滋味已经三十多年了，请国家认真地做好对辽和西夏两个边境的防御。
English: Shi Yannian once wrote to the emperor, saying that now the people of the whole country do not know the taste of war for more than thirty years, and asked the country to conscientiously do a good job of defending the two borders of Liao and Western Xia.

古文：不报。
现代文：他的奏疏送上去后毫无音信。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：及元昊反，始思其言，召见，稍用其说。
现代文：等到西夏的首领元昊反，皇帝和大臣才想起他所说的话，于是召见他，并稍微采用了他的话。
English: It wasn't until the leader of the Western Xia, Yuan Haotang, came to mind that the emperor and his ministers remembered what he had said, so they summoned him and adopted some of his words.

古文：命往河东籍乡兵，凡得十数万，时边将遂欲以扞贼，延年笑曰： 此得吾粗也。
现代文：当时皇帝命令他到河东去征集乡兵，他一共征得十几万，边防的将军就想以这些乡兵去抵御敌人，石延年笑着说 ：你们得到我的兵都是没有经过训练的。
English: At that time, the emperor ordered him to go to the east of the river to recruit rural soldiers. He recruited a total of more than 100,000, and the border guard general wanted to use these rural soldiers to resist the enemy. Shi Yanren smiled and said, "You got my soldiers without training.

古文：夫不教之兵勇怯相杂，若怯者见敌而动，则勇者亦牵而溃矣。
现代文：要知道没有经过训练的兵勇敢的和怯懦的都互相混杂，假若怯懦的兵见到敌人就逃跑，那么勇敢的兵也会被牵连而遭到溃败。
English: You see, untrained soldiers, the brave and the cowardly, are all mixed together, and if the cowardly soldiers run away when they see the enemy, then the brave soldiers will also be implicated and defeated.

古文：今既不暇教，宜募其敢行者，则人人皆胜兵也。 又尝请募人使唃厮啰及回鹘举兵攻元昊，帝嘉纳之。
现代文：今天既然没有时间来训练，那么我们就应该招募他们中间能够战斗的，这样，人人就成为不可战胜的兵了。 石延年又曾经上疏请求募人出使口角厮口罗和回鹘，让他们共同出兵和宋一起共攻元昊，皇帝对他的建议非常赞许并加以采纳。
English: Since there is no time for training today, we should recruit those among them who can fight, so that everyone will become an invincible soldier.Shi Yan Nian once again asked Shang So to recruit people to send out the envoys of Qiao Qiao and Hui Yao, so that they could send troops together with Song to attack Yuan Hao. The emperor was very approving of his suggestion and adopted it.

古文：延年喜剧饮，尝与刘潜造王氏酒楼对饮，终日不交一言。
现代文：石延年喜欢猛烈的喝酒，曾经与刘潜到王氏酒楼对饮，整天两人不交谈一句话。
English: Shi Yannian likes to drink heavily. He once had a drink with Liu Qian at Wang's Saloon, and the two did not speak a word all day.

古文：王氏怪其饮多，以为非常人，益奉美酒肴果，二人饮啖自若，至夕无酒色，相揖而去。
现代文：王氏奇怪他们两人喝酒喝得这么多，认为他们两人不是一般的人，就更多地供奉给他们美酒和菜肴瓜果，他们两人继续饮，喝酒吃菜仍轻松自如，一直到夜里，两个人的脸上都还没有什么酒色，最后两人作揖而去。
English: Mr. Wang was surprised that the two of them drank so much alcohol. He thought that they were not ordinary people, so he offered them more wine and dishes of melons and fruits. The two of them continued to drink, and they still drank and ate with ease. Until the night, the two people's faces did not have any wine color. Finally, the two people left.

古文：迁兵部员外郎，召还，将试知制诰，会营建献、懿二皇太后陵，未及试而卒。
现代文：到明日，京城里就传说在王氏酒楼有两个神仙来喝酒，后来才知道是刘潜和石延年两个人。
English: By tomorrow, there will be a legend in the capital that two immortals will come to drink at Wang's Saloon. Only later will it be known that they are Liu Qian and Shi Yan Nian.

古文：贯临事敢为，不苟合于时。初，感疾，梦绿衣中人召至帝所，赋《禁中晓寒歌》，词语清丽，人以比唐李贺。苏舜钦，字子美，参知政事易简之孙。
现代文：石延年虽然喜欢酣饮和豪放，好像不可以询问他以当时的事务，可是他与人谈论国家的事情，是非对错都没有不恰当的。起初，石延年与天章阁待制吴遵路一起出使河东，及石延年死，吴遵路就把他的情况转告给朝廷，皇帝允许石延年一个儿子做官。苏舜钦字子美，是参知政事苏易简的孙子。
English: Although Shi Yan Nian liked to drink and party, it seemed inappropriate to ask him about the affairs of the time. However, it was not improper for him to talk to people about the affairs of the country, right or wrong. At first, Shi Yan Nian and Wu Zunlu, the governor of Tianzhang, were dispatched to Hedong together. When Shi Yan Nian died, Wu Zunlu conveyed his situation to the imperial court. The emperor allowed one of Shi Yan Nian's sons to become an official. Su Yan Qin Zizi Mei was the grandson of Su Yi Jian, the governor.

古文：父耆，有才名，尝为工部郎中、直集贤院。
现代文：他的父亲叫苏耆，很有些才名，曾经担任过工部郎中官和直集贤院。
English: His father, Su Shi, was a very talented man who had served as a vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and as a member of the Council of Elders.

古文：舜钦少慷慨有大志，状貌怪伟。
现代文：苏舜钦少年时即慷慨有大志，状貌也长得奇怪和魁伟。
English: As a young man, Su Yuqin was generous and ambitious, and his appearance was strange and powerful.

古文：当天圣中，学者为文多病偶对，独舜钦与河南穆修好为古文、歌诗，一时豪俊多从之游。
现代文：宋仁宗天圣年间，学者们写的文章都有追求对偶多的毛病，只有苏舜钦和河南穆修喜欢写古文和歌诗，一时的豪俊之士都跟着他们去游学。
English: During the reign of Emperor Song Renzong, scholars wrote articles that had the problem of pursuing too many dualities. Only Su Yuqin and Henan Mu Xiu liked to write ancient texts and poems. For a time, all the great men followed them to travel and study.

古文：初以父任补太庙斋郎，调荥阳县尉。
现代文：苏舜钦开始做官是以父亲的关系任补太庙斋郎，后调任荥阳县尉。
English: Su Suqin started his career as an official in his father's position as a sub-temple official, and was later transferred to the post of Shenyang County lieutenant.

古文：玉清昭应宫灾，舜钦年二十一，诣登闻鼓院上疏曰：
现代文：玉清昭应宫遭灾，苏舜钦这时年正二十一，到登闻鼓院击鼓上疏说：
English: At the time of the disaster that hit the palace, Su Yuqin, who was 21 at the time, went to the Dengwen Drum Academy to play the drums and said:

古文：烈士不避鈇钺而进谏，明君不讳过失而纳忠，是以怀策者必吐上前，蓄冤者无至腹诽。
现代文： 烈士不惧怕斧钺之诛而敢向皇帝进忠言，英明的君主不隐讳自己的过失而虚心采纳臣下的忠告，这样一来，有识之士有什么建议一定会倾吐于皇帝面前，隐藏着冤屈的人由于有机会申诉也用不着再暗中发牢骚。
English: Martyrs do not fear the axe but dare to advise the emperor. Wise monarchs do not hide their faults but humbly accept the advice of their subjects. In this way, people with insight will surely pour out their advice to the emperor. People with hidden grievances will no longer have to grumble secretly because they have the opportunity to appeal.

古文：然言之难不如容之难，容之难不如行之难，有言之必容之行之，则三代之主也，幸陛下留听焉。
现代文：然而说忠言虽然难还不如容纳忠言的难，容纳忠言虽然难又不如实行忠言的难，有忠言一定会采纳而且能坚决实行，那就是夏、商、周三代的君主了，希望陛下能够留心听取臣下的意见。
English: However, it is said that although it is difficult to be a loyal advisor, it is not as difficult to accommodate a loyal advisor, and although it is difficult to accommodate a loyal advisor, it is not as difficult to implement a loyal advisor. There is a loyal advisor who will definitely adopt and can resolutely implement, that is, Xia, Shang and the three generations of monarchs. I hope that His Majesty can pay attention to the opinions of his subjects.

古文：臣观今岁自春徂夏，霖雨阴晦，未尝少止，农田被灾者几于十九。
现代文： 臣观察今年从春天到夏天，天气阴雨连绵未尝停止过，农田不耕被杂草壅塞的几乎占十分之九。
English: The minister observed that from spring to summer this year, the weather was cloudy and rainy without interruption, and almost nine-tenths of the uncultivated farmland was blocked by weeds.

古文：臣以谓任用失人、政令多过、赏罚弗中之所召也。
现代文：之所以这样，臣认为是由于朝廷用人失当，政令多错误，赏罚不明所造成的。
English: The reason for this, the minister believed, was due to the fact that the imperial court employed people inappropriately, the government orders were often incorrect, and the rewards and punishments were unclear.

古文：天之降灾，欲悟陛下，而大臣归咎于刑狱之滥，陛下听之，故肆赦天下以为禳救。
现代文：上天之所以降灾害，目的是想使陛下感悟，而大臣们不考察，却一味地归罪于刑狱的太滥，陛下相信了他们的意见，因此大肆赦免全国的罪犯以求得消除灾害。
English: The reason why the heavens sent the disaster was to impress His Majesty, but the ministers did not investigate, but simply blamed it on the excessive use of prison. His Majesty believed their opinion, and therefore pardoned criminals across the country in order to eliminate the disaster.

古文：如此则是杀人者不死，伤人者不抵罪，而欲以合天意也。
现代文：但是这样一来，就等于是叫杀了人的人不判死刑，伤了人的人不抵罪，而却想用这个来求得符合天意，这显然是错误的。
English: But in this way, it is tantamount to calling for those who kill people not to be sentenced to death, and those who injure people not to confess their sins, but they want to use this to seek to conform to the will of heaven, which is obviously wrong.

古文：古者断决滞讼以平水旱，不闻用赦，故赦下之后，阴雨及今。
现代文：古代曾经有过迅速决断拖了许多年的诉讼来求得消除水旱灾害，但是却没有听到有用大赦的办法的，正由于这样，所以陛下大赦之后，仍阴雨连绵直到今天。
English: In ancient times, there was a speedy resolution of a lawsuit that had dragged on for many years to seek the elimination of flood and drought disasters, but no one had heard of a useful amnesty method, which is why, after His Majesty's amnesty, it is still raining continuously to this day.

古文：前志曰： 积阴生阳，阳生则火灾见焉。 乘夏之气发泄于玉清宫，震雨杂下，烈焰四起，楼观万叠，数刻而尽，非慢于火备，乃天之垂戒也。
现代文： 过去的天文志说： 积阴就生阳，阳产生了火灾就会发生。 今年夏天久阴不晴，阴晦之气积聚于玉清宫得到发泄，加上雷电交加，大雨倾泻，从而烈焰四起，楼台宫观又重重叠叠，互相连在一起，因而数刻之间，即都化为灰烬，这不是对防火有什么疏忽，而是上天想惩戒陛下。
English: In the past, the astrological chronicles said: "When the yin accumulates, the yang is born, and when the yang is born, a fire occurs. This summer, it has been cloudy for a long time, and the gloomy atmosphere accumulated in the Jade Emperor's Palace has been released. In addition, thunder and lightning were added, and heavy rain poured down. As a result, there were four blazes, and the towers of the palace were overlapped and connected with each other, and thus, within a few moments, they were all reduced to ashes. This was not due to any negligence in fire prevention, but the heavens wanted to punish His Majesty.

古文：陛下当降服、减膳、避正寝，责躬罪己，下哀痛之诏，罢非业之作，拯失职之民，察辅弼及左右无裨国体者罢之，窃弄权威者去之；念政刑之失，收刍荛之论，庶几所以变灾为祐。
现代文：因此陛下应该接受这个惩戒，现在就应该改穿朴素的服装，减少膳食，避开正寝，处于偏室，并反省责备自己，找到自己的过错，向全国颁布哀痛和怜惜老百姓的诏书，取消不是有关生产的项目，拯救失业的老百姓，考察朝中大臣特别是宰辅以及左右亲信有无益于国体的人全部加以罢免，有窃弄权柄和威望的人坚决加以清除；找出政刑的失误，收集草野的议论，这样大概才可以变灾祸为福庆。
English: Therefore, His Majesty should accept this punishment. He should now change to plain clothes, reduce meals, avoid sleeping in the same bed, stay in a separate room, and reflect on himself, find his own mistakes, issue an edict of sorrow and pity for the common people to the whole country, cancel projects that are not related to production, save the unemployed common people, investigate the ministers of the DPRK and China, especially the vice-ministers, and the cronies on the right and left, and remove all those who are not beneficial to the national body, and resolutely remove those who have stolen power and prestige; find out the mistakes of the political punishment, and collect grass-roots discussions. In this way,

古文：浃日之间，未闻为此，而将计工役以图修复，都下之人闻者骇惑，聚首横议，咸谓非宜。
现代文： 可是玉清宫灾发生后的十天时间内，没有听到朝廷为这些做任何事情，却听到将重新计算工役准备把宫殿重新修复，都城的人听到这个消息都非常惊骇而且感到迷惑，纷纷聚在一起议论，都认为这样做非常不适合。
English: However, within ten days after the disaster at the Jade Emperor's Palace, we did not hear that the imperial court had done anything about it. Instead, we heard that the workmen would be re-calculated to prepare for the restoration of the palace. When the people in the capital heard this news, they were very shocked and puzzled. They gathered together to discuss it, and they all thought that this was very inappropriate.

古文：皆曰章圣皇帝勤俭十余年，天上富庶，帑府流衍，乃作斯宫，及其毕功，海内虚竭。
现代文：并且一致认为，章圣皇帝克勤克俭了十几年，使天下富裕，府库充实，才修建这座宫殿，但是等到这座宫殿修成，由于耗资太多，使海内都感到虚竭。
English: And they agreed that Emperor Ke Jingsheng had been diligent and frugal for more than ten years, making the world rich and the treasury rich, before building this palace. However, when this palace was completed, because it cost too much, the whole country felt exhausted.

古文：陛下即位及十年，数遭水旱，虽征赋咸入，而百姓困乏。
现代文：现在陛下即位还不到十年，就数次遭到水旱灾害，虽然所征的赋税全部得到保证，但是老百姓却非常劳累贫困。
English: It has been less than ten years since His Majesty ascended the throne, but he has been hit by several floods and droughts. Although all the taxes collected have been guaranteed, the people are very tired and poor.

古文：若大兴土木，则费知纪极，财力耗于内，百姓劳于下，内耗下劳，何以为国！
现代文：如果再大兴土木，那费用不知道要花多少，这样一来，财力全被宫廷消耗，老百姓却在下面劳苦，这怎么能成为国家！
English: If there is another massive construction project, I don't know how much it will cost. In this way, the financial resources are all consumed by the court, while the common people are toiling below. How can this be a country!

古文：况天灾之，己违之，是欲竞天，无省己之意。
现代文：何况上天给陛下呈示灾祸，陛下却违抗它，这是想和天竞争却毫无反省自己的诚意。
English: What's more, the heavens presented His Majesty with a calamity, but His Majesty defied it. This is the sincerity of wanting to compete with the heavens without reflecting on oneself.

古文：逆天不祥，安己难任，欲祈厚贶，其可得乎！
现代文：要知道违反天意不吉祥，自我安逸难以担负重任，想要祈求上天给予优厚的赏赐，那能够得到吗？
English: If you know that it is not auspicious to go against God's will, and that it is difficult to shoulder heavy responsibilities when you are at ease, and if you want to ask God for a generous reward, can you get it?

古文：今为陛下计，莫若求吉士，去佞人，修德以勤至治，使百姓足给而征税宽减，则可以谢天意而安民情矣。
现代文：今天为陛下考虑，不如招徕贤杰之士，去掉奸佞的人，积累德行以勤俭达到国家至高的治理，使老百姓丰衣足食而国家征税宽大减省，这样就既可以对得起上天的意旨而且也可以安定民心了。
English: Today, for His Majesty's consideration, it is better to recruit virtuous people, get rid of traitors, accumulate virtues and achieve the highest governance of the country through diligence and frugality, so that the people are well-fed and the state taxes are reduced, so that it can not only meet the will of heaven but also stabilize the people's hearts.

古文：夫贤君见变，修道除凶，乱世无象，天不谴告。
现代文： 要知道贤明的君主一看到上天呈现出灾异，就想办法修道积德，以求免除灾祸，而在乱世的时候没有什么征兆，因为上天不进行谴告。
English: It should be known that a wise ruler, when he sees the heavens manifesting calamities, will try to cultivate virtue in order to avoid calamities, but in times of chaos, there are no signs, because the heavens do not reprimand.

古文：今幸天见之变，是陛下修己之日，岂可忽哉！
现代文：现在幸而上天给予惩告呈现出灾异，这正是陛下反省检查自己的时候，难道可以忽略吗？
English: Now, fortunately, Heaven's chastisement appears to be disastrous. This is precisely the time for His Majesty to reflect and examine himself. Can it be ignored?

古文：昔汉元帝三年，茂陵白鹤馆灾，诏曰： 乃者火灾降于孝武园馆，朕战慄恐惧，不烛变异，罪在朕躬。
现代文：过去汉元帝三年，茂陵的白鹤馆发生了火灾，元帝下诏说： 近来火灾降临于孝武皇帝的园馆，朕非常战栗恐惧，不了解灾情发生的原因，罪责全在朕一人的身上。
English: In the past three years of Emperor Han Yuan, a fire broke out in the White Crane Pavilion in Maolin. Emperor Yuan issued an edict saying: Recently, a fire broke out in the garden pavilion of Emperor Xiaowu. I am very shaken and frightened. I do not understand the cause of the disaster. The blame is entirely on me.

古文：群有司又不肯极言朕过，以至于斯，将何寤焉！ 夫茂陵不及上都，白鹤馆大不及此宫，彼尚降诏四方，以求己过，是知帝王忧危念治，汲汲如此。
现代文：文武官员又不肯极力陈述朕的过错，以至于造成这样，朕有什么办法能知道自己的过错呢？ 要知道茂陵武帝的园陵怎么比得上上都，白鹤馆也大不及玉清宫，可是元帝尚且降诏宣告四方，以求得闻己之过，因此可以知道帝王们忧虑国家的危亡总想把国家治理好，以致孜孜不倦到这种程度。
English: The civil and military officials also refused to vigorously state my fault, so that caused this, how can I know my own fault? It is necessary to know how the garden of Emperor Murongwu is comparable to Shangdu, and the White Crane Hall is not as big as the Jade Emperor's Palace, but the former emperor still issued the edict to announce to the four directions in order to hear his own fault, so we can know that the emperors are worried about the peril of the country and always want to govern the country well, so that they are tireless to such an extent.

古文：臣又按《五行志》：贤佞分别，官人有叙，率由旧章，礼重功勋，则火得其性。
现代文： 臣又考察《五行志》，发现一个国家如果对贤人和奸佞能够分别对待，任用官吏有严格的程序，办事情能够遵守过去的规章制度，能够以礼尊重功臣，这样火就能够安其本性。
English: The minister also examined the "Five Elements" and found that if a country can treat wise men and traitors separately, has strict procedures for appointing officials, can abide by the rules and regulations of the past, and can respect heroes with courtesy, then the fire can maintain its nature.

古文：若信道不笃，或耀虚伪，谗夫昌，邪胜正，则火失其性，自上而降。
现代文：如果国君信道不诚心，或者炫耀其虚伪，进谗言的人得到提升，并且比比皆是，邪恶战胜了正直，这个时候火就会失去它的本性，从而自天而降。
English: If the ruler believes in insincerity, or flaunts his hypocrisy, and the gossips are promoted and abound, and evil triumphs over honesty, then fire loses its nature and falls from the sky.

古文：及滥炎妄起，燔宗庙，烧宫室，虽兴师徒而不能救。
现代文：等到烈焰到处蔓延，烧毁宗庙，焚烧宫室，虽兴师动众而不能救。
English: Wait until the flames spread everywhere, burn down the ancestral temple, incinerate the palace, and cannot be saved despite the efforts of the teachers.

古文：鲁成公三年，新宫灾，刘向谓成公信三桓子孙之谗、逐父臣之应。
现代文：鲁成公三年时，新修的宫殿发生了火灾，汉朝的刘向认为是成公信任了三桓子孙的谗言，驱逐了父臣的报应。
English: When Lu Chenggong was three years old, a fire broke out in the newly built palace. Liu Xiang of the Han Dynasty believed that Chenggong trusted the words of the three sons and banished his father's retribution.

古文：襄公九年春，宋火，刘向谓宋公听谗、逐其大夫华弱奔鲁之应。
现代文：宋襄公九年春天，宋国大火，刘向认为是宋襄公听信了谗言，驱逐了他的大夫华弱使他逃奔鲁国的报应。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Song Xiangg's reign, there was a big fire in Song, and Liu Xiang thought that it was the retribution of Song Xiangg's listening to the slander and expelling his doctor Hua Wei, causing him to flee to Lu.

古文：今宫灾岂亦有是乎？
现代文：今天玉清宫发生火灾是不是也有这种情况呢？
English: Is this also the case with today's fire at the Jade Emperor's Palace?

古文：愿陛下拱默内省而追革之，罢再造之劳，述前世之法，天下之幸也。
现代文：希望陛下拱手默坐内心反省自己，然后立即想办法改正它，罢掉再建玉清宫的劳费，继承前代皇帝的做法，这就是全国人民的幸福。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will sit quietly and reflect on himself, and then immediately find a way to correct it, eliminate the labor costs of rebuilding the Jade Emperor's Palace, and inherit the practices of previous emperors. This is the happiness of the people of the whole country.

古文：又上书曰：
现代文：后来他又上疏说：
English: He later added:

古文：历观前代圣神之君，好闻谠议，盖以四海至远，民有隐慝，不可以遍照，故无间愚贱之言而择用之。
现代文： 臣历观前代神圣的国君都是喜欢听取批评的意见和建议，大概认为四海是至大至远，民间有什么隐情，难以遍照和普查，因此不管愚陋和至贱之言也虚心听取和努力采用。
English: The previous generation of sacred sovereigns loved to listen to the opinions and suggestions of critics. They probably thought that the four seas were far and wide, and it was difficult to find out the hidden feelings of the people. Therefore, regardless of the stupidity and lowliness of the words, they also humbly listened to and tried to use them.

古文：然后朝无遗政，物无遁情，虽有佞臣，邪谋莫得而进也。
现代文：这样以来，才可以做到朝无遗政，民间没有隐匿的情况，即使有奸佞出现，他们的邪谋也无由得逞。
English: Since then, it has been possible to achieve a situation where there is no trace of the former government and the people are not hidden, and even if there are traitors, their evil plots will not succeed.

古文：臣睹乙亥诏书，戒越职言事，播告四方，无不惊惑，往往窃议，恐非出陛下之意。
现代文： 臣看到陛下乙亥年的诏书，书中明令告诫臣下不要越职上书言事，这个诏书传播四方，所有看到的人无不惊骇，人们往往窃窃私语议论这件事情，臣认为这恐怕不是出之于陛下的本意。
English: When the minister saw His Majesty's Imperial Rescript for the Year of the Boar, in which it was clearly ordered to warn his subjects not to exceed their duties by writing and speaking, and this Imperial Rescript was circulated to all quarters, everyone who saw it was shocked, and people often discussed the matter in whispers. The minister thought that this was probably not His Majesty's original intention.

古文：盖陛下即位以来，屡诏群下勤求直言，使百僚转对，置匦函，设直言极谏科。
现代文：因为从陛下即位以来，曾屡次下诏要臣下勤于征求直言，并要百官转为奏对，而且设置了意见箱，同时还设立了直言极谏科。
English: Because since His Majesty's accession to the throne, he has repeatedly issued an edict to important ministers to work diligently to solicit candid opinions, and to turn all officials into advocates, and has set up an opinion box, and at the same time has also set up a candid extreme discipline.

古文：今诏书顿异前事，岂非大臣雍蔽陛下聪明，杜塞忠良之口，不惟亏损朝政，实亦自取覆亡之道。
现代文：可是今天诏书的内容却完全和以前的事情不同，这岂不是有大臣蒙蔽了陛下的聪明，使陛下堵塞忠良正直人之口，这不但会亏损朝政，而且实际上是自取灭亡的道路。
English: However, the content of today's edict is completely different from the previous events. Is it not the case that a minister has blinded His Majesty's wisdom and caused His Majesty to gag a loyal and honest person? This will not only be a loss to the government, but is actually a path to self-destruction.

古文：夫纳善进贤，宰相之事，蔽君自任，未或不亡。
现代文：要知道采纳善言荐举贤人，是宰相的职责，蒙蔽皇帝以求自己专权，没有不亡国的。
English: It should be known that it is the prime minister's duty to adopt the good words and recommendations of the sages, and to deceive the emperor in order to seek his own exclusive power, without which the country will perish.

古文：今谏官、御史悉出其门，但希旨意，即获美官，多士盈庭。噤不得语。
现代文：今天谏官、御史都出自于宰相之门，他们只要秉承宰相的旨意，就可以得到美官，而广大的朝士充满朝廷，却噤若寒蝉得不到发表意见的机会。
English: Today, both eunuchs and magistrates come from the gate of the prime minister. As long as they uphold the prime minister's will, they can get a good position, while the vast number of courtiers fill the imperial court, but they are not given the opportunity to express their opinions.

古文：陛下拱默，何由尽闻天下之事乎？
现代文：这样下去，陛下端坐拱默怎么能够全部听到全国的事情呢？
English: If this continues, how can His Majesty sit in silence and hear everything that is going on in the country?

古文：前孔道辅、范仲淹刚直不挠，致位台谏，后虽改他官，不忘献纳。
现代文： 前些时孔道辅、范仲淹两人刚正不阿，致位台谏官，后虽然改任其他官，可是他们仍不忘采纳意见和进谏。
English: Some time ago, Kong Daowu and Fan Zhongyun, both of whom were just and upright, were appointed as Taiwan eunuchs. Although they were later reassigned to other positions, they still did not forget to adopt opinions and advance.

古文：二臣者非不知缄口数年，坐得卿辅，盖不敢负陛下委注之意。
现代文：他们两位大臣不是不知道只要缄口数年，就可以坐着得到卿辅的官，只是由于不愿意辜负陛下的委任和关注的恩德。
English: It is not that the two ministers did not know that as long as they kept their mouths shut for a few years, they could sit and get the post of minister-assistant, but only because they did not want to disappoint the grace of His Majesty's appointment and attention.

古文：而皆罹中伤，窜谪而去，使正臣夺气，鲠士咋舌，目睹时弊而不敢论。
现代文：可是他们都被中伤，遭到流放而去，使正直的人为之夺气，骨鲠之士因而咋舌，大家都目睹朝中的弊政，口里却不敢言。
English: But they have all been slandered, driven into exile, and made honest people lose their breath, and eminent people lose their tongues. Everyone has witnessed the maladministration of the central government, but they dare not speak out.

古文：昔晋侯问叔向曰： 国家之患孰为大？ 对曰： 大臣持禄而不极谏，小臣畏罪而不敢言，下情不得上通，此患之大者。 故汉文感女子之说而肉刑是除，武帝听三老之议而江充以族。
现代文： 古时候晋侯问叔向说： 国家的祸害什么最大？ 叔向说 ：大臣保持禄位而不犯颜极谏，小臣怕得罪而不敢说，国家下面的情况不能通达到上面，这是国家最大的祸患。 正由于这样，所以汉文帝有感于女子的话而废除了肉刑，汉武帝听从了三老的建议而族灭了江充。
English: In ancient times, the prince asked his uncle, "What is the greatest scourge of the country?" The uncle said, "Ministers maintain their positions without being embarrassed, and ministers are afraid to say anything for fear of offending, and the situation below the country cannot reach the top, which is the greatest scourge of the country. It is for this reason that Emperor Hanwen was inspired by the words of a woman and abolished corporal punishment, Emperor Hanwu listened to the advice of the three old men and the tribe was destroyed by Jiangchong.

古文：肉刑古法，江充近臣，女子三老，愚耄疏隔之至也。
现代文：肉刑是古代的法律，江充是皇帝的近臣，女子和三老，可以说是愚昧衰老和最疏远的人了。
English: Corporal punishment was an ancient law, and Jiang Chen was the emperor's closest vassal, the woman and the three old men, who could be said to be the most ignorant, the oldest and the most estranged.

古文：盖以义之所在，贱不可忽，二君从之，后世称圣。
现代文：可是义之所在，虽贫贱之人不可忽略，两位皇帝所以听从了他们的意见，后世都称他们为圣。
English: But where righteousness is concerned, although the poor should not be neglected, the two emperors listened to their opinions, and later generations called them saints.

古文：况国家班设爵位，列陈豪英，故当责其公忠，安可教之循默？
现代文：何况国家是专门设置了班子，颁布了爵位，罗置了大量的英豪，所以应该责备于他们秉公尽忠，怎么可以教他们因循苟且从事于沉默？
English: Moreover, the state has specially set up a team, issued a knighthood, and placed a large number of heroes, so they should be reproached for being fair and loyal. How can they be taught to follow the rules and engage in silence?

古文：赏之使谏，尚恐不言；罪其敢言，孰肯献纳？
现代文：奖赏他们，使他们尽忠直谏，犹恐他们不说；现在惩办他们敢说话的，那谁还敢呈献意见？
English: Reward them, that they may be sound in the faith, lest they should not speak: but if they shall be punished for what they have spoken, who shall dare to be heard?

古文：物情闭塞，上位孤危，轸念于兹，可为惊怛！
现代文：民间的情况闭塞，在上位的人就会孤独和危急，沉痛地想到这些，可不为之惊骇和警惕！
English: The situation of the people is blocked, and those in power will be lonely and in danger. Think of these things with sorrow, but do not be alarmed and vigilant!

古文：觊望陛下发德音，寝前诏，勤于采纳，下及刍荛，可以常守隆平，保全近辅。
现代文：殷切希望陛下发布德音，停止前次的诏命，勤于采纳群下的意见，下至于草野的小民，这样就可以长期保守兴隆和太平，也可以保全亲近和辅佐。 
English: I earnestly hope that His Majesty will issue a decree, stop the previous edict, and diligently adopt the opinions of the masses, especially the grassland peasants, so that we can maintain prosperity and peace for a long time, and also maintain closeness and assistance.

古文：寻举进士，改光禄寺主簿，知长垣县，迁大理评事，监在京店宅务。
现代文：不久苏舜钦考取了进士，改任光禄主簿，知长垣县，又迁大理寺评事，监督在京的店宅事务。
English: Soon after, Su Suqin passed the entrance examination and was appointed as the chief accountant of Guanglu, the governor of Nagagaki County, and the commentator of Dali Temple, supervising the business of shops and residences in Beijing.

古文：康定中，河东地震，舜钦诣匦通疏曰：
现代文：仁宗康定中，河东发生了地震，苏舜钦往朝廷设置的意见箱中投放了上皇帝书，书上说：
English: In the middle of the reign of Emperor Kangding of the Nizong Dynasty, an earthquake occurred in Hedong Province. Su Shiqin put the emperor's letter into the suggestion box set up by the imperial court. The letter said:

古文：臣闻河东地大震裂，涌水坏屋庐城堞，杀民畜几十万，历旬不止。
现代文： 臣闻河东地震大裂，涌出的地下水冲毁了房屋和城墙，死伤的人畜有几十万，历时十天不止。
English: The earthquake caused a large crack in the eastern part of the Sichuan River. The groundwater that gushed out destroyed houses and city walls. Hundreds of thousands of people and animals were killed and injured. It lasted more than ten days.

古文：始闻惶骇疑惑。
现代文：臣开始听到这个消息，非常惊惶和疑惑。
English: The minister began to hear the news with great dismay and doubt.

古文：窃思自编策所纪前代衰微丧乱之世，亦未尝有此大变。
现代文：窃思自史策所记载的前代的衰微丧乱的朝代，也未曾有过如此大的灾祸。
English: Looking back on the previous dynasties of decline and turmoil recorded by historians, there has never been such a great calamity.

古文：今四圣接统，内外平宁，戎夷交欢，兵革偃息，固与夫衰微丧乱之世异，何灾变之作反过之耶？
现代文：今我朝四个圣君相继统治全国，国内国外太平安宁，周边各国与我国相互交欢，兵革不兴，完全和衰微丧乱的朝代不同，为什么天灾和变异反而比那些朝代还厉害呢？
English: Today, the Four Holy Kings of the Ming and Qing Dynasties have successively ruled the whole country. There is peace and tranquility at home and abroad. The neighboring countries and our country enjoy each other. There is no war. This is completely different from the dynasties of decline and chaos. Why are natural disasters and mutations more severe than those dynasties?

古文：且妖祥之兴，神实尸之，各以类告，未尝妄也。
现代文：且妖异和吉祥的出现，神实际上主管着，各以其不同的类型显告于人世，从来未曾有过混淆。
English: Moreover, God is actually in charge of the appearance of the strange and auspicious, each of which is revealed to the world in its different types, and there has never been any confusion.

古文：天人之应，古今之鉴，大可恐惧。
现代文：天人的感应，古今以来的借鉴，大可以使人感到恐惧。
English: Divine inspiration, a reference from ancient times to the present, can greatly frighten people.

古文：岂王者安于逸豫、信任近臣而不省政事乎？
现代文：难道是我朝帝王安于逸乐、宠信近臣而荒废了政事吗？
English: Is it possible that I, as emperor, am content with pleasure and trust my close vassals, and have neglected political affairs?

古文：庙堂之上，有非才苟禄、窃弄威福而侵上事者乎？
现代文：还是朝廷之上有不才之徒冒领俸禄、窃弄权柄和福威侵犯了帝王的事业？
English: Or were there incompetents at the top of the imperial court who pretended to receive salaries, stole power and authority, and violated the emperor's cause?

古文：又岂施设之政有不便民者乎？
现代文：又难道是施行的政治有不便于民的吗？
English: Or is it that the politics being practiced is inconvenient for the people?

古文：深宫之中，有阴教不谨以媚道进者乎？
现代文：或者是在深宫之中，有暗中教唆不谨慎有以谄媚获官职的吗？
English: Or is it in the depths of the palace that someone secretly instigates imprudence and obsequiousness to obtain an official position?

古文：西北羌夷有背盟犯顺之心乎？
现代文：抑是西北的羌族有背盟想侵犯大宋的心理呢吗？
English: Or is it that the Yi people in the northwest have the mentality of wanting to encroach on the Great Song Dynasty?

古文：臣从远方来，不知近事，心疑而口不敢道也。
现代文：臣从远方来，不知道朝中最近的事情，心虽有所怀疑而嘴却不敢说。
English: The vassal came from far away and did not know about the recent events in the DPRK. Although his heart had doubts, his mouth did not dare to speak.

古文：所怪者，朝廷见此大异，不修阙政，以厌天戒、安民心，默然不恤，如无事之时。谏官、御史不闻进牍铺白灾害之端，以开上心。
现代文：所感到奇怪的，是朝廷看到这样大的灾异，却不修有缺陷的政事，以此来应对天戒，安定民心，而却默然不加以抚恤，好像没事情的时候一样；谏官、御史都没有听到有人上疏叙述灾害发生的原因，以开导皇帝的思想。
English: What is strange is that the imperial court saw such a great disaster, but did not repair the defective political affairs, in order to respond to the commandments of heaven and stabilize the people's hearts, but silently did not take care of it, as if there was no matter; the eunuchs and the imperial history did not hear anyone explain the causes of the disaster in order to enlighten the emperor's thoughts.

古文：然民情汹汹，聚首横议，咸有忧悸之色。
现代文：但是全国的老百姓却群情汹汹，到处聚在一起议论，脸上都呈现一种忧伤和恐怖的形色。
English: But the common people of the whole country were in a violent mood, gathering everywhere to discuss, with a sad and fearful look on their faces.

古文：臣以世受君禄，身齿国命，涵濡惠泽，以长此躯，目睹心思，惊怛流汗，欲尽吐肝胆，以拜封奏。
现代文： 臣以世代受到国君的俸禄，身膺国命，涵恩渥泽，以成长此躯，但眼睛所看到的，心里所想的，却使人惊悸汗流，想尽吐心中的想法，以拜谢皇帝的恩典。
English: For generations, vassals have received the salary of the sovereign, the body of the country, and the grace of the emperor to grow this body, but what the eyes see, what the heart thinks, makes people sweat, and they want to express their thoughts as much as possible, in order to thank the emperor's grace.

古文：又见范仲淹以刚直忤奸臣，言不用而身窜谪，降诏天下，不许越职言事。
现代文：但又看见范仲淹以刚直而忤犯了奸臣的意旨，意见既未被采用而身体却遭到了贬谪流窜，而且朝廷还降诏全国，不许臣民从此越职言事。
English: However, he also saw that Fan Zhongyun had violated the intention of the treacherous minister with his uprightness, the opinion had not been adopted and the body had been demeaned, and the imperial court had also demoted the whole country, not allowing the subjects to exceed their duties.

古文：臣不避权右，必恐横罹中伤，无补于国，因自悲嗟，不知所措。
现代文：臣不避权贵，却恐怕必定会遭到横祸被人中伤，又无补于国家，因此自己悲伤嗟叹，不知道该怎么办。
English: The vassal does not avoid the powerful, but I am afraid that he will inevitably be slandered by the evil, and will not help the country, so he is sad and sighs, and does not know what to do.

古文：既而孟春之初，雷震暴作，臣以谓国家阙失，众臣莫敢为陛下言者，唯天丁宁以告陛下。
现代文： 既而正月初，地震大爆发，臣以为国家政事有缺失，众臣没有人敢向陛下说，只有上天一再地嘱咐以告诫陛下。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the year, an earthquake broke out, and the courtiers thought that there was a defect in the national politics. None of the courtiers dared to tell His Majesty, only Heaven repeatedly ordered them to admonish His Majesty.

古文：陛下果能沛发明诏，许群臣皆得献言，臣初闻之踊跃欣抃。
现代文：陛下果然能够沛然发出明诏，准许群臣都得上书言事，臣开始听到也非常欣喜踊跃。
English: His Majesty was indeed able to issue a clear edict, allowing all ministers to write and speak, and the ministers were very happy to hear it.

古文：旬日间颇有言事者，其间岂无切中时病，而未闻朝廷举而行之，是亦收虚言而不根实效也。
现代文：旬日之内颇有上书言事的人，但是里面难道没有切中时弊的奏章？却没有听到朝廷有推荐而加以施行的举动，这也是只注重虚言而不根据实际效果。
English: There are quite a few people who write and speak within a few days, but is there not a timely message in it? But they have not heard the recommendation from the imperial court to implement it. This is also only focusing on lies and not based on actual results.

古文：臣闻唯诚可以应天，唯实可以安民，今应天不以诚，安民不以实，徒布空文，增人太息耳，将何以谢神灵而救弊乱也！
现代文：臣听说只有诚心才可以感动天，只有办实事才可以安定民心，今天想感动天却不以诚心，想安定民心却不办实事，徒颁布一纸空文，只是增加人们一阵叹息罢了，又怎么能够感谢神灵而挽救时弊和变乱呢！
English: The minister heard that only sincerity can move the heavens, and only doing real things can stabilize the people's hearts. Today, if you want to move the heavens, you don't do it with sincerity, and if you want to stabilize the people's hearts, you don't do real things. You just promulgate a piece of paper, just adding a sigh to the people. How can you thank the gods and save the times and turmoil?

古文：岂大臣蒙塞天听，不为陛下行之？
现代文：难道是大臣蒙蔽和堵塞了皇帝的视听，使陛下不能够施行？
English: Was it the minister who blinded and blocked the emperor's audio-visual so that his majesty could not perform?

古文：岂言事迂阔无所取，不足行也？
现代文：还是所说的事情都是迂阔毫无所取，不足以实行？
English: Or are all the things that have been said too broad, too vague, and not enough to be implemented?

古文：臣窃见纲纪隳败，政化阙失，其事甚众，不可概举，谨条大者二事以闻：
现代文：臣私自看到朝廷的纪纲隳败，政治和教化残缺而失误，这些事情非常多，不可一概列举，现只选择大的两件事情疏呈以闻：
English: Since I saw that the discipline of the imperial court had been ruined, that politics and education were incomplete, and that mistakes had been made, there are many such things that cannot be enumerated, so I have chosen only two major things to share with you:

古文：一曰正心。
现代文： 第一件事情是正心。
English: The first thing is sincerity.

古文：夫治国如治家，治家者先修己，修己者先正心，心正则神明集而万务理。
现代文：要知道治国譬如治家，治家的人首先要修正自己，所谓修正自己就是要先修正自己的心，因为心正则神明集中而万事万物得到治理。
English: It should be known that governing a country is like governing a family, and those who govern a family must first correct themselves. The so-called correction of oneself is to first correct one's own heart, because the heart is the center of the gods and everything is governed.

古文：今民间传陛下比年稍迩俳优贱人，燕乐逾节，赐予过度。
现代文：今天民间传闻陛下近年以来稍微亲近一些以乐舞谐戏等为业的贱人，欢乐宴饮过节，赏赐过度。
English: Today, folk rumor has it that in recent years, His Majesty has become a little too close to some of the hussies who make their living from music, dance, and opera, and that he has treated them to extravagant feasts and gifts.

古文：燕乐逾节则荡，赐予过度则侈。
现代文：欢乐宴饮过节就会流于放荡，赏赐过度则会流于奢侈。
English: Happy feasting and drinking during the festival will flow into debauchery, and excessive rewards will flow into luxury.

古文：荡则政事不亲，侈则用度不足。
现代文：放荡则国家的政事不能亲自处理，奢侈则国家用度会不足。
English: If one is dissolute, one cannot personally handle the affairs of state. If one is extravagant, the state will not have enough resources.

古文：臣窃观国史，见祖宗日视朝，旰昃方罢，犹坐于后苑，门有白事者，立得召对，委曲询访，小善必纳。
现代文：臣私自观看了我朝的历史，看到我们祖宗日日视察朝廷，天黑才罢朝，这时犹一人坐在后苑，遇到门上有报告事的人，立刻就召见，委婉曲折多方进行询问，有一点好意见一定被采纳。
English: I personally watched the history of my dynasty. I saw that our ancestors inspected the imperial court every day, and only left the imperial court after dark. At that time, Judah was sitting alone in the backyard. When he met someone who had a report on the door, he immediately summoned him and made many inquiries in various ways. One good suggestion was definitely adopted.

古文：真宗末年不豫，始间日视事。
现代文：真宗末年身体不太好，才开始隔日一视事。
English: In the last years of his life, Shinshu's health was not so good, and he only began to see things clearly the next day.

古文：今陛下春秋鼎盛，实宵衣旰食求治之秋，而乃隔日御殿，此政事不亲也。
现代文：今天陛下春秋鼎盛，年富力强，实在是天不亮就穿衣起床，延迟到晚上才得以吃饭的励精求治的时候，而现在却隔一天才临朝，这是对政事疏远了。
English: Today, His Majesty is in the full bloom of spring and autumn, and he is rich and strong. It is really a time when he gets dressed and gets up before dawn, and when he has to wait until the evening to be able to eat, and now it is only a day later that he visits the Imperial Palace. This is a distancing from political affairs.

古文：又府库匮竭，民鲜盖藏，诛敛科率，殆无虚日。
现代文：而且现在国库空虚，老百姓没有被褥和存粮，而国家的苛捐杂税、对老百姓的催逼却没有一天停止过。
English: Moreover, the state treasury is now empty, the people have not been plundered and stored grain, and the state's harsh taxes and the urging of the people have not stopped for a day.

古文：计度经费，二十倍于祖宗时，此用度不足也。
现代文：计算国家向老百姓征收的经费，大约二十倍于祖宗的时候，这说明国家的用度已经一天天不足了。
English: When calculating the funds collected by the state from the people, it is about twenty times that of the ancestors, which shows that the state's expenditure has been insufficient day by day.

古文：政事不亲，用度不足，诚国大忧。
现代文：对政事疏远，国家的用度又不足，这诚是国家的大忧患。
English: Alienation from political affairs and insufficient use of the state are serious problems for the country.

古文：臣望陛下修己以御人，洗心以鉴物，勤听断，舍燕安，放弃优谐近习之纤人，亲近刚明鲠直之良士。
现代文：臣希望陛下修正自己以统治别人，洗心革面以鉴别万物，勤于听断政事，放弃游乐，疏远那些以乐舞谐戏为业的艺人，亲近刚明正直的良士。
English: The minister hopes that His Majesty will correct himself to rule others, purify his heart and face to distinguish all things, diligently listen to political affairs, give up entertainment, alienate those artists who are engaged in music and dance, and be close to honest and upright good men.

古文：因此灾变，以思永图，则天下幸甚。
现代文：因这次灾祸和变异，而想奋发图强、长治久安，则是全国人民的幸福。
English: Because of this calamity and mutation, it is the happiness of the people of the whole country to strive to be strong and long-term peace.

古文：其二曰择贤。
现代文： 第二件事情是择贤。
English: The second thing is the selection of talent.

古文：夫明主劳于求贤而逸于任使，然盈庭之士不须尽择，在择一二辅臣及御史、谏官而已。
现代文：要知道英明的君主劳苦于求贤而安心于任用使唤人才，当然满朝的文武官员不需要皇帝一个个亲自选择，皇帝主要在于选择好宰辅和御史、谏官罢了。
English: It is important to know that a wise monarch works hard to seek out the best and is at ease in appointing the best talent. Of course, the civil and military officials of the Manchu Dynasty do not need to be personally selected by the emperor. The emperor mainly needs to choose a good vice-president, imperial historian and eunuch.

古文：陛下用人尚未慎择。
现代文：可是臣认为陛下在用人方面还未慎重地加以选择。
English: However, I believe that His Majesty has not yet made a careful selection in terms of personnel.

古文：昨王随自吏部侍郎迁门下侍郎平章事，超越十资，复为上相。
现代文：昨天王随从吏部侍郎一下子升迁为门下侍郎平章事。超越了十级资历，又再提升为上相。
English: Yesterday, Wang Sui was suddenly promoted from the secretary of the cadre department to the subordinate secretary Hei Zhangji. He surpassed the ten-level qualification and was promoted to the senior minister.

古文：此乃非常之恩，必待非常之才，而随虚庸邪谄，非辅相之器，降麻之后，物论沸腾。
现代文：这是一种特殊的恩典，也只有对待特殊的人才才行，可是王随为人虚伪庸俗奸邪谄媚，不是宰辅的材料，自颁降诏后，全国舆论沸腾，都认为用人失当。
English: This is a special grace, and it is only possible to treat special talents. However, the king's followers are hypocritical, vulgar, treacherous, and charming, and are not the material of the vice-premiers. Since the issuance of the Edict of Abdication, the national public opinion is boiling, and they all think that it is improper to employ people.

古文：故疾缠其身，灾仍于国，此亦天意爱惜我朝，陛下鉴之哉！
现代文：所以疾病缠绕一个人的身体，灾害不断地侵袭一个国家，这都是上天有意爱惜我们大宋王朝，陛下应该引起注意而加以鉴戒！
English: Therefore, a disease wrapping around a person's body, and disasters constantly invading a country, are all God's intention to cherish our Great Song Dynasty. Your Majesty should pay attention and admonish them!

古文：且石中立顷在朝行，以诙谐自任，士人或有宴集，必置席间，听其语言，以资笑噱。
现代文：况且石中立近在朝廷，以诙谐逗乐作为自己的责任，士大夫或有什么宴乐集会，必请他出席，目的在于听取他的言辞，以作为嬉笑取闹的资料。
English: Moreover, Shi Zhongli was close to the imperial court, and he regarded it as his duty to play witty and amusing roles. If there were any banquet gatherings, he would be invited to attend. The purpose was to listen to his words and use them as a source of fun and mischief.

古文：今处之近辅，不闻嘉谋，物望甚轻，人情所忽，使灾害屡降而朝廷不尊，盖近臣多非才者。
现代文：今天陛下把他处在近辅的位置，却没有听到他出一件嘉谋良策，他在朝中威望甚轻，人们都忽视他，现在灾害屡次降临而朝廷不尊显，缺乏威望，大概是由于皇帝身边的近臣大多数不是有贤才的人。
English: Today, His Majesty has placed him in the position of a close aide, but has not heard him come up with a single good strategy. His prestige in the court is very low, and people ignore him. Now, disasters repeatedly occur and the court is not respected. The lack of prestige is probably due to the fact that most of the courtiers around the emperor are not talented people.

古文：陛下左右尚如此，天下官吏可知也。
现代文：陛下左右都是这样，那么下面的官员更是可知了。
English: His Majesty is like this on all sides, and the officials below him are even more so.

古文：实恐远人轻笑中国，宜即行罢免，别选贤才。
现代文：实在怕别国轻笑我大宋，应立即将这些人罢免，另选贤才。
English: I'm really afraid that other countries will laugh at me, so I should immediately dismiss these people and choose other talents.

古文：又张观为御史中丞，高若讷为司谏，二人者皆登高第，颇以文词进，而温和软懦，无刚鲠敢言之气。
现代文：另外张观为御史中丞，高若讷为司谏，他们两人都登过高第，颇以文词见长，但他们两人温和软弱，毫无刚正梗直敢言的气概。
English: In addition, Zhang Guan is a historian and Gao Ruona is a priest. Both of them have been promoted to high ranks and are quite good at writing, but they are both gentle and weak, without the courage to speak out.

古文：斯皆执政引拔建置，欲其慎默，不敢举扬其私，时有所言，则必暗相关说，旁人窥之，甚可笑也。
现代文：这些人都是由执政选拔引进安置，目的是要他们保持谨慎沉默，不敢揭发宣扬他的隐私，即有时有所进言，也必暗中互相关照说明，从旁边人看来，这是非常可笑的。
English: These people were all brought in and placed by the ruling selection, with the aim of asking them to keep a discreet silence, not to dare to expose and promote his privacy, that is, sometimes there is input, but also to secretly take care of each other, from the side, this is very ridiculous.

古文：故御史、谏官之任，臣欲陛下亲择之，不令出执政门下。
现代文：所以对于御史、谏官的任命，臣希望陛下能够亲自选任，不能让他们出自执政的门下。
English: Therefore, with regard to the appointment of imperial historians and eunuchs, I hope that His Majesty will be able to personally select them, and that they will not come from the ruling family.

古文：台谏官既得其人，则近臣不敢为过，乃驭下之策也。
现代文：这样，台谏官既然得到了所需要的人才，那么近臣就不敢为非作歹，这是驾驭下面的良策。
English: In this way, since the eunuchs of Taiwan have obtained the talent they need, the vassals will not dare to do anything wrong, which is a good way to control the following.

古文：臣以谓陛下身既勤俭，辅弼、台谏又皆得人，则天下何忧不治，灾异何由而生？
现代文： 臣认为陛下如果本身做到了勤俭，宰辅、台谏官又都所用得人，这样又何患国家不能治好，灾异又怎么能够发生？
English: The vassal thought that if His Majesty himself was diligent and frugal, and the vice-premiers and eunuchs were all useful people, then how many diseases could the country not cure, and how could disasters occur?

古文：惟陛下少留意焉。
现代文：那时，只是希望陛下稍微留意这些事情就行了。 
English: At that time, I just hope that His Majesty will pay a little attention to these things.

古文：范仲淹荐其才，召试，为集贤校理，监进奏院。
现代文：范仲淹向仁宗推荐苏舜钦的才能，仁宗皇帝召苏舜钦面试，委任他为集贤院校理，监督进奏院。
English: Fan Zhongyun recommended Su Shiqin's talent to Emperor Nanzong. Emperor Nanzong called Su Shiqin for an interview and appointed him as the director of the academy to supervise the entrance into the academy.

古文：舜钦娶宰相杜衍女，衍时与仲淹、富弼在政府，多引用一时闻人，欲更张庶事。
现代文：苏舜钦娶宰相杜衍的女儿为妻，杜衍当时与范仲淹、富弼在朝中，多引用一些一时有名的人物，想改革朝中政事。
English: Su Shiqin married the daughter of the prime minister Du Yan. Du Yan was at that time in the imperial court with Fan Zhongyan and Fuxi. He often quoted some famous figures to reform the political affairs of the imperial court.

古文：御史中丞王拱辰等不便其所为。
现代文：御史中丞王拱辰等不满意杜衍他们的行为。
English: Gu Shizhongzhen Wang Gongchen and others were not satisfied with Du Yan's behavior.

古文：会进奏院祠神，舜钦与右班殿直刘巽辄用鬻故纸公钱召妓乐，间夕会宾客。
现代文：适逢奏院祭神，苏舜钦与右班殿直刘巽用卖故纸的公家的钱雇请乐妓，晚上大会宾客。
English: Su Yuqin and his right-hand man Liu Ye used public money from the sale of ancient paper to hire a prostitute, and they were the guests of the congress in the evening.

古文：拱辰廉得之，讽其属鱼周询等劾奏，因欲摇动衍。
现代文：王拱辰侦得这种情况非常高兴，就指使其下属鱼周询等上疏劾奏苏舜钦，目的在于动摇杜衍。
English: Wang Gongchen was very pleased to detect this situation, and he pointed out that his subordinate Yu Zhou Ying and others had slandered Su Suqin, with the aim of shaking Du Yan.

古文：事下开封府劾治，于是舜钦与巽俱坐自盗除名，同时会者皆知名士，因缘得罪逐出四方者十余人。
现代文：皇帝把这件事情下到开封府去侦治，于是苏舜钦和刘巽都以监守自盗罪被开除，当时参加宴会的都是知名人士，因这件事情得罪和被流放四方的有十几个人。
English: The emperor sent the matter to the Kaifeng government to investigate, and both Su Suqin and Liu Xuan were expelled for the crime of stealing from the guards. At that time, the banquet was attended by famous people, and more than a dozen people were offended and exiled because of this matter.

古文：世以为过薄，而拱辰等方自喜曰： 吾一举网尽矣。 
现代文：当世的人都以为这件事情处理得过于苛刻，可是王拱辰等却高兴地说： 我们这一次一网把他们打尽了。 
English: Contemporary people thought that this matter was handled too harshly, but Wang Gongchen and others were happy to say: This time we beat them all.

古文：舜钦既放废，寓于吴中，其友人韩维责以世居京师而去离都下，隔绝亲交。
现代文：苏舜钦既被废除，居在吴中，他的朋友韩维责备他世代居在京师却离开京师而居在他乡，并且宣布与他绝交。
English: Su Yuqin was abolished and lived in Wuzhong. His friend Han Wei Guo reproached him for living in Beijing for generations but leaving Beijing to live in another township, and declared that he had broken off diplomatic relations with him.

古文：舜钦报书曰：
现代文：苏舜钦在痛苦之余给他回信说：
English: Su Yuqin wrote back to him in pain, saying:

古文：蒙闻责以兄弟在京师，不以义相就，独羁外数千里，自取愁苦。
现代文： 承蒙来信责备我兄弟亲友都在京城，而却不以义相亲，独自一人远离开亲人独居于数千里之外，是自己寻找苦恼。
English: I received a letter reproaching me that my brothers, relatives and friends are all in Beijing, but they do not make friends with righteousness, they live alone thousands of miles away from their relatives, and they are looking for trouble.

古文：予岂无亲戚之情，岂不知会合之乐也？
现代文：要知道，我难道没有亲戚之情，岂不知道兄弟亲友在一起聚会是非常快乐的？
English: You know, don't I have a kinship feeling, don't I know that brothers, relatives and friends are very happy to gather together?

古文：安肯舍安逸而甘愁苦哉！
现代文：我又怎么愿意自动放弃安逸生活而自甘过愁苦的生活呀！
English: How I would like to give up my comfortable life and live a miserable life!

古文：昨在京师，不敢犯人颜色，不敢议论时事，随众上下，心志蟠屈不开，固亦极矣。
现代文： 过去在京师，不敢触犯人家的颜色，不敢议论当时的政事，随着大家上下浮沉，心志遭到委屈不能开心，已经达到极点了。
English: In the past, in Beijing, I did not dare to touch the color of the prisoner's home, I did not dare to discuss the political affairs at that time, with everyone's ups and downs, I could not be happy when I was wronged, I had reached the extreme.

古文：不幸适在嫌疑之地，不能决然早自引去，致不测之祸，捽去下吏，人无敢言，友仇一波，共起谤议。
现代文：不幸我又恰巧处在嫌疑的位置，又不能自己决意早点引去，这就招致了不测之祸，被抓去下到狱吏，人没有敢为我说话的，朋友和仇人形成了一气，共同对我进行了诽谤攻击。
English: Unfortunately, I happened to be in a position of suspicion, and I couldn't bring myself to leave early, which led to an unforeseen disaster. I was taken down to the warden, no one dared to speak for me, friends and enemies formed an alliance and jointly slandered and attacked me.

古文：被废之后，喧然未已，更欲置之死地然后为快。
现代文：自我被废除之后，犹自喧嚣不已，更想把我置之死地而后为快。
English: Ever since I was abolished, there has been no end to the clamor, and they would like nothing better than to put me to death.

古文：来者往往钩赜言语，欲以传播，好意相恤者几希矣。
现代文：来看望我的人往往是为了探求我有什么秘藏的言论，想以此加以传播宣扬，真正好意安慰和同情我的人是非常少的。
English: People who come to see me often do so in order to find out what secrets I have to say and to spread the word about it. Very few people are genuinely interested in consoling and sympathizing with me.

古文：故闭户不敢与相见，如避兵寇。
现代文：所以我闭门不敢与这些人相见，像躲避寇仇一样。
English: That's why I don't dare to meet with these people behind closed doors, as if I were hiding from a vendetta.

古文：偷俗如此，安可久居其间！
现代文：风俗的败坏像这，我又怎么能够久在那里住呢！
English: How could I live there for so long, with such decadence?

古文：遂超然远举，羁泊于江湖之上，不唯衣食之累，实亦少避机阱也。
现代文：因此我便超然远走，离开京师，羁旅飘泊于江湖之上，不光是为了衣食之累，实际上是为了躲避使自己少遭到陷阱。
English: Therefore, I went far away, away from Beijing, and wandered over the rivers and lakes, not only for the sake of food and clothing, but actually to avoid traps.

古文：况血属之多，资入之薄，持国见之矣。
现代文： 况且亲属之多，收资的微薄，持国是看到了的。
English: Moreover, there are a lot of relatives, the fundraising is meager, and the holding of the country is seen.

古文：常相团聚，可乏衣食乎？
现代文：经常互相团聚，可以没有衣服穿饭吃吗？
English: They often get together. Can they eat without clothes on?

古文：不可也。
现代文：是不行的。
English: It's not going to work either.

古文：可闭关常不与人接乎？
现代文：这种情况又可不可能经常闭门不与人接触呢？
English: Is it not possible that this situation often takes place behind closed doors, without any human contact?

古文：不可也。
现代文：也是不行的。
English: It's not going to work either.

古文：与人接必与之言，与之言必与之还往，使人人皆如持国则可，不迨持国者必加酿恶言，喧布上下，使仆不能自明，则前日之事未为重也。
现代文：与人接触，就必须与人讲话，与人讲话就必须与别人交往，使每个人都像持国这样就好了，赶不上持国这样的人与之交往就一定会对我加紧制造恶言，从而喧嚣传播上下，使我不能够自明，这样，过去发生的事情就不会是最重大的了。
English: In order to have contact with people, it is necessary to talk to people, and in order to talk to people, it is necessary to interact with others, so that everyone can be like Shing Guo. If you can't catch up with Shing Guo and interact with him, you will definitely intensify the creation of evil words to me, and thus spread noisily up and down, so that I can't be self-evident, so that what happened in the past will not be the most important.

古文：都无此事，亦终日劳苦，应接之不暇，寒暑奔走尘土泥淖中，不能了人事，羸马饿仆，日栖栖取辱于都城，使人指背讥笑哀闵，亦何颜面，安得不谓之愁苦哉！
现代文： 在都城为了这些事情，我终日劳苦，每天应接不暇，不论寒暑总奔走于尘土泥淖之中，还不能了却人事，一匹瘦马一个饿仆，每天栖栖惶惶地取辱于都城，让人家指着背脊讥笑怒骂和哀怜，这样，我还有什么脸面，又怎么不称得上是愁苦呢！
English: For these things in the capital, I toil all day long, I am swamped with responsibilities every day, no matter whether it is hot or cold, I am always running in the dust and mud, I am still unable to do anything, but I am a person, a thin horse, a hungry servant, I live in the capital every day, I am humiliated, I have people pointing at my back, I am ridiculed, I am scolded and pitied, so what face do I have, and how can I not be called sad?

古文：此虽与兄弟亲戚相远，而伏腊稍足，居室稍宽，无终日应接奔走之劳，耳目清旷，不设机关以待人，心安闲而体舒放。
现代文： 我在这里虽然与兄弟亲戚相远，可是夏冬衣食稍微充足，居室比较宽，没有整天应酬奔走的劳苦，耳目清静，不要挖空心思以对待别人，心安闲而身体舒放。
English: Although I am far away from my brothers and relatives here, I have enough food and clothing in summer and winter, the living room is relatively wide, I don't have the labor of running around all day, my eyes and ears are clear, I don't have to dig into my heart to treat others, my mind is at ease and my body is relaxed.

古文：三商而眠，高舂而起，静院明窗之下，罗列图史琴樽以自愉悦，有兴则泛小舟出盘、阊二门，吟啸览古于江山之间。
现代文：天黑了就睡觉太阳很高了才起，在静院明窗之下，罗列图书史册杯盘和琴以自愉悦，有兴致就泛一叶扁舟出盘、阊二门，从而吟啸鉴古于苍茫山水之间。
English: When it's dark, you go to bed. When the sun is high, you get up. Under the open window of the Secluded Courtyard, you can enjoy the collection of books, historical records, cups and pans, and the piano. If you are interested, you can take a boat out of the boat and go to the two gates, so that you can listen to the ancient music in the vast landscape.

古文：渚茶、野酿足以销忧，菁鲈、稻蟹足以适口。
现代文：煮茶和在野外饮酒可以消除我的烦恼，茶菜和鲈鱼脍以及稻蟹可以满足我的口福。
English: Cooking tea and drinking alcohol in the open air can eliminate my troubles, and tea and eel stew and rice crabs can satisfy my palate.

古文：又多高僧隐君子，佛庙胜绝，家有园林，珍花奇石，曲池高台，鱼鸟留连，不觉日暮。
现代文：这里又多高僧和隐君子，佛庙绝胜，家家都有园林，还有珍花奇石，曲池高台和鱼鸟之胜，使你流连忘返，不觉就到日暮。
English: There are also many high monks and hermits, Buddhist temples, gardens, and rare flowers and stones, Quchi Plateau and fish and bird victory, so that you can linger and forget, and you will reach dusk.

古文：昔孔子作《春秋》而夷吴，又曰： 吾欲居九夷。 观今之风俗，乐善好事，知予守道好学，皆欣然愿来过从，不以罪人相遇，虽孔子复生，是亦必欲居此也。
现代文： 古时孔子做《春秋》而以吴为夷，他又说 ：我想居九夷。 我看今天吴地的风俗，乐善好施，知道我谨守善道和好学，都高兴得愿意和我交往，从不以罪人来看待我，如果孔子再生，我相信他是会喜欢住在这里的。
English: In ancient times, Confucius made "Spring and Autumn" and chose Wu as his capital. He also said, "I want to live in Jiujiang. I see the customs of today's Wuxi, the kindness and generosity, and I know that I am careful to keep the good way and eager to learn. They are so happy that they are willing to associate with me and never look at me as a sinner. If Confucius were to be reborn, I believe he would like to live here.

古文：以彼此较之，孰为然哉！
现代文：把这里和京都比较，究竟哪里为更好呢！
English: If you compare it to Kyoto, which is better?

古文：人生内有自得，外有所适，固亦乐矣，何必高位厚禄，役人以自奉养，然后为乐？
现代文：一个人的一生内心安然自得，外面又有舒适的环境，那就很快乐了，何必非要高官厚禄，奴役别人以奉养自己，然后才叫作快乐。
English: A person's inner life is safe and secure, and there is a comfortable environment outside, then he is very happy. Why do you have to be a high-ranking official, enslave others to support yourself, and then call it happiness.

古文：今虽侨此，亦如仕宦南北，安可与亲戚常相守耶！
现代文：我今天虽然是侨居在这里，这也就好像过去离开家做官在南北一样，又何必要与亲戚朝夕相厮守呢？
English: Although I am an expatriate living here today, it is just like leaving home to work as an official in the north and south in the past. Why is it necessary to spend time with relatives in the morning and evening?

古文：予窘迫，势不得如持国意，必使我尸转沟洫，肉餧豺虎，而后以为安所义，何其忍耶！
现代文：我出于窘迫，形势完全是不得已，但是这却不能如持国的意，难道非要使我流尸沟壑，我的肉喂饱豺虎，而后才认为我安于仁义，这又何其残忍啊！
English: Out of my embarrassment, the situation is completely out of necessity, but this cannot be the intention of holding the country. Is it necessary to let my corpse flow into the ditch, my meat to feed the tigers, and then think that I am satisfied with benevolence, what a cruelty!

古文：《诗》曰： 凡今之人，莫如兄弟。 谓兄弟以恩，急难必相拯救。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 凡今天的人，莫有哪个赶得上兄弟。 这是说兄弟必须以恩，有急难必须互相拯救。
English: The "Song of Songs" says, "No one alive today is equal to a brother," which means that brothers must be kind to each other, and must save each other in times of trouble.

古文：后章曰： 丧乱既平，既安且宁，虽有兄弟，不如友生。 谓友朋尚义，安宁之时，以礼义相琢磨。
现代文：《诗经》的后章说 ：丧乱既然平定，社会已经安定。虽然有了兄弟，不如朋友亲近。 这是说明朋友必须尚义，在太平安宁的日子里，要以礼义互相切磋琢磨。
English: The latter chapter of the "Book of Songs" says: Since the turmoil has been settled, society has been stable. Although there are brothers, they are not as close as friends. This shows that friends must be righteous, and in the days of peace and tranquility, they must compete with each other in courtesy and righteousness.

古文：予于持国，外兄弟也。
现代文：我对于持国，是兄弟以外的朋友。
English: I am more than a brother to Mochikuni.

古文：急难不相救，又于未安宁之际，欲以义相琢刻，虽古人所不能受，予欲不报，虑浅吾持国也。
现代文：我有急难不能相救，又在没有太平安宁的时候，想以义与我相琢磨，这虽是古代的人也不能接受，我想要不回报，担心是不是看轻了我的持国了。 
English: I am in dire straits and cannot save myself, and when there is no peace and tranquility, I want to think about righteousness with me. Although this is unacceptable to ancient people, I do not want to reciprocate, I am worried about whether I have taken my country lightly.

古文：二年，得湖州长史，卒。
现代文：第二年，苏舜钦得任湖州长史，不久去世。
English: The following year, Su Suqin was appointed governor of Hubei Province and died soon after.

古文：舜钦数上书论朝廷事，在苏州买水石作沧浪亭，益读书，时发愤懑于歌诗，其体豪放，往往惊人。
现代文：他数次上书论述朝廷的政事，在苏州买水石做沧浪亭，益发愤读书，经常把他愤懑的心情表现于诗歌中，他的诗歌非常豪放，往往使人惊奇。
English: He wrote several times to discuss the political affairs of the imperial court, bought waterstones in Suzhou to make a canglang pavilion, and read with increasing anger. He often expressed his angry mood in poetry. His poetry was very bold and often surprising.

古文：善草书，每酣酒落笔，争为人所传。
现代文：他又善于草书，每次酒酣动笔，所写的字争为人们所传看。
English: He was also good at cursive, and every time he moved his pen, the words he wrote were passed down for people to see.

古文：及谪死。世尤惜之。
现代文：及他贬谪而死，世人都惋惜他。
English: He died in disgrace, and the world mourned for him.

古文：妻杜氏，有贤行。
现代文：他的妻子杜氏也有贤行。
English: His wife, Toji, was also a virtuous woman.

古文：兄舜元，字才翁，为人精悍任气节，为歌诗亦豪健，尤善草书，舜钦不能及。
现代文：苏舜钦的哥哥苏舜元字才翁，为人精悍任侠，崇尚气节，所写的诗歌也雄健豪放，尤其善于草书，苏舜钦不能及。
English: Su Suqin's elder brother, Su Suyuan, was a man of great talent. He was a brave warrior and a great admirer of the Qing Dynasty. He was also a talented poet. He was especially good at cursive writing, which Su Suqin could not match.

古文：官至尚书度支员外郎、三司度支判官。
现代文：苏舜元官做到尚书度支员外郎、三司度支判官。
English: Su Xuan Yuan was able to become the vice-chairman of the Shandong Provincial Party Committee and the vice-judge of the Third Provincial Party Committee.

