古文：崔祖思刘善明苏侃垣荣祖崔祖思，字敬元，清河东武城人，崔琰七世孙也。
现代文：崔祖思字敬元，清河东武城人，是崔琰的七世孙。
English: Cui Zu Si Zi Jing Yuan, a native of Wucheng in the east of the Qing River, is the seventh-generation grandson of Cui Yao.

古文：祖諲，宋冀州刺史。
现代文：祖父名诞，是宋的冀州刺史。
English: My grandfather's famous birthday is the history of Jizhou in the Song Dynasty.

古文：父僧护，州秀才。
现代文：父亲名僧护，州裹的秀才。
English: His father was a famous monk, and he was a talented person in the state.

古文：祖思少有志气，好读书史。
现代文：祖思年少时就有志气，喜欢读书史。
English: When Zu Si was young, he had ambition and liked to read history.

古文：初州避主簿，与刺史刘怀珍于尧庙祀神，庙有苏侯像。
现代文：起初被州裹召为主簿，与刺史刘怀珍一起到尧庙祭神，庙裹有苏侯的像。
English: At first, he was summoned by the state to be the main book, and together with Liu Huizhen, he went to the temple to worship the gods, and the temple was wrapped with the image of Su Hou.

古文：怀珍曰： 尧圣人，而与杂神为列，欲去之，何如？ 
现代文：怀珍说： 尧是圣人，却与杂神并列在一起，我想搬掉杂神，怎么样? 
English: Huai Zhen said, "He is a saint, but he is ranked alongside the evil spirits. I want to get rid of the evil spirits. How about it?

古文：祖思曰： 苏峻今日可谓四凶之五也。 
现代文：祖思说： 苏峻现在可以称得上是四凶之外的第五凶了。 
English: Zu Si said: Su Jun can now be called the fifth villain in addition to the four villains.

古文：怀珍遂令除诸杂神。
现代文：怀珍就命人搬走了那些杂神。
English: Huai Zhen ordered the people to remove the gods.

古文：太祖在淮阴，祖思闻风自结，为上辅国主簿，甚见亲待，参豫谋议。
现代文：太祖在淮阴时，祖思一听说就自去攀附，任上辅国主簿，很被亲信，参与谋划。
English: When the great-grandfather was in Huaiyin, as soon as Zhu Si heard about it, he attached himself to it. He was appointed as the chief assistant of the country and was very trusted by his relatives. He participated in the planning.

古文：除奉朝请，安成王抚军行参军，员外正员郎，冀州中正。
现代文：授任奉朝请，安成王的抚军行参军，员外正员郎，冀州中正。
English: Appointed to serve the imperial court, Prince Ancheng's tutelary army marched to join the army, and the non-commissioned officer, the vice-commissioned officer, and the vice-commissioned officer of Jizhou Province joined the army.

古文：宋朝初议封太祖为梁公，祖思启太祖曰： 谶书云 金刀利刃齐刈之 。
现代文：宋朝开国之初封太祖为梁国公，祖思告诉太祖说： 谶书上说 金刀锐利的锋刃，齐用来刈割 。
English: The founding father of the Song Dynasty was Liang Guogong. Zu Si told the founding father: "According to the book, the sharp edge of the golden sword is used for cutting.

古文：今宜称齐，实应天命。 
现代文：现在适合称齐，实可应天命。 
English: Now it is suitable to be equal, and it can actually meet the destiny.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：转为相国从事中郎，迁齐国内史。
现代文：转任相国从事中郎，升为齐国内史。
English: He was transferred to Shikoku to work as a churo (middle-ranking official) and was promoted to the rank of chō (senior official) in Shikoku history.

古文：建元元年，转长兼给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：建元元年，转任长兼给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he was transferred to the post of chief and attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：上初即位，祖思启陈政事曰： 《礼诰》者，人伦之襟冕，帝王之枢柄。
现代文：皇上刚即位，祖思奏陈政事说：《礼》和《诰》是人伦的衣襟和冠冕，是帝王治国的总纲。
English: As soon as the emperor ascended the throne, Zu Si played the role of Chen Zhengji and said: "Li" and "Ji" are the collar and crown of human relations, and are the general outline of the emperor's governance.

古文：自古开物成务，必以教学为先。
现代文：自古以来开启万物成为事务，一定把教学放在首位。
English: Since ancient times, the opening of all things has become a matter of course, and teaching must be given top priority.

古文：世不习学，民罔志义，悖竞因斯而兴，祸乱是焉而作。
现代文：世人不学习，百姓就会忘了正义，悖乱争斗因此产生，祸患因此而起。
English: If the world does not learn, the people will forget justice. Disorder and strife will result, and calamity will arise.

古文：故笃俗昌治，莫先道教，不得以夷险革虑，俭泰移业。
现代文：所以整肃流俗治好国家，没有什么比教化更重要，不能因时势的平安或危险来考虑，也不能以年成的好坏而改变事业。
English: Therefore, nothing is more important than education to rectify customs and improve the country. It cannot be considered according to the safety or danger of the current situation, nor can it change the cause according to the good or bad of the year.

古文：今无员之官，空受禄力。三载无考绩之效，九年阙登黜之序。
现代文：现在无实务的官员，白白受俸禄，三年没有任何政绩可考，九年没有升降的区别。
English: Now there are no substantive officials, they receive salaries in vain, there has been no political achievement to examine for three years, and there has been no difference between promotion and demotion for nine years.

古文：国储以之虚匮，民力为之凋散。
现代文：国家储积空虚，民力凋敝。
English: National reserves are empty, and people's power is withering.

古文：能否无章，泾渭混流。
现代文：能干和不能干的分不清，泾水和渭水混在一起。
English: The distinction between those who can and those who can't is blurred, muddy water and muddy water are mixed together.

古文：宜大庙之南，弘修文序；司农以北，广开武校。
现代文：应是朝廷面南，大修文教；司农面北，广开武场。
English: It should be that the imperial court faces south, overhauling literature and education; the farmers face north, opening a wide martial arts arena.

古文：台府州国，限外之职，问其所乐，依方课习，各尽其能。
现代文：中央和州郡藩国，京外的职官，问他们所愿意的，按各自条件学习，各尽所能。
English: Officials from the central government, prefectures, counties, and provinces, as well as those from outside Beijing, are asked what they would like to study, according to their own conditions, and do their best.

古文：月供僮干，如先充给。
现代文：每月的供给和下属，像以前一样给足。
English: The monthly supply and the subordinates, as before, give foot.

古文：若有废堕，遣还故郡。
现代文：如有办不好事的，遣回老家。
English: If there are any problems, they will be sent back to their hometowns.

古文：殊经奇艺，待以不次。
现代文：具有特殊本领的，也特殊对待，不受等级限制。
English: Those with special skills will be given special treatment and will not be subject to rank restrictions.

古文：士修其业，必有异等，民识其利，能无勉励？ 
现代文：士人修养他的学业，定有特殊人才，百姓明白了这样做的好处，怎能不努力呢。又说：
English: If a scholar cultivates his studies, he must be a special talent. If the people understand the benefits of doing so, how can they not make an effort? He also said:

古文：又曰： 汉文集上书囊以为殿帷，身衣弋绨，以韦带剑，慎夫人衣不曳地，惜中人十家之产，不为露台。
现代文：汉文帝用包扎奏书的布袋集成大块作为宫殿的帷幕，身上穿着黑粗布衣，用皮制的剑鞘佩剑，慎夫人衣裙不拖地，珍惜中等人家的十家一样多的财力，不做露台。
English: Emperor Hanwen used a cloth bag with a bandage and a book to integrate a large piece as a curtain for the palace, wearing a black coarse cloth, using a leather scabbard to carry a sword, Mrs. Shan's dress did not drag the ground, cherishing as much financial resources as ten middle-class families, and not making a terrace.

古文：刘备取帐钩铜铸钱以充国用。
现代文：刘备用做帐钩的铜来铸钱补充国用。
English: Liu Bei used the copper from which the hooks were made to mint money to supplement the state budget.

古文：魏武遣女，皂帐，婢十人；东阿妇以绣衣赐死，王景兴以淅米见诮。宋武节俭过人，张妃房唯碧绡蚊帱，三齐穀席，五盏盘桃花米饭。
现代文：魏武帝嫁女儿，用黑色的帐幕，十个婢女作陪嫁，东阿的妇人因穿绣衣而被赐死，王景兴因为淘米而被讥诮宋武帝的节俭超过一般人，张妃的房裹衹有碧捎的蚊帐，三齐用偭草织的席，五盏盘盛的桃花米饭。
English: Emperor Weiwu married his daughter with a black tent and ten maids of honor as bridesmaids. A woman in Dong'a was sentenced to death for wearing embroidered clothes. Wang Jingxing was ridiculed for stealing rice. Emperor Songwu was more frugal than the average person. Empress Zhang's house was covered with a mosquito net made of tourmaline, three tables were woven with reeds, and there were five bowls of peach blossom rice.

古文：殷仲文劝令畜伎，答云 我不解声 。
现代文：殷仲文劝他养歌伎，他回答 我不懂音乐 。
English: When Yin Zhongwen advised him to take up kabuki, he replied, "I don't know music."

古文：仲文曰 但畜自解 ，又答 畏解，故不畜 。
现代文：仲文说 衹管养来自然就懂了 ，又答 我怕懂了，所以不养伎 。
English: Zhongwen said that it is natural to understand fistulas, and replied that I am afraid to understand, so I do not raise them.

古文：历观帝王，未尝不以约素兴，侈丽亡也。
现代文：纵观历代帝王，没有不是因俭约朴素而兴盛，因奢侈华丽而灭亡的。
English: Throughout the ages of emperors, there is no one who did not prosper because of frugality and simplicity, and perish because of luxury and splendor.

古文：伏惟陛下，体唐城俭，踵虞为朴，寝殿则素木卑构，膳器则陶瓢充御。
现代文：希望陛下像唐尧那样俭约，像虞舜男阵样朴素。寝宫就用白木粗陋地建构，餐具就用陶器土瓢之类。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will be as frugal as Tang Xuan and as simple as the men of the Yue clan. The bedchamber will be built crudely with white wood, and the tableware will be made of pottery.

古文：琼簪玉箸，碎以为尘，珍裘绣服，焚之如草。
现代文：把琼玉做的簪筷之类，视作尘土一样把它们打碎，把珍裘绣服，当作草一样烧了。
English: They smashed chopsticks made of Qiong Yu as if they were dust, and burned Qiong Yu's embroidered clothes as if they were grass.

古文：斯实风高上代，民偃下世矣。
现代文：这就真是风气高过上代，百姓尊崇于后世了。
English: This is really a higher ethos than the previous generation, and the people respect it in the future.

古文：然教信虽孚，氓染未革，宜加甄明，以速归厚。
现代文：教化虽然施行，但百姓的坏习惯没有革除，应加以辨明，使他们很快达到淳厚。
English: Although indoctrination has been carried out, the bad habits of the people have not been eliminated. It is necessary to identify them so that they can quickly achieve chunhu.

古文：详察朝士，有柴车蓬馆，高以殊等；雕墙华轮，卑其称谓。
现代文：仔细观察朝中人，有的虽用简陋的车子和住房，却有特高的等级；有的住着有雕画墙壁的房子和坐着华丽的车子，而称号却很卑下。
English: If you carefully observe the people of the dynasty, you will find that although some of them use humble cars and houses, they are of a very high class; others live in houses with carved walls and drive ornate cars, but their titles are very low.

古文：驰禽荒色，长违清编，嗜音酣酒，守官不徙。
现代文：玩狗马美色，常违背书理，爱音乐酣饮酒，守住职位不动。
English: Playing dress-up, often violating book rules, loving music and drinking alcohol, and not moving from his post.

古文：物识义方，且惧且劝，则调风变俗，不俟终日。 
现代文：要让他们懂得大义方正，又给予告诫和鼓励，那么移风易俗，就不用等到天黑就完成了。又说：
English: If we want them to understand the fundamentals of Daiyi, and give them admonition and encouragement, then changing customs and habits does not have to wait until nightfall. He also said:

古文：又曰： 宪律之重，由来尚矣。故曹参去齐，唯以狱市为寄，余无所言。
现代文：法律重要，从来是很注重的。所以曹参离开齐相位，衹以狱讼和市集交易两件事相托与后相，其余的话什么也没说。
English: The law is important and has always been very important. Therefore, Cao San left Qi phase and relied on the two things of prison litigation and market trading. He did not say anything else.

古文：路温舒言 秦有十失，其一尚在，治狱之吏是也 。
现代文：路温舒说： 秦有十种制度都失传了，祇有一种还存在，那就是断案的官吏 。
English: Lu Wenshu said: Ten systems of the Qin Dynasty have been lost, and only one still exists, that is, the officials who decide cases.

古文：实宜清置廷尉，茂简三官，寺丞狱主，弥重其选，研习律令，删除繁苛。
现代文：实应整肃设置廷尉，加强三官，寺丞狱主，更慎重选人担任，研究熟悉法律，删除繁琐和残酷的。
English: In fact, it is necessary to rectify the situation by appointing a courtier, strengthening the three officials, the chief priest and the warden, more carefully selecting people to serve, studying and familiarizing with the law, and deleting the cumbersome and cruel.

古文：诏狱及两县，一月三讯，观貌察情，欺枉必达。
现代文：诏狱和两县，一月报告三次，考察情况，欺君枉上的一定会知道。
English: Zhaojing and the two counties, the January report three times, the inspection of the situation, the tyrant will certainly know.

古文：使明慎用刑，无忝大《易》；宁失不经，靡愧《周书》。
现代文：让他们慎重使用刑法，无隗大《易》上所说，宁可失误而不轻易乱用，无愧《周书》上所载。
English: Let them use the criminal law prudently. As it was said in the "E," it is better to make mistakes than to abuse it easily, which is well-deserved to be included in the "Weekly."

古文：汉来治律有家，子孙并世其业，聚徒讲授，至数百人。
现代文：漠代以来研究法律的有家传的特点，子孙世代以此为业，收徒众讲授，达到几百人。
English: Since the desert era, the study of law has been a family tradition, and generations of descendants have made it their business to teach it to hundreds of students.

古文：故张、于二氏，洁誉文、宣之世；陈、郭两族，流称武、明之朝。
现代文：所以张、于二姓，在文、宣时代就有声誉；陈、郭两族，在武、明时代就出名。
English: Therefore, Zhang and Yu, the two surnames, had a reputation in the Wen and Xuan eras; Chen and Guo, the two tribes, were famous in the Wu and Ming eras.

古文：决狱无冤，庆昌枝裔，槐衮相袭，蝉紫传辉。
现代文：断案没有冤枉，宗族后代旺盛，王公重爵转相承袭，蝉冠紫绶生辉。
English: There was no wrongdoing in the decision of the case, the descendants of the clan are vigorous, Wang Gongzhongzhe inherits the succession, and the cicada crown is brilliant.

古文：今廷尉律生，乃令史门户，族非咸、弘，庭缺于训。
现代文：现在的廷尉律生，就是令史的家世，不是咸、弘那一族，在家裹缺乏训导。
English: The current courtier, Ritsuko, is from the same family as Reishi. She is not from the Haman or Hona clans, and she lacked discipline at home.

古文：刑之不措，抑此之由。
现代文：刑法不施，还是这个原因吧。
English: This is the reason why criminal law is not enforced.

古文：如详择笃厚之土，使习律令，试简有征，擢为廷尉僚属。
现代文：如仔细选择忠诚的人让他们学习法律，试用中有好的，就任为廷尉的部属。
English: If you carefully select loyal people and let them study the law, the good ones will be appointed as subordinates of the court officers.

古文：苟官世其家而不美其绩，鲜矣；废其职而欲善其事，未之有也。
现代文：如职务世世在他家族中选拔政绩却不好的情况是少有的；废弃他的职权却想他办好事，没有这种事。
English: For example, it is rare for a person who has been in his family for generations to be selected for political achievements but not do well; there is no such thing as abandoning his position but wanting him to do well.

古文：若刘累传守其业，庖人不乏龙肝之馔，断可知矣。 
现代文：像刘累那样守着家传术业，厨子都不缺龙肝做菜，这是断然可知的。
English: Like Liu Lei, who adheres to the family tradition of cooking, chefs are not short of dragon's liver to cook, which is absolutely knowable.

古文：又曰： 乐者动天地，感鬼神，正情性，立人伦，其义大矣。
现代文：又说：音乐感动天地鬼神，使人情性正大，使人伦建立，那意义很大了。
English: He also said: "Music moves heaven and earth, ghosts and spirits, makes human nature upright, and builds human relations. That is of great significance."

古文：按前汉编户千万，太乐伶官方八百二十九人，孔光等奏罢不合经法者四百四十一人，正乐定员，唯置三百八十八人。
现代文：据查前汉人户有千万，太乐伶官才八百二十九人，孑光等人奏请去掉不合礼法的四百四十一人，修正乐律确定人员，衹设置三百八十八人。
English: According to the investigation, there were tens of thousands of Han households before the investigation, and only 829 eunuchs were eunuchs. Gongguang and other eunuchs were asked to remove 441 eunuchs who did not follow the etiquette, amend the eunuchs who determined the music rhythms, and set up 388 eunuchs.

古文：今户口不能百万，而太乐雅、郑，元徽时校试千有余人，后堂杂伎，不在其数，糜废力役，伤败风俗。
现代文：现在户口不足百万，但是太乐雅、郑，元徽时查检就有一千多人，后堂的杂伎，不在那数目里面，浪费劳力，伤风败俗。
English: At present, the number of household registrations is less than one million, but when Tai Le Ya, Zheng, and Yuan Hui were inspected, there were more than a thousand people. The back hall of Zogi is not in that number, wasting labor and corrupting customs.

古文：今欲拨邪归道，莫若罢杂伎，王庭唯置钟虡、羽戚、登歌而已。
现代文：现在想要改邪归正，没有什么比废除蓄伎更重要。朝廷衹设钟帘、羽戚、登歌罢了。
English: Now, if we want to change evil into good, there is nothing more important than abolishing the gargoyles. All the imperial court has to do is to set up a bell curtain, a feather curtain, and sing a song.

古文：如此，则官充给养，国反淳风矣。 
现代文：如此，就会使职官的供给充足，国家恢复淳朴的风气了。
English: In this way, the supply of officials will be sufficient, and the country will return to a simple culture.

古文：又曰： 论儒者以德化为本，谈法者以刻削为体。
现代文：又说：谈论儒学的把道德教化作为根本，讲法制的人把严厉作为根本。
English: He also said: Those who talk about Confucianism take moral enlightenment as the fundamental, and those who talk about the legal system take severity as the fundamental.

古文：道教治世之粱肉，刑宪乱世之药石。故以教化比雨露，名法方风霜。
现代文：道德教化是太平时代的美味佳肴，刑法是治理乱世的药石，因而把教化比作雨露，把法律比作风霜。
English: Moral enlightenment is a delicacy of the Taiping era, and criminal law is a remedy for the chaotic world. Therefore, enlightenment is likened to rain, and law is likened to style.

古文：是以有耻且格，敬让之枢纽；令行禁止，为国之关楗。
现代文：因此有羞耻之心而且有规矩，是恭敬谦让的枢纽；令行禁止，是治国的关键。
English: Therefore, having a sense of shame and having rules is the hub of respect and humility; forbidding orders is the key to governing the country.

古文：然则天下治者，赏罚而已矣。
现代文：这样说来那么天下大治，衹是明赏罚罢了。
English: In this way, there is so much peace in the world, it's just reward and punishment.

古文：赏不事丰，所病于不均；罚不在重，所困于不当。
现代文：赏不在多，就怕不平均；处罚不在重，就怕用得不恰当。
English: If the reward is not much, it is afraid of not being equal; if the punishment is not heavy, it is afraid of being used inappropriately.

古文：如令甲勋少，乙功多，赏甲而舍乙，天下必有不劝矣；丙罪重，丁眚轻，罚丁而赦丙，天下必有不悛矣。
现代文：如果甲的勋劳少，乙的功劳多，赏赐了甲却没有赏给乙，天下一定有未受到鼓励的人；又假如丙的罪重，丁的罪责轻，处罚了丁却赦免了丙，天下一定有不悔改的人。
English: If A's reward is less and B's merit is more, and A is rewarded but B is not, there must be people in the world who are not encouraged; and if C's crime is heavy and D's crime is light, and Ding is punished but C is pardoned, there must be people in the world who do not repent.

古文：是赏罚空行，无当乎劝沮。
现代文：这就是白白地进行了赏罚，对于鼓励人劝阻人都不起作用。
English: This is a gratuitous reward and punishment, which does not work to encourage or dissuade people.

古文：将令见罚者宠习之臣，受赏者仇雠之士，戮一人而万国惧，赏匹夫而四海悦。 
现代文：假如被惩罚的是一贯受宠幸的臣子，受奖赏的是君王的仇人，杀了一个人却使万国惊恐，奖赏了一个平民却使天下都喜悦。又说：
English: If the one punished is a courtier who has always been favored, and the one rewarded is the king's enemy, if one man is killed, the whole world will be frightened, and if one man is rewarded, the whole world will be pleased.

古文：又曰： 籍税以厚国，国虚民贫；广田以实廪，国富民赡。
现代文：征收赋税来使朝廷富裕，但是国家空虚百姓贫穷；扩大耕地来充实仓库，那么国家富裕百姓丰足。
English: Taxes are levied to enrich the court, but the country is empty and the people are poor; arable land is expanded to fill warehouses, and then the country is rich and the people are rich.

古文：尧资用天之储，实拯怀山之数；汤凭分地之积，以胜流金之运。
现代文：尧依仗自然的储积，确实挽救了洪水滔天的厄运。汤凭藉土地的出产，来战胜酷旱的厄运。
English: Relying on natural reserves, they actually saved themselves from the terrible misfortune of the flood. Tang used the production of the land to overcome the bad luck of the drought.

古文：近代魏置典农而中都足食，晋开汝、颍而汴河委储。
现代文：近代魏设置典农，中都食物丰富；晋开掘汝水和颖水灌溉，汴河储满粮食。
English: In the modern Wei Dynasty, farmers were set up, and food was plentiful in Zhongdu; in the Jin Dynasty, people dug wells and irrigated with water, and the Wei River was full of grain.

古文：今将扫辟咸、华，题镂龙漠，宜简役敦农，开田广稼。
现代文：现在却要开启咸、华，在龙漠镂刻题铭。应减少劳役督促农耕，扩大耕地多多种植。
English: Now, however, it is necessary to open Haman and Hua, and to engrave inscriptions in Longmen. It is necessary to reduce labor supervision and encourage farming, and to expand cultivated land with more varieties of plants.

古文：时罢山池之威禁，深抑豪右之兼擅，则兵民优赡，可以出师。 
现代文：按时停止山池的禁令，狠狠抑制豪强的兼并独占，那么军民给养富足，就能随时派出军队了。又说：
English: Timely stop the ban on mountains and ponds, severely curb the annexation and monopoly of the powerful, then the military and the people will be well-fed and can send troops at any time. He also said:

古文：又曰： 古者左史记言，右史记事。故君举必书，尽直笔而不污；上无妄动，知如丝之成纶。
现代文：古代设置左史记语言，右史记事情，所以君王的行动一定会记述下来，全是率直的记载而不虚假；君王不胡乱行动，明白逭会像丝织成布一样。
English: In ancient times, the left-hand language was used to record history, and the right-hand language was used to record events. Therefore, the actions of the king would be recorded, and they were all straightforward records and not false. The king did not act recklessly, and he knew that the cocoon would be like silk woven into cloth.

古文：今者著作之官，起居而已；述事之徒，褒谀为体。
现代文：现在记事的官员，祇记起居罢了；记事的人，以颂扬阿谀为本。
English: Now, officials who keep records only have to remember to live; those who keep records are based on the glorification of grandma.

古文：世无董狐，书法必隐；时阙南史，直笔未闻。 
现代文：世间没有董狐，写出来的东西一定含蓄；当今缺少南史，未听说过有直率的文字。又说：
English: There is no Dong Foo in the world, and what is written must be subtle; today, there is a lack of southern history, and there is no direct writing. He also said:

古文：又曰： 废谏官，则听纳靡依。
现代文：废除了谏官，那么采纳意见就没有依凭。
English: If the eunuchs are abolished, then there is no basis for the adoption of the opinion.

古文：虽课励朝僚，征访刍舆，莫若推举质直，职思其忧。
现代文：即便是考察朝廷大臣，诗问隐士，不如推举正直的人，专司这个职责。
English: Even if it is to investigate a minister of the imperial court or ask a hermit for poetry, it is better to appoint an honest person to be in charge of this duty.

古文：夫越任于事，在言为难，当官而行，处辞或易。
现代文：超越职权办事，说话就难，正在职责分内的，说话或许容易。
English: It is difficult to speak when acting beyond one's authority, but it may be easy to speak when acting within one's duties.

古文：物议既以无言望己，己亦当以吞默惭人。
现代文：人们议论中没有指责自己的，自己就会静默地对人。
English: If people do not criticize themselves in discussions, they will silently criticize others.

古文：中丞虽谢咸、玄，未有全废劾简；廷尉诚非释之，宁容都无讯牒！
现代文：中丞中虽然没有咸、玄，也还没有完全废除弹劾；廷尉的确不是释之，岂能没有审讯。
English: Although there is no Xian or Xuan in Chujo, impeachment has not been completely abolished; the imperial lieutenant is indeed not dismissed, can there be no trial.

古文：故知与其谬人，宁不废职，目前之明效也。
现代文：由此可见与其用错人，不如不废这个官职，这是明摆的事。
English: From this, it can be seen that rather than using the wrong person, it is better not to abolish this official post, which is a clear matter.

古文：汉征贡禹为谏大夫，矢言先策，夏侯胜狂直拘系，出补讽职，伐柯非遐，行之即善。 
现代文：漠代启用贡禹为谏大夫，他发誓以先贤为榜样，夏侯胜粗豪率直，出任讽谏职务，古人之法并不远，实行了就会有好处。
English: He swore to follow the example of the sages. Xia Hou Sheng was bold and outspoken, and held the post of Qian Ye. The law of the ancients is not far away, and there will be benefits if it is implemented.

古文：又曰： 天地无心，赋气自均，宁得诞秀往古而独寂寥一代！
现代文：又说：天地没有思想，衹是均匀地散布着灵气，难道衹在古代产生秀逸的人才，独独这一代没有吗?
English: He also said, "Heaven and earth have no thought, but are evenly spread with the aura. Did they produce outstanding talents in ancient times, but not in this generation?

古文：将在知与不知，用与不用耳。
现代文：衹在于了解和不了解，用与不用罢了。
English: The crux lies in understanding and not understanding, using and not using.

古文：夫有贤而不知，知贤而不用，用贤而不委，委贤而不信，此四者，古今之通患也。
现代文：有贤士却不知道，知道贤才却不用他，用了贤才却不委托重任，委托了重任却不信任，这四点，是古今通病。
English: There are sages who do not know, know sages but do not use them, use sages but do not entrust them with important tasks, entrust them with important tasks but do not trust them, these four points are common diseases from ancient times to the present.

古文：今诚重郭隗而招剧辛，任鲍叔以求夷吾，则天下之士，不待召而自至矣。 
现代文：现在如果真的重视郭隗招来剧辛，任用鲍叔来求得夷亘，那么天下的贤士，不须召请就自己来了。
English: Now, if we really attach importance to Guo Jian's summoning drama and hardship, and appoint Bao Shu to seek enlightenment, then the sages of the world will come without being summoned.

古文：上优诏报答。
现代文：皇上下诏予以嘉奖。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to commend them.

古文：寻迁宁朔将军、冠军司马，领齐郡太守、本官如故。
现代文：不久升为宁朔将军、冠军司马，领齐郡太守、原职不变。
English: He was soon promoted to Ningshuo General, Champion Sima, Leader Qi County Governor, and his original position remained unchanged.

古文：是冬，虏动，迁冠军将军、军主，屯淮上。
现代文：这年冬天，北虏蠢动，升为冠军将军、军主，驻军进上。
English: In the winter of that year, Beikru was promoted to champion general and commander, and the garrison advanced.

古文：二年，进号征虏将军，军主如故。
现代文：二年，遣号征虏将军，军主职不变。
English: Two years later, he was sent to be conscripted as a general, but his main military duties remained unchanged.

古文：仍迁假节、督青冀二州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：又升为假节、督青冀二州刺史，将军职未变。
English: He was also promoted to Fuxi, the governor of Qinghai and Hebei two states, and the military post remained unchanged.

古文：少时，卒。
现代文：不久，死。
English: The royal line died out soon after.

古文：上叹曰： 我方欲用祖思，不幸，可惜！ 
现代文：皇上叹息道： 我正想重用童蝎，不幸死了，令人惋惜。 
English: The emperor sighed, "I was thinking of reusing the scorpion, but unfortunately it died, which is regrettable."

古文：诏赙钱三万，布五十匹。
现代文：下诏赐丧礼三万钱，布五十匹。
English: Gao Zu issued an edict to donate 30,000 yuan and 50 cloth horses to help with the funeral.

古文：祖思宗人文仲，初辟州从事。
现代文：祖思的同宗人文仲，起初被召为州从事。
English: Zu Si's fellow clansman, Jin Zhong, was initially called to work for the state.

古文：泰始初，为薛安都平北主簿，拔难归国。
现代文：泰始初年，任整安都的平北主簿，脱逃回国。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, he was appointed as the main bookkeeper of Pingbei, the capital of rectification and national security, but he escaped and returned to China.

古文：元徽初，从太祖于新亭拒桂阳贼，著诚效，除游击将军。
现代文：元徽初年，跟着左祖在新亭抵抗桂阳叛贼，很忠诚卖力，任游击将军。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he followed Zuo in resisting the Guiyang rebels in Xingting. He was very loyal and hardworking, and was appointed as a guerrilla general.

古文：沈攸之事起，助豫章王镇东府，历骠骑谘议，出为徐州刺史。
现代文：沈攸之事发，协助豫章王镇守塞疽，历任骠骑谘议，出京任徐州刺史。
English: After the incident of Shen You, he assisted Yu Zhang Wang Zhen to guard Xigang. Successive officials consulted with him, and he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：建元初，封建阳县子，三百户。
现代文：建元初年，封为建阳县子，食邑三百户。
English: In the first year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the county was named Jianyang County, with 300 households in the county.

古文：二年，虏攻钟离，文仲击破之。
现代文：二年，北虏进攻钟雳，塞世打败了他们。
English: In the second year, the Hokuriku attacked Zhongye, and Cixi defeated them.

古文：又遣军主崔孝伯等过淮攻拔虏茬眉戍，杀戍主龙得侯及伪阳平太守郭杜羝、馆陶令张德、濮阳令王明。
现代文：又派军主崔孝伯等人渡淮攻下了北虏的茬眉戍，杀了戊主龙得侯和伪阳平太守郭杜羝、篮盥县令噩夔、溅垦县令王飓。
English: He also sent the commander of the army, Cui Xiao Bo, and others to Waduhuai to capture the North Korean capital, Xiamen, and killed the warlord Long De Hou and the pseudo-Yang Ping governor Guo Du Juan, the warlord of Jianye County, and the warlord of Sputtering County, Wang Xuan.

古文：时虏攻杀马头太守刘从，上曰： 破茬眉，足相补。 
现代文：当时北虏击杀了匾噩太守型从，皇上说： 破了茬盾，足够抵偿。 
English: At that time, the Hokuriku army defeated the Shogunate, and the emperor said, "Breaking the shield is enough to compensate."

古文：文仲又遣军主陈靖攻虏竹邑戍主白仲都，又遣军主崔延叔攻伪淮阳太守梁恶，并杀之。
现代文：又仲又派遣军主、陈殖攻打北虏竹邑戍主白仲都，又派军丰崔延叔攻打北虏的伪淮阳太守梁恶，都杀了。
English: He also dispatched the army commander, Chen Xuan, to attack Bai Zhongtu, the warlord of Beyrutzhu, and the army commander, Feng Cui Yan, to attack the pseudo-Huaiyang Grand Prince Liang Qi, the warlord of Beyrutzhu, both of whom were killed.

古文：三年，淮北义民桓磊磈于抱犊固与虏战，大破之。
现代文：三年，淮北的义民桓磊碗在抱犊固和北虏作战，打得他们大败。
English: Three years ago, Huaibei's Yi Min Huan Lei fought against Bei Rui in the Battle of Baozhuigu, and defeated them.

古文：文仲驰启，上敕曰： 北间起义者众，深恐良会不再至，卿善奖沛中人，若能一时攘袂，当遣一佳将直入也。 
现代文：文仲快报朝廷，皇上命令说： 北方起义的人多，很担心再也没有这么好的机会，你重奖沛地的人，如果能一下奋起，我会派一员好将领去直捣北方。 
English: Wenzhong Express reported to the imperial court that the emperor ordered: "There are many people in the north rebelling, and I am very worried that there will never be such a good opportunity again. You are highly prized people, if you can rise up at once, I will send a good general to the north.

古文：文仲在政，为百姓所惮。
现代文：文仲治政，百姓害怕他。
English: The people are afraid of him.

古文：除黄门郎，领越骑校尉，改封随县。
现代文：升任黄门郎，领越骑校尉，改封为随县。
English: He was promoted to Huangmenluo, given the rank of captain of cavalry, and his title was changed to Suixian.

古文：尝献太祖缠须绳一枚，上为纳受。
现代文：曾献一枚缠须绳给太祖，皇上收下了。
English: He once offered a noose to the great-grandfather, and the emperor accepted it.

古文：永明元年，为太子左率，累至征虏将军、冠军司马、汝阴太守。
现代文：永明元年，任太子左率，多次升职做到了征虏将军、冠军司马、汝阴太守。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was appointed as the left leader of the prince, and he was promoted several times to achieve the status of conscript general, champion Sima, and Ruyin governor.

古文：四年，卒。
现代文：四年，死。
English: Four years, dead.

古文：赠后将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：追赠为后将军、徐州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the posthumous title of General, Xuzhou Jishi.

古文：谥襄子。
现代文：谧号襄子。
English: His nickname is Xiangzi.

古文：刘善明，平原人。
现代文：刘善明，平原人。
English: Liu Zhenming, a Plainsman.

古文：镇北将军怀珍族弟也。
现代文：是镇北将军怀珍同宗族弟。
English: He is the younger brother of Zhenbei General Huai Zhen of the same family.

古文：父怀民，宋世为齐北海二郡太守。
现代文：父亲名怀民，在宋任齐、北海二郡太守。
English: His father's name was Huai Min, and he was the governor of two counties in the North Sea during the Song Dynasty.

古文：元嘉末，青州饥荒，人相食。善明家有积粟，躬食饘粥，开仓以救乡里，多获全济，百姓呼其家田为 续命田 。
现代文：元嘉末年，青州闸饥荒，到了人吃人的程度，善明的家裹有储粮，他自己吃粥，打开仓库来救济乡邻，许多人得到救助而活了下来，百姓称他家裹的田是 续命田 。
English: At the end of Yuan Jia, the Qingzhou Gate famine reached the level of man-eating-man. Shenming's home was wrapped with stored grain, he himself ate porridge, opened a warehouse to help his neighbors, many people were rescued and survived, and the people said that the field he was wrapped in was a "life-sustaining field."

古文：少而静处读书，刺史杜骥闻名候之，辞不相见。
现代文：他年少时爱在静处读书，刺史杜骥听说他这个人就去拜访他，他谢绝相见。
English: When he was young, he loved to read in a quiet place. When Zhaishi Duzhen heard that he was this person, he went to visit him, but he declined to meet.

古文：年四十，刺史刘道隆辟为治中从事。
现代文：四十岁时，刺史刘道隆召他为治中从事。
English: At the age of forty, Liu Daolong called him to engage in middle school.

古文：父怀民谓善明曰： 我已知汝立身，复欲见汝立官也。 
现代文：父亲怀民对善明说： 我已知道你能立足于世了，还想看着你能立足官场。 
English: His father, Huamin, said to him, "I already know that you can stand on your own two feet in the world, and I want to see you stand on your own two feet in the official world."

古文：善明应辟。
现代文：善明同意应召。
English: Sonoaki agreed to be called up.

古文：仍举秀才。
现代文：又被推荐为秀才。
English: He was also recommended as an outstanding talent.

古文：宋孝武见其对策强直，甚异之。
现代文：宋孝武帝看他策对时谈论刚毅正直，认为他很特殊。
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu thought he was very special and talked about his courage and honesty when he saw his strategy.

古文：泰始初，徐州刺史薛安都反，青州刺史沈文秀应之。
现代文：泰始初年，徐州刺史薛安都反叛，青州刺史沈文秀响应。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Xuzhou Prince Xue Andu rebelled, and Qingzhou Prince Shen Wenxiu responded to him.

古文：时州治东阳城，善明家在郭内，不能自拔。
现代文：当时州衙府在束阳城，善明的家在城内，不能自救。
English: At that time, the prefectural government was in Sokyang City, and Sanming's home was in the city, so he couldn't save himself.

古文：伯父弥之诡说文秀求自效，文秀使领军主张灵庆等五千援安都。
现代文：伯父弥之用假话在文秀那裹表示效力，文秀就派他带着军主张灵庆等五千人去支援安都。
English: Uncle Ya used a lie to show his effectiveness to Wenxiu. Wenxiu sent him with 5,000 soldiers to support Andu, including Lingqing.

古文：弥之出门，密谓部曲曰： 始免祸坑矣。 
现代文：弥之一出城，悄悄对部下说： 现在脱离祸坑了。 
English: After Liu Yizhi left home, he secretly said to his subordinates: This is the only way out of the pit.

古文：行至下邳，起义背文秀。
现代文：走到下邳，起义背弃了文秀。
English: When it came to the lower jaw, the uprising turned its back on Wenxiu.

古文：善明从伯怀恭为北海太守，据郡相应。
现代文：善明的大伯怀恭任北海太守，占据州郡舆他呼应。
English: The benevolent great-uncle Huaijun was appointed the governor of the North Sea, occupying the state and county, which was echoed by others.

古文：善明密契收集门宗部曲，得三千人，夜斩关奔北海。
现代文：善明密约聚集了宗族门人部下，有三千人，夜襄杀出关投奔北海。
English: Zhenming secretly gathered his family members and subordinates, three thousand of them, and rushed out of the pass into the North Sea at night.

古文：族兄乘民又聚众渤海以应朝廷。
现代文：同族兄乘民又在渤海招募兵马响应朝廷。
English: In response to the imperial court, the brother of the same tribe, Heng Min, recruited soldiers and horses in the Bohai Sea.

古文：而弥之寻为薛安都所杀，明帝赠辅国将军、青州刺史。
现代文：弥之不久就被薛安都杀了，明帝追赠他为辅国将军、青州刺史。
English: Soon after, Yazhi was killed by Xue Andu, and Emperor Ming posthumously bestowed him with the title of General of the Auxiliary State, and the title of Qingzhou Prince.

古文：以乘民为宁朔将军、冀州刺史，善明为宁朔长史、北海太守，除尚书金部郎。
现代文：任乘民为宁朔将军、冀州刺史，善明为宁朔长史、北海太守，升为尚书金部郎。
English: Ren Renmin was appointed as the general of Ningshuo and the chief historian of Jizhou, while Zennming was appointed as the chief historian of Ningshuo and the governor of the North Sea, and was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Ministry of Finance.

古文：乘民病卒，仍以善明为绥远将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：乘民病死，又任善明为绥远将军、冀州刺史。
English: Chengmin died of illness, and was appointed as the general of Jinyuan and the historian of Jizhou.

古文：文秀既降，除善明为屯骑校尉，出为海陵太守。
现代文：文秀投降了，授予善明为屯骑校尉，出京任海陵太守。
English: Wenxiu capitulated, appointed Zengming as a cavalry lieutenant, and sent him to Beijing as the governor of Hailing.

古文：郡境边海，无树木，善明课民种榆槚杂果，遂获其利。
现代文：郡边界靠海，没有树木，善明督促百姓种上榆树梗树和一些杂果树，于是得到收益。
English: The county border is by the sea, and there are no trees. So, he urged the people to plant eucalyptus trees and some other fruit trees, and made a profit.

古文：还为后军将军、直阁。
现代文：回京任后军将军、直合。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed general of the army and became Tadafusa.

古文：五年，青州没虏，善明母陷北，虏移置桑乾。
现代文：五年，青州被北虏攻陷，善明的母亲沦陷在北方，北虏把她迁到了桑干。
English: In the fifth year, Qingzhou was invaded by the Northern Ruins, and Zengming's mother was captured in the north, and the Northern Ruins moved her to Sangan.

古文：善明布衣蔬食，哀戚如持丧。
现代文：善明穿布衣吃素斋，悲伤得如同守丧。
English: Zhenming wears cloth and eats vegetarian food. He is as sad as a mourner.

古文：明帝每见，为之叹息，时人称之。
现代文：明帝每次看到他这样子，为他叹息，当时人称颂他。
English: Every time Emperor Ming saw him like this, he sighed for him. At that time, people praised him.

古文：转宁朔将军、巴西梓潼二郡太守。
现代文：转任为宁朔将军、巴西梓潼二郡太守。
English: He was transferred to the post of Ningshuo General, and became the governor of the second county of Brazil.

古文：善明以母在虏中，不愿西行，涕泣固请，见许。
现代文：善明因母亲还在北方，不想到西方，哭着坚决请求不去，被允许。
English: Because her mother was still in the north, Zhenming did not want to go to the west. She cried and begged not to go, and was allowed.

古文：朝廷多哀善明心事。
现代文：朝臣大多同情善明的心情。
English: Most of the courtiers sympathized with Zenmei's feelings.

古文：元徽初，遣北使，朝议令善明举人，善明举州乡北平田惠绍使虏，赎得母还。
现代文：元徽初年，派遣去北方的使者，朝臣们商议让善明推荐人选，善明推举同乡北平的田惠绍出使北虏，赎回了母亲。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, an emissary was sent to the north, and the courtiers consulted with Zengming to recommend a candidate. Zengming recommended Tian Huishao, a fellow Beiping, to send an envoy to Beiping to redeem his mother.

古文：幼主新立，群公秉政，善明独结事太祖，委身归诚。
现代文：幼主刚即位时，众重臣掌权，善明独独结交太祖，表示诚心依附。
English: When the young lord had just ascended the throne, many senior vassals took power, and all of them made friends with the great ancestor, expressing their sincere attachment.

古文：二年，出为辅国将军、西海太守、行青冀二州刺史。
现代文：二年，出京任辅国将军、西海太守、行青冀二州刺史。
English: In the second year, he went to Beijing to be appointed as the general of the auxiliary province, the governor of the West China Sea, and went to Qinghai and Hebei to make history in the two states.

古文：至镇，表请北伐，朝议不同。
现代文：到了任上，进表请求北伐，朝中议论没达到一致。
English: After taking office, Jinba requested the Northern Expedition, but the discussions between North Korea and China did not reach a consensus.

古文：善明从弟僧副，与善明俱知名于州里。
现代文：善明的堂弟僧副，在州郡乡里和善明一样出名。
English: Zenmei's cousin, the vice-priest, is just as famous as Zenmei in the county.

古文：泰始初，虏暴淮北，僧副将部曲二千人东依海岛；太祖在淮阴，壮其所为，召与相见，引为安成王抚军参军。
现代文：泰始初年，北虏在淮北肆虐，僧副带二干部下依据束边的海岛，太祖在淮阴，认为他的行为雄壮，召来相见，推荐为安成王的抚军参军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the Northern Hordes raged in northern Huaibei. The monk's deputy and two subordinates based on the island of Shukou, the great-grandfather in Huaiyin, thought that his behavior was heroic, summoned him to meet, and recommended him to join the army of King Ancheng's army.

古文：苍梧肆暴，太祖忧恐，常令僧副微行伺察声论。
现代文：苍梧王残暴，太祖忧虑恐惧，常命僧副化装成百姓去侦察动静。
English: King Cangwu is cruel, the great-grandfather is worried and afraid, and the senior monk disguises himself as a commoner to spy on the movement.

古文：使僧副密告善明及东海太守垣崇祖曰： 多人见劝北固广陵，恐一旦动足，非为长算。
现代文：派僧副悄悄告诉善塱和塞复太守垣崖塑说： 很多人劝我到北边去坚守广陵，衹怕一旦行动，不是长久之计。
English: "Many people have advised me to go to the north to hold on to Guangling, but I'm afraid that once I act, it won't be a long-term solution," the deputy monk quietly told Zenzhang and Sefu Taishou.

古文：今秋风行起，卿若能与垣东海微共动虏，则我诸计可立。 
现代文：今年秋风起时，你如果能和垣柬海稍使北虏行动，那么我的计策就能成功。 
English: Now that the autumn wind is about to blow, if you can unite with Kaki Rongzu and slightly provoke Huru, my various plans can be implemented.

古文：善明曰： 宋氏将亡，愚智所辨。
现代文：善明说： 苤医快要衰亡了，这是无论愚蠢或智慧的人都能看到的。
English: Zhenming said, "Hangyue is on the verge of decline, which can be seen by both the foolish and the wise.

古文：故胡虏若动，反为公患。
现代文：所以胡人如果采取行动，反而成为你的忧患。
English: Therefore, if the goose takes action, it will become your sorrow.

古文：公神武世出，唯当静以待之，因机奋发，功业自定。
现代文：你神采威武是当世杰出的，衹应静静地等待，趁有利时机奋力发动，功业自然成功。
English: Your spirit and prowess are outstanding in today's world. You should wait quietly, take advantage of the favorable opportunity to launch your efforts, and your work will naturally succeed.

古文：不可远去根本，自贻猖蹶。 
现代文：不能远离根本，自己为己留下祸患。 
English: You can't be too far away from the root of the problem and leave a disaster for yourself.

古文：遣部曲健儿数十人随僧副还诣领府，太祖纳之。
现代文：派几十个有武力的部下跟着僧副回到领军府，太祖采纳了。
English: He sent dozens of powerful subordinates to follow the monk and deputy back to the military headquarters, and the great-great-grandfather accepted.

古文：苍梧废，征善明为冠军将军、太祖骠骑谘议、南东海太守、行南徐州事。
现代文：苍梧王被废黜后，召善明任冠军将军、太祖骠骑谘议、南束海太守、管理南徐州事务。
English: After the dethronement of King Cangwu, Zengming was appointed as the champion general, the great ancestor of the cavalry consultation, the governor of South Sokha, and the management of the affairs of South Xuzhou.

古文：沈攸之反，太祖深以为忧。
现代文：沈攸之反叛，太祖很是担忧。
English: Shen You's rebellion worried Taizu very much.

古文：善明献计曰： 沈攸之控引八州，纵情蓄敛，收众聚骑，营造舟仗，苞藏贼志，于焉十年。
现代文：善明献计说： 沈攸之管辖，尽量地征收聚歜钱财，招兵买马，建造战船器械，藏有叛心，这样有十年之久。
English: Shen Ming presented a plan: Under the jurisdiction of Shen Youlong, collect as much money and wealth as possible, recruit soldiers and horses, build warships and equipment, and harbor traitors. This went on for ten years.

古文：性既险躁，才非持重，而起逆累旬，迟回不进，岂应有所待也？
现代文：他性情险恶暴躁，并不稳重，叛乱以来累计有几十天了，却迟疑不进，难道还等什么吗?
English: His temperament is sinister and irascible, and he is not stable. It has been a total of dozens of days since the rebellion, but he hesitates and does not advance. Is there still something to wait for?

古文：一则暗于兵机，二则人情离怨，三则有掣肘之患，四则天夺其魄。
现代文：一来他足不懂军事，二是人心离散有怨气，三是怕有干扰阻挠的忧患，第四点就是老天使他丧失信心。
English: On the one hand, he does not understand military affairs, on the other hand, his military spirit is scattered, on the third hand, he is constrained, and on the fourth hand, heaven has taken away his soul.

古文：本虑其剽勇，长于一战，疑其轻速，掩袭未备。
现代文：本来我们怕他骁勇，会打仗，疑心他会轻骑突进，掩袭防备不及的我军。
English: Originally, we were afraid of his bravery and ability to fight, suspecting that he would ride in on a light horse and attack our unprepared army.

古文：今六师齐备，诸侯同举。
现代文：现在六军一齐奋勇，诸侯都行动起来了。
English: Now the six armies are all fighting together, and the lords are on the move.

古文：昔谢晦失理，不斗自溃；卢龙乖道，虽众何施。
现代文：从前谢晦失了正义，不战自败；卢龙违背道义，虽然人多又能起什么作用。
English: Once upon a time, Xie Xuan lost justice and was defeated without a fight; Lulong violated morality, although there were many people, what effect could it have?

古文：且袁粲、刘秉，贼之根本，根本既灭，枝叶岂久？
现代文：再说袁粲、刘秉是叛贼的根子，根本已灭，枝枝叶叶岂能活得长久。
English: Furthermore, Yuan Shao and Liu Bing are the root of the traitors, and they are completely extinct. Can the branches and leaves survive for a long time?

古文：此是已笼之鸟耳。 
现代文：这人衹不过是笼中乌罢了。 
English: This man is nothing but a rat in a cage.

古文：事平，太祖召善明还都，谓之曰： 卿策沈攸之，虽复张良、陈平，适如此耳。 
现代文：乱事平定后，太祖召善明回京，对他说： 你论说沈攸之的事，即使是张良、陈平再世，也不过如此罢了。 
English: After the turmoil was settled, the great-great-grandfather called Zengming back to Beijing and said to him: "You are talking about matters that are not important, even if Zhang Liang and Chen Ping are reincarnated, it is nothing more than that.

古文：仍迁散骑常侍，领长水校尉，黄门郎，领后军将军、太尉右司马。
现代文：又任他为散骑常侍，领长水校尉，黄门郎，领后军将军、太尉右司马。
English: He was also appointed as the straggler's attendant, the leader of the Choshui lieutenant, Huangmenro, the leader of the rear army general, and the captain of the right Sima.

古文：齐台建，为右卫将军，辞疾不拜。
现代文：齐王组阁时，任右卫将军，他以病为由辞让不受。
English: When Qi Wang formed his cabinet, he was appointed as the General of the Right Division of the Guard. He refused to resign on the grounds of illness.

古文：司空褚渊谓善明曰： 高尚之事，乃卿从来素意。今朝廷方相委待，讵得便学松、乔邪？ 
现代文：司空褚渊对善明说： 清高是你向来的追求。现在朝廷正要重用你，你怎能就毕松、乔呢? 
English: Siku Shanyuan said to Sanmei, "Being a high-ranking official has always been your pursuit. Now that the imperial court is about to make heavy use of you, how can you neglect Bi Song and Qiao?"

古文：善明曰： 我本无宦情，既逢知己，所以戮力驱驰，愿在申志。
现代文：善明说： 我本来就无意于仕途，遇到了知己，所以我才全力奔走，衹希望舒展抱负。
English: Zen Ming said: I originally had no intention of pursuing a career, but I met a confidant, so I just went all out, hoping to stretch my ambitions.

古文：今天地廓清，朝盈济济，鄙怀既申，不敢昧于富贵矣。 
现代文：现在天地清明，朝廷人才济济，我理想已实现了，不敢被富贵迷失了心性。 
English: Now that the heavens and earth are clear and the imperial court is brimming with talent, my ideal has been realized, and I dare not lose my heart by being rich.

古文：太祖践阼，以善明勋诚，欲与善明禄，召谓之曰： 淮南近畿，国之形势，自非亲贤，不使居之。卿为我卧治也！ 
现代文：太祖即位，因善明功高忠诚，想给善明爵禄，召来对他说： 淮南是京城的近郊，是国家的重要地方，不是亲信贤臣，我不会让他管理，你就替我将政事清简，卧而治之吧! 
English: When the great-grandfather ascended the throne, he wanted to give him a knighthood for his good deeds and high loyalty, so he summoned him and said to him: Huainan is a suburb of Beijing, it is an important place for the country, it is not a close confidant and wise minister, I will not let him manage it, you will simplify government affairs for me, lie down and govern it!

古文：代高宗为征虏将军、淮南宣城二郡太守，遣使拜授，封新涂伯，邑五百户。
现代文：代理高宗为征虏将军、淮南、宣城二郡太守，派使者授职，封为新淦伯，食邑五百户。
English: Acting Gao Zong for the conscript general, Huainan, Xuancheng two county governors, sent an envoy to confer the post, was appointed as a new nobleman, and fed 500 households.

古文：善明至郡，上表陈事曰： 周以三圣相资，再驾乃就；汉值海内无主，累败方登；魏挟主行令，实逾二纪；晋废立持权，遂历四世。
现代文：善明到郡府，上表奏陈道：周代靠三位圣人帮助，两次出征才成功。汉代正遇上国内没有统一的君主，多次失败后才登上大位。魏挟天子以令诸侯，实际上衹沿袭两代。晋废魏掌了政权，于是经历了四代。
English: Zhenming went to the county seat, and Chen Dao was played on the table: Zhou Dynasty relied on the help of three saints, and only succeeded in two expeditions. Han Dynasty was faced with no unified monarch in the country, and only ascended to the throne after many failures. Wei Cang Tian Zi ruled the princes, and actually followed two generations. Jin and Wei held power, so it went through four generations.

古文：景祚攸集，如此之难者也。
现代文：国家政权的取得，是如此艰难。
English: The acquisition of state power is so difficult.

古文：陛下凝辉自天，照湛神极，睿周万品，道洽无垠。
现代文：陛下光辉得自上天，到处照彻，智慧超过万类人，道德无边。
English: His majesty is radiant from on high, shining everywhere, his wisdom surpasses all kinds of people, and his morality is boundless.

古文：故能高啸闲轩，鲸鲵自翦，垂拱云帟，九服载晏，靡一战之劳，无半辰之棘，苞池江海，笼苑嵩岱，神祇乐推，普天归奉，二三年间，允膺宝命，胄临皇历，正位宸居。开辟以来，未有若斯之盛者也。
现代文：所以能在轩中悠闲地高声啸吟，虹霓焕彩，云帟垂拱，九卿欢悦，没费战事的劳顿，没受半时的艰难，以江海为池，以嵩岱为苑，神灵乐意推举，普天下归附，两三年内，就荣登大位，继统皇权，在宫正位，开天辟地以来，从没有这样的盛事。
English: Therefore, it is possible to sing loudly and loudly in a leisurely manner, the rainbow is radiant, the clouds are hanging, the nine lords are happy, there is no hard work of war, there is no half-time hardship, the rivers and seas are pools, the mountains and rivers are gardens, the gods are willing to be elected, and the whole world is attached. In two or three years, it will be crowned with great power, succeed the imperial power, and be in the palace, and there has never been such a grand event since the heavens and the earth were created.

古文：夫常胜者无忧，恒成者好怠。
现代文：常胜的人没有忧患意识，总是成功的人容易懈怠。
English: People who always win have no sense of anxiety, and people who are always successful are easy to slack off.

古文：故虽休勿休，姬旦作《诰》；安不忘危，尼父垂范。
现代文：所以虽然安逸了也不要安逸，姬旦为此作《诰》；在平安中不忘危险，尼父留下榜样。
English: Therefore, even if you are at ease, you should not be at ease, Hidan wrote "" for this; do not forget the danger in peace, her father left an example.

古文：今皇运草创，万化始基，乘宋季叶，政多浇苛，亿北倒悬，仰齐苏振。
现代文：现在皇运初创，万事开始奠基，宋的末年，政令多有苛酷，亿兆百姓处于倒悬的苦难中，仰望齐来改变振兴。
English: Now, at the beginning of the imperial era, everything begins to lay the foundation. At the end of the Song Dynasty, government decrees are often harsh, and hundreds of trillions of people are in the midst of suffering, looking up to change and revitalization.

古文：臣早蒙殊养，志输肝血，徒有其诚，曾阙埃露。
现代文：我很早就得到皇上特殊的恩顾，立志奉上我的忠心和热血。牢有忠心，也衹有坠落于尘埃露水之中。
English: I received the Emperor's special favor very early on, and I resolved to offer my loyalty and my blood. I have always been loyal, and I have never fallen into the dust and dew.

古文：夙宵惭战，如坠渊谷，不识忌讳，谨陈愚管，瞽言刍议，伏待斧皞。 
现代文：早晚惭愧惶恐，像坠入深渊峡谷。不知忌讳，敬献浅陋的意见，瞎说些不成熟的看法，衹等待治罪。
English: Sooner or later, ashamed and afraid, like falling into the abyss of the canyon. I do not know taboos, offer shallow opinions, talk nonsense about immature opinions, and wait for punishment.

古文：所陈事凡十一条：其一以为 天地开创，人神庆仰，宜存问远方，宣广慈泽 ；其二以为 京师浩大，远近所归，宜遣医药，问其疾苦，年九十以上及六疾不能自存者，随宜量赐 ；其三以为 宋氏赦令，蒙原者寡。
现代文：他所陈述的共有十一条：第一，认为 天地开创时，入神欢庆景仰，应该慰问远方，扩大散布恩泽 。第二，认为 京城盛大，远近的人都会来，应派医备药，询问病苦。九十岁以上的人和六病不能自己出钱求医的，应酌情赠药 。第三，认为 宋氏大赦，受原宥的人少。
English: He stated a total of eleven articles: First, he believed that when heaven and earth were created, people rejoiced in God, celebrated and admired, and should offer condolences to distant places and expand the distribution of grace. Second, he believed that Beijing was grand and that people from near and far would come, and should send doctors to prepare medicines and inquire about illnesses. People over the age of ninety and those with six diseases who could not pay for their own medicine should be given medicine as appropriate. Third, he believed that the Song Dynasty granted amnesty, and few people accepted the original pardon.

古文：今大化创始，宜怀以恩德，未应远劳将士，摇动边氓，且彼土所出，唯有珠宝，实非圣朝所须之急。
现代文：边境上的那些城池，应严格戒备，格外选拔雄才大略的将领，等待机会，所需要的物资等，都要预先备办 。第五，认为 应废除宋代大明、泰始以来的那些苛法。崇尚简易的制度 。第六，认为 凡是一些土木工程，都可以暂且停止 。第七，认为 帝子王姬，应崇尚俭约 。第八，认为 应诏告百官和府州郡县官员，各进正直意见，来发扬唐虞一样的美政 。第九，认为 对忠贞孝悌的人，应拔举为特别的等级，对清廉俭约苦守节操的人，应授予他们治理百姓的官职 。第十，认为 改革才开头，天地大庆，应时不时选择人才，往北出使匈奴 。第十一，认为 交州是险要的地方，在少数民族部落中是有领头作用的，宋末政治苛酷，才怨愤叛离，现在天下大化刚开始，应用恩德使他们感怀，不应劳役将士远征，使得边疆百姓动荡不安。而且那裹的特产，衹有珠寅，实在不是朝廷所急需的东西。
English: Those cities on the border should be on high alert, and generals of outstanding talent should be specially selected, waiting for opportunities, and the necessary materials should be prepared in advance. Fifth, it is believed that the harsh laws since the Song Dynasty should be abolished. It advocates a simple system. Sixth, it is believed that all civil engineering projects can be temporarily stopped. Seventh, it is believed that Emperor Wang Ji should advocate frugality. Eighth, it is believed that it is necessary to issue an edict to hundreds of officials and prefectural, county and county officials to promote honest opinions and carry out the same beauty politics as Tang Yu. Ninth, it is believed that those who are loyal and filial should be

古文：讨伐之事，谓宜且停 。
现代文：讨伐一类的事，我认为应该暂时停止 。
English: I think that things like crusades should be suspended for the time being.

古文：又撰《贤圣杂语》奏之，托以讽谏。
现代文：又撰写了《贤圣杂语》一书献给皇上，用来起讽谕作用。
English: He also wrote a book, "Miscellaneous sayings of sages and saints," dedicated to the emperor, which was used as a satire.

古文：上答曰： 省所献《杂语》，并列圣之明规，众智之深轨。
现代文：皇上回覆： 看了你献来的《杂语》，上面列举了许多圣人的规范：许多智士的榜样。
English: Emperor's reply: I read "Miscellaneous sayings" which you offered, and it listed the standards of many saints: the examples of many wise men.

古文：卿能宪章先范，纂镂情识，忠款既昭，渊诚肃著，当以周旋，无忘听览也 。
现代文：你能效法先贤，记述他们的事迹和思想，忠心显著，真诚昭明，我会在处事中不忘阅读。 
English: If you can follow the example of the sages and record their deeds and thoughts, your loyalty will be conspicuous, your sincerity will be clear, and I will not forget to read in my work.

古文：又谏起宣阳门；表陈宜明守宰赏罚；立学校，制齐礼；广开宾馆，以接荒民。
现代文：又劝阻建宣阳门；上表奏陈应明矿地方执政者的赏罚；兴学校，修立齐国的礼仪；广设宾馆，来接待边远的人。
English: He also discouraged the construction of the Xuanyang Gate; the reward and punishment of the local rulers of the Chen Ying Ming Mine; the construction of schools and the establishment of the etiquette of Qi; and the establishment of a wide range of hotels to receive remote people.

古文：上又答曰： 具卿忠谠之怀。
现代文：皇上又回覆： 你详细表达了正直忠诚的思想。
English: The Emperor also replied: You have expressed in detail your thoughts on honesty and loyalty.

古文：夫赏罚以惩守宰，饰馆以待遐荒，皆古之善政，吾所宜勉。
现代文：用赏罚来管理地方官，装饰宾馆来接待远方的人。都是古代的好政策，我当努力去做。
English: Using rewards and punishments to manage local officials, and decorating hotels to receive people from far away, are all good policies from ancient times, and I should work hard to do them.

古文：更撰新礼，或非易制；国学之美，已敕公卿；宣阳门今敕停。
现代文：重新制定礼仪，也许不容易，国家兴学堂的好策略，我已命公卿办理。宣阳门现已命令停建。
English: It may not be easy to reformulate the etiquette, but I have ordered the noble to deal with the good strategy of the national school building. Xuanyang Gate has now been ordered to stop construction.

古文：寡德多阙，思复有闻 。
现代文：我德薄缺点多，还想再听到你的忠言。 
English: I have many faults, and I want to hear your advice again.

古文：善明身长七尺九寸，质素不好声色，所居茅斋斧木而已，床榻几案，不加刬削。
现代文：善明身高七尺九寸，向来不爱淫声女色，住的衹是茅屋和用斧砍的木料建构，床榻桌子等，也不削刨打光。
English: Zhenming is seven feet nine inches tall. He has never been fond of lewd women. He lives in a hut made of wood hewn with an axe, and his bed, table, etc. are not planed.

古文：少与崔祖思友善，祖思出为青、冀二州，善明遗书曰： 昔时之游，于今邈矣。
现代文：年轻时和崔祖思交情好，祖思出任青、冀二州时，善明写信给他说：往日交游的情景，到现在已久远了。
English: When he was young, he had a good friendship with Cui Zu Si. When Cui Zu Si was in charge of the Qing and Hebei provinces, Sheng Ming wrote to him, "The scene of traveling together in the past is long gone.

古文：或携手春林，或负杖秋涧，逐清风于林杪，追素月于园垂，如何故人，徂落殆尽。
现代文：有时在春天的林中携手漫步，有时拄杖游览秋天的山涧，追逐林梢的清风，趁赶园中的明月，一些老朋友怎么都死完了。
English: Sometimes they walk hand in hand in the woods in spring, sometimes they cane to visit the mountains in autumn, chase the breeze in the forest, and take advantage of the bright moon in the garden. Some old friends have died.

古文：足下方拥旄北服，吾剖竹南甸，相去千里，间以江山，人生如寄，来会何时！
现代文：你正在北方战场上指挥大军，我在南方为官，相距千里，山重水复，人生如寄，何时能相会呢?
English: You are commanding a large army on the northern battlefield, I am an officer in the south, thousands of miles apart, mountains and rivers, life is like a dream, when can we meet?

古文：尝览书史，数千年来，略在眼中矣。
现代文：我曾经阅读书史，几千年以来的事，大致都在眼裹。
English: I used to read the history of books, and the events of thousands of years ago were mostly in the blink of an eye.

古文：历代参差，万理同异。夫龙虎风云之契，乱极必夷之几，古今岂殊，此实一揆。
现代文：历史上多少朝代兴亡的原因相同，龙虎与风云相合，乱到极点一定会安定下来，古今怎有不同，这确是一理。
English: The reasons for the rise and fall of many dynasties in history are the same. The dragon and the tiger coincide with the wind and the clouds, and the chaos to the extreme will surely settle down. No matter how different the past and the present are, this is indeed the truth.

古文：日者沈攸之拥长蛇于外，粲、秉复为异识所推，唯有京镇，创为圣基。
现代文：目前沈攸之在外地作乱，粲、秉又被异议推举；衹有京城为镇，开创成圣君基业。
English: At present, Shen Youzhi is making trouble in other places, and Zou and Bing have been elected by objection; Zou has the capital as a town and has created a saint's foundation.

古文：遂乃擢吾为首佐，授吾以大郡，付吾关中，委吾留任。
现代文：于是选拔我作为首席辅佐，把大郡授予我管理，把关中交给我辖制，委我大任。
English: Therefore, I was selected as the chief assistant, I was given the management of the large county, I was given the jurisdiction of the customs center, and I was assigned to the important position.

古文：既不办有抽剑两城之用，横槊搴旗之能，徒以挈瓶小智，名参佐命，常恐朝露一下，深恩不酬。
现代文：我既没有抽剑拔两城的本领，又没有横槊跃马夺敌旗的才能，衹是凭着浅薄的智识，名列辅佐大臣中，常常怕一到明天，不能酬报深恩。
English: I do not have the ability to draw a sword and take two cities, nor do I have the talent to leap across a horse to capture the enemy's flag. It is because of my shallow intelligence that I am ranked among the assistant ministers, and I am often afraid that I will not be able to repay my deep gratitude.

古文：忧深责重，转不可据，还视生世，倍无次绪。藿羹布被，犹笃鄙好；恶色憎声，暮龄尤甚。
现代文：忧虑深重责任重大，辗转不安，回想生平，倍感没有条理藿菜羹粗布被，还很合我粗鄙的爱好，我讨厌女色淫声，晚年更厉害。
English: Worries, heavy responsibilities, restlessness, recollection of life, double sense of lack of organization, coarse fabric quilt, and also very suitable for my coarse hobby, I hate female voice, even more in my later years.

古文：出蕃不与台辅别，入国不与公卿游，孤立天地之间，无猜无托，唯知奉主以忠，事亲以孝，临民以洁，居家以俭。
现代文：出京到藩国时不和台辅告别，入京又不和公卿交游，在天地间孤孤单单地，没有幻想没有寄托，衹知凭着忠心事君，凭着孝心侍奉父母，凭廉洁治民，在家俭约。
English: He did not say goodbye to Taifu when he left Beijing for the feudal state, and he did not make friends with court nobles when he entered Beijing. He was lonely in the world, with no illusions and no trust. He knew that he would serve his parents with loyalty, serve his parents with filial piety, govern the people with integrity, and live frugally at home.

古文：足下今鸣笳旧乡，衣绣故国，宋季荼毒之悲已蒙苏泰，河朔倒悬之苦方须救拔。
现代文：你今天在家乡振军威，衣锦还乡，宋末患难的悲伤已蒙你扫清抚平，河朔百姓倒悬的苦难正要你拯救。
English: Today, in your hometown, you have shaken up the military and returned to your hometown. The sorrow of the tribulation at the end of the Song Dynasty has been cleared and smoothed by you. The suffering of the people in Hexuo is just waiting for you to save them.

古文：遣游辩之士，为乡导之使，轻装启行，经营旧壤，令泗上归业，稷下还风，君欲谁让邪？
现代文：派遣善辩的作领路的人，轻装出发，到旧地经营，使泗上人回归本业，稷下恢复原来风俗，你想让给谁呢?
English: To whom do you want to cede the right to send well-spoken leaders, to set out in a light pack, to operate in the old country, to make their superiors return to their profession and their subordinates to their original customs?

古文：聊送诸心，敬申贫赠。 
现代文：且向你倾吐心事，表达敬意。
English: and pour out my heart to you, to show my respect.

古文：建元二年卒，年四十九，遗命薄殡。
现代文：建元二年死，终年四十九岁。遣言薄葬。
English: He died in the second year of Jianyuan, at the age of forty-nine. He was given a short funeral.

古文：赠钱三万，布五十匹。
现代文：皇上赐钱三万，布五十匹。
English: The emperor gave thirty thousand in money and fifty in cloth.

古文：又诏曰： 善明忠诚夙亮，干力兼宣，豫经夷险，勤绩昭著。
现代文：又下诏说： 善明素来忠诚气节高尚，有才干有能力，参议平定险阻，政绩显著。
English: The next edict said: "Zenming has always been loyal, noble, talented and capable, and has made remarkable achievements in politics.

古文：不幸殒丧，痛悼于怀。
现代文：不幸去世，心中痛悼。
English: He passed away with deep sorrow in his heart.

古文：赠左将军、豫州刺史，谥烈伯。 
现代文：追赠为左将军、豫州刺史，谧号烈伯。 
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Left, Henan Provincial Historian, and Renmin Ribo.

古文：子涤嗣。
现代文：他儿子刘涤承袭爵位。
English: His son Liu Ying inherited the title.

古文：善明家无遗储，唯有书八千卷。
现代文：善明家裹没有留下积蓄，衹有八千卷书。
English: Liu Shanming's family has no remaining savings, only eight thousand volumes of books.

古文：太祖闻其清贫，赐涤家葛塘屯谷五百斛。
现代文：太祖听说他清贫，赐给刘涤家葛塘屯的谷五百斛。
English: When the great-grandfather heard that he was poor, he gave 500 baht to the Liu family in the Gutang Tun Valley.

古文：善明从弟僧副，官至前将军，封丰阳男，三百户。
现代文：善明的堂弟僧副，官职做到前将军，封为丰陨星缠，食邑三百户。
English: Zhenming's cousin, the vice-priest, became a former general after attaining his official position. He was given the title of Fengjiao Xinghuan (丰隕星缠) and had 300 households in his hometown.

古文：永明四年，为巴西、梓潼二郡太守，卒。
现代文：丞塱四年，任旦酉、圭迤二郡太守，死在任上。
English: In the fourth year of the Joseon Dynasty, he served as the governor of two counties, Danzhong and Guizhong, and died in office.

古文：苏侃，字休烈，武邑人也。
现代文：苏侃，字休烈，是武邑人。
English: Su Kan, also known as Hurei, is a native of Wuyi.

古文：祖护，本郡太守。
现代文：祖父名护，是本郡的太守。
English: My grandfather, Nago, was the governor of this county.

古文：父端，州治中。
现代文：父亲名端，任州治中。
English: His father, Naehata, was a state-appointed middle school teacher.

古文：侃涉猎书传，出身正员将军，补长城令。
现代文：苏侃阅览书传，出身是正员将军，候补为长越县令。
English: Su Kan read the book biography, he was born as a full-time general, and the alternate was a Chang Yue County magistrate.

古文：薛安都反，引侃为其府参军，使掌书记。
现代文：薛安都反叛时，苏侃为他的府参军，让他掌书记。
English: When Xue Andu rebelled, Su Kan joined the army for his government and put him in charge of the secretariat.

古文：安都降虏，侃自拔南归。
现代文：安都投降北虏时，苏侃自救逃回南方。
English: When Ando surrendered to Hokuriku, Sukan fled back to the south.

古文：除积射将军。
现代文：授予他积射将军。
English: Give him a general discharge.

古文：遇太祖在淮上，便自委结。
现代文：适逢太祖在淮上，就白去攀附。
English: When the great-grandfather was in Huai, he went to cling in vain.

古文：上镇淮阴，以侃详密，取为冠军录事参军。
现代文：皇上镇守淮阴，因为苏侃精细，调他为冠军录事参军。
English: The imperial town guard Huaiyin, because of Su Kan fine, transferred him to the champion record to join the army.

古文：是时张永、沈攸之败后，新失淮北，始遣上北戍，不满千人。每岁秋冬间，边淮骚动，恒恐虏至。
现代文：这时张永和沈攸之失败以后，刚失陷进北，才派人到北方戍守，不到一千人，每年秋冬期间，边境淮水一带骚乱动荡，常怕北虏杀来。
English: At this time, after the defeat of Zhang Yong and Shen You, just after the fall into the north, less than a thousand people were sent to the north to guard. During the autumn and winter every year, there were riots and turbulence in the Huai Shui area along the border, and they were often afraid of the northern captors.

古文：上广遣侦候，安集荒余，又营缮城府。
现代文：皇上多派人侦察，安置逃荒的人，又修建城郭府衙。
English: The emperor sent many people to investigate, resettle those who fled the famine, and build the castle.

古文：上在兵中久，见疑于时，乃作《塞客吟》以喻志曰： 宝纬紊宗，神经越序。
现代文：皇上在军中久了，被时人猜疑，苏侃就写了《塞客吟》来表达志向： 珍贵的纬线为导向，神奇的经线领次序。
English: After the emperor had been in the army for a long time and was regarded with suspicion by the people of the time, Sukhan wrote "Sekkagin" to express his ambitions: precious lines of latitude as a guide, magical lines of longitude leading the order.

古文：德晦河、晋，力宣江、楚。
现代文：品德使河、晋显得黯淡，力量大过江、楚。
English: Virtue makes the river and the stream appear bleak, and the strength is greater than the river and the stream.

古文：云雷兆壮，天山繇武。
现代文：乌云雷霆预兆着雄壮，蓝天大山预示着威武。
English: Dark clouds and thunderstorms foreshadow grandeur, and blue skies and mountains foreshadow power.

古文：直发指秦关，凝精越汉渚。秋风起，塞草衰，雕鸿思，边马悲。
现代文：怒发冲冠杀向秦关，凝神结想越过汉水中的沙洲秋风吹，边塞的草枯黄，大雕鸿雁在沉思，边关的战马悲鸣。
English: The angry hair rushes to Qin Guan, the autumn wind blows, the grass at the border is withered and yellow, the great egrets are contemplating, and the horses at the border are lamenting.

古文：平原千里顾，但见转蓬飞。
现代文：遥看千里平原，衹见蓬蒿飞旋。
English: Looking at the vast plains from afar, you can see the phoenix flying around.

古文：星严海净，月澈河明。
现代文：星星泛着寒光，海天无云，月亮皎洁河汉朗朗。
English: The stars shine coldly, the sea and sky are cloudless, the moon is bright and the river is clear.

古文：清辉映幕，素液凝庭。
现代文：清清的光辉映照着帐幕，银辉如水泻在庭院中。
English: The pure radiance shines on the tabernacle, and the silver sparkles like water in the courtyard.

古文：金笳夜厉，羽轊晨征。
现代文：金色的胡笳夜裹发出凄厉的声音，羽饰的战车早晨便出发。
English: In the night the golden cuckoos make a terrible noise, and in the morning the plumed chariots set out.

古文：斡晴潭而怅泗，枻松洲而悼情。
现代文：徘徊在潭边欷献，泛舟松汾而伤怀。
English: Wandering on the edge of the lake to make offerings, rafting in the pine forest and grieving.

古文：兰涵风而泻艳，菊笼泉而散英。
现代文：兰花随风飘着幽香，菊花含润绽放。
English: Orchids are fragrant with the wind, and chrysanthemums are in full bloom.

古文：曲绕首燕之叹，吹轸绝越之声。
现代文：歌曲散布着燕地的叹息，鼓吹深含越地的声调。
English: The songs are interspersed with Yandi's sighs, and the rhymes are sung in a deep Yidi tone.

古文：欷园琴之孤弄，想庭藿之余馨。
现代文：伤叹独在园中抚琴，怀想院裹藿草的余香。
English: Sad and lonely in the garden, stroking the harp, remembering the lingering scent of the herbaceous weeds.

古文：青关望断，白日西斜。恬源靓雾，垄首辉霞。
现代文：远望尽是青青的边关，夕阳西下，静静的河的源头上浮起迷茫的雾气，垄头上映着金色晚霞。
English: The distant view is all of the verdant border, the setting sun, the source of the quiet river, the misty fog, and the golden sunset on the ridge.

古文：戒旋醿，跃还波，情绵绵而方远，思袅袅而遂多。
现代文：飞翔的鹉鸟降落水中，绵绵情愫正遐想远方，长长的思绪纷纷乱乱。
English: The flying cockatoo landed in the water, and the long-suffering mother was thinking about far away, and her long-term thoughts were in disarray.

古文：粤击秦中之筑，因为塞上之歌。
现代文：奏响秦中的筑，于是唱起塞上的歌。
English: He played the middle cymbal of the qin, and then sang the cymbal song.

古文：胡埃兮云聚，楚旆兮星悬。
现代文：唱道：早上从大江升起，日暮降落在山岭。
English: Singing: Rising from the big river in the morning, landing in the mountains at dusk.

古文：愁墉兮思宇，恻怆兮何言。
现代文：狂风激荡，淮水奔流。胡地尘土如云，楚地旌旗如星。
English: The wind is raging, the water is rushing. The dust of the Hu Di is like a cloud, and the flags of the Chu Di are like stars.

古文：定寰中之逸鉴，审雕陵之迷泉。
现代文：想天宇茫茫几多愁绪，心中凄怆又能说什么。找来天下流失的宝镜，仔细观察雕陵迷乱的泉流。
English: Think of the vast expanse of the heavens and how much sadness there is, and what can be said for the desolation in your heart. Find the precious mirror that has been lost to the world, and carefully observe the chaotic flow of the fountain.

古文：悟樊笼之或累，怅遐心以栖玄。 
现代文：明白了在樊笼或许被笼所困，但是迷茫的心又归向何方。 
English: I understand that I may be trapped in a cage, but where does my confused heart go?

古文：侃达上此旨，更自勤励。
现代文：苏侃向皇上表达这样的意思后，更加努力。
English: After expressing this to the emperor, Su Kan worked even harder.

古文：委以府事，深见知待。
现代文：交给他府中的事务，很是受到理解重用。
English: The affairs of the government, which were handed over to him, were understood and put to good use.

古文：元徽初，巴西人李承明作乱，太祖议遣侃衔使慰劳，还除羽林监，加建武将军。
现代文：元徽初年，巴西人李承明叛乱，太祖建议派苏侃出使慰抚，回京授予羽林监，加官建武将军。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, when the Brazilian Li Chengming rebelled, the great-grandfather suggested sending Su Kan as a consolation envoy, returning to Beijing and awarding him the title of Ulin Inspector and the additional post of General Jianwu.

古文：桂阳之难，上复以侃为平南录事，领军主，从顿新亭，使分金银赋赐诸将。
现代文：桂阳发难时，皇上又任苏侃为平南绿事，领军主，跟着在新亭驻守，让他分金银财物赏赐众将。
English: When Guiyang was in trouble, the emperor also appointed Su Kan to be the leader of the army, and stationed him in Xinting to reward the generals with gold, silver and property.

古文：事宁，除步兵校尉，出为绥虏将军、山阳太守，清修有治理，百姓怀之。
现代文：乱事平定了，任步兵校尉，出京任绥虏将军、山阳太守，为官清正，治理得很好，百姓感激他。
English: The turmoil was calmed down. He was appointed as an infantry lieutenant colonel, went to Beijing as a general, and became the governor of Sanyang. He was a clean official and governed well, and the people were grateful to him.

古文：进号龙骧将军，除前军将军。
现代文：进号为龙骧将军，任前军将军。
English: His regnal name was General Longyu, and he was a former army general.

古文：沈攸之事起，除侃游击将军，迁太祖骠骑咨议，领录事，除黄门郎，复为太祖太尉咨议。
现代文：沈攸之造反时，又任苏侃为游击将军，升焉太祖骠骑谘议，领录事，任黄门郎，后又任太祖的太尉谘议。
English: During the rebellion of Shen You, Su Kan was appointed as a guerrilla general. He was promoted to consult the ancestor's cavalry, led the record, and was appointed as Huang Men Lang, and later he was appointed as the ancestor's lieutenant.

古文：侃事上既久，备悉起居，乃与丘巨源撰《萧太尉记》，载上征伐之功。
现代文：苏侃侍奉皇上时间长了，都熟悉起居情况，就和丘巨源撰写《萧太尉记》，记述皇上征伐的功业。
English: Su Qian had served the emperor for a long time and was familiar with the living conditions, so he and Qiu Jiyuan wrote "The Diary of Emperor Xiao," describing the emperor's conquering exploits.

古文：以功封新建县侯，五百户。
现代文：因功被封为新建县侯，食邑五百户。
English: He was awarded the title of "newly-established county magistrate" for his achievements, with 500 households in his shokui.

古文：齐台建，为黄门郎，领射声校尉，任以心膂。
现代文：齐王建台阁时，任黄门郎，领射声校尉，把他当作心腹和得力助手来任用。
English: When King Qi built the pavilion, he appointed Huangmenro, the captain of the leading voice, as his confidant and right-hand man.

古文：上即位，侃撰《圣皇瑞命记》一卷奏之。
现代文：皇上即位，苏侃撰写《圣皇瑞命记》一卷呈献。
English: When the emperor ascended the throne, Sukan wrote a volume of "The Life of the Holy Emperor" and presented it to the emperor.

古文：建元元年，卒，年五十三。
现代文：建元元年死。终年五十三岁。
English: He died in the first year of Jianyuan, at the age of 53.

古文：上惜之甚至，追赠辅国将军、梁南秦二州刺史，谥质侯。
现代文：皇上很痛惜，追赠为辅国将军、梁南秦二州刺史，谧号质侯。
English: The emperor was very sorry, and posthumously gave him the title of General of the Auxiliary Provinces, Liangnan Qin Erzhou, and the posthumous name of Qiu Hou.

古文：弟烈，字休文。初为东莞令，张永镇军中兵，累至山阳太守，宁朔将军，游击将军。
现代文：弟弟名烈，字休文，起初任东莞县令，张永镇军中兵，多次升任至山阳太守，宁朔将军，游击将军。
English: His famous younger brother, surnamed Huiwen, initially served as the governor of Dongguan County and a soldier in Zhang Yongzhen's army, and was promoted several times to the governor of Shanyang, the general of Ningshuo, and the guerrilla general.

古文：袁粲起事，太祖先遣烈助防城，仍随诸将平石头，封吉阳县男。
现代文：袁粲作乱时，太祖先派苏烈协助守城，又派他跟着众将军平定石头，封为吉阳县男。
English: When Yuan Shao made a disturbance, the great ancestor sent Su Lie to help defend the city, and also sent him to follow the generals to pacify the stone, and was named the best man of Jiyang County.

古文：建元中，为假节、督巴州军事、巴州刺史、巴东太守，宁朔将军如故。
现代文：建元年间，任假节、督巴州军事、巴州刺史、巴束太守，宁朔将军职位不变。
English: During the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the positions of Ningshuo General remained unchanged.

古文：永明中，至平西司马、陈留太守，卒官。
现代文：永明年间，官做到平西司马、陈留太守，死于任上。
English: In the middle of the following year, officials such as Ping Xi Sima and Chen Liu Taizhou died in office.

古文：垣荣祖，字华先，下邳人，五兵尚书崇祖从父兄也。
现代文：垣荣祖字华先，下邳人，是五兵尚书垣崇祖的堂兄。
English: Kaki Rongzu (Chinese: 垣榮祖; pinyin: Kaki Rongzu) was a cousin of the five-soldier Shogun Kaki Takasago.

古文：父谅之，宋北中郎府参军。
现代文：父亲名谅之，是宋的北中郎府参军。
English: His father forgave him, and it was Song's Kitanakatsurofu who joined the army.

古文：荣祖少学骑马及射，或谓之曰： 武事可畏，何不学书？ 
现代文：荣祖青年时学骑马射箭，有人对他说： 习武的事可怕，为何不学文。 
English: When Rong Zu was young, he learned to ride a horse and shoot arrows. Someone said to him, "It's terrible to learn martial arts. Why don't you study literature?"

古文：荣祖曰： 昔曹操、曹丕上马横槊，下马谈论，此于天下可不负饮食矣。
现代文：荣祖说： 从前曹操、曹丕上马横槊，下马能高谈阔论，这可立于天下而不辜负吃喝了。
English: Rong Zu said, "Once upon a time, Cao Cao and Cao Pi rode on horseback and rode side by side. When they dismounted, they were able to speak highly of each other. This can be established in the world and can live up to eating and drinking.

古文：君辈无自全之伎，何异犬羊乎！ 
现代文：你们没有保全自己的本领，与犬羊有何不同呢! 
English: Like you readers, they don't even have the ability to protect themselves, so what's the difference between them and dogs and sheep!

古文：宋孝建中，州辟主簿，为后军参军。
现代文：宋孝建年间，州裹用他为主簿，任为后军将军。
English: During the Song and Xiao Jian years, he was appointed as the general of the rear army.

古文：伯父豫州刺史护之子袭祖为淮阳太守，宋孝武以事徙之岭南，护之不食而死。
现代文：他伯父豫州刺史护之的儿子袭祖任淮阳太守，宋孝武帝因事贬谪他到岭南，护之绝食而死。
English: The son of his uncle, Yu Zhou Zhi Guo Zhi, succeeded his ancestor as Huaiyang governor. Emperor Song Xiaowu demoted him to Lingnan, and Guo Zhi died of starvation.

古文：帝疾笃，又遣使杀袭祖。袭祖临死，与荣祖书曰： 弟常劝我危行言逊，今果败矣。 
现代文：皇帝病重时，又派人去杀袭祖，袭祖临死时，给荣祖写信说： 弟弟常勉励我要谨慎行事语言谦逊，现在果真完了。 
English: When the emperor was seriously ill, he sent someone to assassinate the heir to the throne. When the heir to the throne was about to die, he wrote a letter to the glorious ancestor, saying: My younger brother often urged me to be cautious and humble, but now it is really over.

古文：明帝初即位，四方反，除荣祖冗从仆射，遣还徐州说刺史薛安都曰： 天之所废，谁能兴之。
现代文：明帝刚即位时，四方反叛，授予荣祖为冗从仆射，派他回到徐州劝告刺史薛安都说： 上天要废弃的人，谁能使他兴起呢。
English: When Emperor Ming first ascended to the throne, the four quarters rebelled, and awarded Rong Zu the title of "long-suffering follower," and sent him back to Xuzhou to advise Jishi Xue Andu, saying: "Heaven wants to discard a person, but who can make him rise?

古文：使君今不同八百诸侯，如民所见，非计中也。 
现代文：使君你不同于八百诸侯，像百姓一样的见识，不是妥善的打算呀。 
English: It is not a proper plan to make you different from the eight hundred princes and to have the same insight as the common people.

古文：安都曰： 天命有在，今京都无百里地，莫论攻围取胜，自可拍手笑杀。
现代文：安都说： 天命有归，现在京城没有百里地盘，不说围攻取胜，当拍手笑死人了。
English: Ando said, "It's fate. Now the capital doesn't have a hundred-mile site, not to mention the siege to win. I'm dying of laughter."

古文：且我不欲负孝武。 
现代文：况且我不想背叛孝武帝。 
English: Besides, I don't want to betray Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：荣祖曰： 孝武之行，足致余殃。
现代文：荣祖说： 孝武帝的行为，足使他招致灾殃。
English: Rong Zu said: Emperor Xiaowu's actions have brought disaster upon him.

古文：今虽天下雷同，正是速死，无能为也。 
现代文：现在天下都是这样，正是加速灭亡，是没有任何办法的。 
English: This is the case all over the world now. There is no way to speed up the demise.

古文：安都曰： 不知诸人云何，我不畏此。大蹄马在近，急便作计。 
现代文：安都说： 不知众人怎样说，我不怕这个。 大蹄马 就在近处，要赶快想出办法来。 
English: Amdo said, "I don't know what people are saying, I'm not afraid of this.

古文：荣祖被拘不得还，因收集部曲，为安都将领。
现代文：荣祖被扣留不能回京，于是收集部下，成了安都的将领。
English: Rong Zu was detained and could not return to Beijing, so he gathered his subordinates and became the general of Andu.

古文：假署冠军将军。
现代文：暂任冠军将军。
English: Interim champion general.

古文：安都引虏入彭城，荣祖携家属南奔朐山，虏遣骑追之不及。
现代文：安都带来北虏进入彭城，荣祖带着家眷往南逃奔朐山，北虏派骑兵追赶不上。
English: An Du brought the Northern Ruthenians into Pengcheng. Rong Zu and his family fled south to Lushan. The Northern Ruthenians could not catch up with the cavalry.

古文：荣祖惧得罪，乃逃遁淮上。
现代文：荣祖害怕因造事获罪，就逃到淮上。
English: Rong Zu was afraid of being punished for his actions, so he fled to Huaijiao.

古文：太祖在淮阴，荣祖归附，上保持之。
现代文：太祖在淮阴，荣祖归附太祖，太祖保护了他。
English: The great-great-grandfather was in Huaiyin, Rongzu was attached to the great-great-grandfather, and the great-great-grandfather protected him.

古文：及明帝崩，太祖书送荣祖诣仆射褚渊，除宁朔将军、东海太守。
现代文：等到明帝驾崩，太祖写信送荣祖去见仆射褚渊，任宁朔将军、束海太守。
English: When Emperor Ming died, Emperor Taizu sent a letter to Emperor Rongzhu, asking him to meet with the general of Ningshuo and the governor of Sokhai.

古文：渊谓之曰： 萧公称卿干略，故以此郡相处。 
现代文：褚渊对他说： 萧公赞扬你有才干，因此把这个郡给你。 
English: Gongyuan said to him, "King Xiao praised you for your talent, so he gave you this county.

古文：荣祖善弹，弹鸟毛尽而鸟不死。
现代文：荣祖善于打弹弓，打得鸟毛都掉光了，乌还不会死。
English: Rong Zu was good at playing the slingshot. He could make the bird's feathers fall out, but Wu would not die.

古文：海鹄群翔，荣祖登城西楼弹之，无不折翅而下。
现代文：海鹄群飞，荣祖登上城西楼弹鹄，没有不断翅落下的。
English: The seagulls flew in flocks, and Rong Zu climbed onto the west tower of the city to shoot the gulls, but his wings never fell off.

古文：除晋熙王征虏、安成王车骑中兵，左军将军。
现代文：任晋熙王的征虏、安成王的车骑中兵，左军将军。
English: He was a conscript of King Jinxi, a chariot and cavalry soldier of King Ancheng, and a general of the Left Army.

古文：元徽末，太祖欲渡广陵，荣祖谏曰： 领府去台百步，公走，人岂不知？
现代文：元徽末年，太祖想渡水到广陵，荣祖劝阻说： 领府离台阎百步远，你离开了，别人怎能不知觉。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Taizu wanted to cross the water to Guangling, but Emperor Rongzu dissuaded him, saying, "The capital is a hundred paces away from Taiyan. If you leave, how can others not notice?

古文：若单行轻骑，广陵人一旦闭门不相受，公欲何之？
现代文：如果一个人轻装骑马去，广陵的人一旦闭门不接受，你将到哪儿去呢?
English: If a person is lightly loaded on a horse, and the people of Guangling do not accept the horse once it is closed, where will you go?

古文：公今动足下床，便恐即有扣台门者，公事去矣。 
现代文：你现在祇要一动身下床来，恐怕就有人去敲台门报告了，你的大事就完了。 
English: You've only got to get out of bed now and someone will be knocking on your door to tell you that your big day is over.

古文：及苍梧废，除宁朔将军、淮南太守，进辅国将军，除游击将军、太祖骠骑谘议，辅国将军、西中郎司马、汝阴太守，除冠军将军，给事中，骁骑将军。
现代文：等到苍梧废黜后，他被授予宁朔将军、淮南人守，进号辅国将军，任游击将军、太祖骠骑谘议，辅国将军、西中郎司马、汝阴太守，任冠军将军，给事中，骁骑将军。
English: After the dethronement of Cangwu, he was awarded the titles of Ningshuo General, Huainan People's Warden, Shingou Auxiliary General, Guerrilla General, Taizu Horseman, Auxiliary General, Xizhong Lang Sima, Ruyin Overseer, Champion General, and, in the middle of the war, Horseman General.

古文：豫佐命勋，封将乐县子，三百户，以其祖旧封封之。
现代文：因参预辅佐有勋功，被封为将乐县子，食邑三百户，封给他祖上的旧封地。
English: Because of his meritorious services as a prefect and assistant governor, he was awarded the title of son of Joraku County and 300 households of Shokui County, and the old fiefdoms of his ancestors were awarded to him.

古文：出为持节、督青冀二州刺史，冠军如故。
现代文：出京任持节、督青冀二州刺史，冠军之职不变。
English: He will go to Beijing to hold the festival, and the governor of Qinghai and Hebei will make history, and the champion's position will remain unchanged.

古文：迁黄门郎。
现代文：升黄门郎。
English: Shōkōmonro.

古文：永明二年，为冠军将军、寻阳相、南新蔡太守。
现代文：永明二年，任冠军将军、寻阳相、南新蔡太守。
English: In the 2nd year of Yongming, he was appointed Champion General, Minister of Searching for the Sun, and Governor of Nanxin Cai.

古文：作大形棺材盛仗，使乡人田天生、王道期载渡江北。
现代文：他做了个特大的棺材装着仪仗，让同乡人田天生、王道期押运到江北。
English: He made an extra-large coffin with a ceremonial casket and asked his fellow countrymen Tian Tian Sheng and Wang Daozi to escort it to the north of the Yangtze River.

古文：监奴有罪，告之，有司奏免官削爵付东冶，案验无实见原。
现代文：监奴有罪，告了他，官员启奏免除他的官职和爵位交给束冶治罪，经调查罪名不符事实被原宥。
English: The inmate was found guilty, he was indicted, the officials absolved him of his official position and peerage and handed him over to the shackles to be punished. After investigation, the charges did not match the facts and were dismissed.

古文：为安陆王平西谘议，带江陵令，仍迁司马、河东内史。
现代文：任安陆王的干西谘议，兼江陵县令，又升为司马、河东内史。
English: He was appointed as the Ganxi advisory council of Anlu Wang, and also the governor of Jiangling County, and was promoted to Sima and the head of the Inner History of Hedong.

古文：迁持节、督缘淮诸军事、冠军将军、兖州刺史，领东平太守、兖州大中正。
现代文：升持节、督沿淮诸军事、冠军将军、兖州刺史，领束平太守、兖州大中正。
English: Shengzhi Festival, Governor Yanhuai Zhu Military, Champion General, Zhangzhou Sashih, Collar Bund Ping Taishou, Zhangzhou University Junior High School.

古文：巴东王子响事，方镇皆启称子响为逆，荣祖曰： 此非所宜言。政应云刘寅等孤负恩奖，逼迫巴东，使至于此。 
现代文：在巴东王子响的事件中，地方镇守官员都奏告说王响叛逆，荣祖说： 这事不能这样说，衹能说塞蝼等人辜负圣恩，逼迫巴束王，才成了这样子。 
English: In the case of Prince Badong, the local town guard officials all reported that Wang Xiang had rebelled. Rong Zu said, "This cannot be said. It can only be said that Sayyid and others betrayed the holy grace and persecuted King Ba Sok. This is how things have come to be."

古文：时诸启皆不得通，事平后，上乃省视，以荣祖为知言。
现代文：当时众人的启奏都不能上达，事情平定后，皇上才审察这事，认为荣祖是了解实情的论述。
English: At that time, many people could not reach the opening, and after the matter was settled, the emperor examined the matter and thought that Rong Zu was a discussion to understand the truth.

古文：九年，卒，年五十七。
现代文：九年，死，终年五十七岁。
English: He died nine years after the Taiping Rebellion, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：从父闳，宋孝建初，为威远将军、汝南新蔡太守，据梁山拒丞相义宣贼，以功封西都县子。
现代文：他的叔父垣闳，在宋孝建初年，任威远将军、这亩和塞昵的太守，据守鎏山抵抗丞相义宣叛军，因功封为丙都县子。
English: In the first year of Song Xiao Jian, his uncle, Gaki Xi, was appointed as the general of Wei Yuan, the governor of Mu and Xeni, and he resisted the rebel army of the prime minister, Yixuan, in Shaoshan. Because of his achievements, he was awarded the title of the son of Xindu County.

古文：累迁龙骧将军、司州刺史。
现代文：多次升官做到龙骧将军、司州刺史。
English: He has been promoted many times to the rank of general and secretary of the State Council.

古文：义嘉事起，明帝使闳出守盱眙，领兵北讨薛道标破之。
现代文：义嘉事发时，明帝派垣闳出京守盱眙，领兵往北去讨伐薛道标，打败了他。
English: At the time of the Yijia Incident, the Ming Emperor sent Qigong out of Beijing to guard the capital, and led the army to the north to fight against Xue Daobiao and defeated him.

古文：封乐乡县男，三百户。
现代文：封为乐乡县侯，食邑三百户。
English: He was given the title of county magistrate of Lexiang County, with 300 households in the county.

古文：升明初，为散骑常侍，领长水校尉，与豫章王对直殿省，迁右卫将军。
现代文：升明初年，任散骑常侍，领长水校尉，与豫章王一起轮值殿省，升右卫将军。
English: In the first year after ascending the throne, he was appointed as a knight-errant, the captain of the captain of the water school, and together with Yu Zhangwang, he was assigned to the Ministry of the Palace and promoted to the General of the Right Division.

古文：太祖即位，以心诚封爵如旧，加给事中，领骁骑将军。
现代文：太祖即位，因忠诚封赐爵位像原来一样，加官给事中，领骁骑将军。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended the throne, he was given a knighthood for his loyalty, as he had been before, and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general.

古文：累迁金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：屡次升职做到金紫光禄大夫。
English: He has been promoted many times to the highest rank of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：年七十六，永明五年，卒，谥定。
现代文：活到七十六岁，在永明五年死，谧号为定。
English: He lived to the age of seventy-six and died five years later in Yongming.

古文：荣祖从弟历生，亦为骁骑将军。
现代文：荣祖的堂弟名历生，也是骁骑将军。
English: Rong Zu's cousin was also a cavalry general.

古文：宋泰始初，薛安都反，以女婿裴祖隆为下邳太守，历生时请假还北，谋杀祖隆，举城应朝廷。事发奔走。
现代文：宋泰始初年，薛安都反叛，因为女婿裴祖隆是下邳太守，历生当时请假回到北方，设计杀祖隆，号召全城响应朝廷，事情被发觉而逃跑了。
English: In the first year of Song Taishi, Xue Andu rebelled, because his son-in-law Pei Zulong was the lower eunuch governor. At that time, he asked for leave to return to the north, designed to kill Zulong, and called on the whole city to respond to the court. The matter was discovered and he fled.

古文：历官太子右率。
现代文：官至太子右率。
English: official to the right of the crown prince.

古文：性苛暴，好行鞭捶。
现代文：性残暴，喜欢用鞭刑。
English: He is sexually brutal and likes to use the cane.

古文：与始安王遥光同反，伏诛。
现代文：后来和始安王遥光一起造反，被诛杀。
English: Later, he rebelled together with the King of Shi'an, Yaoguang, and was killed.

古文：史臣曰：太祖作牧淮、兖，始基霸业，恩成北被，感动三齐。
现代文：史臣日：太祖统辖淮、兖，才建立霸业的基础，恩威遮盖北方，感动三齐。
English: Historian Sun: It was only when the Great Ancestor controlled Huai and Zhou that he established the foundation for hegemony. His benevolence covered the north and moved everyone.

古文：青、冀豪右，崔、刘望族，先睹人雄，希风结义。
现代文：青、冀的豪强，崔、刘一样的贵族，先瞻仰了人间雄杰的风采，闻风归附。
English: The heroes of Qing and Jie, the aristocrats like Cui and Liu, foresaw and admired the style of the world's heroes, and were inspired by them.

古文：夫谏江都之略，似任光之言，虽议不独兴，理成合契，盖帷幕之臣也。
现代文：献上江都一样的韬略，提出任光一样的计谋，虽然议论不是单独提出，道理却都符合，大都是帐中谋臣。
English: Presented the same strategy as Jiangdu, put forward the same strategy as Ren Guang, although the argument is not put forward separately, the reason is consistent, most of them are advisers in the account.

古文：赞曰：淮镇北州，获在崔、刘。
现代文：赞曰：淮阴威镇北方，得计因有崔、刘。
English: Zang said: In the northern part of Huaiyinwei Town, there are Cui and Liu.

古文：献书上议，帝念忠谋。
现代文：献上策略，皇帝顾念他们的忠诚谋略。
English: Presented with the strategy, the emperor pondered their loyalty strategy.

古文：侃奉潜跃，皇瑞是鸠。
现代文：苏侃事奉君王含而不露，所以吉祥的兆头像鸠乌一样聚集。
English: Su Qian served the king implicitly, so the auspicious signs gathered like clouds.

古文：垣方带砺，削免虚尤。
现代文：垣氏命运多有磨难，所以经受过免官削爵的虚惊。
English: The fate of the Gaki clan was full of hardships, so they experienced the false shock of being stripped of their titles.

