古文：诸侯行而死于馆，则其复如于其国。
现代文：诸侯出访他国而死于宾馆，举行的招魂仪式和死在自己国内一样。
English: When princes visit other countries and die in a hotel, the soul-winning ceremony is the same as if they had died in their own country.

古文：如于道，则升其乘车之左毂，以其绥复。
现代文：如果是死在半路上，招魂的人就站在国君所乘的左轮轴头，拿着车上旗杆顶端的飘带来招魂。
English: In the case of a death on the road, the soul-winner would stand at the hub of the king's chariot, holding the wreath from the top of the flagpole to summon the soul.

古文：其輤有裧，缁布裳帷素锦以为屋而行。
现代文：其载尸车上方有一篷盖，篷盖的四周有下垂的缘边，载尸车的四周是用黑布围成的帷幕，整个棺材还要用素锦覆盖起来。
English: There is a canopy cover above the hearse, the canopy cover is surrounded by sagging edges, the hearse is surrounded by a curtain made of black cloth, and the entire coffin is covered with brocade.

古文：至于庙门，不毁墙遂入适所殡，唯輤为说于庙门外。
现代文：如此安排停当，再把尸车送回家。来到自家庙门，不须撤掉枢车四周的围布就可以进去，径直把灵枢停放在堂上两楹之间。但枢车上的篷盖要卸下来，放在庙门外。
English: After this arrangement, the hearse is parked and then sent home. When you arrive at the temple gate of your home, you can enter without removing the cloth around the hearse and directly park the hearse between the two beams on the hall. However, the cover on the hearse must be removed and placed outside the temple gate.

古文：大夫、士死于道，则升其乘车之左毂，以其绥复。
现代文：大夫、士出行，死在半路上，招魂的人站在死者所乘车左轮轴头，拿着车上旗竿顶端的飘带来招魂。
English: A doctor and a lawyer are traveling and die on the way. The soul-winner stands at the head of the car's revolving axle, holding the waving flag at the top of the flagpole to summon the soul.

古文：如于馆死，则其复如于家。
现代文：如果死在国外的宾馆里，招魂仪式和死在家里一样。
English: If you die in a foreign hotel, the soul-winning ceremony is the same as if you died at home.

古文：大夫以布为輤而行，至于家而说輤，载以輲车，入自门至于阼阶下而说车，举自阼阶，升适所殡。
现代文：大夫死，载尸的车子用布拉起篷顶后再上路。到达自家门口时，卸下篷顶，把尸体移到端车上，从大门进去，来到东阶下，把尸体从车上搬下，从东阶抬上去，一直抬到停尸之处。
English: When the doctor died, the car carrying the corpse used a broom to lift the canopy and then went on the road. When arriving at the door of his home, he removed the canopy, moved the body to the end car, entered through the gate, came to the east steps, took the body off the car, lifted it up from the east steps, and carried it all the way to the morgue.

古文：士輤，苇席以为屋，蒲席以为裳帷。
现代文：士死，载尸的车子也有顶篷，但用苇席覆盖棺木，用蒲席作枢车的布围。
English: When a person dies, the carriage that carries the body also has a canopy, but the coffin is covered with a canopy seat and the hearse is surrounded with a canopy seat.

古文：凡讣于其君，曰： 君之臣某死 ；父母、妻、长子，曰： 君之臣某之某死 。
现代文：大夫、士死了，凡是向自己的国君报丧，应当说: 君的臣子某某死。 如果是大夫、士的父、母、妻室或长子死，报丧时应当说: 君的臣子某某家中某某死。 
English: When a doctor or a statesman dies, anyone who reports the death to his sovereign should say: Your vassal so-and-so died. If the doctor or statesman's father, mother, wife or eldest son died, the report should say: Your vassal so-and-so died in so-and-so's house.

古文：君讣于他国之君，曰： 寡君不禄，敢告于执事。 ；夫人，曰： 寡小君不禄。 ；大子之丧，曰： 寡君之适子某死。 
现代文：国君死，向别国君王报丧时应说: 寡君不禄，敢向执事禀告。 
English: When announcing the death of a sovereign to other sovereigns, it should be said: "It is not fitting for a king to die without informing his steward."

古文：大夫讣于同国：适者，曰： 某不禄 ；讣于士，亦曰： 某不禄 ；讣于他国之君，曰： 君之外臣寡大夫某死 ，讣于适者，曰： 吾子之外私寡大夫某不禄，使某实。 
现代文：如果国君夫人死了，报丧时就说: 寡小君不禄。 
English: If the wife of the sovereign dies, it is said at the time of the announcement of the funeral: "It is not a small honor to be the wife of the sovereign."

古文：讣于士，亦曰： 吾子之外私寡大夫某不禄，使某实。 
现代文：太子死，报丧时就说: 寡君的嫡子某某死。 大夫死了，在国内报丧时，如果是地位相当的人，应说: 某某不禄。 向士报丧，也说: 某某不禄。 
English: When the crown prince died, it was said at the time of mourning: "The legitimate son of the widowed monarch died so-and-so." When the doctor died, when mourning in the country, if it was a person of equivalent status, it should be said: "So-and-so is unlucky."

古文：士讣于同国大夫，曰： 某死 ，讣于士，亦曰： 某死 ；讣于他国之君，曰： 君之外臣某死 ，讣于大夫，曰： 吾子之外私某死 ，讣于士，亦曰： 吾子之外私某死 。
现代文：向别国的国君报丧，应说: 君的外臣寡大夫某某死。 
English: When announcing the death of the sovereign of another country, it should be said: Your foreign minister, Dr. Oli, has died.

古文：大夫次于公馆以终丧，士练而归。
现代文：向别国的大夫报丧，说: 您的国外好友寡大夫某某不禄，派我来报丧。 
English: When announcing the death of a doctor from another country, he said: Your foreign friend, Dr. Oliyev, sent me to announce the death.

古文：士次于公馆，大夫居庐，士居垩室。
现代文：向别国的士报丧，也说: 您的国外好友寡大夫某某不禄，派我来报丧。 士死，向本国大夫报丧，应说: 某某死了。 
English: When announcing the death of a foreign doctor, you should also say: Your foreign friend, Dr. So-and-So, died, and I was sent to announce the death.

古文：大夫为其父母兄弟之未为大夫者之丧，服如士服。
现代文：向本国的士报丧，也说: 某某死了。 向别国国君报丧，应说: 君的外臣某某死。 
English: When announcing the death of a statesman of one's own country, one should also say: So-and-so has died. When announcing the death of a sovereign of another country, one should say: Your foreign minister So-and-so has died.

古文：士为其父母兄弟之为大夫者之丧，服如士服。大夫之适子，服大夫之服。
现代文：身为士的人，给做过大夫的父母或兄弟服丧，也只能依士礼服丧。大夫的嫡长子，可以按大夫礼服丧。
English: If you are a doctor and you are mourning the death of a parent or sibling who was a doctor, you can only mourn in accordance with the dress code for doctors. If you are the eldest son of a doctor, you can mourn in accordance with the dress code for doctors.

古文：大夫之庶子为大夫，则为其父母服大夫服；其位，与未为大夫者齿。
现代文：大夫的庶子如果也是大夫，可以依大夫礼为父母服丧，但哭泣的位置只能与没有当大夫的人同列。
English: If the doctor's son-in-law is also a doctor, he can mourn for his parents according to the doctor's etiquette, but the crying position can only be the same as that of a person who is not a doctor.

古文：士之子为大夫，则其父母弗能主也，使其子主之。
现代文：士的儿子当了大夫之后，他的父母就不能为他主持丧事，而应由他的儿子主持。
English: After the doctor's son became a doctor, his parents could not preside over his funeral, but his son should.

古文：无子，则为之置后。
现代文：假如他没有儿子，就要为他立一个承嗣的人。
English: And if he have no son, then ye shall appoint him his successor.

古文：大夫卜宅与葬日，有司麻衣、布衰、布带，因丧屦，缁布冠不蕤。占者皮弁。
现代文：大夫死后，用龟卜的方式选择墓地和下葬的日期，这时候掌事的人要身穿麻衣，麻衣的前胸后背各缀一块麻布，腰系布带，脚穿麻绳编的屡，头戴没有缨饰的细布冠。至于占者则穿皮弃服。
English: After the doctor's death, the cemetery and the date of burial were chosen in the manner of a tortoise. At this time, the person in charge should be wearing a linen dress, with a piece of linen embroidered on the front, chest and back of the linen dress, a cloth belt around the waist, hemp rope braid on the feet, and a fine cloth crown without embroidery on the head. As for the diviner, he should wear leather cast-off clothes.

古文：如筮，则史练冠长衣以筮。占者朝服。
现代文：如果是用筮选择葬地与日期，筮史就戴白练布帽，穿素色深衣行筮；占者穿朝服。
English: If the burial place and date are selected using the urn, the urn historian will wear a white cloth cap, wear a plain dark suit and walk with the urn; the occupant will wear a court dress.

古文：大夫之丧，既荐马。荐马者，哭踊，出乃包奠而读书。
现代文：大夫的丧礼，在下葬那一天，拉枢车的马已被牵进祖庙，孝子见此情景，又哭又跺脚。马从庙门出来以后，套到灵车上，这时要举行包奠和读书的仪式。
English: At the doctor's funeral, on the day of the burial, the horse pulling the cart had been dragged into the ancestral temple. Seeing this scene, the filial son cried and stamped his feet. After the horse came out of the temple gate, it was put on the hearse. At this time, a ceremony of commemoration and reading was to be held.

古文：大夫之丧，大宗人相，小宗人命龟，卜人作龟。
现代文：大夫的丧事，由大宗人辅佐行礼，由小宗人告龟以所向之事，由卜人灼龟以观兆之吉凶。
English: For the doctor's funeral, the great ancestor assisted with the rites, the small ancestor told the tortoise what to do, and the person who prayed burned the tortoise as a good omen.

古文：复，诸侯以褒衣冕服，爵弁服，夫人税衣揄狄，狄税素沙。内子以鞠衣，褒衣，素沙。下大夫以襢衣，其余如士。
现代文：招魂时所用的衣服：诸侯用褒衣、冕服和爵弃服；诸侯的夫人，用榆狄、网狄、鞠衣、展衣、椽衣等五种衣服，这五种衣服都是用素纱作里子；卿的正妻，用鞠衣和褒衣，也都是以素纱作里子；下大夫之妻，用檀衣；其余的人都和士妻一样，用椽衣。
English: The robes used in the spirit-attracting ceremony: the lords use the praiseworthy robe, the crowned robe, and the peer's discarded robe; the lords' wives use five kinds of robes, including the gown, the net, the jersey, the draped robe, and the pleated robe, all of which are made of plain yarn; the lord's wife uses the jersey and the praiseworthy robe, both of which are made of plain yarn; the junior doctor's wife uses the sandal; and the rest of the people use the pleated robe like the warrior's wife.

古文：复西上。大夫不揄绞，属于池下。
现代文：招魂的人如果在两个以上，以立在西边的为上位。大夫葬时的运枢车，不得把愉绞系到池下。
English: If there are more than two soul-winners, the one who stands on the west side is the superior one. When the doctor is burying, the hearse must not tie the coffin to the bottom of the pond.

古文：大夫附于士，士不附于大夫，附于大夫之昆弟。
现代文：大夫死后，他的神主可以附在生前为士的祖父的神主后面。
English: After the doctor's death, his god can be attached to the god of his grandfather, who was a priest before his death.

古文：无昆弟，则从其昭穆。虽王父母在，亦然。妇附于其夫之所附之妃，无妃。则亦从其昭穆之妃。
现代文：反过来，士死之后，他的神主却不可附在生前为大夫的祖父的神主后面，而只能附在生前为士的叔伯祖父的神主后面；如果没有这样的叔伯祖父，还可以按照昭穆顺序附在高祖神主后面。即使祖父母仍健在，也是这样。媳妇的神主应该附在祖姑之后；如果没有祖姑可附，也可以按照昭穆顺序附在高祖配偶的后面。
English: On the other hand, after the death of a priest, his god master should not be attached to the god master of his grandfather who was a doctor before his death, but only to the god master of his great-uncle who was a priest before his death; if there is no such great-uncle, it can be attached to the great-grandfather god master in the order of succession. This is true even if the grandparents are still alive. The god master of a daughter-in-law should be attached to the great-aunt; if there is no great-aunt to attach to, it can also be attached to the great-grandfather spouse in the order of succession.

古文：妾附于妾祖姑，无妾祖姑则亦从其昭穆之妾。
现代文：妾的神主应该附于身份是妾的祖姑后面；如果没有妾祖姑，也可以按照昭穆顺序附于高祖之妾。
English: The deity of the concubine should be attached to the status of the concubine's great-grandmother; if there is no great-grandmother, it can also be attached to the great-grandfather's concubine in accordance with the Shomu order.

古文：男子附于王父则配；女子附于王母，则不配。
现代文：男子衬于祖父时，要以祖母来配享；女子衬于祖母时，则不以祖父来配享。
English: When a man is a grandfather, he should share with his grandmother; when a woman is a grandmother, she should not share with her grandfather.

古文：公子附于公子。
现代文：国君的庶子只能衬于祖辈的庶子。
English: The illegitimate son of a sovereign can only be compared to the illegitimate son of an ancestor.

古文：君薨，大子号称子，待犹君也。
现代文：国君去世的当年，太子只称 子 ，但在交往中受到的礼遇却和国君一样。
English: In the year of the sovereign's death, the crown prince was only a son, but he was treated with the same courtesy as the sovereign.

古文：有三年之练冠，则以大功之麻易之；唯杖屦不易。
现代文：原来有父母三年丧服，在小祥后改用练冠以后，这时又遇到大功亲属去世，就应该把头上的练冠、腰上的葛带统统改为大功的麻绖，只有孝棒和丧屦不变。
English: Originally, there were three years of mourning clothes for parents, but after Xiao Xiang later changed to the practice crown, when he encountered the death of relatives with great merits, he should change the practice crown on his head and the gether belt on his waist to the great merits. Only the filial rod and the mourning crown remain unchanged.

古文：有父母之丧，尚功衰，而附兄弟之殇则练冠。附于殇，称阳童某甫，不名，神也。
现代文：正在为父母守孝之中，已经过了小祥，换上了功衰，如果这时遇上了未成年兄弟的衬祭，本来也应把练冠改为大功的麻续，但因为是荡，所以就戴着练冠参加柑祭就行了。在祭荡的祭文中，要称 阳童某甫 ，不能直呼其名，因为已经把他当作神来对待了。
English: During the filial piety for parents, it has already passed the minor auspiciousness, and has been replaced by the merits and demerits. If at this time you encounter the minor brother's lining sacrifice, you should have changed the practice crown to the great merit sequence, but because it is a swing, it is enough to wear the practice crown to participate in the mandarin festival. In the sacrificial text, it is necessary to call the young man a certain time, but you can not call his name directly, because he has been treated as a god.

古文：凡异居，始闻兄弟之丧，唯以哭对，可也。
现代文：凡是分居两地的兄弟，在刚听到兄弟死的讣告时，只用哀苦来对答报丧人是可以的，一言不发也是可以的。
English: All brothers who live in two different places, when they have just heard the obituary notice of their brother's death, can only use sorrow to answer the bereaved person, and it is also possible to say nothing.

古文：其始麻，散带绖。
现代文：第二日就开始带孝，腰纽束腰后的多余部分任其散开下垂。
English: On the second day, the filial piety began, and the excess part of the waistband after the waistband was allowed to spread and droop.

古文：未服麻而奔丧，及主人之未成绖也：疏者，与主人皆成之；亲者，终其麻带绖之日数。
现代文：如果没有披麻就回去奔丧，又正赶上主人成服，在这种情况下，比较疏远的亲属就可以和主人一道成服，关系亲近的就不行，一定要披麻散带到规定的天数再成服。
English: If you don't have a cloak, you can go back to mourn and catch up with the master to complete the dress. In this case, more distant relatives can complete the dress with the master, but those who are close to him can't. You must wear a loose cloak and take it to the specified number of days to complete the dress.

古文：主妾之丧，则自绖至于练祥，皆使其子主之。
现代文：主妾去世，则由丈夫亲自为她主持衬祭；至于小祥、大祥之祭，都让她的儿子主持。
English: When the main concubine died, the husband himself presided over the lining ceremony for her; as for the small auspicious and great auspicious festivals, he let her son preside.

古文：其殡祭，不于正室。
现代文：虽然生前代理主妇，但究竟还不是主妇，所以对她的殡和祭都不在正室举行。
English: Although she was a surrogate housewife during her lifetime, she was not a housewife after all, so her funeral and memorial service were not held in her regular room.

古文：君不抚仆妾。女君死，则妾为女君之党服。
现代文：仆妾死后，因为他们的身份低贱，主人不须抚摩其尸而哭。主妇死后，主妇的娘家人死了，众妾仍须为之服丧，但代理主妇的妾则可以不为之服丧。
English: After the death of a servant or a concubine, because of their lowly status, the master does not have to touch the corpse and cry. After the death of a housewife, the housewife's daughter and family members have died, and the concubines still have to mourn for them, but the concubines acting as housewives can not mourn for them.

古文：摄女君，则不为先女君之党服。闻兄弟之丧，大功以上，见丧者之乡而哭。
现代文：听到兄弟的死讯，急忙前去奔丧，如果是死者大功以上的兄弟，就要在看见死者所住村落时就放声痛哭。
English: On hearing the news of the death of a brother, one should hasten to mourn. If it is a brother who has done more than the deceased, one should cry loudly when seeing the village where the deceased lived.

古文：适兄弟之送葬者弗及，遇主人于道，则遂之于墓。
现代文：去给兄弟送葬而没有赶上，碰见主人时已经是在葬毕回家的路上，这时候自己就要独自走到墓地哭送。
English: He went to his brother's funeral and didn't make it. When he met his owner, he was already on his way home after the funeral. At this time, he had to walk to the cemetery alone to cry.

古文：凡主兄弟之丧，虽疏亦虞之。
现代文：凡是为兄弟主持丧事，即令是小功以下之亲，也要在虞祭之后才回家。
English: Anyone who presides over the funeral of a brother, even a relative of minor merit, should go home only after the state festival.

古文：凡丧服未毕，有吊者，则为位而哭拜踊。
现代文：只要还在服丧期内，如果有客人来吊孝，孝子都应在规定的位置上哭泣，拜宾、成踊，不可在礼数上打折扣。
English: As long as it is still within the mourning period, if there are guests coming to hang the filial piety, the filial children should cry in the specified position, visit the guests, and dance, and the number of ceremonies should not be discounted.

古文：大夫之哭大夫，弁绖；大夫与殡，亦弁绖。
现代文：大夫去哭吊大夫，要身着锡衰，头戴弃纽；如果是在主人未成服时前去哭吊，也是头戴弃纽，但不着锡衰，仍着常服。
English: When a doctor goes to mourn, he should be dressed in pewter and wear a cast-off tie; if he goes to mourn when his master is not dressed, he should also wear a cast-off tie, but he should not wear a cast-off tie and should still wear his regular clothes.

古文：大夫有私丧之葛，则于其兄弟之轻丧，则弁绖。
现代文：大夫的妻子死了，已经过了卒哭，改戴较轻的葛纽，这时又遇到小功以下的兄弟去世，大夫前去吊孝也要改作头戴弃纽。
English: When the doctor's wife died, he had already shed a few tears and changed to a lighter carnation. At this time, he also encountered the death of his younger brother, Xiao Gong. When the doctor went to hang Xiao, he also had to change to a headdress and abandon the carnation.

古文：为长子杖，则其子不以杖即位。
现代文：长子死了，其父为长子服丧时持丧杖，长子之子就不能再持丧杖即孝子之位。
English: When the eldest son died, his father held the mourning stick for the eldest son, and the eldest son could no longer hold the mourning stick, that is, the position of filial son.

古文：为妻，父母在，不杖，不稽颡。母在，不稽颡。
现代文：为妻服丧，如果父亲还健在，那就要在礼数上打点折扣，不能手持丧杖，也不能对来宾行稽颗之拜；如果是父亲去世而母亲健在，那就可以手持丧杖，但仍不得对宾客稽颗。
English: For mourning a wife, if the father is still alive, then it is necessary to make a discount on the number of ceremonies, you can not hold a funeral cane, nor can you worship the guests; if the father is dead and the mother is alive, then you can hold a funeral cane, but you still can not worship the guests.

古文：稽颡者，其赠也拜。
现代文：除非宾客有较多物品赠送，为表示拜谢，才可为之稽颗。
English: Unless the guest has more items to give, in order to express gratitude, it can only be a gift.

古文：违诸侯之大夫，不反服。违大夫之诸侯，不反服。
现代文：离开诸侯而到大夫之家为臣，或者离开大夫而到诸侯那里为臣，在旧主人去世时，都不再怀念旧情而为之服丧。
English: If one leaves the lords and becomes a vassal of the doctor's house, or if one leaves the doctor and becomes a vassal of the lords, when the old master dies, one will no longer miss the old feelings and will mourn for him.

古文：丧冠条属，以别吉凶。
现代文：丧冠的武与缨通用一条麻绳来做，凭这一点就可以看出它和吉冠的不同。
English: Wu and Zou, who lost the crown, used a piece of hemp rope to make it. This is how you can tell the difference between it and the auspicious crown.

古文：三年之练冠，亦条属，右缝。小功以下左。
现代文：三年之丧，小祥以后改戴练冠，此练冠的武与缨也是通用一条麻布来做，但冠梁上的皱褶要折向右边来缝；小功以下才向左缝。
English: After the three-year mourning period, Xiao Xiang changed to wearing a practice crown. This practice crown is also made of a general-purpose linen cloth, but the folds on the crown beam should be folded to the right and sewn; below the small gong, it should be sewn to the left.

古文：缌冠缲缨。
现代文：绍麻亲属的丧冠，是用漂白后的麻布做冠缨。
English: The mourning crown of Shoma's relatives is made of bleached linen.

古文：大功以上散带。朝服十五升，去其半而缌；加灰，锡也。
现代文：朝服用的布，含有经线十五升；去掉十五升的一半，就是绍麻丧服所用的布；把这种布再加上灰，经过捶洗，就成了做锡衰所用之布。
English: The cloth used in the morning contains fifteen liters of warp; if half of the fifteen liters is removed, it is the cloth used for the mourning clothes of Shoma; if this cloth is added with ash, after being washed, it becomes the cloth used for making tin ware.

古文：诸侯相襚，以后路与冕服。
现代文：诸侯互相赠送敛葬的衣物，可以用随行的副车和礼服。
English: Princes give each other clothes for funerals, and can use the accompanying sidecar and dress.

古文：先路与褒衣，不以襚。
现代文：自己所乘之车和天子所赐之衣，不可用来赠给死者。
English: The chariot in which you are riding and the robe given to you by the Son of God are not to be used to give to the dead.

古文：遣车视牢具。
现代文：遣车的多少要根据包奠的数量来决定。
English: The number of cars to be sent will be decided according to the number of vouchers.

古文：疏布輤，四面有章，置于四隅。
现代文：遣车用稀布作篷顶，四面也有东西遮挡。
English: The wagon is covered with a thin cloth as a canopy, and there are also things blocking it on all sides.

古文：载粻，有子曰： 非礼也。
现代文：遣车随棺入葬时，放在外棺的四角。当时有的人家在遣车上载着谷物，有子批评说： 这不合礼制。
English: When the hearse was buried with the coffin, it was placed at the four corners of the outer coffin. At that time, some people were carrying grain on the hearse, and Ariko criticized: This is not proper etiquette.

古文：丧奠，脯醢而已。 
现代文：丧事祭奠所用的供品，不过肉干肉酱而已。 
English: The offerings used for the funeral rites were nothing more than dried meat paste.

古文：祭称孝子、孝孙，丧称哀子、哀孙。
现代文：吉祭的时候，自称 孝子 或 孝孙 ；丧事中的讣告和祭文，自称 哀子 或 哀孙 。
English: At the time of the auspicious festival, they call themselves "filial sons" or "filial grandsons"; in the obituary and the memorial service, they call themselves "poor sons" or "poor grandsons."

古文：端衰，丧车，皆无等。
现代文：孝子穿的丧服、乘的丧车，不分贵贱，都是一样的。
English: The mourning clothes that a filial son wears and the mourning carriage that he rides in are the same, regardless of whether he is a noble or a commoner.

古文：大白冠，缁布之冠，皆不蕤。
现代文：太白冠和细布冠，都是没有缨饰的。
English: Both the too-white crown and the fine-cloth crown are without enamel decoration.

古文：委武玄缟而后蕤。
现代文：有冠圈的玄冠和大祥以后所戴的编冠才有缨饰。
English: The black crown with a wreath and the braided crowns worn by the Daisho dynasty were only adorned with ornaments.

古文：大夫冕而祭于公，弁而祭于己。
现代文：大夫戴着缔冕去参加国君的祭祀，而家祭却戴爵弃。
English: The doctor, wearing a crown, went to participate in the sacrifice of the sovereign, but the family festival was abandoned.

古文：士弁而祭于公，冠而祭于己。
现代文：士戴着爵弃去参加国君的祭祀，而家祭却戴玄冠。
English: The nobles, wearing their peerages, go to participate in the rituals of the sovereign, while the nobility wear their crowns.

古文：士弁而亲迎，然则士弁而祭于己可也。
现代文：结婚的那天，士是戴着爵弃去迎新娘的，由此看来，士的家祭时戴爵弃也是可以的吧。
English: On the day of the wedding, the priest would wear a cassock to greet the bride, so it seems that it is okay to wear a cassock at the priest's memorial service.

古文：畅臼以椈，杵以梧。
现代文：捣粤的臼用柏木制成下柞用桐木制成。
English: The mortar used for pounding yakitori is made of cypress wood, while the pestle is made of paulownia wood.

古文：枇以桑，长三尺；或曰五尺。
现代文：捞牲体的大木勺用桑木制成，长三尺，有的说长五尺。
English: The large wooden spoon used to fish for livestock is made of mulberry wood and is three feet long, some say five feet long.

古文：毕用桑，长三尺，刊其柄与末。
现代文：捞牲体的木叉也用桑木制成，叉 柄与叉尖都要削得小一点。
English: The wooden forks for catching livestock are also made of mulberry wood, and both the handle and the tip of the fork must be made smaller.

古文：率带，诸侯、大夫皆五采；士二采。
现代文：袭尸用的绰带，诸侯、大夫是五种色彩具备，士则只有红、绿二色。
English: The epaulettes used to attack the corpse, lords and doctors have five colors, while the nobles only have red and green.

古文：醴者，稻醴也。
现代文：随葬用的酸，是用稻米酿制的醛。
English: The acid used in funerals is an aldehyde brewed from rice.

古文：瓮甒筲衡，实见间而后折入。重，既虞而埋之。凡妇人，从其夫之爵位。
现代文：盛放酱类的瓮，盛放酒浆的坛子，盛放谷物的竹篓，盛放各种容器的木架，以上这些随葬物品，统统填到棺饰与外榔之间的孔隙中，然后把棺梆的盖板放入扩中，至于临时作神主用的重，虞祭以后就埋掉了。凡是妇人的丧礼，其办事规格都随照其夫之爵位。
English: Jars for sauces, jars for wine, bamboo baskets for grain, and wooden racks for containers of all kinds were all filled into the gap between the coffin decoration and the outer coffin, and then the lid of the coffin was placed in the middle of the expansion. As for the weight that temporarily served as the main god, it was buried after the Yu Festival. In the case of a woman's funeral, the work specifications are in accordance with her husband's rank.

古文：小敛、大敛、启，皆辩拜。
现代文：小敛、大敛和启殡这三件事，每件事做完以后主人都要遍拜宾客。
English: After the completion of these three things, the host should bow to the guests.

古文：朝夕哭，不帷。
现代文：朝夕哭时，要把遮挡灵枢的帷幕撩起来，哭过以后再放下。
English: When you cry in the morning or evening, you should pull up the curtain that covers your spiritual center, and then put it down after you have cried.

古文：无柩者不帷。
现代文：如果灵枢已下葬，则帷幕也就不用了。
English: If the spiritual center has been buried, then the curtain is no longer needed.

古文：君若载而后吊之，则主人东面而拜，门右北面而踊。出待，反而后奠。
现代文：国君如果在灵枢已载到车上之后来吊问，这时主人要退居宾位朝东拜谢，再到门内右边向北哭踊，然后先出门外等待拜送国君。
English: If the sovereign comes to ask questions after the spiritual center has been loaded onto the car, then the host should retreat to the guest seat to the east to give thanks, then to the right side of the door to the north to cry and dance, and then go outside to wait for the sovereign.

古文：子羔之袭也：茧衣裳与税衣纁袡为一，素端一，皮弁一，爵弁一，玄冕一。
现代文：送走国君以后再举行祖奠。子羔死的时候，其小敛用的衣服有五套：一套是在装有丝绵的上衣下裳之外罩上一件镶有绛色下缘的税衣，一套是布衣素裳，一套是皮弃服，一套是爵弃服，一套是玄冕服。
English: An ancestor's memorial service will be held after the king is sent away. When the lamb dies, it will have five sets of clothes to wear: one set is a silk tunic with a navy hem, one set is a cloth dress, one set is a leather dress, one set is a knight's dress, and one set is a crown dress.

古文：曾子曰： 不袭妇服。 
现代文：曾子说： 不该用那镶有绛色的下缘，因为那是妇人之服。 
English: Zeng Zi said, "You shouldn't use the bottom hem with the navy blue, because it's a woman's dress.

古文：为君使而死，于公馆，复；私馆不复。
现代文：奉国君之命出使他国而死，如果是死于公馆就招魂，死于私馆就不招魂。
English: If you are ordered by the sovereign to go and die in another country, if you die in your official residence, your soul will be summoned, but if you die in your private residence, your soul will not be summoned.

古文：公馆者，公宫与公所为也。
现代文：所谓公馆，就是他国国君的宾馆或国君指定的下榻处。
English: The so-called "guest house" is the guesthouse of the sovereign of another country or the place designated by the sovereign to stay.

古文：私馆者，自卿大夫以下之家也。
现代文：所谓私馆，就是卿大夫以下的私宅。
English: The so-called private residence is the private residence of a doctor or lower.

古文：公七踊，大夫五踊，妇人居间，士三踊，妇人皆居间。
现代文：从始死之日到成殡之日，为国君要七踊，为大夫要五踊，为士要三踊。每一次踊，都是男子先踊，接着是妇人踊，最后是宾客踊。
English: From the day of the first death to the day of the funeral, seven dances are required for the sovereign, five dances for the doctor, and three dances for the priest. In each dance, the man dances first, followed by the woman dance, and finally the guest dance.

古文：公袭：卷衣一，玄端一，朝服一，素积一，纁裳一，爵弁二，玄冕一，褒衣一。朱绿带，申加大带于上。
现代文：国君小敛用的衣服有九套：一套衰衣贴身穿，下面依次是一套玄端，一套朝服，一套皮弃服，一套缥裳，两套爵弃服，一套玄冕服，一套褒衣；穿好以后，用朱绿两色的带子系腰，外面再加上一条大带。
English: There are nine sets of clothes used by the sovereign: a set of faded clothes worn close to the body, followed by a set of dark ends, a set of court dress, a set of leather abandoned clothes, a set of gowns, two sets of peer abandoned clothes, a set of corona dress, and a set of clothes; after wearing, tie the waist with a vermilion-green ribbon, and add a large ribbon on the outside.

古文：小敛环绖，公大夫士一也。
现代文：小敛时主人要头戴环纽，在这一点上，国君、大夫和士都是一样的。
English: When the master is small, he should wear a ring on his head. In this respect, the sovereign, the doctor and the scholar are all the same.

古文：公视大敛，公升，商祝铺席，乃敛。
现代文：国君光临臣下的大敛，尽管大敛已经开始也不算数，而要等到国君升堂之后，商祝才铺设敛席，从头开始大敛，这样做才显得光彩。
English: It is not enough for the sovereign to greatly restrain his vassals, even if the great restraint has already begun, but it is necessary to wait until after the sovereign ascends the throne to lay the restraining seat, and it is glorious to begin the great restraint from scratch.

古文：鲁人之赠也：三玄二纁，广尺，长终幅。
现代文：鲁国人赠送死者入扩的帛，三块是玄色，二块是绛色，每块宽一尺，长二尺二寸，这距礼的要求太远了。
English: The Lu people presented the deceased with an expanded coffin, three of which were black and two were dark blue, each one foot wide and two feet and two inches long, which was too far from the requirements of the ceremony.

古文：吊者即位于门西，东面；其介在其东南，北面西上，西于门。
现代文：某国诸侯去世，他国诸侯派来吊丧的使者就在主国大门以西就位，面朝东。使者的随员站在使者的东南，面朝北，以西边为上位。
English: When a feudal lord of a certain country died, an envoy sent by the feudal lord of another country to pay his respects took his place west of the main gate of the host country, facing east. The envoy's attendant stood southeast of the envoy, facing north, with the west as the superior side.

古文：主孤西面。相者受命曰： 孤某使某请事。 
现代文：使者及其随员都要站在大门以西，不可挡住大门。门内，嗣君站在东阶下，面朝西。
English: The messenger and his attendants must stand west of the gate, and must not block the gate. Inside the gate, the heir stands at the bottom of the east steps, facing west.

古文：客曰： 寡君使某，如何不淑！ 
现代文：辅导嗣君行礼的人接受嗣君的委托，出来对使者说： 嗣君某让我来请教有何公干。 
English: The person who had been instructing him to perform the rite, having been commissioned by him, came out and said to the messenger: "My lord, I have come to ask you what I should do.

古文：相者入告，出曰： 孤某须矣。 
现代文：使者答道： 敝国国君特派我来表示他对此不幸事件的哀悼。 
English: The other party went inside to investigate the heir, and then came out to invite him, saying: The heir has been waiting inside.

古文：吊者入，主人升堂，西面。
现代文：辅导嗣君行礼的人听过后进去报告，然后又走出来相请，说： 嗣子某某已在里边恭候。 
English: After listening, the person who was teaching the heir to perform the salute went in to report, and then came out to invite each other, saying: "The heir has been waiting inside.

古文：吊者升自西阶，东面，致命曰： 寡君闻君之丧，寡君使某，如何不淑！ 
现代文：吊者入门，主人从昨阶升堂，面向西；吊者从西昨升堂，面向东，表达来意说： 敝国国君听到贵国国君去世的噩耗，非常悲痛，特派我来表示他对此不幸的哀悼。 
English: When the hangman enters, the master ascends the hall from the previous step, facing west; when the hangman ascends the hall from the previous step, facing east, he expresses his meaning by saying: "My country's sovereign heard the sad news of your country's sovereign's death, was very saddened, and sent me to express his condolences for this misfortune.

古文：子拜稽颡，吊者降，反位。
现代文：嗣子磕头拜谢。于是吊者从西阶下堂，出门，返回原位。
English: The heir bowed his head in thanks. Then the hangman left the hall from the west steps and returned to his original position.

古文：含者执璧将命曰： 寡君使某含。 
现代文：随员之一执璧向相者说明来意： 敝国国君特派我来馈献含玉。 
English: One of the attendants insisted on explaining the meaning to the couple: "The king of the country sent me to donate the jade.

古文：相者入告，出曰： 孤某须矣。 
现代文：相者进去察告嗣君，然后出来相请，说： 嗣子某某已在里边恭候。 
English: The other party went inside to investigate the heir, and then came out to invite him, saying: The heir has been waiting inside.

古文：含者入，升堂，致命。
现代文：此随员即进门，从西阶升堂转达来意。
English: This attendant entered the door and conveyed the message from the west staircase.

古文：再拜稽颡。
现代文：嗣子听了以后磕头拜谢。
English: After hearing this, the heir bowed his head in thanks.

古文：含者坐委于殡东南，有苇席；既葬，蒲席。
现代文：此随员跪下，把所执璧放在灵枢东南的苇席上。如果是下葬以后才行此礼，灵枢东南铺的苇席就换成了蒲席。
English: The attendant kneels down and places the object of his devotion on the funeral pyre in the southeast corner of the shrine. If this ceremony is only performed after the burial, the funeral pyre in the southeast corner of the shrine is replaced with a cushion.

古文：降，出，反位。
现代文：然后从西阶走下来，出门，返回原位。
English: Then walk down from the west steps, go out, and return to the original position.

古文：宰朝服，即丧屦升自西阶，西面，坐取璧，降自西阶以东。
现代文：诸侯的宰则身穿吉服朝服，脚穿麻绳编的丧屡，从西阶升堂，面向西，跪下拿起所赠之璧，再从西阶下堂往东走，藏之于宫内。
English: The daimyōs of the lords, dressed in kichifuku (traditional court attire) and kimono, and with their feet bound in hemp rope, would walk from the west staircase to the west, kneel down to pick up the gifts, and then walk from the west staircase to the east, where they would hide them in the palace.

古文：襚者曰： 寡君使某襚。 
现代文：褪者出列向相者致意说： 敝国国君特派我来致褪。 
English: The faded person lined up to greet the couple and said, "The king of the country sent me to faded.

古文：相者入告，出曰： 孤某须矣。 
现代文：相者入内察告嗣子，然后出来相请，说： 嗣子某某已在里边恭候。 
English: The other party went inside to investigate the heir, and then came out to invite him, saying: The heir has been waiting inside.

古文：襚者执冕服；左执领，右执要，入，升堂致命曰： 寡君使某襚。 
现代文：褪者拿起冕服，左手执领，右手执腰，入门，从西阶升堂，说明来意： 敝国国君特派我来致褪。 
English: The wearer picks up the coronation robe, holds it with the left hand, holds the waist with the right hand, enters, and ascends the hall from the west steps, explaining the meaning: "The king of the country sent me specially to wear the crown."

古文：子拜稽颡。
现代文：嗣子听了以后就磕头拜谢。
English: After hearing this, the heir bowed his head in thanks.

古文：委衣于殡东。襚者降，受爵弁服于门内溜，将命，子拜稽颡，如初。受皮弁服于中庭。
现代文：于是褪者将冕服在殡东的席子上放好，然后下堂，走到门内屋檐正下方，从贾人手里接过爵弃服，又上堂说明来意，嗣子接着磕头拜谢，这一切的作法和第一次褪冕服的作法一样。
English: Therefore, the deceased placed the coronation robe on the funeral director's mat, and then went down the hall, walked to the door just below the eaves, took the discarded robe from Jia's hand, and went to the hall to explain his intention. The heir then bowed his head in thanks, all of which was the same as the first coronation robe.

古文：自西阶受朝服，自堂受玄端，将命，子拜稽颡，皆如初。
现代文：然后褪者一次又一次地从贾人手中接过褪衣：在院子当中接过皮弃服，在西阶接过朝服，在堂上接过玄端。对于每一套褪服，褪者的上堂致词和嗣子的磕头拜谢都和第一次一样。
English: Then, time and time again, the wearer took over the clothes from the Jia people: in the middle of the yard, he took over the abandoned clothes, in the west steps, he took over the morning dress, and in the hall, he took over the black end. For each set of clothes, the wearer's speech and the heir's bow of thanks are the same as the first time.

古文：襚者降，出，反位。
现代文：五套隧服赠毕，褪者从西阶下堂，出门，返回原位。
English: Five sets of tunnel clothes were given away. Those who had lost their clothes went down from the west steps, went out, and returned to their original positions.

古文：宰夫五人，举以东。
现代文：宰夫五人，每人从席子上拿起褪服一套，下堂往东走，存放起来。
English: Five attendants, each of whom picked up a set of clothes from the mat, walked down the hall to the east and stored them.

古文：降自西阶。其举亦西面。
现代文：下堂要从西阶下，所以宰夫取衣时也面向西。
English: The lower hall should be under the west steps, so when the zaif takes the clothes, he also faces west.

古文：上介赗：执圭将命，曰： 寡君使某赗。 
现代文：上介负责致帽，他手执玉圭向相者说明来意： 敝国国君特派我来致帽。 
English: The petitioner is responsible for presenting the hat, and he holds the tamagui in his hand and explains the meaning to the recipient: "The king of the country sent me to present the hat.

古文：相者入告，反命曰： 孤某须矣。 
现代文：相者入内察告，然后又出来传达主人的交待说： 嗣子某某已在里边恭候。 
English: The other party went inside to investigate, and then came out again to convey the owner's message, saying: Heir so-and-so has been waiting inside.

古文：陈乘黄大路于中庭，北辀。
现代文：上介命其助手将四匹黄马和一辆副车陈设在院子中间，车辕朝北。
English: The superintendent ordered his assistant to display four yellow horses and a second cart in the middle of the yard, with the cart facing north.

古文：执圭将命。客使自下，由路西。
现代文：上介手执玉圭登堂说明来意，陈设车马的人牵着马站在副车西面。
English: The superintendent, Yu Gui, came to the hall to explain, and the person who set up the carriage and horse led the horse to stand on the west side of the second carriage.

古文：子拜稽颡，坐委于殡东南隅。
现代文：嗣子磕头拜谢。上介跪下，把圭放在灵枢东南角的席上。
English: The heir bowed his head in thanks. The superior knelt down and placed Gui on the seat in the southeast corner of the spiritual center.

古文：宰举以东。
现代文：主国的宰跪下将圭取走存放。
English: The head of the host country kneeled down and took Gui away and stored it.

古文：凡将命，乡殡将命，子拜稽颡。
现代文：通例：凡说明来意时，要向着灵枢说明来意。
English: General rule: When explaining the meaning, explain the meaning to the spirit.

古文：西面而坐，委之。
现代文：嗣子听到后都要磕头拜谢。
English: After hearing this, all the heirs bowed their heads in thanks.

古文：宰举璧与圭，宰夫举襚，升自西阶，西面，坐取之，降自西阶。
现代文：凡赠送东西都要面向西跪下，把东西轻放在席子上。来宾赠送的圭和璧，由主国的宰从席上取走；来宾赠送的衣服，由宰夫从席上取走。宰和宰夫，都是由西阶升堂，面向西跪下取走东西，然后从西阶下堂。
English: All gifts should be kneeled facing west and placed lightly on the mat. The guest's gifts of rice and vegetables should be taken away from the table by the host's butler; the guest's gifts of clothes should be taken away from the table by the butler. Both the butler and the butler go up the west staircase, kneel facing west to take things away, and then go down the west staircase.

古文：赗者出，反位于门外。
现代文：帽者出门，返回门外的原位。
English: The man in the hat goes out and returns to his original position outside the door.

古文：上客临曰： 寡君有宗庙之事，不得承事，使一介老某相执綍。 
现代文：公事到此完毕，下面是使者私人之礼。使者向相者表示欲入内哭临致哀，说： 敝国国君因为有宗庙之事缠身，不能事自前来帮忙，特派一个像我这样的老臣前来听候差遣。 
English: Now that the official business is over, here is the envoy's personal tribute. The envoy expressed to his counterpart his desire to go inside and weep, saying: "Since the sovereign of the country is entangled in the matter of the ancestral temple, he cannot come to help himself, so he has sent an old minister like me to wait for instructions.

古文：相者反命曰： 孤某须矣。 
现代文：相者察告嗣子以后，出来传话说： 嗣子某某已经在里边恭候了。 
English: After the other party sued the heir, he sent out a message saying: The heir has been waiting inside.

古文：临者入门右，介者皆从之，立于其左东上。
现代文：于是使者入门，站在门内右侧，其随员也都跟着，立在他的左边，以东边为上位。
English: So the messenger went in and stood on the right side of the inner door, and his attendants also went in and stood on his left side, with the east side on top.

古文：宗人纳宾，升，受命于君；降曰： 孤敢辞吾子之辱，请吾子之复位。 
现代文：宗人迎进这些客人以后，升堂，请示嗣君如何招待，得到指示以后，下堂对这些客人说： 嗣子某某不敢当您的如此盛情，请您返回门西的客位。 
English: After my father-in-law welcomed these guests, he went up to the hall and asked my son-in-law how to invite them. After receiving instructions, he went down to the hall and said to these guests: My son-in-law does not dare to treat you so generously, please return to your guest seat in the west hall.

古文：客对曰： 寡君命某，毋敢视宾客，敢辞。 
现代文：客人回答说： 敝国国君派我等前来帮忙，我们怎敢自同于宾客，这是使不得的。 
English: The guest replied: "The sovereign of this country has sent me to come and help. How dare we treat ourselves like guests? This is unacceptable.

古文：宗人反命曰： 孤敢固辞吾子之辱，请吾子之复位。 
现代文：宗人在察报之后再次转达嗣君的指示说： 嗣子某某绝不敢当您的如此盛情，还是请您返回门西的客位吧。 
English: After examining the report, my father-in-law relayed the instructions of the heir for the third time, saying, "The heir, so-and-so, would never dare to accept such a generous offer from you, so please return to your guest seat in Mengxi."

古文：客对曰： 寡君命某，毋敢视宾客，敢固辞。 
现代文：客人也再次回答说： 敝国国君派我等前来帮忙，我们怎敢自同于宾客呢，这是使不得的。 
English: The guest answered again: "The sovereign of this country has sent me to help. How dare we treat ourselves like guests? This is intolerable."

古文：宗人反命曰： 孤敢固辞吾子之辱，请吾子之复位。 
现代文：宗人在察报之后又第三次转达嗣君的指示说： 嗣子某某绝不敢当您的如此盛情，还是请您返回门西的客位吧。 
English: After examining the report, my father-in-law relayed the instructions of the heir for the third time, saying, "The heir, so-and-so, would never dare to accept such a generous offer from you, so please return to your guest seat in Mengxi."

古文：客对曰： 寡君命使臣某，毋敢视宾客，是以敢固辞。
现代文：客人回答说： 敝国国君派我前来听候差遣，不敢自比于宾客，所以坚决辞谢。
English: The guest replied: "The Emperor of China sent me here to wait for instructions. I did not dare to compare myself to the guests, so I firmly declined to thank them.

古文：固辞不获命，敢不敬从。 
现代文：坚决辞谢既然不获允许，只好从命。 
English: Since he was not allowed to resign, he had to do as he was told.

古文：客立于门西，介立于其左，东上。
现代文：于是客人立到门内西侧，众随员立于其左，以东边为上位。
English: As a result, the guests stood on the west side of the door, and the attendants stood on their left, with the east side as the upper level.

古文：孤降自阼阶，拜之，升哭，与客拾踊三。
现代文：嗣子从东阶下堂，向客人拜谢。然后嗣子从东阶升堂，客人从西阶升堂，在哭的同时，嗣子与客人轮流跺脚三节。
English: The son-in-law went down the hall from the east step and bowed to the guests. Then the son-in-law went up the hall from the east step, and the guests went up the hall from the west step. While crying, the son-in-law and the guests took turns stomping their feet three times.

古文：客出，送于门外，拜稽颡。
现代文：客人出门时，嗣子要送出门外，磕头拜谢。
English: When a guest leaves the house, the son-in-law should send him out the door, bowing his head in thanks.

