古文：芒卯谓秦王曰： 王之士未有为之中者也。臣闻明王不肯中而行。王之所欲于魏者，长羊、王屋、洛林之地也。
现代文：芒卯对秦王说： 大王的属下没有在诸侯国中做内应的，臣下听说大王不等有内应就要行动，大王想向魏国要的，是长羊、玉屋、洛林的土地。
English: Mengwu said to King Qin: The great king's subordinates have not done anything in the provinces. His subjects have heard that the great king does not wait for a request to act. What the great king wants from Wei is the land of Changyang, Tamaya and Lorraine.

古文：王能使臣为魏之司徒，则臣能使魏献之。 秦王曰： 善。 
现代文：大王能让臣下到魏国做司徒徒，那么臣下就能让魏国献出它们。 秦王说： 好。 
English: If the Great King can have his vassals go to Wei to serve as Stutts, then his vassals can have Wei offer them. King Qin said, "Good."

古文：因任之以为魏之司徒。
现代文：于是就设法任命他为魏国的司徒。
English: So they tried to appoint him as the leader of the state of Wei.

古文：谓魏王曰： 王所患者上地也。
现代文：芒卯对魏王说： 大王所担忧的是上郡的土地。
English: Mengwu said to Wei Wang: What the great king is worried about is the land in Shangguan.

古文：秦之所欲于魏者，长羊、王屋、洛林之地也。
现代文：秦国想从魏国得到的，是长羊、王屋、洛林的土地。
English: What Qin wanted from Wei was the land of Changyang, Wangya and Lorraine.

古文：王献之秦，则上地无忧患。
现代文：大王把它们献给秦国，那么上郡的土地就没有忧患了。
English: The great king dedicated them to Qin, so the land of Shang County would have no worries.

古文：因请以下兵东击齐，攘地必远矣。 魏王曰： 善。 
现代文：于是就请求秦国出兵向东进攻齐国，侵夺扩张的土地一定很远。 魏王说： 好。 
English: Therefore, he asked Qin to send troops to the east to attack Qi, and the land to be invaded and expanded must be very far away. Wei Wang said: Good.

古文：因献之秦。
现代文：就把长羊、王屋、洛林之地献给了秦国。
English: He dedicated the land of Changyang, Wangya and Lorin to Qin.

古文：地入数月，而秦兵不下。
现代文：土地已经归属秦国几个月了，而秦国军队没有出兵东下。
English: The land has belonged to Qin for several months, but the Qin army has not sent troops to the east.

古文：魏王谓芒卯曰： 地已入数月，而秦兵不下，何也? 
现代文：魏王对芒卵说： 土地已经归属秦国几个月了，而秦国军队没有出兵东下，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Wei Wang said to Mang Yu: The land has belonged to Qin for several months, but the Qin army has not sent troops to the east. Why is that?

古文：芒卯曰： 臣有死罪。虽然，臣死，则契折于秦，王无以责秦。
现代文：芒卯说： 臣下犯下了死罪，即使如此，臣下死了对于秦国就像讨债昀自己折了契约，大王没有什么可以责难秦国的。
English: Mengwu said: The vassal has committed a capital crime. Even so, the death of the vassal is like a debt collection for the Qin State. The king himself has broken the contract. The king has nothing to reproach the Qin State.

古文：王因赦其罪，臣为王责约于秦。 
现代文：大王就赦免了臣下的罪过，臣下替大王到泰国责难他们的负约。 
English: The great king forgave the sins of his vassals, and his vassals went to Thailand on behalf of the great king to rebuke them for breaking the covenant.

古文：乃之秦，谓秦王曰： 魏之所以献长羊、王屋、洛林之地者，有意欲以下大王之兵东击齐也。
现代文：芒卯就去了秦国，对秦王说： 魏国之所以献出长羊、王屋、洛林的土地，是有意想依靠大王的军队向东进攻齐国。
English: Mengwu then went to Qin and said to the Qin king: "The reason why Wei offered the land of Changyang, Wangwu and Lorraine was that it intended to rely on the great king's army to attack Qi to the east.

古文：今地已入，而秦兵不可下，臣则死人也。
现代文：现在土地已被秦国接受，而秦国军队不肯东下，臣下就将成为一具死尸了。
English: Now that the land has been accepted by Qin, and the Qin army refuses to go east, the vassal will become a corpse.

古文：虽然，后山东之士，无以利事王者矣。 
现代文：即使如此，以后山东的士人不会有用好处来服事大王了。 
English: Even so, in the future, Shandong's scholars will no longer be useful to serve the great king.

古文：秦王戄然曰： 国有事，未澹下兵也，今以兵从。 
现代文：秦王惊恐地说： 国家有事，没有来得及出兵东下，现在派军队跟从您。 
English: King Qin said in alarm: The country is in trouble, we did not have time to send troops to the east, now send troops to follow you.

古文：后十日，秦兵下。
现代文：此后十天，秦国派兵东下。
English: Ten days later, Qin sent troops to the east.

古文：芒卯并将秦、魏之兵，以东击齐，启地二十二县。
现代文：芒卯同时率领秦围、魏国军队向东进攻齐国，扩展了二十二个县的土地。
English: At the same time, Mengwu led the Qin and Wei armies to attack Qi to the east, expanding the land of twenty-two counties.

