古文：范质王溥魏仁浦
现代文：范质字文素，大名宗城人。
English: He was a literate man, and a daimyo (feudal lord) of Sochon.

古文：范质字文文素，大名宗城人。父守遇，郑州防御判官。
现代文：他的父亲范守遇，任郑州防御判官。
English: His father, Fan Shouyu, was a Zhengzhou defense judge.

古文：质生之夕，母梦神人授以五色笔。
现代文：范质出生那天傍晚，他的母亲梦见神仙授给她一支五色笔。
English: On the evening of his birth, his mother dreamed that a genie had given her a five-coloured pen.

古文：九岁能属文，十三治《尚书》，教授生徒。
现代文：范质九岁能写文章，十三岁研究《尚书》，并教授学生。
English: At the age of nine, he was able to write articles, and at the age of thirteen, he studied "Shang Shu" and taught students.

古文：后唐长兴四年举进士，为忠武军节度推官，迁封丘令。
现代文：后唐长兴四年，考中进士，被任为忠武军节度使推官，后迁升封丘令。
English: After four years of the Tang Dynasty, Changxing was promoted to the middle school entrance examination, was appointed as the commander of the loyal military, and was later promoted to the order of sealing the hill.

古文：晋天福中，以文章干宰相桑维翰，深器之，即奏为监察御史。
现代文：晋天福年间，用文章游说宰相桑维翰，宰相很器重他，即上奏封他为监察御史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jintianfu, he used his articles to lobby the prime minister, Sang Weihan. The prime minister held him in high regard, and appointed him as the inspector of imperial history.

古文：及维翰出镇相州，历泰宁、晋昌二节度，皆请质为从事。
现代文：到维翰出京师去镇守相州，历任泰宁节度使、晋昌节度使时，维翰都请求朝廷让范质给他当从事。
English: When Wei Han was sent from Beijing to guard the city of Xiangzhou, he asked the imperial court to allow him to do so.

古文：维翰再相，质迁主客员外郎、直史馆。
现代文：桑维翰第二次任宰相时，范质迁升为主客员外郎、直史馆。
English: When Sang Wichan was appointed prime minister for the second time, the standard was raised to the main guest, the foreign guest, and the direct history museum.

古文：岁余，召入为林学士，加比部郎中、知制诰。
现代文：一年多后，召范质入朝任翰林学士，加任比部郎中、知制诰。
English: A little more than a year later, he was summoned to the imperial court as a scholar of Hanlin, and was also appointed as a tutor of Hibe and a tutor of Chisei.

古文：契丹侵边，少帝命汉祖等十五将出征。
现代文：契丹侵扰边境，少帝命汉祖等十五位将领出征。
English: Khitan invaded the border, the young emperor ordered Han Zu and fifteen other generals to go to war.

古文：是夜，质入直，少帝令召诸学士分草制，质曰： 宫城已闭，恐泄机事。 独具草以进，辞理优赡，当时称之。
现代文：当天夜晚，范质在朝中值班，少帝命令召诸位学士来起草诏令，范质说： 宫城已经关闭，如再召人恐怕事机泄露。 范质单独起草诏令进送少帝，文词事理都很优秀，当时即受称道。
English: On the evening of the same day, the standard was on duty in the middle of the court, and the young emperor ordered to call all the bachelors to draft the edict, and the standard said: Miyagi has been closed, if the person is called again, I am afraid that the opportunity will be leaked.The standard alone drafted the edict and sent it to the young emperor, and the writing and logic were excellent, and it was praised at the time.

古文：汉初，加中书舍人、户部侍郎。
现代文：后汉初，加封范质为中书舍人、户部侍郎。
English: At the beginning of the late Han Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Chusho-sojin and Hobe-sajiro.

古文：周祖征叛，每朝廷遣使赍诏处分军事，皆合机宜。
现代文：周祖征伐叛乱，每次朝廷派遣使者下诏处理军事，都符合机宜。
English: Zhou Zu conquered the rebels, and every time the imperial court sent an emissary to deal with the military, it was opportune.

古文：周祖问谁为此辞，使者以质对。
现代文：周祖问使者是谁起草的诏令，使者答称是范质。
English: Zhou Zu asked the messenger who drafted the edict, and the messenger replied that it was the emperor.

古文：叹曰： 宰相器也。 
现代文：周祖叹道 ：真是宰相之料啊！ 
English: Zhou Zu sighed: What a prime minister material!

古文：周祖自邺起兵向阙，京城扰乱，质匿民间，物色得之，喜甚，时大雪，解袍衣之。
现代文：周祖从邺地起兵攻向皇宫，京城纷乱，范质藏匿民间，周祖派人到处寻找，后来找到，非常高兴，当时正下大雪，周祖解下自己的袍衣让给范质穿。
English: Zhou Zu raised an army from Shantian to attack the imperial palace. The capital was in turmoil, and Guan Qi was hiding among the people. Zhou Zu sent people everywhere to look for him. They found him later and were very happy. It was snowing heavily at the time, and Zhou Zu took off his robe and gave it to Guan Qi to wear.

古文：且令草太后诰及议迎湘阴公仪注，质苍黄论撰，称旨。
现代文：并命令范质起草太后诰命及商议迎湘阴公礼节，范质急速起草，很合周祖心意。
English: He also ordered the standard to be drafted according to the wishes of the Empress Dowager and discussed the etiquette of welcoming the Xiangyin Emperor. The standard was drafted quickly, which was very much in line with the wishes of Zhou Zu.

古文：乃白太后，以质为兵部侍郎、枢密副使。
现代文：于是周祖告诉太后，任命范质为兵部侍郎、枢密副使。
English: Therefore, Zhou Zu told the empress dowager that he would appoint Gan Quan as the attendant of the military department and the deputy of the privy council.

古文：周广顺初，加拜中书侍郎、平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：后周广顺初年，加拜他为中书侍郎、平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: Later, in the first year of Zhou Guangshun, he was awarded the titles of Chushushijiro, Taira Shoji, and Jixianden University Scholar.

古文：翌日，兼参知枢密院事。
现代文：第二天，兼任参知枢密院事。
English: The next day, he also assumed the post of Sanzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：郊祀毕，进位左仆射兼门下侍郎、平章事、监修国史。
现代文：郊祀完后，升迁官位左仆射、门下侍郎、平章事、监修国史。
English: After the completion of the suburb worship, he was promoted to the official rank of sahukusa, subordinate attendant, subordinate officer, and supervisor of national history.

古文：从征高平还，加司徒、弘文馆大学士。
现代文：跟随皇帝征伐高平回来，加官司徒、弘文馆大学士。
English: After returning from the Emperor's conquest of Gaoping, he was promoted to the rank of officer and scholar, and became a scholar at the Hongwen Academy.

古文：显德四年夏，从征寿州还，加爵邑。
现代文：显德四年夏天，跟随皇帝征伐寿州回来，增加封爵食邑。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of Xiande, he returned from the Emperor's conquest of Shoushou to increase the number of knighted food villages.

古文：质建议以律条繁冗，轻重无据，吏得因缘为奸。
现代文：范质提出因为法律条例繁冗，轻重没有依据，官吏得以因缘为奸。
English: Because the laws and regulations are cumbersome and there is no basis for weighting, officials are able to commit treason.

古文：世宗特命详定，是为《刑统》。
现代文：世宗特命他详细审定法律，这就是《刑统》。
English: Sejong specially ordered him to revise the law in detail, which is the "Code of Criminal Procedure."

古文：六年夏，世宗北征，质病留京师，赐钱百万，俾市医药。
现代文：六年夏天，周世宗北征，范质因病留在京师，世宗赐给他钱百万用来就医买药。
English: In the summer of the sixth year, when Zhou Shizong was on the Northern Expedition, Fan Jie stayed in Beijing due to illness. Shizong gave him one million yuan to buy medicine.

古文：及平关南，至瀛州，质见于路左。
现代文：到世宗平定关南，到达瀛州时，范质在路的左边迎见。
English: To the south of Sejong Pingding, when arriving at Luzhou, the norm is met on the left side of the road.

古文：师还，以枢密使魏仁浦为相，命质与王溥并参知枢密院事。
现代文：军队回到京师，世宗任用枢密使魏仁浦为宰相，任命范质与王溥一同为参知枢密院事。
English: When the army returned to Beijing, Shizong appointed Wei Rimpu, a privy councillor, as prime minister, and appointed Fan Chiao and Wang Xi as members of the Sanchi Privy Council.

古文：世宗不豫，入受顾命。
现代文：周世宗有病，范质入宫接受临终遗命。
English: Zhou Shizong was ill, and he entered the palace to accept his deathbed will.

古文：恭帝嗣位，加开府仪同三司，封萧国公。
现代文：恭帝即位，加封范质开府仪同三司，封为萧国公。
English: When Emperor Gong came to the throne, he was given the title of "Kafu Yi Tong San Shi" and the title of "Shao Guogong."

古文：及太祖北征，为六师推戴，自陈桥还府署。
现代文：到宋太祖北征，被军队拥戴为皇帝，从陈桥回到官邸。
English: To Song Taizu's Northern Expedition, he was embraced by the army as the emperor, and returned to the official residence from Chenqiao.

古文：时质方就食阁中，太祖入，率王溥、魏仁浦就府谒见。
现代文：此时范质正在楼中吃饭，太祖一到，率领王溥、魏仁浦来拜见。
English: At this time, the standard was eating in the building, and as soon as the great-grandfather arrived, he led Wang Xuan and Wei Renpu to visit him.

古文：太祖对之呜咽流涕，具言拥逼之状。
现代文：太祖对他呜咽哭泣，陈述拥戴被逼之状。
English: The great-grandfather whimpered and cried to him, stating that he was being forced.

古文：质等未及对，军校罗彦瑰举刃拟质曰： 我辈无主，今日须得天子。 
现代文：范质等还未对答，军校罗彦举刀对范质比划着说： 我们没有主上，今天必须得到一个天子。 
English: There was still no response from the generals, so the commander of the military academy, Luo Yan, raised his sword to the generals and said: "We have no master, today we must get a heavenly son."

古文：太祖叱彦环不退，质不知所措，乃与浦等降阶受命。
现代文：太祖叱骂不走彦，范质不知所措，就与王溥等人走下阶梯听命。
English: The great-great-grandfather scolded but did not leave, and being at a loss, he walked down the stairs with Wang Yao and others to obey orders.

古文：宋初，加兼侍中，罢参知枢密。
现代文：宋初，加官兼侍中，罢参知枢密一职。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to official and chamberlain, and was given the post of privy councillor.

古文：俄被疾，太祖征泽、潞，幸其第，赐黄金器二百两、银器千两、绢二千匹、钱二百万。
现代文：不久病了，太祖征伐泽、潞二地，到他的宅第，赐给他黄金器二百两、银器一千两、绢二千匹、钱二百万。
English: Not long after, he fell ill. The great-grandfather went to his house, and gave him two hundred taels of gold, one thousand taels of silver, two thousand horses, and two million taels of money.

古文：太祖初即位，庶事谦抑，至于藩戚尚水崇建幕府宾佐未列于位。
现代文：太祖刚即位，诸事谦逊自抑，至于藩镇亲戚还没有封建，幕府宾客佐僚没有官位。
English: The great-grandfather had just ascended the throne, and he was modest and self-controlled in all things. As for his relatives in the hanzhong, they were not yet feudal, and the shogunate guests and advisers did not have official positions.

古文：质因上奏曰： 自古帝王开基创业，封建子弟，树立磐维，宗戚既隆，社稷永固。
现代文：范质因此上奏说： 自古帝王开创基业，都分封子弟，树立屏障，宗族亲戚一旦兴隆，国家就可长久巩固。
English: Therefore, the standard said: Since the ancient emperors created the foundation, they have all assigned children and set up barriers. Once the clan relatives flourish, the country can be consolidated for a long time.

古文：伏见皇弟泰宁军节度使光义，自居戎职，特负将材，及领藩维，尤积时望；嘉州防御使光美，雄俊老成，修身乐善，嘉誉日闻。
现代文：我看皇弟泰宁军节度使赵光义，自从在军队中任职，特别有将才，树立为藩镇后，尤其积累起名望；嘉州防御使赵光美，雄俊老成，注重修养好行善，好声誉日有所闻。
English: I think that the victory of the Taining Army, the younger brother of the emperor, made Zhao Guangyi, since he served in the army, especially talented in generalship, and especially accumulated fame after he was established as a town; the defense of Jiazhou made Zhao Guangyi beautiful, handsome and mature, focusing on cultivation and good deeds, and his good reputation is well known.

古文：乞并行封册，申锡命书。
现代文：乞求一并颁发封册，赐给爵位。
English: Begging to be published in a book and given a knighthood.

古文：皇子皇女虽在襁褓者，亦乞下有司许行恩制，此臣炎愿也。
现代文：皇子皇女虽然还是婴儿的，也请下诏让有关部门可以推行恩封之制，这是我的愿望。
English: Although the prince and princess are still babies, please issue a decree so that the relevant departments can implement the system of enthronement. This is my wish.

古文：臣又闻为宰相者，当举贤能，以辅佐天子。
现代文：臣又听说当宰相的，应当推举贤能之人，来辅佐天子。
English: The vassal also heard that when a prime minister is appointed, a capable person should be chosen to assist the divine son.

古文：窃以端日用殿学士吕余庆、枢密副使赵普精通治道，经事霸府，历岁滋深，睹其公忠，诚堪毗倚。
现代文：我认为端明殿学士吕馀庆、枢密副使赵普精通治国之道，事从霸府，时间很久，看他们的公忠之志，很可倚靠利用。
English: I think that Lu Yuqing, the academician of the Duanming Palace, and Zhao Pu, the vice-secretary of the Privy Council, are well versed in the way of governing the country, and have been in charge of the government for a long time. Looking at their public loyalty, they can be relied on and used.

古文：乞授以台司，俾申才用。 帝嘉纳之。
现代文：请求授给他们朝廷要职，使他们的才能得以申展。 
English: They asked to be given important positions in the imperial court, so that their talents could be put to use.

古文：先是，宰相见天子议大政事，必命坐面议之，从容赐茶而退，唐及五代犹遵此制。
现代文：皇帝很赞许并采纳了他的意见。原先，宰相朝见天子商议重大政事，皇帝必定命令宰相坐下来面议，皇帝从从容容赐茶后告退，唐朝及五代还遵照这个制度。
English: The emperor highly approved and adopted his opinion. Originally, when the prime minister went to see the emperor to discuss important political affairs, the emperor would certainly order the prime minister to sit down and discuss, and the emperor would withdraw after giving tea. The Tang Dynasty and the Five Dynasties also followed this system.

古文：及质等惮帝英睿，每事辄具劄子进呈，具言曰： 如此庶尽禀承之方，免妄庸之失。 帝从之。
现代文：到了范质等人畏惮皇帝英明睿智，每次议事都具写公文进呈，向皇帝陈述说： 这样才算臣子们禀承圣意之方，免除妄庸的过失。 皇帝采纳了这个意见。
English: When they reached the standard, they feared the emperor's wisdom and sagacity, and each time they had a meeting, they wrote a letter to the emperor, stating: "This is the only way for the courtiers to follow the side of the holy will, and to avoid the mistakes of the vulgar." The emperor accepted this opinion.

古文：由是奏御浸多，始废坐论之礼。
现代文：从此奏御越来越多，开始废除坐论的旧礼。
English: From then on, more and more imperial residences were built, and the old rite of sitting down began to be abolished.

古文：乾德初，帝将有事圜丘，以质为大礼使。
现代文：乾德初，皇帝将在圜丘祭天，任命范质为大礼使。
English: At the beginning of the Qiande era, the emperor will hold a festival in Fuchu to celebrate the birth of the emperor, and will appoint Guan Jia as the grand envoy.

古文：质与卤簿使张昭、仪仗使刘温叟讨论旧典，定南郊行礼图》上之。
现代文：范质与卤簿使张昭、仪仗使刘温叟讨论旧的典章制度，审定《南郊行礼图》呈上。
English: Zhang Zhao and Liu Wenqi discussed the old award system in terms of norms and rules, and submitted the "Southern Suburbs Travel Etiquette Map" for approval.

古文：帝尤嘉奖。
现代文：皇帝特别嘉奖他们。
English: The emperor gave them a special award.

古文：由是礼文始备，质自为序。
现代文：从此礼仪制度开始完备，范质自己作了序。
English: From then on, the etiquette system began to be perfected, and the norm itself became the order.

古文：礼毕，进封鲁国公，质奉表固辞，不允。
现代文：礼仪完毕后，进封范质为鲁国公，范质向皇上呈表再三推辞，皇上不允许。
English: After the completion of the ceremony, the prince of the state of Lu was chosen as the prince of the state of Lu. The prince repeatedly submitted his resignation to the emperor, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：二年正月，罢为太子太傅。
现代文：二年正月，罢官任太子太傅。
English: In the first month of the second year, he was dismissed from his post and appointed Crown Prince Taifu.

古文：九月，卒，年五十四。
现代文：九月，范质死去，终年五十四岁。
English: In September, Norma died, aged fifty-four.

古文：将终，戒其子旻勿请谥，勿刻墓碑。
现代文：将死的时候，告诫他的儿子范不要向朝廷请赐谥号，不要刻墓碑。
English: When he was about to die, he warned his son Fan not to ask the imperial court for a posthumous name and not to carve a tombstone.

古文：太祖闻之，为悲惋罢朝。
现代文：太祖听到这件事，为之感到悲痛而罢朝。
English: When the great-grandfather heard about this, he felt sad and went to the imperial court.

古文：赠中书令，赗绢五百匹、粟麦各百石。
现代文：追赠中书令，送绢五百匹，粟、麦各一百石，给范家办丧事。
English: Afterward, he sent 500 yakitori, 100 koku of millet and 100 koku of wheat to the Fan family for the funeral.

古文：质力学强记，性明悟。
现代文：范质力学强记，生性敏悟。
English: Strong memory of norm mechanics, quick-witted by nature.

古文：举进士时，和凝以翰林学士典贡部，鉴质所试文字，重之，自以登第名在十三，亦以其数处之。
现代文：考进士时，和凝以翰林学士身份主管贡部。观读范质的考试文字，很器重他，因为自己登进士第时名在十三，所以和凝也把范质的名次也排在这个数。
English: When he took the entrance examination, he was in charge of the tribute department with the status of Hanlin's bachelor. He paid great attention to the examination text of the reading standard, because he was the thirteenth when he was admitted to the examination, so he also ranked the standard place in this number.

古文：贡闱中谓之 传衣钵 。
现代文：贡院中称这件事为 传衣钵 。
English: The gongin middlemen called this matter "passing down clothes."

古文：其后质登相位，为太子太傅，封鲁国公，皆与凝同云。
现代文：后来范质官登相位，做太子太傅，被封为鲁国公，都与和凝一样。
English: Later, the standard quality official ascended the phase, became the prince of the prince, and was named the prince of Lu, all of which were the same as the condensation.

古文：初，质既登朝，犹手不释卷，人或劳之，质曰： 有善相者，谓我异日位宰辅。
现代文：当初，范质进入朝廷做官，还能常常手不释卷，有人慰劳他时，范质说 ：有擅长相术的人，说我今后位登宰相。
English: At the beginning, when he entered the imperial court and became an official, he could often not let go of the scroll. When someone consoled him, he said: There are people who are good at the art of reading, saying that I will become prime minister in the future.

古文：诚如其言，不学何术以处之。 后从世宗征淮南，诏令多出其手，吴中文士莫不惊伏。
现代文：如果真是这样，不学习哪来权术处理政事。 后来跟随周世宗征伐淮南，诏令多由他起草，吴中文士们没有不惊服的。
English: If this is really the case, there is no better way to deal with political affairs than to learn the art of power. Later, he followed Zhou Shizong to conquer Huainan, and most of the imperial edicts were drafted by him. Wu Chinese scholars were not surprised.

古文：质每下制敕，未尝破律，命刺史县令，必以户口版籍为急。
现代文：范质每次下制敕，从未不合律令，命令刺史县令，一定以户口版籍为头等政事。
English: Every time the standard is raised, it never fails to meet the legal requirements, and the order is ordered to record the county ordinance, and the household registration version must be the first-class government affairs.

古文：朝廷遣使视民田，按狱讼，皆延见，为述天子忧勤之意，然后遣之。
现代文：朝廷每次派遣使者视察民田，巡视狱讼，范质都接见他们，向他们陈述天子忧虑勤政的意图，然后派遣他们。
English: Every time the imperial court sent emissaries to inspect people's fields and prisons, the emperor received them, told them of the emperor's concern and diligent intention, and then sent them.

古文：世宗初征淮南，驻寿、濠，锐意攻取，且议行幸扬州。
现代文：世宗当初征伐淮南，驻扎在寿、濠二地，锐意攻取，还准备到扬州。
English: At the beginning, Shizong conquered Huainan, stationed in Shou and Handan, determined to conquer, and also prepared to go to Yangzhou.

古文：质以师老，与王溥泣谏乃止。
现代文：范质认为军队征战太久，与王溥泣谏，世宗才放弃这个念头。
English: The emperor thought that the army had been at war for too long, and it was only after the war that the emperor gave up the idea.

古文：及再驾扬州，因事怒窦仪，罪在不测。
现代文：到世宗第二次到扬州，窦仪因事得怒于世宗，不知将定何罪。
English: This is Sejong's second visit to Yangzhou. Dou Yi is angry with Sejong for something, and he doesn't know what crime he will be convicted of.

古文：质入谒请见，世宗意其救仪，起避之。
现代文：范质入宫求见，世宗知道他是来救窦仪的，站起来避开他。
English: When the prince entered the palace to seek an audience, Shizong knew that he had come to save Dou Yi, and stood up to avoid him.

古文：质趋前曰： 仪近臣也，过小不当诛。 因免冠叩头泣下，曰： 臣备位宰相，岂可使人主暴怒，致近臣于死地耶？
现代文：范质上前说： 窦仪是近臣，过错很小不应当诛杀。 于是摘下官帽叩头泣，说： 臣位在宰相，难道能让人主暴怒，致使近臣就死吗？
English: He said in front of the judge: Douyi is a close vassal, the fault is very small and should not be killed. So he took off his official cap and bowed his head and cried, saying: If a vassal is the prime minister, can it make the master angry, causing the death of a close vassal?

古文：愿宽仪罪。 世宗意遂解，复坐，即遣赦仪。
现代文：请求宽赦窦仪的罪过。 世宗怒意才消解，回到座位，马上遣使者赦免窦仪。
English: He asked for forgiveness for Douyi's sins, and only after the world's anger had dissipated, he returned to his seat and immediately sent an envoy to pardon Douyi.

古文：质性卞急，好面折人。
现代文：范质性格偏急，爱当面驳斥人，使对方屈服。
English: Norm personality is impatient, love to refute people in person, make the other side give in.

古文：以廉介自持，未尝受四方馈遗，前后所得禄赐多给孤遗。
现代文：以廉洁耿介自持，从未接受各方人士的馈赠，前后的优厚俸禄赏赐常常送给孤寡之人。
English: He never accepted gifts from anyone, and he always gave his generous salary to the needy.

古文：闺门之中，食不异品。
现代文：内室之中，吃饭不相异。
English: In the inner room, the meals are the same.

古文：身没，家无余赀。
现代文：身死后，家里没有多余的钱财。
English: After his death, the family had no spare money.

古文：太宗闵之，录其二子。杲性虚诞，与人交，好面誉背非，惟与柳开善，更相引重，始终无间。不善治生，家益贫，杲端坐终日，不知计所出，人皆笑之。
现代文：于是告诉所有辅佐的将相： 朕听说范质只有住宅，不置产业，是个真正的宰相啊！ 太宗也曾经称赞他说 ：宰相中能够遵循规矩，慎于名声才能，坚守廉节的，没有人比范质做得更好，但范质没有替世宗一死，真是可惜。 范质的侄子范杲上奏请求迁升秩阶，范质作诗晓谕他，当时人遍为传诵作为劝诫。
English: So he told all the assistant generals: "I heard that the standard is only a house, not a property, a real prime minister! Taizong also once praised him, saying: "Among the prime ministers who can follow the rules, be careful of reputation and talent, and adhere to integrity, no one can do better than the standard, but it is a pity that the standard did not die for the sejong. "The nephew of the standard, Fan Xuan, requested to be promoted, and the standard wrote a poem to instruct him. At that time, people often recited it as an exhortation.

古文：子坦亦登进士第。王溥字齐物，并州祁人。
现代文：有文集三十卷，又叙述朱梁至周五代历史写成《通录》六十五卷，流行于世。儿子名范。王溥字齐物，并州祁人。
English: There are thirty volumes of anthologies, and the history of the Zhu Liang to the Fifth Dynasties is described in the "Complete Record" of sixty-five volumes, which is popular in the world. His son's name is Fan. Wang Xizhe's characters are the same, and he is a member of the State Council.

古文：父祚，为郡小吏，有心计，从晋祖入洛，掌盐铁案，以母老解职归。汉祖镇并门，统行营兵拒存丹，委祚经度刍粟；即位，擢为三司副使。
现代文：他的父亲王祚，任州郡小吏，很有心计，跟从晋祖到洛阳，掌管盐铁事务，因母亲年老辞职归家，汉祖镇守并门，统领行营兵马抵抗契丹，委用王祚管理粮草；汉祖即皇帝位，擢升他为三司副使。
English: His father, Wang Zou, a minor official of Zhouzhou County, was very resourceful. He followed his father from Jinzu to Luoyang, in charge of salt and iron affairs. Due to his mother's old age, he resigned and returned home. Han Zou kept the town and the gate, led the troops and horses to resist the Khitan, and appointed Wang Zou to manage grain and grass. Han Zou was the emperor, and he was promoted to the third deputy envoy.

古文：历周为随州刺史。
现代文：在后周朝任随州刺史。
English: In the late Zhou Dynasty, he was appointed as Suizhou chief historian.

古文：汉法禁牛革，辇送京师，遇暑雨多腐坏，祚请班铠甲之式于诸，令裁之以输，民甚便之。
现代文：后汉法律征集牛皮，牛皮转送到京师，遇暑天雨淋多腐坏变质，王祚请求把铠甲的样式颁布给诸州，命令将牛皮裁制成铠甲来输送，百姓感到很方便。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the law called for the collection of cowhide, and the cowhide was sent to Beijing for processing. In the heat and rain, much of it rotted and deteriorated. Wang Xi requested that the style of armor be promulgated to the states, and ordered that the cowhide be cut into armor to be transported. The people felt very convenient.

古文：移刺商州，以奉钱募人开大秦山岩梯路，行旅感其惠。
现代文：调任商州刺史时，用俸钱招募人开凿大秦山岩梯路，行人旅客深得方便。
English: When he was transferred to Shangzhou to write history, he used his salary to recruit people to excavate the rock stairway in the Qin Mountains, which was convenient for pedestrians.

古文：显德初，置华州节度，以祚为刺史。
现代文：显德初年，设置华州节度，任命王祚为刺史。
English: In the first year of Xiande, the Huazhou Festival was set up, and Wang Xi was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：未几，改镇颍州均部内租税，补实流徙，以出旧籍。
现代文：不久，改任颍州刺史。平均辖区里的租税，补足流徙租额，抵销旧籍账目。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou. The tax in the average jurisdiction area made up for the migration rent and offset the old residence account.

古文：州境旧有通商渠，距淮三百，岁久湮塞，祚疏导之，遂通舟楫，郡无水患。
现代文：州境有条通商渠，距离淮河三百里，时间长了就淤塞了，王祚把它疏通，于是舟楫通航，郡里没有水灾。
English: There is a commercial canal on the state border, three hundred miles away from the Huai River. If it takes a long time, it will be blocked. Wang Xi dredged it, so the boat was able to sail. There was no flood in the county.

古文：历郑州团练使。
现代文：历任郑州团练使。
English: Successive Zhengzhou group training envoys.

古文：宋初，升宿州为防御，以祚为使。
现代文：宋初，升宿州为防御区，任用王祚为防御使。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, Shengju County was designated as a defense zone, and Wang Qi was appointed as a defense envoy.

古文：课民凿井修火备，筑城北堤以御水灾。
现代文：督促百姓凿井以备防火，在城北筑堤以防水灾。
English: Urge the people to drill wells to prepare for fire, and build dikes to prevent floods in the north of the city.

古文：因求致政，至阙下，拜左领军卫上将军，致仕。
现代文：请求退休，到皇宫，皇上任命他为左领军卫上将军，退休。
English: He went to the Imperial Palace to ask for retirement, and the Emperor appointed him as the left-hand admiral of the Imperial Guard, and he retired.

古文：溥，汉乾祐中举进士甲科，为秘书郎。
现代文：王溥，后汉乾年间考中进士甲科，任秘书郎。
English: Wang Qian, after the Han Dynasty, he was promoted to Grade A in the junior high school entrance examination, and served as secretary.

古文：时李宗贞据河中，赵思绾反京兆，王景崇反凤翔，周祖将兵讨之，辟溥为从事。
现代文：当时李守贞占据河中，赵思绾在京兆反叛，王景崇在凤翔反叛，周祖带领部队讨伐他们，任命王溥为从事。
English: At that time, Li Shuzhen occupied Hezhong, Zhao Siyu rebelled in Jingzhao, and Wang Jingsong rebelled in Fengxiang. Zhou Zu led the troops to fight against them and appointed Wang Xi as the leader.

古文：河中平，得贼中文书，多朝贵及藩相交结语。
现代文：河中平定后，得到叛贼的文书，里面有很多朝中大臣及藩镇互相勾结的话。
English: After the middle of the river was pacified, a traitor's document was obtained, in which there were many words about the collusion between the ministers of the central government and the towns of the domain.

古文：周祖籍其名，将按之，溥谏曰： 魑魅之形，伺夜而出，日月既照，氛沴自消。
现代文：周祖记下他们名字，准备按察审问他们，王溥谏阻说 ：鬼魅这些东西，趁夜黑而出，一旦日月光明，就自动消灭。
English: Zhou Zu wrote down their names and prepared to interrogate them according to the inspection. Wang Xizang said: Ghost these things, take advantage of the darkness of the night, and once the sun and moon are bright, they will automatically disappear.

古文：愿一切焚之，以安反侧。 周祖从之。
现代文：请把这些东西都烧掉，以安君主旁边的反贼之心。 周祖照办。
English: Please burn all these things, with the anti-thief heart next to the An monarch. Zhou Zu complied.

古文：师还，迁太常丞。
现代文：部队回师，王溥升任太常丞。
English: The troops returned to the division, and Wang Xi was promoted to the position of Tai Chang Rong.

古文：从周祖镇邺。
现代文：跟随周祖镇守邺地。
English: Following Zhou Zu's example, the town guards the land.

古文：广顺顺初，授左谏议大夫、枢密直学士。
现代文：广顺初年，任左谏议大夫、枢密直学士。
English: In the first year of Guangshun, he was appointed as the doctor of Zuo Jianli and the direct bachelor of the Privy Council.

古文：二年，迁中书舍人、翰林学士。
现代文：广顺二年迁升为中书舍人、翰林学士。
English: In the second year, Guang Shun was promoted to the position of Chinese literature teacher and scholar of Hanlin.

古文：三年，加户部侍郎，改端明殿学士。
现代文：广顺三年，加官户部侍郎，改任端明殿学士。
English: In the third year of Guangshun's reign, he was promoted to attendant of the Household Department and became a scholar of the Duanming Palace.

古文：周祖疾革，召学士草制，以溥为中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：周祖生病，召学士拟旨，任命王溥为中书侍郎、平章事。
English: Zhou Zu fell ill, summoned scholars to draft the edict, and appointed Wang Xi as the secretary of the Central Committee, and Ping Zhangji.

古文：宣制毕，周祖曰： 吾无忧矣。 即日崩。
现代文：宣诏后，周祖说： 我没有忧虑了。 当日去世。
English: After the proclamation of the edict, Zhou Zu said, "I am no longer worried," and passed away the same day.

古文：世宗将亲征泽、潞，冯道力谏止，溥独赞成之。
现代文：周世宗准备亲自征讨泽、潞二地，冯道极力谏阻，只有王溥赞成。
English: Zhou Shizong was preparing to personally conquer the lands of Zhe and Qian, but Feng Dao strongly opposed this, and only Wang Qian agreed.

古文：凯还，加兼礼部尚书，监修国史。
现代文：部队凯旋还师，加任王溥为礼部尚书、监修国史。
English: The troops returned in triumph, and Wang Xi was appointed as the head of the Ceremonial Department and the supervisor of the national history.

古文：世宗尝从容问溥曰： 汉禁止李崧以蜡书与契丹，犹有记其词者，信有之耶？ 溥曰： 崧为大臣，设有此谋，肯轻示外人？
现代文：周世宗曾经从容问王溥说 ：后汉丞相李崧用蜡封书信送给契丹，有人还记得书信言辞，这件事可信吗？ 王溥说： 李崧是大臣，如果有这事，怎么肯轻易让外人知道？
English: Zhou Shizong once calmly asked Wang Qian, "After the Han Dynasty, the Prime Minister Li Qian sent a letter sealed with wax to Qidan. Does anyone still remember the words of the letter? Is this credible?" Wang Qian said, "Li Qian is a minister, if there is such a thing, how can he easily let outsiders know?

古文：盖苏逢吉诬之耳。 世宗始悟，诏赠其官。
现代文：这是苏逢吉诬蔑他罢了。 世宗才醒悟，诏令追赠李崧官职。
English: This was nothing more than Su Fengji slandering him. It was only when Sejong came to his senses that he issued an imperial edict awarding Li Ye the post of official.

古文：世宗将讨秦、凤，求帅于溥，溥荐向拱。
现代文：世宗打算讨伐秦、凤二地，向王溥求元帅，王溥推荐向拱。
English: King Sejong planned to invade Qin and Feng, and asked Wang Xi for a field marshal. Wang Xi recommended Xiang Gong.

古文：事平，世宗因宴酌酒赐溥曰： 为吾择帅成边功者，卿也。 从平寿春，制加阶爵。
现代文：战事平息后，世宗在宴席上酌酒赐给王溥说 ：替我选择元帅成就边疆功业者，是你啊！ 跟从皇帝平定寿春，皇帝诏令给他加阶进爵。
English: After the war calmed down, Shizong gave wine to Wang Yao at the banquet and said, "You are the one who chose the marshal and accomplished the frontier work for me! He followed the emperor to pacify Shuchun, and the emperor gave him a knighthood.

古文：显德四年，丁外艰。
现代文：显德四年，遭父丧。
English: Hende was four years old when his father passed away.

古文：起复，表四上，乞终丧。
现代文：守丧未满三年，被朝廷重新起用，四次上表，请求守丧满期。
English: After less than three years of mourning, he was reappointed by the imperial court and petitioned four times to complete the period of mourning.

古文：世宗大怒，宰相范质奏解之，溥惧入谢。
现代文：世宗大怒，宰相范质上奏解救他，王溥惧怕，入朝谢罪。
English: King Sejong was furious, and the prime minister tried to save him, but Wang Yao was afraid and entered the court to apologize.

古文：六年夏，命参知枢密院事。
现代文：显德六年夏天，任命他为参知枢密院事。
English: In the summer of the sixth year of Hende's reign, he was appointed as a member of the Sanchi Privy Council.

古文：恭帝嗣位，加右仆射。
现代文：恭帝继承帝位，加王溥为右仆射。
English: Emperor Gao succeeded to the throne, and Wang Yao became his right-hand man.

古文：是冬，表请修《世宗实录》，遂奏吏馆修撰、都官郎中、知制诰扈蒙，右司员外郎、知制诰张淡，左拾遗王格，直史馆、左拾遗董淳，同加修纂，从之。
现代文：这年冬天，王溥上表请求编写《世宗实录》，于是上奏建议史馆修撰、都官郎中、知制诰扈蒙，右司员外郎、知制诰张淡，左拾遗王格，直史馆、左拾遗董淳，共同修纂，诏令照办。
English: In the winter of that year, Wang Xi requested the compilation of the "Sejong Record" from the upper table, so the upper table suggested that the history museum, the government officials, the intellectuals, the right secretary, the intellectuals, Zhang Tan, the left scholar Wang Ge, the direct history museum, and the left scholar Dong Jun should jointly revise and compile, and the edict was carried out accordingly.

古文：宋初，进位司空，罢参知枢密院。
现代文：宋初，进位为司空，罢参知枢密院职。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of Siku, and was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：乾德二年，罢为太子太保。
现代文：乾德二年，罢去他职任太子太保。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Qiande, he was appointed to the post of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：旧制，一品班于台省之后，太祖因见溥，谓左右曰： 溥旧相，当宠异之。 即令分台省班东西，遂为定制。
现代文：旧制，一品官班位在台省官之后，太祖因为看见王溥，对身边的人说： 王溥是以往的丞相，应当超常宠幸他。 就下令分台省官班位为东西二向，成为定制。
English: According to the old system, the first-class official class was reserved for Taiwanese provincial officials, and after the great-grandfather saw Wang Qian, he said to the people around him: Wang Qian was the former prime minister, and he should be extraordinarily favored. He ordered that the second-class official class for Taiwanese provincial officials be divided into east and west, and it became a custom.

古文：五年，丁内艰。
现代文：乾德五年，遭母丧。
English: Kande was five years old when his mother passed away.

古文：服阕，加太子太傅。
现代文：守丧期满，加任太子太傅。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed Crown Prince Taifu.

古文：开宝二年，迁太子太师。
现代文：开宝二年，升为太子太师。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：中谢曰，太祖顾左右曰： 溥十年作相，三迁一品，福履之盛，近世未见其比。 太平兴国初，封祁国公。
现代文：中谢日，太祖对身边的人说： 王溥任丞相十年，三次迁升一品，官福之盛，近世没有可与比拟的人。 太平兴国初年，封为祁国公。
English: On the day of thanksgiving, the great-grandfather said to the people around him: Wang Xuan served as the prime minister for ten years, and was promoted to the first grade three times. There is no one in modern times who can be compared with the prosperity of the government. In the first year of Taiping Xingguo, he was named the prince of Xingguo.

古文：七年八月，卒，年六十一。
现代文：太平兴国七年八月，去世，终年六十一岁。
English: Taiping Xingguo passed away in August of the seventh year, at the age of 61.

古文：辍朝二日，赠侍中，谥文献。
现代文：朝廷停朝两天，赠侍中，谥号为文献。
English: The imperial court stopped for two days, bestowed the title of "chambermaid" on her, and gave her the posthumous title of "document."

古文：溥性宽厚，美风度，好汲引后进，其所荐至显位者甚众。
现代文：王溥禀性宽厚，风度优美，喜欢提拔后进，被他推荐官位显达的人很多。
English: Wang Xuan is generous, graceful, likes to promote and advance, and he has recommended many people to high-ranking positions.

古文：颇吝啬。
现代文：非常吝啬。
English: Very stingy.

古文：祚频领牧守，能殖货，所至有田宅，家累万金。
现代文：其父王祚历任地方刺史，擅长积聚家财，所到地方有田宅，家资积累至万金。
English: His father, Wang Hui, served as a local historian, and was good at accumulating family wealth. He had a farmhouse in every place he went to, and his family accumulated up to 10,000 yuan.

古文：溥在相位，祚以宿州防御使家居，每公卿至，必首谒。祚置酒上寿，溥朝服趋侍左右，坐客不安席，辄引避。
现代文：王溥任宰相时，王祚以宿州防御使官衔居家，每有公卿到他家，一定先去拜见王家，王祚摆酒宴庆寿，王溥穿着朝服侍奉左右，坐客不敢安坐，都起身回避。
English: When Wang Hui was the prime minister, he lived at home with the title of Suizhou defense envoy. Whenever a nobleman came to his house, he must first visit the royal family. Wang Hui held a wine banquet to celebrate his birthday. Wang Hui was dressed in court service and served around. Guests did not dare to sit down, they all got up and avoided him.

古文：祚曰： 此豚犬尔，勿烦诸君起。 溥讽祚求致政，祚意朝廷未之许也，既得请，祚大骂溥曰： 我筋力未衰，汝欲自固名位，而幽囚我。 举大梃将击之，亲戚劝谕乃止。
现代文：王祚说 ：这是我养的豚犬而已，不必麻烦诸君起避。 王溥劝王祚请求退休，王祚认为朝廷不会同意，得到朝廷批准后，王祚大骂王溥说： 我体力未衰，你想保固自己的名位，而断我的官路。 举大梃想打王溥，亲戚们劝阻他才作罢。
English: Wang Yao said, "This is just a pig dog I raised, you don't have to trouble the princes to avoid it." Wang Yao advised Wang Yao to ask for retirement. Wang Yao thought that the imperial court would not agree. After receiving the approval of the imperial court, Wang Yao scolded Wang Yao, saying, "My physical strength has not deteriorated. You want to secure your own position, but cut off my official path. If you want to beat Wang Yao, let your relatives dissuade you.

古文：溥好学，手不释卷，尝集苏冕《会要》及崔弦《续会要》，补其阙漏，为百卷，曰《唐会要》。
现代文：王溥好学，手不释卷，曾经集苏冕的《会要》及崔铉《续会要》，补上缺漏，编为百卷本《唐会要》。
English: Wang Hui was a studious man, and he never let go of a book. He once collected Su Guanzhong's "Meeting Notes" and Cui Hui's "Meeting Notes," filled in the gaps, and compiled them into a hundred-volume "Tang Meeting Notes."

古文：又采朱梁至周为三十卷，曰《五十会要》。
现代文：又采摘朱梁至周为三十卷本《五代会要》。
English: Zhu Liang and Zhou Zhou were also selected for the thirty-volume book "Five Generations Club."

古文：有集二十卷。
现代文：有文集二十卷。
English: There are 20 volumes in the series.

古文：子贻孙、贻正、贻庆、贻序。
现代文：儿子贻孙、贻正、贻庆、贻序。
English: His sons are Gongsun, Gongzheng, Gongqing and Gongxu.

古文：贻正至国子博士。
现代文：贻正官至国子博士。
English: He rose through the ranks to the position of Kuniko hakase.

古文：贻庆比部郎中。
现代文：贻庆任比部郎中。
English: Zou Qing was appointed as Hibe's junior.

古文：贻序，景德二年进士，后改名贻矩，至司封员外郎。
现代文：贻序，考中景德二年进士，后改名贻矩，官至司封员外郎。
English: In the second year of his junior high school exams, Jingde became a student, and later changed his name to Shunmoku. He rose to the rank of Shifu member, Gairo.

古文：贻正子克明，尚太宗女郑国长公主，改名贻永，令与其父同行。
现代文：贻正的儿子克明，与太宗女郑国长安公主结婚，改名贻永，令他与父亲同辈。
English: Yu Zheng's son Ke Ming married Princess Zheng Guo Chang'an, daughter of Emperor Taizong, and changed his name to Yu Yong, making him the same age as his father.

古文：见《外戚传》。
现代文：见《外戚传》。
English: See "The Story of My Mother's Relatives."

古文：贻孙字象贤，少随周祖典商、颍二州，署衙内都指挥使。
现代文：贻孙字象贤，年轻时随周祖管理商、颍二州，署任衙内都指挥使。
English: His great-grandson, Zi Xiangxian, was a manager with Zhou Zu when he was young, and served as commander of two states and deputy commander of Inner Mongolia.

古文：德中，以父在中书，改朝散大夫、著作佐郎。
现代文：显德年间，因为父亲在中书省，改任朝散大夫、著作佐郎。
English: During the Hende era, because his father was in the Ministry of Chinese Literature, he was reassigned to the post of Chosan-dokufu and Shososaro.

古文：宋初，迁金部员外郎，赐紫，累迁右司郎中。
现代文：宋初，升为金部员外郎，赐给紫衣，历升右司郎中。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to vice-minister of finance, given the purple robe, and was promoted to vice-minister of the right.

古文：淳化中，卒。
现代文：淳化年间，去世。
English: He died in the Junka era.

