古文：金下张珽龚播宜春郡民张彦康氏豫章人陈浚建安村人蔡彦卿
现代文：金下张珽龚播宜春郡民张彦康氏豫章人陈浚建安村人蔡彦卿
English: Zhang Yikang, a resident of Yichun County, Zhang Yan Kang, a resident of Yuzhang County, Chen Dong, a resident of Jian'an County, and Cai Yanqing, a resident of Jian'an County, were awarded the gold medal.

古文：水银吕生
现代文：水银吕生
English: Mercury Lv Sheng

古文：玉沈攸之玉龙江严唐玄宗五色玉玉辟邪软玉鞭玉猪子
现代文：玉沈攸之玉龙江严唐玄宗五色玉玉辟邪软玉鞭玉猪子
English: The Jade Dragon River, the Tang Dynasty, the Emperor Xuanzong, the five-colored jade, the soft jade, the evil jade, the whip jade, and the pig

古文：金下
现代文：金下
English: Kinshita

古文：张珽
现代文：张珽
English: Zhang Ye

古文：咸通末年，张珽自徐之长安，至圃田东，时于大树下。
现代文：咸通末年，张珽从徐地到长安去，走到一个菜园东边，当时他正在一棵大树下。
English: At the end of his life in Hamdang, Zhang Ye went from Xudi to Chang'an. He walked to the east of a vegetable garden. At that time, he was walking under a big tree.

古文：俄顷，有三书生继来，环坐。珽因问之。
现代文：不一会儿，有三个书生相继而来，围坐在一起，张珽就问他们各叫什么名字。
English: After a while, three students came one after another and sat together. Zhang Ye asked each of them what their names were.

古文：一书生曰： 我，李特也。 
现代文：一个说： 我是李特。 一个说： 我是王象之。 
English: One said, "I am Li Te," and the other said, "I am Wang Xiangzhu."

古文：一曰： 我，王象之也。 
现代文：第三个说： 我是黄真。 
English: The third said: I am Huang Zhen.

古文：一曰： 我，黄真也。 皆曰： 我三人俱自汴水来，欲一游龙门山耳。 乃共闲论。
现代文：三个人都说： 我们三人都从汴水而来，想要游一游龙门山。 于是四人一起闲聊。
English: All three of them said, "All three of us have come from Surabaya and want to visit Longmen Mountain," so the four of them chatted together.

古文：其王象之曰： 我去年游龙门山，经于是。路北一二里，有一子，亦儒流也，命我于家再宿而回，可同一谒之。 
现代文：那王象之说： 我去年游龙门山，从这经过，路北一二里的地方，有一个男青年，也是读书人，让我在他家住过两宿才回去。你们可以和我一块去谒见他。 
English: The king elephant said, "Last year, I went to Longmen Mountain, and there was a young man, who was also a reader, who lived in his house for two nights before letting me go back. You can go with me to see him.

古文：珽因亦同行。
现代文：张珽就和他们一块去。
English: Zhang Ye went with them.

古文：至路北一二里，果见一宅，甚荒毁。
现代文：走到路北一二里的地方，果然看到一处宅院，很荒凉。
English: When I walked one or two miles north of the road, I saw a house, which was very desolate.

古文：既叩门，有一子儒服，自内而出，见象之颇喜。问象之曰： 彼三人者何人哉。 
现代文：敲门之后，有一个穿书生衣服的男青年从里走出，他见了王象之很高兴，问王象之道： 那三人是谁？ 
English: After knocking on the door, a young man in scruffy clothes came out. He was happy to see Wang Xiangzhi and asked Wang Xiangzhi: Who are those three?

古文：象之曰： 张珽秀才也，李特、黄真，即我同乡之书生也。 
现代文：王象之说： 这个是张珽秀才，那两个是李特和黄真，是我同乡的书生。 
English: Wang Xiangzhi said, "This one is Zhang Xuanxiu, and the other two are Li Te and Huang Zhen, who are students from my hometown.

古文：其儒服子乃并揖入，升堂设酒馔，其所设甚陈故。
现代文：那青年就把他们都请进屋，设酒宴招待。屋里的摆设都很破旧。
English: So the young man invited them all into his house and gave a banquet for them. The furnishings of the house were very old.

古文：儒服子谓象之曰： 黄家弟兄将大也。 
现代文：那青年对王象之说： 黄家弟兄快长大了。 
English: The young man said to Wang Xiangzhi, "Brother Huang is about to grow up.

古文：象之曰： 若皇上修德好生，守帝王之道，下念黎庶，虽诸黄齿长，又将若何？ 
现代文：王象之说： 如果皇上有好生之德，恪守帝王之道，关心天下的百姓，即使那几个姓黄的长大了又能怎样呢？ 
English: Wang Xiangzhi said: If the emperor has the virtue of a good life, adheres to the emperor's way, and cares about the people of the world, even if those surnamed Huang grow up, what can he do?

古文：黄真遽起曰： 今日良会，正可尽欢，诸君何至亟预人家事，波及我孙耶？ 
现代文：黄真急忙站起来说： 今天这么好的相聚，正可尽欢，各位为什么多管别人家的闲事，波及到我的子孙呢？ 
English: Huang Zhen hurriedly stood up and said: Today's such a good get-together, it's just so much fun. Why are you all meddling in other people's family affairs, affecting my children and grandchildren?

古文：珽性素刚决，因大疑其俱非人也，乃问之曰： 我偶与二三子会于一树下，又携我至此，适见高论，我实疑之，黄家弟兄，竟是谁也？
现代文：张珽的性情一向刚毅，于是就怀疑他们都不是人，就问道： 我偶然与你们几个在一树下相遇，你们又领我来到这里，刚才听到你们的高论，我实在是怀疑。黄家弟兄到底是谁？
English: Zhang Yao's temperament has always been strong, so he suspected that they were not human, and asked: I accidentally met several of you under a tree, and you led me here. Just now I heard your lofty talk, I really doubt it. Who exactly are the brothers of the Huang family?

古文：且君辈人也？
现代文：你们几个是不是人呢？
English: Are any of you human?

古文：非人也？我平生性不畏惧，但实言之！ 象之笑曰： 黄氏将乱东夏，弟兄三人也。我三人皆精也。
现代文：我向来胆大不怕事，只管照实说吧！ 王象之笑着说： 姓黄的他们弟兄三人将要作乱于东夏。
English: I've always been bold and fearless, so let's just say it as it is! Wang Xiangzhi laughed and said, "Their three brothers surnamed Huang are going to start a riot in the Eastern Summer."

古文：儒服子即鬼也。 
现代文：我们三个都是精怪。穿书生衣服的青年是个鬼。 
English: The three of us are eccentrics. The young man in the shabby clothes is a ghost.

古文：珽乃问曰： 是何物之精也？
现代文：张珽就问道： 是什么东西变成的精？是什么鬼？ 
English: Zhang Ye asked: What is the spirit that turns into a thing? What is the ghost?

古文：是何鬼也？ 象之曰： 我玉精也，黄真即金精也，李特即枯树精也，儒服子即是二十年前死者郑适秀才也。我昔自此自化精，又去年复遇郑适，今诣之。
现代文：王象之说： 我是玉精，黄真是金精，李特是枯树精，穿书生服的青年就是二十年前死的秀才郑适。我以前在这里自己变化成精，去年又遇见郑适，今天来拜访他。
English: Wang Xiangzhi said: I am the Jade Fairy, Huang is really the Gold Fairy, Li Te is the Dry Tree Fairy, and the young man wearing the book and fresh clothes is the talented Zheng Si, who died twenty years ago. I used to transform myself into a fairy here, and last year I met Zheng Si, so I came to visit him today.

古文：君是生人，当怯我辈；既君不怯，故聊得从容耳。 
现代文：你是活着的人，应该怕我们。既然你不怕，所以我们暂且从容相处也就行了。 
English: You're a living person, you should be afraid of us. Since you're not afraid, it's okay for us to get along for the time being.

古文：珽又问曰： 郑秀才既与我同科，奚不语耶？ 
现代文：张珽又问道： 郑秀才既然与我同是秀才科，为什么不说话呢？ 
English: Zhang Ye also asked: Since Zheng Xiucai is the same as me, why not speak?

古文：郑适曰： 某适思得诗一首以赠。 
现代文：郑适说： 我正好想好了一首诗，赠给你。 
English: Zheng Shi said: I just thought of a poem to give to you.

古文：诗曰： 昔为吟风啸月人，今是吟风啸月身；冢坏路边吟啸罢，安知今日又劳神！ 
现代文：诗是这样写的： 昔为吟风啸月人，今是吟风啸月身。冢坏路边吟啸罢，安知今日又劳神！ 
English: The poem is written as follows: Once upon a time it was the people of the moon who whistled to the wind, now it is the moon itself that whistles to the wind.

古文：珽览诗怆然，叹曰： 人之死也，反不及物；物犹化精，人不复化。 
现代文：张珽读诗之后很是悲怆，叹道： 人死了之后，反而不如物体，物体还能化成精灵，而人不能再复化。 
English: After reading the poem, Zhang Rong was very sad and lamented: After death, people are not as good as objects. Objects can also turn into spirits, but people can no longer be reincarnated.

古文：象之辈三人，皆闻此叹，怒而出。
现代文：王象之等三人，都听到了这感叹，愤怒地走了出去。
English: All three of them, including Wang Xiangzhu, heard this exclamation and angrily walked out.

古文：适亦不留。
现代文：郑适也不再久留。
English: Zheng Shih also did not stay long.

古文：珽乃拂衣。
现代文：张珽也就拂袖而去。
English: Zhang Ye also left with a whimper.

古文：及至门外回顾，已见一坏冢。
现代文：等他走到门外回头再看，看到的是一个残破的坟墓。
English: When he went outside the door and looked back, he saw a ruined tomb.

古文：因逐三精，以所佩剑击之。
现代文：于是他追赶那三个精怪，用他佩带的宝剑砍杀他们。
English: So he chased the three elves and cut them down with the sword he was carrying.

古文：金玉精皆中剑而踣，唯枯树精走疾。
现代文：金精玉精都中剑倒毙，只有枯树精跑得快。
English: The gold elves and the jade elves all fell to the sword, and only the dead tree elves ran fast.

古文：追击不及，遂回，反见一故玉带及一金杯在路傍。
现代文：追杀不到，于是只好返回，回来后看见一条旧玉带和一个金杯在路边。
English: Unable to chase it down, he had no choice but to return, and when he did, he saw an old jade belt and a gold cup on the side of the road.

古文：王廷拾得之，长安货之，了无别异焉矣。
现代文：张珽拾得玉带和金杯，到长安去卖，与其它金玉没有丝毫不同。
English: Zhang Ye picked up a jade belt and a gold cup and went to Chang'an to sell them. They were no different from other gold and jade.

古文：龚播
现代文：龚播
English: 播

古文：龚播者，峡中云安监盐贾也。
现代文：龚播是峡中云安监一带的大盐商。
English: Gongbo is a large salt trader in the area of the Yunnan Safety Supervision Bureau in the gorge.

古文：其初甚穷，以贩鬻蔬果自业，结草庐于江边居之。
现代文：当初他很穷，以贩卖蔬菜瓜果为业，在江边上盖了两间草房居住。
English: At first he was very poor, selling vegetables, melons and fruits for a living, and he built two grass huts on the riverbank.

古文：忽遇风雨之夕，天地阴黑，见江南有炬火，复闻人呼船求济急。
现代文：一天晚上风雨骤起，天地阴黑，他望见江南岸有火炬，又听到有人喊叫，急切地要找船过江。
English: One night, when the wind and rain suddenly picked up and the sky was dark, he saw a torch on the south bank of the river and heard someone shouting, eager to find a boat to cross the river.

古文：时已夜深，人皆息矣。
现代文：当时夜已深，人都睡下了。
English: It was late at night and everyone was asleep.

古文：播即独棹小艇，涉风而济之。
现代文：龚播就独自摆着小船，冒着风浪去摆渡那人。
English: Xuan Bao set out alone with a small boat and braved the wind and waves to ferry the man across.

古文：至则执炬者仆地。
现代文：一到南岸，那个执火炬的就倒在地上。
English: Once on the south bank, the torchbearer fell to the ground.

古文：视之即金人也，长四尺余。
现代文：上前一看，原来是个金人，长四尺有余。
English: On closer inspection, it turned out to be a golden man, more than four feet long.

古文：播即载之以归。于是遂富。
现代文：龚播就把金人用船载回来。于是他就富了。
English: The hawker brought the gold back in a boat, and he became rich.

古文：经营贩鬻，动获厚利，不十余年间，积财巨万，竟为三蜀大贾。
现代文：他经营买卖，动辄就获大利，不到十多年，积累了上万的巨大财富，竟成了三蜀一带的大富商。
English: He engaged in business and trade, and he gained a lot of money at every turn. In less than ten years, he accumulated tens of thousands of huge wealth, and became a very rich businessman in the Sanshu area.

古文：宜春郡民
现代文：宜春郡民
English: The people of Yichun County

古文：宜春郡民章乙，其家以孝义闻，数世不分异，诸从同爨。
现代文：宜春郡民章乙，他家以 孝 和 义 闻名遐迩，几辈子没分家，各堂房亲属都吃一个灶做出来的饭。
English: In Minzhang B, Yichun County, his family is famous for its filial piety and righteousness. They have not been separated for several lifetimes, and all of their relatives eat meals cooked on one stove.

古文：所居别墅，有亭屋水竹。
现代文：他所居住的别墅，亭屋水竹什么都有。
English: The villa where he lives, the pavilion and the water bamboos have it all.

古文：诸子弟皆好善积书，往来方士高僧儒生。
现代文：他的子弟们都喜欢收藏书籍，喜欢与方士、高僧、儒生结交往来。
English: His children all like to collect books and like to socialize with scholars, high priests, and Confucians.

古文：宾客至者，皆延纳之。
现代文：宾客到来，全都欢迎接纳。
English: When guests arrive, all are welcome.

古文：忽一日晚际，有一妇人，年少端丽，被服靓妆，与一小青衣，诣门求寄宿。
现代文：一天傍晚，忽有一位妇人，年轻貌美，打扮得很漂亮，与一位小婢女一起，上门来要求留宿。
English: One evening, suddenly a woman, young and beautiful, dressed very nicely, together with a maid, came to the door and asked to stay.

古文：章氏诸妇，忻然近接，设酒馔，至夜深而罢。
现代文：章家的妇人们，欣然上前迎接，摆酒宴招待，直到夜深才完。
English: The women of the Zhang family gladly came forward to welcome them, served them wine and invited them to a banquet, which did not end until late in the evening.

古文：有一小子弟，以文自业，年少而敏俊，见此妇人有色，遂嘱其乳妪，别洒扫一室，令其宿止。
现代文：章家一个小子弟，以文为业，年轻而聪明俊秀，见这妇人有姿色，就嘱咐他的乳娘另打扫了一间屋子，让妇人和小婢睡下。
English: Zhang Jia's younger son, who was young, clever and handsome, and whose profession was writing, saw that the woman was beautiful, so he ordered his wet nurse to clean another room and let the woman and the maid sleep there.

古文：至深夜，章生潜身入室内，略不闻声息，遂升榻就之。
现代文：到深夜，他偷偷潜入室内，一点声息也没听到，于是他就上床扑到妇人身上。
English: In the middle of the night, he sneaked into the room, and without hearing a sound, he jumped on the woman's bed.

古文：其妇人身体如冰，生大惊，命烛照之，乃是银人两头，可重千百斤。
现代文：那妇人的身体冰凉，章生大惊，点燃蜡烛一照，原来是两个银人，重量有千百来斤。
English: The woman's body was cold, and Zhang Sheng was shocked. He lit a candle and shined it. It turned out to be two silver people, weighing thousands of pounds.

古文：一家惊喜，然恐其变化，即以炬炭燃之，乃真白金也。
现代文：一家人全都惊喜异常。但是怕有变化，就用火烧那两个银人，竟是真正的白银无疑。
English: The whole family was surprised, but fearing a change, they set fire to the two pieces of silver, which turned out to be real silver.

古文：其家至今巨富，群从子弟妇女，共五百余口。每日三就食，声鼓而升堂。
现代文：章家至今是巨富，各房子弟妇女共五百多人，每天三顿饭要击鼓升堂。
English: The Zhang family is still very rich. There are more than 500 brothers and sisters in each house, and they have to play drums for three meals a day.

古文：江西郡内，富盛无比。
现代文：在江西郡内，这一家的富足昌盛是无比的。
English: In Jiangxi County, this family's wealth and prosperity are unparalleled.

古文：张彦
现代文：张彦
English: Zhang Yan

古文：巴巫间民，多积黄金。
现代文：巴巫一带的百姓，多数都积有黄金。
English: Most of the people in the Bavu area have accumulated gold.

古文：每有聚会，即于席上罗列三品，以夸尚之。
现代文：每当有聚会，就在席上罗列许多东西，来显示自己的富贵。
English: Whenever there is a party, he lists a lot of things on the table to show his wealth.

古文：云安民有李仁表者，施泽金台盘，以此相高。
现代文：云安有个叫李仁表的人，用大量的黄金做善事，以抬高自己的声望。
English: In Yun'an, there is a man named Li Ren watch, who uses a large amount of gold to do good deeds to enhance his reputation.

古文：乱离之后，州将皆武人，竞于贪虐。
现代文：发生离乱之后，州府里将官都是习武之人，一个比一个贪婪暴虐。
English: After the disturbance, the generals in the prefectural government were all martial arts practitioners, and one was more greedy and violent than the other.

古文：蜀将张彦典忠州，暴恶尤甚。
现代文：蜀将张彦主管忠州，更厉害。
English: Shu general Zhang Yan, in charge of Chungju, is even more powerful.

古文：将校苦之，因而作叛，连及党与数千家。
现代文：他手下的将校怨恨他，因此叛变起义，株连到同伙数千家。
English: His officers resented him, and a mutiny broke out, involving thousands of collaborators.

古文：张攫其金银，莫知纪极。
现代文：张彦趁机将州中的金子攫为己有，也不知道数量有多少。
English: Zhang Yan took advantage of the opportunity to take possession of the gold in the state, and he did not know how much it was.

古文：后于蜀中私第别构一堂，以贮其金。
现代文：后来他在蜀中家里专构一室，用来贮藏这些金子。
English: Later, he built a special room in his home in Shuzhong to store the gold.

古文：忽一旦，屋外有火烟频起，骇入验之，乃无延爇之处。
现代文：忽然有一天，屋外火烟之光闪闪。他吃了一惊，跑到藏金子的屋里查看，却没有着火的地方。
English: Suddenly one day, he was surprised to see flames and smoke flashing outside. He ran to the room where the gold was hidden to check, but there was no fire.

古文：由是疑焉，及开箧视之，悉已空矣。
现代文：因此产生怀疑，就打开箱子查看，发现箱子全都空了。
English: Suspicion aroused, he opened the box to inspect it and found it completely empty.

古文：即向时火烟，乃金化矣。
现代文：刚才他看到的烟和火，就是金子变的。
English: The smoke and fire he had just seen had turned into gold.

古文：康氏
现代文：康氏
English: Mr. Kang

古文：伪吴杨行密，初定扬州，远坊居人稀少，烟火不接。
现代文：伪吴的杨行密，当初定居在扬州。远离住宅区，人家稀少，烟火不接。
English: Yang Xingmi, the pseudo-Wu, initially settled in Yangzhou. Far from residential areas, people are scarce, and fireworks are not received.

古文：有康氏者，以佣赁为业，僦一室于太平坊空宅中。
现代文：有一个姓康的人，以出卖劳动力为生，在太平坊租了间空房子居住。
English: A man surnamed Kang, who made a living by selling his labor, rented an empty house in Taipingfang to live in.

古文：康晨出未返，其妻生一子。
现代文：有一天姓康的早晨出去没有回来，他的妻子生下一个男孩。
English: One morning, Kang went out and did not return. His wife gave birth to a baby boy.

古文：方席藁，忽有一异人，赤面朱衣冠，据门而坐。
现代文：孩子刚生下来，就有一个很奇怪的人，红脸红衣红帽，靠着门坐在那里。
English: Just after the baby was born, there was a very strange man, red-faced, red-coated, sitting by the door.

古文：妻惊怖，叱之乃走。
现代文：康妻又惊又怕，没好声地把他赶走。
English: Shocked and afraid, Kang's wife drove him away in a sullen voice.

古文：如舍西，踣然有声。
现代文：那人走到屋西侧， 咕咚 一声摔倒了。
English: The man walked to the west side of the house, grunted and fell.

古文：康适归，欲至家，路左忽有钱五千、羊半边、尊酒在焉。
现代文：赶巧这时候姓康的回来了。将要到家的时候，忽见路边有五千钱、半边羊和一尊酒。
English: Just at that time, Kang came back. When he was about to get home, he suddenly saw five thousand coins, half a sheep and a bottle of wine on the side of the road.

古文：伺之久，无行人，因持之归。
现代文：他等了许久，也不见有人来，就把这些东西拿回家中。
English: He waited for a long time, and when no one came, he took these things home.

古文：妻亦告其所见，即往舍西寻之，乃一金人，仆于草间，亦曳之归。因烹羊饮酒，得以周给。
现代文：妻子也把她刚才看到听到的告诉了他，他就到屋西去找那个怪人，一看，原来是个金人倒在草中。他把金人也拉回家去，于是烹羊饮酒，吃喝全都有了。
English: His wife also told him what she had just seen and heard, and he went to the west side of the house to look for the strange man. At first glance, it turned out to be a golden man lying in the grass. He took the golden man home, whereupon he cooked lamb and drank wine, and had enough to eat and drink.

古文：自是出必获利，日以富赡。
现代文：从此，他每次出门一定能得到好处，渐渐富足起来。
English: From then on, every time he went out, he was sure to benefit, and he gradually became rich.

古文：而金人留为家宝。
现代文：他把金人留做传家之宝。
English: He kept the gold medal as a family heirloom.

古文：所生子名曰平。
现代文：其妻所生的那个孩子，取名叫康平。
English: The child born to his wife was named Kangping.

古文：平长，遂为富人。
现代文：康平一长大就是个富人。
English: Kang Ping grew up to be a rich man.

古文：有李浔者，为江都令，行县至新宁乡，见大宅，即平家也。
现代文：有个叫李浔的人，是江都县的县令，他因事来到新宁乡，见到一所大宅院，就是康平家。
English: There was a man named Li Qian, who was the county magistrate of Jiangdu County. He came to Xinning Township for some reason and saw a large mansion, which was the Kangping family.

古文：其父老为李言如此。
现代文：这里的父老乡亲为李县令讲了上面这个故事。
English: The parents and fellow villagers here told the above story to the Li County magistrate.

古文：豫章人
现代文：豫章人
English: Yuanzhangren

古文：天复中，豫章有人治舍，掘地，得一木匮。
现代文：天复年间，豫章那里有人盖房子，挖地时挖出来一个小木匣。
English: During the Tianfu era, someone was building a house in Yuzhang. While digging, a small wooden box was unearthed.

古文：发之，得金人十二头，各长数寸，皆古衣冠，首戴十二辰属，数款精丽，殆非人功。
现代文：打开一看，里边有十二个金人，各都几寸长，全是古人的衣帽打扮，头戴十二生肖的属相，各种姿势，精妙美丽，简直不是人工能做的。
English: On opening it, there were twelve golden men inside, each a few inches long, all dressed in the clothing and hats of the ancients, wearing the signs of the zodiac on their heads, in various poses, exquisitely beautiful, and simply not man-made.

古文：其家宝祠之，因以致福。
现代文：这家把这些金人当宝贝供起来，因而得福。
English: The family was blessed by offering up these gold people as treasures.

古文：时兵革未定，遂为戍将劫取之。
现代文：当时兵慌马乱，戍守当地的将领抢走了这些金人。
English: At that time, the soldiers panicked, and the local generals who were guarding the area snatched these gold people.

古文：后不知所终。
现代文：以后就不知怎么样了。
English: I don't know what will happen next.

古文：陈浚
现代文：陈浚
English: Chen Jun

古文：江南陈浚尚书，自言其诸父在乡里，好为诗。
现代文：江南的陈浚尚书，自己说他的叔叔大爷们在乡间都喜欢作诗。
English: Chen Jun Shangshu from the south of the Yangtze River says that his uncles all like to write poetry in the countryside.

古文：里人谓之陈白舍，人比之乐天也。
现代文：同乡人都叫他陈白舍，拿他与白乐天相比。
English: His fellow villagers call him Chen Bai She and compare him to Bai Lotian.

古文：性疏简，喜宾客。
现代文：他性情豪爽，热情好客。
English: He has a great personality and is very hospitable.

古文：尝有二道士，一黄衣，一白衣，诣其家求宿。
现代文：曾经有两个道士，一个穿黄衣，一个穿白衣，到他家求宿。
English: Once, two Taoists, one in yellow and one in white, came to his house to ask for a place to stay.

古文：舍之厅事。
现代文：他家便让二位道士住在厅堂里。
English: His family let the two Taoists live in the hall.

古文：夜间，闻二客床坏，訇然有声。
现代文：夜间，听到二位道士的床塌了，发出很大的响声。
English: During the night, I heard the beds of two Taoist monks collapse and make a loud noise.

古文：久之，若无人者。
现代文：过了一会儿，又静得像没有人似的。
English: After a while, it was quiet again, as if no one was there.

古文：秉烛视之，见白衣卧于壁下，乃银人也；黄衣不复见矣。
现代文：拿着蜡烛进去查看，见穿白衣的躺在壁下，是一个银人；穿黄衣的不知哪里去了。
English: Taking a candle, he went in to look, and saw lying under the wall, dressed in white, was a silver man; dressed in yellow, he did not know where he was.

古文：自是致富。
现代文：从此他们家富了。
English: From then on, their family became rich.

古文：建安村人
现代文：建安村人
English: Jian'an villagers

古文：建安有人村居者，常使一小奴。
现代文：建安年间有个住在乡村的人，平常使唤一个小孩为奴。
English: During the Jian'an era, there was a man who lived in the countryside and usually enslaved a child.

古文：出入城市，经舍南大冢。
现代文：小奴来来往往到城里买东西，要经过屋南的大坟墓。
English: The little slave often comes and goes to the city to buy things, and he has to pass the big grave in the south of the house.

古文：冢傍恒有一黄衣儿，与之较力为戏。
现代文：坟旁经常有一个穿黄衣服的小孩，和他比力气玩耍。
English: Next to the grave there is often a child dressed in yellow, playing with him.

古文：其主迟之，奴以实告。
现代文：小奴的主人问他为什么往往回来晚了，小奴便把实情告诉了主人。
English: The slave's master asked him why he often came back late, and the slave told his master the truth.

古文：觇之信然。
现代文：主人偷偷地去看了看，的确像小奴说的那样。
English: The master sneaked a peek, and sure enough, it was just as the runt had said.

古文：一日，挟挝而住，伏于草间。
现代文：有一天，主人带着武器前往，埋伏在草丛里。
English: One day, the owner went there with a weapon and lay in wait in the grass.

古文：小奴至，黄衣儿复出。
现代文：小奴来到，那黄衣小孩又跑出来。
English: The little slave came, and the little boy in yellow ran out again.

古文：即起击之，应手而踣，乃金儿也。
现代文：埋伏在草丛里的这位立即跳起来攻击黄衣小孩。黄衣小孩立即被打倒，原来是个金小孩。
English: Lurking in the grass, the ant immediately jumped up and attacked the yellow-clad child. The yellow-clad child was immediately knocked down and turned out to be a golden child.

古文：因持以归，家自是富。
现代文：于是他就把金小孩拿回家中，从此便富了。
English: So he took the golden child home with him and became rich.

古文：蔡彦卿
现代文：蔡彦卿
English: Cai Yanqing

古文：庐州军吏蔡彦卿，为拓皋镇将。
现代文：有一个叫蔡彦卿的庐州军吏，是拓皋的镇守将。
English: There was a military official from Zhangzhou named Cai Yanqing, who was the town guard of Tuobao.

古文：暑夜，坐镇门外纳凉，忽见道南桑林中，有白衣妇人独舞，就视即灭。
现代文：一个闷热的夜晚，他坐在门外乘凉，忽然看到道南的桑树林中，有一个白衣女子独自起舞，近看就消逝不见了。
English: One sultry night, he was sitting outside enjoying the cool, when he suddenly saw a white-clad woman dancing alone in the mulberry groves of southern Hokkaido. When he looked closer, she was gone.

古文：明夜，彦卿挟杖先往，伏于草间。
现代文：次日晚上，蔡彦卿带着武器前往，埋伏在草丛里。
English: In the evening of the next day, Cai Yanqing went with weapons and lay in ambush in the grass.

古文：久之，妇人复出。
现代文：过了一会儿，那白衣女子又出现了。
English: Moments later, the woman in white reappeared.

古文：方舞，即击之堕地，乃白金一瓶。
现代文：她刚起舞，蔡彦卿就把她打倒在地。细一看，竟是一银瓶子。
English: As soon as she started dancing, Cai Yanqing knocked her to the ground. A closer look revealed that it was a silver bottle.

古文：复掘地，获银千两。
现代文：又挖地，挖出白银上千两。
English: And he dug in the earth, and found two thousand talents of silver.

古文：遂为富人云。水银
现代文：于是他成为富人。水银
English: So he became rich.

古文：吕生
现代文：吕生
English: Lv Sheng

古文：大历中，有吕生者，自会稽上虞尉调集于京师。
现代文：大历年间，有个姓吕的书生，从会稽的上虞尉调集到京城。
English: In the year of the great calendar, there was a scholar surnamed Lv who was summoned to the capital from Shangyu, the auditor.

古文：既而侨居永崇里。
现代文：不久他便侨居永崇里。
English: Soon he was living in Yongzhongli.

古文：尝一夕，与其友数辈会食于其室。
现代文：曾经有一个晚上，他与几个朋友在家中聚餐。
English: One evening, he was having dinner with some friends at home.

古文：食毕，将就寝，俄有一妪，容服洁白，长二尺许，出于室之北隅，缓步而来，其状极异。
现代文：吃完饭将要就寝的时候，顷刻之间出现了一个老女人，面容与衣服都很洁白，身高二尺左右。她是从屋子的北边旮旯里出现的，缓步走来，样子很怪异。
English: After dinner, when it was time to go to bed, an old woman suddenly appeared, her face and clothes were very white, she was about two feet tall. She appeared from the north side of the room, walking slowly, looking very strange.

古文：众视之，相目以笑。
现代文：众人见了，相视而笑。
English: Everyone saw it, looked at each other and laughed.

古文：其妪渐迫其榻，且语曰： 君有会，不能一命耶，何待吾之薄欤？ 
现代文：那老女人走近床榻，还说话道： 你们聚餐，就不能让我也参加？为什么待我这么不够意思？ 
English: The old woman approached the bed and said, "You are having a dinner party, can't you let me join you? Why are you being so mean to me?

古文：吕生叱之。遂退去。至北隅，乃亡所见。
现代文：吕生喝斥她，她便退去，退到北旮旯就看不见了。
English: Lv Sheng shouted at her, and she retreated. When she retreated to Beilun, she could no longer be seen.

古文：且惊且异，莫知其来也。
现代文：众人又惊又怪，不知她是怎么来的。
English: Everyone was shocked and puzzled, not knowing how she got there.

古文：明日，生独寤于室，又见其妪在北隅下，将前且退，惶然若有所惧。
现代文：第二天，吕生独自在屋里睡觉，又看见那老女人出现在北旮旯，要上前又不上前，惶惶然像是很害怕的样子。
English: The next day, when Lv Sheng was sleeping alone in his room, he saw the old woman appear in Beilun. She wanted to go forward, but did not go forward. She looked panicked, as if she was very scared.

古文：生又叱之，遂没。
现代文：吕生又喝斥她。她就又消逝了。
English: Lv Sheng shouted at her again, and she disappeared again.

古文：明日，生默念曰： 是必怪也，今夕将至，若不除之，必为吾患不朝夕矣。 
现代文：到了第三天，吕生暗想： 这一定是个妖怪，今晚上如果不除掉她，早晚是我的一大祸害。 
English: On the third day, Lv Sheng thought to himself, "This must be a monster. If I don't get rid of her tonight, sooner or later she will be a great evil to me."

古文：即命一剑置其榻下。
现代文：于是他就把一把剑藏到床下。
English: So he hid a sword under his bed.

古文：是夕，果是北隅徐步而来。
现代文：这天晚上，老女人果然又从北旮旯徐步走来。
English: That evening, the old woman walked slowly from Beilun.

古文：颜色不惧。
现代文：她的表情并无惧色。
English: There was no fear in her expression.

古文：至榻前，生以剑挥之，其妪忽上榻以臂揕生胸。
现代文：她走到床前，吕生急忙挥剑。那老女人忽然蹦到床上，伸手臂去抓挠吕生的前胸。
English: When she came to the bed, Lv Sheng quickly swung his sword. The old woman suddenly jumped onto the bed and stretched out her arm to scratch Lv Sheng's forearm.

古文：余又跃于左右，举袂而舞。
现代文：以后又跃于左右，举袖而舞。
English: Later, he leapt to the left and right, dancing with his sleeves up.

古文：久之，又有一妪忽上榻，复以臂揕生。
现代文：过了些时候，又有一个老女人忽然蹦上床，又用手臂去抓挠吕生前胸。
English: After a while, another old woman suddenly jumped onto the bed and scratched Lv Sheng's forearm with her arm.

古文：生遽觉一身尽凛然若霜被于体。
现代文：吕生突然觉得全身冰凉，像冰霜覆盖了身体。
English: Lv Sheng suddenly felt cold all over his body, as if he was covered with frost.

古文：生又以剑乱挥。俄有数妪，亦随而舞焉。
现代文：吕生又把剑乱挥一阵，顷刻间出现了好几个老女人，也跟着挥袖而舞起来。
English: Lv Sheng waved his sword wildly for a while, and several old women appeared in an instant, and they also danced with the waving of their sleeves.

古文：生挥剑不已。
现代文：吕生不停地挥剑。
English: Lv Sheng kept waving his sword.

古文：又为十余妪，各长寸许。
现代文：她又变成十多个更小的老女人，每个只有一寸来长。
English: She turned into a dozen smaller old women, each only an inch long.

古文：虽愈多而貌如一焉，皆不可辨。
现代文：这些小人儿虽然数量更多了，却都是一个模样，都不能分辨。
English: Although the number of these little people has increased, they all have the same appearance and cannot be distinguished.

古文：环走四垣，生惧甚，计不能出。
现代文：她们在四壁下乱跑，吕生非常害怕，却想不出办法来。
English: They were running around under the four walls. Lv Sheng was very scared, but couldn't think of a way to stop them.

古文：中者一妪谓书生曰： 吾将合为一矣，君且观之。 
现代文：其中一个老女人对吕生说： 我要合成一个了，你要看清楚啊！ 
English: One of the old women said to Lv Sheng, "I'm going to make one, you have to see it clearly!"

古文：生惧益甚，乃谓曰： 尔何怪？而敢如是挠生人耶！
现代文：说完，那些小人儿向一起拢来，都来到床前，又合拢为一个老女人，和原先见到的那个一模一样。吕生更加惧怕，就对老女人说： 你是什么妖怪，敢抓挠活人？
English: Having said that, the little people gathered together, all came to the bed, and then closed in on an old woman, exactly the same as the one they had seen before. Lv Sheng was even more afraid, and said to the old woman: "What kind of monster are you, daring to scratch a living person?"

古文：当疾去！不然，吾求方士，将以神术制汝，汝又安能为耶？ 
现代文：你应该赶快离去，不然，我请一个方士，将用神术制你，你又能怎样呢？ 
English: You should leave quickly, otherwise, I will invite a sorcerer who will use magic to control you, and what can you do?

古文：妪笑曰： 君言过矣。若有术士，吾愿见之。
现代文：老女人笑着说： 你说严重了，如果有术士来，我愿意见他。
English: The old woman smiled and said, "You are serious. If a sorcerer comes, I would like to see him."

古文：吾之来，戏君耳，非敢害也。
现代文：我来，是和你闹着玩的，并不敢害你。
English: I'm just messing with you. I wouldn't dare to hurt you.

古文：幸君无惧，吾亦还其所矣。 
现代文：希望你别害怕。我也该回去了。 
English: I hope you're not scared. I should go back too.

古文：言毕遂退于北隅而没。
现代文：说完，老女人退到北旮旯而消逝。
English: After saying this, the old woman retreated to Beilun and passed away.

古文：明日，生以事语于人。
现代文：第二天，吕生把这事告诉了别人。
English: The next day, Lv Sheng told others about this.

古文：有田氏子者，善以符术除去怪魅，名闻长安中。
现代文：有一个姓田的人，善于用符术除去妖孽，在长安城中很有名气。
English: There was a man surnamed Tian who was good at using magic to get rid of evil spirits. He was very famous in Chang'an City.

古文：见说喜跃曰： 是我事也，去之若爪一蚁耳。
现代文：他听说此事之后，高兴得连蹦带跳说： 这正是该我干的事，除去老女人就像弄死一只蚂蚁那么容易。
English: When he heard about it, he jumped for joy and said: "This is exactly what I should do, getting rid of an old woman is as easy as killing an ant."

古文：今夕愿往君舍，且伺焉。 
现代文：今晚我就到你家去，你在家等着吧！ 
English: I'll come to your house tonight, you wait at home!

古文：至夜，生与田氏子俱坐于室。未几而妪果来，至榻前。
现代文：到了夜间，吕生与姓田的一起坐在屋里，不大一会儿，老女人果然又来了。
English: At night, Lv Sheng sat in the house with Tian, and before long, the old woman came again.

古文：田氏子叱曰： 魅疾去！ 
现代文：老女人来到床前，姓田的喝斥道： 大胆妖怪你赶快离开！ 
English: When the old woman came to the bed, Tian shouted at her: "You audacious monster, leave at once!"

古文：妪扬然其色不顾，左右徐步而来去者久之。
现代文：老女人神色从容不理睬他，在左右徐步来回走动了许久。
English: The old woman calmly ignored him and walked slowly back and forth for a long time.

古文：谓田生曰： 非吾之所知也。 
现代文：她对姓田的说： 我并不了解你！ 
English: To Tian, she said, "I don't know you!

古文：其妪忽挥其手，手堕于地，又为一妪甚小，跃而升榻，突入田生口中。
现代文：那老女人突然一挥手，手掉到地上，变成一个极小的老女人。这个老女人儿蹦到床上，突然蹦入姓田的口中。
English: The old woman suddenly waved her hand and it fell to the ground, turning into a tiny old woman. The old woman jumped onto the bed and suddenly into Tian's mouth.

古文：田生惊曰： 吾死乎！ 
现代文：姓田的大惊失色道： 我能死吗？ 
English: Surname Tian's great surprise and loss of color: Can I die?

古文：妪谓生曰： 吾比言不为君害，君不听；今田生之疾，果何如哉？
现代文：老女人对吕生说： 我几次说过不害你，你不听，现在姓田的这样了，你信了吧？
English: The old woman said to Lv Sheng: I told you several times not to harm you, but you didn't listen. Now my surname is Tian. Do you believe me?

古文：然亦将成君之富耳。 
现代文：不过也好，这也让你致富了！ 
English: But hey, it made you rich!

古文：言毕，又去。
现代文：说完又离去。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：明日，有谓吕生者，宜于北隅发之，可见矣。
现代文：次日，有人对吕生说，应该把北旮旯挖开，就可以知道怎么回事了。
English: The next day, someone said to Lv Sheng that they should dig up the north pier, so that they could find out what was going on.

古文：生喜而归，命家僮于其所没穷焉。
现代文：吕生欣然而归，让家僮把北旮旯彻底挖开。
English: Lv Shengxin returned home, and let Jiayu completely excavate the north moat.

古文：果不至丈，得一瓶，可受斛许，贮水银甚多。
现代文：果然，挖了不到一丈深，便挖到一个瓶子，可容纳一斤左右，里边装了不少水银。
English: Sure enough, after digging less than a meter deep, they dug up a bottle that could hold about a kilo and contained a lot of mercury.

古文：生方怪其妪乃水银精也。
现代文：吕生这才恍然大悟，原来那老女人是个水银精。
English: Lv Sheng suddenly realized that the old woman was a mercury essence.

古文：田生竟以寒栗而卒。
现代文：那位姓田的居然因此惊吓而死。
English: That person, whose last name was Tian, actually died from the shock.

古文：玉
现代文：玉
English: Tamaso

古文：沈攸之
现代文：沈攸之
English: Shen Youzhi

古文：宋顺帝升明中，荆州刺史沈攸之，厩中群马，辄踯蹋惊嘶，如似见物。
现代文：宋顺帝升明年间，荆州刺史沈攸之，马厩里养了一群好马，这些马总是踢蹄惊叫，好像看到了什么东西似的。
English: When Emperor Song Shun ascended to the throne, a group of good horses were raised in the stables in Jingzhou. These horses were always kicking and screaming as if they had seen something.

古文：攸之令人伺之，见一白驹，又绿绳系腹，直从外来。
现代文：沈攸之让人等候在马厩里观察，看到一个白色小马驹，用一根绿绳系着肚子，直接从厩外奔来。
English: Shen Youzhi asked people to wait and watch in the stables, and saw a white foal, with a green rope tied to its stomach, running directly from outside the stables.

古文：圉者具言，攸之使人夜伏枥边候之。
现代文：养马人详细地告诉了沈攸之，沈攸之派人夜间埋伏在马槽子旁边等着。
English: The horse breeder told Shen Yuanzhi in detail, and Shen Yuanzhi sent someone to wait for the horse at night by the side of the manger.

古文：俄而见白驹来，忽然复去。
现代文：不多时见白马驹到来，忽然又离去。
English: It's not often that you see a white stallion arrive and then suddenly leave.

古文：视厩门犹闭，计其踪迹，直入阁内。
现代文：去查看厩门，厩门还是关着的。查那白马驹的踪迹，竟直入刺史所居的小楼里。
English: I went to check the stable door, but it was still closed. The search for the white horse's tracks led straight into the small building where Sasuke lives.

古文：时人见者，咸谓为怪。
现代文：当时见到的人，都认为这是精怪。
English: Everyone who saw it at the time thought it was very strange.

古文：检内人，唯爱妾冯月华臂上一玉马，以绿丝绳穿之。
现代文：查检阁内之人，只有沈攸之的爱妾冯月华臂上佩有一匹玉马，用绿丝绳穿着。
English: Of the people in the inspection pavilion, only Feng Yuehua, Shen Youzhi's beloved concubine, was wearing a golden horse on her arm, tied with a green silk rope.

古文：至夜，辄脱置枕边，至夜有时失去，晓时则还。
现代文：到了晚上，她总是把玉马摘下来放在枕头边，夜间有时候丢失，到天明就又回来了。
English: In the evening, she would always take off her horse and put it next to her pillow. Sometimes she would lose it during the night and it would be back by dawn.

古文：试取看之，见蹄下有泥。
现代文：沈攸之把玉马取来一看，见马蹄下有泥。
English: Shen Youzhi took a look at the horse and saw mud under the horse's hooves.

古文：后攸之败。不知所在。
现代文：后来沈攸之败了，不知那玉马哪里去了。
English: Later, Shen Youyou was defeated, and I don't know where that horse went.

古文：玉龙
现代文：玉龙
English: Jade Dragon

古文：梁大同八年，戍主杨光欣，获玉龙一枚。
现代文：梁大同八年，戍主杨光欣，得到一枚玉雕的龙。
English: In the eighth year of Liang Datong's reign, Yang Guangxin, the dragon's master, received a dragon carved from jade.

古文：长一尺二寸，高五寸，雕镂精妙，不似人作。
现代文：龙长一尺二寸，高五寸，雕刻得十分精妙，不像人工做的。
English: The dragon is 1 foot 2 inches long and 5 inches high. It is very delicately carved, unlike those made by hand.

古文：腹中容斗余，颈亦空曲。
现代文：玉龙肚子里可装一斗多东西，脖子也是空而弯曲的。
English: The belly of the Jade Dragon can hold a lot of things, and the neck is also empty and curved.

古文：置水中，令水满，倒之，水从口出，出声如琴瑟，水尽乃止。
现代文：把它放到水中装满水，再往外倒水，水从龙口流出来，会发出琴瑟奏鸣一样的声音，水流尽才停止。
English: Put it in water, fill it with water, and then pour water out. When the water flows out of the faucet, it will make a sound like a harp, and the water flow will only stop when it is full.

古文：江严
现代文：江严
English: Jiang Yan

古文：江严于富春县清泉山，遥见一美女，紫衣而歌。
现代文：江严在富春县清泉山上，远远望见一位美女，穿着紫色衣服在那里唱歌。
English: Jiang Yan is on the Qingquan Mountain in Fuchun County. A beautiful woman can be seen in the distance, wearing a purple dress and singing.

古文：严就之，数十步，女遂隐，唯见所据石。
现代文：江严走近她，还离她几十步，她就隐去不见了，只见到她所依靠的那块石头。
English: Jiang Yan walked close to her, and was still a few dozen paces away from her when she disappeared, leaving only the stone on which she was leaning.

古文：如此数四，乃得一紫玉，广一尺。
现代文：如此经历了几次，于是就得到一块紫色的玉，长宽一尺。
English: He did this several times, and he ended up with a purple marble, a foot long and a foot wide.

古文：又邴浪于九田山见鸟，状如鸡，色赤，鸣如吹笙。
现代文：另外，邴浪在九田山见到一只鸟，形状像鸡，红色，叫起来像吹笙。
English: In addition, Gong Lang saw a bird in Mount Kutian, shaped like a chicken, red, calling like a kite.

古文：射之中，即入穴。
现代文：邴浪射中它，它就钻进一个洞穴中。
English: A rogue wave hit it and it swam into a cave.

古文：浪遂凿石，得一赤玉，如鸟形状也。
现代文：邴浪就凿开那石洞，凿出一块赤色玉，像鸟的形状。
English: The waves broke through the rock and chiseled out a red stone, shaped like a bird.

古文：唐玄宗
现代文：唐玄宗
English: Tang Xuan Zong

古文：唐天后尝召诸皇孙，坐于殿上，观其嬉戏。
现代文：唐天后曾经召见各位皇孙。她坐在殿上，看孩子们嬉闹玩耍。
English: The Queen of Tang once summoned all the grandchildren of emperors. She sat in the hall and watched the children play.

古文：因出西国所贡玉环钏杯盘，列于前后，纵令争取，以观其志。
现代文：于是将西方国家所贡的玉环、钏、杯、盘等拿出来，摆放在前前后后，让孩子们随便争夺拿取，以观察他们各自的志向。
English: Then, they took out the jade rings, urns, cups, plates, etc. that were donated by Western countries and placed them in front, behind, and to the side, and let the children compete to take them, to observe their respective aspirations.

古文：莫不奔竞，厚有所获。独玄宗端坐，略不为动。
现代文：孩子们没有不争抢奔夺的，都有很大收获，只有唐玄宗端坐在那里，根本没动。
English: None of the children did not scramble, they all had a great harvest, only Tang Xuan Zongduan sat there, did not move at all.

古文：后大奇之，抚其背曰： 此儿当为太平天子。 
现代文：皇后认为他很不一般，抚摸着他的背说： 这个孩子应该成为一个太平天子。 
English: The Empress thought he was very unusual, stroked his back and said: This child should become a Taiping Tianzi.

古文：因命取玉龙子以赐。
现代文：于是让人取来玉龙子赐给他。
English: So someone fetched the dragon eggs and gave them to him.

古文：玉龙子，太宗于晋阳宫得之，文德皇后常置之衣箱中。及大帝载诞之三日，后以珠络衣褓并玉龙子赐焉。
现代文：玉龙子，是唐太宗从晋阳宫得到的。文德皇后平日把玉龙子放在衣箱里保存，等到大帝诞生第三天，她把珠络衣褓和玉龙子等物全都赐给他。
English: The Jade Dragon was given to Emperor Taizong of Tang from the Jinyang Palace. Empress Wende usually kept the Jade Dragon in her wardrobe, but on the third day of the emperor's birth, she gave him the pearl-encrusted robe and the Jade Dragon.

古文：其后常藏之内府。
现代文：以后便一直放在内府珍藏。
English: Since then, it has been stored in Naifu.

古文：虽其广不数寸，而温润精巧，非人间所有。
现代文：玉龙子虽然长宽不过几寸，却温润精巧，人间不可多得。
English: Although the length and width of the dragon egg is only a few inches, it is warm and delicate, which is rare in the human world.

古文：及玄宗即位，每京师僣雨，必虔诚祈祷。
现代文：等到唐玄宗即位，每当京城久旱不雨，他必定虔诚地向玉龙子祈祷。
English: By the time Emperor Xuanzong of Tang ascended the throne, whenever there was a long drought in the capital, he would surely pray to the Jade Dragon.

古文：将有霖注，逼而视之，若奋鳞鬣。
现代文：要下雨的时候，近看玉龙子，龙鳞及鬃毛都像在动。
English: When it is about to rain, if you look closely at the dragon eggs, the dragon scales and bristles all seem to be moving.

古文：开元中，三辅大旱，玄宗复祈祷，而涉旬无雨。
现代文：开元年间，三辅大旱，唐玄宗又向玉龙子祈祷，但十多天以后也没下雨。
English: During the first year of the year, there was a severe drought in Sanfu, and Emperor Xuanzong of Tang prayed to the Jade Dragon, but it did not rain for more than ten days.

古文：帝密投南内之龙池，俄而云物暴起，风雨随作。
现代文：他把玉龙子悄悄地扔到南内的龙池中，顷刻之间，云状的东西骤然而起，紧接着风雨大作。
English: He quietly threw the dragon eggs into the dragon pond in the south of the country, and in an instant, the cloud-like thing suddenly rose up, followed by a storm.

古文：及幸西蜀，车驾次渭水，将渡，驻跸于水滨，左右侍御，或有临流濯弄者，於沙中得之。
现代文：等到他游幸西蜀，车驾来到渭水，将要渡河，车马停在水边，左右侍卫，有的在河中洗弄身子，无意中从沙中拾到了玉龙子。
English: Waiting for him to travel to Xishu, driving to Surabaya, about to cross the river, the car and horse stopped at the water's edge, the guards around, some washed themselves in the river, and inadvertently picked up the dragon egg from the sand.

古文：上闻惊喜，视之泫然流泣曰： 此吾昔时所宝玉龙子也。 
现代文：唐玄宗听说之后十分惊喜。他看过玉龙子之后流着泪说： 这是我从前极宝贵的玉龙子啊！ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very surprised when he heard about it. After he had seen the Jade Dragon, he shed tears and said, "This is my precious Jade Dragon!

古文：自后每夜中，光彩辉烛一室。
现代文：从此以后，每天夜里，玉龙子都把屋里照得通亮。
English: From then on, every night, the dragonfly would light up the room.

古文：上既还京，为小黄门攘窃，以遗李辅国。
现代文：唐玄宗回京以后，玉龙子被一个小黄门偷去，送给了李辅国。
English: After Tang Xuan Zong returned to Beijing, Yulong Zi was stolen by a small yellow door and given to Li Yuxuan.

古文：李辅国常置于柜中。
现代文：李辅国平常把它放在柜子里。
English: Li Fuguo usually put it in the cupboard.

古文：辅国将败，夜闻柜中有声，开视之，已亡其所。
现代文：李辅国将败落的时候，夜里听到柜子里有声音，打开一看，柜中没有玉龙子了。
English: When Li Yu's state was about to fall, he heard a noise in the cupboard at night. When he opened it, there was no more yulongzi in the cupboard.

古文：五色玉
现代文：五色玉
English: Five-coloured ball

古文：天宝初，安思顺进五色玉带。又于左藏库中得五色玉。
现代文：天宝初年，安思顺献给皇上一条五色玉带，又从左藏库中得到了五色玉。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, An Shishun dedicated a five-color jade belt to the emperor, and obtained five-color jade from the left repository.

古文：上怪近日西贡无五色玉，令责安西诸蕃。
现代文：于是皇上就怪怨西蕃各国的贡品中没有五色玉。他派人向西蕃各国问罪。
English: As a result, the emperor complained that there were no five-colored gems in the tributes of the Xidi countries. He sent someone to ask the Xidi countries about the crime.

古文：蕃言此常进，皆为小勃律所劫，不达。
现代文：西蕃回答说这种东西经常向皇上进贡，都被小勃律国打劫抢去了，运不到。
English: Xidi replied that this kind of thing was often paid as tribute to the emperor, but it was all robbed by the small Bo state and could not be transported.

古文：上怒，欲征之。
现代文：皇上大怒，要征讨小勃律。
English: The emperor was furious and wanted to collect the small erection.

古文：群臣多谏，独李林甫赞成上意，且言武臣王天运，谋勇可将。
现代文：群臣大多数劝皇上不要征伐，只有李林甫赞成皇上的主意，并且说武臣王天运有勇有谋可以领兵打仗。
English: Most of the courtiers advised the emperor not to invade, but only Li Linfu agreed with the emperor's idea and said that the warrior king had the courage and wisdom to lead troops into battle.

古文：乃命王天运将四万人，兼统诸蕃兵伐之。
现代文：于是皇上就让王天运领兵四万人，又统领西蕃各国之兵讨伐小勃律。
English: As a result, the emperor asked Wang Tianyun to lead 40,000 soldiers, and also to lead the soldiers of the Western Wei countries to fight against Xiaoboru.

古文：及逼勃律城下，勃律君长，恐惧请罪，悉出宝玉，愿岁贡献。
现代文：等到大军逼近勃律城下，勃律的君长很害怕，出来请罪，愿意把宝玉全都献出来，年年岁岁向大唐进贡。
English: When the great army approached the city of Bo R, the ruler of Bo R was very afraid, came out to plead guilty, was willing to give all the precious stones, and paid tribute to the Great Tang Dynasty year after year.

古文：天运不许，即屠城，虏二千人及其珠玑而还。
现代文：王天运不答应，就攻城屠杀，俘虏两千人及其珠宝而还。
English: Wang Tianyun did not agree, so he attacked and slaughtered the city, captured two thousand people and their jewels, and returned.

古文：勃律中有术者，言将军无义不祥，天将大风矣。
现代文：勃律国中有一位术士，说王天运如此无义是不祥之兆，天要刮大风啦！
English: There is a sorcerer in the country of Bodu, who says that it is an ominous sign that the king of heaven's fortune is so unjust. The sky is about to blow a gale!

古文：行数百里，忽惊风四起，雪花如翼，风激小海水成冰柱，起而复摧。
现代文：王天运指挥军队走了数百里，忽然间大风四起，雪花大如鸟雀翅翼。大风激起小海水冻成冰柱，然后又被大风吹折。
English: Wang Tianyun commanded the army to walk hundreds of miles, and suddenly there was a gale. Snowflakes were as big as the wings of a bird. The gale stirred up small seawater to freeze into icicles, which were then broken by the gale.

古文：经半日，小海涨涌，四万人一时冻死。唯蕃汉各一得还，具奏。
现代文：经过半日，小海波涛涨涌，四万人一时间全都冻死，只有一个汉人和一个蕃人跑了回来，详细地向皇上禀报。
English: After half a day, the waves of the small sea swelled, and forty thousand people all froze to death at once. Only one Han Chinese and one deaf person ran back and reported to the emperor in detail.

古文：玄宗大惊异，即命中使随二人验之。
现代文：唐玄宗听了非常惊异，马上就派中使随二人回去查验真假。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very surprised to hear this, and immediately sent a middle-ranking official to go back with the two men to verify the authenticity.

古文：至小海侧，冰犹峥嵘如山，隔水见兵士尸，立者坐者，莹彻可数。
现代文：来到小海之侧，冰还像小山一样峥嵘而立。隔冰就可望见兵士的尸体，有站着的，有坐着的，晶莹明彻，看得很清楚。
English: When I came to the side of the small sea, the ice still stood like a hill. Across the ice, I could see the bodies of soldiers, some standing, some sitting, crystal clear, and I could see them very clearly.

古文：中使将返，冰忽消释，众尸亦不复见。
现代文：中使要返回的时候，冰柱忽然消释，兵士们的尸体也不见了。
English: When the envoy was about to return, the icicle suddenly dissolved and the bodies of the soldiers disappeared.

古文：玉辟邪
现代文：玉辟邪
English: Tamaki Zetsu

古文：肃宗赐李辅国香玉辟邪二，各高一尺五寸。
现代文：唐肃宗赐给李辅国两枚能散发香味的玉辟邪，各高一尺五寸。
English: Tang Su Zong gave two fragrant jade incense sticks, each one foot and five inches high, to Li Yu Province.

古文：工巧殆非人工。
现代文：玉辟邪做工之巧几乎不是人工所能达到的。
English: It's almost impossible to achieve this level of craftsmanship by hand.

古文：其玉之香，可闻数百步，虽锁之于金函石柜中，不能掩其气。
现代文：那玉的香气，数百步之外就可以闻到。即使锁在铁匣子石柜子当中，也不能掩盖它的香气。
English: The scent of that jade can be smelled hundreds of paces away, and even if it is locked in an iron box or a stone cabinet, it cannot hide its aroma.

古文：或以衣裾误拂，芬馥经年，纵瀚濯数四，亦不消歇。
现代文：有的人不小心用衣服搽抹了玉辟邪，香味经年不退，即使把衣服放水里冲洗多次，也不能把香味洗掉。
English: Some people have accidentally smeared jade to ward off evil with clothes, and the fragrance does not fade over the years. Even if the clothes are rinsed in water several times, the fragrance cannot be washed off.

古文：辅国常置之坐侧。
现代文：李辅国常把玉辟邪放在座位旁边。
English: Li Yuxuo often put the ball and chain next to the seat.

古文：一日，方巾栉，而辟邪一则大笑，一则悲号。
现代文：有一天，他正在梳洗，而两个玉辟邪一个发出大笑，一个发出悲号。
English: One day, while he was combing his hair, two evil spirits, one laughing, the other crying.

古文：辅国惊愕失据。
现代文：李辅国惊得不知如何是好。
English: Li Fuguo was so shocked that he didn't know what to do.

古文：而冁然者不已，悲号者更涕泣交下。
现代文：而那个笑的笑个不停，那个哭的哭得涕泪交加。
English: And the one who was laughing was laughing incessantly, and the one who was crying was in tears.

古文：辅国恶其怪，遂碎之为粉，没于厕中。
现代文：李辅国对两个玉辟邪的怪异表现十分讨厌，就把它们砸得粉碎，扔到厕所里。
English: Li Fuguo was so disgusted by the bizarre performance of the two jade evil spirits that he smashed them to pieces and threw them into the toilet.

古文：自后常闻冤痛之声。
现代文：从此以后常听到厕所里有冤痛之声。
English: Since then, voices of grievance have often been heard in the toilets.

古文：其辅国所居安邑里，芬馥弥月犹在。
现代文：李辅国所居住的安邑里，一个多月之后还有香味。
English: More than a month later, there is still fragrance in An'yur, where Li Fuguo lived.

古文：盖舂之为粉，愈香故也。
现代文：大概是把它碾成粉末，香味就更浓的缘故。
English: It's probably because it's ground into a powder, which makes it more fragrant.

古文：不周岁而辅国死焉，始碎辟邪。
现代文：不到一年李辅国就死了。
English: In less than a year, Li Yuxuo died.

古文：辅国嬖奴慕容宫，知异常物，隐屑二合。
现代文：当初把玉辟邪弄碎的时候，李辅国宠爱的奴婢慕容宫，知道这不是平常之物，偷偷地保存了些碎屑。
English: At the beginning, when the jade idol was broken, Mu Rong Palace, the favorite slave of the State of Li Yu, knew that this was not an ordinary thing, and secretly preserved some crumbs.

古文：鱼朝恩不恶辅国之祸，以钱三十万买之。
现代文：鱼朝恩不忌讳李辅国的灾祸，用三十万钱把零碎的玉辟邪买去。
English: Yucho Chao En did not hesitate to use 300,000 yuan to buy up the pieces of the evil empire.

古文：而朝恩将伏诛，其香化为白蝶，冲天而去。
现代文：鱼朝恩将被杀的时候，那些散发香气的玉屑，化成白蝴蝶，冲天而去。
English: When the fish Chao En will be killed, those fragrant jade chips will turn into white butterflies and fly away.

古文：当时议者，以奇香异宝，非人臣之所蓄也。
现代文：当时人们议论，认为这样的奇香异宝，不是做臣子的所能保存的。
English: At that time, people argued that such a treasure could not be preserved by a courtier.

古文：辅国家藏珍玩，皆非世人所识。
现代文：李辅国家里所藏的珍宝古玩，都不是世人所能认识的。
English: The treasures and curiosities hidden in the country of Li Yu are not known to the world.

古文：夏即于堂中设迎凉草，其色类碧，而干似苦竹，叶细于杉。虽若乾枯，未尝凋落。
现代文：夏季就在堂中设迎凉草，草色接近碧绿，基干像苦竹，叶比杉叶还细，虽然像是干枯，却不曾凋落。
English: In the summer, cool grass is set up in the hall, the grass color is close to green, the base is like bitter bamboo, the leaves are finer than cedar leaves, although it seems to be dry, it has not fallen.

古文：盛暑朿之窗户间，凉自至。
现代文：将这种草扎在窗户之间，凉气自来。
English: Tie this grass between the windows and the cool air will come.

古文：凤首木高一尺，而凋刻如鸾凤之形，其木颇似枯槁，故毛羽秃落不甚尽。
现代文：凤首木高一尺，而雕刻成像鸾凤那样的形状，木头很像已经枯干了，所以就像鸾凤的羽毛没有落尽。
English: The phoenix's head is a foot tall, and the carving is shaped like a phoenix. The wood looks like it has dried out, so it's like the phoenix's feathers haven't fallen out.

古文：虽严凝之时，置于高堂大厦中，而和煦之气如二三月，故别名曰常春木。
现代文：即使是严寒之日，把凤首木放在高堂大厦中，和煦之气就像二三月份。所以凤首木又叫常春木。
English: Even if it is a very cold day, placing the phoenix tree in the high-rise building will make it feel like February or March. That is why the phoenix tree is also called the evergreen tree.

古文：纵以烈火焚之，终不焦黑。
现代文：即使用烈火焚烧它，也不能把它烧焦烧黑。
English: Even if it is burned with fire, it cannot be scorched.

古文：凉草凤木，或出于薛王宅。
现代文：凉草和凤木，或许是从薛王的宅里弄到的。
English: The cool grass and pine trees may have been obtained from King Xue's residence.

古文：《十洲记》云：火林国出也。软玉鞭
现代文：《十洲记》说，它出自火林国。软玉鞭
English: "The Record of the Ten States" says that it comes from the country of the fire forest.

古文：德宗尝幸兴庆宫，于复壁间得宝匣，中获玉鞭。
现代文：唐德宗曾经幸兴庆宫，在夹壁墙里发现一个宝匣，从匣中得到一把玉鞭。
English: Emperor Dezong of Tang was once fortunate enough to find a treasure box in the wall of the Xingqing Palace. He obtained a jade whip from the box.

古文：其末有文，曰 软玉鞭 。
现代文：鞭的末端刻有文字： 软玉鞭 。
English: The end of the whip is engraved with the words: soft jade whip.

古文：即天宝中异国所献也。
现代文：这是天宝年间外国进贡献来的。
English: This was a result of foreign investment during the Tenpo era.

古文：瑞妍节文，光明可鉴，虽蓝田之美，不能过也。
现代文：软玉鞭的玉质好花纹美，亮得可以当镜子使用，即使是蓝田产的美玉，也不能超过它。
English: The jade of the soft jade whip has beautiful patterns and is so bright that it can be used as a mirror. Even the beautiful jade from Lantian cannot surpass it.

古文：屈之则首尾相就，舒之则径直如绳。
现代文：使它弯曲，头和尾可以靠近；使它展开，那么它直得像用过绳墨。
English: Bend it so that the head and tail are close together; spread it out so that it is as straight as if it had been inked.

古文：虽以斧鑕锻斫，终不伤缺。
现代文：即使是用刀斧砍它，也始终不能使它残缺。
English: Even if you cut it with a knife and an axe, you still can't make it incomplete.

古文：德宗叹为神物，遂命联蝉绣为囊，碧蚕丝为鞘。
现代文：德宗赞叹它是神物。于是命人用薄如蝉翼的绸子绣成装鞭的口袋，用碧蚕丝做成鞭梢。
English: Emperor Dezong praised it as a sacred object, so he ordered someone to embroider a bag for the whip with silk as thin as a cicada's wing, and to make whip laces with blue silk.

古文：碧蚕丝，即永泰元年东海弥罗国所贡也。
现代文：碧蚕丝，就是永泰元年东海弥罗国进贡献来的。
English: Bijiao silk was brought to China from the East China Sea in the first year of the Yongtai Dynasty.

古文：云其国有桑，枝干盘屈，覆地而生。
现代文：说他们国中有桑树，枝干盘曲，遮天盖地地生长。
English: They say that in their country there is a mulberry tree with curved branches and trunks, which covers the sky and grows everywhere.

古文：大者亦连延十数里，小者亦荫百亩。
现代文：大的连绵十几里，小的也能遮一百亩地的荫凉。
English: The big ones stretch for more than ten miles, and the small ones can also shade a hundred mu of land.

古文：其上有蚕，可长四寸。
现代文：树上面有蚕，有四寸来长。
English: There are silkworms on the tree, four inches long.

古文：其色金，其丝碧，亦谓之金蚕丝。
现代文：它的身体是金黄色的，它的丝是碧绿的，也叫做金蚕丝。
English: Its body is golden yellow, and its silk is turquoise green, also known as golden silk.

古文：纵之一尺，引之一丈。
现代文：再说那软玉鞭，松开时是一尺长，拉直就是一丈长。
English: Besides, the soft jade whip, when loosened, is a foot long, and when straightened, it is a foot long.

古文：反撚为鞘，表里通莹如贯瑟，虽并十夫之力，挽之不断。
现代文：把它捻成鞭梢，表里通莹象琴弦，即使合并十个人的力气，也拉不断它。
English: Twisted it into whip tips, the surface and the inside are like strings, even if the strength of ten people is combined, it will continue to pull.

古文：为琴弦，鬼神愁，为弩弦，则箭出一千步，为弓弦，则箭出五百步。
现代文：用它做琴弦，奏出的声音极美，鬼神听了都发愁；用它做弩弦，那么箭就能射出去一千步远；用它做弓弦，那么箭就可以射出去五百步远。
English: Use it for strings, and the sound it makes is so beautiful that the gods and goddesses are troubled; use it for strings, and the arrow can be shot a thousand paces; use it for strings, and the arrow can be shot five hundred paces.

古文：上令藏于内府。
现代文：皇上下令把它珍藏在内府。
English: The emperor ordered that it be preserved in Naifu.

古文：至朱泚犯禁阙，其鞭不知所在。
现代文：到朱泚作乱于京师的时候，那鞭不知哪里去了。
English: By the time of Zhu Xi's rebellion in Beijing, the whip had disappeared.

古文：玉猪子
现代文：玉猪子
English: Gyokuro pork

古文：执金吾陆大钧，从子某，其妻常夜寝中，闻有物啁啾斗声。
现代文：官职为执金吾的陆大钧有个侄子陆某，他的妻子常常于夜间听到有两件东西打斗的声音。
English: Lu Dazhao, who holds the official post of Kingu, has a nephew named Lu. His wife often hears the sounds of two things fighting at night.

古文：既觉，於枕下揽之，得二物，遽以火照，皆白玉猪子也。
现代文：一天早晨醒来，在枕边摸到两个东西，急忙点灯一照，原来是两只玉雕的小猪。
English: One morning I woke up and felt two things on my pillow. I quickly turned on the light. It turned out to be two little pigs carved from jade.

古文：大数寸，状甚精妙。
现代文：小猪的大小有几寸长，形状特别精妙。
English: The piglet is a few inches long and has a particularly delicate shape.

古文：置之枕中而宝之。
现代文：她把它们当成宝贝放在枕头里珍藏。
English: She treasures them like treasures in her pillow.

古文：自此财货日增，家转蕃衍，有求必遂，名位迁腾。
现代文：从此，这一家的钱财一天比一天增多，家境繁盛起来，做什么事都成功，名誉地位日见显赫。
English: From then on, the family's wealth increased day by day, the family flourished, everything they did was successful, and their reputation became more and more prominent.

古文：如此二十年。
现代文：这样过了二十年。
English: This went on for twenty years.

古文：一夕忽失所在，而陆氏亦不昌矣。
现代文：有天夜里忽然不见了玉雕小猪，陆家也就渐渐不如从前昌盛了。
English: One night, the little pig with the jade carving suddenly disappeared, and the Lu family gradually became less prosperous.

