古文：魏收，字伯起，小字佛助，巨鹿下曲阳人也。
现代文：魏收，字伯起，小字佛助，巨鹿下曲阳人氏。
English: Wei collection, word Boqi, small word Bussu, giant deer down the Yangren.

古文：曾祖缉，祖韶。
现代文：曾祖名缉，祖父名韶。
English: His great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather.

古文：父子建，字敬忠，赠仪同、定州刺史。
现代文：父子建，字敬忠，赠仪同、定州刺史。
English: Built by father and son, the characters "Jingzhong" (敬忠) and "Zhongyi" (贈儀同) and "Jingzhou" (定州刺史) are engraved.

古文：收年十五，颇已属文。
现代文：收年十五，便会撰著文辞。
English: At the end of the fifteenth year, he will write a speech.

古文：及随父赴边，好习骑射，欲以武艺自达。
现代文：跟随父亲来到边地后，却又喜欢上了骑马射箭，并准备依仗武艺晋升。
English: After following his father to the outlying areas, he developed a liking for horse riding and archery, and was preparing to rise through the ranks of the martial arts.

古文：荥阳郑伯调之曰： 魏郎弄戟多少？ 收惭，遂折节读书。
现代文：荥阳郑伯戏弄说： 魏郎用过了几多戟？ 收惭愧，便改变志向认真读书。
English: Shenyang Zhengbo teased: "How many books did Wei Lang use? He felt ashamed and changed his mind to study hard."

古文：夏月，坐板□，随树阴讽诵，积年，板□为之锐减，而精力不辍。
现代文：夏月，坐板床，随着树荫移动读诵文章，几年下来，板床因此磨损，但精力没有分散。
English: Summer months, sitting on the board bed, moving with the shade of the trees, reading articles. After a few years, the board bed is worn out, but the energy is not dispersed.

古文：以文华显。
现代文：凭借文章的华美而崭露头角。
English: He rose to prominence through the pageantry of his writing.

古文：初除太学博士。
现代文：初授太学博士。
English: He was initially appointed as a Doctor of Science.

古文：及尒朱荣于河阴滥害朝士，收亦在围中，以日晏获免。
现代文：尔朱荣在河阴残害朝士时，收也在被害人之中，由于天晚而幸免于难。
English: When Er Zhu Rong was harming the Asashi in Heyin, Hui was also among the victims, but he was spared due to bad weather.

古文：吏部尚书李神□重收才学，奏授司徒记室参军。
现代文：吏部尚书李神俊看重了收的才学，上奏朝廷，被委任为司徒记室参军。
English: Li Shenjun, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, attached great importance to the ability to learn, appealed to the imperial court, and was appointed to join the army as a clerk.

古文：永安三年，除北主客郎中。
现代文：永安三年，除北主客郎中。
English: In the third year of Emperor Yongan of Xiaozhuang, he served as the guest of the north.

古文：节闵帝立，妙简近侍，诏试收为封禅书，收下笔便就，不立稿草，文将千言，所改无几。
现代文：节闵帝立，拣选近臣，诏收试作《封禅书》，收下笔便成，不打草稿，文近千言，删改极少。
English: When the emperor was enthroned, he selected his closest vassals and ordered them to write "The Sealed Book of Zen," which was completed without any drafts. The text is nearly a thousand words long, with very few deletions and alterations.

古文：时黄门郎贾思同侍立，深奇之，白帝曰： 虽七步之才，无以过此。 迁散骑侍郎，寻□典起居注，并修国史，兼中书侍郎，时年二十六。
现代文：此时黄门郎贾思同侍立帝侧，十分惊奇，禀告说： 虽七步之才，也不能超过此人。 迁散骑侍郎，不久受令掌管起居注，并修国史，兼中书侍郎，当时二十六岁。
English: At this time, Huangmen Lang Jasi, who was also serving the Emperor, was very surprised, and the obituary said: Although he was seven steps ahead, he could not surpass this person. He was 26 years old at the time.

古文：孝武初，又诏收摄本职，文诰填积，事咸称旨。
现代文：孝武初年，又诏收摄本职，文诰堆积，他却处理得颇合皇上意旨。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the imperial court issued an imperial edict ordering Wei Jie to resume his former official position. The imperial court had accumulated a lot of paperwork, and Wei Jie dealt with it one by one, so that everything could satisfy Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：黄门郎崔□从齐神武入朝，熏灼于世，收初不诣门。
现代文：黄门郎崔随从齐神武帝入朝，傲气逼人，收起初没有登门拜访。
English: Huangmen Lang Cui followed Emperor Qishenwu into the imperial court. He was arrogant and did not visit the emperor at first.

古文：□为帝登阼赦，云 朕托体孝文 ，收嗤其率直。
现代文：崔为帝登基作赦，称 朕托体孝文 ，收嗤笑他率直。
English: Cui made a pardon for the emperor's enthronement, saying "I am a filial son," and laughed at his frankness.

古文：正员郎李慎以告之，□深愤忌。
现代文：正员郎李慎将此事向作了报告，极其忌恨。
English: Li Shin, the chief steward, reported the matter to the emperor, which was extremely regrettable.

古文：时节闵帝殂，令收为诏。
现代文：时节闵帝驾崩，令收为诏。
English: At this time, Emperor Jiechi had already passed away, and the imperial court ordered Wei Wei to draft the edict.

古文：□乃宣言：收普泰世出入帏幄，一日造诏，优为词旨，然则义旗之士尽为逆人；又收父老，合解官归侍。
现代文：崔便公开讲：魏收普泰年间出入帏幄，一日撰诏，美饰词藻，可是义旗之士全成了叛逆之徒；又收的父亲老迈，当辞官回家服侍。
English: Cui then publicly said: Wei Jie, during the years of Putai, went in and out of the imperial residences, wrote an edict a day, and embellished words and phrases, but the men of the banner of righteousness all became traitors; and Jie's father, an old man, served as a dictionary officer when he came home.

古文：南台将加弹劾，赖尚书辛雄为言于中尉綦□，乃解。
现代文：南台将给以弹劾。幸亏尚书辛雄为他向中尉綦俊游说，才免于惩罚。
English: Thanks to Shang Shuxu's hard work in lobbying for him to be released from punishment, he was able to avoid punishment.

古文：收有贱生弟仲同，先未齿录，因此怖惧，上籍，遣还乡扶侍。
现代文：收有贱生的弟弟仲同，先前没有登记，因而怖惧，上户籍后，遣送回乡侍奉老父。
English: Wei collected a younger brother, Wei Zhongtong, who had not been included before, so he was very afraid. After registration, he was sent back to the countryside.

古文：孝武尝大发士卒，狩于嵩少之南旬有六日。
现代文：孝武曾大发士卒，在嵩山之南打了半个多月的猎。
English: Xiaowu was a college graduate and had been hunting in the south of Songshan for more than half a month.

古文：时天寒，朝野嗟怨。
现代文：那时天气寒冷，朝野怨恨。
English: At that time, the weather was cold and there was a lot of resentment between the emperor and the people.

古文：帝与从官及诸妃主，奇伎异饰，多非礼度。
现代文：帝与从官及诸妃公主，奇伎异饰，不合礼数。
English: The emperor, his attendants, and princesses, all adorned in strange attire, do not match the number of rites.

古文：收欲言则惧，欲默不能已，乃上南狩赋以讽焉，时年二十七，虽富言淫丽，而终归雅正。
现代文：收想进谏但很害怕，想保持沉默却又忍不住，于是便上《南狩赋》以行劝谏，时年二十七，虽言辞淫丽，而终归雅正。
English: He was 27 years old at the time, and although his words were lewd, he eventually returned to his senses.

古文：帝手诏报焉，甚见褒美。
现代文：帝亲手为诏回报，极其褒美。
English: Emperor Xiaowu personally approved the reading of the edict with his own handwriting, and received a great deal of praise.

古文：郑伯谓曰： 卿不遇老夫，犹应逐兔。 
现代文：郑伯对魏收说： 你若没有遇见老夫，眼下还在追逐兔子吧？ 
English: Zheng Bo said to Wei Wei: If you haven't met your husband, are you still chasing rabbits?

古文：初神武固让天柱大将军，魏帝□收为诏，令遂所请。
现代文：当初神武坚决推辞天柱大将军之职，魏帝令收作诏，同意神武的请求。
English: At first, Shenwu resolutely declined the post of Tianzhu Grand General, and Emperor Wei issued an edict accepting Shenwu's request.

古文：欲加相国，问品秩，收以实对，帝遂止。
现代文：欲加神武相国，问品秩，收以实情回答，帝遂止。
English: If you want to be promoted to a higher rank, ask for a higher rank, get a truthful answer, the emperor will stop you.

古文：收既未测主相之意，以前事不安，求解，诏许焉。
现代文：收不知主相之意何在，加之前事造成的恐惧，请求辞职，诏许可。
English: I don't know what the prime minister's intention was, but in addition to the fear caused by the previous incident, I asked for his resignation and got his permission.

古文：久之，除帝兄子广平王赞开府从事中郎，收不敢辞，乃为庭竹赋以致己意。
现代文：很长时间，才任帝兄之子广平王赞的开府从事中郎，收不敢推辞，乃撰《庭竹赋》以表白己意。
English: It took him a long time to appoint the son of his elder brother, Guangping Wangzan, as the middle-ranking official in Kaifu. He did not dare to refuse, but wrote "Tiwatakefu" to express his will.

古文：寻兼中书舍人，与济阴温子升、河间邢子才齐誉，世号三才。
现代文：很快就兼任了中书舍人，与济阴人温子升、河间人邢子才齐名，世称 三才 。
English: Soon, he also served as the person in charge of the Chinese calligraphy school. He was as famous as the Jilin people's Wanzi Sheng and the Kawama people's Shanzi Cai, and was known as the Three Cai.

古文：时孝武猜忌神武，内有间隙，收遂以疾固辞而免。
现代文：时孝武疑忌神武，两人矛盾较多，收因此托病辞官才获批准。
English: When Xiaowu suspected Shenwu, the two of them had more conflicts, which is why the adoption of a sick leave was approved.

古文：其舅崔孝芬怪而问之，收曰： 惧有晋阳之甲。 寻而神武南上，帝西入关。
现代文：其舅崔孝芬感到不好理解，质问他，收说： 害怕晋阳甲士。 不久神武南下，帝西入关。
English: His uncle Cui Xiaofen felt hard to understand, questioned him, and concluded: Afraid of Jinyang Jia Shi. Soon, Shenwu went south, and Dixi entered the customs.

古文：收兼通直散骑常侍，副王昕使梁，昕风流文辩，收辞藻富逸，梁主及其□臣咸加敬异。
现代文：收兼通直散骑常侍，作为王昕的副使出使梁朝，昕风流文辩，收辞藻富丽，梁主及其群臣均加敬异。
English: Liang Chao, who was the deputy envoy of Wang Xi, was a frequent attendant of the imperial conclave and the imperial cavalry. Liang Chao was a fluent and eloquent speaker, and his speeches were well-received. Liang Shuzhong and his retainers all held him in high esteem.

古文：先是南北初和，李谐、卢元明首通使命，二人才器，并为邻国所重。
现代文：先是南北刚刚和好，李谐、卢元明首通使命，二人才器，并为邻国推崇。
English: First, North and South Korea have just been reconciled, and Li Jinyi and Lu Yuanming are the first to pass the mission, the two talents and tools, and are respected by the neighboring countries.

古文：至此，梁主称曰： 卢、李命世，王、魏中兴，未知后来复何如耳？ 收在馆，遂买吴婢入馆，其部下有买婢者，收亦唤取，遍行奸秽，梁朝馆司皆为之获罪。
现代文：到这个时候，梁主褒赞道： 卢、李命世，王、魏中兴，不知再来的人情况如何？ 收住旅馆，便买吴婢女进馆，他的部下也有买婢的，收亦唤来，一一奸污，梁朝馆司因此也都获罪。
English: At this time, Master Liang praised: Lu, Li Minshi, Wang, Wei Zhongxing, I don't know what the situation is for those who come back. He closed the hotel and bought Wu handmaidens to enter the hall, and his subordinates also bought handmaids and called them to come in. One by one, they all committed adultery. Liang's librarians were also convicted.

古文：人称其才而鄙其行。
现代文：人们称道收的才气但鄙视他的品行。
English: People praise his talent but despise his character.

古文：在途作聘游赋，辞甚美盛。
现代文：在途中作《聘游赋》，言辞十分华美。
English: On the way, he wrote "Hei You Fu" (聘游赋), and his words were very beautiful.

古文：使还，尚书右仆射高隆之求南货于昕、收，不能如志，遂讽御史中尉高仲密禁止昕、收于其台，久之得释。
现代文：出使梁朝回来，尚书右仆射高隆之向昕、收索求南货，不能如愿，就进行诬告，使御史中尉高仲密将昕、收二人拘禁于御史台，很久才被释放。
English: After returning, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Gao Longzhi asked him and Wang Xi for Nan Liang's goods, but the two did not give them to him. He then asked Wang Shi's lieutenant Gao Zhongmi to detain Wang Xi and Wei Jie in the Imperial Palace. It took a long time before they were released.

古文：及孙搴死，司马子如荐收，召赴晋阳，以为中外府主簿。
现代文：孙搴死后，司马子如推荐魏收，征召到晋阳，任命为中外府主簿。
English: After Sun Yat-sen's death, Sima Ziru recommended Wei Jie to the imperial court. He was summoned to Jinyang to serve as the chief secretary of the central and foreign prefectures.

古文：以受旨乖忤，频被嫌责，加以棰楚，久不得志。
现代文：因受旨乖忤，常遭斥责，并受杖打，所以久不得志。
English: Because he was often rebuked and beaten with a cane, he had no ambition for a long time.

古文：会司马子如奉使霸朝，收假其余光。
现代文：恰逢司马子如奉命出使神武的霸朝，收便沾了他的光。
English: When Sima Zi was ordered to come to the high-spirited imperial court, Wei Hui took advantage of his influence.

古文：子如因宴戏言于神武曰： 魏收天子中书郎，一国大才，愿大王借以颜色。 由此转府属，然未甚优礼。
现代文：宴会上，子如向神武戏言： 魏收是天子的中书郎，一国的大才，希望大王借给他一些机会。 由此转为府属，但还没有得到优待。
English: At the banquet, Ziru joked to Shenwu: Wei Jie is the middle school teacher of the son of heaven, a great talent of the country, I hope the great king will lend him some opportunities. From this, he was transferred to the capital, but has not yet received preferential treatment.

古文：收从叔季景，有才学，历官著名，并在收前，然收常所欺忽。
现代文：收从叔季景，有才学，历官著名，二者均在收上，但常受收欺侮。
English: He learned from his uncle, Ji Jing, who was a talented scholar and had a distinguished career as a government official. Both of them were on the receiving end, but they were often bullied.

古文：季景、收初赴并，顿丘李庶者，故大司农谐之子也，以华辩见称，曾谓收曰： 霸朝便有二魏。 收率尔曰： 以从叔见比，便是耶输之比卿。 耶输者，故尚书令陈留公继伯之子也，愚痴有名，好自入市肆，高价买物，商贾共所嗤玩。
现代文：季景、收初次赶赴并州，顿丘人李庶，前大司农谐的儿子，以善辩被世人称赞，对收说： 霸者的朝堂有二魏。 收轻蔑地说： 将我同从叔对比，便是拿耶输和我相比。 耶输这个人，是故尚书令陈留公继伯的儿子，痴呆有名，喜欢一个人跑到集市上，高价购物，而被行商坐贾们逗笑取乐。
English: When Ji Jing and Hui first arrived in Nianzhou, Li Shizhu, a Dongqiu man and the son of the former head of the peasantry, was praised by the world for his eloquence, and said to Hui: The ruler's palace has two Wei. Hui said contemptuously: Comparing me with my uncle is to compare me with Ya You, the son of the former Shang scholar Chen Liukong's stepbrother, who is famous for his dementia and likes to go to the market alone and shop at high prices, while being made fun of by the hawkers.

古文：收忽季景，故方之，不逊例多如此。
现代文：收瞧不起季景，故有这种比方。如此不逊之例还有很多。
English: There is a reason for this metaphor, as there are many other examples of this.

古文：收本以文才，必望颖脱见知，位既不遂，求修国史。
现代文：收本想凭其文才脱颖而出，但官位不亨通，于是便求修国史。
English: Wei Hui originally had literary talent, hoping that one day he would be able to stand out and be known by the Son of Heaven. However, his official position was not high, and his wish was difficult to fulfill. Therefore, he requested to write a national history.

古文：崔暹为言于文襄曰： 国史事重，公家父子霸王功业，皆须具载，非收不可。 文襄启收兼散骑常侍，修国史。
现代文：为此事，崔暹特意报告文襄说： 国史事大，公家父子的霸王功业，都该详细记载，执掌者非收不可。 文襄启奏授收兼散骑常侍，修国史。
English: For this matter, Cui Siam specifically reported to Wen Xiang that: the history of the country is great, and the tyrannical exploits of the father and son of the prince should be recorded in detail, and the person in charge must receive it. Wen Xiang initiated the awarding of the award and the free-riding attendant, and repaired the national history.

古文：武定二年，除正常侍，领兼中书侍郎，仍修史。
现代文：武定二年，升正常侍，领兼中书侍郎，仍然修史。
English: In the second year of Wuding, he was promoted to a regular attendant, leader and junior secretary, and still studied history.

古文：魏帝宴百僚，问何故名人日，皆莫能知。
现代文：魏帝设宴款待百官，问什么叫 人日 ，众不能答。
English: Emperor Wei held a banquet and entertained hundreds of officials. When asked what "People's Day" was, they couldn't answer.

古文：收对曰： 晋议郎董勋答问礼俗云： 时邢卲亦在侧，甚恧焉。
现代文：收说： 晋议郎董勋《答问礼俗》云： 正月一日为鸡，二日为狗，三日为猪，四日为羊，五日为牛，六日为马，七日为人。  
English: Conclusion: Jinzhe Lang Dongxun's "Answering Questions on Etiquette and Customs" says: On the first day of the first month, it is chicken, on the second day it is dog, on the third day it is pig, on the fourth day it is sheep, on the fifth day it is cow, on the sixth day it is horse, and on the seventh day it is human.

古文：自魏、梁和好，书下纸每云： 想彼境内宁静，此率土安和。 梁后使，其书乃去 彼 字，自称犹着 此 ，欲示无外之意。
现代文：此时邢邵也在旁边，十分地惭愧。自从魏、梁和好之后，书信上常有： 想彼境内宁静，此率土安和。 梁后派使者来魏，其书就去掉了 彼 字，自称还保留着 此 字，想显示无外之意。
English: At this time, Zou Shao was also nearby, very ashamed. Since Wei and Liang were reconciled, the letters often said: "If you want peace in his territory, this is the rate of peace and tranquility." After Liang sent an envoy to Wei, his book removed the word "he" and claimed to still retain this word, wanting to show no other meaning.

古文：收定报书云： 想境内清晏，今万国安和。 梁人复书，依以为体。
现代文：收确定复信，称 想境内清晏，今万国安和 ，梁人回信，以此为本。
English: After receiving a definite reply, saying that he wanted to clean up the country and bring peace to the world, Liang replied to the letter, taking this as the basis.

古文：后神武入朝，静帝授相国，固让，令收为启。
现代文：后神武入朝，静帝授给相国，坚决推辞不受，便请收作启。
English: Later, Emperor Shenwu sent Gao Huan back to the imperial court, and Emperor Xiaozhing ordered him to become a consort of the emperor. Gao Huan resolutely refused and let Wei collect him to write a musical composition.

古文：启成呈上，文襄时侍侧，神武指收曰： 此人当复为崔光。 四年，神武于西门豹祠宴集，谓司马子如曰： 魏收为史官，书吾等善恶，闻北伐时，诸贵常饷史官饮食，司马仆射颇曾饷不？ 因共大笑。
现代文：启写好后呈送给了皇上，此时文襄站在帝的身边，神武指着收对文襄说： 此人当是第二个崔光。 四年，神武在西门豹祠集宴，对司马子如说： 魏收为史官，记载我们的善与恶，听说北伐时，各位豪贵们常常送给史官好吃的东西，司马仆射送过没有？ 于是一同大笑。
English: After the opening was written, it was presented to the emperor. At this time, Wenxiang stood by the emperor's side. Shenwu pointed to Hui and said to Wenxiang: This person should be the second Cui Guang. In four years, Shenwu held a banquet at the West Gate Leopard's Shrine, and said to Sima Zi: Wei Hui was a historian, recording our good and evil. I heard that during the Northern Expedition, dignitaries often sent delicious things to historians. Has Sima Minion ever sent them? So they laughed together.

古文：仍谓收曰： 卿勿见元康等在吾目下趋走，谓吾以为勤劳，我后世身名在卿手，勿谓我不知。 寻加兼著作郎。
现代文：又转向收说： 你不要看元康他们在我眼皮底下理事，就生嫉妒，我后世的声名执掌在你的手中，不要说我不知晓。 不久加兼著作郎。
English: He also turned to the emperor and said, "Don't look at Yuan Kang, they became the director right under my nose, and you'll get jealous. My reputation in the future is in your hands, don't say I don't know about it. I'll soon be promoted to the post of writer."

古文：收昔在洛京，轻薄尤甚，人号云 魏收惊蛱蝶 。
现代文：往昔收在洛阳，十分轻薄，人称 魏收惊蛱蝶 。
English: In the past, it was collected in Luoyang. It was very light and thin, and was known as the "Wei Collection" butterfly.

古文：文襄曾游东山，令给事黄门侍郎颢等宴。
现代文：文襄有次游玩东山，令给事黄门侍郎颢等人侍宴。
English: Wen Xiang once visited Dongshan and gave a banquet to Huangmen's chamberlains and others.

古文：文襄曰： 魏收恃才无宜适，须出其短。 往复数番，收忽大唱曰： 杨遵彦理屈已倒。 愔从容曰： 我绰有余暇，山立不动，若遇当涂，恐翩翩遂逝。 当涂者，魏；翩翩者，蛱蝶也。
现代文：文襄说： 魏收恃才傲物，应该揭发他的短处。 并且重复了数遍，收突然大声唱道： 杨遵彦理屈已倒。 遵彦不慌不忙地说： 我绰有余裕，山一样的立着不动，如果遇见当涂，大概就会翩翩飞去。 当涂是魏；翩翩者，是蛱蝶。
English: Wen Xiang said: Wei Zhenyu is a proud person, and his shortcomings should be exposed. And after repeating several times, Wei suddenly sang out loud: Yang Zunyan's logic has fallen. Zunyan said unhurriedly: I have more leeway, I stand still like a mountain, if I meet Dang Tuo, I will probably fly away. Dang Tuo is Wei; Dang Dang Dang is a butterfly.

古文：文襄先知之，大笑称善。
现代文：文襄最先明白遵彦话语的含义，大笑着称好。
English: Gao Cheng first heard the meaning of the words, laughed loudly and praised him for speaking well.

古文：文襄又曰： 向语犹微，宜更指斥。 愔应声曰： 魏收在并作一篇诗，对□读讫，云：远近所知，非敢妄语。 文襄喜曰： 我亦先闻。 □人皆笑。
现代文：文襄又说： 刚才的话还不算什么，当再指斥。 遵彦应声而道： 魏收在并州时作有一首诗，对众朗读完后，说： 从叔季景出六百斛米请人，也闹不清我的诗意。 众人所知，不敢妄语。 文襄兴奋地说： 先前我也听说过的。 众人都笑。
English: Wen Xiang also said, "What you said just now is nothing, it should be pointed out again." Zun Yan replied, "Wei Hui composed a poem when he annexed the state, and after reading it aloud to everyone, he said, "From Uncle Ji Jing, I offer you six hundred glutinous rice, but people can't understand my poetry. Everyone knows it, so don't dare to say it." Wen Xiang said excitedly, "I've heard it before, too." Everyone laughed.

古文：收虽自申雪，不复抗拒，终身病之。
现代文：收虽然为自己辩护，不再还击，但将此事终身记在了心上。
English: Although Wei Jie defended himself, he no longer denied the incident. He had been plagued by it all his life.

古文：侯景叛入梁，寇南境，文襄时在晋阳，令收为檄五十余纸，不日而就。
现代文：侯景叛变逃往梁，寇掠魏南部边境，文襄时在晋阳，令收作檄文，不到一天时间，就写了五十多张纸。
English: Hou Jing fled to Liang and plundered the southern border of Wei. When Wen Xiang was in Jinyang, he was ordered to collect and write more than 50 pieces of paper in less than a day.

古文：又檄梁朝，令送侯景，初夜执笔，三更便成，文过七纸。
现代文：又晓喻梁朝，令其送还侯景，天黑时动笔，不到三更就写好了，共有七页多纸。
English: He also knew Liang Chao and sent him back to Houjing. He started to write when it was dark, and finished it in less than three hours, with a total of more than seven pages.

古文：文襄善之。
现代文：文襄很是欣赏。
English: Takasumi admires him very much.

古文：魏帝曾季秋大射，普令赋诗，收诗末云： 尺书征建邺，折简召长安。 文襄壮之，顾诸人曰： 在朝今有魏收，便是国之光采，雅俗文墨，通达纵横。
现代文：魏帝曾于晚秋举行大射礼，令百官赋诗，收的诗末这样说： 尺书征建业，折简召长安。 文襄赞赏他，回头对人讲： 本朝今有魏收，便是国家的光彩，文墨雅俗，通达纵横。
English: Emperor Wei once held a grand ceremony in the late autumn, and ordered all the officials to compose a poem, and at the end of the poem, he said: "Shakusho collected money for construction, and Orizan collected money for Chang'an." Wen Xiang praised him, and turned to the people and said: "This morning, there is a Wei collection, which is the glory of the country, the style is elegant, and it is accessible to all.

古文：我亦使子才、子升时有所作，至于词气，并不及之。
现代文：我也让子才、子升写过檄文之类的东西，但在词气方面，却不能同日而语。
English: I have also had Zizai and Zisheng write such things as poems, but in terms of tone, they cannot be the same.

古文：吾或意有所怀，忘而不语，语而不尽，意有未及，收呈草皆以周悉，此亦难有。 又□兼主客郎接梁使谢珽、徐陵。
现代文：我意有所怀，忘了，也讲不出来了，或者讲出来了，但表达不清楚，收写出来后，将我的想法表达得十分周全、完整，这是难得的。 文襄又让收兼主客郎接待梁朝使者谢、徐陵。
English: I had something in mind, forgot it, and couldn't get it out, or I got it out, but I couldn't express it clearly, and after writing it down, I expressed my thoughts very thoroughly and completely, which is rare.Wen Xiang also let the concierge and host host receive Liang Dynasty emissaries Xie and Xu Ling.

古文：侯景既陷梁，梁鄱阳王范时为合州刺史，文襄□收以书喻之。
现代文：侯景攻克建康，此时梁鄱阳王范为合州刺史，文襄令收写信劝谕。
English: Hou Jing conquered Jiankang, at this time, Liang Biyang Wang Fan was the governor of Hezhou, and Wen Xiang ordered to receive letters of advice.

古文：范得书，仍率部伍西上，刺史崔圣念入据其城。
现代文：范收到信后，便率领部众西上，魏刺史崔圣念趁机占据了合州城。
English: After Fan received the letter, he led the troops westward, and Wei Zhi Shi Cui Shengnian took advantage of the opportunity to occupy Hezhou City.

古文：文襄谓收曰： 今定一州，卿有其力，犹恨未□耳。 
现代文：文襄对收说： 今定一州，你有大力，但我还遗憾 尺书征建邺 的目标没有实现。 
English: Wen Xiang said to him: Now Ding Yizhou, you have great power, but I still regret that the goal of collecting and building a minarets has not been achieved.

古文：文襄崩，文宣如晋阳，令与黄门郎崔季舒、高德正，吏部郎中尉瑾于北第掌机密。
现代文：文襄驾崩，文宣前往晋阳，令魏收与黄门郎崔季舒、高德正，吏部郎中尉瑾在北第掌管机密。
English: Wen Xiang passed away, Wen Xuan went to Jinyang, leaving Wei Jie, Huangmen Lang, Cui Jishu, Gao Dezheng, and Li Bu Lang, Lieutenant Zou in charge of secrets in the north.

古文：转秘书监，兼著作郎，又除定州大中正。
现代文：转秘书监，兼著作郎，又任定州大中正。
English: Wei Jie was also transferred to the post of secretary supervisor, author's assistant, and vice-president of Dingzhou University.

古文：时齐将受禅，杨愔奏收置之别馆，令撰禅代诏册诸文，遣徐之才守门不听出。
现代文：时北齐将受东魏禅，杨遵彦请求将收安置在别馆，让他撰写禅代诏册诸文，派徐之才把守门户，不准其出入。
English: At that time, Bei Qi would be accepted by the East Wei Zen, and Yang Zunyan requested that he be placed in another hall, let him write the texts of the Zen Dynasty, and sent Xu Zhicai to guard the portal and not allow him to enter.

古文：天保元年，除中书令，仍兼著作郎，封富平县子。
现代文：天保元年，授中书令，仍兼著作郎，封富平县子。
English: In the first year of the Northern Qi era, he was appointed as the middle secretary, still concurrently serving as the scribe, and was named the son of Fuping County.

古文：二年，诏撰魏史。
现代文：二年，受诏撰述魏史。
English: Two years later, the imperial court ordered him to write "The History of Wei."

古文：四年，除魏尹，故优以禄力，专在史阁，不知郡事。
现代文：四年，拜魏尹，并以优厚俸禄，使其专心史阁，而且还不让主持州郡事务。
English: For four years, he was Wei Yin, so he gave him a generous salary, let him write exclusively in the history museum, and did not participate in other affairs.

古文：初帝令□臣各言尔志，收曰： 臣愿得直笔东观，早成魏书。 故帝使收专其任。
现代文：一次，帝令群臣谈谈各自的志向，收说： 我希望能在东观秉笔直书，早日成就《魏书》。 因此帝让收专力此事。
English: On one occasion, the emperor ordered his ministers to talk about their respective ambitions and concluded: I hope to be able to write straightforwardly in Dongguan and achieve the "Weishu" as soon as possible. Therefore, the emperor let the collection concentrate on this matter.

古文：又诏平原王高隆之总监之，署名而已。
现代文：又诏平原王高隆之为总监理，当然，他不过是挂名而已。
English: He also issued an edict ordering the Plain King Gaolong to be in charge of supervising the revision of the history book, but it was just a name.

古文：帝□收曰： 好直笔，我终不作魏太武诛史官。 始魏初邓彦海撰代记十余卷，其后崔浩典史，游雅、高允、程骏、李彪、崔光、李琰之徒世修其业。
现代文：帝敕令收说： 一定要直笔，我不会做出魏太武帝诛杀史官这类事的。 魏初邓彦海撰《代记》十多卷，之后崔浩主持史馆工作，游雅、高允、程骏、李彪、崔光、李琰等人世为此业。
English: The imperial edict concluded: "Be sure to write directly, I will not do such things as Wei Taiwu Emperor's assassination of historians." At the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, Deng Yanhai compiled more than ten volumes of "Diary," after which Cui Hao presided over the work of the history museum, and Youya, Gao Yun, Cheng Yu, Li Biao, Cui Guang, Li Xi and others worked for this industry.

古文：浩为编年体，彪始分作纪、表、志、传，书犹未出。
现代文：崔浩撰编年体，李彪开始分撰纪、表、志、传，当然书还没有写出来。
English: Cui Hao revised the chronicle, Li Biao was assigned to revise the discipline, table, history, and biography, but the book was not written.

古文：宣武时，命邢峦追撰孝文起居注，书至太和十四年，又命崔鸿、王遵业补续焉。
现代文：宣武帝时，命令邢峦追记《孝文起居注》，时间截止于太和十四年，又让崔鸿、王遵业续补。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuanwu, he ordered Zhai to write down the "Note on the Beginning and End of Filial Piety," which was completed in the 14th year of the Taihe era, and also asked Cui Hong and Wang Zunye to supplement it.

古文：下讫孝明，事甚委悉。
现代文：下至孝明帝，记载都十分的详尽。
English: Down to Emperor Xiaoming, the records are very detailed.

古文：济阴王晖业撰辨宗室录三十卷。
现代文：济阴王晖业撰《辨宗室录》三十卷。
English: Wang Yuanjun of Jilin Province wrote 30 volumes of "Banshu Shuroku."

古文：收于是部通直常侍房延佑、司空司马辛元植、国子博士刁柔、裴昂之、尚书郎高孝干专总斟酌，以成魏书。
现代文：这样，魏收便安排通直常侍房延佑、司空司马辛元植、国子博士刁柔、裴昂之、尚书郎高孝干广泛搜集资料并行取舍斟酌，以成《魏书》。
English: In this way, Wei Zhe arranged for Zong Zhi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi, Zong Zi

古文：辨定名称，随条甄举，又搜采亡遗，缀续后事，备一代史籍，表而上闻之。
现代文：收辨定名称，随条甄举，又搜采亡遗，缀续后事，备一代史籍，向皇帝上表报告。
English: Collect the distinguished names, enumerate them according to the article, collect the remains of the dead, follow up the aftermath, prepare a generation of historical records, and report to the emperor.

古文：勒成一代大典：凡十二纪，九十二列传，合一百一十卷。
现代文：撰成一代大典，计十二纪，九十二列传，合一百一十卷。
English: The scale of this important classic of this generation is: a total of twelve periods, ninety-two series of biographies, a total of one hundred and ten volumes.

古文：五年三月奏上之。
现代文：天保五年三月奏上。
English: It was first performed in March of the fifth year of the Tenpo era.

古文：秋，除梁州刺史。
现代文：秋，授梁州刺史。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wei Jie was appointed as the chief historian of Liangzhou.

古文：收以志未成，奏请终业，许之。
现代文：收以《魏书》志未撰成，奏请修志，朝廷同意。
English: Since Wei Jie had not finished the whole book, he asked the court to continue the work, and the court agreed.

古文：十一月，复奏十志：天象四卷，地形三卷，律历二卷，礼乐四卷，食货一卷，刑罚一卷，灵征二卷，官氏二卷，释老一卷，凡二十卷，续于纪传，合一百三十卷，分为十二帙。
现代文：十一月，复奏十志：《天象》四卷，《地形》三卷，《律历》二卷，《礼乐》四卷，《食货》一卷，《刑罚》一卷，《灵征》二卷，《官氏》二卷，《释老》一卷，共二十卷，连前纪传，合为一百三十卷，分为十二帙。
English: In November, the complex of ten volumes: "Celestial Elephant" four volumes, "Terrain" three volumes, "Ritual Calendar" two volumes, "Ritual Music" four volumes, "Food" one volume, "Punishment" one volume, "Spiritual Sign" two volumes, "Civil Servant" two volumes, "Old Man" one volume, a total of twenty volumes, including the previous chronicles, combined into one hundred and thirty volumes, divided into twelve volumes.

古文：其史三十五例，二十五序，九十四论，前后二表一启焉。
现代文：其史有三十五例，二十五序，九十四论，前后还有二表一启。
English: There are thirty-five cases in its history, twenty-five prefaces, ninety-four treatises, and two tables and an introduction.

古文：所引史官，恐其凌逼，唯取学流先相依附者。
现代文：魏收招引的史官，要么学派相同，要么关系密切，所以对那些有威胁力量的人一概不用。
English: The historians recruited by Wei Zhe are either of the same school or are closely related, so those who have threatening power are not used at all.

古文：房延佑、辛元植、眭仲让虽夙涉朝位，并非史才。
现代文：房延、辛元植、眭仲让虽然很早就入了仕途，但不是史才。
English: Although Fang Yan, Xin Yuan Zhi, and Zou Zhongjan entered the career path very early, they are not historical talents.

古文：刁柔、裴昂之以儒业见知，全不堪编缉。
现代文：刁柔、裴昂之以儒学为世人所知，却不能胜任史书的编辑工作。
English: Gong Rong and Pei Aung are well-known for their Confucianism, but they are not qualified to edit history books.

古文：高孝干以左道求进。
现代文：高孝干用歪门邪道求得的官职。
English: Gao Xiaoxiao used crooked methods to obtain the official post.

古文：修史诸人祖宗姻戚多被书录，饰以美言。
现代文：凡参加修史的，其祖宗姻戚都被收录，而且讲的都是好话。
English: The ancestors, in-laws and relatives of all those who took part in the history-making were recorded, and they all spoke good words.

古文：收性颇急，不甚能平，夙有怨者，多没其善。
现代文：收性格急躁，心胸也不宽广，对有怨恨的人，多没其善、扬其恶。
English: He is quick-tempered, and his heart is not broad. For those who hold grudges, there is little good and much evil.

古文：每言： 何物小子，敢共魏收作色，举之则使上天，按之当使入地。 初收在神武时为太常少卿修国史，得阳休之助，因谢休之曰： 无以谢德，当为卿作佳传。 休之父固，魏世为北平太守，以贪虐为中尉李平所弹获罪，载在魏起居注。
现代文：收常言： 哪家小子，敢向魏收变脸！抬举，可让上天，贬抑，可使入地。 当初收在神武手下任太常少卿修国史，得阳休之的帮助，于是向休之表示谢意，说： 无法感激你的恩德，但我要为你作一佳传。 休之父固，魏代为北平太守，由于贪残暴虐被中尉李平弹劾而受惩处，此事在《魏起居注》中有记载。
English: Confucius often said, "What boy would dare to change his face to the Wei dynasty! If you elevate him, you can raise him to heaven; if you degrade him, you can lower him to the ground." At first, Confucius received help from Yang Xiu, the Taizang Shaoqing (太常少卿) who was in charge of national history under the Shenwu army, so he expressed his gratitude to Xiu and said, "I can't thank you for your kindness, but I want to write a good biography for you." Xiu's father, Gu, who was the governor of Peking in the Wei dynasty, was punished by being impeached by Lieutenant Li

古文：收书云： 固为北平，甚有惠政，坐公事免官。 又云： 李平深相敬重。 尒朱荣于魏为贼，收以高氏出自尒朱，且纳荣子金，故减其恶而增其善，论云： 若修德义之风，则韦、彭、伊、霍夫何足数。 
现代文：但魏收的书却是： 固任北平太守，甚有惠政，因公事犯法，被免官。 又说： 李平极其尊敬推崇阳固。 对于魏来说，尔朱荣是盗贼，收认为高姓出自尔朱，又收受了尔朱荣儿子的贿赂，所以少写其罪恶而增加其善举，他在荣传的论中说： 如果修德义之风的话，豕韦、大彭、伊尹、霍光就不值得一提了。 
English: However, Wei Shu's book is: Gu was appointed as the governor of Peking, had a very favorable policy, and was removed from office for violating the law in public affairs. He also said: Li Ping highly respected and respected Yang Gu. For Wei, Er Zhu Rong was a thief, and Hui thought that the high surname came from Er Zhu, and accepted the bribe of Er Zhu Rong's son, so he wrote less about his sins and increased his good deeds. He said in the theory of honor: If the style of cultivating virtue and righteousness, Wei, Dapeng, Yin, and Huo Guang are not worth mentioning.

古文：时论既言收着史不平，文宣诏收于尚书省与诸家子孙共加论讨，前后投诉百有余人，云 遗其家世职位 ，或云 其家不见记录 ，或云 妄有非毁 。收皆随状答之。
现代文：时论认为收修史不公平。文宣便诏收在尚书省与各家子孙论讨，前后投诉的有一百多人，有的说漏失了家世职位，有的说家史上没有这样的记录，有的说妄加诋毁，收则依照人们的责问分别进行了答复、解释。
English: The Wen Xuan Ben Zhao collection was discussed with the descendants of each family in Shangshu Province. More than 100 people complained, some said that the position of the family was omitted, some said that there was no such record in the history of the family, and some said that it was defamatory. The collection responded and explained separately according to people's questions.

古文：范阳卢斐父同附出族祖玄传下，顿丘李庶家传称其本是梁国蒙人，斐、庶讥议云： 史书不直。 收性急，不胜其愤，启诬其欲加屠害。帝大怒，亲自诘责。
现代文：范阳卢斐父卢同附在族祖卢玄的传后，顿丘李庶家传记他们本是梁国蒙地人，因此斐、庶讥讽说： 史书不直。 魏收性急，听后十分愤慨，上书皇帝诉说诬陷之苦和即将遭受杀戮的情况，帝大怒，亲自诘问。
English: Fan Yang, Lu Fei's father, Lu Tong attached to the lineage of the ancestor Lu Xuan, Dongqiu Li branch family biography, they were originally the Mengdi people of Liang, so Fei and Wei Wei ridiculed: The history book is not straight. Wei Wei was impatient, very indignant after hearing, the emperor complained in the letter about the suffering of the frame-up and the impending killing, the emperor was furious and personally interrogated.

古文：斐曰： 臣父仕魏，位至仪同，功业显著，名闻天下，与收无亲，遂不立传。
现代文：斐说： 我的父亲仕魏，位至仪同，功名显著，名闻天下，同收无亲无邻，所以不被立传。
English: Fei said, "My father was from the Wei Dynasty. He was in the same rank as Ji, and his achievements were outstanding. He was well-known all over the world. He had no relatives or neighbors in Tonghui, so he was not passed down.

古文：博陵崔绰，位止本郡功曹，更无事□，是收外亲，乃为传首。 收曰： 绰虽无位，名义可嘉，所以合传。 帝曰： 卿何由知其好人？ 收曰： 高允曾为绰赞，称有道德。 帝曰： 司空才士，为人作赞，正应称扬。
现代文：博陵人崔绰，官位只不过是本郡的功曹，更是没有什么事迹，但他是收的亲戚，便被置于传首。 收说： 绰虽官位低下，但名义可嘉，合乎立传的要求。 帝说： 你从哪方面知道他是好人？ 收答： 高允曾经为绰写过赞语，称他有道有德。 帝说： 司空是才士，他为人作赞，自然要讲好话，这就像你为人作文章那样，说人好难道都是真话？ 
English: Cui Qiao, a resident of Boling, was only a meritorious person in the county, and had no achievements, but he was a relative of Hui, so he was placed at the head of the list. Hui said: Although Qiao's official rank is low, his name is commendable, which is in line with the requirements of the legend. The emperor said: How do you know that he is a good person? Hui replied: Gao Yun once wrote a praise for Qiao, saying that he has virtue. The emperor said: Siku is a talented person, he praises people, naturally he has to say good things, this is like you writing an article for people

古文：亦如卿为人作文章，道其好者岂能皆实？ 收无以对，战栗而已。
现代文：收无言再对，战栗不止。因帝很早就推赏收的文才，故没有加罪。
English: Received speechless and then right, shuddering more and more. Because the emperor had long ago commended the literary talent of Received, there was no additional crime.

古文：但帝先重收才，不欲加罪。时太原王松年亦谤史，及斐、庶并获罪，各被鞭配甲坊，或因以致死，卢思道亦抵罪。
现代文：这时太原人王松年也毁谤魏收，当斐、庶均获罪，并遭鞭打、罚配甲坊，有人因此事而被处死时，卢思道也受到了惩处。
English: At this time, Wang Songnian, a Taiyuan person, also slandered Wei Jie, and both Dang Fei and Shao were convicted, and were whipped and fined. When someone was executed for this matter, Lu Si Dao was also punished.

古文：然犹以□口沸腾，□魏史且勿施行，令□官博议。听有家事者入署，不实者陈牒。
现代文：不过，人们依然还是不满，这样，帝便下令魏史暂不发行，敕百官博议，还允许有疑问者入署，不实者陈牒。
English: However, people were still dissatisfied, so the emperor ordered Wei Shi not to be issued for the time being, and allowed hundreds of officials to discuss it. He also allowed those who had doubts to sign up, and those who were untruthful.

古文：于是□口諠然，号为 秽史 ，投牒者相次，收无以抗之。
现代文：虽然如此，人们还是议论纷纷，称魏史为 秽史 ，投诉者一个接一个，收则无可奈何。
English: Despite this, people are still talking about it, calling Wei history "obscene history," and the complainants are one after another, and there is nothing to be done.

古文：时左仆射杨愔、右仆射高德正二人势倾朝野，与收皆亲，收遂为其家并作传。
现代文：左仆射杨忄音、右仆射高德政两人权倾朝野，同收关系密切，收便为这两家立传。
English: The left-hand retainer, Yang Xuanying, and the right-hand retainer, Gao Dezheng, both of whom were loyal to the imperial court, had a close relationship with Hui, and it was Hui who established the lineage of the two families.

古文：二人不欲言史不实，抑塞诉辞，终文宣世更不重论。
现代文：二人不让人们说史不实，就阻碍诉讼，一直到文宣帝去世，才算结束。
English: In order to prevent people from saying that the history is untrue, the two hindered the lawsuit, and it was not over until the death of Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：又尚书陆操尝谓愔曰： 魏收魏书可谓博物宏才，有大功于魏室。 愔谓收曰： 此谓不刊之书，传之万古。
现代文：尚书陆操曾对杨忄音说： 魏收的《魏书》可谓博物宏才，对魏室立下了汗马功劳。 对收说： 这是不刊之书，当会传之万古。
English: Shang Shul Lu once said to Yang Xuanyin: Wei Shu's "Weishu" can be described as a magnificent natural history, and he has made great contributions to the Wei dynasty. He said to Wei Shu: This is an unpublished book, and it will be passed down for thousands of years.

古文：但恨论及诸家枝叶亲姻，过为繁碎，与旧史体例不同耳。 收曰： 往因中原丧乱，人士谱牒，遗逸略尽，是以具书其支流。
现代文：遗憾的是论及诸家枝叶姻亲，过于繁杂，与旧史体例不同罢了。 收说： 以往由于中原丧乱，各家谱牒，遗逸殆尽，所以详细地记录了那些支流。
English: Regrettably, it is too complicated to discuss the branches and branches of various families, which is different from the old historical examples.Conclusion: In the past, due to the Central Plains War, all family trees were lost, so those tributaries were recorded in detail.

古文：望公观过知仁，以免尤责。 
现代文：望你观过知仁，不要对我特别指责。 
English: I hope you've seen Tomohito, but don't blame me.

古文：八年夏，除太子少傅、监国史，复参议律令。
现代文：八年夏，拜太子少傅，监修国史，再参议制定律令。
English: In the summer of the eighth year, the young tutor of the crown prince, supervised the national history, and then participated in the formulation of the ritsuryo.

古文：三台成，文宣曰： 台成须有赋。 愔先以告收，收上皇居新殿台赋，其文甚壮丽。
现代文：三台建成，文宣说： 台成应该有赋。 杨忄音提前告诉了魏收，收上《皇居新殿台赋》，其文非常的壮丽。
English: After the completion of the three stages, Wen Xuan said: Taicheng should have Fu. Yang Xuanyin told Wei Ji in advance and closed the "Imperial Palace New Hall Stage Fu," which was very magnificent.

古文：时所作者，自邢卲已下咸不逮焉。
现代文：他人所作，从邢邵开始都赶不上。
English: Other people's work can't keep up with it from the beginning.

古文：收上赋前数日乃告卲。
现代文：收上赋前几天才告知邢邵，邵后来对人讲： 收很讨厌，不早点给我讲。 
English: A few days before the confiscation, Zou Shao was told about the confiscation. Shao later told people: "The confiscation is very unpleasant, don't tell me about it earlier."

古文：卲后告人曰： 收甚恶人，不早言之。 帝曾游东山，□收作诏，宣扬威德，譬喻关西，俄顷而讫，词理宏壮。
现代文：帝曾出游东山，敕收作诏，宣扬威德，晓喻西魏，很快写成，且词理极壮。
English: The emperor once traveled to Dongshan, collected and compiled the edict, preached virtue, and knew the Western Wei Dynasty. It was written quickly, and the words were very strong.

古文：帝对百僚大嗟赏之。
现代文：帝当着百官的面，大加赞叹。
English: The emperor, in front of hundreds of officials, was greatly impressed.

古文：仍兼太子詹事。
现代文：兼太子詹事。
English: He is still the crown prince.

古文：收娶其舅女，崔昂之妹，产一女，无子。
现代文：收娶其舅舅之女，即崔昂的妹妹，育有一女，无子。
English: Wei married his uncle's daughter, Choi Aung's sister, and had a daughter, but no son.

古文：魏太常刘芳孙女，中书郎崔肇师女，夫家坐事，帝并赐收为妻，时人比之贾充置左右夫人。
现代文：魏太常刘芳的孙女，中书郎崔肇师的女儿，均因夫家犯罪受株连，帝都赏赐给收做妾，时人拿他与贾充置左右夫人相比。
English: Wei Taizang, Liu Fang's granddaughter, and the daughter of the Chinese scholar Cui Zhaojun, were all punished for their husbands' crimes, and the emperor rewarded them with concubines. At the time, people compared him to Jia Chongzhi's left and right wives.

古文：然无子。
现代文：但两妾都没有生养儿子。
English: However, he did not have a son in the end.

古文：后病甚，恐身后嫡媵不平，乃放二姬。
现代文：收后来病重的时候，担心自己死后嫡妾不谐，就放走了刘、崔二妾。
English: When he was seriously ill after the collection, he was worried that his concubine would not be happy after his death, so he released Liu and Cui's two concubines.

古文：及疾瘳追忆，作怀离赋以申意。
现代文：病愈后回忆此事，作《怀离赋》表述自己的心意。
English: After he recovered from the illness, he recalled the incident and expressed his thoughts in "Hui Yifu."

古文：文宣每以酣宴之次，云： 太子性懦，宗社事重，终当传位常山。 收谓杨愔曰： 古人云，太子国之根本，不可动摇。
现代文：文宣每当酒足饭饱之后，说： 太子懦弱，社稷事重，当传位于常山。 收对杨说： 古人云，太子为国家的根本，是不能动摇的。
English: Whenever Wen Xuan had had enough to eat and drink, he would say, "The crown prince is weak and the social problems are serious. It is rumored that he is in Changshan." Concluding, he said to Yang, "The crown prince is the foundation of the country and cannot be shaken.

古文：至尊三爵后，每言传位常山，令臣下疑贰。
现代文：至尊三杯酒下肚，就说传位给常山，这将会使臣下疑贰。
English: After Emperor Wenxuan had drunk a few glasses of wine, he often said that he wanted to pass the throne to King Changshan, which made us courtiers have doubts.

古文：若实，便须决行。
现代文：如果是真的，应该快些行动。
English: If it's true, we should act quickly.

古文：此言非戏。
现代文：这绝对不是戏言。
English: This is definitely not a joke.

古文：魏收既忝师傅，正当守之以死，但恐国家不安。 愔以收言白于帝，自此便止。帝数宴喜，收每预侍从。
现代文：魏收既然是师傅，就应该保护好太子，哪怕是杀了头，我只是担心国家不得安宁。 将收讲的话向帝作了报告，从此之后，帝就不讲这样的话了。
English: Since Wei Hui was the master, he should have protected the prince, even if he had killed him, I was only worried that the country would not have peace. I reported Wei Hui's words to the emperor, and from then on, the emperor would not speak such words.

古文：皇太子之纳郑良娣也，有司备设牢馔，帝既酣饮，起而自毁覆之。
现代文：帝多次设宴，收常侍从在侧。皇太子纳郑良娣为妃，有司备置牢馔，帝猛食酣饮后，站起来掀翻了桌子。
English: The emperor held many banquets, with his regular attendants at his side. The crown prince, Na Zhengliang, was the prince's wife, and he had a steward to put the prisoners in chains. After the emperor had eaten and drunk a lot, he stood up and overturned the table.

古文：仍诏收曰： 知我意不？ 收曰： 臣愚谓良娣既东宫之妾，理不须牢，仰惟圣怀，缘此毁去。 帝大笑，握收手曰： 卿知我意。 安德王延宗纳赵郡李祖收女为妃，后帝幸李宅宴，而妃母宋氏荐二石榴于帝前。
现代文：继而问收说： 明白我的意思吗？ 收说： 我以为良娣既然是东宫之妃，按理酒桌上不应有牛、羊等，陛下也是这样想的，所以掀翻了桌子。 帝大笑，握着收的手说： 只有你晓得我的心思。 安德王延宗纳赵郡李祖收的女儿为妃，后帝前往李宅赴宴，妃的母亲将两颗石榴贡献在帝的面前。
English: Then he asked her, "Do you understand what I mean?" She said, "I thought that since Liang Ye is the princess of the East Palace, there should not be cattle, sheep, etc. on the wine table according to the rules, and your majesty also thought so, so he overturned the table." The emperor laughed loudly and, holding her hand, said, "Only you know my thoughts." The daughter of King of Ande, Yang Zongna of Zhao County, Li Zu Jie, was the princess, the emperor went to Li's house for a banquet, and the mother of the princess offered two pomegranates in front of the emperor.

古文：问诸人莫知其意，帝投之。
现代文：问侍从，均不解其意，帝扔掉了石榴。
English: The Emperor threw away the pomegranate, to the bewilderment of his attendants.

古文：收曰： 石榴房中多子，王新婚，妃母欲子孙□多。 帝大喜，诏收 卿还将来 ，仍赐收美锦二疋。
现代文：收说： 石榴房中多子，王刚结婚，妃母希望女儿有众多的子孙。 帝十分高兴，叫收赶快把石榴捡回来，还赐收美锦二匹。
English: Rui said, "There are many sons in the pomegranate house, Wang Gang is married, and the queen mother hopes that her daughter will have many children and grandchildren. The emperor was very happy, and told Rui to quickly pick up the pomegranate, and also gave Rui Meijin two horses.

古文：十年，除仪同三司。
现代文：十年，拜仪同三司。
English: In the tenth year of the Tenpo era, the Imperial Court appointed him as the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：帝在宴席，口□以为中书监，命中书郎李愔于树下造诏。
现代文：帝在酒席上，口敕收为中书令，叫中书郎李在树下造诏。
English: At the banquet, the emperor closed his mouth for the imperial edict and asked the imperial scribe Li to make the edict under the tree.

古文：愔以收一代盛才，难于率尔，久而未讫。
现代文：李认为收是一代盛才，不能随便轻率，很久也没有写成。
English: Li believes that Hui is a once-in-a-generation great talent, and cannot be careless. It has not been written for a long time.

古文：比成，帝已醉醒，遂不重言，愔仍不奏，事竟寝。
现代文：写好后，帝已醒酒，再不提及，李也就把诏压下了，事情便告结束。
English: Emperor Wenxuan sobered up from his drunkenness and no longer mentioned the matter of the appointment. Li Yinyin did not know about it, and things gradually calmed down.

古文：及帝崩于晋阳，驿召收及中山太守阳休之参议吉凶之礼，并掌诏诰。
现代文：帝死于晋阳，驿车征召魏收和中山太守阳休之参议吉凶礼仪，并一同执掌诏诰。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan passed away in Jinyang, the imperial court sent an envoy to summon Wei Jie and Zhongshan Taishou Yang Xiu to participate in the agreed funeral ceremony, and was responsible for drafting the imperial edict.

古文：仍除侍中，迁太常卿。
现代文：授侍中，迁太常卿。
English: During the investiture ceremony, he was transferred to the position of grand secretary.

古文：文宣谥及庙号、陵名，皆收议也。
现代文：文宣帝的谥、庙号、陵名，都是收定下来的。
English: Emperor Wenxuan's posthumous name, temple name, and tomb name have all been decided.

古文：及孝昭居中宰事，命收禁中为诸诏文，积日不出。
现代文：孝昭帝在宫中主事，命收于禁中作诸种诏诰文书，几天也不让他出门。
English: Wang Gaoyuan of Changshan served as prime minister in the middle of the dynasty. He ordered Wei Wei to draft the imperial edict in the palace, and did not leave the palace for several days.

古文：转中书监。
现代文：转中书监。
English: Transferred middle school librarian.

古文：皇建元年，除兼侍中、右光禄大夫，仍仪同、监史。
现代文：皇建元年，除兼侍中、右光禄大夫，依然为仪同、监修国史。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, in addition to being a chamberlain and doctor of the right light, he was still the master of ceremonies and the supervisor of national history.

古文：收先副王昕使梁，不相协睦。时昕弟晞亲密。
现代文：收先为王昕副使往梁，两人关系紧张，时昕与弟关系密切。
English: The first to receive the letter was Wang Xuan's deputy envoy, Xiang Liang. The relationship between the two men was strained, and Xuan and his brother had a close relationship.

古文：而孝昭别令阳休之兼中书，在晋阳典诏诰，收留在邺，盖晞所为。
现代文：孝昭别令阳休之兼中书，在晋阳执掌诏诰，留收在邺城，这大概是做了小动作。
English: Xiao Zhao did not order Yang Xiu to be concurrently in charge of the imperial edict, he held the imperial edict in Jinyang and kept it in Lucheng, which was probably a small move.

古文：收大不平，谓太子舍人卢询祖曰： 若使卿作文诰，我亦不言。 又除祖珽为著作郎，欲以代收。
现代文：收心中忿忿不平，对太子舍人卢询祖说： 如果让你起草文诰，我也就没有意见了。 又授祖为著作郎，想让他代替收。
English: Concealing the resentment in his heart, he said to the prince's son, Lu Xunzu, "If you let me draft the document, I will have no objection." He also designated his father as the scribe and wanted him to replace Concealment.

古文：司空主簿李翥，文词士也。闻而告人曰： 诏诰悉归阳子烈，著作复遣祖孝征，文史顿失，恐魏公发背。 于时诏议二王三恪，收执王肃、杜预义，以元、司马氏为二王，通曹备三恪。
现代文：司空主簿李翥是位文词之士，听到这两条消息后对人讲： 诏诰全由阳子烈，著作复委祖孝征，文史顿失，恐怕魏收要发病于背部了。 帝诏令议论二王三恪，收依据王肃、杜预的观点，把元、司马氏作为二王，连同曹就成了三恪。
English: After hearing these two pieces of news, Li Yan, a literary man, said to others: "The Emperor's edict is entirely written by Yang Zili, and the work was restored by Zu Xiao Zheng, but the writing style has been lost, and I'm afraid Wei Jie is going to have an attack on his back. The Emperor's edict talks about two kings and three kings, and according to Wang Su and Du Yuan's point of view, Yuan and Sima are two kings, and together with Cao, they become three kings.

古文：诏诸礼学之官，皆执郑玄五代之议。
现代文：又诏告诸礼学之官讨论，他们都赞同郑玄的五代之议。
English: He also issued an edict to the etiquette officials to discuss, and they all agreed to Zheng Xuan's five-generation proposal.

古文：孝昭后姓元，议恪不欲广及，故议从收。
现代文：孝昭后姓元，也就是说恪的范围不能太广，所以讨论后便顺从了收的主张。
English: Wei Jie was very dissatisfied and said to Lu Xunzu, the prince's concubine, "If you let me draft the imperial edict, I won't say anything." The imperial court also appointed Zu Wangting as the scribe, who wanted to replace Wei Jie.

古文：又除兼太子少傅，解侍中。
现代文：又拜兼太子少傅，解除侍中之职。
English: He also paid tribute to Prince Kaneko Shonofu and dismissed him from the position of chamberlain.

古文：帝以魏史未行，诏收更加研审。
现代文：因为魏史没有刊行，所以帝诏收再加审定增补。
English: Because the Wei history was not published, the imperial edict had to be revised and supplemented.

古文：收奉诏，颇有改正。
现代文：收依照诏令，颇多改正。
English: The collection was in accordance with the imperial edict, and quite a few corrections were made.

古文：及诏行魏史，收以为直置秘阁，外人无由得见。
现代文：当诏令颁行魏史时，收认为只是置放秘阁，外人无法看见，不妥。
English: When the imperial edict was issued on the history of the Wei Dynasty, it was wrong to think that the collection was just kept in a secret place and could not be seen by outsiders.

古文：于是命送一本付□省，一本付邺下，任人写之。
现代文：于是帝下令一套付并府保存，一套收藏在邺城，准许人们任意阅读抄写。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered that one set be deposited with the government for safekeeping, and the other set be collected in Handan, allowing people to read and copy at will.

古文：大宁元年，加开府。
现代文：太宁元年，加开府。
English: In the first year of Tainin, the capital was Kaifu.

古文：河清二年，兼右仆射。
现代文：河清二年，兼右仆射。
English: In the second year of Heqing, he was also the right-hand man.

古文：时武成酣饮终日，朝事专委侍中高元海。
现代文：这一时期，武成整天酣饮不休，朝政专委侍中高元海。
English: During this period, Takeshige spent all day drinking and drinking, and served as a member of the Special Committee for the Political Affairs of the Imperial Court under Gao Yuanhai.

古文：元海凡庸，不堪大任，以收才名振俗，都官尚书毕义云长于断割，乃虚心倚仗。
现代文：元海平庸，不堪大任，因为收才名振俗，都官尚书毕义云擅长决断，所以元海虚心地倚仗他们两人。
English: Motohai was mediocre and not up to the task. Because he was a man of great ability, and the magistrate was well versed in decision-making, Motohai reluctantly relied on the two of them.

古文：收畏避不能匡救，为议者所讥。
现代文：收畏避不前，无所匡救，颇为时人讥议。
English: It was ridiculed at the time for its timidity and reluctance to move forward.

古文：帝于华林别起玄洲苑，备山水台观之丽，诏于阁上画收，其见重如此。
现代文：帝在华林另起一玄洲苑，尽收山水台观的壮美，还诏令在阁上图绘魏收之像，可见帝对他的敬重。
English: Emperor Wucheng also built Xuanzhouyuan in Hualin, to maximize the magnificence of the landscape pavilion, and ordered the portrait of Wei Jie to be painted in the pavilion.

古文：始收比温子升、邢卲稍为后进，卲既被疏出，子升以罪幽死，收遂大被任用，独步一时。
现代文：最初收同温子升、邢邵相比，稍为后进些，自从邵被疏远外任，子升犯罪囚禁而死，于是收大受信任，独步一时。
English: At first, Hui compared to Wen Zisheng and Zou Shao, he was a little behind. Since Shao was estranged from the outside, Zisheng was imprisoned and died, so Hui was trusted and walked alone for a while.

古文：议论更相訾毁，各有朋党。
现代文：议论更相诋毁，而且各有朋党。
English: The discourse has become even more vituperative.

古文：收每议陋邢卲文。
现代文：收常常鄙视邢邵的文章。
English: Take the oft-despised Yu Shao's article.

古文：卲又云： 江南任昉，文体本疏，魏收非直模拟，亦大偷窃。 收闻乃曰： 伊常于沈约集中作贼，何意道我偷任昉。 任、沈俱有重名，邢、魏各有所好。
现代文：邢邵说： 江南任窻，文体本来疏落，魏收不仅是模仿，简直是大剽窃。 收听到后说： 他常在《沈约集》中做贼，为何说我偷任窻的。 任、沈都很著名，邢、魏便各有喜好。
English: Zou Shao said: In the south of the Yangtze River, Ren Zou's style was originally neglected, and Wei Zi's was not only imitation, but outright plagiarism. Upon hearing this, Zou Shao said: He often played the role of a thief in "Shen Yuanshu," why did he say that I stole from Ren Zou. Ren and Shen are both famous, and Zou and Wei have their own preferences.

古文：武平中，黄门郎颜之推以二公意问仆射祖珽，珽答曰： 见邢、魏之臧否，即是任、沈之优劣。 收以温子升全不作赋，邢虽有一两首，又非所长，常云： 会须作赋，始成大才士。
现代文：武平中，黄门郎颜之推就两人的喜好向仆射祖请教，祖回答说： 看邢、魏的褒贬，就能知道任、沈的优劣。 收见温子升没有作过一篇赋，邢虽有一两篇，但却不是所长，所以常说： 必须会作赋，才能成为大才士，只是夸耀自己的章表碑志，其实就像在作儿戏。 
English: In the middle of Wu and Ping, Huangmen Langyan suggested that they should consult with Min Sho Zu about their preferences. Zu replied, "If you look at the praise and disapproval of Zou and Wei, you can know the merits and demerits of Ren and Shen. If you see that Wen Zi Shen has never made a fu, although Zou has one or two, he is not the director, so he often said, "You must be able to make a fu in order to become a great talent. However, boasting about your own chapter and epitaph is actually like playing a child's game."

古文：唯以章表碑志自许，此外更同儿戏。 自武定二年已后，国家大事诏命，军国文词，皆收所作。
现代文：从武定二年之后，国家大事诏令，军国文辞，都是魏收制作的。
English: Two years after Wuding, all the important national edicts and military proclamations were made by Wei.

古文：每有警急，受诏立成，或时中使催促，收笔下有同宿构，敏速之工，邢、温所不逮，其参议典礼与邢相埒。
现代文：每当有紧急之事，得旨后马上就作好了。或者时时有中使催促，收成竹在胸，如有宿构，敏捷快速，邢、温是赶不上的，其参议典制则与邢邵不相上下。
English: Whenever there is an urgent matter, it will be done immediately after the order is received. Or there is always a middle-ranking officer urging, the harvest is in the chest, if there is a post-structure, it is agile and fast, and the heat and temperature can not be caught up, and its senate system is comparable to that of Shao.

古文：既而赵郡。公。增年获免，收知而过之，事发除名。
现代文：不久赵郡公增大年岁得以免罪，收知晓而且探望过他，此事被人揭发遭受除名的处罚。
English: Not long after, Zhao Guojin was exonerated. He was found to have known and visited him, and the matter was exposed and he was punished by being removed from the list.

古文：其年又以托附陈使封孝琰，牒令其门客与行，遇昆仑舶至，得奇货猓然褥表、美玉盈尺等数十件，罪当流，以赎论。
现代文：其年，又由于请托陈朝使者封孝琰，用公文命令其门客与封氏一同前往，遇昆仑船抵达，收得奇货猓然褥表、美玉盈尺等几十件，论罪当处流刑，用钱赎免。
English: In the same year, because he asked the Chen dynasty emissary Feng Xiaojun to go, he used official documents to order his clients to go with Feng. When the Kunlun ship arrived, he received dozens of strange goods, such as rare watches, precious stones, etc. He was sentenced to exile on the spot and redeemed with money.

古文：三年，起除清都尹。
现代文：河清三年，起任为清都尹。
English: In the third year of Heqing, he was appointed to the Qing capital Yin.

古文：寻遣黄门郎元文遥□收曰： 卿旧人，事我家最久，前者之罪，情在可恕。
现代文：不久，帝派黄门郎元文遥敕收说： 你是老臣，侍奉我家最久，前时所犯之罪，情理当可宽恕。
English: Not long after, Huangmen Lang Yuanwen Yangtong, the imperial envoy, said: You are an old minister, you have been serving my family for the longest time, and the sins you have committed in the past should be forgiven.

古文：比令卿为尹，非谓美授，但初起卿，斟酌如此。
现代文：前些时令你为尹，不能算是美授，但这是初次启用你，所以只能如此。
English: Some time ago, you were Yin, which can't be considered a beautiful teaching, but this is the first time you have been used, so it can only be so.

古文：朕岂可用卿之才而忘卿身，待至十月，当还卿开府。 天统元年，除左光禄大夫。
现代文：朕哪能用你的才气而遗忘你的身子。等到十月，当把开府官职归还给你。 天统元年，授左光禄大夫。
English: I can't use your talent and forget your body. Wait until October, when I return the post of the head of the prefectural government to you. In the first year of the reign of Heaven, I was awarded the title of Doctor of the Left Guanglu.

古文：二年，行齐州刺史，寻为真。
现代文：二年，行齐州刺史事，不久，任齐州刺史。
English: In the second year, he went to Qizhou to make history, and soon he was appointed as the first president of Qizhou.

古文：收以子侄少年，申以戒厉，着枕中篇，其词曰：
现代文：因子侄年少，魏收便著《枕中篇》向他们提出告诫，其词云：
English: Because his nephews were young, Wei Cui wrote "The Middle Pillow" to admonish them, saying:

古文： 吾曾览管子之书，其言曰： 任之重者莫如身，途之畏者莫如口，期之远者莫如年。
现代文：我曾浏览过管子的著作，其中有： 任重不如身体，畏途不如关口，期远不如年数。
English: I have looked through the works of the pipe, among which are: the weight of the task is not as heavy as the body, the fear of the road is not as high as the pass, and the period is far less than the number of years.

古文：以重任行畏途，至远期，惟君子为能及矣。 追而味之，喟然长息。
现代文：负重任走畏途，至远期，只有君子才能抵达。 细细品味，喟然长叹。
English: It is only a gentleman who can travel far and wide with a heavy burden of responsibility, and it is only a gentleman who can arrive.

古文：若夫岳立为重，有潜戴而不倾；山藏称固，亦趋负而弗停；吕梁独浚，能行歌而匪惕；焦原作险，或跻踵而不惊；九陔方集，故眇然而迅举；五纪当定，想窅乎而上征。
现代文：好像那高山耸立，偷偷地增大重量却不会倾斜；山有宝藏，为取宝人们奔走不息；吕梁河深广，畅行无阻而不必戒惧；焦原山险峻，努力攀登而勿须惊恐；九天方集，虽高远能迅举；五纪已定，想深远而上问。
English: It's as if the high mountain is towering, secretly increasing its weight, but not tilting; the mountain has treasure, and people are running ceaselessly to get it; the Luliang River is deep and wide, and you can travel unhindered without fear; Mount Jiao Yuan is precipitous, and you don't have to be afraid when you try to climb it; although it is high and far, it can be raised quickly; the Five Precepts have been set, and you can ask questions when you want to go far.

古文：彼期远而能通，果应之而可必。
现代文：若任重有度，则任之更稳固；登高有术，登之而无忧。期远而能达，果应而可必。
English: If there is a degree of responsibility, then it is more stable; there is a skill to climb high, and there is no worry to climb it. It is long-term and can be achieved, and the result is inevitable.

古文：岂神理之独尔，亦人事其如一。
现代文：岂神理之独然，人事亦如此。啊！
English: Is it not the case that God's way is the only way, and the same applies to human affairs?

古文：呜呼！处天壤之间，劳死生之地，攻之以嗜欲，牵之以名利，粱肉不期而共臻，珠玉无足而俱致；于是乎骄奢仍作，危亡旋至。
现代文：居处于天地之间，劳苦在死生之地，用嗜欲作引诱，以名利为牵制，食味不召而同来，珠玉无脚而齐到；于是骄奢兴起，危亡急来。
English: Living between heaven and earth, laboring in the land of the living and the dead, lured by lust, restrained by fame and fortune, taste comes without calling, jewels come without feet; then pride arises, peril comes.

古文：然则上知大贤，唯几唯哲，或出或处，不常其节。
现代文：然而上智大贤，唯机唯智，或出或居，不常节制。
English: However, the wisest and most virtuous man, who is only a machine and only a mind, is either in or out, and is not always temperate.

古文：其舒也济世成务，其卷也声销□灭。
现代文：若舒展，则济世安民；若伸缩，则销声匿迹。
English: If it is stretched, it will benefit the world and the people; if it is stretched, it will disappear.

古文：玉帛子女，椒兰律吕，谄谀无所先；称肉度骨，膏唇挑舌，怨恶莫之前。
现代文：玉帛子女，椒兰律吕，谄谀不占先；称肉量骨，膏唇挑舌，怨仇不在前。
English: The children of the Jade Emperor, the peppers and the orchids, the dragonflies do not take precedence; weigh the meat and measure the bones, smear the lips and provoke the tongue, and do not harbor grudges.

古文：勋名共山河同久，志业与金石比坚。
现代文：功名与山河同在，志业如金石坚固。
English: Their honours are on a par with the mountains and rivers, and their selflessness is on a par with the precious stones.

古文：斯盖厚栋不桡，游刃砉然。
现代文：这大概是栋梁不曲，游刃有余的缘故。
English: Therefore, the thick wooden beam will not bend, and if you have enough skill, you will be able to open the stone.

古文：胶漆讵坚，寒暑甚促。
现代文：当道德破坏之时，则金璞丢失。
English: When morals are destroyed, the pot of gold is lost.

古文：反利而成害，化荣而就辱。
现代文：奔走人间，鼓动流俗。抱着太阳说寒冷，囊括山河道不足。源不清而流浊，身不正而影歪。啊！
English: Running around the world, encouraging popular customs. Holding the sun and saying cold, covering the lack of mountains and rivers. The source is unclear and flowing, the body is crooked and crooked. Ah!

古文：欣戚更来，得丧仍续。
现代文：胶漆固牢，寒暑迫近。
English: The glue paint is solid, and the cold and hot weather are approaching.

古文：至有身御魑魅，魂沉狴狱。
现代文：反利为害，化荣成辱。高兴忧愁接踵而至，获取丢失连续不断。以至身抗鬼怪，魂入地狱。
English: Counter-benefits are harmed, glory is turned into disgrace. Happiness and sorrow follow one after another, gain and loss are continuous. So much so that the body resists ghosts, and the soul goes to hell.

古文：讵非足力不强，迷在当局。
现代文：并非脚力不健，而是当局者迷。
English: It's not that they don't have enough strength, it's that the authorities are infatuated with them.

古文：孰可谓车戒前倾，人师先觉。
现代文：真可谓前事不忘，后事之师。
English: It can truly be said that he never forgets the past, and is a master of the future.

古文： 闻诸君子，雅道之士，游遨经术，厌饫文史。
现代文：听君子们说：雅道之士，遨游儒术，饱学文史。
English: Listen to what the gentlemen say: they are all adepts of the Art Nouveau, frequent Confucianism, and are well-studied in literary history.

古文：笔有奇锋，谈有胜理。
现代文：笔有奇锋，论有大道。
English: The pen has a magic front, and the discussion has a road.

古文：孝悌之至，神明通矣。
现代文：孝悌之至，神明通晓。
English: Filial piety to parents, harmonious brothers, truly like the wisdom of the Shinran clan, omniscient.

古文：审道而行，量路而止。
现代文：看路而行，量路而止。
English: Watch the road and walk, measure the road and stop.

古文：不养望于丘壑，不待价于城市。
现代文：从我到物，先人后己。情感不要被荣誉和忧愁牵连，心思勿要为怨恨和高兴羁縻。不隐居山林，不待价集市。
English: Do not seek comfort in the mountains and hills, do not wait for a bargain in the big cities.

古文：言行相顾，慎终犹始。
现代文：言行一致，始终如一。
English: Words and deeds are consistent, and a good beginning makes a good ending.

古文：有一于斯，郁为羽仪。
现代文：有一如此，即成表率。
English: Accidents can also happen at home, so it's important to keep things confidential.

古文：恪居展事，知无不为。
现代文：谨慎从事，无往不胜。
English: Proceed with caution and never expect to win.

古文：或左或右，则髦士攸宜；无悔无吝，故高而不危。
现代文：或左或右，则英俊之士强健。无悔无贪，故高而不危。
English: or left or right, the handsome man is strong. No regrets and no greed, so he is tall and not dangerous.

古文：异乎勇进忘退，苟得患失，射千金之产，邀万钟之秩，投烈风之门，趣炎火之室，载蹶而坠其贻宴，或蹲乃丧其贞吉。
现代文：不同于勇进忘退，如果患得患失，追求万贯家财，逐取万钟品秩，归附烈风之门，趋赴炎火之室，或颠仆致使子孙不安，或蹲坐而丧失贞操。
English: It is different from daring to advance and forgetting to retreat, if you suffer from gain and loss, pursue great wealth, successively take the rank of ten thousand bells, join the door of the gale, go to the room of fire, or make your children and grandchildren uneasy, or squat and lose your chastity.

古文：可不畏欤！可不戒欤！
现代文：这难道不当畏惧，难道不应戒备？
English: Is that not something to be afraid of, to be wary of?

古文： 门有倚祸，事不可不密；墙有伏寇，言不可而失。
现代文：门外有灾祸，事情不能不保密；墙边有伏盗，言语不能不谨慎。
English: If it exceeds the blue, it becomes blue. If you hold the amount of ink rope, you can see whether it is straight or not; if you observe with a level, you can see whether it is flat or not. If you wait for the opportunity and then seek, it is better not to have greedy desires.

古文：宜谛其言，宜端其行。
现代文：宜注意言辞，宜端正行为。
English: If you know restraint and contentment, you can be exempted from punishment for corruption.

古文：言之不善，行之不正。
现代文：言辞不善，品行不正。
English: Bad language, bad manners.

古文：鬼执强梁，人囚径廷。
现代文：鬼执凶暴，人囚径庭。
English: Demons are ferocious, and people are imprisoned.

古文：幽夺其魄，明夭其命。
现代文：阴夺其魄，明丧其命。
English: The shadow seizes his soul, the light his life.

古文：不服非法，不行非道。
现代文：不事非法，不行非道。
English: Nothing illegal, nothing improper.

古文：公鼎为己信，私玉非身宝。
现代文：公鼎为己信，私玉非身宝。
English: I believe in honesty, but I am not an honest person.

古文：过涅为绀，踰蓝作青。持绳视直，置水观平。时然后取，未若无欲。
现代文：太涅是为绀，过蓝则为青，扯绳测量直，置水考察平，时机来了便争取，不如无欲。
English: Transcendental nirvana is for the cocoon, transcendental blue is for the blue, pull the rope to measure straight, put the water to examine the flat, when the time comes, it is better to fight for it, than to have no desire.

古文：知止知足，庶免于辱。
现代文：知止亦知足，则可少受侮辱。
English: If you know when to stop and when to be content, you will be less insulted.

古文： 是以为必察其几，举必慎于微。
现代文：因此行动一定要察看时机，举止一定要小心谨慎。
English: If you are learned and virtuous, many calumnies will be heaped upon you; if you are high-ranking and responsible, all grudges will be united against you.

古文：知几虑微，斯亡则稀。
现代文：知晓时机考虑周全，那么失误就会更少。
English: If you know when to be thoughtful, you'll make fewer mistakes.

古文：既察且慎，福禄攸归。
现代文：既审察而且谨慎，福禄全有。
English: It is both prudent and cautious, and has all the benefits.

古文：昔蘧瑗识四十九非，颜子几三月不违。
现代文：古时蘧瑗认为四十九岁前全是非，颜渊三月不弃背仁义。
English: In ancient times, Yan Xun believed that everything before the age of forty-nine was right and wrong, and Yan Yuan did not abandon benevolence and righteousness in March.

古文：跬步无已，至于千里。
现代文：不停地行走，可达千里。
English: Keep walking and you can walk for thousands of miles.

古文：覆一篑进，及于万仞。
现代文：不断地堆土，可致万仞。
English: Continuously piling up soil can cause a lot of damage.

古文：故云行远自迩，登高自卑，可大可久，与世推移。
现代文：所以说走远路是从近处开始的，登上高处自觉卑贱，可大可久，与世长存。
English: Therefore, it is said that the long-distance journey begins from the near, and climbing to a high place is self-consciously lowly, but it can be great for a long time, and it will last forever.

古文：月满如规，后夜则亏。
现代文：明月满如镜，后夜便亏。
English: The bright moon is full like a mirror, but the night after is a waste.

古文：槿荣于枝，望暮而萎。
现代文：槿花开于枝，傍晚便谢。
English: The thistle blossoms on the branches, and in the evening they wither away.

古文：夫奚益而非损，孰有损而不害？
现代文：增益而不减损，岂有减损而不是祸害？
English: Is there gain without loss, or loss without pain?

古文：益不欲多，利不欲大。唯居德者畏其甚，体真者惧其大。
现代文：增加不想太多，利益不要过大，惟有居德之士畏惧过多，体健之人害怕巨大。
English: Don't want to increase too much, don't want to make too much profit. Only the virtuous fear too much, and the healthy fear too much.

古文：道尊则□谤集，任重而□怨会。
现代文：道尊，诽谤便会齐集；任重，众怨便会汇合。
English: Moral dignity, slander will come together; responsibility, grievances will converge.

古文：其达也则尼父栖遑，其忠也而周公狼狈。
现代文：其达观，孔子便会周游列国；其忠心，而周公狼狈不堪。
English: Confucius would travel all over the world if he was able to attain enlightenment, but Zhou Gong was disgusted by his loyalty.

古文：无曰人之我狭，在我不可而覆。
现代文：如山一样的高大，什么都会拥有；如谷一样的空虚，什么都可接收。
English: As high as a mountain, everything can be possessed; as empty as a valley, everything can be received.

古文：无曰人之我厚，在我不可而咎。
现代文：能柔能刚，重任可以负担；能伸能顺，险地亦能行走；能智能愚，年数可以长久。
English: If you can be gentle and firm, you can bear heavy responsibilities; if you can stretch and smooth, you can walk dangerously; if you can be intelligent and stupid, your years can be long.

古文：如山之大，无不有也；如谷之虚，无不受也；能刚能柔，重可负也；能信能顺，险可走也；能知能愚，期可久也。周庙之人，三缄其口。
现代文：进入周庙，三缄其口。
English: When entering the Zhou Temple, be sure to keep your mouth shut.

古文：漏□在前，欹器留后。俾诸来裔，传之坐右。 
现代文：漏卮在前，欹器留后，令我后辈，置之座右。
English: Leaking bowl in front, bowl left behind, so my juniors, put the seat to the right.

古文：其后□臣多言魏史不实，武成复□更审，收又回换。
现代文：后来群臣又多讲魏史不真实，武成帝再敕重新审定，收便进行了一些加工处理。
English: Later, the courtiers said that Wei history was not true, and Emperor Wucheng re-evaluated and re-evaluated, and some processing was carried out.

古文：遂为卢同立传，崔绰返更附出。
现代文：如为卢同立传，崔绰反而附于他人传后。
English: For example, if Lu Tong passed on, Cui Cao would instead follow the footsteps of others.

古文：杨愔家传，本云 有魏以来一门而已 ，至是改此八字；又先云 弘农华阴人 ，乃改 自云弘农 ，以配王慧龙自云太原人。
现代文：杨家传，原本有 有魏以来一门而已 ，此时删掉了这八个字；又先说 弘农华阴人 ，这次改为 自云弘农 ，以与王慧龙自称是太原人相配。
English: According to the Yang family legend, there was originally only one family since the Wei Dynasty, but these eight words were deleted at this time; and the first to say "Hong Nong Hua Yin Ren" was changed to "Zi Yun Hong Nong" to match Wang Huilong claiming to be a Taiyuan person.

古文：此其失也。
现代文：这就是魏收的失误。
English: This is Wei Shu's mistake.

古文：寻除开府、中书监。
现代文：不久为开府、中书监。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the head of the government and the chief librarian.

古文：武成崩，未发丧。
现代文：武成帝死，还没有发丧。
English: The death of Emperor Wu Chengdi has not yet been mourned.

古文：在内诸公以后主即位有年，疑于赦令。
现代文：正在宫中的诸公认为后主即位已快一年，因此对赦令怀疑。
English: Some people in the palace believe that it has been almost a year since the empress ascended the throne, so they are skeptical about the pardon order.

古文：诸公引收访焉，收固执宜有恩泽，乃从之。
现代文：诸公向收询问，收坚决坚持当有恩泽，人们才依从了他的看法。
English: Zhu Gong inquired to Hui, and Hui resolutely insisted that when there was a blessing, people would follow his opinion.

古文：掌诏诰，除尚书右仆射，总议监五礼事，位特进。
现代文：执掌诏诰，授尚书右仆射，总领议定五礼事，位特进。
English: He held the imperial scepter, bestowed the honorable title to the right-hand servant, and the leader agreed on the five courtesies. He was promoted to the highest rank.

古文：收奏请赵彦深、和士开、徐之才共监。
现代文：收上书请赵彦深、和士开、徐之才共同监办。
English: The closing letter asked Zhao Yanshen, He Shikai, and Xu Zhicai to jointly supervise.

古文：先以告士开，士开惊辞以不学。
现代文：收提前将此事告诉了士开，士开吃了一惊便以不学无术相推辞。
English: Hui told Shikai about the matter ahead of time, and Shikai was taken aback and refused to learn anything.

古文：收曰： 天下事皆由王，五礼非王不决。 士开谢而许之。
现代文：收说： 天下事都由大王您总理，议定五礼没有王就决断不了。 士开致谢才勉强同意。
English: He concluded by saying, "Everything under heaven is done by the great king, your prime minister, and the five rites agreed upon cannot be decided without the king. I grudgingly agreed after expressing my gratitude."

古文：多引文士令执笔，儒者马敬德、熊安生、权会实主之。
现代文：于是广招文士令其执笔，事实上，它是由儒者马敬德、熊安生、权会诸人主持的。
English: He mostly appointed literati bachelors to write, and the Confucian scholars Ma Jingde, Xiong Ansheng, and Quan Cong were actually in charge of the matter.

古文：武平三年薨。
现代文：武平三年死。
English: Takehei died three years later.

古文：赠司空、尚书左仆射，谥文贞。
现代文：赠司空、尚书左仆射，谥文贞。
English: Starring Zi Ku, Shang Shuzha, Zi Wen Zhen.

古文：有集七十卷。
现代文：有文集七十卷。
English: There are seventy volumes in the anthology.

古文：收硕学大才，然性褊，不能达命体道。
现代文：魏收硕学大才，但心胸狭窄，不能达命体道。
English: Wei Zhe is well-educated and talented, but his disposition is narrow and he is not able to reach his destiny and practice morality.

古文：见当途贵游，每以言色相悦。然提□后辈，以名行为先，浮华轻险之徒，虽有才能，弗重也。
现代文：见当朝权贵，则阿谀奉承。提拔后辈，重视名声行为，浮华轻率之徒，虽有才华，却不能入选。
English: If you see that the current government is powerful and noble, then flattery is the best. Promote the younger generation, attach importance to reputation behavior, flashy and imprudent, although talented, but can not be selected.

古文：初河间邢子才及季景与收并以文章显，世称大邢小魏，言尤俊也。
现代文：当年河间人邢子才和魏季景与收一道以文章扬名于世，时称大邢小魏，意思是说他们特别优异。
English: At that time, the people of Kawama, Shanzicai and Wei Jiqing and Hui, were famous in the world for their articles. At that time, they were called Dazhong Xiaowei, which meant that they were particularly excellent.

古文：收少子才十岁，子才每曰： 佛助寮人之伟。 后收稍与子才争名，文宣贬子才曰： 尔才不及魏收。 收益得志。
现代文：收比子才小十来岁，子才常说： 佛助是我们同僚中的伟人。 后来收渐渐地与子才齐名。文宣帝贬子才说： 你的才能赶不上魏收。 收越发得意。
English: He was about ten years younger than Choi Bi Tzu, and Choi Bi Tzu often said, "Buddha's help is a great man among our colleagues." Later, Choi gradually became as famous as Choi Bi Tzu. Emperor Wenxuan scolded Choi Bi Tzu and said, "Your talent is not as good as that of Wei Choi. Choi Bi Tzu is getting more and more proud.

古文：自序云： 先称温、邢，后曰邢、魏。 然收内陋邢，心不许也。
现代文：自序称： 先云温、邢，后曰邢、魏。 但收在内心里鄙视邢，对他不服气。
English: The self-sequence says: First Yunwen, Zou, then Zou, Wei. However, Hui despised Zou in his heart and was not convinced by him.

古文：收既轻疾，好声乐，善胡舞。
现代文：收有些轻佻，好声乐，善胡舞。
English: It's a bit light-hearted, with good vocal music and a good goose dance.

古文：文宣末，数于东山与诸优为狝猴与狗□，帝宠狎之。
现代文：文宣帝末年，他多次在东山同优人做猕猴嘻闹和狗斗游戏，帝因而宠幸亲近他。
English: In the last years of Emperor Wenxuan's life, he often played monkey hopscotch and dog fighting games with his friends in Dongshan, and the emperor was fortunate enough to be close to him.

古文：收外兄博陵崔岩尝以双声嘲收曰： 愚魏衰收。 收答曰： 颜岩腥瘦，是谁所生，羊颐狗颊，头团鼻平，饭房笭笼，着孔嘲玎。 其辩捷不拘若是。
现代文：收表兄博陵人崔岩曾用双声讥讽他： 愚魏衰收。 收回答： 颜岩腥瘦，为谁生养？羊下巴猪狗脸，头圆鼻扁，饭筐鱼篓，张口朝天。 他就是这样的辩捷不拘。
English: Hui's cousin Cui Yan, a resident of Boling, once mocked him with a double voice: "Foolish and decadent." Hui replied: "Yan Yan Yan is so thin, for whom was he born and raised? He has a lamb's chin, a pig's and dog's face, a round and flat nose, a basket of rice, a fish's fin, and a mouth as wide as the sky. This is how he is able to argue effectively.

古文：既缘史笔，多憾于人，齐亡之岁，收□被发，弃其骨于外。
现代文：掌管修史后，多有憾于人，齐亡之年，其冢被人挖开，尸骨抛散野地。
English: After presiding over the revision of history, he often felt sorry for people. In the year of Qi's death, his coffin was dug up, and his bones were scattered in the fields.

古文：先养弟子仁表为嗣，位至尚书膳部郎中。隋开皇中卒于温县令。
现代文：收养其弟之子仁表为后嗣，仁表官至尚书膳部郎中，隋开皇年间，死在温县县令位上。
English: His adopted younger brother's son, Ninpyo, became his heir. Ninpyo was an official of the Imperial Household Agency and a junior member of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. During the reign of Emperor Sui, he died at the top of the government of Wenshan County.

