古文：鳖灵玉梁观湘穴耒阳水孙坚得葬地聂友八阵图海畔石龟钓台石
现代文：鳖灵玉梁观湘穴耒阳水孙坚得葬地聂友八阵图海畔石龟钓台石
English: 靈玉梁观湘穴阳水孙坚得葬地友八阵图海畔石龟釣台石

古文：汾州女子波斯王女程颜文水县坠石玄宗圣容渝州莲花玉马华山道侣
现代文：汾州女子波斯王女程颜文水县坠石玄宗圣容渝州莲花玉马华山道侣
English: Chenzhou Women's Persian Princess Cheng Yan Wenshui County's Falling Stone Xuan Zong Sheng Rong Yuzhou Lotus Jade Horse Huashan Taoist Couple

古文：郑仁本弟楚州僧胡氏子王蜀先主庐山渔者桂从义金精山木鹤卖饼王老
现代文：郑仁本弟楚州僧胡氏子王蜀先主庐山渔者桂从义金精山木鹤卖饼王老
English: Zheng Ren's own brother, the Chuzhou monk Hu Shi Zi Wang Shu, the forefather of the Lushan fisherman Gui, from the Yijing Jing Mountain, the wood crane selling cakes Wang Lao

古文：桃林禾王延政洪州樵人
现代文：桃林禾王延政洪州樵人
English: Tao Lin, He Wang, Yan Zheng, Hong Zhou, Xing Ren

古文：鳖灵
现代文：鳖灵
English: Hailing

古文：鳖灵于楚死，尸乃溯流上。至汶山下，忽复更生。
现代文：鳖灵在楚地死了，尸体竟溯着长江逆流而上，到岷山脚下，忽然又活了。
English: Hailing died in Chudi, but the corpse actually followed the Yangtze River upstream, to the foot of Mount Lushan, and suddenly came back to life.

古文：乃见望帝，望帝立以为相。
现代文：于是他去拜见传说中的望帝杜宇，杜宇封他为宰相。
English: So he went to see the legendary Emperor Du Yu, who made him prime minister.

古文：时巫山瓮江蜀民多遭洪水，灵乃凿巫山，开三峡口，蜀江陆处。
现代文：当时，巫山瓮江蜀民大多数人家遭受洪水灾害，鳖灵就开凿巫山，通开瞿塘、巫、西陵三个峡口，蜀江两岸露出了陆地。
English: At that time, most of the people in Wushan and Shu of the Shu River suffered from flood disasters. Bailing then excavated Wushan and opened the three gorges of Shantang, Wushan and Xiling, exposing land on both sides of the Shu River.

古文：后令鳖灵为刺史，号曰西州皇帝。
现代文：以后封鳖灵为刺史，号为西州皇帝。
English: Later, he was given the title of Xizhi and the title of Emperor of Xizhou.

古文：以功高，禅位与灵，号开明氏。
现代文：因为功劳高，杜宇把帝位禅让给他，号称开明氏。
English: Because of his high merit, Du Yu ceded the imperial throne of Zen to him, known as the Enlightened One.

古文：玉梁观
现代文：玉梁观
English: Yu Liangguan

古文：汉武帝时，玉笥山民，感山之灵异，或愆旱灾蝗，祈之无不应。
现代文：汉武帝时，湖南玉笥山的老百姓，有感于山神奇灵，有时要消除旱灾虫害，祈祷它没有不灵验的。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, the people of Yulun Mountain in Hunan Province, impressed by the magical spirit of the mountain, sometimes wanted to eliminate droughts and insect pests, praying that it would not fail.

古文：乃相谓曰：可置一观，彰表灵迹。
现代文：于是大家互相商量说：应该建一座寺观，以表彰它的灵迹。
English: So everyone consulted with each other and said: A temple should be built to honor his genius.

古文：既构殿，缺中梁一条。邑民将选奇材，经数旬未获。
现代文：在建造大殿时，缺一条中梁，百姓们要选择最好的木材，寻找几十天而未能获得。
English: During the construction of the main hall, a middle beam was missing, and the people had to choose the best wood, searching for dozens of days and failing to obtain it.

古文：忽一夜，震雷风裂，达曙乃晴。
现代文：忽然有一夜，风吼雷鸣，到天亮才晴。
English: Suddenly, one night, the wind howled and thundered, and it didn't clear until dawn.

古文：天降白玉梁一条，可以尺度，严安其上，光彩莹目。因号为玉梁观。
现代文：这时，天空降下一条白玉梁，正合尺寸，严密地安放在殿上面，光彩夺目，因此号为玉梁观。
English: At this time, the sky dropped a white jade beam, exactly the right size, tightly placed on top of the hall, dazzling, so the name is Jade View.

古文：至魏武帝时，遣使取之。
现代文：魏武帝当政时，他派人取之。
English: When Emperor Weiwu was in power, he sent someone to retrieve it.

古文：至其山门，去观数里。亭午之际，雷电大镇，裂殿脊，化为白龙，擘烟雾而去，没观之东山下。
现代文：那些人刚到山门，距寺观还有好几里，大晌午天竟然雷电大震，使殿脊开裂，那玉梁化作一条白龙，腾云驾雾而去，隐没在寺观的东山下。
English: Those people had just arrived at the mountain gate, and were still several miles away from the temple. At noon, there was a thunder and lightning earthquake, which cracked the temple ridge. The jade beam turned into a white dragon, and the clouds drove away the fog, disappearing under the east mountain of the temple.

古文：晋永嘉中，有戴氏，不知其谁之子，每好游岩谷。
现代文：晋代永嘉年间，有个戴氏，不知道是谁的儿子，经常喜欢到岩谷中游玩。
English: During the Yongjia Dynasty of the Jin Dynasty, there was a Mr. Dai, I don't know whose son, who often liked to visit Iwatani.

古文：偶入郁木山下，见两座青石，搘指一条白玉梁于岩下。
现代文：一次，他偶然来到郁木山下，看见两块青石在岩下支撑着那条白玉梁。
English: Once, he accidentally came to the foot of Ikuki Mountain and saw two bluestones supporting the white jade beam under the rock.

古文：戴氏俯近看之，以手扪摸其上，见赤书五行，皆天文云篆。
现代文：戴氏俯身上前看去，用手一摸，见上面有五行红字，都是天文云篆。
English: Mr. Dai leaned forward and looked at it. Touching it with his hand, he saw five lines of red characters on it, all of which were astronomical clouds.

古文：试以手斧敲之，声如钟，又如隐雷之声，鳞甲张起。
现代文：他试着用斧敲敲，那玉梁发出的声音如钟，如雷，并迅速展起鳞甲。
English: He tried to knock with an axe, and the sound of the jade beam was like a bell, like thunder, and quickly spread its scales.

古文：戴氏惊异，奔走告人。
现代文：戴氏十分惊异，奔走告人。
English: Mr. Dai was very surprised and ran to tell others.

古文：再求寻之，不知其所。
现代文：待再去寻找，却不知去向。
English: Wait to search again, but don't know where to go.

古文：唐大历初，有无瑶黄生，因猎亦见。后数数有人见之，皆隐而不闻于人。
现代文：唐代大历初年，无瑶有个姓黄的，因为打猎也看见过，后来又有不少人见过它，但都隐瞒不说。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a dragonfly with the surname Huang, because it was also seen hunting. Later, many people saw it, but they did not tell anyone.

古文：自玉梁飞去后，其处莫能居之，皆为猛兽毒蛇所逼。
现代文：自从玉梁飞走之后，那个地方再也不能居住了，因为毒蛇猛兽常在那里出没，逼得你不得不走。
English: Since the Jade Dragonfly flew away, that place can no longer be inhabited, because venomous snakes and beasts often haunt there, forcing you to leave.

古文：湘穴
现代文：湘穴
English: Hunan Province

古文：湘穴中有黑土，岁旱，人则共壅水，以塞此穴。穴淹则大雨立至。
现代文：湘穴中有黑土，旱了的年头，人们共同灌水堵塞这个穴，穴被水淹没之后，大雨立刻就到了。
English: There is black soil in the Hunan cave. In the dry years, people jointly flooded the hole. After the hole was flooded, heavy rain immediately arrived.

古文：耒阳水
现代文：耒阳水
English: Poyang Water

古文：耒阳县有雨濑。
现代文：耒阳县有个雨濑。
English: There is a rain gutter in Fenyang County.

古文：此县时旱，百姓共壅塞之，则甘雨普降。
现代文：这个县时常发生旱灾，老百姓共同用土堵塞它，甘雨就会普降大地。
English: Droughts often occur in this county, and the common people jointly plug it with soil, and the sweet rain will fall on the earth.

古文：若一乡独壅，雨亦遍应。
现代文：假如一个乡单独堵它，雨也普降四处。
English: If a township blocks it alone, the rain will fall everywhere.

古文：随方所祈，信若符刻。
现代文：随便任何一方祈祷，都非常灵验。
English: Praying on either side is very effective.

古文：孙坚得葬地
现代文：孙坚得葬地
English: Sun Jian's burial place

古文：孙坚丧父，行葬地。
现代文：孙坚死了父亲，要找埋葬之处。
English: When Sun Jian's father died, he wanted to find a place to bury him.

古文：忽有一人曰：君欲百世诸侯乎，欲四世帝乎？
现代文：这时，忽然有个人对他说：你想百代为侯，还是四代称帝？
English: At this time, someone suddenly said to him, "Do you want to reign for a hundred generations, or do you want to be emperor for four generations?"

古文：答曰：欲帝。
现代文：孙坚回答说：要称帝。
English: Sun Jian replied, "We should praise the emperor."

古文：此人因指一处，喜悦而没。
现代文：那个人于是用手指出一个地方，欣然而逝。
English: The man then pointed out a place with his hand and died happily.

古文：坚异而从之。
现代文：孙坚认为这是奇异，但还是照办了。
English: Sun Jian thought this was strange, but he did as he was told.

古文：时富春有沙涨暴出。
现代文：这时富春当即有大沙滩露出。
English: At this time, Fuchun immediately had a large beach exposed.

古文：及坚为监丞，邻党相送于上。父老谓曰：此沙狭而长，子后将为长沙矣。
现代文：等到孙坚任监丞官时，邻里们前来相送，走到其父坟旁的大沙滩上，父老们说：这沙滩狭窄而绵长，看来子孙们将去长沙做官了。
English: When Sun Jian was appointed superintendent, the neighbors came to see him off and walked to the large sandy beach next to his father's grave. The parents said: This beach is narrow and long, it seems that the children and grandchildren will go to Changsha to work as officials.

古文：果起义兵于长沙。
现代文：果然，孙坚后来从长沙举兵起义。
English: Sure enough, Sun Jian later raised an army from Changsha to revolt.

古文：聂友
现代文：聂友
English: 友

古文：新淦聂友少时贫。
现代文：江西新淦县的聂友，少年时很贫穷，曾经打过猎。
English: Xinyi County, Jiangxi Province, Shanyou was very poor when he was a boy. He used to go deer hunting.

古文：尝猎，见一白鹿，射中后见箭著梓树。
现代文：一次，他遇见一只白鹿，射中之后见箭竟然穿进了梓树里。
English: On one occasion, he met a white deer, and after shooting it, the arrow actually went through a tree.

古文：八阵图
现代文：八阵图
English: Figure 8

古文：夔州西市，俯临江岸，沙石下有诸葛亮八阵图。
现代文：四川夔州西市，俯临江岸，沙石下面有诸葛亮留下的八阵图。
English: West Luzhou City, Sichuan Province, overlooking the riverbank. Below the sandstone, there are the eight patterns left by Zhuge Liang.

古文：箕张翼舒，鹅形鹳势，象石分布，宛然尚存。
现代文：它象簸箕似地张开翅膀，象鹅一样的形状，象鹳一样的势态，石头有序地分布着，宛如当初一样。
English: It spreads its wings like a dragonfly, has the shape of a goose, the momentum of a dragonfly, and the stones are arranged in an orderly manner, just as they were originally.

古文：峡水大时，三蜀雪消之际，澒涌混瀁，可胜道哉。
现代文：三峡水涨，三蜀的大雪融化的时候，大水汹涌澎湃，混混荡荡，怎样赞美呢。
English: When the water of the Three Gorges rises and the snow of the Three Shores melts, the water surges and swirls. How can you praise it?

古文：大树十围，枯槎百丈，破磑巨石，随波塞川而下。
现代文：十抱粗的大树，百丈长的枯树枝，石磨般的大石头，一起随波浪拥塞大江，江水和堤岸齐平。
English: Large trees with thick trunks, long dead branches, and large stones like stone mills, together with the waves, congest the river. The river and the embankment are flush.

古文：水与岸齐，人奔山上，则聚石为堆者，断可知也。
现代文：人们纷纷跑到山上，聚拢的石头堆成堆，那情景可想而知。
English: People ran to the mountains in droves, gathering piles of stones, and the scene is well known.

古文：及乎水落川平，万物皆失故态。唯诸葛阵图，小石之堆，标聚行列，依然如是者。
现代文：等到水落川平，万物都失去了原来的样子，只有诸葛亮的八阵图那些小石头堆子，聚合成行，仍然象原来一样。
English: By the time the water had fallen to the river level, everything had lost its original appearance. Only Zhuge Liang's eight patterns, those small piles of stones, gathered into rows, were still the same as before.

古文：仅已六七百年，年年淘灑推激，迨今不动。
现代文：将近六七百年了，年年大浪淘沙，推拍击打，那些小石头堆子到现在还是一动不动。
English: For nearly six or seven hundred years, the waves have been pounding the sand, and those small piles of stones have remained motionless.

古文：海畔石龟
现代文：海畔石龟
English: Seaside Stone Turtle

古文：海畔有大石龟，俗云鲁班所作。
现代文：海岸上有个大石龟，相传是鲁班所造。
English: There is a large stone turtle on the shore, which is said to have been made by Luban.

古文：夏则入海，冬则复止于山上。
现代文：它夏季就进入大海，冬季又爬到山上。
English: It enters the sea in summer and climbs into the mountains in winter.

古文：陆机诗云：石龟常怀海，我宁忘故乡？
现代文：晋代诗人陆机写道：石龟常怀海，我宁忘故乡？
English: The Jin Dynasty poet Lu Ji wrote: "Stone turtles often go to the sea. Would I rather forget my hometown?

古文：又临邑县北，有燕公墓碑，碑寻失，唯趺龟存焉。
现代文：又山东临邑县北，有燕公墓碑一座。那墓碑不久便丢失了，只有底座和大龟还在。
English: In the north of Linyi County, Shandong Province, there is a tombstone of the Yan Cemetery. The tombstone was soon lost, only the base and the big turtle are still there.

古文：石赵世。此龟夜常负碑入水，至晓方出。其上常有萍藻。
现代文：石氏建立后赵的年代，此龟常常在夜晚背碑入水，天亮之后才爬上岸，身上沾满了浮萍和水藻。
English: In Zhao's time, after the establishment of the Stone Clan, this turtle often went into the water at night, crawled ashore after dawn, and was covered with duckweed and algae.

古文：有伺之者，果见龟将入水。因叫呼，龟乃走，坠折碑焉。
现代文：有偷看者，果然见到龟要入水，于是大喊大叫，龟就跑了，碑也坠落摔断了。
English: A bystander saw the turtle about to enter the water, and shouted loudly. The turtle ran away, and the tablet fell and broke.

古文：钓台石
现代文：钓台石
English: Fishing platform stone

古文：大业七年二月，初造钓台之时，多运石者。
现代文：隋代大业七年二月，刚建造浙江钓台的时候，很多搬运石头的役夫。
English: In February of the seventh year of the Sui Dynasty, when the Zhejiang Fishing Platform was newly built, there were a lot of laborers carrying stones.

古文：将船兵丁，困弊于役，嗟叹之声，闻于道路。
现代文：牵拉船只的兵丁，对服劳役感到困乏厌倦，吁嗟感叹之声，沿途都可以听见。
English: The soldiers pulling the boats, tired and weary from their labor, can be heard moaning and sighing along the way.

古文：时运石者，将船至江东岸山下取石，累构为钓台之基。
现代文：当时运石头，要拉船到江东岸山下搬取，这是累造钓台的基础。
English: At that time, stones were transported, and the boat had to be pulled under the mountain on the east bank of the river. This was the foundation of the accumulated fishing platform.

古文：忽有大石如牛，十余，自山顶飞下，直入船内，如人安置，船无伤损。
现代文：一天，忽然有十多块牛一样大小的石头，从山顶飞下来，一直滚入船中，象是人安放的一样，船也没有受到什么损伤。
English: One day, suddenly more than ten stones the size of oxen flew down from the top of the mountain and rolled all the way into the boat, as if they had been placed by someone, and the boat did not suffer any damage.

古文：汾州女子
现代文：汾州女子
English: Zhangzhou women's team

古文：隋末筑汾州城，惟西南隅不合，朝成夕败，如此数四焉。
现代文：隋朝末年修筑汾州城时，只有西南角不能合拢，早晨建成晚上就倒，象这样有四五次了。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, when Luzhou City was being built, only the southwest corner could not be closed. It was built in the morning and collapsed in the evening. This happened four or five times.

古文：城中一童女，年十二三。告其家人云：非吾入筑，城终无合理。
现代文：城中有位童女，年龄十二三岁，她告诉家里人说：如果不把我筑入城中，此城最终便难以合拢。
English: There was a maiden in the city, about twelve or thirteen years old, who said to her family, "If you do not build me into the city, it will be difficult to close the city in the end."

古文：家人莫信，邻里哂之。
现代文：家里人不相信，邻居们也讥笑她。
English: Her family didn't believe her, and the neighbors laughed at her.

古文：此后筑城，败如初。
现代文：从这以后修筑城墙，仍象当初一样，朝成夕倒。
English: And from that time forth the building of the wall went forward in the same manner as before.

古文：童女曰：吾今日死，死后瓮盛吾，埋于筑处。
现代文：童女说：我今天就要死了，死后你们用坛子盛殓我，埋在筑墙之处。
English: And the maiden said, This day will I die: and when I am dead, take me away in a charger, and bury me in the wall.

古文：言讫而终。
现代文：她说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：如其言瘗之，瘗讫，即板筑，城不复毁。
现代文：人们就象她说的那样埋葬了她。葬毕，人们立即开始筑墙，那墙便再也不倒了。
English: They buried her just as she had said, and when they had buried her, they immediately began to build a wall, and that wall has never come down.

古文：波斯王女
现代文：波斯王女
English: Princess of Persia

古文：吐火罗国缚底野城，古波斯王乌瑟多习之所筑也。
现代文：中亚的吐火罗国缚底野城，是古代波斯王乌瑟多习建筑成的。
English: The ancient Persian king Uther the Great built the city of Tubala in Central Asia.

古文：王初筑此城，即坏。
现代文：波斯王刚建此城时，马上就倒塌了。
English: When the king of Persia began to build the city, it immediately fell down.

古文：叹曰：吾今无道，天令筑此城不成矣。
现代文：波斯王叹息道我现在无道，上天不让我筑成此城呵！
English: The king of Persia sighed and said, "I have no way now. Heaven forbid that I should build this city!"

古文：有小女名那息，见父忧恚，问曰：王有邻敌乎？
现代文：他有个小女儿名字叫那息，见父亲忧伤烦恼，那息便问道：父王有邻敌吗？
English: He had a little daughter, whose name was Nain, and when she saw her father sad and troubled, Nain asked, "Does my father have any enemies?"

古文：王曰：吾是波斯国王，领千余国。
现代文：波斯王说：我是波斯国王，统领一千多个国家。
English: And the king of Persia said, I am king of Persia, and have dominion over a thousand countries.

古文：今至吐火罗中，欲筑此城，垂功万代，既不遂心，所以忧耳。
现代文：今天来到了吐火罗国中，要建筑此城，以流传万代，然而一点也不顺心，我因此十分忧愁。
English: Today I have come to the land of Tuvaro, to build this city, to pass it down to all generations, but it is not at all to my liking, so I am very sad.

古文：女曰：愿王无忧，明旦令匠视我所履之迹筑之，即立。
现代文：女儿道：望父王不要担忧，明天早晨命令工匠按我走的足迹筑墙，就修成了。
English: The daughter said, "Don't worry, father. Tomorrow morning, I will order the craftsmen to build the wall following my footsteps, and it will be completed."

古文：王异之。
现代文：波斯王觉得奇怪。
English: The king of Persia was puzzled.

古文：至明，女起步西北，自截右手小指，遗血成踪。匠随血筑之，城不复坏。
现代文：第二天，女儿从西北角起步，自己切断右手的小指，滴血成迹，工匠们沿着血迹筑墙，城墙就不再坏了。
English: The next day, the daughter started from the northwest corner, cut off the little finger of her right hand, dripping blood into the trail, craftsmen built a wall along the blood trail, and the city wall was no longer broken.

古文：女遂化为海神，其海至今犹在堡下，水澄清如镜，周五百余步。
现代文：女儿随即变为海神，那海至今还在城堡下面，水澄清如镜，周围有五百多步。
English: The daughter then turned into a sea god, the sea is still under the castle, the water is clear as a mirror, and there are more than five hundred steps around it.

古文：程颜
现代文：程颜
English: Cheng Yan

古文：程颜税居新昌里，调选不集，贫而复病。
现代文：程颜租居在新昌里，应选没有成功，贫病交加。
English: Cheng Yan rented a house in Xinchang, but her application was not successful, and she suffered from both poverty and illness.

古文：有老妪谓曰：君贫病，吾能救之，复能与君致妻。
现代文：有位老妇对他说：你贫而又病，我能救你，还能给你娶个妻子。
English: An old woman said to him, "You are poor and sick. I can save you and give you a wife."

古文：言讫而去。
现代文：说完便离去了。
English: After Bao Jiu's daughter finished speaking, Saburo left.

古文：是夜三更，果有人云，陈尚令持礼来。
现代文：这天夜里三更，果然有人说：陈尚让我拿礼物来了！
English: On this day, there were three more people in the night, and someone said, "Chen Shang asked me to bring a gift!"

古文：颜莫测其由，开关，乃送绫绢数十束。
现代文：程颜不解其故，打开了门，那人竟送进来几十束绫绢。
English: Unable to understand why, Cheng Yan opened the door, and the man sent in dozens of bundles of strawberries.

古文：颜问陈尚何人也，使者曰：医也。乃附药一丸，令带之能愈一切疾。
现代文：程颜问陈尚是什么人，使者说是个医生，并给了他一丸药，让他带在身上，说是能治疗一切疾病。
English: When Cheng Yan asked who Chen Shang was, the messenger said he was a doctor and gave him a pill to carry with him, saying it could cure all diseases.

古文：颜带之，果疾愈。
现代文：程颜带上它，果然病好了。
English: Cheng Yan took it and her illness was cured.

古文：数日后，夕有大旋风入颜居。
现代文：几天之后，晚上有大旋风刮进程颜的房宅。
English: A few days later, in the evening, there was a big cyclone that swept away the house of the procession.

古文：须臾风定，见担舆三乘，有一女，三青衣从之。
现代文：一会儿风停，这时只见三乘轿子，上面有一个女子，后面跟着三个婢女。
English: After a while the wind died down, and at that time there were only three palanquins, with a woman on top, followed by three maids.

古文：问其故，曰：越州扶余县赵明经之女，父母配事前扶余尉程颜，适为大风飘至此。
现代文：问她们要到哪里去，那女子回答说：我是浙江越州扶余县赵学究的女儿，父母把我许配前扶余县尉程颜为妻，刚才被大风刮到这里。
English: Asked where they wanted to go, the woman replied: "I am the daughter of Zhao Xuecheng of Fuyun County, Yuezhou, Zhejiang Province. My parents married me to Cheng Yan, a former lieutenant of Fuyun County. I was just blown here by the strong wind.

古文：颜无所遣，因纳之。
现代文：程颜无处遣送，就把这几个人都收纳了。
English: Cheng Yan had nowhere to send them, so she took them all in.

古文：既而以其事验之，信然。
现代文：不久有人去验证这件事，结果属实。
English: Soon, someone went to verify the story, and it turned out to be true.

古文：而越州自有人，与颜姓名同。
现代文：而越州是另有他人，与程颜姓名相同。
English: But Yuezhou is a different person, with the same name as Cheng Yan.

古文：文水县坠石
现代文：文水县坠石
English: Pingshi Mountain, Wenshui County

古文：唐贞观十八年十月，文水县天大雷震，云中落一石下，大如碓觜，脊高腹平。
现代文：唐代贞观十八年十月，山西文水县天打大雷，云中落下一块石头，大小像捣米杵，脊梁高高的，腹部平平的。
English: In October of the 18th year of Zhenguan of the Tang Dynasty, a thunderstorm occurred in Wenshui County, Shanxi Province. A stone fell from the clouds. It was the size of a rice ball, with a high backbone and a flat abdomen.

古文：县丞张孝静奏，时有西域摩伽筜菩提寺长年师到西京。颇推博识。
现代文：县丞张孝静向上奏了一本。当时，西域摩伽陁菩提寺长年师到京，他学识渊博，颇受尊崇。
English: County magistrate Zhang Xiaojing played a copy to the emperor. At that time, the long-time teacher of the Western Regions Mogao Family Temple came to Beijing. He was well-read and highly respected.

古文：敕问之，是龙食，二龙相争，故落下耳。
现代文：皇帝问他那块石头是个什么东西，他回答说：这是龙的食物，二龙相互争斗，所以掉下来了。
English: The emperor asked him what the stone was, and he replied, "It was dragon food. Two dragons were fighting, and it fell down."

古文：玄宗圣容
现代文：玄宗圣容
English: The Holy Face of Xuanzong

古文：玄宗皇帝御容，夹苎作。
现代文：唐玄宗李隆基的御像，是夹杂着苎麻制作的。
English: The imperial portrait of Emperor Li Longji of the Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty was made with nettle.

古文：本在周至修真观中。
现代文：原来摆在陕西周至修真观中。
English: It was originally placed in the Shaanxi Zhou Shi Zhen Guan.

古文：忽有僧如狂，负之，置于武功潜龙宫。
现代文：忽然有一天，有个和尚疯也似地背着它，把它放置到武功潜龙宫。
English: Suddenly, one day, there was a monk carrying it madly, and he placed it in the Dragon Palace.

古文：宫即神尧故第也，今为佛宇。
现代文：此宫就是唐尧的旧宅第，现在变成了佛堂。
English: This palace is the former residence of Tang Xuan, now turned into a Buddhist temple.

古文：御容唯衣绛纱衣幅巾而已。
现代文：玄宗的御像只穿绛色纱衣，戴一绛色幅巾。
English: The image of Emperor Xuanzong only wears a dark blue gauze dress and a dark blue scarf.

古文：寺僧云：庄宗入汴，明宗入洛，洎清泰东赴伊瀍之岁。额上皆有汗流。
现代文：寺院的僧人说：五代时后唐庄宗进入开封，明宗进入洛阳，等到清泰东去伊水瀍水那年，玄宗御容额头上都有汗水流淌。
English: The monks of the temple said: Five generations later, Tangzhuang Zong entered Kaifeng, Ming Zong entered Luoyang, and when Qing Taidong went to Yishui, Xun Zong's forehead was dripping with sweat.

古文：学士张沆，尝闻之而未之信。及经武功，乃细视之，果如其说。
现代文：学士张沆，曾经听说此事但却不信，直到经过武功时，亲自细看了一下，果然象传说的一样。
English: Zhang Qian, a bachelor, once heard about this but did not believe it until he went through the martial arts and personally took a closer look. It was just like the legend.

古文：又意其雨漏所致，而幅巾之上则无。
现代文：不过，他怀疑那是漏雨造成的，可玄宗的幅巾上却是干干的。
English: However, he suspected that it was caused by a leak, but the cloth was dry.

古文：自天福之后，其汗遂绝。
现代文：从五代后晋高祖天福年之后，御容上的汗水就断绝了。
English: From the fifth generation after the promotion to the ancestor Tianfu, the sweat on the countenance was cut off.

古文：高陵县又有神尧先世庄田，今亦为宫观矣。
现代文：高陵县还有唐尧先辈的庄田，如今也变成宫观寺院了。
English: In Goryeong County, there is also the ancestral village of Tongyeong, which has now been turned into a temple.

古文：有柏树焉，相传云，高祖在襁褓之时，母即置放柏树之阴，而往饷田。比饷回，日斜而树影不移，则今柏树是也。
现代文：那里长着一株古柏树，人们传说：唐高祖在襁褓为婴儿时，母亲把他放在柏树的阴影下，到田地里去祭祀；待她回来时，只见日头斜了但树影却未移动，就是现在的那株柏树。
English: There is an ancient cypress tree there. People say that when Tang Gaozu was a baby, his mother put him under the shade of the cypress tree and went to the fields to make a sacrifice. When she came back, she saw that the sun had set but the tree's shadow had not moved. This is the cypress tree that stands there now.

古文：史传不载，而故老言之。
现代文：当然，这在史书上没有记载，是听老人传说的。
English: Of course, this is not recorded in the history books, but is a legend told by old people.

古文：渝州莲花
现代文：渝州莲花
English: Yuzhou lotus blossoms

古文：渝州西百里相思寺北石山，有佛迹十二，皆长三尺许，阔一尺一寸，深九寸，中有鱼文。
现代文：渝州西一百里处相思寺附近的北石山上，有十二个佛的脚印，都三尺左右长，一尺一寸宽，九寸深，中间有古代的鱼纹。
English: On the Beishi Mountain near the Confucius Temple, 100 miles west of Yuzhou, there are twelve Buddha footprints, all about three feet long, one foot and one inch wide, nine inches deep, with ancient fish lines in the middle.

古文：在佛堂北十余步。
现代文：这些脚印在佛堂北面十多步远。
English: These footprints are more than ten steps north of the Buddhist temple.

古文：贞观二十年十月，寺侧泉内，忽出红莲花，面广三尺。游旅往还，无不叹讶，经月不灭。
现代文：唐代贞观二十年十月，寺院旁边的泉水中，忽然长出红莲花，面积足有三尺多宽，游观者来来往往，没有不惊叹的。
English: In October of the 20th year of Zhenguan in the Tang Dynasty, a red lotus suddenly sprouted in the spring water next to the temple, with an area more than three feet wide. Tourists came and went, and they were amazed.

古文：昔齐荆州城东天子井，出锦。
现代文：这莲花经过一个多月也没有凋谢。
English: This lotus flower has not withered after more than a month.

古文：于时士女取用，与常锦不异，经月乃歇。亦此类也。
现代文：当年齐朝荆州城东的天子井往上漂锦缎，士人和女子们纷纷拿用，与平常的锦缎没有什么区别，经过一个多月才停止，也跟这忽然长出莲花的事类似。
English: In those days, the brocade floated up from the Tianzi Well in the east of Jingzhou City, and the men and women used it one after another. It was no different from ordinary brocade, and it took more than a month to stop. It was also similar to the sudden growth of lotus flowers.

古文：玉马
现代文：玉马
English: Tama from

古文：沈傅师为宣武节度使。
现代文：沈傅师任河南宣武节度使。
English: Shen Fushi served as the Henan Xuanwu Festival envoy.

古文：堂前忽马嘶，其声甚近，求之不得。
现代文：一天，他家门前有马嘶鸣，声音似乎很近，却又找寻不到。
English: One day, there was a horse neighing in front of his house. The sound seemed very close, but he couldn't find it.

古文：他日，嘶声渐近，似在堂下。
现代文：后来有一天，那马叫声更近了，好象就在厅堂下面。
English: Then one day, the horse neighed closer, as if it were right under the hall.

古文：掘之，深丈余，遇小空洞。
现代文：挖了一丈多深，遇到了个小洞穴，得到一只玉马。
English: He dug down as deep as he could, came across a small cave, and got a horse.

古文：其间得一玉马，高三二寸，长四五寸，嘶则如壮马之声。其前致碎朱砂，贮以金槽。
现代文：它二三寸高，四五寸长，叫起来象壮马嘶鸣。在它的前面放着一些碎朱砂，用金槽贮藏着。
English: It was two or three inches high, four or five inches long, and it neighed like a stallion. In front of it lay some crushed cinnabar, which was stored in a gold tank.

古文：粪如绿豆，而赤如金色。
现代文：它的粪蛋绿豆大小，金子般的颜色。
English: Its dung egg is the size of a green bean and has a gold-like colour.

古文：沈公恒以朱砂喂之。
现代文：沈公经常用朱砂喂它。
English: Shen Gong often feeds it with cinnabar.

古文：华山道侣
现代文：华山道侣
English: Huashan Doulu

古文：处士元固言，贞元初，尝与道侣游华山。
现代文：处士元固说，在唐代贞元初年，曾经和道侣漫游华山。
English: Officer Yuan Gu said that in the first year of the Tang Dynasty Zhenyuan, he once roamed Huashan with Taoists.

古文：谷中见一人股，袜履甚新，断处如膝头，初无痕迹。
现代文：他们在山谷中看见一条人的大腿，袜子和鞋都很新，断处象膝盖骨的头，原来一点伤痕也没有。
English: They saw a human thigh in the valley, socks and shoes were new, the break was like the head of the kneecap, and there was no scar at all.

古文：郑仁本弟
现代文：郑仁本弟
English: Zheng Ren's younger brother

古文：唐大和中。郑仁本表弟，不记姓名。
现代文：唐代太和年间，郑仁本有个表弟，记不住他的姓名了。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi in the Tang Dynasty, Zheng Ren had a cousin, but he couldn't remember his name.

古文：常与一王秀才游嵩山，扪罗越涧，境极幽夐，忽迷归路。
现代文：曾经和一个王秀才游嵩山，他们攀藤越涧，来到一极幽之境时，忽然迷失归途。
English: Once, he and Wang Xiucai were hiking in the Songshan Mountains. They climbed rattan canes and crossed a stream. When they came to a very secluded area, they suddenly lost their way back.

古文：将暮，不知所之。
现代文：将近天晚，不知该到什么地方去。
English: It was getting late and I didn't know where to go.

古文：徙倚间，忽觉丛中鼾声。披榛窥之，见一人布衣，衣甚洁白，枕一袱物，方眠熟。
现代文：他们正踌躇间，忽然听到树丛中有打鼾的声音，便拨开榛柴棵子察看，只见一个穿布衣的人，衣裳很洁白，枕着一个包袱刚刚睡熟。
English: While they were hesitating, they suddenly heard the sound of snoring in the bushes. They opened the firewood and looked around. All they saw was a man in cloth, his clothes were very clean and white, and he had just fallen asleep with a bag on his pillow.

古文：即呼之曰：某偶入此径，迷路，君知向官道无？
现代文：他二人急忙将他唤醒，说：我们偶然来到此地，迷了路，你知道哪里有大道吗？
English: They both woke him up in a hurry and said, "We came here by accident and lost our way. Do you know where the main road is?"

古文：其人举首略视，不应复寝。
现代文：那人抬头看了他们一眼，不吱声又要睡。
English: The man glanced up at them and quietly went back to sleep.

古文：又再三呼之，乃起坐，顾曰：来此。
现代文：他二人再三喊他，他才坐起来，转过头来说道：到这里来。
English: They both called him repeatedly until he sat up, turned his head and said, "Come here."

古文：二人因就之，且问其所自。
现代文：二人于是走上前去，并问他来自何方。
English: The two men then walked up to him and asked him where he was from.

古文：其人笑曰：君知月七宝合成乎？
现代文：那个人笑着说：你们知道月亮是七宝合成的吗？
English: The man smiled and said, "Do you know that the moon is made of cloisonné?"

古文：月势如丸，其影多为日烁。其亚处也，常有八万二千户修之。子即一数。
现代文：月亮的情况像圆球，它的阴影多半是被太阳销熔的，在它的暗处，常常有八万二千人在那里修整，我就是其中的一个。
English: The moon looks like a round ball, and its shadow is mostly cast by the sun. In its shadow, there are often 82,000 people working there, and I am one of them.

古文：因开袱，有斤凿事。
现代文：于是他打开包袱，里面有斧凿等物。
English: He then opened the bag, which contained an axe, chisel and other items.

古文：玉屑饭两裹，授与二人曰：分食此，虽不足长生，无疾耳。
现代文：他拿出两包用玉屑做成的饭团子，送给二人说：分吃这个东西虽然不足以长生不老，但却可以免除疾病了！
English: He took out two packets of rice balls made of jade chips and gave them to two people, saying, "Eating this separately is not enough to live forever, but it can prevent illness!"

古文：乃起，与二人指一歧径，曰：但由此，自合官道矣。
现代文：然后站起来，给二位指点一条岔道，说：只要从这向前走，自然就可以上大道了。
English: Then he stood up, pointed out a side street to the two of them, and said, "Just walk forward from here, and you will naturally be able to get onto the main road."

古文：言已不见。
现代文：话音刚落，人已不见踪影。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：楚州僧
现代文：楚州僧
English: A monk from Chuzhou

古文：楚州界内小山，山上有室而无水。
现代文：楚州界的有座小山，山上有房屋但是没有水。
English: There is a hill on the border of Chuzhou. There are houses on the hill, but there is no water.

古文：僧智一掘井，深三丈遇石。
现代文：和尚智一想挖口井，挖到三丈深时遇到一块石头。
English: Monk Zhi wanted to dig a well, but when he reached a depth of three meters, he encountered a stone.

古文：凿石穴及土，又深五十尺，得一玉。
现代文：凿开石头见到土，又挖了五十尺深，得到一块玉。
English: He chiseled away at the stone, saw the soil, dug fifty feet deeper, and got a piece of jade.

古文：长尺二，阔四寸，赤如榴花。
现代文：这玉一尺二寸长，四寸宽，象石榴花一样红。
English: The stone is one foot two inches long, four inches wide, and as red as a pomegranate.

古文：每面有六龟子，紫色可爱，中若可贮水状。
现代文：每个面都有六个龟子，紫色的，非常可爱，中间象能贮水的样子。
English: Each side has six purple, very cute, water-holding beetles.

古文：僧偶击一角视之，遂沥血，半月日方止。
现代文：智一和尚偶然击打一个角看看，一股血水就从里面沥沥滴出，半个月才停止。
English: Zhi Yi, a monk, accidentally hit a horn and saw a stream of blood drip from it, which only stopped after half a month.

古文：胡氏子
现代文：胡氏子
English: Hu Shi Zi

古文：洪州胡氏子，亡其名。
现代文：洪州胡氏有个儿子，忘记了他的名字。
English: The Hongzhou Hu family had a son, but I have forgotten his name.

古文：胡本家贫，有子五人，其最小者，气状殊伟。
现代文：胡家原来很穷，一共有五个儿子，他是其中最小的，气质容貌不一般。
English: Originally, the Hu family was very poor. There were five sons in total, and he was the youngest. His temperament and appearance were not ordinary.

古文：此子既生，家稍充给。
现代文：他一生下来，家里便稍稍宽裕起来，种田养蚕，日子一天比一天好。
English: When he was born, his family was a little more affluent, farming and raising silkworms, and his life was getting better day by day.

古文：农桑营赡，力渐丰足。乡里咸异之。其家令此子主船载麦，溯流诣州市。
现代文：乡里人都感到奇怪。一天，家里让他押着载麦子的船，逆流而上去州市。
English: The villagers were surprised. One day, the family asked him to hold the boat carrying the wheat and tow it upstream to the city.

古文：未至间，江岸险绝，牵路不通。截江而渡，船势抵岸，力不制，沙摧岸崩。
现代文：快要到时，大江两岸峭壁险绝，纤道不通，只好横江而渡，结果船抵向岸去，怎么也控制不了，最后冲垮了堤岸。
English: When it was almost time, the cliffs on both sides of the river were in danger of collapsing, and the cableway was impassable, so they had to cross the river. As a result, the ship came ashore and could not be controlled in any way, and finally broke down the embankment.

古文：穴中得钱数百万，乃弃麦载钱而归。
现代文：不料，从那堤穴中得到了好几百万钱！于是，他便扔弃麦子载钱而归。
English: Unexpectedly, he got several million dollars from the hole in the dike! So, he threw away the wheat and returned with the money.

古文：由是其家益富，市置仆马，营饰服装。
现代文：从此，他家越发富足了，雇仆人买车马，买服装和首饰。
English: From then on, his family became richer and richer, hiring servants to buy cars and horses, and buying clothes and jewelry.

古文：咸言此子有福。
现代文：人们都说这小子有福气。
English: People say he's a lucky boy.

古文：不欲久居村落，因令来往城市。
现代文：他不想久居乡下，家里就让他经常往城里跑，渐渐地就学坏了。
English: He didn't want to live in the countryside for a long time, so his family made him run to the city often. Gradually, he became a bad student.

古文：稍亲狎人事。行及中道，所乘之马跪地不进。顾谓其仆曰：船所抵处得钱，今马跪地，亦恐有物。
现代文：一日行至中途，他的马竟跪地不起。他回头对仆人说：上次咱们是在撞船处得到的钱，现在马跪地不起，也恐怕会有什么好宝贝呢！
English: Halfway through the day's journey, his horse fell to its knees. He turned to his servant and said: "Last time we got the money at the crash site, now the horse is on its knees, and I'm afraid there will be no good treasure!"

古文：因令左右副斫之。得金五百两。赍之还家。
现代文：于是让手下人挖地，结果又得到五百两黄金，拿回家去。
English: So he had his men dig up the earth, and as a result they got five hundred taels of gold, which they took home.

古文：他日复诣城市，因有商胡遇之，知其头中有珠，使人诱而狎之，饮之以酒，取其珠而去。
现代文：后来有一天，他又进城去，遇到一位经商的胡人。见他头上有珍珠，那胡商便同他亲近戏狎，诱惑于他。后来将其灌醉，把他头上的珍珠拿跑了。
English: Then one day he went into the city again and met a merchant who had pearls on his head. The merchant approached him, joked with him, and seduced him. Then he got him drunk and took the pearls off his head.

古文：初额上有肉，隐起如球子形，失珠之后，其肉遂陷。
现代文：原来他额上有块肉，暗暗突起如球状，失去珍珠之后，那块肉就陷下去了。
English: It turned out that he had a lump of flesh on his forehead, darkly protruding like a ball, and after losing the pearl, that piece of flesh sank.

古文：既还家，亲友眷属，咸共嗟讶之。
现代文：他当即回到家中，亲友家人都叹讶不已。
English: He immediately returned home to the surprise of his friends and family.

古文：自是此子精神减耗，成疾而卒，其家生计亦渐亡落焉。
现代文：从此，他精力减退，患病而死，家道也渐渐衰落下来。
English: From then on, his energy waned, he fell ill and died, and his family gradually declined.

古文：王蜀先主
现代文：王蜀先主
English: Ancestor Wang Shu

古文：唐僖宗皇帝，播迁汉中，蜀先主建为禁军都头。
现代文：唐代僖宗皇帝，流离迁徙到陕西汉中后，前蜀先主王建任禁军都头。
English: Emperor Jianzong of the Tang Dynasty, after being displaced and migrated to the Han Dynasty Middle School in Shaanxi, the former Shu Emperor Wang Jianren became the head of the Imperial Army.

古文：与其侪于僧院掷骰子，六只次第相重，自幺至六。
现代文：一日，他与下属在僧院里掷骰子，六只骰子依次相重合，从幺点到六点。
English: One day, he and his subordinates were throwing dice in the monastery, and six dice coincided in turn, from dusk to six o'clock.

古文：人共骇之。
现代文：人们都为此事感到惊骇。
English: People are horrified by this.

古文：他日霸蜀。
现代文：以后王建在蜀地称霸。
English: Wang Jian later became the ruler of Shu.

古文：因幸兴元，访当时僧院，其僧尚在。
现代文：一次因为巡幸兴无，访问当时的那座僧院，和尚还在。
English: Once, because he was not in the mood for sightseeing, he visited the monastery at that time, and the monk was still there.

古文：问以旧事，此僧具以骰子为对。
现代文：提起旧事，那和尚都用骰子的事答对。
English: When the old story was mentioned, the monk answered correctly with the story of the mule.

古文：先主大悦，厚赐之。
现代文：先主王建非常高兴，厚厚地赏赐了他。
English: The forefather Wang Jian was very pleased and rewarded him generously.

古文：庐山渔者
现代文：庐山渔者
English: The fishermen of Lushan

古文：庐山中有一深潭，名落星潭，多渔钓者。
现代文：庐山中有一深水潭，名叫落星潭，经常有人来此垂钓。
English: In the Lushan Mountains, there is a deep pond called the Falling Star Pool. People often come here to fish.

古文：后唐长兴中，有钓者得一物，颇觉难引，迤逦至岸。
现代文：后唐明宗长兴年间，有个钓鱼人钓到一个怪物，觉得难以牵引，费了一番周折才把它拖上岸。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mingzong of the Later Tang Dynasty in Changxing, there was a fisherman who caught a monster. He found it difficult to tow it, and it took a lot of effort to drag it ashore.

古文：见一物如人状，戴铁冠，积岁莓苔裹之。
现代文：这怪物象人的形状，戴着铁帽子，被多年的青苔包裹着。
English: The monster was in the shape of a man, wearing an iron hat and wrapped in years of moss.

古文：意其木则太重，意其石则太轻，渔者置之潭侧。
现代文：说它是木头又太重，说它是石头又太轻，钓鱼人把它扔到了潭边。
English: Say it is wood and too heavy, say it is stone and too light, the angler threw it to the edge of the pond.

古文：后数日，其物上有泥滓莓苔，为风日所剥落，又经雨淋洗，忽见两目俱开，则人也。
现代文：几天之后，那怪物身上的泥潭青苔被风日剥落，又经雨淋洗，忽然见其睁开双眼，原来是个人。
English: A few days later, the marsh moss on the monster's body was peeled off by the wind and sun, and washed by the rain. Suddenly, I saw it open its eyes, and it turned out to be a person.

古文：歘然而起，就潭水盥手靧面。
现代文：他忽然站起来，撩着潭水洗洗手脸。
English: He suddenly stood up and washed his face with a basin of water.

古文：众渔者惊异，共观之。
现代文：众垂钓者惊讶不已，都围上去看。
English: The anglers were astonished and gathered around to watch.

古文：其人即询诸渔者，本处土地山川之名，及朝代年月甚详审，问讫，却入水中，寂无声迹。
现代文：那人就询问这里土地山川的名字，以及朝代年月等，很详细。问罢，转身钻入水中，寂然无声无迹。
English: The man asked for the names of the land, mountains and rivers here, as well as the dates of the dynasties, etc., in great detail. Ask away, turn around and dive into the water, lonely and silent.

古文：然竟无一人问彼所从来者。
现代文：但竟无一人问他从何而来。
English: But no one asked him where he came from.

古文：南中吏民神异之，为建祠坛于潭上。
现代文：南中的吏民们觉得此事怪异而神奇，为他在潭边修建起一座祠堂。
English: The officials and citizens of South Middle School found this strange and magical, and built a shrine for him at the edge of the lake.

古文：桂从义
现代文：桂从义
English: Gui Congyi

古文：池阳建德县吏桂从义，家人入山伐薪，常所行山路，忽有一石崩倒。
现代文：陕西池阳建德县吏桂从义，他的家人进山砍柴，平常行走的山路旁，忽然崩倒一块山石。
English: Gui Congyi, an official of Chiyang Jiande County, Shaanxi Province, and his family went into the mountains to cut firewood. While they were walking along the mountain road, a rock suddenly fell down.

古文：就视之，有一室。
现代文：家人上前去看，只见那里露出一屋室。
English: Family members went up to take a look, only to see a one-room house standing there.

古文：室有金漆柏床六张，茭荐芒簟皆新，金翠积叠。
现代文：室内有六张全漆的柏木床，草垫竹席等都是新的，金银首饰堆了很多。
English: There are six fully-painted cypress beds in the room, the grass-cushioned bamboo seats are all new, and there is a lot of gold and silver jewelry.

古文：其人坐床上，良久，因揭簟下，见一角柄小刀，取内怀中而出。
现代文：他在床上坐了很久，然后就揭开竹席，看见一把角柄小刀，拿起揣进怀里就走了出来。
English: He sat on the bed for a long time, then he opened the bamboo seat, saw a horn-handled knife, picked it up, put it in his arms and walked out.

古文：扶起崩石塞之，以物为记。
现代文：接着，他扶起那块崩石塞住洞室，并用东西作个记号。
English: Next, he propped up the boulder that blocked the chamber and made a mark with something.

古文：归呼家人共取。
现代文：回家招呼人一起去拿那些财宝。
English: Go home and get someone to go with you to get the treasure.

古文：及至，则石壁如故，了无所见。
现代文：等大家赶到后，只见那石壁完好如初，什么也没有看到。
English: When we arrived, we saw that the stone wall was as good as new, and we didn't see anything.

古文：金精山木鹤
现代文：金精山木鹤
English: Kinsei mountain wood cranes

古文：虔州虔化县金精山，昔长沙王吴芮时，仙女张丽英飞升之所，道馆在焉。
现代文：虔州虔化县有座金精山。当年长沙王吴芮当政时，仙女张丽英就在这里飞升上天，如今道馆还在。
English: There is a golden mountain in Qianhua County, Qianzhou. When the Changsha king Wu Gan was in power, the fairy Zhang Liying flew up to heaven here, and now the Taoist hall is still there.

古文：岩高数百尺，有二木鹤，二女仙乘之。
现代文：此处山岩有好几百尺高，还有两只木鹤，是二位仙女骑的。
English: The rocks here are several hundred feet high, and there are also two cranes, ridden by two fairies.

古文：铁锁悬于岩下，非榜道所及，不知其所从。
现代文：铁锁链子悬在岩石下边，不是立标志开辟道路时搞的，谁也不知道它是怎么来的。
English: The iron chain hangs below the rock. It was not made when the road was marked, and no one knows how it came to be there.

古文：其二鹤，恒随四时而转，初不差忒。
现代文：那两只木鹤，总是随着四季的变化而动，一点也不差。
English: Those two wood cranes, always moving with the changes of the four seasons, are not bad at all.

古文：顺义道中，百胜军小将陈师粲者，能卷簟为井，跃而出入。
现代文：顺义道里，百胜军有个小将叫师粲，能够将竹席卷成井状，自由地跳进跳出。
English: In Shunyi Road, the Yixing Army had a young general named Shizhao, who was able to roll bamboo into a well and jump in and out freely.

古文：尝与乡里女子遇于岩下，求娶焉。女子曰：君能射中此鹤目，即可。
现代文：一次，他与一乡里女子在岩下相遇，他向她求婚，那女子说：你能射中那鹤眼，就可以。
English: Once, he met a village girl under a rock. He asked her to marry him. The girl said, "If you can hit the crane's eye, you can."

古文：师粲即一发而中，臂即无力，归而病卧。
现代文：师粲一发即中。不料，他立刻觉得臂软无力，回来就病倒在床。
English: Shi Hao was in the middle of the class. Unexpectedly, he immediately felt weak and weak, and fell ill in bed when he came back.

古文：如梦非梦，见二女道士，饶床而行。
现代文：似梦非梦中，他看见二位女道士，绕床而走，每走一圈就用手摸摸他的眼睛。
English: As if in a dream, he saw two female Taoists walking around the bed, touching his eyes with their hands every time they walked around.

古文：每过，辄以手拂师粲之目，数四而去。
现代文：四五圈之后，她们便离去。而师粲则失明而死。
English: After four or five laps, they left, and Shi Yao went blind and died.

古文：竟失明而卒。所射之鹤，自尔不复转，其一犹转如故。
现代文：被射中的那只鹤从此不再转动，另外那只还转动如初。
English: The crane that was shot never moved again, while the other one continued to move as before.

古文：辛酉岁，其女子犹在。师粲之子孙，亦为军士。
现代文：辛酉年，那位乡里女子还在，师粲的子孙也做了军士。
English: In 1989, that woman from the countryside was still alive, and the children and grandchildren of her mentor had also become sergeants.

古文：卖饼王老
现代文：卖饼王老
English: The old man selling cakes

古文：广陵有卖饼王老，无妻，独与一女居。
现代文：广陵有位卖饼的王老，死了妻子，独自和一个女儿居住。
English: In Guangling, there was a cake seller, Wang Lao, whose wife had died, and who lived alone with a daughter.

古文：王老怒，持刀逐之，少年跃走得免。王老怒甚，遂杀其女。
现代文：王老有一天从卖饼处回家，看见女儿和一个少年正在北窗下共枕，顿时大怒，拿起刀就追。那少年跑得快，得以幸免；王老气极了，就杀死了自己的女儿。
English: One day, when Wang Lao came home from selling cakes, he saw his daughter and a boy sleeping together under the north window. He was furious and picked up a knife to chase after them. The boy ran fast and was spared; Wang Lao was furious and killed his daughter.

古文：而少年行至中路，忽流血满身。吏呵问之，不知所对。
现代文：而少年跑在半路上，忽然满身流血，官吏斥问他，他又说不出原因。
English: But when the boy ran halfway and suddenly bled all over, the officials scolded him and he couldn't say why.

古文：拘之以还王老之居，邻伍方案验其事。王老见而识之，遂抵罪。
现代文：于是，便将他拘捕押到王老处。这时，人们正为那案子勘查现场，王老认出那位少年，于是就让他抵了罪。
English: As a result, he was arrested and detained at Wang Lao's place. At that time, people were surveying the scene for the case, Wang Lao recognized the boy, so he let him confess.

古文：桃林禾
现代文：桃林禾
English: Taolin Herbs

古文：闽王审知，初为泉州刺史。
现代文：闽王王审知，当初任泉州刺史。
English: Shao Wang Wang Xizhi was initially appointed as Quanzhou chief historian.

古文：州北数十里，地名桃林。
现代文：在州城以北几十里处，有一个地方叫桃林。
English: Dozens of miles north of the state capital, there is a place called Taolin.

古文：光启初，一夕，村中地震有声，如鸣数百面鼓。
现代文：唐代僖宗光启年间，一天晚上，村中地震发出声响，如几百面鼓在敲。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty, one night, an earthquake in the village made a sound like hundreds of drums beating.

古文：及明视之，禾稼方茂，了无一茎。
现代文：待到天亮一看，那长得正茂盛的庄稼已不见一株。
English: After waiting until dawn, there was not a single plant of the luxuriant crop.

古文：试掘地求之，则皆倒悬在土下。
现代文：试着挖地寻找，原来那禾苗都倒悬在土下。
English: Try to dig the ground to find it, but it turns out that the grass seedlings are all hanging upside down under the soil.

古文：其年，审知尅晋安，尽有瓯闽之地。传国六十年。
现代文：那年，审知攻克晋安，完全占领了闽、浙一带，传国六十年。
English: In that year, the Jurchen conquered Jinan, completely occupied the areas of Shandong and Zhejiang, and ruled the country for sixty years.

古文：至于延羲立，桃林地中复有鼓声。
现代文：到延羲登基时，桃林地里又响鼓声。
English: When Yan Xuan ascended to the throne, the drums sounded in the peach grove.

古文：时禾已收，惟余梗在田。
现代文：这时庄稼已经收了，只剩下禾梗还在田间。
English: By this time, the crops had been harvested, and only the stalks of wheat were left in the fields.

古文：及明视之，亦无一茎。
现代文：等到天明去看，也没有剩一棵。
English: Wait until daylight to see, not a single tree is left.

古文：掘地求之，则亦倒悬土下。
现代文：掘地一找，竟然也是倒悬土下。
English: As soon as they started digging, they found themselves upside down under the earth.

古文：其年，延羲为左右所杀，王氏遂灭。
现代文：那年，延羲被身边的人杀害，王氏王朝也就灭亡了。
English: That year, Yan Xuan was killed by someone close to him, and the Wang dynasty also came to an end.

古文：王延政
现代文：王延政
English: Wang Yanzheng

古文：王延政为建州节度，延平村人夜梦人告之曰：与汝富，旦入山求之。
现代文：王延政任建州节度使时，延平村有个人梦见有人告诉他：我想给你富贵，明天早晨进山去找吧。
English: When Wang Yanzheng was appointed as the envoy of the Jianzhou Festival, a person in Yanping Village had a dream that someone told him: "I want to give you wealth, go into the mountains tomorrow morning to find it."

古文：明日入山，终无所得。
现代文：第二天，那个人进了山，结果一无所获。
English: The next day, the man went into the mountains and found nothing.

古文：尔夕，复梦如前。
现代文：这天晚上，又复梦如前。
English: That night, the dream came back.

古文：村人曰：旦已入山，无所得也。
现代文：村里人说：我早晨已经进山，不是什么也没找到吗？
English: The villager said, "I went into the mountains this morning, but I didn't find anything, did I?"

古文：其人曰：但求之，何故不得？
现代文：那个人说：只要去找，哪有找不到之理？
English: The man said, "If you look for it, why can't you find it?"

古文：于是明日复入。
现代文：于是，他第二天又进山了。
English: So the next day he went back into the mountains.

古文：向暮，息大树下，见方丈之地独明净，试掘之，得赤土如丹。
现代文：傍晚，他在大树下休息，看见前面有块一丈见方的土地特别明净，他试着挖掘下去，得到一些如丹的红土。
English: In the evening, when he was resting under a tree, he saw in front of him a piece of land about a foot square, very clear, and he tried to dig down and get some of the red earth.

古文：既无他物，则负之归。饰以墙壁，焕然可爱。
现代文：既然没有其他东西，他就将那红土背回家中，粉饰墙壁，光闪闪的非常可爱。
English: Since he didn't have anything else, he took the red clay back home and painted the walls. The glitter was so lovely.

古文：人闻者，竞以善价。
现代文：人们听说了，竞相用高价来买。
English: People heard about it and rushed to buy it at high prices.

古文：从此人求市。
现代文：此后，这个人又到集市上寻求买主。
English: After that, the man went to the bazaar to look for a buyer.

古文：延政闻之，取以饰其宫室，署其人以牙门之职。
现代文：闽王王延政听说了此事，拿那红土来粉饰宫室，并让那人到衙门里做事。
English: When King Yan Zheng heard about this, he used the red clay to decorate the palace and sent the man to work at the gate.

古文：数年，建州亦败。
现代文：几年之后，建州也就失败了。
English: A few years later, statehood also failed.

古文：洪州樵人
现代文：洪州樵人
English: Hongzhou Xingren

古文：洪州樵人，入西山岩石之下。
现代文：洪州的樵夫到西山岩石下砍柴。
English: The woodcutter from Hongzhou went to the West Mountain to cut firewood under the rocks.

古文：藤萝甚密，中有一女冠，姿色绝世，闭目端坐，衣帔皆如新。
现代文：那里藤萝稠密，只见一位姿色绝代的女道士，闭目端坐，身上的衣裳霞帔都像新的。
English: The wisteria is thick there, and I see a female Taoist with an extraordinary appearance, sitting with her eyes closed, and her clothes all look like new.

古文：众观之不能测，或为整其冠髻，即应手腐坏。众惧散去。
现代文：大家看半天不能理解，有人便上前为她整理冠髻，不料，他一伸手那冠髻就腐坏了，众人吓得四散而逃。
English: It seemed incomprehensible to everyone, so someone came forward to sort out the wreath for her. Unexpectedly, as soon as he stretched out his hand, the wreath was rotten, and everyone fled in fear.

古文：复寻之，不能得。
现代文：再来寻找她，却怎么也找不到了。
English: I looked for her again, but I couldn't find her.

