古文：范晔在狱中，与诸甥侄书曰： 吾既造《后汉》，详观古今著述及评论，殆少可意者。
现代文：范晔在狱中时，对他的外甥和侄子们写信道： 我已经写成了《后汉书》，细看古今的著述及有关的评论，很少有符合自己心意的。
English: When Fan Qi was in prison, he wrote to his nephews and nieces: I have already written "Hou Han Shu" (The Book of Later Han Dynasty). I have carefully read the ancient and modern writings and relevant comments, and very few are in line with my own wishes.

古文：班氏最有高名，既任情无例，不可甲乙，唯志可推耳。
现代文：班固的名望最高，全是随意写的，毫无体例，不值得评判其优劣，只是他著述的志向可嘉罢了。
English: Banggu's reputation is the highest, it is all written arbitrarily, without style, it is not worth judging its merits and demerits, but the ambition of his writing is commendable.

古文：博赡可不及之，整理未必愧也。
现代文：在材料的全面和丰富上我可能比不上他，如果看材料的整理，我却未必感到惭愧。
English: In terms of the comprehensiveness and richness of the material, I may not be as good as him, but if you look at the arrangement of the material, I don't necessarily feel ashamed.

古文：吾杂传论，皆有精意深旨。
现代文：我写的杂传的末尾的议论文字，都有精深的意旨。
English: The argumentative passages at the end of the miscellany I have written have a profound meaning.

古文：至于《循吏》以下及六夷诸序论，笔势纵放，实天下之奇作。
现代文：至于《循吏》以下及至六夷部分的诸篇序论，笔力雄健，尽情挥洒，实在是天下的奇作。
English: As for the prologues of the following and up to the sixth part of "Xu Li," the penmanship is strong and vigorous, and it is really a wonder of the world.

古文：其中合者，往往不减《过秦篇》。
现代文：其中适当的篇章，往往不低于贾谊的《过秦论》。
English: Among them, the appropriate chapter is often no less than Jia Yi's "On the Qin Dynasty."

古文：尝共比方班氏所作，非但不愧之而已。
现代文：曾经同班氏所作之书放在一起比较，强之多多，并不只是不感到惭愧。
English: When I compare the books I once read by my classmates, there are so many that are much better, and I'm not just not ashamed.

古文：赞自是吾文之杰思，殆无一字空设，奇变不穷，同合异体，乃自不知所以称之。
现代文：赞语的部分自然是我的文章的杰出构思之处，大概没有一个字虚设，行文求变出奇，精彩处一个接一个，就是相同的内容也要用不同的叙述方式，竟然连我自己都不知道怎么称赞它。
English: Of course, the part of the praise is the outstanding conception of my article. There is probably not a single word that is false, the writing is trying to be surprising, the highlights are one after another, that is, the same content should be described in different ways, and even I don't know how to praise it.

古文：此书行，故应有赏音者。
现代文：这部书出现在社会上，必然应该得到人们的赏识。
English: This book appears in society, and it is bound to be appreciated by people.

古文：自古体大而思精，未有此也。 
现代文：自古以来结构宏大并且思致精密之作，还没有这样的。 
English: Since ancient times, there has never been a work of such a grand structure and thought-provoking precision.

古文：晔之高自夸诩如此。至以谓过班固，固岂可过哉？
现代文：范晔自高自大，自吹自擂居然达到这种地步，至于自称超过了班固最是不当，班固难道是随便就可以超过的吗？
English: Fan Ye is so arrogant and boastful that he has reached such a level. As for claiming to have surpassed Ban Gu, it is most improper. Can Ban Gu be surpassed casually?

古文：晔所著序论，了无可取，列传如邓禹、窦融、马援、班超、郭泰诸篇者，盖亦有数也，人苦不自如，可发千载一笑。
现代文：范晔所写的序论，全无可取之处，列传如邓禹、窦融、马援、班超、郭泰诸篇，也只不过是有数的几篇。人最怕没有自知之明，像范晔这样自夸，千年之后免不了被人耻笑。
English: The prologue written by Fan Hui has no redeeming features at all. It lists the works of Deng Yu, Dou Rong, Ma Yuan, Ban Chao, Guo Tai, and is just a few. People are most afraid of not being self-aware, and boasting like Fan Hui will inevitably be ridiculed after a thousand years.

