古文：士虞礼。特豕馈食，侧亨于庙门外之右，东面。
现代文：士虞祭之礼：用一只豕致祭，将豕的左半边置于寝门外的西边烹煮，面向东。
English: The ceremony of Shigusai: Using a yakitori to make a sacrifice, the left half of the yakitori is placed on the west side of the yakitori and cooked, facing east.

古文：鱼腊爨亚之，北上。
现代文：烹煮豕的灶的南边依次是烹煮鱼的灶和烹煮干肉的灶，以北为上。
English: On the south side of the cooker for cooking clams is the cooker for cooking fish and the cooker for cooking dried meat, with the north on top.

古文：饎爨在东壁，西面。
现代文：炊黍稷的灶设在东墙下，面朝西。
English: The cook stove is located under the east wall, facing west.

古文：设洗于西阶西南，水在洗西，篚在东。
现代文：设弃水之器一一洗于西阶的西南边，盥洗之水放在洗的西边，盛物的竹器一一篚放在洗的东边。
English: Set the waste water bowl to be washed one by one on the southwest side of the west staircase, the rinse water to be put on the west side of the wash, and the bamboo bowl to be filled one by one on the east side of the wash.

古文：尊于室中北墉下，当户，两甒醴、酒，酒在东。
现代文：酒尊设于室中东北隅，正对着门，甜醴酒一甒，酒一甒，共两甒，其位置是，甜醴酒在西，酒在甜醴酒之东。
English: The Sake Master is located in the north-eastern corner of the room, facing the door. There is one ladle of sweet sake and one ladle of wine, a total of two ladles. Its location is, sweet sake is in the west, and wine is in the east of sweet sake.

古文：无禁，幂用絺布，加勺，南枋。
现代文：酒尊直接放在地上，不用 禁 承垫，酒尊之口用麻葛粗布封盖，其上放勺，勺柄朝南。
English: The sake sommelier is placed directly on the ground, without a support cushion. The mouth of the sake sommelier is covered with a coarse mahogany cloth, and a spoon is placed on it, with the spoon handle facing south.

古文：素几，苇席，在西序下。
现代文：设素几和苇席于堂上西墙下。
English: Set up a kitchenette and a dining table under the west wall of the hall.

古文：苴刌茅，长五寸，束之，实于篚，馔于西坫上。馔两豆菹、醢于西楹之东，醢在西，一鉶亚之。
现代文：继而陈设菹菜和肉酱各一豆于西楹柱的东边，肉酱在西，菹菜在肉酱之东，依于菹菜之东设一盛羹器一一铏。
English: Next, one bean each of stew and meat sauce was set up on the east side of the west pillar, meat sauce on the west side, stew on the east side of meat sauce, and a bowl of soup was set up on the east side of stew.

古文：从献豆两亚之，四笾亚之，北上。
现代文：铏之东又设丧主献祝的两只豆，豆东设主妇献尸二笾、献祝二笾，两豆和四笾各自为列，以北为上。
English: To the east of the urn, there are two beans for the deceased to offer, and to the east of the cucumber, there are two beans for the hostess to offer, and two beans for the hostess to offer. The two beans and four beans are arranged in a row, with the north at the top.

古文：馔黍稷二敦于阶间，西上，藉用苇席。
现代文：设一盛黍、一盛稷的两只敦于东西两阶之间，盛黍之敦靠西，盛稷之敦靠东，以西为上，下用苇席垫着。
English: Set up a set of tongs and a set of tongs of two tongs between the east and west two steps, the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs of the tongs.

古文：匜水错于槃中，南流，在西阶之南，箪巾在其东。
现代文：把洗手浇水之器一一匜放在盥盘里，匜的吐水口朝南，将其设在西阶的南边，又把盛有巾的竹器一一箪放在盘、匜之东。
English: Place the hand-washing and watering utensils, one by one, in the bowl, with the spout of the bowl facing south, and place it on the south side of the west step, and place the bamboo utensil containing the towel, one by one, on the plate, east of the bowl.

古文：陈三鼎于门外之右，北面，北上，设扃鼏。
现代文：置放三只鼎于寝门外的西边，鼎的正面朝北，以北为上。
English: Place three tripods on the west side outside the sleeping door. The front of the tripod faces north, with north at the top.

古文：匕俎在西塾之西。羞燔俎在内西塾上，南顺。
现代文：接着又设抬鼎的杠子和覆鼎之巾，设盛有匕的俎于西塾，即门内西侧的堂屋的西边。设炙肉之俎于内西塾，俎之上端在北，下端在南。
English: Next, there is a raised bar and a cloth covering it, and a bowl with a yakitori is set up in the west school, that is, on the west side of the hall on the west side of the gate. A bowl of roasted meat is set up in the inner west school, with the upper end of the bowl in the north and the lower end in the south.

古文：主人及兄弟如葬服，宾执事者如吊服，皆即位于门外，如朝夕临位。
现代文：丧主及众兄弟穿葬服，宾客执事穿吊服，都于门外就位，和朝夕哭位相同。
English: The mourners and the brothers, dressed in funeral clothes, and the guest deacons, dressed in hanging clothes, all took their places outside the door, the same as the morning and evening wailing.

古文：妇人及内兄弟服、即位于堂，亦如之。
现代文：妇人和内兄弟穿丧服于堂上就位，亦和朝夕哭位相同。
English: Wearing mourning clothes, the woman and her brother-in-law took their places in the hall, also the same as the morning and evening crying places.

古文：祝免，澡葛絰带，布席于室中，东面，右几，降，出，及宗人即位于门西，东面南上。
现代文：丧祝穿 免服 ，整理好葛绖和葛带，然后在室中铺席，席的正面朝东，席的右边放几；继而下堂、出门，和宗人一起向东于门西就位，以南为上。
English: The mourners should wear casual clothes, arrange the kudzu and kudzu belt, and then set up a seat in the room, the front of the seat facing east, and put a few on the right side of the seat; then go down the hall, go out, and take a position with the deceased to the east of the west gate, and to the south.

古文：宗人告有司具，遂请拜宾。
现代文：宗人告诉丧主一切准备就绪，请行虞祭之礼。
English: The patriarch told the mourners that everything was ready, and invited them to perform the rite of the festival.

古文：如临，入门哭，妇人哭。
现代文：丧主随即拜谢宾客，和朝夕哭时一样，然后丧主和众兄弟入门而哭，妇人也跟着哭。
English: The mourners then bowed and thanked the guests, just as they did in the morning and evening, and then the mourners and all the brothers entered the door and wept, and the woman also wept.

古文：主人即位于堂，众主人及兄弟、宾即位于西方，如反哭位。
现代文：丧主于堂上西阶向东就位，众主人及兄弟、宾客于堂下西边向东就位，和朝夕哭位相反。
English: The mourners take their places on the west steps of the upper hall, facing east, while the hosts, brothers and guests take their places on the west side of the lower hall, facing east. This is the opposite of the morning and evening crying places.

古文：祝入门，左，北面。宗人西阶前北面。
现代文：丧祝入门后于左边向北就位，宗人则于西阶前向北就位。
English: After the mourners enter, they take their seats on the left, facing north, while the mourners take their seats in front of the west steps, facing north.

古文：祝盥，升，取苴降，洗之，升，入设于几东席上，东缩，降，洗觯，升，止哭。
现代文：丧祝洗手后，登堂，从西坫上取白茅草下堂，将其洗净；然后登堂入室，将白茅草放在几前的席上，自西而东置放，以西为上；继而下堂，清洗酒觯；又上堂，止众人哭。
English: After the mourners and celebrants had washed their hands, they went into the hall, took the white thatch from the west window, and washed it; then they went into the room, placed the white thatch on the seats in front of them, from west to east, and from west to top; then they went down the hall, washed the wine goblets; then they went back up the hall, and everyone stopped crying.

古文：主人倚杖，入。
现代文：丧主倚丧杖于西墙，然后入室朝西而立。
English: The mourner leans on the mourning staff on the west wall, then enters the room and stands facing west.

古文：祝从，在左，西面。
现代文：丧祝随从丧主入堂，于丧主的左边向西而立。
English: The Funeral Blessing follows the mourner into the church and stands to the left of the mourner, facing west.

古文：赞荐菹醢，醢在北。佐食及执事盥，出举，长在左。
现代文：助祭执事者一一赞献上盛菹菜和肉酱之二豆，盛菹菜之豆放在南边，盛肉酱之豆放在盛菹菜之豆的北边。佐食和执事洗手后，出去抬鼎，抬鼎时助祭者之长在左边。
English: The deacon praises the two beans with pickled vegetables and meat sauce one by one. The beans with pickled vegetables are placed on the south side, and the beans with meat sauce are placed on the north side of the beans with pickled vegetables. After washing their hands, Sasaki and the deacon go out to carry the table, and the deacon is on the left when carrying the table.

古文：鼎入，设于西阶前，东面北上。
现代文：完毕，左边之助祭者先退而复宾位。
English: When it was over, the deacon on the left stepped back and returned to his seat.

古文：匕俎从设。左人抽扃、鼏、匕，佐食及右人载。
现代文：取豕俎入而设于豆的东边；取鱼俎入而设于豕俎的东边，取干肉俎入而设干豕俎的北边。
English: Take the bean and place it on the east side of the bean; take the fish and place it on the east side of the bean; take the dried meat and place it on the north side of the bean.

古文：卒，朼者逆退复位。俎入，设于豆东，鱼亚之，腊特。赞设二敦于俎南，黍，其东稷。
现代文：助祭执事者赞设两只敦于俎的南边一一盛黍之敦在豕俎之南，盛稷之敦在鱼俎之南和盛黍之敦的东边。
English: The assistant deacon is in favour of setting up two temples on the south side of the moat, namely the temple of Dun in the south of the moat, the temple of Dun in the south of the fish pond and the temple of Dun in the east of the moat.

古文：设一鉶于豆南。
现代文：设一盛羹器一一铏于豆的南边。
English: Place a bowl of soup, one ladle at a time, on the south side of the beans.

古文：佐食出，立于户西。
现代文：佐食出室，立于户西。
English: Sashiki goes out of the room and stands in the west of the house.

古文：赞者彻鼎。
现代文：助祭执事者撤去空鼎。
English: The deacon removes the empty chair.

古文：祝酌醴，命佐食启会。
现代文：祝斟甜醴酒，命佐食启开敦盖。
English: Let's drink sweet sake, and let's eat sashimi.

古文：佐食许诺，启会，却于敦南，复位。
现代文：佐食应诺，启开敦盖，仰置于敦的南边后，复户西原位。
English: Sasaki agreed, opened the Dunkai, and after it was placed on the south side of the Dunkai, it was restored to its original position in the west.

古文：祝奠觯于鉶南。复位。
现代文：祝设斟有甜醴酒的酒觯于盛羹器铏的南边，回到丧主左边原位。
English: Place the wine ladle filled with sweet wine on the south side of the soup ladle, and return to the original position on the left side of the host.

古文：主人再拜稽首。
现代文：丧主再次叩首拜谢。
English: The mourners again bowed their heads in thanks.

古文：祝飨，命佐食祭。
现代文：祝告神享此祭，并命佐食行祭。
English: He congratulated the deities for enjoying the festival and ordered the Sasakitori procession.

古文：佐食许诺，钩袒，取黍稷，祭于苴三，取肤祭，祭如初。
现代文：佐食应诺，挽袖露臂，取黍稷置于白茅草上，祭三次：又取脰肉置于白茅草上，亦祭三次。
English: Sashimi is offered, the sleeves are rolled up, the yakitori is placed on the white thatch grass, and the offering is made three times: the yakitori is placed on the white thatch grass, and the offering is made three times.

古文：祝取奠觯，祭，亦如之；不尽，益，反奠之。
现代文：祝取铏南之酒觯，于白茅草上祭之，亦三次，觯中的甜醴酒不倒尽，添满后还置于铏南。
English: The wine jars from southern Anhui Province were collected and placed on the white thatch grass. Three times, the sweet wine in the jars was not emptied, and after being filled, they were placed in southern Anhui Province.

古文：主人再拜稽首。
现代文：丧主再次叩首拜谢。
English: The mourners again bowed their heads in thanks.

古文：祝祝卒，主人拜如初，哭，出复位。
现代文：祝读享辞完毕，丧主又叩首拜谢，和前面一样，继而哭着出来，返回西阶上向东之原位。
English: After the reading of the eulogy, the mourners bowed their heads in thanks, as before, and then came out crying, returning to their original position on the west steps facing east.

古文：祝迎尸，一人衰絰，奉篚，哭从尸。
现代文：祝迎代表死者受祭之人一一 尸 进门。
English: Greet those who have been sacrificed on behalf of the dead, one by one, as they enter the door.

古文：尸入门，丈夫踊，妇人踊。淳尸盥，宗人授巾。
现代文：丧主之兄弟一人服衰带绖，捧拿盛物之器一一篚，哭着从 尸 而入。 尸 入门，男子哭、踊，妇人亦哭、踊。执事用盥倒水让 尸 洗手，宗人授巾于 尸 揩手。
English: One of the deceased's brothers put on the cassock, took out the vessels one by one, and wept as he entered the tomb. As the corpse entered, the man wept and danced, and the woman also wept and danced. The deacon poured water with a ladle for the corpse to wash his hands, and the priest gave the corpse a handkerchief to wash his hands.

古文：尸及阶，祝延尸。尸升，宗人诏踊如初。尸入户，踊如初，哭止。
现代文： 尸 至阶前，祝请 尸 上阶。 尸 上堂，宗人诏告，男子、妇人哭、踊和前面一样。 尸 入室时，则只踊不哭。
English: When the corpse enters the hall, the priest announces that the man and woman will cry and dance as before, but when the corpse enters the room, they will only dance and not cry.

古文：妇人入于房。
现代文：此时妇人回避入房。
English: At this time, the woman avoided entering the room.

古文：主人及祝拜妥尸。尸拜，遂坐。
现代文：丧主和祝向 尸 叩拜，请 尸 安坐； 尸 回拜后坐下。
English: Mourners and well-wishers bow to the corpse, and ask the corpse to sit quietly; the corpse sits down after bowing.

古文：从者错篚于尸左席上，立于其北。尸取奠，左执之，取菹，擩于醢，祭于豆间。
现代文：从 尸 而入者将篚置放于 尸 左边之席上，并于席之北边侍立。 尸 取酒觯于铏南，用左手拿着，又用右手取来菹菜，并杂以肉酱，于两豆之间行祭。
English: Those who enter from the corpse will be placed on the table to the left of the corpse and stand on the north side of the table.The corpse takes the wine and stews it in the south of the country, holding it with the left hand, and takes the stew with the right hand, and mixes it with meat sauce, and performs the ritual between two beans.

古文：祝命佐食堕祭。
现代文：祝命佐食取祭物以授 尸 。
English: I wish you a life of feasting on sacrificial food and offering it to the dead.

古文：佐食取黍稷肺祭，授尸，尸祭之。
现代文：佐食遵命取来黍、稷、肺等授于 尸 ， 尸 以之行祭。
English: According to the order, sashimi was taken to give gills, gills, lungs, etc. to the corpse, and the corpse was used for the festival.

古文：祭奠，祝祝，主人拜如初。尸尝醴，奠之。
现代文：祭毕放回原处，祝请 尸 享祭，丧主叩拜如前。 尸 尝过甜醴酒后，亦放回原处。
English: After the ceremony, the corpse was returned to its original place, and the mourners bowed to the deceased as before.The corpse was also returned to its original place after tasting the sweet sake.

古文：佐食举肺脊授尸。尸受，振祭，哜之，左手执之。
现代文：佐食又取来肺脊授于 尸 。 尸 接受振祭，尝过后用左手拿着。
English: The corpse received the vibrating offering, tasted it, and then held it in his left hand.

古文：祝命佐食迩敦。
现代文：祝命佐食将敦移近。
English: I wish Sashiki would move closer.

古文：佐食举黍，错于席上。
现代文：佐食遵命并取黍置于席上。 
English: Sasaki complied and took the bowl and placed it on the table.

古文：尸祭鉶，尝鉶，泰羹湆自门入，设于鉶南；四豆，设于左。尸饭，播余于篚。
现代文：尸 以右手用祭勺祭、尝菜羹。太羹肉汁从门外拿进来，陈设于铏的南边；切好的大块肉放在四只豆中，陈设于太羹肉汁的左边， 尸 吃饭，剩余的放入篚中。
English: The corpse is sacrificed with a ceremonial spoon in the right hand, and the vegetable soup is tasted. The gravy is brought in from outside the door and placed on the south side of the cocoon; the chopped chunks of meat are placed in four beans and placed on the left side of the gravy. The corpse is eaten, and the rest is placed in the cocoon.

古文：三饭，佐食举干；尸受，振祭，哜之，实于篚。
现代文：俟 尸 取饭三次，佐食献上肋肉； 尸 接受振祭，尝过肋肉，剩余的放入篚中。
English: 

古文：又三饭。举胳，祭如初。
现代文：又俟 尸 取饭三次，佐食献上豕之后胫骨， 尸 受和尝如前。
English: Again, the corpse was roasted, and the rice was taken three times. After the sausage was presented, the bones were roasted, and the corpse was eaten as before.

古文：佐食举鱼腊，实于篚。
现代文：佐食又献上鱼和干肉， 尸 不受纳，故佐食直接将其放入篚中。
English: Sashimi also offered fish and dried meat, but the corpse was not accepted, so Sashimi put it directly into the eel.

古文：又三饭，举肩，祭如初。
现代文：又俟 尸 取饭三次，佐食献上豕肩， 尸 受、尝如前。
English: Again, the corpse was roasted, and the rice was taken three times, and the sausage was presented on a spit, and the corpse was eaten and tasted as before.

古文：举鱼腊俎，俎释三个。
现代文：佐食又献上鱼和干肉二俎，而留下臂、臑、肫三俎。
English: Sashimi is also served with two pieces of fish and dried meat, leaving three pieces of arm, gill and gill.

古文：尸卒食。佐食受肺脊，实于篚。反于篚，反黍如初设。
现代文：至此 尸 食完毕。 尸 取肺、脊于豆而交于佐食，佐食接过后放进篚中；佐食又取席上之黍放回原处，和开始陈设时一样。
English: At this point, the eating of the corpse was complete. The corpse's lungs and ridge were taken from the beans and given to Sashiki. Sashiki took them and placed them in the urn; Sashiki then took the urn from the table and put it back in the same place as when it was first set up.

古文：主人洗废爵，酌酒酳尸。尸拜受爵，主人北面答拜。尸祭酒，尝之。
现代文：丧主洗净无足之酒爵，斟酒后献给 尸 ，让其漱口。 尸 拜谢后接过酒爵，丧主面朝北回拜。 尸 继而用酒行祭，然后尝酒。
English: The mourners washed the legless baron, and after pouring the wine, offered it to the corpse to rinse its mouth. The corpse, after bowing, received the baron, and bowed to the mourners facing north. The corpse then performed the ritual with the wine, and then tasted the wine.

古文：宾长以肝从，实于俎，缩，右盐。尸左执爵，右取肝，擩盐，振祭，哜之，加于俎。
现代文：宾客之长随之献肝和盐于 尸 ，肝、盐皆盛于俎，肝在左侧，盐在右侧。 尸 左手执酒爵，右手取肝，蘸盐振祭，尝过后放回俎上。
English: The head of the guests then offers the liver and salt to the corpse, the liver and salt are both placed in the urn, the liver is on the left side and the salt is on the right side. the corpse holds the wine in his left hand, takes the liver in his right hand, shakes the salt, tastes it and puts it back on the urn.

古文：宾降，反俎于西塾，复位。尸卒爵，祝受，不相爵。主人拜，尸答拜。
现代文：宾客下堂，将俎放回西塾原位，然后自己返回西阶前众兄弟南边原位。 尸 喝干酒爵中酒，祝接过空爵，不命丧主拜送爵。丧主向 尸 叩拜， 尸 答拜。
English: After the guests left the hall, the coffin was put back in its original place in the west side of the hall, and then the coffin itself was returned to its original place in the south side of the hall in front of the brothers on the west side of the hall. The corpse drank the dry liquor, received the empty coffin, and prayed for the deceased. The deceased bowed to the corpse, and the corpse bowed back.

古文：祝酌授尸，尸以醋主人，主人拜受爵，尸答拜。
现代文：祝又斟酒授于 尸 ， 尸 以之回报丧主；丧主拜谢后接过酒爵， 尸 回拜。
English: Wishing and pouring liquor to the corpse, the corpse returns it to the bereaved; the bereaved thanks the deceased and receives the liquor, the corpse thanks the bereaved.

古文：主人坐祭，卒爵，拜，尸签拜。
现代文：丧主坐下行祭，继而饮尽爵中酒，拜谢 尸 ； 尸 又回拜。
English: The mourner sits down and performs the ritual, then drinks all the wine in the jar, prays for the corpse, and the corpse prays back.

古文：筵祝，南面。
现代文：祝坐在细苇席上，面朝南。
English: I wish you to sit at the fine table, facing south.

古文：主人献祝，祝拜，坐受爵，主人答拜。
现代文：丧主献酒给祝；祝拜谢后，坐着接过酒爵；丧主回拜。
English: The mourner offers wine to the celebrant; the celebrant, after bowing and thanking, sits down to receive the wine; the mourner returns the bow.

古文：荐菹醢，设俎。
现代文：丧主献上置于俎上的菹菜和肉酱给祝。
English: The mourners offered stew and meat sauce placed on the urn to the mourners.

古文：祝左执爵，祭荐，奠爵，兴，取肺，坐祭，哜之，兴；加于俎，祭酒，尝之。
现代文：祝左手执拿酒爵，右手以所献之菹菜和肉酱行祭，祭过后放下酒爵，站起来；继而取肺坐下，祭、尝之后，又起立；将肺放回俎上，又取酒行祭，并尝酒。
English: Let the left hand hold the wine goblet, and the right hand make the offering with the leeks and meat sauce. After the offering, put down the wine goblet and stand up. Next, take the lungs and sit down. After the offering and tasting, stand up again. Put the lungs back on the urn, take the wine and make the offering and taste the wine.

古文：肝从。
现代文：次宾接着献肝于祝。
English: The second guest went on to offer his best wishes.

古文：祝取肝擩盐，振祭，哜之，加于俎，卒爵，拜。
现代文：祝取肝蘸盐，祭、尝之后，放回俎上，饮尽酒爵中酒，拜谢丧主。
English: After saluting and tasting the liver pickled in salt, put it back on the yakitori, drink all the wine in the bottle, and give thanks to the deceased.

古文：主人答拜。
现代文：丧主回拜。
English: The host returns the compliment.

古文：祝坐授主人。
现代文：祝坐下，将酒爵授给丧主。
English: Please be seated, and may I present the sommelier to the deceased.

古文：主人酌献佐食，佐食北面拜，坐受爵，主人答拜。
现代文：丧主斟酒后，献干佐食；佐食朝北叩拜，坐下接过酒爵；丧主回拜。
English: After the mourners poured the wine, they offered dried sashimi; the sashimi bowed to the north and sat down to receive the wine; the mourners bowed back.

古文：佐食祭酒，卒爵，拜。
现代文：佐食以之行祭后，饮尽爵中酒，并拜谢丧主。
English: After the procession of the festival with the sashimi, they drank all of the sake and bowed to the deceased.

古文：主人答拜，受爵，出，实于篚，升堂复位。
现代文：丧主回拜，接过空爵，出而置于篚中，继而登堂返回原位，取过丧杖。
English: The mourner bowed in return, took the empty knight, went out and placed it in the coffin, and then returned to the original place and took the funeral staff.

古文：主妇洗足爵于房中，酌，亚献尸，如主人仪。
现代文：主妇在房中清洗有足之酒爵，斟上酒后二次献 尸 ，和前面丧主献 尸 一样。
English: The housewife cleans the foot-deep liquor in the room, and after pouring the liquor, she offers the corpse a second time, just as the previous mourners offered the corpse.

古文：自反两笾枣、栗，设于会南，枣在西。尸祭笾，祭酒，如初。
现代文：旋即自己返回堂上取两笾入室，设于敦盖的南边，盛枣之笾在西，盛栗之笾在东。 尸 以笾行祭，又以酒行祭，和前面丧主献 尸 之仪相同。
English: He immediately returned to the hall to take the two urns and brought them into the room. They were placed on the south side of the roof, the urn for the jujube in the west, and the urn for the chestnut in the east.

古文：宾以燔从，如初。尸祭燔，卒爵，如初。
现代文：宾接着献上炙肉，也和前面仪节相同。 尸 以炙肉行祭，然后饮尽爵中酒，亦和前面仪节相同。
English: The guests then present roasted meat, which is also the same as the previous ceremony.The corpse performs a ritual with roasted meat, and then drinks up the wine, which is also the same as the previous ceremony.

古文：酌献祝，笾、燔从，献佐食，皆如初。
现代文：宾又斟酒献于祝，又献二笾之枣、栗和炙肉于佐食，皆与前面仪节相同。
English: The guests also poured wine to celebrate the occasion, and also offered dates, chestnuts and roasted meat in sashimi, all of which were the same as the previous ceremony.

古文：以虚爵入于房。
现代文：于是主妇执拿空爵入房。
English: So the housewife took the empty jar and went into the house.

古文：宾长洗繶爵，三献，燔从，如初仪。
现代文：宾客之长清洗口足间有篆文为饰的繶爵，斟上酒后，第三次献给 尸 、祝等，接着又献上炙肉，和丧主献 尸 之仪相同。
English: The head of the guests cleans the coffin, which is decorated with inscriptions between the mouth and the feet. After pouring the wine, the coffin is offered for the third time, and then the roasted meat is offered, which is the same as the ceremony of offering the corpse to the deceased.

古文：妇人复位。
现代文：妇人返回室上原位。
English: The woman returns to her original position in the room.

古文：祝出户，西面告利成。
现代文：祝出室后，向西告诉丧主虞祭礼毕。
English: After leaving the room, he announced to the west that the funeral ceremony was over.

古文：主人哭，皆哭。
现代文：丧主哭，男子、妇人皆哭。
English: Both men and women weep at the loss of a loved one.

古文：祝入，尸谡。
现代文：祝又入室， 尸 起立。
English: Welcome back, corpse, arise.

古文：从者奉篚哭，如初。
现代文：从 尸 者捧拿盛物之器一一篚而哭，和先前一样。
English: From the corpse, one by one, the mourners picked up their offerings and wept, just as before.

古文：祝前尸。出户，踊如初；降堂，踊如初；出门亦如之。
现代文：祝在 尸 前面引导，出室，这时男子、妇人哭、踊；祝和 尸 下堂，男子、妇人哭、踊；祝和 尸 出门，男子、妇人哭、踊，皆和先前一样。
English: In front of the corpse, men and women wept and danced as they led the corpse out of the room; with the corpse, men and women wept and danced as they led the corpse downstairs; with the corpse, men and women wept and danced as they led the corpse out of the door.

古文：祝反，入彻，设于西北隅，如其设也。
现代文：祝又返回入室，撤去祭席，改设于西北隅，和前面设席时次第相同。
English: I wish you to return to the room, remove the altar, and replace it in the northwest corner, in the same order as when the front seats were set up.

古文：几在南，〈厂非〉用席。
现代文：置几于南边，又用席子挡住西北隅使之幽暗。
English: Put a few on the south side, and use a mat to block the northwest corner to make it dark.

古文：祝荐席彻入于房。
现代文：献给祝的坐席撤、收于房中。
English: The seats dedicated to congratulation are withdrawn and closed in the room.

古文：祝自执其俎出。
现代文：祝自己执俎而出。
English: I wish you the best of luck.

古文：赞阖牖户。主人降，宾出。主人出门，哭止，皆复位。
现代文：丧主、众兄弟和宾客皆即位于门外，如朝夕哭时临位。
English: The mourners, the brethren, and the guests were all immediately outside the door, as they are in the morning and evening, when there is weeping.

古文：宗人告事毕。
现代文：宗人诏告礼事完毕。
English: The ceremony is over.

古文：宾出，主人送，拜稽颡。
现代文：宾客出大门，丧主叩首相送。
English: The guests leave the gate, and the mourners clap for the prime minister.

