古文：武王问太公曰： 攻伐之道奈何？ 
现代文：武王询问太公说： 进攻作战的原则是什么？ 
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke: What is the principle of offensive operations?

古文：太公曰： 势因敌家之动，变生于两阵之间，奇正发于无穷之源。
现代文：太公答道： 作战的态势要根据敌人的行动而决定，战术的变化产生于敌我双方的临阵对垒，奇正的运用来源于将帅无穷的智慧和思考。
English: Tai Gong replied: The battle situation should be decided according to the enemy's actions. The change of tactics comes from the confrontation between the enemy and us. The correct use of tactics comes from the infinite wisdom and thinking of the general.

古文：故至事不语，用兵不言。且事之至者，其言不足听也；兵之用者，其状不足见也。
现代文：所以，最重要的机密不能泄露，用兵的谋略不可言传，况且机密极为重要只能藏于心中而不能表现为论论，军队的部署和运用只能隐秘而不可暴露于敌。
English: Therefore, the most important secrets cannot be divulged, the strategy of using troops cannot be told, moreover, secrets are extremely important and can only be hidden in the heart and cannot be expressed as a theory, the deployment and use of troops can only be concealed and cannot be exposed to the enemy.

古文：忽而往，忽而来，能独专而不制者，兵也。
现代文：倏然而去，转眼间来，独自一人掌握而不受制于人，这就是用兵的原则。
English: The principle of the use of troops is to go in spite of everything, and to come out of it in the blink of an eye, to be in sole control and not subject to others.

古文： 夫兵闻则议，见则图，知则困，辨则危。故善战者，不待张军；善除患者，理于未生；善胜敌者，胜于无形；上战无与战。
现代文：敌人听说我军兴兵，就会商议应对之策；敌人发现我军行动，就会设计对我算计图谋；敌人知道了我军企图，我军就会陷入困境；敌人掌握了我军的行动规律，我军就会遭遇危险。所以善于用兵的，不需要等到兵力部署完成后才知晓；善于消除祸患的，能够防患于未然；善于打胜仗的，能够取胜于无形之中。最高明的作战是不战而使敌人屈服。
English: When the enemy hears that our army has raised an army, he will discuss how to deal with it; when the enemy discovers our army's actions, he will devise plans and schemes against me; when the enemy knows our army's intentions, our army will be in trouble; when the enemy grasps the rules of our army's actions, our army will be in danger. Therefore, those who are good at using troops do not need to wait until the deployment of troops is completed to know; those who are good at eliminating disasters can prevent them before they happen; those who are good at winning wars can win in the invisible. The wisest way to fight is to make the enemy surrender without fighting.

古文：故争胜于白刃之前者，非良将也；设备于已失之后者，非上圣也；智与众同，非国师也；技与众同，非国工也。
现代文：因此，经过白刃相交殊死拚搏而取胜的，不是良将；在失败之后再来设置守备的，不是智士；智慧与一般人相同的，不能称为国师；技艺与一般人相同的，不能称为国工。
English: Therefore, it is not a good general who wins through a desperate struggle; it is not a wise man who sets up a defense after a defeat; the same wisdom as ordinary people cannot be called a national teacher; the same skills as ordinary people cannot be called a national worker.

古文：事莫大于必克，用莫大于玄默，动莫神于不意，谋莫善于不识。
现代文：用兵最重要的莫过于所攻必克，作战最重要的莫过于保守机密，行动最重要的莫过于出其不意，计谋最重要的莫过于神妙难测。
English: There is nothing more important in the use of troops than to strike hard, nothing more important in war than to keep secrets, nothing more important in action than to surprise, and nothing more important in strategy than to outwit.

古文：夫先胜者，先见弱于敌，而后战者也，故事半而功倍焉。
现代文：凡是未战而先胜的，都是先示弱于敌，然后进行决战。这样便可事半而功倍。
English: Whoever wins first without fighting shows that he is weaker than the enemy first, and then fights a decisive battle. In this way, he can do more with less.

古文： 圣人征于天地之动，孰知其纪。
现代文：圣人观察天地的变化，反复探求其运行的规律，根据日月的运行，季节的变化，昼夜的长短，推断出事物变化的普遍规律。
English: The sage observed the changes of heaven and earth, repeatedly explored the laws of their operation, and deduced the general laws of the changes of things according to the operation of the sun and the moon, the changes of the seasons, and the length of day and night.

古文：循阴阳之道而从其候；当天地盈缩因以为常；物有死生，因天地之形。故曰：未见形而战，虽众必败。
现代文：万物的生死，取决于天地的变化。所以说，还没有弄清战争的形势就轻率出击，即使人数众多也一定失败。
English: The life and death of all things depend on the changes in the heavens and the earth. Therefore, if the situation of the war is not clear, it will be rash to attack, and even if there are many people, it will certainly fail.

古文：善战者，居之不挠，见胜则起，不胜则止。
现代文：善于指挥作战的人，按兵不动等待时机，不被假象所扰，看到有胜利把握就发动进攻，没有获胜的把握就静卧观察。
English: Those who are good at commanding and fighting wait for the right time, do not be disturbed by illusions, and launch an attack when they are sure of victory. If they are not sure of victory, they lie still and observe.

古文：故曰： 无恐惧，无犹豫。
现代文：所以说，不要恐惧，不要犹豫不决。
English: So don't be afraid, don't hesitate.

古文：用兵之害，犹豫最大；三军之灾，莫过狐疑。
现代文：用兵的大忌是犹豫不决；军队最可怕的灾难也莫过于犹豫不决。
English: Hesitancy is the great taboo in the employment of soldiers; nothing is more disastrous for an army than indecision.

古文：善者见利不失，遇时不疑，失利后时，反受其殃。
现代文：善于打仗的人，看到有利的情况决不放过，遇到有利的战机决不迟疑。否则，失掉有利条件放过有利战机，自己反而会遭受祸殃。
English: A person who is good at fighting will never miss a favorable situation and will never hesitate to encounter a favorable fighter plane. Otherwise, if he misses a favorable condition and misses a favorable fighter plane, he will suffer a disaster.

古文：故智者从之而不释，巧者一决而不犹豫，是以疾雷不及掩耳，迅电不及瞑目，赴之若惊，用之若狂，当之者破，近之者亡，孰能御之？
现代文：所以，聪明的指挥者抓住战机就不放过，机智的指挥者一旦下了决定就绝不迟疑。所以投入战斗才能迅雷使人不及掩耳，像闪电使人来不及闭上眼睛，前进有如惊马奔驰，作战有如狂风扫荡。凡是阻挡它的就被击破，靠近它的都被消灭，这样的军队还有谁能阻挡呢？
English: Therefore, a clever commander will not let go of the fighter, and a witty commander will never hesitate once he has made a decision. Therefore, it is only by engaging in battle that lightning can make people unable to cover their ears, lightning can make people unable to close their eyes, advance is like a horse galloping, and combat is like a wild wind sweeping. Anything that blocks it will be defeated, and anything close to it will be eliminated. Who else can stop such an army?

古文： 夫将有所不言而守者，神也；有所不见而视者，明也。
现代文：将帅用兵，能不动声色而胸有成竹的叫做神，情况未明而洞察端倪的叫做明。
English: The commander-in-chief uses soldiers. The one who can be calm and confident is called a god. The one whose situation is unclear and insightful is called a sage.

古文：故知神明之道者，野无衡敌，对无立国。 武王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：因此，掌握了神明的方法，作战就没有势均力敌的对手，也没有敢与之作对的国家了。 武王说： 您说得太好了！ 
English: Therefore, having mastered the divine method, there is no equal opponent in the war, and there is no country that dares to oppose it.Wu Wang said: You said it so well!

