古文：孝成皇帝，元帝太子也。
现代文：孝成皇帝，是元帝的太子。
English: Emperor Xiaocheng was the prince of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：母曰王皇后。元帝在太子宫生甲观画堂，为世嫡皇孙。
现代文：母亲是王皇后，元帝为太子时，生成帝于宫中的彩画之堂，为嫡皇孙。
English: His mother was the empress dowager, and when Emperor Yuan was crown prince, he was born in the palace's painting hall, making him a direct descendant of the emperor.

古文：宣帝爱之，字曰太孙，常置左右。
现代文：宣帝十分喜爱，替他取字为太孙，经常置于膝下。
English: Emperor Xuan was very fond of him, and often placed him on his knee to take his last name as his grandson.

古文：年三岁而宣帝崩，元帝即位，帝为太子。
现代文：年三岁而祖父宣帝去世，元帝继位，成帝立为太子。
English: When he was three years old, his grandfather Emperor Xuan died, Emperor Yuan succeeded to the throne, and Emperor Cheng became the crown prince.

古文：壮好经书，宽博谨慎。
现代文：成年后好读经书，宽博谨慎。
English: When they become adults, they are good at reading scriptures and are broad-minded and prudent.

古文：初居桂宫，上尝急召，太子出龙楼门，不敢绝驰道，西至直城门，得绝乃度，还入作室门。
现代文：原先居于桂宫，元帝有时紧急召见，太子出龙楼门，不敢横穿天子所行的驰道，西至直城门，到城门前才横穿以过，又回头到作室门。
English: Originally, he lived in the Katsura Palace. The Yuan Emperor sometimes summoned him urgently. The prince went out of the gate of the Dragon Palace, but did not dare to cross the road traveled by the heavenly son. He went west to the straight city gate, and only crossed it before reaching the city gate, and then turned back to the house gate.

古文：上迟之，问其故，以状对。上大说，乃著令，令太子得绝驰道云。
现代文：元帝见迟到，询问原因，成帝将不敢穿越天子驰道而绕道的情况告知，元帝十分高兴，于是下令，说太子可以横越驰道。
English: Seeing that he was late, Emperor Yuan inquired about the reason, and Chengdi told him that he would not dare to pass through the path of the prince and take a detour. Emperor Yuan was very happy, so he ordered that the prince could cross the path.

古文：其后幸酒，乐燕乐，上不以为能。而定陶恭王有材艺，母傅昭仪又爱幸，上以故常有意欲以恭王为嗣。
现代文：后来好酒贪杯寻欢作乐，元帝认为他无能，而定陶恭王多才多艺，其母傅昭仪又受宠，元帝有意立恭王为太子。
English: Later, after drinking a lot of wine and looking for fun, the Yuan Emperor thought he was incompetent, but Ding Tao and King Gong were versatile, and his mother Fu Zhaoyi was also favored. The Yuan Emperor intended to make King Gong the crown prince.

古文：赖侍中史丹护太子家，辅助有力，上亦以先帝尤爱太子，故得无废。
现代文：赖侍中史显护太子家，辅助有力，而元帝又因宣帝特别喜欢太子，所以才免于废。
English: Lai's attendant, Zhongshi Xian, protected the prince's family and was a powerful assistant, while Emperor Yuan, because Emperor Xuan was particularly fond of the prince, was spared the waste.

古文：竟宁元年五月，元帝崩。
现代文：竟宁元年五月，元帝驾崩。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of Emperor Genning, Emperor Yuan passed away.

古文：六月已未，太子即皇帝位，谒高庙。
现代文：六月二十二日，太子登皇帝位，参拜高祖庙。
English: On June 22, the crown prince ascended to the throne and visited the Gaozhu Temple.

古文：尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
English: The respected empress dowager is the great empress dowager, and the empress is the empress dowager.

古文：以元舅侍中卫尉阳平侯王凤为大司马大将军，领尚书事。
现代文：以大舅侍中卫尉阳平侯王凤为大司马、大将军，领尚书事。
English: Yang Ping Hou Wang Feng, the great uncle and lieutenant of the Middle Guards, was the chief steward and general, and was in charge of bookkeeping.

古文：乙未，有司言： 乘舆车、牛、马、禽兽皆非礼，不宜以葬。 
现代文：七月二十八日，有关人员上言： 乘舆车、牛马、禽兽随葬都属非礼，不应随葬。 
English: On July 28th, the relevant personnel made the following statement: It is impolite to take public vehicles, cattle, horses, and animals to accompany the funeral, and they should not accompany the funeral.

古文：奏可。
现代文：成帝同意。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：七月，大赦天下。
现代文：七月，大赦天下。
English: In July, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：建始元年春正月乙丑，皇曾祖悼考庙灾。
现代文：建始元年正月初一日，皇曾祖悼考庙火灾。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the first century, the emperor's great-grandfather mourned the fire of the examination temple.

古文：立故河间王弟上郡库令良为王。
现代文：立已故河间王弟上郡库令良为王。
English: The late King Kawama's younger brother, the former county treasurer, installed Ryo as king.

古文：有星勃于营室。
现代文：有彗星出现在营室星区。
English: A comet has appeared in the Cambrian star region.

古文：罢上林诏狱。
现代文：罢免上林诏狱。
English: He was dismissed from Shanglin Zhao Prison.

古文：二月，右将军长史姚尹等使匈奴还，去塞百余里，暴风火发，烧杀尹等七人。
现代文：二月，右将军长史姚尹等出使匈奴回国途中，离边塞百余里时，突然遭遇风暴火灾，烧死姚尹等七人。
English: In February, when Commander-in-Chief of the Right Division Shi Yao Yin and other envoys of the Xiongnu were on their way back to China, more than a hundred miles away from the border fortress, they suddenly encountered a storm fire, which burned Yao Yin and seven others to death.

古文：官吏千石以下至二百石及宗室子有属籍者、三老、孝弟、力田、鳏、寡、孤、独钱、帛，各有差，吏民五十户牛、酒。
现代文：赏赐各侯王、丞相、将军、列侯、王太后、公主、王主、吏二千石黄金，宗室各官吏千石以下到二百石及宗室男子谱籍有名者、三老、孝悌力田、鳏寡孤独赏以钱帛，各有差等，赏吏民五十户牛酒若干。
English: Rewarded the princes, ministers, generals, vassals, queens, queens, princesses, sovereigns, and officials with 2,000 koku of gold, the families of officials with 1,000 koku or less to 200 koku, and the families of men with famous genealogies, the three old men, the filial piety, and the lonely widows and widowers with money, each with a difference, and rewarded the officials and the people of fifty households with a number of cattle and wine.

古文：诏曰： 乃者火灾降于祖庙，有星孛于东方，始正而亏，咎孰大焉！
现代文：下诏说： 前时火灾降于祖庙，彗星出现于东方，开始登基就被上天示警，过失是严重的！
English: The next edict said: Previously, a fire fell on the ancestral temple, a comet appeared in the east, and since the enthronement of the emperor, he was warned by heaven. The fault is serious!

古文：《书》云： 惟先假王正厥事。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 古代至道之君遇灾，就正其德行以应天象。 
English: "Shangshu" said: When the ancient prince of Tao suffered a calamity, he did his best to respond to the celestial body.

古文：群公孜孜，帅先百寮，辅朕不逮。
现代文：望众公卿孜孜不倦，率领群僚，以辅朕的不足。
English: I hope that all the noblemen will work tirelessly to lead their colleagues and help me with my shortcomings.

古文：崇宽大，长和睦，凡事恕己，毋行苛刻。
现代文：崇尚宽大，提倡和睦，凡事推己及人，对人不要苛刻。
English: Advocate magnanimity, promote harmony, be considerate of others in all things, and do not be harsh on others.

古文：其大赦天下，使得自新。 
现代文：现大赦天下，使犯人能改过自新。 
English: There is now a general amnesty so that prisoners can reform themselves.

古文：封舅诸吏光禄大夫关内侯王崇为安成侯。
现代文：赐舅诸吏光禄大夫、关内侯王崇为安成侯。
English: He bestowed the title of Guanglu Daifu and Guanai Hou Wang Chong to his uncles.

古文：赐舅王谭、商、立、根、逢时爵关内侯。
现代文：赐舅王谭、王商、王立、王根、王逢时爵为关内侯。
English: He gave his uncles Wang Tan, Wang Shang, Wang Li, Wang Gen, and Wang Feng Shiji the title of Guanai Marquis.

古文：夏四月，黄雾四塞，博问公卿大夫，无有所讳。
现代文：夏季四月，黄雾四塞，广问公卿大夫，望无所隐讳。
English: In the summer of April, when the yellow fog is at its thickest, it is customary to ask the nobles for advice.

古文：六月，有青蝇无万数集未央宫殿中朝者坐。
现代文：六月，有数以万计的青蝇聚集在未央宫殿中朝臣的坐席上。
English: In June, tens of thousands of blue flies gathered at the courtiers' table in the palace.

古文：秋，罢上林宫、馆希御幸者二十五所。
现代文：秋季，罢去上林宫馆希御幸处二十五处。
English: In autumn, go to the Shanglin Palace Museum and look for the 25 places of happiness.

古文：八月，有两月相承，晨见东方。
现代文：八月，出现两个月亮上下相接，早晨在东方出现。
English: In August, there will be two moons in conjunction, appearing in the east in the morning.

古文：九月戊子，流星光烛地，长四五丈，委曲蛇形，贯紫宫。
现代文：九月二十八日，流星光芒照地，长四五丈，委曲蛇形，贯于紫宫星区。
English: On September 28th, a meteor streaked across the sky. It was about four or five meters long and had a serpentine shape, and it passed through the star region of the Purple Palace.

古文：十二月，作长安南北郊，罢甘泉、汾阴祠。
现代文：十二月，在长安建南北郊祭之处，罢去甘泉、汾阴祭祠。
English: In December, in Chang'an, where the North and South Suburbs Festival was held, the Ganquan and Suyin Festival Shrines were built.

古文：是日大风，拔甘泉畤中大木十韦以上。
现代文：此日起大风，拔甘泉寺中十围以上的大树。
English: From this day on, high winds will uproot large trees with a circumference of more than ten meters in Ganquan Temple.

古文：郡国被灾什四以上，毋收田租。
现代文：郡国有十分之四遭受风灾。免去灾区田租。
English: Four-tenths of the county was affected by the typhoon. The affected areas were exempted from paying land rent.

古文：二年春正月，罢雍五畤。
现代文：建始二年春正月，罢去雍地五处祭祀天地之所。
English: In the first month of the second year of construction, five places of worship of heaven and earth were built in Yongdi.

古文：辛已，上始郊祀长安南郊。诏曰： 乃者徙泰畤、后士于南郊、北郊，朕亲饬躬，郊祀上帝。皇天报应，神光并见。
现代文：二十三日，成帝开始在长安南郊进行郊祭，下诏说： 前者迁移泰畤、后土于南郊、北郊，朕虔诚恭敬，郊祀上天，皇天报应，神光交现。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Chengdu began to hold a suburb festival in the southern suburb of Chang'an. The following edict said: The former migrated to Thailand, the latter to the southern suburb and the northern suburb, I am pious and respectful, the suburb worships God, the emperor's retribution, and the divine light is manifested.

古文：三辅长无共张徭役之劳，赦奉郊县长安、长陵及中都官耐罪徒。
现代文：三辅地区常年有供帐服役之劳，赦免奉郊祀的长安县、长陵县及中都官中判鬓须之罪的罪犯。
English: Sanfu area has a perennial allowance for service labor, and pardons criminals who have been convicted of crimes in Chang'an County, Changling County and the central government officials who worship in the suburbs.

古文：减天下赋钱，算四十。 
现代文：减少天下的赋税钱，算赋减四十。 
English: If you reduce the tax money of the whole world, it will be reduced by forty.

古文：闰月，以渭城延陵亭部为初陵。
现代文：闰正月，以渭城延陵亭部为初陵。
English: In leap year, Yanling Pavilion in Fucheng was designated as the first mausoleum.

古文：二月，诏三辅内郡举贤良方正各一人。
现代文：二月，诏令三辅内郡举荐贤良方正各一人。
English: In February, Sanfu County was ordered to recommend one person from each of the virtuous Fang Zheng.

古文：三月，北宫井水溢出。
现代文：三月，北宫井水涌出地面。
English: In March, Kitamiya well water gushed out of the ground.

古文：辛丑，上始祠后土于北郊。丙午，立皇后许氏。
现代文：三月十四日，成帝开始在长安北郊祭祀后土。三月十九日，立皇后许氏。
English: On March 14th, Emperor Chengdu began to offer sacrifices to Hou Tu in the northern suburb of Chang'an. On March 19th, Empress Xu was established.

古文：罢六厩、技巧官。
现代文：罢去六厩、技巧官。
English: Eliminate six stables, skill officer.

古文：夏，大旱。
现代文：夏，发生大的旱灾。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：东平王宇有罪，削樊、亢父县。
现代文：东平王宇有罪，削其封邑樊、亢父县。
English: Dongping Wang Yu was found guilty and was stripped of his fiefs in Yunnan and Yunnan.

古文：秋，罢太子博望苑，以赐宗室朝请者。
现代文：秋，撤销太子博望苑，以此赐来京朝请的宗室。
English: In autumn, he revoked the prince's grant of Bohangyuan, thereby granting it to the Imperial family invited to Kyoto.

古文：减乘舆厩马。
现代文：减少皇帝乘舆的厩马。
English: Reduce the emperor to ride on my stable horse.

古文：三年春三月，赦天下徒。
现代文：三年春三月，赦免天下囚徒。
English: In March of the spring of the third year, the world's prisoners were pardoned.

古文：赐孝弟、力田爵二级。诸逋租赋所振贷勿收。
现代文：赏赐孝悌力田爵二级，对逃亡租赋所给予的赈贷免收。
English: He was awarded the second-level title of Tianjie for his filial piety and forbearance, and the loan given to him for his escape was exempted.

古文：秋，关内大水。
现代文：秋，关内大水。
English: In autumn, there is a lot of water in Kwanai.

古文：七月，虒上小女陈持弓闻大水至，走入横城门，阑入尚方掖门，至未央宫钩盾中。
现代文：七月，羋上小女子陈持弓听说大水至，走入横城门，撞入宫廷的旁门，直到未央宫钅句盾官署中。
English: In July, Chen, a little girl on the raft, holding a bow, heard that the flood had arrived, walked into the gate of the castle, crashed into the side door of the palace, until she was in the palace of Weiyang and the shield office.

古文：吏民惊上城。
现代文：吏民都惊奔上城。
English: Officials and citizens all rushed to the city.

古文：九月，诏曰： 乃者郡国被水灾，流杀人民，多至千数。
现代文：九月，下诏说： 前者郡国遭受水灾，淹死的百姓多达千数。
English: In September, the next edict said: The former county suffered floods, and as many as a thousand people drowned.

古文：京师无故讹言大水至，吏民惊恐，奔走乘城。
现代文：京师无故讹言大水将到，吏民惊恐，奔走登城。
English: The governor of Beijing said, without reason, that a great flood was coming, and the officials and people were terrified and rushed to the city.

古文：殆苛暴深刻之吏未息，元元冤失职者众。
现代文：这可能是苛刻残暴的官吏结怨于百姓。百姓遭受冤屈而失去的甚多，因而造成这些讹言伪语。
English: It may be that the harsh and cruel officials have a grudge against the people, and the people have suffered grievances and lost a lot, thus causing these insults and lies.

古文：遣谏大夫林等循行天下。 
现代文：现派谏大夫林等循行天下。 
English: Now, there are so-called "bureaucrats" and "bureaucrats" in the world.

古文：冬十二月戊申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十二月初一，出现日偏食。
English: In winter, a partial solar eclipse occurs on the first day of December.

古文：夜，地震未央宫殿中。
现代文：夜，未央宫中地震。
English: In the evening, there was an earthquake in the palace.

古文：诏曰： 盖闻天生众民，不能相治，为之立君以统理之。
现代文：下诏说： 常闻天生众民，不能自治，就为之立君上以进行统理。
English: The following edict said: It is a well-known fact that the people are innately numerous and cannot govern themselves, so a ruler must be set up to govern them.

古文：君道得，则草木、昆虫咸得其所；人君不德，谪见天地，灾异娄发，以告不治。
现代文：君王得道，则草木昆虫都各得其所；人君无德，则天地见责，屡现灾异以告诫其不合治道。
English: When a ruler is virtuous, all plants, trees, and insects find their place; when a person is not virtuous, the heavens and the earth see it as their duty, and repeatedly manifest disasters and signs to admonish him for not being virtuous.

古文：朕涉道日寡，举错不中，乃戊申日蚀、地震，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：朕对君王之道涉猎太少，而举动与措施又多有不当。于是十二月一日，日蚀地震同时出现，朕深感惶恐。
English: I have been too little concerned with the ways of kings, and many of my actions and measures have been improper. Therefore, on December 1, when the solar eclipse earthquake occurred at the same time, I was deeply frightened.

古文：公卿其各思朕过失，明白陈之。 女无面从，退有后言。 
现代文：公卿应认真思考朕的过失，明白地为朕指出。《尚书》说过： 你不要当面顺从唯唯，背后却有诽谤之言。 
English: "Shang Shu" said: "Don't obey Wei Wei in front of your face, but slander behind your back.

古文：丞相、御史与将军、列侯、中二千石及内郡国举贤良方正能直言极谏之士，诣公车，朕将览焉。 
现代文：丞相、御史与将军、列侯、中二千石及中原地区郡国举荐贤良方正能直言极谏之士，到公车官署上书陈言，朕将亲览其书。 
English: The prime minister, the minister of history, the general, the lord of the manor, the middle-aged man of 2,000 koku and the county of the Central Plains region recommend the virtuous man who can speak frankly, go to the bus office to write and make a statement, I will read his book.

古文：越巂山崩。
现代文：赵巂山崩。
English: Zhao Yao's Mountain Collapse.

古文：四年春，罢中书宦官，初置尚书员五人。
现代文：四年春，罢去中书宦官，开始设置尚书员五人。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the eunuch of Chinese calligraphy was dismissed, and five calligraphers were set up.

古文：夏四月，雨雪。
现代文：夏四月，下雪。
English: In summer, in April, it snows.

古文：五月，中谒者丞陈临杀司隶校尉辕丰于殿中。
现代文：五月，中谒者丞陈临杀司隶校尉辕丰于殿中。
English: In May, the middle eunuch, Chen Lin, killed the second eunuch, Lieutenant Yu Feng, in the hall.

古文：秋，桃、李实。
现代文：秋，桃李结实。
English: In autumn, peaches and plums are firm.

古文：大水，河决东郡金堤。
现代文：大水，黄河在东郡金堤溃决。
English: Due to heavy water, the Yellow River broke through the golden dike in Dong County.

古文：冬十月，御史大夫尹忠以河决不忧职，自杀。
现代文：冬十月，御史大夫尹忠因河决渎职，自杀。
English: In the winter of October, the chief historian, Yin Zhong, committed suicide for dereliction of duty.

古文：河平元年春三月，诏曰： 河决东郡，流漂二州，校尉王延世堤塞辄平，其改元为河平。
现代文：河平元年春三月，下诏说： 黄河决口于东郡，淹没兖、豫二州，校尉王延世堵口复堤而黄河归故道，其改元为 河平 。
English: In the spring and March of Heping in the first year of the year, the following edict was issued: The mouth of the Yellow River broke in Dong County, flooding Shandong and Henan Provinces. Lieutenant Wang Yanshi blocked the mouth and rebuilt the dike, and the Yellow River returned to its old course. It was changed to Heping.

古文：赐天下吏民爵，各有差。 
现代文：赏赐天下吏民爵级，各有差等。 
English: The world's officials are awarded the rank of people's peer, each with a difference.

古文：夏四月己亥晦，日有蚀之，既。
现代文：夏四月三十日，日从偏食到全蚀。
English: On the 30th day of the 4th month of summer, the sun went from a partial eclipse to a total eclipse.

古文：诏曰： 朕获保宗庙，战战栗栗，未能奉称。
现代文：下诏说： 朕得以继承宗庙，战战栗栗，未能完满地履行自己的职责。
English: The following edict said: I was able to inherit the ancestral temple, trembling, unable to fully perform my duties.

古文：传曰： 男教不修，阳事不得，则日为之蚀。 
现代文：《传》说： 男教有亏，阳刚不振，就会出现日蚀。 
English: "Biography" said: Male education is at a disadvantage, masculinity is weak, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：天著厥异，辜在朕躬。
现代文：天显异象，罪在朕躬。
English: A vision from heaven, my sins are on me.

古文：公卿大夫其勉，悉心以辅不逮。
现代文：公卿大夫其勉力尽心，以匡正朕的过失。
English: The noble doctor tried his best to rectify my mistake.

古文：百寮各修其职，惇任仁人，退远残贼。陈朕过失，无有所讳。 
现代文：百僚都恪尽职守，重用贤人，摒弃奸邪，指出朕的过失，无所隐讳。 
English: Hundreds of colleagues have all fulfilled their duties, reused sages, abandoned treachery, pointed out my mistakes, and have nothing to hide.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：六月，罢典属国并大鸿胪。
现代文：六月，撤销典属国与大鸿胪机构。
English: In June, the subordinate state and the Great Hong Kong Institution were revoked.

古文：秋九月，复太上皇寝庙园。
现代文：秋九月，恢复太上皇寝庙陵园。
English: In autumn and September, the tomb garden of the Emperor's mausoleum was restored.

古文：二年春正月，沛郡铁官治铁飞，语在《五行志》。
现代文：二年春正月，沛郡铁官冶铁飞，其事记在《五行志》。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, the iron official of Pei County, Ye Tiefei, rose up, and his story was recorded in the "Five Elements."

古文：夏六月，封舅谭、商、立、根、逢时皆为列侯。
现代文：夏六月，封舅王谭、王商、王立、王根、王逢时都为列侯。
English: In the summer of June, the vassals Wang Tan, Wang Shang, Wang Li, Wang Gen, and Wang Feng were all made princes.

古文：三年春二月丙戌，犍为地震、山崩、雍江水，水逆流。
现代文：三年春二月二十七日，犍为地震山崩，堵塞江水，水倒流。
English: On the 27th day of February in the spring of the third year, a landslide caused by an earthquake blocked the river and the water flowed backwards.

古文：秋八月乙卯晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋八月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: In autumn, on August 30, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：光禄大夫刘向校中秘书。谒者陈农使，使求遗书于天下。
现代文：光禄大夫刘向校理朝廷藏书，派谒者陈农，求遗书于天下。
English: Liu, the doctor of Guanglu, sent a letter to Chen Nong, the person in charge of collecting books for the imperial court, requesting that his last will and testament be made public.

古文：四年春正月，匈奴单于来朝。
现代文：四年春正月，匈奴单于来京朝见。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year, Xiong Nuan came to Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：赦天下徒，赐孝弟、力田爵二级，诸逋租赋所振贷勿收。
现代文：赦免天下囚徒，赏赐孝悌力田爵二级，对于逃避租赋所欠的赈贷免收。
English: He pardoned all the prisoners under heaven, rewarded the filial piety of the second-level gentry, and waived the debt of the loan for the evasion of rent.

古文：二月，单于罢归国。
现代文：二月，单于朝见后回国。
English: In February, Shan returned to China after seeing the emperor.

古文：三月癸丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月初一日，日偏食。
English: A partial solar eclipse will occur on the first day of March.

古文：遣光禄大夫博士嘉等十一人行举濒河之郡水所毁伤困乏不能自存者，财振贷。
现代文：遣光禄大夫博士嘉等十一人巡行于黄河两岸的郡国，了解因水患而无法生存的，根据情况予以赈贷。
English: Eleven people including Dr. Yan Guanglu and Dr. Ji went on a tour of counties on both sides of the Yellow River to understand that if people could not survive due to floods, they would be given loans according to the situation.

古文：其为水所流压死，不能自葬，令郡国给槥櫝葬埋。
现代文：被水淹死、压死，不能自葬的，令郡国供给薄棺葬埋。
English: If a person is drowned or crushed to death by water and cannot be buried, the county shall provide a thin coffin for burial.

古文：已葬者与钱，人二千。
现代文：已经葬埋的折钱付给，每人二千。
English: Those who have already been buried will be paid 2,000 rupees each.

古文：避水它郡国，在所冗食之，谨遇以文理，无令失职。
现代文：逃水荒在外地的，由所在地散发粮食，要认真地登记与关心他们，不让他们失其常业。
English: If there is a water shortage in the field, distribute grain from the location, carefully register and care for them, and do not let them lose their usual business.

古文：举惇厚有行、能直言之士。
现代文：举荐敦厚有高行能直言的人。
English: Recommend someone with high morals and the ability to speak frankly.

古文：壬申，长陵临泾岸崩，雍泾水。
现代文：三月二十日，长陵临泾水处岸崩，壅塞泾水。
English: On March 20th, a landslide occurred at the waterfront of Linyi, Changling, blocking the waterway.

古文：夏六月庚戌，楚王嚣薨。
现代文：夏六月二十九日，楚王刘嚣去世。
English: On the 29th day of the 6th month of the summer, King Liu Han of Chu passed away.

古文：山阳火生石中，改元为阳朔。
现代文：山阳火生于石中，改元为阳朔。
English: Sanyang Huo was born in Shizhong, and changed its name to Yangshuo.

古文：阳朔元年春二月丁未晦，日有蚀之。三月，赦天下徒。
现代文：阳朔元年春二月三十日，日偏蚀。三月，赦免天下囚徒。
English: On the 30th day of the 2nd month in the spring of the first year of Yangshuo, the sun was eclipsed. In March, the world's prisoners were pardoned.

古文：冬，京兆尹王章有罪，下狱死。
现代文：冬，京兆尹王章有罪，下狱死。
English: In winter, Jingzhao Yin Wangzhang was found guilty and died in prison.

古文：二年春，寒。
现代文：二年春，寒。
English: In the spring of the second year, it was cold.

古文：诏曰： 昔在帝尧，立羲、和之官，命以四时之事，令不失其序。
现代文：下诏说： 古代帝尧立羲、和二官，命他们掌天地四时的事，让生产与生活能按季节与时令的顺序进行。
English: The edict said: The ancient emperors set up an imperial eunuch and two officials, and ordered them to take charge of the four seasons of the world, so that production and life could be carried out in accordance with the season and seasonal order.

古文：故《书》云 黎民于蕃时雍 ，明以阴阳为本也。
现代文：所以《尚书》说： 众民能适应变化，保持雍和。 说明阴阳时令是十分重要的。
English: Therefore, "Shangshu" said: All the people can adapt to changes and maintain harmony, indicating that the yin and yang seasons are very important.

古文：今公卿大夫或不信阴阳，薄而小之，所奏请多违时政。
现代文：今日公卿大夫有的不信阴阳，认为是轻小之事，有些奏章多不合月令。
English: Today, some court nobles and doctors do not believe in yin and yang, and consider it to be a trivial matter. Some musical pieces do not match the lunar calendar.

古文：传以不知，周行天下，而欲望阴阳和调，岂不谬哉！
现代文：在位的都不懂阴阳时令，辗转相因，天下也都弄不清楚了。如此而指望阴阳和调，岂非荒谬？
English: Those in power do not understand the yin and yang of the seasons, nor do they understand the causes of the changes. It is absurd to expect harmony between yin and yang in this way.

古文：其务顺四时月令。 
现代文：现令公卿大夫要注意顺应四时月令。 
English: Court nobles and doctors are now ordered to pay attention to the four-hour lunar calendar.

古文：三月，大赦天下。
现代文：三月，大赦天下。
English: In March, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：夏五月，除吏八百石、五百石秩。
现代文：夏五月，减少吏八百石俸为六百石，五百石俸为四百石。
English: In summer and May, officials' salaries of 800 koku were reduced to 600 koku, and those of 500 koku to 400 koku.

古文：秋，关东大水，流民欲入函谷、天井、壶口、五阮关者，勿苛留。
现代文：秋，关东大水，逃荒百姓想进入函谷、天吉、壶口、五阮关的，不要阻止。
English: In the autumn, when the Kanto region is flooded, if people want to flee to Hakodate, Tengji, Hukou and Wuyuan Pass, don't stop them.

古文：遣谏大夫博士分行视。
现代文：派谏议大夫博士赴各地巡视。
English: He sent Dr. Zeng Rong to inspect various regions.

古文：八月甲申，定陶王康薨。
现代文：八月二十二日，定陶王刘康去世。
English: On August 22, Liu Kang, the king of Dingtao, passed away.

古文：九月，奉使者不称。
现代文：九月，有些奉命出使的官员不称其职。
English: In September, some of the officials sent on the mission were not up to the job.

古文：诏曰： 古之立太学，将以传先王之业，流化于天下也。
现代文：下诏说： 古往今来的朝廷之所以设立太学，是要求用以广传先王的功业，弘扬其教化于天下的。
English: The following edict said: The reason why the imperial court from ancient times to the present has established the Imperial Academy is to require that it be used to spread the work of the former king and promote his enlightenment throughout the world.

古文：儒林之官，四海渊原，宜皆明于古今，温故知新，通达国体，故谓之博士。
现代文：儒林的官员，要求学识渊博，应能博古通今，温故知新，运用理论来解答国家当前的主要问题，所以才称之为博士。
English: The officials of the Julin Dynasty were required to be well-educated. They should be able to know the past and the present, know the old and the new, and use theory to solve the country's current major problems. That is why they were called doctors.

古文：否则学者无述焉，为下所轻，非所以尊道德也。 工欲善其事，必先利其器。 
现代文：否则学者在学识上没有什么精辟之论，就会受到人们的轻视，这就达不到尊重知识与道德的目的。《论语》说： 工欲善其事，必先利其器。 
English: Otherwise, if scholars do not have any incisive theories on knowledge, they will be despised by people, which will not achieve the purpose of respecting knowledge and morality. "Analects" says: If you want to be good at something, you must first be good at it.

古文：丞相、御史其与中二千石、二千石杂举可充博士位者，使卓然可观。 
现代文：丞相、御史以及中二千石、二千石荐举可充任博士位的人选，使其作用与地位卓然可观。 
English: The chancellor, the minister of history, and the 2,000-koku junior high school and 2,000-koku high school recommend candidates who can serve as doctorates, making their role and status remarkable.

古文：是岁，御史大夫张忠卒。
现代文：这年，御史大夫张忠去世。
English: In the same year, Dr. Zhang Zhong passed away.

古文：三年春三月壬戌，陨石东郡，八。
现代文：三年春三月七日，东郡陨石，八块。
English: On March 7 of the third year of spring, the Dong County meteorite, eight pieces.

古文：夏六月，颍川铁官徒申屠圣等百八十人杀长吏，盗库兵，自称将军，经历九郡。
现代文：夏六月，颍川铁官役夫申屠圣等一百八十人杀死长吏，盗出武库兵器，自称将军，横行九郡。
English: In the summer of June, one hundred and eighty people, including the Luchuan railway official Fu Shen Tu Sheng, killed officials, stole weapons from the arsenal, called themselves generals, and rampaged through nine counties.

古文：遣丞相长史、御史中丞逐捕，以军兴从事，皆伏辜。
现代文：派丞相长史、御史中丞进行追捕，用军队围剿，都斩首伏罪。
English: He sent the prime minister, Nagashi, and the vice-premier, Chujo, to hunt them down, surrounded them with troops, and had them all beheaded.

古文：秋八月丁已，大司马、大将军王凤薨。
现代文：秋八月三十日，大司马大将军王凤去世。
English: On the 30th day of the 8th month of autumn, Wang Feng, the general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, passed away.

古文：四年春正月，诏曰： 夫《洪范》八政，以食为首，斯诚家给刑错之本也。
现代文：四年春正月，下诏说： 《尚书·洪范》八政，以食为首。因为它是家庭自足与人不犯禁的根本。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Spring, the following edict was issued: "Shangshu·Hongfan" eight policies, with food as the first, because it is the foundation of family self-sufficiency and non-violation of taboos.

古文：先帝劭农，薄其租税，宠其强力，令与孝弟同科。
现代文：先帝劝勉农事，薄收赋税，奖励力田的人，让其与孝悌同等。
English: The former emperor exhorted people to be diligent in farming, to collect taxes sparingly, and to reward those who worked hard in the fields, making them equal to filial sons and daughters.

古文：间者，民弥惰怠，乡本者少，趋末者众，将何以矫之？
现代文：近来，农民愈趋怠惰，安心农业的少，从事经商的多，这将如何进行矫正呢？
English: Recently, farmers have become more and more lazy, with fewer engaged in safe agriculture and more engaged in business. How will this be corrected?

古文：方东作时，其令二千石勉劝农桑，出入阡陌，致劳来之。
现代文：当春耕时，特令二千石劝勉农桑，要深入到农田上去，鼓励农民努力从事农业生产。
English: When spring ploughing, a special order of 2,000 koku was issued to encourage farmers to go deep into the farmland and encourage farmers to work hard in agricultural production.

古文：《书》不云乎？ 服田力啬，乃亦有秋。 
现代文：《尚书》不是说过吗？ 全力投入耕耘，方有秋天的收获。 
English: Isn't it said in "Shangshu"? If you put all your efforts into cultivation, you will have a harvest in autumn.

古文：其之哉！ 
现代文：都应努力呀！ 
English: Everyone should work hard!

古文：二月，赦天下。
现代文：二月，大赦天下。
English: In February, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：秋九月壬申，东平王宇薨。
现代文：秋九月十六日，东平王刘宇去世。
English: Autumn On September 16th, Dongping King Liu Yu passed away.

古文：闰月壬戌，御史大夫于永卒。
现代文：闰十二月初七日，御史大夫于永去世。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th lunar month, Dr. Yu Yong passed away.

古文：鸿嘉元年春二月，诏曰： 朕承天地，获保宗庙，明有所蔽，德不能绥，刑罚不中，众冤失职，趋阙告诉者不绝。
现代文：鸿嘉元年春二月，下诏说： 朕承天地之恩，得保祖宗祠庙，明不足详察民情，德不足以绥定四方。刑罚失当，不少人含冤失其常业，到朝廷上访上诉者不绝。
English: In the spring and February of the first year of Hongjia, he issued the following edict: "I, by the grace of heaven and earth, have been able to protect the ancestral ancestral temple. It is not enough to investigate the people's conditions in detail, and it is not enough to determine the four sides. The punishment is inappropriate, many people have lost their regular jobs unjustly, and there is no shortage of petitioners to the imperial court.

古文：是以阴阳错谬，寒暑失序，日月不光，百姓蒙辜，朕甚闵焉。
现代文：是以阴阳错谬，寒暑失序，日月无光，百姓遭灾，朕深为不安。
English: The yin and yang are wrong, the cold and heat are out of order, the sun and moon have no light, and the people are suffering from disasters. I am deeply uneasy.

古文：《书》不云乎？ 即我御事，罔克耆寿，咎在厥躬。 
现代文：《尚书》不是说过吗？ 在我主持国政时，没有老臣贤者进行辅弼，这是我自己的过失。 
English: Didn't "Shang Shu" say that when I presided over state affairs, there was no elder statesman to assist me, which was my own fault?

古文：方春生长时，临遣谏大夫理等举三辅、三河、弘农冤狱。
现代文：目前正是春耕季节，特派谏大夫理等察举三辅、三河、弘农冤狱。
English: At present, it is the spring ploughing season. Special envoys such as Dr. Zou Li have been sent to investigate the wrongful imprisonment of Sanfu, Sanhe and Hongnong.

古文：公卿大夫、部刺史明申敕守、相，称朕意焉。
现代文：公卿大夫、部刺史应谕郡守国相，要不负朕对他们的重托。
English: The Kugyo-dokufu and the Bu-sashi should be instructed by the county governor and the minister of state, or else they will not be able to fulfill my heavy trust in them.

古文：其赐天下民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒，加赐鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。逋贷未入者勿收。 
现代文：现赏赐天下民爵一级，女子百户牛酒若干，加赐鳏寡孤独高年帛若干，逃贷未交的免收。 
English: Now, the world is rewarded with a first-class title of people's peerage, a number of women's hundred households of cattle wine, plus a number of widows and widowers and lonely senior citizens, and the unpaid loans are exempted.

古文：壬午，行幸初陵，赦作徒。
现代文：二月二十八日，成帝驾临于初陵，赦免在初陵服役的罪徒。
English: On the 28th of February, Emperor Cheng visited the First Mausoleum and pardoned the criminals who had served in the First Mausoleum.

古文：以新丰戏乡为昌陵县，奉初陵，赐百户牛、酒。
现代文：划新丰县的戏乡为昌陵县，以奉初陵，每百户赏赐牛酒若干。
English: Changling County will be designated as the theater town of Xinfeng County, and every hundred households will be rewarded with a certain amount of cattle wine.

古文：上始为微行出。
现代文：成帝开始著平民衣，带少量随从单骑出入市里。
English: Emperor Cheng began to wear civilian clothes and rode into and out of the city with a small number of attendants.

古文：冬，黄龙见真定。
现代文：冬，黄龙在真定出现。
English: In winter, Huanglong appears in Zhending.

古文：二年春，行幸云阳。
现代文：二年春，驾临于云阳。
English: In the spring of the second year, it arrived in Yunyang.

古文：三月，博士行饮酒礼，有雉蜚集于庭，历阶升堂而雊，后集诸府，又集承明殿。
现代文：三月，博士行饮酒礼，有雉鸡飞集于殿庭，历阶升堂而群声呼叫，后集栖于各府署上，又集栖于承明殿上。
English: In March, there was a drinking ceremony for the doctoral candidates. There were pheasants flying and gathering in the main hall courtyard. They called out loudly as they ascended the steps to the hall. Later, they gathered at each prefectural office, and again at the Shomei Hall.

古文：诏曰： 古之选贤，傅纳以言，明试以功。故官无废事，下无逸民，教化流行，风雨和时，百谷用成，众庶乐业，咸以康宁。
现代文：下诏说： 古代选拔贤才，首先听取他敷陈见解，然后予以试用来考察他的能力，所以官吏的效率很高，人才也不会埋没，教化流行，风调雨顺，谷物丰收，人民安居乐业，大众康泰安宁。
English: The next edict said: In ancient times, the selection of a wise man was first to listen to his opinions, and then to try to use them to examine his ability. Therefore, the efficiency of officials is very high, talent will not be buried, enlightenment is popular, the weather is good, grain harvest is abundant, people live and work in peace, and the public is well-off and peaceful.

古文：朕承鸿业十有余年，数遭水、旱、疾疫之灾，黎民娄困于饥寒，而望礼义之兴，岂不难哉！
现代文：朕继承大业十有余年，屡逢水旱瘟疫之灾，黎民经常受困于饥寒，如此而希望百姓兴礼义知荣辱，那将是何等困难！
English: I have been inheriting the great cause for more than ten years. There have been frequent floods, droughts and plagues, and the people of Li are often trapped in hunger and cold. If I hope that the people will be polite and honorable, how difficult it will be!

古文：朕既无以率道，帝王之道日以陵夷，意乃招贤选士之路郁滞而不通与，将举者未得其人也？
现代文：朕无能进行领导，以致帝王之道日趋衰微，朕再三思考：这是招贤选士的道路阻塞不通呢？还是举荐的人名不副实呢？
English: I am unable to lead, so that the emperor's way is getting weaker and weaker. I have repeatedly thought: Is this the way of recruiting good candidates blocked? Or is the name of the person recommended not true?

古文：其举敦厚有行义、能直言者，冀闻切言嘉谋，匡朕之不逮。 
现代文：望举荐敦厚有德行能直言的人才，希望听到他们的深刻的见解与良好的谋略，以匡辅朕的不足。 
English: I hope to recommend talented people with strong moral character and ability to speak frankly. I hope to hear their profound opinions and good strategies to supplement my shortcomings.

古文：夏，徒郡国豪杰赀五百万以上五千户于昌陵。
现代文：夏，迁移郡国豪家资财在五百万以上的五千户到昌陵。
English: In the summer, five thousand households with assets of more than five million were relocated to Changling.

古文：赐丞相、御史、将军、列侯、公主、中二千石冢地、第宅。
现代文：赏赐丞相、御史、将军、列侯、公主、中二千石在昌陵以墓地房屋。
English: The chancellor, imperial historian, general, vassal, princess, and junior vassal were rewarded with 2,000 koku of land and a cemetery house in Changling.

古文：六月，立中山宪王孙云客为广德王。
现代文：六月，立中山宪王孙刘云客为广德王。
English: In June, Sun Liuyunke, the constitutional king of Zhongshan, was proclaimed the King of Guangde.

古文：三年夏四月，赦天下。
现代文：三年夏四月，赦免天下。
English: In the summer and April of the third year, the world was pardoned.

古文：令吏民得买爵，贾级千钱。
现代文：令吏民可以买爵，每级价一千钱。
English: Officials and citizens can buy a peerage, at a price of one thousand yuan per grade.

古文：大旱。
现代文：发生大的旱灾。
English: There was a severe drought.

古文：秋八月乙卯，孝景庙阙灾。
现代文：秋八月十五日，孝景帝庙门发生火灾。
English: On the 15th day of the 8th month of autumn, a fire broke out at the gate of the Emperor Xiaoqing Temple.

古文：冬十一月甲寅，皇后许氏废。
现代文：冬十一月十七日，皇后许氏被废。
English: On the 17th day of the 11th month of winter, Empress Xu was abolished.

古文：广汉男子郑躬等六十余人攻官寺，篡囚徒，盗库兵，自称山君。
现代文：广汉男子郑躬等六十余人攻打官署，放出囚徒，盗取兵库武器，自称山君。
English: Zheng Mu, a man from Guanghan, and more than sixty others attacked the government office, released prisoners, stole weapons from the arsenal, and called themselves the Mountain King.

古文：四年春正月，诏曰： 数敕有司，务行宽大，而禁苛暴，讫今不改。
现代文：四年春正月，下诏说： 多次指示有关机构，要务行宽大，禁止苛暴刑罚，而至今不改。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, the following edict was issued: Relevant agencies have been repeatedly instructed to be lenient and to prohibit harsh punishments, and this has not changed.

古文：一人有辜，举宗拘系，农民失业，怨恨者众，伤害和气，水旱为灾，关东流冗者众，青、幽、冀部尤剧，朕甚痛焉。
现代文：一人犯罪，全族拘系，农民失其常业，怨恨者多，由此而伤害天地的和谐之气，水旱为灾，关东流散者甚多，青州、幽州、冀州更为严重，朕甚为痛心。
English: If one person commits a crime, the whole family will be punished, farmers will lose their jobs, there will be a lot of resentment, which will hurt the harmony of heaven and earth, floods and droughts will be a disaster, there will be a lot of people scattered in Kanto, and Qingzhou, Yuzhou and Jizhou will be more serious, I am very sad.

古文：未闻在位有恻然者，孰当助朕忧之！
现代文：而却未听见在位公卿对此而表示难过的，谁能与朕分忧啊！
English: However, I did not hear the reigning nobles express their sadness about this. Who can share my worries?

古文：已遣使者循行郡国。被灾害什四以上，民赀不满三万，勿出租赋。
现代文：已派遣使者到各地检查，凡属灾害在四成以上，百姓的资产不满三万，可不出租赋。
English: Envoys have been dispatched to all parts of the country to check that more than 40% of all disasters are disasters, and the assets of the people are less than 30,000, which can not be rented out.

古文：逋贷未入，皆勿收。
现代文：逃避税赋未交的，都予免收。
English: Those who evade and fail to pay taxes will be exempted.

古文：流民欲入关，辄籍内。
现代文：流民要想入关，登记后就允许进入。
English: If the refugees want to enter the customs, they will be allowed to enter after registration.

古文：所之郡国，谨遇以理，务有以全活之。
现代文：流民所到的郡国，要给予关心和引导，要保证不因冻饿而死一人。
English: The county to which the displaced people go should give them concern and guidance, and ensure that no one dies from cold and hunger.

古文：思称朕意。 
现代文：望理解朕的心意。 
English: I hope you understand my meaning.

古文：秋，勃海、清河河溢，被灾者振贷之。
现代文：秋，勃海、清河发生水灾，对受灾地区给予赈贷。
English: In autumn, floods occurred in Bohai and Qinghe, and loans were given to the affected areas.

古文：冬，广汉郑躬等党与浸广，犯历四县，众且万人。
现代文：冬，广汉郑躬等党羽逐渐发展，攻打四县，众达万人。
English: In the winter, Guanghan, Zheng Mu and other party members gradually developed and attacked four counties, with a total of ten thousand people.

古文：拜河东都尉赵护为广汉太守，发郡中及蜀郡合三万人击之。
现代文：封河东都尉赵护为广汉太守，征调广汉郡中及蜀郡的兵丁共三万人进行围剿。
English: He appointed Zhao Guo, the captain of Hedong, as the governor of Guanghan, and conscripted a total of 30,000 soldiers from the middle of Guanghan County and Shu County to carry out the siege.

古文：或相捕斩，除罪。
现代文：并号召郑躬所部如在内部互相捕斩，可以将功抵罪。
English: He also called on Zheng Mishou's department to compensate for the crime if they catch each other inside.

古文：旬月平，迁护为执金吾，赐黄金百斤。
现代文：十天半月就平定了，升赵护为执金吾官，赐黄金八百斤。
English: After ten and a half days, the matter was settled. Sheng Zhao Guo was appointed as the official to administer the gold, and he was given eight hundred catties of gold.

古文：永始元年春正月癸丑，太官凌室火。
现代文：永始元年春正月二十二日，太官凌室发生火灾。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of spring in the first year of the Yongshi era, a fire broke out in the eunuch Ling's room.

古文：戊午，戾后园阙火。
现代文：二十七日，戾后园正门也发生火灾。
English: On the 27th, a fire also broke out at the main gate of Gonghouyuan.

古文：夏四月，封婕妤赵氏父临为成阳侯。
现代文：夏四月，封婕妤赵氏父赵临为成阳侯。
English: In the summer of April, Zhao's father, Zhao Lin, was enthroned as the Prince of Chengyang.

古文：五月，封舅曼子侍中骑都尉光禄大夫王莽为新都侯。
现代文：五月，封舅父王曼之子侍中骑都尉、光禄大夫王莽为新都侯。
English: In May, Wang Mang, the son of Wang Man, the uncle of the emperor, became the new lord of the capital.

古文：六月丙寅，立皇后赵氏。
现代文：六月七日，立皇后赵氏。
English: On June 7th, the Zhao Dynasty was established.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：秋七月，诏曰： 朕执德不固，谋不尽下，过听将作大匠万年言昌陵三年可成。
现代文：秋七月，下诏说： 朕立德的决心不够，不能充分与臣下集思广益，过分地听信将作大匠解万年所讲的昌陵三年可以建成。
English: In the autumn of July, the next imperial edict said: My determination to establish virtue is not enough, I can't fully brainstorm with my subjects, and I listen too much to believe that I will be a great master to explain that the Changling Mausoleum can be built in three years.

古文：作治五年，中陵、司马殿门内尚未加功。
现代文：兴建了五年，中陵、司马殿门尚未动工，而国库耗资巨大。
English: After five years of construction, the central mausoleum and the Sima hall gate have yet to start construction, and the national treasury has incurred huge costs.

古文：天下虚耗，百姓罢劳，客土疏恶，终不可成。
现代文：百姓疲劳不堪，从异地运来筑陵的客土土质疏松杂乱，终难将昌陵建成。
English: The local people were exhausted, and the foreign soil brought from other places to build the mausoleum was sparse and disorderly, making it difficult to finally build Changling.

古文：朕惟其难，怛然伤心。
现代文：朕想到工程如此劳民伤财，就怛然伤心。
English: I was heartbroken to think that the project had cost so much in terms of labor and money.

古文：夫 过而不改，是谓过矣 。
现代文：古人说 有过不改，小过就会成为大过。 
English: The ancients said that if you do not change what you have done, you will become a bigger person.

古文：其罢昌陵，及故陵勿徒吏民，令天下毋有动摇之心。 
现代文：现决定昌陵停建，原定迁五千户于昌陵的也不再迁徙了，让天下不产生离乡背井的动摇之心。 
English: Now it has been decided to stop the construction of Changling, and the original plan to relocate five thousand households in Changling will no longer be relocated, so that the world will not have the wavering heart of leaving the hometown.

古文：立城阳孝王子俚为王。
现代文：立城阳王子刘俚为王。
English: Liu Ye, the prince of Licheng Yang, became king.

古文：八月丁丑，太皇太后王氏崩。
现代文：八月十九日，太皇太后王氏去世。
English: On August 19th, Grand Empress Dowager Wang Shi passed away.

古文：二年春正月己丑，大司马车骑将军王音薨。
现代文：二年春正月初三日，大司马车骑将军王音去世。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year of spring, the great carriage driver Wang Yin passed away.

古文：二月癸未夜，星陨如雨。
现代文：二月二十八日，星陨如雨。
English: On February 28th, the meteor shower began.

古文：乙酉晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：三十日，日偏食。
English: Acetylene for New Year's Eve, solar eclipse.

古文：诏曰： 乃者，龙见于东莱，日有蚀之。天著变异，以显朕邮，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：下诏说： 前时，龙现于东莱，日偏食，上天显示变异，以彰朕的过失，朕深为惶恐。
English: The following edict said: In the past, dragons appeared in Donglai, the sun was partially eclipsed, and the heavens showed variations to highlight my mistakes. I was deeply frightened.

古文：公卿申敕百寮，深思天诫，有可省减便安百姓者，条奏。
现代文：公卿大臣要晓谕群僚，严肃思考上天所显示的警戒。对于能够省减赋役以方便百姓的意见，可以逐条上奏。
English: The Minister of Justice should speak to his colleagues and seriously think about the warning shown by the heavens. Opinions on how to save and reduce the compulsory military service to make it more convenient for the people can be raised one by one.

古文：所振贷贫民，勿收。 
现代文：所借贷给贫民的钱粮，免收。 
English: The money and grain lent to the poor shall be exempt from tax.

古文：又曰： 关东比岁不登，吏民以义收食贫民、入谷物助县官振赡者，已赐直，其百万以上，加赐爵右更，欲为吏，补三百石，其吏也，迁二等。
现代文：又说： 关东几年歉收，有的吏民出于大义施舍粮食给贫民，或者献出谷物帮助县官赈赡的，官家应按价还钱。数在百万以上的，加赐爵级为右更，如先已为吏补三百石，则官升二级。
English: He also said, "Due to poor harvests in Guandong in recent years, some officials and citizens have donated grain to the poor out of charity, or donated grain to help county officials support themselves. The officials should pay back the money according to the price. If the number is more than one million, they should be given a knighthood. If they have already compensated officials with three hundred koku, they will be promoted to the second level.

古文：三十万以上，赐爵五大夫，吏亦迁二等，民补郎。
现代文：数在三十万以上，赐爵为五大夫，原已为吏的官升二级，普通百姓补为郎官。
English: There are more than 300,000 of them, with five grand dukes receiving knighthoods, officials who were already officials being promoted to the second level, and ordinary people being promoted to vassals.

古文：十万以上，家无出租赋三岁。
现代文：数在十万以上的，三年免出租赋。
English: If the number is more than one hundred thousand, three years of rent-free rent.

古文：万钱以上，一年。 
现代文：在万钱以上的，免出租赋一年。 
English: Above 10,000 yuan, rent-free for up to one year.

古文：冬十一月，行幸雍，祠五畤。
现代文：冬十一月，驾临雍地，祭祀五畤。
English: In the winter of November, arriving in the Yangtze River Valley, the ritual of the Five Auspices began.

古文：十二月，诏曰： 前将作大匠万年知昌陵卑下，不可为万岁居，奏请营作，建置郭邑，妄为巧作，积土增高，多赋敛徭役，兴卒暴之作。
现代文：十二月，下诏说： 以前将作大匠解万年明知昌陵地势低下，不可以为皇帝陵墓之地，却奏请在此地营造陵墓，并建立奉陵的城邑，妄为巧诈，从外地运土来增高地基，浪费财力人力，仓促上马与急于求成，以致参加兴建的卒徒遭受折磨，造成大量死亡。
English: In December, the following edict was issued: "Knowing that the Changling Mausoleum is low-lying and cannot be the place for the emperor's mausoleum, the former grand master of masonry, who had been invited to build a mausoleum in this place and establish a city dedicated to the mausoleum, was reckless and cunning, transported soil from other places to raise the foundation, wasted money and manpower, hastily embarked on a horse and eager for success, so that the pawns participating in the construction suffered torture, causing a large number of deaths.

古文：卒徒蒙辜，死者连属，百姓罢极，天下匮谒。常侍闳前为大司农中丞，数奏昌陵不可成。
现代文：百姓疲劳已极，国库耗费一空。常侍王闳前为大司农中丞，多次上奏说昌陵不可能建成。
English: The people were extremely fatigued, and the state treasury was completely depleted. The chief steward, Wang Qian, who was the chief secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, repeatedly reported that Changling could not be built.

古文：侍中卫尉长数白宜早止，徙家反故处。
现代文：侍中尉淳于长几次建议说应早日停建，并将已迁徙户返回原籍。
English: Samurai Lieutenant Jun Yu suggested several times that the construction should be stopped as soon as possible, and that the displaced families should be returned to their original homes.

古文：朕以长言下闳章，公卿议者皆合长计。
现代文：朕因淳于长的建议而将王闳的奏章下发给公卿讨论，公卿讨论后认识都与淳于长一致。
English: Due to the suggestion of Jun Yuchang, I sent Wang Yao's musical composition to the nobles for discussion. After the discussion, the nobles' understanding was consistent with that of Jun Yuchang.

古文：长首建至策，闳典主省大费，民以康宁。
现代文：淳于长首建正确之策，王闳主管钱谷与雇佣而减少其损失浪费，使百姓得以康宁。
English: Jun Yu, the chief, established the correct policy, while Wang Qi, in charge of the money valley and employment, reduced the losses and waste, so that the people could get ahead.

古文：闳前赐爵关内侯，黄金百斤。
现代文：前已赐王闳爵为关内侯，黄金百斤。
English: In the past, Wang Xizhe was given the title of Guan Nei Hou, with 100 jin of gold.

古文：其赐长爵关内侯，食邑千户，闳五百户。
现代文：现赐淳于长爵为关内侯，食邑千户，王闳五百户。
English: Chunyu Chosaku was now given the title of Kwanai no kuni, with 1,000 households in Shokui and 500 households in Wangye.

古文：万年佞邪不忠，毒流众庶，海内怨望，至今不息，虽蒙赦令，不宜居京师。其徙万年敦煌郡。 
现代文：解万年谄佞不忠，坑害百姓，怨声载道，至今不息。虽赦其罪，但不应居于京师，现决定将解万年迁徙到敦煌郡。 
English: Although he was pardoned, he should not live in Beijing Division. It is now decided to relocate him to Dunhuang County.

古文：是岁，御史大夫王骏卒。
现代文：本年，御史大夫王骏去世。
English: This year, Wang Xi, the master of history, passed away.

古文：三年春正月乙卯晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：三年春正月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: On the 30th day of the first month of the third year of spring, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：诏曰： 天灾仍重，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：下诏说： 天灾多次出现，朕深感惶恐。
English: The next edict said: I am deeply alarmed by the repeated occurrence of natural disasters.

古文：惟民之失职，临遣太中大夫嘉等循行天下，存问耆老，民所疾苦。
现代文：担心百姓失其常业，特派遣大中大夫嘉等人循行于天下，询问年老德厚的人，了解民间的疾苦。
English: Fearing that the common people would lose their usual occupation, he dispatched Da Zhong Dafu Jia and others to travel around the world, inquire about the old and virtuous people, and understand the hardships of the common people.

古文：其与剖刺史举惇朴逊让有行义者各一人。 
现代文：可会同部刺史举荐淳朴逊让有德行的各一人。 
English: Each person with virtue can be recommended by the history of the same department.

古文：冬十月庚辰，皇太后诏有司复甘泉泰畤、汾阴后土、雍五畤、陈仓陈宝祠。
现代文：冬十月初五日，皇太后令有关机构恢复甘泉泰畤、汾阴后土、雍五畤、陈仓陈宝祠。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, the Empress Dowager ordered the relevant agencies to restore Ganquan Taiyuan, Shanying Houtu, Yongwu Temple and Chencang Chenbao Shrine.

古文：语在《郊祀志》。
现代文：其事记在《郊祀志》中。
English: The event is recorded in the "History of Suburbs."

古文：十一月，尉氏男子樊并等十三人谋反，杀陈留太守，劫略吏民，自称将军。
现代文：十一月，尉氏县男子樊并等十三人谋反，杀死陈留太守，劫掠吏民，自称为将军。
English: In November, a man from Jo County and 13 others plotted a rebellion, killed Chen Liu Taishu, plundered officials and people, and called himself a general.

古文：徒李谭等五人共格杀并等，皆封为列侯。
现代文：罪徒李谭等五人奋力杀死樊并等，都封为列侯。
English: The criminal Li Tan and five others fought hard to kill Zou and others, and they were all knighted.

古文：十二月，山阳铁官徒苏令等二百二十八人攻杀长吏，盗库兵，自称将军，经历郡国十九，杀东郡太守、汝南都尉。
现代文：十二月，山阳铁官役徒苏令等二百二十八人攻杀长吏，盗出军库武器，自称将军，攻掠郡国十九，杀死东郡太守、汝南都尉。
English: In December, 228 people, including Shanyang railway officials and Su Ling, attacked and killed officials, stole weapons from the military depot, called themselves generals, attacked and plundered nineteen counties, and killed Dong County Governor and Runan Lieutenant.

古文：遣丞相长史、御史中丞持节督趣逐捕。汝南太守严讠斤捕斩令等。
现代文：朝廷派丞相长史、御史中丞持符节督促追捕，汝南太守严讠斤捕斩苏令等人。
English: The imperial court sent the chancellor Chang Shi and the vice-chancellor Mishi Chujo to urge the pursuit, and the Runnan Empress Dowager Guo severely punished and captured Su Ling and others.

古文：近为大司农，赐黄金百斤。
现代文：升严讠斤为大司农，赐黄金五百斤。
English: Sheng Yan Shujin was made the Chief Secretary for Agriculture, and was awarded five hundred jin of gold.

古文：四年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤，神光降集紫殿。大赦天下。赐云阳吏民爵，女子百户牛、酒、鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。
现代文：四年春正月，驾临甘泉，郊祭泰畤。神光下降出现在紫殿，大赦天下，赏赐云阳吏民爵位，女子每百户牛酒若干，鳏寡孤独高年帛若干。
English: In the first month of spring in the fourth year, he came to Ganquan, the suburb festival of Taiyuan. The divine light descended and appeared in the Purple Hall, the world was amnestied, and the Yunyang officials were awarded the title of nobility, the women had a certain amount of cattle wine per hundred households, and the widows and the lonely elderly had a certain amount of money.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后士，赐吏民如云阳，行所过无出田租。
现代文：三月，驾临河东，祭祀后土，赏赐吏民与云阳相同，御驾经过的地方不出田租。
English: In March, driving to the east of the river, after the sacrifice, the reward for officials and people is the same as that of Yunyang, and the place you drive through does not have to pay land rent.

古文：夏四月癸未，长乐临华殿、未央宫东司马门皆灾。
现代文：夏四月十一日，长乐临华殿、未央宫东司马门都发生火灾。
English: On April 11, a fire broke out in the Changle Linhua Hall and the East Sima Gate of the Weiyang Palace.

古文：六月甲午，霸陵园门阙灾。
现代文：六月二十三日，霸陵园正门火灾。
English: On June 23rd, a fire broke out at the main gate of the Mausoleum.

古文：出杜陵诸未尝御者归家。
现代文：将杜陵的还未入宫的姬妾遣返回籍。
English: Du Ling's concubine, who had not yet entered the palace, was sent back to her hometown.

古文：诏曰： 乃者，地震京师，火灾娄降，朕甚惧之。
现代文：下诏说： 前者，地震京师，火灾屡现，朕甚为惶恐。
English: The next edict said: In the first place, since the earthquake in Beijing and the repeated occurrence of fires, I am very frightened.

古文：有司其悉心明对厥咎，朕将亲览焉。 
现代文：望有关大臣尽心指出朕的过失，朕将亲自阅读奏章。 
English: I hope that the relevant ministers will do their best to point out my mistakes. I will read the report myself.

古文：又曰： 圣王明礼制以序尊卑，异车服以章有德，虽有其财，而无其尊，不得逾制，故民兴行，上义而下利。
现代文：诏书又说： 古代圣王规定礼制以序尊卑，标志车服以表彰有德。虽有钱财，而无其尊，不得逾越礼制。所以人民注重自己的德行，重义而轻利。
English: The edict also said: "Ancient holy kings stipulated that the etiquette should be based on the order of superiority and inferiority, and marked car clothes to commend virtue. Although there is money and wealth, there is no dignity, and the etiquette should not be exceeded. Therefore, the people pay attention to their own virtues, emphasizing righteousness and frivolity.

古文：方今世俗奢僭罔极，靡有厌足。
现代文：当今世俗奢侈与僭越无度，不知满足。
English: Today, worldly luxury and extravagance are rampant and insatiable.

古文：公卿列侯亲属近臣，四方所则，未闻修身遵礼，同心忧国者也。
现代文：公卿列侯与亲属近臣，是四方吏民的表率，这些人中很少听说能修身遵礼，同心忧国的。
English: Court nobles, lords and princes, and their relatives and close retainers, are the role models for the officials and people of the four directions. Few of these people are said to be able to cultivate themselves and be respectful, and they are all concerned about the country.

古文：或乃奢侈逸豫，务广第宅，治园池，多畜奴婢，被服绮縠，设钟鼓，备女乐，车服、嫁娶、葬埋过制。吏民慕效，浸以成俗，而欲望百姓俭节，家给人足，岂不难哉！
现代文：有的挥霍无度，贪图安逸，一心地去广置田宅，兴修别墅，畜奴养婢，穿绫着缎，庭设钟鼓，家列女乐，车服与嫁娶埋葬都逾越礼制，吏民羡慕而仿效，逐渐形成一种挥霍浪费的陋习，如此而期望百姓节俭，以保证衣食无缺，那将是何等困难啊！
English: Some people are extravagant, covet comfort, single-mindedly go to build farmhouses, build villas, keep slaves and maidservants, wear yakitori, set up bells and drums in the garden, listen to women's music in the family, go beyond the etiquette of wedding and burial, envy and imitate the officials and the people, and gradually form a bad habit of squandering and wasting, and thus expect the people to be frugal to ensure food and clothing, what a difficulty that will be!

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 赫赫师尹，民具尔瞻。 
现代文：《诗》不是说过吗？ 威仪赫赫的太师，百姓都瞻仰着你啦！ 
English: Isn't it said in "Poetry"? You are a dignified grandmaster, and the people are looking up to you!

古文：司隶校尉察不变者。 
现代文：现特谕有关机构，对此奢侈逾制之风要约束禁止。而青绿二色是民的常服，不必禁。
English: The relevant agencies are now specifically instructed to restrict and prohibit this extravagant and excessive style. And the green and blue is the people's daily wear, it does not need to be banned.

古文：秋七月辛未晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：列侯近臣应自我反省并及时改正，司隶校尉要查处那些有禁不止的人。 秋七月三十日，日偏食。
English: The vassals of the feudal lords should self-reflect and correct themselves in a timely manner, and the lieutenant should investigate and deal with those who have more than one ban.

古文：元延元年春正月己亥朔，日有蚀之。三月，行幸雍，祠五畤。
现代文：元延元年正月初一，日偏食。三月，驾临于雍，祭祀五畤。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1

古文：夏四月丁酉，无云有雷，声光耀耀，四面下至地，昏止。
现代文：夏四月初一，无云有雷，电光闪耀，从四面八方直到地下，黄昏才止。
English: In summer, on the first day of April, there are no clouds, thunder and lightning. The lightning flashes from all directions to the underground, and the twilight only ends.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：秋七月，有星孛于东井。
现代文：秋七月，彗星出现于东井星区。
English: In autumn and July, the comet appeared in the eastern constellation.

古文：诏曰： 乃者，日蚀、星陨，谪见于天，大异重仍。在位默然，罕有忠言。
现代文：下诏说： 前者，日蚀星陨，上天见责，天地的变异不断，而在位的公卿默然，很少进以忠言。
English: The next edict said: The former, eclipses and meteorites, are blamed by heaven, and the heavens and the earth are constantly changing, while the reigning nobles are silent and rarely give advice.

古文：今孛星见于东井，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：今日彗星出现于东井，朕深为恐惧。
English: Today, a comet appeared in Higashii, and I was deeply frightened.

古文：公卿大夫、博士、议郎其各悉心，惟思变意，明以经对，无有所讳。
现代文：公卿大夫、博士、议郎都应理解朕的苦心。认真思考天地变异的原因，明白地对朕指出，不要有所隐讳；要与中原各郡国荐举品行方正能直言极谏的各一人。
English: Kugyo-dokufu, hakase, and hirō should all understand my painstaking efforts. Think seriously about the reasons for the change of heaven and earth, and clearly point out to me that I should not hide anything; I should recommend to the counties and provinces of the Central Plains each and every person who is able to speak frankly.

古文：与内郡国举方正能直言极谏者各一人，北边二十二郡举勇猛知兵法者各一人。 
现代文：边部边区二十二郡举荐勇猛而知兵法的各一人。 
English: Twenty-two counties in the outlying areas of the outlying districts recommended one person each who was brave and knew the art of war.

古文：封萧相国后喜为酂侯。
现代文：封萧何相国之后萧喜为酂侯。
English: After Xiao Ho's accession to the throne, Xiao Xi became the prince.

古文：冬十二月辛亥，大司马大将军王商薨。
现代文：冬十一月十八日，大司马大将军王商去世。
English: In the winter of November 18th, Major General Wang Shang passed away.

古文：是岁，昭仪赵氏害后宫皇子。
现代文：本年，昭仪赵氏害死后宫皇子。
English: This year, after the death of Zhao Zhaozhi, Zhaoyi Zhao became the prince of the palace.

古文：二年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：二年春正月，驾临甘泉，郊祭泰山。
English: In the first month of spring of the second year, arriving at Ganquan, the suburb festival was held.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，驾临河东，祭祀后土。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：夏四月，立广陵孝王子守为王。
现代文：夏四月，立广陵孝王子刘守为王。
English: In the summer of April, Guangling Prince Liu Shou was crowned king.

古文：冬，行幸长杨宫，从胡客大校猎。宿萯阳宫，赐从官。
现代文：冬，驾临长杨宫，与来京朝见的胡客检阅军事演习，宿于艹负阳宫，对随从官员进行赏赐。
English: In winter, he visited the Yang Palace, reviewed the military exercises with the Hu guest who came to Beijing to see the DPRK, stayed at the Yang Palace, and rewarded the accompanying officials.

古文：三年春正月丙寅，蜀郡岷山崩，雍江三日，江水竭。
现代文：三年春正月初十日，蜀郡岷山崩陷，堵塞江水三日，下流江水断流。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the third year of spring, Lushan, Shu County, collapsed, blocking the river water for three days, and the downstream river water was cut off.

古文：二月，封侍中卫尉淳于长为定陵侯。
现代文：二月，封侍中尉淳于长为定陵侯。
English: In February, the vassal lieutenant Jun Yuchang became the lord of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：四年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：四年春正月，驾临甘泉，祭祀泰畤。
English: In the first month of spring in the fourth year, arriving at Ganquan, the suburb festival was held.

古文：二月，罢司隶校尉官。
现代文：二月，罢免司隶校尉官。
English: In February, he was dismissed from his position as a lieutenant.

古文：甘露降京师，赐长安民牛、酒。
现代文：甘露降于京师，赏赐长安百姓牛酒。
English: The nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：绥和元年春正月，大赦天下。
现代文：绥和元年春正月，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the year of the Heian and Taisho eras, there was a general amnesty.

古文：二月癸丑，诏曰： 朕承太祖鸿业，奉宗庙二十五年，德不能绥理宇内，百姓怨恨者众。不蒙天晁，至今未有继嗣，天下无所系心。
现代文：二月初九日，下诏说： 朕继承太祖鸿业，奉祖宗宗庙已二十五年，薄德不足以安定四海，百姓怨望者多，得罪于上天，至今未生太子，天下无仰盼的核心。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, the next imperial edict said: I have inherited the great-grandfather's great-great-great-great-grandfather's great-great-great-great-grandfather's great-great-great-great-great-grandfather's great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather's great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather's great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather's great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather's great-great-great-great-great

古文：观于往古近事之戒，祸乱之萌，皆由斯焉。
现代文：从古往今来的历史教训来看，祸乱的始生，多因继承人的问题而引起。
English: Judging from the lessons of history from ancient times to the present, the genesis of disasters is mostly caused by the issue of successors.

古文：定陶王欣于朕为子，慈仁孝顺，可以承天序，继祭祀。
现代文：定陶王欣是朕的嗣子，慈仁孝顺，可以承天序，继祭祀。
English: Ding Tao Wang Xin is my heir, benevolent and filial, and can inherit the heavenly order and follow the sacrificial rites.

古文：其立欣为皇太子。
现代文：现决定立欣为太子。
English: It has now been decided that Lixin will become crown prince.

古文：封中山王舅谏大夫冯参为宜乡侯，益中山国三万户，以慰其意。
现代文：封中山王舅谏大夫冯参为宜乡侯，增加中山国三万户，以安慰其意。
English: He consoled his uncle, Dr. Feng San, by appointing him as the mayor of Yixiang and increasing the number of households in Zhongshan Province by 30,000.

古文：赐诸侯王、列侯金，天下当为父后者爵，三老、孝弟、力田帛，各有差。 
现代文：赏赐各侯王、列侯黄金，天下为父的继承人的赐以爵级、三老、孝悌力田赏赐各有差别。 
English: There are differences in the rewards given to each lord and vassal of gold, and the rewards given to the heirs of the father of the world in the form of peerage, three elders, and filial piety.

古文：又曰： 盖闻王者必存二王之后，所以通三统也。
现代文：诏书又说： 曾闻王者必存前朝二王的后代，连同今王本身以象征天、地、人三统。
English: The edict also said: Those who have heard of the king must be descendants of the two kings of the previous dynasty, together with the present king himself, symbolizing heaven, earth and man.

古文：昔成汤受命，列为三代，而祭祀废绝。
现代文：昔商汤王开国为帝，列为夏、商、周三代，而后来祭祀废绝。
English: Long ago, the merchant Tang Wang founded the country as an emperor, and was classified as the third generation of Xia, Shang and Zhou, and later the ritual was abolished.

古文：考求其后，奠正孔吉。其封吉为殷绍嘉侯。 
现代文：现考求其后代，只有孔吉为正，特封孔吉为殷绍嘉侯。 
English: Now, looking for his descendants, only Kongji is positive, and Kongji is a special vassal of Yin Shao Jia Hou.

古文：三月，进爵为公，及周承休侯皆为公，地各百里。
现代文：三月，进孔吉爵为公，同与周承休侯都为公，辖地各百里。
English: In March, Jin Kong Jizhe was made a prince, and both he and Zhou Chengxiu were made princes, each with jurisdiction over a hundred li.

古文：行幸雍，祠五畤。
现代文：驾临雍地，祭祀五畤。
English: Arriving in the Yangtze River Valley, the Five Rites of Spring Festival were performed.

古文：夏四月，以大司马票骑将军为大司马，罢将军官。
现代文：夏四月，以大司马骠骑将军为大司马，罢去将军官。
English: In the summer of April, with the commander of the horse riding the general as the commander of the horse, the general officer was dismissed.

古文：御史大夫为大司空，封为列侯。
现代文：御史大夫为大司空，封为列侯。
English: He was given the title of daishi taifu (senior secretary) and the title of laihou (liege lord).

古文：益大司马、大司空奉如丞相。
现代文：增加大司马，大司空的俸禄与丞相相同。
English: The salary of grand secretary Ma will be increased, and that of grand secretary Ku will be the same as that of the prime minister.

古文：秋八月庚戌，中山王兴薨。
现代文：秋八月初九日，中山王刘兴去世。
English: Autumn On the 9th day of early August, Liu Xing, the king of Zhongshan, passed away.

古文：冬十一月，立楚孝王孙景为定陶王。
现代文：冬十一月，立楚孝王之孙刘景为定陶王。
English: In the winter of November, Liu Jing, the grandson of King Chu Xiao, was crowned King Ding Tao.

古文：定陵侯淳于长大逆不道，下狱死。
现代文：定陵侯淳于长大逆不道，下狱赐死。
English: Dingling Houjun grew up to be a rebel, and was sent to prison and died.

古文：廷尉孔光使持节赐贵人许氏药，饮药死。
现代文：廷尉孔光为使持节赐前所废皇后许氏毒药酒，饮药酒而死。
English: The courtier Kong Guang died from drinking the poisoned wine of Queen Hui, which had been given to him on the occasion of the festival.

古文：十二月，罢部刺史，更置州牧，秩二千石。
现代文：十二月，罢去部刺史，改设州牧，禄为二千石。
English: In December, the Department of History was abolished and replaced by the Department of State Pastoral Care, with a stipend of two thousand koku.

古文：二月壬子，丞相翟方进薨。
现代文：二月十三日，丞相翟方进去世。
English: On the 13th of February, the Minister of War, Min Fangjin, passed away.

古文：丙戌，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：三月十八日，成帝驾崩于未央宫。
English: On March 18th, Emperor Chengde passed away at the Miyang Palace.

古文：皇太后诏有司复长安南北郊。
现代文：皇太后诏令有关机构恢复长安南北郊。
English: Empress Dowager Zhao ordered relevant agencies to restore the northern and southern suburbs of Chang'an.

古文：四月己卯，葬延陵。
现代文：四月十一日，葬于延陵。
English: On April 11, he was buried in Yanling.

古文：赞曰：臣之姑充后宫为婕妤，父子昆弟侍帷幄，数为臣言：成帝善修容仪，升车正立，不内顾，不疾言，不亲指，临朝渊嘿，尊严若神，可谓穆穆天子之容者矣！
现代文：班固评论：臣的姑母充成帝后宫为婕妤，父子兄弟在接待与侍奉她时，她多次对臣讲成帝十分注意仪表。上车正立，端坐前视，不动声色，不指手画脚，临朝严肃深沉，如同神明，可称为穆穆天子的容仪！
English: Comment by Ban Gu: My uncle's aunt was a courtesan in Emperor Cheng Rong's harem. When my father and brother received and served her, she repeatedly told my uncle that Emperor Cheng Rong paid great attention to his appearance. When getting on the bus, he stood up straight, looked straight ahead while sitting, did not make a sound, did not point his finger, and was serious and serious, like a god, which can be called the appearance of a god!

古文：博览古今，容受直辞。
现代文：博古通今，采纳直言。
English: Bo Guotong now adopts blunt speech.

古文：公卿称职，奏议可述。遭世承平，上下和睦。
现代文：公卿称职，其奏议文采斐然可观，逢升平盛世，上下和睦。
English: The Kugyo was competent in his duties, and his proclamation and speech were impressive. The era of prosperity was prosperous, and there was harmony between the upper and lower classes.

古文：然湛于酒色，赵氏乱内，外家擅朝，言之可为於邑。
现代文：但由于沉于酒色，赵飞燕姊妹乱于内宫，王氏外戚专擅朝政，说起来是令人叹息的。
English: However, due to indulging in alcohol, Zhao Feiyan's sisters ran amok in the inner palace, and Wang's maternal relatives were exclusively involved in court politics. It is a sighing thing to say.

古文：建始以来，王氏始执国命，哀、平短祚，莽遂篡位，盖其威福所由来者渐矣！
现代文：从建始纪元以来，王氏开始操纵国柄，哀帝与平帝在位时间不长，王莽得以篡位，大概王家的威福是从成帝开始逐步形成的。
English: Since the beginning of the founding era, the Wang clan began to manipulate the national character. The reigns of Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping were not long, and Wang Mang was able to usurp the throne. It is likely that the power of the royal family was gradually formed from the beginning of the emperor.

