古文：杂器用苏丕女蒋惟岳华阴村正韦谅东莱客交城里人岑顺元无有李楚宾
现代文：杂器用苏丕女蒋惟岳华阴村正韦谅东莱客交城里人岑顺元无有李楚宾
English: Jiang Wei Yue Hua Yin Village Zheng Wei Yue Donglai Hakka Town Li Shun Yuan None Li Chubin

古文：苏丕女
现代文：苏丕女
English: Su Ying Niu

古文：武功苏丕，天宝中为楚丘令，女适李氏。
现代文：武功人苏丕，天宝年间是楚丘县县令，女儿嫁给了一个姓李的人。
English: Su Shi, a martial arts practitioner, was the county magistrate of Chuqiu County during the Tenpo era, and his daughter married a man with the surname Li.

古文：李氏素宠婢，因与丕女情好不笃。
现代文：姓李的素来宠爱婢女，因而和苏丕的女儿的感情不够笃诚。
English: Li has always been fond of his maidservant, so his feelings for Su Yao's daughter are not sincere enough.

古文：其婢求术者行魇盅之法，以符埋李氏宅粪土中。
现代文：那婢女求一个术士作害人的法术，把符埋在李家宅院里的粪土中。
English: The servant girl asked a sorcerer to perform a harmful spell and bury the charm in the dung in the courtyard of the Li family home.

古文：又缚綵妇人形七枚，长尺余，藏于东墙窟内，而泥饰之，人不知也。
现代文：又扎制了七个妇人形状的纸人，每个都是一尺多高，藏在东墙洞中，用泥伪装好，谁也不知道。
English: They also tied up seven paper people in the shape of women, each more than a foot tall, and hid them in a hole in the east wall, disguised with mud, no one knows.

古文：数岁，李氏及婢，相继死亡。女寡居四五年。魇盅术成。
现代文：几年之后，姓李的和婢女相继死亡，苏丕女寡居四五年，害人的法术成了。
English: A few years later, the maidservants surnamed Li and He died one after another, and the maidservant Su Ying lived as a widow for four or five years. The harmful spell was broken.

古文：綵妇人出游宅内，苏氏因尔疾发闷绝。
现代文：扎制的纸妇人在宅中出游，苏女因而病发昏倒。
English: The paper woman, who was tied up, went for a walk in the house. As a result, Ms. Su fell ill and passed out.

古文：李婢已死，莫知所由。
现代文：李氏婢女已经死了，没有人知道这是怎么回事。
English: Ms. Li's maid has died, and no one knows what happened.

古文：经一载，累求术士，禁咒备至，而不能制。
现代文：经过一年，多次求术士，什么样的禁咒都用了，就是不能制止。
English: After a year and many requests to the sorcerer, no matter what kind of curse was used, it could not be stopped.

古文：后伺其复出，乃率数十人掩捉，得一枚。
现代文：后来等它们再出来，就率领几十人捕捉，捉到一个。
English: Later, when they came out again, he led dozens of people to catch them, and caught one.

古文：视其眉目形体悉具，在人手中，恒动不止。
现代文：看它眉目形体全都具备，在人手中，总是不停地动。
English: Look at it, it has all the features of the face and body, and in human hands, it always keeps moving.

古文：以刀斫之，血流于地，遂积柴焚之。
现代文：用刀砍它，血流到地上。于是就堆柴草烧它。
English: He cut it with a knife, and the blood flowed to the ground. So he made a pile of sticks and burned it.

古文：其徒皆来焚所号叫，或在空中，或在地上。
现代文：它的同伴们都来烧它的地方号叫，或在空中，或在地下。
English: Its companions all come to burn it where it roars, either in the air or underground.

古文：烧毕，宅中作炙人气。
现代文：烧完了，宅院里有一股烤人的气味。
English: When it was done, there was a smell of roasting in the courtyard.

古文：翌日，皆白衣号哭，数日不已。
现代文：第二天，它的同伙们都穿白衣号哭，几天不止。
English: The next day, his comrades, all dressed in white, wept for days.

古文：其后半岁，累获六枚，悉焚之。
现代文：此后半年，陆陆续续捉到六个，全都烧了。
English: Over the next six months, six more were caught one after another, and all of them were burned.

古文：唯一枚得而复逸，逐之，忽乃入粪土中。
现代文：只有一个捉到以后又跑了，去追它，它忽然进到粪土中。
English: Only one was caught and then ran away. When I went to chase it, it suddenly fell into the manure.

古文：苏氏率百余人掘粪，深七八尺，得桃符。
现代文：苏氏女率领几十人掘粪，掘到七八尺深，掘到一块桃符。
English: Su's daughter led dozens of people to dig dung, dug to seven or eight feet deep, and dug a peach charm.

古文：符上朱书字，宛然可识。
现代文：符上有红色字迹，似乎还可以辨识。
English: The sign has red lettering and appears to be legible.

古文：云：李氏婢魇苏氏家女，作人七枚，在东壁上土龛中。其后九年当成。
现代文：那上面写的是：李氏的婢女魇苏氏家的女儿，作了七个纸人，在东壁上的土龛中，此后九年会成功。
English: On it was written: The daughter of the Li family's maid, the Su family's daughter, made seven paper people in the mound on the east wall. Nine years later, she would succeed.

古文：遂依破壁，又得一枚，丕女自尔无恙。
现代文：于是就打破东壁，又捉到仅剩下的那一个纸人。苏丕的女儿从此没有什么病灾。
English: So they broke down the east wall and caught the only remaining paper person. Su Shi's daughter has never been ill since.

古文：蒋惟岳
现代文：蒋惟岳
English: Jiang Weiyue

古文：蒋惟岳，不惧鬼神。
现代文：蒋惟岳，不怕鬼神。
English: Jiang Wei Yue is not afraid of ghosts and gods.

古文：常独卧窗下，闻外有人声，岳祝云：汝是冤魂，可入相见。
现代文：他常常独自躺在窗下，听到外面有人说话的声音，蒋惟岳祷告说：你是冤魂，可以进来相见。
English: He often lay alone under the window and heard the voice of someone speaking outside. Jiang Wei Yue prayed and said, "You are an evil spirit, you can come in and see me."

古文：若是闹鬼，无宜相惊。
现代文：如果是闲鬼，不应该来惊扰我。
English: If it's an idler, it shouldn't bother me.

古文：于是窣然排户，而欲升其床。
现代文：于是鬼魂窸窸窣窣地打开窗子，想要到床上来。
English: So the ghost rattled open the window and tried to get into the bed.

古文：见岳不惧，旋立壁下，有七人焉。
现代文：见蒋惟岳不怕，旋即站到壁下去了，共有七个。
English: Seeing that Jiang Wei Yue was not afraid, he immediately stood up and went down to the wall, a total of seven.

古文：问其所为，立而不对。
现代文：蒋惟岳问他们要干什么，他们立而不答。
English: Jiang Wei Yue asked them what they wanted to do, but they did not answer.

古文：岳以枕击之，皆走出户。
现代文：蒋惟岳用枕头击打他们，他们都跑出门去。
English: Jiang Weiyue hit them with a pillow, and they all ran out of the door.

古文：因走趁，没于庭中。
现代文：于是他跑去追赶，见他们消失在庭院里。
English: He ran after them and saw them disappear into the courtyard.

古文：明日掘之，得破车辐七枚，其怪遂绝。
现代文：第二天挖掘庭院，挖到破车辐条七根，那怪就绝迹了。
English: The next day, they dug up the yard and found seven broken car spokes. The monster was gone.

古文：又其兄常患重疾，岳亲自看视。
现代文：另外，他哥哥曾经患重病，蒋惟岳亲自照看。
English: In addition, his brother was once seriously ill, and Jiang Weiyue personally took care of him.

古文：夜深，又见三妇人鬼，至兄床前。
现代文：夜深了，又看见三个女鬼，来到哥哥床前。
English: Late at night, he saw three female ghosts come to his brother's bed.

古文：叱退之，三遍，鬼悉倒地，久之走出。
现代文：他把鬼叱退三遍，鬼全都倒在地上，好长时间才跑出去。
English: He rebuked the demons three times, and they all fell to the ground. It took a long time for them to run away.

古文：其兄遂愈。
现代文：他哥哥于是就痊愈了。
English: And his brother was healed.

古文：华阴村正
现代文：华阴村正
English: Huayin Village is rising

古文：华阴县七级赵村，村路因啮成谷，梁之以济往来。
现代文：华阴县七级的赵村，村路因为雨水冲刷而形成深沟，就在上面架了一座桥以帮助行人来往。
English: In Zhao Village, Huayin County, the village road was washed away by rainwater, forming a deep ditch. A bridge was built on top of it to help pedestrians get around.

古文：有村正常夜渡桥，见群小儿聚火为戏。
现代文：有一个村正曾经夜里渡桥，看见一群小孩聚在火堆旁边作游戏。
English: A villager was crossing a bridge at night when he saw a group of children playing around a fire.

古文：村正知甚魅，射之，若中木声，火即灭。
现代文：村正知道他们是鬼魅，用箭射他们，就象射中了木头的声音，火就灭了。
English: The villagers knew they were ghosts, and shooting them with an arrow was like hitting wood, and the fire went out.

古文：闻啾啾曰：射著我阿连头。
现代文：听见一个声音啾啾地说：射着我阿连的头了。
English: He heard a voice muttering: "He shot me in the head."

古文：村正上县回，寻之，见破车轮六七片，有头杪尚衔其箭者。韦谅
现代文：村正上县里回来，找到那地方一看，是六七片破车轮，有一片的头梢还钉着他射出去的那支箭。韦谅
English: Mura was on his way back to the county, and when he found the place, he saw that there were six or seven pieces of broken wheel, and one piece of the arrow he had shot was still pinned to the top of his head.

古文：乾元中，江宁县令韦谅堂前忽见小鬼，以下唇掩面，来至灯所，去又来。
现代文：乾元年间，江宁县县令韦谅在堂前忽然看见小鬼，用下嘴唇盖着脸，来到放灯的地方。离去了又回来。
English: During the year of Qianyuan, Wei Peng, a prefectural governor of Jiangning County, suddenly saw a small ghost in front of the hall, covered his face with his lower lip, and came to the place where the lights were put on. He left and came back.

古文：使人逐之，没于阶下。
现代文：派人追它，它消失在台阶下。
English: Send someone to chase it and it disappears under the steps.

古文：明旦，掘其没处，得一故门扇，长尺余，头作卷荷状。
现代文：第二天早晨，在它消失的地方挖掘，挖到一块旧门扇，长一尺多，头象卷荷叶的形状。
English: The next morning, digging at the spot where it had disappeared, they found an old door leaf, more than a foot long, with a head shaped like a lotus leaf.

古文：东莱客
现代文：东莱客
English: Donglai Guest House

古文：东都郡有馆亭，其西轩常有怪异。
现代文：东都郡有一个馆亭，它的西廊常有鬼怪。
English: There is a pavilion in Dongdu County, and its west gallery is often haunted.

古文：客有寝其下者，夜常闻有犬吠，声甚微。
现代文：有睡在那里的客人，夜里常常听到有狗叫声，声音非常小。
English: There are guests sleeping there, and at night you often hear a dog barking, very softly.

古文：以烛视之，则一无所见，如是者累年矣。
现代文：用灯烛去照，却什么也没看到。如此好几年了。
English: Shine a candle and you see nothing. It's been like this for years.

古文：其后郡守命扃键为库。
现代文：后来郡守命令把此亭装上门栓做仓库。
English: Later, the county governor ordered this pavilion to be fitted with bolts to be used as a warehouse.

古文：尝一夕月皎，有库吏见一犬甚小，苍色，自轩下环庭而走。
现代文：曾经在一个月色明亮的夜晚，有一个守库人看见一只很小的小狗。小狗是苍色的，从廊下绕着庭院跑。
English: Once, on a bright moonlit night, one of the keepers saw a small, pale little dog running along the corridor and around the courtyard.

古文：库吏怪其与常犬异，因投石击之。
现代文：守库人见它与平常小狗不同感到奇怪，就扔石头打它。
English: The curator was surprised to see that it was different from an ordinary puppy, so he pelted it with stones.

古文：郡守命于西轩穷其迹，见门上狗有苍毛甚多，果库吏所见苍犬之色，众方悟焉。
现代文：那小狗叫着跑开了。它跑进西廊下。第二天，守库人把这事报告郡守，郡守命人在西廊下彻底地寻找它的踪迹。看见门上画的狗有很多苍色毛，果然是守库人看见的苍狗的颜色，大家这才恍然大悟。
English: The little dog ran away screaming. It ran into the west corridor. The next day, the custodian reported the matter to the county sheriff, who ordered a thorough search for its tracks in the west corridor. Seeing that the dog painted on the door had a lot of pale fur, it was indeed the color of the greyhound seen by the custodian, and everyone suddenly realized this.

古文：交城里人
现代文：交城里人
English: People from Jiaocheng

古文：交城县南十数里，常夜有怪见于人，多悸而病且死焉。
现代文：交城县南十几里，常常夜间有鬼怪在人前出现，大多都惊悸而病死。
English: More than a dozen miles south of Jiaocheng County, ghosts often appear in front of people at night, and most of them are shocked and die of illness.

古文：里人患之久矣。
现代文：乡里人忧虑这事很久了。
English: The villagers have been worried about this for a long time.

古文：其后里中人有执弧矢夜行者，县南见一魁然若巨人状，衣朱衣，以皂中蒙其首，缓步而来，欹偃若其醉者。
现代文：后来乡里人有带着弓箭夜间走路的，在县南见到一个象巨人一样的庞然大物。那东西穿红衣服，用黑头巾蒙着头，慢慢走来，跌跌撞撞象个喝醉了的人。
English: Later, a villager walking at night with a bow and arrow saw a huge, giant-like creature in the south of the county. It was dressed in red, with a black hood over its head, and walked slowly, stumbling like a drunken man.

古文：里人惧，即引满而发，果中焉，其怪遂退。
现代文：乡里人害怕了，就拉满弓射箭，果真射中了，那怪就退了。
English: When the villagers were afraid, they pulled out their bows and arrows and shot at it. When they hit it, the monster retreated.

古文：里人惧少解，即北走至旅舍，且语其事。
现代文：乡里人的恐惧稍有缓解，就向北跑到旅店，而且讲了这件事。
English: Slightly less frightened, the villager ran north to the inn and told the story.

古文：明日，抵县城。见郭之西丹桂，有一矢贯其上，果里人之矢。
现代文：第二天，到达县城，见城西的一棵丹桂上有一支箭贯在上面，竟是乡里人射出的那支箭。
English: The next day, when I arrived at the county seat, I saw that an arrow had pierced the top of a guava tree in the west of the city. It turned out to be the arrow shot by the villagers.

古文：取之以归，镞有血甚多。
现代文：他把它拿下来回家，箭头上有许多血。
English: He took it down and came home with a lot of blood on the arrow.

古文：白于县令，令命焚之。
现代文：他报告给县令，县令下令把丹桂烧了。
English: He reported it to the county magistrate, who ordered Dan Gui Rong to be burned.

古文：由是县南无患。
现代文：从此县南没有祸患了。
English: Since then, there have been no disasters in the southern part of the prefecture.

古文：岑顺
现代文：岑顺
English: Jinshun

古文：汝南岑顺字孝伯，少好学有文，老大尤精武略。
现代文：汝南人岑顺字孝伯，年轻时好学有文才，老大之后尤其精通战略。
English: A native of southern Yunnan Province, he was studious and literate when he was young, and he was especially adept at strategy after he became the boss.

古文：旅于陕州，贫无第宅。
现代文：他旅居在陕州，穷得没有房子住。
English: He lived in Shaanxi Province and was too poor to live in a house.

古文：其外族吕氏，有山宅，将废之，顺请居焉。
现代文：他的外祖父吕氏有小宅，将要废弃，岑顺请求住在那里。
English: His maternal grandfather, Lv Shi, had a small house that was about to be abandoned, and Hao Shun asked him to live there.

古文：人有劝者，顺曰：天命有常，何所惧耳！
现代文：有的人劝他，岑顺说：天命是一定的，怕什么呢？
English: Some people advised him and said to him, "Fate is certain, what is there to be afraid of?

古文：卒居之。
现代文：到底住进去了。
English: He's moved in after all.

古文：后岁余，顺常独坐书阁下，虽家人莫得入。
现代文：后来过了一年多，岑顺曾经独自坐在书阁下，即使家里人也不能进入。
English: More than a year later, Hao Shun used to sit alone in the library, where even family members could not enter.

古文：夜中闻鼓鼙之声，不知所来，及出户则无闻。
现代文：夜间他听到击鼓的声音，不知从哪来的，等到走出门就听不到了。
English: At night, he hears the sound of drums beating. He doesn't know where it's coming from, but when he walks out the door, he can't hear it.

古文：而独喜，自负之，以为石勒之祥也。
现代文：岑顺因而独自高兴，自己认为自己了不起，以为自己遇到了象十六国后赵王石勒发迹那样的吉祥兆头。
English: As a result, Hao Shun was happy all by himself. He thought he was great and that he had encountered an auspicious sign like the birth of Zhao Wangshile after the Sixteen Kingdoms.

古文：祝之曰：此必阴兵助我，若然，当示我以富贵期。
现代文：他祈祷说：这一定是阴间的军队帮助我，如果真是那样，应当把富贵的日期预示给我。
English: He prayed: "This must be the army of the netherworld helping me, and if so, it should foretell me the date of my prosperity."

古文：数夕后，梦一人被甲胄，前报曰：金象将军使我语岑君，军城夜警，有喧诤者。
现代文：几个晚上之后，他梦见一个人身披甲胄，上前报告说：金象将军派我来告诉岑先生，军队守城，夜里报警，有喧哗争吵的。
English: A few nights later, he dreamed of a man wearing a suit of armor and came forward to report: General Jinxiang sent me to tell Mr. Zou that the army was guarding the city, the police were called at night, and there were noises and quarrels.

古文：蒙君见嘉，敢不敬命。
现代文：受到您的赞美，怎敢不听您的命令。
English: How dare I disobey your orders after receiving your praise.

古文：君甚有厚禄，幸自爱也。
现代文：您定有高官厚禄，希望您自己爱惜自己。
English: You must have a high rank and high salary. I hope you will take good care of yourself.

古文：既负壮志，能猥顾小国乎。
现代文：既然心怀壮志，能屈尊顾及我们小国吗？
English: Since you are ambitious, can you condescend to take care of our small country?

古文：今敌国犯垒，侧席委贤，钦味芳声，愿执旌钺。
现代文：现在敌国侵犯城垒，空着席位委任贤能，你有可敬的名声，愿您来统帅军队。
English: Now that the enemy country has invaded the fortress, and the vacant seat has been assigned to a man of merit, you have an honorable reputation, and I would like you to command the army.

古文：顺谢曰：将军天质英明，师真以律。
现代文：岑顺致谢说：金象将军天生聪明，军队真正是按军纪要求的。
English: Hao Shun expressed his thanks, saying: General Jinxiang is naturally intelligent, and the army is truly in accordance with the requirements of military discipline.

古文：猥烦德音，屈顾疵贱。
现代文：您德高望重却屈尊来看我这微贱之人。
English: You, who are held in such high esteem, have condescended to see me, a lowly man.

古文：然犬马之志，惟欲用之。
现代文：那么我这效犬马之劳的志向，想来是有个有用的时候。
English: Well, my ambition to work like a dog, I think, has come in handy.

古文：使者复命。
现代文：使者回去复命。
English: The messenger went back to answer the summons.

古文：顺忽然而寤，恍若自失，坐而思梦之征。
现代文：岑顺忽然醒了，恍恍惚惚的，像丢了魂，坐在那里思想梦的征兆。
English: Hao Shun suddenly woke up, and sat there in a daze, as if he had lost his soul, thinking about the signs of a dream.

古文：俄然鼓角四起，声愈振厉。
现代文：忽然间鼓角声四起，声音更响。
English: All of a sudden, the sound of drums and horns began to play, louder and louder.

古文：顺整巾下床，再拜祝之。
现代文：岑顺整理头巾下床，连连下拜进行祷告。
English: Hao Shun straightens his headscarf and gets out of bed, bowing down and praying.

古文：须臾，户牖风生，帷帘飞扬。
现代文：不一会儿，门窗有风吹进，帷帘飞动。
English: A moment later, the wind blew in through the doors and windows, and the curtains flew.

古文：灯下忽有数百铁骑，飞驰左右。悉高数寸，而被坚执锐，星散遍地。
现代文：灯下忽然有几百名铁骑，飞奔左右两边，全都几寸高，却披着坚硬的铠甲，拿着锐利的武器，像天上的星星那样散落在地上。
English: Suddenly, under the light, there were hundreds of iron horsemen, flying to the right and left, all a few inches high, but wearing hard armor, holding sharp weapons, and scattered on the ground like stars in the sky.

古文：倏闪之间，云阵四合。
现代文：像闪电那样快的时间里，云阵从上面合拢。
English: In lightning-quick time, the cloud bank closed in from above.

古文：顺惊骇，定神气以观之。
现代文：岑顺又惊又怕，镇定神气观看。
English: Surprised and afraid, Hao Shun watched with a calm demeanor.

古文：须臾，有卒赍书云：将军传檄。
现代文：不一会儿，有个小卒送来战书说：将军传下作战的檄文。
English: A short while later, a private sent in a letter saying: "The general has sent down the order of battle.

古文：顺受之。
现代文：岑顺接了过来。
English: The cormorant followed suit.

古文：云：地连獯虏，戎马不息。向数十年，将老兵穷，姿霜卧甲。天设勍敌，势不可止。
现代文：檄文说：土地连接匈奴，战争连年不断，过去几十年，将军年老，兵力穷尽，披甲卧雪餐霜，老天布下强敌，情势不可阻止。
English: Yu Wen said: The land is connected to the Xiongnu, the war continues year after year, the past few decades, the general is old, the troops are exhausted, the armor is lying in the snow, the enemy is strong, the situation cannot be stopped.

古文：明公养素畜德，进业及时。
现代文：您修养素质积蓄道德，文武学业进步及时。
English: Your cultivation of quality and accumulation of morality, and your academic progress in literature and martial arts are timely.

古文：屡承嘉音，愿托神契。
现代文：屡次受到赞美之音，愿意把神界的符契托付给您。
English: Repeatedly receiving praise, I am willing to entrust you with the symbols of the spirit world.

古文：然明公阳官，固当享大禄于圣世，今小国安敢望之？
现代文：但是您是阳间的官，本来应该在圣世享受高官厚禄，现在小国怎敢奢望用您？
English: But you are a high-ranking official, who should have enjoyed high-ranking and rich rewards in the holy world. How can a small country dare to use you now?

古文：缘天那国北山贼合从，克日会战。
现代文：由于天那国北山贼联合起来，限定日期作战。
English: Due to the fact that the North Mountain bandits of the Heavenly Kingdom have united, the battle will be limited to a specific date.

古文：事图子夜，否灭未期，良用惶骇。
现代文：事情定在半夜，虽然胜负不能预知，也用不着惶恐害怕。
English: The matter was settled in the middle of the night, and although the outcome could not be predicted, there was no need to panic.

古文：顺谢之，室中益烛，坐观其变。
现代文：岑顺道谢。室中的烛光越发亮了，他坐在那里观看事情的变化。
English: The candlelight in the room grew brighter as he sat and watched things change.

古文：夜半后，鼓角四发。
现代文：半夜以后，战鼓号角从四面八方响起。
English: After midnight, war drums and trumpets sounded from all directions.

古文：先是东面壁下有鼠穴，化为城门。
现代文：首先在东边的墙下有个老鼠洞变成了城门。
English: First, a rat hole under the eastern wall became a gate.

古文：垒敌崔嵬。
现代文：抗敌的堡垒高大森严。
English: The fortress of resisting the enemy is high and impregnable.

古文：三奏金革，四门出兵，连旗万计，风驰云走，两皆列阵。
现代文：三次鸣锣击鼓，四门出兵，连旗上万杆，风刮云起，两方都排列成阵。
English: Three times the war-drums were sounded, the troops were sent out from the four gates, the banners were raised ten thousand times, the wind blew, and both sides lined up.

古文：其东壁下是天那军，西壁下金象军，部后各定。
现代文：那东墙下的是天那军，西墙下的是金象军。部署之后各方压住阵脚。
English: Under the east wall is the Tianna Army, and under the west wall is the Jinxiang Army. After the deployment, the parties held down the positions.

古文：军师进曰：天马斜飞度三止，上将横行系四方。
现代文：军师进诗说：天马斜飞度三止，上将横行系四方。
English: The military strategist Jin Shi said: The horse flies diagonally three times, and the general runs rampant in four directions.

古文：辎车直入无回翔，六甲次第不乖行。
现代文：辎车直入无回翔，六甲次第不乖行。
English: There's no turning back for cars coming straight in, and the Rokko train doesn't obey the rules.

古文：王曰：善。
现代文：国王说：好！
English: The king said, "Good!

古文：于是鼓之，两军俱有一马，斜去三尺止。
现代文：于是就击鼓。两军都有一匹战马，斜离三尺停止。
English: So they beat the drums. Both armies had a war horse, which stopped three feet away.

古文：又鼓之，各有一步卒，横行一尺。
现代文：又击鼓进军，各方都有一个徒步的小卒，横行一尺。
English: They also marched to the beat of drums, and on each side there was a foot soldier marching at full speed.

古文：又鼓之，车进。
现代文：又击鼓进军，战车前进。
English: The drums beat again, and the chariots advance.

古文：如是鼓渐急而各出，物包矢石乱交。
现代文：像这样战鼓渐渐急促各队就出来，物件包裹着箭石混杂交锋。
English: Like this, the war drums gradually urge the teams to come out, and the objects are wrapped with arrow stones and mixed with each other.

古文：须臾之间，天那军大败奔溃，杀伤涂地。
现代文：不一会儿，天那军大败，逃奔溃散，杀伤倒地。
English: In a short time, the army of heaven was defeated, fled and scattered, and fell to the ground.

古文：王单马南驰，数百人投西南隅，仅而免焉。
现代文：大王独自骑马往南逃跑，几百人奔向西南角，仅仅幸免了。
English: The king fled south alone on horseback, and several hundred people ran to the southwest corner, only to be spared.

古文：先是西南有药，王栖臼中，化为城堡。
现代文：原先西南角有药臼，大王栖息在药臼中，变化成城堡。
English: Originally, there was a mortar in the southwest corner, and the great king lived in the mortar, transforming it into a castle.

古文：金象军大振，收其甲卒，舆尸横地。
现代文：金象军军威大振。收集它的甲兵、车辆、尸体横仆地上。
English: The military power of the Golden Elephant Army was greatly shaken. Its armored soldiers, vehicles, and corpses were piled up on the ground.

古文：顺俯伏观之，于时一骑至禁，颁曰：阴阳有厝，得之者昌。
现代文：岑顺低身观看他们。于是，一匹马到禁区，颁书说：阴间阳间的事都有一定的安排，得到它的就盛。
English: So, a horse rode into the restricted area and handed out a book saying, "Things in the underworld and in the sun are all arranged in a certain way, and if you get it, you prosper."

古文：亭亭天威，风驱连激，一阵而胜，明公以为何如？
现代文：高大的老天威严，象刮风般驱驰接连激烈战斗，一阵就胜利。明公认为怎么样呢？
English: The lofty majesty of heaven, like the wind, drives one fierce battle after another, one victory at a time. What do you think?

古文：顺曰：将军英贯白日，乘天用时，窃窥神化灵文，不胜庆快。
现代文：岑顺说：将军英明使日光逊色，趁天时用事，能知晓神仙变化的灵文非常庆幸愉快。
English: Hao Shun said, "The general is so wise that he makes the sunlight inferior, takes advantage of the weather, and is able to know the changes of the gods. Lingwen is very happy and joyful."

古文：如是数日会战，胜败不常。
现代文：像这样几天会战，胜利和失败没有一定。
English: In a battle of several days like this, victory and defeat are not certain.

古文：王神貌伟然，雄姿罕俦。
现代文：大王相貌雄伟，雄姿天下无双。
English: The great king has a majestic appearance, and his stature is second to none.

古文：宴馔珍宴与顺，致宝贝明珠珠玑无限。顺遂荣于其中，所欲皆备焉。
现代文：摆宴吃山珍海味，给岑顺宝贝明珠珠玑无数，岑顺就在里面荣耀起来了，想要的完全齐备了。
English: They had a banquet, ate mountain and sea delicacies, and gave countless pearls and beads to the children of Jushun. Jushun was glorified inside, and everything they wanted was completely ready.

古文：后遂与亲朋稍绝，闲间不出。
现代文：以后，岑顺就和亲戚朋友渐渐地断绝来往，闲暇时间不出门。
English: After that, Hao Shun gradually cut off contacts with relatives and friends, and did not go out during leisure time.

古文：家人异之，莫究其由。
现代文：家里人认为他奇怪，谁也不知道是什么原因。
English: His family thought he was strange, and no one knew why.

古文：而顺颜色憔悴，为鬼气所中。
现代文：但是岑顺面色憔悴，象是被鬼气迷住了。
English: But Hao Shun looked pale, as if he had been possessed by evil spirits.

古文：亲戚共意有异，诘之不言。
现代文：亲戚共同认为其中有异，诘问他，他也不说。
English: Relatives agree that there is a difference, but when they ask him, he won't say.

古文：因饮以醇醪，醉而究泄之。
现代文：于是，让他喝醇美的酒，喝醉后就盘问他，他终于泄露了这事。
English: So they plied him with wine, got him drunk, interrogated him, and he finally revealed the affair.

古文：其亲人僭备锹锸，因顺如厕而隔之。
现代文：他的亲人背着他准备锹镐，趁岑顺上厕所的时候，拿着锹镐挖掘他的房内。
English: His relatives prepared shovels behind his back and used them to dig into his room when he went to the toilet.

古文：荷锸乱作，以掘室内，八九尺忽坎陷，是古墓也。
现代文：挖到八九尺深的时候，忽然陷落成坑，是一个古坟。
English: When it was dug to a depth of eighty-nine feet, it suddenly collapsed into a pit and became an ancient grave.

古文：墓有砖堂，其盟器悉多，甲胄数百，前有金床戏局，列马满枰，皆金铜成形，其干戈之事备矣。
现代文：坟里有砖砌的内堂，里面陪葬的器物很多，铠甲头盔几百，前面有金床和游戏的棋盘，排列车马满横盘，都是金铜做成的。那些干戈作战的事非常完备。
English: There is a brick-built inner hall in the grave, with many funerary objects inside, hundreds of armored helmets, a gold bed and a game board in the front, and a platoon horse full of cross plates, all made of gold and copper.

古文：乃悟军师之词，乃像戏行马之势也。
现代文：于是明白军师的诗，就是象棋走马的形势。
English: Then I understood that the poem of the strategist is the situation of the chess game.

古文：既而焚之，遂平其地。
现代文：不久就烧了它们，平整了那块地。
English: They soon burned them and levelled the land.

古文：多得宝贝，皆墓内所畜者。
现代文：得到了很多宝贝，都是坟内蓄积的。
English: I got a lot of treasures, all of which were accumulated in the grave.

古文：顺阅之，恍然而醒，乃大吐，自此充悦，宅亦不复凶矣。
现代文：岑顺看过这些，从恍惚不清中明白过来，就大吐。从此精力充沛快乐，房宅也不闹鬼了。
English: Hao Shun read these, came to understand from the trance, and vomited. From then on, he was full of energy and happy, and his house was no longer haunted.

古文：时宝应元年也。
现代文：当时是唐代宝应元年。
English: At that time, it was the first year of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：元无有
现代文：元无有
English: From nothing to something

古文：宝应中，有元无有，常以仲春末，独行维扬郊野。
现代文：唐代宝应年间，有个元无有，曾经在仲春二月末，独自行走在江苏扬州的郊外。
English: During the Baoying Dynasty of the Tang Dynasty, there was a time when no one existed. Once, at the end of February in the middle of spring, I was walking alone in the suburbs of Yangzhou, Jiangsu.

古文：值日晚，风雨大至。
现代文：正赶上天晚了，大风骤雨到了。
English: It was getting late in the day when the wind and rain came.

古文：时兵荒后，人户多逃，遂入路旁空庄。
现代文：当时是兵荒马乱以后，住家人多半逃跑了，于是进入道旁空旷的村庄里。
English: At that time, it was after the war, and most of the residents had fled, so they entered the empty village next to the road.

古文：须臾霁止，斜月方出。
现代文：不久天晴了，斜照的明月才升起来。
English: Soon the sky cleared, and the slanting bright moon rose.

古文：无有坐北窗，忽闻西廊有行人声。
现代文：元无有坐在北窗下，忽然听到西廊有行人的脚步声。
English: Yuan Muxuo was sitting under the north window when he suddenly heard the footsteps of pedestrians on the west corridor.

古文：未几，见月中有四人，衣冠皆异，相与谈谐，吟咏甚畅。
现代文：不一会，看见月中有四个人，衣服帽子都奇异，互相交谈很和谐，吟诗咏诵得很顺畅。
English: After a while, I saw four people in the moon, their clothes and hats were strange, their conversation was very harmonious, and their chanting was very smooth.

古文：乃云：今夕如秋，风月若此，吾辈岂不为一言，以展平生之事也？
现代文：于是说：今晚象秋季，清风明月这样美，我们怎能不说一二句诗，用来抒展平生的愿望呢？
English: Then he said, "Tonight is as beautiful as autumn, the wind is fresh and the moon is bright. How can we not say one or two lines of poetry to express our lifelong wishes?"

古文：其一人即曰云云。吟咏既朗，无有听之具悉。
现代文：其中有一个人就说对对，吟诵诗的声音很清朗，元无有听得完全明白。
English: One of them said, "That's right," and the chanting voice was so clear that it was completely understandable.

古文：其一衣冠长人即先吟曰：齐绔鲁缟如霜雪，寥亮高声予所发。
现代文：其中一个衣帽华贵的高个子就首先吟诗说：齐地产的绔，鲁地产的缟象霜雪一样浩白，清彻响亮的高声是我发出来的。
English: One of them, a tall man with an ornate hat, began to chant: "Qi real estate's dragonfly, Lu real estate's dragonfly is as white as frost and snow. I made the clear, loud, high-pitched sound."

古文：其二黑衣冠短陋人诗曰：嘉宾良会清夜时，煌煌灯烛我能持。
现代文：其中第二个穿着黑衣戴着短冠的丑陋的人说：最好的来宾良友相会在清风月白的夜晚，煌煌灿烂灯烛我能支撑。
English: The second of them, an ugly man dressed in black and wearing a short crown, said: "The best guests and friends will meet on a clear, windy, moonlit night. I can support the brilliant lights and candles."

古文：其三故弊黄衣冠人亦短陋，诗曰：清冷之泉候朝汲，桑绠相牵常出入。
现代文：其中第三个穿着旧的破的黄衣冠的也是短小的丑陋的人，作诗：清洁冰凉的泉水等候早晨来汲取。用桑树皮搓成的绠绳互相牵引着常常出来进去。
English: The third of them, also a short, ugly man, wearing an old, tattered yellow crown, wrote a poem: "Clean, cold spring water, waiting for the morning to draw it."

古文：其四故黑衣冠人诗曰：爨薪贮泉相煎熬，充他口腹我为劳。
现代文：其中第四个穿旧黑色衣帽的人作诗说：燃烧柴禾贮存泉水互相煎熬，充实别人的口腹我为他们勤劳。
English: The fourth one, wearing an old black cap, wrote a poem: "Burning firewood, storing spring water, tormenting each other, filling other people's stomachs, I work hard for them."

古文：无有亦不以四人为异，四人亦不虞无有之在堂隍也。递相褒赏，羡其自负。则虽阮嗣宗《咏怀》，亦若不能加矣。
现代文：元无有也不认为四个人为奇异的怪物，四个人也没料想到元无有就在堂下的空沟上，轮流相互褒奖欣赏，羡慕他们自己高傲了不起，就连三国时魏的阮籍的《咏怀》，也象不能比他们好了。
English: Yuan none of them thought that the four people were strange monsters, and the four people did not expect that Yuan none of them would be on the ditch below the hall, taking turns to praise and appreciate each other, and envying their own arrogance. Even the Three Kingdoms, the Wei and the Nguyn, could not be better than them.

古文：四人迟明方归旧所，无有就寻之，堂中惟有故杵、灯、台、水桶、破铛，乃知四人，即此物所为也。
现代文：四人到天亮后才归回原来的地方。元无有就地寻找他们，堂屋中只有旧杵、灯台、水桶、破锅，才知道四个人，就是这些物件变化的。
English: The four people did not return to their original place until after dawn. There was no place to look for them, and only the old plow, the lighthouse, the bucket, and the broken pot in the house knew the four people, it was these objects that changed.

古文：李楚宾
现代文：李楚宾
English: Li Chubin

古文：李楚宾者，楚人也。
现代文：李楚宾，是楚地人。
English: Li Chubin is a native of Chu.

古文：性刚傲，惟以畋猎为事。
现代文：性情刚毅傲慢，只把打猎作为职业。
English: Temperament: Stubborn and arrogant, only hunting as a career.

古文：凡出猎，无不大获。
现代文：凡是出去打猎，没有不大获而归的。
English: No one who goes out to hunt ever comes back without some small gain.

古文：时童元范家住青山，母尝染疾，昼常无苦，至夜即发。
现代文：当时童元范家居住在青山，母亲曾经染上疾病，白天常常没有痛苦，到晚间就发作。
English: At that time, Tongyuan Fan's family lived in Aoyama. His mother had been infected with a disease. During the day, there was often no pain, but it would flare up in the evening.

古文：如是一载，医药备至，而绝无瘳减。
现代文：这样过了一年，医药全都用到了，但是一点没有减轻。
English: After a year of this, all the medicine had been used up, but there was no relief.

古文：时建中初，有善《易》者朱邯归豫章，路经范舍，邯为筮之。
现代文：当时是唐德宗建中初年，有位善长《易经》的人朱邯回江西豫章，路经童元范家，朱邯为他用蓍草占卜。
English: At that time, it was the first year of Tang Dezong Jian Middle School. Zhu Xi, a good student of the I Ching, returned to Yuzhang, Jiangxi Province, and passed by Tongyuan Fan's house. Zhu Xi divined for him with reeds.

古文：乃谓元范曰：君今日未时，可具衫服，于道侧伺之，当有执弓挟矢过者。
现代文：于是对童元范说：您今天未时，可准备单上衣，在道边守候，会有个拿弓挟箭的过路人。
English: So he said to Tongyuan Fan, "If you are late today, you can prepare a single jacket and wait by the roadside. There will be a passerby with a bow and arrow.

古文：君能求之斯人，必愈君母之疾，且究其原矣。
现代文：您能哀求这个人，一定能治愈您母亲的病，并且能弄清病的原委了。
English: You can plead with this man, and he will surely cure your mother's illness and find out what caused it.

古文：元范如言，果得楚宾，张弓骤马至。
现代文：童元范象他说的那样，果然等得了李楚宾，李楚宾张着弓驰马到了。
English: Tongyuan Fan, as he said, waited for Li Chubin, and Li Chubin arrived on horseback with a bow.

古文：元范拜请过舍，宾曰：今早未有所获，君何见留？
现代文：童元范礼拜邀请到家里。李楚宾说：今天早晨没有收获，您为什么还留我呢？
English: Tongyuan invited Fan Ribei to his home. Li Chubin said, "There was no harvest this morning, why did you keep me?

古文：元范以其母疾告之，宾许诺。
现代文：童元范把他母亲的病告诉了他，李楚宾答应了。
English: Tongyuan Fan told him about his mother's illness, and Li Chubin agreed.

古文：元范备饮膳，遂宿楚宾于西庑。
现代文：童元范准备了吃喝，于是让李楚宾在西厢房住宿。
English: Tong Yuan Fan prepared food and drink, so he let Li Chubin stay in the west wing room.

古文：是夜，月明如昼。
现代文：这天晚上，月光明亮象白昼一样。
English: That night, the moon was as bright as day.

古文：楚宾乃出户，见空中有一大鸟，飞来元范堂舍上，引喙啄屋，即闻堂中叫声，痛楚难忍。
现代文：李楚宾就走出房门，看见空中有只大鸟，飞到童元范的堂屋房上，伸出嘴啄房，立即听到堂屋中的叫声，痛苦难以忍受。
English: Li Chubin walked out of the door, saw a large bird in the air, flew to Tongyuan Fan's hall, stretched out his mouth to peck at the door, and immediately heard the cries in the hall, the pain was unbearable.

古文：楚宾揆之曰：此其妖魅也。
现代文：李楚宾推测说：这个鸟是妖魅。
English: Li Chubin surmised that the bird was a genie.

古文：乃引弓射之，两发皆中，其鸟因而飞去，堂中哀痛之声亦止。
现代文：于是引满弓发箭射它，两发都中，那个鸟便飞离开了。堂屋中哀痛的声音也停止。
English: So he shot it full of arrows from his bow, and when he had shot it twice, the bird flew away, and the sound of weeping in the hall ceased.

古文：至晓，楚宾谓元范曰：吾昨夜已为子除母害矣。
现代文：到拂晓，李楚宾对童元范说：我昨晚已为您除掉了您母亲的病了。
English: At dawn, Li Chubin said to Tongyuan Fan, "I cured your mother's illness for you last night.

古文：乃与元范绕舍遍索，俱无所见。
现代文：于是和童元范绕着房舍遍地搜索，都没有发现什么。
English: So he and Tongyuan Fan searched everywhere around the house and found nothing.

古文：因至坏屋中，碓桯古址，有箭两只，所中箭处，皆有血光。
现代文：于是到破屋中，在支撑碓臼木架的旧址上，有两只箭，中箭的地方，都有血光。
English: So I went to the ruined house, on the old site of the wooden frame supporting the mortar and pestle, and there were two arrows. Where the arrows hit, there was blood.

古文：元范遂以火燔之，精怪乃绝。
现代文：童元范就用火烧了它，妖精怪物才灭绝。
English: Tong Yuan Fan burned it with fire, and the fairy monster became extinct.

古文：母患自此平复。
现代文：母亲的病从此以后平安康复。
English: Mother's illness has since made a safe recovery.

