古文：鹅
现代文：鹅
English: Goose

古文：史悝
现代文：史悝
English: History Channel

古文：晋太元中，章安郡史悝家有驳雄鹅，善鸣。
现代文：晋代太元年间，章安郡史悝家有只杂色的公鹅，喜欢鸣叫。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, the Shih family in Zhang'an County had a male goose of mixed color that liked to crow.

古文：悝女常养饲之，鹅非女不食，荀佥苦求之，鹅辄不食，乃以还悝。
现代文：史悝的女儿常常喂鹅吃食，不是史悝的女儿喂的食，鹅就不吃。荀佥向史悝要来这只鹅，鹅就不吃食，只好把鹅又还给了史悝。
English: Shi Yan's daughter often fed the goose to eat, but the goose wouldn't eat the food that wasn't fed by Shi Yan's daughter. When the stork asked Shi Yan for the goose, the goose wouldn't eat and had to give the goose back to Shi Yan.

古文：又数日，晨起，失女及鹅。
现代文：又过了几天，早晨起来，女儿和鹅一起不见了。
English: A few days later, when she woke up in the morning, her daughter was gone, along with the goose.

古文：邻家闻鹅向西，追至一水，唯见女衣及鹅毛在水边。
现代文：邻居家听到鹅向西面走的声音，史悝便追到一条河边，只看见女儿的衣服和鹅毛堆在河边。
English: Neighbors heard the sound of the goose heading west, and Shi Yan chased it to the edge of a river, only to see her daughter's clothes and goose feathers piled up by the river.

古文：今名此水为鹅溪。
现代文：如今这条河就叫 鹅溪 。
English: The river is now called Goose Creek.

古文：姚略
现代文：姚略
English: Yao Liang

古文：而众鹅中有铃声甚清亮，候之，见一鹅咽颈极长，因罗得之，项上有铜铃，缀以银锁，有隐起元鼎元年字。
现代文：雀目夕昏鹅沟济南郡张公城的西北方向有个鹅沟。南燕的时候，有个打渔的人住在水边，经常听到鹅叫的声音，并且还在众多的鹅鸣中传出清亮的铃声。等到这群鹅游过来，他看见一只鹅的脖颈极长，于是用网扣住了这只鹅。发现鹅的脖子上有只铜铃，用银锁锁在脖子上，铃上隐隐约约地有突起的 元鼎元年 的字样。
English: There is a goose ditch in the northwest direction of Zhang Gongcheng, Jinan County. When Nanyan, a fisherman lived on the water's edge. He often heard the sound of geese calling, and also heard the clear ringing sound in the numerous goose songs. When the group of geese swam over, he saw a goose with a very long neck, so he caught the goose with a net. He found that there was a copper bell on the goose's neck, locked with a silver lock on the neck, and the bell had the protruding words "元鼎元年" vaguely on it.

古文：祖录事久视年中，越州有祖录事，不得名，早出，见担鹅向市中者。
现代文：祖录事久视年中，越州有祖录事，不得名，早出，见担鹅向市中者。
English: In the middle of the year, Yuezhou has an ancestor, nameless, early out, seen carrying a goose to the city.

古文：鹅见录事，频顾而鸣，祖乃以钱赎之。
现代文：鹅见录事，频顾而鸣，祖乃以钱赎之。
English: The goose saw the recording, looked at it often and crowed. The ancestor redeemed it with money.

古文：到僧寺，令放为长生。
现代文：到僧寺，令放为长生。
English: Go to a Buddhist temple, and you will be granted eternal life.

古文：鹅竟不肯入寺，但走逐祖后，经坊历市，稠人广众之处，一步不放，祖收养之。
现代文：鹅竟不肯入寺，但走逐祖后，经坊历市，稠人广众之处，一步不放，祖收养之。
English: The goose did not want to enter the temple, but after following the ancestors, he went to the city of sutras, where there was a large number of people, and he did not let go, and the ancestors adopted him.

古文：左丞张锡亲见说。
现代文：左丞相张锡说是自己亲眼看见的事。
English: Zhang Xi, Minister of the Left, said that he saw it with his own eyes.

古文：周氏子
现代文：周氏子
English: Zhou Eriko

古文：汝南周氏子，吴郡人也，亡其名，家于昆山县。
现代文：汝南周生是吴郡人，不知道他的名字了，他家住在昆山县。
English: Runan Zhou Sheng is a native of Wuxi County. I don't know his name. His family lives in Kunshan County.

古文：元和中，以明经上第，调选，得尉昆山。
现代文：元和年间，他考中了明经，安排选拔担任昆山尉。
English: During the Yuan and He years, he took the Ming Dynasty examination and was selected to serve as Kunshan lieutenant.

古文：既之官，未至邑数十里，舍于逆旅中。夜梦一丈夫，衣白衣仪状甚秀，而血濡衣襟，若伤其臆者。
现代文：去昆山县赴任途中住在距离县城几十里的一个旅店里，夜里他梦见一个穿白衣服仪表俊秀的男子，这男子的衣襟染满了血，象是胸部受了伤。
English: On his way to work in Kunshan County, he stayed in a hotel dozens of miles away from the county seat. At night, he dreamed of a handsome man dressed in white. The man's collar was stained with blood, as if he had suffered a chest injury.

古文：既拜而泣谓周生曰： 吾家于林泉者也，以不尚尘俗，故得安其所有年矣。
现代文：这男子行过礼哭着对周生说： 我是个住在树林泉水间的人，因为不喜欢尘世的搔扰，所以在树林泉水间安度许多年了。
English: The man bowed and wept and said to Zhou Sheng: I am a person who lives in the forest springs, because I do not like the disturbance of the world, so I have spent many years in the forest springs.

古文：今以偶行田野间，不幸值君之家僮，有系吾者。
现代文：今天因为偶尔在田野之间走走，不幸被你家僮仆把我捉住用绳子拴上了。
English: Today, because I occasionally walked between the fields, I was unfortunately caught by your servant and tied with a rope.

古文：吾本逸人也，既为所系，心甚不乐，又纵狂犬噬吾臆，不胜其愤。
现代文：我本来是个隐居的人，被捉住之后，心里很不高兴。家僮又放恶狗咬伤了我的胸部，我气愤得忍受不了了，希望你能可怜并放了我。
English: I used to be a recluse, but after I was caught, I was very upset. My family also let a vicious dog bite my chest. I was so angry that I couldn't bear it. I hope you can take pity on me and release me.

古文：愿君子悯而宥之，不然，则死在朝夕矣。 周生曰： 谨受教，不敢忘。 
现代文：不然的话，我不久就会死去。 周县尉说： 我接受你的要求，不敢忘记。 
English: Otherwise, I will soon die.Lieutenant Zhou County said: I accept your request and dare not forget it.

古文：言讫忽寤，心窃异之。
现代文：说完忽然醒了，心中觉得这事很奇怪。
English: After saying this, I suddenly woke up and thought this was very strange.

古文：明日，至其家。
现代文：第二天，他回到自己家里。
English: The next day, he returned to his home.

古文：是夕，又梦白衣来曰： 吾前以事诉君，幸君怜而诺之，然今尚为所系，顾君不易仁人之心，疾为我解其缚，使不为君家囚，幸矣。 
现代文：这天晚上，他又梦见白衣人来说： 我上一次把事情告诉了你，幸亏你怜悯并答应了我，可是现在我还被捆绑着，想你不会改变仁爱之心，快些替我解开绳子，使我不再被囚禁在你们家里，那就万幸了。 
English: That night, he also dreamed of the man in white and said, "I told you about this last time, and fortunately you took pity on me and agreed to help me, but now I'm still tied up. I don't think you'll change your benevolent heart. Quickly untie the rope for me, so that I'm no longer imprisoned in your house, and then I'll be happy."

古文：周即问曰： 然则尔之名氏，可得闻乎？ 
现代文：周县尉就问他说： 然而你的名姓，能够告诉我吗？ 
English: Lieutenant Zhou County then asked him, "However, can you tell me your name?"

古文：其人曰： 我鸟也。 
现代文：那个人说： 我是一只鸟。 
English: The man said: I am a bird.

古文：言已遂去。
现代文：说完就离开了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：又明日，周生乃以梦语家僮，且以事讯之，乃家人因适野，遂获一鹅，乃笼归，前夕，有犬伤其臆，周生即命放之。
现代文：第二天，周县尉就把梦中的事和僮仆说了，并向僮仆询问这件事。原来家人到野外去，捉到了一只鹅，就用笼子装着回家来。前天晚上，有只狗伤了鹅的胸部。周县尉立即命令把鹅放了。
English: The next day, Lieutenant Zhou told the dream to the servants and asked them about it. Originally, the family went to the field, caught a goose, and brought it home in a cage. The night before, a dog had injured the goose's chest. Lieutenant Zhou immediately ordered the goose to be released.

古文：是夕，又梦白衣人辞谢而去。
现代文：这天晚上，又梦见白衣人向他告辞道谢，然后就离去了。
English: That night, he also dreamed that the man in white said goodbye and thanked him, and then left.

古文：平固人
现代文：平固人
English: Hirakuto from

古文：处州平固人访其亲家，因留宿。
现代文：处州平固有个人去拜访他的亲家，被留下住宿。
English: Went to visit his relatives in Zhouzhou Pingyuan and was left without accommodation.

古文：夜分，闻寝室中有人语声，徐起听之，乃群鹅语曰： 明旦主人将杀我，善视诸儿。 
现代文：半夜时，他听见寝室中有人说话的声音，便慢慢地起身过去仔细倾听，原来是群鹅在说话。一只鹅说： 明天早晨主人将要杀我，好好照看这群孩子吧。 
English: In the middle of the night he heard someone talking in his bedroom. He slowly got up and went to listen carefully. It turned out to be a gaggle of geese talking. One goose said: "Tomorrow morning my master is going to kill me. Take good care of these children."

古文：言之甚悉。
现代文：说得很清楚。
English: He said it very clearly.

古文：既明，客辞去，主人曰： 我有鹅甚肥，将以食子。 
现代文：天亮以后，客人要走。主人说： 我有只鹅很肥，准备把它杀了给你吃。 
English: After dawn, the guest wanted to leave. The host said: I have a very fat goose, and I am going to kill it for you to eat.

古文：客具告之，主人于是举家不复食鹅。
现代文：客人就把听到的鹅的话全告诉了主人，主人全家从此不再吃鹅。
English: The guest told his host everything he had heard about the goose, and his host's whole family stopped eating goose.

古文：顷之，举乡不食矣。
现代文：不多久，全乡的人也都不再吃鹅了。
English: It didn't take long for the whole village to stop eating goose.

古文：海陵斗鹅
现代文：海陵斗鹅
English: The Hailing Dueling Geese

古文：乙卯岁，海陵郡西村中有二鹅斗于空中，久乃堕地，其大可五六尺，双足如驴蹄，村人杀而食之者皆卒。
现代文：乙卯年，海陵郡的西村里有两只鹅在空中相斗，过了很长时间后坠落到地上。它们大约有五六尺长，双脚象驴的蹄子那样大。村子里凡是杀了这两只鹅并且吃了鹅肉的人都死了。
English: In the year of Wu Wu, in the West Village of Hailing County, there were two geese that fought each other in the air. After a long time, they fell to the ground. They were about five or six feet long, and their feet were as big as a donkey's hoof. Everyone in the village who killed the two geese and ate the goose meat died.

古文：明年，兵陷海陵。
现代文：第二年，军队攻陷海陵。
English: The next year, the army invaded Hailing.

古文：鸭
现代文：鸭
English: Duck

古文：晋周昉少时与商人泝江俱行，夕止宫亭庙下。
现代文：晋代的周昉少年时与商人一块逆江而行，傍晚来到宫亭庙外。
English: When he was a young boy in the Jin Dynasty, Zhou Qi went against the river with a merchant, and in the evening he came to the outskirts of the palace and temple.

古文：同侣相语： 谁能入庙中宿？ 
现代文：同行的人们说： 谁敢到庙里去睡一宿？ 
English: Those who accompanied him said, "Who would dare to sleep in a temple for a night?"

古文：昉性胆果决，因上庙宿。
现代文：周昉胆大果断，就单独到庙里去睡，一宿都很平安。
English: Zhou Yu boldly and decisively went to the temple to sleep alone, and the whole night was very peaceful.

古文：竟夕晏然，晨起，庙中见有白头老翁，昉遂擒之，化为雄鸭。昉捉还船，欲烹之，因而飞去，后竟无他。
现代文：早晨起来的时候，他看见庙里有一个白发老翁。周昉就去捉拿他，白头翁变成了一只雄鸭，周昉捉住鸭子回到船上，准备煮了吃肉，这雄鸭又跑了，后来也没有发生别的什么事。
English: When he got up in the morning, he saw a white-haired old man in the temple. Zhou Yu went to catch him, and the white-haired old man turned into a male duck. Zhou Yu caught the duck, returned to the boat, and prepared to cook and eat the meat. The male duck ran away again, and nothing else happened.

古文：鹭
现代文：鹭
English: 

古文：冯法
现代文：冯法
English: by Feng Fa

古文：晋建武中，剡县冯法作贾，夕宿荻塘，见一女子，著服，白皙，形状短小，求寄载。
现代文：晋代建武年间，剡县的冯法作买卖。晚上船停荻塘里，他看见一个穿着丧服的女人，皮肤白皙，身形矮小，请求搭船。
English: During the Jianwu era of the Jin Dynasty, Feng Fa, a merchant from Jixian County, saw a woman in mourning dress, with fair skin and short stature, asking for a ride when the boat stopped at Qutang in the evening.

古文：明旦，船欲发，云： 暂上取行资。 
现代文：第二天早晨，船正要出发，女人说： 我上岸去取出门用的钱物。 
English: The next morning, as the boat was about to leave, the woman said, "I'll go ashore and get the money for the door."

古文：既去，法失绢一疋，女抱二束刍置船中。
现代文：她离船后，冯法丢了一匹绢，这时那女人抱着两捆草回来放在船里。
English: After she left the boat, Fengfa lost a donkey. At that time, the woman came back with two bundles of grass and put them in the boat.

古文：如此十上，失十绢。
现代文：那女人象这样上下了十次，就丢了十匹绢。
English: The woman went up and down ten times like this and lost ten donkeys.

古文：法疑非人，乃缚两足，女云： 君绢在前草中。 
现代文：冯法怀疑她不是人，就捆上了她的两只脚，那女人说： 你的绢在前面的草丛中。 
English: Fengfa suspected that she was not human and tied her two feet. The woman said, "Your shackles are in the grass in front."

古文：化形作大白鹭，烹食之，肉不甚美。
现代文：说完身形变成了一只大白鹭。将大白鹭煮着吃了，肉味并不太好吃。
English: After saying that, his body turned into a great egret. I cooked the great egret and ate it, but the meat did not taste very good.

古文：钱塘士人
现代文：钱塘士人
English: Qiantang Scholar

古文：钱塘士人姓杜，船行。
现代文：钱塘有个书生姓杜。有一天他坐船外出，当时天下大雪并已到黄昏。
English: There was a scholar surnamed Du in Qiantang. One day he went out on a boat, when it was snowing heavily and it was already dusk.

古文：时大雪日暮，有女子素衣来，杜曰： 何不入船？ 
现代文：有个穿着白衣服的女子走来，书生说： 你为什么不进到船舱里来？ 
English: A woman in a white dress came up to me and said, "Why don't you come into the cabin?"

古文：遂相调戏。
现代文：然后就调戏她。
English: Then he molested her.

古文：杜阖船载之，后成白鹭去。
现代文：书生关上船舱门将那个女子载走，没想到那女子后来又变成一只白鹭飞走了。
English: The student closed the cabin door and carried the woman away. Unexpectedly, the woman later turned into an egret and flew away.

古文：杜恶之，便病死也。
现代文：姓杜的书生厌恶这件事，生病死了。
English: The student, surnamed Du, was disgusted by this and fell ill and died.

古文：黎州白鹭
现代文：黎州白鹭
English: Lizhou Baiyun

古文：黎州通望县，每岁孟夏，有白鹭鹚一双坠地。
现代文：黎州的通望县，每年的初夏，都有一对白鹭鹚落到地上。
English: Every early summer, a pair of egrets fall to the ground in Tongwang County, Li Prefecture.

古文：古老传云，众鸟避瘴。临去，留一鹭祭山神。
现代文：古老的传说中说： 这是众鸟躲避瘴毒，临离开的时候，留下一对鹭鹚祭祀山神。 
English: An ancient legend says: This is the time when all the birds hide from the dragonfly poison and leave a pair of storks to be sacrificed to the mountain gods.

古文：又每郡主将有除替，一日前，须有白鹭鹚一对，从大渡河飞往州城，盘旋栖泊，三五日却回。
现代文：又传说，每郡的主将如果有了升迁替换的事，一天之前，一定会有一对白鹭鹚，从大渡河飞往州城，盘旋飞翔，栖息在水边，三五天又飞回去。
English: There is also a legend that if the lord of each county has a promotion and replacement, a day before, there will definitely be a pair of egrets flying from the Dadu River to the state capital, hovering, perching on the water's edge, and flying back in three to five days.

古文：军州号为先至鸟。
现代文：黎州的军人称这种鸟叫 先至鸟 。
English: The soldiers in Lizhou called this bird the first bird.

古文：便迎新送故，更无误焉。
现代文：见到先至鸟，人们就开始准备迎接新上司送走老上司，从来没有过差错。
English: Seeing the first bird, people began to prepare to welcome the new boss and send off the old boss. There was never a mistake.

古文：雁南人捕雁
现代文：雁南人捕雁
English: South of the Wild Geese

古文：雁宿于江湖之岸，沙渚之中，动计千百，大者居其中，令雁奴围而警察。
现代文：雁夜间栖息在江河与湖的岸边，以及水中的沙洲上，往往都是千百只为一群。大的雁睡在中间，让雁奴围在外面并担任警戒。
English: At night, geese roost on the banks of rivers and lakes, as well as on sandbanks in the water, often in groups of hundreds. The large geese sleep in the middle, allowing the geese's nymphs to surround them and act as a guard.

古文：南人有采捕者，俟其天色阴暗，或无月时，于瓦罐中藏烛，持棒者数人，屏气潜行。
现代文：南方有捕捉大雁的人，专等那天色阴暗，或者没有月光的晚上，在瓦罐中藏好蜡烛，很多人拿着棒子，屏住呼吸悄悄地行走。
English: In the south, there are people who catch wild geese, waiting for the day to be dark, or in the evening when there is no moonlight, hiding candles in earthenware jars. Many people hold sticks and walk quietly, holding their breath.

古文：将欲及之，则略举烛，便藏之。
现代文：接近雁群的时候，就略微举一下蜡烛，然后立即藏起来。
English: When approaching a flock of geese, he raises the candle slightly and then immediately hides it.

古文：雁奴惊叫，大者亦惊，顷之复定。
现代文：雁奴看见火光惊叫起来，雁群也被惊醒了，不一会又安定下来。
English: When the wildebeest saw the light of the fire, they screamed in fright. The geese were also startled awake, but soon settled down again.

古文：又欲前举烛，雁奴又惊。
现代文：这时再向前举起蜡烛，雁奴又惊叫起来。
English: At this time, he held the candle forward again, and the wild goose began to scream in fright.

古文：如是数四，大者怒啄雁奴，秉烛者徐徐逼之，更举烛，则雁奴惧啄，不复动矣。
现代文：象这样反复进行几次，大雁生气了，就去啄雁奴。拿蜡烛的人再慢慢地向前逼进，再举起蜡烛。这时雁奴因为害怕被啄，不再骚动和鸣叫了。
English: This was repeated several times. When the geese became angry, they would go to chase the wildebeest. The person with the candle would then slowly push forward and lift the candle. At this point, the wildebeest, afraid of being chased, would no longer make any noise or chirp.

古文：乃高举其烛，持棒者齐入群中，乱击之，所获甚多。
现代文：于是那人高高地举起蜡烛，拿棒子的人一起冲进雁群中，乱打一顿，就能捕获到很多雁。
English: So the man held the candle aloft, and the man with the stick rushed into the geese together, beating them indiscriminately, and was able to catch a lot of geese.

古文：昔有淮南人张凝评事话之，此人亲曾采捕。
现代文：从前有个淮南人张凝评事讲述了这件事，张评事曾经亲自参加捕雁。
English: Once upon a time, there was a commentator from Huainan, Zhang Rong, who recounted this incident. Zhang Rong once personally participated in goose hunting.

古文：海陵人
现代文：海陵人
English: People from Hailin

古文：海陵县东居，人多以捕雁为业。恒养一雁，去其六翮以为媒。
现代文：在海陵县东边住的人大多以捕雁维持生活，家家都长年养着一只雁，拔去雁的六根大毛后用它作引雁。
English: Most of the people who live in the eastern part of Hailing County make a living by hunting geese. Every family has kept a goose for many years. After plucking six feathers from the goose, they use it to attract geese.

古文：一日群雁回塞时，雁媒忽人语谓主人曰： 我偿尔钱足，放我回去。 
现代文：有一天，雁群回栖息地的时候，一只雁媒忽然说人话，对它的主人说： 我给你赚来的钱够多了，放我回去吧。 
English: One day, when the geese were returning to their roost, one of the geese-carriers suddenly spoke like a human and said to its owner: I've earned enough money for you, let me go back.

古文：因腾空而去，此人遂不复捕雁。
现代文：接着腾空飞走了。这个人就不再捕雁了。
English: Then he took off and flew away. This man no longer hunts geese.

古文：勾足
现代文：鸜鹆勾足
English: 勾足

古文：鸜鹆交时，以足相勾，促鸣鼓翼如斗状，往往坠地。
现代文：八哥交配时，用脚互相勾着，短促地叫着，扇动翅膀象是在争斗的样子，往往坠落到地上。
English: During mating, starlings hook each other with their feet, call briefly, flap their wings as if in a fight, and often fall to the ground.

古文：俗取其勾足为魅药。
现代文：民间习俗取八哥的勾足做魅药。
English: It is a folk custom to use the hooked foot of the mynah as a charm.

古文：能言
现代文：能言
English: Noh play

古文：鸜鹆，旧言可使取火，效人言胜鹦鹉。
现代文：八哥，传说可以让它取火。它学人说话胜过鹦鹉。
English: The starling, legend has it, can start a fire. It can learn to speak better than a parrot.

古文：取其目精，和人乳研，滴眼中，能见烟霄外物。
现代文：取出它眼中的核仁，和人乳研在一起，滴到眼睛里，能看见云霄以外的东西。
English: Take out the kernels of its eyes, grind them together with human milk, drip them into the eyes, and it will be able to see things beyond the clouds.

古文：桓豁
现代文：桓豁
English: Kanpaku

古文：晋司空桓豁之在荆州也，有参军，五月五日，剪鸜鹆舌教语，无所不名。
现代文：晋代司空桓豁在荆州的时候，有个参军在五月五日这一天，剪下八哥的舌头教它说话，没有什么不会说的。
English: When the Jin Dynasty's Secretary Ku Kuanhong was in Jingzhou, a conscripted soldier cut off the tongue of a starling to teach it to speak on May 5. There was nothing it couldn't say.

古文：后于大会，悉效人语声，无不相类。
现代文：后来在一次大聚会中，让八哥摹仿一个人说话的声音，没有不像的。
English: Later, at a large gathering, there is nothing quite like having a mynah mimic the sound of a person speaking.

古文：时有参佐齆鼻，因内头瓮中效之，有主典盗牛肉，乃白参军： 以新荷裹置屏风后。 搜得，罚盗得。
现代文：当时有个参佐患有鼻道阻塞发音不清的病，八哥就把头钻进瓮中模仿他的声音。有个主典偷了牛肉，用新鲜荷叶裹着放在屏风后面，八哥就告诉了参军，搜查出来后惩罚了偷肉的人。
English: At that time, there was a Sanzo who suffered from nasal obstruction and had a disease that made his pronunciation unclear, so the starling burrowed his head into the cocoon to imitate his voice. There was a host who stole beef and wrapped it in fresh lotus leaves and put it behind a screen, so the starling told the soldiers and punished the person who stole the meat after it was searched.

古文：广陵少年
现代文：广陵少年
English: Guangling juvenile ring

古文：广陵有少年畜一鸜鹆，甚爱之。
现代文：广陵有一个少年养了一只八哥，很喜爱它，但是在笼子里关养了八十天就死了。
English: There was a boy in Guangling who raised a starling and loved it very much, but it died after being kept in a cage for eighty days.

古文：笼槛八十日死，以小棺贮之，将瘗于野。
现代文：少年用一个小棺材装着它，准备埋葬在野外。
English: The boy put it in a small coffin and prepared to bury it in the open.

古文：至城门，阍吏发视之，乃人之一手也，执而拘诸吏。凡八十日，复为死鸜鹆，乃获免。
现代文：到了城门，守门的官吏打开一看，是一只人手。于是把少年捉住并交给有关的官吏，一共关押了八十天，那只人手又变成八哥，少年才获免。
English: When he arrived at the city gate, the official guarding the gate opened the gate and saw that it was a human hand. So he caught the boy and handed him over to the relevant officials. He was detained for a total of eighty days. The human hand turned into a starling, and the boy was released.

古文：雀
现代文：雀
English: Sparrow

古文：雀目夕昏雀皆至夕而不见物，人有至夕昏不见物者，谓雀盲是也。
现代文：麻雀都是到了晚上就看不见东西，也有到了晚间看不清东西的人，这种病叫做雀盲。
English: Sparrows can't see anything at night, and there are also people who can't see anything clearly at night. This disease is called night blindness.

古文：鸺鹠夜察毫末，昼瞑目不见丘山，殊性也。
现代文：鸺鹠夜间能看清毫微，白天却目昏而看不见山丘，这都是因为有不同的天性啊。
English: It's because of their different natures that owls can see so clearly at night, while during the day they are dazed and can't see the hills.

古文：吊乌山
现代文：吊乌山
English: Hanging the Wax Mountain

古文：蜀吊乌山，至雉雀来吊，最悲。
现代文：蜀地的吊乌山，等到雉雀都来吊唁情景，最令人悲伤。
English: It is the saddest sight to see the mourning doves come to mourn the death of the mountain in Shunde.

古文：百姓夜燃火，伺取之，其无嗉不食，似特悲者。以为义则不杀。
现代文：百姓在夜间点上火，找机会捉拿雉雀。其中有的雉雀嗉子空空的没吃食，象是特别悲伤的鸟，百姓认为是义雀就不杀它。
English: The people light fires at night, looking for an opportunity to catch the starlings. Some of the starling chicks are empty and have not eaten, like a particularly sad bird. The people do not kill it if they think it is a bird of righteousness.

古文：杨宣
现代文：杨宣
English: Yang Xuan

古文：杨宣为河内太守，行县，有群雀鸣桑树上，宣谓吏曰： 前有覆车粟。 
现代文：杨宣做河内太守的时候，有一次去县里，遇见一群雀在桑树上鸣叫。杨宣对随行的官吏说： 前面有一辆运谷子的车翻了。
English: When Yang Xuan was the governor of Hanoi, he once went to the county and met a flock of finches singing in the mulberry trees. Yang Xuan said to the accompanying officials: In front of me, a wagon carrying grain has overturned.

古文：乌
现代文：乌
English: Uzbekistan

古文：越乌台
现代文：越乌台
English: Yuewutai District

古文：越王入国，丹乌夹王而飞，故句践得入国也。
现代文：越王回国的时候，丹乌鸟围着越王飞翔，所以勾践才能够回到国内。
English: When Yue Wang returned to China, the dan wu bird flew around him, so it was only through practice that he was able to return to China.

古文：起望乌台，言乌之异也。
现代文：他修建了一座望乌台，来纪念丹乌鸟的奇异功绩。
English: He built a watchtower to commemorate the bird's amazing feat.

古文：何潜之
现代文：何潜之
English: Ho Chien-Chih

古文：晋时营道县令何潜之于县界得乌，大如白鹭，膝上髀下，自然有铜环贯之。
现代文：晋代营道县令何潜之在县界内捉到一只乌鸦，大小象白鹭一样。这只鸟的膝上面、大腿下面，天然地有铜环贯穿着。
English: He Xunzhi, the county magistrate of Jingdao County, caught a crow the size of an egret within the county's borders. The bird was naturally wearing a copper ring above the knee and below the thigh.

古文：乌君山
现代文：乌君山
English: Wujun Mountain

古文：乌君山者，建安之名山也，在县西一百里。
现代文：乌君山是建安县的一座名山，在县城西面一百里处。
English: Wujun Mountain is a famous mountain in Jian'an County, located a hundred miles west of the county seat.

古文：近世有道士徐仲山者，少求神仙，专一为志，贫居苦节，年久弥励。
现代文：近代有个道士叫徐仲山，从少年时代就开始追求得道成仙，并且非常专心虔诚，生活俭朴坚守节操，时间越长越坚定。
English: In modern times, there was a Taoist monk named Xu Zhongshan, who began to pursue the path to immortality from a young age, and was very dedicated and pious, living a frugal life and adhering to discipline. The longer he lived, the more determined he became.

古文：与人遇于道，修礼，无少长皆让之。
现代文：他与别人在路上相遇，自觉遵守礼节，无论是老是少全都让人先行。
English: When he meets other people on the road, he consciously observes etiquette, and always lets others go first, no matter how few there are.

古文：或果谷新熟，辄祭，先献虚空，次均宿老。
现代文：当瓜果粮食刚刚成熟时，他就进行祭祀，第一次献给上天，第二次给德高年老的人。
English: When the melon and fruit grain is just ripe, he performs sacrifices, the first dedicated to the heavens, the second to the virtuous old people.

古文：乡人有偷者坐罪当死。仲山诣官，承其偷罪，白偷者不死，无辜而诛，情所未忍。
现代文：乡里有个小偷按罪应当处死，徐仲山去面见审理案件的官员，承认自己是小偷有罪。又说小偷不应当判死罪，不应处死却杀了他，感情上忍受不了。
English: There was a thief in the village who should be put to death according to his crime. Xu Zhongshan went to meet the official who heard the case and admitted that he was guilty of being a thief. He also said that the thief should not be sentenced to death and should not be put to death, but he killed him. Emotionally, he could not bear it.

古文：乃免冠解带，抵承严法，所司疑而赦之。
现代文：然后他摘掉帽子脱下衣服，自愿替小偷抵罪承受制裁。审案官署怀疑自己判断有错就赦免了小偷。
English: He then took off his hat and clothes and volunteered to take the rap for the thief, who was pardoned by the CID after they suspected he had made an error of judgement.

古文：仲山又尝山行，遇暴雨，苦风雷，迷失道径。
现代文：徐仲山有一次在山路上行走，遇上了大暴雨，无法抵挡大风雷电，竟迷了路。
English: Once, Xu Zhongshan was walking on a mountain road and encountered a heavy rainstorm. Unable to withstand the wind and lightning, he lost his way.

古文：忽于电光之中，见一舍宅，有类府州，因投以避雨。
现代文：忽然他在闪电中，一处住宅，有点类似州府官员的住宅，因此就走过去想避避雨。
English: All of a sudden, he's in a lightning storm, in a house that looks a little bit like a state official's house, so he walks over to get out of the rain.

古文：至门，见一锦衣人，顾仲山，乃称此乡道士徐仲山拜。其锦衣人称监门使者萧衡，亦拜。
现代文：到了门前，看见一个穿华丽衣服的人发现了他。他就自称本乡的道士徐仲山拜见，那个穿华丽衣服的人自称是监门使者萧衡，也回了礼。
English: When he arrived in front of the door, he saw that a man in fancy dress had spotted him. He called himself his hometown Taoist priest Xu Zhongshan to say hello. The man in fancy dress called himself the prison gate messenger Xiao Heng, and also returned the salute.

古文：因叙风雨之故，深相延引。
现代文：那人同他谈起了风雨，并真诚地邀请他进宅。
English: The man struck up a conversation with him and sincerely invited him into his home.

古文：仲山问曰： 自有乡，无此府舍。 
现代文：徐仲山问： 自从有了这个山乡，从未看见过有这么一处住宅。 
English: Xu Zhongshan asked: Since this mountain village came into being, I have never seen such a house.

古文：监门曰： 此神仙之所处，仆即监门官也。 
现代文：监门说： 这里是神仙的住处，我就是监门官。 
English: The gatekeeper said, "This is the dwelling place of the gods, and I am the gatekeeper.

古文：俄有一女郎，梳绾双鬟，衣绛赭裙青文罗衫，左手执金柄尘尾幢旄，传呼曰： 使者外与何人交通，而不报也？ 
现代文：不久有一个女郎，梳着一对环形的发髻，穿着紫红色的裙子和有着青色花纹的绸衫，左手拿着金柄牛尾拂尘，传呼说： 使者在外面与什么人谈话，怎么不报告呢？ 
English: Presently a girl, wearing a pair of ring-shaped hairpins, a mauve dress and a blue-patterned silk blouse, and with a gold-handled oxtail brushing the dust with her left hand, called out: "Who is the messenger talking to outside, and why doesn't he report it?"

古文：答云： 此乡道士徐仲山。 
现代文：萧衡回答说： 是这个乡的道士徐仲山。 
English: Xiao Heng replied: It is the Taoist priest Xu Zhongshan from this township.

古文：须臾，又传呼云： 仙官召徐仲山入。 
现代文：不一会，那女子又招呼说： 仙官请徐仲山进去。 
English: A short while later, the woman called out again, saying, "Messenger, ask Xu Zhongshan to come in."

古文：向所见女郎，引仲山自廊进。至堂南小庭，见一丈夫，年可五十余，肤体须发尽白，戴纱搭脑冠，白罗银镂帔，而谓仲山曰： 知卿精修多年，超越凡俗。
现代文：刚才见过的女郎，领着徐仲山从走廊进去，到了堂屋南侧的小庭院，看见一个男子，年龄大约五十多岁，身上的皮肤、胡须和头发全都是白的，戴着纱巾搭成的帽子，穿着白绸布绣着银色花纹的披肩。这男子对徐仲山说： 我知道你诚心修炼了很多年，超越凡俗之人。
English: The girl whom I had just seen led Xu Zhongshan through the corridor and into the small courtyard on the south side of the hall. She saw a man in his fifties, with white skin, beard and hair, wearing a hat made of a scarf and a shawl embroidered with silver patterns. The man said to Xu Zhongshan, "I know that you have been sincerely cultivating for many years, surpassing ordinary people.

古文：吾有小女颇闲道教，以其夙业，合与卿为妻，今当吉辰耳。 
现代文：我有个小女儿熟悉修道的方法，根据她的愿望和命运，应当与你结为夫妻，今天正是好时辰。 
English: I have a young daughter who is familiar with the ways of the monks, and according to her wishes and destiny, she should be married to you. Today is a good time.

古文：仲山降阶称谢拜起，而复请谒夫人，乃止之曰： 吾丧偶已七年，吾有九子，三男六女，为卿妻者，最小女也。 
现代文：徐仲山走下台阶拜谢，接着又请求拜见老夫人。男子阻止他说： 我丧妻已经七年了。我有九个孩子，三个男孩六个女儿。做你妻子的，是我最小的女儿。 
English: Xu Zhongshan walked down the steps to thank her, and then asked to see the old lady. The man stopped him and said: "It's been seven years since I lost my wife. I have nine children, three boys and six daughters. Your wife is my youngest daughter.

古文：乃命后堂备吉礼。
现代文：然后他命令在后堂准备举行婚礼的设置，摆上了酒菜，和徐仲山一起吃喝完毕。
English: Then he ordered to prepare the wedding setting in the back hall, set up the wine and vegetables, and finished eating and drinking with Xu Zhongshan.

古文：既而陈酒肴，与仲山对食讫，渐夜闻环珮之声，异香芬郁，荧煌灯烛，引去别室。
现代文：渐渐地夜深了，徐仲山听到了妇女身上所佩饰物的声音，奇异的香味特别浓郁，灯烛辉煌照耀，有人把徐仲山领到另外的房间。
English: Gradually, it was late at night, Xu Zhongshan heard the sound of the jewelry worn by the woman, the strange fragrance was particularly rich, the candle was shining brilliantly, and someone led Xu Zhongshan to another room.

古文：礼毕三日，仲山悦其所居，巡行屋室，西向厂舍，见衣竿上悬皮羽十四枚，是翠碧皮，余悉乌皮耳。
现代文：婚礼结束后第三天，徐仲山高兴地观看居住的房屋，逐个参观各个房间，走到一朝西的棚屋，看见竹竿上悬挂着十四件羽毛皮衣，一件是翠碧鸟的皮羽，其余全是乌鸦的皮羽。
English: On the third day after the end of the wedding, Xu Zhongshan happily watched the houses they lived in, visited each room one by one, walked to a shed in the west, and saw fourteen feather skins hanging on the bamboo pole, one was the feather of the kingfisher, and the rest were all crow feathers.

古文：乌皮之中，有一枚是白乌皮。
现代文：乌鸦皮中，有一件是白乌鸦的皮羽。
English: One of the raven skins is a feather from a white raven.

古文：又至西南，有一厂舍，衣竿之上，见皮羽四十九枚，皆鸺鹠。
现代文：他又到西南面去看，有一个棚屋，衣竿上有四十九件羽毛皮衣，全是鸺鹠鸟的皮羽。
English: He looked again to the southwest, and there was a shed with forty-nine feather coats on the clothesline, all of which were ostrich feathers.

古文：仲山私怪之，却至室中，其妻问其夫曰： 子适游行，有何所见，乃沈悴至此？ 
现代文：徐仲山暗自觉得这事很怪异，回到自己的居室中后，妻子问他说： 你刚才出去走了一趟，看见了什么？
English: Xu Zhongshan secretly felt that this was very strange. After returning to his bedroom, his wife asked him: You just went out for a walk, what did you see?

古文：仲山未之应，其妻曰： 夫神仙轻举，皆假羽翼。
现代文：竟然情绪低落地回来了？ 
English: He actually came back depressed?

古文：不尔，何以倏忽而致万里乎？ 
现代文：徐仲山没有回答。他的妻子又说： 神仙能够轻飘飘地升到天上去，全都是凭借翅膀作用。
English: Xu Zhongshan did not answer. His wife also said: Immortals can float up to the sky, all by virtue of their wings.

古文：因问曰： 乌皮羽为谁？ 
现代文：否则，又怎么能够在片刻之间就到了万里之外呢？ 徐仲山便问： 乌鸦皮羽衣是谁的？ 
English: Otherwise, how is it possible to travel thousands of miles away in the blink of an eye? Xu Zhongshan then asked: Who owns the raven skin coat?

古文：曰： 此大人之衣也。 
现代文：回答说： 那是父亲的羽衣。 
English: And he answered, It is my father's coat.

古文：又问曰： 翠碧皮羽为谁？ 
现代文：又问： 翠碧鸟的羽衣是谁的？ 
English: He also asked: Who owns the feathers of the kingfisher?

古文：曰： 此常使通引婢之衣也。 
现代文：回答说： 那是经常派去通话领路的女仆的羽衣。 
English: He replied, "It is the feathered coat of the maid who is always sent to call and lead the way."

古文： 又余乌皮羽为谁？ 
现代文：又问其余乌鸦皮羽衣是谁的。
English: He also asked who owned the rest of the raven skins.

古文：曰： 新妇兄弟姊妹之衣也。 
现代文：回答说： 是我的兄弟姐妹们的羽衣。 
English: He answered, "It is the feathers of my brothers and sisters.

古文：又问： 鸺鹠皮羽为谁？ 曰： 司更巡夜者衣，即监门萧衡之伦也。 
现代文：又问鸺鹠皮羽衣是谁的，回答说： 是负责打更和巡夜的人的羽衣，就是监门官萧衡一类人的羽衣。 
English: He also asked who the ermine coat belonged to, and answered: "It is the coat of the person who is responsible for beating the guards and patrolling the night, that is, the coat of the person such as the gatekeeper Xiao Heng.

古文：语未毕，忽然举宅惊惧，问其故，妻谓之曰： 村人将猎，纵火烧山。 
现代文：话没说完，忽然整个宅院的人都惊慌失措起来。徐仲山问是什么原因，妻子对他说： 村里的人准备打猎，放火烧山。 
English: Xu Zhongshan asked what the reason was, and his wife said to him: "People in the village are preparing to hunt and set fire to the mountain.

古文：须臾皆云： 竟未与徐郎造得衣。今日之别，可谓邂逅矣。 
现代文：不一会大家都说： 竟没来得及给徐郎制做一件羽衣，今日分别之后，就当是萍水相逢一场吧。 
English: After a while, everyone said, "We didn't have time to make a feather coat for Xu Lang. After today's separation, let's meet face to face."

古文：乃悉取皮羽，随方飞去。
现代文：然后众人都取来羽衣，四散飞去。
English: Then they all took down their feather coats and scattered.

古文：即向所见舍屋，一无其处。
现代文：原来看见的一片房屋，也都不见了。
English: A block of houses that I had originally seen was also gone.

古文：因号其地为乌君山。
现代文：从此以后那个地方就叫 乌君山 。
English: Since then, that place has been called Wujun Mountain.

古文：魏伶
现代文：魏伶
English: Wei Wei

古文：唐魏伶为西市丞，养一赤嘴乌，每于人众中乞钱，人取一文，而衔以送伶处，日收数百，时人号为魏丞乌。
现代文：唐代魏伶做长安西市丞，他养了一只红嘴乌鸦，经常在人多的地方向人要钱。如果有人给它一文，它就衔着送到魏伶的住处，每天能收几百文，人们叫它魏丞乌。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Wei Wei was the magistrate of Chang'an and Xi'an. He raised a red-billed crow, which often asked people for money in crowded places. If someone gave it a coin, it would be led to Wei Wei's residence. It could collect hundreds of coins every day. People called it Wei Wei.

古文：三足乌
现代文：三足乌
English: Three-legged stork

古文：天后时，有献三足乌，左右或言： 一足伪耳。 
现代文：唐朝武则天当政的时候，有人献上一只三足乌鸦。左右有人说： 一只脚是假造的。 
English: When Wu Zetian was in power in the Tang Dynasty, someone offered a three-legged crow. Some people around said: One foot is fake.

古文：天后笑曰： 但令史册书之，安用察其真伪？ 
现代文：武则天笑着说： 命令将这件事记录到史书上，何必去考察它的真假呢？ 
English: Wu Zetian smiled and said, "I ordered this matter to be recorded in the history books. Why should I investigate whether it is true or not?

古文：《唐书》云： 天授元年，有进三足乌，天后以为周室之瑞。 
现代文：唐代史书上说：天授元年，有人进献三足乌，则天皇后认为是大周王朝吉祥的征兆。
English: According to the Tang Dynasty history book: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhou, some people presented three-legged wax, which the empress thought was an auspicious sign for the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：睿宗云： 乌前足伪。 
现代文：睿宗说： 乌的前脚是假的。 
English: Ruizong said: Wu's front foot is fake.

古文：天后不悦。
现代文：武则天不高兴。
English: Bu Zetian was not happy.

古文：须臾，一足坠地。
现代文：不一会，乌鸦的一只脚掉到了地上。
English: After a while, one of the crow's feet fell to the ground.

古文：李纳
现代文：李纳
English: by Li Na

古文：贞元十四年，郑汴二州群乌飞入田绪、李纳境内，衔木为城。高至二三尺，方十余里。
现代文：唐朝贞元十四年，郑州和汴州有一群乌鸦飞到了田绪和李纳的辖区，衔来树枝木块垒成城墙，高有二三尺，方圆十多里。
English: In the 14th year of Zhengyuan of the Tang Dynasty, a group of crows from Zhengzhou and Zhangzhou flew to the jurisdiction areas of Tianxu and Lina. They brought branches and blocks of wood to build the city wall, which was two to three feet high and more than ten miles in circumference.

古文：绪、纳恶而命焚之，信宿如旧，乌口皆流血。
现代文：田绪和李纳厌恶这件事派人烧了 城墙 。过了两宿，乌鸦又把城墙恢复成原来的样子，乌鸦的嘴里都流出了血。
English: Disgusted by this, Tian Xu and Li Na sent someone to burn the city wall. After two nights, the crow restored the city wall to its original appearance, and blood flowed from the crow's mouth.

古文：吕生妻
现代文：吕生妻
English: Lyu Shengzhu

古文：东平吕生，鲁国人，家于郑。
现代文：东平县的吕生，是鲁国人，家住在郑城。
English: Liusheng of Dongping County is a native of Lu and lives in Zhengcheng.

古文：其妻黄氏病将死，告于姑曰： 妾病且死，然闻人死当为鬼。妾常恨人鬼不相通，使存者益哀。
现代文：他的妻子黄氏有病快要死了，告诉她的婆婆说： 我得病快死了，可是听说人死了要变成鬼，我常常痛恨人和鬼不能相互沟通，因而使活着的人更加悲哀。
English: His wife, Ms. Huang, was ill and about to die. She told her mother-in-law, "I am sick and about to die, but I have heard that when people die, they turn into ghosts. I often hate that people and ghosts can't communicate with each other, which makes living people even more sad.

古文：今姑念妾深，妾死，必能以梦告于姑矣。 
现代文：婆婆你同我感情很深，我死后一定要在梦中告诉婆婆。 
English: Mother-in-law, you have very deep feelings for me. When I die, I must tell my mother-in-law in a dream.

古文：及其死，姑梦见黄氏来，泣而言曰： 妾平生时无状，今为异类，生于郑之东野丛木中，黰其翼，嗷其鸣者，当是也。
现代文：等到黄氏死了，婆婆梦见黄氏回来，哭着对她说： 我生前做了些不该做的事，现在成为不同的族类，出生在郑城东面的荒野丛林之中。那个翅膀是黑色的，嗷嗷鸣叫的，就是我呀。
English: After Mr. Huang died, her mother-in-law dreamed that Mr. Huang had returned, and wept and said to her, "I did something I shouldn't have done before I died, and now I'm a different race, born in the wilderness of the jungle east of Zhengcheng. That one with the black wings and chirping crickets is me."

古文：后七日，当来谒姑，愿姑念平生时，无以异类见阻。 
现代文：再过七天，我会来拜见婆婆，希望婆婆念我活着时的情况，不要因为我是不同的族类就阻挠我。 
English: In another seven days, I will visit my mother-in-law, hoping that she will remember me when I was alive and not hinder me because I am of a different race.

古文：言讫遂去。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：后七日，果一乌自东来，至吕氏家，止于庭树，哀鸣久之，其姑泣而言曰： 果吾之梦矣，汝无昧平素，直来吾之居也。 
现代文：过了七天，果然有只乌鸦从东面飞来，飞到吕家庭院的树上，悲哀地叫了很长时间。她的婆婆哭着说： 果然同我的梦一样，你还像活着的时候一样，直接来我的住处吧。 
English: Seven days later, a crow flew from the east and landed on a tree in Lv's courtyard. It cried for a long time. Her mother-in-law cried and said, "It's just like my dream. You're still alive. Come directly to my place."

古文：其乌即飞入堂中，回翔哀唳，仅食顷，方东向而去。
现代文：那只乌鸦便飞入堂中，来回地飞着，悲哀地叫着，仅仅呆了一顿饭的工夫，就向东方飞去。
English: The crow flew into the hall, flew back and forth, cried sadly, and only stayed for one meal before flying off to the east.

古文：梁祖
现代文：梁祖
English: Liang Zu

古文：梁祖亲征郓州，军次卫南。
现代文：后梁太祖亲自征伐郓州，军队驻扎在卫南。
English: Later Liang Taizu personally conquered Zhangzhou, and the army was stationed in the south of Wei.

古文：时筑新垒工毕，因登眺其上，见飞乌止于峻坂之间而噪，其声甚厉。
现代文：新工事修筑完毕，他们登上工事向远处观看，见乌鸦飞来停在陡坡上叫，叫声凄厉。
English: After the new construction was completed, they climbed onto the construction site to watch from a distance, and saw crows flying and stopping on the steep slope, crying, crying terribly.

古文：副使李璠曰： 是乌鸣也，将不利乎？ 
现代文：副使李璠说： 这是乌鸦在叫，将对我们不利吧？ 
English: Deputy envoy Li Wei said: This is the crow crowing, will it be bad for us?

古文：其前军朱友裕为朱瑄所掩，拔军南去，我军不知，因北行。
现代文：后梁太祖的前锋朱友裕的部队受朱瑄的袭击转向南去，但后梁太祖不知道，却向北走。
English: After Liang Taizu's advance, Zhu Youyu's troops were attacked by Zhu Xi and turned south, but Liang Taizu did not know, but went north.

古文：遇朱瑄军至，梁祖策马南走，入村落闻，为贼所追。
现代文：中途遇上朱瑄的部队，后梁太祖又打马向南走。进入村落里又被贼所追赶，前面有一壕沟，又深又宽。
English: Midway he met Zhu Xi's troops, after which Liang Taizu rode south again. He entered the village and was chased by thieves. In front of him was a trench, deep and wide.

古文：前有沟坑，颇极深广，匆遽之际，忽见沟内蜀黍秆积以为道，正在马前，遂腾跃而过。
现代文：荒乱之际，忽然沟内的蜀黍秸秆自动堆积起来形成一条通路，正在马前。于是后梁太祖放马腾跳过去。
English: At the time of the chaos, suddenly the straw in the ditch automatically piled up to form a passage, just in front of the horse. So Hou Liang Taizu let the horse jump over.

古文：副使李璠、郡将高行思为贼所杀。
现代文：副使李璠和郡将高行思被贼兵所杀。
English: The vice-envoy Li Yanhe and the county magistrate Gao Xingsi were killed by the bandits.

古文：张归宇为殿骑，援戈力战，仅得生还，身被十五箭。
现代文：张归宇是后卫骑士，拿着武器拚力战斗，仅仅使梁太祖能活着回去，身上中了十五枝箭。
English: Zhang Guiyu was a guard knight, holding weapons and fighting hard, just so that Liang Taizu could return alive. He was hit by fifteen arrows.

古文：乃知卫南之乌，先见之验也。
现代文：这时才知道卫南的乌鸦，是事先发出的预兆。
English: Only then did it become clear that the crows in the south of Wei were an omen sent in advance.

古文：枭
现代文：枭
English: 

古文：鸣枭
现代文：鸣枭
English: Hoot hoot hoot

古文：夏至阴气动为残杀，盖贼害之候，故恶鸟鸣于人家，则有死亡之征。
现代文：夏至的时候阴气开始发动，就是快到肃杀的季节了。所以说有恶鸟在家鸣叫，就是这家有人要死的征兆。
English: At the time of the summer solstice, the gloomy weather begins to set in, that is, it is almost time for the killing season. Therefore, if there is a malevolent bird singing at home, it is a sign that someone in the family is about to die.

古文：又云： 鸱枭食母眼精，乃能飞。 
现代文：又有人说： 鸱枭吃了母亲眼睛里的核仁，才能飞翔。 
English: Another said: "The dragonfly eats the pips from its mother's eyes to fly."

古文：郭璞云： 伏土为枭。 
现代文：郭璞说： 藏在人住处的就是枭鸟。 
English: Guo Wei said, "It is the ostrich that hides in people's homes.

古文：《汉书·郊祀志》云： 古昔天子，尝以春祠黄帝，用一枭破镜。 
现代文：汉书《郊祀志》上说： 从前的天子，在春天祭祀黄帝，用一只枭鸟和一只破镜。 
English: The Chinese book "History of Suburban Worship" says: Once upon a time, the son of heaven worshiped the Yellow Emperor in the spring, using an ostrich and a broken mirror.

古文：鸱
现代文：鸱
English: 

古文：鸱，相传鹘生三子一为鸱。
现代文：鸱鸟，相传鹘鸟生三个雏鸟其中一个就是鸱。
English: According to legend, an ostrich gives birth to three chicks, one of which is a stork.

古文：肃宗张皇后专权，每进酒，常以鸱脑和酒，令人久醉健忘。
现代文：肃宗的张皇后很专权，每次送上酒来，常常用鸱鸟的脑子和在酒中，喝了让人长时间醉酒并健忘。
English: The austere Empress Zhang was very authoritarian. Every time she served wine, she often used the brain of an ostrich and made people drunk and forgetful for a long time.

古文：又世俗相传，鸱不饮泉及井水，唯遇雨濡翮，方得水饮。
现代文：民间传说，鸱鸟不喝泉水和井水，只有遇上下雨沾湿了羽毛，才能饮到水。
English: According to folklore, ostriches do not drink spring or well water. They can only drink water when their feathers get wet in the rain.

古文：鸺鹠目夜明
现代文：鸺鹠目夜明
English: 目夜明

古文：鸺鹠即鸱也，为圝，可以聚诸鸟。
现代文：鸺鹠就是鸱鸟，长得呈圆形，能够把各种鸟聚集起来。
English: The stork is an ostrich. It has a round shape and can gather all kinds of birds together.

古文：鸺鹠昼日，目无所见。夜则飞撮蚊虻。
现代文：鸺鹠在白天什么也看不见，夜间飞着能捕捉蚊虫。
English: During the day, dragonflies can't see anything, but when they fly at night, they can catch mosquitoes.

古文：鸺鹠乃鬼车之属也，皆夜飞昼藏。
现代文：鸺鹠是鬼车鸟一类的鸟，都是夜间活动，白天就躲藏起来。
English: The kakapo is a nocturnal bird that hides during the day.

古文：或好食人爪甲，则知吉凶，凶者辄鸣于屋上，其将有咎耳。
现代文：有的鸺鹠喜欢吃人的指甲，就能知道人的吉凶，有凶信的就在他家的屋子上面鸣叫，那家就将有灾祸。
English: Some crickets like to eat people's fingernails, so they can know people's fortune and misfortune. If you have evil beliefs, they will sing above your house, and that house will have disaster.

古文：故人除指甲，埋之户内，盖忌此也。
现代文：所以人们剪下指甲，都把指甲埋在屋里，就是忌讳鸺鹠。
English: So people cut their fingernails and bury them in the house, which is taboo.

古文：亦名夜游女，好与婴儿作祟，故婴孩之衣，不可置星露下，畏其祟耳。
现代文：有人叫鸺鹠为夜游女，因为它喜欢与婴儿作怪。所以婴孩的衣服，不可放在星光下的露天场所，是害怕鸺鹠作怪。
English: Some people call the dragonfly a night prowler, because it likes to play tricks with babies. Therefore, the baby's clothes should not be placed in the open air under the starlight, for fear of the dragonfly playing tricks.

古文：又名鬼车，春夏之间，稍遇阴晦，则飞鸣而过，岭外尤多，爱入人家，烁人魂气。
现代文：又有人叫它 鬼车鸟 ，春夏之间，稍微遇到阴晦天气，它就飞着叫着掠过天空。这种鸟岭外尤其多，喜欢进入人们的住宅，迷惑人的精气魂魄。
English: Some people also call it the ghost car bird. Between spring and summer, when the weather is a little cloudy, it flies and screams across the sky. There are especially many of these birds outside the ridge, and they like to enter people's homes and confuse people's spirits.

古文：或云，九首，曾为犬啮其一，常滴血，血滴之家，则有凶咎。
现代文：有的人说： 鸺鹠鸟九个头被狗咬去一个，伤口常常滴血，血滴到谁家，就有灾祸。 
English: Some people say: An ostrich loses one of its nine heads when bitten by a dog, and the wound often drips blood. If blood drips into anyone's home, it will bring disaster.

古文：《荆楚岁时记》云： 闻之，当唤犬耳。 
现代文：《荆楚岁时记》上说： 听到了鸺鹠的叫声，就应当把狗唤来。 
English: "Jing Chu Leti Ji" said: When you hear the crickets, you should call the dogs.

古文：又曰： 鸮大如鸩，恶声，飞入人家不祥。 
现代文：又说： 鸮鸟的大小象鸩鸟，声音难听，飞进人家不吉祥。
English: He also said: The size of an ostrich is like an ostrich, the sound is unpleasant, and it is not auspicious to fly into someone's house.

古文：其肉美，堪为炙，故《庄子》云： 见弹思鸮炙。 
现代文：它的肉很鲜美，适合烤着吃。所以《庄子》上说： 看见弹弓就想烤鸮肉吃炙。 
English: Its meat is very delicious, suitable for grilling and eating. Therefore, "Zhuangzi" said: Seeing the slingshot makes you want to grill the stew and eat it.

古文：又云： 古人重鸮炙。 尚肥美也。
现代文：又说： 古代人喜欢烧烤，是喜欢他的肉肥美。 
English: He also said: The ancients liked barbecues because they liked their meat to be fat and beautiful.

古文：《说文》： 枭不孝鸟，食母而后能飞。 
现代文：《说文》上说： 枭是一种不孝的鸟，吃了母亲然后才能飞翔。 
English: "The Story" said: The cormorant is an unfilial bird. It eats its mother before it can fly.

古文：《汉书》曰： 五月五日作枭羹，以赐百官。 
现代文：《汉书》上说： 五月五日这天用枭鸟做汤，并把它赏赐给文武百官吃。 
English: "The Book of Han" said: On May 5, this day, make soup with ostriches and give it to the civil and military officials to eat.

古文：又或云，鸺鹠食人遗爪，非也，盖鸺鹠夜能拾蚤虱耳，爪蚤声相近，故误云也。
现代文：因为枭是恶鸟，所以五月五日这一天吃它汤。古时候人们看重鸮和枭汤，是想消灭这种鸟。有的人说，鸺鹠吃人的指甲，不对，是因为鸺鹠鸟夜间能拾起跳蚤和虱子吃掉，蚤和爪两个字声音接近，所以产生误传。
English: Because the stork is an evil bird, people eat its soup on May 5th. In ancient times, people valued the soup of the stork and the cormorant, and wanted to exterminate this bird. Some people say that the stork eats people's fingernails, but this is not true, because the stork can pick up fleas and lice at night and eat them, and the sounds of the two words flea and claw are close, so there is misinformation.

古文：夜行游女
现代文：夜行游女
English: The Night Wanderer

