古文：平原君赵胜者，赵之诸公子也。
现代文：平原君赵胜，是赵国的一位公子。
English: Plain Jun Zhao Sheng is a noble son of Zhao.

古文：诸子中胜最贤，喜宾客，宾客盖至者数千人。
现代文：在诸多公子中赵胜最为贤德有才，好客养士，宾客投奔到他的门下大约有几千人。
English: Among the many nobles, Zhao Sheng was the most virtuous and talented, hospitable and nurturing. About several thousand guests rushed to his door.

古文：平原君相赵惠文王及孝成王，三去相，三复位，封於东武城。
现代文：平原君担任过赵惠文王和孝成王的宰相，曾经三次离开宰相职位，又三次官复原职，封地在东武城。
English: He served as the prime minister of King Zhao Huiwen and King Xiaocheng. He left the post of prime minister three times, and was reinstated three times. His fief was in Dongwu City.

古文：平原君家楼临民家。
现代文：平原君家有座高楼面对着下边的民宅。
English: There is a high-rise building facing the private house below.

古文：民家有躄者，槃散行汲。
现代文：民宅中有个跛子，总是一瘸一拐地出外打水。
English: There is a cripple in a private house who always limps out to fetch water.

古文：平原君美人居楼上，临见，大笑之。
现代文：平原君的一位美丽的妾住在楼上，有一天她往下看到跛子打水的样子，就哈哈大笑起来。
English: One day, one of Hirahara's beautiful concubines, who lived upstairs, laughed out loud when she looked down and saw the mule drawing water.

古文：明日，躄者至平原君门，请曰： 臣闻君之喜士，士不远千里而至者，以君能贵士而贱妾也。
现代文：第二天，这位跛子找上平原君的家门来，请求道： 我听说您喜爱士人，士人所以不怕路途遥远千里迢迢归附您的门下，就是因为您看重士人而卑视姬妾啊。
English: The next day, the cripple came to the door of Mr. Hirahara's house and pleaded, "I heard that you like scholars. That's why they are not afraid to travel thousands of miles to join you. It's because you value scholars and look down on concubines."

古文：臣不幸有罢癃之病，而君之後宫临而笑臣，臣原得笑臣者头。 平原君笑应曰： 诺。 
现代文：我遭到不幸得病致残，可是您的姬妾却在高楼上耻笑我，我希望得到耻笑我的那个人的头。 平原君笑着应答说： 好吧。 
English: I have been disabled by an unfortunate illness, but your concubine is laughing at me from a high-rise building. I hope to get the head of the person who laughed at me. Hirahara replied with a smile, "Okay."

古文：躄者去，平原君笑曰： 观此竖子，乃欲以一笑之故杀吾美人，不亦甚乎！ 
现代文：等那个跛子离开后，平原君又笑着说： 看这小子，竟因一笑的缘故要杀我的爱妾，不也太过分了吗？ 
English: After the cripple left, Plain Jun smiled again and said, "Look at this boy, he actually wants to kill my beloved concubine because of a smile, isn't that too much?

古文：终不杀。
现代文：终归没杀那个人。
English: In the end, he did not kill the man.

古文：居岁馀，宾客门下舍人稍稍引去者过半。
现代文：过了一年多，宾客以及有差使的食客陆陆续续地离开了一多半。
English: After more than a year, more than half of the guests and diners on business left one after another.

古文：平原君怪之，曰： 胜所以待诸君者未尝敢失礼，而去者何多也？ 
现代文：平原君对这种情况感到很奇怪，说： 我赵胜对待各位先生的方方面面不曾敢有失礼的地方，可是离开我的人为什么这么多呢？ 
English: Mr. Hirahara felt very strange about this situation, saying: I, Zhao Sheng, have never dared to be rude to you gentlemen in all aspects, but why are so many people leaving me?

古文：门下一人前对曰： 以君之不杀笑躄者，以君为爱色而贱士，士即去耳。 
现代文：一个门客走上前去回答说： 因为您不杀耻笑跛子的那个妾，大家认为您喜好美色而轻视士人，所以士人就纷纷离去了。 
English: A doorkeeper stepped forward and replied, "Because you did not kill the concubine of the shameless womanizer, everyone thought that you liked beauty and despised the scholars, so the scholars left in droves.

古文：於是平原君乃斩笑躄者美人头，自造门进躄者，因谢焉。
现代文：于是平原君就斩下耻笑跛子的那个爱妾的头。亲自登门献给跛子，并借机向他道歉。
English: As a result, Hirahara-kun chopped off the head of the concubine of the laughing cripple. He personally went to the door to dedicate it to the cripple, and took the opportunity to apologize to him.

古文：其後门下乃复稍稍来。
现代文：从此以后，原来门下的客人就又陆陆续续地回来。
English: Since then, the guests under the original door have come back one after another.

古文：是时齐有孟尝，魏有信陵，楚有春申，故争相倾以待士。
现代文：当时，齐国有孟尝君，魏国有信陵君，楚国有春申君，他们都好客养士，因此争相超过别人的礼遇士人，以便使自己招徕更多的人才。
English: At that time, the state of Qi had Meng Yaojun, the state of Wei had Xin Lingjunjun, and the state of Chu had Chunshenjun. They were all hospitable and nurtured scholars, so they competed to outdo others in the courtesy of scholars in order to attract more talents.

古文：秦之围邯郸，赵使平原君求救，合从於楚，约与食客门下有勇力文武备具者二十人偕。
现代文：秦国围攻邯郸时，赵王曾派平原君去求援，当时拟推楚国为盟主，订立合纵盟约联兵抗秦，平原君约定跟门下有勇有谋文武兼备的食客二十人一同前往楚国。
English: During the siege of Qin, King Zhao sent Plain Jun to ask for help. At that time, it was planned to promote Chu as the alliance leader and conclude a joint alliance against Qin. Plain Jun agreed to go to Chu with twenty diners who were brave and resourceful.

古文：平原君曰： 使文能取胜，则善矣。
现代文：平原君说： 假使能通过客气的谈判取得成功，那就最好了。
English: Mr. Hirahara said, "If we can succeed through polite negotiations, that would be the best.

古文：文不能取胜，则歃血於华屋之下，必得定从而还。
现代文：如果谈判不能取得成功，那么也要挟制楚王在大庭广众之下把盟约确定下来，一定要确定了合纵盟约才回国。
English: If the negotiations are not successful, then it is necessary to force King Chu to confirm the alliance in front of the general public, and it is necessary to confirm the alliance before returning to China.

古文：士不外索，取於食客门下足矣。 
现代文：同去的文武之士不必到外面去寻找，从我门下的食客中选取就足够了。 
English: You don't have to go outside to find the literati who are going with you, it's enough to choose from the diners under my door.

古文：得十九人，馀无可取者，无以满二十人。
现代文：结果选得十九人，剩下的人没有可再挑选的了，竟没办法凑满二十人。
English: As a result, nineteen people were chosen, and there were no more people left to choose from. There was no way to get twenty people.

古文：门下有毛遂者，前，自赞於平原君曰： 遂闻君将合从於楚，约与食客门下二十人偕，不外索。
现代文：这时门下食客中有个叫毛遂的人，径自走到前面来，向平原君自我推荐说： 我听说您要到楚国去，让楚国作盟主订下合纵盟约，并且约定与门下食客二十人一同去，人员不到外面寻找。
English: At this time, one of the diners under the door, a man named Mao Sui, walked up to the front and recommended himself to Mr. Pingyuan, saying: I heard that you want to go to the State of Chu, let the State of Chu be the leader of the alliance, and make an agreement to go together with twenty diners under the door, so that people do not have to look for you outside.

古文：今少一人，原君即以遂备员而行矣。 
现代文：现在还少一个人，希望您就拿我充个数一起去吧。 
English: Now there's one less person, I hope you'll take all of me with you.

古文：平原君曰： 先生处胜之门下几年於此矣？ 
现代文：平原君问道： 先生寄附在我的门下到现在有几年啦？ 
English: Mr. Hirahara asked: How many years has it been since my teacher has been under my roof?

古文：毛遂曰： 三年於此矣。 
现代文：毛遂回答道： 到现在整整三年了。 
English: Mao Sui replied, "It's been three years now.

古文：平原君曰： 夫贤士之处世也，譬若锥之处囊中，其末立见。
现代文：平原君说： 有才能的贤士生活在世上，就如同锥子放在口袋里，它的锋尖立即就会显露出来。
English: Mr. Hirahara said: Talented sages live in the world, just like a cone placed in a pocket, its sharp point will be revealed immediately.

古文：今先生处胜之门下三年於此矣，左右未有所称诵，胜未有所闻，是先生无所有也。
现代文：如今先生寄附在我的门下到现在已三年了，我的左右近臣们从没有称赞推荐过你，我也从来没听说过你，这是先生没有什么专长啊。
English: It has now been three years since you came to live under my roof. My right and left ministers have never commended or recommended you, and I have never heard of you. This is not your area of expertise.

古文：先生不能，先生留。 
现代文：先生不能去，先生留下来。 
English: Mr. can't go, Mr. stay.

古文：毛遂曰： 臣乃今日请处囊中耳。
现代文：毛遂说： 我就算是今天请求放在口袋里吧。
English: Mao Sui said, "I might as well put my request in my pocket today."

古文：使遂蚤得处囊中，乃颖脱而出，非特其末见而已。 
现代文：假使我早就被放在口袋里，是会整个锥锋都脱露出来的，不只是露出一点锋尖就罢了的。 
English: If I had been put in a pocket long ago, the whole cone would have been exposed, not just the tip.

古文：平原君竟与毛遂偕。
现代文：平原君终于同意让毛遂一同去。
English: Mr. Hirahara finally agreed to let Mao Sui go with him.

古文：十九人相与目笑之而未废也。
现代文：那十九个人互相使眼色示意，暗暗嘲笑毛遂，只是没有发出声音来。
English: The nineteen people winked at each other and secretly laughed at Mao Sui, but they didn't make a sound.

古文：毛遂比至楚，与十九人论议，十九人皆服。
现代文：等到毛遂到达楚国，跟那十九个人谈论、争议天下局势，十九个人个个佩服他。
English: When Mao finally arrived in Chu, he discussed and disputed the world situation with the nineteen people, and each of the nineteen people admired him.

古文：平原君与楚合从，言其利害，日出而言之，日中不决。十九人谓毛遂曰： 先生上。 
现代文：平原君与楚王谈判订立合纵盟约的事，再三陈述利害关系，从早晨就谈判，直到中午还没决定下来，那十九个人就鼓动毛遂说： 先生登堂。 
English: Plainsmen and King Chu negotiated the conclusion of a military alliance. They repeatedly stated their interests. They negotiated from the morning until noon. When no decision was reached, the nineteen people encouraged Mao and said, "Teacher, come to the hall."

古文：毛遂按剑历阶而上，谓平原君曰： 从之利害，两言而决耳。
现代文：于是毛遂紧握剑柄，一路小跑地登阶到了殿堂上，便对平原君说： 谈合纵不是 利 就是 害 ，只两句话罢了。
English: As a result, Mao finally gripped the hilt of his sword tightly and ran all the way up the steps to the hall of fame, where he said to Plains: "Talking about whether it is beneficial or harmful is just two sentences."

古文：今日出而言从，日中不决，何也？ 
现代文：现在从早晨就谈合纵，到了中午还决定不下来，是什么缘故？ 
English: Now they have been talking about the merger since the morning, and by noon they still decided not to come down. What is the reason?

古文：楚王谓平原君曰： 客何为者也？ 
现代文：楚王见毛遂登上堂来就对平原君说： 这个人是干什么的？ 
English: When King Chu saw Mao finally come into the court, he said to Plain Jun, "What does this man do?"

古文：平原君曰： 是胜之舍人也。 
现代文：平原君回答说： 这是我的随从家臣。 
English: Hirahara replied, "This is my attendant vassal.

古文：楚王叱曰： 胡不下！
现代文：楚王厉声呵叱道： 怎么还不给我下去！
English: Chu Wang snapped and scolded: Why won't you let me go down!

古文：吾乃与而君言，汝何为者也！ 
现代文：我是跟你的主人谈判，你来干什么！ 
English: I'm negotiating with your master, what are you doing here!

古文：毛遂按剑而前曰： 王之所以叱遂者，以楚国之众也。
现代文：毛遂紧握剑柄走向前去说： 大王敢呵叱我，不过是依仗楚国人多势众。
English: Mao then clenched the hilt of his sword and walked forward, saying, "The Great King dares to scold me, but he is relying on the overwhelming power of the people of Chu.

古文：今十步之内，王不得恃楚国之众也，王之命县於遂手。
现代文：现在我与你相距只有十步，十步之内大王是依仗不了楚国的人多势众的，大王的性命控制在我手中。
English: Now I am only ten steps away from you. Within ten steps, the great king cannot rely on the many powerful people of Chu. The great king's life is in my hands.

古文：吾君在前，叱者何也？
现代文：我的主人就在面前，当着他的面你为什么这样呵叱我？
English: My master is right in front of me. Why are you scolding me like this?

古文：且遂闻汤以七十里之地王天下，文王以百里之壤而臣诸侯，岂其士卒众多哉，诚能据其势而奋其威。
现代文：况且我听说商汤曾凭着七十里方圆的地方统治了天下，周文王凭着百里大小的土地使天下诸侯臣服，难道是因为他们的士兵多吗，实际上是由于他们善于掌握形势而奋力发扬自己的威力。
English: Moreover, I heard that Shang Tang once ruled the world by virtue of a seventy-mile-square place, and King Zhou Wen subjugated the world's princes with a hundred-mile-wide land. Is it because they have more soldiers? In fact, it is because they are good at mastering the situation and strive to develop their power.

古文：今楚地方五千里，持戟百万，此霸王之资也。
现代文：如今楚国领土纵横五千里，士兵百万，这是争王称霸所凭借的资本。
English: Today, the territory of the State of Chu is five thousand miles in length and breadth, with a million soldiers. This is the capital with which to compete for supremacy.

古文：以楚之彊，天下弗能当。
现代文：凭着楚国如此强大，天下谁也不能挡住它的威势。
English: With Chu so powerful, no one in the world can stop its might.

古文：白起，小竖子耳，率数万之众，兴师以与楚战，一战而举鄢郢，再战而烧夷陵，三战而辱王之先人。
现代文：秦国的白起，不过是个毛孩子罢了，他带着几万人的部队，发兵与楚国交战，第一战就攻克了鄢城郢都，第二战烧毁了夷陵，第三战便使大王的先祖受到极大凌辱。
English: Baiqi of Qin was just a child. He took tens of thousands of troops with him and sent them to fight against Chu. In the first battle, he conquered the city of Yancheng and the capital, in the second battle, he burned down the Yiling, and in the third battle, he greatly humiliated the ancestors of the great king.

古文：此百世之怨而赵之所羞，而王弗知恶焉。
现代文：这是楚国百世不解的怨仇，连赵王都感羞耻，可是大王却不觉得羞愧。
English: This is the most puzzling feud in the history of Chu. Even King Zhao felt ashamed, but the great king did not feel ashamed.

古文：合从者为楚，非为赵也。
现代文：合纵盟约是为了楚国，不是为了赵国。
English: The alliance is for the sake of Chu, not for the sake of Zhao.

古文：吾君在前，叱者何也？ 
现代文：我的主人就在面前，你为什么这样呵叱我？ 
English: My master is right in front of me. Why are you scolding me like this?

古文：楚王曰： 唯唯，诚若先生之言，谨奉社稷而以从。 
现代文：听了毛遂这番数说，楚王立即改变了态度说： 是，是，的确像先生所说的那样，我一定竭尽全国的力量履行合纵盟约。 
English: After listening to Mao Sui say this number, King Chu immediately changed his attitude and said: Yes, yes, indeed, as the gentleman said, I will do my best to fulfill the alliance.

古文：毛遂曰： 从定乎？ 
现代文：毛遂进一步逼问道： 合纵盟约算是确定了吗？ 
English: Mao then pressed further and asked: Is the alliance contract finalized?

古文：楚王曰： 定矣。 
现代文：楚王回答说： 确定了。 
English: King Chu replied, "It is definite.

古文：毛遂谓楚王之左右曰： 取鸡狗马之血来。 
现代文：于是毛遂用带着命令式的口吻对楚王的左右近臣说： 把鸡、狗、马的血取来。 
English: So Mao Sui said to King Chu's right and left vassals with a commanding tone: "Get the blood of the chicken, dog, and horse."

古文：毛遂奉铜槃而跪进之楚王曰： 王当歃血而定从，次者吾君，次者遂。 
现代文：毛遂双手捧着铜盘跪下把它进献到楚王面前说： 大王应先吮血以表示确定合纵盟约的诚意，下一个是我的主人，再下一个是我。 
English: Mao then knelt down with a bronze plate in his hands and presented it to King Chu, saying, "The great king should first draw blood to show his sincerity in confirming the alliance. The next is my master, and then the next is me."

古文：遂定从於殿上。
现代文：就这样，在楚国的殿堂上确定了合纵盟约。
English: In this way, the alliance treaty was confirmed in the hall of fame of the state of Chu.

古文：毛遂左手持槃血而右手招十九人曰： 公相与歃此血於堂下。公等录录，所谓因人成事者也。 
现代文：这时毛遂左手托起一盘血，右手招呼那十九个人说： 各位在堂下也一块儿吮盘中的血，各位虽然平庸，可也算完成了任务，这就是所说的依赖别人的力量来完成自己的任务吧。 
English: At this time, Mao then held up a plate of blood in his left hand, and called out to the nineteen people with his right hand, saying, "You all have blood in your plate together. Although you are mediocre, you have also accomplished your mission. This is what is meant by relying on the strength of others to accomplish one's mission."

古文：平原君已定从而归，归至於赵，曰： 胜不敢复相士。
现代文：平原君确定了合纵盟约便返回赵国，回到赵国后，说： 我不敢再观察识别人才了。
English: Mr. Plains confirmed the merger agreement and returned to Zhao. After returning to Zhao, he said, "I don't dare to observe and identify talent anymore."

古文：胜相士多者千人，寡者百数，自以为不失天下之士，今乃於毛先生而失之也。
现代文：我观察识别人才多说上千，少说几百，自认为不会遗漏天下的贤能之士，现在竟然把毛先生给漏下了。
English: I have observed that people talk more about thousands than about hundreds, and they think that they will not miss out on the world's talented people, but now they have missed out on Mr. Mao.

古文：毛先生一至楚，而使赵重於九鼎大吕。
现代文：毛先生一次到楚国，就使赵国的地位比九鼎大吕的传国之宝还尊贵。
English: Once Mr. Mao went to Chu, he made the status of Zhao more honorable than the national treasure of Jiuding Dairu.

古文：毛先生以三寸之舌，强于百万之师。
现代文：毛先生凭着他那一张能言善辩的嘴，竟比百万大军的威力还要强大。
English: Mr. Mao, with his eloquent mouth, was more powerful than a million-man army.

古文：胜不敢复相士。 
现代文：我不敢再观察识别人才了。 
English: I don't dare to watch talent scouts anymore.

古文：遂以为上客。
现代文：于是把毛遂尊为上等宾客。
English: So he treated Mao Suizhong as a high-class guest.

古文：平原君既返赵，楚使春申君将兵赴救赵，魏信陵君亦矫夺晋鄙军往救赵，皆未至。
现代文：平原君回到赵国后，楚国派春申君带兵赶赴救援赵国，魏国的信陵君也假托君命夺了晋鄙军权带兵前去救援赵国，可是都还没有赶到。
English: After the Plain Prince returned to the State of Zhao, the State of Chu sent Chunshen Prince to rush to the rescue of the State of Zhao, and the State of Wei sent Xinling Prince to rescue the State of Zhao, but they have not arrived yet.

古文：秦急围邯郸，邯郸急，且降，平原君甚患之。
现代文：这时秦国急速地围攻邯郸，邯郸告急，将要投降，平原君极为焦虑。
English: At this time, Qin rapidly besieged Yunnan, warning that it was about to surrender, and Pingyuan was extremely anxious.

古文：邯郸传舍吏子李同说平原君曰： 君不忧赵亡邪？ 
现代文：邯郸宾馆吏员的儿子李同劝说平原君道： 您不担忧赵国灭亡吗？ 
English: Li Tong, the son of a hotel clerk, persuaded Pingyuan Jun: Aren't you worried about the demise of Zhao?

古文：平原君曰： 赵亡则胜为虏，何为不忧乎？ 
现代文：平原君说： 赵国灭亡那我就要作俘虏，为什么不担忧呢？ 
English: Plain Jun said, "If Zhao is destroyed, I will become a prisoner. Why should I not be worried?"

古文：李同曰： 邯郸之民，炊骨易子而食，可谓急矣，而君之後宫以百数，婢妾被绮縠，馀粱肉，而民褐衣不完，糟糠不厌。
现代文：李同说： 邯郸的百姓，拿人骨当柴烧，交换孩子当饭吃，可以说危急至极了，可是您的后宫姬妾侍女数以百计，侍女穿着丝绸绣衣，精美饭菜吃不了，而百姓却粗布短衣难以遮体，酒渣谷皮吃不饱。
English: Li Tong said, "You lazy people, taking human bones as firewood and exchanging children for food, can be said to be in a critical situation. However, your harem of concubines number in the hundreds. The maids wear silk embroidered clothes and cannot eat fine food, while the common people can hardly cover themselves with coarse cloth shorts and cannot eat enough wine dregs and grain hulls.

古文：民困兵尽，或剡木为矛矢，而君器物锺磬自若。
现代文：百姓困乏，兵器用尽，有的人削尖木头当长矛箭矢，而您的珍宝玩器铜钟玉罄照旧无损。
English: The people are tired, the weapons are exhausted, some people are sharpening wood for spears and arrows, and your precious toy, the brass bell, is still intact.

古文：使秦破赵，君安得有此？
现代文：假使秦军攻破赵国，您怎么能有这些东西？
English: If the Qin army invades Zhao, how can you have these things?

古文：使赵得全，君何患无有？
现代文：假若赵国得以保全，您又何愁没有这些东西？
English: If Zhao Guo is preserved, why are you worried about not having these things?

古文：今君诚能令夫人以下编於士卒之间，分功而作，家之所有尽散以飨士，士方其危苦之时，易德耳。 
现代文：现在您果真能命令夫人以下的全体成员编到士兵队伍中，分别承担守城劳役，把家里所有的东西全都分发下去供士兵享用，士兵正当危急困苦的时候，是很容易感恩戴德的。 
English: Now that you can really order all the members from the wife down to the soldiers to join the soldiers, to bear the labor of defending the city separately, and to distribute all the things at home for the soldiers to enjoy, it is easy for soldiers to be grateful when they are in distress.

古文：於是平原君从之，得敢死之士三千人。
现代文：于是平原君采纳了李同的意见，得到敢于冒死的士兵三千人。
English: As a result, Plains adopted Li Tong's opinion and gained three thousand soldiers who dared to die.

古文：李同遂与三千人赴秦军，秦军为之卻三十里。
现代文：李同就加入了三千人的队伍奔赴秦军决一死战，秦军因此被击退了三十里。
English: Li Tong then joined a team of three thousand people to rush to the Qin Army to fight to the death. As a result, the Qin Army was repulsed thirty miles away.

古文：亦会楚、魏救至，秦兵遂罢，邯郸复存。
现代文：这时也凑巧楚、魏两国的救兵到达，秦军便撤走了，邯郸得以保存下来。
English: At this time, by chance, the Wei and Qin armies arrived to rescue the soldiers, and the Qin army withdrew, allowing the cocoon to be preserved.

古文：李同战死，封其父为李侯。
现代文：李同在同秦军作战时阵亡，赐封他的父亲为李侯。
English: Li Tong died in battle with the Qin army, and his father was given the title of Li Hou.

古文：虞卿欲以信陵君之存邯郸为平原君请封。
现代文：虞卿想要以信陵君出兵救赵保存了邯郸为理由替平原君请求增加封邑。
English: Yuqing wanted to increase the fief for Pingyuan's request on the grounds that Xinlingjun sent troops to rescue Zhao and saved the fief.

古文：公孙龙闻之，夜驾见平原君曰： 龙闻虞卿欲以信陵君之存邯郸为君请封，有之乎？ 
现代文：公孙龙得知这个消息，就连夜乘车去见平原君说： 我听说虞卿想要以信陵君出兵救赵保存了邯郸为理由替您请求增加封邑，有这回事吗？ 
English: When Gongsun Long learned this news, he drove all night to see Pingyuan Jun and said: I heard that Yu Ching wanted to request an increase in fiefs for you on the grounds that Xin Lingjun sent troops to save Zhao and preserved the imperial seal. Is there such a thing?

古文：平原君曰： 然。 
现代文：平原君回答说： 有的。 
English: Mr. Hirahara replied, "Yes.

古文：龙曰： 此甚不可。
现代文：公孙龙说： 这是很不合适的。
English: Gongsun Long said: This is very inappropriate.

古文：且王举君而相赵者，非以君之智能为赵国无有也。
现代文：说来国君任用您担任赵国宰相，并不是因为您的智慧才能是赵国独一无二别人没有的。
English: It is not because your wisdom and talent are unique to Zhao that the sovereign has appointed you as the prime minister of Zhao.

古文：割东武城而封君者，非以君为有功也，而以国人无勋，乃以君为亲戚故也。
现代文：划出东武城封赐给您，也不是因为您做出了有功劳的事情，只是由于您是国君近亲的缘故啊。
English: It is not because you have done something meritorious that the Tobu Castle was given to you, but because you are a close relative of the sovereign.

古文：君受相印不辞无能，割地不言无功者，亦自以为亲戚故也。
现代文：您接受相印并不因自己无能而推辞，取得封邑也不说自己没有功劳而不接受，也是由于您自己认为是国君的近亲的缘故啊。
English: You did not refuse to accept the imperial seal because of your own incompetence, nor did you refuse to accept the fief without saying that you had no merit, but also because you thought you were a close relative of the sovereign.

古文：今信陵君存邯郸而请封，是亲戚受城而国人计功也。
现代文：如今信陵君出兵保存了邯郸而您要求增加封邑，这是无功时作为近亲接受了封邑，而有功时又要求按照普通人来论功计赏啊。
English: Now that Xinyingjun has sent troops to save the Jiuquan and you have requested to increase the fiefs, this is when there is no merit, he accepted the fiefs as a close relative, and when there is merit, he asked to be rewarded according to ordinary people.

古文：此甚不可。
现代文：这显然是很不合适的。
English: It's obviously very inappropriate.

古文：且虞卿操其两权，事成，操右券以责；事不成，以虚名德君。
现代文：况且虞卿掌握着办事成功与不成功的两头主动权。事情成功了，就要像拿着索债的契券一样来索取报偿；事情不成功，又要拿着为您争功求封的虚名来让您感激他。
English: Moreover, Yuqing holds the initiative on both sides of the success and failure of the work. If the matter is successful, it is necessary to claim compensation like holding a deed of debt collection; if the matter is not successful, it is necessary to take the false name that you are striving for to make you grateful to him.

古文：君必勿听也。 
现代文：您一定不要听从他的主张。 
English: You mustn't listen to him.

古文：平原君遂不听虞卿。
现代文：平原君于是拒绝了虞卿的建议。
English: Therefore, Hirahara-kun rejected the suggestion of Yu-ch'ing.

古文：平原君以赵孝成王十五年卒。
现代文：平原君在赵孝成王十五年去世。
English: He died in the fifteenth year of the reign of King Zhao Xiaocheng.

古文：子孙代，後竟与赵俱亡。
现代文：平原君的子孙世代承袭他的封爵，他的后嗣终于在赵国灭亡的同时断绝了。
English: The descendants of Hirahara-kun inherited his title, and his heirs were finally cut off at the same time as the fall of Zhao.

古文：平原君厚待公孙龙。
现代文：平原君对待公孙龙很是优厚。
English: Mr. Hirahara treated his grandson, Ryu, very generously.

古文：公孙龙善为坚白之辩，及邹衍过赵言至道，乃绌公孙龙。
现代文：公孙龙善于进行 离坚白 命题的论辩，到了邹衍访问赵国时，纵论至高无尚的正大道理，驳斥公孙龙的名辩命题，此后平原君便辞退了公孙龙。
English: Gongsun Long was good at arguing the proposition of "staying away from solid white." When Zou Yan visited Zhao, he refuted Gongsun Long's name argument proposition, even though it was the loftiest and most important principle. After that, Pingyuan Jun dismissed Gongsun Long.

古文：虞卿者，游说之士也。蹑蹻檐簦说赵孝成王。
现代文：虞卿，是个善于游说的有才之士，他脚穿草鞋，肩搭雨伞，远道而来游说赵孝成王。
English: Yuqing was a talented man who was good at lobbying. He wore straw sandals on his feet and carried an umbrella on his shoulder. He came from afar to lobby Zhao Xiaocheng.

古文：一见，赐黄金百镒，白璧一双；再见，为赵上卿，故号为虞卿。
现代文：第一次拜见赵王，赵王便赐给他黄金百镒，白璧一对；第二次拜见赵王，就当上了赵国的上卿，所以称他为虞卿。
English: The first time he met King Zhao, King Zhao gave him a hundred pieces of gold and a pair of white pearls; the second time he met King Zhao, he became the high lord of Zhao, so he was called Yuqing.

古文：秦赵战於长平，赵不胜，亡一都尉。
现代文：秦、赵两国在长平交战，赵国初战不利，损失一员都尉。
English: The two countries of Qin and Zhao fought in Changping, and Zhao was at a disadvantage in the first battle, losing one captain.

古文：赵王召楼昌与虞卿曰： 军战不胜，尉复死，寡人使束甲而趋之，何如？ 
现代文：赵王召来楼昌和虞卿计议说： 我军初战不利，都尉战死，我要卷甲赴敌与秦军决战，你们看怎么样？ 
English: Zhao Wang summoned Louchang and Yuqing to discuss the matter and said: Our army was at a disadvantage in the first battle, the captain died in battle, I want to roll armor to go to the enemy and the Qin army for a decisive battle, what do you think?

古文：楼昌曰： 无益也，不如发重使为媾。 
现代文：楼昌说： 没有好处，不如派重要使臣去求和。 
English: Lou Chang said: There is no benefit, it is better to send important envoys to sue for peace.

古文：虞卿曰： 昌言媾者，以为不媾军必破也。
现代文：虞卿说： 楼昌主张求和的原因，是认为不求和我军必败。
English: Yu Qing said: The reason why Lou Chang advocated seeking peace is that he believed that if he did not seek peace, he and his army would be defeated.

古文：而制媾者在秦。
现代文：可是控制和谈主动权在秦国一方。
English: However, the control and negotiation initiative is on the side of Qin.

古文：且王之论秦也，欲破赵之军乎，不邪？ 
现代文：而且大王您估计一下秦国的作战意图，是要击败赵国军队呢，还是不要呢？ 
English: Moreover, Your Majesty, please estimate the battle intention of Qin, is it to defeat the army of Zhao, or not?

古文：王曰： 秦不遗馀力矣，必且欲破赵军。 
现代文：赵王回答说： 秦国已经竭尽全力毫不保留了，必定将要击败赵军。 
English: Zhao Wang replied, "Qin has spared no effort and will surely defeat Zhao's army.

古文：虞卿曰： 王听臣，发使出重宝以附楚、魏，楚、魏欲得王之重宝，必内吾使。
现代文：虞卿接着说： 大王听从我的话，派出使臣拿上贵重的珍宝去联合楚、魏两国，楚、魏两国想得到大王的贵重珍宝，一定接纳我们的使臣。
English: Yu Jing continued, "The Great King listened to my words and sent an envoy with precious treasures to unite the two countries of Chu and Wei. If the two countries of Chu and Wei want to obtain the Great King's precious treasures, they must accept our envoy."

古文：赵使入楚、魏，秦必疑天下之合从，且必恐。
现代文：赵国使臣进入楚、魏两国，秦国必定怀疑天下诸侯联合抗秦，而且必定恐慌。
English: When Zhao's envoys entered the states of Chu and Wei, the state of Qin must have suspected that the princes of the world would unite to resist Qin, and must have panicked.

古文：如此，则媾乃可为也。 
现代文：这样，和谈才能进行。 
English: Only then can peace talks take place.

古文：赵王不听，与平阳君为媾，发郑硃入秦。
现代文：赵王没有听从虞卿的意见，与平阳君赵豹议妥求和，就派出郑朱先到秦国联系。
English: Zhao Wang did not listen to Yu Ching's advice, and sent Zheng Zhu to Qin to make contact with Pingyang's Zhao Bao.

古文：秦内之。
现代文：秦国接纳了郑朱。
English: The State of Qin accepted Zheng Zhu.

古文：赵王召虞卿曰： 寡人使平阳君为媾於秦，秦已内郑硃矣，卿之为奚如？ 
现代文：赵王又召见虞卿说： 我派平阳君到秦国求和，秦国已经接纳郑朱了，您认为怎么样？ 
English: Zhao Wang also summoned Yu Qing and said: I sent Pingyang Jun to Qin to sue for peace, Qin has already accepted Zheng Zhu, what do you think?

古文：虞卿对曰： 王不得媾，军必破矣。
现代文：虞卿回答说： 大王的和谈不能成功，赵军必定被击败。
English: Yu Jing replied: The Great King's peace talks cannot succeed, the Zhao Army will be defeated.

古文：天下贺战者皆在秦矣。
现代文：天下诸侯祝贺秦国获胜的使臣都在秦国了。
English: The ambassadors from all over the world congratulating Qin on its victory are all in Qin.

古文：郑硃，贵人也，入秦，秦王与应侯必显重以示天下。
现代文：郑朱是个显贵之人，他进入秦国，秦王和应侯一定把郑朱来到秦国这件事大加宣扬而给天下诸侯看。
English: Zheng Zhu was a prominent person. When he entered Qin, the King of Qin and Ying Hou must have publicized Zheng Zhu's arrival in Qin to all the princes in the world.

古文：楚、魏以赵为媾，必不救王。
现代文：楚、魏两国认为赵国到秦国求和，必定不会救援大王。
English: The two countries of Chu and Wei believed that if Zhao went to Qin to sue for peace, they would not rescue the great king.

古文：秦知天下不救王，则媾不可得成也。 
现代文：秦国知道天下诸侯不救援大王，那么和谈是不可能得到成功的。 
English: Qin knew that if the princes of the world did not come to the rescue of the great king, then the peace talks could not succeed.

古文：应侯果显郑硃以示天下贺战胜者，终不肯媾。
现代文：应侯果然把郑朱来到秦国这件事大加宣扬而给天下诸侯祝贺秦国获胜的使臣们看，终究不肯和谈。
English: The envoys of the princes of the world congratulated Qin on their victory after the princes had publicized the fact that Zheng Zhu had come to Qin, but in the end they refused to talk peace.

古文：长平大败，遂围邯郸，为天下笑。
现代文：赵军在长平大败，于是邯郸被围困，被天下人耻笑。
English: Zhao's army suffered a crushing defeat in Changping, as a result of which Yunnan was besieged and ridiculed by the world.

古文：秦既解邯郸围，而赵王入朝，使赵郝约事於秦，割六县而媾。
现代文：秦国解除了邯郸的包围之后，而赵王却准备到秦国拜访秦王，就派赵郝到秦国去订约结交，割出六个县而讲和。
English: After Qin lifted the siege of Yao, but King Zhao was preparing to visit Qin, he sent Zhao Yao to Qin to make a treaty and cut out six counties to make peace.

古文：虞卿谓赵王曰： 秦之攻王也，倦而归乎？
现代文：虞卿对赵王说： 大王您看，秦国进攻大王，是因为打得疲顿了才撤回呢？
English: Yuqing said to Zhao Wang: Your Majesty, you see, Qin attacked the Great King, but withdrew because they were exhausted?

古文：王以其力尚能进，爱王而弗攻乎？ 
现代文：还是它能够进攻，由于怜惜大王而不再进攻呢？ 
English: Or is it able to attack, but does not attack out of pity for the great king?

古文：王曰： 秦之攻我也，不遗馀力矣，必以倦而归也。 
现代文：赵王回答说： 秦国进攻我，是毫不保留竭尽全力了，一定是因为打得疲惫了才撤回的。 
English: Zhao Wang replied, "Qin attacked me without reservation and with all their strength. They must have withdrawn because they were exhausted.

古文：虞卿曰： 秦以其力攻其所不能取，倦而归，王又以其力之所不能取以送之，是助秦自攻也。
现代文：虞卿说： 秦国用它的全部力量进攻它所不能夺取的土地，结果打得疲顿而回，可是大王又把秦国兵力所不能夺取的土地白白送给秦国，这等于帮助秦国进攻自己啊。
English: Yuqing said: Qin State used all its strength to attack the land that it could not capture. As a result, it fought back exhausted. However, the great king also gave the land that Qin State's military strength could not capture to Qin State for free. This is tantamount to helping Qin State attack itself.

古文：来年秦复攻王，王无救矣。 
现代文：明年秦国再进攻大王，大王就无法自救了。 
English: Next year, Qin will attack Daowang again, and Daowang will not be able to save himself.

古文：王以虞卿之言赵郝。
现代文：赵王把虞卿的话告诉了赵郝。
English: Zhao Wang told Zhao Yao what Yu Qing had said.

古文：赵郝曰： 虞卿诚能尽秦力之所至乎？
现代文：赵郝说： 虞卿真能摸清秦国兵力的底细吗？
English: Zhao Wei said: Can Yuqing really figure out the details of Qin's military strength?

古文：诚知秦力之所不能进，此弹丸之地弗予，令秦来年复攻王，王得无割其内而媾乎？ 
现代文：果真知道秦国兵力今年不能进攻了，这么一块弹丸之地不给它，让秦国明年再来进攻大王，那时大王岂不是要割让腹地给它来求和吗？ 
English: If he really knew that Qin's army could not attack this year, he would not give it such a piece of land, and let Qin attack the king again next year. At that time, wouldn't the king want to cede the hinterland to it to sue for peace?

古文：王曰： 请听子割，子能必使来年秦之不复攻我乎？ 
现代文：赵王说： 我听从你的意见割让六县了，你能一定让秦国明年不再进攻我吗？ 
English: Zhao Wang said: I have listened to your advice and ceded six counties. Can you make sure that Qin will not attack me next year?

古文：赵郝对曰： 此非臣之所敢任也。
现代文：赵郝回答说： 这个可不是我所敢承担的事情。
English: Zhao Wei replied: This is not something I dare to undertake.

古文：他日三晋之交於秦，相善也。
现代文：过去韩、赵、魏三国与秦国交往，互相亲善。
English: In the past, the three countries of Han, Zhao and Wei interacted with Qin and were friendly to each other.

古文：今秦善韩、魏而攻王，王之所以事秦必不如韩、魏也。
现代文：现在秦国对韩、魏两国亲善而进攻大王，看来大王事奉秦国的心意一定是不如韩、魏两国了。
English: Now that Qin is attacking the Great King out of friendship for Han and Wei, it seems that the Great King's intention to serve Qin must be inferior to that of Han and Wei.

古文：今臣为足下解负亲之攻，开关通币，齐交韩、魏，至来年而王独取攻於秦，此王之所以事秦必在韩、魏之後也。
现代文：现在我替您解除因背弃与秦国亲善关系而招致的进攻，开启关卡，互通贸易，与秦国的交好程度同韩、魏两国一样，若到了明年大王独自招来秦国的进攻，这一定是大王事奉秦国的心意又落在韩、魏两国的后面了。
English: Now I will relieve you of the attack caused by the betrayal of the friendly relations with Qin, open the checkpoints, exchange trade, and the degree of friendship with Qin is the same as that of South Korea and Wei. If the king alone invites the attack of Qin next year, this must be the king's intention to serve Qin and fall behind South Korea and Wei.

古文：此非臣之所敢任也。 
现代文：所以说，这不是我所敢承担的事情。 
English: So it's not something that I would take on.

古文：王以告虞卿。
现代文：赵王把赵郝的话告诉了虞卿。
English: Zhao Wang told Yu Qing about Zhao Yao's words.

古文：虞卿对曰： 郝言 不媾，来年秦复攻王，王得无割其内而媾乎 。
现代文：虞卿回答说： 赵郝说 不讲和，明年秦国再来进攻大王，大王岂不是要割让腹地给它来求和吗 。
English: Yuqing replied: Zhao Yu said that he would not talk about peace, and that the Qin State would attack the Great King again next year. Wasn't the Great King going to cede the hinterland to the Great King to sue for peace?

古文：今媾，郝又以不能必秦之不复攻也。
现代文：现在讲和，赵郝又认为不能保证秦国不再进攻。
English: Now that peace has been declared, Zhao Wei also believes that there is no guarantee that Qin will not attack again.

古文：今虽割六城，何益！
现代文：那么现在即使割让六个城邑，又有什么好处！
English: So now, even if we cede six towns, what good will it do?

古文：来年复攻，又割其力之所不能取而媾，此自尽之术也，不如无媾。
现代文：明年再来进攻，又把它的兵力所不能夺取的土地割让给它来求和。这是自取灭亡的办法，所以不如不讲和。
English: To attack again next year, and to sue for peace by ceding to it land which its forces cannot take, is a recipe for self-destruction, so it is better not to sue for peace.

古文：秦虽善攻，不能取六县；赵虽不能守，终不失六城。
现代文：秦国即使善于进攻，也不能轻易地夺取六个县；赵国即使不能防守，终归也不会丧失六座城。
English: Even if Qin is good at attacking, it can't easily capture six counties; even if Zhao can't defend, it won't lose six cities.

古文：秦倦而归，兵必罢。
现代文：秦国疲顿而撤兵，军队必然疲软。
English: The Qin state was exhausted and withdrew its troops, and the army was inevitably weak.

古文：我以六城收天下以攻罢秦，是我失之於天下而取偿於秦也。
现代文：我用六座城来收拢天下诸侯去进攻疲软的秦军，这是我在天下诸侯那里失去六座城而在秦国那里得到补偿。
English: I used six cities to rally the world's lords to attack the weak Qin army. This is because I lost six cities from the world's lords and got compensation from Qin.

古文：吾国尚利，孰与坐而割地，自弱以彊秦哉？
现代文：我国还可得到好处，这与白白地割让土地，使自己削弱而使秦国强大相比，哪样好呢？
English: Our country can still get benefits, which is better than ceding land in vain, weakening ourselves and making Qin strong.

古文：今郝曰 秦善韩、魏而攻赵者，必王之事秦不如韩、魏也 ，是使王岁以六城事秦也，即坐而城尽。
现代文：现在赵郝说 秦国与韩、魏两国亲善而进攻赵国的原因，一定是大王事奉秦国的心意不如韩、魏两国 ，这是让大王每年拿出六座城来事奉秦国，也就是白白地把城邑送光。
English: Now Zhao Yu said that the reason why the friendly Qin, Han and Wei attacked Zhao was that the great king's intention to serve the Qin was not as good as that of the Han and Wei, which was to let the great king take out six cities every year to serve the Qin, that is, to send the cities to the light in vain.

古文：来年秦复求割地，王将与之乎？
现代文：明年秦国又要求割地，大王将给它吗？
English: Next year, Qin will ask for more land. Will the king give it to him?

古文：弗与，是弃前功而挑秦祸也；与之，则无地而给之。
现代文：不给，这是抛弃了原来割让土地所换取的成果而挑起秦国进攻的兵祸；给它，也就无地可给了。
English: If it does not give it, it is abandoning the fruits of the original cession of land and provoking the military disaster of Qin's attack; if it does give it, it will have no land to give.

古文：语曰 彊者善攻，弱者不能守 。
现代文：俗话说： 强大的善于进攻，弱小的不能防守 。
English: As the saying goes: The strong are good at attacking, the weak cannot defend.

古文：今坐而听秦，秦兵不弊而多得地，是彊秦而弱赵也。
现代文：现在平白地听任秦国摆布，秦国军队毫不费力便可多得土地，这是使秦国更加强大而使赵国更加削弱啊。
English: Now they are at the mercy of Qin, and the Qin army can gain more land without any effort. This makes Qin stronger and Zhao weaker.

古文：以益彊之秦而割愈弱之赵，其计故不止矣。
现代文：让越来越强大的秦国来割取越来越弱小的赵国，秦国年年谋取赵国土地的打算因而就不会停止了。
English: Let the increasingly powerful Qin State seize the increasingly weak Zhao State, and the Qin State's plan to seek land in Zhao State every year will not stop.

古文：且王之地有尽而秦之求无已，以有尽之地而给无已之求，其势必无赵矣。 
现代文：况且大王的土地有限而秦国的要求无限，拿有限的赵国土地去应付无限的秦国要求，那势必不会再有赵国了。 
English: Moreover, the great king's land is limited, but the demands of Qin are unlimited. If the limited land of Zhao were used to meet the unlimited demands of Qin, there would no longer be a Zhao.

古文：赵王计未定，楼缓从秦来，赵王与楼缓计之，曰： 予秦地如毋予，孰吉？ 
现代文：赵王的想法还没确定下来，楼缓从秦国回到赵国，赵王与楼缓商议这个问题，说： 给秦国土地与不给，哪种作法好？ 
English: Zhao Wang's idea had not yet been determined. Lou Xuan returned from Qin to Zhao. Zhao Wang and Lou Xuan discussed the issue and said: To give land to Qin or not to give land to Qin, which way is better?

古文：缓辞让曰： 此非臣之所能知也。 
现代文：楼缓推让说： 这不是我所能知道的。 
English: "It's not something I can know," Ms. Lou said.

古文：王曰： 虽然，试言公之私。 
现代文：赵王说： 虽然这么说，也不妨试着谈谈你个人的意见。 
English: Zhao Wang said: In spite of that, you might as well try to talk about your personal opinion.

古文：楼缓对曰： 王亦闻夫公甫文伯母乎？
现代文：楼缓便回答说： 大王也听说过那个公甫文伯母亲的事吗？
English: Lou Yu replied, "Did the great king also hear about the story of the mother of the prince's uncle?

古文：公甫文伯仕於鲁，病死，女子为自杀於房中者二人。
现代文：公甫文伯在鲁国做官，病死了，妻妾中为他在卧房中自杀的有两个人。
English: His father-in-law Wenbo, an official in the State of Lu, died of illness, and two of his wives and concubines committed suicide in his bedchamber.

古文：其母闻之，弗哭也。
现代文：他的母亲听到这件事，居然不哭一声。
English: His mother didn't even cry when she heard about it.

古文：其相室曰： 焉有子死而弗哭者乎？ 
现代文：公甫文伯家的保姆说： 哪里有儿子死了而母亲不哭的呢？ 
English: The nanny of the court official's uncle's family said: Where is the son who died and the mother did not cry?

古文：其母曰： 孔子，贤人也，逐於鲁，而是人不随也。
现代文：他的母亲说： 孔子是个大贤人，被鲁国驱逐了，可是他这个人却不跟随孔子了。
English: His mother said, "Confucius was a great sage who was banished from Lu, but this man no longer follows Confucius.

古文：今死而妇人为之自杀者二人，若是者必其於长者薄而於妇人厚也。 
现代文：现在他死了而妻妾为他自杀的有两人，像这样的情况一定是他对尊长的人情义淡薄而对妻妾的情义深厚。 
English: Now that he is dead and two of his wives and concubines have committed suicide for him, a situation like this must have been one in which he felt little for his father-in-law and a great deal for his wife and concubine.

古文：故从母言之，是为贤母；从妻言之，是必不免为妒妻。
现代文：所以由母亲说出这样的话，这是个贤良的母亲，若由妻子说出这样的话，这一定免不了是个嫉妒的妻子。
English: So if a mother says it, she's a good mother, but if a wife says it, she's a jealous wife.

古文：故其言一也，言者异则人心变矣。
现代文：所以说的话虽然都一样，但由于说话人的立场不同，人的用意也就跟着变化了。
English: Therefore, although the words are all the same, because the speaker's position is different, the person's intention changes accordingly.

古文：今臣新从秦来而言勿予，则非计也；言予之，恐王以臣为为秦也：故不敢对。
现代文：现在我刚刚从秦国来，如果说不给，那不是上策；如果说给它，恐怕大王会认为我是替秦国帮忙：所以我不敢回答。
English: Now that I've just come from Qin, if I say no, it's not the best policy; if I say yes, I'm afraid the king will think I'm helping Qin: so I don't dare to answer.

古文：使臣得为大王计，不如予之。 
现代文：假使我能够替大王考虑，不如给它好。 
English: If I can think of anything for the king, I'd rather give it to him.

古文：王曰： 诺。 
现代文：赵王听后说： 嗯 。
English: After listening, Zhao Wang said, "Hmm.

古文：虞卿闻之，入见王曰： 此饰说也，王蜰勿予！ 
现代文：虞卿听到这件事，入宫拜见赵王说： 这是虚伪的辩说，大王切切不要给秦国六个县！ 
English: When Emperor Yu heard about this, he went to the palace to see King Zhao and said, "This is a hypocritical argument. The great king must not give six counties to Qin!"

古文：楼缓闻之，往见王。
现代文：楼缓听说了，就去拜见赵王。
English: When Lou Ye heard about it, he went to visit Zhao Wang.

古文：王又以虞卿之言告楼缓。
现代文：赵王把虞卿的话告诉了楼缓。
English: Zhao Wang relayed Yuqing's words to Lou Xiao.

古文：楼缓对曰： 不然。虞卿得其一，不得其二。
现代文：楼缓说： 不对，虞卿知其一，不知其二。
English: Lou said slowly, "No, that's not right. Yuqing knows one thing and I don't know another.

古文：今赵兵困於秦，天下之贺战胜者则必尽在於秦矣。
现代文：秦、赵两国结下怨仇引起兵祸而天下诸侯都很高兴，这是为什么？说 我们将借强国来欺弱国 。如今赵国军队被秦国围困，天下诸侯祝贺获胜的人必定都在秦国了。
English: Qin and Zhao countries made a grudge and caused a military disaster, and all the princes in the world were happy. Why? They said, "We will use a strong country to bully a weak country." Now Zhao's army is besieged by Qin, and all the princes in the world congratulating the winners must be in Qin.

古文：故不如亟割地为和，以疑天下而慰秦之心。
现代文：所以不如赶快割让土地讲和，来使天下诸侯怀疑秦、赵已经交好而又能抚慰秦国。
English: Therefore, it is better to quickly cede land to make peace, so that the princes of the world doubt that Qin and Zhao have made peace and can comfort Qin.

古文：不然，天下将因秦之怒，乘赵之弊，瓜分之。
现代文：不然的话，天下诸侯将借着秦国的怨怒，趁着赵国的疲困，瓜分赵国。
English: Otherwise, the princes of the world will take advantage of the Qin's anger and Zhao's exhaustion to carve up Zhao.

古文：赵且亡，何秦之图乎？
现代文：赵国将要灭亡，还图谋什么秦国呢？
English: The state of Zhao is about to perish. What is the state of Qin plotting?

古文：故曰虞卿得其一，不得其二。
现代文：所以说虞卿知其一，不知其二。
English: Therefore, it is said that Emperor Yu knows one thing, but does not know another.

古文：原王以此决之，勿复计也。 
现代文：希望大王从这些方面考虑决定给它吧，不要再盘算了。 
English: Let's hope that the king will consider these aspects and decide to give it to him. Let's not make any more calculations.

古文：虞卿闻之，往见王曰： 危哉楼子之所以为秦者，是愈疑天下，而何慰秦之心哉？
现代文：虞卿听到这番议论后，去拜见赵王说： 危险了，楼缓就是为秦国帮忙的，这只是越发让天下诸侯怀疑我们了，又怎么能抚慰秦国呢？
English: After hearing this argument, Emperor Yu went to see King Zhao and said, "It's dangerous. The delay is to help Qin. This only makes the princes of the world doubt us more and more. How can we comfort Qin?

古文：独不言其示天下弱乎？
现代文：他为什么偏偏不说这么做就是向天下诸侯昭示赵国软弱可欺呢？
English: Why did he not say that by doing so he was showing the princes of the world that Zhao was weak and could be deceived?

古文：且臣言勿予者，非固勿予而已也。
现代文：再说我所主张不给秦国土地，并不是坚决不给土地就算了。
English: Furthermore, what I am advocating is not to give land to Qin, but not to give land outright.

古文：秦索六城於王，而王以六城赂齐。
现代文：秦国向大王索取六个城邑，而大王则把这六个城邑送给齐国。
English: Qin asked the king for six cities, and the king gave the six cities to Qi.

古文：齐，秦之深雠也，得王之六城，并力西击秦，齐之听王，不待辞之毕也。
现代文：齐国，是秦国的死对头，得到大王的六个城邑，就可以与我们合力攻打秦国，齐王倾听大王的计谋，不用等话说完，就会同意。
English: Qi is the mortal enemy of Qin. If we can get the six cities of the great king, we can work together to attack Qin. King Qi will listen to the great king's strategy and agree without waiting for him to finish speaking.

古文：则是王失之於齐而取偿於秦也。
现代文：这就是大王虽然在齐国方面失去六个城邑却在秦国方面得到补偿。
English: This means that although the great king lost six cities in Qi, he was compensated in Qin.

古文：而齐、赵之深雠可以报矣，而示天下有能为也。
现代文：这样做，齐国、赵国的深仇大恨都可以报复了，而且又向天下诸侯显示赵王是有作为的。
English: In doing so, the deep hatred of Qi and Zhao could be avenged, and it also showed the princes of the world that King Zhao was effective.

古文：王以此发声，兵未窥於境，臣见秦之重赂至赵而反媾於王也。
现代文：大王把齐、赵两国结盟的事声扬出去，我们的军队不必到边境侦察，我就会看到秦国的贵重财礼送到赵国来而反过来向大王求和了。
English: The great king made the alliance between the two countries of Qi and Zhao known. Our army did not have to go to the border to reconnoitre, I would see the precious gifts of Qin sent to Zhao and in turn begged the great king for peace.

古文：从秦为媾，韩、魏闻之，必尽重王；重王，必出重宝以先於王。
现代文：一旦跟秦王讲和，韩、魏两国听到消息，必定尽力敬重大王；既要敬重大王，就必定拿出珍贵的宝物争先向大王致意。
English: Once peace is declared with King Qin, the two countries of Han and Wei, upon hearing the news, will certainly make every effort to pay their respects to the great king; since they must pay their respects to the great king, they will certainly come up with precious treasures to rush to pay their respects to the great king.

古文：则是王一举而结三国之亲，而与秦易道也。 赵王曰： 善。 
现代文：这样大王的一个举动可以与韩、魏、齐三国结交亲善，从而与秦国改换了处事的位置。 赵王听后说： 好极了。 
English: Such a move of the great king could make friendship with Han, Wei and Qi, thus changing the position of dealing with Qin. After listening, Zhao Wang said: Excellent.

古文：则使虞卿东见齐王，与之谋秦。
现代文：就派虞卿向东去拜见齐王，与齐王商议攻打秦国的问题。
English: He sent Yu Jing to the east to meet with King Qi and discuss with him the issue of attacking Qin.

古文：虞卿未返，秦使者已在赵矣。
现代文：虞卿还没返回齐国，秦国的使臣已经在赵国了。
English: Before Yuqing returned to Qi, Qin's envoys were already in Zhao.

古文：楼缓闻之，亡去。
现代文：楼缓得知这个消息，立即逃跑了。
English: When Lou was informed of the news, he immediately ran away.

古文：赵於是封虞卿以一城。
现代文：赵王于是把一座城邑封给了虞卿。过了不久，魏国请求与赵国合纵盟约。
English: King Zhao then gave a city to Emperor Yu. Soon after, Wei asked for an alliance with Zhao.

古文：居顷之，而魏请为从。
现代文：赵孝成王就召虞卿来商议这件事。
English: King Zhao Xiaocheng summoned Yuqing to discuss the matter.

古文：赵孝成王召虞卿谋。过平原君，平原君曰： 原卿之论从也。 
现代文：虞卿先去拜访平原君，平原君说： 希望听您论述一下合纵之道。 
English: Yuqing first went to visit Plains, and Plains said, "I would like to hear you expound on the way of merging.

古文：虞卿入见王。
现代文：虞卿入宫拜见赵王。
English: The Prince of Yue entered the palace to visit King Zhao.

古文：王曰： 魏请为从。 
现代文：赵王说： 魏国请求合纵盟约。 
English: Zhao Wang said, "Wei asked for a formal alliance.

古文：对曰： 魏过。 
现代文：虞卿说： 魏国错了。 
English: Yuqing said, "Wei Guo is wrong.

古文：王曰： 寡人固未之许。 
现代文：赵王说： 我本来也没答应它。 
English: Zhao Wang said, "I never agreed to it.

古文：对曰： 王过。 
现代文：虞卿说： 大王错了。 
English: Yuqing said, "The great king is wrong.

古文：王曰： 魏请从，卿曰魏过，寡人未之许，又曰寡人过，然则从终不可乎？ 
现代文：赵王说： 魏国请求合纵，您说魏国错了；我没有答应它，您又说我错了。既然这样，那么合纵盟约是终归不可以了吗？ 
English: Zhao Wang said, "Wei asked for unification, and you said that Wei was wrong; I did not agree to it, and you also said that I was wrong. In this case, is it impossible to return to the unification treaty?

古文：对曰： 臣闻小国之与大国从事也，有利则大国受其福，有败则小国受其祸。
现代文：虞卿回答说： 我听说小国跟大国一起办事，有好处就由大国享用成果，有坏处就由小国承担灾祸。
English: Yuqing replied, "I have heard that small countries should work together with big countries. If there are benefits, the big countries should enjoy the fruits, and if there are disadvantages, the small countries should bear the disasters.

古文：今魏以小国请其祸，而王以大国辞其福，臣故曰王过，魏亦过。
现代文：现在的情况是魏国以小国的地位情愿担当灾祸，而您是以大国的地位辞却享用成果。我所以说大王错了，魏国也错了。
English: The current situation is that Wei, as a small country, is willing to bear the disaster, while you, as a big country, are enjoying the fruits. I therefore say that the great king is wrong, and Wei is also wrong.

古文：窃以为从便。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：我私下认为合纵盟约有利。 赵王说： 好。 
English: Privately, I think it is advantageous to join the alliance.Zhao Wang said: Good.

古文：乃合魏为从。
现代文：于是就同魏国合纵盟约。
English: As a result, they formed an alliance with Wei.

古文：虞卿既以魏齐之故，不重万户侯卿相之印，与魏齐间行，卒去赵，困於梁。
现代文：虞卿因为魏国宰相魏齐的缘故，宁愿抛弃万户侯的爵位和卿相大印，与魏齐一起从小路逃走，最后离开赵国，在魏国大梁遭到困厄。
English: Because Wei Qi, the prime minister of the State of Wei, came to power, Yu Jing preferred to give up the title of the Marquis of Wanyu and the Great Seal of the State of Wei, and he and Wei Qi fled from the path, and finally left the State of Zhao, and was trapped in Dalian, the State of Wei.

古文：魏齐已死，不得意，乃著书，上采春秋，下观近世，曰节义、称号、揣摩、政谋，凡八篇。
现代文：魏齐死后，虞卿更加不得意，就著书立说，采集《春秋》的史实，观察近代的世情，写了《节义》、《称号》、《揣摩》、《政谋》共八篇。
English: After Wei Qi's death, Yu Qing was even more disappointed, so he wrote a book, collected the historical facts of "Spring and Autumn" and observed the modern world, and wrote "Section," "Title," "Speculate" and "Political Plot" a total of eight articles.

古文：以刺讥国家得失，世传之曰虞氏春秋。
现代文：用来批评国家政治的成功与失败，世上流传，称为《虞氏春秋》。
English: Used to criticize the success and failure of national politics, it has been circulated around the world and is known as "The Spring and Autumn of Yu Shi."

古文：太史公曰：平原君，翩翩浊世之佳公子也，然未睹大体。
现代文：太史公说：平原君，是个乱世之中风采翩翩有才气的公子，但是不能识大局。
English: Tai Shikong said: Plain Jun is a dashing and talented young man in a chaotic world, but he can't see the big picture.

古文：鄙语曰 利令智昏 ，平原君贪冯亭邪说，使赵陷长平兵四十馀万众，邯郸几亡。
现代文：俗话说： 贪图私利便丧失理智 ，平原君相信冯亭的邪说，贪图他献出的上党，致使赵国兵败长平，赵军四十多万人被坑杀，赵国几乎灭亡。
English: As the saying goes, "Greed for self-interest leads to loss of reason," Pingyuan Jun believed Feng Ting's heresy and coveted his offer to join the party, which led to the defeat of Changping by the soldiers of Zhao, the death of more than 400,000 soldiers of Zhao, and the near-extinction of Zhao.

古文：虞卿料事揣情，为赵画策，何其工也！
现代文：虞卿分析事理推测情势，为赵国出谋划策，是多么周密巧妙啊！
English: Yuqing analyzed the facts and reasoned the situation, and made suggestions for Zhao Guo. How thoughtful and ingenious!

古文：及不忍魏齐，卒困於大梁，庸夫且知其不可，况贤人乎？
现代文：到后来不忍心看着魏齐被人追杀，终于在大梁遭到困厄，平常人尚且知道不能这么做，何况贤能的人呢？
English: Later, he couldn't bear to watch Wei Qi being chased and killed, and he was finally trapped in Dalian. Ordinary people knew that they couldn't do that, let alone a man of virtue.

古文：然虞卿非穷愁，亦不能著书以自见於後世云。
现代文：但是虞卿若不是穷困忧愁，也就不能著书立说而使自己的名声表露于世，流传后代了。
English: However, if Yuqing was not poor and sad, he would not have been able to write a book and make his reputation known to the world and passed down to future generations.

