古文：◎世祖三
现代文：至元二年春，正月初一，发生日食。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：二年春正月辛未朔，日有食之。癸酉，山东廉访使言： 真定路总管张宏，前在济南，乘变盗用官物。 
现代文：初三，山东廉访使上言说： 真定路总管张宏先前在济南时乘机盗用官物。 
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the Shandong low-level envoy said: Zhang Hong, the general manager of Jinding Road, previously took the opportunity to embezzle government goods when he was in Jinan.

古文：诏以宏尝告李璮反，免宏死罪，罢其职，征赃物偿官。
现代文：皇上诏令：因为张宏曾经告发李王造反，免去张宏的死罪，罢免他的官职，收取赃物偿还官府。
English: Emperor's edict: because Zhang Hong had accused Li Wangcheng of rebellion, Zhang Hong was exempted from the death penalty, dismissed from his official post, and received stolen goods to repay the government.

古文：邳州万户张邦直等违制贩马，并处死。
现代文：邳州万户张邦直等人违犯法令贩卖马匹，全部处死。
English: Zhang Bangzhi and others in Wanzhou who violated laws and regulations by selling horses were all executed.

古文：敕徙镇海、百八里、谦谦州诸色匠户于中都，给银万五千两为行费。
现代文：敕命迁徙到镇海、百八里、谦谦州的各行匠户前去中都，发给一万五千两银子作为路费。
English: All the craftsmen who had migrated to Zhenhai, Baili and Qianqianzhou went to the capital and were given 15,000 taels of silver as travel expenses.

古文：又徙奴怀、忒木带儿炮手人匠八百名赴中都，造船运粮。
现代文：又迁徙奴怀、忒木带儿的炮手工匠八百人前往中都制造船只以运输粮食。
English: Eight hundred gunsmiths from Nuhai and Zhangmu also migrated to Zhongdu to build ships to transport grain.

古文：己卯，北京路行省给札剌赤户东徙行粮万石。
现代文：初九，北京路行省供给向东迁徙的蒙古族百姓行粮一万石。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Beijing Lu Xing Province began to supply 10,000 kilos of grain to Mongolian people migrating to the east.

古文：以邓州监战讷怀、新旧军万户董文炳并为河南副统军。
现代文：任命邓州监战讷怀、新旧军万户董文炳同为河南副统军。
English: Deng Zhou was appointed as the supervisor of the war, and the new and old troops were appointed as the deputy unified army of Henan.

古文：甲申，诏申严越界贩马之禁，违者处死。
现代文：十四日诏令 ：严申越过边界贩运马匹的禁令，违犯者处以死刑。 
English: Decree issued on the 14th: The ban on horse trafficking across the border is strictly enforced, and violators will be sentenced to death.

古文：乙酉，以河南北荒田分给蒙古军耕种。
现代文：十五日，把黄河南北岸的荒田分给蒙古军耕种。
English: On the 15th, the wasteland on the north and south banks of the Yellow River was given to the Mongolian army to cultivate.

古文：戊子，诸王塔察儿使臣阔阔出至北京花道驿，手杀驿吏郝用、郭和尚，有旨征钞十锭给其主赎死。
现代文：十八日，诸侯王塔察儿的使臣阔阔出到北京路的花道驿亲手杀死驿吏郝用、郭和尚，皇上有旨，征收十锭钱钞给他们的主人，赎免死罪。
English: On the 18th day, the envoys of the princes Wang Tachar went to the flower road of Beijing Road to personally kill the officials, Guo and the monk, and the emperor had the will to collect ten yuan banknotes to their masters to redeem the death penalty.

古文：庚寅，城西番匣答路。
现代文：二十日，修筑西番的匣答路城。
English: On the 20th, the construction of the west gate of the city was completed.

古文：癸巳，八东乞儿部牙西来朝，贡银鼠皮二千，赐金、素币各九、帛十有八。
现代文：二十三日，八东乞儿部的牙西前来朝见，进贡银鼠皮二千张，皇上赏赐金银币各九枚、绢帛十八段。
English: On the 23rd, the leader of the beggar's section from the east to the west came to see the emperor. He paid a tribute of 2,000 silver and mouse skins, and the emperor rewarded him with nine pieces of gold and silver coins each, and 18 denarii.

古文：武城县王氏妻崔一产三男。
现代文：武城县王姓人的妻子崔氏一次产下三个男孩。
English: Cui, the wife of a man surnamed Wang in Wucheng County, gave birth to three boys at the same time.

古文：丁酉，给亲王玉龙答失部民粮二千石。
现代文：二十七日，赐给亲王玉龙答失部属的百姓二千石粮食。
English: On the 27th, 2,000 koku of grain was given to the people of Prince Yulong's lost followers.

古文：高丽国王王禃遣其弟广平公恂奉表来贡。
现代文：高丽国王王礻直派遣他的弟弟广平公王恂奉上表章前来朝贡。
English: The King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhi, sent his younger brother, the Guangping Prince, to pay tribute.

古文：二月辛丑朔，元帅按东与宋兵战于钓鱼山，败之，获战舰百四十六艘。
现代文：二月初一，元帅按东和宋军在钓鱼山交战，击败了宋军，缴获战舰一百四十六艘。
English: On the first day of February, Marshal Yadong and the Song Army fought in Diaoyu Mountain, defeated the Song Army and captured 146 warships.

古文：甲辰，初立宫闱局。
现代文：初四，开始设置宫闱局。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the Imperial Household Agency began to be established.

古文：戊申，赐亲王兀鲁带河间王印，给所部米千石。
现代文：初八，赐予亲王兀鲁带河间王的印信，给予他的部属一千石米。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he gave the seal of the King of Kawama to Prince Jiro, and a thousand koku meters of land to his subordinates.

古文：丁巳，车驾幸上都。
现代文：十七日，皇上的车驾临幸上都。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor's carriage drove to the capital.

古文：癸亥，并六部为四，以麦术丁为吏礼部尚书，马亨户部尚书，严忠范兵刑部尚书，别鲁丁工部尚书。
现代文：二十三日，把中书省的六部合并为四部，任命麦术丁为吏、礼部尚书，任命马亨为户部尚书，任命严忠范为兵、刑部尚书，任命别鲁丁为工部尚书。
English: On the 23rd, the six departments of the Ministry of Education and Culture were merged into four departments, appointing Mai Zhuting as the official, the Ministry of Rites as the official, appointing Ma Heng as the official of the Ministry of Household, appointing Yan Zhongfan as the official of the Ministry of War, the Ministry of Justice as the official of the Ministry of Justice, and appointing Beiluding as the official of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：禁山东东路私煎硝碱。
现代文：禁止山东东路私自煎煮硝碱。
English: Shandong East Road is prohibited from self-decoction of nitrate.

古文：甲子，以蒙古人充各路达鲁花赤，汉人充总管，回回人充同知，永为定制。
现代文：二十四日，派蒙古人充任各个路的镇守官，汉人充当总管，回回人充当同知，成为永久的定制。
English: On the 24th, Mongolians were assigned to serve as town guards for each road, Han Chinese to act as chief administrators, and Hui Hui people to act as confidants, which became a permanent custom.

古文：以同知东平路宣慰使宝合丁为平章政事，山东廉访使王晋为参知政事。
现代文：任命东平路宣慰使同知宝合丁为平章政事，山东廉访使王晋为参知政事。
English: He appointed Dongping Road Xuancheng envoy Tongzhi Bao He Ding as Pingzhang political affairs, and Shandong Liangzhu envoy Wang Jin as Sangzhi political affairs.

古文：廉希宪、商挺罢。
现代文：廉希宪、商挺革去官职。
English: Lian Xixian and Shang Ting relegated to official positions.

古文：诏并诸王只必帖木儿所设管民官属。
现代文：诏令把诸侯王只必帖木儿所设置的管民官僚属合并。
English: The imperial edict merged the administrative and bureaucratic departments set up by the princes and princes.

古文：诏谕总统所： 僧人通五大部经者为中选，以有德业者为州郡僧录、判、正副都纲等官，仍于各路设三学讲、三禅会。 
现代文：诏谕总统所 ：以通晓五大部经书的僧人作为中选者，任用其中有德行的为州郡的僧录、判、正副都纲等官职，并在各路设立三学讲、三禅会。 
English: The edict of the president's office: to select monks who are familiar with the five major scriptures as the winners, appoint the virtuous ones among them to the official positions of the state and county's sokuroku, hanzan, and official and vice-official sokuroku, and set up the three schools of lectures and three Zen meetings in various regions.

古文：三月癸酉，骨嵬国人袭杀吉里迷部兵，敕以官粟及弓甲给之。
现代文：三月初四，骨嵬国的人袭击、杀死吉里迷部的士兵，敕令以官仓的粮米和弓矢、甲仗给予他们。
English: On the 4th day of the 3rd month, the people of Okuhaku attacked and killed the soldiers of Jiri-mamibe, and were ordered to give them grain and rice from the official storehouse, as well as bows and arrows and armor.

古文：丁亥，敕边军习水战、屯田。
现代文：十八日，敕令戍边的军队学习水战、屯田。
English: On the 18th, the Emperor ordered the troops around the country to study naval warfare and the construction of military camps.

古文：诛宋谍李富住。
现代文：将宋朝间谍李富住处死。
English: Li Fuzhu, a spy of the Song Dynasty, was executed.

古文：乙未，罢南北互市，括民间南货，官给其直。
现代文：二十六日，停止南北之间的互市贸易，搜求民间的南方货物，由政府付给他们钱款。
English: On the 26th, the inter-city trade between the North and the South was stopped, the goods of the South were searched, and the government paid them money.

古文：辽东饥，发粟万石、钞百锭赈之。
现代文：辽东发生饥荒，调发粮米一万石、钱钞一百锭赈济他们。
English: A famine occurred in Liaodong, and ten thousand koku of grain and rice and one hundred pennies of money were allocated to help them.

古文：夏四月戊午，赐诸王合必赤、亦怯烈金、素币各四，拜行金币一。
现代文：夏季，四月十九日，赐给诸侯王合必赤、亦怯烈金币、银币各四枚，赐给拜行金币一枚。
English: In the summer, on April 19th, four gold coins and four silver coins were given to each of the princes and princes, and one gold coin was given to Bai Xing.

古文：五月壬午，赏万户晃里答儿所部征吐蕃功银四百五十两。
现代文：五月十四日，因万户晃里答儿的部下征伐吐蕃的功劳，赏给白银四百五十两。
English: On the 14th of May, for the service of his subordinates in the conquest of Tubo, he was awarded 450 taels of silver.

古文：戊子，禁北京、平滦等处人捕猎。
现代文：二十日，禁止北京、平滦等地的人进行捕猎。
English: On the 20th, people in Beijing, Pingyao and other places were banned from hunting.

古文：庚寅，令： 军中犯法，不得擅自诛戮，罪轻断遣，重者闻奏。 
现代文：二十二日，朝廷敕令： 军队中有人犯法，不得擅自将犯人处死，罪轻的判处流放，罪重的向朝廷奏报。 
English: On the 22nd, the imperial court issued an edict: If anyone in the army commits a crime, the offender must not be put to death without authorization. Minor crimes will be sentenced to exile, and serious crimes will be reported to the imperial court.

古文：敕上都商税、酒醋诸课毋征，其榷盐仍旧；诸人自愿徙居永业者，复其家。
现代文：皇上敕命：不征收上都的商税、酒税等各种税收，盐税则仍和先前一样。凡是自愿迁居去耕种永业田的，免除其全家的赋税。
English: The emperor decreed that Shangdu's commercial tax, liquor tax and other taxes would not be levied, and the salt tax would remain the same as before. Anyone who voluntarily moved to cultivate Yongye field would be exempted from the tax for his whole family.

古文：诏西川、山东、南京等路戍边军屯田。
现代文：诏令西川、山东、南京等路戍守边境的军队屯田。
English: He ordered the troops guarding the border in Xichuan, Shandong, Nanjing and other areas to set up garrisons.

古文：闰五月癸卯，升蓚县为景州。
现代文：闰五月初六，把县升格为景州。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month, the county was upgraded to Jingzhou.

古文：辛亥，检核诸王兀鲁带部民贫无孳畜者三万七百二十四人，人月给米二斗五升，四阅月而止。
现代文：十四日，检查核实诸侯王兀鲁带属下贫穷而没有牲畜的百姓，共三万零七百二十四人，每人每月给米二斗五升，实行四个月后停止。
English: On the 14th, a total of 30,724 people who were poor and had no livestock were inspected and verified. Each person was given 2.5 liters of rice per month, and it was stopped after four months.

古文：丙辰，雅州碉门宣抚使请复碉门城邑，诏相度之。
现代文：十九日，雅州碉门宣抚使请求恢复碉门的城邑，诏令相机酌情处理这件事。
English: On the 19th, the Yazhou Shimen Procuratorate issued a request to restore the town of Shimen, and ordered the camera to deal with the matter as appropriate.

古文：癸亥，移秦蜀行省于兴元。
现代文：二十六日，把秦蜀行省的治所迁到兴元。
English: On the 26th, the administrative center of Qin Shuxing Province was moved to Xingyuan.

古文：丙寅，命四川行院分兵屯田。
现代文：二十九日，命令四川行枢密院分遣军队去屯田。
English: On the 29th, he ordered the Sichuan-bound Privy Council to dispatch troops to Tonden.

古文：丁卯，分四亲王南京属州，郑州隶合丹，钧州隶明里，睢州隶孛罗赤，蔡州隶海都，他属县复还朝廷。
现代文：三十日，把南京属下的州郡分封给四个亲王：郑州隶属于合丹，钧州隶属于明里，睢州隶属于孛罗赤，蔡州隶属于海都，其他的属县重新归属于朝廷。
English: On the 30th, the prefectures under Nanjing were assigned to four princes: Zhengzhou was subordinated to Handan, Zhangzhou was subordinated to Mingli, Zhangzhou was subordinated to Luocheng, Caizhou was subordinated to Haidu, and the other prefectures were reattached to the imperial court.

古文：以平章政事赵璧行省于南京、河南府、大名、顺德、洺磁、彰德、怀孟等路，平章政事廉希宪行省事于东平、济南、益都、淄莱等路，中书左丞姚枢行省事于西京、平阳、太原等路。
现代文：任命平章政事赵璧在南京、河南府、大名、顺德、氵名磁、彰德、怀孟等路代理处置中书省事务，平章政事廉希宪在东平、济南、益都、淄莱等路代理处置中书省事务，中书左丞姚枢在西京、平阳、太原等路代理处置中书省事务。
English: Pingzhang Political Secretary Zhao Bi was appointed to handle the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture in Nanjing, Henan Province, Daming, Shunde, Yunnan, Changde and Huai Meng, and Pingzhang Political Secretary Liang Xixian was appointed to handle the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture in Dongping, Jinan, Yidu and Bailai, and Pingzhang Political Secretary Zuo Yao was appointed to handle the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture in Xijing, Pingyang and Taiyuan.

古文：诏： 诸路州府，若自古名郡，户数繁庶，且当冲要者，不须改并。
现代文：皇上诏令： 各路的州府，如果自古以来是名城，人口稠密，而且又处于交通要冲，则不须合并。
English: Emperor's edict: If the capitals of various provinces have been famous cities since ancient times, are densely populated, and are located in the center of transportation, they do not need to be merged.

古文：其户不满千者，可并则并之，各投下者，并入所隶州城。
现代文：那些户数不满一千的，能够合并的就合并。各俘户比较集中的投下州，归并到所属的州城。
English: Those with less than a thousand households will be merged if they can be merged. The more concentrated captive households will be thrown out of the state and merged into the state capital to which they belong.

古文：其散府州郡户少者，不须更设录事司及司候司，附郭县止令州府官兼领。
现代文：那些民户少，居住分散的州郡，不须另行设置录事司和司侯司。附属于州的县只令州府官兼管。
English: Those prefectures and counties with few private households and scattered residences do not need to set up a separate registrar and registrar. The prefectures attached to the state are only managed by the prefectural governor.

古文：括诸路未占籍户任差职者以闻。 
现代文：统计各路没有落籍的民户中担任差役职务的人上报。 
English: Statistics will be collected from all households that have not lost their citizenship, and those who hold positions of duty will be reported.

古文：六月戊辰朔，新得州安抚向良言： 顷以全城内附，元领军民流散南界者，多欲归顺，并乞招徕。 
现代文：六月初一，新得州安抚使向良上奏说 ：近来全城都有很多内附的民户，原来治下的军民流离到南面边界的，大多数想要归顺，希望全部予以招徕。 
English: On the first day of June, Xiang Liang, the pacifying envoy of New Texas, reported to the emperor, "Recently, there are a lot of attached private households in the whole city. The soldiers and civilians who had been displaced to the southern border under the former regime, most of them want to surrender and hope to be recruited completely.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：又敕良以所领新降军民移戍通江县，行新得州事。
现代文：又敕令向良率管辖下新近归降的军民迁移到通江县去戍守，执掌新得州的事务。
English: In addition, the emperor ordered the military and civilians who had recently surrendered under the jurisdiction of the emperor to migrate to Tongjiang County to take charge of the affairs of New Texas.

古文：辛未，赐阿术所部马价钞一千二十三锭有奇。
现代文：初四，赐予阿术部下马价钱钞一千零二十三锭多。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the new year, more than 1,023 baht in horse money was given to Ah Xiu's subordinates.

古文：丙子，太阴犯心大星。
现代文：初九，太阴星干犯心宿的大星。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the big star of the big star of the big star.

古文：戊寅，移山东统军司于沂州。
现代文：十一日，把山东统军司迁移到沂州。
English: On the 11th, the Shandong United Military Department was relocated to Ganzhou.

古文：万户重喜立十字路。复正阳，命秃剌戍之。
现代文：万户重喜修筑十字路城，收复正阳关，命令秃剌戍守。
English: All households rejoiced in the construction of the crossroad city, the recovery of Zhengyang Pass, and the order to guard the vultures.

古文：己卯，以淇州隶怀孟路。
现代文：十二日，把琪州隶属于怀孟路。
English: On the 12th, it subordinated Qizhou to Huaimeng Road.

古文：高丽国王王禃遣其臣荣胤伯奉表来贺圣诞节。
现代文：高丽国王王礻直派遣他的大臣荣彻伯奉上表章前来恭贺皇上的寿诞佳节。
English: The King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhi, sent his minister, Rong Cheob, to congratulate the emperor on his birthday.

古文：千户阔阔出部民乏食，赐钞赈之。
现代文：千户阔阔出部属的百姓粮食匮乏，皇上赐予钱钞赈济他们。
English: The emperor gave them money and banknotes to help the thousands of wealthy and dependent people who were short of food.

古文：王晋罢。
现代文：王晋被革职。
English: Wang Jin was dismissed.

古文：枢密院臣言： 各路出征逃亡汉军，及贫难未起户，并投下隐匿事故者，宜一概发遣应役。 
现代文：枢密院大臣上奏说 ：各路出征的汉军逃亡的士兵，以及贫困而没有转机的民户，所有被隐匿的俘户和私奴，应当一概遣送去服兵役。 
English: The Minister of the Privy Council reported: The soldiers who fled from the Chinese army, who went to war in all directions, as well as the impoverished households who had no chance to turn around, all the hidden captives and slaves, should all be sent to military service.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：敕行院及诸军将校卒伍，须正身应役，违者罪之。
现代文：敕令行枢密院以及各军的将校军官和士兵，必须由本人正身服兵役，违抗者追究罪责。
English: The Privy Council, as well as the officers and soldiers of all armies, must serve in the army in person, and those who disobey will be held accountable.

古文：秋七月辛酉，益都大蝗饥，命减价粜官粟以赈。
现代文：秋季，七月二十五日，益都发生大蝗灾，造成大饥荒，命令减价出售官仓的粮食以赈济饥民。
English: In the autumn, on July 25th, a large locust plague occurred in Yidu, causing a great famine, and ordered the sale of grain from government warehouses at a reduced price to feed the hungry.

古文：癸亥，安南国王陈光昞遣使奉表来贡。
现代文：二十七日，安南国王陈光日丙派遣使臣奉上表章前来进贡。
English: On the 27th, the king of Annan, Chen Guangri, sent an envoy to pay tribute with the above seal.

古文：甲子，诏赐光昞至元三年历。
现代文：二十八日，下诏赐给陈光日丙至元三年的历书。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued to Chen Guang, giving him a calendar for the 3rd year of the Heian period.

古文：八月丙子，济南路邹平县进芝草一本。
现代文：八月十一日，济南路邹平县进献灵芝草一株。
English: On August 11th, a strain of Ganoderma lucidum was donated from Buping County, Jinan Road.

古文：戊寅，高丽国王王禃遣使来贡方物。
现代文：十三日，高丽国王王礻直派遣使臣来进贡地方特产。
English: On the 13th, the King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhong, sent envoys to bring tribute of local special products.

古文：己卯，诸宰职皆罢，以安童为中书右丞相，伯颜为中书左丞相。
现代文：十四日，各宰相职官全部免职，任命安童为中书右丞相，伯颜为中书左丞相。
English: On the 14th, all the officials of the Prime Minister were dismissed, and Ando was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Right, and Bo Yan as the Vice-Minister of the Left.

古文：戊子，召许衡于怀孟，杨诚于益都。车驾至自上都。
现代文：二十三日，从怀孟征召许衡，从益都征召杨诚。皇上的车驾从上都来到。
English: On the 23rd, Xu Heng was conscripted from Huai Meng, and Yang Cheng was conscripted from Yidu. The emperor's chariots came from above.

古文：九月戊戌，以将有事太庙，取大乐工于东平，预习仪礼。
现代文：九月初三，因为将在太庙举行祭祀大典，从东平召来大批乐工，预习仪礼。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, a large number of musicians were summoned from Dongping to prepare for the ceremony, as a grand ritual was to be held at the Great Temple.

古文：敕江淮沿边树栅，徐、宿、邳三州助役徒。
现代文：敕令江淮地区沿边境树立木栅栏，徐州、宿州、邳州三州以服劳役的罪徒帮助完成。
English: Yanling Jianghuai District erected a wooden fence along the border, and Xuzhou, Suzhou and Zhangzhou three states were completed with the help of criminals serving labor service.

古文：庚子，皇孙铁穆尔生。
现代文：初五，皇孙铁穆儿诞生。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the royal grandchild Tie Mu Er was born.

古文：丁巳，赏诸王只必帖木儿麾下河西战功银二百五十两。
现代文：二十二日，赏赐诸侯王只必帖木儿的部下战功银二百五十两。
English: On the twenty-second day, the princes rewarded Timur's men with two hundred and fifty-two pieces of silver.

古文：冬十月己卯，享于太庙。
现代文：冬季，十月十四日，在太庙举行祭祀大典。
English: In winter, on October 14th, a grand ritual was held at Taimiao.

古文：癸未，敕顺天张柔、东平严忠济、河间马总管、济南张林、太原石抹总管等户，改隶民籍。
现代文：十八日，敕令顺天府的张柔、东平府的严忠济、河间府的马总管、济南府的张林、太原府的石抹总管等人属下的户籍改属于民户。
English: On the 18th, the imperial edict changed the household registrations of Zhang Rong of Shuntianfu, Yan Zhongji of Dongpingfu, Ma Shouguan of Hemafu, Zhang Lin of Jinanfu, and Shi Maku Shouguan of Taiyuanfu to private households.

古文：统军抄不花、万户怀都麾下军士所俘宋人九十三口，官赎为民。
现代文：统军抄不花、万户怀都部下士兵所俘虏的九十三名宋人，由官府出钱赎出为民。
English: The ninety-three Song people who were captured by the soldiers of Wanhu Huaytu's subordinates of the Unification Army at no cost were ransomed by the government.

古文：其私越禁界掠获者四十五人，许令亲属完聚，并种田内地。
现代文：私自越过禁界抢来的四十五个人，允许让亲属前来和他们团聚，并在内地种田。
English: The forty-five people who were illegally abducted from across the border were allowed to have their relatives come and reunite with them, and they were allowed to farm on the mainland.

古文：戊子，诏随路私商曾入南界者，首实免罪充军。
现代文：二十三日，诏令曾经进入南面边界的随路私商，据实自首的，免罪充军。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict exempted private traders who had entered the southern border and had actually surrendered from criminal responsibility.

古文：十一月丙申，召李昶于东平。
现代文：十一月初二，从东平征召李昶。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Li Yao was called up from Dongping.

古文：辛丑，赐诸王只必帖木儿银二万五千两、钞千锭。
现代文：初七，赐予诸侯王只必帖木儿二万五千两白银、一千锭钱钞。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the prince of the princes gave Timur twenty-five thousand taels of silver and one thousand taels of banknotes.

古文：癸丑，赏杨文安战功金五十两，所部军银六百两及币帛有差。
现代文：十九日，因战功而赏予杨文安五十两黄金，赏给他的部下六百两白银及数量不等的各种绢帛。
English: On the 19th, Yang Wen'an was awarded fifty-two ounces of gold for his war service, and his subordinates were awarded six hundred and two ounces of silver and various medals of varying amounts.

古文：甲子，诏事故贫难军不堪应役者，以两户或三户合并正军一名，其丁单力备者，许顾人应役。
现代文：三十日，诏令因生活贫困不能应征服役的人户，以两户或三户合出正军一名，其中人力具备而人数稀少的，允许其雇人代替应征。
English: On the 30th, the imperial edict ordered that households that could not enlist due to poverty should combine two or three households to form a regular army, of which the manpower was available but the number was scarce, allowing them to hire people instead of enlisting.

古文：十二月己巳，省并州县凡二百二十余所。
现代文：十二月初五，减少、合并州县共二百二十余处。
English: On December 5, a total of more than 220 counties and prefectures were reduced or merged.

古文：庚午，宋子贞言： 朝省之政，不宜数行数改。
现代文：初六，宋子贞上奏说： 朝廷台省的政令，不应该一边执行一边更改。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Song Zizhen said: The decree of the Imperial Court should not be changed while being implemented.

古文：又刑部所掌，事干人命，尚书严忠范年少，宜选老于刑名者为之。 
现代文：另外，刑部所执掌的事务关系到人命，刑部尚书严忠范年纪还轻，应当挑选在司法刑事方面富有经验的人担当。 
English: In addition, the affairs handled by the Criminal Investigation Department are related to human life. The Criminal Investigation Department is still young, so it is necessary to select a person with rich experience in criminal justice.

古文：又请罢北京行中书省，别立宣慰司以控制东北州郡。
现代文：又请求撤销北京行中书省，另外设立宣慰司，以控制东北的各州郡。
English: He also requested the revocation of the Ministry of Literature in Beijing and the establishment of the Department of Propaganda and Consolation to control the counties and prefectures in Northeast China.

古文：并从之。
现代文：皇上全部允从。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：禁朝省告讦以息争讼。
现代文：禁止中书省官员互相告发、攻讦以平息争讼。
English: It is forbidden for the officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture to sue each other or attack each other in order to settle the dispute.

古文：辛未，以诸王也速不花所部戍西番军屡有战功，赏银三百两。
现代文：初七，因为诸侯王也速不花戍守西蕃的部队屡次立下战功，赏给白银三百两。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, because the princes did not hesitate to spend money on the troops guarding Xidi, they repeatedly distinguished themselves in battle and were awarded three hundred taels of silver.

古文：癸酉，召张德辉于真定，徒单公履于卫州。
现代文：初九，从真定征召张德辉，从卫州征召徒单公履。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhang Dehui was conscripted from Zhending, and apprentices were conscripted from Weizhou.

古文：丁丑，诏谕高丽，赐至元三年历日。
现代文：十三日，下诏谕给高丽，赐予至元三年的历书。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued to Goryeo, granting it a calendar for the year of the dragon.

古文：癸未，赐刘秉忠金五十两。
现代文：十九日，赐予刘秉忠黄金五十两。
English: On the 19th, 50 taels of gold were given to Liu Bingzhong.

古文：甲申，赐伯颜、宋子贞、杨诚银千两、钞六十锭。
现代文：二十日，赐予伯颜、宋子贞、杨诚白银一千两、钱钞六十锭。
English: On the 20th, Bo Yan, Song Zizhen, and Yang Cheng were given 1,000 taels of silver and 60 taels of banknotes.

古文：丁亥，敕选诸翼军富强才勇者万人，充侍卫亲军。
现代文：二十三日，敕令挑选各军年富力强、聪明勇敢的士兵一万名充任侍卫亲军。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial command selected 10,000 strong, intelligent and brave soldiers from each army to serve as bodyguards.

古文：己丑，渎山大玉海成，敕置广寒殿。
现代文：二十五日，渎山大玉海制成，敕令放置在广寒殿。
English: On the 25th, it was made into the Jade Mountain and placed in the Guangan Hall by imperial order.

古文：是岁，户一百五十九万七千六百一，丝九十八万六千二百八十八斤，包银钞五万七千六百八十二锭。
现代文：这一年，全国共一百五十九万七千六百零一户，产丝九十八万六千二百八十八斤，包银税钱五万七千六百八十二锭。
English: In that year, a total of 1,597,600.1 households across the country produced 9,186,288 catties of silk and paid 57,682 baht in taxes and fees.

古文：赐诸王金、银、币、帛如岁例。
现代文：按每年常例赐给诸侯王黄金、白银、钱币、绢帛。
English: According to the annual practice, the princes were given gold, silver, banknotes and ingots.

古文：彰德、大名、南京、河南府、济南、淄莱、太原、弘州雹，西京、北京、益都、真定、东平、顺德、河间、徐、宿、邳蝗旱，太原霜灾。
现代文：彰德、大名、南京、河南府、济南、淄莱、太原、弘州等地降下冰雹，西京、北京、益都、真定、东平、顺德、河间、徐州、宿州、邳州等地发生蝗灾和旱灾。太原发生霜灾。
English: Hail fell in Zhangde, Daimyo, Nanjing, Henan, Jinan, Bailai, Taiyuan, and Hongzhou. Locust plagues and droughts occurred in Xijing, Beijing, Yidu, Zhending, Dongping, Shunde, Hema, Xuzhou, Shuzhou, and Zhangzhou. Frosts occurred in Taiyuan.

古文：断死罪四十二人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯四十二人。
English: A total of 42 criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：三年春正月乙未朔，高丽国王王禃遣使来贺。
现代文：至元三年春，正月初一，高丽国王王礻直派遣使臣前来恭贺新年。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, the King of Korea, Wang Xizhi, sent an envoy to congratulate the new year.

古文：丙午，遣朵端、赵璧持诏抚谕四川将吏军民。
现代文：十二日，派遣朵端、赵璧携带诏书前去抚慰四川的将吏军民。
English: On the 12th, Dotan and Zhao Bi were sent to carry the edict to comfort the soldiers and civilians in Sichuan.

古文：壬子，立制国用使司，以阿合马为使。
现代文：十八日，设置制国用使司，派阿合马担任使司使。
English: On the 18th, the State-building Envoy Division was set up, and Ahama was sent to serve as the Envoy Division.

古文：癸丑，选女直军二千为侍卫军。
现代文：十九日，挑选二千名女真士兵为侍卫亲军。
English: On the 19th, 2,000 female real soldiers were selected as bodyguards for the troops.

古文：四川行枢密院谋取嘉定，请益兵，命朵端、赵璧摘诸翼蒙古、汉军六千人付之。
现代文：四川行枢密院谋划攻取嘉定，请求增派军队，朝廷命令朵端、赵璧从各营蒙古军、汉军中选取六千人交付给他们。
English: When the Privy Council went to Sichuan to plan the capture of Jiading and request additional troops, the imperial court ordered Dotan and Zhao Bi to select six thousand people from each battalion of the Mongol and Han armies and hand them over to them.

古文：二月丙寅，廉希宪、宋子贞为平章政事，张文谦复为中书左丞，史天泽为枢密副使。
现代文：二月初二，廉希宪、宋子贞担任同平章事，张文谦重新担任中书省左丞，史天泽担任枢密院副使。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Lian Xixian and Song Zizhen served as Tongping Zhengji, Zhang Wenqian re-served as the left secretary of the Central Book Department, and Shi Tianze served as the deputy envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：癸酉，立沈州以处高丽降民。
现代文：初九，建置沈州以安置高丽归降的百姓。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Shenzhou was built to accommodate the people who returned from Korea.

古文：壬午，平阳路僧官以妖言惑众伏诛。
现代文：十八日，平阳路的僧官以妖言蛊惑百姓，被处死。
English: On the 18th, the monk official of Pingyang Road seduced the people with magic words and was put to death.

古文：以中书右丞张易同知制国用使司事，参知政事，张惠为制国用副使。
现代文：派中书省右丞张易参与执掌制国用使司事务，参知政事张惠担任制国用使司副使。
English: Zhang Yi, the right-hand man of the Ministry of Education and Culture, was sent to participate in the management of the state-level envoy affairs, and Zhang Hui, the political advisor, served as the vice-envoy of the state-level envoy affairs.

古文：癸未，车驾幸上都。
现代文：十九日，皇上的车驾临幸上都。
English: On the 19th, the emperor's carriage drove to the capital.

古文：甲申，罢西夏行省，立宣慰司。
现代文：二十日，撤销西夏行省，设立宣慰司。
English: On the 20th, Xi Xia Xing Province was revoked, and the Propaganda and Consolation Department was established.

古文：初制太常礼乐工冠服。
现代文：开始制作太常寺礼乐工的冠服。
English: Began making the ceremonial robes for the musicians of Taijō-ji Temple.

古文：立东京、广宁、懿州、开元、恤品、合懒、婆娑等路宣抚司。
现代文：建立东京、广宁、懿州、开元、恤品、合懒、婆娑等路的宣抚司。
English: Set up a hotline in Tokyo, Guangning, Zhangzhou, Kaiyuan, Xiangfan, Hualien, and Bafang.

古文：乙酉，蠲中都今年包银四分之一。
现代文：二十一日，免除中都今年包银税的四分之一。
English: On the 21st, the central government exempted a quarter of this year's silver tax.

古文：诏理断阿术部下所俘人口、畜牧及其草地为民侵种者。
现代文：下诏依据法制判决阿术部下所俘获的人口、牲畜，以及他们的草地牧场被百姓侵占耕种的事。
English: The following edict, in accordance with the legal system, adjudicated the matter of the people and livestock captured by Ah Ju's subordinates, as well as their grassland pastures being occupied and cultivated by the people.

古文：以制国用使司条画谕中外官吏。
现代文：把制国用使司制定的条款谕示朝廷内外的官吏。
English: Officials inside and outside the imperial court were instructed to follow the rules set by the imperial envoys.

古文：三月辛巳，分卫辉路为亲王玉龙答失分地。
现代文：三月辛巳日，把卫辉路划为亲王玉龙答失的封地。
English: On Xinshi Day in March, Weihui Road was designated as the lost fief of Prince Yulong.

古文：戊戌，赈水达达民户饥。
现代文：初五，赈济水达达部族百姓的饥荒。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the famine of the people of the Dada tribe occurred.

古文：己未，王晋及侍中和哲斯、济南益都转运使王明，以隐匿盐课，皆伏诛。
现代文：二十六日，王晋以及侍中和哲斯、济南益都转运使王明因为隐瞒盐税被处死。
English: On the 26th, Wang Jin and his attendants, He Jies and Jinan Yi, were all transferred, and Wang Ming was executed for concealing the salt tax.

古文：夏四月丁卯，五山珍御榻成，置琼华岛广寒殿。
现代文：夏季，四月初四，五山珍御榻制成，安放在琼花岛上的广寒殿。
English: In the summer, on the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th

古文：亳州水军千户胡进等领骑兵渡淝水，逾荆山，与宋兵战，杀获甚众，赏钞币有差。
现代文：亳州水军千户胡进等率领骑兵渡过淝水，越过荆山，与宋军接战，斩杀、俘虏了很多宋军士兵，朝廷给予他们数量不同的钞币作为奖赏。
English: Qianhu Hujin and other leaders of the Luzhou Navy led the cavalry across Surabaya and over Jing Mountain to fight with the Song Army, killed and captured many Song Army soldiers, and the court gave them a different number of banknotes as a reward.

古文：庚午，敕僧、道祈福于中都寺观。
现代文：初七，敕命僧侣、道士在中都的寺庙、道观中祈求福祚。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, monks and Taoists who have died pray for good fortune at temples and Taoist temples in the capital.

古文：诏以僧机为总统，居广寿寺。
现代文：下诏以僧人机担任总统，居住在庆寿寺。
English: The following edict appointed a monk named Renji as president, and he lived in Keishu-ji Temple.

古文：己卯，申严濒海私盐之禁。
现代文：十六日，严申禁止临海地区贩卖私盐。
English: On the 16th, the sale of illegal salt in coastal areas was strictly prohibited.

古文：敕宫烛毋彩绘。
现代文：敕命宫烛不得用彩色绘制。
English: The Deathly Hallows candle must not be drawn in colour.

古文：五月乙未，遣使诸路虑囚。
现代文：五月初三，派遣使臣到各路讯问判决囚犯的情况。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, envoys were dispatched to various regions to inquire about the status of sentenced prisoners.

古文：庚子，敕太医院领诸路医户、惠民药局。
现代文：初八，敕命由太医院管理各路的医户和利惠百姓的药局。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Tai Hospital took over the management of medical institutions and pharmacies benefiting the people.

古文：辛丑，以黄金饰浑天仪。
现代文：初九，用黄金装饰浑天仪。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the amulet is decorated with gold.

古文：丙午，浚西夏中兴汉延、唐来等渠。
现代文：十四日，疏浚西夏中兴府汉延渠、唐来渠等河道。
English: On the 14th, river channels such as the Han Yan Canal and the Tang Lai Canal in Zhongxingfu, Western Xia, were dredged.

古文：凡良田为僧所据者，听蒙古人分垦。
现代文：凡是被僧侣占据的良田，听任蒙古人分取开垦。
English: Any good land occupied by monks was left to the Mongols to reclaim.

古文：丙辰，罢益都行省。
现代文：二十四日，撤销益都行省。
English: On the 24th, the revocation of the benefits of the capital went to the province.

古文：蠲平滦、益都质子户赋税之半。
现代文：免除平滦、益都的藩属和军将子弟组成的质子军军户赋税的一半。
English: Half of the tax was exempted from the households of the proton army, which was made up of the children of feudal retainers and generals from Pingyao and Yindu.

古文：六月丁卯，封皇子南木合为北平王，以印给之。
现代文：六月初六，晋封皇子南木合为北平王，授予他印信。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：辛未，徙归化民于清州兴济县屯田，官给牛具。
现代文：初十，把归化来的百姓迁移到清州兴济县去屯田，由官府供给耕牛农具。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the naturalized people were relocated to Qingzhou Xingji County to set up farms, and the government provided them with cattle farming tools.

古文：壬申，赐刘整畿内地五十顷。
现代文：十一日，赐给刘整京师畿辅之内的土地五十顷。
English: On the 11th day of the month, 50 hectares of land were given to Liu Seijing within the Kijiyu District.

古文：癸酉，以千户紥剌儿没于王事，赐其妻银二百五十两。
现代文：十二日，因为千户札剌儿是为王事而死，赐给他的妻子白银二百五十两。
English: On the twelfth day he gave his wife two hundred and fifty-two shekels of silver, because he had died for the king.

古文：丙子，立漕运司。
现代文：十五日，设立漕运司。
English: On the 15th, the Rowing Division was established.

古文：戊寅，以陕西行省平章赛典赤等政事修治，赐银五千两。
现代文：十七日，因陕西行省平章政事赛典赤等人的政务修明、治平，赐给白银五千两。
English: On the 17th, because of the visit to Shaanxi Province, the political affairs of Pingzhang, Saiten and others were rectified and pacified, and they were given 5,000 taels of silver.

古文：命山东统军副使王仲仁督造战船于汴。
现代文：命令山东统军副使王仲仁在汴州督造战船。
English: He ordered the deputy envoy of the Shandong United Army, Wang Zhongren, to supervise the construction of warships in Zhangzhou.

古文：申严陕西、河南竹禁。
现代文：严申陕西、河南禁止伐竹。
English: It is strictly prohibited to cut bamboo in Shaanxi and Henan.

古文：立拱卫司。
现代文：设立拱卫司。
English: The Arch Guard Division was established.

古文：秋七月丙申，罢息州安抚司。
现代文：秋季，七月初五，撤销息州安抚司。
English: In autumn, on the fifth day of the first month of July, the Ezhou Pacification Division was abolished.

古文：壬寅，诏上都路总管府遇车驾巡幸，行留守司事，车驾还，即复旧。
现代文：十一日，诏命上都路总管府，遇到皇上到外地巡视，就暂时掌管留守司的事务，待皇帝的车驾返回，再恢复原来的职司。
English: On the 11th day, the imperial edict was sent to the General Administration of Capital Highway, and when the emperor came to inspect the field, he temporarily took charge of the affairs of the caretaker, until the emperor's car returned, and then resumed the original duties.

古文：丙午，遣使祀五岳四渎。
现代文：十五日，派遣使臣祭祀五岳四渎。
English: On the fifteenth day, the envoys were dispatched to perform the ritual of the Five Mountains and Four Deities.

古文：甲寅，添内外巡兵。
现代文：二十三日，增添京内外巡兵。
English: On the 23rd, patrols in and around Kyoto were added.

古文：外路每百户选中产者一人充之，其赋令余户代输，在都增武卫军四百。
现代文：外路每一百户选一名中等财产的人充当，原来应纳的赋税由其他的民户代为交纳；京师增加武卫军四百名。
English: One middle-class person from every hundred households will be selected to act as a representative, and the tax originally payable will be paid by other private households; the Beijing division will increase the number of military guards by four hundred.

古文：己未，以崞、代、坚、台四州隶忻州。
现代文：二十八日，把崞州、代州、坚州、台州等四州隶属于忻州。
English: On the 28th, four prefectures, including Ganzhou, Daizhou, Jianzhou and Taizhou, were subordinated to Ganzhou.

古文：诏令西夏避乱之民还本籍，成都新民为豪家所庇者皆归之州县。
现代文：下诏，令西夏逃避战乱的百姓返回原籍；成都新归附的百姓被豪民家所庇护的，全部让他们返回州县。
English: It was decreed that the people who fled the war in Western Xia should return to their original homes. The newly annexed people in Chengdu who were sheltered by wealthy families should all return to their prefectures and counties.

古文：诏招集逃亡军，限百日诣所属陈首，原其罪，贫者并户应役。
现代文：下诏招集逃亡的士兵，限一百天之内到所属的地方呈报自首，赦免他们的罪过，贫困户两户合选一人应征服役。
English: The following edict called for the soldiers who had fled to report to the place where they belonged and surrender themselves within 100 days, and their sins would be forgiven. One person from each of the two poor households was selected to serve in the conquest.

古文：八月癸亥，赐丞相伯颜第一区。
现代文：八月初三，赐予丞相伯颜宅第一所。
English: On the third day of the eighth lunar month, the first shrine was built at the residence of the chancellor.

古文：丁卯，以兵部侍郎黑的、礼部侍郎殷弘使日本，赐书曰： 皇帝奉书日本国王：朕惟自古小国之君，境土相接，尚务讲信修睦，况我祖宗受天明命，奄有区夏，遐方异域畏威怀德者，不可悉数。
现代文：初七，派遣兵部侍郎黑的、礼部侍郎殷弘出使日本，赐给书信说： 大元皇帝奉上书信给日本国王：我想自古以来，小国的国君，只要领土相连，尚且要讲求信义，修治和睦，何况我祖先承受皇天的明命，据有中国。远方异域畏惧我邦的威力、感戴吾国的恩德者数都数不清。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Emperor Daigen sent a letter to the king of Japan, saying, "I think that since ancient times, the sovereign of a small country, as long as the territory is connected, still needs to seek loyalty, cultivate harmony. Moreover, my ancestors received a clear mandate from the emperor, according to China. There are countless people in distant foreign countries who fear the power of our country and feel the grace of our country.

古文：朕即位之初，以高丽无辜之民，久瘁锋镝，即令罢兵，还其疆埸，反其旄倪。
现代文：当我即位之初，因为高丽无辜的百姓久被战争所苦，便命令罢兵停战，归还他们的疆土，让他们的老幼百姓返回家园。
English: At the beginning of my reign, because the innocent people of Korea had been suffering from the war for a long time, I ordered an armistice, the return of their territory, and the return of their old and young people to their homes.

古文：高丽君臣，感戴来朝，义虽君臣，而欢若父子。
现代文：高丽国的君臣感恩戴德地前来朝见，按照大义虽说是君臣关系，而彼此的欢洽却情同父子一般。
English: The princes and ministers of Goryeo came to the Imperial Court with deep gratitude. Although the relationship between the prince and the minister is said to be the best in the world, their friendship is like that of a father and son.

古文：计王之君臣，亦已知之。
现代文：估计贵国君臣也都已经知道了。
English: It is estimated that your country's princes and ministers already know about it.

古文：高丽，朕之东藩也。
现代文：高丽国是我国东边的藩属。
English: Korea belongs to the eastern part of our country.

古文：日本密迩高丽，开国以来，时通中国，至于朕躬，而无一乘之使以通和好。尚恐王国知之未审，故特遣使持书布告朕心，冀自今以往，通问结好，以相亲睦。
现代文：日本与高丽关系密切，地域相近，自从开国以来，时时与中国相通。至于我，却还没有一个使臣与贵国沟通和睦友好关系，还担心贵国对这情况知道得不够仔细，因此特地派遣使臣带着信件通报我的心意，希望从今以后沟通音讯，结成友好，以做到互相亲善和睦。
English: As for me, I have not yet had an envoy to communicate with your country about harmonious and friendly relations, and I am worried that your country does not know enough about this situation. Therefore, I specially sent an envoy with a letter to inform you of my intentions. I hope to communicate information from now on and form a friendship in order to achieve mutual goodwill and harmony.

古文：且圣人以四海为家，不相通好，岂一家之理哉？
现代文：再说圣人以四海为一家，互相不沟通友好，难道是一家之理么？
English: Besides, the sages regard the four seas as one family, and do not communicate with each other in a friendly manner. Is this the reason for a family?

古文：以至用兵，夫孰所好，王其图之。 
现代文：至于用兵打仗，谁高兴呢？希望国王盘算一下吧！ 
English: As for using soldiers to fight, who is happy about that? Let the king figure it out!

古文：又诏高丽导去使至其国。
现代文：又下诏，令高丽引导出使的人到达那个国家。
English: It also ordered the DPRK to guide the envoys to the country.

古文：戊子，高丽国王王禃遣其大将军朴琪来贺圣诞节。
现代文：二十八日，高丽国王王礻直派遣他的大将军朴琪前来恭贺皇上的寿诞佳节。
English: On the 28th, the king of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhi, sent his general, Pak Ki, to congratulate the emperor on his birthday.

古文：阿术略地蕲、黄，俘获以万计。
现代文：阿术占领蕲州、黄州，俘获敌人数以万计。
English: Ah Jiu occupied Bozhou and Huangzhou, and captured tens of thousands of enemy soldiers.

古文：九月戊午，车驾至自上都。
现代文：九月二十九日，皇上的车驾从上都到达。
English: On September 29th, the Emperor's carriage arrived from Shangdu.

古文：冬十月庚申朔，降德兴府为奉圣州。癸亥，高丽使还，以王禃病，诏和药赐之。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，把德兴府降格为奉圣州，初四，高丽使臣返国，因为王礻直患病，皇上诏令配药赐给他。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, Dexingfu was downgraded to Bongseongju, and on the fourth day of the first month, the Korean envoys returned to the country. Because Wang Xizhi was ill, the emperor issued a decree to give him medicine.

古文：丁丑，徙平阳经籍所于京师。
现代文：十八日，把平阳经籍所迁移到京师。
English: On the 18th, the Pingyang Registration Office was moved to the Beijing Division.

古文：更敕牒旧式。
现代文：改换旧式书版。
English: Change the old-style book plates.

古文：太庙成，丞相安童、伯颜言： 祖宗世数、尊谥庙号、增祀四世、各庙神主、配享功臣、法服祭器等事，皆宜定议。 
现代文：太庙落成，丞相安童、伯颜说 ：祖宗传代的数目，他们的尊号、谥号、庙号，增入庙祭的四代祖宗，各个庙室祭祀的神主，配祭的功臣、礼服、祭器等事情，都应该做出决定。 
English: When the Great Temple was completed, Prime Ministers Ando and Bo Yan said: the number of generations of ancestors, their honorifics, posthumous names, temple names, the four generations of ancestors added to the temple festival, the deities worshiped in each temple room, the heroes of the festival, the ceremonial dress, the sacrificial vessels, and other matters should all be decided.

古文：命平章政事赵璧等集群臣议，定为八室。
现代文：皇帝命令平章政事赵璧等召集群臣商议，确定太庙中设立八个祭室。
English: The emperor ordered Ping Zhang, Zhao Bi, and other government officials to convene a group of ministers to discuss and determine the establishment of eight ritual rooms in the Great Temple.

古文：申禁京畿畋猎。
现代文：申令禁止在京畿地区狩猎。
English: The decree bans hunting in the Gyeonggi region.

古文：壬午，命制国用使司造神臂弓千张、矢六万。
现代文：二十三日，命令制国用使司制造神臂弓一千张、箭六万支。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor ordered the imperial envoys to make 1,000 divine-arm bows and 60,000 arrows.

古文：十一月辛卯，初给京、府、州、县、司官吏俸及职田。
现代文：十一月初三，开始发给京师、府、州、县、司的官员俸禄和做俸禄的职分田。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, officials of the Beijing Division, prefectures, counties, counties, and divisions began to be paid a salary and a salary field.

古文：戊戌，濒御河立漕仓。
现代文：初十，滨临御河建立漕运粮食的粮仓。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, a grain silo for transporting grain by rowing boat was built on the coast of Mikawa.

古文：丁未，申严杀牛马之禁。宋子贞致仁。
现代文：十九日，严申禁止屠宰牛马。宋子贞离职退休。
English: On the 19th, the slaughter of cattle and horses was strictly prohibited. Song Zizhen retired.

古文：辛亥，以忽都答儿为中书左丞相。
现代文：二十三日，任命忽都答儿为中书省左丞相。
English: On the 23rd, Hu Dudatser was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Left for the Ministry of Literature.

古文：诏禁天文、图谶等书。
现代文：诏令禁止天象、图谶之类的书籍。
English: The edict banned books about celestial objects and the like.

古文：丙辰，千户散竹带以嗜酒失所守大良平，罪当死，录其前功免死，令往东川军前自效。
现代文：二十八日，千户散竹带因为好酒贪杯致使大良平失守，罪当处死。审察其原来的功劳，免除其死罪，命令他前往东川军前效力。
English: On the 28th, because of drinking too much wine and drinking too much sake, Chika Sanzhuko caused Daliangping to lose his guard, and he was sentenced to death. His original merits were examined, he was exempted from the death penalty, and he was ordered to go to Dongchuan to serve before the army.

古文：诏建都使复归朝。
现代文：诏令建都，令其重新回归朝廷。
English: The imperial edict ordered the construction of the capital and its return to the imperial court.

古文：又诏嘉定等府沿江一带城堡早降。
现代文：又诏令嘉定等府沿江一带的城堡及早投降。
English: He also ordered the castles along the river in Jiading and other prefectures to surrender at an early date.

古文：又诏四川行枢密院遣人告谕江、汉、庸、蜀等效顺，具官吏姓名，对阶换授，有功者迁，有才者用；民无生理者以衣粮赈之，愿迁内地者给以田庐，毋令失所。
现代文：又诏令四川行枢密院派人前去告谕江州、汉州、庸州、蜀州等地的官民归顺朝廷以自效，列具官吏的姓名，按原来的官品改授相应的官职，有功的升迁，有才的任用；失去生计的百姓用衣服粮食赈济他们，愿意移居内地的给予田地房屋，不让他们流离失所。
English: He also ordered the Privy Council to send people to Sichuan to tell the officials and people in Jiangzhou, Hanzhou, Yongzhou, Shuzhou and other places to submit to the imperial court as a matter of course, list the names of officials, according to the original official ranks, re-assign the corresponding official positions, promote the meritorious, and appoint the talented; the people who lost their livelihoods would help them with clothes and grain, and would be willing to move inland to give them fields and houses to prevent them from being displaced.

古文：十二月庚申，给诸王合必赤行军印。
现代文：十二月初二，赐给诸侯王合必赤执行军令的印信。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, a seal letter was given to the princes Wang He Bicheng to implement the military order.

古文：辛酉，诏改四川行枢密院为行中书省，以赛典赤、也速带儿等佥行中书省事。
现代文：初三，诏令把四川行枢密院改为行中书省，任命赛典赤、也速带儿等执掌行中书省事务。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the imperial decree changed the Sichuan-bound Privy Council to the Sichuan-bound Ministry of Books, and appointed Saiten Chia and Ya Huan Tiao to be in charge of the Sichuan-bound Ministry of Books.

古文：甲子，立诸路洞冶所。
现代文：初六，建立诸路洞冶所。
English: In his sixth year of junior high school, he established the Zhuludong smelting plant.

古文：以梁成生擒宋总辖官，授同知开府事，佩金符。
现代文：因为梁成生擒宋军的总辖官，授予他开州同知，佩戴金符。
English: Because Liang Chengsheng was the commander-in-chief of the Song Army, he was awarded the title of "Kezhou Tongzhi" and wore a gold badge.

古文：减辉州竹课，先是官取十之六，至是减其二。
现代文：减少辉州的竹税，原先，官府收取十分之六，这时减少其中两成。
English: Reducing the bamboo tax in Huizhou. Originally, the government collected six-tenths of the tax, but now it will reduce it by 20 percent.

古文：丁亥，诏安肃公张柔、行工部尚书段天祐等同行工部事，修筑宫城。
现代文：二十九日，下诏令安肃公张柔，暂署工部尚书段天等共同掌管工部的事务，修筑宫城。
English: On the 29th, An Sui Gong Zhang Rong issued an order to temporarily assign Shang Shu Dan Tian and others from the Ministry of Works to jointly manage the affairs of the Ministry of Works and rebuild Miyagi.

古文：并太府监入宣徽院，仍以宣徽使专领监事。
现代文：把太府监合并入宣徽院，并以宣徽院使专门管领太府监事务。
English: To merge the Dafu Supervisor into the Xuanhuiyuan, and to make the Xuanhuiyuan envoy in charge of the affairs of the Dafu Supervisor.

古文：诏赐高丽以至元四年历日，仍慰谕之。
现代文：下诏赐给高丽至元四年的历书，并慰问勉励他们。
English: He issued the following edict to give the four-year almanac of the Goryeo Dynasty to them, and offered his condolences and encouragement.

古文：建大安阁于上都。
现代文：在上都修建大安阁。
English: Daan Pavilion will be built in Shangdu.

古文：凿金口，导卢沟水以漕西山木石。
现代文：开凿金口以引导卢沟的水运输西山的木材石料。
English: The gold mouth was excavated to guide the water of the Lu ditch to transport the timber and stone of the West Mountain.

古文：敕： 诸越界私商及谍人与伪造钞者，送京师审核。 
现代文：敕令 ：把所有偷越边界的私商和间谍，以及伪造假钞的，都押送到京师审查。 
English: The imperial edict: All smugglers and spies who have crossed the border, as well as those who have forged and counterfeited banknotes, are to be sent to the Beijing Division for examination.

古文：是岁，天下户一百六十万九千九百三。
现代文：这一年，全国共有一百六十万零九千九百零三户。
English: In that year, there were a total of 1,609,903 households across the country.

古文：东平、济南、益都、平滦、真定、洺磁、顺天、中都、河间、北京蝗，京兆、凤翔旱。
现代文：东平路、济南路、益都路、平滦路、真定路、氵名磁路、顺天路、中都路、河间路、北京路发生蝗灾，京兆府、凤翔府发生旱灾。
English: Locust plagues occurred in Dongping Road, Jinan Road, Yidu Road, Pingluo Road, Zhending Road, Renmei Magnetic Road, Shuntian Road, Zhongdu Road, Hema Road and Beijing Road, and droughts occurred in Jinghao Prefecture and Fengxiang Prefecture.

古文：断死罪九十六人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯为九十六人。
English: Ninety-six criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：赐诸王金、银、币、帛如岁例。
现代文：按每年的常例赐给诸侯王黄金、白银、钱钞、绢帛。
English: According to the annual practice, the princes were given gold, silver, banknotes and ingots.

古文：四年春正月甲午，陕西行省以开州新得复失，请益兵，敕平阳、延安等处签民兵三千人，山东、河南、怀孟、潼川调兵七千人益之。
现代文：至元四年春，正月初六，陕西行省因为开州刚刚占领又重新失守，请求增兵，皇上敕令平阳、延安等发民兵三千人，山东、河南、怀孟、潼关调兵七千人前往增援。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the sixth day of the first month of the year, the province of Shaanxi, which had just been occupied by Kaizhou, lost its defense again and asked for more troops. The emperor ordered Pingyang and Yan'an to send 3,000 militia, and Shandong, Henan, Huai Meng and Shaoguan to send 7,000 troops to reinforce.

古文：丁酉，申严平阳等处私盐之禁。
现代文：初九，申令严禁平阳等地贩运私盐。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, a decree was issued to strictly prohibit the trafficking of illegal salt in Pingyang and other places.

古文：壬寅，立茶速秃水十四驿。
现代文：十四日，建立茶速秃水驿站十四处。
English: On the 14th, 14 tea-making stations were set up.

古文：癸卯，敕修曲阜宣圣庙。
现代文：十五日，敕令修建曲阜宣圣孔子庙。
English: On the 15th, the government ordered the construction of Qufu Xuan Sheng Confucius Temple.

古文：乙巳，百济遣其臣梁浩来朝，赐以锦绣有差。
现代文：十七日，百济派遣其使臣梁浩前来朝见，皇上赐给他们数目不等的锦绣。
English: On the seventeenth day, Baekje sent its envoy, Liang Hao, to see the emperor, and the emperor gave them a varying number of brocades.

古文：禁僧官侵理民讼。
现代文：禁止僧官侵权受理民事诉讼。
English: Monastic officials are prohibited from accepting civil lawsuits for infringement.

古文：辛亥，封安肃公张柔为蔡国公，以赵璧为枢密副使。
现代文：二十三日，晋封安肃公张柔为蔡国公。任命赵璧为枢密院副使。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Rong of Ansu Province was promoted to Cai Guogong, and Zhao Bi was appointed Vice-Minister of the Privy Council.

古文：立诸路洞冶都总管府。
现代文：设立诸路洞冶都总管府。
English: The Zhulongdongye Capital General Administration Office was established.

古文：癸丑，敕封昔木土山为武定山，其神曰武定公；泉为灵渊，其神曰灵渊侯。
现代文：二十五日，敕命封昔木土山为武定山，其山神封为武定公，其泉封为灵渊，其神封为灵渊侯。
English: On the 25th, he died and sealed the former wood and soil mountain as Wuding Mountain, its mountain god as Wuding Lord, its spring as Lingyuan, and its god as Lingyuan.

古文：佥蒙古军，户二丁三丁者出一人为军，四丁五丁者二人，六丁七丁者三人。
现代文：签征蒙古军，每户有两名或三名男丁的出一人为兵，四名或五名男丁出二人为兵，六名或七名男丁出三人为兵。
English: When signing up for the Mongolian army, each household with two or three men sent one soldier, four or five men sent two soldiers, and six or seven men sent three soldiers.

古文：乙卯，高丽国王王禃遣使来朝，诏抚慰之。
现代文：二十七日，高丽国王王礻直派遣使臣前来朝见，皇上下诏对其安抚慰问。
English: On the 27th, the King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhi, sent an envoy to see the emperor, and the emperor sent an imperial edict to appease and offer condolences.

古文：戊午，立提点宫城所。
现代文：三十日，建立提点宫城所。
English: On the 30th, the Miyagi Point was established.

古文：析上都隆兴府自为一路，行总管府事；立开元等路转运司。
现代文：分出上都的隆兴府自成一路，执掌总管府事务。设立开元等路转运司。
English: Longxingfu, the capital of Shangdu, was separated from Jicheng 1st Road, and took charge of the general management of the affairs of the capital. The Kaiyuan and other roads transfer department was established.

古文：城大都。
现代文：修筑大都城垣。
English: Most of the city walls are under construction.

古文：二月庚申，粘合南合复平章事，阿里复为中书右丞。
现代文：二月初二，恢复粘合南合的平章政事之职，阿里重新担任中书省右丞。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：丁卯，改经籍所为弘文院，以马天昭知院事。
现代文：初九，把经籍所改为弘文院，以马天昭掌管院务。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, he changed his family name to Kobun-in, and put Ma Tian Zhao in charge of the affairs of the school.

古文：丁亥，括西夏民田，征其租。
现代文：二十九日，统计西夏的民田，征收其赋税。
English: On the 29th, the people's fields in Western Xia were counted and taxes were levied.

古文：车驾幸上都。
现代文：皇帝的车驾临幸上都。
English: The emperor's car drove to Shangdu.

古文：诏陕西行省招谕宋人。
现代文：诏令陕西行省招降宋人。
English: The imperial edict ordered the province of Shaanxi to recruit Song people.

古文：又诏嘉定、泸州、重庆、夔府、涪、达、忠、万及钓鱼、礼义、大良等处官吏军民有能率众来降者，优加赏擢。
现代文：下诏令嘉定、泸州、重庆、夔府、涪州、忠州、万州以及钓鱼、礼义、大良等处的官吏军民，有能够率领部下前来降顺的，从优给予奖励升迁。
English: He issued an edict to the officials, soldiers and civilians of Jiading, Zhangzhou, Chongqing, Zhangfu, Zhangzhou, Chungzhou, Wanzhou, as well as the departments of fishing, etiquette, and Dalian, that if they could lead their subordinates to surrender, they would be rewarded with promotion.

古文：三月己丑，复以耶律铸为中书左丞相。
现代文：三月初二，再次任命耶律铸为中书省左丞相。
English: On the second day of March, Yerutsu was reappointed as the Vice-Minister of the Left for the Ministry of Literature.

古文：辛卯，自潼关至蕲县立河渡官八员，以察奸伪。
现代文：初四，在潼关和蕲县之间设置八名渡河官，以便审察作奸犯法的事。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, eight river crossing officers were set up between Shaoguan and Shixian in order to investigate the crime of treason.

古文：乙未，敕中都路建习乐堂，使乐工隶业其中。
现代文：初八，敕命中都路建立习乐堂，把乐工的业务隶属于其中。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, he established a music hall on Zhongdu Road, and subordinated the music business to it.

古文：己亥，赐皇子燕王、忙阿剌、那没罕、忽哥赤银三万两。
现代文：十二日，赐给皇子燕王、忙阿剌、那没罕、忽哥赤白银三万两。
English: On the twelfth day, thirty thousand taels of red and white silver were given to Prince Yan Wang, Busy Grandmother, Na Mian Han, and Hu Ge.

古文：辛丑，夏津县大雨雹。
现代文：十四日，夏津县发生大雨雹。
English: On the 14th, heavy rain and hail occurred in Xiajin County.

古文：壬寅，安童言： 比者省官员数，平章、左丞各一员，今丞相五人，素无此例。
现代文：十五日，安童上奏说： 近来中书省官员的人数，平章政事、左丞各一人，如今丞相为五人，向来没有这样的先例。
English: On the 15th, Ando reported, "Recently, the number of officials in the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology was reduced to one each for the Vice-Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the Vice-Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and now there are five Vice-Ministers of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. There has never been such a precedent.

古文：臣等议拟设二丞相，臣等蒙古人三员，惟陛下所命。 
现代文：臣等商议，打算设置两名丞相，臣等蒙古人共三人，希望由陛下决定。 
English: The vassals and others discussed and planned to set up two prime ministers, and the vassals and other Mongolians were a total of three, hoping that it would be decided by His Majesty.

古文：诏以安童为长，史天泽次之，其余蒙古、汉人参用，勿令员数过多；又诏宜用老成人如姚枢等一二员同议省事。
现代文：皇上下诏，以安童为首，史天泽其次，其余的蒙古人、汉人，根据具体情况任用，不要使任用的员额人数太多。又诏令应该用姚枢等老成持重的一两个人一起商议中书省政务。
English: The emperor decreed that Andong should be the first, Shi Tianze the second, and the rest of the Mongolians and Han Chinese should be appointed according to the specific situation, so as not to make the number of appointed posts too large. It was also decreed that one or two people with long-standing weight, such as Yao Zu, should be used to discuss the government affairs of Zhongshuo.

古文：丁巳，耶律铸制宫县乐成，诏赐名《大成》。
现代文：三十日，耶律铸制成宫悬乐，皇上下诏赐名为《大成乐》。
English: On the 30th, Yerut was cast into the palace suspense music, and the emperor gave it the name "Daxingle."

古文：夏四月申子，新筑宫城。
现代文：夏季，四月初七，重新修筑宫城。
English: In the summer, on the 7th day of the 4th month, Miyagi is rebuilt.

古文：辛未，遣使祀岳渎。
现代文：十四日，派遣使臣祭祀五岳四渎。
English: On the 14th, the envoys were dispatched to perform the ritual of the Five Mountains and Four Deities.

古文：五月丁亥朔，日有食之。敕上都重建孔子庙。
现代文：五月初一，发生日食。敕命上都重新修建孔子庙。
English: On the first day of May, a solar eclipse occurred. The Confucius Temple was urgently rebuilt.

古文：乙未，应州大水。
现代文：初九，应州发生大水。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, a large flood occurred in Yingzhou.

古文：丙申，威州山后大番弄麻等十一族来附，赐以玺书、金银符。
现代文：初十，威州山后大番族弄麻等十一个部族前来归顺，皇上赐给加盖玺印的诏书和金、银符牌。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, eleven tribes came to submit, including the Nagama clan of the Yamaguchi clan in Wizhou, and the emperor gave them a stamped imperial edict and gold and silver tokens.

古文：己酉，以捕猎户达鲁花赤伪造银符，处死。
现代文：二十三日，猎户总管因伪造银符牌被处死。
English: On the 23rd, the head of the Hunter was executed for forging silver tokens.

古文：壬子，敕诸路官吏俸，令包银民户，每四两增纳一两以给之。
现代文：二十六日，敕令各路官吏的俸禄，由交纳包银税的民户，每四两税增交一两给予官吏。
English: On the 26th, the government ordered that the salaries of officials in all sectors should be increased by one or two taxes for every four taxes paid by households.

古文：丙辰，析东平之博州五城别为一路。
现代文：三十日，分出东平府的博州等五城另外组成一路。
English: On the 30th, five cities including Bozhou, which is separated from Dongping Prefecture, formed a separate first line.

古文：六月壬戌，以中都、顺天、东平等处蚕灾，免民户丝料轻重有差。
现代文：六月初六，因为中都、顺天、东平等地蚕病成灾，不同程度地减免民户的丝税银。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：乙丑，复以史天泽为中书左丞相，忽都答儿、耶律铸并降平章政事，伯颜降中书右丞，廉希宪降中书左丞，阿里、张文谦并降参知政事。
现代文：初九，再度任命史天泽为中书左丞相，忽都答儿、耶律铸都降职为平章政事，伯颜降职为中书省右丞，廉希宪降职为中书省左丞，阿里、张文谦均降职为参知政事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Shi Tianze was reappointed as the Vice-Minister of the Left Division of the Central Office of the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, while Hu Du Daer and Yerut Shidu were demoted to the post of Vice-Minister of the Communist Party of China, Bo Yan was demoted to the post of Vice-Minister of the Right Division of the Central Office of the Communist Party of China, Liang Xixian was demoted to the post of Vice-Minister of the Left Division of the Central Office of the Communist Party of China, and Ali and Zhang Wenqian were both demoted to the post of

古文：乙酉，赐诸王玉龙答失银五千两、币三百，岁以为常。
现代文：二十九日，赐予诸侯王玉龙答失白银五千两，钞币三百锭，每年作为常例。
English: On the 29th, he gave 5,000 taels of silver and 300 taels of banknotes to Prince Yulong, as is customary every year.

古文：罢宣徽院。
现代文：撤销宣徽院。
English: Xuan Hui Academy was abolished.

古文：黑的、殷弘以高丽使者宋君斐、金赞不能导达至日本来奏，降诏责高丽王王禃，仍令其遣官至彼宣布，以必得要领为期。
现代文：黑的、殷弘把高丽使者宋君斐、金赞不能引导中国使臣抵达日本一事前来奏闻皇上，皇上下诏责备高丽国王王礻直，仍然命他派官员到日本去宣读圣旨，以必须得到确实的信息为期。
English: Koryo emissaries Song Junhui and Jinzan were unable to guide the Chinese envoys to arrive in Japan, so they sent a report to the emperor in advance. The emperor issued an imperial edict to rebuke King Wang Xizhi of Korea, but still ordered him to send officials to Japan to read the imperial edict, stating that it was necessary to obtain accurate information.

古文：秋七月丙戌朔，敕自中兴路至西京之东胜立水驿十。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，敕令从中兴路到西京的东胜设立水驿十处。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, the government ordered the establishment of ten water reservoirs from Zhongxing Road to Dongsheng in West Beijing.

古文：戊戌，罢息州安抚岳林，以其民隶南京路；罢怀孟路安抚李宗杰，以其民隶本路。
现代文：十三日，革去息州安抚使岳林的官职，把他治下的百姓隶属于南京路。革去怀孟路安抚使李宗杰的官职，把他治下的百姓隶属于本路。
English: On the 13th, he went to Sizhou to appease the official position of Yuelin, and the people under his rule were subordinated to Nanjing Road. He went to Huai Meng Road to appease the official position of Li Zongjie, and the people under his rule were subordinated to this road.

古文：发巩昌、凤翔、京兆等处未占籍户一千，修治四川山路、桥梁、栈道。
现代文：调发巩昌、凤翔、京兆等地没有落户定居的民户一千户前去四川修筑山路、桥梁、栈道。
English: One thousand households that have not settled in Gongchang, Fengxiang, Jingzhao and other places will go to Sichuan to build mountain roads, bridges and trestle roads.

古文：大名路达鲁花赤爱鲁、总管张弘范等盗用官钱，罢之。
现代文：大名路镇守官爱鲁、总管张弘范等盗用官钱，将他们撤职。
English: Daming Road Town Guard Officer Ai Lu, General Manager Zhang Hongfan and others embezzled government money and were removed from their posts.

古文：壬寅，申严京畿牧地之禁。
现代文：十七日，申令严禁在京畿地区放牧。
English: On the 17th, a decree was issued to strictly prohibit grazing in the Gyeonggi region.

古文：甲寅，诏亦即纳新附贫民，从人借贷困不能偿者，官为偿之，仍给牛具、种实及粮食。
现代文：二十九日，诏令亦即纳新归附的向人借贷的贫苦百姓，因贫困而无力偿还的，由官府代为偿还，并供给耕牛、农具、种子及粮食。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict also included the newly attached poor people who borrow money from others. If they are unable to repay because of poverty, the government will repay on their behalf and provide them with cattle, farm tools, seeds and grain.

古文：签东京军千八百人充侍卫军。
现代文：签征东京的士兵一千八百人充当侍卫亲军。
English: One thousand eight hundred soldiers were conscripted to Tokyo to serve as bodyguards for the troops.

古文：八月庚申，填星犯天樽。
现代文：八月初五，土星干犯天缶尊座天区。
English: On the fifth day of the eighth month, Saturn entered the celestial region of the Zodiac.

古文：辛酉，申严平滦路私盐酒醋之禁。
现代文：初六，申令严禁平滦路贩卖私盐酒醋。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, a decree was issued to strictly prohibit the sale of salt wine vinegar on Pingyao Road.

古文：丙寅，复立宣徽院，以前中书右丞相线真为使。
现代文：十一日，恢复设立宣徽院，任命前中书省右丞相线真为宣徽院使。
English: On the 11th, the establishment of the Xuanhui Academy was resumed, and Lin Zhen, the former Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture, was appointed as the ambassador of the Xuanhui Academy.

古文：丁丑，封皇子忽哥赤为云南王，赐驼钮金镀银印。
现代文：二十二日，晋封皇子忽哥赤为云南王，赐予饰有骆驼形钮键镀金的银印。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Jinfeng's son, Emperor Hu Go-Chak, was crowned King of Yunnan and given a gold-plated silver seal with a camel-shaped button.

古文：壬午，太白犯轩辕大星。
现代文：二十七日，太白金星干犯轩辕座大星。
English: On the 27th, the too-white Venus offends the great star of Capricorn.

古文：命怯绵征建都。
现代文：命令怯绵征伐建都。
English: Ordered the timid conquest and construction of the capital.

古文：高丽国王王禃遣其秘书监郭汝弼来贺圣诞节。
现代文：高丽国王王礻直派遣他的秘书监郭汝弼前来恭贺皇帝的寿诞佳节。
English: The king of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhong, sent his secretary, Guo Rong, to congratulate the emperor on his birthday.

古文：阿术略地至襄阳，俘生口五万、马牛五千。
现代文：阿术攻占的土地直到襄阳，俘获人口五万，马牛五千头。
English: Ah Jiu conquered the land up to Yangyang, capturing a population of fifty thousand and five thousand horses and cattle.

古文：宋人遣步骑来拒，阿术率骑兵败之。
现代文：宋军派遣步兵骑兵前来抵抗，阿术率领骑兵击败了他们。
English: The Song Army dispatched infantry and cavalry to resist, and the cavalry led by Ah Xiu defeated them.

古文：九月壬辰，作玉殿于广寒殿中。
现代文：九月初八，在广寒殿中制成玉殿。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, the Jade Hall was completed in the Guangan Hall.

古文：乙未，总帅汪良臣请立寨于毋章德山，控扼江南，以当钓鱼之冲，从之。
现代文：十一日，总帅汪良臣请求在母章德山建立营寨，控制、扼守江南，以守住钓鱼城要冲，皇上允从。
English: On the 11th day, the commander-in-chief, Wang Liangchen, asked the emperor to build a camp on the mother Zhangde Mountain, control and hold the south of the Yangtze River, and hold the Diaoyu City. The emperor agreed.

古文：戊申，以许衡为国子祭酒。
现代文：二十四日，任命许衡为国子祭酒。
English: On the 24th, Xu Heng was appointed as the national son's sacrificial wine.

古文：安南国王陈光昞遣使来贡，优诏答之。
现代文：安南国王陈光日丙派遣使臣前来朝贡，皇上特赐优诏答谢。
English: Annan King Chen Guang Rong sent envoys to pay tribute to the court, and the emperor issued a special edict to thank him.

古文：立大理等处行六部，以阔阔带为尚书兼云南王傅，柴祯尚书兼府尉，宁源侍郎兼司马。
现代文：设立大理等地行中书省六部，任命阔阔带为尚书兼云南王太傅，柴祯任尚书兼府尉，宁源任侍郎兼司马。
English: The six departments of the Ministry of Literature were established in Dali and other places, and Kuo Kuang Zhe was appointed as the Minister of Literature and the Grand Master of Yunnan Province, Chai Wei was appointed as the Minister of Literature and the Lieutenant of Yunnan Province, and Ning Yuan was appointed as the Chamberlain and the Secretary of Horse.

古文：庚戌，遣云南王忽哥赤镇大理、鄯阐、茶罕章、赤秃哥儿、金齿等处，诏抚谕吏民。
现代文：二十六日，派遣云南王忽哥赤镇守大理、鄯阐、茶罕章、赤秃哥儿、金齿等地，皇上下诏安抚、慰问官吏和百姓。
English: On the 26th, King Hu Ge of Yunnan sent emperors up and down the country to various places, such as Dali, Shiyan, Cha Han Zhang, Red Bald Brother, and Jintao, to pacify and console officials and people.

古文：又诏谕安南国，俾其君长来朝，子弟入质，编民出军役、纳赋税，置达鲁花赤统治之。
现代文：又下诏晓谕安南国，令其国君前来朝见，子弟入朝做人质，编户之民服兵役，交纳赋税，并设置镇守官统辖治理该国。
English: He also issued the following edict to Annan, ordering his sovereign to come to the court, his children to be taken as hostages, the people of his household to perform military service, to pay taxes, and to set up town guards to govern the country.

古文：癸丑，申严西夏中兴等路僧尼、道士商税、酒醋之禁。
现代文：二十九日，向西夏的中兴等路申令严禁僧尼道士经商和制造酒醋。
English: On the 29th, the Zhongxing and other roads to the west of Xia were ordered to strictly prohibit monks and nuns from doing business and making wine vinegar.

古文：车驾至自上都。
现代文：皇上的车驾从上都来到。
English: The emperor's car drove from the capital to the capital.

古文：鹗请立选举法，有旨令议举行，有司难之，事遂寝。
现代文：王鹗请求确定考选、举荐人才的办法，皇上有旨，命令商讨实行科举考试之事，有关署衙认为事情很难，便搁置下来。
English: Wang Wei requested to determine the method of selecting and recommending talents, the emperor had a will, and ordered to discuss the implementation of the imperial examination. The relevant authorities thought that the matter was difficult and put it on hold.

古文：冬十月辛酉，制国用司言： 别怯赤山石绒织为布，火不能然。 
现代文：冬季，十月初八，制国用使司说 ：别怯赤山的石绒织成布，火烧不着。 
English: In the winter, on the eighth day of the first month of October, the imperial envoy said, "Don't be afraid to weave Akayama's stone wool into cloth. It won't catch fire."

古文：诏采之。
现代文：皇帝下令开采。
English: The emperor ordered mining.

古文：壬戌，赐驸马不花银印。
现代文：初九，赐给驸马不花银印。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, give your horse a free ride.

古文：鱼通岩州等处达鲁花赤李福招谕西番诸族酋长以其民入附，以阿奴版的哥等为喝吾等处总管，并授玺书及金银符。
现代文：鱼通、岩州等处镇守官李福招降西番各族的酋长带领他们的百姓归顺，任命阿奴版的哥等人担任喝吾等处的总管，并授予加盖玺印的文书和金、银牌符。
English: Uotsu, Iwashu, and other town guards, Li Fu, recruited the chiefs of the various tribes of Xipan to lead their people to submit, appointed the Anu version of brothers and others to serve as the head of the drinking places, and awarded stamped documents and gold and silver medals.

古文：铁旗城后番官官折兰遣其子天郎持先受宪宗玺书、金符，乞改授新命，从之。
现代文：铁旗城后番官折兰派遣他的儿子天郎带着原来所接受的宪宗玺书和金符，请求改授重新任命的玺书，皇帝允从。
English: After the siege of Tieqicheng, the governor, Orilan, sent his son, Tianro, with the original imperial edict and gold badge to request that the emperor grant the newly appointed imperial edict. The emperor complied.

古文：甲子，岁星犯轩辕大星。
现代文：十一日，木星干犯轩辕座大星。
English: On the 11th, Jupiter trespassed on the great star of Virgo.

古文：辛未，太原进嘉禾二本，异亩同颖。
现代文：十八日，太原进献嘉禾二株，生在不同的地里，穗子却长在一起。
English: On the 18th, Taiyuan donated two plants of Jiahe, which were born in different fields, but the spikes grew together.

古文：甲戌，赈新附民陈忠等钞。
现代文：二十一日，向新归附的百姓陈忠等赈济钱钞。
English: On the 21st, Chen Zhong and other newly annexed people were given banknotes.

古文：丁丑，制国用使司请量节经用，从之。
现代文：二十四日，制国用使司请求酌量节约经费，皇上允从。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the imperial envoy requested a discretionary amount of savings, and the emperor complied.

古文：庚辰，定品官子孙荫叙格。
现代文：二十七日，确定八品官员的子孙以荫庇任职的规格。
English: On the 27th, the specifications for the children and grandchildren of the eight-grade officials to serve in the shadow of the eaves were determined.

古文：十一月乙酉，享于太庙。
现代文：十一月初二，在太庙举行祭祀大典。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, a grand ritual was held in Taimiao.

古文：戊戌，立新蔡县，以忽察、李家奴统所部兵戍之。
现代文：十五日，设立新蔡县，派忽察、李家奴统率其部下的士兵戍守。
English: On the fifteenth day, the new Cai County was established, and the soldiers under the command of Guo Zha and Li Jianu were sent to defend it.

古文：甲辰，立夔府路总帅府，戍开州。
现代文：二十一日，设立夔府路总帅府，戍守开州。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the general superintendent's office of Yefu Road was established, and Ye Gu Keshou was established.

古文：乙巳，填星犯天樽距星。
现代文：二十二日，土星干犯天缶尊宿距星。
English: On the 22nd, Saturn trespassed on the home planet.

古文：申严京畿畋猎之禁。
现代文：再次申令严禁在京畿地区狩猎。
English: Once again, hunting is strictly prohibited in the Gyeonggi region.

古文：南京宣慰刘整赴阙，奏攻宋方略，宜先从事襄阳。
现代文：南京路宣慰使刘整前来京师，上奏进攻宋朝的策略应该先从襄阳下手。
English: The propaganda of Nanjing Road made Liu Zhengyi come to Beijing, and the strategy of attacking the Song Dynasty should start from Xiangyang.

古文：十二月甲戌，赏河南路统军使讷怀所部将士战功银九千六百五十两，钞币、鞍勒有差。
现代文：十二月二十二日，赏给河南路统军使讷怀部下的将士战功银九千六百五十两，钱钞、马鞍、马笼头数量不等。
English: On December 22nd, the Henan Road Union Army awarded 9,652 pieces of silver to the soldiers of the Henan Road Union Army. The number of banknotes, saddles and horse-cage heads varied.

古文：丙子，赈亲王移相哥所部饥民。
现代文：二十四日，赈济亲王移相哥属下的饥民。
English: On the 24th, Prince Xizhi moved the starving people under his brother-in-law.

古文：丁丑，给辽东新签军布六万匹。
现代文：二十五日，赐给辽东新签征的军队六万匹布。
English: On the 25th, 60,000 pieces of cloth were given to the newly conscripted troops in Liaodong.

古文：己卯，立辽东路水驿七。
现代文：二十七日，设立辽东路水驿七处。
English: On the 27th, seven water stations along Liaodong Road were set up.

古文：赏元帅阿术部下有功将士二千二十五人，银五万五千三百两、金五十两，及锦彩、鞍勒有差。
现代文：赏给元帅阿术部下有功的将士二千零二十五人白银五万五千三百两、黄金五十两，以及数目不等的锦彩、马鞍、马笼头。
English: Awarded to 2,025 meritorious soldiers under Marshal Ah Xiu, including 55,300 taels of silver, 50 taels of gold, and varying amounts of brocade, saddles, and horse-cages.

古文：庚辰，签女直、水达达军三千人。
现代文：二十八日，签征女真水达达部士兵三千人。
English: On the 28th, 3,000 female soldiers of the Zhanshui Dada Division were conscripted.

古文：立诸位斡脱总管府。
现代文：设立各地官商总管府。
English: The establishment of local government and business headquarters.

古文：省平阳路岳阳、和州二县入冀氏，复置霸州益津县，省安西路栎阳县入临潼。
现代文：减省平阳路的岳阳、和川二县，并入冀氏县，重新设置霸州的益津县，撤销安西路的栎阳县，其土地并入临潼县。
English: The two counties of Yueyang and Wagawa on Pingyang Road were reduced and merged into Jishi County, Yijin County of Banzhou was re-established, and Poyang County on Anxi Road was revoked, and its land was merged into Linyi County.

古文：是岁，天下户口一百六十四万四千三十。
现代文：这一年，全国共有一百六十四万四千零三十户。
English: In that year, there were a total of 1,644,030 households in the country.

古文：山东、河南北诸路蝗，顺天束鹿县旱，免其租。
现代文：山东、河南、河北等路发生蝗灾，顺天府的束鹿县发生旱灾，免除他们的租税。
English: Locust plagues occurred in Shandong, Henan, Hebei and other areas, and drought occurred in Shunde County of Shuntianfu, exempting them from taxes.

古文：断死罪一百十四人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的犯人共一百一十四人。
English: A total of 114 prisoners were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：赐诸王金、银、币、帛如岁例。
现代文：按每年常例赐给诸侯王黄金、白银、钱钞、绢帛。
English: According to the annual practice, the princes were given gold, silver, banknotes and ingots.

古文：五年春正月甲午，太阴犯井。
现代文：至元五年春，正月十二日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the 12th day of the first month of the year, Taiyin Star went to Jianjing Subdistrict.

古文：庚子，上都建城隍庙。
现代文：十八日，上都修建城隍庙。
English: On the 18th, Shangdu completed the construction of the City God Temple.

古文：辛丑，敕陕西五路四川行省造战舰五百艘付刘整。
现代文：十九日，敕令陕西五路、四川行省建造五百艘战舰交付给刘整。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor ordered the five provinces of Shaanxi and Sichuan to build and deliver 500 warships to Liu Zhengyi.

古文：高丽国王王禃遣其弟淐来朝。
现代文：高丽国王王礻直派遣他的弟弟王氵昌前来朝见。
English: The king of Goryeo, Wang Bingzhi, sent his younger brother, Wang Bingchang, to meet the emperor.

古文：诏以禃饰辞见欺，面数其事于淐，切责之。
现代文：因为王礻直以伪饰之辞欺骗朝廷，皇帝当着王氵昌的面列举他的罪状，对王礻直进行指责。
English: Because Wang Xizhi deceived the imperial court with false words, the emperor listed his crimes in front of Wang Xichang and criticized Wang Xizhi.

古文：复遣北京路总管于也孙脱、礼部郎中孟甲持诏往谕，令具表遣海阳公金俊、侍郎李藏用与去使同来以闻。
现代文：再次派遣北京路总管于也孙脱、礼部郎中孟甲携带诏书前往晓谕，令王礻直准备表章，派海阳公金俊、侍郎李藏用和前去的使臣一起前来奏明情况。
English: Once again, he sent the general manager of Beijing Road, Yu Yasuntao, and the head of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Meng Jia, to carry the edict to the envoy, ordered Wang Xizhi to prepare the seal, and sent Haiyang Gong, Jinjun, and Li Zangyong, along with the envoys, to report the situation.

古文：庚戌，赐高丽国新历。
现代文：二十八日，赐予高丽国新年历书。
English: On the 28th, the New Year's Calendar of the Republic of Korea was issued.

古文：闰月戊午，以陈、亳、颍、蔡等处屯田户充军；令益都漏籍户四千淘金登州栖霞县，每户输金岁四钱。
现代文：闰正月初六，以陈州、亳州、颍州、蔡州等处的屯田户充当士兵，令益都漏登户籍的民户四千户到登州木妻霞县淘金，每一户一年交纳黄金四钱。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the leap year, thousands of households in Chenzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Caizhou and other places were used as soldiers, and 4,000 households whose income was omitted from the household registration went to Dengzhou Muzhuma Xia County for gold prospecting. Each household paid 4 yuan of gold a year.

古文：二月戊子，太阴犯天关。
现代文：二月初七，太阴星干犯天关星。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd lunar month, the great dark star caused the great celestial event.

古文：己丑，太阴犯井。
现代文：初八，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the yin and yang stars are in the yin and yang quarter.

古文：给河南、山东贫乏军士钞。
现代文：给予河南、山东贫困的士兵钱钞。
English: Giving money and banknotes to impoverished soldiers in Henan and Shandong.

古文：戊戌，改军器局为军器监。
现代文：十七日，把军器局改为军器监。
English: On the 17th, the Ordnance Bureau was renamed the Ordnance Inspector.

古文：辛丑，百户浑都速驻营济南路属县三年。胁取民饮食粮料当粟五千石，敕杖决之，仍偿粟千石。
现代文：二十日，百户浑都速在济南路的属县驻军三年，逼取百姓的饮食粮料相当于米粟五千石，敕令处以杖刑，并偿还米粟一千石。
English: On the 20th, hundreds of households hurriedly stationed troops in the county of Jinan Road for three years, forcing the people to eat food equivalent to 5,000 koku of rice, and the imperial order was punished with a cane, and repaid 1,000 koku of rice.

古文：析甘州路之肃州自为一路。
现代文：分出甘州路的肃州自成一路。
English: Suzhou Zicheng 1st Road, which branches off Ganzhou Road.

古文：三月丙寅，罢诸路四品以下子孙入质者。
现代文：三月初五，停止各路四品以下官员的子孙入朝做人质。
English: On the 5th of March, the descendants of officials under the rank of four pins were banned from entering the imperial palace as hostages.

古文：田禹妖言，敕减死流之远方。
现代文：田禹散布妖言，敕令减去他的死罪充军到远方。
English: Tian Yu spread rumors, and the imperial edict reduced his capital punishment to exile to a faraway place.

古文：禁民间兵器，犯者验多寡定罪。
现代文：禁止民间私藏武器，违犯禁令的根据武器的多少定罪。
English: Civilian private possession of weapons is prohibited, and violators of the ban are convicted according to the number of weapons.

古文：甲子，敕怯绵率兵二千招谕建都。
现代文：十三日，敕令怯绵率领二千名士兵去招降建都。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Wu led 2,000 soldiers in a timid manner to recruit and build the capital.

古文：壬申，改毋章德山为定远城，武群山为武胜军。
现代文：二十一日，把母章德山改为定远城，武群山改为武胜军。
English: On the twenty-first day, the mother Zhang De Shan was changed to Dingyuancheng, and Wu Qunshan was changed to Wu Shengjun.

古文：丁丑，敕阿里等诣军前阅视军籍。
现代文：二十六日，敕令阿里等人前往军中观看、视察军队的名册。
English: On the 26th, the emperor ordered Ali and others to go to the army to watch and inspect the army's roster.

古文：罢诸路女直、契丹、汉人为达鲁花赤者，回回、畏兀、乃蛮、唐兀人仍旧。
现代文：罢免各路女真人、契丹人、汉人担任的镇守官，回回人、畏兀儿人、乃蛮人、唐兀人依然照旧。
English: The town guard officials who were appointed by Jurchens, Khitans, and Han Chinese were removed from their posts, but Hui Hui people, Hui children, Nao barbarians, and Tang Dynasty people remained as before.

古文：夏四月壬寅，遣使祀岳渎。
现代文：夏季，四月二十一日，派遣使臣去祭祀五大山四大水。
English: In the summer, on April 21, envoys were sent to the Five Great Mountains and Four Great Waters to offer sacrifices.

古文：五月辛亥朔，以太医院、拱卫司、教坊司及尚食、尚果、尚酝三局隶宣徽院。
现代文：五月初一，把太医院、拱卫司、教坊司以及尚食、尚果、尚酝三个局隶属于宣徽院。
English: On the first day of May, the Tai Hospital, the Arch Guard Division, the Teaching Division, and the three bureaus of Shang Cuisine, Shang Fruit, and Shang Xuan were subordinated to Xuan Hui Hospital.

古文：癸亥，都元帅百家奴拔宋嘉定五花、石城、白马三寨。
现代文：十三日，都元帅百家奴攻下宋朝嘉定的五花、石城、白马三个寨子。
English: On the 13th, Marshal Du and hundreds of slaves captured the three villages of Wufua, Shicheng and Baima in Jiading during the Song Dynasty.

古文：癸酉，赐诸王禾忽及八剌合币帛六万匹。
现代文：二十三日，赐给诸侯王禾忽及八剌合绢帛六万匹。
English: On the 23rd, he gave the princes 60,000 horses of the Wanghechu and the eight-horse yoke.

古文：六月辛巳朔，济南王保和以妖言惑众，谋作乱，敕诛首恶五人，余勿论。
现代文：六月初一，济南王保和用妖言蛊惑百姓，图谋叛乱，敕令将五名首恶者处死，其余的不予追究。
English: On the first day of June, King Baohe of Jinan used magical words to entice the people and plot a rebellion. He ordered that five of the worst offenders be put to death, while the rest would not be investigated.

古文：甲申，中山大雨雹。
现代文：初四，中山降下大冰雹。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, a large hailstone fell in Zhongshan.

古文：阿术言： 所领者蒙古军，若遇山水寨栅，非汉军不可。
现代文：阿术上奏说 ：我所率领的是蒙古军，如果遇到山水、寨栅，非得汉军不可。
English: Ah Jiu said: I am leading the Mongolian army, if we encounter mountains, rivers, and fortresses, the Han army will have to come.

古文：宜令史枢率汉军协力征进。 
现代文：应该命令史枢率领汉军协力征讨。 
English: Shizuru should be ordered to lead the Chinese army in a joint campaign.

古文：从之。戊申，东平等处蝗。
现代文：皇上允从，二十八日，东平等地发生蝗灾。
English: With the Emperor's consent, on the 28th, a plague of locusts broke out in the east.

古文：己酉，封诸王习列吉为河平王，赐驼钮金印。
现代文：二十九日，晋封诸侯王习列吉为河平王，赐给饰有骆驼钮的金印。
English: On the 29th, the prince of the princes Xi Leji was promoted to the king of the plain, and was given a gold seal decorated with a camel knob.

古文：秋七月辛亥，召翰林直学士高鸣，顺州知州刘瑜，中都郝谦、李天辅、韩彦文、李祐赴上都，以山东统军副使王仲仁戍眉州。
现代文：秋季，七月初二，征召翰林直学士高鸣，顺州知州刘瑜，中都的郝谦、李天辅、韩彦文、李前来上都。任命山东统军副使王仲仁戍守眉州。
English: In autumn, on the second day of the first month of July, Han Lin Zhi Ba Gao Ming, Shunzhou Chizhou Liu Yu, Zhongdu Zou Qian Qian, Li Tianyu, Han Yanwen and Li came to Shangdu, and appointed Wang Zhongren, deputy envoy of the Shandong United Army, to guard Meizhou.

古文：壬子，诏陕西统军司兼领军民钱谷。
现代文：初三，诏令陕西统军司兼管军民的钱粮。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he issued an edict to make Shaanxi the unified military department and in charge of the money grain of the military and the people.

古文：罢各路奥鲁官，令管民官兼领。
现代文：撤销各路管领军队辎重的奥鲁官，令各路管民官兼管辎重老营。
English: Revoke the Oulu official who is in charge of leading the army in each road, and make the civilian officials in charge of each road also be in charge of leading the old battalion.

古文：癸丑，立御史台，以右丞相塔察儿为御史大夫，诏谕之曰： 台官职在直言，朕或有未当，其极言无隐，毋惮他人，朕当尔主。 
现代文：初四，设立御史台，任命右丞相塔察儿为御史大夫，下诏晓谕他说： 御史台官员的职责在于直言敢谏，我处理事情说不定有不恰当的，希望能够尽量说出，无须隐晦，也不要顾忌别人，我会为您做主的。 
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he established the Imperial Historian's Office, and appointed the Minister of the Right, Tachara, as the Imperial Historian's Officer. The following edict was issued to him: The duty of an official of the Imperial Historian's Office is to be outspoken, I may have handled things inappropriately, I hope to be able to say as much as possible, there is no need to hide, and do not worry about others, I will be the one to decide for you.

古文：仍以诏谕天下。
现代文：并下诏通报全国。
English: It was also announced nationwide.

古文：立高州北二驿。
现代文：在高州北面设立两处驿站。
English: Two stations will be set up in the north of Gaozhou.

古文：戊辰，罢西夏宣抚司。
现代文：十九日，撤销西夏宣抚司。
English: On the 19th, the Xixia Proclamation Office was revoked.

古文：庚午，省诸路打捕鹰坊工匠洞冶总管府，令转运司兼领之。
现代文：二十一日，撤销各路的打捕鹰坊、工匠、洞冶的总管府，令转运司兼管这些机构的事务。
English: On the twenty-first day, the head offices of the various departments responsible for hunting eagles, craftsmen, and cave smiths were abolished, and the Transportation Department was also put in charge of the affairs of these institutions.

古文：丙子，立西夏惠民局。
现代文：二十七日，设立西夏惠民局。
English: On the 27th, the Xixia Huimin Bureau was established.

古文：高丽国王王禃遣其臣崔东秀来言备兵一万，造船千只。
现代文：高丽国王王礻直派遣使臣崔东秀前来禀告，准备了一万名士卒，建造了一千艘船。
English: The King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhi, sent an envoy, Choe Dong Soo, to pay his respects. He prepared ten thousand soldiers and built one thousand ships.

古文：诏遣都统领脱朵儿往阅之，就相视黑山日本道路，仍命耽罗别造船百艘以伺调用。
现代文：皇上诏令，派遣都统领脱朵儿前往查看，就便视察从黑山去日本的道路，并命令耽罗另造一百艘船以待调用。
English: On the Emperor's edict, he sent Tudor, the commander-in-chief, to investigate, and he inspected the road from Montenegro to Japan, and ordered Tanno to build another hundred ships to be called upon.

古文：诏四川行省赛典赤自利州还京兆，立东西二川统军司，以刘整为都元帅，与都元帅阿术同议军事。
现代文：诏令四川行省的赛典赤从利州返回京兆府。设置东西二川统军司，任命刘整为都元帅，与都元帅阿术一同商议军务大事。
English: He ordered Sai Dianchi of Sichuan Province to return from Lizhou to Jingzhao Prefecture, set up the East-West Second Sichuan United Military Department, appointed Liu Jie as the capital marshal, and discussed military affairs with the capital marshal Ah Shu.

古文：整至军中，议筑白河口、鹿门山，遣使以闻，许之。
现代文：刘整到军中，建议修筑白河口、鹿门山城垣，派遣使者奏闻皇帝，皇帝同意。
English: Liu Zhengyi went to the army and proposed to build the Baihekou and Lumen Mountain city walls, and sent an envoy to report to the emperor. The emperor agreed.

古文：罢军中诸司参议。
现代文：革去军中各司的参议。
English: The consultation of all departments in the army was abolished.

古文：八月乙酉，程思彬以投匿名书言斥乘舆，伏诛。
现代文：八月初六，程思彬因投递匿名信斥责皇帝，被处以死刑。
English: On August 6, Cheng Siping was sentenced to death for sending an anonymous letter rebuking the emperor.

古文：己丑，亳州大水。
现代文：初十，亳州发生大水。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, a big flood occurred in Zhangzhou.

古文：庚子，敕京师濒河立十仓。
现代文：二十一日，敕命京师在临河的地方修建十座粮仓。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Keishi died building ten grain silos in the vicinity of the river.

古文：命忙古带率兵六千征西番、建都。
现代文：命令忙古带率领六千名士卒征讨西番、建都。
English: He ordered He Guotai to lead six thousand nobles and soldiers to conquer the West Bank and build the capital.

古文：九月癸丑，中都路水，免今年田租。
现代文：九月初五，中都路发生水灾，免交今年田租。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, floods occurred in Zhongdu Road, and this year's field rent was exempted.

古文：罢中都路和顾所。
现代文：撤销中都路掌管雇佣工匠事务的和雇所。
English: revoking Zhongdu Road's control over the employment of craftsmen and employment agencies.

古文：丁巳，阿术统兵围樊城。
现代文：初九，阿术率军包围樊城。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Ah Xiu led an army to encircle Handan City.

古文：敕长春宫修设金箓周天大醮七昼夜。
现代文：敕令长春宫设立金周天大醮七昼夜。
English: The Emperor ordered the Changchun Imperial Palace to set up a seven-day and seven-night Golden Week.

古文：建尧庙及后土太宁宫。
现代文：修建尧帝庙和土地大神庙太宁宫。
English: The construction of the Emperor Gong Temple and the Land Great God Temple Taining Palace.

古文：庚申，赐安南国王陈光昞锦绣，及其诸臣有差。
现代文：十二日，赐给安南国王陈光日丙锦绣，他的大臣们也得到了数量不等的赏赐。
English: On the 12th, Chen Guangri, the king of Annan, was given a number of gifts, and his ministers also received a number of rewards.

古文：己丑，立河南屯田。
现代文：十七日，在河南建立屯田。
English: On the 17th, a military garrison was established in Henan.

古文：命兵部侍郎黑的、礼部侍郎殷弘赍国书复使日本，仍诏高丽国遣人导送，期于必达，毋致如前稽阻。
现代文：命令兵部侍郎黑的、礼部侍郎殷弘携带国书再次出使日本，仍然命高丽派人做向导陪同前往，务必达到目的，不要导致前一次那样稽留阻滞的结果。
English: He ordered the attendant of the military department, Kuro, and the attendant of the ceremonial department, Inhiro, to carry the national anthem to Japan again, and still ordered Koryo to send a guide to accompany them. It was important to achieve the goal, and not to lead to the same result as the previous delay.

古文：诏谕安南国陈光昞： 来奏称占城、真腊二寇侵扰，已命卿调兵与不干并力征讨，今复命云南王忽哥赤统兵南下，卿可遵前诏，遇有叛乱不庭为边寇者，发兵一同进讨，降服者善为抚绥。 
现代文：下诏昭示安南国王陈光日丙： 送达的奏章说占城、真腊两地的盗寇侵害、扰乱地方，早先已经命令你调兵和不干一起合力征讨，现在再命令云南王忽哥赤领兵南下，你可以遵照前诏，遇有叛乱，不服从朝廷成为边寇的，派兵和云南王一起进军征讨，凡投降归顺的则妥善地予以安抚。 
English: The following edict was issued to the king of Annam, Chen Guangri: The dispatched report said that the robbers and bandits in the two provinces of Champeng and Zhenla had violated and disturbed the localities. Earlier, you had ordered the transfer of troops and non-participants to join forces to fight, and now you ordered the king of Yunnan, Hu Ge, to lead the soldiers south. You can follow the previous edict. In case of rebellion, disobey the court and become a border robber, send troops to fight with the king of Yunnan. If you surrender, you will be properly pacified.

古文：车驾至自上都。
现代文：皇帝的车驾从上都到达。
English: The emperor's car drove from the capital to the capital.

古文：益都路饥，以米三十一万八千石赈之。
现代文：益都路发生饥荒，用三十一万八千石粮米赈济他们。
English: A famine occurred in Yidu Road, and 3.18 million kilos of grain and rice were used to feed them.

古文：复以史天泽为枢密副使。
现代文：再度任命史天泽担任枢密副使。
English: He reappointed Shi Tianze as vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：冬十月戊寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，发生日食。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：己卯，敕中书省、枢密院，凡有事与御史台官同奏。
现代文：敕令中书省、枢密院，凡属有事上奏，与御史台官员同奏。
English: The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the Privy Council were ordered to report to the Emperor and play along with the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office.

古文：立河南等路行中书省，以参知政事阿里行中书省事。
现代文：建立河南等路行中书省，任命参知政事阿里掌管中书省事务。
English: the establishment of Henan and other provinces of the People's Republic of China, and the appointment of the governor of the People's Republic of China, Ali, to take charge of the affairs of the People's Republic of China.

古文：庚辰，以御史中丞阿里为参知政事。
现代文：初三，任命御史中丞阿里为参知政事。
English: On the third day of the junior high school year, Mishi Chujo Ali was appointed to the post of co-governor.

古文：壬午，诏恤沿边诸军，其横科差赋，责奥鲁官偿之。
现代文：初五，下诏抚恤沿边境驻防的各军，那些妄行征收的赋税，责成掌管辎重老营的奥鲁官偿还百姓。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he issued an edict to compensate the troops stationed along the border for the taxes they had collected, and ordered the Oulu official in charge of the old camp to repay the people.

古文：庚寅，敕从臣秃忽思等录《毛诗》、《孟子》、《论语》。
现代文：十三日，敕令侍从官秃忽思等抄录《毛诗》、《孟子》、《论语》。
English: On the 13th, he ordered the attendant officer Zhao Qushi to transcribe "Mao Poems," "Mencius" and "Analects."

古文：乙未，享于太庙。
现代文：十八日，在太庙举行祭祀大典。
English: On the 15th, offerings were made to the Imperial Temple.

古文：中书省臣言： 前代朝廷必有起居注，故善政嘉谟不致遗失。 
现代文：中书省的大臣进言 ：前代的朝廷一定有皇帝的起居注，故而好的政绩和谋略不至于遗忘、丢失。 
English: Jin Yan, Minister of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy: The imperial court of the previous generation must have the emperor's living notes, so good political achievements and strategies will not be forgotten and lost.

古文：即以和礼霍孙、独胡剌充翰林待制兼起居注。
现代文：于是任命和礼霍孙、独胡剌充当翰林待制兼起居注官员。
English: As a result, He Li Huo-sun and Du Du Huan were appointed to serve as Hanlin's officials.

古文：敕给黎、雅、嘉定新附民田。
现代文：敕命给予黎州、雅州、嘉定新归附的百姓田地。
English: Li Zhou, Yazhou and Jiading were ordered to give the newly annexed land to the people.

古文：戊戌，宫城成。
现代文：二十一日，宫城建成。
English: On the 21st, Miyagi was completed.

古文：刘秉忠辞领中书省事，许之，为太保如故。
现代文：刘秉忠辞谢管领中书省事务，皇上允从，但仍和原来一样担任太保。
English: Liu Bingzhong resigned to take charge of the affairs of the Chinese Ministry of Literature, with the emperor's consent, but he still served as the imperial bodyguard.

古文：十一月己酉，签河南、山东边城附籍诸色户充军。
现代文：十一月初二，签征河南、山东边境城镇新入户籍的各类民户充任兵卒。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, all kinds of private households newly registered in the border towns of Henan and Shandong were conscripted.

古文：庚申，宋兵自襄阳来攻沿山诸寨，阿术分诸军御之，斩获甚众，立功将士千三百四人。
现代文：十三日，宋军从襄阳前来进攻沿山的各堡寨，阿术分派各军抵抗他们，杀死和俘获了很多敌人，立下战功的将士有一千三四百人。
English: On the 13th, the Song army came from Xiangyang to attack the fortresses along the mountain. Ah Shou dispatched various armies to resist them, killed and captured many enemies, and there were thirteen hundred and four hundred soldiers who distinguished themselves in the war.

古文：诏首立战功生擒敌军者，各赏银五十两，其余赏赉有差。
现代文：皇上下诏给首先立下战功，生擒敌军的战士各赏五十两银子，其余的立功者也给予数量不等的奖赏。
English: The emperor decreed that the first to make war merit would be rewarded with 50 taels of silver. The soldiers who captured the enemy army alive would also be rewarded with 50 taels of silver, and the rest of the meritorious persons would also be rewarded with different amounts.

古文：癸酉，御史台臣言： 立台数月，发擿甚多，追理侵欺粮粟近二十万石，钱物称是。 
现代文：二十六日，御史台大臣进言： 御史台建立几个月以来，揭发的罪案很多，追加审理侵吞、欺占的粮食就接近二十万石，钱物也相当于这个价值。 
English: On the 26th, the Minister of the Imperial Historical Records Office said: Since the Imperial Historical Records Office was established a few months ago, many crimes have been uncovered. The additional trial of the embezzlement and misappropriation of grain is close to 200,000 koku, and the money is also equivalent to this value.

古文：有诏褒谕。
现代文：皇上下诏予以褒扬。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict praising them.

古文：免南京、河南两路来岁修筑都城役夫。
现代文：免征南京、河南两路明年前来修筑大都城垣的民工。
English: Nanjing and Henan will be exempt from the levy for the migrant workers who come to build the city wall next year.

古文：十二月戊寅，以中都、济南、益都、淄莱、河间、东平、南京、顺天、顺德、真定、恩州、高唐、济州、北京等处大水，免今年田租。
现代文：十二月初二，由于中都、济南、益都、淄莱、河间、东平、南京、顺天、顺德、真定、恩州、高唐、济州、北京等处发生水灾，免交今年的田租。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, due to floods in Zhongdu, Jinan, Yidu, Wulai, Hema, Dongping, Nanjing, Shuntian, Shunde, Jinding, Enzhou, Gaotang, Jeju, Beijing and other places, this year's field rent will be exempted.

古文：敕二分、二至及圣诞节日，祭星于司天台。
现代文：敕令：春分、秋分、夏至、冬至，以及皇上寿诞的日子，在司天台祭祀星宿。
English: Imperial edict: On the vernal equinox, autumnal equinox, summer solstice, winter solstice, and the day of the Emperor's birthday, star lodges are to be worshipped at the Sittendai.

古文：诏谕四川行省沿边屯戍军士逃役者处死。
现代文：下诏给四川行省：沿边境屯驻、戍守的士兵，凡是逃避服役的处死。
English: The following edict is issued to the Sichuan Province: All soldiers stationed or garrisoned along the border who evade military service will be executed.

古文：复置乾州奉天县，省好畤、永寿入焉。
现代文：恢复设置乾州奉天县，这是废置了好县、永寿县而划入乾州的。
English: The resumption of the establishment of Qianzhou Bongtian County, which is the abolition of Yao County and Yongshou County and is included in Qianzhou.

古文：以凤州隶兴元路；德兴府改奉圣州，隶宣德。
现代文：把凤州隶属于兴元路；把德兴府改为奉圣州，隶属于宣德府。
English: To subordinate Fengzhou to Xingyuan Road; to change Dexing Prefecture to Fengsheng Prefecture, which is subordinate to Xuande Prefecture.

古文：是岁，京兆大旱。
现代文：这一年，京兆府发生大旱。
English: That year, a severe drought occurred in Keicho Prefecture.

古文：天下户一百六十五万二百八十六，断死罪六十九人。
现代文：全国共有一百六十五万零二百八十六户。全年判处死刑的罪犯共六十九人。
English: There were a total of 1,652,286 households in the country, and a total of 69 criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：赐诸王金、银、币、帛如岁例。
现代文：按照每年的常例赐给诸侯王黄金、白银、钞币、绢帛。
English: According to the annual practice, the princes were given gold, silver, banknotes and ingots.

古文：六年春正月癸丑，高丽国王王禃遣使以诛权臣金俊来告，赐历日、西锦。
现代文：至元六年春，正月初七，高丽国王王礻直派遣使臣把处死权臣金俊的事奏告皇上，皇上赐给高丽新年历书、西域锦缎。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the seventh day of the first month of the year, the King of Goryeo, Wang Yeongjong, dispatched an envoy to report the execution of the powerful minister, Kim Jun, to the emperor. The emperor gave the Goryeo New Year's Calendar and the Seogwip brocade.

古文：立四道按察司。
现代文：设立四道按察司。
English: Set up a four-way inspection division.

古文：戊午，阿术军入宋境，至复州、德安府、荆山等处，俘万人而还。
现代文：十二日，阿术的军队攻入宋朝境内，抵达复州、德安府、荆山等处，俘获一万人而返回。
English: On the 12th, the army of Ah Shou invaded the Song Dynasty and arrived in Fuzhou, De'an Prefecture, Jingshan and other places, captured 10,000 people and returned.

古文：庚申，以参知政事杨果为怀孟路总管。
现代文：十四日，任命参知政事杨果为怀孟路总管。
English: On the 14th, Yang Guo, a political advisor to the governor, was appointed as the general manager of Huai Meng Road.

古文：甲戌，益都、淄莱大水，恩州饥，命赈之。
现代文：二十八日，益都、淄莱发生大水，恩州发生饥荒，皇上命令赈济这些地方。
English: On the 28th, heavy water occurred in Yidu and Balai, and famine occurred in Enzhou. The emperor ordered to provide relief to these places.

古文：敕史天泽与枢密副使驸马忽剌出董师襄阳。
现代文：敕令史天泽和枢密副使，驸马忽剌出到襄阳督师。
English: The imperial commanding officer Shi Tianze and the vice-envoy of the Privy Council, Yao Ma, suddenly went to the inspector of Xiangyang.

古文：二月壬午，以立四道提刑按察司诏谕诸道。
现代文：二月初六，把设立四道提刑按察司的事下诏谕示各道。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, the establishment of the four-way penalty according to the inspector was announced to each way.

古文：己丑，诏以新制蒙古字颁行天下。
现代文：十三日，下诏把新创制的蒙古文字颁行于全国。
English: On the 13th, the newly created Mongolian script was promulgated throughout the country.

古文：丙申，罢宣德府税课所，以上都转运司兼领。
现代文：二十日，撤销宣德府的税课所，命令上都转运司兼管宣德府的税课。
English: On the 20th, the tax office of Xuandefu was revoked, and the order was issued to transfer the transportation department and take charge of the tax office of Xuandefu.

古文：改河南、怀孟、顺德三路税课所为转运司。
现代文：把河南、怀孟、顺德三个路的税课所改成转运司。
English: The three tax offices in Henan, Huai Meng and Shunde will be transformed into transit departments.

古文：丁酉，签民兵二万赴襄阳。
现代文：二十一日，签征民兵二万名前往襄阳。
English: On the 21st, 20,000 militiamen signed up to go to Xiangyang.

古文：赈欠州人匠贫乏者米五千九百九十九石。
现代文：赈济欠州贫穷的工匠五千九百九十九石粮食。
English: He gave 5,999 koku of grain to poor artisans in Guizhou.

古文：敕： 鞍、靴、箭镞等物，自今不得以黄金为饰。 
现代文：皇上敕令： 马鞍、靴子、弓矢等物品，今后不得用黄金作为装饰。 
English: Imperial edict: Saddles, boots, bows and arrows and other items must not be decorated with gold in the future.

古文：开元等路饥，减户赋布二匹，秋税减其半，水达达户减青鼠二，其租税被灾者免征。
现代文：开元等路发生饥荒，减征每户的赋税布两匹，秋税减征一半，水达达户减征两张青鼠皮，受灾户免收租税。
English: During the famine in Kaiyuan and other areas, the tax on each household was reduced by two pieces of cloth, the autumn tax was reduced by half, the water tax was reduced by two green mouse skins, and the affected households were exempt from tax.

古文：免单丁贫乏军士一千九百余户为民。
现代文：贫困而独子当兵的军户一千九百多户免服兵役，复员为民户。
English: More than 1,900 impoverished military households whose only son was a soldier were exempted from military service and demobilized as private households.

古文：癸卯，给河南行省钞千锭犒军。
现代文：二十七日，给予河南行省钱钞一千锭犒劳士卒。
English: On the 27th, a 1,000-baht saving banknote was given to laborers traveling to Henan.

古文：三月甲寅，诏益都路签军万人，人给钞二十五贯。
现代文：三月初九，下诏令益都路签征士兵一万人，每人给予钱钞二十五贯。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, the emperor issued an edict to conscript 10,000 soldiers along the Yidu Road, each of whom would be given 25 yuan in banknotes.

古文：戊午，赈曹州饥。
现代文：十三日，赈济曹州的饥荒。
English: On the 13th, the famine in Caozhou began.

古文：筑堡鹿门山。
现代文：在鹿门山修筑堡寨。
English: The construction of a fortified village in Lumen Mountain.

古文：夏四月辛巳，制玉玺大小十纽。
现代文：夏季，四月初六，制造大小不同的玉玺十颗。
English: In the summer, on the 6th day of the 4th month, ten jade bracelets of different sizes are made.

古文：甲午，遣使祀岳渎。
现代文：十九日，派遣使者祭祀五岳四渎。
English: On the 19th, an emissary was sent to offer sacrifices to the Five Mountains and the Four Deities.

古文：大名等路饥，赈米十万石。
现代文：大名等路发生饥荒，赈济粮米十万石。
English: Famine occurred in Daimyo and other areas, and 100,000 koku of grain and rice were donated.

古文：五月丙午，东平路饥，赈米四万一千三百余石。
现代文：五月初一，东平路发生饥荒，赈济四万一千三百多石米。
English: On the first day of May, famine occurred in Dongping Road, and more than 41,300 stone meters were saved.

古文：辛酉，诏禁戍边军士牧践屯田禾稼。
现代文：十六日，下诏禁止戍守边境的士兵放牧牲畜践踏屯田的庄稼。
English: On the 16th, the following edict prohibited the soldiers guarding the border from grazing livestock and trampling the crops of the occupied fields.

古文：六月辛巳，以招讨怯绵征建都败绩，又擅追唆火儿玺书、金符，处死。
现代文：六月初七，因为招讨使怯绵征伐建都招致失败，又加上擅自追索唆火儿的玺书、金符，被处死。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, he was put to death for inviting and causing the failure of the timid campaign to conquer and build the capital, as well as for illegally seeking and instigating the burning of the imperial edicts and gold certificates.

古文：壬午，免益都新签军单丁者千六百二十一人为民。
现代文：初八，益都新签发的士兵中的一千六百二十一名独生子免服兵役为民。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the only son of one thousand six hundred and twenty-one newly issued soldiers in Yidu was exempted from military service.

古文：丁亥，河南、河北、山东诸郡蝗。
现代文：十三日，河南、河北、山东各州郡发生蝗灾。
English: On the 13th, locust plague occurred in Henan, Hebei and Shandong provinces and counties.

古文：癸巳，敕： 真定等路旱蝗，其代输筑城役夫户赋悉免之。 
现代文：十九日，皇上敕令： 真定各路发生旱灾和蝗灾，该地区代那些修筑城垣的夫役交纳的赋税全部免除。 
English: On the 19th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: Due to the drought and locust plagues, all taxes paid on behalf of those who built the city walls in the area were exempted.

古文：丙申，高丽国王王禃遣其世子愖来朝，赐禃玉带一，愖金五十两，从官银币有差。
现代文：二十二日，高丽国王王礻直派遣他的世子王忄甚前来朝见，皇上赐予王礻直玉带一根，赐给王忄甚黄金五十两，随从的官员也赐予数目不等的银两和钞币。
English: On the 22nd, the King of Goryeo, Wang Xizhi, sent his heir, Wang Xizhi, to the imperial court. The emperor gave Wang Xizhi a jade belt, gave Wang Xizhi fifty taels of gold, and the accompanying officials also gave varying amounts of silver taels and banknotes.

古文：壬寅，阿术率兵万五千人厄宋万山、射垛冈、鬼门关樵苏之路。
现代文：二十八日，阿术率领一万五千名士卒扼守宋朝的万山、射垛冈、鬼门关打柴割草的道路。
English: On the 28th, Ah Ju led fifteen thousand dignitaries to protect the Song Dynasty's Wanshan, Shaoshan Hill, and Kinmen Pass roads.

古文：癸卯，诏董文炳等率兵二万二千人南征。
现代文：二十九日，下诏令董文炳率领二万二千名士卒征伐南方。
English: On the 29th, the emperor ordered Dong Wenyi to lead 22,000 soldiers to invade the south.

古文：东昌路饥，赈米二万七千五百九十石。
现代文：东昌路发生饥荒，赈济二万七千五百九十石米。
English: Famine occurred in Dongchang Road, and 27,590 koku meters of rice were provided.

古文：秋七月丁巳，遣宋私商四十五人还其国。
现代文：秋季，七月十三日，遣送宋朝的私商四十五人返回他们本国。
English: In the autumn, on July 13th, 45 smugglers from the Song Dynasty were sent back to their home countries.

古文：庚申，水军千户邢德立、张志等生擒宋荆鄂都统唐永坚，赏银币有差。
现代文：十六日，水军千户邢德立、张志等生擒宋朝荆鄂都统唐永坚，赏赐他们数量不等的银两和钱钞。
English: On the 16th, Tang Yongjian, the ruler of the Song Dynasty, awarded a number of silver coins and banknotes to the sailors of the Thousand Households of Zhu De Li, Zhang Zhi and others.

古文：辛酉，制太常寺祭服。
现代文：十七日，制成太常寺祭祀用的礼服。
English: On the seventeenth day, a ceremonial dress for the Taijo-ji Temple was made.

古文：壬戌，西京大雨雹。
现代文：十八日，西京天降大雨冰雹。
English: On the 18th, heavy rain and hail fell in Xijing.

古文：己巳，立诸路蒙古字学。
现代文：二十五日，设立各路的蒙古文字学校。
English: On the 25th, Mongolian script schools in various regions were established.

古文：癸酉，立国子学。
现代文：二十九日，建立最高学府国子学。
English: On the 29th, Kuniko Gaku, the highest level of education, was established.

古文：诏遣官审理诸路冤滞，正犯死罪明白者，各正典刑，其杂犯死罪以下量断遣之。
现代文：下诏派遣官员审理各个路的冤案和滞留未决的案犯。凡是明确无误应处死罪的正犯，各依据刑律治罪；那些死罪以下的各类杂犯，则酌量情况判决、遣送。
English: Under the edict, officials will be dispatched to try all kinds of unjust cases and unsolved criminals. All serious criminals who are clearly and unambiguously subject to the death penalty will be punished according to the criminal law; all kinds of minor criminals who are not subject to the death penalty will be sentenced and deported according to the circumstances.

古文：又诏谕宋国官吏军民，示以不欲用兵之意。
现代文：又下诏晓谕宋朝的官吏军民，表示不打算打仗的意思。
English: He also issued an edict to the officials, soldiers and people of the Song Dynasty, expressing his intention not to go to war.

古文：复遣都统领脱朵儿、统领王国昌等往高丽点阅所备兵船，及相视耽罗等处道路。
现代文：再度派遣都统领脱朵儿、统领王国昌等前往高丽清点、视察所准备的兵船，并察看耽罗等地方的道路情况。
English: Once again, he dispatched General Tudor, General Wang Guochang and others to the Korean Peninsula to inspect the prepared warships, and to inspect the road conditions in Tanro and other places.

古文：立西蜀四川监榷茶场使司。
现代文：设立西蜀四川监榷茶场使司。
English: Set up the West Shu Sichuan Supervisor and Tea Industry Envoy Division.

古文：宋将夏贵率兵船三千至鹿门山，万户解汝楫、李庭率舟师败之，俘杀二千余人，获战舰五十艘。
现代文：宋朝将领夏贵率领三千艘兵船到达鹿门山，万户解汝楫、李庭率领水师击败了他，俘获杀死宋兵二千多人，缴获战舰五十艘。
English: Song Dynasty general Xia Gui led three thousand warships to reach Lumen Mountain. Wanhu Xie Rong and Li Ting led the sailors to defeat him, captured and killed more than two thousand Song soldiers, and captured fifty warships.

古文：八月己卯，立金州招讨司。
现代文：八月初六，建立金州招讨使。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the Jinzhou Recruitment Envoy was established.

古文：丙申，以沙、肃州钞法未行，降诏谕之。
现代文：二十三日，因为沙州、肃州钞法未能通行，下诏将钞法晓谕这些地区。
English: On the 23rd, because the banknote laws of Shazhou and Suzhou could not be passed, the banknote laws were promulgated to these regions.

古文：诏诸路劝课农桑。
现代文：诏令各路，鼓励百姓学习种田养蚕。
English: The Emperor issued an edict to encourage the people to learn how to farm and raise silkworms.

古文：命中书省采农桑事，列为条目，仍令提刑按察司与州县官相风土之所宜，讲究可否，别颁行之。
现代文：命令中书省搜集有关农桑的情况，编列成为条目，并命令提刑按察司和各州县的官员观察各地风土所宜，探究是否可以实行，另行颁布条令推行之。
English: In the order, the Ministry of Education and Culture was ordered to collect the information about the agricultural mulberry, compile it into an article, and order the penalty to be raised according to the inspector general and the officials of each state and county to observe the local customs, explore whether it can be implemented, and issue a separate regulation to implement it.

古文：高丽国世子愖奏，其国臣僚擅废国王王禃，立其弟安庆公淐。
现代文：高丽国的世子王忄甚上奏说，他们国内的臣僚擅自废掉了国王王礻直，另立国王的弟弟安庆公王氵昌为国王。
English: The heir of the Koryo Kingdom, Wang Junchang, said that their domestic ministers had arbitrarily abolished King Wang Junchang and set up the king's brother, Prince Anqing, as king.

古文：诏遣斡朵思不花、李谔等往其国详问，条具以闻。
现代文：皇帝下诏，派斡朵思不花、李谔等前往高丽详细询问情况，列具条文上奏。
English: The emperor issued an edict, and sent his emissaries, such as Do Sifu Hua and Li Jie, to Goryeo to inquire about the situation in detail, and to prepare the articles for publication.

古文：九月癸丑，恩州进嘉禾，一茎三穗。
现代文：九月初十，恩州进献嘉禾，一株长出了三支穗子。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month, Enzhou presented Jiahe, and one plant grew three spikes.

古文：戊午，敕民间贷钱取息，虽逾限止偿一本息。
现代文：十五日，敕令民间借贷钱款收取利息，即使超过了偿还的期限，也只偿还一本之息。
English: On the 15th, the government ordered the private lending money to charge interest, and even if the repayment period is exceeded, only one interest will be repaid.

古文：己未，授高丽世子王愖特进上柱国、东安公。
现代文：十六日，授予高丽国世子王忄甚特进上柱国、东安公的尊号。
English: On the 16th, the honorific title of Dongan Gong was conferred on the heir of Goryeo, Wang Jinshi, who entered Shangzhu Province.

古文：壬戌，丰州、云内、东胜旱，免其租赋。
现代文：十九日，丰州、云内、东胜发生旱灾，免征他们的租税。
English: On the 19th, Fuzhou, Yunnai and Dongsheng were exempted from tax due to drought.

古文：戊辰，敕高丽世子愖率兵三千赴其国难，愖辞东安公，乃授特进上柱国。
现代文：二十五日，敕令高丽世子王忄甚率领三千名兵卒回国解救国难。王忄甚推辞东安公的尊号，于是授予他特进上柱国。
English: On the 25th, the Emperor ordered the heir of Goryeo, Wang Bingyi, to lead 3,000 soldiers back to Korea to relieve the national distress. Wang Bingyi refused the honorary title of Dongan Gong, and therefore granted him a special entry into Shangzhuang.

古文：辛未，敕管军万户宋仲义征高丽。
现代文：二十八日，敕令管军万户宋仲义征讨高丽。
English: On the 28th day of the month, Song Zhongyi, the commander-in-chief of thousands of households, went to conquer Korea.

古文：以忽剌出、史天泽并平章政事，阿里中书右丞，行河南等路中书省事，赛典赤行陕西五路西蜀四川中书省事。
现代文：命忽剌出、史天泽均担任平章政事，阿里任中书右丞，掌管河南等路的中书省事务，赛典赤掌管陕西五路、西蜀、四川的中书省事务。
English: Soon after his death, Shi Tianze served as the political affairs of Pingzhang, Ali was appointed as the political affairs of Zhongshu Ruzheng, in charge of the affairs of Zhongshu Province in Henan and other provinces, and Sai Dianchi was in charge of the affairs of Zhongshu Province in the five provinces of Shaanxi, West Shu and Sichuan.

古文：车驾至自上都。
现代文：皇上的车驾从上都来到。
English: The emperor's car drove from the capital to the capital.

古文：斡朵思不花、李谔以高丽刑部尚书金方庆至，奉权国王淐表，诉国王禃遘疾，令弟淐权国事。
现代文：斡朵思不花、李谔带引高丽国刑部尚书金方庆来到，奉上代理国王王氵昌的表章，陈奏国王王礻直患病，令他的弟弟王氵昌暂时执掌国政的事。
English: It didn't take much thought to arrange a meeting, and Ri Su Yong brought the head of the Koryo State Criminal Department, Shang Shu Kim Fang Ching, and presented him with the seal of the acting king, Wang Bingchang. Chen explained that King Wang Bingzhi was ill and that his brother, Wang Bingchang, was temporarily in charge of state affairs.

古文：冬十月己卯，定朝仪服色。
现代文：冬季，十月初七，确定朝廷礼仪和朝服的颜色。
English: In winter, on the 7th day of the 10th month, the color of the imperial etiquette and the imperial robe are determined.

古文：壬午，升高唐、冠氏并为州。
现代文：初十，把高唐、冠氏都升格为州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Gaotang and Guanxi were both upgraded to prefectures.

古文：丁亥，广平路旱，免租赋。
现代文：十五日，广平路发生旱灾，免征该地区租税。
English: On the 15th, a drought occurred in Guangping Road, and the area was exempted from tax.

古文：诏遣兵部侍郎黑的、淄莱路总管府判官徐世雄，召高丽国王王禃、王弟淐及权臣林衍俱赴阙。
现代文：下诏派遣兵部侍郎黑的、淄莱路总管府判官徐世雄，征召高丽国王王礻直、王弟王氵昌以及权臣林衍全部前来京师。
English: The following edict dispatched Xu Shixiong, the general of the Military Department, and the judge of the General Administration Office of the Goryeo Road, to summon the King of Goryeo, Wang Xizhi, the King's brother, Wang Shichang, and the powerful minister, Lin Yan, all to come to Beijing.

古文：命国王头辇哥以兵压其境，赵璧行中书省于东京，仍降诏谕高丽国军民。
现代文：命令蒙古国王头辇哥率军逼近高丽的边境，赵璧在东京路执掌中书省事务。仍旧下诏晓谕高丽的军民。
English: The Mongolian King ordered his army to approach the border of Goryeo, and Zhao Bi took charge of the affairs of the Chinese Ministry of Education in Tokyo Road. He still issued an edict to the soldiers and civilians of Goryeo.

古文：庚子，太阴犯辰星。
现代文：二十八日，太阴星干犯心宿天区。
English: On the 28th day of the lunar month, the yin and yang stars are aligned in the sky.

古文：宋遣人馈盐、粮入襄阳，我军获之。
现代文：宋朝派人送食盐粮米进入襄阳，被我军截获。
English: The Song Dynasty sent people to bring salt, grain and rice into Xiangyang, but they were intercepted by our army.

古文：赐诸王奥鲁赤驼钮金镀银印。
现代文：赐予诸侯王奥鲁赤饰有骆驼形钮键的镀金银印。
English: A gold-plated silver seal with a camel-shaped button was given to the vassal king Auroch.

古文：十一月癸卯，高丽都统领崔坦等，以林衍作乱，挈西京五十余城来附。
现代文：十一月初二，高丽国都统领崔坦等，因为林衍作乱，带领西京五十多个城邑前来归附。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Choe Tan, the leader of the capital of Goryeo, led more than 50 cities and towns of Saikyo to annexation because of Lin Yan's rebellion.

古文：丁未，签王綧、洪茶丘军三千人往定高丽。
现代文：初六，签征王纟享、洪茶丘军的三千名士兵前去平定高丽。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, 3,000 soldiers from the armies of Wang Bingxuan and Hong Cha Kuo marched to pacify Goryeo.

古文：高丽西京都统李延龄乞益兵，遣忙哥都率兵二千赴之。
现代文：高丽的西京都统李延龄请求增兵，朝廷派遣忙哥都率两千名士卒前往增援。
English: Goryeo's Western General Ri Yanling requested more troops, and the imperial court dispatched Bushy Goto and two thousand dignitaries to reinforce.

古文：庚午，敕： 诸路鳏寡废疾之人，月给米二斗。 
现代文：二十九日，皇上敕命 ：各路的鳏寡及残疾人每月发给粮米二斗。 
English: On the 29th, the emperor died: widows and widowers of all walks of life and the disabled were given two buckets of grain and rice every month.

古文：安南国王陈光昞遣使来贡。
现代文：安南国王陈光日丙派遣使臣前来进贡。
English: Annan's king, Chen Guangri, sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：济南饥，以米十二万八千九百石赈之。
现代文：济南发生饥荒，朝廷拨给粮米十二万八千九百石赈济饥民。
English: When a famine occurred in Jinan, the imperial court allocated 128,900 koku of grain and rice to feed the starving people.

古文：高丽国王王禃遣其尚书礼部侍郎朴烋从黑的入朝，表称受诏已复位，寻当入觐。
现代文：高丽国王王礻直派遣他的尚书礼部侍郎朴休灬跟随黑的入朝，上表章说接到皇帝的诏书已恢复王位，不久就会入朝觐见皇上。
English: The King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhong, sent his attendant of the Imperial Protocol Department, Pak Huye, to follow the Black Emperor's entry into the imperial court. The above seal said that the throne had been restored after receiving the Emperor's edict, and that he would soon enter the imperial court to see the Emperor.

古文：筑新城于汉江西。十二月戊子，筑东安浑河堤。
现代文：在汉江以西修筑新城。十二月十七日，修筑东安浑河的堤防。
English: A new city is being built west of the Han River. On December 17th, the embankment of the Dong'an Hunhe River was completed.

古文：己丑，作佛事于太庙七昼夜。
现代文：十八日，在太庙做佛事七昼夜。
English: On the 18th, he performed Buddhist rites for seven days and nights in Taimiao.

古文：高唐、固安二州饥，以米二万六百石赈之。
现代文：高唐、固安二州发生饥荒，拨给粮米二万零六百石以赈济饥民。
English: A famine occurred in the two prefectures of Gaotang and Gu'an, and 20,600 kilos of grain and rice were allocated to help the starving people.

古文：析彰德、怀孟、卫辉为三路，升林虑县为林州，改桢州复为韩城县，并省冯翊等州县十所，以懿州、广宁等府隶东京。
现代文：把彰德、怀孟、卫辉分为三路，把林虑县升格为林州，把桢州重新改为韩城县，合并、减少冯翊等十所州县，把懿州、广宁等府隶属于东京。
English: Dividing Changde, Huai Meng and Wei Hui into three districts, upgrading Linxian County to Linzhou, changing Luzhou back to Hancheng County, merging and reducing Fengye and other ten prefectures, and subordinating Luzhou and Guangning to Tokyo.

古文：是岁，天下户一百六十八万四千一百五十七。
现代文：这一年，全国共一百六十八万四千一百五十七户。
English: In that year, there were a total of 1,684,157 households in the country.

古文：赐诸王金、银、币、帛如岁例。
现代文：按每年常例赐给诸侯王黄金、白银、钱钞、绢帛。
English: According to the annual practice, the princes were given gold, silver, banknotes and ingots.

古文：断死罪四十二人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯共四十二人。
English: A total of 42 criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

