古文：郁人掌祼器。
现代文：郁人掌管行裸礼的器具。
English: Ikujin is in charge of the nudity equipment.

古文：凡祭祀、宾客之祼事，和郁鬯以实彝而陈之。
现代文：凡祭祀或招待宾客有行裸礼的事，就调和郁鬯盛在彝中而加以陈设。
English: Whenever there is a matter of nudity at a religious service or when inviting guests, it is arranged in the middle of the coffin in accordance with Ikuhimori.

古文：凡祼玉，濯之陈之，以赞祼事，诏祼将之仪与其节。
现代文：凡行裸礼用的圭瓒、璋瓒，要洗涤干净，加以陈设，而佐助行裸礼，告教王献裸的礼仪和时间。
English: All the chasubles and cymbals used for the naked ceremony should be washed clean and displayed, while the assistants should perform the naked ceremony and teach the king the etiquette and time for the offering of the naked.

古文：凡祼事，活盥。
现代文：凡行裸礼都要洗手。
English: All those who perform naked prostrations should wash their hands.

古文：大丧之渳，共其肆器。
现代文：有大丧将洗沐尸体，供给洗沐所用的器具。
English: A grand mourner will wash the body and provide the utensils used for washing.

古文：及葬，共其祼器，遂狸之。
现代文：到将出葬时，供给设遣奠所需的裸器，用毕随即埋掉。
English: When the time comes for the funeral, provide the bare utensils needed for the memorial service, and bury them immediately afterwards.

古文：大祭祀，与量人受举斝之卒爵而饮之。
现代文：大祭祀的礼仪完毕后，同量人一起接受王所赐最后一斝酒而饮之。
English: After the ceremony of the great sacrifice was over, everyone in the same amount received the last sip of wine given by the king and drank it.

古文：鬯人掌共秬鬯而饰之。
现代文：鬯人掌管供应柜鬯并用布巾覆盖。
English: The person in charge of the supply cupboard ripped it up and covered it with a cloth.

古文：凡祭祀，社壝用大罍，禜门用瓢赍，庙用修，凡山川四方用蜃，凡祼事用概，凡疈事用散。
现代文：祭祀盛酒的器具，凡祭祀社稷用大垦，在国都城门举行萦祭用瓢盛酒，宗庙祭祀用卣尊，凡祭祀山川和四方用蜃尊，凡行埋祭用概尊，凡毁折牲体祭祀四方小神用散尊。
English: For the sake-serving utensils, the large ladle is used for the sake-serving ceremony, the large ladle is used for the sake-serving ceremony held at the capital city gate, the large ladle is used for the sake-serving ceremony held at the ancestral temple, the large ladle is used for the sake-serving ceremony held at the mountain and river, the small ladle is used for the sake-serving ceremony held at the four directions, the small ladle is used for the sake-serving ceremony held at the burial site, and the small ladle is used for the sake-serving ceremony held at the broken animal.

古文：大丧之大渳，设斗，共其衅鬯。
现代文：大丧将为尸体沐洗，就设置斗，供给涂抹尸体用的柜鬯。
English: The funeral director will wash the body, set up a bucket, and provide a cabinet for smearing the body.

古文：凡王之齐事，共其衅鬯。
现代文：凡王斋戒，供给沐洗用的柜鬯。
English: All the kings of the earth have fasted and have supplied basins for washing.

古文：凡王吊临，共介鬯。
现代文：凡王临吊臣下，供给洒被王身用的柜鬯。
English: Every king hangs out with his vassals and provides them with counters that are used by the king himself.

古文：鸡人掌共鸡牲，辨其物。
现代文：鸡人掌管供给祭祀用的鸡牲，辨别鸡牲的毛色。
English: The chicken man is in charge of providing chicken animals for sacrifice, and distinguishing the fur color of chicken animals.

古文：大祭祀，夜虖旦，以百官。
现代文：举行大祭祀，夜将尽时就呼喊天亮了以叫起百官。
English: A great ritual was held, and at the end of the night, they called for the dawn to wake up the hundreds of officials.

古文：凡国之大宾客、会同、军旅、丧纪，亦如之。
现代文：凡王国有招待来朝诸侯、会同、征伐、丧事等，也这样做。
English: All kingdoms that have invitations to come to the imperial court, gatherings, conquests, funerals, etc., do the same.

古文：凡国事为期，则告之时。
现代文：凡王国有事确定了行事的时间，就把时问报告主事官吏。
English: Whenever there is a matter in the kingdom for which the time for action has been fixed, the time shall be reported to the responsible official.

古文：凡祭祀面禳衅，共其鸡牲。
现代文：凡祭祀，或四面禳祭以消灾，或举行衅礼，供给所需的鸡牲。
English: Whenever there is a religious ceremony, or a sacrifice is offered on all sides to ward off disaster, or a rite of defiance is held, the necessary chickens and animals are provided.

古文：司尊彝掌六尊、六彝之位、诏其酌，辨其用与其实。
现代文：司尊彝掌管六尊、六彝的陈列位置，告教执事者酌酒，辨别各种尊彝的用途以及所当盛的酒。
English: The chief abbot presided over the display of the six statues and six jars, and told the deacon to drink wine and distinguish the uses of the various jars and the wine to be served.

古文：春祠、夏禴，祼用鸡彝、鸟彝，皆有舟。其朝践用两献尊，其再献用两象尊，皆有罍。
现代文：宗庙春季举行祠祭，夏季举行榆祭，行裸礼用鸡彝、鸟彝，都有托盘；行朝践礼用两牺尊，行醑礼用两象尊，春祠和夏禴都设有基，供诸臣酌酒行自酢礼。
English: The ancestral temple holds an ancestral shrine festival in spring, and a bonfire festival in summer. There are trays with chicken and bird feathers for the naked ceremony; two sacrificial statues are used for the morning ceremony, and two elephant statues are used for the bonfire ceremony. Both the spring shrine and the summer shrine have a base for the vassals to drink wine and have a self-wine ceremony.

古文：诸臣之所昨也，秋尝、冬烝，祼用斝彝、黄彝，皆有舟。其朝献用两著尊，其馈献用两壶尊，皆有罍，诸臣之所昨也。
现代文：秋季举行尝祭，冬季举行熏祭，行裸礼用稼彝、黄彝，都有托盘；行酯礼用两著尊，行馈食礼用两壶尊，秋尝和冬蒸都设有孽，供诸臣酌酒行自酢礼。
English: The tasting festival is held in autumn, the incense festival is held in winter, and there are trays for the naked rites with rice and barley; there are two statues for the ester rite, and two pots for the feeding rite. Both the autumn tasting and the winter steaming are set up, for the ministers to drink wine and make vinegar rites.

古文：凡四时之闲祀、追享、朝享，祼用虎彝、蜼彝，皆有舟。其朝践用两大尊，其再献用两山尊，皆有罍，诸臣之所昨也。
现代文：凡四季之间的祭祀，如追享、朝享，行裸礼用虎彝、蛙彝，都有托盘；行朝践礼用两大尊，行醑礼用两山尊，追享和朝享都设有基，供诸臣酌酒行自酢礼。
English: All the rituals between the four seasons, such as the pursuit of enjoyment, the morning enjoyment, and the naked ceremony with the tiger and frog, have a tray; the morning ceremony with the two major deities, the morning ceremony with the two mountain deities, the pursuit of enjoyment and the morning enjoyment all have a base, for the ministers to drink wine and perform the self-wine ceremony.

古文：凡六彝六尊之酌，郁齐献酌，醴齐缩酌，盎齐涚，凡酒修酌。
现代文：凡六彝、六尊中之酒的酌用，郁鬯要经过搓拌再过滤而后酌用，醴齐用茅草过滤而后酌用，盎齐用清酒掺和经过滤而后酌用，三酒要掺和明水再过滤而后酌用。
English: For the drinking of the six kinds and six kinds of Chinese liquor, the yakitori should be stirred and then filtered and then drunk, the koji should be filtered with thatch and then drunk, the ounce should be mixed with sake and then filtered and then drunk, and the three kinds of liquor should be mixed with water and then filtered and then drunk.

古文：大丧，存奠彝。
现代文：王、王后或太子的丧事，省视举行大遗奠时所设的彝尊。
English: For the funeral of a king, queen, or prince, it depends on the yakitori set up at the time of the memorial service.

古文：大旅，亦如之。
现代文：举行大旅祭也负责省视彝尊。
English: The province is also responsible for holding the Grand Journey Festival.

古文：司几筵掌五几、五席之名物，辨其须知与其位。
现代文：司几筵掌管五几、五席的名称种类，辨别它们的用途和所当布设的位置。
English: The Division of Geometry is in charge of naming the types of pentagons and pentagons, distinguishing their uses and where they should be placed.

古文：凡大朝觐、大飨射，凡封国、命诸侯，王位设黼依，依前南乡，设莞筵、纷纯，加缫席、画纯，加次席、黼纯。
现代文：凡大朝觐、大飨礼、大射礼，凡封建国家、策命诸侯，在王位设置黼依，黼依的前边面向南布设有黑丝带镶边的莞席，莞席上加放边缘画有云气图案的五彩蒲席，蒲席上再加绣有黑白花纹镶边的竹席，席左右两端设玉几。
English: In all great pilgrimages, grand ceremonies, and grand ceremonies, in all feudal countries and statesmen, a throne is set up in the throne. In front of the throne, there is a black ribbon-trimmed seat facing the southern cloth, a five-colored cushion with a cloud pattern painted on the edge is placed on the cushion, a bamboo seat with a black and white patterned border is embroidered on the cushion, and a jade bench is set on the left and right ends of the seat.

古文：左右玉几，祀先王昨席，亦如之。
现代文：为王祭祀先王和接受酢酒所布的席也是这样。
English: So is the king's table spread for the king's sacrifice, and for the wine offering.

古文：诸侯祭祀席，黼筵、缋纯，加莞席、纷纯，右雕几。
现代文：诸侯祭祀宗庙，为神布设边缘绘有花纹的蒲席，蒲席上加用黑色丝带镶边的莞席，席右端设雕几。
English: The princes worshipped at the ancestral temple. For the gods, a cushion with a pattern painted on the edge was set up. A seat bordered with a black ribbon was added to the cushion, and a carved bench was set up at the right end of the seat.

古文：昨席，莞筵纷纯，加缫席、画纯。
现代文：为诸侯接受酢酒设带有黑色镶边的莞席，莞席上加放边缘绘有花纹的五彩蒲席。
English: For the lords to receive the vinegar, there were seats with black edging, and on top of the seats, there were colorful cushions with patterns painted on the edges.

古文：筵国宾于牖前，亦如之，右彤几。甸役，则设熊席，右漆几。
现代文：在王的宗庙里为国宾在室窗前布席也是这样，为国宾中的孤卿大夫在席的左端设红漆几。王发徒役田猎，在立表处举行貉祭时就设熊席，席右端设黑漆几。
English: In Wang's ancestral temple, the table setting for the state guests in front of the room window is also the same. For the state guests, the red lacquer table is set at the left end of the table. Wang sent the disciples to hunt, and set up a bear seat when holding the burnt offering at the table, and set up a black lacquer table at the right end of the table.

古文：凡丧事，设苇席，右素几。其柏席用萑，黼纯，诸侯则纷纯，每敦一几。
现代文：凡丧奠，设苇席，席的右端设素几；奠祭时放置黍稷的席是边缘绘有黑白两色花纹的萑席，诸侯设奠放黍稷的席就用黑色丝带镶边，每只敦放在一张几上。
English: For all funerals, a wreath-laying table is set up, and a plain table is set up at the right end of the table; the table where the wreath is placed during the offering is a wreath-laying table with a black and white pattern painted on the edge, and the table where the wreath is set up by the lords is edged with a black ribbon, and each wreath is placed on a table.

古文：凡吉事变几，凶事仍几。
现代文：凡吉礼随着仪节的进行要变换几，凶礼则仍沿用一几。
English: The auspicious and inauspicious rites change with the progress of the ceremony, while the evil and inauspicious rites remain the same.

古文：天府掌祖庙之守藏，与其禁令，凡国之玉镇、大宝器藏焉。若有大祭、大丧，则出而陈之。既事，藏之。
现代文：天府掌管始祖庙中宝物的收藏，以及有关的禁令。凡王国的玉镇和大宝器都收藏在祖庙中，如果有大祭祀或大丧事，就拿出来陈设，事毕再收藏起来。
English: The Heavenly Palace is in charge of the collection of treasures in the ancestral temple, as well as the relevant prohibitions. All the kingdom's jade towns and great treasures are collected in the ancestral temple. If there is a great sacrifice or a great funeral, they will be displayed and collected again.

古文：凡官府、乡州及都鄙之治中，受而藏之，以诏王察群吏知治。
现代文：凡王国各官府、各乡、州以及各采邑治理政事的文书，都接受而加以保存，以诏告王考察官吏们的政绩。
English: All the documents on the administration of government affairs from all government offices, townships, prefectures, and counties in the kingdom were accepted and preserved, and the king was told to inspect the performance of government officials.

古文：上春，衅宝镇及宝器。
现代文：春正月，用牲血涂抹宝镇和宝器而祭之。
English: In the first month of spring, the treasure towns and treasures were smeared with animal blood and sacrificed.

古文：凡吉凶之事，祖庙之中，沃盥，执烛。
现代文：凡祭祀或丧事，在祖庙中举行，有关官吏洗手时就为他们持火把照明。
English: Whenever a sacrifice or funeral is held in the ancestral temple, the relevant officials hold torches to light them when they wash their hands.

古文：季冬，陈玉以贞来岁之媺恶。
现代文：冬十二月，陈设玉器而占卜明年年成的好坏。
English: In the winter of December, jade vessels are set up to tell the fortunes of the coming year.

古文：若迁宝，则奉之。
现代文：如果迁移祖庙的宝器就负责奉送。
English: If you relocate the treasures of the ancestral temple, you will be responsible for sending them.

古文：若祭天之司民、司禄而献民数、谷数，则受而藏之。
现代文：如果是在冬十月祭祀司民、司禄的时候，有关官吏向王呈报人民数和谷物数，就从王那里接受薄书加以保存。
English: If, in the winter or October, when the priests, people, and crops were sacrificed, the relevant officials reported to the king the number of people and the number of grains, they would receive a booklet from the king and keep it.

古文：典瑞掌玉瑞、玉器之藏，辨其名物与其用事。
现代文：掌管玉瑞、玉器的收藏，辨别它们的名称和种类以及运用它们的事项，为它们设置装饰物。
English: In charge of the collection of jade and jade objects, identify their names and types as well as the use of them, and set up decorations for them.

古文：设其服饰：王晋大圭，执镇圭，缫藉五采五就，以朝日。
现代文：王腰插大圭，手执镇圭，圭垫上用五种色彩绘饰五匝，这样行拜日礼。
English: The king performs the Sunday service by inserting a daegui into his waist, holding a zhengui in his hand, and using five colors to decorate the five gongs on the gui cushion.

古文：公执三圭，侯执信圭，伯执躬圭，缫皆三采三就。子执谷璧，男执蒲璧，缫皆二采再就，以朝觐、宗遇、会同于王。
现代文：公执桓圭，侯执信圭，伯执躬圭，圭垫都用三种色彩绘饰三匝；子执谷璧，男执蒲璧，璧垫都用两种色彩绘饰两匝：这样来向王行春朝、秋觐、夏宗、冬遇和会同之礼。
English: Gu Gu, Hou Gu Xun Gu, Bo Gu Xun Gu and Gui Mat all use three colors to decorate the three bowls; Zi Gu Xun Pi, Male Gu Xun Pu Pi, and Gui Mat all use two colors to decorate the two bowls: in this way, the Spring Festival, the Autumn Festival, the Summer Festival, the Winter Festival and the Reunion are presented to Wang Xing.

古文：诸侯相见，亦如之。
现代文：诸侯相见也执同样的瑞玉。
English: Princes and concubines also wore the same gems.

古文：瑑、圭、璋、璧、琮，缫皆二采一就，以覜聘。
现代文：有刻纹隆起的圭、璋、璧、琮，它们的衬垫都用丽种颜色绘饰一匝，用以看望或慰问王。
English: There are engraved ridges on the gong, gong, gong, gong, and their pads are all painted in beautiful colors to decorate a gong for visiting or consoling the king.

古文：四圭有邸，以祀天、旅上帝。
现代文：用以璧为本的四圭祭祀天，并用以旅祭上天。
English: It is used to worship the heavens with a four-pronged offering of gems, and it is also used as a traveling offering to the heavens.

古文：两圭有邸，以祀地、旅四望。
现代文：用以琮为本的两圭祭祀地，并用以旅祭四方名山大川。
English: It is used as a place of worship for the deities of Futagui, which is based on the dragonfly, and for the traveling festival of the famous mountains and rivers in all directions.

古文：祼圭有瓚，以肆先王，以祼宾客。
现代文：用有勺的裸圭肆祭先王，并用以向宾客行裸礼。
English: A naked geisha with a spoon is used to worship the former king, and to make a naked bow to the guests.

古文：圭璧，以祀日月星辰。
现代文：用圭璧祭祀日月星辰。
English: The sun, the moon and the stars are worshipped with Gui Bi.

古文：璋邸射，以祀山川，以造赠宾客。
现代文：用以琮为本而锐出一璋的玉器祭祀山川，并用在造赠宾客时拿着它致辞。
English: It is used to worship mountains and rivers, and it is used to give a speech when making gifts to guests.

古文：土圭，以致四时日月，封国，则以土地。
现代文：土圭用以测度四季的日影、月影，封建诸侯国就用以测度地域。
English: Tokuis were used to measure the shadow of the sun and moon during the four seasons, and feudal vassal states were used to measure regions.

古文：珍圭，以征守，以恤凶荒。
现代文：珍圭用以征召诸侯，抚恤灾荒。
English: Zhen Gui used it to conscript lords and nobles, and to raise funds for disaster relief.

古文：牙璋，以起军旅，以治兵守。
现代文：牙璋用以发兵，用以调动驻守的部队。
English: Gums are used to send troops and to mobilize the garrisoned troops.

古文：璧羡，以起度，驵圭璋、璧琮、琥璜之渠眉。疏璧琮，以敛尸。
现代文：璧的径长可用作度量的标准。用丝带贯穿圭、璋、璧、琮、琥、璜沟纹中的孔眼，使璧、琮上面的沟纹上下贯通，这样用来敛尸。
English: The diameter of the gouge can be used as a measurement standard. Use a ribbon to pierce the holes in the grooves of the gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge, gouge.

古文：谷圭，以和难，以聘女。
现代文：谷圭用以调和仇怨，用以行聘女礼。
English: Gu Gui is used to reconcile grudges and to perform a maiden's rite.

古文：琬圭，以治德，以结好。
现代文：琬圭用以表彰有德的诸侯，用以缔结诸侯间的友好。
English: Gonggui was used to commend virtuous lords and to conclude friendship between lords.

古文：琰圭，以易行，以除慝。
现代文：琰圭用以告喻诸侯改变行为，消除恶行。
English: Gonggui was used to tell the lords to change their behavior and eliminate their evil deeds.

古文：大祭祀、大族，凡宾客之事，共其玉器而奉之。
现代文：举行大祭祀、大旅祭，以及凡招待宾客的事，供给所需的玉器并奉送到行礼之处。
English: To hold a grand ritual, a grand traveling festival, and for all matters of inviting guests, to provide the necessary jade and send it to the place of worship.

古文：大丧，共饭玉、含玉、赠玉。
现代文：有大丧，供给所需的饭玉、含玉和赠玉。
English: There was a great mourning, and rice balls, including balls, and gift balls were supplied.

古文：凡玉器出，则共奉之。
现代文：凡有玉器赐出，就供给并奉送到被赐者之处。
English: Whenever a jade object is given out, it is supplied and sent to the place of the recipient.

