古文：张鷟石抱忠郑愔宋务先傅岩侯味虚贾言忠司马承祯李敬玄格辅元
现代文：张鷟石抱忠郑愔宋务先傅岩侯味虚贾言忠司马承祯李敬玄格辅元
English: Zhang Yanshi was loyal to Zheng He, Song Wuxi was loyal to Fu Yan, Hou Yi was loyal to Jia Yan, Ma Chengyu was loyal to Li Jing, and Xuan Ge was loyal to Jia Yan.

古文：祝钦明姜师度姜晦魏光乘邵景黄幡绰贺知章王维甘洽乔琳契綟秃
现代文：祝钦明姜师度姜晦魏光乘邵景黄幡绰贺知章王维甘洽乔琳契綟秃
English: Best wishes to Qin Ming, Jiang Shidu, Jiang Yu, Wei Guang, Shao Jing, Huang Fan, Bao He, Zhi Zhang, Wang Wei, Gan Cai, Qiaolin Qi, and Zhou Yu

古文：宋济安陵佐史崔护
现代文：宋济安陵佐史崔护
English: Song Jian's Mausoleum

古文：张鷟
现代文：张鷟
English: Zhang Ye

古文：则天革命，举人不试皆与官，起家至御史、评事、拾遗、补阙者，不可胜数。
现代文：武则天改革朝政，举人不再进行考试就可以给官做，可授与御史、评事、拾遗、补阙等职，一时间这些官数不胜数。
English: Wu Zetian reformed the imperial government. Officials could be promoted without having to take examinations, and could be awarded the posts of imperial historian, commentator, scavenger of relics, and compiler of records. There were countless such officials at one time.

古文：张鷟为谣曰：补阙连车载，拾遗平斗量。杷推侍御史，椀脱校书郎。
现代文：张鷟写了首歌谣道：补阙连车载，拾遗平斗量，杷推侍御史，碗脱校书郎。
English: Zhang Zhe wrote a song ballad: Zhe Zhen Lian Chuxiang, Zhe Yi Ping Dou Quan, Zhe Shuxi Zhi Shi, Bowl de-schooling Shulong.

古文：时有沈全交者，傲诞自纵，露才扬己。
现代文：当时有个叫沈全交的人，狂傲怪诞而又放纵自己，喜欢显示才能、自我表现。
English: At that time, there was a man named Shen Quanzhang, who was arrogant, bizarre and self-indulgent, and liked to show talent and self-expression.

古文：高巾子，长布衫。
现代文：此人的打扮是高扎头巾，身着长衫。
English: The man was dressed in a high-collared turban and a long shirt.

古文：南院吟之，续四句曰：评事不读律，博事不寻章。面糊存抚使，眯目圣神皇。
现代文：有一次，沈全交在尚书省咏诗，他把张鷟的歌谣又续上四句，这四句是评事不读律，博士不寻章，面糊存抚使，眯目圣神皇。
English: On one occasion, Shen Quanzhong submitted a poem to Zhang Xuan in Shangshu Province, and he continued Zhang Xuan's ballad with four more sentences. These four sentences are: the critic does not read the law, the doctor does not look for the chapter, the batter saves the stroking, and the Holy Spirit Emperor is the eye.

古文：遂被杷推御史纪先知，捉向右台对仗弹劾。以为谤朝政，败国风，请于朝堂决杖，然后付法。
现代文：于是被杷推御史纪先知捉到右御史台进行核对审理其罪状，认为他是诽谤朝政，败坏国风，并要到朝堂对其审判，然后绳之以法。
English: As a result, the prophet of the historical record, who was pushed forward, was caught to the right of the historical stage for verification and trial of his guilt, believing that he was slandering the imperial government and corrupting the national style, and that he would be brought to the imperial court for trial, and then brought to justice.

古文：则天笑曰：但使卿等不滥，何虑天下人语。
现代文：可是到了朝堂，武则天一听却笑了，她说道：只要你们这些朝官不滥用职权，何怕天下人去说。
English: However, when she arrived at the Imperial Palace, Emperor Wuzetian laughed at her. She said, "As long as you imperial officials don't abuse your power, don't be afraid of what people around the world might say.

古文：不须与罪，即宜放却。
现代文：不要给他什么罪状了，应该立刻释放。
English: Don't charge him with anything. He should be released immediately.

古文：先知于是乎面无色。
现代文：纪先知于是乎脸面无光。
English: Ji Sheng then almost lost his face.

古文：唐豫章令贺若瑾，眼皮急，项辕粗。鷟号为饱乳犊子。
现代文：豫章县令贺若瑾眼皮子紧缩，脖子粗，张鷟称之为饱乳犊子。
English: Yuanzhang County's Ling He Ruoqi's eyelids are tightened, his neck is thick, and Zhang Qi calls him a full-breasted mule.

古文：石抱忠
现代文：石抱忠
English: Shi Baozhong

古文：石抱忠检校天官郎中，与侍郎刘奇、张询古，同知选。
现代文：石抱忠代理吏部郎中，与侍郎刘奇、张询古共同主持选拔官员之事。
English: Shi Baozhong, acting vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and his attendants Liu Qi and Zhang Yinggu jointly presided over the selection of officials.

古文：抱忠素非静慎、刘奇久著清平、询古通婚名族。
现代文：石抱忠平素不很冷静谨慎，刘奇向来清廉公平。张询古与名门贵族联姻。
English: Shi Baozhong is not very calm and prudent, Liu Qi has always been honest and fair. Zhang Xuan Gu is married to a famous aristocrat.

古文：将分钤，时人语曰：有钱石下好，无钱刘下好，士大夫张下好。
现代文：快要对选人进行分组审理的时候，人们议论道：有钱的分到石抱忠名下好，没钱的分到刘奇名下好，士大夫阶层的分到张询古名下好。
English: When the trial of the candidates was about to be divided into groups, people discussed: those with money should be assigned to the name of Shi Baozhong, those without money should be assigned to the name of Liu Qi, and those of the scholar-official class should be assigned to the name of Zhang Xuan Gu.

古文：斯言果征。
现代文：这话果然得到验证。
English: This has indeed been proven.

古文：复与许子儒同知选，刘奇独以公清称。
现代文：后来又与许子儒一起主持铨选，刘奇唯独以公正清廉而著称。
English: Later, he presided over the election together with Xu Ziru. Liu Qiwei is known for his fairness and integrity.

古文：抱忠、师范、子儒，颇任令史勾直，每注官，呼曰：勾直乎？
现代文：而抱忠、师范、子儒都叫令史去勾直，每拟授一个选人的官职，令史们都问道：勾直吗？
English: But all of them, including Baozhong, Shifan, and Ziru, called on Ling Shi to straighten up. For every elected official position that was to be conferred, the Ling Shi asked: "Straighten up?

古文：时人又为之语曰：硕学师刘子，儒生用典言。
现代文：当时人们又对他们议论道：刘奇是一位很有学问的人，而那些学问不深的人却偏用掌故来表达意思。
English: At that time, people also commented on them: Liu Qi is a very learned person, while those who are not very learned tend to use gestures to express their meaning.

古文：抱忠后与奇同弃市。选人或为摈抑者，复为语曰：今年柿子并遭霜，为语石榴须早摘。
现代文：石抱忠后来与刘奇一起被处死并陈尸街头示众，有些落选的应试者又说道：今年的柿子一起遭霜打。所以说石榴应该早些摘去。
English: Shi Baozhong was later executed together with Liu Qi and their corpses were displayed on the streets. Some unsuccessful candidates also said: This year's persimmons were hit by frost together. Therefore, pomegranates should be picked earlier.

古文：抱忠在始平，尝为谐诗曰：平明发始平，薄暮至何城。
现代文：石抱忠当年在始平的时候，曾写诙谐诗道：平明发始平，薄暮至何城。
English: When Shi Baozhong was at the beginning of the Heian period, he wrote a witty poem: "The bright morning heralds the beginning of the Heian period, and the twilight heralds the end of the Heian period."

古文：库塔朝云上，晃池夜月明。
现代文：库塔朝云上，晃池夜月明。
English: In the morning, Kuta is above the clouds, and in the evening, the moon shines over the pond.

古文：略彴桥头逢长史，棂星门外揖司兵。
现代文：略彴桥头逢长史，棂星门外揖司兵。
English: There is a long history of skirmishes on the bridge, and there are soldiers outside the star gate.

古文：一群县尉驴骡聚，数个参军鹅鸭行。
现代文：一群县尉驴骡骤，数个参军鹅鸭行。
English: A group of county lieutenants donkey stampede, several joined the army goose and duck line.

古文：郑愔
现代文：郑愔
English: Zheng Wei

古文：唐郑愔曾骂选人为痴汉。选人曰：仆是吴痴，汉即是公。
现代文：唐朝时郑愔曾骂一个应试的人为痴汉，那个选人说：我是吴痴，汉是你。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zheng Yao once called a candidate an idiot. The candidate said, "I am Wu Di, you are Han."

古文：愔令咏痴。
现代文：郑愔叫他咏一首描写痴呆的诗。
English: Zheng Yao asked him to recite a poem about dementia.

古文：吴人曰：榆儿复榆妇，造屋兼造车。
现代文：那个从吴地来的选人咏道：榆儿复榆妇，选屋兼造车。
English: The candidate who came from Wuxi said, "I have a son, a wife, a polling station and a car."

古文：十七八九夜，还书复借书。
现代文：十七八九夜，还书复借书。
English: On the night of 1789 he returned the borrowed book.

古文：愔本姓鄚，改姓郑，时人号为鄚郑。
现代文：愔本来姓鄚，后改姓郑，当时人们都叫他鄚郑。
English: He was originally surnamed Yu, but later changed his surname to Zheng. At that time, people called him Yu Zheng.

古文：宋务先
现代文：宋务先
English: Song Wuxian

古文：唐有监察御史不工文，而好作不已。
现代文：唐朝时，有个监察御史不擅长诗文，然而又不断地写作。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was an inspector general who was not good at poetry, but he continued to write.

古文：既居权要，多为人所谀，不之觉也。每篇辄为宋务先书以光台。
现代文：这个人既然身居机要之地，因而被很多人奉承，可他自己并不觉悟，每写出一篇就让宋务先书写张贴于台院。
English: Since this man lived in an important place, he was flattered by many people, but he did not realize it himself. For every article he wrote, he asked Song Wuxian to write and post it on the Taiyuan.

古文：月俸几尽，其妻谓曰：公经生，素非文笔，所称篇咏，不为外人所传。此必台中玩公，折俸助厨耳。奈何受人嗤玩？自后虽吟咏不辍，不复出光台钱矣。
现代文：工资钱都快要花费光了，妻子对他说：你长这么大，平素并不写作，你所称道诗文，也没被外面人传诵，看来一定是台院中的人戏弄你，工资大概都让你吃喝掉了，你干么要去受人耻笑玩弄呢：自后他虽然仍是不断写作，但不再花钱让人抄写出去了。
English: His wife said to him, "You've grown so big, you don't usually write. The poems you've praised haven't been recited by outsiders. It seems that the people in the academy must be playing tricks on you. You've probably eaten and drunk all your wages. Why do you want to be made fun of by others?" Although he continued to write, he no longer spent money to have them copied.

古文：或问之，以妻言对。
现代文：有人问他是怎么回事，他便把妻子说的告诉给人家。
English: When someone asked him what had happened, he told them what his wife had said.

古文：诸御史退相谓曰：彼有人焉，未可玩也。
现代文：御史们出去后告诉说：他是有明白人的帮助，不可以再拿他玩耍。
English: After the historians went out, they told him that he had the help of a wise man, and that he should not play with him any more.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是不再戏弄他了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：傅岩
现代文：傅岩
English: Fu Yan

古文：唐傅岩，魏州人，本名佛庆。
现代文：唐朝的傅岩，魏州人，本名叫傅佛庆。
English: Fu Yan of the Tang Dynasty, a native of Weizhou, was originally named Fu Foqing.

古文：尝在左台，监察中溜，而中溜小伺，无牺牲之礼。比回，怅望曰：初一为大祠，乃全薄。
现代文：曾经在御史左台任职，有一次去巡察祭祀中溜的地方，而当时正赶上那里是一次小型祭祀活动，不供牲畜祭品，等到巡察回来，怅望地说道：初一是大祠，还弄得这么冷清？
English: He once held a post at the left-hand side of the history department, and once went to inspect a place where a sacrifice was taking place, and at the time he was catching up with it, there was a small sacrificial activity there, without offering animal sacrifices. When the inspector came back, he said wistfully: The first day was a large shrine, and it was still so deserted?

古文：殿中梁载言咏之曰：闻道监中溜，初言是大祠。
现代文：殿中侍御史梁载言咏诗道：闻道监中溜，初言是大祠。
English: The attendant in the hall, Liang Shiliang, recited a poem: "Wen Dojun Zhonglu, the first word is Dashi."

古文：狼傍索传马，偬动出安徽。
现代文：狼傍索传马，偬动出安徽。
English: A wolf by the side of a horse, Anhui is stirred up.

古文：卫司无帟幕，供膳乏鲜肥。
现代文：卫司无帟幕，供膳乏鲜肥。
English: Weizhi had no curtain, and there was not enough fresh manure for the meal.

古文：形容消瘦尽，空往复空归。
现代文：形容消瘦尽，空往复空归。
English: Described as emaciated and exhausted, he would return home empty-handed.

古文：侯味虚
现代文：侯味虚
English: Hou Mi-hyuk

古文：唐户部郎侯味虚著《百官本草》，题御史曰：大热，有毒。
现代文：唐朝的户部郎官侯味虚写了一部《百官本草》，其中写到御史时说：大热，有毒。
English: The Tang dynasty's head of the household, court official, and lord of the manor, Miharu, wrote a book, "Hundreds of Officials' Herbs," in which, when writing about goshi, he said, "It's very hot and poisonous."

古文：又朱书云：大热有毒。
现代文：他又用红笔写道：大热而有毒。
English: He also wrote with a red pen: Very hot and poisonous.

古文：主除邪侫，杜奸回，报冤滞，止淫滥，尤攻贪浊。
现代文：主要除祛邪恶和奸侫，杜绝邪行，判理冤屈，制止淫滥，尤其善于攻讦贪赃污浊等行为。
English: They are mainly good at eliminating evil and treachery, putting an end to evil practices, adjudicating grievances, and stopping debauchery. They are especially good at attacking corruption and other corrupt practices.

古文：无大小皆搏之，畿尉簿为之相。
现代文：不论大小官员一概可以纠弹，从京畿各县的尉簿小吏到大至朝中宰相。
English: No matter how big or small, all officials can be purged, from the county officials in Gyeonggi to the prime minister in the middle of the dynasty.

古文：畏还使，恶爆直，忌按权豪。
现代文：畏还使，恶爆直，忌按权豪。
English: Fear also makes, evil bursts forth, avoid according to power.

古文：出于雍洛州诸县，其外州出者，尤可用。
现代文：出自雍州洛州各县，有其他州出产的，更加好用。
English: From the counties of Yongzhou and Luozhou, and produced in other states, it is more convenient to use.

古文：日炙乾硬者为良。
现代文：经日晒后又干又硬的为上品。
English: The cream that is dry and hard after being exposed to the sun is the top grade.

古文：服之，长精神，灭姿媚。
现代文：吃了它，可以长精神，灭媚态。
English: If you eat it, you can keep your spirits up and get rid of flattery.

古文：久服，令人冷峭。
现代文：长久服用，能使人刚直严峻。
English: Taken for a long time, it can make a person rigid and austere.

古文：贾言忠
现代文：贾言忠
English: Jia Yanzhong

古文：唐贾言忠撰《监察本草》云：服之心忧，多惊悸，生白发。
现代文：唐朝人贾言忠在他撰写的《监察本草》中写道：服了它心忧，多惊悸，生白发。
English: Jia Yanzhong, a Tang Dynasty person, wrote in his "Monitoring the Grass" that he was "overwhelmed with worry, alarmed, and white-haired."

古文：时义云：里行及试员外者，为合口椒，最有毒。
现代文：时义写道：里行御史和试员御史是合口椒，毒最大。
English: Shigeyoshi wrote: Li Xingshi and examiner Shigeyoshi are like two peas in a pod, the most poisonous.

古文：监察为开口椒，毒微歇。
现代文：监察御史是开口椒，毒性稍轻一些。
English: The inspector general's report is a wake-up call. It is slightly less toxic.

古文：殿中为萝卜，亦曰生姜，虽辛辣而不为患。
现代文：殿中御史是萝卜，也叫生姜，虽然辛辣但不用忧患。
English: The main dish is radish, also known as ginger, which is spicy, but don't worry.

古文：侍御史为脆梨，渐入佳味。
现代文：侍御史则是脆梨，越吃越好吃。
English: The waiter's specialty is crispy pears. The more you eat, the better they taste.

古文：迁员外郎为甘子，可久服。
现代文：由侍御史迁调为员外郎，那就是柑桔了，可以久服。
English: To be transferred from the position of chamberlain to that of outside retainer, that's the cherry on top, and you can wear it for a long time.

古文：或谓合口椒少毒而脆梨毒者，此由触之则发，亦无常性。
现代文：有人说合口椒毒性轻而脆梨有剧毒，这是因个别吃过的人发出的感叹，其实这东西是无常性的。
English: Some people say that Hekou pepper is mildly poisonous, while crispy pear is highly poisonous. This is due to the exclamation of some people who have eaten it. In fact, this thing is impermanent.

古文：唯拜员外郎，号为摘去毒。
现代文：唯有官拜员外郎后，方可称为除去了毒。
English: Only after the official worshiper, Wairo, can it be said that the poison has been removed.

古文：欢怅相半，喜迁之，惜其权也。
现代文：但是，由御史迁调员外郎，他们也是欢喜惆怅各占一半，喜的是升迁，可惜的是失去了御史的权力。
English: However, they were also happy to be transferred from the position of chief historian to that of deputy chief historian, with each of them taking half of the position. They were happy to be promoted, but regretted losing the power of chief historian.

古文：司马承祯
现代文：司马承祯
English: Sima Chengyao

古文：道士司马承祯。睿宗追至京，将还职。
现代文：唐朝的卢藏用，最初隐居在终南山，中宗执政时期，累居要职。
English: Lu Zang of the Tang Dynasty, initially lived in seclusion in the final Nanshan, during the reign of Zhong Zong, lived in important positions.

古文：藏用指终南山谓之曰：此中大有佳景处，何必在远。
现代文：到睿宗时期，诏令司马承祯入京，不久打算回去。卢藏用指着终南山对他说：这山中就大有好风景，何必走那么远！
English: At the time of Emperor Ruizong, Emperor Zhao ordered Sima Chengyu to go to Beijing, intending to return soon. Lu Zang pointed to Mount Nanshan and said to him, "This mountain has great scenery, why go so far away!"

古文：承祯徐答曰：以仆所观，乃仕宦捷径矣。
现代文：司马承祯慢慢回答道：以我所见，隐居乃是通往高官的捷径。
English: Sima Chengyao slowly replied: As far as I can see, seclusion is a shortcut to high office.

古文：藏用有惭色。
现代文：卢藏用面显羞愧之色。
English: Luzang has a bashful expression.

古文：李敬玄
现代文：李敬玄
English: Li Jingxuan

古文：唐中书令李敬玄为元帅，讨吐蕃，至树敦城。闻刘尚书没蕃，着靴不得，狼狈而走。
现代文：唐代的中书令李敬玄被授以元帅，去征讨吐蕃，行至树敦城，听说刘尚书已丧身于吐蕃，没敢停留，便狼狈而逃。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Li Jingxuan, a Chinese scholar, was given the title of marshal. He went to Shudan City to collect money for Tuyun. When he heard that Liu Shangshu had been killed in Tuyun, he did not dare to stay there and fled in panic.

古文：王杲、副总管曹怀舜等惊退。
现代文：王杲和副总管曹怀舜等也吓得惊慌而退。
English: Wang Hui and vice-president Cao Huaiyu also panicked and retreated.

古文：遗却麦饭，首尾千里，地上尺余。
现代文：逃跑时扔掉粮饷无数，在一千里路上，足足盖了一尺多厚。
English: When fleeing, they threw away countless grain baskets. On the thousand-mile journey, their feet were covered with a foot-thick layer.

古文：时军中谣曰：洮河李阿婆，鄯州王伯母，见贼不敢斗，总由曹新妇。
现代文：当时军中流传一首歌谣：洮河李阿婆，鄯州王伯母，见贼不敢斗，总由曹新妇。
English: At that time, there was a folk song circulating in the army: "Fenghe Li's grandmother, Zhangzhou Wang's aunt, if you see a thief, don't dare to fight, it's always the bride of Cao."

古文：格辅元
现代文：格辅元
English: Kheju Yuan

古文：唐格辅元拜监察，迁殿中。充使，次龙门遇盗，行装都尽，袒被而坐。
现代文：后来有个监察御史杜易简写诗嘲弄他道：你住于龙门的那一夜够耻辱的了，想要知道什么叫精彩吗？
English: Later, he was mocked by an inspector of the Styrian shorthand poetry: "The night you lived in Longmen was humiliating enough. Do you want to know what's wonderful?

古文：监察御史杜易简，戏咏之曰：有耻宿龙门，精彩先瞰浑。眼瘦呈近店，睡响彻遥林。
现代文：那就先去看看你这的狼狈像吧。一双小眼睛只能眼巴巴地望着自己的住处，而那如雷的鼾声却响彻远处的树林。
English: Well, let's see what you look like first. A pair of small eyes can only stare at their place of residence, while the thunderous beeping resounds through the woods in the distance.

古文：捋囊将旧识，制被异新婚。
现代文：把你的一切倾囊拿走，你虽用的是新被却不是刚婚娶。
English: Throw all your money away, you're not a newlywed, even though you're using a new bed.

古文：谁言骢马使，翻作蛰熊蹲。
现代文：谁说骑着骢马的使臣，反而变作蹲卧的蛰熊呢？
English: Who said that an envoy riding a steed would turn into a crouching raccoon?

古文：祝钦明
现代文：祝钦明
English: Congratulations to Khin Myint

古文：唐礼部尚书祝钦明颇涉经史，不闲时务，专硕肥腯，顽滞多疑。台中小吏，号之为媪。
现代文：唐朝时有位礼部尚书祝钦明一心钻研经史，而不识时务。脑袋大且肥，迂顽而又多疑，官署中的小官吏们称他为媪。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a ceremonial official, Zhu Qinming, who devoted himself to studying the history of scripture, but did not know the current affairs. His head was large and fat, he was devious and suspicious, and the minor officials in the government office called him a baboon.

古文：媪者，肉块，无七窍。秦穆公时野人得之。
现代文：媪就是大肉块子，没长七窍，秦穆公时代有野人得到过。
English: Dragonfly is a large piece of meat, without long seven orifices, which was obtained by a wild man during the Qin and Mugong dynasties.

古文：姜师度
现代文：姜师度
English: Jiang Shidu

古文：唐先天中，姜师度于长安城中穿渠，绕朝堂坊市，无所不至。
现代文：唐玄宗时期，姜师度在长安城里开掘水渠。水渠穿绕过宫庭殿堂、大街小巷。无所不至。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, Jiang Shidu dug canals in the city of Chang'an. The canals passed through and around the palace, courtyards, streets and alleys. They went everywhere.

古文：上登西楼望之，师度堰水泷，柴筏而下，遂授司农卿。
现代文：皇上登临西楼观望，只见师度堰水流湍急，柴筏顺水而下，甚为满意，于是升他为司农卿。
English: The Emperor went to the West Building to watch. He was very pleased to see the rapid flow of water from the Shidu Weir and the rush of firewood down the river. He was then promoted to the post of Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：于后水涨则奔突，水缩则竭涸。
现代文：可是到后来，遇到雨多涨水时，大水便横冲直撞，遇上干旱少雨时，水渠却又干涸。
English: But later, when it rained more and the water rose, the floodwaters would rush headlong, and when there was drought and little rain, the canals would dry up again.

古文：又前开黄河，引水向棣州，费亿兆功。
现代文：于是他又把水渠开掘到黄河，经棣州把黄河水引进长安。
English: So he dug a canal to the Yellow River and brought the Yellow River water to Chang'an via Zhangzhou.

古文：百姓苦其淹渍，又役夫塞河口。
现代文：这项工程花费巨大，可两岸百姓却常常遭受水淹之害。因此他又不得不派民工把黄河的放水口堵死。
English: This project is very expensive, but people on both sides of the strait often suffer from flooding. Therefore, he had to send migrant workers to block the water outlet of the Yellow River.

古文：开元六年，水泛溢，河口堰破，棣州百姓，一概没尽。师度以为功，官品益进。
现代文：开元六年，黄河泛滥，大水冲破了堵死的放水口，整个棣州的百姓，全都淹死，可是姜师度仍以修渠有功为由，官品一再晋升。
English: Six years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the Yellow River flooded, and the floodwaters broke through the dead sluice gates. The entire people of Zhangzhou were drowned, but Jiang Shidu was still promoted repeatedly on the grounds that he had done a good job in repairing the canal.

古文：又有傅孝忠为太史令，自言明玄象，专行矫谲。
现代文：当时还有一个叫傅孝忠的人，官授太史令，此人自己说懂得天象，其实是专搞假冒欺骗。
English: At that time, there was also a man named Fu Xiaozhong, who was an official of the Grand Historian's Office. This man said that he understood the celestial body, but in fact he specialized in counterfeiting and deception.

古文：京中语曰：姜师度一心看地，傅孝忠两眼相天。
现代文：京城里的人都说道：姜师度一心看地，傅孝忠两眼相天。
English: People in Beijing said: Jiang Shidu is single-minded, Fu Xiaozhong is two-eyed.

古文：神武即位，知其矫，并斩之。
现代文：神武皇帝即位后，知道他们的欺诈行为，把两个人一起斩首。
English: When Emperor Jimmu came to the throne, he found out about their fraud and beheaded them both.

古文：姜晦
现代文：姜晦
English: Jiang Wei

古文：唐姜晦为吏部侍郎，眼不识字，手不解书，滥掌铨衡，曾无分别。
现代文：唐朝时姜晦官拜吏部侍郎，眼不认字，手不会书，把他执掌的铨选之任弄得一塌糊涂，甚至连高低优劣都不分。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Jiang Hui was an official who worshipped the attendant of the cadre department. His eyes could not read, his hands could not write, and he made a complete mess of the selection task he was in charge of, and even did not distinguish between high and low.

古文：选人歌曰：今年选数恰相当，都由座主无文章。案后一腔冻猪肉，所以名为姜侍郎。
现代文：因而选人们编成歌谣咏道：今年选数恰相当，都因座主无文章，案后一腔冻猪肉，所以名为姜侍郎。
English: As a result, people were selected to make up songs: this year, the number of candidates was just right, all because the host had no article, and there was a cavity of frozen pork after the case, so it was named Jiang Zhi Lang.

古文：魏光乘
现代文：魏光乘
English: Wei Guangzheng

古文：唐兵部尚书姚元崇，长大行急，魏光乘目为趁蛇鹳鹊。
现代文：唐代的兵部尚书姚元崇，个头大行走快，魏光乘便把他称作追蛇的鹳鹊。
English: Yao Yuan Chong, a military commander in the Tang Dynasty, was tall and walked fast. Wei Guangzheng called him a snake-chasing dragonfly.

古文：黄门侍郎卢怀慎好视地，目为觑鼠猫儿。
现代文：黄门侍郎卢怀慎好低头看地，被他称为偷看老鼠的猫。
English: Huangmen waiter Lu Huaixin looked down at the ground, and he called it a cat peeping at a mouse.

古文：殿中监姜皎肥而黑，目为饱葚母猪。
现代文：殿中监姜皎长得胖又黑，称他为饱食桑葚的母猪。
English: The overseer of the palace, Jiang Chen, grew fat and dark, calling him a sow full of mulberries.

古文：紫微舍人倪若水，黑而无须鬓，目为醉部落精。
现代文：紫微舍人倪若水长得黑而又没有胡子，被他称之为醉部脱落了精华。
English: Zi Wei's nephew Ni Ruoshui grew up black and without a mustache. He called him a drunkard who had lost his essence.

古文：舍人齐处冲好眇目视日，云暗烛底觅虱老母。
现代文：舍人齐处冲喜好眯起一只眼睛看太阳，便说他是在暗烛光下寻找母虱子。
English: He liked to squint his eyes at the sun, so he said that he was looking for mother lice under the candlelight.

古文：舍人吕延嗣长大少发，目为日本国使人。
现代文：舍人吕延嗣个头高大头发稀少，被称之为日本使者。
English: Lyu Yanji, a tall man with sparse hair, is known as Japan's envoy.

古文：又目舍人郑勉为醉高丽。
现代文：而把舍人郑勉看作醉高丽。
English: However, he regarded Zheng Min as a drunken Goryeo.

古文：目拾遗蔡孚、小州医博士，诈谙药性。
现代文：称拾遗蔡孚为小州县的医博士，假装懂得药性。
English: He claimed to be a medical doctor from Xiaozhou County and pretended to understand medicinal properties.

古文：又有殿中侍御史短而丑黑，目为烟熏地术。
现代文：还有个殿中侍御史个子小、又丑又黑，被称之为烟熏了的地术。
English: There is also a small, ugly and dark attendant in the hall, which is called a smoky geisha.

古文：目御史张孝嵩为小村方相。
现代文：称御史张孝嵩为小村子里求仙弄鬼的方相。
English: Zhang Xiaosong, a historian, is said to be a ghost hunter in a small village.

古文：目舍人杨伸嗣为热鏊上猢狲。
现代文：称舍人杨伸嗣为热鏊子上的猢狲。
English: Yang Shinji, a layman, was said to be the maggot on the hot cocoon.

古文：目补阙袁辉为王门下弹琴博士。
现代文：称补阙袁辉为王爷门下的弹琴博士。
English: He said that Yuan Hui, the completer, was a piano-playing doctor under Wang Ye.

古文：目员外郎魏恬为祈雨婆罗门。
现代文：称员外郎魏恬为祈祷下雨的婆罗门教徒。
English: He described Wei Wei as a Brahmin who prayed for rain.

古文：目李全交为品官给使。
现代文：称李全交为品官给事。
English: He said that Li Quanzhong was given the post of the grade officer.

古文：目黄门侍郎李广为饱水虾蟆。
现代文：称黄门侍郎李广为喝饱水的大虾。
English: He called the Yellow Gate waiter Li Guang a big shrimp drinking plenty of water.

古文：由是坐此品题朝士，自左拾遗贬新州新兴县尉。
现代文：因为他犯了这样随意评品戏弄朝官的错误，所以从左拾遗的官位被贬到新州新兴县做了县尉。
English: Because he made such a mistake of arbitrarily judging and teasing the imperial officials, he was demoted from the official rank of left gleaning to Xinzhou Xinxing County and became a county lieutenant.

古文：邵景
现代文：邵景
English: Shao Jing

古文：唐邵景，安阳人。
现代文：唐代的邵景，是安阳人。
English: Shao Jing of the Tang Dynasty was from Anyang.

古文：擢第授汾阴尉，累转歙州司仓，迁至右台监察考功员外。
现代文：经铨选而提拔为汾阴县尉，又转授歙州司仓，后来迁调右御史台任监察考功员外。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Shujin County Lieutenant after being selected by the imperial court, and was also transferred to the Shuzhou Custodian. Later, he was transferred to the Right Imperial Historian's Office to serve as an inspector and examiner.

古文：时神武皇帝即位，景与殿中御史萧嵩、韦铿。俱升殿行事，职掌殊别。
现代文：神武皇帝即位时，邵景与殿中御史萧嵩、韦铿一起擢升为殿行事，而职掌的事物各不相同。
English: When Emperor Jinwu ascended the throne, Shao Jing was promoted to the palace together with the palace officials Xiao Song and Wei Wei, and their duties varied.

古文：而制出，景、嵩俱授朝散大夫，而铿无命。
现代文：后来皇上下令，加授邵景和萧嵩为朝散大夫，而韦铿却没有此项任命。
English: Later, the emperor ordered that Shao Jing and Xiao Song be awarded the title of Choshan doctor, but Wei Wei did not receive this appointment.

古文：景、嵩状貌类胡，景鼻高而嵩须多。
现代文：邵景、萧嵩的相貌都很象胡人，邵景鼻子高，萧嵩胡须多。
English: The appearance of Shao Jing and Xiao Song is very similar to that of the Hu people. Shao Jing has a high nose, and Xiao Song has many whiskers.

古文：同时服朱绂，对立于庭。铿独廉中窃窥而咏之：一双胡子著绯袍，一个须多一鼻高。相对厅前捺且立，自惭身品世间毛。
现代文：上朝时他们同穿朱红官袍，面对着站立于朝堂，韦铿从帘外偷偷看到了他俩可笑的样子，便咏了首诗：一对胡人穿着大红色的官袍，一个胡须多一个鼻子高，两人在朝堂前如一撇一捺地相对站立，自愧自己的地位官品兽毛一样的多而轻。
English: In the last dynasty, they both wore scarlet official robes and stood facing each other in the court. Wei Wei secretly saw their ridiculous appearance from outside the curtain, and wrote a poem: a pair of Hu people wearing big red official robes, one beard more than one nose high, the two stood opposite each other in front of the court, feeling ashamed of their status.

古文：举朝欢咏之。
现代文：满朝官员听说后都笑而咏之。
English: When the officials of the Manchu Dynasty heard about it, they all laughed and dismissed it.

古文：他日，睿宗御承天门，百僚备列，铿忽风眩而倒。
现代文：有一天睿宗要去承天门，文武百官列队恭驾，一阵旋风突然吹来，韦铿感到眼睛昏眩晕倒在地上。
English: One day, when Ruizong was on his way to the Gate of Heaven, and hundreds of officials were marching in formation, a whirlwind suddenly blew, and Wei Wei felt dizzy and fell to the ground.

古文：铿肥而短，景咏之曰：飘风忽起团圞旋，倒地还如着脚包。莫怪殿上空行事，却为元非五品才。
现代文：韦铿个子很小又很胖，于是邵景咏道：一阵旋风忽然盘旋而来，韦铿随风倒在地上，那样子就象用脚踩过的发面大蒸饼，难怪他至今还在担当殿行事，只因他本来就不够五品官才能。
English: Wei Wei is short and fat, so Shao Jingjun said: A whirlwind suddenly circled, and Wei Wei fell to the ground with the wind. It was like stepping on a large steamed cake. It is no wonder that he is still in charge of the palace, just because he is not good enough to be an official.

古文：黄幡绰
现代文：黄幡绰
English: Huangbanpo

古文：唐安西牙将刘文树口辩，善奏对，明皇每嘉之。
现代文：唐代时安西牙将刘文树口才很好，尤其善于向皇上进言或回答皇上的问话，明皇为此曾多次称赞过他。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, An Xi Ya was very good at talking to Liu Wenshu, especially good at giving advice to the emperor or answering the emperor's questions. Emperor Ming had praised him for this many times.

古文：文树髭生颌下，貌类猴。
现代文：刘文树的胡须长在下巴颏的下边、面貌很象个猴子。
English: Liu Wenshu's whiskers grow on the underside of his chin and his face resembles a monkey.

古文：上令黄幡绰嘲之。文树切恶猿猴之号，乃密赂幡绰，不言之。
现代文：有一次唐明皇让黄幡绰嘲弄一番他的相貌以取乐，刘文树是最忌讳别人称他猿猴这一雅号的，于是偷偷地奉送财物行赂，求他不要说自己象猿猴。
English: Once, Emperor Ming of Tang let Huang Banzhu ridicule his appearance for fun. Liu Wenshu was the most tabooed by others to call him a monkey, so he secretly bribed him with money and goods, begging him not to say he was like a monkey.

古文：幡绰许而进嘲曰：可怜好个刘文树，髭须共颏颐别住。
现代文：黄幡绰答应了，他嘲咏道：可怜好一个刘文树呀，胡须与下颏一起都长在了别的地方。
English: Huang Banzhuo agreed, and he mockingly said, "Pity a Liu Wenshu. His beard and lower eyelid have both grown somewhere else."

古文：文树面孔不似猢狲，猢狲面孔强似文树。
现代文：刘文树的相貌根本不象猴子，而猴子的相貌太象刘文树了。
English: Liu Wenshu looks nothing like a monkey, and monkeys look too much like Liu Wenshu.

古文：上知其遗赂，大笑。
现代文：明皇知道了他这样说，是刘文树行了小贿求请之故，于是大笑。
English: When Emperor Ming learned that Liu Wenshu had asked for a small bribe, he burst out laughing.

古文：贺知章
现代文：贺知章
English: Chorus: "Hechizaki"

古文：唐秘监贺知章有高名，告老归吴中，明皇嘉重之，每事加异。知章将行，泣涕辞，上问何所欲，曰：臣有男，未有定名，幸陛下赐之，归为乡里之荣。
现代文：明皇给他很重的嘉奖，每一件奖赏各有不同。贺知章将要离开朝廷了，他声泪俱下地与皇上辞别，皇上问他还有什么要求，他说：臣有一个儿子，至今还没有定下来叫什么名字，希望陛下恩赐。这样就是我回到故乡也感到十分荣耀。
English: Emperor Ming gave him a very heavy award, and each award was different. He Zhizhang was about to leave the court, and he said goodbye to the emperor with tears in his eyes. The emperor asked him what else he wanted, and he said, "My vassal has a son, and he hasn't decided what to name him yet. I hope His Majesty will give him a gift. So I feel very honored to return to my hometown."

古文：上曰：为道之要，莫若于信，孚者、信也，履信思乎顺，卿之子必信顺之人也，宜名之曰孚。
现代文：皇上道：作为道德行为最重要的，莫过于信了。孚就是信，每每有信才能顺。你的儿子必是信顺之人，应该起名叫孚。
English: Empress Dowager: As the most important moral behavior, nothing is more important than faith. Fo is faith, and every faith can be obedient. Your son must be an obedient person, and should be named Fo.

古文：再拜而授命焉。久而谓人曰：上何谑我邪，我实吴人，孚乃爪下为子，岂非呼我儿为爪子耶。
现代文：过了很久，贺知章对人说：皇上怎么戏谑我啊，我是吴地人，这个孚字是爪字下面加个子字，这难道不是叫我儿子为无爪子吗？
English: After a long time, He Zhizhang said to the man: "How dare the emperor make fun of me, I am a Wu people, this Fu character is a claw character with a sub-character underneath, isn't this calling my son a clawless one?"

古文：王维
现代文：王维
English: Wang Wei

古文：唐宰相王玙好与人作碑志。
现代文：唐朝曾有个叫王玙的宰相，很愿意与人家写碑文。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a prime minister named Wang Xuan, who was very willing to write inscriptions with others.

古文：有送润毫者。误扣右丞王维门。维曰：大作家在那边。
现代文：有人来送报酬，错敲了尚书右丞，王维的门，王维道：大作家在那边。
English: Someone came to deliver the reward, knocking on the wrong door of Shang Shuyuan, Wang Wei, Wang Wei Dao: the great writer is over there.

古文：甘洽
现代文：甘洽
English: Amago

古文：唐甘洽与王仙客友善。
现代文：唐代人甘洽与王仙客素来很友好，于是他们便以姓氏相互嘲讽。
English: The people of the Tang Dynasty had always been friendly with Wang Xianke, so they mocked each other with their surnames.

古文：因以姓相嘲，洽曰：王，计尔应姓田。为你面拨獭，抽却你两边。
现代文：甘洽道：你姓的是王字，我考虑你本应姓田，因为你的面目很象水獭，只好把你的两侧去掉了。
English: Ganga said, "Your surname is Wang, I thought you should have been surnamed Tian, because your face is very similar to that of a leech, so I had to remove both sides of your face.

古文：仙客应声曰：甘，计你应姓丹。为你头不曲，回脚向上安。
现代文：王仙客接着说：你姓个甘字，我琢磨你本应该姓丹，就因为你的脑袋不能弯曲，只好把你倒过来两脚向上了。
English: Wang Xianke went on to say: Your surname is a sweet character, I guessed that your surname should have been Dan, just because your head can't be bent, I had to turn you upside down.

古文：乔琳
现代文：乔琳
English: By Jolene

古文：唐朱泚始乱。源休、姚令言等，收图书，贮仓廪，作萧何事业。
现代文：唐末朱泚将要攻入京城，源休、姚令言等人便将重要档案藏于仓库中，想要作当年刘邦进入京都前萧何曾先收藏档案而后献上的事。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Zhu Xi was about to invade the capital, and Yuan Hui, Yao Lingyan and others hid important archives in a warehouse, intending to do what Xiao He had done before Liu Bang entered Kyoto that year, first collecting archives and then presenting them.

古文：休退语伪黄门侍郎蒋练曰：若度其才，即吾为萧，姚为曹耳。
现代文：后来源休又对后梁朝的门下省黄门侍郎蒋练态度谦恭地说：若衡量才能，那么我就是萧何，姚令言就是曹参。
English: Later, Yuanxuan Hui humbly said to Jiang Lian, the attendant of Huangmen, a province under the control of the Later Liang Dynasty: If talent is measured, then I am Xiao He, and Yao Lingyan is Cao San.

古文：识者闻之，为休不奈官职。
现代文：有认得他的人听说此事后，都知道他对自己的官职不那么满意了。
English: Those who know him say he is less than happy with his job since hearing the news.

古文：乔琳性好谐谑，因语旧僚曰：源公真谓火迫酂侯尔。
现代文：乔琳喜好戏谑，于是对当年的同僚们说道：源公为了做官，简直可以说是用火来逼迫酂侯了！
English: Jolene likes to joke, so she said to her colleagues of that year: In order to become an official, Geng Gong can be said to have used fire to persecute his vassals!

古文：契綟秃
现代文：契綟秃
English: Che Guevara

古文：唐京城有僧，性甚机悟，病足，有人于路中见，嘲之曰：法师是云中郡。
现代文：唐朝时京城里有个和尚，天性机敏。腿脚有毛病，有人在路上遇见，便嘲弄他说：法师是云中郡。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk in the capital who was quick-witted by nature. He had problems with his legs and feet. When someone met him on the road, they mocked him and said, "The sorcerer is from Yunzhong County."

古文：僧曰：与君先不相知，何因辱贫道作契綟秃？
现代文：和尚说：我与你先前并不相识，什么原因要侮辱贫僧，把我称作契綟秃呢？
English: The monk said, "I didn't know you before, so why would you insult a poor monk by calling me "Che"?"

古文：其人诈之曰：云中郡言法师高远，何为是辱？
现代文：那个人欺骗他说：云中郡是说法师学问高远，怎么能说是侮辱你了呢？
English: The man deceived him and said, "Yunzhong County is a highly educated county, how can it be said to insult you?

古文：僧曰：云中郡是天州，翻为偷毡，是毛贼，毛贼翻为墨槽，傍边有曲录铁，翻为契綟秃，何事过相骂邪？
现代文：和尚说：云中郡就是天州，翻译过是偷毡，即毛贼。毛贼再翻译过来是墨糟，傍边有曲录铁，译作契綟秃。我们之间有什么过从，要骂我呢？
English: The monk said, "Yunzhong County is Tianzhou. Translated into English, it means thief. Thief is also translated into Chinese as ink, and there is a music box next to it, which is translated as Cheongbald. What's the difference between us, do you want to scold me?

古文：前人于是愧伏。
现代文：那人感到羞愧而佩服。
English: The man was ashamed but impressed.

古文：宋济
现代文：宋济
English: Song Ji

古文：唐许孟容与宋济为布素之交。
现代文：唐朝时，许孟容与宋济二人未做官时就有交情。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Xu Meng Rong and Song Ji were friends before they became officials.

古文：及许知举，宋不第。
现代文：到许孟容主管选拔官员时，宋济落选。
English: When Xu Meng Rong was in charge of selecting officials, Song Jie lost the election.

古文：放榜后，许颇惭，累请人申意，兼遣门生就看。
现代文：发榜后，许孟容很觉愧疚，他曾多次请人去说明和致意，并派自己的学生去看望。
English: After the release of the list, Xu Mengrong felt very guilty. He had repeatedly invited people to explain and pay their respects, and sent his own students to visit.

古文：宋不得已，乃谒焉。
现代文：不得已，宋济来拜见他。
English: As a last resort, Song Jie came to see him.

古文：许但分诉首过，因命酒酣，乃曰：虽然，某今年为国家取卿相，时有姚嗣卿及第后，翌日而卒。
现代文：许孟容分说一番并道歉后，便请宋济多饮酒。他说：虽然，我今年为国家选拔卿相，但过去也有象姚嗣卿刚刚选中，第二天就死去那样的事。
English: After a few words and an apology, Xu Meng Rong invited Song Jidong for a drink. He said, "Although I was selected as the country's prime minister this year, in the past, there were also things like Yao Shih Ching was just selected and died the next day.

古文：因起慰许曰：邦国不幸，姚令公薨谢。
现代文：宋济站起来对许孟容道：姚令公谢世，那是国家的不幸！许孟容十分惭愧。
English: Song Ji stood up and said to Xu Meng Rong: Yao Ling Gong Xie Shih, that is the misfortune of the country! Xu Meng Rong was very ashamed.

古文：许大惭。安陵佐史
现代文：安陵佐史
English: Anling Sashi

古文：唐安陵人善嘲，邑令至者，无不为隐语嘲之。
现代文：唐朝时，安陵人很善于嘲讽，凡是有县令派到这里来的，没有不被用隐语嘲弄的。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Anling people were very good at mockery. Anyone who was sent here by the county government was mocked with slang.

古文：有令，口无一齿，常畏见嘲。
现代文：有这么一个县令，满口没有一只牙，常常怕人嘲笑。
English: There was such a prefectural governor, with a mouth full of teeth, who was often afraid of being laughed at.

古文：初至，谓邑吏：我闻安陵太喜嘲弄，汝等不得复踵前也。
现代文：刚到任时，对手下的小吏们说：我听说安陵这地方的人太喜好嘲弄人，你们可不能重走过去的老路。
English: When he first took office, the petty officials under his command said, "I've heard that people in Anling are too fond of mocking people. You can't go back to the old ways.

古文：初上，判三道，佐史抱案在后曰：明府书处甚疾。
现代文：第一次上堂，断了三个案子。佐史在他身后抱着案卷说道：明府书处甚疾。
English: The first time he went to court, he lost three cases. Sashi, holding the case files behind him, said: "The Myofu library department is in dire straits.

古文：其人不觉为嘲，乃谓称己之善，遂甚信之。
现代文：这位县令没觉察出被嘲弄，还称赞说对自己很好，于是对他很信任。
English: The county magistrate did not notice that he was being mocked, but also praised that he was very good to himself, so he trusted him.

古文：居数月，佐史仇人告曰：言 明府书处甚疾 者，其人嘲明府。
现代文：过了几个月后，有个与佐史有仇的人来告发说：那个说你 明府书处甚疾 的人，实际是嘲弄明府。
English: A few months later, a person with a grudge against Sashi came to report: "The person who said you were very ill at the Myofu Library was actually mocking Myofu.

古文：令曰：何为是言？
现代文：县令问：这话是什么意思呢？
English: The county magistrate asked: What does this mean?

古文：曰：书处甚疾者，是奔墨，奔墨者翻为北门，北门是缺后，缺后者翻为口穴，此嘲弄无齿也。
现代文：那人道：书处甚疾的意思就是奔墨，奔墨翻转为北门，北门就是缺后，缺后再翻转就是口穴，这是嘲弄无齿之人。
English: The man said, "The meaning of the book is to run ink, and the running ink is turned into the north gate, and the north gate is the back, and the back is turned into the mouth, which is a mockery of the toothless people."

古文：令始悟，鞭佐史而解之。
现代文：县令这才明白过来，于是将佐史鞭打一顿后赶了出去。
English: It was only then that the county magistrate came to understand, so he whipped Sashi and drove him out.

古文：崔护
现代文：崔护
English: Choe Son-woo

古文：唐刘禹锡云：崔护不登科，怒其考官苗登，即崔之三从舅也。
现代文：唐朝的刘禹锡讲，崔护不能被考取作官，怨怒于考官苗登，苗登是他的三堂舅。
English: Liu Yuxi of the Tang Dynasty said that Cui You could not be selected as an examiner, and he resented the examiner Miao Deng, who was his third cousin.

古文：乃私试为判头，毁其舅曰：甲背有猪皮之异。
现代文：于是私下写一篇判状，诋毁他舅说：他的后背与常人不一样，长了一层象猪皮似的硬甲壳。
English: So he secretly wrote a judgment, slandering his uncle, saying: His back is different from that of ordinary people, with a layer of hard carapace like pigskin.

古文：人问曰：何不去之？有所受。
现代文：有人问：怎么不除掉，而要忍受着呢？
English: Some people ask: why not get rid of it, but tolerate it?

古文：其判曰：曹人之坦重耳，骈胁再观。
现代文：崔护说：官署里的人都好坦怀，可往两胁观看。
English: Cui Zhou said: The people in the government office are very frank, and you can look at them from both sides.

古文：相里之剥苗登，猪皮斯见。
现代文：相里剥掉了苗登的衣服，才看见确有猪皮。
English: Soiri peeled off Miao Deng's clothes, only to see that there was indeed pigskin.

古文：初登为东畿尉，相里造为尹。
现代文：当初，苗登曾作过东都畿尉，相里造作过那里的长官。
English: At the beginning, Miao Deng had been a lieutenant of Dongdu, and Sori Zuo had been a governor there.

古文：曾欲笞之，袒其背，有猪毛长数寸。
现代文：有一次曾要鞭笞苗登，可是除掉他的上衣露出脊背，却有猪毛，长约数寸。
English: On one occasion, Miao Deng was to be whipped, but his shirt was removed to reveal his back, but it had pig hair, about a few inches long.

古文：故又曰。当偃兵之时，则隧而无用，在穴食之日，则摇而有求。
现代文：所以崔护又说：当不打仗的时候，那层硬甲壳累坠而无用。在圈中饲养之时，他摇晃有求。
English: So Cui Guo also said, "When there is no war, that layer of hard carapace is useless. When he is raised in a cage, he wobbles and begs.

古文：皆言其尾也。
现代文：这是说他还长了尾巴。
English: That means he still has a tail.

