古文：赋宪之谥，短折曰哀。
现代文：《逸周书·谥法》中说： 年纪很小死了的就叫哀。 
English: "The Book of Life and Death" says: If you die at a very young age, you will be mourned.

古文：哀者，依也。悲实依心，故曰哀也。
现代文：哀就是依，哀伤之情必须依靠心，所以叫做哀。
English: To mourn is to rely, and the feeling of sadness must rely on the heart, which is why it is called mourning.

古文：以辞遣哀，盖下流之悼，故不在黄发，必施夭昏。
现代文：哀辞的写作，主要是对幼年死者的哀悼，因此，年老的人无关，而必须用于短命死去的小孩。
English: The writing of eulogies is mainly for the mourning of the young dead, so the elderly are irrelevant, but must be used for the short-lived dead children.

古文：昔三良殉秦，百夫莫赎，事均夭枉，《黄鸟》赋哀，抑亦诗人之哀辞乎？
现代文：从前子车氏的三个好儿子为秦穆公殉葬；他们的死，用一百个人也换不回来。这种情形和人的夭折相同，《黄鸟》诗中表达了对他们的悲哀，这也许可算《诗经》中的哀辞了吧。
English: Once upon a time, three good sons of the former Zi Che clan were martyred and buried for Qin Mu Gong; their death cannot be replaced by a hundred people. This situation is the same as the premature death of a person. The "Yellow Bird" poem expressed sorrow for them, which may be considered a lament in the "Book of Songs."

古文：暨汉武封禅，而霍嬗暴亡，帝伤而作诗，亦哀辞之类矣。
现代文：到汉武帝赴泰山祭天地，跟从去的霍嬗突然死亡，汉武帝哀伤霍嬗而写的诗，也是属于哀辞一类的作品了。
English: When Emperor Hanwu went to Mount Taishan for the Heaven and Earth Festival, Houtong, who accompanied him, died suddenly. The poem that Emperor Hanwu wrote to mourn Houtong also belongs to the category of elegy.

古文：降及后汉，汝阳主亡，崔瑗哀辞，始变前式。
现代文：及至东汉汝南王刘畅死后，崔瑗为刘畅所写哀辞，才改变过去只为夭折者写哀辞的格式。
English: It was not until after the death of Liu Chang, King of the Southern Ru of the Eastern Han Dynasty, that Cui Yao changed the format of writing a eulogy for Liu Chang, which had previously only been written for those who died young.

古文：然履突鬼门，怪而不辞；驾龙乘云，仙而不哀；又卒章五言，颇似歌谣，亦仿佛乎汉武也。
现代文：但其中写到死者冲进鬼门，怪异而不通；又说死者乘云驾龙，入于仙境而不悲哀；最后一段用五言句子，好像歌谣的形式，也略近于汉武帝为霍嬗写的哀辞。
English: However, it says that the deceased rushed into the ghost door, which is strange and incomprehensible; it also says that the deceased rode a dragon on a cloud and entered a fairyland without sadness; the last paragraph uses five-word sentences, as if in the form of a ballad, and is also slightly closer to the lamentation that Emperor Wu of Han wrote for Hou Yi.

古文：至于苏顺、张升，并述哀文，虽发其情华，而未极其心实。
现代文：至于东汉的苏顺、张升，都作过哀文，虽然写得有感情、有文采，却未能充分表达其真情实感。
English: As for Su Shun and Zhang Sheng of the Eastern Han Dynasty, they both wrote lamentations. Although they were written with emotion and wit, they failed to fully express their true feelings.

古文：建安哀辞，惟伟长差善，《行女》一篇，时有恻怛。
现代文：建安年间的哀辞，只有徐赴幹写得较好，他的《行女哀辞》一篇，还有一些哀痛的感情。
English: Of the lamentations written during the Jian'an era, only Xu Zhigang's is better, his "Lamentation of a Woman on Her Way to Work" contains some sorrowful sentiments.

古文：及潘岳继作，实锺其美。
现代文：到晋代潘岳继续写作的哀辞，真是集中了哀辞写作的优点。
English: The elegy that continued to be written until the time of the Jin Dynasty's Pan Yue really concentrated the advantages of elegy writing.

古文：观其虑赡辞变，情洞悲苦，叙事如传，结言摹诗，促节四言，鲜有缓句；故能义直而文婉，体旧而趣新，《金鹿》、《泽兰》，莫之或继也。
现代文：特别是潘岳的《金鹿哀辞》和《为任子咸妻作孤女泽兰哀辞》两篇，再也没有人能写得这样好了。关于哀辞写作的主要点，是感情要哀痛，文辞要尽量表达出对死者的爱惜。
English: In particular, Pan Yue's "Lamentation for the Golden Deer" and "Lamentation for the Orphaned Daughter Ze Lan" are two pieces that no one else can write so well. The main point about writing a lamentation is that the feelings should be sad, and the words should try to express the love for the deceased.

古文：原夫哀辞大体，情主于痛伤，而辞穷乎爱惜。幼未成德，故誉止于察惠；弱不胜务，故悼加乎肤色。
现代文：由于死者年幼，他的品德还未形成，所以主要是赞美他的聪慧；因为死者幼弱，还未担任过国家大事，所以只能对他的容貌加以悼念。
English: Since the deceased was young, his character was not yet formed, so he was mainly praised for his intelligence; because the deceased was young and weak, he had not yet served as a national event, so he could only be mourned for his appearance.

古文：隐心而结文则事惬，观文而属心则体奢。
现代文：作者把悲痛的心情写成哀辞，就能令人满意；为了华美的文辞而去联结心思，就会写得浮夸不实。
English: The author can write the sorrowful mood as a lament and it will be satisfactory; if he connects his thoughts for the sake of beautiful words, he will write pompous and untrue.

古文：奢体为辞，则虽丽不哀；必使情往会悲，文来引泣，乃其贵耳。
现代文：用浮夸不实的文风写成哀辞，那就虽然华丽，却不悲哀；必须使作者的思想感情融会在悲哀之中，写出的哀辞能引起他人哭泣，这种作品才是可贵的。
English: If a lament is written in a pompous and false style, it will be gorgeous, but not sad; the author's thoughts and feelings must be integrated into the sorrow, and the written lament can cause others to cry. This kind of work is valuable.

古文：吊者，至也。
现代文：所谓吊，就是到。
English: The so-called hanging is the arrival.

古文：诗云 神之吊矣 ，言神至也。
现代文：《诗经》中说 神之吊矣 ，就是说神的到来。
English: In the "Book of Songs," it says, "God's hanging is over," which means God's arrival.

古文：君子令终定谥，事极理哀，故宾之慰主，以至到为言也。
现代文：正常死亡的人定谥治丧，是极为悲哀的事，所以，宾客对治丧主人的慰问，他们的到来，就是 吊 的意思了。
English: The funeral of a person who has died a natural death is an extremely sad event, so the guests' condolences to the mourners, their arrival, is the meaning of the hanging.

古文：压溺乖道，所以不吊矣。
现代文：《礼记》中说，被物压死、被水淹死等，因为不是正常死亡，所以不必哀悼。
English: "Li Ji" said that being crushed to death by objects, being drowned by water, etc., because it is not a normal death, there is no need to mourn.

古文：又宋水郑火，行人奉辞，国灾民亡，故同吊也。
现代文：春秋时宋国发生水灾，郑国发生火灾后，各国派使臣前往致辞慰问；这是国家遇上灾难，人民遭到死亡，所以，这种慰问和哀吊相同。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, floods occurred in Song, and after a fire occurred in Zheng, various countries sent envoys to the country to offer condolences; this was a national disaster, and people were killed, so this kind of condolence was the same as mourning.

古文：及晋筑虒台，齐袭燕城，史赵苏秦，翻贺为吊，虐民构敌，亦亡之道。
现代文：还有一种情形：如春秋时晋国建成虒祁宫，齐国袭击燕国，史赵和苏秦认为这样的事不应祝贺，而应哀吊。因为建筑虒祁宫残害人民，攻打燕国结下仇敌，这都是亡国之道。
English: There is another situation: if Jin built the Summer Palace in the Spring and Autumn Period, and Qi attacked Yan, Shi Zhao and Su Qin believed that such a thing should not be congratulated, but should be mourned. Because building the Summer Palace and killing the people, attacking Yan and creating enemies, these are all ways to ruin a country.

古文：凡斯之例，吊之所设也。或骄贵以殒身，或狷忿以乖道，或有志而无时，或美才而兼累，追而慰之，并名为吊。
现代文：大凡这样一些情形，就要运用吊辞：或者是过于骄贵而丧命，或者是褊急忿恨而违背常道，或者是有大志而生不逢时，或者是有美好的才能又连带着一定的缺损。追念这些而加以慰问的作品，都叫做吊。
English: In situations like this, it is necessary to use the term "hanging": either they were too proud and lost their lives, or they were in a rush of anger and went against the norm, or they had great ambitions and were born at the wrong time, or they had wonderful talents but also had certain defects. The works that commemorate these and offer condolences are all called hanging.

古文：自贾谊浮湘，发愤吊屈。体同而事核，辞清而理哀，盖首出之作也。
现代文：自从汉初贾谊渡湘江，感发愤激而写了《吊屈原文》，体制周密，事实准确，文辞清晰，内容悲哀，这要算是最早出现的哀吊作品了。
English: Ever since Jia Yi crossed the Xiangjiang River in the early Han Dynasty, he felt indignant and wrote "The Original Story of the Hanging," which has a thorough structure, accurate facts, clear wording, and sad content. This is the earliest work of mourning.

古文：及相如之吊二世，全为赋体；桓谭以为其言恻怆，读者叹息。及卒章要切，断而能悲也。
现代文：到司马相如所写《哀秦二世赋》，完全是赋的体裁。桓谭认为它写得伤痛，能使读者为之叹息；赋的最后写得扼要而确切，读完后能使人为之哀伤。
English: As far as Sima Xiangru's "Lamentation of Qin II Fu" is concerned, it is entirely a genre of fu. Kuan Tan believes that it is written painfully and can make the reader sigh; the end of the fu is written concisely and accurately, and can make people sad after reading it.

古文：扬雄吊屈，思积功寡，意深反骚，故辞韵沈膇。
现代文：扬雄为哀吊屈原而写的《反离骚》，思考的很多，但成就不大；其立意重在反诘《离骚》，所以文辞音韵不很流畅。
English: Yang Xiong's "Anti-Leaving Song," which he wrote to mourn Qu Yuan, has a lot of thoughts, but little achievement; its intention is to ruminate on "Leaving Song," so the word rhyme is not very smooth.

古文：班彪、蔡邕，并敏于致诘。然影附贾氏，难为并驱耳。
现代文：又如班彪的《悼离骚》，蔡邕的《吊屈原文》，也善于提出责问；但他们追随贾谊的《吊屈原文》，是很难与之并驾齐驱的。
English: For example, Ban Biao's "The Mourning of a Parting" and Cai Xuan's "The Original Text of a Surrender" are also good at asking questions, but it is difficult for them to keep up with Jia Yi's "The Original Text of a Surrender."

古文：胡阮之吊夷齐，褒而无间，仲宣所制，讥呵实工。
现代文：此外，如胡广的《吊夷齐文》，阮瑀的《吊伯夷文》，只有赞扬没有批评；王粲的《吊夷齐文》，对伯夷、叔齐的批评写得较好。
English: In addition, such as Hu Guang's "Hanging Yi Qi Wen" and Nguyen Xuan's "Hanging Bo Yi Wen," there is only praise without criticism; Wang Xuan's "Hanging Yi Qi Wen," the criticism of Bo Yi and Uncle Qi is better written.

古文：然则胡阮嘉其清，王子伤其隘，各其志也。
现代文：但胡广、阮瑀是嘉奖伯夷、叔齐的清高，王粲则是不满其狭隘，这是由于他们的观点各不相同。
English: However, Hu Guang and Nguyn Th are praising the clearness of Bi and Đc Th, while Văn Th is dissatisfied with their narrowness. This is because their views are different.

古文：祢衡之吊平子，缛丽而轻清；陆机之吊魏武，序巧而文繁。
现代文：汉末祢衡的《吊张衡文》，辞采繁盛而忽于明洁。晋代陆机的《吊魏武帝文》，序写得不错，吊词却过于繁杂。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Youheng's "Hanging Zhang Hengwen" was prosperous and lucid. The "Hanging Wei Emperor Wuwen" of the Jin Dynasty, the preface was well written, but the hanging words were too complicated.

古文：降斯以下，未有可称者矣。
现代文：从此以后，就没有值得称道的作品了。
English: Since then, there have been no more works worthy of praise.

古文：夫吊虽古义，而华辞末造；华过韵缓，则化而为赋。
现代文：哀吊的意义虽然古老，后来却出现华丽的文辞；华丽过分，音韵不紧凑，就演变成为赋体了。
English: Although the meaning of mourning is ancient, it later appeared in gorgeous words; the gorgeousness is too much, the rhyme is not compact, and it has evolved into an endowment.

古文：固宜正义以绳理，昭德而塞违，剖析褒贬，哀而有正，则无夺伦矣！
现代文：哀吊文本应用以伸张正义，纠正事理，彰明美德而防止错误；所以要有所分析地加以褒扬或贬斥，能够正确地表达哀情，那就不致破坏哀吊文的正当意义了。总结：
English: The application of the mourning text is to promote justice, rectify matters, highlight virtues and prevent mistakes; therefore, it is necessary to praise or disparage analytically, and to be able to express grief correctly, so as not to destroy the legitimate meaning of the mourning text.

古文：赞曰∶辞之所哀，在彼弱弄。
现代文：吊辞所哀伤的，在于幼弱的儿童。
English: What is sad about the resignation lies in the young children.

古文：苗而不秀，自古斯恸。
现代文：幼苗不能成长，自古以来都为之悲痛。
English: Since ancient times, it has been a source of sorrow for seedlings that fail to grow.

古文：虽有通才，迷方失控。
现代文：虽有写作的全才，如果迷失以辞遣哀的方向，就很难正确运用。
English: Although there is a talent for writing, if it is lost in the direction of expressing sorrow, it is difficult to use it correctly.

古文：千载可伤，寓言以送。
现代文：这种千古可悲的感情，只有用吊辞来遣送。
English: This age-old, pathetic feeling can only be dismissed with a dismissive comment.

