古文：花卉怪下光化寺客僧智聓邓珪刘皂田布梁生苏昌远
现代文：花卉怪下光化寺客僧智聓邓珪刘皂田布梁生苏昌远
English: Gwanghwamun Guest Monk of Gwanghwamun Temple, Zhisheng, Dengye, Liu So Tian, Bu Liang Sheng, Su Changyuan

古文：药怪上党人田登娘赵生
现代文：药怪上党人田登娘赵生
English: Party member Tian Deng's daughter, Zhao Sheng, a drug fiend

古文：菌怪郭元振宣平坊官人豫章人
现代文：菌怪郭元振宣平坊官人豫章人
English: Fungus monster Guo Yuan Zhen, Xuan Pingfang, government officials, Yu Zhangren

古文：花卉怪下
现代文：花卉怪下
English: Under the Flower Monster

古文：光化寺客
现代文：光化寺客
English: Guests of Gwanghwamun Temple

古文：兖州徂徕山寺曰光化，客有习儒业者，坚志栖焉。
现代文：兖州徂徕山有寺叫光化寺，有个以读书为业的客人意志坚强，长期住在这里。
English: There is a temple in Lushan, Luzhou, called Guanghua Temple. There is a strong-willed guest who lives here for a long time.

古文：夏日凉天，因阅壁画于廊序。
现代文：夏季里的一个较凉爽的日子，他因为观看壁画来到廊下忽然遇上一位美丽的少女。
English: On a cooler day in the summer, he came to the corridor because he was looking at the murals and suddenly met a beautiful girl.

古文：忽逢白衣美女，年十五六，姿貌绝异。
现代文：少女十五六岁的年纪，姿色绝异。他询问女子从哪里来。
English: The girl was 15 or 16 years old, with a very different appearance. He asked her where she came from.

古文：客询其来，笑而应曰： 家在山前。 
现代文：女子笑着回答，家在山前。
English: The woman replied with a smile, "My home is in front of the mountain."

古文：白衣曰： 幸不以村野见鄙，誓当永奉恩顾。然今晚须去，复来则可以不别矣。 
现代文：他心里明知山前没有这女子，也没有怀疑她是妖，只是心里因为特别喜欢她的眉眼，又是挑逗，又是说笑，就把她引诱到室内，交欢结义，情意绵绵，难舍难分。白衣说： 你不因为我是村野之人而瞧不起我，我坚决要永远侍奉你，但是今晚必须离去。再回来就可以永不分离了。 
English: He knew in his heart that there was no such woman in front of the mountain, nor did he suspect that she was a demon, but in his heart, because he was particularly fond of her eyebrows, and teasing, and laughing, he lured her into the room, mingled with her, and their affection was so strong that they could not be separated. Bai Rong said: You do not despise me because I am a villager, I am determined to serve you forever, but tonight I must leave. If I come back, I will never be parted from you.

古文：客因留连，百端遍尽，而终不可。素宝白玉指环，因以遗之曰： 幸视此，可以速还。 
现代文：他因为心里留连不舍，千方百计地留她，到底不可，只好把平常带在身上的一件宝贝一一白玉指环，送给她说： 希望你见到它就能赶快回来。 
English: Because he couldn't bear to be left behind, he did everything he could to keep her, but in the end he had no choice but to give her one of the precious things he usually carried with him, a white jade ring, saying, "I hope you can come back soon when you see it."

古文：因送行。
现代文：于是就出去送送她。
English: So he went out to see her off.

古文：白衣曰： 恐家人接迎，愿且回去。 
现代文：她说： 恐怕俺家有人来接我，你先回去吧！ 
English: She said: I'm afraid someone from our house is coming to pick me up, you should go home first!

古文：客即上寺门楼，隐身目送。
现代文：客就爬上寺门楼，隐身目送她。
English: The guests climbed onto the gate tower of the temple to see her off incognito.

古文：白衣行计百步许，奄然不见。
现代文：她大约走出百步左右，忽然就不见了。
English: She took about a hundred steps and suddenly disappeared.

古文：客乃识其灭处，径寻究。
现代文：寺前平阔数里，小树小草，一根头发都不能隐藏。
English: The front of the temple is several miles wide, with small trees and grasses, and not a single hair can be hidden.

古文：寺前舒平数里，纤木细草，毫发无隐，履历详熟，曾无踪迹。暮将回，草中见百合苗一枝，白花绝伟。客因斸之。
现代文：他对这里特别熟悉，却就是找不到她的踪迹。天将黑时，他见草中有一株百合，白花绝美，就把它挖了出来。
English: He was very familiar with this place, but he couldn't find any trace of her. When it got dark, he saw a lily in the grass. The white flowers were beautiful, so he dug it out.

古文：根本如拱，瑰异不类常者。
现代文：那百合根本处是拱形，非常瑰异。
English: The lily is arched at the base, very unusual.

古文：及归，乃启其重付，百叠既尽，白玉指环，宛在其内。
现代文：等到拿到屋里，才发现那只白玉指环，就裹在这株百合里。
English: It wasn't until I got inside the house that I discovered the white jade ring, wrapped in this lily plant.

古文：乃惊叹悔恨，恍惚成病，一旬而毙。
现代文：于是他就惊叹，就悔恨，恍恍惚惚，一病不起，十天之后便死去。
English: So he was astonished, remorseful, delirious, fell ill, and died ten days later.

古文：僧智聓
现代文：僧智聓
English: Sang Ji-soo

古文：上元中，蜀郡有僧智聓在宝相寺持经。夜久，忽有飞虫五六大如蝇，金色，迭飞赴灯焰，或蹲于灯花上鼓翅。
现代文：上元年中，蜀郡有一个叫智聓的和尚在宝相寺念经，夜深，忽然有五六个苍蝇大小的金色小虫飞进来，轮流交替地飞向灯的火苗上，有的蹲在灯花上扇动翅膀。
English: In the middle of the first year of the 21st century, there was a monk named Zhisheng in Shuxi County who was chanting a sutra in Baoxiang Temple. In the dead of night, five or six golden insects the size of flies suddenly flew in, taking turns to fly to the flame of the lamp, and some squatted on the lantern and fanned their wings.

古文：与火一色，久乃灭于焰中。
现代文：虫火一色，许久才消灭在火焰之中。
English: It took a long time to extinguish the fire.

古文：如此数夕。
现代文：如此好几个夜晚。
English: This went on for several nights.

古文：童子击堕其一，乃董陆花也。
现代文：童子击落其中一个，一看，竟然是一朵董陆花。
English: The boy shot down one of them, and it turned out to be a Donglu flower.

古文：亦无形状。
现代文：也没有什么形状。
English: There's no shape to it.

古文：自是不复见。
现代文：从此不再出现了。
English: It has not reappeared since.

古文：邓珪
现代文：邓珪
English: 邓

古文：晋阳西有童子寺在郊牧之外。
现代文：晋阳之西有一座童子寺立在郊外。
English: To the west of Jinyang, a children's temple stands on the outskirts.

古文：贞元中，有邓珪者寓居于寺。
现代文：贞元年中，有一个叫邓珪的人寄居在寺中。
English: In the middle of the first year of the Zhen, there was a man named Deng Yao living in the temple.

古文：是岁秋，与朋友数辈会宿。既阖扉后，忽见一手自牖间入。
现代文：这年秋，他与好几位朋友会宿，关门之后，忽然间有一只手从窗户伸进来。
English: In the autumn of that year, he was staying with several friends. After closing the door, a hand suddenly reached through the window.

古文：其手色黄而瘦甚。
现代文：那手色黄而且瘦得厉害。
English: His hands were yellow and very thin.

古文：众视之，俱慄然。
现代文：大伙见了，都吓得发抖。
English: When they saw it, they were all shaking with fear.

古文：独珪无所惧。反开其牖。
现代文：唯独邓珪不怕，反而打开窗子。
English: However, Deng Yao was not afraid and opened the window instead.

古文：闻有吟啸之声，珪不之怪。
现代文：这时听到有吟啸之声。邓珪不以为怪，问道： 你是谁？ 
English: At this time, I heard the sound of chanting. Not surprised, I asked, "Who are you?"

古文：讯之曰： 汝为谁？ 对曰： 吾隐居山谷有年矣。
现代文：对方回答说： 我隐居山谷有年头了。
English: The man replied, "I have lived in the valley for many years.

古文：今夕纵风月之游，闻先生在此，故来奉谒。
现代文：今晚任风月而游，听说先生在此，特意来拜见。
English: I heard that Mr. Ren is here tonight, so I came to see him.

古文：诚不当列先生之席，愿得坐牖下，听先生与客谈足矣。
现代文：实在不应该坐先生的坐席，愿能坐到窗外，听先生和客人谈话就满足了。 
English: I really shouldn't be sitting at the gentleman's table. I'd rather be able to sit outside the window and listen to the conversation between the gentleman and his guests.

古文：珪许之。
现代文：邓珪同意了。
English: Deng Yao agreed.

古文：既坐，与诸客谈笑极欢。
现代文：坐下之后，那东西和人们谈笑谈得极欢。
English: After sitting down, the creature enjoyed chatting and laughing with people.

古文：久之告去。
现代文：过了许久，便告退。
English: After a long time, he retired.

古文：将行，谓珪曰： 明夕当再来。愿先生未见摈。 
现代文：临走时说： 明晚应该再来。希望先生不要排斥我。 
English: As she was leaving, she said, "I should come back tomorrow night. I hope my husband doesn't reject me."

古文：既去，珪与诸客议曰。
现代文：走后，邓珪对大伙说： 这一定是个鬼。
English: After leaving, Deng Yao said to everyone: This must be a ghost.

古文：此必鬼也。不穷其迹，且将为患矣。 
现代文：如果不追查他的踪迹，将成为祸患了。 
English: If we don't track him down, he's going to be trouble.

古文：于是缉丝为缗数百寻，候其再来。必缚之。
现代文：于是用丝搓了一根数百寻长的绳子，等候他再来，一定要缚住他。
English: So she tied a rope several hundred yards long with silk and waited for him to come back, making sure to tie him up.

古文：明夕果来，又以手出于牖间。
现代文：第二天晚上他果然来了，又把手从窗户伸进来。
English: The next night he did come, and he put his hand through the window again.

古文：珪即以缗系其臂，牢不可解。
现代文：邓珪就把绳子系到他的手臂上，系得很牢，没法解开。
English: Deng Yao then tied a rope to his arm. It was so tightly tied that it could not be untied.

古文：闻牖外问： 何罪而见缚？
现代文：人们听到他在窗外问： 我有什么罪而绑我？
English: People heard him outside the window asking: What crime have I committed to be tied up?

古文：其议安在？
现代文：那讲好的协议哪去了？
English: Where is the good deal?

古文：得无悔邪？ 
现代文：莫不是后悔了？ 
English: Do you have any regrets?

古文：遂引缗而去。
现代文：于是就拖着绳子跑了。
English: So he dragged the rope and ran away.

古文：至明日，珪与诸客俱穷其迹。
现代文：到天明，邓珪和客人们一起追寻他的踪迹。
English: By dawn, Deng Yao and his guests were chasing after him.

古文：至寺北百余步，有蒲桃一株，甚蕃茂，而缗系其枝。
现代文：到寺北一百多步的地方，有一棵葡萄，特别繁茂，而绳子就系在葡萄藤上。
English: More than a hundred paces to the north of the temple, there is a grape, particularly lush, and the rope is tied to the vine.

古文：有叶类人手，果牖间所见者。
现代文：有一片叶子像人手，正是人们从窗户见到的那只手。
English: There is a leaf that looks like a human hand, which is the hand that people can see from the window.

古文：遂命掘其根而焚之。
现代文：于是让人挖出它的根，把它全部烧掉。
English: So someone dug up its roots and burned it all.

古文：刘皂
现代文：刘皂
English: Liu Soap

古文：灵石县南尝夜中妖怪，由是里中人无敢夜经其地者。
现代文：灵石县南曾经夜间出现妖怪，从此乡里人没有敢夜间从那路过的。
English: In the south of Lingshi County, a monster once appeared at night. Since then, the villagers have not dared to pass there at night.

古文：元和年，董叔经为西河守。
现代文：元和年间，董叔经是西河太守。
English: During the Yuan and He years, Dong Shujing was the governor of the West River.

古文：时有彭城刘皂，假孝义尉。
现代文：当时有一个彭城人刘皂，在他手下做孝义尉。
English: At that time, there was a man from Pengcheng, Liu Soap, who worked under him as a filial lieutenant.

古文：皂顷尝以书忤董叔，怒甚，遂弃职。
现代文：刘皂近来因事与董叔经不和睦，刘皂很生气，一气之下便弃官不做，一走了之。
English: Recently, Liu Soap and Dong Shujing did not get along due to some issues. Liu Soap was very angry and resigned from his post in a fit of rage.

古文：入汾水关，夜至灵石南，逢一人立于路旁。
现代文：刘皂进入汾水关，正好是夜间来到灵石县南，碰上有一个人站在路旁。
English: Liu Soap entered Surabaya, just came to the south of Lingshi County at night, and met a man standing by the roadside.

古文：其状绝异，皂马惊而坠。
现代文：那人样子怪异，刘皂的马惊了，他便从马上掉下来。
English: The man looked strange. Liu So's horse was startled, and he fell off the horse.

古文：久之乃起。
现代文：老半天他才起来。
English: He didn't get up until the middle of the day.

古文：其路旁立者，即解皂衣袍而自衣之。
现代文：站在路旁的那个人就上来脱刘皂的衣服，穿到自己身上。
English: The man standing by the road came up, took off Liu Soap's clothes, and put it on himself.

古文：皂以为劫，不敢拒。
现代文：刘皂以为是打劫的，不敢反抗。
English: Liu Soap thought it was a robbery and did not dare to resist.

古文：既而西走近十余里，至逆旅，因言其事。
现代文：然后向西跑出十多里，来到一家客栈，就讲了这件事。
English: Then he ran more than ten miles to the west, came to an inn, and told the story.

古文：逆旅人曰： 邑南夜中有妖怪，固非贼尔。 
现代文：客栈里的人说： 县南夜里有妖怪，本来不是强盗。 
English: People in the inn said: There are monsters in the southern night of the county, but they are not robbers.

古文：明日，有自县南来者，谓皂曰： 县南野中有蓬蔓，状类人，披一青袍，不亦异乎？ 
现代文：次日，有从县南来的人，对刘皂说： 县南田野中有一棵蓬蔓，样子像人，披了一件青色衣袍，你说怪不怪！ 
English: The next day, someone from the southern part of the county said to Liu So: There is a tree in a field in the southern part of the county. It looks like a person and is wearing a blue robe. You say it's strange, but it's not!

古文：皂往视之，果己之袍也。
现代文：刘皂去看了看，果然是自己的那件袍子。
English: Liu So went to have a look, and sure enough, it was his robe.

古文：里中人始悟，为妖者乃蓬蔓耳。
现代文：乡里人才明白，原来作妖的是一棵蓬蔓罢了。
English: The people in the village understood that the original demon was just a pomeranian.

古文：由是尽焚，其妖遂绝。
现代文：于是把它全烧掉，那妖便灭绝了。
English: So they burned it all, and the demon was gone.

古文：田布
现代文：田布
English: Tabu

古文：唐田布，田悦之子也。
现代文：唐朝的田布，是田悦的儿子。
English: Tianbu of the Tang Dynasty was the son of Tian Yue.

古文：元和中，尝过蔡比，路侧有草如蒿。
现代文：元和年中，田布有一天路过蔡比，见路旁有一种草很像蒿子。
English: In the middle of the 19th century, Tianbu passed by Cai Bi one day and saw a grass that looked like a grasshopper on the roadside.

古文：茎大如指，其端聚叶，若鹪鹩巢在苇。
现代文：草的茎有手指那么粗，它的顶端聚集着叶子，就像鹪鹩在芦苇上筑的巢。
English: The stem of the grass is as thick as a finger, and its tip is clustered with leaves, like a stork's nest on reeds.

古文：折视之，叶中有小鼠数十，才若皂荚子，目犹未开，啾啾有声。
现代文：他把它折下来一看，叶子里裹着几十只小老鼠，才只像皂荚子那么个小不点，眼睛还没睁开，吱吱直叫。
English: When he broke it open, he saw dozens of tiny mice wrapped in the leaves. They were only as small as a bar of soap, but their eyes were still open and they were squeaking.

古文：梁生
现代文：梁生
English: Liang Sheng

古文：唐兴平之西，有梁生别墅，其后园有梨树十余株。
现代文：唐时，兴平之西有梁生的别墅，别墅后园里有十几棵梨树。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a villa of Liang Sheng in the west of Xingping. There were more than a dozen pear trees in the garden behind the villa.

古文：太和四年冬十一月，初雪霁，其梨忽有花发，芳而且茂。
现代文：太和四年冬十一月，头场雪刚下完，那梨树忽然有的开了花，芳香而且繁茂。
English: In November of the fourth year of the winter, just after the first snowfall, the pear tree suddenly bloomed, fragrant and lush.

古文：梁生甚奇之，以为吉兆。
现代文：梁生特别惊奇，以为是吉兆。
English: Liang Sheng was particularly surprised and thought it was a good omen.

古文：有韦氏谓梁生曰： 夫木以春而荣，冬而瘁，固其常矣。焉可谓之吉兆乎？ 
现代文：有个姓韦的人对梁生说： 树木在春天繁荣，在冬天枯败，是不可改变的规律，怎么能说这是吉兆呢？ 
English: A man surnamed Wei said to Liang Sheng: "Trees flourish in spring and wither in winter, which is an unchangeable law. How can we say that this is a good omen?

古文：生闻之不悦。
现代文：梁生听了不大高兴。
English: Liang Sheng was not very happy to hear this.

古文：后月余，梁生父卒。
现代文：后来一个多月，梁生的父亲死了。
English: More than a month later, Liang Sheng's father died.

古文：苏昌远
现代文：苏昌远
English: Su Changyuan

古文：中和中，有士人苏昌远居苏州属邑。
现代文：中和年间，有个叫苏昌远的人居住在苏州所属的县城里。
English: In the middle of the 19th century, a man named Su Changyuan lived in the county seat of Suzhou.

古文：有小庄去官道十里。
现代文：离官道十里的地方有一个小村庄。
English: Ten miles away from the official road, there is a small village called Tsuru.

古文：吴中水乡率多荷芰。
现代文：吴中水乡一般都多有荷花菱角什么的。
English: In Wuzhong Water Township, there are usually a lot of lotus crabs and so on.

古文：忽一日，见一女郎，素衣红脸，容质艳丽。
现代文：忽然有一天，苏昌远见到一位女郎。女郎白衣红脸，容质艳丽。
English: Suddenly one day, Su Changyuan saw a girl. The girl was dressed in white, had a red face, and was very beautiful.

古文：阅其色，恍若神仙中人。
现代文：看那姿色，就像是神仙界的人。
English: Look at that appearance, it's like a person from the spirit world.

古文：自是与之相狎，以庄为幽会之所。
现代文：从此，苏昌远就和这位佳人混在一起，以那个小村庄为幽会的场所。
English: From then on, Su Changyuan mingled with this beautiful woman, using the small village as a place for their trysts.

古文：苏生惑之既甚，尝以玉环赠之，结系殷勤。
现代文：苏昌远已经迷惑得不轻，曾经把一只玉环赠给了她。
English: Su Changyuan was already puzzled, and once gave her a jade ring.

古文：或一日，见槛前白莲花开敷殊异，俯而玩之。见花房中有物。
现代文：有一天，苏昌远见门前白莲花开得很美，俯身玩赏，见花房中有个什么东西。
English: One day, Su Chang foresaw the white lotus blooming beautifully in front of the door, bent down to admire it, and saw something in the flower room.

古文：细视，乃所赠玉环也。
现代文：仔细一看，原来是自己送给那女子的玉环。
English: On closer inspection, it turned out to be a jade ring that he had given to the woman.

古文：因折之，其妖遂绝。
现代文：于是他就把这株莲花折了下来。那妖女再也没见。
English: So he broke off the lotus and the witch was never seen again.

古文：药怪
现代文：药怪
English: The Medicine Monster

古文：上党人
现代文：上党人
English: Members of the Upper Party

古文：隋文帝时，上党有人宅后每夜有人呼声。
现代文：隋文帝时，上党有个人的宅子后边，每天夜里都有人的呼叫声。
English: During the time of the Sui Dynasty, there was a party at the back of a man's house, and every night there were shouts from people.

古文：求之不见。
现代文：找还找不到。
English: I haven't been able to find it.

古文：去宅一里，但见一人参枝。
现代文：离宅子一里的地方，有一棵人参。
English: There is a ginseng tree one mile away from the house.

古文：掘之，入地五尺，如人体状。
现代文：挖它，挖了五尺，才看清它长的是人体形状。
English: Digging it, digging five feet, only to see that it is a human body shape.

古文：掘去之后，呼声遂绝。
现代文：把它挖掉之后，呼叫声便再也没有了。
English: After it was dug up, the calls stopped.

古文：时晋王广阴有夺宗之计，谄事权要，上君也，党与也，言朋党比而谮。太子竟见废。
现代文：当时晋王杨广暗中有夺权篡位之心，他巴结讨好权贵要人，勾结朋党，造谣诬陷，终于使太子被废。
English: At that time, Yang Guang, the king of Jin, secretly had the intention of seizing power and usurping the throne. He tried to curry favor with the powerful and important people, colluded with his friends and fooled them with rumors, and finally the prince was abolished.

古文：隋室因此而乱。
现代文：隋朝王室因此而乱。
English: As a result, the royal family of the Sui Dynasty fell into disarray.

古文：田登娘
现代文：田登娘
English: Tandon Musume

古文：陕州西北白径岭上逻村，村之田氏尝穿井，得一根大如臂。
现代文：陕州西北白径岭上逻村，村中有一家姓田的。有一次姓田的挖井，挖出来一块手臂粗细的什么植物的根。
English: In Shangluo Village, Baigeiling, northwest of Shaanxi Province, there is a family with the surname Tian. Once, when the family dug a well, they dug out a piece of plant root with the thickness of an arm.

古文：节中粗皮若茯苓，香气似术。
现代文：根的节中粗皮像茯苓，它的香气像术。
English: The coarse skin in the joint of the root is like wax; its fragrance is like the fragrance of musk.

古文：其家奉释，有像设数十，遂置于像前。
现代文：田家信奉佛教，家中设有几十个佛像。
English: The Tian family believes in Buddhism and has dozens of Buddha statues in their home.

古文：田氏女名登娘，十六七，有容质。
现代文：所以他们就把这块根放在佛像前。田氏有个女儿叫登娘，今年十六七岁，有几分姿色。
English: So they placed the piece of root in front of the Buddha statue. Mr. Tian has a daughter named Deng Niang, who is sixteen or seventeen years old and has a bit of charisma.

古文：其父常令供香火焉。
现代文：她父亲常让她供香火。
English: Her father often asked her to make incense.

古文：经岁余，女尝日见一少年出入佛堂中，白衣蹑屐。
现代文：一年多以后。登娘发现有一个年轻人出入佛堂中，身穿白衣脚穿木鞋。
English: More than a year later, Deng Niu found a young man entering and leaving the Buddhist temple, wearing a white robe and wooden shoes.

古文：女遂私之。
现代文：一来二去，登娘就和他私通了。
English: One thing led to another, and Deng's daughter had an affair with him.

古文：精神举止，有异于常矣。
现代文：既然私通，精神举止便和平常不同了。
English: Since it's adultery, the mental demeanor is different from usual.

古文：其物根每岁至春萌芽。
现代文：那块木根每到春天都发芽。
English: The root of the tree sprouts every spring.

古文：其女有妊，乃具白于母。
现代文：田登娘怀孕了，就全都告诉了母亲。
English: When Tian Deng's daughter became pregnant, she told her mother everything.

古文：母疑其怪。
现代文：母亲怀疑那怪物。
English: My mother suspected the monster.

古文：尝有衲僧过门，其家因留之供养。
现代文：有一天一位僧人门前路过，田家就留僧人住下。
English: One day, a monk passed in front of the door, and the Tian family let the monk stay.

古文：僧将入佛宇，辄为物拒之。
现代文：僧人将要进入佛堂的时候，总有什么东西阻止他。
English: When a monk is about to enter a Buddhist temple, there is always something to stop him.

古文：一日，女随母他出，僧入佛堂。
现代文：有一天，田登娘跟母亲出去了，僧人进到佛堂。
English: One day, Tian Deng's daughter went out with her mother, and the monk went into the Buddhist hall.

古文：门才启，有一鸽拂僧飞去。
现代文：门刚打开，有一只鸽子轻轻掠过僧人身边飞去。
English: As soon as the door opened, a pigeon flew past the monk.

古文：其夕，女不复见其怪，视其根，亦成朽蠹。
现代文：那天晚上，田登娘没再见到那怪物。看那块根，也变成朽烂虫咬的木头了。
English: That night, Tian Deng Niang did not see the monster again. Look at that piece of root, it has also turned into wood bitten by rotten insects.

古文：女娠才七月，产物三节，其形如象前根也。
现代文：田登娘怀孕七个月，产下三节东西，那形状就像佛像前的那块根。
English: Tian Deng's daughter was seven months pregnant and gave birth to a three-knot thing, the shape of which was like the piece of root in front of the Buddha statue.

古文：田氏并火焚之，其怪亦绝。
现代文：田氏把它烧掉，那怪也就没有了。
English: Mr. Tian burned it, and the monster was gone.

古文：旧说枸杞茯苓人参术形有异，服之获上寿。
现代文：旧话说枸杞、茯苓、人参、术，形各有异，但是服用这些东西都可以长寿。
English: According to the old saying, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng, ginseng.

古文：或不荤血，不色欲，遇之必能降真为地仙矣。
现代文：有的说不吃荤腥，不近女色，遇上这样的好药就能成为地仙。
English: Some people say that you shouldn't eat spicy food or be close to women. If you encounter such a good medicine, you can become a fairy godmother.

古文：田氏非冀，故见怪而去之。
现代文：田氏没有这样的奢望，所以发现了怪物就除掉它。
English: Mr. Tian doesn't have that luxury, so when he finds a monster, he gets rid of it.

古文：宜乎！
现代文：应该如此啊！
English: That's how it should be!

古文：赵生
现代文：赵生
English: Zhao Sheng

古文：天宝中，有赵生者，其先以文学显。
现代文：天宝年中，有一个姓赵的读书人，他的先人凭文学显贵一时。
English: In the Heavenly Treasure Year, there was a reader surnamed Zhao, whose ancestors were famous for literature.

古文：生兄弟数人，俱以进士明经入仕。
现代文：他兄弟几人，都以进士或明经资格进入仕途。
English: Several of his brothers have entered the career path with the qualification of Jin Shi or Ming Jing.

古文：独生性鲁钝，虽读书，然不能分句详义。
现代文：只有这位赵生愚鲁，虽然读书，却不能分开句子，理解含义。
English: Only this Zhao Shengguru, although reading, could not separate sentences and understand the meaning.

古文：由是年壮尚不得为郡贡。
现代文：因此岁数不小了也不能得到郡守的推荐。
English: As a result, he is too old to be recommended by the county governor.

古文：常与兄弟友生会宴，盈座朱绿相接，独生白衣，甚为不乐。
现代文：有一回他与哥哥弟弟们的朋友一起吃饭，满座红衣绿袍相连，只有他赵生是白衣，他非常不快。
English: Once he was having a meal with his brothers' and brothers' friends. The whole table was dressed in red and green, but he, Zhao Sheng, was dressed in white. He was very unhappy.

古文：及酒酣，或靳之，生益惭且怒。
现代文：等到酒酣，有的人嘲笑他，他便更加惭愧愤怒。
English: When he got to the bar, some people laughed at him, which made him even more ashamed and angry.

古文：后一日，弃其家遁去，隐晋阳山，葺茅为舍。
现代文：一天之后，他撇弃家园隐遁而去，住进晋阳山中。房屋是用茅草盖的。
English: A day later, he abandoned his home and went into seclusion, living in the mountains of Jinyang. The house was covered with thatch.

古文：生有书百余编，笈而至山中，昼习夜息，虽寒热切肌，食粟袭紵，不惮劳苦。
现代文：他把一百多编书用箱子运进山来，白天读书，黑夜休息，虽然寒热侵袭，吃的是粗粮，穿的是麻衣，但他不怕劳苦。
English: He transported more than a hundred books in boxes into the mountains, read during the day and rested at night. Although cold and heat invaded, he ate coarse grains and wore linen clothes, but he was not afraid of hard work.

古文：而生蒙懵，力愈勤而功愈少。
现代文：然而这位赵生生性愚鲁，用力越勤功效越少。
English: However, this Zhao is inherently stupid, and the harder he works, the less effective he is.

古文：生愈恚怒。终不易其志。
现代文：他更加愤怒，始终不动摇自己的意志。
English: He got angrier and angrier, never wavering in his resolve.

古文：后旬余，有翁衣褐来造之，因谓生曰： 吾子居深山中，读古人书，岂有志于禄仕乎？
现代文：十几天后，有一个穿短褐衣服的老头来拜访他。老头说： 你隐居深山之中，读古人之书，难道有志于高官厚禄吗？
English: A dozen days later, an old man in a short brown robe came to visit him. The old man said, "You live in seclusion in the mountains, reading books of the ancients. Do you aspire to be a high-ranking official with a large salary?"

古文：虽然，学愈久而卒不能分句详议，何蔽滞之甚邪！ 
现代文：即使这样，学的时间越长而到底也不能分句晓义，是多么不明智不灵活呀！ 
English: Even so, how unwise and inflexible it is to study longer and longer and still not be able to understand a single sentence!

古文：生谢曰： 仆不敏，自度老且无用，故入深山，读书自悦。
现代文：赵生表示感谢，说： 在下不聪敏，自己估计老了将无用，所以来到深山，读书自悦。
English: Zhao Sheng expressed his gratitude, saying, "I am not clever at the bottom, I estimate that I will be useless when I am old, so I came to the mountains to enjoy reading.

古文：虽不能达其精微，然必欲死于志业，不辱先人。
现代文：尽管不能通晓它的精深微妙之处，但是我一定要死在我想干的事业上，不给先人带来耻辱。
English: Though I cannot fathom its subtleties, I must die doing what I want to do, without bringing shame to my ancestors.

古文：又何及于禄仕也？ 
现代文：又怎能说到官和禄上去呢？ 
English: And how can one speak of promotion and reward?

古文：翁曰： 吾子之志甚坚。
现代文：老头说： 你的意志特别坚定。
English: The old man said, "You have a very strong will.

古文：老夫虽无术能有补于郎君，但幸一谒我耳。 
现代文：老夫我虽然没有什么仙术异能帮助你，只希望你到我那去一趟。 
English: Old man, although I don't have any magical powers to help you, I just want you to come to me.

古文：因徵其所止。
现代文：于是赵生问老头在什么地方住。
English: So Zhao Sheng asked the old man where he lived.

古文：翁曰： 吾段氏子，家于山西大木之下。 
现代文：老头说： 我是段氏之子，家在山西大树底下。 
English: The old man said, "I am the son of Duan, and my home is under a big tree in Shanxi Province.

古文：言讫，忽亡所见。
现代文：老头说完这话，忽然就不见了。
English: After saying this, he suddenly did not know where to go.

古文：生怪之，以为妖。遂径往山西寻其迹，果有段树蕃茂。
现代文：赵生奇怪，以为是妖精，就径直到山西去寻找他的踪迹。果然有棵繁茂的椴树。
English: Zhao Sheng was puzzled and thought it was a fairy, so he went all the way to Shanxi to look for traces of him. Sure enough, there was a lush eucalyptus tree.

古文：生曰： 岂非段氏子乎？ 
现代文：赵生想： 这就是段氏之子吗？ 
English: Zhao Sheng thought: Is this Duan's son?

古文：因持锸发其下，得人参长尺余，甚肖所遇翁之貌。生曰： 吾闻人参能为怪者，可愈疾。 
现代文：于是拿来铁锹挖那树下，挖到一棵一尺多长的人参。这人参特别象他见过的那个老头。赵生想： 我听说能变成妖怪的人参，可以治病。 
English: So he took a spade and dug under the tree, and dug up a ginseng more than a foot long. This ginseng especially resembled the old man he had seen. Zhao Sheng thought: I heard that ginseng, which can turn into a monster, can cure diseases.

古文：遂瀹而食之。
现代文：于是就把人参煮着吃了。
English: So she boiled the ginseng and ate it.

古文：自是醒然明悟，目所览书，尽能穷奥。
现代文：从此以后他头脑清醒，聪明颖悟，凡是看过的书，都能通晓其中奥妙。
English: From then on, he was clear-headed, clever and enlightened, and could understand all the books he had read.

古文：后岁余，以明经及第。历官数任而卒。
现代文：一年之后，考中 明经 科，做了好几任官才死。
English: A year later, he topped the middle school exam in economics, and held several positions before his death.

古文：菌怪
现代文：菌怪
English: Fungus monster

古文：郭元振
现代文：郭元振
English: Guo Yuanzhen

古文：郭元振尝山居。中夜，有人面如盘，瞬目出于灯下。
现代文：郭元振有一回住在山里，到了半夜，有一个脸如圆盘的人眨着眼睛出现在灯下。
English: Guo Yuanzhen once lived in the mountains. In the middle of the night, a person with a face like a disk appeared under the lamp with blinking eyes.

古文：元振了无惧色。徐染翰题其颊曰： 久戍人偏老，长征马不肥。 
现代文：郭元振一点也没害怕，慢慢地拿起笔蘸了墨，在那人的面颊上写道： 久戍人偏老，长征马不肥。 
English: Guo Yuanzhen was not afraid at all, slowly picked up the pen and dipped the ink, and wrote on the man's cheek: "People in Jiuzhaigou are old, and the Long March horses are not fat."

古文：元振之警句也。
现代文：这是郭元振的警句。
English: This is Guo Yuanzhen's epigram.

古文：题毕吟之，其物遂灭。
现代文：写完读了一遍，那人就没了。
English: I wrote it down and read it over, and the man was gone.

古文：久之，元振随樵闲步，见巨木上有白耳，大如数斗，所题句在焉。
现代文：后来，郭元振跟着打柴的随便走走，发现一棵大树上有白木耳，有几斗那么大，那上面有他题写的那两句诗。
English: Later, Guo Yuanzhen casually walked along with the woodcutter and found a big tree with white wood, a few buckets in size, with the two poems he had inscribed on it.

古文：宣平坊官人
现代文：宣平坊官人
English: Government officials at Xuanping Square

古文：京宣平坊，有官人夜归。
现代文：京中宣平坊，有一位官人夜里归来。
English: In Beijing's Xuanping Square, a government official came home late at night.

古文：入曲，有卖油者张帽驮桶，不避道。
现代文：走进曲斜僻静之处，见有一个卖油的，戴着草帽，用驴驮着油桶，不避开道路。
English: Entering a secluded place in Kyushu, I saw an oil seller, wearing a straw hat, carrying oil barrels with a donkey, not avoiding the road.

古文：导者搏之，头随而落，遂遽入一大宅门。
现代文：官人的导者上去打他，他的头应声而落，其余部分以及驴和油桶迅速地跑进一个大宅院的门里。
English: The leader of the officers went up and struck him, and his head fell, and the rest of him, with the donkey and the barrel of oil, ran quickly into the door of a great house.

古文：官人异之，随入至一大槐树下，遂灭。
现代文：官人觉得奇怪，就跟了进去，只见那人和驴跑到一棵大槐树下便不见了。
English: The officials thought it was strange and followed him inside, only to see that the man and the donkey had run under a large elm tree and disappeared.

古文：因告其家。
现代文：于是官人告诉了这家的主人。
English: So the officials told the owner of the house.

古文：其家即掘之。
现代文：这家主人立即命人发掘。
English: The owner of the house immediately ordered an excavation.

古文：深数尺，并树枯根，下有大蛤蟆如叠。
现代文：挖到几尺深，见树的枯根下有一只大蛤蟆。
English: Dig down a few feet and you'll find a giant salamander under the dead root of a tree.

古文：挟二笔錔。
现代文：蛤蟆很恐惧的样子。
English: The baboon looked very scared.

古文：树溜津满其中也。
现代文：蛤蟆的两边有两只笔套。
English: There are two pen holders on either side of the handle.

古文：及有巨白菌如殿门浮沤钉。其盖已落。
现代文：笔帽里流满了树的津液，还有一个挺大的白菌就像殿门上的浮沤钉，那盖已经落了。
English: The pen cap was full of tree sap, and there was a rather large white fungus like a floating nail on the temple door, the lid had fallen off.

古文：蛤蟆乃驴也，笔錔乃油桶也，菌则其人矣。
现代文：蛤蟆就是驴。笔帽就是油桶。菌就是那个卖油的人了。
English: The donkey is the donkey. The pen cap is the oil barrel. The fungus is the oil seller.

古文：里人有买其油者月余，怪其油好而贱。
现代文：乡里人有的一个月前就买了他的油，奇怪他的油为什么质量好价钱便宜。
English: The villager had bought his oil a month ago, and wondered why his oil was of good quality and cheap.

古文：及怪发，食者悉病呕。
现代文：等到这事发生，吃过那油的全都呕吐起来。
English: When this happened, everyone who had eaten the oil vomited.

古文：豫章人
现代文：豫章人
English: Yuanzhangren

古文：豫章人好食蕈。
现代文：豫章人喜欢吃蕈。
English: People in Yuzhang like to eat cucumbers.

古文：有黄姑蕈者尤为美味。
现代文：有一种黄姑蕈更是味道鲜美。
English: One kind of Huangguoshu is even more delicious.

古文：有民家治舍，烹此蕈以食工人。
现代文：有一家盖房子，煮这种蕈招待帮着盖房的工人们。
English: One family building a house cooked this stew to entertain the workers helping to build the house.

古文：工人有登屋施瓦者，下视无人，唯釜煮物，以盆覆之。
现代文：有一个工人在房上瓦瓦。向下看见地上无人，只有一口锅正在煮着什么东西，用盆盖着。
English: A worker was shoveling on the roof. Looking down, he saw that there was no one on the ground, only a pot that was cooking something, covered with a basin.

古文：俄有小儿裸身绕釜而走，倏忽没于釜中。
现代文：片刻之间，有一个光着身子的小男孩绕着那锅跑，倏地就在锅里消失了。
English: In an instant, a naked little boy ran around the pan and disappeared into it.

古文：顷之，主人设蕈，工独不食，亦不言。
现代文：不多时，主人把煮好的蕈摆到餐桌上，只有那个瓦瓦的工人不吃，也不说。
English: Not infrequently, the master would put the cooked eel on the table, but the unkempt worker would neither eat nor speak.

古文：既暮，食蕈者皆卒。
现代文：到了天黑，吃蕈的人全死了。
English: By nightfall, everyone who had eaten the toad was dead.

