古文：起昭阳作噩，尽旃蒙大渊献，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。魏纪八魏邵陵厉公嘉平五年
English: a total of three years. Wei Ji eight years, Wei Shao Ling five years, Li Gong Ji Ping five years.

古文：邵陵厉公下嘉平五年春，正月，朔，蜀大将军费祎与诸将大会于汉寿，郭修在坐；祎欢饮沉醉，修起刺祎，杀之。
现代文：春季，正月朔，蜀大将军费与诸位将领在汉寿大聚会，郭循也在座。费欢饮以致沉醉，这时郭循突起刺杀了费。
English: In the spring, on the first day of the first month of the year, General Fei of Shu Da and all the generals gathered at the Han Shou Grand Gathering, and Guo Xun was also present. Fei was so drunk that he was intoxicated, and then Guo Xun jumped up and stabbed Fei to death.

古文：祎资性泛爱，不疑于人。
现代文：费性情宽厚广施仁爱，从不怀疑别人。
English: He is generous and kind, and never doubts others.

古文：越巂太守张嶷尝以书戒之日： 昔岑彭率师，来歙杖节，咸见害于刺客。
现代文：越太守张嶷曾写信告诫他说： 从前岑彭率领军队，来歙手持杖节为帅时，都被刺客所害。
English: The Grand Empress Dowager Zhang Ye once wrote a letter to him, admonishing him: "In the past, when Nie Peng led an army and came to Du holding a staff, they were all killed by assassins.

古文：今明将军位尊权重，待信新附太过，宜鉴前事，少以为警。 
现代文：如今将军您地位尊贵权力重大，但您对待和信任新近归附的人太过分，应该以前代之事为鉴，稍微加强一些警戒。 
English: Now, General, your position is honorable and your power is great, but your treatment and trust of the newly annexed people is too excessive. You should learn from the previous generation and be a little more vigilant.

古文：祎不从，故及祸。
现代文：但费不听，所以祸殃及身。
English: But Fai didn't listen, so the disaster struck.

古文：诏追封郭循为长乐乡侯，使其子袭爵。
现代文：魏国下诏追封郭循为长乐乡侯，让他的儿子因袭继承爵位。
English: Under the imperial edict of Wei, Guo Xun was made the lord of Changle Township, and his son was allowed to inherit the title.

古文：王昶、毌丘俭闻东军败，各烧屯走。
现代文：王昶、丘俭听说东部魏军失败，各自烧毁营地后撤走。
English: After hearing that the Eastern Wei Army had failed, Wang Qian and Qiu Jian burned down their respective camps and withdrew.

古文：朝议欲贬黜诸将，大将军师曰： 我不听公休，以至于此。
现代文：朝臣议论想要把诸将罢官降职，大将军司马师说： 我没有听诸葛诞的话，才造成这样的后果。
English: When the courtier talked about wanting to demote Zhuge, General Sima Shi said, "I didn't listen to Zhuge's words, and this is the result."

古文：此我过也，诸将何罪！ 
现代文：这是我的错误，各位将军有什么罪？ 
English: It was my mistake. What are the generals guilty of?

古文：悉宥之。
现代文：于是全部宽宥了他们。
English: So he forgave them all.

古文：师弟安东将军昭时为监军，唯削昭爵而已。
现代文：司马师之弟安东将军司马昭当时为监军，所以只削去司马昭一人的爵位而已。
English: Sima Zhao, the younger brother of Sima's mentor, General Anton Sima Zhao, was in charge of supervising the troops at the time, so only Sima Zhao's title was cut.

古文：以诸葛诞为镇南将军，都督豫州；毌丘俭为镇东将军，都督扬州。
现代文：任命诸葛诞为镇南将军，都督豫州；丘俭为镇东将军，都督扬州。
English: Zhu Gezhen was appointed as the general of Zhenan and the governor of Yuzhou; Qiu Jian was appointed as the general of Zhendong and the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：是岁，雍州刺史陈泰求敕并州并力讨胡，师从之。
现代文：这一年，雍州刺史陈泰请求下令让并州与他合力讨伐胡人，司马师同意了。
English: In that year, Chen Tai, the governor of Yongzhou, asked for an order to have the annexed state join forces with him to fight the Hu people, and Sima agreed.

古文：未集，而雁门、新兴二郡胡以远役，遂惊反。
现代文：队伍尚未集中起来，而新兴、雁门两个郡的胡人由于路途太远，惊疑不定而反叛。
English: The team has not yet concentrated, and the Hu people in the two counties of Xinxing and Yanmen have rebelled because the road is too far and they are uncertain.

古文：师又谢朝士曰： 此我过也，非陈雍州之责！ 
现代文：对此事，司马师又向朝廷大臣谢罪说： 这是我的错误，不是陈雍州的责任！ 
English: Regarding this matter, Sima Shi also apologized to the Minister of the Imperial Court, saying: This is my mistake, not Chen Yongzhou's responsibility!

古文：是以人皆愧悦。
现代文：因此人们都行惭愧而对司马师心悦诚服。
English: As a result, people are ashamed of themselves and are sincerely pleased with Sima Shi.

古文：习凿齿论曰：司马大将军引二败以为己过，过消而业隆，可谓智矣。
现代文：习凿齿论曰：司马大将军以两次失败引咎自责，错误消弥而事业却兴隆了，真可谓智者之举。
English: According to the theory of chiseling teeth: General Sima blamed himself for two failures, eliminated mistakes, but his career flourished. It was truly a wise man's move.

古文：若乃讳败推过，归咎万物，常执其功而隐其丧，上下离心，贤愚解体，谬之甚矣！
现代文：如果讳言失败推卸责任，归咎于各种原因，经常自伐其功而隐匿失误，使上上下下离心离德，各种人才分散解体，那谬误就太大了。
English: If we conceal our failures, shirk our responsibilities, attribute them to various causes, often take credit for our own work while concealing our mistakes, and cause the top and bottom to be centrifugally separated from virtue, and all kinds of talents to be dispersed and disintegrated, then the fallacy will be too great.

古文：君人者，苟统斯理而以御国，行失而名扬，兵挫而战胜，虽百败可也，况于再乎！
现代文：身为君主之人，如果能掌握这个道理来治国家，行动失误却名声远扬，兵力暂时受挫却能最终战胜敌人，那么即使失败一百次都无妨，何况只有两次呢！
English: If a prince, who governs his country by this rule, can make a name for himself by making mistakes, and by defeating his enemies when his army is temporarily defeated, then a hundred defeats are nothing, let alone two!

古文：光禄大夫张缉言于师曰： 恪虽克捷，见诛不久。 
现代文：光禄大夫张缉对司马师说： 诸葛恪虽然获得了胜利，但离被诛杀却不远了。 
English: Guanglu doctor Zhang Wei said to Sima Shi: Although Zhuge Ke has won the victory, he is not far from being killed.

古文：师曰： 何故？ 
现代文：司马师问道： 这是什么缘故？ 
English: Sima asked: What is the reason for this?

古文：缉曰： 威震其主，功盖一国，求不得死乎！ 
现代文：张缉说： 他的声威震慑其君主，功劳盖过全国，想要求得不死，还可能吗？ 
English: Zhang Zhe said: His voice is so powerful that it can shake the monarch, and his achievements have covered the whole country. Is it still possible to ask for immortality?

古文：二月，吴军还自东兴。
现代文：二月，吴国军队自东兴返回。
English: In February, the Wu army returned from Dongxing.

古文：进封太傅恪阳都侯，加荆、扬州牧，督中外诸军事。
现代文：进封太傅诸葛恪为阳都侯，并兼任荆州、扬州牧，都督中外诸军事。
English: Jinfeng Taifu Zhuge Ke was the Yang capital, and also served as the Jingzhou and Yangzhou herdsman, and the military governor.

古文：恪遂有轻敌之心，复欲出军。诸大臣以为数出罢劳，同辞谏恪，恪不听。
现代文：诸葛恪于是产生了轻敌之心，想要再度出兵，各位大臣认为频繁出兵军队疲惫不堪，就异口同声地劝谏诸葛恪，但诸葛恪不听。
English: Zhuge Ke then had a light-hearted heart, and wanted to send troops again. The ministers thought that the frequently dispatched troops were exhausted, so they advised Zhuge Ke in unison, but Zhuge Ke did not listen.

古文：中散大夫蒋延固争，恪命扶出。
现代文：中散大夫蒋延仍坚持争谏，但诸葛恪却命人把他架扶出去。
English: Zhongshan doctor Jiang Yan still insisted on fighting, but Zhuge Ke ordered someone to carry him out.

古文：因著论以谕众曰： 凡敌国欲相吞，即仇雠欲相除也。
现代文：诸葛恪因此事著文晓谕众人说： 凡是敌对国家想要互相吞并，也就是仇敌想要互相铲除。
English: For this reason, Zhuge Liang wrote an article to instruct the people, saying, "All hostile countries want to annex each other, that is, enemies want to eliminate each other."

古文：有仇而长之，祸不在己，则在后人，不可不为远虑也。
现代文：有仇敌而使之发展，祸患如果不在眼前，就是留给了后人，所以不能不深谋远虑。
English: If there is an enemy and it develops, if the disaster is not in front of us, it will be left to future generations, so we must think ahead.

古文：昔秦但得关西耳，尚以并吞六国。
现代文：古时秦国只有关西之地，尚且能吞并六国。
English: In ancient times, Qin only controlled the western part of the country, yet it was able to annex six countries.

古文：今以魏比古之秦，土地数倍；以吴与蜀，比古六国，不能半也。
现代文：如今以魏国与古代的秦国相比，土地却不到六国的一半。
English: Today, compared to the ancient Qin and Wei dynasties, the land is less than half of the Six Kingdoms.

古文：然今所以能敌之者，但以操时兵众，于今适尽，而后生者未及长大，正是贼衰少未盛之时。加司马懿先诛王凌，续自陨毙，其子幼弱而专彼大任，虽有智计之士，未得施用。
现代文：然而今天我们之所以能与魏国对敌，只是因为曹操时期的士兵到今天已经老弱不能打仗，而后来出生的人还没有长大，这正是敌人兵力微弱而未及强盛之时，再加上司马懿先诛杀了王，接着自己死去，他的儿子幼弱却专擅那里的大权，虽然有聪明的谋士，却未能加以任用。
English: However, today we are able to fight against Wei only because the soldiers of Cao Cao's time are too old and weak to fight, and those who were born later have not grown up. This is when the enemy's military strength was weak and not strong enough. In addition, Sima Ye first killed the king and then died himself. His son was young and weak, but he was good at power there. Although he had clever advisers, he was unable to appoint them.

古文：当今伐之，是其厄会。
现代文：如今去讨伐，正是他们的厄运到来之日。
English: To go ahead with the conquest of Wei at the very time when it was doomed.

古文：圣人急于趋时，诚谓今日。
现代文：圣人急于顺随时势，指的实在就是今天的这种情况。
English: The sage urgently grasped the opportunity, saying that this is the situation in the world today.

古文：若顺众人之情，怀偷安之计，以为长江之险可以传世，不论魏之终始而以今日遂轻其后，此吾所以长叹息者也！
现代文：如果顺从众人之情，心怀苟且偷安的想法，认为长江天险可以世代保持，不考虑魏国全面的情况而只看现在的形势就轻视其以后的发展，这就是我一直为之难过叹息的原因。
English: If you obey the feelings of the people, cherish the idea of peace, think that the Yangtze River natural hazards can be maintained for generations, and do not consider the overall situation of Wei, but only look at the current situation and despise its future development, this is the reason why I have always been sad and sigh.

古文：今闻众人或以百姓尚贫，欲务闲息，此不知虑其大危而爱其小勤者也。
现代文：如今我听说有些人认为百姓还很贫困，想要先从事休养生息之事，这是不知考虑其大的危害则只是怜惜其小的勤苦的想法。
English: Now I have heard that some people think that the people are still very poor and want to engage in recreation and livelihood first, which is an idea that does not consider its great harm but only pities its small diligence.

古文：昔汉祖幸已自有三秦之地，何不闭关守险以自娱乐，空出攻楚，身被创痍，介胄生虮虱，将士厌困苦，岂甘锋刃而忘安宁哉？
现代文：以前汉高祖幸运地占据了三秦之地，为什么他不闭关守住险要以自享娱乐，却偏要发动全部兵力去攻打西楚项羽，以致于身受创伤，甲胄里生满了虱子，将士们饱受艰难困苦，难道他甘心在刀剑里生活而忘记安宁了吗？
English: Once upon a time, the founder of the Han Dynasty was fortunate to have obtained the land of Sanqin, but why did he not close the gate to guard the danger and enjoy the entertainment, but he went out to attack the West Chu, with trauma, his clothes and armor were raw, and his soldiers were tired of hardship. Is it that he likes to take the risk of the blade and forget peace?

古文：虑于长久不得两存者耳。
现代文：这是因为考虑到天长日久他与项羽势不两存的缘故。
English: This is due to the fact that he and Xiang Yu have been rivals for a long time.

古文：每览荆邯说公孙述以进取之图，近见家叔父表陈与贼争竞之计，未尝不喟然叹息也！
现代文：每当我借鉴荆邯劝说公孙述锐意进取的图谋，以及近来见到家叔诸葛亮上表陈述与敌人争竞的计策，我都要喟然叹息！
English: Whenever I draw on the example of Jing Xi to persuade his son-in-law to describe his ambitious plans, as well as the recent sight of his uncle Zhuge Liang's strategy of competing with the enemy, I have to sigh!

古文：夙夜反侧，所虑如此，故聊疏愚言，以达二、三君子之末。
现代文：我朝夕辗转反侧，所想的就是这些，因此姑且陈述我的浅见，以送达各位君子明鉴。
English: This is what I think about, day in and day out, so let me state my shallow opinion to serve as a clear example to you gentlemen.

古文：若一朝陨没，志画不立，贵令来世知我所忧，可思于后耳。 
现代文：如果一旦我死去，志向计划不能实现，重要的是让来世之人了解我所忧虑的事情，在我死后深入地思考此事。 
English: If once I die, the aspiration plan cannot be realized, it is important to let the people of the afterlife understand what I am worried about, and think about it deeply after my death.

古文：众人虽皆心以为不可，然莫敢复难。
现代文：众人虽然心里都认为他说得不对，但没有人再敢提出异议了。
English: Although everyone thought in their hearts that he was wrong, no one dared to raise objections.

古文：丹杨太守聂友素与恪善，以书谏恪曰： 大行皇帝本有遏东关之计，计未施行；今公辅赞大业，成先帝之志，寇远自送，将士凭赖威德，出身用命，一旦有非常之功，岂非宗庙神灵社稷之福邪！
现代文：丹阳太守聂友平素与诸葛恪很有交情，就写信劝谏他说： 先帝本来有遏止东关之敌的计策，但没有施行；敌人自远方前来送死，我军将士凭借先帝的威德，舍身拼命，一下子就取得了非常卓著的战功，这难道不是宗庙、神灵、社稷的福分吗？
English: Danyang Daju, who was a close friend of Zhuge Ke, wrote a letter to persuade him to say: The former emperor originally had a strategy to stop the enemy in Dongguan, but did not implement it; the enemy came from afar to send death, our soldiers, with the help of the former emperor's virtue, sacrificed themselves desperately, and immediately achieved very outstanding war exploits. Isn't this the blessing of ancestral temples, deities, and shrines?

古文：宜且案兵养锐，观衅而动。
现代文：现在我们应当暂且按兵不动，养精蓄锐，伺察到敌国的内部裂痕再发动兵力。
English: Now is the time to stay calm, stay focused, and wait for the right moment to act.

古文：今乘此势欲复大出，天时未可而苟任盛意，私心以为不安。 
现代文：如今您乘此胜利之势想要再次大规模出兵，这是未得天时之利而随便按您个人的意旨行事，我内心深感不安。 
English: Now that you want to take advantage of this victory to send large-scale troops again, I feel deeply uneasy that you are acting according to your personal will without taking advantage of the situation.

古文：恪题论后，为书答友曰： 足下虽有自然之理，然未见大数，熟省此论，可以开悟矣。 
现代文：诸葛恪在他的文章后面附了一封信回答聂友说： 您的话虽然符合自然之理，但却没有看到胜负存亡的大道理，您仔细阅读这篇文章，就可以明白了。 
English: Zhuge Ke attached a letter at the end of his article to reply to Xing You, saying: Although your words are in line with the laws of nature, they do not see the truth of victory or defeat. If you read this article carefully, you will understand.

古文：滕胤谓恪曰： 君受伊、霍之托，入安本朝，出摧强敌，名声振于海内，天下莫不震动，万姓之心，冀得蒙君而息。
现代文：滕胤对诸葛恪说： 您接受象伊尹、霍光那样的辅佐君王重托，在内则安定我们的朝廷，出外则摧败强大的敌人，名声震摄海内，天下之人无不震动，万众之心，是希望蒙受您的恩德而休养生息。
English: Tengyin said to Zhuge Ke: You accept the heavy entrustment of the assistant monarchs like Yi Yin and Huo Guang, among which is to stabilize our imperial court, and to defeat the powerful enemies when you go abroad. Your fame is shocking at sea, and everyone in the world is shaken. The hearts of all people hope to receive your grace and recover.

古文：今猥以劳役之后，兴师出征，民疲力屈，远主有备，若攻城不克，野略无获，是丧前劳而招后责也。
现代文：如今在繁重的劳役之后，又兴兵出征，人民疲惫精力不足，而且远方的敌人也有了防备。如果城池不能攻破，掠夺地盘也没有收获，就会使前功尽弃而招致后来的责备。
English: Today, after the heavy labor, the soldiers are sent out again, the people are tired and lack of energy, and the distant enemy is also prepared. If the city cannot be broken, and the plunder of the site has no harvest, it will cause the previous achievements to be abandoned and cause later reproach.

古文：不如案甲息师，观隙耐劝。
现代文：因此不如先按兵不动休养军队，然后伺察敌人的漏洞再发兵行动。
English: Therefore, it is better to rest and recuperate the army first, and then investigate the enemy's loopholes before sending troops into action.

古文：且兵者大事，事以众济，众苟不悦，君独安之！ 
现代文：而且兴兵打仗是件大事，只有依靠众人才能成功，众人如果不愿打仗，您独自一人能安然处之吗？ 
English: Moreover, raising an army to fight a war is a big deal. Success can only be achieved by relying on the people. If the people do not want to fight, can you do it alone?

古文：恪曰： 诸云不可，皆不见计算，怀居苟安者也。而子复以为然，吾何望乎！
现代文：诸葛恪说： 众人说不可出兵，都未见有什么具体的计划打算，只是心怀苟且偷安的思想；而你又认为他们是对的，我还有什么指望？
English: Zhuge Ke said, "Many people say that it is impossible to send troops, but I haven't seen any specific plan or intention, just the thought of being careful and safe; and you think they are right, what hope do I have?

古文：夫以曹芳暗劣，而政在私门，彼之民臣，固有离心。
现代文：因曹芳昏庸无能，而使政权落入私家，魏国的臣民本来已经产生离异之心。
English: Because of Cao Fang's incompetence, the political power fell into the hands of a private individual, and the subjects of Wei had already begun to feel a sense of estrangement.

古文：今吾因国家之资，藉战胜之威，则何往而不克哉！ 
现代文：如今我凭借国家的资财，依仗上次战争胜利的威势，那么将无往而不胜。 
English: Now, with the resources of the country and the momentum of the victory of the last war, I will be invincible.

古文：三月，恪大发州郡二十万众复入寇，以滕胤为都下督，掌统留事。
现代文：三月，诸葛恪发州郡之兵二十万人再次进犯魏国，任命滕胤为都下督，总管留守事宜。
English: In March, Zhuge sent 200,000 soldiers from Zhoushou County to invade Wei again, and appointed Teng Yan as the governor of the capital, in charge of staying behind.

古文：夏，四月，大赦。
现代文：夏季，四月，实行大赦。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：汉姜维自以练西方风俗，兼负其才武，欲诱诸羌、胡以为羽翼，谓自陇以西，可断而有。
现代文：蜀将姜维自以为详熟西部风俗，再加上对自己的才华武略颇为自负，所以总想诱使各个羌、胡的部族成为自己的羽翼，他认为从陇地往西，都可以断为己有。
English: Shu general Jiang Wei thought that he was familiar with Western customs, and he was a little conceited about his talent. Therefore, he always wanted to entice the various Yao and Hu tribes to become his wings. He thought that he could own everything from Yao to the West.

古文：每欲兴军大举，费祎常裁制不从。
现代文：每次他想要兴兵大举进攻，费就常常加以阻止，不听从他的主张，调给他的兵力也不足一万人。
English: Every time he wanted to launch a large-scale offensive, Fei often prevented it, did not listen to his proposal, and transferred less than ten thousand troops to him.

古文：与其兵不过万人，曰： 吾等不如丞相亦已远矣，丞相犹不能定中夏，况吾等乎！
现代文：费说： 我们这些人比诸葛丞相差得远了。丞相尚且不能平定中原，更何况我们呢？
English: Fei said, "We people are far from Zhuge. Even though Zhuge can't pacify the Central Plains, what about us?

古文：不如且保国治民，谨守社稷，如其功业，以俟能者，无为希冀徼幸，决成败于一举；若不如志，悔之无及。 
现代文：所以我们不如先保国治民，谨守住自己的国土，至于建功立业扩大疆土，那就要等待有才能的人去干了。我们不要寄希望于侥幸，把成败系于一举，如果不能如愿以偿，后悔就来不及了。 
English: Therefore, it is better for us to protect the country and the people first and keep our own land. As for making achievements and expanding the territory, we must wait for talented people to do it. Let's not hope for luck, and make success or failure depend on one stroke. If we can't get what we want, we won't have time to regret it.

古文：及祎死，维得行其志，乃将数万人出石营，围狄道。
现代文：等到费死后，姜维才得以实行他的计划，率兵将数万人越过石营，围攻狄道县。
English: It was only after Fei's death that Jiang Wei was able to carry out his plan, leading tens of thousands of soldiers across the stone camp and besieging Dido County.

古文：吴诸葛恪入寇淮南，驱略民人。
现代文：吴国的诸葛恪进犯淮南，驱杀掠夺百姓。
English: Zhuge of Wu invaded Huainan, killing and plundering the people.

古文：诸将或谓恪曰： 今引军深入，疆场之民，必相率远遁，恐兵劳而功少，不如止围新城，新城困，救必至，至而图之，乃可大获。 
现代文：将领中有人对诸葛恪说： 如今率兵深入敌境，境内的百姓必然都一起远远地逃离了，恐怕我们的兵士费尽辛劳而功效甚少，不如仅围困新城，新城被困，必然会有救兵来，等救兵一到，再与他们交战，就可以大获全胜。 
English: One of the generals said to Zhuge Ke: Now that you have led your soldiers deep into the enemy territory, the people in the territory must have fled far away together. I am afraid that our soldiers have worked hard and have little effect. It is better to just besiege the new city. If the new city is trapped, there will inevitably be a rescue. Once the rescue arrives, and then fight with them, you can win a complete victory.

古文：恪从其计，五月，还军围新城。
现代文：诸葛恪采纳了这个计策，五月，撤回军队围困新城。
English: Zhuge Ke adopted this strategy and withdrew his army to besiege Xincheng in May.

古文：诏太尉司马孚督诸军二十万往赴之。
现代文：诏命太尉司马孚率军二十万人奔赴战场。
English: The emperor ordered Lieutenant Sima Fu to lead an army of 200,000 men to the battlefield.

古文：大将军师问于虞松曰： 今东西有事，二方皆急，而诸将意沮，若之何？ 
现代文：大将军司马师询问虞松说： 如今东西都有战事，两个地方都很紧急，但诸位将领却意志沮丧，应该怎么办？ 
English: The general Sima asked Yu Song: "Nowadays, there are wars in both directions, and both places are very urgent, but your generals are frustrated. What should we do?

古文：松曰： 昔周亚夫坚壁昌邑而吴、楚自败，事有似弱而强，不可不察也。
现代文：虞松说： 从前西汉周亚夫坚守昌邑而吴、楚之军不战自败，有些事情看似弱而实际强，所以不能不详察。
English: Yu Song said: In the past, Zhou Yafu of the Western Han Dynasty held fast to Changyi, while the armies of Wu and Chu were defeated without a fight. Some things seem weak but are actually strong, so they must be examined in detail.

古文：今恪悉其锐众，足以肆暴，而坐守新城，欲以致一战耳。
现代文：如今诸葛恪带来他全部的精锐部队，足以肆意逞强施暴，但他却坐等在新城，想要招来魏军与他一战。
English: Now Zhuge Ke brought all his elite troops, enough to wantonly commit violence, but he was waiting in Xincheng, wanting to invite the Wei army to fight him.

古文：若攻城不拔，请战不可，师老众疲，势将自走，诸将之不径进，乃公之利也。
现代文：如果他不能攻破城池，请战也无人理睬，军队就会士气低落疲劳不堪，势必将自动撤退，诸位将领的不愿径直进击，对您反而是有利的。
English: If he is unable to break through the city, and his request for battle is ignored, the army will be demoralized and exhausted, and will inevitably withdraw automatically. Your generals' reluctance to attack directly is beneficial to you.

古文：姜维有重兵而县军应恪，投食我麦，非深根之寇也。
现代文：姜维握有重兵，但却是深入我境的孤军与诸葛恪遥相呼应，他们没有运粮部队，只以我们境内的麦子为食，不是能坚持长久作战的军队。
English: Jiang Wei has a heavy army, but it is a lone army that has penetrated deep into our territory, echoing Zhuge Liangyao. They do not have grain transport troops, they only eat wheat in our territory, and they are not an army that can persist in fighting for a long time.

古文：且谓我并力于东，西方必虚，是以径进。
现代文：而且他认为我们全力投入东方的战斗，西方必定空虚，所以径直深入我方境内。
English: And he thought that we were fully committed to the battle in the East, and the West must be empty, so he went straight into our territory.

古文：今若使关中诸军倍道急赴，出其不意，殆将走矣。 师曰： 善！ 
现代文：现在如果令关中各军日夜兼程快速奔赴前线，出其不意地攻打姜维，他大概就要撤走了。 司马师说： 好！ 
English: Now, if the armies of Lingguanzhong rush to the front line day and night, and attack Jiang Wei unexpectedly, he will probably withdraw.Sima said: Good!

古文：乃使郭淮、陈泰悉关中之众，解狄道之围；敕毌丘俭等案兵自守，以新城委吴。
现代文：于是命令郭淮、陈泰率领关中全部军队，去解救狄道的围困；命令丘俭按兵不动坚守营地，而把新城交给吴国去围攻。
English: Therefore, he ordered Guo Huai and Chen Tai to lead the entire army of Guanzhong to relieve the siege of Di Dao; he ordered Qiu Jian to hold the camp by soldiers, and to give Xincheng to Wu to besiege.

古文：陈泰进至洛门，姜维粮尽，退还。
现代文：陈泰行军至洛门，姜维粮尽，只好撤退。
English: Chen Tai marched to Lomeng, Jiang Wei ran out of food and had to retreat.

古文：扬州牙门将涿郡张特守新城。吴人攻之连月，城中兵合三千人，疾病战死者过半，而恪起土山急攻，城将陷，不可护。
现代文：扬州牙门将涿郡人张特守卫新城，吴国人连月攻打，城中兵士共三千人，疾病战死者超过了一半，而诸葛恪又堆起了土山猛烈进攻，新城将要失陷，不能再守护了。
English: Zhang Te, Yangzhou's keeper of the city gate, guarded the new city, and the Wu people attacked it for months on end. There were three thousand soldiers in the city, and more than half of them died of disease. Zhuge Ke also piled up earth and mountains in a fierce attack. The new city was about to fall and could no longer be guarded.

古文：特乃谓吴人曰： 今我无心复战也。
现代文：于是张特对吴国人说： 现在我已经无心再战了。
English: So Zhang Te said to the people of Wu: Now I have no intention of fighting again.

古文：然魏法，被攻过百日而救不至者，虽降，家不坐；自受敌以来，已九十馀日矣，此城中本有四千馀人，战死者已过半，城虽陷，尚有半人不欲降，我当还为相语，条别善恶，明日早送名，且以我印绶去为信。 
现代文：但魏国法律规定，被围攻超过百日而救兵仍然未至者，虽然投降，其家属也不治罪；我自受围攻以来，已经九十多天了，这城中本来有四千余人，战死者已超过一半，城虽然失陷，但还有一半人不愿投降，我要回去劝说他们，逐一辩别好坏，明天一早送名单过来，请先把我的印绶拿去当做信物。 
English: However, Wei law stipulates that if a city has been besieged for more than 100 days and the rescuers have not yet arrived, their families will not be punished even if they surrender. It has been more than 90 days since I was besieged. There were originally more than 4,000 people in this city, and more than half of them died in the war. Although the city has fallen, half of them still do not want to surrender. I want to go back and persuade them. Don't judge one by one. Send the list to me in the morning. Please take my seal as a token.

古文：乃投其印绶与之。
现代文：随即把他的印绶扔给了吴人。
English: He then threw his seal to the Wu people.

古文：吴人听其辞而不取印绶。
现代文：吴人听信了他的话而没要他的印绶。
English: The Wu people listened to his words and did not ask for his seal.

古文：特乃投夜彻诸屋材栅，补其缺为二重，明日，谓吴人曰： 我但有斗死耳！ 
现代文：于是张特连夜拆除城内房屋的木材，修补加固城墙缺口成为双重防护，第二天，对吴人说： 我只有战斗而死，决不投降！ 
English: As a result, Zhang Te dismantled the wood of the houses in the city overnight, repaired and reinforced the gaps in the city wall to become a double protection. The next day, he said to Wu people: I can only die in battle, I will never surrender!

古文：吴人大怒，进攻之，不能拔。
现代文：吴人愤怒已极，加紧攻城，但却不能攻克。
English: The Wu people were extremely angry and intensified their attack on the city, but they could not conquer it.

古文：会大暑，吴士疲劳，饮水，泄下，流肿，病者太半，死伤涂地。
现代文：当时天气十分炎热，吴国士兵疲劳不堪，饮用了不洁净的水，造成了腹泻、浮肿病流行，生病者过半，死伤之人满地都是。
English: At that time, the weather was very hot, the soldiers of the State of Wu were exhausted and drank unclean water, causing an epidemic of diarrhea and edema, more than half of whom were ill, and the dead and wounded were everywhere.

古文：诸营吏日白病者多，恪以为诈，欲斩之，自是莫敢言。
现代文：各兵营的官吏每天都报告生病者太多，诸葛恪认为他们谎报，要杀掉他们，从此没有人再敢说了。
English: Every day, the officials of each military camp reported that there were too many sick people. Zhuge believed that they were lying and wanted to kill them. From then on, no one dared to say anything.

古文：恪内惟失计，而耻城不下，忿形于色。
现代文：诸葛恪心中没有良策，又耻于攻城不下，所以忿恨之情常流露于外表。
English: Zhuge Ke knew in his heart that attacking the new city was a mistake, but he was still ashamed of attacking the city, with an angry look on his face.

古文：将军硃异以军事迕恪，恪立夺其兵，斥还建业。
现代文：将军朱异在军事上与诸葛恪发生抵触，诸葛恪就立刻夺去他的兵权，驱逐他回建业。
English: General Zhu Rong clashed militarily with Zhuge Ke, and Zhuge Ke immediately seized his military power and expelled him back to Jianye.

古文：都尉蔡林数陈军计，恪不能用，策马来奔。
现代文：都尉蔡林多次提出军事计策，诸葛恪都不采纳，结果蔡林骑马逃走投降魏国。
English: Captain Cai Lin repeatedly proposed military strategies, but they were not adopted by Zhuge, and as a result, Cai Lin fled on horseback and surrendered to Wei.

古文：诸将伺知吴兵已疲，乃进救兵。
现代文：魏国将领伺察了解到吴国兵士已疲惫不堪，于是发出救兵。
English: When the Wei general learned that the Wu soldiers were exhausted, he sent out a rescue team.

古文：秋，七月，恪引军去，士卒伤病，流曳道路，或顿仆坑壑，或见略获，存亡哀痛，大小嗟呼。
现代文：秋季，七月，诸葛恪率军退却，那些受伤生病的士卒流落在道路上，艰难地互相扶持着行走，有的人困顿地倒毙于沟中，有的人则被俘获，全军上下沉浸在哀痛悲叹之中。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zhuge Ke and his army retreated. The wounded and sick soldiers were stranded on the road, supporting each other with difficulty. Some of them died in the ditch, others were captured. The whole army was immersed in sorrow and lamentation.

古文：而恪晏然自若，出住江渚一月，图起田于浔阳；诏召相衔，徐乃旋师。
现代文：但诸葛恪却安然自若，外出在江中小洲上住了一月，还计划在浔阳地区开发田地，召他回去的诏书接连不断，他才慢慢地返回。
English: However, Zhuge Ke was calm and collected. He went out and lived on a small island in the Yangtze River for a month. He also planned to develop fields in the Poyang area. He was only able to return slowly after receiving a succession of official letters calling him to return.

古文：由此众庶失望，怨讟兴矣。
现代文：从此他在群臣百姓中失去威望，人们对他的怨恨之言也越来越多。
English: From then on, he lost his prestige among the common people, and more and more people spoke of their resentment towards him.

古文：汝南太守邓艾言于司马师曰： 孙权已没，大臣未附。吴名宗大族皆有部曲，阻兵仗势，足以违命。
现代文：汝南太守邓艾对司马师说： 孙权已经死了，大臣们尚未顺从新朝廷，吴国的名宗大族都有自己的部曲，拥兵仗势，足可以违抗朝廷命令。
English: Deng Ai, the Empress Dowager of South Run, said to Sima Shi: Sun Quan is dead, the ministers have not yet obeyed the new imperial court, and the great families of the Ming Dynasty in Wuxi all have their own music, support the war effort, and can easily defy the imperial order.

古文：诸葛恪新秉国政，而内无其主，不念抚恤上下以立根基，竞于外事，虐用其民，番国之众，顿于坚城，死者万数，载祸而归，此恪获罪之日也。
现代文：诸葛恪新近才执掌国政，而朝内又没有明君，诸葛恪也不想着抚恤关怀上下臣民以树立治国的根基，却热衷于对外战争，肆虐役使人民，把全国的军队，困顿在坚固的城下，死掉的数以万计，结果遭受重创失败而归，这就是诸葛恪获罪之日。
English: Zhuge Ke only recently took charge of state affairs, and there was no clear ruler in the imperial court. Zhuge Ke did not want to nurture and care for his subjects to establish a foundation for governing the country, but he was keen on foreign wars, raged against the people, and trapped the national army under a solid city. Tens of thousands died, and as a result, they suffered heavy losses and returned home defeated. This was the day Zhuge Ke was convicted.

古文：昔子胥、吴起、商鞅、乐毅皆见任时君，主没犹败，况恪才非四贤，而不虑大患，其亡可待也。 
现代文：古时的伍子胥、吴起、商鞅、乐毅都受到了君主的信任，但君主死后他们仍然失败了，更何况诸葛恪的才能比不上这四个贤人，而且他也不顾虑大的忧患，所以诸葛恪的败亡指日可待。 
English: In ancient times, Wu Zixuan, Wu Qi, Shang Qi, and Le Yi were all trusted by the monarch, but they still failed after the death of the monarch. What's more, Zhuge Ke's talent is not as good as these four sages, and he is not worried about great sorrow, so Zhuge Ke's defeat is just around the corner.

古文：八月，吴军还建业，诸葛恪陈兵导从，归入府馆，即召中书令孙嘿，厉声谓曰： 卿等何敢数妄作诏！ 
现代文：八月，吴国军队回到建业，诸葛恪让兵士排成队列，前有引导后有随从地步入府邸，刚到家就立刻召来中书令孙嘿，厉声申斥他说： 你们怎么敢屡次妄作诏书！ 
English: In August, when the Wu army returned to Jianye, Zhuge Ke asked the soldiers to line up in a queue. The soldiers entered the mansion with a guide in front and a follower behind. As soon as they arrived home, they immediately summoned the Chinese envoy, Sun Hei, and severely reprimanded him, saying: "How dare you repeatedly make an imperial edict!

古文：嘿惶惧辞出，因病还家。
现代文：孙嘿十分恐惧地告辞出来，托病返回家中。
English: Afraid, Sun Hei resigned and returned home on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：恪征行之后，曹所奏署令长职司，一罢更选，愈治威严，多所罪责，当进见者无不竦息。
现代文：诸葛恪出征回来之后，选曹所奏请的各机构选任的官吏，一概不用，重新选拔。治事愈来愈威严，被治罪和受责备的人很多，该去进见诸葛恪的人没有不胆战心惊唉声叹气的。
English: After Zhuge Ke left for the expedition and left Beijing, he was dismissed and re-appointed as the chief of all officials, and the order of the election of Cao was approved. He showed more dignity, often blaming and blaming others, and those who wanted to see him were sincerely afraid.

古文：又改易宿卫，用其亲近；复敕兵严，欲向青、徐。
现代文：诸葛恪又更换宫中侍卫，全部选用他的亲近之人；又下令让军队加紧备战，想要出兵攻打青州、徐州。
English: Zhuge Ke also changed the palace guards, all of whom were close to him. He also ordered the army to step up preparations for war, and wanted to send troops to attack Qingzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：孙峻因民之多怨，众之所嫌，构恪于吴主，云欲为变。
现代文：孙峻因为臣民百姓大都怨恨嫌恶诸葛恪，就在吴王面前诬陷诸葛恪，说他想要发动变乱。
English: Because most of the subjects and common people hated Zhuge Liang, Sun Jun framed Zhuge Liang in front of King Wu, saying that he wanted to start a revolution.

古文：冬，十月，孙峻与吴主谋置酒请恪。
现代文：冬季，十月，孙峻与吴王密谋在酒筵上杀死诸葛恪。
English: In the winter, in October, Sun Jun and Wu Wang conspired to kill Zhuge Cai over sake.

古文：恪将入之夜，精爽扰动，通夕不寐，又家数有妖怪，恪疑之。
现代文：诸葛恪将要赴宴的前一天晚上，精神燥动不安，整夜都不能入睡；另外，家里又发生了几次怪异之事，诸葛恪起了疑心。
English: The night before Zhuge was to go to the banquet, he was so nervous that he couldn't sleep all night. In addition, several strange things happened at home, which made Zhuge suspicious.

古文：旦日，驻车宫门，峻已伏兵于帷中，恐恪不时入，事泄，乃自出见恪曰： 使君若尊体不安，自可须后，峻当具白主上。 
现代文：第二天，诸葛恪把车停在宫门，当时孙峻已经在帷帐之中设下伏兵，唯恐诸葛恪不按时进来使事情泄露，于是就亲自出来见诸葛恪说： 您如果贵体欠安，可以等以后再说，我会把情况禀告主上的。 
English: The next day, Zhuge Ke put his car at the palace gate. At that time, Sun Junjun had already set an ambush in the curtain, lest Zhuge Ke did not come in time to leak the matter, so he came out to see Zhuge Ke in person and said: If you are not well, you can wait until later, I will report the situation to the Lord.

古文：欲以尝知恪意。
现代文：他说这话实际是想探试诸葛恪的态度。
English: He actually said this to test Zhuge's attitude.

古文：恪曰： 当自力入。 
现代文：诸葛恪说： 我要勉力进去见主上。 
English: Zhuge Ke said, "I will try my best to go in and see the Lord."

古文：散骑常侍张约、硃恩等密书与恪曰： 今日张设非常，疑有他故。 
现代文：当时散骑常侍张约、朱恩等人写密信给诸葛恪说： 今日宫内的陈设不同一般，我们怀疑有其他变故。 
English: At that time, Zhang You, Zhu En and other knights-errant wrote a secret letter to Zhuge Ke, saying: Today's furnishings in the palace are generally different, we suspect that there are other changes.

古文：恪以书示滕胤，胤劝恪还。
现代文：诸葛恪把密信给滕胤看，滕胤劝诸葛恪回府。
English: Zhuge Keqin showed the secret letter to Teng Tan, and Teng Tan persuaded Zhuge Keqin to return to the capital.

古文：恪曰： 儿辈何能为！
现代文：诸葛恪说： 这些小辈能干什么？
English: Zhuge Ke said: What can these juniors do?

古文：正恐因酒食中人耳。 
现代文：恐怕他们是在酒食中下毒来害人而已。 
English: I'm afraid they're just poisoning people's food and drink.

古文：恪入，剑履上殿，进谢还坐。
现代文：诸葛恪进入宫内，带着剑不脱鞋上殿，上前谢过主上，回来坐在座位上。
English: Zhuge Ke entered the palace, took his sword and did not take off his shoes to go to the hall, went forward to thank the Lord, and came back to sit on the seat.

古文：设酒，恪疑未饮。
现代文：摆上酒宴，诸葛恪因有疑心就不饮酒。
English: When the banquet was set up, Zhuge did not drink because he was suspicious.

古文：孙峻曰： 使君病未善平，有常服药酒，可取之。 
现代文：孙峻说： 您的病没有大好，如果有常服的药酒，就请派人取来。 
English: Sun Jun said, "Your illness is not very good. If you have any medicinal liquor that you usually take, please send someone to get it.

古文：恪意乃安。
现代文：诸葛恪这才安了心。
English: Zhuge was relieved.

古文：别饮所赍酒，数行，吴主还内。峻起如厕，解长衣，着短服，出曰： 有诏收诸葛恪。 
现代文：诸葛恪喝着自己人送来的酒，喝了几杯之后，吴王回到内室；这时孙峻也起来上厕所，在那儿脱下长衣，换上短衣服，一出来就喊道： 主上有诏命立即拘捕诸葛恪！ 
English: Zhuge Ke drank the wine sent by his people, and after drinking a few glasses, Wu Wang returned to the inner room. At this time, Sun Jun also got up to go to the toilet, where he took off his long robe and put on a short robe. As soon as he came out, he shouted: The Lord has a command to immediately arrest Zhuge Ke!

古文：恪惊起，拔剑未得，而峻刀交下，张约从旁斫峻，裁伤左手，峻应手斫约，断右臂。
现代文：诸葛恪慌忙站起，还没拔出剑而孙峻的刀已经砍了下来，张约从旁边刀劈孙峻，但只伤及左手，孙峻却回手砍断了张约的右臂。
English: Zhuge stood up in a hurry. He had not yet pulled out his sword, but Sun Jun's sword had already been cut down. Zhang You cut Sun Jun with a knife from the side, but only injured his left hand. However, Sun Jun cut Zhang You's right arm with his other hand.

古文：武卫之士皆趋上殿，峻曰： 所取者恪也，今已死！ 
现代文：这时，宫内的卫兵都跑上殿来，孙峻说： 今天要捕取的只是诸葛恪，现在他已经死了。 
English: At this time, the palace guards all ran up to the palace. Sun Jun said, "Today, we only want to capture Zhuge Ke, but now he is dead."

古文：悉令复刃，乃除地更饮。
现代文：然后命令卫兵全都把刀收起来，又把地上清除打扫一番重新开筵。
English: He then ordered the sword to be sheathed, cleaned the floor and continued drinking.

古文：恪二子竦、建闻难，载其母欲来奔，峻使人追杀之。
现代文：诸葛恪的两个儿子诸葛竦和诸葛建听说父亲遭难，就用车拉起母亲想要投奔魏国，孙峻派人追赶并杀掉了他们。
English: Zhuge's two sons, Zhuge Ying and Zhuge Jian, heard that their father was in trouble, and they used a car to pull up their mother to go to Wei. Sun Jun sent people to chase and kill them.

古文：以苇席裹恪尸，篾束腰，投之石子冈。
现代文：又命令用芦席裹住诸葛恪的尸体，中间用竹蔑一捆，扔到了石子冈。
English: He also ordered that Zhuge's body be wrapped in reed mats, with a bundle of bamboo strips in the middle, and thrown onto Shishioka.

古文：又遣无难督施宽就将军施绩、孙壹军，杀恪弟奋威将军融于公安，及其三子。
现代文：另外派遣无难督施宽到将军施绩、孙壹的军队中，在公安县杀了诸葛恪的弟弟奋威将军诸葛融和他的三个儿子。
English: In addition, he dispatched the commander-in-chief Shih Kuan to the army of General Shih Chien and Sun Yat-sen, and killed Zhuge Ke's brother, General Zhuge Rong and his three sons in the Public Security County.

古文：恪外甥都乡侯张震、常侍硃恩，皆夷三族。
现代文：诸葛恪的外甥都乡侯张震、常侍朱恩也都被诛灭三族。
English: Zhuge's nephews, Zhang Zhen, the mayor of the capital, and Zhu En, the attendant, were also killed.

古文：临淮臧均表乞收葬恪曰： 震雷电激，不崇一朝；大风冲发，希有极日；然犹继之以云雨，因以润物。
现代文：临淮人臧均上表请求收拾诸葛恪尸骨并加以安葬，他上书说： 电闪雷鸣，不会在整个早晨都连续不断，狂风怒吼，也很少终日不停，雷电狂风过后仍然还会有和风细雨，滋润万物。
English: Lin Huai and his followers petitioned the government to collect Zhuge's bones and bury them. He wrote: Lightning and thunder will not continue continuously throughout the morning, and strong winds will rarely rage all day long. After the lightning and strong winds, there will still be a gentle breeze and drizzle to moisten everything.

古文：是则天地之威，不可经日浃辰；帝王之怒，不宜讠乞情尽意。
现代文：因此天地的威严不会整日整夜连绵不断地施展；帝王的怒气也不应毫无约束地尽情发散。
English: Therefore, the majesty of heaven and earth will not be exerted continuously all day and night; nor should the emperor's anger be allowed to flow freely without restraint.

古文：臣以狂愚，不知忌讳，敢冒破灭之罪以邀风雨之会。
现代文：我狂妄愚鲁，不避忌讳，胆敢冒着破家灭身之罪，象祈求上天降下和风细雨一样，求您暂息雷霆之怒。
English: I am arrogant and foolish, I do not avoid taboos, I dare to risk the crime of destroying my family and my life, like praying for the sky to fall and the wind to drizzle, I beg you to suspend the wrath of thunder.

古文：伏念故太傅诸葛恪，罪积恶盈，自致夷灭，父子三首，枭市积日，观者数万，詈声成风；国之大刑，无所不震，长老孩幼，无不毕见。
现代文：追想已故太傅诸葛恪，罪恶满盈，自己招致了诛灭三族的结果，他们父子三人的首级被砍下示众也有不少天了，观看者有数万人，咒骂他们的声音也如风四起；国家的大刑震慑了各个地方，就连老人孩童也全都见到了。
English: Thinking back on the late great master Zhuge Liang, he was full of sins and brought about the annihilation of the three ethnic groups. The heads of his three sons and three fathers were chopped off and displayed to the public for many days. Tens of thousands of people watched, and the voices of cursing them were heard everywhere. The state's capital punishment shocked every place, and even the elderly and children all saw it.

古文：人情之于品物，乐极则哀生，见恪贵盛，世莫与贰，身处台辅，中间历年，今之诛夷，无异禽兽，观讫情反，能不憯然！
现代文：人情对于万物，往往是乐极生哀，看到诸葛恪在尊贵全盛之时，世上没有人能与他相比，身居三公宰相的高位，经历多年，而如今被诛杀灭族，却无异于禽兽，察尽人情的反复，怎能不令人悲伤！
English: When observing things, people's thoughts are always full of joy and sadness. Seeing Zhuge Liang's magnificence and prosperity, the world is incomparable. Being in the position of the Three Kingdoms, he has been living in the middle for many years. Today, he is being killed and exterminated, just like animals are slaughtered. Watching such a scene will produce the opposite feelings. Can you not be sad and sad?

古文：且已死之人，与土壤同域，凿掘斫刺，无所复加。
现代文：而且他是已经死去之人，应埋葬于地下，没有必要再对他砍凿击刺。
English: Moreover, those who have died are one with the soil, chiseled, dug, cut, stabbed, and can no longer inflict punishment.

古文：愿圣朝稽则乾坤，怒不极旬，使其乡邑若故吏民收以士伍之服，惠以三寸之棺。
现代文：希望圣明的朝廷，效法天地，发怒不超过十日，让他的乡里之民和手下故吏用普通士卒的丧服为他收尸，再恩准他殓入三寸薄棺。
English: It is hoped that the court of Shengming will follow the example of others and let his fellow countrymen or former subordinates receive him in ordinary soldier's clothing and give him a three-inch thin coffin.

古文：昔项籍受殡葬之施，韩信获收敛之恩，斯则汉高发神明之誉也。
现代文：从前项藉曾受到殡葬的礼遇，韩信也曾得到入殓安葬的恩惠，这都是汉高祖被誉为光大神明的举动。
English: Formerly, Xiang Yu also received the gift of funeral and burial, and Han Xin also received the grace of acceptance, which made Han Gao Zu show his reputation as a god.

古文：惟陛下敦三皇之仁，垂哀矜之心，使国泽加于辜戮之骸，复受不已之恩，于以扬声遐方，沮劝天下，岂不大哉！
现代文：愿陛下施布三皇的仁慈，垂赐哀怜之心，使国家的恩泽施加于因罪被杀者的尸骸，再次让他得到不尽的恩惠，从此仁德的声名扬于远方，使天下劝善惩恶，这难道不正大吗？
English: May His Majesty bestow the benevolence of the three emperors, bestow the heart of pity, cause the grace of the state to be applied to the corpses of those who were killed because of sin, and again let him receive inexhaustible grace. From now on, let the reputation of benevolence be known far and wide, and let the world exhort good and punish evil. Isn't this great?

古文：昔栾布矫命彭越，臣窃恨之，不先请主上而专名以肆情，其得不诛，实为幸耳。
现代文：从前汉代的栾布故意违背成命，向彭越的首级禀奏并祭祀。我对栾布的做法极为不满。他不先请求主上的恩典，而擅自肆意发泄自己的情感，他能够不受诛杀，实在是万幸之事。
English: Once upon a time, in the Han Dynasty, Zhou Bu deliberately disobeyed the Mandate of Heaven, and played and sacrificed to Peng Yue's severed head. I am extremely dissatisfied with Zhou Bu's actions. He did not first ask for the Lord's grace, but gave free rein to his emotions. It is indeed fortunate that he was not killed.

古文：今臣不敢章宣是表以露天恩，谨伏手书，冒昧陈闻，乞圣明哀察。 
现代文：如今我不敢明白地表达自己的情感来显露圣上的恩赐，只能恭敬地写信上书，冒昧地向您陈述我的意见，请求圣明天子爱怜而体察臣下之心。 
English: Now, I dare not express my feelings clearly to reveal the gift of the Holy Spirit. I can only respectfully write a letter, venturing to express my opinion to you, and ask the Holy Son of Heaven to be merciful and consider the hearts of his subjects.

古文：于是吴主及孙峻听恪故吏敛葬。
现代文：于是吴王和孙峻下令听任诸葛恪过去的部下把他收敛安葬。
English: As a result, King Wu and Sun Jun ordered that Zhuge's former subordinates be allowed to restrain and bury him.

古文：初，恪少有盛名，大帝深器重之，而恪父瑾常以为戚，曰： 非保家之主也。 
现代文：当初，诸葛恪少年即名声大振，吴大帝孙权非常器重他，而他的父亲诸葛瑾常为此事忧虑，说诸葛恪不是能保护家族的主人。
English: At the beginning, Zhuge Ke was a young boy with a great reputation. Wu Emperor Sun Quan highly valued him, and his father Zhuge Yao often worried about this, saying that Zhuge Ke was not the master who could protect the family.

古文：父友奋威将军张承亦以为恪必败诸葛氏。
现代文：诸葛瑾的朋友张承也认为诸葛恪必将败坏诸葛氏家族。
English: Zhang Cheng, a friend of Zhuge Liang, also believes that Zhuge Liang will surely corrupt the Zhuge family.

古文：陆逊尝谓恪曰： 在我前者吾必奉之同升，在我下者则扶接之；今观君气陵其上，意蔑乎下，非安德之基也。 
现代文：陆逊曾对诸葛恪说： 在我前面的人，我必然尊奉他，与他共同升迁；在我之下者，我就去扶持接引他。如今我看你气势凌驾于你前面的人之上，心意中又蔑视在你之下的人，这不是安定德业的根基。 
English: Lu Xun once said to Zhuge Ke: "Those who are ahead of me, I will certainly respect him and move up together with him; those who are below me, I will support and lead him. Now I see that you are superior to those who are ahead of you, and in your heart you despise those who are below you. This is not the foundation of stable virtue.

古文：汉侍中诸葛瞻，亮之子也；恪再攻淮南，越巂太守张嶷与瞻书曰： 东主初崩，帝实幼弱，太傅受寄托之重，亦何容易！
现代文：蜀汉的侍中诸葛瞻，是诸葛亮之子。诸葛恪再次攻打淮南时，越太守张嶷给诸葛瞻写信说： 吴王刚刚驾崩，现在的皇帝实在太年幼怯弱，太傅诸葛恪承受辅政托孤的重担，又哪里是容易的事！
English: Zhuge Zhan, a courtier of Shu Han, was the son of Zhuge Liang. When Zhuge Ke attacked Huainan again, the Emperor of Yue wrote a letter to Zhuge Zhan, saying: The King of Wu has just passed away, the current emperor is too young and weak, Zhuge Zhan is too young to bear the burden of supporting the government, and what is easy!

古文：亲有周公之才，犹有管、蔡流言之变，霍光受任，亦有燕、盖、上官逆乱之谋，赖成、昭之明以免斯难耳。
现代文：以周公之才且有亲戚关系，来摄理朝政，仍然会有管叔、蔡叔散布流言发动叛乱；霍光受命摄理朝政，也有燕王刘旦、盖主和上官桀等人阴谋陷害霍光的活动，只是依赖周成王、汉昭帝的圣明才得以免遭危难。
English: With Zhou Gong's talent and relative relationship, there will still be Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai spreading rumors to launch a rebellion; Huo Guang was ordered to be the regent of the dynasty, and there were also the activities of Yan Wang Liu Dan, Gaishu and Shangguan Yao, who conspired to frame Huo Guang. It was only by relying on the wisdom of King Zhou Cheng and Emperor Han Zhao that they were able to avoid danger.

古文：昔每闻东主杀生赏罚，不任下人，又今以垂没之命，卒召太傅，属以后事，诚实可虑。
现代文：以前常听说吴王生杀赏罚的大权，从不交给下人，如今却在垂死之时，终于召来太傅，把后事托付给他，这实在令人忧虑。
English: In the past, every time I heard that the ruler of the Eastern Wu Kingdom rewarded and punished those who killed without appointing subordinates, and now it is already excellent, and before he was about to die, he suddenly summoned Taifu to entrust the future, it is really possible to consider.

古文：加吴楚剽急，乃昔所记，而太傅离少主，履敌庭，恐非良计长算也。
现代文：另外从以前的记载看，吴、楚地方的人性格轻飘急躁，但太傅却远离年幼的君主，深入敌国境内，这恐怕不是良好而长远的计策。
English: In addition, according to previous records, the people in Wu and Chu regions are light and quick-tempered, but Taifu is far away from the young monarch and deep into the territory of the enemy country, which is probably not a good and long-term strategy.

古文：虽云东家纲纪肃然，上下辑睦；百有一失，非明者之虑也。
现代文：虽然说吴国国家纲纪整肃，君臣上下和睦相处，但百事中即使有一次失误，也不是明智者的谋略。
English: Although it is said that the discipline of the state of Wu was rectified and the monarchs and ministers lived in harmony, even if there was a mistake in one thing, it was not a wise man's strategy.

古文：取古则今，今则古也，自非郎君进忠言于太傅，谁复有尽言者邪！
现代文：用古事来衡量今天的事情，则今事如同古事一样，如果您不向太傅进献忠言，还有谁能直言相告呢？
English: If you judge today's events by the standards of the past, then today's events will be the same as the past. If you don't give advice to the emperor, who else can give it to you?

古文：旋军广农，务行德惠，数年之中，东西并举，实为不晚，愿深采察！ 
现代文：希望您能劝他撤回军队扩展农业，致力于推行仁德恩惠，数年之中，我们东西两国再同时大举进攻魏国，也不算晚，希望您深刻地考虑和采纳我的建议！ 
English: I hope you can persuade him to withdraw the army, expand agriculture, and devote himself to the promotion of benevolence and benevolence. In a few years, our two countries in the east and west will simultaneously attack Wei. It is not too late. I hope you will deeply consider and adopt my suggestion!

古文：恪果以此败。
现代文：后来诸葛恪果然如张嶷所言而失败。
English: Later, Zhuge Ke failed, just as Zhang Ye said.

古文：吴群臣共议上奏，推孙峻为太尉，滕胤为司徒。
现代文：吴国的群臣共同建议上奏，推举孙峻为太尉，滕胤为司徒。
English: The vassals of the State of Wu jointly proposed the promotion of Sun Jun to the rank of captain and Teng Yin to the rank of disciple.

古文：有媚峻者言曰： 万机宜在公族，若承嗣为亚公，声名素重，众心所附，不可量也。 
现代文：有个向孙峻献媚的人说： 政务的权柄应由皇族掌握，如果滕胤当了司徒，地位仅次于太尉，而且他声名卓著，众人之心都归附他，那么他日后的势力则不可估量。 
English: A flatterer of Sun Jun said, "The power of government affairs should be controlled by the royal family. If Teng Ying becomes a tutor, second only to the captain, and his reputation is outstanding, and everyone's hearts are attached to him, then his future power will be immeasurable.

古文：乃表峻为丞相、大将军，督中外诸军事，又不置御史大夫；由是士人失望。
现代文：于是又上表请任命孙峻为丞相、大将军，都督中外诸军事，却不设置协助丞相管理政务的御史大夫，因此士人都大失所望。
English: As a result, Sun Jun was appointed as the prime minister, general, and military governor of foreign countries, but there was no secretary of state to assist the prime minister in the management of government affairs, so the scholars were greatly disappointed.

古文：滕胤女为恪子竦妻，胤以此辞位。
现代文：滕胤的女儿是诸葛恪之子诸葛竦的妻子，滕胤以此为由想要辞职。
English: Teng Tan's daughter is the wife of Zhuge Yao, the son of Zhuge Ke, and Teng Tan wants to resign on this basis.

古文：孙峻曰： 鲧、禹罪不相及，滕侯何为！ 
现代文：孙峻对他说： 鲧之罪不会牵连到禹，你何必这样呢？ 
English: Sun Jun said to him, "Yu will not be implicated in the crime of the dragonfly. Why do you have to do this?

古文：峻与胤虽内不沾洽，而外相苞容，进胤爵高密侯，共事如前。
现代文：孙峻和滕胤虽然内心不甚融洽，但处理外部事务却能互相包容。于是进封滕胤的爵位为高密侯，二人像以前一样一起共事。
English: Although Sun Jun and Teng Ying were not very compatible at heart, they were able to tolerate each other in dealing with external affairs. Therefore, Teng Ying's title was Gao Mi Hou, and the two worked together as before.

古文：齐王奋闻诸葛恪诛，下住芜湖，欲至建业观变。
现代文：齐王孙奋听说诸葛恪被诛杀，于是移居芜湖，想要到建业去观察事态变化。
English: Qi Wang Sunfen heard that Zhuge Ke was killed, so he moved to Wuhu and wanted to go to Jianye to observe the changes in the situation.

古文：傅相谢慈等谏，奋杀之，坐废为庶人，徙章安。
现代文：傅相谢慈等人劝谏他不要去，孙奋就把谢慈杀掉了。朝廷得知后，把孙奋废黜为庶民，徙居章安县。
English: Fu Xiang Xie Ci and others advised him not to go, so Sun Fen killed Xie Ci. After the imperial court learned of this, Sun Fen was dethroned as a commoner and moved to Zhang'an County.

古文：南阳王和妃张氏，诸葛恪之甥也。
现代文：南阳王孙和的妃子张氏，是诸葛恪的外甥女。
English: Zhang, the concubine of Nanyang King Sun He, was the niece of Zhuge Ke.

古文：先是恪有徙都之意，使治武昌宫，民间或言恪欲迎和立之。
现代文：早先诸葛恪有迁都的打算，就让孙和去修建武昌宫，民间有谣传说诸葛恪想要迎立孙和为天子。
English: Earlier, Zhuge Ke had planned to move the capital, so he let Sun He build Wuchang Palace. Folklore has it that Zhuge Ke wanted to make Sun He the Son of Heaven.

古文：及恪被诛，丞相峻因此夺和玺绶，徙新都，又遣使者追赐死。
现代文：诸葛恪被诛之后，丞相孙峻就因此事夺去了孙和的印玺，徙居到新都，又派使者随后追去赐孙和自杀。
English: After Zhuge Ke was captured, the prime minister, Sun Jun, seized Sun He's seal, moved to the new capital, and then sent an envoy to pursue Sun He and commit suicide.

古文：初，和妾何氏生子皓，诸姬子德、谦、俊。
现代文：当初，孙和之妾何氏生了儿子孙，其他姬妾生的儿子有孙德、孙谦、孙俊。
English: At first, Sun He's concubine, He Shi, had a son, Sun, and other concubines had sons, Sun De, Sun Qian, and Sun Jun.

古文：和将死，与张妃别，妃曰： 吉凶当相随，终不独生。 
现代文：孙和将死时，与张妃决别，张妃说： 无论吉凶祸福，我当永远相随，决不独自活着。 
English: When Sun He was about to die, he bade farewell to Zhang Fei. Zhang Fei said, "No matter whether it is good or bad, I should always be with you, and I will never live alone."

古文：亦自杀。
现代文：然后也自杀而死。
English: He then took his own life.

古文：何姬曰： 若皆从死，谁当字孤！ 
现代文：何姬说： 如果都相从而死，谁来抚养孤儿呢？ 
English: He Ji said: If they all die together, who will raise the orphans?

古文：遂抚育皓及其三弟，皆赖以获全。
现代文：于是就抚育孙和他的三个弟弟，这些孩子都依靠她才得以生存下来。
English: So she raised her grandson and his three younger brothers, who depended on her to survive.

古文：高贵乡公上
现代文：高贵乡公上
English: High-ranking township official

古文：邵陵厉公下正元元年
现代文：魏高贵乡公正元元年
English: Wei Gao Gui Township, just before the first year of the first year

古文：春，二月，杀中书令李丰。
现代文：春季，二月，魏国杀中书令李丰。
English: In the spring, in February, the State of Wei ordered Li Feng to be killed.

古文：初，丰年十七、八，已有清名，海内翕然称之。
现代文：当初，李丰十七八岁时，已经颇有清雅之名，海内人士交口称誉。
English: At the beginning, when Li Feng was seventeen or eighteen years old, he already had quite a reputation for elegance, and was praised by people at home.

古文：其父太仆恢不愿其然，敕使闭门断客。
现代文：他的父亲太仆李恢不愿让他这样，所以就令他闭门谢客，不与人往来。
English: His father, Li Wei, was too much of a servant to let him do that, so he made him keep his door closed and not mingle with others.

古文：曹爽专政，司马懿称疾不出，丰为尚书仆射，依违二公间，故不与爽同诛。
现代文：曹爽独揽朝政时，司马懿称病不出，当时李丰任尚书仆射，就在曹爽、司马懿二人之中周旋反覆，因此没有与曹爽一起被诛杀。
English: When Cao Shuang single-handedly took over the government, Sima Yi said that he was not ill. At that time, Li Feng was appointed as Shang Shuxu's lackey, and he repeatedly maneuvered between Cao Shuang and Sima Yi, so he was not killed together with Cao Shuang.

古文：丰子韬，以选尚齐长公主。
现代文：李丰的儿子李韬，被选中娶齐长公主为妻。
English: Li Feng's son, Li Yao, was chosen to marry the eldest princess Qi.

古文：司马师秉政，以丰为中书令。
现代文：司马师主持朝政时，任命李丰为中书令。
English: When Sima Shi presided over the imperial government, he appointed Li Feng as the Censer.

古文：是时，太常夏侯玄有天下重名，以曹爽亲故，不得在势任，居常怏怏；张缉以后父去郡家居，亦不得意。丰皆与之亲善。
现代文：当时，太常夏侯玄在天下极有威望，但因为与曹爽是亲戚，不能担任有权势的职位，平时常常怏怏不乐；张缉因为是皇后之父而免去郡守闲居在家，他也很不得意；李丰与夏侯玄和张缉关系十分亲密。
English: At that time, Tai Chang Xia Hou Xuan had great prestige in the world, but because he was a relative of Cao Shuang and could not hold a powerful position, he was often unhappy in his daily life; Zhang Ji, because he was the father of the queen, was exempted from being county governor and lived at home, he was also very unhappy; Li Feng was very close to Xia Hou Xuan and Zhang Ji.

古文：师虽擢用丰，丰私心常在玄。
现代文：司马师虽然提拔了李丰，但李丰心里更为看重夏侯玄。
English: Although Sima promoted Li Feng, Li Feng valued Xia Houxuan more in his heart.

古文：丰在中书二岁，帝数独召丰与语，不知所说。
现代文：李丰担任中书令的两年中，皇帝多次召见李丰一起交谈，但不知说些什么。
English: During the two years that Li Feng held the post of Censorship, the emperor repeatedly summoned Li Feng to talk with him, but he did not know what to say.

古文：师知其议己，请丰相见以诘丰，丰不以实告；师怒，以刀镮筑杀之，送尸付廷尉，遂收丰子韬及夏侯玄、张缉等皆下廷尉，钟毓案治，云： 丰与黄门监苏铄，永宁署令乐敦，冗从仆射刘贤等谋曰： 拜贵人日，诸营兵皆屯门，陛下临轩，因此同奉陛下，将群僚人兵，就诛大将军；陛下傥不从人，便当劫将去耳。  
现代文：司马师知道他们是在议论自己，所以请李丰来相见，向他询问，但李丰却不以实言相告；司马师勃然大怒，就用刀把上的铁环捶死了李丰，把尸体送交廷尉，接送又逮捕了李丰之子李韬和夏侯玄、张缉等人，都送交廷尉收监。钟毓负责审讯治狱，他说： 李丰与黄门监苏铄、永宁宫署令乐敦，冗从仆射刘贤等人阴谋策划说： 拜贵人的那天，各营的兵力都把守在宫门口，陛下临近前廊时，借此机会共同侍奉陛下，再率领众官兵士，近前去诛杀大将军；陛下如果不听从，就要挟持着他离开。  
English: Sima knew that they were talking about themselves, so he invited Li Feng to meet and ask him, but Li Feng did not tell him the truth. Sima was furious, so he stabbed Li Feng to death with the iron ring on the handle of the knife, and sent the body to the court officer. He also arrested Li Feng's son Li Qian, Xia Houxuan, Zhang Ji and others, and sent them to the court officer for imprisonment. Zhong Qi was in charge of interrogation and imprisonment. He said: Li Feng plotted with the Yellow Gate Warden Su Qian, Yongning Palace Office Ling Le Dun, and Liu Xian's subordinates, saying: On the day of

古文：又云： 谋以玄为大将军，缉为骠骑将军；玄、缉皆知其谋。 
现代文：又说： 他们阴谋商定以夏侯玄为大将军，张缉为骠骑将军；夏侯玄、张缉都知道这个阴谋。 
English: He also said: They conspired and agreed to appoint Xia Houxuan as the grand general and Zhang Ye as the cavalry general; Xia Houxuan and Zhang Ye were both aware of this conspiracy.

古文：庚戌，诛韬、玄、缉、铄、敦、贤，皆夷三族。
现代文：庚戌，诛杀李韬、夏侯玄、张缉、苏铄、乐敦、李贤等人，并诛灭三族。
English: Geng Xuan killed Li Qian, Xia Hou Xuan, Zhang Jie, Su Qian, Le Dun, Li Xian and others, and wiped out the three tribes.

古文：夏侯霸之入蜀也，邀玄欲与之俱，玄不从。
现代文：夏侯霸投奔蜀国时，曾邀请夏侯玄和他一同去，但夏侯玄没有听从。
English: When Xia Houba invaded Shu, he invited Xia Houxuan to go with him, but Xia Houxuan did not listen.

古文：及司马懿薨，中领军高阳许允谓玄曰： 无复忧矣！ 
现代文：等司马懿去世，中领军高阳人许允对夏侯玄说： 以后不用再忧虑了。 
English: When Sima Yi died, Xu Yun, the leader of the Gaoyang army, said to Xia Houxuan, "Don't worry about it anymore.

古文：玄叹曰： 士宗，卿何不见事乎！
现代文：夏侯玄叹道： 士宗啊，你怎么不明事理呢？
English: Xia Hou Xuan sighed and said: Shizong, how can you be so unreasonable?

古文：此人犹能以通家年少遇我，子元、子上不吾容也。 
现代文：司马懿还是能把我作为世代交好的少年来对待我，而司马师、司马昭就不会容我了。 
English: Sima Yao can still treat me as a generationally friendly young man, but Sima Shi and Sima Zhao will not tolerate me.

古文：及下狱，玄不肯下辞，锺毓自临治之。
现代文：入狱之后，夏侯玄不肯招供，钟毓亲自去处理。
English: After he was jailed, Xia Houxuan refused to confess, and Zhong Rong personally dealt with him.

古文：玄正色责毓曰： 吾当何罪！
现代文：夏侯玄表情严肃地斥责钟毓说： 我有什么罪！
English: Xia Houxuan, with a serious expression, rebuked Zhong Yao and said: "What crime have I committed!

古文：卿为令史责人也，卿便为吾作！ 
现代文：你身为公府令史亲自来责问我，那你就替我写！ 
English: If you, as a public official, come to scold me in person, then write it for me!

古文：毓以玄名士，节高，不可屈，而狱当竟，夜为作辞，令与事相附，流涕以示玄；玄视，颔之而已。
现代文：钟毓认为夏侯玄是名士，志节清高，不可屈服，但案子要了结，于是连夜为他写了供状，使与所查察之事相符合，然后流着眼泪给夏侯玄看；夏侯玄看后，只是微微点了点头而已。
English: Zhong Qi thought that Xia Houxuan was a famous person, with a clear ambition and could not give in, but the case was about to end, so he wrote a confession for him overnight to match the investigated matter, and then showed it to Xia Houxuan with tears; after seeing Xia Houxuan, he only nodded slightly.

古文：及就东市，颜色不变，举动自若。
现代文：等到推到东市斩首，他仍然脸不变色，举动自如。
English: He waited until the beheading in Dongshi, but his face did not change color, and he acted freely.

古文：李丰弟翼，为兗州刺史，司马师遣使收之。
现代文：李丰的弟弟李翼是兖州刺史，司马师派人去逮捕他。
English: Li Feng's younger brother, Li Ying, was the instigator of the Zhangzhou Incident, and Sima Shi sent someone to arrest him.

古文：翼妻荀氏谓翼曰： 中书事发，可及诏书未至赴吴，何为坐取死亡！
现代文：李翼的妻子荀氏对他说： 中书令出了事，你可在诏书未到之前跑到吴国去，为什么要坐着等死！
English: Li Ying's wife, Ms. Zou, said to him, "Something has happened to the imperial edict, you can run to Wuzhong before the imperial edict arrives, why sit and wait to die!"

古文：左右可共同赴水火者为谁？ 
现代文：你的左右有谁能与你一起赴汤蹈火？ 
English: Is there anyone on your left or right who can go through thick and thin with you?

古文：翼思未答，妻曰： 君在大州，不知可与同死生者，虽去亦不免！ 
现代文：李翼想了想没有回答，他妻子说： 你身在大州，却不知有谁能与代同生共死，你虽然离去也不免一死！ 
English: Li Ying thought for a while and did not answer, his wife said: You are in Dazhou, but you do not know who can live and die together with you. Even if you leave, you will not be spared death!

古文：翼曰： 二儿小，吾不去，今但从坐身死耳，二儿必免。 
现代文：李翼说： 两个儿子还小，我不能走，如今只是我一人受牵连而死，两个儿子必能获免。 
English: Li Ying said, "My two sons are still small, so I can't leave. Now I am the only one to be implicated and die, and my two sons will surely be spared.

古文：乃止，死。
现代文：终于没有逃走，被杀而死。
English: In the end, he did not escape and was killed.

古文：初，李恢与尚书仆射杜畿及东安太守郭智善，智子冲，有内实而无外观，州里弗称也。
现代文：当初，李恢与尚书仆射杜畿和东安太守郭智是好朋友。郭智的儿子郭冲，有内秀而外表不漂亮，州里没有人称赞他。
English: At the beginning, Li Huai was good friends with Shang Shuxu's servant Sha Duqi and Dong'an's eunuch Guo Zhi. Guo Zhi's son Guo Chong was handsome on the inside but not beautiful on the outside, and no one in the state praised him.

古文：冲尝与李丰俱见畿，既退，畿叹曰： 孝懿无子；非徒无子，殆将无家。
现代文：郭冲曾与李丰一起去看望杜畿，走了之后，杜畿叹道： 李恢没有儿子了；不仅没有儿子，恐怕也将要没有家了。
English: Guo Chong once went with Li Feng to visit Dugui. After they left, Dugui lamented: Li Wei no longer has a son; not only does he no longer have a son, I'm afraid he will no longer have a home.

古文：君谋为不死也，其子足继其业。 
现代文：郭智却是死不了的，他的儿子足以继承父业。 
English: Guo Zhi, however, cannot die. His son is old enough to inherit his father's business.

古文：时人皆以畿为误。及丰死，冲为代君太守，卒继父业。
现代文：当时人都认为杜畿说得不对，等李丰死时，郭冲则当了代郡太守，终于继承了父业。
English: At that time, everyone thought that Du Gui was wrong, and when Li Feng died, Guo Chong became the acting county governor, and finally inherited his father's business.

古文：正始中，夏侯玄、何晏、邓飏俱有盛名，欲交尚书郎傅嘏，嘏不受。
现代文：正始年间，夏侯玄、何晏、邓都很有名气，他们想要结交尚书郎傅嘏，但傅嘏却不接受。
English: At the beginning of the year, Xia Houxuan, He Yao and Deng were all famous. They wanted to make friends with Shang Shulang Fu Yao, but Fu Yao did not accept.

古文：嘏友人荀粲怪而问之，嘏曰： 太初志大其量，能合虚声而无实才。
现代文：傅嘏的朋友荀粲奇怪地问他何以如此，傅嘏说： 夏侯玄的志向超过了其能力，他能符合虚有的声名却没有实际的才干。
English: Fu Yao's friend Zou asked him curiously why this was so, Fu Yao said: Xia Houxuan's ambition exceeds his ability, he can live up to the false reputation but has no actual talent.

古文：何平叔言远而情近，好辩而无诚，所谓利口覆邦国之人也。
现代文：何晏话说得很高远而情感却很浅近，喜好辩论却没有真诚，这就是所谓口齿伶俐却会颠覆邦国的人。
English: What is a person who speaks loftily but whose emotions are shallow, who likes to debate but is not sincere? This is a person who is articulate but will subvert the state.

古文：邓玄茂有为而无终，外要名利，内无关钥，贵同恶异，多言而妒前；多言多衅，妒前无亲。
现代文：邓有所作为但最终没有成就，他在外邀取名利，而内心却毫无节制，喜欢与自己相同而讨厌与自己不同的意见，多嘴多舌而且嫉妒超过自己的人；多嘴多舌就会造成很多矛盾，嫉妒超过自己的人就会失去亲近的朋友。
English: Deng made some achievements but ultimately did not succeed. He invited fame and fortune from the outside, but his heart was unrestrained. He liked opinions that were the same as his own and hated those that were different from his own. He talked a lot and was jealous of people who were better than him. Talking a lot would cause a lot of conflicts, and people who were jealous of others would lose close friends.

古文：以吾观此三人者，皆将败家；远之犹恐祸及，况昵之乎！ 
现代文：以我看这三个人都将要家败族灭，我远远地避开他们还恐怕会招惹灾祸，更何况与他们亲近呢？ 
English: In my opinion, these three people will destroy the family. If I avoid them at a distance, I'm afraid I'll invite disaster, let alone be close to them?

古文：嘏又与李丰不善，谓同志曰： 丰饰伪而多疑，矜小智而昧于权利，若任机事，其死必矣！ 
现代文：傅嘏又与李丰不和，曾对朋友说： 李丰善于掩饰其虚伪而且生性多疑，沾沾自喜于小聪明而又热衷于权利，如果让他掌管机密要事，那么他被杀是必定无疑的！ 
English: Fu Yao was also at odds with Li Feng. He once told a friend: Li Feng is good at hiding his hypocrisy and is naturally suspicious. He is proud of his small cleverness but keen on power. If he is put in charge of confidential and important matters, then there is no doubt that he will be killed!

古文：辛亥，大赦。
现代文：辛亥，实行大赦。
English: On the 18th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：三月，废皇后张氏，夏，四月，立皇后王氏，奉车都尉夔之女也。
现代文：三月，魏国废掉皇后张氏；夏季，四月，立皇后王氏。王皇后是奉车都尉王夔之的女儿。
English: In March, the State of Wei abolished the Empress Zhang clan; in the summer, in April, the Empress Wang clan was established. Empress Wang was the daughter of Fengche captain Wang Xizhe.

古文：狄道长李简密书请降于汉。
现代文：狄道长李简写密信给蜀汉，请求投降。
English: Di Daochang Li Jian wrote a secret letter to Shu Han, requesting surrender.

古文：六月，姜维寇陇西。
现代文：六月，姜维率军进犯陇西。
English: In June, Jiang Wei led an army to invade Shaanxi.

古文：中领军许允素与李丰、夏侯玄善。
现代文：中领军许允平时与李丰、夏侯玄交好。
English: Xu Yun, the leader of the Central Army, was friendly with Li Feng and Xia Hou Xuan in peacetime.

古文：秋，允为镇北将军、假节、都督河北诸军事。
现代文：秋季，许允任镇北将军、假节、都督河北诸军事。
English: In the autumn, Xu Yun was appointed as the general of Zhenbei, the military of the false festival, and the governor of Hebei.

古文：帝以允当出，诏会群臣，帝特引允以自近；允当与帝别，涕泣歔欷。
现代文：魏帝认为许允应当离京外出，于是诏令群臣集会，魏帝特地把许允拉到自己身旁谈话；许允在与魏帝告别时，泪流满面哀叹着不忍离去。
English: Emperor Wei thought that Xu Yun should leave Beijing, so he ordered the courtiers to assemble. Emperor Wei specially pulled Xu Yun to his side for a conversation. When Xu Yun said goodbye to Emperor Wei, he was tearful and lamented that he could not bear to leave.

古文：允未发，有司奏允前放散官物，收付廷尉，徙乐浪，未至，道死。
现代文：许允还没走，有司就奏告说许允以前曾随便散发官用物品，于是就把他逮捕交付廷尉处理，后又把他押送到乐浪，还没有到达就死在路上。
English: Before Xu Yun left, the division reported that Xu Yun had previously distributed official items, so they arrested him and handed him over to the court lieutenant to deal with, and then escorted him to Lelang. He died on the way before he arrived.

古文：吴孙峻骄矜淫暴，国人侧目。
现代文：吴国的孙峻骄横傲慢乱残暴，国人愤恨，侧目而视。
English: Sun Jun of the State of Wu was arrogant, haughty, disorderly, and cruel. The people of his country resented him and looked sideways at him.

古文：司马桓虑谋杀峻，立太子登之子吴侯英；不克，皆死。
现代文：任司马的桓虑谋划要杀掉孙峻，立太子孙登之子吴侯孙英为君；没有成功，参与者都被处死。
English: Ren Sima's Han Kui planned to kill Sun Jun and install Wu Hou Sun Ying, the son of Sun Deng, as crown prince; it was unsuccessful, and all participants were executed.

古文：帝以李丰之死，意殊不平。
现代文：魏帝对李丰之死，心中颇为愤愤不平。
English: Emperor Wei was quite indignant about Li Feng's death.

古文：安东将军司马昭镇许昌，诏召之使击姜维。
现代文：安东将军司马昭镇守武昌，诏令召入京然后去攻打姜维。
English: General Anton Sima Zhaozhen guarded Wuchang. He was summoned to Beijing by imperial order and then went to attack Jiang Wei.

古文：九月，昭领兵入见，帝幸平乐观以临军过。
现代文：九月，司马昭领兵来晋见魏帝，魏帝到平乐观检阅他的军队。
English: In September, Sima Zhao led an army to Jin to meet Emperor Wei, and Emperor Wei went to Ping to review his army with optimism.

古文：左右劝帝因昭辞，杀之，勒兵以退大将军；已书诏于前，帝惧，不敢发。
现代文：左右亲信借司马昭进见辞行的机会杀掉他，然后再领兵击退大将军司马师；在此之前已经写好诏书，但魏帝害怕，不敢发。
English: His right and left cronies took the opportunity of Sima Zhao Jinjun's resignation to kill him, and then led the troops to repel the general Sima Shi; before this, the edict had been written, but Wei Di was afraid and did not dare to send it.

古文：昭引兵入城，大将军师乃谋废帝。
现代文：司马昭领兵入城，大将军司马师就阴谋废掉魏帝。
English: Sima Zhao led the troops into the city, and the general Sima Shi then plotted to depose the Wei Emperor.

古文：甲戌，师以皇太后令召群臣会议，以帝荒淫无度，亵近倡优，不可以承天绪；群臣皆莫敢违。
现代文：甲戌，司马师假传皇太后的命令召集群臣开会议论，以魏帝荒淫无度宠幸亲近歌舞艺人为理由，认为他不能再承担帝王的重任了。群臣都不敢反对。
English: Armour-plated, Sima falsely transmitted the empress dowager's order to convene a group of courtiers to hold a meeting to discuss, on the grounds that Emperor Wei's extravagant indulgence in close contact with singing and dancing artists meant that he could no longer bear the heavy responsibilities of the emperor. The courtiers did not dare to object.

古文：乃奏收帝玺绶，归籓于齐。
现代文：于是上奏章要没收魏帝的御玺，贬为齐王。
English: As a result, Shang Songzhang wanted to confiscate Emperor Wei's imperial scepter and reduce him to the status of Qi Wang.

古文：使郭芝入白太后，太后方与帝对坐，芝谓帝曰： 大将军欲废陛下，立彭城王据！ 
现代文：又让郭芝入宫告诉太后。太后正在与魏帝对坐闲谈，郭芝就对魏帝说： 大将军想要废掉陛下，立彭城王曹据为帝！ 
English: He also let Guo Zhi enter the palace to tell the empress dowager. The empress dowager was sitting and chatting with Emperor Wei, and Guo Zhi said to Emperor Wei: The general wants to abolish your majesty, and make Li Pengcheng Wang Cao the emperor!

古文：帝乃起去。
现代文：魏帝站起来就走了。
English: Wei Di got up and left.

古文：太后不悦。
现代文：太后很不高兴。
English: The Queen Mother was not happy.

古文：芝曰： 太后有子不能教，今大将军意已成，又勒兵于外以备非常，但当顺旨，将复何言！ 
现代文：郭芝说： 太后有儿子却不能教育，现在大将军主意已定，又领兵在外以防备非常事变，只能顺着他的旨意，还有什么可说的！ 
English: Guo Zhi said, "The empress dowager has a son, but she cannot educate him. Now the general's mind is made up, and he is leading soldiers outside to be prepared for an emergency. We can only follow his will. What else is there to say!"

古文：太后曰： 我欲见大将军，口有所说。 
现代文：太后说： 我要见大将军，对他有话说。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "I want to see the General and have a word with him."

古文：芝曰： 何可见邪！
现代文：郭芝说： 有什么可见的！ 
English: Guo Zhi said: What is there to see!

古文：但当速取玺绶！ 
现代文：现在只应该快点取来御玺！ 
English: Now we just have to hurry up and get the broom!

古文：太后意折，乃遣傍侍御取玺绶著坐侧。
现代文：太后无奈，就让身边的侍从官取来御玺放在座位旁。
English: The Empress Dowager was helpless, so she asked the attendants around her to take the imperial scepter and place it next to the seat.

古文：芝出报师，师甚喜。
现代文：郭芝出来报告司马师，司马师很高兴。
English: Guo Zhi came out to report to Sima Shi. Sima Shi was very happy.

古文：又遣使者授帝齐王印绶，使出就西宫。
现代文：又派使者把齐王之印绶给魏帝，让他出来住在西宫。
English: He also sent an envoy to give the seal of the King of Qi to the Wei Emperor, so that he could come out and live in the West Palace.

古文：帝与太后垂涕而别，遂乘王车，从太极殿南出，群臣送者数十人，司马孚悲不自胜，馀多流涕。
现代文：魏帝与太后垂泪而别，然后乘坐亲王规格的车子，从太极殿出来往南而行，群臣出来送别的有数十人，司马孚悲痛欲绝，其他人也都挥泪相送。
English: Emperor Wei bade a tearful farewell to the empress dowager, and then rode out of the Taiji Hall to the south in a car made to the prince's specifications. Dozens of courtiers came out to bid farewell. Sima Fu was overwhelmed with grief, and others also sent their farewells in tears.

古文：师又使使者请玺绶于太后。太后曰： 彭城王，我之季叔也，今来立，我当何之！
现代文：司马师又派使者向太后索要御玺，太后说： 彭城王是我的小叔，他立为天子，我该到哪儿去？
English: Sima Shi also sent an envoy to the empress dowager to ask for the imperial scepter. The empress dowager said: King Pengcheng is my little uncle, he is the son of heaven, where should I go?

古文：且明皇帝当永绝嗣乎？
现代文：再说明皇帝难道就永绝后嗣了吗？
English: Does this mean that the emperor will never have an heir?

古文：高贵乡公，文皇帝之长孙，明皇帝之弟子。于礼，小宗有后大宗之义，其详议之。 
现代文：高贵乡公是文皇帝的长孙，明皇帝之弟的儿子，按照礼制，可以选择小宗的后代来继承大宗的统绪，你们再详细议论议论。 
English: Gao Guixiang is the eldest grandson of Emperor Wen and the son of Emperor Ming's younger brother. According to the etiquette, you can choose a descendant of a minor line to inherit the lineage of a major line. Let's discuss it in detail.

古文：丁丑，师更召群臣，以太后令示之，乃定迎高贵乡公髦于元城。
现代文：丁丑，司马师再次召集群臣，把太后的命令给他们看，然后决定到元城迎接高贵乡公曹髦。
English: Ding Yuxi, Sima Shih once again summoned the courtiers, showed them the order of the empress dowager, and then decided to go to Yuancheng to meet the nobles of the town.

古文：髦者，东海定王霖之子也，时年十四，使太常王肃持节迎之。
现代文：曹髦是东海定王曹霖之子，当时年仅十四岁，所以让太常王肃持符节去迎接他。
English: Cao Xiang was the son of Cao Lin, the East China Sea King of Ding, and was only fourteen years old at the time, so he asked King Taizang to hold a rite of passage to welcome him.

古文：师又使请玺绶，太后曰： 我见高贵乡公，小时识之，我自欲以玺绶手授之。 
现代文：司马师又派人向太后要御玺，太后说： 我要见高贵乡公，他小的时候我就认识他了，我想亲手把御玺授给他。 
English: Sima Shi also sent someone to ask the empress dowager for the imperial scepter. The empress dowager said, "I want to see my noble countryman. I have known him since he was a child. I want to give him the imperial scepter with my own hands."

古文：冬，十月，己丑，高贵乡公至玄武馆，群臣奏请舍前殿，公以先帝旧处，避止西厢；群臣又请以法驾迎，公不听。
现代文：冬季，十月，己丑，高贵乡公到达玄武馆，群臣上奏请求让他住在前殿，高贵乡公认为那是先帝的旧居，就避开前殿而住到西厢；群臣又请求让朝内用皇帝的车驾平迎接，高贵乡公不同意。
English: In the winter, in October, when he was ugly, the noble townsman arrived at the Xuanwu Pavilion, and the courtiers made a request to let him live in the front hall. The noble townsman thought that it was the former residence of the former emperor, so he avoided the front hall and lived in the west wing. The courtiers also asked the court to use the emperor's car to meet him, but the noble townsman did not agree.

古文：庚寅，公入于洛阳，群臣迎拜西掖门南，公下舆答拜，傧者请曰： 仪不拜。 
现代文：庚寅，高贵乡公进入洛阳，群臣在西掖门南边跪拜迎接，高贵乡公也下车答拜，司仪对他说： 按照礼仪不必答拜。 
English: When Geng Yin, the noble townsman, entered Luoyang, the courtiers knelt down to greet him on the south side of the West Gate. The noble townsman also got out of the car and bowed. The master of ceremonies said to him, "According to the etiquette, you don't have to bow."

古文：公曰： 吾人臣也。 遂答拜。
现代文：高贵乡公说： 我也是天子之臣，怎能不拜？ 
English: The noble townsman said, "I am also a subject of the Son of Heaven, how can I not worship Him?"

古文：至止车门下舆，左右曰： 旧乘舆入。 
现代文：于是就下车答拜。到了止车门高贵乡公下了车，左右之人说： 按旧仪您可乘车进入。 
English: So he got off the bus and bowed. When he reached the bus stop, he got off the bus, and people around him said, "You can get on the bus according to the old schedule."

古文：公曰： 吾被皇太后征，未知所为。 
现代文：高贵乡公说： 我受到皇太后的征召，还不知干什么呢？ 
English: The noble townsman said, "I have been summoned by the empress dowager, but I still don't know what to do."

古文：遂步至太极东堂，见太后。
现代文：然后就步行到太极东堂，拜见太后。
English: Then he walked to the East Hall of the Taiji Temple to meet the empress dowager.

古文：其日，即皇帝位于太极前殿，百僚陪位者皆欣欣焉。
现代文：当天，高贵乡公在太极前殿即皇帝位，出席的文武百官都十分喜悦。
English: On the same day, Prince Gao Guixiang was enthroned as emperor in the front hall of the Taiji Temple. The hundreds of civil and military officials in attendance were very pleased.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：然后实行大赦，改年号为正元。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：为齐王筑宫于河内。
现代文：又在河北郡为齐王建造了宫室。
English: He also built a palace for King Qi in Hebei County.

古文：汉姜维自锹道进拔河间、临洮。
现代文：蜀汉的姜维从狄道进军攻克河关和临洮。
English: Jiang Wei of Shu Han marched from Dido to conquer Heguan and Linyi.

古文：将军徐质与战，杀其荡寇将军张嶷，汉兵乃还。
现代文：将军徐质与之交战，杀了蜀汉的荡寇将军张嶷，蜀汉军队随即撤回。
English: General Xu Qian fought with it and killed the Shu Han's roving general Zhang Qian. Shu Han's army then withdrew.

古文：初，扬州刺史文钦，骁果绝人，曹爽以乡里故爱之。
现代文：当初，扬州刺史文钦，骁勇果敢超过他人，曹爽因与他同乡，所以非常器重他。
English: At the beginning, Yangzhou stabbed Shi Wenqin, Hao Yuang dared to surpass others, Cao Shuang was a fellow villager, so he was very important to him.

古文：钦恃爽势，多所陵傲。
现代文：文钦依仗曹爽的权势，也常常盛气凌人。
English: Wen Qin, relying on Cao Shuang's power, often bullied people.

古文：及爽诛，钦已内惧，又好增虏级以邀功赏，司马师常抑之，由是怨望。
现代文：曹爽被杀后，文钦内心十分恐惧，又喜好虚报俘虏的人数以邀功求赏，司马师常常约束遏制他，因此他对司马师十分怨恨。
English: After Cao Shuang was killed, Wenqin was very afraid in his heart, and he liked to falsify the number of captives to solicit rewards. Sima often restrained him, so he was very resentful of Sima.

古文：镇东将军毌丘俭素与夏侯玄、李丰善，玄等死，俭亦不自安，乃以计厚待钦。
现代文：镇东将军丘俭平素与夏侯玄、李丰交往甚密，夏侯玄等人被杀之后，丘俭内心也惴惴不安，于是就按照内心的计谋，拉拢文钦，给他丰厚的待遇。
English: Zhendong General Qiu Jianping had a very close relationship with Xia Houxuan and Li Feng. After Xia Houxuan and others were killed, Qiu Jian was also uneasy in his heart, so according to his inner strategy, he attracted Wenqin and gave him rich treatment.

古文：俭子治书侍御史甸谓俭曰： 大人居方岳重任，国家倾覆而晏然自守，将受四海之责矣！ 
现代文：丘俭的儿子治书侍御史丘甸对他父亲说： 父亲大人担当国家一个方面的重大责任，如果国家覆没灭亡而您却安然无恙自守一方，那将受到天下人的责难。 
English: Qiu Qian's son, the secretary Shi Qudian, said to his father: Your father is responsible for a major aspect of the country. If the country is destroyed and you are safe and sound, you will be blamed by the world.

古文：俭然之。
现代文：丘俭认为他说得很对。
English: Qiu Jian thought he was right.

古文：邵陵厉公下正元二年
现代文：正元二年
English: 2nd year of the first century

古文：春，正月，俭、钦矫太后诏，起兵于寿春，移檄州郡，以讨司马师。又表言： 相国懿忠正，有大勋于社稷，宜宥及后世，请废师，以侯就第，以弟昭代之。
现代文：春季，正月，丘俭、文钦假称受太后诏书，在寿春起兵，并向各州郡发檄文以共同讨伐司马师，又上表说： 相国司马懿，为人忠正，为国家立了伟大功勋，应该宽宥他的后世，请求只废掉司马师的官职，让他以侯爵的身分退居家中，让其弟司马昭代替他。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, Qiu Jian and Wen Qin pretended to accept the empress dowager's edict, raised an army in Shouchun, and sent a letter to all states and counties to jointly fight Sima Shi. They also said in the letter: Sima Shi, who is loyal to the country and has made great contributions to the country, should be pardoned by future generations. They only requested that Sima Shi's official post be abolished, that he retire to his home as a marquis, and that his brother Sima Zhao replace him.

古文：太尉孚忠孝小心，护军望，忠公亲事，皆宜亲宠，授以要任。 
现代文：太尉司马孚尽忠尽孝小心奉职，护军司马望也能忠心耿耿尽职尽责，他们都应得到亲近和信任，授予他们重要职务。 
English: Second Lieutenant Sima Fu is loyal and diligent in his duties, and the escort Sima Wang can also be loyal and diligent in his duties. They should be close and trusted, and they should be given important positions.

古文：望，孚之子也。
现代文：司马望是司马孚之子。
English: Sima Wang is the son of Sima Fu.

古文：俭又遣使邀镇南将军诸葛诞，诞斩其使。
现代文：丘俭又派使者邀请镇南将军诸葛诞共讨司马师，但诸葛诞杀掉了使者。
English: Qiu Jian also sent an envoy to invite Zhenan General Zhuge Zheng to discuss Sima Shi, but Zhuge Zheng killed the envoy.

古文：俭、钦将五六万众渡淮，西至项；俭坚守，使钦在外为游兵。
现代文：丘俭、文钦率五六万大军渡过淮河，向西到达项县；丘俭坚守城池，让文钦在外率领游动兵力。
English: Qiu Jian and Wen Qin led an army of fifty or sixty thousand across the Huai River and reached Xiang County in the west; Qiu Jian held the city and let Wen Qin lead the troops.

古文：司马师问计于河南尹王肃，肃曰： 昔关羽虏于禁于汉滨，有北向争天下之志，后孙权袭取其将士家属，羽士众一旦瓦解。
现代文：司马师向河南尹王肃询问计策，王肃说： 从前关羽在汉水之滨俘虏了于禁，有向北争夺天下的志向，后来孙权袭击攻取了其将士的家属，结果关羽的军队一下子就瓦解了。
English: Sima asked Yin Wang Su of Henan Province about the strategy. Wang Su said: Guan Yu once captured Guan Yin on the banks of the Han River. Guan Yu had the ambition to conquer the world to the north. Later, Sun Quan attacked and captured the families of his soldiers. As a result, Guan Yu's army suddenly collapsed.

古文：今淮南将士父母妻子皆在内州，但急往御卫，使不得前，必有关羽土崩之势矣。 
现代文：现在淮南众将士的父母妻子都留在内地州县，只要迅速派兵去保护其家属抵御丘俭、文钦的军队，不让他们进来，那他们必然会象关羽那样土崩瓦解。 
English: Nowadays, the parents, wives and children of Huainan soldiers are all in the inland states. As long as they send troops to rush to the guard, so that the enemy can not approach, then their army will certainly have the same tendency to collapse as the feathered army.

古文：时师新割目瘤，创甚，或以为大将军不宜自行，不如遣太尉孚拒之。
现代文：当时司马师刚刚割掉眼部肿瘤，创口很大，很多人都认为此时大将军不应自己率兵前往，不如派太尉司马孚去抵抗叛军。
English: At that time, Sima Division had just cut off the eye tumor, the wound was large, many people thought that at this time the general should not lead his own soldiers, it was better to send Lieutenant Sima Fu to resist the rebels.

古文：唯王肃与尚书傅嘏、中书侍郎钟会劝师自行，师疑未决。
现代文：只有王肃与尚书傅嘏、中书侍郎钟会等人劝司马师亲自去，但司马师犹豫不决。
English: Only Wang Su and Shang Shufu, Zhong Shushirong Zhonghui and others persuaded Sima Shi to go in person, but Sima Shi hesitated.

古文：嘏曰： 淮、楚兵劲，而俭等负力远斗，其锋未易当也。
现代文：傅嘏说： 淮、楚地区的兵力强劲，而且丘俭等自负力量强大要远征拼斗，其锋锐之势不易抵挡。
English: Fu Jun said: The military forces in Huai and Chu regions are strong, and the arrogant forces such as Qiu Jian are strong enough to fight an expedition, and their sharp momentum is not easy to resist.

古文：若诸将战有利钝，大势一失，则公事败矣。 
现代文：如果诸将的战斗出现不利，大势一去，那么您的事情就要失败。 
English: If the battle of generals is unfavorable and the momentum is lost, then your business will fail.

古文：师蹶然起曰： 我请舆疾而东。 
现代文：司马师快速地站起来说： 我要抱病登车前去东边。 
English: Sima Shi quickly stood up and said, "I'm going to be sick and get on the train to the east."

古文：戊午，师率中外诸军以讨俭、钦，以弟昭兼中领军，留镇洛阳，召三方兵会于陈、许。
现代文：戊午，司马师率领中外各军去讨伐丘俭和文钦，让其弟司马昭兼任中领军，留守洛阳，并召集三个方面的军队在陈县、许县会合。
English: In the afternoon, Sima Shih led the Chinese and foreign armies to fight against Qiu Jian and Wenqin, and let his brother Sima Zhao also serve as the leader of the army, stay in Luoyang, and convene the three armies to meet in Chen County and Xu County.

古文：师问计于光禄勋郑袤，袤曰： 毌丘俭好谋而不达事情，文钦勇而无算。
现代文：司马师向光禄勋郑袤询问御敌之策，郑袤说： 丘俭善于谋划但不能通达事情，文钦有勇而无谋。
English: Sima asked Zheng Qi, a member of the Guanglu Order, about the enemy's strategy. Zheng Qi said: Qiu Jian is good at planning but can't get things done. Wen Qin is brave but has no plan.

古文：今大军出其不意，江、淮之卒，锐而不能固，宜深沟高垒以挫其气，此亚夫之长策也。 
现代文：如今大军出其不意地进攻，而江、淮地区的士卒，锐气是不能持久的，您应该深挖沟高立垒以挫其锐气，这是汉代周亚夫用过的妙计。 
English: Nowadays, the great army attacks unexpectedly, and the soldiers in the Jiang and Huai regions cannot maintain their spirit. You should dig a deep ditch and stand high to frustrate their spirit. This is a clever trick used by Zhou Yafu in the Han Dynasty.

古文：师称善。
现代文：司马师称赞这个计策好。
English: Sima praised this strategy as a good one.

古文：师以荆州刺史王基为行监军，假节，统许昌军。
现代文：司马师任命荆州刺史王基为行监军，借用符节，统率许昌军队。
English: Sima Division appointed Jingzhou chief Wang Ji as the commander of the troops, and he used symbols to command Xu Chang's army.

古文：基言于师曰： 淮南之逆，非吏民思乱也，俭等诳诱迫胁，畏目下之戮，是以尚屯聚耳。
现代文：王基对司马师说： 淮南的叛逆，并不是吏卒和百姓想要作乱，而是丘俭等人诳骗引诱再加以胁迫，他们害怕眼前的被杀之祸，所以暂时还聚集在一起。
English: Wang Qi said to Sima Shi: The rebellion in Huainan was not caused by the officials and the people who wanted to make trouble, but by Qiu Jian and others who tried to deceive, lure and coerce. They were afraid of being killed in front of them, so they temporarily gathered together.

古文：若大兵一临，必土崩瓦解，俭、钦之首不终朝而致于军门矣。 
现代文：如果大兵一到，他们必然会土崩瓦解，丘俭和文钦的首级用不了一早上就会送到军营的门前。 
English: If the soldiers arrive, they will inevitably collapse, and the heads of Qiu Jian and Wenqin will be delivered to the door of the military camp in the morning.

古文：师从之。
现代文：司马师采纳了他的计策。
English: The teacher followed his master's advice.

古文：以基为前军，既而复敕基停驻。
现代文：让王基为前军，但不久又下令让王基停止前进。
English: Wang Ji was made the vanguard, but he was soon ordered to halt his advance.

古文：基以为： 俭等举军足以深入，而久不进者，是其诈伪已露，众心疑沮也。
现代文：王基认为： 丘俭等人发兵足以长驱直入，而现在所以久久不进，是因为其诈伪之心已经败露，众人心怀疑虑而停止不前。
English: Wang Qi believed that: Even if people such as Qiu Jian and others marched into the army in a big way, it was enough to go deep, but they did not advance for a long time, because their lies had been exposed, and the soldiers already had doubts in their hearts.

古文：今不张示威形以副民望，而停军高垒，有似畏懦，非用兵之势也。
现代文：如今不大张旗鼓地显示军队的威风阵势以求符合百姓的意愿，而是停止不前高筑营垒以自守，就好象十分畏惧懦弱，这不是用兵的气势。
English: There is no demonstration to meet the expectations of the people, but the army has stopped building barriers. It is as if our army is afraid and cowardly. This is not the spirit of using soldiers.

古文：若俭、钦虏略民人以自益，又州郡兵家为贼所得者，更怀离心，俭等所迫胁者，自顾罪重，不敢复还，此为错兵无用之地而成奸宄之源，吴寇因之，则淮南非国家之有，谯、沛、汝、豫危而不安，此计之大失也。
现代文：如果丘俭、文钦掠夺人民以补充自己，另外州郡兵士中有些人的家属被叛贼所获，他们顾虑重重，会进一步产生叛离之心；那些被丘俭等所胁迫的人，因顾虑自己的罪行严重，也不敢再回来；这就是置兵于无用之地，又促成了叛乱犯罪之徒的出现。假如吴国乘机进犯，那么淮南地区就不属于我国所有了，谯、沛、汝、豫等地也会危险而不安定，这是战略的极大失误。
English: If Qiu Jian and Wen Qin plundered the people to replenish themselves, and the families of some of the soldiers of the state and county were captured by the traitors, they would be worried and would further have a spirit of defection; those who were coerced by Qiu Jian and others would not dare to return because they were worried about the seriousness of their crimes; this was the placement of troops in a useless place and also contributed to the emergence of criminal rebels. If the State of Wu took the opportunity to attack, then the Huainan region would not belong to our country, and places such as Qu, Pei, Ru and Yu would also be dangerous and unstable. This is a

古文：军宜速进据南顿，南顿有大邸阁，计足军人四十日粮。保坚城，因积谷，先人有夺人之心，此平贼之要也。 
现代文：我军应迅速推进占据南顿县，南顿县有大邸阁，估计有足够军队食用四十日的口粮，保卫坚固的城池，凭借积蓄的粮食，行动在敌人之先而有夺取敌人的决心，这是平定叛贼的关键。 
English: Our army should quickly advance to occupy Nantong County. Nantong County has a large mansion, it is estimated that there are enough troops to consume forty days of rations, defend a solid city, rely on accumulated grain, act ahead of the enemy and have the determination to seize the enemy. This is the key to pacifying the traitors.

古文：基屡请，乃听，进据氵隐水。
现代文：王基多次请求，终于采纳了他的意见，于是进军占据水地区。
English: After repeated requests, Wang Ji finally accepted his opinion and marched to occupy the water area.

古文：闰月，甲申，师次于氵隐桥，俭将史招、李续相次来降。
现代文：闰月，甲申，司马师驻军于桥，丘俭的将领史招、李续相继来投降。
English: Yue Yue, Jia Shen, Sima's division garrisoned at the bridge, and the thrifty generals Shi Zhao and Li Rongyi surrendered one after another.

古文：王基复言于师曰： 兵闻拙速，未睹巧之久也。
现代文：王基又对司马师说： 用兵只听说宁拙而能速胜，还未见过求巧而能持久。
English: Wang Ji also said to Sima Shi, "I have only heard that using soldiers is not good and can be won quickly, but I have never seen seeking skill and lasting.

古文：方今外有强寇，内有叛臣，若不时决，则事之深浅未可测也。
现代文：如今外部有强大的敌人，内部有叛乱的臣子，如果不及时作出决断，那么事态发展的深浅祸福则是难以预测的。
English: At present, there are powerful foreign invaders and rebellious courtiers inside the country. If it cannot be resolved immediately, the severity of the situation cannot be predicted.

古文：议者多言将军持重。
现代文：议论的人都说将军持重稳健。
English: Commentators say the general is a steady hand.

古文：将军持重，是也；停军不进，非也。
现代文：您持重稳健是对的，但按兵不动则不对。
English: You are right to be cautious, but you are wrong not to act.

古文：持重，非不得之谓也，进而不可犯耳。
现代文：持重，不是不往前行的意思，而是指前进而不可抵挡。
English: To carry the weight does not mean not to move forward, but to move forward and be irresistible.

古文：今保壁垒以积实资虏而远运军粮，甚非计也。 
现代文：如今我们坚守营垒，使其他各地积存的粮食资助了叛军而我们却从远方运输军粮，这实在不是好的计谋。 
English: Now we're holding the fort, and it's not a good strategy to have grain stored elsewhere subsidize the rebels while we're shipping it in from far away.

古文：师犹未许。
现代文：但司马师仍然不准进军。
English: However, Sima's division was still not allowed to march.

古文：基曰： 将在军，君令有所不受。
现代文：王基说： 将领在行军作战时，君主的命令也可以不接受。
English: Wang said, "Generals are in the army, and the emperor's orders are not acceptable.

古文：彼得则利，我得亦利，是谓争地，南顿是也。 
现代文：如果敌人得到对敌人有利，我方得到对我方有利，这就是所谓争地，这个地方就是南顿。 
English: If the enemy gains an advantage over the enemy, and we gain an advantage over ourselves, this is the so-called disputed territory, and this place is Nandong.

古文：遂辄进据南顿，俭等从项亦欲往争，发十馀里，闻基先到，乃复还保项。
现代文：随即就进军占据了南顿，丘俭等人从项县出发也想去争夺南顿，发兵行进了十余里，听说王基已经抢先到达，于是又撤兵坚守项县。
English: Immediately after that, they marched to occupy Nantong. Qiu Jian and others also wanted to fight for Nantong when they set out from Xiangxian. They marched more than ten miles. They heard that Wang Ji had arrived ahead of them, so they withdrew and held on to Xiangxian.

古文：癸未，征西将军郭淮卒，以雍州刺史陈泰代之。
现代文：癸未，征西将军郭淮去世，任命雍州刺史陈泰接替其职。
English: Not long ago, Guo Huai, the general of the Western Conquest, died, and Chen Tai, the governor of Yongzhou, was appointed to succeed him.

古文：吴丞相峻率骠骑将军吕据、左将军会稽留赞袭寿春，司马师命诸军皆深壁高垒，以待东军之集。
现代文：吴国丞相孙峻率领骠骑将军吕据、左将军会稽人留赞袭击寿春，司马师命令各部队都加固加高营垒坚守不出，以等待东部军队的到来。
English: Sun Jun, the minister of Wu Guozheng, led the cavalry general Liushen and the inspector of the Left General Association Zuozhan to attack Shuchun. Sima ordered all the troops to strengthen and raise the barracks to wait for the arrival of the eastern army.

古文：诸将请进军攻项，师曰： 诸军得其一，未知其二。
现代文：各位将领请求进军攻打项县，司马师说： 诸位只知其一，不知其二。
English: The generals requested to attack Xiang County, Sima said: You only know one, I don't know the other.

古文：淮南将士本无反志，俭、钦说诱与之举事，谓远近必应；而事起之日，淮北不从，史招、李继前后瓦解，内乖外叛，自知必败。
现代文：淮南的将士们本来没有反叛之心，丘俭、文钦说服劝诱他们共同反叛，说是无论远近必然群起响应；而他们起事之后，不仅淮北地区不响应，而且史据李续也都前后投降。内部离心，外部背叛，他们自知必败无疑。
English: The soldiers of Huainan did not have a rebellious heart. Qiu Jian and Wenqin persuaded and enticed them to rebel together, saying that they would inevitably respond in large numbers, no matter how far or near they were. After their uprising, not only did the Huaibei region not respond, but according to historical records, they also surrendered. Internal centrifugation, external betrayal, they knew that they would inevitably lose.

古文：困兽思斗，速战更合其志。虽云必克，伤人亦多。
现代文：被困的野兽想着拼斗，如果速战就更符合他们的心意，虽然我们一定能胜，但伤亡也必然惨重。
English: The trapped beasts are itching for a fight, and a quick battle is more to their liking, and while we're sure to win, there's bound to be casualties.

古文：且俭等欺诳将士，诡变万端，小与持久，诈情自露，此不战而克之术也。 
现代文：况且丘俭等人诳骗自己的将士，诡计多端，变化无常，我们只要稍微多与他们持久对峙一些时日，其诈伪之情自然会显露出来，这是不战而胜的战术。 
English: Moreover, Qiu Jian and others deceive their own soldiers, are tricky and changeable. As long as we have a little more time to confront them for a long time, their deception will naturally be revealed. This is a tactic to win without a fight.

古文：乃遣诸葛诞督豫州诸军，自安风向寿春；征东将军胡遵督青、徐诸军出谯、宋之间，绝其归路；师屯汝阳。
现代文：于是派遣诸葛诞督领豫州各军从安风向寿春推进；派遣征东将军胡遵督领青州、徐州各军进驻谯郡、睢阳之间，以绝断叛军退路；司马师自己率军驻扎在汝阳。
English: Therefore, Zhuge Zheng sent Zhuge Zheng to lead the armies of Yuzhou to advance from Anfeng to Shuchun; sent the East Conquering General Hu Zun to lead the armies of Qingzhou and Xuzhou to be stationed between Shishun and Shenyang to cut off the retreat of the rebels; Sima himself led the army to be stationed in Ruyang.

古文：毌丘俭、文钦进不得斗，退恐寿春见袭，计穷不知所为。淮南将士家皆在北，众心沮散，降者相属，惟淮南新附农民为之用。
现代文：丘俭、文钦进不能战，退又恐怕寿春受到袭击，无计可施不知应该怎么办；淮南将士们的家都在北方，此时众心沮丧涣散，投降者接连不断，只有淮南地区新依附的农民能受他们驱使。
English: Qiu Jian and Wen Qin could not fight when they entered, and they were afraid that Shou Chun would be attacked when they retreated, and they did not know what to do. The homes of the Huainan soldiers were all in the north. At this time, the hearts of the people were disheartened and scattered, and the surrenders continued one after another. Only the newly attached farmers in the Huainan region could be driven by them.

古文：俭之初起，遣健步赍书至兗州，兗州刺史邓艾斩之，将兵万馀人，兼道前进，先趋乐嘉城，作浮桥以待师。
现代文：丘俭起兵之初，曾派遣善于走路的人到兖州送信，兖州刺史邓艾把他杀了。然后领兵一万多人，兼程前进，抢先赶到乐嘉城，制作了浮桥以等待司马师的大军。
English: At the beginning of Qiu Jian's army, he sent a man who was good at walking to Zhangzhou to send a message, and Zhangzhou's leader Deng Ai killed him. Then he led more than ten thousand soldiers, advanced part of the way, rushed to Lejia City ahead of time, and made a pontoon bridge to wait for Sima's army.

古文：俭使文钦将兵袭之。
现代文：丘俭让文钦领兵去袭击乐嘉城。
English: Qiu Jian asked Wenqin to lead an army to attack the city of Lejia.

古文：师自汝阳潜兵就艾于乐嘉，钦猝见大军，惊愕未知所为。
现代文：但司马师从汝阳秘密进兵到了乐嘉城与邓艾会合，文钦突然看到大军，大吃一惊不知如何是好。
English: However, Sima's division secretly marched from Ruyang to meet Deng Ai in Lejia City. Wenqin suddenly saw a large army and was taken aback and did not know what to do.

古文：钦子鸯，年十八，勇力绝人，谓钦曰： 及其未定，击之，可破也。 
现代文：文钦之子文鸯，十八岁，勇猛强健，体力超人，此时就对文钦说： 我们趁其尚未安定，猛然出击可以攻破他们。 
English: Wenqin's son, Wen Rong, eighteen years old, brave and strong, physically superhuman, said to Wenqin at this time: We can take advantage of their instability and make a sudden attack to break them.

古文：于是分为二队，夜夹攻军。鸯率壮士先至鼓噪，军中震扰。
现代文：于是兵分二路，当夜就开始夹攻进击，文鸯率领强壮的士兵首先赶到，大声鼓噪进攻，城内军队惊扰不安。
English: As a result, the soldiers were divided into two groups, and the night began with a pincer attack. Strong soldiers led by Wen Xuan arrived first, loudly attacking, and the troops in the city were alarmed and uneasy.

古文：师惊骇。所病目突出，恐众知之，啮被皆破。
现代文：司马师也十分惊恐，急得他那只病眼也向外空了出来，他恐怕众人知道，就咬住被子强忍疼痛，结果把被子都咬破了。
English: Sima Shi was also very frightened. He was so anxious that his diseased eye also came out. He was afraid that everyone would know, so he bit the quilt to endure the pain. As a result, he bit through the quilt.

古文：钦失期不应，会明，鸯见兵盛，乃引还。
现代文：但文钦误了约定的时间未来接应，等到天明，文鸯见到对方兵力强盛，就撤兵而回。
English: However, Wen Qin missed the agreed time to respond in the future. When it was daylight, Wen Jiabao saw that the other side's forces were strong and withdrew.

古文：师谓诸将曰： 贼走矣，可追之！ 
现代文：司马师对诸将说： 叛贼跑了，现在可以去追击他们！ 
English: Sima said to the generals, "The traitors have fled, now we can go after them!"

古文：诸将曰： 钦父子骁猛，未有所屈，何苦而走？ 
现代文：诸将说： 文钦父子骁勇异常，没有受到挫折，苦于什么而要逃跑呢？ 
English: They will say, "Wenqin father and son are exceptionally brave, they have not suffered any setbacks. What are they suffering from that they want to escape?"

古文：师曰： 夫一鼓作气，再而衰。
现代文：司马师说： 打仗时第一次击鼓进攻士气大振，再次击鼓士气就衰弱了。
English: Sima Shi said, "During the war, the first time the drums were beaten, morale was greatly boosted, and the second time the drums were beaten, morale was weakened.

古文：鸯鼓噪失应，其势已屈，不走何待！ 
现代文：文鸯鼓噪一夜又失去策应，其士气已然受挫，不逃走还等什么？ 
English: Wen Xuan drum noise overnight and lost the strategy, its morale has been frustrated, do not run away and wait for what?

古文：钦将引而东，鸯曰： 不先折其势，不得也。 
现代文：文钦将要领兵向东而退，文鸯说： 如果不先挫其威势，我们是走不了的。 
English: Moon Jae-in will lead the troops to retreat to the east, and Moon Jae-in said, "If we don't defeat him first, we won't be able to go."

古文：乃与骁骑十馀摧锋陷陈，所向皆披靡，遂引去。师使左长史司马班率骁将八千翼而追之，鸯以匹马入数千骑中，辄杀伤百馀人，乃出，如此者六七，追骑莫敢逼。
现代文：于是就同十几个骁勇骑兵杀入敌兵冲锋陷阵，所向披靡，然后才领兵而去，司马师派左长史司马班率领骁勇骑兵八千人从两翼追击，文鸯单枪匹马闯入数千骑兵之中，一次就杀伤百余人，然后突出重围而走，象这样来回六七次，追赶的骑兵也不敢向前紧逼。
English: So, together with a dozen brave cavalrymen, he charged into the enemy soldiers, which was overwhelming, and then he led the soldiers away. Sima Division sent the left commander Shi Sima Ban to lead eight thousand brave cavalrymen to chase from two wings. Wenyu single-handedly broke into thousands of cavalrymen, killing more than a hundred people at a time, and then went around and around. Like this, the pursuing cavalry did not dare to push forward.

古文：殿中人尹大目小为曹氏家奴，常在天子左右，师将与俱行，大目知师一目已出，启云： 文钦本是明公腹心，但为人所误耳；又天子乡里，素与大目相信，乞为公追解语之，令还与公复好。 
现代文：殿中官员尹大目从小就是曹氏家奴，经常在天子左右侍奉，司马师带着他一起出来，尹大目知道司马师的一只眼已经突了出来，病情严重，就启禀说： 文钦本是您的心腹之人，只是被人所蒙蔽而已；他又是天子的同乡，平时与我互相信任，我请求为您去追赶并劝解他，让他与您恢复旧交。 
English: Yin Daming, an official in the palace, had been a slave of the Cao family since he was a child. He often served around Tianzi. Sima Shi took him out with him. Knowing that one of Sima Shi's eyes had protruded and that he was seriously ill, Yin Daming said: Wenqin was your confidant, but he was deceived by others; he was also a fellow villager of Tianzi, and we trusted each other in normal times. I asked you to chase and persuade him, and let him resume his old friendship with you.

古文：师许之。
现代文：司马师同意了。
English: Sima agreed.

古文：大目单身乘大马，被铠胄，追钦，遥相与语。大目心实欲为曹氏，谬言： 君侯何苦不可复忍数日中也！ 
现代文：尹大目单身骑一匹大马，披上铠甲，追赶文钦，远远地与他说话，尹大目内心实际上是为曹氏着想，但不便直言，只好旁敲侧击地说： 您苦于什么而不能再多忍受几天呢？ 
English: Yin Dame, single, rode a large horse, put on armor, chased Wen Qin, and spoke with him from a distance. Yin Dame's heart was actually for Cao's sake, but it was not convenient to speak frankly, so he had to knock on the side and say: What are you suffering from that you can't bear it for a few more days?

古文：欲使钦解其旨。钦殊不悟，乃更厉声骂大目曰： 汝先帝家人，不念报恩，反与司马师作逆，不顾上天，天不祐汝！ 
现代文：他想让文钦理解他的意思，但文钦却一点儿也不明白，就更加严厉地大骂尹大目说： 你是先帝的家人，却不想着报恩，反而与司马师一起作逆，你不顾忌上天，上天也不会保佑你！ 
English: He wanted Wenqin to understand his meaning, but Wenqin didn't understand at all, so he scolded Yin Daim even more severely, saying: You are the family of the former emperor, but you don't want to repay the favor, instead you are working against him together with Sima Shi. If you don't care about heaven, heaven won't bless you!

古文：张弓傅矢欲射大目。大目涕泣曰： 世事败矣，善自努力！ 
现代文：说完就张弓搭箭想射尹大目，尹大目流着眼泪说： 当世之事败坏，您好自为之吧！ 
English: After saying this, he raised his bow and arrows to shoot at Yin Daime. With tears streaming down his face, Yin Daime said, "Things in this world are corrupt. You're on your own!

古文：是日，毌丘俭闻钦退，恐惧，夜走，众遂大溃。
现代文：这天，丘俭听说文钦败退，十分恐惧，就连夜逃走，将士也随之四散溃逃。
English: On this day, Qiu Jian heard that Wenqin had been defeated and retreated, and was very afraid. He fled overnight, and his soldiers also scattered and fled.

古文：钦还至项，以孤军无继，不能自立，欲还寿春；寿春已溃，遂奔吴。
现代文：文钦退回到项县，因孤军无援，自己难以立足，想要回到寿春，而寿春已经溃败，于是就投奔了吴国。
English: Wenqin retreated back to Xiang County, because he was alone and had no support, it was difficult for him to gain a foothold, he wanted to return to Shouchun, but Shouchun had been defeated, so he fled to Wuzhong.

古文：吴孙峻至东兴，闻俭等败，壬寅，进至橐皋，文钦父子诣军降。
现代文：吴国孙峻到达东兴，听说丘俭等人失败，壬寅，进军到橐皋，文钦父子到军前来投降。
English: Sunjun of the State of Wu arrived in Dongxing, and heard that Qiu Jian and others had failed. Ren Yin marched to Handan, and Wen Qin and his son came to the army to surrender.

古文：毌丘俭走，比至慎县，左右人兵稍弃俭去，俭藏水边草中。
现代文：丘俭逃走，向北到了慎县，左右的士兵逐渐都弃他而去，丘俭就藏身于水边的草丛中。
English: Qiu Jian fled and went north to Shen County. The soldiers on both sides gradually abandoned him, and Qiu Jian hid in the bushes by the water.

古文：甲辰，安风津民张属就杀俭，传首京师，封属为侯。
现代文：甲辰，安风津的百姓张属走过去杀掉了丘俭，丘俭的首级送到京师，于是加封张属为侯爵。
English: At that time, Zhang Zhen, a citizen of Anfengjin, went over and killed Qiu Jian. Qiu Jian's head was sent to the capital, and Zhang Zhen was made a marquis.

古文：诸葛诞至寿春，寿春城中十馀万口，惧诛，或流迸山泽，或散走入吴。
现代文：诸葛诞到达寿春，寿春城中十余万人口害怕被杀，有的人流窜到山林川泽，有的人则分散地逃入吴国。
English: Zhuge's birthday arrived in Shouchun. More than 100,000 people in Shouchun City were afraid of being killed. Some people fled to the mountains, forests and rivers, while others scattered into Wu.

古文：诏以诞为镇东大将军、仪同三司，都督扬州诸军事。
现代文：诏令任命诸葛诞为镇东大将军、仪同三司，都督扬州诸军事。
English: The imperial edict appointed Zhu Gezhu as the general of the town of Dongda, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the military governor of Yangzhou.

古文：夷毌丘俭三族。
现代文：诛杀丘俭的三族。
English: The three clans that fought and killed Qiu Jian.

古文：俭党七百馀人系狱，侍御史杜友治之，惟诛首事者十馀人，馀皆奏免之。
现代文：丘俭的同党七百余人皆被逮捕入狱，由侍御史杜友处理，只诛杀首犯十余人，其余皆奏明朝廷而赦免其罪。
English: More than seven hundred of Qiu Jian's fellow party members were arrested and imprisoned, and were dealt with by the attendant Shi Duyou. Only more than ten of the first offenders were killed, and the rest were reported to the imperial court and their crimes were pardoned.

古文：俭孙女适刘氏，当死，以孕系廷尉。
现代文：丘俭的孙女嫁给了刘氏，应当处死，但因有身孕便关在廷尉狱中。
English: Qiu Jian's granddaughter married Mr. Liu and should have been put to death, but because she was pregnant, she was locked up in Tingyi Prison.

古文：司隶主簿程咸议曰： 女适人者，若已产育，则成他家之母，于防则不足惩奸乱之源，于情则伤孝子之恩。
现代文：司隶主簿程咸议论说： 已经出嫁的女子，如果已经生育了孩子，那就成了别人家的母亲，将她定罪，对于防止犯罪来说不足惩诫奸乱之源，对于情理来说则伤害了孝子之情。
English: Cheng Xian, the chief clerk of the court, said: If a married woman has given birth to a child, she will become the mother of someone else's family. Convicting her is not enough to prevent crime and discipline the source of adultery, but it hurts filial piety.

古文：男不遇罪于他族，而女独婴戮于二门，非所以哀矜女弱、均法制之大分也。
现代文：男子不受其他家族罪行的牵连，而女子却偏偏要受到父母家和丈夫家两个家族罪行的牵连，这不是同情怜悯弱女子的政策。
English: Men are not implicated in other family crimes, while women are implicated in the crimes of their parents' and husband's families. This is not a policy of compassion for weak women.

古文：臣以为在室之女，可从父母之刑；既醮之妇，使从夫家之戮。 
现代文：这些问题都是法制的重要内容，我认为未出嫁的女子可以随同父母的罪行而治罪，而已经出嫁的妇女就要随同丈夫家的罪行而治罪。 
English: These issues are important parts of the legal system. I believe that unmarried women can be punished according to the crimes of their parents, while married women should be punished according to the crimes of their husband's family.

古文：朝廷从之，仍著于律令。
现代文：朝廷采纳了这个建议，并写入了法律条款。
English: The Imperial Court accepted this suggestion and included it in a legal clause.

古文：舞阳忠武侯司马师疾笃，还许昌，留中郎将参军事贾充监诸军事。
现代文：舞阳忠武侯司马师病情严重，回到许昌，留下中郎将参军事贾充监管诸军之事。
English: Maiyang Zhongwu Hou Sima, who was seriously ill, returned to Xu Chang, leaving Zhong Lang to supervise the military affairs of the army.

古文：充，逵之子也。
现代文：贾充是贾逵之子。
English: Jia Chong is the son of Jia Yao.

古文：卫将军昭自洛阳往省师，师令昭总统诸军。
现代文：卫将军司马昭从洛阳去许昌看望司马师，司马师让司马昭总管诸军。
English: General of the Guards Sima Zhao went from Luoyang to Xuchang to visit Sima Shih, and Sima Shih asked Sima Zhao to take charge of the troops.

古文：辛亥，师卒于许昌。
现代文：辛亥，司马师在许昌去世。
English: Xinhai, Sima Shi died in Xuchang.

古文：中书侍郎钟会从师典知密事，中诏敕尚书傅嘏，以东南新定，权留卫将军昭屯许昌为内外之援，令嘏率诸军还。
现代文：中书侍郎钟会跟随司马师掌管机密要事，天子下达诏令给尚书傅嘏，说东南刚刚安定下来，应暂且让卫将军司马昭留守许昌作为内外的援军，命令傅嘏率领各军返回。
English: Zhongshu's attendant Zhong Hui followed Sima Shi in charge of confidential and important matters. Tianzi issued an imperial decree to Shang Shufu Fu Xi, saying that Southeast Asia had just settled down, and should temporarily let the guard general Sima Zhao stay in Xu Chang as a reinforcement force at home and abroad, and order Fu Xi to lead the army back.

古文：会与嘏谋，使嘏表上，辄与昭俱发，还到洛水南屯住。
现代文：钟会与傅嘏商量，让傅嘏上表章说明情况，然后就同司马昭一同出发，回到洛水以南驻扎。
English: The bell association discussed with Fu Yao, let Fu Yao explain the situation on the watch chapter, and then set off with Sima Zhao to return to the south of Luoshui.

古文：二月，丁巳，诏以司马昭为大将军、录尚书事。
现代文：二月，丁巳，诏令任命司马昭为大将军、录尚书事。
English: In February, Ting Si issued an imperial edict appointing Sima Zhao to the rank of general.

古文：会由是常有自矜之色，嘏戒之曰： 子志大其量，而勋业难为也，可不慎哉！ 
现代文：钟会因此事而常常流露出骄傲自得的表情，傅嘏告诫他说： 你的志向大于你的能力，而功勋事业是难于建立的，能不谨慎吗？ 
English: Because of this, Zhonghui often showed an expression of pride and self-satisfaction. Fu Yao admonished him: Your ambition is greater than your ability, and a meritorious career is difficult to establish. Can you not be prudent?

古文：吴孙峻闻诸葛诞已据寿春，乃引兵还。
现代文：吴国的孙峻听到诸葛诞已经占据了寿春，就领兵返回。
English: When Sun Jun of the State of Wu heard that the birth of Zhuge had occupied Shouchun, he led his soldiers back.

古文：以文钦为都护、镇北大将军、幽州牧。
现代文：任命文钦为都护、镇北大将军和幽州牧。
English: Appointed Wenqin as the capital guard, the general of Zhenbei and the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：三月，立皇后卞氏，大赦。
现代文：三月，立皇后卞氏，实行大赦。
English: In March, she proclaimed herself empress and ordered a general amnesty.

古文：后，武宣皇后弟秉之曾孙女也。
现代文：皇后是武宣皇后的弟弟卞秉的曾孙女。
English: The empress is the great-granddaughter of Wu Xuan's younger brother Zou Bing.

古文：秋，七月，吴将军孙仪、张怡、林恂谋杀孙峻，不克，死者数十人。
现代文：秋季，七月，吴国将军孙仪、张怡、林恂等人要谋杀孙峻，未能成功，被杀者有数十人。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Wu generals Sun Yi, Zhang Yi, Lin Ye and others tried to murder Sun Jun, but failed, and dozens of people were killed.

古文：全公主谮硃公主于峻，曰 与仪同谋 。峻遂杀硃公主。
现代文：全公主在孙峻面前诽谤朱公主，说她与孙仪是同谋，于是孙峻又杀了朱公主。
English: The whole princess slandered Princess Zhu in front of Sun Jun, saying that she was an accomplice with Sun Yi, so Sun Jun killed Princess Zhu again.

古文：峻使卫尉冯朝城广陵，功费甚众，举朝莫敢言，唯滕胤谏止之，峻不从，功卒不成。
现代文：孙峻派卫尉冯朝修筑广陵城，耗资巨大，整个朝廷无人敢劝说，只有滕胤进谏劝止，但孙峻不听，工程终究未能完成。
English: Sun Jun sent his bodyguard Feng Chao to build Guangling City, which was very costly. No one dared to persuade the entire imperial court, only Teng Yat-sen tried to dissuade him, but Sun Jun did not listen, and the project was ultimately not completed.

古文：汉姜维复议出军，征西大将军张翼廷争，以为： 国小民劳，不宜黩武。 
现代文：蜀汉的姜维又讨论出兵之事，征西大将军张翼在朝廷上劝谏他，认为： 国家弱小人民劳苦，不宜滥用兵力。 
English: Jiang Wei of Shu Han also discussed the matter of sending troops, and Zhang Ying, the general of the Western Expedition, advised him at the imperial court, saying: The weak people of the country are working hard, and it is not appropriate to abuse the military.

古文：维不听，率车骑将军夏侯霸及翼同进。
现代文：但姜维不同意，还是率领车骑将军夏侯霸以及张翼共同进军。
English: However, Jiang Wei did not agree, and still led the cavalry general Xia Houba and Zhang Ying to march together.

古文：八月，维将数万人至枹罕，趋狄道。
现代文：八月，姜维率领数万人到达罕县，并向狄道进军。
English: In August, Jiang Wei led tens of thousands of people to Dahan County and marched to Di Dao.

古文：征西将军陈泰敕雍州刺史王经进屯狄道，须泰军到，东西合势乃进。
现代文：征西将军陈泰命令雍州刺史王经进驻狄道，等待陈泰军队到达，再把东西兵力合在一起进军。
English: Chen Tai, the general of the Western Expedition, ordered Wang Jing, the governor of Yongzhou, to enter Di Dao, wait for Chen Tai's army to arrive, and then march the eastern and western troops together.

古文：泰军陈仓，经所统诸军于故关与汉人战不利，经辄渡洮水。
现代文：陈泰军队驻扎在陈仓，而王经所统领的各军在旧边关地区与蜀汉交战不利，于是王经渡过洮水。
English: Chen Tai's army was stationed in Chen Cang, while the armies led by Wang Jing were at a disadvantage in the war with Shu Han in the old border area, so Wang Jing crossed the Surabaya.

古文：泰以经不坚据狄道，必有他变，率诸军以继之。
现代文：陈泰认为王经不坚守狄道，必然是有其他变故，就率领各军去接应他。
English: Chen Tai thought that if Wang Jing did not stick to the Di way, there must be other reasons, so he led the army to meet him.

古文：经已与维战于洮西，大败，以万馀人还保狄道城，馀皆奔散，死者万计。
现代文：此时王经已经与姜维在洮西交战，结果大败，又率领万余人返回保卫狄道城，其余的兵士全都四散奔逃，被杀者以万计。
English: At this time, Wang Jing was already at war with Jiang Wei in Shaanxi. The result was a crushing defeat, and he led more than ten thousand people back to defend Dido City. The rest of the soldiers all scattered and fled, with tens of thousands killed.

古文：张翼谓维曰： 可以止矣，不宜复进，进或毁此大功，为蛇画足。 
现代文：张翼请求姜维说： 我们可以停止了，不应再向前进，如果再向前进，也许就要毁掉这次大的胜利，而变成画蛇添足了。 
English: Zhang Ying pleaded with Jiang Wei, saying, "We can stop now, we shouldn't advance any further. If we advance any further, we might ruin this great victory and become a footnote."

古文：维大怒，遂进围狄道。
现代文：姜维勃然大怒，不听张翼的意见，于是进军包围了狄道。
English: Jiang Wei flew into a rage and did not listen to Zhang Ying's advice, so he marched in and surrounded Di Dao.

古文：辛未，诏长水校尉邓艾行安西将军，与陈泰并力拒维；戊辰，复以太尉孚为后继。
现代文：辛未，诏命长水校尉邓艾出任安西将军，与陈泰协力抵抗姜维，戊辰，又让太尉司马孚为后续部队。
English: Xin Wei issued an edict ordering the chief water officer, Lieutenant Deng Ai, to take the position of General Anxi, and he and Chen Tai worked together to resist Jiang Wei and Wu Chen, and also ordered Lieutenant Sima Fu to be the follow-up force.

古文：泰进军陇西，诸将皆曰： 王经新败，贼众大盛，将军以乌合之卒，继败军之后，当乘胜之锋，殆必不可。
现代文：陈泰进军至陇西，诸将都对陈泰说： 王经新近才失败，敌兵气势正盛，而将军您率领临时杂凑起来的军队，又是继败军之后，去抵挡正乘胜前进的锋锐部队，恐怕必定不能取胜。
English: When Chen Tai marched to Shaanxi, all the generals said to Chen Tai: Wang Jing only recently suffered a defeat, the enemy troops are in full swing, and the army that you, the general, have temporarily assembled to resist the sharp-edged troops that are advancing after the defeated army, I am afraid that you will not be able to win.

古文：古人有言： 蝮蛇螫手，壮士解腕。 
现代文：古人有言： 被蝮蛇螫了手，壮士就砍掉了手腕。 
English: The ancients had a saying: When bitten by a boa constrictor, a strong man cuts off his wrist.

古文：《孙子》曰： 兵有所不击，地有所不守。 
现代文：《孙子》说： 兵有时不必出击，地有时不必坚守。 
English: "Sun Tzu" said: Sometimes soldiers don't have to attack, and sometimes they don't have to stand firm.

古文：盖小有所失而大有所全故也。
现代文：这是因为小的方面有所失而大的方面就能保全的缘故。
English: Probably because there is a small loss but can save more profit.

古文：不如据险自保，观衅待敝，然后进救，此计之得者也。 
现代文：您不如先占据险要之地以求自何，观察敌人的失误等待敌人出现漏洞，然后再进军救援，这个计策是最好的。 
English: You might as well occupy the critical position first to find out what to do, observe the enemy's mistakes, wait for the enemy to have loopholes, and then go to the rescue, this strategy is the best.

古文：泰曰： 姜维提轻兵深入，正欲与我争锋原野，求一战之利。
现代文：陈泰说： 姜维带领轻装军队深入我境，正是想与我们在原野上一争锋芒，希求一战而胜。
English: Chen Tai said, "Jiang Wei led a light-armed army deep into our territory, precisely because he wanted to fight with us on the plain, hoping to win a battle.

古文：王经当高壁深垒，挫其锐气，今乃与战，使贼得计。
现代文：王经应当高筑营垒坚守不出，挫败敌人的锐气，但现在竟与敌人交战，使敌人的计策得以实现。
English: Wang Jing should have built up a stronghold and defeated the enemy, but now he is actually fighting with the enemy, making the enemy's strategy come true.

古文：经既破走，维若以战克之威，进兵东向，据栎阳积谷之实，放兵收降，招纳羌、胡，东争关、陇，传檄四郡，此我之所恶也。
现代文：王经既已失败逃去，姜维如果凭借战胜的威势，向东进兵，占据栎阳这座有粮食储备的城池，然后放出兵力四处收罗降兵降将，招纳羌、胡部族，向东争夺关、陇地区，再向陇西、南安、天水、略阳四郡发布檄文，这是我们所担忧之事。
English: Since Wang Jing has failed to escape, if Jiang Wei, by virtue of the might of victory, marches to the east to occupy the city of Poyang, a city with grain reserves, and then sends troops to collect the fallen soldiers, recruit the Yao and Hu tribes, and compete for the Guan and Yao regions to the east, and then issue an imperial edict to the four counties of Shaanxi, Nan'an, Tianshui and Liaoyang, this is a matter of concern to us.

古文：而乃以乘胜之兵，挫峻城之下，锐气之卒，屈力致命，攻守势殊，客主不同。
现代文：但姜维却用士气强盛的兵力围攻狄道，使兵力受挫于坚固的城池之下，锐气耗尽仍竭力拼命攻城，攻与守的形势差别很大，主与客也有不同。
English: However, Jiang Wei besieged Di Dao with his morale-boosting troops, causing the troops to be frustrated under the solid city pool. Exhausted, he still tried his best to attack the city. The situation of attack and defense was very different, and the host and guest were also different.

古文：兵书曰： 修橹轒辒，三月乃成，拒堙三月而后已。 
现代文：兵书上说： 制作大盾牌和攻城的战车，三个月才能完成；堆积土山攻城，也要三个月时间才能完成。 
English: According to the military manual: It takes three months to make a large shield and a siege chariot; it takes three months to pile up earth and siege the city.

古文：诚非轻军远入之利也。
现代文：因此围攻城池对于轻装远来的军队是十分不利的。
English: Therefore, the siege of the city is very unfavorable for the lightly armed troops coming from far away.

古文：今维孤军远侨，粮谷不继，是我速进破贼之时，所谓疾雷不及掩耳，自然之势也。
现代文：如今姜维孤军深入远离本土客居我方境内，粮草接济不上，这正是我军迅速前进消灭敌人的时机，所谓迅雷不及掩耳，这是自然形成的威势。
English: Today, Jiang Wei's isolated army is far away from the mainland, living in our territory. There is no grain or grass to help. This is precisely the time for our army to quickly advance and destroy the enemy. The so-called thunderbolt can't be hidden. This is a naturally formed power.

古文：洮水带其表，维等在其内，今乘高据势，临其项领，不战必走。
现代文：洮水象带子一样围在敌军外面，姜维的兵力在洮水以内，如今我们登高占据险要地势，突然出现在敌人头上的高处，不用交战他们就必定要逃走。
English: Surabaya is surrounded by the periphery, Jiang Wei and others are in the interior. Now our army occupies the highlands and the critical terrain, stuck the enemy's key areas, without fighting, the enemy will certainly retreat.

古文：寇不可纵，围不可久，君等何言如是！ 
现代文：敌寇不可纵容，围城不可持久。你们怎能说这样的话！ 
English: The enemy raiders cannot be tolerated, the siege cannot be sustained. How can you say such a thing!

古文：遂进军度高城岭，潜行，夜至狄道东南高山上，多举烽火，鸣鼓角。
现代文：于是进军爬过高城岭，秘密行军，夜里到达狄道东南的高山之上，突然举起众多火把，同时击鼓吹响号角。
English: So they marched and climbed over the Gaocheng Mountains, marched secretly, and arrived at the top of the mountain southeast of Dido in the night, suddenly holding up many torches, while beating drums and blowing horns.

古文：狄道城中将士见救至，皆愤踊。
现代文：狄道城中的将士们见到救兵来到，都奋发振作欢呼跳跃起来。
English: When the soldiers in Dido's city saw the rescuers coming, they all cheered and jumped up.

古文：维不意救兵卒至，缘山急来攻之，泰与交战，维退。
现代文：姜维没想到救兵突然到达，并借山势紧急向他进攻。陈泰与姜维交战，姜维退却。
English: Jiang Wei did not expect the rescuers to suddenly arrive, and took advantage of the mountain situation to urgently attack him. Chen Tai and Jiang Wei fought, and Jiang Wei retreated.

古文：泰引兵扬言欲向其还路，维惧，九月，甲辰，维遁走，城中将士乃得出。
现代文：陈泰又领兵扬言要截断姜维退路，姜维十分惊恐。九月，甲辰，姜维率兵逃走，狄道城中的将士才得以出来。
English: Chen Tai also led the soldiers to threaten to cut off Jiang Wei's escape route, and Jiang Wei was very frightened. In September, Jiachen, Jiang Wei led the soldiers to escape, and the soldiers in Dido City were able to come out.

古文：王经叹曰： 粮不至旬，向非救兵速至，举城屠裂，覆丧一州矣！ 
现代文：王经感叹地说： 我们的粮食已不足十天所用，如果不是救兵迅速赶到，全城之人就要遭到屠杀，我们也要丧失一州之地了！ 
English: Wang Jing sighed and said, "Our grain has been used for less than ten days. If the rescuers do not arrive quickly, the entire city will be slaughtered, and we will lose a province!"

古文：泰慰劳将士，前后遣还，更差军守，并治城垒，还屯上邽。
现代文：陈泰慰劳守城将士，先后让他们返回，另外选择军队把守狄道城，并修筑了城垒，然后率兵撤回，驻扎在上。
English: Chen Tai consoled the laborers, successively sent the soldiers back, let some of them stay in important areas, and intensified the renovation of the fortress, leading the army back to Shangluo.

古文：泰每以一方有事，辄以虚声扰动天下，故希简上事，驿书不过六百里。
现代文：陈泰常常认为，凡是发生情况，有关人员总要虚张声势扰动全国，因此他自己奏事既稀少又简略，传递书信不用每日超过六百里的加急文书。
English: Chen Tai often believed that whenever a situation occurred, the relevant personnel would always bluff and disturb the whole country. Therefore, his own correspondence was scarce and concise, and he did not need to send more than six hundred miles of urgent documents every day.

古文：大将军昭曰： 陈征西沉勇能断，荷方伯之重，救将陷之城，而不求益兵，又希简上事，必能办贼故也。
现代文：大将军司马昭说： 征西将军陈泰沉着勇敢能果断行事，承担了一个方面的重任。救援将要失陷的城池而不要求增加兵力，上书言事又稀少而简略，是个必能打败敌兵的人。
English: General Sima Zhao said: General Chen Tai, the general of the Western Expedition, is calm, brave, and can act decisively, and has undertaken a heavy task in one aspect. Rescue the city that is about to fall without requiring additional troops, and the written words are rare and concise. He is a person who can defeat the enemy soldiers.

古文：都督大将不当尔邪！ 
现代文：都督大将难道不应象他那样么！ 
English: Shouldn't the Governor-General act like him?

古文：姜维退驻钟提。
现代文：姜维退兵，驻守在钟提。
English: Jiang Wei left the army and was stationed in Zhongti.

古文：初，吴大帝不立太庙，以武烈尝为长沙太守，立庙于临湘，使太守奉祠而已。
现代文：当初，吴大帝孙权不立太庙，因为武烈皇帝孙坚曾任长沙太守，所以在临湘县立了庙，让太守供奉祭祠而已。
English: At first, Emperor Sun Quan of the Wu Dynasty did not build a grand temple, because Emperor Sun Jian of the Wu Dynasty had once served as the grand abbot of Changsha, so he built a temple in Linxiang County and let the grand abbot offer a sacrificial shrine.

古文：冬，十二月，始作太庙于建业，尊大帝为太祖。
现代文：冬季，十二月，开始在建业建筑太庙，尊吴大帝孙权为太祖。
English: In the winter, in December, the construction of the Great Temple began. Sun Quan, the great-grandfather of Emperor Wu, was venerated.

