古文：黄帝问力黑曰：大庭氏之有天下也，不辨阴阳，不数日月，不志四时，而天开以时，地成以财。
现代文：黄帝问力黑说：大庭氏的取得天下，他并不需要去辨别阴阳晦明、不记数年月时日、也不认知四时节序，然而阴阳晦明、四时节序却自然有规律的交替运转，各种物质生活资料也自然生成长就。
English: Huangdi Qilihe said: Mr. Datu's acquisition of the world, he does not need to distinguish between yin and yang, do not remember years, months, days, and do not recognize the four-hour sequence, but the yin and yang, the four-hour sequence is naturally regular alternating operation, and various material living resources are also naturally generated.

古文：其为之若何？
现代文：他究竟是怎样管理天下的呢？
English: How on earth does he run the world?

古文：力黑曰：大庭之有天下也，安徐正静，柔节先定。
现代文：力黑回答说：大庭氏的取得天下，是靠着安然舒适正定静默，以雌柔来正定天下。
English: Lihai replied: Mr. Oba's acquisition of the world is based on peace and comfort, calmness and tranquility, and calmness and serenity.

古文：委燮恭俭，卑约主柔，常后而不先。
现代文：同时委婉和顺恭敬谦让，谦卑简易执持柔弱，退守雌节而不进逞雄强。
English: At the same time, it is tactful and obedient, respectful and humble, humble and simple, adhering to the weak, retreating to the feminine without advancing, and strong.

古文：体正信以仁，慈惠以爱人，端正勇，弗敢以先人。
现代文：实行公正的律度以取信天下，施以恩惠以爱护众生，端正其行，不敢居先自傲。
English: Practice the rhythm of justice to win the world's trust, bestow favors to protect all living beings, and do things properly. Don't be arrogant.

古文：中情不流，执一毋求。
现代文：心意静守而不外驰，执持大道而不追逐物欲。
English: The mind should keep quiet and not run away, and should keep to the road and not chase after material desires.

古文：刑于女节，所生乃柔。
现代文：取法雌节，处守柔弱。
English: Take law female section, deal with weak.

古文：故安静正德，好德不争。
现代文：安舒静定持正其德，美好之德不枉自争竞。
English: Peaceful, tranquil, and stable is the virtue of the righteous, and the virtue of the beautiful is not in vain.

古文：立于不敢，行于不能。战示不敢，明示不能。
现代文：要立足行事表现出怯懦和卑弱，善战却显示出不敢战斗的样子，强大却执守卑弱。
English: To stand and act shows cowardice and meanness, to fight well shows that one does not dare to fight, to be strong is to cling to meanness.

古文：守弱节而坚之，胥雄节之穷而因之。
现代文：持守弱节必须坚决而有耐性，直等到逞强侍勇之敌穷困的时候再去趁机攻击它。
English: One must be resolute and patient in defending one's weak points, and wait until the enemy is weak before attacking him.

古文：若此者其民劳不僈，饥不怠，死不怨。
现代文：这样的话，手下的臣民虽然会辛劳疲惫，但绝不会怠慢，虽然忍饥但不懈惰，虽出生入死而不会有怨恨之情。
English: In this way, although the subjects under his command will be tired and tired, they will never be negligent, although they will be hungry, they will not be tireless, and although they will be born and die, they will not be resentful.

古文：不旷其众，不为兵邾，不为乱首，不为怨媒，不阴谋，不擅断疑，不谋削人之野，不谋劫人之宇。
现代文：不应使百姓穷困，不做战争的发动者，不做祸乱的肇始人，不做引起怨恨的媒介，不去搞阴谋颠覆，不妄自专断和犹疑，不图谋侵削他国的领土，不谋求掠夺别的国家的宫殿居舍。
English: They should not impoverish the people, not be the instigators of wars, not be the initiators of disasters, not be the agents of resentment, not engage in subversive plots, not be arbitrary and hesitant, not attempt to encroach on the territory of other countries, and not seek to plunder the palaces and residences of other countries.

古文：慎案其众，以随天地之从。
现代文：严谨地稳定自己的臣民，遵从天地运行的规律。
English: to rigorously stabilize his subjects and follow the laws of the heavens and the earth.

古文：不擅作事，以待逆节所穷。
现代文：不妄自行事，等待 逆节 自己走向穷途末路。
English: Don't try to do things on your own, wait for the contrarians to lead you to a dead end.

古文：见地夺力，天逆其时，因而饰之，事环克之。
现代文：觊觎别的国家的土地，肆意掠夺民力，这是违背天道的，乘势因时去伐正它，而敌人所行的恶事也会反过来促使其导致失败的。
English: To covet the land of another country and wantonly plunder the people's strength is against the way of heaven. We should seize the opportunity to rectify it, and the evil deeds of the enemy will, in turn, cause it to fail.

古文：若此者，战胜不报，取地不反，战胜于外，福生于内，用力甚少，名声章名，顺之至也。
现代文：如果这样的话，则战争会彻底取得胜利并且不会再有反复，攻夺了敌国土地也不会再得而复失。这样就可以外得兵功，内得财富，以和微小的代价，取得显赫的功名。这便是顺应天道的结果。
English: If this is the case, the war will be completely won and there will be no repetition, and if the enemy's land is conquered, it will no longer be gained and lost. In this way, it will be possible to gain military merit from the outside, gain wealth from the inside, and gain a prominent reputation at a small cost. This is the result of obeying the heavenly way.

