古文：长子澄，字道镜，少好学，美鬓发，善举止，言辞清辩，响若县钟。
现代文：元澄是任城王拓跋云的长子，字道镜，从小好学，鬓发很美，举止进退有节，言语清晰明辩，声音有如洪钟。
English: Yuancheng is the eldest son of the city king Tuobao, the word mirror. He has been eager to learn from an early age, his hair is beautiful, his manners are neat, his speech is clear and clear, and his voice is like a bell.

古文：康王薨，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：他的父亲康王去世后，居丧期间，他以守孝道而闻名。
English: After the death of his father, King Kang, he was known for his filial piety during the mourning period.

古文：袭封，加征北大将军。
现代文：他承袭了父亲的封爵，并被加封为征北大将军。
English: He inherited his father's knighthood, and was also made a general of the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：以氏羌反叛，除征南大将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：因氐羌反叛，朝廷任命他为征南大将军、梁州刺史。
English: Because of his rebellion, the imperial court appointed him to be the general of the Southern Expedition and the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：文明太后引见诫厉之，顾谓中书令李冲曰： 此兒风神吐发，当为宗室领袖，是行当不辱命，我不妄也。 
现代文：文明太后接见了他并加以告诫和勉励，她看着元澄，对中书令李冲说： 这个孩子的风采神韵焕然迸发，自当成为皇族宗室的领袖，这次出行应当不辱使命，我不会乱说的。 
English: The Empress Dowager of Civilization met him and admonished and encouraged him. She looked at Yuancheng and said to Li Chong of the Chinese Calligraphy: This child's style and verve are bursting out, he should become the leader of the royal family. This trip should not dishonor the mission, I will not say anything.

古文：澄至州，诱导怀附，西南款顺。
现代文：元澄到梁州以后，耐心诱导氐羌人归附朝廷，西南一带都归顺了。
English: After Yuancheng arrived in Liangzhou, he patiently induced the people of Handan to accede to the imperial court, and the southwestern region all submitted.

古文：加侍中，赐衣一袭，乘黄马一匹，以旌其能。
现代文：朝廷加封他为侍中，赏赐一套衣物，让他乘上一匹黄马，以表彰他的功绩和才能。
English: In recognition of his achievements and talent, the court made him a courtier, awarded him a set of clothes, and let him ride a yellow horse.

古文：转开府、徐州刺史，甚著声绩。
现代文：改为开府、徐州刺史，很有名声和政绩。
English: It was changed to Kaifu and Xuzhou, both of which have a long history of fame and political achievements.

古文：朝京师，引见于皇信堂。
现代文：朝拜京城时，被引到皇信堂。
English: During the visit to the capital, he was led to the Imperial Chapel.

古文：孝文诏澄曰： 昔郑子产铸刑书而晋叔向非之。
现代文：孝文帝问元澄： 过去郑国子产铸刑书，而晋国的叔向不以为然。
English: Emperor Xiaowen asked Yuancheng: In the past, Zheng Guozhong cast the punishment book, but Jin Guozhong's uncle was not impressed.

古文：此二人皆贤士，得失竟谁？ 
现代文：这两人都是贤士，究竟谁是谁非？ 
English: Both of them are sages, so who is to blame?

古文：对曰： 郑国寡弱，摄于强邻，人情去就，非刑莫制，故铸刑书以示威。
现代文：元澄回答说 ：郑国弱小寡助，慑于强大的邻国压力，人心容易反复，不用刑律难以管理，所以铸刑书向他们表示威严。
English: Yuancheng replied: Zheng Guo is weak and helpless, deterred by the pressure of strong neighboring countries, people's hearts are easy to repeat, and it is difficult to manage without criminal law, so the casting of the punishment book shows them majesty.

古文：虽乖古式，合今权道。 
现代文：虽然有背于古制，却适合于今天权变之道。 
English: Although it is contrary to the ancient system, it is suitable for today's revolutionary way.

古文：帝方革变，深善其对，笑曰： 任城当欲为魏子产也。
现代文：孝文帝正在进行变革，十分欣赏元澄的回答，便笑着说 ：任城王应当成为魏国的子产啊！
English: Emperor Xiaowen was carrying out reforms, and he was very appreciative of Yuancheng's answer, so he smiled and said, "Rencheng should become the progeny of Wei!"

古文：朕方创改朝制，当与任城共万世之功。 
现代文：我正在创改朝中制度，自当和任城王共建万世之功。 
English: I am creating and reforming the Korean-Chinese system, and it is my honor to work with the king of the city to build a great achievement.

古文：后征为中书令，改授尚书令。
现代文：后来便征召他入朝当中书令，又改任尚书令。
English: Later, he was called up to join the imperial court as a middle-ranking official and was appointed as a high-ranking official.

古文：齐庾荜来朝，见澄音韵遒雅，风仪秀逸，谓主客郎张彝曰： 往魏任城以武著称，今魏任城乃以文见美也。 
现代文：齐国的庾荜前来朝见，见元澄言辞文雅，风度秀逸超群，便对主客郎张彝说： 以前魏国的任城王以勇武著称，如今魏国任城王却以文采见美了！ 
English: Zhai of Qi came to see the emperor. Seeing Yuancheng's elegant speech and superb demeanor, he said to his guest Zhang Zhai: In the past, the king of Wei was famous for his bravery, but now the king of Wei is famous for his writing!

古文：时诏延四庙之子，下逮玄孙之胄，申宗宴于皇信堂。不以爵秩为列，悉序昭穆为次，用家人之礼。
现代文：这时，皇帝下诏大集四庙的子孙，下至玄孙的儿子，在皇信堂举办宴会共叙宗室之亲，不按爵位排列顺序，全按昭穆的次序排位，用家人的礼节相见。
English: At this time, the emperor decreed that the descendants of the four temples of the Great Collection, down to the sons of the great-great-grandson, would hold a banquet in the Emperor's Hall to celebrate the relatives of the family, not according to the order of rank, but according to the order of the Shomu, and use the etiquette of the family to meet.

古文：帝曰： 行礼已毕、欲令宗室各言其志，可率赋诗。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：行礼已毕，我要让宗室内各人都表达自己的志向，可一概赋诗。 
English: The emperor said, "Now that the ceremony is over, I want everyone in the household to express their wishes, and everyone can write a poem."

古文：特命澄为七言连韵，与孝文往复赌赛，遂至极欢，际夜乃罢。
现代文：他特别下令由元澄作七言诗句连韵。元澄和孝文帝反复打赌比赛，因而玩得十分高兴，直至深夜才结束。
English: He specially ordered Motosumi to make a seven-syllable rhyme. Motosumi and Emperor Xiaowen repeatedly bet on the game, so they were very happy to play until late at night.

古文：后帝外示南讨，意在谋迁，齐于明堂左个。诏太常卿王谌，亲令龟卜易筮南伐之事，其兆遇《革》。
现代文：后来孝文帝对外表示要南征，本意却打算迁都，他在明堂左侧斋戒，召来太常卿王谌，亲自命令他占卜易卦来预测南征之事，得到了革的卦象。
English: Later, Emperor Xiaowen announced to the outside world that he wanted to invade the south, but he intended to move the capital. He fasted on the left side of the Ming Hall, summoned the Grand Vizier Wang Qian, and personally ordered him to predict the invasion of the south by divination, and obtained the leather elephant.

古文：澄进曰： 《易》言革者更也，将欲革君臣之命，汤、武得之为吉。
现代文：元澄进言说 ：《易》中说，革就是改更的意思，将要革君臣之命。商汤、周武王得了这个卦象就是吉兆。
English: Motosumi commented, "In Yi, it is said that "kaku" means to change, and that it is the order of the king and his ministers to change. It is a good omen for Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu to have this gaga elephant.

古文：陛下帝有天下，今日卜征，不得云革命，未可全为吉也。 
现代文：陛下为天下皇帝，今日的卦象，不能说是革命，不能认为全是吉兆。 
English: Your Majesty is the emperor of the world. Today's situation cannot be called a revolution, nor can it be considered all good.

古文：帝厉声曰： 此象云大人武变，何言不吉也！ 
现代文：孝文帝严厉地说道： 这个卦象说，大人虎变，怎么说不吉利呢！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said sternly, "This riddle says that the adult tiger changes, how can it be said to be unlucky!

古文：车驾还宫，便召澄，未及升阶，遥谓曰： 向者之《革》，今更欲论之。
现代文：车驾回官后，立即召见元澄。元澄还未登上台阶，孝文帝就远远地对他说： 刚才所说的 革 卦，现在想和你再讨论一下。
English: After driving back to the office, he immediately summoned Motosumi. Before Motosumi climbed the steps, Emperor Xiaowen said to him from a distance, "I would like to discuss the revolution I just mentioned with you again."

古文：明堂之忿，惧众人竞言，沮我大计，故厉色怖文武耳。 
现代文：我在明堂发怒，是担心大家跟着说三道四，坏了我的大计，所以装出很生气的样子让文武百官感到害怕罢了。 
English: When I got angry in the Ming court, I was worried that everyone would gossip about me and ruin my grand plan, so I just pretended to be very angry so that the officials would be scared.

古文：乃独谓澄曰： 国家兴自北土，徙居平城，虽富有四海，文轨未一。
现代文：于是，他单独对元澄说： 国家从北方兴起，迁居到平城，虽然富有四海，但文化、习俗等均未合一。
English: As a result, he said to Motosumi alone: The country arose from the north and moved to Heijo. Although it is rich in the four seas, culture, customs, etc. are not unified.

古文：此间用武之地，非可兴文。
现代文：这里是用武之地，不是可以兴起文教的地方。
English: This is a battlefield, not a place where literature and education can flourish.

古文：崤函帝宅，河洛王里，因兹大举，光宅中原，任城意以为何如？ 
现代文：崤函自古为帝宅，河洛一向是王室之居，我想举此大事，宅居中原，你意下以为如何？ 
English: Shihang has been the imperial residence since ancient times, and Helo has always been the royal residence. I want to make this a big event, the residence of the Central Plains, what do you think?

古文：澄深赞成其事。
现代文：元澄十分赞成这件事。
English: Motosumi is very much in favour of this.

古文：帝曰： 任城便是我之子房。 
现代文：孝文帝说 ：任城王便是我的张子房啊！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "The king of the city is my Zhang Zifu!"

古文：加抚军大将军、太子少保，又兼尚书左仆射。
现代文：于是，加封他为抚军大将军、太子少保，又兼尚书左仆射。
English: As a result, he was given the additional titles of General of the General Staff, Junior Protector of the Crown Prince, and Left-Handed Shooter.

古文：及车驾幸洛阳，定迁都之策，诏澄驰驿向北，问彼百司，论择可否。
现代文：当车驾到达洛阳，确定了迁都的计谋之后，皇帝诏令元澄驰回北方，询问留在那里的百官，议论这一抉择的可否。
English: When the car arrived in Luoyang and the plan to move the capital was finalized, the emperor ordered Yuancheng to return to the north, ask the hundreds of officials who remained there, and discuss the feasibility of this decision.

古文：曰： 近论《革》，今真所谓革也。 
现代文：元澄说 ：近日所说的 革 卦，如今真是可称为革了！ 
English: Motosumi said, "The recently talked about leather, can now truly be called leather!"

古文：澄既至代都，众闻迁诏，莫不惊骇。
现代文：元澄到达代都之后，众人听了有关迁都的诏书，无不惊讶万分。
English: After Motosumi arrived at the capital, everyone listened to the imperial edict concerning the relocation of the capital, and they were all very surprised.

古文：澄援引今古，徐以晓之，众乃开伏。
现代文：元澄援引古今事例，耐心地加以开导，众人这才明白和信服。
English: Motosumi cites examples from the past and present, and patiently enlightens them. Only then do people understand and are convinced.

古文：遂南驰还报，会车驾于滑台。
现代文：于是，元澄南归回报，在滑台会见了皇帝。
English: As a result, Yuancheng returned to the south and met the emperor at the landing stage.

古文：帝大悦曰： 若非任城，朕事业不得就也。 
现代文：孝文帝大喜，说： 如果不是任城王，我的大业不能成功啊！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen was overjoyed and said, "If it wasn't for King Ren, my great undertaking wouldn't have succeeded!"

古文：从幸鄴宫。除吏部尚书。
现代文：元澄跟从皇帝到达邺宫，被任命为吏部尚书。
English: Motosumi followed the emperor to the Imperial Palace and was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：及车驾自代北巡，留澄铨简旧臣。
现代文：当皇帝从代都出发北巡时，留下元澄挑选旧臣。
English: When the emperor went on a tour of the north from Dadu, he left Motosumi to choose the old vassals.

古文：初，魏自公侯以下，动有万数，冗散无事。
现代文：当初，魏国官员从公侯以下，动则以万计，沉冗闲散，没事可做。
English: In the beginning, the officials of the Wei dynasty, from the prince on down, were idle and had nothing to do.

古文：澄品为三等，量其优劣，尽其能否之用，咸无怨者。
现代文：元澄将他们分为三等，确定优劣，让他们中有才能的尽其所能加以任用，没有人发出怨言。
English: Motosumi divided them into three classes, determined their strengths and weaknesses, and let the talented ones do their best to be appointed, and no one complained.

古文：驾还洛京，复兼右仆射。
现代文：车驾回到洛阳后，皇帝又让他兼右仆射。
English: After the chauffeur returned to Luoyang, the emperor made him the second right-hand man.

古文：帝至北芒，遂幸洪池，命澄侍升龙舟。
现代文：孝文帝到北芒，因而前往洪池，令元澄上龙舟侍候。
English: Emperor Xiaowen came to Beimang, so he went to Hongchi and ordered Yuancheng to wait for him on the dragon boat.

古文：帝曰： 朕昨夜梦一老公，拜立路左，云晋侍中嵇绍，故此奉迎，神爽卑惧，似有求焉。 
现代文：皇帝对他说 ：昨天夜里我梦见有一位老公公，拜立在路的左侧，说是晋朝的侍中嵇绍，特地前来迎接，神情谦恭有些害怕的样子，似乎有所请求。 
English: The emperor said to him, "Yesterday night, I dreamt that there was an old man, standing on the left side of the road, who said that he was Jinsha's chamberlain, Jinshao, and had come specially to greet me. He looked humble and somewhat afraid, and seemed to have a request.

古文：澄曰： 陛下经殷墟而吊比干，至洛阳而遗嵇绍，当是希恩而感梦。 
现代文：元澄说： 陛下经过殷墟时吊祭比干，到洛阳以后没有祭祀嵇绍，想是他请求皇上的加恩所以托梦吧！ 
English: Yuancheng said, "When His Majesty passed through the Yin Ruins, the hanging ceremony took place, but after he arrived in Luoyang, there was no sacrificial rite for Xinshao. I think he asked for the emperor's blessing, so let him dream!

古文：帝曰： 朕既有此梦，或如任城所言。 
现代文：文帝说 ：我既然有了这个梦，或许真像你所说的那样。 
English: Wendi said, "Since I have this dream, perhaps it really is as you say.

古文：于是求其兆域，遣使吊祭焉。
现代文：于是，他派人寻找嵇绍的坟墓，派使者加以祭祀。
English: As a result, he sent someone to look for the grave of Gongshao and sent an envoy to offer a sacrifice.

古文：齐明帝既废弑自立，其雍州刺史曹武请以襄阳内附。
现代文：齐明帝废了海陵王而自立为帝，南齐的雍州刺史曹武请求以襄阳城前来归附，皇帝准备亲自前去接受。
English: Emperor Qiming abolished the king of Hailing and became emperor himself. The Yongzhou statesman Cao Wu from South Qi requested to come and annex Xiangyang City, and the emperor was ready to go and accept it in person.

古文：车驾将自赴之，引澄及咸阳王禧、彭城王勰、司徒冯诞、司空穆亮、镇南李冲等议之。
现代文：他召来元澄和咸阳王禧、彭城王勰、司徒冯诞、司空穆亮、镇南将军李冲等一起商议。
English: He summoned Yuancheng to discuss with Xianyang Wangxi, Pengcheng Wangyu, Sitou Fengxiao, Siku Mu Liang, and Zhenan General Li Chong.

古文：禧等或云宜行，或言宜止。
现代文：咸阳王禧等人主张应当前往，也有些人认为不该去。
English: Xianyang Wangxi and others advocate that they should go, and some people think that they should not go.

古文：帝曰： 众人意见不等，宜有客主，共相起发。
现代文：皇帝说： 众人的意见不一致，应当有个主客之分，互相启发。
English: The emperor said: Since the opinions of many people do not coincide, there should be a distinction between host and guest to inspire each other.

古文：任城与镇南为应留之议，朕当为宜行之论。诸公坐听，长者从之。 
现代文：任城王和镇南将军主张应当留在京城，我自当作为应当前去的一方，大家静坐听我们论辩，最后都听从获胜的一方。 
English: Ren Shiwang and General Zhenan advocated that we should stay in the capital, and I considered myself to be the one who should go ahead. Everyone sat quietly and listened to our arguments, and in the end they all listened to the winning side.

古文：于是帝往复数交，驾遂南征，不从澄及李冲等言。
现代文：于是，文帝和他们反复辩论了几轮，车驾决定南征，不听从元澄和李冲等人的意见。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen repeatedly debated with them for several rounds, and decided to invade the south without listening to the opinions of Yuancheng and Li Chong.

古文：后从征至县瓠，以疾笃还京。
现代文：元澄跟从皇帝南征到达悬瓠，因为病重而回京。
English: Motosumi followed the Emperor Nansei to Suspension Bridge, but returned to Kyoto due to serious illness.

古文：车驾还洛，引见王公侍臣于清徽堂。
现代文：车驾回到洛阳后，孝文帝在清徽堂引见王公侍臣。
English: After returning to Luoyang by car, Emperor Xiaowen introduced Wang Gong's attendants in Qinghui Hall.

古文：帝曰： 此堂成来，未与王公行宴乐之礼。
现代文：皇帝说 ：这座殿堂建成以来，还没有和王公们在这里举行宴乐之礼。
English: The emperor said, "Since this hall of fame was built, there has never been a banquet held here with princes.

古文：今与诸贤，欲无高而不升，无小而不入。 
现代文：今天要和群贤们一起做到没有不登的高处，没有不入的小地方。 
English: Today, we must work with the sages to make sure that there is no high place that cannot be climbed, and no small place that cannot be entered.

古文：因之流化渠。
现代文：于是到了流化渠。
English: So we arrived at the drainage channel.

古文：帝曰： 此曲水者，取乾道曲成，万物无滞。 
现代文：皇帝说： 这里的曲水，取乾道曲成之意，万物没有留滞的地方。 
English: The emperor said, "The curved water here means that everything has no place to linger.

古文：次之洗烦池。
现代文：其次到了洗烦池。
English: Next came the washing pond.

古文：帝曰： 此池亦有嘉鱼。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：这个池内也有嘉鱼。 
English: The emperor said, "There are also carp in this pond."

古文：澄曰： 所谓 鱼在在藻，有颁其首。  
现代文：元澄说 ：所谓 鱼在水藻，有颁其首 啊！ 
English: Motosumi said, "The so-called fish is in the algae, and it has a head!"

古文：帝曰： 且取 王在灵沼，于牣鱼跃。  
现代文：皇帝说： 且取 王在灵沼，于禼鱼跃 之意。 
English: The emperor said, "And take the king in Lingnuma, meaning the eel's leap."

古文：次之观德殿。
现代文：又来到观德殿。
English: I came to the Kuangde Hall again.

古文：帝曰： 射以观德，故遂命之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 射以观德，所以叫这个名字。 
English: The emperor said, "Shooting with virtue is called by this name.

古文：次之凝闲堂。
现代文：又到了凝闲堂。
English: It's time to go to the lounge again.

古文：帝曰： 此堂取夫子闲居之义。
现代文：皇帝说 ：这座堂名取自夫子闲居的意思。
English: The emperor said, "The name of this hall is derived from the meaning of the master's idleness.

古文：不可纵奢以忘俭，自安以忘危，故此堂后作茅茨堂。 
现代文：不可以纵情奢侈而忘了勤俭，自觉安乐而忘了危险，所以在这堂的后面建了茅茨堂。 
English: You can't indulge in luxury and forget about hard work and frugality, and you can't consciously enjoy yourself and forget about danger. That's why Moutz Hall was built behind this hall.

古文：谓李冲曰： 此东曰步元庑，西曰游凯庑。
现代文：他又对李冲说 ：这座堂的东面称为步元庑，西面称游凯庑。
English: He also said to Li Chong: The east side of this hall is called Bu Yuan Gong, and the west side is called You Kai Gong.

古文：此坐虽无唐尧之君，卿等当无愧于元、凯。 
现代文：这里虽然没有唐尧这样的明君，但你们都是无愧于当他下面的元、凯这样的贤臣的。 
English: Although there is no Ming prince like Tang Zheng here, you are all worthy of being a wise minister like Yuan and Kai below him.

古文：冲对曰： 臣既遭唐尧之君，敢辞元、凯之誉？ 
现代文：李冲回答说 ：臣下等人既然遇到了唐尧这样的明君，又怎么敢推去元、凯之臣的称号呢？ 
English: Li Chong replied: Since the vassals and others have met such a wise ruler as Tang Xuan, how dare they push away the title of Yuan, Kai's vassal?

古文：帝曰： 光景垂落，朕同宗有载考之义，卿等将出，何得默尔德音。 
现代文：皇帝说： 太阳将下山，我还和同族宗亲有共叙亲情的惯例，你们准备出宫，怎么能不留下佳篇呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "The sun is about to set, and I still have the custom of recounting family relationships with my relatives of the same race. As you prepare to leave the palace, how can you not leave a good story behind?

古文：即命黄门侍郎崔光、郭祚、通直郎刑峦、崔休等赋诗言志。
现代文：于是当即让黄门侍郎崔光、郭祚、通直郎邢峦、崔休等赋诗以言志。
English: As a result, Huangmen's attendants, Cui Guang, Guo Zheng, Tong Naorang, Cui Xiu and others were immediately made to write poems.

古文：烛至，公卿辞退，李冲再拜上于万岁寿。
现代文：送上烛火时，公卿们辞退，李冲再次拜辞并且祝皇帝千万岁寿。
English: When presented with a candle, the nobles declined, Li Chong bowed again and wished the emperor a long life.

古文：帝曰： 卿等以烛至致辞，复献于万寿，朕报卿以《南山》之诗。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：你们在烛火送到时告辞，又献上千万岁寿，我当回报你们《南山》之诗。 
English: The emperor said, "When the candle is brought to you, say your farewells and offer ten thousand years of life. I shall return the poem "Nanshan" to you."

古文：乃曰： 烛至辞退，庶姓之礼；在夜载考，宗族之义。
现代文：于是，他便说： 烛至辞退，庶姓之礼；在夜载考，宗族之义。
English: Therefore, he said: Candles to decline, the courtesy of the maiden name; at night to take the exam, the righteousness of the clan.

古文：卿等且还，朕与诸王宗室欲成此夜饮。 
现代文：你们暂且回去，我要和各宗室亲王在此举行夜饮。 
English: If you'll step back for a moment, I'm going to hold an evening reception here with the princes.

古文：后坐公事免官。
现代文：后来，元澄因公事而被免职。
English: Later, Motosumi was relieved of his duties for official business.

古文：寻兼吏部尚书。
现代文：不久，又兼任吏部尚书。
English: Not long after, he was also appointed to the post of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：恆州刺史穆泰在州谋反，授澄节，铜武、竹使符，御仗左右，仍行恆州事。
现代文：恒州刺史穆泰在恒州谋反，朝廷授给元澄持节、铜武、竹使符，左右御杖，仍兼管恒州事。
English: The imperial court awarded Yuan Chengzhi Jie, bronze weapons, bamboo emblems, right and left scepters to Moutai, the prince of Hengzhou, who plotted a rebellion in Hengzhou. He was still in charge of the affairs of Hengzhou.

古文：行达雁门，遣书侍御史李焕先赴。
现代文：当行进到雁门时，派遣书侍御史李焕先去。
English: When marching to the Wild Goose Gate, Li Huan, the scribe, was sent ahead.

古文：至即禽泰，穷其党与，罪人皆得。
现代文：到恒州后立即抓住穆泰，穷追同党，所有罪犯都被抓获。
English: After arriving in Hengzhou, they immediately caught Mu Tai and chased after his accomplices. All the criminals were caught.

古文：钜鹿公陆睿、安乐侯元隆等百余人并狱禁。
现代文：巨鹿公陆睿又、安乐侯元隆等一百多人都被关进狱中。
English: More than a hundred people, including Koga Gonglu Rui and Anle Hou Yuanlong, were jailed.

古文：具状表闻。
现代文：将详细情况表奏朝廷。
English: Report the details of the situation to the Imperial Court.

古文：帝览表，乃大悦曰： 我任城可谓社稷臣，正复皋陶断狱，岂能过之？ 
现代文：皇帝看完奏表，便十分高兴地说： 我的任城王真是社稷重臣，就算让皋陶来审理，又怎能超过他？ 
English: After reading the score, the emperor was very pleased and said: My king of the city is really a social dignitary. Even if he were to be tried by Juntao, how could he surpass him?

古文：顾咸阳王等曰： 汝等脱当其处，不能办此也。 
现代文：皇帝看着咸阳王说 ：你们如果正在那里的话，不可能办成这件事。 
English: The emperor looked at Xianyang Wang and said: "If you are there, it is impossible to do this."

古文：车驾寻幸平城。劳澄，引见逆徒，无一人称枉。时人莫不叹之。
现代文：皇帝不久驾幸平城，犒劳元澄，并去看了那些叛乱的党人，那些人没有一个说自己是被冤枉的，当时的人无不赞叹。
English: The emperor soon traveled to Pingcheng to reward the labor of Yuancheng, and went to see those rebellious party members. None of those people said that they had been wronged, and the people at the time were all amazed.

古文：帝谓左右曰： 必也无讼，今日见之。 
现代文：皇帝对左右的人说： 必也无讼，我今天亲眼见到了。 
English: The emperor said to the people around him, "There is no need for a lawsuit. I saw it with my own eyes today."

古文：以澄正尚书。
现代文：于是，任命元澄为正尚书。
English: As a result, Motosumi was appointed to the post of chancellor.

古文：车驾南伐，留澄居守，复兼右仆射。
现代文：皇帝南征时，留下元澄守卫京都，又兼右仆射。
English: During the Emperor's Southern Expedition, he left Motosumi to guard Kyoto, and also acted as his right-hand man.

古文：澄表请以国秩一岁租帛，助供军资，诏受其半。
现代文：元澄上表请求以自己封国的一年的租赋和布帛资助军队使用，皇帝只同意接受一半。
English: The emperor only agreed to accept half of the rent and cloth subsidy for one year's use of the country, which was requested by Yuancheng in his petition.

古文：帝复幸鄴。见公卿曰： 朕昨入城，见车上妇人冠帽而著小襦袄者，尚书何为不察？ 
现代文：皇帝又到邺城，见到公卿们便说： 我昨天进城时，见到车上的妇女有戴着帽子，身穿小短袄的，尚书为什么没有注意到？ 
English: The emperor went to Handan again, and when he saw the nobles, he said: When I entered the city yesterday, I saw that some of the women in the car were wearing hats and short skirts. Why didn't Shangshu notice?

古文：澄曰： 著者犹少。 
现代文：元澄说 ：穿的人还很少。 
English: Motosumi said, "Very few people still wear them."

古文：帝曰： 任城欲令全著乎？
现代文：皇帝说 ：任城王想让全城都穿上吗？
English: The emperor said, "Does the king of the city want the whole city to wear capes?"

古文：一言可以丧邦，其斯之谓。
现代文：一句话可以使邦国丧亡，说的正是这样。
English: It is said that a single word can destroy a nation.

古文：可命史官书之。 
现代文：可让史官把这件事记下来。 
English: Let the historian write it down.

古文：又曰： 王者不降佐于苍昊，拔才而用之。
现代文：他又说 ：王者的辅助大臣不是从天而降的，而是选拔有才能的人加以任用。
English: He added: "The king's aides-de-camp do not fall from the sky, but talented people are selected and appointed.

古文：朕失于举人，任一群妇女辈，当更铨简耳。
现代文：我用人失当，你竟听任一群妇女穿着这样的奇服，我自当再行挑选。
English: I'm in the wrong line of work if you're going to let a bunch of women dress up in these outfits and I'm supposed to pick and choose.

古文：任城在省，为举天下纲维，为当署事而已？ 
现代文：任城王在官署中办事，是让天下人遵从纲纪法度，还是处理日常事务呢？ 
English: If the king of the city is appointed to work in the government office, is it to make the people of the world follow the rules and regulations, or is it to deal with everyday affairs?

古文：澄曰： 臣实署事而已。 
现代文：元澄说 ：我实在是到那里办理一下事务而已。 
English: Motosumi said, "I really just went there to take care of some business."

古文：帝曰： 如此，便一令史足矣，何待任城？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：要是这样的话，只要任命一位令史去办就行了，何必让你去呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "In that case, all you have to do is to appoint a magistrate to do it. Why should you go?"

古文：寻除尚书左仆射，从驾南伐。
现代文：不久便改任元澄为尚书右仆射，随从皇帝南征。
English: Soon, he was reassigned to be the right-hand man of Shang Shuxu, and followed the emperor to the south.

古文：孝文崩，受顾命。
现代文：孝文帝逝世时，受命佐政。
English: At the time of Emperor Xiaowen's death, he was ordered to take over the government.

古文：宣武初，有降人严叔懋告尚书令王肃遣孔思达潜通齐国，为叛逆。
现代文：宣武初年，有一位前来投降的人叫严叔懋的报告说，尚书令王肃派孔思达私通齐国，准备叛变。
English: In the first year of Xuanwu, a man named Yan Shuxuan, who came to surrender, reported that Wang Su sent Kong Sida to infiltrate Qi and prepare for a mutiny.

古文：澄信之，乃表肃将叛，辄下禁止。
现代文：元澄相信了他的话，便上表说，王肃将要叛变，立即将他监禁起来。
English: Yuancheng believed him and declared that Wang Su was about to defect, and immediately imprisoned him.

古文：咸阳、北海二王奏澄擅禁宰辅，免官还第。
现代文：而咸阳王、北海王上表说元澄擅自拘禁朝廷宰辅大臣，于是被免官回来。
English: However, King Hamyang and King Hokkai publicly stated that Yuancheng had arbitrarily detained the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Court, so he was dismissed and returned.

古文：寻除开府、扬州刺史。
现代文：不久又被任命为开府、扬州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Kaifu and Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：下车封孙叔敖之墓，毁蒋子文之庙；上表请修复皇宗之学，开四门之教。
现代文：他一到扬州，便加封增修孙叔敖的陵墓，捣毁蒋子文的神庙，同时上表请求修建和恢复皇室宗族的学堂，开设四科教学。
English: As soon as he arrived in Yangzhou, he ordered the mausoleum of Sun Shuxuan to be repaired, destroyed the temple of Jiang Ziwen, and at the same time asked the emperor to build and restore the school of the royal family and open a four-subject teaching.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇帝下诏同意这一建议。
English: He complied.

古文：先是，朝议有南伐之计，以萧宝夤为东扬州刺史，据东城；陈伯之为江州刺史，戍阳石。
现代文：起先，朝廷中商议南征的计划，任命萧宝夤为东扬州刺史，驻守东城；陈伯之为江州刺史，戍守于阳石。
English: At first, the plans for the Southern Expedition were discussed in the imperial court, and Xiao Baojun was appointed as the leader of the East Yangzhou Expedition and stationed in Dongcheng; Chen Boyi was appointed as the leader of the Jiangzhou Expedition and stationed in Yangshi.

古文：以澄总督二镇，授之节度。
现代文：任命元澄总督二镇，给予管辖指挥权。
English: Appointed the governor of two towns, giving him the power of command.

古文：澄于是遣统军傅竖眼、王神念等进次大岘、东关、九山、淮陵，皆分部诸将，倍道据之。
现代文：元澄便派遣统军傅竖眼、王神念等进军前往大岘、东关、九山、淮陵，分派诸将，日夜兼程占领这些地方。
English: Yuancheng then dispatched the leading generals Fu Xieyan, Wang Shennian and others to march to Dalat, Dongguan, Jiushan and Huairing, assigning generals to occupy these places day and night.

古文：澄总勒大众，络绎相接，所在克捷，诏书褒美。
现代文：元澄统率大军，络绎不绝，首尾相接，所到之处，捷报频传，朝廷下诏书予以表彰。
English: Yuan Chengtong led a large army, and they were incessantly in succession, one after another, and wherever they went, the news of their success was frequently spread, and they were commended by the imperial edict.

古文：既而遇雨，淮水暴长，澄引归寿春。
现代文：不久遇到大雨，淮河水暴涨，元澄领军回归寿春。
English: Soon after, heavy rain fell and the Huaihe River swelled, forcing the Yuancheng army to return to Shuchun.

古文：还既狼狈，失兵四千余人。
现代文：回兵时十分狼狈，损失兵士四千多人。
English: When the soldiers returned, they were very disheartened, having lost more than four thousand soldiers.

古文：澄频表解州，帝不许。
现代文：元澄连续上表请求免去扬州刺史的职务，皇帝不答应。
English: The emperor did not agree to Motosumi's continuous request to be relieved of his duties as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：有司奏夺其开府，又降三阶。
现代文：有关方面上奏，请求免去其开府名号，又降了三级。
English: Relevant parties appealed, requesting that the name of its founder be removed, and it was downgraded three levels.

古文：转镇北大将军、定州刺史。
现代文：转任镇北大将军、定州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of the general of Zhenbei University and the post of the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：初，百姓每有横调，恆烦苦之。
现代文：起先，这里的百姓常常被征收各种额外的赋税，他们都觉得烦恼愁苦。
English: At first, the people here were often burdened with all kinds of extra taxes, which made them feel sad.

古文：前后牧守未能蠲除，澄多所省减。
现代文：前任的州官未能免除。
English: A previous state official was not exonerated.

古文：又明黜陟赏罚之法，表减公园之地以给无业贫人，布绢不任衣者禁不听造，百姓欣赖焉。
现代文：元澄把这些负担大多减免了，又明订了各种奖罚升降的条令，上表请示朝廷，减少园林所占土地，分给无业的贫民，布绢不能当做衣服用的不让再织造，百姓们十分高兴和仰赖他。
English: Motosumi reduced and exempted most of these burdens, and clearly stipulated the regulations of various rewards and punishments, and requested the imperial court to reduce the land occupied by gardens, distribute it to the unemployed poor, and forbid the re-weaving of cloth that could not be used as clothing. The people were very happy and relied on him.

古文：母孟太妃薨，居丧过毁，当世称之。
现代文：他的母亲孟太妃去世，元澄在居丧期间，十分伤心，世人都称赞他的孝行。
English: When his mother, Princess Mengtaifi, passed away, Yuancheng was very sad during the mourning period, and the world praised his filial piety.

古文：服阕，除太子太保。
现代文：守丧期满，被任命为太子太保。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm.

古文：时高肇当朝，猜忌贤戚。
现代文：这时，高肇当政，猜忌有才能的皇亲国戚。
English: At this time, Gaozhao was in power, and he was suspicious of talented imperial relatives.

古文：澄为肇间构，常恐不全，乃终日昏饮，以示荒败。
现代文：元澄受到高肇的诬陷，经常害怕难以保全自身，便整天喝得醉醺醺地，以表示自己荒废颓唐。
English: Being framed by Gao Zhao, Yuancheng was often afraid that it would be difficult to protect himself, so he would get drunk all day long to show that he was a desolate man.

古文：所作诡越，时谓为狂。
现代文：他的行为奇特，被时人看作是狂荡不经。
English: His behaviour was peculiar and was regarded by contemporaries as wild.

古文：宣武夜崩，时事仓卒，高肇拥兵于外。明帝冲幼，朝野不安。
现代文：宣武帝在夜间去世，事情发生得十分突然，高肇在外面手握重兵，明帝年幼，朝野人心惶惶不安。
English: Emperor Xuanwu died in the night, the event happened very suddenly, Gao Zhao was holding a heavy army outside, Emperor Ming was young, and the government and the people were worried.

古文：澄虽疏斥，而朝望所属。
现代文：元澄虽然受到疏远罢斥，可是在朝中仍是众望所归。
English: Although he was ostracized and shunned, Motosumi remained a popular figure in the court.

古文：领军于忠、侍中崔光等奏澄为尚书令，于是众心欣服。
现代文：领军于忠、侍中崔光等奏请任命元澄为尚书令，于是众人才感到欣慰和信服。
English: Yu Zhong, the leader of the army, Choe Kwang, the chamberlain, and others petitioned for the appointment of Motosumi as Shosho Rei, and the people were gratified and convinced.

古文：寻迁司空，加侍中，俄诏领尚书令。
现代文：不久又改任司空、加侍中，随着又下诏兼领尚书令。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the posts of Jikku and Kaji no chu, and received the imperial edict as well as the imperial edict.

古文：登表上《皇诰宗制》并《训诂》各一卷，欲太后览之，思劝诫之益。
现代文：元澄向朝廷进上《皇诰宗制》和《训诂》各一卷，想让太后读后，多想想劝诫的益处。
English: Motosumi submitted to the imperial court one volume each of "Imperial Family System" and "Exegetical Precepts," hoping that the empress dowager would think more about the benefits of exhortation after reading them.

古文：又奏利国济人所宜振举者十条：一曰律度量衡，公私不同，所宜一之；二曰宜兴学校，以明黜陟之法；三曰宜兴灭继绝，各举所知；四曰五调之外，一不烦人，任人之力，不过三日；五曰临人之官，皆须黜陟，以旌赏罚；六曰逃亡代输，去来年久者，若非伎作，任听即住；七曰边兵逃走，或实陷没，皆须精检，三长及近亲，若实隐之，征其代输，不隐勿论；八曰工商世业之户，复征租调，无以堪济，今请免之，使专其业；九曰三长禁奸，不得隔越相领，户不满者，随近并合；十曰羽林武贲，边方有事，暂可赴战，常戍宜遣番兵代之。
现代文：又上奏有关利国利民所应注意去做的十条：一是度量衡应当一致，公家和私人目前不同，应当统一起来；二是应兴办学校，以明示提升和罢免的法规；三是应当兴灭国、继绝世，各举荐所了解的人才；四是在征收了五种赋调之外，一样也不再干扰民众，需使用民力的，不要超过三天；五是治理民众的官员，都应加以晋升或罢免，以示有赏有罚；六是逃亡户代缴租税的，离开原地时间已久的，如果不是工匠，应当允许他们居住下来；七是边境上的兵士已经逃跑的，或者确实已死于战场的，都应认真检查确实，三长和他们的近亲，如果确实加以隐藏，向他们征收应代缴的赋税，没有隐藏的就不要找他们的事；八是世代从事工商的人家，又向他们征收租调，他们就难以维持下去，请求从现在起免去他们的租调，让他们安心从事本业；九是严禁三长欺诈瞒骗，不得隔层相兼任职，户数不足的，就近合并；十是羽林军和武贲兵士，当边境发生战争时，可以暂时出征作战。
English: He also uploaded the ten articles that should be paid attention to in order to benefit the country and benefit the people: First, the measurement should be consistent, the public and private are currently different, and should be unified; Second, schools should be established, with explicit promotion and dismissal regulations; Third, the country should be revived and destroyed, and after the death of the country, the talents that are known should be recommended; Fourth, in addition to the five types of assignment, the same will no longer interfere with the people, and the need to use people's power should not exceed three days; Fifth, the officials who govern the people should be promoted or dismissed, to show that they have been rewarded or punished; Sixth,

古文：灵太后下其奏，百僚议之，事有同否。
现代文：正常时期的守边任务，应当派军队轮换驻守。灵太后把他的奏章批下来交百官们审议，这些条条有的被采纳有的被否决。
English: The task of defending the border in normal times should be to send troops to rotate the garrison. The Empress Dowager approved his report and submitted it to the officials for review. Some of these provisions were adopted and some were rejected.

古文：时四中郎将兵数寡弱，不足以襟带京师。
现代文：当时四方中郎将兵少势弱，不足以防守京城。
English: At that time, Shikata no churo had a small and weak army, which was not enough to defend the capital.

古文：澄奏宜以东中带荥阳郡，南中带鲁阳郡，西中带恆农郡，北中带河内郡，选二品、三品亲贤兼称者居之。省非急之作，配以强兵。
现代文：元澄上奏说，应当由东中郎将兼管荥阳郡，南中郎将兼管鲁阳郡，西中郎将兼管恒农郡，北中郎将兼管河内郡。挑选二品、三品中比较亲近和贤能的两者兼具的官员们担任，减少不急之务，给四中郎将配置强兵。
English: According to the report of Gencong Zangpo, it should be the East Middle Man who will also be in charge of Fenyang County, the South Middle Man who will also be in charge of Luyang County, the West Middle Man who will also be in charge of Hengnong County, and the North Middle Man who will also be in charge of Hanoi County. The officials who are both close and capable in the second and third grades will be selected to reduce the non-urgent tasks, and strong soldiers will be assigned to the fourth middle man.

古文：如此则深根固本，强干弱枝之义也。
现代文：这样就能够作到深根固本，主干强劲而枝叶减弱。
English: In this way, the roots can be deeply rooted, the trunk is strong, and the branches and leaves are weakened.

古文：灵太后将从之，从议者不同，乃止。
现代文：灵太后打算听从他的建议，可是因后来在商议中有不同的意见，便没有实行。
English: The Dowager Empress intended to follow his suggestion, but later, due to different opinions in the discussion, it was not implemented.

古文：寻以疾患，表求解任，不许。
现代文：不久，元澄因为有病，上表请求免去职务，朝廷不答应。
English: Soon after, Motosumi requested to be relieved of his duties because of his illness, but the Imperial Court did not agree.

古文：澄以北边镇将选举弥轻，恐贼虏窥边，山陵危迫，奏求重镇将之选，修警备之严，诏不从。
现代文：元澄又觉得北方边境挑选任用镇将时过于轻率，恐怕敌人入侵边境时，危及山陵，因此上奏朝廷请求认真选用北部的镇将，以严密防守警戒。朝廷不肯听从。
English: Motosumi also felt that the selection of the appointed town marshal on the northern border was too hasty, fearing that when the enemy invaded the border, it would endanger the mountains, so he petitioned the court to carefully select the northern town marshal and keep a close guard. The court would not listen.

古文：后贼虏入寇，至于旧都，镇将多非其人；所在叛乱，犯逼山陵，如澄所虑。
现代文：后来敌寇入侵，直到旧都城，而镇将们大多不称职，各处发生叛乱，进逼皇家陵园，确实像元澄原先担心的那样。
English: Later, enemy raiders invaded as far as the old capital city, and the town officials were mostly incompetent, there were rebellions everywhere, and they forced their way into the royal cemetery, just as Motosumi had originally feared.

古文：澄奏： 都城府寺犹未周悉，今军旅初宁，无宜发众，请取诸职人及司州郡县犯十杖以上、百鞭以下收赎之物，绢一匹输砖二百，以渐修造。 
现代文：元澄又上奏说 ：如今都城中府寺都没有建筑完备，现在军事稍停，不要再征召民众，请调用各杂务人员以及司州郡县中犯罪应责打十大板以上、百鞭以下之人改为收取赎罪之物，让交纳绢一匹、送砖二百块，以便逐渐修建。 
English: Motsumi also made a report, saying, "Nowadays, none of the temples in the capital city are fully built. Now, the military has stopped for a while. Don't conscript the people again. Please call in all the clerical staff, and those who have committed crimes in the prefectures and counties should be punished with more than ten boards and less than one hundred lashes. Instead, they should receive something to atone for their sins. Let them pay one yakitori and send two hundred bricks so that the construction can be carried out gradually."

古文：诏从之。
现代文：朝廷诏令听从办理。
English: He complied.

古文：太傅、清河王怿表驳其事，遂寝不行。
现代文：但太傅、清河王元怿上表反对这件事，因而未能实行。
English: However, Emperor Taifu and King Yuan of Qinghe opposed the matter at the table, so it could not be implemented.

古文：澄又奏： 司州牧、高阳王臣雍拷杀奉朝请韩元昭、前门下录事姚敬贤，虽因公事，理实未尽。
现代文：元澄又奏说： 司州牧、高阳王雍拷打奉朝请韩元昭、前门下录事姚敬贤致死，虽然是因公而办案，于理却不合。
English: Yuancheng also said: Sizhou Maki and Gaoyang Wangyong were tortured, and Han Yuan Zhao and Yao Jingxian, who was recorded at the front gate, were tortured to death. Although the case was handled for public interest, it did not conform to reason.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：若昭等状彰，死罪以定，应刑于都市，与众弃之。如其疑似不分，情理未究，不宜以三清九流之官，杖下便死，轻绝人命，伤理败法。
现代文：如果韩元昭等人罪恶昭彰，可定为死罪，就应当在都市中用刑，当众弃市；如果仅出于怀疑有罪，情况尚未查清，不应让三清九流之内的官员，死于杖下，草菅人命，伤理败法。
English: If Han Yuan Zhao and others are guilty of a crime that can be classified as a capital crime, they should be punished in the city and abandoned in public; if they are guilty only because of suspicion and the situation has not been clarified, they should not let the officials within the nine streams of the Third Qing Dynasty die under the cane, wasting human lives and ruining the law.

古文：往年在州，于大市鞭杀五人，及检贼状，全无寸尺。今复酷害，一至于此。
现代文：往年他在州中任职时，在大集市上鞭打致死五人，可是检查这些人的赃物，却没有一点证据。如今又酷刑伤人，竟至于此。
English: In previous years, when he was in office in the state, he had whipped five people to death in the bazaar, but when the stolen goods of these people were examined, there was no evidence.

古文：朝野云云，咸怀惊愕。
现代文：朝野议论纷纷，都觉得十分惊异。
English: There was a lot of chatter about Asano, which I found quite surprising.

古文：若生杀在下，虐专于臣，人君之权，安所复用？
现代文：如果生杀之权在下面，为臣子的可以专行暴虐，那么，国君的权力，又有什么用途？
English: If the power of life and death is below, for the vassal can be exclusively tyrannical, then what is the use of the sovereign's power?

古文：请以见事付廷尉推究，验其为劫之状，察其拷杀之理。 
现代文：请将这件事交付廷尉追究，检验他们逼迫的情形，追查他们被拷打致死的理由。 
English: Please refer this matter to the court marshal for investigation, examine the circumstances of their persecution, and find out why they were tortured to death.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：朝廷下诏听从。
English: He complied.

古文：澄当官无所回避。
现代文：元澄当官，对各种事情都不加回避。
English: When Motosumi was in office, he did not shy away from anything.

古文：又奏垦田授受之制八条，甚有纲贯。
现代文：他又上奏有关垦田中分配给人以及接受者之间的八条规定，很有条理。
English: He also mentioned the eight regulations concerning the distribution of rice and the recipients in the middle of the rice field, which is very systematic.

古文：西哉嚈哒、波斯诸国，各因公使，并遗澄骏马一匹。
现代文：西域的口厌哒、波斯各国，都通过他们的公使们送给元澄骏马一匹。
English: Through their envoys, the Western countries and the Persian countries all sent a horse to Yuancheng.

古文：澄请付太仆，以充国闲。
现代文：元澄请求交给太仆，充实到国家的马厩中。
English: Motosumi's request was handed over to the eunuch, and the money was put into the country's stables.

古文：诏曰： 王廉贞之德，有过楚相，可敕付厩，以成君子大哉之美。 
现代文：朝廷下诏： 任城王廉洁忠贞的品德，超过了楚相孙叔敖，可以让他交付马厩，以成就君子之大美。 
English: The imperial court issued a decree: Ren Chengwang's integrity and loyalty exceeded that of Chu Xiangsun Shuxuan, and he could be entrusted with the stables to achieve the great beauty of a gentleman.

古文：御史中尉、东平王匡奏请取景明元年以来内外考簿、吏部除书、中兵勋案并诸殿最，欲以案校窃阶盗官之人。
现代文：御史中尉、东平王元匡奏请朝廷，取出景明元年以来朝廷内外的考绩簿籍、吏部的任命官员登记册、中兵功勋登记簿和各种考核官吏的资料，准备从中检查出冒升官阶窃取官职的人员。
English: Lieutenant Mishi and Dongping Wangyuan Kuangso asked the imperial court to take out the performance appraisal books inside and outside the imperial court since the first year of Jingming, the registration of appointed officials of the personnel department, the registration of the merits of the Chinese soldiers and various materials of the appraisal officials, in order to check out the people who have risen in rank and stolen official positions.

古文：灵太后许之。
现代文：灵太后应许了他的请求。
English: The Dowager Empress granted his request.

古文：澄表以为 御史之体，风闻是司。
现代文：元澄上表认为： 御史的职责，根据传闻纠察。
English: Motosumi believes that the above table: the duty of the historian is to picket according to rumors.

古文：至于昌勋妄阶，皆有处别。
现代文：至于冒称功勋而得品级，各处情况不同。
English: As for obtaining a rank by pretending to be a meritorious person, the situation varies from place to place.

古文：若一处有风谣，即应摄其一簿，研检虚实。
现代文：如果传闻是某一处有问题，就应当检查这一部分的材料。
English: If the rumor is that there is a problem somewhere, this part of the material should be checked.

古文：若差殊不同，伪情自露，然后绳以典刑，人谁不服？
现代文：如果差别很大，虚假的情形必然败露，然后以典章刑法加以处置，谁敢不服？
English: If the difference is very large, the false situation will inevitably be exposed, and then it will be dealt with by the Criminal Law, who dares not accept it?

古文：岂有移一省之事，穷革世之尤，如此求过，谁堪其罪？
现代文：岂能因为某一处出现问题就全部追究已经隔代所发生的差错，这样追究过失，谁能承担罪责？
English: Is it possible that because of a problem in one place, all the mistakes that have occurred in the past generation can be investigated, and the fault can be investigated in this way. Who can bear the guilt?

古文：斯实圣朝所宜重慎也。 
现代文：这实在是圣朝所应慎重处置的大事啊！ 
English: This is really an important matter that should be handled carefully by the Holy Office!

古文：灵太后纳之，乃止。
现代文：灵太后采纳了他的意见，停止查办。
English: The Dowager Empress adopted his opinion and stopped the investigation.

古文：后迁司徒公，侍中、尚书令如故。
现代文：后来，又改任元澄为司徒公，侍中、尚书令依旧。
English: Later, he was reappointed as Motosumi to the position of Sotsuko, but he remained a chamberlain and a secretary.

古文：神龟元年，诏加女侍中貂蝉，同外侍中之饰。
现代文：神龟元年，朝廷下诏加赐女侍中们貂蝉，和宫廷外面的侍中服饰相同。
English: In the first year of the Kamakura period, the Imperial Court issued an edict that female attendants should wear the same dress as the attendants outside the court.

古文：澄上表谏曰： 高祖、世宗皆有女侍中官，未见缀金蝉于象珥，极鼲貂于鬓发。
现代文：元澄上表进谏说： 高祖、世宗时都有女侍中的官职，没有看见把金蝉连缀在象珥上，把鼠貂竖在鬓发上。
English: "When Gaozu and Shizong were young, they all had official positions as maids of honor, but they didn't see the gold cicadas attached to the elephant's beak, or the rat's beak attached to the beak's hair.

古文：江南伪晋穆何后有女尚书而加貂榼，此乃衰乱之世，妖妄之服。
现代文：江南伪晋时，穆何皇后曾经给女尚书的冠上加饰貂，这是衰乱的世道，妖异的服饰。
English: At the time of the Jiangnan pseudo-Jin Dynasty, Empress Mu He once decorated the crown of a woman's fashion book with a dragonfly, which is a decadent way of life and a strange costume.

古文：且妇人而服男子之服，至阴而阳，故自穆、哀以降，国统二绝。
现代文：况且由妇人来穿男子的服装，是阴盛到极点而转化为阳，所以从穆、哀帝之后，国家很快就灭亡了。
English: Moreover, when women started to wear men's clothing, it was the culmination of yin and yang, so the country soon perished after the death of Mu and Ai.

古文：因是刘裕所以篡逆。
现代文：因此刘裕能够篡权叛道。
English: Therefore, Liu Yu was able to usurp power and commit treason.

古文：礼容举措，风化之本，请依常仪，追还前诏。 
现代文：礼乐仪表，各种变化，是风化的本原，请求仍依照过去的礼仪，收回原来颁发的诏书。 
English: The etiquette, the various changes, are the origin of the weathering. The request is still in accordance with the etiquette of the past, to withdraw the original edict.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：时太后锐于兴缮，在京师则起永宁、太上公等佛寺，工费不少，外州各造五级佛图。
现代文：当时，灵太后非常喜欢大兴土木，在京城建起永宁、太上公等佛家寺庙，人力金钱耗费不少，在外地各州也都修建五层佛塔。
English: At that time, the Empress Dowager Ling was very fond of large-scale civil engineering. She built Buddhist temples such as Yongning and Dajangong in Beijing, which required a lot of manpower and money. Five-story pagodas were also built in other provinces.

古文：又数为一切斋会，施物动至万计。
现代文：又经常为各种斋会施舍财物，动则以万计。
English: In addition, he often donates money and goods to various fasting associations, and the amount is in the tens of thousands.

古文：百姓疲于土木之功，金银之价为之踊上。
现代文：老百姓因修建各种土木工程而疲惫不堪，金银的价格扶摇直上。
English: The people are exhausted from the construction of various civil engineering projects, and the prices of gold and silver are soaring.

古文：削夺百官禄力，费损库藏。
现代文：削减和侵夺百官们的俸禄和人力，耗费国库中积蓄的钱财。
English: Cutting and robbing the salaries and manpower of the centurions, draining the treasury of its savings.

古文：兼曲赉左右，日有数千。
现代文：同时，她又任意赏赐身边的人员，每天多达数千。
English: At the same time, she arbitrarily rewarded the people around her, up to thousands a day.

古文：澄上表极言得失。
现代文：元澄上表极力说明这些事的得失。
English: Motosumi went on the record to explain the pros and cons of these things.

古文：虽卒不从，常优答礼之。
现代文：虽然最终没有被采纳，但灵太后经常很客气而有礼貌地加以答复。
English: Although it was not finally accepted, the Reverend Mother often replied very politely and courteously.

古文：政无大小，皆引参预。
现代文：朝政事务，不论大小，都召他参与。
English: He is called upon to participate in the affairs of the Imperial Court, no matter how big or small.

古文：澄亦尽心匡辅，事有不便于人者，必于谏诤，殷勤不已，内外咸敬惮之。
现代文：元澄也尽心辅佐朝廷，凡是所办的事情于民众不利的，元澄必定竭力劝谏，十分认真，反复不断，朝廷内外人都敬重他并对他有所惧怕。
English: Motosumi also did his best to assist the imperial court. Whenever anything was done that was unfavorable to the people, Motosumi would do his best to persuade them, very seriously and repeatedly. People inside and outside the imperial court respected him and feared him.

古文：二年，薨，赠假黄钺、使持节、都督中外诸军事、太傅、领太尉公，加以殊礼，备九锡，依晋大司马齐王攸故事，谥曰文宣王。
现代文：神龟二年去世，追赠假黄钺、使持节、都督中外诸军事、太傅、领太尉公，给予特殊的礼遇，备有九锡，依照晋朝大司马齐王攸的作法，谥号为文宣王。
English: Shen Gui died two years later. He was posthumously awarded the title of "False Yellow Kite," "Ambassador of the Year of the Horse," "Military Governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces," "Grand Master" and "Grand Officer," and was given special courtesies. He was provided with nine pennies. His posthumous name was "Wen Xuan Wang" in accordance with the practice of the Grand Master of the Jin Dynasty, King Maqi You.

古文：澄之葬也，凶饰甚盛。灵太后亲送郊外，停舆悲哭，哀恸左右。
现代文：元澄安葬的时候，各种丧器都装饰得非常齐全，灵太后亲自送到郊外，停车悲伤地痛哭，悲哭之声感动了左右侍从们。
English: At the time of Yuancheng's burial, all kinds of funerary objects were decorated very well. The Reverend Mother personally sent them to the suburbs, where she stopped and wept with sadness. The sound of her weeping moved the attendants on both sides.

古文：百官会赴千余人，莫不欷歔，当时以为哀荣之极。
现代文：百官们前来参加丧礼的有一千多人，无不伤心地哭泣着，当时的人都认为这是丧礼中最为荣耀的一次了。
English: More than a thousand dignitaries came to attend the funeral, all of them weeping inconsolably. People at the time thought it was the most glorious of funerals.

古文：第四子彝袭。
现代文：元澄的第四位儿子彝承袭了他的爵位。
English: Motosumi's fourth son, Minoru, succeeded to his title.

古文：彝字子伦，继室冯氏所生，颇有父风。
现代文：元彝字子伦，是元澄的后妻冯氏所生的，颇有他父亲的风度。
English: Zi Lun, the son of Feng, the second wife of Yuan Zheng, had his father's demeanor.

古文：拜通直散骑常侍。
现代文：被任命为通直散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed as Tsuchida Sanshiro no Tsuneishi.

古文：及元叉专权而彝耻于托附，故不得显职。
现代文：当元叉专权时，元彝耻于依附他，所以得不到显要的职位。
English: When Yuan Shikai was in power, Yuan Shao was ashamed to be dependent on him, so he did not get a prominent position.

古文：庄帝初，河阴遇害。
现代文：庄帝初年，在河阴遇害。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was killed in Hebei Province.

古文：赠仪同三司、青州刺史，谥曰文。
现代文：追赠他仪同三司、青州刺史，谥为 文 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of the Third Division and the First Division of the Qingzhou Military Region.

古文：彝庶长兄顺，字子和。
现代文：元彝的庶长兄元顺，字子和。
English: Mototsune's eldest brother, Motoshin, and his son, Kazuko.

古文：年九岁，师事乐安陈丰，初书王羲之《小学篇》数千言，昼夜诵之，旬有五日，一皆通彻。
现代文：九岁那年，拜乐安的陈丰为老师。起初让他写王羲之的《小学篇》几千字，元顺日夜诵读，十五天以后，全部理解背诵得透彻。
English: At the age of nine, Chen Feng of Bai Le'an became his teacher. At first, he asked him to write several thousand words of Wang Xizhi's "Elementary School" and read it day and night. Fifteen days later, he understood and recited everything thoroughly.

古文：丰奇之。白澄曰： 丰十五从师，迄于白首，耳目所经，未见此比，江夏黄童不得无双也。 
现代文：陈丰十分惊讶，对元澄说： 我十五岁跟从老师学习，至今已白头了，耳目所见所闻，没有见到有人可和他相比，江夏的黄童不能无双啊！ 
English: Chen Feng was very surprised and said to Yuan Cheng: I was fifteen years old when I learned from my teacher, and I've been white-haired ever since. From what I've seen and heard, I haven't seen anyone who can be compared to him. The Yellow Boy of Jiangxia can't be without a match!

古文：澄笑曰： 蓝田生玉，何容不尔。 
现代文：元澄笑着说 ：蓝田生美玉，有什么不可以的！ 
English: Motosumi smiled and said, "Lantern raw gems, what's not to like!"

古文：十六通《杜氏春秋》，下帷读书，笃志爱古。
现代文：十六岁时，便精通《杜氏春秋》，他关门读书，十分喜好古籍。
English: At the age of sixteen, he was proficient in "Dushi Spring and Autumn," he closed the door to study, and was very fond of ancient books.

古文：性謇愕，淡于荣利，好饮酒，解鼓琴。
现代文：性情刚直，淡泊于名利荣誉，喜欢喝酒，会弹琴。
English: He has a straightforward temperament, is indifferent to fame and fortune, likes to drink, and can play the piano.

古文：每长吟永叹，托咏虚室。
现代文：他经常长吟咏叹，在空室中吟咏。
English: He often chants and sighs, and sings in empty rooms.

古文：宣武时，上《魏道颂》，文多不载。
现代文：宣武帝时，曾经献上《魏道颂》，可是文字大多没有载录下来。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuanwu, the "Ode to the Wei Dynasty" was presented, but most of the text was not recorded.

古文：起家为给事中。
现代文：开始当官任给事中。
English: He is in the middle of his first term in office.

古文：时高肇权重，天下人士望尘拜伏。
现代文：当时高肇手握大权，天下的士人都望尘拜伏。
English: At that time, Gaozhao held great power, and all the scholars in the world looked up to him.

古文：顺曾怀刺诣肇门，门者以其年少，答云： 在坐大有贵客 。
现代文：元顺曾经带着名帖到高肇门前，守门人因为元顺年纪小，就对他说： 在座的有许多贵客。 
English: Once, Yuan Shun came to Gaozhao's gate with a famous postcard. Since Yuan Shun was young, the gatekeeper said to him, "There are many distinguished guests here.

古文：不肯为通。
现代文：不肯替他通报。
English: He refused to inform on his behalf.

古文：顺叱之曰： 任城王兒可是贱也？ 
现代文：元顺喝斥他们，说： 任城王的儿子难道是低贱的吗？ 
English: Yuan Shun shouted at them, saying, "Is the son of the city's king a scoundrel?

古文：及见，直往登床，捧手抗礼，王公先达莫不怪慑；而顺辞吐傲然，若无所睹。
现代文：当进见高肇时，元顺直入上床，拱着手和高肇对等礼拜，那些王公贵人们无不感到怪异，而元顺言词高傲，仿佛谁都不在他的眼下。
English: When he went to see Gao Zhao, Yuan Shun went straight to bed, bowed his hands and prayed with Gao Zhao. Those princes and nobles all felt strange, while Yuan Shun spoke haughtily, as if no one was under his eyes.

古文：肇谓众宾曰： 此兒豪气尚尔，况其父乎！ 
现代文：高肇便对众宾客们说 ：这么小的孩子尚且豪气如此之壮，何况他的父亲！ 
English: Gao Zhao then said to the guests: Such a small child is still so strong-willed, not to mention his father!

古文：及去，肇加敬送之。
现代文：当他离开时，高肇特别尊重地礼送他。
English: When he left, Gaozhao gave him a special respectful gift.

古文：澄闻之大怒，杖之数十。
现代文：元澄知道以后大怒，打了他几十杖。
English: Knowing this, Motosumi flew into a rage and beat him with dozens of canes.

古文：后拜太常少卿，以父忧去职，哭泣欧血，身自负土。
现代文：后被任命为太常少卿，因父亲去世而离职，他悲伤痛哭直至吐血，亲自背土给父亲上坟。
English: Later, he was appointed as Tai Chang Shaoqing, but left the post due to his father's death. He cried bitterly with grief until he vomited blood, and went to visit his father's grave in person.

古文：时年二十五，便有白发，免丧抽去，不复更生，世人以为孝思所致。
现代文：当时他只有二十五岁，却已有了白发，当服丧期满后拔掉白头发，也就不再长出来，世人都认为是他的孝心所致。
English: At that time, he was only twenty-five years old, but he already had white hair. When the mourning period was over, he plucked out the white hair, and it no longer grew out. The world believed that it was due to his filial piety.

古文：寻除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久被任命为黄门侍郎。
English: He was soon appointed as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：时领军元叉威势尤盛，凡有迁授，莫不造门谢谒。
现代文：这时领军元叉声威权势最盛，所有升迁任职的人，无不登门拜谢求见。
English: At this time, the leader of the army, Yuan Zhaoxing, was at the height of his power, and everyone who was promoted to a higher position would come to his door to ask for a meeting.

古文：顺拜表而已，曾不诣叉。
现代文：元顺不过送去一份拜表而已，从不去拜见元叉。
English: Yuan Shun only sent a greeting card, but never went to meet Yuan Zhao.

古文：叉谓顺曰： 卿何得聊不见我？ 
现代文：元叉对元顺说 ：你依仗什么不来见我？ 
English: Yuan Zha said to Yuan Shun: What are you relying on not to come to see me?

古文：顺正色曰： 天子富于春秋，委政宗辅，叔父宜以至公为心，举士报国。
现代文：元顺很严肃正经地说： 天子年轻，将朝政大事委托于宗室辅政，叔父应当一心为公，荐举贤士，以报效国家。
English: Yuan Shun said gravely and seriously, "Since the Son of Heaven is young, he should entrust the important affairs of the imperial government to his father-in-law, the Vice-President, and his uncle should devote himself to public service, recommending the appointment of sages to serve the country.

古文：如何卖恩，责人私谢，岂所望也！ 
现代文：怎么可以私卖恩惠，要求人家私下向您道谢，这难道是朝廷所期望于您的吗？ 
English: How can you sell favors and ask people to thank you privately? Is this what the court expects of you?

古文：至于朝论得失，顺常鲠言正议，曾不阿旨。
现代文：至于在朝廷议论各种事情的得失时，元顺总是直言正议，从不违心地附和。
English: As for when the imperial court discussed the gains and losses of various things, Yuan Shun was always forthright and never went against his heart.

古文：由此见惮，出除恆州刺史。
现代文：他因此而受到一些人的惧怕，让他出任恒州刺史。
English: As a result, some people feared him and made him the chief historian of Hengzhou.

古文：顺谓叉曰： 北镇纷纭，方为国梗，请假都督，为国屏捍。 
现代文：元顺对元叉说： 北镇十分混乱，正是国家的祸患，请让我代理都督职务，替国家御敌。 
English: Yuan Shun said to Yuan Zha: Beizhen is very chaotic, it is the scourge of the country, please let me act as governor and fight the enemies of the country.

古文：叉心疑难，不欲授以兵官，谓顺曰： 此朝廷之事，非我所裁。 
现代文：元叉心中十分怀疑和为难，不想授给他兵权，便对元顺说： 这是朝廷决定的事情，不是我一人能够决定的。 
English: Genghis was very doubtful and perplexed in his heart and did not want to grant him military power, so he said to Yuan Shun: This is a matter decided by the imperial court, and I am not the only one who can decide.

古文：顺曰： 叔父既杀生由己，自言天历应在我躬，何得复有朝廷？ 
现代文：元顺说 ：叔叔既然声言生杀大权在自己一身，并且自己说天意已在自己了，哪里还有朝廷？ 
English: Yuan Shun said, "Since my uncle claims that he alone has the power of life and death, and since he says that he already has the will of heaven, where is the imperial court?

古文：叉弥忿惮之。
现代文：元叉听后更加恼怒和惧恨。
English: After hearing this, Yuan Xuan became even more angry and fearful.

古文：转齐州刺史。
现代文：又改任齐州刺史。
English: He was also appointed to the post of Chizhou chief historian.

古文：顺自负有才，不得居内，每怀郁怏，形于言色。
现代文：元顺自负有才干，却不能在朝廷任职，经常心中郁闷不乐，并以话语和表情反映出来。
English: Yuan Shun is conceited and talented, but unable to serve in the imperial court. He is often depressed and unhappy, which is reflected in his words and facial expressions.

古文：遂纵酒自娱，不亲政事。
现代文：于是他放纵于饮酒自乐，不亲理政事。
English: As a result, he indulged in drinking for pleasure and did not take part in political affairs.

古文：叉解领军，征为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：元叉被免除领军职务后，朝廷召他回去担任给事黄门侍郎职务。
English: After Yuan Zha was relieved of his duties as the leader of the army, the imperial court called him back to serve as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：亲友郊迎，贺其得入。
现代文：亲友们到郊外迎接他，祝贺他入朝任职。
English: His relatives and friends went to the suburbs to welcome him and congratulate him on his appointment to the post.

古文：顺曰： 不患不入，正恐入而复出耳。 
现代文：元顺说 ：我不担心不入朝廷，担心的是入而复出啊！ 
English: Yuan Shun said, "I'm not worried about not entering the imperial court, I'm worried about entering and coming back!"

古文：俄兼殿中尚书，转侍中。
现代文：不久便兼任殿中尚书，又转任侍中。
English: Soon he was also appointed to the post of courtier in the palace, and then to the post of chamberlain.

古文：初，中山王熙起兵讨元叉，不果而诛。
现代文：起先，中山王元熙起兵讨伐元叉，未能成功而被杀。
English: At first, the king of Zhongshan, Yuan Xi, raised an army to fight against Yuan Zhao, but he was unsuccessful and was killed.

古文：及灵太后反政，方得改葬。
现代文：当灵太后重新听政时，才得以改葬。
English: When the Dowager Empress regained her political position, she was able to be reburied.

古文：顺侍坐西游园，因奏太后曰： 臣昨往看中山家葬，非唯宗亲哀其冤酷，行路士庶见一家十丧，皆为青族旐，莫不酸泣。 
现代文：元顺在西游园侍坐时，便向灵太后上奏说： 微臣昨天去观看中山王家里的葬礼，不仅皇室宗亲都因他受到冤枉和酷刑而悲哀，而且在路上士民百姓见到一家十丧，都插着黑色的招魂幡，无不辛酸哭泣。 
English: While attending at the West Garden, Yuan Shun reported to the Empress Dowager: Yesterday, Weizhen went to watch the funeral at the home of King Zhongshan. Not only did the royal family mourn for the injustice and torture he suffered, but also the common people saw a family of ten mourners on the road, all wearing black banners and weeping bitterly.

古文：叉妻时在太后侧，顺指之曰： 陛下奈何以一妹之故，不伏元叉之罪，使天下怀冤？ 
现代文：当时元叉的妻子就坐在灵太后的身边，元顺指着她说 ：陛下怎么能因为一个妹妹的缘故而不追究元叉的罪状，让天下人都怀着冤情呢？ 
English: At that time, Yuan Zha's wife was sitting next to the Dowager Empress, and Yuan Shun pointed to her and said, "How can His Majesty not pursue Yuan Zha's guilt for the sake of a younger sister, so that the whole world will hold a grudge?"

古文：太后默然不语。
现代文：灵太后沉默着，不说一句话。
English: The Reverend Mother was silent, not saying a word.

古文：就德兴于营州反，使尚书卢同往讨之，大败而还。
现代文：就德兴在营州造反，朝廷派尚书卢同前去征讨，结果大败而回。
English: As for Dexing's rebellion in Yingzhou, the imperial court sent Shang Shulu to go and fight with him, but he was defeated and returned.

古文：属侍中穆绍与顺侍坐，因论同之罪。
现代文：这时，正好侍中穆绍和元顺都侍坐于灵太后身边，商议处置卢同的罪责。
English: At this time, it just so happened that the attendants, Musao and Yuan Shun, were both sitting next to the Empress Dowager, discussing the disposition of Lu Tong's culpability.

古文：同先有近宅借绍，绍颇欲为言。顺勃然曰： 卢同终将无罪！ 
现代文：卢同先前将近处的宅院借给穆绍，穆绍很想替卢同说好话，元顺生气地说： 卢同最后肯定不会有罪！ 
English: Lu Tong had previously lent Musho a nearby mansion. Musho was eager to speak well of Lu Tong, and Yuan Shun angrily said: Lu Tong will definitely not be guilty in the end!

古文：太后曰： 何得如侍中之言？ 
现代文：灵太后说： 侍中怎么会讲这种话？ 
English: The Reverend Mother said, "How could a chamberlain say such a thing?"

古文：顺曰： 同有好宅与要势侍中，岂虑罪也？ 
现代文：元顺说 ：卢同有好房子给了有权势的侍中，还怕被治罪吗？ 
English: Yuan Shun said: Lu Tong gave a good house to a powerful chamberlain, is he still afraid of being punished?

古文：绍惭，不敢复言。
现代文：穆绍听后十分羞愧，便不敢再替他说话了。
English: Moussaoui was so ashamed that he no longer dared to speak for him.

古文：灵太后颇事妆饰，数出游幸，顺面诤之曰： 礼，妇人丧夫，自称未亡人，首去珠珥，衣不被采。
现代文：灵太后颇喜欢装饰，还常常外出游玩。元顺当面直言进谏说： 按照礼节，妇女死去丈夫，应自称为未亡人，头上去掉珍珠玉珥，衣服不饰彩绣。
English: The Empress Dowager was quite fond of decoration, and often went out to play. Yuan Shun said directly to her: According to etiquette, when a woman's husband dies, she should call herself a widow, remove the pearl and jade bracelet from her head, and not decorate her clothes with embroidery.

古文：陛下母临天下，年垂不惑，过修容饰，何以示后世？ 
现代文：陛下以母仪而治理天下，已近不惑之年，却过于修整容貌和装饰，将如何为后世留下榜样？ 
English: How will His Majesty, who rules the world with a mother's rite, and who is almost old enough to be bewildered, but who is too well groomed and adorned, set an example for future generations?

古文：灵太后惭而还入，召顺责之曰： 千里相征，岂欲众中见辱也！ 
现代文：灵太后感到惭愧而回宫，她召来元顺责备说： 我从千里之外召你回朝，难道是想让你在大庭广众之中来羞辱我吗！ 
English: The Empress Dowager felt ashamed and returned to the palace. She summoned Yuan Shun and scolded him, saying, "I summoned you from thousands of miles away to return to the imperial court. Did I want you to humiliate me in front of the public?"

古文：顺曰： 陛下盛服炫容，不畏天下所笑，何耻臣之一言乎！ 
现代文：元顺说： 陛下身穿华衣丽服，炫耀自己容貌，并不怕受天下人的耻笑，又怎么会因为臣下的一句话而感到羞耻呢！ 
English: Yuan Shun said: His Majesty is dressed in gorgeous clothes, showing off his appearance, and is not afraid of being laughed at by the world. How can he be ashamed of a word from his subjects?

古文：初，城阳王徽慕顺才名，偏相赏纳。而广阳王深通徽妻于氏，大为嫌隙。
现代文：起初，城阳王元徽敬慕元顺的才名，格外欣赏并和他结交，而广阳王元深和元徽妻子于氏私通，两人有了仇隙。
English: At first, King Yuanhui of Chengyang admired the talent of Yuan Shun, especially appreciated and befriended him, while King Yuan Shen of Guangyang and the wife of Yuan Hui had a personal relationship with him, and the two had a feud.

古文：及深自定州被征，入为吏部尚书，兼中领军，顺为诏书，辞颇优美。
现代文：当元深从定州被征召入朝，担任吏部尚书兼中领军时，元顺起草了一份诏书，言辞中对元深加以褒美。
English: When Yuan Sheng was conscripted into the imperial court from Dingzhou and served as the leader of the army, Yuan Shun drafted an edict, praising Yuan Sheng in his speech.

古文：徽疑顺为深左右，由是与徐纥间顺于灵太后。出顺为护军将军、太常卿。
现代文：元徽就怀疑元顺是元深的心腹，于是就跟徐纥一起在灵太后的面前离间元顺，把元顺派出去担任护军将军、太常卿。
English: Yuan Hui suspected that Yuan Shun was a confidant of Yuan Sheng, so he and Xu Xi separated Yuan Shun in front of the Empress Dowager, and sent Yuan Shun out to serve as a general of the escort and the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：顺奉辞于西游园，徽、纥侍侧。顺指谓灵太后曰： 此人魏之宰嚭，魏国不灭，终不死亡。 
现代文：元顺在西游园向灵太后告辞时，元徽、徐纥正好在旁边侍奉，元顺指着他们对灵太后说： 这两人正是魏国的宰，魏国不灭，他们就不会死亡。 
English: When Yuan Shun bade farewell to the Empress Dowager in the West Garden, Yuan Hui and Xu Xi happened to be serving nearby. Yuan Shun pointed to them and said to the Empress Dowager: These two are the kings of Wei. If Wei does not perish, they will not die.

古文：纥协肩而出。顺因抗声叱之曰： 一介刀笔小人，正堪为几案之吏，宁应忝兹执戟，亏我彝伦！ 
现代文：徐纥缩着肩膀走出去，元顺便高声叱责他说： 一个用刀笔的小人，只配当书案中的小吏，怎么能够让他在这里手执戟杖，害我伦常呢？ 
English: Xu Yao shrugged his shoulders and walked out. Yuan, by the way, scolded him in a loud voice, saying: A villain who uses a knife and pen is only worthy of a minor official in a book case. How can he be allowed to hold a cane here and harm me?

古文：遂振衣而起。
现代文：于是振衣而起。
English: That's when things really took off.

古文：灵太后默而不言。
现代文：灵太后沉默着不说话。
English: The Reverend Mother was silent and did not speak.

古文：时追论顺父顾托之功，增任城王彝邑二千户，又析彝邑五百以封顺为东阿县公。
现代文：当时有人追论元顺的父亲受先帝嘱托而辅佐朝政的功勋，增封给任城王元彝食邑二千户，又分元彝的食邑五百户用来加封元顺为东阿县公。
English: At that time, some people argued that the father of Yuan Shun was entrusted by the former emperor to assist the government of the dynasty, and 2,000 households in the food village of Yuan Shun, the king of the city, were given additional fiefs, and 500 households in the food village of Yuan Shun were used to add Yuan Shun to Donga County.

古文：顺疾徽等间之，遂为《苍蝇赋》。属疾在家，杜绝庆吊。
现代文：元顺憎恨元徽等离间他和朝廷的关系，便写了一篇《苍蝇赋》，称病在家，杜绝和外人一切交往。
English: Yuan Shun hated Yuan Hui and his relationship with the imperial court, so he wrote a "Fly Fu," saying that he was sick at home and cut off all contacts with outsiders.

古文：后除吏部尚书，兼右仆射，与城阳王徽同日拜职。
现代文：后被任命为吏部尚书，兼右仆射，和城阳王元徽同日被任命。
English: After that, he was appointed as the official of Shangshu, concurrently the right-hand man of Jia, and the same day he was appointed as the king of Chengyang and Yuanhui.

古文：舍人郑俨于止车门外先谒徽，后拜顺。
现代文：舍人郑俨在止车门外先谒见元徽，然后拜见元顺。
English: Zheng Yao, the caretaker, first met with Yuan Hui outside the car door, and then met with Yuan Shun.

古文：顺怒曰： 卿是佞人，当拜佞王。
现代文：元顺大怒，说： 你是个佞人，当然先拜佞王。
English: Yuan Shun flew into a rage and said, "You are a Jurchen, of course you must first bow to the Jurchen king."

古文：我是直人，不受曲拜。 
现代文：我是个直人，不接受曲人的拜见。 
English: I'm a straightforward person, and I don't accept visits from con artists.

古文：俨深怀谢。
现代文：郑俨再三表示谢罪。
English: Zheng Rong repeatedly expressed his remorse.

古文：顺曰： 卿是高门子弟，而为北宫幸臣，仆射李思冲尚与王洛诚同传，以此度之，卿亦应继其卷下。 
现代文：元顺说 ：你是高门大家子弟，却成为北宫的宠臣，仆射李思冲还跟王洛诚合写在一篇传记中，按照这种估计，你也将续写在同卷的后面。 
English: Yuan Shun said: You are the eldest son of Gao Men, but you have become the favorite of the Northern Palace. Li Sicong, the servant, also co-wrote a biography with Wang Loc Cheng. According to this estimation, you will also continue to write in the back of the same volume.

古文：见者为之震动，而顺安然自得。
现代文：见到这件事的人都十分震惊，而元顺却安然自若。
English: People who saw the incident were very shocked, but Yuan Shun remained calm.

古文：及上省，登阶向榻，见榻甚故，问都令史徐仵起。
现代文：当他上吏部办事，登上台阶，走向座榻时，看见榻床很旧，便责问都令史徐仵起。
English: When he went to do his work in the cadre department, climbed the steps and walked to the bed, he saw that the bed was very old, so he scolded Shi Xu to get up.

古文：仵起曰： 此榻曾经先王坐。 
现代文：徐仵起说 ：这个榻曾经被先王坐过。 
English: Xu Bingqi said: This couch was once sat on by the former king.

古文：顺即哽塞，涕泗交流，久而不能言，遂令换之。
现代文：元顺当即咽喉哽塞，眼泪鼻涕都交流而下，很久说不出话来，于是，他让人把座榻换过了。
English: Mr. Yuan's throat immediately choked up, tears and snot ran down his face, and he couldn't speak for a long time, so he asked someone to change his bed.

古文：时三公曹令史硃晖素事录尚书、高阳王雍，雍欲以为廷尉评，频烦托顺，顺不为用。
现代文：当时，三公曹令史朱晖一向侍奉录尚书事、高阳王元雍，元雍想让他担任廷尉评，多次托人告诉元顺，元顺不肯委任他。
English: At that time, the three princes ordered Shi Zhu Xi to always serve the record of Shang Shuji and the high yang king Yuan Yong. Yuan Yong wanted him to serve as a courtier, and he repeatedly told Yuan Shun that Yuan Shun would not appoint him.

古文：雍遂下命用之，顺投之于地。
现代文：元雍便下令让元顺必须任用，元顺将元雍的命令扔到地上，元雍听说以后，大怒。
English: Yuan Yong ordered that Yuan Shun must be appointed. Yuan Shun threw Yuan Yong's order to the ground. After hearing this, Yuan Yong flew into a rage.

古文：雍闻之，大怒，昧爽坐都，召尚书及丞郎毕集，欲待顺至，于众挫之。
现代文：第二天早上，他坐在都厅上，召集尚书们和丞、郎等所有官员，准备等元顺到达时，当众给他下马威。
English: The next morning, he sat in the hall of the capital and called together all the officials, including Shang Shulun, his son-in-law, and his son-in-law, to prepare for when Yuan Shun arrived and to publicly give him orders.

古文：顺日高方至。
现代文：元顺却等到太阳很高的时候才来到。
English: However, Genshun did not come until the sun was high in the sky.

古文：雍攘袂抚几而言曰： 身天子之子，天子之弟，天子之叔，天子之相，四海之内，亲尊莫二。元顺何人，以身成命投弃于地！ 
现代文：元雍卷起衣袖按着桌子，对元顺说： 我身为天子的儿子、天子的弟弟、天子的叔叔、天子的宰相，四海之内，这样的亲近和尊贵是独一无二的，你元顺是什么样的人，竟敢把我写好的命令扔到地上！ 
English: Yuan Yong rolled up his sleeves and put them on the table and said to Yuan Shun: I am the son of the Son of Heaven, the brother of the Son of Heaven, the uncle of the Son of Heaven, the prime minister of the Son of Heaven. Within the four seas, such closeness and nobility is unique. What kind of person are you, Yuan Shun, that you dare to throw my written orders on the ground!

古文：顺须鬓俱张，仰面看屋，愤气奔涌，长歔而不言。
现代文：元顺当即鬓发都竖立起来，怒气在胸中奔涌，长嘘一声，并不说话。
English: Yuan Shun immediately stood up with his hair standing on end, his anger surging in his chest. He did not speak for a long time.

古文：久之，摇一白羽扇，徐而谓雍曰： 高祖迁宅中土，创定九流，官方清浊，轨仪万古。
现代文：过了好久，他才摇动一把白羽毛扇，缓缓地对元雍说： 高祖迁都中原，创定九流官制，官分清流和浊流，作为万古的定制。
English: After a long time, he shook a white feather fan and slowly said to Yuan Yong: Gaozhu moved the capital to the Central Plains, creating a nine-stream official system, distinguishing between clear flow and turbulent flow, as a custom for all time.

古文：而硃晖小人，身为省吏，何合为廷尉清官？
现代文：而朱晖不过是个小人，身为省吏，怎么适合担任廷尉这样的清流官？
English: But Zhu Xi is nothing more than a villain. As a provincial official, how is he fit to serve as a magistrate?

古文：殿下既先皇同气，诚宜遵旨，自有恆规，而复逾之也？ 
现代文：殿下既然是和先皇同出的，就应当遵从他的旨意，自有常规可循，怎么能加以违抗呢？ 
English: Since His Imperial Highness is from the same lineage as the former emperor, he should follow his wishes, he has his own rules to follow, how can he defy them?

古文：雍曰： 身为丞相、录尚书，如何不得用一人为官？ 
现代文：元雍说： 我身为丞相、录尚书事，怎么不能任命一个人当官？ 
English: Yuan Yong said, "As I am the prime minister and the chief secretary, how can I not appoint a person as an official?"

古文：顺曰： 庖人虽不理庖，尸祝不越樽俎而代之。
现代文：元顺说 ：厨子即使不去做饭，也不能让专管祭祀的尸祝越俎代庖啊！
English: Yuan Shun said, "Even if the cook doesn't cook, we can't let the person in charge of the sacrificial rites get away with it!"

古文：未闻有别旨令殿下参选事。 
现代文：我没有听说朝廷有旨意让您参与选用官员的事情。 
English: I haven't heard anything about the imperial court wanting you to participate in the selection of officials.

古文：顺又厉声曰： 殿下必如是，顺当依事奏闻。 
现代文：说完，元顺又高声而口气十分严厉地说： 殿下如果一定要这样做，我自当把这件事详细奏明朝廷。 
English: At the end of his speech, Yuan Shun said loudly and sternly, "Your Highness, if I must do this, I will report the matter to the imperial court in detail.

古文：雍遂笑而言曰： 岂可以硃晖小人，便相忿恨。 
现代文：元雍于是大笑起来，说道 ：怎么能因为朱晖一个小人，而使我们相互怨恨呢！ 
English: Yuan Yong laughed loudly and said, "How can we hate each other because Zhu Xi is a small person?"

古文：遂起，呼顺入室，与之极饮。
现代文：他便站起来，喊元顺和他一起进入内室，设宴和他畅饮。
English: He then stood up and called for Yuan Shun to come into the inner room with him, set up a banquet and drink with him.

古文：顺之亢毅不挠，皆此类也。
现代文：元顺的不屈不挠的故事，都和这事相类似。
English: The story of Genshun's perseverance is similar.

古文：后兼左仆射。
现代文：后来，他又兼左仆射。
English: Later, he was also a left-handed shooter.

古文：氽硃荣之奉庄帝，召百官悉至河阴。素闻顺数谏诤，惜其亮直，谓硃瑞曰： 可语元仆射，但在省，不须来。 
现代文：尔朱荣拥立庄帝时，把百官们都召集到河阴去，他一向听说元顺多次直言进谏，爱惜他是个刚正的人，便对朱瑞说 ：可以告诉元仆射，让他在吏部理事，不要前来。 
English: When Emperor Zhu Rong was enthroned, he summoned all the officials to Heyin. He had always heard that Yuan Shun had been outspoken many times, and regretted that he was an upright person. So he said to Zhu Rui, "You can tell Yuan Shao, let him be the director of the personnel department, and don't come."

古文：顺不达其旨，闻害衣冠，遂便出走，为陵户鲜于康奴所害。
现代文：元顺不明白他的意思，当听说杀害了百官时，便立即出走，被陵户鲜于康奴杀害。
English: Yuan Shun didn't understand what he meant, and when he heard that a hundred officials had been killed, he immediately ran away and was killed by the mausoleum's owner, Xian Yu Kangnu.

古文：家徒四壁，无物佥，止有书数千卷而已。门下通事令史王才达裂裳覆之。
现代文：他家穷得只有四堵墙壁，没有东西可收殓，只有几千卷书而已，门下通事令史王才达撕开衣裳把他的尸体盖住。
English: His family was so poor that they had only four walls, nothing to store, and only a few thousand volumes of books. A passer-by told Shi Wangcai to tear open his clothes and cover his body.

古文：庄帝还宫，遣黄门侍郎山伟巡喻京邑。
现代文：庄帝回宫，派黄门侍郎山伟巡视京城。
English: Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace and sent Huangmen chamberlain Shan Wei to inspect the capital.

古文：伟临顺丧，悲恸无已。
现代文：山伟参加了元顺的葬礼，悲伤得难以自制。
English: Shan Wei attended Yuan Shun's funeral and was overcome with grief.

古文：既还，庄帝怪其声散，伟以状对。
现代文：回到朝廷后庄帝很奇怪，问他怎么声音嘶哑了，山伟将实情报告庄帝。
English: After returning to the court, Zhuang Di was very strange. When he asked why his voice was hoarse, Shan Wei reported the truth to Zhuang Di.

古文：庄帝敕侍中元祉曰： 宗室丧亡非一，不可周赡。
现代文：庄帝对侍中元祉说 ：宗室死亡的不是一二人而已，不可能全部赈济他们。
English: Zhuangdi said to the chamberlain Yuan Zhi: "The death of the family was not just one or two people, it is impossible to help them all.

古文：元仆射清苦之节，死乃益彰，特赠绢百匹，余不得为例。 
现代文：元仆射清苦的情形，死而更为显彰，特赐给绢百匹，其余人不得为例。 
English: In the case of a former servant who had been shot and died, the situation was even more conspicuous, and he was specially given a hundred horses, and the rest of the people could not be taken as an example.

古文：赠尚书令、司徒公，谥曰文烈。
现代文：赠尚书令、司徒公，谥为 文烈 。
English: He was given the posthumous titles of Shang Shuling, Sitou Gong, and Wen Rong.

古文：初，帝在籓，顺梦一段黑云从西北直来，触东南上日月俱破，复翳诸星，天地尽暗。
现代文：起初，庄帝还是藩王时，元顺梦见有一片黑云从西北直压过来，把东南方向上的日月都压碎了，又遮住满天星斗，天地一片昏黑。
English: At first, when Zhuangdi was still the king of the domain, Yuan Shun dreamed of a black cloud coming straight down from the northwest, crushing the sun and moon in the southeast direction, covering the sky with stars, and the world was dark.

古文：俄而云消雾散，便有日出自西南隅，甚明净，云长乐王日。
现代文：不久，云消雾散，便有一轮红日从西南角升起，很是明亮，并说是长乐王的日头。
English: Soon, the clouds dissipated, and a red sun rose from the southwest corner, very bright, and said to be the sun of Changle Wang.

古文：寻见庄帝从阊阖门入，登太极殿，唱万岁者三，百官咸加朝服谒帝，唯顺集书省步廊西槐树下，脱衣冠卧。
现代文：不久便看见庄帝从阊阖门入宫，登上太极殿，三呼万岁之后，百官都身穿朝服拜见皇帝，只有元顺在集书省走廊西边的槐树下，脱了衣服和帽子睡卧着。
English: Soon he saw Emperor Zhuang enter the palace through the main gate and ascend to the Taiji Hall. After three cheers, all the officials wore court dress to pay homage to the emperor. Only Yuan Shun, under the eucalyptus tree on the west side of the corridor of the Provincial Library, took off his clothes and hat and lay down to sleep.

古文：既寤，告元晖业曰： 吾昨夜梦，于我殊自不佳。 
现代文：醒来之后，他告诉元晖业说： 我昨晚做了个梦，对我很不利。 
English: After he woke up, he told Yuan Xuanye: "I had a bad dream last night.

古文：说梦，因解之曰： 黑云，气之恶者，是北方之色，终当必有北敌，以乱京师，害二宫，残毁百僚。
现代文：他便说了梦中情景，同时解说道： 黑云，是气中凶恶的东西，也是北方的色彩，最终必定有北方来的敌人祸乱京城，残害二宫，杀害百官。
English: He then described the scene in the dream, and at the same time explained: The black cloud is a vicious thing in the air, and it is also the color of the north. In the end, there must be an enemy from the north to wreak havoc on the capital, destroy the Second Palace, and kill hundreds of officials.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：日，君象也。月，后象也。众星，百官象也。
现代文：日，是国君的象征；月，是皇后的象征；众星，是百官的象征。
English: The sun is the symbol of the sovereign; the moon is the symbol of the empress; the stars are the symbols of the officials.

古文：以此言之，京邑其当祸乎？
现代文：按照这样来看，京城恐要遭到祸患了吧！
English: According to this view, the capital is likely to suffer a disaster!

古文：昔刘曜破晋室以为髑髅台，前途之事，得无此乎？
现代文：过去刘曜攻破晋朝，使之成为髑髅台，展望前程，莫非也会这样吗？
English: In the past, Liu You broke through the Jin Dynasty and made it a battleground. Looking ahead, will it be the same?

古文：虽然，彭城王勰有文德于天下，今梦其兒为天子，积德必报，此必然矣！
现代文：虽说这样，彭城王勰有文德，传于天下，如今梦见他的儿子当了天子，积德的人一定有报应，这也是必然的事情。
English: In spite of this, the Pengcheng Emperor was a man of great virtue, which was passed down to the world. Now, he dreamed that his son had become the Son of Heaven. People with great virtue must have retribution, which is also an inevitable thing.

古文：但恨其得之不久。
现代文：只是遗憾他在位时间不长。
English: It's just a pity he didn't last longer.

古文：所以然者，出自西南，以时易年，不过三载。
现代文：我所以这样说，是因为他是从西南而出的。以时辰计算年数，也不过三年而已。
English: I say this because he comes from the south-west, and in terms of years, it's only been three.

古文：但恨我不见之。
现代文：但只恨我不能亲眼见到。
English: But I hate that I can't see it with my own eyes.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢！
English: Why is that?

古文：我梦卧槐树下，槐字木傍鬼，身与鬼并，复解冠冕，此宁不死乎！
现代文：我梦见自己躺在槐树底下，槐字在木的旁边是个鬼字，身子和鬼相并，又脱去衣冠，这还能不死吗！
English: I dreamt that I was lying under an elm tree, the swastika next to the tree was a ghost, my body was the same as the ghost, and I had taken off my clothes. How could I not die!

古文：然亡后乃得三公赠耳。 
现代文：不过死后能得到三公的追赠吧！ 
English: However, if you die, you can get a posthumous gift from the three dukes!

古文：皆如其梦。
现代文：后来果然都和他的梦相符。
English: Later, they all matched his dream.

古文：顺撰《帝录》二十卷，诗赋表颂数十篇，并多亡失。
现代文：元顺曾撰有《帝录》二十卷，诗、赋、表、颂几十篇，大多佚亡了。
English: Yuan Shun once wrote twenty volumes of "Imperial Records" and dozens of poems, fus, tables, and odes, most of which have been lost.

古文：长子朗，时年十七，枕戈潜伏积年，乃手刃康奴，以首祭顺墓，然后诣阙请罪。
现代文：元顺的长子元朗，当时年纪十七岁，他枕戈潜伏了许多时间，最后亲手杀了康奴，将他的头颅祭祀于元顺墓前，然后到朝廷请罪。
English: Yuen Long, the eldest son of Yuan Shun, who was 17 years old at the time, hid under his pillow for a long time, and finally killed Kang Niu with his own hands, sacrificed his head in front of Yuan Shun's tomb, and then went to the imperial court to plead guilty.

古文：朝廷嘉而不问。
现代文：朝廷嘉勉他的作为，不予问罪。
English: The Imperial Court commended his actions and did not charge him with a crime.

古文：朗位司徒属。
现代文：元朗后来任司徒属官。
English: Yuen Long later served as a subordinate officer of the State Council.

古文：天平中，为奴所害，赠尚书右仆射。
现代文：天平年间，被他的奴仆所杀，追赠为尚书右仆射。
English: During the Heian period, he was killed by his slave, and was posthumously given to his right-hand man, Sho Sho.

古文：顺弟纪，字子纲，随孝武入关中，位尚书左仆射、华山郡王。
现代文：元顺的弟弟元纪，字子纲，他追随孝武帝进入关中，任尚书左仆射，华山郡王。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Shun, Yuan Ji, Zizi Gang, he followed Emperor Xiaowu into Guanzhong, was appointed as the left-hand servant of Shang Shu, and the king of Huashan County.

古文：澄弟嵩，字道岳，孝文时，位步兵校尉。
现代文：元澄的弟弟元嵩，字道岳，孝文帝时，任步兵校尉、大司马。
English: The younger brother of Motosumi, Mototake, also known as Dōgaku, served as an infantry captain and grand steward during the reign of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：大司马、安定王休薨，未及卒哭，嵩便游田。
现代文：安定王休去世时，人家还没有哭完，他就出去游玩打猎。
English: When Wang Xiu passed away, people had not finished crying, and he went out to play and hunt.

古文：帝闻而大怒，诏曰： 嵩，大司马薨殂甫尔，便以鹰鹞自娱，有如父之痛，无犹子之情，捐心弃礼，何其太速！
现代文：皇帝知道以后，大为恼怒，下诏说： 元嵩，大司马刚刚去世，你带着鹰鹞打猎寻乐，应是有如丧父之悲痛，而你却没有像儿子一样的感情，丧心失礼，怎么这么快！
English: When the emperor learned of this, he was very angry, and issued the following edict: "Yuan Song, Da Sima has just passed away. Your hunting with eagle beak for fun should be like the grief of losing your father, but you don't have the same feelings as your son. It's disrespectful to lose heart so quickly!

古文：便可免官。 
现代文：便可免官。 
English: He can be dismissed from his post.

古文：后兼武卫将军。
现代文：后来又兼任武卫将军。
English: Later, he also held the post of General Takei.

古文：孝文南伐，齐将陈显达率众拒战，嵩身备三仗，免胄直前，勇冠三军。将士从之，显达奔溃。
现代文：孝文帝南征时，齐将陈显达率兵抵抗，元嵩亲自三次参加战斗，他脱去甲胄，勇往直前，勇冠三军，将士们都跟着他冲向敌人，陈显达军队败退散去。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen marched to the south, Qi dispatched Chen Xianda to lead the troops to resist. Yuan Song personally took part in the battle three times. He took off his armor and bravely marched forward, leading the three armies. The soldiers all rushed to the enemy with him. Chen Xianda's army was defeated and dispersed.

古文：帝大悦曰： 任城康王大有福德，文武顿出其门。 
现代文：孝文帝十分高兴地说 ：任城康王真有福气和积德，文武人才都出自他一门。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen was very pleased and said, "Rencheng Kangwang is truly blessed and virtuous, and all literary and military talents come from him."

古文：以功赐爵高平县侯。
现代文：因为功勋被赐封为高平县侯。
English: Because of his meritorious service, he was given the title of Lord of Takahira County.

古文：初，孝文之发洛也，冯皇后以罪幽于宫内。
现代文：起初，孝文帝从洛阳出兵时，冯皇后因罪而被关在宫内。
English: At first, when Emperor Xiaowen sent troops from Luoyang, Empress Feng was imprisoned in the palace for a crime.

古文：既平显达，回次谷唐原，帝疾甚，将赐后死，曰： 使人不易可得。 
现代文：当打败陈显达以后，回军至谷唐原，皇帝病危，准备赐冯皇后死。说 ：找一位合适的人不容易。 
English: After defeating Chen Xianda, the army returned to the valley of Tangyuan. The emperor was critically ill and prepared to have Empress Feng die. He said, "It's not easy to find a suitable person."

古文：顾谓任城王澄曰： 任城必不负我，嵩亦当不负任城，可使嵩也。 
现代文：皇帝望着任城王元澄说 ：任城王一定不会辜负我的，元嵩也必定不会有负于任城王，可派元嵩去。 
English: The emperor looked at the king of Rencheng, Yuancheng, and said, "The king of Rencheng will not fail me, and the king of Yuancheng will not fail the king of Rencheng. You can send Yuancheng."

古文：于是引嵩入内，亲诏遣之。
现代文：于是召元嵩入内，亲自将诏书交给他。
English: Therefore, he summoned Mototsune to the palace and personally handed over the imperial edict to him.

古文：宣武即位，为扬州刺史，威名大振。
现代文：宣武帝即位时，任命他为扬州刺史，威名大振。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu ascended the throne, he appointed him as Yangzhou chief historian, and his reputation was greatly enhanced.

古文：赠太尉，谥曰躁戾。
现代文：后来他和妻子穆氏同时被仆人李太伯等杀害。谥为 刚侯 。
English: Later, he and his wife Mu were killed at the same time by their servant Li Tai Bo and others.

古文：南安王桢，皇兴二年封。
现代文：南安王元桢，是皇兴二年所封的。
English: Nan'an Wang Yuanqi, was crowned in the second year of Emperor Xing.

古文：孝文时，累迁长安镇都大将、雍州刺史。
现代文：孝文帝时，累迁任长安镇都大将、雍州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, he was successively appointed as the general of Chang'an Town and the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：桢性忠谨。
现代文：元桢性情忠厚谨慎。
English: Geng Yao was loyal and prudent.

古文：其母疾笃，忧毁异常，遂有白雉游其庭前。
现代文：他母亲病危时，他悲伤异常，于是有白雉来停歇在门前。
English: When his mother was dying, he was so sad that a white stork came to rest in front of the door.

古文：帝闻其致感，赐帛千匹以褒美之。
现代文：皇帝知道以后十分感动，赐给他千匹帛加以奖赏。
English: The emperor was very moved when he found out, and rewarded him with a thousand yakitori.

古文：征赴讲武，引见于皇信堂，戒之曰： 公孝行著于私庭，令问彰于邦国，既国之懿亲，终无贫贱之虑。
现代文：召他前往讲习武艺，在皇信堂接见他，并告诫他说： 你的孝行闻名于民间，美誉显彰于邦国，既是宗室至亲，终不必担心会贫贱。
English: He summoned him to attend a martial arts class, received him at the Emperor's Hall, and admonished him: Your filial piety is famous among the people, and your reputation is prominent in the country. Since you are the closest relative of the family, you don't have to worry about being poor.

古文：所宜慎者略有三事：一者恃亲骄矜，违礼僭度；二者傲慢贪奢，不恤政事；三者饮酒游逸，不择交友。
现代文：所应当注意的有三件事：一是自恃宗室至亲而骄傲自大，违反礼节和超越常度；二是傲慢贪婪奢侈，不认真处理政务；三是饮酒游乐，不加选择交结朋友。
English: There are three things that should be noted: First, pride and arrogance, violating etiquette and transcending the norm by claiming to be the closest relative; second, arrogance, greed and extravagance, not seriously handling government affairs; third, drinking and amusement, and making friends without choice.

古文：三者不去，患祸将生。 
现代文：这三方面不除去，将会产生祸患。 
English: If these three aspects are not eliminated, disasters will occur.

古文：而桢不能遵奉，后乃聚敛肆情。
现代文：可是，元桢未能遵从皇帝的劝诫，后来更加肆意聚敛钱财。
English: However, Yuan Shao failed to follow the emperor's admonition, and later he amassed even more wealth.

古文：孝文以桢孝养闻名内外，特加原恕，削除封爵，以庶人归第，禁锢终身。
现代文：孝文帝因为他曾以孝养母亲而闻名于朝廷内外，特地宽恕了他，只削除封爵，以平民回家闲居，软禁终身。
English: Emperor Xiaowen, because he was famous for his filial piety to his mother both inside and outside the court, specially pardoned him, only removed his knighthood, went home to idle with civilians, and was under house arrest for life.

古文：以议定迁都，复封南安王，为镇北大将军、相州刺史。帝饯桢于华林都亭，诏并赋诗。不能者，并可听射，当使武士弯弓，文人下笔。
现代文：后因议定迁都事，又被封为南安王，任镇北大将军、相州刺史，皇帝在华林都亭给元桢饯行，下令所有人都要赋诗，不会写诗的，可以让他们射箭，一定要让武士弯弓射箭，文人下笔赋诗。
English: Later, due to the agreed relocation of the capital, he was also named the King of Nan'an, appointed the General of Zhenbei and the Historian of Xiangzhou. The emperor gave Yuanming a tour in the capital of Hualin, and ordered all people to write poems. Those who can't write poems can let them shoot arrows, and must let the samurai bend the bow and shoot arrows, and the literati write poems.

古文：帝送桢下阶，流涕而别。
现代文：皇帝送元桢走下台阶时，流着泪和他告别。
English: When the emperor sent Yuan Xuan down the steps, he bade him farewell with tears.

古文：太和二十年五月，至鄴。
现代文：太和二十年五月，元桢到达邺城。
English: In May of the 20th year of the Taisho era, Yuan Shao arrived in Shicheng.

古文：上日，暴雨大风，冻死者数十人。
现代文：到达的前一天，下暴雨刮大风，冻死了几十人。
English: The day before their arrival, torrential rain and high winds caused dozens of people to freeze to death.

古文：桢又以旱，祈雨于群神。
现代文：元桢后因旱情，向群神祈祷求雨。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty, due to the drought, they prayed to the gods for rain.

古文：鄴城有石季龙庙，人奉祀之。
现代文：邺城有石季龙的庙，民间祭祀他。
English: There is a temple of Shiji Long in Lucheng, and the people worship him.

古文：桢告神像云： 三日不雨，当加鞭罚。 
现代文：元桢对神像说： 三天之内不下雨，我就要鞭打惩罚你。 
English: Yuan Zang said to the statue: "If it does not rain for three days, I will whip you as punishment."

古文：请雨不验，遂鞭像一百。
现代文：求雨没有灵验，他就鞭打神像一百鞭。
English: When he failed to get rain, he lashed the idol with a hundred lashes.

古文：是月，疽发背薨，谥曰惠。
现代文：当月，因长了背疽而死去，谥为 惠 。
English: In the same month, he died of gangrene.

古文：及恆州刺史穆泰谋反，桢知而不告。虽薨，犹追夺爵封，国除。
现代文：当时恒州刺史穆泰谋反，元桢知情却不举报，虽然已经死去，仍然被追夺了封爵，除去封国。
English: At that time, the ruler of Hengzhou, Shumutai, plotted a rebellion, but the Yuancheng knew about it but did not report it. Although he was dead, he was still deprived of the title of knight and removed from the country.

古文：子英，性识聪敏，善骑射，解音律，微晓医术。
现代文：元桢的儿子元英，很懂事而又聪明机敏，善于骑射，懂音律，也略知一点医术。
English: Yuan Yong's son, Yuan Ying, is very sensible and clever, good at riding and shooting, knows music, and knows a little about medicine.

古文：孝文时，为梁州刺史。
现代文：孝文帝时，任梁州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, Liangzhou was assigned to write history.

古文：帝南伐，为汉中别道都将。
现代文：皇帝南征，他担任汉中别道的都将。
English: Emperor Nan Zheng, he served as the leader of the Han Dynasty.

古文：后大驾临钟离，英以大驾亲动，势倾东南，汉中有可乘之会，表求追讨，帝许之。
现代文：后来皇帝驾临钟离，元英认为皇帝亲征，势压东南方，汉中有可乘之机，上表请求追击讨伐，皇帝允许他的请求。
English: Later, when the emperor was about to leave, Yuan Ying thought that the emperor should personally lead the expedition, the pressure was in the southeast, and there was an opportunity for the Han Dynasty to take advantage of it. He asked the emperor to pursue the crusade, and the emperor allowed his request.

古文：以功迁安南大将军，赐爵广武伯。
现代文：因功迁为安南大将军，赐爵为广武伯。
English: Due to his meritorious service, he was promoted to General Annan and given a knighthood as Guangwu Bo.

古文：宣武即位，拜吏部尚书，以前后军功，进爵常山侯。
现代文：宣帝即位，任命他为吏部尚书，因前后所立下的军功，晋爵位为常山侯。
English: When Emperor Xuan came to the throne, he was appointed as an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. Because of his military exploits, he was promoted to the peerage as the Lord of Changshan.

古文：寻诏英率众南讨，大破梁曹景宗军。
现代文：不久又下诏让元英带领军队南征，大败梁朝曹景宗的军队。
English: Soon after, he issued an edict to Yuan Ying to lead the army to invade the south, defeating the army of Liang Dynasty's Cao Jingzong.

古文：梁司州刺史蔡道恭忧死，三关戍弃城而走。
现代文：梁朝司州刺史蔡道恭忧虑而死，三关的守军弃城而退。
English: Liang Chaozhou stabbed Shi Cai Daogong and died of worry. The defenders of Sankuan abandoned the city and retreated.

古文：初，孝文平汉阳，英有战功，许复其封。
现代文：当初，孝文帝攻下汉阳，元英立有战功，孝文帝就答应恢复南安王的封号。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Xiaowen conquered Hanyang, and Yuan Yingli made great achievements in the war. Emperor Xiaowen promised to restore the title of Nan'an King.

古文：及为陈显达所败，遂寝。
现代文：当被陈显达打败以后，这件事就不提了。
English: After being defeated by Chen Xianda, this matter was not mentioned.

古文：是役也，宣武大悦，乃复之，改封中山王。
现代文：这次南征之后，宣武帝大喜，便恢复了他世袭的王爵，改封为中山王。
English: After this southern expedition, Emperor Xuanwu was overjoyed and restored his hereditary title of prince, changing it to King of Zhongshan.

古文：既而梁入寇肥梁，诏英率众十万讨之，所在皆以便宜从事。
现代文：不久，梁军入侵肥梁，朝廷下诏让元英带领十万军队讨伐，所至之处可听其相机行事。
English: Soon, Liang's army invaded Feiliang, and the imperial court ordered Yuan Ying to lead a hundred thousand troops to fight, and his camera could be heard everywhere he went.

古文：英表陈事机，乃击破阴陵，斩梁将二十五人，及虏首五千余级。又频破梁军于梁城，斩其支将四十二人，杀获及溺死者将五万。
现代文：元英上表陈述有关事宜，便攻下阴陵，斩了梁将二十五人，杀贼兵首级五千多颗，又在梁城接连打败梁军，斩了梁国偏将四十二人，杀死、抓获以及淹死的近五万人。
English: After presenting the relevant matters at the table, Yuan Ying captured Yinling, beheaded 25 Liang generals and more than 5,000 rebel soldiers, defeated Liang's army in succession in Liangcheng, beheaded 42 Liang provincial generals, and killed, captured and drowned nearly 50,000 people.

古文：梁中军大将军临川王萧宏、尚书左仆射柳惔等大将五人沿淮东走。
现代文：梁国中军大将军临川王萧宏、尚书左仆射柳忄炎等五员大将沿淮河向东逃走。
English: Five generals, including Liang Guozhong's general Linchuan Wang Xiaohong and Shang Shuxu's second-in-command Sha Liu Xuan Yan, fled eastward along the Huai River.

古文：凡收米四十万石。
现代文：共缴获米四十万石。
English: A total of 400,000 koku of rice was seized.

古文：英追奔至马头，梁马头戍主委城遁走，遂围钟离。
现代文：元英一直追赶到马头，梁国马头戍主将弃城逃跑，于是围困了钟离。
English: Yuan Ying chased him all the way to Ma Tou. The lord of Ma Tou, Liang Province, abandoned the city and fled, so he besieged Zhong Li.

古文：诏以师行已久，命英为振旅之意。
现代文：朝廷下诏说，出师时间已久，令元英作回师的准备。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict saying that it had been a long time since he had become a disciple, so Yuan Ying had to prepare for his return.

古文：英表： 期至二月将末，三月之初，理在必克。
现代文：元英上表说 ：原预期到二月底、三月初，理应攻克敌人。
English: Yuan Ying said on the table: It was originally expected to take until the end of February or the beginning of March to defeat the enemy.

古文：但自此月一日已来，霖雨连并，可谓天违人愿。
现代文：但从本月一日以来，阴雨连绵，可谓天违人意。
English: However, since the first day of this month, it has been raining continuously, which can be described as unwelcome.

古文：然王者行师，举动不易，不可以少致暌淹，便生异议。
现代文：然而王者出师，举动不易，不能因稍有滞留，就产生异议。
English: However, it is not easy for the king to go out, and it is not possible to have objections due to a slight delay.

古文：愿闻朝廷，特开远略，少复赐宽，假以日月，无使为山之功，中途而废。 
现代文：愿上奏朝廷，特加开恩，以图长远谋略，略为放宽，假以时日，不要让造山之功，中途而废。 
English: I would like to appeal to the imperial court to be kind and considerate, to take a long-term strategy, to relax a little, to take time, and not to let the mountain-building work go to waste halfway.

古文：及四月，水盛破桥，英及诸将狼狈奔退，士众没者十有五六。
现代文：到四月间，大水暴涨，冲坏桥梁，元英和众将狼狈逃出，士卒死者十分之五六。
English: By April, the floodwaters had risen dramatically, destroying the bridge. Yuan Ying and his men managed to escape, but five or six out of ten of the soldiers died.

古文：英至扬州，遣使送节及衣冠、貂蝉、章绶，诏以付典。
现代文：元英到扬州后，派使者送去符节、衣冠、貂蝉、印绶，朝廷下诏交付法司。
English: After Yuan Ying arrived in Yangzhou, he sent an envoy to deliver the rune festival, the crown, the cicada, and the seal, and the imperial edict was delivered to the magistrate.

古文：有司奏英经算失图，案劾处死。
现代文：有关方面上奏说，元英谋算不周失利，应当处死。
English: Relevant parties reported that Yuan Ying's plot was ill-conceived and unsuccessful, and that he should be executed.

古文：诏恕死为百姓。
现代文：朝廷下诏赦免死罪，削职为民。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict pardoning the death penalty and cutting jobs for the people.

古文：后京兆王愉反，复英王封，除使持节、假征东将军、都督冀州诸军事。
现代文：后来京兆王元愉谋反，朝廷恢复元英的封爵，任命他为使持节、假征东将军、都督冀州诸军事。
English: Later, King Yuan of Jingzhao plotted a rebellion, and the imperial court restored the knighthood of Yuan Ying, appointing him as the envoy, the fake general of the East, and the military governor of Jizhou.

古文：英未发而冀州已平。
现代文：元英尚未出发而冀州已平息。
English: Yuan Ying has not yet set off and Jizhou has calmed down.

古文：时郢州中从事督荣祖潜引梁军，以义阳应之，三关之戍并据城降梁。
现代文：当时郢州的中从事督荣祖暗中引导梁军，以义阳来接应，三关的守军都以据守的关城投降梁人。
English: At that time, Bozhou's middle-ranking commander, Du Rongzu, secretly guided Liang's army and responded with Yiyang. The defenders of the three passes all surrendered to Liang's people with the defended pass.

古文：郢州刺史娄悦婴城自守。
现代文：郢州刺史娄悦也占城自守。
English: Zhangzhou Zishi Meiyue also occupied the city to defend itself.

古文：县瓠人白早生等杀豫州刺史司马悦，据城南叛。
现代文：县瓠人白早生等杀了豫州刺史司马悦，占据城池投降南朝。
English: Baizhousheng Bai and others of the County of Yunnan killed Sima Yue, the governor of Yuzhou, occupied the city and surrendered to the Southern Dynasty.

古文：梁将齐苟兒率众守县瓠。
现代文：梁将齐苟儿领军守卫县瓠。
English: Liang will lead the army to guard the county.

古文：悦子尚华阳公主，并为所劫。
现代文：司马悦的儿子娶华阳公主为妻，这次都被抓走。
English: Sima Yue's son married Princess Huayang, and this time they were all arrested.

古文：诏英使持节、都督南征诸军事、假征南将军，出自汝南。
现代文：朝廷下诏任命元英为使持节、都督南征诸军事、假征南将军，从汝南出兵。
English: The imperial court issued an edict appointing Yuan Ying as the envoy of the festival, the governor of the south was conscripted into the military, and the fake south was conscripted into the general, and sent troops from the south of the country.

古文：帝以刑峦频破早生，诏英南赴义阳。
现代文：皇帝因为邢峦多次打败了白早生，所以令元英南下义阳。
English: Because the emperor defeated Bai Chaosheng many times, he ordered Yuan Ying to go south to Yiyang.

古文：英以众少，累表请军，帝不许。
现代文：元英因军队人少，多次上表请增派军队，皇帝不答应。
English: Due to the shortage of troops, Yuan Ying repeatedly asked the emperor to send more troops, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：而英辄与邢峦分兵共攻县瓠，之，乃引军而南。
现代文：因此元英便和邢峦分兵一起进攻悬瓠，攻克以后，再领军南下。
English: As a result, Yuan Ying attacked Hanging Rock together with the soldiers of the Second Division, and after conquering it, he led the army southward.

古文：既次义阳，将取三关。
现代文：到达义阳时，准备夺取三关。
English: When they arrived in Yiyang, they were ready to capture Sanguan.

古文：英策之曰： 三关相须如左右手，若一关，而二关不待攻而定。
现代文：元英说了他的计策 ：三关相依，犹如左右手，如攻克一关，那两关不攻而定。
English: Yuan Ying said his strategy: the three passes depend on each other, just like the right and left hands, if one pass is conquered, the other two passes are not attacked.

古文：攻难不如易，东关易攻，宜须先取，即黄石公所谓战如风发，攻如河决也。 
现代文：攻难的不如攻易的，东关容易攻，应当先取下，这也就是黄石公所说的，战如大风发作，攻如大河决堤啊！ 
English: Difficult to attack is not as good as easy to attack, Dongguan is easy to attack, it should be taken down first, which is what Huangshi Gong said, the battle is like a gale, the attack is like a big river breaking through the dike!

古文：英恐其并力于东，乃使长史李华率五统向西关，分其兵势，身督诸军向东关。
现代文：元英担心梁军聚集力量保护东关，便派长史李华带领五统军队进攻西关，以分散梁军力量。他自己率领军队攻向东关。
English: Fearing that Liang's army was gathering strength to protect Dongguan, Yuan Ying sent the commander Shi Lihua to attack West Guan with the Five-Unity Army to disperse the strength of Liang's army. He led the army to attack East Guan.

古文：果如英策。凡禽其大将六人、支将二十人、卒七千、米四十万石，军资称是。
现代文：结果果然和元英预计的一样，抓住了梁军大将六人，支将二十人，俘虏士兵七千，米四十万石，军用充足。
English: As expected by Yuan Ying, the result was as expected. Six generals of Liang's army and 20 subordinate generals were captured, 7,000 soldiers were captured, and 400,000 kilos of rice were seized, which was enough for the military.

古文：还朝，除尚书仆射。
现代文：回朝以后，被授予尚书右仆射。
English: After returning to China, he was awarded the title of Shangshu Righteous Servant.

古文：薨，赠司徒公，谥献武王。
现代文：去世后，追赠司徒公，谥为 献武王 。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of King of the Stu, and became known as the King of the Military Offering.

古文：英子熙，字真兴，好学俊爽，有文才，声著于世。
现代文：元英的儿子元熙，字真兴，好学有才干，有文学才能，声名显著于时。
English: Motohide's son, Motohide, whose family name was Zhenxing, was studious, talented, and literate. He became famous at an early age.

古文：然轻躁浮动，英深虑非保家之主，常欲废之，立第四子略。
现代文：可是他举止轻浮，元英十分忧虑，认为他不是个能保全家族的人，经常想废掉他，立第四个儿子元略为世子。
English: However, he behaved frivolously, and Yuan Ying was very worried, thinking that he was not a person who could preserve the family, and often wanted to abolish him and establish the fourth son, Yuan Li, as the heir.

古文：略固请乃止。
现代文：由于元略坚持不从这才停止。
English: It only stopped because of the insistence of Yuan Liang not to start from here.

古文：累迁光禄勋。
现代文：逐步升迁任光禄勋。
English: He was gradually promoted to the highest rank of Ren Guanglu Xun.

古文：时领军于忠执政。熙，忠之婿也，故岁中骤迁。
现代文：当时朝廷由领军于忠执政，元熙是于忠的女婿，所以一年之间突然高升。
English: At that time, the imperial court was ruled by Yu Zhong, the leader of the army, and Yuan Xi was Yu Zhong's son-in-law, so he suddenly rose to the top within a year.

古文：后授相州刺史。熙以七月上，其日大风寒雨，冻死者二十余人，驴马数十匹。
现代文：后来被任命为相州刺史，元熙在七月里上任，到达这天，刮起大风，下雨奇冷，冻死了二十多人、驴马二十多匹。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief historian of Xiangzhou. Yuanxi took office in July. On the day he arrived, a strong wind blew, it rained and was very cold, and more than 20 people and more than 20 donkeys and horses froze to death.

古文：熙闻其祖父前事，心恶之。又有蛆生其庭。
现代文：元熙曾经听说过他的祖父元桢的故事，心中十分厌恶，又有蛆生长在他家里。
English: He once heard the story of his grandfather, Yuan Xi, and was so disgusted that there were maggots growing in his house.

古文：初，熙兄弟并为清河王怿所昵，及刘腾、元叉隔绝二宫，矫诏杀怿，熙乃起兵讨之。
现代文：起先，元熙的兄弟都被清河王元怿所喜爱，当刘腾、元叉隔绝两宫关系以后，他们又传圣旨，杀了元怿，元熙便起兵讨伐。
English: At first, all of Yuan Xi's brothers were loved by the King of the Qing River, Yuan Shao. When Liu Teng and Yuan Zha severed the relationship between the two palaces, they also preached the holy will, killed Yuan Shao, and Yuan Xi raised an army to fight.

古文：熙起兵甫十日，为其长史柳元章、别驾游荆、魏郡太守李孝怡执熙置之高楼，并其子弟。
现代文：元熙刚起兵十天，就被他的长史柳元章、别驾游荆、魏郡太守李孝怡抓了起来并关在高楼上，连同他的子弟也同时被关押。
English: Just ten days after Yuan Xi raised an army, he was arrested and detained in a high-rise building by his chiefs Shi Liu Yuan Zhang, Bei Rui Yu Jing, and Wei County Governor Li Xiaoyi. He was also detained together with his son.

古文：叉遣尚书左丞卢同斩之于鄴街，传首京师。
现代文：元叉派尚书左丞卢同将他斩于邺城大街上，将首级送到京城。
English: Yuan Zhaoping dispatched Shang Shuzhong Lu to behead him on Shicheng Street, and the head was sent to Beijing.

古文：始熙妃于氏知熙必败，不从其谋，自初哭泣不绝，至于熙死。
现代文：一开始元熙的妻子于氏就知道元熙必定失败，不同意他的计划，从起先就哭泣不停，直到元熙死去。
English: From the very beginning, Yuan Xi's wife Yu knew that Yuan Xi would certainly fail. She did not agree with his plan and cried from the beginning until Yuan Xi died.

古文：熙既籓王，加有文学，风气甚高。
现代文：元熙身为藩王，又有文学才能，风采气度高雅。
English: As the king of the domain, Yuan Xi had literary talent and a refined style.

古文：始镇鄴，知友才学之士袁翻、李琰之、李神俊、王诵兄弟、裴敬宪等咸饯于河梁，赋诗告别。
现代文：当他镇守邺郡时，知心朋友中有才学的士人袁翻、李琰之、李神亻隽、王诵兄弟、裴敬宪等在河梁为他饯行，赋诗告别。
English: When he was in charge of Min County, some of his close friends, including the talented scholars Yuan Furu, Li Shanzhi, Li Shenshan, Wang Chiao brothers, and Pei Jingxian, walked for him in Hailiang and composed poems to bid him farewell.

古文：及将死，复与知故书，恨志意不遂。
现代文：当元熙临死时，又写信给相知的朋友和故旧，自恨没有能够实现自己的志愿。
English: When Yuan Xi was on the verge of death, he wrote to his old friends and acquaintances, regretting that he had not been able to realize his wish.

古文：时人矜之。
现代文：当时的人对他很同情和惋惜。
English: People at the time felt sorry for him.

古文：又，熙于任城王澄薨前，梦有人告之曰： 任城当死，死后二百日外，君亦不免。
现代文：又元熙在任城王元澄去世之前，曾经梦见有人告诉他说 ：任城王马上要死了，他死后两百多天，你也难免。
English: Also, before the death of Rencheng King Yuancheng, Yuanxi once dreamed that someone told him: "Rencheng King is about to die, more than two hundred days after his death, you are inevitable."

古文：若其不信，试看任城家。 
现代文：如果不相信，请看任城王家里。 
English: If you don't believe me, look at Ren Shiwang's family.

古文：熙梦中顾瞻任城第舍，四面墙崩，无遗堵焉。熙恶之，觉而以告所亲。
现代文：元熙在梦中看到任城王的府第房舍，四面墙壁崩塌，没有留下完整的一堵墙壁，元熙十分厌恶，醒来以后就告诉了自己的亲属。
English: In his dream, Yuan Xi saw the residence of the king of Rencheng. The four walls had collapsed, leaving no complete wall. Yuan Xi was very disgusted, and after waking up, he told his relatives.

古文：及熙之死也，果如所梦。
现代文：当元熙死时，果然和他梦中情形相符。
English: When Yuan Xi died, it did indeed match the situation in his dream.

古文：熙兄弟三人，每从英征伐，在军贪暴，或因迎降逐北，至有斩杀无辜，多增首级，以为功状。
现代文：元熙弟兄三人，总是跟从元英出征，他们在军中贪婪暴虐，有时接送投降的人到北方时滥杀无辜的人以增加首级数量，作为增加军功的资本。
English: The three brothers of Yuan Xi, who always went to war with Yuan Ying, were greedy and tyrannical in the army, and sometimes killed innocent people to increase the number of heads as a capital to increase military merit when transporting surrendered people to the north.

古文：又于忠诬郭祚、裴植也，忠意未决害之，由熙劝奖，遂至极法，世以为冤。
现代文：当于忠诬陷郭祚、裴植时，于忠并没有完全决定杀害他们，而元熙却加以劝告和鼓励，使他们遭受极刑，世人都认为是冤枉的。
English: When Yu Zhong framed Guo Gan and Pei Zhi, Yu Zhong did not fully decide to kill them, but Yuan Xi advised and encouraged them to suffer capital punishment, which the world believed was unjustified.

古文：及熙之祸，识者以为有报应焉。
现代文：元熙遭祸时，有识者认为这是所受到的报应。
English: When Yuan Xi suffered a misfortune, people with insight believed that this was the retribution he received.

古文：灵太后反政，赠太尉公，谥曰文庄王。
现代文：灵太后重新执政时，追赠元熙为太尉公，谥为 文庄王 。
English: When Empress Dowager Ling returned to power, she posthumously awarded Yuan Xi the title of Taifu Gong (太尉公) and Zou the title of Wenzhuang Wang (文庄王).

古文：熙弟略，字亻隽兴，位给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：元熙的弟弟元略，字亻隽兴，任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Yuan Xi's younger brother, Yuan Liang, also known as Yu Xing, was appointed as Huangmen's chamberlain.

古文：熙败，略潜行，自托旧识河内司马始宾。
现代文：元熙失败后，元略秘密逃走，投奔旧相识河内的司马始宾家里。
English: After the failure of Yuan Xi, Yuan Liang secretly fled and went to the home of his old acquaintance Sima Shibin in Hanoi.

古文：始宾便为荻筏，夜与略俱渡盟津，诣上党屯留县栗法光家。
现代文：始宾便建造了荻筏，在夜间和元略一起渡过盟津，住在上党屯留县的栗法光家里。
English: The first guest then built a raft, and in the night he and Yuan Li crossed Mengjin together, and lived in the home of Li Fangguang in Tunliu County, Shangdang.

古文：法光素敦信义，忻而纳之。
现代文：栗法光一向注重信义，便欣然接纳了他们。
English: Kurihara Hikaru, who has always paid attention to loyalty, gladly accepted them.

古文：略旧识刁双，时为西河太守，略复归之。
现代文：元略有位旧相识叫刁双，当时任西河太守，元略又去投靠他。
English: Yuan Liang had an old acquaintance named Xiang Shuang. At that time, he was the governor of the West River, and Yuan Liang went to join him.

古文：停止经年，双乃令从子昌送略潜遁江左。
现代文：停留了一年多，刁双便让他的侄儿刁昌护送元略到江东去。
English: After staying for more than a year, Yan Shuang asked his nephew Yan Chang to escort Yuan Rong to the East River.

古文：梁武甚礼敬之，封中山王，宣城太守。
现代文：梁武帝对元略很敬重，封他为中山王、宣城太守。
English: Emperor Liangwu had great respect for Yuanli, and made him the king of Zhongshan and the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：俄而徐州刺史元法僧据城南叛，梁乃以略为大都督，令诣彭城接诱初附。
现代文：不久，徐州刺史元法僧以徐州归降南朝，梁朝任命元略为大都督，让他到彭城去迎接初来归附的人。
English: Soon after, the Xuzhou Priest Yuan Shishi returned to the Southern Dynasty with Xuzhou, and the Liang Dynasty appointed Yuan Liang as the Grand Governor, and sent him to Pengcheng to welcome the newcomers.

古文：寻征略与法僧同还。
现代文：不久，又征召元略和法僧同时回来。
English: Soon after, Yuan Liang and the monk were summoned to return at the same time.

古文：略虽在江南，自以家祸，晨夜哭泣，身若居丧。
现代文：元略虽然身在江东，自己因为家中所遭受的灾祸，早晚哭泣，居处犹如守丧一般。
English: Although he was in the east of the Yangtze River, Yuan Li would cry every morning and night because of the disaster he suffered at home. His home was like a funeral home.

古文：又恶法僧为人，与法僧言，未尝一笑。
现代文：他又厌恶元法僧的为人，和他谈话时，从来没有笑过。
English: He also disliked the former monk and never smiled when talking to him.

古文：梁复除略衡州刺史，未行。会其豫章王综以城归国，综长史江革、司马祖恆、将士五千人，悉见禽虏。
现代文：梁朝又任命元略为衡州刺史，还未出发，正好豫章王萧综以守城归降北魏，萧综的长史江革、司马祖日恒、将士五千多人都被俘虏。
English: The Liang Dynasty also appointed Yuan Liang as the chief historian of Hengzhou, but he had not yet set out. It just so happened that Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Simi returned to the Northern Wei Dynasty to defend the city. Xiao Simi's Changshi Jiang Ge, Sima Zu Riheng, and more than 5,000 soldiers were all captured.

古文：明帝敕有司悉遣革等还南，因以征略，梁乃备礼遣之。
现代文：明帝下令让有关方面把江革等人都送回南朝，并因此而召回元略，梁朝便以礼遣送他回北方。
English: Emperor Ming ordered the relevant authorities to send Jiang Ge and others back to the Southern Dynasty, and therefore recalled Yuan Liang, and Liang Dynasty sent him back to the North with a gift.

古文：明帝诏光禄大夫刁双境首劳问，除略侍中、义阳王。
现代文：明帝下令由光禄大夫刁双到边境加以慰问，任命元略为侍中、义阳王。
English: Emperor Ming ordered Dr. Guanglu and his wife to go to the border to offer condolences, and appointed Yuan Rong as an attendant and King Yiyang.

古文：还达石人驿亭，诏宗室亲党、内外百官先相识者，迎之近郊。
现代文：回到石人驿亭时，明帝又命宗室亲属、内外百官中原先和元略认识的，到近郊迎接。
English: When he returned to Shichin Shotei, Emperor Ming also ordered the relatives of the imperial family, and the hundreds of officials at home and abroad who had previously known Yuan slightly, to go to the suburbs to meet him.

古文：其司马始宾除给事中，领直侯，栗法光本县令，刁昌东平太守，刁双西兗州刺史。
现代文：任命司马始宾为给事中、领直后，栗法光为本县县令，刁昌为东平太守，刁双为西兖州刺史。
English: After the appointment of Sima Xibin as the presenter and leader, Li Fangguang was appointed as the county magistrate of this county, Yu Chang was appointed as the governor of Dongping, and both of them were appointed as the governor of Xishuanzhou.

古文：略所经一食一宿处，无不沾赏。
现代文：凡元略所经过的吃过一顿饭、住过一宿的地方，无不沾光而受赏。
English: All the places that Yuanlio has passed through, where he has eaten a meal and stayed for a night, have been appreciated.

古文：寻改封东平王，后为尚书令。灵太后甚宠任之，其见委信，殆与元徽相埒。
现代文：不久又改封为东平王。后担任尚书令，灵太后很宠信他，对他的信任程度，可以和元徽相比。
English: He was soon renamed Dongping Wang. Later, he served as Shang Shuling. He was a favorite of the Empress Dowager, and the degree of trust in him can be compared to that of the original emblem.

古文：于时天下多事，军国万端。略守常自保，无他裨益，唯具臣而已。
现代文：当时天下比较混乱，军国大事万般纷繁，元略却仍照常只求自保，并没有提多少有益于国家的策略，只是当一名备位充数的臣子而已。
English: At that time, the world was relatively chaotic, military and national events were numerous and varied, but Yuan Shao still only sought self-preservation as usual, and did not mention much of a strategy beneficial to the country, but only to be a vassal with enough seats.

古文：尔硃荥，略之姑夫，略素所轻忽。
现代文：尔朱荣是元略的姑夫，元略一向轻视他。
English: Er Zhu Rong was the uncle of Yuan Liang, and Yuan Liang had always despised him.

古文：宣武闻之，诏夺禄一周。
现代文：元略又和郑俨、徐纥结成一党，尔朱荣更加恨他。
English: Yuan Liang also formed a party with Zheng Yao and Xu Yao, and Er Zhu Rong hated him even more.

古文：薨，谥怀王。
现代文：尔朱荣入洛时他被杀害于河阴。
English: When Er Zhu Rong entered Luo, he was killed in Heyin.

古文：子徽，字显顺，粗涉文史，颇有吏才。
现代文：朝廷加赠他为太保、司空公，谥为 文贞 。元徽是元鸾的儿子，字显顺，粗知文史，颇有为官之才。
English: The imperial court gave him the titles of Taibo, Sikuo, and Wenzhen. Yuan Hui was the son of Yuan Hui. He was well versed in literature and history, and was quite talented as an official.

古文：宣武时，袭封，为河内太守。
现代文：宣武帝时，袭封王爵，任河内太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanwu, he was awarded the title of prince and was appointed governor of Hanoi.

古文：在郡清整，有时誉。
现代文：在郡时治理得清净严整，在当时很有声誉。
English: At that time, the county had a good reputation for its clean and strict governance.

古文：明帝时，为并州刺史。
现代文：明帝时，担任并州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Ming, he served as the state chief historian.

古文：先是，州界夏霜，安业者少，徽辄开仓振之，文武咸共谏止。
现代文：早先，并州夏天受了霜灾，很少有人安于本业，元徽便要开仓赈济，文武官员们都出来劝谏和阻止。
English: Earlier, when the summer frosts hit the province of Hebei, few people were satisfied with their work, and the Yuanhui had to open warehouses to make money. The civil and military officials all came out to persuade and prevent.

古文：徽曰： 昔汲长孺郡守耳，尚辄开仓，救人灾弊。
现代文：元徽说 ：原先汲长孺当郡守时，还立即开仓，救人灾祸。
English: Yuan Hui said: Originally, when Qi Changyu was the county governor, he immediately opened the warehouse to save people from disaster.

古文：况我皇家亲近，受委大籓，岂可拘法而不救人困也？ 
现代文：况且我是皇室近亲，受封为大藩，怎能够拘于成法而不救人之危困呢！ 
English: Besides, I am a close relative of the imperial family and have been given the title of daifan, so how can I stick to the law and not save people from danger?

古文：先给后奏。
现代文：他便先行赈济，然后上奏朝廷。
English: He first helped the poor, and then appealed to the imperial court.

古文：明帝嘉之，加安北将军。
现代文：明帝嘉奖了他，加封他为安北将军。
English: Emperor Ming rewarded him with the title of General Anbei.

古文：汾州山胡旧多劫掠，自徽为郡，群胡自相戒，勿得侵扰邻州。
现代文：汾州的山胡人过去时常出来掳掠，自从元徽到郡以后，他们便相互告诫，不要到邻州去骚扰。
English: In the past, the Sanhu people of Zhangzhou often went out to kidnap and plunder. Since the Yuanhui came to the county, they have warned each other not to go to neighboring states to harass.

古文：汾、肆之人多来诣徽投诉，愿得口判。
现代文：汾州、肆州的百姓也大多来找元徽投诉，愿意接受他的裁决。
English: Most of the people in Zhangzhou and Zhouzhou have also come to complain to Yuan Hui and are willing to accept his ruling.

古文：除秦州刺史，还都，吏人泣涕攀车，不能自已。
现代文：又转任秦州刺史，回京都时，官吏和百姓们都攀着车子哭泣，难以控制自己的感情。
English: When he returned to Kyoto, officials and citizens alike clung to their cars and wept, unable to control their emotions.

古文：徽车马羸弊，皆京来旧物，见者莫不叹其清俭。
现代文：元徽使用的车破烂，马也很瘦弱，还是他原先从京城带来的旧物，见到的人无不赞叹他的清廉节俭。
English: The car used for the original emblem is tattered, the horse is also very thin and weak, and it is still an old thing that he originally brought from the capital. Everyone who sees him admires his cleanliness and frugality.

古文：改授度支尚书，兼吏部尚书，寻为正。
现代文：改任为度支尚书，兼吏部尚书，不久又当了正尚书。
English: He was reappointed as Duozhi Shangshu, concurrently Liibu Shangshu, and soon became the official Shangshu.

古文：徽以选举法期在得人，限以停年，有乖旧体。
现代文：元徽认为选拔官员的目的在于得到合适的人才，如果因年限而造成有些年停止选举人才，这就有悖于旧制。
English: Yuanhui believes that the purpose of selecting officials is to get the right talent. If the election of talent is suspended for some years due to the length of service, this is contrary to the old system.

古文：但行之日久，难以顿革，以德同者尽年，劳等者进德，于时称为中平。
现代文：但是原法实行时间很久了，难以立即革除，他便采取德行相同的根据年限长短作为任用的先后，而劳绩相同的先晋升那些有德行的人，当时人认为是比较合理公平的办法。
English: However, the original law had been in effect for a long time, and it was difficult to immediately abolish it. He then took the same virtue as the length of service as the order of appointment, and those with the same performance were promoted first, which was considered to be a more reasonable and fair method at the time.

古文：除侍中，余官如故。
现代文：又委任为侍中，其余官职照旧。
English: He was also appointed as an attendant, and the rest of his official positions remained the same.

古文：徽表乞守一官。
现代文：元徽曾上表请求担任一个州的太守。
English: Yuan Hui once petitioned to serve as the governor of a state.

古文：天下士子莫不叹息，咸曰： 城阳离选，贫者复何所希！ 
现代文：天下士人听后无不叹息，都说 ：城阳王离开选部，贫贱者还有什么希望！ 
English: After listening to him, all of them sighed and said, "The king of the city of the sun has left the election department, what hope is there for the poor and lowly!"

古文：怨嗟之声，俄然上彻。
现代文：抱怨和感叹的声音，很快传到朝廷。
English: The sound of complaints and lamentations soon reached the imperial court.

古文：还令兼吏部尚书。
现代文：于是仍让他兼任吏部尚书。
English: As a result, he was still allowed to hold the post of secretary.

古文：累迁尚书令。
现代文：屡迁至尚书令。
English: He was gradually promoted to the post of Shang Shuling.

古文：时灵太后专制，朝纲颓褫，徽既居宠任，无所匡弼。与郑俨之徒，更相阿党。
现代文：当时灵太后专制朝政，朝中纲纪败坏，元徽既为太后所宠信，却没有什么建树来辅佐朝廷，又跟郑俨之流同结一党。
English: At that time, the Empress Dowager Ling was in charge of the autocratic imperial government, and the discipline of the imperial court had deteriorated. Yuan Hui was the favorite of the Empress Dowager Ling, but he did not do anything to help the imperial court, and he formed a party with the Zheng Hui family.

古文：外似柔谨，内多猜忌，睚眦之忿，必思报复，识者疾之。
现代文：外表显得柔顺谨慎，内心多是相互猜忌，那怕瞪上一眼的不满，也要寻机报复，有识者都十分不满。
English: Outwardly, they appear soft and cautious, but inwardly, they are mostly suspicious of each other. Even if they are dissatisfied for a moment, they will look for an opportunity to take revenge. People with insight are very dissatisfied.

古文：又不能防闲其妻于氏，遂与广阳王深奸通。
现代文：他又设法防备妻子于氏，于氏因而和广阳王元深私通。
English: He also tried to prevent his wife, Yu, from having an affair with Guangyang Wangyuan.

古文：及深受任军府，每有表启，论徽罪过，虽涉诬毁，颇亦实焉。
现代文：当元深受委任掌管军队时，经常有表启上奏，论及元徽的罪过，虽然也有诬告和毁坏他的名声之处，但也有许多是实有其事的。
English: When the former was put in charge of the army, there were frequent accusations about the sins of the former, and although there were false accusations and damage to his reputation, there were also many real things.

古文：庄帝践阼，拜司州牧。
现代文：庄帝继位，被任命为司州牧。
English: Zhuangdi succeeded to the throne and was appointed as the head of state.

古文：寻除司徒，仍领牧。
现代文：不久又任司徒，仍兼司州牧。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a steward, and he is still the steward of the state.

古文：元颢之入洛，徽从庄帝北巡。
现代文：元颢入洛时，元徽跟从庄帝北行。
English: When Yuan Shao entered Luo, Yuan Hui followed him north from Zhuangdi.

古文：及车驾还宫，以与谋之功，除侍中、大司马、太尉公，加羽葆鼓吹，增邑通前二万户。
现代文：当车驾回京时，因有预谋的功绩，被任命为侍中、大司马、太尉公，加给羽葆鼓吹，增加的食邑连同从前的共二万户。
English: When the car drove back to Beijing, because of his premeditated achievements, he was appointed as a chamberlain, grand steward, and lieutenant, and was added to the feathers to preach. The number of restaurants increased along with the previous total of 20,000 households.

古文：徽表辞官封，前后屡上。
现代文：元徽上表辞去官职和封号，前后多次上表。
English: The original emblem resigned from the official position and the seal number on the watch face, and it has been on the watch face many times.

古文：徽为庄帝亲待，内惧尔硃荣等，故有此辞。
现代文：元徽因为是庄帝亲信的侍臣，内心害怕尔朱荣等，所以才会上表辞官。
English: Because Yuan Hui was a trusted retainer of Emperor Zhuang, he was afraid of Le Zhu Rong and so on, so he only became a speech writer.

古文：庄帝识其意，听其辞封，不许让官。
现代文：庄帝明白他的心意，同意他辞去封号，不让他辞去官职。
English: Zhuang Di understood his intention and agreed to let him resign from the post. However, he did not let him resign from the post.

古文：徽后妻，庄帝舅女。
现代文：元徽的后妻是庄帝舅舅的女儿。
English: Yuan Hui's second wife was the daughter of Zhuang Di's uncle.

古文：侍中李彧，帝之姊婿。
现代文：侍中李，是庄帝姐姐的女婿。
English: Li, the chamberlain, is the son-in-law of Zhuang Di's sister.

古文：徽性佞媚，善自取容，挟内外之意，宗室亲宠，莫与比焉。
现代文：元徽本来就善于献媚取宠，很会取悦于人，他身负朝廷内外的重望，其他宗室亲信，没有人能和他相比。
English: Yuan Hui was originally good at flattery and getting favors, and he is very good at pleasing people. He bears the weighty expectations of the imperial court and beyond, and other family members are close friends. No one can compare to him.

古文：遂与彧等劝帝图荣。
现代文：他便和李等人劝告庄帝除掉尔朱荣。
English: He and Li and others then advised Zhuang Di to get rid of Er Zhu Rong.

古文：庄帝亦先有意。
现代文：庄帝原先也有这个意图。
English: Zhuangdi originally had this intention.

古文：荣死，世隆等屯据不解。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，尔朱世隆等人的力量仍聚集不散。
English: After the death of Er Zhu Rong, the power of Er Zhu Shilong and others is still gathering.

古文：除徽太保，仍大司马、宗师、录尚书事，总统内外。
现代文：朝廷任命元徽为太保，仍任大司马、宗师、录尚书事，总管内外事务。
English: The imperial court appointed Yuan Hui as Tai Bao, and he continued to serve as the grand steward, mentor, record keeper, and general manager of domestic and foreign affairs.

古文：徽本意谓荣死后枝叶散亡。
现代文：元徽原以为尔朱荣死后，枝叶自然散亡。
English: Yuan Hui originally thought that after the death of Le Zhu Rong, the branches and leaves would naturally perish.

古文：及尔硃宗族聚结谋难，徽算略无出，忧怖而已。
现代文：当尔朱氏宗族聚集起来图谋叛乱时，元徽不知道该用什么办法才行，只是忧虑和恐惧不安而已。
English: When the Zhu clan gathered to plot a rebellion, Yuan Hui didn't know what to do, but he was worried and afraid.

古文：性多嫉妒，不欲人居其前。每入参谋议，独与帝决。
现代文：他性格又特别嫉妒别人，不喜欢有人在他前头露面，每次入宫参与谋略，都独自和皇帝一起作决定。
English: His character was also particularly jealous of others, he did not like anyone to appear in front of him, and every time he entered the palace to participate in strategy, he made decisions alone with the emperor.

古文：朝臣有上军国筹策者，并劝帝不纳。
现代文：朝臣们有上奏陈述军国大政谋略的，他都劝告皇帝不要听从。
English: He advised the emperor not to listen to the courtiers when they had to report on the military's grand political strategy.

古文：乃云： 小贼何虑不除？ 
现代文：他总是说 ：小贼何必担心不能除去？ 
English: He always said: why should petty thieves worry about not being eliminated?

古文：又惜财用，于时有所赏锡，咸出薄少，或多而中减，与而复追。
现代文：又特别吝惜费用，当时凡有所赏赐，都特别少薄，或者说时多，中途又削减，或给过以后又讨回去。
English: He was also particularly stingy with his expenses. At the time, any rewards he received were either very small, or took a long time to arrive, and were cut off in the middle, or given and then asked for back.

古文：庄帝雅自约狭，尤亦徽所赞成。
现代文：庄帝对自己特别节俭，尤其受到元徽的赞同。
English: Zhuang Di was particularly frugal with himself, which was especially approved by Yuan Hui.

古文：太府少卿李苗，徽司徒时司马也，徽待之颇厚。
现代文：太府少卿李苗，在元徽任司徒时他担任司马，元徽和他相交深厚。
English: Li Miao, Taifu Shaoqing, when he was a disciple of Yuan Hui, he served as Sima, and Yuan Hui had a deep relationship with him.

古文：苗每致忠言，徽多不采纳。
现代文：李苗每次进献忠言时，元徽多数不采纳。
English: Every time Li Miao makes a loyal recommendation, most of the original emblem is not adopted.

古文：苗谓人曰： 城阳本自蜂目，而豺声复将露也。 
现代文：李苗对人家说 ：城阳王原来已是蜂目，连豺声也将要露出来了。 
English: Li Miao said to others: Chengyang Wang was originally a bee's eye, and even the beep will come out.

古文：及尔硃兆之入，禁卫奔散，庄帝步出云龙门，徽乘马奔度，帝频呼之，徽不顾而去。
现代文：当尔朱兆入京时，侍卫们都逃散了，庄帝步行走出云龙门，见元徽骑马奔过去。庄帝连连大声喊叫，元徽头也不回，只顾自己逃走。
English: When Zhu Zhao entered Beijing, the guards all fled. Zhuangdi walked out of the Cloud Dragon Gate on foot, and ran to see Yuan Hui on horseback. Zhuangdi shouted loudly, and Yuan Hui did not turn back, but fled on his own.

古文：遂走山南，至故吏寇弥宅。
现代文：于是，元徽逃到了山南，来到旧吏寇弥的家里。
English: As a result, Yuan Hui fled to Shannan and came to the home of the old official Kou Mi.

古文：弥外虽容纳，内不自安，乃怖徽云： 官捕将至。 
现代文：寇弥表面上虽然表示接纳，心里却十分不安。他便说了许多话来恐吓元徽，对他说： 官家的捕手马上就要来了。 
English: On the surface, Komei showed acceptance, but in his heart he was very uneasy. He said many things to intimidate Yuan Hui, telling him: The official catcher is coming soon.

古文：令其避他所，使人于路邀害，送尸于尔硃兆。
现代文：让他躲到别的地方，又派人在路上杀害了他，把尸体送到尔朱兆那里。
English: They told him to hide somewhere else, and sent someone to kill him on the road and take the body to Lzhu Zhao.

古文：孝武初，赠使持节、侍中、太师、录尚书事、司州牧，谥曰文献。
现代文：孝武帝初年，追赠为使持节、侍中、太师、录尚书事、司州牧，谥为 文献 。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu, the posthumous gifts included an envoy, a chamberlain, a grand master, a record of records, a steward, and a document.

古文：子延袭爵。
现代文：元徽的儿子元延袭了封爵。
English: The son of Yuan Hui, Yuan Yan, was knighted.

古文：安定王休，皇兴二年封。
现代文：齐国受禅时，依例降爵。安定王拓跋休，是皇兴二年所加封的。
English: When Qi was enthroned, he was demoted to a peerage, as was customary. Wang Tuoba, the Prince of Stability, was ennobled in the second year of the reign of Emperor Xing.

古文：少聪敏。
现代文：他从小聪明机敏。
English: He's always been bright and quick-witted.

古文：为外都大官，断狱有称。
现代文：在担任外都大官时，以善于判案而被人称誉。
English: When he served as a foreign capital official, he was praised for being good at judging cases.

古文：车驾南伐，领大司马。
现代文：皇帝南征时，任大司马。
English: During the Emperor's Southern Expedition, he served as the Grand Master of the Horse.

古文：孝文亲行诸军，遇休以三盗人徇六军，将斩之，有诏赦之。
现代文：孝文帝亲自带领各军出发时，遇到休正因为有三个盗贼偷盗六军物品，准备把他们斩首。皇帝下诏赦免了他们。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen personally led the armies to set out, he encountered a truce because three thieves had stolen the goods of the Sixth Army and were preparing to behead them. The emperor pardoned them with an imperial edict.

古文：休执曰： 不斩何以息盗？ 
现代文：休固执地说 ：不斩他们怎么能使盗贼止息？ 
English: Hugh said stubbornly, "How can we stop the thieves without killing them?"

古文：诏曰： 王者之体，亦时有非常之泽，虽违军法，可特原之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：王者的规矩，也时常有一些特别的恩泽，所以虽然违反了军法，也可以特别加以宽恕。 
English: The emperor said: The king's rules often have some special grace, so although it violates the military law, it can also be specially forgiven.

古文：休乃奉诏。
现代文：休这才遵从诏令。
English: Only then did he comply with the edict.

古文：帝谓司徒冯诞曰： 大司马严而执法，诸军不可不慎。 
现代文：皇帝便对司徒冯诞说： 大司马严于执法，各军不能不格外谨慎。 
English: The emperor then said to St. Feng Xuan: The great general is strict in enforcing the law, and all armies must be extremely cautious.

古文：于是六军肃然。
现代文：于是六军肃然听令。
English: As a result, the six armies obediently obeyed the order.

古文：定都洛邑，休从驾幸鄴，命休率从驾文武迎家于平城，帝亲饯休于漳水之北。
现代文：定都洛阳时，休跟从皇帝到达邺城，孝文帝让休率领随从的文武官员到平城迎接家属，皇帝亲自在漳水之北为休饯行。
English: When Luoyang was the capital, Hugh followed the emperor to Lushan. Emperor Xiaowen asked Hugh to lead his civil and military officials to welcome the family members to Pingcheng. The emperor himself accompanied Hugh to the north of Surabaya.

古文：十八年，休寝疾，帝幸其第，流涕问疾，中使医药相望于路。
现代文：太和十八年，拓跋休患病卧床不起，皇帝亲往他的府第，流着泪询问病情，宫中使者送医送药的相望于路。
English: In the 18th year of the reign of Emperor Taobao, Emperor Tuoba fell ill and was bedridden. The emperor personally went to his palace to inquire about his illness with tears streaming down his face. The courier from the imperial court was on his way to deliver medicine.

古文：及薨至殡，车驾三临。
现代文：从休去世到出殡，皇帝三次亲临看视。
English: From the time of Hugh's death to the funeral, the emperor came three times to watch.

古文：帝至其门，改服锡衰，素弁加绖。
现代文：文帝到达拓跋休家门后，改穿衰服，白帽上加用首。
English: After Emperor Wen arrived at Tuoba's home, he changed his clothes and put on a white cap.

古文：皇太子百官皆从行吊礼。谥曰靖王。
现代文：皇太子和百官们都跟从皇帝行了哀吊之礼，谥为 靖王 。
English: The crown prince and hundreds of officials followed the emperor in a mourning salute, bowing to the king of peace.

古文：超弟琰，字伏宝，大统中，封宋安王。
现代文：下诏赠给假黄钺、加羽葆鼓吹，全部依照三老尉元的丧礼。皇帝亲自送出城郭，大哭而回。各王所受的恩礼都难以和他相比。
English: The following edicts were issued to the false Huang Qi and the propagandist Ka Yu Qi, all in accordance with the funeral rites of the three old lieutenants. The emperor himself sent them out of the castle and returned in tears. It is difficult to compare the grace that each king received with him.

古文：薨，谥曰懿。
现代文：宣武帝时，配祭于太庙。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanwu, the festival was held in the Great Temple.

古文：子景山。景山字宝岳，少有器局，干略过人。
现代文：元景山是宋安王元琰的儿子，字宝岳，从小就有度量，才干谋略过人。
English: Yuan Jingshan is the son of King Yuan of Song An, and his name is Bao Yue. Since he was a child, he has always been meticulous and able to outmaneuver others.

古文：周景帝时，以军功累迁开府仪同三司。
现代文：周闵帝时，因军功累迁任开府仪同三司。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Enlai, he was appointed to the post of Kaifu Yi and the three departments due to his military service.

古文：从武帝平齐，以功拜大将军、平原郡公、亳州总管。
现代文：他随从周武帝讨平齐国，因功被任命为大将军、平原郡公、亳州总管。
English: He followed Emperor Zhou to pacify Qi, and was appointed as a general, the governor of Pingyuan County, and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：法令明肃，贼盗屏迹，部内大清。
现代文：为政法令严明，盗贼也不见踪迹，辖区内部大为清平。
English: The laws and regulations are strict, there is no trace of thieves, and the area is very clean.

古文：征为候正。
现代文：朝廷召回担任候正。
English: He was recalled by the Imperial Court to serve as an alternate.

古文：宣帝嗣位，从上柱国韦孝宽经略淮南。
现代文：宣帝继位，他随从上柱国韦孝宽攻打淮南。
English: When Emperor Xuancheng succeeded to the throne, he followed Wei Xiaokang, the upper pillar state, to attack Huainan.

古文：郧州总管宇文亮反，以轻兵袭孝宽。
现代文：郧州总管宇文亮反叛，用轻骑兵突袭韦孝宽。
English: The governor of Zhangzhou, Uwen Liang, rebelled and attacked Wei Xiaokang with light cavalry.

古文：宽为亮所薄，景山击破之。
现代文：韦孝宽被宇文亮的军队所逼迫，元景山出兵打败了宇文亮。
English: Wei Xiaokuan was persecuted by Uwen Liang's army, and Yuan Jingshan sent troops to defeat Uwen Liang.

古文：以功拜亳州总管。
现代文：他因功又被任命为亳州总管。
English: He was also appointed as the chief administrator of Zhangzhou for his merits.

古文：隋文帝为丞相，尉迟迥作乱。荣州刺史宇文胄与迥通谋，阴以书讽景山。
现代文：隋文帝当丞相时，尉迟迥作乱，荥州刺史宇文胄和尉迟迥勾结合谋，秘密写信劝告元景山。
English: When Sui Emperor Wen was the prime minister of the Empire of Japan, he sent a secret letter to advise Yuan Jingshan.

古文：景山执使，封书诣相府，进位上大将军。
现代文：元景山把使者抓起来，封了书信，送到丞相府，被加封为上大将军。
English: Yuan Jingshan arrested the envoy, sealed the letter, sent it to the prime minister's office, and was awarded the title of senior general.

古文：以军功，迁安州总管，进柱国。
现代文：由于军功，改任安州总管，晋位柱国。
English: Due to his military service, he was promoted to the post of Anzhou chief administrator and promoted to the post of pillar state.

古文：隋文帝受禅，拜上柱国。
现代文：隋文帝受禅后，封为上柱国。
English: After Emperor Sui Wen accepted Zen, it was designated as a Shangzhu country.

古文：明年，大举伐陈，以景山为行军元帅，出汉口。
现代文：第二年，隋大举攻陈，任命元景山为行军元帅，从汉口出兵。
English: In the second year, the Sui Dynasty attacked Chen in a big way, appointed Yuan Jingshan as the marshal of the march, and sent troops from Hankou.

古文：将济江，会陈宣帝殂，有诏班师。
现代文：正准备渡江时，正好陈宣帝死去，朝廷有诏书让他回师。
English: When he was preparing to cross the river, Chen Xuandi died, and the imperial court ordered him to return to his master.

古文：景山大著威名，甚为敌人所惮。
现代文：元景山威名大振，敌人对他十分害怕。
English: The enemy was very afraid of him.

古文：后数载，坐事免。
现代文：几年后，因事被免职。
English: A few years later, he was fired for cause.

古文：卒于家，赠梁州总管，谥曰襄。
现代文：他死在家中，追赠为梁州总管，谥为 襄 。
English: He died at home and was posthumously awarded the title of Chief Administrator of Liangzhou, and his posthumous name was Jo.

古文：子成寿嗣。
现代文：他的儿子成寿承袭了他的封爵。
English: His son, Seiju, inherited his title.

