古文：王诞王华王惠王彧
现代文：后来桓玄得志，将要杀死他，桓修为他求情，于是把他流放到广州。
English: Later, Huan Xuan got the message that they were going to kill him, and Huan Xiu begged for his forgiveness, so he was exiled to Guangzhou.

古文：卢循据广州，以诞爲其平南府长史，甚宾礼之。
现代文：卢循占据广州，以王诞担任他的平南府长史，对他十分有礼。
English: Lu Xun occupied Guangzhou and made Wang Sheng his governor of Pingnan Prefecture. He was very courteous to him.

古文：诞久客思归，乃说循曰： 下官与刘镇军情味不浅，若得北归，必蒙任寄。 
现代文：王诞做客久了想回去，于是便劝告卢循说： 我和刘镇军情分不浅，如果能够北归，一定会受到任用。 
English: Wang Xizhe wanted to go back after being a guest for a long time, so he advised Lu Xun and said: I and Liu Zhen are not shallow in military affairs. If I can return to the north, I will definitely be appointed.

古文：时广州刺史吴隐之亦爲循所拘留，诞又曰： 将军今留吴公，公私非计。
现代文：当时广州刺史吴隐之也被卢循所挽留，王诞又说： 将军现在挽留吴公，于公于私都不是良策。
English: At that time, the Guangzhou assassin, Wu Yingzhi, was also retained by Lu Xun, and Wang Zetian also said: The general now retains Wu Gong, which is not a good strategy for both the public and the private.

古文：孙伯符岂不欲留华子鱼，但以一境不容二君耳。 
现代文：孙伯符难道不想留华子鱼，只是因为一个地方不能容下两个君主罢了。 
English: Didn't Sun Bofu want to keep the Chinese fish just because one place couldn't accommodate two monarchs?

古文：于是诞及隐之俱得还。
现代文：于是王诞和吴隐之都得以回归。
English: As a result, the capitals of Wangjing and Wuyin were able to return.

古文：诞爲宋武帝太尉长史，尽心归奉，帝甚仗之。
现代文：王诞做宋武帝的太尉长史，尽心效力，武帝十分信赖他。
English: Wang Zetian had a long history of serving as Song Emperor Wu's lieutenant, and he worked hard. Emperor Wu trusted him very much.

古文：卢循自蔡洲南走，刘毅固求追讨。
现代文：卢循从蔡州向南逃走，刘毅坚决要求追击讨伐。
English: Lu Xun fled southward from Caizhou, and Liu Yi resolutely demanded to pursue and fight against Lu Xun.

古文：诞密白帝曰： 公既平广固，复灭卢循，则功盖终古，勋无与二。
现代文：王诞秘密地告诉武帝说： 您既平了广固，又灭了卢循，那么就会功盖今古，勋业没有第二个人可比。
English: Wang Xizhun secretly told Emperor Wu: "You have not only leveled Guanggu, but also eliminated Lu Xun, then you will have made great achievements in this ancient time. No other person can match your distinguished career."

古文：如此大威，岂可使馀人分之？
现代文：如此巨大的威望，怎么可以让其他人来瓜分？
English: How can such a huge prestige be divided among others?

古文：毅与公同起布衣，一时相推耳，今既丧败，不宜复使立功。 
现代文：刘毅和您同是从平民起家，一时间很受推重，现在既然遭到失败，不应该再让他立功。 
English: Liu Yi and you both started from the common people. For a while, he was pushed very hard. Now that he has been defeated, he should not be allowed to make meritorious contributions.

古文：帝纳其说。
现代文：武帝采纳了他的意见。
English: Emperor Wu adopted his opinion.

古文：后爲吴国内史，母忧去职。
现代文：后来他做了吴国内史，因为给母亲服丧而离职。
English: Later, he did Wu's domestic history, but left the post because of mourning for his mother.

古文：武帝伐刘毅，起爲辅国将军，诞固辞，以墨絰从行。
现代文：武帝讨伐刘毅，起用他为辅国将军，王诞坚持推辞，结果穿着黑色丧服随从出发。
English: Emperor Wu cracked down on Liu Yi and appointed him as an auxiliary general of the country. Wang Xizhe persisted in his refusal, and as a result, he set off with his followers wearing black mourning clothes.

古文：时诸葛长人行太尉留府事，心不自安，武帝甚虑之。
现代文：当时诸葛长人负责太尉留府的事务，自己心中不安，武帝十分担心。
English: At that time, Zhuge Changren was in charge of the affairs of the captain's stay in the capital. He was uneasy in his heart, and Emperor Wu was very worried.

古文：毅既平，诞求先下。
现代文：刘毅平灭以后，王诞请求自己先回去。
English: After Liu Yi was defeated, Wang Xizhe asked him to go back first.

古文：帝曰： 长人似有自疑心，卿讵宜便去？ 
现代文：武帝说： 诸葛长人似乎自己有疑心，您哪能就过去？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "The elder Zhuge seems to have doubts of his own. How can you just go over there?"

古文：诞曰： 长人知下官蒙公垂盼，今轻身单下，必当以爲无虞，可少安其意。 
现代文：王诞说： 诸葛长人知道我很受您的赏识，现在轻身独自回去，必然会觉得没有担忧，可以稍微安定一下他的心意。 
English: Wang Xizhe said: Zhuge elders know that I am very appreciated by you, and now I am going back alone, I will certainly feel that there is no worry, and I can stabilize his mind a little.

古文：王惊赧即起。
现代文：武帝笑着说： 您的勇敢超过孟贲、夏育了。 
English: Emperor Wu said with a smile: Your bravery surpasses that of Meng Xi and Xia Yu.

古文：后密啓之，因此废锢。
现代文：于是先回去了。后来去世，追封为作唐县五等侯。
English: So he went back first. Later, he died and was posthumously made the fifth highest official in Tang County.

古文：亮字奉叔，莹从父弟也。
现代文：○王亮王亮字奉叔，是王莹的堂弟。
English: ○ Wang Liang Wang Liang is a cousin of Wang Ying.

古文：父攸字昌达，仕宋位太宰中郎，赠给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：他的父亲王悠字昌达，在宋朝做官担任太宰中郎，追赠为给事黄门侍郎。
English: His father, Wang Yu Zi Chang Da, was an official in the Song Dynasty and served as Dazai Zhongro, and was posthumously given the title Huangmen Zhi Rong.

古文：亮以名家子，宋末选尚公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：王亮因为是名家弟子，宋朝末年选他与公主结婚，封为驸马都尉。
English: Because Wang Liang was a disciple of a famous family, the Song Dynasty chose him to marry a princess at the end of the year, and he was appointed as the captain of the horse.

古文：历任秘书丞。
现代文：曾担任秘书丞。
English: He worked as a secretary.

古文：齐竟陵王子良开西邸，延才俊，以爲士林馆，使工图其像，亮亦预焉。
现代文：齐朝的竟陵王萧子良开了西邸，招揽俊才，作为士林馆，让工匠画下他们的肖像，王亮也参与了。
English: Xiao Ziliang, the King of Mausoleums of the Qi Dynasty, opened the West Mansion to recruit talented people. It was used as a scholastic hall and allowed craftsmen to paint their portraits. Wang Liang also participated.

古文：累迁晋陵太守，在职清公，有美政。
现代文：他逐步调任晋陵太守，在职清廉公正，具有良好的政绩。
English: He was gradually transferred to the post of the governor of Jinling, was honest and fair in his work, and had a good political record.

古文：时有晋陵令沈巑之性粗疏，好犯亮讳，亮不堪，遂啓代之。
现代文：当时有个晋陵令沈繨之，性格粗疏，好犯王亮的忌讳，王亮不能忍受，于是上表取代了他。
English: At that time, there was a Jinling order, Shen Xizhi, with a coarse personality, who liked to commit the taboo of Wang Liang. Wang Liang could not bear it, so the above table replaced him.

古文：巑之怏怏，乃造坐云： 下官以犯讳被代，未知明府讳。
现代文：沈繨之很不高兴，便到了他的衙门说： 下官因为犯了忌讳而被取代，不知道您的忌讳是什么。
English: Unhappy, Shen Yanzhi went to his superior and said, "Your subordinate was replaced because he broke a taboo. I don't know what your taboo is.

古文：若爲攸字，当作无骹尊傍犬？
现代文：如果是攸字，应当是无脚尊旁犬？
English: If it's a word, should it be "footless dog"?

古文：爲犬傍无骹尊？
现代文：还是犬旁无脚尊？
English: Or is there no honor among dogs?

古文：若是有心攸？
现代文：或者是有心的攸字？
English: Or is it a deliberate choice of words?

古文：无心攸？
现代文：无心的攸字？
English: A careless choice of words?

古文：乞告示。 
现代文：请告诉我。 
English: Please tell me.

古文：亮不履下床跣而走，巑之抚掌大笑而去。
现代文：王亮不穿鞋下床光着脚走路，沈繨之拍掌大笑而去。
English: Wang Liang got out of bed without shoes and walked barefoot. Shen Yao clapped his hands and laughed loudly.

古文：建武末，累迁吏部尚书。
现代文：建武末年，逐步升迁为吏部尚书。
English: In the last years of Jianwu's reign, he was gradually promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：时右仆射江祏管朝政，多所进拔，爲士所归。
现代文：当时右仆射江纏主管朝政，提拔的人很多，为士人所归心。
English: At that time, his right-hand man, Shoe Edo, was in charge of the imperial court, and promoted many people, which was a win-win situation for the nobles.

古文：亮自以身居选部，每持异议。
现代文：王亮自以为身在吏部，常常持不同意见。
English: Wang Liang, by virtue of being a member of the Selection Committee, often insisted on dissent.

古文：始亮未爲吏部郎时，以祏帝之内弟，故深友祏。
现代文：开始王亮没做吏部郎的时候，因为江纏是皇帝的内弟，所以深深地和他交好。
English: At the beginning, when Wang Liang was not a bureaucrat, because Jiang Ting was the emperor's brother-in-law, he had a deep friendship with him.

古文：祏爲之延誉，益爲帝所器重。
现代文：江纏为他扩大名誉，越发被皇帝所器重。
English: Jiang Tang expanded his reputation and became more and more important to the emperor.

古文：至是与祏情好携薄，祏昵之如初。
现代文：到了现在与江纏的感情淡薄，而江纏对他亲昵如初。
English: Now, his feelings for Jiangzhang are weak, but Jiangzhang is as close to him as ever.

古文：及祏遇诛，群小放命，凡所除拜，悉由内宠，亮弗能止。
现代文：等江纏被杀以后，一群小人放弃天子命令，凡是任命官吏，都是由于内部宠幸，王亮不能阻止。
English: After Tochigawari was killed, a group of villains abandoned God's order. Any appointment of officials was due to internal favors, and Wang Liang could not stop them.

古文：外若详审，内无明鉴，所选用，拘资次而已，当时不谓爲能。
现代文：外面好像详加审查，内部却没有明正的鉴别，所选用的人，都只是根据资历，当时人们不认为他们有能力。
English: There seems to have been a lot of scrutiny externally, but no proper vetting internally. People were chosen on the basis of their qualifications, when they weren't thought to be capable.

古文：后爲尚书左仆射。
现代文：王亮后来担任尚书左仆射。
English: Wang Liang later served as Shang Shushi's right-hand man.

古文：及东昏肆虐，亮取容以免。
现代文：等到东昏侯逞凶，王亮曲意取悦，得以免祸。
English: Wait until the East drowsy, Wang Liang will be pleased, and he will be spared.

古文：梁武帝至新林，内外百僚皆道迎，其不能拔者亦间路送诚款，亮独不遣。
现代文：梁武帝到了新林，朝内外的百官都去路上迎接，那些不能前往的也派人从小道去表示诚心，独有王亮不派人去。
English: When Emperor Liangwu arrived in Xinlin, hundreds of officials from both inside and outside the North went to the road to meet him. Those who could not go also sent people from the path to show their sincerity. Only Wang Liang did not send anyone.

古文：及东昏遇杀，张稷仍集亮等于太极殿前西锺下坐，议欲立齐湘东嗣王宝晊。
现代文：等东昏侯被杀，张稷便把王亮等人召集到太极殿前西面的钟下聚坐，讨论想立齐朝的湘东嗣王萧宝緻为皇帝。
English: After Dongwen Hou was killed, Zhang Ye called Wang Liang and others to gather under the clock in front of the Taiji Hall to discuss the idea of making the Eastern Hunan successor of the Qi Dynasty, Wang Xiao Baoji, the emperor.

古文：领军莹曰： 城闭已久，人情离解，征东在近，何不谘问？ 
现代文：领军萧莹说： 城已经关闭了很久，人的感情离散，征东将军就在近处，何不前去咨询？ 
English: The leader of the army, Xiao Ying, said: The city has been closed for a long time, people's feelings are scattered, the General of the Eastern Expedition is nearby, why not go to consult?

古文：张稷又曰： 桀有昏德，鼎迁于殷。
现代文：张稷又说： 夏桀有昏德，政权就转移到殷朝。
English: Zhang Ye also said, "Xia Ye had a lapse in virtue, and the political power was transferred to the Yin Dynasty.

古文：今实微子去殷、项伯归汉之日。 
现代文：现在实在就是微子离开殷、项伯归附汉的时候。 
English: Now is really the time for Micron to leave Yin and Xiangbo to join Han.

古文：亮默然。
现代文：王亮沉默不语。
English: Wang Liang was silent.

古文：朝士相次下床，乃遣国子博士范云齎东昏首送石头，推亮爲首。
现代文：朝士陆续离座，于是就派国子博士范云把东昏侯的头送往石头城，推举王亮为首。
English: The imperial princes left the throne one after another, so he sent Dr. Fan Yun, the son of a provincial official, to send the head of the Eastern Conclave to Stone Town and promote Wang Liang as the head.

古文：城平，朝士毕至，亮独后，裙履见武帝。
现代文：城市平定后，朝士都到了，惟独王亮在后面，穿着裙子和布鞋来见武帝。
English: After the city was pacified, the Asashi all arrived, except for Wang Liang, who was in the back, wearing a skirt and cloth shoes to see Emperor Wu.

古文：帝谓曰： 颠而不扶，安用彼相？ 
现代文：武帝对他说： 倒了却不去扶它，那些大臣还有什么用处？ 
English: Emperor Wu said to him, "What use are those ministers if they fall down but don't try to help him up?

古文：亮曰： 若其可扶，明公岂有今日之举。 
现代文：王亮说： 如果它可以扶起，明公您哪里还会有今天的壮举？ 
English: Wang Liang said: If it can be lifted up, Ming Gong, where will you have today's feat?

古文：因泣而去。
现代文：于是哭着走了。
English: So she went away crying.

古文：霸府开，以爲大司马长史。
现代文：藩王的府邸开设，任命他为大司马长史。
English: The residence of the lord of the domain was opened, and he was appointed the grand secretary, Ma Changshi.

古文：梁台建，授侍中、尚书令，固让，乃爲侍中、中书监，兼尚书令。
现代文：梁台建立，任命他为侍中、尚书令，他坚决推辞，于是做了侍中、中书监，兼尚书令。
English: Liang Tai was established, and he was appointed as a chamberlain and senior secretary, but he resolutely refused, so he became a chamberlain, senior book supervisor, and senior secretary.

古文：及受禅，迁侍中、尚书令、中军将军，封豫宁县公。
现代文：等到梁武帝接受了禅让，调任他为侍中、尚书令、中军将军，封为豫宁县公。
English: When Emperor Liang Wu accepted Zen's resignation, he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, secretary, and general of the Chinese army, and was appointed as the governor of Yuanning County.

古文：天监二年，转左光禄大夫。
现代文：天监二年，转为左光禄大夫。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the position of Sakoroku doctor.

古文：元日朝会，亮辞疾不登殿，设馔别省，语笑自若。
现代文：一次吉日朝会，王亮请病假不登殿，而在省台设宴，谈笑自如。
English: Wang Liang asked for sick leave to avoid attending a auspicious imperial meeting, and instead held a banquet in the provincial capital, where they were able to talk and laugh freely.

古文：数日，诏公卿问讯，亮无病色。
现代文：几天后，诏令让公卿前去问候，王亮并没有病色。
English: A few days later, the imperial edict asked the noble to come and greet him. Wang Liang did not look ill.

古文：御史中丞乐蔼奏亮大不敬，论弃市。
现代文：御史中丞乐霭上表指责王亮大不敬，论罪处死示众。
English: The above table accused Wang Liang of great disrespect and sentenced him to death.

古文：诏削爵，废爲庶人。
现代文：结果下令削去他的爵位，废为平民。
English: As a result, he was stripped of his title and made a commoner.

古文：四年，帝宴华光殿，求谠言。
现代文：天监四年，武帝在华光殿举行宴会，征求正直的言论。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, Emperor Wu held a banquet at the Hua Guang Palace to solicit honest speech.

古文：尚书左丞范缜起曰： 司徒谢朏本有虚名，陛下擢之如此；前尚书令王亮颇有政体，陛下弃之如彼。
现代文：尚书左丞范缜站起来说： 司徒谢月出本来只有虚名，陛下却这样地提拔他；前尚书令王亮颇有政治才干，而陛下却那样地抛弃他。
English: Shang Shuling Zuoxing Fan Qi stood up and said: "Stu Xie Yuexing originally had only a false name, but your majesty promoted him in this way; before, Shang Shuling Wang Liang had considerable political ability, but your majesty abandoned him in this way.

古文：愚臣所不知。 
现代文：这是愚臣所不能理解的。 
English: This is what fools cannot understand.

古文：帝变色曰： 卿可更馀言。 
现代文：武帝改变了脸色说： 您可以改变一个话题。 
English: Emperor Wu changed his face and said: You can change a topic.

古文：缜固执不已，帝不悦。
现代文：范缜坚持不放，武帝很不高兴。
English: Fan Ye persisted, and Emperor Wu was very displeased.

古文：御史中丞任昉因奏缜妄陈褒贬，请免缜官。
现代文：御史中丞任窻于是上表说范缜乱加褒贬，请求免除范缜的官职。
English: Goshi Chujo Rinno then made a request to remove Fan Rong from his official position, stating that Fan Rong's actions were both praiseworthy and demeaning.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：亮因屏居闭扫，不通宾客。
现代文：王亮于是闭门闲居洒扫，不和宾客往来。
English: As a result, Wang Liang secluded himself behind closed doors and did not mingle with guests.

古文：遭母忧，居丧尽礼。
现代文：遭遇了母亲的丧事，守丧非常尽礼。
English: He suffered the death of his mother and devoted himself to filial piety.

古文：后爲中书监，加散骑常侍。
现代文：后来做了中书监，加官散骑常侍。
English: Later, he became a middle school librarian, and was promoted to officer and horseback riding attendant.

古文：卒，諡炀子。
现代文：死后，谥号为炀子。
English: After his death, his posthumous nickname was Zengzi.

古文：王华字子陵，诞从祖弟也。
现代文：○王华王华字子陵，是王诞同一曾祖的弟弟。
English: ○ Wanghua Wanghua Zizi Mausoleum, is the younger brother of the same great-grandfather of Wang Huan.

古文：祖荟，卫将军、会稽内史。
现代文：祖父王荟，是卫将军、会稽内史。
English: His grandfather, Wang Qian, was a Wei general and the internal history of the association.

古文：父廞，司徒右长史。
现代文：父亲王繤，是司徒右长史。
English: His father, Wang Yao, was a disciple of Stowe.

古文：晋安帝隆安初，王恭起兵讨王国宝，时廞丁母忧在家。
现代文：晋安帝隆安初年，王恭起兵讨伐王国宝，当时王繤遇到母亲的丧事呆在家里。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Longan of Jin and An, Wang Qiong raised an army to fight for the treasure of the kingdom. At that time, Wang Yao stayed at home when his mother passed away.

古文：恭檄令起兵，廞即聚衆应之，以女爲贞烈将军，以女人爲官属。
现代文：王恭发出讨伐檄文，下令起兵，王繤立即聚众响应，以女儿为贞烈将军，以妻子为属官。
English: Wang Qiong issued a proclamation for a crusade and ordered troops to be raised. Wang Qiong immediately gathered a crowd to respond, with his daughter as the general and his wife as a subordinate officer.

古文：及国宝死，恭檄廞罢兵。
现代文：后来王国宝死去，王恭传令让王繤罢兵。
English: Later, Wang Guobao died, and Wang Qiong ordered Wang Yao to withdraw.

古文：廞起兵之际，多所诛戮，至是不复得已，因举兵以讨恭爲名。
现代文：王繤起兵的时候，杀人很多，到现在已经控制不住，于是便举兵以讨伐王恭为名。
English: When Wang Hui raised an army, there was a lot of killing, and now it is out of control, so he raised an army in the name of fighting Wang Qiong.

古文：恭遣刘牢之击廞，廞败走，不知所在。
现代文：王恭派刘牢之进击王繤，王繤败逃，不知逃到了什么地方。
English: Wang Gong sent Liu Du to attack Wang Yao, but Wang Yao was defeated and fled to I don't know where.

古文：长子泰爲恭所杀。
现代文：长子王泰被王恭所杀。
English: The eldest son Wang Tai was killed by Wang Qiong.

古文：华时年十三在军中，与廞相失，随沙门释昙冰逃，使提衣襆从后，津逻咸疑焉。
现代文：王华当时十三岁，就在军中，与王繤互相失散，随着和尚释昙冰逃跑，让他提着衣物跟在后面，津渡的巡逻兵都很怀疑他们。
English: Wang Hua was thirteen years old at the time. He was in the army, and he and Wang Yao became separated from each other. Wang Hua ran away with the monk Xie Bingbing, leaving him to follow behind with his clothes. The patrolmen in Tsudo were very suspicious of them.

古文：华行迟，昙冰骂曰： 奴子怠懈，行不及我。 
现代文：王华走得慢，昙冰骂道： 奴才懈怠，跟不上我！ 
English: Wang Hua walked slowly, and Yan Bing scolded him, saying, "You slacker, you can't keep up with me!"

古文：以杖捶华数十，衆乃不疑，由此得免。
现代文：用棍子捶了王华好几十下，众人才不怀疑了，因此得以免祸。
English: After poking Wang Hua with a stick for dozens of times, many talents did not doubt, so they were able to avoid the disaster.

古文：遇赦还吴，以父存没不测，布衣蔬食，不交游者十馀年。
现代文：后来遇到赦免，回到了吴地，因为父亲存亡不明，所以他穿布衣，吃菜饭，不与人交游达十几年。
English: Later, he was pardoned and returned to Wudi. Since his father's whereabouts are unknown, he wore a cloth coat, ate vegetable rice, and did not travel with others for more than ten years.

古文：宋武帝欲收其才用，乃发廞丧，使华制服。
现代文：宋武帝想征召利用他的才干，于是便为王繤发丧，让王华照礼服丧。
English: Emperor Songwu wanted to enlist the use of his talent, so he held a funeral for Wang Yao, and had Wang Huazhao wear a ceremonial mourning robe.

古文：服阕，武帝北伐长安，领镇西将军、北徐州刺史，辟华爲州主簿。
现代文：服丧完毕，武帝北伐长安，当时兼任镇西将军、北徐州刺史，召王华为州主簿。
English: After the funeral, Emperor Wu led the Northern Expedition to Chang'an. At that time, he concurrently served as the Zhenxi General and the Northern Xuzhou Historian, and summoned Wang Huai to be the chief record of the state.

古文：后爲别驾，历职着称。
现代文：后来为别驾，历次任职都很有名。
English: Later, he was a different driver, and each time he was in office he was famous.

古文：文帝镇江陵，爲西中郎主簿、谘议参军。
现代文：文帝镇守江陵，他担任西中郎主簿、咨议参军。
English: Emperor Wen was in charge of Jiangling, and he served as the chief accountant of the West Middle Kingdom and consulted on joining the army.

古文：文帝未亲政事，悉委司马张邵。
现代文：文帝尚未亲理政事的时候，完全委任给司马张邵。
English: When Emperor Wen was not yet personally in charge of government affairs, he fully delegated to Sima Zhang Shao.

古文：华性尚物，不欲人在己前。
现代文：王华好胜，不想让别人在自己前面。
English: Wang Hua likes to win and doesn't want others to get ahead of her.

古文：邵性豪，每行来常引夹毂。
现代文：张邵性格豪迈，每次行动常常带着很多随从。
English: Zhang Shao is a heroic character, and he often brings a lot of followers with him to every action.

古文：华出入乘牵车，从者不过两三人以矫之。
现代文：王华则是出入乘坐牛车，随行的不过两三个人，故意与他形成对照。
English: Wang Hua, on the other hand, went in and out by ox cart, accompanied by only two or three people, deliberately forming a contrast with him.

古文：尝相逢，华阳若不知是邵，谓左右曰： 此卤簿甚盛，必是殿下。 
现代文：曾经有一次和他相逢，王华假装不知道是张邵，对左右的人说： 这人仪仗十分盛大，一定是殿下吧！ 
English: Once, when meeting him, Wang Hua pretended not to know that it was Zhang Shao, and said to the people around him, "This man is very dignified, it must be His Royal Highness!"

古文：乃下牵车立于道侧，及邵至乃惊。
现代文：于是便下了牛车，立在道边，等张邵到了，才大吃一惊。
English: So he got off the cart and stood by the side of the road. When Zhang Shao arrived, he was taken aback.

古文：邵白服登城，爲华所纠，邵坐被征，华代爲司马。
现代文：张邵曾经穿白衣登城，被王华所弹劾，张邵获罪被调走，由王华代任司马。
English: Zhang Shao once wore a white coat to the city, was impeached by Wang Hua, Zhang Shao was convicted and transferred away, and Wang Hua took the place of Sima.

古文：文帝将入奉大统，以少帝见害，不敢下。
现代文：文帝即将入京继承帝位，因为少帝陷害，不敢东下。
English: Emperor Wen was about to enter Beijing to succeed to the throne, but because the young emperor was framed, he did not dare to go to the East.

古文：华曰： 先帝有大功于天下，四海所服。
现代文：王华说： 先帝对天下立有大功，四海归服。
English: Wang Hua said: The former emperor has made great contributions to the world, and the four seas have submitted to him.

古文：虽嗣主不纲，人望未改。
现代文：虽然继承人不循正轨，但是威望不改。
English: Although the heirs do not follow the right path, the prestige does not change.

古文：徐羡之中才寒士，傅亮布衣诸生，非有晋宣帝、王大将军之心明矣。
现代文：徐羡之是个中等才能的寒士，傅亮是个平民书生，并非有晋宣帝、王大将军的心意是很明白的。
English: Xu Enzhi is a cold warrior of medium talent, Fu Liang is a commoner student, and it is very clear that he does not have the intention of promoting Emperor Xuan and General Wang.

古文：畏庐陵严断，将来必不自容。
现代文：害怕像庐陵王那样严断，将来必定不能自容。
English: If you are afraid of being as strict as the King of Fuling, you will not be able to tolerate it in the future.

古文：殿下宽叡慈仁，天下所知，已且越次奉迎，冀以见德，悠悠之论，殆必不然。
现代文：殿下宽宏仁慈，是天下人都知道的，而且越过名次前来奉迎，希望能有大德，纷繁议论，恐怕都不正确。
English: His Royal Highness's magnanimity and benevolence are well-known to the world, and people come to greet him regardless of his rank, hoping that he will have great virtue. There is a lot of discussion, but I am afraid it is all incorrect.

古文：羡之、亮、晦又要檀道济、王弘五人同功，孰肯相让，势必不行。
现代文：徐羡之、傅亮、谢晦又要与檀道济、王弘五人同功，谁肯相让，看来必定不能成功。
English: Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang and Xie Hui also have to work together with Dang Daoji and Wang Hong. Whoever is willing to concede must not succeed.

古文：今日就征，万无所虑。 
现代文：今天前往接受征召，不须有任何顾虑。 
English: There is nothing to be afraid of when you go for your call-up today.

古文：帝从之，曰： 卿复欲爲吾之宋昌矣。 
现代文：文帝听从了，说： 你又想做我手下的宋昌了。 
English: Emperor Wen listened and said: You want to be my subordinate Song Chang again.

古文：乃留华总后任。
现代文：于是便留下王华总管后方。
English: As a result, Wang Hua, the general manager, was left behind.

古文：上即位，以华爲侍中、右卫将军。
现代文：皇上即位，以王华担任侍中、右卫将军。
English: The emperor ascended to the throne, with Wang Hua serving as an aide-de-camp and general of the right guard.

古文：先是，会稽孔甯子爲文帝镇西谘议参军，以文义见赏，至是爲黄门侍郎，领步兵校尉。
现代文：在此以前，会稽的孔宁子担任文帝的镇西咨议参军，以文才受到欣赏，到现在当了黄门侍郎，兼任步兵校尉。
English: Prior to this, the auditor, Kong Ningzi, served as Emperor Wen's Zhenxi advisory to join the army, and was appreciated for his literary talent. He is now a Huangmen waiter, and also serves as an infantry captain.

古文：甯子先爲何无忌安成国侍郎，还东修宅，令门可容高盖，邻里笑之。
现代文：孔宁子先前曾做何无忌安成国的侍郎，回到东部修建宅院，门楼盖得可以容下高高的华盖，邻里都笑话他。
English: Kong Ningzi had previously worked as a waiter for Ancheng, and returned to the east to build a mansion. The gatehouse was built to accommodate a tall huagai, and the neighbors laughed at him.

古文：甯子曰 大丈夫何常之有。 
现代文：孔宁子说： 大丈夫有什么固定的状况呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "What is the fixed state of a healthy man?

古文：甯子与华并有富贵之愿，自羡之等执权，日夜构之于文帝。
现代文：孔宁子与王华都有富贵的愿望，自从徐羡之等人掌权，二人就日夜在文帝面前构陷他们。
English: Both Kong Ningzi and Wang Hua had the desire to be rich. Ever since Xu Enzhi and others came to power, the two of them would frame them in front of Emperor Wen day and night.

古文：甯子尝东归至金昌亭，左右欲泊船，宁子命去之，曰： 此杀君亭，不可泊也。 
现代文：孔宁子曾经东归到金昌亭，左右的人想把船停泊在那里，孔宁子命令离开那里，说： 这里是杀君亭，不可停泊。 
English: Confucius once went back east to Jinchangting, and people on both sides wanted to moor their boats there. Confucius ordered them to leave, saying, "This is Sakyongting, you can't moor here."

古文：华每闲居讽咏,常诵王粲登楼赋曰： 冀王道之一平,假高衢而骋力。 
现代文：王华常常闲居吟咏，常常朗诵王粲的《登楼赋》说： 希望天下能政治清平，凭借大道而施展才力。 
English: Wang Hua often lounges in Jingya, often reciting Wang Yao's "Climbing the Building" and saying: I hope that the world can be politically peaceful, and display their talents by virtue of the avenue.

古文：出入逢羡之等，每切齿愤叱，叹曰： 当见太平时否？ 
现代文：平时出入遇着了徐羡之等人，经常切齿怒骂。他慨叹说： 还能见到太平的时代吗？ 
English: In ordinary times, he encountered people such as Xu Enzhi, who often cut his teeth and cursed. He sighed and said: Can we still see the era of peace?

古文：元嘉二年，宁子卒。
现代文：元嘉二年，孔宁子去世。
English: In the second year of Yuan Jia, Kong Ningzi passed away.

古文：三年，诛羡之等。
现代文：三年，杀了徐羡之等人。
English: Three years later, he killed Xu Enzhi and others.

古文：华迁护军将军，侍中如故。
现代文：王华升为护军将军，侍中职位仍旧。
English: Wang Huasheng is the general of the escort, and the position of the chamberlain is still the same.

古文：宋世唯华与南阳刘湛不爲饰让，得官即拜，以此爲常。
现代文：宋代的时候，只有王华和南阳刘湛不作谦让，得官就做，以此为习惯。
English: During the Song Dynasty, only Wang Hua and Nanyang Liu Zhan did not make any concessions, but did so when they became officials. This was the custom.

古文：华以情事异人，未尝预宴集。
现代文：王华的处事与常人不同，他不曾参加宴席聚会。
English: Wang Hua's way of doing things is different from that of ordinary people. He has never attended a banquet.

古文：终身不饮酒，有宴不之诣。
现代文：终身不饮酒，有宴会的地方不去。
English: Don't drink alcohol for life, and don't go to parties.

古文：若有论事者，乘车造门，主人出车就之。
现代文：如果有人谈论事情，乘车到了门上，主人便坐车出去迎上。
English: If someone is talking about something and a car pulls up to the door, the owner will drive out to meet them.

古文：及王弘辅政，而弘弟昙首爲文帝所任，与华相埒。
现代文：后来王弘辅佐大政，而王弘的弟弟王昙首被文帝所信赖，与王华同等。
English: Later, Wang Hongfu assisted Emperor Taizong, while Wang Hong's younger brother, Wang Xizhou, was trusted by Emperor Wen, and was on a par with Wang Hua.

古文：华常谓己力用不尽，每叹曰： 宰相顿有数人，天下何由得安？ 
现代文：王华常常说自己的力量用不完，屡屡感叹说： 宰相同时并存几个人。天下怎么会得安宁？ 
English: Wang Hua often said that his strength was inexhaustible, and repeatedly lamented, "There are several prime ministers at the same time. How can the world have peace?"

古文：四年卒，年四十三。
现代文：元嘉四年死去，年龄四十三岁。
English: Yuan Jia died four years later at the age of forty-three.

古文：九年，以诛羡之功，追封新建县侯，諡曰宣。
现代文：元嘉九年，以杀死徐羡之的功劳，被追封为新建县侯，谥号为宣。
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, he was posthumously awarded the title of newly created county magistrate, with the posthumous name of Xuan, for killing Xu Enzhi.

古文：及齐高帝辅政，蕴与沈攸之连谋，事败，斩于秣陵市。
现代文：孝武帝即位，配享文帝庙庭。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne and was given Emperor Wen's temple garden.

古文：奂字道明，彧兄子也。
现代文：○王奂王奂字道明，是王彧哥哥的儿子。
English: ○ Wang Yao Wang Yao is the son of Wang Yao's older brother.

古文：父粹字景深，位黄门侍郎。
现代文：他的父亲王粹字景深，位居黄门侍郎。
English: His father, Wang Zizhizhen, was a servant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：奂继从祖球，故小字彦孙。
现代文：王奂过继给了堂祖父王球，所以小字叫彦孙。
English: Wang Xuan was succeeded by his great-grandfather Wang Qiu, so the small character is called Yixun.

古文：年数岁，常侍球许，甚见爱。
现代文：年龄才几岁的时候，常常跟随在王球身边，十分受宠爱。
English: When he was just a few years old, he often followed the king's ball around and was very much loved.

古文：奂诸兄出身诸王国常侍，而奂起家着作佐郎。
现代文：王奂的几个哥哥担任各王的国常侍，而王奂担任著作佐郎。
English: Several of Wang Yao's brothers served as imperial attendants to the kings, while Wang Yao served as the chief scribe.

古文：琅邪顔延之与球情款稍异，常抚奂背曰： 阿奴始免寒士。 
现代文：琅笽颜延之与王球情感诚挚融洽逐渐特殊，常常用手抚着王奂的背说： 阿奴刚刚脱出了寒士。 
English: Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan

古文：奂少而强济，叔父景文常以家事委之。
现代文：王奂年少时就很强干，叔父王景文常常把家中的事情委托给他。
English: Wang Yao was very hardworking when he was young, and his uncle Wang Jingwen often entrusted him with the affairs of the family.

古文：仕宋历侍中，祠部尚书，转掌吏部。
现代文：他在宋朝做官历任侍中、祠部尚书，转为掌管吏部。
English: During the Song Dynasty, he served as a courtier and secretary of the ancestral hall, and was put in charge of the cadre department.

古文：升明初，迁丹阳尹。
现代文：升明初年，调任丹阳尹。
English: In the first year of ascension, he was transferred to Danyang Yin.

古文：初，王晏父普曜爲沈攸之长史，常惧攸之举事，不得还，奂爲吏部，转普曜爲内职，晏深德之。
现代文：起初，王晏的父亲王普曜担任沈攸之的长史，常常害怕沈攸之起事，不能回来，王奂做了吏部，调王普曜担任朝内职务，王晏对他深深地感谢。
English: At first, Wang Yao's father, Wang Puyang, served as Shen Youzhi's long-term secretary. He was often afraid of Shen Youzhi's uprising and could not return. Wang Yao became the secretary and transferred Wang Puyang to serve in the imperial court. Wang Yao was deeply grateful to him.

古文：及晏仕齐，武帝以奂宋室外戚，而从弟蕴又同逆，疑有异意，晏叩头保奂无异志。
现代文：等王晏到齐朝做事，武帝认为王奂是宋朝的外戚，而他的堂弟王蕴又同为逆党，怀疑他有异志，王晏叩头担保王奂没有异志。
English: When Wang Hui went to work for the Qi Dynasty, Emperor Wu thought that Wang Hui was a relative of the Song Dynasty, while his cousin Wang Yun was also a member of the opposite party. He suspected that Wang Hui had a different agenda, and Wang Hui's kowtow guaranteed that Wang Hui did not have a different agenda.

古文：时晏父母在都，请以爲质，武帝乃止。
现代文：当时王晏的父母都在京城，王晏请求把他们作为人质，武帝才停止了。
English: At that time, Wang Yao's parents were both in Beijing. Wang Yao asked to take them as hostages, but Emperor Wu stopped him.

古文：永明中，累迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：永明时期，逐步升任尚书右仆射。
English: During the Yongming period, he was gradually promoted to the leading position of Shangshu Yudu.

古文：王俭卒，上欲用奂爲尚书令，以问晏。
现代文：王俭去世，皇上想用王奂担任尚书令，问王晏的意见。
English: After Wang Jian's death, the emperor wanted to use Wang Qian as Shang Shuling and asked Wang Qian's opinion.

古文：晏位遇已重，意不推奂，答曰： 柳世隆有勋望，恐不宜在奂后。 
现代文：王晏的地位恩宠已经很重，不想再推荐王奂，回答说： 柳世隆有功勋和威望，恐怕不应该在王奂的后面。 
English: Wang Yao's status and grace were already very heavy, and he didn't want to recommend Wang Yao anymore, he replied: Liu Shilong has merits and prestige, I'm afraid he shouldn't be behind Wang Yao.

古文：乃转左仆射，加给事中。
现代文：于是转为左仆射，担任给事中。
English: As a result, he switched to left-handed shooting and served as a midfielder.

古文：出爲雍州刺史，加都督。
现代文：出京做雍州刺史，同时担任都督。
English: He went to Beijing to write the history of Yongzhou and at the same time served as the governor.

古文：与甯蛮长史刘兴祖不睦。
现代文：与宁蛮长史刘兴祖不和睦。
English: He did not get along well with Liu Xingzu, who had a long history with Ning.

古文：十一年，奂遣军主朱公恩征蛮失利，兴祖欲以啓闻，奂大怒，收付狱。
现代文：永明十一年，王奂派遣军中主将朱公恩出征蛮邦失利，刘兴祖打算上表报告，王奂大怒，把他抓起来关到了监狱中。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, when the commander-in-chief of the army dispatched by Wang Hui sent Zhu Gong'en to the barbarian states and failed, Liu Xingzu planned to report to the table. Wang Hui was furious and arrested him and put him in prison.

古文：兴祖于狱以针画漆合盘爲书，报家称枉，令啓闻，而奂亦驰信啓上，诬兴祖扇动荒蛮。
现代文：刘兴祖在狱中用针画漆合盘为书信，报告家中说他是冤枉的，让他们报知朝廷，而王奂也派人乘快马上报，诬告刘兴祖煽动蛮族。
English: In prison, Liu Xingzu used a needle to draw a lacquer cover for a letter, reported to his family that he was wronged, and asked them to inform the court, and Wang Xi also sent someone to take the express to report, falsely accusing Liu Xingzu of inciting the barbarians.

古文：上知其枉，敕送兴祖还都，奂恐辞情翻背，辄杀之。
现代文：皇上知道他是冤枉的，下令让刘兴祖返回京城，王奂恐怕自己的报告被推翻，便把他杀掉。
English: The emperor knew that he was wrong and ordered Liu Xingzu to return to Beijing. Wang Xi was afraid that his report would be overturned, so he killed him.

古文：上大怒，遣中书舍人吕文显、直合将军曹道刚领兵收奂，又别诏梁州刺史曹武自江陵步出襄阳。
现代文：皇上大怒，派遣中书舍人吕文显、直阁将军曹道刚领兵去抓王奂，又另外诏令梁州刺史曹武从江陵步行出襄阳。
English: The emperor was so angry that he sent Lu Wenxian, a Chinese scholar, and Cao Daogang, a general of Zhougu, to lead the troops to arrest Wang Yao, and also ordered Liang Zhou to arrest Cao Wu from Jiangling to walk out of Xiangyang.

古文：奂子彪凶愚，颇干时政，士人咸切齿。
现代文：王奂的儿子王彪凶猛愚蠢，好干预当时政治，世人都切齿痛恨。
English: Wang Yao's son, Wang Biao, was ferociously stupid and eager to interfere in the politics of the time. The world hated him.

古文：时文显以漆匣匣箜篌在船中，因相诳云， 台使封刀斩王彪 。
现代文：当时吕文显用一个漆匣盛着一架箜篌放在船中，于是诳他说： 朝廷给使者封了快刀来斩王彪。 
English: At that time, Lu Wenxian used a lacquer box to put a crossbow in the boat, so he said: The court sealed the messenger with a sword to behead Wang Biao.

古文：及道刚、曹武、文显俱至，衆力既盛，又惧漆匣之言，于是议闭门拒命。
现代文：等曹道刚、曹武、吕文显全都来到，众人的力量既大，又害怕漆匣中的话，于是商议关闭城门拒绝接受命令。
English: When Cao Daogang, Cao Wu, and Lü Wenxian all arrived, the strength of the crowd was great, and they were afraid of the words in the lacquer box, so they discussed closing the gate and refused to accept the order.

古文：长史殷叡，奂女婿也，谏曰： 今开城门，白服接台使，不过槛车征还，隳官免爵耳。 
现代文：长史殷睿，是王奂的女婿，劝谏说： 现在打开城门，身穿白色衣服迎接朝廷的使者，顶多不过是囚车送还，罢官免爵罢了。 
English: Chang Shi Yin Rui, Wang Yao's son-in-law, advised him: "Open the city gate now, wear white clothes to welcome the imperial envoys. At most, they will only be sent back in a prisoner's carriage, dismissed from their posts and stripped of their titles."

古文：彪坚执不从，叡又曰： 宜遣典签间道送啓自申，亦不患不被宥。 乃令叡书啓，遣典签陈道齐出城，便爲文显所执。
现代文：王彪坚决不同意，殷睿又说： 应该派典签从小路送上奏表，自我辩解，也不担心不被宽大， 于是命令殷睿书写奏表，派遣典签陈道齐出城，结果便被吕文显抓住。
English: Wang Biao resolutely disagreed, and Yin Rui also said: It is necessary to send the signature from the path to send the report form, self-justification, and do not worry about not being lenient, so he ordered Yin Rui to write the report form and send the signature of Chen Daoqi out of the city, and the result was caught by Lu Wenxian.

古文：叡又曰： 忠不背国，勇不逃死，百世门户，宜思后计，孰与仰药自全，则身名俱泰，叡请先驱蝼蚁。 
现代文：殷睿又说： 忠不背叛国家，勇不逃避死亡，百代家门，应该想想后代，何如服药自尽，这样可以身与名都安泰，请让我首先自杀。 
English: Yin Rui also said: Loyalty does not betray the country, courage does not escape death, hundreds of generations of families, we should think about future generations, such as taking medicine to commit suicide, so that my body and reputation can be safe, please let me commit suicide first.

古文：又不从。
现代文：王奂又不听从。
English: Wang Yao again did not listen.

古文：奂门生郑羽叩头啓奂，乞出城迎台使，奂曰： 我不作贼，欲先遣啓自申，政恐曹、吕辈小人相陵藉，故且闭门自守耳。 
现代文：王奂的门生郑羽叩头请求王奂，请他出城迎接台使，王奂说： 我没有作贼，打算派人上表自我申辩，正恐怕曹、吕这些小人来相欺压，所以暂且闭上城门自我守卫。 
English: Wang Yao's protégé Zheng Yu bowed his head and asked Wang Yao to leave the city to meet the envoy. Wang Yao said, "I did not commit any theft. I plan to send someone to the front to defend myself. I am afraid that Cao and Lu, these villains, will oppress each other. Therefore, I will temporarily close the city gate to protect myself."

古文：彪遂出战，败走归。土人起义，攻州西门，彪登门拒战，却之。
现代文：王彪于是出战，失败逃走，土人起义，进攻州城的西门，王彪登上大门抵抗，把他们打退。
English: Wang Biao then went to war, failed to escape, the natives revolted, attacked the west gate of the state capital, Wang Biao boarded the gate to resist and beat them back.

古文：司马黄瑶起、甯蛮长史裴叔业于城内起兵攻奂，奂闻兵入，礼佛，未及起，军人斩之，彪及弟爽、弼、殷叡皆伏诛。
现代文：司马黄瑶起、宁蛮长史裴叔夜在城内起兵攻击王奂，王奂听到兵士进入，正在拜佛，没有来得及起身，军人就把他杀死了，王彪和他的弟弟王亻由爽、王弼、殷睿，都被处死。
English: During the night, Sima Huang Rong and Ningyuan Chang Shi Pei Rong raised an army in the city to attack Wang Hui. Wang Hui heard the soldiers enter and was worshiping Buddha. Before he could get up, the soldiers killed him. Wang Biao and his brother Wang Rong Yu Shuang, Wang Hui and Yin Rui were all executed.

古文：奂长子太子中庶子融，融弟司徒从事中郎琛，于都弃市，余孙皆原宥。
现代文：王奂的长子太子中庶子王融，王融的弟弟司徒从事中郎王琛，都在京城被杀死示众，其余孙子辈的人，都被宽大处理。
English: Wang Rong's eldest son, Wang Rong's illegitimate son, Wang Rong, and Wang Rong's younger brother, Sito, who acted as Wang Rong's second-in-command, were both publicly killed in Beijing. The rest of the grandchildren were treated leniently.

古文：琛弟肃、秉并奔魏，后得黄瑶起脔食之。
现代文：王琛的弟弟王肃、王秉都跑到了魏国，后来捉住了黄瑶起，把他一块一块地吃掉。
English: Wang Yao's younger brothers, Wang Su and Wang Bing, both fled to Wei. Later, they caught Huang Xuanqi and ate him up piece by piece.

古文：弟伷女爲长沙王晃妃，以男女并长，又且出继，特不离绝。
现代文：王奂弟弟王亻由的女儿是长沙王萧晃的妃子，因为儿女都长大了，又将出继给别人，故而特许不加分离。
English: The daughter of Wang Xizhi's younger brother, Wang Xiyu, was the concubine of the Changsha king, Xiao Xuan. Because the children had all grown up and would be succeeded by others, they were not allowed to be separated.

古文：奂既诛，故旧无敢至者，汝南许明达先爲奂参军，躬爲殡敛，经理甚厚，当时高其节。
现代文：王奂被杀以后，旧时的朋友没有敢去关照的，汝南人许明达是王奂的参军，亲自为他殡殓，经办得很丰厚，当时的人很高看他的气节。
English: After Wang Yao was killed, his old friends did not dare to take care of him. Xu Mingda from Yunnan Province, who was Wang Yao's military comrade, personally held a funeral for him, which was very richly organized. People at that time highly regarded his virtue.

