古文：起强圉大荒落，尽屠维协洽，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。晋安帝义熙十三年
English: a total of three years. The thirteenth year of Emperor Jian of An

古文：安皇帝癸义熙十三年
现代文：春季，正月，甲戌朔，出现日食。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the Year of the Horse, the appearance of a solar eclipse.

古文：春，正月，甲戌朔，日有食之。秦主泓朝会百官于前殿，以内外危迫，君臣相泣。
现代文：后秦国主姚泓，在王宫前殿接受文武百官的朝贺，因国家内患外忧交迫，君臣们相对哭泣。
English: Later, the Qin sovereign, Yao Wei, received the morning greetings of hundreds of civil and military officials in the vestibule of the royal palace. Due to the country's internal troubles and external pressures, the monarchs and courtiers were relatively crying.

古文：征北将军齐公恢帅安定镇户三万八千，焚庐舍，自北雍州趋长安，自称大都督、建义大将军，移檄州郡，欲除君侧之恶；扬威将军姜纪帅从归之，建节将军彭完都弃阴密奔还长安。
现代文：征北将军、齐公姚恢率领安定当地居民三万八千户人家，纵火焚烧了房屋，从北雍州直奔长安而来。姚恢自称大都督、建义大将军，向所过州县传布檄文，声称要铲除君主身边的恶人。扬威将军姜纪率领部众归附了姚恢，建节将军彭完都放弃了阴密城，逃回长安。
English: Yao Wei, the general of the Northern Expedition, Qigong Yao Wei, led 38,000 households of stable local residents, set fire to the houses, and came straight from Beiyongzhou to Chang'an. Yao Wei called himself the great governor, General Jianyi, and spread slander to the counties he passed, claiming to eradicate the evildoers around the monarch. Yang Wei General Jiang Ji led the troops to attach Yao Wei, and Jian Jie General Peng Can abandoned the gloomy city and fled back to Chang'an.

古文：恢至新支，姜纪说恢曰： 国家重将、大兵皆在东方，京师空虚，公亟引轻兵袭之，必克。 
现代文：姚恢大队人马抵达新支，姜纪对姚恢说： 朝廷重要将领和军队主力都在东方，京师空虚，您如果迅速率领轻装的军士袭击长安，定能攻克。 
English: When Yao Hongzhi's large contingent arrived at Xinzhi, Jiang Ji said to Yao Hongzhi: The important generals of the imperial court and the main force of the army are all in the East, Beijing is empty. If you quickly lead the lightly armed sergeants to attack Chang'an, you will surely be able to conquer it.

古文：恢不从，南攻郿城。
现代文：姚恢没有同意，却向南进攻城。
English: Yao Jia did not agree, but attacked the city from the south.

古文：镇西将军姚谌为恢所败，长安大震。
现代文：镇西将军姚谌被姚恢击败，长安受到很大震动。
English: Zhenxi General Yao Wei was defeated by Yao Wei, and Chang'an was greatly shaken.

古文：泓驰使征东平公绍，遣姚裕及辅国将军胡翼度屯澧西。
现代文：姚泓派人飞马前去征召东平公姚绍，并派姚裕和辅国将军胡翼度屯驻澧西。
English: Yao Pi sent Fei Ma to recruit Dongping Gong Yao Shao, and sent Yao Yu and Fu Guo's general Hu Yidu to be stationed in Shaanxi.

古文：扶风太守姚俊等皆降于恢。
现代文：扶风太守姚俊等人都投降了姚恢。
English: Fufeng Taishu Yao Jun and others all surrendered to Yao Wei.

古文：东平公绍引诸军西还，与恢相持于灵台，姚赞留宁朔将军尹雅为弘农太守，守潼关，亦引兵还。
现代文：东平公姚绍率各路人马紧急向西回军，与姚恢的军队在灵台相持。姚留下宁朔将军尹雅为弘农太守，镇守潼关，然后也率军回到长安。
English: Dongping Gong Yao Shao led all the people and horses to urgently return to the west, and stand with Yao Guo's army in Lingdai. Yao left Ningshuo General Yin Ya as the governor of Hongnong and Shiguan, and then led the army back to Chang'an.

古文：恢众见诸军四集，皆有惧心，其将齐黄等诣大军降。
现代文：姚恢的部众看到各路兵马四面集中过来，都心惊胆战，大将齐黄等人前往官军大营投降。
English: When Yao Jiao's subordinates saw soldiers and horses coming from all directions, they panicked. General Qi Huang and others went to the government army camp to surrender.

古文：恢进兵副绍，赞自后击之，恢兵大败，杀恢及其三弟。
现代文：姚恢挥师进逼姚绍军，姚从后面进攻姚恢，姚恢的部众大败，四处逃散，官军斩杀了姚恢和他的三个弟弟。
English: Yao Xiaowei's division advanced to force Yao Shao's army, Yao attacked Yao Xiaowei from behind, Yao Xiaowei's army was defeated and scattered everywhere, and the government army killed Yao Xiaowei and his three younger brothers.

古文：泓器之恸，葬以公礼。
现代文：姚泓闻知姚恢的死讯失声恸哭，用公爵的礼仪把他们安葬。
English: When Yao Xuan heard the news of Yao Huai's death, he wept and buried them with the etiquette of a duke.

古文：太尉裕引水军发彭城，留其子彭城公义隆镇彭城。
现代文：东晋太尉刘裕从彭城率水军出发西上，留下他的儿子、彭城公刘义隆镇守彭城。
English: Eastern Jin Dynasty Lieutenant Liu Yu led the navy from Pengcheng to the west, leaving his son, Pengcheng Prince Liu Yilong, to guard Pengcheng.

古文：诏以义隆为监徐、兗、青、冀四州诸军事、徐州刺史。
现代文：晋安帝司马德宗下诏，任命刘义隆为监徐、兖、青、冀四州诸军事，兼徐州刺史。
English: Emperor Sima De Zong of the Jin and An dynasties issued an edict, appointing Liu Yilong as the inspector of the military of the four states of Xu, Min, Qing and Hebei, and the historian of Xuzhou.

古文：凉公暠寝疾，遣命长史宋繇曰： 吾死之后，世子犹卿子也，善训导之。 
现代文：西凉公李患病卧床，临终前，他嘱咐长史宋繇说： 我死以后，世子李歆就像你的儿子，你要好好训导他。 
English: Xilang Gong Li was bedridden with illness. Before his death, he instructed his eldest son, Shi Songjun, saying, "After my death, my son, Li Jun, will be just like your son. You must train him well."

古文：二月，暠卒，官属奉世子歆为大都督、大将军、凉公、领凉州牧。
现代文：二月，李去世。朝廷文武百官拥立世子李歆为大都督、大将军、凉公、领凉州牧。
English: In February, Li passed away. Hundreds of officials from the imperial court and the armed forces supported his son, Li Xi, to become the Grand Governor, General, Prince of Liang, and the leader of Liangzhou.

古文：大赦，改元嘉兴。
现代文：下令大赦，改年号为嘉兴。
English: An amnesty was ordered, and the year name was changed to Jiaxing.

古文：尊歆母天水尹氏为太后。
现代文：尊奉李歆的母亲、天水人尹氏为太后。
English: Tianshui person Yin, the mother of revered Li Xi, became the empress dowager.

古文：以宋繇录三府事。
现代文：李歆任命宋繇为录三府事。
English: Li Gan appointed Song Gan to record the three prefectural affairs.

古文：谥暠曰武昭王，庙号太祖。
现代文：追加李谥号称武昭王，庙号称太祖。
English: Addition of the surnames Li Xi and Wu Zhao Wang, and the temple name Taizu.

古文：西秦安东将军木弈干击吐谷浑树洛干，破其弟阿柴于尧杆川，俘五千馀口而还。
现代文：西秦安东将军乞伏木弈干，进攻吐谷浑汗国可汗树洛干，在尧杆川大败他的弟弟阿柴，俘虏五千多人班师。
English: The Western Qin general Andong besieged Muyi Gan, attacked the Khan Shu of the Tuyun Khanate Luo Gan, defeated his brother Achai in the Liangjia River, and captured more than five thousand people.

古文：树洛干走保白兰山，惭愤发疾，将卒，谓阿柴曰： 吾子拾虔幼弱，今以大事付汝。 
现代文：树洛干逃走，退保白兰山；他又羞又愤，大病不起，临死前，他对阿柴说： 我的儿子慕容拾虔年小，我如今把身后大事托付给你。 
English: He was ashamed and angry, and he was very ill. Before he died, he said to Achai, "My son Murong Qian is young, and I am entrusting you with the important things behind me.

古文：树洛干卒，阿柴立，自称骠骑将军、沙州刺史。
现代文：树洛干去世，阿柴继位，自称为骠骑将军、沙州刺史。
English: Shu Luo Gan died and was succeeded by Achai, who styled himself as the general of horse cavalry and the historian of Shazhou.

古文：谥树洛干曰武王。
现代文：追赠树洛干为武王。
English: After the gift of the tree, Luo Gan became the King of Wu.

古文：阿柴稍用兵侵并其傍小种，地方数千里，遂为强国。
现代文：阿柴逐渐兴兵向外扩张，吞并吐谷浑周围的弱小部落，扩展疆域数千里，于是成为一个强大国家。
English: Achai gradually raised an army and expanded outward, absorbing the weak tribes around Tugu Hun and expanding its territory by thousands of miles, thus becoming a powerful country.

古文：河西王蒙逊遣其将袭乌啼部，大破之；又击卑和部，降之。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊，派遣他的部将袭击乌啼部落，大败乌啼军。随即又袭击卑和部落，收降他们。
English: The Western King of the North Lianghe River frustrated Meng Song and sent his general to attack the Wuyi tribe, defeating the Wuyi army. He then attacked the Beihe tribe and defeated them.

古文：王镇恶进军渑池，遣毛德祖袭尹雅于蠡吾城，禽之，雅杀守者而逃。
现代文：东晋龙骧将军王镇恶，进军渑池，又派毛德祖袭击后秦弘农太守尹雅据守的蠡吾城，生擒尹雅。尹雅杀死了看守他的兵卒逃走。
English: Wang Zhenxiong, the general of the East Jin Longyi, marched into Dianchi, and sent Mao Dezu to attack Qin Hongnong Daju Yin Ya, who was guarding Shenwu City. Yin Ya killed the soldiers guarding him and fled.

古文：镇恶引兵径前，抵潼关。
现代文：王镇恶一直向前进攻，抵达潼关。
English: Wang Zhenxiong continued to advance and arrived at Shaoguan.

古文：檀道济、沈林子自陕北渡河，拔襄邑堡，秦河北太守薛帛奔河东。
现代文：檀道济、沈林子等从陕城北面渡过黄河，攻陷襄邑堡。后秦河北太守薛帛逃奔河东。
English: Dang Daoji, Shen Linzi, and others crossed the Yellow River from the north of Shaanxi City and captured Yangyi Fort. Later, the governor of the north of the Qin River, Xue Yao, fled to the east of the river.

古文：又攻秦并州刺史尹昭于蒲阪，不克。
现代文：东晋军继续前进，又攻击后秦并州刺史尹昭据守的蒲阪，没有攻克。
English: The East Jin army continued to advance, and attacked the post-Qin and state assassin Yin Zhao's stronghold of Busan, but failed to conquer it.

古文：别将攻匈奴堡，为姚成都所败。
现代文：东晋另一路将领进攻匈奴堡，被守将姚成都击败。
English: The East Jin generals attacked the Xiongnu Fort from another direction, and were defeated by the defender Yao Chengdu.

古文：辛酉，荥阳守将傅洪以虎牢降魏。
现代文：辛酉，东晋荥阳守将傅洪，献出虎牢城，投降北魏。
English: Xin Xuan, the Eastern Jin, and Fu Hong, the Yang governor, surrendered the Tiger's Stronghold and surrendered to the Northern Wei.

古文：秦主泓以东平公绍为太宰、大将军、都督中外诸军事，假黄钺，改封鲁公，使督武卫将军姚鸾等步骑五万守潼关，又遣别将姚驴救蒲阪。
现代文：后秦国主姚泓任命东平公姚绍为太宰、大将军、都督中外诸军事，颁赐帝王专用的黄钺，改封鲁公。命他督率武卫将军姚鸾等，率步、骑兵共五万人镇守潼关，又遣另一大将姚驴，援救蒲阪。
English: Later, the ruler of Qin, Yao Xi, appointed Dongping Gong, Yao Shao, as Dazai, general, and military governor of China and abroad, and awarded him the imperial yellow scepter, changing his title to Lu Gong. He ordered him to lead Wuwei General, Yao Xi, and a total of 50,000 soldiers and cavalry to guard Shaoguan, and sent another general, Yao Jie, to rescue Busan.

古文：沈林子谓檀道济曰： 蒲阪城坚兵多，不可猝拔，攻之伤众，守之引日。
现代文：东晋建武将军沈林子对檀道济说： 蒲阪城池坚固，守军又多，不可能一举攻克。强攻则白白使我军伤亡，不强攻又会拖延时间。
English: Eastern Jin Dynasty Jianwu General Shen Linzi said to Dang Daoji: Busan Castle is strong, there are many defenders, and it is impossible to conquer it in one fell swoop. A strong attack will cause our army to suffer casualties in vain, and a weak attack will delay the time.

古文：王镇恶在潼关，势孤力弱，不如与镇恶合势并力，以争潼关。
现代文：现在，王镇恶在潼关，势单力弱，我们不如与王镇恶会师，合兵攻打潼关。
English: Now, Wang Zhenxiong is in Shaoguan, and his strength alone is weak. We should join forces with Wang Zhenxiong to attack Shaoguan.

古文：若得之，尹昭不攻自溃矣。 
现代文：如能攻克潼关，尹昭在蒲阪，就可以不攻自破了。 
English: If we can overcome Shouguan, Yin Zhao in Busan, we can break through without attacking.

古文：道济从之。
现代文：檀道济同意。
English: The charity heeded the advice.

古文：三月，道济、林子至潼关，秦鲁公绍引兵出战，道济、林子奋击，大破之，斩获以千数。
现代文：三月，檀道济、沈林子抵达潼关。后秦鲁公姚绍率兵出城迎战，檀道济、沈林子奋勇进攻，大破后秦军，斩杀和俘虏敌人数以千计。
English: In March, Dandooji and Shen Linzi arrived in Shaoguan. After Qin Lu Gong, Yao Shao led his troops out of the city to meet the battle. Dandooji and Shen Linzi bravely attacked and defeated the post-Qin army, killing and capturing thousands of enemies.

古文：绍退屯定城，据险拒守，谓诸将曰： 道济等兵力不多，悬军深入，不过坚壁以待继援。
现代文：姚绍率领后秦军撤退，屯驻定城，凭依险要的地势固守城池。姚绍对他手下的将领们说： 檀道济他们的兵力不多，而且孤军深入，所以他只能加强营垒固守，等待后继援军。
English: Yao Shao led the retreat of the Qin army, stationed in Dingcheng, and defended the city by relying on the precarious situation. Yao Shao said to his generals: Unfortunately, their troops are not many, and the lone army is deep, so he can only strengthen the camp and wait for reinforcements.

古文：吾分军绝其粮道，可坐禽也。 
现代文：我现在分兵几路，切断他的粮饷供给之路，就可以稳坐这里生擒他。 
English: I'll send a few soldiers now, cut off his food and water supply, and then we can sit here and keep him alive.

古文：乃遣姚鸾屯大路以绝道济粮道。
现代文：于是，姚绍派姚鸾把守大路要道，断绝檀道济的送粮道路。
English: As a result, Yao Shao sent Yao Jie to guard the main road and cut off the grain supply route.

古文：鸾遣尹雅将兵与晋战于关南，为晋兵所获，将杀之。雅曰： 雅前日已当死，幸得脱至今，死固甘心。
现代文：姚鸾派尹雅率兵与东晋军在潼关之南会战，尹雅再度被东晋士卒俘虏，就要斩首，尹雅说： 我前不久被俘就应当被杀，幸亏逃脱，才得以活到今天，死也当然甘心情愿。
English: Yao Wei sent Yin Ya to lead his soldiers to fight against the Eastern Jin army in the south of Shaoguan. Yin Ya was once again captured by the Eastern Jin soldiers and was about to be beheaded. Yin Ya said: I should have been killed when I was captured a short time ago. Fortunately, I escaped and have been able to live to this day. Of course, I am willing to die.

古文：然夷、夏虽殊，君臣之义一也。
现代文：然而。汉人与夷人虽然民族不同，君臣之间的大义却是一样的。
English: However, although the Han and the barbarians are different ethnic groups, the great justice between monarchs and subjects is the same.

古文：晋以大义行师，独不使秦有守节之臣乎！ 
现代文：晋国既然可以出于大义兴兵遣将，为什么只是不让秦国有守节的大臣呢！ 
English: Since Jin can dispatch soldiers for the sake of justice, why not just let Qin have a minister for the festival?

古文：乃免之。
现代文：东晋军才赦免了他的死罪。
English: So they let him go.

古文：丙子夜，沈林子将锐卒袭鸾营，斩鸾，杀其士卒数千人。
现代文：丙子，夜间，沈林子率领精锐部队突然偷袭姚鸾的大营，斩杀姚鸾以及他手下的士卒几千人。
English: In the middle of the night, Shen Linzi led the elite troops to suddenly attack Yao Yao's camp, killing Yao Yao and several thousand of his soldiers.

古文：绍又遣东平公赞屯河上以断水道；沈林子击之，赞败走，还定城。
现代文：姚绍又派东平公姚驻军黄河岸边，企图断绝东晋军的水道；沈林子又率军进攻姚，姚军大败，姚本人则逃回定城。
English: Yao Shao also sent Dongping Gong Yao to garrison the banks of the Yellow River, attempting to cut off the waterway of the East Jin Army; Shen Linzi also led the army to attack Yao, Yao's army was defeated, and Yao himself fled back to Dingcheng.

古文：薛帛据河曲来降。
现代文：后秦河北太守薛帛，献出河曲，投降了东晋军。
English: Later, Qin Hebei's eunuch governor, Xue Long, presented the Hequ and surrendered to the East Jin Army.

古文：太尉裕将水军自淮、泗入清河，将溯河西上，先遣使假道于魏；秦主泓亦遣使请救于魏。
现代文：东晋太尉刘裕率领水军从淮河、泗水进入清河，准备再逆流西上，开进黄河，他先派使节向北魏借路。后秦国主姚泓也派人出使北魏，请求救援。
English: Liu Yu, the captain of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, led the naval forces from the Huai River and the Surabaya River into the Qing River, preparing to go upstream to the west and enter the Yellow River. He first sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty to borrow the road. Later, the Qin sovereign, Yao Wei, also sent someone to the Northern Wei Dynasty to request rescue.

古文：魏主嗣使群臣议之，皆曰： 潼关天险，刘裕以水军攻之，甚难；若登岸北侵，其势便易。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣命令文武百官共同商讨这件事，群臣们都说： 潼关是天险，刘裕用水军攻克恐怕难以达到。但是，如果从黄河北岸登陆向北方侵入，那就容易得多。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, ordered hundreds of civil and military officials to discuss the matter together. The ministers all said: Shaoguan is a natural hazard, and Liu Yu's conquest with water troops is probably difficult to achieve. However, if you land on the north bank of the Yellow River and invade the north, it will be much easier.

古文：裕声言伐秦，其志难测。且秦，婚姻之国，不可不救也。
现代文：刘裕声称讨伐秦，他的真实目的难以猜测；而且秦是与我们有婚姻关系的国家，不可以不出兵相助。
English: Liu Yu claims to be fighting against Qin, but it's hard to guess his real purpose. Moreover, Qin is a country with which we have a marital relationship, and we cannot help without troops.

古文：宜发兵断河上流，勿使得西。 
现代文：我们应派兵切断黄河上游，阻止晋军西上。 
English: We should send troops to cut off the upper reaches of the Yellow River and prevent the Jin army from moving westward.

古文：博士祭酒崔浩曰： 裕图秦久矣。
现代文：博士祭酒崔浩说： 刘裕吞并秦国的野心由来已久。
English: "Liu Yu's ambition to annex Qin has been around for a long time.

古文：今姚兴死，子泓懦劣，国多内难。
现代文：如今，姚兴去世。他的儿子姚泓愚劣懦弱，国内灾难一再发生。
English: Now that Yao Xing has passed away, his son, Yao Jun, is stupid, cowardly and weak, and domestic disasters have occurred again and again.

古文：裕乘其危而伐之，其志必取。
现代文：刘裕乘他国内危机而兴兵讨伐，他的决心是一定要夺取。
English: Liu Yu took advantage of his domestic crisis to raise an army for a crusade. He was determined to capture the capital.

古文：若遏其上流，裕心忿戾，必上岸北侵，是我代秦受敌也。
现代文：我们如果切断黄河上游，阻截晋军，刘裕一怒之下，必然登陆向我们进攻，这样一来，我们等于代替秦国挨打。
English: If we cut off the upper reaches of the Yellow River and block the Jin army, Liu Yu, in a fit of rage, would inevitably land and attack us. In this way, we would be beaten in place of Qin.

古文：今柔然寇边，民食又乏，若复与裕为敌，发兵南赴则北寇愈深，救北则南州复危，非良计也。
现代文：如今柔然进攻我们边境，百姓又缺少粮食，如果再与刘裕为敌，发兵南下进攻晋，那么北边敌军柔然就会更加深入。那时，大军救援北方，南方的州县又将告急，这不是好计策。
English: Now they are softly attacking our border, and the people are short of grain. If they become enemies with Liu Yu again and send troops south to attack Jin, then the enemy army in the north will be more deeply penetrated. At that time, a large army will rescue the north, and the states and counties in the south will be in a hurry. This is not a good strategy.

古文：不若假之水道，听裕西上，然后屯兵以塞其东。
现代文：不如借给刘裕水道，听任刘裕西上，然后我们出兵驻防东部，阻塞他的退路。
English: It would be better to lend Liu Yu the waterway and let him go west. Then we would send troops to the east to block his escape route.

古文：使裕克捷，必德我之假道；不捷，吾不失救秦之名。
现代文：如果刘裕得胜告捷，一定会感激我们借路的恩德；如果失败，我们也会有援救秦国的美名，这是很多办法中比较好的一个。
English: If Liu Yu succeeds, he will certainly be grateful to the benevolence of the country we have taken advantage of; if he fails, we will also have the good name of rescuing Qin. This is one of the better ways.

古文：此策之得者也。且南北异俗，借使国家弃恒山以南，裕必不能以吴、越之兵与吾争守河北之地，安能为吾患乎！
现代文：况且，南方与北方风俗不同，即使朝廷放弃恒山以南的领土，刘裕也决不会用来自吴、越的军队与我们争夺据守黄河以北的土地，怎么会成为我们的威胁呢？
English: Moreover, the customs of the south are different from those of the north. Even if the imperial court were to give up the territory south of Mount Heng, Liu Yu would never use the troops from Wu and Yue to compete with us for the land north of the Yellow River. How could he become a threat to us?

古文：夫为国计者，惟社稷是利，岂顾一女子乎！ 
现代文：为国家制定方略的人，应该只为国家的利益考虑，怎么可以顾念一个嫁过来的女子呢！ 
English: Those who make policies for the country should only consider the interests of the country, how can they care about a married woman!

古文：议者犹曰： 裕西入关，则恐吾断其后，腹背受敌；北上，则姚氏必不出关助我，其势必声西而实北也。 
现代文：大臣们还说： 刘裕向西进入潼关，便害怕我们切断他的退路，腹背同时遭到攻击；而刘裕如果北上进攻我们，那么秦国姚氏一定不会从潼关出兵救援，所以看刘裕的样子虽然是声称向西，但实际一定是北上。 
English: The ministers also said: Liu Yu entered Shaoguan to the west, he was afraid that we would cut off his escape route, and his abdomen and back would be attacked at the same time; and if Liu Yu attacked us to the north, then Qin Guoyao would definitely not send troops from Shaoguan for rescue, so although Liu Yu's appearance claimed to be westward, it must actually be northward.

古文：嗣乃以司徒长孙嵩督山东诸军事，又遣振威将军娥清、冀州刺史阿薄干将步骑十万屯河北岸。
现代文：拓跋嗣于是命令司徒长孙嵩为督山东诸军事。又派振威将军娥清、冀州刺史阿薄干，率领步、骑兵十万人屯军黄河北岸。
English: Therefore, Tuoba Zi ordered the military commander of Shandong Province, the chief of the Scouts, Sun Song, to lead the troops. He also sent the generals Zhenwei, E Qing, and Jizhou, Zhi Shi, and Bo Gan, to lead the infantry and cavalry of 100,000 troops to the north bank of the Yellow River.

古文：庚辰，裕引军入河，以左将军向弥为北青州刺史，留戍碻磝。
现代文：庚辰，刘裕率领水军开进黄河，任命左将军向弥为北青州刺史，留下戍守。
English: Geng Chen and Liu Yu led the naval forces into the Yellow River and appointed General Xiang Ya to write the history of North Qingzhou, leaving him in charge.

古文：初，裕命王镇恶等： 若克洛阳，须大军到俱进。 
现代文：当初，刘裕命令王镇恶等人： 如果攻克洛阳，一定要等主力大军到达后共同前进。 
English: At first, Liu Yu ordered Wang Zhenxiong and others: If you attack Luoyang, you must wait for the main army to arrive and advance together.

古文：镇恶等乘利径趋潼关，为秦兵所拒，不得前。久之，乏食，众心疑惧，或欲弃辎重还赴大军。
现代文：王镇恶等人却乘胜直接进攻潼关，被后秦兵牵制，不能前进，时间一长，军中粮饷接济不上，士卒中发生恐慌和疑虑，有人打算放弃笨重的军用品回去投奔大军。
English: However, Wang Zhenxiong and others took advantage of the victory to directly attack Shaoguan. They were held back by the post-Qin soldiers and could not advance. After a long time, the army was unable to obtain food and supplies. Panic and doubts occurred among the soldiers. Some people planned to abandon the bulky military supplies and go back to join the army.

古文：沈林子按剑怒曰： 相公志清六合，今许、洛已定，关右将平，事之济否，系于前锋。
现代文：沈林子手按佩剑怒斥道： 相公大志是统一天下，而今许昌、洛阳均已平定，关右也将要收复，大事成功与否，就在前锋部队的行动。
English: Pressing his sword, Shen Lin's son-in-law angrily rebuked, "Sogong's great ambition is to unify the country, but now Xuchang and Luoyang have been pacified, and Guanzhong will also have to be recovered. Whether it is a great success or not, it is the action of the vanguard troops.

古文：奈何沮乘胜之气，弃垂成之功乎！
现代文：为什么要挫伤胜利后的士气，放弃就要得到的功业？
English: Why dampen the morale after the victory and give up the hard-won achievements?

古文：且大军尚远，贼众方盛，虽欲求还，岂可得乎！ 
现代文：况且现在主力大军距我们还远，敌人的力量正强盛，即使我们打算撤退，又怎么能够走脱，我接受了命令就不作回头的打算。
English: Moreover, the main army is now far away from us, and the enemy's strength is strong. Even if we plan to retreat, how can we escape? I have accepted the order and do not plan to turn back.

古文：下官授命不顾，今日之事，当自为将军办之，未知二三君子将何面以见相公之旗鼓邪！ 
现代文：今天的事，我自己率军完成任务，不知你们这些君子，将来有什么面目去见宋公的旗鼓！ 
English: Today's matter, I myself led the army to complete the task, I do not know what kind of face you gentlemen will have in the future to meet Song Gong's banner!

古文：镇恶等遣使驰告裕，求遣粮援。
现代文：王镇恶等人派人飞马报告刘裕，要求支援粮草和兵力。
English: Wang Zhenxiong and others sent people to report to Liu Yu, requesting support for grain and troops.

古文：裕呼使者，开舫北户，指河上魏军以示之曰： 我语令勿进，今轻佻深入。岸上如此，何由得遣军！ 
现代文：刘裕把王镇恶的使节叫到面前，打开战船的北窗，指着黄河岸边的北魏大军给他看，说： 我告诉他们不能单独前进，如今却轻率地深入敌境，岸上的形势如此严重，我怎么派得出军队！ 
English: Liu Yu called Wang Zhen's evil envoy to the front, opened the north window of the warship, pointed to the Northern Wei army on the shore of the Yellow River, and said: I told them that they could not advance alone, but now they are rashly penetrating into the enemy territory. The situation on the shore is so serious, how can I send an army!

古文：镇恶乃亲至弘农，说谕百姓，百姓竞送义租，军食复振。
现代文：王镇恶于是亲自回到弘农，向百姓说明情况，晓以大义，百姓争相捐献粮草，军队的粮饷重新得到补充。
English: Wang Zhenxun then personally returned to Hongnong to explain the situation to the people, knowing that it was just. The people rushed to donate grain and grass, and the army's grain reserve was replenished.

古文：魏人以数千骑缘河随裕军西行；军人于南岸牵百丈，风水迅急，有漂渡北岸者，辄为魏人所杀略。
现代文：北魏军队的几千名骑兵，一直沿着黄河随着刘裕的大军向西行进。东晋士卒在黄河南岸，用长绳牵引战船，风大浪急，有的牵绳突然折断，战船漂流到北岸，船上的晋军全都遭到北魏军队诛杀劫掠。
English: Several thousand cavalrymen of the Northern Wei army have been marching west along the Yellow River with Liu Yu's large army. Eastern Jin soldiers stood on the south bank of the Yellow River, pulling warships with long ropes. The wind was strong and the waves were fast. Some of the ropes broke suddenly, and the warships drifted to the north bank. The Jin troops on board were all killed and plundered by the Northern Wei army.

古文：裕遣军击之，裁登岸则走，退则复来。
现代文：刘裕派军还击北魏军队，东晋军一上岸，北魏军就逃走，等东晋军回到船上，北魏军又返回岸边。
English: Liu Yu sent his army to fight back against the Northern Wei army. As soon as the Eastern Jin army came ashore, the Northern Wei army fled. After the Eastern Jin army returned to the ship, the Northern Wei army returned to the shore.

古文：夏，四月，裕遣白直队主丁旿帅仗士七百人、车百乘，渡北岸，去水百馀步，为却月阵，两端抱河，车置七仗士，事毕，使竖一白毦；魏人不解其意，皆未动。
现代文：夏季，四月，刘裕派白直队主丁，统率武士七百人，战车一百辆，登上黄河北岸，在距河岸一百步的地方，构筑新月形战阵，以河岸作为月弦，两端抱住河道。每个战车上布置七个武士。新月阵布置完毕，在阵中竖一个白色羽旗。北魏军队不知道这是什么意思，都不敢轻举妄动。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Yu sent the leader of the Bai Zhi team, leading seven hundred warriors and one hundred chariots, to the north bank of the Yellow River. At a distance of one hundred paces from the riverbank, they built a crescent-shaped battle array, using the riverbank as a moon string, with both ends hugging the river channel. Seven warriors were arranged on each chariot. When the crescent array was completed, a white feather flag was erected in the array. The Northern Wei army did not know what this meant, and did not dare to make any rash moves.

古文：裕先命宁朔将军硃超石戒严，白毦既举，超石帅二千人驰往赴之，赍大弩百张，一车益二十人，设彭排于辕上。
现代文：刘裕先派宁朔将军朱超石严加戒备，准备出战，等新月阵中的白旗一举起来，朱超石率领二千人飞奔而至，进入新月阵，携带大弩一百张，每个战车上增加到二十人，并在车辕上安置了防箭木板。
English: Liu Yuxian sent the Ningshuo general Zhu Chaoishi to be on high alert, ready to go to war, and the white flag in the crescent rose at once. Zhu Chaoishi led two thousand people to rush into the crescent, carrying one hundred large shields, increasing to twenty people on each chariot, and placing arrow-proof wooden boards on the carriages.

古文：魏人见营阵既立，乃进围之；长孙嵩帅三万骑助之，四面肉薄攻营，弩不能制。
现代文：北魏军看到战阵已经完成，开始进攻包围。长孙嵩又率三万骑兵作为后继援军，从四面八方向新月阵展开肉搏冲锋，东晋军的强弓不能阻止敌人的势头。
English: The Northern Wei Army saw that the battle line had been completed and began to attack and encircle. Chosun Song also led thirty thousand cavalry as a follow-up reinforcement and launched a hand-to-hand attack on the crescent line from all directions. The strong bow of the East Jin Army could not stop the enemy's momentum.

古文：时超石别赍大锤乃槊千馀张，乃断槊长三四尺，以锤锤之，一槊辄洞贯三四人。
现代文：当时，朱超石另外还携带了大铁锺和铁一千支，这时朱超石命人把铁折成三四尺长，用大锺锺打铁，一下去，能贯穿三四人。
English: At that time, Zhu Chaoishi also carried a large anvil and a thousand pieces of iron. At that time, Zhu Chaoishi ordered the person to break the iron into three or four feet long, and hit the iron with a large anvil. At one go, it can pass through three or four people.

古文：魏兵不能当，一时奔溃，死者相积；临陈斩阿薄干，魏人退还畔城。
现代文：北魏士卒招架不住，一时间全都四处溃散，争相逃命，阵亡将士的尸体堆积成山。东晋军在战阵中斩杀了北魏冀州刺史阿薄干，北魏军败退，逃回畔城。
English: The soldiers of the Northern Wei Dynasty could not resist, and for a while they all scattered everywhere, scrambling for their lives, and the bodies of the dead soldiers piled up into a mountain. The East Jin Army killed the Northern Wei Jizhou Zhishi Abokan in the battle, and the Northern Wei Army was defeated and fled back to Hencheng.

古文：超石帅宁朔将军胡籓、宁远将军刘荣祖追击，又破之，杀获千计。
现代文：朱超石率领宁朔将军胡藩、宁远将军刘荣祖乘胜追击，又一次大破北魏军，斩杀和俘虏敌人数以千计。
English: Zhu Chaoishi led the victorious pursuit of Ningshuo General Hu Han and Ningyuan General Liu Rongzu, and once again defeated the Northern Wei Army, killing and capturing thousands of enemies.

古文：魏主嗣闻之，乃恨不用崔浩之言。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣听到报告，才后悔没有采用崔浩的建议。
English: Upon hearing the report, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, regretted that he did not adopt Cui Hao's suggestion.

古文：秦鲁公绍遣长史姚洽、宁朔将军安鸾、护军姚墨蠡、河东太守唐小方帅众三千屯河北之九原，阻河为固，欲以绝檀道济粮援。
现代文：后秦鲁公姚绍派长史姚洽、宁朔将军安鸾、护军姚墨蠡、河东太守唐小方，率领二千人驻军黄河北岸的九原，依据黄河天险，打算切断檀道济军队的粮草供应。
English: Later, Qin Emperor Lu Gong Yao Shao sent commander Shi Yao Cai, Ningshuo General An Qian, escort Yao Mo Qian, and Hedong Governor Tang Xiao Fang, who led two thousand people to garrison the north bank of the Yellow River in Jiujiang. According to the Yellow River natural hazard, they intended to cut off the grain and grass supply of the Taoist army.

古文：沈林子邀击，破之，斩洽、黑蠡、小方，杀获殆尽。
现代文：东晋建武将军沈林子阻击后秦军，大败敌人，斩杀了姚洽、姚墨蠡和唐小方，这支后秦部队被杀被俘几乎全军覆灭。
English: East Jin Jianwu General Shen Linzi blocked the rear Qin army, defeated the enemy, and killed Yao Cai, Yao Muxuan and Tang Xiaofang. This rear Qin army was killed and captured, and almost the entire army was destroyed.

古文：林子因启太尉裕曰： 绍气盖关中，今兵屈于外，国危于内。恐其凶命先尽，不得以膏齐斧耳。 
现代文：于是，沈林子奏报太尉刘裕说： 姚绍的威名，遍扬关中，但如今在外，他的大军遭到多次失败；在内，他的国家又危机四伏，恐怕他的寿命提前结束，等不到让我们用利斧来斩杀他了。 
English: As a result, Shen Linzi sent a report to Lieutenant Liu Yu saying: Yao Shao's reputation has spread all over Guanzhong, but now he is outside, his great army has suffered many defeats; in particular, his country is in crisis, I am afraid his life is over ahead of schedule, can't wait for us to kill him with a sharp ax.

古文：绍闻洽等败死，愤恚，发病呕血，以兵属东平公赞而卒。
现代文：姚绍听说姚洽等人战败身死，又伤心又愤怒，得了重病，吐血不止，把兵权交给东平公姚，便死去了。
English: Yao Shao heard that Yao Chia and others had been defeated and killed, and he was sad and angry. He became seriously ill and vomited blood. He handed over the military power to Dongping Gong Yao and died.

古文：赞既代绍，众力犹盛，引兵袭林子，林子复击破之。
现代文：姚代替姚绍之后，后秦的兵势仍很强盛，姚领兵袭击沈林子，沈林子又一次打败后秦军。
English: After Yao replaced Yao Shao, the strength of the post-Qin army was still very strong. Yao led the troops to attack Shen Linzi, and Shen Linzi once again defeated the post-Qin army.

古文：太尉裕至洛阳，行视城堑，嘉毛修之完葺之功，赐衣服玩好，直二千万。
现代文：东晋太尉刘裕抵达洛阳，巡视东晋军队的城堡工事，嘉奖毛之整理修护的功劳，赐给毛之许多衣服珍宝，价值高达二千万。
English: Eastern Jin Dynasty Lieutenant Liu Yu arrived in Luoyang, inspected the castle construction of the Eastern Jin Army, commended Mao's work of sorting and repairing, and gave Mao many clothes and treasures worth up to 20 million.

古文：丁巳，魏主嗣如高柳。壬戌，还平城。
现代文：丁巳，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往高柳，壬戌，返回京都平城。
English: Ting Si, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Gaoliu, Rinchen, and returned to Kyoto Heijo.

古文：河西王蒙逊大赦，遣张掖太守沮渠广宗诈降，以诱凉公歆，歆发兵应之。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊大赦天下。他派张掖太守沮渠广宗向西凉诈降，引诱西凉公李歆派兵出来迎接，李歆果然发兵接应。
English: The Western King of the North Lianghe River, Deshu Mengson, pardoned the whole world. He sent Zhang Ye, the dethroned governor of Deshu Guangzong, to the West Lianghe River to defraud the West Lianghe River and lure the West Lianghe Prince Li Ye to send troops to meet him. Li Ye actually sent troops to meet him.

古文：蒙逊将兵三万伏于蓼泉，歆觉之，引兵还。
现代文：而沮渠蒙逊率领三万士兵埋伏在蓼泉，李歆发觉，率兵撤退。
English: However, the despondent Meng Song led 30,000 soldiers to lie in ambush in Huanquan. Li Jun discovered this and led his soldiers to retreat.

古文：蒙逊追之，歆与战于解支涧，大破之。斩首七千馀级。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊率众追击，李歆与沮渠蒙逊在解支涧会战，李歆大破北凉军，斩杀七千余人。
English: Depuqiu Mengsong led the crowd in pursuit. Li Rong and Depuqiu Mengsong fought in the Battle of Jiezhu, and Li Rong defeated the Bei Liang Army, killing more than seven thousand people.

古文：蒙逊城建康，置戍而还。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊修建建康城，设置戍所，然后回国。
English: Despondent, Mengxun built Jiankang City, set up a detention center, and then returned to China.

古文：五月，乙未，齐郡太守王懿降于魏，上书言： 刘裕在洛，宜发兵绝其归路，可不战而克。 
现代文：五月，乙未，东晋齐郡太守王懿投降了北魏，他上书北魏朝廷说： 刘裕现在洛阳，应该迅速发兵切断他的归路，可以不战而胜。 
English: In May of the same year, Wang Xi, the governor of East Jinqi County, surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty. He wrote to the Northern Wei Dynasty court saying: Liu Yu is now in Luoyang, we should quickly send troops to cut off his way back, we can win without a fight.

古文：魏主嗣善之。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣表示赞许。
English: The head of the Northern Wei State, Tuoba Xi, expressed his approval.

古文：崔浩侍讲在前，嗣问之曰： 刘裕伐姚泓，果能克乎？ 
现代文：当时，崔浩在前面为拓跋嗣讲解经典，拓跋嗣问崔浩说： 刘裕讨伐姚泓，果真能攻克吗？ 
English: At that time, Cui Hao was in front of Tuoba Zi to explain the classics. Tuoba Zi asked Cui Hao, "Liu Yu is fighting against Yao Zi, can he really defeat him?"

古文：对曰： 克之。 嗣曰： 何故？ 
现代文：崔浩回答说： 定能攻克！ 拓跋嗣问： 为什么！ 
English: Cui Hao replied, "We will definitely be able to defeat them!" Tuoba Zi asked, "Why?"

古文：对曰： 昔姚兴好事虚名而少实用，子泓懦而多病，兄弟乖争。
现代文：崔浩说： 当年姚兴喜欢追求虚名而不做实事，他的儿子姚泓生性懦弱，身体多病，兄弟之间争权夺势，不能团结一心。
English: Cui Hao said: At that time, Yao Xing liked to pursue a false name without doing real things. His son Yao Xing was born with a weak character and a sickly body. The brothers fought for power and could not unite as one.

古文：裕乘其危，兵精将勇，何故不克！ 
现代文：如今刘裕乘人之危，他的将士勇猛善战，训练有素，有什么理由不能取胜！ 
English: Now Liu Yu is riding on the crest of a wave, his soldiers are brave, fierce and well-trained, what reason is there not to win!

古文：嗣曰： 裕才何如慕容垂？ 
现代文：拓跋嗣又问： 刘裕的才华与慕容垂相比如何？ 
English: Tuoba Zi also asked: How does Liu Yu's talent compare with that of Mu Rongtui?

古文：对曰： 胜之。
现代文：崔浩说： 刘裕胜过慕容垂。
English: Cui Hao said: Liu Yu is better than Murong Dui.

古文：垂藉父兄之资，修复旧业，国人归之，若夜虫之就火，少加倚仗，易以立功。
现代文：慕容垂凭借父兄的资荫，复兴故有的基业，国人都投靠他，就像夜间的昆虫飞向火光一样，对此稍加凭借，就能轻而易举地建功立业。
English: With the help of his father's and brother's wealth, Murongdiao revived the original foundation. The people of the country relied on him, just like insects flying to the firelight at night. With a little help, he could easily build a career.

古文：刘裕奋起寒微，不阶尺土，讨灭桓玄，兴复晋室，北禽慕容超，南枭卢循，所向无前，非其才之过人，安能如是乎！ 
现代文：而刘裕则出身微贱贫寒，没有一尺土地可以凭借，却消灭了桓玄，兴复了晋朝宗室的统治。在北方生擒慕容超，在南方砍下卢循的首级，所过之处，没有敌手，他如果不是才智过人，怎么会这样呢？ 
English: Liu Yu, on the other hand, came from a humble and poor background. He did not have a single foot of land to rely on, but he eliminated Huan Xuan and restored the rule of the imperial family of the Jin Dynasty. In the north, he was born as Murong Chao, and in the south, he cut off the head of Lu Xun. Wherever he passed, there was no opponent. If he was not a brilliant man, how could this happen?

古文：嗣曰： 裕既入关，不能进退，我以精骑直捣彭城、寿春，裕将若之何？ 
现代文：拓跋嗣说： 刘裕既然已经进入函谷关，一时不能前进，也不能后退，而我们以精锐骑兵直捣他的老巢彭城、寿春，刘裕将会怎么样！ 
English: Tuoba Zi said: Since Liu Yu has entered the Hangtan Pass, he cannot advance or retreat for the time being, and we will directly attack his old nest Pengcheng and Shuchun with elite cavalry, what will happen to Liu Yu!

古文：对曰： 今西有屈丐，北有柔然，窥伺国隙。
现代文：崔浩回答说： 如今我们西面有夏国赫连勃勃，北有柔然，他们都在时刻窥伺我们的行动，准备乘机来攻。
English: Cui Hao replied, "Nowadays, we have Xia Guohelian in the west, and Juren in the north. They are always spying on our actions, ready to take the opportunity to attack.

古文：陛下既不可亲御六师，虽有精兵，未睹良将。长孙嵩长于治国，短于用兵，非刘裕敌也。
现代文：陛下既然不能亲自指挥军队，我军虽然有精兵，却没发现有良将，长孙嵩的长处是善于治理国家，短处是不善于用兵，根本不是刘裕的对手。
English: Since His Majesty cannot personally command the army, although our army has elite soldiers, it has not been found to have good generals. The strength of the eldest son Song is good at governing the country, the weakness is not good at using soldiers, and it is not an opponent of Liu Yu at all.

古文：兴兵远攻，未见其利，不如且安静以待之，裕克秦而归，必篡其主。
现代文：我军大举兴兵远征，看不到实际利益，不如暂且按兵不动，静观事态的发展。刘裕攻克秦国后回国，一定会篡取皇帝宝座。
English: Our army has launched a large-scale military expedition, and we can't see the actual benefits. It's better to stay still for the time being and watch the development of the situation. Liu Yu will definitely usurp the emperor's throne when he returns home after conquering Qin.

古文：关中华、戎杂错，风俗劲悍；裕欲以荆、扬之化施之函、秦，此无异解衣包火，张罗捕虎；虽留兵守之，人情未洽，趋尚不同，适足为寇敌之资耳。
现代文：关中地区汉族、戎族杂居一处，风俗强悍。刘裕打算用教化荆州、扬州百姓的方法统治函谷关和秦国这一带的百姓，这就好像脱下衣服包火，张开罗网捕捉老虎一样，难以奏效。刘裕虽然会留下军队驻守，可一时人心难以信服，志趣习俗又不一样，恰好为别人入侵提供了好条件。
English: In Guanzhong area, Han and Rong people live together, and customs are strong. Liu Yu's plan to use the method of educating the people of Jingzhou and Yangzhou to rule the people of Hangu Guanzhong and Qin Province is like taking off his clothes to wrap fire and opening a net to catch a tiger. It is difficult to succeed. Although Liu Yu will leave the army stationed, it is difficult to convince the people for a while, and the customs are different. It just provides a good condition for others to invade.

古文：愿陛下按兵息民以观其变，秦地终为国家之有。可坐而守也。 
现代文：希望陛下停止出兵征讨，让百姓休养生息，观察局势的变化，秦国的地盘终究会为我国所有，我们可以坐在这里，就能到手。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will stop sending out troops for conscription, let the people rest and recuperate, and observe the changes in the situation. The land of Qin will eventually be owned by our country. We can sit here and get it.

古文：嗣笑曰： 卿料之审矣！ 
现代文：拓跋嗣笑着说： 你分析得很周详。 
English: Tuoba Zi said with a smile: Your analysis is very detailed.

古文：浩曰： 臣尝私论近世将相之臣：若王猛之治国，苻坚之管仲也；慕容恪之辅幼主，慕容暐之霍光也；刘裕之平祸乱，司马德宗之曹操也。 
现代文：崔浩说： 我曾经私下评论过近世的将领和宰相，比如王猛治理国家，是苻坚的管仲；慕容恪辅佐幼主，是慕容的霍光；刘裕平定桓玄祸乱，是司马德宗的曹操呀。 
English: Cui Hao said: I have once privately commented on the generals and prime ministers of modern times. For example, Wang Meng governed the country and was the guarantor of Zhen Jian; Mu Rong assisted the young master and was the light of Mu Rong; Liu Yu Ping calmed the chaos and was the Cao Cao of the Sima De sect.

古文：嗣曰： 屈丐何如？ 
现代文：拓跋嗣又问： 赫连勃勃怎么样？ 
English: Tuoba Zi also asked: What about Herengong?

古文：浩曰： 屈丐国破家覆，孤孑一身，寄食姚氏，受其封殖。
现代文：崔浩说： 赫连勃勃当年国破家亡，孤身一人，寄食在姚家门下，接受姚氏的官禄。
English: Cui Hao said: Herengong died when the country broke up, and he was all alone, eating under Yao's door, and accepting Yao's official salary.

古文：不思酬恩报义，而乘时缴利，盗有一方，结怨四邻。
现代文：不但不想报答姚氏的恩情，反而乘人之危，占据一方地盘，与四邻结下了仇怨。
English: Not only did he not want to repay Mr. Yao's kindness, but he took advantage of people's danger, occupied one side of the site, and forged a grudge with the four neighbors.

古文：撅竖小人，虽能纵暴一时，终当为人所吞食耳。 
现代文：像他这样的撅起自我竖立的小人，虽然能强大暴虐一时，终究要被别人吞并。 
English: A self-made villain like him, though powerful and tyrannical for a while, will eventually be swallowed up by others.

古文：嗣大悦，语至夜半，赐浩御缥醪十觚，水精盐一两，曰： 朕味卿言，如此盐、洒，故欲与卿共飨其美。 
现代文：拓跋嗣非常高兴，君臣二人一直谈论到深夜，拓跋嗣把御用青白色醅酒三十升、水精盐一两赏赐崔浩，说： 我听了你一席话，就像品味这盐和酒的滋味一样，所以想和你一起共享这种美好的感受。 
English: Tuoba Zi was very happy. The two princes and ministers kept talking until late at night. Tuoba Zi rewarded Cui Hao with 30 liters of royal blue-and-white wine and one or two water-based salts, saying, "I listened to your speech, and it was like tasting the salt and the taste of the wine, so I want to share this wonderful feeling with you."

古文：然犹命长孙嵩、叔孙建各简精兵，伺裕西过，自成皋济河，南侵彭、沛，若不时过，则引兵随之。
现代文：然而，拓跋嗣还是命令长孙嵩、叔孙建各自挑选精兵备战，如果刘裕再向西部深入，他们则从成皋渡黄河南下，进攻彭城、沛郡；如果刘裕推进很慢，则仍继续在岸上紧紧跟随。
English: However, Tuoba Zi still ordered his eldest son Song and his uncle Sun Jian to select their own elite soldiers to prepare for battle. If Liu Yu went further to the west, they would cross the Yellow River from Chengdu to the south to attack Pengcheng and Pei County; if Liu Yu advanced slowly, they would continue to follow closely on the shore.

古文：魏主嗣西巡至云中，遂济河，畋于大漠。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣向西巡视，抵达云中；然后渡过黄河，在大漠上狩猎。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, made a tour to the west and arrived in Yunzhong; then he crossed the Yellow River and went hunting in the desert.

古文：魏置天地四方六部大人，以诸公为之。
现代文：北魏朝廷设置天、地、东、西、南、北六部大人，一律选用爵以及地位相当于公爵的大臣担任。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the imperial court set up six departments of heaven, earth, east, west, south and north, and all adults were selected to be knights and ministers with the status equivalent to dukes.

古文：秋，七月，太尉裕至陕。沈田子、傅弘之入武关，秦戍将皆委城走。
现代文：秋季，七月，东晋太尉刘裕抵达陕城，沈田子、傅弘之等率兵进入武关，后秦的守将纷纷弃城逃走。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Eastern Jin Taifu Liu Yu arrived in Shaanxi, Shen Tianzi, Fu Hongzhi and other soldiers entered Wuguan, and the defenders of Houqin abandoned the city and fled.

古文：田子等进屯青泥，秦主泓使给事黄门侍郎姚和都屯峣柳以拒之。
现代文：沈田子等进兵驻守青泥。后秦国主姚泓命给事黄门侍郎姚和都，在柳驻兵屯守，阻截东晋军。
English: Shen Tianzi and other soldiers were stationed in Qingde. Later, the Qin ruler Yao Xi ordered the Yellow Gate servant Yao Wadu to stay in Liu and block the East Jin army.

古文：西秦相国翟勍卒；八月，以尚书令昙达为左丞相，右仆射元基为右丞相，御史大夫麹景为尚书令，侍中翟绍为左仆射。
现代文：西秦相国翟去世。八月，西秦朝廷任命尚书令乞伏昙达为左丞相，左仆射乞伏元基为右丞相，御史大夫麴景为尚书令，侍中翟绍为左仆射。
English: In August, the Western Qin court appointed Shang Shuling (尚書令) to be the minister of the left, and his left-hand man Shao Shuling (射乞伏元基) to be the minister of the right, and his secretary of state Shujing (御史大夫) to be the minister of the left, and his second-in-command Shuxiao (侍中) to be the second-in-command Shao.

古文：太尉裕至乡，沈田子等将攻峣柳。
现代文：东晋太尉刘裕抵达乡。沈田子等将领准备进攻柳。
English: Eastern Jin Dynasty Lieutenant Liu Yu arrived in the township. Shen Tianzi and other generals prepared to attack Liu.

古文：秦主泓欲自将以御裕军，恐田子等袭其后，欲先击灭田子等，然后倾国东出；乃帅步骑数万，奄至青泥。
现代文：后秦国主姚泓打算亲自统兵出征，抵御刘裕的大军，又害怕沈田子等人突袭他的后方，就想先消灭沈田子等人，然后出动全国的兵力向东攻打刘裕。于是，姚泓率领步、骑兵数万人，突然抵达青泥。
English: Later, the ruler of Qin, Yao Wei, planned to personally lead an army to resist Liu Yu's large army, but he was afraid that Shen Tianzi and others would raid his rear, so he wanted to destroy Shen Tianzi and others first, and then dispatch the country's forces to the east to attack Liu Yu. As a result, Yao Wei led tens of thousands of cavalry and suddenly arrived in Qingdao.

古文：田子本为疑兵，所领裁千馀人，闻泓至，欲击之；傅弘之以众寡不敌止之，田子曰： 兵贵用奇，不必在众。
现代文：沈田子这支部队，本来就是为迷惑敌人布置的疑兵，一共才一千多人。沈田子听说姚泓亲征，打算迎战，建威将军傅弘之认为敌众我寡无法抵敌，从而劝止他。沈田子说： 用兵贵在出奇制胜，不一定在人数多。
English: Shen Tianzi's army was originally just over a thousand suspicious soldiers who were arranged to confuse the enemy. Shen Tianzi heard that Yao Jun personally recruited and planned to fight, and Jianwei General Fu Hongzhi thought that the enemy was too few to defeat, so he dissuaded him. Shen Tianzi said: The use of soldiers is to win by surprise, not necessarily by the number of people.

古文：且今众寡相悬，势不两立，若彼结围既固，则我无所逃矣。
现代文：况且如今敌我寡众悬殊，看形势不能并存。如果等到敌人集结的阵势稳固，我们就会无处可逃。
English: Moreover, there is a great disparity between us and the enemy, so we cannot coexist. If we wait until the enemy's position is stable, we will have nowhere to run.

古文：不如乘其始至，营陈未立，先薄之，可以有功。 
现代文：不如乘他们刚刚到达，营地和战阵都没有建立，我们主动挑战，定能成功。 
English: It would be better to take advantage of the fact that they have just arrived, the camp and the battle line have not been established, we take the initiative to challenge, and we will succeed.

古文：遂帅所领先进，弘之继之。
现代文：于是，沈田子率领他的部众首先出动，傅弘之作为后继援军紧跟。
English: As a result, Shen Tian Zi led his subordinates to move out first, and Fu Hongzhi followed as a follow-up reinforcement.

古文：秦兵合围数重。
现代文：后秦兵把这支东晋军重重包围。
English: Later Qin soldiers encircled this East Jin army.

古文：田子抚慰士卒曰： 诸君冒险远来，正求今日之战，死生一决，封侯之业于此在矣！ 
现代文：沈田子安抚激励士卒们说： 各位不畏艰险、远道而来，就是为了像今天这样的会战，生死对决，封侯升官的大业就在这里了！ 
English: Shen Tianzi calmed and inspired the soldiers, saying, "You have come all the way here, braving hardships and dangers, just for a battle like today, a life-and-death showdown, and the great cause of enthronement and promotion is here!

古文：士卒皆踊跃鼓噪，执短兵奋击，秦兵大败，斩馘万馀级，得其乘舆服御物，秦主泓奔还灞上。
现代文：士卒们大声疾呼，跃跃欲试，手执短兵器奋勇杀敌。后秦军大败，被斩杀共一万多人，缴获姚泓的御车御衣，以及王家专用的器物。姚泓逃回灞上。
English: The soldiers shouted loudly, eager to try, and bravely killed the enemy with hand-held short weapons. After the Qin Army was defeated, a total of more than 10,000 people were killed, and Yao Yao's carriage and clothes, as well as the royal family's special utensils, were seized. Yao Yao fled back to the raft.

古文：初，裕以田子等众少，遣沈林子将兵自秦岭往助之，至则秦兵已败，乃相与追之，关中群县多潜送款于田子。
现代文：当初，刘裕认为沈田子兵员太少，就派沈林子率兵从秦岭赶赴救助。等他们到达青泥，后秦军已经失败，于是沈林子与沈田子合兵追击敌人，关中郡县很多向沈田子暗中投降。
English: At first, Liu Yu thought that Shen Tianzi's soldiers were too few, so he sent Shen Linzi and his soldiers from Qinling to rush to the rescue. By the time they reached Qingdi, the Qin Army had already failed, so Shen Linzi and Shen Tianzi joined forces to chase the enemy, and many people in Guanzhong County secretly surrendered to Shen Tianzi.

古文：辛丑，太尉裕至潼关，以硃超石为河东太守，使与振武将军徐猗之会薛帛于河北，共攻蒲阪。
现代文：辛丑，东晋太尉刘裕抵达潼关，他任命朱超石为河东太守，命他与振武将军徐猗之在河北与薛帛会师，共同进攻蒲阪。
English: Sin ugly, Eastern Jin Lieutenant Liu Yu arrived in Shaoguan, he appointed Zhu Chaoishi as the governor of Hedong, ordered him and Zhenwu General Xu Yanzhi to join Xue Yanzhi's division in Hebei and jointly attack Busan.

古文：秦平原公璞与姚和都共击之，猗之败死，超石奔还潼关。
现代文：后秦平原公姚璞与姚和都迎击东晋军，徐猗之战败身亡，朱超石逃回潼关。
English: After the Qin plain, Yao Yao and Yao He both fought against the East Jin army, Xu Yao was defeated and killed, and Zhu Chaoshi fled back to Shaoguan.

古文：东平公赞遣司马国璠引魏兵以蹑裕后。
现代文：后秦东平公姚，派司马国率领北魏军队尾随刘裕大军之后。
English: After Qin Dongping Gongyao, he sent the Northern Wei army led by Sima Guo to follow Liu Yu's army.

古文：王镇恶请帅水军自河入渭以趋长安，裕许之。
现代文：东晋龙骧将军王镇恶，请求率水军从黄河开进渭水，然后直趋长安，刘裕应允。
English: Wang Zhenxiong, the general of the East Jin Longjing, requested the navy to sail from the Yellow River into Surabaya, and then straight to Chang'an. Liu Yu agreed.

古文：秦恢武将军姚难自香城引兵而西，镇恶追之；秦主泓自灞上引兵还屯石桥以为之援，镇北将军姚强与难合兵屯泾上以拒镇恶。
现代文：后秦恢武将军姚难，从香城率军向西退却，王镇恶挥师追击。后秦国主姚泓从灞上率军返回，屯驻石桥，准备援救姚难。后秦镇北将军姚强与姚难会师，屯兵泾水岸边，抵抗王镇恶的追击。
English: After the return of the Qin Dynasty, General Yao Nan led his army from Xiangcheng and retreated to the west, while Wang Zhen's evil army pursued him. After the return of the Qin Dynasty, the lord of the Qin Dynasty, Yao Zhen, led his army from Jiaxing and returned, stationed in Shihqiao, preparing to rescue Yao Nan. After the return of the Qin Dynasty, the northern general of the Qin Dynasty, Yao Qiang, and Yao Nan's division, stationed on the shore of Shishui, resisted the evil pursuit of Wang Zhen.

古文：镇恶使毛德祖进击，破之，强死，难奔长安。
现代文：王镇恶命毛德祖进攻，大破后秦军，姚强战死，姚难逃回长安。
English: Wang Zhen's evil fate was Mao Zedzu's attack, after the Qin army was defeated, Yao Qiang died in battle, and Yao could not escape back to Chang'an.

古文：东平公赞退屯郑城，太尉裕进军逼之。
现代文：后秦东平公姚退守郑城，东晋太尉刘裕进逼城下。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, Dongping Gongyao retreated to Zhengcheng, and Dongjin Taiyi Liu Yujin forced him out of the city.

古文：泓使姚丕守渭桥，胡翼度屯石积，东平公赞屯灞东，泓屯逍遥园。
现代文：姚泓命姚丕守住渭桥，胡翼度屯驻石积，东平公姚驻守灞东。姚泓自己则驻守逍遥园。
English: Yao Zhen ordered Yao Zhen to guard the Zhenqiao Bridge, Hu Yidu stationed in Shizhi, Dongping Gong Yao stationed in Zhengdong, and Yao Zhen himself stationed in Xiaoyang Park.

古文：镇恶溯渭而上，乘蒙冲小舰，行船者皆在舰内；秦人见舰进而无行船者，皆惊以为神。
现代文：王镇恶率水军在渭水中逆流而上，乘坐蒙冲小舰，划桨的士卒都在船内。后秦人看到战舰行进却没有划船的人，都惊奇地以为神仙下凡。
English: Wang Zhen viciously led the navy upstream in the turbid water, riding on the Mengchong small ship, and the oarsmen were all inside the ship. When the post-Qin people saw the warships marching without rowing boats, they were surprised to think that the gods had descended to earth.

古文：壬戌旦，镇恶至渭桥，令军士食毕，皆持仗登岸，后登者斩。
现代文：壬戌凌晨，王镇恶军抵达渭桥，命令战士们吃饱喝足以后，全部手持兵器登岸，最后登陆的人斩首。
English: In the early hours of the morning, Wang Zhen's evil army arrived at the bridge. After ordering the soldiers to eat and drink enough, they all went ashore with weapons in hand. The last person to land was beheaded.

古文：众既登，渭水迅急，舰皆随流，倏忽不知所在。
现代文：士卒们登陆完毕，渭水流急，东晋的战舰随波东下，倏忽之间，不见踪影。
English: After the soldiers landed, the waters of the Yunnan River were swift, and the warships of the Eastern Jin Dynasty followed the waves to the east, and disappeared in a flash.

古文：时泓所将尚数万人。
现代文：当时姚泓统率的军队还有几万人。
English: At that time, there were still tens of thousands of troops under the command of Yao Jun.

古文：镇恶谕士卒曰： 吾属并家在江南，此为长安北门，去家万里，舟楫、衣粮皆已随流。今进战而胜，则功名俱显；不胜，则骸骨不返，无它歧矣。
现代文：王镇恶向士卒们宣告说： 我们的亲人和家园都在江南，这里是长安北门，离故乡有万里之遥。现在，战船、衣服、粮食都随波飘走，今天我们进攻，战胜可以建功立名；失败，我们的尸骨都回不了家，没有第三条路可走。
English: Wang Zhenxun announced to the soldiers: Our relatives and homes are all in the south of the Yangtze River. Here is the North Gate of Chang'an, thousands of miles away from our hometown. Now, warships, clothes, and grain are all drifting away with the waves. Today, we attack, and if we win, we can make achievements and make a name for ourselves. If we fail, our bodies and bones cannot return home, and there is no third way to go.

古文：卿等勉之！ 
现代文：你们大家共勉吧！ 
English: Let's all pray together!

古文：乃身先士卒，众腾踊争进，大破姚丕于渭桥。
现代文：于是，王镇恶身先士卒，冲在最前面，士卒们士气高涨，踊跃奋击，在渭桥大败后秦姚丕的军队。
English: As a result, Wang Zhen rushed to the front, leading the soldiers. The soldiers' morale was high, and they fought enthusiastically. After the great defeat of Qin Yaoqin's army at the bridge.

古文：泓引兵救之，为丕败卒所蹂践，不战而溃。
现代文：姚泓率兵救援，却被姚丕的败兵冲击践踏，不战自溃。
English: Yao Xuan led his soldiers to rescue, but was trampled by the impact of Yao Xuan's defeated soldiers, and self-destructed without a fight.

古文：姚谌等皆死，泓单马还宫。
现代文：姚谌等人全都战死，姚泓单人匹马逃回皇宫。
English: Yao Yao and the others all died in the battle, and Yao Yao fled back to the imperial palace alone.

古文：镇恶入自平朔门，泓与姚裕等数百骑逃奔石桥。
现代文：王镇恶从长安的平朔门进城，姚泓和姚裕等率几百名骑兵逃奔石桥。
English: Wang Zhenxiong entered the city from the Pingshuo Gate of Chang'an, and Yao Zhen and Yao Yu led several hundred cavalrymen to flee to the stone bridge.

古文：东平公赞闻泓败，引兵赴之，众皆溃去。
现代文：东平公姚听说姚泓战败，急忙率军赴难救援，可是，后秦军心大乱，士卒们四处逃散。
English: Dongping Gongyao heard that Yao Wei had been defeated and hurriedly led the army to the rescue, but after the Qin army was in turmoil, the soldiers fled everywhere.

古文：胡翼度降于太尉裕。
现代文：胡翼度向东晋太尉刘裕投降。
English: Hu Yidu surrendered to the Eastern Jin Taijun Liu Yu.

古文：泓将出降，其子佛念，年十一，言于泓曰： 晋人将逞其欲，虽降必不免，不如引决。 
现代文：姚泓打算出城投降，他的儿子姚佛念，年仅十一岁，对姚泓说： 晋人势必要在我们身上满足欲望，即使投降也难免一死，不如自杀。 
English: Yao Yao planned to leave the city and surrender. His son Yao Fonen, who was only eleven years old, said to Yao Yao: "The Jin people are bound to satisfy their desires in us. Even if we surrender, we will inevitably die. It would be better to commit suicide."

古文：泓怃然不应，佛念登宫墙自投而死。
现代文：姚泓心里痛楚，没有回答。姚佛念自己登上宫墙，投下摔死。
English: With pain in his heart, Yao Yao did not answer. Yao Fuxiong climbed the palace wall and fell to his death.

古文：癸亥，泓将妻子、群臣诣镇恶垒门请降，镇恶以属吏。
现代文：癸亥，姚泓携妻子儿女、文武百官，前往王镇恶的大营投降，王镇恶把他们交给下属官吏关押。
English: Yan Hai, Yao Wei, together with their wives and children, and hundreds of civil and military officials, went to the large camp of Wang Zhenxiong to surrender. Wang Zhenxiong then handed them over to subordinate officials for detention.

古文：城中夷、晋六万馀户，镇恶以国恩抚慰，号令严肃，百姓安堵。
现代文：长安城中的汉族人和夷族人共有六万多户，王镇恶宣扬东晋的恩德，加以安抚，号令严明，百姓安居乐业。
English: In total, there are more than 60,000 households of Han and Yi people in Chang'an City. Wang Zhen evilly preached the benevolence of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, pacified them, and issued strict orders, so that the people could live and work in peace.

古文：九月，太尉裕至长安，镇恶迎于灞上。
现代文：九月，太尉刘裕抵达长安，王镇恶在灞上迎接。
English: In September, Lieutenant Liu Yu arrived in Chang'an, and Wang Zhenxiong greeted him on the raft.

古文：裕劳之曰： 成吾霸业者，卿也！ 
现代文：刘裕慰劳他说： 是你帮助我完成了霸业！ 
English: Liu Yu consoled him, saying: "You helped me complete my career as a tyrant!

古文：镇恶再拜谢曰： 明公之威，诸将之力，镇恶何功之有！ 
现代文：五镇恶再拜谦让说： 全仰赖您的英明指挥和威望，各位将领的努力，我有什么功劳！ 
English: The five towns bowed humbly and said, "We all rely on your wise leadership and prestige. The efforts of your generals, what credit do I have!

古文：裕笑曰： 卿欲学冯异邪？ 
现代文：刘裕笑着说： 你难道要学习冯异吗？ 
English: Liu Yu said with a smile, "Do you really want to learn from Feng Ying?

古文：镇恶性贪，秦府库盈积，镇恶盗取不可胜纪；裕以其功大，不问。
现代文：其实，王镇恶一向贪财好利，后秦府库仓储十分丰富，王镇恶私自盗取的财物，不计其数，刘裕因为他的功劳很大，所以不予过问。
English: In fact, Wang Zhenxiong has always been greedy for money and profit, the post-Qin government warehouse is very rich, the property that Wang Zhenxiong stole from himself is countless, and Liu Yu is not questioned because his merit is great.

古文：或谮诸裕曰： 镇恶藏姚泓伪辇，将有异志。 
现代文：有人向刘裕诬陷王镇恶说： 王镇恶私藏姚泓的御用辇车，可能会叛变。 
English: Some people told Liu Yu that Wang Zhen was framed for evil and said: Wang Zhen is evil and is hiding Yao Yao's royal carriage. He may turn traitor.

古文：裕使人觇之，镇恶剔取其金银，弃辇于垣侧，裕意乃安。
现代文：刘裕派人侦察。原来，王镇恶剔取了辇车上的金银珠饰，然后把辇车抛弃到城墙外面。刘裕这才安心。
English: Liu Yu sent someone to investigate. It turned out that Wang Zhen viciously stripped the gold and silver beads on the carriage, and then abandoned the carriage outside the city wall. Liu Yu was relieved.

古文：裕收秦彝器、浑仪、土圭、记里鼓、指南车送诣建康。
现代文：刘裕下令没收后秦的宗室祭祀用具彝器、浑天仪、测日仪器土圭、计程用的记里鼓、指南车等，送往建康。
English: Liu Yu ordered the confiscation of Hou Qin's ancestral hall's sacrificial tools, including the crockery, the compass, the sundial, the drum, and the guide car, and sent them to Jiankang.

古文：其馀金玉、缯帛、珍宝，皆以颁赐将士。
现代文：其余金银玉石、绫罗绸缎、稀世珍宝都赏赐给将士。
English: The rest of the gold, silver, jade, scarlet silk, and rare treasures were given to the soldiers.

古文：秦平原公璞、并州刺史尹昭以蒲阪降，东平公赞帅宗族百馀人诣裕降，裕皆杀之。
现代文：后秦平原公姚璞、并州刺史尹昭，献出了蒲阪城投降；东平公姚，率领皇室一百多人，前往刘裕的大营投降，刘裕把他们全部杀死。
English: Later, Qin Pingyuan Duke Yao Zhen, accompanied by the provincial governor Yin Zhao, offered the surrender of Busan City; Dongping Duke Yao, led by more than a hundred members of the royal family, went to Liu Yu's large camp to surrender, Liu Yu killed them all.

古文：送姚泓至建康，斩于市。
现代文：然后把姚泓送到建康，绑到市井刑场斩首。
English: They then sent Yao Yao to Jiankang, where he was tied up and beheaded at the city's execution site.

古文：裕以薛辩为平阳太守，使镇捍北道。
现代文：刘裕任命薛辩为平阳太守，令他镇守和保卫东晋北部边防。
English: Liu Yu appointed Xue Dian as the governor of Pingyang, and ordered him to guard and defend the northern border of East Jin.

古文：裕议迁都洛阳，谘议参军王仲德曰： 非常之事，固非常人所及，必致骇动。
现代文：刘裕提议迁都洛阳。谘议参军王仲德说： 不寻常的事，本来不是寻常人所能接受，一旦迁都，必然引起举国惊骇骚动。
English: Liu Yu proposed to move the capital to Luoyang. Wang Zhongde, who participated in the consultation, said: "This is an unusual thing, and it is not something that ordinary people can accept. Once the capital is moved, it will inevitably cause nationwide shock and commotion.

古文：今暴师日久，士卒思归，迁都之计，未可议也。
现代文：如今军队在外作战已久，人心思归，迁都的计划，不能提出讨论。 
English: Now that the army has been fighting abroad for a long time, people are thinking about returning home, and the plan to move the capital cannot be discussed.

古文：裕乃止。
现代文：刘裕才作罢。
English: Liu Yu finally gave up.

古文：羌众十馀万口西奔陇上，沈林子追击至槐里，俘虏万计。
现代文：羌族部落的部众十余万口，向西逃奔陇上，沈林子追击羌人直到槐里，俘虏数以万计。
English: More than a hundred thousand members of the Yao tribe fled westward to Lugu, Shen Linzi pursued the Yao people to Luli, and there were tens of thousands of prisoners.

古文：河西王蒙逊闻太尉裕灭秦，怒甚。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊听说东晋太尉刘裕灭掉了后秦，十分愤怒。
English: Beilianghe Xi Wang Dequan Mengxun was very angry when he heard that the Eastern Jin's Lieutenant Liu Yu had eliminated the Western Qin.

古文：门下校郎刘祥入言事，蒙逊曰： 汝闻刘裕入关，敢谓群臣曰： 姚泓非裕敌也。
现代文：门下校郎刘祥进宫向蒙逊奏事，沮渠蒙逊暴跳说： 你听说刘裕进关，还敢穿得如此漂亮！ 于是斩杀了刘祥。
English: Liu Xiang, an underling at the school, went to the palace to report to Meng Song. Frustrated, Meng Song jumped up and said, "You heard that Liu Yu went to the palace, and you dared to dress so beautifully!" So he killed Liu Xiang.

古文：且其兄弟内叛，安能拒人！裕取关中必矣。
现代文：当初，夏王赫连勃勃听说刘裕讨伐后秦，对文武百官说： 姚泓不是刘裕的对手。而且他的兄弟们纷纷背叛，怎么还能抗拒别人？刘裕定能夺取关中。
English: At first, Xia Wang Herlian was very excited when he heard that Liu Yu was fighting against the Qin Dynasty. He said to the military officials: "Yao Wei is not Liu Yu's rival. Moreover, his brothers have all betrayed him. How can he resist others? Liu Yu Ding can capture Guanzhong."

古文：然裕不能久留，必将南归，留子弟及诸将守之，吾取之如拾芥耳。 
现代文：可是，刘裕自己也不会长久留在关中，最后还得回到江南，留下子弟和一些战将守卫在那里。那时，我再去夺取关中，就像拾一根草叶一样容易。 
English: However, Liu Yu himself would not stay in Guanzhong for long, and finally had to return to the south of the Yangtze River, leaving his son and some generals to guard there. At that time, I went to seize Guanzhong again, as easy as picking up a blade of grass.

古文：乃秣马砺兵，训养士卒，进据安定，秦岭北郡县镇戍皆降之。
现代文：于是，他秣马厉兵，让士卒充分休息，加以训练。然后，赫连勃勃兵进占据了安定。后秦岭北各郡县、军事重镇、戍所纷纷投降了夏国。
English: As a result, he encouraged the soldiers to rest and trained them. Then, Herengong marched in and occupied the stable. After that, the counties and counties in the north of Qinling, the military strongholds, and the military camps all surrendered to Xia.

古文：裕遗使遗勃勃书，约为兄弟；勃勃使中书侍郎皇甫徽为报书而阴育之，对裕使者，口授舍人使书之。
现代文：刘裕派人出使夏国，致信给赫连勃勃，相约结为兄弟之国。赫连勃勃命中书侍郎皇甫徽代写一封回信，暗地里背诵下来，然后当着刘裕使臣的面，口授舍人命他照写。
English: Liu Yu sent an envoy to Xia Province to write a letter to Herengong, and the two agreed to form a brotherly country. Herengong ordered the imperial attendant to write a reply letter on behalf of the emperor, secretly recited it, and then, in front of Liu Yu's envoy, dictated to him to give up his life.

古文：裕读其文，叹曰： 吾不如也！ 
现代文：刘裕看到后，叹息说： 我比不上他！ 
English: After seeing this, Liu Yu sighed and said, "I'm no match for him!"

古文：广州刺史谢欣卒，东海人徐道期聚众攻陷州城，进攻始兴，始兴相彭城刘廉之讨诛之。
现代文：东晋广州刺史谢欣去世。东海人徐道期召集部众，攻克州城番禺，进攻始兴，始兴相、彭城人刘谦之讨伐徐道期，徐道期被杀。
English: Xie Xin, the East Jin ruler of Guangzhou, died. Xu Daotong, a man from the East China Sea, gathered his followers and conquered Panyu, the capital of the state, and attacked Shi Xing. Shi Xing Xiang and Liu Qian, a man from Pengcheng, fought against Xu Daotong and were killed.

古文：诏以谦之为广州刺史。
现代文：东晋朝廷下诏任命刘谦之为广州刺史。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty imperial court issued an edict to appoint Liu Qian as the chief historian of Guangzhou.

古文：癸酉，司马休之、司马文思、司马国璠、司马道赐、鲁轨、韩延之、刁雍、王慧龙及桓温之孙道度、道子、族人桓谧、桓璲、陈郡袁式等皆诣魏长孙嵩降。
现代文：癸酉，先后从东晋流亡后秦的司马休之、司马文思、司马国、司马道赐、鲁轨、韩延之、刁雍、王慧龙，以及桓温的孙子桓道度、桓道子、族人桓谧、桓、陈郡人袁式等，全都投降了北魏司徒长孙嵩。
English: , Sima Xiu Zi, Sima Wensi, Sima Guo, Sima Dao Zi, Lu Lu, Han Yan Zi, Zhi Yong, Wang Huilong, as well as Kuan Wen's grandson Kuan Dao Du, Kuan Dao Zi, the tribesman Kuan Zi, Kuan, and the Chen County man Yuan Shih, all surrendered to the Northern Wei leader Sun Song.

古文：秦匈奴镇将姚成都及弟和都举镇降魏。
现代文：后秦匈奴堡守将姚成都与他的弟弟姚和都，举献城池，投降了北魏。
English: Yao Chengdu and his brother Yao Wadu, who guarded the fortress after the Qin and Xun dynasties, surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏主嗣诏民间得姚氏子弟送平城者赏之。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣下诏，声称民间百姓凡是救出姚氏子弟送到平城的人，重重有赏。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, issued an edict, claiming that the people who rescued the children of the Yao clan and sent them to Pingcheng would be rewarded.

古文：冬，十月，己酉，嗣召长孙嵩等还。
现代文：冬季，十月，己酉，拓跋嗣征召长孙嵩等班师回朝。
English: In the winter, in October, Ji Kun, Tuoba Zi conscripted Changsun Song and other class teachers to return to the North.

古文：司马休之寻卒于魏。
现代文：不久，司马休之死在北魏。
English: Soon after, Sima Xiu died in Northern Wei.

古文：魏赐国璠爵淮南公，道赐爵池阳子，鲁轨爵襄阳公。
现代文：北魏朝廷赐封司马国为淮南公、司马道赐为池阳子、鲁轨为襄阳公。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty gave Sima Guo the title of Huainan Gong, Sima Dao the title of Chiyangzi, and Lu Luo the title of Xiangyang Gong.

古文：刁雍表求南鄙自效，嗣以雍为建义将军。
现代文：刁雍上书请求到南部边疆，报效北魏，拓跋嗣任命刁雍为建义将军。
English: Gong Yong sent a letter requesting to go to the southern border to serve the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Tuoba subsequently appointed Gong Yong as General Jianyi.

古文：雍聚众于河、济之间，扰动徐、兗；太尉裕遣兵讨之，不克，雍进屯固山，众至二万。
现代文：刁雍在黄河、济水之间集结部队，骚扰东晋所属的徐州、兖州；太尉刘裕出兵讨伐，不能攻克。刁雍进驻固山，手下兵员达二万人。
English: Gong Yong amassed troops between the Yellow River and Jishui and harassed Xuzhou and Ganzhou, which belonged to the Eastern Jin Dynasty; Lieutenant Liu Yu sent troops to fight and could not be defeated. Gong Yong was stationed in Gushan with 20,000 soldiers under his command.

古文：诏进宋公爵为王，增封十郡；辞不受。
现代文：东晋安帝司马德宗下诏封宋公刘裕为宋王，采邑增加十个郡，刘裕辞让，没有接受。
English: East Jinan Emperor Sima De Zong issued an edict to crown Song Gong Liu Yu as the King of Song, adding ten counties to the county, but Liu Yu declined and did not accept.

古文：西秦王炽磐遣左丞相昙达等击秦故将姚艾，艾遣使称籓，炽磐以艾为征东大将军、秦州牧。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣左丞相乞伏昙达等进攻后秦旧将姚艾。姚艾遣使到西秦，愿为藩属，乞伏炽磐任命姚艾为征东大将军、秦州牧。
English: After the Western Qin Dynasty, the king of Qibao sent Yao Ai, the former Qin general, to attack the Western Qin Dynasty. Yao Ai sent Yao Ai to Western Qin, willing to be a member of the clan, and Qibao appointed Yao Ai to be the general of the Eastern Expedition and the Qin State herdsman.

古文：征王松寿为尚书左仆射。
现代文：召回王松寿，任命他为尚书左仆射。
English: Wang Songshou was recalled and appointed as Shang Shuxi's second-in-command.

古文：十一月，魏叔孙建等讨西山丁零翟蜀洛支等，平之。
现代文：十一月，北魏征南大将军叔孙建等征讨西山丁零部落酋长翟蜀洛支，平定了该部。
English: In November, Uncle Sun Jian, the Northern Wei general of the Southern Expedition, and others went to subjugate the Xishan Dingye tribal chiefs of the Shu Shu Luo branch and pacified the area.

古文：辛未，刘穆之卒。
现代文：辛未，东晋左仆射、军司刘穆之去世。
English: Xin Wei, Eastern Jin Zuofu Jia, and the military commander Liu Muzhong died.

古文：太尉裕闻之，惊恸哀惋者累日。
现代文：太尉刘裕听说后，一连几天震惊悲痛，不胜哀惋。
English: After hearing the news, Captain Liu Yu was shocked and grieved for several days.

古文：始，裕欲留长安经略西北，而诸将佐皆久役思归，多不欲留。
现代文：当初，刘裕打算留在长安，继续征服西北，但是，东晋的各位将领都因长期征战，思念故土，大多数都不愿再留。
English: At first, Liu Yu planned to stay in Chang'an and continue to conquer the northwest, but the generals of the Eastern Jin all missed their homeland due to the long war, and most of them did not want to stay any longer.

古文：会穆之卒，裕以根本无托，遂决意东还。
现代文：正巧，刘穆之去世，刘裕鉴于朝中没有可以托付的人，才决定东返。
English: Coincidentally, Liu Mu Zhi passed away, and Liu Yu decided to return to the East only because there was no one to entrust him to.

古文：穆之之卒也，朝廷恇惧，欲发诏，以太尉左司马徐羡之代之，中军咨议参军张邵曰： 今诚急病，任终在徐；然世子无专命，宜须谘之。 
现代文：刘穆之去世之后，东晋朝廷不胜惶恐，打算颁下诏书，任命太尉左司马徐羡之代替刘穆之的职位。中军谘议参军张邵说： 现在情势确实危急，看来最终还要委任徐羡之。
English: After Liu Muzhi's death, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court was so alarmed that it planned to issue an imperial edict to appoint the captain of the Left Division, Ma Xu Enzhi, to replace Liu Muzhi. Zhang Shao, who was consulted by the Chinese army to join the army, said: Now the situation is really critical, it seems that Xu Enzhi will eventually be appointed.

古文：裕欲以王弘代穆之，从事中郎谢晦曰： 休元轻易，不若羡之。 
现代文：然而，世子刘义符还没有决定一方的权力，应该询问刘裕裕。 刘裕又想让王弘代替刘穆之，从事中郎谢晦说： 王弘轻率简单，不如徐羡之。 
English: However, Liu Yifu's son Liu Yifu has not yet decided on the power of one side, and should ask Liu Yuyu. Liu Yu also wants Wang Hong to replace Liu Muzhi, engaged in Zhonglang Xie Yu said: Wang Hong is imprudent and simple, not as good as Xu Enzhi.

古文：乃羡之为吏部尚书、建威将军、丹阳尹，代管留任。
现代文：于是刘裕才决定任命徐羡之为吏部尚书、建威将军、丹杨尹，代管留任的事务。
English: As a result, Liu Yucai decided to appoint Xu Qianqin as the person in charge of the affairs of retaining Shang Shu, General Jian Wei, and Danyang Yin.

古文：于是朝廷大事常决于穆之者，并悉北咨。
现代文：从此，过去朝廷中由刘穆之决定的大事，现在都送到北方，由刘裕亲自决定。
English: From then on, important matters that were previously decided by Liu Mu in the imperial court were now sent to the north and decided by Liu Yu himself.

古文：裕以次子桂阳公义真为都督雍、梁、秦王州诸军事、安西将军、领雍、东秦二州刺史。
现代文：刘裕任命他的次子、桂阳公刘义真为都督雍、梁、秦三州诸军事，安西将军，领雍、东秦二州刺史。
English: Liu Yu appointed his second son, Guiyang Prince Liu Yizhen, as the military governor of the three states of Yong, Liang and Qin, the general of Anxi, and the territorial governor of Yong and the two states of East Qin.

古文：义真时年十二。
现代文：刘义真当时只有十二岁。
English: Liu Yizhen was only 12 years old at the time.

古文：以太尉咨议参军京兆王修为长史，王镇恶为司马、领冯翊太守，沈田子、毛德祖皆为中兵参军，仍以田子领始平太守，德祖领秦州刺史、天水太守，傅弘之为雍州治中从事史。
现代文：又任命太尉谘议参军、京兆人王为长史；王镇恶为司马，兼任冯翊太守；沈田子、毛德祖都为中兵参军。命沈田子兼任始平太守，毛德祖兼任秦州刺史、天水太守，傅弘之为雍州治中从事史。
English: He also appointed Wang Zhenxiong as Sima and concurrently served as the governor of Fengyuan; Shen Tianzi and Mao Dezu both joined the army as soldiers; Shen Tianzi concurrently served as the governor of Shihping; Mao Dezu concurrently served as the governor of Qinzhou and the governor of Tianshui; and Fu Hongshi served as the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：先是，陇上流户寓关中者，望因兵威得复本土；及置东秦州，知裕无复西略之意，皆叹息失望。
现代文：在此之前，陇上流亡到关中寄居的流民，冀望东晋军队乘胜西上，光复故土。等到刘裕设置东秦州，知道刘裕没有继续西上的意图，都叹息失望。
English: Prior to this, the exiles who had been exiled to Guanzhong and resided there hoped that the East Jin army would take advantage of the victory to go west and recover their homeland. When Liu Yu set up East Qin Province, they were disappointed to learn that Liu Yu did not intend to continue westward.

古文：关中人素重王猛，裕之克长安，王镇恶功为多，由是南人皆忌之。
现代文：关中人一向看重王猛的威名，刘裕攻克长安，王镇恶的功劳最大，所以南方的将领都忌恨王镇恶。
English: Guanzhong people have always valued the prestige of Wang Meng, Liu Yu conquered Chang'an, and Wang Zhenxiong's merit is the greatest, so the generals in the south all hate Wang Zhenxiong.

古文：沈田子自以峣柳之捷，与镇恶争功不平。
现代文：沈田子自以为柳大捷，功绩不凡，与王镇恶争功，心里十分不平。
English: Shen Tianzi thought that Liu was a great conqueror, his achievements were extraordinary, and he argued with Wang Zhen evil, and he was very dissatisfied.

古文：裕将还，田子及傅弘之屡言于裕曰： 镇恶家在关中，不可保信。 
现代文：刘裕将回建康，沈田子和傅弘之多次对刘裕说： 王镇恶的老家在关中，不能完全信任他。 
English: Liu Yu will return to Jiankang, Shen Tianzi and Fu Hongzhi repeatedly said to Liu Yu: Wang Zhen's evil hometown is in Guanzhong, can't fully trust him.

古文：裕曰： 今留卿文武将士精兵万人，彼若欲为不善，正足自灭耳。
现代文：刘裕说： 现在，我留你们这些文武官员、将领和精锐士卒一万人，王镇恶如果图谋不轨，只能是自取灭亡。
English: Liu Yu said: Now, I am leaving 10,000 of you civil and military officials, generals and elite soldiers. If Wang Zhenxiong tries to do something wrong, he will only destroy himself.

古文：勿复多言。 
现代文：你们别再多说了。 
English: You don't have to say any more.

古文：裕私谓田子曰： 钟会不得遂其乱者，以有卫瓘故也。
现代文：刘裕私下对沈田子说： 钟会之所以没有作乱，是因为卫的缘故。
English: Liu Yu privately said to Shen Tianzi: The reason why the bell association did not make a disturbance was because of Wei.

古文：语曰： 猛兽不如群狐 ，卿等十馀人，何惧王镇恶！ 
现代文：俗话说： 猛兽不如群狐 ，你们十多人，难道还惧怕王镇恶不成？ 
English: As the saying goes: "Fierce beasts are not as good as a pack of foxes. Are you more than ten people still afraid that you won't be able to defeat evil?

古文：臣光曰：古人有言： 疑则勿任，任则勿疑。 
现代文：臣司马光曰：古人有言道： 疑人不用，用人不疑。 
English: Minister Sima Guang said: The ancients had a saying: Don't suspect, employ.

古文：裕既委镇恶以关中，而复与田子有后言，是斗之使为乱也。
现代文：刘裕既然委任王镇恶镇守关中，而又与沈田子说了后面那些话，是挑拨他们相斗为乱。
English: Since Liu Yu appointed Wang Zhenxiang Zhen to guard the pass, and then said those words with Shen Tianzi, he was provoking them to fight each other.

古文：惜乎！百年之寇，千里之士，得之艰难，失之造次，使丰、鄗之都复输寇手。
现代文：太可惜了，百年之久的敌人，千里之广的疆土，取得不易，却因一时不慎而丢掉，使丰邑、京这些古都，又重新落入敌手。
English: It is a great pity that an enemy that has existed for a hundred years and whose territory extends for thousands of miles was not easily won, but was lost due to a moment's carelessness, causing the ancient capitals of Fengyi and Beijing to fall back into the enemy's hands.

古文：荀子曰： 兼并易能也，坚凝之难。 
现代文：荀况说过： 兼并容易，凝结为一体就难了。 
English: As the saying goes: Mergers are easy, but integration is difficult.

古文：信哉！
现代文：这话太对了！
English: This is indeed the case!

古文：三秦父老闻裕将还，诣门流涕诉曰： 残民不沾王化，于今百年，始睹衣冠，人人相贺。
现代文：三秦地区的父老，听说刘裕就要返回江南，都痛哭流涕地来到大营门前诉说： 我们这些残余的汉人，没有接受朝廷的教化，至今已有一百年之久，直到今天才看到汉民族衣冠装束，人人都互相庆贺。
English: Fathers and grandfathers in the Sanqin region, hearing that Liu Yu was about to return to the south of the Yangtze River, all came to the front of the camp with tears streaming down their faces and said: We, the remaining Han people, have not accepted the indoctrination of the imperial court for a hundred years. It is only today that we see the Han national clothing and costumes, and everyone is celebrating with each other.

古文：长安十陵是公家坟墓，咸阳宫殿是公家室宅，舍此欲何之乎！ 
现代文：长安十陵是你们刘家的坟墓，咸阳宫殿是你们刘家的住宅，你放弃它们想要去哪里！ 
English: The ten mausoleums of Chang'an are the tombs of your Liu family, the Xianyang Palace is the residence of your Liu family, where do you want to go if you abandon them!

古文：裕为之愍然，慰谕之曰： 受命朝廷，不得擅留。
现代文：刘裕也很伤感，安慰他们说： 我接受朝廷的命令，不敢擅自停留。
English: Liu Yu was also very sad, and consoled them by saying, "I accept the order of the imperial court, and I dare not stay without permission."

古文：诚多诸君怀本之志，今以次息与文武贤才共镇此境，勉与之居。 
现代文：感谢诸位怀念故国的诚意，现在留下我的次子与文武贤才共同镇守这里，希望你们和好共处。 
English: I would like to thank you all for your sincerity in remembering your home country, and now leaving my second son to stay here together with the literati and military geniuses. I hope you will live together harmoniously.

古文：十二月，庚子，裕发长安，自洛入河，开汴渠以归。
现代文：十二月，庚子，刘裕从长安出发，自洛水进入黄河，开掘汴渠东返。
English: In December, Geng Zi and Liu Yu set out from Chang'an, entered the Yellow River from Luoshui, excavated a canal and returned east.

古文：氐豪徐骇奴、齐元子等拥部落三万在雍，遣使请降於魏。
现代文：氐族酋长徐骇奴、齐元子等率领部落部众三万人在雍城，派遣使臣投降了北魏。
English: Yi chieftains such as Xu Hacknu and Qi Yuanzi led the tribal council of 30,000 people in Yongcheng and sent envoys to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏主嗣遣将军王洛生、河内太守杨声等西行以应之。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣，派遣将军王洛生、河内太守杨声等向西行进，接应氐族部落。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, sent the general Wang Lousheng and the governor of Hanoi, Yang Sheng, to the west to meet the Dong tribe.

古文：闰月，壬申，魏主嗣如大宁长川。
现代文：闰十二月，壬申，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往大宁、长川。
English: In the intercalary month of December, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, went to Danning and Changchuan in Jinshin.

古文：秦、雍人千馀家推襄邑令上谷寇赞为主，以降于魏，魏主嗣拜赞魏郡太守。
现代文：秦州、雍州土著居民一千多家，推举襄邑令、上谷人寇为盟主，投降了北魏。北魏国主拓跋嗣任命寇为魏郡太守。
English: More than a thousand indigenous residents of Qinzhou and Yongzhou, including Xiangyurong and Shangguan people, elected Guo as the leader, and surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty. Northern Wei ruler Tuoba Zi appointed Guo as the governor of Wei County.

古文：久之，秦、雍人流入魏之河南、荥阳、河内者，户以万数。嗣乃置南雍州，以赞为刺史，封河南公，治洛阳，立雍州郡县以抚之。
现代文：很久以后，秦州、雍州的百姓流亡到北魏的河南、荥阳、河内的有几万户，拓跋嗣于是设置南雍州，任命寇为南雍州刺史，封河南公，州治设在洛阳，设立雍州郡县安抚流民。
English: After a long time, tens of thousands of people from Qinzhou and Yongzhou were exiled to Henan, Shenyang, and Hanoi in the Northern Wei Dynasty. Tuoba Zi then set up Nanyangzhou, appointed Qo as the historian of Nanyangzhou, sealed Henan Gong, set up the state government in Luoyang, and set up Yongzhou counties to pacify the exiles.

古文：赞善于招怀，流民归之者，三倍其初。
现代文：寇善于招抚怀柔，前来归附的流民，比当初多了三倍。
English: Ko is good at wooing Huairou, and the number of refugees coming to join him has tripled since the beginning.

古文：夏王勃勃闻太尉裕东还，大喜，问于王买德曰： 腾欲取关中，卿试言其方略。 
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃，听说东晋太尉刘裕返回江南，大喜，向王买德询问说： 我打算夺取关中，你说说你的方法策略。 
English: Xia Wang Herlian was full of vigor. He was overjoyed to hear that Eastern Jin's Lieutenant Liu Yu had returned to the south of the Yangtze River. He asked Wang Baide: "I plan to seize Guanzhong. Tell me about your methods and strategies."

古文：买德曰： 关中形胜之地，而裕以幼子守之。狼狈而归，正欲急成篡事耳，不暇复以中原为意。
现代文：王买德说： 关中的地理位置十分重要，而刘裕却叫他的幼子镇守，自己则狼狈而回，正打算快点办完篡夺帝位的事，没时间再把中原这块地盘放在心上。
English: Wang Baide said: "The geographical location of Guanzhong is very important, but Liu Yu called his young son to be the town guard, but he was confused and returned. He was planning to quickly complete the usurpation of the imperial throne, and did not have time to take this Central Plains site to heart.

古文：此天以关中赐我，不可失也。
现代文：这是上天把关中赏赐给我们，不能错过这个机会。
English: This is God's gift to us, and we must not miss this opportunity.

古文：青泥、上洛，南北之险要，宜先遣游军断之；东塞潼关，绝其水陆之路；然后传檄三辅，施以威德，则义真在网罟之中，不足取也。 
现代文：青泥、上洛，是南北的险要重镇，应该先派出游击部队，切断他们的补给和退路，然后在东部阻住潼关，切断他们与本国的水陆通道。
English: Qingde and Shangluo are the most important towns in the north and south. The guerrilla forces should be dispatched first to cut off their supplies and escape routes, and then to block Shouguan in the east and cut off their land and water routes with their own country.

古文：勃勃乃以其子抚军大将军璝都督前锋诸军事，帅骑二万向长安。
现代文：然后向三辅地区发布檄文，恩威并施。这样，刘义真就等于掉进了网篓之中，不用费劲就可以生擒。 于是，赫连勃勃任命他的儿子、抚军大将军赫连为都督前锋诸军事，率领骑兵二万人直奔长安。
English: Then, he issued an imperial edict to the Sanfu area, bestowing grace and favor. In this way, Liu Yizhen was just like falling into a net, and he could be caught without much effort. As a result, Herengong appointed his son, General Herengong, as the vanguard of the military, and led 20,000 cavalrymen straight to Chang'an.

古文：前将军昌屯潼关，以买德为抚军右长史，屯青泥，勃勃将大军为后继。
现代文：命前将军赫连昌屯驻潼关；任命王买德为抚军右长史，屯驻青泥；赫连勃勃本人则亲自统率大军尾随在后。
English: The former general Herenchang was stationed in Shaoguan; Wang Baide was appointed as the right-hand man of the army and stationed in Qingde; Herenchang himself personally led a large army to follow.

古文：是岁，魏都坐大官章安侯封懿卒。
现代文：这一年，北魏都坐大官、章安侯封懿去世。
English: In the same year, the Northern Wei Doudou official, Zhang An Houfeng, passed away.

古文：安皇帝癸义熙十四年
现代文：十四年春季，正月，丁酉朔，北魏国主拓跋嗣抵达平城。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, in the first month of the year, Ding Junshuo, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, arrived in Pingcheng.

古文：春，正月，丁酉朔，魏主嗣至平城，命护高车中郎将薛繁帅高车、丁零北略，至弱水而还。辛巳，大赦。
现代文：命护高车中郎将薛繁，率领高车、丁零部落向北进攻，推进到弱水，班师。辛巳，东晋下令实行大赦。
English: To protect his own life, Gao Che Zhong Lang attacked Xue Xiang, leading Gao Che and Ding Zi Tribe to the north and pushed them to Weak Water. Soon, the Eastern Jin Dynasty ordered an amnesty.

古文：夏赫连璝至渭阳，关中民降之者属路。
现代文：夏国抚军大将军赫连率军开到渭阳，关中前来投降的百姓，在道上前后相连。
English: General Herlian of the Xia Guozhu army led the army to Shenyang. The people who came to Guanzhong to surrender were connected on the road.

古文：龙骧将军沈田子将兵拒之，畏其众盛，退屯刘回堡，遣使还报王镇恶。
现代文：东晋龙骧将军沈田子，率军迎战，害怕夏军人多势众，退守刘回堡。然后派人立即回去向王镇恶报告。
English: Eastern Jin Longjing General Shen Tianzi, led the army to meet the battle, afraid of the large number of Xia soldiers, retreated to Liu Huibao. Then he sent someone back immediately to report to Wang Zhenxiong.

古文：镇恶谓王修曰： 公以十岁儿付吾属，当共思竭力；而拥兵不进，虏何由得平！ 
现代文：王镇恶对王说： 刘公把十岁小儿托付给我们，我们应该同心协力。沈田子拥兵众多，却迟迟不进攻，敌人怎么会击退！ 
English: Wang Zhenxiong said to Wang: Liu Gong entrusted his ten-year-old son to us, we should work together. Shen Tianzi has a large number of soldiers, but he is slow to attack, how can the enemy fight back!

古文：使者还，以告田子。
现代文：使节回去，把这些话报告给沈田子。
English: The envoy went back and reported these words to Shen Tianzi.

古文：田子与镇恶素有相图之志，由是益忿惧。
现代文：沈田子与王镇恶平时就有互不相容心思，现在更是又愤又惧。
English: Shen Tianzi and Wang Zhenxiong have incompatible thoughts in peacetime, and now they are even more angry and afraid.

古文：未几，镇恶与田子俱出北地以拒夏兵，军中讹言： 镇恶欲尽杀南人，以数十人送义真南还。因据关中反。 
现代文：不久，沈田子和王镇恶同时出军北地，抵抗夏兵的进攻。东晋军中传言： 王镇恶打算全部杀掉南方人，然后派几十人把刘义真送回江南，自己占据关中，背叛朝廷。 
English: Not long after, Shen Tianzi and Wang Zhenxiong simultaneously went to the north to resist Xia Jun's attack. There was a rumor in the East Jin Army: Wang Zhenxiong planned to kill all the southerners, then send dozens of people to send Liu Yizhen back to the south of the Yangtze River, occupy Guanzhong himself, and betray the imperial court.

古文：辛亥，田子请镇恶至傅弘之营计事。
现代文：辛亥，沈田子请王镇恶来到傅弘之的大营商讨战事。
English: Xinhai and Shen Tianzi invited Wang Zhenqi to come to Fu Hongzhi's grand conference to discuss the war.

古文：田子求屏人语，使其宗人沈敬仁斩之幕下，矫称受太尉令诛之。
现代文：沈田子请求屏退左右侍从密谈，然后命他的族人沈敬仁，在虎帐下将王镇恶斩杀，声称是奉太尉刘裕的旨意行事。
English: Shen Tianzi asked the attendants to have a secret talk, and then ordered his kinsman Shen Jingren to kill Wang Zhenxuan under the tigers, claiming that he was acting according to the will of Lieutenant Liu Yu.

古文：弘之奔告刘义真，义真与王修被甲登横门以察其变。
现代文：傅弘之急忙跑去报告刘义真，刘义真和王全副武装登上横门，观察局势的变化。
English: Fu Hongzhi hurriedly ran to report Liu Yizhen. Liu Yizhen and Wang boarded the side gate fully armed to observe the changes in the situation.

古文：俄而田子帅数十人来至，言镇恶反。
现代文：不久，沈田子率领几十人赶来，声称王镇恶谋反。
English: Soon, Shen Tianzi led dozens of people to arrive, claiming that Wang Zhen was plotting evil.

古文：修执田子，数以专戮，斩之；以冠军将军毛修之代镇恶为安西司马。
现代文：王逮捕沈田子，历数他擅自杀戮的罪行，将他斩首。然后命令冠军将军毛之代替王镇恶为安西司马。
English: Wang arrested Shen Tianzi, charged him with the crime of unauthorized killing, beheaded him, and then ordered the champion general Mao Zhi to replace Wang Zhenrong as Ansi Sima.

古文：傅弘之大破赫连璝于池阳，又破之于寡妇渡，斩获甚众，夏兵乃退。
现代文：傅弘之在池阳大破赫连，在寡妇渡再一次大败夏军，斩杀和俘虏夏军士卒很多，夏军撤退。
English: Fu Hongzhi defeated Heren in Chiyang, and defeated the Xia army again in Widow's Pass. He killed and captured many Xia soldiers, and the Xia army retreated.

古文：壬戌，太尉裕至彭城，解严，琅邪王德文先归建康。
现代文：壬戌，东晋太尉刘裕抵达彭城，解除戒严。琅邪王司马德文提前返回建康。
English: At the same time, the Eastern Jin Dynasty Lieutenant Liu Yu arrived in Pengcheng and lifted the martial law. The evil king Sima Dewen returned to Jiankang ahead of schedule.

古文：裕闻王镇恶死，表言 沈田子忽发狂易，奄害忠勋 ，追赠镇恶左将军、青州刺史。
现代文：刘裕听到王镇恶的死讯，上疏东晋安帝司马德宗说： 沈田子忽然发狂，杀害忠良功臣。 东晋朝廷追赠王镇恶为左将军、青州刺史。
English: When Liu Yu heard the news of Wang Zhenxun's death, the Eastern Jin Dynasty Emperor Sima Dezong said: "Shen Tianzi suddenly went mad and killed a loyal and meritorious vassal.

古文：以彭城内史刘遵考为并州刺史、领河东太守，镇蒲阪；征荆州刺史刘道怜为徐、兗二州刺史。
现代文：东晋朝廷任命彭城内史刘遵考为并州刺史、兼任河东太守，镇守蒲阪；征召荆州刺史刘道怜为徐州、兖州二州刺史。
English: The East Jin Dynasty court appointed Liu Zunkao, the historian of Pengcheng, as the historian of the annexed states, and concurrently served as the governor of Hedong and the town guard of Pusan; Liu Dorei, the historian of Jingzhou, was conscripted as the historian of Xuzhou and the two states of Ganzhou.

古文：裕欲以世子义符镇荆州，以徐州刺史刘义隆为司州刺史，镇洛阳。
现代文：刘裕打算派世子刘义符镇守荆州，以徐州刺史刘义隆为司州刺史，镇守洛阳。
English: Liu Yu planned to send his descendant Liu Yifu to guard Jingzhou, and Liu Yilong, the governor of Xuzhou, to guard Luoyang.

古文：中军谘议张邵谏曰： 储贰之重，四海所系，不宜处外。 
现代文：中军谘议张劝阻说： 世子是储君，维系四海人心，不能派到外地驻守。 
English: Zhang, the Chinese military adviser, dissuaded him, saying, "The emperor is the crown prince, who maintains the hearts of the people of the four seas, and cannot be sent to garrison in other places.

古文：乃更以义隆为都督荆、益、宁、雍、梁、秦六州诸军事、西中郎将、荆州刺史，以南郡太守到彦之为南蛮校尉，张邵为司马、领南郡相，冠军功曹王昙首为长史，北徐州从事王华为西中郎主簿，沈林子为西中郎参军。
现代文：于是，刘裕改派刘义隆为都督荆州、益州、宁州、雍州、梁州、秦州六州诸军事，兼任西中郎将、荆州刺史。又任命南郡太守到彦之为南蛮校尉；张为司马，兼任南郡相；冠军功曹王昙首为长史；北徐州从事王华为西中郎主簿；沈林子为西中郎参军。
English: As a result, Liu Yu reassigned Liu Yilong as the military governor of the six states of Jingzhou, Yizhou, Ningzhou, Yongzhou, Liangzhou, and Qinzhou, and also served as the West Vice Admiral and the Jingzhou Military Historian. He also appointed the South County Governor to be the Nanban School Captain; Zhang to be the Sima and the South County Minister; the champion of the victory of Cao Wang to be the Long History; the North Xuzhou to be engaged in the main book of the West Vice Admiral; and Shen Linzi to be the West Vice Admiral to join the army.

古文：义隆尚幼，府事皆决于邵。
现代文：刘义隆年纪尚小，府中大小事务都由张决定。
English: Liu Yilong is still young, and all the major and minor affairs of the government are decided by Zhang.

古文：昙首，弘之弟也。
现代文：王昙首，是王弘的弟弟。
English: Wang Xizhou is Wang Hong's younger brother.

古文：裕谓义隆曰： 王昙首沉毅有器度，宰相才也，汝每事咨之。 
现代文：刘裕对刘义隆说： 王昙首沉着坚毅，有器度，是宰相之才。你每件事都要征求他的意见。 
English: Liu Yu said to Liu Yilong, "Wang Xizhou is calm and resolute, he has a good sense of organization, and he is the prime minister's talent. You should seek his opinion on everything.

古文：以南郡公刘义庆为豫州刺史。
现代文：东晋朝廷任命南郡公刘义庆为豫州刺史。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Liu Yijing, the governor of Nan County, as the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：义庆，道怜之子也。
现代文：刘义庆是刘道怜的儿子。
English: Liu Yiqing is the son of Liu Daorai.

古文：裕解司州，领徐、冀二州刺史。
现代文：东晋朝廷解除刘裕司州刺史职务，任命他兼徐、冀二州刺史。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court dismissed Liu Yushi from the post of state historian and appointed him as the historian of the two states of Xu and Hebei.

古文：秦王炽磐以乞伏木弈干为沙州刺史，镇乐都。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐任命乞伏木弈干为沙州刺史，镇守乐都。
English: The Western Qin Dynasty king Qibuxing Bolan appointed Qibuxing Muxing Jian as the governor of Shazhou and the governor of Leduc.

古文：二月，乙弗乌地延帅户二万降秦。
现代文：二月，乙弗部落、乌地延部落酋长率二万户部众归降西秦。
English: In February, the chiefs of the Yifu Tribe and the Wudiyan Tribe led 20,000 households to return to the Western Qin Dynasty.

古文：三月，遣使聘魏。
现代文：三月，东晋朝廷派遣使臣访问北魏。
English: In March, the Eastern Jin Dynasty sent an envoy to visit the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：夏，四月，己巳，魏徙冀、定、幽三州徒河于代都。
现代文：夏季，四月，己巳，北魏强行迁徙散居在冀州、定州、幽州三州的徒河人到代郡。
English: In the summer, in April, the Northern Wei Dynasty forcibly migrated the Tuhe people scattered in the three states of Jizhou, Dingzhou and Yuzhou to Dai County.

古文：初，和龙有赤气四塞蔽日，自寅至申，燕太史令张穆言于燕王跋曰： 此兵气也。今魏方强盛，而执其使者，好命不通，臣窃惧焉。 跋曰： 吾方思之。 
现代文：北燕太史令张穆对北燕国王冯跋说： 这是战争之气呀。如今魏国的势力正十分强盛，而我们扣留他们的使臣，致使两国交好的使命不能通达，我深感恐惧。 冯跋说： 我正在考虑这件事。 
English: The Northern Yan Taishi ordered Zhang Mu to say to the Northern Yan King Feng Bao: This is the spirit of war. Today, the power of Wei is very strong, and we detain their envoys, so that the mission of friendship between the two countries cannot be achieved, I am deeply afraid. Feng Bao said: I am considering this matter.

古文：五月，魏主嗣东巡，至濡源及甘松，遣征东将军长孙道生、安东将军李先、给事黄门侍郎奚观帅精骑二万袭燕，又命骁骑将军延普、幽州刺史尉诺自幽州引兵趋辽西，为之声势，嗣屯突门岭以待之。
现代文：五月，北魏国主拓跋嗣向东巡视，先后抵达濡源和甘松。他征调征东将军长孙道生、安东将军李先、给事黄门侍郎奚观等人，率领精锐骑兵二万人袭击北燕；又命骁骑将军延普、幽州刺史尉诺，从幽州率兵直扑辽西，为长孙道生声援；拓跋嗣亲自屯驻突门岭督战。
English: In May, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, made an inspection tour to the east, arriving at Nueryuan and Gansong successively. He enlisted and dispatched the generals of the East, including the chief Sun Dosheng, the general of the East, Li Xian, and the attendant of the Yellow Gate, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, Yan Guan, and led the elite cavalry of 20,000 people to attack Beiyan; he also ordered the cavalry generals Yan Pu and Yuzhou Zhishihong to attack the west of Liaoning with the soldiers from Yuzhou to support the eldest son of Dosheng; Tuoba Zi

古文：道生等拔乙连城，进攻和龙，与燕单于右辅古泥战，破之，杀其将皇甫轨。
现代文：长孙道生等人攻克乙连城，进攻和龙，与北燕单于右辅古泥会战，大破北燕军，斩杀他们的将领皇甫轨。
English: The eldest grandson, Tao Sheng, and others conquered Yilian City, attacked Hulong, and fought with Bei Yanshan in Zuoyu ancient mud, smashed Bei Yanshan's army, and killed their general, Wang Fule.

古文：燕王跋婴城自守，魏人攻之，不克，掠其民万馀家而还。
现代文：北燕王冯跋绕城固守，北魏加紧围攻，不能攻克，劫掠北燕百姓一万余家班师回国。
English: Feng Baw, the king of the Northern Yan, surrounded the city and defended it. The Northern Wei tightened the siege, but could not conquer it. More than ten thousand soldiers returned home after plundering the people of the Northern Yan.

古文：六月，太尉裕始受相国、宋公、九锡之命。
现代文：六月，东晋太尉刘裕接受了相国、宋公、九锡之命。
English: In June, Liu Yu, the Eastern Jin's lieutenant, accepted the orders of his brother-in-law, Song Gong, and Jiuxi.

古文：赦国中殊死以下，崇继母兰陵萧氏为太妃。
现代文：赦免了宋公封邑内死罪以下的囚徒。
English: He pardoned the prisoners who were under the sentence of death in Songgongfei.

古文：以太尉军谘祭酒孔靖为宋国尚书令，左长史王弘为仆射，领选，从事中郎傅亮、蔡廓皆为侍中，谢晦为右卫将军，右长史郑鲜之为奉常，行参军殷景仁为秘书郎，其馀百官，悉依天朝之制。
现代文：尊崇刘裕的继母、兰陵人萧氏为太妃；任命太尉军谘祭酒孔靖为宋国尚书令，左长史王弘为仆射，兼管官员的选举和任免；任命从事中郎傅亮、蔡廓都担任侍中，谢晦为右卫将军，右长史郑鲜之为奉常，行参军殷景仁为秘书郎，其他文武官员，也都按照朝廷的编制设置。
English: Liu Yu's revered stepmother, the Lanling man Xiao, was made the empress dowager; the first lieutenant of the army, Kong Jing, was appointed Song Guo Shang Shuling, and the left-hand commander, Shi Wanghong, was appointed as the second-in-command, and was also in charge of the election and appointment and dismissal of officials; the middle-ranking officers, Fu Liang and Cai Kuo, were appointed as chamberlains, Xie Guo as the right-hand general, and the right-hand commander, Zheng Xiangshi, as the second-in-command, and Yin Jingren, who joined the army,

古文：靖辞不受。
现代文：孔靖谢绝，没有接受。
English: Kong Jing declined and did not accept.

古文：亮，咸之孙；廓，谟之曾孙；鲜之，浑之玄孙；景仁，融之曾孙也。
现代文：傅亮是傅咸的孙子；蔡廓，是蔡谟的曾孙；郑鲜之，是郑浑的玄孙；殷景仁，是殷融的曾孙。
English: Fu Liang is the grandson of Fu Han; Cai Kuo is the great-grandson of Cai Mu; Zheng Xian Zhi is the great-great-grandson of Zheng Hun; Yin Jingren is the great-grandson of Yin Rong.

古文：景仁学不为文，敏有思致；口不谈义，深达理体；至于国典、朝仪、旧章、记注，莫不撰录，识者知其有当世之志。
现代文：殷景仁学识超人，但不写文章，敏捷而善于思考，从不空谈义理，却深通情理大体，以至于朝廷的法律制度、礼仪规章、行政司法的注释和记录，都抄录下来，有识之士都知道他有治理国家的雄心大志。
English: Yin Jingren was a man of superhuman learning, but he did not write articles. He was quick and good at thinking. He never talked idly about righteousness, but he was deeply versed in reason in general, so much so that he copied down the legal system, etiquette rules, and administrative and judicial notes and records of the imperial court. People with insight knew that he had great ambitions to govern the country.

古文：魏天部大人白马文贞公崔宏疾笃，魏主嗣遣侍臣问病，一夜数返。
现代文：北魏天部大人、白马公崔宏病重，北魏国主拓跋嗣派他的侍从询问病情，一夜之间，返往数次。
English: Northern Wei emperor Cui Hong was gravely ill. The Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zi sent his attendant to inquire about his condition. Overnight, he returned several times.

古文：及卒，诏群臣及附国渠帅皆会葬。
现代文：不久，崔宏去世，拓跋嗣下诏，命群臣和归附的部落酋长都来参加葬礼。
English: Soon after, Cui Hong died, and Tuoba Zi issued an edict ordering all his ministers and subordinate tribal chiefs to attend the funeral.

古文：秋，七月，戊午，魏主嗣至平城。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊午，北魏国主拓跋嗣抵达平城。
English: In the autumn, in July, at noon, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Xi, arrived in Pingcheng.

古文：九月，甲寅，魏人命诸州调民租，户五十石，积于定、相、冀三州。
现代文：九月，甲寅，北魏朝廷命令各州县征收租赋，每户交纳五十石，屯积在定州、相州、冀州三州。
English: In September, the Northern Wei Dynasty ordered all prefectures and counties to collect rent, with each household paying fifty koku, and settled in Dingzhou, Xiangzhou, and Jizhou.

古文：河西王蒙逊复引兵伐凉，凉公歆将拒之，左长史张体顺固谏，乃止。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊再次率兵讨伐西凉，西凉公李歆准备出兵迎战，左长史张体顺坚决劝阻，李歆才停止行动。
English: Meng Song, the Western King of the Beiliang River, once again led an army to fight against the Western Liang. The Western Liang's ruler, Li Qian, prepared to send troops to fight, but was resolutely dissuaded by Zhang Tieshun, the Left Senior Historian. Only then did Li Qian stop the action.

古文：蒙逊芟其秋稼而还。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊收割了长成的庄稼，班师回国。
English: Despondent, Monsoon harvested the crops that had grown, and the class teacher returned home.

古文：歆遣使来告袭位。
现代文：李歆派人出使东晋，报告他继位。
English: Li Lan sent an envoy to the Eastern Jin Dynasty to inform them of his succession.

古文：冬，十月，以歆为都督七郡诸军事、镇西大将军、酒泉公。
现代文：冬季，十月，东晋朝廷任命李歆为都督七郡诸军事、镇西大将军、酒泉公。
English: In winter and October, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Li Qian as the military governor of the seven counties, the general of Zhenxi, and the lord of Jiuquan.

古文：姚艾叛秦，降河西王蒙逊，蒙逊引兵迎之。
现代文：西秦秦州牧姚艾叛变，投降了北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊，沮渠蒙逊出兵迎接。
English: Western Qin, Qin State, Muyao Ai mutinied and surrendered to the Western King of the Beiliang River, Qiuqiu Mengxun, who sent troops to meet them.

古文：艾叔父俊言于众曰： 秦王宽仁有雅度，自可安居事之，何为从河西王西迁！ 
现代文：姚艾的叔父姚隽对他的部众说： 秦王乞伏炽磐宽厚仁爱有雅量，我们可以安心留下来事奉他，为什么要跟随沮渠蒙逊西迁？ 
English: Yao Ai's uncle, Yao Jun, said to his subordinates: "The Qin King is a great supplicant, generous, benevolent, and gracious. We can stay and serve him with peace of mind. Why should we follow Meng Song westward?

古文：众咸以为然，乃相与逐艾，推俊为主，复归于秦。
现代文：部众都认为有理，就联合起来驱逐了姚艾，推举姚隽为首领，又归附了西秦。
English: The members of the ministry all thought it was reasonable, so they united to expel Yao Ai, elected Yao Jie as the leader, and annexed West Qin.

古文：秦王炽磐征俊为侍中、中书监、征南将军，赐爵陇西公，以左丞相昙达为都督洮、罕以东诸军事、征东大将军、秦州牧，镇南安。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐委任姚隽为侍中、中书监，赐封陇西公；又任命左丞相乞伏昙达为都督洮、罕以东诸军事、征东大将军、秦州牧，镇守南安。
English: Western Qin King Qibu Glowing Rock appointed Yao Jie as an attendant and librarian, and gave him the title of the Duke of Western Qin; he also appointed the left-hand minister, Qibu Jie Da, as the governor of the capital, the military commander of the eastern provinces, the general of the eastern expedition, the governor of Qin Province, and the town guard of Nan'an.

古文：刘义真年少，赐与左右无节，王修每裁抑之。
现代文：东晋雍州、东秦州二州刺史刘义真，年纪还小，随意赏赐左右侍从，没有节制。长史王常常限制他。
English: Liu Yizhen, the prince of East Jin, Yongzhou and East Qin, was still a young man, and he had no restraint in rewarding his attendants at will. Changshi Wang often restricted him.

古文：左右皆怨，谮修于义真曰： 王镇恶欲反，故沈田子杀之。
现代文：于是，刘义真左右都怨恨王，在刘义真面前陷害王，说： 王镇恶打算叛变，所以沈田子杀了他。
English: As a result, Liu Yizhen resented Wang right and left, and framed Wang in front of Liu Yizhen, saying: Wang Zhenxiong planned to rebel, so Shen Tianzi killed him.

古文：修杀田子，是亦欲反也。 
现代文：王杀死沈田子，这样也是打算造反呀。 
English: The king killed Shen Tianzi, so he was planning to rebel.

古文：义真信之，使左右刘乞等杀修。
现代文：刘义真信以为真，派亲信刘乞等杀死了王。
English: Liu Yizhen believed it to be true and sent his close confidant Liu Qian and others to kill Wang.

古文：修既死，人情离骇，莫相统壹。
现代文：王一死，人心惧怕离散，各自为政，无法统一。
English: As soon as the king died, the people feared that they would be separated and unable to unite.

古文：义真悉召外军入长安，闭门拒守。
现代文：刘义真把驻防在外地的军队全部调入长安，关闭城门自守。
English: Liu Yizhen transferred all the troops stationed in the field into Chang'an, closed the city gate and defended himself.

古文：关中郡县悉降于夏。
现代文：关中的各个郡县全都投降了夏国。
English: All the counties in Guanzhong surrendered to Xia.

古文：赫连璝夜袭长安，不克，夏王勃勃进据咸阳，长安樵采路绝。
现代文：赫连在夜间突袭长安，不能攻克。夏王赫连勃勃进兵占据了咸阳，长安的砍柴的路被切断。
English: He Lian raided Chang'an at night and could not conquer it. Xia Wang He Lian vigorously marched in and occupied Xianyang. Chang'an's wood-cutting road was cut off.

古文：宋公裕闻之，使辅国将军蒯恩如长安，召义真东归；以相国右司马硃龄石为都督关中诸军事、右将军、雍州刺史，代镇长安。
现代文：东晋宋公刘裕听说这种情况后，派辅国将军蒯恩前往长安，征召刘义真回到江南；任命相国右司马朱龄石为都督关中诸军事、右将军、雍州刺史，代替刘义真镇守长安。
English: After hearing of this situation, Liu Yu, the Song Emperor of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, sent the General of the Auxiliary to Chang'an to recruit Liu Yizhen to return to the south of the Yangtze River; appointed the Right Secretary of the Auxiliary, Ma Zhu Lingshi, as the military governor of Guanzhong, the Right General, and the Yongzhou chief historian, and replaced Liu Yizhen as the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：裕谓龄石曰： 卿至，可敕义真轻装速发，既出关，然后可徐行。
现代文：刘裕对朱龄石说： 你到了那里，可以命令刘义真轻装疾速前进。等出了潼关，才可以放慢脚步。
English: Liu Yu said to Zhu Lingshi, "When you get there, you can order Liu Yizhen to speed ahead lightly. When you get out of the pass, you can slow down.

古文：若关右必不可守，可与义真俱归。 
现代文：如果关右确实难以驻守，你可以与刘义真一道回来。 
English: If Guan Zhen is indeed difficult to garrison, you can come back with Liu Yizhen.

古文：又命中书侍郎硃超石慰劳河、洛。十一月，龄石至长安。
现代文：随后，刘裕又命中书侍郎朱超石慰劳黄河、洛水一带的军民，安定人心。十一月，朱龄石抵达长安。
English: Subsequently, Liu Yu also hit the concierge Zhu Chaoishi to comfort the soldiers and civilians in the area of the Yellow River and Luoshui, and stabilize their hearts. In November, Zhu Lingshi arrived in Chang'an.

古文：义真将士贪纵，大掠而东，多载宝货、子女，方轨徐行。
现代文：刘义真手下的将士贪婪放纵，在长安周围大肆掠夺以后才准备返回江南。
English: The soldiers under Liu Yiming were greedy and indulgent. They plundered the area around Chang'an before preparing to return to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：雍州别驾韦华奔夏，赫连璝帅众三万追义真。
现代文：刘义真的车辆上，都装满了金银财宝、子女，然后两车并进，缓慢向东撤退。
English: Liu Yizhen's vehicle was loaded with gold, silver, treasure, and children, and then the two cars drove side by side, slowly retreating eastward.

古文：建威将军傅弘之曰： 公处分亟进；今多将辎重，一日行不过十里，虏追骑且至，何以待之！
现代文：东晋雍州别驾韦华逃奔夏国。夏国大将赫连率领三万人追击刘义真。东晋建威将军傅弘之对刘义真说： 宋公让你疾速前进，而现在你带这么多辎重，一日走不出十里，敌人的骑兵马上就要追到，你该怎么办？
English: Eastern Jin Yongzhou, don't drive Weihua, flee to Xia. Xia General He Lian led 30,000 people to chase Liu Yizhen. Eastern Jin Jianwei General Fu Hongzhi said to Liu Yizhen: Song let you advance rapidly, and now you carry so much baggage, you can't walk ten miles a day, the enemy's cavalry is about to catch up, what should you do?

古文：宜弃车轻行，乃可以免。 
现代文：应该放弃车辆，轻装前进，才有可能幸免。 
English: It is only possible to escape if you abandon your vehicle and travel light.

古文：义真不从。
现代文：刘义真没有听从。
English: Liu Yizhen did not obey.

古文：俄而夏兵大至，傅弘之、蒯恩断后，力战连日，至青泥，晋兵大败，弘之、恩皆为王买德所禽。
现代文：不久，夏国的大军追到，傅弘之、蒯恩在后面掩护，奋力拚战，连续几天不能休息。在青泥，东晋军大败，傅弘之、蒯恩都被王买德生擒。
English: Soon, the large army of Xia Province caught up with them, and Fu Hongzhi and Yan En took cover behind them and fought hard, unable to rest for several days. In Qingde, the East Jin Army was defeated, and Fu Hongzhi and Yan En were both killed by Wang Bai De.

古文：司马毛修之与义真相失，亦为夏兵所禽。
现代文：司马毛之与刘义真走散，也被夏军擒获。
English: Sima Mao Zhi and Liu Yizhen wandered away and were captured by Xia Jun.

古文：义真行在前，会日暮，夏兵不穷追，故得免；左右尽散，独逃草中。
现代文：刘义真在最前面奔逃，正巧夜色降临，夏兵没有继续追赶，所以才幸免于难。刘义真的左右亲兵都被夏兵冲散，他一个人藏在草丛中。
English: Liu Yizhen was the first to flee, just as night fell. Xia Bing did not continue to pursue, so he was spared. Liu Yizhen's right and left soldiers were scattered by Xia Bing, and he hid alone in the grass.

古文：中兵参军段宏单骑追寻，缘道呼之，义真识其声，出就之，曰： 君非段中兵邪？
现代文：东晋中兵参军段宏，单枪匹马追踪找寻，一道呼叫刘义真。刘义真听出是他的声音，才跑出来，说： 你是不是段中兵？
English: Eastern Jin soldiers joined the army Duanhong, single-handedly tracking and searching, together calling Liu Yizhen. Liu Yizhen recognized his voice, only to run out and say: Are you a soldier?

古文：身在此，行矣！
现代文：我在这儿呢，咱们走吧！
English: I'm here. Let's go!

古文：必不两全，可刎身头以南，使家公望绝。 
现代文：你保护我上路一定不能两全，如果情势危急，可以割下我的头，带回南方，叫我的父亲不再想念我。 
English: If the situation is critical, you can cut off my head and take it back to the south, so that my father will no longer miss me.

古文：宏泣曰： 今日之事，诚无算略；然丈夫不经此，何以知艰难！ 
现代文：段宏哭着说： 我们要生死与共，下官不忍心那样做。 于是，段宏把刘义真绑在自己的背上，两人乘一匹马逃回。刘义真对段宏说： 今天发生的事情，实在由于少谋失算，然而大丈夫不经这次大难，怎么知道事情的艰难。 
English: Duan Hong cried and said, "We have to live and die together, the subordinate officers can't bear to do that." Therefore, Duan Hong tied Liu Yizhen on his back, and the two fled back on a horse. Liu Yizhen said to Duan Hong, "What happened today is really due to a miscalculation, but everything is fine, without this great difficulty, how do you know how difficult things are."

古文：夏王勃勃欲降傅弘之，弘之不屈。
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃打算让傅弘之归降，傅弘之宁死不屈。
English: Xia Wang He Lian vigorously planned to make Fu Hongzhi surrender, but Fu Hongzhi would rather die than give in.

古文：时天寒，勃勃裸之，弘之叫骂而死。
现代文：赫连勃勃脱光了他的衣服，傅弘之叫骂不停而死。
English: Kherlian vigorously stripped off his clothes, Fu Hongzhi shouted and cursed incessantly and died.

古文：勃勃积人头为京观，号曰髑髅台。
现代文：赫连勃勃把死人的头骨堆积成山，建为大坟，号称髑髅台。
English: Herlian vigorously piled up the skulls of the dead into a mountain and built it into a large tomb, known as Xingtai.

古文：长安百姓逐硃龄石，龄石焚其宫殿，奔潼关。
现代文：长安城的百姓驱逐朱龄石，朱龄石纵火焚烧了长安的宫殿，逃回潼关。
English: The people of Chang'an City expelled Zhu Lingshi. Zhu Lingshi set fire to the palace in Chang'an and fled back to Shouguan.

古文：勃勃入长安，大飨将士，举觞谓王买德曰： 卿往日之言，一期而验，可谓算无遗策。
现代文：赫连勃勃进入长安，大举犒赏将士。在庆功宴上，赫连勃勃举杯对王买德说： 你往日的预言，仅一年就应验了，可以说是预谋没有丝毫的失算。
English: At the celebration banquet, Herlian enthusiastically raised a glass to Wang Baide and said: Your prophecy of the past has come true in just one year. It can be said that there was no premeditation or miscalculation.

古文：此觞所集，非卿而谁！ 
现代文：这一杯酒，不敬你敬谁？ 
English: Who would you like to toast with this glass of wine?

古文：以买德为都官尚书，封河阳候。
现代文：然后，他任命王买德为都官尚书，封爵为河阳侯。
English: Then, he appointed Wang Baide as the governor of Shangshu and knighted him as the marquis of Kheyang.

古文：龙骧将军王敬先戍曹公垒，龄石往从之。
现代文：东晋龙骧将军王敬先驻守在曹公垒，朱龄石前往投奔。
English: Wang Jing, the East Jin Longjing general, first stationed in Cao Gongye, and Zhu Lingshi went to join the army.

古文：硃超石至蒲阪，闻龄石所在，亦往从之。
现代文：朱超石抵达蒲阪，得知朱龄石在曹公堡，也投奔到那里。
English: Zhu Chaoishi arrived in Busan, learned that Zhu Lingshi was in Cao Gongbao, and also rushed there.

古文：赫连昌攻敬先垒，断其水道。众渴，不能战，城且陷。龄石谓超石曰： 弟兄俱死异城，使老亲何以为心！
现代文：夏国前将军赫连昌进攻王敬先的堡垒，切断堡中的水源，东晋士卒干渴乏力不能战斗，城池将被攻克时，朱龄石对朱超石说： 我们兄弟俩都死在异城他乡，父母亲会何等伤心！
English: When the former general Herenchang of Xia attacked the fortress of Wang Jingxian, cutting off the water source in the fortress, and the Eastern Jin soldiers were too thirsty and weak to fight, and the city was about to be conquered, Zhu Lingshi said to Zhu Chaoshi: Both of our brothers died in a foreign city, how sad our parents would be!

古文：尔求间道亡归，我死此，无恨矣。 
现代文：你快从小路逃走，我死在这里，也就没有遗恨了。 
English: If you run away from the path, I will die here, and there will be no hatred left.

古文：且虏虽得志，不敢乘胜过关陕者，犹慑服大威，为将来之虑故也。
现代文：朱超石握着哥哥的手说： 人谁能不死，我怎么忍心在这个时候与你辞别而去！ 于是，兄弟二人与王敬先，以及右军参军刘钦之都被俘虏，押送到长安。
English: Zhu Chaoishi held his brother's hand and said, "If you can't die, how can I bear to say goodbye to you at this time!" As a result, the two brothers and Wang Jingxian, as well as Liu Qinzhi, a member of the Right Army, were all captured and escorted to Chang'an.

古文：若造洛而返，虏必更有揣量之心，或益生边患。
现代文：赫连勃勃杀害了他们。刘钦之的弟弟刘秀之不胜悲哀，十年间不曾欢歌宴饮。刘钦之，是刘穆之的堂侄。东晋宋公刘裕听说晋军在青泥大败的消息，不知刘义真的生生边患。
English: Herengong killed them. Liu Qinzhi's younger brother Liu Xiuzhi was so sad that he hadn't had a good meal in ten years. Liu Qinzhi was Liu Muzhi's cousin. When Eastern Jin Song Emperor Liu Yu heard the news of the Jin army's crushing defeat in Qingdao, he didn't know that Liu Yizhong was seriously ill.

古文：况大军远出，后患甚多。
现代文：何况大军远征，后患很多。
English: What's more, large-scale military expeditions are fraught with many problems.

古文：昔岁西征，刘钟狼狈；去年北讨，广州倾覆；既往之效，后来之鉴也。
现代文：当年西征，刘钟十分狼狈；去年北伐，广州一度陷落。以往的经验，是将来的借鉴。
English: During the Western Expedition of that year, Liu Zhong was very disheartened; during the Northern Expedition last year, Guangzhou once fell. Past experience is a reference for the future.

古文：今诸州大水，民食寡乏，三吴群盗攻没诸县，皆由困于征役故也。
现代文：如今境内各州县发生水灾，饥馑频频发生，三吴地区盗匪遍地，攻克各县，都是因为苦于出征服役的缘故。
English: Today, floods and famines frequently occur in all prefectures and counties in the territory, and bandits in the Sanwu region are everywhere, conquering all counties, all because of the hardships of the conquest.

古文：江南士庶，引领颙颙以望殿下之返旆，闻更北出，不测浅深之谋，往还之期，臣恐返顾之忧更在腹心也。
现代文：江南的士大夫和老百姓，都伸长脖子盼望您的归来。忽然听说您又要北伐，都不了解其中的真实情况和大军班师的日期，我恐怕要在心腹之地发生异变成为后顾之忧。
English: The officials and common people in the south of the Yangtze River are all craning their necks in anticipation of your return. Suddenly hearing that you want to go to the north again, they do not understand the true situation and the date of the great army. I am afraid that there will be a mutation in my heartland and become a worry.

古文：若虑西虏更为河、洛之患者，宜结好北虏；北虏亲则河南安，河南安则济、泗静矣。 
现代文：殿下如果担心西边的夏虏不断侵扰河洛地区，最好是与北方的魏国结盟。我们与魏国关系友好，黄河之南自然安定，黄河之南安定，济水、泗水流域也会平静了。 
English: Your Highness, if you are worried that the Xia croup in the west will continue to invade the Helo region, it is best to ally with Wei in the north. We have friendly relations with Wei, the south of the Yellow River is naturally stable, the south of the Yellow River is stable, and the Jishui and Ershui basins will be calm.

古文：会得段宏启，知义真得免，裕乃止，但登城北望，慨然流涕而已。
现代文：正巧，刘裕刚接到段宏的报告，得知刘义真已经幸免，刘裕才放弃西征的计划。只不过登上城楼向西眺望，都禁不住感慨流涕。
English: Coincidentally, Liu Yu had just received a report from Duan Hong and learned that Liu Yizhen had been spared, and only then did Liu Yu give up his plan to march west. However, when he climbed the tower and looked westward, he couldn't help but be overcome with emotion.

古文：降义真为建威将军、司州刺史；以段宏为宋台黄门郎、领太子右卫率。
现代文：于是，下令把刘义真贬降为建威将军、司州刺史；任命段宏为宋台黄门郎，兼领太子右卫率。
English: As a result, he ordered Liu Yizhen to be demoted to General Jian Wei and Sizhou Shishi; and appointed Duan Hong as Song Tai Huangmen Lang and concurrently the leader of the Prince Uwei.

古文：裕以天水太守毛德祖为河东太守，代刘遵考守蒲阪。
现代文：刘裕还任命天水太守毛德祖为河东太守，代替刘遵考镇守蒲阪。
English: Liu Yu also appointed the governor of Tianshui, Mao Dezu, as the governor of Hedong, replacing Liu Zunka as the governor of Busan.

古文：夏王勃勃筑坛于灞上，即皇帝位，改元昌武。
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃，在灞上建筑高台，正式登上皇帝宝座，改年号为昌武。
English: Xia Wang Herlian was full of vigor. He built a high platform on the ridge, officially ascended the imperial throne, and changed his era name to Changwu.

古文：西秦王炽磐东巡；十二月，徙上邽民五千馀户于枹罕。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐向东巡视；十二月，强行将上的百姓五千余户迁徙到罕。
English: The king of Western Qin begged Blazing Rock to make a tour to the east; in December, he forcibly relocated more than five thousand people to Han.

古文：彗星出天津，入太微，经北斗，络紫微，八十馀日而灭。
现代文：彗星从天津星穿出，进入太微星，经过北斗星，联结紫微星，八十多天以后，彗星消失。
English: The comet passed through the Tianjin star, entered the Taimixing star, passed the Big Dipper star, and connected with the Purple Microburst star. After more than 80 days, the comet disappeared.

古文：魏主嗣复召诸儒、术土问之曰： 今四海分裂，灾咎之应，果在何国？
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣，再次征召名儒、术士，问道： 如今天下四分五裂，各自为主。这次天上变异所暗示的灾祸，到底应在哪一国？
English: Tuoba Zi, the ruler of Northern Wei, once again called up famous Confucians and magicians and asked: If the world were to be torn apart today, with each dominating the other, which country would be responsible for the calamity implied by this heavenly mutation?

古文：腾甚畏之。卿辈尽言，勿有所隐！ 
现代文：我心中十分恐惧，你们可以畅所欲言，不要有所隐瞒。 
English: I have a lot of fear in my heart. You can say whatever you want, don't hide anything.

古文：众推崔浩使对，浩曰： 夫灾异之兴，皆象人事，人苟无衅，又何畏焉？
现代文：众人都推举崔浩回答这个问题，崔浩说： 天灾异变的发生，通常照应地上人间的事变，如果人间的统治没有发生问题，又有什么值得畏惧的？
English: Cui Hao was elected by all to answer this question. Cui Hao said: The occurrence of natural disasters and abnormal changes usually corresponds to the events on the earth and among human beings. If there is no problem with human rule, what is there to be afraid of?

古文：昔王莽将篡汉，彗星出入，正与今同。
现代文：当年王莽将要篡夺汉位时，彗星出入的方向，正与今天相同。
English: When Wang Mang was about to usurp the Han throne, the direction of the comet's entry and exit was the same as today.

古文：国家主尊臣卑，民无异望，晋室陵夷，危亡不远；彗之为异，其刘裕将篡之应乎！ 
现代文：我们魏国，主尊臣卑，老百姓就没有不安分的想法。现在晋朝皇室日趋没落，危亡不远。彗星的出现，莫非预示刘裕将要篡夺皇位！ 
English: In Wei, we, the masters, the subjects, and the common people, did not have the idea of being restless. Now the imperial family of the Jin Dynasty is increasingly in decline and is not far from peril. The appearance of the comet may indicate that Liu Yu will usurp the imperial throne!

古文：众无以易其言。
现代文：其他人都没有不同意见。
English: No one else disagreed.

古文：宋公裕以谶云 昌明之后尚有二帝 ，乃使中书侍郎王韶之与帝左右密谋鸩帝而立琅邪王德文。
现代文：东晋宋公刘裕，认为谶书上有句话： 昌明之后，还有两个皇帝。 于是，派中书侍郎王韶之，与晋安帝左右亲信密谋毒死安帝司马德宗，另立琅邪王司马德文。
English: Liu Yu, the Song Emperor of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, thought that there was a sentence in the Book of Zhai: "After Changming, there are two emperors." Therefore, he sent the servant of the book, Wang Xizhi, to conspire with the close confidants of the Emperor of Jin and An to poison the Emperor of An, Sima De Zong, and set up another evil king, Sima De Wen.

古文：德文常在帝左右，饮食寝处，未尝暂离；韶之伺之经时，不得间。
现代文：司马德文常在司马德宗身边，饮食睡眠，都不曾暂时离开。王韶之窥伺多时，没有机会下手。
English: Sima Dewen often stayed with Sima Dewen, eating and sleeping, and never left temporarily. Wang Xizhi spied on him for a long time, but did not have a chance to intervene.

古文：会德文有疾，出居于外。
现代文：正巧，司马德文患病，出宫休养。
English: Coincidentally, Sima Dewen fell ill and left the palace to recuperate.

古文：戊寅，韶之以散衣缢帝于东堂。
现代文：戊寅，王韶之用衣裳拧成绳索，在东堂勒死司马德宗。
English: In Wuyin, Wang Xizhi twisted ropes with his clothes and strangled Sima Dezong in the East Hall.

古文：韶之，廙之曾孙也。
现代文：王韶之是王的曾孙。
English: Wang Xizhi is Wang's great-grandson.

古文：裕因称遗诏，奉德文即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：刘裕于是声称奉司马德宗的遗诏，拥立司马德文即皇帝位，大赦天下。
English: Liu Yu then claimed that he would carry out Sima De Zong's last will and testament, establish Sima De Wen as emperor, and grant amnesty to the world.

古文：是岁，河西王蒙逊奉表称籓，拜凉州刺史。
现代文：本年，北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊，向东晋呈上奏章，自称藩属。东晋朝廷任命他为凉州刺史。
English: This year, the Western King of the Northern Lianghe River, Qiuqiu Mengxun, presented the imperial rescript to the Eastern Jin Dynasty, claiming to be a member of the clan. The Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed him as the official historian of Liangzhou.

古文：尚书右仆射袁湛卒。
现代文：东晋尚书右仆射袁湛去世。
English: Eastern Jin Emperor Shangshu's right-hand man Yuan Zhan passed away.

古文：恭皇帝
现代文：恭皇帝
English: Emperor Gong of Song

古文：安皇帝癸元熙元年
现代文：晋恭帝元熙元年
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu

古文：春，正月，壬辰朔，改元。
现代文：春季，正月，壬辰朔，东晋改年号元熙。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Ren Chenshuo, the Eastern Jin Dynasty change the year name to Yuanxi.

古文：立琅邪王纪褚氏为皇后；后，裒之曾孙也。
现代文：东晋朝廷立琅邪王妃褚氏为皇后；褚皇后是褚裒的曾孙女。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court made the evil queen, Lady Zou, the empress; Queen Zou was Zou's great-granddaughter.

古文：魏主嗣畋于犊渚。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣在犊渚狩猎。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, used to go hunting at the foot of the mountain.

古文：甲午，征宋公裕入朝，进爵为王。
现代文：甲午，东晋恭帝司马德文召宋公刘裕回朝，入宫晋见。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 12th year of the 13th year

古文：裕辞。癸卯，魏主嗣还平城。
现代文：司马德文封他为宋王，刘裕谢绝。癸卯，北魏国主拓跋嗣返回平城。
English: Sima Dewen crowned him as the King of Song, Liu Yu refused to do so, and Tuoba, the ruler of Northern Wei, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：庚申，葬安皇帝于休平陵。
现代文：庚申，东晋朝廷在休平陵安葬晋安帝司马德宗。
English: Emperor An was buried in the tomb of Emperor Xuping.

古文：敕刘道怜司空出镇京口。
现代文：东晋恭帝司马德文，诏命刘道怜为司空，镇守京口。
English: The Eastern Jin Emperor, Sima Dewen, issued an edict ordering Liu Daorei to be the Siku, the town guard of Jingkou.

古文：夏将叱奴侯提帅步骑二万攻毛德祖于蒲阪，德祖不能御，全军归彭城。
现代文：夏国将领叱奴侯提率领步、骑兵二万人，进攻毛德祖据守的蒲阪。毛德祖没有能力抵抗，撤退。全军退回彭城。
English: Xia Guo's general, Rebuke Hou Ti, led 20,000 cavalry to attack Busan, where Mao Tse-tung was based. Mao Tse-tung was unable to resist and retreated. The entire army returned to Pengcheng.

古文：二月，宋公裕以德祖为荥阳太守，戍虎牢。
现代文：二月，宋公刘裕任命毛德祖为荥阳太守，驻守虎牢。
English: In February, Song Emperor Liu Yu appointed Mao Zedzu as the governor of Shenyang and stationed him in the tiger prison.

古文：夏主勃勃征隐土京兆韦祖思。
现代文：夏主赫连勃勃征召隐士、京兆人韦祖思。
English: The summer lord Heren vigorously conscripted the hermit, Wei Zu Si.

古文：祖思既至，恭惧过甚，勃勃怒曰： 我以国士征汝，汝乃以非类遇我，汝昔不拜姚兴，今何独拜我？
现代文：韦祖思来到长安，过于谦卑恐惧，赫连勃勃大怒道： 我把你当成国家的高士，征召来京，你却把我当作异族来对待。你当年不向姚兴叩头，今天为什么偏偏来拜见我？
English: When Wei Zu Si came to Chang'an, he was too humble and afraid, but Herlian was furious and said, "I treated you as a national dignitary and summoned you to Beijing, but you treated me as an alien. You didn't kowtow to Yao Xing back then, so why did you come to see me today?

古文：我在，汝犹不以我为帝王；我死，汝曹弄笔，当置我于何地邪！
现代文：我活着的时候，你就不把我当作帝王；我死后，你们这些人舞文弄墨，还不知把我作践到何种地步！ 
English: When I'm alive, you don't treat me like an emperor; when I'm dead, you people dance around in circles, and you don't know how far you've pushed me!

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：于是，杀掉了韦祖思。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：群臣请都长安，勃勃曰： 朕岂不知长安历世帝王之都，沃饶险固！
现代文：夏国朝廷中的文武百官，都请求把都城迁到长安。赫连勃勃说： 我怎会不知道长安是历代帝王之都，土地肥沃，地势险固！
English: Hundreds of civil and military officials in the court of Xia all requested that the capital be moved to Chang'an. Herengong said: How could I not know that Chang'an is the capital of emperors throughout the ages, the land is fertile, and the terrain is rugged!

古文：然晋人僻远，终不能为吾患。
现代文：然而，晋人鞭长莫及，终究不会与我们为敌。
English: However, Jin people can't be beaten for long, and they won't be our enemy in the end.

古文：魏与我风俗略同，土壤邻接，自统万距魏境裁百馀里，朕在长安，统万必危；若在统万，魏必不敢济河而西。
现代文：魏国的风俗人情与我们大略相同，疆域相连，从统万到魏国边境只有一百余里，我在长安，统万一定危险。我留在统万，魏军绝不敢渡过黄河西上。
English: The customs and people of Wei are roughly the same as ours. The territories are connected. It is only a hundred miles from Tongwan to the border of Wei. If I am in Chang'an, Tongwan must be in danger. If I stay in Tongwan, the Wei army will never dare to cross the Yellow River to the west.

古文：诸卿适未见此耳。 皆曰： 非所及也。 
现代文：你们各位没有考虑到这一点。 文武百官都说： 我们是望尘莫及的。 
English: You have all failed to take this into account, and all the civil and military officials have said: We are beyond hope.

古文：乃于长安置南台，以赫连璝领大将军、雍州牧、录南台尚书事；勃勃还统万，大赦，改元真兴。
现代文：于是，在长安设置南台，任命赫连为领大将军、雍州牧、录南台尚书事。赫连勃勃回到统万，大赦天下，改年号为 真兴 。
English: As a result, Nantai was set up in Chang'an, and Herien was appointed as the leading general, Yongzhou herdsman, and recorded Nantai Shang Shuxing. Herien vigorously returned to Tongwan, pardoned the world, and changed the year name to Zhenxing.

古文：勃勃性骄虐，视民如草芥。
现代文：赫连勃勃生性骄躁暴虐，视百姓如草芥。
English: Herlian was a proud and tyrannical man, who regarded the common people as nothing more than grass and mustard.

古文：常居城上，置弓剑于侧，有所嫌忿，手自杀之。
现代文：常常登上城楼，旁边放置弓剑，每每心中不快，就亲自杀人泄愤。
English: He often went up to the castle tower and placed a bow and sword next to it. Whenever he was unhappy, he would commit suicide to release his anger.

古文：群臣迕视者凿其目，笑者决其脣，谏者先截其舌而后斩之。
现代文：群臣中如有斜眼看他的，就会被挖去眼睛。如有胆敢随便发笑的，用刀豁开他的嘴唇；有进言劝阻的，先割掉舌头，再斩下头颅。
English: If any of his courtiers looked at him cross-eyed, they would have their eyes gouged out; if any dared to laugh, they would have their lips cut open with a knife; if any tried to dissuade him, they would have their tongues cut out and their heads chopped off.

古文：初，司马楚之奉其父荣期之丧归建康，会宋公裕诛剪宗室之有才望者，楚之叔父宣期、兄贞之皆死，楚之亡匿竟陵蛮中。
现代文：当初，东晋益州刺史司马荣期被叛将暗杀，他的儿子司马楚之，送灵柩回建康安葬。而宋公刘裕正在着手斩除晋室皇族司马氏中有才士、有名望的人，司马楚之的叔父司马宣期、哥哥司马贞之都被处死。于是司马楚之流亡至竟陵蛮人中躲藏。
English: At the beginning, the East Jin province assassinated the rebel general Sima Rong, and his son Sima Chu, sent the coffin back to Jiankang for burial. Meanwhile, Song Emperor Liu Yu was in the process of eliminating the talented and famous members of the Jin royal family, the Sima clan. Sima Chu's uncle Sima Xuan and brother Sima Zhen were both executed. So Sima Chu went into exile and hid among the barbarians.

古文：及从祖休之自江陵奔秦，楚之亡之汝、颍间，聚众以谋复仇。
现代文：后来，他的堂祖父司马休之从江陵投奔后秦，司马楚之又逃亡到汝水、颍水流域，集结部众准备复仇。
English: Later, his great-uncle Sima Xuzhi fled from Jiangling to the Later Qin Dynasty, and Sima Chu Zhi also fled to the watersheds of Riushui and Ershui, gathering followers to prepare for revenge.

古文：楚之少有英气，能折节下士，有众万馀，屯据长社。
现代文：司马楚之年青有为，有英雄气概，能够放下架子，礼遇士人。他拥有一万多人的军队，屯驻在长社。
English: Sima Chu was a young man of action and heroism, able to let down his guard and treat people with courtesy. He had an army of more than ten thousand men, stationed in Chosha.

古文：裕使刺客沐谦往刺之，楚之待谦甚厚。
现代文：刘裕派刺客沐谦去暗杀他，司马楚之对沐谦礼貌周到，格外重视。
English: Liu Yu sent the assassin Mu Qian to assassinate him. Sima Chuzhi was polite and thoughtful to Mu Qian and paid special attention to him.

古文：谦欲发，未得间，乃夜称疾，知楚之必往问疾，因欲刺之。
现代文：沐谦打算下手，总没有机会，于是他在一个夜晚声称有病，知道司马楚之一定会赶来探望，想要借机刺杀他。
English: When Mu Qian planned to attack, he never got the chance, so one night he claimed to be ill, knowing that one of the Sima Chu would surely come to visit, wanting to take the opportunity to assassinate him.

古文：楚之果自赍汤药往视疾，情意勤笃，谦不忍发，乃出匕首于席下，以状告之曰： 将军深为刘裕所忌，愿勿轻率以自保全。 
现代文：司马楚之果然端着汤药亲自赶来，问候病情，情意真挚诚恳，沐谦不忍动手，于是从席下拿出匕首，把实情一一报告给司马楚之，说： 刘裕对于将军，深为忌恨，希望你不要轻率跟人亲近，借以保全自己。 
English: Sima Chuzhi indeed arrived in person with the soup medicine, greeted the illness, his feelings were sincere and sincere, and he could not bear to do it, so he took out a dagger from under the seat and reported the facts one by one to Sima Chuzhi, saying: Liu Yu is deeply jealous of the general, I hope you do not get close to people rashly, so as to protect yourself.

古文：遂委身事之，为之防卫。
现代文：于是投效司马楚之，担任司马楚之的贴身卫士。
English: So he joined Sima Chu Zhi and served as Sima Chu Zhi's close bodyguard.

古文：王镇恶之死也，沈田子杀其兄弟七人，唯弟康得免，逃就宋公裕于彭城，裕以为相国行参军。
现代文：王镇恶被杀以后，沈田子又杀死了王氏兄弟七人，只有王镇恶的弟弟王康逃走，才得以幸免。王康来到彭城投奔宋公刘裕，刘裕任命他为相国行参军。
English: After Wang Zhenxiong was killed, Shen Tianzi also killed seven of Wang's brothers. Only Wang Zhenxiong's younger brother Wang Kang escaped and was spared. Wang Kang came to Pengcheng to join Song King Liu Yu. Liu Yu appointed him to join the army of his brother's country.

古文：康求还洛阳视母；会长安不守，康纠合关中徙民，得百许人，驱帅侨户七百馀家，共保金墉城。
现代文：王康请求回洛阳探望老母，正巧长安失守，王康纠集关中流亡的逃民，共百多人，又裹胁客居洛阳的外郡人七百多户，共同保卫金墉城。
English: Wang Kang requested to return to Luoyang to visit his mother, just as Chang'an fell into the hands of the enemy. Wang Kang gathered more than a hundred fugitives from Guanzhong, and more than seven hundred households of out-of-county people who had stayed in Luoyang as guests, to jointly defend Jinlu City.

古文：时宗室多逃亡在河南，有司马文荣者，帅乞活千馀户屯金墉城南；又有司马道恭，自东垣帅三千人屯城西，司马顺明帅五千人屯陵云台，司马楚之屯柏谷坞。
现代文：当时晋朝宗室的人，大多数都在河南流亡。其中有个叫司马文荣的人，率领流民一千多户屯驻在金墉城南；还有司马道恭，从东垣东下，率领三千多人屯驻在金墉城西；司马顺明，率领五千人屯驻在陵云台；司马楚之则驻防在柏谷坞。
English: At that time, the majority of Jin Dynasty's family members were in exile in Henan. Among them, there was a man named Sima Wen Rong, who led more than a thousand families of exiles to settle in the south of Jinli City; there was also Sima Daokong, who led more than three thousand people to settle in the west of Jinli City from Donggaki East; Sima Shunming, who led five thousand people to settle in Lingyuntai; and Sima Chu, who was stationed in Baigu dock.

古文：魏河内镇将于栗磾游骑在芒山上，攻逼交至，康坚守六旬。
现代文：北魏河内守将于栗的游击骑兵，在芒山上逗留，等待时机。
English: The Northern Wei governor of Hanoi will lead the guerrilla cavalry of the chestnut, stay on the Mang Mountain, and wait for the opportunity.

古文：裕以康为河东太守，遣兵救之，平等皆散走。
现代文：各方面敌人交相逼近金墉城下，王康坚守孤城达六十天。刘裕任命王康为河东太守，派兵赶赴救援，敌人才被驱散逃走。
English: Enemies from all sides were approaching the city of Jinyu, and Wang Kang held the isolated city for sixty days. Liu Yu appointed Wang Kang as the governor of Hedong and sent troops to the rescue, and the enemy was dispersed and fled.

古文：康劝课农桑，百姓甚亲赖之。
现代文：王康劝百姓耕种土地，植桑养蚕，当地百姓都非常信赖他。
English: Wang Kang advised the people to cultivate the land, plant mulberry and raise silkworms, and the local people trusted him very much.

古文：司马顺明、司马道恭及平阳太守薛辩皆降于魏，魏以辩为河东太守以拒夏人。
现代文：司马顺明、司马道恭，以及平阳太守薛辩都投降了北魏。北魏朝廷任命薛辩为河东太守，抵拒夏国军队的进攻。
English: Sima Shunming, Sima Daogong, and the governor of Pingyang, Xue Fen, all surrendered to the Northern Wei. The Northern Wei court appointed Xue Fen as the governor of Hedong to resist the attack of the Xia army.

古文：夏，四月，秦征西将军孔子帅骑五千讨吐谷浑觅地于弱水南，大破之，觅地帅其众六千降于夏，拜弱水护军。
现代文：夏季，四月，西秦征西将军乞伏孔子，率领骑兵五千人，在弱水之南进攻吐谷浑国酋长觅地，大破吐谷浑军队，觅地率领他的部众六千人归降了西秦，被西秦委任为弱水护军。
English: In the summer, in April, the Western Qin general Zheng Xi begged Confucius and led five thousand cavalry to attack the south of Weak Water, and the chief of the Tuyuhun country searched for land. He defeated the Tuyuhun army, searched for land and led six thousand of his subordinates to surrender to the Western Qin, and was appointed by the Western Qin as the Weak Water Protector.

古文：庚辰，魏主嗣有事于东庙，助祭者数百国；辛巳，南巡至雁门。
现代文：庚辰，北魏国主拓跋嗣在白登山东皇家祖庙祭祀祖先，前来陪祭的有几百个部落酋长。辛巳，拓跋嗣向南巡视，抵达雁门。
English: Geng Chen, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Tuoba Zi held a ceremony to worship their ancestors at the Eastern Imperial Ancestral Temple in Baiteng Mountain. Several hundred tribal chiefs came to accompany the ceremony. Soon, Tuoba Zi went on a tour to the south and arrived at the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：五月，庚寅朔，魏主嗣观渔于水。己亥，还平城。
现代文：五月，庚寅朔，拓跋嗣在水观看捕鱼；己亥，返回平城。
English: In May, Geng Yinshuo, Tuoba Zi watched fishing in the water; Ji Hai, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：凉公歆用刑过严，又好治宫室。从事中郎张显上疏，以为： 凉土三分，势不支久。
现代文：西凉公李歆用刑过于严厉，又喜欢大造宫殿，从事中郎张显上疏劝告说： 凉州疆土被一分为三，势必不会长久维持这种局面。
English: Li Yan, the lord of West Liang, was too harsh in his punishments and liked to build large palaces. Zhang Xianxiang, his middle brother, advised him: "The territory of Liangzhou has been divided into three parts, and this situation will not last long.

古文：兼并之本，在于务农；怀远之略，莫如宽简。
现代文：军事兼并的根本，在于发展农耕；怀柔远方部族的方法，莫过于统治宽大，刑罚简单。
English: The essence of military annexation lies in the development of agriculture; there is no better way to appease distant tribes than to have a lenient rule and simple punishments.

古文：今入岁已来，阴阳失序，风雨乖和；是宜减膳撤悬，侧身修道，而更繁刑峻法，缮筑不止，殆非所以致兴隆也。
现代文：今年新年以来，阴阳失序，风雨失调，正应该减少膳食，撤除乐器，谨身修道。而如今，刑罚繁重，法规严峻，又大兴土木，不停地修造，这样不能使国家兴隆。
English: Since this year's New Year, the yin and yang have been out of order, the wind and rain have been out of balance, it is time to reduce meals, remove musical instruments, and practice self-restraint. But now, the penalties are onerous, the laws and regulations are severe, and the construction of civil engineering is in full swing. This cannot make the country flourish.

古文：昔文王以百里而兴，二世以四海而灭，前车之轨，得失昭然。
现代文：当年，周文王只依据一百多里的土地，兴起帝王大业；秦二世虽然拥有四海之广，却被消灭。前车之鉴，成功失败，非常明显。
English: In that year, King Zhou Wen only based on more than a hundred miles of land, the rise of the emperor's great cause; Qin II, although it has the breadth of the four seas, but was eliminated.

古文：太祖以神圣之姿，为西夏所推，左取酒泉，右开西域。
现代文：太祖以神圣的英姿，受到西夏百姓的拥戴，东取酒泉，西开西域之道。
English: The great-great-grandfather, with his holy heroic appearance, was embraced by the people of Western Xia, taking the liquor spring in the east and opening the western region in the west.

古文：殿下不能奉承遗志，混壹凉土，侔踪张后，将何以下见先王乎！
现代文：殿下不能继承太祖遗志，统一凉州疆土，与张轨相媲美，将来有什么面目去见先王呢！
English: His royal highness cannot inherit the great ancestor's will and unify the territory of Liangzhou, which is comparable to Zhangluo. In the future, what kind of face will he have to meet the ancestor king?

古文：沮渠蒙逊，胡夷之杰，内修政事，外礼英贤，攻战之际，身先士卒，百姓怀之，乐为之用。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊是胡族中的一代英杰，他对内政治修明，对外礼遇贤才。每遇战事，都能身同士卒，老百姓对他深为敬服，愿意接受他的统治。
English: Deqiu Mengxun was a prominent member of the Hu ethnic group. He was a shrewd politician in domestic politics and a wise man in foreign affairs. Whenever there was a war, he was able to serve as an ally. The common people deeply respected him and were willing to accept his rule.

古文：臣谓殿下非但不能平殄蒙逊，亦惧蒙逊方为社稷之忧。 
现代文：我认为，殿下不仅不能削平沮渠蒙逊，还恐怕沮渠蒙逊图谋我们的疆土。 
English: I believe that not only will His Highness not be able to quell the monsoon, but I am afraid that the monsoon will try to invade our territory.

古文：歆览之，不悦。
现代文：李歆看过奏章，非常不高兴。
English: Li Yao read the score and was very unhappy.

古文：主簿汜称上疏谏曰： 天之子爱人主，殷勤至矣；故政之不修，下灾异以戒告之，改者虽危必昌，不改者虽安必亡。
现代文：西凉主簿称也上疏劝告说： 上天把人主当作儿子来爱护，百般殷勤周到。所以政治不清明，上天就要降下灾异警告人主。凡是能够改正的人主，国家眼下虽危，最终还会昌盛起来；不能改正的人主，现在统治安定，最后难免灭亡。
English: Xi Liang's main book said that he was also advised by Shang Su that: Heaven cherishes the human master as a son, and is very diligent and thoughtful. Therefore, the politics are not clear, and Heaven will send disasters to warn the human master. If the human master can be corrected, the country will be in danger at the moment, but will eventually flourish; if the human master cannot be corrected, the reign is stable now, and finally it will inevitably perish.

古文：元年三月癸卯，敦煌谦德堂陷；八月，效穀地裂；二年元日，昏雾四塞；四月，日赤无光，二旬乃复；十一月，狐上南门；今兹春、夏，地频五震；六月，陨星于建康。
现代文：嘉兴元年，三月，癸卯，敦煌谦德堂塌陷；八月，效发生地裂。二年，正月初一，天降大雾，四处弥漫；四月，太阳赤红，黯淡无光，二十天以后才恢复原状；十一月，狐狸跳上南门城楼。今年春、夏两季，地震频发，连续发生五次；六月，又有陨星坠落在建康。
English: In the first year of Jiaxing, in March, the Dunhuang Qiande Hall collapsed; in August, the ground cracked. In the second year, on the first day of the first month, the sky fell heavy fog, pervading everywhere; in April, the sun was red, dim and dull, and it was restored to its original state after twenty days; in November, the fox jumped onto the South Gate Tower. This spring and summer, earthquakes occurred frequently, occurring five times in a row; in June, another meteorite fell on Jiankang.

古文：臣虽学不稽古，行年五十有九，请为殿下略言耳目之所闻见，不复能远论书传之事也。
现代文：我的学问虽然不能考证古书，年龄却已有五十九岁，请允许我为殿下大略陈述一下耳闻目睹的灾变，不再引证史书记载的事情。
English: Although my knowledge does not extend to the study of ancient books, and I am fifty-nine years old, please allow me to outline for Your Highness the cataclysms I have heard and witnessed, and no longer quote from historical records.

古文：乃者咸安之初，西平地裂，狐入谦光殿前；俄而秦师奄至，都城不守。
现代文：记得在咸安初年，西平发生地裂，狐狸窜进谦光殿的前面。不久，秦国大军突然兵临城下，都城失守。
English: I remember that in the first year of Xi'an, there was a crack in the ground in Xiping, and a fox ran into the front of the Qian Guang Palace. Soon, the Qin army suddenly arrived at the foot of the city, and the capital was lost.

古文：梁熙既为凉州，不抚百姓，专为聚敛，建元十九年，姑臧南门崩，陨石于闲豫堂；明年为吕光所杀。
现代文：梁熙既为凉州刺史，不安抚百姓，只知搜刮贪污。建元十九年，姑臧南门突然崩塌，陨石落到闲豫堂。第二年，梁熙被吕光诛杀。
English: Since Liang Xi was the historian of Liangzhou, he did not care about the people, and only knew how to search for corruption. In the 19th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the South Gate of Guqin suddenly collapsed, and the meteorite fell on Zhiyu Hall. The next year, Liang Xi was killed by Luguang.

古文：段业称制此方，三年之中，地震五十馀所；既而先王龙兴于瓜州，蒙逊篡弑于张掖。
现代文：段业在此地称王的时候，三年之中，发生了五十多次地震。不久，先王在瓜州兴起，沮渠蒙逊也在张掖杀主篡位。
English: When Duan Ye was crowned king here, there were more than 50 earthquakes in three years. Soon, the former king arose in Guazhou, and Mengxun also killed the usurper in Zhangye.

古文：此皆目前之成事，殿下所明知也。
现代文：这些都是眼前现成的事例，殿下知道得十分清楚。
English: These are all ready-made examples, as His Royal Highness knows only too well.

古文：效穀，先王鸿渐之地；谦德，即尊之室；基陷地裂，大凶之征也。
现代文：效，是先王发祥之地；谦德堂是继承王位的宝殿。根本之地发生崩塌陷裂，是非常凶险的征兆。
English: It is the birthplace of the previous king; the Temple of Humility is the treasure house of succession to the throne. The collapse and collapse of the foundation is a very dangerous sign.

古文：日者，太阳之精，中国之象；赤而无光，中国将衰。
现代文：太阳，是阳气的精华，中国的象征；太阳红而无光，预示中国将要衰微。
English: The sun is the essence of yang, the symbol of China; the sun is red and without light, indicating that China will decline.

古文：谚曰： 野兽入家，主人将去。 
现代文：俗谚说： 野兽闯进家门，主人就要逃奔。 
English: As the saying goes: If a wild beast breaks into a house, the owner will run away.

古文：狐上南门，亦变异之大者也。
现代文：狐狸窜上南门，也是大的变异。
English: The fox latched onto the south gate is also a big variation.

古文：今蛮夷益盛，中国益微。
现代文：如今夷族更加强盛，中原汉族统治更加衰落。
English: Nowadays, the barbarians are more prosperous, and the Han rule in the Central Plains is more in decline.

古文：愿殿下亟罢宫室之役，止游畋之娱，延礼英俊，爱养百姓，以应天变，防未然。 
现代文：希望殿下赶快停止兴建宫室，停止出游狩猎娱乐，延请并礼遇英才俊杰，爱护并用心休养百姓，以应答上天的警告，防范于未然。 
English: I hope that His Royal Highness will quickly stop the construction of the palace, stop traveling for hunting and entertainment, extend the invitation and courtesy to the talented, love and care for the people, respond to God's warning, and prevent it from happening.

古文：歆不从。
现代文：李歆没有听从。
English: Li Yao did not listen.

古文：秋，七月，宋公裕始受进爵之命。
现代文：秋季，七月，东晋宋公刘裕接受了晋封为宋王的诏命。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Yu, the Song Emperor of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, received the imperial command to be appointed as the King of Song.

古文：八月，移镇寿阳，以度支尚书刘怀慎为督淮北诸军事、徐州刺史，镇彭城。
现代文：八月，从彭城移驻寿阳，任命度支尚书刘怀慎为督淮北诸军事、徐州刺史，镇守彭城。
English: In August, he moved from Pengcheng to Shouyang and appointed Liu Huaixin as the governor of Huaibei Province, Xuzhou Province, and Pengcheng.

古文：辛未，魏主嗣东巡；甲申，还平城。
现代文：辛未，北魏国主拓跋嗣向东巡视；甲申，返回平城。
English: In Xinwei, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zi went on an inspection tour to the east; Gao Shen returned to Pingcheng.

古文：九月，宋王裕自解扬州牧。
现代文：九月，东晋宋王刘裕主动辞去扬州牧一职。
English: In September, the Eastern Jin Dynasty Song King Liu Yu voluntarily resigned from the post of Yangzhou Patriarch.

古文：秦左卫将军匹达等将兵讨彭利和于漒川，大破之，利和单骑奔仇池；获其妻子，徙羌豪三千户于枹罕，漒川羌三万馀户皆安堵如故。
现代文：西秦左卫将军乞伏匹达率军讨伐彭利和据守的川，大破彭利和军，彭利和单枪匹马逃奔仇池。
English: The Western Qin general Zuo Wei led the army to fight against Penli and the defended river, and defeated Penli and the army. Penli and single-handedly fled to Qiuchi.

古文：冬，十月，以尚书右仆射王松寿为益州刺史，镇漒川。
现代文：乞伏匹达俘虏了他的妻子。把羌族豪民三千户强行迁到罕。
English: Beggar-pirates captured his wife and forcibly relocated three thousand families of the powerful Yi people to Han.

古文：宋王裕以河南萧条，乙酉，徙司州刺史义真为扬州刺史，镇石头，萧太纪谓裕曰： 道怜汝布衣兄弟，宜用为扬州。 裕曰： 寄奴于道怜，岂有所惜！
现代文：川羌族三万多户百姓仍然像过去一样安居乐业。冬季，十月，西秦任命尚书右仆射王松寿为益州刺史，镇守川。东晋宋王刘裕鉴于河南人稀荒凉，乙酉，召回司州刺史刘义真，改任扬州刺史，镇守石头。萧太妃对刘裕说： 刘道怜是你从小患难与共的兄弟，应该让他担任扬州刺史。 刘裕说： 我对于道怜，还有什么舍不得的！
English: In winter, October, the Western Qin Dynasty appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Sha Wang Song Shou, as the governor of Yizhou and the governor of Sichuan. The Eastern Jin Dynasty's Song King Liu Yu recalled the governor of Sichuan, Liu Yizhen, and changed his post to the governor of Yangzhou and the governor of Shandong. Xiaotaifei said to Liu Yu: "Liu Dao Er is your brother who has been with you since childhood. You should let him serve as the governor of Yangzhou." Liu Yu said: "I have nothing to do with Dao Er!"

古文：扬州根本所寄，事务至多，非道怜所了。 
现代文：可是扬州是京师重地，国家的根本，事务繁多，恐怕不是道怜所能胜任的。 
English: Just because Yangzhou is the fundamental place of the country, there are too many affairs, which cannot be handled by Tao Er.

古文：太妃曰： 道怜年出五十，岂不如汝十岁儿邪？ 
现代文：萧太妃说： 刘道怜已经年过五十，难道还不如你那十几岁的小儿吗？ 
English: Xiao Taifei said: Liu Daorai is already over fifty years old, isn't he as good as your teenage son?

古文：裕曰： 义真虽为刺史，事无大小，悉由寄奴。
现代文：刘裕说： 刘义真虽然名为刺史，但事无大小，都由我亲自决定。
English: Liu Yu said: Although Liu Yizhen is known as a stabbing history, but no matter how big or small, everything is decided by me personally.

古文：道怜年长，不亲其事，于听望不足。 
现代文：道怜年长，不亲自处理事务，有损于声望名位。 
English: He is more than fifty years old, and if he does not care about those things, his reputation will be unfavorable.

古文：太妃乃无言。
现代文：萧太妃才无言以对。
English: Xiao Taifei was speechless.

古文：道怜性愚鄙而贪纵，故裕不肯用。
现代文：刘道怜生性愚蠢卑鄙，贪婪放纵，所以刘裕不肯任用他。
English: Liu Daolei was stupid, mean and greedy, so Liu Yu refused to appoint him.

古文：十一月，丁亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，丁亥朔，出现日食。
English: In November, Dinghai New Year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：十二月，癸亥，魏主嗣西巡至云中，从君子津西渡河，大猎于薛林山。
现代文：十二月，癸亥，北魏国主拓跋嗣向西巡视，抵达云中。然后从君子津向西渡过黄河，在薛林山大举狩猎。
English: In December, Emperor Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, made an inspection tour to the west and arrived in Yunzhong. Then, he crossed the Yellow River from Junzijin to the west and went hunting in Mount Xuelin.

古文：辛卯，宋王裕加殊礼，进王太妃为太后，世子为太子。
现代文：辛卯，东晋宋王刘裕被朝廷加授特殊礼仪，进封萧太妃为太后，称世子刘义符为太子。
English: In Xinwu, the Eastern Jin Dynasty Song King Liu Yu was given a special etiquette by the court, and Xiao Taifi was appointed as the empress dowager, and his son Liu Yifu was named the prince.

