古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫 加罪 ？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：五人，臧一錢以上，斬左止，有黥以為城旦；不盈五人，過六百六十錢，黥以為城旦；不盈六百六十到二百廿錢，黥為城旦；不盈二百廿以下到一錢，之。
现代文：五人共同行盗，赃物在一钱以上，断去左足，并黥为城旦；不满五人，所盗超过六百六十钱，黥劓为城旦；不满六百六十钱而在二百二十钱以上，黥为城旦；不满二百二十钱而在一钱以上，加以流放。
English: If there are five thieves and they steal more than a dollar, they will have their left foot amputated and be exiled; if there are less than five thieves and they steal more than 660 dollars, they will be exiled; if there are less than 660 dollars and they steal more than 220 dollars, they will be exiled; if there are less than 220 dollars and they steal more than a dollar, they will be exiled.

古文：求比此。
现代文：求盗与此同样论处。
English: Soliciting theft is treated the same way.

古文：求，當刑為城旦，問罪當駕如害不當？
现代文：求盗盗窃，应刑为城旦，问是否应像害盗那样加罪？
English: Asking whether theft should be punished as a misdemeanor, asking whether it should be punished as a felony?

古文：當。
现代文：应当。
English: It should.

古文：甲謀遣乙，一日，乙且往，未到，得，皆贖黥。
现代文：甲主谋派乙去盗窃，一天，乙去行盗，还没有走到，就被拿获，甲乙都应判处赎黥。
English: A mastermind sent B to steal, and one day, B went to steal, and before he got there, he was caught. Both A and B should be sentenced to pay a ransom.

古文：人臣甲謀遣人妾乙主牛，買，把錢偕邦亡，出徼，得，論各可？
现代文：男奴甲主谋叫婢女乙偷主人的牛，把牛卖掉，带着卖牛的钱一同逃越国镜，出边塞时，被拿获，各应如何论处？
English: A male slave and a mastermind asked a female servant to steal her master's cow, sell the cow, and escape across the Looking Glass with the money from the sale of the cow. When they leave the border, they are caught. How should each of them be dealt with?

古文：當城旦黥之，各畀主。
现代文：应按城旦的样子施以黥刑，然后分别交还主人。
English: They should be beaten according to the appearance of the city, and then returned to the owner separately.

古文：甲牛，牛時高六尺，一歲，復丈，高六尺七寸，問甲可論？
现代文：甲偷牛，偷牛时身高六尺，囚禁一年，再加度量，身高六尺七寸，问甲应如何论处？
English: A steals a cow, he is six feet tall when he steals a cow, he is imprisoned for one year, and then he is measured, he is six feet seven inches tall, how should A be dealt with?

古文：當完城旦。
现代文：应完城旦。
English: It's time to finish the city.

古文：或采人桑葉，臧不盈一錢，可論？
现代文：有人偷摘别人的桑叶，赃值不到一钱，如何论处？
English: Someone steals someone else's mulberry leaves, which are worth less than a penny, how should they be dealt with?

古文：貲三旬。
现代文：罚服徭役三十天。
English: He was sentenced to 30 days of forced labor.

古文：司寇百一十錢，先自告，可論？
现代文：司寇盗窃一百一十钱，先已自首，如何论处？
English: A scout steals a hundred and ten yuan and surrenders himself first. How will he be dealt with?

古文：當耐為隸臣，或曰貲二甲。
现代文：应耐为隶臣，一说应赀二甲。
English: Ying Yao was a vassal, and it is said that Ying Yao was twice his age.

古文：甲，臧直千錢，乙智其，受分臧不盈一錢，問乙可論？
现代文：甲盗窃，赃值一千钱，乙知道甲盗窃，分赃不满一钱，问乙应如何论处？
English: A steals, the stolen goods are worth one thousand yuan, B knows A steals, the stolen goods are less than one yuan, and asks B how to deal with it?

古文：同論。
现代文：与甲同样论处。
English: The same punishment as A.

古文：甲不盈一錢，行乙室，乙弗覺，問乙論可？
现代文：甲盗窃不满一钱，前往乙家，乙没有察觉，问乙方如何论处？
English: A steals less than a penny, goes to B's house, B does not notice, asks B how to deal with it?

古文：毋論。
现代文：不应论罪。
English: There will be no disciplinary action.

古文：其見智之而弗捕，當貲一盾。
现代文：如系知情而不加捕拿，应罚一盾。
English: If they knew about it and didn't arrest him, they should be fined one ryo.

古文：甲錢以買絲，寄乙，乙受，弗智，乙論可？
现代文：甲盗钱用以买丝，把丝寄存在乙方处，乙收受了，但不了解盗窃的事，乙方如何论处？
English: A steals money to buy silk, deposits the silk at Party B's place, Party B receives it, but does not know about the theft, how does Party B deal with it?

古文：毋論。
现代文：不应论罪。
English: There will be no disciplinary action.

古文：甲乙雅不相智，甲往丙，毚到，乙亦往丙，與甲言，即各，其臧直各四百，已去而偕得。
现代文：甲乙素不相识，甲去丙处盗窃，刚到，乙也去丙处盗窃，与甲交谈，于是分别偷盗，其赃物各值四百钱，在离开丙处后同时拿获。
English: A and B did not know each other, A went to C's place to steal, just arrived, B also went to C's place to steal, talked with A, so they stole separately, their stolen goods were worth four hundred dollars each, and they were seized at the same time after leaving C's place.

古文：其前謀，當并臧以論；不謀，各坐臧。
现代文：如有预谋，应将两人赃数合并一起论处，没有预谋，各依所盗赃数论罪。
English: If there is premeditation, the number of stolen coins of the two persons shall be combined and dealt with together. If there is no premeditation, each person shall be dealt with according to the number of stolen coins.

古文：工以出，臧不盈一錢，其曹人當治不當？
现代文：工匠偷出来东西，赃不满一钱，其同班工匠应否答打？不应答打。
English: If a craftsman steals something and is not satisfied with a penny, should his classmates beat him?

古文：不當治。夫千錢，妻所匿三百，可以論妻？
现代文：丈夫盗窃一千钱，在其妻处藏匿了三百，妻应如何论处？
English: If a husband steals a thousand dollars and hides three hundred from his wife, what should the wife do?

古文：妻智夫而匿之，當以三百論為；不智，為收。
现代文：妻如知道丈夫盗窃而藏钱，应按盗窃三百论处；不知道，作为收藏。
English: If a wife knows that her husband steals and hides money, she should be punished according to the theft of three hundred; do not know, as a collection.

古文：夫三百錢，告妻，妻與共飲食之，可以論妻？
现代文：丈夫盗窃三百钱，告知其妻，妻和他一起用这些钱饮食，妻应如何论处？
English: If a husband steals 300 yuan and tells his wife that she can use the money to eat and drink with him, what should she do?

古文：非前謀，當為收；其前謀，同罪。
现代文：没有预谋，应作为收藏；如系预谋，与其夫同罪。
English: If there was no premeditation, it should be treated as a collection; if there was premeditation, she and her husband are guilty of the same crime.

古文：夫二百錢，妻所匿百一十，可以論妻？
现代文：丈夫盗窃二百钱，在其妻处藏匿了一百一十，妻应如何论处？
English: If a husband steals two hundred denarii and hides a hundred and ten with his wife, how should the wife be dealt with?

古文：妻智夫，以百一十為；弗智，為守臧。
现代文：妻如知道丈夫盗窃，应按盗钱一百一十论处；不知道，作为守赃。
English: If a wife knows that her husband has stolen, she should be punished to the extent of one hundred and ten times the amount of the stolen money; if she does not know, she should act as a guardian.

古文：削，臧直百一十，其妻、子智，與食肉，當同罪。
现代文：夜间行盗，赃值一百一十钱，其妻、子知情，与他一起用钱买肉吃，其妻、子应同样论罪。
English: If a man steals an ephah worth a hundred and ten shekels of silver by night, and his wife and children know about it, and buy meat with him for money to eat, his wife and children shall be guilty in the same way.

古文：削，臧直百五十，告甲，甲與其妻、子智，共食肉，甲妻、子與甲同罪。
现代文：夜间行盗，赃值一百五十钱，盗犯将此事告甲，甲和甲的妻、子知情后，与盗犯一起用赃钱买肉吃，甲的妻、子和甲都应同样论罪。。
English: A and A's wife and son, after knowing about it, used the stolen money to buy meat to eat together with the thief. A's wife, son and A should all be charged with the same crime.

古文：今父子，可論當為。
现代文：如义父盗窃义子的东西，应如何论处？
English: If a stepfather steals something from his son-in-law, how should he be dealt with?

古文：律曰，有曰，此二物其同居、典、伍當坐之。
现代文：应作为盗窃律文说 与盗同法 ，又说 与同罪 ，这两类犯罪的同居、里典和同伍的人都应连坐。
English: It should be said that the theft law should be the same as the theft law and the same crime, and the two types of crimes of cohabitation, and the people who are in the same team should sit together.

古文：云，云者，弗當坐。人奴妾其主之父母，為主，且不為？
现代文：律文说 与同罪 ，但又说 反其罪 的，犯罪者的同居、里典和同伍的人不应连坐。私家奴婢盗窃主人父母的东西，作为盗主，还是不作为盗主？
English: The text of the law says that the same crime, but it also says that the opposite crime, the cohabitation of the offender, the reader and the people in the same team should not sit together. Private slaves and maids steal the things of the master's parents, as a thief, or not as a thief?

古文：同居者為主，不同居不為主。
现代文：主人的父母是与主人同居，就作为盗主；不同居，不作为盗主。
English: If the master's father and mother live with him, they are thieves; if they do not, they are not.

古文：可謂？戶為，坐隸，隸不坐戶謂。
现代文： 盗窃和其他类似犯罪，同居应连坐 。什么叫 同居 ？
English: Theft and other similar crimes, cohabitation should sit together. What is cohabitation?

古文：今甲衣，買，以買布衣而得，當以衣及布畀不當？
现代文：同户就是 同居 ，但奴隶犯罪，主人应连坐，主人犯罪，奴隶则不连坐。
English: To live in the same household is to live together, but if a slave commits a crime, the master should sit with him; if the master commits a crime, the slave should not sit with him.

古文：當以布及其它所買畀甲，衣不當。
现代文：盗窃犯行窃后，将所窃出卖，另买他物，均应退给还原主。
English: After a thief steals, sells what he stole, and buys something else, all of it should be returned to the original owner.

古文：今或益〈〉一腎，益〈〉一腎臧〈〉不盈一錢，可論？
现代文：如盗窃犯偷得甲的衣服，把衣服买掉，换买了布，然后被拿获，是否应把衣服和布给甲？
English: If a thief steals A's clothes, buys the clothes, exchanges them for cloth, and is caught, should the clothes and cloth be given to A?

古文：祠固用心腎及它支物，皆各為一具，一具之臧不盈一錢，之當耐。
现代文：祭祀时必然要用牲畜的心、肾和肢体，各作为一份供品，这一份供品作为赃物价值虽不满一钱，盗窃了它也应耐为隶臣。
English: The heart, kidneys and limbs of the animal must be used as an offering at the time of the sacrifice. Although the value of this offering as stolen goods is less than one yuan, it should be stolen as a vassal.

古文：或直廿錢，而柀之，不盡一具，及不直者，以律論。
现代文：又有供品值二十钱，但只盗窃了一部分，没有盗完一整份，以及所盗窃的是不作为供品陈放的东西，这两种情况按一般法律论处。什么叫 祠未 ？
English: There are also offerings worth twenty dollars, but only a part was stolen, not a whole one, and what was stolen was not exhibited as an offering, both of which are dealt with according to general law.

古文：可謂？置豆俎鬼前未徹乃為。
现代文：将豆俎陈放在鬼神位前，没有撤下，就是。
English: That is to say, the soybean meal was placed in front of the ghost god's throne without being removed.

古文：未置及不直者不為，必已置乃為。
现代文：还没有陈放以及不准备陈放东西不算具，一定要已经陈放了的才算具。
English: Things that have not yet been exhibited and are not ready to be exhibited are not considered to be tools, but those that have been exhibited must be considered to be tools.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫盗掘祭祀的？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：王室祠，貍其具，是謂。
现代文：王室祭祀，埋其祭品，叫做。
English: The royal sacrifice, burying its offerings, is called rime.

古文：士五甲一羊，羊頸有索，索直一錢，問可論？
现代文：士伍甲盗窃一只羊，羊头上有绳，绳值一钱，问应如何论处？
English: A soldier steals a sheep. The sheep has a rope around its head. The rope is worth one yuan. How should he be dealt with?

古文：甲意所羊，而索繫羊，甲即牽羊去，議不為過羊。
现代文：甲所要偷的是羊，绳是拴羊的，甲就把羊牵走了，不应以超过盗羊议罪。
English: It is a sheep that A wants to steal, and the rope is a shepherd's rope, so A takes the sheep away, and should not be charged with more than stealing a sheep.

古文：可謂？
现代文：抉籥，应赎黥。
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：抉籥者已抉啟之乃為抉，且未啟亦為抉？
现代文：什么叫抉籥？撬门键的人已经撬开才算撬，还是没撬开也算撬？
English: What is "decision"? Is the person who has opened the lock considered to be "decided," or is the person who has not opened the lock also considered to be "decided"?

古文：抉之弗能啟即去，一日而得，論皆可？
现代文：撬而未能撬开就走了，当天被拿获，以上各种情形都就如何论处？
English: How should the above-mentioned situations be dealt with?

古文：抉之且欲有，弗能啟即去，若未啟而得，當贖黥。
现代文：撬门键目的在于盗窃的，未能撬开就走，或未撬开而被拿获，都应赎黥。
English: If the purpose of the key is to steal, if it cannot be pried open and leaves, or if it is taken without being pried open, it should be ransomed.

古文：抉之非欲，已啟乃為抉，未啟當貲二甲。
现代文：撬门键目的不在盗窃的，已开才算作撬，未开应罚二甲。
English: If the purpose of the lock is not theft, it is only considered to be stolen if it has been opened. If it has not been opened, it will be subject to a fine of two points.

古文：?
现代文：府中的公家金钱，私自借用，与盗窃同样论罪。
English: A child may sue his parents, a slave may sue his master, but if the case is not filed in a public office, it will not be accepted.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫府中？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：唯縣少內為，其它不為。
现代文：只有县少内算作府中，其他不算。
English: Only prefectural Shonai are counted as Fuchu, others are not counted.

古文：士五甲，以得時直臧，臧直過六百六十，吏弗直，其獄鞫乃直臧，臧直百一十，以論耐，問甲及吏可論？
现代文：士伍甲盗窃，如在捕获时估其赃物价值，所值应超过六百六十钱，但吏当时没有估价，到审讯时才估，赃值一百一十钱，因而判处耐刑，问甲和吏如何论处？
English: In the case of theft by Officer A, if the value of the stolen goods was estimated at the time of capture, the value should exceed 660 yuan. However, the officials did not estimate the value at that time, but only estimated it at the time of trial. The value of the stolen goods was 110 yuan, and the sentence was suspended. How should Officer A and the officials be dealt with?

古文：甲當黥為城旦；吏為失刑罪，或端為，為不直。
现代文：甲应黥为城旦；吏以用刑不当论罪，如系故意这样做的，以不公论罪。
English: A should be punished as a citizen; officials are guilty of improper use of punishment, and if they did it intentionally, they are guilty of injustice.

古文：甲當耐為隸臣，吏為失刑罪。甲有罪，吏智而端重若輕之，論可？
现代文：士伍甲盗窃，如在捕获时估其赃物价值，所值应为一百一十钱，但吏当时没有估价，到审讯时才估，赃值超过六百六十钱，因而把甲黥为城旦，问甲和吏如何论处？吏知道他的罪而故意从重或从轻判刑，应如何论处？
English: In the case of theft by soldier A, if the value of the stolen goods was estimated at the time of capture, the value should be one hundred and ten dollars. However, the officials did not estimate the value at that time, but only estimated it at the time of the trial. The value of the stolen goods exceeded six hundred and sixty dollars. Therefore, the armor was considered to be stolen. How should A and the officials be dealt with? How should the officials be dealt with if they knew about his crime and deliberately increased or decreased the sentence?

古文：為不直。
现代文：以不公论处。
English: Unfairness will be punished.

古文：或以赦前盗千錢，赦後盡用之而得，論可毋論。
现代文：有人在赦令颁布前盗窃一千钱，赦令颁布后将钱全部花费而被拿获，应如何论处？
English: If someone steals a thousand dollars before the pardon is issued, but spends all the money after the pardon is issued and is caught, how should they be dealt with?

古文：告人盗百一十，問盗百，告者可論？
现代文：以不公论处。控告他人盗窃一百一十钱，审问结果是盗窃一百钱，控告者应如何论处？
English: If you accuse someone of stealing a hundred and ten dollars, and the result of the interrogation is the theft of a hundred dollars, how should the accuser be dealt with?

古文：當貲二甲。
现代文：应罚二甲。
English: A fine of up to two times salary shall be imposed.

古文：盗百，即端盗駕十錢，問告者可論？
现代文：盗窃一百钱，控告者故意私加十钱，问控告者应如何论处？
English: How should the plaintiff be dealt with if he steals 100 yuan and the plaintiff deliberately adds 10 yuan?

古文：當貲一盾。
现代文：应罚一盾。
English: shall be fined one ryo.

古文：貲一盾應律，雖然，廷行事以不審論，貲二甲。
现代文：罚一盾符合法律，但成例以控告不实论处，罚二甲。
English: A fine of one dong is in line with the law, but it is customary to punish the accusation of untruthfulness with a fine of two koku.

古文：告人盗千錢，問盗六百七十，告者可論毋論。
现代文：控告他人盗窃一千钱，审问结果是盗窃六百七十钱，控告者应如何论处？
English: If you accuse someone of stealing a thousand dollars, and the result of the interrogation is the theft of six hundred and seventy dollars, how should the accuser be dealt with?

古文：誣人千錢，問六百七十，誣者可論？
现代文：不予论处。诬告他人盗窃一千钱,审问结果是盗窃六百七十钱,诬告者应如何论处?
English: How should a false accuser be dealt with if he falsely accused someone of stealing a thousand dollars and the result of the interrogation was the theft of six hundred and seventy dollars?

古文：毋論。
现代文：不予论处。
English: There will be no disciplinary action.

古文：甲告乙直□□，問乙卅，甲誣駕乙五十，其卅不審，問甲當論不當？
现代文：甲控告乙盗窃值钱的东西，审问结果是盗窃三十钱，甲诬加乙五十钱，又有三十钱不实，问甲应否论处？
English: A accuses B of stealing something valuable. The result of the interrogation is the theft of thirty dollars, A accuses B of stealing fifty dollars, and the thirty dollars are not real. Should A be punished?

古文：廷行事貲二甲。
现代文：成例应罚二甲。
English: As a result, a fine of 2 kopecks will be imposed.

古文：甲告乙牛若賊傷人，今乙不牛、不傷人，問甲可論？
现代文：甲控告乙方盗牛或杀伤人，现在乙没有盗牛、没有伤人，问甲应如何论处？
English: Party A accuses Party B of stealing cattle or killing people. Now that Party B has not stolen cattle or hurt people, how should Party A deal with it?

古文：端為，為誣人；不端，為告不審。
现代文：如系故意，作为诬告他人；不是故意，作为控告不实。
English: If it is intentional, it is a false accusation; if it is unintentional, it is a false accusation.

古文：甲告乙盗牛，今乙賊傷人，非盗牛，問甲當論不當？
现代文：甲控告乙盗牛，现在乙是杀伤人，不是盗牛，问甲应否论处？
English: A accuses B of cattle theft. Now B is a murderer, not a cattle thief. Should A be punished?

古文：不當論，亦不當購；或曰為告不審。
现代文：不应盗牛，问甲应否论处？不应论处，也不应奖赏；一说应作为控告不实。
English: Shouldn't the theft of cattle be discussed and punished? Shouldn't the theft of cattle be discussed and punished? Shouldn't the theft of cattle be rewarded? This should be regarded as a false accusation.

古文：甲盗羊，乙智，即端告曰甲盗牛，問乙為誣人，且為告不審？
现代文：甲盗羊，乙方知道，而故意控告说甲盗牛，问乙应作为诬告人，还是作为控告不实？
English: A steals sheep, B knows, and deliberately accuses A of stealing cattle, asking B whether he should be regarded as a false accuser, or as a false accusation?

古文：當為告駕臧。
现代文：应作为控告盗窃而增多脏数。
English: The dirty number should be increased as a complaint of theft.

古文：甲盗羊，乙智盗羊，而不智其羊數，即告吏曰三羊，問乙可論？
现代文：甲盗羊，乙知道是盗羊，而不知道所盗羊数，就向吏控告说甲盗窃了三只羊，问乙方应如何论处？
English: A steals a sheep, B knows that it is a stolen sheep, but does not know the number of stolen sheep, so he complains to the officials that A has stolen three sheep, and asks B what should be done?

古文：為告駕臧。
现代文：作为控告盗窃而增多赃数。
English: As a complaint of theft, the number of thefts has increased.

古文：甲告乙盗牛，今乙盗羊，不盗牛，問可論？
现代文：甲控告乙方盗牛，现在乙是盗羊，不是盗牛，问甲应如何论处？
English: Party A accuses Party B of stealing cattle. Now Party B is stealing sheep, not cattle. How should Party A deal with it?

古文：為告不審。
现代文：作为控告不实。
English: as a false accusation.

古文：■貲盾不直，可論？
现代文：官吏判处犯人罚盾不公，应如何论处？
English: How should officials be dealt with if they impose an unfair punishment on a prisoner?

古文：貲盾。
现代文：应罚盾。
English: It's a foul.

古文：當貲盾，沒錢五千而失之，可論？
现代文：应罚盾，而没钱五千，判处不当，如何论处？
English: Should be fined a shield, but no money five thousand, sentenced improperly, how to deal with it?

古文：當誶。
现代文：应申斥。
English: It should be condemned.

古文：■告人曰邦亡，未出徼闌亡，告不審，論可？
现代文：控告他人说逃出国境，实际没有私出边界，所控告不实，应如何论处？
English: What should be done with those who accuse others of illegally crossing the border when they actually did not, and the accusation is false?

古文：為告黥城旦不審。
现代文：作为控告应判黥城旦的罪而不实。
English: The accusation that he should be convicted of a crime is not true.

古文：誣人直廿，未斷，有有它，直百，乃後覺，當并臧以論，且行真罪、有以誣人論？
现代文：诬告他人盗窃值二十钱的东西，尚未判罪，本人又另犯盗窃罪，赃值一百钱，然后被察觉，应将两项赃值合并论处，还是判处实际盗窃的罪，再按诬告他人论处？
English: If a person falsely accuses another person of stealing something worth twenty dollars, but has not yet been convicted, and he himself commits another crime of theft, with a value of one hundred dollars, and then is discovered, should the two crimes be punished together, or should he be sentenced for the crime of actual theft, and then be punished for falsely accusing others?

古文：當貲二甲一盾。
现代文：应罚二甲一盾。
English: shall be fined two kan and one ryo.

古文：上造甲一羊，獄未斷，誣人曰一，論可？
现代文：上造甲盗了一只羊，案子尚未判决，又诬告他人盗窃了一只猪，应如何论处？
English: Shangzhuang Armor stole a sheep, the case has not yet been adjudicated, and falsely accused others of stealing a pig, how should it be dealt with?

古文：當完城旦。
现代文：应完城旦。
English: It's time to finish the city.

古文：將軍材以錢若金賞，毋恒數。
现代文：赞扬敌人而动摇军心的人，应戮。什么叫戮？
English: Those who praise the enemy and shake the morale of the army should be killed. What is killing?

古文：所謂者，見書而投者不得，燔書，勿發；投者得，書不燔，鞫審之之謂。
现代文：先活着刑辱示众，然后斩首。能振作士气使将军知道他的名声的人，应予赏赐。
English: Those who first live to be humiliated and then beheaded should be rewarded for raising morale and letting the general know of their reputation.

古文：可？為有秩偽寫其印為大嗇夫。
现代文：由将军酌量赏给钱或黄金，没有固定数目。
English: The generals award money or gold at their discretion, and there is no fixed amount.

古文：盗封嗇夫可論？廷行事以偽寫印。
现代文： 有投匿名信的，不得拆看，见后应即烧毁；能把投信人捕获的，奖给男女奴隶二人，将投信人囚禁，审讯定罪。 
English: If there is an anonymous letter, it must not be torn apart, and it should be burned immediately after being seen; if it is possible to capture the letter writer, two male and female slaves will be awarded, and the letter writer will be imprisoned, tried and convicted.

古文：今咸陽發偽傳，弗智，即復封傳它縣，它縣亦傳其縣次，到關而得，今當獨咸陽坐以貲，且它縣當盡貲？
现代文：律文的意思是，看到匿名信而没有拿获投信人，应将信烧毁，不得开看；已拿获投信人，信不要烧毁，将投信者审讯定罪。
English: The text of the law means that if you see an anonymous letter and have not found the investor, you should burn the letter and not open it; if you have found the investor, do not burn the letter, and try and convict the investor.

古文：咸陽及它縣發弗智者當皆貲。
现代文：什么叫矫丞令？例如低级官吏伪造丞的官印，冒充大啬夫。
English: For example, a low-ranking official forged the official seal of the emperor, posing as a miser.

古文：廷行事吏為詛偽，貲盾以上，行其論，有廢之。
现代文：成例，官吏弄虚作假，其罪在罚盾以上的，依判决执行，同时要撤职永不叙用。
English: As a general rule, if an official commits fraud and his crime is more than a fine, he shall be executed according to the judgment, and at the same time, he shall be removed from his post and shall never be promoted.

古文：廷行事有罪當，已斷已令，未行而死若亡，其所包當詣所。
现代文：成例，有罪应加流放，已经判决，尚未执行而死去或逃亡，当去的家属仍前往流放地点。
English: As a rule, the guilty should be exiled, has been sentenced, has not yet been executed and died or fled, and the family members who should go still go to the place of exile.

古文：嗇夫不以官為事，以奸為事，論可？
现代文：啬夫不以官职为事，而专干坏事，应如何论处？
English: How should a miser who does not care about his official position but only does bad things be dealt with?

古文：當。
现代文：应流放。
English: He should be exiled.

古文：者妻當包不當？
现代文：被流放者的妻应否随往流放地点？不应随往。
English: Should the wife of an exile accompany him to the place of exile?

古文：不當包。當，其妻先自告，當包。
现代文：应当流放的人，其妻事先自首，仍应随往流放地点。
English: If the wife of the person to be exiled surrenders herself in advance, she shall still accompany him to the place of exile.

古文：將上不仁邑里者而縱之，可論？
现代文：押送在乡里作恶的人而将放走，应如何论处？
English: How should we deal with those who escort evildoers in the countryside and then let them go?

古文：當作如其所縱，以須其得；有爵，作官府。
现代文：应当象他所放走的罪犯那样拘禁劳作，直到罪犯被捕获为止；如果是有爵的人，可在官府服役。 私自移封，应赎耐。 什么叫 封 ？ 封 就是田地的阡陌。
English: Like the criminals he released, they should be confined to labor until the criminals are caught; if they have a peerage, they can serve in the government.

古文：可如為？即田千佰。頃半，且非是？而徙之，贖耐，可重也？
现代文：百亩田的田界是算做封，如私加移动，便判处赎耐，是否太重？
English: The field boundary of a hundred mu field is considered to be a seal. If I move, I will be sentenced to redemption. Is it too heavy?

古文：是，不重。
现代文：算做封，判处并不算重。
English: Even if it is sealed, it is not a heavy sentence.

古文：今內人，人未蝕奸而得，可論？
现代文： 容使坏人入内，应赎耐。 如容人入内，人们没有让他的奸谋得逞，就把他捕获了，应如何论处？免罪。
English: If a wicked man is allowed to enter a house, he should atone for his sins. If a man is allowed to enter a house, but his evil schemes are not successful, and he is caught, what should be his punishment? Exoneration.

古文：除。求盗追捕罪人，罪人挌殺求，問殺人者為賊殺人，且斲殺？
现代文：求盗追捕罪犯，罪犯击杀求盗，问杀人者应作为贼杀人论处，还是作为斗杀人论处？
English: Should a criminal who steals be pursued, a criminal who kills someone who steals be punished as a thief or as a murderer?

古文：斲殺人，廷行事為賊。
现代文：系斗杀人，但成例以贼杀人论处。
English: It was a homicide committed in a fight, but it was ruled to be a homicide committed by a thief.

古文：甲謀遣乙殺人，受分十錢，問乙高未盈六尺，甲可論？
现代文：甲主谋派乙盗劫杀人，分到十钱，问乙身高不满六尺，甲应如何论处？
English: A mastermind sent A to commit robbery and murder, and was fined ten yuan. He asked B, who was less than six feet tall, how should A be dealt with?

古文：當磔。
现代文：应车裂。
English: The car broke down.

古文：甲殺人，不覺，今甲病死已葬，人乃後告甲，甲殺人審，問甲當論及收不當？
现代文：甲杀人，未被察觉，现甲因病死亡，已经埋葬，事后才有人对甲控告，甲杀人系事实，问应否对甲论罪并没收其家属？
English: Person A killed person A without being noticed. Now person A has died of illness and has been buried. It was only after the fact that someone filed a complaint against person A. Person A's murder is a fact. Should person A be convicted and his family members be confiscated?

古文：告不聽。
现代文：对控告不予受理。
English: The complaint is inadmissible.

古文：今生子，子身全，毋怪物，直以多子故，不欲其生，即弗舉而殺之，可論？
现代文： 擅自杀子，应黥为城旦舂。如小儿生下时身上长有异物，以及肢体不全，不予治罪。 如新生小儿，身体完好，没有生长异物，只是由于孩子大多，不愿他活下来，就不加养育而把他杀死，应如何论处？
English: For example, if a child is born with a foreign body and incomplete limbs, it will not be punished; if a newborn child is healthy and does not have a foreign body, but because most children do not want him to survive, they will not raise him and kill him, how should it be dealt with?

古文：為殺子。
现代文：作为杀子。
English: As a murder.

古文：士五甲毋子，其弟子以為後，與同居，而擅殺之，當棄市。
现代文：士伍甲无子，以其侄为后嗣，在一起居住，而擅自将他杀死，应当弃市。
English: A samurai who had no son and lived with his nephew as his heir, but killed him without permission, should leave the city.

古文：?
现代文： 擅自杀死、刑伤或髡剃其后子的，均应定罪。
English: A child may sue his parents, a slave may sue his master, but if the case is not filed in a public office, it will not be accepted.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫后子？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：官其男為爵後，及臣邦君長所置為後大子，皆為。
现代文：经官方认可其子为爵位的继承人，以及臣邦君长立为后嗣的太子，都是后子。
English: The heir whose son is officially recognized as the heir to the title of nobility, as well as the prince who is the heir to the throne, are all descendants.

古文：人奴擅殺子，城旦黥之，畀主。
现代文：私家奴婢擅自杀子，应按城旦的样子施以黥刑，然后交还主人。
English: If a private slave commits suicide, he or she should be flogged according to the rules of the city, and then returned to the master.

古文：人奴妾治子，子以死，黥顏頯，畀主。
现代文：私家奴婢笞打自己之子，子因此患病而死，应有额上和颧部刺墨，然后交还主人。
English: If a man's slave beat his son, and the son died of disease, the slave should have his forehead and beard tattooed, and then he should be returned to his master.

古文：■相與，交傷，皆論不？
现代文：互相斗殴，双方都受了伤，是否都要论处？
English: If two people fight and both are injured, should they both be punished?

古文：交論。
现代文：都应论处？
English: Should they all be dealt with?

古文：臣強與主奸，可論？
现代文：男奴强奸主人，应如何论处？
English: How should male slaves who rape their masters be dealt with?

古文：比毆主。
现代文：与殴打主人同样论处。
English: The same applies to beating the owner.

古文：■折脊頸骨，可論？
现代文：斗殴折断了颈脊骨，应如何论处？
English: The neck and spine were broken in a fight. What should the punishment be?

古文：比折支。
现代文：与折断四肢同样论处。
English: The same applies to the breaking of limbs.

古文：?可謂牧？
现代文： 奴婢谋杀主人。 什么叫谋？
English: A slave murders her master. What is the plot?

古文：欲賊殺主，未殺而得，為牧。
现代文：企图杀害主人，没有杀就被捕获，叫作谋。
English: Attempting to kill the master, and being caught without killing him, is called conspiracy.

古文：或自殺，其室人弗言吏，即葬貍之，問死者有妻、子當收，弗言而葬，當貲一甲。
现代文：有人自杀，其同居的人没有向官吏报告，就把死者埋葬了，经讯问知道死者有妻、子，本应收尸，只是未经报告即行埋葬，应罚一甲。
English: Someone committed suicide, and the person who lived with him did not report it to officials, so they buried the dead person. After interrogation, it was learned that the dead person had a wife and a son, and the body should have been collected, but they buried it without reporting it, and they should be fined one jia.

古文：今毆高大父母，可論？
现代文： 殴打祖父母，应黥为城旦舂。 
English: If you beat up your grandparents, you should be put in jail.

古文：比大父母。
现代文：如殴打曾祖父母，应如何论处？
English: If you beat your great-grandparents, how should you be dealt with?

古文：妻悍，夫毆治之，夬其耳，若折支指、胅，問夫可論？
现代文：与殴打祖父母同样论处。妻凶悍，其夫加以责打，撕裂了她的耳朵，或打断了四肢、手指，或造成脱臼，问其夫应如何论处？
English: If a wife is violent and her husband beats her and tears her ear, or breaks a limb, or fingers, or dislocates a joint, how should the husband be punished?

古文：當耐。
现代文：应处以耐刑。
English: He should be given a suspended sentence.

古文：律曰：今夬耳故不穿，所夬非珥所入，可論？
现代文：律文说： 斗殴撕裂他人耳朵，应处耐刑。 如撕裂的耳朵本来没有穿过戴珥的部位，应如何论处？
English: The text of the law says: "If a fight results in someone's ear being torn off, the punishment shall be long-suffering; if the torn ear did not originally go through the part of the person wearing the shackles, what should the punishment be?

古文：律所謂，非必珥所入乃為夬，夬裂男若女耳，皆當耐。
现代文：律文的意思，并没有说的只有挂珥的部位才算撕裂、撕裂男子或妇女的耳朵，都应处以耐刑。
English: The meaning of the text of the law does not say that only the part of the hook is considered to be torn, and tearing a man's or woman's ear should be punished with imprisonment.

古文：或與人，縛而盡拔其須麋，論可？
现代文：有人与他人斗殴，将他人捆绑起来，拔光其胡须眉毛，应如何论处？
English: How should someone who fights with others, ties others up, and plucks out their beards and eyebrows be dealt with?

古文：當完城旦。
现代文：应完城旦。
English: It's time to finish the city.

古文：拔人髮，大可如為？
现代文：拔落他人头发，拔多少称为 提 ？
English: Pulling out someone else's hair, how much is it called "pulling"?

古文：智以上為。
现代文：被拔者有所感觉上称为 提 。
English: The chosen one is referred to as 提.

古文：或，嚙斷人鼻若耳若指若唇，論各可？
现代文：有人斗殴，咬断他人鼻子，或耳朵，或手指，或嘴唇，各应如何论处？
English: If someone fights and bites off someone's nose, or ear, or finger, or lip, how should they be dealt with?

古文：議皆當耐。
现代文：都应以耐刑论处。
English: All of them should be punished with capital punishment.

古文：士五甲，拔劍伐，斬人髮結，可論？
现代文：士伍甲斗殴，拔出剑来砍，砍断他人的发髻，应如何论处？
English: How should we deal with a soldier who fights in a battle, pulls out a sword to cut, and cuts off another person's hair?

古文：當完為城旦。
现代文：应完为城旦。
English: It should be finished as a city.

古文：鈹、戟、矛有室者，拔以，未有傷，論比劍。
现代文：铍、战、矛有鞘的，拔出来相斗，没有伤人，应与拔剑相斗同样论处。
English: If a halberd, war club, or spear has a sheath, and is pulled out to fight, but does not injure anyone, it shall be dealt with in the same way as if it were a sword.

古文：斗以箴、鉥、錐，若箴、鉥、錐傷人，各可論？
现代文：用针、鉥、锥相斗，或用针、鉥、锥伤人，各应如何论处？
English: With needle, pestle, and cone fighting, or with needle, pestle, and cone injuring people, how should each be dealt with?

古文：，當貲二甲；賊，當黥為城旦。
现代文：用以相斗，应罚二甲；伤害人，应黥为城旦。
English: If used in a fight, the offender shall be fined up to two times the amount of the fine; if the offender is injured, the offender shall be sentenced to imprisonment.

古文：或與人，夬人唇，論可？
现代文：有人与他人斗殴，撕破他人嘴唇，应如何论处？
English: If someone fights with someone else and tears their lips, how should they be dealt with?

古文：比疻痏。
现代文：与打人造成青肿或破伤同样论处。
English: The same shall apply to bruising or laceration caused by beating a person.

古文：或，嚙人頯若顏，其大方一寸，深半寸，可論？
现代文：有人斗殴，咬伤他人头部或颜面，伤口的大小是方一寸，深半寸，应如何论处？
English: If someone fights and bites someone on the head or face, and the wound is one inch square and half an inch deep, how should they be dealt with?

古文：比疻痏。
现代文：与打人造成青肿或破伤同样论处。
English: The same shall apply to bruising or laceration caused by beating a person.

古文：斗，為人毆，毋疻痏，毆者顧折齒，可論？
现代文：斗殴，被人殴打，没有青肿破伤，打人的人反而折断了牙齿，应如何论处？
English: Fighting, being beaten, no bruises, bruises, but the person who hit someone broke his teeth, how should it be dealt with?

古文：各以其律論之。
现代文：应各自依有关法律论处。
English: Each should be dealt with in accordance with the relevant laws.

古文：可謂？布入公，如貲布，入齎錢如律。
现代文：邦客和秦人相斗，邦客用兵刃、棍棒、拳头伤了人，应以布。什么叫？将作为抚慰的布缴官，也就是和罚布一样，依法缴钱。 用梃伤人。 
English: If a state guest fights with a Qin person, and the state guest injures the person with a sword, club, or fist, the cloth should be used. What is it called? The cloth will be paid to the official as a consolation, that is, it will be paid according to the law, just like the punishment cloth.

古文：?
现代文：什么叫梃？
English: A child may sue his parents, a slave may sue his master, but if the case is not filed in a public office, it will not be accepted.

古文：可謂？
现代文：可以用来打人的木棍称为梃。
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：木可以伐者為。小畜生入人室，室人以投梃伐殺之，所殺直二百五十錢，可論？
现代文：小牲畜进入他人家中，家里的人用棍棒将牲畜打死，所打死的牲畜值二百五十钱，应如何论处？
English: A small animal enters someone's house, and the person in the house beats the animal to death with a club. The animal that was beaten to death is worth two hundred and fifty dollars. What should the punishment be?

古文：當貲二甲。
现代文：应罚二甲。
English: A fine of up to two times salary shall be imposed.

古文：論獄何謂？
现代文：判案怎样称为 不直 ？
English: How is the verdict called "unjust"?

古文：可謂？
现代文：怎样称为 纵囚 ？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：罪當重而端輕之，當輕而諯重之，是謂。
现代文：罪应重而故意轻判，应轻而故意重判，称为不直。
English: If the crime deserves a heavy but deliberately light sentence, and if it deserves a light but deliberately heavy sentence, it is called injustice.

古文：當論而端弗論，及其獄，端令不致，論出之，是謂。
现代文：应当论罪而故意不论罪，以及减轻案情，故意使犯人够不判罪标准，于是判他无罪，称为 纵囚 。
English: It is necessary to judge the crime and deliberately disregard the crime, as well as mitigate the case, deliberately make the prisoner meet the standard of not being convicted, and then find him not guilty, which is called "suspended sentence."

古文：贖罪不直，史不與嗇夫和，問史可論？
现代文：判处犯人赎罪不公正，史没有和啬夫合谋，问史应如何论处？
English: Sentencing a prisoner to atone for his sins is unfair. History did not conspire with the miser. How should history deal with it?

古文：當貲一盾。
现代文：应罚一盾。
English: shall be fined one ryo.

古文：?今郡守為廷不為？
现代文： 诉讼者向廷诉讼。 
English: The plaintiff sued in court.

古文：為。
现代文：如郡守算不算廷？
English: If the county magistrate counts, does the court count?

古文：■■可謂？
现代文：算廷。 诉讼者不先向官长、啬夫诉讼。 
English: The litigant does not first sue the magistrate or the miser.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫官长？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：命都官曰，縣曰。
现代文：什么叫啬夫？称都官的主管官员为长，县的主管官员为 啬夫 。
English: What do you call a miser? The official in charge of the capital is called the chief, and the official in charge of the county is called the miser.

古文：今甲曰伍人乙賊殺人，即執乙，問不殺人，甲言不審，當以告不審論，且以所辟？
现代文： 同伍的人相控告，加以罪名，不确实，应以所加的罪名论处控告者。 律文又说： 不能确定罪人，而对他人进行控告，称为所告不实。 如甲控告说同伍的乙杀害了人，因而将乙拘捕，经审讯乙并未杀人，甲所言不实，应以告不实论处，还是以所加的罪名论处？
English: The text of the law also says: If it is not possible to determine the guilty party, but an accusation is made against someone else, it is called a false accusation. If A complains that his comrade B has killed a person, and B is arrested as a result, and upon interrogation it is found that B did not kill the person, and what A said is false, should the accusation be treated as a false accusation, or should it be treated as a false accusation?

古文：以所辟論當。
现代文：应以所加的罪名论处。
English: He should be punished for the crime he committed.

古文：賊入甲室，賊傷甲，甲號寇，其四鄰、典、老皆出不存，不聞號寇，問當論不當？
现代文：有贼进入甲家，将甲杀伤，甲呼喊有贼，其四邻、里典、伍老都外出不在家，没有听到甲呼喊有贼，问应否论处？
English: A thief enters A's house, kills and injures A, A shouts that there is a thief, his four neighbors, Li Dian and Wu Lao all go out and are not at home. They do not hear A shouting that there is a thief. Should they be dealt with?

古文：審不存，不當論；典老雖不存，當論。
现代文：四邻确不在家，不应论处；里典、伍老虽不在家，仍应论罪。什么叫 四邻 ？
English: If the four neighbors are indeed not at home, they should not be dealt with; if Li Dian and Wu Lao are not at home, they should still be dealt with. What are the four neighbors?

古文：可謂？
现代文：四邻就是同伍的人。
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：即伍人謂。
现代文：什么叫州告？
English: What is a state complaint?

古文：可謂？者，告罪人，其所告且不審，有以它事告之。
现代文：所谓州告，就是控告罪人，所控告的已属不实，又以其他事控告。
English: The so-called state complaint is to accuse the criminal, the accusation has been untrue, and to accuse him of other things.

古文：勿聽，而論其不審。
现代文：不应受理，而以所告不实论罪。
English: The complaint is inadmissible, and the charges are based on a false accusation.

古文：有賊殺傷人衝術，偕旁人不援，百步中比，當貲二甲。
现代文：有人在大道上杀伤人，在旁边的人不加援救，其距离在百步以内，应与在郊外同样论处，应罚二甲。
English: If a person kills another person on the highway, but does not rescue the person next to him, and the distance is less than one hundred paces, he shall be dealt with in the same way as in the suburbs, and shall be fined two times.

古文：免老告人以為不孝，謁殺，當三環之不？不當環，亟執勿失。
现代文：老人控告不孝，要求判以死刊，应否经过三次原宥的手续，不应原宥，要立即拘捕，勿令逃走。
English: The old man accused the newspaper of being unfilial and demanded that it be sentenced to death. He asked whether it should go through the formalities of the three-time pardon, and if it should not be pardoned, it should be immediately arrested and not allowed to escape.

古文：何？
现代文：什么叫公室告？
English: What is an official complaint?

古文：可？
现代文：什么叫非公室告？
English: What is an unofficial complaint?

古文：賊殺傷、它人為；子盜父母，父母擅殺、刑、髡子及奴妾，不為。
现代文：杀伤或盗窃他人，是公室告；子盗窃父母，父母擅自杀死、刑伤、髡剃子及奴婢，不是 公室告 。
English: If a person kills, maims or steals another person, it is a public complaint; if a child steals from his parents, or if his parents commit suicide, or inflict torture or injury, or beat or shave their sons or daughters, it is not a public complaint.

古文：?
现代文： 子控告父母，奴婢控告主人，非公室告，不予受理。 什么叫 非公室告 ？
English: A child may sue his parents, a slave may sue his master, but if the case is not filed in a public office, it will not be accepted.

古文：可謂？主擅殺、刑、髡其子、臣妾，是謂，勿聽。
现代文：家主擅自杀死、刑伤、髡剃其子或奴婢，这叫非公室告，不予受理。
English: If the landlord commits suicide, inflicts injury, or shaves his son or slave without authorization, this is called a non-official complaint and will not be accepted.

古文：而行告，告者罪。
现代文：如仍行控告，控告者有罪。
English: If the accusation is still made, the accuser is guilty.

古文：告者罪已行，它人有襲其告之，亦不當聽。
现代文：控告者已经处罪，又有别人接替控告，也不受理。
English: If the accuser has already been punished and someone else takes over the accusation, it is also inadmissible.

古文：可謂？者，父殺傷人及奴妾，父死而告之，勿治。
现代文： 对家属的论处，如系父在世时的家罪，父死后才有人控告，不予受理。 
English: The treatment of family members, such as the family crime committed by the father when he was alive, which was only reported after the father's death, is not acceptable.

古文：葆子以上，未獄而死若已葬，而誧告之，亦不當聽治，勿收，皆如家罪。
现代文：什么叫家罪？家罪即父杀伤了人以及奴婢，在父死后才有人控告，不予处理。葆子以上有罪未经审判而死或已埋葬，才有人控告，不加拘捕，都和家罪同例。什么叫 家罪 ？
English: What is a family crime? A family crime is when a father kills and injures a person, as well as his male and female slaves. Only after the father's death will someone file a complaint, and the case will not be handled. Only after a son or daughter has died without trial, or has been buried, will someone file a complaint, and no arrest will be made. This is the same as a family crime. What is a family crime?

古文：可謂？父子同居，殺傷父臣妾、畜產及之，父已死，或告，勿聽，是胃。有收當耐未斷，以當刑隸臣罪誣告人，是謂。葆子□□未斷而誣告人，其罪當刑城旦，耐以為鬼薪鋈足。
现代文：父子居住在一起，子杀伤及盗窃父亲的奴婢、牲畜，父死后，有人控告，不予受理，这叫 家罪 。 葆子 尚未判决而诬告他人，其罪当刑城旦，应耐以为鬼薪并且鋈足。
English: If a father and son live together, and the son kills or steals his father's male and female slaves and livestock, and someone files a complaint after the father's death, but the complaint is not accepted, this is called a family crime.

古文：耤葆子之謂。
现代文：意即断去葆子的足部。
English: What is the punishment for being a subordinate?

古文：可謂？
现代文： 葆子案件尚未判决而诬告他人，其罪当刑为隶臣，不要施加肉刑，应加以耐刑，并拘系服城旦劳役六年。 
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：耤葆子之謂。
现代文：什么叫当刑为隶臣？
English: What is the punishment for being a subordinate?

古文：有收當耐未斷，以當刑隸臣罪誣告人，是謂當刑隸臣。
现代文：被收捕应处耐刑而尚未判决，以刑为隶臣的罪名诬告他人，这叫 当刑为隶臣 。
English: A person who has been arrested and sentenced to a long prison term, but has not yet been sentenced, falsely accuses others of the crime of punishing subordinates, which is called punishing subordinates.

古文：可謂？當耐為鬼薪未斷，以當刑隸臣及完城旦誣告人，是謂。
现代文： 葆子案件尚未判决而诬告他人，其罪当刑为鬼薪，不要施加肉刑，应加以耐刑，并拘系服城旦劳役六年。 什么叫 当刑为鬼薪 ？
English: In the case of a lame person who has not yet been adjudicated and falsely accuses others, his crime should be punished as a ghost salary. Do not impose corporal punishment, it should be tolerated, and he should be sentenced to six years of forced labor. What is the punishment for ghost salary?

古文：可謂？
现代文：应耐为鬼薪而尚未判决。
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：可謂？臣邦真戎君長，爵當上造以上，有罪當贖者，其為，令贖鬼薪鋈足；其有府罪，贖宮。
现代文：以刑为隶臣和完城旦的罪名诬告他人，这叫当刑为鬼薪。怎样是 赎鬼薪鋈足 ？怎样是 赎宫 ？臣邦真戎君长，相当于上造以上的爵位，有罪应准赎免，如为群盗，判为赎鬼薪鋈足；如有应处宫刑的罪，判为赎宫。
English: To falsely accuse others of the crime of being a subordinate subject and a criminal, this is called when the punishment is a ghost. How is it to redeem the ghost? How is it to redeem the palace? Minister Bongzhen Rongjun, equivalent to the nobility above, the guilty should be allowed to redeem, if it is a group of thieves, it is sentenced to redeem the ghost; if there is a crime that should be punished by the palace, it is sentenced to redeem the palace.

古文：其它罪比者亦如此。
现代文：其他与群盗同样的罪也照此处理。
English: Other crimes similar to banditry will be dealt with in the same way.

古文：以乞鞫及為人乞鞫者，獄已斷乃聽，且未斷猶聽？
现代文：已要求重审及为他人要求重审的，是在案件判决以后受理，还是在没有判决以前就受理？
English: If a retrial has been requested and a retrial is requested for someone else, is it accepted after the case is decided, or is it accepted before there is no decision?

古文：獄斷乃聽之。
现代文：在案件判决以后再受理。
English: After the case is adjudicated, it will not be accepted.

古文：失鋈足，論可？如失刑罪。
现代文：判处鋈足不当，应如何论处？按失刑论罪。
English: If the sentence is improper, how should it be dealt with? The crime should be dealt with according to the loss of sentence.

古文：?可謂？
现代文：什么叫 从母为收 ？
English: Mutton is an edible grass seed.

古文：人固買，子小不可別，弗買子母謂。
现代文：意思是人肯定要卖，但其子年小，不能分离，不要单卖孩子的母亲。
English: It means that a person must be sold, but his child is young and cannot be separated. Do not sell the child's mother alone.

古文：當耐司寇而以耐隸臣誣人，可論？
现代文：应判处耐为司寇的人，以应耐为隶臣的罪名诬赖他人，如何论处？
English: Should a person be sentenced for being a scoundrel and slandering others with the accusation of being a subordinate, how should it be dealt with?

古文：當耐為隸臣。
现代文：诬赖者应耐为隶臣。
English: The detractors should be tolerated as subordinates.

古文：■當耐為侯罪誣人，可論？
现代文：应判处耐为候的人，以应的罪名诬赖他人，如何论处？
English: Should those who wait patiently be sentenced, and how should they be dealt with for slandering others with appropriate charges?

古文：當耐為司寇。
现代文：诬赖者应耐为司寇。
English: The detractors should be treated as scoundrels.

古文：當耐為隸臣，以司寇誣人，可論？
现代文：应判处耐为隶臣的人，以应为司寇的罪名诬他人，如何论处？
English: Should a person who is a subordinate of a subordinate be sentenced, and how should he be punished for slandering others with the charge of being a scoundrel?

古文：當耐為隸臣，有城旦六歲。
现代文：诬赖者应耐为隶臣，并拘禁为城旦六年。
English: The detractors should be treated as subordinates and detained for six years.

古文：完城旦，以黥城旦誣人。
现代文：应判处完城旦的人，以应黥城旦的罪名诬赖他人，如何论处？
English: Should a person who has been sentenced to death be accused of slandering others on the charge of being sentenced to death, how should it be dealt with?

古文：可論？當黥。
现代文：诬赖者应处以黥刑。
English: The slanderer shall be flogged.

古文：甲賊傷人，吏論以為傷人，吏當論不當？
现代文：甲杀伤人，吏以斗殴伤人论处，吏应否论罪？
English: A killed and injured a person, the officials punished the injured person with a fight, should the officials be convicted?

古文：當誶。
现代文：应申斥。
English: It should be condemned.

古文：當黥城旦而以完城旦誣人，可論？
现代文：应判处黥城旦的人，以完城旦的罪名诬赖他人，如何论处？
English: Should a person be sentenced to death for slandering others with the accusation of slander, how should it be dealt with?

古文：當黥。
现代文：诬赖者应处以黥劓。
English: Those who make false accusations should be punished with whipping.

古文：可如？
现代文： 麻风病人犯罪，应定杀。 
English: If a leper commits a crime, he should be put to death.

古文：生定殺水中之謂。
现代文： 定杀 是怎样的？
English: What is it like to be sentenced to death?

古文：或曰生埋，生埋之異事。
现代文：就是活着投入水中淹死。有的认为是活埋，活埋与律意不合。
English: Some people think it means to be buried alive. Buried alive is not in accordance with the precepts.

古文：甲有完城旦罪，未斷，今甲癘，問甲可以論？
现代文：甲犯有应处完城旦的罪，尚未判决，现甲患麻风病，问甲应如何论处？
English: A is guilty of a crime that should be dealt with severely, but has not yet been sentenced, now A is suffering from leprosy, how should A be dealt with?

古文：當癘所處之；或曰當所定殺。城旦、鬼薪癘，可論？
现代文：应迁往麻风隔离区居住；有的认为应造往麻风隔离区淹死。城旦、鬼薪患麻风病，如何论处？
English: They should move to live in the leprosy isolation zone; some people think that they should be sent to the leprosy isolation zone to drown. City dweller, ghost firefly suffer from leprosy, how should they be dealt with?

古文：當癘所。
现代文：应迁往麻风隔区。
English: They should move to a leper colony.

古文：捕貲罪，即端以劍及兵刃刺殺之，可論？
现代文：捉拿应判处赀罪的犯人，便故意用剑以及兵刃把他刺杀了，如何论处？
English: How is it to be dealt with when a prisoner who should have been sentenced to the crime of assault is caught and then deliberately stabbed to death with a sword and a sword?

古文：殺之，完為城旦；傷之，耐為隸臣。
现代文：杀死犯人的，应完为城旦；杀伤犯人的，应耐为隶臣。
English: If a criminal is killed, he should be executed; if a criminal is killed or injured, he should be treated as a vassal.

古文：可罪得？赦為庶人，將戒囚刑罪以上，亡，以故罪論，斬左止為城旦，後自捕所亡，是謂。
现代文： 监领人犯而将人犯失去，能自己捕获以及亲友代为捕获，可以免罪；已受肉刑的处隐官。 什么罪可 处隐官 ？群盗已被赦免为庶人，带领判处肉刑以上罪的戴着刑械的囚徒，将囚徒失去，以过去犯的罪论处，断去左足为城旦，后来自己把失去的囚徒捕获，这样应处隐官。
English: The leader of a group of robbers who have been pardoned as commoners, the leader of a prisoner with a weapon who has been sentenced to corporal punishment or more, the leader of a group of robbers who have been pardoned as commoners, the leader of a group of prisoners who have been sentenced to corporal punishment or more, the leader of a group of robbers who have been pardoned as commoners, the leader of a group of robbers who have been pardoned as commoners, the leader of a group of robbers who have been pardoned as commoners, the leader of a group of robbers who have been pardoned as commoners, the leader of

古文：它罪比者皆如此。
现代文：其他与群盗同样的罪照此处理。
English: Other crimes similar to banditry will be dealt with in the same way.

古文：大夫甲堅鬼薪，鬼薪亡，問甲可論？
现代文：大夫甲鞭打鬼薪，鬼薪逃亡，问甲应如何论处？
English: Doctor A whipped the ghost salary, the ghost salary fled, how should A be dealt with?

古文：當從事官府，須亡者得。
现代文：应在官府服役，等待逃亡者被捕获。
English: They should serve in the government, waiting for the fugitive to be caught.

古文：今甲從事，有去亡，一月得，可論？
现代文：如甲服役而逃亡，一月后被拿获，如何论处？
English: If A served in the army and ran away, but was caught a month later, how should he be dealt with?

古文：當貲一盾，復從事。
现代文：应罚一盾，仍旧服役。
English: He was fined one shilling and still had to serve in the army.

古文：從事有亡，卒歲得，可論？
现代文：如再服役而又逃亡，满一年后被拿获，如何论处？
English: If he serves in the army again and escapes, but is caught after one year, how will he be dealt with?

古文：當耐。
现代文：应处耐刑。
English: He should be given a suspended sentence.

古文：餽遺亡鬼薪於外，一以上，論可？
现代文：在运送食物时，鬼薪在外逃亡一人以上，应如何论处？
English: When transporting food, if more than one person absconds, how should they be dealt with?

古文：毋論。
现代文：不予论处。
English: There will be no disciplinary action.

古文：所捕耐罪以上得取。
现代文： 捕拿逃亡，逃亡的人携带有钱，捕拿者可以取为已有。 
English: Capture and escape, the fugitive is carrying money, the captor can take it for granted.

古文：把其以亡，得及自出，當為不當？自出，以亡論。
现代文：所捕的人在耐刑的罪以上可以取钱。携带借用的官有物品逃亡，被捕获以及自首，应否作为盗窃？自首，以逃亡论罪。
English: The arrested person can withdraw money if the crime is punishable by imprisonment. If he or she escapes with borrowed official property, is it considered theft if he or she is caught and surrenders? If he or she surrenders, is it considered a crime of escape?

古文：其得，坐臧為；罪輕於亡，以亡論。
现代文：如系捕获，按赃数作为盗窃；如以盗窃处罪轻于以逃亡处罪，则仍以逃亡论罪。
English: If it is a case of capture, it is regarded as theft according to the number of points; if the crime of theft is less serious than the crime of escape, it is still regarded as the crime of escape.

古文：隸臣妾城旦舂，去亡，已奔，未論而自出，當治五十，備日。
现代文：隶臣妾拘禁服城旦舂劳役，逃亡、已经出走，尚未论处而自首，应答打五十，仍拘系直至满期。
English: If a subordinate, subject, or concubine is detained and sentenced to forced labor, flees, has already fled, surrenders before being dealt with, and is sentenced to fifty lashes, he or she shall remain in custody until the expiration of the term.

古文：罷守官府，亡而得，得比公不得？
现代文：看守官府的废疾者，逃亡而被捕获，可否与因公废疾的人同样处理？
English: Can a fugitive from the custody of the government who is captured be dealt with in the same way as a fugitive from justice?

古文：得比焉。
现代文：可以同样处理。
English: It can be handled the same way.

古文：甲告乙賊傷人，問乙賊殺人，非傷，甲當購，購幾可？
现代文：甲控告乙杀伤人，经讯问乙是杀死了人，并非杀伤，甲应受奖，奖赏多少？
English: A accuses B of killing a person. Upon interrogation, B is said to have killed a person, but not to have killed a person. Should A receive an award? How much should the award be?

古文：當購二兩。
现代文：应奖赏黄金二两。
English: Two gold coins should be awarded.

古文：捕亡完城旦，購幾可？
现代文：捕获逃亡的完城旦，奖赏多少？
English: How much is the reward for the capture of a fugitive?

古文：當購二兩。
现代文：应奖赏黄金二两。
English: Two gold coins should be awarded.

古文：夫、妻、子五人共盗，皆當刑城旦，今中〈甲〉盡捕告之，問甲當購◎幾可？
现代文：夫、妻、子五人共同行盗，均应刑为城旦，现由把他们全部捕获告官，问甲应奖赏多少？
English: A husband, a wife, and their five children committed a joint theft, and all of them should be punished. Now the prosecutor has arrested all of them. How much should A be rewarded?

古文：人購二兩。
现代文：每捕获一人奖赏黄金二两。
English: Two pairs of gold will be awarded for each person caught.

古文：夫、妻、子十人共盗，當刑城旦，亡，今甲捕得其八人，問甲當購幾可？
现代文：夫、妻子十人共同行盗，应刑为城旦，已逃亡，现甲捕获其中八人，问甲应奖赏多少？
English: A husband and wife, ten persons, committed theft together, were sentenced to imprisonment, and fled. Now A has captured eight of them. How much should A be rewarded?

古文：當購人二兩。
现代文：每捕获一人应奖赏黄金二两。
English: Two ounces of gold shall be awarded for each person caught.

古文：甲捕乙，告盗書丞印以亡，問亡二日，它如甲，已論耐乙，問甲當購不當？
现代文：甲捕获乙，控告乙偷盗县丞官印而逃亡，经讯问乙逃亡的日期不合，其它与甲所控告相符，已判处乙耐刑，问甲应否受奖？
English: A captures B, accuses B of stealing the seal of the county magistrate and fleeing. After interrogation, the date of B's escape does not match. Others are consistent with A's accusation. B has been sentenced to endure the punishment. Should A receive the award?

古文：不當。
现代文：不应受奖。
English: He doesn't deserve the award.

古文：有秩吏捕闌亡者，以畀乙，令詣，約分購，問吏及乙論可？
现代文：有秩名捕获逃亡出关的人，把犯人交给乙，叫乙送交官府，约定同分奖金，问吏和乙应如何论处？
English: If a person with a certain rank is captured and escapes from the customs, and the prisoner is handed over to B, and B is ordered to deliver the prisoner to the government, and a bonus of the same amount is agreed, how should the interrogator and B be dealt with?

古文：當貲各二甲，勿購。
现代文：应各罚二甲，不予奖赏。
English: Shall each be fined two kopecks, and no reward shall be given.

古文：可以購之？其耐罪以上，購如捕它罪人；貲罪，不購。
现代文： 将珠玉偷运出境以及卖给邦客的，应将珠玉上交内吏，内吏酌量给予奖赏。 
English: Those who smuggle gems out of the country and sell them to foreigners shall submit the gems to the internal affairs officials, and the internal affairs officials shall give a reward according to their discretion.

古文：或捕告人奴妾百一十錢，問主購之且公購？
现代文：应怎样奖赏？如被捕犯人应处耐罪以上，与捕获其他罪犯同样奖赏；如应处罚款，不予奖赏。
English: What kind of reward should be given? If the arrested criminal should be punished with more than forbearance, the same reward should be given as for the capture of other criminals; if he should be fined, no reward should be given.

古文：公購之之。
现代文：私家私婢盗窃一百一十钱，有人捕获告官，问应由主人给予奖赏还是由官府给予奖赏？由官府给予奖赏。怎样是 犯令 ， 废令 ？
English: A private servant steals a hundred and ten coins, someone catches the prosecutor, and asks whether the reward should be given by the owner or by the government? The government gives the reward. What is the violation order, the annulment order?

古文：可如為？律所謂者，令曰勿為，而為之，是謂；令曰為之，弗為，是謂。
现代文：律文的意思是，规定不要做的事，做了，称为犯令；规定要做的事，不去做，称为废令。
English: The meaning of the text of the law is that what is stipulated not to be done, if done, is called a violation order; what is stipulated to be done, if not done, is called a cancellation order.

古文：廷行事皆以論。
现代文：成例均以犯令论处。
English: The cases were all dealt with by way of an injunction.

古文：法令、犯令，遝免、徙不遝？
现代文：废令，犯令的罪，对已经免职或调任的应否追究？
English: Should those who have been removed from office or transferred be investigated for the crime of repealing or violating an order?

古文：遝之。
现代文：应予追究。
English: They should be prosecuted.

古文：郡縣除佐，事它郡縣而不視其事者，可論？
现代文：郡县所任用的佐，在其它郡县做事而不到任管理职务的，如何论处？
English: How should county-appointed assistants who work in other counties and do not hold management positions be dealt with?

古文：以小犯令論。
现代文：按轻微的犯令论处。
English: It will be dealt with as a minor offense.

古文：任人為丞，丞已免，後為令，今初任者有罪，令當免不當？
现代文：保举他人为丞，丞已免职，事后本人为令，如原来保举过的那个人有罪，令应否免职？不应免职。
English: If the person who was originally pardoned is found guilty, should he or she be removed from office?

古文：不當免。亡久書、符券、公璽、衡羸，已坐以論，後自得所亡，論當除不當？
现代文：丢失了记书、符券、官印、衙器的权，已受论处，后来自己找到所丢失的东西，应否免除所论的罪？不应免除。
English: If a person has lost the right to keep books, certificates, official seals, and official documents, and has been punished for the crime, but later finds the lost things, should he or she be exempted from the crime?

古文：不當。甲徙居，徙數謁吏，吏環，弗為更籍，今甲有耐、貲罪，問吏可論？
现代文：甲迁居，请求吏迁移户籍，吏加以拒绝，不为他更改户籍，如甲有处耐刑，罚款的罪，问吏应如何论处？
English: If A moves to another place and requests the official to transfer his household registration, and the official refuses to do so and does not change his household registration for him, and if A is punished with a suspended sentence and a fine, how should the official be dealt with?

古文：耐以上，當貲二甲。
现代文：甲罪有耐刑以上，吏应罚二甲。
English: If crime A is punishable by imprisonment for a term of not less than one year, the official shall be fined not more than two times the amount of the fine.

古文：廷行事強質人者論，鼠者不論；和受質者，鼠者□論。
现代文： 百姓间有债务，不准擅自强行索取人质，擅自强行索取人质以及双方同意质押的，均罚二甲。 
English: If there is a debt between the people, they are not allowed to take hostages without authorization. If they take hostages without authorization, and if both parties agree to pledge, they will be fined two points.

古文：實官戶關不致，容指若抉，廷行事貲一甲。
现代文：成例，向他人强行索取人质的人应论罪，把人质给人的人不论罪；双方同意抵押的，把人质给人的人也要论罪。
English: As a general rule, a person who forcibly takes a hostage from another person shall be guilty, and the person who gives the hostage shall not be guilty; if both parties agree to pledge, the person who gives the hostage shall also be guilty.

古文：實官戶扇不致，禾稼能出，廷行事貲一甲。
现代文：仓房门闩不紧密的，可以容下手指或用以撬动的器具，成例应罚一甲。仓房门扇不紧密，谷物能从里面漏出，成例应罚一甲。
English: If the latch of the barn door is not tight enough to accommodate a finger or a tool used to pry it open, a fine of one point shall be imposed. If the barn door is not tight enough to allow grain to leak out, a fine of one point shall be imposed.

古文：空倉中有薦，薦下有稼一石以上，廷行事貲一甲，令史監者一盾。
现代文：空仓里有草垫，垫下有粮食一石以上，成例应罚一甲，并罚负责监管的令史一盾。
English: If there is a straw mat in the empty warehouse and more than one stone of grain under the mat, it should be fined one jia, and the person in charge of supervision should be fined one dong.

古文：倉鼠穴幾可而當論及誶？
现代文：仓里有多少鼠洞就应论处及申斥？
English: How many rat holes in the warehouse should be discussed and reprimanded?

古文：廷行事鼠穴三以上貲一盾，二以下誶。
现代文：成例，有鼠洞三个以上应罚一盾，两个以下应申斥。
English: As a rule, more than three rat holes should be fined one rupee, and two or less should be reprimanded.

古文：鼷穴三當一鼠穴。
现代文：鼷鼠洞三个算一个鼠洞。
English: Three molehills make a molehill.

古文：有稟叔、麥，當出未出，即出禾以當叔、麥，叔、麥賈賤禾貴，其論可？
现代文：发给豆、麦，应发的没有发，而发谷子来顶替豆、麦，豆、麦价贱而谷子价贵，应如何论处？
English: How should it be dealt with if beans and wheat are given out, but the beans that should have been given out are not given out, while the beans and wheat are given out to replace the beans and wheat, and the beans and wheat are low-priced, but the beans and wheat are expensive?

古文：當貲一甲。
现代文：应罚一甲。
English: shall be fined one jia.

古文：會赦未論，有亡，赦期已盡六月而得，當耐。
现代文：由于遇到赦令而没有论罪，又逃亡，赦令限定日期已过六个月才被捕获，应处以耐刑。
English: Since he did not plead guilty and fled when confronted with the pardon order, he was only caught six months after the limited date of the pardon order, and should be given a suspended sentence.

古文：吏有故當止食，弗止，盡稟出之，論可？
现代文：官吏因故应停止杀给口粮，不加停止而仍全部发给，应如何论处？
English: For some reason, government officials should stop giving out rations. If they still give out rations without stopping, how should they be dealt with?

古文：當坐所贏出為。
现代文：应以其多发的作为盗窃处罪。
English: It should be punished as theft because of its frequent occurrence.

古文：吏從事於官府，當坐伍人不當？
现代文：官吏在官府服役，应否因其同伍的人有罪而连坐？不应当。
English: If a government official is serving in a government office, should he or she be punished for the crimes of his or her comrades? No.

古文：不當。大夫寡，當伍及人不當？
现代文：大夫数小，应否与其他人合编为伍，不应当。
English: If the number of doctors is small, should they be grouped together with others, or not?

古文：不當。部佐匿者民田，者民弗智，當論不當？
现代文：部佐隐匿百姓的田，百姓不知道，应否论罪？
English: If a subordinate hides a commoner's field, and the commoner does not know about it, should it be considered a crime?

古文：部佐為匿田，且可為？
现代文：部佐应以匿田论处，还是作为什么别的罪？
English: Should the deputy be punished for the Anoda incident, or for some other crime?

古文：已租者民，弗言，為匿田；未租，不論◎◎為匿田。
现代文：已向百姓收取田赋而不上报，就是匿田；未收田赋，不予匿田论处。
English: Those who have collected rice fields from the people but have not reported it are called anonymous rice fields; those who have not collected rice fields are called anonymous rice fields.

古文：甲小未盈六尺，有馬一匹自牧之，今馬為人敗，食人稼一石，問當論不當？
现代文：甲年小，身高不满六尺，有马一匹，自己放牧，现马被人惊吓，吃了别人的禾稼，问应否论处？
English: A year old, less than six feet tall, has a horse, grazes his own, the current horse was startled, ate someone else's grain, should it be dealt with?

古文：不當論及賞稼。
现代文：不应论处，也不应赔偿禾稼。
English: There should be no punishment and no compensation for the crops.

古文：?今舍公官，旞火燔其乘車馬，當負不當出？
现代文：在官家馆舍居住，失火房屋被烧，其中虽有官有器物，不令赔偿。
English: He lived in a government-owned building and his house caught fire and burned down. Although there were government-owned items in the house, he was not ordered to pay compensation.

古文：當出之。旞火延燔里門，當貲一盾；其邑邦門，貲一甲。
现代文：如在官家馆舍居住，失火将所借用车马焚毁，应否赔偿？应予报销。失火连带烧毁里门，应罚一盾；如烧毁城门，应罚一甲。 擅自兴造奇祠，罚二甲。 
English: If you live in a government building and a fire destroys the car or horse you borrowed, should you be compensated? You should be reimbursed. If a fire destroys the inner gate, you should be fined one ryo; if you burn the city gate, you should be fined one ka. If you build a shrine without permission, you should be fined two ka.

古文：可如為？
现代文：怎样算作奇祠？
English: How does it count as a wondrous shrine?

古文：王室所當祠固有矣，擅有鬼立，為，它不為。
现代文：王室规定应加祭祀的已经有了，此外擅自设立神位，就是奇祠，其他的不是。 不准穿锦履。 
English: The royal family has already stipulated what should be added to the sacrificial rites, in addition to the unauthorized establishment of a shrine, that is, a strange shrine, the others are not.

古文：之狀可如？
现代文： 穿锦履 的样子是怎样的？
English: What do you look like in trainers?

古文：律所謂者，以絲雜織履，履有文，乃為，以錦縵履不為，然而行事比焉。
现代文：律文所说，用不同色彩的丝织鞋，鞋上有花纹，才算锦履，用锦做鞋帮，不算锦履，然而成例同样论处。
English: According to the law, silk shoes with different colors of laces and patterns on the shoes are considered brocade shoes, and brocade shoes with brocade uppers are not considered brocade shoes, but the cases are the same.

古文：今士五甲不會，治五十；未卒歲而得，治當駕不當？
现代文： 不报到，应答打，未满一年被捕获，因游荡罪应再答打。 如士伍甲不报到，应答打五十，未满一年被捕获，应否加打？应当。
English: If he does not report, he should be beaten, if he is caught within one year, he should be beaten again for the crime of loitering; if he does not report, he should be beaten fifty times, if he is caught within one year, should he be beaten more?

古文：匿戶弗、使，弗令出戶賦之謂。女子甲為人妻，去亡，得及自出，小未盈六尺，當論不當？已官，當論；未官，不當論。
现代文：什么叫逋事和乏徭？律文的意思是，在徭役的时候，吏和里典已下令征发，随即逃亡，不去报到，称为逋事；已经参加检阅、共同乘车和吃口粮，或已到服徭役地点，然后逃亡，都作为乏徭。什么叫 匿户 和 敖童弗傅 ？就是隐藏人户，不征发徭役，不加役使，也不命缴纳户赋。女子甲为人之妻，私逃，被捕获以及自首，年小，身高不满六尺，应否论处？婚姻曾经官府认可，应论处；未经认可，不应论处。
English: What are anecdotes and anecdotes? According to the text of the law, anecdotes are anecdotes in which officials and residents have ordered the requisition and then fled without reporting for duty; anecdotes are anecdotes in which officials and residents have participated in the inspection, shared a ride and eaten rations, or have arrived at the place of duty and then fled. What are anonymous households and child-free households? They are hidden households that do not require the requisition, do not add servants, and are not required to pay the household tax. Should the wife of a man, who fled, was captured, and surrendered, who is young and less than six feet

古文：女子甲去夫亡，男子乙亦闌亡，相夫妻，甲弗告請，居二歲，生子，乃告請，乙即弗棄，而得，論可？
现代文：女子甲离夫私逃，男子乙也无通行凭证而逃亡，结为夫妻，甲没有把私逃的事实告诉乙，过了两年，生了孩子，才知告实情，乙便没有休弃甲，然后被捕获，应如何论处？
English: Woman A ran away from her husband, man B also ran away without a pass certificate and married. A did not tell B about the fact of the elopement. After two years, she gave birth to a child and only then learned to tell the truth. B did not give up on A and was then captured. What should be the punishment?

古文：當黥城旦舂。
现代文：应黥为城旦、舂。
English: It should be pronounced as  or.

古文：甲取人亡妻以為妻，不智亡，有子焉，今得，問安置其子？
现代文：甲娶他人私逃的妻为妻，不知道私逃的事，已有了孩子，被捕获，问其子应如何处置？
English: A marries another man's runaway wife, does not know about the runaway, has a child, is captured, asks his son what to do?

古文：當畀。
现代文：应给还。
English: It should be returned.

古文：或入公，入公異是。
现代文：有的认为应没收归官。
English: Some believe they should be confiscated and returned to officials.

古文：其棄妻亦當論不當？
现代文：没收归官与律意不合。
English: The confiscation and the return of officials are inconsistent with the intention of the law.

古文：貲二甲。
现代文：休妻而不登记，罚二甲。
English: A fine of up to two times salary shall be imposed.

古文：妻賸臣妾、衣器當收不當？不當收。
现代文：所休的妻应否也加论处？应罚二甲。 丈夫有罪，妻先告发，不没收为官婢。 
English: If the husband is guilty, the wife should be the first to report it, rather than being confiscated as a government servant.

古文：妻有罪以收，妻賸臣妾、衣器當收，且畀夫？
现代文：妻陪嫁的奴婢，衣物应否没收？不应没收。妻有罪被收，妻陪嫁的奴婢，还是给其丈夫？
English: Should the clothing of a slave who is accompanied by his wife be confiscated? Should it not be confiscated? If the wife is found guilty, should the slave who is accompanied by his wife be given to her husband?

古文：畀夫。
现代文：给其丈夫。
English: To her husband.

古文：同母異父相與奸，可論？
现代文：同母不同父的人通奸，如何论处？
English: How is the adultery of a person with the same mother but different father dealt with?

古文：棄布。
现代文：应弃市。
English: It should be abandoned.

古文：甲、乙交與女子丙奸，甲、乙以其故相刺伤，丙弗智，丙論可？
现代文：甲、乙都和女子丙通奸，甲、乙因此互相刺伤，丙不知情，丙应如何论处？
English: A, B both commit adultery with woman C. As a result, A and B stab each other. C does not know about it. How should C be dealt with?

古文：毋論。
现代文：不予论处。
English: There will be no disciplinary action.

古文：女子為隸臣妻，有子焉，今隸臣死，女子北其子，以為非隸臣子，問女子論可？
现代文：女子为隶臣之妻，有子，现隶臣已死，女子将其子从家中分出，作为不是隶臣之子，问妇子应如何论处？
English: A woman is the wife of a vassal, has a son, now the vassal is dead, the woman separates her son from the family, as he is not the son of a vassal, and asks what should be done with the woman and her son?

古文：或黥顏頯為隸妾，或曰完，完之當。
现代文：有的认为应在额上和颈部刺墨，有的认为应处以完刑，处完刑是妥当的。
English: Some people think that it should be tattooed on the forehead and neck, while others think that the punishment should be carried out to the end. It is appropriate to carry out the punishment to the end.

古文：以其乘車載女子，可論？
现代文：用其乘车载妇子，如何论处？
English: What is the punishment for using a car to carry a woman and child?

古文：貲二甲。
现代文：应罚二甲。
English: A fine of up to two times salary shall be imposed.

古文：以乘馬駕私車而乘之，毋論。
现代文：用驾乘车的马驾私人的车而载女子，则不予论处。
English: If a woman is driven in a private car by a man who uses a horse-drawn carriage, she will not be punished.

古文：可謂？欲去秦屬是謂。
现代文： 臣属于秦的少数民族的人，对其主长不满而想去夏的，不予准许。 
English: If a retainer who belongs to a minority group in Qin is dissatisfied with his or her superior and wants to go to Xia, he or she will not be allowed.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫 去夏 ？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：臣邦父母產子及產它邦而是謂。可謂？
现代文：想离开秦的属境，称为去夏。 真臣邦君公有罪，应判处耐刑以上，可使赎罪。 什么叫 真 ？
English: If you want to leave Qin's territory, it's called "going to Xia." If you are guilty, you should be sentenced to at least long-term imprisonment to atone for your sins.

古文：臣邦父、秦母謂。
现代文：臣属于秦的少数民放的父母生子，以及出生在其他国的，称为真。
English: Those who belong to the minority of the Qin dynasty, whose parents and children were born in other countries, are called true.

古文：炎之可？
现代文：什么叫 夏子 ？
English: What is Natsuko?

古文：當者侯不治騷馬，騷馬蟲皆麗衡厄鞅轅，是以炎之。
现代文：父为臣属于秦的少数民族，母亲是秦人，其子称为夏子。 诸侯国有来客，用火熏其车上的衡轭。 为什么要用火熏？
English: The father is a vassal belonging to the Qin ethnic minority, the mother is a Qin person, and the son is called Xia Zi. The guests from the provinces use fire to smoke the scales on their cars. Why should they use fire to smoke?

古文：可謂？亡校券右為害。
现代文：倘如诸侯国不处治马身上的寄生虫，寄生虫都附着在车的衡轭和驾马的皮带上，所以要用火熏。什么叫 丢失契券而造成危害， 丢失了作为凭证的右券，为造成危害。 出使到诸侯国，臣服于秦的属国，随同出使的邦徒和伪使不归来，使臣不连坐。 什么叫 邦徒 、 伪使 ？
English: If the vassal state does not control the parasites on the horse, the parasites are attached to the balance of the car and the belt of the driving horse, so they should be smoked with fire. What is the loss of the deed causing harm, the loss of the right ticket as a certificate, to cause harm. Sent to the vassal state, subject to the Qin's vassal state, the envoys and the false envoys do not return, and the envoys do not sit together. What is the state, the false envoy?

古文：可謂？徒、吏與偕使而弗為私舍人，是謂？
现代文：与使臣一起出使的本国随从和吏，不是使臣自己的舍人的，称为邦徒、伪使。
English: The attendants and officials of the home country who are sent along with the envoys, but who are not the envoys' own, are called "putschists" or "false envoys."

古文：邦亡來通錢過萬，已復，後來而得，可以論之？
现代文：逃亡出境的人向国内行贿，数目超过万钱，已得到宽免，后来回国，又因盗窃被捕获，应如何论处？以行贿罪论处。
English: What should be the punishment for a person who has fled abroad and paid bribes in excess of 10,000 yuan to a person in China, has been pardoned, and later returns to China and is arrested for theft? He should be punished for the crime of bribery.

古文：以通錢。智人通錢而為臧，其主已取錢，人後告臧者，臧者論不論？
现代文：知道他人行贿而代为收藏钱财，钱的主人已将钱取走，事后才有人控告藏钱的人，藏钱的应否论罪？应论罪。
English: If you know that someone else paid a bribe to collect money on your behalf, and the owner of the money has already taken the money away, it is only afterwards that someone accuses the person who hid the money. Is it a crime to hide money? It should be a crime.

古文：不論論。甲誣乙通一錢黥城旦罪，問甲同居、典、老當論不當？
现代文：甲诬告乙行贿一钱而有应处黥城旦的罪，问甲的同居、里典、伍老应否论罪？不应当。
English: A falsely accuses B of offering a bribe of one yuan, which is a crime that should be dealt with severely, and asks whether A's cohabitation, Li Dian, and Wu Lao should be considered a crime?

古文：不當。可謂？
现代文： 邦客的未布吏，就和他交易，罚一甲。 
English: If a state guest fails to pay the tax, he will be fined one jia for trading with him.

古文：詣符傳於吏是謂。
现代文：什么叫 布吏 ？
English: What is a cloth officer?

古文：內公孫毋爵者當贖刑，得比公士贖耐不得？
现代文：把通行凭证送交官吏，称为布吏。没有爵位的宗室子孙应判处赎刑的，可否与公士同样减处赎耐？可以同样判处。
English: If a descendant of a lineage without a peerage should be sentenced to atonement, can he or she be sentenced to atonement in the same way as a noble? Can he or she be sentenced in the same way?

古文：得比焉。越里中之與它里界者，垣為不為？
现代文：越过里与其他里之间的界墙，该墙是不是 院 ？
English: Beyond the boundary wall between ri and other ri, is this wall a courtyard?

古文：巷相直為；宇相直者不為。
现代文：两巷相对，其间的墙是院；两屋相对，其间的墙不是院。
English: If two alleys are opposite each other, the wall between them is a courtyard; if two houses are opposite each other, the wall between them is not a courtyard.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫宫均人？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：宮中主循者。
现代文：是官中主管巡查的人。
English: He's the official in charge of inspections.

古文：可謂，宮隸有刑，是謂。
现代文：什么叫宫更人？宫内奴隶曾受肉刑的，称为官更人。
English: What is a palace eunuch? A palace slave who has been subjected to physical punishment is called a court eunuch.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫官狡士，外狡士？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：皆主王犬者。
现代文：都是管理秦王的狗的人。
English: They are the people who manage the dogs of King Qin.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫甸人？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：守孝公、公冢者。
现代文：甸人是看守孝公、献公墓的人。
English: The Dian people are the guardians of filial piety and the people who dedicate cemeteries.

古文：可謂宦及智於王，及六百石吏以上，皆為。
现代文：什么叫 宦者显大夫 ？做官达到为王所知，以及俸禄在六百石以上的，都是 显大夫 。
English: What do you call Dr. Hsien Loong? He is known to the king for his achievements as an official, as well as his salary of more than six hundred koku.

古文：◎◎◎◎◎◎◎◎◎◎◎?
现代文：什么叫 爨人 ？是古代管烧的人。
English: What is the name of "Hao people"? They are the people who used to burn pipes in ancient times.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫集人？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：古主爨者。
现代文：是古时管采集薪柴的人。什么叫 耐卜隶 、 耐史隶 ？
English: In ancient times, it was the people who collected firewood. What is Naibulli, Nasiulli?

古文：可謂？古主取薪者。
现代文：应处耐刑的卜、史都加耐刑而作为卜、史隶。后来已修改律文，与其他人同样处理。
English: Bu and Shi should be punished with Bu and Shi plus Bu and Shi. Later, the legal text was amended to deal with them in the same way as others.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫 人貉 ？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：卜、史當耐者皆耐以為卜、史隸。後更其律如它。
现代文：所谓人貉，其子要去奉养主人，不去奉养主人，即应没收归官，虽然不奉养主人，但向主人缴纳粮食的，不予没收，给予主人。什么叫 署人 、 更人 ？
English: The so-called man-servant, whose son wants to support the master, if he does not support the master, he should be confiscated and returned to the official, although he does not support the master, but if he pays grain to the master, he will not be confiscated and will be given to the master.

古文：可謂？謂者，其子入養主之謂也。不入養主，當收；雖不養主而入量者，不收，畀其主。
现代文：假设牢狱有六处看守岗位，囚犯经过一处岗位的地段出入，经由出入的岗位名为署人，其他都是更人，一说看守囚犯的就是更人，进行督察的是署人。什么叫 窦署 ？窦署就是去署，还是不是去署，如果是，应如何论处，就是去署。什么叫 率敖 ？
English: Suppose that there are six guard posts in a prison, and prisoners enter and leave through the section of one post. The post through which the prisoners enter and leave is called the signer, and the others are the inspectors. When it comes to guarding prisoners, it is the signer, and the inspector is the inspector. What is the Dou Department? The Dou Department is to go to the department, or not to go to the department, and if so, how should it be dealt with, that is, to go to the department. What is the rate?

古文：可謂？
现代文：率敖就是充当里典。
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：耤牢有六署，囚道一署旞，所道旞者命曰，其它皆為；或曰守囚即，原者。可謂？即去，且非是？是，其論可？
现代文：什么叫 逵卒 ？
English: What do you call a ruffian?

古文：即去署。
现代文：有大徭而聚众打群架，称为逵卒。
English: When there is a big fight and people gather to fight in a group, it is called a fight.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫旅人？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：當里典謂。
现代文：寄居和外来作客的人，称为旅人。什么叫 室人 ？
English: People who live as sojourners and foreign guests are called travelers. What is called a roommate?

古文：可謂？有大而曹相趣，是謂。
现代文：什么叫 同居 ？ 同居 就是同人户中同母的人。
English: What do you call cohabitation? Cohabitation is a person with the same mother in a same-sex household.

古文：可謂？寄及客，是謂。
现代文：室人就是一家，都应罪人而连坐。
English: The housemates are a family, and they all sit together in response to the sinner.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫 瓊 ？ 瓊 就是玉上的检，如果丢失了玉或都被人替换了，看检可以知道玉的大小，据以论处，并决定用多少钱赔偿。
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫熏玉？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：獨戶母之謂。
现代文：就是诸侯国的客人出使来秦，应以玉赠送给王。
English: It is the guests of the vassal states who are sent to Qin and should be presented to the king with jade.

古文：者，一室，盡當坐罪人之謂。
现代文：什么叫 面 ？ 面 就是假使秦人出使，有他国能干的官吏和队伍陪行，称他国官吏为，队伍为面。
English: What is "face"? "Face" means that if the Qin people sent an envoy, it would be accompanied by competent officials and teams from other countries, calling the officials from other countries "face" and the teams "face."

古文：可謂？
现代文：什么叫 赃人 ？
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：者，玉檢。節亡玉若人貿之，視檢智小大以論及以齎負之。
现代文：赃人，如甲将自己的衣物钱财藏到乙家，于是报告说东西丢了，想使乙成为盗窍，而实际乙并不盗窃。 贷人赢律及介人 ，什么叫 介人 ？
English: For example, if A hides his clothes, money and property in B's house, and then reports that something is lost, he wants to make B a thief, but in fact B does not steal.

古文：可謂？者候客節來使入秦，當以玉問王之謂。
现代文：不应借给钱的，借给了，称为介人。 氣人贏律及介人。 什么叫 介人 ？
English: Those who should not lend money are called loaners, and those who lend money are called intermediaries. What is an intermediary?

古文：可謂？
现代文：不应发给粮食的，错发了，称为介人。
English: Those who should not be given food are wrongly given it, and are called kaito.

古文：耤秦人使，它邦耐吏、行旞與偕者，命客吏曰，行旞曰。
现代文：怎样是 大痍 ？ 大痍 就是肢体可能还没有断，但需要将长叫两个人扶回来，称为大痍。怎样是 大误 ？
English: What is a big mistake? A big mistake is when a limb may not have been broken, but two people have to be called to help it back up. How is it a big mistake?

古文：可謂？者，甲把其衣錢匿臧乙室，即告亡，欲令乙為之，而實弗之謂。
现代文：错算人户，牛马以及价值超过六百六十钱的财货，就是大误，其他为小。什么叫 羊驱 ？
English: If you miscalculate the number of people, cattle, horses, and goods worth more than 660 yuan, it is a big mistake, and the others are small.

古文：?可謂？
现代文：羊躯是一种可以吃的草籽。
English: Mutton is an edible grass seed.

