古文：赫连达字朔周，盛乐人，勃勃之后也。
现代文：赫连达字朔周，盛乐人，是勃勃的后裔。
English: Herenda character Shuo Zhou, a merrymaker, is a vigorous descendant.

古文：曾祖库多汗，因避难改姓杜氏。
现代文：曾祖库多汗，因为避难改姓杜氏。
English: Zengzu Kudohan changed his surname to Dou because he was granted asylum.

古文：达性刚鲠，有胆力。
现代文：赫连达性情刚烈耿直，有胆量魄力。
English: Herenda's temperament is tough and upright, with courage and daring.

古文：少从贺拔岳征讨有功，拜都将，赐爵长广乡男，迁都督。
现代文：年少时跟随贺拔岳征讨有功，被封为都将，赐爵为长广乡男，升任都督。
English: When he was young, he was awarded the title of "Marshal" for his meritorious service in the conquest of Mt. Hebatake. He was also given the title of "Changguang Countryman" and promoted to the post of "governor-general."

古文：及岳为侯莫陈悦所害，军中大扰。
现代文：等到贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害，军中大为惊扰。
English: When He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, the army was greatly alarmed.

古文：赵贵建议迎太祖，诸将犹豫未决。
现代文：趟贵建议迎接太祖，众将犹豫不决。
English: The crowd will be hesitant to welcome the great ancestor at your suggestion.

古文：达曰： 宇文夏州昔为左丞，明略过人，一时之杰。
现代文：赫连达说： 宇文夏州当初做左丞，智谋高明过人，是一时的豪杰。
English: Herenda said, "Uwen Xiazhou was originally a left-handed general, a brilliant strategist, and a one-time hero.

古文：今日之事，非此公不济。
现代文：今日的事情，非他处理不行。
English: Today's events cannot be dealt with without him.

古文：赵将军议是也。
现代文：赵将军的建议是正确的。
English: General Zhao's suggestion is correct.

古文：达请轻骑告哀，仍迎之。 诸将或欲南追贺拔胜，或云东告朝廷。
现代文：我请求轻装骑马去报告这悲哀的消息，顺便迎接他来。 众将有的想向南追随贺拔胜，有的说向东报告朝廷。
English: I asked him to ride lightly to report the sad news and to meet him on the way. Some people wanted to follow He Bi Sheng to the south, while others said they wanted to report to the imperial court to the east.

古文：达又曰： 此皆远水不救近火，何足道哉。 贵于是谋遂定，令达驰往。
现代文：赫连达又说： 这些都是远水不救近火，哪里值得一说。 赵贵于是终将谋划定了下来，命令赫连达飞马前往。
English: Herenda also said, "These are matters of near and far, so it's worth talking about them." Zhao Gui then finalized the plan and ordered Herenda Pegasus to go.

古文：太祖见达恸哭，问故，达以实对。
现代文：太祖见赫连达恸哭，问他是什么缘故，赫连达以实情相告。
English: When the great-grandfather saw Helenda crying, he asked her why, and she told him the truth.

古文：太祖遂以数百骑南赴平凉，引军向高平，令达率骑据弹筝峡。
现代文：太祖于是率领数百名骑兵向南奔赴平凉，引着军队赶向高平，命令赫连达率领骑兵占据弹筝峡。
English: The great-grandfather then led hundreds of cavalry to the south to Pingliang, led the army to Gaoping, and ordered Helenda to lead the cavalry to occupy the Kite Gorge.

古文：时百姓惶惧，奔散者多。
现代文：当时百姓惊惶恐惧，四散奔逃的人很多。
English: At the time, people were panicked and scared, and many fled in all directions.

古文：有数村民，方扶老弱、驱畜牧，欲入山避难，军士争欲掠之。
现代文：有几个村的百姓，正扶老携弱，驱赶畜牧，想进入山中避难，军士争着想抢掠他们。
English: The people of several villages, who were helping the old and the weak, driving away livestock, wanted to take refuge in the mountains, and the soldiers were competing to rob them.

古文：达曰： 远近民黎，多受制于贼，今若值便掠缚，何谓伐罪吊民！
现代文：赫连达说： 远近的百姓，多受贼寇控制，现在如果趁便掠缚百姓，那么怎能称得上讨伐有罪、抚慰百姓呢!
English: Herenda said: The people near and far are mostly under the control of thieves and robbers. If they now take advantage of this to plunder the people, then how can they be called guilty of crusading and appeasing the people!

古文：不如因而抚之，以示义师之德。 乃抚以恩信，民皆悦附，于是迭相晓语，咸复旧业。
现代文：不如趁势安抚百姓，以表明义军的仁德。 于是以恩德信义抚慰百姓，百姓都喜悦归附，轮流不断相互转告，都恢复了旧业。
English: It would have been better to take advantage of the situation to appease the people, to show the benevolence of the rebels. So they comforted the people with grace, faith and righteousness, and the people were all happy to join in, taking turns to keep telling each other, and they all restored the old business.

古文：太祖闻而嘉之。
现代文：太祖听闻此事，嘉许赫连达。
English: When the great-grandfather heard about this, he congratulated Herenda.

古文：悦平，加平东将军。
现代文：侯莫陈悦被讨乎后，朝廷加封游连达为平东将军。
English: After Hou Mo Chen Yue was coaxed out, the imperial court promoted Guan Yu Lian Da to the rank of General Pingdong.

古文：太祖谓诸将曰： 当清水公遇祸之时，君等性命悬于贼手，虽欲来告，其路无从。
现代文：左担对众将说： 当清水公遇祸的时候，你们的性命悬挂在贼寇的手中，即使想来报告，也无路可走。
English: Zuodan said to the generals: When Shimizu was in trouble, your lives hung in the hands of the bandits. Even if you wanted to report, there was no way.

古文：杜朔周冒万死之难，远来见及，遂得共尽忠节，同雪雠耻。
现代文：杜朔周冒着万死一生的艰险，远远赶来见我，最终得以共尽忠节，报仇雪耻。
English: Du Shuo Zhou risked his life and came from far away to see me. In the end, he was able to fulfill his loyalty and take revenge.

古文：虽藉众人之力，实赖杜子之功。
现代文：虽然藉助众人的力量，其实依赖杜子的功劳。
English: Although it relies on the power of many people, it actually relies on the merit of Duzi.

古文：劳而不酬，何以劝善。 乃赐马二百匹。
现代文：有功劳而不酬报，怎么来劝勉善行。 于是赐给赫连达马二百匹。
English: If there is merit without reward, how can one encourage good deeds? So he gave him two hundred horses.

古文：达固让，太祖弗许。
现代文：赫连达坚决推让，太祖不允许。
English: Herenda resolutely gave in, but Taizu would not allow it.

古文：魏孝武入关，褒叙勋义，以达首逆元帅，匡复秦、陇，进爵魏昌县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝入关，嘉奖评定有功勋的忠义之士，因赫连达首先迎接元帅，匡复秦、陇，晋爵为魏昌县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu entered the pass and commended the loyal people who had meritorious deeds. Because Herenda was the first to welcome the marshal, Kuang Fu Qin, Yao, and Jinjue, there were five hundred households in Weichang County and food villages.

古文：从仪同李虎破曹泥，除镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫，加通直散骑常侍，增邑并前一千户。
现代文：赫连达与仪同三司李虎攻破曹泥，被任命为镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫，加授通直散骑常侍，食邑增至一千户。
English: Herenda and Yi and the third secretary Li Hu defeated Cao Miao, and were appointed as the general of Zhenan, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and the attendant of Zhenan, and the number of restaurants increased to one thousand.

古文：从复弘农，战沙苑，皆有功。
现代文：跟从太祖恢复弘农，战于沙苑，都立有战功。
English: Following the restoration of Hongnong from the great-grandfather, he fought in Sha Yuan, and achieved great military achievements.

古文：又增邑八百户，除郡守，转帅都督，加持节，除济州刺史。
现代文：又增加食邑八百户，授任白水郡守，改任帅都督，加授持节，任济州刺史。
English: He also increased the number of food villages to 800, was appointed as the governor of Baishui County, was reappointed as the governor of Shuai, was awarded the Jizhi Festival, and was appointed as the historian of Jeju.

古文：诏复姓赫连氏。
现代文：朝廷下诏让他恢复姓赫连氏。
English: The imperial court ordered him to restore the surname Kheren.

古文：以达勋望兼隆，乃除云州刺史，即本州也。
现代文：因为赫连达功勋名望都很显著，朝廷任命他为云州刺史，即是本州。
English: Because Herenda's merits and fame were all remarkable, the imperial court appointed him as the governor of Yunnan Province, that is, the home province.

古文：进爵为公，拜大都督，寻授仪同三司。
现代文：晋为公爵，官拜大都督，不久授任仪同三司。
English: He was promoted to the rank of duke, given the official title of grand governor, and was soon appointed to the Third Division.

古文：从大将军达奚武攻汉中。
现代文：赫连达跟从大将军达奚武攻讨漠中。
English: Herenda is in the desert fighting with the general Daren.

古文：梁宜丰侯萧循拒守积时，后乃送款。
现代文：梁宜丰侯萧循拒守多时，后来才请降。
English: Liang Yi Feng Hou Xiao Xun refused to defend for a long time, and later asked to be demoted.

古文：武问诸将进止之宜。
现代文：达奚武问众将是进兵还是停战。
English: Datongwu asked the crowd whether it would be an invasion or an armistice.

古文：开府贺兰愿德等以其食尽，欲急攻取之。
现代文：开府贺兰愿德等以其军粮已尽为由，想急速攻取城池。
English: The prefectural governor, Horan Kanade, and others wanted to quickly capture the castle on the grounds that they had exhausted their military supplies.

古文：达曰： 不战而获城，策之上者。
现代文：赫连达说： 不动刀兵而获取城池，这是上策。
English: Herenda said, "It is the best strategy to capture a castle without using swords and soldiers.

古文：无容利其子女，贪其财帛。
现代文：不能允许掠人子女，贪得财帛。
English: It cannot be allowed to prey on people's children and be greedy for money.

古文：穷兵极武，仁者不为。
现代文：好战不止，是仁义之人所不做的。
English: To be more than belligerent is what a man of virtue does not do.

古文：且观其士马犹强，城池尚固，攻之纵克，必将彼此俱损。
现代文：况且看起来对方的军队还很强大，城池尚且牢固，攻打他们纵使获胜，必将两败俱伤。
English: Moreover, it seems that the other side's army is still very strong, the city is still strong, and attacking them, even if they win, will surely hurt both sides.

古文：如其困兽犹斗，则成败未可知。
现代文：如果对方身处绝境还极力拼杀，那么胜败仍不能预料。
English: If the other side is in a desperate situation and still fights hard, then victory or defeat cannot be predicted.

古文：况行师之道，以全军为上。 
现代文：何况用兵的原则，以保全军队为上策。 达奚武说：
English: Moreover, the principle of the use of troops is that the preservation of the army is the best policy. Dadongwu said:

古文：武曰： 公言是也。 
现代文： 你说的正确。 便命令将帅各抒己见。
English: You're right. Then he ordered the generals to express their opinions.

古文：乃命将帅各申所见。于是开府杨宽等并同达议，武遂受循降。
现代文：于是开府杨宽等人都赞同赫连达的建议，达奚武终于接受了萧循的投降。
English: As a result, Yang Guang and others in Kaifu agreed with Herenda's suggestion, and Dabangwu finally accepted Xiao Xunwu's surrender.

古文：师还，迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中，进爵蓝田县公。
现代文：班师回朝，朝廷升任赫连达为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加授侍中，晋爵为蓝田县公。
English: When the team returned to the imperial court, the imperial court promoted Herenda to the rank of grand general of cavalry, Kaifu Yi to the rank of third secretary, Zhaozhong to the rank of second secretary, and Jianzhong to the rank of Lantian County official.

古文：六官初建，授左遂伯。
现代文：六官初步建立，授任赫连达为左遂伯。
English: Six offices were initially established, and Herenda was given the post of Zuo Suibao.

古文：出为陇州刺史。
现代文：出任陇州刺史。
English: Appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：保定初，迁大将军、夏州总管、三州五防诸军事。
现代文：保定初年，升任赫连达为大将军、夏州总管、三州五防诸军事。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was promoted to the general of Herenda, the general manager of Xiazhou, and the military of the three states and five national defense.

古文：达虽非文吏，然性质直，遵奉法度，轻于鞭挞，而重慎死罪。
现代文：赫连达虽然不是文官，然而性情正直，遵奉法度，对于鞭挞士民看得较轻，对于死罪重视谨慎。
English: Although he was not a civil servant, Herenda was honest and law-abiding. He did not think much of whipping people and was cautious about the death penalty.

古文：性又廉俭，边境胡民或馈达以羊者，达欲招纳异类，报以缯帛。
现代文：品性又廉明节俭，边境的少数民族有的送羊给他，他想招纳他们，就用丝绸布帛作为回报。
English: He is honest and frugal, and some ethnic minorities on the border have sent him sheep. If he wants to recruit them, he will offer silk cloth in return.

古文：主司请用官物，达曰： 羊入我厨，物出官库，是欺上也。 命取私帛与之。
现代文：主司请求用官府物品，避连达说： 羊进入我的厨房，物品从官库给出，这是欺骗皇上。 命令取自家的绸帛给献羊之人。
English: When the chief steward requested the use of government goods, Hui Lian Da said: "The sheep entered my kitchen, and the goods were given from the government treasury, which is deceiving the emperor.

古文：识者嘉其仁恕焉。
现代文：知道此事的人都称赞他仁爱宽容。
English: Those who knew him praised him for his kindness and tolerance.

古文：寻进爵乐川郡公。
现代文：不久，晋爵为乐川郡公。
English: Soon after, he became the lord of Lechuan County.

古文：建德二年，进位柱国，薨。
现代文：建壁二年，晋为柱国，去世。
English: Two years after the wall was built, he was promoted to pillar country and passed away.

古文：子迁嗣。
现代文：他的儿子赫连迁继承爵禄。
English: His son, Herenqian, inherited the peerage.

古文：大象中位至大将军、蒲州刺史。
现代文：大象年间官至大将军、蒲州刺史。
English: In the elephant years, the highest-ranking general was Bushu Sashi.

古文：韩果字阿六拔，代武川人也。
现代文：韩果字阿六拔，是代武川人。
English: Han Guo (Hangul: 韩果; pinyin: Háng Guo; literally: "Hangul: Han Guo" or "Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul" or "Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul" or "Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul" or "Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul" or "Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul" or "Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hangul: Hang

古文：少骁雄，善骑射。
现代文：年少时骁勇威武，善于骑马射箭。
English: He was brave and powerful when he was young, and was good at riding and archery.

古文：贺拔岳西征，引为帐内。
现代文：贺拔岳西征时，将他引进军帐听用。
English: He was recruited to accompany the accountant in the Western Expedition of He Baturake.

古文：击万俟丑奴及其枝党，转战数十合，并破之。
现代文：韩果攻击万俟丑奴及其分支的党羽，转战数十回合，把他们全部打败了。
English: Han Kuo attacked Wan Xuan Ugly Bastard and his offshoot faction, fought dozens of rounds, and defeated them all.

古文：膂力绝伦，被甲荷戈，升陟峰岭，犹涉平路，虽数十百日，不以为劳。
现代文：韩果的膂力无人能比，身披镗甲，手执戈矛，爬山登岭，犹如行走于平地之上，即使数十上百日，也不感到疲劳。
English: Han Kuo's strength is unmatched. Wearing armor and holding a spear, he climbs mountains as if he were walking on flat ground. Even if it takes him dozens or hundreds of days, he doesn't feel tired.

古文：以功授宣将军、子都督。
现代文：凭藉战功被封为宣威将军、子都督。
English: He was awarded the title of General Xuan Wei and the title of the son of the governor of the capital.

古文：从太祖讨平侯莫陈悦，迁都督，赐爵邯郸县男。
现代文：韩果跟随太祖讨平侯莫陈悦，升任都督，被赐予邯郸县男爵号。
English: Han Guo followed his great-great-grandfather to settle down the feudal lord Mo Chen Yue, was promoted to the governor of the capital, and was given the title of baron of Jixian County.

古文：魏孝武入关，进爵石县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝入关，晋爵为石城县伯，食邑五百户。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu entered the customs, Jinjue was the county magistrate of Shicheng County, and there were 500 households in the food village.

古文：大统初，进爵为公，增邑通前一千户，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：大统初年，晋为公爵，食邑增至一千户。加授通直散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of unification, he was promoted to Duke, and the number of restaurants increased to a thousand.

古文：果性强记，兼有权略。
现代文：韩果记忆力强，兼有权谋策略。
English: Han Guo has a strong memory and has the power to strategize.

古文：所行之处，山川形势，备能记忆。
现代文：所经过的地方，山川地势，全都能记住。
English: I can remember the places I passed through, the mountains and rivers, everything.

古文：兼善伺敌虚实，揣知情状，有潜匿溪谷欲为间侦者，果登高望之，所疑处，往必有获。
现代文：并且善于窥探敌军的虚实，揣测了解敌军的情状，有偷偷隐藏在溪谷中想做间谍侦察的人，韩果登上高处一望，凡是他所怀疑的地方，去搜必定有所收获。
English: He is also good at spying on the enemy's army, speculating to understand the situation of the enemy's army. There are people who secretly hide in the valley and want to do spy reconnaissance. Han Guo climbed to a high place to have a look. Wherever he suspects, there must be something to be gained by searching.

古文：太祖由是以果为虞候都督。
现代文：太祖因此让韩果担任虞候都督。
English: As a result, the great-great-grandfather made Han Kuo the governor.

古文：每从征行，常领候骑，昼夜巡察，略不眠寝。
现代文：每次随从出征，韩果常带领巡逻的骑兵，昼夜巡察，很少睡觉。
English: Every time Han Guo went on a campaign, he often led the cavalry on patrol, patrolled day and night, and rarely slept.

古文：从袭窦泰于潼关，太祖依其规画，军以胜返。
现代文：韩果跟随大军在潼关袭击宝泰，太祖依照他的谋划安排，大军得以获胜而返。
English: Han Kuo followed the army to attack Baotai in Shaoguan. Taizu followed his plan, and the army was able to return victorious.

古文：赏真珠金带一腰、帛二百匹，授征虏将军。
现代文：太祖赏给他真珠金带一条、布帛二百匹，授任他为征虏将军。
English: The great-grandfather rewarded him with a pearl-and-gold belt and 200 cloth ponies, and appointed him as a conscript general.

古文：又从复弘农，攻拔河南城，获郡守一人，论功为最。
现代文：又跟随太祖收复弘农，攻克河南城，俘获郡守一人，论功最大。
English: He also followed his great-grandfather to recover Hongnong, conquered Henan City, and captured one county governor, which is the greatest achievement.

古文：破沙苑，战河桥，并有功，授抚军将军、银青光禄大夫，增邑九百户。
现代文：攻破沙苑，战于河桥，韩果都有功劳，被任命为抚军将军、银青光禄大夫，增加食邑九百户。
English: Han Guo was credited with conquering Sha Yuan and fighting in Heqiao. He was appointed as the general of Fuzhou army, the doctor of Yinqing Guanglu, and increased the number of food villages by 900.

古文：迁朔州刺史，转安州刺史，加帅都督。
现代文：升任朔州刺史，改任安州刺史，加授帅都督。
English: He was promoted to the post of the governor of Shuozhou, changed to the post of the governor of Anzhou, and was awarded the title of the governor of the capital.

古文：九年，从战邙山，军还，除河东郡守。
现代文：九年，跟从大军战于邙山，军队返回后，他被任命为河东郡守。
English: In the ninth year, he followed the great army to fight in Lushan. After the army returned, he was appointed as the county governor of Hedong.

古文：又从大军破稽胡于北山。
现代文：又跟从大军在北山攻破稽胡。
English: He also followed the great army to attack and destroy Jiuhu in Beishan.

古文：胡地险阻，人迹罕至，果进兵穷讨，散其种落。
现代文：稽胡之地险恶，人迹罕至，韩果进兵彻底征讨，打散稽胡的种族部落。
English: Jihu is a dangerous place, rarely visited by people, and Han Guo marched into the army to thoroughly investigate and disperse the ethnic tribes of Jihu.

古文：稽胡惮果劲健，号为着翅人。
现代文：稽胡害怕韩果刚劲强健，号称韩果为插翅人。
English: Qi Hu was afraid of the vigorous and strong Han Guo. He was known as the Wing Inserting Man.

古文：太祖闻之，笑曰： 着翅之名，宁减飞将。 
现代文：太祖听说后，笑道： 插翅之名，难道亚于飞将军。 
English: After hearing this, the great-grandfather laughed and said, "Isn't the name of inserting wings inferior to General Fei?"

古文：累迁大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，出为宜州刺史。
现代文：屡经升迁为大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，出任宜州刺史。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to Grand Governor, General of Chariots and Cavalry, General of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, General of Cavalry, General of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and General of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and held the post of Yizhou Historian.

古文：录前后功，进爵褒中郡公。
现代文：朝廷记录他的前后功劳，晋爵为褒中郡公。
English: The Imperial Court recorded his merits before and after, and he was promoted to the peerage as the Prince of Baozhong County.

古文：魏恭帝元年，授大将军。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，韩果被任命为大将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, Han Guo was appointed as a general.

古文：从贺兰祥讨吐谷浑，以功别封一子县公。
现代文：跟从贺兰祥征讨吐谷浑，因为军功另封一子为县公。
English: He followed in the footsteps of Helan Xiangzheng to discuss with Tu Guhun. Because of his military exploits, one of his sons became the county magistrate.

古文：武成二年，又率军破稽胡，大获生口。
现代文：武成二年，韩果又率军打败稽胡，抓获大量俘虏。
English: In the second year of Wucheng, Han Guo again led the army to defeat Ji Hu and captured a large number of prisoners.

古文：赐奴婢一百口，除宁州刺史。
现代文：朝廷赐给他奴婢一百人，任命他为宁州刺史。
English: The imperial court gave him a hundred slaves and appointed him as the first governor of Ningzhou.

古文：保定三年，拜少师，进位柱国。
现代文：保定三年，韩果担任少师，晋为柱国。
English: In Baoding for three years, Han Guo served as a junior teacher and was promoted to a pillar country.

古文：四年，从尉迟迥围洛阳。
现代文：四年，跟从尉迟迥包围洛阳。
English: In four years, he surrounded Luoyang with his subordinates.

古文：军退，果所部独全。
现代文：大军撤退，惟独韩果所率的军队保全无损。
English: The large army retreated, but the army led by Han Kuo remained intact.

古文：天和初，授华州刺史，为政宽简，吏民称之。
现代文：天和初年，韩果任华州刺史，治理政事宽和简约，官吏百姓交口称赞。
English: In the first year of Tianhe, Han Guo was appointed as the governor of Huazhou, governing the affairs of state in a broad and simple manner, and was praised by officials and the people.

古文：建德初，薨。
现代文：建德初年，韩果去世。
English: In the first year of Jiande, Han Guo passed away.

古文：子明嗣。
现代文：他的儿子韩明继承爵禄。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Xue Ming.

古文：大象末，位至上大将军、黎州刺史。
现代文：大象末年，官至上大将军、黎州刺史。
English: At the end of the elephant's life, the highest-ranking general, Lizhou Jishi, was born.

古文：与尉迟迥同谋，被诛。
现代文：与尉迟迥同谋反叛，被杀。
English: He plotted a rebellion with his comrade, and was killed.

古文：蔡佑字承先，其先陈留圉人也。
现代文：蔡佑字承先，他的祖先是陈留圉人。
English: Cai Youzi succeeded his father, and his ancestor was Chen Ruzhen.

古文：曾祖绍为夏州镇将，徙居高平，因家焉。
现代文：曾祖蔡绍任夏州镇将，迁居高平，因此在那裹安家。
English: Zengzu Cai Shao was the general of Xiazhou Town and moved to Gaoping, so he settled there.

古文：祖护，魏景明初，为陈留郡守。
现代文：祖父蔡护，魏景明初年，担任陈留郡守。
English: Cai's grandfather, Wei Jingming, served as Chenliu County Governor in the first year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：父袭，名著西州。
现代文：父亲蔡袭，名声在西州地区很显著。
English: His father, Cai Qi, is famous in the Xizhou region.

古文：正光中，万俟丑奴寇乱关中，袭乃背贼，弃妻子，归洛阳。
现代文：正光年间，万俟丑奴侵掠扰乱关中，蔡袭就背离贼寇，抛下妻儿，归附洛阳。
English: During the Zhengguang years, when thousands of ugly slaves invaded and disturbed Guanzhong, Cai Wei turned away from the thieves and robbers, left his wife and children, and returned to Luoyang.

古文：拜齐安郡守。
现代文：被任命为齐安郡守。
English: He was appointed the governor of Qi'an County.

古文：及魏孝武西迁，仍在关东。
现代文：等到魏孝武帝西迁，蔡袭仍在关东。
English: By the time Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, Cai Wei was still in Kanto.

古文：后始拔难西归，赐爵平舒县伯，除岐、夏二州刺史，卒。
现代文：后来才脱离危难西归，受赐爵位子舒县伯，任岐、夏二州刺史，去世。
English: Later, he returned to the west after getting out of the danger and was awarded the title of Shuxian Bo, Renqi, Xia Erzhou Sashi, and passed away.

古文：赠原州刺史。
现代文：封赠原州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of Wonju Sashimi.

古文：佑性聪敏，有行检。
现代文：蔡佑生性聪颖敏捷，有操行。
English: Cai Yousheng is intelligent, quick-witted and has good manners.

古文：袭之背贼东归也，佑年十四，事母以孝闻。
现代文：蔡袭背离贼寇东归时，蔡佑十四岁，侍奉母亲以孝顺闻名。
English: Cai You was 14 years old when he left the bandits and returned to the East. He was known for his filial piety while serving his mother.

古文：及长，有膂力，便骑射。
现代文：等到长大，膂力过人，善于骑马射箭。
English: When he grows up, he will be super strong and good at riding and archery.

古文：太祖在原州，召为帐下亲信。
现代文：太祖在原州时，召蔡佑做帐下亲信。
English: When the great-grandfather was in Wonju, he called Cai You to be his trusted confidant.

古文：太祖迁夏州，以佑为都督。
现代文：太祖迁往夏州，以蔡佑做都督。
English: The great-grandfather moved to Xiazhou, with Cai You as governor.

古文：及侯莫陈悦害贺拔岳，诸将遣使迎太祖。
现代文：及至侯莫陈悦杀害贺拔岳，众将派使者迎接太祖。
English: As far as Hou Mo Chen Yue's killing of He Baturake, the people will send an envoy to meet the great ancestor.

古文：将赴，夏州首望弥姐元进等阴有异计。
现代文：太祖将赶赴那裹，夏州首望弥姐元进等人暗中有反叛的计谋。
English: The great-grandfather will rush there, and the head of Xiazhou, Miao Jie, and others, including Yuan Jin, are secretly plotting to rebel.

古文：太祖微知之，先与佑议执元进。
现代文：太祖暗中知道此事，先与蔡佑商议拘捕元进。
English: Taizu secretly knew about this and first discussed the arrest of Genjin with Cai You.

古文：佑曰： 狼子野心，会当反噬，今若执缚，不如杀之。 太祖曰： 汝大决也。 
现代文：蔡佑说： 奸暴小人有险恶用心，一定会反过来噬咬，今天如若抓捕他，不如把他杀掉。 太祖说： 你做事很果断。 
English: Cai You said, "If a vicious villain has a sinister intention, he will surely bite back. If you catch him today, it would be better to kill him." Grandfather said, "You are very decisive in your actions.

古文：于是召元进等入计事。
现代文：于是召唤元进等人进来计议事情。
English: So he summoned Motojin and others to come in and discuss the matter.

古文：太祖曰： 陇贼逆乱，与诸人戮力讨之。
现代文：太祖说： 陇地的贼寇叛乱。我将与众人齐心协力去讨伐贼寇。
English: The great-grandfather said, "The bandit rebellion in Shunde. I will make concerted efforts with everyone to fight the bandits."

古文：观诸人辈似有不同者。 太祖微以此言动之，因目佑。
现代文：我看众人中好像有不同想法之人。 太祖略微用此言来触动众人，于是目视蔡佑。
English: I see many people who seem to have different ideas. Taizu uses this word to touch everyone slightly, so he looks at Cai You.

古文：佑即出外，衣甲持刀直入，瞋目叱诸人曰： 与人朝谋夕异，岂是人也！
现代文：蔡佑就走到外面，穿着镗甲手持钢刀径直走了进来，瞪大眼睛喝叱众人道： 与人早晨谋划晚上就变了，难道是人吗!
English: Cai You walked outside, dressed in armor and holding a steel knife, walked straight in, stared wide-eyed and scolded the crowd: If you plan with someone in the morning, it will change in the evening. Are you human?

古文：蔡佑今日必斩奸人之头。 因按剑临之。
现代文：蔡佑今日定要斩去奸人的脑袋。 因此手按刀剑面临众人。
English: Cai You was determined to behead the traitor today, so he faced the crowd with his sword in his hand.

古文：举座皆叩头曰： 愿有简择。 佑乃叱元进而斩之，并其党并伏诛。
现代文：举座之人都叩头说： 希望把奸人挑拣出来。 蔡佑于是叱骂元进，斩了他，连同他的党羽一起诛戮。
English: Everyone in the audience kowtowed and said, "I hope the traitor will be picked out." Cai You then scolded Yuan Jin, beheaded him, and killed him together with his followers.

古文：一坐皆战栗，不敢仰视。
现代文：在场的人都战战兢兢，不敢仰视。
English: Everyone present was trembling, afraid to look up.

古文：于是与诸将结盟，同心诛悦。
现代文：于是太祖与众将结下盟誓，同心诛灭侯莫陈悦。
English: So the great-grandfather and the generals swore an oath to destroy Hou Mo Chen Yue together.

古文：太祖以此知重之。
现代文：太祖由此了解看重蔡佑。
English: From this, the great-grandfather understood the importance of Cai You.

古文：乃谓佑曰： 吾今以尔为子，尔其父事我。 后从讨悦，破之。
现代文：于是对蔡佑说： 我现在把你当作儿子，你当像对父亲一样侍奉我。 此后跟随太祖讨伐侯莫陈悦，打败了他。
English: So he said to Cai You, "I now treat you as a son, you should serve me like a father." After that, he followed his great-grandfather to fight against Hou Mo Chen Yue and defeated him.

古文：又从迎魏孝武于潼关。
现代文：蔡佑又跟从军队到潼关迎接魏孝武帝。
English: Cai You also followed the army to Shaoguan to meet Emperor Wei Xiaowu.

古文：以前后功，封苌乡县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：凭藉前后功劳，被封为苌乡县伯，食邑五百户。
English: By virtue of his past and present achievements, he was awarded the title of county magistrate of Xiangxiang County, with 500 households in food villages.

古文：大统初，加宁朔将军、羽林监，寻持节、员外散骑常侍，进爵为侯，增邑一千一百户。
现代文：大统初年，朝廷加授他为宁朔将军、羽林监，不久授任他持节、员外散骑常侍，晋为侯爵，增加食邑一千一百户。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, the imperial court awarded him the title of Ningshuo General and Uebayashi Inspector. Soon after, he was awarded the title of Jijie, and was promoted to marquis, increasing the number of households by 1,100.

古文：从太祖擒窦泰，复弘农，战沙苑，皆有功，授平东将军、太中大夫。
现代文：蔡佑跟从太祖擒获窦泰，恢复弘农，战于沙苑，都立有战功，被任命为平束将军、太中大夫。
English: Cai You followed his great-great-grandfather in conquering Dou Tai, restoring Hongnong, and fighting in Shayuan. He was appointed as the general of Hirazuk and the doctor of the imperial court.

古文：又从太祖战于河桥，佑乃下马步斗，手杀数人。
现代文：又跟从太祖战于河桥，蔡枯竟下马步行作战，亲手杀死数人。
English: He also followed his great-great-grandfather to fight in Heqiao. Cai Kun actually dismounted and fought on foot, killing several people with his own hands.

古文：左右劝乘马以备急卒。
现代文：左右的人劝他乘马以防备紧急事变。
English: People around him advised him to ride a horse in case of an emergency.

古文：佑怒曰： 丞相养我如子，今日岂以性命为念！ 遂率左右十余人，齐声大呼，杀伤甚多。
现代文：蔡枯发怒说： 丞相抚养我如同自己的儿子，今难道能把性命放在心上吗! 于是率领左右十余人，齐声大呼，杀伤敌人很多。
English: Cai Guan said angrily, "The prime minister raised me like his own son, can he really put my life in his heart now?" He then led more than ten people to the left and right, shouting in unison, killing and wounding many enemies.

古文：敌以其无继，遂围之十余重，谓佑曰： 观君似是勇士，但弛甲来降，岂虑无富贵耶。 佑骂之曰： 死卒！
现代文：敌人因为他没有接继的人马，就把他围了十几层，对蔡佑说： 看你像个勇士，衹要脱下镜甲来投降，难道还担心没有富贵吗? 蔡佑骂他们道： 该死的士卒!
English: The enemy, because he had no successor, surrounded him for more than a dozen floors and said to Cai You: You look like a warrior, don't you want to take off your armor and surrender, are you still worried about not being rich? Cai You scolded them: Damn officers!

古文：吾今取头，自当封公，何假贼之官号也。 乃弯弓持满，四面拒之。
现代文：我现在取下你们的头，自然会封为公侯，哪裹要借贼人的官号。 于是将弓拉满，向着四面抵拒敌人。
English: Now that I have taken off your heads, it is natural that I should crown you as princes, but I do not wish to assume the title of a robber, so I drew my bow to its full length and turned it against the enemy on all sides.

古文：东魏人弗敢逼，乃募厚甲长刀者，直进取佑。
现代文：东魏人不敢逼近，就招集身穿厚甲手持长刀的士兵，径直前进攻取蔡枯。
English: The Eastern Wei people did not dare to approach, so they summoned soldiers wearing thick armor and holding long swords to advance straight ahead to capture Caiwu.

古文：去佑可三十步，左右劝射之，佑曰： 吾曹性命，在一矢耳，岂虚发哉。 
现代文：离蔡揎大约三十步，左右的人劝蔡棺射箭，蔡棺说： 我们的性命，就在这一支箭，难道能白射吗? 
English: About thirty paces away from Cai Xuan, the people around Cai Xuan advised Cai Xuan to shoot an arrow. Cai Xuan said: Our life is in this arrow, can it be shot in vain?

古文：敌人渐进，可十步，佑乃射之，正中其面，应弦而倒，便以矛刺杀之。
现代文：敌人逐渐逼进，大约十步，蔡佑才将箭射出，正中其面，敌人应声而倒，使用长矛刺死敌人。
English: The enemy gradually forced their way in, and it took about ten steps for Cai You to shoot the arrow, which hit him in the face. The enemy fell to the ground, and he used a spear to stab the enemy to death.

古文：因此，战数合，唯失一人。
现代文：因此，战斗了几个回合，衹损失了一个人。
English: So the fight went on for a few rounds, and the baboons lost one man.

古文：敌乃稍却。
现代文：敌人稍稍退却。
English: The enemy retreated slightly.

古文：佑徐引退。
现代文：蔡佑徐徐地引兵撤退。
English: Cai You slowly led the troops to retreat.

古文：是战也，我军不利。
现代文：这一仗，我军不利。
English: In this battle, our army is at a disadvantage.

古文：太祖已还。
现代文：左担已经还师。
English: The left-hander has been reinstated.

古文：佑至弘农，夜中与太祖相会。
现代文：蔡枯赶到弘农，夜间与太祖相会。
English: Cai Kan rushed to Hongnong and met with Taizu at night.

古文：太祖见佑至，字之曰： 承先，尔来，吾无忧矣。 太祖心惊，不得寝，枕佑股上，乃安。
现代文：太祖见蔡佑来到，称呼他的表字说： 承先，你来了，我就没有忧虑了。 太祖心中惊惶，不能入睡，枕在蔡佑的腿上，方才安眠。
English: When the great-grandfather saw Cai You coming, he called him by name and said, "Dear, now that you have come, I don't have to worry anymore." The great-grandfather was so frightened that he couldn't fall asleep, so he laid his pillow on Cai You's lap and finally fell asleep.

古文：以功进爵为公，增邑三百户，授京兆郡守。
现代文：因为立功，蔡枯被晋为公爵，增加食邑三百户，授任京兆郡守。
English: Because of his meritorious service, Cai Jian was promoted to the rank of duke, increased the number of households to 300, and was appointed the governor of Jingzhao County.

古文：九年，东魏豫州刺史高仲密举州来附。
现代文：九年，束魏北豫州刺史高仲密率全州之人来归附。
English: In the ninth year of the Northern Wei Dynasty, people from all over the state came to attach themselves to it.

古文：太祖率军援之，与齐神武遇，战于邙山。
现代文：太祖率领军队救援他，与齐神武帝相遇，战于亡口山。
English: The great-grandfather led the army to rescue him, met with Emperor Qishenwu, and fought on Mount Ubukuchiyama.

古文：佑时着明光铁铠，所向无前。
现代文：蔡佑当时穿着闪闪发光的铁铵，冲向前去无人敢挡。
English: Cai You was wearing a glittering shovel at the time, and no one dared to stand in his way.

古文：敌人咸曰 此是铁猛兽也 ，皆遽避之。
现代文：敌人都说 这是只铁老虎 ，都急忙躲避他。
English: The enemies all said that this was an iron tiger, and they all hurried to avoid him.

古文：俄授青州刺史，转原州刺史，加帅都督，寻除大都督。
现代文：不久，他被任命为青州刺史，改任原州刺史，加授帅都督，很快又任大都督。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Qingzhou, then the governor of Wonju, then the governor of Shuai, and soon he was appointed as the governor of Jung.

古文：十三年，遭父忧，请终丧纪。
现代文：十三年，遇到父亲去世，请求服满丧期。
English: Thirteen years later, when his father passed away, he requested to complete the mourning period.

古文：弗许。
现代文：朝廷不答应。
English: Yan Le still did not agree.

古文：迁车骑大将军、仪同三司，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、侍中，赐姓大利稽氏，进爵怀宁郡公。
现代文：升任他为车骑大将军、仪同三司，加授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、侍中，赐姓大利稽氏，晋爵为怀宁郡公。
English: He was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, the general of horse and carriage, the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, and the second secretary of attendants, and was given the surname of Dali Lijie. He was promoted to the peerage as the prince of Huaining County.

古文：魏恭帝二年，中领军。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，蔡佑任中领军。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, Cai You became the leader of the army.

古文：六官建，授兵部中大夫。江陵初附，诸蛮骚动，诏佑与大将军豆卢宁讨平之。
现代文：六官建立，他任兵部中大夫江陵刚刚归附，众蛮骚动，朝廷诏令蔡佑与大将军豆卢宁讨平众蛮。
English: Six officers were established, and he was appointed as the middle doctor of the military department. Jiangling had just been annexed, and the people were in uproar. The imperial court ordered Cai You and the great general Dou Luning to pacify the people.

古文：三年，拜大将军，给后部鼓吹。
现代文：三年，官拜大将军，赐给他车驾出游时在后面吹打鼓钮箫笳的权利。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to the rank of general and given the right to play the tambourine in the back of his car while driving.

古文：以前后功，增邑并前四千户，别封一子县伯。
现代文：他因前后所立功劳，食邑增至四千户，另外封一子为县伯。
English: Due to his continuous efforts, the number of food villages increased to 4,000 households, and his son was awarded the title of county magistrate.

古文：太祖不豫，佑与晋公护、贺兰祥等侍疾。
现代文：太祖有病，蔡佑与晋公宇文护、贺兰祥等在旁侍奉。
English: The great-grandfather was ill, and Cai You, along with Jin Gong, Yu Wen Rong, and Helan Xiang, served alongside him.

古文：及太祖崩，佑悲慕不已，遂得气疾。
现代文：等到太祖去世，蔡佑悲痛想念不已，就患上了气疾。
English: After the death of his great-grandfather, Cai You was so grief-stricken that he suffered from gas sickness.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜少保。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，授任蔡佑为少保。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne and appointed Cai You as a minor protector.

古文：佑与尉迟纲俱掌禁兵，递直殿省。
现代文：蔡佑与尉迟纲一同掌管禁兵，交替担任宫殿巡察工作。
English: Cai You was in charge of the forbidden soldiers together with Fei Chi Gang, and they took turns in inspecting the palace.

古文：时帝信任司会李植等，谋害晋公护，佑每泣谏，帝不听。
现代文：当时孝闰帝信任司会李植等人，谋害晋公宇文护，蔡佑时常哭泣讽谏，皇帝不听。
English: At that time, Li Zhi and others of the Emperor Xiaolei's Committee of Trust, plotted to kill Jin Gongyu Wenpo, Cai You often cried ironically, and the emperor did not listen.

古文：寻而帝废。
现代文：不久皇帝被废。
English: Emperor Xuan was soon deposed.

古文：世宗即位，拜小司马，少保如故。
现代文：世宗即位，授任蔡佑为小司马，少保的职位仍旧保留。
English: When King Sejong ascended the throne, Cai You was appointed as a petty steward, but the position of minor overseer was still reserved.

古文：帝之为公子也，与佑特相友昵，至是礼遇弥隆。
现代文：世宗做公子时，与蔡佑相互友爱亲昵，到这时对蔡棺恩遇更加深重了。
English: When Sejong was a young man, he and Cai You were friendly and intimate with each other. At this time, Cai Xuan's favor was even more profound.

古文：御膳每有异味，辄辍以赐佑；群臣朝宴，每被别留，或至昏夜，列炬鸣笳，送佑还宅。
现代文：所用的膳食有风味独特的，就停下筷子把它赐给蔡佑；群臣参加朝廷宴会时，蔡佑常被另外留下，有时直到夜晚，排列灯烛，吹动胡笳，护送蔡佑回宅。
English: When a group of courtiers attended an imperial banquet, Cai You was often left behind, sometimes until late at night, to arrange the candles, blow the shofar, and escort Cai You back home.

古文：佑以过蒙礼遇，常辞疾避之。
现代文：蔡拓因为过分蒙受礼遇，常以有病推辞回避。
English: Cai Tuo, because of the excessive courtesy he received, often refused to go because he was ill.

古文：至于婚姻，尤不愿交于势要。
现代文：至于婚姻之事，尤其不愿与权贵缔结。
English: As for marriage, they are especially reluctant to enter into it with the powerful.

古文：寻以本官权镇原州。
现代文：不久以本官的身份权且镇守原州。
English: The imperial court appointed him to write the history of Yizhou, but he died before taking office.

古文：顷之，授州刺史，未之部，因先气疾动，卒于原州。
现代文：时间不长，被授任为宜州刺史，未能到任所，因为原先的气疾发作，死于原州。
English: His time was not long, and he was appointed as the chief historian of Yizhou. However, he was unable to come to the office due to a previous attack of gas sickness, and he died in Wonju.

古文：时年五十四。
现代文：当时年龄五十四岁。
English: He was 54 years old at the time.

古文：佑少有大志，与乡人李穆，布衣齐名。
现代文：墓茧年少时胸有大志，与同乡人李穆，身为平民同样有名。
English: When he was young, Tombo had big ambitions. He is as famous as his fellow villager, Li Mu, who is a commoner.

古文：尝相谓曰： 大丈夫当建立功名，以取富贵，安能久处贫贱邪！ 言讫，各大笑。
现代文：曾经相互说道： 大丈夫应当建立功名，用以获取富贵，怎么能长久地处在贫贱之中呢! 说罢，各自大笑。
English: They used to say to each other: "It's all right for a man to build up his reputation and use it to acquire wealth, but how can he remain poor for long?" Just say it, and they all burst out laughing.

古文：穆即申公也。
现代文：李穆就是申公。
English: Li Mu is Shen Gong.

古文：后皆如其言。
现代文：后来都如他们所说的那样。
English: It all turned out like he said.

古文：及从征伐，常溃围陷阵,为士卒先。
现代文：等到跟从大军征伐，常常突破包围深入敌阵，冲在士兵前面。
English: He waited until he was marching with a large army, often breaking through the encirclement and rushing ahead of the soldiers.

古文：军还之日，诸将争功，佑终无所竞。
现代文：军队回还之时，众将争夺功劳，蔡佑始终没有什么竞争。
English: When the army returned, many generals competed for the credit, but Cai You never had any competition.

古文：太祖叹之，尝谓诸将曰： 承先口不言勋，孤当代其论叙。 其见知如此。
现代文：太祖时常赞叹他，曾经对众将说： 承先口中不说功劳，我应当代替他论叙战绩。 他被太祖了解达到如此地步。
English: The great-grandfather often praised him, and once said to the generals: "Instead of talking about his merits, I should talk about his record instead of him."

古文：性节俭，所得禄皆散与宗族，身死之日,家无余财。
现代文：蔡佑生性节俭，所得的俸禄都散给了他的宗族，去世时，家中没有剩余的财产。
English: Cai Yousheng was frugal by nature. The salary he earned was distributed to his family. When he died, there was no remaining property in the family.

古文：赠使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、五州诸军事、原州刺史。
现代文：朝廷追赠他使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、五州诸军事、原州刺史。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of envoy, general of the pillar country, grand governor, military commander of the five states, and the history of the original state.

古文：谥曰庄。
现代文：谧号叫庄。
English: His posthumous name was Sho.

古文：子正嗣。
现代文：他的儿子蔡正承袭爵位。
English: His son Cai Zheng inherited the title.

古文：官至使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：官至使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: officials to hold the festival, the general of chariot and cavalry, and the three departments of etiquette.

古文：佑弟泽，颇好学，有干能。起家魏广平王参军、丞相府兼记室，加宣将军、给事中。
现代文：蔡佑弟弟紫泽，很好学，有才干能力，从家中征召出来任魏广平王参军、兼丞相府记室，加授宣威将军、给事中。
English: Cai Yu's younger brother, Zi Ze, was very studious and talented. He was conscripted from home to join the army of Wei Guangping Wang, and also served as the secretary of the prime minister's office, was awarded the title of General Xuan Wei, and was in charge of affairs.

古文：从尉迟迥平蜀，授帅都督，赐爵安弥县男。
现代文：跟从尉迟迥平定蜀，授任帅都督，赐封爵号安弥县男。
English: He was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and given the title of Ami County man.

古文：稍迁司辂下大夫、车骑大将军、仪同三司、澧州刺史。
现代文：逐渐升任司辂下大夫、车骑大将军、仪同三司、澧州刺史。
English: Gradually, he was promoted to the position of the doctor under the secretary, the general of the cavalry, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：在州受赂，总管代王达以其功臣子弟，密奏贳之。
现代文：在澧州时收受贿赂，总管代王宇文达因为他是功臣子弟，秘密上奏赦免了他。
English: Wang Yuwenda, who received bribes when he was in Zhangzhou, was secretly pardoned by the emperor because he was the son of a meritorious subject.

古文：后为州刺史，不从司马消难，被害。
现代文：后来担任郡州刺史，不服从司马消难，被杀害。
English: Later, he served as the county magistrate, disobeyed the magistrate, and was killed.

古文：常善，高阳人也。世为豪族。
现代文：遂，是矗堡人。世代是豪门大族。
English: In the end, it was the people of the bunker. The generation was a large family.

古文：父安成，魏正光末，茹茹寇边，以统军从镇将慕容胜与战，大破之。
现代文：父亲堂叁盛，魏正光末年，堑苞人入侵边界，以统军身份跟从镇将慕容胜与茹茹作战，大败茹茹。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Wei Zhengguang, his father, Dong Shuxing, invaded the border and, as a member of the unified army, fought with the town's general Murong Sheng and Zhu Ru, and was defeated by Zhu Ru.

古文：时破六汗拔陵作乱，欲逼安成。
现代文：当时破六汗拔陵作乱，想逼迫塞盛。
English: At that time, he wanted to persecute Cai Sheng.

古文：不从，乃率所部讨陵。
现代文：塞盛不服从，就率部下讨伐破六汗拔陵。
English: When Setheng disobeyed, he led his subordinates in a crusade to break the six khan and pull out the mausoleum.

古文：以功授伏波将军，给鼓节。
现代文：凭藉功劳，被任命为伏波将军，赐给表示官阶的仪仗。
English: On the basis of merit, he was appointed General of Fubao, and was given the honorary title indicating his official rank.

古文：后与拔陵连战，卒于阵。
现代文：后来与拔陵连续作战，死于战阵。
English: Later, he fought continuously with Bailing and died in battle.

古文：善，魏孝昌中，从尔朱荣入洛，授威烈将军、都督，加龙骧将军、中散大夫、直寝，封房城县男，邑三百户。
现代文：常善，魏孝昌年间，跟随尔朱荣入洛，授任威烈将军、都督，加授龙骧将军、中散大夫、直寝，封爵房城县男，食邑三百户。
English: Zongshen, during the Wei and Xiaochang dynasties, followed Er Zhu Rong into Luo, and was awarded the title of General Weli, Governor, and was also awarded the title of General Longyu, Doctor Zhongshan, and slept straight, was knighted as the man of Fangcheng County, and had 300 households.

古文：后从太祖平侯莫陈悦，除天水郡守。
现代文：后来跟随太狙平定侯莫陈悦，升任天水郡守。
English: Later, he followed the imperial edict to subdue Hou Mo Chen Yue and was promoted to the governor of Tianshui County.

古文：魏孝武西迁，授武卫将军，进爵武始县伯，增邑二百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁，授任主遂武卫将军，晋爵为武始县伯，增添食邑二百户。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei Xiao Wu moved to the west, conferred the title of Lord and then General of Wuwei, conferred the title of Count of Wuxi County, and increased the number of food villages by 200 households.

古文：大统初，加平东将军，进爵为侯。
现代文：大统初年，加授常善为平束将军，晋升为侯爵。
English: In the first year of the unification of Korea, Jang Son was awarded the title of General Hiratsuka and promoted to marquis.

古文：擒窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，累有战功。
现代文：擒获宝泰，收复弘农，攻破沙苑，当姜屡次立功。
English: He won Baotai, recovered Hongnong, and defeated Shayuan. Dangjiang repeatedly made meritorious contributions.

古文：除使持节、卫将军，假骠骑大将军、秦州刺史。
现代文：升任使持节、卫将军，假骠骑大将军、秦州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the posts of envoy to Jizhixi, general of Wei, general of fake imperial cavalry, and chief historian of Qinzhou.

古文：四年，从战河桥，加大都督，进爵为公，除泾州刺史。
现代文：四年，跟从大军战于河桥，加授大都督，晋为公爵，担任泾州刺史。
English: In four years, he followed the great army to fight in Heqiao, was awarded the title of grand governor, promoted to duke, and served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：属茹茹入寇，抄掠北边，善率所部破之，尽获所掠。
现代文：碰上茹茹入侵，抄掠北部边境，常善率领部下打败茹茹，全部截获蕴茎掠夺之物。
English: When Zhu Ru invaded and plundered the northern border, Chang Sheng led his subordinates to defeat Zhu Ru and intercepted all the loot.

古文：拜车骑大将军、仪同三司，迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，西安州刺史。
现代文：官拜车骑大将军、仪同三司，升任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，西安州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry, and the general of the cavalry.

古文：转蔚州刺史。
现代文：转任薮蛆刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shoseishi.

古文：频莅三蕃，颇有政绩。
现代文：多次莅临三蕃，很有政绩。
English: He has been to Samcheok many times and has made great achievements in politics.

古文：魏恭帝二年，进爵永阳郡公，增邑二千户。
现代文：瑟鳄二年，晋爵为永阳郡公，增加食邑二千户。
English: In the second year of Shiguo, Jinjie became the governor of Yongyang County, increasing the number of food villages by two thousand.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜大将军、宁州总管。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，升任常善为大将军、宁州总管。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, and Jonsen was promoted to the rank of general and made the governor of Ningzhou.

古文：保定二年，入为小司徒。
现代文：保定二年，入朝担任小司徒。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he entered the imperial court and served as a minor disciple.

古文：四年，突厥出师与隋公杨忠东伐，令善应接之。
现代文：四年，突厥人出兵与随公杨忠束伐，命令常善接应。
English: In the fourth year, the Turks sent troops and accompanied Yang Zhongzhu to attack, and ordered Chang Sheng to respond.

古文：五年夏，卒，时年六十四。
现代文：五年夏天，常善去世，当时年龄六十四岁。
English: In the summer of 2005, Chang Son passed away at the age of 64.

古文：赠使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、延夏盐恒燕五州诸军事、延州刺史。
现代文：朝廷追赠他使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、延夏盐恒燕五州诸军事、延州刺史。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Jijisai, General of the Column, Grand Governor, Military Commander of the Five Provinces of Yanxia, Yan and Hengyan, and Historian of Yanzhou.

古文：子升和嗣。
现代文：他的儿子常升和承袭爵位。
English: His sons were often promoted and inherited peerages.

古文：先以善勋，拜仪同三司。
现代文：先是凭藉常善的功勋，官拜仪同三司。
English: First of all, by virtue of the merits of common good, the official worship ceremony is the same as the three divisions.

古文：辛威，陇西人也。
现代文：辛威，是陇西人。
English: Xinwei is from Shaanxi Province.

古文：祖大汗，魏渭州刺史。
现代文：祖父辛大汗，是魏渭州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Xin Dakhan, was a Wei and Zhangzhou scholar.

古文：父生，河州四面大都督。
现代文：父亲辛生，是河州四面大都督。
English: His father, Xin Sheng, was the four-faced governor of Hezhou.

古文：及威着勋，追赠大将军、凉甘等五州刺史。
现代文：等到辛威功勋显著，辛生被追赠大将军、凉甘等五州刺史。
English: When Xin Wei's meritorious service was conspicuous, Xin Sheng was posthumously awarded the title of general, and Liang Gan and other five states were engraved in history.

古文：威少慷慨，有志略。
现代文：辛威年少慷慨，有志向谋略。
English: Xinwei is young and generous, with ambition and strategy.

古文：初从贺拔岳征讨有功，假辅国将军、都督。
现代文：起初跟从贺拔岳征讨有功，代理辅国将军、都督。
English: At first, he followed He Bajiao in the conquest of Mt. He Bajiao, acting as the general of the auxiliary province and the governor.

古文：及太祖统岳之众，见威奇之，引为帐内。
现代文：等到太祖统领贺墨遥的部队，见到圭戚后觉得他不同寻常，就将他留在军帐内听用。
English: When the great-grandfather led the troops of He Mo Yao, he thought that he was unusual after seeing Gui Qi, so he left him in the military account to listen.

古文：寻授羽林监，封白土县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：不久，授任辛威为羽林监，封为白土县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Soon, Xin Wei was appointed as the supervisor of the Ural forest, and was given the title of Baidu County, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：从迎魏孝武，因攻回洛城，功居最。
现代文：辛威跟随大军迎接魏孝武帝，因此攻打回洛城，他的功劳居于首位。
English: Xinwei followed the great army to meet Emperor Wei Xiaowu, so he attacked back to Los Angeles, and his merit ranks first.

古文：大统元年，拜宁远将军，增邑二百户。
现代文：大统元年，辛威被封为宁远将军，增加食邑二百户。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, Xinwei was appointed as the general of Ningyuan, increasing the number of food villages by two hundred.

古文：累迁通直散骑常侍，进爵为侯，增邑三百户。
现代文：多次提升做到通直散骑常侍，晋为侯爵，增加食邑三百户。
English: He has been promoted many times to become a regular attendant, promoted to marquis, and increased the number of restaurants to three hundred.

古文：从擒窦泰，复弘农，战沙苑，并先锋陷敌，勇冠一时。
现代文：跟随大军擒获实泰，收复弘农，战于沙苑，并当先冲入敌阵，勇猛冠绝一时。
English: Following the great army, he captured Sittai, recovered Hongnong, fought in Shayuan, and rushed into the enemy's line first, bravely winning the ultimate victory.

古文：以前后功，授抚军将军、银青光禄大夫。
现代文：凭藉前后所立功劳，他被授任为抚军将军、银青光禄大夫。
English: On the strength of his past and present achievements, he was awarded the titles of General of the Fuzhou Army and Doctor of the Silver Qingguanglu.

古文：从于谨破襄城。
现代文：跟从于谨攻破襄城。
English: Followed by breaking through Xiangcheng.

古文：又从独孤信入洛阳，经河桥阵，加持节，进爵为公，增邑八百户。
现代文：又跟从独孤售进入越曼，经历蜡一战，加授持节，晋为公爵，增加食邑八百户。
English: He also followed from the sole proprietorship into Vietnam, experienced the first battle of wax, added the awarding festival, promoted to the duke, and increased the number of 800 households.

古文：五年，授扬州刺史，加大都督。
现代文：五年，辛威被任命为扬州刺史，加授大都督。
English: In five years, Xinwei was appointed as Yangzhou chief historian and awarded the title of grand governor.

古文：十三年，迁车骑大将军、仪同三司，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，赐姓普氏，出为鄜州刺史。
现代文：十三年，升任车骑大将军、仪同三司，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，赐姓普屯氏，出任鄘州刺史。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry, the third division of ceremony, the general of horse and rider, the third division of Kaifu ceremony, given the surname of Putun, and served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：威时望既重，朝廷以桑梓荣之，迁河州刺史，本州大中正。
现代文：辛威当时声望已很高，朝廷要让他荣归故里，任命他为河州刺史，本州大中正。
English: At that time, Xin Wei's reputation was already very high. The imperial court wanted him to return to his hometown in glory, and appointed him as Hezhou Sashishi, Honshu Daizhongzheng.

古文：频领二镇，颇得民和。
现代文：屡次统领二镇，很得百姓的信赖。
English: He has repeatedly led the two towns and has won the trust of the people.

古文：闵帝践阼，拜大将军，进爵枹罕郡公，增邑五千户。
现代文：盟壶即位，任命芝盛为大将军，晋爵为饱至虽公，增加食邑五千户。
English: Meng Jiu was enthroned, Zhi Sheng was appointed as the general, and Jin Jie was promoted to the rank of full general, increasing the number of food villages by five thousand.

古文：及司马消难来附，威与达奚武率众援接。
现代文：等到司马消难前来归附，辛威与达奚武率众支援接应。
English: As soon as Sima was out of trouble, he came to pay his respects, and Xinwei and Daguangwu led the crowd to support him.

古文：保定初，复率兵讨丹州叛胡，破之。
现代文：保定初年，辛威又率兵讨伐丹州反叛的胡人，打败了他们。
English: In the first year of Baoding, Xinwei led the troops to fight the rebellious Hu people in Danzhou and defeated them.

古文：三年，与达奚武攻阳关，拔之。
现代文：三年，辛威与达奚武攻打阳关，占领了它。
English: Three years later, Xinwei and Daguangwu attacked Yangguan and occupied it.

古文：明年，从尉迟迥围洛阳。
现代文：等二年，辛威跟随尉迟迥包围洛阳。
English: In the following two years, Xinwei and his subordinates besieged Luoyang.

古文：还，拜小司马。
现代文：班师后，他被封为小司马。
English: After graduating from the class, he was awarded the title of Xiao Sima.

古文：天和初，进位柱国。
现代文：天和初年，晋为柱国。
English: In the first year of Tianhe, it was promoted to a pillar country.

古文：复为行军总管，讨绥、银等诸州叛胡，并平之。
现代文：辛威又任行军总管，讨伐绥、银等各州叛乱的胡人，全部平定了他们。
English: Xinwei was also appointed as the general manager of the march, and fought against the Hu people who rebelled in various states, such as Yao and Yin, and all of them were pacified.

古文：六年，从齐王宪东伐，拔伏龙等五城。
现代文：六年，辛威跟随齐王宇文宪东伐，攻取伏龙等五城。
English: In the sixth year, Xinwei followed the eastward march of Qi Wang Yuwen Xian and captured five cities including Fulong.

古文：建德初，拜大司寇。
现代文：建德初年，辛威被任命为大司寇。
English: In the first year of Jiande, Xinwei was appointed as the chief scout.

古文：三年，迁少傅，出为宁州总管。
现代文：三年，任少傅，出任宁州总管。
English: Three years later, he was appointed as a sous chef and served as the general manager of Ningzhou.

古文：宣政元年，进位上柱国。
现代文：宣政元年，晋为上柱国。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Constitution, it was promoted to Shangzhu Province.

古文：大象二年，进封宿国公，增邑并前五千户，复为少傅。
现代文：大象二年，晋为宿国公，食邑增至五千户，又任少傅。
English: In the second year of the elephant, he was promoted to the host country, the food village increased to five thousand households, and he was appointed as a sous chef.

古文：其年冬，薨，时年六十九。
现代文：遣一年冬天，辛威去世，当时六十九岁。
English: A year later, in the winter, Xinwei passed away at the age of 69.

古文：威性持重，有威严。
现代文：辛威生性稳重，富有威严。
English: Xinwei has a steady nature and is full of majesty.

古文：历官数十年，未尝有过，故得以身名终。
现代文：前后做官几十年，不曾有过失，所以能够以地位名誉善终。
English: He has been an official for decades and has never made a mistake, so he can end up with a good reputation.

古文：兼其家门友义，五世同居，世以此称之。
现代文：加上他的家族友善孝义，五代人住在一起，世人因此称扬不已。
English: In addition, his family is friendly and filial, five generations live together, and the world praises him for this.

古文：子永达嗣。大象末，以威勋，拜仪同大将军。
现代文：他的儿子辛永达继袭爵禄，大象末年，凭藉辛威的功勋，官拜仪同大将军。
English: His son Xin Yongda succeeded to the peerage, and in the elephant's later years, thanks to Xin Wei's merits, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：厍狄昌字恃德，神武人也。
现代文：库狄昌字恃德，是神武人。
English: Kudichang, whose Chinese name means "virtuous," is a divine warrior.

古文：少便骑射，有膂力。
现代文：年少时善于骑马射箭，有膂力。
English: When he was young, he was good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：及长，进止闲雅，胆气壮烈，每以将帅自许。
现代文：等到长大，举止娴雅，胆魄气势雄壮激烈，常常以将帅自许。
English: When he grows up, his manners are elegant, his courage is strong and fierce, and he often praises himself as a handsome general.

古文：年十八，尔朱天光引为幢主，加讨夷将军。
现代文：十八岁时，库狄昌被尔朱天光引用担任幢主，加授讨夷将军。
English: At the age of eighteen, Ku Dichang was cited by Er Zhu Tianguang as the master of the building, and was awarded the title of general of expelling the barbarians.

古文：从天光定关中，以功拜宁远将军、奉车都尉、统军。
现代文：跟从玉光平定题中，凭藉战功被任命为宁远将军、奉车都尉、统军。
English: He was appointed as the general of Ningyuan, the lieutenant of Fengche, and the leader of the unified army.

古文：天光败，又从贺拔岳。
现代文：天光失败，库狄昌又跟从贺拔岳。
English: Tianguang failed, and Ku Dichang followed He Bailu.

古文：授征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：任征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Appointed as the general of the Western Expedition and the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：及岳被害，昌与诸将议翊戴太祖。
现代文：及至贺拔岳被害，库狄昌与众将计议辅佐拥戴太祖。
English: As far as the He Baturakure disaster, Ku Dichang and his generals discussed and supported Dai Zu.

古文：从平侯莫陈悦，赐爵阴盘县子，加卫将军、右光禄大夫。
现代文：跟从太祖平定侯莫陈悦，被赐爵阴盘县子，加授卫将军、右光禄大夫。
English: He followed his great-grandfather to subdue Hou Mo Chen Yue, and was given the title of peer of Yinpan County, awarded the title of General of the Guards, and the title of Doctor of the Right Light of Lu.

古文：后从太祖迎魏孝武，复潼关，改封长子县子，邑八百户。
现代文：后来，库狄昌跟从太祖迎接魏孝武帝，恢复渔闱，朝廷改封他为长广县子，食邑八百户。
English: Later, Ku Dichang followed his great-grandfather to meet Emperor Wei Xiaowu, resumed fishing, and the court changed his name to Changguang County, with 800 households.

古文：大统初，进爵为公，增邑一千户。
现代文：大铲初年，晋为公爵，增加食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of the shovel, he was promoted to duke, increasing the number of households by a thousand.

古文：从破窦泰，授车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：跟从大军打败窦台，被任命为车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: He followed the great army to defeat Dou Tai and was appointed as the general of chariot and cavalry and the doctor of Zuo Guanglu.

古文：又从复弘农，战沙苑，昌皆先登陷阵。
现代文：又跟从大军收复弘农，战于沙苑，库狄昌都一马当先冲入敌阵。
English: He also followed the great army to recover Hongnong and fought in Sha Yuan. Ku Di Chang was the first to rush into the enemy's line.

古文：太祖嘉之，授帅都督。
现代文：太祖褒赏他，封他为帅都督。
English: The great-grandfather rewarded him by appointing him as a handsome governor.

古文：四年，从战河桥，除冀州刺史。
现代文：四年，跟从大军战于河桥，被升任为冀州刺史。
English: In four years, he followed the great army to fight in Heqiao, and was promoted to be the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：后与于谨破胡贼刘平伏于上郡，授冯翊郡守。
现代文：后来与工谨在上郡打败胡贼刘芒优，被任命为冯翊垫守。
English: Later, he and Gong Jian defeated the Hu bandit Liu Mengyou in Shang County and was appointed as the guardian of Fengyuan.

古文：久之，转河北郡守。
现代文：过了很久，改任河北郡守。
English: After a long time, he was appointed Hebei County Governor.

古文：十三年，录前后功，授大都督、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：十三年，朝廷记录库狄昌前后功劳，授任他为大都督、通直散骑常侍。
English: In the thirteenth year, the imperial court recorded Ku Dichang's merits and awarded him the title of grand governor and the title of non-commissioned officer.

古文：又从随公杨忠破蛮贼田社清，昌功为最，增邑三百户，拜仪同三司。
现代文：库狄昌又跟随堕公查蝗打败蛮贼旦丝清，库狄昌功劳最大，朝廷增加他的食邑三百户，任命他为仪同三司。
English: Ku Dichang also followed the fallen lord Cha Locust to defeat the barbarian thief Dansi Qing. Ku Dichang's greatest achievement was that the imperial court increased his number of households by 300 and appointed him as the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：寻迁开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久升任开府仪同三司。
English: He was soon promoted to the 3rd Division of Kaifu Giri Tong.

古文：十六年，出为东夏州刺史。
现代文：十六年，库狄昌出任束夏州刺史。
English: Sixteen years later, Ku Dichang served as the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：魏废帝元年，进爵方城郡公，增邑并前四千一百户。
现代文：魏废帝元年，晋爵方城郡公，食邑增至四千一百户。
English: In the first year of the Wei Emperor's rule, the number of households in Jingsu Fangcheng County increased to 4,100.

古文：六官建，授稍伯中大夫。
现代文：六官建立，库狄昌被授任稍伯中大夫。
English: Six departments were established, and Ku Dichang was awarded the title of Junior Middle Doctor.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜大将军。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，库狄吕被任命为大将军。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, and Qudiliu was appointed grand general.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后来因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：田弘字广略，高平人也。
现代文：旦弘字卢堕，是直至人。
English: If Hongzhi, the name of Lu, falls, it is up to the people.

古文：少慷慨，志立功名，膂力过人，敢勇有谋略。
现代文：少年慷慨，有志建立功名，膂力过人，勇敢而有谋略。
English: The boy is generous, aspires to build a reputation, is overpowering, brave and resourceful.

古文：魏永安中，陷于万俟丑奴。
现代文：魏丞岩年间，旦丛陷身在万俟丑奴军中。
English: During the turbulent years of the Wei and Zheng Dynasties, Tang Cong was trapped in the Ugly Slave Army.

古文：尔朱天光入关，弘自原州归顺，授都督。
现代文：尔朱天光入闽，旦弘白区业归顺玉光，被任命为都督。
English: Zhu Tianguang entered the imperial palace, and Tang Hongbai District was transferred to Shun Yuguang, who was appointed as the governor.

古文：及太祖初统众，弘求谒见，乃论世事，深被引纳，即处以爪牙之任。
现代文：等到太祖刚统领众将不久，田弘请求拜见太祖，于是议论世事，多被太祖引用采纳，太祖把他当作得力的助手加以任用。
English: Not long after Emperor Taizu ascended to the throne, Tahiro asked to see Emperor Taizu, and they discussed world affairs. He was mostly quoted and adopted by Emperor Taizu, who appointed him as an able assistant.

古文：又以迎魏孝武功，封鹑阴县子，邑五百户。
现代文：田弘又因迎接魏孝武帝有功，被封为鹑阴县子，食邑五百户。
English: In addition, Tianhong was awarded the title of the son of Shuyin County for his meritorious service in welcoming Emperor Wei Xiaowu, with 500 households in Shuiyin County.

古文：太祖常以所着铁甲赐弘云： 天下若定，还将此甲示孤也。 大统三年，转帅都督，进爵为公。
现代文：太祖曾把所穿的铁甲赐给田弘说： 天下如果平定，你还将这副铁甲拿给我看。 大统三年，田弘改任帅都督，被晋升为公爵。
English: The great-grandfather once gave the iron armor he was wearing to Tahiro, saying, "If the world is pacified, you will also show me this pair of iron armor." In the third year of the Taisei era, Tahiro was reappointed as the military governor of the capital and was promoted to the rank of duke.

古文：从太祖复弘农，战沙苑，解洛阳围，破河桥阵，弘功居多，累蒙殊赏，赐姓纥干氏。
现代文：跟从太祖收复弘农，战于沙苑，解除洛阳包围，打败河桥敌军，田弘功劳居多，多次蒙受特殊赏赐，赐姓纥干氏。
English: Following his great-grandfather, he recovered Hongnong, fought in Shayuan, lifted the siege of Luoyang, and defeated the enemy army in Heqiao. Tianhong did most of the work, received special rewards many times, and was given the surname of Yinggan.

古文：寻授原州刺史。
现代文：不久被任命为原州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the original state chief historian.

古文：以弘勋望兼至，故以衣锦荣之。
现代文：因为田弘功勋威望都很高，所以朝廷让他显贵使他荣耀。
English: Because Tian Hong's achievements and prestige were very high, the imperial court made him prominent and glorified him.

古文：太祖在同州，文武并集，乃谓之曰： 人人如弘尽心，天下岂不早定。 即授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：太祖在同州，文武官员齐集，太祖对众人说： 人人都像田弘那样尽心，天下难道不早就平定了! 就授任田弘为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: The great-grandfather was in the same prefecture, and the military and civilian officials were gathered together. The great-grandfather said to everyone, "Everyone is as dedicated as Tahiro. Isn't it time that the world was leveled?" He appointed Tahiro as the General of the Cavalry and the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：魏废帝元年，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：魏废帝元年，加授田弘骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was awarded the title of General of the Horse of Tian Hongxuan, and the title of General of the Three Departments of Kaifu.

古文：平蜀之后，梁信州刺史萧韶等各据所部，未从朝化，诏弘讨平之。
现代文：平定蜀地之后，梁信州刺史萧韶等各自凭靠所统军兵，不服从朝廷的统治，朝廷韶令田弘讨平了他们。
English: After the pacification of Shu, Liang Xinshou, Zhi Shi, Xiao Wei and others each relied on the unified army and disobeyed the rule of the imperial court, and the imperial court ordered Tian Hong to defeat them.

古文：又讨西平叛羌及凤州叛氐等，并破之。
现代文：田弘又讨伐西平叛乱的羌人及凤州叛乱的氐人等，把他们都打败了。
English: Tian Hong also fought against the Xiping Rebellion and the Pengzhou Rebellion, defeating them both.

古文：弘每临阵，摧锋直前，身被一百余箭，破骨者九，马被十矛，朝廷壮之。
现代文：田弘每次临阵作战，破敌深入勇往直前，身上被射遇一百多箭，骨头损伤九次，战马被长矛戳伤十次，朝廷认为他很勇敢。
English: Every time Tian Hong fought in the front line, he broke through the enemy and marched forward bravely. He was shot with more than a hundred arrows, his bones were injured nine times, and his horse was wounded by a spear ten times. The court thought he was very brave.

古文：信州群蛮反，又诏弘与贺若敦等平之。
现代文：信州众蛮人造反，朝廷又韶令田弘与贺若敦等讨平了他们。
English: The barbarians of Shinshu rebelled, and the imperial court ordered Tian Hiro and Heraotun to fight them.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵鴈门郡公，邑通前二千七百户。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，田弘晋爵为雁门郡公，食邑增至二千七百户。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, Tian Hong Jinjie became the prince of Ganmen County, and the number of food villages increased to 2,700.

古文：保定元年，出为岷州刺史。
现代文：保定元年，田弘出任岷州刺史。
English: In the first year of Baoding, Tian Hong served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：弘虽武将，而动遵法式，百姓颇安之。
现代文：田弘虽然是武将，但行动遵循法度，百姓感到很安宁。
English: Although Tahiro was a military commander, his actions were in accordance with the law, and the people felt very peaceful.

古文：三年，从随公杨忠伐齐，拜大将军。
现代文：三年，旦弘跟从堕公圭眯讨伐齐，被任命为大将军。
English: Three years later, Tan Hong was appointed to the position of grand general, following in the footsteps of his fallen comrade, Gui Yao.

古文：明年，又从忠东伐。
现代文：第二年，又跟从杨忠束伐。
English: The following year, he followed Yang Zhongzhuang.

古文：师还，乃旋所镇。
现代文：班师回朝后，田弘就很快回到所镇守之地。
English: After the team returned to the morning, Tian Hong quickly returned to the place of the town guard.

古文：吐谷浑寇西边，宕昌羌潜相应接，诏弘讨之，获其二十五王，拔其七十栅，遂破平之。
现代文：吐谷浑入侵西部边境，宕昌羌人暗中相接应，朝廷诏令田弘讨伐他们，俘获了敌方二十五王，拔除了七十六个寨栅，终于打败讨平了他们。
English: Tu Gu Hun invaded the western border, and the Tang, Chang, and Qin secretly responded. The imperial court ordered Tian Hong to fight them, captured the enemy's twenty-five kings, pulled out seventy-six stockades, and finally defeated and leveled them.

古文：天和二年，陈湘州刺史华皎来附，弘从卫公直赴援。
现代文：天和二年，陈湘州刺史苹皎前来归附，田弘跟随卫公宇文直赶去支援。
English: In 1902, Chen Xiangzhou and Shi Pingyao came to annex it, and Tian Hong followed Wei Gong and U Wendao to rush to support.

古文：与陈人战，不利，仍以弘为江陵总管。
现代文：与陈人交战，失利，朝廷仍然让田弘担任江陵总管。
English: He fought with Chen Ren and lost, but the imperial court still allowed Tian Hong to serve as the chief administrator of Gangneung.

古文：及陈将吴明彻来寇，弘与梁主萧岿退保南，令副总管高琳拒守，明彻退，乃还江陵。
现代文：及至陈将领吴明彻来侵犯，田弘与梁主萧归退军保卫纪南，命令副总管高琳拒守，吴明彻退兵，田弘才回到江陵。
English: When Chen's general Wu Mingcher came to invade, Tian Hong and Liang's commander Xia Gui Rong withdrew to defend Jinan, ordered vice-commander Gao Lin to refuse to defend, Wu Mingcher to withdraw, and Tian Hong returned to Gangneung.

古文：寻以弘为仁寿城主，以逼宜阳。
现代文：不久朝廷让田弘担任仁寿城主，以便逼近宜阳。
English: Soon after, the imperial court made Tianhong the lord of Renshou Castle in order to get closer to Yiyang.

古文：齐将段孝先、斛律明月出军定陇以为宜阳援，弘与陈公纯破之，遂拔宜阳等九城。
现代文：齐将段孝先、斛律明月从定陇出军以便作为宜阳的援军，田弘与陈公宇文纯打败了他们，于是攻占了宜阳等九座城池。
English: Qi dispatched Duan Xiaoxian and Lu Mingyue from Dingyuan to serve as reinforcements for Yiyang. Tian Hong and Chen Gongwu Wenzhong defeated them and captured nine cities including Yiyang.

古文：以功增邑五百户，进位柱国大将军。
现代文：凭藉功劳田弘得以增加食邑五百户，晋为柱国大将军。
English: Thanks to his efforts, Tahiro was able to increase the number of households in his shokui to 500 and was promoted to the rank of Shukoku taisho (commander-in-chief).

古文：建德二年，拜大司空，迁少保。
现代文：建德二年，田弘官拜大司空，升任少保。
English: In the second year of Jiande, Tian Hong was promoted to the position of Junior Security Officer.

古文：三年，出为总管襄郢昌丰唐蔡六州诸军事、襄州刺史。
现代文：三年，出任总管襄郢昌丰唐蔡六州诸军事、襄州刺史。
English: In three years, he served as the general manager of Xiangfan Changfeng Tang Cai Ruzhou Military and Xiangzhou History.

古文：薨于州。
现代文：在襄州去世
English: Died in Xiangzhou

古文：子恭嗣。
现代文：他的儿子田恭继承爵禄。
English: His son, Tian Qiao, inherited the peerage.

古文：少有名誉，早历显位。
现代文：年少时就有声誉，很早就处在显要的位置。
English: He gained a reputation at a young age and was in a prominent position early on.

古文：大象末，位至柱国、小司马。
现代文：大象末年，官至柱国、小司马。
English: At the end of the elephant's life, officials such as Zhu Guo and Xiao Sima were promoted.

古文：朝廷又追录弘勋，进恭爵观国公。
现代文：朝廷又追录田弘的功勋，提升田恭的爵号为观国公。
English: The imperial court also recorded the merits of Tago and promoted Tago's title to Kankokuko.

古文：梁椿字千年，代人也。
现代文：梁椿字王年，是佳人。
English: In the year of the Dragon King, Liang Chunzhu is a beautiful woman.

古文：祖屈朱，魏昌平镇将。
现代文：祖父凿屈叁，是魏昌平的镇将。
English: His grandfather, He Jucu, was the town marshal of Wei Changping.

古文：父提，内郎。
现代文：父亲梁提，是内三郎。
English: His father, Liang Ti, was Uchisaburo.

古文：椿初以统军从尔朱荣入洛，复从荣破葛荣于滏口，以军功进授都将。
现代文：梁椿起初以统军的身份跟从尔朱荣进入洛地，又跟从玺塞莹在遥旦打败姜茔，凭藉军功被提升为都将。
English: At first, as a member of the unified army, Liang Tsiming followed Zhu Rong into Luodi. He also followed Yu Xie Ying to defeat Jiang Chen in Yotan, and was promoted to general thanks to his military exploits.

古文：后从贺拔岳讨平万俟丑奴、萧宝夤等，迁中坚将军、屯骑校尉、子都督。
现代文：后来跟从贺拔岳讨平万俟丑奴、萧直鱼等，升任中坚将军、屯骑校尉、子都督。
English: Later, he followed He Baduyue to subdue Wan Xun Ugly Slave, Xiao Zhiyu, etc., and was promoted to general, cavalry captain, and son of the governor.

古文：普泰初，拜征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：普壶初年，升任征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of Pu Jiu, he was promoted to the general of the Western Expedition and the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：二年，除高平郡守，封卢奴县男，邑一百户。
现代文：二年，任高平郡守，被封为卢奴县男，食邑一百户。
English: Two years later, he was appointed the governor of Gaoping County, and was named the man of Lunu County, with a hundred households.

古文：太昌元年，进授都督。
现代文：太旦元年，升任都督。
English: In the first year of the Tai Tan era, he was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：从太祖平侯莫陈悦，拜卫将军、右光禄大夫。
现代文：梁椿跟从太祖平定侯莫陈坦，授任卫将军、右光禄大夫。
English: Liang Zhan followed his great-grandfather Pingding Hou Mo Chen Tan and was awarded the title of General of the Guards and Doctor of the Right Light.

古文：大统初，进爵栾城县伯，增邑五百户。
现代文：大统初年，晋爵为乐城县伯，增加食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, Jinzhe became the county magistrate of Lecheng County, increasing the number of food villages by 500 households.

古文：出为陇东郡守。
现代文：出任陇束郡守。
English: Appointed as Hatsuka-gun governor.

古文：寻进爵为公，增邑五百户，迁梁州刺史。
现代文：不久，他又被晋为公爵，增加食邑五百户，升任粱业刺史。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the rank of duke, increased the number of households to 500, and was promoted to the position of chief historian.

古文：从复弘农，战沙苑，与独孤信入洛阳，从宇文贵破东魏将尧雄等，累有战功。
现代文：跟从大军收复弘农，战于沙苑，与独幽言一起进入盗屋，跟从室塞贵打败塞魏将领童雄等，多次建有战功。
English: He followed the great army to recover Hongnong, fought in Shayuan, entered the thief's house together with Du Yuyan, and followed Muro Segui to defeat Wei general Tongxiong, etc. He has made many war exploits.

古文：授车骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督。
现代文：朝廷授任他为车骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, and the grand governor.

古文：从战河桥，进爵东平郡公，增邑一千户。
现代文：跟从大军战于河桥，被晋爵为束平郡公，增加食邑一千户。
English: He followed the great army to fight in Heqiao and was promoted to the peerage as the Duke of Sokping County, increasing the number of food villages by one thousand.

古文：俄迁侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久又升任侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of chamberlain, cavalry general, and Keifu-gi and Sanji.

古文：七年，从于谨讨稽胡刘平伏，椿擒其别帅刘持塞。
现代文：七年，梁椿跟从于谨讨伐稽胡刘干伏，擒获配合平伏作战的将帅刘持塞。
English: In the seventh year, Liang Tsun followed Hu Liu Ganfu, who was trained to fight with honor, and won the support of Liu Jisei, who was trained to fight with meekness.

古文：又从独孤信讨岷州羌梁仚定，破之。
现代文：又跟从独孤信讨伐岷州羌人梁仑定，打败了他。
English: He also followed Liang Lunding, who believed in fighting the Xizhou Xiang people alone, and defeated him.

古文：除清州刺史。
现代文：被任命为渭州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：在州虽无他政绩，而夷夏安之。
现代文：在渭州虽然没有其他政绩，但夷人汉民都相安无事。
English: Although there are no other political achievements in Zhangzhou, the Chinese people and the Chinese people are all safe and sound.

古文：十三年，从李弼赴颍川援侯景。
现代文：十三年，梁椿跟从李弼赶赴颖支援侯景。
English: In the thirteenth year, Liang Tsubing followed Li Yao to rush to Ying to support Houjing.

古文：别攻阎韩镇，斩其镇城徐卫。
现代文：另外攻打阎韩镇，斩除镇城将领徐卫。
English: In addition, they attacked Yanhan Town and killed the town's general, Xu Wei.

古文：城主卜贵洛率军士千人降。
现代文：城主卜贵洛率领军士一千人投降。
English: The lord of the city, Bugui Lo, led a thousand soldiers to surrender.

古文：以功增邑四百户。
现代文：因功增加食邑四百户。
English: Due to his efforts, he increased the number of restaurants to 400.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，除华州刺史，改封清陵郡公，增邑通前三千七百户。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，任命梁椿为华州刺史，改封他为清陵郡公，增加食邑与以前的相加共三千七百户。
English: Emperor Xiaozhong ascended the throne, appointed Liang Zhan as the governor of Huazhou, changed his title to the governor of Qingling County, and increased the number of counties and towns to a total of 3,700.

古文：二年，入为少保，转少傅。
现代文：二年，梁椿入朝担任少保，改任少傅。
English: Two years later, Liang Chin entered the imperial court as a junior bodyguard and was appointed as a junior chef.

古文：保定元年，拜大将军。
现代文：保定元年，官拜大将军。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：卒于位。
现代文：死于他所在的职位上。
English: He died in office.

古文：赠恒鄜延丹宁五州诸军事，行恒州刺史，谥曰烈。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为恒鄘延丹宁五州诸军事，兼任恒州刺史，谧号叫烈。
English: The imperial court posthumously presented him to the military of the five states of Hengshui, and he also served as the historian of Hengshui. His posthumous name was Yu Yu.

古文：椿性果毅，善于抚纳，所获赏物，分赐麾下，故每践敌场，咸得其死力。
现代文：梁椿生性果敢刚毅，善于安抚接纳他人，所获得的赏赐物品，分开来赐给他的部下，所以每次上阵杀敌，都能得到部下的拼死效力。
English: Liang Tsun's nature is resolute and strong, and he is good at appeasing and accepting others. The reward items he has obtained are given to his subordinates separately, so every time he goes into battle to kill the enemy, he can get the death-defying effectiveness of his subordinates.

古文：雅好俭素，不营赀产，时论以此称焉。
现代文：他很爱节俭朴素，不经营资产，当时舆论因此称赞他。
English: Public opinion at the time praised him for his love of frugality and simplicity, and for not managing assets.

古文：子明，魏恭帝二年，以椿功袭爵丰阳县公。
现代文：他的儿子梁明，在魏恭帝二年，凭藉梁椿的功勋承袭爵位为丰阳县公。
English: His son Liang Ming, in the second year of Emperor Wei Gong, inherited the title of Fengyang County with the merits of Liang Zhan.

古文：寻授大都督，迁车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，治小吏部，历小御伯、御正下大夫。
现代文：不久授任大都督，升任车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，管理小吏部，历任小御伯、御正下大夫。
English: He was soon appointed Grand Governor, promoted to General of Cavalry and Chariots, Third Secretary for Ceremonies and Ceremonies, Knight-at-Arms, in charge of the Petty Officers' Department, and successively held the positions of Junior Imperial Officer and Imperial Physician.

古文：保定五年，诏袭椿爵，旧封回授弟朗。
现代文：保定五年，朝廷下诏让他承袭父亲梁椿的爵号，将他以前的封爵回授给他的弟弟梁朗。
English: Five years after Baoding, the imperial court issued an edict to let him inherit the title of his father, Liang Zhan, and to return his previous title to his brother, Liang Lang.

古文：天和中，改封乐陵郡公，除上州刺史，增邑并前四千三百户。
现代文：天和年间，朝廷改封他为乐陵郡公，任上史，增加食邑与以前的相加共四千三百户。
English: During the Heian period, the Imperial Court changed his title to Leling County Governor, and he was appointed to the post of Shoshi, increasing the number of shokui to a total of 4,300 households.

古文：梁台字洛都，长池人也。
现代文：梁台字洛都，是长池人。
English: Liang Tai Zi Luo Du is a native of Changchi.

古文：父去斤，魏献文时为陇西郡守。
现代文：父亲梁去斤，在魏献文帝时担任陇西郡守。
English: His father, Liang Dejin, served as the governor of Shaanxi County during the reign of Emperor Wei Jianwen.

古文：台少果敢，有志操。
现代文：梁台年少果敢，有志气和操守。
English: Liang Tai is young and brave, with ambition and integrity.

古文：孝昌中，从尔朱天光讨平关、陇，一岁之中，大小二十余战，以功授子都督，赐爵陇城乡男。
现代文：孝昌年间，跟从尔朱天光讨平关、陇，一年当中，打了大小二十多仗，凭藉功劳被授任子都督，赐予爵号陇城乡男。
English: During the years of Xiaochang, he fought more than 20 battles with Zhu Tianguang in one year. He was awarded the title of "City and Countryman" and the title of "Junior Governor" for his distinguished service.

古文：普泰初，进授都督。
现代文：萱台初年，升任都督。
English: In the first year of Xingtai, he was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：后隶侯莫陈悦讨南秦州群盗，平之。
现代文：后来隶属侯莫陈坦讨伐亩画业的众多强盗，平定了那裹。
English: Later, many robbers affiliated with Hou Mo Chentan, who were fighting for the painting industry, leveled it.

古文：悦表台为假节、卫将军、左光禄大夫，进封陇城县男，邑二百户。
现代文：侯莫陈悦上表使梁台任假节、卫将军、左光禄大夫，晋封为陇城县男，食邑二百户。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue promoted Liang Tai to the post of holiday, Wei general, and Zuo Guanglu doctor, and was promoted to the post of the man of Shicheng County, with 200 households.

古文：寻行天水郡事，转行赵平郡事。
现代文：不久，梁台掌管天眯事务，转而掌管趟平郡事务。
English: Soon, Liang Tai was in charge of Tianzhu affairs, and then in charge of Wiping County affairs.

古文：频治郡，颇有声绩。
现代文：屡次治郡，很有声誉政绩。
English: He has repeatedly governed the county and has a very good reputation.

古文：未几，天光追台还，引入帐内。
现代文：不多时，尔朱天光征召梁台回来，引入军帐听用。
English: Not infrequently, Le Zhu Tianguang conscripted Liang Tai to come back and introduce military accounts.

古文：及天光败于寒陵，贺拔岳又引为心膂。
现代文：等到尔朱天光在寒陵失败，贺拔岳又引用他作为心腹。
English: When Er Zhu Tianguang failed in the Cold Mausoleum, He Batyue also cited him as a confidant.

古文：岳为侯莫陈悦所害，台与诸将议翊戴太祖。
现代文：贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害，梁台与众将议论拥戴太祖。
English: He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, and Liang Tai and the generals discussed and supported the great ancestor.

古文：从讨悦，破之。
现代文：跟从太祖讨伐侯莫陈悦，打败了他。
English: He followed his great-grandfather to fight against Hou Mo Chen Yue and defeated him.

古文：又拜天水郡守。
现代文：又被任命为天水郡守。
English: He was also appointed Governor of Amami County.

古文：大统初，复除赵平郡守。
现代文：大统初年，再任赵平郡守。
English: In the first year of unification, Zhao Ping was reappointed as county governor.

古文：又与太仆石猛破两山屠各，诏增邑一百户，转平凉郡守。
现代文：梁台又与太仆石猛打败两山屠各部落，朝廷下诏为他增加食邑一百户，改任平凉郡守。
English: Liang Tai and his eunuchs defeated the tribes of the two mountains, and the imperial court ordered him to increase the number of households to a hundred, and he was appointed the governor of Pingliang County.

古文：时莫折后炽结聚轻剽，寇掠居民。
现代文：当时莫折后炽聚集轻捷剽悍的兵卒，入侵抢掠居民。
English: At that time, the light, swift and powerful soldiers gathered and invaded and robbed the residents.

古文：州刺史史宁讨之，历时不克。
现代文：州刺史史宁讨伐他们，多时不能取胜。
English: Shishining, the provincial magistrate, fought against them and could not win for a long time.

古文：台陈贼形势，兼论攻取之策，宁善而从之，遂破贼徒。
现代文：梁台陈述贼寇的军事阵势，同时论述攻取的策略，史宁认为很好就听从了，于是打败了贼寇。
English: Liang Tai stated the military position of the bandits, and discussed the strategy of attack. Shining thought it was good and obeyed, so he defeated the bandits.

古文：复与于谨破刘平伏。
现代文：梁台又舆于谨打败了刘平伏。
English: Liang Tai also defeated Liu Pingfu.

古文：录前后勋，授颍州刺史，赐姓贺兰氏。
现代文：朝廷记录他的前后功劳，授任他为颖州刺史，赐姓贺兰氏。
English: The imperial court recorded his achievements and awarded him the title of Yingzhou historian, and gave him the surname of Heran.

古文：从援玉壁，战邙山，授帅都督。
现代文：梁台跟从大军支援玉壁，战于亡口山，被授任为帅都督。
English: Liang Tai followed the great army to support Yubi, fought in the mountain of the dead mouth, and was appointed as the governor of the capital.

古文：大统十五年，拜南夏州刺史，加通直散骑常侍、本州大中正，增邑二百户。
现代文：大统十五年，朝廷任命他为南夏州刺史，加授通直散骑常侍、本州大中正，增添食邑二百户。
English: In the fifteenth year of unification, the imperial court appointed him to be the governor of Nanxia Prefecture, and he was also awarded the title of Tongzhizhanyi Changzhi and the title of Honshu Daizhongzheng, adding 200 households.

古文：魏废帝二年，迁使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中。
现代文：魏废帝二年，升任梁台使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司，晋为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加授侍中。
English: In the second year of the Wei Dynasty, he was promoted to the Liangtai Jizhi Festival, the General of Chariot and Cavalry, the Third Division of Ceremonial, the General of Horse and Cavalry, the Third Division of Kaifu Ceremonial, and the Junior Chamberlain.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵中部县公，增邑通前一千户。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，提升梁台封号为中部县公，增加食邑与以前的相加共一千户。
English: Emperor Xiaozhong ascended the throne, elevated Liangtai to the title of Chubu County, and increased the number of food villages to a total of one thousand.

古文：武成中，从贺兰祥征洮阳，先登有功，别封绥安县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：武成年间，梁台跟从贺兰祥征讨洮阳，率先登城有功，另外受封绥安县侯，食邑一千户。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, Liang Tai followed He Lan Xiang to conquer Fenyang. He was the first to successfully enter the city. In addition, he was awarded the title of county magistrate of Fenyang County. There were one thousand households in the food village.

古文：诏听转授其子元庆。
现代文：朝廷下韶听任他将爵禄转而授给他的儿子梁元庆。
English: The imperial court ordered him to transfer his peerage to his son, Liang Yuanqing.

古文：保定四年，拜大将军。
现代文：保定四年，梁台官拜大将军。
English: After four years of Baoding, Liang Tai was promoted to general.

古文：时大军围洛阳，久而不拔。
现代文：当时大军围困洛阳，很久攻不下来。
English: At that time, a large army besieged Luoyang and could not be defeated for a long time.

古文：齐骑奄至，齐公宪率兵御之。
现代文：齐朝的骑兵忽然赶到，齐公宇文宪率兵抵御。
English: The cavalry of the Qi Dynasty suddenly arrived, and Qi Gong Uwen led the gendarmes to resist.

古文：乃有数人为敌所执，已去阵二百余步，台望见之，愤怒，单马突入，射杀两人，敌皆披靡，执者遂得还。
现代文：竟有数人被敌人捉去，已经离开阵地二百多步，梁台望见之后，心中愤怒，独自骑马突入敌阵，射杀两人，敌人都纷纷败退，被捉去的人终于得以归还。
English: Several people were actually captured by the enemy, they had already left the position more than two hundred paces, after seeing the bridge and platform, they were angry, they rode alone into the enemy line, shot two people, the enemy were defeated and retreated, and the captured people were finally returned.

古文：齐公宪每叹曰： 梁台果毅胆决，不可及也。 五年，拜鄜州刺史。
现代文：齐公宇文宪经常赞叹说： 梁台果敢刚毅能决断，别人赶不上他。 五年，梁台被委任为鄘州刺史。
English: Qi Gongyu Wenxian often praised and said: Liangtai's courage and determination can make decisions, others can't catch up with him. In five years, Liangtai was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：台性疏通，恕己待物。
现代文：梁台性情通达，接人待物很宽厚。
English: Liang Tai's disposition is open-minded, and his hospitality is very generous.

古文：至于莅民处政，尤以仁爱为心。
现代文：至于治理百姓处理政事，尤其把仁爱作为本心。
English: When it comes to governing the people and dealing with political affairs, benevolence is especially important.

古文：不过识千余字，口占书启，辞意可观。
现代文：不过认识一千多字，口授书信，言辞意思都值得一看。
English: However, knowing more than a thousand words, dictating letters, and the meaning of words are all worth a look.

古文：年过六十，犹能被甲跨马，足不蹑镫。
现代文：年龄过了六十岁，还能身披锁甲跨上战马，不用踩着马鉴。
English: At the age of over sixty, he can still wear a suit of armour and mount a war horse without stepping on a horse-shoe.

古文：驰射弋猎，矢不虚发。
现代文：骑马奔驰射箭打猎，箭不虚发。
English: Ride a horse, drive a Mercedes, shoot arrows and go hunting, the arrows will not be wasted.

古文：后以疾卒。宇文测字澄镜，太祖之族子也。
现代文：后来因病去世宇文测字澄镜，是太祖的同族子孙。
English: Uwen Chaozheng, who later died of illness, was a descendant of the same family as the great-grandfather.

古文：高祖中山、曾祖豆颓、祖骐驎、父永，仕魏，位并显达。
现代文：高祖宇文中山；曾祖宇文豆颓、祖父宇文骥膦、父亲宇文永，在魏做官，地位都荣显闻达。
English: The great-great-grandfather, Uwen Zhongshan; the great-great-grandfather, Uwen Doudou; the grandfather, Uwen Doudou; and the father, Uwen Yong, all served as officials in the Wei Dynasty, and their positions were distinguished and well-known.

古文：测性沉密，少笃学，每旬月不窥户牖。
现代文：宇文测性情深沉严谨，年少好学，常常卜天半月不看窗外。
English: Yu Wenmei's disposition is profound and rigorous, he is eager to learn at a young age, and he often does not look out of the window for half a day.

古文：起家奉朝请、殿中侍御史，累迁司徒右长史、安东将军。
现代文：从家中征召出来，任奉朝请、殿中侍御史的职位，多次提升担任司徒右长史、安束将军。
English: He was called up from his home and appointed to the position of courtier to the emperor, the position of attendant to the emperor in the palace, and was promoted several times to the position of Shtuyu Choshi and General Antsuko.

古文：尚宣武女阳平公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶宣武帝的女儿阳平公主为妻，官拜驸马都尉。
English: He married Princess Yang Ping, the daughter of Emperor Xuanwu, and was given the official title of "Captain of Horse."

古文：及魏孝武疑齐神武有异图，诏测诣太祖言，令密为之备。
现代文：等到魏孝武帝疑心齐神武帝有谋叛的意图，孝武帝便下诏派宇文测赶去报告太祖，命令太祖秘密作好准备。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu suspected Emperor Qinwu of plotting a rebellion, Emperor Xiaowu sent Wu Wenmei to report to Emperor Taizu and ordered Emperor Taizu to make secret preparations.

古文：太祖见之甚欢。使还，封广川县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：太祖见到宇文测非常高兴出使回来，宇文测被封为广川县伯，食邑五百户。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy to see that Uwenmei had returned from his mission. Uwenmei was given the title of huangchuan county, with more than 500 households.

古文：寻从孝武西迁，进爵为公。
现代文：不久跟从孝武帝西入长安，晋为公爵。
English: Soon after, he followed Emperor Xiaowu westward to Guanai and was promoted to the peerage.

古文：太祖为丞相，以测为右长史，军国政事，多委任之。
现代文：太祖做丞相，用宇文测任右长史，军队国家的行政事务，多委任宇文测办理。
English: The great-grandfather was the prime minister, and appointed Uwen Jie as the right-hand man of history, and appointed Uwen Jie to handle the administrative affairs of the army and the country.

古文：又令测详定宗室昭穆远近，附于属籍。
现代文：又命令宇文测详细确定宗室的辈次排列亲疏远近，附录在家族的名册上。
English: He also ordered Uwenmei to make a detailed determination of the lineage of the family's ancestral home, which was appended to the family register.

古文：除通直散骑常侍、黄门侍郎。
现代文：升任宇文测为通直散骑常侍、黄门侍郎。
English: He was promoted to Uwensho as Tsuchizhitsuji Sanzhijo no Tsuneishi, and Omon no Tsuneishi.

古文：大统四年，拜侍中、长史。
现代文：大统四年，宇文测任侍中、长史。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Unification, Uwen Jie was appointed as a chamberlain, and his reign was a long one.

古文：六年，坐事免。
现代文：六年，因为犯事被免去官职。
English: Six years later, he was removed from office for the crime.

古文：寻除使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、行汾州事。
现代文：不久升任使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、代理汾州事务。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of envoy, the general of the cavalry, the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, the grand governor, and the agent of Zhangzhou affairs.

古文：测政存简惠，颇得民和。
现代文：宇文测施政简略而存恩惠，很得百姓欢心。
English: The people were very pleased with the concise and benevolent policies of Uwenmei.

古文：地接东魏，数相钞窃，或有获其为寇者，多缚送之。
现代文：汾州与束魏接壤，束魏人屡次来抄掠盗窃，有时抓获东魏来侵掠的人，多绑缚送给宇文测。
English: Zhangzhou shares a border with Shu Wei. Shu Wei people repeatedly came to Zhangzhou to pillage and steal. Sometimes they captured people who came from Eastern Wei to invade and plunder. Most of them were tied up and sent to Wu Wenmei.

古文：测皆命解缚，置之宾馆，然后引与相见，如客礼焉。
现代文：宇文测都命令解开绑缚，安置他们在宾馆里，然后引来与己相见，像宾客一样礼待他们。
English: Instead, he had his captives unchained, put up in a hotel and received as guests.

古文：仍设酒肴宴劳，放还其国，并给粮饩，卫送出境。
现代文：仍然设置酒宴菜肴慰劳他们，放他们回到自己国家去，并给粮食，护送他们出境。
English: Still set up banquets and dishes to console them, let them go back to their own country, and give food to escort them out of the country.

古文：自是东魏人大惭，乃不为寇。
现代文：从这以后东魏人大为羞惭，于是不再做贼寇。
English: From then on, the Eastern Wei people were very ashamed, so they stopped being thieves and robbers.

古文：汾、晋之间，各安其业。
现代文：汾、晋之间，人们各自安居乐业。
English: Between the Jiu and Jin dynasties, people lived and worked independently.

古文：两界之民，遂通庆吊，不复为仇雠矣。
现代文：边界两旁的百姓，于是喜庆、吊丧相互往来，不再互为仇敌了。
English: As a result, the people on both sides of the border exchanged joyous celebrations and funerals, and no longer regarded each other as enemies.

古文：时论称之，方于羊叔子。
现代文：当时舆论称赞此事，把宇文测比作羊叔子。
English: At that time, the public opinion praised the matter, comparing Uwen Jie to a sheep's uncle.

古文：或有告测与外境交通，怀贰心者。
现代文：有人状告宇文测与束魏勾结，怀有贰心。
English: Someone sued Yu Wenmei for colluding with Sok Wei and harboring ill intentions.

古文：太祖怒曰： 测为我安边，吾知其无贰志，何为间我骨肉，生此贝锦！ 乃命斩之。
现代文：太祖发怒道： 宇文测替我安抚边境，我知道他没有贰心，为什么要离间我们骨肉，生出这种谗言! 于是下令把进谗的人斩了。
English: The great-grandfather angrily said, "Uwensho pacified the border for me. I know he didn't mean it. Why did he create such a rift between our flesh and blood? He then gave the order to behead the person who broke into the coffin."

古文：仍许测以便宜从事。
现代文：仍然允许宇文测按照方便适宜的方式处理事务。
English: Yu Wenmei is still allowed to handle affairs in a convenient and appropriate manner.

古文：八年，加金紫光禄大夫，转行绥州事。
现代文：八年，朝廷加授宇文测为金紫光禄大夫，让他转而执掌绥州事务。
English: Eight years later, the imperial court promoted Uwen Jie to the position of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, allowing him to take charge of Zhangzhou affairs.

古文：每岁河冰合后，突厥即来寇掠，先是常预遣居民入城堡以避之。
现代文：每年河水结冰合成一片后，室厥人就来入侵抢掠，此前官府常常预先让居民进入城堡来躲避突厥人。
English: Every year, after the river froze and formed a sheet, the Turks would invade and plunder. Previously, the government often allowed residents to enter the castle in advance to avoid the Turks.

古文：测至，皆令安堵如旧。
现代文：字文测到了，都令百姓像以往一样安居。
English: When the word was measured, it made the people live as peacefully as before.

古文：乃于要路数百处并多积柴，仍远斥候，知其动静。
现代文：于是在几百处紧要的道路上都多积柴草，频繁在远处设置哨兵，了解突厥人的动静。
English: As a result, firewood and grass were piled up in hundreds of critical places on the road, and sentries were frequently set up in the distance to understand the movements of the Turks.

古文：是年十二月，突厥从连谷入寇，去界数十里。
现代文：这一年十二月，突厥人从连谷入侵，距离边界数十里。
English: In December of that year, the Turks invaded from the valley, dozens of miles from the border.

古文：测命积柴之处，一时纵火。
现代文：宇文测命令堆积柴草的地方，在同一时间放起大火。
English: Yu Wenmei ordered the firewood to be piled up at the same time as the fire was set off.

古文：突厥谓有大军至，惧而遁走，自相蹂践，委弃杂畜及辎重不可胜数。
现代文：突厥人以为有大军到了，害怕逃跑，自相践踏，丢弃的各种牲畜及军用物资不可胜数。
English: The Turks thought that a large army had arrived, were afraid to flee, trampled on each other, and abandoned countless livestock and military supplies.

古文：测徐率所部收之，分给百姓。
现代文：宇文测不慌不忙地率领部下收拾突厥弃下的财物，分给百姓。
English: Uwenmei unhurriedly led his subordinates to collect the property abandoned by the Turks and distribute it to the people.

古文：自是突厥不敢复至。
现代文：自此突厥人不敢再来入侵。
English: Since then, the Turks have not dared to invade again.

古文：测因请置戍兵以备之。
现代文：字文测于是请求朝廷设置守卫的士兵用以防备突厥人。
English: He therefore asked the imperial court to set up soldiers to guard against the Turks.

古文：十年，征拜太子少保。
现代文：十年，朝廷征召宇文测回朝任用他为太子少保。
English: Ten years later, the imperial court summoned Uwen to return to the court and appointed him as the prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：十二年十月，卒于位，时年五十八。太祖伤悼，亲临恸焉。
现代文：十二年卜月，宇文测死于他所任的职位上，当时五十八岁太祖悲伤哀悼，亲临现场表示悲恸。
English: In the twelfth year of Bu Yue, Yu Wenmei died in the position he held. At that time, the fifty-eight-year-old grandfather was sad and mourned, and came to the scene to express his grief.

古文：仍令水池公护监护丧事。
现代文：又令水池公宇文护监督护理丧事。
English: He also ordered the death of Shuichongwu Wenro, a nursing supervisor.

古文：赠本官，谥曰靖。
现代文：追赠本来的官职，谧号叫靖。
English: He was posthumously given his original official position, and his posthumous name was Jing.

古文：测性仁恕，好施与，衣食之外，家无蓄积。
现代文：宇文测性情仁爱宽容，好以财物周济别人，衣物食品之外，家中没有蓄积。
English: Yu Wenmei's disposition is benevolent and tolerant, so he is able to use his wealth to help others. In addition to clothing and food, there is no accumulation in his home.

古文：在洛阳之日，曾被窃盗，所失物，即其妻阳平公主之衣服也。
现代文：在洛阳的时候，他曾被人盗窃，所失去的物品，就是他妻子阳平公主的衣服。
English: When he was in Luoyang, he was robbed, and the items he lost were the clothes of his wife, Princess Yangping.

古文：州县擒盗，并物俱获。
现代文：州县擒拿盗贼，连同赃物一起抓获。
English: The thief was caught together with the stolen goods.

古文：测恐此盗坐之以死，乃不认焉。
现代文：宇文测恐怕这个盗贼因罪被处死，竟然不认衣物。
English: I'm afraid that this thief was executed for his crime, and he didn't recognize the clothes.

古文：遂遇赦得免。
现代文：盗贼于是遇赦得以免祸。
English: The thief was therefore pardoned and spared.

古文：盗既感恩，因请为测左右。
现代文：盗贼既然感恩，因而请求在宇文测左右效力。
English: Since the thief was grateful, he asked for the effect to be around Uwenmei.

古文：及测从魏孝武西迁，事极狼狈，此人亦从测入关，竟无异志。
现代文：等到宇文测跟从魏孝武帝西迁，事情极其窘迫，此人也跟随宇文测入关，竟然没有贰心。
English: By the time Wu Wenmei moved west with Emperor Wei Xiaowu, the situation was extremely difficult. This person also followed Wu Wenmei into the pass, and he didn't have a bad heart.

古文：子该嗣。
现代文：宇文测的儿子宇文该继承爵禄。
English: Uwen, Uwenke's son, should inherit the peerage.

古文：历官内外，位至上开府仪同三司、临淄县公。
现代文：他先后在朝廷内外做官，官位达到上开府仪同三司、临淄县公。
English: He successively served as an official both inside and outside the imperial court, reaching the rank of Shangkaifu Yi, Tongsan Shi, and Linyi County official.

古文：测弟深。
现代文：宇文测的弟弟是宇文深。
English: The younger brother of Uwensho is Uwenshin.

古文：深字奴干。
现代文：宇文深字奴干。
English: Yuwen is a deep-voiced slob.

古文：性鲠正，有器局。
现代文：性情耿直正派，有器量。
English: Genuine, decent and resourceful.

古文：年数岁，便累石为营伍，并折草作旌旗，布置行列，皆有军阵之势。
现代文：年龄才几岁，便堆起石块作为阵营队伍，并且折草当作旌旗，布置军队行列，都有行军排阵的阵势。
English: When they were only a few years old, they piled up stones as a camp team, and folded grass as a banner, arranged army ranks, and had a marching formation.

古文：父永遇见之，乃大喜曰： 汝自然知此，于后必为名将。 
现代文：父亲宇文永见到后，于是大喜说： 你生来就这样，以后必定会成为名将。 
English: When his father, Yu Wenyong, saw him, he was overjoyed and said, "You were born like this, and you will surely become a great player in the future."

古文：至永安初，起家秘书郎。
现代文：到了永安初年，宇文深出任秘书郎。
English: In his first year at Yongan, Wu Wenshen became the secretary.

古文：时群盗蜂起，深屡言时事，尔朱荣雅知重之。
现代文：当时盗贼成群起来作乱，宇文深屡次谈论时事，尔朱荣很赏识重视他。
English: At that time, thieves gathered in groups to make trouble, and Yu Wenshen repeatedly talked about current affairs. Le Zhu Rong appreciated and valued him very much.

古文：拜厉武将军。
现代文：官拜厉武将军。
English: General Lv Wu was appointed to the post.

古文：寻除车骑府主簿。
现代文：不久担任车骑府主簿。
English: He soon became the chief clerk of the Cheka.

古文：三年，授子都督，领宿卫兵卒。
现代文：三年，朝廷授任他为子都督，统领在宫中值宿警卫的兵卒。
English: Three years later, the imperial court appointed him as the son of the governor, commanding the soldiers on guard duty in the palace.

古文：及齐神武举兵入洛，孝武西迁。
现代文：及至齐神武帝率领军队攻入洛阳，孝武帝西迁长安。
English: Until Emperor Qishenwu led the army into Luoyang, Emperor Xiaowu moved west to Chang'an.

古文：既事起仓卒，人多逃散，深抚循所部，并得入关。
现代文：事已匆促，人多逃散，字塞逐安抚部下，一起得以入关。
English: The situation was already urgent, many people fled and dispersed, word stopper one by one to appease his subordinates, and they were able to enter the customs together.

古文：以功赐爵长乐县伯。
现代文：囚功被赐爵号为长乐县伯。
English: He was given a knighthood for his contribution to the establishment of Changle County.

古文：太祖以深有谋略，欲引致左右，图议政事。
现代文：太祖因为宇文深有谋略，想把他召引到自己身边，谋划计议政事。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to call him to his side to plan and discuss political affairs, because he had a deep understanding of strategy.

古文：大统元年，乃启为丞相府主簿，加朱衣直合。
现代文：大统元年，于是启用宇文深做丞相府主簿，加授朱衣直合。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, therefore, Yu Wenshen was appointed as the chief secretary of the Prime Minister's Office, and Zhu Yizhong was additionally awarded.

古文：寻转尚书直事郎中。
现代文：很快又改任尚书直事郎中。
English: He was soon reappointed as a disciple of Shosho Naoji.

古文：及齐神武屯蒲阪,分遣其将窦泰趣潼关,高敖曹围洛。
现代文：等到齐神武帝驻军蒲坂，分别派遣他的将领窦泰赶往潼关，高敖曹围攻洛州。
English: When Emperor Qishenwu garrisoned in Busaka, he sent his generals Dou Tai and Gao Bing Cao to rush to Shaoguan and besiege Lozhou.

古文：太祖将袭泰，诸将咸难之。
现代文：太祖打算袭击窦泰，众将都认为很难。
English: Taizu planned to attack Dou Tai, but the generals thought it would be difficult.

古文：太祖乃隐其事，阳若未有谋者，而独问策于深。
现代文：太祖于是隐瞒这件事，表面上好像没有谋划，却单独向宇文深询问计策。
English: The great-grandfather then concealed the matter, ostensibly as if there was no plan, but separately inquired about the strategy from Wu Wenshen.

古文：对曰： 窦氏，欢之骁将也，顽凶而勇，战亟胜而轻敌，欢每仗之，以为御侮。
现代文：宇文深回答道： 窦氏，是高欢的骁将，顽强凶猛而勇敢，作战急于求胜而轻敌，高欢每每依仗他，用他来抵御外侮。
English: Yu Wenshen replied: Dou, is Gao Huan's great general, tenacious, fierce and brave, eager to fight for victory and despise the enemy, Gao Huan always relies on him and uses him to resist foreign attacks.

古文：今者大军若就蒲阪，则高欢拒守，窦泰必援之，内外受敌，取败之道也。
现代文：现在大军如果开往蒲坂，那么高欢拒守，窦泰必然支援，我军内外受敌，这是自取失败的路子。
English: Now, if the great army is heading for Busaka, then Gao Huan will refuse to defend, Dou Tai will inevitably support, and our army will be subject to enemies inside and outside. This is the path to self-defeat.

古文：不如选轻锐之卒，潜出小关。
现代文：不如挑选轻装精锐的士卒，暗中从小关出击。
English: It is better to select lightly armed elite soldiers and secretly attack from a small pass.

古文：窦性躁急，必来决战，高欢持重，未即救之，则窦可擒也。
现代文：宝泰性情急躁，必然来决战，高欢做事持重，不立即救援，那么宝泰束手可擒了。
English: Baotai's temperament is impatient, it is inevitable to come to a decisive battle, Gao Huan is serious about doing things, if he does not immediately rescue, then Baotai's hands will be tied.

古文：既虏窦氏，欢势自沮。
现代文：既已俘虏了窦氏，高欢的气势自然颓丧。
English: Now that the Dou clan had been captured, Gao Huan's momentum naturally waned.

古文：回师御之，可以制胜。 太祖喜曰： 是吾心也。 
现代文：我们回兵抵挡他，可以取胜。 太祖欢喜地说： 这正是我心中所想的。 
English: We will fight back against him and we can win, my great-grandfather said happily, "This is exactly what I had in mind."

古文：军遂行，果获泰而齐神武亦退。
现代文：军队于是出击，果然擒获宝泰而齐神武帝也退兵离去。
English: The army then attacked, successfully captured Baotai, and Emperor Qishenwu also withdrew.

古文：深又说太祖进取弘农，复克之。
现代文：宇文深又劝说太祖进兵夺取弘农，又攻取了。
English: Yu Wenshen also persuaded Taizu to enter the army to capture Hongnong, and he captured it again.

古文：太祖大悦，谓深曰： 君即吾家之陈平也。 
现代文：太祖非常高兴，对宇文深说： 你就是我家的陈平。 
English: The great-grandfather was very happy and said to Yu Wenshen: You are the Chen Ping of my family.

古文：是冬，齐神武又率大众度河涉洛，至于沙苑。
现代文：这年冬天，齐神武帝又率领大军渡过黄河涉过洛水，到达沙苑。
English: This winter, Emperor Qishenwu led a large army across the Yellow River, waded through Luoshui, and arrived at Sha Yuan.

古文：诸将皆有惧色，唯深独贺。
现代文：众将都面有惧色，衹有宇文深独自祝贺。
English: The generals all wore a somber expression, but Yu Wenshen was the only one to offer congratulations.

古文：太祖诘之，曰： 贼来充斥，何贺之有？ 对曰： 高欢之抚河北，甚得众心，虽乏智谋，人皆用命，以此自守，未易可图。
现代文：太祖诘问他，说： 贼兵铺天盖地而来，有什么值得祝贺的? 宇文深回答道： 高欢安抚黄河以北，很得众人之心，虽然缺乏智谋，众人都为他卖命，以此自家守卫，别人不容易谋取他。
English: Grandfather Yao asked him, saying, "What is there to be congratulated for when the bandits come from all over the world?" Wu Wenshen replied, "Gao Huan appeased the north of the Yellow River and won the hearts of everyone. Although he lacked wisdom, everyone worked hard for him and guarded their homes with him. It was not easy for others to get him.

古文：今悬师度河，非众所欲，唯欢耻失窦氏，愎谏而来。
现代文：现在高欢率军渡过黄河，不是众人愿意的，衹是高欢为失去窦氏感到耻辱，不听劝谏而来。
English: Now Gao Huan led the army across the Yellow River, which was not what everyone wanted, but because Gao Huan was ashamed of losing the Dou clan, he did not listen to advice.

古文：所谓忿兵，一战可以擒也。
现代文：这是所说的忿兵，一次战斗就可以擒住他。
English: This is the so-called enraged soldier, who can be subdued in a single battle.

古文：此事昭然可见，不贺何为。
现代文：这件事明白可见，不祝贺干什么。
English: You can see this clearly, what's not to congratulate.

古文：请假深一节，发王罴之兵，邀其走路，使无遗类矣。 太祖然之。
现代文：请借给我宇文深一个符节，发派王熊的军队，拦截敌人的退路，使敌人无一可以逃脱。 太祖认为他说得正确。
English: Please lend me one of Yu Wenshen's talismans to send the army of Wang Xiong to intercept the enemy's retreat, so that none of the enemy can escape.

古文：寻而大破齐神武军，如深所策。
现代文：不久大败齐神武帝的军队，正如宇文深所策划的那样。
English: Soon, Emperor Qizhenwu's army was defeated, just as Yu Wenshen had planned.

古文：四年，从战河桥。
现代文：四年，宇文深跟从大军战于河桥。
English: Four years later, Yu Wenshen followed the great army to fight in Heqiao.

古文：六年，别监李弼军讨白额稽胡，并有战功。
现代文：六年，另外监督李弼军队讨伐白额稽胡，都建有战功。
English: In six years, he also supervised the Li Rong army's crusade against Bai Bing Hu, and all of them have made war achievements.

古文：俄进爵为侯，历通直散骑常侍、东雍州别驾、使持节、大都督、东雍州刺史。
现代文：不久，宇文深被提升爵位为侯，历任通直散骑常侍、束雍州别驾、使持节、大都督、东雍州刺史。
English: Soon after, Yu Wenshen was promoted to the peerage as a marquis, and successively served as a non-commissioned officer, a special envoy to Yongzhou, an envoy to the festival, a grand governor, and a historian of East Yongzhou.

古文：深为政严明，示民以信，抑挫豪右，吏民怀之。
现代文：宇文深治理政事严明，对待百姓讲信用，抑制挫折豪强大族，官吏百姓怀恩。
English: Yu Wenshen governed the government strictly, treated the people with trust, restrained the setbacks of the powerful and powerful, and the officials and the people were grateful.

古文：十七年，入为雍州别驾。
现代文：十七年，召入任雍州别驾。
English: Seventeen years later, he was summoned to Yongzhou.

古文：魏恭帝二年，进车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，他被提升为车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of etiquette, and the attendant of horseback riding.

古文：六官建，拜小吏部下大夫。
现代文：六官建立，他受封为小吏部下大夫。
English: Six official positions were established, and he was given the title of minor official and subordinate doctor.

古文：孝闵帝受襌，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，迁吏部中大夫。
现代文：孝闵帝接受禅让，提升宇文深为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，任吏部中大夫。
English: Emperor Xiaojun accepted Zen's resignation and promoted Wu Wenshen to the general of cavalry, the third secretary of Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and the junior doctor of the cadre department.

古文：武成元年，除州刺史，改封安化县公。
现代文：武成元年，任命宇文深为豳州刺史，改封他为安化县公。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he appointed Wu Wenshen as the governor of Zhangzhou and changed his title to the governor of Anhua County.

古文：二年，征拜宗师大夫，转军司马。
现代文：二年，朝廷征召他为宗师大夫，改任军司马。
English: Two years later, he was called up by the imperial court to become a grandmaster, and was appointed to the post of military governor.

古文：保定初，除京兆尹。
现代文：保定初年，任京兆尹。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：入为司会中大夫。
现代文：入朝担任司会中大夫。
English: Entered the imperial court as the secretary and junior doctor.

古文：深少丧父，事兄甚谨。
现代文：宇文深年少丧父，侍奉兄长非常勤谨。
English: Having lost his father at a young age, Uwenshin was very obedient to his older brother, Uwensho.

古文：性多奇谲，好读兵书。既在近侍，每进筹策。
现代文：性情奇异而多变化，喜爱读兵书，既在君相左右奉侍，每每进献谋略计策。
English: His character is strange and changeable, he likes to read military books, he serves at the side of the prince, and he is always devising strategies.

古文：及在选曹，颇获时誉。
现代文：等到他在吏部供职，很受时人称誉。
English: By the time he served in the Personnel Department, he was highly praised by the people of the time.

古文：性仁爱，情隆宗党。
现代文：他秉性仁爱，对待宗族党人情义深厚。
English: He was benevolent by nature and treated the party members of his clan with deep feelings.

古文：从弟神、神庆幼孤，深抚训之，义均同气，世亦以此称焉。
现代文：堂弟字文神举、宇文神庆年幼丧父，宇文深抚养教育他们，情义均如骨肉，世人也因此称道他。
English: His cousins, Uwen Shengju and Uwen Shenqing, lost their father at a young age. Uwen deeply raised and educated them, and their feelings were like flesh and blood. The world praised him for this.

古文：天和三年，卒于位。
现代文：天和三年，死于所任职位上。
English: days and three years, died in office.

古文：赠使持节、少师、恒云蔚三州刺史，谥曰成康。
现代文：朝廷追赠他使持节、少师、恒云蔚三州刺史，谧号叫成康。
English: The imperial court posthumously presented him with the titles of envoy, young teacher, and Hengyunwei of the Three Provinces, and his nickname was Chengkang.

古文：子孝伯，自有传。
现代文：他的儿子叫宇文孝伯，自有传记。
English: His son is called Uwen Takahiro, and has his own biography.

古文：史臣曰：太祖属祸乱之辰，以征伐定海内，大则连兵百万，系以存亡，小则转战边亭，不阕旬月。
现代文：史臣曰：太祖适逢祸乱时期，凭藉征伐安定海内，大规模的征伐则连兵百万，事关生死存亡，小规模的征伐则在边境连续作战，不下十天半月。
English: Shichen said: Taizu fell into a period of calamity, with the help of the conquest to stabilize the sea, the large-scale conquest was a million soldiers, a matter of life and death, and the small-scale conquest was a continuous battle on the border, not less than ten days and a half months.

古文：是以人无少长，士无贤愚，莫不投笔要功，横戈请奋。
现代文：因此人们不管年少年长，文士不管是贤是愚，没有谁不弃文求取功名，持戈请求奋战。
English: Therefore, no matter how old or young people are, whether scribes are wise or foolish, there is no one who does not abandon the text to seek fame, hold the sword and request to fight.

古文：若夫数将者，并攀翼云汉，底绩屯夷，虽运移年世，而名成终始，美矣哉！
现代文：像这几位将领，都是振翅高飞，在困厄之中建立功绩，虽然经历许多战斗岁月，但是功名有始有终，确实很美好啊!
English: Like these several generals, they are all high-flying wings, building achievements in the midst of adversity. Although they have experienced many years of combat, their achievements have a beginning and an end. It's really wonderful!

古文：以赫连达之先识，而加之以仁恕；蔡佑之敢勇，而终之以不伐。
现代文：以赫连达的先见之明，却又兼有仁厚宽容；蔡佑的勇敢善战，却又不因功自夸。
English: With Herenda's foresight, but also with benevolence and tolerance; Cai You's bravery and bravery, but without boasting.

古文：斯岂企及所致乎，抑亦天性也。
现代文：这难道是主观追求所能达到的吗?抑或也是天性所致吧。
English: Is this something that can be achieved through subjective pursuit? Or is it a result of nature?

古文：宇文测昆季，政绩谋猷，咸有可述，其当时之良臣欤。
现代文：宇文测兄弟，政绩和谋略，都有可以称道的，大概可算是当时的良臣了吧！
English: The Uwenke brothers, their political achievements and strategies are commendable, and they can probably be regarded as good ministers at that time!

