古文：八年春，王正月，公侵齐。
现代文：八年春季，周历正月，定公发兵入侵齐国。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Ding Gong sent troops to invade Qi.

古文：公至自侵齐。
现代文：定公从入侵齐国的地方回来。
English: Dingong returned from the place where he invaded Qi.

古文：二月，公侵齐。
现代文：二月，定公发兵入侵齐国。
English: In February, Ding Gong sent troops to invade Qi.

古文：三月，公至自侵齐。
现代文：三月，定公从入侵齐国的地方回来。
English: In March, Dingong returned from the invasion of Qi.

古文：曹伯露卒。
现代文：曹伯露去世。
English: Cao Bo Lu passed away.

古文：夏，齐国夏帅师伐我西鄙。
现代文：夏季，齐国的国夏率领军队攻打我国西面边境。
English: In the summer, Guoxia of Qi led an army to attack the western border of our country.

古文：公会晋师于瓦。
现代文：定公在瓦地与晋国军队会合。
English: Sadagimi met with the Jin army in Wadi.

古文：公至自瓦。
现代文：定公从瓦地回来。
English: Sadamasa returns from Wadi.

古文：秋七月戊辰，陈侯柳卒。
现代文：秋季七月戊辰日，陈侯柳去世。
English: In the autumn of July, on the day of Pentecost, Chen Houliu passed away.

古文：晋士鞅帅师侵郑，遂侵卫。
现代文：晋国的士鞅率领军队入侵郑国，有入侵卫国。
English: The Shih Tzu of Jin led an army to invade Zheng, and there was an invasion to defend the country.

古文：葬曹靖公。
现代文：安葬曹靖公。
English: The funeral of Cao Jing is over.

古文：九月，葬陈怀公。
现代文：九月，安葬陈怀公。
English: In September, Chen Huai Gong was buried.

古文：季孙斯、仲孙何忌帅师侵卫。
现代文：季孙斯、仲孙何忌率领军队入侵卫国。
English: Qisuns and Zhongsun He Gui led the army to invade the country.

古文：冬，卫侯、郑伯盟于曲濮。
现代文：冬季，卫侯、郑伯在曲濮结盟。
English: In winter, Wei Hou and Zheng Bo formed an alliance in Quzhou.

古文：从祀先公。
现代文：依即位的先后次序祭祀先公。
English: According to the order of succession to the throne, sacrifices are made to the predecessor.

古文：盗窃宝玉、大弓。
现代文：阳虎盗取了宝玉、大弓。
English: Yanghu stole the precious stones and the big bow.

古文：八年春，王正月，公侵齐，门于阳州。
现代文：八年春季，周王朝历法的正月，鲁定公发兵入侵齐国，攻打阳州的城门。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, the first month of the Zhou dynasty calendar, Luding sent soldiers to invade Qi and attack the city gate of Yangzhou.

古文：士皆坐列，曰，颜高之弓六钧，皆取而传观之。
现代文：士兵们都排成行列坐着，说： 颜高的硬弓有一百八十斤呢！ 
English: The soldiers all sat in rows and said: Yan Gao's bow weighs one hundred and eighty pounds!

古文：阳州人出，颜高夺人弱弓，籍丘子鉏击之，与一人俱毙。
现代文：大家都拿来传看。阳州人出战，颜高把别人的软弓抢过来准备射箭，籍丘子鉏击打颜高，颜高和另外一个人都被击倒在地上。
English: Yangzhou people went out to fight, Yan Gao snatched someone else's soft bow to prepare for archery, and he was beaten by Qiu Ziqi. Yan Gao and another person were knocked down to the ground.

古文：偃且射子鉏，中颊，殪。
现代文：颜高倒在地上，向子鉏射了一箭，射中他的脸颊，把他射死了。
English: Yan Gao fell to the ground and shot an arrow at Zi Yao, hitting him in the cheek and killing him.

古文：颜息射人中眉，退曰： 我无勇，吾志其目也。 
现代文：颜息射人射中眉毛，退下来说： 我没有本事，我本来是想射他的眼睛。 
English: He shot someone in the eyebrow, stepped back and said, "I don't have the skill. I meant to shoot him in the eye."

古文：师退，冉猛伪伤足而先。其兄会乃呼曰： 猛也殿。 
现代文：军队撤退，冉猛假装脚上受伤而走在前面，他的哥哥冉会就大喊说： 猛啊，到后面去吧！ 
English: When the army retreated, Ran Meng pretended to have injured his foot and walked in front. His brother Ran Hui shouted: "Meng Meng, go to the back!"

古文：二月己丑，单子伐穀城，刘子伐仪栗。辛卯，单子伐简城，刘子伐盂，以定王室。
现代文：二月二十六日，单武公发兵进攻谷城，刘桓公发兵进攻仪栗，三月二十八日，单武公发兵进攻简城，刘桓公发兵进攻盂地，以安定王室。
English: On February 26th, Emperor Wu sent troops to attack Gu Cheng and Liu Huan sent troops to attack Yi Li, and on March 28th, Emperor Wu sent troops to attack Jian Cheng and Liu Huan sent troops to attack Handan, in order to stabilize the royal family.

古文：赵鞅言于晋侯曰： 诸侯唯宋事晋，好逆其使，犹惧不至。今又执之，是绝诸侯也。 
现代文：赵鞅对晋定公说： 诸侯之中惟有宋国事奉晋国，好好迎接他们的使者，还恐怕不来，现在又逮捕了他们的使者，这样将会使自己继绝与诸侯的关系。 
English: Zhao Yao said to Jin Ding Gong: Among the princes, only Song served Jin, welcomed their envoys well, but did not come, and now they have arrested their envoys. In this way, they will sever their relationship with the princes.

古文：将归乐祁。士鞅曰： 三年止之，无故而归之，宋必叛晋。 
现代文：准备放回乐祁，士鞅说： 扣留了他三年，无缘无故又把他放回去，宋国必然背叛晋国。 
English: Preparing to release Le Yao, Shi Yao said, "After detaining him for three years and releasing him again for no reason, Song necessarily betrayed Jin.

古文：献子私谓子梁曰： 寡君惧不得事宋君，是以止子。子姑使溷代子。 
现代文：士鞅私下对乐祁说： 寡君害怕不能事奉宋君，因此没有让您回去，您姑且让溷来代替您。 
English: Shi Yan said to Le Yan in private, "You were afraid that you would not be able to serve Song Jun, so you did not let you go back. Please let me take your place."

古文：子梁以告陈寅。
现代文：乐祁把话告诉陈寅。
English: Le Yao told the story to Chen Yin.

古文：陈寅曰： 宋将叛晋，是弃溷也。不如待之。 
现代文：陈寅说： 宋国将要背叛晋国，这是丢弃溷，乐祁不如等一下。 
English: Chen Yin said: Song is about to betray Jin. This is a waste of time. Let's wait.

古文：乐祁归，卒于大行。
现代文：乐祁动身回去，死在太行。
English: Le Yao went back and died in Taihang.

古文：士鞅曰： 宋必叛，不如止其尸以求成焉。 
现代文：士鞅说： 宋国必定背叛，不如留下他的尸体来求和。 
English: Shi Yan said, "Song Guo must have betrayed us. It's better to leave his corpse behind to sue for peace."

古文：乃止诸州。
现代文：于是就把尸体留在州地。
English: So they left the body in the state.

古文：公侵齐，攻廪丘之郛。
现代文：鲁定公入侵齐国，攻打廪丘外城。
English: Ludingkun invaded Qi Province and attacked the outer city of Shaoqiu.

古文：主人焚冲，或濡马褐以救之，遂毁之。主人出，师奔。
现代文：廪丘守将放火焚烧冲城的战车，有人把麻布短衣沾湿了灭火，就攻破了外城。守将出战，鲁军奔逃。
English: The defenders of Shaoshan Hill set fire to the chariots that were rushing to the city. Someone drenched their linen shorts to extinguish the fire, and they broke through the outer city. The defenders went to fight, and the Russian army fled.

古文：阳虎伪不见冉猛者，曰： 猛在此，必败。 
现代文：阳虎假装没有看见冉猛的样子，说： 冉猛要在这里，一定能打败他们。 
English: Yang Hu pretended not to see Ran Meng and said, "Ran Meng must be here, he will surely defeat them."

古文：猛逐之，顾而无继，伪颠。虎曰： 尽客气也。 
现代文：冉猛追逐廪丘人，看到后面没有人跟上来，就假装从车上掉下来。阳虎说： 都是言不由衷。 
English: He chased after the man, and when he saw that no one was following him, he pretended to fall off the car. Yanghu said, "It's all insincere.

古文：苫越生子，将待事而名之。
现代文：苫越生了儿子，准备等到有了大事再来命名。
English: Hao Yue gave birth to a son and is preparing to wait until there is a big event before naming him.

古文：阳州之役获焉，名之曰阳州。
现代文：阳州这一役俘虏了敌人，就把儿子命名为阳州。
English: Yangzhou captured the enemy in this battle, and named his son Yangzhou.

古文：夏，齐国夏、高张伐我西鄙。
现代文：夏季，齐国的国夏、高张进攻我国西部边境。
English: In the summer, Qi's Guoxia and Gao Zhang attacked the western border of our country.

古文：晋士鞅、赵鞅、荀寅救我。
现代文：晋国的士鞅、赵鞅、荀寅救援我国。
English: Jin's Shifu, Zhao Wei, and Zou Yin came to the rescue of our country.

古文：公会晋师于瓦。范献子执羔，赵简子、中行文子皆执雁。
现代文：鲁国在瓦地会见晋军，士鞅手拿小羔，赵鞅、荀寅都手拿大雁作为礼物。
English: Lu met with the Jin army in Wadi. Shi Yan held a lamb in his hand, while Zhao Wei and Zou Yin both held a wild goose as a gift.

古文：鲁于是始尚羔。
现代文：鲁国从这时开始就以羔羊为贵重礼物。
English: From that time on, lambs were given as precious gifts in Lu.

古文：晋师将盟卫侯于泽。赵简子曰： 群臣谁敢盟卫君者？ 
现代文：晋军将要和卫灵公在鄟泽结盟，赵简子说： 臣下们有谁敢和卫国国君结盟？ 
English: The Jin army will ally with Wei Ling in Heze, Zhao Jianzi said: "Who of my subjects would dare to ally with the Emperor of the Great Patriotic War?

古文：涉佗、成何曰： 我能盟之。 
现代文：涉佗、成何说： 我们能和他结盟。 
English: "We can make an alliance with him," Wafang and Cheng Ho said.

古文：卫人请执牛耳。
现代文：卫国人请他们两人执牛耳。
English: The defenders of the country asked the two of them to take the lead.

古文：成何曰： 卫，吾温原也，焉得视诸侯？ 
现代文：成何说： 卫国，不过和我国温地、原地差不多，哪里能和诸侯相比？ 
English: Cheng He said, "Defending the country, but it is almost the same as our warm place, the original place, where can it be compared with the feudal lords?"

古文：将歃，涉佗捘卫侯之手及捥，卫侯怒。
现代文：将要歃血，涉佗推开卫灵公的手，血顺着淌到手腕上。
English: He will have to draw blood, and he will have to push Wei Ling Gong's hand away, and the blood will run down to his wrist.

古文：王孙贾趋进曰： 盟以信礼也。有如卫君，其敢不唯礼是事，而受此盟也？ 
现代文：卫灵公发怒，王孙贾快步走进，说： 结盟是用来伸张礼仪的，就像卫国国君所做的那样，难道敢不奉行礼仪而接受这个盟约？ 
English: Wei Ling Gong was furious, Wang Sun Jia quickly walked in and said, "Alliances are used to extend etiquette, just as the Emperor of China did. Do you dare to accept this covenant without following etiquette?"

古文：卫侯欲叛晋，而患诸大夫。
现代文：卫灵公想要背叛晋国而又担心大夫们反对。
English: Wei Linggong wanted to betray Jin and was afraid that the doctors would object.

古文：王孙贾使次于郊，大夫问故。公以晋诟语之，且曰： 寡人辱社稷，其改卜嗣，寡人从焉。 
现代文：王孙贾让卫灵公住在郊外，大夫问什么缘故，卫灵公把所受晋国人的侮辱告诉他们，而且说： 寡人对不起国家，还是改卜其他人作为继承人，寡人愿意服从。 
English: Wang Sunjia let Wei Ling live in the suburbs, the doctor asked why, Wei Ling told them about the insults he had received from the Jin people, and said: If you are not sorry for the country, or change the other people as heirs, few people are willing to obey.

古文：大夫曰： 是卫之祸，岂君之过也？ 
现代文：大夫说： 这是卫国的祸患，哪里是君王的过错吗？ 
English: The doctor said, "This is a national calamity. What is the fault of the king?"

古文：公曰： 又有患焉，谓寡人必以而子与大夫之子为质。 
现代文：卫灵公说： 还有使人担心的事呢，他们对寡人说： 一定要你的儿子和大夫的儿子作为人质。  
English: They said to one of them: "Be sure to take your son and the doctor's son as hostages."

古文：大夫曰： 苟有益也，公子则往。群臣之子，敢不皆负羁絏以从。 
现代文：大夫说： 如果有好处，公子就去，臣下们的儿子岂敢不背负着马笼头和马缰绳跟随前去？ 
English: The doctor said, "If it is good, the prince will go. Would the sons of the vassals dare to follow without carrying the horse's bridle and bridle?

古文：将行，王孙贾曰： 苟卫国有难，工商未尝不为患，使皆行而后可。 
现代文：将要动身，王孙贾说： 如果卫国有了灾难，工匠商人未尝不是祸患，要让他们全都走了才行。 
English: About to leave, Wang Sunjia said: "If there is a disaster in the homeland, craftsmen and merchants are not necessarily a disaster, they should all be allowed to leave."

古文：公以告大夫，乃皆将行之。
现代文：卫灵公把话告诉大夫，于是就要他们都走。
English: Wei Ling Gong told the words to the doctor, so he asked them all to leave.

古文：行有日，公朝国人，使贾问焉，曰： 若卫叛晋，晋五伐我，病何如矣？ 
现代文：已经定了起程日期，卫灵公让国内的人们朝见，派王孙贾向大家说： 如果卫国背叛晋国，晋国攻打我们五次，会危险到什么程度？ 
English: The departure date had already been set. Wei Ling Gong let the people in the country see the imperial court, and sent Wang Sunjia to say to everyone: If the motherland betrays Jin, and Jin attacks us five times, how dangerous will it be?

古文：皆曰： 五伐我，犹可以能战。 
现代文：大家都说： 攻打我们五次，还可以有能力作战。 
English: Everyone said: If you attack us five times, you will still be able to fight.

古文：贾曰： 然则如叛之，病而后质焉，何迟之有？ 
现代文：王孙贾说： 那么应当先背叛晋国，发生危险再送人质，还不晚吧？ 
English: Wang Sunjia said, "Then we should first betray Jin, and if there is danger, then send the hostages. Isn't it too late?"

古文：乃叛晋。晋人请改盟，弗许。
现代文：于是就背叛晋国，晋国人请求重新结盟，卫国人不同意。
English: As a result, he betrayed Jin, the Jin people asked for a new alliance, and the defenders of the country did not agree.

古文：秋，晋士鞅会成桓公，侵郑，围虫牢，报伊阙也。
现代文：秋季，晋国的士鞅会合成桓公侵袭郑国，包围虫牢，以报复伊阙那次战役。
English: In the autumn, the warriors of Jin invaded Zheng and besieged the insect prison to avenge the battle of Ili.

古文：遂侵卫。
现代文：于是就乘机侵袭卫国。
English: So they took the opportunity to invade the motherland.

古文：九月，师侵卫，晋故也。
现代文：九月，鲁军侵袭卫国，这是为了协同于晋国作战的缘故。
English: In September, the Russian army invaded the defense of the country, this was in order to cooperate in the battle of Jin.

古文：季寤、公鉏极、公山不狃皆不得志于季氏，叔孙辄无宠于叔孙氏，叔仲志不得志于鲁。故五人因阳虎。
现代文：季寤，公鉏极、公山不狃在季氏那里不得志，叔孙辄在叔孙氏那里不受宠信，叔孙志在鲁国不得志，所以这五个人依靠阳虎。
English: Ji Ying, Gong Ying Ji, and Gong Shan Fu Ying were not popular with the Ji clan, the uncle Sun Ying was not popular with the uncle Sun clan, and the uncle Sun Zhi was not popular with the Lu clan, so these five people relied on Yang Hu.

古文：阳虎欲去三桓，以季寤更季氏，以叔孙辄更叔孙氏，己更孟氏。
现代文：阳虎想要去掉三桓，用季寤取代季氏，用叔孙辄取代叔孙氏，自己取代孟氏。
English: Yang Hu wanted to get rid of the Three Kings, replace the Ji clan with the Ji clan, replace the Sun clan with the Sun clan, and replace the Meng clan with himself.

古文：冬十月，顺祀先公而祈焉。
现代文：冬季十月，依即位的先后次序祭祀先公并且祈祷。
English: In winter, in October, according to the order of succession to the throne, the ancestors are sacrificed and prayed.

古文：辛卯，禘于僖公。
现代文：初二日，在僖公庙里举行大规模祭祀。
English: On the second day of the first month, a large-scale ritual was held in the Shoko Temple.

古文：壬辰，将享季氏于蒲圃而杀之，戒都车曰： 癸巳至。 
现代文：初三日，准备在蒲圃设享礼招待季氏时而杀死他，命令都邑里的战车部队说： 初四那天都要来。 
English: On the third day of the first lunar month, he ordered the chariot troops in the capital to kill Ji when they were preparing to hold a ceremony to invite him to a flower bed, saying, "Come on the fourth day of the first lunar month."

古文：成宰公敛处父告孟孙曰： 季氏戒都车，何故？ 
现代文：成地的宰臣公敛处父告诉孟孙说： 季氏命令战车部队，是什么缘故？ 
English: Chengdu's Vice-Minister of Public Security told Meng Sun: Ji ordered the chariot troops, for what reason?

古文：孟孙曰： 吾弗闻。 
现代文：孟孙说： 我没有听说过。 
English: Meng Sun said: I haven't heard of it.

古文：处父曰： 然则乱也，必及于子，先备诸。 
现代文：处父说： 那么这就是叛乱了，必定会涉及您，是不是先准备一下？ 
English: The superintendent said: So this is a rebellion, it will definitely involve you. Shouldn't you prepare first?

古文：与孟孙以壬辰为期。
现代文：和孟孙约定以初三作为预定日期。
English: He and Meng Sun agreed that the performance would take place on the third day of the third lunar month.

古文：阳虎前驱，林楚御桓子，虞人以铍盾夹之，阳越殿。
现代文：阳虎驱车走在前边，林楚为桓子驾车，警卫军官手持铍、盾在两边夹护，阳越走在最后。
English: Yang Hu drove the car and walked in front, Lin Chu drove the car for Huan Zi, the guard officers clamped the shields and shields on both sides, and Yang Yue walked at the end.

古文：将如蒲圃，桓子咋谓林楚曰： 而先皆季氏之良也，尔以是继之。 
现代文：将到蒲圃，桓子突然对林楚说： 你的先人都是季氏家里的忠良之臣，你也要以此来继承他们。 
English: On his way to the nursery, Han Zi suddenly said to Lin Chu: Your ancestors were all loyal vassals of the Ji family, and you want to inherit them.

古文：对曰： 臣闻命后。
现代文：林楚说： 下臣听到这话已经迟了。
English: Lin Chu said: It's too late for the vassal to hear this.

古文：阳虎为政，鲁国服焉。违之，征死。死无益于主。 
现代文：阳虎执政，鲁国人都服从他，违背他就是找死，死了也对主人没有好处。 
English: Yanghu is in power, and the Lu people all obey him. To disobey him is to seek death, and death is of no benefit to the master.

古文：桓子曰： 何后之有？
现代文：桓子说： 有什么迟？
English: Kaneko said, "What's the delay?"

古文：而能以我適孟氏乎？ 
现代文：你能带我去到孟氏那里吗？ 
English: Can you take me to Mr. Meng's house?

古文：对曰： 不敢爱死，惧不免主。 桓子曰： 往也。 
现代文：林楚回答说： 我不敢爱惜一死，怕的是不能使主人免于祸难。 桓子说： 去吧！ 
English: Lin Chu replied, "I don't dare to spare a single death, for fear of not being able to save my master from the calamity." Huan Zi said, "Go ahead!"

古文：孟氏选圉人之壮者三百人，以为公期筑室于门外。
现代文：孟氏挑选了三百个健壮奴隶为公期在门外造房子。
English: Mr. Meng selected three hundred able-bodied slaves to build a house for him outside the gate.

古文：林楚怒马，及衢而骋，阳越射之，不中，筑者阖门。
现代文：林楚鞭打乘马，到了大街上就飞跑而去，阳越用箭射他，没有射中，造房子的人关上大门。
English: Lin Chu whipped the horse, and when he reached the street, the horse ran away. Yang Yue shot him with an arrow, but did not hit him. The builders closed the gate.

古文：有自门间射阳越，杀之。
现代文：有人从门缝里用箭射阳越，杀死了他。
English: Someone shot him with an arrow through a crack in the door, killing him.

古文：阳虎劫公与武叔，以伐孟氏。
现代文：阳虎劫持鲁定公和武叔以攻打孟氏。
English: Yanghu kidnapped Luding and Uncle Wu to attack Meng.

古文：公敛处父帅成人，自上东门入，与阳氏战于南门之内，弗胜。
现代文：公敛处父率领成地人从上东门进入，和阳氏在南门里边作战，没有战胜。
English: The Chengdu people, led by the father of the public restraint department, entered from the upper east gate, and fought with the Yang clan inside the south gate, and did not win.

古文：又战于棘下，阳氏败。
现代文：又在棘下作战，阳氏战败。
English: He fought under the thorn again, and the Yang clan was defeated.

古文：阳虎说甲如公宫，取宝玉大弓以出，舍于五父之衢，寝而为食。
现代文：阳虎脱去皮甲去到公宫，拿了宝玉、大弓出来，住在五父之衢，自己睡下而让人做饭。
English: Yang Hu took off his leather armor and went to the palace. He took the jewels and the big bow and came out. He lived in his father's house. He fell asleep and had someone cook for him.

古文：其徒曰： 追其将至。 
现代文：他的同伙说： 追赶的人恐怕快来了。 
English: His companion said, "I'm afraid the pursuers are coming."

古文：虎曰： 鲁人闻余出，喜于征死，何暇追余？ 
现代文：阳虎说： 鲁国人听说我出去了，正高兴可以晚点死了，哪里有空来追我？ 
English: Yanghu said, "When the people of Lu heard that I had gone out, they were so happy that they could die later. Where did they find the time to chase me?

古文：从者曰： 嘻！速驾，公敛阳在。 
现代文：跟随的人说： 呀，快点套上马车吧，公敛处父在那里。 
English: Those who followed said: Ah, hurry up and hitch up the carriage, the chancellor is there.

古文：公敛阳请追之，孟孙弗许。
现代文：公敛处父请求追赶阳虎，孟孙不答应。
English: Meng Sun did not agree to his father's request to catch up with Yang Hu.

古文：阳欲杀桓子，孟孙惧而归之。
现代文：公敛处父想要杀死季桓子，孟孙害怕，就把季桓子送回家去。
English: His father wanted to kill Ji Huan Zi, but Meng Sun was afraid and sent Ji Huan Zi home.

古文：子言辨舍爵于季氏之庙而出。阳虎入于讙、阳关以叛。
现代文：季寤在季氏的祖庙里向祖宗一一斟酒祭告然后逃走。阳虎进入讙地、阳关而叛变。
English: In the ancestral temple of the Ji clan, Ji Yao made a wine offering to the ancestors one by one and then ran away. Yang Hu entered the land of Lu and Yang Guan and rebelled.

古文：郑驷歂嗣子大叔为政。
现代文：郑国的驷歂继承子太叔执政。
English: Zheng's great-uncle, the successor to Zhai, is now in power.

