古文：◎历二
现代文：历二
English: Second half of the year

古文：▲大统历法一上
现代文：大统历法一上
English: The Great Unification Calendars

古文：造历者各有本原，史宜备录，使后世有以考。
现代文：制定历法的人各有自己的渊源，史书应该详尽采录，使后世有参考的依据。
English: The people who set the calendar each have their own sources. Historical books should be recorded in detail so that future generations have a basis for reference.

古文：如《太初》之起数钟律，《大衍》之造端蓍策，皆详本志。
现代文：如《太初历》起源于音律，《大衍历》发端于蓍卜，都详细见于本历志。
English: For example, the origin of the "Taihatsu Calendar" is in the musical rhythm, and the origin of the "Daiyan Calendar" is in the maple tree, both of which can be seen in detail in this calendar.

古文：《授时历》以测算术为宗，惟求合天，不牵合律吕、卦爻。
现代文：《授时历》以测量检骏推算焉宗旨，祇求与天相合，不牵强附会音律、卦爻。
English: The purpose of the "Giving Time Calendar" is to measure, check and calculate. It only seeks to be compatible with the heavens, and does not forcefully attach to the rhythms of the meeting and the Gua Yao.

古文：然其法所以立，数之所从出，以及晷影、星度，皆有全书。
现代文：然而它立法的依据数据的出处，以及日晷影长、行星度数，都有完整的书籍。
English: However, there are complete books on the source of the data on which its legislation is based, as well as the length of the solar eclipse and the planetary degree.

古文：郭守敬、齐履谦传中，有书名可考。
现代文：郭守堃、查履谦的传中，有书名可考。
English: In the transmission of Guo Shouqi and Zha Luchen, there are book titles to examine.

古文：《元史》漫无采摭，仅存李谦之《议禄》、《历经》之初稿。
现代文：《元史》全没有采录，现仅存奎盏的《议录》、《历经》的初稿。
English: There is no record of the "Original History" at all, only the first drafts of Qui Jian's "Discourse" and "History" are extant.

古文：其后改三应率及立成之数，与夫割圆弧矢之法，平立定三差之原，尽削不载。
现代文：后来改变三应率及数据表的数据，和割圆弧矢的方法、平立定三差的来源，都删去没有记载。
English: Later, the change of the triaxial rate and the data of the data table, and the method of cutting the circular arc and the source of leveling the fixed three differences, were all deleted and there was no record.

古文：使作者精意湮没，识者憾焉。
现代文：使作者的精辟见解湮汝无闻，有见识的人都为此感到道憾。
English: It is regrettable that the author's incisive insights have gone unheard by anyone with insight.

古文：今据《大统因通轨》及《历草》诸书，稍为编次，首法原，次立成，次推步。
现代文：现在根据《大统历通轨》及《历草》等书，稍加编排，首先是历法原理，其次是数据表，再其次是推算。
English: Now, according to books such as "The Great Unified Calendar" and "The Calendars," with a little arrangement, the first is the calendar principle, followed by the data table, and then followed by the calculation.

古文：而法原之目七：曰句股测望，曰弧矢割圆，曰黄赤道内外度，曰白道交周，曰日月五星平立定三差，曰里差刻漏。
现代文：而历法原理的细目有七项，是勾股测望，弧矢割圆，黄赤道差，黄赤道内外度，白道交周，日月五星平立定三差，里差刻漏。
English: And the details of the calendar principle have seven items, which are the crosstalk observation, the arc and arrow cutting circle, the yellow equatorial difference, the yellow equatorial internal and external degrees, the white path intersection, the sun and moon and the five stars standing flat and fixed three differences, and the difference between the inside and the outside.

古文：▲句股测望
现代文：勾股测望
English: Stocks rise in anticipation

古文：北京立四丈表，冬至日午正，测得景辰七丈九尺八寸五分。
现代文：在北京立四丈高的标尺，冬至日正午，测得影长七丈九尺八寸五分。
English: At noon on the winter solstice, a ruler with a height of four meters was set up in Beijing, and the length of the shadow was measured to be seven meters, nine feet, and eight inches.

古文：随以简仪测到太阳南至地平二十六度四十六分半，为半弧背。
现代文：随即用简仪测得太阳南至地平二十六度四十六分半，焉半弧背。
English: He then used a simple instrument to measure the sun's south-to-horizon longitude as 26 degrees 46 minutes and a half, and its arc as half a degree.

古文：求得矢度，五度九十一分半。
现代文：求得矢度为五度九十一分半。
English: The obtained vector is five degrees ninety-one and a half.

古文：置周天半径，截矢余五十四度九十六分为股，乃本地支戴日下之度。
现代文：将周天半径，减去矢度，剩余五十四度九十六分为股，就是本地离头顶上太阳的度数。
English: Divide the radius of the circumference of the sky, minus the vector, and the remaining fifty-four degrees into ninety-six parts, which is the degree of the sun above the head.

古文：以弦股别句术，求得句二十六度一下七分六十六秒，为日出地半弧弦。
现代文：用以弦股求勾的方法，求得勾为二十六度十七分六十六秒，就是太阳出地的半弧弦。
English: Using the method of finding the right angle with a chord, the right angle is found to be 26 degrees, 17 minutes and 66 seconds, which is half an arc of the sun.

古文：北京立四丈表，夏至日午正，测得景长一丈一尺七寸一分。
现代文：在北京立四丈高的标尺，夏至日正午，测得影长一丈一尺七寸一分。
English: At noon on the summer solstice, a yardstick with a height of four feet was set up in Beijing, and the length of the shadow was measured to be one foot, seven inches and one minute.

古文：随以简仪测到太阳南至地平七十四度二十六分半，为半弧背。
现代文：随即用简仪测到太阳南至地平七十四度二十六分半，为半弧背。
English: A simple instrument was then used to measure the sun's south-to-horizon longitude as seventy-four degrees twenty-six and a half, which is half an arc.

古文：求得矢度，四十三度七十四分少。
现代文：求得矢度为四十三度七十四分又四分之一。
English: The obtained vector is 43 degrees, 74 minutes and a quarter.

古文：置周天半径，截矢余一十七度一十三分二十五秒为句，乃本地去戴日下之度。
现代文：将周天半径，减去矢度，剩下十七度十三分二十五秒焉勾，就是本地离头顶上太阳的度数。
English: Subtract the radii of the celestial circles from the vectors, and the remaining seventeen degrees, thirteen minutes, and twenty-five seconds is the number of degrees of the sun above your head.

古文：以句弦别股术，求得股五十八度四十五分半，为日出地半弧弦。
现代文：用以勾弦求股的方法，求得股为五十八度四十五分半，就是太阳出地的半弧弦。
English: Using the method of finding the clef by the hook chord, the clef is found to be fifty-eight degrees forty-five and a half, which is the half-arc chord of the sun's rising.

古文：以二至日度相并，得一百度七十三分，折半得五十度三十六分半，为北京赤道出地度。
现代文：将冬至夏至太阳南至地平的度数相加，得一百度七十三分，折半得五十度三十六分半，为北京的赤道出地度数。
English: Add up the degrees of the winter solstice, summer solstice, south of the sun to the horizon, and get one hundred degrees and seventy-three minutes, and fold it in half to get fifty degrees and thirty-six and a half minutes, which is the degree of Beijing's equator.

古文：以赤道出地度转减周天四之一，余四十度九十四分九十三秒七十五微，为北京北极出地度。
现代文：以赤道出地度转减周天的四分之一，余四十度九十四分九十三秒七十五微，就是北京的纬度。
English: Taking the latitude of the equator and subtracting a quarter of Sunday, the remaining forty degrees, ninety-four minutes, ninety-three seconds, and seventy-five microseconds is the latitude of Beijing.

古文：▲弧矢割圆
现代文：弧矢割圆
English: Arcs and arrows cut circles

古文：周天经一百二十一度七十五分少。
现代文：周天圆的直径为一百二十一度七十五分又四分之一。
English: The circumference of the firmament is a hundred and twenty-one and seventy-five minutes and a quarter.

古文：半径六十零度八十七分半。
现代文：四分之一不用。半径为六十度八十七分半。
English: A quarter is not needed. The radius is sixty degrees eighty-seven and a half.

古文：二至黄赤道内外半弧背二十四度。
现代文：又是黄道赤道的大弦。冬至夏至黄道赤道内外半弧背为二十四度。
English: It is also the great chord of the zodiacal equator. The winter solstice and the summer solstice of the zodiacal equator have a semi-arc back of twenty-four degrees.

古文：二至黄赤道弧矢四度八十四分十二秒。
现代文：所测敷取整数。冬至夏至黄道赤道弧矢为四度八十四分八十二秒。
English: The winter-summer-zodiac equatorial arc is 4 degrees, 84 minutes, and 82 seconds.

古文：黄赤道大句二十三度八十分七十秒。
现代文：黄道赤道大勾为二十三度八十分七十秒。
English: The equator of the zodiac is at 23 degrees, 80 minutes and 70 seconds.

古文：黄赤道大股五十六度零二分六十八秒。割圆求矢术置半弧度自之，为半弧背幕，周天径自之，为上廉。
现代文：半径内减去矢度。割圆求矢的方法。将半弧背的度数自乘，就是半弧背的幂。将周天圆的直径自乘，就是上廉。
English: Subtraction of a vector within a radius. Method of finding an arrow by cutting a circle. Self-multiplication of the degree of a semicircle is the power of a semicircle. Self-multiplication of the diameter of a circumference is the power of a circle.

古文：上廉乘半弧背幕，为正实。
现代文：上廉乘半弧背的幂，就是正实。
English: Shanglian by means of a half-arched back is Zhengsi.

古文：上廉乘径，为益从方。
现代文：上廉乘以天圆直径，就是益从方。
English: The upper limit multiplied by the diameter of the celestial sphere is the square of the profit.

古文：半弧背倍之，乘径，为下廉。
现代文：半弧背乘以二，乘以天圆直径，就是下廉。
English: The half-arc back multiplied by two, multiplied by the diameter of the celestial sphere, is the bottom line.

古文：以初商乘上廉，得数以减益从方，余为从方。
现代文：用初商乘上廉，再用益从方减去这个得数，余数就是从方。
English: Use the initial merchant to take the cheapest price, then subtract this number from the profit, and the remaining number is from the profit.

古文：置初商自之以下廉，余以初商乘之，为从廉。
现代文：将初商自乘并用下廉减自乘的得数，余数乘以初商，就是从廉。
English: The number obtained by multiplying the initial quotient by itself and using the lower quotient to reduce the initial quotient, and multiplying the remaining number by the initial quotient, is from the lower quotient.

古文：从方、从廉相并，为下法。
现代文：从方和从廉相加，就是下法。
English: The sum of the square and the rhombus is the square root.

古文：下法乘初商，以减正实，实不足减，改初商。
现代文：下法乘以初商，再用正寅减去此数，如正赏不够减，就改用初商。
English: The following method is to multiply by the initial bid, and then subtract this number by Zheng Yin. If the initial bid is not reduced enough, the initial bid is used instead.

古文：实有不尽，次第商除之。
现代文：正实还有余数，依次用商除下去。
English: In fact, there are still a few left, and the users will be removed in turn.

古文：倍初商数，与次商相并以乘上廉，得数以减益从方，余为从方。
现代文：将初商乘以二，与次商相加并乘以上廉，再用益从方减去乘积，余数为从方。
English: Multiply the first quotient by two, add the second quotient to the first quotient and multiply the first quotient by the second quotient. Subtract the product from the square of the second quotient. The remainder is the square of the second quotient.

古文：并初商次商而自之，又以初商自之，并二数以减下廉，余以初商倍数并次商乘之，为从廉。
现代文：将初商和次商相加并自乘，又将初商自乘，然后两数相加，再用下廉城此数，余数用初商的二倍加次商舆之相乘，就是从廉。
English: Add the number of first-time buyers and second-time buyers and multiply by itself, then multiply the number of first-time buyers by itself, then add the two numbers, and then use the number of cheap cities. The remaining number is multiplied by twice the number of first-time buyers plus the number of second-time buyers, that is, from cheap.

古文：从方、从廉相并，为下法。
现代文：从方和从廉相加，就是下法。
English: The sum of the square and the rhombus is the square root.

古文：下法乘次商，以减余实，而定次商。
现代文：下法乘以次商，再用余实碱此数，从而确定次商。
English: Multiply the lower method by the lower quotient, and then use the remainder of the real base to determine the lower quotient.

古文：有不尽者，如法商之，皆以商得数为矢度之数。
现代文：如还有余数，用同样的方法计算，商的得敷就是矢的度数。
English: If there is a remainder, it is calculated by the same method, and the quotient is the number of degrees of the arrow.

古文：如以半弧背一度求矢。
现代文：黄道赤道同用这一度数。例如以半弧背一度来求矢的度数。
English: This degree is also used for the ecliptic and the equator. For example, the degree of an arrow can be found by subtracting half an arc from one degree.

古文：术曰：置半弧背一度自之，得一度，为半弧幕。
现代文：方法是：将半弧背一度自乘，得敷为一度，是半弧背的幂。
English: The method is: multiply the half-arc back by itself one time, and the result is one time, which is the power of the half-arc back.

古文：置周天径一百二十一度太自之，得一万四千八百二十三度零六分二十五秒，为上廉。
现代文：将天圆直径一百二十一度又四分之三自乘，得一万四千八百二十三度零六分二十五秒，就是上廉。
English: If you multiply the diameter of the celestial sphere by one hundred and twenty-one and three quarters, you get fourteen thousand eight hundred and twenty-three degrees, six minutes and twenty-five seconds, which is the upper limit.

古文：上廉乘半弧背幕，得一万四千八百二十三度零六分二五，为正实。
现代文：上廉乘以半弧背的幂，得一万四千八百二十三度零六分二十五秒，就是正实。
English: Shanglian multiplied by the power of the half-arc back and got 14,823 degrees, 6 minutes and 25 seconds, which is positive real.

古文：上廉又乘径，得一百八十零万四千七百零七度八十五分九十三秒七五，为益从方。
现代文：上廉又乘天圆直径，得一百八十万四千七百零七度八十五分九十三秒七五，就是益从方。
English: Shanglian also multiplied by the diameter of the celestial sphere to get one million eight hundred and forty-four thousand seven hundred and seventy-seven degrees eighty-five minutes ninety-three seconds seventy-five, which is the square of Yick Zong.

古文：半弧背一度倍之，得二度，以乘径得二百四十三度五十分，为下廉。
现代文：半弧背一度加倍，得二度，乘以天圆直径得二百四十三度五十分，就是下廉。
English: If you double the half-arc back, you get two degrees, and if you multiply it by the diameter of the celestial sphere, you get two hundred and forty-three degrees and fifty minutes, which is the lower limit.

古文：初商八十秒。
现代文：初商八十秒。
English: First sale in 80 seconds.

古文：置初商八十秒乘上廉一万四千八百二十三度零六二五，得一百一十八度五八四五，以减益从方一百八十零万四千七百零七度八五九三七五，余一百八十零万四千五百八十九度二七四八七五，为从方。
现代文：将初商八十秒乘以上廉一万四千八百二十三度零六二五，得一百一十八度五八四五，再用益从方一百八十万四千七百零七度八五九三七五减此数，余一百八葛四千五百八十九度二七四八七五，就是从方。
English: Multiply the initial quotient of eighty seconds by the upper limit of fourteen thousand eight hundred and twenty-three degrees six hundred and twenty-five, to get one hundred and eighteen degrees five hundred and eighty-five, and then subtract this number from the square of one hundred and eighty thousand four thousand seven hundred and seven degrees eight thousand nine hundred and thirty-five, and the remaining one hundred and eighty-four thousand five hundred and eighty-nine degrees twenty-seven thousand four hundred and eighty-five, is the square.

古文：又置初商八十秒自之，得六十四微，以减下廉余二百四十三度四九九三六。
现代文：又将初商八十秒自乘，得六十四微，再用下廉减此敷，余二百四十三度四九九九三六。
English: He also multiplied the initial bid by eighty seconds to get sixty-four micro, and then used the lower price to reduce this deposit, leaving two hundred and forty-three degrees forty-nine nine thirty-six.

古文：仍以八十秒乘之，得一度九四七九九九四八八，为从廉。
现代文：仍然用八十秒乘此余数，得一度九四七九九九四八八，就是从廉。
English: Still using eighty seconds to multiply this remaining number, once got nine forty-seven nine ninety-nine forty-eight, that is, from corruption.

古文：以从廉、从方并之，共得一百八十零万四千五百九十一度二二二八七四四八八，为下法。
现代文：将从廉和从方相加，共得一百八十万四千五百九十一度二二二八七四四八八，就是下法。
English: The sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the square root of the square root of the sum of the square root of the sum of the

古文：下法乘初商，得一万四千四百三十六度七十二分九七八二九九五九零四，以减正实，余实三百八十六度三十三分二七一七零零四零九六。
现代文：下法乘以初商，得一万四千四百三十六度七十二分九七八二九九五九零四，再用正实藏去此数，得余实三百八十六度三十三分二七一七零零四零九六。
English: Multiplying the lower method by the first method, the result is 14 thousand 4 hundred and thirty-six degrees 72 minutes 97 thousand 8 thousand 29 thousand 5 thousand 90 minutes, and then hiding this number with the positive method, the result is 3 hundred and eighty-six degrees 33 minutes 27 thousand 170 thousand 40 minutes.

古文：次商二秒。
现代文：次商二秒。
English: Sub-market two seconds.

古文：置初商八十秒倍之，得一分六十秒。
现代文：将初商八十秒加倍，得一分六十秒。
English: Double the initial quotient of eighty seconds to get one minute and sixty seconds.

古文：加次商二委六十二秒，乘上廉一万四千八百二十三度零六二五，得二百四十零度一三三六一二五，以减益从方，余一百八十零万四千四百六十七二五七六二五，为从方。
现代文：加次商二秒，得一分六十二秒，乘以上廉一万四千八百二十三度零六二五，得二百四十度一三三六一二五，再用益从方减此数，余一百八十万四千四百六十七度七二五七六二五，就是从方。
English: Add the quotient of two seconds, get one minute and sixty-two seconds, multiply the quotient of fourteen thousand eight hundred and twenty-three degrees and six hundred and twenty-five, get two hundred and forty degrees and thirteen thousand three hundred and six hundred and twenty-five, then subtract this number from the square, and the remaining one million eight hundred and forty-four thousand four hundred and sixty-seven degrees and seven hundred and twenty-five degrees and seven hundred and sixty-five, is from the square.

古文：又置初次商八十二秒自之，得六十七微。
现代文：又将初商和次商八十二秒自乘，得六十七微。
English: It also multiplied the initial quotient and the second quotient by eighty-two seconds to get sixty-seven micro.

古文：加初商八十秒自之之数，得一秒三十一微，以减下廉，余二百四十三度四九九八六九。
现代文：加上初商八十秒自乘之数，得一秒三十一微，用下廉减此敷，余二百四十三度四九九八六九。
English: Adding the number of the initial quotient of eighty seconds multiplied by itself, we get one second and thirty-one microseconds, and subtracting this layer with the lower layer, the remaining two hundred and forty-three degrees and forty-nine ninety-eight sixty-nine.

古文：以前所得一分六十二秒乘之，得三度九十四分四六九七八七七八，为从廉。
现代文：乘以前面所得到的一分六十二秒，得三度九十四分四六九七八七七八，就是从廉。
English: Multiply the previous one minute and sixty-two seconds, and you get three times ninety-four minutes, forty-six, ninety-seven, eighty-seven, and seventy-eight, that is, from corruption.

古文：以从廉、从方并，得一百八十零万四千四百七十一度六十七分零四六零三七八，为下法。
现代文：将从廉和从方相加，得一百八十万四千四百七十一度六十七分零四六零三七七八，就是下法。
English: If you add up the number of people who are honest and the number of people who are not, you will get 1,804,471,67,404,637,778, which is the lower number.

古文：下法乘次商，得三百六十零度八九四三三四零九二零七五五六，以减余实，仍余二十五度四三八三八二九一二零二零四四。
现代文：将下法乘以次商，得三百六十度八九四三三四零九二零七五五六，用余实减此敷，还余二十五度四三八三八二九一二零二零四四。
English: Multiply the following formula by the quotient, and the result is 360 degrees 894333409207556, subtract this number from the remainder, and the remainder is 25 degrees 43838291202044.

古文：凡求得矢度八十二秒，余度各如上法，求到矢度，以为黄赤相求及其内外度之根。
现代文：不足一秒舍弃不用，以下同。求得矢的度数共八十二秒，剩余部分继续用上列方法计算。求得矢的度数，作为黄道赤道相求及求二者内外度的根。
English: Less than one second is discarded, the same as below. The total number of degrees of the obtained arrow is eighty-two seconds, and the remaining part continues to be calculated by the above method. The number of degrees of the obtained arrow is used as the root of the internal and external degrees of the ecliptic and the equator.

古文：▲黄赤道差
现代文：数据详见后文。黄赤道差
English: For details of the data, see the following.

古文：求黄赤道各度下赤道积度术。
现代文：求黄道各度之下赤道度数的方法。
English: Method of finding the degree of the equator below each degree of the ecliptic.

古文：置周天半径内减去黄道矢度，余为黄赤道小弦。
现代文：将天圆的半径减去黄道矢的度数，余数焉黄道赤道的小弦。
English: Subtract the radius of the celestial sphere from the degree of the ecliptic arrow, and the remainder is the minor chord of the ecliptic equator.

古文：置黄赤道小弦，以黄赤道大股乘之为实。
现代文：将黄道赤道的小弦，乘以黄道赤道的大股大股见弧矢割圆作为被除数。
English: Divide the small chord of the ecliptic equator by the great chord of the ecliptic equator.

古文：置黄赤道半弧弦自之为股幕，黄赤道小股自之为句幕，二幕并之，以开平方法除之，为赤道小弦。
现代文：黄道赤道的大弦天圆半径作为除数。两数相除，就是黄道赤道的小股。将黄道的矢自乘作为被除数，以天圆的直径作为除数，两数相除，就是黄道半背弦差。
English: The great chord of the ecliptic equator and the radius of the celestial circle are taken as the divisors. If two numbers are divided, it is the minor scale of the ecliptic equator. If the arrow of the ecliptic is multiplied by itself as the divisor, the diameter of the celestial circle is taken as the divisor, and if two numbers are divided, it is the semicircle chord difference of the ecliptic.

古文：置黄赤道半弧弦，以周天半径乘之为实，以赤道小弦为法而一，为赤道半弧弦。
现代文：用黄道积度即黄道半弧背减这个差，余数就是黄道半弧弦。将黄道的半弧弦，乘以天圆的半径也是赤道大弦作为被除数，以赤遒小弦作为除数与之相除，就是赤道的半弧弦。
English: Using the zodiacal integral, that is, the half-arc of the zodiac, subtract this difference, and the remainder is the half-arc chord of the zodiac. The half-arc chord of the zodiac, multiplied by the radius of the celestial sphere is also the great chord of the equator as the divisor, and divided by the small chord of the ecliptic as the divisor, is the half-arc chord of the equator.

古文：置黄赤道小股，以赤道大弦乘之为实，以赤道小弦为法而一，为赤道横大句，以减半径，余为赤道磺弧矢。
现代文：将黄道赤道的小股，也是赤道的横小勾。用赤道大弦即半径相乘作为被除数，以赤道小弦作为除数与之相除，就是赤道横大勾，再用半径减赤道横大勾，余数就是赤道横弧矢。
English: Using the major chord of the equator, that is, the radius multiplied by itself, as the divisor, and the minor chord of the equator as the divisor and divided by itself, is the major chord of the equator, and then using the radius to reduce the major chord of the equator, and the remaining number is the transverse arrow of the equator.

古文：横弧矢自之为实，以全径为法而一，为赤道半背弦差。
现代文：将横弧矢自乘作为被除数，以直径作为除数与之相除，就是赤道的半背弦差。
English: Dividing the cross-arrow multiplication by itself as the divisor, and dividing it by the diameter as the divisor, is the half-back chord difference of the equator.

古文：以差加赤道半弧，为赤道积度。
现代文：以半背弦差加赤道半弧弦，就是赤道的度数。
English: The difference between the half-back chord and the equatorial half-arc chord is the degree of the equator.

古文：如黄道半弧背一度，求赤道积度。
现代文：如黄道半弧背为一度，求赤道的度数。
English: If the half arc of the ecliptic is one degree, find the degree of the equator.

古文：术曰： 置半径六十零度八十七分五十秒，内减黄道矢八十二秒余六十零度八六六八，为黄赤道小弦。
现代文：方法是：将半径六十度八十七分五十秒，即黄道赤道大弦。黄道的矢八十二秒，余六十度八六六八，就是黄道赤道小弦。
English: The method is: take the radius of sixty degrees, eighty-seven minutes and fifty seconds, that is, the zodiacal equator major chord. The arrow of the zodiac is eighty-two seconds, and the remaining sixty degrees is 8668, that is, the zodiacal equator minor chord.

古文：置黄赤道小弦，以黄赤道大股五十六度零二六八乘之，得三千四百一十零度一七二零三零二四为实，以黄赤道大弦六十零度八七五为法，实如法而一，得五十六度零一分九十二秒，为黄赤道小股。
现代文：将黄道赤道小弦，乘以黄道赤道大股五十六度零二六八，得三千四百一十度一七二零三零二四作为被除数，以黄道赤道大弦六十度八七五作为除数，两敷相除，得五十六度零一分九十二秒，就是黄道赤道的小股。
English: Multiply the minor chord of the ecliptic equator by the major chord of the ecliptic equator at 56 degrees and 268 minutes, and the result is 3,410 degrees and 1,720,324 minutes as the divisor. Take the major chord of the ecliptic equator at 60 degrees and 875 minutes as the divisor, and divide the two strands to obtain 56 degrees and 1 minute and 92 seconds, which is the minor chord of the ecliptic equator.

古文：置矢度八十二秒自之，得六十七微，以全径一百二十一度七五为法，除之得五十五纤，为黄道平半背弦差。
现代文：又是赤道小勾。将矢的度数八十二秒自乘，得六十七微，以天圆直径一百二十一度七五作为除数，舆之相除得五十五纤，就是黄道半背弦差。
English: Again, it is the small hook of the equator. Multiply the degree of the arrow by eighty-two seconds and you get sixty-seven microseconds. Divide this by the diameter of the celestial sphere, which is one hundred twenty-one and seventy-five, and you get fifty-five fibres, which is the half-span of the ecliptic.

古文：置黄道半弧弦一度，内减黄道半背弦差，余为半弧弦，因因差在微以下不减，即用一度为半弧弦。
现代文：将黄道半弧背一度，减黄道半背弦差，余数就是半弧弦。因半背弦差在一微以下，所以不减，就用一度作为半弧弦。
English: The half-arc of the ecliptic is reduced by one degree, and the half-arc of the ecliptic is reduced by the half-arc of the ecliptic, and the remainder is the half-arc. Since the half-arc of the ecliptic is less than one micron, it is not reduced, and one degree is used as the half-arc.

古文：置黄道半弧弦一度自之，得一度为股幕。
现代文：将黄道半弧弦一度自乘，得一度作为股的幂。
English: Multiply the semi-arc chord of the zodiac by itself once, and you will get one round as the gong of the stock.

古文：黄赤道小股五十六度零一矣二自之，得三千一百三十八度一五零七六八六四为句幕。
现代文：黄道赤道小股五十六度零一九二自乘，得三千一百三十八度一五零七六八六四作为勾的幂。
English: The zodiacal equatorial cusp of fifty-six degrees in 1922 multiplied by itself, resulting in three thousand one hundred and thirty-eight degrees in 1576864 as the sign of the hook.

古文：二幕并得三千一百三十九度一五零七六八六四为弦实，平方开之，得五十六度零二八一，为赤道小弦。
现代文：两个幂相加得三千一百三十九度一五零七六八六四焉弦实，开平方，得五十六度零二八一，就是赤道小弦。
English: The sum of the two powers is 3,139 degrees 157,668,644, which is a perfect square, and 56 degrees 281, which is an equatorial minor.

古文：置黄道半弧弦一度，以半径乘之，得六十零度八七五为实，以赤道小股五十六度零二八一为法除之，得一度零八分六十五秒，为赤道半弧弦。
现代文：将赤道半弧弦一度，乘以天圆半径，即赤道大弦。得六十度八七五作为被除数，以赤道小弦五十六度零二八一作为除敷相除，得一度零八分六十五秒，就是赤道的半弧弦。
English: Multiply the half-arc chord of the equator by one and the radius of the celestial sphere, that is, the great chord of the equator. The result is sixty degrees 875 as the divisor, and the small chord of the equator is fifty-six degrees 0281 as the dividend. The result is one minute and eighty-five seconds, which is the half-arc chord of the equator.

古文：置黄赤道小股五十六度零一九二，以赤道大弦六十零度八七五乘之，得三千四百一十零度一六八八为实，以赤道小弦为法除之，得六十零度八十六分五十三秒，为赤道横大句。
现代文：将黄道赤道的小股五十六度零一九二，又是赤道小勾。乘以赤道大弦天圆半径六十度八七五，得三千四百一十度一六八八作为被除数，以赤道小弦作为除数相除，得六十度八十六分五十三秒，就是赤道横大勾。
English: Multiply the great chord of the equator with the radius of the celestial circle of 60 degrees 875 and get 3,410 degrees 1688 as the divisor. Divide the great chord of the equator with the small chord of the equator as the divisor and get 60 degrees 86 minutes 53 seconds, which is the great chord of the equator.

古文：置半径六十零度八十七分五十秒，内减赤道大句六十零度八十六分五十三秒，余九十七秒，为赤道横弧矢。
现代文：将天圆半径六十度八十七分五十秒，减赤道大勾六十度八十六分五十三秒，余九十七秒，就是赤道横弧矢。
English: Subtract the radius of the celestial circle from sixty degrees eighty-seven minutes and fifty seconds, subtract the great circle of the equator from sixty degrees eighty-six minutes and fifty-three seconds, and the remaining ninety-seven seconds is the equatorial transverse arrow.

古文：置赤道横弧矢九十七秒自之，得九十四微零九，以全径为法除之，得七十纤，为赤道背弦差。
现代文：将赤道横弧矢九十七秒自乘，得九十四微零九，再以天圆直径作除数舆之相除，得七十七纤，就是赤道背弦差。
English: Divide the equatorial arc by ninety-seven seconds and you get ninety-four thousand nine, then divide by the diameter of the celestial sphere and you get seventy-seven, which is the equatorial back-string difference.

古文：置赤道半弧弦一度零八分六十五秒，加赤道背弦差，为赤道积度，今差在微已下不加，即用半弧弦为积度。
现代文：将赤道半弧弦一度零八分六十五秒，加赤道背弦差，就是赤道的度数。现在赤道背弦差在一微以下，舍弃不加，就用半弧弦作为度数。
English: If the equatorial half-arc chord is increased by one time to 0.865 seconds, and the equatorial back chord difference is added, it is the degree of the equator. Now the equatorial back chord difference is less than one micron, and if it is not added, the half-arc chord is used as the degree.

古文：凡求得赤道积度一度零八分六十五秒。
现代文：共求得赤道度数为一度零八分六十五秒。
English: The total obtained equatorial degree is one degree eight minutes sixty-five seconds.

古文：余度各如上法，求到各黄道度下赤道积，两数相减，即得黄赤道差，乃至后之率。
现代文：其余度数各自用上面的方法，求到各黄道度数下的赤道度数，两敷相减，就得到黄道赤道差，这是冬至夏至后的比率。
English: For the remaining degrees, use the above method to find the equatorial degree under each ecliptic degree, and subtract the two layers to get the ecliptic-equatorial difference, which is the ratio after the winter solstice and summer solstice.

古文：其分后，以赤道度求黄道，反此求之，其数并同。
现代文：春分秋分以后，以赤道度数求黄道，反过来相求，数据都相同。
English: After the vernal equinox and autumnal equinox, the ecliptic is calculated by the equatorial degree, and vice versa, the data are the same.

古文：▲黄赤道相求弧矢诸率立成上
现代文：黄赤道相求弧矢诸率立成上
English: Yellow equatorial phase seeking arc arrow arrow arrowhead standing up

古文：▲黄赤道相求弧矢诸率立成下
现代文：黄赤道相求弧矢诸率立成下
English: Yellow equatorial phase seeking arc arrows and arrowheads stand up

古文：按郭敬创法五端，内一曰黄道差，此其根率也。
现代文：按郭守敬创立的新方法有五条，其中一条是黄道赤道差，这就是它的数据。
English: There are five new methods created by Guo Shoujing, one of which is the zodiacal-equatorial difference, which is its data.

古文：旧法以一百一度相减乘。
现代文：旧方法用一百零一度相减相乘。
English: The old method was to subtract and multiply by one hundred and one.

古文：《授时》立术，以句股、弧矢、方圆、斜直所容，求其数差，合於浑象之理，视古为密。
现代文：《授时历》创立新方法，用勾股、弧矢、方圆、斜直所包含的内容，推求黄道赤道的差敷，合乎天象的原理，比古代更严密。
English: "Giving the Time Calendar" created a new method, using the hooks, arrows, squares and diagonals to deduce the difference between the zodiac and the equator, which is in line with the principle of celestial phenomena and is more rigorous than in ancient times.

古文：顾《至元历经》所载略，又误以黄道矢度为积差，黄道矢差为率，今正之。
现代文：只是《至元历经》的记载很筒略，又误以黄道矢度为积差，黄道矢差为差率，现在予以纠正。
English: However, the records of the "Zhi Yuan Li Jing" are very sketchy, and mistakenly take the ecliptic vector as the product difference, and the ecliptic vector difference as the difference rate, which will now be corrected.

古文：▲割圆弧矢图
现代文：割圆弧矢图
English: Circumferential arc diagram

古文：凡浑圆中剖，则成平圆。
现代文：凡是圆周从中间剖开，就成了半圆。
English: If a circle is cut in half, it becomes a semicircle.

古文：任割平圆之一分，成弧矢形，皆有弧背，有弧弦，有矢。
现代文：任意切分半圆的一部分，就成了弧矢形，都有弧背，有弧弦，有矢。
English: Any section of a semicircle becomes an arc-vector, with an arc-back, an arc-string, and an arrow.

古文：剖弧矢形而半之，则有半弧背，有半弧弦，有矢。
现代文：切分出弧矢形的一半，就有半弧背，有半弧弦，有矢。
English: If you cut out half of the arc of a vector, you will have half of the arc back, half of the arc string, and an arrow.

古文：因弦矢句股形，以半弧弦为句，矢减半径之余为股，半径为弦。
现代文：因为弦和矢就生出勾股形，以半弧弦焉勾，半径减矢的余数为股，半径为弦。
English: Because the string and the arrow produce a hook shape, the half-arc string is the hook, the remaining number of the radius subtraction is the shaft, and the radius is the string.

古文：句股内成小句股，则有小句、小股、小弦、而大小可互求，平侧可互用，浑圆之理，斯为密近。
现代文：勾股内又形成小勾股，就有小勾、小股、小弦，而大小可以互相推求，平侧可以互相利用，圆周的道理，这就很切近了。
English: Small hooks are formed inside the hooks, and there are small hooks, small strands, and small strings. The size can be mutually inferred, and the flat sides can be mutually used. The reason for the circumference is very close.

古文：平者为赤道，斜者为黄道。
现代文：平线是赤道，斜线是黄道。
English: The flat line is the equator and the oblique line is the ecliptic.

古文：因二至黄道赤之距，生大句股。
现代文：因为冬至夏至黄道赤道的距离，生出大勾股。
English: Because of the distance from the winter solstice to the summer solstice to the ecliptic equator, large hooks are produced.

古文：因各度黄赤之距，生小句股。
现代文：因为各度黄道赤道的距离，生出小勾股。
English: Because of the distance between the ecliptic and the equator in each degree, small hooks appear.

古文：外大圆为赤道。
现代文：外面的大圆是赤道。
English: The big circle outside is the equator.

古文：从北极平视，则黄道在赤道内，有赤道各度，即各有其半弧弦，以生大名股。
现代文：从北极俯视，黄道在赤道之内，有赤道的各度，就有各度的半弧弦，以此生出大勾股。
English: Looking down from the North Pole, the ecliptic is within the equator. If there are degrees of the equator, there will be a half-arc of each degree, which will produce a large hook.

古文：又各有其相当之黄道半弧弦，以生小句股。
现代文：又各有舆它们相应的黄道半弧弦，以此生出小勾股。
English: Each also has its own corresponding half-arc of the ecliptic, producing a small hook.

古文：此二者皆可互求。
现代文：这二者可以互相推求。
English: The two can be mutually reinforcing.

古文：按旧史无图，然表亦图之属也。
现代文：按旧史书没有图，然而表也是和圆同类的。
English: According to the old history book, there is no picture, but the table is the same as the circle.

古文：今句股割弧矢之法，实为历家测算之本。
现代文：现在勾股割圆弧矢的方法，实在是历算家测算的根本。
English: Now the method of hooking and cutting circular arrows is really the basis of the calculator's calculation.

古文：非图不明，因存其要者数端。
现代文：没有图不能说明问题，因而保留其重要的几幅。
English: There is no picture that does not illustrate the problem, so it is important to retain a few.

古文：▲黄赤道内外度
现代文：黄赤道内外度
English: Yellow equator inside and outside degrees

古文：推黄道各度，距赤道内外及去极远近术。
现代文：推算黄道各度距离赤道的内外度数及距离北极远近的方法。
English: A method for calculating the inner and outer degrees of the ecliptic from the equator and the distance from the North Pole.

古文：置半径内减去赤道小弦，余为赤道二弦差。
现代文：将天圆半径减去赤道小弦，余敷就是赤道两个弦的差。
English: Subtract the equatorial minor chord from the celestial radius, and the remainder is the difference between the two equatorial chords.

古文：置半径内外减去黄道矢度，余为黄赤道小弦，以二至黄赤道内外半弧弦乘之为实，以黄赤道大弦为法，除之为黄赤道小弧弦。
现代文：又是黄道赤道小弧的矢，又是内外矢，又是股弦差。将半径减去黄道矢的度数，余数就是黄道赤道的小弦。将冬至夏至黄道赤道内外半弧弦舆黄道赤道小弦相乘作为被除数，以黄道赤道大弦作为除数，即半径。舆之相除就是黄道赤道小弧弦。
English: It is also the arrow of the small arc of the ecliptic equator of the zodiac, it is also the inner and outer arrow, and it is also the difference of the cords. Subtract the radius from the degree of the ecliptic arrow, and the remaining number is the small string of the ecliptic equator. Multiply the winter solstice to the summer solstice inside and outside the half arc chord of the ecliptic equator and the small chord of the ecliptic equator as the divisor, and take the large chord of the ecliptic equator as the divisor, that is, the radius. The

古文：置黄赤道小弧矢自之，以全径除之，为半背弦差。
现代文：就是黄道赤道内外半弧弦，又是黄道赤道小勾。将黄道赤道小弧矢自乘，即赤道两弦的差。除以直径，就是半背弦差。
English: It is the half-arc chord inside and outside the ecliptic equator of the zodiac and the small hook of the ecliptic equator. Multiply the small arc arrow of the ecliptic equator by itself, that is, the difference between the two chords of the equator. Divided by the diameter, it is the half-back chord difference.

古文：以差加黄赤道小弧弦为黄赤道小弧半背，即黄赤道内外度。
现代文：用这个差加黄道赤道小弧弦就是黄道赤道小弧半背，也就是黄道在赤道内外的度数。
English: Using this difference plus the zodiacal equatorial minor arc chord is the zodiacal equatorial minor arc half back, that is, the degrees of the zodiac inside and outside the equator.

古文：置黄赤道内外度，视在盈初缩末限以加，在缩初盈天限以减，皆加减象限度，即各得太阳去北极度分。
现代文：根据黄道在赤道内外的度数，如果在盈初缩末象限表内就加，在缩初盈末象限表内就减，都加减象限表内的度数，就得到太阳距离北极的度数。
English: According to the degrees of the ecliptic inside and outside the equator, if you add in the first-in, first-out contraction quadrant table, and subtract in the first-in, first-out contraction quadrant table, and add and subtract the degrees in the quadrant table, you will get the degrees of the sun's distance from the North Pole.

古文：如冬至后四十四度，求太阳去赤道内外及去极度。
现代文：如冬至后黄道四十四度，求太阳距离赤道内外的度数及距离北极的度数。
English: If the ecliptic is forty-four degrees after the winter solstice, find the degrees of the sun's distance from the equator inside and outside and the degrees of the distance from the North Pole.

古文：术曰： 置半径六十零度八十七分半，内减黄道四十四度下赤道小弦五十八度三十五分六十九秒，余二度五十一分八十一秒，为黄赤道小弧矢。
现代文：方法是：将天圆半径六十度八十七分半，减黄道四十四度时赤道小弦五十八度三十五分六十九秒，余二度五十一分八十一秒，就是黄道赤道小弧矢。
English: The method is: the celestial circle radius is reduced to sixty degrees eighty-seven minutes and a half, the zodiac is reduced to forty-four degrees, the equatorial minor chord is reduced to fifty-eight degrees thirty-five minutes and sixty-nine seconds, and the remaining two degrees fifty-one minutes and eighty-one seconds are the zodiacal equatorial minor arc arrow.

古文：置半径六十零度八七五，内减黄道四十四度，矢一十六度五十六分八十二秒，余四十四三十零分六十八秒，为黄赤道小弦。
现代文：即内外矢。将半径六十度八七分半，减黄道四十四度时的矢一十六度五十六分八十二秒，余四十四度三十分六十八秒，就是黄道赤道小弦。
English: That is, the inner and outer arrows. If the radius of sixty degrees is eighty-seven and a half, the arrow when the ecliptic is reduced by forty-four degrees is sixteen degrees, fifty-six minutes, and eighty-two seconds, and the remaining forty-four degrees is thirty-six and sixty-eight seconds, it is the ecliptic-equatorial minor chord.

古文：置黄赤道小弦，以二至黄赤道内外半弧弦二十三度七十一分乘之，得一千零五十零度五十一分四二三八为实，以黄赤道大弦六十零度八七五为法除之，得一十七度二十五分十九秒为黄赤道小弧弦。
现代文：将黄道赤道小弦，用冬至夏至时黄道赤道内外半弧弦二十三度七十一分舆之相乘，得一千零五十度五十一分四二三八作为被除数，以黄道赤道大弦六十度八七五作为除数舆之相除，得十七度二十五分六十九秒，即黄道赤道小弧弦。
English: Multiply the minor chord of the ecliptic equator by the semi-arc between the inner and outer half of the ecliptic equator at the winter solstice and summer solstice, which is 23 degrees and 71 minutes, and get 1,050 degrees, 51 minutes, 4238 as the divisor. Divide the major chord of the ecliptic equator by 60 degrees, 875 minutes, and get 17 degrees, 25 minutes, 69 seconds, which is the minor chord of the ecliptic equator.

古文：置黄赤道小弧矢二度五十一分八十一秒自之为实，以全径地百二十一度七十五分除之，得五分二十一秒为背弦差，以差加黄赤道小弧弦一十七度二十五分六十九秒，得一十七度三十零分八十九秒，为二至前后四十四度，太阳去赤道内外度。
现代文：即内外半弧弦。将黄道赤道小弧矢二度五十一分八十一秒自乘作为被除数，用直径一百二十一度七十五分与之相除，得五分二十一秒就是背弦差。用背弦差加黄道赤道小弧弦十七度二十五分六十九秒，得十七度三十分八十九秒，就是冬至夏至前后黄道四十四度时，太阳距离赤道的内外度。
English: That is, the inner and outer half of the bowstring. Divide the small bowstring of the zodiacal equator by two degrees, fifty-one minutes and eighty-one seconds, and divide it by the diameter of one hundred twenty-one and seventy-five minutes to get five minutes and twenty-one seconds, which is the backstring difference. Use the backstring difference to add the small bowstring of the zodiacal equator to seventeen degrees, twenty-five minutes and sixty-nine seconds, and get seventeen degrees, thirty minutes and eighty-nine seconds, which is the inner and outer degrees of the sun from the equator when the ecliptic is forty-four degrees

古文：置象限九十一度三十一分四十三秒七五，以内外度一十七度三零八九加之，得一百零八度六十二分三十二秒七五，为冬至后四十四度太阳去北极度。
现代文：将象限九十一度三十一分四十三秒七五，加内外度十七度三零八九，得一百零八度六十二分三十二秒七五，就是冬至后黄道四十四度时太阳距离北极的度数。
English: Add the quadrant of ninety-one degrees, thirty-one minutes, forty-three seconds, seventy-five degrees, and the internal and external degrees of seventeen degrees, thirty-eight degrees, and get one hundred and eight degrees, sixty-two minutes, thirty-two seconds, seventy-five degrees, which is the degree of the sun's distance from the North Pole when the ecliptic is forty-four degrees after the winter solstice.

古文：▲黄道每度去赤道内外及去北极立成
现代文：黄道每度去赤道内外及去北极立成白道交周
English: The ecliptic goes in and out of the equator and to the North Pole every degree, forming a meridian.

古文：▲白道交周推白赤道正交，距黄赤道正交北极数。
现代文：推算白道和赤道的降交点距离黄道赤道降交点的最大数值。
English: Calculate the maximum value of the distance between the declination point of the white path and the equator and the declination point of the ecliptic equator.

古文：术曰： 置实测白道出入黄道内外六度为半径弧弦，又为大图弧矢，又为股弦差。
现代文：方法是：将寅测到的白道出入黄道内外的六度作为半弧弦，又是大圆的弦矢，又是股和弦的差。
English: The method is: to take the six degrees of the white path in and out of the ecliptic measured by Yin as a half-arc chord, a large round bowstring, and the difference between the clef and the chord.

古文：置半径六十零度七五自之，得三千七百零五度七六五六二五，以矢六度而一，得六百一十七度六十三分为股弦和，加矢六度，共六百二十三度六十三分为大圆径。
现代文：将半径六十度八七五自乘，得三干七百零五度七六五六二五，用矢六度与之相除，得六百一十七度六十三分为股弦的和，再加矢六度，共六百二十三度六十三分，就是大圆直径。
English: Divide the radius of 60 degrees by 875 and multiply by itself to get 3,705 degrees by 7,656,255. Divide it by 6 degrees and get 617°63 divided by the sum of the chords. Add another 6 degrees and get a total of 623°63 divided by the chord, which is the diameter of the great circle.

古文：依法求得容阔五度七十分，又为小句。
现代文：按法则求得容阔五度七十分，又是小勾。
English: According to the law, it is a small hook to obtain a width of five degrees and seventy minutes.

古文：又以二至出入半弧弦二十三度七十一分为大句。
现代文：又以冬至夏至时出入半弧弦二十三度七十一分作为大勾。
English: It also uses the winter solstice and summer solstice as a big hook.

古文：以大句为法，除大股五十六度零六分五十秒，得二度三十七分为度差。
现代文：以大勾作除数，除大股五十六度零六分五十秒，得二度三十七分就整敷而言为度差。
English: With a large check mark as a divisor, the division of a large unit is fifty-six degrees and six minutes and fifty seconds, and the result is two degrees and thirty-seven minutes, which is a difference in degree in terms of the whole unit.

古文：以度差乘小句，得小股一十三度四十七分八十二秒，为容半长。
现代文：以度差乘小勾，得小股十三度四十七分八十二秒，就是容半长。
English: With the difference in degrees multiplied by the small hook, the small strands are 13 degrees, 47 minutes and 82 seconds, which is half the length.

古文：置半径六十零度八七五为大弦，以乘小句五度七十分为实，以大句二十三度七十一分为法除之，得一十四度六十三分为小弦，又为白赤道正交，距黄赤道正交半弧弦。
现代文：以半径六十度八七五焉大弦，乘以小勾五度七十分作为被除数，以大勾二十三度七十一分焉除数舆之相除，得十四度六十三分就是小弦；又是白道赤道降交点距离黄道赤道降交点的半弧弦。
English: The major chord with a radius of sixty degrees and eighty-seven-five minutes is multiplied by the minor chord with a radius of five degrees and seventy minutes as the divisor, and the minor chord with a radius of twenty-three degrees and seventy-one minutes is divided by the major chord with a radius of twenty-three degrees and seventy-one minutes as the divisor, resulting in fourteen degrees and sixty-three minutes being the minor chord; it is also the semi-arc chord between the declination point of the White Road Equator and the declination point of the Zodiac Equator.

古文：依法求行半弧背一十四度六十六分，为白赤道正交距黄赤道正交极娄数。
现代文：按法则求得半弧背十四度六十六贫，就是白道赤道降交点距离黄道赤道降交点的最大敷值。
English: According to the law, the half-arc back fourteen degrees sixty-six poverty is the maximum load value of the white road equatorial declination point from the zodiacal equatorial declination point.

