古文：魏允贞，字懋忠，南乐人。
现代文：魏允贞，字懋忠，南乐人。
English: Wei Yunzhen, Zhaojun Zhong, Nanle people.

古文：万历五年进士。授荆州推官。
现代文：万历五年中进士，授职荆州推官。
English: In the fifth year of Wanli's reign, he was promoted to the rank of middle school student, and was given the post of Jingzhou superior officer.

古文：大学士张居正归葬，群吏趋事恐后，允贞独不赴，且抶其奴。
现代文：大学士张居正回家安葬，群吏争先恐后赶去，魏允贞一个人没有去，而且还鞭打他的仆人。
English: Zhang Ju, a university scholar, was returning home to be buried, and officials were scrambling to get there. Wei Yunzhen did not go alone, and even whipped his servants.

古文：治行最，征授御史。
现代文：评定政绩时他列为最佳一等，升为御史。
English: In the evaluation of his political performance, he was ranked as the best first-class and promoted to goshi.

古文：吏部尚书梁梦龙罢。
现代文：吏部尚书梁梦龙被罢官。
English: Shang Shuliang and Meng Long of the Personnel Department were dismissed.

古文：允贞言： 铨衡任重。往者会推之前，所司率受指执政或司礼中官，以故用非其人。 
现代文：魏允贞说： 吏部官职重要，过去都在会同推荐选任之前，有关官吏都受到当政之人和司礼中官的影响，所以任用了一些不恰当的人。 
English: Wei Yunzhen said: "The position of cadre is very important. In the past, before the appointment was made with the recommendation, the relevant officials were influenced by the people in power and the vice-minister of ceremony, so some inappropriate people were appointed.

古文：帝纳其言，特用严清，中外翕服。
现代文：皇帝接受了他的意见，特地任用严清，中外感到信服。
English: The emperor accepted his opinion and specially appointed Yan Qing, which convinced people at home and abroad.

古文：俄劾兵部尚书吴兑，兑引去。
现代文：不久，他弹劾兵部尚书吴兑，吴兑引咎辞职。
English: Soon, he impeached Wu Dui, the secretary of the military department, and Wu Dui resigned.

古文：已，陈时弊四事，言： 自居正窃柄，吏、兵二部迁除必先关白，故所用悉其私人。
现代文：过了不久，他上疏陈明有关时弊的四事，说： 自从张居正窃取权柄，吏、兵二部升迁、授职须先报告他，所以任用的都是与他有私交的人。
English: After a short while, he went up the stairs to clarify four things about the current situation, saying: Since Zhang Juzheng stole power, the promotion and appointment of officials and soldiers of the Second Division must be reported to him first, so all the appointments are people who have personal relationships with him.

古文：陛下宜与辅臣精察二部之长，而以其职事归之。
现代文：陛下应当与辅臣好好考察两部的负责人，让他们有自己管辖的事宜。
English: His Majesty should have a good look at the heads of the two departments with his aides, and let them have their own affairs.

古文：使辅臣不侵部臣之权以行其私，部臣亦不乘辅臣之间以自行其私，则官方自肃。
现代文：使辅臣不要侵犯部臣的权力而谋取私利，部臣也不能乘辅臣的空隙自行其私，则官风自会整肃。
English: If assistant ministers do not encroach on the power of subordinates to seek personal gain, and subordinates do not take advantage of the vacancy of assistant ministers to pursue their own interests, then the official style will be rectified.

古文：自居正三子连登制科，流弊迄今未已。
现代文：自从张居正的三个儿子连连进入制科，遗留的祸患到现在还未停止。
English: Since Zhang Juzheng's three sons successively entered the education system, the remaining scourge has not yet stopped.

古文：请自今辅臣子弟中式，俟致政之后始许廷对，庶幸门稍杜。
现代文：请从今天开始辅臣子弟中了进士，等到离职后才允许参加廷试，或许可以使宠幸之门稍有杜绝。
English: Please, from today onwards, if a vassal's son wins promotion, he will not be allowed to take part in a court trial until after he leaves office. This may help to put an end to the door of favouritism.

古文：自居正恶闻谠言，每遇科道员缺，率择才性便给、工谄媚、善逢迎者授之，致昌言不闻，佞臣得志。
现代文：自从张居正讨厌听到正直的言论，每遇到科道员有空缺，都选择才性便于利用、善于谄媚、迎逢的人授给，致使正当的言论听不到了，小人得志。
English: Since Zhang Juzheng hated to hear honest speech, whenever there was a vacancy for a scholar, he chose a talent that was easy to use, good at flattery, and given to someone he met. As a result, legitimate speech could not be heard, and the villain won.

古文：自今考选时，陛下宜严敕所司，毋循故辙。
现代文：从现在开始考察、选任官吏时，陛下应该严厉告诫有关部门，不要重蹈故辙。
English: From now on, when inspecting and selecting officials, His Majesty should sternly warn the relevant departments not to repeat the same mistakes.

古文：俺答自通市以来，边备懈弛。
现代文：自从与俺答互市以后，边备松弛。
English: Ever since he and I exchanged greetings, he's been more relaxed.

古文：三军月饷，既克其半以充市赏，复克其半以奉要人，士无宿饱，何能御寇？
现代文：三军的月饷，克扣一半以充市场赏赐，又克扣另一半给达官要人，士兵没有隔夜的粮，怎么能抵御边寇呢？
English: How could the three armies defend themselves against the border robbers when they had to pay half of their monthly salaries to the market and the other half to high-ranking officials and dignitaries, and the soldiers had no overnight rations?

古文：至辽左战功，尤可骇异。
现代文：来自辽东的战功，尤其到了令人惊异的程度。
English: The war exploits from Liaodong in particular are astonishing.

古文：军声则日振于前，生齿则日减于旧。
现代文：军队的声誉日益振奋，而人口天天比过去有所减少。
English: The reputation of the army is growing, while the population is shrinking day by day.

古文：奏报失真，迁叙逾格，赏罚无章，何以能国哉！ 
现代文：奏报失实，升迁出格，赏罚无章，何以能卫国？ 
English: The report is untrue, the promotion is out of standard, and there is no award or punishment. How can we defend the country?

古文：疏入，下都察院。
现代文：奏疏上传后，皇上把它下到都察院。
English: After the transcript was uploaded, the emperor sent it to the Duka-in.

古文：先是，居正既私其子，他辅臣吕调阳子兴周，张四维子泰徵、甲徵，申时行子用懋，皆相继得举。
现代文：先前，张居正对其子有私心，其他辅臣吕调阳儿子兴周，张四维儿子泰征、甲征，申行时儿子用懋，都相继举进士。
English: Previously, Zhang Juzheng had a selfish motive for his son, and other vassals, Lv Duyang's son, Xing Zhou, Zhang Siwei's sons, Tai Zheng and A Zheng, and his son's use of a shovel when applying for promotion, all successively raised new recruits.

古文：甲徵、用懋将廷对，而允贞疏适上。
现代文：甲征、用懋即将廷试，魏允贞的上疏刚好送上。
English: A Zheng, with a shovel, is about to be tested in court, and Wei Yunzhen's upper shoelace is just about to be sent on.

古文：四维大愠，言： 臣待罪政府，无所不当闻。
现代文：张四维大怒，说： 臣在政府做事，没有什么不应当听说的。
English: Zhang Siwei was furious and said, "When a minister is working in the government, there is nothing he should not hear.

古文：今因前人行私，而欲臣不预闻吏、兵二部事，非制也。 
现代文：因为前人行私，就不让臣过问吏、兵二部事，这不是制度。 
English: This is not a system where a minister is not allowed to ask questions of officials and soldiers because the previous person acted selfishly.

古文：因为子白诬，且乞骸骨。
现代文：因而为他儿子辩诬，而且乞求告老回乡。
English: So he pleaded with his son and begged him to come home.

古文：时行亦疏辨。帝并慰留，而责允贞言过当。
现代文：申时行也上疏争辩，皇上一同安慰挽留，责备魏允贞言词过当。
English: At the time of the petition, there was also little debate. The emperor consoled Wei Yunzhen and reproached her for being too hasty in her words.

古文：户部员外郎李三才奏允贞言是，并贬秩调外。
现代文：户部员外郎李三才上奏认为魏允贞是对的，他俩一同被贬官调出京城。
English: A member of the household department, Wairo Li Sancai, argued that Wei Yunzheng was right, and both of them were demoted and transferred out of Beijing.

古文：允贞得许州判官。
现代文：魏允贞得到许州判官。
English: Wei Yunzhen won the Xuzhou judge.

古文：给事中御史周邦杰、赵卿等论救，不纳。
现代文：给事中、御史周邦杰、赵卿等上疏申说救助，皇上一概不予接纳。
English: During the incident, Imperial Historians Zhou Bangjie, Zhao Qing, and others made a brief appeal for help, but the Emperor did not accept any of them.

古文：允贞虽谪，然自是辅臣居位，其子无复登第者。
现代文：魏允贞虽然被贬，但从此辅臣当权时，其子没有再登进士的。
English: Although Wei Yunzhen was demoted, his son did not become a member of the elite cadre again when the vice-minister was in power.

古文：久之，累迁右通政。
现代文：过了很久，逐级升到右通政使。
English: After a long time, he was promoted step by step to the post of Right Direct Political Envoy.

古文：二十一年，以右佥都御史巡抚山西。
现代文：万历二十一年以右佥都御史巡抚山西。
English: In the 21st year of the Manchurian calendar, he ascended to the post of the governor of Shanxi Province.

古文：允贞素刚果，清操绝俗。
现代文：魏允贞平素刚正、果断、清廉、脱俗。
English: Wei Yunzhen was upright, resolute, incorruptible and unsophisticated.

古文：以所部地疹民贫，力裁幕府岁供及州县冗费，以其银数万缮亭障，建烽堠，置器市马易粟。
现代文：因为山西地瘠民贫，力主裁减幕府的每岁上供和州县的冗费，用这样节约的万余银钱修治亭障，修建烽火台，购置器具、马匹以换取粮食。
English: Because of the poverty of the people in Shanxi, the main force was to reduce the annual supply of the shogunate and the redundant expenses of the prefectures and counties, and use the more than 10,000 silver coins saved in this way to repair pavilions, build campfires, and purchase equipment and horses in exchange for grain.

古文：又奏免平阳岁额站银八万，以所省邮传羡补之。
现代文：又上奏请求免除平阳站每岁的定额银八万，用山西省邮传节余的费用来补充。
English: The petition also requested that the annual quota of 80,000 silver be waived for Pingyang Station, and that the remaining costs of postal and telecommunications in Shanxi Province be used to supplement it.

古文：雁门、平定军以逋屯粮窜徙，允贞奏除其租，招令复业。
现代文：雁门、平定军因为逃避屯田粮税而逃跑，魏允贞上奏免除两军的地租，下令恢复开垦。
English: The Ganmen and the Peacemaking Army fled because they evaded the farmland grain tax. Wei Yunzhen issued a report exempting the two armies from land rent and ordered the resumption of land reclamation.

古文：岢岚互市，省抚赏银六万。
现代文：岢岚互市，省抚赏给银钱六万。
English: The provincial government rewarded him with 60,000 silver coins.

古文：汾州有两郡王，宗人与军民杂处，知州秩卑不能制，奏改为府。
现代文：汾州有两个郡王，管理人员与军民杂处，知州职位太低不能制服，魏允贞奏请改为府。
English: Bozhou has two county chiefs, administrators and military-civilian miscellaneous departments. Chizhou's position is too low to be subdued. Wei Yunzheng, please change it to the capital.

古文：自款市成，边政废。允贞视要害，筑边墙万有余丈。
现代文：自从互市后，边政废弛，魏允贞看到了要害，修筑边墙万余丈。
English: Since the exchange of markets, the border policy was wasted, Wei Yunzhen saw the key, and built the border wall.

古文：政声大著。帝亦数嘉其能。
现代文：声名大振，皇上数次嘉奖他的才能。
English: He became very famous, and the emperor praised his talent several times.

古文：会诏中官张忠矿山西，允贞抗疏极谏，不报。
现代文：恰好下诏让宦官张忠在山西采矿，魏允贞上疏极力主张不可，皇上没有答复他。
English: It just so happened that the emperor issued an edict to allow the eunuch Zhang Zhong to mine in Shanxi, and Wei Yunzheng strongly advocated that it should not be done. The emperor did not reply to him.

古文：已，西河王知燧请开解州、安邑、绛县矿，以仪宾督之。
现代文：不久，西河王知燧请求开凿解州、安邑、绛县的矿产，以仪宾督促有关事宜。
English: Soon after, the West River King Zhisheng requested to excavate the minerals in Dezhou, Anyi, and Jixian, and urged the relevant matters with the guest of honor.

古文：指挥王守信请开平定、稷山诸矿。
现代文：指挥王守信请求开凿平定、稷山各矿山。
English: Commander Wang Shuxin requested that mines in Shaoshan be excavated and leveled.

古文：帝并报允。
现代文：皇帝都批复同意。
English: The emperor gave his approval.

古文：允贞恐民愈扰，请令忠兼领，亦不纳。
现代文：魏允贞恐怕老百姓受到更多的干扰，请求命令让张忠一个人管理，皇上也不同意。
English: Wei Yunzhen, fearing that the common people would be disturbed more, asked for an order to let Zhang Zhong manage alone, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：三殿灾，诏求直言。
现代文：三殿受灾，皇上下诏恳求大臣讲实话。
English: Three halls were affected by the disaster, and the Emperor issued an imperial edict imploring the minister to tell the truth.

古文：允贞言咎在辅臣，历数赵志皋、张位罪。
现代文：魏允贞认为过错在于辅臣，历数赵志皋、张位的罪行。
English: Wei Yunzhen believes that the fault lies in the crimes of the assistant minister, Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang Yi.

古文：且曰： 前二臣以二月加恩，逾月两宫灾。
现代文：并且说： 这二个人在二月加了恩宠，过了一个月两宫发生灾乱。
English: He also said, "These two people were favored in February, and a month later there was a disaster in the two palaces.

古文：今年又加恩，而三殿复灾。
现代文：今年又加恩，三殿又受灾，天意啊！ 
English: Another setback this year, another disaster at the San-den. Providence!

古文：天意昭然。 位等力辨，求罢。
现代文：张位极力为自己辩解，请求罢官。
English: Zhang Yi tried his best to defend himself and asked to be dismissed.

古文：帝慰留，责允贞边臣不当言朝事，因屡推不用，遂肆狂言，夺俸五月。
现代文：皇上安慰，予以挽留，责备魏允贞是边臣不当议论朝政，因为屡被推举不被任用，遂放肆乱言，被停发俸禄五个月。
English: The emperor consoled her, kept her on, and reproached Wei Yunzhen for improperly discussing imperial politics as a border vassal. Because she was repeatedly nominated but not appointed, she spoke recklessly and was suspended from receiving her salary for five months.

古文：顷之，允贞疏举遗贤，请召还王家屏、陈有年、沈鲤、李世达、王汝训及小臣史孟麟、张栋、万国钦、马经纶、顾宪成、赵南星、邹元标等，疏留中。
现代文：不久，魏允贞上疏推举被人忽视的贤明人士，请召回王家屏、陈有年、沈鲤、李世达、王汝训和小官史孟麟、张栋、万国钦、马经纶、顾宪成、赵南星、邹元标等，上疏被留在禁中。
English: Soon after, Wei Yunzhen selected the wise people who had been ignored by the people in Shangxo, and asked them to recall Wang Jiaping, Chen Younian, Shen Yu, Li Shida, Wang Ruxun, and minor officials Shi Menglin, Zhang Dong, Wang Guoqin, Ma Jingyao, Gu Xiancheng, Zhao Nansing, and Xuan Yuanbiao. Shangxo was left in the ban.

古文：以久次，进右副都御史。
现代文：过了很久，他才按程序提拔为右副都御史。
English: It was a long time before he was promoted to Right Deputy Metropolitan Historian in accordance with the procedure.

古文：二十八年春，疏陈时政缺失，言： 行取诸臣，几经论荐，陛下犹不轻予一官。
现代文：万历二十八年春天，上疏陈明时政的过失，说： 从地方考察选取的各位臣僚，几经论辩、推荐，皇上还是没有轻意地授予一官。
English: In the spring of the 28th year of the Wanli calendar, Shang Zoshu pointed out the mistakes of the current government, saying: After several discussions and recommendations, the emperor still did not lightly grant an official post to the ministers selected from the local inspection.

古文：彼鲁坤、马堂、高淮、陈朝辈，试之何事，举之何人，乃令其衔命横行，生杀予夺，恣出其口。
现代文：那个鲁坤、马堂、高淮、孙朝之辈，做了什么事，推举了什么人，皇上让他们拥有权力横行朝中，生杀予夺，全由他们一句话。
English: That generation of Lu Kun, Ma Tong, Gao Huai, Sun Dynasty, what did they do, what people did they elect, the emperor let them have the power to run rampant in the court, to kill and conquer, all by their own words.

古文：廷臣所陈率国家大计，一皆寝阁，甚者严谴随之。
现代文：朝廷大臣所陈明的都是国家大计，一切搁置阁中，不予实行，更有甚者被严加责备。
English: All that the ministers of the imperial court put forward were national plans, all of which were shelved in the cabinet, not implemented, and even more severely rebuked.

古文：彼报税之徒，悉无赖奸人，乡党不齿，顾乃朝奏夕报，如响应声。
现代文：那些监税之徒，都是无赖小人，为老百姓所不齿，却早晨上奏，晚上得到批复，如声音与回音一样相随。
English: Those tax inspectors are all scoundrels and villains. They are despised by the common people, but they are praised in the morning and reprimanded in the evening. They follow each other like sound and echo.

古文：臣不解也。
现代文：我百思不得其解。
English: I can't figure it out.

古文：胥徒入乡，民间犹扰，况缇骑四出，如虎若狼，家室立破。
现代文：小官吏下乡，民间仍被干扰，更何况官役四出，如虎若狼，老百姓倾家荡产、家破人亡。
English: Minor officials go to the countryside, the people are still disturbed, not to mention that government officials are everywhere, like tigers and wolves, and the common people lose their homes, their families are broken, and people die.

古文：如吴宝秀、华钰诸人，祸至惨矣，而陛下曾不一念及。
现代文：如吴宝秀、华钰等人，就惨到极点，可陛下没有一点念及到他们。
English: For example, Wu Baoxiu, Hua Wei and others, they were miserable to the extreme, but His Majesty did not think about them at all.

古文：钱谷出入，上下相稽，犹多奸弊。
现代文：钱粮的出入，上下拖延，还有很多弊病。
English: Money and grain coming in and going out, delays up and down, and many other ills.

古文：敕使手握利权，动逾数万。
现代文：这些人大权在握，动辄数万。
English: These people wield great power and often have tens of thousands of followers.

古文：有司不敢问，抚按不敢闻，岂无吮膏血以自肥者，而陛下曾不一察及。
现代文：有关官吏不敢过问，抚按也不敢上报。难道没有吸民脂民膏而自己发财的吗？可陛下也没有一点察觉。
English: The relevant officials did not dare to inquire, nor did they dare to report. Did they not get rich by sucking the people's fat and ointment? But His Majesty did not notice at all.

古文：金取于滇，不足不止；珠取于海，不罄不止；锦绮取于吴越，不极奇巧不止。
现代文：黄金取于云南，不满足不停止索取。珍珠取自大海，不弄完不停止。锦缎取于苏杭，不到极端奇巧不停止。
English: The gold is taken from Yunnan, and if it is not satisfied, it will not stop asking for it. The pearl is taken from the sea, and it will not stop until it is finished. The brocade is taken from Suhang, and it will not stop until it is extremely wonderful.

古文：乃元老听其投闲，直臣几于永锢，是陛下之爱贤士，曾不如爱珠玉锦绮也。 
现代文：元老听任他们闲置，而正直的大臣几乎全被永远禁止参予朝政，陛下爱贤明的人士，还不如爱珠玉锦缎。 
English: The senators have allowed them to remain idle, and the honest ministers have almost all been banned for ever from taking part in the government of the court. His Majesty does not love wise men as much as he loves jewels.

古文：疏奏，亦不省。
现代文：上疏奏上，皇上也不理会。
English: The Emperor did not pay any attention to the chorus.

古文：先是，张忠以开矿至，后孙朝复至榷税，诛求百方，允贞每事裁抑。
现代文：起先，张忠因开矿到山西，后来孙朝也来收税，责备、哀求的呼声来自四方，魏允贞每次予以裁定、抑制。
English: At first, Zhang Zhong went to Shanxi to mine, and later the Sun Dynasty also came to collect taxes. The cries of reproach and entreaty came from all directions, and Wei Yunzhen adjudicated and restrained them each time.

古文：会忠杖死太平典史武三杰，朝使者逼杀建雄县丞李逢春，允贞疏暴其罪。
现代文：恰好张忠打死太平典史武三杰，孙朝的使者逼死建雄县丞李逢春，魏允贞上疏揭露他们的罪行。
English: It just so happened that Zhang Zhong killed the three great generals of the Taiping Dynasty, Sun Dynasty emissaries forced the death of Jianxiong County Governor Li Fengchun, and Wei Yunzheng secretly exposed their crimes.

古文：朝怒，劾允贞抗命沮挠。
现代文：孙朝发怒，弹劾魏允贞违抗命令、肆意阻挠。
English: Enraged, the Sun Dynasty impeached Wei Yunzhen for disobeying orders and wanton obstruction.

古文：帝留允贞疏不下，而下朝疏于部院。
现代文：皇上将魏允贞的奏疏留下，而把孙朝的奏疏下到部院。
English: The emperor left Wei Yunzhen's syllabus behind, and sent the Sun Dynasty's syllabus down to the ministry.

古文：吏部尚书李戴、都御史温纯等力称允贞贤，请下允贞疏平议。
现代文：吏部尚书李戴、都御史温纯等极力称赞魏允贞的贤明，请求将魏允贞的奏疏下到部院进行评议。
English: Li Dai, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and Wen Chun, the governor of the capital, praised Wei Yunzheng's wisdom and requested that Wei Yunzheng's report be submitted to the ministry for review.

古文：帝并留中。
现代文：皇上把他们的意见都留下了。
English: The Emperor kept all their opinions to himself.

古文：山西军民数千恐允贞去，相率诣阙诉冤，两京言官亦连章论救。
现代文：山西军民数千人怕魏允贞离去，相继到京城喊冤，两京的御史也连连上奏救援。
English: Thousands of soldiers and civilians from Shanxi were afraid of Wei Yunzhen's departure, and successively went to the capital to appeal for justice. The two capitals' governors also repeatedly came to the rescue.

古文：帝乃两置不问。
现代文：皇上于是将两个人都不问罪。
English: The emperor therefore acquitted both men.

古文：明年，忠以夏县知县彭应春抗礼，劾贬之。
现代文：第二年，张忠因为夏县知县袁应春对他不礼貌，弹劾，并要求贬他的官。
English: The following year, Zhang Zhong impeached Yuan Yingchun of Xia County and Zhixian County for being rude to him, and demanded that he be demoted.

古文：允贞请留应春，不报。
现代文：魏允贞请求留任袁应春，皇上不答应。
English: Wei Yunzhen asked Yuan Yingchun to stay on, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：允贞父已九十余，允贞岁岁乞侍养，章二十上。
现代文：魏允贞的父亲年已九十多，魏允贞年年乞求侍养，奏章上了二十回。
English: Wei Yunzhen's father is more than ninety years old, and Wei Yunzhen begs to be taken care of year after year. He is mentioned in the record twenty times.

古文：廷议以敕使害民，非允贞不能制，固留之。
现代文：朝廷大臣认为皇上特使为害百姓，不是魏允贞不能制服，所以留任了他。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Court believed that the Emperor's special envoy was harming the people and that Wei Yunzhen could not be subdued, so he kept him on.

古文：其年五月，请益力，始听归。
现代文：这一年五月魏允贞的要求更坚决，才让他回家乡。
English: In May of this year, Wei Yunzhen's request was more resolute, and he was allowed to return to his hometown.

古文：世所称 南乐三魏 、 漳浦三刘 者也。
现代文：官吏、百姓为他立祠。不久，朝廷的视察人员上奏魏允贞守边疆的功劳，在家提升为兵部右侍郎。
English: Government officials and ordinary people built a shrine for him. Soon, the inspectors of the imperial court praised Wei Yunzheng's service in guarding the frontier, and he was promoted to the right attendant of the military department.

古文：王国，字子桢，耀州人。
现代文：很快他就去世了。天启初年，追封谥号为介肃。王国，字之桢，耀州人。
English: He died soon after. In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was given the posthumous name of Jie Su. Kingdom, Zha Zhi Yao, Yashu people.

古文：万历五年进士。选庶吉士，改御史。
现代文：万历五年中进士，授职庶吉士，改任御史。
English: In the fifth year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to junior high school teacher, given the title of junior high school teacher, and was reassigned to the position of senior history teacher.

古文：出视畿辅屯田，清成国公朱允祯等所侵地九千六百余顷。
现代文：王国出去巡视京畿一带的屯田，清理成国公朱允祯等所侵占的田地九千六百余顷。
English: The kingdom went out to inspect the occupied fields around Gyeonggi, and cleared more than 9,600 hectares of fields occupied by Chenggukong Zhu Yunhui and others.

古文：张居正疾笃，疏荐其座主潘晟入内阁，帝从之。
现代文：张居正病重后，他上疏推荐他的座师潘晟进入内阁，皇上采纳了。
English: After Zhang Juzheng fell seriously ill, he recommended his acting teacher Pan Zheng to the cabinet, and the emperor accepted.

古文：国与同官魏允贞、雷士桢及给事中王继光、孙炜、牛惟炳、张鼎思抗言不可，寝其命。
现代文：王国与同官魏允贞、雷士祯和给事中王继光、孙炜、朱惟炳、张鼎思以为不可，皇上停止了任命。
English: Wang Jiguang, Sun Yat-sen, Zhu Weizhen, and Zhang Ding thought it was impossible for the kingdom to deal with their colleagues Wei Yunzheng and Lei Shizhen, so the emperor stopped the appointment.

古文：已，极论中官冯保罪。
现代文：不久，极力弹劾宦官冯保的罪行。
English: Soon, the eunuch Feng Bao was impeached.

古文：且言： 居正死，保令徐爵索其家名琴七、夜光珠九、珠帘五、黄金三万、白金十万。
现代文：并且说： 张居正死后，冯保令徐爵索取他家的七张名琴、九个夜光珠、五个珠帘、三万两黄金、十万两白银。
English: He also said: After Zhang Jizheng's death, Feng Bao ordered Xu Jie to obtain his family's seven famous guitars, nine luminous beads, five beaded curtains, 30,000 taels of gold, and 100,000 taels of silver.

古文：居正子简修躬赍至保邸，而保扬言陛下取之，诬污圣德。 
现代文：张居正的儿子恭恭敬敬送到冯保的屋里，而冯保扬言是陛下要的，玷污了皇上的名声。 
English: Zhang Juzheng's son was respectfully sent to Feng Bao's house, and Feng Bao's threat was what His Majesty wanted, tarnishing the Emperor's reputation.

古文：因发曾省吾、王篆表里结纳状。
现代文：因而揭发曾省吾、王内外勾结的情况。
English: As a result, the collusion between Zeng and Wang was exposed.

古文：国疏自外至，与李植疏先后上。
现代文：王国的奏疏从外地到，与李植的奏疏先后呈上。
English: The Kingdom's anthology arrived from out of town, and was presented in succession with Li Zhi's.

古文：帝已纳植言罪保，植遂受知，而国亦由此显名。
现代文：皇上已采纳李植说冯保有罪的意见，李植遂为人所知，而王国的名声也由此显赫。
English: The emperor had accepted Li Zhi's opinion that Feng was guilty of treason, and Li Zhi became famous, and the reputation of the kingdom was also prominent.

古文：还朝，荐王锡爵、陆树声、胡执礼、耿定向、海瑞、胡直、颜鲸、魏允贞。
现代文：回到朝廷，推荐王锡爵、陆树声、胡执礼、耿定向、海瑞、胡直、颜琼、魏允贞。
English: Returning to the imperial court, he recommended Wang Xizhe, Lu Shuxing, Hu Xili, Geng Dingling, Hai Rui, Hu Zhi, Yan Qiong, and Wei Yunzhen.

古文：寻出督南畿学政，以疾归。
现代文：不久之后，他又出督南畿学政，因病回乡。
English: Soon after, he was appointed governor of Nanki to study politics, but returned to his hometown due to illness.

古文：起掌河南道。
现代文：王国起用掌管河南道。
English: The kingdom has appointed a new governor to take charge of Henan Province.

古文：首辅申时行欲置所不悦者十九人察典，吏部尚书杨巍等依违其间，国力持不可。
现代文：首辅申时行想把他不喜欢的十九个人置于考察的名册上，吏部尚书杨巍也在其中，王国极力坚持不能这样做。
English: At the request of the capital's vice-governor, the nineteen people whom he did not like were put on the inspection list, including the head of the personnel department, Yang Xi, but the kingdom insisted that this could not be done.

古文：时行以御史马允登资在国前，乃起允登掌察，而国佐之。
现代文：申时行以御史马允登资历较王国老，起用马允登掌考察事宜，让王国辅佐他。
English: At the time of the petition, he was older than the kingdom with more seniority than the kingdom, and appointed Ma Yun to investigate the matter, and let the kingdom assist him.

古文：诸御史咸集，允登书十九人姓名，曰： 诸人可谓公论不容者矣。 
现代文：各位御史都集中了，马允登写下十九个人的姓名，说： 这些人都是为众人所不能容忍的人。 
English: When all the historians were gathered, Ma Yunden wrote down the names of nineteen people and said: These people are intolerable to everyone.

古文：国熟视，叱曰： 诸人独忤执政耳。
现代文：王国仔细看后，喝叱道： 这些人唯独与执政相抵触。
English: After taking a closer look, the kingdom scolded: These people are the only ones who are in conflict with the government.

古文：天日监临，何出此语！ 
现代文：皇天在上，怎么能说出这样的话呢？ 
English: Good heavens, how can you say such a thing?

古文：允登意不回。国怒，奋前欲殴允登。
现代文：马允登不收回意见，王国很气愤，奋力上前想揍他。
English: Ma Yunden did not retract his opinion, and the kingdom was very angry and tried its best to beat him.

古文：允登走，国环柱逐之，同列救解。
现代文：马允登赶紧逃跑，王国围着柱子追他，其他人上来劝解。
English: Ma Yunden hurriedly ran away, the kingdom chased him around the pillar, others came up to persuade him.

古文：事闻，两人并调外，国得四川副使。移疾归。
现代文：皇上听到了此事，把两个人都调出京城，王国任四川副使，后因疾归家。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he transferred both of them out of the capital, and appointed the kingdom's deputy envoy to Sichuan. He later returned home due to illness.

古文：而十九人赖国以免。
现代文：那十九个人靠王国幸免于难。
English: The nineteen men were spared by the kingdom.

古文：久之，起故官，莅山西。
现代文：很久以后，王国起用为原官职，到山西任职。
English: After a long time, Wang Guojun was appointed to the original post and served in Shanxi.

古文：改督河南学政，迁山东参政。
现代文：后改任河南督学，升为山东参政。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Henan Supervisor and was promoted to Shandong to participate in politics.

古文：所在以公廉称。
现代文：在他任职的地方，他以公正、廉洁而著称。
English: Where he served, he was known for his fairness and integrity.

古文：召为太仆少卿。
现代文：征召为太仆少卿。
English: Subsequently, he was summoned to Kyoto as Taihoku shochikyo.

古文：复出为山西副使，历南京通政使。
现代文：又外出任山西副使，做南京通政使。
English: He also went abroad to serve as deputy envoy to Shanxi and as envoy to Nanjing.

古文：三十七年，以兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史巡抚保定。
现代文：万历三十七年以兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史的身份巡抚保定。
English: In the 37th year of the lunar calendar, he became the governor of Baoding as the right-hand man of the military department and the right-hand man of the capital.

古文：岁凶，屡上宽恤事宜。
现代文：年内发生灾害，王国屡屡上书皇上请求放宽赈恤事宜。
English: When disasters occurred during the year, the Kingdom repeatedly wrote to the Emperor to request the relaxation of the ban.

古文：大盗刘应第、董世耀聚众称王，剽劫远近，督兵讨灭之。
现代文：大盗刘应弟、董世耀聚众称王，远近劫掠，王国率兵剿灭了他们。
English: The great thieves Liu Ying's younger brother and Dong Shiyao gathered together and proclaimed themselves kings. They plundered far and wide, and the kingdom's soldiers destroyed them.

古文：进右都御史，巡抚如故。
现代文：升为右都御史，巡抚身份如旧。
English: He was promoted to Utsunomiya governor, but his status as governor remained the same.

古文：国刚介。与弟吏部侍郎图并负时望，为党人所忌。
现代文：王国刚正耿直，与弟弟吏部侍郎王图为当时人所仰慕，遭朋党忌恨。
English: Wang Guo and his younger brother Wang Tu, who served as an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, were admired by the people at that time, and were hated by their friends.

古文：乞休归，卒。
现代文：他请求归家，死于家乡。
English: He begged to come home and died in his hometown.

古文：余懋衡，字持国，婺源人。
现代文：余懋衡，字持国，江西婺源人。
English: Yu Yu Heng, Zhaozhi Guo, Jiangxi Yu Yuan Ren.

古文：万历二十年进士。除永新知县。
现代文：万历二十年中进士，授职永新知县。
English: In the 20th year of the Manchurian calendar, he was promoted to junior high school teacher, and was assigned to Yongxin County.

古文：征授御史。时以殿工，矿税使四出，骄横。
现代文：升为御史，当时因为修建大殿，矿税使被派往各地，骄横异常。
English: He was promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, but at that time, because of the construction of the main hall, the mining tax inspectors were sent to various regions. He was extremely arrogant.

古文：懋衡上疏言： 与其骚扰里巷，榷及鸡豚，曷若明告天下，稍增田赋，共襄殿工。
现代文：余懋衡上奏说： 与其骚扰平民，榷税至于鸡猪，还不如明明白白告诉天下人，稍为增加田赋，共同赞助大殿工程。
English: Yu Yuheng said in his report: "Instead of harassing the common people and imposing taxes on chickens and pigs, it would be better to clearly tell the world that in order to slightly increase the rice fields, we should jointly sponsor the Great Hall project."

古文：今避加赋之名，而为竭泽之计，其害十倍于加赋。 
现代文：现在避开增加赋税的名声，实际上是竭泽而渔的办法，这样的害处比增加赋税要大十倍。 
English: The avoidance of raising taxes, now famous, is in fact a cop-out, ten times more harmful than raising taxes.

古文：忤旨，停俸一年。
现代文：违背圣旨，余懋衡被停发俸禄一年。
English: Contrary to the holy will, Yu Xingheng was suspended from salary for one year.

古文：巡按陕西。税监梁永辇私物于畿辅，役人马甚众。
现代文：巡按陕西，税监梁永将私人财产运到畿辅，役使人马甚众。
English: While on patrol in Shaanxi, the tax inspector Liang Yong transported private property to Kiyosu, which caused quite a stir.

古文：懋衡奏之。永大恨，使其党乐纲贿膳夫毒懋衡。
现代文：余懋衡上奏弹劾他，梁永恨得要命，唆使其帮凶乐纲贿赂厨师想毒死余懋衡。
English: Yu Xuanheng impeached him, and Liang Yong hated him so much that he instigated his accomplice to bribe the chef to poison Yu Xuanheng.

古文：再中毒，不死。拷膳夫，获所予贿及余蛊。遂上疏极论永罪，言官亦争论永，帝皆不省。
现代文：两次中毒，余懋衡都没死，拷问厨师，获取乐纲给予的贿赂和剩下的毒药，于是，上疏极力弹劾梁永，御史官也争相弹劾梁永，皇上都不讯问。
English: Twice poisoned, Yu Xuanheng did not die, tortured the chef, obtained the bribe given by the music program and the remaining poison, so Shang So tried his best to impeach Liang Yong, the historians also competed to impeach Liang Yong, and the emperor did not interrogate.

古文：永虑军民为难，召亡命擐甲自卫。
现代文：梁永害怕军民为难他，召进一些亡命之徒自卫。
English: Liang Yong was afraid that the military and the people would make trouble for him, so he called in some desperadoes to defend himself.

古文：御史王基洪声言永必反，具陈永斩关及杀掠吏民状。
现代文：御史王基洪声言梁永一定会造反，将梁永杀掠官吏、百姓的事一一陈上。
English: Gu Shi Wang Ji Hong said that Liang Yong would definitely rebel, and would expose Liang Yong's killing and plundering of officials and people one by one.

古文：巡抚顾其志颇为永讳，永乃藉口辨。
现代文：巡抚顾其志为梁永隐讳，梁永于是为自己辩护。
English: Supervisor Gu Qizhi kept a secret for Liang Yong, Liang Yong then defended himself.

古文：帝疑御史言不实。
现代文：皇帝怀疑御史说的不是实话。
English: The emperor suspected that what you said was not true.

古文：而咸宁、长安二知县持永益急。
现代文：可咸宁、长安二个知县与梁永的对立更加厉害。
English: However, the opposition between Xianning and Chang'an, two counties of Zhixian, and Liang Yong is even more severe.

古文：永党王九功辈多私装，恐为有司所迹，托言永遣，乘马结阵驰去。
现代文：梁永党徒王九功等多私人武装，怕被有关官吏察觉，托词说是梁永调遣，拉帮结伙乘马驰走。
English: Many of Liang Yong's party members, including Wang Jugong, were privately armed, fearing that they would be detected by the relevant officials. The excuse was that Liang Yong had dispatched them, and they were riding away on horseback.

古文：县棣追及之华阴，相格斗，已皆被系，懋衡遂以反逆闻。
现代文：县吏在华阴追上他们，相互之间发生战斗，不久都被抓住，余懋衡于是以谋反之罪控告梁永。
English: The county officials caught up with them in Huayin, a fight broke out between them, and they were all caught soon after. Yu Yuheng then accused Liang Yong of plotting treason.

古文：永窘甚，爪牙尽亡，独纲在，乃教永诬劾咸宁知县满朝荐，朝荐被逮。
现代文：梁永很害怕，他的爪牙也逃散了，只有乐纲还在，他教梁永诬告咸宁知县朝荐，朝荐被逮捕。
English: Liang Yong was very scared, his minions also fled, only the music program was still there. He taught Liang Yong to falsely accuse Xianning Zhixian Chaoren, and Chaoren was arrested.

古文：永不久亦撤还，关中始靖。
现代文：梁永不久也被撤回京城，关中才安宁下来。
English: Liang Yong was soon withdrawn to Beijing, and Guanzhong only calmed down.

古文：懋衡寻以忧归。
现代文：余懋衡不久后因家人去世回到家乡。
English: Soon after, Yu Yuheng returned to his hometown due to the death of a family member.

古文：起掌河南道事。
现代文：后被起用掌管河南道。
English: He was later put in charge of Henan Province.

古文：擢大理右寺丞，引疾去。
现代文：升为大理右寺丞，声称有病归家。
English: He was promoted to Dari Uji no jo, but claimed to be ill and returned home.

古文：天启元年，起历大理左少卿，进右佥都御史，与尚书张世经共理京营戎政。
现代文：天启元年他又被起用为大理左少卿，官至右佥都御史，与尚书张世经共同管理京城军队政事。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was appointed as Dali Zuo Shaoqing, official to the right of Sheduo Guishi, and jointly managed the political affairs of the Beijing army with Shangshu Zhang Shijing.

古文：进右副都御史，改兵部右侍郎，俱理戎政。
现代文：又任右副都御史，改做兵部右侍郎，都是管理军队。
English: He was also appointed as the right vice-governor of the capital, and became the right attendant of the military department, both of which were to manage the army.

古文：三年八月，廷推南京吏部尚书，以懋衡副李三才；推吏部左侍郎，以曹于汴副冯从吾。
现代文：三年八月朝官推举南京吏部尚书，李三才为第一人选，余懋衡为第二人选；推举吏部左侍郎，以冯从吾为第一人选，以曹于汴为第二人选。
English: In August of the same year, the imperial officials selected Shang Shu from the Nanjing cadre, with Li Sancai as the first candidate and Yu Yu Heng as the second candidate; they also selected the left-hand man from the cadre, with Feng Congwu as the first candidate and Cao Yuqi as the second candidate.

古文：帝皆用副者。
现代文：皇上都用第二人选。
English: Emperors have always used a second candidate.

古文：大学士叶向高等力言不可，弗听。
现代文：大学士叶向高等极力认为不行，皇上不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to Ye Xiangguo, a college graduate, who tried his best to convince him that it was not possible.

古文：懋衡、于汴亦以资后三才等，力辞新命，引疾归。
现代文：余懋衡、曹于汴也认为自己资历不及李三才等，极力推辞新的任命，声称有病回到家乡。
English: Yu Yuheng and Cao Yuyao also believed that their qualifications were not as good as Li Sancai, and they strongly rejected the new appointment, claiming that they were ill and returning to their hometown.

古文：明年十月，再授前职。
现代文：第二年十月，余懋衡又被授予前职。
English: In October of the following year, Yu Xingheng was awarded his former position again.

古文：懋衡以珰势方张，坚卧不起。
现代文：他看到宦官势力正大，坚决不肯就任。
English: He saw that the power of the eunuchs was on the rise and resolutely refused to take office.

古文：既而奸党张讷丑诋讲学诸臣，以懋衡、从吾及孙慎行为首，遂削夺。
现代文：不久奸臣张纳肆意诋毁讲学各位大臣，其中以余懋衡、冯从吾和孙慎行为首，于是，余懋衡等被削职。
English: Soon, the treacherous vassal Zhang Na wantonly slandered and lectured the ministers, with Yu Yuhengheng, Feng Congwu and Sun Sheng as the leaders. As a result, Yu Yuhengheng and others were dismissed.

古文：崇祯初，复其官。
现代文：崇祯初年，方又官复原职。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, Fang was reinstated.

古文：李三才，字道甫，顺天通州人。
现代文：李三才，字道甫，顺天通州人。
English: Li Sancai, also known as Daofu, was from Shuntian Tongzhou.

古文：万历二年进士。授户部主事，历郎中。
现代文：万历二年中进士，授职户部主事，任郎中。
English: In the second year of the Manchurian calendar, he was promoted to the position of the head of the household department, and became a junior vassal.

古文：与南乐魏允贞、长垣李化龙以经济相期许。
现代文：与南乐的魏允贞、长垣李化龙以经世致用相互勉励。
English: With Wei Yunzhen and Nagagaki Li Hualong of Nanle, they encouraged each other with their experience.

古文：及允贞言事忤执政，抗疏直之，坐谪东昌推官。
现代文：等到魏允贞因为议论朝廷违背辅臣意思，李三才抗旨为他申辩，被贬为东昌推官。
English: It wasn't until Wei Yunzhen argued that the imperial court had violated the will of the vassal that Li San defied the order to defend him and was demoted to Dongchang magistrate.

古文：再迁南京礼部郎中。
现代文：再改任南京礼部郎中。
English: He was then reassigned to the post of vice-chairman of the Nanjing Refectory.

古文：会允贞、化龙及邹元标并官南曹，益相与讲求经世务，名籍甚。
现代文：恰好魏允贞、李化龙与邹元标等在南曹做官，愈加来往密切，讲求经世致用，名声更为著名。
English: Just as Wei Yunzheng, Li Hualong and Xuan Yuanbiao served as officials in Nanzhao, they became more and more close to each other, paid more attention to the times, and became more famous.

古文：迁山东佥事。
现代文：调任山东佥事。
English: Transferred to Shandong Anji.

古文：所部多大猾积盗，广设方略，悉擒灭之。
现代文：山东多狡猾的大盗，李三才多方设计圈套，将他们一一剿灭逮捕。
English: Li Sancai, the most cunning robber in Shandong, designed many traps and arrested them one by one.

古文：迁河南参议，进副使。
现代文：升河南参议，又升副使。
English: He was promoted to Henan Councillor and Deputy Minister.

古文：两督山东、山西学政，擢南京通政参议，召为大理少卿。
现代文：督山东、山西两省学政，提拔为南京通政参议，征召为大理少卿。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Shandong and Shanxi provinces, promoted to be a member of the Nanjing Political Consultative Committee, and was conscripted as the Dalian Junior Secretary.

古文：二十七年，以右佥都御史总督漕运，巡抚凤阳诸府。
现代文：万历二十七年以右佥都御史总管漕运，巡抚凤阳各府。
English: In the 27th year of the Manchurian calendar, he was appointed as the right-hand man of the governor of the capital, and the governor of the Fengyang prefectures.

古文：时矿税使四出。
现代文：当时矿税使横行各地。
English: At that time, envoys to collect the mineral tax were everywhere.

古文：三才所部，榷税则徐州陈增、仪真暨禄，盐课则扬州鲁保，芦政则沿江邢隆，棋布千里间。
现代文：李三才所辖范围，由徐州陈增、仪真暨禄收商税，扬州鲁保征收盐课，沿江邢隆征收芦课税，蔓延千里。
English: The area under the jurisdiction of Li Sancai, from Xuzhou Chen Zeng, Yi Zhen Ji Luo to collect business tax, Yangzhou Rubo to collect salt tax, and along the Yalong River to collect reed tax, spread thousands of miles.

古文：延引奸徒，伪锲印符，所至若捕叛亡，公行攘夺。
现代文：矿税使任用奸徒，伪造印章，所到之处如追捕叛乱和逃亡者一样，公然抢夺。
English: The mining tax has led to the appointment of traitors, the forging of seals, and the pursuit of rebels and fugitives everywhere, as well as open robbery.

古文：而增尤甚，数窘辱长吏。
现代文：而陈增尤其过分，公然数次凌辱官吏。
English: Chen Zeng, in particular, went too far, openly insulting officials several times.

古文：独三才以气凌之，裁抑其爪牙肆恶者，且密令死囚引为党，辄捕杀之，增为夺气。
现代文：唯有李三才正气凛然，压制其肆意行凶的爪牙，而且密令犯死罪的囚犯将他们指为同党，从而将他们捕杀，陈增的气焰才被压下。
English: Chen Zeng's arrogance was only suppressed when Li Sancai had the courage to suppress his wantonly murderous minions, and secretly ordered the prisoners who had committed capital crimes to designate them as fellow party members, so that they could be hunted down and killed.

古文：然奸民以矿税故，多起为盗。
现代文：而那些不安分的人因为矿税使的缘故，多起来做了强盗。
English: And those people who are restless because of the mining tax have become more and more robbers.

古文：浙人赵一平用妖术倡乱。
现代文：浙江人赵一平用妖术倡议叛乱。
English: Zhao Yiping from Zhejiang initiated the rebellion with magic.

古文：事觉，窜徐州，易号古元，妄称宋后。
现代文：事情被发觉，他逃往徐州，改名古元，胡说自己是宋皇室的后代。
English: When the affair was discovered, he fled to Xuzhou, changed his name to Gu Yuan, and lied that he was a descendant of the Song royal family.

古文：与其党孟化鲸、马登儒辈聚亡命，署伪官，期明年二月诸方并起。
现代文：与其同伙孟化鲸、马登儒聚集亡命之徒，自署官职，预定第二年二月各方起事。
English: Together with his associates, Meng Huahui and Madeng Ru, he gathered the exiles, appointed himself as an official, and scheduled the uprising of all parties in February of the following year.

古文：谋泄，皆就捕。
现代文：计谋被泄露，他们都被逮捕。
English: The plot was discovered and they were all arrested.

古文：一平亡之宝坻，见获。
现代文：赵一平逃到宝坻，被抓获。
English: Zhao Yiping fled to Baodi and was caught.

古文：三才再疏陈矿税之害，言： 陛下爱珠玉，民亦慕温饱；陛下爱子孙，民亦恋妻孥。
现代文：李三才再次上疏陈明矿税使的害处，说： 陛下喜爱珠玉，老百姓也羡慕温饱；陛下爱护子孙，百姓也恋妻女。
English: Li Sancai once again went on to explain the harm caused by the mining tax, saying: His Majesty loves jewels, and the people also envy food and clothing; His Majesty loves his children and grandchildren, and the people also love their wives and daughters.

古文：奈何陛下欲崇聚财贿，而不使小民享升斗之需；欲绵祚万年，而不使小民适朝夕之乐。
现代文：为什么陛下要聚集财宝，而不让小民老百姓有一升一斗的需要；想绵延万年，而不让百姓有一天的欢乐呢？
English: Why does His Majesty want to accumulate treasure, but not let the common people have a liter and a bucket of needs; want to extend for thousands of years, but not let the people have a day of joy?

古文：自古未有朝廷之政令、天下之情形一至于斯，而可幸无乱者。
现代文：自古未有朝廷的政令，天下的情形就到了这种地步，而能幸免没有叛乱的。
English: Since ancient times, when there was no imperial decree, the situation in the world has reached this level, and only those who do not rebel can be spared.

古文：今阙政猥多，而陛下病源则在溺志货财。
现代文：朝政鄙陋的多，而陛下的病根就在于沉溺于钱财之中。
English: The imperial government is much more despicable, and the root of His Majesty's illness lies in his addiction to money.

古文：臣请涣发德音，罢除天下矿税。
现代文：臣请求陛下发善心，罢除天下的矿税。
English: The minister asked His Majesty to have a good heart and abolish the mining tax.

古文：欲心既去，然后政事可理。 
现代文：贪欲之心既然丢掉，则朝政可以治理好。 
English: Now that the greedy heart has been discarded, the imperial government can be governed well.

古文：逾月未报，三才又上言： 臣为民请命，月余未得请。
现代文：过了一月，皇上没有回答。李三才又上疏，说： 臣为百姓请命，一个多月没有得到回答。
English: After a month had passed, the emperor did not reply. It was not until the thirteenth day of the third month that Li Sanzu again went to the emperor and said: "My vassal has been pleading for his life for the people, but he has not received an answer for more than a month.

古文：闻近日章奏，凡及矿税，悉置不省。此宗社存亡所关，一旦众畔土崩，小民皆为敌国，风驰尘骛，乱众麻起，陛下块然独处，即黄金盈箱，明珠填屋，谁为守之？ 
现代文：听说近日的奏章，凡涉及到矿税，都置之不理，这是国家存亡的关键，一旦众叛亲离，老百姓都成为敌人，风驰尘扬，叛乱的人群四起，陛下安然独处；即使黄金满箱，明珠填屋，谁替你守护呢？ 
English: It is said that the recent decrees ignore everything related to the mining tax, which is the key to the country's survival. Once the relatives are separated, the common people will become enemies, the wind will blow, the rebellious crowd will gather, and His Majesty will be left alone. Even if the gold is full and the pearls fill the house, who will protect you?

古文：亦不报。
现代文：皇上也不答复。
English: There was no answer to that either.

古文：三十年，帝有疾，诏罢矿税，俄止之。
现代文：万历三十年，皇上生病，下诏罢矿税，转眼之间又下诏停止罢免矿税。
English: After thirty years, the emperor fell ill and issued an edict to abolish the mining tax. In the blink of an eye, he also issued an edict to stop the abolition of the mining tax.

古文：三才极陈国势将危，请亟下前诏，不听。
现代文：李三才极力陈明国家形势危急，请立刻颁下前面停矿税的诏书，皇上不听。
English: Li Sancai tried his best to make it clear that the national situation was critical. Please immediately issue the edict to stop the mining tax. The emperor did not listen.

古文：清口水涸阻漕，三才议浚渠建闸，费二十万，请留漕粟济之。
现代文：清口水干涸阻碍了漕运。李三才建议开渠建闸，花费二十万，请求留下漕粮接济。
English: Li Sancai proposed to open a canal and build a lock, spending two hundred thousand yuan, and asked to keep the grain supply.

古文：督储侍郎赵世卿力争，三才遂引疾求去。
现代文：督储侍郎赵世卿力争，李三才于是声称有病请求离去。
English: The governor's equerry, Zhao Shijing, tried to intervene, but Li Sancai claimed to be ill and asked to leave.

古文：帝恶其委避，许之。
现代文：皇帝讨厌他回避，同意了。
English: The emperor hated his evasiveness and agreed.

古文：淮扬巡按御史崔邦亮、巡漕御史李思孝、给事中曹于汴、御史史学迁、袁九皋交章乞留。
现代文：淮扬巡按御史崔邦亮，巡漕御史李思孝，给事中曹于汴，御史史学迁、袁九皋交上奏章乞求把李三才留下。
English: Huaiyang sent his envoy Cui Bangliang, his envoy Li Siqiao, Cao Yujun, his envoy Xu Xuanqian, and Yuan Jiuyong to beg Li Sancai to stay.

古文：而学迁言： 陛下以陈增故，欲去三才，托词解其官。
现代文：史学迁说： 陛下因为陈增的原因，想去掉李三才，托词解除了他的官职。
English: Shi Xueqian said: His Majesty wanted to get rid of Li Sancai because of Chen Zeng, and he dismissed him from his official post on pretext.

古文：年来中使四出，海内如沸。
现代文：近年来宦官四出，海内沸腾。
English: In recent years, eunuchs have sprung up everywhere, and the sea is boiling.

古文：李盛春之去以王虎，魏允贞之去以孙朝，前漕臣李志之去亦以矿税事。
现代文：李盛春的去职因为王虎，魏允贞因为孙朝，前任漕臣李志也是因为矿税事。
English: Li Shengchun was dismissed because of Wang Hu, Wei Yunzhen was dismissed because of the Sun Dynasty, and Li Zhi, the former Cao minister, was also dismissed because of the mining tax.

古文：他监司守令去者，不可胜数，今三才复继之。
现代文：其他官吏离开岗位的，不可胜数，现在李三才又接着要被去职。
English: There are countless other officials who have left their posts, and now Li Sancai is the next to be dismissed.

古文：淮上军民以三才罢，欲甘心于增，增避不敢出。
现代文：淮上军民因为李三才被罢官，想找陈增算帐，陈增避门不出。
English: Huai Shang military and civilians because Li San was dismissed, want to find Chen Zeng's account, Chen Zeng can not escape.

古文：三才不当去可知。 
现代文：李三才不当离职可想而知。 
English: It is conceivable that Li Sancai left his post improperly.

古文：疏仍不答。
现代文：皇上对上疏仍不予理睬。
English: The emperor still ignored Joso.

古文：三才遂去淮之徐州。连疏请代，未得命。
现代文：李三才于是离开徐州，接连上疏请求找人替代他，未得到命令。
English: Li Sancai then left Xuzhou, and successively asked Shangsu to find someone to replace him, but did not receive the order.

古文：会侍郎谢杰代世卿督储，复请留。
现代文：正好侍郎谢杰代替赵世卿为督储，再次请求让李三才留下。
English: Just at that time, the attendant, Xie Jie, replaced Zhao Shijing as the governor, and once again asked Li Sancai to stay.

古文：乃命三才供事俟代者，帝亦竟不遣代也。
现代文：皇上于是命令李三才继续任职以等待代替的人，皇上也终究没有派遣代替的人。
English: The emperor then ordered Li Sancai to continue in office to wait for a replacement, and the emperor did not send a replacement after all.

古文：明年九月，复疏言： 乃者迅雷击陵，大风拔木，洪水滔天，天变极矣。
现代文：第二年九月又上疏说： 近来雷电击中了陵寝，大风拔起了树木，洪水滔天，天变到了极点。
English: In September of the following year, Shang Suo again said, "Recently, lightning has struck the mausoleum, high winds have uprooted trees, floods are raging, and the sky has changed to the extreme.

古文：赵古元方磔于徐，李大荣旋枭于亳，而睢州巨盗又复见告，人离极矣。陛下每有征求，必曰 内府匮乏 。
现代文：赵古元刚被肢解于徐州，赵大荣在亳州被砍头，而睢州的大盗又出现了，人心的离散到了极点，陛上每当有征求时，必定说： 内府已很匮乏。 
English: Zhao Guyuan had just been dismembered in Xuzhou, Zhao Dayong was beheaded in Ganzhou, and the bandits of Ganzhou appeared again. The dispersion of people's hearts has reached the extreme. Whenever there is a request, His Majesty will certainly say: "There is already a shortage in the inner city."

古文：夫使内府果乏，是社稷之福也，所谓貌病而天下肥也。
现代文：如果内府果然匮乏，那是国家的福气。所谓皇上瘦弱而天下肥，实际上不是这样。
English: If the inner palace is really lacking, it is a blessing for the country. The so-called emperor is thin and the world is fat is actually not the case.

古文：而其实不然。陛下所谓匮乏者，黄金未遍地，珠玉未际天耳。
现代文：陛下所谓的匮乏，是黄金没有遍地，珠宝玉石没有堆到像天那么高。
English: His Majesty's so-called scarcity is that gold is not everywhere, and jewels and precious stones are not piled up as high as the sky.

古文：小民饔飧不饱，重以征求，箠楚无时，桁杨满路，官惟丐罢，民惟请死，陛下宁不惕然警悟邪！
现代文：小民饭都吃不饱，又来搜刮，鞭打没有止尽，道路上全是囚犯，官吏唯有请求罢官，老百姓唯有一死，陛下难道还不引起警惕吗！
English: The peasants can't get enough to eat, the police are coming to search and seize, the whipping hasn't stopped, the roads are full of prisoners, the officials can only ask to be dismissed, and the common people can only die. Won't Your Majesty be alarmed?

古文：陛下毋谓臣祸乱之言为未必然也；若既已然矣，将置陛下何地哉！ 
现代文：陛下不要说臣危言耸听、言过其实，真的到了这一步，哪有陛下安身的地方呢！ 
English: Your Majesty, don't say that your subjects are being alarmist and exaggerating, it really has come to this, where is Your Majesty going to live?

古文：亦不报。
现代文：皇上也不回答。
English: There was no answer to that either.

古文：既而睢盗就获，三才因奏行数事，部内晏然。
现代文：不久，睢州的盗匪被擒获。李三才因此上奏施行几件事，境内安宁。
English: Soon after, the bandits in Zhangzhou were caught. Li Sancai therefore reported the implementation of several things, and there was peace in the territory.

古文：翕人程守训以赀官中书，为陈增参随。
现代文：歙县人程守训以纳财得中书官职，他为陈增的随从。
English: Zou County resident Cheng Shouxun used his wealth to obtain the post of official secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. He was a top follower of Chen Zeng.

古文：纵横自恣，所至鼓吹，盛仪卫，许人告密，刑拷及妇孺。
现代文：骄横跋扈，所到之处为他举行盛大的仪式，允许人告密，连妇女、儿童也拷问。
English: He was arrogant, held grand ceremonies for him everywhere he went, allowed people to inform on him, and even tortured women and children.

古文：畏三才，不敢至淮。
现代文：他害怕李三才，不敢到淮上。
English: He was afraid of Li Sancai and did not dare to go to Huaiyuan.

古文：三才劾治之，得赃数十万。
现代文：李三才弹劾整治他，得到他的赃物数十万。
English: It took Li Sancai to impeach and rectify him and get hundreds of thousands of his stolen goods.

古文：增惧为己累，并搜获其奇珍异宝及僣用龙文服器。
现代文：陈增害怕连累到自己，搜查他的奇珍异宝，盗用的龙文、服饰、器物。
English: Chen Zeng is afraid of being implicated in the search for his rare treasures, pirated dragon texts, clothing and utensils.

古文：守训及其党俱下吏伏法，远近大快。
现代文：程守训和他的帮凶都被逮捕受到法律的制裁，远近地方人心大快。
English: Cheng Shouxun and his accomplices were all arrested and punished by the law, and the hearts of local people were greatly moved.

古文：三十四年，皇孙生。
现代文：万历三十四年皇帝的孙子出生。
English: In the thirty-fourth year of Wanli, the emperor's grandson was born.

古文：诏并矿税，释逮系，起废滞，补言官，既而不尽行。
现代文：皇上下诏合并矿税，释放囚犯，起用被解职的官员，增补御史，不久却不全部实行。
English: The Emperor decreed the unification of the mining tax, the release of prisoners, the appointment of dismissed officials, and the addition of imperial history, but not all of them were implemented soon.

古文：三才疑首辅沈一贯尼之，上疏阴诋一贯甚力。
现代文：李三才怀疑首辅沈一贯从中作梗，便上疏暗中诋毁沈一贯。
English: It was not until Li Sancai suspected that the chief aide Shen had always obstructed him, that he slandered Shen in the dark.

古文：继又言： 恩诏已颁，旋复中格，道路言前日新政不过乘一时喜心，故旋开旋蔽。 
现代文：接着，他又说： 恩诏已颁布，立刻又中途停止，在路上人们说前几天的新政不过是陛下一时心喜，所以旋开旋闭。 
English: Next, he said: "The edict has been issued, and immediately stopped halfway. On the way, people said that the New Deal of the previous few days was nothing more than His Majesty's momentary pleasure, so they turned on and off.

古文：又谓： 一贯虑沈鲤、朱赓逼己。
现代文：又说： 沈一贯担心沈鲤、朱赓威逼自己。
English: He also said: Shen has always been worried about Shen Rong, and Zhu Rongwei has forced himself.

古文：既忌其有所执争，形己之短，又耻其事不由己，欲坏其成。
现代文：又害怕他们有所争执，暴露了自己的短处，害怕事情不由自己去做，就想从中使坏。
English: They are also afraid that they will quarrel, expose their own shortcomings, fear that things will not be done by themselves, and want to make bad things out of it.

古文：行贿左右，多方蛊惑，致新政阻格。 
现代文：他行贿左右的人，多方煽动，致使新政遇到阻力。 
English: He bribed those around him, instigated from many sides, and caused the New Deal to encounter resistance.

古文：帝得疏，震怒。严旨切责，夺俸五月。
现代文：皇上得到奏疏，感到很震惊，下诏严厉责问，将他的俸禄停发了五个月。
English: The emperor was shocked to receive the report and issued a stern reprimand, suspending his salary for five months.

古文：其明年，暨禄卒。
现代文：第二年，暨禄死。
English: He died the following year.

古文：三才因请尽撤天下税使，帝不从，命鲁保兼之。
现代文：李三才因而请求下诏将天下的税使全部撤离，皇上不听，命令鲁保兼任暨禄的职务。
English: As a result, Li Sancai requested the emperor to issue an edict to evacuate all the tax officials in the world, but the emperor did not listen and ordered Lu Bao to also take on the duties of Jinlu.

古文：是时顾宪成里居，讲学东林，好臧否人物。
现代文：当时，顾宪成住在无锡，在东林书院讲学，喜欢品评人物。
English: At that time, Gu Xiancheng lived in Wuxi, lectured at Donglin College, and liked to evaluate characters.

古文：三才与深相结，宪成亦深信之。
现代文：李三才与他有深交，顾宪成也极信任他。
English: Li Sancai has a deep friendship with him, and Gu Xiancheng also trusts him very much.

古文：三才尝请补大僚，选科道，录遗佚。
现代文：李三才曾经请求增补大僚，选拔科道，录用被贬的官员。
English: Li Sancai once asked for the addition of senior officials, the selection of disciplines, and the appointment of officials who had been demoted.

古文：因言： 诸臣只以议论意见一触当途，遂永弃不收，要之于陛下无忤。
现代文：因而说： 各大臣只因为议论一有触及到掌权的人，便永远不被任用，他们并没有违背陛下。
English: He said: "Ministers are not disloyal to His Majesty because they never get appointed just because they talk about someone who is in power.

古文：今乃假天子威以锢诸臣，复假忤主之名以文己过。
现代文：现在有些人假皇上的威风禁锢大臣，又借他们违抗陛下的名义替自己的罪过掩饰。
English: Now there are some who pretend to be the emperor's ministers of discipline and punishment, and use the name of defying his majesty to cover up their own sins.

古文：负国负君，罪莫大此。 
现代文：有负国家有负君王，没有比这个罪更大的了。 
English: There is no greater crime than betraying one's country and one's king.

古文：意为宪成诸人发。
现代文：意在为顾宪成等人呼吁。
English: Intended to appeal for Gu Xiancheng and others.

古文：已，复极陈朝政废坏，请帝奋然有为，与天下更始。
现代文：不久，又极力陈明朝政的败坏，请求皇上奋发有为，与天下一起有所变化。
English: Not long after, he tried his best to expose the corruption of the Ming Dynasty's politics, and asked the emperor to work hard and make changes together with the world.

古文：且力言辽左阽危，必难永保状。
现代文：而且极力说明辽东一带危急，必定难以永保安全。
English: Moreover, they tried their best to explain that the Liaodong region is in a critical situation, and it will be difficult to maintain safety forever.

古文：帝皆置不省。
现代文：皇上都将其置于一边不加理会。
English: The emperor put it aside and ignored it.

古文：三才挥霍有大略，在淮久，以折税监得民心。
现代文：李三才有雄才大略，在淮上一带干了很久，以抑止税监深得民心。
English: Li San only has great talent, and he has worked for a long time in Huaiyang to deter the tax inspectors and win the hearts of the people.

古文：及淮、徐岁侵，又请振恤，蠲马价。
现代文：待淮、徐一带发生灾害，他又请求赈恤，减免马价。
English: Waiting for disasters to occur in the Huai and Xu regions, he also asked for a reduction and exemption of horse prices.

古文：淮人深德之。屡加至户部尚书。
现代文：淮上之人深为崇敬他，逐渐地升至户部尚书。
English: He was deeply revered by the people of Huai, and gradually rose to the top of the household.

古文：会内阁缺人，建议者谓不当专用词臣，宜与外僚参用，意在三才。
现代文：正好内阁缺人，建议的人认为不应当专门只用文学侍从，应该让地方官也参加补缺，李三才依次被召进朝中。
English: Just as the cabinet was short of people, the person who suggested it believed that literary attendants should not be used exclusively, and that local officials should also be involved in filling the vacancies. Li Sanluo was called into the central government in turn.

古文：及都御史缺，需次内召。
现代文：由此忌恨他的人日众，诽谤他的言论四起。
English: As a result, the people who hate him are on the rise, and slanderous remarks about him are on the rise.

古文：由是忌者日众，谤议纷然。工部郎中邵辅忠遂劾三才大奸似忠，大诈似直，列具贪伪险横四大罪，御史徐兆魁继之。
现代文：工部郎中邵辅忠弹劾李三才表面上是忠臣其实是个大奸贼，表面上正直实质上狡猾，列举他贪污、虚伪、险恶、专横四大罪状，御史徐兆魁接着弹劾。
English: Shao Shuozhong, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, impeached Li Sancai for being a loyal subject on the surface, but actually a great traitor, honest on the surface and cunning in essence. He listed four major crimes of corruption, hypocrisy, sinister and despotic. Gu Shi Xu Zhaokui then impeached him.

古文：三才四疏力辨，且乞休。
现代文：李三才上了四份奏疏为自己极力辩护，而且乞求退休。
English: Li San only went to four hearings to vigorously defend himself, and begged to retire.

古文：给事中马从龙、御史董兆舒、彭端吾、南京给事中金士衡相继为三才辨。
现代文：给事中马从龙，御史董兆舒、彭端吾，南京给事中金士衡相继为李三才申辩。
English: Ma Conglong, Mishi Dong Zhaoshu, Peng Dangwu, and Jin Shihheng successively pleaded for Li Sancai in the Nanjing case.

古文：大学士叶向高言三才已杜门待罪，宜速定去留，为漕政计。
现代文：大学士叶向高说李三才已闭门等待治罪，为朝政考虑，应立即定下他的去留问题。
English: Ye Xianggao, a university scholar, said that Li Sancai had closed his door and was waiting to be punished. For the sake of imperial politics, the question of his whereabouts should be settled immediately.

古文：皆不报。
现代文：皇上一概不予回答。
English: None of this has been approved.

古文：已而南京兵部郎中钱策，南京给事中刘时俊，御史刘国缙、乔应甲，给事中王绍徵、徐绍吉、周永春、姚宗文、朱一桂、李瑾，南京御史张邦俊、王万祚，复连章劾三才。
现代文：不久，南京兵部郎中钱策，南京给事中刘时俊，御史刘国缙、乔应甲，给事中王绍徽、徐绍吉、周永春、姚宗文、朱一桂、李瑾，南京御史张邦俊、王万祚，又连着上奏弹劾李三才。
English: Soon after, Qian Ze, the head of the Nanjing Military Department, Liu Shijun, Liu Guojun, and Qiao Yingjia, the military governor of Nanjing, Wang Shaohui, Xu Shaoji, Zhou Yongchun, Yao Zongwen, Zhu Yikui, Li Qian, the military governor of Nanjing, Zhang Bangjun, and Wang Wanqian, the military governor of Nanjing, and Li Sancai, the military governor of Nanjing, were impeached.

古文：而给事中胡忻、曹于汴，南京给事中段然，御史史学迁、史记事、马孟祯、王基洪，又交章论救。
现代文：而给事中胡忻、曹于汴，南京给事中段然，御史史学迁、史记事、马孟祯、王基洪，又上疏为他申说救助。
English: However, Hu Yao, Cao Yuxuan, and Nanjing were given the lead in the middle of the matter, and Gu Shi Shi Xue Qian, Shi Ji Ji, Ma Mengyao, Wang Qihong, and Shang Shou were sent to help him.

古文：朝端聚讼，迄数月未已。
现代文：一时间，朝臣聚讼，过了几个月还没有平息。
English: For a while, the courtiers were at loggerheads, and this did not subside for several months.

古文：宪成乃贻书向高，力称三才廉直，又贻书孙丕扬力辨之。
现代文：顾宪成于是写信给叶向高，极力称赞李三才廉洁、正直，又写信给孙丕扬极力为他辩护。
English: Gu Xiancheng then wrote to Ye Xianggao, strongly praising Li Sancai's integrity and honesty, and also wrote to Sun Yat-sen to vigorously defend him.

古文：御史吴亮素善三才，即以两书附传邸报中，由是议者益哗。
现代文：御史吴亮素与李三才要好，就把两信附在邸报之中，由此议论更为喧哗。
English: Gu Shi Wu Liangsu and Li San only wanted to be good, so they attached the two letters to the residence newspaper, which made the discussion more noisy.

古文：应甲复两疏力讦，至列其十贪五奸。
现代文：乔应甲又上了两疏极力攻击他，列举了李三才十贪五奸之事。
English: Qiao Ying A went on to attack him vigorously, listing Li Sancai's ten cases of greed and five cases of treachery.

古文：帝皆不省。
现代文：皇帝都不闻不管。
English: But the emperor did not look.

古文：三才亦力请罢，疏至十五上。久不得命，遂自引去。
现代文：李三才又再三请求辞职，奏疏上了十五道，过了很久不见命令下来，于是自己就走了。
English: Li Sancai again and again asked for resignation, and the play was delayed for fifteen days. After a long time, the order did not come down, so he left.

古文：帝亦不罪也。
现代文：皇上也没有怪罪他。
English: The Emperor did not blame him either.

古文：三才既家居，忌者虑其复用。
现代文：李三才已在家乡定居，恨他的人害怕他再次被任用。
English: Li Sancai has settled in his hometown, and his haters are afraid that he will be reappointed.

古文：四十二年，御史刘光复劾其盗皇木营建私第至二十二万有奇。且言三才与于玉立遥执相权，意所欲用，铨部辄为推举。
现代文：万历四十二年，御史刘光复弹劾他盗用皇木二十二万根营建私邸，而且说李三才与于玉立遥相呼应，他想任用的，吏部就为他推举。
English: In the 42nd year of Wanli, the imperial historian Liu Guangfu impeached him for embezzling 220,000 imperial wood to build a private residence, and said that Li Sancai echoed Yu Yuliyao. If he wanted to be appointed, the cadre department would elect him.

古文：三才疏辨，请遣中官按问。
现代文：李三才上疏申辩，请求派遣宦官调查。
English: Li Sancai made a brief plea, requesting that a eunuch be sent to investigate.

古文：给事中刘文炳、御史李徵仪、工部郎中聂心汤、大理丞王士昌，助光复力攻三才。
现代文：给事中刘文炳、御史李征仪、工部郎中聂心汤、大理丞王士昌，帮助刘光复攻击李三才。
English: Liu Wenjuan, Gu Shi Li Zhengyi, Gongbu Langzhong Zhenxin Tang, and Dalizhe Wang Shichang helped Liu Guangfu attack Li Sancai.

古文：徵仪、心汤，三才尝举吏也。
现代文：李征仪、聂心汤，是三才推举的官吏。
English: Li Zhengyi and Zou Xin Tang are officials who were elected only three years ago.

古文：三才愤甚，自请籍其家。
现代文：李三才气愤异常，自己请求登记家产。
English: Li Sancai was so angry that he asked to register the family property.

古文：工部侍郎林如楚言宜遣使覆勘。
现代文：工部侍郎林如楚说应当派遣使者检验一下。
English: Lin Ruchu, the secretary of the engineering department, said that an envoy should be sent to inspect it.

古文：光复再疏，并言其侵夺官厂为园囿。
现代文：刘光复再次上疏，并说他侵夺官厂为自己的园苑。
English: Liu Guangfu once again went on a rampage, and said that he had invaded the government factory for his own garden.

古文：御史刘廷元遂率同列继之，而潘汝祯又特疏论劾。
现代文：御史刘廷元率部属又接着上奏，且潘汝祯又特地上奏弹劾。
English: Liu Tingyuan, the chief of the General Staff, then led his subordinates to play the impeachment song, and Pan Ruzhen also specially played the impeachment song.

古文：既而巡按御史颜思忠亦上疏如光复指。
现代文：不久，巡按御史颜思忠也上疏证实了刘光复所说的。
English: Soon, the inspector, Yan Sizhong, also confirmed what Liu Guangfu said.

古文：三才益愤，请诸臣会勘，又请帝亲鞫。
现代文：李三才更为愤怒，请求各位大臣一同勘查，又乞求皇上亲自审问。
English: Li Sancai was even more angry, and he asked the ministers to investigate together, and begged the emperor to personally interrogate him.

古文：乃诏徵仪偕给事中吴亮嗣往。
现代文：皇上于是下诏让李征仪带领给事中吴亮嗣前往。
English: The emperor then issued an edict to let Li Zhengyi lead Wu Liangzi to the scene of the incident.

古文：其明年，光复坐事下狱。
现代文：第二年，刘光复因事被下狱。
English: The following year, Liu Guangfu was released from prison.

古文：三才阳请释之，而复力为东林辨白，曰： 自沈一贯假撰妖书，擅僇楚宗，举朝正人攻之以去。
现代文：李三才表面上请求释放他，而极力为东林党人辩白，说： 自从沈一贯伪造妖书，任意杀戮楚王宗族，满朝正直之人将他攻击出廷。
English: Li Sancai ostensibly asked for his release, but tried his best to defend the Donglin Party members, saying: Since Shen has consistently forged evil books and arbitrarily killed the Chu Wang clan, honest people all over the country have attacked him in court.

古文：继汤宾尹、韩敬科场作奸，孽由自取，于人何尤。
现代文：接着汤宾尹、韩敬考场作弊，咎由自取，与别人何干。
English: Next, Tang Bin Yin and Han Jing cheated in the examination hall. They took the blame on themselves, and had nothing to do with others.

古文：而今之党人动与正人为仇，士昌、光复尤为戎首。挺身主盟，力为一贯、敬报怨。
现代文：现在的党人动不动就与正直的人为仇敌，王士昌、刘光复尤其厉害，挺身而出，极力为沈一贯、韩敬报仇。
English: Wang Shichang and Liu Guangfu, in particular, stood up and tried their best to take revenge for Shen Gangun and Han Jing.

古文：腾说百端，攻击千状。
现代文：乱说一气，百般攻击。
English: Talk nonsense and attack in every way.

古文：以大臣之贤者言之，则叶向高去矣，王象乾、孙玮、王图、许弘纲去矣，曹于汴、胡忻、朱吾弼、叶茂才、南企仲、朱国祯等去矣，近又攻陈荐、汪应蛟去矣。
现代文：就贤明的大臣来说，叶向高走了，王象乾、孙玮、王图、许弘纲走了，曹于汴、胡忻、朱吾弼、叶茂才、南企仲、朱国祯等也走了，近来又将陈荐、汪应蛟攻击走了。
English: As far as wise ministers are concerned, Ye Xianggao has gone, Wang Xiangqian, Sun Qian, Wang Tu and Xu Honggang have gone, Cao Yuqian, Hu Yao, Zhu Wuzhong, Ye Maocai, Nan Qizhong and Zhu Guozhen have also gone, and recently Chen Ruiqi and Wang Yingqin have also gone.

古文：以小臣之贤者言之，梅之焕、孙振基、段然、吴亮、马孟祯、汤兆京、周起元、史学迁、钱春等去矣，李朴、鲍应鳌、丁元荐、庞时雍、吴正志、刘宗周等去矣。
现代文：以贤明的小臣来说，梅之焕、孙振基、段然、吴亮、马孟祯、汤兆京、周起元、史学迁、钱春等走了，李朴、鲍应鳌、丁元荐、庞时雍、吴正志、刘宗周等走了。
English: As far as wise ministers are concerned, Mei Zhihuan, Sun Zhenji, Duan Ran, Wu Liang, Ma Mengyao, Tong Zhaojing, Zhou Qianyuan, Shi Xueqian, Qian Chun, Li Pu, Bao Yingyao, Ding Yuan Xian, Pang Shiyong, Wu Zhengzhi, Liu Zongzhou and others have left.

古文：合于己则留，不合则逐。
现代文：与他们意见一致的就留下，不一致的就赶走。
English: If you agree with them, you stay, if you disagree, you leave.

古文：陛下第知诸臣之去，岂知诸党人驱之乎？
现代文：陛下只知道各大臣离开了，哪里知道都是党人赶走的呢？
English: His Majesty only knew that the ministers had left, but how did he know that it was the party members who had driven them away?

古文：今奸党仇正之言，一曰东林，一曰淮抚。
现代文：现在奸人仇视的正直之人，一是东林人，一是淮抚。
English: Now the honest people who are hated by the traitors are Donglin people and Huai Fuzhou people.

古文：所谓东林者，顾宪成读书讲学之所也。
现代文：所谓东林，是顾宪成读书讲学的地方。
English: The so-called Donglin is the place where Gu Xiancheng read and lectured.

古文：从之游者如高攀龙、姜士昌、钱一本、刘元珍、安希范、岳元声、薛敷教，并束身厉名行，何负国家哉？
现代文：与他一起的像高攀龙、姜士昌、钱一本、刘元珍、安希范、岳元声、薛敷教，都是些约束自己、有气节的人，有什么辜负国家的地方？
English: Together with him, the likes of Gao Panglong, Jiang Shichang, Qian Yibang, Liu Yuanzhen, An Xi Fan, Yue Yuan Xiang, Xue Shikijiao are all people who have self-discipline and discipline. What is there to live up to the country?

古文：偶曰东林，便成陷井。
现代文：偶然被指为东林，便陷入深渊。
English: Accidentally referred to as Donglin, it fell into the abyss.

古文：如邹元标、赵南星等被以此名，即力阻其进。
现代文：如邹元标、赵南星等就因为背上此名，晋升的道路就非常困难。
English: For example, the path to promotion is very difficult for the likes of Xuan Yuanbiao and Zhao Nansing because they have this name on their back.

古文：所朝上而夕下者，惟史继偕诸人耳。
现代文：早上申报晚上被任命的，只有史继偕等人。
English: Only Shi Jizhe and others who reported in the morning and were appointed in the evening.

古文：人才邪正，实国祚攸关，惟陛下察焉。 
现代文：人才的邪与直，实与国家命运相攸关，希望陛下要看清楚。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will see clearly that the merits and demerits of talent are closely related to the fate of the country.

古文：疏入，众益恨之。
现代文：上疏奏上，众人更加恨他。
English: As the song progressed, the crowd hated him even more.

古文：亮嗣等既往勘，久之无所得。
现代文：吴亮嗣等已经去勘察，很久都没有得到什么。
English: Wu Liangzhi and others have gone to investigate, but they haven't found anything for a long time.

古文：第如光复言还报，遂落职为民。
现代文：宅第并不是刘光复所说的那样，回来汇报后，李三才被降为平民。
English: Li San was only demoted to a commoner after he came back to report that his home was not as Liu Guangfu had said.

古文：天启元年，辽阳失。
现代文：天启元年，辽阳失守。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, Liaoyang was lost.

古文：御史房可壮连疏请用三才。
现代文：御史房可壮接连上疏请起用李三才。
English: Please appoint Li Sancai as the chief historian.

古文：有诏廷臣集议。
现代文：皇上下诏让大臣讨论。
English: The Emperor issued an edict to let the ministers discuss it.

古文：通政参议吴殿邦力言不可用，至目之为盗臣。
现代文：通政参议吴殿邦极力说不行，把他指为强盗大臣。
English: Wu Dianbang, the political counselor, tried his best to say no, calling him a robber minister.

古文：御史刘廷宣复荐三才，言： 国家既惜其才，则用之耳，又何议，然广宁已有王化贞，不若用之山海。 
现代文：御史刘廷宣又推荐李三才，说： 国家既然珍惜他的才干，就用他吧。
English: Liu Tingxuan, the chief historian, also recommended Li Sancai, saying: Since the country values his talent, let's use him.

古文：帝是其言，即欲用三才，而廷议相持未决。
现代文：还议论什么呢？然而广宁已有王化贞，不如让他在山海关任职。 皇上同意他的话，想起用李三才，可是大臣的意见相持不下。
English: However, Guangning already had Wang Huazhen, so it would be better to let him work at the Shanhaiguan Customs. The emperor agreed with him and thought of using Li Sancai, but the minister's opinion could not be reconciled.

古文：詹事公鼐力言宜用，刑部侍郎邹元标、佥都御史王德完并主之。
现代文：詹事公鼐极力认为可用，刑部侍郎邹元标、佥都御史王德完都赞同。
English: Zhan Zhi Gongjun strongly believed that it could be used, and the attendant of the criminal department, Zou Yuanbiao, and the governor of the capital, Wang De, all agreed.

古文：已，德完迫众议，忽变前说。
现代文：不久，王德完迫于众议，就改变了态度。
English: Wang De soon changed his attitude after he was forced to listen to the crowd.

古文：及署议，元标亦不敢主。
现代文：等到安排议定时，邹元标也不敢表态。
English: When the arrangement was agreed upon, Xuan Yuanbiao did not dare to make a statement.

古文：议竟不决，事遂寝。
现代文：议论没有结果，事情就搁置下来。
English: Discussions were inconclusive and the matter was shelved.

古文：三年，起南京户部尚书，未上卒。
现代文：三年李三才被起用为南京户部尚书，还没上任就死了。
English: It took Li Sanru three years to be appointed as the head of the Nanjing Household Department, but he died before taking office.

古文：后魏忠贤乱政，其党御史石三畏追劾之。诏削籍，夺封诰。
现代文：后来，魏忠贤专权，其帮凶、御史石三畏弹劾他，皇上下诏削掉他的名册，夺回封诰。
English: Later, Wei Zhongxian monopolized power, and his accomplice, Gu Shishi Sanji, impeached him, and the emperor issued an edict to cut off his roster and recapture the seal.

古文：崇祯初复官。
现代文：崇祯初年，才将他官复原职。
English: It was not until his first year in office that he was reinstated.

古文：三才才大而好用机权，善笼络朝士。
现代文：李三才有雄才大略却爱耍手腕，善于笼络朝廷大臣。
English: Li San Tzu was a man of great talent, but he loved to play tricks and was good at entrapping the imperial court ministers.

古文：抚淮十三年，结交遍天下。
现代文：巡抚淮上十三年，结交的人遍天下。
English: Inspector Huai has been in charge for 13 years and has made friends all over the world.

古文：性不能持廉，以故为众所毁。
现代文：生性不能坚持廉洁，所以为众人所抨击。
English: He was criticized by many people for his inability to maintain integrity.

古文：其后击三才者，若邵辅忠、徐兆魁辈，咸以附魏忠贤名丽逆案。
现代文：其后，攻击李三才的人，如邵辅忠、徐楚魁等人，都是依附魏忠贤的小人。
English: After that, those who attacked Li Sancai, such as Shao Shuozhong, Xu Chukui and others, were all villains who depended on Wei Zhongxian.

古文：而推毂三才，若顾宪成、邹元标、赵南星、刘宗周，皆表表为时名臣。
现代文：而推崇李三才的，如顾宪成、邹元标、赵南星、刘宗周，都是当时公认的名臣。
English: Those who respected Li Sancai, such as Gu Xiancheng, Xuan Yuanbiao, Zhao Nansing, and Liu Zongzhou, were all well-known eminent ministers at that time.

古文：故世以三才为贤。
现代文：所以世人认为李三才是贤臣。
English: Therefore, the world thinks that Li San is a wise minister.

