古文：贺胜贺胜，仁杰子也，字贞卿，一字举安，小字伯颜，以小字行。
现代文：贺胜字贞卿，另字举安，小名伯颜。
English: He Sheng Zi Zhenqing, another Zi Hoan, a small name Bo Yan.

古文：尝从许衡学，通经传大义。年十六，入宿卫，凝重寡言，世祖甚器重之。大臣有密奏，辄屏左右，独留胜，许听之。出则参乘舆，入则侍帷幄，非休沐不得至家。
现代文：曾随许衡学习，十六岁入宿卫，庄重寡言，世祖很器重他，大臣有密奏时，屏除左右，只留他一人听；出则陪乘于车中，入则侍奉于帷幄，非假期不回家。
English: He once studied with Xu Heng. He entered the palace guard at the age of 16. He was solemn and taciturn. The founder held him in high esteem. When the minister had a secret recital, he would remove the left and right screens and leave him alone to listen. When he went out, he would accompany him in the car. When he came in, he would serve at the curtain. He would not go home unless it was a holiday.

古文：至元二十四年，乃颜叛，帝亲征，胜直武帐中，虽亲王不得辄至。
现代文：至元二十四年，乃颜叛变，帝亲征，胜在军帐中，即使亲王也不能随便进去。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Naoyan mutinied, the emperor personally recruited, and won in the military account, even the prince could not enter casually.

古文：胜传旨饬诸将，诘旦合战，还侍帝侧，矢交帐前，胜立侍不动。
现代文：早晨贺胜传旨命各将合战，回来侍奉在帝身旁，箭射到帐前，而胜伫立不动。
English: In the morning, He Sheng passed down the order to each general to fight, and they returned to serve beside the emperor. They shot arrows at the table, but Sheng Sheng did not move.

古文：至元二十八年，桑哥败，罢尚书省，政归中书。
现代文：乃颜败，帝夜行回京都，寒冷难忍，胜用自己的身体暖帝的脚。
English: Defeated, the emperor returned to Kyoto at night. The cold was unbearable, and he preferred to use his own body to warm the emperor's feet.

古文：帝问谁可相者，胜对曰： 天下公论，皆属完泽。 
现代文：拜集贤学士，领导太史院的事务，赐一品服。卢世荣、桑哥执政，气势凶狠，贺胜的父亲仁杰留守上都，不愿在他们手下干事，桑哥想暗中害他，上数十奏，帝不理会。
English: Lu Shirong and Sanguo were in power, and their power was fierce. He Sheng's father, Renjie, was away in Shangdu, and did not want to be an official under them. Sanguo wanted to harm him secretly, and played dozens of games, but the emperor did not pay attention.

古文：遂相完泽，而以胜参知政事。
现代文：至元二十八年，桑哥败，胜推荐完泽为相，胜任参知政事。
English: In the 28th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Sango was defeated, and the victory recommendation was completed, and he was appointed to the post of governor.

古文：三十年，佥枢密院事，迁大都护。
现代文：三十年任枢密院佥事，授大都护。
English: He served as a privy councillor for 30 years and was awarded the title of Metropolitan Protector.

古文：大德九年，胜父仁杰请老，以胜代为上都留守，兼本路都总管、开平府尹、虎贲亲军都指挥使。
现代文：大德九年，胜父告老辞官，胜留守上都并兼本路都总管、开平府尹、虎贲亲军都指挥使。
English: In the ninth year of the Great German Empire, Katsu's father retired from the post, and Katsu stayed in Shangdu and also served as the head of the capital, Kaiping Fuyin, and the commanding envoy of Tigress's relatives.

古文：既至，通商贾，抑豪纵，出纳有法，裁量有度，供亿不匮，民赖以安。
现代文：胜到任后，开展贸易，抑制豪强，财政支出与收取均有限度，供给充足，百姓生活安定。
English: After he won the post, he carried out trade, restrained arrogance, limited financial expenditure and collection, adequate supply, and stable people's lives.

古文：诸权贵子弟奴隶有暴横骄纵者，悉绳以法。
现代文：权贵子弟及其奴隶有横行霸道者，均绳之以法。
English: The sons of powerful nobles and their slaves who indulged in tyranny were all brought to justice.

古文：至大三年，进光禄大夫、左丞相，行上都留守，兼本路总管府达鲁花赤。
现代文：至大三年授光禄大夫、左丞相，留守上都，兼本路总管达鲁花赤。
English: In the third year of his senior year, he was awarded the title of "Doctor of Luku" and "Minister of the Left," he stayed in Shangdu, and he was also given the title of "Head of the Main Road."

古文：寻又加开府仪同三司、上柱国。
现代文：不久又加开府仪同三司、上柱国。
English: Soon, he added Kaifu-gi, Sanji, and Shangzhu Province.

古文：奉圣州民高氏，籍虎贲，以赀雄乡里，身死子幼。有达官利其财，使其部曲强娶高氏妇。
现代文：奉圣州百姓高氏，在虎贲名册，是他家乡最富的人，死后子年幼，有达官贵人贪其钱财，要部属强娶高氏妻。
English: According to the people of Shengzhou, Gao was the richest person in his hometown. After his death, his son was young. Some high-ranking dignitaries were greedy for his money, and important subordinates were forced to marry Gao's wife.

古文：帝报曰： 祖宗以上都之民付卿父子，欲安之也。卿能如此，朕复何忧，卿其视事。 
现代文：贺胜告诉帝，高氏得救。是年遭灾，胜开仓救民，上书请罪。帝说 ：祖宗把上都的百姓托付给你父子，百姓安定，卿能这样做，我还有什么忧虑。 
English: He Sheng told the emperor that Gao was saved. It was a year of disaster, Sheng opened the warehouse to save the people, and sent a letter to plead guilty. The emperor said: The ancestors entrusted the people of Shangdu to your father and son. The people are stable. If you can do this, what worries do I have?

古文：未几，以足疾请老，不许，曰： 卿卧护足矣。 赐小车，出入禁闼。
现代文：百姓称颂他，在上都西门外为他立祠，帝听说这事后，命画像赐给他，以传给子孙。不久因足有病请求告老还乡，帝未同意，赐给小车出入宫门。
English: The people praised him and built a small shrine for him outside the western gate of Shangdu. After the emperor heard about this, he gave him a portrait of his life to pass on to his children and grandchildren. Soon, because of his foot disease, he asked to return to his hometown. The emperor did not agree and gave him a carriage to enter the palace gate.

古文：初，开平人张弼，家富。弼死，其奴索钱民家，弗得，殴负钱者至死。有治其狱者，教奴引弼子，并下之狱。丞相铁木迭儿受其赂六万缗，终不为直。胜素恶铁木迭儿贪暴，居同巷，不与往来。
现代文：当初开平富翁张弼死，他的奴仆到百姓家要债，打死了人，管狱的人叫奴仆带弼子一同入狱，丞相铁木迭儿受贿赂六万缗，不为弼之子伸冤，贺胜平素就厌恶铁木迭儿贪暴，同住一条巷子，互不往来。
English: At the beginning, the wealthy merchant Zhang Xuan died, his servants went to people's homes to collect debts and killed people, the prison authorities ordered the servants to go to prison with the mule, the chancellor Tiemu Di'er received a bribe of sixty thousand baht and did not seek justice for the son of the mule, He Sheng always hated Tiemu Di'er's corruption, they lived in the same alley and did not interact with each other.

古文：闻弼事，以语御史中丞杨朵儿只。杨朵儿只以语监察御史玉龙帖木儿、徐元素。
现代文：听说弼的事后，告诉了御史中丞杨朵儿只，杨又告诉了御史玉龙帖木儿、徐元素。
English: After hearing about Zhai, she only told the Grand Historian Yang Douren, and Yang also told the Grand Historian Yulong Timur and Xu Ye.

古文：及英宗即位，在谅暗中，铁木迭儿遂复出据相位，乃执杨朵儿只及中书平章政事萧拜住，同日戮于市。且复诬胜乘赐车迎诏，不敬，并杀之。
现代文：一同弹劾丞相，逮捕其左右审问，得知确实受贿。帝平素也讨厌铁木迭儿，要杀他。他躲到太后宫中，太后为他说情，故只夺印罢相。英宗就位，铁木迭儿又恢复原位，将杨朵儿只、萧拜住同一天在集市杀戮。又诬陷贺胜乘赐车迎诏不恭敬，也杀了。
English: Emperor Ping also hated Tie Mu Di'er and wanted to kill him. He hid in the Empress Dowager's palace, and the Empress Dowager interceded for him, so he only seized the seal and resigned. Ying Zong took his place, Tie Mu Di'er resumed his original position, and killed Yang Duo'er and Xiao Bai in the market on the same day. He also falsely accused He Sheng of being disrespectful by giving him a car, and killed him.

古文：胜死之日，百姓争持纸钱，哭于尸傍甚哀。
现代文：贺胜死的这天，百姓拿着纸钱在他尸旁痛哭。
English: On the day of He Sheng's death, the people held paper money and cried beside his corpse.

古文：泰定初，诏雪其冤，赠推忠宣力保德功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封秦国公，谥惠愍。
现代文：泰定初年，下诏昭雪申冤，赠给推忠宣力保德功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封秦国公，谥号惠愍。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the imperial edict of Zhaoxue was issued to redress the grievances, and was presented to Tuzhong Xuanli, Taifu, Kaifu Yi and Sanji, Shangzhu Guo, with the posthumous title of Qin Guogong and the posthumous title of Huiyi.

古文：孙均，太子詹事。杨朵儿只
现代文：至正三年加赠推忠亮节同德翊戴功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封泾阳王，改谥忠宣。
English: In the third year of the Taizhou era, he was awarded the title of Zhengyang Wang and changed his title to Zhongxuan.

古文：杨朵儿只，河西宁夏人。
现代文：杨朵儿只是河西宁夏人。
English: Yang Doer is a native of Ningxia, Hexi.

古文：少孤，与其兄皆幼，即知自立，语言仪度如成人。
现代文：年幼丧父，语言姿态像成人。
English: He lost his father at a young age, and his speech is like that of an adult.

古文：事仁宗于藩邸，甚见倚重。大德丁未，从迁怀孟。
现代文：在封地的府第事奉仁宗，受到信赖。大德十一年，随帝迁调怀孟。
English: In the fiefdom's capital, he served the Rinzong sect and was trusted. In the eleventh year of his great virtue, he moved to Menghuai with the emperor.

古文：仁宗闻朝廷有变，将北还，命朵儿只与李孟先之京师，与右丞相哈剌哈孙定议，迎武宗于北藩。
现代文：仁宗听说朝廷有变故，命朵儿只与李孟先到京与右丞相哈剌哈孙商议，决定在北边迎接武宗。
English: When Rinzong heard that there was a change in the imperial court, he decided to go to Beijing with Li Mengxian to discuss the matter with the Minister of the Right, Haji Hasun, and decided to meet Emperor Wuzong in the north.

古文：仁宗还京师，朵儿只讥察禁卫，密致警备，仁宗嘉赖焉，亲解所服带以赐。
现代文：仁宗回京师，朵儿只秘密戒备警卫，仁宗更加信赖，亲自解下佩带赐给他。
English: When Nizong returned to Beijing, Doer was only a secret guard, but Nizong trusted him more and personally took off his armband and gave it to him.

古文：既佐定内难，仁宗居东宫，论功以为太中大夫、家令丞，日夕侍侧，虽休沐不至家，众敬惮之。
现代文：协助平定内难后，按功绩任命太中大夫、家令丞，从早到晚在仁宗身旁侍奉，即使休假也不回家，大家都敬畏他。
English: After helping to quell the internal difficulties, according to his merits, he was appointed as the First Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household and the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household, and he served beside Rinzong from morning to night. Even when he was on vacation, he did not go home. Everyone was in awe of him.

古文：会兄卒，涕泣不胜哀，仁宗怜之，存问优厚。
现代文：适逢兄卒，万分悲痛，仁宗非常同情他，给以慰问和优厚的抚恤。
English: When it happened to his brother, he was extremely sad. Rinzong was very sympathetic to him and gave him condolences and a generous pension.

古文：事寡嫂有礼，待兄子不异己子，家人化之。
现代文：朵儿只事奉寡嫂有礼，待兄子与自己的儿子完全一样，使家人感动。
English: Doer only served her widowed sister-in-law with courtesy, and treated her brother exactly the same as her own son, which moved the family.

古文：进正奉大夫、延庆使。
现代文：进正奉大夫、延庆使。
English: Jin Zhengfeng doctor, Yanqing envoy.

古文：武宗闻其贤，召见之，仁宗曰： 此人诚可任大事，然刚直寡合。 
现代文：武宗听说他很贤德，召见他，仁宗说： 这个人可以任大事，只是性格刚直，难与别人投合。 
English: Wu Zong heard that he was very virtuous, summoned him, and Ren Zong said, "This man can do great things, but he has an upright character and is difficult to get along with others.

古文：武宗顾视之，曰： 然。 
现代文：武宗看了看朵儿只说 ：明白。 
English: Buzong looked at Doer and only said, "I understand."

古文：仁宗始总大政，执误国者，将尽按诛之，朵儿只曰： 为政而尚杀，非帝王治也。 
现代文：仁宗开始总理大政时，逮捕误国事的人，准备全部杀掉，朵儿只说 ：当政的只注意杀人，不是帝王的治国之道。 
English: When Emperor Nenzong began his reign as prime minister, he arrested those who had misgoverned the country and prepared to kill them all. Dore only said, "Politicians only pay attention to killing people, not the emperor's way of governing the country."

古文：帝感其言，特诛其尤者，民大悦服。
现代文：帝深受感动，只杀了罪恶突出的，百姓心悦诚服。
English: The emperor was deeply moved and only killed the most prominent criminals, which pleased the people.

古文：帝他日与中书平章李孟论元从人材，孟以朵儿只为第一，帝然之，拜礼部尚书。
现代文：帝与中书平章李孟谈到随从他的人才时，孟以朵儿只为第一，于是拜朵儿只为礼部尚书。
English: When the Emperor and Li Meng talked about the talents who followed him, Meng Yidol was only the first, so Baidol was only the ceremonial department.

古文：初，尚书省改作至大银钞，视中统一当其二十五，又铸铜为至大钱，至是议罢之。
现代文：当初尚书省改作至大银钞，中统一当至大二十五，又铸至大钱。朵儿只说： 法便不便，不应因人而定。
English: At the beginning, Shangshu was changed to large silver banknotes, and the unification of China was changed to large twenty-five, and it was minted to large money. Dole only said: The method is inconvenient, and it should not be determined by people.

古文：世无诤臣久矣，张珪真中丞也。 帝喜，竟用珪言，拜朵儿只为侍御史。帝宴闲时，群臣侍坐者，或言笑逾度，帝见其正色，为之改容，有犯法者，虽贵幸无所容贷。
现代文：银钞固然应该废，而铜钱与楮币同时通用，是从前一贯的做法。国家不抛弃宝物，百姓不会失去利益，因此钱不可以急忙废除。 升宣徽副使。有人告发近臣受贿，帝要杀告发的，御史中丞张王圭叩头进谏，不听，朵儿只对帝说： 杀告发的人，不合刑法；拒绝纳谏，是不应该的。很久已无直言规劝的人，张王圭是真正的中丞。 
English: Of course, silver banknotes should be abolished, but it has always been common practice for copper money to be used at the same time as pennies. The country will not abandon its treasures, and the people will not lose their benefits, so money cannot be abolished in a hurry. Sheng Xuan Hui, vice-envoy. Some people reported that their close vassals had accepted bribes, and the emperor wanted to kill those who reported it. Zhang Wang Gui, the vice-president of history, kowtowed to the emperor and did not listen, but only said to the emperor: "It is not in accordance with the criminal law to kill those who reported; it is not right to refuse to

古文：怨者因共谮之，帝知之深，谮不得行。
现代文：帝终于采纳张王圭的意见，升朵儿只为侍御史。
English: The emperor finally adopted Zhang Wanggui's opinion, and Shendou'er became only an attendant to the emperor.

古文：拜资德大夫、御史中丞。
现代文：授资德大夫、御史中丞。
English: He was awarded the title of Doctor of German Literature and the title of Junior Secretary of History.

古文：中书平章政事张闾以妻病，谒告归江南，夺民河渡地，朵儿只以失大体，劾罢之。
现代文：中书平章政事张闾因妻有病，告假回江南时，强取百姓渡口，朵儿只以失大体弹劾他。
English: In the middle of the book, the political affairs of Pingzhang Zhang Xuan, when he returned to the south of the Yangtze River on leave due to his wife's illness, forcibly took the people's ferry, and the daughter only impeached him for the loss.

古文：江东、西奉使斡来不称职，权臣匿其奸，冀不问，朵儿只劾而杖之，斡来愧死。
现代文：江东、西奉使斡来不称职，朵儿只弹劾他并用杖刑，斡来愧死。
English: In the East and West of the Yangtze River, the mediator was incompetent, and the daughter only impeached him and punished him with a cane. The mediator was ashamed to die.

古文：御史纳璘言事忤旨，帝怒叵测，朵儿只救之，一日至八九奏，曰： 臣非爱纳璘，诚不愿陛下有杀御史之名。 
现代文：御史纳王违背了圣旨，帝大怒，朵儿只为救他一天上八、九奏，并说 ：我不是偏爱纳王，确实不愿意陛下有杀御史的名声。 
English: King Na violated the sacred will, and the emperor was furious. To save him, Dore played eight or nine times a day, and said, "I do not favor King Na, and I really do not want His Majesty to have the reputation of killing history."

古文：帝曰： 为卿宥之，可左迁为昌平令。 
现代文：帝说： 为了你赦免罢，可贬为昌平令。 
English: The emperor said, "Let it be pardoned for your sake, and it can be reduced to a high-ranking order."

古文：帝笑曰： 卿意在纳璘耶？
现代文：朵儿只又说： 用御史统辖京邑，没有不可以的。
English: Dor only added: There is nothing wrong with using imperial history to govern Kyoto.

古文：当赦之，以成尔直名也。 
现代文：只是因为进谏而被贬，恐怕以后的人以此为戒，不肯再进谏了。 
English: Just because he was demoted, I'm afraid that people in the future will take this as a warning and refuse to be demoted again.

古文：有上书论朝政阙失，面触宰相，宰相怒，将取旨杀之。
现代文：帝不同意，过了几天帝读《贞观政要》学习唐太宗，听取了朵儿只的意见。有人上书谈朝政的过失而涉及宰相，宰相十分恼怒，帝下旨杀他。
English: The emperor did not agree. A few days later, the emperor read "Zhenguan Zhengyao" to learn Tang Taizong and listened to Dole's opinion. Someone wrote a book about the fault of the government and involved the prime minister. The prime minister was very angry, and the emperor ordered to kill him.

古文：朵儿只曰： 诏书云：言虽不当，无罪。
现代文：朵儿只说 ：他的话虽有不当，但无罪。
English: She only said that although his words were inappropriate, he was not guilty.

古文：今若此，何以示信天下！
现代文：现在杀了，用什么显示取信于天下？
English: Kill it now, with what display to get the world's attention?

古文：果诛之，臣亦负其职矣。 
现代文：果真杀他，我也得负责了！ 
English: If I did kill him, I'd be responsible!

古文：帝悟，释之。
现代文：帝醒悟而放了他。
English: The emperor came to his senses and released him.

古文：于是特加昭文馆大学士、荣禄大夫，以奖其直言。
现代文：特加封昭文馆大学士、荣禄大夫，以奖励直言。
English: He was specially awarded the title of Shouwen Academy Scholar and the title of Honorable Doctor, for his forthright speech.

古文：帝犹数以台事问之，对曰： 非臣职事，臣不敢与闻。
现代文：当时位至一品的人希求王爵、赠先世，希望朵儿只为他们说话，他拒绝了。升为中政院使。不久又任中丞，又升集贤大学士。
English: At that time, the person who was in the first grade wished to ask for a peerage and present it to the past generation, hoping that Doer would only speak for them, but he refused. He was promoted to the Vice-Councilor of State. Soon he was appointed to the Vice-President, and he was promoted to the scholar.

古文：所念者，铁木迭儿虽去君侧，反得为东宫师傅，在太子左右，恐售其奸，则祸有不可胜言者。 仁宗崩，英宗犹在东宫，铁木迭儿复相，乃宣太后旨，召萧拜住、朵儿只至徽政院，与徽政使失里门、御史大夫秃忒哈杂问之，责以前违太后旨之罪。
现代文：铁木迭儿掌权后竟害死了他，年仅四十二岁。朵儿只从侍御史拜御史中丞，以纠正朝政的错误为己任。上都富民张弼杀人入狱，铁木迭儿受贿巨万，被朵儿只查出后，铁木迭儿逃匿，徽政近臣以太后旨，罢杨朵儿只相位，调迁集贤学士。仁宗崩，英宗还在东宫，铁木迭儿此时又复相位，并宣读太后旨，召萧拜住、朵儿只到徽政院，与徽政使失里门、御史大夫秃忒哈一块问他们，说他们以前犯了违背太后旨的罪。
English: After Tie Mu Di'er took power, he actually killed him, at the age of only forty-two. Du'er only took on the responsibility of correcting the mistakes of the imperial government from the position of the attendant Shi Bai, the middle-ranking official of the imperial court. Shangdu Fumin Zhang Xi went to prison for murder, Tie Mu Di'er accepted a huge bribe, and was only discovered by Du'er. After that, Tie Mu Di'er went into hiding, a close vassal of the imperial government issued a posthumous decree, Yang Du'er was only deposed, and scholars and scholars were transferred. Rin Zong died, Ying Zong was still in

古文：英宗即位，诏书遂加以诬罔大臣之罪。
现代文：朵儿只说 ：中丞的职责恨不得立即杀了你，来向全国的人谢罪。
English: Dole only said, "It is the duty of the junior middle-rank officer to kill you at once, and to apologize to the whole country."

古文：铁木迭儿权势既成，毫发之怨，无不报者，太后惊悔，而帝亦觉其所谮毁者皆先帝旧臣。
现代文：果真违背太后旨，你难道还有今天？ 不久，将朵儿只和萧拜住拉到京都的城门，一同杀害。英宗即位，诏书便给朵儿只加上了诬陷大臣的罪名，于是铁木迭儿的权势已经形成，即使像毫发般的小怨恨，也没有不报复的，这时太后又惊又悔，帝也觉察到被谗言诬陷的都是先帝的老臣。
English: If you really violated the empress dowager's will, do you still have it today? Soon, Dou Er and Xiao Bai were dragged to the gate of Kyoto and killed together. When Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, the imperial edict only added the charge of framing a minister to Dou Er. As a result, the power of Tiemu Di'er had already been formed. Even if it was a small grudge, there was no way not to retaliate. At this time, the empress dowager was shocked and remorseful, and the emperor also realized that those who were framed by slander were the old ministers of the former emperor.

古文：未及论治，而铁木迭儿以病死。
现代文：这时铁木迭儿已病死。
English: At this time, Tie Mu Di'er had already died of illness.

古文：会有天灾，求直言，会议廷中，集贤大学士张珪、中书参议回回，皆称萧、杨等死甚冤，是致不雨。
现代文：适逢天灾，求直言，会议廷中，集贤大学士张王圭、中书参议回回，都说萧、杨等人死得太冤，以致不雨。
English: In the event of a natural disaster, to be frank, in the court of the meeting, Zhang Wang Gui, a scholar of the University of Shanghai, and Hui Hui, a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, both said that Xiao, Yang and others died too unjustly, so that it did not rain.

古文：闻者失色，言终不得达。
现代文：听的人都失色了，没人敢答话。
English: Everyone listening is stunned, no one dares to answer.

古文：及珪拜平章，即告丞相拜住曰： 赏罚不当，枉抑不伸，不可以为治。
现代文：王圭授平章后，立即告诉丞相说： 赏罚不当，枉曲不伸，是不能治国的。
English: After Wang Gui was awarded the medal of nobility, he immediately told the prime minister: "If the rewards and punishments are improper, and if you don't do what is right, you can't govern the country."

古文：若萧、杨等冤，何可不亟昭雪也！ 
现代文：像萧、杨等人的冤案，怎能不昭雪呢？ 
English: How can the unjust cases of people like Xiao and Yang not be exposed?

古文：丞相善之，遂请于帝，诏昭雪其冤，特赠思顺佐理功臣、金紫光禄大夫、司徒、上柱国、夏国公，谥襄愍。
现代文：丞相认为有道理，于是向帝请求，帝下令为杨朵儿只昭雪，特赠思顺佐理功臣、金紫光禄大夫、司徒、上柱国、夏国公，谥号襄愍。
English: The chancellor thought it was reasonable, so he asked the emperor, and the emperor ordered only Zhaoxue for Yang Doer, with the special gifts of Shunsari meritorious minister, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, Szeto, Shangzhu Guo, Xia Guo Guo, and the posthumous name Xiang Yao.

古文：萧拜住萧拜住，契丹石抹氏也。
现代文：萧拜住是契丹石抹氏人。
English: Xiao Baiju is a member of the Khitan Shima clan.

古文：弟老瓦，始以杨城渔寨来降，为丑奴弟充质子，多立战功，袭檀州。
现代文：曾祖丑奴，善骑射，见广识多，在金做官，带领千户驻古北口防守。
English: Zeng Zu was ugly, good at riding and shooting, with broad knowledge. He was an official in Jin and led thousands of households to defend the ancient Beigou.

古文：节度使言安以水栅未下，阴诱汤河川人叛去，老瓦追之不克，死焉。丑奴子青山，中统元年袭万户。至元十一年，从丞相伯颜平宋。还，授湖北提刑按察使。追封顺国公，谥武定。
现代文：其弟老瓦，在杨城渔寨投降元，充当质子，因多次立战功而袭封檀州节度使。后死于战场。其子青山，中统元年袭封万户，至元十一年跟随丞相伯颜平定宋回来，授湖北提刑按察使，追封顺国公，谥号武定。
English: His younger brother, Lao Wa, surrendered in Yangcheng Yuzhai Yuan, served as a proton, and was awarded the title of Danzhou Festival Envoy for his many war exploits. He later died on the battlefield. His son, Aoyama, won the title of Zhongtong Yuan, and returned in the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, following the prime minister, Bojan Pingding Song, and was awarded the title of Hubei Punitive Envoy, and was awarded the title of Shun Guogong, and his posthumous name was Wu Ding.

古文：青山子哈剌帖木儿，少事裕宗于东宫，典宿卫，仕为檀州知州。
现代文：青山之子哈剌帖木儿，少年时在东宫侍奉裕宗，掌管宿卫，官做到檀州知州。
English: Aoyama's son, Hachijo Timur, when he was a boy, served Yuzong in the East Palace, was in charge of the guards, and rose to the rank of Danzhou Zhizhou.

古文：追封顺国公，谥康惠。
现代文：追封顺国公，谥号康惠。
English: He was given the posthumous title of Shun Guogong and the nickname Kanghui.

古文：拜住，乃哈剌帖木儿之子也。尝从成宗北征，特授檀州知州，入为礼部郎中，擢同知大都路总管府事，出知中山府，以忧去官。
现代文：拜住是哈剌帖木儿之子，曾随成宗北征，特授檀州知州，在朝中任礼部郎中，提拔为同知大都路总管府事，出知中山府，因亲丧而辞官。
English: Baizhu was the son of Harun Timur. He had accompanied Chengzong on the Northern Expedition and was specially awarded the title of Danzhou Chizhou. He served as the vice-chairman of the Ministry of Ceremonies in the imperial court. He was promoted to the post of the chief administrator of the Dadu Road in Tongzhi, and was sent to Zhongshan Prefecture. He resigned due to the death of a relative.

古文：属仁宗过中山，有同官者谮于近侍曰： 知府去官，实惮迎候烦劳耳。 
现代文：仁宗路过中山时，有人对近臣说： 知州辞官，实际上是怕迎驾的麻烦。 
English: When Nizong was passing through Zhongshan, someone said to his close vassal: Chizhou Dictator, in fact, is afraid of trouble.

古文：帝颔之。适行田野间，见老妪，问之曰： 府中官孰贤？ 
现代文：帝点点头，恰巧走在田野间遇见一位老婆婆，就问她说： 府中的官谁贤德？ 
English: The emperor nodded and happened to meet an old woman walking in the fields. He asked her, "Who is the most virtuous official in the government?"

古文：妪对曰： 有萧知府，余不知也。 
现代文：老婆婆说： 有萧知府，余下的不知道。 
English: The old woman said, "There is Xiaochifu, but I don't know about the rest."

古文：复过神祠，有数老人焚香罗拜，遣问之曰： 汝辈何所祷？ 
现代文：又过神祠，有几位老人在焚香罗拜，派人问他们说： 你们为什么祈祷？ 
English: Past the shrine, several old men were burning incense and sending people to ask them: Why are you praying?

古文：合辞对曰： 萧知府奔丧还，欲速其来，是以祷也。 
现代文：他们回答说： 萧知府奔丧，希望他赶快回来，因此祈祷。 
English: They replied: Xiao Zhifu is in mourning, and we hope he will come back soon, so we are praying.

古文：帝意遂释。
现代文：仁宗对萧拜住的怀疑也就消除了。
English: Rinzong's suspicion of Xiao Baiju was also eliminated.

古文：武宗即位，起复为中书左司郎中，出为河间路总管，召为右卫率使，迁户部尚书，遂拜御史中丞。
现代文：武宗即位，再起用拜住为中书左司郎中，出任河间路总管，召为右卫率使，升迁为户部尚书，于是拜御史中丞。
English: When Emperor Takemune ascended to the throne, he reinstated Baizhu as the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary of the middle secretary.

古文：皇庆元年，迁陕西行中书省右丞。
现代文：皇庆元年调陕西行中书省右丞。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he went to Shaanxi Province.

古文：延祐三年，进中书平章政事，除典瑞院使，超授银青荣禄大夫、崇祥院使。
现代文：延三年升中书平章政事，提升典瑞院使，超授银青荣禄大夫、崇祥院使。
English: He was promoted to Zhongshu Pingzhang Political Affairs in the third year, promoted to the envoy of the Xuhui Academy, the super-awarded doctor of the Silver Qing Ronglu, and the envoy of the Chongxiang Academy.

古文：英宗即位之十有九日，右丞相铁木迭儿怨拜住在省中牵制其所为，又发其奸赃、专制等事，遂请依皇太后旨，并前御史中丞杨朵儿只皆杀之。
现代文：英宗即位十九天，右丞相铁木迭儿怨恨拜住在省中牵制他，以及发现他的奸赃、专制等事，于是请皇太后下旨，将萧拜住同前御史中丞杨朵儿只一块儿杀掉。
English: Nineteen days after Emperor Yingzong's enthronement, the Minister of the Right, Tiemu Di'er, resented the fact that Baizhong was holding him back in the province, and discovered his treachery and despotism, so he asked the Empress Dowager to issue an order to kill Xiao Baizhong together with the former Vice-Minister of History, Yang Du'er.

古文：帝曰： 人命至重，刑杀非轻，不宜仓卒。
现代文：帝说： 人命是最重要的事，刑杀不是轻事，不应仓卒。
English: The emperor said: "Human life is the most important thing. Execution is not a trivial matter and should not be rushed.

古文：二人罪状未明，当白太后，使详谳之，若果无冤，诛之未晚。 
现代文：二人罪不清楚时，应告诉太后，详细审判后定案，如果真无冤，再杀也不晚。 
English: If the guilt of the two people is not clear, they should tell the empress dowager. After a detailed trial, the case will be finalized. If there is no injustice, it is not too late to kill again.

古文：竟杀之，并籍其家，语见杨朵儿只及铁木迭儿传。
现代文：但终于杀了他们。并没收了他们的家产，可参看《杨朵儿只传》和《铁木迭儿传》。
English: However, they finally killed them and confiscated their family property, as can be seen in "The Tale of Yang Duo'er" and "The Tale of Tiemu Di'er."

古文：泰定间，赠守正佐治功臣、太保、仪同三司、柱国，追封蓟国公，谥忠愍。
现代文：泰定间赠守正佐治功臣、太保、仪同三司、柱国，追封蓟国公，谥号忠愍。
English: During the reign of Yasuchika, the Shogun bestowed the title of Shogun, the title of Taibo, the title of Gidon Sanji, the title of Shikoku, and the posthumous title of Tadahiro.

