古文：○二十八舍下西方
现代文：西方
English: The West

古文：奎宿十六星，天之武库，一曰天豕，一曰封豕，主以兵禁暴，又主沟渎。
现代文：奎宿十六颗星，是天的器具物资仓库，一叫天豕，一叫封豕，主管用军队禁止暴乱，又主管沟渠。
English: Kuizhong sixteen stars, is the warehouse of heaven's equipment and materials, one is called the heavenly anchor, one is called the sealing anchor, in charge of using the army to prohibit riots, and in charge of ditches.

古文：西南大星曰天豕目，亦曰大将。
现代文：西南的大星叫天豕目，也叫大将。
English: The large star in the south-west is called the Southern Cross, also called the General.

古文：明动，则兵、水大出。
现代文：星明亮动摇，那么战争、水灾大规模出现。
English: If the star is bright and wavering, then wars and floods will occur on a large scale.

古文：日食，鲁国凶，边兵起及水旱。
现代文：日食，鲁国凶险，边区发生战争及水旱灾。
English: Solar eclipses, the perilous state of Lu, wars and floods and droughts in border areas.

古文：日晕，为兵，为火。
现代文：日晕，是战争，是火灾。
English: The sun is eclipsed, there is war, there is fire.

古文：月食，聚敛之臣有忧。
现代文：月食，搜刮财货的大臣有忧患。
English: Lunar eclipse, the minister of scavenging goods is worried.

古文：月晕，兵败，籴贵，将戮，人疾疫。
现代文：月晕，战争失败，买米价贵，将军被杀，人民有疾病瘟疫。
English: The moon is faint, the war is lost, it is expensive to buy rice, the general has been killed, and the people are plagued by disease.

古文：月犯之，其分乱。
现代文：月亮侵犯，它的分野地区发生动乱。
English: The moon is encroaching, and its sector areas are in turmoil.

古文：岁星犯之，近臣为逆；守之，虫为灾，人民饥，盗起，多狱讼；久守，北兵降；色润泽，大熟；守二十日以上，兵起鲁地；逆行守之，君好兵，民流亡。
现代文：岁星侵犯，近臣发生叛逆；占据奎宿，虫类成灾，人民饥饿，盗贼发生，多刑狱诉讼；长久占据，北方军队投降；星色润泽，谷物大丰收；占据二十天以上，战争发生在鲁国地区；逆向运行占据奎宿，君主喜欢战争，入民流亡。
English: The year star invaded, the vassals rebelled; occupied Quixing, the insects were plagued, the people were hungry, the thieves occurred, the multi-prison lawsuits; occupied for a long time, the northern army surrendered; the star color was moist, the grain harvest was plentiful; occupied for more than twenty days, the war occurred in the Lu region; the reverse run occupied Quixing, the monarch liked war, and the people went into exile.

古文：荧惑犯之，环绕三十日以上，将相凶，大水，民流；守二十日以上，鲁地有兵；动摇、进退，有赦；舍，岁大熟；留，臣下专权，多狱讼；守百日以上，多盗。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，环绕三十天以上，将相凶险，发大水，人民流亡；占据二十天以上，鲁园地区有战争；星动擂、进退，有赦免；住宿在奎宿，年成大丰收；停留，臣下专权，多刑狱诉讼；占据一百天以上，多盗贼。
English: Infringement by a fluorescent planet, orbiting for more than 30 days, will bring danger, flood, and people's exile; occupy for more than 20 days, there will be war in Luyuan area; the stars will move, advance and retreat, and there will be amnesty; stay in Kweiju, and the year will be a great harvest; stay, vassal dictatorship, more prison litigation; occupy for more than 100 days, more thieves.

古文：填星入犯，吴、越有兵，一曰齐、鲁，一曰兵、丧；守之，有贵女执政；出入，水泉溢。
现代文：镇星进犯，昊、越地区有战争，一说齐、鲁地区，一说战争、丧事；占据奎宿，有妇执政；出来又进去，泉水溢出。
English: Zhenxing invaded, there was war in Hao and Yue regions, one said Qi and Lu regions, one said war and mourning; occupied Quixing, there was a woman in power; came out and went in again, spring water overflowed.

古文：太白犯之，大水，有兵，霜杀物；入，则外兵入国；昼见，将相死。
现代文：太白星侵犯，发大水，有战争，霜冻杀死作物；进入，那么外族军队侵入国家；白天出现，将相死亡。
English: If it is too white, it will invade, if there is too much water, there will be war, frost will kill crops; if it is too dark, foreign troops will invade the country; if it is too light, it will die.

古文：辰星犯之，江河决，有兵，为旱，为火。
现代文：辰星侵犯，江河决口，有战争，是旱灾，是火灾。
English: A star intrudes, a river bursts its banks, there is a war, a drought, a fire.

古文：守之，王者忧，兵、旱。
现代文：占据奎宿，王者有忧患，战争、旱灾。
English: Occupy Kweijuku, the king is troubled, war, drought.

古文：客星犯之，有沟渎事；守，则王者有忧，军败，贼臣在侧；入之，破军杀将；舍留不去，人饥；出，则为谋臣惑天子。
现代文：客星侵犯，有沟渠河流的事情；占据，那么王者有忧患，军队失败，贼臣在君侧；进入奎宿，攻破军队，杀死将领；住宿停留不离开，人民饥饿；出去，就是谋臣迷惑天子。
English: The guest star invades, there are ditches and rivers; occupy, then the king is in trouble, the army is defeated, and the vassal is on the side of the monarch; enter the Kui residence, break through the army, kill the general; stay in the accommodation and do not leave, the people are hungry; go out, that is, the strategist confuses the heavenly son.

古文：彗犯，为饥，为兵、丧；出，则有水灾。
现代文：彗星侵犯，是饥饿，是战争、丧事；出去，就有水灾。
English: If a comet comes, there will be famine, war, and mourning; if it goes, there will be a flood.

古文：星孛之，其下兵出，民饥，国无继嗣；出，则西北有兵起。
现代文：星变出现，它下方的军队出动，人民饥饿，国家没有继承人；出去，那么西北有战争发生。
English: Star Change appears, the army under it is dispatched, the people are starving, the country has no successor; go out, then there is a war in the northwest.

古文：流星入犯之，有沟渎事，破军杀将。
现代文：流星进入侵犯，有沟渠河流的事情，攻破军队，杀死将领。
English: Meteors enter the encroachment, there are ditches rivers things, break through the army, kill generals.

古文：《乙巳占》：流星出入，色黄白光润，文昌武偃；赤如火光作声，为弓弩用；一曰入则有聚众事。
现代文：《乙巳占》：流星出来又进去，星色黄白光润，文化昌盛，武力停止；星色赤如火光发出声响，是弓箭被使用；一说进入就有聚众的事情。
English: "Yi Si Zhan": The meteor comes out and goes in again, the star color is yellow and white, the culture is prosperous, and the force is stopped; the star color is red like fire and emits a sound, it is the bow and arrow that is used; as soon as it enters, there is a gathering of people.

古文：赤云气入犯，为兵；黄，为天子喜；黑，则大人有忧。
现代文：赤色云气进入侵犯，是战争；色黄，是天子有喜事；黑色，那么王公大人有忧患。
English: When red clouds invade, there is war; when yellow clouds invade, there is joy; when black clouds invade, there is sorrow.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，以奎为十七度，唐开元游仪十六度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，认为奎宿是十七度；唐朝开元游仪，十六度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan Bronze Statuette, it is believed that Guizhou is the seventeenth degree; the Tang Dynasty opened the Yuan Yu statuette, the sixteenth degree.

古文：旧去极七十六度，景祐测验同。
现代文：从前离极七十六度，景佑观测验证相同。
English: Previously, it was 76 degrees away from the pole, and the observation and verification of Jingyou were the same.

古文：天溷七星，在外屏南，主天厕养猪之所，一曰天之厕溷也。
现代文：天溷七颗星，在外屏南面，主管天的厕所养猎的地方，一说是天的厕所。
English: There are seven stars in the heavens, and on the south side of the outer screen, the toilet in charge of heaven is the place for hunting, and it is said to be the toilet of heaven.

古文：暗，则人不安；移徙，则忧。
现代文：星暗淡，那么人民不安定；移动迁徙，就有忧患。
English: If the stars are dim, the people will be unstable; if there is movement and migration, there will be trouble.

古文：土司空一星，在角南，一曰天仓，主土事。
现代文：土司空一颗星，在奎宿南面，又叫天仓，主管动土的事。
English: Toji, a star in the sky, is in charge of earthmoving in the southern part of Kui-juku, also known as Amakura.

古文：凡营城邑、浚沟洫、修堤防、则议其利，建其功，四方小大功课，岁尽则奏其殿最而行赏罚。
现代文：凡是营建城邑、疏通沟渠、修筑堤防，就议论它的利益，建立它的功效，四方大大小小的工程成绩，年终就奏上他们的高下名次而施行赏罚。
English: Whenever a town is built, a ditch is dredged, or a dike is built, its benefits are discussed, its effectiveness is established, and the project achievements of all parties, large and small, are reported at the end of the year and their higher and lower ranks are rewarded and punished.

古文：星大、色黄，则天下安。
现代文：星大、色黄，那么天下安定。
English: If the stars are big and the sky is yellow, the world will be stable.

古文：五星犯之，男女不得耕织。
现代文：五星侵犯，男女不能耕作纺织。
English: Five-star encroachment, men and women can not cultivate textiles.

古文：彗、客犯之，水旱，民流，兵大起，土功兴。
现代文：彗星、客星侵犯。水灾旱灾，人民流亡，战争大规模爆发，水土工程兴起。
English: Comets, invasions by alien planets, floods, droughts, the exodus of people, the outbreak of large-scale wars, and the rise of hydraulic engineering.

古文：客星守之，有土功、哭泣事。
现代文：客星占据此星，有水土工程、哭泣的事。
English: A guest star occupies this planet, there are hydro-geological projects and weeping.

古文：黄云气入，土功兴，移京邑。
现代文：黄色云气进入，水土工程兴起，迁移京城。
English: Yellow haze enters, soil and water engineering emerges, and the capital city is relocated.

古文：策一星，在王良北，天子仆也，主执策御。
现代文：策一颗星，在王良北面，是天子的仆吏，掌管持鞭驾车。
English: Zhao a star, in Wang Liang north, is the servant of the son of heaven, in charge of driving a car with a whip.

古文：流星、彗、孛、客星犯之，皆为大兵起，天子自将于野；近之，下有谋乱者。
现代文：流星、彗星、变星、客星侵犯，都是大规模战争发生，天子亲自在野外带兵；靠近它，臣下有阴谋叛乱的。
English: Meteors, comets, variable stars, and the invasion of a guest star are all examples of large-scale wars. The heavenly son himself leads soldiers in the field; near him, his vassals are plotting rebellion.

古文：附路一星附一作傅，在阁道南旁，别道也。
现代文：附路一颗星，附又作傅。在阁道的南边，是另一条道路。
English: There is another road on the south side of the pavilion road.

古文：一曰在王良东，主太仆，主御风雨。
现代文：一说在王良束面，主管太仆，主管抵御风雨。
English: One said that in Wang Liangzhuan, the supervisor is a servant, and the supervisor is able to withstand the wind and rain.

古文：芒角，则车骑在野；星亡，有道路之变；不具，则兵起。
现代文：星有光芒，那么战车骑兵在旷野；星消失，有道路的变动；星不全备，那么战争发生。
English: When the star shines, there are chariots and horsemen in the wilderness; when the star disappears, there are changes in the road; when the star is incomplete, there is war.

古文：太白、荧惑入，兵起。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星进入，战争发生。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet enters, war occurs.

古文：彗、孛犯之，道路不通。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，道路不通行。
English: Comets and variable stars encroach, and roads are impassable.

古文：客星入，马贱。
现代文：客星进入，马价贱。
English: The guest star enters, the horse price is low.

古文：苍白云气入，太仆有忧；赤，为太仆诛；黄白，太仆受赐；黑，为太仆死。
现代文：苍白色云气进入，太仆有忧患；赤色，是太仆被杀；黄白色，太仆受赏赐；黑色，是太仆死亡。
English: Pale-white clouds enter, the servant has sorrow; red, the servant is killed; yellow-white, the servant is rewarded; black, the servant dies.

古文：阁道六星，在王良前，飞道也，从紫宫至河神所乘也。
现代文：阁道六颗星，在王良前面，是架设凌空的道路，是从紫宫到银河，天神乘车通行的。
English: In front of Wang Liang, there is a road with six stars on the pavilion road. From the Purple Palace to the Milky Way, Tenjin is accessible by car.

古文：一曰主辇阁之道，天子游别宫之道也。
现代文：一说主管楼阁问人力车通行的道路，是天子游别宫的道路。
English: The person in charge of the building asked the rickshaw to pass the road, which is the road to the other palace.

古文：星不见，则辇阁不通；动摇，则宫掖有兵。
现代文：星不出现，那么辇阁不通行；星动摇，那么皇宫掖庭有战斗。
English: If the star does not appear, then the pavilion is impassable; if the star wavers, then there will be a battle in the palace courtyard.

古文：彗、孛、客星犯之，主不安国，有丧。
现代文：彗星、变星、客星侵犯，人主不能使国家安定，有丧事。
English: Comets, variable stars, and guest stars invade, human masters cannot make the country stable, and there are tragedies.

古文：白云气入，有急事；黑，主有疾；黄，则天子有喜。
现代文：白色云气进入，有紧急的事情；黑色，人主有病；黄色，那么天子有喜事。
English: When the white cloud enters, there is an emergency; when the black cloud enters, people are sick; when the yellow cloud enters, there is joy.

古文：王良五星，在奎北，居河中，天子奉车御官也。
现代文：王良五颗星，在奎宿北面，处在银河中，是为天子供奉车驾马夫的官。
English: Wang Liang five stars, in the north of Kui Suku, located in the Milky Way, is the official who drives the carriage for the Heavenly Child.

古文：其四星曰天驷，旁一星曰王良，亦曰天马星，动则车骑满野。
现代文：其中的四颗星叫天驷，旁边一颗星叫王良，也叫天马星，星摇动，那么战车骑兵布满旷野。
English: Four of the stars are called the Heavenly Armadillo, and one star next to it is called Wang Liang, also known as the Heavenly Horse Star. When the star shakes, chariots and horsemen fill the wilderness.

古文：一曰为天桥，主御风雨、水道。
现代文：一说是天桥，主管抵御风雨、水道。
English: It is said to be a flyover, capable of withstanding wind, rain and water.

古文：星不具，或客星守之，津梁不通。
现代文：星不全备，或者客星占据此星，渡口桥梁不通行。
English: If the star is incomplete, or if a guest star occupies the star, the ferry bridge will not be passable.

古文：与阁道近，有江河之变。
现代文：与阁道接近，有江河的变迁。
English: Close to the pavilion road, there are changes in the river.

古文：星明，马贱；暗，则马灾。
现代文：星明亮，马价贱；暗淡，那么马有灾祸。
English: If the star is bright, the horse is cheap; if it is dim, the horse is a disaster.

古文：太白、荧惑入守，为兵。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星进入并占据，是战争。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet enter and occupy, is war.

古文：彗、客犯之，为兵、丧，天下桥梁不通。
现代文：彗星、客星侵犯，是战争、丧事，天下桥梁不通行。
English: Comet, guest star encroachment, is war, mourning, the world's bridges impassable.

古文：流星犯，大兵将出。
现代文：流星侵犯，大部队要出征。
English: Meteor encroachment, large forces to go to war.

古文：青云气入犯之，王良奉车忧坠车。
现代文：青色云气侵入进犯，王良供奉车驾担心掉下车来。
English: The blue clouds invaded and attacked, and Wang Liang got out of the car fearing to fall.

古文：云气赤，王良有斧锧忧。
现代文：云气赤色，王良有被腰斩的忧患。
English: The air is red and Wang Liang is worried about being beheaded.

古文：外屏七星，在奎南，主障蔽臭秽。
现代文：外屏七颗星，在奎宿南面，主管阻挡掩盖腐臭污秽。
English: Seven stars on the outer screen, on the south side of Kweijuku, supervisors block and cover the rancid filth.

古文：军南门，在天大将军南，天大将军之南门也。
现代文：军南门，在天大将军南面，是天大将军的南门。
English: The south gate of the army, on the south side of General Tianda, is the south gate of General Tianda.

古文：主谁何出入。
现代文：主管查问出入。
English: The supervisor asked about the discrepancy.

古文：星不明，外国叛；动摇，则兵起；明，则远方来贡。
现代文：星不明亮，外国叛乱；动摇，那么战争发生；明亮，那么远方来进贡。
English: The star is not bright, foreign rebellion; falter, then war; bright, then far away to pay tribute.

古文：按《步天歌》，以上诸星俱属奎宿。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以上各星都属于奎宿。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," the above stars all belong to Kui.

古文：以《晋志》考之，王良、附路、阁道、军南门、策星，俱在天市垣，别无外屏、天溷、土司空等星，《隋志》有之。
现代文：用《晋书，天文志》孝查它，王良、附路、阁道、军南门、策星，都在天市垣，另外没有外屏、天溷、土司空等星，《隋书&;;天文志》有它们。
English: Using the "Jin Shu, Astronomy" to examine it, Wang Liang, Fuyu Lu, Guodou, Junnanmen, and Zhe Xing are all in the sky. In addition, there are no outer screens, constellations, and planets, and the "Sui Shu&;; Astronomy" has them.

古文：而武密以王良、外屏、天溷皆属于壁，或以外屏又属奎。
现代文：而武密认为王良、外屏、天溷都属于壁宿，有的认为外屏又属于奎宿。
English: However, Wu Mi believed that Wang Liang, Waiping, and Tianzhu all belonged to Walled Town, and some believed that Waiping belonged to Kui Town.

古文：《乾象新书》以王良西一星属壁，东四星属奎，外屏西一星属壁，东六星属奎，与《步天歌》各有不合。
现代文：《干象新书》认为王良西边一颗星属于壁宿，束边四颗星属于奎宿，外屏西边一颗星属于壁宿，束边六颗星属于奎宿，与《步天歌》各有不合。
English: "Dry Elephant New Book" believes that one star on the west side of Wang Liang belongs to the wall inn, four stars on the edge of the bunch belong to the Kui inn, one star on the west side of the outer screen belongs to the wall inn, and six stars on the edge of the bunch belong to the Kui inn, each of which is inconsistent with "Walking Song of Heaven."

古文：娄三星，为天狱，主苑牧牺牲，供给郊祀，亦为兴兵聚众。
现代文：娄三颗星，是天的刑狱，主管园林中放牧用作牺牲的牲畜，供给郊外祭祀天地，也是兴兵聚众。
English: The three-pointed star is the heaven's prison. It is responsible for the grazing of sacrificial animals in the garden, the supply of sacrificial heaven and earth in the suburbs, and the gathering of soldiers.

古文：明大，则赋敛以时。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么收取赋税能按季节。
English: The stars are bright, so the tax can be collected according to the season.

古文：星直，则有执主命者；就聚，国不安。
现代文：星列垂直，就有执行人主命令的；三颗星趋向聚集，国家不安定。
English: When the constellations are in a vertical line, there are those who carry out the orders of the human masters; when the three stars tend to gather, the country is unstable.

古文：日食于娄，宰相、大人当之，郊祀神不享。
现代文：日食发生在娄座，宰相、王公大人承担责任，郊祀时神不享受供品。
English: The solar eclipse took place in Koza, the prime minister and the prince took responsibility, and the gods did not enjoy the offerings when they were worshipped in the suburbs.

古文：日晕，有兵，大人多死。
现代文：日晕，有战争，王公大人多死亡。
English: The sun faded, there was war, and most of the princes died.

古文：月食，其分后妃忧，民饥。
现代文：月食，它的分野地区皇后妃嫔有忧患，人民饥荒。
English: Lunar eclipse, its field area empress consort is in distress, the people are starving.

古文：月晕，在春百八十日有赦，又为籴贵，三日内雨解之。
现代文：月晕，在春季，一百八十天有赦免，又是买米价高，三天内下雨，缓解这种情形。
English: Moon halo, in the spring, there is an amnesty for one hundred and eighty days, and the price of buying rice is high, and it rains for three days, alleviating this situation.

古文：月犯，多畋猎，其分忧，将死，民流。一曰多冤狱。
现代文：月亮侵犯，多游猎，它的分野地区有忧患，将军死亡，人民流亡，一说多冤案。
English: The moon encroaches, more hunting, its field areas are troubled, generals die, people go into exile, and there are more cases of injustice.

古文：岁星犯之，牛多死，米贱，有赦；守之，国安，一曰：民多疫，六畜贵，有兵自罢。
现代文：岁星侵犯，牛多死亡，米价贱，有赦免；占据此宿，国家安定，一说人民多瘟疫，牛羊等六种牲畜价贵，有战争自行停止。
English: The year star encroaches, more cattle die, the price of rice is low, there is an amnesty; occupy this inn, the country is stable, it is said that the people have more plagues, six kinds of livestock such as cattle and sheep are expensive, and wars stop by themselves.

古文：荧惑犯守，为旱，为火，谷贵；又曰：守二十日以上，大臣死。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯并占据，是旱灾，是火灾，谷物价贵；又说占据二十天以上，大臣死亡。
English: Fluorescent planets invade and occupy, it is drought, it is fire, grain prices are expensive; also said to occupy more than twenty days, the minister died.

古文：星动，人多死；若逆行入成勾巳者，国廪灾。
现代文：星移动，人民多死亡；如果逆向运行进入成勾巳形，国家粮仓有灾。
English: If the star moves, more people will die; if it moves in the opposite direction, the country's granary will be in trouble.

古文：填星犯之，天子戒边境，不可远行，将兵凶；守之，谷丰，民乐；若逆行，女谒行；留舍于娄，外国兵来。
现代文：镇星侵犯，天子警戒边境，不能远行，带兵凶险；占据娄宿，谷物丰收，人民安乐；如果逆向运行，女谒通行；停留住宿在娄宿，外国军队前来。
English: The town star encroaches, the heavenly son guards the border, can not travel far, takes soldiers to be in danger; occupies Shaoshu, grain harvest, people's well-being; if it runs in the opposite direction, the maiden passes; stay and stay in Shaoshu, foreign troops come.

古文：太白犯之，有聚众事；守之，期三十日有兵，民饥。
现代文：太白星侵犯，有聚众的事；占据娄宿，三十天期限内有战争，人民饥饿。
English: Too white star encroaches, there is a gathering of the people; occupy the capital, there is a war within thirty days, the people are hungry.

古文：辰星犯之，刑罚急，多水旱，大臣忧，王者以赦除之；守而芒角、动摇、色赤黑者，臣下起兵。
现代文：辰星侵犯，刑罚苛急，多水灾旱灾，大臣有忧患，王者用赦免解除宅；占据而发出光芒、星动摇、星色赤黑的，臣下发动战争。
English: The hour and the star violate, the punishment is harsh, many floods and droughts occur, the minister is in distress, the king releases the house with pardon; the occupied emits light, the star wavers, the star is red and black, and the vassal wages war.

古文：客星犯，大兵；守之，五谷不成，又曰：臣惑主，专政，岁多狱讼；环绕三日，大赦。
现代文：客星侵犯，是大的战争；占据娄宿，五谷不成熟，又说臣下迷惑主上，专政，这年多刑狱讼案；环绕三天，大赦。
English: The invasion of the guest star is a big war; the occupation of the guest house, the grain is immature, and the subject is said to confuse the master, the dictatorship, the multi-year prison lawsuit; the three-day encirclement, the amnesty.

古文：彗星犯之，民饥死；出，则先旱后水，谷大贵，六畜疾，仓库空，又曰国有大兵。
现代文：彗星侵犯，人民饿死；出来，那么先旱灾后水灾，谷物特别贵，牛羊等六种牲畜有病，仓库空虚，又说国家有大的战争。
English: The comet invades, the people starve to death; when it comes out, there are first droughts and then floods, grain is particularly expensive, six kinds of livestock such as cattle and sheep are sick, warehouses are empty, and it is said that the country is at war.

古文：星孛，其分为兵，为饥。
现代文：星变出现，它的分野地区是战争，是饥荒。
English: Star Change appears, and its domain is war and famine.

古文：流星出犯之，有法令清狱。
现代文：流星出来又侵犯，有法令清理刑狱。
English: The meteor came out and encroached again, and there was a decree to clean up the prison.

古文：青赤云气入，为兵、丧；黑，为大水。
现代文：青赤色云气进入，是战争、丧事；黑色，是大水灾。
English: A blue-red cloud enters, signifying war and mourning; black, a great flood.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，以娄为十二度，唐开元游仪十三度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，认为娄宿是十二度；唐朝开元游仪，十三度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan Bronze Statuette, it is considered to be the twelfth degree; the Tang Dynasty, the thirteenth degree.

古文：旧去极八十度。
现代文：从前离极八十度。
English: It used to be 80 degrees out.

古文：景祐测验，娄宿十二度，距中央大星去极八十度，在赤道内十一度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，娄宿十二度，距星中央大星离极八十度，在赤道内十一度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the Pleiades is 12 degrees, the distance from the central star is 80 degrees from the pole, and it is 11 degrees within the equator.

古文：天仓六星，在娄宿南，仓谷所藏也，待邦之用。
现代文：天仓六颗星，在娄宿南面，是入仓谷物的库藏所在，以供国家的使用。
English: Amakura six stars, in the south of Oshuku, is the repository of stored grain for use by the state.

古文：星近而数，则岁熟粟聚；远而疏，则反是。
现代文：星距离近而且敷得清楚，那么年成丰收，谷类积聚；星远离而且稀疏，那就与此相反。
English: On the contrary, if the stars are close and clear, the harvest will be abundant and the grain will accumulate; if the stars are far away and sparse, it will be the opposite.

古文：月犯之，主发粟。
现代文：月亮侵犯，主管发放谷类。
English: As the moon encroaches, supervisors hand out cereal.

古文：五星犯，兵起，岁饥，仓粟出。
现代文：五星侵犯，战争发生，这年饥荒，仓里的谷类发出。
English: The Five-Star Movement invaded, war broke out, famine struck that year, and the grain in the storehouses began to rot.

古文：荧惑、太白合守，军破将死。
现代文：荧惑星、太白星联合占据，军队破败，将领死亡。
English: Fluorescent Planet and Too White Star jointly occupied, the army was ruined, and the general died.

古文：荧惑入，军转粟千里；近之，天下旱。
现代文：荧惑进入，军队千里转运谷类；靠近它，天下旱灾。
English: When the flood came, the army transported grain thousands of miles; when it was near, the world suffered from drought.

古文：太白犯之，外国人相食，兵起西北。
现代文：太白星侵犯，外国人吃人，战争在西北发生。
English: Taibai invaded, foreigners ate people, and war broke out in the northwest.

古文：辰星守之，大水、客、彗犯之，五谷不成。
现代文：辰星占据此星，发大水。客星、彗星侵犯，五谷不成熟。
English: The star of the hour occupies this planet, causing great water. The guest star and comet invade, and the grain is immature.

古文：客星入，岁饥籴贵。
现代文：客星进入，这年饥荒，买米价贵。
English: The guest star enters, there is famine this year, and rice is expensive to buy.

古文：流星入，色赤，为兵；犯之，粟以兵出；色黄白，岁大稔。
现代文：流星进入，星色赤，是战争；侵犯，谷类因战事而发出；星色黄白，年成大丰收。
English: Meteor enters, starry red, is war; invasion, cereals are issued due to war; starry yellow and white, the year is a bumper harvest.

古文：苍白云气入，岁饥；赤，为兵、旱，仓廪灾；黄白，岁大熟。
现代文：苍白色云气进入，这年饥荒；赤色，是战争、旱灾，粮仓火灾；黄白色，年成大丰收。
English: When the pale-white clouds roll in, it's a year of famine; when the red clouds roll in, it's a year of war, drought, and barn fires; and when the yellow-white clouds roll in, it's a year of great harvest.

古文：右更五星，在娄西，秦爵名，主牧师官，亦主礼义。
现代文：右更五颗星，在娄宿西面，是秦的爵位名称，主管放牧牲畜官吏的官，也主管礼义。
English: The five stars to the right, to the west of Usuki, are the names of the peerages of the Qin Dynasty, the officials in charge of herding livestock, and the officials in charge of etiquette.

古文：星不具，天下道不通。
现代文：星不全备，天下道路不通行。
English: If the stars are incomplete, the world's roads are impassable.

古文：太白、荧惑犯守，山泽兵起。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星侵犯并占据，山野发生战争。
English: Taibai Star and Fluorescent Planet invaded and occupied, and a war broke out in the mountains.

古文：左更五星，在娄东，亦秦爵名，山虞之官，主山泽林薮竹木蔬菜之属，亦主仁智。
现代文：左更五颗星，在娄宿东面，也是秦的爵位名称，山林的官，主管山泽林薮竹木蔬菜之类，也主管仁智。
English: To the left are five stars. To the east of Usuki, it is also the name of Qin's peerage, the official of the mountains and forests, the person in charge of the mountains and forests, the bamboo and vegetables, and the person in charge of benevolence.

古文：占同右更。
现代文：占验与右更相同。
English: The horoscope is the same as the one on the right.

古文：天大将军十一星，在娄北，主武兵。
现代文：天大将军十一颗星，在娄宿北面，主管武力战争。
English: General Tendai, with eleven stars, is in charge of armed warfare in the north of Oshuku.

古文：中央大星，天之大将也；外小星，吏士也。
现代文：中央大星，是天的大将；外边的小星，是官吏军士。
English: The large star in the center is the general of heaven; the small star on the outside is the officer.

古文：动摇，则兵起，大将出；小星动摇，或不具，亦为兵；旗直扬者，随所击胜。
现代文：星动摇，那么战争发生，大将出征；小星动摇，或是星数不全备，也是战争；旗帜径直飘扬的，到处攻击都胜利。
English: If the stars are wavering, it is war; if the stars are wavering, it is war; if the stars are wavering, it is war; if the stars are wavering, it is war; if the flags are waving, it is war; if the flags are waving, it is war.

古文：五星犯守，大将忧。
现代文：五星侵犯并占据，大将有忧患。
English: If the Five Stars invade and occupy, there will be trouble.

古文：客星守之，大将不安，军吏以饥败。
现代文：客星占据此星，大将不安全，军中官吏因饥饿而失败。
English: The guest star occupies this star, the general is not safe, and the military officials are defeated by hunger.

古文：流星入，大将忧。
现代文：流星造入，大将有忧患。
English: If a meteor hits, there will be a lot of trouble.

古文：苍白云气犯之，兵多疾；赤，为兵出。
现代文：苍白色云气侵犯，士兵多病；赤色，是军队出征。
English: Pale clouds encroach, soldiers are sickly; red, the army is on the march.

古文：天庾四星，在天仓东南，主露积。
现代文：天庾四颗星，在天仓东南，主管露天积储。
English: Tianzhu four stars, in the southeast of Tiancang, in charge of open-air storage.

古文：占与天仓同。
现代文：占验与天仓相同。
English: The horoscope is the same as that of the heavenly storehouse.

古文：按《晋志》，天仓、天庾在二十八宿之外，天大将军属天市垣，左更、右更惟《隋志》有之。
现代文：按《晋书，天文志》，天仓、天庾在二十八宿之外，天大将军属于天市垣，左更、右更只有《隋书天文志》有它们。
English: According to "Jin Shu, Astronomy," Tiancang and Tianzhu are in addition to the twenty-eight lodges, and Tianda Shogun belongs to Tianchigaki. Only "Sui Shu, Astronomy" has them.

古文：《乾象新书》以天仓属奎。
现代文：《干象新书》认为天仓属于奎宿。
English: "Ganxiang New Book" believes that Tiancang belongs to Kuizhou.

古文：武密亦以属奎，又属娄。
现代文：武密也认为属于奎宿，又属于娄宿。
English: Wu Mi also believes that it belongs to Kui-juku, and also belongs to Sui-juku.

古文：《步天歌》皆属娄宿。
现代文：《步天歌》认为都属于娄宿。
English: "Butenka" believes that they all belong to Minshuku.

古文：胃宿三星，天之厨藏，主仓廪，五谷府也。
现代文：胃宿三颗星，天的厨房储藏的地方，主管粮仓，是五谷的库藏。
English: The three-star gastro inn, the place where heaven's kitchen is stored, the head granary, is the storehouse of grain.

古文：明，则天下和平，仓廪实，民安；动，则输运。暗，则仓空；就聚，则谷贵、民流；中星众，谷聚；星小，谷散；芒，则有兵。
现代文：星明亮，那么天下和平，粮仓充实，人民安定；动摇，就运输出去；暗淡，那么粮仓空虚；走向聚集，那么谷物价贵、人民流亡；胃宿中的星多，谷物积聚；星小，谷物散失；星有光芒，就有战争。
English: If the stars are bright, there will be peace in the world, the granaries will be full and the people will be stable; if they are shaken, they will be transported away; if they are dim, the granaries will be empty; if they gather, the grain will be expensive and the people will flee; if there are many stars in the stomach, the grain will be accumulated; if there are few stars, the grain will be scattered; if the stars are bright, there will be war.

古文：日食，大臣诛，一曰乏食，其分多疾，谷不实，又曰有委输事。
现代文：日食，大臣被杀，一说缺乏食物，它的分野地区多疾病，谷物不结实，又说有运送的事。
English: The sun was eclipsed, the minister was killed, there was a shortage of food, there were many diseases in his region, the grain was not strong, and there was a matter of transportation.

古文：日晕，谷不熟。
现代文：日晕，谷物不成熟。
English: The sun is fading, the grain is not ripe.

古文：月食，王后有忧，将亡，亦为饥，郊祀有咎。
现代文：月食，王后有忧患，将军死亡，也是饥荒，郊祀天地有过错。
English: The moon is eclipsed, the queen is in distress, the general is dead, there is also a famine, the suburbs worship heaven and earth are at fault.

古文：月晕，兵先动者败，妊妇多死，又曰国主死，大多雨，或山崩，有破军。
现代文：月晕，军队先出动的一方失败，怀孕的妇女多死亡，又说一国的君主死亡，天多雨，或者发生山崩，有军队被攻破。
English: The moon is waning, the side that sent the troops out first lost, more pregnant women died, the monarch of a country died, there was a lot of rain, or there was a landslide, and some troops were defeated.

古文：岁星在晕内，天子有德令。
现代文：岁星在月晕之内，天子有德政的诏令。
English: The year star is within the moon's halo, and the emperor's edict of virtue prevails.

古文：月晕在四孟之月，有赦。
现代文：月晕在四季每季的第一个月，有赦免。
English: Moon halo in the four seasons of the first month of each season, there is an amnesty.

古文：荧惑在晕中，为兵。
现代文：荧惑星在月晕中，是战争。
English: Fluorescent planets in the Moon's umbra are signs of war.

古文：月犯之，邻国有暴兵，天下饥，外国忧，谷不实，民多疾；变色，将军凶。
现代文：月亮侵犯，邻国有暴乱战争，天下饥荒，外国有忧患，谷物不结实，人民多病；星变色，将军凶险。
English: The moon encroaches, the neighboring country has a riotous war, the world is starving, there is sorrow in foreign countries, the grain is not strong, the people are sickly; the star changes color, the general is dangerous.

古文：岁星犯之，大人忧，兵起；守，则国昌；入，则国令变更，天下狱空；若逆行，五谷不成，国无积蓄。
现代文：岁星侵犯，王公大人有忧患，战争发生；占据，那么国家昌盛；进入，那么国家政令变更，天下监狱都空；如果逆向运行，五谷不成熟，国家没有积蓄。
English: If the year star encroaches, the prince has worries, and war occurs; if it occupies, then the country is prosperous; if it enters, then the state decrees are changed, and the world's prisons are empty; if it runs in the opposite direction, the grain is immature, and the country has no savings.

古文：荧惑犯之，兵乱，仓粟出，贵人忧；守之，旱饥，民疫，客军大败；入，则改法令，牢狱空；进退环绕勾巳、凌犯及百日以上，天下仓库并空，兵起。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，军队动乱，粮仓的谷类放出，贵人有忧患；占据胃宿，旱灾饥荒，人民有瘟疫，客籍军队大败；进入，就更改法令，牢狱空；进进退退，环绕成勾巳形、侵犯达一百天以上，天下仓库都空，战争发生。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, the army is in turmoil, the grain in the granary is released, the nobles are worried; occupy the stomach, drought and famine, the people have plague, the guest army is defeated; enter, change the law, the prison is empty; advance and retreat, encircle in the shape of a hook, invade for more than a hundred days, the world's warehouses are empty, war occurs.

古文：填星犯之，大臣为乱；守之，无蓄积，有德令，岁谷大贵；若逆行守勾巳者，有兵；色赤，兵起流血；青，则有德令。
现代文：镇星侵犯，大臣作乱；占据胃宿，没有积蓄，有德政的诏令，这年谷物特别贵；如果逆向运行占据成勾巳形，有战争；星色赤，战争发生流血；青色，就有德政的诏今。
English: If the town is invaded by the star, the minister will make a disturbance; if the stomach is occupied, there is no savings, there is a decree of the German government, this year the grain is particularly expensive; if the reverse movement is occupied in the shape of a hook, there is a war; if the star is red, there is bloodshed in the war; if it is blue, there is a decree of the German government.

古文：辰星犯，其分不宁；守之，有兵，国有立侯，巫咸曰： 为旱，谷不成，有急兵。 又逆行守之，仓空，水灾。
现代文：辰星侵犯，它的分野地区不安宁；占据胃宿，有战争，国家有自立为侯的，巫咸说 是旱灾，谷物不成熟，有紧急的战争 ；又逆向运行占据胃宿，仓库空，水灾。
English: The hour-star encroaches, its fields and regions are unsettled; the stomach is occupied, there is war, the country is self-reliant, Wuhan says it is drought, the grain is immature, there is an urgent war; and the reverse movement occupies the stomach, the warehouse is empty, and there is a flood.

古文：客星犯之，王者忧，仓廪用；退行入，则有赦；守之，强臣凌国，谷不熟；乘之，为火；舍而不去，人饥；出，其分君有忧。
现代文：客星侵犯，王者有忧患，粮仓被用；倒退运行进入，就有赦免；占据胃宿，强悍的臣下凌驾国家之上，谷物不成熟；登临在胃宿上面，是火灾；住宿而不离开，人民饥饿；出去，它的分野地区君主有忧患。
English: The guest star invades, the king is troubled, the granary is used; the backward run enters, there is pardon; occupy the stomach lodging, the strong vassal overrides the country, the grain is not ripe; the fire lands on the stomach lodging; the lodging does not leave, the people are hungry; go out, the monarch is troubled in its field area.

古文：彗星犯之，兵动，臣叛，有水灾，谷不登。
现代文：彗星侵犯，军队出动，臣下叛乱，有水灾，谷物不丰收。
English: The comet invaded, the army was dispatched, the vassals rebelled, there were floods, and the grain harvest was poor.

古文：星孛，其分兵起，王者恶之。
现代文：星变出现，它的分野地区发生战争，王者厌恶这种情形。
English: The king abhors the situation when a star change occurs and a war breaks out in his domain.

古文：流星犯之，仓库空；色赤，为火灾。
现代文：流星侵犯，仓库空；星色赤，是火灾。
English: Meteor intrusion, warehouse empty; starry red, is a fire.

古文：苍白云气出入犯之，以丧籴粟事；黑，为仓谷败腐；青黑，为兵；黄白，仓实。
现代文：苍白色云气出去进来又侵犯，因为丧亡而有买粮的事；黑色，是粮仓的谷物腐败；青黑色，是战争；黄白色，仓库充实。
English: Pale-white clouds go out and come in and invade again, because of the loss and there is a matter of buying grain; black is the grain corruption of the granary; blue-black is the war; yellow-white, the warehouse is full.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，胃宿十五度。景祐测验，十四度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，胃宿十五度；景佑间观测验证，十四度。
English: According to the Yongyuan bronze instrument of the Han Dynasty, the stomach is fifteen degrees; the observation and verification between Jingyu, fourteen degrees.

古文：天囷十三星，如乙形，在胃南，仓廪之属，主给御廪粢盛。
现代文：天困十三颗星，像乙字的形状，在胃宿南面，是粮仓之类，主管供给皇帝用的米仓糕点和祭品。
English: The thirteen stars, shaped like the letter B, on the south side of the gastronome, are granaries and the like, in charge of supplying the emperor with rice cakes and offerings.

古文：星明，则丰稔；暗，则饥。
现代文：星明亮，就丰收成熟；暗淡，就饥荒。
English: When the stars are bright, the harvest is ripe; when they are dim, there is famine.

古文：月犯之，有移粟事。
现代文：月亮侵犯，有迁移谷类的事。
English: Moon encroachment, there is a migration of cereals.

古文：五星犯之，仓库空虚。
现代文：五星侵犯，仓库空虚。
English: Five-star encroachment, warehouse emptiness.

古文：客、彗入，仓库忧，水火焚溺。
现代文：客星、彗星进入，仓库有忧患，水淹火烧。
English: The guest star and the comet enter, the warehouse is in trouble, the water is flooded and the fire is burning.

古文：青白云气入，岁饥，民流亡。
现代文：青白色云气进入，这年饥荒，人民流亡。
English: A bluish-white cloud entered the atmosphere. This was the year of famine and the exodus of the people.

古文：大陵八星，在胃北，亦曰积京，主大丧也。
现代文：大陵八颗星，在胃宿北面，也叫积京，是主管大的丧事的。
English: Daling eight-pointed star, in the north of the gastric hospital, also known as Jiejing, is the head of the funeral.

古文：中星繁，诸侯丧，民疫，兵起。
现代文：它里面的星繁多，诸侯丧亡，人民有瘟疫，战争发生。
English: It contains a multitude of stars, the death of princes, plagues on the people, and wars.

古文：月犯之，为兵，为水、旱，天下有丧。
现代文：月亮侵犯，是战争，是水灾、旱灾，天下有丧事。
English: The moon's encroachment is a war, a flood, a drought, and the world is in mourning.

古文：月晕前足，大赦。
现代文：月晕发生在前足部分，大赦。
English: The lunacy occurs in the forefoot part, amnesty.

古文：五星入，为水、旱、兵、丧。
现代文：五星进入，是水灾、旱灾、战争、丧事。
English: Five stars mean floods, droughts, war and death.

古文：荧惑守之，天下有丧。
现代文：荧惑星占据此星，天下有丧事。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy this star, and the world is in mourning.

古文：客、彗入，民疫。
现代文：客星、彗星进入，人民有瘟疫。
English: A guest star, a comet enters, and the people are stricken with a plague.

古文：流星出犯之，其下有积尸。
现代文：流星出来又侵犯，它的下面有积尸。
English: The meteor comes out and encroaches again, and there are bodies underneath it.

古文：苍白云气犯之，天下兵、丧；赤，则人多战死。
现代文：苍白色云气侵犯，天下有战争、丧事；赤色，那磨人多战死。
English: Pale clouds invade, and there is war and mourning in the world; red clouds, and many people die in war.

古文：积尸一星，在大陵中。
现代文：积尸一颗星，在大陵中间。
English: A star-shaped pile of corpses in the middle of the Great Mausoleum.

古文：明，则有大丧，死人如山。
现代文：星明亮，就有大的丧事，死人堆积如山。
English: When the stars are bright, there is great mourning, and the dead are heaped together as a heap.

古文：月犯之，有叛臣。
现代文：月亮侵犯，有叛逆之臣。
English: The moon encroaches, there is a rebellious vassal.

古文：五星犯之，天下大疾。
现代文：五星侵犯，天下有大病。
English: Five-star encroachment, the world has a serious illness.

古文：客、彗犯，有大丧。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，有大的丧事。
English: Invaded by a guest star or comet, there is great mourning.

古文：苍色云气入犯之，人多死；黑，为疫。
现代文：苍色云气进入侵犯，人多死亡；黑色，是瘟疫。
English: Pale clouds invade and many people die; black clouds are plagues.

古文：天船九星，在大陵北，河之中，天之船也，主通济利涉。
现代文：天船九颗星，在大陵北面，银河的中间，是天的船，主管交通过河便利涉水。
English: The nine stars of the celestial ship, in the north of Daling, in the middle of the Milky Way, are the ships of the sky.

古文：石申曰： 不在汉中，津河不通。 
现代文：石申说： 不在银河中，渡口河水不通。 
English: Shi Shen said: Without the Milky Way, the Toguchi River would not flow.

古文：明，则天下安；不明及移徙，天下兵、丧。
现代文：星明亮，那么天下安定；不明亮以及迁徙移动，天下有战争、丧事。
English: If the stars are bright, the world will be stable; if they are not bright, the world will be full of war and death.

古文：月犯之，百川流溢，津梁不通。
现代文：月亮侵犯，百川奔流外溢，渡口桥梁不通行。
English: The moon encroaches, the torrents overflow, the ferry bridges are impassable.

古文：五星犯之，水溢，民移居。
现代文：五星慢犯，江河水溢出，人民迁移居住。
English: Five-star slow-moving prisoners, river water overflowing, people relocating.

古文：彗星犯之，为大水。
现代文：彗星侵犯，是大水。
English: Comet encroaches, big water comes up.

古文：客星犯，为水，为兵。
现代文：客星侵犯，是水灾，是战争。
English: The invasion of a guest star is a flood and a war.

古文：青云气入，天子忧，不可御船；赤，为兵，船用；黄白，天子喜。
现代文：青色云气进入，天子有忧患，不能乘船；赤色，是战争，船被动用；黄白色，天子有喜事。
English: When the blue cloud enters, the son of heaven is sad and cannot take the boat; when the red cloud enters, it is war and the boat is used; when the yellow cloud enters, the son of heaven is happy.

古文：天廪四星，在昴宿南，一曰天，主蓄黍稷，以供享祀。
现代文：天麇四颗星，在昴宿南面，一说天唐，主管蓄积黍稷，以供给祭祀享品。
English: In the southern part of Oshuku, one of the four celestial mansions, called Tiantang, was in charge of accumulating yakitori in order to supply sacrificial delicacies.

古文：《春秋》所谓御廪，此之象也。
现代文：《春秋》所说的御糜，是此星的形象。
English: The imperial egret mentioned in "Spring and Autumn" is the image of this star.

古文：又主赏功，掌九谷之要。
现代文：又主管赏赐功劳，掌管九谷的总要。
English: In addition, the supervisor rewards merit, and is in charge of the main points of the nine valleys.

古文：明，则国实岁丰；移，则国虚；黑而稀，则粟腐败。
现代文：星明亮，那么国家充实年成丰收；移动，那么国家空虚；黑色而且稀疏，那么谷类腐败。
English: The stars are bright, then the country is full of good harvest; they move, then the country is empty; they are black and sparse, then the grain is rotten.

古文：月犯之，谷贵。
现代文：月亮侵犯，谷物价贵。
English: The moon encroaches, grain prices are high.

古文：五星犯之，岁饥。
现代文：五星侵犯，这年饥荒。
English: Five-star encroachment, famine this year.

古文：客星犯，仓库空虚。
现代文：客星侵犯，仓库空虚。
English: The guest star encroaches, the warehouse is empty.

古文：流星入，色青为忧；赤，为旱，为火；黄白，天下熟。
现代文：流星进入，星色青是忧患；赤色，是旱灾，是火灾；黄白色，天下丰收。
English: The meteor enters, the star color blue is sorrow; red, is drought, is fire; yellow-white, the world's harvest.

古文：青云气入，蝗，饥，民流；赤，为旱；黑，为水；黄，则岁稔。
现代文：青色云气进入，蝗灾，饥荒，人民流亡；赤色，是旱灾；黑色，是水灾；黄色，那么年成丰收。
English: When the blue cloud enters, locusts, famine, and people's exodus begin; when the red cloud enters, drought; when the black cloud enters, flood; when the yellow cloud enters, the year's harvest begins.

古文：积水一星，在天船中，候水灾也。
现代文：积水一颗星，在天船中，是观测水灾的。
English: Standing water is a star, in the celestial ship, is to observe the flood.

古文：明动上行，舟船用。
现代文：星明亮移动向上行，舟船动用。
English: The star brightly moves upward, the boat is used.

古文：荧惑犯，有水。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，有水灾。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, flooding occurs.

古文：按《晋志》大陵、积尸、天船、积水俱属天市垣，天囷、天廪在二十八宿之外。
现代文：按《晋书&;;天文志》，大陵，积尸、天船、积水都属于天市垣，天困、天麇在二十八宿之外。
English: According to the "Jinshu" & "Astronomy," the Great Mausoleum, the Bodies of the Dead, the Heavenly Boat, and the Backwaters all belong to the Heavenly City Wall, while the Heavenly City and the Heavenly Palace are outside the Twenty-eight Quarters.

古文：武密以天囷、大陵属娄，又属胃；天船属胃，又属昴。
现代文：武密认为天困、大陵属于娄宿，又属于胃宿；天船属于胃宿，又属于昴宿。
English: Wu Mi believed that Tianyou and Daling belonged to the stomach and the stomach and the heavenly ship belonged to the stomach and the stomach.

古文：《乾象新书》，天囷五星属娄，余星属胃，大陵西三星属娄，东五星属胃，与《步天歌》互有不同。
现代文：《干象新书》，天困五颗星属于娄宿，其余的星属于胃宿，大陵西边三颗星属于娄宿，束边五颗星属于胃宿，和《步天歌》互有不同。
English: In the "Dry Elephant New Book," the five stars in the sky belong to the rooster, the remaining stars belong to the stomach, the three stars on the west side of Daling belong to the rooster, and the five stars on the edge of the bunch belong to the stomach, which are different from the "Walking Song of Heaven."

古文：昴宿七星，天之耳目也，主西方及狱事。
现代文：昴宿七颗星，是天的耳目，主管西方及刑狱的事情。
English: The seven stars of the Pleiades are the eyes and ears of the heavens, and are in charge of the West and prison affairs.

古文：又为旄头，北星也，又主丧。
现代文：又是旄头，是北星，又主管丧亡。
English: It's Shantou again, it's the North Star, and the leader is dead.

古文：昴、毕间为天街，天子出，旄头、毕以前驱，此其义也。
现代文：昴宿、毕宿之间是天街，天子出行，旄头、罕毕用作前驱，这是它的意义。
English: Between Shantou and Bi, there is Tianjie (天街), which means that Shantou and Bi are used as forerunners. This is its significance.

古文：黄道所经。
现代文：是黄道所经过的地方。
English: is where the zodiac passes through.

古文：明，则天下牢狱平；六星皆明与大星等，为大水。
现代文：星明亮，那么天下监牢讼案公平；六颗星都明亮得像大星一样，是发大水。
English: If the stars are bright, then the world's prison lawsuits are fair; six stars are as bright as big stars, which is a big problem.

古文：七星皆黄，兵大起。
现代文：七颗星都是黄色，战争大规模发生。
English: If all seven stars are yellow, there will be a large-scale war.

古文：一星亡，为兵、丧。
现代文：一星消失，是战争、丧事。
English: When a star disappears, there is war and mourning.

古文：摇动，有大臣下狱及有白衣之会。
现代文：摇动，有大臣下监狱以及有平民的聚会。
English: Shaking, there were ministers going to prison and there were gatherings of civilians.

古文：大而数尽动，若跳跃者，北兵大起。
现代文：星大而且屡屡摇动，像跳跃似的，北方战争大规模发生。
English: Huge and repeatedly shaking, like a jump, the Northern War occurred on a large scale.

古文：一星独跳跃而动，北兵欲犯边。
现代文：一星单独跳跃而且摇动，北方军队要侵犯边境。
English: One star alone leaps and shakes, the northern army is about to invade the border.

古文：日食，王者疾，宗姓自立，又占边兵起。
现代文：日食，王者有病，皇姓宗族自立为王，又占验为边境战争发生。
English: The sun eclipsed, the king was ill, the royal family became self-sufficient, and a border war broke out.

古文：日晕，阴国失地，北主忧，赵地凶，又云大饥。
现代文：日晕，阴面的国家丧失土地，北国的君主有忧患，赵国地区凶险，又说大饥荒。
English: The sun is fading, the shadowy country is losing land, the monarch of the northern country is in trouble, the Zhao country is in danger, and it is said that there is a great famine.

古文：月食，大臣诛，女主忧，为饥，边兵起，将死，北地叛。
现代文：月食，大臣被杀，女主有忧患，是饥荒，边境战争发生，将军死亡，北方地区叛乱。
English: An eclipse of the moon, a minister killed, a mistress in distress, a famine, a border war, the death of a general, a rebellion in the north.

古文：月岁三晕，弓弩贵，民饥。晕在正月上旬，有赦；犯之，为饥，北主忧，天子破北兵；变色，民流，国亡，下有暴兵，有赦；出昴北，天下有福；乘之，法令峻，大水，谷不登。
现代文：月亮一年中发生三次月晕，弓箭价贵，人民饥荒；月晕在正月上旬，有赦免；侵犯，是饥荒，北国君主有忧患，天子攻破北国军队；星变色，人民流亡，国家灭亡，下有暴乱战争，有赦免；从昴宿北面出来，天下有福；登临在昴宿之上，法令严酷，发大水，谷物不收。
English: Three times a year, the moon is eclipsed, bows and arrows are expensive, and the people are starving; the moon is eclipsed in the first half of the first month, and there is an amnesty; invasion is famine, the northern monarchs are in trouble, and the heavenly son defeats the northern army; the star changes color, the people are exiled, the country is destroyed, there is a riotous war, and there is an amnesty; the world is blessed when it comes out of the north side of Oshuku; when it lands on the top of Oshuku, the laws are harsh, there is a lot of water, and grain is not

古文：岁星犯之，狱空；乘之，阴国有兵，北主忧；守之，主急刑罚，狱空，一曰臣下狱有解者；守其北，有德令，又曰水物不成；久守，大臣坐法，民饥；留守，破军杀将。
现代文：岁星侵犯，监狱空；登临在昴宿之上，阴面的国家有战争，北国的君主有忧患；占据昴宿，帝王刑罚苛急，监狱空，一说臣下的讼案有解除的；占据它的北部，有德政的诏令，又说水中作物没有收成；长久占据，大臣犯法，人民饥荒；停留并占据，攻破军队，杀死将领。
English: The star of the year encroaches, the prison is empty; a bird lands on the mansion, the shadowy country is at war, the northern monarch is in distress; the mansion is occupied, the emperor's punishment is severe, the prison is empty, and it is said that the lawsuit of the vassals has been lifted; the mansion is occupied in the north, there is a decree of the German government, and it is said that the crops in the water have not been harvested; the mansion is occupied for a long time, the minister has broken the law, and the people are starving; the mansion is stopped and occupied, the army is defeated, and the general is killed.

古文：荧惑犯守，为兵，为旱、饥；守东，齐、楚、越地有兵；守南，荆、楚有兵；西，则兵起秦、郑；北，则兵起燕、赵，又为贵人多死，北地不宁；入则有喜，有赦，天下无兵；守而环绕勾巳，为赦；久守，籴贵。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯并占据，是战争，是旱灾、饥荒；占据柬部，齐、楚、越地区有战争；占据南部，荆、楚有战争；占据西部，那么战争发生在秦、郑地区；占据北部，那么战争发生茌燕、赵地区，又是贵人多死亡，北方地区不安宁；进入就有喜事，有赦免，天下没有战争；占据而且环绕成勾巳形，是赦免；长久占据，买米价贵。
English: If a fluorescent planet invades and occupies, there will be war, drought and famine; if it occupies Cambodia, there will be war in the regions of Qi, Chu and Yue; if it occupies the south, there will be war in the regions of Jing and Chu; if it occupies the west, there will be war in the regions of Qin and Zheng; if it occupies the north, there will be war in the regions of Zhai, Yan and Zhao; if it occupies the south, there will be drought and famine; if it occupies the north, there will be drought and famine; if it occupies the south, there will be war in the regions of Qi, Chu and Yue; if it

古文：填星犯，或出入守之，北地为乱，有土功，五谷不成，水火为灾，民疫，又为女主失势；入，则地动水溢，宗庙坏；留，则大将出征。
现代文：镇星侵犯，或者出来进去并占据昴宿，北方地区发生动乱，有水土工程，五谷不成熟，水火成灾，人民有瘟疫，又是女主失去权势；进入，那么地震，江河水溢出，宗庙毁坏；停留，那么大将出征。
English: Towns and stars invade, or come in and occupy the capital, the northern region is in turmoil, there are hydro-geological projects, crops are immature, floods and fires become disasters, the people have plagues, and the matriarch loses power; enter, then earthquakes, rivers overflow, the ancestral temple is destroyed; stay, then the general will go to war.

古文：太白入犯之，大赦；在东，六畜伤；在西，六月有兵；又曰守之，北兵动，将下狱；昼见，边兵起；出、入、留、舍，在南为男丧，北为女丧。
现代文：太白星侵犯，大赦；在柬部，六畜受伤害；在西部，六个月有战争；又说占据昴宿，北方军队出动，将军下狱；白天出现，边区战争发生；出来、进去、停留、住宿，在南部是男人丧事，北部是女人丧事。
English: Too white star invasion, amnesty; in the Cambodian Ministry, six animals were harmed; in the west, there was a war for six months; also said to occupy Xizhu, the northern army sent out, the general went to prison; appeared in the daytime, the border war occurred; out, in, stay, stay, in the south is a man's funeral, in the north is a woman's funeral.

古文：辰星犯，北主忧，守之，谷不成，民饥；久守，为水，为兵。
现代文：辰星侵犯，北国君主有忧患；占据昴宿，谷物不成熟，人民饥荒；长久占据，是水灾，是战争。
English: If the stars and planets encroach, the northern monarchs will be in trouble; if they occupy the summer resort, the grain will not be ripe, and the people will be starving; if they occupy it for a long time, it will be a flood and a war.

古文：客星犯，贵人有急，北兵大败，谗人在内；守之，臣叛主，兵起；入，则其分有丧。
现代文：客星侵犯，贵人有紧急的事情，北国军队大败，进谗言的人在朝廷中；占据昴宿，臣下叛逆君主，战争发生；进入，那么它的分野地区有丧事。
English: If a guest star invades, a nobleman has an urgent matter, the northern army is defeated, and a person who is involved in gossip is in the imperial court; if a guest star invades, a nobleman has an urgent matter, the northern army is defeated, a person who is involved in gossip is in the imperial court; if a guest star invades, a nobleman has an urgent matter, the northern army is defeated, a person who is involved in gossip is in the imperial court; if a guest star invades, a nobleman has an urgent matter, the northern army is defeated, a person who is involved in gossip is in the imperial court; if a guest star invades,

古文：彗星犯之，大臣为乱；出，则边兵起，有赦。
现代文：彗星侵犯，大臣作乱；出去，那么边地战争发生，有赦免。
English: Comets invade, ministers make trouble; go out, then there is a border war, there is an amnesty.

古文：星孛，其分臣下乱，有边兵，大臣诛。
现代文：星变出现，它的分野地区臣下叛乱，有边区战争，大臣被杀。
English: Star Change appeared, its field area vassals rebelled, there was a border war, and the minister was killed.

古文：流星出入犯之，夷兵起。
现代文：流星出来进去侵犯它，夷族战争发生。
English: The meteor came out and invaded it, and the War of the Barbarians broke out.

古文：《乙巳占》： 流星入，北方来朝；出，则天子有赦令恤民。 
现代文：《乙巳占》： 流星侵入，北方来朝见；出去，那么天子有赦免令抚恤人民。 
English: "Yi Si Zhan": Meteor invades, the north comes to see the emperor; if it goes out, then the son of heaven has a pardon order to benefit the people.

古文：苍赤云气犯之，民疫；黑，则北主忧；青，为水，为兵；青白，人多丧；黄，则有喜。
现代文：苍赤色云气侵犯，人民有瘟疫；黑色，那磨北国君主有忧患；青色，是水灾，是战争；青白色，人多丧亡；黄色，就有喜事。
English: Pale red clouds invade, the people have the plague; black, the northern monarchs have sorrow; blue, floods, war; blue-white, many people are killed; yellow, there are joyful events.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，昴宿十二度，唐开元游仪十一度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，昴宿十二度；唐朝开元游仪，十一度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan Bronze Statuette, there are twelve statues of Pochu; the Tang Dynasty has eleven statues of Kaiyuan.

古文：旧去极七十四度。
现代文：从前离极七十四度。
English: It used to be 74 degrees.

古文：景祐测验，昴宿十一度，距西南星去极七十一度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，昴宿十一度，距星西南星离极七十一度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the Pleiades is eleven times farther away, and the southwest star is seventy-one times farther away.

古文：刍稾六星，在天苑西，一曰在天囷南，主积稿之属。
现代文：刍稾六颗星，在天苑西面，一说在天困南面，主管堆积干草之类。
English: Six stars, in the west of Tianyuan, one said in the south of Tianyu, the superintendent piled up hay and the like.

古文：一曰天积，天子之藏府。
现代文：一说天积，是天子的库藏。
English: The heavens are the storehouse of the Son of God.

古文：星明，则刍稾贵；星盛，则百库之藏存；无星，则百库之藏散。
现代文：星明亮，那么喂牲口的草料价贵；星旺盛，那么各个仓库的收藏得以保存；没有星，那么各个仓库的收藏散失。
English: If the star is bright, the grass to feed the livestock will be expensive; if the star is strong, the collection of each warehouse will be preserved; if there is no star, the collection of each warehouse will be lost.

古文：月犯之，财宝出。
现代文：月亮侵犯，财宝散出。
English: The moon encroaches, the treasure scatters.

古文：辰星、荧惑犯之，刍稾有焚溺之患。
现代文：辰星、荧惑星侵犯，喂牲口的草料有火烧水淹的忧患。
English: Invaded by the star and the fluorescent planet, the grasses for feeding livestock are plagued by fire and flooding.

古文：赤云气犯之，为火；黄，为喜。
现代文：赤色云气侵犯，是火灾；黄色，是喜事。
English: Red clouds encroach, it's fire; yellow, it's joy.

古文：天阴五星，主从天子弋猎之臣。
现代文：天阴五颗星，主管随从天子射箭的臣下。
English: Heaven and hell are five stars, and the leaders are the vassals who follow the Son of Heaven and shoot arrows.

古文：不明，则为吉；明，则禁言泄。
现代文：星不明亮，是吉兆；明亮，那么宫内的话泄露出来。
English: If the star is not bright, it is a good omen; if it is bright, then the words within the palace will leak out.

古文：天河一星一作天阿，在天廪星北。
现代文：天河一颗星，一作天阿。在天糜星北面。
English: Tianhe, one star, one sky. In the north of the constellation.

古文：《晋志》在天高星西，主察山林妖变。
现代文：《晋书，天文志》：在天高星西面，主管观察山林的妖变。
English: "Jinshu, An Astronomical History": In the west of Tiangao Star, the supervisor observed the magical transformation of the mountains and forests.

古文：五星、客、彗犯之，主妖言满路。
现代文：五星、客星、彗星侵犯，预兆妖言传满道路。
English: Five stars, a guest star, and a comet encroach, and ominous omens fill the roads.

古文：卷舌六星，在昴北，主枢机智谋，一曰主口舌语，以知谗佞。
现代文：卷舌六颗星，在昴宿北面，主管朝廷的机要部门的智谋，一说主管言论，用来知道谗言奸佞。
English: There are six stars on the roll of the tongue, and in the north of Funchal, the wit in charge of the important departments of the imperial court, the one in charge of speech, is used to know the words of the traitors.

古文：曲而静，则贤人升；直而动，多谗人，兵起，天下有口舌之害。
现代文：星曲折而平静，那么贤人升迁；平直而动摇，多进谗言的人，战争发生，天下有口舌争端的祸害。
English: When the stars are twisted and calm, then wise men are promoted; when they are upright, they are shaken; when there is much slander, there is war; when there is discord, there is calamity.

古文：徙出汉外，则天下多妄说。
现代文：迁徙出银河之外，那么天下多虚妄的说道。
English: "Migrate out of the Milky Way," the world says, how preposterous.

古文：星繁，人多死。
现代文：星数繁多，人多死亡。
English: Many stars, many deaths.

古文：月犯之，天下多丧。
现代文：月亮侵犯，天下多丧事。
English: The moon encroaches, the world mourns.

古文：五星犯，佞人在侧。
现代文：五星侵犯，奸佞之人在君侧。
English: Five-star encroachment, traitors are on your side.

古文：彗、客犯之，侍臣忧。
现代文：彗星、客星侵犯，侍臣有忧患。
English: Comets and guest stars encroach, and courtiers are worried.

古文：天苑十六星，在昴、毕南，如环状，天子养禽兽之苑。
现代文：天苑十六颗星，在昴宿毕宿南面，像环状，天子放养禽兽的园林。
English: Tianyuan sixteen stars, in the southern side of Shishuku Bi-Shuku, is like a ring, a garden where animals and birds are raised.

古文：明，则禽兽牛马盈；不明，则多瘠死；不具，有斩刈事。
现代文：星明亮，那么禽兽牛马充盈；不明亮，那么多瘦弱而死的；星数不全备，有斩杀砍割的事。
English: The stars are bright, so the beasts, cattle and horses are full; not bright, so many are thin and dead; the number of stars is not complete, there is killing and cutting.

古文：五星犯之，兵起。
现代文：五星侵犯，战争发生。
English: Five-Star encroaches, war breaks out.

古文：客、彗犯，为兵，兽多死。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，是战争，兽类多死亡。
English: Invaded by a guest star or comet, it's war, and many animals die.

古文：流星入，色黑，禽兽多死；黄，则蕃息。
现代文：流星进入，星色黑，禽兽多死亡；黄色，就繁殖增多。
English: When the meteor enters, the star color is black, and many animals die; when it is yellow, there is an increase in reproduction.

古文：《云气占》同。
现代文：《云气占》相同。
English: It's the same with "Yunqi Zhanxing."

古文：天谗一星，在卷舌中，主巫医。
现代文：天谗一颗星，在卷舌的中间，主管巫医。
English: There is a star in the heavens, in the middle of the scroll, which is the witch doctor.

古文：暗，则为吉；明盛，人君纳佞言。
现代文：暗淡，是吉兆；星明亮旺盛，人君接纳奸佞之言。
English: Dim, it is a good omen; the star is bright and vigorous, and people accept the words of the traitor.

古文：月一星，在昴宿东南，蟾蜍也，主日月之应，女主臣下之象，又主死丧之事。
现代文：月一颗星，在昴宿东南面，是蟾蜍，主管日月的应验，女主臣下的象征，又主管死丧的事。
English: The moon is a star, in the southeast of Oshuku, it is, in charge of the fulfillment of the sun and moon, the symbol of the female boss, and also in charge of death and mourning.

古文：明大，则女主大专。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么女主大权独揽。
English: If the star is bright and large, then the female dominatrix has all the power.

古文：太白、荧惑守之，臣下起兵为乱。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星占据此座，臣下起兵作乱。
English: Too White Star and Fluorescent Planet occupy this seat, and their vassals start a riot.

古文：彗、客犯之，大臣黜，女主忧。
现代文：骜星、客星侵犯，大臣被罢黜，女主有忧患。
English: The evil star and the guest star have invaded, the minister has been ousted, and the mistress is in distress.

古文：砺石四星，在五车星西，主百工磨砺锋刃，亦主候伺。
现代文：砺石四颗星，在五车星西面，主管百工磨砺剑锋刃，也主管探测伺望。
English: Zircon four stars, in the west of the five-chariot star, the head of the hundred craftsmen sharpened the blade of the sword, and also the head of the detection and investigation.

古文：明，则兵起；常，则吉。
现代文：星明亮，那么战事发生；正常，就吉利。
English: If the star is bright, then war will occur; if it is normal, then it is lucky.

古文：荧惑入，边兵起；守之，诸侯发兵。
现代文：荧惑星进入，边地战争发生；占据此星，诸侯发动战争。
English: Fluorescent planet enters, border war occurs; occupy this planet, princes wage war.

古文：客星守之，为兵。
现代文：客星占据此星，是战争。
English: A visitor has taken over the planet, and it's war.

古文：按《晋志》，天河、卷舌、天谗俱属天市垣，天苑在二十八宿之外，刍稾、天阴、月、砺石，《晋志》不载，《隋史》有之。
现代文：按《晋书&;;天文志》，天河、卷舌、天谗都属于天市垣，天苑在二十八宿之外，刍稾、天阴、月、砺石，《晋书，天文志》不载录，《隋书，天文志》有它们。
English: According to the "Jin Shu" & "Astronomy," the Tianhe, the Curling Tongue, and the Heavenly Palace all belong to the Heavenly City Wall, and the Heavenly Garden is outside the twenty-eight quarters. The Dragonfly, the Celestial Shade, the Moon, and the Zircon are not recorded in the "Jin Shu" & "Astronomy," but they are recorded in the "Sui Shu" & "Astronomy."

古文：武密又以刍稾属胃，卷舌属胃，又属昴。
现代文：武密又认为刍稾属于胃宿，卷舌属于胃宿，又属于昴宿。
English: Wu Min also believed that the gizzard belongs to the stomach, the rolled tongue belongs to the stomach, and it belongs to the gizzard.

古文：《乾象新书》以刍稾属娄，卷舌西三星属胃，东三星属昴，天苑西八星属胃，南八星属昴。
现代文：《干象新书》认为刍禀属于娄宿，卷舌西边三颗星属于胃宿，束边三颗星属于昴宿，天苑西边八颗星属于胃宿，南边八颗星属于昴宿。
English: "Dry Elephant New Book" believes that the beak belongs to the stomach, the three stars on the west side of the beak belong to the stomach, the three stars on the edge of the beak belong to the stomach, the eight stars on the west side of the heavenly garden belong to the stomach, and the eight stars on the south side belong to the stomach.

古文：《步天歌》以上诸星皆属昴宿，互有不合。
现代文：《步天歌》认为以上各星都属于昴宿，互有不同。
English: "Bu Tiange" believes that each of the above stars belongs to Xizhu, and they are different from each other.

古文：毕宿八星，主边兵弋猎。
现代文：毕宿八颗星，主管边区军队射猎。
English: He was awarded eight stars, and was in charge of the frontier troops' shooting.

古文：其大星曰天高，一曰边将，主四夷之尉也。
现代文：其中的大星叫天高，又叫边将，是主管四方异族的尉官。
English: The one on the star is called Tien Gao, and the one on the other side is called Bian Zheng, the lieutenant in charge of Shifang Yidi.

古文：《天官书》曰： 毕为车。 
现代文：《天官书》说： 毕宿是罕车。 
English: "The Book of Heaven's Officials" says: It is rare to stay overnight.

古文：明大，则远人来朝，天下安；失色，边兵乱；一星亡，为兵、丧；动摇，则边兵起；移徙，天下狱乱；就聚，则法令酷。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么远方的人来朝见，天下安定；失去光色，边区军队动乱；一星消失，是战争、丧事；星动摇，那么边区战争发生；移动迁徙，天下刑狱混乱；走向聚集，那么政令苛酷。
English: If a star is bright and large, then people from far away will come to see the emperor, and the world will be stable; if it loses its brightness, the border troops will be in turmoil; if a star disappears, it is war and mourning; if a star wavers, then a border war will occur; if it moves and migrates, then the world will be in chaos; if it gathers, then the government will be harsh.

古文：日食，边王死，军自杀其主，远国有谋乱。
现代文：日食，边区的王死亡，军队自己杀死它的主帅，远方的国家阴谋叛乱。
English: An eclipse, the death of a provincial king, an army's own killing of its commander, a distant country's plotting a rebellion.

古文：日晕，有边兵；不则北主忧，又占有风雨。
现代文：日晕，有边区战争；否则北国君主有忧患，又占验为有风雨。
English: If the sun is eclipsed, there will be a border war; otherwise, the northern monarchs will be troubled, and the situation will be stormy.

古文：月食，有赦，赵分有兵，或赵君忧。
现代文：月食，有赦免，趟国分野地区有战争，或者趟国君主有忧患。
English: There are lunar eclipses, there are pardons, there are wars in the provinces of foreign countries, or there are troubles for the monarchs of foreign countries.

古文：月晕，兵乱，饥，丧；晕三重，边有叛者，七日内风雨解之，又为阴国有忧，天下赦。
现代文：月晕，军队动乱，饥荒，丧事；晕环三重，边区有叛乱的，七天之内有风雨就解除叛乱，又是阴面国家有忧患，天下赦免。
English: The moon is faint, the army is in turmoil, there is famine, and there are funerals. The circle is threefold. If there is a rebellion in the border area, the rebellion will be lifted within seven days if there is wind and rain. If there is sorrow in the country, the country will be pardoned.

古文：犯毕大星，下犯上，大将死，阴国忧；入毕口，多雨；穿毕，岁饥，盗起；失行，离于毕，则雨；居中，女主忧；又曰犯北，则阴国忧；南，则阳国忧。
现代文：侵犯毕宿的大星，臣下犯上作乱，大将死亡，阴位国家有忧患；进入毕宿口，多雨；穿过毕宿，逭年饥荒，盗贼群起；运行走错轨道，依附到毕宿，就下雨；处在中央，女主有忧患；又说侵犯北部，那么阴位的国家有忧患；在南部，那么阳位的国家有忧患。
English: If a great star encroaches on a mansion, his vassals will start a riot, the general will die, and the country of the yang position will be troubled; if it enters the entrance of a mansion, there will be a lot of rain; if it passes through a mansion, there will be a famine for three years, and a group of thieves will arise; if it runs on the wrong track, it will attach to a mansion, and it will rain; if it is in the center, the mistress will be troubled; if it encroaches on the north, the country of the yang position will be troubled; and if it is in the south, the country of

古文：岁星犯之，冬多风雨，又曰为水；入毕口，边兵起，民饥，有赦；守三十日，客兵起；出阳，为旱；阴，为水。
现代文：岁星侵犯，冬季多风雨，又说是水灾；进入毕宿口，边区战争发生，人民饥饿，有赦免；占据三十天，客籍军队发生战争；从阳位出来，是旱灾；从阴位出来，是水灾。
English: The year of the star, the winter of the wind and rain, is also said to be a flood; the border war occurs, the people are hungry, and there is an amnesty; the guest army is occupied for thirty days, and there is a war; it is a drought when it comes out of the Yang position; it is a flood when it comes out of the Yin position.

古文：荧惑犯右角，大战；左角，小战；入，则边兵忧；守之，为饥，有赦；成勾巳环绕，大赦；一曰入毕中，有兵兵罢；又曰守之，有畋猎事，北主忧，天下道路不通；入毕口，有赦；逆行至昴，为死丧；已去还守，贵臣忧；舍毕口，赵国忧。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯右角，大的战争；侵犯左角，小的战争；进入，那磨边区军队有忧患；占据此宿，是饥荒，有赦免；形成勾巳环绕，大赦；一说进入毕宿中，有战争但战争停止；又说占据毕宿，有游猎的事，北国君主有忧患，天下道路不通行；进入毕宿口，有赦免；逆向运行到昴宿，是死亡丧乱；已经离开又回来占据，贵臣有忧患；住宿在毕宿口，赵国有忧患。
English: When the firefly planet invades the right angle, it is a big war; when it invades the left angle, it is a small war; when it enters, the army of the Nama Border Region is in distress; when it occupies this lodging, it is a famine, there is an amnesty; when it forms a cocoon, it is an amnesty; when it enters the Bi lodging, there is a war, but the war has stopped; when it occupies the Bi lodging, there is a hunting event, the northern monarchs are in distress, and the roads of the world are impassable; when it enters the Bi lodging, there is an amnesty; when it runs in the opposite direction to

古文：填星犯之，兵起西北，不战；守之，兵有降军，有赦，一曰土功徭役烦，兵起；入，则地震水溢；守毕口，大人当之；出、入、留、舍，其野兵起，客军死。
现代文：镇星侵犯，战争发生在西北，但没有打仗；占据毕宿，战争有投降的军队，有赦免，一说水土工程的徭役烦多，战争发生；进入，那么地震，江河水溢出；占据毕宿口，王公大人承担责任；出来、进去、停留、住宿，它的分野地区战争发生，客籍军队死亡。
English: Towns and stars invaded, the war occurred in the northwest, but there was no war; occupied a post, the war had a surrendering army, there was an amnesty, it was said that the construction of water and soil projects was troublesome, the war occurred; entered, then an earthquake, river water overflowed; occupied a post, Wang Gong adults took responsibility; came out, went in, stayed, stayed, its field area war occurred, guest army died.

古文：太白犯右角，战败，将死；入毕口，将相为乱，大赦，国易政令，诸侯起兵，为水，五谷不成；贯毕，仓廪空，四国兵起。
现代文：太白星侵犯右角，战争失败，将军死亡；进入毕宿口，将相作乱，大赦，国家改变政令，诸侯发动战争，是水灾，五谷不成熟；贯穿毕宿，粮仓空，四国战争发生。
English: Too white a star encroaches on the right angle, the war is lost, the general dies; entering the end of the quarter, there will be chaos, amnesty, the state changes the decree, the princes launch a war, it is a flood, the grain is not ripe; running through the end of the quarter, the granary is empty, the war of the four countries occurs.

古文：辰星犯之，边地灾；入毕口，国易政；守之，水溢，民病，物不成，边兵起；守毕口，人为乱。
现代文：辰星侵犯，边区有灾祸；进入毕宿口，国家更换政权；占据毕宿，江河水溢出，人民有疾病，作物不成熟，边区战争发生；占据毕宿口，有人作乱。
English: If a star encroaches, there will be a disaster in the border area; if a country enters a border village, the regime will be changed; if a border village is occupied, rivers will overflow, people will have diseases, crops will be immature, and there will be a border war; if a border village is occupied, there will be a disturbance.

古文：客星犯之，大人忧，无兵兵起，有兵兵罢；入，则多狱事；守之，为饥，边兵起；出，为车马急行。
现代文：客星侵犯毕宿，王公大人有忧患，没有军队而战争发生，有军队而战争停止；进入，就多讼案之事；占据毕宿，是饥荒，边区战争发生；出去，是车马急速出行。
English: If a guest star invades Bye-juku, the prince is troubled; if there is no army, a war breaks out; if there is an army, the war is stopped; if he enters, it is a matter of litigation; if he occupies Bye-juku, it is famine; if there is a border war; if he leaves, it is a matter of speedy travel by horse and carriage.

古文：彗星犯之，北地为乱，人民忧。
现代文：彗星侵犯，北方地区作乱，人民忧患。
English: Comets invade, the northern regions are in turmoil, and the people are in distress.

古文：星孛，其分土功兴，多徭役。
现代文：星变出现，它的分野地区水土工程兴起，多徭役。
English: With the emergence of star change, the field of water and soil engineering has emerged in its area, and it has played many roles.

古文：色苍，为饥，破军；黄，则女为乱；白，为兵、丧；黑，为水。
现代文：星色苍，是饥荒，攻破军队；黄色，那磨妇女作乱；白色，是战争、丧事；黑色，是水灾。
English: Starry sky, is famine, breaking the army; yellow, that mill women riot; white, is war, mourning; black, is floods.

古文：流星犯之，边兵大战；色赤贯之，戎兵大至；入而复出，为赦；入而黄白有光，外人入贡。
现代文：流星侵犯，边区军队大战；星色赤贯穿毕宿，戎族军队大规模到来；进入又出来，是赦免；进入而星色黄白有光，外国人入朝进贡。
English: The meteor invades, the border troops fight a great battle; the red star runs through the night, and the army of the Eunuchs arrives on a large scale; entering and leaving is amnesty; entering while the star is yellow and white with light, foreigners enter the DPRK to pay tribute.

古文：苍白云气入，岁不收；赤，为兵、旱，为火；黄白，天子有喜。
现代文：苍白色云气进入，这年没有收成；赤色，是战争、旱灾，是火灾；黄白色，天子有喜事。
English: When the pale-white clouds roll in, there will be no harvest that year; when the red clouds roll in, there will be war, drought, and fire; when the yellow-white clouds roll in, there will be joy.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，毕十六度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，毕宿十六度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan Bronze Statuette, there are 16 levels of lodging.

古文：旧去极七十八度。
现代文：从前离极七十八度。
English: It used to be 78 degrees.

古文：景祐测验，毕宿十七度，距毕口北星去极七十七度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，毕宿十七度，距星毕宿口北边的星离极七十七度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, Bi Shuk is seventeen degrees, and the star north of the star Bi Shukou is seventy-seven degrees away from the pole.

古文：天节八星，在毕、附耳南，主使臣持节宣威四方。
现代文：天节八颗星，在毕宿、附耳南面，主管使臣持节到四方去宣扬国家的威势。
English: On the eight-pointed star day of the festival, in the south of Bi-juku and Zuye, the responsible envoys will hold the festival and go to the four directions to promote the country's prestige.

古文：明大，则使忠；不明，则奉使无状。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么使臣忠诚；不明亮，那么奉命出使没有功绩。
English: If the star is bright and shines brightly, then the envoy is loyal; if it is not bright, then the envoy has no merit.

古文：荧惑守之，臣有谋逆，或使臣死。
现代文：荧惑星占据此星，臣下有阴谋叛逆的，或是使臣死亡。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy the planet, vassals plot treason, or envoys die.

古文：太白守之，大将出。
现代文：太白星古据此星，大将出征。
English: According to this star, Taibai Xinggu, the general went to war.

古文：客、彗犯之，法令不行。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，政令不能施行。
English: Invaded by a guest star or comet, the decree cannot be enforced.

古文：客星守，持节臣有忧。
现代文：客星占据，持节的使臣有忧患。
English: The guest stars occupy the stage, and the seasoned envoys are worried.

古文：九州殊口九星，在天节南下，晓方俗之官，通重译者也。
现代文：九州岛殊口九颗星，在天节南边的下面，通晓各地习俗的官，是通晓辗转翻译的人。
English: The nine stars at the entrance to the island of Kyushu, below the southern edge of the festival, are officials who are familiar with the customs of various regions.

古文：常以十一月候之。
现代文：通常在十一月观测它。
English: It is usually observed in November.

古文：亡一星，一国忧；二星以上，天下乱，兵起。
现代文：消失一颗星，一国有忧患；两星以上，天下动乱，战争发生。
English: If one star disappears, a country is in trouble; if two stars disappear, the world is in turmoil and war breaks out.

古文：太白、荧惑守之，亦为兵。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星占据此星，也是战争。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet occupy this star, is also a war.

古文：客星入，民忧，水负海，国不安，有兵。
现代文：客星进入，人民忧患，水灾，沿海僻远的国家不安定，有战争。
English: The guest star enters, the people are in distress, there are floods, the distant coastal countries are unstable, and there is war.

古文：附耳一星，在毕下，主听得失，伺愆邪，察不祥也。
现代文：附耳一颗星，在毕宿下面，主管听访得失，侦察罪遇奸邪，观察不吉祥。
English: Attached to the ear is a star, under the bed, the supervisor will listen to the gains and losses, investigate the crimes of rape and evil, and observe the bad luck.

古文：星盛，则中国微，有盗贼，边候警，外国反。
现代文：星旺盛，那磨中原国家衰微，有盗贼，边防哨所报警，外国造反。
English: The stars are bright, the Central Plains countries are waning, there are thieves, border guard posts are on the alert, and foreign countries are rebelling.

古文：动摇，则谗臣在君侧。
现代文：星动摇，那么进谗言的臣子在君侧。
English: If the stars are wavering, then the courtiers who speak harshly are on the emperor's side.

古文：岁星犯之，有兵，将相丧。
现代文：岁星侵犯，是战争，将相丧亡。
English: If the stars and planets encroach, it will be war, and we will all perish.

古文：太白犯之，佞臣在侧。
现代文：太白星侵犯，奸佞之臣在君侧。
English: Taibai Xing encroaches, the traitor's vassal is on your side.

古文：九斿九星，在玉井西南，一曰在九州殊口东，南北列，主天下兵旗，又曰天子之旗也。
现代文：九旃九颗星，在玉井西南面，一说在九州岛殊口东面，南北排列，主管天下的战旗，又说是天子的旗帜。
English: Nine crosses and nine stars, in the southwest of Tamai, one said to be in the east of the mouth of Kyushu Island, arranged from north to south, responsible for the world's battle flag, also said to be the flag of the Son of Heaven.

古文：太白、荧惑犯之，兵骑满野。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星侵犯，步兵骑兵满野。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet encroachment, infantry cavalry all over the field.

古文：客星犯，诸侯兵起，禽兽多疾。
现代文：客星侵犯，诸侯军队发动战争，禽兽多病。
English: Invaded by foreign invaders, war is waged by the armies of princes, and animals are often sick.

古文：天街二星，在昴、毕间，一曰在毕宿北，为阴阳之所分。
现代文：天街二颗星，在昴宿、毕宿中间，一说在毕宿北面，是阴阳的分界线。
English: The two stars of Tian Jie, in the middle of Xizhu and Bi Zhu, and one in the north of Bi Zhu, are the dividing line between yin and yang.

古文：《大象占》：近月星西，街南为华夏，街北为外邦。
现代文：《大象占》：靠近月星的西面，天街南面是华夏，天街北面是外国。
English: "Zhao Zhan": close to the west side of the moon star, the south side of the sky street is China, and the north side of the sky street is a foreign country.

古文：又曰三光之道，主伺候关梁中外之境。
现代文：又说是日月星三光的通道，主管侦察关隘桥梁及国内外的边境。
English: It is also said to be the passage of the sun, moon and stars, and is responsible for reconnaissance of bridges and borders at home and abroad.

古文：明，则王道正。
现代文：星明亮，那么王道公正。
English: The star is bright, so the royal road is fair.

古文：月犯天街中，为中平，天下安宁；街外，为漏泄，谗夫当事，民不得志；不由天街，主政令不行。
现代文：月亮侵犯天街中间，是中正和平，天下安宁；侵犯天街外面，是泄露，进谗之人当权，人民不得志；不经过天街，预兆政令不得施行。
English: If the moon encroaches on the middle of Tian Jie, it means that China is at peace and the world is at peace; if it encroaches on the outside of Tian Jie, it is a leak, and the person who enters Tian Jie is in power, and the people are discouraged; if it does not pass through Tian Jie, the omen decree cannot be implemented.

古文：月晕其宿，关梁不通。
现代文：月晕在这个星宿，关隘桥梁不通行。
English: The moon is eclipsed in this constellation, and bridges are impassable.

古文：荧惑守之，道路绝；久守，国绝礼。
现代文：荧惑星占据此星，道路断绝；长久占据，国家绝弃礼法。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy this star, the road is cut off; occupy for a long time, the country abandons etiquette.

古文：岁星居之，色赤，为殃，或大旱。
现代文：岁星住在此星，星色赤，是祸殃，或是大旱。
English: The year star lives on this planet, starry red, is a scourge, or drought.

古文：太白守之，兵塞道路，六夷旄头灭，一曰民饥。
现代文：太白星占据此星，战争阻塞道路，六夷的旄头被消灭，一说人民饥饿。
English: Too white stars occupy this planet, war blocks the road, the Shantou of the Six Emperors is eliminated, and people say they are starving.

古文：天高四星，在坐旗西，《乾象新书》：在毕口东北。
现代文：天高四颗星，在坐旗西面，《干象新书》：在毕宿口的东北。
English: Four stars high in the sky, in the west of Ziqi, "dry elephant new book": in the northeast of Bi Shukou.

古文：台榭之高，主望八方云雾氛气，今仰观台也。
现代文：台榭高耸，主管观望八方的云雾气氛，是现在的仰观台。
English: The towering platform, which presides over the misty atmosphere of the eight directions, is now a viewing platform.

古文：不见，为主失礼；守常，则吉；微暗，阴阳不和。
现代文：不出现，是官吏失去礼法；占撩正常，就吉利；微小暗淡，阴阳不调和。
English: If it does not appear, it is because the officials have lost the etiquette; if it is normal, it is lucky; if it is small and dim, it is because the yin and yang are not reconciled.

古文：月、五星犯之，则水旱不时；乘之，外臣诛。
现代文：月亮、五星侵犯，那么水旱不按季节；登临在此星之上，外臣被杀。
English: If the moon and the five stars encroach, then droughts and floods are not seasonal; if they land on this star, the foreign minister will be killed.

古文：月晕，不出六月有丧。
现代文：月晕，不出六个月有丧事。
English: The moon is waning, and there will be a funeral within six months.

古文：荧惑入十日，为小赦；留三十日，大赦。
现代文：荧惑星进入十天，是小的赦免；停留三十天，大赦。
English: Fluorescent planet enters ten days, is a small pardon; stay thirty days, amnesty.

古文：客、彗守之，大旱。
现代文：客星、彗星占据此星，大旱。
English: A guest star, a comet, occupies this star, and a great drought ensues.

古文：苍白云气犯，亦然。
现代文：苍白色云气侵犯，也是这样。
English: It is the same with the pale clouds encroaching.

古文：诸王六星，在五车南，主察诸侯存亡。
现代文：诸王六颗星，在五车南面，主管观察诸侯的存亡。
English: The kings of the six stars, in the south of the five chariots, supervise the survival of the princes.

古文：明，则下附上；不明，则下叛；不见，宗庙危，四方兵起。
现代文：星明亮，那么臣下依附君上；不明亮，那么臣下背叛；不出现，宗庙危险，四方战争发生。
English: If the star is bright, then the vassals will cling to the prince; if it is not bright, then the vassals will betray; if it does not appear, the ancestral temple will be in danger, and a four-sided war will occur.

古文：荧惑入之，诸王妃恣，为下所谋；守之，下不信上。
现代文：荧惑星进入此星，王妃们放肆，被臣下算计；占据此星，臣下不信服君上。
English: Fluorescent planets enter this planet, empresses are presumptuous and are outwitted by vassals; occupy this planet, and vassals do not trust the sovereign.

古文：太白、荧惑犯，诸王当之，一曰宗臣忧。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星侵犯，诸王承担责任，一说宗室大臣有忧患。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet encroach, all kings take responsibility, one says the family minister is worried.

古文：客、彗守，诸侯黜。
现代文：客星、彗星占据，诸侯被罢黜。
English: Guest stars and comets take over, princes are deposed.

古文：五车五星、三柱九星，在毕宿北，五帝坐也，又五帝之车舍也。
现代文：五车五颗星、三柱九颗星，在毕宿北面，是五帝的座位，又是五帝的车库。
English: Five cars, five stars, three pillars, nine stars, in the north of Bi-Shuku, is the seat of the Five Emperors, and the garage of the Five Emperors.

古文：主天子五兵，又主五谷丰耗。
现代文：主管天子的五兵，又主管五谷的丰盈和消耗。
English: In charge of the five soldiers of the son of heaven, and in charge of the abundance and consumption of grain.

古文：一车主蕡麻，一车主麦，一车主豆，一车主黍，一车主稻米。
现代文：一车主管黄麻，一车主管麦，一车主管豆，一车主管黍，一车主管稻米。
English: One wagonload of jute, one wagonload of wheat, one wagonload of beans, one wagonload of sorghum, one wagonload of rice.

古文：西北大星曰天库，主太白，秦分及雍州，主豆。
现代文：西北边的大星叫天库，主管太白星，秦国分野及雍州，主管豆。
English: The big star in the northwest is called Tianku, which is in charge of Taibai Star, Qin Guo Field and Yongzhou, which is in charge of beans.

古文：东北一星曰天狱，主辰星，燕、赵分及幽、冀，主稻。
现代文：东北边一颗星叫天狱，主管辰星，燕、趟国分野及幽州、冀州，主管稻。
English: In the northeast, there is a star called Heaven and Hell, which is in charge of Chenxing, Yan, Wugu, Yuzhou and Jizhou, and is in charge of rice.

古文：东南一星曰天仓，主岁星，鲁分徐州，卫分并州，主麻。
现代文：东南边一颗星叫天仓，主管岁星，鲁国分野徐州，卫国分野并州，主管麻。
English: On the southeastern side, there is a star called Tiancang, which is in charge of the year star, the Lu country field Xuzhou, the national defense field and the state, and is in charge of Ma.

古文：次东南一星曰司空，主填星，楚分荆州，主黍粟。
现代文：接着东南一颗星叫司空，主管镇星，楚国分野剂州，主管黍粟。
English: Next, a star in the southeast called Siku, in charge of Zhenxing, Chu country field agent state, in charge of opium poppy.

古文：次西南一星曰卿，主荧惑，魏分益州，主麦。
现代文：接着西南一颗星叫卿，主管荧惑星，魏国分野益州，主管麦。
English: Next, a star in the southwest called Sir, in charge of the fluorescent planet, Wei Province, Yizhou, in charge of wheat.

古文：《天文录》曰： 太白，其神令尉，辰星，其神风伯；岁星，其神雨师；荧惑，其神丰隆；填星，其神雷公。
现代文：《天文录》说： 太白，它的神是令尉；辰星，它的神是风伯；岁星，它的神是雨师；荧惑星，它的神是丰隆；镇星，它的神是雷公。
English: "The Astronomical Record" said: Taibai, its god is Lingfeng; Chuxing, its god is Fengbo; Lv Xing, its god is Yushi; Fuxing, its god is Honglong; Zhenxing, its god is Lei Gong.

古文：此五车有变，各以所主占之。 
现代文：这五车有变化，分别用它们所主管的星来占验。 
English: These five chariots have variations, and they are divined separately by the stars over which they preside.

古文：三柱，一曰天渊，一曰天休，一曰天旂，欲其均明阔狭有常，星繁，则兵大起。
现代文：三柱，一叫天渊，一叫天休，一叫天旃，要它们均匀明亮，宽窄有常规；星数繁多，那么战争大规模发生。
English: Three pillars, one is called Tianyuan, one is called Tianyu, and one is called Tianyu, they should be evenly bright, and the width and narrowness should be regular; if there are many stars, then the war will occur on a large scale.

古文：石申曰： 天库星中河而见，天下多死人，河津绝。 
现代文：石申说： 天库星在银河中出现，天下多死人，河水渡口阻绝。 
English: Shi Shen said: The Celestial Treasury appears in the Milky Way, there are many dead people in the world, and river crossings are blocked.

古文：又曰： 天子得灵台之礼，则五车、三柱均明有常。 
现代文：又说： 天子得到灵台的礼仪，那么五车、三柱都明亮有常规。 
English: He also said, "When the heavenly son receives the etiquette of the hearse, then the five chariots and three pillars are bright and have a routine.

古文：天旂星不见，则大风折木；天休动，则四国叛。
现代文：天旃星隐匿不见，那么大风吹折树木；天休星移动，那么四方国家叛乱。
English: If the constellations disappear, then the wind will blow down trees; if the heavenly bodies move, then the four countries will rebel.

古文：一柱出，或不见，兵半出；三柱尽出，及不见，兵亦尽出。
现代文：一柱星出现，或不出现，军队出动一半；三柱星全部出现，以及不出现，军队也全部出动。
English: If a single star appears or does not appear, half of the army is sent out; if all three stars appear or do not appear, the entire army is sent out.

古文：柱外出一月，谷贵三倍；出二月、三月，以次倍贵；外出不尽两间，主大水。
现代文：柱星出现在外面一个月，谷物贵三倍；出现两个月、三个月，依次加倍地贵；出现在外面不满两问，预兆发大水。
English: If a star appears outside for a month, the price of grain will triple; if it appears for two months or three months, the price will double; if it appears for less than two months, it portends a flood.

古文：月犯天库，兵起，道不通；犯天渊，贵人死，臣逾主。
现代文：月亮侵犯天库，战争发生，道路不通行；侵犯天渊，贵人死亡，臣下逾越主上。
English: The moon encroaches on the vault of heaven, war breaks out, roads become impassable; it encroaches on the abyss of heaven, nobles die, and vassals trespass on the lord.

古文：月晕，女主恶之；在正月，为赦；晕一车，赦小罪；五车俱晕，赦殊罪；四、七、十月晕之，为水；晕十一、十二月，谷贵。
现代文：月晕，女主厌恶这种情况；在正月，是赦免；月晕在一颗车星，赦免小的罪行；五颗车星都出现月晕，赦免极大的罪行；四月、七月、十月在五车出现月晕，是水灾；月晕在十一月、十二月，谷物价贵。
English: If the moon is eclipsed, the mistress abhors the situation; if the moon is eclipsed in the first month, the mistress is pardoned; if the moon is eclipsed in one chariot, the mistress is pardoned for minor offenses; if the moon is eclipsed in all five chariots, the mistress is pardoned for major offenses; if the moon is eclipsed in five chariots in April, July, and October, the mistress is a flood; if the moon is eclipsed in November and December, the price of grain is high.

古文：五星犯，为旱，丧；犯库星，为兵起。
现代文：五星侵犯，是旱灾，丧事；侵犯库星，是战争发生。
English: To invade the Five Stars is to suffer drought and death; to invade the Ku Stars is to go to war.

古文：岁星入之，籴贵。
现代文：岁星进入此星，买米价贵。
English: When the year star enters this star, it is expensive to buy rice.

古文：荧惑入之，为火，或与岁星占同。
现代文：荧惑星进入此星，是火灾，或者与岁星占验相同。
English: Fluorescent planet enters this star, is fire, or is the same as horoscope.

古文：填星入天库，为兵，为丧；舍中央，为大旱，燕、代之地当之；舍东北，畜蕃，帛贱；舍西北，天下安。
现代文：镇星进入天库，是战争，是丧事；住宿在中央，是大旱，燕、代地区承担责任；住宿在东北，牲畜蕃盛，帛值低贱；住宿在西北，天下安定。
English: If a town star enters the heavenly storehouse, it is a war, it is a funeral; if it stays in the center, it is a drought, and the Yan and Dai regions bear the responsibility; if it stays in the northeast, the livestock is prosperous and the net value is low; if it stays in the northwest, the world is stable.

古文：太白入之，兵大起；守五车，中国兵所向慴伏；舍西北，为疾疫，牛马死，应酒泉分。
现代文：太白星进入此星，战争大规模发生；占据五车，中原国家军队所向威慑屈服；住宿在西北，是疾病瘟疫，牛马死亡，应验在酒泉分野地区。
English: Too white star entered this planet, war occurred on a large scale; occupied five cars, the Central Plains national army yielded to deterrence; accommodation in the northwest, is a disease plague, cattle and horses died, fulfilled in the Jiuquan field area.

古文：辰星入舍为水；犯之，兵以水潦起。
现代文：辰星进入并住宿是水灾；凌犯它，战争因水滂而发生。
English: It is a flood for the star to enter and lodge; it is a deluge for it to invade, and it is a flood for war to break out.

古文：客星犯，则人劳；庚寅日候近之，为金车，主兵；甲寅日候近之，为木车，主槥增价；戊寅日候近之，为土车，主土功；丙寅日候近之，为火车，主旱；壬寅日候近之，为水车，主水溢；入之，色青为忧，赤为兵；守天渊，有大水；守天休，左为兵，右为丧；黄为吉。
现代文：客星侵犯，那么人民劳累；庚寅日观察靠近它，是金车，预兆战争；甲寅日观察靠近它，是木车，预兆棺材涨价；戊寅日观察靠近它，是土车，预兆水土工程；丙寅日观察靠近它，是火车，预兆旱灾；壬寅日观察靠近它，是水车，预兆江河水溢出；进入此星，星色青是忧患，赤色是战争；占据天渊，有大水；占据天休，左边是战争，右边是丧事；黄色是吉利。
English: If the guest star encroaches, then the people are overworked; if the Geng Yin day is observed close to it, it is a golden chariot, a harbinger of war; if the K Yin day is observed close to it, it is a wooden chariot, a harbinger of rising coffin prices; if the Wu Yin day is observed close to it, it is a soil chariot, a harbinger of water and soil engineering; if the H Yin day is observed close to it, it is a train, a harbinger of drought; if the Ren Yin day is observed close to it, it is a water chariot, a harbinger of

古文：彗、孛犯之，兵起，民流。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，战争发生，人民流亡。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, war breaks out, and people are driven into exile.

古文：流星入，甲子日，主粟；丙午日，主麦；戊寅日，主豆；庚申日，主蕡，壬戌日，主黍：各以其日占之，而粟麦等价增。
现代文：流星进入，甲子日，预兆粟；丙午日，预兆麦；戊寅日，预兆豆；庚申日，预兆黄；壬戌日，预兆黍。分别用它们的日子来占验，而粟麦等涨价。
English: The meteor enters, the day of the goat, the omen of the poppy; the day of the rooster, the omen of the wheat; the day of the goat, the omen of the bean; the day of the rooster, the omen of the yellow; the day of the rooster, the omen of the ploughshare. Use their days separately to predict, and the price of the poppy and so on.

古文：白云气入，民不安；赤，为兵起。
现代文：白色云气进入，人民不安定；赤色，是战争发生。
English: When white clouds enter, the people are unsettled; when red clouds enter, war breaks out.

古文：天潢五星，在五车中。
现代文：天潢五颗星，在五车中间。
English: Five stars in the heavens, in the middle of the five chariots.

古文：主河梁津渡。
现代文：主管河水桥梁和渡口摆渡。
English: Responsible for river bridges and ferry crossings.

古文：星不见，则津渡不通。
现代文：星不出现，那么渡口桥梁不通行。
English: If the star does not appear, then the ferry bridge will not be passable.

古文：月入天潢，兵起。
现代文：月亮进入天潢，战争发生。
English: The moon was eclipsed and war broke out.

古文：五星失度，留守之，皆为兵。
现代文：五星失去常度，停留占据此星，都是战争。
English: Five stars lose their constancy, stay occupy this star, are wars.

古文：荧惑、填星入之，为大旱，为火。
现代文：荧惑星、镇星进入此星，是大旱，是火灾。
English: Fluorescent planet, town star enters this star, it is drought, it is fire.

古文：荧惑舍之，牛马疫，为兵。
现代文：荧惑星住宿在此星，牛马有瘟疫，是战争。
English: Fluorescent planets stay on this planet, cattle and horses have plague, there is war.

古文：辰星出天潢，有赦。
现代文：辰星从天潢出来，有赦免。
English: Stars come out of the heavens and are pardoned.

古文：客星入，为兵；留守，则有水害。
现代文：客星进入，是战争；停留占据，就有水害。
English: When a guest star enters, there is war; when it stays, there is water damage.

古文：苍白或黑云气入，为丧；赤，为兵；黄白，则天子有喜。
现代文：苍白色或黑色云气进入，是丧事；赤色，是战争；黄白色，那么天子有喜事。
English: If pale white or black clouds enter, it is a funeral; if red, it is a war; if yellow and white, it is a joyful event.

古文：咸池三星，在天潢南，主陂泽池沼鱼鳖凫雁。
现代文：咸池三颗星，在天潢南面，主管山泽池沼鱼鳖昆雁。
English: Xianchi three stars, in the south of Tianyu, in charge of Shanze Pond swamp fish bait Kunyan.

古文：明大，则龙见，虎狼为害；星不具，河道不通。
现代文：垦明亮光大，那么龙出现，虎狼为患；星数不全备，河道不通行。
English: If the cocoon is bright and large, then dragons will appear, tigers and wolves will be plagued; if the number of stars is not complete, the river will not be passable.

古文：月入，为暴兵。
现代文：月亮进入，是爆发战争。
English: The moon enters, and war breaks out.

古文：五星入，为兵，为旱，失忠臣，君易政；守之，为饥，为兵。
现代文：五星进入，是战争，是旱灾，失去忠臣，君主更换政权；占据此星，是饥荒，是战争。
English: Five stars enter, it's war, it's drought, it's loss of loyal subjects, the monarch changes regime; occupy this star, it's famine, it's war.

古文：客星入，天下大水。
现代文：客星进入，天下发大水。
English: A guest star enters, and the whole world is flooded.

古文：流星入，为丧；出，则兵起。
现代文：流星进入，是丧事；出去，那么战争发生。
English: If a meteor enters, it's a tragedy; if it leaves, it's war.

古文：云气入，色苍白，鱼多死；赤，为旱；白，为神鱼见；黑，为大水。
现代文：云气进入，星色苍白，鱼多死亡；赤色，是旱灾；白色，是神鱼出现；黑色，是大水。
English: Cloud enters, starry pale, fish mostly die; red, is drought; white, is the appearance of divine fish; black, is big water.

古文：参旗九星，一曰天旗，一曰天弓，司弓弩，候变御难。
现代文：参旗九颗星，又叫天旗，又叫天弓，主管弓弩，侦察变故抵御国难。
English: There are nine stars on the flag, also known as the flag of heaven, also known as the celestial bow, the chief bow and arrow, the reconnaissance of changes, and the resistance to national difficulties.

古文：星如弓张，则兵起；明，则边寇动；暗，为吉。
现代文：星列像弓一样张开，那么战争发生；明亮，那么边区侵略发动；暗淡，是吉利。
English: If the constellations are open like a bow, then war will occur; if they are bright, then an invasion of a border region will be launched; if they are dim, then it is auspicious.

古文：又曰天弓不具，天下有兵。
现代文：又说天弓星不全备，天下有战事。
English: He also said that the celestial bows and stars were not complete, and that there would be war in the world.

古文：五星犯之，兵起。
现代文：五星侵犯，战争发生。
English: Five-Star encroaches, war breaks out.

古文：荧惑守之，下谋上，诸侯起兵；一曰有边兵。
现代文：荧惑星占据此星，臣下谋逆主上，诸侯发动战争；一说有边区战争。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy this planet, vassals plot against their masters, and lords wage war; there is even talk of a border war.

古文：太白守之，兵乱。
现代文：太白星占据此星，军队动乱。
English: Too white stars occupy this planet, the army is in turmoil.

古文：客星守，天下忧。
现代文：客星占据，天下有忧患。
English: The guest stars occupy, the world is in trouble.

古文：流星入，北地兵起。
现代文：流星进入，北方地区战争发生。
English: A meteor enters, and war breaks out in the northern region.

古文：云气犯之，色青，入自西北，兵来，期三年。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色青，从西北进入，军队招来，为期三年。
English: The clouds encroach, the stars turn blue, the north-west invades, and the army is called in for a period of three years.

古文：天关一星，在五车南，亦曰天门，日月之所行，主边方，主关闭。
现代文：天关一颗星，在五车南面，也叫天门，日月运行的地方，主管边疆地方，主管关闭。
English: Tianguan is a star, in the south of the five chariots, also called Tianmen, the place where the sun and the moon run, in charge of border areas, in charge of closing.

古文：星芒角，为兵；不与五车合，大将出。
现代文：星有光芒，是战争；不与五车聚合，大将出征。
English: If the star shines, it is war; if it does not converge with the five chariots, the general will go to war.

古文：月岁三晕，有赦；犯之，有乱臣更法。
现代文：月亮每年三晕，有赦免；侵犯，有乱臣更改法令。
English: The moon appears three times a year, there are pardons; violations, there are chaotic ministers changing decrees.

古文：五星守之，贵人多死。
现代文：五星占据此星，贵人多死亡。
English: If the Five-Star Movement enters and stays, many dignitaries will die.

古文：岁星、荧惑守之，臣谋主，为水，为饥。
现代文：岁星、荧惑星占据此星，臣下谋逆主上，是水灾，是饥荒。
English: The year star and the fluorescent planet occupy this planet, and the vassals plot against the lord, causing floods and famine.

古文：太白、荧惑守之，大赦，关梁有兵。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星占据此星，大赦，关隘桥梁有战争。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet occupy this star, amnesty, close bridges, there is war.

古文：太白入，则大乱。
现代文：太白星进入，就大乱。
English: Too white star enters, it is a big mess.

古文：填星守，王者壅蔽；犯之，臣谋主。
现代文：镇星占据，王者受蒙蔽；侵犯，臣下谋逆主上。
English: If the town star is occupied, the king is deceived; if it is invaded, the vassal plots against the lord.

古文：太白失行，兵起。
现代文：太白星运行失轨，战争发生。
English: The Taibai Star went off the rails and war broke out.

古文：客星犯之，民多疾，关市不通；又曰诸侯不通，民相攻。
现代文：客星侵犯，人民多病，城关集市不通行；又说诸侯不通好，人民互相攻击。
English: The guest star encroaches, the people are sickly, the city gate market does not pass; it is also said that the princes do not pass well, and the people attack each other.

古文：客星入，多盗。
现代文：客星进入，多盗贼。
English: A guest star enters, and more thieves appear.

古文：流星犯之，天下有急，关梁不通，民忧，多盗。
现代文：流星侵犯，天下有紧急情况，城关桥梁不通行，人民忧患，多盗贼。
English: Meteor invades, there is an emergency in the world, city gates and bridges are impassable, people are worried, and there are many thieves.

古文：黄云气犯，四方入贡。
现代文：黄色云气侵犯，四方入朝进贡。
English: Yellow clouds invade, and tributes pour in from all directions.

古文：天园十三星，在天苑南，植菜果之处。
现代文：天园十三颗星，在天苑南面，种植蔬菜水果的地方。
English: There are thirteen stars in the heaven garden. In the south of the heaven garden, there is a place where vegetables and fruits are grown.

古文：曲而钩，菜果熟。
现代文：星群曲折而成钩状，蔬菜水果成熟。
English: The star cluster twists and turns into a hook shape, vegetables and fruits ripen.

古文：白云气犯之，兵起。
现代文：白色云气侵犯，战争发生。
English: White clouds encroach and war breaks out.

古文：按《步天歌》，以上诸星皆属毕宿。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以上各星都属于毕宿。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," the above stars all belong to the end of the world.

古文：武密书以天节属昴，参旗、天关、五车、三柱皆属觜，与《步天歌》不同。
现代文：迭密的书认为天节属于昴宿，参旗、天关、五车、三柱都属于觜宿，与《步天歌》不同。
English: It is different from the "Walking Song of Heaven" in that the book of Iitomi believes that Tianjie belongs to Bozhuang, and that Sanqi, Tenguan, Wujie, and Sanjiao all belong to Bozhuang.

古文：《乾象新书》以天节、参旗皆属毕；天园西八星属昴，东五星亦属毕；五车北西南三大星属毕，东二星及三柱属参。
现代文：《干象新书》认为天节、参旗都属于毕宿；天园西边人颗星属于昴宿，柬边五颗星也属于毕宿；五车北边、西边、南边三颗大星属于毕宿，束边二颗星及三柱属于参宿。
English: "Dry Elephant New Book" believes that Tianjie and Sanqi both belong to Bijuku; the human star on the west side of Tianyuan belongs to Xingjuku, and the five stars on the Cambodian side also belong to Bijuku; the three big stars on the north, west and south sides of the five chariots belong to Bijuku, and the two stars and three pillars on the side of the bunch belong to Bijuku.

古文：说皆不同，今皆存之。
现代文：说法都不同，现在都保存这些说法。
English: The stories are all different, and they're all preserved now.

古文：觜觿三星，为三军之候，行军之藏府，葆旅收，敛万物。
现代文：觜鯆三颗星，是三军的侦察岗哨，行军的库藏所在，野生作物收成，聚集万物。
English: The three stars are the reconnaissance posts of the three armies, the treasury of the marching army, the harvest of wild crops, and the gathering of all things.

古文：明，则军粮足，将得势；动，则盗贼行，葆旅起；暗，则不可用兵。
现代文：星明亮，那么军粮充足，将军得势；星动摇，那么盗贼活动，野生作物生长；暗淡，就不能用兵。
English: If the star is bright, then the military food is sufficient and the general gains power; if the star is wavering, then thieves are active and wild crops grow; if it is dim, then soldiers cannot be used.

古文：日食，臣犯主，戒在将臣。
现代文：日食，臣下冒犯主上，警戒在将军大臣方面。
English: The sun is eclipsed, the vassal offends his master, the general and the minister are on the alert.

古文：晕及三重，其下谷不登，民疫；五重，大赦，期六十日。
现代文：日晕达到三重，它的下面谷物不丰收，人民有瘟疫；五重，大赦，为期六十天。
English: The sun is eclipsed three times, under which crops fail and the people are plagued by plague; five times, amnesty, lasting sixty days.

古文：月食，为旱，大将忧，有叛主者。
现代文：月食，是旱灾，大将有忧患，有背叛君主的。
English: The lunar eclipse is a drought, there will be great sorrow, and there will be treason against the monarch.

古文：正月月晕，有赦，外军不胜，大将忧，偏裨有死者。
现代文：正月月晕，有赦免，外族军队不能战胜，大将有忧患，偏将裨将有死亡的。
English: In the first month, there will be a lunar eclipse, there will be an amnesty, the foreign troops will not be able to win, there will be great sorrow, and there will be death.

古文：岁星犯之，其分兵起；守，则农夫失业，后有忧，丁壮多暴死，下有叛者，民多疾疫；入，则多盗，天时不和；国君诛伐不当，则逆行。
现代文：岁星侵犯，它的分野地区战争发生；占据，那么农夫失去产业，皇后有忧患，壮丁多暴死，下面有叛乱的人，人民多疾病瘟疫；进入，就多盗贼，天时不协调；国君诛伐不当，就逆向运行。
English: If the year star encroaches, war will occur in its field area; if it occupies, then the farmer will lose his industry, the queen will have sorrow, the young men will die violently, there will be rebels below, and the people will have more diseases and plagues; if it enters, there will be more thieves, and the weather will not be coordinated; if the sovereign is not properly cut, it will run in the opposite direction.

古文：荧惑犯之，其分有叛者，为旱，为火，为兵起，为籴贵；与觜觿合，赵分相忧；入，则其下有兵。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，它的分野地区有叛变的人，是旱灾，是火灾，是战争发生，是买米价贵；与觜鳙会合，趟国分野地区丞相有忧患；进入，那磨它下面有战争。
English: When the fluorescent planet invades, there are mutineers in its field area, droughts, fires, wars occur, and rice is expensive to buy; when it meets the earthworm, there are troubles for the prime minister in the field area of the country; when it enters, there is war below it.

古文：填星入犯，为兵，为土功，其分失地；女主恣，则填星逆行而色黄。
现代文：镇星进入侵犯，是战争，是水土工程，它的分野地区丧失土地；女主放肆，那么镇星逆向运行而星色黄。
English: If the town star enters the encroachment, it is war, it is soil and water engineering, its field area loses land; the hostess is impudent, then the town star runs in the opposite direction and the star is yellow.

古文：太白犯之，兵起；守之，其分易令，大臣叛，物不成，民疫。
现代文：太白星侵犯，战争发生；占据觜宿，它的分野地区更改法令，大臣叛乱，作物不成熟，人民有瘟疫。
English: Taibai invaded, war broke out; occupied Xuzhou, its provinces and regions changed laws, ministers rebelled, crops were immature, and the people had the plague.

古文：辰星犯之，不可举兵；一曰赵地水，有叛者；守之，赵分饥。
现代文：辰星侵犯，不能发动战争；一说趟国地区水灾，有叛乱的人；占据觜宿，趟国分野地区饥荒。
English: If a country is invaded by another country, it cannot start a war; if a country is flooded, there will be a rebellion; if a country is occupied, there will be famine.

古文：客星出入其宿，青为忧，赤为兵，黑为水，白为丧，黄白为吉。
现代文：客星在觜鯆出来进去，青色是忧患，赤色是战争，黑色是水灾，白色是丧事，黄白色是吉利。
English: The guest star comes out of the cocoon and goes in, the blue color is sorrow, the red color is war, the black color is flood, the white color is mourning, and the yellow-white color is good luck.

古文：彗星犯之，兵起；出入其分，失地，民流。
现代文：彗星侵犯，战争发生；在它的分野地区出来进去，丧失土地，人民流亡。
English: Comet invades, war breaks out; in its field regions come and go, lands are lost, people are exiled.

古文：星孛之，为兵乱，军破，其色与客星同占。
现代文：星变出现，是军中动乱，军队被攻破，它的星色与客星的占验相同。
English: The appearance of a star change is a disturbance in the army, the army is broken, and its star color is the same as the horoscope of the guest star.

古文：流星入犯之，有叛者，有破军。
现代文：流星进入侵犯，有叛乱的人，有攻破的军队。
English: The meteor enters the encroachment, there are rebels, there are invading armies.

古文：云气犯之，赤，为兵；苍白，为兵、忧；黑，赵地大人有忧；色黄，有神宝入。
现代文：云气侵犯，赤色，是战争；苍白色，是战争、忧患；黑色，趟国地区王公大人有忧患；星色黄，有神仙宝物进入。
English: The clouds invade, red is war; pale white is war, sorrow; black, the princes of the country have sorrow; star yellow, there are immortal treasures entering.

古文：按汉永元铜仪、唐开元游仪，皆以觜觿为三度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪、唐朝开元游仪，都认为觜鯆是三度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument and the Tang Dynasty Kaiyuan tour instrument, it is believed that it is three times.

古文：旧去极八十四度。
现代文：从前离极八十四度。
English: It used to be 84 degrees.

古文：景祐测验，觜宿三星一度，距西南星去极八十四度，在赤道内七度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，觜宿三星一度，距星西南星离极八十四度，在赤道内七度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the Pleiades star is once, the southwest star is eighty-four degrees away from the pole, and it is seven degrees within the equator.

古文：坐旗九星，在司怪西北，君臣设位之表也。
现代文：坐旗九颗星，在司怪西北面，是君臣设立地位的标志。
English: The nine stars on the flag, on the northwest side of the Shihai, are a sign of the status established by the monarchs and ministers.

古文：星明，则国有礼。
现代文：星明亮，那么国家有褴法。
English: If the star is bright, the country will have good luck.

古文：司怪四星，在井钺星前，主候天地、日月、星辰变异，鸟兽、草木之妖，明主闻灾，修德保福。
现代文：司怪四颗星，在井铁星前面，主管观测天地、日月、星辰的变化异常，鸟兽、草木的妖怪，圣明的君主听到灾异，修养德行保佑福气。
English: In front of the four-pointed star, in charge of observing the abnormal changes of heaven and earth, the sun, the moon, and the stars, the monsters of birds, beasts, and plants, the monarch of the holy light hears the calamity, and cultivates virtue and blesses good fortune.

古文：星不成行列，宫中及天下多怪。
现代文：星不成为行列，宫中及天下多妖怪。
English: Stars do not form a line, and there are many monsters in the palace and in the world.

古文：按《步天歌》，坐旗、司怪俱属觜宿，武密书及《乾象新书》皆属于参。
现代文：按《步天歌》，坐旗、司怪都属于觜宿，武密的书和《干象新书》都属于参宿。
English: According to "Walking in Heavenly Songs," "Sitting Banner" and "Strange Beast" all belong to the "Bamboo House," and "The Book of Wu Mi" and "The New Book of Dry Elephants" both belong to the "Bamboo House."

古文：参宿十星，一曰参伐，一曰天市，一曰大辰，一曰鈇钺，主斩刈万物，以助阴气；又为天狱，主杀，秉威行罚也；又主权衡，所以平理也；又主边城，为九译，故不欲其动。
现代文：参宿十颗星，一叫参伐，一叫天市，一叫大辰，一叫鈇铁，主管斩割万物，用来助长阴气；又是天的牢狱，主管斩杀，是秉持威权执行刑罚的；又主管权衡，是用来公平处理的；又主管边区城塞，是辗转翻译的僻远地区，所以不要它变动。
English: There are ten stars at the residence of the emperor, one is called the "camping," one is called the "heavenly city," one is called the "great clock," and one is called the "iron chisel." It is in charge of cutting all things, which is used to promote the gloomy atmosphere; it is also the "heavenly prison," in charge of killing, which is used to enforce the punishment with authority; it is also in charge of weighing, which is used to deal with it fairly; it is also in charge of the "border city," which is a remote area for translation, so don't change it.

古文：参为白虎之体，其中三星横列者，三将也；东北曰左肩，主左将；西北曰右肩，主右将；东南曰左足，主后将军；西南曰右足，主偏将军。
现代文：参宿是白虎的身体，它中央三颗星横向排列的，是三个将军；东北的叫左肩，主管左将；西北的叫右肩，主管右将；东南的叫左足，主管后将军；西南的叫右足，主管偏将军。
English: Betelgeuse is the body of the white tiger. The three stars in the middle of it, arranged horizontally, are the three generals. The northeastern one is called the left shoulder, and is in charge of the left general; the northwestern one is called the right shoulder, and is in charge of the right general; the southeastern one is called the left foot, and is in charge of the hind general; and the southwestern one is called the right foot, and is in charge of the partial general.

古文：参应七将，中央三小星曰伐，天之都尉，主鲜卑外国，不欲其明。
现代文：参宿应验七颗星，中央三颗小星叫伐，是天的都尉，主管鲜卑外国，不要它明亮。
English: There are seven stars in the residence hall, and three small stars in the center. It is the captain of the sky, in charge of the lowly foreign country, do not want it to be bright.

古文：七将皆明大，天下兵精；王道缺，则芒角张；伐星明与参等，大臣有谋，兵起；失色，军散败；芒角动，边有急，兵起，有斩伐之事；星移，客伐主；肩细微，天下兵弱；左足入玉井中，兵起，秦有大水，有丧，山石为怪；星差戾，王臣贰；左股星亡，东南不可举兵；右股，则主西北。
现代文：七颗将星都明亮光大，天下军队精锐；王道残缺，那磨星的光芒四射；伐星明亮程度与参宿等同，大臣有阴谋，战争发生；星失色，军队散乱败北；星发射光芒，动摇，边区有紧急情况，战争发生，有杀伐之事；星移动，客人讨伐主人；肩星细微，天下军队疲弱；左足星进入玉井中，战争发生，秦地有大水，有丧事，山石作怪；星位错乱，王臣有二心；左股星消失，东南不能发动战争；右股星消失，就主管西北。
English: The seven guiding stars are all bright and brilliant, the world's army is elite; the royal road is incomplete, the shining of the grinding star is extensive; the brightness of the cutting star is the same as that of the lodging, the minister has a conspiracy, the war occurs; the star fades, the army is scattered and defeated; the star emits light, shakes, there is an emergency in the border area, the war occurs, there is a slaughter; the star moves, the guests fight the master; the shoulder star is fine, the world's army is weak; the left foot star enters the jade well, the war occurs, the Qin land has heavy water, there is a funeral,

古文：又曰参足移北为进，将出有功；徙南为退，将军失势。
现代文：又说参宿的足星向北移动是前进，将军出征有功；向南迁徙是后退，将军失去权势。
English: It is also said that the northward movement of the foot star of Betelgeuse is to move forward, and the general is meritorious; the southward migration is to retreat, and the general loses power.

古文：三星疏，法令急。
现代文：三星疏远，法令紧急。
English: Samsung estranged, emergency decree issued.

古文：日食，大臣忧，臣下相残，阴国强。
现代文：日食，大臣有忧患，臣下相互残杀，阴面的国家强大。
English: The sun is eclipsed, the minister is troubled, the vassals are killing each other, and the shadowy country is strong.

古文：日晕，有来和亲者，一曰大饥。
现代文：日晕，有来和亲的，一说大饥荒。
English: The sun is fading, and those who have come to visit relatives say there is a great famine.

古文：月食其度，为兵，臣下有谋，贵臣诛，其分大饥，外兵大将死，天下更令。
现代文：月食发生在它的垣度，是战争，臣下有阴噪，贵臣被杀，它的分野地区有大饥荒，外族军队的大将死，天下更改政令。
English: The lunar eclipse occurred in its shadow, it was a war, the vassals were noisy, the dignitaries were killed, there was a great famine in its field area, the general of the foreign army died, and the world changed the government decree.

古文：月晕，将死，人殃乱，战不利。
现代文：月晕，将军死亡，人民遭受祸殃动乱，战争不利。
English: The moon is faint, the general is dead, the people are plagued by turmoil, and the war is unfavorable.

古文：月犯，贵臣忧，兵起，民饥；犯参伐，偏将死。
现代文：月亮侵犯，贵臣有忧患，战争发生，人民饥饿；侵犯参宿的伐星，偏将死亡。
English: The moon encroaches, dignitaries are troubled, war breaks out, the people are hungry; the star that encroaches on Betelgeuse will die.

古文：岁星犯之，水旱不时，大疫，为饥；守之，兵起，民疫；入，则天下更政。
现代文：岁星侵犯，水灾旱灾不按季节，大瘟疫，是饥荒；占据参宿，战争发生，人民有瘟疫；进入，那么天下改革政治。
English: When the year star invades, floods and droughts occur out of season, and the great plague is famine; when a city is occupied, a war breaks out, and the people are plagued with pestilence; when an invasion occurs, the whole world reforms its politics.

古文：荧惑犯之，为兵，为内乱，秦、燕地凶；守之，为旱，为兵，四方不宁；逆行入，则大饥。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，是战争，是内乱，秦、燕地区凶险；占据参宿，是旱灾，是战争，四方不安宁；逆向运行进入，就有大饥荒。
English: The invasion of a fluorescent planet is a war, a civil war, and a grave danger in the Qin and Yan regions; the occupation of a residence is a drought, a war, and unrest in all directions; if it runs in the opposite direction, there will be a great famine.

古文：填星犯之，有叛臣；守之，其下国亡，奸臣谋逆，一云有丧，后、夫人当之；逆行留守，兵起。
现代文：镇星侵犯，有叛乱之臣；占据参宿，它下面的国家灭亡，奸臣图谋叛逆，一说有丧事，王后、夫人承担责任；逆向运行停留占据，战争发生。
English: A town-star is invaded, there is a rebellious vassal; a post is occupied, the country below it is destroyed, a treacherous vassal plots treason, a funeral is said, the queen and her consort take responsibility; a reverse movement stops, the post is occupied, a war occurs.

古文：太白犯之，天下发兵；守之，大人为乱，国易政，边民大战。
现代文：太白星侵犯，天下发生战争；占据参宿，王公大人作乱，国家更换政权，边区人民大战。
English: Taibai invaded, war broke out all over the world; occupied Banshuku, Wanggong people rioted, the country changed regimes, and the Border Region People's War broke out.

古文：辰星犯之，为水，为兵，贵臣黜。
现代文：辰星侵犯，是水灾，是战争，贵臣被罢黜。
English: If the hour star encroaches, it is a flood, it is a war, and the noblemen are ousted.

古文：辰星与参出西方，为旱，大臣诛。逆守之，兵起。
现代文：辰星和参宿同出西方，是旱灾，大臣被杀；逆向运行占据参宿，战争发生。
English: Star and Betelgeuse go west together, there is a drought, the minister is killed; the retrograde motion takes over Betelgeuse, and war breaks out.

古文：客星入犯之，国内有斩刈事；守之，边州失地；环绕者，边将有斩刈事。
现代文：客星进入侵犯参宿，国内有斩割之事；占据参宿，边区州郡丧失领土；环绕参宿的，边区将军有斩割之事。
English: If a guest star enters and encroaches on a tributary, it will be cut off from the rest of the country; if it occupies a tributary, it will lose its territory; if it surrounds a tributary, it will be cut off from the rest of the country.

古文：彗星犯之，边兵败，君亡，远期三年；贯之，色白，为兵、丧。
现代文：彗星侵犯，边境战争败北，君主死亡，远的期限是三年；贯穿参宿，星色白，是战争、丧事。
English: Comet invasion, the defeat of the border war, the death of the monarch, the far deadline is three years; throughout the Betelgeuse, the star is white, it is war, mourning.

古文：星孛于参，君臣俱忧，国兵败。
现代文：在参宿出现星变，君臣都忧患，国家军队失败。
English: In Benjuku, there was a change of the stars, monarchs and ministers were worried, and the national army failed.

古文：流星入犯之，先起兵者亡。
现代文：流星进入侵犯参宿，先起兵的一方败亡。
English: A meteor enters and encroaches on Betelgeuse, and the side that started the battle is defeated.

古文：《乙巳占》曰： 流星出而光润，边安，有赦，狱空。 
现代文：《乙巳占》说： 流星出来而星光润泽，边区安定，有赦免，监狱空。 
English: "Yi Si Zhan" said: The meteor comes out and the star shines brightly, the border area is stable, there is amnesty, and the prison is empty.

古文：青云气入犯之，天子起边城；苍白，为臣乱；赤，为内兵；黄色润泽，大将受赐；黑，为水灾，大臣忧。
现代文：青色云气进入侵犯，天子在边城起事；星色苍白，是臣下叛乱；星色赤，是国内战争；星色黄而润泽，大将受赏赐；星色黑，是水灾，大臣有忧患。
English: The blue clouds invade, and the son of heaven rises up in the border city; the pale star is the rebellion of the vassals; the red star is the civil war; the yellow star is moist, and the general is rewarded; the black star is the flood, and the minister is worried.

古文：白云气出贯之，将死，天子疾。
现代文：白色云气出来贯穿参宿，大将死亡，天子有病。
English: A white cloud comes out and penetrates the camp, the general is dead, and the heavenly son is ill.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，参八度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，参宿八度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument, the accompaniment octave.

古文：旧去极九十四度。
现代文：从前离极九十四度。
English: It used to be ninety-four degrees.

古文：景祐测验，参宿十星十度，右足入毕十三度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，参宿十颗星十度，右足星侵入毕宿十三度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the number of stars in Betelgeuse is ten, and the number of right-footed stars in Aries is thirteen.

古文：玉井四星，在参左足下，主水泉，以给庖厨。
现代文：玉井四颗星，在参宿左足下面，主管水泉，用来供给厨房。
English: Tamai four stars, under the left foot of the Betelgeuse, presides over the water spring, used to supply the kitchen.

古文：动摇，为忧。
现代文：星动摇，是忧患。
English: A wavering star is a sign of trouble.

古文：客星入，为水，为丧国失地；出，则国得地，一云将出。
现代文：客星进入，是水灾，是丧亡国家失去土地；出去，那么国家得到土地，一说大将出征。
English: When the guest star enters, it is a flood, it is a lost country losing land; when it leaves, the country gains land, and the general goes to war.

古文：流星入，为大水。
现代文：流星进入，是发大水。
English: When a meteor enters, it's a big splash.

古文：云气入而色青，井水不可食。
现代文：云气进入而星色青，井水不能饮用。
English: The well water is undrinkable when cloudy air enters and the star color turns blue.

古文：屏二星，一作天屏，在玉井南，一云在参右足。
现代文：屏二颗星，一作天屏，在玉井南面，一说在参宿右足部。
English: There are two stars on the screen, one is the sky screen, in the south of Tamai, and one is said to be in the right foot of Betelgeuse.

古文：星不具，人多疾。
现代文：星不全备，人民多病。
English: The stars are not perfect, and the people are often ill.

古文：不明，大人寝疾。
现代文：星不明亮，王公大人卧病。
English: The stars were not bright, and the prince lay ill.

古文：星亡，主多病。
现代文：星消失，帝王多病。
English: The stars disappear, the emperor is often ill.

古文：月、五星犯之，为水。
现代文：月亮、五星侵犯，是水灾。
English: The moon, the five-star invasion, is a flood.

古文：客星出于屏，亦为大人有疾。
现代文：客星从屏出来，也是王公大人有病。
English: When the guest star comes out of the screen, it is also Wang Gong who is ill.

古文：彗星犯之，水旱不时。
现代文：彗星侵犯，水灾旱灾不按季节。
English: Comets invade, floods and droughts are not seasonal.

古文：军井四星，在玉井东南，军营之井，主给师，济疲乏。
现代文：军井四颗星，在玉井东南面，是军营的水井，主管供给军队，赈济疲倦困乏。
English: The four stars of the military well, in the southeast of Tamai, are the wells of the military camp, which are responsible for supplying the army and relieving tiredness and fatigue.

古文：月犯，刍稾财宝出。
现代文：月亮侵犯，草料财宝出现。
English: The moon encroaches, and the herbaceous treasure appears.

古文：荧惑入，为水，兵多死。
现代文：荧惑星进入，是水灾，兵士多死亡。
English: Fluorescent planet enters, it's a flood, more soldiers die.

古文：太白入，兵动，民不安。
现代文：太白星进入，军队出动，人民不安定。
English: Too white a star enters, the army is dispatched, and the people are unstable.

古文：客星入，忧水害。
现代文：客星进入，忧患水害。
English: A guest star enters and worries about flooding.

古文：厕四星，在屏星东，一曰在参右脚南，主溷。
现代文：厕四颗星，在屏星束面，一说在参窑右足部南面，主管厕所。
English: There are four stars on the toilet, one is on the south side of the right foot of the kiln, and the other is on the top of the toilet.

古文：色黄，为吉，岁丰；青黑，人主腰下有疾。
现代文：星色黄，是吉利，年成丰收；星色青黑，人主腰下有病。
English: If the star is yellow, it means good luck and a good harvest; if the star is blue and black, it means that the person has a disease below the waist.

古文：星不具，则贵人多病。
现代文：星不全备，那么贵人多病。
English: The stars are not complete, so the nobles are often ill.

古文：客星入，为谷贵。
现代文：客星进入，是谷物价贵。
English: As the guest star enters, the price of grain is high.

古文：彗、孛入，岁饥。
现代文：彗星、变星进入，这年饥荒。
English: Comets and variable stars enter, and this is the year of famine.

古文：青云气入，为兵；黑，为忧；黄，则天子有喜。
现代文：青色云气进入，是战争；黑色，是忧患；黄色，那么天子有喜事。
English: When the blue clouds come in, there is war; when the black clouds come in, there is sorrow; when the yellow clouds come in, there is joy.

古文：天屎一星，在天厕南。
现代文：天屎一颗星，在天厕南面。
English: The sky poops out a star, south of the celestial toilet.

古文：色黄，则年丰。
现代文：星色黄，那么年成丰收。
English: If the stars are yellow, the harvest will be good.

古文：凡变色，为蝗，为水旱，为霜杀物。
现代文：凡是星变色，是蝗灾，是水灾旱灾，是霜冻杀伤作物。
English: Every star that changes color is a locust plague, a flood, a drought, and a frost-killed crop.

古文：常以秋分候之。
现代文：通常在秋分时观测它。
English: It is usually observed at the time of the autumn equinox.

古文：星亡不见，天下荒；星微，民多流。
现代文：星消失不出现，天下荒芜；星微细，人民多流亡。
English: The stars disappear and do not appear, the world is desolate; the stars are faint, and the people are mostly exiled.

古文：按《步天歌》，玉井、军井、厕各四星，屏二星，天屎一星，俱属参宿。
现代文：按《步天歌》，玉井、军井、厕各四颗星，屏二颗星，天屎一颗星，都属于参宿。
English: According to the "Walking Heavenly Song," Tamai, Junii, and Toilets each have four stars, the Screen has two stars, and the Sky Poop has one star, all of which belong to Betelgeuse.

古文：《晋志》玉井在参左足，武密书属觜，《乾象新书》属毕；军井，《晋志》在玉井南，武密亦属觜，《乾象新书》亦属毕，唐开元游仪在玉井东南；屏、厕、天屎，《晋志》皆不载，《隋志》屏在玉井南，开元游仪在觜，《隋志》厕在屏东，屎在厕南，《乾象新书》皆属参，与《步天歌》互有不合。
现代文：《晋书，天文志》玉井在参宿左足部，武密的书属于觜宿，《干象新书》属于毕宿；军井，《晋书，天文志》在玉井南面，武密也属于觜宿，《干象新书》也属于毕宿，唐朝开元游仪在玉井东南面；屏、厕、天屎，《晋书&;;天文志》都不载录，《隋书&;;天文志》屏在玉井南面，开元游仪在觜宿，《隋书&;;天文志》厕在屏的东面，天屎在厕的南面，《干象新书》都属于参宿；与《步天歌》互有不同。
English: "Jinshu, Astronomy" in Yujing is in the left foot of the staff room, Wu Mi's book belongs to the bed room, "Dry Elephant New Book" belongs to the bed room; the army, "Jinshu, Astronomy" in the south of Yujing, Wu Mi also belongs to the bed room, "Dry Elephant New Book" also belongs to the bed room, the Tang Dynasty's Yuan Yuyi is in the southeast of Yujing; the screen, the toilet, the sky dung, "Jinshu&;; Astronomy" are not recorded, "Sui Book&;; Astronomy" screen in the south of Yujing, the

古文：南方
现代文：南方
English: Nanfang

古文：东井八星，天之南门，黄道所经，七曜常行其中，为天之亭候，主水衡事，法令所取平也。
现代文：东井八颗星，天的南门，黄道经由的轨道，七曜常常运行其中，是天监视敌情的岗哨，主管管理水利官吏的事情，是法令规定公平的。
English: The eight stars of the East Well, the south gate of heaven, and the orbit of the zodiac, which often runs on the seventh day, are the sentinels of heaven to monitor the hostile situation, and are responsible for the management of water conservancy officials. It is fair according to laws and regulations.

古文：武密占曰：井中为三光正道，五纬留守若经之，皆为天下无道。
现代文：武密占验说：井宿中间是三光的正常轨道；五纬停留占据，如果经由井宿，都是天下无道。
English: Wu Mi said: the middle of the well is the normal orbit of the three lights; the five latitudes are occupied, and if it passes through the well, there is no way out.

古文：不欲明，明则大水。
现代文：星不要明亮，明亮就发大水。
English: Don't make the stars too bright. If they are too bright, there will be a lot of rain.

古文：又占曰：用法平，井宿明。
现代文：又占验说：运用法令公平，井宿明亮。
English: Zhan Qian also said: the application of laws and regulations is fair, and the well is bright.

古文：钺一星，附井宿前，主伺奢淫而斩之；明大与井宿齐，则用钺于大臣。
现代文：铁一颗星，依附在井宿前面，主管侦察奢侈荒淫的人而斩杀他们；星明亮光大跟井宿一样，那么对大臣使用斧钹。
English: An iron star, attached to the front of the well, is in charge of spying on extravagant people and killing them; the star is as bright as the well, so use an axe on the minister.

古文：月宿，其分有风雨。
现代文：月亮住宿在此，它的分野地区有风雨。
English: The moon stays here, and its field area is windy.

古文：日食，秦地旱，民流，有不臣者；晕，则多风雨；有青赤气在日，为冠，天子立侯王。
现代文：日食，秦地干旱，人民流亡，有不肯臣服的人；日晕，就多风雨；有青赤色云气在太阳上，是王冠，天子封立侯王。
English: The eclipse of the sun, the drought of Qin, the exile of the people, there are people who refuse to submit; the sun's halo, there are many wind and rain; there is a blue-red cloud on the sun, it is the crown, the son of heaven crowns the prince.

古文：月食，有内乱，大臣黜，后不安，五谷不登，分有兵、丧。
现代文：月食，有内乱，太臣被罢黜，皇后不安宁，五谷不丰收，分野地区有战争、丧事。
English: The moon eclipses, there is civil unrest, a great vassal is deposed, the empress is restless, the grain harvest is poor, and there are wars and funerals in the provinces.

古文：月晕，为旱，为兵，为民流，国有忧，一曰有赦。阴阳不和则晕，晕及三重，在三月为大水，在十二月日壬癸为大赦。
现代文：月晕，是旱灾，是战争，是人民流亡，国家有忧患，一说有赦免；阴阳不调和就有月晕，晕环达到三重，在三月是大水，在十二月壬癸日是大赦。
English: If the moon is eclipsed, it is drought, it is war, it is the exodus of the people, the country is in distress, and it is said that there is an amnesty; if the yin and yang are not reconciled, there will be a moon eclipse, the halo ring will reach three times, in March there will be heavy water, and in December there will be an amnesty.

古文：月犯之，将死于兵，水官黜，刑不平；犯井钺，大臣诛，有水事。
现代文：月亮侵犯，将军死在战场，水官被罢免，刑罚不公平；侵犯井宿钹星，大臣被杀，有水事。
English: The moon is violated, the general dies on the battlefield, the water officer is dismissed, the punishment is unfair; the well is violated, the minister is killed, there is a water matter.

古文：岁星犯之，主急法，多狱讼，水溢，将军恶之；犯井钺，近臣为乱，兵起；逆行入井，川流壅塞。
现代文：岁星侵犯，帝王法令苛急，多讼案，江河水外溢，将军厌恶这种情况。侵犯井宿钹星，近臣作乱，战争发生；逆向运行进入井宿，河流堵塞。
English: The year star encroaches, the emperor's decree is harsh, multiple lawsuits arise, rivers overflow, the general abhors this situation. Invade the well, the close vassal makes a disturbance, war occurs; reverse running into the well, the river is blocked.

古文：荧惑犯之，兵先起者殃，又曰天子以水败；入守经旬，下有兵，贵人不安；守三十日，成勾巳，角动，色赤黑，贵人当之，百川溢，兵起。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，先起兵的一方遭殃，又说天子因为水灾而失败；进入占据十天，它下面有战事，贵人不安全；占据三十天，形成勾巳，放射光芒摆动，星色赤黑，贵人承担责任，各条河流溢水，战争发生。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, the first to raise an army suffers disaster, and it is also said that the son of heaven fails because of the flood; enter and occupy for ten days, there is a battle below it, the nobles are not safe; occupy for thirty days, the formation of hooks, the radiation rays swing, the stars are red and black, the nobles take responsibility, the rivers overflow, and the war occurs.

古文：填星入犯之，兵起东北，大臣忧；入井钺，王者恶之；在觜而去东井，其下亡地。
现代文：镇星进入侵犯，战事发生在东北，大臣有忧患；进入井宿铁星，王者厌恶这种情况；在觜宿而离开东井，它下面丧失土地。
English: When the town of Xing is invaded, the war takes place in the northeast, and the minister is worried; when the iron star enters the well, the king abhors this situation; when the iron star enters the well and leaves the east well, it loses the land below.

古文：太白犯之，咎在将；久守，其分君失政，臣为乱。
现代文：太白星侵犯，遇错在将军；长久占据，它的分野地区君主政治失误，臣下作乱。
English: Too white star encroach, encounter error in the general; occupy for a long time, its field area monarch political error, vassal make turmoil.

古文：辰星犯之，星进则兵进，退则兵退，刑法平，又曰北兵起，岁恶。
现代文：辰星侵犯，星前进那么军队也前进，星后退那么军队也后退，刑法公平，又说北方战争发生，年成恶劣。
English: If the star advances, the army advances; if the star retreats, the army retreats; if the criminal law is fair, the Northern War will take place, and the year will be bad.

古文：芒角、动摇，色赤黑，为水，为兵起。
现代文：放射光芒、动摇，星色赤黑，是水灾，是战争发生。
English: Radiant, shaken, starry red and black, it is a flood, it is a war.

古文：客星犯之，谷不登，大臣诛，有土功，小儿妖言。
现代文：客星侵犯，谷物不鲎收，大臣被杀，有水土工程，小孩子说怪话。
English: A guest star invades, grain is not harvested, a minister is killed, there are water and soil projects, and children say strange things.

古文：彗星犯之，民谗言，国失政，一曰大臣诛，其分兵灾。
现代文：彗星侵犯，人民进谗言，国家政治失误，一说大臣被杀，它的分野地区有战争。
English: Comets invade, the people speak out, the state makes political blunders, a minister is said to have been killed, and there is war in its domain.

古文：流星犯之，在春夏则秦地谋叛，在秋冬则宫中有忧。
现代文：流星侵犯，在春季夏季那么秦国地方阴谋叛乱，在秋季冬季那么宫中有忧患。
English: Meteor invasion, in the spring and summer, then the Qin State local conspiracy rebellion, in the autumn and winter, then the palace is in trouble.

古文：《乙巳占》：流星色黄润，国安；赤黑，秦分民流，水灾。
现代文：《乙巳占》：流星色黄润泽，国家安定；赤黑色，秦国分野地区人民流亡，水灾。
English: "Yi Si Zhan": meteor-colored yellow and moist, the country is stable; red and black, the people in the field area of Qin State are exiled, and there is a flood.

古文：苍黑云气入犯之，民有疾疫；黄白润泽，有客来言水泽事。
现代文：苍黑色云气进入侵犯，人民有瘟疫疾病；星色黄白润泽，有客人来说河湖沼泽的事。
English: Pale black clouds invade, the people are plagued with diseases; the stars are yellow and white, and guests come to talk about rivers, lakes, and swamps.

古文：黑气入，为大水。
现代文：黑色云气进入，是发大水。
English: Black clouds come in, and it's a lot of water.

古文：常以正月朔日入时候之，井宿上有云，岁多水潦。
现代文：通常在正月初一的日入时分观测它。井宿上有云，这年多水涝灾害。
English: It is usually observed at the time of sunset on the first day of the first month of the year. There are clouds over Ijuku, and there are many floods this year.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，井宿三十度，唐开元游仪三十三度，去极七十度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，井宿三十度；唐朝开元游仪，三十三度，离极七十度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument, the well is 30 degrees; the Tang Dynasty Kaiyuan tour instrument, 33 degrees, 70 degrees from the extreme.

古文：景祐测验，亦三十三度，距西北星去极六十九度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，也是三十三度，距星西北的星离极六十九度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, it is also thirty-three degrees, and the star northwest of the star is sixty-nine degrees away.

古文：五诸侯五星，在东井北，主断疑、刺举、戒不虞、理阴阳、察得失，亦曰主帝心。
现代文：五诸侯五颗星，在东井北面，主管判断疑惑、揭发检举、警戒不测的事、调理阴阳、监察得失，又说主管帝王的心。
English: Five princes, five stars, in the north of the East Well, the person in charge of judging doubts, exposing and reporting, guarding against unforeseen things, adjusting yin and yang, monitoring gains and losses, and also said to be in charge of the emperor's heart.

古文：一曰帝师，二曰帝友，三曰三公，四曰博士，五曰太史，五者常为帝定疑议。
现代文：第一颗叫帝师，第二颗叫帝友，第三颗叫三公，第四颗叫博士，第五颗叫太史，这五类人常常替帝王裁定异议疑问。
English: The first is called the emperor's teacher, the second is called the emperor's friend, the third is called the three princes, the fourth is called the doctor, and the fifth is called the great historian. These five types of people often adjudicate disputes and doubts for the emperor.

古文：星明大、润泽，则天下治。
现代文：星明亮光大、润泽，那么天下太平。
English: The stars are bright and shiny and moist, so the world is peaceful.

古文：五礼备，则光明，不相侵陵；暗，则贵人谋上；芒角，祸在中。
现代文：五礼齐备，那么垦明亮，不相侵犯；暗淡，那么贵人图谋犯上；星有光芒，祸患在其中。
English: The five elements are complete, so bright, do not violate each other; dim, so noble, conspire to commit; stars have light, disaster is in them.

古文：岁星犯之，兵起三年。
现代文：岁星侵犯，战争发生三年。
English: The war lasted for three years.

古文：荧惑犯之，大臣叛不成。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，大臣叛乱不成功。
English: Fluorescent planet encroaches, minister's rebellion is unsuccessful.

古文：太白犯之，诸侯兴兵亡国；经天昼见，则诸侯受诛。
现代文：太白星侵犯，诸侯发动战争使国家灭亡；经由天空在白天出现，那么诸侯被杀。
English: If a white star intrudes, the princes will wage war and the country will be destroyed; if a white star appears in the sky during the day, the princes will be killed.

古文：客星犯，王室乱，诸侯亡地，秦国殃；守之，诸侯亲属失位。
现代文：客星侵犯，王室混乱，诸侯丧失领地，秦国遭殃；占据此座，诸侯的亲属失去地位。
English: The guest star invaded, the royal family was in disarray, the lords lost their territory, and the Qin state suffered a disaster; the relatives of the lords lost their status when they occupied this seat.

古文：彗、孛犯之，执法臣诛，又曰贵臣当之，期一年。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，执法大臣被杀，又说贵臣承担责任，为期一年。
English: Comet, variable star infringement, the minister of law enforcement was killed, and it was said that the dignitary assumed responsibility, for a period of one year.

古文：云气犯之，色苍白，诸侯有丧；不，则臣有诛戮。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色苍白，诸侯有丧事；否则臣下有被杀的。
English: The clouds encroach, the stars are pale, the lords mourn; otherwise, their vassals are killed.

古文：天下表大水。积水一星，在北河西北，所以供酒食之正也。
现代文：积水一颗星，在北河的西北面，是用来供给酒食的长官。
English: Standing water is a star, in the northwest of the North River, it is used to supply wine and food.

古文：不见，为灾。
现代文：不出现，是灾祸。
English: Failure to appear is a disaster.

古文：岁星犯之，水物不成，鱼盐贵，民饥。
现代文：岁星侵犯，水中作物没有收成，鱼盥价贵，人民饥饿。
English: The stars of the year encroach, the crops in the water are not harvested, the fish bait is expensive, and the people are hungry.

古文：荧惑犯之，为兵，为水。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，是战争，是水灾。
English: Fluorescent planet invasion, is war, is a flood.

古文：辰星犯之，为水、旱。
现代文：辰星侵犯，是水灾、旱灾。
English: The invasion of the stars is followed by floods and droughts.

古文：客星犯之，兵起，大水，大臣忧，期一年。
现代文：客星侵犯，战争发生，发大水，大臣有忧患，为期一年。
English: A guest star invades, a war breaks out, a great flood occurs, a minister is troubled, and a one-year period ensues.

古文：苍白云气入犯之，天下有水。
现代文：苍白色云气进入侵犯，天下有水灾。
English: Pale clouds encroached, and there were floods all over the world.

古文：积薪一星，在积水东北，供庖厨之正也。
现代文：积薪一颗星，在积水东北面，是供给厨房的长官。
English: One star, in the northeast of the backwaters, is the head of the kitchen supply.

古文：星不明，五谷不登。
现代文：星不明亮。五谷不丰收。
English: The stars are not bright. The grain is not plentiful.

古文：荧惑犯之，为旱，为兵，为火灾。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，是旱灾，是战争，是火灾。
English: Fluorescent planet invasion, is drought, is war, is fire.

古文：客星守之，薪贵。
现代文：客星占据此座，柴木价贵。
English: Guest stars occupy this seat, and firewood is expensive.

古文：赤云气入犯之，为水灾。
现代文：赤色云气进入侵犯，是火灾。
English: Red clouds encroached and there was a fire.

古文：南河三星，与北河夹东井，一曰天之关门也，主关梁。
现代文：南河三颗星，与北河夹着东井，一说是天的城关门户，主管关隘桥梁。
English: Nanhe three stars, with the North River sandwiched between the East Well, one is said to be the gateway to heaven, the bridge in charge of the pass.

古文：南河曰南戍，一曰南宫，一曰阳门，一曰越门，一曰权星，主火。
现代文：南河叫南戍，又叫南宫，又叫阳门，又叫越门，又叫权星，主管火。
English: Nanhexing and Beihexing are three stars each, sandwiched by Dongjing. It is said that Tiangao Star is the closing door of the celestial body and is responsible for the important road of land and water transportation. Nanhexing is called Nanluo, and is also called Nangu, Yangmen, Yuemen, and Guanxing, and is responsible for fire.

古文：两河戍间，日、月、五星之常道也。
现代文：两河戍之间，是日、月、五星正常的轨道。
English: Between the two rivers, the sun, moon and five stars are in their normal orbits.

古文：河戍动摇，中国兵起。
现代文：河戍动摇，中原国家战争发生。
English: If Hebei falters, there will be war in the Central Plains.

古文：河星不具，则路不通。水泛溢。
现代文：河戍的星不全备，那么道路不通行，流水泛滥。
English: If the stars of the river are not complete, then the road is impassable, and running water floods.

古文：月出入两河间中道，民安，岁美，无兵；出中道之南，君恶之，大臣不附。
现代文：月亮在两河戍中间的轨道出来进去，人民安定，年景好，没有战争；从中间轨道的南边出来，君主厌恶这种情况，大臣不附合。
English: When the moon enters the orbit between the two rivers, the people are stable, the year is good, and there is no war; when it comes out from the south of the middle orbit, the monarch abhors this situation, and the minister does not join.

古文：星明，为吉；昏昧动摇，则边兵起，远人叛，主忧。
现代文：星明亮，是吉利；星光昏暗动摇，那么边地战争发生，远方的人叛乱，人主忧患。
English: When the stars are bright, it is good luck; when the stars are dim and wavering, it is border wars, distant people's rebellions, and people's worries.

古文：月犯之，为中邦忧，一曰为兵，为丧，为旱，为疫；行西南，为兵、旱；入南戍，则民疫；晕，则为土功；乘之，四方兵起；经南戍南，则为刑罚失。
现代文：月亮侵犯，是中原国家有忧患，一说是战争，是丧事，是旱灾，是瘟疫；在中间轨道西南运行，是战争、旱灾；进入南戍，那么人民有瘟疫；月晕，就是水土工程；登临在它上面，四方战争发生；经由南戍的南面，那就是刑罚失误。
English: When the moon encroaches, it is the Central Plains countries that are in distress, when it is a war, it is a funeral, it is a drought, it is a plague; when it orbits the southwest in the middle orbit, it is a war, a drought; when it enters the South Pole, then the people have a plague; when the moon is eclipsed, it is a water and soil project; when it lands on it, a four-way war occurs; when it passes through the south side of the South Pole, it is a penalty error.

古文：岁星犯之，北主忧。
现代文：岁星侵犯，北国君主有忧患。
English: The year star encroaches, and the northern monarch is troubled.

古文：荧惑犯两河，为兵；守三十日以上，川溢；守南河，谷不登，女主忧；守南戍西，果不成；在东，则有攻战。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯两河，是战争；占据三十天以上，江河外溢；占据南河，谷物不丰收，女主有忧患；占据南戍星西面，果实不成熟；在束边，就有进攻战斗。
English: If a fluorescent planet invades two rivers, it is a war; if it occupies more than thirty days, the rivers will overflow; if it occupies the South River, the grain will not be plentiful, and the hostess will be worried; if it occupies the west side of the South Star, the fruit will not be ripe; if it occupies the edge of the bunch, there will be an offensive battle.

古文：填星乘南河，为旱，民忧；守之，为兵，道不通。
现代文：镇星登临在南河上面，是旱灾，人民忧患；占据此星，是战争，道路不通行。
English: When the town star appeared above the Nanhe River, it was a drought, and the people were worried; when the star was occupied, it was a war, and the roads were impassable.

古文：太白舍三十日，川溢；一曰有奸谋；守两河，为兵起。
现代文：太白星住宿三十天，江河外溢；一说有奸谋；占据两河，是战争发生。
English: If you stay in Taibai Star for 30 days, the rivers will overflow; if you say there is a conspiracy; if you occupy two rivers, it is a war.

古文：客星守之，为旱，为疫。
现代文：客星占据此星，是旱灾，是瘟疫。
English: It's a drought, it's a plague.

古文：彗、孛出，为兵；守，为旱。
现代文：彗星、变星出来，是战争；占据，是旱灾。
English: Comets and variable stars bring war; occupation brings drought.

古文：流星出，为兵、丧，边戍有忧。
现代文：流星出来，是战争、丧事，边境驻防有忧患。
English: If a meteor comes out, there will be war and mourning, and there will be trouble at the border.

古文：苍白云气入之，河道不通；出而色赤，天子兵向诸侯。
现代文：苍白色云气进入此星，河道不通行；出去而星色赤，天子的军队指向诸侯。
English: Pale white clouds enter this planet, the river is impassable; go out and the star is red, the army of the Son of Heaven points to the princes.

古文：黄气入之，有德令；出，为灾。
现代文：黄色云气侵入此星，有德政的诏令；出去，是灾祸。
English: Yellow clouds invade this planet, there is a decree of German government; go out, it is a disaster.

古文：北河亦三星，北河曰北戍，一曰北宫，一曰阴门，一曰胡门，一曰衡星，主水。
现代文：北河也是三颗星，北河叫北戍，又叫北宫，又叫阴门，又叫胡门，又叫衡星，主管水。
English: The North River is also three stars. The North River is called Beigu, also known as Beigu, also known as Yinmen, also known as Humen, also known as Hengxing, and is in charge of water.

古文：五星出、入、留、守之，为兵起；犯之，为女丧；乘之，为北主忧。
现代文：五星出来、进入、停留、占据此星，是战争发生；侵犯，是妇女有丧事；登临在此星上面，是北方君主有忧患。
English: When the five stars come out, enter, stay, and occupy this planet, it is war; when they invade, it is a woman's tragedy; when they land on this planet, it is a northern monarch's sorrow.

古文：岁星入北戍，大臣诛。
现代文：岁星进入北戍，大臣被杀。
English: Jiuxing entered Beilun, and the minister was killed.

古文：荧惑从西入北戍，六十日有丧；从东入，九十日有兵；一曰出北戍北守之，边将有不请于上而用兵外国者胜。
现代文：荧惑星从西面进入北戍星，六十天有丧事；从东面进入，九十天有战争；一说从北戍星北面出来，占据此星，边区将军有不向主上请命，而对外国用兵取得胜利。
English: Fluorescent planet from the west into the North Star, sixty days there is a funeral; from the east into, ninety days there is a war; once said to come out from the north of the North Star and occupy this star, the frontier general did not ask the Lord for his life, but used foreign troops to achieve victory.

古文：填星守之，兵起，六十日内有赦，一曰有土功；若守戍西，五谷不实。
现代文：镇星占据此星，战争发生，六十天内有赦免，一说有水土工程；如果留守北戍星西面，五谷不结实。
English: The town star occupies this star, a war occurs, there is an amnesty within sixty days, it is said that there are water and soil projects; if you stay west of Beilun star, the grain is not solid.

古文：太白舍北戍，三十日为女丧，有内谋；守阴门，不出百日天下兵悉起。
现代文：太白星住宿北戍，三十天是妇女丧事，有宫廷阴谋；占据阴门，不出一百天而天下的军队全都发动起来。
English: Too white star accommodation Beibei, thirty days is a woman's funeral, there is a palace conspiracy; occupy the underworld, no more than a hundred days and all the armies of the world are launched.

古文：辰星守之，外兵起，边臣有谋；留止，则兵起四方。
现代文：辰星占据此星，外国的战争发生，边区的大臣有图谋；停止，那么战争在四方发生。
English: The hour star occupies this planet, a foreign war occurs, the minister of the border region has a plot; stop, then the war occurs in the four directions.

古文：客星入犯之，有丧于外，奸人在中；入自东，兵起，期九十日；入自西，有丧，期六十日；守之，为大水。
现代文：客星进入侵犯，有丧亡发生在地方上，有奸佞之人在朝廷中；从束边进入，战争发生，为期九十天；从西边进入，有丧事，为期六十天；占据此星，是发大水。
English: When a guest star invades, there is death in the countryside and a traitor in the court; when it invades from the east, there is war for ninety days; when it invades from the west, there is mourning for sixty days; when it invades from the west, there is a great flood.

古文：流星经两河间，天下有难；入，为北兵入中国，关梁不通。
现代文：流星经由两河星之间，天下有难；进入，是北方军队侵入中原国家，关口桥梁不通行。
English: When a meteor passes between two rivers, the world is in trouble; when it enters, it is the northern army invading the Central Plains countries, and the bridges at the checkpoints are impassable.

古文：云气苍白入犯之，边有兵，疾疫，又为北主忧。
现代文：云气苍白色进入侵犯，边区有战争，有疾病瘟疫，又是北方君主有忧患。
English: Pale clouds encroach, there is war in the border region, there are diseases and plagues, and the northern monarchs are troubled.

古文：四渎四星，在东井南垣之东，江、河、淮、济之精也。
现代文：四渎四颗星，在东井南垣的柬面，是长江、黄河、淮河、济水的精灵。
English: The four stars at the four corners of the East Well South Wall are the spirits of the Yangtze River, Yellow River, Huaihe River and Jishui River.

古文：明大，则百川决。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么百川决口。
English: If the star is bright and shines brightly, then there will be a breakthrough.

古文：水位四星，在积薪东，一曰在东井东北，主水衡。
现代文：水位四颗星，在积薪柬面，一说在东井东北面，主管水衡。
English: The water level of four stars, in the accumulated salary Cambodia, one said that in the northeast of the east well, the head of water balance.

古文：岁星犯之，为大水；一曰出南，为旱。
现代文：岁星侵犯，是发大水；一说从南面出来，是旱灾。
English: When the year star invades, it is flood; when it comes from the south, it is drought.

古文：荧惑守之，田不治。
现代文：荧惑星占据此星，田地没有种好。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy this planet, and the fields are not well planted.

古文：客星犯之，水道不通，伏兵在水中；一曰客星若水、火，守犯之，百川流溢。
现代文：客星侵狍，水道不通行，伏兵在水中；一说客星如果是水星、火星，占据又侵犯，百川溢流。
English: If the guest star is Mercury or Mars, it will occupy and invade, and the river will overflow.

古文：彗、孛出，为大水，为兵，谷不成。
现代文：彗星、变星出来，是发大水，是战争，谷物不成熟。
English: Comets and variable stars come out, it is a flood of water, it is a war, the grain is not ripe.

古文：流星入之，天下有水，谷败民饥。
现代文：流星进入，天下有水灾，谷物腐败，人民饥饿。
English: The meteor enters, the world is flooded, the grain is spoiled, and the people are hungry.

古文：赤云气入，为旱、饥。
现代文：赤色云气进入，是旱灾、饥荒。
English: When the red clouds come in, it's drought and famine.

古文：天樽三星，在五诸侯南，一曰在东井北，樽，器也，主盛饘粥，以给贫馁。
现代文：天樽三颗星，在五诸侯南面，一说在柬井北面，是樽器，主管盛糊粥，用来供给贫困饥饿的人。
English: The three stars of the Heavenly Barrel, located in the south of the Five Provinces, and the one in the north of the Kingdom of Cambodia, are barrels, in charge of porridge, used to feed the poor and hungry.

古文：明，为丰；暗，则岁恶。
现代文：星明亮，是丰收；暗淡，那么年成恶劣。
English: When the stars are bright, it is a good harvest; when they are dim, it is a bad year.

古文：阙丘二星，在南河南，天子双阙，诸侯两观也。
现代文：阙丘二颗星，在南河南面，是天子的双阙，诸侯的雨观。
English: The two stars of Mengqiu, on the south side of the Nanhe River, are the twin moles of the heavenly sons, and the rain outlook of the princes.

古文：太白、荧惑守之，兵战阙下。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星占据此星，兵士在阙下战斗。
English: A too-white star and a fluorescent planet occupy this planet, and soldiers fight under the yoke.

古文：军市十三星，状如天钱，天军贸易之市，有无相通也。
现代文：军市十三颗星，形状像天钱，是天军贸易的集市，互通有无。
English: The thirteen stars of the military market, shaped like heavenly money, are the bazaar of the heavenly army trade, with or without intercommunication.

古文：中星众，则军余粮；小，则军饥。
现代文：军市里面星很多，那么军队有余粮；小，那么军队饥饿。
English: If there are many stars in the military market, then the army has surplus grain; if there are few stars, then the army is starving.

古文：月入，为兵起，主不安。
现代文：月亮进入，是战争发生，君主不安全。
English: The moon is setting, there is war, and the monarch is not safe.

古文：五星守之，军粮绝。
现代文：五星占据此星，军队粮食断绝。
English: The Five Stars occupy this planet, and the army is cut off from food.

古文：客星入，则有刺客起，将离卒亡。
现代文：客星进入，有刺客出现，将军离心，士卒逃亡。
English: A guest star enters, an assassin appears, a general is distracted, and a soldier flees.

古文：流星出，为大将出。
现代文：流星出来，是大将出征。
English: When the meteor comes out, the general will go to war.

古文：野鸡一星，在军市中，主变怪。
现代文：野鸡一颗星，在军市中间，主管变异怪诞。
English: Pheasants one star, in the middle of the military market, superintendent of mutant crows grotesque.

古文：出市外，天下有兵。
现代文：出现在军市外面，天下有战争。
English: Appear outside the military market, the world is at war.

古文：守静，为吉；芒角，为凶。
现代文：保持平静，是吉利；星有光芒，是凶险。
English: Keep calm, it is auspicious; the stars have light, it is dangerous.

古文：狼一星，在东井东南，为野将，主侵掠。
现代文：狼一颗星，在东井东南面，是草野的将军，主管侵犯掠夺。
English: Wolf one star, in the southeast of Dongjing, is the general of grassland, in charge of encroachment and plunder.

古文：色有常，不欲动也。
现代文：星有常色，不要它动摇。
English: The star is stable, don't let it waver.

古文：芒角、动摇，则兵起；明盛，兵器贵；移位，人相食；色黄白，为凶；赤，为兵。月犯之，有兵不战，一曰有水事。
现代文：星有光芒、动摇，那么战争发生；星明亮光大，兵器价贵；移动位置，人吃人；星色黄白，是凶险；赤色，是战争，月亮侵犯，有军队却不作战，一说有发水的事。
English: If the stars are shining and wavering, there is war; if the stars are bright and shiny, the weapons are expensive; if the positions are shifting, people are eating each other; if the stars are yellow and white, there is danger; if they are red, there is war, the moon is encroaching; if there is an army, but there is no fighting, there is a drought.

古文：月食在狼，外国有谋。
现代文：月食在狼星，外国有图谋。
English: Lunar eclipse on the Wolf star, foreign countries are plotting.

古文：五星犯之，兵大起，多盗。
现代文：五星侵犯，战争大规模发生，多盗贼。
English: Five-star encroachment, large-scale war, many thieves.

古文：彗、孛犯之，盗起。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，盗贼出现。
English: Comets, variable stars invade, thieves appear.

古文：客星守之，色黄润，为喜；黑，则有忧。
现代文：客星占据此星，星色黄润，是喜事；黑色，就有忧患。
English: The guest star occupies this star, the star color is yellowish, it is a happy event; black, there is sorrow.

古文：赤云气入，有兵。
现代文：赤色云气侵入，有战争。
English: Red clouds invade, there is war.

古文：弧矢九星，在狼星东南，天弓也，主行阴谋以备盗，常属矢以向狼。
现代文：弧矢九颗星，在狼星东南面，是天弓，主管施行阴谋来防备盗贼，常常带着弓箭针对着狼。
English: The nine-pointed star, in the southeast of the wolf star, is the celestial bow. Supervisors carry out conspiracies to prevent thieves, often targeting wolves with bows and arrows.

古文：武密曰： 天弓张，则北兵起。 
现代文：武密说： 天弓拉开，那么北方战争发生。 
English: Wu Mi said: If the bow of heaven is pulled away, then the Northern War will occur.

古文：又曰： 天下尽兵。 
现代文：又说： 天下都是战争。 
English: He also said: All the world is at war.

古文：动摇明大，则多盗；矢不直狼，为多盗；引满，则天下尽为盗。
现代文：星动摇明亮光大，就多盗贼；弧矢不直指狼，是多盗贼；天弓拉满，那么天下都是盗贼。
English: If the stars are shaken and grow bright, then there will be many thieves; if the arrows do not point directly at the wolf, then there will be many thieves; if the bow is drawn full, then the whole world will be full of thieves.

古文：月入弧矢，臣逾主。
现代文：月亮进入弧矢，臣下逾越主上。
English: The moon enters the arc of the arrow, and the vassal surpasses the master.

古文：月晕其宿，兵大起。
现代文：月晕在它的星宿，战争大规模发生。
English: The moon is eclipsed by its star, and war breaks out on a large scale.

古文：客星入，南夷来降；若舍，其分秋雨雪，谷不成；守之，外夷饥；出入之，为兵出入。
现代文：客星进入，南方夷族来投降；如果住宿，它的分野地区秋天下雪，谷物不成熟；占据此星，境外夷族饥饿；出来又进入此星，是军队出征入境。
English: If the guest star enters, the southern barbarians will come to surrender; if the guest star stays, its field area will be snowy in autumn and the grain will not be ripe; if the guest star is occupied, the barbarians outside the country will be hungry; if the guest star comes out and enters the country again, it is the army entering and leaving the country.

古文：流星入，北兵起，屠城杀将。
现代文：流星进入，北方战争发生，屠毁城邑，杀死将军。
English: A meteor enters, the Northern War breaks out, cities are slaughtered, a general is killed.

古文：赤云气入之，民惊，一曰北兵入中国。
现代文：赤色云气进入，人民惊恐，一说北方军队入侵中原国家。
English: The red cloud entered, the people were terrified, and it was said that the northern army had invaded the Central Plains countries.

古文：老人一星，在孤矢南，一名南极。
现代文：老人一颗星，在弧矢南面，一名南极。
English: The old man is a star, and on the south side of the arc is the South Pole.

古文：常以秋分之旦见于丙，候之南郊，春分之夕没于丁。
现代文：常在秋分的早晨出现在丙，在南郊观测它，春分的晚上沉没在丁。
English: It often appears in the morning of the autumnal equinox in C, and is observed in the southern suburbs. In the evening of the vernal equinox, it sinks in D.

古文：见，则治平，天子寿昌；不见，则兵起，岁荒，君忧。
现代文：出现，那么天下太平，天子长寿昌宁；不出现，那么战争发生，年成荒芜，君主忧患。
English: If he appears, then the world will be at peace and the emperor will live a long and prosperous life; if he does not appear, then war will break out, the year will be barren, and the monarch will be troubled.

古文：客星入，为民疫，一曰兵起，老者忧。
现代文：客星进入，是人民瘟疫，一说战争发生，老人忧患。
English: When the guest star enters, it is a plague of the people. When war breaks out, the old people are troubled.

古文：流星犯之，老人多疾，一曰兵起。
现代文：流星侵犯，老人多病，一说战争发生。
English: Meteors invade, the elderly are sickly, and war is said to have broken out.

古文：白云气入之，国当绝。
现代文：白色云气进入，国运当绝。
English: As the white clouds roll in, the national movement is in full swing.

古文：丈人二星，在军市西南，主寿考，悼耄矜寡，以哀穷人。
现代文：丈人二颗星，在军市西南面，主管寿命，顾惜老年孤独鳏寡的人，以哀悯贫穷的人。
English: The two stars, in the southwest of the military city, are in charge of life expectancy, taking care of the elderly, lonely and widowed people, and pitying the poor.

古文：星亡，人臣不得自通。
现代文：星消失，人臣不能使自己仕途通达。
English: When the stars disappear, ministers can't make their own way.

古文：子二星，在丈人东，主侍丈人则。
现代文：子二颗星，在丈人束面，主管侍奉在丈人身边。
English: The son of two stars, in the father-in-law bunch face, the supervisor served in the father-in-law's side.

古文：不见，为灾。
现代文：不出现，是灾难。
English: Failure to appear is a disaster.

古文：孙二星，在子星东，以天孙侍丈人侧，相扶而居以孝慈。
现代文：孙二颗星，在子星东面，以天孙的身份侍奉在丈人身边，扶着丈人住在一起是出于孝爱。
English: The grandson of the two stars, in the east of the child star, serves the father-in-law as a grandson. Supporting the father-in-law to live together is out of filial piety.

古文：不见，为灾；居常，为无咎。
现代文：不出现，是灾祸；正常居留，是无遇错。
English: Failure to appear is a calamity; normal residence is no accident.

古文：水府四星，在东井西南，水官也，主堤塘、道路、梁沟，以设堤防之备。
现代文：水府四颗星，在东井西南面，是水官，主管堤防塘堰、道路、桥梁沟渠，用来设置堤防的守备。
English: The four stars of Suifu, in the southwest of Dongjing, are water officials, in charge of dike weirs, roads, bridges and ditches, used to set up dike defenses.

古文：荧惑入之，有谋臣。
现代文：荧惑星进入，有图谋不轨的臣下。
English: Fluorescent planet incoming, scheming vassal.

古文：辰星入，为水。
现代文：辰星进入，是水灾。
English: When the star enters, it is a flood.

古文：客星入，天下大水。
现代文：客星进入，天下大水。
English: A guest star enters, and the whole world is flooded.

古文：流星入，色青，所主之邑大水；赤，为旱。
现代文：流星进入，星色青，预兆所到的城邑发大水；赤色，是旱灾。
English: When the meteor enters, the stars are blue, and the cities visited by the omen are flooded; red is drought.

古文：按《步天歌》自五诸侯至水府常星一十八坐，俱属东井。
现代文：按《步天歌》，从五诸侯到水府常星十八座，都属于东井。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," from the Five Princes to the 18 Suifu Stars, they all belong to the East Well.

古文：武密书以丈人二星、子、孙各一星属牛宿。
现代文：武密的书认为丈人二颗星，子、孙各一颗星属于牛宿。
English: Wu Mi's book believes that the father-in-law has two stars, and the son and grandson each have one star.

古文：《乾象新书》以丈人与子属参、孙属井；又以水府四星亦属参。
现代文：《干象新书》认为丈人和子属于参宿，孙属于井宿；又认为水府四颗星也属于参宿。
English: "Ganxiang New Book" believes that the father-in-law and son belong to the staff accommodation, and the grandson belongs to the well accommodation; it also believes that the four stars of Mizufu also belong to the staff accommodation.

古文：武密以水府属井。
现代文：武密认为水府属于井宿。
English: Wu Mi believes that Mizufu belongs to Ijuku.

古文：余皆与《步天歌》合。
现代文：其余的都和《步天歌》吻合。
English: The rest are consistent with the "Walking Song."

古文：舆鬼五星，主观察奸谋，天目也。
现代文：舆鬼五颗星，主管观察奸谋，是天的眼睛。
English: The public spirit is the five stars, the supervisor observes the treacherous plot, and is the eye of heaven.

古文：东北星主积马，东南星主积兵，西南星主积布帛，西北星主积金玉，随变占之。
现代文：东北的星主管积聚马匹，东南的星主管积聚兵器，西南的星主管积聚布帛，西北的星主管积聚金玉，随着变化而占验它。
English: The north-east star is in charge of accumulating horses, the south-east star is in charge of accumulating weapons, the south-west star is in charge of accumulating cloth, and the north-west star is in charge of accumulating gold.

古文：中央星为积尸，主死丧祠祀；一曰鈇锧，主诛斩。
现代文：中央的星是积尸星，主管死丧的祭祀；又叫鈇踬，主管斩杀。
English: The central star is the star of the dead, responsible for the sacrificial rites of the dead; also known as the dragonfly, responsible for killing.

古文：星明大，谷不成；不明，民散。
现代文：星明亮光大，谷物不成熟；不明亮，人民离散。
English: The stars are bright and shiny, but the grain is not ripe; it is not bright, and the people are scattered.

古文：锧欲其忽忽不明，明则兵起，大臣诛；动而光，赋重役烦，民怀嗟怨。
现代文：鈇钻星要它模糊不明，明亮就有战争发生，大臣被杀；动摇而光亮，赋税重徭役烦多，人民心怀嗟叹怨恨。
English: If you want it to be vague and unclear, bright, war will happen, the minister will be killed; shaky and bright, tax heavy, labor heavy, and the people will have resentment.

古文：日食，国不安，有大丧，贵人忧。
现代文：日食，国家不安定，有大的丧事，贵人有忧患。
English: Solar eclipses, national instability, great funerals, noblemen in distress.

古文：晕，则其分有兵，大臣有诛废者。
现代文：日晕，那么它的分野地区右战争，大臣有被杀死废置的。
English: Sun halo, then it's field area right war, minister have been killed scrapped.

古文：月食，贵臣、皇后忧，期一年。
现代文：月食，贵臣、皇后有忧患，为期一年。
English: Lunar eclipses, dignitaries, and empresses are troubled, for a period of one year.

古文：晕，为旱，为赦。
现代文：月晕，是旱灾，是赦免。
English: The crescent moon, the drought, and the pardon.

古文：月犯之，秦分君忧，一曰军将死，贵臣、女主忧，民疫。
现代文：月亮侵犯，秦国分野地区君主有忧患，一说军中将军死，贵臣、女主有忧患，人民有瘟疫。
English: The moon encroaches, the monarchs in the field areas of Qin are in distress, a general in the army is said to have died, the dignitaries and hostesses are in distress, and the people have the plague.

古文：岁星犯之，谷伤民饥，君不听事；犯鬼锧，执法臣诛。
现代文：岁星侵犯，谷物受伤害，人民饥饿，君主不听政治事；侵犯舆鬼鈇钻，执法臣被杀。
English: The year star encroaches, the grain is hurt, the people are hungry, the monarch does not listen to politics; encroach on public opinion, the law enforcement minister is killed.

古文：荧惑犯之，忠臣诛，一曰兵起，后失势；入，则后及相忧，一曰贼在君侧，有兵、丧；勾巳，国有赦；留守十日，诸侯当之；二十日，太子当之；勾巳环绕，天子失庙。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，忠臣被杀，一说战争发生，皇后失势；进入，那么皇后及宰相有忧患，一说奸贼在君侧，有战争、丧事；星形成勾巳，国家有赦免；停留占据十天，诸侯承担责任；二十天，太子承担责任；星形成勾巳环绕，天子失去宗庙。
English: If a planet is invaded and a loyal subject is killed, it is said that a war has broken out and the empress has lost her power; if a planet is invaded and a loyal subject is killed, it is said that a war has broken out and the empress and the prime minister have lost their power; if a planet is invaded and a loyal subject is killed, it is said that a war has broken out and the empress has lost her power; if a planet is invaded and a loyal subject is killed, it is said that a war has broken out and the empress has lost her power; if a planet is invaded and a loyal subject is killed, it is said that a war has broken out and the em

古文：填星犯之，大臣、女主忧；守之，忧在后宫，为旱，为土功；入锧，王者恶之；犯积尸，在阳为君，在阴为后，在为太子，右为贵臣，随所守恶之。
现代文：镇星侵犯，大臣、女主有忧患；占据，忧患在后宫，是旱灾，是水土工程；进入鈇矿，王者厌恶这种情况；侵犯积尸，在阳位是君主，在阴位是皇后，在左边是太子，在右边是贵臣，随着镇星占据之处，都厌恶这种情况。
English: When the town star encroaches, the minister and the mistress are worried; when it occupies, the worry is in the harem, it is drought, it is soil and water project; when it enters the molybdenum mine, the king abhors this situation; when it encroaches on the pile of corpses, in the masculine position is the monarch, in the feminine position is the queen, on the left is the prince, on the right is the dignitary, with the town star occupying, all abhor this situation.

古文：太白入犯之，为兵，乱臣在内，一曰将有诛；贯之而怒，下有叛臣；久守之，下有兵，为旱，为火，万物不成。
现代文：太白星进入侵犯，是战争，乱臣贼子在朝廷，一说将军有被杀的；贯穿舆鬼而且暴亮，下有叛臣；长久占据，下有战事，是旱灾，是火灾，万物不成熟。
English: Too white a star enters the encroachment, it is a war, a ruffian thief in the imperial court, a general is said to have been killed; through the public spirit and violent, there is a traitor; long-term occupation, there is a war, it is a drought, it is a fire, everything is immature.

古文：辰星犯之，五谷不登；守，为有丧，忧在贵人。
现代文：辰星侵犯，五谷不丰收；占据，是有丧事，忧患在贵人。
English: When the stars encroach, the grain will not be plentiful; when they occupy, there will be mourning, and the nobles will be troubled.

古文：客星犯之，国有自立者败，一曰多土功；入之，有诅盟祠鬼事。
现代文：客星侵犯，国内有自立焉王的人失败，一说多水土工程；进入，有诅咒盟誓祭鬼的事情。
English: The guest star invaded, the people with self-reliance in the country failed, and there were many water and soil projects; entering, there were curses, oaths, and ghosts.

古文：彗星犯之，兵起，国不安。
现代文：彗星侵犯，战争发生，国家不安定。
English: Comets invade, wars break out, countries are destabilized.

古文：星孛，其下有丧，兵起，宜修德禳之。
现代文：星变出现，下有丧事，战争发生，应该修养德行来禳除这个灾殃。
English: When star changes appear, when there is a tragedy, when there is a war, we should cultivate virtue to get rid of this scourge.

古文：流星犯鬼锧，有戮死者；入，则四国来贡。
现代文：流星侵犯舆鬼鈇钻，有被杀死的；进入，那么四方国家来进贡。
English: Meteors invade, ghosts are slain; when they enter, the four countries pay tribute.

古文：白云气入，有疾疫；黑，后有忧；赤，为旱；黄，为土功；入犯积尸，贵臣有忧；青，为病。
现代文：白色云气进入，有疾病瘟疫；黑色，皇后有忧患；赤色，是旱灾；黄色，是水土工程；侵入积尸，贵臣有忧患；青色，是疾病。
English: When white clouds enter, there are diseases and plagues; when black clouds enter, the empress is in distress; when red clouds enter, there is drought; when yellow clouds enter, there are water and soil projects; when dead bodies enter, there are troubles for dignitaries; when blue clouds enter, there are diseases.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，舆鬼四度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，舆鬼四度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument, the ghost is four degrees.

古文：旧去极六十八度。
现代文：从前离极六十八度。
English: It used to be sixty-eight degrees away.

古文：景祐测验，舆鬼三度，距西南星去极六十八度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，舆鬼三度，距星西南星离极六十八度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the ghost is three degrees, and the southwest star is sixty-eight degrees away from the extreme.

古文：爟四星，在鬼宿西北，一曰在轩辕西，主烽火，备边亭之警急。
现代文：照四颗星，在鬼宿西北面，一说在轩辕西面，主管烽火，预备边境岗楼的紧急警报。
English: Shining four stars, in the northwest of the haunted house, one said in the west of Xuancheng, supervise the bonfire, prepare the emergency alarm of the border post tower.

古文：以不明为安，明大则边有警。
现代文：以不明亮为安全，明亮光大那磨边境有警报。
English: It's safe to say that it's not bright, but there is an alert at the border of Nama.

古文：赤云气入，天下烽火皆动。
现代文：赤色云气进入，天下烽火都发动。
English: Red clouds came in, and bonfires were lit all over the world.

古文：天狗七星，在狼星北，主守财。
现代文：天狗七颗星，在狼星北面，主管保守财物。
English: Tengu seven stars, on the north side of the wolf star, responsible for the protection of property.

古文：动移，为兵，为饥，多寇盗，有乱兵。
现代文：星动播迁移，是战争，是饥荒，多匪寇盗贼，有叛乱的军队。
English: There is migration, there is war, there is famine, there are bandits and thieves, there are rebel armies.

古文：填星守之，人相食。
现代文：镇星占据，人吃人。
English: The stars of the town dominate, and people eat people.

古文：客、彗守之，则群盗起。
现代文：客星、彗星占据，那么众多盗贼出现。
English: If a guest star or comet occupies it, then many thieves will appear.

古文：外厨六星，为天子之外厨，主烹宰，以供宗庙。
现代文：外厨六颗星，是天子的外厨，主管烹饪宰杀，以供给宗庙。
English: The kitchen, with six stars, is the kitchen of the heavenly son, in charge of cooking and slaughtering to supply the ancestral temple.

古文：占与天厨同。
现代文：占验和天厨相同。
English: Divination is the same as divination.

古文：积尸气一星，在鬼宿中，孛孛然入鬼一度半，去极六十九度，在赤道内二十二度，主死丧祠祀。
现代文：积尸气一颗星，在鬼宿中间，光芒四射地进入嵬宿垣度一度半，离极六十九度，在赤道内二十二度，主管死丧的祭祀。
English: A dead star, in the middle of the haunted house, the light shines brightly into the haunted house at one and a half degrees, at sixty-nine degrees from the extreme, and at twenty-two degrees within the equator, in charge of the sacrifice of death.

古文：天纪一星，在外厨南，主禽兽之齿。
现代文：天纪一颗星，在外厨南面，主管禽兽的牙齿。
English: A star in the sky, south of the outer kitchen, presides over the teeth of animals.

古文：太白、荧惑守犯之，禽兽死，民不安。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星占据侵犯，禽兽死亡，人民不安定。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet occupy encroach, animals die, people are unstable.

古文：客星守之，则政隳。
现代文：客星占据，那磨政治败坏。
English: When guest stars occupy, that's when politics goes bad.

古文：天社六星，在弧矢南。
现代文：天社六颗星，在弧矢南面。
English: Tiansha six stars, in the arc south of the arrow.

古文：昔共工氏之勾龙能平水土，故祀之以配社，其精上为星。
现代文：从前共工氏的勾龙能治平水土，所以祭祀他以配享土地神，他的精神上升焉星。
English: The dragon, once a member of the Koga clan, can level the land and water, so he is worshipped as the god of land distribution, and his spirit rises to the stars.

古文：明，则社稷安；不明、动摇，则下谋上。
现代文：星明亮，那么国家安定；不明亮、动摇，那么臣下谋逆主上。
English: If the star is bright, then the country is stable; if it is dim and wavering, then the vassals are plotting against the master.

古文：太白、荧惑犯之，社稷不安。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星侵犯，国家不安定。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet encroachment, national instability.

古文：客星入，有祀事于国内；出，则有祀事于国外。
现代文：客星进入，在国内有祭祀的事；出去，那么在国外有祭祀的事。
English: When a guest star enters, there is a ritual in the country; when he leaves, there is a ritual abroad.

古文：按《晋志》，爟四星属天市垣，天狗七星在七星北。武密以天狗属牛宿，又属舆鬼，《乾象新书》属井。
现代文：按《晋书，天文志》，炉星四颗星属于天市垣，天狗七颗星在七星北面、蓝蜜认为天狗属于牛宿，又属于舆鬼，《干象新书》属于井宿。
English: According to the "Jinshu, Astronomy," the four stars of the furnace star belong to the sky city wall, the seven stars of the sky dog belong to the north of the seven stars, the blue honey believes that the sky dog belongs to the cattle inn and belongs to the ghost, and the "dry elephant new book" belongs to the well inn.

古文：外厨六星，《晋志》在柳宿南，武密书亦属柳，《乾象新书》与《步天歌》皆属舆鬼。
现代文：外厨六星，《晋书&;;天文志》在柳宿南面，武密书也属于柳宿，《干象新书》和《步天歌》都属于舆鬼。
English: There are six stars in the outer kitchen, "Jin Shu" and "Astronomy" are in the south of Yanjuku, "Wu Mi Shu" also belongs to Yanjuku, "Gan Xiang Xinshu" and "Bu Tian Ge" both belong to Uchiha.

古文：天纪一星，武密书及《乾象新书》皆属柳，惟《步天歌》属鬼宿。
现代文：天纪一颗星，武密书及《干象新书》都属于柳宿，只有《步天歌》属于鬼宿。
English: A star in the celestial calendar, Wu Mi Shu and "The Dry Elephant New Book" both belong to the willow lodge, only "Walking Heavenly Songs" belongs to the ghost lodge.

古文：天社六星，武密书属井，又属鬼。
现代文：天社六颗星，武密书属于井宿，又属于鬼宿。
English: Tiansha six stars, Wu Mishu belongs to the well, but also belongs to the ghost.

古文：《乾象新书》以西一星属井，中一星属鬼，末一星属柳。
现代文：《干象新书》认为西边一颗星属于井宿，中间一颗星属于鬼宿，末尾一颗星属于柳宿。
English: According to the "Dry Elephant New Book," one star in the west belongs to the well, one star in the middle belongs to the ghost, and one star at the end belongs to the willow.

古文：今从《步天歌》，以诸星俱属舆鬼，而备存众说。
现代文：现在依从《步天歌》认为各星都属于舆鬼，而全部保存众说。
English: Now, according to the "Walking Song of Heaven," it is believed that all the stars belong to ghosts, and all of them are preserved.

古文：柳宿八星，天之厨宰也，主尚食，和滋味，又主雷雨。
现代文：柳宿八颗星，是天的厨师长，主管供奉膳食，调和滋味，又主管雷雨。
English: Yanagiyado eight stars, is the chief chef of heaven, in charge of offering meals, blending flavors, and in charge of thunderstorms.

古文：《尔雅》曰： 咮谓之柳。柳，鹑火也。 
现代文：《尔雅》说： 味，谓之柳；柳，鹑火也。 
English: "Lya" said: "Aji" means willow; willow also means bonfire.

古文：又主木功。
现代文：又主管木材建筑、制作。
English: He is also in charge of timber construction and production.

古文：一曰天库，又为鸟喙，主草木。
现代文：一说天库，又是乌嘴，主管草木。
English: Speaking of heaven's storehouse, it is also the wuzu, the head of the plants.

古文：明，则大臣谨重，国家厨食具；开张，则人饥死；亡，则都邑振动；直，则为兵。
现代文：明亮，那么大臣严谨稳重，国家的厨房饮食具备；星开张，那么人民饿死；消失，那么都市城邑振动；直行排列，就是战争。
English: Bright, then the minister is strict and steady, the country's kitchen diet is ready; the star opens, then the people starve to death; disappear, then the cities and towns vibrate; straight line, is war.

古文：日食，宫室不安，王者恶之，厨官、桥道、堤防有忧。
现代文：日食，官室不安宁，王者厌恶这种情况，厨官、桥梁道路、堤防有忧患。
English: The sun is eclipsed, the government offices are uneasy, the king is disgusted with this situation, and the chefs, bridges, roads, and dikes are in trouble.

古文：日晕，飞鸟多死，五谷不成；三抱而戴者，君有喜。
现代文：日晕，飞乌多死亡，五谷不成熟；三层环抱而尊奉柳宿的君王有喜事。
English: The sun is fading, Fei Udo is dead, the grain is immature; the monarchs who are surrounded by three layers and worship the willow lodge have a happy event.

古文：月食，宫室不安，大臣忧。
现代文：月食，官室不安宁，大臣有忧患。
English: The moon is eclipsed, the government office is restless, and the minister is worried.

古文：月晕，林苑有兵，天下有土功，厨狱官忧，又为兵，为饥，为旱、疫。
现代文：月晕，林苑有战争，天下有水土工程，厨官狱官有忧患，又是战争，是饥荒，是旱灾、瘟疫。
English: The moon is eclipsed, there is war in the forest, there are water and soil projects around the world, chefs and prison officers are worried, there is war, famine, drought and plague.

古文：岁星犯之，国多义兵。
现代文：岁星侵犯，国家多义军。
English: Year star encroachment, the country more than the rebel army.

古文：荧惑犯之，色赤而芒角，其下君死，一曰宫中忧火灾；守之，有兵，逆臣在侧；逆行守之，王不宁。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，星色赤而有光芒，它下面的君主死亡，一说宫中有忧患火灾；占据，有战争，叛逆之臣在君侧；逆向运行占据，帝王不安宁。
English: Fluorescent planet encroaches, starry red and shining, the monarch below it dies, one says that there is a fire in the palace; occupy, there is a war, the rebellious vassal is on the side of the monarch; reverse run occupy, the emperor is restless.

古文：填星犯守，君臣和，天下喜；石申曰： 天子戒饮食之官。 
现代文：镇星侵犯占据，君臣和谐，天下高兴；石申说： 天子戒饮食的官。 
English: Zhenxing occupied the encroachment, the monarch and the minister were harmonious, and the world was happy; Shi Shen said: The official who abstains from eating is the son of heaven.

古文：出、入、留、舍，有急令。
现代文：出来、进入、停留、住宿，有紧急的法令。
English: There are emergency decrees for leaving, entering, staying and lodging.

古文：太白犯之，有急兵。
现代文：太白星侵犯，有紧急军事。
English: Too white star encroachment, there is a military emergency.

古文：逆行勾巳，臣谋主；昼见，为兵。
现代文：逆向运行形成勾巳，臣下谋逆主上；白天出现，是战争。
English: Running in the opposite direction forms a hook, the vassal plots against the master; appearing in the daytime, it is war.

古文：辰星犯之，民相仇，岁旱，君戒在酒食。
现代文：辰星侵犯，人民互相仇视，这年干旱，君主戒在酒食。
English: The hour-star encroaches, the people hate each other, the year is dry, and the monarch abstains from food and drink.

古文：客星犯之，咎在周国；守，则布帛、鱼盐贵。
现代文：客星侵犯，过失在周国；占据，那么布帛、鱼盐价贵。
English: If the guest star encroaches, the fault is in Zhou Province; if it occupies, then the cloth and fish salt are expensive.

古文：色苍白，杀边地诸侯。
现代文：星色苍白，杀死边区诸侯。
English: Starry-eyed and pale, he killed the lords of the border region.

古文：彗星犯之，大臣诛，为兵，为丧。
现代文：彗星侵犯，大臣被杀，是战争，是丧事。
English: A comet strikes, a minister is killed, it's war, it's a funeral.

古文：星孛于柳，南夷叛，甘德曰： 为兵，为丧。 
现代文：星变出现在柳宿，南方夷族叛乱，甘德说： 是战争，是丧事。 
English: When the Star Change occurred in Yanjuku and the Southern barbarians rebelled, Gander said, "It was a war, it was a funeral."

古文：流星出犯之，周分忧；色黄，为喜；入，则王者内有火灾；《乙巳占》： 出，则宗庙有喜，贤人用；入，为天厨官有忧，木功废。 
现代文：流星出来侵犯，周国分野地区有忧患；星色黄，是喜事；进入，那么王者宫内有火灾；《乙巳占》： 出来，那么宗庙有喜事，贤人起用；进入，是天厨官有忧患，木功废止。 
English: If a meteor comes out to invade, there will be sorrow in the Zhou Guofeng area; if the star is yellow, it is a happy event; if it enters, there will be a fire in the king's palace; "Yi Si Zhan": If it comes out, there will be a happy event in the ancestral temple, and the wise man will be appointed; if it enters, there will be sorrow in the heavenly kitchen, and the woodwork will be abolished.

古文：赤云气入，为火；黄，为赦；黄白，为天子有喜，起宫室。
现代文：赤色云气进入，是火灾；黄色，是赦免；黄白色，是天子有喜事，筑起宫室。
English: When the red cloud enters, it is fire; when the yellow cloud enters, it is pardon; and when the yellow and white clouds enter, it is the son of heaven having a happy event and building a palace.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，以柳为十四度，唐开元游仪十五度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，以柳宿为十四度；唐朝开元游仪十五度。
English: According to the Yongyuan Bronze Statuette of the Han Dynasty, Yanagishuku is the fourteenth degree; the Tang Dynasty's Yanyu Statuette is the fifteenth degree.

古文：旧去极七十七度。
现代文：从前离极七十七度。
English: It used to be 77 degrees.

古文：景祐测验，柳八星一十五度，距西头第三星去极八十三度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，柳宿八星十五度，距星西第三颗星离极八十三度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the eight stars of the willow lodge are fifteen degrees, and the third star in the west is eighty-three degrees away from the pole.

古文：酒旗三星，在轩辕右角南，酒官之旗也，主宴享饮食。
现代文：酒旗三颗星，在轩辕右角南面，是酒官的旗帜，主管宴会饮食。
English: The three stars of the wine flag, on the south side of the right corner of the ridge, is the flag of the wine officer, in charge of banquets and meals.

古文：星不具，则天下有大丧，帝王宴饮，沉昏非礼，以酒亡国；明，则宴乐谨。
现代文：星不全备，那么天下有大丧亡，帝王宴饮，沉迷昏惯不守礼法，因为酒而亡国；星明亮，那么宴会欢乐而谨慎。
English: If the star is not full, there will be great destruction in the world, emperors will feast, indulge in debauchery, not observe etiquette, and ruin the country because of wine; if the star is bright, then the banquet will be joyful and prudent.

古文：五星守之，天下大酺，有酒肉赐宗室。
现代文：五星占据，天下人民聚会饮酒，有酒肉赏赐宗室。
English: Five stars occupy, the people of the world gather to drink, and the ancestral home is rewarded with meat and wine.

古文：荧惑犯之，饮食失度。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，饮食失去常度。
English: Fluorescent planet encroaches, diet loses regularity.

古文：太白犯之，三公九卿有谋。
现代文：太白星侵犯，三公九卿有图谋。
English: Taibaixing encroaches, the three princes and nine nobles are plotting.

古文：客、彗犯，主以酒过为相所害。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，君主因为酒的过失被宰相所害。
English: Invaded by guest stars and comets, the monarch was victimized by the prime minister because of his drinking.

古文：赤云气入，君以酒失。
现代文：赤色云气进入，君主因酒失误。
English: The red mist descends and the monarch makes a drunken blunder.

古文：按《晋志》，酒旗在天市垣。
现代文：按《晋书&;;天文志》，酒旗在天市垣。
English: According to the "Jinshu" & "Astronomy," the wine flag is in the heavenly city wall.

古文：《步天歌》以酒旗属柳宿。
现代文：《步天歌》，认为酒旗属于柳宿。
English: "Bu Tiange" believes that the liquor flag belongs to the willow lodge.

古文：以《通占镜》考之，亦属柳，又属七星。
现代文：用《通占镜》考察它，也属于柳宿，又属于七星。
English: Using "Tong Zhan Mirror" to examine it, it also belongs to Yanjuku, and belongs to the seven stars.

古文：《乾象新书》亦属七星，与《步天歌》不同，今并存之。
现代文：《干象新书》也属于七星，和《步天歌》不同，现在都保存这些说法。
English: "The Dry Elephant New Book" also belongs to the seven stars, and unlike "Walking Song of Heaven," these sayings are now preserved.

古文：七星七星，一名天都，主衣裳文绣，又主急兵。
现代文：七星七颗星，一名天都，主管衣裳花纹刺绣，又主管紧急军事。
English: Seven stars, seven stars, one emperor, in charge of clothing pattern embroidery, and in charge of emergency military.

古文：故星明，王道昌；暗，则贤良去，天下空；动，则兵起；离，则易政。
现代文：所以星明亮，王道昌盛；暗淡，那么贤艮之士离开，天下空虚；星动摇，那么战争发生；离散，那么更改政权。
English: Therefore, the star is bright, the royal road is prosperous; dim, then the wise men leave, the world is empty; the star is shaken, then the war occurs; dispersion, then the change of regime.

古文：盖天曰：七星为朱雀颈。
现代文：盖天说认为：七星是朱雀颈。
English: Geitian said that he believed that the seven stars were the neck of a starling.

古文：颈者，文明之粹，羽仪所承。
现代文：颈，是文明的精粹，表率所秉承。
English: neck, is the essence of civilization, upheld by the example.

古文：日食其宿，主不安，刑在门户之神。又曰：文章士受诛，其分兵起，臣为乱。
现代文：日食发生在此宿，君主不安宁，刑罚在门户之神，又说文章之士被杀，它的分野地区战争发生，臣下作乱。
English: The solar eclipse occurred in this inn, the monarch was restless, the punishment was in the god of the gate, it was also said that the article's people were killed, the war occurred in its field area, and the vassals rioted.

古文：日晕，周邦君忧；青色抱而顺，在兵为东军吉。
现代文：日晕，周国君主有忧患；青色环抱而且顺从，在战争中是束军吉利。
English: The sun is fading, the Zhou monarch is in distress; the blue embraces and obeys, and in the war it is good luck for the army.

古文：月食，后及大臣有忧，又为岁饥，民流，其国更政。
现代文：月食，王后及大臣有忧患，又是这年饥荒，人民流亡，这个国家更改政权。
English: The moon was eclipsed, the queen and her ministers were troubled, there was a famine that year, people fled, and the country changed hands.

古文：晕，其地旱，狱官凶。
现代文：月晕，这个地方干旱，司法官凶恶。
English: The moon is faint, the place is dry, the magistrate is fierce.

古文：岁星犯之，主忧兵，五谷多伤。
现代文：岁星侵犯，帝王忧患战争，五谷多受损伤。
English: The year star encroaches, the emperor worries about the war, and the grain is mostly damaged.

古文：荧惑犯之，桥梁不通；逆行，则地动为火灾；出、入、留、舍，其国失地，水决。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，桥梁不通行；逆向运行，那么地震，是火灾；出来、进入、停留、住宿，这个国家丧失土地，水决口。
English: Fluorescent planets encroach, bridges are impassable; running in reverse, then an earthquake, is a fire; coming out, entering, staying, lodging, the country loses land, water breaks.

古文：填星犯守，世治平，王道兴，后、夫人喜。
现代文：镇星侵犯占据，治世太平，王道兴盛，皇后、夫人有喜事。
English: The town was invaded and occupied by the star, the reign was peaceful, the royal road was prosperous, and the empress and her consort had a happy event.

古文：太白犯之，兵暴起，大臣为乱；经天，防诈伪。
现代文：太白星侵犯，战争骤然发生，大臣作乱；经过天空，防备奸诈虚伪。
English: Too white star encroaches, war suddenly occurs, minister makes trouble; through the sky, guard against treachery and hypocrisy.

古文：辰星犯之，贼臣在侧；守，则其分有忧，万物不成，兵从中起，贵臣有罪，民疫流亡。
现代文：辰星侵犯，贼子乱臣在君侧；占据，那么它的分野地区有忧患，万物不成长，战争从中央发生，贵臣有罪，人民流行瘟疫四处流亡。
English: The hour and the star encroach, the thief and the disorderly vassal are on the side of the monarch; occupy, then there is sorrow in its field and region, everything does not grow, war occurs from the center, the noble vassal is guilty, and the people are exiled everywhere by epidemic plague.

古文：客星犯之，为兵，《荆州占》云： 河水决，民流。 
现代文：客星侵犯，是战争，《剂州占》说： 黄河决口，人民流亡。 
English: The invasion of the guest star is a war, "Jangzhou Zhan" said: the Yellow River is broken, and the people are exiled.

古文：彗犯，有乱兵起，贵臣戮；武密曰： 彗星出七星，状如杵，为兵。 
现代文：彗星侵犯，有叛乱战争发生，贵臣被杀；武密说： 彗星从七星出来，形状像杵，是战争。 
English: Comets invade, there is a war of rebellion, and noblemen are killed; Wu Mi said: Comets come out of the seven stars, shaped like a dragonfly, it is war.

古文：星孛于星，有乱兵起宫殿，贵臣戮，大臣相谮。
现代文：星变出现在火星，有叛乱战争在宫殿发生，贵臣被杀，大臣互相诬陷。
English: Star changes appear on Mars, there is a war of rebellion in the palace, dignitaries are killed, and ministers frame each other.

古文：流星犯之，为兵、忧；又曰：入，则有急使来。《乙巳占》： 流星入，库官有喜，锦绣进，女工用。 
现代文：流星侵犯，是战争、忧患；又说：进入，就有紧急的使者来，《乙巳占》： 流星进入，库官有喜事，锦绣进献，女工被使用。 
English: Meteor invasion is war, sorrow; also said: enter, there will be an urgent messenger, "Yi Si Zhan": meteor enters, the treasurer has a happy event, brocade is donated, female workers are used.

古文：苍白云气入，贵人忧；出，则天子用急使。
现代文：苍白色云气进入，贵人有忧患；出去，那么天子紧急派遣使者。
English: When the pale clouds come in, the nobles are troubled; when they go out, the Son of Heaven urgently dispatches an envoy.

古文：赤入，为兵；黑，为贤士死；黄，则远人来贡；白，为天子遣使赐诸侯帛。
现代文：赤色云气进入，是战争；黑色，是贤士死；黄色，那么远人来进贡；白色，是天子派遣使者赏赐诸侯财帛。
English: When the red clouds come in, it is war; when the black clouds come in, it is the death of a wise man; when the yellow clouds come in, it is tribute from afar; and when the white clouds come in, it is the Son of Heaven sending an emissary to reward the wealth of the provinces.

古文：按景祐测验，七星七度，距大星去极九十七度。
现代文：按景佑观测验证，七星七度，距星大星离极九十七度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the seven stars are seven degrees away from each other, and the great star is ninety-seven degrees from the pole.

古文：轩辕十七星，在七星北，后妃之主，士职也。
现代文：轩辕十七颗星，在七星北面，是王后妃嫔的主宰，是士师的官职。
English: Seventeen stars, in the north of the seven stars, is the head of the queen's concubine, and is the official position of the judge.

古文：一曰东陵，一曰权星，主雷雨之神。
现代文：又叫束陵，又叫权星，主管雷雨的神。
English: One is called Dongling and the other is called Guanxing. He is the god in charge of thunderstorms.

古文：南大星，女主也；次北一星，夫人也，屏也，上将也；次北一星，妃也，次将也；其次诸星，皆次妃之属也。
现代文：南边的大星，是女主；挨着北边一颗星，是夫人，是屏风，是上将；挨着北边一颗星，是妃子，是次将；其余挨着的各星，都是低于妃嫔之类。
English: The large star on the south side is the mistress; next to the north star is the lady, the screen, the admiral; next to the north star is the concubine, the second-in-command; the rest of the stars are lower than the concubines.

古文：女主南小星，女御也；左一星少民，后宗也；右一星太民，太后宗也。
现代文：女主南面的小星，是女御者；左边一颗星少民，是王后的宗族；右边一颗星是大民，是太后的宗族。
English: The small star to the south of the hostess is the hostess; the small star to the left is the queen's clan; the large star to the right is the queen mother's clan.

古文：欲其色黄小而明。
现代文：要它的星色黄小而且明亮。
English: Let its starry yellow be small and bright.

古文：武密曰： 后妃后宫之象，阴阳交合，感为雷，激为电，和为雨，怒为风，乱为雾，凝为霜，散为露，聚为云气，立为虹蜺，离为背璚，分为抱珥，此二十四变皆权主之。 
现代文：武密说： 是后妃后宫的象征，阴阳交合，感发为雷，激发为电，融和为雨，震怒为风，散乱为雾，凝结为霜，发散为露，积聚为云气，站立为虹霓，离别为背坝，分散为抱珥，这二十四种变化都由权星主管它们。 
English: Wu Mi said: is a symbol of the queen's harem, the yin and yang intersect, the induction is thunder, the excitation is electricity, the fusion is rain, the shock and anger is wind, the dispersion is fog, the condensation is frost, the dispersion is dew, the accumulation is cloud, the standing is rainbow, the parting is back dam, and the dispersion is cuddle. These twenty-four kinds of changes are all controlled by the authority star.

古文：微细，则皇后不安；黑，则忧在大人；移徙，则民流；东西角大张而振，后族败。
现代文：星微细，那磨皇后不安宁；黑色，那么忧患在大人；星移动迁徙，那么人民流亡；东西角大开而且振动，皇后的宗族败落。
English: The stars are faint, and the queen of Nama is restless; black, and the adults are worried; the stars move and migrate, and the people are exiled; the east and west are wide open and vibrate, and the queen's clan is defeated.

古文：月入之，女主失势，或火灾；犯左右角，大臣以罪免；中犯乘守太民，为饥，太后宗有罪；守少民，小有饥，女主失势；守御女，有忧。
现代文：月亮进入，女主失去权势，或者火灾；侵犯左、右角，大臣因罪被罢免；从中间侵犯登临占据大民，是饥荒，太后宗族有罪；占据少民，有小饥荒，女主失去权势，占据御女，有忧患。
English: The moon enters, the mistress loses power, or there is a fire; the left and right corners are encroached upon, and the minister is dismissed for a crime; the middle encroaches upon and occupies the people, it is a famine, and the empress dowager's clan is guilty; the few people are occupied, there is a small famine, the mistress loses power, the empress dowager is occupied, and there is sorrow.

古文：月晕，女主有丧。
现代文：月晕，女主有丧事。
English: The moon is waning, the mistress is in mourning.

古文：月、五星凌犯、环绕、乘守，皆为女主有祸。
现代文：月亮、五星进犯、环绕、登临占据，都是女主有灾祸。
English: The moon, the five-star attack, the encirclement, and the occupation of the landing are all the disasters of the hostess.

古文：月食，女主忧。
现代文：月食，女主有忧患。
English: The moon is eclipsed, the mistress is troubled.

古文：岁星犯之，女主失势，一曰大臣当之；乘守大民，为大饥，太后宗黜；中犯乘守少民，为小饥，后宫有黜者。
现代文：岁星侵犯，女主失去权势，一说大臣承担责任；登临占据大民，是大饥荒，太后宗族被罢黜；从中间侵犯登临占据少民，是小饥荒，后宫有被罢黜的。
English: When the year star encroaches, the mistress loses power, and the minister assumes responsibility; when the emperor invades and occupies the people, it is a great famine, and the dowager empress's clan is ousted; when the emperor invades and occupies a small number of people from the middle, it is a small famine, and the harem is ousted.

古文：荧惑犯守勾巳，后妃离德；犯御女，天子仆妾忧；犯太民、少民，忧在后宗；守之，宫中有戮者。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯占据形成勾巳，皇后妃子离心离德；侵犯御女，天子的仆妾有忧患；侵犯大民、少民，忧患在皇后的宗族；占据，官中有被杀的。
English: Fluorescent planets invade and occupy the formation of hooks, the empress's concubine is centrifugal and departs from virtue; invade the daughter, the son of heaven's servant and concubine has sorrow; invade the great people, the small people, the sorrow is in the queen's clan; occupy, the official has been killed.

古文：填星行其中，女主失势，有丧。
现代文：镇星运行其中，女主失去权势，有丧事。
English: When the town star is running, the lady loses her power and there is a funeral.

古文：太白犯之，皇后失势。
现代文：太白星侵犯，皇后失去权势。
English: Taibai Xing encroached, the empress lost power.

古文：客星犯之，近臣谋灭宗族。
现代文：客星侵犯，近臣图谋消灭宗族。
English: A guest star invades, a close retainer plots to exterminate the clan.

古文：彗、孛犯，女主为寇，一曰兵起。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，女主掠夺，一说战争发生。
English: Comets, variable stars invade, mistresses plunder, and war breaks out.

古文：流星入之，后宫多谗乱《乙巳占》： 流星出之，后有中使出。 
现代文：流星进入，后官多谗言祸乱；《乙巳占》： 流星从轩辕出来，皇后派出宫中使者。 
English: Meteors enter, and officials often speak of calamity; "Yi Si Zhan": Meteors emerge from the turmoil, and the empress sends an emissary to the palace.

古文：一曰天子有子孙喜。
现代文：一说天子有子孙之喜。
English: It is said that the Son of Heaven is pleased to have descendants.

古文：天稷五星，在七星南，农正也，取百谷之长以为号。
现代文：天稷五颗星，在七星南面，是农官，取百谷中居于首位的来作为名号。
English: The five stars in the heavens, south of the seven stars, are agricultural officials, taking the first place in the hundred valleys as a name.

古文：明，则岁丰；暗，或不具为饥；移徙，天下荒歉。
现代文：星明亮，那么年成丰收；星暗淡或星不全备，是饥荒；移动迁徙，天下饥荒歉收。
English: If the stars are bright, there will be a good harvest; if the stars are dim or incomplete, there will be famine; if the stars move and migrate, there will be famine and poor harvest.

古文：客星入之，有祠事于内；出，有祠事于国外。
现代文：客星进入，宫廷内有祭祀的事；出去，在国外有祭祀的事。
English: When a guest star enters, there is a ritual in the court; when he leaves, there is a ritual abroad.

古文：天相三星，在七星北，一曰在酒旗南，丞相大臣之象。
现代文：天相三颗星，在七星北面，一说在酒旗南面，丞相大臣的象征。
English: Three stars in the sky, seven stars in the north, and a flagpole in the south, symbolize the prime minister.

古文：武密曰： 占与相星同。 
现代文：武密说： 占验和相星相同。 
English: Wu Mi said: The horoscope and the phase star are the same.

古文：五星犯守之，后妃、将相忧。
现代文：五星侵犯占据，后妃、将相有忧患。
English: Five-star encroachments occupy, the empress and the emperor will be in trouble.

古文：彗、客犯之，大臣诛。
现代文：彗星、客星侵犯，大臣被杀。
English: Comet, guest star encroach, minister is killed.

古文：云气入，黄，为大臣喜；黑，为将忧。
现代文：云气进入，黄色，是大臣有喜事；黑色，是将军有疾病。
English: When the clouds come in, yellow is when a minister is happy, and black is when a general is ill.

古文：内平四星，在三台南，一曰在中台南，执法平罪之官。
现代文：内平四颗星，在三台南面，一说在中台南面，执掌法律评审罪行的官。
English: There are four stars in the inner circle, one in the southern part of the third circle, and one in the southern part of the middle circle, who are in charge of the legal assessment of crimes.

古文：明，则刑罚平。
现代文：星明亮，那么刑罚公平。
English: If the star is bright, the punishment is fair.

古文：按轩辕十七星，《晋志》在七星北，而列于天市垣；武密以轩辕属七星，又属柳；《乾象新书》以西八星属柳，中属七星，末属张。
现代文：按轩辕十七颗星，《晋书，天文志》左七星北面，而排列在天市垣；武密认为轩辕属于七星，又属于柳宿；《干象新书》认为西边八颗星属于柳宿，中间属于七星，末尾属于张宿。
English: According to the seventeen stars of Xuan Zang, the left seven stars of "Jinshu, Astronomical History" are on the north side, and are arranged in the sky city wall; Wu Mi believes that Xuan Zang belongs to the seven stars and belongs to the willow lodge; "Gan Xiang New Book" believes that the eight stars on the west side belong to the willow lodge, the middle belongs to the seven stars, and the end belongs to the Zhang lodge.

古文：天稷五星，《晋志》在七星南；武密亦以天稷属七星，又属柳；《乾象新书》以西二星属柳，余属七星。
现代文：天稷五颗星，《晋书&;;天文志》在七星南面；武密也认为天稷属于七星，又属于柳宿；《干象新书》认为西边二颗星属于柳宿，其余属于七星。
English: Five stars in the heavens, "Jinshu" and "Astronomy" are in the south of the seven stars; Wu Mi also believes that the heavens belong to the seven stars and belong to the willow lodge; "Ganxiang New Book" believes that the two stars in the west belong to the willow lodge, and the rest belong to the seven stars.

古文：天相三星，《晋志》在天市垣，武密书属七星，《乾象新书》属轸宿。
现代文：天相三颗星，《晋书，天文志》在天市垣，武密书认为属于七星，《干象新书》认为属于干宿。
English: There are three stars in the celestial aspect, "Jinshu, Astronomy" is at the top of the heavenly city wall, "Wu Mishu" is considered to belong to the seven stars, and "Dry Elephant New Book" is considered to belong to the dry lodge.

古文：内平四星，《晋志》在天市垣，武密书属柳，《乾象新书》属张，《步天歌》属七星。
现代文：内平四颗星，《晋书，天文志》在天市垣，武密书属于柳宿，《干象新书》属于张宿，《步天歌》属于七星。
English: Nei Ping four stars, "Jin Shu, Astronomy" is in Tian Shigaki, Wu Mi Shu belongs to Liu Shuku, "Dry Elephant New Book" belongs to Zhang Shuku, "Walking Heavenly Songs" belongs to Seven Stars.

古文：诸说皆不同，今并存之。
现代文：诸说都不同，现在一并保存这些说法。
English: All the stories are different, and now they are kept together.

古文：张宿六星，主珍宝、宗庙所用及衣服，又主天厨饮食、赏赉之事。
现代文：张宿六颗星，主管珍宝、宗庙用的东西及衣服，又主管天厕饮食、赏赐的事情。
English: Zhangjuku six stars, in charge of treasures, things and clothes for the ancestral temple, and in charge of the heavenly toilet diet, reward things.

古文：明，则王行五礼，得天下之中；动，则赏赉不明，王者子孙多疾；移徙，则天下有逆；就聚，则有兵。
现代文：星明亮，那么帝王推行五礼，得到天的中意；星动播，那么赏赐不明，王者的子孙多病；星迁移，那么天下有叛逆；走向聚集，就有战争。
English: If the stars are bright, the emperor will carry out the Five Rites and obtain the will of heaven; if the stars are moving, the reward will be unknown, and the king's descendants will be sickly; if the stars are migrating, there will be rebellion in the world; if the world is gathering, there will be war.

古文：日食，为王者失礼，掌御馔者忧。甘德曰： 后失势，贵臣忧，期七十日。 
现代文：日食，是王者失礼，掌管御用饮食的人有忧患，甘德说： 王后失势，贵臣有忧患，为期七十天。 
English: A solar eclipse is a royal faux pas, and those in charge of the royal diet are in distress, Gander said: The queen loses power, and the dignitaries are in distress, for a period of seventy days.

古文：晕及有黄气抱日，主功臣效忠。又曰： 财宝大臣黜，将相忧。 
现代文：日晕及有黄色云气围抱太阳，预兆功臣效忠，又说： 掌财宝的大臣被罢免，将相有忧患。 
English: The sun was eclipsed, and a yellow cloud enveloped the sun, foreshadowing the loyalty of the meritorious. He also said, "If the minister in charge of the treasury is dismissed, there will be great sorrow."

古文：月食，其分饥，臣失势，皇后有忧。
现代文：月食，它的分野地区饥荒，臣下失势，皇后有忧患。
English: The eclipse of the moon, famine in its sphere, the loss of power of the vassals, and the distress of the queen.

古文：晕，为水灾。陈卓曰： 五谷、鱼盐贵。 
现代文：月晕，是水灾，陈卓说： 五谷、鱼盐价贵。 
English: The moon halo is a flood, Chen Zhuo said: grain and fish salt are expensive.

古文：巫咸曰： 后妃恶之，宫中疫。 
现代文：巫咸说： 后妃厌恶这种情况，宫中有瘟疫。 
English: Wuxian said, "The Empress is disgusted with this situation. There is a plague in the palace."

古文：月犯之，将相死，其国忧。
现代文：月亮侵犯，将相死亡，那个国家有忧患。
English: The moon encroaches, the general dies, that country is in trouble.

古文：岁星入犯之，天子有庆贺事；守之，国大丰，君臣同心；三十日不出，天下安宁，其国升平。
现代文：岁星进入侵犯，天子有庆贺的事情；占据，国家大丰收，君臣同心同德；三十天不出来，天下安宁，那个国家升平。
English: The year star enters the encroachment, the heavenly son has something to celebrate; occupy, the country's bumper harvest, the monarch and the minister are of the same mind and the same virtue; thirty days do not come out, the world is peaceful, and the country is leveled.

古文：荧惑犯之，功臣当封；入，则为兵起；又曰色如四时休王，其分贵人安，社稷无虞；又曰荧惑春守，诸侯叛；逆行守之，为地动，为火灾，又曰将军惊，土功作，又曰会则不可用兵。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，功臣应当封赏；进入，就是战争发生；又说星色像四季赞美帝王，它的分野地区贵人安宁，国家没有忧虑；又说荧惑星在春天占据，诸侯叛乱；逆向运行占据，是地震，是火灾，又说将军惊动，水土工程兴起，又说星集会就不能用兵。
English: If a fluorescent planet invades, the meritorious should be rewarded; if it enters, a war will occur; it is also said that the star color is like the four seasons to praise the emperor, its field area is noble and peaceful, and the country has no worries; it is also said that the fluorescent planet occupies in the spring, the princes rebel; if it occupies in the opposite direction, it is an earthquake, it is a fire, it is also said that the general is alarmed, the water and soil project arises, and it is also said that the star assembly cannot use soldiers.

古文：填星犯之，为女主饮宴过度，或宫女失礼；入，为兵；出，则其分失地；守之，有土功。
现代文：镇星侵犯，是女主饮宴过度，或宫女失礼；进入，是战争；出来，那么它的分野地区丧失土地；占据，有水土工程。
English: Town star encroachment, is the hostess feasting excessively, or the courtesan faux pas; enter, is war; out, then its field area loss of land; occupy, there are water and soil works.

古文：太白犯之，国忧；守之，其国兵谋不成，石申曰： 国易政。 舍留，其国兵起。
现代文：太白星侵犯，国家有忧患；占据，那个国家战争图谋不成，石申说 国家更换政权 ；住宿停留，那个国家战争发生。
English: Too white star invasion, the country is in trouble; occupy, that country's war plan fails, Shishen said; the country changes the regime; accommodation stay, that country's war occurs.

古文：辰星犯守，五谷不成，兵起，大水，贵臣负国，民疫，多讼，芒角，臣伤其君；入，为火灾；出；则有叛臣。
现代文：辰星侵犯占据，五谷不成熟，战争发生，发大水，贵臣辜负国家，人民瘟疫，多讼案；发射光芒，臣下伤害他的君主；进入，是火灾；出去，就有叛乱之臣。
English: The hour and the star encroach and occupy, the grain is immature, the war occurs, the flood occurs, the dignitary betrays the country, the people are plagued, there are multiple lawsuits; the light is emitted, the vassal harms his monarch; the entrance is a fire; the exit has a rebel vassal.

古文：客星犯之，天子以酒为忧；守之，周、楚之国有隐士出；入于张，兵起，国饥；舍留不去，前将军有谋。又曰利先起兵。
现代文：客星侵犯，天子把酒作为忧虑；占据，周、楚国有隐士出现；进入到张宿，战争发生，国家饥荒；住宿停留不离开，前将军有图谋，又说先起兵的一方有利。
English: The guest star invades, the heavenly son regards wine as a worry; the hermit of Zhou and Chou states occupies, the hermit of Zhou and Chou states appears; he enters Zhangshu, the war occurs, the country is starving; he stays in the accommodation and does not leave, the former general has a plan, and it is advantageous to be the first to raise an army.

古文：彗星犯之，国用兵，民亡；守，为兵；出，为旱；又曰犯守，君欲移徙宫殿。
现代文：彗星侵犯，国家动用军队，人民流亡；占据，是战争；出去，是旱灾；又说侵犯占据，君主要迁移宫殿。
English: The comet invades, the country uses the army, the people go into exile; occupy, it is war; go out, it is drought; also said to invade and occupy, the monarch moves the palace.

古文：星孛于张，为民流，为兵大起。
现代文：星变出现在张宿，是人民流亡，是战争大规模发生。
English: The star change appeared in Zhangshu, the people were exiled, and a large-scale war broke out.

古文：《乙巳占》： 流星出入，宗社昌，有赦令，下臣入贺。 
现代文：《乙巳占》： 流星出来进入，宗庙社稷昌盛，有赦免令，下臣入朝贺喜。 
English: "Yi Si Zhan": The meteor comes out and enters, the ancestral temple is prosperous, there is a pardon order, and the vassal enters the morning congratulation.

古文：苍白云气入之，庭中觞客有忧；黄白，天子因喜赐客；黑，为其分水灾；色赤，天子将用兵。
现代文：苍白色云气进入，朝廷宴饮宾客有忧患；黄白色，天子因为高兴而赏赐宾客；黑色，是它的分野地区有水灾；星色赤，天子将要用兵。
English: Pale-white clouds enter, the guests of the imperial banquet are worried; yellow-white, the Son of Heaven rewards the guests for their happiness; black, there is a flood in its field area; star-red, the Son of Heaven will use soldiers.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，张宿十七度，唐开元游仪十八度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，张宿十七度；唐朝开元游仪，十八度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan Bronze Statuette, Zhangshu is 17 degrees; the Tang Dynasty Kaiyuan Tour Statuette, 18 degrees.

古文：旧去极九十七度。
现代文：从前离极九十七度。
English: It used to be ninety-seven degrees.

古文：景祐测验，张十八度，距西第二星去极一百三度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，张宿十八度，距星西第二星离极一百零三度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, Zhangshu is 18 degrees, and the second star in the west is 103 degrees away from the pole.

古文：天庙十四星，在张宿南，天子祖庙也。
现代文：天庙十四颗星，在张宿南面，是天子的祖庙。
English: The fourteen stars of the Temple of Heaven, south of Zhangshu, is the ancestral temple of the Son of Heaven.

古文：明，则吉；微细，其所有兵，军食不通。
现代文：明亮，就吉利；微细，那个地方有战争，军中粮食运输有阻碍。
English: If it's bright, it's lucky; if it's faint, there's a war in that place, and the army's grain transportation is hindered.

古文：客星中犯之，有白衣会，兵起。又曰祠官有忧。
现代文：客星从中部侵犯，有平民聚会，战争发生，又说祭祠官有忧患。
English: The guest star invaded from the central region, there was a gathering of civilians, a war broke out, and it was said that the sacrificial officials were worried.

古文：武密曰： 与虚梁同占。 
现代文：武密说： 和虚梁有相同的占验。 
English: Wu Mi said, "I have the same fortune-telling ability as Quliang."

古文：按天庙十四星，《晋志》虽列于二十八宿之外，而亦曰在张宿南，与《隋志》所载同，兼与《步天歌》合。
现代文：按天庙十四颗星，《晋书&;;天文志》虽列在二十八宿之外，却也说在张宿南面，和《隋书&;;天文志》所载录相同，同时和《步天歌》吻合。
English: According to the 14 stars of the Temple of Heaven, although "Jin Shu&; Astronomy" is listed outside the 28 villages, it is also said to be in the south of Zhangshu, which is the same as the record contained in "Sui Shu&; Astronomy" and coincides with "Walking Heavenly Song."

古文：翼宿二十二星，天之乐府，主俳倡戏乐，又主外夷远客、负海之宾。
现代文：翼宿二十二颗星，天的乐府，主管俳优倡伎戏曲音乐，又主管境外夷族远方来客、遥远异国的宾客。
English: It is the home of twenty-two stars, the heavenly music palace, the director of haiku and opera music, and also the director of foreign guests and guests from distant countries.

古文：星明大，礼乐兴，四国宾；动摇，则蛮夷使来；离徙，天子将举兵。
现代文：星明亮光大，礼乐兴盛，四方国家宾服；星动摇，那么蛮族夷族的使者前来；分离迁移，天子将要发动战争。
English: The star shines brightly, the ritual music flourishes, and the guests from four countries come; if the star wavers, then the barbarian and barbarian emissaries will come; if they separate and migrate, the Son of Heaven will start a war.

古文：日食，王者失礼，忠臣见谮，为旱灾。
现代文：日食，王者失礼，忠臣受赞害，是旱灾。
English: The eclipse of the sun, the king's discourtesy, the loyal subject's praise, is a drought.

古文：晕，为乐官黜；上有抱气三，敌心欲和。
现代文：日晕，是乐官被罢免；星上有星气围抱三重，敌人的心思要讲和。
English: The sun is eclipsed, the music director is dismissed; the stars are surrounded by three stars, and the enemy's mind wants to make peace.

古文：月食，亦为忠臣见谮，飞虫多死，北方有兵，女主恶之，石申曰： 大臣有谋。 
现代文：月食，也是忠臣受谱害，飞虫多死亡，北方有战争，女主厌恶这种情况，石申说： 大臣有图谋。 
English: The lunar eclipse was also a disaster for the loyal vassals. Flying insects caused many deaths. There was a war in the north. The mistress was disgusted with this situation. Shi Shen said, "The minister has a plot."

古文：月犯之，国忧，其分有兵，大将亡，女主恶之。
现代文：月亮侵犯，国家有忧患，它的分野地区有战争，大将死亡，女主厌恶这种情况。
English: The moon is encroaching, the country is in distress, its provinces are at war, the general is dead, and the mistress abhors the situation.

古文：岁星犯，五谷为风所伤；守之，王道具，将相忠，文术用；逆行入之，君好畋猎。
现代文：岁星侵犯，五谷被风灾损害；占据，王道具备，将相忠诚，文人术士被任用；逆向运行进入，君主喜欢游猎。
English: The year star encroaches, the grain is damaged by wind and disaster; occupy, the royal road is available, the general is loyal, the literati magician is appointed; reverse running enters, the monarch likes hunting.

古文：荧惑犯之，其分民饥，臣下不从命，边兵起；出、入、留、舍，为兵；守之，佞臣为乱。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，它的分野地区人民饥荒，臣下不服从命令，边区战争发生；出来、进入、停留、住宿，是战争；占据此宿，奸佞之臣作乱。
English: Fluorine planet encroaches, people in its field area suffer from famine, vassals disobey orders, border war occurs; leaving, entering, staying, lodging, is war; occupying this lodging, treacherous vassals make trouble.

古文：填星犯之，大臣忧；守之，主圣臣贤，岁丰，后有喜；出、入、留、舍，兵起；逆行，则女主失政。
现代文：镇星侵犯，大臣有忧患；占据，君主圣明，臣下贤良，年成丰收，皇后有喜事；出来、进入、停留、住宿，战争发生；逆向运行，那么女主政治失误。
English: If the town is invaded, the minister is in trouble; if the town is occupied, the monarch is saintly, the vassal is virtuous, the year has a good harvest, and the empress has a happy event; if the town is left, entered, stayed in, lodged in, and war breaks out; if the town is run in the opposite direction, then the empress has made a political mistake.

古文：太白入或犯之，皆为兵起；出、入、留、舍，大风水灾，其分君不安；舍左，为旱；守犯、勾巳、凌突，则大臣专君令。
现代文：太白星进入，或侵犯，都是战争发生；出来、进入、停留、住宿，有大风水灾，它的分野地区君主不安全；住宿在左部，是旱灾；占据又侵犯、形成勾巳、冲突，那么大臣专擅君令。
English: If the white star enters, or encroaches, it is war; if it leaves, enters, stays, or stays, it is storm and flood, and the monarch is not safe in its domain; if it stays in the left part, it is drought; if it occupies and encroaches, and there is a quarrel or conflict, then the minister is just following the monarch's orders.

古文：辰星凌抵，下臣为乱伏诛；守之，旱，饥，民流，龙蛇见；守其中，兵大起；同见西方，大臣忧。
现代文：辰星进犯到达，下臣作乱被杀；占据，旱灾、饥荒，人民流亡，龙蛇出现；占据在翼宿中，战争大规模发生；一同出现在西方，大臣有忧患。
English: The hour star attack arrives, the vassal is killed for making trouble; occupied, drought, famine, people are exiled, dragons and snakes appear; occupied in the wings, war occurs on a large scale; both appear in the west, the minister is worried.

古文：客星入犯之，国有兵，大臣忧，一曰负海国有使来；守之，为兵起。
现代文：客星进入侵犯，国家有战争，大臣有忧患，一说四方遥远的国家有使者来；占据，是战争发生。
English: When a guest star invades, a country is at war, a minister is in distress, or an envoy comes from a faraway country; when a country is occupied, a war has broken out.

古文：彗星犯之，大臣忧，国有兵、丧。
现代文：彗星侵犯，大臣有忧患，国家有战争、丧事。
English: Comets invade, ministers are troubled, the country is at war and in mourning.

古文：星孛于翼，亦为大臣忧，其分失礼乐；出，则其地有谋，下有兵、丧；芒所指，有降人。
现代文：星变在翼宿出现，也是大臣有忧患，它的分野地区丧失礼乐；出来，那么那个地方有图谋，下面有战争、丧事；星光芒所指的地方，有投降的人。
English: When the star appears in the constellation of Pleiades, it is the minister who is in distress, and his province is bereft of liturgy; when the star appears, there is intrigue in that place, war and mourning below; and where the starlight points, there are those who have surrendered.

古文：流星犯之，亦为忧在大臣；出，则其下有兵；入，为贵臣囚系，《乙巳占》曰： 流星入，天下贤士入见，南夷来贡，国有贤臣。 
现代文：流星侵犯，也是忧患在大臣；出来，那么它下面有战争；进入，是贵臣被囚禁，《乙巳占》说： 流星进入，天下贤士进京朝见，南方夷族来进贡，国家有贤良的大臣。 
English: The meteor's invasion is also the minister's sorrow; if it comes out, then there is a war below it; if it enters, it is a noble minister who is imprisoned. "Yi Si Zhan" said: the meteor enters, the wise men of the world go to Beijing to meet the emperor, the southern barbarians come to pay tribute, and the country has wise ministers.

古文：赤云气出入，有暴兵；黄而润泽，诸侯来贡；黑，为国忧。
现代文：赤色云气出来进去，有突发的战争；星色黄而润泽，诸侯来进贡；黑色，是国家有忧患。
English: Red clouds come and go, there are sudden wars; stars are yellow and moist, lords come to pay tribute; black, the country is in trouble.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，翼宿十九度，唐开元游仪十八度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，翼宿十九度；唐开丞游仪，十八度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument, the wings of the inn is 19 degrees; the Tang Dynasty Kaizhen Yu instrument, 18 degrees.

古文：旧去极九十七度。
现代文：从前离极九十七度。
English: It used to be ninety-seven degrees.

古文：景祐测验，翼宿一十八度，距中行西第二星去极百四度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，翼宿十八度，距星中行西第二星离极一百零四度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the Pleiades is 18 degrees, and the second star in the middle of the star is 104 degrees away from the pole.

古文：东瓯五星，在翼南，蛮夷星也。
现代文：束瓯五颗星，在翼宿南面，是蛮族夷族的星。
English: The five stars at the top of the cluster, to the south of Tsubasa, are the stars of the barbarian barbarians.

古文：《天文录》曰： 东瓯，东越也，今永嘉郡永宁县是也。 
现代文：《天文录》说： 束瓯，是束越，就是现在的永嘉郡永宁县。 
English: "Astronomical Records" said: Sokcho is Sokue, which is now Yongning County, Yongjia County.

古文：芒角、动摇，则蛮夷叛。
现代文：星有光芒、星动摇，那么蛮族夷族叛乱。
English: The star shines, the star wavers, then the barbarians and barbarians rebel.

古文：太白、荧惑守之，其地有兵。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星占据，那个地方有战争。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet occupy, that place have war.

古文：按东瓯五星，《晋志》在二十八宿之外，《乾象新书》属张宿；武密书属翼宿，与《步天歌》合。
现代文：按东瓯五颗星，《晋书&;;天文志》在二十八宿之外，《干象新书》认为属于张宿；武密的书认为属于翼宿，和《步天歌》吻合。
English: According to the five stars in the East, "Jin Shu" and "Astronomy" are outside the twenty-eight stations, "Gan Xiang New Book" is considered to belong to Zhangjuku; Wu Mi's book is considered to belong to Yingjuku, and coincides with "Walking Song of Heaven."

古文：轸宿四星，主冢宰、辅臣，主车骑，主载任。
现代文：干宿四颗星，主管宰相、辅臣，主管车驾乘骑，主管运载担负。
English: Four stars for dry accommodation, responsible for the prime minister and assistant ministers, responsible for driving and riding, and responsible for carrying loads.

古文：有军出入，皆占于轸。
现代文：有军队出征或归来，都茌干宿占验。
English: If there are military movements in and out, they should all make divination to Shishuku.

古文：又主风，占死丧。
现代文：又主管风，占验死丧。
English: He was also in charge of the wind, accounting for the death.

古文：明大，则车驾备；移徙，天子有忧；就聚，则兵起。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么车驾齐备；迁移，天子有忧患；走向聚集，那么战争发生。
English: If the stars are bright and large, the chariots are ready; if there is migration, there will be trouble; if there is gathering, there will be war.

古文：辖二星，傅轸两旁，主王侯，左辖为王者同姓，右辖为异姓。
现代文：辖二颗星，辅助在斡宿两旁，主管王侯，左辖是帝王同姓，右辖是帝王异姓。
English: Administered by two stars, assisted on both sides by magistrates, in charge of princes, the left-hand one is the emperor with the same surname, and the right-hand one is the emperor with a different surname.

古文：星明，兵大起；远轸，凶；辖举，南蛮侵；车无辖，国有忧。
现代文：星明亮，战争大规模发生；干宿远，凶险；辖星挺出，南方蛮族入侵；车没有车辖，国家有忧患。
English: The star is bright, the war occurs on a large scale; dry and distant, dangerous; the ruling star comes forward, the southern barbarians invade; the car does not have car jurisdiction, the country is in trouble.

古文：日食，忧在将相，戒车驾之官，一曰后不安。
现代文：日食，忧患在将相，警戒掌管车马的官，一说皇后不安宁。
English: An eclipse of the sun, a time of trouble in the offing, an official in charge of horses and chariots on the alert, a queen restless.

古文：晕而生背气，其下兵起，城拔，视背所向击之胜，又曰王者恶之。
现代文：日晕而生背气，它下面战争发生，城池攻克，看背气所指的方向攻打敌人就会胜利，又说王者厌恶这种情况。
English: When the sun is eclipsed, the king is angry, war breaks out beneath him, the city is conquered, and if he attacks the enemy in the direction indicated by his anger, he will be victorious. It is also said that the king abhors this situation.

古文：月食，后及大臣忧。
现代文：月食，皇后及大臣有忧患。
English: Lunar eclipse, the queen and the minister are worried.

古文：月晕，有兵，岁旱，多大风。
现代文：月晕，有战争，这年干旱，多大风。
English: The moon is eclipsed, there is war, there is drought this year, and there is a lot of wind.

古文：岁星犯之，为火灾，为民疫，大臣忧，主库者有罪；入，则其国将死；守之，国有丧；七日不移，有赦，又曰君有忧。
现代文：岁星侵犯，是火灾，是人民瘟疫，大臣有忧患，主管库房的人有罪；进入，那么那个国家的将军死亡；占据，国家有丧事；七天不移动，有赦免，又说君主有忧患。
English: The invasion of a year star is a fire, a plague of the people, the minister has sorrow, the person in charge of the treasury is guilty; enter, then the general of that country dies; occupy, the country has a funeral; do not move for seven days, there is a pardon, and it is said that the monarch has sorrow.

古文：荧惑犯之，有乱兵；入轸，将军为乱，水伤稼，民多妖言；逆行，为火，为兵。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，有动乱的军队；进入干宿，将军作乱，水灾损害庄稼，人民中多妖言；逆向运行，是火灾，是战争。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, the army is in turmoil; entering dry quarters, the general is in turmoil, floods damage crops, and there are many gossips among the people; running in the opposite direction, is fire, is war.

古文：填星犯之，为兵，为土功；入，则兵败；逆行，女主忧；出、入、舍、留，六十日兵起，大旱。
现代文：镇星侵犯，是战争，是水土工程；进入，那么战败；逆向运行，女主有忧患；出来、进入、住宿、停留，六十天战争发生，大旱。
English: Town star encroachment, is war, is water and soil engineering; enter, then defeat; reverse running, the hostess is in trouble; out, enter, stay, stay, sixty-day war occurs, drought.

古文：太白犯之，为兵起，得地；入，为兵；守之，亡地，将忧；起左角，逆行至轸，失地；经天，则兵满野。
现代文：太白星侵犯，是战争发生，获得土地；进入，是战争；占据，丧失土地，将军有忧患；从左角起动，逆向运行到干宿，丧失土地；经过天空，那么军队满野。
English: If the white star invades, it is war, land is gained; if it enters, it is war; if it occupies, land is lost, the general is in trouble; if it starts from the left corner, runs in the opposite direction to dry lodging, land is lost; if it passes through the sky, then the army is all over the field.

古文：辰星犯之，民疫，大臣忧，中国有贵丧；守之，大水；入，则天下以火为忧，一曰国有丧。
现代文：辰星侵犯，人民有瘟疫，大臣有忧患，中原国家有颢贵丧亡；占据，发大水；进入，那磨天下把火作为忧患，一说国家有丧亡。
English: The hour and the star invade, the people have the plague, the minister has the sorrow, the Central Plains countries have the loss of wealth; occupy, send big water; enter, that is, the world will set fire as a sorrow, and say that the country has lost.

古文：客星犯之，为兵，为丧；入，则有土功，籴贵，诸侯使来；出，则君使诸侯；守之，边兵起，民饥；守辖，军吏忧。
现代文：客星侵犯，是战争，是丧事；进入，就有水土工程，买米价贵，诸侯的使者前来；出去，那么君主派遣使者出访诸侯；占据，边区战争发生，人民饥饿；占据辖星，军中官吏有忧患。
English: If a guest star invades, it is war, if a guest star invades, it is mourning; if a guest star enters, there will be water and soil projects, rice will be expensive to buy, and emissaries from the princes will come; if a guest star leaves, the monarch will send emissaries to visit the princes; if a guest star invades, there will be war, and the people will be hungry; if a guest star invades, there will be hydro-geological projects, rice will be expensive to buy, and emissaries from the princes will come; if a guest star invades, there will be war, and the people will be hungry; if a guest star invades

古文：彗星犯之，为兵，为丧；色赤，为君失道，又曰天子起兵，王公废黜。
现代文：彗星侵犯，是战争，是丧事；星色赤，是君主失道，又说天子发动战争，王公被废黜。
English: Comet invasion, is war, is mourning; star red, is the monarch losing his way, also said that the Son of Heaven launched a war, the prince was deposed.

古文：星孛于轸，亦为兵、丧，又曰下谋上，主忧。
现代文：星变在干宿出现，也是战争、丧事，又说臣下谋逆主上，人主忧惧。
English: The appearance of star changes in dry lodgings is also a war, a funeral, and it is also said that the vassal plots against the lord, and the lord is afraid.

古文：流星犯之，有兵起，亦有丧，不出一年，库藏空；春夏犯之，为皮革用；秋冬，为水旱不调。
现代文：流星侵犯，有战争发生，也有丧事，不出一年，库藏空虚；舂季夏季侵犯，是皮革被用；秋季冬季，是水旱不调和。
English: Invaded by meteors, invaded by war, invaded by death, in less than a year, the storehouses are empty; invaded by summer in the rainy season, the leather is used; invaded by winter in the autumn, the water and drought are not reconciled.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，以轸宿为十八度。
现代文：按照汉朝永元铜仪，认为干宿是十八度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze standard, it is considered that the dry stay is eighteen degrees.

古文：旧去极九十八度。
现代文：从前离极九十八度。
English: It used to be ninety-eight degrees.

古文：景祐测验，亦十八度，去极一百度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，也是十八度，离极一百度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, it is also eighteen degrees, one hundred degrees from the extreme.

古文：长沙一星，在轸宿中，入轸二度，去极百五度，主寿命。
现代文：长沙一颗星，在干宿中间，进入干宿二度，离极一百零五度，主管寿命。
English: A star in Changsha, in the middle of the dry camp, enters the dry camp twice, is 105 degrees away from the extreme, and has a long life.

古文：明，则君寿长，子孙昌。
现代文：星明亮，那么君主长寿，子孙蕃盛。
English: If the stars are bright, the monarch will live a long life, and his descendants will prosper.

古文：青丘七星，在轸东南，蛮夷之国号。
现代文：青丘七颗星，在干宿东南面，是蛮族夷族的国号。
English: The seven stars of Qingqiu, in the southeast of Ganjuku, is the country name of the barbarian barbarians.

古文：星明，则夷兵盛；动摇，夷兵为乱；守常，则吉。
现代文：星明亮，那么夷族军队兴盛；星动摇，夷族军队作乱；正常占据，就吉利。
English: If the star is bright, the barbarian army will prosper; if the star is shaky, the barbarian army will make trouble; if it is occupied normally, it will be lucky.

古文：军门二星，在青丘西，一曰在土司空北，天子六宫之门。主营候，设豹尾旗，与南门同占。
现代文：军门二颗星，在青丘西面，一说在土司空北面，是天子六宫的门，主管军队岗哨，设置豹尾旗，和南门有相同的占验。
English: The two stars of the military gate, in the west of Qingqiu, one said to be in the north of Tusi Kuo, is the gate of Tianzi Sixth Palace, in charge of the army sentry post, set up the leopard tail flag, and the south gate has the same occupation test.

古文：星非其故，及客星犯之，皆为道不通。
现代文：星不是它原来的样子，以及客星侵犯，都是道路不通行。
English: The star is not what it used to be, and the guest star encroaches, making the road impassable.

古文：器府三十二星，在轸宿南，乐器之府也。
现代文：器府三十二颗星，在斡宿南面，是乐器的府库。
English: Thirty-two stars, in the south of the inn, is a musical instrument warehouse.

古文：明，则八音和，君臣平；不明，则反是。
现代文：星明亮，那么八音和谐，君臣平和；不明亮，就与此相反。
English: If the star is bright, then the eight tones are harmonious and the monarchs and ministers are peaceful; if it is not bright, then it is the opposite.

古文：客、彗犯之，乐官诛。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，乐官被杀。
English: A guest star, a comet intruded, and a musician was killed.

古文：赤云气掩之，天下音乐废。
现代文：赤色云气掩盖它，天下音乐废止。
English: Red clouds cover it, and all music is silenced.

古文：土司空四星，在青丘西，主界域，亦曰司徒。
现代文：土司空四颗星，在青丘西面，主管边界疆域，也叫司徒。
English: There are four stars in the sky, in the west of Qingqiu, in charge of the border territory, also known as Szeto.

古文：均明，则天下丰；微暗，则稼穑不登。
现代文：星均匀明亮，那么天下丰收；星微细暗淡，那么庄稼不丰收。
English: If the stars are evenly bright, there will be a good harvest; if the stars are slightly dim, there will be a poor harvest.

古文：太白、荧惑犯之，男女废耕桑。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星侵犯，男女停止耕田植桑。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet encroach, men and women stop plowing and planting mulberry.

古文：客、彗犯之，为兵起，民流。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，是战争发生，人民流亡。
English: Invaded by a guest star or comet, war breaks out and people are forced into exile.

古文：按《步天歌》，以左辖右辖二星、长沙一星、军门二星、土司空四星、青丘七星、器府三十二星俱属轸宿；《晋志》惟辖星、长沙附于轸，余在二十八宿之外；《乾象新书》以军门、器府、土司空属翼，青丘属轸；武密书以军门属翼，余皆属轸。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以为左辖右辖二颗星、长沙一颗星、军门二颗星、土司空四颗星、青丘七颗星、器府三十二颗星都属于斡宿；《晋书&;;天文志》只有辖星，长沙附于轸宿，其余在二十八宿之外；《干象新书》认为军门、器府、土司空属于翼宿，青丘属于干宿；武密害认为军门属于翼宿，其余都属于干宿。
English: According to "Bu Tiange," it is believed that the left and right two stars, Changsha one star, the military gate two stars, Tusi sky four stars, Qingqiu seven stars, and Jifu thirty-two stars all belong to the goodwill; "Jinshu&; Astronomy" only has the goodwill star, Changsha is attached to the goodwill, and the rest are outside the twenty-eight inns; "Dry Elephant New Book" believes that the military gate, Jifu, and Tusi sky belong to the wing inn, and Qingqiu belongs to the dry inn; Wu Mitai believes that the military gate belongs to the wing inn, and the rest belong

古文：今从《步天歌》，而附见诸家之说。
现代文：现在依从《步天歜》，而附见各家的说法。
English: Now, according to "Walking on the Heavenly Staircase," and see the comments of each family.

