古文：答失八都鲁答失八都鲁，曾祖纽璘、祖也速答儿，有传。
现代文：答失八都鲁，南加台之子，曾祖纽瞞，祖父也速答儿。
English: The son of Southern Katai, the great-grandfather of Niu Xie, the grandfather also answered quickly.

古文：答失八都鲁，南加台子也。以世袭万户镇守罗罗宣尉司。
现代文：答失八都鲁世袭万户，镇守罗罗宣慰司。
English: The town's guardian, Luo Luo Xuanliao, is now in charge of the town.

古文：土人作乱，答失八都鲁捕获有功，四川省举充船桥万户。
现代文：土人反抗，答失八都鲁镇压有功，四川省荐举为船桥万户。
English: The local people resisted, but the suppression of Badulu was successful, and Sichuan Province was recommended as a bridge for all households.

古文：出征云南，升大理宣慰司都元帅。
现代文：出征云南，升大理宣慰司都元帅。
English: He went to fight in Yunnan, and rose to the rank of Marshal.

古文：至正十一年，特除四川行省参知政事，拨本部探马赤军三千，从平章咬住讨贼于荆襄。
现代文：至正十一年，特委任答失八都鲁为四川行省参知政事，发本部探马赤军三千随平章咬住镇压荆襄人民起义。
English: By the eleventh year of the Taiping era, the special commission had appointed Badulu as the assistant governor of Sichuan Province, and sent the headquarters to explore the Red Army of three thousand with the banner to suppress the Jingxiang people's uprising.

古文：九月，次安平站。
现代文：九月，进抵安平站。
English: September, arrived at Anping Station.

古文：时咬住兵既平江陵，答失八都鲁请自攻襄阳。
现代文：咬住平江陵后，答失八都鲁请求自己率兵攻襄阳。
English: After seizing the Pingjiang Mausoleum, the defeated Badaru requested that he lead his troops to attack Xiangyang.

古文：十二年，进次荆门。
现代文：十二年进抵荆门。
English: Twelve years later, he arrived at Jingmen.

古文：时贼十万，官军止三千余，遂用宋廷杰计，招募襄阳官吏及土豪避兵者，得义丁二万，编排部伍，申其约束。
现代文：这时，起义军有十万，官军只有三千余人。答失八都鲁用宋廷杰之计，招募襄阳逃避战乱的官吏及土豪，得兵丁二万，编组为伍。
English: At this time, the rebel army had 100,000 men, while the government army only had more than 3,000 men. In response to the loss of the eight capital cities, Song Tingjie used the strategy of recruiting officials and local heroes from Xiangyang to escape the war, gaining 20,000 soldiers and forming them into an army.

古文：行至蛮河，贼守要害，兵不得渡，即令屈万户率奇兵由间道出其后，首尾夹攻，贼大败。
现代文：行至蛮河，义军扼守要害，答失八都鲁令屈万户率奇兵抄小路绕义军后方，前后夹攻，义军大败。
English: After marching to the Savage River, the rebels held the key, defeated the eight capital cities, commanded the ten thousand households, and led the soldiers to follow the small roads around the rear of the rebels, and attacked back and forth. The rebels were defeated.

古文：追至襄阳城南，大战，生擒其伪将三十人，腰斩之。
现代文：元军追至襄阳城南，大战，擒义军将官三十人。义军守城不出。
English: The Yuan army chased to the south of Xiangyang City. During the great war, there were 30 generals of the rebel army. The rebel army did not defend the city.

古文：贼自是闭门不复出。
现代文：答失八都鲁观察襄阳的地势，分其军为内外两部分。
English: Azuhachi-doru observed the situation in Yangyang and divided his army into two parts: internal and external.

古文：答失八都鲁乃相视形势，内列八翼，包络襄城；外置八营，军岘山、楚山，以截其援；自以中军四千据虎头山，以瞰城中。署从征人李复为南漳县尹，黎可举为宜城县尹，拊循其民，以赋军馈。
现代文：内列八翼以包围襄城，外置八营，屯驻于岘山、楚山以截断援军，自己率中军四千占据虎头山以俯瞰城中动静。任随征者李复为南漳县令，黎可举为宜城县令，令他们安抚百姓，供应军粮。
English: He enlisted eight wings to encircle Xiangcheng, stationed eight battalions outside, stationed in Lushan and Chushan to cut off reinforcements, and led 4,000 Chinese troops to occupy Hutou Mountain to overlook the city. He appointed the enlisted men Li Fu as Nanlu County Commander and Li Kefu as Yicheng County Commander to pacify the people and supply military food.

古文：城中之民受围日久，夜半，二人缒城叩营门，具告虚实，愿为内应。
现代文：城中居民因受围日久，一天半夜有二人从城上缒下来向围城元军报告了城内虚实，表示愿为内应。
English: As the residents of the city had been under siege for a long time, two people came down from the city in the middle of the night and reported to the besieging Yuan army the truth and falsehood in the city, expressing their willingness to respond.

古文：答失八都鲁与之定约，以五月朔日四更攻城，授之密号而去。至期，民垂绳以引官军，先登者近千人。
现代文：答失八都鲁与二人约定五月初一四更攻城。到时，这二人从城上垂绳下来以引导官军，先登城者近千人。
English: Akuhatsu Batoru agreed with the two men to attack the city on the 14th day of the 5th month. At that time, the two men hung a rope down from the city to guide the government army. The first to climb the city were nearly a thousand people.

古文：时贼船百余艘在城北，阴募善水者凿其底。
现代文：义军有战船百余艘集中在城北，答失八都鲁募习于水性的人潜入水中凿穿船底。
English: The rebels had more than a hundred warships concentrated in the north of the city, and they recruited people who were accustomed to water to dive into the water and drill through the bottom of the ship.

古文：天将明，城破，贼巷战不胜，走就船，船坏，皆溺水死。
现代文：天将明，城被攻破，义军在城内巷战不利，欲乘船退走，船被破坏，皆不幸淹死水中。
English: In the twinkling of an eye, the city was breached, the rebels were at a disadvantage in street fighting in the city, they wanted to retreat by boat, the boat was destroyed, and they all drowned in the water.

古文：伪将王权领千骑西走，遇伏兵被擒。
现代文：义军将领王权率领千骑西走，遇伏击而被擒。
English: The rebel general Wang Quan led a thousand horsemen westward and was ambushed and captured.

古文：襄阳遂平。加答失八都鲁资善大夫，赐上尊及黄金束带，以其弟识里木为襄阳达鲁花赤，子孛罗帖木儿为云南行省理问。
现代文：答失八都鲁因平襄阳有功而加资善大夫，赐上尊及黄金束带，任命其弟识里木为襄阳达鲁花赤，子孛罗帖木儿为云南省理问。
English: For his meritorious service in Pingyang and Xiangyang, he was awarded the title of Doctor of Merit, granted the title of His Excellency and a gold sash, and appointed his brother Zhi Li Mu as the Xiangyang Daruhana Red, and his son Luo Timur as the Yunnan Provincial Magistrate.

古文：比贼再犯荆门、安陆、沔阳，答失八都鲁辄引兵败之。
现代文：起义军进攻荆门、安陆、沔阳，均为答失八都鲁所败。
English: The insurgents attacked Jingmen, Anlu and Shenyang, but were defeated by Batulu.

古文：寻诏益兵五千，以乌撒乌蒙元帅成都不花听其调发。
现代文：朝廷诏令再给答失八都鲁兵五千，令乌撒乌蒙元帅成都不花由他调遣。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree that another five thousand Batulu soldiers were lost, so that Usa Umun, the marshal of Chengdu, did not have to be dispatched by him.

古文：十三年，定青山、荆门诸寨。
现代文：至正十三年，答失八都鲁平定青山、荆门诸寨。
English: By the thirteenth year of the Taisho era, the eight capital cities of Lu, Pingding, Aoyama, and Jingmen were lost.

古文：九月，率兵略均、房，平谷城，攻开武当山寨数十，获伪将杜将军。
现代文：九月，平定均州、房州、谷城，攻下武当山寨数十座，俘义军将领杜将军。
English: In September, they pacified Junzhou, Fangzhou, and Gucheng, captured dozens of Wudang cottages, and captured General Du, the general of the rebel army.

古文：十二月，趋攻峡州，破伪将赵明远木驴寨。
现代文：十二月，攻峡州，破赵明远之木驴寨。
English: In December, they attacked Xiaozhou and broke through Zhao Mingyuan's wooden donkey corral.

古文：升四川行省右丞，赐金系腰。
现代文：因功升四川行省右丞，赐金腰带。
English: For his achievements, he was promoted to Sichuan Provincial Right Officer and given a gold belt.

古文：十四年正月，复峡州。
现代文：十四年正月，攻克峡州。
English: In the first month of the 14th year, they conquered Xiaozhou.

古文：三月，升四川行省平章政事，兼知行枢密院事，总荆襄诸军。
现代文：三月，升四川行省平章政事，兼知行枢密院事，统领荆襄诸军。
English: In March, Sheng traveled to Sichuan Province for the Pingzhang Political Affairs and the Privy Council Affairs, leading the Jingxiang troops.

古文：五月，命玉枢虎儿吐华代答失八都鲁守中兴、荆门，且令答失八都鲁以兵赴汝宁。
现代文：五月，命玉枢虎儿吐华代替答失八都鲁镇守中兴、荆门，答失八都鲁则领兵赴汝宁。
English: In May, the fateful pivotal tiger Tuhua took the place of the lost eight capital cities of Zhongxing and Jingmen, and the lost eight capital cities of Lu led the army to Runing.

古文：十月，诏与太不花会军讨安丰。
现代文：十月，诏答失八都鲁与太不花会军讨安丰。
English: In October, the imperial edict lost the eight capital cities to the Taiwu flower association to discuss Anfeng.

古文：是月，复苗军所据郑、钧、许三州。
现代文：同月，克服苗军所据之郑、钧、许三州。
English: In the same month, Zheng, Yao, and Xu won the three states where the Miao army was based.

古文：十二月，复河阴、巩县。
现代文：十二月，克复河阴、巩县。
English: In December, Kheyin and Gong counties were recovered.

古文：十五年，命答失八都鲁就管领太不花一应诸王藩将兵马，许以便宜行事。
现代文：十五年，命答失八都鲁管领太不花所属之诸王藩将兵马，有权处理各项事务。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Heian period, the ruler of the Edo bakufu lost his life, and it was left to the generals and soldiers of the various domains that he belonged to to handle various affairs.

古文：六月，拜河南行省平章政事。进次许州长葛，与刘福通野战，为其所败，将士奔溃。
现代文：六月，拜河南行省平章政事，领军进至许州之长葛，为起义军刘福通所败，将士溃散。
English: In June, Bai went to Henan Province, Pingzhang Province for political affairs, and led the army to Changge of Huzhou. He was defeated by the rebel army Liu Futong, and the soldiers dispersed.

古文：九月，至中牟，收散卒，团结屯种。
现代文：九月，屯驻中牟，收集逃散兵卒，进行屯种。
English: In September, he was stationed in Zhongmou to collect soldiers who had fled and to plant seeds.

古文：贼复来劫营，掠其辎重，遂与孛罗帖木儿相失。刘哈剌不花进兵来援，大破贼兵，获孛罗帖木儿归之。
现代文：义军来劫营，掠夺其辎重，答失八都鲁与孛罗帖木儿失去联络，幸刘哈剌不花来救援，大破义军，救回孛罗帖木儿。
English: The rebels came to rob the camp, plundered its treasures, and lost contact between Batoru and Mirotemur. Fortunately, Liu Harun came to the rescue, defeated the rebels, and rescued Mirotemur.

古文：复驻汴梁东南青堽。
现代文：然后驻汴梁东南之青。
English: Then, it was stationed in the southeastern part of Handan.

古文：十二月，调兵进讨，大败贼于太康，遂围亳州，伪宋主小明王遁。十六年，加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：十二月在太康战胜义军，进围亳州，义军宋小明王逃走。十六年，加答失八都鲁为金紫光禄大夫。
English: In December, after defeating the rebels in Taikang and encircling Bozhou, the rebels of King Song Xiaoming fled. In 16 years, he became the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：三月，朝廷差脱欢知院来督兵，答失八都鲁父子亲与刘福通对敌，自巳至酉，大战数合，答失八都鲁坠马，孛罗帖木儿扶令上马先还，自持弓矢连发以毙追者，夜三更步回营中。
现代文：三月，朝廷差脱欢知院来督兵，答失八都鲁父子亲与刘福通对敌，战斗从巳时一直打到酉时，答失八都鲁被义军射中坠马，幸孛罗帖木儿赶来救起，直到夜三更才步行回到营中。
English: In March, the imperial court sent Huan Zhiying to supervise the soldiers, but lost Batulu father and son against Liu Fortong. The battle lasted from dusk to dawn. However, Batulu was shot by the rebels and fell from his horse. Fortunately, Luo Timur came to rescue him, and he did not return to the camp on foot until three o'clock in the evening.

古文：十月，移驻陈留。
现代文：十月，移驻陈留。
English: October, moved to Chenzuo.

古文：是夜二鼓，贼五百余骑来劫，以有备亟遁。
现代文：十一月，进攻夹河义军刘福通寨。十二月十五日元官军至高柴店，离太康三十里。
English: In November, the Jiehe Liberation Army attacked Liu Futong Village. On December 15, the former government army reached Gaoshaidian, 30 miles away from Taikang.

古文：火而追之，比晓，督阵力战，自寅至巳，四门皆陷，壮士缘城入其郛，斩首数万，擒伪将军张敏、孙韩等九人，杀伪丞相王、罗二人。辛酉，太康悉平，遣孛罗帖木儿告捷京师。帝赐劳内殿，王其先臣三世，拜河南行省左丞相，仍兼知行枢密院事，守御汴梁；识里木云南行省左丞；孛罗帖木儿四川行省左丞；将校僚属赏爵有差。
现代文：十六日黎明与义军大战，从寅时战到巳时，太康城陷，义军张敏、孙韩二将军等九人被俘，丞相王、罗二人战死，太康为元军所有，答失八都鲁因功，朝廷封他三世为王，拜他为河南行省左丞相，仍兼知行枢密院事，守御汴梁，其弟识里木为云南行省左丞，子孛罗帖木儿为四川行省左丞，其他将校僚属各有赏爵。
English: At dawn on the 16th, the Great War with the rebels was fought. From the time of the Battle of Yin to the time of Yin, the city of Taikang fell. The rebels Zhang Min, General Sun Han II, and nine others were captured. The Prime Minister Wang and Luo both died in the battle. Taikang was owned by the Yuan army, but lost eight provinces to Lu for his service. The court named him the third king. He was worshiped as the Henan Provincial Left-Handed Minister, and was still known for his work in the Privy Council, guarding the Imperial Palace. Liang, his brother, was the Yunnan Provincial Left-Handed Minister, and

古文：十七年三月，诏朝京师，加开府仪同三司、太尉、四川行省左丞相。
现代文：至正十七年三月，诏答失八都鲁回京师，加开府仪同三司、太尉、四川行省左丞相。
English: In March of the seventeenth year of the Heian period, Emperor Tadatsugu returned to Beijing after losing Hattoru, and he was promoted to the third secretary of Kaifu, the captain, and the minister of Sichuan Province.

古文：九月，取沟城、东明、长垣三县。
现代文：九月，答失八都鲁攻取观城、东明、长垣三县。
English: In September, the eight capital cities were defeated and the three counties of Guancheng, Dongming and Nagagaki were captured.

古文：十月，诏遣知院达理麻失理来援，分兵雷泽、濮州，而达理麻失理为刘福通所杀，达达诸军皆溃。
现代文：十月，朝廷派知院达理麻失理来援助答失八都鲁，他们分兵攻雷泽、濮州。达理麻失理为义军刘福通所杀，达理麻失理诸军皆被击溃。
English: In October, the imperial court dispatched Darima Gurei, a member of the Imperial Household Agency, to aid Hakuhodo, and they divided their forces to attack Leize and Zhangzhou. Darima Gurei was killed by rebel Liu Futong, and all of Darima Gurei's forces were defeated.

古文：答失八都鲁力不能支，退驻石村。
现代文：答失八都鲁抵抗不住义军的进攻，退驻于石村。
English: However, Hatoru could not resist the attack of the rebel army and withdrew to Ishimura.

古文：答失八都鲁觉知，一夕忧愤死，十二月庚子也。
现代文：朝廷颇怀疑他是玩忽职守，失去战机，便不断派使者去督战。义军探悉元军内部不和，诈称与答失八都鲁和好，并将通好书信丢在道路上，让朝廷使者拾去报告皇帝。
English: The imperial court rather suspected that he was negligent in his duties and lost his warplane, so he kept sending emissaries to supervise the war. The rebels found out that there was discord within the Yuan army, fraudulently claimed to be reconciled with the lost eight capital cities, and threw the good letter on the road for the imperial court emissary to pick up and report to the emperor.

古文：子孛罗帖木儿别有传。庆童庆童，字明德，康里氏。
现代文：答失八都鲁知道这些事后于十二月某日忧愤而死。庆童字明德，姓康里氏。
English: Knowing these facts, Badaru died of grief and anger on a certain day in December. His family name was Kangri.

古文：祖明里帖木儿，父斡罗思，皆封益国公。
现代文：祖父明里帖木儿、父斡罗思，皆封益国公。
English: His grandfather, Mingli Timur, and his father, Su Luo Si, were both princes of Fengyi Province.

古文：庆童早以勋臣子孙受知仁庙，给事内廷，遂长宿卫。授大宗正府掌判，三迁为上都留守。又累迁为江西、河南二行省平章政事。入为太府卿。复为上都留守。
现代文：庆童因是功臣子孙，从仁宗朝起就授官职，历任大宗正府掌判、上都留守、江西河南二行省平章政事、太府卿，再任上都留守，出任辽阳行省平章政事。
English: Because he was the descendant of a meritorious vassal, Qing Tong was appointed to official positions from the time of the Renzong Dynasty. He served as the chief judge of Zhengfu, the governor of Shangdu, the governor of the two provinces of Jiangxi and Henan, the governor of Taifu, and the governor of Liaoyang.

古文：出为辽阳行省平章政事，以宽厚为政，辽人德之。至正十年，迁平章，行省江浙。
现代文：在辽任职期间，为政宽厚，深得辽人赞誉。至正十年，调任江浙行省平章政事。
English: During his term of office in Liao, he was praised by the people of Liao for his lenient politics. In the tenth year of his reign, he was transferred to the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Government of Pingzhang.

古文：适时承平，颇沉湎于宴乐，凡遗逸之士举校官者，辄摈斥不用，由是不为物论所与。
现代文：当时太平日久，庆童颇沉醉于酒色之中，对于一些有才能的人排斥不用，曾一时不受人们称赞。
English: At that time, the Taiping era lasted for a long time, Qing Tong was quite intoxicated with liquor, and some talented people were rejected and not used, and were not praised by people for a while.

古文：明年，盗起汝、颍，已而蔓延于江浙，江东之饶、信、徽、宣、铅山、广德，浙西之常、湖、建德，所在不守。
现代文：至正十一年，汝州、颍州一带人民掀起反元斗争，蔓延于江浙，江东之饶州、信州、徽州、宣城、铅山、广德，浙西之常州、湖州、建德均为起义军占领。
English: By the eleventh year of the Taiping Rebellion, the people in and around Ruzhou and Ganzhou had launched an anti-Yuan struggle, which spread to Jiangsu and Zhejiang. The eastern Jiangsu provinces of Raozhou, Xinshou, Huizhou, Xuancheng, Zhishan, and Guangde, and the western Zhejiang provinces of Changzhou, Huzhou, and Jiande were all occupied by the rebel army.

古文：庆童分遣僚佐往督师旅，曾不逾时，以次克复。
现代文：庆童派遣文武官员分别至各地督师镇压，不久相继收复被起义军占领的州郡。
English: Qing Tong dispatched civil and military officials to supervise the suppression in various regions, and soon recovered the states and counties occupied by the insurgents.

古文：既乃令长吏按视民数，凡诖误者悉置不问，招徕流离，俾安故业，发官粟以赈之。
现代文：他令各州郡长官，对于与起义军有牵连者都不问罪，招徕流离人民，使他们安于本业，官府发粟赈济饥民。
English: He ordered the governors of the states and counties not to charge anyone who was involved with the insurgents, to recruit displaced people, so that they would be satisfied with their work, and the government would provide food for the hungry.

古文：省治毁于兵，则拓其故址，俾之一新。
现代文：省会在战乱中被毁，在旧址上重建新城，募贫民为工役，官府付给工钱。
English: The provincial capital was destroyed in the war, and a new city was rebuilt on the old site. The poor were recruited as laborers, and the government paid their wages.

古文：募贫民为工役而偿之以钱，杭民赖以存活者尤众。
现代文：杭州人民赖以存活者尤多。
English: The people of Hangzhou rely more on the survivors.

古文：十四年，脱脱以太师、右丞相统大兵南征，一切军资衣甲器仗谷粟薪藁之属，咸取具于江浙。
现代文：至正十四年，脱脱以太师、右丞相之职统大军南征，其一切衣甲粮草等军需物资，全由江浙供给。
English: In the 14th year of the Taisho era, the army of the ethereal division and the minister of the right marched south, and all of its clothing, armor, grain and grass and other military supplies were supplied by Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：庆童规措有方，陆运川输，千里相属，朝廷赖之。
现代文：庆童规划措置有方，水陆运输，千里相望，朝廷有赖于他。
English: Qing Tong has good planning measures, land and water transportation, thousands of miles away, the imperial court depends on him.

古文：明年，盗起常之无锡，众议以重兵歼之，庆童曰： 赤子无知，迫于有司，故弄兵耳。
现代文：十五年亳、常州之无锡人民起义反元，众人都主张派重兵去镇压，而庆童则认为： 百姓无知，其起兵是为官府所迫。
English: Fifteen years ago, the Wuxi People's Uprising in Changzhou broke out against the Yuan Dynasty. Everyone advocated sending heavy troops to suppress it, but Qing Tong believed that the people were ignorant and were forced by the government to raise an army.

古文：苟谕以祸福，彼无不降之理。 
现代文：如果向他们讲明祸福，他们没有不降顺的道理。 
English: If they are told about the evil and the good, they have no reason not to yield.

古文：盗闻之，果投戈解甲，请为良民。十六年，平江、湖州陷。
现代文：按庆童的意思去做，起义者果然放下武器。至正十六年，起义人民占领平江、湖州。
English: According to the intention of Qing Tong, the insurgents did lay down their weapons. By the 16th year, the insurgent people occupied Pingjiang and Huzhou.

古文：义兵元帅方家奴以所部军屯杭城之北关，钩结同党，相煽为恶，劫掠财货，白昼杀人，民以为患。
现代文：官军元帅方家奴率所部军士屯驻杭州城之北关，勾结同党，相互为非作歹，抢劫财货，白昼杀人，深为民患。
English: The marshal of the government army, Fang Jia Nu, led by the staff sergeant of the headquarters, stationed in the north gate of Hangzhou City, colluded with the party, committed crimes against each other, robbed goods, and killed people in the daytime, which was a serious problem for the people.

古文：庆童言于丞相达识帖睦迩曰： 我师无律，何以克敌？必斩方家奴乃可出师。 
现代文：庆童对丞相达识帖睦迩说： 我军无纪律，何以战胜敌人，必须斩方家奴才可出师。 
English: Qing Tong said to the Minister of the Army, Dazhong Zhichang Muxuan: Our army is undisciplined, how can we defeat the enemy, we must kill the party's slaves before they can be trained.

古文：丞相乃与庆童入其军，数其罪，斩首以徇，民大悦。
现代文：于是丞相与庆童到方家奴军中宣布其罪状，斩首示众，人民大喜。
English: As a result, the prime minister and Qing Tong went to the slave army of the Fang family to announce their guilt, beheaded and demonstrated to the public, and the people were very happy.

古文：丞相达识帖睦迩既承制授完者江浙行省右丞，而完者益以功自骄，因求娶庆童女。
现代文：苗军统帅杨完者率其军驻守杭州，丞相达识帖睦迩授杨完者为江浙行省左丞相。完者更加居功自傲，要娶庆童女为妻。
English: Yang Wan, commander of the Miao Army, stationed his army in Hangzhou. Yang Wan, minister of education, was appointed as the left minister of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province. He was even more proud of his achievements and wanted to marry Qingdong.

古文：庆童初不许，时苗军势甚张，达识帖睦迩方倚以为重，强为主婚，庆童不得已以女与之。
现代文：庆童开始不答应，但因苗军势力甚大，达识帖睦迩又倚重于他们，强为主婚，庆童不得已将女儿许配给杨完者。
English: At first, Qing Tong did not agree, but due to the great power of the Miao army, and the fact that Daju Xizhe Muxuan was more important than them, Qing Tong had no choice but to marry his daughter to Yang Wan.

古文：明年，出镇海宁州，距杭百里，地濒海硗瘠，民甚贫。
现代文：至正十七年，庆童镇守海宁州。此地距杭州百里，在海滨，地瘠民贫。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Taisho era, Qingdong Town stood guard over Haining State. This place was a hundred miles from Hangzhou, on the seashore, and the local people were poor.

古文：居二年，盗息而民阜。
现代文：庆童在那里住了两年，使该地盗息民富。
English: Qing Tong lived there for two years and made the place rich.

古文：至是，庆童在江浙已七年，涉历险艰，劳绩甚优著，召拜翰林学士承旨，改淮南行省平章政事，未行，仍任江浙。
现代文：到此时，庆童在江浙已为官七年，历涉艰险，成绩卓著，召拜翰林学士承旨，后改任淮南行省平章政事，尚未启程赴任，诏令仍为江浙平章政事。
English: By this time, Qing Tong had been an official in Jiangsu and Zhejiang for seven years, experienced hardships and dangers, and achieved outstanding results. He summoned Bai Hanlin, a bachelor, to carry out his will. Later, he was reassigned to Huainan Province Pingzhang Political Affairs. He had not yet left for his post, but the decree was still Jiangsu and Zhejiang Pingzhang Political Affairs.

古文：十八年，迁福建行省平章政事，未行，拜江南行台御史大夫，赐以御衣、上尊。时南行台治绍兴，所辖诸道皆阻绝不通。
现代文：至正十八年，调福建行省平章政事，未启行又改拜江南行台御史大夫。当时行御史台治所在绍兴，所辖诸道皆交通不便。
English: In the 18th year of the Heian period, he was transferred from Fujian Province to govern the province of Pingzhang, but he changed his allegiance to the governor of Jiangnan Province and became the governor of Taiji Province. At that time, the governor of Taiji Province was in Shaoxing, and the roads under his jurisdiction were not easily accessible.

古文：绍兴之东，明、台诸郡则制于方国珍，其西杭、苏诸郡则据于张士诚。
现代文：绍兴东之明州、台州为起义军方国珍所控制；浙西之杭州、苏州诸郡为起义军张士诚所据。
English: Mingzhou and Taizhou to the east of Shaoxing were controlled by the insurgent military Guozhen; Hangzhou and Suzhou counties to the west of Zhejiang were controlled by the insurgent military Zhang Shicheng.

古文：宪台纲纪不复可振，徒存空名而已。
现代文：御史台的纲纪不振，徒有空名而已。
English: The discipline of the Imperial Historian's Office is not strong, and it is just an empty name.

古文：二十年，召还朝，庆童乃由海道趋京师。拜中书平章政事。
现代文：至正二十年，庆童奉召还朝，由海道至京师，拜中书平章政事。
English: In the 20th year of the Taisho era, Qing Tong was summoned to return to the imperial court, and he traveled from the sea route to the capital, where he was appointed to the post of government official.

古文：俄有谮其子刚僧私通宫人者，帝怒杀之。
现代文：忽有人诬奏庆童之子刚僧私通宫人，顺帝大怒，将刚僧斩首。
English: Suddenly, someone falsely accused Qing Tong's son, the monk, of being an illegitimate member of the imperial court. Emperor Shun was furious and had the monk beheaded.

古文：庆童因鞅鞅不得志，移疾家居久之，日饮酒以自遣。
现代文：庆童因而怏怏不乐，称病久居家中，每天饮酒消遣。
English: As a result, Qing Tong was unhappy and said that he had been ill at home for a long time, drinking alcohol every day.

古文：二十五年，诏拜陕西行省左丞相。
现代文：二十五年，诏拜陕西行省左丞相。
English: In the 25th year of his reign, Zhaobai went to Shaanxi Province as the Minister of the Left.

古文：时李思齐拥兵关中，庆童至则御之以礼，待之以和。
现代文：这时，李思齐拥兵占据关中，庆童去对李思齐待之以礼。
English: At this time, Li Sizi's supporters occupied Guanzhong, and Qing Tong went to greet Li Sizi.

古文：居三年，关陕用宁。
现代文：在那里三年，关陕安宁无事。
English: There, for three years, there was no peace or tranquility.

古文：召还京师。
现代文：朝廷召庆童还朝。
English: The imperial court summoned Qing Tong to return to the court.

古文：二十八年七月，大明兵逼京城，帝与皇太子及六宫至于宰臣近戚皆北奔，而命淮王帖木儿不花监国，庆童为中书左丞相以辅之。
现代文：至正二十八年七月，大明兵逼近京师，顺帝与皇太子、六宫以及宰臣、近戚皆北逃，命淮王帖不儿不花管理朝政，庆童为中书左丞相。
English: By July 28, Daming soldiers were approaching the capital, and Emperor Shun, the crown prince, Rikugo, and his vassals and relatives had all fled to the north. Huai Wang Cebul was ordered not to take part in the administration of the imperial court, and Qing Tong became the chancellor.

古文：八月二日，京城破，淮王与庆童出齐化门，皆被杀。
现代文：八月二日，大明军攻陷京师，淮王与庆童企图从齐化门逃命，未成，都被杀。
English: On August 2nd, the Great Ming Army captured Beijing Division. Huai Wang and Qing Tong tried to escape from Qihua Gate, but failed, and were both killed.

古文：也速
现代文：也速，蒙古族人。
English: Also, Mongolians.

古文：也速，蒙古人，倜傥有能名。由宿卫历尚乘寺提点，迁宣政院参议。
现代文：为人豪爽，能干，由宫廷侍卫亲军，历尚乘寺提点，官至宣政院参议。
English: He was a brave and capable man. He served in the palace as an attendant and guard, visited temples as a priest, and served as a councilor in the Xuan Zheng Yuan.

古文：至正十四年，河南贼芝麻李据徐州，也速从太师脱脱南征，徐州城坚不可猝拔，脱脱用也速计，以巨石为炮，昼夜攻之不息，贼困莫能支。也速又攻破其南关外城，贼遂遁走。
现代文：至正十二年，河南人民起义军芝麻李部占据徐州，也速随太师脱脱南征。徐州城义军坚守，官军久攻不下。脱脱采用也速之计，用巨石为炮，日夜攻击不停，也速攻破徐州南关外城，义军被迫弃城转移。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhi Ma Li, the Henan People's Uprising Army occupied Xuzhou, and quickly broke away from the Southern Expedition with the Tai Division. The Xuzhou City Uprising Army held out, and the government army could not attack for a long time. The escape adopted a quick strategy, using boulders as cannons, attacking day and night, and quickly broke through the Xuzhou South Gate Outer City, and the Uprising Army was forced to abandon the city and move.

古文：以功除同知中政院事。
现代文：也速因功任命为同知中政院事。
English: He was also quickly appointed as a member of the Central Political Bureau of Tongzhi due to his merits.

古文：进攻濠州，有诏班师，乃还。
现代文：随后又领军随其父太尉月阔察儿征淮西。当时起义军围攻安丰，也速率军援救，解安丰之围，又进攻濠州。
English: Subsequently, he led the army to conquer Huaxi with his father, Lieutenant Yue Kuo-ch'er. At that time, the rebel army besieged Anfeng, and also led the army to rescue and relieve the siege of Anfeng, and also attacked Zhangzhou.

古文：升将作院使。
现代文：奉诏班师回朝后，也速升将作院使。
English: After returning to the Imperial Palace, he will also be promoted to be an envoy.

古文：复从太尉征淮东，取盱眙。迁淮南行枢密院副使，升同知枢密院事。
现代文：也速随太尉征淮东，攻取盱眙，升为淮南行枢密院副使，又升为同知枢密院事。
English: He was also promoted to vice-envoy of the Privy Council of Huainan Province, and was promoted to Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：讨贼海州，大败之。贼走，航海袭山东，尽有其地。
现代文：率军镇压海州人民起义，义军转而航海占据山东。
English: He led the army to suppress the Haizhou people's uprising, and the rebels turned to sailing to occupy Shandong.

古文：也速计贼必乘胜北侵，急引兵北还，表里击之，复滕、兖二州，及费、邹、曲阜、宁阳、泗水五县，贼势遂衄。
现代文：也速急忙领兵向北，克复滕州、兖州及费、邹、曲阜、宁阳、泗水五县。
English: He also hastened to lead the troops to the north, conquering the five counties of Tengzhou, Zhangzhou, Fei, Handan, Qufu, Ningyang and Surabaya.

古文：未几，复泰安州及平阴、肥城、莱芜、新泰四县，又平安水等五十三寨。升知枢密院事。
现代文：不久又克复泰安州及平阴、肥城、莱芜、新泰四县及安水等五十三寨，因功升知枢密院事。
English: Soon, he also recovered Taian Prefecture and Pingyin, Fucheng, Laiwu, Xintai four counties and 53 villages including Anshui, and was promoted to Privy Councillor for his achievements.

古文：知枢密院事刘哈剌不花所部卒掠怀来、云州，欲为乱，也速以轻骑击灭其首祸者，降其众隶麾下。贼陷大宁，诏也速往讨之。
现代文：其后又在蒲台镇压起义军杜黑儿部。东昌义军经陵州北进，在景州遭也速的伏击，损失颇大，失去阜城县。朝廷命也速屯军于单家桥以图截断义军北进的去路。义军转攻长芦，又与也速军大战，射伤也速，但也速仍打败义军，分兵攻下山寨。朝廷拜也速为中书平章政事。后改淮南行省平章政事，平息雄州、蔚州一带人民反元的烽火。知枢密院事刘哈剌不花的部卒抢掠怀来、云州，也速以轻骑击灭其祸首，其余降归于也速麾下。
English: After that, the rebels were suppressed in Pudai. The Dongchang rebels advanced northward through Lingzhou, and were ambushed by Yahe in Jingzhou, with considerable losses, losing Fucheng County. The imperial court also ordered the army to rush to the bridge in order to cut off the route of the rebels' northward advance. The rebels turned to attack Changlu, and fought with the Yahe army, shot and wounded Yahe, but Yahe still defeated the rebels, and the detachment captured the cottage. The court also quickly became the government of Pingzhang. Later, it was changed to the government of Pingzhang in Huainan Province, to quell the fire of people's

古文：贼兵次侯家店，也速遇贼，即前与战，自昏抵曙，散而复合。
现代文：起义军攻克大宁，进至侯家店，遇也速军，大战通宵，不分胜负。
English: The insurgent army conquered Danying, entered Houjia store, and met the rapid troops. The great battle lasted all night, regardless of victory or defeat.

古文：也速遣别骑绕出贼后，贼腹背受敌，大败。遂拔大宁，擒首贼汤通、周成等三十五人，磔于都市。
现代文：也速遣兵绕到义军背后，义军腹背受敌，大败，丢失大宁，将领汤道、周成等三十五人被俘斩。
English: He also quickly dispatched soldiers to go around the back of the rebel army. The rebel army suffered a major defeat and lost Danying. Thirty-five people, including generals Tong Dao and Zhou Cheng, were captured and beheaded.

古文：召入觐，赏赉优渥，进阶金紫光禄大夫、知枢密院事。
现代文：也速因功召入京师觐见皇帝，除优厚赏赐外，还进阶金紫光禄大夫、知枢密院事。
English: He was also quickly summoned to the imperial court in Beijing for his merits. In addition to the generous reward, he was also promoted to the rank of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor and Zhizhu Secret Academy.

古文：程思忠果弃城遁去，亟追至瑞州，杀获万计。
现代文：反元军雷帖木儿不花、程思忠等部攻陷辽东之永平。也速奉诏出师，克复滦州及迁安县，又克复昌黎、抚宁二县，生擒雷帖木儿不花送至京师。
English: The Anti-Yuan Army led by Lei Zhiming and Cheng Sizhong invaded Yongping in eastern Liaodong. They also dispatched troops to recover Bozhou and Qian'an County, as well as Changli and Fuxing Counties, and sent the captured Lei Zhiming to Beijing.

古文：贼遂东走金复州。诏还京师。
现代文：随后又追击程思忠至瑞州。程思忠东走金复州，也速奉诏班师回京。
English: Subsequently, he pursued Cheng Sizhong to Suzhou. Cheng Sizhong went east to Jin Fuzhou, and also returned to Beijing immediately.

古文：拜辽阳行省左丞相，知行枢密院事，抚安迤东兵农，委以便宜，开省于永平，总兵如故。金、复、海、盖、乾、王等贼并起，西侵兴中州，阴由海道趋永平，闻也速开省乃止。
现代文：朝廷拜也速为辽阳行省左丞相、知行枢密院事，省会设于永平，统领辽东兵马。辽东人民也相继起义反元，计有金、复、海、盖、乾、王等部，占据兴中州，计划由海道偷袭永平，因闻也速以永平为省会才停止这项进军计划。
English: The imperial court also hastened to establish Liaoyang as the provincial capital of Liaoning Province, and the provincial capital was set up in Yongping to command the Liaodong soldiers and horses. The people of Liaodong also revolted successively, with the departments of Jin, Fu, Hai, Gai, Qian, and Wang occupying Xingzhong Prefecture. The plan was to attack Yongping by sea, but the news quickly stopped this advance plan with Yongping as the provincial capital.

古文：也速亟分兵防其冲突。贼乃转攻大宁，为守将王聚所败，斩其渠魁，众溃，皆西走。
现代文：也速急忙分兵防御。义军转攻大宁，为守将王聚所败，转而向西进军。
English: The rebel army turned to attack Danying, but was defeated by the defending general Wang Ju, and instead marched west.

古文：二十四年，孛罗帖木儿与右丞相搠思监、宦者朴不花有怨，遣兵犯阙，执二人以去，而也速遂拜中书左丞相。七月，孛罗帖木儿留兵守大同，自率兵复向阙。京师大震，百官从帝城守，皇太子统兵迎于清河，命也速军于昌平。
现代文：于是，永平、大宁都平静无事。也速委任官吏安抚百姓，把他们按十家五家人结成保伍，从事耕种。至正二十四年，孛罗帖木儿与右丞相搠思监及宦官朴不花有怨，遣兵入侵大都，掳此二人而去，朝廷遂拜也速为中书左丞相。七月，孛罗帖木儿留兵守大同，自领兵再进犯京师，京师大为惶恐，百官随皇帝守城，皇太子统兵迎战于清河，命也速屯兵昌平。
English: As a result, Yongping and Danying were calm and peaceful. He also quickly appointed officials to pacify the people, and organized them according to the ten families and five families to form a protection force and engage in farming. Until the 24th year of the year, Luo Timur and the minister of the right Shizhong and the eunuch Pak Fuxin had a grudge, sent troops to invade the capital, captured the two and left, and the court quickly became the minister of the left Shizhong. In July, Luo Timur left the troops to guard Datong, and led the troops to attack the Beijing division again. The Beijing division was very frightened. Hundreds of

古文：而孛罗帖木儿前锋已度居庸关，至昌平。也速一军皆无斗志，不战而溃。皇太子驰入城，寻出奔于太原。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿前锋已度居庸关，进至昌平，也速一军皆无斗志，不战而溃，皇太子退入京城内，不久逃往太原。
English: The advance of the Minoan Timur had passed through Juyongguan and entered Changping, but the army had no fighting spirit and was defeated without a fight. The crown prince retreated into the capital and soon fled to Taiyuan.

古文：孛罗帖木儿遂入京城，为中书右丞相，语具《孛罗帖木儿传》。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿进入京师，自为中书右丞相，见《孛罗帖木儿传》。
English: Shiloh Timur entered the Beijing division and became the vice-premier of Chinese literature, see "Biography of Shiloh Timur."

古文：二十五年，皇太子在太原，与扩廓帖木儿谋清内难，承制调甘肃、岭北、辽阳、陕西诸省诸王兵入讨孛罗帖木儿。
现代文：至正二十五年，皇太子在太原与扩廓帖木儿谋划清除内难，调甘肃、岭北、辽阳、陕西诸省诸王兵讨伐孛罗帖木儿。
English: By the 25th year of the Heian period, the crown prince in Taiyuan plotted with the expansionist Timur to remove internal difficulties, and dispatched soldiers from the provinces of Gansu, Lingbei, Liaoyang and Shaanxi to fight against Timur.

古文：孛罗帖木儿乃遣御史大夫秃坚帖木儿率兵攻上都附皇太子者，且以御岭北之兵，又调也速率兵南御扩廓帖木儿部将竹贞、貊高等。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿遣御史大夫秃坚帖木儿领兵攻上都，同时抵御岭北之兵，又调也速率兵南御扩廓帖木儿的部将竹贞、貊高等。
English: Luo Timur sent the imperial historian Dr. Bald Jian Timur to lead the army to attack the capital, while resisting the soldiers from the north of the Ling, and also transferred the soldiers from the south to expand the scope of Timur's troops, including the generals Zhu Zhen and Zou Gao.

古文：也速军次良乡不进，谋之于众，皆以谓孛罗帖木儿所行狂悖，图危宗社，中外同愤。
现代文：也速军进至良乡不前，与部众商议，都说孛罗帖木儿行为狂妄，要图谋国家大权，中外同愤。
English: They also marched to Liangxiang and discussed with the officials. They all said that Luo Tiemu's behavior was arrogant and that he wanted to seek state power. Both at home and abroad were outraged.

古文：遂勒兵归永平，西连太原扩廓帖木儿，东连辽阳也先不花国王，军声大振。
现代文：于是也速回军驻永平，并西与太原扩廓帖木儿、东与辽阳也先不花国王联络，军威大振。
English: As a result, the army quickly returned to Yongping, and expanded to the west with Taiyuan, and to the east with Liaoyang, without first contacting the king. The military power was greatly shaken.

古文：孛罗帖木儿患之，遣其将同知枢密院事姚伯颜不花以兵往讨。军过通州，白河水溢不能进，驻虹桥，筑垒以待。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿遣其将同知枢密院事姚伯颜不花领兵讨也速军，经过通州时，白河水涨不能进，只得屯驻虹桥。
English: Luo Timur sent his friend Yao Boyan, a member of the Privy Council, to lead the army. When passing through Tongzhou, the rising waters of the Baihe River prevented him from entering, so he had to stay in Hongqiao.

古文：姚伯颜不花素轻也速无谋，不设备。
现代文：姚伯颜不花素来轻视也速无谋，故不设防。
English: Yao Boyan is reckless and reckless, so she does not set up a defense.

古文：也速觇知之，袭破其军，擒姚伯颜不花。
现代文：也速探知敌情，进行突然袭击，生擒姚伯颜不花。
English: He also quickly detected the enemy's situation and carried out a surprise attack, which did not cost Yao Boyan much.

古文：孛罗帖木儿大恐，自将讨也速，至通州，大雨三日，乃还。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿大恐，自己率兵讨伐也速，行至通州，大雨三日军不能进，只得退回京城。
English: Miro Timur was very afraid, and he led his troops to fight quickly, and went to Tongzhou. It rained heavily, and the Japanese army could not enter, but had to return to the capital.

古文：孛罗帖木儿先以部将保安不附己，杀之，至是又失姚伯颜不花，二人皆骁将也，如失左右手，郁郁不乐。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿因其部将保安不服调度，把他杀了，现在又失去姚伯颜不花，连损二员骁将，如失左右手，郁郁不乐。
English: Zhao Luo Timur killed his security guard because he didn't accept the schedule, and now he's lost Yao Boyan. He's also lost two members of his security team, such as his right and left hands, and he's depressed.

古文：事败，遂伏诛。
现代文：终于失败被诛。
English: Finally, he was arrested for failure.

古文：二十七年，诏以也速为中书右丞相，分省山东。
现代文：至正二十七年，朝廷任命也速为中书右丞相，分管山东行省。
English: In the 27th year of the Taisho era, the imperial court quickly appointed him to the post of the Vice-Minister of Central Affairs, in charge of Shandong Province.

古文：二十八年，大明兵取山东。
现代文：二十八年，大明军夺取山东。
English: In the 28th year, the Great Ming Army captured Shandong Province.

古文：闰七月，也速与部将哈剌章、田胜、周达等御于莫州，众败溃，乃尽掠莫州残民北遁。
现代文：闰七月，也速与部将哈剌章、田胜、周达等在莫州为大明军击溃，他便在莫州大肆掳掠百姓北逃。
English: In leap July, he also quickly defeated the Daming Army in Mozhou with his subordinates Haruzhang, Tian Sheng, Zhou Da, etc. He then plundered and looted the people in Mozhou and fled north.

古文：彻里帖木儿，阿鲁温氏。
现代文：彻里帖木儿，姓阿鲁温氏。
English: Cheri Timur, surnamed Aruwin.

古文：祖父累立战功，为西域大族。
现代文：祖父累立战功，为西域大族。
English: His grandfather had distinguished himself in the war and was a member of a large clan in the western region.

古文：彻里帖木儿幼沉毅有大志，早备宿卫，擢中书直省舍人，遂拜监察御史。
现代文：彻里帖木儿自幼沉着，胸有大志，早年入宫为禁卫亲军，后升为中书直省舍人，拜监察御史。
English: Since childhood, Cheri Timur has been calm and ambitious. In his early years, he entered the palace as a palace guard, and later he was promoted to the position of inspector of the imperial history.

古文：时右丞相帖木迭儿用事，生杀予夺皆出其意，道路侧目。
现代文：右丞相帖木迭儿执政，握生杀予夺之大权，人们无不恐惧。
English: The chancellor of the right, Tetsuko Dier, is in power, wielding the power of life and death, and people are not without fear.

古文：彻里帖木儿抗言，历诋其奸，帖木迭儿欲中伤之。
现代文：彻里帖木儿却敢于与他对抗，指责其一切奸诈行为。帖木迭儿一心想中伤他。
English: But Cherry Timur dared to confront him, accusing him of all sorts of treacherous behavior. Timur's daughter was bent on slandering him.

古文：会山东水，盐课大损，除山东转运司副使。甫浃月，补其亏数皆足。
现代文：山东大水，盐课多有亏损，朝廷任命彻里帖木儿为山东转运司副使，仅数月，所亏盐课皆如数补济。
English: Shandong was flooded, and there were many losses in the salt business. The imperial court appointed Cheri Timur as the deputy envoy of the Shandong Transportation Department. In just a few months, all the losses in the salt business were made up.

古文：转刑部尚书，京师豪右惮之，不敢犯法，而以非罪丽法者多所全脱。
现代文：转任刑部尚书，京师豪强都怕他，不敢犯法，而无罪被拘留的人多被释放。
English: When Shang Shu was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department, the Beijing teachers were afraid of him and did not dare to break the law, while many people who were detained without charge were released.

古文：天历二年，拜中书右丞，寻升中书平章政事，出为河南行省平章政事。
现代文：天历二年拜中书右丞，不久又升为中书平章政事，后又出任河南行省平章政事。
English: In the second year of the lunar calendar, he was promoted to Zhongshu Pingzhang Zhengji, and soon he was promoted to Zhongshu Pingzhang Zhengji, and then he was appointed to Henan Province Pingzhang Zhengji.

古文：黄河清，有司以为瑞，请闻于朝。
现代文：黄河水清，地方认为是祥兆，要上报朝廷。
English: The water of the Yellow River is clear, which is considered to be a good omen by the local people, and should be reported to the imperial court.

古文：彻里帖木儿曰： 吾知为臣忠、为子孝、天下治、百姓安为瑞，余何益于治。 
现代文：彻里帖木儿说： 我只知为臣忠，为子孝，天下治，百姓安，这才是祥瑞之兆，其余何益于百姓？ 
English: Cherry Timur said: I only know to be a loyal subject, a filial son, to rule the world, and to keep the people safe. This is the sign of auspiciousness. What benefit does the rest bring to the people?

古文：岁大饥，彻里帖木儿议赈之。其属以为必自县上之府，府上之省，然后以闻。
现代文：这年闹灾荒，彻里帖木儿提出赈济灾民，其僚属认为必须先由县上报给府，府上报于省，省上报朝廷。
English: In this year of disaster and famine, Cheri Timur proposed to provide relief to the victims, and his colleagues believed that it must first be reported to the prefecture by the county, the prefecture reported to the province, and the province reported to the court.

古文：彻里帖木儿慨然曰： 民饥死者已众，乃欲拘以常格耶？往复累月，民存无几矣。
现代文：彻里帖木儿说 ：如今饥民死者已多，还要拘于平常的程序，往复要几个月，那时能存活的百姓就不多了。
English: Cheritemur said: Now that the number of famine victims has increased, it is necessary to stick to the usual procedure, and it will take several months to go back and forth. At that time, there are not many people who can survive.

古文：此盖有司畏罪，将归怨于朝廷，吾不为也。 
现代文：这是地方官府畏罪，使百姓抱怨朝廷，我决不这样做。 
English: This is a crime of fear on the part of the local government, causing the people to complain to the imperial court. I will never do this.

古文：大发仓廪赈之，乃请专擅之罪。
现代文：先开仓赈济，然后上书请专擅之罪。
English: First, open a warehouse to make money, and then write a letter to ask for the crime of being an expert.

古文：文宗闻而悦之，赐龙衣、上尊。
现代文：文宗不仅不罪，而且十分高兴，赐龙衣、上尊。
English: Wenzong was not only not guilty, but also very happy, and gave him the dragon robe and the highest honor.

古文：至顺元年，云南伯忽叛，以知行枢密院事总兵讨之。治军有纪律，所过秋毫无犯。
现代文：至顺元年，云南的伯忽反叛，彻里帖木儿以知行枢密院事领兵讨伐，他的军队纪律严明，所过秋毫无犯。
English: By the first year of Shun, Yunnan's Bo Hu rebelled, and Cheri Timur led the troops in the crusade with the knowledge of the Privy Council. His army was well-disciplined, so there was no offense.

古文：贼平，赏赉甚厚，悉分赐将士，师旋，囊装惟巾栉而已。
现代文：平叛后朝廷赏赐甚厚，他都分给将士，班师回朝时，自己只有日用行装。
English: After defeating the rebels, the imperial court rewarded him very generously. He distributed all of it to his soldiers, but when Banshi returned to the imperial court, he only had enough money for daily necessities.

古文：除留守上都。
现代文：回朝后任上都留守。
English: After returning to the imperial court, they all stayed away from the post.

古文：先是，上都官买商旅之货，其直不即酬给，以故商旅不得归，至有饥寒死者。
现代文：上都官府买商人的东西不给钱，故来上都经商的人无盘缠回家，甚至有饿死冻死的。
English: The local government does not pay to buy things from merchants, so people who come to the capital to do business are entangled in their homes, and some even starve and freeze to death.

古文：彻里帖木儿为之请。有旨，出钞四百万贯偿之。
现代文：彻里帖木儿到上都后，将此等情形上报朝廷，朝廷令出钞四百万贯来偿还给商人。
English: After Cheritemmur arrived in the capital, he reported the situation to the imperial court, which ordered the payment of four million rupees to the merchant.

古文：迁江浙行省平章政事，以严厉为政，部内肃然。
现代文：后调任江浙行省平章政事，为政严厉，官吏不敢胡作非为。
English: Later, he was transferred to Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, where he was in charge of the administrative affairs of Pingzhang Province. He was strict in politics, and officials did not dare to do anything wrong.

古文：寻召拜御史中丞，朝廷惮之，风纪大振。
现代文：不久召他回朝拜为御史中丞，朝廷大小官员无不怕他三分，风纪大振。
English: He was soon called back to the imperial court to serve as the Imperial Historian, and officials of all ranks in the imperial court were afraid of him. He had a strong sense of discipline.

古文：至元元年，拜中书平章政事。
现代文：至元元年，拜中书平章政事。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bai Zhongshu Pingzhang's political career ended.

古文：首议罢科举，又欲损太庙四祭为一祭。
现代文：他首先主张废除科举制度，把对太庙一年四祭改为一年一祭。
English: First of all, he advocated the abolition of the imperial examination system and the change of the annual four-day festival to the annual one-day festival.

古文：监察御史吕思诚等列其罪状劾之，帝不允，诏彻里帖木儿仍出署事。
现代文：监察御史吕思诚罗织一些罪状弹劾他，顺帝不理会，仍令彻里帖木儿署理中书平章政事之职。
English: The inspector general, Lü Shicheng, fabricated some charges to impeach him, but Emperor Shun ignored it and still appointed Cheri Timur to the post of acting secretary of the Central Government of Pingzhang.

古文：时罢科举诏已书而未用宝，参政许有壬入争之。太师伯颜怒曰： 汝风台臣言彻里帖木儿邪？ 
现代文：这时，废科举之诏已拟定，只是尚未加盖皇帝玉玺，参政许有壬坚持不废科举，太师伯颜大怒，问许有壬： 你这个谏官是冲着彻里帖木儿来的吗？ 
English: At this time, the edict to abolish the imperial examinations had already been drafted, but it had not yet been stamped with the emperor's imperial seal. Xu Yiren, who was a member of the government, insisted on not abolishing the imperial examinations. Grandmaster Boyan was furious and asked Xu Yiren: Did you, this eunuch, come against Cheri Timur?

古文：有壬曰： 太师以彻里帖木儿宣力之故，擢置中书。
现代文：有壬说 ：太师因为彻里帖木儿为朝廷效力，故提拔到中书省任职。
English: Yu Ren said: The Grand Master was promoted to the post of the Ministry of Literature because Cheri Timur worked for the imperial court.

古文：御史三十人不畏太师而听有壬，岂有壬权重于太师耶？ 
现代文：御史三十人不怕太师，而听从于我有壬，岂是因我有壬的权重于太师？ 
English: Is it because I have rhinoceroses that I am more important than the grandmaster that the thirty-year-old imperial historian is not afraid of the grandmaster, but obeys me?

古文：伯颜意解。
现代文：伯颜听后怒气消了。
English: After hearing this, Bo Yan's anger dissipated.

古文：有壬乃曰： 科举若罢，天下人才觖望。 
现代文：许有壬说 ：若废科举，天下人才必然抱怨。 
English: Xu Yiren said: If the science education is scrapped, the world's talent will inevitably complain.

古文：伯颜曰： 举子多以赃败，又有假蒙古、色目名者。 
现代文：伯颜指出，举子多以贪赃而身败名裂，并认为科举制妨碍了蒙古传统的选官之法。
English: Bo Yan pointed out that most of the candidates were corrupted by corruption, and believed that the imperial examination system hindered Mongolia's traditional method of selecting officials.

古文：有壬曰： 科举未行之先，台中赃罚无算，岂尽出于举子？
现代文：有壬辩解说 ：科举未行之先，御史台中因贪赃而受罚者无数，怎能说贪赃尽出于举子？
English: Some people argued that: before the imperial examination was held, there were countless people in the imperial history department who were punished for corruption. How can it be said that all corruption was caused by the imperial examination?

古文：初，彻里帖木儿之在江浙也，会行科举，驿请考官，供张甚盛，心颇不平，故其入中书，以罢科举为第一事。
现代文：不能说举子中无贪赃者，但比起来还是少一些。 并举出事实说明科举并未妨碍传统选官之法，二人反复辩论不已，伯颜虽心中已同意许有壬的意见，但废科举之议已定，不可中止，只得以温和语言来劝解许有壬。罢科举之议，是由于彻里帖木儿在任江浙行省平章政事时，举行科举考试，在馆驿盛宴招待考官，内心颇为不平，故回朝入中书省把废科举列为第一事。
English: It cannot be said that there are no corrupt officials in the examination, but there are fewer of them. And facts were cited to show that the imperial examination did not interfere with the traditional method of selecting officials. The two repeatedly debated. Although Bo Yan agreed with Xu Youren's opinion in her heart, the proposal to scrap the imperial examination had already been decided and could not be canceled. She could only use gentle language to persuade Xu Youren. The proposal to strike the imperial examination was due to the fact that Cheri Timur held the imperial examination examination and invited examiners to a banquet at the pavilion when he was in Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province. He was very unhappy, so he listed the scrapping of

古文：先论学校贡士庄田租可给怯薛衣粮，动当国者，以发其机，至是遂论罢之。
现代文：在此之前，也还有人要把学校贡士的庄田收入用来做怯薛军衣粮，正要找一位当权者提出来，于是有罢科举之议。
English: Prior to this, there were also people who wanted to use the shoeda income from the school's gongs to make clothing and food for the army. They were about to find someone in power to propose it, so there was a proposal for a strike.

古文：彻里帖木儿尝指斥武宗为那壁，那壁者，犹谓之彼也。
现代文：彻里帖木儿曾指斥武宗为 那壁 ， 那壁 是蒙古语，意为 彼 。
English: Cheri Timur once referred to the rejection of Wuzong as the wall, the wall is Mongolian, meaning him.

古文：又尝以妻弟阿鲁浑沙女为己女，冒请珠袍等物。
现代文：又曾将妻弟阿鲁浑沙之女为自己的女儿来向皇帝请求赏赐珠袍等物。
English: He also once claimed the daughter of his brother-in-law, Aru Hunsa, as his own daughter and came to the emperor to ask for a gift of a jeweled robe and other items.

古文：于是台臣复劾其罪。而伯颜亦恶其忤己，欲斥之。
现代文：于是大臣们又弹劾其罪，因而诏贬彻里帖木儿于南安，人人称快。
English: As a result, the ministers impeached him for his crime, and as a result, Timur was deposed in Nan'an by imperial edict, which everyone praised.

古文：诏贬彻里帖木儿于南安，人皆快之。
现代文：最后，彻里帖木儿死于南安。
English: In the end, Cheri Timur died in Nan'an.

古文：久之，卒于贬所。至正二十三年，监察御史野仙帖木儿等辩其罪，可依寒食国公追封王爵定谥，加功臣之号，事不行。
现代文：至正二十三年，监察御史野仙帖木儿等为彻里帖木儿辩解其罪，并请求按寒食国公追封王爵，定谥号，没有成功。
English: In the 23rd year of the Taisho era, the inspector of the imperial court, Sen Tetsumu'er, and others pleaded for Cheri Tetsumu'er to justify his crime, and requested that he be awarded the title of prince according to the cold food sovereign, and that his posthumous name be determined, but without success.

古文：纳麟纳麟，知曜之孙，睿之子也。
现代文：纳麟，高智耀之孙，高睿之子。
English: Narin, the grandson of Gao Zhiyao, the son of Gao Rui.

古文：大德六年，纳麟以名臣子，用丞相哈剌哈孙答剌罕荐，入备宿卫。
现代文：大德六年，纳麟因是名臣的子孙，由丞相哈剌哈孙答剌罕之荐举，入禁卫亲军。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, because Narin was the grandson of a famous minister, he was recommended by the prime minister, Haji Hasun, to join the Imperial Guard.

古文：十年，除中书舍人。
现代文：大德十年任中书舍人。
English: Dade ten years in office of the book-shy person.

古文：至大四年，迁宗正府郎中。
现代文：至大四年，升宗正府郎中。
English: At the age of four, he became a disciple of Shoson Shofu.

古文：皇庆元年，擢佥河南廉访司事。
现代文：皇庆元年，擢为佥河南廉访司事。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was promoted to the post of secretary of the Henan Lianyuan Visitation Division.

古文：延祐初，拜监察御史。以言事忤旨，仁宗怒叵测，中丞朵儿只力救之，乃解。又言风宪恃纠劾之权而受人赂者，宜刑而加流。
现代文：延初年，拜监察御史，奏事有忤仁宗旨意，幸中丞朵儿只力救才免于罪。他认为，谏官恃其弹劾之权而受人贿赂者，宜处以流放之刑。
English: In the first year of Yan, he paid homage to the overseer's history, and the report had a benevolent purpose, but fortunately, he was only able to save his son from the crime. He believed that if a eunuch abused his power of impeachment and accepted bribes, it would be appropriate to punish him with exile.

古文：四年，迁刑部员外郎。
现代文：延四年，调任刑部员外郎。
English: He was extended for four years and reassigned to be a member of the criminal justice department, Wairo.

古文：六年，出为河南行省郎中。
现代文：六年，出任河南行省郎中。
English: For six years, he served as the Henan Provincial Vice-Minister.

古文：至治三年，入为都漕运使。
现代文：至治三年，任都漕运使。
English: He held the post for three years.

古文：泰定中，擢湖南、湖北两道廉访使。
现代文：泰定中升为湖北、湖南两道廉访使。
English: In the middle of the Taiding period, he was promoted to be the unlicensed envoy to Hubei Province and Hunan Province.

古文：天历元年，除杭州路总管。锄奸去蠹，吏畏民悦。
现代文：天历元年，纳麟在任杭州路总管时，铲除一些奸邪和国家蛀虫，官吏畏惧，人民高兴。
English: In the first year of the calendar, when Narin was the chief administrator of Hangzhou Road, he eradicated some treacherous evils and national maggots. The officials were afraid, and the people were happy.

古文：明年，改江西廉访使。
现代文：第二年改任江西廉访使。
English: The following year, he was appointed as the Jiangxi Lian Envoy.

古文：南昌岁饥，江西行省难于发粟。纳麟曰： 朝廷如不允，我当以家赀偿之。 乃出粟以赈民，全活甚众。
现代文：南昌发生饥荒，江西行省难于发粟赈济，纳麟表示愿以其家产为担保，这样行省方出粟赈灾，救活了很多人。
English: There was a famine in Nanchang, and it was difficult for Narin to go to Jiangxi Province to make a donation of millet. Narin expressed his willingness to use his family's property as a guarantee. By going to the province to make a donation of millet, he saved the lives of many people.

古文：平章政事把失忽都贪纵不法，纳麟劾罢之。
现代文：平章政事把失忽都贪婪违法，被纳麟弹劾而罢官。
English: He was impeached by Nalin and removed from office.

古文：至顺元年，拜湖广行省参知政事。
现代文：至顺元年，拜湖广行省参知政事。
English: By the first year of Shun, Baihu Guangxing became the governor of the province.

古文：元统初，召为刑部尚书，未至，改江南行台治书侍御史。寻升中丞。
现代文：元统初年，召回朝廷任刑部尚书，还未到任又改为江南行台治书侍御史，不久升为中丞。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was recalled to the imperial court to serve as the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law, but before taking up the post, he was changed to the secretary of the Department of the Southern Yangtze River, and was soon promoted to the position of junior secretary.

古文：至元元年，召拜中书参知政事，迁同知枢密院事。
现代文：至元元年，召回朝拜中书参知政事，后转为知枢密院事。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was called back to the Imperial Court to be a member of the Council of Chancellors, and later became a member of the Privy Council.

古文：寻出为江浙行省右丞，乞致仕，不允，除浙西廉访使，力辞不赴。
现代文：不久，出任江浙行省右丞。请求辞官，未准，委为浙西廉访使，他极力推辞，不肯赴任。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province. He asked to resign, but was not allowed to do so. He was appointed as the West Zhejiang Ambassador of Integrity, but he tried his best to resign and refused to take up the post.

古文：至正二年，除行宣政院使。
现代文：至正二年，任行宣政院使。
English: In the following year, he was appointed as the envoy of the Xuancheng government.

古文：上天竺耆旧僧弥戒、径山耆旧僧惠洲，恣纵犯法，纳麟皆坐以重罪。
现代文：上天竺老僧弥戒、径山老僧惠洲，恣意妄为，违犯国法，纳麟皆判以重罪。
English: The Heaven-sent old monk, Mika, and the Mountain-sent old monk, Huizhou, acted arbitrarily and violated the law of the country, and Narin was sentenced to a felony.

古文：请行宣政院设崇教所，拟行省理问官，秩四品，以治僧狱讼，从之。
现代文：还奏请宣政院设立崇教所，行省设理问官，官秩四品，专门审理僧寺诉讼之事，皇帝允准。
English: He also petitioned the Xuan Zheng Academy to set up a religious education center, the province to set up an inquisitor, four official ranks, and a special trial of monks and temples, and the emperor approved.

古文：寻为江浙行省平章政事。
现代文：不久，升为江浙行省平章政事。
English: Soon, he was promoted to Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, Pingzhang Government.

古文：三年，迁河南行省平章政事。
现代文：至正三年，调任河南行省平章政事。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the Henan Provincial Government of Pingzhang Province.

古文：明年，入为中书平章政事。
现代文：至正四年，入朝为中书平章政事。
English: In the fourth year of the Taisho era, he entered the imperial court as a member of the Chusho Taira clan.

古文：七年，出为江南行台御史大夫。
现代文：七年，出任江南行台御史大夫。
English: For seven years, he served as the chief historian of the Southern Yangtze River.

古文：寻召拜御史大夫，所荐用御史，必老成更事者。
现代文：不久，召入朝拜御史大夫，所荐用的御史，都是老成持重阅历较深的人。
English: Before long, the chief historian was summoned to the shrine, and the recommended historians were all experienced and experienced people.

古文：八年，进金紫光禄大夫，请老，不许，加太尉。
现代文：八年，进阶金紫光禄大夫，奏请告老回乡，不许，加太尉。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to the rank of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor. He was requested to return to his hometown, but he was not allowed to do so.

古文：御史劾罢之。退居姑苏。
现代文：因受御史弹劾而罢官，退居姑苏。
English: Due to being impeached by the Emperor, he was removed from office and retired to Gusu.

古文：会江浙杭城失守，淮南行省平章政事失列门引兵往援，次于采石。
现代文：至正十二年，江淮人民掀起反元斗争。顺帝任命纳麟为南台御史大夫。他奉诏立即上任，仍兼为太尉，总领江浙、江西、湖广三省军马。
English: In the twelfth year of the Zheng He, the people of Jianghuai launched an anti-Yuan struggle. Emperor Shun appointed Narin as the Nantai Grand Historian. He took office immediately after receiving the imperial edict, and was still a lieutenant general, commander of the three provinces of Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Hunan.

古文：纳麟使止之曰： 闻杭贼易破不足忧，今宣城危急，先宜以兵救宣城。 
现代文：向皇帝表示，他虽已七十岁了，但还是要勉力从事，尽其毕生之力以报皇上。就任后驻屯集庆。这时，江浙的杭州已为起义军所有，淮南行省平章政事失列门引兵去援救，行至采石，纳麟劝他去解救宣城危急要紧。
English: He expressed to the emperor that although he was seventy years old, he still had to work hard and do his best throughout his life to report to the emperor. After taking office, he stayed in the camp to celebrate. At this time, Hangzhou in Jiangsu and Zhejiang was already owned by the insurgents, Huainan Province and Pingzhang Province were lost in the political affairs, and the soldiers were brought to the rescue, and they went to quarry. Narin advised him to rescue Xuancheng. It was urgent.

古文：乃调典瑞院使脱火赤率蒙古军应之，大破贼于堈下门，宣州以安。
现代文：又调典瑞院使脱火赤率蒙古军接应，在聏下门大败义军，终解宣州之围。
English: He also dispatched the Xu Academy to make the Mongolian army, which had escaped from the fire and was led by the Red Army, defeat the rebel army at the lower gate, and finally lift the siege of Xuanzhou.

古文：已而贼陷徽州、广德、常州、宜兴、溧水、溧阳，蔓延丹阳、金坛、句容，略上元、江宁，游兵至钟山，集庆势甚危。
现代文：随后，义军攻陷徽州、广德、常州、宜兴、溧水、溧阳，丹阳、金坛、句容、上元、江宁等地人民纷纷响应，义军前锋已至钟山，集庆形势危急。
English: Subsequently, the people of Huizhou, Guangde, Changzhou, Yixing, Lishui, Fenyang, Danyang, Jintan, Jujong, Shangyuan, Jiangning and other places responded in succession to the capture of Huizhou, Guangde, Changzhou, Yixing, Lishui, Fenyang, Danyang, Jintan, Jujong, Shangyuan, Jiangning and other places by the rebel army. The rebel army's vanguard has reached Zhongshan, and the celebration situation is critical.

古文：已而也先帖木儿兵东趋秣陵，杀贼二千余人，平湖熟镇，尽复上元、江宁境，乘胜入溧阳、溧水，贼溃奔广德，其据龙潭、方山者奔常州。
现代文：纳麟极力整顿兵马，部署士卒，命治书侍御史左答纳失理守城中，中丞伯家奴戍守东郊。这时湖广行省平章政事也先帖木儿驻军和州，纳麟遣使向他求援，遭到拒绝。又遣监察御史郑癸阝再去求援，也先帖木儿率步骑军度过采石至台城，然后东趋秣陵，克复湖熟镇、上元、江宁，乘胜入溧阳、溧水。义军转至广德。占据龙潭、方山的义军转至常州。
English: Narin tried his best to straighten out the soldiers and horses, deploying officers and soldiers, and guarding the middle of the city, while the vice-commander Bo Jia Nong guarded the eastern suburbs. At this time, Hukangang went to the province of Pingzhang for political affairs. First, Timur stationed troops and states, and Narin sent an envoy to him for help, but he was rejected. He also sent the inspector general Zheng Yi to ask for help again. First, Timur led the cavalry through the quarry to Taicheng, and then eastward to Fuling, recovered Hukou Town, Shangyuan, Jiangning, and took the

古文：时江浙行省平章政事三旦八、右丞佛家闾亦引兵来会。
现代文：江浙行省平章政事三旦八、右丞佛家闾都领兵来援，克复所失州郡。
English: The governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, Pingzhang Zhengji Sanlianba, and the right-hand man of the provincial government, Fojiakou, both led troops to come to the rescue, and the place of recovery was Fuzhou County.

古文：十三年，纳麟固请谢事，从之，命太尉如故，乃退居庆元。
现代文：至正十三年，纳麟竭力请求辞官，被允准，以太尉衔退居庆元。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Taisho era, Narin tried his best to resign from his post and was granted permission to retire to Qingyuan with the rank of lieutenant.

古文：十六年九月，诏以江南行台移置绍兴，复以纳麟为御史大夫，仍太尉。
现代文：十六年九月，江南行台移于绍兴，诏令以纳麟为御史大夫，仍兼太尉之职。
English: In September 16th, the southern line of the Yangtze River was moved to Shaoxing, and the imperial edict named Narin as the imperial historian, and he still held the position of captain.

古文：十八年，赴召，由海道入朝，至黑水洋，阻风而还。
现代文：十八年召他入朝，取海道行至黑水洋，遇大风而还。
English: In 18 years, he was summoned to the imperial court, took the sea route to the Black Sea, and in the event of a strong wind, returned.

古文：十九年，复由海道趋直沽。
现代文：十九年仍由海道往直沽。
English: Nineteen years later, people still travel by sea to Naosuke.

古文：山东俞宝率战舰断粮道，纳麟命其子安安及同舟人拒之，破其众于海口。
现代文：山东俞宝率战舰断其粮道，纳麟命其子安安率同舟抵抗。八月，抵京师。
English: Shandong Zibo led the warship to cut off its food supply, and Narin ordered his son An'an to lead the resistance in the same boat. In August, the division arrived in Beijing.

古文：而纳麟感疾日亟，卒于通州。年七十有九。
现代文：但纳麟途中感染疾病，日益沉重，死于通州，年七十九岁。
English: However, Narin contracted an increasingly serious illness on the way and died in Tongzhou at the age of 79.

