古文：杜僧明，字弘照，广陵临泽人也。
现代文：杜僧明字弘照，广陵临泽人。
English: The head monk, Mingzha Hongzhao, was from Guangling, Linze.

古文：形貌眇小，而胆气过人，有勇力，善骑射。
现代文：身材瘦小，但胆量勇气超人，勇猛有气力，擅长骑马射箭。
English: He is small in stature, but has superhuman courage, bravery and strength, and is good at riding and archery.

古文：梁大同中，卢安兴为广州南江督护，僧明与兄天合及周文育并为安兴所启，请与俱行。
现代文：梁塑主周年问，卢宝玺任庐业卢辽督护，坦塱与他的哥哥杜天合以及周文育都经安兴奏请，与他一起赴任。
English: On the anniversary of the death of Liang Shuxuan, Lu Baozhen was appointed as the supervisor and protector of Lu Liao, and Tang Zheng and his brother Du Tianhe and Zhou Wenyu were all invited by An Xingso to go to work with him.

古文：频征俚獠有功，为新州助防。
现代文：屡次征讨俚僚有功，任新州助防。
English: He repeatedly recruited meritorious colleagues and was assigned to Xinzhou to assist in the defense.

古文：天合亦有材干，预在征伐。
现代文：天金也有才干，参预征伐。
English: Tianjin also has the ability to participate in the pre-conquest.

古文：安兴死，僧明复副其子子雄。
现代文：安兴去世，僧明又辅助他的儿子卢子雄。
English: After Anxing's death, Sengming assisted his son Lu Zixiong.

古文：及交州土豪李贲反，逐刺史萧谘，谘奔广州，台遣子雄与高州刺史孙冏讨贲。
现代文：交州土豪李贲谋反，驱逐刺史萧谘，萧谘逃奔广州，朝廷派遣子雄与高州刺史茎同讨伐李贲。
English: The local strongman of Jiaozhou, Li Xi, plotted a rebellion, expelled the assassin, Shi Xiaozhi, and Shi Xiaozhi fled to Guangzhou. The imperial court sent Zixiong and Gaozhou's assassin, Zhu Zhu, to fight against Li Xi.

古文：时春草已生，瘴疠方起，子雄请待秋讨之，广州刺史新渝侯萧映不听，萧谘又促之，子雄等不得已，遂行。
现代文：当时春草已经长出，瘴疫之气正盛，王雄请求等到秋季再讨伐奎贲，广州刺史新逾堡芦堕不听，继又一再催逼，王雄等人迫不得已，于是发兵前行。
English: At that time, spring grass had already sprouted, and the epidemic was in full swing. Wang Xiong requested that they wait until the autumn to fight against the epidemic. Guangzhou did not listen and repeatedly urged them. Wang Xiong and others had no choice but to send troops forward.

古文：至合浦，死者十六七，众并惮役溃散，禁之不可，乃引其馀兵退还。
现代文：来到合浦，士兵死亡十之六七，军众都害怕劳役因而溃散，无法加以禁止，于是带领剩余的兵员退回。
English: When he arrived in Hapu, soldiers were dying at a rate of 67 out of 10. The soldiers were afraid of forced labor, so they dispersed. They couldn't ban it, so he led the remaining soldiers back.

古文：萧谘启子雄及冏与贼交通，逗留不进，梁武帝敕于广州赐死。
现代文：萧谘上奏说，子雄及茎皿与贼人交往，逗留不肯进军，梁武帝下令在广州处死他们。
English: Xiao Zhi said in his report that Zi Xiong and Zhu Di had dealings with thieves and refused to march into the army. Emperor Liang ordered them to be executed in Guangzhou.

古文：子雄弟子略、子烈并雄豪任侠，家属在南江。
现代文：子雄的弟弟子略、子烈都雄豪任侠，家属都在南江。
English: Zi Xiong's younger brothers, disciples, and descendants are all heroes, and their families are all in Nanjiang.

古文：天合谋于众曰： 卢公累代待遇我等亦甚厚矣，今见枉而死，不能为报，非丈夫也。
现代文：天合舆众人谋议道： 卢公两代对待我们都很优厚，如今子雄受冤枉而死，不能为他报仇，不是大丈夫。
English: Tianheyin and the others deliberated and said, "The two generations of Lu Gongtuo treated us very generously. Now that our son has died unjustly, we can't avenge him. This is not okay."

古文：我弟僧明万人之敌，若围州城，召百姓，谁敢不从。
现代文：我弟弟僧明勇敌万人，如果包围广州城，号召百姓，谁敢不顺从。
English: If my brother, the monk Ming, surrounded the city of Guangzhou and called out to the people, who would dare not to obey?

古文：城破，斩二侯祭孙、卢，然后待台使至，束手诣廷尉，死犹胜生。
现代文：攻破州城，斩杀二侯来祭奠孙、卢二人。然后等待朝廷使者来，束手就擒见廷尉，即使死去也胜遇活着。
English: Break through the state capital, kill two nobles to pay tribute to Sun and Lu. Then wait for the imperial envoy to come and meet the court lieutenant, even if you die, you will be lucky to live.

古文：纵其不捷，亦无恨矣。 
现代文：纵然不能取胜，也没有遗憾。 
English: Even if I don't win, I have no regrets.

古文：众咸慷慨曰： 是愿也，唯足下命之。 
现代文：众人都慷慨激昂地说： 这是我们的心愿，您尽管下命令吧! 
English: Everyone said enthusiastically, "This is what we want, just give us the order!"

古文：乃与周文育等率众结盟，奉子雄弟子略为主，以攻刺史萧映。
现代文：于是与周文育等率众人结盟，推奉王雄弟王监为盟主，从而进攻刺史萧映。
English: As a result, he allied with Zhou Wenyu and others to promote Wang Xiong's younger brother Wang Guan as the leader, thus attacking Xiao Ying.

古文：子略顿城南，天合顿城北，僧明、文育分据东西，吏人并应之，一日之中，众至数万。
现代文：子略屯兵城南，天合屯兵城北，僧明、文育分别占据东西，官吏平民都来响应，一天之中，聚集多达数万人。
English: Ziliya's garrison was in the south of the city, Tianhe's garrison was in the north of the city, and So Ming and Wen Yu occupied the east and west respectively. Officials and civilians all came to respond, and as many as tens of thousands of people gathered in one day.

古文：高祖时在高要，闻事起，率众来讨，大破之，杀天合，生擒僧明及文育等，高祖并释之，引为主帅。
现代文：高祖陈霸先当时驻兵高要，听说广州起事，率众军来讨伐，大破子略等，杀死天合，生擒僧明和文育等人，高祖将他们全释放了，任命为麾下的军官。
English: At that time, Gaozhu Chen Baxian was a high-ranking soldier stationed there. He heard that Guangzhou had revolted and led the army to fight against the rebels. He killed Tianhe, Shengzang Zengming and Wenyu. Gaozhu released all of them and appointed them as officers under his command.

古文：高祖征交止及讨元景仲，僧明、文育并有功。
现代文：高祖征讨交耻以及讨伐元景仲时，僧明、文育都有功劳。
English: When the Gaozhu Conquest was launched to remove the disgrace of the Yuan Dynasty, and when the Yuan Dynasty was subjugated by the Qing Dynasty, both monks and scholars made contributions.

古文：侯景之乱，俱随高祖入援京师。
现代文：侯景作乱时，他们一起随高祖进兵援救京城。
English: When Houjing made a disturbance, they marched together with Gaozu to rescue the capital.

古文：高祖于始兴破兰裕，僧明为前锋，擒裕斩之。
现代文：高祖在始兴打败兰裕，僧明为前锋，擒获并斩杀兰裕。
English: Gaozu defeated Lan Yu in Shixing, and Sangming, as the forward, captured and killed Lan Yu.

古文：又与蔡路养战于南野，僧明马被伤，高祖驰往救之，以所乘马授僧明，僧明乘马与数十人复进，众皆披靡，因而乘之，大败路养。
现代文：又在南野同蔡路养交战，僧明的战马受伤，高祖驰马过去救他，将自己的坐马送给僧明，僧明骑马与数十人又前进，敌众都溃败逃散，乘机进击，大败路养。
English: In addition, in Nan'an, there was a battle with Cai Luo, and the war horse of Monk Ming was injured. Gao Zu galloped to rescue him and gave his own horse to Monk Ming. Monk Ming rode with dozens of people and advanced again. The enemies were routed and fled. They took the opportunity to attack and defeated Luo.

古文：高州刺史李迁仕又据大皋，入灨石，以逼高祖，高祖遣周文育为前军，与僧明击走之。
现代文：高州刺史李迁仕又占据大皋，进入满石，因而威逼高祖，高祖派周文育为前军，与僧明一起攻击赶走迁仕。
English: Gaozhou assassin Li Qianshi occupied Daxu again and entered Mengshi, thus intimidating Gaozhu. Gaozhu sent Zhou Wenyu as the vanguard to attack and drive out Qianshi together with Sangming.

古文：迁仕与宁都人刘孝尚并力将袭南康，高祖又令僧明与文育等拒之，相持连战百馀日，卒擒迁仕，送于高祖军。
现代文：迁仕舆宁都人刘孝尚合力将要袭击南康，高祖又令僧明与文育等人抵御他们，双方相持连续作战百余日，最终擒获迁仕，送往高祖军中。
English: Liu Xiaoshang, who had been transferred from Ningdu, was going to attack Nankang, and Gaozu ordered Sengming, Wenyu and others to resist them. The two sides fought for more than a hundred days in a row. Finally, Liu Xiaoshang was transferred and sent to Gaozu's army.

古文：及高祖下南康，留僧明顿西昌，督安成、庐陵二郡军事。
现代文：当高祖南下南康时，留僧明驻守西昌，督安成、庐陵二郡军事。
English: When Gao Zu went south to Nankang, the remaining monk Ming was stationed in Xichang, and the military of the two counties of Ancheng and Fuling.

古文：元帝承制授假节、清野将军、新州刺史，临江县子，邑三百户。
现代文：元帝摄行朝政授僧明假节、清野将军、新州刺史，临江县子。封邑三百户。
English: Emperor Yuan's entourage included the monk Ming Fuxi, the general Kiyono, the statesman Xin Zhou, and the son of Linjiang County. There were three hundred households in the county.

古文：侯景遣于庆等寇南江，高祖顿豫章，命僧明为前驱，所向克捷。
现代文：侯景派于庆等人寇掠南江，高祖屯兵豫章，命僧明为前锋，所向皆被攻克。
English: Hou Jing sent Yu Qing and others to raid the Nanjiang River, Gao Zu sent troops to Yuzhang, and Mingsang Ming was the vanguard. All directions were conquered.

古文：高祖表僧明为长史，仍随东讨。
现代文：高祖任命僧明为长史，依然随军东征。
English: Gaozu appointed Monk Ming as Long History, and he still followed the army to the east.

古文：军至蔡洲，僧明率麾下烧贼水门大舰。
现代文：军队来到蔡洲，僧明率部下烧毁贼人水军的营门和大舰。
English: The army came to Cai Zhou, and the monk Ming and his subordinates burned the camp gate and the big ship of the thief navy.

古文：及景平，以功除员外散骑常侍、明威将军、南兗州刺史，进爵为侯，增邑并前五百户，仍领晋陵太守。
现代文：到平定侯景时，避塱因战功任员外散骑常侍、明威将军，亩查丛刺史，爵位晋升为侯爵，增加封邑并先前所封共五百户，依然任晋陵太守。
English: At the time of the pacification of Houjing, General Ming Wei, who was appointed as a non-commissioned officer, rode a horse and rode on horseback to avoid capture due to his war exploits, investigated the history of Mu Cong, was promoted to the rank of marquis, increased the number of fiefs and previously sealed a total of five hundred households, and still served as the governor of Jinling.

古文：承圣二年，从高祖北围广陵，加使持节，迁通直散骑常侍、平北将军、馀如故。
现代文：承圣二年，随从高祖北围广陵，加使持节，迁通直散骑常侍、平北将军，其余职务如故。
English: In the second year after his consecration, he followed Gao Zu to Beiwei Guangling Mausoleum, and was given the title of Jizhi Jie. He was also transferred to the position of Zhi Xuan Ji Changzhi and Pingbei General. The rest of his duties remain the same.

古文：荆州陷，高祖使僧明率吴明彻等随侯瑱西援，于江州病卒，时年四十六。
现代文：荆州陷落时，高祖派僧明率领吴明彻等人随从侯琐西援朝廷，在江州因病亡故，当时四十六岁。
English: At the time of the fall of Jingzhou, Gao Zu sent the monk Ming, led by Wu Mingcher and others, to follow the lord Zhao Xi to aid the imperial court. He died of illness in Jiangzhou at the age of forty-six.

古文：赠散骑常侍，谥曰威。
现代文：赠散骑常侍，谧号为威。
English: Riding attendants were given away, and the nickname prevailed.

古文：世祖即位，追赠开府仪同三司。
现代文：世祖即位时，追赠他为开府仪同三司。
English: When the founder ascended to the throne, he was posthumously awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：天嘉二年，配享高祖庙庭。
现代文：天嘉二年，配飨高祖庙庭。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, the temple garden of Gao Zu was completed.

古文：子晋嗣。
现代文：他的儿子杜晋继承爵位。
English: His son Du Jin succeeded to the title.

古文：周文育，字景德，义兴阳羡人也。
现代文：周文育，字景德，义兴阳羡人。
English: Zhou Wenyu, Zijing De, and Yixing Yang are envied by others.

古文：少孤贫，本居新安寿昌县，姓项氏，名猛奴。
现代文：幼年时，父亲去世，家中贫寒，原本居住在新安郡的寿昌壁，姓项，名猛塑。
English: When he was a child, his father died, and the family was poor. Originally, he lived in Shouchangbi, Xin'an County. His surname was Xiang and his given name was Mengsuo.

古文：年十一，能反覆游水中数里，跳高五六尺，与群儿聚戏，众莫能及。
现代文：十一岁时，他能在水中反复游数里远，能跳五六尺高，与其他儿童玩耍时，谁都比不上他。
English: At the age of eleven, he could swim several miles in the water repeatedly, could jump five or six feet high, and when playing with other children, no one could match him.

古文：义兴人周荟为寿昌浦口戍主，见而奇之，因召与语。
现代文：义兴人周苍担任寿昌浦口的守官，见到文育感到不同一般，于是召他谈话。
English: Zhou Cang, a philanthropist who served as the governor of Shouchang Pukou, felt different when he saw Wen Yue, so he called him for a talk.

古文：文育对曰： 母老家贫，兄姊并长大，困于赋役。 
现代文：文育对周蕾说： 母亲年老，家中贫穷，哥哥姐姐都长大成人，但困于沉重的赋税差役。 
English: Wen Yu said to Zhou Lei: My mother is old, my family is poor, my brothers and sisters have all grown up, but they are stuck in the heavy tax service.

古文：荟哀之，乃随文育至家，就其母请文育养为己子，母遂与之。
现代文：周蓍哀怜他，便同他一块去项家，向他母亲请求将文育收为自己的养子，文育母亲同意给他。
English: Zhou Ye took pity on him and went to Xiangya with him. He asked his mother to adopt Wen Yu as her son. Wen Yu's mother agreed to give him to him.

古文：及荟秩满，与文育还都，见于太子詹事周舍，请制名字，舍因为立名文育，字景德。
现代文：待周着任满时，带文言一起返回京都，谒见太子詹事周舍，请周舍起名字，周舍于是给他起名文育，字景德。
English: When Zhou's term of office was over, he returned to Kyoto with a letter, and met with Prince Zhan Zhi Zhou She. He asked Zhou She to give him his name, and Zhou She gave him the name Wen Yu and the Chinese character Jing De.

古文：命兄子弘让教之书计。
现代文：周苍又请哥哥的儿子弘让教文言书写计算。
English: Zhou also asked his brother's son, Hongzhang, to teach him how to write and calculate.

古文：弘让善隶书，写蔡邕《劝学》及古诗以遗文育，文育不之省也，谓弘让曰： 谁能学此，取富贵但有大槊耳。 
现代文：弘让擅长隶书，书写蔡邕的《劝学》和古诗赠给文言，文育不认识这些字，对弘让说： 谁能学这些东西，取得富贵祇要有大槊就行了。 
English: Hong Zhan was good at writing, he wrote Cai Zhen's "Persuasion" and ancient poems for Wen Rong. Wen Rong did not know these words, and said to Hong Zhan: "Whoever can learn these things, it is enough to have a big gong to get rich."

古文：弘让壮之，教之骑射，文育大悦。
现代文：至递赞赏他的豪壮，教他骑马射箭，塞直十分喜悦。
English: She admired his stature, taught him to ride a horse and shoot arrows, and was overjoyed.

古文：司州刺史陈庆之与荟同郡，素相善，启荟为前军军主。
现代文：司州刺史陈庆之与周苍同郡，平常交往密切，庆之荐举周蓍为前军军主。
English: Chen Qingzhi, the governor of Shizhou, and Zhou Cang, the governor of the same county, usually had close contacts. On the recommendation of Qingzhi, Zhou Ye became the commander of the former army.

古文：庆之使荟将五百人往新蔡悬瓠，慰劳白水蛮，蛮谋执荟以入魏，事觉，荟与文育拒之。
现代文：庆之令周蓍带领五百人前往面蔡的悬瓠，慰问白水蛮，蛮人阴谋劫持旦萱入韭瑟，事情被发觉，且萱与塞直抵抗蛮人。
English: To celebrate, Zhou Jun led five hundred people to the hanging coffin of Mian Cai, and offered condolences to Baishui Ban. The barbarians had plotted to kidnap Danzhang into the coffin, but the matter was discovered, and Zhou Jun stood up against the barbarians.

古文：时贼徒甚盛，一日之中战数十合，文育前锋陷阵，勇冠军中。
现代文：当时贼军甚多，一天之中交战数十回，文直在军前冲锋陷阵，勇猛为军中之冠。
English: At that time, there were a lot of bandits, and they fought dozens of times a day. Wen Zhi was the first to charge in front of the army, and he was the bravest in the army.

古文：荟于阵战死，文育驰取其尸，贼不敢逼。
现代文：周蓍在阵前战死，文育驰马夺得尸体，贼兵不敢相逼。
English: Zhou Yuxuan died before the battle, Wen Yuxi's horse won the body, and the robber soldiers did not dare to face each other.

古文：及夕，各引去。
现代文：到夜晚，双方引兵退去。
English: By nightfall, both sides had withdrawn.

古文：文育身被九创，创愈，辞请还葬，庆之壮其节，厚加灊遗而遣之。
现代文：文言九处受伤，伤势痊愈后，辞别庆之请求还京都埋葬周萱，庆之赞赏他的节操，厚加赠遣，遣送他还都。
English: Wenyan was injured in nine places. After his injuries had healed, he asked Qingzhi to return to Kyoto to bury Zhou Qi. Qingzhi appreciated his self-restraint, gave him a generous allowance, and sent him back to the capital.

古文：葬讫，会庐安兴为南江督护，启文育同行。
现代文：埋葬且萱后，正遇上卢窒基任直丝督护，荐举塞直一同前往。
English: After he was buried and cremated, he met Lu Niji, who was in charge of supervising the cremation, and recommended that they go to the cremation together.

古文：累征俚獠，所在有功，除南海令。
现代文：多次参与征伐俚僚，所到之处都有战功，任南海令。
English: He took part in the conquest of Yunnan Province many times, and achieved great military feats wherever he went. He was appointed as the commander of the South China Sea.

古文：安兴死后，文育与杜僧明攻广州，为高祖所败，高祖赦之，语在僧明传。
现代文：安兴死后，文言舆杜僧塱进攻卢业，被直担战败，产担赦免了他，事情经过记载在杜僧明的传记中。
English: After An Xing's death, Wen Ying Du, a monk, attacked Lü Ye, was defeated by Zhishang, and was pardoned by Zhishang. The story is recorded in Du Xiangming's biography.

古文：后监州王劢以文育为长流，深被委任。
现代文：后来代行州刺史王勤任命文育为长流参军，深受信任。
English: Later, the acting state secretary Wang Qin appointed Wen Yue as a long-term member of the army, and he was deeply trusted.

古文：劢被代，文育欲与劢俱下，至大庾岭，诣卜者，卜者曰： 君北下不过作令长，南入则为公侯。 
现代文：王劝被人取代后，塞直想舆他一起离开，行至大庾岭，遇见一占卜者，占卜者说： 您北下不过是做个县官，往南行便可以成为公侯。 
English: After Wang Xuan was replaced by someone else, he really wanted to leave with him and went to Dalatling. He met a soothsayer, who said, "If you go north, you will only be a county official, but if you go south, you can become a prince."

古文：文育曰： 足钱便可，谁望公侯。 
现代文：塞直说： 钱多够用就行了，谁奢望成为公侯? 
English: He said bluntly: "All you need is enough money. Who wants to be a prince?

古文：卜人又曰： 君须臾当暴得银至二千两，若不见信，以此为验。 
现代文：占卜者又说： 您很快就会突然获得银子多至二千两，倘若不相信我，便以这件事来验证。 
English: The soothsayer went on to say: You will soon suddenly acquire as much as two thousand taels of silver. If you do not believe me, let this prove it.

古文：其夕，宿逆旅，有贾人求与文育博，文育胜之，得银二千两。
现代文：这天夜晚，住宿旅馆，有商人约文育一起赌博，塞直胜了他，赢得银子二千两。
English: That night, at the lodging hotel, a businessman gambled with Wen Yue and beat him, winning two thousand taels of silver.

古文：旦日辞劢，劢问其故，文育以告，劢乃遣之。
现代文：次日天亮，他辞别王勘，王勤询问原因，文言将逭一情况告知，王戏便让他离去。
English: At dawn the next day, he said goodbye to Wang Kan, Wang Qin inquired about the reason, Wenwen informed him of the situation, and Wang Yue then let him leave.

古文：高祖在高要，闻其还也，大喜，遣人迎之，厚加赏赐，分麾下配焉。
现代文：直担当时在直至，听说他返回，十分高兴，派人迎接他，厚加赏赐，分派部下由他率领。
English: Directly in charge at the time, he was very happy to hear that he had returned, sent someone to meet him, rewarded him generously, and assigned his subordinates to be led by him.

古文：高祖之讨侯景，文育与杜僧明为前军，克兰裕，援欧阳頠，皆有功。
现代文：高祖征讨侯景时，文育和杜僧明担任前锋，攻克兰裕，援助欧阳顿，都有战功。
English: During Gaozu's conquest of Houjing, Wen Rong and Du Xiangming served as forwards, and the conquest of Kranyu and the assistance to Ouyangdong were all war feats.

古文：高祖破蔡路养于南野，文育为路养所围，四面数重，矢石雨下，所乘马死，文育右手搏战，左手解鞍，溃围而出，因与杜僧明等相得，并力复进，遂大败之。
现代文：高祖在南野进攻蔡路养时，文育被路养围困，四面数重，箭石如雨般倾下，他的战马被射死，他右手搏击，左手解去马鞍，冲出包围逃出。于是与杜僧明相互支援，双方合力又前进，因而大败路养。
English: When Gaozu attacked Cai Luyang in Nan'an, Wenyu was besieged on all sides by Luyang's troops, and his horses were shot dead. He fought with his right hand, unsaddled his horse with his left hand, and broke out of the encirclement to escape. So he and Du Sangming supported each other, and the two sides advanced together, thus defeating Luyang.

古文：高祖乃表文育为府司马。
现代文：高祖为此上表荐举文育任府司马。
English: For this reason, Gaozu was recommended for the post of prefectural secretary of literature and education.

古文：李迁仕之据大皋，遣其将杜平虏入灨石鱼梁作城，高祖命文育击之，平虏弃城走，文育据其城。
现代文：李迁仕占据友叁，派将领丝垩廛进入遗五鱼凿建城，直担命塞直攻击他，呈卢弃城逃跑，塞直占领逭座城。
English: Li Qian occupied Youyuan, and sent his general, Shi Zheng, to enter and build a city at the site of the Five Fish Chisel, attacking him with his life in his hands, abandoning the city of Lu and fleeing, and occupying the city of Xingza.

古文：迁仕闻平虏败，留老弱于大皋，悉选精兵自将，以攻文育，其锋甚锐，军人惮之。
现代文：难听说垩卢战败，留下老弱士兵守大皋，选拔出所有精锐的士兵，由自己亲自统率，来进攻文育，其军锋芒甚是锐利，文言部军恐惧。
English: It is hard to hear that Lu Han was defeated, leaving the old and weak soldiers to guard the Great Pagoda. He selected all the elite soldiers, led by himself, to attack the culture and education. His military edge is very sharp, and the military of the Ministry of Literature is afraid.

古文：文育与战，迁仕稍却，相持未解，会高祖遣杜僧明来援，别破迁仕水军，迁仕众溃，不敢过大皋，直走新淦。
现代文：立育与迁仕交战，迁仕稍稍退却，双方相持不下，正好造时高祖派杜僧明赶来援助，从另一冀击破迁丝的水军，迁仕的军队溃败，不敢过左呈，直接逃奔堑涂。
English: Liyu and Qianshi fought, Qianshi slightly retreated, and the two sides could not stand each other. Just at the right time, Gao Zu sent Du Sengming to come to the rescue. From the other side, he defeated Qianshi's navy, and the army of Qianshi was defeated. They did not dare to go too far to the left, and fled directly to Xingtu.

古文：梁元帝授文育假节、雄信将军、义州刺史。
现代文：銮五童任命塞直为假节、雄信将军、义州刺史。
English: Zou Wudong appointed Jianzhong as the head of the False Festival, General Xiongxin, and the governor of Yizhou.

古文：迁仕又与刘孝尚谋拒义军，高祖遣文育与侯安都、杜僧明、徐度、杜棱筑城于白口拒之。
现代文：迁仕又与刘孝尚共谋抗拒义军，尘祖派遣文育与侯安都、杜僧明、徐仅、丝茎在皇旦筑城防御他们。
English: Qian Shi also conspired with Liu Xiaoshang to resist the rebel army, and Chen Zu sent Wen Yue and Hou An Du, Du Seng Ming, Xu Yuan, and Shigu to build a city in Wotan to defend them.

古文：文育频出与战，遂擒迁仕。
现代文：塞直屡次出城舆敌军交战，于是擒获了迁仕。
English: Sa Zhi Zhi repeatedly went out of the city to engage the enemy army, and thus won the transfer.

古文：高祖发自南康，遣文育将兵五千，开通江路。
现代文：宣祖从亩康出发，派文言带领士兵五千人，打开通往旦红的水路。
English: Xuanzu set out from Mu Kang, sent a message and led five thousand soldiers to open the waterway to Danhong.

古文：侯景将王伯丑据豫章，文育击走之，遂据其城。
现代文：谜部将王值堕占据邃娄塑，塞直打败并赶走他，于是便占领了遣座城。
English: The riddles department took Wang Zhenpo to Zibo, defeated and drove him away, and then occupied the city of Yanza.

古文：累前后功，除游骑将军、员外散骑常侍，封东迁县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：凭着累积前后战功，被授任游骑将军、员外散骑常侍，封东迁县侯，食邑五百户。
English: Based on his accumulated war exploits, he was awarded the rank of Ranger General, Non-Commissioned Officer, Non-Commissioned Officer, Count of Dongqian County, and 500 households of Shuei County.

古文：高祖军至白茅湾，命文育与杜僧明常为军锋，平南陵、鹊头诸城。
现代文：产担大军来到皇圣整，任命塞直舆丝仅塱常任军队前锋，平定南陵、鹊头诸城。
English: The army of production coordinators came to the Emperor Shengjing and appointed Jianzhong as the only permanent army vanguard to pacify Nanling and Shantou cities.

古文：及至姑熟，与景将侯子鉴战，破之。
现代文：来到姑熟时，舆室垦部将堡王鉴交战，打败敌军。
English: When he came to Gu Rong, the vice-minister of the Public Affairs Office of the State Council sent the Fort Wang Jian into battle to defeat the enemy.

古文：景平，授通直散骑常侍，改封南移县侯，邑一千户，拜信义太守。
现代文：平定侯量后，塞直任通直散骑常侍，改封为南移县侯，食邑一千户，任值盏太守。
English: After the settlement of the marches, Xie Zhizhong was appointed as the general of the cavalry, and changed his title to the marcher of Nanyi County, with a thousand households, and was appointed as the governor of Zhizhong.

古文：累迁南丹阳、兰陵、晋陵太守、智武将军、散骑常侍。
现代文：累迁亩且堡堕陆置堕太守、智武将军、散骑常侍。
English: Countless mu have been moved, and the castle has fallen, the land has fallen, the crown prince has fallen, the general Chibu has fallen, and the equestrian has fallen.

古文：高祖诛王僧辩，命文育督众军会世祖于吴兴，围杜龛，克之。
现代文：产担诛减王仅避，命塞直率领众军在呈堡与世担会合，围困丝鑫，攻克了他。
English: The procurator only avoided the king, and led the army directly to meet with the seer in the castle, besieged Si Xin, and defeated him.

古文：又济江袭会稽太守张彪，得其郡城。
现代文：又渡过长江袭击会稽太守张彪，夺得张彪的郡城。
English: He also crossed the Yangtze River to attack Zhang Biao, the Grand Inquisitor, and captured Zhang Biao's county seat.

古文：及世祖为彪所袭，文育时顿城北香岩寺，世祖夜往趋之，因共立栅。
现代文：当世祖被张彪攻击时，文育当时屯兵在城北的香岩寺，世祖夜晚前往与文育合兵，于是共同建立营栅。
English: When Shizu was attacked by Zhang Biao, Benyu was garrisoned in Xiangyan Temple in the north of the city. Shizu went to join forces with Benyu in the evening, and together they built a camp gate.

古文：顷之，彪又来攻，文育悉力苦战，彪不能克，遂破平彪。
现代文：不久，张彪又来进攻，文育竭尽全力苦战，张彪无法攻破，于是平定张彪。
English: Not long after, Zhang Biao attacked again. Wenyu tried his best to fight hard, but Zhang Biao could not break through, so he subdued Zhang Biao.

古文：高祖以侯瑱拥据江州，命文育讨之，仍除都督南豫州诸军事、武威将军、南豫州刺史，率兵袭湓城。
现代文：高祖因为侯琐拥有占据江州，就命文言讨伐侯琐，仍任都督南豫州诸军事、武威将军、南豫州刺史，率兵袭击湓城，没有攻克。
English: Gao Zu, because Houzo had the power to occupy Jiangzhou, ordered the words to fight Houzo. He still served as the military governor of South Yuzhou, General Wu Wei, and the governor of South Yuzhou, and led the troops to attack Shicheng, but did not conquer it.

古文：未克，徐嗣徽引齐寇渡江据芜湖，诏征文育还京。
现代文：徐嗣徽带领变寇渡过长江占据芜湖，下韶征召文言返回京城。
English: Xu Shihui led the mutineers across the Yangtze River to occupy Wuhu, and issued a call to return to Beijing.

古文：嗣徽等列舰于青墩，至于七矶，以断文育归路。
现代文：昼玺銮等人在壹銮排列战舰，直到土盛，从而阻截文育回师的道路。
English: Ryohei and the others lined up the warships in a row until they reached Tsuchimori, thus cutting off the path of Wen Yu's division.

古文：及夕，文育鼓噪而发，嗣徽等不能制。
现代文：到了夜晚，文育军队击鼓呼喊进发，嗣徽等人不能阻挡。
English: In the evening, the Education and Culture Army marched in, beating drums and shouting. Tsuguhi and others could not stop them.

古文：至旦，反攻嗣徽，嗣徽骁将鲍砰独以小舰殿军，文育乘单舴艋与战，跳入舰，斩砰，仍牵其舰而还。
现代文：到天亮时，反攻鱼巡，显銮麾下勇将鲍巫独自乘小舰断后，塞直乘单人舴艋船与他交战，文育跳入小舰中，斩杀鲍壁，又牵着那条小舰返回军中。
English: At dawn, after counter-attacking the fish patrol and bravely taking Bao Wu alone on a small ship, Zi directly engaged him on a single-person paddle boat. Wenyu jumped into the small ship, killed Bao Bi, and led the small ship back to the army.

古文：贼众大骇，因留船芜湖，自丹阳步上。
现代文：贼军极其惊骇，于是将船留在芜湖，从丹阳徒步上岸。
English: The bandits were extremely shocked, so they left the boat in Lugu Lake and went ashore on foot from Danyang.

古文：时高祖拒嗣徽于白城，适与文育大会。
现代文：当时直担在旦壁防御瓸邀，正好舆塞直大会师。
English: At that time, he was directly in charge of the defense of Danbei, and it was just right for the public to stop the direct division.

古文：将战，风急，高祖曰： 兵不逆风。 
现代文：当时将要交战，疾风大作，高祖说： 军队不逆风交战。 
English: At that time, there was going to be a battle, and the wind was blowing hard. Gaozu said, "An army does not fight against the wind.

古文：文育曰： 事急矣，当决之，何用古法。 
现代文：塞直说： 事情紧急，应该决断，何必遵从古法。 
English: Zi Zhizhong said, "Things are urgent, we should make a decision, why should we follow the ancient law?"

古文：抽槊上马，驰而进，众军从之，风亦寻转，杀伤数百人。
现代文：抽槊上马，奔驰前进，众军跟随他，风向不久也转了，杀伤敌军数百人。
English: He got on his horse, galloped forward, the army followed him, and the wind soon turned, killing and wounding hundreds of enemy soldiers.

古文：嗣微等移营莫府山，文育徙顿对之。
现代文：嗣徽等人移营至莫府山，塞直移兵驻扎与之相对。
English: Tsuguhi and others moved their camp to Mt. Mofusan, and soldiers from Saitama were stationed opposite them.

古文：频战功最，加平西将军，进爵寿昌县公，并给鼓吹一部。
现代文：屡次交战功劳最卓著，加平西将军，进爵为寿昌县公，并赐给鼓吹一部。
English: General Ga Pingxi, who was most distinguished for his repeated war service, was knighted as the Duke of Shuchang County, and was given a part of the propaganda.

古文：广州刺史萧勃举兵逾岭，诏文育督众军讨之。
现代文：刺史芦垫举兵越过左厘岭，朝廷韶令塞直率领众军讨伐。
English: Zhishi Lushushan raised an army to cross the Zuo Liling, and the imperial court directly led the army in a crusade.

古文：时新吴洞主余孝顷举兵应勃，遣其弟孝劢守郡城，自出豫章，据于石头。
现代文：当时台匣呈洞主金垄玺举兵响应芦勃，派他的弟弟耋擞留守郡城，自己出兵违童，占据亘亟。
English: At that time, it was reported that the main leader Kim Ryong-soo raised an army in response to Luo Bo, sent his younger brother Hao to stay in the county seat, and sent his own troops to occupy the county seat.

古文：勃使其子孜将兵与孝顷相会，又遣其别将欧阳騑顿军苦竹滩，傅泰据墌口城，以拒官军。
现代文：芦勃派儿子芦茎带兵与垄虽相会，又派别将匦垦噬屯军于萱笠邀，遇坠据守篮旦继，从而抗拒官军。
English: Lu Bo sent his son Lu Zhu to lead the soldiers to meet the troops from the ridges, but the faction invited the besieging army to Hekasa, and in the event of a clash, they continued to defend the basket, thus resisting the government army.

古文：官军船少，孝顷有舴艋三百艘、舰百馀乘在上牢，文育遣军主焦僧度、羊柬潜军袭之，悉取而归，仍于豫章立栅。
现代文：官军船少，孝顷有三百艘舴艋舟、百余乘战舰在上牢，文育派遣军主焦僧度、芏塞暗中率军偷袭，将这些船只全部夺取归来，就在医童建立营栅。
English: There were few ships of the government and army. Xiao He had three hundred rafts and more than a hundred warships in prison. Ciao Zangdu, the commander of the education and culture dispatched army, secretly led the army to make a sneak attack, captured all these ships and returned them, and built a camp gate in the infirmary.

古文：时官军食尽，并欲退还，文育不许。
现代文：当时官军粮尽，都想退还，塞直不允许。
English: At that time, the official army ran out of grain and wanted to return it, which was not allowed.

古文：乃使人间行遗周迪书，约为兄弟，并陈利害。
现代文：就派人悄悄送信给周迪，相约为兄弟，并陈说利害。
English: He sent someone to quietly send it to Zhou Di, who was like a brother to him, and explain the situation.

古文：迪得书甚喜，许馈粮饷。
现代文：周迪得信后很是高兴，许诺供给粮饷。
English: After receiving the letter, Zhou Di was very happy and promised to supply grain.

古文：于是文育分遣老小乘故船舫，沿流俱下，烧豫章郡所立栅，伪退。
现代文：于是文育分遣城中的老人小孩乘官军先前的船只，顺流俱下，烧毁豫章郡所建立的营栅，佯装退却。
English: As a result, the Education and Culture Division sent the old people and children in the city to take the ships of the previous government army, go down the river, burn the camp gate established by Yu Zhang County, and pretend to retreat.

古文：孝顷望之，大喜，因不设备。
现代文：孝顷看见后，大喜，因而不加戒备。
English: When Xiao Hao saw it, he was overjoyed, so he didn't take any precautions.

古文：文育由间道兼行，信宿达芊韶。
现代文：塞直由小路急行，一夜之间便到达芊韶。
English: The express train went straight through the narrow road and arrived in Handan overnight.

古文：芊韶上流则欧阳頠、萧勃，下流则傅泰、余孝顷，文育据其中间，筑城飨士，贼徒大骇。
现代文：芊韶上流则是欧阳愿、萧勃，下流则是傅泰、余孝顷，文育占据他们中间，筑起城墙。飨宴士卒，贼军十分震骇。
English: Ouyang Zhen and Xiao Bo were in the upper stream, while Fu Tai and Yu Xiaoha were in the lower stream. Wen Yue occupied the middle of them and built the city wall. The banquet guests were very shocked by the thief army.

古文：欧阳頠乃退入泥溪，作城自守。
现代文：欧阳顾于是退入泥溪，建城自守。
English: Ouyang Gu then retreated into the muddy creek, leaving Jiancheng to defend itself.

古文：文育遣严威将军周铁虎与长史陆山才袭頠，擒之。
现代文：文言派严威将军周铁武，与长史陆山才袭击欧阳颐，擒获了他。
English: Zhou Tiewu, a strict general of the literary faction, and Long Shi Lushan attacked Ouyang Xuan and captured him.

古文：于是盛陈兵甲，与頠乘舟而，以巡傅泰城下，因而攻泰，克之。
现代文：于是盛排兵甲，与欧阳愿乘船饮宴，这样行进到傅泰的城下，乘机进攻傅泰，攻克了。
English: As a result, a grand array of soldiers and armor, and Ouyang Zheng took a boat for a banquet, so they marched to the castle of Fu Tai, took the opportunity to attack Fu Tai, and conquered it.

古文：萧勃在南康闻之，众皆股栗，莫能自固。
现代文：萧勃在南康听说这一情况，部众都胆颤心惊，不能自安。
English: When Xiao Bo heard about this situation in Nankang, the club members were scared and could not calm down.

古文：其将谭世远斩勃欲降，为人所害。
现代文：萧勃的将领谭世远杀死萧勃想投降，被人杀害。
English: Xiao Bo's general, Tan Shiyuan, killed Xiao Bo when he tried to surrender and was killed.

古文：世远军主夏侯明彻持勃首以降。
现代文：世远的军主夏侯明彻携持芦垫的首级投降。
English: The long-gone warlord Xia Houming, carrying a reed cushion, surrenders his head.

古文：萧孜、余孝顷犹据石头，高祖遣侯安都助文育攻之，孜降文育，孝顷退走新吴，文州平，广育还顿豫章。
现代文：芦巫、金耋虽仍占据亘题，直担派侯安都帮助文育攻打叛军，萧孜向文言投降，孝顷退兵逃到新吴，广州之乱平定，文言还兵驻守重睦。
English: Although Lu Wu and Jinyu still occupied Wangtai, Hou An, who was directly in charge, helped Wen Yu to attack the rebels, Xiao Zi surrendered to Wen Yan, Xiao He retreated and fled to Xinwu, the Guangzhou Rebellion was put down, and Wen Yan's soldiers were stationed again.

古文：以功授镇南将军、开府仪同三司、都督江广衡交等州诸军事、江州刺史。
现代文：因战功任镇南将军。开府仪同三司、都督江、广、衡、交等州诸军事，江州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of Zhenan for his war exploits. The ceremony of Kaifu, along with the three divisions, the governors of Jiangsu, Guangxi, Hebei, and Jiaotong provinces, was a milestone in the history of Jiangsu.

古文：王琳拥据上流，诏命侯安都为西道都督，文育为南道都督，同会武昌。与王琳战于沌口，为琳所执，后得逃归，语在安都传。
现代文：王燮拥兵占据星红上流，朝廷诏令堡室垫为西道都督，塞育为南道都督，一同会师武昌，舆王继在迤旦交战，他们都被王壁抓获，后来得以逃归，事情经过记载于侯安都传中。
English: Wang Hui's soldiers occupied the upper reaches of Xinghong. The imperial court decreed that Zhuang Miao Mat was the governor of the West Road, and that Xie Yu was the governor of the South Road. Together, they set out for Wuchang, and Wang Miao continued to fight in Shantang. They were all captured by Wang Wei, but later they were able to escape and return. The story is recorded in the History of Hou An Du.

古文：寻授使持节、散骑常侍、镇南将军、开府仪同三司，寿昌县公，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：不久任使持节、散骑常侍、镇南将军、开府仪同三司，寿昌县公，赐给鼓吹一部。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the envoy to hold the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the Zhenan general, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, the governor of Shuchang County, and was given a part of the propaganda.

古文：及周迪破余孝顷，孝顷子公飏、弟孝劢犹据旧栅，扇动南土，高祖复遣文育及周迪、黄法抃等讨之。
现代文：当周迪攻破余孝顷时，孝顷之子公飚、弟孝酌依然占据旧有的营栅，在南方煽动作乱，高祖再派文育及周迪、黄法毡等人讨伐。
English: When Zhou Di defeated Yu Xiaoha, Zhou Di's son Gong Liang and younger brother Xiaozhu still occupied the old camp gate and instigated chaos in the south. Gao Zu then sent Wen Yu, Zhou Di and Huang Fahui to fight.

古文：豫章内史熊昙朗亦率军来会，众且万人。
现代文：豫章内史熊昙塑也率领军队来会合，部众有上万人。
English: The historian Xiong Junpiao of the Henan chapter also led the army to the meeting, which was attended by tens of thousands of people.

古文：文育遣吴明彻为水军，配周迪运粮，自率众军入象牙江，城于金口。
现代文：文育分派呈婴邀率领水军，分派雕塑运粮，自己率领众军进入象牙江，在金建城驻兵。
English: Wen Yue dispatched Zheng Yu to lead the naval forces, dispatched sculptures to transport grain, and himself led the army into the Ivory River and stationed soldiers in Jinjiancheng.

古文：公飏领五百人伪降，谋执文育，事觉，文育囚之，送于京师，以其部曲分隶众军。
现代文：公飚带领五百人诈降，阴谋抓获文育，事情被察觉，文育拘禁了他，解送至京城，将他的部众分配到各支军队中。
English: Gwangsoo led 500 men in a plot to defraud and capture Wenyu. When the plot was discovered, Wenyu detained him, sent him to the capital, and assigned his men to various military units.

古文：乃舍舟为步军，进据三陂。
现代文：于是塞直舍弃舟船为步军，进兵占据三陂。
English: As a result, they abandoned their boats and ships for the infantry, and the marching soldiers occupied the three ridges.

古文：王琳遣将曹庆帅兵二千人以救孝劢，庆分遣主帅常众爱与文育相拒，自帅所领径攻周迪、吴明彻军。
现代文：王壁派遣将领萱庆率领二千士兵救援耋曲，茎庆分兵派主帅当众爱舆文言相持，自己率领所属军队直接进攻旦迪、吴明彻的军队。
English: Wang Bi dispatched general Zhai Qing to lead two thousand soldiers to rescue Zong Qu, and Zhu Qing sent a detachment of soldiers to lead the army directly to attack the army of Dandi and Wu Ming Che.

古文：迪等败绩，文育退据金口。
现代文：显迪等人战败，文言退兵据守金。
English: Xian Di and others were defeated, and Wen Yan retreated to protect Jin.

古文：熊昙朗因其失利，谋害文育，以应众爱。
现代文：熊昙朗因为文育失利，想谋害他，从而呼应众爱。
English: Because Xiong Yulang failed in education, he wanted to murder him, thus echoing the love of the people.

古文：文育监军孙白象颇知其事，劝令先之。
现代文：文言的监军孙白象颇知晓这一情况，劝他先下手。
English: Sun Baixiang, the overseer of Wenyan, was quite aware of this situation and advised him to attack first.

古文：文育曰： 不可，我旧兵少，客军多，若取昙朗，人人惊惧，亡立至矣，不如推心以抚之。 
现代文：文言说： 不行，我们旧有兵力少，新来的军士多，如果拿下昙朗，人人惊惧，败亡立即来临，不如推心置腹地安抚他。 
English: Wenwen said, "No, we have fewer soldiers than before, and more newly arrived sergeants. If we defeat Hulang, everyone will be alarmed, and defeat will come immediately. It is better to calm him down from the bottom of our hearts."

古文：初，周迪之败也，弃船走，莫知所在，及得迪书，文育喜，赍示昙朗，昙朗害之于座，时年五十一。
现代文：起初，周迪战败时，弃船逃走，不知他在哪裹，得到他的书信后，文育喜悦，送给昙朗看，昙朗将他杀害于座位上，当时他五十一岁。
English: At first, when Zhou Di was defeated, he abandoned the ship and fled. I don't know where he was. After receiving his letter, Wen Yu was delighted and showed it to Yu Lang. Yu Lang killed him on the seat. He was fifty-one years old at the time.

古文：高祖闻之，即日举哀，赠侍中、司空、谥曰忠愍。
现代文：高祖闻讯后，当天便举哀，追赠他为侍中、司空，谧号为忠愍。
English: After Gao Zu heard the news, he offered his condolences on the same day, posthumously awarding him the titles of chamberlain and magistrate, and his posthumous name was Zhongjun.

古文：初，文育之据三陂，有流星坠地，其声如雷，地陷方一丈，中有碎炭数斗。
现代文：起初，文育占据三陂，有流星坠落地下，其声如雷，地下陷落一丈见方的大坑，坑中有数斗碎炭。
English: At the beginning, culture and education occupied Sanluo. There was a meteor falling underground, and the sound of it was thunderous. There was a large pit with a square shape falling underground, and there were several piles of crushed coal in the pit.

古文：又军市中忽闻小儿啼，一市并惊，听之在土下，军人掘得棺长三尺，文育恶之。
现代文：又在军营中忽然听到小孩哭啼，整个军队都惊恐，听这声音在地底下，军人掘地得到一具三尺长的棺材，文育深感厌恶。
English: Also, in the military camp, a child was suddenly heard crying, and the entire army was alarmed. Hearing this sound under the ground, the soldiers dug up a three-foot-long coffin, and Benyu was deeply disgusted.

古文：俄而迪败，文育见杀。
现代文：不久，周迪战败，文育被杀。
English: Soon after, Zhou Di was defeated and Wen Rong was killed.

古文：天嘉二年，有诏配享高祖庙庭。
现代文：天嘉二年，有诏令文言配享高祖庙宇。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, there was a decree saying that the temple of Gao Zu should be awarded.

古文：子宝安嗣。
现代文：文育子实安继承爵位。
English: Bunyuko Shisan succeeded to the peerage.

古文：文育本族兄景曜，因文育官至新安太守。
现代文：文育同族兄景曜，因文言而官至新安太守。
English: The elder brother of the same ethnic group, Jing You, was promoted to the position of the new governor of An because of his proclamation.

古文：宝安字安民。
现代文：周实安字安民。
English: Zhou Shi, An Zi, An Min.

古文：年十馀岁，便习骑射，以贵公子骄蹇游逸，好狗马，乐驰骋，靡衣媮食。
现代文：十余岁时，便练习骑马射箭，以贵公子身份骄纵嬉游，爱好猎狗骏马，喜欢驰骋，衣着华丽，饮食豪奢。
English: When he was more than ten years old, he practiced horse riding and archery, swam with pride as a noble man, loved hunting dogs and horses, liked galloping, dressed gorgeously, and ate sumptuously.

古文：文育之为晋陵，以征讨不遑之郡，令宝安监知郡事，尤聚恶少年，高祖患之。
现代文：文言任晋陵太守时，因为征战讨伐无暇到郡任，命实安代管郡中事务，更是肆意纠集恶少年，高祖为此忧虑。
English: Gaozu was worried about the fact that when he was appointed as Jinling Taishou, because he did not have time to go to the county to fight, he was ordered to take charge of the county's middle school affairs, and even more so, he wanted to gather bad boys.

古文：及文育西征败绩，絷于王琳，宝安便折节读书，与士君子游，绥御文育士卒，甚有威惠。
现代文：待到文育西征失败，被王琳拘禁，宝安便改变往日恶习潜心读书，舆正人君子交游，安抚控御文育部下士卒，颇有威望和恩惠。
English: After the failure of the Western Expedition of the Ministry of Education and Culture and the detention of Wang Lin, Bao An changed the bad habits of the past and devoted himself to reading. He became a friend of the righteous and a gentleman, and appeased the subordinates of the Ministry of Education and Culture. He enjoyed considerable prestige and favors.

古文：除员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：任员外散骑侍郎。
English: He was appointed as a non-commissioned officer samurai.

古文：文育归，复除贞威将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：文育回归，又任贞威将军、吴兴太守。
English: Literature and education returned, and General Zhen Wei and Wu Xing, the de facto ruler, were also appointed.

古文：文育为熊昙朗所害，征宝安还。
现代文：文育被熊昙朗杀害，征召实安还京都。
English: Benyu was killed by Xiong Yulang, and Shi'an was conscripted to return to Kyoto.

古文：起为猛烈将军，领其旧兵，仍令南讨。
现代文：起用为猛烈将军，带领文育的旧兵，仍然命令他南征。
English: Appointed as a fierce general, leading the old soldiers of culture and education, he still ordered him to march south.

古文：世祖即位，深器重之，寄以心膂，精卒利兵多配焉。
现代文：世祖即位，深深器重他，以他为心腹，多配给他精锐的士卒和锐利的兵器。
English: When the founder of the world ascended the throne, he held him in high esteem and considered him his confidant. He was more than worthy to give him elite soldiers and sharp weapons.

古文：及平王琳，颇有功。
现代文：在平定王琳时，颇有功劳。
English: When Wang Lin was pacified, he did quite a bit of work.

古文：周迪之破熊昙朗，宝安南入，穷其馀烬。
现代文：周迪攻破熊昙朗时，宝安南进，剪除尽昙朗的余党。
English: When Zhou Di broke through Xiong Ronglang, Bao An marched south and eliminated the remaining party in Xiong Ronglang.

古文：天嘉二年，重除雄信将军、吴兴太守，袭封寿昌县公。
现代文：天嘉二年，重任雄信将军、吴兴太守，袭封寿昌县公。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, Wu Xing, the governor of Shuchang County, was appointed as the general of Xiongxin.

古文：三年，征留异，为侯安都前军。
现代文：三年，征伐留异，担任侯安都的前军。
English: For three years, he served as a member of the former army of Hou'an.

古文：异平，除给事黄门侍郎、卫尉卿。
现代文：平定留异后，任给事黄门侍郎、卫尉卿。
English: After suppressing the dissidents, he was appointed as Huangmen Zhi Rong, and Wei Rongqing.

古文：四年，授持节、都督南徐州诸军事、贞毅将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：四年，授持节、都督南徐州诸军事、贞毅将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the fourth year, the conferring festival, the military, General Zhengyi, the governor of South Xuzhou, and the history of South Xuzhou.

古文：征为左卫将军，加信武将军。
现代文：征入朝任左卫将军，加信武将军。
English: He was conscripted into the Imperial Army as General of the Left Division and General of the Right Division.

古文：寻以本官领卫尉卿，又进号仁威将军。
现代文：不久又以本官领卫尉卿，又进号为仁威将军。
English: Soon after, he was given the official title of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, and was also given the title of General Ren Wei.

古文：天康元年卒，时年二十九。
现代文：天康元年去世，当时二十九岁。
English: Tian Kang died in the first year of the year, when he was twenty-nine years old.

古文：赠侍中、左卫将军，谥曰成。
现代文：追赠侍中、左卫将军，谧号为成。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Middle Rank and General of the Left Division, and his posthumous name became Tsuru.

古文：子嗣。
现代文：宣玄之子且继承爵位。
English: Xuan Xuan's son, Kecheng, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：宝安卒后，亦为偏将。
现代文：宣室去世后，且习也曾任偏将。
English: After the death of his wife, Xi also served as a general.

古文：征欧阳纥，平定淮南，并有功，封江安县伯，邑四百户。
现代文：征讨欧阳纥，平定淮南，都立有战功，封江安县伯，食邑四百户。
English: The conquest of Ouyang Province, the pacification of Huainan Province, the military exploits of Du Li, the fencing of Jiang'an County, and the 400 households of Shiyi Village.

古文：历晋陵、定远二郡太守。
现代文：历任置堕、赵塞二郡太守。
English: Successive incumbents were overthrown, and Zhao Seyi became the county's governor.

古文：太建九年卒，时年二十四，赠电威将军。
现代文：太建九年去世，当时二十四岁，追赠电威将军。
English: When Tai Jian died nine years later, at the age of twenty-four, he was posthumously awarded the title of General Taiwei.

古文：侯安都，字成师，始兴曲江人也。
现代文：侯安都字成师，始兴曲江人。
English: Hou Andu is a calligraphy master, Shixing Qujiang people.

古文：世为郡著姓。
现代文：世代为始兴郡的大姓。
English: The family has been prominent in the county for generations.

古文：父文捍，少仕州郡，以忠谨称，安都贵后，官至光禄大夫、始兴内史，秩中二千石。
现代文：父亲侯文捍，年轻时在州郡任职，以忠诚谨慎著称，安都显贵后，官至光禄大夫、始兴内史，官秩为中二千石。
English: His father, Hou Wenhan, served in the prefecture and county when he was young, and was known for his loyalty and prudence. After becoming a prominent figure in Andu, he was promoted to the posts of Guanglu Doctor and Shi Xing Naishi, and his official rank was middle-ranking and 2,000 koku.

古文：安都工隶书，能鼓琴，涉猎书传，为五言诗，亦颇清靡，兼善骑射，为邑里雄豪。
现代文：安都擅长隶书，能弹琴，涉猎书传，作五言诗，也很清丽，兼善骑马射箭，为乡里的豪杰。
English: Andu is good at handwriting, can play the piano, dabble in books, write five-character poems, is also very beautiful, and is good at riding and archery. He is a hero in the village.

古文：梁始兴内史萧子范辟为主簿。
现代文：梁朝的始兴内史萧子范任命他为主簿。
English: Xiao Zifan, a leading historian of the early Liang Dynasty, appointed him as his chief scribe.

古文：侯景之乱，招集兵甲，至三千人。
现代文：侯景作乱时，他招集士兵，多至三千人。
English: When Hou Jing started a riot, he called up as many as three thousand soldiers.

古文：高祖入援京邑，安都引兵从高祖，攻蔡路养，破李迁仕，克平侯景，并力战有功。
现代文：高祖进兵救援京城，安都带领军兵随从高祖，进攻蔡路养，打败李迁仕，平定侯景，都因为他拼力苦战建立功勋。
English: Gaozhu marched into the army to rescue Beijing, Andu led the army to follow Gaozhu, attacked Cai Luyang, defeated Li Qianshi, and pacified Houjing, all because he fought hard to establish merits.

古文：元帝授猛烈将军、通直散骑常侍，富川县子，邑三百户。
现代文：元帝任命他为猛烈将军、通直散骑常侍，富川县子，食邑三百户。
English: Emperor Yuan appointed him as a fierce general, a regular attendant, a son of Tomikawa County, and a member of 300 households.

古文：随高祖镇京口，除兰陵太守。
现代文：随从高祖镇守京口，任兰陵太守。
English: He followed Gaozouzhen to guard Jingkou and served as Lanling Taishou.

古文：高祖谋袭王僧辩，诸将莫有知者，唯与安都定计，仍使安都率水军自京口趋石头，高祖自率马步从江乘罗落会之。
现代文：高祖谋划袭击王僧辩，麾下众将没有知情者，惟独与安都制定计策，就派安都率领水军从京直奔石头，高祖自己率领马步军从江乘、罗落方向来会师。
English: Gaozu planned to attack Wang Sangye, but no one under his command knew about it. He only worked out a strategy with Ando, and sent Ando to lead the navy from Beijing straight to the stone, and Gaozu himself led the horse-mounted army from the direction of Jiangren and Luolai to join the army.

古文：安都至石头北，弃舟登岸，僧辩弗之觉也。
现代文：安都来到石头城北，舍弃船只登上江岸，僧辩没有察觉。
English: Andu came to the north of Stone Town, abandoned the boat and boarded the riverbank, but Sangye did not notice.

古文：石头城北接岗阜，雉堞不甚危峻，安都被甲带长刀，军人捧之投于女垣内，众随而入，进逼僧辩卧室。
现代文：石头城北连接岗峦，城墙不很高峻，安都穿着盔甲携带长刀，军人抬起他扔进女墙内，士兵们也随之进入，进逼僧辩的卧室。
English: The stone north of the city is connected to the mound, the city wall is not very high, and Andu is wearing armor and carrying a long knife. The soldiers lift him up and throw him into the female wall, and the soldiers also enter, into the bedroom of the monk.

古文：高祖大军亦至，与僧辩战于听事前，安都自内阁出，腹背击之，遂擒僧辩。
现代文：高祖大军也来到遣裹，舆僧辩在办事的大厅前交战，安都从阁内冲出，前后夹击，因而捉住僧辩。
English: Gao Zu's army also came to the envoys, and the public and the monks fought in front of the office hall, and An Du rushed out of the pavilion and clashed back and forth, thus catching the monks.

古文：绍泰元年，以功授使持节、散骑常侍、都督南徐州诸军事、仁威将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：绍泰元年，以战功授使持节、散骑常侍、都督南徐州诸军事、仁威将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Shao Tai Dynasty, he was awarded the Military Merit Award of the Military Merit Award of the Military Merit Award of the Military Merit Award of the Military Merit Award of the Military Merit Award of the Military Merit Award of the Military Merit Award.

古文：高祖东讨杜龛，安都留台居守。
现代文：高祖东征杜仓，安都留守京城。
English: Gao Zu went to the east to conquer Du Cang, but An Du stayed in Beijing.

古文：徐嗣徽、任约等引齐寇入据石头，游骑至于阙下。
现代文：徐嗣徽、任约等人引导齐寇进据石头城，巡逻骑兵来到京城的门前。
English: Xu Shihui, Ren You and others led the Qi Ke into the Stone City, and the patrol cavalry came to the gate of the capital.

古文：安都闭门偃旗帜，示之以弱，令城中曰： 登陴看贼者斩。 
现代文：安都关闭城门倒伏旗帜，故意表现虚弱，命令城中军民说： 登上城楼观看贼军者斩首。 
English: Ando closed the city gate, raised the flag upside down, deliberately showed weakness, and ordered the soldiers and civilians in the city to say, "Climb the city tower to watch the beheading of the traitor soldiers."

古文：及夕，贼收军还石头，安都夜令士卒密营御敌之具。
现代文：到了夜晚，贼人收军返回石头城，安都夜晚命令士卒秘密准备防御敌人的工具。
English: At night, the thieves gathered their forces and returned to Stone Town. At night, Andu ordered his soldiers to secretly prepare tools to defend against the enemy.

古文：将旦，贼骑又至，安都率甲士三百人，开东西掖门与战，大败之，贼乃退还石头，不敢复逼台城。
现代文：天将亮，贼军的骑兵又来了，安都率领披甲士兵三百人，开东西掖门与敌军交战，大败敌军，贼军于是退回石头城，不敢再进逼台城。
English: At dawn, the cavalry of the thief army came again. Ando led three hundred armored soldiers, opened the east and west gates to fight with the enemy army, and defeated the enemy army. The thief army then retreated to Stone City, and did not dare to enter Taicheng again.

古文：及高祖至，以安都为水军，于中流断贼粮运。
现代文：等到高祖回兵，以安都率领水军，在长江中流阻断贼军运粮。
English: When Gao Zu returned, he led a naval force to Andu to block the midstream of the Yangtze River from transporting grain.

古文：又袭秦郡，破嗣徽栅，收其家口并马驴辎重。
现代文：又袭击秦郡，攻破嗣徽的营栅，俘获他的家人和马驴辎重器械。
English: They also attacked Qin County, breached the camp gate of Zi Hui, and captured his family members and horses, donkeys and heavy equipment.

古文：得嗣徽所弹琵琶及所养鹰，遣信饷之曰： 昨至弟住处得此，今以相还。 
现代文：夺得嗣徽弹奏的琵琶，豢养的猎鹰，派人送信给他说： 昨天来到老弟住处得到这些东西，今日还给你。 
English: He sent a messenger to say, "I came to my brother's place yesterday to get these things, and I will return them to you today."

古文：嗣徽等见之大惧，寻而请和，高祖听其还北。
现代文：嗣徽等人见到十分恐惧，不久请求和解，高祖听任他们回到北方。
English: Tsuguhi and the others were very frightened, and soon asked for reconciliation. Gaozu allowed them to return to the north.

古文：及嗣徽等济江，齐之馀军犹据采石，守备甚严，又遣安都攻之，多所俘获。
现代文：等到嗣徽等人渡过长江，北齐剩余军队仍然占据采石，防守十分森严，又派安都进攻，俘获了许多齐兵。
English: When Tsuguhi and others crossed the Yangtze River, the remaining troops of Northern Qi still occupied the quarry, the defense was very strict, and they sent Andu to attack, capturing many Qi soldiers.

古文：明年春，诏安都率兵镇梁山，以备齐。
现代文：第二年春天，朝廷诏令安都率军镇守梁山，来防备北齐。
English: In the spring of the following year, the imperial court ordered Ando to lead an army to guard the town of Liangshan in order to protect Northern Qi.

古文：徐嗣徽等复入丹阳，至湖熟，高祖追安都还，率马步拒之于高桥。
现代文：徐嗣徽等人又进入丹阳，来到湖熟，高祖追令安都率军回还，统领骑兵和步兵在高桥防敌。
English: Xu Shihui and others also entered Danyang and came to Hukou. Gaozu ordered Andu to lead the army back, leading the cavalry and infantry to defend against the enemy in Gaoqiao.

古文：又战于耕坛南，安都率十二骑，突其阵，破之，生擒齐仪同乞伏无劳。
现代文：又在耕坛南边交战，安都带领十二个骑兵，冲突敌人的阵营，打败敌军，活捉齐的仪同乞伏无劳。
English: They also fought on the south side of the ploughing field. An Du led twelve cavalrymen, clashed with the enemy's camp, defeated the enemy army, and caught Qi alive.

古文：又刺齐将东方老堕马，会贼骑至，救老获免。
现代文：又将齐将东方老刺下马来，正好贼军的骑兵赶到，救下束方老，使他免于一死。
English: Zi stabbed Dongfanglao off his horse, just as the cavalry of the robber army arrived to rescue Sok Fanglao and save him from death.

古文：贼北渡蒋山，安都又与齐将王敬宝战于龙尾，使从弟晓、军主张纂前犯其阵。
现代文：贼军往北渡过蒋山，安都又在龙尾道上与齐将王敬实交战，派堂弟侯晓、军主张纂前行冲击敌阵。
English: The bandit army crossed the Jiangshan Mountains to the north, and Andu fought against the Qi general Wang Jingshi on the Longtou Road, and sent his cousin Hou Xiao and the army advocate Zuo to advance and attack the enemy.

古文：晓被枪坠马，张纂死之。
现代文：侯晓被枪刺下马来，张纂战死。
English: Hou Xiao was stabbed to death and Zhang Zuo was killed in the battle.

古文：安都驰往救晓，斩其骑士十一人，因取纂尸而还，齐军不敢逼。
现代文：安都驰马前往救侯晓，斩杀敌人的骑兵十一人，于是夺得张纂的尸首回还，齐军不敢进逼。
English: An Du galloped to rescue Hou Xiao, killed eleven enemy cavalrymen, and then recaptured Zhang Zuo's corpse. The Qi army did not dare to advance.

古文：高祖与齐军战于莫府山，命安都领步骑千馀人，自白下横击其后，齐军大败。
现代文：高祖在莫府山与齐兵交战，命令安都带领步兵骑兵千余人，从白下横击敌军腹背，齐军大败。
English: Gaozu fought against the Qi soldiers in Mofu Mountain, and ordered Andu to lead more than a thousand infantry and cavalry to attack the enemy's belly and back from below, and the Qi army was defeated.

古文：安都又率所部追至摄山，俘获首虏不可胜计。
现代文：安都又率领自己的部属追到摄山，俘获敌人的首级难以数计。
English: Ando also led his subordinates to chase Tsurumo to Mount Teru, capturing countless enemy heads.

古文：以功进爵为侯，增邑五百户，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：因战功爵位晋升为侯爵，增加封邑五百户，赐给鼓吹一部。
English: He was promoted to the rank of marquis for his war service, increased the number of fiefs by 500, and gave a portion of the fiefs to the propagandists.

古文：又进号平南将军，改封西江县公。
现代文：又进号为平南将军，改封西江县公。
English: He was also given the title of General Pingnan and changed his title to Xijiang County official.

古文：仍都督水军出豫章，助豫州刺史周文育讨萧勃。
现代文：又都督水军前往豫章，协助豫州刺史周文言讨伐萧勃。
English: In addition, the governor's naval forces went to Yuzhang to assist the Yuzhou Jishi Zhouwenwen to fight against Xiao Bo.

古文：安都未至，文育已斩勃，并擒其将欧阳頠、傅泰等。
现代文：安都尚未赶到，文言已经斩杀萧勃，并且抓获了他的将领欧阳顿、傅泰等人。
English: Before An Du arrived, Wen Yan had already killed Xiao Bo and captured his generals Ouyang Tong, Fu Tai and others.

古文：唯余孝顷与勃子孜犹据豫章之石头，作两城，孝顷与孜各据其一，又多设船舰，夹水而阵。
现代文：惟有余耋厘与芦垫之子盖茎依然占据蝗的互亟，营建两座军城，孝顷和萧孜每人据守一座，又广设船舰，夹江排起阵列。
English: However, Yu Baili and the son of Lushan, Gaizhong, still occupied the mutual interests of the locusts, built two military cities, Xiao He and Shau Ze each guarded one, and set up ships, and lined up the rivers.

古文：安都至，乃衔枚夜烧其舰。
现代文：安都率兵而至，便在夜晚悄悄地焚烧敌军的船舰。
English: Ando led his troops to the scene and quietly burned the enemy ships at night.

古文：文育率水军，安都领步骑，登岸结阵。
现代文：文育率领水军，安都带领步骑军，登岸结成战阵。
English: Wen Yu led the navy, An Du led the cavalry, and they went ashore to form a battle line.

古文：孝顷俄断后路，安都乃令军士多伐松木，竖栅，列营渐进，频战屡克，孜乃降。
现代文：孝顷很快阻断后面的道路，圭都于是命令军士砍来许多松木，竖起栅栏，排列营垒逐渐前行，屡战屡胜，萧孜便投降了。
English: Xiaohao quickly blocked the road behind, and Guidu ordered the sergeant to cut down a lot of pine trees, erect a fence, line up the camp and gradually advance. After repeated battles and victories, Xiao Ze surrendered.

古文：孝顷奔归新吴，请入子为质，许之。
现代文：茎玺逃奔回塞退，请求朝廷愿将儿子送入朝中作为人质，得到允许。
English: He fled back to Saipan and begged the imperial court to allow him to take his son as a hostage to China.

古文：师还，以功进号镇北将军，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：军队回还，安都因为战功进号镇北将军，加开府仪同三司。
English: The army returned, and Andu was awarded the title of Zhenbei General for his military exploits, as well as the title of Kaifu with three divisions.

古文：仍率众会于武昌，与周文育西讨王琳。
现代文：又率众军集会于武昌，与周文育一起西征王继。
English: He also led the troops to assemble in Wuchang and went to the West together with Zhou Wenyu.

古文：将发，王公已下饯于新林，安都跃马渡桥，人马俱堕水中，又坐絺内坠于橹井，时以为不祥。
现代文：将要出发，王公以下的朝廷官员都去新林饯行，安都跃马渡桥，人和马全掉入水中，又坐在船舱内掉进橹井中，时人认为这不吉利。
English: When it was about to set sail, the imperial officials from the prince on down went to Xinlin to travel, and all of them jumped across the bridge. People thought it was unlucky when people and horses all fell into the water, and when people sat in the cabin and fell into the well.

古文：至武昌，琳将樊猛弃城走。
现代文：兵临武昌，王琳的守将樊猛弃城逃走。
English: When the soldiers arrived in Wuchang, Wang Lin's guards abandoned the city and fled.

古文：文育亦自豫章至。
现代文：文育也从豫章来到逭裹。
English: Literature and education have also come from Yuanzhang to Zouwu.

古文：时两将俱行，不相统摄，因部下交争，稍不平。
现代文：当时两将同时进兵，相互之间没有统一指挥，又因为部下互相争斗，渐渐军队之中不安定了。
English: At that time, the two generals entered the army at the same time, there was no unified command between them, and because their subordinates fought with each other, the army gradually became unstable.

古文：军至郢州，琳将潘纯陀于城中遥射官军，安都怒，进军围之，未能克。
现代文：军队来到郢州，王琳部将潘纯陁在城裹面远远地射击官军，安都愤怒，进军围困敌人，没有攻克。
English: When the army came to Zhangzhou, Wang Lin's army encircled Pan Chun in the city and fired at the official army from a distance. Enraged, An Du marched to besiege the enemy, but failed to conquer.

古文：而王琳至于弇口，安都乃释郢州，悉众往沌口以御之，遇风不得进。
现代文：遣时王琳来到弁口，安都于是解了郢州之围，带领所有军队前往沌口抵御王琳，遇到大风无法前进。
English: When Wang Lin came to Bengkou, Andu lifted the siege of Zhangzhou and led all the troops to Chaokou to resist Wang Lin. They could not advance in the face of strong winds.

古文：琳据东岸，官军据西岸，相持数日，乃合战，安都等败绩。
现代文：王琳占据东岸，宫军据守西岸，相持了数天才交战，安都等人战败。
English: Wang Lin occupied the east coast, the palace army defended the west coast, and fought for several days. Ando and others were defeated.

古文：安都与周文育、徐敬成并为琳所囚。
现代文：安都与周文直、途塑盛都被旦壁拘禁。
English: Ando, along with Zhou Wenzhong and Tuo Shuxing, were all detained at the Great Wall.

古文：琳总以一长锁系之，置于絺下，令所亲宦者王子晋掌视之。
现代文：旦壁用一条长锁链将他们锁到一块儿，放置在船底下，令自己的亲信宦官王子晋监管他们。
English: He chained them together with a long chain and placed them under the boat, leaving his trusted eunuch Prince Jin to watch over them.

古文：琳下至湓城白水浦，安都等甘言许厚赂子晋。
现代文：王琳束下至湓城的白水逋，塞都等人甜言蜜语许诺要以重金送给子晋。
English: Wang Lin's retinue went to Baishuiyuan in Handan City, and the people of Handan and other places promised to give Zi Jin a large sum of money.

古文：子晋乃伪以小船依絺而钓，夜载安都、文育、敬成上岸，入深草中，步投官军。
现代文：王置便伪装用小船靠近关人的大船钓鱼，夜晚装载宝都、塞直、董哩上岸，进入深草之中，徒步投奔官军。
English: Wang Jie disguised himself as a fisherman and used a small boat to go fishing near Guanren's big boat. At night, he loaded Baodu, Zaizhi, and Dongli onto the shore, went into the deep grass, and ran on foot to join the government army.

古文：还都自劾，诏并赦之，复其官爵。
现代文：回到都城后自我弹劾，朝廷诏令将他们一并赦免，恢复他们的官爵。
English: After returning to the capital and self-impeachment, the Imperial Court issued a decree to pardon them all and restore their titles.

古文：寻为丹阳尹，出为都督南豫州诸军事、镇西将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：不久任且屋尹，出任都督亩辽业诸军事、镇西将军、卢塑出刺史。
English: Kechiya Yin, who held the post for a short time, served as the military governor of Mu Liaoye, the general of Zhenxi, and the history of Lu Shuo.

古文：令继周文育攻余孝劢及王琳将曹庆、常众爱等。
现代文：朝廷命令他继周文育之后攻打金耋曲和王壁的部将萱庆、鲎塞爱等。
English: The imperial court ordered him, following Zhou Wenyu, to attack Jin Rongqu and Wangbi's subordinates, such as Zou Qing and Zou Sai Ai.

古文：安都自宫亭湖出松门，蹑众爱后。
现代文：窒都从宣皇塑出查幽，紧迫于塞玺的军队后面。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xuanxuan was casting out the Chayu army, which was pressing in behind the Saigon army.

古文：文育为熊昙朗所害，安都回取大舰，值琳将周炅、周协南归，与战，破之，生擒炅、协。
现代文：塞直被熊昙朗杀害，塞都回军取来大船舰，正好遇上王壁部将旦星、且协南归，与他们交战，打败他们，并活捉且垦、且垄。
English: Xizhi was killed by Xiong Yulang, Xidu returned to the army to take a large ship, just met the king's wall department commander Dan Xing, and cooperated with the south to return, fought with them, defeated them, and captured them alive.

古文：孝劢弟孝猷率部下四千家欲就王琳，遇炅、协败，乃诣安都降。
现代文：耋曲弟弟垄逖率领部下四千家想归附王逊，遇到旦垦、旦垣战败，于是拜见窒都投降。
English: Zong Qu's younger brother, Reng Yao, led 4,000 of his subordinates in an attempt to annex Wang Song, but was defeated by Danzhong and Dangak, and surrendered.

古文：安都又进军于禽奇洲，破曹庆、常众爱等，焚其船舰。
现代文：宝都又进军至盒童剀，打败萱庆、当塞爱等人，焚毁他们的船舰。
English: Baodu also marched to Houtongyu, defeated Zhai Qing, Dang Sai Ai and others, and burned their ships.

古文：众爱奔于庐山，为村人所杀，馀众悉平。
现代文：众爱逃奔到庐山，被村民杀死，其余乱众全被平息。
English: They fled to Lushan and were killed by the villagers. The rest of the rioters were all subdued.

古文：还军至南皖，而高祖崩，安都随世祖还朝，仍与群臣定议，翼奉世祖。
现代文：率军返回至尘壁，而逢直担驾崩，宣都随从世担回朝廷，就与群臣议定大计，奉戴世祖为帝。
English: He led the army back to the dust wall, and when Zhitang died, Xuandu followed Shitang back to the imperial court, and agreed on a grand plan with the courtiers to worship Shitang as the emperor.

古文：时世祖谦让弗敢当，太后又以衡阳王故，未肯下令，群臣犹豫不能决。
现代文：当时世担谦让不敢承当，太后又因为衡阳王速旦的缘故，不肯下韶令，群臣犹豫不能决断。
English: At that time, the world did not dare to accept it, and the empress dowager did not want to issue the imperial edict because of the swiftness of King Hengyang. The ministers hesitated and could not make a decision.

古文：安都曰： 今四方未定，何暇及远，临川王有功天下，须共立之。
现代文：支都说： 现今四方没有安定，哪有空闲顾及远处，临川王有功于天下，群臣应该共同拥立。
English: The prefectures said, "There is no stability in the four directions at present. There is no time to think about the distant places. The king of Linchuan has made great contributions to the world. The ministers should jointly support him."

古文：今日之事，后应者斩。 
现代文：今天这件事，后响应者斩首。 
English: In today's incident, the respondent was beheaded.

古文：便按剑上殿，白太后出玺，又手解世祖发，推就丧次。
现代文：于是带剑上宫殿，启禀太后交出玉玺，又亲手解开世祖的发髻，推举他主持直担的丧礼。
English: So he took the sword to the palace, the Empress Dowager handed over the jade brooch, and personally untied the ancestor's hairpin, recommending him to preside over the funeral.

古文：世祖即位，迁司空，仍为都督南徐州诸军事、征北将军、南徐州刺史，给扶。
现代文：世担即皇帝位，安都迁任司空，依然担任都督南徐州诸军事、征北将军、南徐州刺史，给予扶侍之人。
English: Shetan is the emperor's position, and Andu was transferred to the position of Siku, and still served as the military governor of South Xuzhou, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the historian of South Xuzhou.

古文：王琳下至栅口，大军出顿芜湖，时侯瑱为大都督，而指麾经略，多出安都。
现代文：王琳东下到达栅口，朝廷大军出兵驻守芜湖，当时的大都督是侯琐，但指挥调度军队的策略，大多由安都制定。
English: Wang Lin went east to reach the gate, and the imperial army stationed troops at Wuhu. At that time, the grand governor was Hou Zuo, but the strategy of commanding and dispatching the army was mostly formulated by Ando.

古文：天嘉元年，增邑千户。
现代文：天嘉元年，封邑增加一千户。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, an additional one thousand households were given food villages.

古文：及王琳败走入齐，安都进军湓城，讨琳馀党，所向皆下。
现代文：待到王琳失败逃,齐时，安都进军湓城，讨伐王琳余党，所向攻无不克。
English: When Wang Lin failed to escape, at the same time, An Du marched into Lucheng to fight against Wang Lin's remaining party.

古文：仍别奉中旨，迎衡阳献王昌。
现代文：又秘密遵奉宫中的旨意，迎接衡阳献王陈昌。
English: He also secretly obeyed the will of the palace to welcome Hengyang Xianwang Chenchang.

古文：初，昌之将入也，致书于世祖，辞甚不逊，世祖不怿，乃召安都从容而言曰： 太子将至，须别求一蕃，吾其老焉。 
现代文：起初，陈昌将要入京，致书给世祖，言辞很无理，世祖不痛快，于是召来安都从容说道： 太子将要到达京城，我需要另寻一处藩国，我将要在那儿养老。 
English: At first, Chen Chang was going to go to Beijing and send a letter to Shizu, but his words were unreasonable and Shizu was not happy, so he called Andu and calmly said: The prince is about to arrive in Beijing, I need to find another domain, I will retire there.

古文：安都对曰： 自古岂有被代天子？
现代文：安都对他说： 从古至今难道有过被代理的天子吗?
English: Ando said to him, "Has there ever been a divine son who has been represented from ancient times to the present?

古文：臣愚不敢奉诏。 
现代文：下臣愚蠢不敢遵奉韶令。 
English: The vassal foolishly dared not obey the imperial order.

古文：因请自迎昌，昌济汉而薨。
现代文：于是请求自己去迎接陈昌，陈昌渡过汉江时溺水而亡。
English: So he asked himself to meet Chen Chang, who drowned while crossing the Han River.

古文：以功进爵清远郡公，邑四千户。
现代文：因为功劳爵位晋升为清速郡公，食邑四千户。
English: Because of his merits, he was promoted to the peerage of Qingpu County, with 4,000 households in the county.

古文：自是威名甚重，群臣无出其右。
现代文：从此后安都威名甚重，群臣没有谁能超过他。
English: From then on, An Du became very famous, and none of the courtiers could surpass him.

古文：安都父文捍，为始兴内史，卒于官。
现代文：安都的父亲文捍，任始兴内史，在任职期间去世。
English: Andu's father, Wenhan, Ren Shixing, died while in office.

古文：世祖征安都还京师，为发丧。
现代文：世祖征召安都返回京都，为文捍发丧。
English: The founder summoned Ando to return to Kyoto to mourn for Munenori.

古文：寻起复本官，赠其父散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，拜其母为清远国太夫人。
现代文：不久就恢复安都的官职，追赠他的父亲为散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，封他的母亲为清远国太夫人。
English: He soon restored Ando's official position, posthumously bestowing upon his father the title of "free-riding attendant" and "gold, purple, and light doctor," and bestowing upon his mother the title of "Empress Dowager of Qingyuan."

古文：仍迎还都，母固求停乡里，上乃下诏，改桂阳之汝城县为卢阳郡，分衡州之始兴、安远二郡，合三郡为东衡州，以安都从弟晓为刺史，安都第三子秘年九岁，上以为始兴内史，并令在乡侍养。
现代文：又迎她到京都来，她再三请求留居乡里，皇上便下韶，将桂阳郡的汝城县改为卢阳郡，分割衡州的始兴、安远二郡，合并三郡为束衡州，任命安都的堂弟侯晓为刺史，安都第三子侯秘衹有九岁，皇上任命他任始兴内史，并且命令他在乡侍养祖母。
English: She was also welcomed to Kyoto. She repeatedly requested to stay in the countryside, and the emperor issued an edict, changing Rucheng County of Guiyang County to Luyang County, dividing Hengzhou into two counties, Shixing and Anyuan, and merging the three counties into Shucheng County, appointing Ando's cousin Hou Xiao as the chief historian, and appointing Ando's third son Hou Bibo, who was nine years old, as the chief historian of Shixing, and ordering him to take care of his grandmother in the village.

古文：其年，改封安都桂阳郡公。
现代文：这年安都改封为桂阳郡公。
English: This year, Ando was renamed Guiyang County.

古文：王琳败后，周兵入据巴、湘，安都奉诏西讨。
现代文：王琳失败后，北周进军占据巴、湘二地，安都奉诏命西征。
English: After the defeat of Wang Lin, the Northern Zhou marched to occupy Ba and Hunan, and Andu was ordered to march to the west.

古文：及留异拥据东阳，又奉诏东讨。
现代文：当留异拥兵占据束阳时，又奉诏命束征。
English: When the followers of Rui occupied Sokyang, they were ordered by the emperor to be conscripted.

古文：异本谓台军由钱塘江而上，安都乃步由会稽之诸暨，出于永康。
现代文：留异本来认为政府军会由钱塘江上溯，而安都却由会稽的诸暨陆路进发，出至永康。
English: Originally, Ruiyi thought that the government army would go upstream from the Qiantang River, but Andu went by land from Zhuji to Yongkang.

古文：异大恐，奔桃枝岭，处岭谷间，于岩口坚栅，以拒王师。
现代文：留异十分恐惧，逃奔桃枝岭，处于岭谷之间，在山岩道口竖起栅栏，以此抗拒官军。
English: Remaining very afraid, he fled to Taoshering, located between the ridge valleys, and erected a fence at the entrance of the mountain rock to resist the government army.

古文：安都作连城攻异，躬自接战，为流矢所中，血流至踝，安都乘舆麾军，容止不变。
现代文：安都建立连城进攻留异，亲自参加战斗，被流箭射中，血流至脚踝。安都乘坐舆车指挥军队，面容行止毫无变化。
English: Andu set up the Liancheng attack to stay different, personally participated in the battle, was shot by a stray arrow, blood flowed to the ankle. Andu took a public car to command the army, his face and behavior did not change.

古文：因其山垅之势，迮而为堰。
现代文：顺着山峦的地势，快速筑起堰坝。
English: Following the topography of the mountains, we quickly built a dam.

古文：天嘉三年夏，潦，水涨满，安都引船入堰，起楼舰与异城等，放拍碎其楼雉。
现代文：天嘉三年夏天，涨水，水灌满堰坝，安都引船进入堰坝，竖起的楼舰与留异的城楼一般高，放船撞碎城楼的墙垣。
English: In the summer of the third year of Tianjia, the water rose, the water filled the dam, the Andu guided the ship into the dam, the erected buildings and the unusual city tower were generally high, and the ship crashed into the wall of the city tower.

古文：异与第二子忠臣脱身奔晋安，安都虏其妻子，尽收其人马甲仗，振旅而归。
现代文：留异舆第二个儿子忠臣脱身逃奔晋安，安都俘虏了他的妻子和儿子，缴获了他的全部人马军械，班师回朝。
English: The second son of Liu Yimou, a loyal subject, escaped and fled to Jinan. Andu captured his wife and son, seized all of his men, horses, and weapons, and sent his division back to the imperial court.

古文：以功加侍中、征北大将军，增邑并前五千户，仍还本镇。
现代文：因战功加侍中、征北大将军，增加封邑合并先前所封共五千户，仍然回还原来镇守的地方。
English: As a result of his war exploits, he was promoted to the rank of chamberlain and general of the Northern Expedition, his fiefs were increased, and a total of five thousand households that had previously been fiefed were combined, but he still returned to the original place of the town guard.

古文：其年，吏民诣阙表请立碑，颂美安都功绩，诏许之。
现代文：这一年，有官吏和百姓谒见皇帝上表请为安都立碑，称颂赞美他的功绩，诏令允许。
English: In that year, some officials and common people met with the emperor and requested him to erect a monument for Ando, praising and praising his achievements, which was allowed by the imperial edict.

古文：自王琳平后，安都勋庸转大，又自以功安社稷，渐用骄矜，数招聚文武之士，或射驭驰骋，或命以诗赋，第其高下，以差次赏赐之。
现代文：自从平定王琳之后，安都勋爵功劳愈来愈大，又自认为有安定社稷的功绩，渐渐因此而骄傲起来，屡次招集文武士人，或者骑马射箭驰骋，或者要求他们作诗，评定诗作优劣，按照等次予以赏赐。
English: Since he had subdued Wang Lin, Lord Andu's merit had become increasingly greater. He also considered himself to have the merit of a stable society, and gradually became proud of it. He repeatedly summoned literary warriors, or rode on horseback to shoot arrows, or asked them to write poems, evaluated the quality of the poems, and rewarded them according to the order.

古文：文士则褚玠、马枢、阴铿、张正见、徐伯阳，刘删、祖孙登，武士则萧摩诃、裴子烈等，并为之宾客，斋内动至千人。
现代文：文士中有褚蚧、马枢、阴铿、张正见、徐伯阳、刘删、祖孙登，武士中有萧摩诃、裴子烈等人，这些人都成为他的宾客，屋内经常多达上千人。
English: Among the scribes, there were Zou, Ma Zu, Yin Zou, Zhang Zhengdi, Xu Boyang, Liu Qian, Sun Deng, and among the samurai, there were Xiao Mazu, Pei Zile, and others. These people all became his guests, and there were often as many as a thousand people in the house.

古文：部下将帅，多不遵法度，检问收摄，则奔归安都。
现代文：部下的将帅，大多不遵守法纪，遇到查问追捕则逃奔安都处。
English: Most of the subordinate generals do not abide by the law and discipline, and when they are investigated and pursued, they flee to Andu.

古文：世祖性严察，深衔之。
现代文：世祖性格严厉苛察，深深忌恨他。
English: The ancestor was a stern and harsh character, and deeply resented him.

古文：安都弗之改，日益骄横。
现代文：安都并不悔改，日益骄横。
English: Ando did not repent and became increasingly arrogant.

古文：每有表启，封讫，有事未尽，乃开封自书之，云又启某事。
现代文：每当有上奏的表章，封好后，有些事遣漏了，就自己开封书写上去，说是又有某事启奏。
English: Every time there is an opening chapter, after sealing, some things are omitted, they open the book and write it down, saying that there is something else opening.

古文：及侍宴酒酣，或箕踞倾倚。
现代文：奉侍皇帝饮宴酒酣，有时坐在椅上，两腿叉开，身子歪斜。
English: He served the emperor at banquets, sometimes sitting on a chair with his legs apart and his body askew.

古文：尝陪乐游禊饮，乃白帝曰： 何如作临川王时？ 
现代文：曾在上巳曰陪皇帝在乐游苑修楔饮宴，他对皇帝说： 这比当临川王如何? 
English: He once said that he had accompanied the emperor to hold a banquet in Le Youyuan. He said to the emperor: How is this different from being the king of Linchuan?

古文：帝不应。安都再三言之，帝曰： 此虽天命，抑亦明公之力。 
现代文：皇帝不回答，他再三询问，皇帝说： 此事虽说是天命，或许也仰仗您的竭力帮助。 
English: The emperor did not answer, he asked again and again, the emperor said: Although this is a matter of fate, it may also rely on your best help.

古文：宴讫，又启便借供帐水饰，将载妻妾于御堂欢会，世祖虽许其请，甚不怿。
现代文：宴会终了，又向皇帝借用帷帐和游船水上游戏的装饰物，要装载妻妾在皇帝的御堂裹欢乐聚会，世祖虽答应了他的请求，但是十分不快。
English: At the end of the banquet, he asked the emperor to lend him the curtains and the decorations for the water games on the pleasure boat, so that he could load his wife and concubine into the emperor's hall for a joyous gathering. Although the patriarch agreed to his request, he was very displeased.

古文：明日，安都坐于御坐，宾客居群臣位，称觞上寿。
现代文：第二天，安都坐在皇帝的宝座上，宾客处在群臣的位置上，举杯敬酒祝他长寿。
English: The next day, An Du sat on the throne of the emperor, and the guests were in the position of the courtiers, raising a toast to wish him a long life.

古文：初，重云殿灾，安都率将士带甲入殿，帝甚恶之，自是阴为之备。
现代文：先前，重云殿发生火灾，安都率领将士穿着战甲进入宫殿，皇帝对此十分厌恶，从此暗中加以防备。
English: Previously, a fire broke out in the Chongyun Palace, and Ando led the generals into the palace wearing battle armor. The emperor was very disgusted by this, and secretly took precautions.

古文：又周迪之反，朝望当使安都讨之，帝乃使吴明彻讨迪，又频遣台使案问安都部下，检括亡叛，安都内不自安。
现代文：又在周迪谋反时，朝廷一般舆论认为应当派窒都征讨，皇帝却派星旦困讨伐且迤，又屡次派朝廷使者追查安都部下，搜检逃亡的叛乱者，安都内心不得安宁。
English: In addition, when Zhou Di plotted a rebellion, the general public opinion of the imperial court believed that the capital should be sent to fight, but the emperor sent Xingtan to fight and harass, and repeatedly sent imperial envoys to investigate Ando's subordinates and search for fugitive rebels. Ando's heart was not at peace.

古文：三年冬，遣其别驾周弘实自托于舍人蔡景历，并问省中事。
现代文：三年冬天，他派部下别驾周弘宜请托于舍人蔡景历，并向景历询问台省中的机密。
English: In the winter of the third year, he sent his subordinate Zhou Hongyi to ask his subordinate Cai Jingli, and asked Cai Jingli about the secrets in Taiwan.

古文：景历录其状具奏之，希旨称安都谋反。
现代文：景历记录下逭一情状一一上奏朝廷，迎合皇上的旨意告安都谋反。
English: According to the records of the calendar, the situation was reported to the imperial court one by one, and the emperor's will was catered for.

古文：世祖虑其不受制，明年春，乃除安都为都督江吴二州诸军事、征南大将军、江州刺史。
现代文：世祖担心制伏不了他，次年春天，就任命安都为都督江吴二州诸军事、征南大将军、江州刺史。
English: The ancestor was worried that he could not be subdued, and in the spring of the following year, he appointed Andu as the military governor of Jiangwu two states, the general of the Southern Expedition, and the historian of Jiangzhou.

古文：自京口还都，部伍入于石头，世祖引安都宴于嘉德殿，又集其部下将帅会于尚书朝堂，于坐收安都，囚于嘉德西省，又收其将帅，尽夺马仗而释之。
现代文：从京口回到都城，部队进入石头城，世祖召引安都在嘉德殿宴饮，又召集他部下将帅在尚书朝堂宴会。在座中逮捕了安都，囚禁在嘉德殿的西省，又逮捕他部下将帅，缴获他们的所有马匹和兵器后便释放了他们。
English: Returning from Beijing to the capital, the troops entered Stone Town, and the ancestor called for An Zhuang to have a banquet at the Palace of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dow

古文：因出舍人蔡景历表以示于朝。
现代文：于是拿出舍人蔡景历的表章出示给朝臣。
English: Therefore, he took out the seal of Cai Jingli to show it to the courtier.

古文：乃诏曰： 昔汉厚功臣，韩、彭肇乱，晋倚蕃牧，敦、约称兵。
现代文：才下诏说：先前西汉厚待功臣，而韩信、彭越开启祸端；束晋倚重地方长官，王敦、祖约举兵谋反。
English: He then issued an edict saying: Previously, the Western Han Dynasty had treated meritorious vassals generously, but Han Xin and Peng Yue opened the door to disaster; Sok Jin relied heavily on local governors, and Wang Dun and Zuyo raised armies to plot rebellion.

古文：托六尺于庞萌，野心窃发；寄股肱于霍禹，凶谋潜构。
现代文：把幼小的君主托付给庞萌，他的野心暗中萌发；将霍禹视为股肱重臣，他暗中策划凶恶阴谋。
English: He entrusted the young monarch to Pang Meng, and his ambition secretly sprouted; he regarded Huo Yu as a senior vassal, and he secretly plotted a vicious conspiracy.

古文：追惟往代，挻逆一揆，永言自古，患难同规。
现代文：追思前代，叛逆灾难的发生总是一样的；常论古今，动乱祸害的起因都是相同的。
English: Looking back on previous generations, the occurrence of rebellious disasters is always the same; the causes of turmoil and disasters are always the same.

古文：侯安都素乏遥图，本惭令德，幸属兴运，预奉经纶，拔迹行间，假之毛羽，推于偏帅，委以驰逐。
现代文：侯安都一向缺乏宏才大略，本应为自己的德行感到惭愧，他有幸遭逢国运兴盛，参预国家大事。高祖从行伍中擢拔他，分派兵员给他，推举他为一方主帅，委托他驰骋疆场。
English: Hou Andu always lacked great talent, and should have been ashamed of his virtue. He was fortunate to meet the prosperity of the national movement and participate in national events. Gaozu promoted him from the ranks, assigned soldiers to him, elected him as a side coach, and entrusted him to gallop on the battlefield.

古文：位极三槐，任居四狱，名器隆赫，礼数莫俦。
现代文：他位极三公，身任地方大员，地位显赫，对他的礼敬无人可比。
English: He held the highest rank of the three princes, served as a local magistrate, held a prominent position, and his courtesy was incomparable.

古文：而志唯矜己，气在陵上，招聚逋逃，穷极轻狡，无赖无行，不畏不恭。
现代文：但是他心中祇是自我夸耀，气势凌驾于朝廷之上，招集逃亡的叛党，轻狂狡诈至极，不加检点没有德行，无所敬畏。
English: But all he has in mind is self-aggrandizement, arrogance over the imperial court, summoning fugitive rebels, frivolity and cunning to the extreme, no discipline, no virtue, nothing to fear.

古文：受脤专征，剽掠一逞，推毂所镇，裒敛无厌。
现代文：受朝廷派遣专任征伐，却放肆劫掠，压榨所镇守的州郡，聚敛没有限度。
English: The imperial court dispatched a full-time expedition, but they plundered and pillaged, squeezed the towns and counties they defended, and there was no limit to their accumulation.

古文：寄以徐蕃，接邻齐境，贸迁禁货，鬻卖居民，椎埋发掘，毒流泉壤，睚眦僵尸，罔顾彝宪。
现代文：他任南徐州刺史，与北齐接邻，转运贸易禁止买卖的货物，出卖居民，盗掘坟墓，流毒深入泉水土壤，亵渎僵尸，完全不顾王法。
English: He was the history of southern Xuzhou, adjacent to North Qi, transshipping goods prohibited from trading, selling residents, robbing graves, poisoning springs and soil, desecrating zombies, and completely disregarding the law.

古文：朕以爰初缔构，颇著功绩，飞骖代邸，预定嘉谋，所以淹抑有司，每怀遵养，杜绝百辟，日望自新。
现代文：朕因为国家初建之时，他颇有功绩；又飞驰赶到朕的藩国，参预拥立朕的大计。因而朕抑制有司，总是宽容维护他，阻止群臣对他的弹劾，天天希望他能够悔过自新。
English: Because when the country was first built, he had quite a lot of achievements; he also rushed to our domain to participate in and support our grand plan. Therefore, I restrained Yushi, always tolerated and defended him, prevented the ministers from impeaching him, and hoped every day that he would repent and reform.

古文：款襟期于话言，推丹赤于造次，策马甲第，羽林息警，置酒高堂，陛戟无卫。
现代文：与他在言谈时总是坦露胸襟，与他交往时总是满怀诚意，乘车驾去他的府第，羽林军不加警戒，在高堂设置酒宴款待他，殿中不用兵器护卫。
English: When talking with him, he was always open-hearted, and when dealing with him, he was always full of sincerity. He drove to his capital by car. The Ulin Army did not take precautions, set up a wine banquet in the high hall to entertain him, and did not use weapons to escort him in the hall.

古文：何尝内隐片嫌，去柏人而勿宿，外协猜防，入成皋而不留？
现代文：朕何曾内心有丝毫嫌疑，像汉高祖那样离开柏人而不住宿；又何曾对他猜忌防备，进入成皋而不停留?
English: Have I ever had the slightest suspicion in my heart, like Han Gaozu, to leave the Bao people without staying; and have I ever been suspicious of him, to enter Chengdu without staying?

古文：而勃戾不悛，骄暴滋甚，招诱文武，密怀异图。
现代文：但是他暴戾而不思悔改，骄横之态愈益滋甚，招纳引诱文武士人，暗中怀有异图。
English: However, he was violent and unrepentant, and his arrogance became more and more pronounced. He recruited and enticed literati, secretly harboring a different vision.

古文：去年十二月十一日，获中书舍人蔡景历启，称侯安都去月十日遣别驾周弘实来景历私省宿，访问禁中，具陈反计，朕犹加隐忍，待之如初。
现代文：去年十二月十一，得到中书舍人蔡景历启奏，说侯安都上个月十派别驾周弘实私自找到景历在中书省夜宿，询问宫禁中的情况，详细陈述谋反计策，朕仍然加以忍耐宽容，对待他依然如前。
English: On December 11 last year, I received a message from Cai Jinglian, the person in charge of the Chinese bookstore, saying that Hou Andu had driven ten parties to Zhou Hongshi last month to personally find Jinglian's overnight stay in the Chinese bookstore, inquire about the situation during the palace ban, and make a detailed statement to devise countermeasures. I am still patient and tolerant, and I still treat him as before.

古文：爰自北门，迁授南服，受命经停，奸谋益露。
现代文：在京城北门，他受命任江州刺史，奸谋愈益显露出来。
English: At the North Gate of Beijing, he was appointed to be the historian of Jiangzhou, and his treachery became more and more obvious.

古文：今者欲因初镇，将行不轨。
现代文：如今他想趁前往镇守之机，将要图谋不轨。
English: Now he wants to take advantage of the opportunity to go to the town guard, he will plot.

古文：此而可忍，孰不可容？
现代文：如果这种事情可以容忍，还有什么不可以容忍?
English: If this kind of thing can be tolerated, what else cannot be tolerated?

古文：赖社稷之灵，近侍诚悫，丑情彰暴，逆节显闻。
现代文：仰赖社稷神灵的庇佑和宫廷侍卫的忠诚，他叛逆的丑恶行径暴露无遗。
English: Relying on the patronage of the shrine's deities and the loyalty of the palace guards, his treasonous and heinous acts were fully exposed.

古文：外可详案旧典，速正刑书，止在同谋，馀无所问。 
现代文：宫外的有关官署可以详细按照旧的典章，从速肃正刑法，仅仅追究同谋，其余不要追问。
English: The relevant government departments outside the palace can, in accordance with the old regulations, immediately correct the criminal law, only investigate the accomplices, and do not pursue the rest.

古文：明日，于西省赐死，时年四十四。
现代文：第二天，在西省赐侯安都死，当时四十四岁。
English: The next day, in Xi Province, Ji Hou An Du died at the age of forty-four.

古文：寻有诏，宥其妻子家口，葬以士礼，丧事所须，务加资给。
现代文：不久下诏，宽恕他的妻儿家属，以士礼埋葬他，丧事所需的钱财，由国家供给。
English: He soon issued an edict, forgiving the families of his wife and children, burying him with honors, and the money needed for the funeral was provided by the state.

古文：初，高祖在京城，尝与诸将宴，杜僧明、周文育、侯安都为寿，各称功伐。
现代文：先前，高祖在京城，曾经舆诸将一起饮宴，杜僧明、周文育、侯安都敬酒，各自称自己的功绩。
English: In the past, Gao Zu was in Beijing, and there was a banquet where all the dignitaries had a drink together. Du Seng Ming, Zhou Wenyu, and Hou An all gave a toast, each claiming their own achievements.

古文：高祖曰： 卿等悉良将也，而并有所短。
现代文：高祖说： 你们都是良将，但是都有弱点。
English: Gaozu said, "You are all good generals, but you all have weaknesses.

古文：杜公志大而识暗，狎于下而骄于尊，矜其功不收其拙。
现代文：杜公志大而见识浅陋，与下属亲密而对上司骄横，对自己的功绩沾沾自喜而不收敛自己的短处。
English: Du Gongzhi is big-hearted but shallow-minded, he is intimate with his subordinates but arrogant to his superiors, he is complacent about his own merits but does not restrain his shortcomings.

古文：周侯交不择人，而推心过差，居危履险，猜防不设。
现代文：周侯交友不加选择，并且与人交心过于坦诚，即使处于危险境地，也不猜疑设防。
English: Zhou Hou makes friends indiscriminately, and is too frank with people. Even in a dangerous situation, he does not suspect fortification.

古文：侯郎傲诞而无厌，轻佻而肆志。
现代文：侯郎狂傲放纵而没有限制，轻薄浮躁而肆无忌惮。
English: The lord of the manor is arrogant and indulgent without limits, frivolous and impetuous and unscrupulous.

古文：并非全身之道。 
现代文：这些都不是全身之道。 
English: These are not whole-body exercises.

古文：卒皆如其言。
现代文：最终他们的结局都验合了遣番话。
English: In the end, both of their endings fulfilled the prophecy.

古文：安都长子敦，年十二，为员外散骑侍郎，天嘉二年堕马卒，追谥桂阳国愍世子。
现代文：安都的长子侯敦，十二岁时，任员外散骑侍郎，丢台二年从马上摔下死去，追谧为桂阳国愍世子。
English: At the age of twelve, Houtun, the eldest son of Andu, was appointed as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback. Two years after losing his seat, he fell off his horse and died. He became the heir of Guiyang Guozhen.

古文：太建三年，高宗追封安都为陈集县侯，邑五百户，子亶为嗣。
现代文：太建三年，高宗追封安都为陈集县侯，封邑五百户，儿子侯宣继承爵位。
English: In the third year of the Tai Jian period, Gao Zong pursued the fief of Andu to become the lord of Chenji County, with 500 households in the fief, and his son, Hou Xuan, succeeded to the title.

古文：安都从弟晓，累从安都征讨有功，官至员外散骑常侍、明威将军、东衡州刺史，怀化县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：塞都的堂弟堡堕，屡次随从塞壑征战建立功绩，官至员外散骑常侍、明威将军、塞垫巡刺史，怀丝墨继，食邑五百户。
English: The cousin of the capital of Tibet, the castle fell, and it has repeatedly followed the conquest of Tibet to establish achievements. Officials and non-officials rode the regular attendants, the Mingwei general, the history of the patrol of the cushion, the Huai Si Moji, and the 500 households of the food village.

古文：天嘉三年卒，年四十一。
现代文：天嘉三年去世，四十一岁。
English: Tian Jia died three years later, at the age of forty-one.

古文：史臣曰：杜僧明、周文育并树功业，成于兴运，颇、牧、韩、彭，足可连类矣。
现代文：史臣曰：杜僧明、周文言都建立了功业，他们发达于陈朝国运初兴之时，足可以与廉颇、李盘、整信、堑超等名将相提并论。
English: Shichen said: Du Mengming and Zhou Wenyan have both made great achievements. They were developed in the early days of the National Movement of the Chen Dynasty, and can be compared with famous generals such as Renpo, Li Pan, Zhixin, and Zou Chao.

古文：侯安都情异向时，权逾曩日，因之以侵暴，加之以纵诞，苟曰非夫逆乱，奚用免于亡灭！昔汉高醢之为赐，宋武拉于坐右，良有以而然也。
现代文：侯安都颢贵后，情态不同于以往，权势超过了往日，因此侵凌冒犯朝廷，加上他放纵无忌，如果说他并无逆乱之心，那么这种行为岂能免于灭亡先前汉高祖、宋武帝剪除功臣，的确是有原因的。
English: After Hou Andu was ennobled, the situation was different from the past, and the power exceeded the previous days. Therefore, the abuse offended the imperial court, and he was indulgent. If he did not have a rebellious heart, then there was indeed a reason why this behavior could not be exempted from the demise of the previous Han Gaozu and Song Emperor Wu's elimination of heroes.

