古文：凡战，若敌人居近草莽，营舍茅竹，积刍聚粮，天时燥旱，因风纵火以焚之，选精兵以击之，其军可破。
现代文：凡是作战中，如果敌人驻扎在靠近草木丛生的地带，并用茅竹搭建营舍，又囤积大批马草和粮食，如遇燥热干旱天气，就可借助风力放火焚烧它，再派主力部队攻击。这样，便会被打败。
English: In any battle, if the enemy is stationed near a thickly vegetated area, and builds a camp with thatched bamboo, and hoards a large amount of grass and grain, in the case of hot and dry weather, he can use the wind to set fire to it, and then send the main force to attack. In this way, he will be defeated.

古文：法曰： 行火必有因。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 对敌采用火攻战法，必须具备一定客观条件。 
English: As stated in the laws of war, certain objective conditions must be met in order to employ the fire attack method against the enemy.

古文：汉灵帝中平元年，皇甫嵩讨黄巾，汉将朱隽与贼波才战，败，贼遂围嵩于长社。
现代文：东汉灵帝中平元年，左中郎将皇甫嵩，进讨黄巾军，朱儁与黄巾军首领波才所部交战而失败，波才遂乘胜挥军包围了退保长社的皇甫嵩。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Han Dynasty Lingdi Zhongping, Zu Zhonglang led the Emperor Fusong to fight against the Yellow Turban Army. Zhu Xi and the leader of the Yellow Turban Army, Ba Zai, fought and failed, and Ba Zai took advantage of the victory to surround the Emperor Fusong of the Tuibo Chief Shrine.

古文：贼依草结营，会大风。
现代文：波才军靠近草木丛生的地带安营扎寨。
English: The Potzeys camped near a grassy area.

古文：嵩敕军束苣乘城，使锐卒间出围外，纵火大呼，城上举燎应之，嵩因鼓而奔其阵，贼惊乱奔走。
现代文：当时正好碰上大风，皇甫嵩便命令部队捆好火把登上城墙，又派精锐士卒偷偷越出包围圈，于城外黄巾军营地纵放大火并狂呼乱叫，城上的汉军则点燃火把与之紧密策应，皇甫嵩乘势击鼓奔向敌阵，波才军惊慌奔逃。
English: At that time, there happened to be a strong wind, and Emperor Fusang ordered the troops to bundle up torches and climb the city wall. He also sent elite soldiers to sneak out of the encirclement and set fire to the camp of the Yellow Turban Army outside the city and shouted wildly. The Han army on the city lit torches and closely coordinated with them. Emperor Fusang took advantage of the situation to beat the drum and ran to the enemy line, and the Batsai army panicked and fled.

古文：会帝遣曹操将兵适至，合战大破之，斩首数万级。
现代文：这时正好又赶上灵帝派遣曹操领兵到来，两人合兵作战，彻底击败敌军，杀死万多人。
English: At this time, just in time for Ling Di to send Cao Cao to lead the army, the two men fought together, completely defeated the enemy army, and killed more than 10,000 people.

