古文：史臣曰：昔者乘云效驾，卷领垂衣，则黄帝皁衣纁裳，放勋彤车白马，叶三微之序，舍寅丑之建，玄戈玉刃，作会相晖。
现代文：史臣曰：自古就有神仙乘坐用云彩做的车辆而仆人为主人试车的事，有先民穿着卷领式服装或长大的衣服的事，所以黄帝有黑色上衣浅红下裳，放勋有朱红车子白色马，和三正的历数相谐调，设置建寅建丑的历法，玄戈玉刃，相映生辉。
English: Shichen said: Since ancient times, there have been celestial beings riding in vehicles made of clouds while servants test-drive for their masters, and there have been ancestors wearing roll-neck clothing or clothes they grew up in. Therefore, the Yellow Emperor has a black upper garment, a light red lower garment, a Zhuhong chariot and a white horse, which are in harmony with the three positive calendars, and a Yin-Yang-Yang-Ugly calendar, and a jade blade, which reflect each other brilliantly.

古文：若乃参旗分景，帝车含曜，又所以营卫南宫，增华北极。
现代文：至于参旗分享日月星辰的光辉，帝车闪曜着灿烂光芒，又是用来护卫南宫，为北极增添光华的。
English: As for the participation of the flag to share the brilliance of the sun, moon and stars, the imperial carriage shines brilliantly on Saturday, and is also used to guard the South Palace and add brilliance to the North Pole.

古文：《月令》季夏之月， 命妇官染彩 ，赪丹班次，各有品章矣。
现代文：《月令》中讲到夏季的第三个月， 命令妇官们染制彩缎 ，红赤深浅，各有一定的标准。
English: In the "Monthly Regulation," the third month of summer was mentioned, and the female officials were ordered to dye the color red, red and red, each with a certain standard.

古文：高旗有日月之象，式视有威仪之选，衣兼鞙珮，衡载鸣和，是以闲邪屏弃，不可入也。
现代文：高扬的旗帜具有日月的形象，众目所注而具有无上的威仪，衣服上佩着玉饰，车衡上銮铃和鸣，因此奸邪之心都被摒弃，不受影响。
English: The exalted banner has the image of the sun and the moon, and it has supreme dignity in the eyes of the public. Jade ornaments are worn on clothes, and bells and chimes are on car scales. Therefore, the hearts of evil are abandoned and are not affected.

古文：若乃正名百物，补缉四维，疏怀山之水，静倾天之害，功尤彰者饰弥焕，德愈盛者服弥尊，莫不质良，用成其美。
现代文：至于为百物正名，修订法纪，消除洪水怀山的大灾，解决天塌地陷般的大害，功绩特别突出的人服饰就更加有光彩，德行非常盛大的人服饰就更加尊贵，没有不是质地精良，用来成全他们的美好德行的。
English: As for justifying a hundred things, revising the legal code, eliminating the great disaster of the flood of Huai Mountain, and solving the great harm of the collapse of the world, the clothing of people with particularly outstanding achievements is more glorious, and the clothing of people with very grand virtues is more honorable. There is nothing but exquisite texture to perfect their beautiful virtues.

古文：《书》曰： 明试以功，车服以庸。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 根据功绩来公正地评判，用车马服饰来奖赏功臣。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Judging fairly according to merit, rewarding meritorious soldiers with chariots and horses.

古文： 《礼记》曰： 鸾车，有虞氏之路也。
现代文：《礼记》说： 鸾车，是有虞氏的座车。
English: "The Book of Rites" says: A carriage with a yakitori is a carriage with a yakitori.

古文：钩车，夏后氏之路也。
现代文：钩车，是夏后氏的座车。
English: The hook car is Natsugo's car.

古文：大路，殷路也。
现代文：大辖，是殷代帝王的座车。
English: Dazhi, the carriage of the Emperor of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：乘路，周路也。 
现代文：乘格，是周代帝王的座车。 
English: It is the carriage of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：而韨火山龙，以通其意。
现代文：而衣服上的鲅火山龙等花纹图案，就是用来表达同样意思的。
English: And the patterns on the clothes, such as the dragon and dragon, are used to express the same meaning.

古文：前史以为，圣人见鸟兽容貌，草木英华，始创衣冠，而玄黄殊采；见秋蓬孤转，杓觿旁建，乃作舆轮，而方圆异则。
现代文：前代的史书上认为圣人看见鸟兽的容貌，草木的花朵，才创制了衣冠，并且有玄黄等不同的色彩；看见秋天的蓬蒿被风吹卷以及北斗杓鳞的样子，于是创制了车厢车轮，而且方圆形状不同。
English: In the history books of the previous generation, it was believed that the sage saw the appearance of birds and beasts, the flowers of plants and trees, and only then created the crown, and it had different colors such as dark yellow; he saw the autumn pompom being blown by the wind and the appearance of the scales of the Big Dipper, so he created the carriage wheel, and the square shape was different.

古文：遇物成象，触类兴端。周因于殷，其来已旧。
现代文：遇到某一物体而形成新的形象，触及某一事类而生发创造的设想，周代承续殷代，由来已经很久。
English: Encountering a certain object and forming a new image, touching a certain thing and generating creative ideas, Zhou Dynasty succeeded Yin Dynasty, has a long history.

古文：成王之会，坛垂阴羽，五方之盛，有八十物者焉。
现代文：盛王的盟会，坛上装饰着浅黑色的鹤羽，五方聚集，共有八十种物品。
English: Shengwang's alliance, the altar is decorated with light black crane feathers, five parties gathered, a total of eighty kinds of items.

古文：宗马鸟旌，奚往不格，殷公、曹叔，此焉低首。
现代文：宗马鸟旌，处处都仿效自然之物，殷公、曹叔，在这裹低下了头。
English: Zongma bird's beak, everywhere imitating natural things, Yin Gong, Cao Shu, bowed his head here.

古文：《周礼》，巾车氏建大赤以朝，大白以戎。
现代文：根据《周礼》，巾车氏树大赤用于朝会，树大白用于戎事。
English: According to the "Weekly Rituals," the big red tree of the Handkerchief Clan is used for the Imperial Court and the big white tree is used for military affairs.

古文：雅制弘多，式遵遗范，宾入异宪，师行殊则，是以有严有翼，用光其武，钩膺鞗革，乃暢其文。
现代文：典雅的制度很多，都遵奉前代留下的典范，迎宾有不同的规章，出师有相关的制度，因此既庄重又有主次，以此光大它的事业，钩膺条革，也都尽量装饰了花纹。
English: There are many elegant systems, all of which follow the model left by the previous generation. There are different rules for welcoming guests, and there is a relevant system for leaving teachers. Therefore, it is both solemn and primary. In order to magnify its cause, the hooked leather strips are also decorated with patterns as much as possible.

古文：六服之冕，五时之路，王之常制，各有等差。
现代文：不同地方的冠冕，不同时候的车马，在王的常规制度中，各自都有不同的规定。
English: The crowns of different places, the chariots and horses of different times, each has different rules in the king's regular system.

古文：逮礼业雕讹，人情驰爽，诸侯征伐，宪度沦亡，一紫乱于齐饰，长缨混于邹玩。
现代文：等到礼制衰落错乱，人情各自不受约束，诸侯互相征伐，法度沦落消亡的时候，一种紫色混淆了齐国的服饰，一种长缨使邹国贵贱不分。
English: By the time the ceremonial system had fallen into disarray, and people's feelings had become unrestrained, and the feudal lords were fighting each other, and the rule of law had fallen into decline and died out, a kind of purple had confused the clothing of Qi, and a kind of long braid had made it impossible to distinguish between the noble and the lowly.

古文：孔子曰： 君子其学也博，其服也乡。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子学问要广博，服饰要合于身份。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman should be well-educated, and his clothing should fit his status.

古文：若乃豪杰不经，庶人干典，彯鹬冠于郑伯之门，蹑珠履于春申之第。
现代文：至于豪强们不守法度，庶人们破坏典章，戴着鹬冠在郑伯门前招摇，穿着珠履出入于昼史茎的府第。
English: As for the strong and the mighty, they did not abide by the law, and the common people broke the rules and regulations, and swaggered in front of Zheng Bo's gate wearing a crown of thorns, and went in and out of the capital wearing a pair of beaded sandals.

古文：及秦皇并国，揽其余轨，丰貂东至，獬豸南来，又有玄旗皁旒之制，旄头罕车之饰，写九王之廷于咸阳北坂，车舆之彩，各树其文，所谓秦人大备，而陈战国之后车者也。
现代文：到童丝皇兼并各国，继承了他们的做法，搜集了东方的丰貂，南方的獬豸，又制作了玄旗皂旒，装饰了旄头罕车，在咸阳北坂仿造了各国诸侯的宫室，车辆上的彩画，分别是各国的花纹，就是人们所说的秦国人拥有了一切，于是陈列出銮国以后的各种车辆。
English: By the time of Emperor Tongshi's annexation of various countries, he had inherited their practices. He had collected the rich earthenware of the East and the earthenware of the South. He also made the black flag soap dish, decorated the Shantou rare car, imitated the palace rooms of the princes of various countries in the North Slope of Xianyang, and the paintings on the vehicles were the patterns of various countries, that is, people said that the people of Qin had everything, so he displayed various vehicles after Qin.

古文：及凝脂布网，经书咸烬，削灭三代，以金根为帝轸，除弃六冕，以袀玄为祭服。
现代文：到了法网比凝脂还密，经书都被焚烧成了灰烬的时候，消除三伐的影响，把金根车作为皇帝乘坐的车，废弃六冕，用构玄作为祭祀的礼服。
English: When the net of the law was thicker than tar and the scriptures were burned to ashes, he eliminated the influence of the Three Strokes, used the golden chariot as the emperor's chariot, discarded the six crowns, and used the genesis as the ceremonial dress.

古文：高祖入关，既因秦制。
现代文：高祖入关后，因袭了台的制度。
English: After Gao Zu entered the customs, he fell victim to Taiwan's system.

古文：世宗挺英雄之略，总文景之资，扬霓拂翳，皮轩记鼓，横汾河而祠后土，登甘泉而祭昊天，奉常献仪，谓之大驾，车千乘而骑万匹。
现代文：世宗有雄才大略，继承文帝景帝的业绩，霓旌在华盖上飘扬，皮轩在鼓声中前进，渡汾河去祠祭后土，登甘泉而祭祀昊天，奉常献上礼仪规章，称为大驾，车辆千乘而从骑万匹。
English: Sejong had great talent, inheriting the performance of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, the gong fluttered on the lid, Pi Xuan advanced in the drums, crossed the Yunnan River to go to the ancestral hall after the festival, ascended the Ganquan Spring to sacrifice Haotian, and often presented the etiquette rules, known as the big drive, and the vehicles traveled thousands of kilometers and rode thousands of horses.

古文：至于成帝，以幸姬赵飞燕置属车间豹尾中，又杨雄所谓彏天狼之威弧，张曜日之灵旄，骈罗列布，雾集云合者也。
现代文：到了盛帝，让宠幸的姬妾赵飞燕坐在属车中的豹尾车裹，又有杨雄所说的张起天狼般威武的旗弓，撑开日光般耀眼的灵旄，一对对一行行，像雾集云合一样众多。
English: When he arrived at Shengdi, he had his favorite concubine Zhao Feiyan sit in a leopard-tailed chariot in his carriage. He also raised a mighty banner like a wolf, as Yang Xiong said, and held open a casket as dazzling as the sun. They were lined up one on top of the other, as numerous as the clouds of fog.

古文：于后王氏擅朝，武车常轫，赤眉之乱，文物无遗。
现代文：此后王氏独揽朝政，战争不断，尤其是经过赤眉之乱，文物全遭毁坏。
English: Since then, the Wang clan has been in sole control of the government, and wars have continued, especially after the Red Eyebrows Rebellion, and cultural relics have all been destroyed.

古文：建武十三年，吴汉平蜀，始送葆车舆辇，充庭之饰，渐以周备。
现代文：建武十三年，吴汉平定蜀地，才送来葆车舆辇，充实朝廷的各种仪仗装饰，渐渐齐备。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Jianwu era, when Wu Hanping was consolidating his power, it was only in the thirteenth year of the Jianwu era that the imperial chariot was sent, enriching the various ceremonial decorations of the imperial court, and gradually becoming complete.

古文：明帝采《周官》、《礼记》，更服衮章，天子冠通天而佩玉玺。
现代文：明帝根据《周官》、《礼记》，制定服饰，天子戴通天冠而佩玉玺。
English: According to "Zhou Guan" and "Rituals," Emperor Ming developed costumes, and the heavenly son wore a crown and a jade bracelet.

古文：魏明以黼黻之美，有疑于僭，于是随章傧略，而捐者半焉。
现代文：魏明帝认为黼黻华美，类似于僭越，于是根据纹饰情况加以省减，而去除了一半。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei thought that it was gorgeous and beautiful, similar to that of Yue, so it was reduced according to the decoration, and half of it was removed.

古文：高堂隆奏曰： 改正朔、殊徽号者，帝王所以神明其政，变民耳目也。 
现代文：高堂隆上奏说： 之所以要改变正朔，用不同的徽号，是因为帝王要使自己的政权和神明一致，改变民众心裹的印象。 
English: "The reason for changing Zhengshuo and using a different emblem is that the emperor wants to make his regime consistent with the gods and change the impression in the hearts of the people," said Gaodang Rongjiao.

古文：帝从其议，改青龙五年为景初元年，服色尚黄，从地正也。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的意见，将青龙五年改为景初元年，衣服颜色以黄色为贵，这是顺从地的正色。
English: The emperor listened to his advice and changed the year of the dragon to the first year of the year, and the color of the clothes was yellow, which was the positive color of the obedient earth.

古文：世祖武皇帝接天人之贶，开典午之基，受终之礼，皆如唐虞故事。
现代文：世祖武皇帝承接天人的恩赐，开创司马氏的基业，行接受帝位惮让的礼仪，完全仿效唐尧虞舜时的做法。
English: The ancestor of all emperors, Emperor Wu, inherited the gift of heaven and earth, created the foundation of the Sima clan, and carried out the etiquette of accepting the abdication of the throne, completely imitating the practice of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：晋氏金行，而服色尚赤，岂有司失其传欤！
现代文：晋氏属于金行，可是服饰颜色却崇尚赤色，难道是有关的部门不了解自古相传的规矩吗!
English: The Jin clan belongs to the Jin lineage, but the clothing color of the Tsuru clan is red. Could it be that the relevant departments do not understand the rules that have been passed down from ancient times?

古文：玉、金、象、革、木等路，是为五路，并天子之法车，皆硃班漆轮，画为虡文。
现代文：玉、金、象、革、木等车，叫做 五辂 ，都是天子的法车，全都是朱斑漆的车轮，绘有鹿头龙身图案。
English: Jade, gold, elephant, leather, wood and other cars, called the Five Chariots, are all the legal vehicles of the Son of Heaven, all of which are vermilion-painted wheels, painted with a deer head dragon body pattern.

古文：三十幅，法月之数；重毂，贰辖，以赤油，广八寸，长三尺，注地，系两轴头，谓之飞軨。
现代文：三十根辐条，仿效一个月的天数；两毂双辖。用宽八寸、长三尺的红油布系在车轴的两头，直拖到地，叫做 飞斡 。
English: Thirty spokes, imitating the number of days in a month; two hoops are double-jointed. A red oilcloth, eight inches wide and three feet long, is tied to the two ends of the axle and dragged straight to the ground. It is called Fei Miao.

古文：金薄缪龙绕之为舆倚较，较重，为文兽伏轼，龙首衔轭，左右吉阳筩，鸾雀立衡，虡文画辕及轓。
现代文：用金箔盘龙图案装饰车箱两旁的倚和较，车较是双重的，车轼为有彩饰的伏虎形，用雕刻的龙头衔着车轭，左右有吉阳筒，用黄金做成鸾雀形站在衡上，车辕和幡上饰有鹿头龙纹。
English: The carriage is decorated with a gold-leaf pan dragon pattern on both sides of the carriage, the carriage is double, the carriage is a color-decorated flying tiger, the carriage is headed by a carved dragon, there are Jiyang tubes on the left and right, and a gold-made sparrow stands on the balance, and the carriage and flag are decorated with deer head dragon patterns.

古文：青盖，黄为里，谓之黄屋。
现代文：青色车盖，黄色裹子，叫做黄屋。
English: A blue cover with a yellow wrapper is called a yellow house.

古文：金华施末，二十八以象宿。
现代文：车盖上撩的末端装饰着金花，撩有二十八根以象征二十八宿。
English: The end of the fin on the hood is decorated with gold flowers, and the fin has twenty-eight roots to symbolize the twenty-eight inns.

古文：两箱之后，皆玳瑁为鹍翅，加以金银雕饰，故世人亦谓之金鹍车。
现代文：两箱的后面，都是用玳瑁做的鸥翅，加上金银雕饰，所以世人也称之为 金鸥车 。
English: The back of the two boxes are made of dragonfly wings made of dragonflies, with gold and silver carvings, so the world is also called the golden dragonfly car.

古文：斜注旂旗于车之左，又加棨戟于车之右，皆橐而施之。棨戟韬以黻绣，上为亚字，系大蛙蟆幡。
现代文：在车的左侧斜插着脐旗，在车的右侧安着柴戟，都用套子套着。荣戟套子上用的是黻绣，上面有 亚 字，系着大蛙蟆幡。
English: On the left side of the car, a national flag was placed diagonally, and on the right side of the car, a firecracker was attached, both of which were covered with a cover.

古文：轭长丈余。
现代文：车轭长一丈多。
English: The ruts are much longer.

古文：于戟之杪，以牦牛尾，大如斗，置左騑马轭上，是为左纛。
现代文：在戟的顶端，装饰有牦牛尾，像斗那么大，安置在左侧腓马的车轭上，这是左纛。
English: At the top of the scepter, decorated with a snail's tail, as big as a bucket, placed on the left side of the chariot, this is the left scepter.

古文：辕皆曲向上，取《礼纬》 山车垂句 之义，言不揉而能自曲。
现代文：车辕都弯曲向上，取象的是《礼纬》中 山车垂句 的意思，指不用加工而能够自然弯曲。
English: The carriages are all bent upwards, which is like the meaning of the roller coaster phrase in "Courtesy," which means that they can be bent naturally without processing.

古文：玉、金、象三路，各以其物饰车，因以为名。
现代文：玉、金、象三种辖车，各自用舆它们相关的材料来装饰车，因而得名。
English: Jade, gold, and elephant are the three kinds of chariots, each of which uses materials related to them to decorate the car, hence the name.

古文：革者漆革，木者漆木。
现代文：革指油漆了的革，木指油漆了的木。
English: Leather means painted leather, wood means painted wood.

古文：其制，玉路最尊，建太常，十有二旒，九仞委地，画日月升龙，以祀天。
现代文：在形制上，玉辖最尊贵，树的是太常旗，有十二旒，长达九仞而拖到地上，画有日月升龙，用以祀天。
English: In terms of shape, the most prestigious is the Jade Emperor's flag. The tree is the Taizhang flag, which has twelve stalks, up to nine stalks and is dragged to the ground. It is painted with the rising sun, moon and dragon, and is used to worship the heavens.

古文：金路建大旂，九旒，以会万国之宾，亦以赐上公及王子母弟。
现代文：金格树的是大旗，有九旒，用以会见万国来宾，也用以赐给上公王子与同母弟弟。
English: The ginger tree is a large banner with nine branches, used to meet guests from all over the world, and also to give to the prince and his younger brother.

古文：象路建大赤，通赤无画，所以视朝，亦以赐诸侯。
现代文：象辖树的是大赤，完全是赤色而没有图案，用来上朝听政，也用来赐给诸侯。
English: The grafted tree is a large red crane, completely red and without a pattern, used to listen to the government, and also used to give to the princes.

古文：革路建大白，以即戎兵事，亦以赐四镇诸侯。
现代文：革格树的是大白，用来参加征战等军事方面的活动，也用来赐给四镇诸侯。
English: Gege trees are large white, used to participate in military activities such as war, and also used to give to the four towns.

古文：木路建大麾，以田猎，其麾色黑，亦以赐籓国。
现代文：木辖树的是大麾，用来出猎，这种麾的颜色是黑的，也用来赐给藩国。
English: The mulberry tree is a large oak, used for hunting. The color of this oak is black, and it is also used to give gifts to the domain.

古文：玉路驾六黑马，余四路皆驾四马，马并以黄金为文髦，插以翟尾。
现代文：玉辂驾六匹黑马，其余的四格都是驾四匹马。所有的马都用黄金做的文髦，插着翟尾。
English: The Jade Urn is pulled by six black horses, and the remaining four squares are pulled by four horses. All the horses are made of gold and have appendages.

古文：象镳而镂锡，锡在马面，所谓当颅者也。
现代文：象牙镳和镂花钖，钖在马的面部，又叫当颇。
English: The ivory and thistle braids, which are attached to the horse's face, are also called dangpo.

古文：金而方釳，金谓以金为文。
现代文：金麦纹的方形铁纥，金妥指以金忧为纹饰。
English: A square shovel with a gold bar pattern. Kintsu refers to a shovel decorated with gold leaf.

古文：釳以铁为之，其大三寸，中央两头高，如山形，贯中以翟尾而结著之也。
现代文：干用蛾制成，三寸大小，中央和两头高，像山字形，从中间贯串起来用翟尾系在一起。
English: Made of dried moth, three inches in size, high in the middle and at both ends, like a chevron, strung from the middle and tied together with a ponytail.

古文：繁缨赤罽易茸，金就十有二。
现代文：繁缨红毛毯子绒式，金饰十二匝。
English: Elaborate red-furred blanket in suede, with twelve gold ornaments.

古文：繁缨，马饰缨，在马膺前，如索裙。
现代文：繁缨，装饰马的缨络，在马的胸前，像索裙的样子。
English: Complicated, decorated horse's mane, on the horse's chest, like a cable skirt.

古文：五路皆有锡鸾之饰，和铃之响，钩膺玉瓖，钩膺，即繁缨也。
现代文：五格都有锡、鸾之类的装饰，和铃之类的响器，钩膺和玉瓖，钩膺，就是繁缨。
English: The five squares have decorations such as tin and enamel, and chimes such as bells, hooks and tambourines, and hooks, which are cumbersome.

古文：瓖，马带玦名也。
现代文：瓖，马带上的玉殃名。
English: , the name of the ball on the horse's belt.

古文：龙辀华轙，辀，车辕也，头为龙象。
现代文：龙轴和华牺，轴，车辕。辕头做得像龙。
English: Dragon's axle and dragon's chariot, axle, chariot wheel. Shovel head made like a dragon.

古文：轙，谓车衡上环受鸾者也。
现代文：辚，指车衡上挂鸾饰的环。
English: , refers to the ring on which the yoke is hung on the balance.

古文：硃幩。
现代文：朱愤。
English: Zhu Yan sighed.

古文：幩，饰也，人君以硃缠镳扇汗，以为饰也。
现代文：装饰物，人君用朱色的丝缠在鳙上来扇汗，以此作为装饰。
English: Decorations, people use vermilion silk wrapped around the collar to fan sweat, as a decoration.

古文：法驾行则五路各有所主，不惧出；临轩大会则陈乘舆车辇旌鼓于其殿庭。
现代文：法驾出行的话五辖各有所用，不一起出车；临轩大会的时候就在殿前庭院中陈列乘舆车辇旌鼓等。
English: If you travel by legal car, each of the five prefectures is useful, do not go out together; when the Linxuan Conference is on display in the courtyard in front of the hall, take the public car to play drums and so on.

古文：车，坐乘者谓之安车，倚乘者谓之立车，亦谓之高车。
现代文：车，坐着搭乘的叫做安车，站着搭乘的叫做立车，也叫做高车。
English: A car that is ridden while sitting is called an "anchor car," while one that is ridden while standing is called a "standing car" or a "tall car."

古文：案《周礼》，惟王后有安车也，王亦无之。
现代文：根据《周礼》，衹有王后才有安车，连王也没有。
English: According to the "Weekly Rituals," only the queen can ride in a carriage, not even the king.

古文：自汉以来制乘舆，乃有之。
现代文：从汉代以后制作乘舆，才有帝王的安车。
English: From the Han Dynasty onwards, only the emperor's chariot was made.

古文：有青立车、青安车、赤立车、赤安车、黄立车、黄安车、白立车、白安车、黑立车、黑安车，合十乘，名为五时车，俗谓之五帝车。
现代文：分别有青色立车、青色安车、赤色立车、赤色安车、黄色立车、黄色安车、白色立车、白色安车、黑色立车、黑色安车，共十乘，名字叫五时车，俗语称作五帝车。
English: There are respectively blue trolley, blue trolley car, red trolley car, red trolley car, yellow trolley car, yellow trolley car, white trolley car, white trolley car, black trolley car, black trolley car, a total of ten, the name is five o'clock car, known as the Five Emperor Car.

古文：天子所御则驾六，其余并驾四。
现代文：天子乘坐的用六匹马，其余的都用四匹马。
English: Tianzi rode on a six-horse carriage, while the others rode on four-horse carriages.

古文：建旂十二，各如车色。
现代文：插十二面旃旗，分别和车的颜色一样。
English: Twelve chequered flags were put up, each the same colour as the car.

古文：立车则正竖其旂，安车则邪注。
现代文：立车就正着竖插那些旃旗，安车就斜着插。
English: The flags were planted vertically on the trolley and diagonally on the trailer.

古文：驾马，马亦各随五时之色，白马则硃其尾，左右騑骖，金镂锡，黄屋左纛，如金根之制，行则从后。
现代文：驾车的马，毛色也分别和五时的颜色一致，若用白马就将它们的鬣和尾涂成朱色。左右两边的腓马骖马，戴镂刻着花纹的黄金头饰，用黄屋和左纛，仿金根车的做法，出行时就让它们跟在后面。
English: The driving horses also have the same coat color as the five o'clock horses. If a white horse is used, their mane and tail are painted vermilion. The horses on the right and left sides, wearing gold headdresses engraved with patterns, use the yellow house and the left mule, imitating the practice of the golden root car, and let them follow behind when traveling.

古文：五牛旗，平吴后所造，以五牛建旗，车设五牛，青赤在左，黄在中，白黑在右。
现代文：五牛旗，是平定吴地以后制造的，用五牛来插旗，车上设置五牛，青色赤色在左，黄色在中间，白色黑色在右。
English: The "Five Cows" flag was made after Wu Di was pacified. Five cows were used to plant the flag. The car was equipped with five cows, blue-red on the left, yellow in the middle, and white-black on the right.

古文：竖旗于牛背，行则使人舆之。
现代文：在牛背上竖起旗帜，出行时就派人用车载着它们。
English: They put flags on the backs of cows and send people to carry them in cars when they travel.

古文：牛之为义，盖取其负重致远而安稳也。
现代文：之所以用牛，是取它能够负重走远道而且安稳。
English: The reason for using cattle is that they can carry heavy loads and travel long distances safely.

古文：旗常缠不舒，所谓德车结旌也。
现代文：车上的旗帜通常缠卷着不舒展，是所谓的有德者的车扎束起旌旗的意思。
English: The flag on the car is usually wrapped around and not stretched out, which is the meaning of the so-called virtuous people's car tie-up to hoist the national flag.

古文：天子亲戎则舒，谓武车绥旌也。
现代文：天子亲征的时候就舒展开，是所谓的有武德者的车松开旌旗的意思。
English: When the Son of Heaven personally leads the army, it will spread out smoothly, which is the meaning of the so-called virtuous person's chariot unfurling the banner.

古文：金根车，驾四马，不建旗帜，其上如画轮车，下犹金根之饰。
现代文：金根车，用四匹马驾车，不插旗帜，它的上部像昼轮车，下部仍然是金根的装饰。
English: A golden chariot, driven by four horses, without a flag, its upper part resembling a day-wheeled chariot, the lower part still decorated with gold.

古文：耕根车，驾四马，建赤旂，十有二旒，天子亲耕所乘者也。
现代文：耕根车，用四匹马驾车，插赤色旗，有十二旒，是天子亲自耕作时乘坐的车。
English: The ploughshare, driven by four horses, with a red flag and twelve ploughshares, was the vehicle that the Son of Heaven himself rode when he was ploughing.

古文：一名芝车，一名三盖车。置耒耜于轼上。
现代文：又叫芝车，又叫三盖车，将耒耜放在车轼上。
English: It is also called the three-deck cart or the three-deck cart, and the yoke is placed on the yoke.

古文：魏景初元年，改正朔，易服色，色尚黄，牲用白，戎事乘黑首白马，建大赤之旂，朝会则建大白，行殷之时也。
现代文：魏景初元年，改变正朔，更换服饰的颜色，尊尚黄色，牲口用白色，有军事行动时用黑首白马，插赤色旗，朝会时就插白色旗，按照殷时制度施行。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Wei Dynasty, Zhengshuo was changed, the color of clothing was changed, yellow was used for dignity, white was used for livestock, white horses with black necks were used when there were military operations, a red flag was inserted, and a white flag was inserted when the imperial court met. This was implemented in accordance with the Yin and Yang system.

古文：泰始二年，有司奏： 宜如有虞遵唐故事，皆用前代正朔服色，其金根、耕根车，并以建赤旗。 
现代文：泰始二年，有司上奏： 应该像有虞遵奉唐尧旧事那样，都用前代的正朔服色，凡是金根车、耕根车，都插赤色旗。 
English: In the second year of Taizhi, there was a superior officer who said: It is necessary to use the previous generation's Zhengshuo clothing color, just like the old days of Yugo Zunbong in Tang Dynasty. All the gold-roofed carts and plow-roofed carts are red-flagged.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：帝听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：辇，案自汉以来为人君之乘，魏晋御小出即乘之。
现代文：辇，考自汉以来就是人君乘坐的，魏晋时皇帝小出时就乘坐它。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, it has been ridden by emperors. During the Wei and Jin Dynasties, it was ridden by emperors when they left the capital.

古文：戎车，驾四马，天子亲戎所乘者也。
现代文：戎车，用四匹马驾车，是天子亲征时乘坐的车。
English: The troop car, driven by four horses, is the car that the Son of Heaven himself rode in when he was conscripted.

古文：载金鼓、羽旗、幢翳，置弩于轼上，其建矛麾悉斜注。
现代文：装载有金鼓、羽旗、幢翳，在车轼上安置弩，插在车上的矛和麾都是斜插的。
English: It was loaded with a golden drum, a feather flag, and a pole, and a yoke was placed on the yoke. The spear and the yoke, which were inserted on the yoke, were inserted obliquely.

古文：猎车，驾四马，天子校猎所乘也。
现代文：猎车，用四匹马驾车，是天子射猎时乘坐的。
English: The hunting carriage, driven by four horses, was used by the Son of Heaven when he went hunting.

古文：重辋漫轮，缪龙绕之。
现代文：车轮有双重的辋，装饰着盘曲的龙。
English: The wheels have double fins and are decorated with coiled dragons.

古文：一名阘戟车，一名蹋猪车。
现代文：又叫阗戟车，又叫蹋猪车。
English: It is also called the piggy wagon and the piggy wagon.

古文：魏文帝改名蹋兽车。
现代文：魏文帝改叫做蹋兽车。
English: Emperor Wei Wen changed the name to "Beast Wagon."

古文：《记》云 国君不乘奇车 ，奇车亦猎车也。
现代文：《记》说 国君不乘坐奇车 ，奇车也是猎车。
English: "Record" says that the king does not ride a strange car, the strange car is also a hunting car.

古文：古天子猎则乘木辂，后人代以猎车也。
现代文：古时候天子出猎就乘木辖，后来人们用猎车代替。
English: In ancient times, when the emperor went hunting, he rode a horse-drawn carriage. Later, people used a hunting carriage instead.

古文：游车，九乘，驾四，先驱之乘是也。
现代文：游车，有九乘，各套四匹马，是作为先驱的车。
English: The coach, with nine carriages, each drawn by four horses, was the pioneer vehicle.

古文：云罕车，驾四。
现代文：云罕车，套四匹马。
English: A rickety cart pulled by four horses.

古文：皮轩车，驾四，以兽皮为轩。
现代文：皮轩车，套四匹马，用兽皮装饰轩。
English: Leather carriage, set of four horses, decorated with animal skins.

古文：鸾旗车，驾四，先辂所载也。
现代文：鸾旗车，套四匹马，是给先导乘坐的车。
English: A four-horse carriage is a car for the guide to ride.

古文：鸾旗者，谓析羽旄而编之，列系幢傍也。
现代文：鸾旗，指的是用羽旄编成，排列着系在幢的旁边。
English: "Flag" refers to the flags made of feathers and arranged next to each other.

古文：建华车，驾四，凡二乘，行则分居左右。
现代文：建华车，套四匹马，共两辆，出行时就分别安排在左右两侧。
English: Jianhua carriage, a set of four horses, a total of two, are arranged separately on the left and right sides when traveling.

古文：轻车，驾二，古之战车也。
现代文：轻车，套两匹马，是古代的战车。
English: The chariot, drawn by two horses, is an ancient chariot.

古文：前后二十乘，分居左右。
现代文：前后二十辆，分列在左右侧。
English: Twenty cars in front and behind, lined up on the left and right sides.

古文：舆轮洞硃，不巾不盖，建矛戟麾幢，置弩于轼上。
现代文：车厢车轮涂成朱红色，不用车衣车盖，插着矛戟麾幢，在轼上设置弩菔。
English: The wheels of the carriage are painted vermilion red, there is no need to cover the car with a coat, a spear is inserted, and a roller is set on the roller.

古文：大驾法驾出，射声校尉、司马、吏士、战士载，以次属车。
现代文：大驾、法驾出行时，射声校尉、司马、吏士、战士乘坐它，按等级排列车的位置。
English: When a large vehicle or a legal vehicle is traveling, the captain, the steward, the official, and the soldier take it, and the position of the train is arranged according to the level.

古文：司南车，一名指南车，驾四马，其下制如楼，三级；四角金龙衔羽葆；刻木为仙人，衣羽衣，立车上，车虽回运而手常南指。
现代文：司南车，一名指南车，套四匹马，它的下部形制像楼，三层；四角装饰着衔着羽葆的金龙；用木头刻制成仙人，穿着羽衣，站在车上，不管车怎么回旋转弯，手都一直指向南方。
English: South car, a guide car, a set of four horses, its lower part forms a statue building, three layers; the four corners are decorated with a golden dragon with feathers; carved from wood, a fairy, wearing a feather coat, standing on the car, no matter how the car turns around, the hands always point to the south.

古文：大驾出行，为先启之乘。
现代文：大驾出行时，作为最先出发的车。
English: When travelling by car, be the first car to set off.

古文：记里鼓车，驾四，形制如司南，其中有木人执棰向鼓，行一里则打一棰。
现代文：记里鼓车，套四匹马，形状像司南车，上面有木头做的人手执槌面向鼓，走一里路就打一槌。
English: Ji Li Drum Car, a set of four horses, shaped like a crane, with a wooden man holding a mallet facing the drum, and beating a mallet a mile away.

古文：羊车，一名辇车，其上如轺，伏兔箱，漆画轮轭。
现代文：羊车，又叫辇车，上部形状像轫车，车箱下用伏兔，油漆彩画车轮车轭。
English: Sheep cart, also known as mule cart, the upper part of the shape like a mule cart, the bottom of the box with a rabbit, paint painting car wheels.

古文：武帝时，护军羊琇辄乘羊车，司隶刘毅纠劾其罪。
现代文：武帝时，护军羊诱妄自乘坐羊车，司隶刘毅纠劾了他的罪。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, a shepherd tricked his sheep into riding in a sheep wagon. Liu Yi, a subordinate of the emperor, punished him for his crime.

古文：画轮车，驾牛，以彩漆画轮毂，故名曰画轮车。
现代文：画轮车，用牛驾车，用彩漆在轮毂上画上图案，所以起名叫画轮车。
English: Painting wheeled vehicles, driving with cattle, using paint to draw a pattern on the rim, hence the name painting wheeled vehicles.

古文：上起四夹杖，左右开四望，绿油幢，硃丝络，青交路，其上形制事事如辇，其下犹如犊车耳。
现代文：上面起建四夹杖，左右两边开四望，绿油幢，朱丝绳络，青交路，上部形制处处和辇一样，下部仍然是犊车的样式。
English: There are four canes on the top, and the left and right sides are open to all directions. There is a green oil building, a jade rope network, and a blue intersection. The upper part is shaped like a plow everywhere, and the lower part is still the style of a plow.

古文：古之贵者不乘牛车，汉武帝推恩之末，诸侯寡弱，贫者至乘牛车，其后稍见贵之。
现代文：古时候的贵人不乘坐牛车，汉武帝推恩的后期，诸侯势寡力弱，穷到了坐牛车的地步，以后渐渐被重视。
English: In ancient times, nobles did not ride ox carts. In the later period of Emperor Hanwu's rule, the lords were powerless and impoverished to the point of riding ox carts. Later, they were gradually valued.

古文：自灵献以来，天子至士遂以为常乘，至尊出朝堂举哀乘之。
现代文：后灵帝献帝以后，天子以至于士就把它当作日常的乘车，至尊出朝堂举哀时乘坐它。
English: After Emperor Hou Ling's offering of the emperor, the emperor and even the priests took it as a daily ride, and the emperor rode it when he went out of the imperial palace to mourn.

古文：属车，一曰副车，一曰贰车，一曰左车。
现代文：属车，又叫副车，又叫贰车，又叫左车。
English: It is also called the first car, the second car, the third car, and the left car.

古文：汉因秦制，大驾属车八十一乘，行则中央左右分为行。
现代文：汉承秦制，大驾的属车为八十一乘，出行时就按中央和左右分列随行。
English: Hancheng Qin system, the driver's vehicle is eighty-one, and when traveling, it is arranged according to the center and left and right.

古文：法驾属车三十六乘。
现代文：法驾的属车有三十六乘。
English: There are thirty-six chariots belonging to the law.

古文：最后车悬豹尾，豹尾以前比之省中。
现代文：最后的属车悬着豹尾，豹尾车前面的仪仗与宫禁中的相当。
English: The last chariot is draped with a leopard's tail, and the battle of honour in front of the leopard's tail chariot is comparable to that in the Imperial Palace.

古文：属车皆皁盖硃里云。
现代文：据说属车都是黑色车盖朱色盖裹。
English: It is said that the cars are all black with vermilion covers.

古文：御衣车、御书车、御轺车、御药车，皆驾牛。
现代文：御衣车、御书车、御韬车、御药车，全都用牛驾车。
English: The clothing cart, the book cart, the candy cart, and the medicine cart are all driven by oxen.

古文：阳遂四望繐窗皁轮小形车，驾牛。
现代文：阳遂四望缠窗皂轮小形车，用牛驾车。
English: Yang Sui looked around at the window-wrapped soap-wheel car, driven by a cow.

古文：象车，汉卤簿最在前。
现代文：象车，在莲优车驾次序中排在最前面。
English: The elephant car is at the forefront of Lianyou's driving order.

古文：武帝太康中平吴后，南越献驯象，诏作大车驾之，以载黄门鼓吹数十人，使越人骑之。
现代文：亘瞪主尘中期平定县厘以后，直堃献来驯象，诏令制作大车而用它们套车，用来装载黄门中的鼓吹手数十人，让趋入骑在上面。
English: In the middle of the reign of Emperor Gaozong, after the county was pacified, Emperor Gaozong offered to tame the elephants, and ordered to make a cart and use it as a carriage to load dozens of propagandists from the Yellow Gate and let them ride on it.

古文：元正大会，驾象入庭。
现代文：新年大会时，驾着象进入大厅。
English: During the New Year's meeting, he drove an elephant into the hall.

古文：中朝大驾卤簿
现代文：中朝时期大驾出行的车辆次序表。
English: This is a list of the order of vehicles that were widely used during the Chinese and Korean dynasties.

古文：先象车，鼓吹一部，十三人，中道。
现代文：首先是象车，有鼓吹一组，十三人，在路中间。
English: First is the elephant cart, with a group of preachers, thirteen people, in the middle of the road.

古文：次静室令，驾一，中道。
现代文：其次是静室令，用一匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the still-room order, driving with a horse, in the middle of the road.

古文：式道候二人，驾一，分左右也。
现代文：两名式道候，用一匹马驾车，分左右两边。
English: A two-person procession, with a horse driving, divided into left and right sides.

古文：次洛阳尉二人，骑，分左右。
现代文：其次是洛阳尉二人，骑马，分左右两边。
English: Next are two Luo Yang lieutenants, on horseback, on either side.

古文：次洛阳亭长九人，赤车，驾一，分三道，各吹正二人引。
现代文：其次是洛阳亭长九人，赤色车，用一匹马驾车，分三路，各有两名吹正作前导。
English: Next is the Luoyang Pavilion, nine people long, a red carriage, driven by a horse, divided into three, each with two pipers as guides.

古文：次洛阳令，皁车，驾一，中道。
现代文：其次是洛阳令，皂色车，用一匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is Luoyang Ling, a soap-coloured car, driven by a horse, in the middle of the road.

古文：次河南中部掾，中道。
现代文：其次是河南中部掾，在路中间。
English: The second is the middle of Henan Province, in the middle of the road.

古文：河桥掾在左，功曹史在右，并驾一。
现代文：河桥掾在左，功曹史在右，都用一匹马驾车。
English: Heqiao Yao on the left, Gong Cao Shi on the right, both driving with a horse.

古文：次河南尹，驾驷，戟吏六人。
现代文：其次是河南尹，用四匹马驾车，执戟吏员六人。
English: Next is Henan Yin, who drives a four-horse carriage and is accompanied by six officials.

古文：次河南主簿，驾一，中道。
现代文：其次是河南主簿，用一匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the Henan master book, with a horse driving, in the middle of the road.

古文：次河南主记，驾一，中道。
现代文：其次是河南主记，用一匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the Henan master, driving with a horse, in the middle of the road.

古文：次司隶部河南从事，中道。
现代文：其次是司隶部河南从事，在路中间。
English: The second is the Henan Provincial Police Department, which is in the middle of the road.

古文：都部从事居左，别驾从事居右，并驾一。
现代文：都部从事位于左侧，别驾从事位于右侧，都用一匹马驾车。
English: The inner city is on the left, the outer city is on the right, and both are driven by a horse.

古文：次司隶校尉，驾三，戟吏八人。
现代文：其次是司隶校尉，用三匹马驾车，执戟吏员八人。
English: Next is the school captain, Sili, who drives a car with three horses and has eight clerks.

古文：次司隶主簿，驾一，中道。
现代文：其次是司隶主簿，用一匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the chief steward, driving with a horse, in the middle of the road.

古文：次司隶主记，驾一，中道。
现代文：其次是司隶主记，用一匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the chief steward, driving with a horse, in the middle of the road.

古文：次廷尉明法掾，中道。
现代文：其次是廷尉明法掾，在路中间。
English: Next is the courtier Ming Fa Jun, in the middle of the road.

古文：五官掾居左，功曹史居右，并驾一。
现代文：五官掾位于左侧，功曹史位于右侧，都用一匹马驾车。
English: The five government offices are located on the left side, and the Gong Cao Shi is located on the right side. Both are driven by a horse.

古文：次廷尉卿，驾驷，戟吏六人。
现代文：其次是廷尉卿，用四匹马驾车，执戟吏员六人。
English: Next is the Lord Chamberlain, driving a carriage with four horses, followed by six bailiffs.

古文：次廷尉主簿、主记，并驾一，在左。
现代文：其次是廷尉主簿、主记，都用一匹马驾车，在左侧。
English: Next, the Master of the Household's book and the Master's diary, both driven by a horse, are on the left.

古文：太仆引从如廷尉，在中。
现代文：太仆的先导和随从与廷尉的一样，在中间。
English: The maidservant's usher and attendant are in the middle, as is the equerry.

古文：宗正引从如廷尉，在右。
现代文：宗正的先导和随从与廷尉的一样，在右侧。
English: Zong Zheng's vanguard and retinue are on the right, as is the courtier.

古文：次太常，驾驷，中道，戟吏六人。
现代文：其次是太常，用四匹马驾车，在路中间，执戟吏员六人。
English: The second is too often, with four horses driving, in the middle of the road, clerk six people.

古文：太常外部掾居左，五官掾、功曹吏居右，并驾一。
现代文：太常外部掾位于左侧，五宫掾、功曹史位于右侧，都用一匹马驾车。
English: Too often, the outer yakitori is on the left side, while the inner yakitori and gong chaoshi are on the right side, and both are driven by a horse.

古文：次光禄引从，中道。
现代文：其次是光禄卿的先导和随从，在路中间。
English: Next is the leader and followers of Lord Guanglu, in the middle of the road.

古文：太常主簿、主记居左，卫尉引从居右，并驾一。
现代文：太常主簿、主记位于左侧，卫尉的先导和随从位于右侧，都用一匹马驾车。
English: Too often, the chief clerk and the chief secretary are on the left side, and the captain of the guard and the attendant are on the right side, all driving with a horse.

古文：次太尉外督令史，驾一，中道。
现代文：其次是太尉外督令史，用一匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: The second is the Lieutenant-Governor Ling Shi, driving with a horse, in the middle of the road.

古文：次西东贼仓户等曹属，并驾一，引从。
现代文：其次是西束贼、仓、户等曹属，都用一匹马驾车，先导或随从。
English: Next are the Cao clans, such as the West Bund Thieves, the Cang, and the House, all of which use a horse to drive, lead or follow.

古文：次太尉，驾驷，中道。
现代文：其次是太尉，用四匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the captain, driving with four horses, in the middle of the road.

古文：太尉主簿、舍人各一人，祭酒二人，并驾一，在左。
现代文：太尉主簿、舍人各一人，祭酒二人，都用一匹马驾车，在左侧。
English: The captain, the chief clerk, the officiant, one each, and the two officiants, all driving with one horse, are on the left.

古文：次司徒引从，驾驷，中道。
现代文：其次是司徒的先导和随从，用四匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is Stout's lead and follow, driving with four horses, in the middle of the road.

古文：次司空引从，驾驷，中道。
现代文：其次是司空的先导和随从，用四匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the leader and the follower, driving with four horses, in the middle of the road.

古文：三公骑令史戟各八人，鼓吹各一部，七人。
现代文：三公的骑令史戟各八人，鼓吹各一组，七人。
English: The three nobles each had eight men to ride the horse, and each group of seven men to preach.

古文：次中护军，中道，驾驷。
现代文：其次是中护军，在路中间，用四匹马驾车。
English: Next is the middle guard, in the middle of the road, driving with four horses.

古文：卤簿左右各二行，戟楯在外，弓矢在内，鼓吹一部，七人。
现代文：左右各有两行仪仗队，执戟循的在外侧，持弓矢的在内侧，鼓吹一组，七人。
English: There are two lines of honor guards on the left and right, with the one who holds the scepter on the outside and the one who holds the bow and arrow on the inside. There is a group of seven people who are preaching.

古文：次步兵校尉在左，长水校尉在右，并驾一。
现代文：其次是步兵校尉在左侧，长水校尉在右侧，都用一匹马驾车。
English: Next is the infantry captain on the left, and the chief water officer on the right, both driving a horse.

古文：各卤簿左右二行，戟楯在外，刀楯在内，鼓吹各一部，七人。
现代文：其左右各有两行仪仗队，执戟檐的在外侧，执刀檐的在内侧，鼓吹各一组，七人。
English: To its right and left, there are two lines of honor guards, the one holding the scepter is on the outside, the one holding the sword is on the inside, and each group of seven people is preaching.

古文：次射声校尉在左，翊军校尉在右，并驾一。
现代文：其次是射声校尉在左侧，翊军校尉在右侧，都用一匹马驾车。
English: Next is the gunnery captain on the left side, and the lieutenant of the Han army on the right side, both driving with a horse.

古文：各卤簿左右各二行，戟楯在外，刀楯在内，鼓吹各一部，七人。
现代文：各有左右两行仪仗队，执戟檐的在外侧，执刀循的在内侧，鼓吹各有一组，七人。
English: Each has two lines of honor guards on the left and right, the one holding the scepter is on the outside, the one holding the sword is on the inside, and the preachers each have one group, seven people.

古文：次骁骑将军在左，游击将军在右，并驾一。
现代文：其次是骁骑将军在左侧，游击将军在右侧，都用一匹马驾车。
English: Next is the cavalry general on the left and the guerrilla general on the right, both driving a horse.

古文：皆卤簿左右引各二行，戟楯在外，刀楯在内，鼓吹各一部，七人。
现代文：都是左右各有两行仪仗队作先导，执戟循的在外侧，执刀循的在内侧，各有鼓吹一组，七人。
English: On both sides, there were two lines of honor guards to lead the way, those on the outer side to lead the procession, and those on the inner side to lead the procession, each with a group of seven preachers.

古文：骑队，五在左，五在右，队各五十匹，命中督二人分领左右。
现代文：骑兵队，五队在左侧，五队在右侧，每队各有五十匹马，命令中督两名分别统领左队和右队。
English: The cavalry, five on the left and five on the right, each with fifty horses, ordered the two lieutenant-governors to lead the left and right respectively.

古文：各有戟吏二人，麾幢独揭，鼓在队前。
现代文：各有执戟吏员二人，单独举着大旗，鼓手走在队伍前面。
English: Each has two officials holding the gong, holding a large flag individually, and the drummer walks in front of the procession.

古文：次左将军在左，前将军在右，并驾一。
现代文：其次是左将军在左，前将军在右，都用一匹马驾车。
English: Next is the left general on the left and the former general on the right, both driving with a horse.

古文：皆卤簿左右各二行，戟楯盾在外，刀楯在内，鼓吹各一部，七人。
现代文：都是左右各有两行仪仗队，执戟循的在外侧，执刀循的在内侧，各有一组鼓吹。七人。
English: They all have two lines of honor guards on the left and right, those who follow the rune on the outside, those who follow the sword on the inside, and each has a group of preachers. Seven people.

古文：次黄门麾骑，中道。
现代文：其次是黄门麾骑，在路中间。
English: Next is the Yellow Gate, in the middle of the road.

古文：次黄门前部鼓吹，左右各一部，十三人，驾驷。
现代文：其次是黄门前部鼓吹，左右各有一组，十三人，用四匹马驾车。
English: Next is the front of the Yellow Gate. There is a group of thirteen people on each side, driving with four horses.

古文：八校尉佐仗，左右各四行，外大戟楯，次九尺楯，次弓矢，次弩，并熊渠、佽飞督领之。
现代文：八校尉的佐仗，左右各有四行，外侧的持大戟循，其次是九尺循，其次是弓矢，其次是弩，都由熊渠、伙飞督领。
English: The eight lieutenants each had four lines on the left and right, with the outer side holding a large yakitori, followed by a nine-foot yakitori, followed by a bow and arrow, followed by a gong, all of which were led by Xiongqiu and Guofei.

古文：次司南车，驾驷，中道。
现代文：其次是司南车，用四匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the Sinan carriage, driven by four horses, in the middle of the road.

古文：护驾御史，骑，夹左右。
现代文：护驾御史，骑着马，夹在左右两侧。
English: He is riding a horse, flanked on the left and right.

古文：次谒者仆射，驾驷，中道。
现代文：其次是谒者仆射，用四匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is a four-horse carriage, driving in the middle of the road.

古文：次御史中丞，驾一，中道。
现代文：其次是御史中丞，用一匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is Mishi Nakajo, driving with a horse, in the middle of the road.

古文：次武贲中郎将，骑，中道。
现代文：其次是武贲中郎将，骑马，在路中间。
English: Next is Takeshi Nakachiro, riding a horse, in the middle of the road.

古文：次九游车，中道，武刚车夹左右，并驾驷。
现代文：其次是九游车，在路中间，武刚车夹在左右两侧，都用四匹马驾车。
English: Next is the nine-course carriage, in the middle of the road, with the Wu Gang carriage sandwiched between the right and left sides, all driven by four horses.

古文：次云罕车，驾驷，中道。
现代文：其次是云罕车，用四匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the Yunhan car, driven by four horses, in the middle of the road.

古文：次阘戟车，驾驷，中道，长戟邪偃向后。
现代文：其次是阗戟车，用四匹马驾车，在路中间，长戟斜着倒向后方。
English: Next is the cart, driven by four horses, in the middle of the road, with the long plough tilted backwards.

古文：次皮轩车，驾驷，中道。
现代文：其次是皮轩车，用四匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is a four-horse carriage, driven by four horses, in the middle of the road.

古文：次鸾旗车，中道，建华车分左右，并驾驷。
现代文：其次是鸾旗车，在路中间，建华车分列在左右两侧，都用四匹马驾车。
English: Next is the banner car. In the middle of the road, Jianhua cars are lined up on the left and right sides, all driven by four horses.

古文：次护驾尚书郎三人，都官郎中道，驾部在左，中兵在右，并骑。
现代文：其次是护驾尚书郎三人，都官郎在路中间，驾部在左侧，中兵在右侧，都骑马。
English: Next, there are three people escorting Shang Shulang. The governor is in the middle of the road, the driver is on the left, and the middle soldier is on the right. They are all on horseback.

古文：又有护驾尚书一人，骑，督摄前后无常。
现代文：又有护驾尚书一人，骑马，管理前后队伍而没有固定的位置。
English: In addition, there is a person driving the chauffeur, riding a horse, managing the front and back of the team, but there is no fixed position.

古文：次相风，中道。
现代文：其次是相风，在路中间。
English: Next is the crosswind, in the middle of the road.

古文：次司马督，在前，中道。
现代文：其次是司马督，在前面，在路中间。
English: Next is Sima Du, in front, in the middle of the road.

古文：左右各司马史三人引仗，左右各六行，外大戟楯二行。次九尺楯，次刀楯。次弓矢，次弩。
现代文：左右各有三名司马史引导仪仗，左右各有六行，外侧是执大戟循的两行，其次是执九尺循的，其次是执刀栀的，其次是执弓矢的，其次是执弩的。
English: There are three Sima Shi on each side to guide the ceremonial battle, and there are six lines on each side. On the outer side are the two lines of the leader, followed by the leader, followed by the leader, followed by the leader, followed by the leader, followed by the leader, followed by the leader, followed by the leader.

古文：次五时车，左右有遮列骑。
现代文：其次是五时车，左右两侧有遮列骑。
English: Next is the five o'clock carriage, on both sides of which there are horse-drawn carriages.

古文：次典兵中郎，中道，督摄前却无常。
现代文：其次是典兵中郎，在路中间，管理前后队伍而没有固定位置。
English: Next is the middle guard, in the middle of the road, managing the front and back of the team without a fixed position.

古文：左殿中御史，右殿中监，并骑。
现代文：左侧是殿中御史，右侧是殿中监，都骑马。
English: On the left is the palace historian, on the right is the palace superintendent, both on horseback.

古文：次高盖，中道，左罼，右罕。
现代文：其次是高盖，在路中间，左侧是单，右侧是罕。
English: Next is the high lid, in the middle of the road, the left side is single, the right side is narrow.

古文：次御史，中道，左右节郎各四人。
现代文：其次是御史，在路中间，左右各有四名节郎。
English: Next is Goshi, in the middle of the road, with four setsuro on each side.

古文：次华盖，中道。
现代文：其次是华盖，在路中间。
English: Next is Huagai, in the middle of the road.

古文：次殿中司马，中道。
现代文：其次是殿中司马，在路中间。
English: Next is Sima in the hall, in the middle of the road.

古文：殿中都尉在左，殿中校尉在右，左右各四行。细楯一行在弩内，又殿中司马一行，殿中都尉一行，殿中校尉一行。
现代文：殿中都尉在左侧，殿中校尉在右侧，左右各有四行，执细循的一行在执弩的内侧，另有殿中司马一行，殿中都尉一行，殿中校尉一行。
English: The captain of the palace is on the left side, the lieutenant of the palace is on the right side, and there are four lines on the left and right, one line of the executioner is on the inside of the executioner, and there is a line of Sima in the palace, a line of the captain of the palace, and a line of the lieutenant of the palace.

古文：次扌罡鼓，中道。
现代文：其次是捏鼓，在路中间。
English: Next, the cymbals, in the middle of the road.

古文：次金根车，驾六马，中道。
现代文：其次是金根车，用六匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the golden chariot, driven by six horses, in the middle of the road.

古文：太仆卿御，大将军参乘。
现代文：太仆卿赶车，大将军担任参乘。
English: The great servant chased the car, and the great general served as a passenger.

古文：左右又各增三行，为九行。
现代文：左右两侧又各增加三行，成为九行。
English: On the left and right sides, three lines were added, making nine lines.

古文：司马史九人，引大戟楯二行，九尺楯一行，刀楯一行，由基一行，细弩一行，迹禽一行，椎斧一行，力人刀楯一行。
现代文：九名司马史，引导两行大戟循，一行九尺循，一行刀循，一行由基，一行细弩，一行迹禽，一行椎斧，一行力士刀循。
English: Nine Sima Shi, guide the two lines of the big hammer, one line of the nine-foot hammer, one line of the knife, one line of the base, one line of the fine hammer, one line of the bird, one line of the axe, one line of the sword.

古文：连细楯，殿中司马，殿中都尉，殿中校尉，为左右各十二行。
现代文：包括细循，殿中司马，殿中都尉，殿中校尉，左右各是十二行。
English: Including the fine line, there are twelve lines on the left and right of Sima, Lieutenant, and Lieutenant-Colonel.

古文：金根车建青旂十二。左将军骑在左，右将军骑在右，殿中将军持凿脑斧夹车，车后衣书主职步从，六行，合左右三十二行。
现代文：金根车上插十二面青色旗，左军将军骑马在左侧，右军将军骑马在右侧，殿中将军持凿脑斧夹侍车旁，车后是衣书主职步行随从，六行，左右合计三十二行。
English: Twelve blue flags were placed on the golden chariot, the general of the left army rode on the left side, the general of the right army rode on the right side, the general of the palace with a chiseled brain axe clamped next to the chariot, and behind the chariot was the main walking follower, six lines, a total of thirty-two lines left and right.

古文：次曲华盖，中道。
现代文：其次是曲华盖，在路中间。
English: Next is Qu Hua Gai, in the middle of the road.

古文：侍中、散骑常侍、黄门侍郎并骑，分左右。
现代文：侍中、散骑常侍、黄门侍郎都骑马，分成左右。
English: The chamberlains, knights-errant, and yellow-faced chamberlains are all on horseback, divided into left and right.

古文：次黄钺车，驾一，在左，御麾骑在右。
现代文：其次是黄铁车，用一匹马驾车，在左侧，御麾骑在右侧。
English: Next is the yellow iron carriage, driven by a horse, on the left, and the imperial carriage on the right.

古文：次相风，中道。
现代文：其次是相风，在路中间。
English: Next is the crosswind, in the middle of the road.

古文：次中书监骑左，秘书监骑右。
现代文：其次是中书监骑马在左侧，秘书监骑马在右侧。
English: Next is the Chinese scribe on horseback on the left, and the secretary on horseback on the right.

古文：次殿中御史骑左，殿中监骑右。
现代文：其次是殿中御史骑马在左侧，殿中监骑马在右侧。
English: Next is the Lord Privy Seal on horseback on the left, and the Master of the Horse on horseback on the right.

古文：次五牛旗，赤青在左，黄在中，白黑在右。
现代文：其次是五牛旗，赤色青色在左，黄色在中间，白色黑色在右。
English: Next is the five-bull flag, red-blue on the left, yellow in the middle, white-black on the right.

古文：次大辇，中道。
现代文：其次是大辇，在路中间。
English: Next is the great cormorant, in the middle of the road.

古文：太官令丞在左，太医令丞在右。
现代文：太官令丞在左侧，太医令丞在右侧。
English: On the left is the Grand Chamberlain, and on the right is the Grand Physician.

古文：次金根车，驾驷，不建旗。
现代文：其次是金根车，用四匹马驾车，不插旗。
English: Next is the golden chariot, driven by four horses, without a flag.

古文：次青立车，次青安车，次赤立车，次赤安车，次黄立车，次黄安车，次白立车，次白安车，次黑立车，次黑安车，合十乘，并驾驷。
现代文：其次是青立车，其次是青安车，其次是赤立车，其次是赤安车，其次是黄立车，其次是黄安车，其次是白立车，其次是白安车，其次是黑立车，其次是黑安车，共十乘，都用四匹马驾车。
English: Next is the Qing Lishui, followed by the Qing An Lishui, followed by the Rua Lishui, followed by the Chia Lishui, followed by the Chia An Lishui, followed by the Huang Lishui, followed by the Huang An Lishui, followed by the Bai Lishui, followed by the Bai An Lishui, followed by the Hei Lishui, followed by the Hei An Lishui, a total of ten carriages, all driven by four horses.

古文：建旗十二，如车色。
现代文：插十二面旗，和车的颜色一样。
English: Put up a dozen flags, all the same color as the car.

古文：立车正竖旗，安东邪拖之。
现代文：立车正着竖插旗，安车斜着插。
English: The flag was planted vertically on the truck, and diagonally on the trailer.

古文：次蹋猪车，驾驷，中道，无旗。
现代文：其次是蹋猪车，用四匹马驾车，在路中间，没有旗。
English: Next is a cart pulled by four horses, in the middle of the road, without a flag.

古文：次耕根车，驾驷，中道，赤旗十二，熊渠督左，佽飞督右。
现代文：其次是耕根车，用四匹马驾车，在路中间，十二面赤色旗，熊渠在左侧督导，仿飞在右侧督导。
English: Next is the ploughing cart, driven by four horses, in the middle of the road, twelve red flags, bear canal on the left side supervision, imitation flying on the right side supervision.

古文：次御轺车，次御四望车，次御衣车，次御书车，次御药车，并驾牛，中道。
现代文：其次是御朝车，其次是御四望车，其次是御衣车，其次是御书车，其次是御药车，都用牛驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the imperial carriage, followed by the imperial carriage, followed by the imperial carriage, followed by the imperial carriage, followed by the imperial carriage, followed by the imperial carriage, followed by the imperial carriage, all driven by cattle, in the middle of the road.

古文：次尚书令在左，尚书仆射在右，又尚书郎六人，分次左右，并驾。
现代文：其次足尚书令在左侧，尚书仆射在右侧，另有六名尚书郎，分别排在左右两边，都乘车。
English: Next, Shosho Shurei is on the left side, Shosho Shitsurei is on the right side, and there are six other Shosho Shuroi, lined up on the left and right sides, all of whom are riding in the car.

古文：又治书侍御史二人，分左右，又侍御史二人，分次左右，又兰台令史分次左右，并骑。
现代文：又有治书侍御史二人，分列左右，又有侍御史二人，分别排在左右两边，又有兰台令史分别排在左右两边，都骑马。
English: There are also two attendants of the history of the Jisho, lined up on the left and right, two attendants of the history of the Jisho, lined up on the left and right, and two attendants of the history of the Landai, lined up on the left and right, all riding horses.

古文：次豹尾车，驾一。
现代文：其次是豹尾车，用一匹马驾车。
English: Next was the leopard-tailed chariot, driven by a horse.

古文：自豹尾车后而卤簿尽矣。
现代文：从豹尾车往后大驾的车马行列就算结束了。
English: The cavalcade of cars driving backwards from the Leopard's Tail is over.

古文：但以神弩二十张夹道，至后部鼓吹。其五张神弩置一将，左右各二将。
现代文：衹是用神弩二十张夹道而行，直到后部鼓吹，每五张神弩设一员将，左右各有两员将。
English: The yakitori is accompanied by 20 shinpachi (sacred bowls) until the last section is played. For every five shinpachi, there is one yakitori player, and for each side, there are two yakitori players.

古文：次轻车二十乘，左右分驾。
现代文：其次是二十乘轻车，左右分列。
English: Next are twenty light vehicles, lined up left and right.

古文：次流苏马六十匹。
现代文：其次是流苏马六十匹。
English: Second, there are sixty tasseled horses.

古文：次金钺车，驾三，中道。
现代文：其次是金钹车，用三匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the golden carriage, driven by three horses, in the middle of the road.

古文：左右护驾尚书郎并令史，并骑，各一人。
现代文：左右护驾尚书郎和令史，都骑马，各一人。
English: On the right and left, the escort drove Shang Shuro and Ling Shi, both on horseback, one each.

古文：次金钲车，驾三，中道。
现代文：其次是金钮车，用三匹马驾车，在路中间。
English: Next is the golden carriage, driven by three horses, in the middle of the road.

古文：左右护驾侍御史并令史等，并骑，各一人。
现代文：左右护驾侍御史和令史等，都骑马，各一人。
English: The left and right guards, including the attendants, ride on horseback, one each.

古文：次黄门后部鼓吹，左右各十三人。
现代文：其次是黄门后部鼓吹，左右各十三人。
English: Next is the rear of the Yellow Gate, with thirteen people on each side.

古文：次戟鼓车，驾牛，二乘，分左右。
现代文：其次是戟鼓车，用牛驾车，两辆，分左右。
English: Next is the gong drum car, driven by a cow, two cars, about a minute.

古文：次左大鸿胪外部掾，右五官掾、功曹史，并驾。
现代文：其次左边是大鸿胪外部掾，右边是五官掾、功曹史，都乘车。
English: Next, on the left is the external courtyard of Dahong Courtyard, and on the right is the courtyard of the Five Officials Courtyard and Gong Cao Shi Courtyard, both of which are accessible by car.

古文：次大鸿胪，驾驷，钺吏六人。
现代文：其次是大鸿胪，用四匹马驾车，执蛾的吏员六人。
English: Next is the Great Horned Owl, which uses four horses to drive, and six officials to catch moths.

古文：次大司农引从，中道，左大鸿胪主簿、主记，右少府引从。
现代文：其次是大司农的先导和随从，在路中间，左边是大鸿胪主簿、主记，右边是少府的先导和随从。
English: Next is the forerunner and follower of the chief farmer, in the middle of the road, on the left is the main book and the main record of Dahongyao, and on the right is the forerunner and follower of Shaofu.

古文：次三卿，并骑，吏四人，铃下二人，执马鞭辟车六人，执方扇羽林十人，硃衣。
现代文：其次是三卿，都骑马，吏员四人，铃下二人，执马鞭辟车的六人，执方扇羽林的十人，朱色衣服。
English: Next are the three nobles, all on horseback, four clerks, two bell ringers, six people to hold the horse whip and pull the cart, ten people to hold the fan and feather forest, and vermilion clothes.

古文：次领军将军，中道。
现代文：其次是领军将军，在路中间。
English: Next is the general leading the army, in the middle of the road.

古文：卤簿左右各二行，九尺楯在外，弓矢在内，鼓吹如护军。
现代文：左右各有仪仗两行，执九尺檐的在外侧，执弓矢的在内侧，鼓吹的编制和护军的一样。
English: There are two lines of honor on each side, holding a nine-foot pole on the outside, holding a bow and arrow on the inside, and the organization of the propaganda is the same as that of the escort.

古文：次后军将军在左，右将军在右，各卤簿鼓吹如左军、前军。
现代文：其次是后将军在左，右将军在右，各自的仪仗鼓吹和左军、前军的一样。
English: Next are the rear generals on the left and the right generals on the right, and their respective ceremonial propaganda is the same as that of the left army and the front army.

古文：次越骑校尉在左，屯骑校尉在右，各卤簿鼓吹如步兵、射声。
现代文：其次是越骑校尉在左，屯骑校尉在右，各自的仪仗鼓吹和步兵、射声的一样。
English: Next is the cavalry captain on the left, the cavalry captain on the right, and their respective ceremonial propaganda is the same as that of infantry and shooting.

古文：次领护骁骑、游军校尉，皆骑，吏四人，乘马夹道，都督兵曹各一人，乘马在中。
现代文：其次是领护骁骑、游击校尉，都骑马，吏员四人，骑着马夹道，都督兵曹各一人，骑着马在中间。
English: Next came the leader, the escort, the cavalry, and the guerrilla lieutenant, all on horseback, four officials, riding side by side, and one Tudor sergeant each, riding in the middle.

古文：骑将军四人，骑校、鞉角、金鼓、铃下、信幡、军校并驾一。
现代文：骑将军四人，骑校、桃角、金鼓、铃下、信幡、军校都用一匹马驾车。
English: There are four riding generals, and the riding school, peach corner, golden drum, bell, letter banner, and military school all use one horse to drive.

古文：功曹吏、主簿并骑从。
现代文：功曹吏、主簿都骑马随从。
English: The meritorious officials and the chief scrivener all followed on horseback.

古文：散扇幢麾各一骑，鼓吹一部，七骑。
现代文：伞扇和幢麾各一骑，鼓吹一组，七骑。
English: The umbrella fan and the palanquin each ride one horse, and a group of seven ride together.

古文：次领护军，加大车斧，五官掾骑从。
现代文：其次是领护军，加大车斧，五官掾骑马随从。
English: Followed by the escort army, the large axe, the five officials and the horse-riding entourage.

古文：次骑十队，队各五十匹。
现代文：其次是骑兵十队，每队各有五十匹。
English: Then ten companies of cavalry, each company with fifty horses.

古文：将一人，持幢一人，鞉一人，并骑在前，督战伯长各一人，并骑在后，羽林骑督、幽州突骑督分领之。
现代文：一员将，一人持幢，一人管靴，都骑马走在前面，督战伯和长各一人，都骑着马走在后面，由羽林骑督、幽州突骑督分别率领他们。
English: One general, one steward, and one steersman all rode ahead on horseback, while the commander and the captain rode behind on horseback, led respectively by Captain Uebayashi and Captain Yuzhou.

古文：郎簿十队，队各五十人。
现代文：郎簿人员十队，每队各五十人。
English: There are ten teams of stewards, each with fifty people.

古文：绛袍将一人，骑、鞉各一人，在前，督战伯长各一人，步，在后。
现代文：穿绛色袍服的将领一人，骑、剃各一人，在前面，督战伯和长各一人，步行，在后面。
English: A general in an ochre-coloured robe, one riding and one shaving, is at the front, and the inspector and the captain, one walking, are at the back.

古文：骑皆持槊。
现代文：骑兵都持稍。
English: The cavalry all hold back a little.

古文：次大戟一队，九尺楯一队，刀楯一队，弓一队，弩一队，队各五十人。
现代文：其次是执大戟的一队，执九尺循的一队，执刀循的一队，执弓的一队，拿弩的一队，每队各有五十人。
English: And the second was the company for the great harp, and the company for the harp of ten strings, and the company for the ten strings of the lute, and the company for the bow, and the company for the cymbals: fifty in each company.

古文：黑袴褶将一人，骑校、鞉角各一人，步，在前，督战伯长各一人，步，在后。
现代文：穿黑裤褶的将领一人，骑校、靴角各一人，步行，在前面，督战伯和长各一人，步行，在后面。
English: One general in black breeches, one riding school and one shoehorn each, on foot, in the front, one inspector and one captain, on foot, in the back.

古文：金颜督将并领之。
现代文：由金颜督将统一率领他们。
English: They will all be led by Governor Kim.

古文：皇太子安车，驾三，左右騑。
现代文：皇太子的安车，用三匹马驾车，左右各有腓马。
English: The crown prince's carriage is pulled by three horses, one on each side.

古文：硃班轮，倚兽较，伏鹿轼。
现代文：朱斑漆的车轮，用倚虎形装饰的车较，用伏鹿的形象装饰车轼。
English: The wheels are painted vermilion, the wheels are decorated with the shape of a crouching tiger, and the rims are decorated with the image of a roe deer.

古文：九旒，画降龙。
现代文：旗帜有九旒，上面画着降龙的图案。
English: The flag has nine ribs and a depiction of a descending dragon.

古文：青盖，金华蚤二十八枚。
现代文：青色车盖，周围饰有二十八枚金花。
English: The blue cover is surrounded by 28 gold flowers.

古文：黑虡文画轓，文辀，黄金涂五采。
现代文：车轜上画着黑色掳文，车轴有文饰，五末都涂金。也叫做鸾辖。
English: There are black Chinese characters painted on the wheel rim, the axle is decorated with Chinese characters, and the five ends are painted with gold.

古文：亦谓之鸾路。非法驾则乘画轮车，上开四望，绿油幢，硃丝绳络，两箱里饰以金锦，黄金涂五采。
现代文：如果不足法驾就乘坐画轮车，上面开着四望，绿油幢，朱丝绳络，两面车箱内侧用金锦装饰，五末都涂金。
English: If you don't have enough money to drive, you can take a Ferris wheel, the top of which is open to all directions, green oil building, jus rope network, both sides of the car box are decorated with gold brocade, all five ends are coated with gold.

古文：其副车三乘，形制如所乘，但不画轮耳。
现代文：副车一共三乘，形制和太子乘坐的一样，祇是不画车轮罢了。
English: There are a total of three sidecars, the same shape as the one used by the prince, except that the wheels are not painted.

古文：王青盖车，皇孙绿盖车，并驾三，左右騑。
现代文：王使用青色车盖的车，皇孙使用绿色车盖的车，都用三匹马驾车，左右各有腓马。
English: The car with the blue cover used by the king, and the car with the green cover used by the king's grandson, were both driven by three horses, with a white horse on each side.

古文：云母车，以云母饰犊车。
现代文：云母车，用云母装饰的犊车。
English: Mica wagon, a cart decorated with mica.

古文：臣下不得乘，以赐王公耳。
现代文：臣子们不能乘坐，是用来赏赐给王公的。
English: The courtiers are not allowed to ride on it, but it is used to reward the prince.

古文：皁轮车，驾四牛，形制犹如犊车，但皁漆轮毂，上加青油幢，硃丝绳络。
现代文：皂轮车，用四头牛驾车，形制类似犊车，衹是用皂色来油漆车轮和车毂，上面有青油幢，朱丝绳络。
English: A soap wheel cart, driven by four oxen, is shaped like a mule cart. The mule is painted with soap to paint the wheels and wheels. It is topped with a blue tarpaulin and a jus rope.

古文：诸王三公有勋德者特加之。
现代文：各位王和三公中有功勋德行的才被特别授予。
English: Kings and emperors were specially awarded for their meritorious and virtuous deeds.

古文：位至公或四望、三望、夹望车。
现代文：地位至公分别为四望、三望、夹望的车。
English: The cars with the highest status were the four-view, three-view and clamp-view.

古文：油幢车，驾牛，形制如皁轮，但不漆毂耳。
现代文：油幢车，用牛驾车，形制和皂轮车一样，祇是不漆车毂。
English: An oil tank car, driven by a cow, shaped like a soap wheel car, only it is not painted.

古文：王公大臣有勋德者特给之。
现代文：王公大臣中有功勋德行的才被特别授予。
English: Wang Gongjin's meritorious and virtuous deeds were specially awarded.

古文：通幰车，驾牛，犹如今犊车制，但举其幰通覆车上也。
现代文：通忆车，用牛驾车，类似现在的犊车形制，衹是用忆完全覆盖在车顶上。
English: The memory car, driven by oxen, was similar to today's mule-drawn car. The mule was completely covered with memories on the roof of the car.

古文：诸王三公并乘之。
现代文：各王和三公都乘坐它。
English: Kings and emperors rode in it.

古文：诸公给朝车驾四、安车黑耳驾三各一乘，皁轮犊车各一乘。
现代文：给各位公用四匹马驾车的上朝车、用三匹马驾车的黑耳安车各一乘，给皂轮车犊车各一乘。
English: Give each of you a ride on the public four-horse carriage, the three-horse carriage, and the soap-wheel carriage.

古文：自祭酒掾属以下及令史，皆皁零，辟朝服。
现代文：自祭酒掾属以下到令史等各级官员，都是皂色车斡，边缘有装饰。
English: Officials at all levels, from the priest to the historian, are in soap-colored chariots, with decorations around the edges.

古文：其武官公又别给大车。
现代文：至于武官公则又另外给大车。
English: As for the military attaché, he was also given a large car.

古文：特进及车骑将军骠骑将军以下诸大将军不开府非持节都督者，给安车黑耳驾二，轺车施耳后户一乘。
现代文：特进和车骑将军、骠骑将军以下各大将军中不开府不是持节都督的，给驾二匹马的黑耳安车，施耳后开门的轫车一乘。
English: Among the major generals, including the special advance and the general of the chariot and cavalry, and the general of the horse and rider, who are not the governors of the prefectural capital, the black-eared chariot with two horses is given a ride, and the chariot with the door open behind the ears is given a ride.

古文：三公、九卿、中二千石、二千石、河南尹、谒者仆射、郊庙明堂法出，皆大车立乘，驾驷。
现代文：三公、九卿、中二千石、二千石、河南尹、谒者仆射，郊庙明堂等正式出行时，都用大车而立乘，用四匹马驾车。
English: The three princes, the nine nobles, the middle-aged 2,000-koku, the 2,000-koku, the Henan Yin, the eunuch Pusha, the suburban temple Myeongdong, etc. all use a large car and four horses to drive when they travel officially.

古文：前后导从大车驾二，右騑。
现代文：前导和后面随从的是驾二匹马的大车，有右腓马。
English: Leading and following behind is a two-horse chariot with a right-hand pommel horse.

古文：他出乘安车。
现代文：其他情况下出行乘坐安车。
English: In other cases, travel by cheap car.

古文：其去位致仕告老，赐安车驷马。
现代文：如果离职退休告老，赐给四匹马驾车的安车。
English: If you retire, you get a four-horse carriage.

古文：郡县公侯，安车驾二，右騑。
现代文：郡县公侯，用驾二匹马的安车，有右腓马。
English: The county and county magistrate, driving a two-horse carriage, has a right pommel horse.

古文：皆硃班轮，倚鹿较，伏熊轼，黑辎，皁缯盖。
现代文：都是朱斑漆车轮，用鹿的形象装饰车较，用熊的形象装饰车轼，黑辎，皂缯的车盖。
English: They are all vermilion-painted wheels, with the image of a deer decorating the rim of the car, with the image of a bear decorating the hubcaps, black felt, and soapy felt.

古文：公旗旂八旒，侯七旒，卿五旒，皆画降龙。
现代文：公的旌旗有八旒，侯的七旒，卿的五旒，皆画降龙。
English: The official banner has eight chevrons, the lord's seven chevrons, and the lord's five chevrons, all depicting a falling dragon.

古文：中二千石、二千石，皆皁盖，硃两轓，铜五采，驾二。
现代文：中二千石、二千石，都是皂车盖，朱色两幡，铜饰五末，驾两匹马。
English: The middle two thousand and the middle two thousand are both soap cart covers, vermilion banners, copper ornaments, and two horses.

古文：中二千石以上，右騑。
现代文：中二千石以上，有右腓马。
English: Of those with more than 2,000 koku, there is a horse called Right Fima.

古文：千石、六百石，硃左轓。
现代文：干石、六百石，朱色左辐。
English: Dry stone, six hundred stones, vermilion left spoke.

古文：车轓长六尺，下屈广八寸，上业广尺二寸，九丈，十二初，后谦一寸，若月初生，示不敢自满也。
现代文：车轜长六尺，下面的短尾宽八寸，上面的业版宽一尺二寸，有九丈，十二初，后面缩一寸，像月亮初生，表示不敢自满。
English: The wheel rim is six feet long, the short tail below is eight inches wide, and the industry plate above is one foot two inches wide, with nine heights, twelve beginnings, and one inch shrinkage behind, like the moon's first birth, indicating that it dare not be complacent.

古文：王公之世子摄命理国者，安车，驾三，旗旂七旒，其封侯之世子五旒。
现代文：王公的世子摄命管理王国的，安车，驾三匹马，旗旃有七旒，如果是封侯的世子就用五旒。
English: The prince's heir is appointed to manage the kingdom. He drives a horse-drawn carriage, drives three horses, and has seven banners. If he is the heir of a feudal lord, he uses five banners.

古文：太康四年，制： 依汉故事，给九卿朝车驾四及安车各一乘。 
现代文：太康四年，制： 按照汉朝旧例，给九卿驾四马朝车以及安车各一乘。 
English: Taikang four years, system: In accordance with the old Han Dynasty, Jiujiang four-horse chariot and four-horse carriage.

古文：八年，诏： 诸尚书军校加侍中常侍者，皆给传事乘轺车，给剑，得入殿省中，与侍臣升降相随。 
现代文：八年，诏： 各尚书军校加侍中常侍的，都给传事乘韬车，给剑，可以进入殿省中，和侍臣一起随从皇上。 
English: In the eighth year, the imperial edict was issued: all those who had studied at the Imperial Academy of Letters and Military Science, as well as those who had served in the Imperial Household, were given a carriage and a sword, and were allowed to enter the palace and attend the emperor together with the attendants.

古文：大使车，立乘，驾四，赤帷裳，驺骑导从。
现代文：大使车，立乘，驾四匹马，赤色帷裳，用捣骑作为先导和随从。
English: An ambassadorial chariot, standing carriage, driving four horses, red curtains, with a rider as a guide and follower.

古文：旧公卿二千石郊庙上陵从驾，乘大使车，他出乘安车也。
现代文：旧公卿二千石在郊庙上陵时随从皇上，乘坐大使车，其他时候出行乘坐安车。
English: The 2,000-koku former noble followed the emperor when he was at the tomb on the outskirts of the temple, taking the ambassador's car, and at other times traveling by car.

古文：小使车，不立乘，驾四，轻车之流也。
现代文：小使车，不立乘，驾四匹马，是轻车之类。
English: A small carriage, not a standing carriage, driven by four horses, is a light vehicle or the like.

古文：兰舆皆硃，赤毂，赤屏泥，白盖，赤帷裳，从驺骑四十人。
现代文：兰舆都是朱漆，赤色车毂，赤色屏泥，白色车盖，赤色帷裳，四十名鞫骑随从。
English: Lanmyo is all vermilion paint, red wheels, red mud, white lids, red curtains, and a retinue of forty horsemen.

古文：又别有小使车，赤毂皁盖，追捕考案有所执取者之所乘也。
现代文：又另有小使车，赤色车毂皂色车盖，追捕考察有拘留押送的时候乘坐。
English: In addition, there is a small car, a red car with a soap-colored cover, which is used when there is a detention escort during the pursuit and investigation.

古文：凡诸使车皆硃班轮，赤衡轭。
现代文：凡是使车都是朱斑漆的车轮，赤色车衡和车轭。
English: All the cars have vermilion-painted wheels, red scales and rims.

古文：追锋车，去小平盖，加通幰，如轺车，驾二。
现代文：追锋车，除去小而平的车盖，加上通幢，像轺车，驾二匹马。
English: Chaser car, remove the small and flat cover, plus through the building, like a carriage, driving two horses.

古文：追锋之名，盖取其迅速也，施于戎阵之间，是为传乘。
现代文：追锋的名称，是根据它的迅速来取的，应用在军营阵垒之间，作为通讯用车。
English: The name "chaser" comes from its speed, and it was used as a communication vehicle between army camps.

古文：轺车，古之时军车也。
现代文：轺车，古时候的军车。
English: It's an ancient military vehicle.

古文：一马曰轺车，二马曰轺传。
现代文：一匹马的叫韬车，两匹马的叫辋传。
English: One horse is called a cart, two horses are called a team.

古文：汉世贵辎軿而贱轺车，魏晋重轺车而贱辎軿。
现代文：坠代看重辎耕而不重视韬车，魏置看重轫车而不重视辎耕。
English: The Qing Dynasty valued ploughing but not ploughing, and the Wei Dynasty valued ploughing but not ploughing.

古文：三品将军以上、尚书令轺车黑耳有后户，仆射但有后户无耳，并皁轮。
现代文：三品将军以上、尚书令等的辎车黑耳而有后开门，仆射衹有后开门而没有耳，都是皂色车轮。
English: The cars of the three generals and above, Shang Shuling and so on, have black ears and open the door behind, and the minibuses have open the door behind and have no ears. They are all soap-colored wheels.

古文：尚书及四品将军则无后户，漆毂轮。
现代文：尚书和四品将军就没有后开门，漆的车毂车轮。
English: Shangshu and the four generals did not open the back door, and the painted car did not have wheels.

古文：其中书监令如仆射，侍中、黄门、散骑，初拜及谒陵庙，亦得乘之。
现代文：如果是中书监令像仆射、侍中、黄门、散骑，在初拜和拜谒陵庙，也可以乘坐。
English: If you are a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, such as the Foot Guards, the Knights Templar, the Yellow Gates, and the Scattered Cavalry, you can also ride in the first worship and worship of the Mausoleum.

古文：皇太后、皇后法驾，乘重翟羽盖金根车，驾青辂，青帷裳，云虡画辕，黄金涂五采，盖爪施金华，驾三，左右騑。
现代文：皇太后、皇后的法驾，乘坐重翟羽车盖的金根车，青丝绳络，青色帷裳，车辕上画着云纹及鹿头龙纹，用黄金涂五末，车盖爪上装饰着金花，驾三匹马，左右有腓马。
English: The empress dowager and the empress dowager, riding in a golden chariot with a heavy-gilt chariot cover, blue silk ropes and blue drapery, painted with cloud patterns and deer head dragon patterns on the chariot frame, painted with gold, decorated with gold flowers on the claws of the chariot cover, driving three horses, with Phi horses on the left and right.

古文：其庙见小驾，则乘紫罽軿车，云虡画辀，黄金涂五采，驾三。
现代文：如果是庙见小驾，就乘坐紫厨耕车，车轴上画着云纹及鹿头龙纹，用黄金涂五末，驾三匹马。
English: If it is a small car, take the purple kitchen tiller, painted with cloud patterns and deer head dragon patterns on the axle, painted with gold, driving three horses.

古文：非法驾则皇太后乘辇，皇后乘画轮车。
现代文：如果不是法驾那就是皇太后乘辇，皇后乘画轮车。
English: If it's not a carriage ride, it's the empress dowager riding on a donkey and the empress riding on a cart.

古文：皇后先蚕，乘油画云母安车，驾六騩马；騩，浅黑色。
现代文：皇后祭蚕神，乘坐以油彩涂绘的云母安车，驾六匹耽马；骁，浅黑色。
English: The silkworm deity of the Queen's Festival, riding in a mica chariot painted in oil, driven by six horses; crimson, light black.

古文：油画两辕安车，驾五騩马，为副。
现代文：以油彩涂绘的两辕安车，驾五匹魏马，作为副车。
English: A two-horse chariot painted in oil with five Wei horses as a second chariot.

古文：又，金薄石山軿、紫绛罽軿车，皆驾三騩马，为副。
现代文：此外，有金薄石山耕、紫绛厨耕车，都驾三匹骁马，作为副车。
English: In addition, there are Jin thin stone mountain cultivator, Ziyi kitchen cultivator, all driving three horses, as a secondary vehicle.

古文：女旄头十二人，持棨戟二人，共载安车，俪驾。
现代文：女子十二人持旄头，二人持荣戟，同乘在安车上，成两行。
English: Twelve women holding hoes, two holding medals, riding together on a horse-drawn carriage, in two lines.

古文：女尚辇十二人，乘辎车，俪驾。
现代文：女子十二人尚辇，乘辎车，成两行。
English: Twelve women, still in their pajamas, ride in a tuk-tuk in two lines.

古文：女长御八人，乘安车，俪驾。
现代文：女子八人长御，乘安车，成两行。
English: Eight women, all of them Nagas, ride in two lines on an Amtrak train.

古文：三夫人油軿车，驾两马，左騑。
现代文：三夫人乘油耕车，驾两匹马，有左腓。
English: The third lady rides an oil truck, drives two horses, and has a left calf.

古文：其贵人驾节画辀。
现代文：如果是贵人就驾节画轴。
English: If it's a noble, it's a scroll.

古文：三夫人助蚕，乘青交路，安车，驾三，皆以紫绛罽軿车。
现代文：三夫人助祭蚕神时，乘青色交路，安车，驾三匹马，都用紫绛厨耕车。
English: When the three ladies assisted the silkworm god, they took the blue crossroads, the safe car, and drove three horses, all using the purple kitchen tiller.

古文：九嫔世妇乘軿车，驾三。
现代文：九嫔世妇乘耕车，驾三匹马。
English: Nine generations of women ride a plow and drive three horses.

古文：长公主赤罽軿车，驾两马。
现代文：长公主用赤厨耕车，驾两匹马。
English: The eldest princess used a red kitchen tiller and drove two horses.

古文：公主、王太妃、王妃，皆油軿车，驾两马，右騑。
现代文：公主、王太妃、王妃，都用油耕车，驾两匹马，右边有骈马。
English: The princess, the king's daughter, and the queen's daughter all use an oil-powered cart and drive two horses, with a draught horse on the right.

古文：公主油画安车，驾三，青交路，以紫绛罽軿车驾三为副，王太妃、三夫人亦如之。
现代文：公主用以油彩涂绘的安车，驾三匹马，青色交路，用紫绛厨耕车驾三匹马作为副车，王太妃、三夫人同样如此。
English: The princess used an oil-painted horse-drawn carriage with three horses to cross the road in blue, and a purple-and-purple kitchen cart with three horses as a secondary vehicle, as did Wang Tofei and the Three Ladies.

古文：公主助蚕，乘油画安车，驾三。
现代文：公主助行祭蚕礼，乘以油彩涂绘的安车，驾三匹马。
English: The princess helps to perform the festival of silkworms, multiplied by the oil-painted chariot, driving three horses.

古文：公主有先置者，乘青交路安车，驾三。
现代文：公主有先导的，乘青交路安车，驾三匹马。
English: The princess had a guide, took a safe car at the crossroads, and drove three horses.

古文：诸王妃、公太夫人、夫人、县乡君、诸郡公侯特进夫人助蚕，乘皁交路安车，驾三。
现代文：各王妃、公太夫人、夫人、县乡君、各郡公侯特进的夫人助行祭蚕礼，乘皂交路安车，驾三匹马。
English: The queens, granddaughters, wives, heads of counties and towns, and wives of the most eligible princes and princesses from each county assisted in the ceremony, riding in a horse-drawn carriage with three horses.

古文：诸侯监国世子之世妇、侍中常侍尚书中书监令卿校世妇、命妇助蚕，乘皁交路安车，俪驾。
现代文：诸侯监国的世子的世妇、侍中常侍尚书中书监令卿校等的世妇、命妇助行祭蚕礼，乘皂交路安车，分成两行。
English: The concubines of the sons of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of

古文：郡县公侯、中二千石、二千石夫人会朝及蚕，各乘其夫之安车，皆右騑，皁交路，皁帷裳。
现代文：郡县公侯、中二千石、二千石的夫人会朝以及参加祭蚕，各自乘坐丈夫的安车，都有右腓马，皂色交路，皂色帷裳。
English: County and prefectural princes, middle-class families with a net worth of 2,000 koku, and wives with a net worth of 2,000 koku will attend the morning assembly and participate in the festival. They will each ride in their husband's carriage. They will all have a right-hand horse-drawn carriage, a soap-colored intersection, and soap-colored curtains.

古文：自非公会则不得乘轺车，止乘漆布辎軿，铜五采而已。
现代文：如果不是因公事聚会就不能乘朝车，祇乘坐漆布辎耕，用铜五采而已。
English: If it's not a business meeting and you can't take the morning train, you can only take the lacquer cloth to plow and use the copper five.

古文：王妃、特进夫人、封郡君，安车，驾三，皁交路。
现代文：王妃、特进夫人、封郡君等，用安车，驾三匹马，皂色交路。
English: The princess, Mrs. Tecjin, Mr. Fong, etc. use a safe car, drive three horses, and cross the road with soap.

古文：封县乡君油軿车，驾两马，右騑。
现代文：封县乡君用油耕车，驾两匹马，有右腓马。
English: The lord of Feng County used an oil-powered cart and rode two horses, including a right-hand pony.

古文：自过江之后，旧章多缺。
现代文：自从过辽以后，旧的典章大多数都不全了。
English: Since the Liao Dynasty, most of the old regulations are incomplete.

古文：元帝践极，始造大路、戎路各一，皆即古金根之制也，无复充庭之仪。
现代文：元童即位后，才制造大路、戎路各一辆，都是古时金根车的规格，不再有充庭的盛况。
English: It was only after the enthronement of Yuan Tong that one each of the Great Road and Eunos Road were made, both of which were the specifications of the ancient gold-rooted car, and no longer had the pomp of the court.

古文：至于郊祀大事，则权饰余车以周用。
现代文：每逢郊祀等大事，就姑且装饰一下其他的车来用。
English: Whenever there is a big event such as a suburb's religious service, other cars can be decorated and used.

古文：六师亲征则用戎路，去其盖而乘之，属车但五乘而已。
现代文：率领六军亲征时就用戎路，去掉它的车盖来乘坐，随从的车衹有五乘。
English: When he led the six armies to recruit, he used the military road, removed its cover to ride, and there were five attendant carriages.

古文：加绿油幢，硃丝路，饰青交路，黄金涂五采，其轮毂犹素，两箱无金锦之饰。
现代文：车上有绿油幢，朱色丝络，装饰着青色交路，用黄金涂五末，车的轮毂仍是素色，两面车厢没有金锦装饰。
English: On the car, there are green oil stains, vermilion silk threads, decorated with blue intersections, painted with gold, the rims of the car are still plain, and there is no gold brocade decoration on both sides of the car.

古文：其一车又是轺车，旧仪，天子所乘驾六，是时无复六马之乘，五路皆驾四而已，同用黑，是为玄牡。
现代文：其中一车又是朝车。旧时的规格，天子乘坐的车驾六匹马，此时不再有驾六匹马的车，五种车都衹驾四匹马，同样是用黑色的马，造就叫做玄牡。
English: One of the chariots is the morning chariot. In the old time, the chariot was driven by six horses. At this time, there is no longer a chariot driven by six horses. The five kinds of chariots are all driven by four horses. Black horses are also used to make the chariot, which is called the black horse.

古文：无复五时车，有事则权以马车代之，建旗其上。
现代文：不再有五时车，有事时就权且用马车代替，在上面树起旗帜。
English: There will be no more five-o'clock trains. In case of emergency, the government has the right to replace them with horse-drawn carriages, and raise flags on them.

古文：其后但以五色木牛象五时车，竖旗于牛背，行则使人舆之。
现代文：以后仅仅用五色木牛来象征五时车，在牛背上竖起旗帜，出行时就派人用车装载着它们。
English: From then on, only five-colored wooden oxen were used to symbolize the five o'clock carriage, flags were erected on the backs of the oxen, and people were sent to load them with cars when traveling.

古文：牛之义，盖取其负重致远安而稳也。
现代文：之所以用牛，是取它能够负重走远道而且安稳。
English: The reason for using cattle is that they can carry heavy loads and travel long distances safely.

古文：旗常缠而不舒旆，所谓德车结旌者也。
现代文：旗帜常常缠起来而不让它飘扬，这是所谓德车结旌的意思。
English: The flag is often wrapped up and not allowed to fly, which is the meaning of the so-called German scabbard.

古文：惟天子亲戎，五旗舒旆，所谓武车绥旌者也。
现代文：衹有天子亲自出征，五面旗帜都打开，这是所谓武车绥旌的意思。
English: If there is a heavenly son who personally goes to war, the five flags are opened, which is the meaning of the so-called chariot.

古文：指南车，过江亡失，及义熙五年，刘裕屠广固，始复获焉，乃使工人张纲补缉周用。
现代文：指南车，过江时丢了，到义熙五年刘裕屠广固城，才又得到，于是派工人张纲修理备用。
English: The guide car was lost when crossing the river, and it was not until the fifth year of Yixi that Liu Yu Tu Guang Gucheng got it back, so he sent workers to Zhang Gang to repair it.

古文：十三年，裕定关中，又获司南、记里诸车，制度始备。
现代文：十三年，刘裕平定关中，又得到司南车、记里车等，车制方面才开始齐备。
English: In the thirteenth year, Liu Yuping received the Sennan car, the Jiri car, etc. in the final inspection, and the car system began to be complete.

古文：其辇，过江亦亡制度，太元中谢安率意造焉，及破苻坚于淮上，获京都旧辇，形制无差，大小如一，时人服其精记。
现代文：说到辇，过江后也没有，太元年间谢安想方设法制造它，等到在淮河边打败苻坚，缴获京都时的旧辇，形状规格没有差别，大小完全一样，当时人们都叹服谢安记忆的精确。
English: When it comes to shackles, there are none after crossing the river. During the first year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Xie An tried his best to make it. When he defeated Shujian by the Huai River and captured the old shackles in Kyoto, there was no difference in the shape specifications and the size was exactly the same. At that time, people marveled at the accuracy of Xie An's memory.

古文：义熙五年，刘裕执慕容超，获金钲辇、豹尾，旧式犹存。
现代文：义熙五年，刘裕捉住了慕容超，缴获金釭辇、豹尾车，旧时的式样还保留着。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Liu Yu captured Murong Chao, and seized the golden scepter and the leopard-tailed chariot. The old style is still preserved.

古文：元帝太兴三年，皇太子释奠。
现代文：元帝太兴三年，皇太子行释奠礼。
English: In the third year of the reign of Yuan Emperor Taixing, the crown prince held a memorial service.

古文：制曰： 今草创，未有高车，可乘安车也。 
现代文：制说： 现在是草创时期，还没有高车，可乘坐安车。 
English: System said: Now is the pioneering period, there is no high-speed train, you can take the cheap train.

古文：太元中，东宫建，乘路有青赤旂，致疑。
现代文：左元中期，东宫建起来了，乘坐的路车中有青色赤色旌旗，引起疑问。
English: In the middle of the Zuoyuan period, the East Palace was built, and there was a blue and red banner in the carriage, which raised questions.

古文：徐邈议，太子既不备五路，赤旂宜省。
现代文：徐邈认为，太子既然不用五辖，赤旗应当省去。
English: Xu Wei believes that since the prince does not need the five jurisdictions, the red flag should be omitted.

古文：汉制，太子鸾路皆以安车为名。
现代文：漠的制度，太子的鸾路都用安车做名称。
English: Prince's Kushiro is named after a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：自晋过江，礼仪疏舛，王公以下，车服卑杂，惟有东宫礼秩崇异，上次辰极，下纳侯王。
现代文：东晋以来，礼仪错乱，王公以下，车服情况既简陋又不统一，衹有束宫之礼仪符合其地位，在皇帝之下而在侯王之上。
English: Since the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the etiquette has been disordered, below the prince, the dress is both simple and inconsistent, and the etiquette of the palace is in line with its status, under the emperor and above the prince.

古文：而安帝为皇太子乘石山安车，制如金路，义不经见，事无所出。
现代文：而安帝当皇太子时乘坐的是石山安车，形制像金辖。既毫无道理，又没有先例。
English: However, when An Di was crown prince, he rode in the Shishan Anche, which was shaped like a golden scepter. This was both unreasonable and unprecedented.

古文：中宫初建及祀先蚕，皆用法驾，太仆妻御，大将军妻参乘，侍中妻陪乘，丹阳尹建康令及公卿之妻奉引，各乘其夫车服，多以宫人权领其职。
现代文：中宫刚建起来以及祭祀先蚕，都用法驾，太仆的妻子赶车，大将军的妻子参乘，侍中的妻子陪乘，且握尹和墟令以及公卿的妻子做前导，各自乘坐丈夫的车，多半用宫人权且代行其职。
English: The newly built middle palace and the sacrificial first silkworm, all use the law to drive, the wife of the servant to catch the car, the wife of the general to participate, the wife of the attendant to accompany, and the wife of the Yin and Hui and the wife of the nobles to guide, each taking their husband's car, mostly using the palace human rights and acting on their behalf.

古文：《周礼》，弁师掌六冕，司服掌六服。
现代文：根据《周礼》，弁师掌管六冕，司服掌管六服。
English: According to the "Weekly Ritual," the benshi is in charge of the six crowns, and the steward is in charge of the six robes.

古文：自后王之制爰及庶人，各有等差。
现代文：从帝王的制服到庶人，各自都有自己的等级。
English: From the emperor's uniform to the commoner, each has its own rank.

古文：及秦变古制，郊祭之服皆以袀玄，旧法扫地尽矣。
现代文：到童伐改变古代制度，郊祭的服装都用构玄，旧的法制彻底扫尽了。
English: By the time Tongfa changed the ancient system, the costumes of the suburban festival were all made of fabric, and the old legal system was completely swept away.

古文：汉承秦弊，西京二百余年犹未能有所制立。
现代文：漠代继承了秦代的弊制，酉塞时期二百多年仍没有能够制定什么制度。
English: The Desert Dynasty inherited the evil system of the Qin Dynasty, and for more than two hundred years during the prevarication period, it was still unable to formulate any system.

古文：及中兴后，明帝乃始采《周官》、《礼记》、《尚书》及诸儒记说，还备衮冕之服。
现代文：到中兴以后，塱帝才开始采纳《周官》、《礼记》、《尚书》以及各儒者的记录和意见，恢复了衮冕的服装制度。
English: It was only after he came to ZTE that Emperor Qian began to adopt the records and opinions of "Zhou Guanren," "Li Ji," "Shang Shu" and various Confucians, and restored the crowned clothing system.

古文：天子车乘冠服从欧阳氏说，公卿以下从大小夏侯氏说，始制天子、三公、九卿、特进之服，侍祠天地明堂，皆冠旒冕，兼五冕之制，一服而已。
现代文：天子车乘冠服制度采纳欧阳氏的学说，公卿以下的车乘冠服制度采纳大小夏侯氐的学说，开始制定天子、三公、九卿、特进的服饰，侍候祠祭天地明堂时，都冠旒冕，兼用五冕的制度，衹是一服。
English: The Emperor's son's carriage ride crown dress system adopted the theory of the Ouyang clan, and the carriage ride crown dress system below the nobility adopted the theory of the size of the Xia Houyi, and began to formulate the costumes of the Emperor, the three princes, the nine nobles, and the special advance. When attending the ancestral hall festival of the Heaven and Earth Ming Hall, both crowns and crowns were used, and the five crowns system was used at the same time.

古文：天子备十二章，三公诸侯用山龙九章，九卿以下用华虫七章，皆具五采。
现代文：天子用所有的十二章，三公诸侯使用山龙等九章，九卿以下用华虫等七章，都具备了五彩颜色。
English: The Heavenly Son uses all twelve chapters, the Three Princes and Princes use nine chapters such as the Mountain Dragon, and the nine nobles and below use seven chapters such as the Insect, all of which have multicolored colors.

古文：魏明帝以公卿衮衣黼黻之饰，疑于至尊，多所减损，始制天子服刺绣文，公卿服织成文。
现代文：魏明帝认为公卿们衮衣黼黻的服饰，和至尊的皇帝差不多，于是减损了很多，开始规定天子的服饰用刺绣纹样，公卿的服饰用编织纹样。
English: Wei Mingdi thought that the nobility's clothing was similar to that of the supreme emperor, so he derogated a lot and began to stipulate that the emperor's clothing should be embroidered and the nobility's clothing should be woven.

古文：及晋受命，遵而无改。
现代文：到晋受天命建国，沿用而没有改变。
English: Jin was chosen by God to found the country, and this has remained unchanged.

古文：天子郊祀天地明堂宗庙，元会临轩，黑介帻，通天冠，平冕。
现代文：天子在郊祀天地明堂宗庙，或是元旦朝会及殿前接见群臣，戴黑色介帧，通天冠，平冕。
English: Tenshi is worshipped in the suburbs at the Tenchi Myodo ancestral temple, or on New Year's Day at the imperial court and in front of the hall to receive a group of retainers, wearing a black frame, a crown, and a crown.

古文：冕，皁表，硃绿里，广七寸，长二尺二寸，加于通天冠上，前圆后方，垂白玉珠，十有二旒，以硃组为缨，无緌。
现代文：冕的形制，外表皂色，朱绿色裹子，宽七寸，长一尺二寸，戴在通天冠上，前面圆而后面方，垂着白玉珠，共有十二旒，用朱丝带做缨子，没有矮。
English: crown-shaped, soap-colored on the outside, vermilion-green wrapper, seven inches wide, one foot two inches long, worn on a canopy, round on the front and behind, hanging white jade beads, a total of twelve braids, braided with vermilion ribbon, not short.

古文：佩白玉，垂珠黄大旒，绶黄赤缥绀四采。
现代文：佩着白玉，垂着珠黄大旒，绶带为黄赤缥钳四种颜色。
English: Wearing white jade, hanging with pearls yellow coat, the ribbon is yellow and red four colors.

古文：衣皁上，绛下，前三幅，后四幅，衣画而裳绣，为日、月、星辰、山、龙、华虫、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻之象，凡十二章。
现代文：上衣皂色，下衣绛色，前面三幅，后面四幅，上衣是画的花纹而下裳是绣的花纹，有、月、星辰、山、龙、华虫、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻等，共十二章。
English: The top coat is soap-colored, the bottom coat is indigo-colored, three on the front, four on the back, the top coat is a painted pattern and the bottom coat is an embroidered pattern, with, moon, stars, mountains, dragons, insects, algae, fire, powdered rice, crickets, grasshoppers, etc., a total of twelve chapters.

古文：素带广四寸，硃里，以硃绿裨饰其侧。
现代文：素带宽四寸，朱色裹子，用朱绿色裨饰它的两侧。
English: The plain ribbon is four inches wide, with a vermilion wrapper and vermilion green trim on both sides.

古文：中衣以绛缘其领袖。
现代文：中衣用绛色装饰领子和袖子的边缘。
English: The blouse is trimmed with navy blue around the collar and sleeves.

古文：赤皮为韨，绛袴袜，赤舄。
现代文：用赤色皮子做祓，绛色裤袜，赤色舄。
English: Exorcism with red leather, navy blue pants and red socks.

古文：未加元服者，空顶介帻。
现代文：没戴冠的时候，光戴着介帧。
English: When not wearing a crown, he is bare-chested.

古文：其释奠先圣，则皁纱袍，绛缘中衣，绛袴袜，黑舄，其临轩，亦衮冕也。
现代文：如果是释奠先圣，就穿皂色纱袍，绛色边缘的中衣，绛色裤袜，黑色舄。如果是在殿前接见臣属，也穿衮冕。
English: If it is a memorial service, wear a soap-colored gauze robe, an ochre-colored blouse, ochre-colored pantyhose, and black socks. If you are receiving a vassal in front of the hall, also wear a crown.

古文：其朝服，通天冠高九寸，金博山颜，黑介帻，绛纱袍，皁缘中衣。
现代文：如果是朝服，用高九寸的通天冠，额上装饰着金博山，黑色介帧，绛色纱袍，皂色边缘的中衣。
English: If it is a morning suit, use a nine-inch-high crown, decorated with Mount Jinbo on the forehead, a black frame, a navy gauze robe, and a soapy-colored midi dress.

古文：其拜陵，黑介帻，单衣。
现代文：如果是拜谒陵寝，戴黑色介帧，穿单衣。
English: If you are going to pray at the Mausoleum, wear a black apron and wear a singlet.

古文：其杂服，有青赤黄白缃黑色，介帻，五色纱袍，五梁进贤冠，远游冠，平上帻武冠。
现代文：如果是杂服，有青赤黄白缃黑等颜色，介帧，五色纱袍，五梁进贤冠，远游冠，平上帧武冠。
English: If it is miscellaneous clothing, there are blue-red-yellow-white-black and other colors, intermediate frame, five-color gauze, five-beam crown, long-distance crown, flat top frame crown.

古文：其素服，白单衣。
现代文：如果是素服，戴白色蛤帽穿单衣。
English: If it is plain clothes, wear a white skull cap and wear a singlet.

古文：后汉以来，天子之冕，前后旒用真白玉珠。
现代文：后汉以来，天子的冕，前后旒用的是真白玉珠。
English: Since the Later Han Dynasty, the crown of the Son of Heaven has been made of pure white jade beads.

古文：魏明帝好妇人之饰，改以珊瑚珠。
现代文：魏明帝喜好妇女的装饰品，改用珊瑚珠。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei favored women's ornaments, switching to coral beads.

古文：晋初仍旧不改。
现代文：晋的初期沿用旧例而没有改变。
English: In the early days of Jin, the old rules were followed and did not change.

古文：及过江，服章多阙，而冕饰以翡翠珊瑚杂珠。
现代文：到过江以后，服饰制度很多都不具备了，至于冕就用翡翠珊瑚杂色珠子来装饰。
English: After crossing the river, many people do not have a dress code. As for the crown, it is decorated with emerald coral and multi-colored beads.

古文：侍中顾和奏： 旧礼，冕十二旒，用白玉珠。
现代文：侍中顾和上奏说： 旧的礼制，冕有十二旒，用白玉珠。
English: Attendant Gu He said, "In the old etiquette, the crown had twelve hoops, with white jade beads.

古文：今美玉难得，不能备，可用白璇珠。 
现代文：如今美玉很难得，不能齐备，可以用白璇珠。 
English: Today, gems are hard to come by and cannot be kept in stock, so it is possible to use chalcedony beads.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：通天冠，本秦制。
现代文：通天冠，本来是秦代的制度。
English: Tong Tian Guan was originally a Qin Dynasty system.

古文：高九寸，正竖，顶少斜却，乃直下，铁为卷梁，前有展筒，冠前加金博山述，乘舆所常服也。
现代文：高九寸，正面直立，顶部稍微向后斜，然后直着下来，用铁做卷梁，前面有展筒，冠的前部有山形装饰并饰有翠鸟羽毛，天子平时常戴这种冠。
English: Nine inches high, standing upright on the front, the top is slightly tilted back, then straight down, made of iron as a coiled beam, with a barrel in front, the front of the crown is decorated with a mountain shape and decorated with kingfisher feathers, the son of heaven usually wears this crown.

古文：平冕，王公、卿助祭于郊庙服之。
现代文：平冕，王公、卿在郊庙助祭时用的。
English: Ping Guan, used by princes and nobles when officiating at suburban temples.

古文：王公八旒，卿七旒。
现代文：王公的八旒，卿的七旒。
English: The eight-pointed star for princes and the seven-pointed star for nobles.

古文：以组为缨，色如其绶。
现代文：用丝带做缨子，和绶带的颜色一样。
English: Use a ribbon for the braid, the same color as the ribbon.

古文：王公衣山龙以下九章，卿衣华虫以下七章。
现代文：王公衣服上用山龙以下的九章作装饰，卿的衣服上用华虫以下的七章做装饰。
English: Wang Gong's clothes are decorated with nine chapters below the mountain dragon, and Sir's clothes are decorated with seven chapters below the Chinese caterpillar.

古文：远游冠，傅玄云秦冠也。
现代文：远游冠，傅玄说是秦冠。
English: According to Fu Xuan, it is the Qin crown.

古文：似通天而前无山述，有展筒横于冠前。
现代文：与通天冠相似但前面没有山形装饰及翠鸟羽饰，有展筒横在冠前。
English: Similar to the crown, but without the pediment decoration and kingfisher feathers on the front, there is a barrel in front of the crown.

古文：皇太子及王者后、帝之兄弟、帝之子封郡王者服之。
现代文：皇太子和王的继承人、皇帝的兄弟、皇帝的儿子中封为郡王的使用它。
English: The crown prince and the king's heir, the emperor's brother, the emperor's son and the crown prince use it.

古文：诸王加官者自服其官之冠服，惟太子及王者后常冠焉。
现代文：各王有加官的各自穿他们的官服，衹有太子和王的继承人常常戴这种冠。
English: Each of the king's courtiers wore their official uniform, and both the crown prince and the king's heir often wore this crown.

古文：太子则以翠羽为緌，缀以白珠，其余但青丝而已。
现代文：太子用翠羽做矮，缀上白珠，其他的衹用青丝就可以了。
English: The crown prince will be made short with cedar feathers and adorned with white beads, while the other emperors can be adorned with green silk.

古文：缁布冠，蔡邕云即委貌冠也。
现代文：缁布冠，蔡邕说就是委貌冠。
English: The cloth crown, Cai Wei said, is the crown.

古文：太古冠布，齐则缁之。
现代文：最早时用普通的布，齐人将其染黑。
English: At first, ordinary cloth was used, but the Qi people dyed it black.

古文：缁布冠，始冠之冠也。
现代文：缁布冠，是最初有冠时的冠。
English: Cloth crown, is the original crown when there is a crown crown.

古文：其制有四形，一似武冠，又一似进贤，其一上方其下如帻颜，其一刺上而方下。
现代文：它有四种形制，一种像武冠；另一种像进贤冠；有一种上面方，下面像帧颜；有一种上面尖下面方。
English: It has four kinds of shapes, one is like a crown of arms; another is like a crown of merit; there is an upper part and a lower part like a frame; there is an upper point and a lower part.

古文：行乡射礼则公卿委貌冠，以皁绢为之。
现代文：行乡射礼时公卿就戴委貌冠，用皂色绢做成。
English: When the court nobles went to the countryside to give the imperial salute, they wore a ceremonial crown, made of soap-colored enamel.

古文：形如覆杯，与皮弁同制，长七寸，高四寸。
现代文：形状像扣着的杯子，和皮弁的样式相同，长七寸，高四寸。
English: Shaped like a clasped cup, it is the same style as the skin valve, seven inches long and four inches high.

古文：衣黑而裳素，其中衣以皁缘领袖。
现代文：上衣是黑的而下裳是素色，中衣用皂色装饰领子和袖子的边缘。
English: The blouse is black and the skirt is plain, while the blouse has a soap-coloured border around the collar and sleeves.

古文：其执事之人皮弁，以鹿皮为之。
现代文：如果是管事的人就戴皮弁，用鹿皮制作。
English: If it is the person in charge, they wear a flap made of deerskin.

古文：进贤冠，古缁布遗象也，斯盖文儒者之服。
现代文：进贤冠，是由古代缁布冠演变而成的，遣一般是文人儒士戴的。
English: The Jinxian Crown evolved from the ancient cloth crown. It was generally worn by literati Confucianists.

古文：前高七寸，后高三寸，长八寸，有五梁、三梁、二梁、一梁。
现代文：前面高七寸，后面高三寸，长八寸，有五梁的、三梁的、二梁的、一梁的。
English: The front is seven inches high, the back is three inches high, and the length is eight inches, with five beams, three beams, two beams, and one beam.

古文：人主元服，始加缁布，则冠五梁进贤。
现代文：人主的元服，才有缁布，就戴五梁的进贤冠。
English: When a person's master celebrates his or her coming of age, he or she only has to put on a piece of cloth and wear a five-beam crown of merit.

古文：三公及封郡公、县公、郡侯、县侯、乡亭侯，则冠三梁。
现代文：三公和封了的郡公、县公、郡侯、县侯、乡亭侯，就戴三梁的。
English: The three princes and the county magistrate, the county magistrate, the county magistrate, the county magistrate, and the township magistrate, who were sealed, wear the three beams.

古文：卿、大夫、八座，尚书，关中内侯、二千石及千石以上，则冠两梁。
现代文：卿、大夫、八座尚书，关中关内侯、二千石以及千石以上，就戴两梁的。
English: Sirs, doctors, eight-star generals, governors of Guanzhong and Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong, lords of Guanzhong.

古文：中书郎、秘书丞郎、著作郎、尚书丞郎、太子洗马舍人、六百石以下至于令史、门郎、小史、并冠一梁。
现代文：中书郎、秘书丞郎、著作郎、尚书丞郎、太子洗马舍人、六百石以下至于令史、门郎、小史，都戴一梁的。
English: Chushiro, secretary churo, shoseki churo, shoseki churo, prince shima shonin, less than six hundred koku, as for reishi, monro, and koshi, they are all worth a fortune.

古文：汉建初中，太官令冠两梁，亲省御膳为重也。
现代文：汉代建初年问，太官令戴两梁的，因为负责御膳是很重要的。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, it was very important for the emperor to be in charge of the meal.

古文：博士两梁，崇儒也。
现代文：博士戴两梁的，是因为尊重儒者。
English: The reason why the Ph.D. is held in such high esteem is because of respect for Confucians.

古文：宗室刘氏亦得两梁冠，示加服也。
现代文：宗室刘氏也可以戴两梁的冠，是表示特别给的服饰待遇。
English: The Liu family can also wear a crown with two beams, which is a special clothing treatment.

古文：武冠，一名武弁，一名大冠，一名繁冠，一名建冠，一名笼冠，即古之惠文冠。
现代文：武冠，又名武弁，又名大冠，又名繁冠，又名建冠，又名笼冠，就是古代的惠文冠。
English: Wu Guan, also known as Wu Ben, also known as Big Guan, also known as Traditional Guan, also known as Jian Guan, also known as Cage Guan, is the ancient Huiwen Guan.

古文：或曰赵惠文王所造，因以为名。
现代文：传说是赵惠文王发明的，因此用作冠的名称。
English: Legend has it that it was invented by King Zhao Huiwen, hence the name of the crown.

古文：亦云，惠者蟪也，其冠文轻细如蝉翼，故名惠文。
现代文：另有一种说法，惠就是蟪，这种冠轻而纹样细得像蝉翼，所以叫做惠文。
English: There is another saying that Hui is a cormorant, this crown is light and the pattern is thin like a cicada's wing, so it is called Huiwen cormorant.

古文：或云，齐人见千岁涸泽之神，名曰庆忌，冠大冠，乘小车，好疾驰，因象其冠而服焉。
现代文：又据说，查地的人见到干涸上千年的沼泽中的神，名叫庆忌，戴着大冠，乘着小车，喜欢迅疾地奔驰，于是模仿他的冠做出来戴。
English: It is also said that the people who investigated the land saw a deity in the swamp that had been dried up for thousands of years, named Qingyi, wearing a large crown, riding a carriage, and liking to drive fast, so they imitated his crown and wore it.

古文：汉幸臣闳孺为侍中，皆服大冠。
现代文：漠代的幸臣闺孺担任侍中，都戴大冠。
English: Empress Dowager Sukenobu of the Musashi era served as a chambermaid and wore a large crown.

古文：天子元服亦先加大冠，左右侍臣及诸将军武官通服之。
现代文：天子的帽子也是光戴大冠，左右侍臣以及各将军武官都戴它。
English: The Son of Heaven's cap is also worn with a large crown, and it is worn by the attendants on the right and left as well as by the generals and military attachés.

古文：侍中、常侍则加金珰，附蝉为饰，插以貂毛，黄金为竿，侍中插左，常侍插右。
现代文：侍中、常侍戴的就加上金瑺，用附蝉做装饰，插上貂毛，用黄金做竿，侍中插左边，常侍插右边。
English: If worn by a chambermaid or regular attendant, a gold brooch is added, a cicada is used as decoration, a mane is inserted, and gold is used as a rod. The chambermaid inserts it on the left, and the regular attendant inserts it on the right.

古文：胡广曰： 昔赵武灵王为胡服，以金貂饰首。
现代文：胡广说： 从前趟武灵王穿胡服，用金貂装饰帽子。
English: Hu Guang said: Once upon a time, Wuling Wang wore Hu clothing and decorated his hat with gold braid.

古文：秦灭赵，以其君冠赐侍臣。 
现代文：秦国减了赵国，把赵国国君的冠赐给了侍臣。 
English: Qin State reduced Zhao State and gave the crown of the sovereign of Zhao State to the attendant.

古文：应劭《汉官》云： 说者以为金取刚强，百炼不耗。
现代文：应劭《汉宫》上说： 评论的人认为金象征刚强，百炼而不损耗。
English: In response, "Han Gong" said: Reviewers believe that gold symbolizes strength, refinement without loss.

古文：蝉居高饮清，口在掖下。
现代文：蝉在高处居留而饮的是清露，嘴巴却藏在腋下。
English: The cicada stays high and drinks dew, but hides its mouth under its beak.

古文：貂内劲悍而外柔缛。 
现代文：貂是内在裹强劲而外表柔和细密。 
English: The cocoon is strong on the inside and soft and fine on the outside.

古文：又以蝉取清高饮露而不食，貂则紫蔚柔润而毛采不彰灼，金则贵其宝莹，于义亦有所取。
现代文：又有人认为蝉取它清高饮露而不吃别的，貂取它紫蔚柔润而毛色光采不耀眼分明，金则看重它宝贵晶莹，从道理上说也可取。
English: Some people also think that cicadas take it to drink clear and high dew and do not eat anything else, take it to be purple and soft and the fur color is not dazzlingly bright, and gold values its precious crystal, and it can also be taken reasonably.

古文：或以为北土多寒，胡人常以貂皮温额，后世效此，遂以附冠。
现代文：有的人认为北方地区多寒气，胡人常常用貂皮暖额，后世的人仿效这一点，于是用来附在冠上。
English: Some people think that the northern regions are colder, and the Hu people often use mink fur to warm their foreheads. Later generations imitated this, so it was used to attach to the crown.

古文：汉貂用赤黑色，王莽用黄貂，各附服色所尚也。
现代文：汉用赤黑色的貂，王莽用黄色的貂，各自和所推崇的衣服颜色相符。
English: Han uses red and black socks, Wang Mang uses yellow socks, each of which matches the color of the clothes they admire.

古文：高山冠，一名侧注，高九寸，铁为卷梁，制似通天。
现代文：高山冠，又名侧注，高九寸，用铁做卷梁，形似通天冠。
English: High mountain crown, also known as side note, nine inches high, made of iron coiled beam, shaped like a crown.

古文：顶直竖，不斜却，无山述展筒。
现代文：顶部直竖着，不向后斜，没有山述展筒等装饰。
English: The top is upright, not tilted backwards, and there is no display tube or other decoration.

古文：高山者，《诗》云 高山仰止 ，取其矜庄宾远者也。
现代文：之所以叫高山，《诗经》上说 高山仰止 ，取它的矜持庄重而能使远方的人来归服。
English: The reason why it is called a high mountain, according to the Book of Songs, is that it is lofty and dignified, and can make people from far away submit to it.

古文：中外官、谒者、谒者仆射所服。
现代文：中外官、谒者、谒者仆射戴它。
English: Chinese and foreign officials, dignitaries, and dignitaries' servants wear it.

古文：胡广曰： 高山，齐王冠也。
现代文：胡广说： 高山，是齐国的王冠。
English: Hu Guang said: High mountains are the crown of Qi.

古文：傅曰 桓公好高冠大带 。
现代文：《传》上说： 桓公喜欢高冠和大带 。
English: "Biography" said: Kan-gong likes high crowns and large belts.

古文：秦灭齐，以其君冠赐谒者近臣。 
现代文：秦国灭了齐国，把齐国国君的冠赐给谒者等近臣。 
English: Qin State annihilated Qi State and gave the crown of the sovereign of Qi State to his closest vassals.

古文：应劭曰： 高山，今法冠也，秦行人使官亦服之。 
现代文：应劭说： 高山，就是现在的法冠，秦国的外交使者也戴它。 
English: Ying Yao said: Takayama is the current crown of law, and Qin's diplomatic envoys also wear it.

古文：而《汉官仪》云 乘舆冠高山之冠，飞翮之缨 ，然则天子亦有时服焉。
现代文：可是《汉宫仪》说 皇帝戴高山冠，用飞翮做缨 ，造就是说天子有时也戴这种冠。
English: However, the "Han Gongyi" says that the emperor wears a high mountain crown, made of flying reeds, which means that the emperor sometimes wears this kind of crown.

古文：《傅子》曰： 魏明帝以其制似通天、远游，故改令卑下。 
现代文：《傅子》说： 魏明帝因为它的形制类似通天冠、远游冠，所以下令把它改成比较简陋的。 
English: "Fu Zi" said: Because its shape is similar to the crown of heaven and the crown of wandering, Wei Mingdi ordered it to be changed to a relatively simple one.

古文：法冠，一名柱后，或谓之獬豸冠。
现代文：法冠，又叫柱后，有人称它为獬豸冠。
English: Law crown, also known as post crown, some people call it crown.

古文：高五寸，以縰为展筒。
现代文：高五寸，用纵做展筒。
English: Five inches high, with a longitudinal barrel.

古文：铁为柱卷，取其不曲挠也。
现代文：用铁做柱卷，取它不会曲挠的性质。
English: And he made the pillar of iron without any crookedness.

古文：侍御史、廷尉正监平，凡执法官皆服之。
现代文：侍御史、廷尉正监平，凡是执法官员都戴它。
English: It is worn by the Grand Chamberlain, the Lieutenant of the Court, and all law enforcement officials.

古文：或谓獬豸神羊，能触邪佞。
现代文：有人说獬豸是神羊，能够识别并去抵触邪佞的人。
English: Some people say that baboons are divine sheep, able to recognize and resist evil people.

古文：《异物志》云： 北荒之中，有兽名獬豸，一角，性别曲直。
现代文：《异物志》说： 北部荒野中，有一种野兽名叫獬豸，一只角，本性能分辨是非曲直。
English: "Stranger Things" says: In the northern wilderness, there is a beast called a stork, a horned creature with the ability to tell right from wrong.

古文：见人斗，触不直者。
现代文：见人相斗，就用角顶无理的一方。
English: If you see people fighting, take the side that is unreasonable.

古文：闻人争，咋不正者。
现代文：听到有人争论，就对不正确的一方大声吼叫。
English: If you hear someone arguing, yell at the wrong person.

古文：楚王尝获此兽，因象其形以制衣冠。 
现代文：楚王曾经得到这种兽，于是模仿它的样子来制成衣冠。 
English: King Chu once got this beast, so he imitated its appearance to make a crown.

古文：胡广曰： 《春秋左氏传》晋侯观于军府，见钟仪，曰 南冠而絷者谁也 ？
现代文：胡广说： 《春秋左氏传》记载晋侯在军府视察，见到钟仪，说 戴着南冠而被绑起来的人是谁 ?
English: Hu Guang said: "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography" records that Jin Hou inspected the military headquarters, saw the clock, and said, "Who is the person wearing the Southern Crown and tied up?"

古文：南冠即楚冠。
现代文：南冠就是楚冠。
English: Nanquan is Chuquan.

古文：秦灭楚，以其冠服赐执法臣也。 
现代文：秦国灭了楚国，把楚国的这种冠服赐给了执法的臣子。 
English: Qin wiped out the state of Chu and gave this crowned robe of the state of Chu to the courtiers who enforced the law.

古文：长冠，一名齐冠。
现代文：长冠，又叫齐冠。
English: Changguan, also known as Qi Guan.

古文：高七寸，广三寸，漆纚为之，制如版，以竹为里。
现代文：高七寸，宽三寸，用有漆的绳纱做成，形制像版，用竹子做裹子。
English: Seven inches high and three inches wide, it is made of lacquered rope yarn, shaped like a picture frame, and wrapped in bamboo.

古文：汉高祖微时，以竹皮为此冠，其世因谓刘氏冠。
现代文：漠高祖显贵以前，用竹皮做这种冠，汉代因此称它为刘氏冠。
English: Before Mogao ancestors were prominent, they used bamboo skin to make this kind of crown, so the Han Dynasty called it Liu's crown.

古文：后除竹用漆纚。
现代文：后来不用竹而用有漆的绳纱。
English: Later, lacquered rope was used instead of bamboo.

古文：司马彪曰： 长冠盖楚制。
现代文：司马彪说： 长冠是楚国发明的。
English: Sima Biao said: The long crown was invented by the State of Chu.

古文：人间或谓之鹊尾冠，非也。
现代文：人间有的称之为鹊尾冠，是不对的。
English: Some people call it the iris crown, which is incorrect.

古文：救日蚀则服长冠，而祠宗庙诸祀冠之。
现代文：救食的时候就戴长冠，此外祠祭宗庙等各种祭祀时戴它。
English: The long crown is worn when helping with food, and in addition, it is worn during various rituals such as ancestral shrines and temples.

古文：此高祖所造，后世以为祭服，尊敬之至也。 
现代文：这是高祖造的，后代用作祭服，是非常尊敬的。 
English: It was made by Gao Zu, and has been used as sacrificial clothing by subsequent generations. It is highly respected.

古文：建华冠，以铁为柱卷，贯大铜珠九枚，古用杂木珠，原宪所冠华冠是也。
现代文：建华冠，用铁做柱卷，穿上九枚大铜珠，古代用杂木珠，原宪戴的华冠就是这种。
English: The crown is made of iron, with nine large bronze beads. In ancient times, wooden beads were used. The original crown was of this type.

古文：又《春秋左氏传》郑子臧好聚鹬冠，谓建华是也。
现代文：另外《春秋左氏传》记载的郑国的子臧喜欢聚鹬冠，指的就是建华冠。
English: In addition, Zheng Guo's grandson, who is recorded in "The Biography of Spring and Autumn Zuo," likes to collect crowns, which refers to the Jianhua crown.

古文：祀天地、五郊、明堂，舞人服之。
现代文：祭祀天地、五郊、明堂时，舞人戴它。
English: Dancers wear it when performing rituals for heaven and earth, the five suburbs, and Myeongdong.

古文：汉《育命舞》乐人所服。
现代文：漠代的《育命舞》的乐人戴它。
English: It was worn by the musicians of the "Ikumei Dance" of the Musashi era.

古文：方山冠，其制似进贤。
现代文：方山冠，它的样式像进贤冠。
English: Fangshan crown, its style is similar to Jinxian crown.

古文：郑展曰： 方山冠，以五采縠为之。 
现代文：邓展说： 方山冠，用五彩的毂制作。 
English: Deng Zhan said: Fangshan crown, made with colorful enamel.

古文：汉《大予》、《八佾》、《五行》乐人所服，冠衣各如其行方之色而舞焉。
现代文：汉代的《大予》、《八佾》、《五行》的乐人戴它，冠和衣服的颜色分别按它们所处的五行方位的颜色来定，然后穿着跳舞。
English: The musicians of the Han Dynasty's "Great Offering," "Eight Cymbals" and "Five Elements" wore it. The color of the crown and the clothes were determined according to the color of the five elements they were in, and then they danced wearing it.

古文：巧士冠，前高七寸，要后相通，直竖。
现代文：巧士冠，前面高七寸，腰和后面相通，直竖着的。
English: A crown, seven inches high at the front, connected at the waist and at the back, standing upright.

古文：此冠不常用，汉氏惟郊天，黄门从官四人冠之；在卤簿中，夹乘舆车前，以备宦者四星。
现代文：这种冠不常戴，漠代衹有在郊祀天的时候，四名黄门从官戴它；在出行的仪仗队列中，夹在皇帝车前，用来表示具备了宦者的四星。
English: This kind of crown is not often worn. In the desert dynasties, four Yellow Gate officials wore it in the suburbs when they were worshiping Heaven. In the honor guard procession on the road, it was placed in front of the emperor's car to show the four stars of those who had the crown.

古文：或云，扫除从官所服。
现代文：有的说，是扫除之类的从官戴的。
English: Some say that it is to sweep away officials and the like.

古文：却非冠，高五寸，制似长冠。
现代文：却非冠，高五寸，形制像长冠。
English: But it is not a crown. It is five inches high and shaped like a long crown.

古文：宫殿门吏仆射冠之。
现代文：宫殿的门吏仆射戴它。
English: The palace's doorkeepers wear it.

古文：负赤幡，青翅燕尾，诸仆射幡皆如之。
现代文：冠后有赤幡，青色帽翅燕尾形装饰，各仆射的幡都像这样。
English: At the back of the crown there is a red flag, the blue wings of the cap are decorated in the shape of a swallow's tail, and the flags of all the minions are like this.

古文：却敌冠，前高四寸，通长四寸，后高三寸，制似进贤。
现代文：却敌冠，前面高四寸，整个长四寸，后面高三寸，形状像进贤冠。
English: But the enemy crown, four inches high in front, four inches long, three inches high behind, shaped like a crown.

古文：凡当殿门卫士服之。
现代文：凡是在殿门值班的卫士都戴它。
English: All the guards on duty at the palace gate wear it.

古文：樊哙冠，广九寸，高七寸，前后出各四寸，制似平冕。
现代文：樊啥冠，宽九寸，高七寸，前后各伸出四寸，形状像平冕。
English: The crown is nine inches wide and seven inches high, with four inches protruding from the front and back. It is shaped like a crown.

古文：昔楚汉会于鸿门，项籍图危高祖，樊哙常持铁楯，闻急，乃裂裳苞楯，戴以为冠，排入羽营，因数羽罪，汉王乘间得出。
现代文：昔日楚汉在鸿门相会，项籍图谋害直塑，矾堕平时拿的是铁循，听说情况紧急，就撕裂衣裳包住栀，戴著作为冠，闯进项羽的营帐，接着指责项羽的罪过，汉王找个机会才逃离了那儿。
English: Once upon a time, Chu and Han met at Hongmen. They were plotting to kill each other. They usually carried iron rods. When they heard that the situation was urgent, they tore their clothes, wrapped the iron rods around themselves, wore them as crowns, broke into Xiang Yu's camp, and then blamed Xiang Yu for his sins. Han Wang only fled there when he found an opportunity.

古文：后人壮其意，乃制冠象焉。
现代文：后人认为樊啥意气壮勇，就制作冠来模仿他。
English: Later generations thought that he was very spirited and made crowns to imitate him.

古文：凡殿门司马卫士服之。
现代文：凡是殿门司马卫士都戴它。
English: All the palace guards and horse guards wear it.

古文：术氏冠，前圆，吴制，差池四重。
现代文：术氏冠，前面圆，吴国制，参差有四层。
English: Zhushi crown, round at the front, made in the State of Wu, with four uneven layers.

古文：赵武灵王好服之。
现代文：趟武灵王喜欢戴它。
English: Wu Ling Wang likes to wear it.

古文：或曰，楚庄王复仇冠是也。
现代文：有人说，这是楚庄王的复仇冠。
English: Some people say that this is the revenge crown of the King of Chu.

古文：鹖冠，加双鹖尾，竖插两边。
现代文：鹃冠，加一对鹛尾，竖着插在两边。
English: Crown of thorns, plus a pair of appendages, inserted vertically on both sides.

古文：鹖，鸟名也，形类鹞而微黑，性果勇，其斗到死乃止。
现代文：鹛，是乌名，形状类似鸥而微黑，性格果敢勇猛，一旦相斗就到死才停下。
English: , is the name of Wu, the shape is similar to  and slightly black, the character is bold and brave, and once they fight, they will not stop until they die.

古文：上党贡之，赵武灵王以表显壮士。
现代文：上党进贡来这种东西，趟武灵王用它表彰壮士。
English: This is the kind of thing that the Shang Party pays tribute to, and Wu Ling Wang uses it to commend strong men.

古文：至秦汉，犹施之武人。
现代文：到了秦汉时期，还在军人中施用。
English: During the Qin and Han dynasties, it was still used by soldiers.

古文：皮弁，以鹿皮浅毛黄白色者为之。
现代文：皮弁，用浅毛黄白色的鹿皮制作。
English: Skin valve, made of light yellow-white deerskin.

古文：《礼》 王皮弁，会五采玉綦，象邸玉笄 ，谓之合皮为弁。
现代文：《礼》上说 王戴皮弁，用五彩绘制而用玉作瓒，象牙做邸玉做笄 ，叫做合皮为弁。
English: "Li" said that the king wore a leather valance, painted with five colors and made of jade, ivory made of jade, called a leather valance.

古文：其缝中名曰会，以采玉硃为綦。
现代文：中间的接缝名叫会，用彩色玉珠做璟，瓒，是结的意思。
English: The seam in the middle is called "kai" and is made of colored jade beads. "knot" means knot.

古文：綦，结也。天子五采，诸侯三采。邸，冠下抵也，象骨为之，音帝也。天子则缝十二，公侯伯七，子男五，孤四，卿大夫三。
现代文：天子用五彩，诸侯用三彩。邸，冠下部的抵，用象骨做成，音帝。天子的有十二缝，公的九缝，侯伯的七缝，子男的五缝，孤卿的四缝，卿大夫的三缝。
English: The son of heaven uses five colors, the princes use three colors. The residence, the arrival of the lower part of the crown, is made of elephant bone, and the emperor. The son of heaven has twelve seams, the duke nine seams, the lord seven seams, the son five seams, the lonely lord four seams, and the doctor three seams.

古文：韦弁，制似皮弁，顶上尖，韎草染之，色如浅绛。
现代文：韦弁，形制像皮弁，顶上尖，用干草染色，颜色类似浅绛。
English: clavicle, shaped like a skin flap, pointed at the top, dyed with hay, similar in colour to a light beak.

古文：爵弁，一名广冕。
现代文：雀弁，又叫广冕。
English: Sparrow's beak, also known as wide crown.

古文：高八寸，长尺二寸，如爵形，前小后大。
现代文：高八寸，长一尺二寸，其形如雀，前面小后面大。
English: Eight inches high, one foot two inches long, its shape is like a sparrow, small in front and large behind.

古文：增其上似爵头色。
现代文：上面用的缯类似雀头的颜色。
English: The beak used above is similar to the colour of a sparrow's head.

古文：有收持笄，所谓夏收殷哻者也。
现代文：以收束发再插上笄，造就是所谓夏代的收冠屋巡的辱冠。
English: It is the so-called summer of the crown of the house inspection.

古文：祠天地、五郊、明堂，《云翘舞》乐人服之。
现代文：祠祭天地、五郊、明堂时，表演《云翘舞》的乐人戴它。
English: It is worn by musicians performing the "Cloud Dance" at the ancestral hall festival of Heaven, Earth, Suburbia and Myeongdong.

古文：帻者，古贱人不冠者之服也。
现代文：愤，是古代地位卑贱而不戴冠的人戴的。
English: It was worn in ancient times by people of lowly status who did not wear crowns.

古文：汉元帝额有壮发，始引帻服之。
现代文：汉五童额头上有粗硬的头发，才开始用帧使它们服贴。
English: Han Wudong had coarse hair on his forehead before he started to frame it.

古文：王莽顶秃，又加其屋也。
现代文：王差是秃顶，就又增高成屋形。
English: If the king is bald, he will grow taller and become a house.

古文：《汉注》曰，冠进贤者宜长耳，今介帻也。
现代文：《汉注》说，戴进贤冠时应该用长耳的帧，如今是用介帧。
English: "Hanshu" said that when wearing a virtuous crown, you should use a long-eared frame, but now it is an intermediate frame.

古文：冠惠文者宜短耳，今平上帻也。
现代文：戴惠文冠时应该用短耳的帧，如今是用平上帧。
English: When wearing the Huiwen crown, you should use the short-eared frame, but now you should use the flat-top frame.

古文：始时各随所宜，遂因冠为别。
现代文：开初是各随所宜，于是根据不同的冠而有区别。
English: The opening is arbitrary, so there are differences according to different crowns.

古文：介帻服文吏，平上帻服武官也。童子帻无屋者，示不成人也。
现代文：文官戴介帧，武官戴平上帧。童子的帧没有屋，是为了表示还没有成人。
English: Civil servants wear the middle frame, military officers wear the top frame. The boy's frame has no roof, to indicate that he is not yet an adult.

古文：又有纳言帻，帻后收又一重，方三寸。
现代文：另外有纳言帻，帧在收的后面又一层，三寸见方。
English: In addition, there is a narrower frame, and the frame has another layer behind the closed one, three inches square.

古文：又有赤帻，骑吏、武吏、乘舆鼓吹所服。
现代文：又有赤帧，骑吏、武吏、乘舆鼓吹所用的。
English: There are also red frames, used by cavalry officers, military officers, and propagandists.

古文：救日蚀，文武官皆免冠著帻，对朝服，示武威也。
现代文：救食的时候，文武官员都去掉冠而戴着帧，配着朝服，用来表示威武。
English: When rescuing food, civil and military officials all removed their crowns and wore frames, matching the imperial robes, to show their might.

古文：汉仪，立秋日猎，服缃帻。
现代文：坠娃的礼仪，立秋逭天打猎，戴缃愤。
English: The etiquette of the baby's birth is to go hunting in the early autumn and wear an apron.

古文：及江左，哀帝从博士曹弘之等议，立秋御读令，改用素白。
现代文：到了塞置时期，直童听从博士萱至丝等人的建议，立秋这天进呈月令，改用素白蛤。
English: When it came to the setting period, Zhi Tong followed the advice of Dr. Zou Zhisi and others to change the lunar calendar on this day at the beginning of autumn and switch to plain chalk.

古文：案汉末王公名士多委王服，以幅巾为雅，是以袁绍、崔钧之徒，虽为将帅，皆著缣巾。
现代文：考汉末的王公名士大多不穿王服，而以戴幅巾为风雅，因此袁绍、崔钩等人，虽然身为将帅，都戴缣巾。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, most of the princes and celebrities did not wear royal robes, but wore scarves for style. Therefore, Yuan Shao, Cui Hook and others, although they were generals, all wore scarves.

古文：魏武以天下凶荒，资财乏匮，拟古皮弁，裁缣帛以为，合乎简易随时之义，以色别其贵贱，本施军饰，非为国容也。
现代文：魏武帝由于天下闹灾荒，资金财物十分匮乏，就仿照古代的皮弁，裁缣帛作为蛤，符合简便易行顺应时势的道理，用颜色区别贵贱，本来是用于军人的服饰上，不是作为国家的服饰标准。
English: Emperor Wu of the Wei Dynasty, due to the world-wide disaster and scarcity of funds and property, imitated the ancient flapper, cut the crotch as a crotch, in line with the principle of simple and easy to comply with the current situation, and used color to distinguish between high and low. It was originally used for military clothing, not as a national clothing standard.

古文：徐爰曰： 俗说本未有岐，荀文若巾之行，触树枝成岐，谓之为善，因而弗改。 
现代文：徐爰说： 传说蛤本来没有分叉，荀文若戴着它走路，碰到树枝而形成分叉，认为不错，沿用下来没有改变。 
English: Xu Wei said: According to the legend, there was originally no bifurcation of the yakitori. If Yu Wen walked while wearing it, he would bump into a branch and form a bifurcation. He thought it was good, and it has not changed since it was used.

古文：今通以为庆吊服。
现代文：如今都作为庆贺吊唁一类的服饰。
English: Nowadays, they are worn as a kind of celebratory and condolence attire.

古文：巾，以葛为之，形如而横著之，古尊卑共服也。
现代文：巾，用葛作成，形状像蛤而横着戴，古代是不分尊卑都戴的。
English: Scarf, made of kudzu, shaped like a cocoon and worn sideways. In ancient times, it was worn by all, high and low alike.

古文：故汉末妖贼以黄为巾，世谓黄巾贼。
现代文：所以漠末的妖贼们用黄色的巾，世人称之为黄巾贼。
English: Therefore, the bandits in the desert wear yellow scarves, and the world calls them yellow scarf thieves.

古文：帽名犹冠也，义取于蒙覆其首，其本纚也。
现代文：帽这一名称相当于冠，意思是蒙在头上的，本来是缆。
English: The name of the cap is equivalent to the crown, which means that it is put on the head, originally it was a rope.

古文：古者冠无帻，冠下有纚，以缯为之。
现代文：古人戴冠时没有帧，冠下面有绳，用缯做的。
English: When the ancients wore crowns, they did not have a frame. There was a rope underneath the crown, made of reeds.

古文：后世施帻于冠，因或裁缨为帽。
现代文：后代人戴冠时有帧，因此有的人裁继而制成帽。
English: Subsequent generations wore crowns with frames, so some were cut and made into hats.

古文：自乘舆宴居，下至庶人无爵者皆服之。
现代文：上自皇帝宴居，下至庶人没有爵位的都戴它。
English: From the emperor's banquet, down to the commoner without a title, they all wear it.

古文：成帝咸和九年，制听尚书八座丞郎、门下三省侍官乘车，白低帏，出入掖门。
现代文：成帝咸和九年，规定允许尚书八座丞郎、门下三省侍官乘车时，戴白蛤用低帏，从掖门出入。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Chengxian's reign, it was stipulated that when Shangshu's eight sons and three provincial attendants rode in a carriage, they were allowed to enter and leave the carriage through the gate while wearing white coats and using low-heeled shoes.

古文：又，二宫直官著乌纱。
现代文：另外，二宫的当直官员戴乌纱恰。
English: In addition, Niimiya's on-duty officer Dai Usacha.

古文：然则往往士人宴居皆著矣。
现代文：然而常常是士人宴居时都戴蛤了。
English: However, it was often the nobles who wore the hakama at banquets.

古文：而江左时野人已著帽，人士亦往往而然，但其顶圆耳，后乃高其屋云。
现代文：可是束晋时期的山野村人已经知道戴帽了，一般人也常常那样戴，祇是帽子的顶是圆的罢了，后来才加高形成屋。
English: However, mountain villagers in the Sokjin period already knew how to wear hats, and ordinary people often wore them that way. The only difference was that the top of the hat was round. It was only later that it was made taller.

古文：汉制，自天子至于百官，无不佩剑，其后惟朝带剑。
现代文：漠代的制度，从天子到百官，没有不佩剑的，从那以后衹有上朝时带剑。
English: In the system of the desert dynasties, there was no one who did not wear a sword from the Son of Heaven to a hundred officials. From then on, there was no one who wore a sword when he ascended the throne.

古文：晋世始代之以木，贵者犹用玉首，贱者亦用蚌、金银、玳瑁为雕饰。
现代文：晋朝才开始用木制的替代，地位高的人还用玉做剑柄装饰，地位低的也用蟀、金银、玳瑁作为雕饰。
English: It was only during the Jin Dynasty that people began to use cinnamon instead of wood. High-ranking people also used jade to decorate their sword handles, while low-ranking people also used tungsten, gold, silver, and antimony as carvings.

古文：乘舆六玺，秦制也。
现代文：皇帝有六玺，是秦代的制度。
English: The emperor has six emperors, which is the system of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：曰 皇帝行玺 、 皇帝之玺 、 皇帝信玺 、 天子行玺 、 天子之玺 、 天子信玺 ，汉遵秦不改。
现代文：就是 皇帝行玺， 皇帝之玺 、 皇帝信玺 、 天子行玺 、 天子之玺 、 天子信玺 ，漠代沿用秦代的而没有改变。
English: That is, Emperor Xingjian, Emperor Zhijian, Emperor Xinjian, Heavenly Son Xingjian, Heavenly Son Zhijian, Heavenly Son Xinjian, and the Desert Dynasty continued to use the Qin Dynasty and did not change.

古文：又有秦始皇蓝田玉玺，螭兽纽，在六玺之外，文曰 受天之命，皇帝寿昌 。
现代文：另外有秦始皇的蓝田玉玺，纽是螭兽形，在六玺以外，玺文是 受天之命，皇帝寿昌 。
English: In addition, there is the Lantian Jade Urn of the First Emperor of Qin. The knot is the animal shape of the Urn. In addition to the six Urns, the Urn is the order of Heaven, the Emperor Shuchang.

古文：汉高祖佩之，后世名曰传国玺，与斩白蛇剑俱为乘舆所宝。
现代文：漠高祖佩用它，后代叫做传国玺，和斩白蛇的剑一起都是皇帝珍藏的。
English: It was used by Mogao Zupei, and later generations called it Chuan Guojun, and it was treasured by emperors along with the sword used to cut the white snake.

古文：斩白蛇剑至惠帝时武库火烧之，遂亡。
现代文：斩白蛇的剑到惠文帝时因为武库着火烧了，于是就没有了。
English: When Emperor Huiwen received the sword for cutting the white snake, it was no longer there because the arsenal had caught fire.

古文：及怀帝没胡，传国玺没于刘聪，后又没于石勒。
现代文：到怀帝被胡人俘虏，传国玺落到刘聪手裹，后来又落到互塑手裹。
English: When Emperor Huai was captured by the Hu people, the imperial scepter fell into the hands of Liu Cong, and later it fell into the hands of the mutual molding.

古文：及石季龙死，胡乱，穆帝世乃还江南。
现代文：等到互垩违死后，胡人内乱，睦的时候才回到江南。
English: He did not return to the south of the Yangtze River until after the death of Mutsuhiro, when there was a civil war between the Hu people and Mutsuhiro.

古文：革带，古之鞶带也，谓之鞶革，文武众官牧守丞令下及驺寺皆服之。
现代文：革带，就是古代的肇带，叫做擎革，文武百官牧守丞令下到鸥寺都用它。
English: The leather belt, that is, the ancient sash, is called qingge. It was used by hundreds of civil and military officials under the command of Mu Mu Shou Zheng when they went to the Jiu Temple.

古文：其有囊绶，则以缀于革带，其戎服则以皮络带代之。
现代文：如果有装印绶的囊，就把它缀在革带上，如果是戎服就用皮络带代替它。
English: If there is a bag with a seal, attach it to the leather belt, if it is a military uniform, replace it with a leather belt.

古文：八坐尚书荷紫，以生紫为袷囊，缀之服外，加于左肩。
现代文：八坐尚书负紫色囊，用生紫做的夹囊，缀在朝服外面，背在左肩上。
English: The eight-seated purple bag, made of raw purple, is embroidered on the outside of the morning dress, and is worn on the left shoulder.

古文：昔周公负成王，制此服衣，至今以为朝服。
现代文：从前周公背负成王，开始做出这种服饰，到今作为朝服。
English: From the previous Zhou Gong, who carried the king on his back, this kind of clothing began to be made, and it is still used as a court dress.

古文：或云汉世用盛奏事，负之以行，未详也。
现代文：有人说汉代用它装上奏的文件，背着便于行走，究竟如何不清楚。
English: Some people say that the Han Dynasty used it to load and play documents, and it was easy to walk on its back. It is not clear how exactly.

古文：车前五百者，卿行旅从，五百人为一旅。
现代文：所谓车前五百，卿出行有旅随从，五百人是一旅。
English: The so-called front five hundred, Sir travel with travel entourage, five hundred people is a journey.

古文：汉氏一统，故去其人，留其名也。
现代文：漠代一统天下，所以不再用那些人，而留下了这个名称。
English: The Musashi era ruled the world, so those people were no longer used, but the name remained.

古文：袴褶之制，未详所起，近世凡车驾亲戎、中外戒严服之。
现代文：裤褶的制度，还不清楚它的起源，近代凡是御驾亲征，内外戒严时穿它。
English: The trouser crotch system is still unclear about its origin. In modern times, it is usually worn when driving a car, and it is worn when there is a state of siege.

古文：服无定色，冠黑帽，缀紫摽，摽以缯为之，长四寸，广一寸，腰有络带以代鞶。
现代文：服装没有规定的颜色，戴黑色帽子，缀着紫色的摞，摞是用缯做的，长四寸，宽一寸，腰上有络带以代替擎。
English: The costume has no set color, but he wears a black hat with a purple crest, the crest is made of ermine, four inches long, one inch wide, and there is a sash around his waist to replace the crest.

古文：中官紫摽，外官绛摽。
现代文：中官缀紫揼，外官缀绛揼。
English: Second-rank officers wear purple ribbons, while non-commissioned officers wear white ribbons.

古文：又有纂严戎服而不缀摽，行留文武悉同。
现代文：另外有戒严时的戎服而不缀标的，出行居守文武官员都一样。
English: In addition, military uniforms worn during martial law without insignia are the same as those worn by civil and military officials.

古文：其畋猎巡幸，则惟从官戎服带鞶革，文官不下缨，武官脱冠。
现代文：如果是畋猎巡视，就祇有随从官员穿戎服带擎革，文官不下缨，武官脱冠。
English: If it is a hunting patrol, only the accompanying officials will wear military uniforms with leather belts, civil servants will not wear shackles, and military attachés will lose their crowns.

古文：汉制，一岁五郊，天子与执事者所服各如方色，百官不执事者服常服绛衣以从。
现代文：汉代制度，一年之中五次郊祀，天子和主事的官员各按五方的颜色穿衣服，百官等不主事的官员穿平常的服装和绛色衣随从。
English: According to the Han Dynasty system, there were five suburban religious services in a year. The emperor and the officials in charge wore clothes according to the colors of the five directions, while the officials who were not in charge wore ordinary clothes and the followers wore navy blue.

古文：魏秘书监秦静曰： 汉氏承秦，改六冕之制，但玄冠绛衣而已。 
现代文：魏秘书监秦静说： 汉氏承继秦，改掉六冕的制度，衹用玄冠绛衣。 
English: Qin Jing, a Wei secretary, said: The Han Dynasty succeeded the Qin Dynasty, changed the six-crown system, and used the black crown to wear.

古文：魏已来名为五时朝服，又有四时朝服，又有朝服。
现代文：魏以来叫做五时朝服，又有四时朝服，又有朝服。
English: Since the Wei Dynasty, it has been called the five o'clock morning dress, the four o'clock morning dress, and the morning dress.

古文：自皇太子以下随官受给。
现代文：自皇太子以下根据官职授予。
English: From the Crown Prince downwards, it is awarded according to official position.

古文：百官虽服五时朝服，据今止给四时朝服，阙秋服。
现代文：百官虽然应服五时朝服，根据现在的情况看来衹给了四时朝服，缺了秋服。
English: Although the officials should wear the morning dress at 5 o'clock, according to the current situation, it seems that they were given the morning dress at 4 o'clock, and the autumn dress was missing.

古文：三年一易。
现代文：每三年更换一次。
English: They are replaced every three years.

古文：诸假印绶而官不给鞶囊者，得自具作，其但假印不假绶者，不得佩绶鞶，古制也。
现代文：凡是代理行使职权而官位不够得到擎囊的，可以自己备办，如果是祇代用印信而不代用绶的，不能佩绶。擎，是古代的制度。
English: If an agent exercises his authority but does not have enough official rank to obtain a certificate, he can prepare it himself. If he only uses a letter instead of a seal, he cannot receive a certificate. The certificate is an ancient system.

古文：汉世著鞶囊者，侧在腰间，或谓之傍囊，或谓之绶囊，然则以紫囊盛绶也。
现代文：汉代带肇囊的，侧佩在腰间，又叫做傍囊，又叫做绶囊，造就是说用紫囊装着绶。
English: Han Dynasty with a zhaozhou bag, worn on the side at the waist, also known as a side bag, also known as a gourd bag, which means wearing a gourd with a purple bag.

古文：或盛或散，各有其时。
现代文：有时装着有时不装着，分别都曾经有遇。
English: Sometimes wearing and sometimes not wearing, they have all encountered each other.

古文：笏，古者贵贱皆执笏，其有事则搢之于腰带，所谓搢绅之士者，搢笏而垂绅带也。
现代文：笏，古时候不分贵贱都执笏，如果有事情就插在腰带上，所谓捂绅之士，就是插着笏而垂着绅带。
English: In ancient times, both the nobility and the commoners wore a yakitori, and if something happened, it was put on the belt. The so-called "gentleman's yakitori" was a yakitori with a yakitori hanging from the gentleman's belt.

古文：绅垂长三尺。
现代文：绅带下垂部分长三尺。
English: The hanging part of the girdle is three feet long.

古文：笏者，有事则书之，故常簪笔，今之白笔是其遗象。
现代文：笏，有事情就记在上面，所以经常用笔做簪子，如今的白笔就是由此演变而来的。
English: , some things are written on it, so I often use a pen to make dice. Today's white pen evolved from this.

古文：三台五省二品文官簪之，王、公、侯、伯、子、男、卿尹及武官不簪，加内侍位者乃簪之。
现代文：三台五省二品文官用簪子，王、公、侯、伯、子、男、卿尹和武官不用簪子，加有内侍地位的人才用这种簪子。
English: Three provinces, five provinces, and two grades of civil servants use tongs. Kings, princes, lords, great-grandfathers, sons, men, noblemen, and military officers do not need tongs, and only those with the status of inner servant use such tongs.

古文：手版即古笏矣。
现代文：手板就是古代的笏。
English: The baseboard is an ancient cymbal.

古文：尚书令、仆射、尚书手版头复有白笔，以紫皮裹之，名曰笏。
现代文：尚书令、仆射、尚书的手板头上又有白笔，用紫皮裹着，名叫笏。
English: There is also a white pen, wrapped in purple leather, on the tablet heads of Shang Shuling, Puxia and Shang Shuling, and it is called Zheng.

古文：皇太子金玺龟钮，硃黄绶，四采：赤、黄、缥、绀。
现代文：皇太子用的金玺有龟形钮，朱黄绶带，四种彩色：赤、黄、缥、绀。
English: The gold scepter used by the crown prince has a turtle-shaped knob, a vermilion scepter, and four colors: red, yellow, indigo, and crimson.

古文：给五时朝服、远游冠，介帻、翠緌。
现代文：赐给五时朝服、远游冠，介帧、翠矮。
English: At five o'clock, he was given a court dress, a traveling crown, an intermediate frame, and a chrysanthemum.

古文：佩瑜玉，垂组。
现代文：佩的是瑜玉，垂着组。
English: The one wearing it is Yu Yu, from the hanging group.

古文：硃衣绛纱襮，皁缘白纱，其中衣白曲领。
现代文：朱色上衣绛色纱领，皂色边白色纱，中衣是白色曲领。
English: The vermilion-coloured blouse has a satin-coloured neckline and a white soap-coloured border, while the blouse has a white collar.

古文：带剑，火珠素首。
现代文：带剑，剑柄用素裹着而火珠作装饰。
English: With a sword, the hilt is wrapped in fabric and decorated with fireballs.

古文：革带，玉钩燮兽头鞶囊。
现代文：用革带，玉钩和兽头擎囊。
English: With leather straps, ball hooks and animal head bags.

古文：其大小会、祠宗庙、朔望、五日还朝皆朝服，常还上宫则硃服，预上宫正会则于殿下脱剑舄。
现代文：大小朝会、祭祠宗庙、朔日望、五还朝等都穿朝服，平常回到上宫时就穿朱服，参预上宫的正式聚会就在殿阶下解剑脱舄。
English: Large and small morning gatherings, festivals, ancestral temples, New Year's Day, and the morning of the 5th day of the month all wear morning dress. When they usually return to the Upper Palace, they wear vermilion clothing, and when they attend formal gatherings in the Upper Palace, they take off their swords under the palace steps.

古文：又有三梁进贤冠。
现代文：另有三梁的进贤冠。
English: In addition, there are three beams of Jinxian crown.

古文：其侍祀则平冕九旒，衮衣九章，白纱绛缘中单，绛缯韠，采画织成衮带，金辟邪首，紫绿二色带，采画广领、曲领各一，赤舄绛袜。
现代文：如果是侍祀就戴九旒的平冕，装饰有九章的衮衣，白纱而有绛色边缘的中单，绛色缯制的鞸，织有彩画的衮带，用黄金做成辟邪的头形，紫和绿两种颜色的带，有彩画的宽领、曲领各一副，赤色舄绛色袜子。
English: In the case of attendants, they wear a plain crown with nine ribbons, a robe decorated with nine chapters, a white gauze with ochre-colored edges, an ochre-colored embroidered cape, a ribbon woven with colorful paintings, a head made of gold to ward off evil, a belt of two colors, purple and green, a pair of wide and curved collars with colorful paintings, and red ochre socks.

古文：若讲，则著介帻单衣。释奠，则远游冠，玄朝服，绛缘中单，绛袴袜，玄舄。
现代文：如果是讲习，就戴介帧穿单衣；如果是释奠，就戴远游冠，穿玄色朝服，绛色边缘的中单，绛色裤子和袜子，玄色舄。
English: If it is a seminar, wear a mediate frame and wear a singlet; if it is a commemoration, wear a long-distance crown, wear a dark-colored morning suit, a dark-colored mid-sleeve, dark-colored pants and socks, and dark-colored socks.

古文：若未加元服，则中舍人执冕从，介帻单衣玄服。
现代文：如果没有戴元服之类，就由中舍人手执冕随从，而戴介帧穿单衣玄服。
English: If there is no such thing as wearing the original costume, the attendant will be crowned by the middle-ranked attendant, and the middle-ranked attendant will wear a single dress.

古文：诸王金玺龟钮，纁硃绶，四采：硃、黄、缥、绀。
现代文：各王用的金玺有龟形钮，缜红色的绶，四种颜色：朱、黄、缥、钳。
English: The golden cymbals used by each king have turtle-shaped knobs, scarlet cymbals, and four colors: vermilion, yellow, indigo, and scarlet.

古文：五时朝服，远游冠介帻，亦有三梁进贤冠。
现代文：五时的朝服，戴远游冠和介帧，也有的戴三梁的进贤冠。
English: At five o'clock in the morning, they wear the imperial robe, the long-distance crown and the intermediate frame, and some also wear the three-beam crown of Jinxian.

古文：硃衣绛纱襮皁缘，中衣表素。
现代文：朱色衣绛色纱裸和皂色边缘，中衣面料为素色。
English: The vermilion-coloured hems of the dress are nude and the edges are soapy, while the fabric of the blouse is plain.

古文：革带，黑舄，佩山玄玉，垂组，大带。
现代文：革制的带，黑色的舄，佩的是山玄玉，垂有组，用大带。
English: Leather belt, black crotch, wearing a mountain gemstone, hanging with a group, with a large belt.

古文：若加余官，则服其加官之服也。
现代文：如果有其他的加官称号，就穿他加官的服装。
English: If there are any other additional officer titles, wear his or her additional officer attire.

古文：皇后谒庙，其服皁上皁下，亲蚕则青上缥下，皆深衣制，隐领，袖缘以绦。
现代文：皇后拜谒宗庙，服装是皂色上衣和皂色下裳，行亲蚕礼时就是青色上衣缥色下裳，都是深衣的式样，隐领，袖子边缘用绦装饰。
English: For the empress to visit the Ancestral Temple, the dress is a soap-colored blouse and a soap-colored petticoat, and when she performs the silk-sowing ceremony, it is a blue blouse and a dark-colored petticoat. They are all dark-colored styles, with hidden collars, and the edges of the sleeves are decorated with embroidery.

古文：首饰则假髻，步摇，俗谓之珠松是也，簪珥。
现代文：头饰假髻、步摇，就是俗话叫做珠松的，戴发簪与珥饰。
English: The headdress is fake and wobbly, that is, it is called bead loose as the saying goes, and it is adorned with a hairpin and braid.

古文：步摇以黄金为山题，贯白珠为支相缪。
现代文：步摇要用黄金作山题，用白珠串做支相绕。
English: For the shakuhachi, you should use gold for the mountain motif and strings of white beads to support each other.

古文：八爵九华，熊、兽、赤罴、天鹿、辟邪、南山丰大特六兽，诸爵兽皆以翡翠为毛羽，金题白珠榼，绕以翡翠为华。
现代文：有八爵九花，熊、虎、赤照、天鹿、辟邪、南山丰大特六兽，各种雀和兽都用翡翠做毛和羽，金题上用白珠做瑺，用翡翠环绕做成花。
English: There are eight jewels and nine flowers, the bear, the tiger, the red-light, the heavenly deer, the evil-eliminating, and the Nanshan Fengda special six beasts. All kinds of sparrows and beasts are made of jade for hair and feathers, with white beads on the gold theme, and with jade around to make flowers.

古文：元康六年，诏曰： 魏以来皇后蚕服皆以文绣，非古义也。
现代文：元康六年，韶书说： 魏以来皇后的蚕服都用文绣，不符合古义。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, the imperial edict said: Since the Wei Dynasty, the empress's silkworm clothes have been embroidered with patterns, which does not conform to the ancient meaning.

古文：今宜纯服青，以为永制。 
现代文：现在改为青色纯服，作为永久的制度。 
English: It has now been changed to plain blue uniforms as a permanent system.

古文：贵人、夫人、贵嫔，是为三夫人，皆金章紫绶，章文曰贵人、夫人、贵嫔之章。
现代文：贵人、夫人、贵嫔，这是三夫人，都用金章紫绶，章文叫做贵人、夫人、贵嫔之章。
English: Noblemen, ladies, and noblewomen, these are the three ladies, all with gold seals and purple ribbons. The inscriptions are called "Chapter of Noblemen, Ladies, and Noblewomen."

古文：佩于阗玉。
现代文：佩带于塞出产的玉。
English: Wearing a bead made in Saitama.

古文：淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、修华、修容、修仪、婕妤、容华、充华，是为九嫔，银印青绶，佩采瓄玉。
现代文：淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、修华、修容、修仪、婕妤、容华、充华，造就是九嫔，用银印青绶，佩带彩琐玉。
English: Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei.

古文：贵人、贵嫔、夫人助蚕，服纯缥为上与下，皆深衣制。
现代文：贵人、贵嫔、夫人协助行蚕礼，穿的上衣和下裳都是纯缥色的，都是深衣的式样。
English: Dignitaries, dignitaries, and their wives assist in performing the silkworm salute, wearing pure navy blue tops and bottoms, all of which are dark-colored.

古文：太平髻，七钅奠蔽髻，黑玳瑁，又加簪珥。
现代文：太平髻，用七朵金花遮蔽发髻，黑色玳瑁，再加上簪子和珥。
English: Taiping braid, with seven gold flowers covering the bun, black braid, plus braids and pigtails.

古文：九嫔及公主、夫人五钅奠，世妇三钅奠。
现代文：九嫔以及公主、夫人用五朵金花，世妇用三朵金花。
English: The Nine Immortals, the Princess and the Lady use five gold flowers, and the World Woman uses three gold flowers.

古文：助蚕之义，自古而然矣。
现代文：助蚕的道理，自古就是这样的。
English: The principle of helping silkworms has been the same since ancient times.

古文：皇太子妃金玺龟钮，纁硃绶，佩瑜玉。
现代文：皇太子妃用黄金玺龟形钮，缜红色绶带，佩的是瑜玉。
English: The crown princess wore a gold tortoise-shaped button, a scarlet ribbon, and a crown jewel.

古文：诸王太妃、妃、诸长公主、公主、封君金印紫绶，佩山玄玉。
现代文：各王太妃、王妃、各长公主、公主、封君都用黄金印紫色绶带，佩的是山玄玉。
English: All the kings, queens, eldest princesses, princesses, and princes wore gold-embroidered purple sashes, and the princesses wore yellow diamonds.

古文：长公主、公主见会，太平髻，七钅奠蔽髻。
现代文：长公主、公主上朝或临会，梳太平髻，用七朵金花遮蔽发髻。
English: The eldest princess and princesses go to the morning or attend the meeting, comb the Taiping braid, and cover the hair braid with seven golden flowers.

古文：其长公主得有步摇，皆有簪珥，衣服同制。
现代文：如果是长公主就可以有步摇，都可以有簪子和珥，衣服的式样相同。
English: If it is the eldest princess, she can have a crotch swing, can have braids and pigtails, and the dress style is the same.

古文：自公主、封君以上皆带绶，以彩组为绲带，各如其绶色，金辟邪首为带玦。
现代文：从公主、封君以上都带绶，用彩丝织成束带，分别和绶带的颜色保持一致，用黄金的辟邪兽头做带块。
English: From the princess to the crown prince and above, they all wear a ribbon, woven into a ribbon with colored silk, which is the same color as the ribbon, and made of gold with the head of an evil beast.

古文：郡公侯县公侯太夫人，夫人银印青绶，佩水苍玉，其特加乃金紫。
现代文：郡公侯或县公侯的太夫人、夫人用银印青绶，佩的是水苍玉，如果有特别加授称号的就用金印紫绶。
English: County dukes or the great-granddaughters and wives of county dukes used silver-stamped indigo dye, wore aquamarine dye, and used gold-stamped purple dye if they had a specially conferred title.

古文：公特进侯卿校世妇、中二千石二千石夫人绀缯帼，黄金龙首衔白珠，鱼须擿长一尺为簪珥。
现代文：公和特进侯卿校的世妇、中二千石和二千石的夫人戴绀色的缯制的帼，黄金龙头衔着白色珍珠，鱼须拢长达一尺做簪珥。
English: The maids of honor and the court ladies of the Houqing School, the middle-aged women of 2,000 koku and the women of 2,000 koku, wore navy-colored embroidered brooches, the gold dragon headdresses with white pearls, and the fish-shaped brooches with a length of one foot.

古文：入庙佐祭者皁绢上下。助蚕者缥绢上下，皆深衣制缘。
现代文：入宗庙辅佐祭祀的穿皂色绢制的上下裳，协助祭蚕神的穿缥色绢制的上下裳，都是深衣的式样和边饰。
English: Soap-coloured embroidered upper and lower robes worn to assist in the sacrificial rites at the ancestral temple, and embroidered upper and lower robes worn to assist in the sacrificial rites of the silkworm god, are all dark-coloured patterns and trimmings.

古文：自二千石夫人以上至皇后，皆以蚕衣为朝服。
现代文：自二千石夫人以上到皇后，都把祭蚕神时穿的衣服作为上朝时穿的朝服。
English: From the lady of more than two thousand koku to the empress, the clothes worn during the celebration of the silkworm god are regarded as the imperial robes worn during the last imperial court.

