古文：熊执易李约郑还古江陵士子郑畋章孝子发冢盗郑雍杨晟王殷
现代文：熊执易李约郑还古江陵士子郑畋章孝子发冢盗郑雍杨晟王殷
English: Xiong Xueyi Li You Zheng also ancient Jiangling scholar Zheng Yuanzhang filial son hairpin thief Zheng Yong Yang Xuan Wang Yin top

古文：熊执易
现代文：熊执易
English: Xiong Xiyi

古文：熊执易赴举，行次潼关。秋霖月余，滞于逆旅。
现代文：熊执易去京城参加科举考试，走到潼关，秋雨连绵下了一个多月，无法行走，滞留在旅店里。
English: Xiong Xiyi went to Beijing to take the entrance examination, walked to Shaoguan, the autumn rain continued for more than a month, unable to walk, stranded in the hotel.

古文：俄闻邻店有一士，吁嗟数次。
现代文：那个人说：我是前尧山县令叫樊泽，去京城赴皇帝亲自在殿廷的考试。
English: The man said, "I am the former governor of Lushan County, called Heze. I went to the capital to take the examination given by the emperor in person at the imperial court.

古文：执易潜问之，曰：前尧山令樊泽，举制科，至此，马毙囊空，莫能自进。执易造焉，遽辍所乘马，倒囊济之。
现代文：走到这里，马死了，口袋里的钱也花光了，没有办法继续前进。熊执易回到自己的房间，将自己所骑的马和口袋里的钱全部拿出来送给樊泽。
English: When he got here, his horse was dead and the money in his pocket was all spent, so he couldn't go any further. Xiong Xiyi went back to his room, took out the horse he was riding and all the money in his pocket and gave it to Heze.

古文：执易其年罢举，泽明年登科。
现代文：熊执易当年没有参加科举考试，而樊泽及时赶到参加了考试并被录取。
English: Xiong Xiyi did not take the entrance examination that year, while Heze arrived in time to take the examination and was admitted.

古文：李约
现代文：李约
English: Li You

古文：李约为兵部员外，汧公之子也。
现代文：李约是汧公的儿子，官职为兵部员外，他见识出众，超凡脱俗，与主客员外张谂是同事。
English: Li You is the son of Gong Li. He is a member of the military department. He is an outstanding and extraordinary person. He is a colleague of the host and guest Zhang Ye.

古文：识度清旷，迥出尘表。与主客张员外谂同官。
现代文：并韦征君况。他避世不结婚，也不积攒家产，只是同张谂的关系特别亲密。
English: He avoided marrying and did not accumulate family property, but he had a particularly close relationship with Zhang Ye.

古文：并韦征君况，墙东遁世，不婚娶，不治生业。李独厚于张，每与张匡床静言，达旦不寝，人莫得知。赠张诗曰：我有心中事，不与韦二说。
现代文：每当他同张谂躺在一张床上说话时，总是非常投机，经常整夜都不睡觉，别人对此都不了解，他作了一首诗赠给张谂：我有心中事，不与韦二说。
English: Whenever he was lying on a bed with Zhang Ye and talking, he was always very opportunistic. He often did not sleep all night, and others did not understand this. He made a poem to give to Zhang Ye: I have something on my mind, I will not talk to Wei Er.

古文：秋夜洛阳城，明月照张八。
现代文：秋夜洛阳城，明月照张八。
English: Luoyang City on an autumn evening, illuminated by the bright moon.

古文：约尝江行，与一商胡舟楫相次。
现代文：李约有一次坐船在江上航行，同一个胡商的船前后行驶。
English: About once, Li took a boat to sail on the river and rode in front of and behind the boat of the same Hu merchant.

古文：商胡病，固邀相见，以二女托之，皆绝色也。又遗一珠。
现代文：胡商生病了，将李约请过船去，把两个女儿托付给他。
English: When Hu Shang fell ill, he asked Li You to go across the ship and entrusted his two daughters to him.

古文：约悉唯唯。
现代文：他的两个女儿都长得异常美丽。
English: Both of his daughters are stunningly beautiful.

古文：及商胡死，财宝约数万，悉籍其数送官，而以二女求配。
现代文：胡商又交给他一枚珠子，嘱咐他许多话。等到胡商死了，李约将他遗留下来的钱财约有好几万贯全都如数送交给官府，并为胡商的两个女儿寻找配偶，办理婚事。
English: Hu Shang also gave him a bead and told him many things. When Hu Shang died, Li You handed over to the government all the money and property he had left behind, which amounted to tens of thousands of yuan, and looked for a spouse for Hu Shang's two daughters and arranged a marriage.

古文：始，殓商胡时，约自以夜光含之，人莫知也。
现代文：当初胡商临死之前，同李约约定，死后要含着那枚夜光珠入殓，别人并不知道这件事。
English: Before Hu Shang was about to die, he made an agreement with Li that he would carry the glow-in-the-dark bead into the coffin after his death. No one else knew about this.

古文：后，死胡有亲属来理资财，约请官司发掘，检之，夜光果在。
现代文：后来死去的胡商的亲属来清理胡商留下的财产，请来官府的人挖开坟墓检查，夜明珠果然还在。
English: The relatives of Hu Shang, who later died, came to clean up the property left behind by Hu Shang. They invited people from the government to dig up the grave and inspect it. The pearl necklace was indeed still there.

古文：其密行皆此类也。
现代文：李约所做的事情，即使是别人不知道，也是这样讲义气。
English: What Li You has done, even if others don't know, is such a demonstration of loyalty.

古文：郑还古
现代文：郑还古
English: Zheng Wanggu

古文：郑还古，东都闲居，与柳当将军者甚熟。
现代文：郑怀古闲住在东都，与柳当将军的关系很密切。
English: Zheng Huai lived in Dongdu and had a close relationship with General Liu Dang.

古文：柳宅在履信东街，有楼台水木之盛。家甚富，妓乐极多。郑往来宴饮，与诸妓笑语既熟，因调谑之。
现代文：柳当将军的住宅在履信东街，有楼台花园，家中非常富有，养了许多乐师歌妓，郑怀古经常去赴宴，同歌妓说笑很熟悉。
English: General Liu Dang's residence is on East Lixin Street, with a terrace garden. The family is very wealthy and has raised many musicians and singers. Zheng Huigu often goes to banquets and is familiar with the singers and singers.

古文：妓以告柳，怜郑文学，又贫，亦不之怪。
现代文：便调戏歌妓，歌妓告诉了柳当将军，柳当将军爱惜郑还古有才学，又很贫穷，所以也不责怪他。
English: The geisha told General Liu Dang that General Liu Dang loved Zheng, who was talented and poor, so he did not blame him.

古文：郑将入京求官，柳开筵饯之。
现代文：郑怀古要去京城谋求官职，柳当将军设宴为他饯行。
English: Zheng Huigu is going to Beijing to seek an official post, and General Liu Dang is holding a banquet for him.

古文：酒酣，与妓一章曰：冶艳出神仙，歌声胜管弦。眼看白苎曲，欲上碧云天。
现代文：酒喝到畅快的时候，郑还古为妓女作了一首诗：冶艳出神仙，歌声胜管弦，眼看白苎曲，欲上碧云天。
English: When the wine was well drunk, Zheng Yaogu composed a poem for the prostitute: Yingyan out of the immortal, singing over the orchestra, looking at the egret, and wanting to go to the blue sky.

古文：未拟生裴秀，如何乞郑玄。
现代文：未拟生裴秀，如何乞郑玄。
English: If you don't have Pei Xiu, how can you have Zheng Xuan?

古文：莫教金谷水，横过坠楼前。
现代文：莫教金谷水，横过坠楼前。
English: Don't teach the golden valley water, walk across before falling down.

古文：柳见诗甚喜。曰：某不惜此妓，然吾子方求官，事力空困，将去固不易支持。专待见荣命，便发遣入京，充贺礼。
现代文：柳当将军见了这首诗很高兴，对郑还古说：我不可惜这个歌妓，然而你正要去谋求官职，需要花费很多精力，如果让歌妓随你去，恐怕你支持不了，等到你当了官，我便将她送到京城，作为贺礼。
English: General Liu Dang was very happy to see the poem, and said to Zheng Wangu, "I don't feel sorry for this geisha. However, you are going to seek an official post, which requires a lot of energy. If you let the geisha go with you, I'm afraid you won't be able to support her. When you become an official, I will send her to Beijing as a congratulatory gift."

古文：及郑入京，不半年，除国子博士。
现代文：郑还古入京不到半年，当上了国子博士。
English: Less than half a year after Zheng Wanggu entered Beijing, he became a Kuniko doctor.

古文：柳见除目，乃津置入京。
现代文：柳当在新任官员的名单上看到他的名字，立即准备贺礼送往京城。
English: When Liu Dang saw his name on the list of newly appointed officials, he immediately prepared a gift to send to Beijing.

古文：妓行及嘉祥驿，郑已亡殁。
现代文：歌妓走到嘉祥驿站，郑怀古死了。
English: The singer walked to Jiaxiang Railway Station, and Zheng Huigu died.

古文：旅村寻到府界。柳闻之悲叹不已，遂放妓他适。
现代文：当郑还古的灵柩运到东都时，柳当将军知道后悲伤感叹不止，于是让歌妓嫁给了别人。
English: When Zheng Yaogu's coffin was transported to Dongdu, General Liu Dang was overwhelmed with grief when he found out, so he had the singer marry someone else.

古文：江陵士子
现代文：江陵士子
English: Gangneung Scholar

古文：江陵寓居士子，忘其姓名。
现代文：江陵住着一个读书人，忘了叫什么名字了，他的妻子长得很美丽，家里很贫穷。
English: In Gangneung, there lived a man who read books. I have forgotten his name. His wife was very beautiful, and the family was very poor.

古文：有美姬，甚贫，求尺题于交广间，游索去万，计支持五年粮食。
现代文：他要出门去收集题诗书画，准备了一些钱，够妻子生活五年的费用。
English: He was going out to collect poems, paintings and calligraphy, and had prepared some money, enough to pay for his wife's living expenses for five years.

古文：且戒其姬曰：我若五年不归，任尔改适。
现代文：他对妻子说：我如果五年不回来，你可以随便改嫁。
English: He told his wife: "If I don't come back in five years, you can get married again.

古文：士子去后，五年未归。
现代文：读书人走了以后，五年没回来。
English: After the student left, he did not return for five years.

古文：姬遂为前刺史所纳，在高丽坡底。
现代文：他的妻子嫁给了前刺史，住在高丽坡底。
English: His wife is married to a former assassin and lives at the bottom of the Koryo Slope.

古文：诗云：阴云漠漠下阳台，惹着襄王更不回。
现代文：又过了一年读书人回来了，找不到妻子。查访妻子的居住地点以后，他写了一首诗托别人送去。这首诗说：阴云漠漠下阳台，惹着襄王更不回。
English: After another year, the reader returned and could not find his wife. After visiting his wife's place of residence, he wrote a poem to be sent to others. This poem said: "Clouds descend on the balcony, provoking Xiang Wang not to return."

古文：五度看花空有泪，一心如结不曾开。
现代文：五度看花空有泪，一心如结不曾开。
English: Five times to see the flowers empty of tears, one heart like a knot never opened.

古文：纤萝自合依芳树，覆水宁思返旧杯。
现代文：纤萝自合依芳树。覆水宁思返旧杯。
English: Dill self-assembly Yiyang tree. Overflowing water rather than thinking back to the old cup.

古文：惆怅高丽坡底宅，春光无复下山来。
现代文：惆怅高丽坡底宅。春光无复下山来。
English: A house at the bottom of a hill in Goryeo. Spring has come down the mountain.

古文：刺史见诗，遂给一百千及资装，便遣还士子。
现代文：刺史见到这首诗，便给了书生的妻子一百贯钱和一些衣物，将她送还给读书人。
English: When Sashi saw the poem, he gave Shousen's wife 100 kroner and some clothes and sent her back to the reader.

古文：郑畋
现代文：郑畋
English: Zheng Wei

古文：郑文公畋，字台文。
现代文：文公郑畋，字叫台文。
English: Wen Gong Zheng, the word is called Taiwanese.

古文：父亚，曾任桂管观察使。
现代文：他的父亲叫郑亚。曾经担任过桂管观察使。
English: His father's name is Zheng Ya. He once served as the Guizhou Observer.

古文：畋生于桂州，小字桂儿。
现代文：郑畋出生在桂州，小名叫桂儿。
English: Zheng Rong was born in Guizhou. Her nickname is Gui Er.

古文：时西门思恭为监军，有诏征赴阙。亚饯于北郊。
现代文：当时的监军叫西门思恭。朝廷有命令，叫西门思恭去京城，郑亚在城北为他设宴饯行。
English: The inspector of the army at that time was called Simon Sikyong. The imperial court had an order to tell Simon Sikyong to go to the capital, and Zheng Ya held a banquet for him in the north of the city.

古文：自以衰年，因以畋托之，曰：他日愿以桂儿为念。九泉之下，不敢忘之。
现代文：郑亚因为自己年老了，将郑畋托付给西门思恭说：将来你如果能照顾桂儿，我就是在九泉之下也不敢忘了你！
English: Zheng Ya, because of his old age, entrusted Zheng Yao to Simon Siyong and said: In the future, if you can take care of Gui Er, I would not dare to forget you under any circumstances!

古文：言讫，泣然流涕。思恭志之。
现代文：说完流下了眼泪，西门思恭记住了他的嘱托。
English: After he finished speaking, he shed tears, and Simon Sikyong remembered his request.

古文：及为神策军中尉，亚已卒。思恭使人召畋，馆之于第。
现代文：等到西门思恭当上了神策军中尉的时候，郑亚死了，西门思恭派人将郑畋找来，收养在家中。
English: By the time Simon Sikyong had become a lieutenant of the Divine Providence Army, Zheng Ya had died, and Simon Sikyong sent someone to find Zheng Ya and adopt him into his family.

古文：年未及冠，甚爱之，如甥侄，因选师友教导之。
现代文：他很喜爱郑畋，对待他像对待自己的外甥和侄子一样，还请来教师教导他。
English: He loved Zheng Yao very much, treated him like his nephew and nephew, and invited teachers to teach him.

古文：畋后官至将相。
现代文：后来郑畋当官直至大将和宰相。
English: Later, Zheng Rong served as an official until he became a general and prime minister.

古文：黄巢之入长安，西门司空逃难于终南山。
现代文：黄巢攻进长安时，西门思恭逃难到终南山。
English: When Huang Chao invaded Chang'an, Simon Sikyong escaped to Nanshan.

古文：畋以家财厚募有勇者，访而获之，以归岐下。温清侍膳，有如父焉。
现代文：郑畋用家财高价招募勇敢的人，去把西门思恭找了回来，奉养在家中，像对待自己的父亲一样无微不至。
English: Zheng Rong used his family's wealth to recruit brave people at high prices, to find and bring back Simon Sikyong, and raised him at home, just as he treated his own father.

古文：思恭终于畋所。畋葬于凤翔西冈。松柏皆手植之。
现代文：西门思恭死在郑畋家里，郑畋将他安葬在凤翔西岗，墓地的松柏树都是他亲手栽植的。
English: Simon Sikyong died in Zheng Yao's home. Zheng Yao buried him in Fengxiang Xigang. The pine and cypress trees in the cemetery were all planted by him.

古文：未几。畋亦卒。葬近西门之坟。
现代文：过了不久郑畋也死了，也葬到了西岗思恭的墓地。
English: Not long after, Zheng Yao also died and was also buried in the cemetery of Xigang Sikyong.

古文：百官造二垅以吊之，无不堕泪，咸伏其义也。章孝子
现代文：官员们修建两个人的坟墓，以祭奠他们。在场的人没有不落泪的，都佩服他们二人的仁义。章孝子
English: The officials built a grave for the two people to commemorate them. There was no one present who did not shed tears, and they all admired the kindness of the two people. Zhang Xiaozi

古文：章孝子名全益，东蜀涪城人。
现代文：章孝子的名字叫章全益，是东蜀涪城人。
English: Zhang Xiaozi's name is Zhang Quanyi, and he is from the city of East Shuxi.

古文：少孤，为兄全启养育。
现代文：他从小丧父，由哥哥章全启抚养。
English: He lost his father at a young age and was raised by his older brother, Zhang Quanzhi.

古文：母疾，全启割股肉以馈，其疾果廖也。
现代文：他母亲病了，章全启割下大腿上的肉给母亲吃，母亲的病果然好了。
English: When his mother was ill, Zhang Quanqi cut off the meat from her thigh and gave it to his mother to eat. As it turned out, his mother's illness was cured.

古文：他日，全启出游。
现代文：过后章全启出门旅游，死在旅店里。
English: Later, Zhang Quanqi went on a trip and died in a hotel.

古文：殂于逆旅。全益感天伦之恩，制斩衰之服。又以全启割肉啖母，遂以火炼指，以申至痛。
现代文：章全益感激哥哥的恩情，制作了丧服，又因为章全启曾割自己的肉给母亲吃，他便用火烧自己的手指，以重复体验哥哥的疼痛。
English: Zhang Quanyi, grateful for his brother's kindness, made funeral clothes, and because Zhang Quanyi had cut his own flesh for his mother to eat, he burned his fingers with fire to repeat the experience of his brother's pain.

古文：仍以银字写法华经一部，日夕讽诵，仍通大义。
现代文：他还用银字书写《法华经》一部，早晚阅读朗诵。领会其中的道理。
English: He also wrote a part of the Lotus Sutra with silver characters, and read and recited it in the morning and evening.

古文：后于成都府楼巷，舍于其间。傍有丹灶。
现代文：后来他在成都的府楼巷，建造了一座房屋，里面设置一座炼丹的炉子。
English: Later, he built a house in Fulao Lane, Chengdu, and set up an alumina furnace inside.

古文：不蓄童仆，块然一室。
现代文：他不用仆人，独自住在这间屋子里，炼丹得钱。
English: He doesn't need servants, he lives alone in this room and makes money from scratch.

古文：鬻丹得钱，数及两金，即刻一象。
现代文：数目达到一两金子，便刻一座佛像。
English: When the number reaches one or two gold coins, they carve a Buddha statue.

古文：今华亭禅院，即居士高楼之所，人谓之黄白之术。
现代文：如今的华亭禅院，就是他当年炼丹奉佛的场所。人们称他的炼丹化为金银的法术为黄白之术。
English: Today's Huating Zen Temple is the place where he used to practice Buddhism. People call his magic of turning refined dan into gold and silver the Yellow and White Magic.

古文：尝言于道友曰：点水银一两，止一两银价。若丸作三百粒，每粒百钱，乃三十千矣。其利博哉。但所鬻之丹亦神矣。
现代文：他曾经对同他一样奉佛的人说：冶炼一两水银，只能得到一两银子，如果将它分作三百粒，每粒化为一百文，便是三万文，其利是非常大的，但是所炼的丹也非常神奇。
English: He once said to people who worshiped Buddha like him: if you smelt one or two mercury, you can only get one or two silver. If you divide it into three hundred grains, and each grain is converted into one hundred mon, it is thirty thousand mon. The profit is very large, but the refined dan is also very magical.

古文：居士到蜀之后，制土偶于丹灶之侧，以代执热之用。
现代文：他到了蜀郡以后，做了一个泥人放在炼丹炉旁，以便用来看火。
English: After he arrived in Shu County, he made a clay figurine and placed it next to the incense burner so that it could be used to watch the fire.

古文：护惜不毁，殆四十年。
现代文：他非常爱惜，不使泥人毁坏，一直用了四十年。
English: He took great care not to destroy the clay figurine and used it for forty years.

古文：大顺中物故，年至九十八。
现代文：大顺中年他死了，死的时候九十八岁。
English: He died in the middle of his life, at the age of ninety-eight.

古文：寺僧写真于壁，节度判官前眉州刺史冯涓撰赞以美之。
现代文：庙里的和尚将他的像画在墙壁上，节度判官前眉州刺史冯涓撰写文章纪念和赞美他。
English: Monks in the temple painted his image on the walls, and the former Meizhou magistrate Zhi Shi Fengyao wrote an article to commemorate and praise him.

古文：发冢盗
现代文：发冢盗
English: A thief in disguise

古文：光启大顺之际，褒中有盗发冢墓者，经时搜索不获。长吏督之甚严。
现代文：光启大顺年间，褒中县发生盗墓的案件，搜索了一段时间没有抓获罪犯，长吏催促破案非常严厉。
English: During the Guangqi and Daxun years, a case of grave robbery occurred in Baozhong County. The search did not catch the criminal for a period of time, and the officials were very strict in urging the case to be solved.

古文：忽一日擒获，置于所司。
现代文：忽然有一天抓到了罪犯，拖延了一年多，也没有招供。
English: Suddenly, one day, they caught the criminal, after more than a year's delay, and without a confession.

古文：淹延经岁，不得其情。拷掠楚毒，无所不至。款古既具，连及数人，皆以为得之不谬矣。
现代文：狱吏毒刑拷打，无所不用，后来招供了，并且牵连了好几个人，大家都认为审判没有错误。
English: The warden tortured him mercilessly, he later confessed, and implicated several people, and everyone agreed that the trial was not flawed.

古文：及临刑，傍有一人攘袂大呼曰：王法岂容枉杀平人者乎！
现代文：等到行刑处死罪犯时，旁边有一个人拉着罪犯的衣服大声呼喊：王法怎么能允许错杀好人呢？
English: While waiting for the execution of the criminal, a person next to him tugged at the criminal's clothes and shouted loudly: How can the king and the law allow the wrongful killing of a good person?

古文：发冢者我也。
现代文：盗墓的人是我。
English: I was the one who robbed the grave.

古文：我日在稠人之中，不为获擒，而斯人何罪，欲杀之？
现代文：我在众人之中，没有被抓住，而这个人有什么罪，却要被杀头？
English: Am I the only one who has not been caught? What is this man guilty of that he must be beheaded?

古文：速请释放。
现代文：快放了他！
English: Let him go!

古文：旋出丘中所获之赃，验之，略无差异。
现代文：随后拿出从墓中所得的赃物，经过检验，一点不差。
English: He then took out the stolen goods from the grave and, after examination, they were perfect.

古文：具狱者亦出其赃，验之无差。及藩帅躬自诱而问之，曰：虽自知非罪，而受棰楚不禁，遂令骨肉伪造此赃，希其一死。
现代文：藩帅亲自审问先前抓住的罪犯，这个人说：我虽然知道自己无罪，但是经受不住没完没了的酷刑，所以叫家里人伪造了赃物，希望早点死。
English: The commander personally interrogated the previously arrested criminal, who said: Although I know I am not guilty, I can't stand the endless torture, so I asked my family members to forge stolen goods and hope to die sooner.

古文：藩帅大骇，具以闻于朝廷。坐其狱吏，枉陷者获免，自言者补衙职而赏之。郑雍
现代文：藩帅听了非常恐惧，将情况上报朝廷，把审理此案的狱吏抓起来治罪，将被诬陷的人释放，自己出来自首的人补充录用为衙役，并获得奖赏。郑雍
English: The commander was very frightened, reported the situation to the imperial court, arrested and punished the prison officers who tried the case, released the person who was framed, and recruited the person who turned himself in as a bailiff, and received a reward. Zheng Yong

古文：郑雍学士未第时，求婚于白州崔相公远。
现代文：学士郑雍在未参加科举考试时，曾经向白州相公崔远的女儿求婚。
English: Zheng Yong, a bachelor, once proposed to the daughter of Baizhou Governor Cui Yuan when he did not take the entrance examination.

古文：才允许，而博陵有事，女则随例填宫。
现代文：崔远刚刚同意，郑雍就有事去了博陵。
English: As soon as Cui Yuan agreed, Zheng Yong went to Boling.

古文：至朱梁开平之前，崔氏在内托疾。敕令出宫，还其本家。
现代文：崔远的女儿崔氏按惯例被召进宫中去作宫女，到了后梁开平年前，崔氏在宫中假托有病，被命令出宫，归还原来自己的家庭。
English: According to the usual practice, Cui Yuan's daughter, Cui, was summoned to the palace to serve as a concubine. Before Emperor Houliang ascended to the throne, Cui feigned illness in the palace and was ordered to leave the palace and return to her original family.

古文：郑则复托媒氏致意，选日亲迎。
现代文：郑雍又托媒婆去求婚，选定日期迎娶结婚。
English: Zheng Yong also asked the matchmaker to propose marriage and choose a date to get married.

古文：士族婚礼，随其丰俭，亦无所阙。
现代文：按照家族的规矩举办婚礼，也不缺少什么，便有庄子鼓盆之感了。
English: When a wedding is held according to the rules of the family, there is no lack of anything, and it has the feeling of a Zhuangzi drum.

古文：寻有庄盆之感，又杖经期周，莫不合礼。
现代文：又经过一年的服丧，所做的事没有不合礼仪的。
English: After another year of mourning, nothing they did was out of line.

古文：士林以此多之，美称籍甚。场中翘足望之，一举中甲科。
现代文：有文士身份的读书人以他为榜样的人多了起来，他的美名轰动一时，参加科举考试的举子都等着看他的考试结果。
English: The number of readers with the status of scribes who follow his example has increased. His fame has caused a sensation, and the children who took the imperial examinations are waiting to see his examination results.

古文：脱白，授秘校，兼内翰，与丘门同敕入。
现代文：他一举考中甲科进士，脱下丧服以后，被任命为秘校兼内翰，同丘门在同一份公文上被任命。
English: He passed the entrance examination for Class A of the Chinese Junior High School Examination in one fell swoop. After he took off his mourning clothes, he was appointed as the secret agent of the school. He was appointed to the same post as Tongqumen.

古文：不数载而卒。
现代文：不过几年他就死了。
English: But he died a few years later.

古文：杨晟
现代文：杨晟
English: by Yang Hui

古文：杨晟，始事凤翔节度使李昌符。累立军功，因而疑之，潜欲加害。
现代文：杨晟一开始在凤翔节度使李昌符的手下任职，多次立下战功，因此而受到李昌符的猜忌，暗中要陷害他。
English: At the beginning of the Fengxiang Festival, Yang Jie served under Li Changfu, and made war exploits many times. As a result, he was suspected by Li Changfu, who secretly wanted to frame him.

古文：昌符爱妾周氏，悯其无辜，密告之，由是亡去而获免。
现代文：李昌符所宠爱的小老婆周氏，可怜他没有什么罪过，偷偷告诉了他，于是他逃跑了，免除了灾难。
English: Li Changfu's beloved little wife, Zhou, took pity on him and secretly told him that there was nothing wrong with him, so he ran away and avoided disaster.

古文：后为驾前五十四军都指挥使，除威胜军节度使。建节于彭州。
现代文：后来杨晟当上了驾前五十四军都指挥使，不久又改任威胜军节度使，去镇守彭州。
English: Later, Yang Jie became the commander of the 54th Army, and soon he was appointed as the commander of the victorious army, and went to guard Pengzhou.

古文：抚绥士民，延敬宾客，洎僧道辈，各得其所。
现代文：他安抚百姓，尊敬宾客，甚至和尚和道士都生活得很自由。
English: He pacified the people, respected his guests, and even the monks and priests lived freely.

古文：厚于礼敬，人甚怀之。
现代文：他提倡礼仪，尊敬贤士，人们都拥护怀念他。
English: He advocated etiquette, respect for sages, and people cherished and remembered him.

古文：李昌符之败，因令求周氏。既至，以义母事之。
现代文：李昌符失败，他派人把周氏找来，以父母的礼节来对待。
English: When Li Changfu failed, he sent someone to find Mr. Zhou and treated him with the courtesy of a parent.

古文：周氏自以少年，复有美色，恳有好合之情。
现代文：周氏认为自己年轻，又长得容貌美丽，恳切请求和杨晟结合。
English: Mr. Zhou thought he was young and good-looking, and earnestly asked to be married to Ms. Yang.

古文：晟告誓天地，终不以非礼偶之。
现代文：杨晟对着天地发誓，始终没有对周氏有任何无礼的行为。
English: Yang Hui swore to heaven and earth that he would never do anything disrespectful to Zhou.

古文：每旦，未视事前，必申问安之礼。虽厄在重围，未尝废也。
现代文：每天早晨，在没有去处理事之前，必然先给周氏请安，虽然是在敌人的围困之下，也从来没有间断过。
English: Every morning, before he left for work, he always greeted Zhou first. Even under the enemy's siege, he never stopped.

古文：新理之郡，兵力不完，遽为王蜀先主攻围。
现代文：因为新建的郡府兵力不足，突然被前蜀先主王建带兵包围。
English: Because the newly built county seat was short of troops, it was suddenly surrounded by troops led by the former Shu Emperor Wang Jian.

古文：保守孤垒，救兵不至，凡千日，为西川所破而害焉。
现代文：杨晟守卫孤城达一千多天。终于因为没有救兵而被先蜀的军队攻破，杨晟遇害身亡。
English: Yang Hui guarded the lonely city for more than a thousand days. Finally, because there was no rescue, he was defeated by the first Shu army, and Yang Hui was killed and died.

古文：有马步使安师建者，杨氏之腹心也，城克执之。
现代文：马步使安师建是杨晟的心腹，城破以后被敌军抓住。
English: Ma Buxiang An Shijian was Yang Zhe's confidant. He was captured by the enemy after the city was breached.

古文：蜀先主知其忠烈，冀为其用，欲宽之。
现代文：先主知道他忠诚勇猛，先要留下他为自己服务，准备宽恕他。
English: The lord knew he was loyal and brave, and wanted to keep him to serve himself first, and was ready to forgive him.

古文：师建曰：某受杨司徒提拔，不敢惜死。
现代文：安师建说：我受杨晟的提拔重用，不敢怕死。
English: An Shijian said: I have been promoted and reused by Yang Hui, and I dare not be afraid of death.

古文：先主嗟赏而行戮，为其设祭而葬之。
现代文：先主赞叹着命令人将他杀了，然后为他举行祭奠仪式之后，将他安葬了。
English: With admiration, the patriarch gave the order to have him killed, and after holding a memorial service for him, he was buried.

古文：王殷
现代文：王殷
English: Wang Yin

古文：王殷，梁开封尹瓒之犹子也。
现代文：王殷是后梁开封尹王瓒兄弟的儿子。
English: Wang Yin is the son of Houliang Kaifeng Yin Wang Yao's brother.

古文：乾化中，为徐州连率。
现代文：乾化年间，他任徐州连率。
English: During the Qianhua period, he served as the leader of Xuzhou Lianzhou.

古文：众叛拒命，杀害使臣，点阅市井而授甲焉。
现代文：士兵们叛乱抗拒命令，杀了朝廷的使臣，然后在市场上检阅封官。
English: The soldiers mutinied against orders, killed the imperial envoys, and then inspected the seals in the marketplace.

古文：有亲随苗温与数辈，度其必不济，窃谋作乱。吏泄被擒，刳心而死。
现代文：王殷的亲信苗温等人，推测叛乱不会成功，暗中商量作乱，因为有人泄秘而被抓住，被挖心而死。
English: Wang Yin's close confidant Miao Wen and others, surmising that the rebellion would not succeed, secretly discussed starting a riot. They were caught because someone leaked the secret, and they were tortured to death.

古文：其妻配隶别部军校，殊不甘，挟短刃，割乳而殒。
现代文：苗温的妻子被强行分配给别人的军校，她不甘心，拿短刀割下自己的乳房而死。
English: Miao Wen's wife was forcibly assigned to someone else's military school. She was not satisfied and took a knife to cut off her breasts and died.

古文：闻者无下嗟尚。
现代文：听了这件事的人没有不叹息的。
English: No one could listen to this without sighing.

