古文：《本草衍义》曰： 止是脂麻也 。
现代文：《本草纲目》说： 止是脂麻。 
English: "This syllabus" says: It's just a bunch of nonsense.

古文：《齐民要术》：胡麻，汉张骞从外国得胡麻子，今俗人呼为 乌麻 ，非也。
现代文：《齐民要术》：胡麻，汉张骞从外国得到胡麻子。今世人称为 乌麻 ，是不对的。
English: "Qimin Yaoshu": Sesame, Han Zhangye got sesame seeds from abroad. Now the world is called "Uma," which is not right.

古文：案今世有白胡麻、八棱胡麻；白者油多，而又可以为饭。此宜于白地种。
现代文：按今日所种植，有白胡麻、八棱胡麻；白胡麻出油多，又可以用来作饭食，适宜在白地种植。
English: According to today's planting, there are white sesame and octagonal sesame; white sesame produces more oil and can be used for cooking, suitable for planting in white soil.

古文：二、三月，为上时；四月上旬，为中时；五月上旬，为下时。
现代文：二三月种，为上等农时；四月上旬种，为中等农时；五月上旬种，为下等农时。
English: Planting seeds in February and March is the upper-class farming time; planting seeds in early April is the middle-class farming time; planting seeds in early May is the lower-class farming time.

古文：月半前种者，实多而成；月半后种者，少子而多秕也。
现代文：上半月播种的，结实多而且饱满；过十五日种的，子实少而且多秕。
English: Those sown in the first half of the month will have plenty of fruit and be full; those sown after the fifteenth day will have few fruit and be full.

古文：种欲截雨脚。
现代文：播种的时间，应在刚下过雨以后。
English: The time for sowing should be just after it has rained.

古文：若不缘湿，融而不生。
现代文：假如不趁湿下种，种子便消失不见，不会出苗。
English: If you don't use wet seeds, the seeds will disappear and there will be no seedlings.

古文：一亩用子二升。
现代文：地一亩用二升种子。
English: One mu of land yields two litres of seeds.

古文：漫种者，先以耧耩，然后散子，空曳劳。
现代文：撒播时，先用耧耩开沟松土，然后撒子，最后拉着空劳进行覆土。
English: When sowing, the first step is to dig a trench of loose soil, then scatter the seeds, and finally cover the soil with empty labor.

古文：劳上加人，则土厚不生。
现代文：劳上若站人，会覆土过深，不出苗。
English: If you work hard, the soil will be too deep, and you won't get any seedlings.

古文：耧耩者，炒沙令燥，中半和之。
现代文：若用耧耩下种，应将炒干燥的沙子同种子各半掺和播下。
English: If using underarm seeds, mix half of the stir-dried sand with the seeds and sow.

古文：不和沙，下不均。
现代文：不掺沙子，下种不均匀。
English: Do not add sand, and sow the seeds unevenly.

古文：垄种若荒，得用锋、耧。
现代文：条播的胡麻，若草秽地荒，可用锋锄或耧锄去锄。
English: Streaked sesame seeds, like grass in a barren field, can be removed with a sharp rake or hoe.

古文：锄不过三遍。
现代文：锄苗，至多不要超过三遍。
English: seedlings, no more than three times.

古文：刈束欲小。束大，则难燥；打，手复不胜。
现代文：收刈时，应捆成小把，把大了不易干，脱粒时，手也不好拿。
English: When harvesting, it should be bundled into a small handle, and it is not easy to dry a large handle. When threshing, it is not easy to hold.

古文：以五六束为一藂，斜倚之。
现代文：将五六个小把聚拢，倾斜放，令互相依附成一丛。
English: Gather five or six small handles together and place them at an angle, so that they are attached to each other to form a cluster.

古文：不尔，则风吹倒，损收也。
现代文：不如此，被风吹倒，容易落粒，使收成减少。
English: Otherwise, it will be blown down by the wind and easily fall, reducing the harvest.

古文：候口开，乘车诣田抖擞；倒竖，以小杖微打之。
现代文：等到裂开口，便可坐着车到田间抖擞；将胡麻捆倒立起，用小棍轻轻敲打。
English: Wait until the opening is cracked, then you can sit in the car and go to the field; stand the sesame seed bundle upside down and gently beat it with a small stick.

古文：还藂之。
现代文：然后再聚拢成簇。
English: Then they come together again in clusters.

古文：三日一打，四五遍乃尽耳。
现代文：每过三天打一次，打至四五遍，便全部脱粒。
English: Beat once every three days, up to four or five times, and then remove all the grains.

古文：若乘湿横积，蒸热速干，虽郁衷，无风吹亏损之虑。
现代文：假如趁湿将刈倒的胡麻平放着横堆在地上捂起来，听任它发热赶快干，虽不免会有浥湿热蒸的缺点，但却没有风吹落粒的顾虑。
English: If you take advantage of the humidity to pile up the cut sesame seeds in a horizontal pile on the ground and let it heat up and dry quickly, although there will inevitably be the disadvantages of steaming, there is no concern about the wind blowing the seeds.

古文：哀者不中为种子，然油无损也。
现代文：受过热蒸的胡麻，虽然不可做种子，但对油的质量却不会有损伤。
English: Although hot-steamed sesame seeds cannot be used as seeds, they will not damage the quality of the oil.

古文：《四时类要》：每科相去一尺为法。
现代文：《四时类要》：胡麻，科与科之间，以相距一尺为通法。
English: "Four-hour class essentials": sesame seeds, between subjects and subjects, with a distance of one foot as the common law.

