古文：长乐村圣僧屈突仲任婺州金刚菩提寺猪李思元僧齐之张无是张应道严
现代文：长乐村圣僧屈突仲任婺州金刚菩提寺猪李思元僧齐之张无是张应道严
English: The holy monk of Changle Village, Qu Duzhong, was appointed as the head monk of the Bozhou Vajra Bodhi Temple, and the priest of the Bozhou Vajra Bodhi Temple, In Li Si Yuan, was appointed as the head monk of the Bozhou Vajra Bodhi Temple.

古文：长乐村圣僧
现代文：长乐村圣僧
English: The holy monk of Changle Village

古文：开元二十二年，京城东长乐村有人家，素敬佛教，常给僧食。
现代文：唐玄宗开元二十二年。京城东面长乐村有一户人家，一向敬奉佛教，常常给僧人饭吃。
English: In the 22nd year of the founding of Tang Xuan Zong, there was a family in Changle Village, east of Beijing, who had always revered Buddhism and often gave meals to monks.

古文：忽于途中得一僧座具，既无所归，至家则宝之。
现代文：他偶然间在道上捡到一件僧人的座具，既然找不到失主，他便拿回家里保存了起来。
English: He happened to pick up a monk's seat on the road, and since he couldn't find the owner, he took it home and kept it.

古文：后因设斋以为圣僧座。
现代文：后来因为请僧人吃饭，他便拿出来让一位圣僧坐着。
English: Later, because he invited a monk to dinner, he took it out to let a holy monk sit.

古文：斋毕众散，忽有一僧扣门请餐。主人曰： 师何由知弟子造斋而来此也？ 
现代文：吃完饭后，大家都散了，突然有个僧人敲门要饭吃，主人说： 师父怎么知道弟子今天准备了斋饭就来了呢？ 
English: After the meal, everyone dispersed. Suddenly, a monk knocked on the door to ask for food. The master said, "How did the master know that his disciple would come today after preparing the meal?"

古文：僧曰： 适到浐水，见一老师坐水滨，洗一座具，口仍怒曰：  请我过斋，施钱半于众僧，污我座具，苦老身自浣之。 
现代文：僧人说： 刚才走到浐水，见一位老师父坐在水边洗一件座具，嘴里还气哼哼地说： 请我去吃饭，施舍给众僧才半串钱，又玷污了我的座具，害得我自己来洗刷。 
English: The monk said, "Just now, I walked to Surabaya and saw a teacher and father sitting by the water's edge washing a seat. He said angrily, "You invited me to dinner and gave the monks half a bunch of money. You also soiled my seat and made me wash it myself."

古文：吾前礼谒，老僧不止。
现代文：我走上前去施礼拜见，老僧仍然洗他的座具说他的气话，根本不理我。
English: I went up to pay my respects, but the old monk was still washing his seat, saying his angry words, and ignoring me.

古文：因问之曰： 老阇梨何处斋来？
现代文：我便问他道： 老禅师到什么地方去吃饭了？
English: I asked him, "Where did the old Zen master go to eat?"

古文：何为自浣？ 
现代文：为什么自己洗呢？ 
English: Why wash it yourself?

古文：僧具言其由，兼示其家所在，故吾此来。 
现代文：老僧跟我讲述了事情的经过，同时告诉了你家的地址，所以我就来了。 
English: The old monk told me what had happened and gave me your address, so I came.

古文：主人大惊，延僧进户。
现代文：主人听了大为惊讶，把这位僧人领进了屋里。
English: The owner was very surprised and led the monk into the house.

古文：先是圣僧座，座上有羹汁翻污处。
现代文：原先圣僧坐的座位上，有菜汤洒在上边弄脏的地方。
English: On the seat where the holy monk used to sit, there is a dirty spot where vegetable soup was spilled.

古文：主人乃告僧曰： 吾家贫，卒办此斋，施钱少，故众僧皆三十，佛与圣僧各半之。
现代文：主人便告诉僧人说： 我家贫穷，仓促之间操办这次斋饭，施舍的钱少，所以众僧都是每人三十文，佛与圣僧各半串。
English: The host then told the monk, "My family is poor, and we are in a hurry to prepare this meal. There is little money for charity, so all the monks are paid 30 mon per person, and the Buddha and the holy monk are each paid half a string.

古文：不意圣僧亲临，而又污其座具。
现代文：想不到圣僧亲临我家，而又弄污了他的座具。
English: I didn't expect the holy monk to come to my house and dirty his seat.

古文：愚戆盲冥，心既差别，又不谨慎于进退，皆是吾之过也。 
现代文：我既头脑呆笨，又没有谨慎地应酬。这些都是我的过错啊！ 
English: I've been stupid and careless in my courting, and it's all my fault!

古文：屈突仲任
现代文：屈突仲任
English: Kutsuryu Chushin

古文：同官令虞咸颇知名。
现代文：同官县令虞咸颇有名气。
English: Dongguan County is famous for being the birthplace of Yu Xian.

古文：开元二十三年春往温县，道左有小草堂，有人居其中，刺臂血朱和用写一切经。
现代文：唐玄宗开元二十三年春天他去温县时，看到道旁有一座小草房，里面住有一个人，此人刺破胳臂取出血来与朱砂和在一起，用来抄写 一切经 。
English: In the spring of the 23rd year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, when he went to Wenshan, he saw a small grass hut beside the road. A man lived in it. This man pricked his arm to draw blood to mix it with cinnabar and use it to transcribe the Bible.

古文：其人年且六十，色黄而羸瘠，而书经已数百卷。
现代文：此人将近六十岁了，脸色枯黄，身体瘦弱，已经抄写了几百卷佛经了。
English: The man was nearly sixty years old, with a withered face and thin body, and he had already copied hundreds of Buddhist scriptures.

古文：人有访者，必丐焉。
现代文：凡有向他访求的人，他都给他一卷。
English: He gave a scroll to everyone who asked him for it.

古文：或问其所从，亦有助焉。其人曰： 吾姓屈突氏，名仲任。
现代文：有的向他求帮忙，他也肯帮助。这个说： 我姓屈突，名叫仲任。 
English: Some asked him for help, and he was willing to help. This one said: My surname is Qu Tu, my name is Zhong Ren.

古文：即仲将、季将兄弟也。
现代文：他就是仲将、季将的兄弟。
English: He is the brother of the team's captain and quarterback.

古文：父亦典邵，庄在温，唯有仲任一子，怜念其少，恣其所为。
现代文：父亲也曾任过郡守，老家在温县，只有仲任一个儿子，怜念他年轻，任其所为，不加任何管束。
English: His father had also been a county magistrate, and his hometown was in Wen County. He had only one son, Zhong Ren, whom he pitied because he was young and allowed to do whatever he wanted without any control.

古文：性不好书，唯以樗蒲弋猎为事。
现代文：仲任生性不喜欢读书，整天只知道赌博游乐打猎。
English: Naka doesn't like to read, all he wants to do is gamble, play and hunt.

古文：父卒时，家僮数十人，资数百万，庄第甚众。
现代文：父亲去世时，家里有僮仆数十人，资产几百万，田庄宅第许多处。
English: At the time of his father's death, the family had dozens of servants, several million in assets, and many country estates.

古文：而仲任纵赏好色，荒饮博戏，卖易且尽。数年后，唯温县庄存焉。
现代文：而仲任生性放荡好色，整日吃喝玩乐，几年之后便把家产变卖完了，只剩下老家温县的那一处田庄。
English: But Zhong indulged in sexual debauchery and lust, eating, drinking and playing all day long. A few years later, he sold off all of his family's property, leaving only the one farm in his hometown of Wen County.

古文：即货易田畴，拆卖屋宇，又已尽矣，唯庄内一堂岿然。
现代文：他便又卖田产又拆房子，结果这所田庄也折腾光了，只有庄内的一座房子还没有拆掉。
English: He then sold the farmland and demolished the house. As a result, the farm was also razed to the ground. Only one house on the farm has not been demolished.

古文：仆妾皆尽，家贫无计。乃于堂内掘地埋数瓮，贮牛马等肉。
现代文：僮仆妻妾却已散尽，家庭生活贫穷，又没有谋生之计，他便在这座房子里挖开地面，埋藏下几只缸，用来贮存牛马等肉。
English: But his servants, wives and concubines were exhausted, the family life was poor, and there was no way to make a living. He dug up the ground in this house and buried several jars to store meat such as cattle and horses.

古文：仲任多力，有僮名莫贺咄，亦力敌十夫。
现代文：仲任很有力气，有个仆人叫莫贺咄，力气也能抵得上十个人。
English: Zhong Ren was very strong. He had a servant called Mogao, who was as strong as ten men.

古文：每昏后。与僮行盗牛马，盗处必五十里外。
现代文：每天黄昏之后，他就与这个僮仆到五十里外的地方去偷牛偷马。
English: After dusk each day, he and this servant rode to a place fifty miles away to steal cattle and horses.

古文：遇牛即执其两角，翻负于背，遇马驴皆绳蓄其颈，亦翻负之。
现代文：遇到牛时就抓住两只牛角翻手背到背上，遇到马或驴时，就用绳子套住脖子，也翻手背着。
English: When encountering a cow, grab the two horns and turn your back on it. When encountering a horse or donkey, put a rope around its neck and turn your back on it.

古文：至家投于地，皆死。
现代文：到了家里往地上一扔，牛与马驴全都死了。
English: When he got home, he threw it on the ground, and the cow and the donkey all died.

古文：乃皮剥之，皮骨纳之堂后大坑，或焚之，肉则贮于地瓮。
现代文：于是就开始剥皮，皮与骨头却扔进房后的大坑里，或者干脆烧掉，肉则装在地下的缸里。
English: So they began to peel the skin, but the skin and bones were thrown into a large pit behind the house, or simply burned, and the meat was placed in an underground tank.

古文：昼日，令僮于城市货之，易米而食。如此者又十余年。
现代文：到了白天，就让僮仆背到城里市场上卖掉，买回米来做饭吃，就这样又过了十几年。
English: During the day, they would ask their servants to go to the city market on their backs to sell the rice and buy it back to cook and eat. This went on for another ten years.

古文：以其盗处远，故无人疑者。
现代文：因为他们偷盗的地方离家里很远，所以没有人怀疑他们。
English: No one suspected them because they were stealing far away from home.

古文：仲任性好杀，所居弓箭罗网叉弹满屋焉，杀害飞走，不可胜数，目之所见，无得全者。
现代文：仲任生性好杀，他住的地方满屋子都是弓箭、罗网、叉子、弹弓之类。经他手杀害的飞禽走兽不计其数，凡是让他看见的，无一能够逃脱。
English: He had a propensity to kill, and his house was full of bows and arrows, snares, forks, slingshots, etc. The number of birds and beasts he killed was uncountable, and nothing he saw could escape.

古文：乃至得刺猬，赤以泥裹而烧之，且熟，除去其泥，而猬皮与刺，皆随泥而脱矣，则取肉而食之。
现代文：就连刺猬他也用泥裹起来放在火里烧，烧熟之后剥掉泥，刺猬的皮也就随着泥而脱落，于是就撕开吃肉。
English: Even the hedgehog he wrapped in mud and put on the fire to roast. After it was cooked, he peeled off the mud, and the hedgehog's skin fell off with the mud, so he tore it open to eat the meat.

古文：其所残酷，皆此类也。
现代文：他残害生灵的情形，都跟这个例子相似。
English: The circumstances of his mutilations are all similar to this one.

古文：后莫贺咄病死，月余，仲任暴卒，而心下暖。
现代文：后来莫贺咄病死了，一个多月之后，屈突仲任也暴亡，但他的胸口还热乎。
English: Later, Moga died of illness, and more than a month later, Qu Tu Zhong Ren also died violently, but his chest was still warm.

古文：其乳母老矣，犹在，守之未瘗。
现代文：仲任的乳母已经老了，还健在，她就守着仲任的尸体，没有埋掉。
English: Zhong Ren's old nanny was still alive, and she guarded Zhong Ren's body and did not bury it.

古文：而仲任复苏，言曰： 初见捕去，与奴对事，至一大院，厅事十余间，有判官六人，每人据二间。
现代文：后来仲任又苏醒过来了，于是讲述了在阴曹地府的经历。他刚被抓到阴间时，与僮仆一块儿受审讯，到了一个大院里，有十几间公堂，六个判官，每个判官占据两间。
English: Afterward, Zhong Ren woke up again, and then recounted his experience in the underworld. When he was just caught in the underworld, he was interrogated together with his servants, and arrived at a large courtyard with more than a dozen courtrooms and six judges, each judge occupying two rooms.

古文：仲任所对最西头，判官不在，立仲任于堂下。有顷判官至，乃其姑夫郓州司马张安也。
现代文：仲任受审的那间公堂在最西头。刚进去时判官不在，他就站在公堂下面，过了一会儿判官来了，原来是他姑夫郓州司马张安。
English: The courtroom where Zhong Ren was tried was at the westernmost end. When he first entered, the judge was not there, so he stood at the bottom of the courtroom. After a while, the judge came, and it turned out to be his uncle, Zhangzhou Sima Zhang An.

古文：见仲任惊，而引之登阶。
现代文：张安见是仲任，大为吃惊。
English: Zhang An was very surprised to see Zhong Ren.

古文：谓曰： 郎在世为恶无比，其所杀害千万头，今忽此来，何方相拔？ 
现代文：把他领上台阶，对他说： 侄儿在世间作恶太多，没人比得过你，你所杀害的生命有千万条。如今突然来到这里，有什么办法救你出去呢？ 
English: He led him up the steps and said to him: "My nephew, you have done so much evil in the world, no one has done it better than you, you have killed thousands of lives. Now that you have suddenly arrived here, what can I do to get you out?

古文：仲任大惧，叩头哀祈。判官曰： 待与诸判官议之。 
现代文：仲任听了十分害怕，连忙跪下叩头哀求，张安说： 待我与各位判官商量商量看。 
English: After listening to this, Zhong Ren was very scared and quickly knelt down to beg for mercy. Zhang An said, "Wait until I discuss this with the judges.

古文：乃谓诸判官曰： 仆之妻侄屈突仲任造罪无数，今召入对事。
现代文：张安便对各位判官说： 我的妻侄屈突仲任作了无数罪孽，现被召进来审判。
English: Zhang An then said to the judges: My wife and nephew, Qu Tu Zhong Ren, have committed countless sins and are now being called in for trial.

古文：其人年命亦未尽，欲放之去，恐被杀者不肯。
现代文：他的寿命还没有完。我想放他出去，又怕被他杀害的冤魂不同意。
English: His life isn't over yet. I want to let him out, but I'm afraid the ghosts he killed won't agree.

古文：欲开一路放生，可乎？ 
现代文：我想开一条生路放他走，可以吗？ 
English: I want to find a way to let him go. Is that okay?

古文：诸官曰： 召明法者问之？ 
现代文：各位判官都说： 叫明法来问问他。 
English: All the judges said, "Tell Mingfa to come and question him."

古文：则有明法者来，碧衣跼蹐。
现代文：明法被找来了，他穿着窄小的绿色衣服，神态畏缩不安。
English: Mingfa was brought in, wearing a tight green dress and a flinching, anxious expression.

古文：判官问曰： 欲出一罪人，有路乎？ 
现代文：判官问道： 想放一个罪人出去，有路吗？ 
English: The judge asked: If you want to let a criminal out, is there a way?

古文：因以具告。
现代文：于是就把仲任的情况告诉了他。
English: So I told him about the appointment.

古文：明法者曰： 唯有一路可出，然得杀者肯。
现代文：明法说： 只有一条路可以出去，但是必须得被杀害的那些鬼魂同意。
English: Mingfa said: There is only one way out, but it must be with the consent of the ghosts who were killed.

古文：若不肯，亦无益？ 官曰： 若何？ 
现代文：如果它们不同意，那就没法放生。 判官说： 那怎么办呢？ 
English: If they don't agree, they can't be released, the judge said.

古文：明法者曰： 此诸物类，为仲任所杀，皆偿其身命，然后托生。
现代文：明法说： 这些东西都是被仲任杀害的，都要偿还它们生命，让它们去托生。
English: Ming Fa said, "These things were all killed by Zhong Ren, and we must repay their lives and let them live.

古文：合召出来，当诱之曰： 屈突仲任今到，汝食啗毕，即托生。羊更为羊，马亦为马，汝余业未尽，还受畜生身。使仲任为人，还依旧食汝。
现代文：应当把它们召唤出来，劝诱它们说： 屈突仲任现已来到这里，你们如果立即把他吃了，就可以马上去托生，因为你们的余业尚未完了，所以还得托生为畜生，倘若仲任托生为人，还是依旧要吃你们。
English: They should be called out, and they should be persuaded to say: Qu Tu Zhong Ren has now come here, if you eat him immediately, you can immediately go to live, because your remaining work is not yet complete, so you still have to live as an animal, if Zhong Ren lives as a human, he will still have to eat you.

古文：汝之业报，无穷已也。
现代文：你们之间的冤孽推来推去，永远没有穷期。
English: The iniquity that is among you will not be purged with the passing of time.

古文：今令仲任略还，令为汝追福，使汝各舍畜生业，俱得人身，更不为人杀害，岂不佳哉？ 
现代文：现在暂且让仲任活着回去，令他为你们赶修功德，使你们个个舍去畜生之业，都能托生为人，再不被杀害了，岂不是好事么？ 
English: Now, for the time being, wouldn't it be a good thing to let Zhong Ren return alive, so that he can make merit for you, so that each of you can give up the animal's karma, can be born as a human, and not be killed again?

古文：诸畜闻得人身必喜，如此乃可放。
现代文：这些畜类听说能够托生为人肯定会高兴，这样便可以放生仲任。
English: These animals are sure to be happy to hear that they can give birth to humans, so they can be released.

古文：若不肯，更无余路。 
现代文：如果它们还不同意，别无其它门路。 
English: If they still do not agree, there is no other way.

古文：乃锁仲任于厅事前房中，召仲任所杀生类到。判官庭中，地可百亩。
现代文：判官便把仲任锁在公堂前面的房子里，召唤被他杀害的冤魂到院子里，判官站在院子的中央。
English: The judge then locked Zhong Ren in a house in front of the courtroom and summoned the wrongdoers he had killed to the courtyard. The judge stood in the middle of the courtyard.

古文：仲任所杀生命，填塞皆满。牛马驴骡猪羊獐鹿雉兔，乃至刺猬飞鸟，凡数万头。
现代文：院子极大，占地百亩，被仲任杀害的冤魂挤得满满的，牛马驴骡猪羊狍鹿野雉兔子，还有刺猬飞鸟等，应有尽有，总计几万头。
English: The yard is huge, covering an area of one hundred mu. It is crammed with the ghosts of those who were killed by Zhong Ren, cattle, horses, donkeys, pigs, sheep, elk, wild boar, rabbits, as well as hedgehogs and birds, etc. There is everything, totaling tens of thousands.

古文：皆曰； 召我何为？ 
现代文：它们齐声喊道： 召唤我们来干什么？ 
English: They cried out in unison: "What are you summoning us for?

古文：判官曰： 仲任已到。 物类皆咆哮大怒，腾振蹴踏之而言曰： 巨盗盍还吾债。 
现代文：判官说： 屈突仲任已经来到这里 院子里立即骚动起来，冤魂们个个咆哮大怒，蹦跳顿足地齐声喊道： 大强盗为什么不偿还我们血债！ 
English: The judge said: Qu Du Zhong Ren has come here. The courtyard immediately became agitated. The wrongdoers all roared with rage, jumped up and down and shouted in unison: Why doesn't the great robber repay our blood debt!

古文：方忿怒时，诸猪羊身长大，与马牛比，牛马亦大倍于常。
现代文：正在愤怒的时候，只见那些猪羊的身体顿时涨大起来，一个个都像牛马一般大；而那些牛马也涨到平常的两倍大。
English: While they were in a rage, the pigs and sheep suddenly swelled up to the size of horses and oxen, and the horses also swelled up to twice their normal size.

古文：判官乃使明法入晓谕。畜闻得人身，皆喜，形复如故。
现代文：判官便让明法进来向它们陈述得失利害，极力劝导。
English: The judge then let Mingfa come in to explain the pros and cons to them, and tried his best to persuade them.

古文：于是尽驱入诸畜，乃出仲任。
现代文：畜生们听说能够托生为人，一个个欢喜雀跃，火灭气消之后，气涨的身体又恢复了原形。
English: The animals heard that they could be reborn as humans, and they were all overjoyed. After the fire was extinguished, the inflated bodies returned to their original shape.

古文：有狱卒二人，手执皮袋兼秘木至，则纳仲任于袋中，以木秘之，仲任身血，皆于袋诸孔中流出洒地。
现代文：于是便把它们全都赶回了各自的地方。仲任被放了出来，有两个狱卒手拿着皮袋与圆木棒走来，把仲任装在袋里，用木棒打，仲任身上的血从袋子的孔隙中流了出来，洒在地上。
English: So they drove them all back to their respective places. Zhongren was released, and two jailers came with a leather bag and a wooden stick in their hands. They put Zhongren in the bag and beat him with a wooden stick. The blood on Zhongren's body flowed out of the pores of the bag and spilled on the ground.

古文：卒秘木以仲任血，遂遍流厅前。
现代文：直到木棒子沾满了血，这才不再打了，这时血已流遍公堂下面。
English: There was no more beating until the cudgel was stained with blood, by which time the blood was all over the floor of the court.

古文：须臾，血深至阶，可有三尺。
现代文：不一会儿，血便涨到了台阶，足有三尺深。
English: Soon, the blood was three feet deep on the steps.

古文：然后兼袋投仲任房中，又扃锁之。
现代文：然后，连袋子一起把仲任扔进了房子里，又把房门锁上。
English: He then threw her into the house with the bag and locked the door.

古文：乃召诸畜等，皆怒曰： 逆贼杀我身，今饮汝血。 
现代文：狱卒又去召唤那些畜生，畜生们愤怒地说： 逆贼杀死了我们，如今我们要喝你的血。 
English: The jailer went to call the animals, and the animals said angrily, "The traitors have killed us, now we will drink your blood."

古文：于是兼飞鸟等，尽食其血。血既尽，皆共舐之，庭中土见乃止。
现代文：于是走兽与飞禽们都去吃仲任的血，吃完了之后又一块儿用舌头去舔，直到院子露出地面为止。
English: So the beasts and birds all went to eat the blood of Zhongren, and when they had finished, they licked it with their tongues until the courtyard was exposed to the ground.

古文：当饮血时，畜生盛怒，身皆长大数倍，仍骂不止。
现代文：当它们在喝血的时候，由于非常愤怒，畜生的身体都涨大了几倍。
English: When they drink blood, the animal's body swells to several times its normal size because it is so angry.

古文：既食已，明法又告： 汝已得债，今放屈突仲任归，令为汝追福，令汝为人身也。 
现代文：血吃完了之后，明法又来告诉它们说： 你们已经得到血债了，现在放屈突仲任回去，叫他为你们去修功德，让你们托生为人。 
English: After the blood-eating was over, Ming Fa came again to tell them, "You have already received the blood debt, now let Chu Chu Ren go back, and tell him to cultivate merits for you, so that you can be reborn as human beings."

古文：诸畜皆喜，各复本形而去。
现代文：畜生们皆大欢喜，各各恢复了原形就回去了。
English: The animals were all overjoyed, and each one went back to its original form.

古文：判官然后令袋内出仲任，身则如故。
现代文：然后，判官张安叫人把仲任从袋子里放出来，只见仲任的身体依然如故。
English: Then, judge Zhang An ordered someone to let Zhong Ren out of the bag, only to see that Zhong Ren's body was still the same.

古文：判官谓曰： 既见报应，努力修福。
现代文：张安对他说： 既然受到了报应，回去之后就要努力修造功德。
English: Zhang An said to him, "Since you have received retribution, you should work hard to cultivate your merits after you return.

古文：若刺血写一切经，此罪当尽。
现代文：如能刺破身上的血，用来抄写 一切经 ，你的罪过就能赎完。
English: If you can pierce the blood on your body and use it to copy the Bible, your sins will be redeemed.

古文：不然更来，永无相出望。 
现代文：不然，如果再被捉来，那就永无救出去的希望了。 
English: Otherwise, if caught again, there is no hope of ever getting out.

古文：仲任苏，乃坚行其志焉。婺州金刚
现代文：屈突仲任活过来之后，便坚定不移地履行着自己的誓愿，孜孜不倦地刺臂出血抄写 一切经 。婺州金刚
English: After Qu Tu Zhong Ren came back to life, he unswervingly fulfilled his vows and tirelessly copied all the scriptures with his bleeding arm.

古文：婺州开元寺门有二金刚，世称其神，鸟雀不敢近。
现代文：婺州开元寺的门楼内有两尊金刚塑像，世人都说它们特别神灵，乌雀不敢靠近。
English: There are two statues of King Kong in the gate tower of Keiyuan Temple in Luzhou. People say that they are special gods, and the egrets do not dare to approach them.

古文：疾病祈祷者累有验，往来致敬。
现代文：有病的人向它们祈祷时，屡屡应验，前来敬奉与祈祷的人整天络绎不绝。
English: When sick people pray to them, they are often answered, and people come to worship and pray all day long.

古文：开元中，州判司于寺门楼上宴会，众人皆言金刚在此，不可。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，婺州判司在开元寺门楼上举行宴会，众人都说这个地方有金刚神像，不应在这里举办宴会。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong in the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Zhangzhou Han Zi held a banquet on the gate tower of Kaiyuan Temple. Many people said that this place had a statue of King Kong, and the banquet should not be held here.

古文：一人曰： 土耳，何能为？ 
现代文：有个人却说： 那不过是一堆泥而已，有什么了不起的！ 
English: One person said: "It's just a pile of mud, what's the big deal!"

古文：乃以酒肉内口。
现代文：说完便将酒肉往金刚神像的嘴里塞。
English: After that, he stuffed the meat and wine into the mouth of the statue of the god of the diamond.

古文：须臾，楼上云昏电掣，既风且雷，酒肉飞扬，众人危惧。
现代文：不大一会儿，楼上乌云密布电光闪闪，狂风挟着雷鸣袭了上来，桌上的酒肉乱飞。
English: A short while later, the upstairs was covered with dark clouds, lightning flashed, a fierce wind came up with thunder, and the meat and wine on the table flew wildly.

古文：独污金刚者，曳出楼外数十丈而震死。
现代文：众人见状十分恐惧，但是独有那个污辱金刚神像的人，被风扯到楼外数十丈处，遭受雷击而死了。
English: Everyone was horrified by the news, but only the man who insulted the statue of the god of King Kong was pulled dozens of feet outside the building by the wind and was struck by lightning and died.

古文：菩提寺猪
现代文：菩提寺猪
English: Bodaiji Inu

古文：唐开元十八年。
现代文：唐玄宗开元十八年。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was founded in the 18th year of the 1st century.

古文：京菩提寺有长生猪，体柔肥硕，在寺十余年。
现代文：京都菩提寺里有一口长生不老猪，体态柔软肥大，在寺里长了十余年了。
English: There is an eternal pig in Kyoto's family temple. It is soft and fat, and has been growing in the temple for more than ten years.

古文：其岁猪死。
现代文：这一年，这口猪死了。
English: This year, the pig died.

古文：僧焚之，火既烬，灰中得舍利百余粒。
现代文：僧人把它用火烧了，火熄灭后，灰里找到一百多粒闪闪发光的遗骨。
English: The monk burned it with fire, and after the fire was extinguished, more than a hundred glittering bones were found in the ashes.

古文：李思元
现代文：李思元
English: Li Siyuan

古文：唐天宝五载夏五月中，左清道率府府史李思元暴卒。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝五年夏季五月间。左清道率府府史李思元突然病故。
English: In the summer of May of the fifth year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, Zuo Qing Dao and Fufu Shi Li Siyuan suddenly died of illness.

古文：卒后心暖，家不敢殡。
现代文：死后胸口仍然热乎，家里人没敢殡葬。
English: After his death, his chest was still warm, and his family did not dare to hold a funeral.

古文：积二十一日，夜中而才苏。
现代文：停放了二十一天，半夜里苏醒了。
English: After being parked for 21 days, it woke up in the middle of the night.

古文：即言曰： 有人相送来，且作三十人供。 
现代文：刚刚苏醒就对别人说： 有人把我送回来的，快准备三十个人的供品。 
English: As soon as he woke up, he said to the others, "Someone has sent me back. Quickly prepare an offering of thirty people."

古文：又曰： 要万贯钱与送来人。 
现代文：又说： 还要一万贯钱，送给送我回来的人。 
English: And he said, I will also give ten thousand talents of silver to him who brings me back.

古文：思元父为署令，其家颇富，因命具馔，且凿纸为钱。
现代文：思元的父亲当署令，家里很富裕，便令人准备饭菜，而且把纸裁成钱。
English: When Siyuan's father was a magistrate, the family was very wealthy, so he had people prepare meals and cut paper into money.

古文：馔熟，令堂前布三十僧供。思元白曰： 蒙恩相送，薄馔单蔬，不足以辱大德。 
现代文：饭菜做好后，令人在房前摆上供给三十个僧人享用的饭菜，思元口中念道： 承蒙各位相送，谨备简单的饭菜，不足以供奉各位高僧大德。 
English: After the meal was ready, the meal was placed in front of the room for the thirty monks to enjoy. I thought about it and said, "Thank you for sending it to me. Preparing a simple meal is not enough to worship the great virtue of the monks."

古文：须臾若食毕，因令焚五千张纸钱于庭中。
现代文：不一会儿，就像吃完饭了一样，于是令人在院里烧了五千张纸钱。
English: In a short time, just as if they had finished eating, they burned five thousand pieces of paper money in the courtyard.

古文：又令具二人食，置酒肉，思元向席曰： 蒙恩释放，但怀厚惠。 
现代文：然后又准备了两个人的饭，摆上了酒肉，思元对着酒桌说： 承蒙释放之恩，永记大恩大德。 
English: Then he prepared a meal for two people, put the meat and wine on the table, and Siyuan said to the wine table: Thank you for releasing me, I will always remember you.

古文：又令焚五千张纸钱毕，然后偃卧。
现代文：说完又让人烧了五千张纸钱。之后，思元便躺下休息。
English: After that, another person burned five thousand pieces of paper money. After that, Si Yuan lay down to rest.

古文：至天晓，渐平和。
现代文：到天亮时，身体已经逐渐平复，于是讲迷了死后在阴间的经历。
English: By dawn, his body had gradually calmed down, so he talked about his experience in the underworld after death.

古文：乃言曰： 被捕至一处，官不在，有两吏存焉，一曰冯江静，一曰李海朝。
现代文：刚开始，他被抓到一个地方，这里的官儿没在，只有两个吏卒守在那里，一个人叫冯江静，一个叫李海朝。
English: At the beginning, he was arrested in a place where no officials were present, and only two officials were there, one named Feng Jiangjing and one named Li Haichao.

古文：与思元同召者三人，两吏曰： 能遗我钱五百万，当舍汝。 
现代文：与思元一起抓来的还有两个人。两个吏卒对他们三人说： 谁能赠给我们五百文钱，我们就放了谁。 
English: Two officers said to the three of them, "Whoever can give us 500 yuan, we will release him."

古文：二人不对，思元独许之，吏喜。
现代文：那两人没有回答，只有思元自己答应给他们五百文钱，吏卒非常高兴。
English: The two did not answer, only Si Yuan himself promised to give them five hundred coins, the officials were very happy.

古文：俄官至，谓三人曰： 要使典二人，三人内办之。 
现代文：不一会儿，当官儿的来了。对他们三人说： 要用两个典吏，从你们三人里面挑。 
English: After a little while the magistrate came and said to the three of them, "Choose two men from the three of you.

古文：官因领思元等至王所。
现代文：当官儿的便领着思元等三人来到阎罗王住的地方。
English: The official then led Siyuan and three others to the place where Yan Luo Wang lived.

古文：城门数重，防卫甚备，见王居有高楼十间，当王所居三间高大，尽垂帘。
现代文：只见这里有好几道城门，防卫十分严密，阎罗王住在一座十间的高楼上，其中他本人所住三间最为高大，门窗都挂着帘子。
English: There are several gates here, and the defences are very tight. King Yama lives in a ten-room high-rise, of which the three rooms he lives in are the tallest. The doors and windows are all covered with curtains.

古文：思元至，未进，见有一人，金章紫授，形状甚贵，令投刺谒王。
现代文：思元等人来到这里后，还没有进去，便见一人佩戴着金章绶带，样子极高贵，也被传令去谒去阎罗王。
English: After Siyuan and the others came here, before they entered, they saw a person wearing a gold band, looking very noble, who was also ordered to be taken to the king of hell.

古文：王召见，思元随而进至楼下，王命却帘，召贵人登楼。贵人自阶陛方登，王见起，延至帘下。贵人拜，王答拜，谓贵人曰： 今既来此，即须置对，不审在生有何善事？ 
现代文：阎罗王要召见他们了，思元跟在贵人后面进来到了楼下，阎罗王命人卷起门帘，召唤贵人上楼，贵人刚登上楼梯，阎罗王看见后就站了起来，把他请到帘子下面，贵人施礼参拜，阎罗王回礼致谢，然后对贵人说： 现在既然来到这里，就须接受审问。不知你生前有什么功德之事？ 
English: Yan Luo was about to summon them. Siyuan followed the noblemen and came downstairs. Yan Luo ordered someone to roll up the door curtain and call the noblemen upstairs. The noblemen had just climbed the stairs, when Yan Luo saw him, he stood up and invited him to come under the curtain. The noblemen bowed to him, and Yan Luo bowed back to thank him, and then said to the noblemen, "Now that you have come here, you must be interrogated. I don't know what merits you had before you died.

古文：贵人曰： 无。 
现代文：贵人答道： 没有。 
English: The dignitary replied: No.

古文：王曰： 在生数十年，既无善事，又不忠孝，今当奈何？ 
现代文：阎罗王说： 有生数十年，既无功德之事，又不忠帘孝，如今应当怎么办呢？ 
English: King Yama said: Having lived for decades, having neither merit nor loyalty, what should I do now?

古文：因嚬蹙曰： 可取所司处分。 
现代文：于是紧锁着眉头道： 送给主管人员去处分！ 
English: Then, with a furrowed brow, he said, "Send it to the person in charge for punishment!"

古文：贵人辞下，未数级，忽有大黑风到帘前，直吹贵人将去。遥见贵人在黑风中，吹其身忽长数丈，而状隳坏，或大或小，渐渐远去，便失所在。
现代文：贵人告辞退下，没等走下几级阶梯，突然一阵黑风刮来，一下子就把贵人卷走了，远远望去，见贵人在黑风的吹拂中身体忽然长大到几丈长，好像被撕碎了，被撕成大小不同的几部分，渐渐刮远了，什么也看不到了。
English: The nobleman bowed and retreated, and before he had gone down a few steps, a sudden gust of black wind blew and swept the nobleman away. Looking far away, he saw the nobleman's body suddenly grow to several feet in the blowing of the black wind. It seemed to be torn apart, torn into several parts of different sizes, and gradually swept away, and nothing could be seen.

古文：王见伫立，谓阶下人曰： 此是业风，吹此人入地狱矣。 
现代文：阎罗王一直站在楼上观看，对楼下的人说： 这是妖风，把这个人刮进地狱去了。 
English: King Yama had been standing on the upper floor watching, and said to the people below: "This is a demon wind, which has blown this man into hell."

古文：官因白思元等，王曰： 可捻筹定之。 
现代文：当官儿的告诉他，思元等人已在此等候多时，阎罗王说： 可以抓阄决定。 
English: When the official told him that Siyuan and others had been waiting here for a long time, Yan Luo Wang said: You can make a decision.

古文：因帘下投三疋绢下，令三人开之。
现代文：于是从帘子下面扔下三块绢布包，叫他们三人各捡一块打开。
English: So he threw down three cloth bags from under the curtain and told the three of them to each pick up one and open it.

古文：二人开绢，皆有当使字，唯思元绢开无有。
现代文：那两人打开自己捡到的布包一看，上面都有 当使 二字，唯独思元的布包上没有字。
English: When the two men opened the cloth bag they had found, they saw that there were two words on it, but there was no word on Shiyuan's cloth bag.

古文：王曰： 留二人，舍思元。 
现代文：阎罗王说： 留下这两个人。 没有要思元。
English: Yan Luo said, "Leave these two people, there is no need to think about Yuan."

古文：思元出殿门，门西墙有门东向，门外众僧数百，持幡花迎思元，云： 菩萨要见。 
现代文：思元走出殿门，在殿门西面的墙上有个向东开的门，门外有几百个僧人，手里拿着旗幡迎接思元，说： 菩萨邀请你进去相见。 
English: Sigen walked out of the temple gate. On the west wall of the temple gate, there was a gate that opened to the east. Outside the gate, there were hundreds of monks, holding banners in their hands to greet Sigen, saying, "The Bodhisattva invites you to come in and meet him."

古文：思元入院，院内地皆于清池，院内堂阁皆七宝，堂内有僧，衣金缕袈裟，坐宝床。
现代文：思元走到院内，只见院内的地面全在清清的池水上面，院内的楼阁房舍全是金银珍珠玛瑙等七宝镶嵌而成，殿堂里面有个僧人，穿的是金罗袈裟，坐在宝床上。
English: Siyuan walked into the courtyard, only to see that the floor of the courtyard was completely above the clear water of the pond. The courtyard's attic rooms were all made of gold, silver, pearl, onyx and other cloisonné inlaid. Inside the hall, there was a monk, wearing a golden robe, sitting on a treasure bed.

古文：思元之礼谒也，左右曰： 此地藏菩萨也。 
现代文：思元上前施礼拜见，身边的人说： 这是地藏菩萨。 
English: Siyuan came forward to pay homage, and the people around him said, "This is Jizang Bodhisattva."

古文：思元乃跪。
现代文：思元于是跪拜。
English: Shigen therefore knelt down.

古文：诸僧皆为赞叹声，思元闻之泣下。
现代文：各位僧人齐声颂赞，思元听了感动得流下泪来。
English: All the monks chanted in unison, and Si Yuan was moved to tears.

古文：菩萨告众曰： 汝见此人下泪乎？
现代文：菩萨告诉众僧道： 你们看见此人流泪了吧？
English: The Bodhisattva told the monks, "Did you see this man shed tears?

古文：此人去亦不久，闻昔之梵音，故流涕耳。 
现代文：这个人离开人间时间不长，所以听到原先熟悉的佛教颂赞之声，就流下了眼泪。 
English: The man had not long left this world, so when he heard the familiar Buddhist chanting, he shed tears.

古文：谓曰： 汝见此间事，到人间一一话之，当令世人闻之，改心修善。
现代文：菩萨对思元说： 你看到这里的事，回到人间后要一一向人们讲述，要让世人知道之后，改邪归正，好好行善。
English: The Bodhisattva said to Siyuan, "After you return to the human world, you should always tell people about the things you have seen here. After letting the world know, you should reform and do good.

古文：汝此生无杂行，常正念，可复来此。 
现代文：你这一生没有淫乱杀生的行为，以后要经常端正自己的信念，你还可以来到这里的。 
English: If you do not commit adultery and murder in this lifetime, you should always correct your beliefs in the future, and you can still come here.

古文：因令诸僧送归。
现代文：说完便令僧人们把他送回了人间。
English: After saying this, he ordered the monks to send him back to the world.

古文：思元初苏，具三十人食，别具二人肉食，皆有赠益，由此也。
现代文：思元当初苏醒过来时，准备了三十人的素食，又单独准备了两个人的肉食，对三十个僧人与两个吏卒都给了五千纸钱，就是因为有这段经历。
English: When Shiyuan first came to his senses, he prepared vegetarian food for thirty people, and meat for two people alone. He gave five thousand paper money to thirty monks and two officials because of this experience.

古文：思元活七日，又设大斋毕，思元又死。
现代文：思元复活后的第七大，又准备了大型的祭典，祭典结束后他又死了。
English: After Shiyuan's resurrection, a large-scale festival was prepared for the seventh grand festival. After the festival was over, he died.

古文：至晓苏云： 向又为菩萨所召，怒思元曰： 吾令汝具宣报应事，何不言之？ 
现代文：天亮时复苏过来说，他又被地藏菩萨召了去，生气地对他说： 我让你回去宣传报应的事，为什么不宣讲？ 
English: When he recovered at dawn, he said, he was again summoned by the Bodhisattva of the Earth, who angrily said to him, "I told you to go back and preach about retribution, why didn't you preach?

古文：将杖之，思元哀请乃放。 
现代文：菩萨要打棍以示惩罚，经他苦苦哀求才又放他回来了。
English: The Bodhisattva wanted to punish him by beating him with a stick, but he only let him go after he begged for his release.

古文：思元素不食酒肉，及得再生，遂乃洁净长斋，而其家尽不过中食。
现代文：思元一向不吃酒肉，这次死而复生之后，干脆不沾腥荤，永远吃素，他全家人也都中午后忌食。
English: Siyuan had always refused to eat meat and alcohol. After he was revived from the dead this time, he simply refused to eat any yakitori and became a vegetarian forever. His entire family also avoided eating after noon.

古文：而思元每人集处，必具言冥中事，人皆化之焉。僧齐之
现代文：而思元每当有人聚集在一起的时候，就必定向人讲述阴间如何报应的事，人们都被他感化了。僧齐之
English: Whenever there was a gathering of people, Shigen must have told them about the retribution in the underworld, and they were all influenced by him.

古文：胜业寺僧齐之好交游贵人，颇晓医术，而行多杂。
现代文：胜业寺僧人齐之喜欢与显贵的人物交往，很懂得医术，但行为举止随便，不大守戒规。
English: Qizhi, a monk at Shengye Temple, likes to socialize with dignitaries and is very knowledgeable about medicine, but he behaves in a casual manner and does not strictly observe the precepts.

古文：天宝五载五月中病卒，二日而苏。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝五年五月中旬病故，两天后又复活了。
English: Tang Xuan Zong Tianbao died of illness in mid-May of the fifth year, and was revived two days later.

古文：因移居东禅定寺，院中建一堂，极华饰，长座横列等身像七躯。
现代文：复活之后使移居于东边的禅定寺，在寺院中修建了一间极为华丽的庙堂，堂内横排陈列着七座等身大的佛像。
English: After his resurrection, he moved to the Zenjo-ji Temple on the east side, where he built an extremely ornate temple hall with seven life-size Buddha statues lined up in a row.

古文：自此绝交游，精持戒。
现代文：从此之后停止了一切交际活动。精诚恪守戒律。
English: Since then, he has stopped all social activities and has faithfully followed the precepts.

古文：自言曰： 初死见录至鬼王庭，见一段肉，臭烂在地。王因问曰： 汝出家人，何因杀人？ 
现代文：他自己说，当初死过去的时候，被送到了鬼王的法庭，见有一块臭烂肉在地上，鬼王便问他道： 你是出家人，为什么杀人？ 
English: He said that when he died, he was taken to the court of the ghost king. When he saw a piece of rotten meat on the ground, the ghost king asked him, "You are a monk, why did you kill someone?"

古文：齐之不知所对。
现代文：齐之莫名其妙，无言以对。
English: It's all so inexplicable, I'm speechless.

古文：王曰： 汝何故杖杀寺家婢？ 
现代文：鬼王说： 你为什么打杀了寺庙上的女仆？ 
English: The demon king said, "Why did you kill the maidservant of the temple?"

古文：齐之方悟。
现代文：齐之这才明白是怎么回事。
English: That's when I realized what was going on.

古文：先是寺中小僧何马师与寺中青衣通，青衣后有异志，马师怒之，因构青衣于寺主。
现代文：在这之前，寺庙里的小和尚何马师与庙上的女仆私通，女仆后来变了心，何马师对她心怀怨恨，便向寺主诬陷她。
English: Prior to this, a minor monk in the temple, He Ma Shi, had an affair with a temple maid. The maid later changed her mind, and He Ma Shi harbored a grudge against her, so he framed her to the temple owner.

古文：其青衣，不臧之人也，寺主亦素怨之，因众僧堂食未散，召青衣对众。
现代文：这个女仆本不是清白之人，寺主平日也很恨她，便乘众僧集体吃饭还没散的时候，把女仆找来，当着大家的面用竹条抽她。
English: This maid was not an innocent person, and the head of the temple hated her very much on weekdays, so he took advantage of the fact that the monks were still having a group meal, to find the maid and whip her with a bamboo stick in front of everyone.

古文：且棰杀之。齐之谏寺主曰： 出家之人，护身口意，戒律之制，造次不可违，而况集众杀乎？ 
现代文：齐之劝说寺主道： 出家之人，在行为、说话、意志方面，却要遵守戒律，切切不可违背；况且又是当着众僧大开杀戒呢？ 
English: Qi Zhi advised the head of the temple: An ordained person, in terms of behavior, speech, and will, must abide by the precepts and must not violate them; moreover, did he kill the precepts in front of all the monks?

古文：马师赞寺主。
现代文：何马师则极力称赞、怂恿寺主的打人行为。
English: He Ma Shi, on the other hand, highly praised the beating behavior of the head priest.

古文：寺主大怒，不纳齐之，遂棰朴交至，死于堂下。
现代文：寺主十分恼火，根本不采纳齐之的劝告，连抽带打，女仆便被活活打死在院子里。
English: The head of the temple was so annoyed that he did not take Qi Zhi's advice at all, and even beat her with a belt. The maid was then beaten to death in the courtyard.

古文：故齐之悟王之问，乃言曰： 杀人者寺主，得罪者马师，今何为见问？ 
现代文：因为有这件事，所以齐之明白了鬼王的问话，齐之便说道： 杀人者是寺主，得罪她的是何马师，现在为什么问罪于我？ 
English: Because of this incident, Qi Zhi understood the demon king's question. Qi Zhi then said: The murderer is the temple's lord. It was He Ma Shi who offended her. Why are you blaming me now?

古文：王前臭肉，忽有声曰： 齐之杀我。 
现代文：鬼王前面的那块臭肉忽然发出声音来： 是齐之杀了我。 
English: The piece of stinking meat in front of the demon king suddenly uttered a voice: It was Qi who killed me.

古文：王怒曰： 婢何不起而卧言？ 
现代文：鬼王愤怒地喝道： 奴婢为什么不识长辈，而要躺在那里说话呢？ 
English: The demon king shouted angrily, "Why don't slaves and maids know their elders, but lie there and talk?

古文：臭肉忽起为人，则所杀青衣。
现代文：臭肉突然站了起来变成一个人，正是被打死的那个女仆。
English: Stinking Flesh suddenly stood up and turned into a person, the very maid who had been beaten to death.

古文：与齐之辩对数反，乃言曰： 当死时，楚痛闷乱，但闻旁有劝杀之声，疑是齐之，所以诉之。 
现代文：女仆与齐之你来我往地辩论了几个回合，后来便说： 当我快被打死的时候，神经迷乱，只听到旁边有怂恿寺主打死我的声音，怀疑是齐之，所以告了他。 
English: The maid and Qi You went back and forth for several rounds of debate, and later said: When I was about to be beaten to death, my nerves were confused, and I only heard the voice of the head of the Zou Temple next to me beating me to death. I suspected Qi, so I sued him.

古文：王曰： 追寺主。 
现代文：鬼王说： 追拿寺主！ 
English: The demon king said, "Let's go after the head of the temple!"

古文：阶吏曰： 福多不可追。 
现代文：阶下差吏说道： 寺主做的功德很多，不能捉拿。 
English: A lower-ranking official said, "The merits of the temple's head priest are many, and they can't be taken away.

古文：曰： 追马师。 
现代文：鬼王说： 追拿何马师！ 
English: The demon king said, "What a way to catch a horse trainer!

古文：吏曰： 马师命未尽。 
现代文：差吏说道： 何马师的寿命未尽。 
English: The policeman said: He Ma Shi's life is not over.

古文：王曰： 且收青衣，放齐之。 
现代文：鬼王使说： 暂且收下女仆，释放齐之。 
English: The demon king's messenger said, "For the time being, take in the maids and release them all.

古文：初齐之入，见王座有一僧一马。及门，僧亦出，齐之礼谒。
现代文：齐之刚进来时，看见鬼王座旁有一个僧人一匹马，现被释放走到门口时，僧人也出来了，齐之便上前施礼拜见。
English: When Qizhi first came in, he saw a monk and a horse next to the throne. When he was released and walked to the door, the monk also came out, and Qizhi went forward to pay homage.

古文：僧曰： 吾地藏菩萨也。
现代文：僧人说道： 我是地藏菩萨。
English: The monk said, "I am the Bodhisattva of the Earth."

古文：汝缘福少，命且尽。所以独追。
现代文：你因为功德做得少，寿命又尽了，所以独独把你追拿来了。
English: You have done little because of your merits, and your lifespan is over, so I have come after you.

古文：今可坚持僧戒，舍汝俗事，住闲静寺，造等身像七躯。
现代文：如今回去之后，可要坚守僧人戒律，丢掉你与尘俗交往的那些事，住在闲静的寺院里，另造等身佛像七尊。
English: Now that you have returned, you should stick to the precepts of a monk, throw away the things you have associated with the world, live in a quiet temple, and make seven statues of the living Buddha.

古文：如不能得钱，彩画亦得。 
现代文：如果不能弄到钱，用彩笔画七幅佛像也可以。 
English: If you can't get the money, you can also draw seven Buddha statues with colored pens.

古文：齐之既苏，遂乃从其言焉。
现代文：齐之复活之后。便遵从菩萨的告诫住到了禅定寺。
English: After Qi's resurrection, he followed the bodhisattva's admonition and lived in a Zen temple.

古文：张无是
现代文：张无是
English: Zhang Muzhe

古文：唐天宝十二载冬，有司戈张无是居在布政坊。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝十二年冬天。有个司戈张无是居住在布政坊。
English: In the winter of the twelfth year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, there was a scholar named Zhang Muxiong who lived in Buzhengfang.

古文：因行街中，夜鼓绝门闭，遂趋桥下而蜷。
现代文：一天晚上，他正走在大街上时，最后一遍鼓声敲完之后，大门都关闭了，他便悄悄溜到桥下蜷缩起来。
English: One night, he was walking down the street when, after the last drumbeat, the gates were closed and he crept under the bridge and curled up.

古文：夜半，忽有数十骑至桥，驻马言： 使乙至布政坊，将马一乘往取十余人。 
现代文：半夜时，突然听到有几十人骑马来到桥上。勒住马说道： 某某去布政坊，带上一匹马到那里把这十几个人拿来。 
English: In the middle of the night, he suddenly heard dozens of people riding onto the bridge. He reined in his horse and said, "So-and-so, go to Buzenbo, take a horse there, and bring these dozen people."

古文：其二人，一则无是妻，一则同曲富叟王翁。
现代文：十几个人中有两人，一个是张无是的妻子，一个则是张无是同一街的富翁王老头。
English: Among more than a dozen people, there are two people, one is Zhang Mujia's wife, and the other is Zhang Mujia's rich friend Wang Lao, who lives in the same street.

古文：无是闻之大惊。
现代文：张无是听了大吃一惊。
English: Zhang Muzhe was taken aback.

古文：俄而取者至云： 诸人尽得，唯无是妻诵金刚经，善神护之，故不得。 
现代文：不一会儿，那个去抓人的回来报告说： 几个人都抓到了，唯独张无是妻子正在诵念《金刚经》，有神灵保护她，所以没抓到。 
English: After a while, the person who went to arrest people came back and reported: Several people were arrested, but Zhang Muxin's wife was chanting the Diamond Sutra. She was protected by gods, so she was not arrested.

古文：因喝所得人名，皆应曰： 唯。 
现代文：于是吆喝着抓来的人名，一个个都应一声 是 。
English: So they called out the names of the people they had captured, and everyone answered yes.

古文：无是亦识王翁，应声答曰毕，俄而鼓动。
现代文：张无是也认识王老头，听到他也被抓来了。
English: Zhang Muzhe also knew Wang Lao Tou, and heard that he was also arrested.

古文：无是归家，见其妻犹诵经坐待。
现代文：点名与应答结束之后，不一会儿便响起了解除夜禁的鼓声。张无是回到家里，见妻子仍然念诵佛经，坐着等他。
English: After the roll call and the answer, the drumbeat to lift the curfew was soon heard. Zhang Muxi returned home to find his wife still chanting Buddhist scriptures and sitting waiting for him.

古文：无是既至，妻曰： 汝常不外宿，吾恐汝犯夜，故诵经不眠相待。 
现代文：无是既已到家，妻子便说： 你平常不在外面住宿，我怕你违犯夜禁被治罪，所以念经祈求保佑，等了你一宿没有睡觉。 
English: However, when he got home, his wife said, "You usually don't stay out overnight. I'm afraid you'll be punished for breaking the curfew, so I prayed for your protection and waited for you to stay up all night."

古文：天晓，闻南邻哭声，无是问之，则王翁死矣。
现代文：天亮之后，听到南面邻居的哭声，无是一打听，原来是王老头死了。
English: After dawn, I heard the cries of my neighbor to the south, and all of a sudden, it turned out that Old Wang had died.

古文：无是大惧，因以具告其妻，妻亦大惧。
现代文：无是非常恐惧，便把夜里在桥下听到的事情告诉了妻子，妻子听了也非常恐惧害怕。
English: He was very scared and told his wife what he had heard under the bridge at night. His wife was also very scared.

古文：因移出宅，谒名僧，发誓愿长斋，日则诵经四十九遍。
现代文：他们便从家里搬走了，去拜访了一位名僧，发下誓愿永远守斋，每天诵经四十九遍。
English: They moved away from home, went to visit a famous monk, and made a vow to always fast and chant forty-nine times a day.

古文：由是得免。
现代文：于是，张无是的妻子便没有被鬼抓走。
English: In this way, one steward's house was spared from disaster.

古文：张应
现代文：张应
English: Zhang Ying

古文：历阳张应本是魔家，娶佛家女为妇。
现代文：历阳的张应本是巫道之人，娶了佛教信徒人家的女儿为媳妇。
English: Liyang's Zhang Yingrong was originally a practitioner of witchcraft and married a Buddhist believer's daughter as his daughter-in-law.

古文：妻病困，为魔事不差。
现代文：妻子患病时，张应运用巫术治疗。
English: When his wife falls ill, Zhang should use witchcraft to cure her.

古文：妻曰： 我本佛家女，乞为佛事。 
现代文：病情丝毫不见好转。妻子说： 我本是佛教信徒人家的女儿，求你替我利用佛教的办法治一治。 
English: His condition did not improve at all. His wife said, "I am the daughter of a Buddhist family. Please cure me using Buddhist methods."

古文：应便往精舍中见竺昙铠，铠曰： 佛普济众生，但当一心受持耳。
现代文：张应便到寺院里拜见竺昙铠，昙铠说： 佛家是普济众生的，但应专心供奉才是。
English: Zhang Ying then went to the temple to see Zou. Zou said, "Buddhist families are pious beings, but they should devote themselves to worshiping.

古文：昙铠明当往其家。 
现代文：明天我会去你家的。 
English: I'll come to your house tomorrow.

古文：其夜，应梦见一人，长一丈四五尺，于南面趋走入门，曰： 此家乃尔不净。 
现代文：当天夜里，张应梦见一个人，身长一丈四五尺，从南面慢慢走进了门，说： 这个家里如此地不干净！ 
English: That night, Zhang Ying had a dream about a man who was four or five feet tall. He slowly walked into the door from the south and said, "This house is so unclean!

古文：梦中见铠，随此人后而白曰： 此处如欲发意，未可以一二责之。 
现代文：梦中见昙铠跟随这个巨人身后，对张应说： 这个地方有向诚之心，不可能用一两处小错责怪他了。 
English: In the dream, I saw Zhai Rong following the giant and said to Zhang Ying: This place has a sincere heart, it is impossible to blame him for one or two small mistakes.

古文：应眠觉，遂把火作高座。
现代文：张应睡醒之后，便点火照明赶紧制作高台。
English: After Zhang Ying woke up, he quickly made a high platform by igniting the lighting.

古文：铠明日食时往应家，高座已成，夫妻受戒，病亦寻瘥。
现代文：昙铠第二天吃早饭时来到张应家，高台已经作成，夫妻二人便由昙铠受了戒。
English: The next day, Zou came to Zhang Ying's house for breakfast. The high table had already been made, and the couple received the precepts from Zou.

古文：咸康二年，应病甚，遣人呼铠，连不在。
现代文：受戒之后，妻子的病很快就好了。晋成帝咸康二年。张应病重，派人招呼昙铠，去了几次昙铠都不在。
English: After receiving the precepts, his wife's illness soon got better. It was two years after the enthronement of Emperor Xiankang. Zhang Ying was seriously ill, so he sent someone to call on Yao. When he went several times, Yao was not there.

古文：应死得苏，说时有数人，以铁钩钩将北下一板岸，岸下见镬汤、刀山、剑树、楚毒之具。
现代文：张应死而复活之后，说当时有几个人用铁钩子钩着他，往北走，从一陡岸上下去，岸下见有沸汤、刀山、剑树、棍棒之类的残酷刑具。
English: After Zhang Ying's resurrection from the dead, he said that at that time several people hooked him with iron hooks, walked north, and went down a steep bank. Beneath the bank, there were boiling soup, knife mountain, sword tree, clubs and other cruel torture tools.

古文：应忘昙铠字，但唤 和尚救我 ，语钩将去人曰： 我是佛子。 
现代文：张应当时忘记了昙铠的字号，只是呼唤为： 和尚救我 ，对钩他走的人说： 我是佛教弟子。 
English: Zhang should have forgotten the sign of the crossbow at that time, but only called out: Monk, save me, and said to the person who hooked him: I am a Buddhist disciple.

古文：人曰： 汝和尚字何等？ 
现代文：那人问他道： 你师父的字号是什么？ 
English: The man asked him, "What is your master's name?"

古文：应忘其字，但唤佛而已。
现代文：张应忘记了师父的字号，只是一个劲儿地喊 佛 而已。
English: Zhang Ying forgot the master's name and just shouted "Buddha" vigorously.

古文：俄转近镬汤，有一人长一丈四五尺，捉金杵欲撞。应走，人怖散去。
现代文：不一会儿便把他推到大锅的沸水跟前，有一个身长一丈四五尺的巨人走来，手持铁棍就要往大锅上撞去，张应离开了，抓他来的那些人都吓得四散逃跑了。
English: After a while, he pushed him to the boiling water of the cauldron. A four- or five-foot-tall giant came, holding an iron rod and about to hit the cauldron. Zhang Ying left, and the people who had come to catch him fled in fear.

古文：长人将应归曰： 汝命尽，不得复生。
现代文：巨人把张应带回来说： 你的寿命已经完了，不能再复活。
English: The giant brought Zhang Ying back and said, "Your life is over, you cannot be revived.

古文：与汝三日中，期诵三偈。取和尚字还。当令汝生。
现代文：给你三天期限，你要念诵三段偈语话，拿到你师父的字号回来，就会让你托生。 
English: Give you a three-day deadline, you have to recite three paragraphs of verse language, get your master's name back, it will let you drop out.

古文：遂推应著门内，便活。
现代文：说完便把张应推到了门内。张应于是得以复活。
English: After saying this, he pushed Zhang Ying into the door. Zhang Ying was then able to revive.

古文：后三日复死。
现代文：三天之后他又死了。
English: Three days later he died again.

古文：道严
现代文：道严
English: Dojan

古文：有严师者，居于成都实历寺。
现代文：有个严法师，住在成都的宝历寺。
English: There is a strict mage who lives in Chengdu's Baoli Temple.

古文：唐开元十四年五月二十一日，于佛殿前轩，燃长明灯，忽见一巨手，在殿西轩。
现代文：唐玄宗开元十四年五月二十一日，他在佛殿前面平台上点燃长明灯时，忽然看见一只巨大的手掌出现在西面平台上。
English: On the 21st day of May in the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, when he was lighting the long lantern on the platform in front of the Buddhist temple, he suddenly saw a huge palm appear on the west platform.

古文：道严悸且甚，俯而不动。
现代文：道严惊吓得心直跳，趴在墙上一动不动。
English: Dao Yan was so scared that his heart skipped a beat. He lay motionless on the wall.

古文：久之，忽闻空中语云： 无惧无惧，吾善神也，且不敢害师之一毫。
现代文：过了一会儿，突然听到空中说道： 不要害怕，不要害怕，我是善良的神，绝对不敢伤害法师一丝一毫的。
English: After a while, I suddenly heard a bird in the sky saying, "Don't be afraid, don't be afraid, I am a kind god, I would never dare to harm a sorcerer in the slightest."

古文：何俯而不动耶？ 
现代文：为什么趴着不敢动弹呢？ 
English: Why doesn't the crane dare to move while lying on its back?

古文：道严既闻，惧少解，因问曰： 檀越为何人？
现代文：道严听到这么说，惊怕稍稍减轻了些，便问道： 施主你是什么人？
English: When Doyan heard this, his fear eased a little, and he asked, "Who is your benefactor?"

古文：匿其躯而见其手乎？ 
现代文：为什么隐藏着身体而只看见你的手呢？ 
English: Why hide your body and only show your hands?

古文：已而闻空中对曰： 天命我护佛寺之地。
现代文：问完之后便听空中答道： 上天派我来保护佛寺之地。
English: After finishing the question, he answered from the air: Heaven sent me to protect the land of the Buddhist temple.

古文：以世人好唾佛祠地，我即以背接之，受其唾。
现代文：因为世人好往佛祠之地吐唾沫，因此背上生了疮，严重地腐蚀着我的肌肤。
English: Because the world likes to spit on the place of the Buddhist shrine, I developed sores on my back, severely eroding my skin.

古文：由是背有疮，渍吾肌且甚，愿以膏油傅其上。
现代文：请给我些膏油涂抹一下，可以吗？ 道严便把清油放在巨大的手掌上，那只巨手立即抽了回去。
English: Could you please apply some ointment for me?Doyan put the oil on the huge palm, and the giant hand immediately pumped it back.

古文：可乎？ 道严遂以清油置巨手中，其手即引去。道严乃请曰： 吾今愿见檀越之形，使画工写于屋壁，且书其事以表之，冀世人无敢唾佛祠之地者。 
现代文：道严请求道： 我现在希望能够看施主的形貌，以便让画工把你的形象画在墙壁上，而且记上这件事，用以表彰于世人，希望世人再不敢往佛庙的地方吐唾沫。 
English: Doyan pleaded, "I now hope to be able to see the shape of the donor, so that the painter can paint your image on the wall, and record this event to commend it to the world, and hope that the world will no longer dare to spit on the place of the Buddhist temple."

古文：神曰： 吾貌甚陋，师见之，无得栗然耶？ 
现代文：神说： 我的形貌特别丑陋，法师见了之后，不能受惊吗？ 
English: God said: My appearance is particularly ugly. After the sorcerer saw it, couldn't he be frightened?

古文：道严曰： 檀越但见其身，勿我阻也。 
现代文：道严说： 施主只管显现自己的身形，不要管我。 
English: Doyan said: The donor only needs to show his body shape, don't mind me.

古文：见西轩下有一神，质甚异，丰首巨准，严目呀口，体状魁硕，长数丈。
现代文：只见西面平台下边有一个神灵，形体十分奇异，肥大的脑袋，又高又宽的鼻梁，双目圆睁，裂着大嘴，躯干高大魁梧，身长好几丈。
English: Just below the platform on the west side, I saw a deity with a very strange shape, a large head, a high and wide bridge of the nose, round eyes, a large gaping mouth, a tall and burly torso, and several feet in height.

古文：道严一见，背汗如沃。
现代文：道严一见，吓得汗流浃背。
English: At the first sight of Doran, he was so scared that he was sweating profusely.

古文：其神即隐去。
现代文：那位神灵很快就隐身而去。
English: The spirit quickly disappeared into thin air.

古文：于是具以神状告画工，命图于西轩之壁。
现代文：于是，道严便把神灵的形状详细地告诉了画匠，让他画在佛殿西面平台的墙壁上。
English: As a result, Doyan told the painter the shape of the deity in detail and asked him to paint it on the wall of the platform on the west side of the Buddhist temple.

