古文：起旃蒙作噩，尽重光单阏，凡七年。
现代文：起，止，一共七年。汉章帝元和二年
English: It lasted for a total of seven years. Emperor Han Zang was crowned in the year 2

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝下元和二年
现代文：春季，正月乙酉，章帝下诏说： 法令规定： 凡有百姓生育，免收人头税三年。 
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying: The law stipulates: Any commoner who gives birth is exempt from paying the head tax for three years.

古文：春，正月，乙酉，诏曰： 令云： 民有产子者，复勿算三岁。 今诸怀妊者，赐胎养谷人三斛，复其夫勿算一岁。
现代文：如今再作规定：所有怀孕的妇女，由官府赏赐胎养谷，每人三斛，免收其丈夫人头税一年。将此诏书定为法令！ 
English: Now it is stipulated again: all pregnant women shall be rewarded by the government with womb-raising grain, three shekels each, and their husband's head tax shall be exempted for one year. Make this edict a law!

古文：著以为令！ 又诏三公曰： 夫俗吏矫饰外貌，似是而非，朕甚餍之，甚苦之！安静之吏，悃愊无华，日计不足，月计有余。
现代文：又对三公下诏说： 踏实稳重的官吏，诚恳而无虚华，考察他每日的劳绩，好象不足，而考察他每月的劳绩，便绰绰有余了。
English: He also said to the three emperors: An official who is steadfast and steady, sincere and without vanity, looking at his daily performance seems to be insufficient, but looking at his monthly performance is more than enough.

古文：如襄城令刘方，吏民同声谓之不烦，虽未有它异，斯亦殆近之矣！
现代文：例如襄城县令刘方，当地官民异口同声地说他为政从简，不烦扰百姓。他虽然没有其它特殊的表现，但这也接近了朕的要求了！
English: For example, Liu Fang, the governor of Xiangcheng County, the local officials and people unanimously said that he was a good politician and did not bother the people. Although he did not have any other special performance, this was also close to my request!

古文：夫以苛为察，以刻为明，以轻为德，以重为威，四者或兴，则下有怨心。
现代文：如果以苛求为明察，以刻薄为智慧，以对过失从轻发落为德，从重惩处为威，一旦有了这四种观念，那么下面的人民就会心怀怨恨。
English: Whether it is demanding, mean-spirited, light-hearted, or heavy-handed, there is resentment underneath.

古文：吾诏书数下，冠盖接道，而吏不加治，民或失职，其咎安在？
现代文：朕曾不断地下诏，颁行诏书的使者车驾在路上前后相接，然而吏治不见好转，有些百姓仍然不守本份，毛病出在哪里？
English: I have repeatedly issued edicts underground, and the cars of the emissaries issuing the edicts have been driving side by side on the road. However, there has been no improvement in the treatment of officials, and some people still do not perform their duties. What is the cause of the problem?

古文：勉思旧令，称朕意焉！ 
现代文：希望各位官员，努力牢记以往的法令，以称朕意！ 
English: I hope that all officials will try to keep in mind the previous laws and regulations in order to express our will!

古文：北匈奴大人车利涿兵等亡来入塞，凡七十三辈。
现代文：北匈奴首领车利涿兵等叛逃，投奔到汉朝边塞，前后共有七十三批人。
English: Northern Hun chieftain Che Lihong defected and fled to the Han Dynasty border fortress. There were a total of 73 groups of people.

古文：时北虏衰耗，党众离畔，南部攻其前，丁零寇其后，鲜卑击其左，西域侵其右，不复自立，乃远引而去。
现代文：当时北匈奴力量衰弱，各部落纷纷离散反叛，南匈奴进攻它的南部地区，丁零进攻北部地区，鲜卑进攻东部地区，西域各国进攻西部地区。北匈奴四面受敌，不再能独立自保，便离开故地向远方迁移。
English: At that time, the enemy in the north was weak and worn out, the troops were defecting, the southern Huns were attacking in the front, Ding Zi invaded their rear, Xianbei attacked on the left side, the western region invaded on the right side, the northern Huns could not stand on their own, and had to retreat far away.

古文：南单于长死，单于汗之子宣立，为伊屠于闾鞮单于。
现代文：南匈奴单于长去世，前单于汗的儿子宣继位，此即伊屠於闾单于。
English: Southern Xiongnu Shan died in the beginning, and the son of former Shan and Khan, Xuan, succeeded to the throne. This was the beginning of the reign of Yidu in the Southern Xiongnu.

古文：《太初历》施行百馀年，历稍后天。
现代文：《太初历》已经实施了一百多年，渐与天象不合，略微向后延迟。
English: The "Taihatsu calendar" has been implemented for more than a hundred years. Gradually, it does not coincide with the celestial phenomenon, and it is slightly delayed.

古文：上命治历编、李梵等综校其状，作《四分历》；二月，甲寅，始施行之。
现代文：章帝命令治历官编、李梵等整理校正误差，制定了《四分历》。本年二月甲寅，开始实施这一新历法。
English: Emperor Zhang ordered the editor of the calendar, Li Fan, to sort out and correct the errors, and formulated the "Quarterly Calendar." In February of this year, the implementation of this new calendar began.

古文：帝之为太子也，受《尚书》于东郡太守汝南张酺。
现代文：章帝做太子的时候，曾师从现任东郡太守汝南人张学习《尚书》。
English: When Emperor Zhang was crown prince, he learned "Shang Shu" from Zhang Nanren, the current East County Governor.

古文：丙辰，帝东巡，幸东郡，引酺及门生并郡县掾史并会庭中。帝先备弟子之仪，使酺讲《尚书》一篇，然后修君臣之礼；赏赐殊特，莫不沾洽。
现代文：二月丙辰，章帝前往东方巡视，临幸东郡。章帝带领张及其学生，连同郡县官吏在郡府庭中集会，章帝先行弟子之礼，让张讲解《尚书》一篇，然后改行君臣之礼。章帝特别颁发赏赐，与会者无不满意欢喜。
English: In February, Emperor Zhang went on a tour of the East, and visited Dong County. Emperor Zhang led Zhang and his students, together with county and prefectural officials, to a meeting in the county palace. Emperor Zhang gave Zhang the honor of being the first disciple, asked him to explain an article from the Shang Shu, and then changed it to the honor of being a prince and a minister. Emperor Zhang specially awarded rewards, and the participants were all pleased and satisfied.

古文：行过任城，幸郑均舍，赐尚书禄以终其身，时人号为 白衣尚书 。
现代文：途经任城时，章帝临幸郑均家，赐给他尚书俸禄，享用终身。因平民穿白衣，所以当时人称郑均为 白衣尚书 。
English: When passing through Rencheng, Emperor Zhang blessed Zheng Jun's family and gave him Shangshu stipend to enjoy for life. Because the commoners wore white clothes, Zheng Jun was known as Shangshu the White.

古文：乙丑，帝耕于定陶。
现代文：二月乙丑，章帝在定陶举行耕藉之礼。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Zhang cultivated in Dingtao.

古文：辛未，幸泰山，柴告岱宗；进幸奉高。
现代文：二月辛未，临幸泰山，燃柴祭告岱宗。继而前往奉高。
English: In February, shortly before the arrival of Mount Tai, a firewood-burning ceremony was held in honor of the founder. He then went to Fenggao.

古文：壬申，宗祀五帝于汶上明堂；丙子，赦天下。
现代文：二月壬申，在汶上明堂祭祀五帝。二月丙子，大赦天下。
English: In February, Jinshin, the Five Emperors are worshipped in the Wen Shangming Hall. In February, Cixi, the emperor is pardoned.

古文：戊寅，进幸济南。
现代文：继而临幸济南。
English: He then went to Jinan.

古文：三月，己丑，幸鲁，庚寅，祠孔子于阙里，及七十二弟子，作六代之乐，大会孔氏男子二十以上者六十二人。
现代文：三月己丑，临幸鲁。三月庚寅，在阙里祭祀孔子以及孔子的七十二位弟子，奏黄帝、尧、舜、禹、汤、周等六代古乐，并举行大会，召见孔家二十岁以上的男子共六十二人。
English: In March, Geng Yin held a festival in Bali to worship Confucius and his seventy-two disciples, playing the ancient music of the six dynasties, including Huangdi, Gong, Gong, Yu, Tang, and Zhou, and held a conference to summon a total of sixty-two men over the age of twenty.

古文：帝谓孔僖曰： 今日之会，宁于卿宗有光荣乎？ 
现代文：章帝对孔僖说： 今天的大会，对你们家族是不是很荣耀？ 
English: Zhang Di said to Kong Yao: Is today's assembly a great honor for your family?

古文：对曰： 臣闻明王圣主，莫不尊师贵道。
现代文：孔僖回答道： 我听说，圣明的君王无不尊重师道。
English: Confucius replied, "I have heard that the wise and holy Lord does not show disrespect to teachers.

古文：今陛下亲屈万乘，辱临敝里，此乃崇礼先师，增辉圣德；至于光荣，非所敢承。 
现代文：如今陛下以天子的身份亲自屈驾，光临我们卑微的乡里，这是崇敬先师，发扬君王的圣德。至于说荣耀，我们可不敢当！ 
English: Now, Your Majesty, as the Son of Heaven, has stooped down to visit our humble village. This is to venerate our forefathers and promote the sacredness of kings. As for glory, we dare not!

古文：帝大笑曰： 非圣者子孙焉有斯言乎！ 
现代文：章帝大笑，说道： 不是圣人的子孙，怎能说出这样的话！ 
English: Zhang Di laughed loudly and said, "I am not the descendant of a saint, how can I say such a thing!"

古文：拜僖郎中。
现代文：于是将孔僖任命为郎中。
English: As a result, he appointed Kong Hao as a retainer.

古文：壬辰，帝幸东平，追念献王，谓其诸子曰： 思其人，至其乡；其处在，其人亡。 
现代文：三月壬辰，章帝临幸东平国，追念前东平王刘苍，对刘苍的儿子们说： 我想念他，来到他的故地，屋舍尚在，人已死亡！ 
English: At the end of March, Emperor Zhang went to Dongping to pay his respects to the former Dongping King Liu Cang, and said to Liu Cang's sons: I miss him, I came to his hometown, the house is still there, but the man is dead!

古文：因泣下沾襟。
现代文：说着，流下眼泪，沾湿衣襟。
English: Saying this, he shed tears and wet his collar.

古文：遂幸献王陵，祠以太牢，亲拜祠坐，哭泣尽哀。
现代文：于是来到刘苍陵墓，命人用牛、羊、猪三牲设祭。章帝亲自在祠庙祭拜刘苍的牌位，尽情地哭泣。
English: So he came to Liu Cang's tomb and ordered a sacrifice to be made with cattle, sheep, and pigs. Emperor Zhang himself offered a place to worship Liu Cang at the ancestral temple and wept heartily.

古文：献王之归国也，骠骑府吏丁牧、周栩以王爱贤下士，不忍去之，遂为王家大夫数十年，事祖及孙。
现代文：当年东平王刘苍从京城归国时，原骠骑将军府官员丁牧、周栩因刘苍礼贤下士，不忍离去，便留下来做了亲王府的家臣，至今已数十年，曾事奉刘苍祖孙三代。
English: When Dongping King Liu Cang returned from Beijing that year, the former cavalry officers of the General Office, Ding Mu and Zhou Tuo, could not bear to leave because Liu Cang was a corporal, so they stayed and became the vassals of the Prince's Office. For decades, they have served Liu Cang's ancestors for three generations.

古文：帝闻之，皆引见，既愍其淹滞，且欲扬献王德美，即皆擢为议郎。
现代文：章帝听说后，召见丁、周二人，既怜惜他们久居下位，又要宣扬刘苍的美德，便将他们全都擢升为议郎。
English: When Emperor Zhang heard of this, he summoned Ding and Zhou, both of whom he pitied for having remained in the lower ranks for so long, and he wanted to promote Liu Cang's virtues, so he promoted all of them to the position of muezzin.

古文：乙未，幸东阿，北登太行山，至天井关。
现代文：三月乙未，章帝临幸东阿，北行，登上太行山，到达天井关。
English: On the 16th, the emperor went to Dong'a, climbed Mount Taihang in the north, and arrived at Dingcheng Pass.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯，还宫。
现代文：夏季，四月乙卯，返回京城皇宫。
English: In the summer, they return to the Imperial Palace in April.

古文：庚申，假于祖祢。
现代文：四月庚申，到宗庙祭告出巡经过。
English: In April, Koshin, a procession was announced for the family temple festival.

古文：五月，徙江陵王恭为六安王。
现代文：五月，章帝将江陵王刘恭改封为六安王。
English: In May, Emperor Zhang changed the title of Jiangling King Liu Gong to Liuan King.

古文：秋，七月，庚子，诏曰： 《春秋》重三正，慎三微。
现代文：秋季，七月庚子，章帝下诏说： 《春秋》重天、地、人 三正 ，而慎 三微 ，即 三正 的开始。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Zhang issued the following edict: "Spring and Autumn" is the beginning of the Heaven, Earth, and Man San Zheng, and the Prudence San Wei, that is, the beginning of the San Zheng.

古文：其定律无以十一月、十二月报囚，止用冬初十月而已。 
现代文：现制定法律：每年的十一月、十二月，不许判决罪人。只准在冬初十月判决罪人。 
English: A law has now been enacted: Convicts are not allowed to be sentenced in November and December of each year. Convicts are only allowed to be sentenced in early winter in October.

古文：冬，南单于遣兵与北虏温禺犊王战于涿邪山，斩获而还。
现代文：冬季，南匈奴单于发兵，同北匈奴温禺犊王在涿邪山交战。
English: In the winter, the Southern Xiongnu sent troops alone and fought with the Northern Xiongnu, the King of Wenzhou, in the Ziyang Mountains.

古文：武威太守孟云上言： 北虏以前既和亲，而南部复往抄掠，北单于谓汉欺之，谋欲犯塞，谓宜还南所掠生口以慰安其意。 
现代文：南匈奴得胜，斩杀并俘虏北匈奴的人民和牲畜后返回。武威太守孟云上书说： 北匈奴先前已同汉朝和解，而南匈奴又去进行抢掠，北匈奴单于会说汉朝是在欺弄他，因而打算进犯边塞。我建议，应当让南匈奴归还抢来的俘虏和牲畜，以安抚北匈奴。 
English: The Southern Xiongnu returned after defeating, slaughtering and capturing the people and livestock of the Northern Xiongnu. Meng Yun, the military governor of Wuwei, wrote: The Northern Xiongnu had previously reconciled with the Han Dynasty, but the Southern Xiongnu went on a looting spree. The Northern Xiongnu would only say that the Han Dynasty was cheating him, so he planned to invade the frontier fortress. I suggested that the Southern Xiongnu should return the looted prisoners and livestock to appease the Northern Xiongnu.

古文：诏百官议于朝堂。
现代文：章帝下诏，命群臣在朝堂会商。
English: Emperor Zhang issued an edict ordering the courtiers to hold a meeting in the imperial hall.

古文：太尉郑弘、司空第五伦以为不可许，司徒桓虞及太仆袁安以为当与之。
现代文：太尉郑弘、司空第五伦认为不应归还，司徒桓虞和太仆袁安则认为应当归还。
English: Second Lieutenant Zheng Hong and Fifth Secretary of the Air Force Guo Lun believed that it should not be returned, while the Secretary of the Air Force Guan Yu and the First Secretary of the Navy Yuan An believed that it should be returned.

古文：弘因大言激厉虞曰： 诸言当还生口者，皆为不忠！ 
现代文：双方意见争执不下，郑弘因而大声激怒桓虞说： 凡是声称应当归还俘虏和牲畜的，都是不忠之人！ 
English: As the two sides continued to argue, Zheng Hong said in a loud voice, infuriating Kanyu: Anyone who claims that captives and livestock should be returned is a disloyal person!

古文：虞延叱之，伦及大鸿胪韦彪各作色变容。
现代文：桓虞也在朝堂呵斥郑弘，第五伦和大鸿胪韦彪全都愤怒得变了脸色。
English: Kanyu also rebuked Zheng Hong in the imperial court, and the Fifth Ron and the Great Hon Wei Biao all changed their faces in anger.

古文：司隶校尉举奏弘等，弘等皆上印绶谢。
现代文：于是司隶校尉上书弹劾郑弘等人，郑弘等人全都交上印信绶带谢罪。
English: As a result, Captain Sili wrote a letter to impeach Zheng Hong and others, and Zheng Hong and others all handed in a sealed letter with a thank you note.

古文：诏报曰： 久议沉滞，各有所志，盖事以议从，策由众定，訚訚衎衎，得礼之容，寝嘿抑心，更非朝廷之福。
现代文：章帝下诏答复道： 问题反复讨论，迟迟不决，群臣们的意见，各不相同。大事需要集思广益，政策需由众人商定。忠诚、正直而和睦，这才符合朝廷之礼，而缄默不语压抑情志，更不是朝廷之福。
English: Emperor Zhang replied, "Questions are discussed over and over, decisions are delayed, and the opinions of ministers are all different. Major events require brainstorming, and policies need to be agreed upon by everyone. Loyalty, honesty, and harmony are in line with the court's etiquette, and silence is not a blessing for the court.

古文：君何尤而深谢！
现代文：你们有什么过失要谢罪？
English: What fault do you have to apologize for?

古文：其各冠覆！ 
现代文：请各自戴上官帽，穿上鞋！ 
English: Please put on your official hats and shoes!

古文：帝乃下诏曰： 江海所以能长百川者，以其下之也。
现代文：于是章帝便下诏决定： 江海所以成为百川的首领，是由于其地势低下。
English: As a result, Emperor Zhang issued an edict: The reason why Jianghai became the leader of Baichuan was due to its low geographical position.

古文：少加屈下，尚何足病！
现代文：汉朝略受委屈，又有什么危害！
English: If the Han Dynasty is slightly aggrieved, what is the harm!

古文：况今与匈奴君臣分定，辞顺约明，贡献累至，岂宜违信，自受其曲！
现代文：何况如今在汉朝与北匈奴之间，君臣的名分已确定。北匈奴言辞恭顺而守约，不断进贡，难道我们应当违背信义，自陷于理亏的境地？
English: What's more, between the Han Dynasty and the Northern Xiongnu, the position of the sovereign and the subject has now been determined. The Northern Xiongnu has kept its word, honored the treaty, and continued to pay tribute. Should we violate the principle of good faith and find ourselves in a situation where we have lost all reason?

古文：其敕度辽及领中郎将庞奋，倍雇南部所得生口以还北虏；其南部斩首获生，计功受赏，如常科。 
现代文：现命令度辽将军兼中郎将庞奋，用加倍的价格赎买南匈奴所抢得的俘虏和牲畜，归还给北匈奴。而南匈奴曾杀敌擒虏，应当论功行赏，一如惯例。 
English: He now ordered General Du Liao and his second-in-command, General Pang Fengtong, to ransom the captives and livestock stolen by the Southern Xiongnu at double the price and return them to the Northern Xiongnu. The Southern Xiongnu had killed the enemy captives and should be rewarded for his deed, as usual.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝下元和三年
现代文：元和三年春季，正月丙申，章帝到北方巡视。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Yuan and the first month of the Hsin, Emperor Zhang went on a tour to the north.

古文：春，正月，丙申，帝北巡，辛丑，耕于怀；二月，乙丑，敕侍御史、司空曰： 方春所过，无得有所伐杀，车可以引避，引避之：騑马可辍解，辍解之。 
现代文：正月辛丑，在怀县举行耕藉之礼。二月乙丑，训令侍御史、司空说： 如今正值春季，我所经过的地方，不得造成任何伤害。车辆可以绕行便绕行，驾车的边马能够解除便解除。 
English: In the first month of Xinwu, a ceremony was held in Huai County to celebrate the end of the farming year. In the second month of February, in the beginning of the second month, the order was given to the attendant of history, Siku, saying: Now it is spring, where I pass, I must not cause any harm. If the vehicle can be bypassed, it will be bypassed, and if the driving horse can be lifted, it will be lifted.

古文：戊辰，进幸中山，出长城；癸酉，还，幸元氏；三月，己卯，进幸赵；辛卯，还宫。
现代文：二月戊辰，前往中山国，穿越长城。二月癸酉，返回，临幸元氏县。三月己卯，前往赵国。三月辛卯，返回京城皇宫。
English: In February, he went to Zhongshan Province and crossed the Great Wall. In February, he returned to Linxingyuan County. In March, he went to Zhao Province. In March, he returned to the Imperial Palace in Beijing.

古文：太尉郑弘数陈侍中窦宪权势太盛，言甚苦切，宪疾之。
现代文：太尉郑弘屡次上书，指出侍中窦宪的权势太盛，言辞极具苦心而恳切，窦宪对他十分怀恨。
English: Second Lieutenant Zheng Hong repeatedly wrote, pointing out that Dou Xian, the chamberlain, was too powerful, his words were very painstaking and earnest, and Dou Xian held a great grudge against him.

古文：会弘奏宪党尚书张林、雒阳令杨光在官贪残。书奏，吏与光故旧，因以告之，光报宪。
现代文：后来，当郑弘弹劾窦宪的党羽尚书张林和洛阳令杨光，说他们为官贪赃枉法而行为残暴的时候，奏书呈上，处理奏书的官吏却是杨光的旧交，此人便通知杨光，杨光又报告了窦宪。
English: Later, when Zheng Hong impeached Dou Xian's party members Zhang Lin and Luoyang Yang Guang, saying that they had acted brutally for official corruption, the report was submitted, but the official who handled the report was an old friend of Yang Guang. This person informed Yang Guang, and Yang Guang reported Dou Xian.

古文：宪奏弘大臣，漏泄密事，帝诘让弘。
现代文：于是窦宪弹劾郑弘身为重臣，泄露机密。章帝因此责问郑弘。
English: As a result, Dou Xian impeached Zheng Hong for being a senior vassal and leaking secrets. Emperor Zhang therefore interrogated Zheng Hong.

古文：夏，四月，丙寅，收弘印缓。
现代文：夏季，四月丙寅，收回郑弘的印信绶带。
English: In the summer, in April, Zheng Hong's seal ribbon was taken back.

古文：弘自诣延尉，诏敕出之，因乞骸骨归，未许。
现代文：郑弘亲自到廷尉投案待审，章帝下诏将他释放。
English: Zheng Hong personally went to the imperial lieutenant to submit to the case pending trial, and Emperor Zhang issued an edict to release him.

古文：病笃，上书陈谢曰： 窦宪奸恶，贯天达地，海内疑惑，贤愚疾恶，谓 宪何术以迷主上！
现代文：于是他请求退休回乡，但未被批准。郑弘病重，上书谢恩说： 窦宪的奸恶，上通于天，下达于地，天下人疑惑不解，贤者愚者心怀憎恶，都说： 窦宪用什么方法迷住了主上！
English: So he asked to retire and return to his hometown, but his request was not approved. Zheng Hong was seriously ill, and he wrote a letter to Shane saying, "Dou Xian's treachery has been reported to the heavens and reported to the earth. People all over the world are puzzled, and the wise and the foolish harbor hatred in their hearts. They all say, "What method did Dou Xian use to bewitch the Lord?"

古文：近日王氏之祸，昞然可见。 
现代文：近代王莽之祸，依然历历在目。 
English: The modern scourge of recklessness is still with us.

古文：陛下处天子之尊，保万世之祚，而信谗佞之臣，不计存亡之机；臣虽命在晷刻，死不忘忠，愿陛下诛四凶之罪，以厌人鬼愤结之望！ 
现代文：陛下居于天子的尊位，守护万世长存的帝业，却信任进谗献媚的奸臣，而不计较这是关系国家存亡的关键！我虽然命在顷刻之间，死而不忘效忠，愿陛下如舜帝除掉 四凶 一样惩办奸臣之罪，以平息人与鬼神共同的愤恨！ 
English: Your Majesty resides in the dignity of the Son of Heaven, guarding the eternal imperial inheritance, but trusts the flattering traitor, regardless of the fact that this is the key to the survival of the country! Although I live in an instant, I die without forgetting my loyalty, may Your Majesty punish the crime of the traitor as if the Emperor had eliminated the four evils, in order to quell the common resentment of man and gods!

古文：帝省章，遣医视弘病，比至，已薨。
现代文：章帝看到奏书后，派医生为郑弘诊病。当医生到达郑家的时候，郑弘已经去世。
English: After Emperor Zhang saw the report, he sent a doctor to diagnose Zheng Hong. When the doctor arrived at Zheng Hong's home, Zheng Hong had already passed away.

古文：以大司农宋由为太尉。
现代文：将大司农宋由任命为太尉。
English: He appointed the chief secretary, Nong Song Yu, to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：司空第五伦以老病乞身，五月，丙子，赐策罢，以二千石俸终其身。
现代文：司空第五伦因年老患病请求退休。五月丙子，章帝赐策书，将第五伦免官，赏给他二千石的终身俸禄。
English: In May, Emperor Zhang sent a letter of recommendation to the Fifth Consul, dismissing him from his post and awarding him a lifetime salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：伦奉公尽节，言事无所依违。
现代文：第五伦奉公尽节，发表政见时观点鲜明，从不模棱两可。
English: Fifthly, they should be law-abiding, be loyal to the Constitution and the Constitution Day, and not hesitate to speak out.

古文：性质悫，少文采，在位以贞白称。
现代文：他天性质朴诚实，少有文采，为官以清白著称。
English: He was by nature simple and honest, with little literary flair, and was known for his purity as an official.

古文：或问伦曰： 公有私乎？ 
现代文：有人问第五伦说： 阁下有私心吗？ 
English: Someone asked the fifth monk, "Does your excellency have a selfish motive?"

古文：对曰： 昔人有与吾千里马者，吾虽不受，每三公有所选举，心不能忘，而亦终不用也。
现代文：他回答道： 从前曾有人送我千里马，我虽未接受，但每当要三公举荐人才的时候，心中总不忘此事，只是最终也没有举荐这个人。
English: He replied, "Someone once gave me a gift of a thousand horses. Although I did not accept it, whenever I was asked to recommend someone, I always kept this in mind. However, in the end, I did not recommend this person.

古文：若是者，岂可谓无私乎！ 
现代文：像这样，难道能说没有私心吗？ 
English: In this way, can it be said that there is no selfishness?

古文：以太仆袁安为司空。
现代文：章帝将太仆袁安任命为司空。
English: Emperor Zhang appointed Yuan An, his eunuch, as his subordinate.

古文：秋，八月，乙丑，帝幸安邑，观盐池。
现代文：秋季，八月乙丑，章帝临幸安邑，视察盐池。
English: In autumn, in August of the second year of the Ugly Emperor, Zhang Di Lin inspected the salt ponds in Xingyuan.

古文：九月，还宫。
现代文：九月，返回京城皇宫。
English: In September, Tuobao returned to the palace.

古文：烧当羌迷吾复与弟号吾及诸种反。
现代文：羌人烧当部落首领迷吾又与弟弟号吾和其他部落起来造反。
English: When the tribe's leader, Mugu, was burned at the stake, he and his younger brother, Gogo, and the rest of the tribe rebelled.

古文：号吾先轻入，寇陇西界，督烽掾李章追之，生得号吾，将诣郡。
现代文：号吾率先轻装入侵，进犯陇西郡边界。督烽掾李章进行追击，将号吾生擒，押送到郡府。
English: "I am the first to invade lightly loaded and invade the border of Shaanxi County. The governor, Li Zhang, pursued and escorted "I am a freshman" to the county government.

古文：号吾曰： 独杀我，无损于羌；诚得生归，必悉罢兵，不复犯塞。 
现代文：号吾说： 杀我一人，羌人并无损失，如果放我活着回去，我一定设法使羌军全部撤兵，不再侵犯边塞。 
English: I said, "If you kill me alone, there will be no loss to the Xiongnu. If you let me go back alive, I will definitely try to make the Xiongnu withdraw all of their troops and no longer invade the border fortress."

古文：陇西太守张纡放遣之，羌即为解散，各归故地。
现代文：陇西太守张纡便将号吾放走，羌军果然随即被号吾解散，各自返回故地。
English: Zhang Ye, the governor of the Western Shan State, released the Wei army, and the Wei army was immediately disbanded by the Wei army, and they all returned to their hometown.

古文：迷吾退居河北归义城。
现代文：迷吾退居到黄河以北的归义城。
English: Megu retreated to Kuiyicheng, north of the Yellow River.

古文：疏勒王忠从康居王借兵，还据损中，遣使诈降于班超，超知其奸而伪许之。
现代文：疏勒王忠向康居王借兵，回到损中据守，派使者向班超诈降。班超看穿他的诡计，假意应允。
English: Shule Wang Zhong borrowed soldiers from Kangju Wang, returned to Zhizhong to defend it, and sent an envoy to Bancao to trick him into surrendering. Bancao saw through his trick and pretended to agree.

古文：忠从轻骑诣超，超斩之，因击破其众，南道遂通。
现代文：于是忠便带领轻装骑兵前来拜见班超，班超将他斩首，又乘机击败他的部众。西域南道从此畅通。
English: As a result, Tadamoto led the light cavalry to visit Bancho, who beheaded him and took advantage of the opportunity to defeat his subordinates.

古文：楚许太后薨。
现代文：楚国许太后去世。
English: Empress Dowager Xu of the State of Chu passed away.

古文：诏改葬楚王英，追爵谥曰楚厉侯。
现代文：章帝下诏，改建楚王刘英之墓，将他追封为楚厉侯。
English: Emperor Zhang issued an edict to reconstruct the tomb of Chu King Liu Ying and to enthrone him as the Prince of Chu.

古文：帝以颍川郭躬为廷尉。
现代文：章帝将颖川人郭躬任命为廷尉。
English: Emperor Zhang appointed Guo Min, a native of Yingchuan, as a court lieutenant.

古文：决狱断刑，多依矜恕，条诸重文可从轻者四十一，奏之，事皆施行。
现代文：郭躬在审案判刑的时候，多采取宽大慎重的态度。他从关于判处重刑的律文中，找出四十一条可以从轻判处的，加以整理，上奏章帝。
English: Guo Wei adopted a more lenient and prudent attitude during the trial and sentencing. From the legal texts on the sentencing of heavy sentences, he found 41 articles that could be sentenced lightly, sorted them out, and submitted them to the Emperor.

古文：博士鲁国曹褒上疏，以为 宜定文制，著成汉礼 ，太常巢堪以为 一世大典，非褒所定，不可许。 
现代文：他的建议被一一采纳实施。博士鲁国人曹褒上书指出： 应当建立典章制度，编写汉朝礼仪大典。 太常巢堪认为： 这是一代大典，非曹褒这样地位的人所能制定，不可应许。 
English: His suggestions were adopted and implemented one by one. Dr. Cao Bao, a native of Lu, pointed out in his petition: It is necessary to establish a ceremonial system and compile a Han Dynasty etiquette code. Mr. Tai Jangjian believed: This is a great code, which cannot be promised unless it is formulated by a person of Cao Bao's status.

古文：帝知诸儒拘挛，难与图始，朝廷礼宪，宜以时立，乃拜褒侍中。
现代文：章帝知道儒生拘谨，难以一同创新，而朝廷的礼仪规章，却应当及时确立，于是就任命曹褒为侍中。
English: Emperor Zhang knew that Confucianism was rigid and difficult to innovate with, while the etiquette rules of the imperial court should be established in a timely manner, so he appointed Cao Bao as an attendant.

古文：玄武司马班固以为 宜广集诸儒，共议得失。 
现代文：玄武司马班固认为： 应当广招儒家各派学者，综合不同的意见，共同讨论。 
English: Genwu Simabanggu believes that: Confucian scholars of all schools should be widely recruited, different opinions should be synthesized and discussed together.

古文：帝曰： 谚言： 作舍道边，三年不成。 
现代文：章帝说： 俗话说： 路边建房，三年不成。 
English: Zhang Di said: As the saying goes: If you build a house on the roadside, it will not be completed in three years.

古文：会礼之家，名为聚讼，互生疑异，笔不得下，昔尧作《大章》，一夔足矣。 
现代文：众人会商讨论礼仪制度，就像在一起吵架，相互生出各种疑问和分歧，无法下笔。从前舜帝作《大章》时，有夔一人就足够了。
English: When people meet to discuss the etiquette system, it's like quarreling with each other, and all kinds of doubts and disagreements arise, making it impossible to write. In the past, when Emperor Xuan made "The Great Chapter," it was enough to have just one person.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝下章和元年
现代文：章和元年
English: Chapter and the first year

古文：春，正月，帝召褒，授以叔孙通《汉仪》十二篇曰： 此制散略，多不合经，今宜依礼条正，使可施行。 
现代文：春季，正月，章帝召见曹褒，将叔孙通制定的《汉仪》十二篇交给他，说道： 这套制度松散精略，多与儒家经义不合，现在应当依据正规礼仪一一订正，使它能够颁布实施。 
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Zhang summoned Cao Bao and handed him the twelve chapters of the "Han Rites" formulated by his uncle Sun Tong, saying: This system is loose and concise, mostly inconsistent with Confucianism, and should now be revised one by one according to the formal etiquette, so that it can be promulgated and implemented.

古文：护羌校尉傅育欲伐烧当羌，为其新降，不欲出兵，乃募人斗诸羌、胡；羌、胡不肯，遂复叛出塞，更依迷吾。
现代文：护羌校尉傅育想要讨伐烧当羌人部落，但由于该部落新近投降，便不打算出兵，而收买内探去挑拨羌人与胡人的关系，使二者互相争斗。羌人和胡人看穿傅育的企图，不肯相斗，于是再次反叛出塞，重新依附了迷吾。
English: Guard lieutenant Fu Yu wanted to fight and burn the Dongshen tribe, but since the tribe had recently surrendered, he did not plan to send troops. Instead, he bribed an insider to provoke the relationship between the Dongshen and Hu people, so that the two would fight each other. The Dongshen and Hu people saw through Fu Yu's attempt and refused to fight each other, so they rebelled again and re-attached themselves to the Maegu.

古文：育请发诸郡兵数万人共击羌。
现代文：傅育请求征调各郡郡兵数万人，一同进攻羌人。
English: Fu Yu requested the transfer of tens of thousands of soldiers from each county to attack Xingren together.

古文：未及会，三月，育独进军。
现代文：还没等各郡郡兵集结，本年三月，傅育率部单独出击。
English: In March of this year, without waiting for the county soldiers to assemble, the education department led a separate attack.

古文：迷吾闻之，徙庐落去。
现代文：迷吾得到消息后，便和部众带着帐幕撤离。
English: After Megu got the news, he and his followers evacuated with their tents.

古文：育遣精骑三千穷追之，夜，至三兜谷，不设备，迷吾袭击，大破之，杀育及吏士八百八十人。
现代文：傅育派遣三千精锐骑兵穷追不舍。
English: Fu Yu dispatched three thousand elite cavalry in hot pursuit.

古文：及诸郡兵到，羌遂引去。
现代文：夜里，汉军抵达三兜谷，放松了戒备。
English: By the time the troops from the counties arrived, the Xiongnu had already retreated.

古文：诏以陇西太守张纡为校尉，将万人屯临羌。
现代文：迷吾乘机发动袭击，大败汉军，杀死傅育及其部下将士八百八十人。及至各郡郡兵到达，迷吾便率军离去。
English: Mugu took the opportunity to launch an attack, defeated the Chinese army, and killed 880 soldiers of Fu Yu and his subordinates. When the soldiers from each county arrived, Mugu led the army away.

古文：夏，六月，戊辰，司徒桓虞免。
现代文：章帝下诏，将陇西太守张纡任命为护羌校尉，率领汉军万人屯驻临羌。夏季，六月戊辰，将司徒桓虞免官。
English: Emperor Zhang issued an imperial edict, appointing Zhang Xuan, the governor of Western Shaanxi Province, as the captain of the garrison to lead the Han army stationed in Linyi. In the summer, in June of the year, he dismissed the commander of the garrison.

古文：癸卯，以司空袁安为司徒，光禄勋任隗为司空。
现代文：六月癸卯，将司空袁安任命为司徒，将光禄勋任隗任命为司空。
English: At the end of June, Yuan An, the first secretary of the Kuomintang, was appointed as the first secretary of the Kuomintang, and Kuang Lu, the second secretary of the Kuomintang, was appointed as the second secretary of the Kuomintang.

古文：隗，光之子也。
现代文：任隗是任光之子。
English: Ren Hong is the son of Ren Guang.

古文：齐王晃及弟利侯刚，与母太姬更相诬告。
现代文：齐王刘晃和弟弟利侯刘刚，与他们的母亲太姬互相诬告。
English: Qi Wang Liu Ao and his brother Lihou Liu Gang, along with their mother Taiki, falsely accused each other.

古文：秋，七月，癸卯，诏贬晃爵为芜湖侯，削刚户三千，收太姫玺绶。
现代文：秋季，七月癸卯，章帝下诏，将刘晃的爵位贬为芜湖侯，将刘刚的封地削减三千户，收回太姬的玺印绶带。
English: In the autumn, at the end of July, Emperor Zhang issued an edict, demoting Liu Xiang's title to the lord of Wuhu, reducing Liu Gang's fief to three thousand households, and withdrawing Taiki's seal and ribbon.

古文：壬子，淮阳顷王昞薨。
现代文：七月壬子，淮阳顷王刘去世。
English: In July, Renzi, Huaiyang and Wang Liu passed away.

古文：鲜卑入左地，击北匈奴，大破之，斩优留单于而还。
现代文：鲜卑部族进入北匈奴东部地区，并发动攻击，大败北匈奴，斩杀优留单于后返回故地。
English: The Xianbei tribe entered the eastern region of the Northern Xiongnu, and launched an attack, defeated the Northern Xiongnu, killed the Superior Remnant, and then returned to their homeland.

古文：羌豪迷吾复与诸种寇金城塞，张纡遣从事河内司马防与战于木乘谷。
现代文：羌人首领迷吾再次联合其他羌人部落进攻金城塞。张纡派从事河内人司马防在木乘谷迎战。
English: The leader of the Xiongnu people, Mugu, once again united with other Xiongnu tribes to attack the Jinsheng fortress. Zhang Jun sent the Hanoi people, Sima Bao, to fight in the Muxiyue Valley.

古文：迷吾兵败走，因译使欲降，纡纳之。
现代文：迷吾战败退却，于是派翻译充当使者向汉军请降，被张纡接受。
English: After losing the battle and retreating, the Megu sent an interpreter to act as an emissary to ask the Han army to surrender, which was accepted by Zhang Ye.

古文：迷吾将人众诣临羌，纡设兵大会，施毒酒中，伏兵杀其酋豪八百馀人，斩迷吾头以祭傅育冢，复放兵击其馀众，斩获数千人。
现代文：于是迷吾率领部众到临羌归附。张纡严阵以待，大张筵席，将毒药下在酒中，用伏兵杀死羌军首领八百余人，并斩下迷吾的人头，用来祭祀傅育的陵墓。他还发兵攻打迷吾的余部，斩杀俘获数千人。
English: As a result, Maugu led his troops to Linyi to surrender. Zhang Yan waited in a tight line, held a large banquet, poisoned the wine, killed more than 800 leaders of the Shan army with ambushes, and cut off the heads of Maugu's men to use for the mausoleum of Fu Yu. He also sent troops to attack the rest of Maugu, killing and capturing thousands of people.

古文：迷吾子迷唐，与诸种解仇，结婚交质，据大、小榆谷以叛，种众炽盛，张纡不能制。
现代文：然而迷吾的儿子迷唐，与其他部落解除了仇怨，他们互相通婚，交换人质，据守在大、小榆谷反叛。这些人数量众多，实力强盛，张纡无法制服。
English: However, Mugu's son, Mangtang, resolved the feud with the other tribes, and they intermarried, exchanged hostages, and rebelled in the large and small valleys. These people were numerous and powerful, and Zhang Ye could not subdue them.

古文：壬戌，诏以瑞物仍集，改元章和。
现代文：七月壬戌，章帝下诏，因祥瑞频出而数量众多，将年号改为 章和 。
English: In July, Emperor Zhang issued an edict, and due to the frequent occurrence of auspicious and auspicious days and the large number of them, the year name was changed to "Zhang He."

古文：是时，京师四方屡有嘉瑞，前后数百千，言事者咸以为美。
现代文：当时，京城和四方不断发现祥瑞，前后有千百次，谈论的人都认为是美事。
English: At that time, the capital and the four sides kept discovering Xiangrui, there were thousands of times before and after, and the people who talked about it thought it was a beautiful thing.

古文：而太尉掾平陵何敞独恶之，谓宋由、袁安曰： 夫瑞应依德而至，灾异缘政而生。
现代文：然而太尉掾平陵人何敞却偏偏表示厌恶。他对太尉宋由、司徒袁安说： 祥瑞伴随恩德而来，灾异由于恶政而生。
English: However, He Dang, the person in charge of the tomb of Second Lieutenant Nie Ping, expressed his disgust. He said to Second Lieutenant Song Yu and Third Officer Yuan An: Xiang Rui came with Ende, and the calamity was caused by bad politics.

古文：今异乌翔于殿屋，怪草生于庭际，不可不察！ 
现代文：如今有奇特的鸟飞到皇家殿堂，怪异的草生在宫廷庭院，不可不小心注意！ 
English: Now there are strange birds flying to the royal palace, strange grass grows in the palace courtyard, do not accidentally notice!

古文：由、安惧不敢答。
现代文：宋、袁二人感到恐惧，不敢回答。
English: Both Song and Yuan were afraid and did not dare to answer.

古文：八月，癸酉，帝南巡。
现代文：八月癸酉，章帝到南方巡视。
English: At the end of August, Emperor Zhang went on a tour to the south.

古文：戊子，幸梁；乙未晦，幸沛。
现代文：八月戊子，临幸梁国。八月乙未晦，临幸沛国。
English: August Bosi, Lin Sheng Liang Guo. August Bi Wei Guo, Lin Sheng Pei Guo.

古文：日有食之。
现代文：出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs.

古文：九月，庚子，帝幸彭城。
现代文：九月庚子，章帝临幸彭城。
English: In September, Geng Zi and Zhang Di visited Pengcheng.

古文：辛亥，幸寿春；复封阜陵侯延为阜陵王。
现代文：九月辛亥，临幸寿春。将阜陵侯刘延重新封为阜陵王。
English: In September, Xinhai, Lin Xing Shuchun. Liu Yan, the lord of Fulin, was reinstated as the king of Fulin.

古文：己未，幸汝阴。
现代文：九月己未，临幸汝阴。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor died.

古文：冬，十月，丙子，还宫。
现代文：冬季，十月丙子，返回京城皇宫。
English: In winter, around October, they return to the Imperial Palace in Kyoto.

古文：北匈奴大乱，屈兰储等五十八部、口二十八万诣云中、五原、朔方、北地降。
现代文：北匈奴发生大乱，屈兰储等五十八个部落、人口二十八万，到云中、五原、朔方、北地归降。
English: The Northern Xiongnu had a great disturbance, and 58 tribes, with a population of 280,000, including Qu Lanquan, surrendered to Yunzhong, Wuhuan, Shuofang, and Hokkien.

古文：曹褒依准旧典，杂以《五经》、《谶记》之文，撰次天子至于庶人冠、婚、吉、凶终始制度凡百五十篇，奏之。
现代文：曹褒以旧典为基础，加入儒家《五经》和《谶记》上的记载，依次编写由皇帝到平民的成年加冠礼、婚嫁礼、祭祀礼、丧葬凶灾礼等仪程，共一百五十篇，奏报章帝。
English: Cao Bao based on the old classics, added the records of the Confucian "Five Classics" and "Record of the Ancestors," and successively compiled the rituals of the adult crowning ceremony, wedding ceremony, sacrifice ceremony, funeral and disaster ceremony from the emperor to the civilians, a total of one hundred and fifty articles, and reported to the emperor.

古文：帝以众论难一，故但纳之，不复令有司平奏。
现代文：章帝认为众人的意见很难统一，所以就接受了曹褒制定的典章，不再命有关部门进行评议。
English: The emperor thought that everyone's discussion was rarely consistent, so he only accepted it, and no longer asked officials to comment.

古文：是岁，班超发于窴诸国兵共二万五千人击莎车，龟兹王发温宿、姑墨、尉头兵合五万人救之。
现代文：本年，班超征调于阗等各国军队，共二万五千人，进攻莎车。龟兹王则征调温宿、姑墨、尉头三国军队，共五万人，前往救援。
English: This year, a total of twenty-five thousand troops from various countries including Yunnan were dispatched to attack Yarkand, while fifty thousand troops from the three countries including Onjuku, Gumo, and Yotou were dispatched to the rescue.

古文：超召将校乃于窴王议曰： 今兵少不敌，其计莫若各散去。
现代文：班超召集部下将校和于阗王商议道： 如今我方兵少，打不过敌人，不如各自分散撤离。
English: The superintendent called together his subordinate officers and Yu Xuanwang to discuss: Nowadays, we have fewer soldiers, we can't beat the enemy, it's better to disperse and evacuate separately.

古文：于窴从是而东，长史亦于此西归，可须夜鼓声而发。 
现代文：于阗军队由此向东，长史也同时动身，从这里西行返回疏勒，可等到夜间鼓声起时出发。 
English: Yu Yao went east from here, and Chang Shi returned west from here. When they heard the drums in the night, they could set out.

古文：阴缓所得生口。
现代文：然后假意放松戒备，让俘虏逃跑。
English: covertly easing the confinement of captured prisoners.

古文：龟兹王闻之，大喜，自以万骑于西界遮超，温宿王将八千骑于东界徼于窴。
现代文：龟兹王得知消息后大喜，亲自率领一万骑兵，到西面拦截班超。温宿王则率领八千骑兵，到东面拦截于阗军队。
English: King Kamezi was overjoyed when he heard the news, and personally led ten thousand cavalry to the west to intercept Banchao. King Onjuku led eight thousand cavalry to the east to intercept Yu Yu's army.

古文：超知二虏已出，密召诸部勒兵。鸡鸣，驰赴莎车营。
现代文：班超听说龟兹、温宿两国军队已经出动，就秘密集结部队备战，急速奔袭莎车军营。
English: When Banchao heard that the armies of Guizi and Onjuku had been dispatched, he secretly assembled troops to prepare for battle and quickly raided the Shache military camp.

古文：胡大惊乱，奔走，追斩五千馀级；莎车遂降，龟兹等因各退散。
现代文：莎车人大为惊慌，乱作一团，四处奔逃，班超等追击斩杀五千余人，于是莎车投降。龟兹等国军队只好各自撤退散去。
English: The Yarkand car people were greatly alarmed, ran in a disorderly group, fled everywhere, and the super-class chased and killed more than five thousand people, so the Yarkand car surrendered. The armies of Kuez and other countries had to withdraw and disperse separately.

古文：自是威震西域。
现代文：从此，班超的威名震动西域。
English: Since then, the prestige of Banchao has shaken the western region.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝下章和二年
现代文：章和二年
English: chapter and two years

古文：春，正月，济南王康、阜陵王延、中山王焉来朝。
现代文：春季，正月，济南王刘康、阜陵王刘延、中山王刘焉来京城朝见。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, King Liu Kang of Jinan, King Liu Yan of Fulin, and King Liu Yan of Zhongshan came to Beijing for a morning meeting.

古文：上性宽仁，笃于亲亲，故叔父济南、中山二王，每数入朝，特加恩宠，及诸昆弟并留京师，不遣就国。
现代文：章帝天性宽厚仁爱，重视骨肉亲情。因此，每当叔父刘康和刘焉二位亲王进京朝见时，都受到特别的优待。章帝还将兄弟们全都留在京城，不派遣他们去封国就位。
English: Emperor Zhang was naturally generous and benevolent, and attached great importance to flesh-and-blood kinship. Therefore, whenever his uncles Liu Kang and Liu Yan, two princes, came to Beijing to meet the imperial court, they received special preferential treatment. Emperor Zhang also kept all the brothers in Beijing, and did not send them to take their places in the imperial court.

古文：又赏赐群臣，过于制度，仓帑为虚。
现代文：并大量赏赐百官，超过了制度规定，国库因此而空虚。
English: and rewarded hundreds of officials in large quantities, exceeding the system regulations, and the national treasury was empty as a result.

古文：何敞奏记宋由曰： 比年水旱，民不收获。凉州缘边，家被凶害；中州内郡，公私屈竭。
现代文：何敞对宋由上书说： 如今年年发生水旱灾害，人民收不到粮食；凉州边境一带，居民遭到羌军的侵害；中原内地各郡，公私财力都已枯竭，这正是减少消费、节约用度的时机。
English: He Zhang said to Song Yu in his letter: If floods and droughts occur this year, the people will not receive grain; around the Liangzhou border, residents will be encroached upon by the Shan army; all counties in the Central Plains inland, public and private financial resources have been depleted, this is exactly the time to reduce consumption and economize.

古文：此实损膳节用之时，国恩覆载，赏赉过度，但闻腊赐，自郎官以上，公卿、王侯以下，至于空竭帑藏，损耗国资。
现代文：皇恩如同天复地载，无与伦比，但陛下的赏赐超过了限度。听说仅在腊日，对郎官以上、公卿王侯以下官员的赏赐，就使国库一空，损耗了国家储备。
English: The grace of the emperor is like heaven and earth, it is incomparable, but His Majesty's reward exceeded the limit. I heard that only in Laos and Japan, the reward for officials above the rank of vassal and below the rank of noble prince, emptied the national treasury and depleted the national reserves.

古文：寻公家之用，皆百姓之力。
现代文：追究公家的经费来源，都是出自百姓的血汗。
English: The expenses of public houses are all paid for by the labor of the people.

古文：明君赐赉，宜有品制；忠臣受赏，亦应有度。
现代文：贤明的君王进行赏赐，应当根据等级制度；忠臣接受赏赐，也应有一定的法规。
English: Wise kings should reward according to the hierarchy, and loyal subjects should receive rewards according to certain laws.

古文：是以夏禹玄圭，周公束帛。
现代文：因此尧帝赐给禹黑色的玉圭，而召公则赐给周公五匹帛。
English: Therefore, Emperor Zhao gave Yu the black horse, and Zhao Gong gave Zhou the five horses.

古文：今明公位尊任重，责深负大，上当匡正纲纪，下当济安元元，岂但空空无违而已哉！
现代文：如今阁下地位尊贵而责任重大，对上应当匡正朝廷纲纪，对下应当安抚人民，难道只恭谨忠诚而不违上命就够了吗！
English: Now it is clear that the public position is dignified but has heavy responsibilities, the responsibility is deep but great, the top is to uphold the correct discipline, and the bottom is to appease the people. Is it just empty words that do not violate the holy will?

古文：宜先正己以率群下，还所得赐，因陈得失，奏王侯就国，除苑囿之禁，节省浮费，赈恤穷孤，则恩泽下畅，黎庶悦豫矣。 
现代文：您应当首先端正自身，做下官的表率，交还所得的赏赐；向皇上陈述利害得失，奏请遣送亲王侯爵各往封国就位；解除禁止人民在皇家园林耕种的法令，节省不必要的开支，赈济抚恤穷苦孤独的人，那么恩泽就会下达，百姓就会喜悦安乐。 
English: You should first rectify yourself, set an example for your subordinates, and return the rewards you have received; report to the emperor the gains and losses, and make a request to send the prince marquis to the fief country to take his place; lift the decree prohibiting the people from cultivating in the royal garden, save unnecessary expenses, and support the poor and lonely, then grace will be given, and the people will be happy.

古文：由不能用。
现代文：宋由未能接受他的建议。
English: Song Yu cannot be used.

古文：尚书南阳宋意上疏曰： 陛下至孝烝烝，恩家隆深，礼宠诸王，同之家人，车入殿门，即席不拜，分甘损膳，赏赐优渥。
现代文：尚书南阳人宋意上书说： 陛下大孝，皇恩深厚，宠爱诸王，亲情如同凡人之家。亲王们可以乘车进入殿门，就座时不叩拜，分享御膳房的饭食，获得优厚的赏赐。
English: Song Yi Shangshu, a person from Nanyang, wrote: Your Majesty is very filial, the imperial grace is profound, the kings are favored, and the relatives are like the homes of ordinary people. The princes can enter the palace gate by car, do not bow when they sit down, share the meals of the imperial dining room, and receive generous rewards.

古文：康、焉幸以支庶，享食大国，陛下恩宠逾制，礼敬过度。
现代文：刘康和刘焉，有幸以旁支庶子的身份享有巨大的封国，陛下对他们的恩宠超过了常制，优礼尊敬超过了限度。
English: Liu Kang and Liu Yan were fortunate enough to enjoy the great honor of being the illegitimate children of a collateral branch of the imperial family. His Majesty's grace to them exceeded the normal system, and his courtesy and respect exceeded the limit.

古文：《春秋》之义，诸父、昆弟，无所不臣，所以尊尊卑卑，强干弱枝者也。
现代文：根据《春秋》大义，对皇帝来说，伯父、叔父和兄弟，无不都是臣属，这是为了使尊者受到尊敬，卑者自守卑位，加强主干而削弱旁枝的缘故。
English: According to the principles of "Spring and Autumn," for the emperor, uncles, uncles and brothers are all subordinates, in order to make the venerable respected, the lowly keep their lowly position, strengthen the main stem and weaken the side branches.

古文：陛下德业隆盛，当为万世典法，不宜以私恩损上下之序，失君臣之正。
现代文：陛下恩德伟业隆盛，当永为后世的典范，不应该由于亲情而破坏上下等级，失掉君臣间的正常秩序。
English: His Majesty's benevolence and great achievements are flourishing, and should always be a model for future generations. It is not appropriate to destroy the upper and lower ranks due to kinship, and lose the normal order between monarchs and subjects.

古文：又西平王羡等六王，皆妻子成家，官属备具，当早就蕃国，为子孙基址；而室第相望，久磐京邑，骄奢僭拟，宠禄隆过。
现代文：此外，西平王刘羡等六位亲王，都已娶妻生子而自成一家，官属齐备，应当尽早去封国就位，为自己的子孙奠定基业。然而他们广修宅第，前后相望，长久地盘踞在京城，骄傲奢侈，超越本分，自比于居上位者；所得的恩宠和俸给，也都过度。
English: In addition, six princes, including Xiping King Liu En, have all married and had children, and have become a family of their own. They have all the necessary officials, and they should go to the country as soon as possible to lay the foundation for their children and grandchildren. However, they have extensively renovated their homes, looked back and forth, and have long been entrenched in the capital. They are proud and extravagant, exceed their duties, and compare themselves to those who are higher up. The favors and salaries they receive are also excessive.

古文：宜割情不忍，以义断恩，发遣康、焉，各归蕃国，令羡等速就便时，以塞众望。 
现代文：陛下应当抛开亲情，不再容忍，以大义切断私恩，遣送刘康、刘焉各回封国，命刘羡等择日速往封国就位，以平息人们的怨言。 
English: His Majesty should put aside family affection, no longer tolerate, cut off personal favors with great righteousness, send Liu Kang and Liu Yan back to their respective fiefdoms, and order Liu Qian and others to go to their fiefdoms and take their positions as soon as possible, so as to quell people's complaints.

古文：帝未及遣。
现代文：然而章帝已来不及遣送。
English: However, Emperor Zhang was too late to be sent away.

古文：壬辰，帝崩于章德前殿，年三十一。
现代文：正月壬辰，章帝在章德前殿驾崩。享年三十一岁。
English: In the first month of Imjin, Emperor Zhang died at the age of thirty-one in the Zhangde front hall.

古文：遣诏： 无起寝庙，一如先帝法制。 
现代文：遗诏命令： 不要在墓地修建祠庙寝殿，一切依照先帝之制。 
English: The imperial edict ordered: Do not build temples or shrines in the cemetery, everything should be done according to the system of the former emperor.

古文：范晔论曰：魏文帝称明帝察察，章帝长者。
现代文：范晔论曰：魏文帝称明帝明辨洞察，而章帝则是忠厚之人。
English: Fan Rong said: Emperor Wei Wen said that Emperor Ming was discerning and insightful, while Emperor Zhang was a loyal person.

古文：章帝素知人，厌明帝苛切，事从宽厚；奉承明德太后，尽心孝道；平徭简赋，而民赖其庆；又体之以忠恕，文之以礼乐。
现代文：章帝一向通达人情，他不喜明帝的苛刻严厉，事事依从宽厚的原则；侍奉马太后，尽心地履行孝道；减轻徭役和赋税，使人民受到恩惠。并以忠恕之道为体，以礼乐教化为文。
English: Emperor Zhang was always sensitive to people's feelings. He disliked Emperor Ming's harshness and sternness and followed the principle of clemency in all matters. He served Empress Matai and fulfilled his filial duty to the best of his ability. He reduced the number of officials and taxes so that the people would be favored. He embodied the spirit of loyalty and taught the people through music and ritual.

古文：谓之长者，不亦宜乎！
现代文：将他称为忠厚之人，不是很恰当吗？
English: Wouldn't it be more appropriate to call him a loyalist?

古文：太子即位，年十岁，尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：太子即位，时年十岁。将窦皇后尊称为皇太后。
English: The Crown Prince ascended the throne at the age of ten, and the Dou Empress became known as the Empress Dowager.

古文：三月，丁酉，用遗诏徙西平王羡为陈王，六安王恭为彭城王。
现代文：三月，根据章帝遗诏，将西平王刘羡改封为陈王，将六安王刘恭改封为彭城王。
English: In March, according to the will of Emperor Zhang, the Xiping King Liu En changed his title to Chen King, and the Liuan King Liu Gong changed his title to Pengcheng King.

古文：癸卯，葬孝章皇帝于敬陵。
现代文：三月癸卯，将章帝安葬于敬陵。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Xiaozhang was buried in the Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：南单于宣死，单于长之弟屯屠何立，为休兰尸逐侯鞮单于。
现代文：南匈奴单于宣去世，前单于长的弟弟屯屠何继位，此即休兰尸逐侯单于。
English: Nan Xun Nuan died in Xuan, and Tun Tu He, the younger brother of the former Nuan Nuan, succeeded to the throne. This was the time when the bodies of Xulan and Hou Nuan Nuan were interred.

古文：太后临朝，窦宪以侍中内干机密，出宣诰命；弟笃为虎贲中郎将，笃弟景、寰并为中常侍，兄弟皆在亲要之地。
现代文：窦太后临朝摄政，窦宪以侍中的身份，入宫主持机要，出宫宣布太后的命令。他的弟弟窦笃为虎贲中郎将，窦笃的弟弟窦景、窦同为中常侍。窦家兄弟全都在接近皇帝、皇后的显要位置上。
English: The Dowager Dowager Dou was the regent of the imperial court, and Dou Xian, as an attendant, was in charge of entering the palace and announcing the empress dowager's orders. His younger brother Dou Tu was the vice-commander of the imperial eagle, and Dou Tu's younger brothers Dou Jing and Dou Tong were the middle attendants. The Dou brothers were all in prominent positions close to the emperor and the empress.

古文：宪客崔骃以书戒宪曰： 《传》曰： 生而富者骄，生而贵者慠。 
现代文：窦宪的门客崔上书告诫窦宪说： 古书说： 生来就富有的人骄横，生来就尊贵的人倨傲。 
English: Dou Xian's protégé, Cui Shangshu, admonished Dou Xian: "Ancient books say: Those who are born rich are arrogant, and those who are born noble are proud.

古文：生富贵而能不骄慠者，未之有也。
现代文：生于富有尊贵而能不骄横倨傲的人。未曾有过。
English: To be born of a man who is rich and noble, but who is not proud and haughty, has never happened before.

古文：今宠禄初隆，百僚观行，岂可不庶几夙夜，以永终誉乎！
现代文：如今您的恩宠和官位正开始上升，朝中百官都在观察您的所作所为，怎能不象《经·周颂》所说 望能以终日的小心谨慎，求得终身的荣耀 呢！
English: Now that your grace and official position are beginning to rise, and all the officials in the DPRK are watching what you are doing, how can you not hope to seek lifelong glory with all-day care and caution, as the "Ching Zhou Song" said?

古文：昔冯野王以外戚居位，称为贤臣；近阴卫尉克己复礼，终受多福。
现代文：从前冯野王以外戚身份居于官位，被人称作贤臣；近代阴兴克己守礼，最终成为多福之人。
English: In the past, relatives other than Feng Ye Wang held official positions and were called wise men; in modern times, they have been self-restraint and etiquette, and eventually became blessed people.

古文：外戚所以获讥于时，垂愆于后者，盖在满而不挹，位有馀而仁不足也。
现代文：外戚之所以被当时的人讥嘲，被后世的人责备，原因在于权势太盛而不知退让，官位太高而仁义不足。
English: The reason why the maternal relative was ridiculed by the people at that time and reproached by the people in later generations was that the power was too strong to concede, the official position was too high and the benevolence was insufficient.

古文：汉兴以后，迄于哀、平，外家二十，保族全身，四人而已。
现代文：从汉朝建立以后，直到哀帝、平帝，皇后家族共计二十，而能保全家族和自身的，只有四位皇后。
English: From the establishment of the Han Dynasty until the reigns of Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping, there were a total of twenty empress families, but only four empresses were able to preserve their families and themselves.

古文：《书》曰： 鉴于有殷， 可不慎哉！ 
现代文：《尚书》说： 以殷商的覆亡，作为鉴戒， 岂能不谨慎吗！ 
English: "Shangshu" said: Taking the downfall of Shang Shang as a warning, can we not be prudent?

古文：庚戌，皇太后诏： 以故太尉邓彪为太傅，赐爵关内侯，录尚书事，百官总己以听。 
现代文：庚戌，窦太后下诏： 将前任太尉邓彪任命为太傅，赐爵为关内侯，主管尚书机要。百官各统己职，听命于太傅。 
English: Emperor Gaozong and Empress Dowager Dou issued the following edict: The former First Lieutenant Deng Biao would be appointed as the Grand Master, and he would be given the title of Kuanai Marquis, with Shang Shudi as his superior. Each of the hundred officials had their own duties, and they would follow the orders of the Grand Master.

古文：窦宪以彪有义让，先帝所敬，而仁厚委随，故尊崇之。
现代文：窦宪因邓彪仁义礼让，受到先帝的敬重，其为人又忠厚随和，所以把他捧上高位。
English: Due to Deng Biao's benevolence and courtesy, Dou Xian was highly respected by the former emperor. He was a loyal and easy-going person, so he was held in high esteem.

古文：其所施为，辄外令彪奏，内白太后，事无不从。
现代文：窦宪要有所举动的时候，就在外面教邓彪奏报，自己到内宫向太后说明，无一事不被批准。
English: When Dou Xian wanted to make a move, he would inform Deng Biao outside and go to the inner palace to explain to the empress dowager that nothing would not be approved.

古文：彪在位，修身而已，不能有所匡正。
现代文：邓彪身居太傅之位，只是修身自好而已，不能匡正朝廷纲纪。
English: Deng Biao was in the position of Taifu, but he only cultivated himself and could not rectify the discipline of the imperial court.

古文：宪性果急，睚眦之怨，莫不报复。
现代文：窦宪性情暴烈，连瞪他一眼的小怨恨，都无不报复。
English: Dou Xian's temperament is violent, and even the small grudges that glare at him are nothing but revenge.

古文：永平时，谒者韩纡考劾宪父勋狱，宪遂令客斩纡子，以首祭勋冢。
现代文：明帝永平年间，谒者韩纡曾审理过窦宪之父窦勋的案件，窦宪便命令门客斩杀韩纡的儿子，用人头祭祀窦勋之墓。
English: During the Yongping era of the Ming Dynasty, the eunuch Han Xuan once tried the case of Dou Xuan, the father of Dou Xuan, and Dou Xuan ordered his protégé to behead Han Xuan's son and use the head as a sacrifice at Dou Xuan's grave.

古文：癸亥，陈王羡、彭城王恭、乐成王党、下邳王衍、梁王畅始就国。
现代文：癸亥，陈王刘羡、彭城王刘恭、乐成王刘党、下邳王刘衍、梁王刘畅开始前往封国就位。
English: Yan Hai, Chen Wang Liu Qian, Pengcheng Wang Liu Qiong, Le Cheng Wang Liu Dang, Heshan Wang Liu Yan, Liang Wang Liu Chang began to go to the fief to take their positions.

古文：夏，四月，戊寅，以遗诏罢郡国盐铁之禁，纵民煮铸。
现代文：夏季，四月戊寅，根据章帝遗诏，撤销各郡各封国盐铁专卖的规定，允许民间煮盐铸铁，自由经营。
English: In the summer, in April, according to Emperor Zhang's last will and testament, the regulations on the exclusive sale of salted iron in each county and province were revoked, and the private sale of salted cast iron was allowed to operate freely.

古文：五月，京师旱。
现代文：五月，京城发生旱灾。
English: In May, there was a drought in Kyoto.

古文：北匈奴饥乱，降南部者岁数千人。
现代文：北匈奴因饥荒而发生内乱，每年有数千人向南匈奴投降。
English: The Northern Huns were in civil strife due to famine, and every year thousands of them surrendered to the Southern Huns.

古文：秋，七月，南单于上言： 宜及北虏分争，出兵讨伐，破北成南，并为一国，令汉家长无北念。
现代文：秋季，七月，南匈奴单于上书朝廷： 应当趁着北匈奴内乱分裂的机会，派出军队进行讨伐，打败北匈奴，成全南匈奴，让南北匈奴统一成为整体，使汉朝永无北方之忧。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Southern Xiongnu alone wrote to the imperial court: It is necessary to take advantage of the opportunity of splitting the Northern Xiongnu, send troops to fight, defeat the Northern Xiongnu, complete the Southern Xiongnu, unify the Northern and Southern Xiongnu into a whole, and make the Han Dynasty never worry about the North.

古文：臣等生长汉地，开口仰食，岁时赏赐，动辄亿万，虽垂拱安枕，惭无报效之义，愿发国中及诸部故胡新降精兵，分道并出，期十二月同会虏地。
现代文：我们长期生活在汉朝境内，仰仗汉朝，才能张口吃饭。
English: We have been living in the territory of the Han Dynasty for a long time, relying on the Han Dynasty to open our mouths to eat.

古文：臣兵众单少，不足以防内外，愿遣执金吾耿秉、度辽将军邓鸿及西河、云中、五原、朔方、上郡太守并力而北。
现代文：汉朝每年四季给我们赏赐，动不动就达亿万之数。我们虽然无须操劳而安享太平，却因未能实行报效之义而感到惭愧。我们愿征调本部和分散在各郡的匈奴精锐，包括老兵和新近归降的北匈奴军队，分为几路，同时进发，约定十二月在北匈奴会师。我的部队力量单薄，不足以内外兼顾，请汉朝派遣执金吾耿秉、度辽将军邓鸿及西河、云中、五原、朔方、上郡等郡太守，合力北征。
English: The Han Dynasty gives us rewards every four seasons, amounting to hundreds of millions at every turn. Although we do not have to work hard and enjoy peace, we are ashamed of not being able to implement the righteousness of reward. We are willing to conscript the headquarters and the Hun elite scattered in the counties, including the veterans and the newly surrendered North Hun army, divided into several routes, advance at the same time, and agree to join the division in the North Hun in December. My force is thin, and it is not enough to take care of both inside and outside. I ask the Han Dynasty to send the Executive King Wu Gengbing, General Du Liao Deng Hong and the county governors of Sai

古文：冀因圣帝威神，一举平定。
现代文：望能凭着圣上的神威，一举平定北方敌害。
English: Hoping to be able to rely on the divine power, to quell the northern enemy at one stroke.

古文：臣国成败，要在今年，已敕诸部严兵马，唯裁哀省察！ 
现代文：我匈奴国的成败，就在今年决定。我已命令各部厉兵秣马，准备作战。请陛下节哀审定。 
English: The success or failure of our Hunnic state will be decided this year. I have ordered all ministries to gather their troops and prepare for battle. I ask His Majesty to decide on the day of mourning.

古文：太后以示耿秉。秉上言： 昔武帝单极天下，欲臣虏匈奴，未遇天时，事遂无成。
现代文：窦太后把南单于的奏书给耿秉看，耿秉进言： 从前武帝耗尽天下之力，想使匈奴臣服，但时机未到，便没有成功。
English: Empress Dowager Dou showed Nan Shan Yu's report to Geng Bing, and Geng Bing said: In the past, Emperor Wu exhausted the power of the world and wanted to make the Xiongnu submit, but he did not succeed until the time was right.

古文：今幸遭天授，北虏分争，以夷伐夷，国家之利，宜可听许。 
现代文：如今遇到天赐良机，北匈奴内部分裂争斗，我们让外族打外族，对国家有利，应当答应南匈奴的请求。 
English: Now, fortunately, we have a heaven-sent opportunity to catch up. The enemies in the north are divided and fighting each other. It is good for the country to fight with the barbarians, and we should agree to it.

古文：秉因自陈受恩，分当出命效用。
现代文：耿秉于是表示自己身受皇恩，应该出征效命。
English: Geng Bing went on to say that he was favored and should have devoted himself to the country.

古文：太后议欲从之。
现代文：窦太后在商议时打算采纳他的意见。
English: Empress Dowager Dou intends to take his opinion into account during the deliberation.

古文：尚书宋意上书曰： 夫戎狄简贱礼义，无有上下，强者为雄，弱即屈服。
现代文：尚书宋意上书说： 匈奴人轻视礼仪，没有君臣上下之分。强悍者则称雄，弱小者便屈服。
English: Shangshu Songyi wrote: The Xiongnu people despise etiquette, and there is no distinction between lords and vassals. The strong are praised, and the weak are subdued.

古文：自汉兴以来，征伐数矣。其所克获，曾不补害。
现代文：自从汉朝建立以来，讨伐他们的次数已很频繁了，但所得的收获，不能补偿国家的损失。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the number of crusades against them has been very frequent, but the gains made cannot compensate for the country's losses.

古文：光武皇帝躬服金革之难，深昭天地之明，故因其来降，羁縻畜养，边民得生，劳役休息，于兹四十馀年矣。
现代文：光武皇帝亲身经历过战乱，显示天地间无与伦比的英明，乘匈奴人前来归降的机会，对他们采取了笼络豢养的政策。于是边疆人民获得生机，减除了劳役，至今已经四十余年了。
English: Emperor Guangwu personally experienced the turmoil of war and showed unparalleled wisdom between heaven and earth. He took advantage of the opportunity for the Huns to surrender and adopted a policy of cosseting them. As a result, the people of the frontier gained vitality and reduced labor service. It has been more than forty years since then.

古文：今鲜卑奉顺，斩获万数，中国坐享大功，而百姓不知其劳。
现代文：现在鲜卑顺服汉朝，斩杀及俘虏北匈奴数万人，汉朝坐观成败，安享巨大成果，而百姓并不感到辛劳。
English: Now, the Xianbei are obedient to the Han Dynasty, killing and capturing tens of thousands of Northern Xiongnu. The Han Dynasty is watching the success or failure, enjoying great achievements, and the people do not feel hard.

古文：汉兴功烈，于斯为盛。
现代文：汉朝建立以来的功业，这是最伟大的一项。
English: This is the greatest achievement since the establishment of the Han Dynasty.

古文：所以然者，夷虏相攻，无损汉兵者也。
现代文：所以如此，是因为异族相互攻伐，而汉军却全无损失。
English: Therefore, this is because the foreigners attacked each other, while the Chinese army suffered no losses.

古文：臣察鲜卑侵伐匈奴，正是利其抄掠；及归功圣朝，实由贪得重赏。
现代文：据我观察，鲜卑攻击北匈奴，是由于抢掠对他们有利；而将战功献给汉朝，实际上是贪图得到重赏。
English: According to my observation, the Xianbei attacked the Northern Xiongnu because the looting was beneficial to them; while the war effort was dedicated to the Han Dynasty, it was actually a desire to get a reward.

古文：今若听南虏还都北庭，则不得不禁制鲜卑。
现代文：如今若是允许南匈奴回到北匈奴王庭建都，那就不得不限制鲜卑的行动。
English: Now, if the Southern Huns are allowed to return to the Northern Huns' court to build a capital, they will have to limit their actions.

古文：鲜卑外失暴掠之愿，内无功劳之赏，豺狼贪婪，必为边患。
现代文：鲜卑外不能实现抢掠的愿望，内不能因功而得到赏赐，以其豺狼般的贪婪，必将成为边疆的祸患。
English: Unworthy and unable to realize the desire to rob and plunder, unable to be rewarded for his work, with his jackal-like greed, he will surely become the scourge of the frontier.

古文：今北虏西遁，请求和亲，宜因其归附，以为外扞，巍巍之业，无以过此。
现代文：现在北匈奴已经向西逃遁，请求与汉朝通好，应当乘他们归顺的机会，使之成为外藩。巍巍的功业，莫过于此。
English: Now that the Northern Xiongnu have fled to the west and are asking to be reconciled with the Han Dynasty, we should take the opportunity of their surrender to make it a foreign domain.

古文：若引兵费赋，以顺南虏，则坐失上略，去安即危矣。
现代文：对南匈奴的请求，实在不可应许。 适逢齐殇王刘石的儿子都乡侯刘畅到京城来祭吊章帝。
English: The request of the Southern Xiongnu could not be granted, so the son of the Qianlong King Liu Shi, the Prince of the Capital Liu Chang, came to the capital to offer sacrifice to the Emperor.

古文：诚不可许。 
现代文：窦太后频繁地召见他。
English: Empress Dowager Dou frequently summoned him.

古文：会齐殇王子都乡侯畅来吊国忧，太后数召见之，窦宪惧畅分宫省之权，遣客刺杀畅于屯卫之中，而归罪于畅弟利侯刚，乃使侍御史与青州刺史杂考刚等。
现代文：窦宪怕刘畅分去自己在内宫的权势，便派刺客在皇宫禁卫军中将刘畅暗杀，而归罪于刘畅的弟弟利侯刘刚。于是朝廷派侍御史和青州刺史一同审讯刘刚等人。
English: Dou Xian was afraid that Liu Chang would divide his power in the inner palace, so he sent assassins to assassinate Liu Chang in the palace guard army, and blamed Liu Chang's brother Li Hou Liu Gang. Therefore, the imperial court sent the imperial secretary and the Qingzhou imperial secretary to interrogate Liu Gang and others.

古文：尚书颍川韩稜以为 贼在京师，不宜舍近问远，恐为奸臣所笑。 
现代文：尚书颍川人韩棱认为： 凶手就在京城，不应舍近求远。而现在的作法，怕要让奸臣讥笑。 
English: Han Ren, a Shangshu Yuchuan resident, believes that: the murderer is in Beijing, and one should not be reluctant to look further afield. And the current approach is likely to be ridiculed by traitors.

古文：太后怒，以切责稜，稜固执其议。
现代文：太后大怒，严厉地责备韩棱，但韩棱仍然坚持自己的看法。
English: The empress dowager was furious and severely reprimanded Han Ren, but Han Ren still insisted on his opinion.

古文：何敞说宋由曰： 畅宗室肺府，茅土籓臣，来吊大忧，上书须报，亲在武卫，致此残酷。
现代文：何敞对太尉宋由说： 刘畅是皇室宗亲，封国藩臣，到京城来祭吊先帝，上书听候命令，身在武装卫士当中，却遭到这样的惨死。
English: He Chang said to the captain Song Yu: Liu Chang was a royal relative, a vassal of a feudal state, who came to the capital to sacrifice and hang the former emperor, and was among the armed guards, but was killed in such a tragic way.

古文：奉宪之吏，莫适讨捕，踪迹不显，主名不立。
现代文：执法官吏盲目地追捕凶手，既不见凶手的踪影，也不知他们的姓名。
English: Constitutional officials, hopeless to catch the murderer, the trail is not obvious, the main name is not established.

古文：敞备数股肱，职典贼曹，欲亲至发所，以纠其变。
现代文：我充数为您属下的要员，主管捕审罪犯，打算亲自到判案场所，以督察事态的进展。
English: I am an important member under you, in charge of arresting and trying criminals, and I intend to go to the place of adjudication in person to inspect the progress of the situation.

古文：而二府执事以为故事：三公不与贼盗。公纵奸慝，莫以为咎。敞请独奏案之。 
现代文：但司徒和司空二府的负责人认为，三公不应参与地方刑事案件，于是公然放纵奸恶，而并不认为是过错，因此我打算单独奏请，参与审案。 
English: However, Sito and the person in charge of the Second Prefectural Office of the Civil Aeronautics Administration believed that the Three Princes should not participate in local criminal cases, so they openly indulged in evil, but did not think it was a mistake, so I plan to make a separate request to participate in the trial.

古文：由乃许焉。
现代文：宋由便答应了何敞的请求。
English: Song Yu only allowed it.

古文：二府闻敞行，皆遣主者随之。
现代文：司徒、司空二府听说何敞将去参与审案，都派主管官员随同前往。
English: When the two prefectures of Szeto and Székesfehérvár heard that Ho Chan was going to participate in the trial, they both sent their competent officials to accompany him.

古文：于是推举，具得事实。
现代文：于是清查案情，得到全部事实。
English: So we investigated the case and got all the facts.

古文：太后怒，闭宪于内宫。
现代文：窦太后知道真相后大怒，将窦宪禁闭在内宫。
English: After knowing the truth, Empress Dowager Dou was furious and confined Dou Xian to the inner palace.

古文：宪惧诛，因自求击匈奴以赎死。
现代文：窦宪害怕被杀，就自己请求去打匈奴，以赎死罪。
English: Dou Xian was afraid of being killed, so he asked to fight the Xiongnu to atone for his death.

古文：冬，十月，乙亥，以宪为车骑将军，伐北匈奴，以执金吾耿秉为副。发北军五校、黎阳、雍营、缘边十二郡骑士及羌、胡兵出塞。
现代文：冬季，十月乙亥，任命窦宪为车骑将军，讨伐北匈奴。任命执金吾耿秉为副统帅，征调北军屯骑、越骑、步兵、长水、射声五校兵和黎阳营、雍营、边疆十二郡的骑兵，以及羌人、胡人部队，出塞征战。
English: In the winter, in October, Dou Xian was appointed as the cavalry general to fight against the Northern Xiongnu. The executioner, Gu Gengbing, was appointed as the deputy commander-in-chief, and the five school soldiers of the Northern Army, including the cavalry, cavalry, infantry, Changshui and Yixing, and the cavalry of the Liyang Camp, Yongying and the 12 counties of the frontier, as well as the troops of the Xiongnu and Hu people, were conscripted and sent to fight.

古文：公卿举故张掖太守邓训代张纡为护羌校尉。
现代文：公卿推举前张掖太守邓训接替张纡任护羌校尉。
English: Deng Xun, the former Zhangye daimyō, was elected by the Kugyo to succeed Zhangye as the commander of the garrison.

古文：迷唐率兵万骑来至塞下，未敢攻训，先欲胁小月氏胡。
现代文：烧当羌人部落首领迷唐率领一万骑兵，逼近边塞，但没有敢进攻邓训，而准备先胁迫小月氏胡人臣服。
English: Fan Tang, the leader of the Burntang and Qiang tribes, led ten thousand cavalry and approached the border fortress, but he did not dare to attack Dengxun, but prepared to first force the submission of the Xiaoyue Hu people.

古文：训拥卫小月氏胡，令不得战。
现代文：由于邓训的庇护，迷唐未能与小月氏胡人交战。
English: Due to Deng Xun's protection, Meitang was not able to fight against the Kogetsu Hu people.

古文：议者咸以羌、胡相攻，县官之利，不宜禁护。
现代文：议论此事的官员一致认为，羌人和胡人互相攻击，是对汉朝有利的事情，不应采取制止和庇护的策略。
English: The officials who discussed the matter agreed that it was beneficial to the Han Dynasty for the Xiong and Hu people to attack each other, and that they should not adopt the strategy of stopping and sheltering the Xiong.

古文：训曰： 张纡失信，众羌大动，凉州吏民，命县丝发。
现代文：邓训说： 由于张纡失信，致使羌人各部落群起反叛，凉州官民的性命，就像悬在一根发丝上那样危险。
English: Deng Xun said: Due to Zhang Ye's breach of trust, all the tribes of the Han people rebelled en masse. The lives of the officials and people in Liangzhou were in danger as if they were hanging by a thread.

古文：原诸胡所以难得意者，皆恩信不厚耳。
现代文：推求胡人所以难与汉朝同心的原因，全都是因为我们的恩德信义不厚。
English: The reason why it is difficult for the Hu people to be one-hearted with the Han Dynasty is all because our benevolence and loyalty are not strong.

古文：今因其追急，以德怀之，庶能有用。 
现代文：现在乘胡人受到逼迫的机会，以恩德相待，希望将来能为我所用。 
English: Now I take the opportunity of the persecution of the Hu people to treat each other with kindness, and hope to be able to use it in the future.

古文：遂令开城及所居园门，悉驱群胡妻子内之，严兵守卫。
现代文：于是下令打开城门和他所居住的护羌校尉府后园大门，将胡人的妻子儿女全部驱赶接纳入内，派兵严密守卫。
English: Therefore, he ordered to open the gate of the city and the gate of the rear garden of the tutelary captain's residence where he lived, to drive all of Hu's wives and children inside, and to send soldiers to guard it closely.

古文：羌掠无所得，又不敢逼诸胡，因即解去。
现代文：羌兵抢掠没有收获，又不敢对小月氏胡人各部落进行逼迫，便撤退离去。
English: There was nothing to be gained from robbing and plundering, and they did not dare to persecute the various tribes of the Kogetsu Hu people, so they retreated and left.

古文：由是湟中诸胡皆言： 汉家常欲斗我曹；今邓使君待我以恩信，开门内我妻子，乃是得父母也！ 
现代文：因此，湟中地区的胡人部族都说： 汉朝官吏总是要我们相斗，而如今邓使君却用恩德信义对待我们，开门收容我们的妻子儿女，我们如同得到了父母的庇护！ 
English: Therefore, all the Hu tribes in the Central Yunnan region said: "The Han officials always want us to fight each other, but now Deng Zikun treats us with kindness and loyalty, opening the door to receive our wives and children, we are like being protected by our parents!"

古文：咸欢喜叩头曰： 唯使君所命！ 
现代文：他们全都十分欢喜，向邓训叩头说： 我们一切听从您的命令！ 
English: They were all very happy and bowed to Deng Xun and said, "We all obey your orders!"

古文：训遂抚养教谕，小大莫不感悦。
现代文：邓训便进行安抚教化，胡人大小无不心悦诚服。
English: Deng Xun then carried out appeasement and indoctrination, and Hu people of all sizes wholeheartedly obeyed.

古文：于是赏赂诸羌种，使相招诱，迷唐叔父号吾将其种人八百户来降。
现代文：于是邓训又悬赏招降羌族各部落，让已降的羌人引诱其他羌人前来归顺。迷唐的叔父号吾率领本部落羌人八百户前来依附汉朝。
English: Therefore, Deng Hun also offered a reward to the tribes of the Yao people who had surrendered, so that the Yao people who had already surrendered could lure other Yao people to come and submit. The uncle of the Tang Dynasty led 800 families of Yao people from this tribe to come and adhere to the Han Dynasty.

古文：训因发湟中秦、胡、羌兵四千人出塞，掩击迷唐于写谷，破之，迷唐乃去大、小榆，居颇岩谷，众悉离散。
现代文：于是，邓训征调湟中地区的汉人、胡人、羌人部队四千人出塞，在写谷袭击迷唐，将他打败。于是迷唐撤离大、小榆谷，移居到颇岩谷，部众全部离散。
English: As a result, Deng Chunzheng dispatched 4,000 troops of Han, Hu and Xiong people from the central region of Yunnan to attack and defeat Fan Tang in Shibuya. As a result, Fan Tang withdrew from Daxi Valley and Xiaoshu Valley, and moved to Poiyang Valley, and his followers were all dispersed.

古文：汉孝和皇帝上
现代文：汉孝和皇帝上
English: Han Xiao and Emperor Wu

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝下永元元年
现代文：汉和帝永元元年
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty

古文：春，迷唐欲复归故地。
现代文：春季，迷唐打算重新回到故地。
English: In the spring, Meitang plans to return to his hometown.

古文：邓训发湟中六千人，令长史任尚将之，缝革为船，置于箄上以渡河，掩击迷唐，大破之，斩首前后一千八百馀级，获生口二千人，马牛羊三万馀头，一种殆尽。
现代文：邓训在湟中征调六千士兵，命长史任尚率领，用皮革缝制小船，放在木筏上，作为渡河工具。汉军发动袭击，大败迷唐，先后斩杀一千八百余人，俘虏二千人，缴获马牛羊三万余头，迷唐的整个部落几乎全被消灭。
English: Deng Xun conscripted and transferred six thousand soldiers to Yunnan, led by the long-lived Ren Shang, and sewed small boats with leather and placed them on rafts as a means of crossing the river. The Chinese army launched an attack, defeated Tang, killed more than eighteen hundred people, captured two thousand people, captured more than thirty thousand heads of horses, cattle and sheep, and almost wiped out the entire tribe of Tang.

古文：迷唐收其馀众西徙千馀里，诸附落小种皆畔之。
现代文：迷唐收集残余的部众，向西迁移了一千余里，原来依附他的那些小部落全部叛变。
English: Meitang gathered the remnants of his followers and moved more than a thousand miles to the west. All of the small tribes that had previously been dependent on him mutinied.

古文：烧当豪帅东号稽颡归死，馀皆款塞纳质。
现代文：于是邓训安抚接纳归顺的羌人，他的威望和信誉广为传播。
English: As a result, Deng Hun appeased and accepted those who surrendered, and his prestige and credibility were widely spread.

古文：于是训绥接归附，威信大行，遂罢屯兵，各令归郡，唯置弛刑徒二千馀人，分以屯田、修理坞壁而已。
现代文：由于边境安宁，便撤除驻军，命士兵各回本郡，只留下免刑囚徒二千余人，分别从事开荒垦田和修缮堡垒亭障而已。
English: Due to the tranquility of the border, the garrison was withdrawn, and the soldiers were sent back to their own counties, leaving only more than two thousand prisoners without sentence, who were engaged in clearing wasteland and repairing fortress barriers.

古文：窦宪将征匈奴，三公、九卿诣朝堂上书谏，以为： 匈奴不犯边塞，而无故劳师远涉，损费国用，徼功万里，非社稷之计。 
现代文：窦宪将要出征讨伐匈奴。三公及九卿到朝堂上书劝阻，认为： 匈奴并未侵犯边塞，而我们却要无缘无故地劳师远行，消耗国家资财，求取万里以外的功勋，这不是为国家着想的策略。 
English: Dou Xian was about to go to fight the Huns. The three princes and nine nobles went to the imperial court to write a letter to dissuade him, saying: The Huns did not invade the border fortress, but we have to travel far away for no reason, consume national resources, and seek merits thousands of miles away. This is not a strategy for the sake of the country.

古文：书连上，辄寝，宋由惧，遂不敢复署议，而诸卿稍自引止。
现代文：奏书接连呈上，却都被搁置下来。太尉宋由感到恐惧，便不敢再在奏章上署名，九卿也逐渐自动停止劝谏。
English: The playbooks were submitted one after another, but they were all put on hold. Taifu Song Yu felt afraid and did not dare to sign the playbook again, and the nine nobles gradually stopped persuading him.

古文：唯袁安、任隗守正不移，至免冠朝堂固争，前后且十上，众皆为之危惧，安、隗正色自若。
现代文：唯独司徒袁安、司空任隗严守正道，坚定不移，甚至脱去官帽在朝堂力争，先后上书约达十次。众人都为他们感到危险和恐惧，但袁、任二人却神情镇定，举止如常。
English: However, Yuan An, the leading disciple, and Ren Yao, the second-in-command, strictly adhered to the right path and remained steadfast. They even took off their official hats to fight in the imperial court, and submitted about ten letters in succession. Everyone felt danger and fear for them, but Yuan and Ren both looked calm and behaved as usual.

古文：侍御史鲁恭上疏曰： 国家新遭大忧，陛下方在谅阴，百姓阙然，三时不闻警跸之音，莫不怀思皇皇，若有求而不得。
现代文：侍御史鲁恭上书说： 我国新近有大忧，陛下正在守丧，百姓失去了先帝的庇护，夏、秋、冬三季听不到圣上出巡时禁卫军警戒喝道的声音，人们无不因思念而惶惶不安，如同有求而不能得。
English: The attendant, Shulugong, wrote: Our country has recently experienced great sorrow. Your Majesty is in mourning. The people have lost the protection of the former emperor. In summer, autumn and winter, the voices of the imperial guards warning and shouting cannot be heard when the saint is out on patrol. People are panicked and anxious because of their thoughts. It is as if they are asking for something but cannot get it.

古文：今乃以盛春之月兴发军役，扰动天下，以事戎夷，诚非所以垂恩中国，改元正时，由内及外也。
现代文：如今却在盛春之月征发兵役，为了远征匈奴而搅扰全国，这实在不符合恩待自己国家、改年号而变更朝代、由内及外地处理政务的原则。
English: Today, however, military service is being conscripted in the month of spring, and the whole country is being disturbed for the expedition of the Xiongnu. This is really inconsistent with the principle of treating one's own country with grace, changing the era and changing the dynasty, and handling government affairs from inside and outside.

古文：万民者，天之所生；天爱其所生，犹父母爱其子，一物有不得其所，则正气为之舛错，况于人乎！
现代文：万民百姓，乃是上天所生。上天爱所生，犹如父母爱子女。天下万物中，只要有一物不能安适，那么天象就会为此发生错乱，何况对于人呢？
English: The people of all nations are born of the heavens. The heavens love their children, just as parents love their children. Of all the things in the world, as long as there is one thing that is not at ease, then the angels will be disturbed by it, and what about people?

古文：故爱民者必有天报。
现代文：因此，爱民的，上天必有回报。
English: Therefore, those who love the people will be rewarded by heaven.

古文：夫戎狄者，四方之异气，与鸟兽无别；若杂居中国，则错乱天气，污辱善人，是以圣王之制，羁縻不绝而已。
现代文：戎狄异族，如同四方的异气，与鸟兽没有分别，如果让他们混居在中原内地，就会扰乱天象，玷污良善之人。所以，圣明君王的作法，只是对他们采取不断笼络和约束的政策而已。
English: The Eun Di aliens, like the foreign spirits of the four directions, are no different from the birds and beasts. If they are allowed to live together in the Central Plains inland, they will disturb the celestial bodies and defile good people. Therefore, the actions of the Holy Emperor are just a policy of constant enticement and restraint.

古文：今匈奴为鲜卑所破，远藏于史侯河西，去塞数千里，而欲乘其虚耗，利其微弱，是非义之所出也。
现代文：如今北匈奴已被鲜卑打败，远远地躲藏到史侯河以西，距离汉朝边塞数千里，而我们打算乘他们空虚之机，利用他们的疲弱，这不是仁义的举动。
English: Now that the Northern Xiongnu have been defeated by the Xianbei, they are hiding far to the west of the Shou River, thousands of miles away from the Han Dynasty, and we intend to take advantage of their empty opportunity and take advantage of their weakness. This is not a benevolent act.

古文：今始征发，而大司农调度不足，上下相迫，民间之急，亦已甚矣。
现代文：现在刚刚开始征发，而物资已不能满足大司农的调度，上官下官互相逼迫，人民的困苦也已到了极点。
English: Now the requisitioning and dispatching has just begun, but the materials can no longer meet the scheduling of the chief secretary for agriculture, the superiors and subordinates are persecuting each other, and the people's hardships have reached the extreme.

古文：群僚百姓咸曰不可，陛下独奈何以一人之计，弃万人之命，不恤其言乎！
现代文：群臣和百姓都说此事不可行，而陛下为什么只为窦宪一人打算，因而毁弃万人的性命，不体恤他们忧患的呼声呢！
English: The ministers and the people all said that the matter was impossible, but why did His Majesty only plan for Dou Xian alone, thus destroying the lives of all people and not sympathizing with their cries of distress!

古文：上观天心，下察人志，足以知事之得失。
现代文：上观天心，下察民意，便足以明白事情的得失了。
English: It is enough for the governor to look up at the heart of heaven and look down at human beings.

古文：臣恐中国不为中国，岂徒匈奴而已哉！ 
现代文：我担心中国将不再是真正的中国，岂只匈奴不把中国当中国看待而已！ 
English: If this continues, China will not become China, and only the Huns will not become Huns!

古文：尚书令韩稜、骑都尉硃晖、议郎京兆乐恢，皆上疏谏，太后不听。
现代文：尚书令韩棱、骑都尉朱晖、京兆人议郎乐恢，也都上书劝谏，但太后不听。
English: Shang Shuling, Han Ren, Captain Zhu Xi, and Jingzhao people also sent letters to persuade and persuade, but the Empress Dowager did not listen.

古文：又诏使者为宪弟笃、景并起邸第，劳役百姓。
现代文：太后又下诏命令使者为窦宪的弟弟窦笃、窦景同时兴建宅第，役使百姓。
English: The empress dowager also issued an imperial edict ordering the emissary to build a residence for Dou Dou, the younger brother of Dou Xian, and Dou Jing to serve the people.

古文：侍御史何敞上疏曰： 臣闻匈奴之为桀逆久矣，平城之围，慢书之耻，此二辱者，臣子所谓捐躯而必死，高祖、吕后忍怒还忿，舍而不诛。
现代文：侍御史何敞上书说： 我听说，匈奴凶暴叛逆由来已久。高祖在平城被围，吕后收到冒顿傲慢的书信，为了这两次侮辱，臣子一定要捐躯而死，但高祖和吕后却忍怒含忿，放过匈奴而未加惩处。
English: "I have heard that the violent rebellion of the Xiongnu has been around for a long time. Gaozu was besieged in Pingcheng, and Lugu received arrogant letters. For these two insults, the vassal must sacrifice his body and die, but Gaozu and Lugu bore their anger and let the Xiongnu go unpunished.

古文：今匈奴无逆节之罪，汉朝无可惭之耻，而盛春东作，兴动大役，元元怨恨，咸怀不悦。
现代文：如今北匈奴没有叛逆之罪，汉朝也没有值得羞惭的耻辱，而时值盛春时节，农民正在田中耕作，大规模地征发兵役，会使百姓产生怨恨。人人心怀不满。
English: Today, the Northern Xiongnu do not have the crime of treason, and the Han Dynasty does not have the shame of shame, but at the time of the Spring Festival, when farmers are working in the fields, large-scale conscription of military service will cause resentment among the people. Everyone is dissatisfied.

古文：又猥复为卫尉笃、奉车都尉景缮修馆第，弥街绝里。
现代文：又为卫尉窦笃、奉车都尉窦景滥修宅第，屋舍占满了街巷。
English: It is also the residence of the guard lieutenant Dou Tu and the commander of the guard car Dou Jing, and the houses occupy the streets and lanes.

古文：笃、景亲近贵臣，当为百僚表仪。
现代文：窦笃、窦景是陛下的亲近贵臣，应当成为百官的表率。
English: Dou Tuo and Dou Jing are close to His Majesty and should be a role model for hundreds of officials.

古文：今众军在道，朝廷焦脣，百姓愁苦，县官无用，而遽起大第，崇饰玩好，非所以垂令德、示无穷也。
现代文：现在远征大军已经上路，朝廷焦灼不安，百姓愁苦，国家财政空虚，而此时骤然兴建巨宅，重视和装饰喜好的东西，这不是发扬恩德、使后世永远仿效的作法。
English: Now that the expeditionary army has set out, the imperial court is anxious and uneasy, the people are sad, and the country's finances are empty. At this time, suddenly building a huge house, valuing and decorating favorite things, this is not a way to promote virtue and make future generations forever imitate.

古文：宜且罢工匠，专忧北边，恤民之困。 
现代文：应当暂且停工，专心考虑北方边疆的战事，体恤人民的困难。 
English: It is necessary to stop work temporarily, concentrate on the war on the northern border, and sympathize with the difficulties of the people.

古文：书奏，不省。
现代文：奏书呈上，未被理睬。
English: The book went up and was not accepted.

古文：窦宪尝使门生赍书诣尚书仆射郅寿，有所请托，寿即送诏狱，前后上书，陈宪骄恣，引王莽以诫国家；又因朝会，刺讥宪等以伐匈奴、起第宅事，厉音正色，辞旨甚切。
现代文：窦宪曾派他的门生带信去见尚书仆射郅寿，有私事请托，郅寿立即将该门生送到诏狱。他还屡次上书，指出窦宪的骄横，引用王莽的史事来告诫朝廷。又趁着上朝的机会，就讨伐匈奴和大肆兴建宅第之事抨击窦宪等人，厉声正色，辞意十分激切。
English: Dou Xian once sent his protégé with a letter to Shang Shufu's servant, Jian Shou, with a request for a private matter. Jian Shou immediately sent the protégé to the imperial prison. He also repeatedly sent letters, pointing out Dou Xian's arrogance, citing Wang Mang's historical events to admonish the imperial court. He also took advantage of the opportunity to attack Dou Xian and others on the issue of fighting the Xiongnu and the construction of a large number of houses. He was very forthright and his words were very passionate.

古文：宪怒，陷寿以买公田、诽谤，下吏，当诛，何敝上疏曰： 寿机密近臣，匡救为职，若怀默不言，其罪当诛。
现代文：窦宪大怒，反诬郅寿私买公田，诽谤朝廷。郅寿被交付官吏审讯，当处斩刑。何敞上书说： 郅寿是圣上身边参与机密的官员，纠正大臣的错误，是他的职责。如果他面对错误而沉默不语，就罪该处死。
English: Dou Xian flew into a rage, lashed out against the false accusation that Zou Shou had bought public land and slandered the imperial court. Zou Shou was handed over to officials for interrogation, and was immediately beheaded. He openly wrote: Zou Shou was an official around the saint who was involved in confidential matters, and it was his duty to correct the minister's mistakes. If he remained silent in the face of a mistake, he would be punished with death.

古文：今寿违众正议以安宗庙，岂其私邪！臣所以触死瞽言，非为寿也。
现代文：如今郅寿为了宗庙的平安而反对群臣，提出正确主张，这难道是为了个人吗？我所以冒死上言，并不是为了郅寿。
English: Now, for the sake of the peace of the ancestral temple, Gong Shou opposes the courtiers and puts forward correct propositions. Is this for the sake of an individual? That's why I'm risking my life to speak up, not for Gong Shou.

古文：忠臣尽节，以死为归；臣虽不知寿，度其甘心安之。
现代文：忠臣尽节，视死如归，我虽不了解郅寿，但估计他会心甘情愿地安然赴死。
English: Although I do not know his exact date of death, I expect that he will go to his death peacefully and willingly.

古文：诚不欲圣朝行诽谤之诛，以伤晏晏之化，杜塞忠直，垂讥无穷。
现代文：我实在不希望圣明的朝廷会对诽谤罪进行诛杀，那将伤害宽厚的教化，堵塞忠诚正直之士的道路，永远被后人讥笑。
English: I really do not want the holy court to fight and kill the crime of defamation, which will hurt the benevolent education, block the path of loyal and honest people, and be forever ridiculed by future generations.

古文：臣敞谬与机密，言所不宜，罪名明白，当填牢狱，先寿僵仆，万死有馀。 
现代文：我参与国家机密，却说出了这些不应由我说出的话，罪名十分清楚，该当入狱，先于郅寿被杀，卧尸在地，死有余辜。 
English: I participated in state secrets, but said these words that should not be said by me, the crime is very clear, I should go to prison, be killed before my death, lie dead on the ground, and die with a lot of guilt.

古文：书奏，寿得减死论，徙合浦，未行，自杀。
现代文：奏书呈上，郅寿被判减死一等之刑，流放合浦。还没有动身，他便自杀了。
English: After the report was submitted, Gong Shou was sentenced to a first-class commutation of the death penalty and banished to Hapu. Before he could leave, he committed suicide.

古文：宪、秉出塞三千馀里，登燕然山，命中护军班固刻石勒功，纪汉威德而还。
现代文：窦宪分别派遣副校窦宪、耿秉出塞三千余里，登上燕然山，命令中护军班固刻石建立功碑，记录汉朝的国威和恩德，然后班师。
English: Dou Xian and Geng Bing, vice principals of the school, were dispatched separately to travel more than three thousand miles out of Tibet and ascend Yanran Mountain. They ordered the middle protection squad to establish a monument of merit, record the national prestige and virtue of the Han Dynasty, and then the squad division.

古文：遣军司马吴汜、梁讽奉金帛遗北单于，时虏中乖乱，汜、讽及单于于西海上，宣国威信，以诏致赐，单于稽首拜受。
现代文：窦宪派军司马吴、梁讽带上金帛财物送给北匈奴单于。当时北匈奴内部大乱，吴、梁二人到西海之畔才追上单于，向他宣布汉朝的国威和信誉，并以皇帝的名义进行赏赐，单于叩首接受。
English: Dou Xian sent the military commander Ma Wu and Liang Lin with gold ingots and valuables to the Northern Huns to present to the Northern Huns. At that time, the Northern Huns were in turmoil. Wu and Liang went to the coast of the West Sea to catch up with the Northern Huns. They announced the national prestige and credibility of the Han Dynasty to the Northern Huns, and rewarded them in the name of the emperor. The Northern Huns bowed their heads to accept the gifts.

古文：讽因说令修呼韩邪故事，单于喜悦，即将其众与讽俱还；到私渠海，闻汉军已入塞，乃遣弟右温禺鞮王奉贡入侍，随讽诣阙。宪以单于不自身到，奏还其侍弟。秋，七月，乙未，会稽山崩。
现代文：于是梁讽向单于游说，让他效法呼韩邪单于的先例，做汉朝的藩属。单于欣然同意，立即率领部众同梁讽一道南归。抵达私渠海时，听说汉军已经入塞，单于便派他的弟弟右温禺王带着贡物去汉朝做人质，随梁讽一同入京朝见。窦宪因北匈奴单于没有亲自前来，便奏报窦太后，把单于派来充当人质的弟弟送回去了。秋季，七月乙未，会稽发生山崩。
English: As a result, Liang Yan lobbied Shan Yu, asking him to follow the precedent of calling Han Ye Xuan Shan Yu and become a member of the Han Dynasty. Shan Yu readily agreed, and immediately led all his subordinates to return south with Liang Yan. When he arrived at the private canal, he heard that the Chinese army had entered the fortress. Shan Yu sent his brother, Right Wen Xuan Wang, with tribute to the Han Dynasty to be a hostage, and followed Liang Yan to Beijing to meet the Imperial Court. Dou Xian, because the North Huns did not come to visit Shan Yu in person, reported to Empress Dowager Dou, and sent back the younger brother that Shan Yu had

古文：九月，庚申，以窦宪为大将军，中郎将刘尚为车骑将军，封宪武阳侯，食邑二万户；宪固辞封爵，诏许之。
现代文：九月庚申，将窦宪任命为大将军，中郎将刘尚任命为车骑将军；并将窦宪封为武阳侯，享有二万户食邑。窦宪坚决推辞，不肯接受封爵，窦太后下诏准许。
English: In September, Goshun appointed Dou Xian as grand general, and Zhong Lang appointed Liu Shang as general of chariots and cavalry; he also made Dou Xian the Marquis of Wuyang and granted him 20,000 households. Dou Xian firmly refused to accept the knighthood, but Empress Dowager Dou gave her approval.

古文：旧，大将军位在三公下，至是，诏宪位次太傅下、三公上；长史、司马秩中二千石。
现代文：依照旧例，大将军的地位原在太尉、司徒、司空三公之下。至此，太后下诏规定：窦宪的地位在太傅以下，三公以上；大将军府的长史、司马的品秩为中二千石。
English: According to the old practice, the position of the general was originally below the three ranks of the captain, the steward, and the steward. At this point, the empress dowager issued an imperial edict stipulating that Dou Xian's position was below the rank of the captain and above the rank of the steward; the long history of the general's office, and the rank of the steward was 2,000 koku.

古文：封耿秉为美阳侯。
现代文：将耿秉封为美阳侯。
English: Geng Bing was made the marquis of Miyang.

古文：窦氏兄弟骄纵，而执金吾景尤甚，奴客缇骑强夺人财货，篡取罪人，妻略妇女。
现代文：窦氏兄弟骄傲放纵，而执金吾窦景尤为突出。他的奴仆和部下骑士抢夺人民的财物，非法夺取罪犯，并奸淫掳掠妇女。
English: The Dou brothers were proud and self-indulgent, and the execution of King Wu Doujing was particularly outstanding. His slaves and subordinate knights robbed the people's property, illegally seized criminals, and raped and kidnapped women.

古文：商贾闭塞，如避寇仇。
现代文：商人们不敢出门经商，如同躲避敌寇。
English: Merchants do not dare to go out to do business, as if they were hiding from the enemy.

古文：又擅发缘边诸郡突骑有才力者，有司莫敢举奏，袁安劾景 擅发边兵，惊惑吏民；二千石不待符信而辄承景檄，当伏显诛。 
现代文：窦景还擅自征发边疆各郡骑兵部队的精锐，为己所用。
English: Doujing also conscripted and dispatched the elite cavalry troops from all counties in the frontier without authorization, and used them for his own purposes.

古文：又奏 司隶校尉河南尹阿附贵戚，不举劾，请免官案罪。 并寝不报。驸马都尉瑰，独好经书，节约自修。
现代文：有关部门无人胆敢举报。司徒袁安弹劾窦景： 擅自征发边疆人民，惊扰欺骗官吏百姓，边郡太守不等待调兵的符信，却即刻奉行窦景的檄书，应当处死示众。 他还上书说： 司隶校尉、河南尹阿谀攀附地位尊贵的外戚，不举报弹劾他们的不法情事，建议免官治罪。 这些奏书全部被搁置下来，得不到答复。窦家兄弟中，唯独驸马都尉窦喜好儒家经书，约束节制而修身自好。
English: No one dared to report it to the relevant departments. Szu Yuan'an impeached Dou Jing: He conscripted the people of the border region without authorization, alarmed and deceived the officials and the people. The governor of the border county did not wait for the letter of the transfer of troops, but immediately followed Dou Jing's imperial edict, and should be put to death. He also wrote a letter saying: Sizi lieutenant and Henan Yin Aqin clung to the status of a distinguished relative, did not report the illegal situation of impeaching them, and recommended that they be exempted from official punishment. All these letters were shelved and did not receive a reply. Among the Dou brothers,

古文：尚书何敞上封事曰： 昔郑武姜之幸叔段，卫庄公之宠州吁，爱而不教，终至凶戾。
现代文：尚书何敞呈上密封奏书，书中写道： 从前，春秋时郑国太后武姜宠爱幼子叔段，卫国国君庄公宠爱庶子州吁，都是只宠爱而不管教，终使叔段和州吁成为凶恶暴戾之人。
English: Shangshu He Zhangran presented a sealed record book, in which he wrote: Once upon a time, during the Spring and Autumn Period, Empress Dowager Wu Jiang of the State of Zheng loved her young son, Uncle Duan, and Emperor Junzhuang of the State of Wei loved his illegitimate son, Zhou Wu, but they only loved them and did not discipline them, which eventually made Uncle Duan and Zhou Wu become vicious and violent people.

古文：由是观之，爱子若此，犹饥而食之以毒，适所以害之也。
现代文：由此看来，像这样宠爱子弟，就好象在他们饥饿时喂给毒药，恰恰是害了他们。
English: From this point of view, loving his son like this, like eating poison when he is hungry, is exactly what harmed him.

古文：伏见大将军宪，始遭大忧，公卿比奏，欲令典干国事。宪深执谦退，固辞盛位，恳恳勤勤，言之深至，天下闻之，莫不悦喜。
现代文：我看到大将军窦宪，在先帝驾崩后不久，公卿曾接连上奏，希望由他主持国家事务，但他严守谦恭退让的原则，坚决辞去高位，态度十分诚恳，言辞极为深挚。天下人听到以后，无不感到欣喜。
English: The great general Dou Xian began to suffer from great anxiety. The nobles began to play up and wanted to put him in charge of state affairs. Dou Xian was very modest, held his position firmly, was earnest and diligent, and spoke profoundly. The whole world listened, and no one was unhappy.

古文：今逾年未几，大礼未终，卒然中改，兄弟专朝，宪秉三军之重，笃、景总宫卫之权，而虐用百姓，奢侈僭逼，诛戳无罪，肆心自快。
现代文：现在一年过去没有多久，国丧尚未告终，窦宪却中途突然改变了态度。如今窦家兄弟都在朝廷专权，窦宪掌握全国的武装，窦笃、窦景统领宫廷禁卫部队。他们苛刻暴虐，役使百姓；生活奢侈，超过本来的身份；诛杀无罪之人，随心所欲而只求自己快意。
English: Now, not long after a year has passed, the national mourning has not yet ended, but Dou Xian suddenly changed his attitude halfway. Today, the Dou brothers are in the exclusive power of the imperial court, Dou Xian is in control of the armed forces of the whole country, and Dou Tu and Dou Jing are in command of the palace guard. They are harsh and tyrannical, serving the people; living in luxury, exceeding their original identity; killing innocent people, doing whatever they want and only seeking their own pleasure.

古文：今者论议讻讻，咸谓叔段、州吁复生于汉。
现代文：如今人们议论纷纷，都说叔段和州吁在汉朝再次出现。
English: Nowadays, people are talking about the reappearance of Shudan and Zhouzhou in the Han Dynasty.

古文：臣观公卿怀持两端，不肯极言者，以为宪等若有匪懈之志，则已受吉甫褒申伯之功；如宪等陷于罪辜，则自取陈平、周勃顺吕后之权，终不以宪等吉凶为忧也！
现代文：据我观察，公卿所以采取骑墙态度，不肯直言，是为了这样的目的：如果窦宪等人有始终效忠朝廷的志节，那么他们自己就有周代吉甫褒扬申国国君的功劳；而如果窦宪等人陷于重罪，那么自己则只是采取了汉初陈平、周勃顺从吕后的权宜之计，到底不忧虑窦宪兄弟的命运吉凶！
English: According to my observation, the reason why the noblemen took the attitude of riding the wall and refused to speak out was for the following purpose: if Dou Xian and others have always been loyal to the imperial court, then they themselves have the merit of Zhou Jifu praising the country's sovereign; and if Dou Xian and others are caught in a serious crime, then they have only taken the expedient measure of Chen Ping in the early Han Dynasty and Zhou Bo Shun following Lu, and they are not worried about the fate of the Dou Xian brothers!

古文：臣敞区区诚欲计策两安，绝其绵绵，塞其涓涓，上不欲令皇太后损文母之号、陛下有誓泉之讥，下使宪等得长保其福祐也。
现代文：微臣何敞真诚地愿为朝廷和窦家筹划两全的方法，斩断灾难的绳索，堵塞祸患的涓流。上不愿使太后如周代文母的美誉受到损害，不愿陛下如郑庄公怨恨母亲那样发誓 黄泉相见 而留下话柄；下使窦宪等人永远保有所获得的福分和庇佑。
English: We sincerely wish to devise a two-pronged approach for the imperial court and the Dou family, to cut off the ropes of disaster and block the flow of calamity. Above, we do not want to damage the reputation of the empress dowager like Zhou Dynasty's literary mother, and do not want His Majesty to swear like Zheng Zhuang's resentful mother that they will meet in the afterlife and leave a legacy; below, let Dou Xian and others forever keep the blessings and patronage they have gained.

古文：驸马都尉瑰，比请退身，愿抑家权，可与参谋，听顺其意，诚宗庙至计，窦氏之福！ 
现代文：驸马都尉窦，曾多次请求从高位退下，希望抑制窦家的权势，陛下可以同他进行磋商，听取他的意见。
English: His Majesty may consult with Lieutenant Dou Ma, who has repeatedly requested to step down from his high position, in hopes of curbing the power of the Dou family, and listen to his opinions.

古文：时济南王康尊贵骄甚，宪乃白出敞为济南太傅。
现代文：这才确实是维护江山社稷的最佳策略，也是窦氏家族的福分！ 当时济南王刘康地位尊贵而十分骄横，于是窦宪就告诉太后，让何敞离开京城，出任济南国太傅。
English: At this time, Liu Kang, the king of Jinan, was extremely proud, and Dou Xian proposed that He Zhang be made the Jinan Taifu.

古文：康有违失，敞辄谏争，康虽不能从，然素敬重敞，无所嫌牾焉。
现代文：每当刘康有失误的时候，何敞便进行劝谏。刘康虽然不能听从何敞的意见，但他一向敬重何敞，并没有什么嫌隙和冲突。
English: Whenever Liu Kang made a mistake, He Zang would advise him. Although Liu Kang could not listen to He Zang's opinion, he always respected He Zang, and there was no rift or conflict.

古文：冬，十月，庚子，阜陵质王延薨。
现代文：冬季，十月庚子，阜陵质王刘延去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Geng Zi, the King of Fuling Liu Yan passed away.

古文：是岁，郡国九大水。
现代文：本年，九个郡和封国发生水灾。
English: This year, nine places in the county experienced major flooding.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝下永元二年春，正月，丁丑，赦天下。
现代文：永元二年春季，正月丁丑，大赦天下。二月壬午，出现日食。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Yonggen era, the first month, Ding Ug, was a national holiday. At noon in February, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：二月，壬午，日有食之。夏，五月，丙辰，封皇弟寿为济北王，开为河间王，淑为城阳王；绍封故淮南顷王子侧为常山王。
现代文：夏季，五月丙辰，将皇弟刘寿封为济北王，皇弟刘开封为河间王，皇弟刘淑封为城阳王。将前淮南顷王的儿子刘侧封为常山王，继承其父刘。
English: In the summer, in May of the year of the Horse, he made Liu Shoufeng, the younger brother of the king, the king of Zhibei, Liu Kaifeng, the king of Hema, and Liu Shufeng, the younger brother of the king, the king of Chengyang. He also made Liu Xiangfeng, the son of the former king of Huainan, the king of Changshan, succeeding his father Liu.

古文：窦宪遣副校尉阎盘将二千馀骑掩击北匈奴之守伊吾者，复取其地。
现代文：窦宪派副校尉阎砻率领骑兵二千余人袭击北匈奴在伊吾的守军，重新占领该地。
English: Dou Xian sent Vice-Colonel Yan Qi to lead more than 2,000 cavalrymen to attack the Northern Xiongnu's defenders in Igu and reoccupy the area.

古文：车师震慑，前、后王各遣子入侍。
现代文：车师深感震恐，前后王国的国王都分别派遣王子到汉朝充当人质。
English: The coachman was deeply shocked, and the kings of the kingdom sent princes to the Han Dynasty to serve as hostages.

古文：月氏求尚公主，班超拒还其使，由是怨恨，遣其副王谢将兵七万攻超。
现代文：月氏王求娶汉朝的公主。班超拒绝，并遣回月氏派来的使者。月氏王因此心怀怨恨，派副王谢率领七万大军进攻班超。
English: The King of the Moon Clan asked to marry a princess of the Han Dynasty. Ban Chao refused and sent back the envoy sent by the Moon Clan. The King of the Moon Clan therefore harbored a grudge and sent Vice-King Xie to attack Ban Chao with 70,000 troops.

古文：超众少，皆大恐；超譬军士曰： 月氏兵虽多，然数千里逾葱岭来，非有运输，何足忧邪！
现代文：班超兵少，众人都大为恐慌。班超告诉士兵们说： 月氏兵虽然多，但他们远从数千里之外翻越葱岭而来，没有运输补给，有什么值得忧虑呢！
English: As there were few Banchao soldiers, everyone panicked. Banchao told the soldiers, "Although there are many soldiers of the Moon Clan, they have come from thousands of miles away across the mountains, and there is no transportation of supplies. What is there to worry about?"

古文：但当收谷坚守，彼饥穷自降，不过数十日决矣！ 
现代文：我们只要将粮食收割干净，据城固守，而敌方饥饿困顿，自会降服，不过数十天，便可以见分晓了！ 
English: As long as we harvest the grain cleanly and hold on to the city, while the enemy is starving and will surrender, but it will take dozens of days, we can see the dawn!

古文：谢遂前攻超，不下，又钞掠无所得。
现代文：谢领兵到达后，便前来进攻班超，不能取胜。又在城外抢掠，也没有收获。
English: After Xie's leading soldiers arrived, they came to attack Banchao, but could not win. They also looted outside the city, but there was no gain.

古文：超度其粮将尽，必从龟兹求食，乃遣兵数百于东界要之。
现代文：班超估计敌方的军粮快要吃完，一定会向龟兹求援，便派出数百伏兵在东方路上拦截。
English: The superintendent estimated that the enemy's military food was about to run out and would certainly ask for help from the turtle, and sent hundreds of soldiers to intercept them on the Dongfang Road.

古文：谢果遣骑赍金银珠玉以赂龟兹，超伏兵遮击，尽杀之，持其使首以示谢。
现代文：谢果然让人骑马带着金银珠玉去龟兹换取粮秣。班超的伏兵发动突袭，将他们全部杀死，斩下使者的人头送给谢看。
English: Xie actually had someone ride a horse and take gold, silver and precious stones to Ganzi in exchange for grain. Banchao's ambush launched a raid, killed them all, and cut off the head of the messenger to show to Xie.

古文：谢大惊，即遣使请罪，愿得生归，超纵遣之。
现代文：谢大吃一惊，立即派人向班超请罪，希望放他们活着回去。
English: Taken aback, Xie immediately sent someone to plead guilty to the superintendent, hoping to let them go back alive.

古文：月氏由是大震，岁奉贡献。
现代文：班超便把他们放走了。月氏因此受到巨大震动，每年都向汉朝进贡。
English: Banchao let them go. The Yue clan was greatly shaken by this and paid tribute to the Han Dynasty every year.

古文：初，北海哀王无后，肃宗以齐武王首创大业而后嗣废绝，心常愍之，遗诏令复齐、北海二国。
现代文：当初，北海哀王刘基死后没有继承人。章帝因齐武王刘首创王朝大业而后嗣断绝，心中常常哀怜。他留下遗诏，命令恢复齐国和北海国两个封国。
English: At first, there was no successor after the death of Liu Ji, the North Sea king of lamentation. Emperor Zhang was often saddened by the fact that the Qiwu king Liu initiated the great cause of the dynasty and cut off the heir. He left a will and ordered the restoration of the two fiefs of Qi and the North Sea.

古文：丁卯，封芜湖侯无忌为齐王，北海敬王庶子威为北海王。
现代文：本年五月丁卯，和帝将芜湖侯刘无忌封为齐王，将前北海敬王刘睦的庶子刘威封为北海王。
English: In May of this year, Emperor He anointed Liu Muxui, the lord of Wuhu, as the King of Qi, and Liu Wei, the illegitimate son of the former King of the North Sea, Liu Mu, as the King of the North Sea.

古文：六月，辛卯，中山简王焉薨。
现代文：六月辛卯，中山简王刘焉去世。
English: In June of Xinwu, Zhongshan Jane Wang Liu Yan passed away.

古文：焉，东海恭王之母弟，而窦太后，恭王之甥也；故加赙钱一亿，大为修冢茔，平夷吏民冢墓以千数，作者万馀人，凡征发摇动六州十八郡。
现代文：因刘焉是东海恭王刘强的同母弟，而窦太后是刘强的外孙女，因此赏赐丰厚，增加助丧钱一亿，为刘焉大修陵墓。在这项工程中，铲平的官民坟墓数以千计，使用的役夫达一万余人。因征发受到扰动的地区，共计六州十八郡。
English: Because Liu Yan was the younger brother of Liu Qiang, the King of Gong in the East China Sea, and the Dowager Empress Dou was the granddaughter of Liu Qiang, she was rewarded generously, with an additional 100 million in death grants, to overhaul the mausoleum for Liu Yan. In this project, thousands of public and private graves were razed, and more than 10,000 workers were used. The areas disturbed by the requisition were a total of 18 counties in six states.

古文：诏封窦宪为冠军侯，笃为郾侯，瑰为夏阳侯；宪独不受封。
现代文：诏书宣布将窦宪封为冠军侯，将窦笃封为郾侯，将窦封为夏阳侯。唯独窦宪不肯接受赐封。
English: The imperial edict announced that Dou Xian would be awarded the title of Champion, Dou Dou would be awarded the title of Champion, Dou Dou would be awarded the title of Champion, and Dou Dou would be awarded the title of Champion. However, Dou Xian refused to accept the award.

古文：秋，十月，乙卯，窦宪出屯凉州，以侍中邓叠行征西将军事为副。
现代文：秋季，七月乙卯，窦宪出京屯驻凉州。命侍中邓叠代理征西将军职务，充当副统帅。
English: In the autumn, in July, Dou Xian left Beijing for Liangzhou. He was appointed to serve as deputy general of the Western Expedition, acting as deputy commander-in-chief.

古文：北单于以汉还其侍弟，九月，复遣使款塞称臣，欲入朝见。
现代文：北匈奴单于因汉朝遣回他送去做人质的弟弟，本年九月，再次派遣使者到边塞表示服臣，并请求入京朝见。
English: In September of this year, the Northern Huns again sent an envoy to the border fortress to express obedience and request to see the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：冬十月，窦宪遣班固、梁讽迎之。
现代文：大军夜间到达，向北匈奴单于发动围攻。
English: The large army arrived at night and launched a siege against the Huns in the north.

古文：会南单于复上书求灭北庭，于是遣左谷蠡王师子等将左右部八千骑出鸡鹿塞，中郎将耿谭遣从事将护之，袭击北单于。夜至，围之，北单于被创，仅而得免，获阏氏及男女五人，斩首八千级，生虏数千口。
现代文：北匈奴单于受伤，仅得活命。南匈奴俘虏了北匈奴王后及其子女五人，斩首八千人，生擒数千人。
English: The Northern Xiongnu was only wounded and barely survived. The Southern Xiongnu captured the Queen of the Northern Xiongnu and her five children, beheaded eight thousand people, and left thousands of people alive.

古文：班固至私渠海而还。
现代文：班固等抵达私渠海后返回。
English: Ban Gu and others arrived at the private canal and then returned.

古文：是时，南部党众益盛，邻户三万四千，胜兵五万。
现代文：此时，南匈奴的势力日益强盛，拥有人口三万四千户，兵员达五万人。
English: At this time, the Southern Huns were becoming increasingly powerful, with a population of thirty-four thousand households and fifty thousand soldiers.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝下永元三年
现代文：永元三年春季，正月甲子，和帝用曹褒制定的新礼仪，举行了成年加冠礼。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Yongyuan era, in the first month of the year, Emperor He used Cao Bao to formulate a new etiquette, and held a coming-of-age ceremony.

古文：春，正月，甲子，帝用曹褒新礼，加元服；擢褒监羽林左骑。
现代文：擢升曹褒督领羽林左骑。
English: Ulin rode on the left, leading the way to promotion to Cao Baotong.

古文：窦宪以北匈奴微弱，欲遂灭之，二月，遣左校尉耿夔、司马任尚出居延塞，围北单于于金微山，大破之，获其母阏氏、名王以下五千馀级，北单于逃走，不知所在，出塞五千馀里而还，自汉出师所未尝至也。
现代文：窦宪因北匈奴力量微弱，想趁势将它消灭。二月，他派遣左校尉耿夔、司马任尚出居延塞，在金微山包围了北匈奴单于。汉军大败北匈奴军队，俘虏了北匈奴单于之母阏氏，斩杀大部落王以下五千余人。北匈奴单于逃走，不知去向。汉军出塞五千余里后班师，其距离之远，是自汉朝出兵匈奴以来未曾达到过的。
English: Dou Xian wanted to take advantage of the weak power of the Northern Huns to eliminate them. In February, he sent the left lieutenant Geng Yao and Sima Renshang to live in Yansai and surrounded the Northern Huns in Jin Weishan. The Chinese army defeated the Northern Huns, captured the Northern Huns, the mother of the Northern Huns, and killed more than five thousand people. The Northern Huns fled alone and did not know where to go. The distance of more than five thousand miles after the Han army left Tibet has not been reached since the Han Dynasty sent troops to the Huns.

古文：封夔为粟邑侯。
现代文：将耿夔封为粟邑侯。
English: Geng Xuan was given the title of Maoyu.

古文：窦宪既立大功，威名益盛，以耿夔、任尚等为爪牙，邓叠、郭璜为心腹，班固、傅毅之徒典文章，刺史、守、令，多出其门，竞赋敛吏民，共为赂遗。
现代文：窦宪立下大功以后，威名越发显赫。他以耿夔、任尚等人为爪牙，邓叠、郭璜为心腹，用班固、傅毅之辈为他撰写文章。州刺史、郡太守和诸县县令，大多由窦氏举荐任命，这些人搜刮官吏百姓，一同进行贪污贿赂的勾当。
English: After the great achievement of Dou Xian, his reputation became more and more prominent. He took Geng Yao, Ren Shang and others as minions, Deng Jia and Guo Yao as confidants, and used Bangu and Fu Yi to write articles for him. The governor of the state, the governor of the county and the county magistrate were mostly appointed by Mr. Dou. These people searched for officials and people, and together they carried out corruption and bribery.

古文：司徒袁安、司空任隗举奏诸二千石并所连及，贬秩免官者四十馀人，窦氏大恨；但安、隗素行高，亦未有以害之。
现代文：司徒袁安、司空任隗弹劾了一批二千石官员，连同受牵连者，被贬官或免职的达四十余人。窦家兄弟对此十分怨恨，但由于袁安、任隗二人一向行为高尚，声望甚重，因此也没有加害于他们。
English: The Dou brothers were very resentful of this, but since Yuan An and Ren Hao had always behaved nobly and had a high reputation, they did not harm them.

古文：尚书仆射乐恢，刺举无所回避，宪等疾之。
现代文：尚书仆射乐恢，监察检举无所忌讳，窦宪等人对他很是厌恶。
English: Shang Shuxu's servants are very happy, there is no taboo in supervision and prosecution, and Dou Xian and others are very disgusted with him.

古文：恢上疏曰： 陛下富于春秋，纂承大业，诸舅不宜干正王室，以示天下之私。
现代文：乐恢上书说： 陛下正年轻，继承了帝业，各位舅父不应控制中央大权，向天下显示私心。
English: "Your majesty is young and has inherited the imperial business. Your uncles should not control the power of the central government and show their selfishness to the world," the letter said.

古文：方今之宜，上以义自割，下以谦自引，四舅可长保爵土之荣，皇太后永无惭负宗庙之忧，诚策之上者也。 
现代文：目前最好的办法是，在上位的人以大义自行割爱，在下位的人以谦让的态度主动引退。这样，四位国舅才可以长久保有封爵和国土的荣耀，皇太后才可以永远没有辜负宗庙的忧虑。确实这是最佳的良策。 奏书呈上，未被理睬。
English: At present, the best way is for those at the top to voluntarily renounce their titles with great righteousness, and for those at the bottom to voluntarily retire with a humble attitude. In this way, the four imperial uncles can retain their knighthoods and the glory of the country for a long time, and the empress dowager can always live up to the concerns of the ancestral temple. Indeed, this is the best strategy. The report was submitted, but was ignored.

古文：书奏，不省。
现代文：于是乐恢称病，上书请求退休，返回故乡长陵。
English: The book went up and was not accepted.

古文：恢称疾乞骸骨，归长陵；宪风厉州郡，迫胁恢饮药死。于是朝臣震慑，望风承旨，无敢违者。
现代文：窦宪暗中严令州郡官府，胁迫乐恢服毒而死。于是朝廷官员十分震恐，全都观望风色而逢迎窦宪的意思，无人胆敢违抗。
English: Dou Xian secretly and severely ordered the county government to force Le Wei to take poison and die. As a result, the court officials were very shocked. They all watched the scene and met Dou Xian's intention. No one dared to disobey.

古文：袁安以天子幼弱，外戚擅权，每朝会进见及与公卿言国家事，未尝不喑呜流涕；自天子及大臣，皆恃赖之。
现代文：袁安因和帝年幼单弱，外戚专权，每当朝会进见之际，以及与公卿谈论国家大事的时候，未曾不呜咽流泪。上自天子，下至大臣，全都依靠信赖袁安。
English: Due to the weakness of Yuan An and the emperor's young age, and the exclusive power of his maternal relative, whenever the imperial court came to see him, and when he talked with the nobles about national affairs, he never did not sob and shed tears. From the heavenly son to the minister, they all relied on Yuan An.

古文：冬，十月，癸未，上行幸长安，诏求萧、曹近亲宜为嗣者，绍其封邑。
现代文：冬季，十月癸未，和帝出行，临幸长安，下诏在萧何、曹参的近亲中寻访适合做后嗣的人，继承萧、曹的封土。
English: In the winter, in October, he traveled with the emperor to Chang'an, and issued an edict to search for a suitable heir among the close relatives of Xiao He and Cao San to inherit the fief of Xiao and Cao.

古文：诏窦宪与车驾会长安。
现代文：和帝下诏，命令窦宪到长安会面。
English: and issued an imperial edict ordering Dou Xian to meet him in Chang'an.

古文：宪至，尚书以下议欲拜之，伏称万岁，尚书韩稜正色曰： 夫上交不谄，下交不黩；礼无人臣称万岁之制！ 
现代文：窦宪到达时，尚书下面的官员中有人提出要向窦宪叩拜，伏身口称 万岁 。尚书韩棱正色说道： 同上面的人交往，不可谄媚；同下面的人交往，不可轻慢。在礼仪上，没有对人臣称 万岁 的制度！ 
English: When Dou Xian arrived, some of the officials below Shangshu suggested that they should bow to Dou Xian and prostrate themselves to say "long live." Shangshu Han said with a straight face: "When dealing with people above, you must not be flattering; when dealing with people below, you must not be contemptuous. In etiquette, there is no system of saying "long live" to people!"

古文：议者皆惭而止。
现代文：倡议者都感到惭愧，因而作罢。
English: The commentators all shamefacedly went on strike.

古文：尚书左丞王龙私奏记、上牛酒于宪，稜举奏龙，论为城旦。
现代文：尚书左丞王龙私自向窦宪上书，并奉献牛、酒，受到韩棱的弹劾。
English: Wang Long, the left-hand man of Shangshu, personally wrote a letter to Dou Xian, and dedicated cattle and wine, and was impeached by Han Ren.

古文：龟兹、姑墨、温宿诸国皆降。
现代文：王龙被判处服苦役四年。龟兹、姑墨、温宿等国，都向汉朝投降。
English: Wang Long was sentenced to four years of hard labor. Guze, Gumo, Onjuku and other provinces all surrendered to the Han Dynasty.

古文：十二月，复置西域都护、骑都尉、戊己校尉官。
现代文：十二月，朝廷重新设置西域都护，骑都尉和戊校尉、己校尉。
English: In December, the posts of West Regional Capital Protector, Cavalry Captain, and Captain Wu Ji were reinstated.

古文：以班超为都护，徐幹为长史。
现代文：将班超任命为西域都护，徐干为长史。
English: The superintendent of the class was appointed as the guardian of the western region, and Xu Gan had a long history.

古文：拜龟兹侍子白霸为龟兹王，遣司马姚光送之。
现代文：将龟兹送到汉朝做人质的王子白霸封为龟兹王，派司马姚光护送回国。
English: Prince Baiba, who had sent the turtle to the Han Dynasty as a hostage, was crowned the king of turtles and sent Ma Yaoguang to escort him back to China.

古文：超与光共胁龟兹，废其王尤利多而立白霸，使光将尤利多还诣京师。
现代文：班超和姚光共同胁迫龟兹，废掉国王尤利多而改立白霸，让姚光带着尤利多返回京城洛阳。
English: Banchao and Yao Guang jointly coerced the tortoise, abolished King Yulido and replaced it with Baiba, and let Yao Guang return to the capital Luoyang with Yulido.

古文：超居龟兹它乾城，徐幹屯疏勒，惟焉耆、危须、尉犁以前没都护，犹怀二心，其馀悉定。
现代文：班超的西域都护府设在龟兹的它乾城，徐干则驻扎疏勒。只有焉耆、危须、尉犁三国，因先前曾经杀死过汉朝的都护，所以仍旧怀着二心，而西域其它各国全都降服。
English: Ban Chao's Western Capital Protectorate was located in Qiancheng, another city in Guizhou, while Xu Gan was stationed in Shule. Only the three states of Yanqi, Gansu, and Yiwu, because they had previously killed the Han Dynasty's Capital Protector, were still ambivalent, while all other countries in the Western Region had surrendered.

古文：庚辰，上至自长安。
现代文：庚辰，上至自长安。
English: Gengchen, upstream from Chang'an.

古文：初，北单于既亡，其弟右谷蠡王于除鞬自立为单于，将众数千人止蒲类海，遣使款塞。
现代文：起初，北匈奴单于不知去向以后，他的弟弟右谷蠡王于除便自称为单于，率领数千部众驻扎在蒲类海一带，派使者到汉朝边塞请求归附。
English: At first, after the Northern Xiongnu alone went to an unknown destination, his younger brother, Ugu Xuan Wang, called himself alone, led thousands of troops stationed in the vicinity of the Putuo Sea, and sent an envoy to the Han Dynasty border fortress to request annexation.

古文：窦宪请遣使立于除鞬为单于，置中郎将领护，如南单于故事。事下公卿议，宋由等以为可许；袁安、任隗奏以为： 光武招怀南虏，非谓可永安内地，正以权时之算，可得扞御北狄故也。
现代文：宋由等人认为可以批准窦宪的建议。袁安、任隗上奏表示反对。他们认为： 光武皇帝招抚南匈奴，并不是说可以让他们永远安居内地，而只是一种权宜之计，为的是能利用他们去抵御北匈奴。
English: Song Yu and others thought that Dou Xian's proposal could be approved, but Yuan An and Ren Hui disagreed. They believed that Emperor Guangwu's appeasement of the Southern Xiongnu did not mean that they could live safely in the interior forever, but was only a stopgap measure to use them to resist the Northern Xiongnu.

古文：今朔漠既定，宜令南单于反其北庭，并领降众，无缘复更立于除鞬以增国费。 
现代文：如今北方大漠已经平定，应当命令南匈奴单于返回他的北方王庭，统领归降部众。没有理由再另封于除做单于来增加国家的经费开支。 
English: Now that the Northern Desert has been pacified, the Southern Xiongnu should be ordered to return to his Northern royal court and lead the people to surrender. There is no reason to increase the country's financial expenditure by making a separate order.

古文：事奏，未以时定。
现代文：两种意见奏报后，一时决定不下。
English: The information went up, but the decision was not made in time.

古文：安惧宪计遂行，乃独上封事曰： 南单于屯先父举众归德，自蒙恩以来四十馀年，三帝积累以遗陛下，陛下深宜遵述先志，成就其业，况屯首唱大谋，空尽北虏，辍而弗图，更立新降；以一朝之计，违三世之规，失信于所养，建立于无功。
现代文：袁安担心窦宪的主张会被批准实行，便独自呈递密封奏书，奏书写道： 南匈奴单于屯屠何的先人曾率领部众归降，蒙受汉朝的大恩，至今已四十余年，历经三位汉帝经营而交到陛下手中。陛下应当深切地追思继承先帝的遗愿，完成他们的事业。况且屯屠何是首先提出北征重大方案的人，消灭北匈奴以后，我们停下来不再进取，却要另立一个新降服的北单于。为了一时的打算，违背三世以来的规划，失信于我们所养护的南匈奴单于，而去扶植无功的北匈奴单于。
English: Yuan An was worried that Dou Xian's proposal would be approved and implemented, so he submitted a sealed report on his own. The report wrote: Southern Huns led by Tun Tu Ho's ancestors had led their subordinates to surrender, and received the great favor of the Han Dynasty. It has been more than forty years since, after being managed by three Han Emperors and handed over to His Majesty. His Majesty should deeply reflect on inheriting the last wishes of the former emperor and complete their cause. Moreover, Tun Tu Ho was the first to propose a major plan for the Northern Expedition. After eliminating the Northern Huns, we will stop and no longer advance, but we will set up a new subjugated

古文：《论语》曰： 言忠信，行笃敬，虽蛮貊行焉。 
现代文：《论语》说： 言辞忠诚而守信，行为敦厚而恭敬，即便在荒蛮之地也通行无阻。 
English: "The Analects" says: Words are faithful and trustworthy, actions are dignified and respectful, and even in a barbaric land there is no obstacle.

古文：今若失信于一屯，则百蛮不敢复保誓矣。
现代文：如今要是失信于一个屯屠何，那么将有一百个蛮族不敢再相信汉朝的承诺了。
English: Now, if you break faith with a Southern Han, then other foreign ethnic groups will not dare to guarantee the implementation of their vows.

古文：又，乌桓、鲜卑新杀北单于，凡人之情，咸畏仇雠，今立其弟，则二虏怀怨。
现代文：再说乌桓、鲜卑新近斩杀了北匈奴优留单于，凡人之常情，全都忌惮仇人，现在扶植优留单于的弟弟，那么乌桓鲜卑就会心怀怨恨。
English: Besides, Wu Huan and Xianbei had recently killed the Northern Huns, and they all feared the enemy. Now they were supporting the younger brother of Xianbei, so Wu Huan and Xianbei would hold a grudge.

古文：且汉故事，供给南单于，费直岁一亿九十馀万，西域岁七千四百八十万；今北庭弥远，其费过倍，是乃空尽天下而非建策之要地。 
现代文：况且依照汉朝旧制，供给南匈奴单于的费用，每年达一亿九十余万；供给西域的费用，每年七千四百八十万；如今北匈奴距离更远，费用超过一倍，这将耗尽国家的财富，不是制定政策的正确原则。 
English: Moreover, according to the old system of the Han Dynasty, the cost of supplying the South Huns alone was more than 190 million yuan per year; the cost of supplying the West was 74.8 million yuan per year; now the North Huns are farther away and the cost is more than double. This will deplete the country's wealth and is not a correct principle for formulating policies.

古文：诏下其议，安又与宪更相难折。
现代文：和帝下诏，命令将此奏章交付群臣讨论，袁安又与窦宪进一步争执，互相诘难。
English: The emperor issued an edict to let everyone discuss the matter, and Yuan An and Dou Xianrong engaged in a tit-for-tat debate.

古文：宪险急负执，言辞骄讦，至诋毁安，称光武诛韩歆、戴涉故事，安终不移；然上竟从宪策。
现代文：窦宪仗势凌人，言辞骄横，甚至诋毁袁安，提出光武帝诛杀韩歆、戴涉的旧事进行威胁，但袁安始终不动摇。
English: Dou Xian was domineering, arrogant in his words, and even slandered Yuan An, threatening to bring up the old matter of Emperor Guangwu's assassination of Han Zheng and Dai's involvement, but Yuan An never wavered.

