古文：前废帝，讳恭，字修业，广陵惠王羽之子也。母曰王氏。
现代文：前废帝，名元恭，字修业，是广陵惠王元羽的儿子，母亲是王氏。
English: The former deposed emperor, Myeongwon Kyong, was the son of Gwangneung Hyeongwang and his mother was a member of the Wang clan.

古文：少端谨，有志度。
现代文：年幼时端庄谨慎，有志向气度。
English: When young, he was modest and prudent, and had an aspirational air.

古文：长而好学，事祖母、嫡母以孝闻。
现代文：长大后喜爱学习，侍奉祖母、嫡母以孝顺闻名。
English: He loved to study when he grew up, and was known for his filial piety while serving his grandmother and mother-in-law.

古文：正始中，袭爵。
现代文：正始年问，继承爵位。
English: At the beginning of the year, he inherited a peerage.

古文：延昌中，拜通直散骑常侍。
现代文：延昌年间，被任命为通直散骑常侍。
English: During the Yanchang period, he was appointed as a regular attendant of Tsuchidana Sanshiro.

古文：神龟中，进兼散骑常侍。
现代文：神龟年间，升任兼散骑常侍。
English: During the tortoise years, he was promoted to samurai and horseback rider.

古文：正光二年，正常侍，领给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：正光二年，任正常侍，兼领给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the second year of Masamitsu, he was appointed as a regular attendant, and was also given the post of Yellow Gate attendant.

古文：帝以元叉擅权，遂称疾不起。
现代文：皇帝因元叉专擅朝政，就称说有病不任职。
English: The emperor said that he was ill and would not take up the post because Yuan Zhaopeng was in charge of the government.

古文：久之，因托喑病。
现代文：过了很久，藉机会托称哑病。
English: After a long time, he took the opportunity to pretend to be mute.

古文：五年，就除金紫光禄大夫，加散骑常侍。
现代文：五年，授任金紫光禄大夫，加授散骑常侍。
English: In the fifth year, he was awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and was also awarded the title of Sanzhi Changzhuang.

古文：建义元年，除仪同三司。
现代文：建义元年，授任仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, the awarding ceremony was the same as the three divisions.

古文：王既绝言，垂将一纪，居于龙花寺，无所交通。
现代文：广陵王不说话，将近十二年，住在龙花寺，不与入交往。
English: Guangling Wang did not speak for nearly twelve years, lived in Longhua Temple, and did not socialize with Niu.

古文：永安末，有白庄帝者，言王不语，将有异图；民间游声，又云有天子之气。
现代文：永安末年，有人禀报庄帝，说广陵王不说话将有反叛的图谋；民间传言，又说他有天子的气象。
English: At the end of the Yongan era, someone reported to Emperor Zhuang that if the Guangling King did not speak, there would be a rebel plot; folk rumors also said that he had the temperament of a heavenly son.

古文：王惧祸，逃匿上洛，寻见追蹑，执送京师，拘禁多日，以无状获免。
现代文：广陵王畏惧祸患，逃到上洛躲藏，不久被跟踪追击，捉住后送到京城，拘禁了多天，因无罪状得以赦免。
English: Guangling Wang was afraid of the disaster, fled to Shangluo to hide, and was soon followed and chased, caught and sent to Beijing, detained for many days, and was pardoned because he was not guilty.

古文：及庄帝崩，尔朱世隆等以元晔疏远，又非人望所推，以王潜默晦身，有过人之量，将谋废立。恐实不语，乃令王所亲申其意，且兼迫胁。
现代文：等到庄帝逝世，尔朱世隆等人因五堕在宗室中族属疏远，又不是人们愿望所推举，因广陵王沉潜藏匿，有超过常人的器量，打算将要废立，担心他真的不说话，就派广壁王的亲信表达意向，而且带有逼迫。
English: By the time Emperor Zhuang died, because of the Five Degenerations, Er Shilong and others were estranged from the clan in the family room, and they were not elected by people's wishes. Because Guangling Wang was hiding, he had more than ordinary people's ability. They planned to abolish him. Fearing that he really would not speak, they sent Guangbei Wang's close confidants to express their intentions, and there was persecution.

古文：王遂答曰： 天何言哉！ 
现代文：广陵王于是回答说： 天哪裹说话呢? 
English: Guangling Wang then replied, "God, how can I talk?

古文：世隆等大悦。
现代文：世隆等人大喜。
English: Shilong and others were overjoyed.

古文：春二月己巳，晔进至邙南，世隆等奉王东郭之外，行禅让之礼。群臣上表曰： 否泰沿时，殷忧启圣，故六飞在御，三石兴符。
现代文：春二月己巳，元晔进到邙山南，世隆等人在东城外侍奉广陵王，施行挥让的礼仪，群臣上奏表说： 顺逆因沿时事，忧虑启迪圣人。所以皇帝的车驾起动，三石的符命兴起。
English: In the spring and February, Yuan Shun entered the southern part of Lushan Mountain, Shilong and others served the Guangling King outside the eastern city, carrying out the etiquette of waving, and the courtiers made a report saying: Shun the contrariety because of the current situation, worry and enlighten the saint. Therefore, the emperor's chariot started, and the fate of the three stones arose.

古文：伏惟陛下运属千龄，智周万物，独昭系象，妙极天人。宝历有归，光宅攸属，而将安独善，不务兼济，灵命徘徊，幽明载伫。伏愿时顺讴谣，念兹宗祏，用舍劳疾，允答人神。 
现代文：伏惟陛下运交长久岁月，智慧遍及万物，独特的光彩显现于外，神妙过于天人，帝位有归宿，天下有依靠而陛下将安于独善己身，不致力兼济天下，天命往复，入神久立思念、希望立即顺从民意，思念宗庙社稷，抛开辛劳疾病，报答入神。 
English: However, His Majesty will live for a long time, wisdom will pervade all things, unique brilliance will appear outside, divinity will surpass that of heavenly beings, the imperial throne will have a home, the world will have its dependence, and His Majesty will be satisfied with being good to himself, not striving to help the world, the destiny of heaven will be reciprocal, he will think about entering God for a long time, hope to immediately obey the will of the people, think about religious temples and shrines, put aside hard work and disease, and repay God.

古文：王答曰： 自量眇身，是以让执。
现代文：广陵王回答说： 自己衡量微薄的德行，所以推让。
English: Guangling Wang replied, "I measure my meager virtue by myself, so I give in.

古文：然王公勤至，不可拒违。
现代文：然而王公恳切之至，不可拒绝违背。
English: However, Wang Gong was so earnest that he could not refuse to renege.

古文：今敬承所陈，惟愧弗堪负荷耳。 
现代文：现在恭敬地接受大家的意见，衹是惭愧不能承受重任而已。 
English: Now, I respectfully accept everyone's opinions, but I am ashamed that I cannot bear the heavy responsibility.

古文：太尉公尔朱度律奉进玺绶哀冕之服。乃就辂车，百官侍卫，入自建春、云龙门，升太极前殿，群臣拜贺。
现代文：太尉公水朱度律献上玉玺丝带和礼服礼帽之类服饰，于是登上帝车，百官侍奉保卫，进入建春门、云龙门，登上太极前殿，群臣叩拜祝贺。
English: Zhu Dulu, the captain of the public waterworks, presented such clothing as a jade ribbon and a ceremonial dress and hat, and then boarded the carriage of God, hundreds of officials served as guards, entered Jianchun Gate and Yunlong Gate, boarded the front hall of Taiji, and the ministers bowed and congratulated.

古文：礼毕，登阊阖门，诏曰： 朕以寡薄，抚临万邦，思与亿兆同兹庆泰，可大赦天下，以魏为大魏，改建明二年为普泰元年。
现代文：礼仪结束，登上间阖门，下诏说： 我以寡德薄才，治理天下，思虑和百姓共度这一喜庆。可大赦天下，称魏为大魏，改建明二年为普泰元年。
English: At the end of the ceremony, he went up to the middle gate and said: "I am a man of few virtues and few talents, I govern the world, and I will spend this joyous celebration with the people. I can forgive the world, call Wei the Great Wei, and change the second year of the Ming Dynasty to the first year of the Putai Dynasty."

古文：其税市及税盐之官，可悉废之。
现代文：凡向市集和盐场征税的官员，可全部废除。
English: All officials who collect taxes from markets and salt mines can be abolished.

古文：百杂之户，贷赐民名，官任仍旧。
现代文：各种杂户，宽恕地赐予平民名号，官员任用依旧不改。
English: All kinds of miscellaneous households have been graciously given civilian names, and the appointment of officials remains unchanged.

古文：天下调绢，四百一匹。
现代文：天下征调的绢，四百钱一匹。
English: A mule imported from abroad costs four hundred yuan a horse.

古文：内外文武，普泛四阶；合叙未定第者，亦沾级。
现代文：内外文武官员，普遍加四级；该任用而未定等级的，也加级。
English: Foreign and domestic civil and military officials are generally promoted to the fourth level; those who have been appointed but whose rank has not been determined are also promoted.

古文：除名免官者，特复本资，品封依旧。
现代文：除去名籍免除官职的，特恢复到本来的地位，等级封爵依旧不改。
English: Except for those who have been exempted from official duties, they will be restored to their original status, and the rank of knighthood will remain unchanged.

古文：颍川王尔朱兆，彭城王尔朱仲远，陇西王尔朱天光，乐平王尔朱世隆，常山王尔朱度律，车骑大将军、仪同三司齐献武王，都督斛斯椿下军士，普泛六级。 
现代文：颖川王氽朱兆，彭城王尔朱仲远，陇西王尔朱天光，乐平王尔朱世隆，常山王尔朱度律，车骑大将军、仪同三司齐献武王，都督斛斯椿手下兵士，普加六级。 
English: The king of Yingchuan, Zhu Zhao, the king of Pengcheng, Zhu Zhongyuan, the king of Shaanxi, Zhu Tianguang, the king of Leping, Zhu Shilong, the king of Changshan, Zhu DuLu, the general of the cavalry, the king of the ceremony and the three divisions, the soldiers under the hands of the governor, Zhu Shizhong, the sixth level of Puja.

古文：庚午，诏曰： 朕以眇身，临王公之上，夕惕祗怀，若履冰谷。
现代文：庚午，下诏说： 我以微薄的德行，身处王公之上，戒慎恐惧心中恭谨，如同越过冰层山谷。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the emperor said, "I have risen above the princes by virtue of my meager virtue. I am as cautious, fearful, and respectful as if I were crossing a valley of ice.

古文：赖七庙之灵，百辟忠诚之举，庶免坠殁。
现代文：依赖七庙的威灵，百官忠诚的举措，希望免于坠落。
English: Relying on the well-being of the seven temples and the loyal measures of hundreds of officials, we hope to avoid falling.

古文：夫三皇称皇，五帝云帝，三代称王，迭冲挹也。
现代文：三皇称皇，五帝称帝，三代称王，逐渐谦虚自抑。
English: The three emperors, the five emperors, and the three generations of emperors gradually became modest and restrained.

古文：自秦之末，竞为皇帝。
现代文：从秦朝的末年，竞相称皇帝。
English: From the last years of the Qin Dynasty, emperors were called concurrently.

古文：忘负乘之深殃，垂贪鄙于万叶。
现代文：忘记了不胜重任的巨大祸殃，欲保留贪婪之心到万代。
English: Forgetting the great calamity of incompetence, they want to preserve greed for generations to come.

古文：予今称帝，已为褒矣！可普告令知。 
现代文：我现在称帝，已经是褒扬了可宣告使大家都知道。 
English: I now praise the emperor, I have already praised the emperor, and I can announce it so that everyone knows.

古文：是月，镇远将军清河崔祖螭聚青州七郡之众十余万人围东阳。
现代文：这月，镇远将军清河人崔祖螭聚集青州七郡的民众十多万人围困束阳。
English: This month, Zhenyuan general and Qinghe man Cui Zuya gathered more than 100,000 people from seven counties in Qingzhou to besiege Sokyang.

古文：幽州刺史刘灵助起兵于蓟。
现代文：幽州刺史刘灵助在蓟县起兵。
English: Liu Lingsu, a famous poet from Yuzhou, raised an army in Handan County.

古文：抚军将军、金紫光禄大夫、兼侍中、河北大使高乾邕及弟平北将军、通直散骑常侍敖曹，率众夜袭冀州，执刺史元嶷，杀监军孙白鹞，共推前河内太守封隆之行州事。
现代文：抚军将军、金紫光禄大夫、兼侍中、河北大使高干邕和弟弟平北将军、通直散骑常侍敖曹，率领部众夜晚袭击冀州，捉住刺史元嶷，杀死监军孙白鹞，共同推举前河内太守封隆之代行中事务。
English: General Fuzhong, Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, concurrently a chamberlain, Hebei Ambassador Gao Ganjun, and his brother General Pingbei, and Consort Zongzhizhanzhong, led the troops to attack Jizhou at night, capture Zhishi Yuanjun, kill the overseer Sun Baijun, and jointly promote the former Hanoi governor Fenglong's acting affairs.

古文：三月癸酉，封长广王晔为东海王。
现代文：三月癸酉，封长广王元晔为束海王。
English: In March, Fuchang Guangwang Yuanjun became the crown prince.

古文：诏太师、骠骑大将军、青州刺史、鲁郡王肃还为太师；特进、车骑大将军、沛郡王欣为太傅、司州牧，改封淮阳王；骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史、彭城王尔朱仲远，骠骑大将军、仪同三司、雍州刺史、陇西王尔朱天光，并为大将军；柱国大将军、并州刺史、颍川王尔朱兆为天柱大将军；骠骑大将军、仪同三司、左卫将军、大都督、晋州刺史、平阳郡开国公齐献武王封勃海王，增邑五百户；特进、车骑大将军、清河王亶为仪同三司；侍中、太傅、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、尚书令、乐平王尔朱世隆为太保；开府、前司徒公长孙稚为太尉公、录尚书事；侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、赵郡王谌为司空公。
现代文：韶令太师、骠骑大将军、青州刺史、鲁郡王元肃返回担任太巾；特进、车骑大将军、沛郡王元欣担任太傅、司州牧。改封为淮阳王；骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史、彭城王尔朱仲远，骠骑大将单、仪同三司、雍州刺史、陇西王水朱天光，都为大将军；柱国大将军、并州刺史、颖川王尔朱兆担任天柱大将军；骠骑大将军、仪同三司、左卫将军、大都督、晋州刺史、平阳郡开国公齐献武王封为勃海王，增封邑五百户；特进、车骑大将军、清河王元直担任仪同三司；侍中、太傅、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、尚书令、乐平王尔朱世隆担任太保；开府、前司徒公长孙椎担任太尉公、录尚书事；侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、赵郡王元谌担任司空公。
English: Gong Ling Taishi, Gong Riding General, Qingzhou Zhishi, Lu County Wang Yuan Su returned to serve as Taifan; Tejin, Chariot Riding General, Pei County Wang Yuan Xin served as Taifu, Sizhou Moo. Renamed as Huaiyang Wang; Gong Riding General, Kaifu Yidong Three Division, Xuzhou Zhishi, Pengcheng Wang Er Zhu Zhongyuan, Gong Riding General Shan, Yidong Three Division, Yongzhou Zhishi, Shaanxi Wang Shui Zhu Tianguang, were all grand generals; Zhu Guo Da Genera, Binzhou Zhishi, Yingchuan Wang Er Zhu Zhao served as Tian

古文：稚固辞，寻除骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：长孙椎执意推辞，不久授任为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: The eldest grandson Shi insisted on resigning, and was soon appointed to the post of General of Cavalry, Kefu Yi and the Third Division.

古文：丙子，帝引见尚书右仆射元罗及皇宗于显阳殿，劳勉之。
现代文：丙子，皇帝在显阳殿接见尚书右仆射元罗和宗室人员，慰劳勉励他们。
English: According to legend, the emperor received Shoshu's right-hand man, Shogenro, and members of his family at the Hsien Yang Palace, and consoled and encouraged them.

古文：丁丑，加骠骑大将军、北华州刺史公孙略仪同三司。
现代文：丁丑，加授骠骑大将军、北华州刺史公孙略为仪同三司。
English: Ding Yuxi was awarded the title of General of Horse Cavalry, and North China's Zhishigong Sun Rong was awarded the title of Third Division.

古文：己卯，诏右卫将军贺拔胜并尚书一人募伎作及杂户从征者，正入出身，皆授实官，私马者优一大阶。
现代文：己卯，诏令右卫将军贺拔胜和一位尚书招募艺伎匠户和杂户征战，以平民地位给予基本身份，都授予实官，有私马的优评一大级。
English: At the same time, the imperial edict ordered the right guard general He Baxeng and a Shangshu to recruit artisan households and miscellaneous households to fight, giving them the basic identity of civilian status, all of which were awarded to real officials, and there was an excellent evaluation of private horses.

古文：庚辰，以侍中、卫将军、咸阳王坦，卫将军、尚书左仆射、南阳王宝炬，侍中、征东将军、平阳王脩，并仪同三司。
现代文：庚辰，任命侍中、卫将军、咸阳王元坦，卫将军、尚书左仆射、南阳王宝炬，侍中、征柬将军、平阳王元脩，都担任仪同三司。
English: Geng Chen, appointed a chamberlain, Wei general, Xianyang Wang Yuan Tan, Wei general, Shang Shuxi Zuo Shuai, Nanyang Wang Bao Jiao, a chamberlain, a conscript general, and Pingyang Wang Yuan Qi, all served as the three departments of the ceremony.

古文：乙酉，诏简北来及在京二官员外剩置者。
现代文：乙酉，韶令挑选从北方而来和在京的二位正员以外委任的官员。
English: The imperial edict selected officials from the north and appointed them in addition to the two officials in Beijing.

古文：己丑，以持节、骠骑将军、泾州刺史贺拔岳为仪同三司、岐州刺史，使持节、车骑大将军、渭州刺史侯莫陈悦为仪同三司、秦州刺史。
现代文：己丑，任命持节、骠骑将军、泾州刺史贺拔岳为仪同三司、岐州刺史，使持节、车骑大将军、渭州刺史侯莫陈悦为仪同三司、秦州刺史。
English: Jixiu, appointed Jixi, Xingjian general, Bozhou scribe He Batyue as the ceremony with the three divisions, Qizhou scribe, appointed Jixi, car and horse general, Bozhou scribe Hou Mo Chen Yue as the ceremony with the three divisions, Qinzhou scribe.

古文：庚寅，诏天下有德孝仁贤忠义志信者，可以礼召赴阙，不应召者以不敬论。
现代文：庚寅，诏令天下有德行孝道仁爱贤明忠诚节义志向信实的人，可以礼仪征召奔赴朝廷，不应征召的以不恭敬论处。
English: Geng Yin decreed that people with virtue, filial piety, benevolence, love, wisdom, loyalty, loyalty, and faithfulness could be summoned to the imperial court, and those who should not be summoned would be treated with disrespect.

古文：丙申，刘灵助率众次于安国城，定州刺史侯渊破斩之，传首京师。
现代文：丙申，刘灵助率领军队停驻在安国城，定州刺史侯渊击败杀了他，传送首级到京城。
English: Bishin, Liu Lingzuo led the army stationed in Anguo City, Dingzhou assassin Houyuan defeated and killed him, and sent his head to Beijing.

古文：戊戌，以使持节、侍中、车骑大将军斛斯椿，侍中、卫将军元受，并特进仪同三司。
现代文：戊戌。任命使持节、侍中、车骑大将军斛斯椿，侍中、卫将军元受，都担任特进、仪同三司。
English: Wuzhen. Appointed envoys to hold the festival, chamberlains, chariot and cavalry general Gao Shizhuan, chamberlains, guards general Yuan Rong, all served as special advance, ceremony and three departments.

古文：诏曰： 顷官方失序，仍令沙汰，定员简剩，已有判决。
现代文：下韶说： 近来官职任免失去准绳，随之指令淘汰，决定定职定员精简多余官员，已有决断。
English: He said, "Recently, the appointment of officials has lost its standard, followed by the elimination of instructions, and it has been decided to streamline redundant officials.

古文：退下之徒，微亦可愍。
现代文：退下来的人，也值得同情。
English: Those who have stepped down are also worthy of sympathy.

古文：诸在简下，可特优一级，皆授将军，豫参选限，随能补用。 
现代文：凡是落选的，可特优评一级，都授予将军，参加选拔的范围，根据才能补充任用。 
English: All those who are not selected will be awarded the rank of General, and the scope of participation in the selection will be based on the ability to supplement the appointment.

古文：是春，冠军将军、南青州刺史茹怀朗使其部将何宝率步骑三千击萧衍守将于琅邪，擒其尚书左仆射、仪同三司、云麾将军、徐兗二州刺史刘相如。
现代文：这年春季，冠军将军、直直业刺史兹坏塑指派他的部将坦童率领步兵骑兵三千人在王鳄攻打盖街的守将，擒获盖堑的尚书左仆射、仪同三司、云麾将军、逮兖二州刺史刘扭迦。
English: In the spring of that year, the champion general, Zhi Zhi, assigned his subordinate, Tang Tong, to lead 3,000 infantry and cavalry to attack the guardsmen of Jie Jie in Wang Kuo, and capture the guardsmen of Jie Jie, including Shang Shuzo, Zhi Zi, General Yun Qi, and Liu Keng Jia, the commander of Jie Jie in Erzhou.

古文：夏四月癸卯，幸华林都亭燕射，班锡有差。
现代文：夏四月癸卯，前往华林园都亭宴饮骑射，赏赐多少不等。
English: In the summer of April, go to the Huarim Garden Pavilion for a banquet, drink, ride and shoot. The rewards vary.

古文：太乐奏伎有倡优为愚痴者，帝以非雅戏，诏罢之。
现代文：太乐上奏才艺中有装愚卖傻的歌舞杂技艺人，皇帝认为不足雅致的戏目，诏令罢除。
English: Song and dance acrobats who pretended to be stupid in the performance of the talent in the taiko, which the emperor considered to be an insufficiently elegant play, were dismissed by imperial decree.

古文：壬子，有事于太庙。
现代文：壬子，在太庙祭祀。
English: In Imoko, a ritual is held at Taimyo.

古文：癸丑，诏以齐献武王为使持节、侍中、都督冀州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、东道大行台、冀州刺史，骠骑大将军、安定王尔朱智虎为开府仪同三司、肆州刺史。
现代文：癸丑，下诏任命齐献武王为使持节、侍中、都督冀州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、束道大行台、冀州刺史，骠骑大将军、安定王尔朱智虎为开府仪同三司、肆州刺史。
English: At the same time, the following edict appointed Qi Xianwu Wang as the envoy of the festival, the chamberlains, the governor of Jizhou, the military, the cavalry general, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, the grand governor, the Sokudo Daigandai, the Jizhou history, the cavalry general, and the stable king Zhu Zhigu as the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, and the history of Wuzhou.

古文：乙卯，以右卫将军贺拔胜、武卫将军大野拔并为仪同三司。
现代文：乙卯，任命右卫将军贺拔胜、武卫将军大野拔都为仪同三司。
English: Second, he appointed the right guard general, He Baxing, and the military guard general, Ohno Baxing, as the three officers of the ceremony.

古文：己未，帝于显阳殿简试通直散骑常侍、散骑侍郎、通直郎，剩员非才他转之。
现代文：己未，皇帝在显阳殿挑选测试通直散骑常侍、散骑侍郎、通直郎，剩下的没有才能的人改任其他职位。
English: Before long, the emperor selected and tested Tsunetsuna horseback riding attendant, horseback riding attendant, and Tsunetsuna horseback riding attendant at the Hall of the Rising Sun, and the remaining people without talent were reassigned to other positions.

古文：癸亥，陇西王尔朱天光大破宿勤明达，擒送京师，斩之。
现代文：癸亥，陇西王尔朱天光大败宿勤明达，擒获后送到京城，杀了他。
English: Zhu Tianguang, the king of the Western Han Dynasty, was captured and brought to Beijing, where he was killed.

古文：丙寅，以侍中、骠骑大将军尔朱彦伯为司徒公。
现代文：丙寅，任命侍中、骠骑大将军令朱彦伯为司徒公。
English: Cui Yin, appointed a chamberlain and a cavalry general, and ordered Zhu Yanbo to be the steward.

古文：诏有司不得复称伪梁，罢细作之条，无禁邻国往还。
现代文：韶令有关官员不能再称伪梁国，罢除奸细的条款，不禁止邻国间的来往。
English: The edict ordered the relevant officials to no longer refer to the country as a pseudo-puppet state, removed the clause on spies, and did not ban contacts between neighboring countries.

古文：诏员外谏议大夫、步兵校尉、奉车都尉、羽林监、给事中、积射将军、奉朝请、殿中将军、宫门仆射、殿中司马督、治礼郎十一官，得俸而不给力，老合外选者，依常格，其未老欲外选者，听解。
现代文：诏令员外谏议大夫、步兵校尉、奉车都尉、羽林监、给事中、积射将军、奉朝请、殿中将军、宫门仆射、殿中司马督、治礼郎十一种官员，获得俸禄而不供给服役者，年老该充外任的，依照正常条例，没有年老而要外任的，准许解除现职。
English: There are eleven types of officials, such as the commander of the imperial edict, the outside counselor, the doctor, the infantry lieutenant, the commander of the imperial carriage, the warden of the imperial forest, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage, the general of the imperial carriage

古文：其七品以上，朔望入朝，若正员有阙，随才进补。
现代文：七品以上官员，初一和十五日入朝，如正式官员有缺额，依据才能补充。
English: If there is a vacancy for an official official, it can only be filled on the basis of officials of the seventh grade and above who enter the DPRK on the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：前员外简退优阶者追之，称事简下者，仍优一级。
现代文：从前正员之外挑选退下来优评等级的予以追夺，称职而被裁减的，仍优评一级。
English: Those who have been selected from among the former regular members and have retired will be pursued for the evaluation grade, and those who have been qualified and have been reduced will still be evaluated at the first level.

古文：先是，南阳太守赵修延执刺史李琰之；五月丙子，荆州城民斩修延，送首，还推琰之为刺史。
现代文：在这以前，直厘太守趟脩延拘捕刺史奎堑之；五月丙子，翅业市民杀死灯丝，送上首级，返回推举堑之为刺史。
English: Prior to this, Zhao Li, the Tai Shouwai of Yan Yan, arrested and arrested the assassin of Shi Kuei; in May, the citizens of the wing industry killed the filament, sent it to the head, and returned to nominate it as the history of the assassination.

古文：尔朱仲远使其都督魏僧勖等讨崔祖螭于东阳，擒斩之。
现代文：尔朱仲远指派他的都督瑟仅垒等人在塞千讨伐崔童困，擒获杀了他。
English: Er Zhu Zhongyuan assigned his governor, Se Huanbi, and others to fight Cui Tongzhu in Caiqian, and they captured and killed him.

古文：六月庚申，齐献武王以尔朱逆乱，始兴义兵于信都。
现代文：六月庚申，齐献武王因尔朱氏叛逆作乱，在信都开始发起义军。
English: In June of Goshun, King Qi Xianwu rebelled against the Zhu clan and started a rebellion in Xindu.

古文：西定殷州，斩其刺史尔朱羽生，命南赵郡太守李元忠为刺史，镇广阿。
现代文：向西平定殷州，杀死刺史尔朱羽生，命令南趟郡太守李元忠担任刺史，镇守广阿。
English: He subdued Yinzhou in the west, killed the county magistrate Zhu Yansheng, and ordered the county magistrate Li Yuanzhong to go to the south to serve as magistrate, and the town warden Guang Ah.

古文：癸亥，帝临显阳殿，亲理冤讼。
现代文：癸亥，皇帝前往显阳殿，亲自审理冤屈诉讼。
English: At that time, the emperor went to the Xianyang Palace to personally hear the grievance lawsuit.

古文：戊辰，以使持节、骠骑大将军、开府尔朱弼为仪同三司。
现代文：戊辰，任命使持节、骠骑大将军、开府尔朱弼为仪同三司。
English: Boshen, appointed Envoys Ji Jie, Zou Jie General, and Kaifuer Zhu Xi as the ceremony and three departments.

古文：秋七月壬申，尔朱世隆等害前太保杨椿、前司空公杨津及其家。
现代文：秋七月壬申，尔朱世隆等人谋害前太保杨椿、前司空公杨津及其家人。
English: In the autumn of July in Jinshin, Er Zhu Shilong and others plotted to kill the former Taibao Yang Cam and the former Sikuo Yang Jin and their families.

古文：丙戊，司徒公尔朱彦伯以旱逊位。
现代文：丙戌，司徒公尔朱彦伯因天旱让位。
English: Zhu Yanbo, the head of Stogong, stepped down due to the drought.

古文：戊子，除彦伯侍中、开府仪同三司。
现代文：戊子，任命彦伯为侍中、开府仪同三司。
English: Boshi, appointed Hikobo as a chamberlain, and started the ceremony with three officials.

古文：庚寅，以侍中、太保、开府、尚书令、乐平王尔朱世隆为仪同三司，位次上公。
现代文：庚寅，任命侍中、太保、开府、尚书令、乐平王水朱世隆为仪同三师，地位仅低于匕公。
English: Emperor Go-In appointed Samurai Junior Secretary, Imperial Guard, Keifu, Shang Shurong, and Leping Wang Shui Zhu Shilong as the three divisions of Ji Tong, whose status was only lower than that of Shigong.

古文：八月庚子，诏陇西王尔朱天光下文武讨宿勤明达者，泛三级。
现代文：八月庚子，韶令陇西王尔朱天光手下讨伐宿勤明达的文武官员，普加三级。
English: August Geng Zi, civil and military officer of the 3rd grade of Puja, who ordered Zhu Tianguo, the king of Shaanxi, to fight against the diligent officials.

古文：颍川王尔朱兆度步骑二万出井陉，趋殷州，李元忠弃城还信都。
现代文：颖王尔朱兆率领步兵骑兵二万人从井陉出兵，赶往殷州，李元忠放弃城池回到信都。
English: Ying Wang Er Zhu Zhao led 20,000 infantry and cavalry troops from Jingyao and rushed to Yinzhou. Li Yuanzhong abandoned the city and returned to Xindu.

古文：丙午，常山王尔朱度律、彭城王尔朱仲远等率众出抗义旗。
现代文：丙午，常山王尔朱度律、彭城王尔朱仲远等人率领部众出兵抗拒起义的军队。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, Wang Lzhu Duru of Changshan and Wang Lzhu Zhongyuan of Pengcheng led the troops to resist the uprising.

古文：九月丁丑，以侍中、骠骑将军卢同，骠骑大将军杜德，车骑大将军桥宁并为仪同三司。
现代文：九月丁丑，任命侍中、骠骑将军卢同，骠骑大将军杜德，车骑大将军桥宁都为仪同三司。
English: In September, Ding Yuxi appointed Lu Tong, a chamberlain and cavalry general, Du De, a cavalry general, and Qiao Ning, a cavalry general, to be the three departments of Yi Tong.

古文：己卯，以使持节、都督东道诸军事、兼尚书令、东道大行台、彭城王尔朱仲远为太宰。
现代文：己卯，任命使持节、都督束道诸军事、兼尚书令、束道大行台、彭城王尔朱仲远为太宰。
English: At the same time, he appointed Zhu Zhongyuan, the envoy of Jichisai, the military governor of Sokudo, Shang Shuling, the governor of Sokudo, and the king of Pengcheng, as Dazai.

古文：庚辰，加使持节、大将军、都督关中诸军事、兼尚书令、西道大行台、陇西王尔朱天光为大司马。
现代文：庚辰，加授使持节、大将军、都督关中诸军事、兼尚书令、西道大行台、陇西王余朱天光为大司马。
English: Geng Chen, was awarded the title of Custodian of the Great Wall of China, the title of General, the title of Governor of the Central Military Region, the title of General Secretary of the People's Liberation Army, the title of Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, the title of Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, the title of Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, the title of Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, the title of Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army and the title of Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：骠骑大将军、青州刺史、开府仪同三司穆绍薨。
现代文：骠骑大将军、青州刺史、开府仪同三司穆绍逝世。
English: Zou Jiaotang, Qingzhou Zhishi, Kaifu Yi and the three Mushuos passed away.

古文：癸巳，追尊皇考为先帝，皇妣王氏为先太妃；封皇弟永业为高密王，皇子子恕为勃海王。
现代文：癸巳，追尊皇帝的父亲为先帝，皇帝的母亲王区为先太妃；封皇帝的弟弟永业为高密王，皇帝的儿子子恕为勃海王。
English: At that time, the father of Emperor Suizong was the former emperor, the emperor's mother, Wang Qu, was the former empress dowager; the emperor's brother, Emperor Yongye, was King Gao Mi, and the emperor's son, Emperor Xizong, was King Bo Hai.

古文：冬十月壬寅，齐献武王推勃海太守元朗即皇帝位于信都。
现代文：冬十月壬寅，齐献武王推举攰遵太守足朗在信都登上皇帝位。
English: In winter and October, Emperor Jinnin, King Qi Xianwu, Emperor Juntao, and Emperor Ashiro ascended to the throne in Xindu.

古文：二年春三月，齐献武王败尔朱天光等于韩陵。
现代文：二年春三月，变戏亘逗在整建打败尔朱天光等人。
English: In the spring and March of the second year, Wanzhong Wanzhong defeated Er Zhu Tianguo and others in the rectification.

古文：夏四月辛巳，齐献武王与废帝至邙山，使魏兰根尉谕洛邑，且观帝之为人。
现代文：夏四月辛巳，变压亘逗和废童到达垫业，派魏蓖担慰劳晓谕谴，而且观察皇帝的表现。
English: In the summer and April, when the pressure was on, Wotan and Wasted Boy arrived at the cushion industry, sent Wei Xuan to comfort and instruct the punishment, and observed the emperor's performance.

古文：兰根忌帝雅德，还致毁谤，竟从崔忄夌议，废帝于崇训佛寺，而立平阳王修为帝。
现代文：菌根忌惮皇帝的雅量德行，返回后加以诋毁诽谤，最后依从崔愤的谋划，在崇训佛寺废黜皇帝，而拥立平阳王元脩为帝。
English: Mycorrhizae abhorred the emperor's magnanimity and virtue, slandered and slandered him after his return, and finally followed Cui Qian's plan to depose the emperor at the Chongxun Buddhist Temple, while upholding the emperor of Pingyang Wang Yuanqi.

古文：帝既失位，乃赋诗曰： 朱门久可患，紫极非情玩。
现代文：皇帝失去帝位后，于是赋诗说： 豪门久已可忧患，皇宫不可任情玩。
English: After the emperor lost his imperial throne, Fu Shi said: The wealthy have long been able to suffer, and the imperial palace should not be indulged.

古文：颠覆立可待，一年三易换。
现代文：败亡站立可等待，一年三次大变换。
English: Standing up after defeat can wait, three times a year there are big changes.

古文：时运正如此，唯有修真观。 
现代文：时事国运正如此，惟有修行入庙观。 
English: The current situation of the national movement is just like this, only the practice of entering the temple view.

古文：太昌初，帝殂于门下外省，时年三十五。
现代文：太昌初年，皇帝在门下外省逝世，时年三十五岁。
English: In the first year of Taichang, the emperor died at the age of thirty-five.

古文：出帝诏百司赴会，大鸿胪监护丧事，葬用王礼，加以九旒、銮辂、黄屋、左纛，班剑百二十人，二卫、羽林备仪卫。
现代文：出帝诏令百官赴会，大鸿胪督察丧事，安葬用王的礼仪，加上九旒的旗帜、皇帝的车驾、黄缯车盖、车衡左边带装饰物的旗帜，仪仗一百二十人，二卫、羽林的预备仪仗卫队。
English: An imperial edict was issued, ordering 100 officials to attend the meeting. The funeral was overseen by the grand dragon, and the funeral was conducted with the etiquette of the king. In addition, there were nine banners, the emperor's chariot, the yellow-plumed chariot cover, the banner with decorations on the left side of the balance, a ceremonial guard of 120 people, and a preparatory guard of honor for the second guard and the feather forest.

古文：后废帝，讳朗，字仲哲，章武王融第三子也。母曰程氏。
现代文：后废帝，名元朗，字仲哲，是章武王元融的第三个儿子，母亲是程氏。
English: Emperor Houwu, also known as Yuen Long and Zhong Zhe, was the third son of King Zhangwu Yuen Rong, and his mother was Cheng.

古文：少称明悟。
现代文：幼年以聪明著称。
English: He was known for his cleverness as a child.

古文：永安二年，为肆州鲁郡王后军府录事参军、仪同开府司马。
现代文：永安二年，担任肆州鲁郡王后军府录事参军、仪同开府司马。
English: In the second year of Yongan, he joined the army and served as the secretary of the Queen's Military Headquarters of Luzhou County.

古文：元晔之建明二年正月戊子，为冀州勃海太守。
现代文：元晔的建明二年正月戊子，担任冀州勃海太守。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Jianming era, the Yuan Dynasty's Empress Dowager Wu Zi assumed the position of Jizhou Bohai Governor.

古文：及齐献武王起义兵，将诛暴逆，乃推戴之。
现代文：等到齐献武王兴起义兵，将要诛杀暴乱叛逆，于是被推举拥戴。
English: He waited until the king of Qi Xianwu raised a volunteer army, and he was going to fight and kill the rebels, so he was elected and supported.

古文：冬十月壬寅，即皇帝位于信都城西。
现代文：冬十月壬寅，在信都城西登上皇帝位。
English: In winter and October, Renin ascended to the imperial throne in the west of the capital city of Xin.

古文：升坛焚燎，大赦，称中兴元年。
现代文：登坛焚柴祭天，大赦天下，称中兴元年。
English: He ascended the altar to burn firewood to celebrate heaven and grant amnesty to the world, which was called the first year of ZTE.

古文：文武百官普泛四级。
现代文：文武百官普加四级。
English: He is a 4th grade of the 100th grade of the 100th grade of the 100th grade.

古文：以齐献武王为侍中、丞相、都督中外诸军事、大将军、录尚书事、大行台，增邑三万户；以兼侍中、抚军将军、河北大使高乾邕为侍中、司空公；前平北将军、通直散骑常侍高敖曹为骠骑大将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史以终其身；以前刺史元嶷为仪同三司。
现代文：任命齐献武王为侍中、丞相、都督中外诸军事、大将军、录尚书事、大行台，增加食邑三万户；任命兼侍中、抚军将军、河北大使高干邕为侍中、司空公；前平北将军、通直散骑常侍高敖曹为骠骑大将军、仪同三司，终生担任冀州刺史；任命前刺史元嶷为仪同三司。
English: Appointed Qi Xianwu Wang as a chamberlain, chancellor, governor of the Middle and Foreign Military, general, recorded records, grand march, and increased 30,000 households; appointed Gao Ganjun, who was also a chamberlain, general of the army, and ambassador of Hebei, as a chamberlain and magistrate; former Pingbei general, Tongzhizan riding attendant Gao Jiao Cao, as a cavalry general, and the third secretary of the ceremony, and served as Jizhou chief historian for life; appointed the former chief historian Yuan Qi as the third secretary of the ceremony.

古文：己酉，尔朱度律、尔朱仲远、斛斯椿、贺拔胜、贾显智次于阳平，将抗义师。齐献武王纵反间构之，遂与尔朱兆相疑，败散而还。
现代文：己酉，尔朱度律、尔朱仲远、斛斯椿、贺拔胜、贾显智停驻在阳平，将要抗拒起义军，齐献武王设反问计离散他们，于是他们和尔朱兆相猜疑，溃败四散而逃。
English: Ji Yao, Lzhu Duru, Lzhu Zhongyuan, Gongszhuan, He Baxian, and Jia Xianzhi were stationed in Yangping. They were going to resist the rebels, and they all proposed to King Wu to set up a countermeasure to disperse them. As a result, they and Lzhu Zhao were suspicious, defeated, and fled.

古文：辛亥，齐献武王大破尔朱兆于广阿，虏其卒五千余人。
现代文：辛亥，齐献武王在广阿大败尔朱兆，俘虏他的士卒五千多人。
English: In Xinhai, Qi Xianwu defeated Zhu Zhao in Guangada and captured more than five thousand of his soldiers.

古文：诏将士泛五级，留守者二级。
现代文：韶令将士普加五级，留守京城的加二级。
English: The imperial edict raised Shibuya to the 5th level, and the city of Kyoto to the 2nd level.

古文：诏征东将军、吏部尚书封隆之为使持节、北道大使，随方处分。
现代文：诏令征束将军、吏部尚书封隆之担任使持节、北道大使，依据形势加以调度。
English: It was ordered that the general of conscription and the head of the personnel department, Shang Shufenglong, be appointed as the envoy of the festival and the ambassador of the North, and be dispatched according to the situation.

古文：十有一月己巳，诏曰： 王度创开，彝伦方始，所班官秩，不改旧章。
现代文：十一月己巳，下韶说： 王业开创，常道初起，所颁官职品级，不改变旧典章。
English: In November, the lower court said, "Since the founding of Wangye and the beginning of the common law, the official ranks and ranks awarded will not change the old regulations."

古文：而无识之徒，因兹侥幸，谬增军级，虚名显位，皆言前朝所授，理难推抑。
现代文：然而没有见识的人，因此而意外获得成功，无端增加军级，空虚的名号显赫的地位，都说是前朝授予，道理难以推求。
English: However, it is difficult to reason with people who have no insight, and therefore unexpectedly achieve success, gratuitously increase military ranks, and empty titles and prominent positions are all said to have been awarded to the previous government.

古文：自非严为条制，无以防其伪窃。
现代文：除非严格订立条例，无法防止他们的诈伪。
English: Unless there are strict regulations, it is impossible to prevent their fraud.

古文：诸有虚增官号，为人发纠，罪从军法。
现代文：所有凭空增加的官号，被别人告发纠举，依军法定罪。
English: All official titles that have been added out of thin air, and have been reported by others, are crimes according to the military law.

古文：若入格检核无名者，退为平民，终身禁锢。 
现代文：如果按条例检查没有名字的，贬退为平民，终生禁止不得为官。 
English: If there is no name according to the regulations, it will be downgraded to a civilian and banned from being an official for life.

古文：庚辰，齐献武王率师攻鄴城。
现代文：庚辰，齐献武王率领军队攻打邺城。
English: Geng Chen and Qi Xianwu led the army to attack Shicheng.

古文：是年，南兗城民王乞德逼前刺史刘世明以州降萧衍，衍使其将元树入据谯城。
现代文：这一年，南兖州市民王乞德逼迫前刺史刘世明献出全州投降萧衍，萧衍派他的将领元树进入谯城据守。
English: In the same year, Wang Qide, a citizen of South Luzhou, forced Liu Shiming, the former leader of the Xiongnu, to surrender the entire state to Xiao Yan. Xiao Yan sent his general Yuan Shu to enter and defend Luzhou.

古文：二年春正月壬午，拔鄴，擒刺史刘诞。
现代文：二年春正月壬午，攻下邺城，擒获刺史刘诞。
English: In the morning of the first day of spring in the second year, he captured Shicheng and won the birth of Liu Xizhi.

古文：诏诸将士泛四级。封侯、增邑九十七人，各有差等。
现代文：诏令所有将士增加四级，封侯、增食邑的九十七人，各有等级。
English: The imperial edict increased the ranks of all soldiers by four grades, and the ninety-seven people who were vassals of fiefs and towns were each given a higher grade.

古文：癸未，诏曰： 自中兴草昧，典制权舆，郡县之官，率多行、督。
现代文：癸未，下诏说： 自从中兴草创，典章制度刚开始，郡县的官员，大多为代行、督察。
English: At the same time, the next edict said: Since the founding of Zhongxing, the award system has just begun, and county officials are mostly agents and inspectors.

古文：假有正者，风化未均。
现代文：代行中有正派的人，但风尚教化不均衡。
English: There are decent people in the agency, but there is an imbalance of moral education.

古文：眷彼周余，专为渔猎。
现代文：回顾那周朝末年，专门渔猎百姓。
English: Looking back on the last years of the Zhou Dynasty, he specialized in hunting and fishing for commoners.

古文：朕所以夙兴夜寐，有惕于怀。
现代文：我因此早起晚睡，心中警惕。
English: As a result, I wake up early and go to bed late, feeling alert.

古文：有司明加纠罚，称朕意焉。 
现代文：有关官员明确地加以纠察惩罚，满足我的心愿。 
English: The relevant officials clearly punished the picket and fulfilled my wish.

古文：二月辛亥，上孝庄皇帝谥曰武怀皇帝。
现代文：二月辛亥，追谧孝庄皇帝为武怀皇帝。
English: In February of Xinhai, Emperor Gaozhong of Xiaozhuang became Emperor Wuhuai.

古文：甲子，以齐献武王为大丞相、柱国大将军、太师，增封三万户，并前为六万户。
现代文：甲子，以齐献武王为大丞相、柱国大将军、太师，增封三万户，总计六万户。
English: In addition, with the appointment of King Qi Xianwu as the Grand Minister of War, the Grand General of the Empire, and the Grand Master, the number of households with this title increased by 30,000 to a total of 60,000 households.

古文：三月丙寅，以齐文襄王起家为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：三月丙寅，任命查塞襄王入仕即为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In March, he appointed Chasai Xiang Wang to be the general of the cavalry and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：丙子，以侍中、车骑大将军、尚书左仆射孙腾为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：丙子，任命侍中、车骑大将军、尚书左仆射逊膛为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Bizi, appointed a chamberlain, a chariot and cavalry general, Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant Shao Xun Rong as a cavalry general, and the three departments of Yidong.

古文：丁丑，车驾幸鄴。
现代文：丁丑，皇帝前往邺球。
English: Ding Yuxi, the emperor went to the world.

古文：乙酉，诏文武家属自信都赴鄴城。
现代文：乙酉，诏令文武官员的家属从值都前往茎啦。
English: Suddenly, the families of the civil and military officials were ordered to go to the stem.

古文：闰月乙未，以安北将军、光禄大夫、博野县开国伯尉景为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：闰月乙未，任命安北将军、光禄大夫、博野县开国伯尉景为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the intercalary month of Yibin, he appointed General Anbei, Doctor Guanglu, and Captain Kaiguo of Bono County as the commander of the cavalry and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：丙申，以卫将军、金紫光禄大夫库狄干为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：丙申，任命卫将军、金紫光禄大夫库狄干为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Bishen, appointed Wei general, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor Kudikan as the general of chariot and cavalry, and the three departments of ceremony.

古文：壬寅，尔朱天光、兆、度律、仲远等屯于洹水之南。
现代文：壬寅，尔朱天光、尔朱兆、度律、仲远等人驻守在洹水的南面。
English: Ren Yin, Lzhu Tianguang, Lzhu Zhao, Du Lu, Zhong Yuan and others were stationed in the south of Surabaya.

古文：癸丑，齐献武王出顿紫陌。
现代文：癸丑，齐献武王出兵驻守紫陌。
English: After the battle, King Wu sent troops to garrison Zi Miao.

古文：庚申，尔朱兆率轻骑三千夜袭鄴城，叩西门，不克，退走。
现代文：庚申，余朱兆率领轻装的骑兵三千人在夜晚袭击邺城，攻打西门，没攻下，撤退逃走。
English: Three thousand lightly armed cavalrymen led by Goshun and Yu Zhuzhao attacked Shicheng at night, attacked the West Gate, failed to capture it, retreated and fled.

古文：壬戌，齐献武王大破尔朱天光等四胡于韩陵，前废帝镇国将军贺拔胜、徐州刺史杜德于陈降。
现代文：壬戌，齐献武王在韩陵大败尔朱天光等四部胡人，前废帝的镇军将军贺拔胜、徐州刺史挂钟在战阵中投降。
English: Four Hu people, including the general of the town army of the former deposed emperor He Baxian and the bell hanging from the Xuzhou engraved history, surrendered in the battle.

古文：尔朱兆走趣并州，仲远奔东郡，天光、度律将赴洛阳。
现代文：金塞逃逃往差州，佳远奔往东郡，天光、度律将要奔赴洛阳。
English: Jin Xie fled to Shizhou, Jiayuan fled to Dong County, and Tianguang and Duodu fled to Luoyang.

古文：大都督斛斯椿、贾显智倍道先还。
现代文：大都督斛斯椿、贾显智日夜兼程先返回。
English: The grand-ducal governors, Jian Shizhong and Jia Xianzhi, returned to the capital after a day-and-night journey.

古文：夏四月甲子朔，椿等据河桥，惧罪自劾。寻擒天光、度律于河桥。
现代文：夏四月甲子初一，斛斯椿等人占据河桥，畏惧罪过弹劾自己，不久在河桥擒获天光、度律。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth month of the summer, Yao Shiqin and others occupied the river bridge, fearing the crime of impeaching themselves, and soon won the heavenly light and death penalty in the river bridge.

古文：西北大行台长孙稚、都督贾显智等率骑入京师，执尔朱世隆、彦伯，斩于都街；囚送天光、度律于齐献武王。
现代文：西北大行台长孙稚、都督贾显智等人率领骑兵进入京城，拘捕水朱世隆、彦伯，在都市斩首，押送天光、度律给齐献武王。
English: The governor of Northwest China, Sun Waki, the governor of the capital, Jia Xianchi, and others led the cavalry into the capital, arrested Zhu Shilong and Yan Bo, beheaded them in the city, and escorted Tian Guang and Du Lu to present King Wu to Qi.

古文：辛未，前废帝骠骑大将军、行济州事侯景据城降，仍除仪同三司、兼尚书仆射、南道大行台、济州刺史。
现代文：辛未，前废帝的骠骑大将军、行济州事侯景占据城池投降，随之授任仪同三司、兼尚书仆射、南道大行台、济州刺史。
English: Xin Wei, the former deposed emperor's cavalry general, marched to Jeju, occupied the city and surrendered, and was subsequently awarded the title of Tong San Si, and also the titles of Shang Shupo Sha, Nan Dao Da Gang Tai, and Jeju Jishi.

古文：甲戍，以车骑将军、尚书右仆射魏兰根为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：甲戌，任命车骑将军、尚书右仆射魏兰根为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Kuching, appointed General of Cavalry and Chariots, Shangshu's right-hand man Wei Langen as General of Cavalry and Chariots, and Yi Tong as Third Secretary.

古文：乙亥，以车骑大将军、仪同三司、中军大都督高盛兼尚书仆射、北道行台，随机处分。
现代文：乙亥，任命车骑大将军、仪同三司、中军大都督高盛为兼尚书仆射、北道行台，依据形势处理事务。
English: Yi Hai, appointed the general of cavalry and cavalry, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the grand governor of the Chinese army, Gao Sheng, as well as Shang, Shupo, and Xingtai of the North Road, and handled affairs according to the situation.

古文：尔朱仲远奔萧衍。
现代文：尔朱仲远投奔萧衍。
English: Er Zhu Zhongyuan defected to Xiao Yan.

古文：青州刺史尔朱弼为其部下冯绍隆所杀，传首京师。
现代文：青州刺史尔朱弼被自己的部下冯绍隆杀死，传送首级到京城。
English: The Qingzhou assassin Zhu Xi was killed by his own subordinate Feng Shaolong, and his head was sent to Beijing.

古文：丙子，前废帝安东将军辛永，右将军、建州大都督张悦举城降。
现代文：丙子，前废帝的安东将军辛永，右将军、建州大都督张悦献出城池投降。
English: Cixi, the former emperor's general Xinyong, and Zhang Yue, the right-wing general and governor of Jianzhou, surrendered the city.

古文：辛巳，车驾至河阳，逊位于别邸。
现代文：辛巳，皇帝到达回屋，在别宫让位。
English: Soon after, the emperor arrived at the back room and gave up his seat in the other palace.

古文：太昌元年五月，封安定郡王，邑一万户。
现代文：主旦元年五月，被封为安定郡王，食邑一万户。
English: On the first day of the new year in May, he was named the stable county king, with ten thousand households in food villages.

古文：后以罪殂于门下外省，时年二十。
现代文：后来因有罪在门下外省死去，时年二十岁。
English: Later, he was found guilty and died in his home province, at the age of twenty.

古文：永熙二年葬于鄴西南野马冈。
现代文：丞毖二年安葬在苤噬西南的墅垦迩。
English: He was buried two years later in a villa in the southwestern part of the province.

古文：出帝，讳修，字孝则，广平武穆王怀之第三子也。母李氏。
现代文：出帝，名元脩，字孝则，是广平武穆王元怀的第三个儿子，母亲是李氏。
English: He was the third son of Guangping Wumu Wang Yuanhuai, and his mother was a member of the Li clan.

古文：性沉厚少言，好武事。
现代文：性情沉稳温厚不多话，喜爱武艺。
English: His temperament is calm, mild, not talkative, and he likes martial arts.

古文：始封汝阳县开国公，拜通直散骑侍郎，转中书侍郎。
现代文：开始封为汝阳县开国公，被任命为通直散骑侍郎，改任中书侍郎。
English: He was initially given the title of the founding father of Ruyang County, and was appointed as the attendant of Zongzhizhanzhijie, and later as the attendant of Zhongshu.

古文：建义初，除散骑常侍，寻迁平东将军、兼太常卿，又为镇东将军、宗正卿。
现代文：建义初年，授任散骑常侍，不久调任平柬将军、兼太常卿，又担任镇束将军、宗正卿。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was appointed as a knight errant, and soon he was transferred to the post of General of the Khmer Rouge, and also to the post of Grand Admiral, and he also served as General of the Garrison and Admiral of the Fleet.

古文：永安三年，封平阳王。
现代文：永安三年，封为平阳王。
English: In the third year of Yongan, he was given the title of King of Pingyang.

古文：普泰初，转侍中、镇东将军、仪同三司、兼尚书右仆射，又加侍中、尚书左仆射。
现代文：普泰初年，改任侍中、镇东将军、仪同三司、兼尚书右仆射，又加授侍中、尚书左仆射。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was reappointed as a chamberlain, Zhendong general, three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the right-hand servant of Shangshu, and was also awarded the title of chamberlain and the left-hand servant of Shangshu.

古文：中兴二年夏四月，安定王自以疏远，未允四海之心，请逊大位。
现代文：中兴二年夏四月，安定王自认为族属疏远，不能符合四海的民心，请求退出帝位。
English: In April of the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhongxing, Prince Anning, believing that his family was distant and could not conform to the hearts of the people of the four seas, requested to withdraw from the imperial throne.

古文：齐献武王与百僚会议，佥谓高祖不可无后，乃共奉王。
现代文：齐献武王和百官集会商议，都认为高祖不可以没有后继者，于是共同拥戴平阳王。
English: King Qi Xianwu and hundreds of officials gathered to discuss, all agreed that Gao Zu could not have no successor, so they jointly supported King Pingyang.

古文：戊子，即帝位于东郭之外，入自东阳、云龙门，御太极前殿，群臣朝贺。
现代文：戊子，在束城外登上皇帝位，从东阳门、云龙门进入，到太极前殿，群臣朝见祝贺。
English: Wu Zi ascended the imperial throne outside of Shucheng, entering from Dongyang Gate and Yunlong Gate, to the Taiji Front Hall, and was congratulated by a group of courtiers.

古文：礼毕，升阊阖门，诏曰： 否泰相沿，废兴互有，玄天无所隐，精灵弗能谕。
现代文：礼仪结束，登上闾阖门，下诏说： 世事盛衰相继，废兴交接，玄妙的天体不能隐藏，精微的神灵不能告示。
English: At the end of the ceremony, he went up to the gate of the imperial court and said: The ups and downs of the world come and go, and the ups and downs are intertwined. Mysterious celestial bodies cannot be hidden, and subtle gods cannot be announced.

古文：大魏统乾，德渐区宇，牢笼九服，旁礴三光。
现代文：大魏统御乾坤，德行普及寰宇，控御边荒地带，恩惠充满曰月星辰照耀之处。
English: The Great Wei Dynasty presided over the creation of the world, spread virtue throughout the world, controlled the wasteland, and was full of bounty wherever the moon and stars shone.

古文：而上天降祸，运踵多难，礼乐崩沦，宪章漂没。
现代文：然而上天降下祸患，国运接连多难，礼乐崩溃沦落，典章漂流沉没。
English: However, a calamity descended from the heavens, the National Games were difficult one after another, the ceremonial music collapsed and fell, and the ceremony drifted and sank.

古文：赫赫宗周，翦为戎寇；肃肃清庙，将成茂草。
现代文：显赫的宗周，为戎寇所灭；肃穆的庙宇，将成为茂密的草丛。
English: The illustrious Zong Zhou was annihilated by the invaders; the solemn temples will become thick grass.

古文：胡羯乘机，肆其昏虐，杀君害王，刳剔海内。
现代文：胡人羯人趁着时机，放纵他们的昏蒙暴虐，杀害君主侯王，剖开天下民众的胸膛。
English: The barbarians took advantage of the opportunity to indulge their ignorance and tyranny, kill the monarchs and princes, and open the chest of the people of the world.

古文：竞其吞噬之意，不识醉饱之心。
现代文：放任吞咬的意图，不懂得醉饱的心情。
English: Indulge the intention of biting, do not understand the mood of being drunk.

古文：自书契以来，未有若斯者已！大丞相勃海王忠存本朝，精贯白日，爰举义旗，志雪国耻。
现代文：自从有文字记载以来，没有如此残酷的大丞相勃海王忠心保卫本朝，精诚贯穿日光，于是举起正义的旗帜，立志洗雪国家的耻辱。
English: Since written records have been available, there has not been such a cruel chancellor Bo Hai Wang, who loyally defended this dynasty and earnestly penetrated the sunlight, so he raised the banner of justice and determined to wash away the country's shame.

古文：故广阿之军，貔虎夺气；鄴下之师，金汤失险。
现代文：所以广阿的军队，如同虎豹夺去胆气；邺下的军队，如同金城汤池失去险固。
English: Therefore, Guang'a's army, like a tiger and a leopard, has lost its courage; the army under his command, like Jincheng Tangchi, has lost its firmness.

古文：近者四胡相率，实繁有徒，驱天下之兵，尽华戎之锐。
现代文：近来四部胡人相继，党徒众多，驱使天下的兵马，用尽各族的精锐。
English: Recently, four Hu people in succession, many party members, drove the world's soldiers and horses, exhausted the elites of all ethnic groups.

古文：桴鼓暂交，一朝荡灭，元凶授首，大憝斯擒。
现代文：战鼓刚一敲响，顷刻之间灭亡，元凶被斩首，大恶人遭擒获。
English: As soon as the war drums started beating, they died in an instant, the culprit was beheaded, and the villain was captured.

古文：扬旆济河、扫清伊洛，士民安堵，不失旧章。
现代文：打着旗帜渡过黄河，扫清贼寇在伊水洛水之间，官民安居乐业，不违失旧时典章。
English: They crossed the Yellow River under the banner of the flag, swept away the bandits between the Yishui and the Luoshui, and the officials and the people lived and worked in peace without violating the old time regulations.

古文：社稷危而复安，洪基毁而还构。
现代文：社稷转危为安，宏大的基业毁坏后重新建构。
English: The society has turned the corner, and the grand foundation has been rebuilt after being destroyed.

古文：朕以托体宸极，猥当乐推，祗握宝图，承兹大业。
现代文：我出身皇族，惭愧地处在被推举的地位，恭敬地执掌国权，继承逭一大业。
English: I come from the imperial family, and I am humbly in the position of being elected, respectfully holding state power, and inheriting a great cause.

古文：得以眇身，托于王公之上，若涉渊水，罔识攸津。
现代文：我以微薄的德行，处于王公之上，如同越过深渊大河，不知从何处渡过。
English: With my meager virtue, I rise above princes, as if I had crossed an abyss, a great river, I don't know where I came from.

古文：思与兆民同兹嘉庆，可大赦天下。
现代文：思虑和万民共度遣一喜庆，可大赦天下。
English: Thoughtfulness and spending a joyous celebration with all the people can make the world a better place.

古文：改中兴二年为太昌元年。 
现代文：改中兴二年为太昌元年。 
English: The second year of ZTE was changed to the first year of Taichang.

古文：诏前御史中尉樊子鹄起复本官，兼尚书左仆射、东南道大行台，都督仪同三司、徐州刺史杜德讨元树。
现代文：诏令前御史中尉樊子鹄复出任本官，兼尚书左仆射、东南道大行台，统领仪同三司、徐州刺史杜德讨伐元树。
English: He ordered the former lieutenant of imperial history, Zou Ziqian, to serve as his superior officer, and also appointed Shang Shuzhu Zuopu Ya, Southeast Daqiantai, the commander of the ceremony and the three departments, and Xuzhou Zhi Shudu De to fight against the Yuan tree.

古文：齐献武王上言，建义之家枉为尔朱氏籍没者，悉皆蠲免。
现代文：齐献武王上奏，兴起正义之举的家族冤屈地受到水朱氏没收财产入官并成为卑下户口的，全都予以免除。
English: All the families who had been unjustly subjected to the Zhu family's confiscation of property, had their property confiscated by the Shuizhu family, had their property confiscated by the Shuizhu family, had their property confiscated by the Shuizhu family, had their property confiscated by the Shuizhu family, had their property confiscated by the Shuizhu family, and had their property confiscated by the Shuizhu family.

古文：帝以世易，复除齐献武王为大丞相、天柱大将军、太师，世袭定州刺史，增封九万，并前十五万户。
现代文：皇帝因世代变换，又授任齐献武王为大丞相、天柱大将军、太师，世袭定州刺史，增封食邑九万户，加上从前的共十五万户。
English: Due to the generational change, the emperor also appointed Qi Xianwu Wang as the grand chancellor, Tianzhu general, and grand master, and the hereditary history of Dingzhou was engraved, increasing the number of fiefs and counties by 90,000 and adding a total of 150,000 households.

古文：庚寅，加齐文襄王侍中、开府仪同，余如故。
现代文：庚寅，加授齐文襄王为侍中、开府仪同，其余职位照旧。
English: Geng Yin, Qibun Xiang Wang were promoted to attendant, Kaifu Yi was promoted to attendant, and the rest of the positions remained the same.

古文：壬辰，齐献武王还鄴，车驾饯别于乾脯山。
现代文：壬辰，齐献武王返回邺城，皇帝在干脯山设宴告别。
English: In Imjin, Qi Xianwu returned to Lucheng, and the emperor held a farewell banquet in Ganlu Mountain.

古文：五月丙申，前废帝广陵王殂。
现代文：五月丙申，前废帝广陵王逝世。
English: In May, the former emperor Guangling Wang passed away.

古文：以太傅、淮阳王欣为太师，封沛郡王；司徒公、赵郡王谌为太保；侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、清河王亶仪同三司；使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、司州牧、南阳王宝炬为太尉公；侍中、太保、录尚书事长孙稚为太傅；侍中、骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射元罗仪同三司、尚书令；骠骑大将军、吏部尚书元世俊仪同三司。
现代文：任命太傅、进旸王元欣为太师，封为沛郡王；司徒公、赵塾王亘谌担任太保；侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、清河王元卖担任仪同三师；使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、司州牧、南阳王实炬担任太尉公；侍中、太保、录尚书事长孙稚担任太傅；侍中、骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射元罗担任仪同三司、尚书令；骠骑大将军、吏部尚书元世俊担任仪同三司。
English: Appointed Taifu, Jinjun Wang Yuanxin as Taishi, and was given the title of Pae County King; Sitou Gong, Zhaoju Wang Wang Wangyi as Taibo; Chamberlain, General of Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Divisions, Qinghe Wang Yuan Rong as Rites and Three Divisions; Jijie Jie, Chamberlain, General of Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Divisions, Shizhou Maki, Nanyang Wang Shicu as Taifu; Chamberlain, Chamberlain, Chief Clerk of Records, Sun Zhi as Taifu; Chamberlain, General of Cavalry, Shangshu

古文：戊戌，以齐献武王固让，听解天柱大将军，灭封五万户，余悉如故。
现代文：戊戌，因齐献武王执意推让，准许免除天柱大将军，削减封邑五万户，其余的职位照旧。
English: Wuzhong, since King Qi Xianwu insisted on making concessions, was allowed to exempt General Tianzhu, reduce the number of fiefs by 50,000, and keep the remaining positions as before.

古文：幸丑，以前司空高乾邕复为司空公。
现代文：辛丑，任命前司空高干邕再任司空公。
English: Sin ugly, appointed former Secretary Gao Ganjun to be reappointed as Secretary Gao.

古文：乙巳，帝幸华林都亭，宴群臣，班赍有差。
现代文：乙巳，皇帝前往华林都亭，宴请群臣，分发赏赐多少不等。
English: At this time, the emperor went to the Waring Palace to hold a banquet for his courtiers, distributing rewards in varying amounts.

古文：羽林队主唐猛突入称庆，帝以猛犯禁卫，杖之。
现代文：羽林队主唐猛冲进去道贺，皇帝因唐猛冒犯宫廷守卫，用棍棒打他。
English: Tang Meng, the head of the eagle forest team, rushed in to congratulate, and the emperor hit him with a club because Tang Meng offended the palace guard.

古文：猛辞色有忤，斩之阶下。
现代文：唐猛言辞神色忤逆旨意，被斩死在台阶下。
English: Tang was beheaded at the foot of the steps after he spoke out against the will of the emperor.

古文：丁未，诏曰： 无侮茕独，事炳前经；惠此鳏寡，声留往册。
现代文：丁未，下诏说： 不要侮辱孤独的人，事情显著于前代经典；优惠鳏夫寡妇，声名留传在以往史册。
English: Ding Wei, the next emperor said: Do not insult lonely people, the matter is significant in the previous generation of classics; prefer widowers and widows, reputation left in the past history.

古文：朕以薄德，作民父母，乃眷元元，寤言增叹。
现代文：我以微薄的德行，做民众的父母，念及百姓，夜感叹。
English: With my meager virtue, I am the parents of the people, think about the people, and lament at night.

古文：今理运惟新，哀矜伊始，如有孤老、疾病、无所依归者，有司明加隐括，依格赈赡。 
现代文：现在国运除旧布新，哀怜百姓刚开始，如果有孤老、疾病、没有依靠的人，有关官员明确加以检查核实，按条例赈济救助。 
English: Now that the National Movement has removed the old cloth and replaced it with a new one, it has just begun to mourn for the people. If there are orphans, diseases, and people who have no support, relevant officials will clearly check and verify them, and provide relief and assistance according to regulations.

古文：又诏曰： 理有一准，则民无觊觎；法启二门，则吏多威福。
现代文：又下诏说： 道理衹有一个标准，民众就没有非分的意图；法令出自不同途径，官吏就作威作福。
English: The next edict said: "If there is only one standard of reason, the people will not have the intention of non-participation; if the laws come from different channels, the officials will use their power to benefit themselves."

古文：前主为律，后主为令，历世永久，实用滋章。
现代文：前朝君主制法律，后朝君主制令文，历代长久，因此滋长增多。
English: The monarchy law of the former dynasty and the monarchy edict of the latter dynasty have been long-lasting throughout the ages, so they have grown and increased.

古文：非所以准的庶品，提防万物。
现代文：这不是用来规范各种行为，防备万物的做法。
English: This is not a practice that is used to regulate all kinds of behavior and prevent everything.

古文：可令执事之官四品以上，集于都省，取诸条格，议定一途。其不可施用者，当局停记。
现代文：可命令四品以上执掌事务的官员，会集在尚书省，取来各种条例，议定一个标准，凡不能施用的，主管部门停止登录。
English: He can order the officials in charge of the affairs of more than four provinces to gather in Shangshu Province, collect various regulations, and agree on a standard. If it cannot be applied, the competent department will stop the registration.

古文：新定之格，勿与旧制相连。
现代文：新议定的条例，不要同旧制度相连。
English: The newly agreed regulations should not be linked to the old system.

古文：务在约通，无致冗滞。 
现代文：必须简约通达，不要繁冗难解。 
English: It must be simple, not complicated.

古文：己酉，以侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、清河王亶为司徒公。
现代文：己酉，任命侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、清河王五直为司徒公。
English: Ji Yu, appointed the chamberlain, the cavalry general, the three officers of the etiquette, and the king of Qinghe Wuzhong as the steward.

古文：庚戌，诏曰： 顷西土年饥，百姓流徒，或身倚沟渠，或命悬道路，皆见弃草土，取厌乌鸢。
现代文：庚戌，下诏说： 近来丙部地区年成饥荒，百姓流浪迁移，有的身体倒在沟渠，有的尸体挂在道路边，都被抛弃在草丛泥土上，为乌鸦老鹰所饱食。
English: "Recently, there has been an annual famine in the Xibe area, and the people are wandering and migrating. Some bodies have fallen into ditches, and some bodies are hanging on the roadside. They are all abandoned on the grass and soil, and are well-fed by crows and eagles.

古文：言念于此，有警夜寐。
现代文：言谈思念到这事，夜晚睡觉都警惕。
English: When I think about it, I am wary of going to bed at night.

古文：掩骼之礼，诚所庶几；行墐之义，冀亦可勉。
现代文：掩埋尸体的礼节，实在是所希望的；对路上饿死人的义理，也希望可以勉励世人。
English: The etiquette of burying a corpse is indeed something to be desired; the righteousness of starving to death on the road is also something to be encouraged.

古文：其诸有露尸，令所在埋覆。可宣告天下。 
现代文：所有暴露的尸体，命令各处掩埋。可布告天下。 
English: All exposed bodies are ordered to be buried everywhere. This can be announced to the world.

古文：乙卯，诏外内解严。
现代文：乙卯，诏令内外解除戒严。
English: Second, the imperial edict lifted martial law both at home and abroad.

古文：六月癸亥朔，帝于华林园纳讼。
现代文：六月癸亥初一，皇帝在华林园听取诉讼。
English: On the first day of the Chinese New Year in June, the emperor came to listen to the lawsuit in the Hualin Garden.

古文：丙寅，蠕蠕、嚈哒、高丽、契丹、库莫奚国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：丙寅，蜢魉、噬壁、直丽、契且、库莫奚国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: The states of Hsin-Yin, Yao, Zhabei, Naoli, Qicheng, and Cuomo sent envoys to pay tribute to the court.

古文：丁卯，太尉公、司州牧、南阳王宝炬坐事降为骠骑大将军、开府，王如故，归第，令羽林卫守。
现代文：丁卯，太尉公、司州牧、南阳王宣炬因事获罪被降为骠骑大将军、开府，王爵照旧，回到第宅，派羽林郎守卫。
English: Ding Wu, Taifu Gong, Shizhou Maki, and Nanyang Wang Xuanqiao were punished by being demoted to the rank of cavalry general and sent to the capital. As before, Wang Jue returned to the second house and sent Ulin Lang to guard it.

古文：改谥武怀皇帝曰孝庄。
现代文：改谧武怀皇帝为孝庄皇帝。
English: Emperor Wuhuai was changed to Emperor Xiaozhuang.

古文：癸酉，蠕蠕、嚈哒国遣使朝贡。
现代文：癸酉，蠕蠕、噘畦国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: The states of Chu, Min, and Yan sent envoys to pay tribute to the court.

古文：戊寅，诏内外百司普泛六级。
现代文：戊寅，诏令内外各府长官普加六级。
English: Wu Yin, the prefectural governors inside and outside the prefectural government were promoted to the sixth level.

古文：在京百僚加中兴四级，义师将士并加军泛六级，在鄴百官三级，河北同义之州两级，河桥建义者加五级，关西二级。诸受建明、普泰封爵、泛级、优特之阶，悉追。
现代文：在京百宫中兴年间在职的加四级，起义军将士都加军泛六级，在邺城的百官加三级，黄河以北随从起义的州宫加两级，在河桥发动义举的加五级，函谷关以西的加二级所有接受建明、普泰年间封爵、泛级、优特等级，全部追夺。
English: Those who served in Beijing during the Hundred Palace Uprising were promoted to the 4th grade, the insurgents were promoted to the 6th grade, the officials in Shicheng were promoted to the 3rd grade, those who followed the uprising north of the Yellow River to the State Palace were promoted to the 2nd grade, those who launched the uprising in Heqiao were promoted to the 5th grade, and those who were promoted to the 2nd grade west of the Hanzhong Pass were promoted to the 2nd grade, and all of them were knighted, promoted to the next grade, and promoted to the superior grade during the Jianming and Putai years.

古文：己卯，帝临显阳殿纳讼。
现代文：己卯。皇帝前往显阳殿听取诉讼。
English: The emperor went to the Xianyang Palace to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：乙酉，高丽、契丹、库莫奚国遣使朝贡。
现代文：乙酉，高丽、契丹、库莫奚国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Ayutthaya, Goryeo, Khitan, and Kumo sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：丙戌，以前骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司斛斯椿还为前官。
现代文：丙戌，任命前骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司斛斯椿仍为从前官职。
English: In addition, the appointment of the former grand marshal of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three officers of the imperial cavalry are still from the former official position.

古文：诏曰： 间者，凶权诞恣，法令变常；遂立夷貊轻赋，冀收天下之意；随以箕敛之重，终纳十倍之征。掩目捕雀，何能过此？
现代文：下诏说： 最近，凶恶权臣放肆恣意，法令改变常规，订立夷人的轻税，希望收取天下人的心，随后以沉重的赋敛，终于收取十倍的税收，捂住眼睛捉麻雀，哪能超得过这一点?
English: The next edict said, "Recently, a wicked vassal has acted impudently and arbitrarily, changing the rules by decree, setting a light tax for the barbarians, hoping to win the hearts and minds of the people of the world, and then imposing a heavy tax, finally collecting ten times the tax, and catching sparrows with his eyes closed. How can this be overcome?

古文：朕属念蒸黎，无忘寝食。加田桑始事，生业未滋，若顿依常格，或不周展。
现代文：我顾念百姓，就寝吃饭都不忘记，加上农田蚕桑刚从事，民众生路不宽广，如果陡然依照通常条例，恐怕不周全。
English: I am mindful of the people, I do not forget to eat and sleep, and I have just been engaged in farmland sericulture, the people's livelihood is not broad, if I suddenly follow the usual regulations, I am afraid it will not be complete.

古文：今岁租调，且两收一丐，来年复旧。 
现代文：今年的租调，暂且征收两份免除一份，来年恢复旧制度。 
English: For this year's rent transfer, two copies will be levied and one copy will be exempted, and the old system will be restored next year.

古文：辛卯，以使持节、卫大将军、仪同三司、尚书左仆射贾显度为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：辛卯，任命使持节、卫大将军、仪同三司、尚书左仆射贾显度为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Xinwu appointed the envoy Jichijie, the general of Wei, and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the left-hand servant of Shangshu, Shejia, to be the general of horse riding and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：秋七月乙未，诏曰： 顷永安驭运，载育皇储，遂锡泛阶，以申国庆。
现代文：秋七月乙未，下诏说： 先前永安年间控御天下，诞生皇子，于是普赐级别，来表现国家的喜庆。
English: In the autumn of July, the following edict was issued: In the previous Yongan era, the emperor ruled the country, and a prince was born, so the emperor granted the rank to show the country's celebration.

古文：近经普泰，便尔中追。
现代文：近来经过普泰，便中途削夺。
English: Recently, after passing through Putai, it cut and seized halfway.

古文：今罪人既殄，旧章斯复。
现代文：现在罪人已被消灭，旧典章即可恢复。
English: Now that the guilty have been eliminated, the old order can be restored.

古文：宜述往旨，用卒前恩。
现代文：应该重申以往的意旨，来完成从前的恩泽。
English: It is necessary to reaffirm the intention of the past to complete the benefits of the past.

古文：皇子泛二级，悉可还授。
现代文：生皇子时普级，全可再行授予。
English: When a prince is born, he is awarded the universal rank, which can be awarded again and again.

古文：文穆庙泛，故宜停寝，若已受者，依例追之。 
现代文：文穆皇帝入庙的赏赐，本应停止，如已接受的，依条例追夺。 
English: Emperor Wenmu's reward for entering the temple should have been stopped, and if it had been accepted, it should have been seized according to the regulations.

古文：庚子，以骠骑大将军、开府、南阳王宝炬为太尉公。
现代文：庚子，任命骠骑大将军、开府、南阳王实炬为太尉公。
English: Geng Zi, appointed the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu, and Nanyang Wang Shitang as the lieutenant.

古文：壬寅，齐献武王率众入自滏口，大都督库狄干入自井陉，讨尔朱兆。
现代文：壬寅，齐麸毖王率领军队从鳖旦进军，大都督库狄干从井陉进军，讨伐尔朱兆。
English: Jinyin, King Qizhi led the army to march from Shantan, and the Grand Dictator Kudikan marched from Jingye to fight against Zhu Zhao.

古文：乙巳，齐献武王以尔朱天光、尔朱度律送之京师，斩于都市。
现代文：乙巳，齐献武王将佥苤玉光、金塞度搂押送到京城，在都市斩首。
English: At this time, King Qi Xianwu sent Zang Yuguang and Jinsai Duye to the capital and beheaded them in the city.

古文：己酉，以兼尚书左仆射、东南道大行台樊子鹄为仪同三司。
现代文：己酉。任命兼尚书左仆射、东南道大行台樊子鹄为仪同三司。
English: He also appointed Shangshu Zuopuzha and Dongnan Daigongdai Shanzi as the three officials of the ceremony.

古文：庚戌，诏侍中、骠骑将军、左光禄大夫高隆之为使持节、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、兼尚书左仆射、北道行台，率步骑十万趋太行，会齐献武王。
现代文：庚戌，诏令侍中、骠骑将军、左光禄大夫直隆之担任使持节、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、兼尚书左仆射、北道行台，率领步兵骑兵十万人赶赴太行山，同齐献武王会合。
English: Geng Zheng, issued an imperial edict to appoint the chamberlain, the cavalry general, and the doctor of the Left Guanglu Division, Zhaolong, as the envoys of the Festival, the cavalry general, the three officers of the ceremony, and the left-hand shooters of the ceremony, and the north road platform, and led 100,000 infantry and cavalry to rush to Taihang Mountain to join in the dedication of King Wu.

古文：隆之解行台，仍为大丞相军司。
现代文：隆之解除行台，随之任大丞相军司。
English: Takashi was relieved of his duties and went to Taiwan, whereupon he was appointed to the post of grand secretary to the minister of war.

古文：齐献武王次于武乡。尔朱兆大掠晋阳，北走秀容。
现代文：齐献武王停驻在武乡，尔朱兆大肆掳掠置堡，向北逃到秀容。
English: Qi Xianwu Wang stayed in Wuxiang, and Er Zhu Zhao plundered the castle and fled north to Xiurong.

古文：并州平。
现代文：并州平定。
English: Since then, the province has been unified and pacified.

古文：乙卯，帝临显阳殿，亲理冤狱。
现代文：乙口，皇帝前往显垦隧，亲自审理冤案。
English: In response, the emperor went to the Hsien Lo Tunnel to personally hear the case.

古文：丙辰，以宗师、东莱王贵平为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：丙辰，任命宗师、束莱王贵平为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Hsin-Chen appointed his guru, Sokrai Wang Guiping, as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Secretary of Ceremonial Affairs.

古文：是月，夏州徙民郭迁据宥州反，刺史元嶷弃城走。
现代文：这月，夏州迁徙的人郭迁占据兖州反叛，刺史元嶷放弃城池逃跑。
English: This month, Guo Qian, a person who migrated from Xiazhou, occupied Zhangzhou and rebelled, forcing Shi Yuanjun to abandon the city and flee.

古文：诏行台侯景率齐州刺史尉景、济州刺史祭俊等攻讨之。
现代文：诏令行台侯景率领齐州刺史尉景、济州刺史蔡俊等人攻打讨伐他们。
English: He ordered Gongtai Houjing to attack and fight them, led by Qizhou Jishi Lvjing, Jeju Jishi Cai Jun and others.

古文：城陷，迁奔萧衍。
现代文：城池陷落，郭迁投奔萧衍。
English: Chengchi fell, Guo Qian ceded to Ben Xiaoyan.

古文：东南道大行台樊子鹄大破萧衍军于谯城，擒其鄴王元树及谯州刺史朱文开。
现代文：东南道大行台樊子鹄在谯城大败萧衍的军队，擒获他的邺王元树和谯州刺史朱文开。
English: The army of Da Xingtai, Da Xingdao Province, defeated the army of Xiao Yan in Handan City, and captured Wang Yuanshu and Zhu Wenkai, the governor of Handan Province.

古文：八月壬戌朔，齐文襄王来朝，燕射，班赍部下各有差。
现代文：八月壬戌初一，齐文襄王前来朝见，饮宴射箭，颁赏部下多少不等。
English: On the first day of the lunar new year in August, King Qibun and King Xiang came to see the emperor in the morning, had a banquet and played archery, and gave awards to their subordinates.

古文：丁卯，以西中郎将元宁为高平王。
现代文：丁卯，任命西中郎将元宁为高平王。
English: Dingwu, Nishi no churo appointed Motonin as the king of Takahira.

古文：甲戌，以车骑大将军、左光禄大夫李琰之为仪同三司。
现代文：甲戌，任命车骑大将军、左光禄大夫李琰之为仪同三司。
English: Armor and Armor, appointed General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Doctor of the Left Hand of the Light, Li Xuanqin, to the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：庚寅，以车骑将军、左光禄大夫崔秉为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：庚寅，任命车骑将军、左光禄大夫崔秉为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Geng Ying, appointed the general of chariot and cavalry, Dr. Cui Bing, the doctor of the Left Guanglu, as the general of cavalry and cavalry, and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：辛卯，以车骑将军、右光禄大夫高岳为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：辛卯，任命车骑将军、右光禄大夫高岳为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Xinwu, appointed the general of chariot and cavalry, Uguanglu doctor Gao Yue as the general of cavalry and cavalry, and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：九月癸未，以侍中、骠骑大将军、左光禄大夫封津为仪同三司。
现代文：九月癸未，任命侍中、骠骑大将军、左光禄大夫封津为仪同三司。
English: At the end of September, he appointed a chamberlain, a cavalry general, and a doctor of medicine named Zuo Guanglu to be the three officials in charge of the ceremony.

古文：庚子，帝幸华林都亭，引见元树及公卿百僚蕃使督将等，宴射，班赍各有差。
现代文：庚子，皇帝前往华林都亭，接见元树和公卿百官藩国使者都督将领等，饮宴射箭，分发赏赐多少不等。
English: Geng Zi, the emperor, went to Huarinting to meet with Yuan Shu and the court nobles, hundreds of officials, emissaries of the state, governors and generals, etc., had a banquet and shot arrows, and distributed rewards in varying amounts.

古文：癸卯，燕郡开国公贺拔允进爵为王。
现代文：癸卯，燕郡开国公贺拔允升爵位为王。
English: At the same time, Yan County's founding father Gong He promoted Yun to the title of king.

古文：乙巳，帝幸都水，南过洛汭，遂至瀍涧。
现代文：乙巳，皇帝前往都水台，向南渡过洛水油水，于是到达渥水涧水。
English: At this time, the emperor went to the capital water tower, crossed the Luoshui oil and water to the south, and then arrived at the Oto water and water.

古文：己酉，复田于北原。
现代文：己酉，又在北原狩猎。
English: He also went hunting in Kitahara.

古文：癸丑，以太师、沛王欣为广陵王，前废帝子勃海王子恕改封沛郡王。
现代文：癸丑，封太师、沛王元欣为广陵王，前废帝的儿子勃海王子恕改封为沛郡王。
English: The former emperor's son, Prince Bo Hai, changed his title to King of Pe County.

古文：甲寅，以侍中、骠骑大将军封隆之、任祥并为仪同三司。
现代文：甲寅，任命侍中、骠骑大将军封隆之，任祥都为仪同三司。
English: Emperor Jiajing appointed Feng Long, the general of the equestrian and cavalry, as the chamberlain, and appointed Xiang Du as the third secretary of the ceremony.

古文：以车骑大将军、河南尹元仲景为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：任命车骑大将军、河南尹元仲景为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: He appointed Yin Yuan Zhongjing of Henan Province as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Division of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies.

古文：乙卯，车驾谒山陵。
现代文：乙卯，皇帝拜谒陵墓。
English: Second, the emperor's mausoleum.

古文：丙辰，蠕蠕、高昌国遣使朝贡。
现代文：丙辰，蠕蠕、高昌国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Gucheng, Cunling and Gaochang sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：庚申，以卫将军、前吏部尚书李神隽，抚军将军、右卫将军娄昭并为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：庚申，任命卫将军、前吏部尚书李神隽，抚军将军、右卫将军娄昭都为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Goshun appointed Wei general, former cadre Shangshu Li Shenyao, Fuzhun general, and Uwei general Zou Zhao to be the commander of the cavalry and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：冬十月甲子，以使持节、卫将军、光州刺史高仲密为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：冬十月甲子，任命使持节、卫将军、监出刺史高仲密为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the winter of October, he appointed Envoy Ji Jie, General of the Guards, Inspector-General Gao Zhongmi as the General of the Cavalry and Cavalry, and the Three Departments of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：丁卯，以车骑大将军、左光禄大夫潘蛮为仪同三司。
现代文：丁卯，任命车骑大将军、左光禄大夫继为仪同三司。
English: Dingwu, appointed the general of the cavalry and the doctor of the left light to be the successors of the three departments.

古文：己卯，以车骑大将军、左光禄大夫高琛为特进、骠骑、开府仪同三司。
现代文：己卯，任命车骑大将军、左光禄大夫产遂为特进、骠骑、开府仪同三司。
English: At the same time, he appointed the general of chariot and cavalry and the doctor of the Left Guanglu Division, and they became the three divisions of special advance, cavalry charge, and opening ceremony.

古文：庚寅，以使持节、骠骑将军、肆州刺史刘贵为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：庚寅，任命使持节、骠骑将军、建州刺史刘童为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Geng Ying, appointed Envoy Ji Jie, Cavalry General, and Jianzhou Sifu Liu Tong as Cavalry General, and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：十有一月甲午，以车骑将军、扬州刺史斛斯敦为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：十一月甲午，任命车骑将军、扬州刺史斛斯敦为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, Yangzhou Zhi Shi Xingston was appointed as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and Yangzhou Zhi Shi Xingston as the General of Cavalry and Cavalry and Yangzhou Zhi Shi Xingston as the General of Cavalry and Cavalry and Yangzhou Zhi Shi Xingston as the General of Cavalry and Cavalry and Yangzhou Zhi Shi Xingston as the General of Cavalry and Cavalry.

古文：丁酉，日南至，车驾有事于圆丘。
现代文：丁酉，是冬至曰，皇帝在圆丘祭祀。
English: It was the winter solstice, and the emperor was performing a ritual at the round mound.

古文：戊戌，朝会百官于太极前殿。
现代文：戊戌，在太极前殿接见百官。
English: Wu Xi, in front of the Taiji Hall, received hundreds of officials.

古文：甲辰，安定王朗及东海王晔坐事死。
现代文：甲辰，安定王元朗和束海王元晔因事获罪被杀死。
English: Jia Chen, Wang Yuen Long and Wang Yuen Yao of Sokai were convicted of the crime and killed.

古文：乙巳，蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：乙巳，蠕蠕国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: At this time, the Kingdom of Worms sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：己酉，以前太尉公、汝南王悦为侍中、大司马、开府。
现代文：己酉，任命前太尉公、汝南王元悦为侍中、大司马、开府。
English: Ji Yan, appointed the former captain, Runan Wang Yuan Rong as a chamberlain, grand steward, and head of the government.

古文：葬灵太后胡氏。
现代文：安葬灵太后胡氏。
English: The Dowager Empress Hu is laid to rest.

古文：十有二月丙寅，以骠骑大将军、领御史中尉綦隽为仪同三司。
现代文：十二月丙寅，任命骠骑大将军、兼任御史中尉墓鱼为仪同三司。
English: In December, Xi Jinping appointed the general of the cavalry and the lieutenant of the history of the tomb fish as the three divisions of the ceremony.

古文：乙亥，以侍中、广平王赞为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：乙亥，任命侍中、庐王王疽赞为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Yi Hai, appointed the chamberlain, the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king.

古文：丁亥，杀大司马、汝南王悦。
现代文：丁亥，杀死大司马、汝南王墓担。
English: Dinghai, killed the grand steed, the tomb of the king of Runan.

古文：大赦天下，改太昌为永兴，以太宗号，寻改为永熙元年。
现代文：大赦天下，改叁旦年号为丞垒，因是立塞的年号，不久改为丞盥元年。
English: The world was amnestied, and the name of the year was changed from 旦年号 to 丞垒, because it was the year of Rissai, and was soon changed to 丞元年.

古文：二年春正月庚寅朔，朝飨群臣于太极前殿。
现代文：二年春正月庚寅初一，在太极前殿接见宴请群臣。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, Geng Yin received a group of ministers at a banquet in the Taiji front hall.

古文：甲午，齐献武王自晋阳出讨尔朱兆。
现代文：甲午，齐献武王从晋阳出兵讨伐尔朱兆。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, King Qi Xianwu sent troops from Jinyang to fight Zhu Zhao.

古文：丁酉，大破之于赤洪岭。兆遁走，自杀。
现代文：丁酉，在赤洪岭把他打得大败，尔朱兆逃跑，自杀。
English: Ding Yao defeated him in Chihongling. Er Zhu Zhao ran away and committed suicide.

古文：己亥，车驾幸岭高石窟灵岩寺。
现代文：己亥，皇帝前往崧高山石窟灵岩寺。
English: At the end of the year, the emperor went to the Lingyan Temple in Shaoshan Grottoes.

古文：庚子，又幸，散施各有差。
现代文：庚子，又前往，施舍多少不等。
English: Geng Zi went there again, and the amount of alms he gave varied.

古文：庚戌，仪同三司李琰之薨。
现代文：庚戌，仪同三司李琰之逝世。
English: The death of Geng Yao, Yi Tong and the third secretary of the Li Yao Gang.

古文：丁巳，追尊皇考为武穆帝，皇太妃冯氏为武穆后，皇妣李氏为皇太妃。
现代文：丁巳，追尊皇帝的父亲为武穆帝，皇太妃蛆为逮壬嘘，皇帝的母亲为皇太妃。
English: According to Ding Si, the father of Emperor Suizong was Emperor Wu Mu, the Empress Dowager was Lady Fang, and the Emperor's mother was the Empress Dowager.

古文：以骠骑将军、前沧州刺史高聿为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：任命骠骑将军、前途业刺史直圭为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Appointed the general of the cavalry, the future career of the general of the cavalry, and the three departments of the ceremony.

古文：萧衍劳州刺史曹凤、东荆州刺史雷能胜等举城内属。
现代文：盖堑的莹业刺史萱凰、塞塑啦刺史重直瞪等人献出城池归附。
English: The Yingye embroidery of the cover, the Yingye embroidery of the cover, the Yingye embroidery of the cover, the Yingye embroidery of the cover, the Yingye embroidery of the cover.

古文：二月庚申，以使持节、镇东将军、行汾州事张琼为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：二月庚申，任命使持节、镇束将军、行进事强琼为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In February, Goshun appointed Jijisai, Zhenzoku, and Marching Qiangqiong as commander of the cavalry and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：辛酉，以司空公高乾邕为使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，咸阳王坦为司空公。
现代文：辛酉，任命司空公高干邕为使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，灭垦旺五坦为司空公。
English: Xin Xin, appointed Sku Gong Gao Ganjun as the envoy, the cavalry general, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and Zhaoyang Wutan as Sku Gong.

古文：三月己丑朔，加骠骑大将军、沧州刺史贾显智开府仪同三司。
现代文：三月己丑初一，加授骠骑大将军、沧州刺史亘题望为开府仪同三司。
English: In March, on the first day of the year, he was awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry and the title of General of the Cangzhou Cavalry Regiment.

古文：辛卯，诏以前普解诸行台，今阿至罗相度降款，复以齐献武王为大行台，随机裁处。
现代文：辛卯，诏令因以前普遍解除各行台，现在阿至罗相继降附，又任命齐献亘逗为大行台，依据形势裁断事务。
English: To make matters worse, because the edict had previously lifted the ban on all the gangs, now A-Zi Luo has been successively lowered, and Qi Xianwu Zi has been appointed as the grand gang leader to adjudicate affairs according to the situation.

古文：甲午，以车骑将军、蔚州刺史窦泰为使持节、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、相州刺史。
现代文：甲午，任命车骑将军、蓝业刺史叟台为使持节、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、相州刺史。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, the general of cavalry and chariots, Lan Ye Zhishi Xingtai was appointed as the commander of the festival, the general of cavalry and chariots, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Sangzhou Zhishi.

古文：使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史高乾邕坐事赐死。
现代文：使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史高干邕因事获罪被赐令自杀。
English: Ji Jizhi Jie, Zou Jie Da Gen, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and Xuzhou Zishi Gao Gannan were given orders to commit suicide after being found guilty.

古文：太师、鲁郡王肃薨。
现代文：太师、鲁郡王元肃逝世。
English: The Grand Master, Lu County Wang Yuan Su passed away.

古文：戊申，以使持节、都督河渭部三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、世袭河州刺史梁景睿为仪同三司。
现代文：戊申，任命使持节、都督河渭部三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、世袭河州刺史梁景敏为仪同三司。
English: Wushin, appointed the envoy Jichijie, the military governor of the three states of Hebei and Shandong, the cavalry general, and the hereditary governor of Hebei, Liang Jingmin, as the three departments.

古文：丁巳，以侍中、太保、司州牧、赵郡王谌为太尉公，加羽葆鼓吹；侍中、太尉公、南阳王宝炬为太尉、开府、尚书令。
现代文：丁巳，任命侍中、太保、司州牧、赵郡王元谌为太尉公，加授仪仗和鼓吹；侍中、太尉公、南阳王宝炬担任太尉、开府、尚书令。
English: Ding Si, appointed the chamberlains, Tai Bao, Shizhou Mu, and Zhao Gu Wang Yuanqi as Tai Li Gong, and awarded them with honors and propaganda; the chamberlains, Tai Li Gong, and Nanyang Wang Baotong served as Tai Li Gong, Kaifu, and Shang Shuling.

古文：夏四月戊辰，诏诸参佐自三府以下爰及外州，皆不得复加常侍及兼两员，虽已授者亦悉追之。
现代文：夏四月戊辰，诏令从三府直到外州的辅佐官吏，都不能再加授常侍和兼两处员吏，虽然已经授任也全部削除。
English: At the end of the summer in April, the imperial edict decreed that the assistant officials from the three prefectures to the out-of-state officials could no longer be awarded the titles of the permanent attendant and the two officials, although they had already been awarded, they were all deleted.

古文：是月，青州人耿翔袭据胶州，杀刺史裴粲，通于萧衍。
现代文：这月，贵州人耿翘偷袭占据胶蛆，杀死刺史寻辽，和芦蛮相交往。
English: This month, Guizhou resident Geng Yao made a sneak attack to occupy Jiaotong, killed Jishi Xingliao, and interacted with Luo Manchu.

古文：五月庚寅，诏诸幽枉未申，事经一周已上，悉集华林，将亲览察；脱事已经年，有司不列者，听其人各自陈诉；若事连州郡、由缘淹岁者，亦仰尚书总集以闻。
现代文：五月庚寅，韶令所有关押有冤屈没有申理，事情经过一年以上的，全部会集到华林园，将要亲自听取处理；如有事过一年，有关官员没有列出的，准许各自陈述申诉；如果事情牵连到州郡、因种种情况拖延岁月的，也由尚书汇总上报。
English: In May, Geng Yin issued an order that all detainees with grievances had no right to appeal. If the case had been going on for more than one year, they would all gather at the Hualin Garden and would be heard and dealt with in person. If there was something that had been going on for more than one year that was not listed by the relevant officials, they were allowed to present their own complaints. If the case involved a county or prefecture and had been delayed for years due to various circumstances, it would also be summarized and reported by Shang Shu.

古文：壬寅，以使持节、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、齐州刺史侯渊复为开府仪同三司。
现代文：壬寅，任命使持节、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、齐州刺史侯渊又为开府仪同三司。
English: Ren Yin, appointed the envoy to hold the festival, the grand general of the cavalry, the three departments of the ceremony, and the three departments of the ceremony in Qizhou.

古文：乙巳，诏曰： 大夫之职，位秩贵显；员外之官，亦为匪贱。
现代文：乙巳，下诏说： 人大的职务，地位尊贵级别显要；正员以外的官员，也不算卑贱。
English: So, the next edict said: the position of the people's congress, the status and the level of dignity are prominent; officials other than regular members are not lowly.

古文：而下及胥吏，带领非一，高卑浑杂，有损彝章。
现代文：而下至办理文书的小吏，兼领不仅一种，高低混杂，有损典章。
English: And down to the clerks who handle documents, there is not only one kind of concurrent leadership, but a mixture of high and low, which is detrimental to the award.

古文：自今已后，京官乐为称事小职者，直加散号将军，愿罢卑官者听为大夫及员外之职，不宜仍前散实参领。
现代文：从今以后，京官愿意担任称职小官的，仅加授散号将军，愿意罢除低官者准许担任大夫和正员以外的职务，不应像从前一样散官实官兼领。
English: From now on, if a Beijing official is willing to serve as a competent minor official, he should only be given the rank of general. If he is willing to dismiss a junior official, he should be allowed to serve in positions other than doctor and regular employee. It should not be the same as in the past.

古文：其中旨特加者，不在此例。 
现代文：有朝廷旨意特地加授的，不在这一条例。 
English: It is not included in this regulation if there is a special grant from the Imperial Court.

古文：东徐州城民王早、简实等杀刺史崔庠，据州入萧衍。
现代文：束徐州市民王呈、个宣等人杀死刺史鲎尘，占据州城依附壶面。
English: A group of Xuzhou citizens, including Wang Zhen and Duan Xuan, killed Zhi Shi and Jian Chen and occupied the city of Xuzhou.

古文：六月壬申，以骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射樊子鹄为青胶大使，督济州刺史、大都督察俊讨耿翔。
现代文：六月壬申，任命骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射樊子鹄为青胶大使，统领济州刺史、大都督基垡讨伐坠翅。
English: In June of the Jinshin era, he appointed the general of the cavalry, Kaifu Irodong Sanji, and Shoshu's right-hand man, Saeko Shoko, as the ambassador of the blue gum, leading the Jeju sashimi and the great governor, Kiho, to fight against the falling wings.

古文：丁丑，以骠骑大将军、前行南兗州事念贤为仪同三司。
现代文：丁丑，任命骠骑大将军、前行兖州事念贤为仪同三司。
English: Ding Yuxi, appointed the general of the cavalry, and the forward march of the state affairs as the ceremony with the three departments.

古文：秋七月辛卯，以使持节、镇北将军、大都督、秦州刺史万俟普拨为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：秋七月辛卯，任命使持节、镇北将军、大都督、蠢业刺史万俟普拨为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the autumn and July of Xinwu, he appointed Zhi Jixi, Zhenbei General, Grand Governor, and Wujie Zhishi Wanzhong to be the general of the cavalry and the three departments of ceremony.

古文：壬辰，以太师、司州牧、广陵王欣为大司马、侍中，以太尉公、赵郡王谌为太师，并开府。
现代文：壬辰，任命太师、业牧、庐懂王亘巫为大司马、侍中，任命太尉公、趟逛五谌为太师，都任开府。
English: Ren Chen, appointed the Grand Master, Yemoku, and Shiguan Wang Wanwu as the grand steward and chamberlain, and appointed the Grand Officer and Watanabe Wujing as the Grand Master, all of whom were appointed as the head of the government.

古文：庚戌，以前司徒公、燕郡王贺拔允为太尉公。
现代文：庚戌，任命前司徒公、燕郡王贺拔允为太尉公
English: Geng Hui, appointed the former Stukong, Yan County Wang He Baiyun as the first lieutenant

古文：八月乙丑，齐文襄王来朝，帝燕于华林都亭，班赍部下各有差。
现代文：八月乙丑，齐文襄王前来朝见，皇帝在华林都亭设宴，分发赏赐部下多少不等。
English: In August, King Qiwenxiang came to see the emperor for the first time. The emperor held a banquet in the Waring Pavilion and distributed rewards to his subordinates.

古文：以骠骑大将军、前南岐州刺史司马子如为仪同三司。
现代文：任命骠骑大将军、前南岐州刺史司马子如为仪同三司。
English: Appointed the General of the Horse Cavalry, the former South Kizhou Governor Sima Ziru as the Third Division.

古文：戊辰，车驾饯文襄王于河梁，仍济河而返。
现代文：戊辰，皇帝在河梁为文襄王饯行，随即渡黄河返回。
English: At that time, the emperor went to the river for King Wenxiang and then returned to the Yellow River.

古文：癸酉，齐献武王上表固让王爵，不许；请分邑十万户，节降为品，回授勋义，从之。
现代文：癸酉，齐献武王上奏表执意推让王爵，不准许；请求分食邑十万户，逐级降为若干级，授给起义有功的人，依从了他。
English: He presented a petition to King Wu, insisting on the promotion of the prince, but was not allowed; he asked for the distribution of food to 100,000 households, gradually reduced to several levels, awarded to those who had meritorious service in the uprising, and obeyed him.

古文：九月壬子，以散骑常侍、车骑大将军、左光禄大夫崔孝芬为仪同三司。
现代文：九月壬子，任命散骑常侍、车骑大将军、左光禄大夫崔孝芬为仪同三司。
English: In September, Ren Zi, appointed the cavalry aide-de-camp, the cavalry general, and the doctor of the Left Guanglu, Cui Xiaofen, as the three departments of the ceremony.

古文：冬十月癸未，以卫将军、瓜州刺史、泰临县开国伯、高昌王麹子坚为仪同三司，进爵郡王。
现代文：冬十月癸未，任命卫将军、瓜州刺史、泰临县开国伯、高昌王曲子坚为仪同三司，升爵位为郡公。
English: In the winter of October, General Wei, Guazhou Shishi, Tai Lin County Founding Count, and Gaochang Wang Quzijian were appointed as the three departments of the ceremony, and were promoted to the rank of county magistrate.

古文：十有一月癸巳，持节、征北将军、殷州刺史邸珍为徐州大都督、东道行台仆射，率将讨东徐州。
现代文：十一月癸巳，持节、征北将军、殷州刺史邸珍担任徐州大都督、东道行台仆射，率领将领讨伐束徐州。
English: In November of the same year, Ji Jie, the general of the Northern Expedition, and Yin Zhou, the governor of Xuzhou, led the generals to fight against Xuzhou.

古文：十有二月丁巳，车驾狩于嵩阳。
现代文：十二月丁巳，皇帝在嵩阳狩猎。
English: In December, the emperor went hunting in Songyang.

古文：己巳，遂幸温汤。
现代文：己巳，于是前往温泉。
English: So I went to a hot spring.

古文：丁丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：丁丑，皇帝回宫。
English: Ding Chou, the emperor returns to the palace.

古文：三年春正月壬辰，齐献武王讨费也头于河西苦洩河，大破之，获其帅纥豆陵伊利，迁其部落于内地。
现代文：三年春正月壬辰，齐献武王在黄河以西的苦连回讨伐盏坦题，将他们打得大败，擒获他们的头领纥豆陵伊利，将其部落迁居到内地。
English: In the first month of the third year of spring, King Qi Xianwu led his troops in a bitterly fought back-and-forth battle to the west of the Yellow River, defeating them, capturing their leader, Peasling Yili, and relocating his tribe to the mainland.

古文：二月，东梁州为夷民侵逼，诏使持节、车骑大将军、行东雍州事泉企为东梁州行台、都督以讨之。
现代文：二月，束梁州被夷入侵犯逼迫，诏令使持节、车骑大将军、行束雍州事泉企担任东梁州行台、都督去讨伐夷人。
English: In February, Sok Liang Prefecture was invaded and persecuted, and the imperial edict was issued to send Jichijie, the general of cavalry and cavalry, Xing Sok Yong Prefecture, Quan Ke as the governor of Dong Liang Prefecture and the governor to fight against the barbarians.

古文：己未，萧衍假节、豫州刺史、南昌王毛香举城内附，授以持节、安南将军、信州刺史、义昌王。
现代文：己未，萧衍的假节、豫州刺史、南昌王毛香献城归附，授任他为持节、安南将军、信州刺史、义昌王。
English: At the same time, Xiao Yan's Fuxi, Yuzhou Zhi Shi, and Nanchang Wang Mao Xiang donated the city to attach, and he was awarded the title of Zhi Shi, General Annan, Shinshu Zhi Shi, and Yichang Wang.

古文：壬戌，大赦天下。
现代文：壬戌，大赦天下。
English: Let's have a general amnesty.

古文：丙子，帝亲释奠礼先师。
现代文：丙子，皇帝亲自设爵于神前而祭祀先师。
English: The emperor personally knighted him in front of the gods and offered him as a sacrifice.

古文：辛巳，幸洪池陂，遂游田。
现代文：辛巳，前往洪池陂，于是游览狩猎。
English: Xin Si, went to Hongchi Yao, and then went on a hunting trip.

古文：壬午，以卫将军、前徐州刺史元祐为卫大将军、仪同三司，以骠骑将军、左卫将军元斌之为颍川王。
现代文：壬午，任命卫将军、前徐州刺史元佑为卫大将军、仪同三司，封骠骑将军、左卫将军元斌之为颍王。
English: In Renwu, he appointed General Wei, former Xuzhou Shishi Yuanyou as General Wei, Yi Tong as Third Secretary, Feng Shuxi as General, and Zuo Wei as General Yuan Bin.

古文：三月壬寅，以前侍中、车骑大将军李彧为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：三月壬寅，任命前侍中、车骑大将军奎毖为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In March, Jinyin appointed the former Vice-Admiral and General of Cavalry and Chariots, Kuijun, as the General of Cavalry and Chariots and Horses and the Third Secretary of Ceremonies and Ceremonies.

古文：夏四月戊午，契丹国遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏四月戊午，望旦国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: On the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, Wotan dispatched an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：辛未，高平王宁坐事降爵为公。
现代文：卒未，直垩王五宁因事获罪被降爵位为公。
English: Not long after that, Wang Wenying of Zhengyi was punished by being demoted from nobility to commoner.

古文：丙子，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：丙子，高丽国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：五月丙戌，增置勋府庶子，厢别六百人；又增骑官，厢别二百人，依第出身，骑官秩比直斋。
现代文：五月丙戌，增设勋宫中的庶子职位，正员外另为六百人，又增设骑官，正员外另为二百人，依门第给予基本身份，骑宫的级别比照直斋。
English: In May, the position of illegitimate son was added to the Imperial Household Agency, and the number of non-officials was increased by another 600, and the position of cavalry officer was added, and the number of non-officials was increased by another 200, and the basic status was given according to the grade, and the level of cavalry was directly proportional.

古文：辛卯，诏曰： 大魏得一居宸，乘六驭宇。
现代文：辛卯，下诏说： 大魏得天道居皇位，得地道统御天下。
English: Xinwu, the next edict said: Great Wei got the heavenly way to stay on the throne, and got the earthly way to rule the world.

古文：考风云之所会，宅日月之所中。
现代文：考察风云的会集，定居在宇宙中央。
English: Examine the gathering of the winds and settle in the center of the universe.

古文：自北而南，东征西怨，后来其苏，无思不偃。
现代文：从北往南，向东征讨西方有怨言，待君王而获新生，没有谁人不归服。
English: From the north to the south, from the east to the west, there are complaints, from the north to the south, from the east to the west there are complaints, from the north to the south, from the south to the west there are complaints, from the north to the west there are complaints, from the north to the south, from the south to the east there are complaints, from the north to the west there are complaints, from the north to the south, from the north to the east there are complaints, from the north to the west there are complaints, from the north to the south, from the north to the west there are complaints, from the north to the south, from the north to the south, from

古文：而句吴负险，久遗度外。
现代文：然而句吴仗恃险阻，长久处在控御外。
English: However, Wu Qianqian was in a precarious situation and was out of control for a long time.

古文：世祖太武皇帝，握金镜以照耀，击玉鼓以铿锵，神武之所牢笼，威风之所兰轹，莫不云彻雾卷，瓦解冰消。
现代文：世祖太武皇帝，手握金镜用以照耀，敲打玉鼓铿锵作响，神明英武所包罗，声威风化所超越，无不云开雾散，瓦解冰消。
English: The ancestor of the world, Emperor Taibu, held a golden mirror to shine, beat a tambourine and made a banging sound. The god Yingwu embraced, the prestige of the weather surpassed, all the clouds dispersed, and the ice disappeared.

古文：长江已北，尽为魏土。
现代文：长江以北，全为魏国领土。
English: To the north of the Yangtze River, it was all Wei territory.

古文：顷天步中圮，国纲时屯，凶竖因机，互窥上国，疆场侵噬，州郡沦胥。
现代文：近来时运衰落，国家纲常呈现困境，凶恶小人趁着机会，相互窥伺大国，边疆受侵犯吞噬，州郡遭沦陷。
English: In recent times, the country's fortunes have been in decline, the country has always been in a difficult situation, vicious villains have taken advantage of the opportunity to spy on each other, the border has been invaded and swallowed up, and the state has fallen.

古文：乃眷东顾，无忘寝食。
现代文：于是想要向东讨伐，就寝饮食不能忘怀。
English: As a result, I wanted to travel to the east, and I couldn't forget my bedtime meal.

古文：自非五牛警旆，七萃按部，何以复文武之旧业，拯涂炭于遗黎？
现代文：除非车马奔驰旌旗飞扬，精干的队伍出征，如何能恢复文武的旧曰业绩，从泥土炭火中拯救出百姓?
English: Unless chariots, horses, Mercedes-Benzes, and flags are flying, and capable teams are going to war, how can the old performance of literature and martial arts be restored, and the people be saved from the mud and charcoal fire?

古文：朕将亲总六军，径临彭、汴。
现代文：我将亲自统领六军，直接开到彭城、汴水。
English: I will personally lead the six armies and drive directly to Pengcheng and Surabaya.

古文：一劳永逸，庶保无疆。
现代文：一劳永逸，希望能使国运永保无疆长久。
English: Once and for all, I hope to make the National Games last forever.

古文：内外百僚，便可严备。
现代文：内外百官，可严密戒备。
English: Hundreds of officials at home and abroad can be on high alert.

古文：出顿之期，更听后敕。 
现代文：出兵的时间，再听今后的命令。 
English: When it is time to send in the troops, then listen to future orders.

古文：时帝为斛斯椿、元毗、王思政、魏光等谄佞间阻，贰于齐献武王，托讨萧衍，盛暑征发河南诸州之兵，天下怪恶之。
现代文：适时皇帝被斛斯椿、元毗、王思政、魏光等人谄媚离间，和齐献武王有二心，假托讨伐萧衍，盛夏时节征发黄河以南各州的兵士，天下都奇怪厌恶。
English: At the right time, the emperor was charmed and alienated by the likes of Qin Shizhuan, Yuan Pi, Wang Sizheng, Wei Guang, and others. He was double-minded with the king of Qi Xianwu, pretending to fight Xiao Yan, and recruiting soldiers from the states south of the Yellow River in midsummer. The whole world was strangely disgusted.

古文：语在《斛斯椿传》。
现代文：记载在《斛斯椿传》。
English: Recorded in "The Tale of Genghis Khan."

古文：丙申，以使持节、侍中、大司马、开府、司州牧、广陵王欣为左军大都督，太傅、录尚书事长孙稚为中军四面大都督。
现代文：丙申，任命使持节、侍中、大司马、开府、司州牧、广陵王元欣为左军大都督，太傅、录尚书事长孙稚为中军四面大都督。
English: Bishin appointed Wang Yuanxin, envoy of Jichijie, chamberlain, grand steward of Ma, Kaifu, steward of Shuzhou, and Guangling, as the grand governor of the left army, and Sun Zhiqi, taifu and chief secretary of Luo Shang, as the grand governor of the four sides of the Chinese army.

古文：丁酉，帝幸华林都亭，集京畿都督及军士三千余人，慰勉之。
现代文：丁酉，皇帝前往华林都亭，召集京城都督和兵士三千多人，慰劳勉励他们。
English: Ding Rong, the emperor went to the capital of Hualin, called together the capital's governor and more than 3,000 soldiers, and consoled and encouraged them.

古文：庚子，又幸华林都亭纳讼。
现代文：庚子，又前往华林都亭听取诉讼。
English: Geng Zi, and went to Warin Du Ting to listen to the proceedings.

古文：壬寅，又以长孙稚为后军大都督。
现代文：壬寅，又任命长孙稚为后军大都督。
English: Minshin also appointed his eldest grandson, Chika, as the supreme commander of the rear army.

古文：六月丁卯，大都督源子恭镇胡阳，汝阳王暹守石济，仪同三司贾显智率豫州刺史斛斯寿东趋济州。
现代文：六月丁卯，大都督源子恭镇守胡阳，汝阳王五逞守卫互辽，仪同三司买题望率领邃业刺史魁斯寿向东赶赴济州。
English: In June of Dingwu, the grand governor Yuan Zi Gong Zhen guarded Huyang, Ruyang Wang Five took the initiative to guard Mutual Liao, and Yi Tong and the three divisions of Buyi Wang led Zou Yip Shi Queshou to rush east to Jeju.

古文：庚午，吐谷浑国遣使朝贡。
现代文：庚午，吐谷浑国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the envoys of the Kingdom of Tugu Hun were sent to pay tribute to the Emperor.

古文：丙子，诏曰： 顷年以来，天步时阻，干戈不戢，荆棘斯生。
现代文：丙子，下韶说： 近年以来，时运艰难，战事不息，荆棘产生。
English: "In recent years, times have been tough, wars have continued, and thorns have appeared.

古文：或徇节感恩，奋不顾命；或临戎对敌，赴难如归。
现代文：有人殉于节义报答恩德，奋不顾身；有人临阵对敌，视死如归。
English: Some people are martyred in the festival to repay their kindness, regardless of their own efforts; some people fight against the enemy, and see death as a homecoming.

古文：身首横分，骸骨不敛。
现代文：身体头颅分开，骨骸没有收殓。
English: The body and head were separated, and the bones were not fused.

古文：勋诚靡录，荣赠莫加。
现代文：功勋忠诚没有记载，荣耀封赠没有施予。
English: There is no record of meritorious service and loyalty, and there is no award of honor.

古文：寤寐矜之，良有嗟悼。
现代文：日夜哀怜，实为嗟叹。
English: Sorrow day and night, it is really a sigh.

古文：可普告内外，所在言列。
现代文：可宣告内外，各地上告列举。
English: It can be announced at home and abroad, and announced and enumerated in various regions.

古文：若无亲近，听故友陈之。
现代文：如果没有亲人，准许老朋友陈述。
English: If there is no next of kin, allow an old friend to make a statement.

古文：尚书检实，随状科赠。
现代文：尚书检查核实，依据事实奖励追赠。
English: The books were checked and verified, and awards and gifts were made according to the facts.

古文：庶粗慰冤魂，少申恻隐。 
现代文：希望大致安慰冤魂，稍微表达痛惜之心。 
English: I hope to comfort the souls of the wrongdoers in general, and to express my heartfelt regret in a small way.

古文：庚辰，以使持节、车骑大将军、中军大都督斛律沙门为开府仪同三司。
现代文：庚辰，任命使持节、车骑大将军、中军大都督斛律沙门为开府仪同三司。
English: Geng Chen, appointed Envoy Ji Jie, General of Chariot and Cavalry, and the Chinese military governor, Bao Lu Shamen, as the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments.

古文：秋七月辛巳朔，以镇东将军、前大鸿胪卿、太原王昶特为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：秋七月辛巳初一，任命镇束将军、前大鸿胪卿、太原王元昶特为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: On the first day of the new year in the autumn and July, he appointed General Zhenzuc, the former Great Honored General, and King Yuan of Taiyuan as the General of Chariots and Cavalry and the Third Division of Ceremonies.

古文：己丑，帝亲总六军十余万众次于河桥。
现代文：己丑，皇帝亲自统领六军十多万人驻守在河桥。
English: Embarrassed, the emperor personally led the six armies and more than 100,000 people stationed in Heqiao.

古文：以斛斯椿为前军大都督，寻诏椿镇虎牢。
现代文：任命斛斯椿为前军大都督，不久诏令斛斯椿镇守虎牢。
English: He appointed Jinshchun as the former military grand governor, and soon ordered Jinshchun to guard the tiger prison.

古文：又诏荆州刺史贺拔胜赴于行所。
现代文：又诏令荆州刺史贺拔胜赶赴皇帝临时所在地。
English: He also decreed that Jingzhou Zishi He Ba Sheng rush to the temporary seat of the emperor.

古文：胜率所部次于汝水。
现代文：贺拔胜率领部众驻守在汝水。
English: Headed by He Baxing, the leading members of the group were stationed in Ruisui.

古文：庚子，以使持节、征西将军、岐州刺史越肱特为仪同三司。
现代文：庚子，任命使持节、征西将军、岐州刺史越肱特为仪同三司。
English: Geng Zi appointed Zhi Jixi, General of the Western Expedition, and Qizhou Zhi Yuejun as the three chief officials of the ceremony.

古文：丁未，帝为椿等迫胁，遂出于长安。
现代文：丁未，皇帝被斛斯椿等人胁迫，于是外出到长安。
English: Ding Wei, the emperor was coerced by Gao Shizhuan and others, so he went out to Chang'an.

古文：己酉，齐献武王入洛，贺拔胜走还荆州。
现代文：己酉，齐献武王进入洛阳，贺拔胜逃回荆州。
English: Ji Yu, Qi Xianwu entered Luoyang, He Baxing fled back to Jingzhou.

古文：八月甲寅，推司徒公、清河王亶为大司马，承制总万几，居尚书省。
现代文：八月甲寅，推举司徒公、清河王元宜为大司马，行使皇帝权力总揽朝政，居住在尚书省。
English: In August, Jia Yin was elected as the Grand Steward of the State, and Wang Yuanyi of Qinghe as the Grand Steward of the State. He exercised the emperor's power to take over the government of the dynasty and resided in Shangshu Province.

古文：辛酉，齐献武王西迎车驾。
现代文：辛酉，齐献武王往西迎接皇帝。
English: Sin Yan and Qi Xianwu marched west to meet the emperor.

古文：戊辰，制曰： 晦为明始，乱实治基，爰著天道，又符人事。
现代文：戊辰，制书说： 暗为明的开端，乱是治的基础，既显现于天道，又符合人间事务。
English: In ancient times, the scribes said, "Darkness is the beginning of light, and chaos is the foundation of order, which is both manifested in the heavenly way and conforms to human affairs."

古文：故姬祚中微，践土有勤王之役；刘氏将倾，北军致左袒之举。
现代文：所以姬氏国运中途衰微，践土有为君王尽力的事；刘氏将要倾覆，北军有露左臂支持的举动。
English: Therefore, the fortunes of the Hime clan were waning in the middle of the country, and it was necessary to work hard for the monarch; the Liu clan was about to be overthrown, and the Northern Army had a move to support it.

古文：用能隆此远年，克兹卜世。
现代文：因此能延长年代，达到预测的世数。
English: Therefore, it can extend the age to reach the predicted number of generations.

古文：永熙之季，权佞擅朝，群小是崇，勋贤见害。
现代文：永熙末年，权臣佞人专擅朝政，尊崇小人。功臣贤人受害。
English: In the last years of the Yongxi Dynasty, the powerful vassals, the eunuchs, were exclusively in charge of the government, and the villains were held in high esteem, while the meritorious vassals, the sages, suffered.

古文：官缘价以贵贱，狱因货而死生。
现代文：官位因价格多少分贵贱，案件由财货定生死。
English: The official rank is more or less valuable due to the price, and the case is determined by the wealth.

古文：宗祏飘若缀旒，民命弃如草莽。
现代文：宗庙飘摇如同连缀的玉串，民众性命被抛弃如同野草。
English: The ancestral temple is swaying like a string of beads, and people's lives are being thrown away like weeds.

古文：大丞相位居晋郑，任属桓文，兴甲汾川，问罪伊洛。
现代文：大丞相居于晋郑之位，担当桓公文公的责任，在汾川起兵，到伊水洛水责问罪过。
English: The grand secretary minister lived in the position of Jin Zheng, took on the responsibility of Huan Gongwen Gong, raised an army in Luochuan, and went to Yishui Luoshui to punish and punish.

古文：群奸畏威，拥迫人主，以自蔽卫，远出秦方。
现代文：奸人畏惧声威，胁迫君主，来保卫自己，远出到秦地。
English: The traitors were afraid of the emperor's authority, so they coerced the emperor to defend himself, and went as far away as Qin.

古文：虽车驾流移，未即返御，然权佞将除，天下延颈。
现代文：虽然君主迁移，没有马上返回，但权臣佞人将要除掉，天下人伸着颈子盼望。
English: Although the monarch moved and did not return immediately, the vassals of power will be eliminated, and the world is looking forward to it.

古文：魏邦虽旧，其化惟新，思与兆民，同兹更始。
现代文：魏邦虽然是旧国，制度革新，思虑和民众，共同重新开始。
English: Although Wei Bang is an old country, the system innovation, thoughts and people, together to start anew.

古文：可大赦天下。 
现代文：可大赦天下。 
English: Convicted criminals across the country can have their sentences commuted or pardoned.

古文：行台侯景讨荆州，贺拔胜战败，走奔萧衍。
现代文：行台侯景讨伐荆州，贺拔胜战败，逃跑投奔萧衍。
English: Gaotai Houjing fought against Jingzhou, He Bi won and defeated, and ran away to join Xiao Yan.

古文：九月癸巳，以卫大将军、河南尹元子思为使持节、行台仆射，使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、领军将军娄昭为西道大都督，并率左右侍官西迎车驾。
现代文：九月癸巳，任命卫大将军、河南尹元子思为使持节、行台仆射，使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、领军将军娄昭为西道大都督，一起率领左右侍奉官员往西迎接皇帝。
English: In September, General Wei and Yin Yuan Zixi of Henan Province were appointed as the envoys to hold the festival and march to the capital, and the envoys to hold the festival and ride the cavalry, and the leader of the army, General Gao Zhao, was appointed as the grand governor of the West Road. Together, they led the left and right service officials to the west to meet the emperor.

古文：己酉，椿党毛鸿宾守潼关，齐献武王破擒之。
现代文：己酉，斛斯椿的党羽壬递宾守卫潼关，齐献武王打败擒获了他。
English: Ji Yu, the party feather of Zou Shizhun, guarding Shiguan, defeated and captured Wu Wang.

古文：是日，齐献武王东还于洛。
现代文：造天，齐献武王回到洛阳。
English: After creating heaven and earth, King Wu returned to Luoyang.

古文：是月，东清河人傅晶杀太守韩子捷，据郡反。
现代文：这月，束清河人傅畠杀死太守韩子捷，占据郡城反叛。
English: This month, a man from Sokcho River, Fu Ye, killed the governor Han Zijie and occupied the county seat in rebellion.

古文：会赦，乃降。
现代文：遇到赦免，于是投降。
English: When he was pardoned, he surrendered.

古文：冬十月戊辰，使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、行青州事侯渊克东阳，斩刺史东莱王贵平，传首京师。
现代文：冬十月戊辰，使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、行青州事侯渊攻克束阳，杀死刺史束莱王量至，传送首级到京城。
English: In the winter of October of the year of the horse, the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the three departments of the imperial cavalry went to Qingzhou Zhihouyuan to conquer Sokyang, killed the king of Soklay, and sent the head to Beijing.

古文：闰十二月癸巳，帝为宇文黑獭所害，时年二十五。
现代文：闰十二月癸巳，皇帝被宇文黑獭杀害，时年二十五岁。
English: On the last day of December, the emperor was killed by Uwen Heiqi, at the age of twenty-five.

古文：史臣曰：广陵废于前，中兴废于后，平阳猜惑，自绝宗庙。
现代文：史臣：广陵王在前面被废黜，中兴皇帝在后面被废黜，平阳帝猜忌受迷惑，自己断绝宗庙祭祀。
English: Shichen: Guangling Wang was dethroned in the front, ZTE Emperor was dethroned in the back, Pingyang Emperor Jiayu was confused, and he cut off the temple worship.

古文：普泰雅道居多，永熙悖德为甚。
现代文：普泰皇帝合于道义之事为多，永熙皇帝违背德行的事过分。
English: Emperor Putai did a lot of things that were moral, while Emperor Yongxi did a lot of things that were immoral.

古文：是俱亡灭，天下所弃欤！
现代文：他们都遭灭亡，是上天抛弃他们的吗!
English: They all perished, was it heaven that abandoned them?

