古文：王僧达、颜竣王僧达，琅邪临沂人，太保弘少子。
现代文：王僧达，琅玡郡临沂人，是太保王弘的小儿子。
English: Wang Sonta, a resident of Linyi in Handan County, is the youngest son of Taiho Wanghong.

古文：兄锡，质讷乏风采。
现代文：他哥哥王锡朴实无华。
English: His brother Wang Xi is unpretentious.

古文：太祖闻僧达蚤慧，召见于德阳殿，问其书学及家事，应对闲敏，上甚知之，妻以临川王义庆女。
现代文：文帝听说僧达早熟，在德阳殿召见了他，问他的书法，读过的书和家庭等事。王僧达回答得从容闲雅，文帝非常喜欢，让他娶了临川王刘义庆的女儿。
English: Emperor Wen heard that the monk was precocious, summoned him to Deyang Palace, and asked him about his calligraphy, the books he had read, and his family. Wang Sonta answered in a leisurely and elegant manner. Emperor Wen liked him very much and let him marry the daughter of Linchuan King Liu Yiqing.

古文：少好学，善属文。年未二十，以为始兴王浚后军参军，迁太子舍人。
现代文：僧达少年时代喜欢读书，很善写文章，年纪不到二十被选为始兴王刘浚后军参军，再升太子舍人。
English: When he was a boy, he liked to read and was good at writing articles. At the age of less than twenty, he was selected to join the army of Shixing King Liu Junhou, and was promoted to the position of crown prince.

古文：坐属疾，于杨列桥观斗鸭，为有司所纠，原不问。
现代文：因为有病，在杨列桥看人斗鸡，被有关官员弹劾，得到宽大处理。
English: Because he was ill, he watched a cockfight in Yangliao Bridge. He was impeached by the relevant officials and received lenient treatment.

古文：性好鹰犬，与闾里少年相驰逐，又躬自屠牛。
现代文：他喜欢追鹰走狗，常和大街小巷的小孩子共同骑马游玩，又亲自屠杀耕牛。
English: He has a natural affinity for falcons, competes with street urchins and slaughters cattle himself.

古文：义庆闻如此，令周旋沙门慧观造而观之。
现代文：刘义庆听说这些，叫他身边和尚慧观察访王僧达，观察他的表现。
English: When Liu Yiqing heard about this, he asked the monks around him to watch Wang Zongda and observe his performance.

古文：僧达陈书满席，与论文义，慧观酬答不暇，深相称美。
现代文：王僧达在整个床上摆满了书，和慧观谈论文章艺术，慧观简直有些对答不上，非常赞叹。
English: Wang Zongda filled the entire bed with books, and talked about the art of writing with Huikan. Huikan couldn't really answer, and was very impressed.

古文：与锡不协，诉家贫，求郡，太祖欲以为秦郡，吏部郎庾炳之曰： 王弘子既不宜作秦郡，僧达亦不堪莅民。 
现代文：僧达和他哥哥王锡关系不好，对皇上说自己家庭非常贫困，要求当一郡太守。文帝想让他当秦郡太守，吏部郎庾炳之说： 王弘的儿子不宜当郡太守，王僧达也不能治理人民。 
English: The relationship between Wang Xizhi and his brother Wang Xida was not good. He told the emperor that his family was very poor and asked to be a county magistrate. Emperor Wen wanted him to be the county magistrate of Qin. The magistrate, Lang Xizhi, said: Wang Xizhi's son is not suitable to be a county magistrate. Wang Xida cannot govern the people.

古文：乃止。
现代文：这事便作罢了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：寻迁太子洗马，母忧去职。兄锡罢临海郡还，送故及奉禄百万以上，僧达一夕令奴辇取，无复所余。
现代文：不久升任太子洗马，母亲去世离职了一段时间，他哥哥王锡从临海郡罢官回来，送回俸禄和其他钱物一百多万。王僧达一天夜晚叫奴婢们用车子装走，一点也没有剩下。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Crown Prince Saima. After his mother passed away, he left the position for a while. His brother Wang Xi returned from Linhai County, where he had been dismissed from his post, and sent back more than one million yuan in salary and other money and goods. One night, Wang Songda had his slaves and maids loaded onto a cart and taken away. There was nothing left.

古文：服阕，为宣城太守。性好游猎，而山郡无事，僧达肆意驰骋，或三五日不归，受辞讼多在猎所。民或相逢不识，问府君所在，僧达曰： 近在后。 
现代文：为母亲守孝三年结束，又当宣城太守，他喜欢游览和打猎，因为郡里没有什么事，僧达便任意驰骋，东游西逛，有时三五天不回郡，接受百姓的诉讼多半在打猎的地方，有时与他不认识的老百姓相遇，百姓问他太守在哪儿，王僧达说： 就在后面附近。 
English: At the end of the three years of filial piety for his mother, when he was the mayor of Xuancheng, he liked to travel and hunt. Because there was nothing to do in the county, the monk would gallop at will, wandering east and west. Sometimes he would not return to the county for three or five days. He accepted the people's lawsuits mostly in the hunting area. Sometimes he met with people he did not know. When the people asked him where the mayor was, Wang Songda said, "It's near the back."

古文：元嘉二十八年春，索虏寇逼，都邑危惧，僧达求入卫京师，见许。
现代文：元嘉二十八年年春，魏军侵略宋国，首都面临危险，王僧达请求回京参加防卫，得到同意，敌人退走，又任宣城太守。
English: In the spring of the 28th year of the Yuan Jia, the Wei army invaded Song, and the capital was in danger. Wang Songda requested to return to Beijing to participate in the defense. He was agreed, the enemy retreated, and he was appointed as the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：贼退，又除宣城太守，顷之，徙任义兴。
现代文：在这以后，再转任义兴太守。文帝三十年，刘邵杀了文帝，孝武帝回军讨伐，给各州各郡下了檄文。
English: After this, he was transferred to the position of the governor of Yixing. Thirty years after Emperor Wen died, Liu Shao killed Emperor Wen, Emperor Xiaowu returned to the battlefield, and issued edicts to all states and counties.

古文：三十年，元凶弑立，世祖入讨，普檄诸州郡；又符郡发兵，僧达未知所从。客说之曰： 方今衅逆滔天，古今未有，为君计，莫若承义师之檄，移告傍郡，使工言之士，明示祸福，苟在有心，谁不响应，此策上也。如其不能，可躬率向义之徒，详择水陆之便，致身南归，亦其次也。 
现代文：王僧达不知道应该站在哪一边，他手下的一个谋士说： 当今刘邵杀文帝，罪恶滔天，古来没有第二件的，为太守您作考虑，不如接受讨伐之师的命令，再移告其他各郡，使能说会道的人告诉他们利害关系，任何有见识的人，都会响应，这是上策；如果此策不能执行，可以选择部分忠诚的部下，巧妙选择水上陆地的途径，亲自回到南边起义部队，也算是中策了。 
English: Wang Songda did not know which side to stand on. A strategist under him said: Today, Liu Shao killed Emperor Wen. The crime is monstrous. In ancient times, there was no second case. For your consideration, it is better to accept the order of the crusading division, and then transfer to other counties, so that people who can speak will tell them what is at stake. Anyone with insight will respond. This is the best policy. If this policy cannot be implemented, you can choose some loyal subordinates, skillfully choose the water and land routes, and personally return to the southern insurgent forces. It is also considered a middle way.

古文：僧达乃自候道南奔，逢世祖于鹊头，即命为长史，加征虏将军。
现代文：僧达于是从山间小路投身南方，在鹊头遇上孝武帝，孝武帝马上叫他当长史，加号征虏将军。
English: So the monk turned south from the mountain path and met Emperor Xiaowu in Shantou. Emperor Xiaowu immediately called him to be the general of the Long History and Conscription.

古文：初，世祖发寻阳，沈庆之谓人曰： 王僧达必来赴义。 
现代文：当初孝武帝从寻阳出发，沈庆之对众人说： 王僧达一定会参加义师。 
English: At first, Emperor Xiaowu set out from Xuanyang, and Shen Qingzhi said to the crowd: "Wang Zongda will surely join the righteous teachers."

古文：人问其所以，庆之曰： 虏马饮江，王出赴难，见在先帝前，议论开张，执意明决，以此言之，其至必也。 
现代文：别人问为什么，沈庆之说： 魏人的骑兵打到江边，王僧达奔来赶赴国难，看见他在先帝面前，议论正直，执意坚决，凭这来看，他必定要来的。 
English: When others asked why, Shen Qingzhi said: The cavalry of the Wei people had reached the edge of the river, Wang Sengda rushed to rush to the national calamity, and saw him in front of the former emperor, talking about honesty and sticking to his resolve. From this point of view, he must come.

古文：上即位，以为尚书右仆射，寻出为使持节、南蛮校尉，加征虏将军。
现代文：孝武做皇帝，让他当尚书右仆射，不久又外出为使持节，南蛮校尉，加号征虏将军。
English: When Xiaowu became the emperor, he was made Shangshu's right-hand man, and soon he went out again as the envoy, the Nanban captain, and the plus-sign conscript general.

古文：时南郡王义宣求留江陵，南蛮不解，不成行。
现代文：当时南郡王刘义宣请求留在江陵，加上南蛮骚扰不停，所以王僧达没有到任。
English: At that time, the king of Nan County, Liu Yixuan, requested to stay in Gangneung, and Nanban harassed him incessantly, so Wang Sonta did not take up his post.

古文：仍补护军将军。
现代文：还是补任护军将军。
English: He was also appointed to the additional post of General of the Guard.

古文：僧达自负才地，谓当时莫及。
现代文：王僧达凭着他的家庭出身和自己的才能，认为自己当世无双。
English: With his family background and talent, Wang Xanda believes that he is unique in the world.

古文：上初践阼，即居端右，一二年间，便望宰相。
现代文：孝武刚当皇帝，他便居高位，只过一二年，便想当宰相。
English: As soon as Xiaowu became emperor, he occupied a high position. Just a year or two later, he wanted to become prime minister.

古文：及为护军，不得志，乃启求徐州，曰：
现代文：等到只当护军将军，王僧达非常不高兴，于是他请调任徐州当刺史，写了一篇上奏，说：
English: When he was only appointed to the position of escort general, Wang Songda was very unhappy, so he asked to be transferred to Xuzhou to be a historian and wrote a prelude, saying:

古文：臣衰索余生，逢辰藉业，先帝追念功臣，眷及遗贱，饰短捐陋，布策稠采，从官委褐，十有一载。
现代文： 臣下我衰老余年，遇着好时光，借着先人的功绩，先帝记念功臣，恩德到了遗少的头上，使我能修饰自己的缺点，陈述自己的计策谋划，任职当官已有十一年了。
English: My vassal, I have been aging for the last few years, I have been in good times, I have benefited from the achievements of my predecessors, the former emperor has remembered his meritorious vassals, and the benevolence has come to the heads of the few, so that I can embellish my own shortcomings, present my own strategies and plans, and I have been in office for eleven years.

古文：早凭庆泰，脱亲盛明，而有志于学，无独见之敏，有务在身，无偏鉴之识，固不足建言世治，备辨时宜。
现代文：早年逢着先帝的恩泽，近年遇着皇上的英明，我一直想多看些书，但没有独特的见解，加上公务在身，没多大见识，自然不能够贡献出伟大策略，建立非凡功勋，评论朝政的好坏。
English: In the early years, with the grace of the former emperor, in recent years, with the wisdom of the emperor, I have always wanted to read more books, but there is no unique opinion, and with the official duties, I do not have much insight. Naturally, I am not able to contribute great strategies, establish extraordinary merits, and comment on the good or bad of the government.

古文：窃以天恩不可终报，尸素难可久处，故猖狂芜谬，每陈所怀。
现代文：我以为这样皇恩终究不能被报答，不应该长期占着官位，所以我要放肆一下，陈述自己的想法。
English: I thought that such a royal favor could not be repaid after all, and that I should not hold the post for a long time, so I wanted to be bold and state my thoughts.

古文：陛下孝诚发衷，义顺动物，自龙飞以来，实应九服同欢，三光再朗。而臣假视巷里，借听民谣，黎氓囗囗，未缔其感，远近风议，不获稍进，臣所用夙宵疾首，寤寐疚心者也。
现代文： 陛下天生诚信敬天，仁义感人，自即位以来，确实是普天同乐，天地人民重见光明，但臣下我住在小街巷里的，有时听到一些民间谣言，这是因老百姓愚昧无知，没有亲受皇上的恩惠，所以有这样的评论。
English: His Majesty's innate sincerity, reverence for the heavens, and benevolence are touching. Since his accession to the throne, it is true that the whole world is rejoicing, and the people of heaven and earth are seeing the light again. However, as a vassal living in the back streets and alleys, I sometimes hear some folk rumors. This is because the common people are ignorant and have not personally received the emperor's favor, so there are such comments.

古文：臣取之前载，譬之于今。
现代文：这些不被告诉皇上，这是我日夜不安、痛心疾首的原因。
English: The fact that these things were not told to the Emperor is the reason why I am anxious day and night, and my heart is in my throat.

古文：当汉文之时，可谓藉已成之业，据既安之运，重以布衣菲食，忧勤治道，而贾谊披露乃诚，犹有叹哭之谏。
现代文：臣子这里用前代的事比喻今天，在汉文帝的时候，可谓凭借先人的基业，占据安宁的国家，加上文帝本人生活俭朴，日夜尽心朝政，但贾谊却坦露自己的一片赤诚之心，说当时的现状令人叹息流泪。
English: The courtier here uses the events of the previous generation as an analogy. Today, when Emperor Hanwen came to power, it can be said that he took advantage of the legacy of his predecessors to occupy a peaceful country. In addition, Emperor Wen himself lived a frugal life and devoted himself to the government day and night. However, Jia Yi revealed his sincere heart, saying that the current situation at that time was saddening and tearful.

古文：况今承颠沛，万机惟始，恩未及普，信未遑周。
现代文：况且今日国家刚经历动乱，朝政刚刚开始，皇恩还未遍及四方，信义还没有被所有人了解。
English: Moreover, today, the country has just experienced turmoil, the imperial government has just begun, the imperial grace has not yet spread to the four directions, and the loyalty has not yet been understood by everyone.

古文：臣又闻前达有言，天下，重器也，一安不可卒危，一危亦不可卒安。陛下神思渊通，亦当鉴之圣虑。
现代文：臣子又听说前人的话，天下国家，是最贵重的神器，一旦安定不可一下子动摇，一旦动摇也不能一下子安定，陛下聪明神圣，一定非常明白这一点。
English: The courtiers also heard the words of the predecessors that the country is the most precious artifact in the world. Once it is stable, it cannot be shaken, and once it is shaken, it cannot be stabilized. Your Majesty is wise and holy, and must be very clear about this.

古文：窃谓当今之务，惟在万有为己，家国同忧，允彼庶心，从民之欲。
现代文： 我以为今日最急需做的，只在为万民着想，既考虑国家又考虑家庭，让百姓高兴，顺从人民的意愿。
English: I thought that the most urgent thing to do today was only to think about the people, to consider both the country and the family, to make the people happy, and to obey the will of the people.

古文：民有咨瘼之声，君表纳隍之志。
现代文：人民请求拯救，皇上就要去拯救。
English: The people asked for salvation, and the emperor was going to save them.

古文：下有愆弊之苦，上无侈豫之情。又应官酌其才，爵畴其望，与失不赏，宁失不刑。
现代文：小民过穷苦的生活，上面的便不应该奢侈无度，另外选拔官员应根据他的才能，官位封赏根据他的威望，与其惩罚得太多，不如赏赐多一些。
English: The common people should live in poverty, and those above them should not live extravagantly. In addition, officials should be selected according to their talents, and positions should be rewarded according to their prestige. Rather than punishing too much, it is better to reward more.

古文：至若枢任重司，籓捍要镇，治乱攸寄，动静所归，百度惟新，或可因而弗革，事在适宜，无或定其出处。
现代文：至于朝廷重官、藩镇大将，关系到国家的安危，朝政的好坏，社会风气的健康正常与否，关键在于有些人应该撤换，有些人应该任用。
English: As for the high-ranking officials of the imperial court and the generals of the provinces and towns, the key is that some people should be replaced and some people should be appointed, which is related to the safety and security of the country, the quality of the imperial government, and the health and normalcy of the social ethos.

古文：天下多才，在所用之。
现代文：天下到处都有有本领的人，关键在于怎样用他们。
English: There are skilled people everywhere, the key is how to use them.

古文：臣非惟寄观世路，谬识其难，即之于身，详见其弊。
现代文： 臣下思念自己在社会上闯了一些年，偶然知道一些艰难，特别是自己亲身经历的，尤其了解。
English: Subordinates think that they have been in the society for a few years, and occasionally know some difficulties, especially those they have personally experienced, and especially understand.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：臣虽得免墙面，书不入于学伍，行无愆戾，自无近于才能，直以廕托门世，夙列荣齿。
现代文：臣子我虽然没有什么过错，但文章还不能进入前列，品行没有什么不肮脏的，但也没有什么显眼卓著的，只因家门余荫，早当高官。
English: Although there is nothing wrong with me as a courtier, I still can't get to the front of the line. There is nothing dirty about my conduct, but there is also nothing conspicuous. I became a high-ranking official only because of my family background.

古文：且近虽奔迸江路，归命南阙，竟何功效，可以书赏。
现代文：况且前年逃到陛下那里，投诚到起义军队，到底有什么功劳而获得赏赐，反而多次受到朝廷的恩宠呢？
English: Moreover, last year he fled to His Majesty and joined the insurrectionary army. What merit did he receive as a reward, but instead he was repeatedly favored by the imperial court?

古文：而频出内宠，陛下绸缪数旬之中，累发明诏。
现代文：陛下在几个月内非常关心我，并多次下诏书表扬。
English: Over the past few months, His Majesty has shown great concern for me and has repeatedly praised me in his official letters.

古文：自非才略有素，声实相任，岂可闻而弗惊，履而无惧。
现代文：如果不是自己才能出众、功勋卓著、名副其实，怎么能见到了不担心，被宠爱了不害怕？
English: If you are not talented, meritorious, and worthy of the name, how can you see without worrying, and be loved without fear?

古文：固宜退省身分，识恩之厚，不知报答，当在何期。
现代文：应该回家检讨自己。既然受到如此的大恩，该如何报答。
English: You should go home and examine yourself. Since you have received such a great favor, how should you repay it?

古文：夫见危致命，死而后已，皆殷勤前诰，重其忘生。臣感先圣格言，思在必效之地，使生获其志，死得其所。
现代文：臣下看到皇上的灾难，应该以身殉国，视死如归，这都是过去书上说得很清楚的，特别是那些取义舍生的人物尤其如此，臣下深思先贤的话，常想在哪个地方报恩皇上，使自己活着能实现心愿，死得其所。
English: When a vassal saw the Emperor's misfortune, he should sacrifice his life for the country and see death as a homecoming. This was all clearly stated in the past books, especially for those who sacrificed their lives for the emperor. The vassals pondered the words of the sages, and often wanted to repay the emperor's kindness in some place, so that they could live to fulfill their wishes and die in the right place.

古文：如使臣享厚禄，居重荣，衣狐坐熊，而无事于世者，固所不能安也。
现代文：如果让我得到重重的俸禄，占据光荣的职务，穿着狐皮衣服，坐着熊皮椅子，但无补于朝廷，确实内心不安。
English: If I get paid a lot of money, occupy an honorable position, wear fox fur clothes, sit on a bearskin chair, but do not contribute to the imperial court, I am really worried.

古文：今四夷犹警，国未忘战，辫发凶诡，尤宜裁防。间者天兵未获，已肆其轻汉之心，恐戎狄贪惏，犹怀匪逊。
现代文：当今敌国正虎视耽耽，为了国家免除战争和种种祸乱，对它们都应有所防备，前一段时间老天还不讨厌战乱，胡人轻兵南犯，戎狄贪心不厌，常常想乘我国的空隙。
English: Today, the enemy country is looking for delays. In order to save the country from war and all kinds of calamities, we should be prepared for them. Some time ago, God did not hate war, the Hu people were light soldiers, and the soldiers were greedy and often wanted to take advantage of the gaps in our country.

古文：脱以神州暂扰，中夏兵饥，容或游魂塞内，重窥边垒。且高秋在节，胡马兴威，宜图其易，蚤为之所。
现代文：如果敌人给我国带来骚乱，中原战火频繁，或者敌人远去，又来侵略边疆，加上秋高马肥，胡马南来，应早早准备，不致敌人抓住机会。
English: If the enemy brings turmoil to our country, the Central Plains war is frequent, or the enemy is far away, and invades the border, plus the autumn high horse manure, humannan, should be prepared early, so that the enemy does not seize the opportunity.

古文：臣每一日三省，志在报效，远近小大，顾其所安，受效偏方，得司者则虑之所办，情有不疑。
现代文：臣下每日要想几遍，常想怎样报答国家，不论大小，只要有机会，哪怕是偏远的地方，如果能有用武之地，则必定尽力而为。
English: A vassal must think several times a day, often wondering how to repay the country, no matter how big or small, as long as there is an opportunity, even if it is a remote place, if it can be useful, it will certainly do its best.

古文：若首统军政，董勒天兵，既才所不周，实诚亦非愿。
现代文：至于经管军事和行政事务，主管国家军队，是我才能不能胜任的，也是我内心不愿意做的。
English: As for the management of military and administrative affairs, and being in charge of the national army, this is beyond my ability, and it is also something I am not willing to do.

古文：陛下矜谅已厚，愿复曲体此心。
现代文：陛下了解我的情况，我不敢当。
English: Your Majesty knows my situation. I wouldn't dare.

古文：护军之任，臣不敢处，彭城军府，即时过立。
现代文：至于彭城军府中事务，希望皇上托付给我。
English: As for the affairs of the Pengcheng Military Government, I hope that the emperor will entrust them to me.

古文：且臣本在驱驰，非希崇显，轻智小号，足以自安。愿垂鉴恕，特赐申奖，则内外荣荷，存没铭分。
现代文：况且我本来就是皇上使唤的，不希望宰相的职务，只想当一州刺史，则我一定安心，愿陛下明白我的心，一定同意我的请求，那么里外都很满意，我将永远铭记您的恩德。 
English: Moreover, I was originally summoned by the emperor, I do not want to take the post of prime minister, I only want to be the history of a state, then I must be at ease, may His Majesty understand my heart and agree to my request, then both inside and outside are satisfied, I will always remember your kindness.

古文：上不许。僧达三启固陈，上甚不说。
现代文：孝武帝又不同意，王僧达三次上疏，孝武帝不高兴了。
English: Emperor Xiaowu disagreed again, and Wang Songda was disqualified three times. Emperor Xiaowu was not happy.

古文：以为征虏将军、吴郡太守。期岁五迁，僧达弥不得意。
现代文：让他当了征虏将军、吴郡太守，一年之内，五次贬官，僧达更加不得意。
English: Within a year, he was demoted five times, making him a conscript general and the governor of Wu County. This made the monk even more unhappy.

古文：吴郭西台寺多富沙门，僧达求须不称意，乃遣主簿顾旷率门义劫寺内沙门竺法瑶，得数百万。
现代文：吴郡城西西台寺里面有很多很富的和尚，王僧达屡次派人向寺中索要财物，派主簿顾旷带手下壮士拦劫寺里的和尚竺法瑶，搞到了几百万。
English: There are many very rich monks in Xitai Temple in the west of the city of Wuxi, Wang Sonta repeatedly sent people to the temple to demand property, sent the master book Gu Mei and his strong men to stop the monks from robbing the temple, and got millions.

古文：荆、江反叛，加僧达置佐领兵，台符听置千人，而辄立三十队，队八十人。
现代文：荆州和江州反叛时，朝廷允许王僧达增加手下士兵一千人，但王僧达却建立三十个小队，每队八十人，共二千四百人。
English: When Jingzhou and Jiangzhou rebelled, the imperial court allowed Wang Zongda to increase the number of soldiers under his command by a thousand. However, Wang Zongda set up thirty squads, each with eighty people, for a total of twenty-four hundred people.

古文：又立宅于吴，多役公力。
现代文：又在吴郡建立自己的豪华住宅，多次使用当地公家壮丁。
English: He also built his own luxury residence in Wuxi County, and repeatedly used local public servants.

古文：坐免官。
现代文：因此事被免官。
English: He was relieved of his duties.

古文：初，僧达为太子洗马，在东宫，爱念军人硃灵宝，及出为宣城，灵宝已长，僧达诈列死亡，寄宣城左永之籍，注以为己子，改名元序，启太祖以为武陵国典卫令，又以补竟陵国典书令，建平国中军将军。
现代文：当初王僧达当太子洗马官，在东宫里服务，喜爱一个士兵叫朱灵宝的，在出任宣城太守时，灵宝已长大成人，王僧达伪装灵宝已经死亡，让灵宝顶替宣城左永之的名额，再注籍为自己的儿子。为灵宝改名元序。启告文帝用灵宝为武陵国典卫令，再用他为竟陵国典书令，建平国中军将军。
English: At that time, Wang Songda was the prince's horse-washing official, serving in the East Palace, and he loved a soldier named Zhu Lingbao. When he became the governor of Xuancheng, Lingbao had grown up. Wang Songda pretended that Lingbao had died, and let Lingbao top the quota of Xuancheng Zuoyong, and then registered as his own son. He changed the name order for Lingbao. He told Emperor Wen to use Lingbao as the Wuling National Guard Order, and then use him as the Gingling National Guard Order to build the General of the Central Army.

古文：孝建元年春，事发，又加禁锢。
现代文：孝建元年春天，事情暴露。他便被禁锢起来。
English: In the spring of the first year of Xiao Jian's reign, the affair was exposed, and he was imprisoned.

古文：上表陈谢云： 不能因依左右，倾意权贵。 
现代文：王僧达上疏认错说： 这些都是因为我不能依顺陛下左右的人，谄媚当权人物所致。 
English: Wang Zengda admitted his mistake and said, "All of this happened because I couldn't obey the people around Your Majesty, because I was too fond of the people in power.

古文：上愈怒。僧达族子确年少，美姿容，僧达与之私款。确叔父休为永嘉太守，当将确之郡，僧达欲逼留之，确知其意，避不复往。
现代文：孝武帝更加愤怒，王僧达族侄王确是个青年人，长相非常好，王僧达和他很相好，王确的叔父王休当永嘉太守，将带王确到那里去，僧达逼迫他留下，王确知道他的打算，避而不见。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was even more furious. Wang Zongda's nephew Wang Ruan was indeed a young man, very good-looking, and Wang Zongda liked him very much. Wang Ruan's uncle Wang Xiu, the Yongjia daimyō, was going to take Wang Ruan there, but the Zongda forced him to stay. Wang Ruan knew of Wang Ruan's plans and avoided him.

古文：僧达大怒，潜于所住屋后作大坑，欲诱确来别，因杀而埋之。
现代文：王僧达大怒，暗地在自己屋后挖了一个坑洞，想引诱王确来话别，乘机杀死他埋掉。
English: Enraged, Wang Zongda secretly dug a hole behind his house, hoping to entice Wang Zhengyi to say goodbye, and take the opportunity to kill and bury him.

古文：从弟僧虔知其谋，禁呵乃止。
现代文：他堂弟王僧虔知道这个阴谋，痛骂他，他才作罢。
English: His cousin, Wang Xiangqian, found out about his plot and yelled at him to stop.

古文：御史中丞刘瑀奏请收治，上不许。
现代文：御史中丞刘王禹上疏请逮捕王僧达治罪。
English: Grand Historian Liu Wang Yu Shangxiao requested the arrest of Wang Sengda to punish the crime.

古文：孝建三年，除太常，意尤不悦。顷之，上表解职，曰：
现代文：孝武没同意。孝武帝三年，他调任太常官职，王僧达尤其不快活，过些时候，上疏请解除职务。
English: Emperor Xiaowu did not agree. In the third year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, he was transferred to the position of the Grand Steward. Wang Sonta was particularly unhappy, and after some time, he asked Shang Su to relieve him of his duties.

古文：臣自审庸短，少阙宦情，兼宿抱重疾，年月稍甚，生平素念，愿闲衡庐。
现代文：疏文说： 我自己反省自己，觉得才能低下，青年时代缺少从政经验，加上过去常发病，几年中病得很厉害。平生的主要心愿，是想闲居家园。
English: Shuwen said: I reflected on myself and felt that my talent was low, my lack of political experience in my youth, coupled with frequent illnesses in the past, I was very ill in the past few years. My main wish in life is to live at home.

古文：先朝追远之恩，早见荣齿。
现代文：先帝追思先人的功劳，让我过早地得到荣誉。
English: The former emperor thought back to the achievements of his predecessors and allowed me to receive the honor prematurely.

古文：曩者以亲贫须养，黾勉从禄，解褐后府，十有余旬。
现代文：以前我也认为穷困的亲戚需要赡养，所以改变平生的打算，进入官场，有一年多。
English: In the past, I also thought that poor relatives needed to be supported, so I changed my life plan and entered the government for more than a year.

古文：俄迁舍人，殆不朝直。实无缘坐阅宸宠，尸爵家庭，情计二三，屡经闻启，终获允亮，赐反初服。
现代文：不久又升任太子舍人，几乎不需要在宫里值班，然而，我确实没有什么功劳享受先皇恩宠，无功受禄，所以自己反复思想，多次启禀皇上，终于被允许，让我复归家园。
English: Soon after, I was promoted to the position of Crown Prince, so I hardly needed to be on duty at the palace. However, I really had no merit to enjoy the grace of the former emperor, so I thought over and over again and repeatedly appealed to the emperor. Finally, I was allowed to return home.

古文：还私未用，又擢为洗马，意旨优隆，其令且拜，许有郡缺，当务处置。
现代文：不久，又被推荐为太子洗马，可谓皇恩优厚。当拜官的时候，说有一郡缺一太守，应该有人去做。
English: Not long after, he was recommended to wash horses for the crown prince, which can be said to be a great favor from the emperor. When he was making prostrations, he said that there was a county that was missing a daimyō, and someone should do it.

古文：会琅邪迁改，即蒙敕往反神翰，慈诱殷勤，令装成即自随。
现代文：恰遇琅王牙王改换官职，即被皇上命令作文书，殷勤宠待，叫我准备好随从他。
English: It so happened that King Zhaozhou changed his official position, and he was ordered by the emperor to serve as a clerk, and he treated me with great care, and told me to be ready to follow him.

古文：灵宝往年沦覆长溪，因彼散失，仰感沉恩，俯铭浮宠。
现代文：灵宝往年散失在长溪，上感皇恩深恩大德，低头铭记光荣的恩宠。
English: In previous years, the spiritual treasure was scattered in Changxi. The emperor was deeply grateful to the emperor, and bowed his head to remember the glorious grace.

古文：臣衅积祸并，仍丁艰罚，聊及视息，即蒙逮问，具启以奉营情事，负举猥多。
现代文：但臣下突然灾难降临，姑且看视关心灵宝，便被逮捕拷问，我当时详细地上奏事情的经过。
English: However, when a sudden disaster befell one of my subordinates, he was arrested and interrogated, even though he was supposed to be concerned about the spiritual treasure. At that time, I recounted the events in detail.

古文：赐莅宣城，极其穷踬。仲春移任，方冬便值虏南侵。臣忝同肺腑，情为义动，苦求还都，侍卫辇毂。
现代文：在宣城任上，极为紧张，二月份到官，冬天便遇到魏人向南侵略，臣下惭愧，作为皇上信任的大臣，深感要报答皇上的厚恩，要求从那里回来，保卫宫城。
English: When he was in charge of Xuancheng, he was extremely nervous. He arrived in February, and in the winter he encountered the Wei invasion to the south. His vassals were ashamed. As a minister trusted by the emperor, he was deeply moved to repay the emperor's kindness and asked to return from there to defend the palace city.

古文：至止之日，戎旗已搴。在郡虽浅，而贪得分了，方拂农衣，还事耕牧，宣城民庶，诣阙见请。
现代文：当我回来时，我军已赶走了敌人，我在宣城时间不长，所得的俸禄已用完了，正准备穿上农民的衣服，回家种地，但宣城的人民到首都来请求我再回宣城。
English: When I returned, our army had driven away the enemy, I had not been in Xuancheng for long, the salary I earned had run out, and I was preparing to put on peasant clothes and go home to farm, but the people of Xuancheng came to the capital to ask me to return to Xuancheng.

古文：尔时敕亡从兄僧绰宣见留之旨。暗疾寡任，野心素积，仍附启苦乞且旋任。还务未期，亡兄臣锡奄见弃背，启解奔赴，赐带郡还都，曾未淹积，复除义兴。
现代文：那时皇上下了命令，和我的已死的堂兄僧绰都让我留在京城，但我多病不能做什么大事，粗野无知，又上疏苦苦哀求再次回任宣城，还未回去，我的哥哥王锡突然去世，我请求回家奔丧，皇上允许我以郡守的身份回到首都，时间不长，又调我任义兴太守。
English: At that time, the emperor issued an order, and my dead cousin Monchaku both asked me to stay in the capital, but I was too sick to do anything important, rude and ignorant, and I begged to return to Xuancheng again. Before I returned, my brother Wang Xi died suddenly. I asked to go home for the funeral. The emperor allowed me to return to the capital as the county governor. It was not long, and I was transferred to the position of Yixing governor.

古文：臣自天飞海泳，岂假鳞翼，徒思横施，与日而深。
现代文：臣下自皇上即位以来，凭着皇上的恩德，想多为朝廷效劳，建立一些功业。
English: Since the Emperor ascended the throne, his vassals, with the Emperor's blessing, have wanted to serve the Imperial Court more and establish some merits.

古文：自处官以来，未尝有涓毫之积，羸疾暗疚，又无人一诺。
现代文：但从任职以来，却没有做出一点成绩，患病已久，更没有值得别人赞扬的地方。
English: But since taking office, he has not made a single achievement. He has been ill for a long time, and there is nothing worthy of praise from others.

古文：而性狎林水，偏爱禽鱼，议其所托，动乖治要。故收崖敛分，无忘俄顷，实由有待难供，上装未立，东郡奉轻，西陕禄重。
现代文：反而生性喜欢游山玩水，喜欢养鸡钓鱼，说到做官的道理，总是不得要领，所以只能安分守己，时刻谨慎，确实是由于有些亲戚需要供养，某些衣服还未准备，东边的郡太守俸禄太轻，西州刺史的收入较多的缘故。
English: On the contrary, he was born with a penchant for hiking in the mountains, playing in the water, raising chickens and fishing. When it comes to being an official, there is always a lack of essentials, so he can only keep himself safe and be cautious at all times. It is indeed due to the fact that some relatives need to be provided for, some clothes have not been prepared, the salary of the county magistrate in the east is too low, and the income of the chief magistrate in the west is more.

古文：具陈蕲恳，备执初愿，气置江、湘远郡，一二年中，庶反耕之日，粮药有寄。
现代文：并且当时反复的陈述我的情况，和开始时的想法一样，请求委任江湘远州刺史，以便一二年中，弄些积蓄，为的是退休时候，粮食和药物能得到保证。
English: And at that time, I repeatedly stated my situation, the same as the idea at the beginning, and requested the appointment of Jiang Xiangyuanzhou stabbing history, so that in a year or two, get some savings, so that when I retire, food and medicine can be guaranteed.

古文：即蒙亮许，当赐矜擢。
现代文：皇上同意我的请求，我马上就得到提拔。
English: The Emperor agreed to my request, and I was immediately promoted.

古文：遭逢厄运，天地崩离，世蒙圣朝门情之顾，及在臣身，复荷殊识，义虽君臣，恩犹父子。臣诚庸蔽，心过草木，奉讳之日，不觉捐身。
现代文： 恰巧此时叛乱顿起，天下动荡，我想我的家一贯承蒙皇家大恩，而对于我本身，再次授以高位，皇上和我们君臣之间的关系，简直是父子一般，我诚然无知少能，但和草木相比却要有情得多，知道什么叫感恩戴德。
English: Coincidentally, it was at this time that the rebellion broke out and the country was in turmoil. I think my family has always benefited from the royal grace, and for myself, once again awarded a high position, the relationship between the emperor and our monarchs and ministers is simply father and son. I am admittedly ignorant and incompetent, but compared to plants, I am much more compassionate and know what gratitude is.

古文：单躯弱嗣，千里共气，继罹凶涂，动临危尽，生微朝露，不察如丝，信顺所扶，得获全济，再见天地，重睹三光。
现代文：听说先帝被弑，简直像自己被杀了一般，我和我的小儿子，千里兼程南奔，路上的千难万险，常常使我们陷于绝境，在那时生命简直像朝晨的露水一样容易被消灭，如蚕丝一样有可能被斩断，幸好老天爷帮助正义的人，我们终于战胜这些困难，再见皇上，重见天日。
English: When I heard that the former emperor had been captured, it was almost as if I had been killed myself. My younger son and I traveled thousands of miles to the south, and the hardships and dangers on the road often brought us to a dead end. At that time, life was as easy to destroy as the morning dew, and as likely to be cut as silk. Fortunately, God help the righteous, we finally overcame these difficulties. Farewell, Emperor, until we meet again.

古文：于时兄子僧亮等幽窘丑逆，尽室狱户，山川险阻，吉凶路塞，悠远之思，谁能勿劳。
现代文：而且当时我哥的儿子王僧亮等被元凶刘邵所抓，全家被投入监狱，即使想救护他们，但关山万里！心中常想念亲人，叫人怎么不痛心。
English: Moreover, at that time, my brother's son Wang Sangliang and others were arrested by the culprit Liu Shao, and the whole family was thrown into prison. Even if I wanted to save them, I would miss them terribly! I often miss my relatives in my heart, which is so heartbreaking.

古文：尝胆濡足，是其公愿，分心挂腹，实亦私苦。
现代文：卧薪尝胆，是为臣的职责，但心里想念亲人，也是我的一片苦心。
English: It is the duty of a vassal to lie in bed and try one's guts out, but it is also a painstaking effort on my part to think of my relatives.

古文：幸属圣武，克复大业，宇宙廓清，四表靖晏。
现代文： 可喜的是皇上圣武，重建秩序，平定四海，天下安宁。
English: It is gratifying that Emperor Shenwu restored order, calmed the four seas, and brought peace to the world.

古文：臣父子叔侄，同获泰辰，造情追寻，归骨之本，欲以死明心，误有余辰；情愿已展，避逆向顺，终古常节，智力无效，有何勋庸，而频烦恩荣，动逾分次。
现代文：我家父子叔侄，同时获得解放，思念所以获得这样结局，我们得以保全躯体，全仗皇恩。希望自己用死效忠皇上以表忠心，根本没想到还留有残余生命。我们的心愿得以实现，背弃反逆，心向正义，那是从古来的应该坚守的节操，但是我们在这活动中并没有贡献什么智力，更谈不上什么功劳，但却多次蒙受皇上的恩德，而且常常比通常的还要优厚。
English: My father, my son, my uncle and my nephew were liberated at the same time, and that's why we ended up like this. We were able to preserve our bodies, all thanks to the imperial grace. I wish I had been loyal to the emperor to the death, and I didn't expect to have any remaining life. Our wishes were fulfilled, we turned our backs on treason, and our hearts turned to justice, which is an ancient discipline that should be adhered to, but we didn't contribute any intelligence to this activity, let alone any merit, but we received the grace of the emperor many times, and it was often more generous than usual.

古文：但忽病之日，不敢固辞，故吞诉于鹊渚，饮愧于新亭。
现代文：只因那时我正患病，不敢坚决推辞，所以心中非常惭愧，一则在鹊头没有立功，二则没有在新亭建立勋业。
English: However, because I was ill at the time, I did not dare to firmly refuse, so I was very ashamed. On the one hand, I did not do any meritorious service in Shantou, and on the other hand, I did not establish a distinguished career in Xinting.

古文：及元凶既殄，人神获乂，端右之授，即具陈请。天慈优渥，每越常伦，南蛮、护军，旬月私授。
现代文：到了元凶刘邵被处死，人民神灵获得平安，我请求给自己免去崇高显赫的官职，但皇恩深厚，每每让我做更高更大的官，南蛮校尉，护军将军，旬月间便授予给我。
English: When the culprit Liu Shao was executed and the people's deities were safe, I asked to be relieved of my lofty and illustrious official position, but the imperial grace was profound, and every time I was made a higher and greater official, Namban lieutenant, escort general, I was awarded to me every month.

古文：臣三省非分，必致孤负，居常轻任，尚惧网墨，况参要内职，承宠外畿，其取覆折，不假识见。
现代文：我内心反省自己，这样的官也许会使我不称职，即使我做一个不重要的官职，还怕犯错误，况且是朝中显要官职，是受皇上重视的外藩大官，像我这样的人去担任，定然要辜负期望，即使没什么见识的人也是知道的。
English: I inwardly reflected on myself, such an official may make me incompetent, even if I do an unimportant official position, I am still afraid of making mistakes, moreover, it is a high-ranking official position in the court, a high-ranking foreign official who is valued by the emperor. People like me will certainly live up to expectations, even if they have little knowledge.

古文：故披诚启诉，表疏相属，或乞轻高就卑，或愿以闲易要，言誓致苦，播于辞牍，诚知固陋，当触明科。
现代文：所以我多次上告皇上我的实际想法，奏章一篇接着一篇，或者请求辞掉高官，愿当小官，或者愿意做闲官而不想做有实权的官，并且表达心中的真诚愿望，我上奏的文章处处都是这些话。
English: Therefore, I repeatedly appealed to the emperor with my actual thoughts, writing one article after another, or requesting to resign from a high-ranking official, I would like to be a minor official, or I would like to be an idle official and do not want to be an official with real power, and express my sincere wishes, these words are everywhere in my articles.

古文：去岁往年，累犯刑禁，理无申可，罪有恆典，虚秽朝序，惭累家业，臣甘其终，物议其尽。
现代文：本来我知道这种不识抬举、消极退避行为，必定会触犯法律。去年前年，我多次违犯纪律，本当不能得到宽容，因为任何罪行都应受到惩罚，我不断给朝廷抹黑，更惭愧我的家风。我甘心受到最后的裁决，使别人得以实现他们的心愿。
English: Originally, I knew that this kind of ignorance, passive avoidance behavior, would certainly violate the law. Last year and the year before, I repeatedly violated discipline, and I really could not be tolerated, because any crime should be punished. I constantly smeared the court, and I was even more ashamed of my family style. I am willing to receive the final ruling, so that others can realize their wishes.

古文：陛下弃其身瑕，矜其贵戚，迂略法宪，曲相全养。臣一至之感，口此何忘。
现代文：皇上忘掉我身上的过错，可怜我的家门，没有以法律惩罚我，反而尽量保护我，我深深感激皇上的大恩，说到这些怎么能忘掉。
English: Your Majesty forgets my faults, pities my family, does not punish me by law, but protects me as much as possible. I am deeply grateful for Your Majesty's great kindness. How can I forget these things?

古文：利伊恩升，加以今位，当时震惊，收足失所，本忘闲情，不敢闻命。
现代文：皇上又开恩让我获得好处，并且赏赐我今天的官位。当时深感皇上仁惠之恩，手足无措，忘乎所以，不敢接受任命。
English: The Emperor was also kind enough to allow me to receive benefits, and rewarded me with today's official position. At that time, I was deeply grateful for the Emperor's benevolence, and I was so overwhelmed that I did not dare to accept the appointment.

古文：内虑于己，外访于亲，以为天地之仁，施不期报，再造之恩，不可妄属。
现代文：经过内心反复考虑，加上询访亲戚，认为这是皇上天地般的仁恩，施舍了不要求报答。使我再生的恩德，不应轻易推辞。
English: After repeated consideration in my heart, plus inquiries from relatives, I believe that this is the benevolence of the emperor like heaven and earth, giving alms without asking for repayment. The grace that regenerated me should not be easily rejected.

古文：故洗拂灰壤，登沐膏露，上处圣泽，下更生辰，合芳离蜕，遐迩改观。
现代文：所以我改掉过去的缺点，改邪归正，对上则为的得皇上照顾，对下的则是保住小人的生命，脱胎换骨，彻底改造。
English: Therefore, I have eliminated the shortcomings of the past, reformed the evil and returned to the right, and received the emperor's care for those at the top, and saved the villain's life for those at the bottom, reborn, and thoroughly reformed.

古文：但偷荣托幸，忽移此岁，自见妨长，转不可宁，宜其沈放，志事俱尽。
现代文：尽管如此我仍不过是蒙受皇恩苟安岁月，到了今年，仍发觉自己无益于朝廷，心中不安，觉得我应该被贬斥，不应有再起的机会。
English: In spite of all this, I am still nothing more than a recipient of the emperor's favor, and this year, I still find that I am of no use to the imperial court, and I am uneasy in my heart, feeling that I should be disparaged and should not have the opportunity to rise again.

古文：伏愿陛下承太始之德，加成物之恩，及臣狂蔽未至，得于荣次自引，圣朝厚终始之惠，孤臣保不泯之泽。夫让功为高，臣无功而让；专素为美，臣荣采已积。
现代文： 臣下我深深希望皇上秉承生成万物的伟大品德，加上成人之美的心意，趁我狂乱还未显露的时候，让我能在光荣时引退，这样朝廷便成就前后的恩惠，小臣我保住好处不消失，辞让功劳是一种高尚品格，但我没有什么功劳，保持朴素是一种了不起的行为，但我获取荣华已经很多。
English: Subordinate, I deeply hope that the emperor will uphold the great virtue of creating all things, coupled with the mind of adult beauty, and take advantage of my madness before it is revealed, so that I can retire in glory, so that the court will achieve the grace before and after, and I will keep the benefits from disappearing. Giving up merit is a noble character, but I have no merit. Keeping simplicity is a great act, but I have gained a lot of glory.

古文：以是求退，诚亦可愍。又妻子为居，更无余累，婢仆十余，粗有田入，岁时是课，足继朝昏。兼比日眩瞀更甚，风虚渐剧，凑理合闭，荣卫惛底，心气忡弱，神志衰散，念此根疵，不支岁月。
现代文：所以希望退休，这个愿望确实值得同情，又加上妻子儿女们和我住在一起，再没其他的累赘，婢女仆从十来人，每年有些收入，逢年过节有一些租税，足以维持生命，加上近来头晕越来越厉害，风寒虚症更加严重，毛孔闭塞不通，营卫经脉更加不畅，心神虚弱，神态衰疲，想我这个身体状况，恐怕坚持不了几年。
English: So I hope to retire, this wish is really worthy of sympathy, plus my wife and children live with me, there is no other burden, there are more than ten maids, some income every year, some taxes every year, enough to sustain life, plus recently dizziness has become more and more severe, cold and wind deficiency has become more serious, pores are blocked, and the camp guard's meridians are more unbalanced, my heart is weak, my face is tired, and I am afraid that I will not last for several years because of my physical condition.

古文：公私诚愿，宜蒙谅许，乞徇余辰，以终琐运。白水皎日，不足为譬，愿垂矜鉴，哀申此请。
现代文：总之，以国家以个人双方角度看，我的退休请求应该被允许，让我剩下的岁月得以安度。白水在下，明日在上，也没有我的誓言坚决。我希望皇上理解我，同意我的这个请求。 
English: In short, from the perspective of both the country and the individual, my request for retirement should be allowed, so that I can spend the remaining years in peace. Whitewater is below, tomorrow is above, and my oath is resolute. I hope the emperor understands me and agrees with my request.

古文：僧达文旨抑扬，诏付门下。侍中何偃以其词不逊，启付南台，又坐免官。
现代文：王僧达文章有怨气，孝武帝下诏书把它送给门下省，侍中何偃因他的文章不恭敬，请求送他到南台御史处理，所以王僧达又被免除官职。
English: Wang Sengda's article aroused resentment, and Emperor Xiaowu issued an edict to send it to the province under his command. The chamberlain, He Qian, requested that he be sent to Nantai Imperial History for his disrespectful article, so Wang Sengda was removed from his official post.

古文：顷之，除江夏王义恭太傅长史、临淮太守，又徙太宰长史，太守如故。
现代文：不久，王僧达被任命为江夏王刘义恭太傅长史，临淮太守，又转官太宰长史，太守官职如旧。
English: Soon after, Wang Songda was appointed as the Jiangxia King Liu Yigong's Taifu Changshi, Lin Huai's Taishou, and then transferred to the post of Dazai Changshi, but the Taishou post remained the same.

古文：大明元年，迁左卫将军，领太子中庶子。以归顺功，封宁陵县五等侯。二年，迁中书令。
现代文：大明元年，升官左卫将军，兼任太子中庶子，又因归顺的功劳，封宁陵县五等侯，大明二年升官中书令。
English: In the first year of the Daming Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of General of the Left Division, concurrently serving as the Prince's middle child, and was also awarded the title of 5th class marquis of Ningling County for his service to the emperor. In the second year of the Daming Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of middle secretary.

古文：先是，南彭城蕃县民高阇、沙门释昙标、道方等共相诳惑，自言有鬼神龙凤之瑞，常闻箫鼓音，与秣陵民蓝宏期等谋为乱。
现代文：开始时候，南彭城蕃县人高阇和尚释昙校、道方等相互欺骗蛊惑，吹嘘自己有招致神仙鬼神获得龙凤的吉祥征兆的能力，说他们常听到箫声和锣鼓的声音，他们和秣陵百姓蓝宏期等打算造反，又结交殿中将军苗允，员外散骑侍郎严颂之，司空参军阚千纂，太宰府将领程农，王恬等。
English: At the beginning, the people of Pengcheng County, including Gao Gan, Shijian School, and Daofang, deceived and bewitched each other, boasting of their ability to attract the gods and spirits to obtain the auspicious signs of dragons and phoenixes, saying that they often heard the sound of gongs and drums. They and the people of Fuling, such as Lanhong, planned to rebel. They also made friends with the general Miao Yun, the non-commissioned cavalry sergeant Yan Songzhi, the secretary Kuang, and the general of Dazaifu, Cheng Nong, and Wang Yao.

古文：又要结殿中将军苗允、员外散骑侍郎严欣之、司空参军阚千纂、太宰府将程农、王恬等，谋克二年八月一日夜起兵攻宫门，晨掩太宰江夏王义恭，分兵袭杀诸大臣，以阇为天子。
现代文：打算在大明二年八月一日夜晚起兵攻打宫门，早晨突袭太宰江夏王义恭，再兴兵杀掉各个大臣，让高做天子。
English: He planned to attack the palace gate on the evening of August 1st, in the year of the Ming Dynasty. In the morning, he would raid the Dazaifu, King Yixiong of Jiangxia, and then raise an army to kill all the ministers and make Gao the godson.

古文：事发觉，凡党与死者数十人。
现代文：事情不久便败露了，所有参与的几十个人都被处死。
English: The affair was soon exposed, and all the dozens of people involved were executed.

古文：僧达屡经狂逆，上以其终无悛心，因高阇事陷之，下诏曰： 王僧达余庆所钟，早登荣观，轻险无行，暴于世谈。
现代文：王僧达多次猖狂犯上，孝武帝认为他终究不会改变，便利用高的事报复他，下了一道诏书说： 王僧达凭借祖宗余萌，很早便当了大官，轻狂阴险，品行不端，被世人广泛地谈论。
English: Wang Zongda committed many rampant crimes, and Emperor Xiaowu thought that he would not change after all, so he took advantage of Gao to take revenge on him, and issued an edict saying: Wang Zongda became a high official very early with the help of his ancestor Yu Meng. He was reckless, insidious, and had a bad character, and was widely talked about by the world.

古文：值国道中艰，尽室愿效，甄其薄诚，贳其鸿慝，爵遍外内，身穷荣宠。
现代文：恰遇国家中间的动乱，他们全家效忠皇室，朝廷记住他的一点忠诚，原谅他的大错误，给他的全家大小亲戚封官晋爵，他本人蒙受巨大的恩宠。
English: When the country was in turmoil, his whole family was loyal to the royal family. The court remembered his little bit of loyalty, forgave his big mistake, and gave his whole family and relatives the title of knight. He himself received great grace.

古文：曾无在泮，食椹怀音，乃协规西楚，志扰东区，公行剽掠，显夺凶党，倚结群恶，诬乱视听。
现代文：他竟不以职务为意，拿公家的俸禄而有怨言，想得到荆州的刺史官职，打算搞乱扬州地界，公开地派人抢夺，比凶贼还坏，结交反贼，败坏社会风气。
English: He didn't care about his position, took the public salary and complained about it, wanted to get the post of the chief historian of Jingzhou, planned to mess up the territorial boundaries of Yangzhou, openly sent people to rob, was worse than a thief, befriended anti-thieves, and corrupted the social ethos.

古文：朕每容隐，思加荡雪，曾无犬马感恩之志，而炎火成燎原之势，涓流兆江河之形，遂脣齿高阇，契规苏宝，搜详妖图，觇察象纬。
现代文：我每每宽容他这些罪行，希望他洗去旧恶，谁知他根本没有犬马那样报答主人恩德的胸怀。以致小火成燎原之势，小溪变成江河的规模，于是和高等结好苏宝，寻找造反的征兆，观察天变的迹象。
English: I always forgave him for these crimes, hoping that he would wash away the old evils. Who knows, he simply did not have the heart to repay his master's kindness like a dog and a horse. As a result, the small fire turned into a floodplain, and the stream turned into the size of a river. Therefore, I made a good match with Su Bao, looking for signs of rebellion and observing signs of a change in the heavens.

古文：逮贼长临枭，余党就鞫，咸布辞狱牒，宣言虚市，犹欲隐忍，法为情屈。
现代文：等到反贼们被处死，胁从们被审讯，都对所犯罪行供认不讳时，而王僧达不说实话，想隐瞒他的罪行，希望法官为他开脱。
English: When the anti-thieves were put to death and the cowards were interrogated, they all confessed to the crimes committed, but Wang Xanda did not tell the truth, wanted to hide his crimes, and hoped that the judge would acquit him.

古文：小丑纷纭，人扇方甚，矫构风尘，志希非觊，固已达诸公卿，彰于朝野。朕焉得轻宗社之重，行匹夫之仁。
现代文：小人不安分守己，经人煽动便是不老实，在人群制造矛盾，他心中怀有巨大野心，一向为朝中大臣们所熟悉，被市民们知晓；我怎么能不以祖宗大业为重，不对他绳之以法。
English: A villain does not hesitate to defend himself, instigating others is dishonest, creating contradictions in the crowd, he has great ambitions in his heart, has always been familiar to the ministers of the DPRK and China, and is known by the citizens; how can I not attach importance to the great cause of the ancestors, and not bring him to justice.

古文：殛山诛邪，圣典所同，戮讽翦律，汉法攸尚。
现代文：舜帝杀斩邪恶的人，被古书所称道，处死那些图谋不轨的人，被汉代法律所遵循。
English: Emperor Qian killed evil people, praised by ancient books, executed those who plotted evil, and was followed by Han Dynasty laws.

古文：便可收付延尉，肃正刑书。
现代文：现在可以把他交给法庭，验明正身绑赴刑场。
English: Now he can be handed over to the court and it can be established that he is being taken to the place of execution in chains.

古文：故太保华容文昭公弘契阔历朝，绸缪眷遇，岂容忘兹勋德，忽其世祀，门爵国姻，一不贬绝。 
现代文：前太保华容文昭公王弘立功前朝，为先帝等眷顾，怎么能忘掉这些大功，忘掉他的祭祀。王僧达家人亲戚，一律不相关。 
English: How can we forget the great feats and sacrifices of Prince Hong, the former grand tutor of Emperor Huarong and Prince Wen Zhao, who made great contributions to the previous dynasty and provided patronage to the former emperor and other emperors? It does not matter if he was a monk, a family member or a relative.

古文：于狱赐死，时年三十六。
现代文：在狱中赐王僧达自杀，当时三十六岁。
English: While in prison, Wang Songda committed suicide at the age of 36.

古文：子道琰，徙新安郡。前废帝即位，得还京邑。后废帝元徽中，为庐陵国内史，未至郡，卒。
现代文：王僧达的儿子道琰，贬谪到新安郡，前废帝即位，得以回到京城，后废帝元徽中，任庐陵国内史，还未到任，便去世了。
English: Daojun, the son of Wang Zongda, was exiled to Xin'an County. After the former emperor ascended to the throne, he was able to return to Beijing. After the former emperor ascended to the throne, he was appointed to the position of Fuling Domestic History in the former imperial seal, but he passed away before he could take up the position.

古文：苏宝者，名宝生，本寒门，有文义之美。元嘉中立国子学，为《毛诗》助教，为太祖所知，官至南台侍御史，江宁令。坐知高阇反不即启闻，与阇共伏诛。
现代文：苏宝，名宝生，本来出身贫民家庭，能作一些文章，元嘉年中建立国子学，当 毛诗 助教，被文帝所欣赏，官至南台侍御史、江陵县令，因为知道高阇谋反没有上告，和高阇同时被杀。
English: Su Bao, a famous Baosheng, originally from a poor family, was able to write some articles. In the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, he established the study of the sons of the state, when he was an assistant teacher of Mao Shi, he was appreciated by Emperor Wen, he was an official from Nantai to serve as the governor of Jiangling County, because he knew Gao Yao's conspiracy, he did not appeal, and Gao Yao was killed at the same time.

