古文：凡人禀命有二品，一曰所当触值之命，二曰强弱寿夭之命。
现代文：人们承受寿命有两种：一是恰好碰上的命，二是因身体强弱而造成的寿命长短的命。
English: There are two types of life expectancy: one is the life that happens to be encountered, and the other is the life of long life caused by physical weakness.

古文：所当触值，谓兵烧压溺也。
现代文：恰好碰上的意外情况，为被兵器杀死，火烧死，土压死，水淹死。
English: In the case of an accident that just happened, it was killed by a weapon, burned to death, crushed to death, and drowned in water.

古文：强寿弱夭，谓禀气渥薄也。
现代文：体强长寿，体弱夭折，是说人承受气的厚薄多少。
English: Strong body, long life, weak body, premature death, is to say how much people can withstand the thickness of qi.

古文：兵烧压溺，遭以所禀为命，未必有审期也。
现代文：被兵器杀死、火烧死、土压死、水淹死，是以遇上的承受的意外情况来决定的命，这就未必有确定的日期。
English: To be killed by a weapon, burned to death, crushed to death by the earth, or drowned by water, is a life that is determined by the unexpected circumstances that one encounters. This does not necessarily have a definite date.

古文：若夫强弱夭寿以百为数，不至百者，气自不足也。夫禀气渥则其体强，体强则其命长；气薄则其体弱，体弱则命短。命短则多病，寿短。
现代文：至于说人因身体强弱而造成的寿命长短，是以一百岁为界限，活不到一百岁，是因为承受的气本身不充足，如果承受的气多他的体质就强健，体质强健他的寿命就长；要是承受的气少他的体质就虚弱，体质虚弱寿命就短，寿命短就多病，短寿。
English: As for the length of life caused by a person's physical strength and weakness, the limit is one hundred years old. If a person does not live to be one hundred years old, it is because he does not have enough qi to withstand. If he has more qi to withstand, his constitution will be strong and his life will be long. If he has less qi to withstand, his constitution will be weak and his life will be short. If his life is short, he will have many diseases and a short life.

古文：始生而死，未产而伤，禀之薄弱也。
现代文：刚生出来就死了，还没有出生就亡了，都是承受的气太少了的缘故。
English: Those who were just born died, and those who were not yet born died, all because they had too little qi to bear.

古文：渥强之人，不卒其寿，若夫无所遭遇，虚居困劣，短气而死，此禀之薄，用之竭也。
现代文：承受的气多，体质强健的人，必定能活满他的百岁寿限。至于说没有什么坎坷的遭遇，闲居在家，都会感到疲乏气短，气短而死，这是承受的气少，被用尽了的缘故。
English: A person with a strong constitution who can withstand a lot of qi will certainly be able to live to his hundredth birthday. As for the fact that there is no rough encounter, if you stay at home, you will feel tired and short of breath, and you will die of shortness of breath. This is due to the lack of qi and being exhausted.

古文：此与始生而死，未产而伤，一命也，皆由禀气不足，不自致於百也。
现代文：这与刚生出就死了，没有出生就亡了的，同属一种命，都因为承受的气不充足，不能自己活到一百岁。
English: This is the same kind of life as those who die just after birth, and those who die without being born, because they do not have enough breath to sustain themselves and cannot live to be a hundred years old.

古文：人之禀气，或充实而坚强，或虚劣而软弱。
现代文：人承受气，有的充实而坚强，有的虚少而软弱。
English: Some people are full of energy and strong, while others are frail and weak.

古文：充实坚强，其年寿；虚劣软弱，失弃其身。
现代文：充实坚强的，他的寿命就长；虚少软弱的，就会丧失他的生命。
English: The full and strong live long, but the weak and feeble come to nothing.

古文：天地生物，物有不遂；父母生子，子有不就。
现代文：天地生出万物，万物中有的长不成；父母生下子女，子女有的长不大。
English: Heaven and earth give birth to all things, and some of them do not grow; parents give birth to children, and some of them do not grow.

古文：物有为实，枯死而堕；人有为兒，夭命而伤。
现代文：万物长成了果实，却会枯死落下。人生出了子女，却会短命死亡。
English: All things bear fruit and then wither and die; they bring forth children and then die.

古文：使实不枯，亦至满岁；使兒不伤，亦至百年。
现代文：假使果实不枯死，也能够长到成熟；假使子女不死亡，也能够活到百岁。
English: If the fruit does not die, it can grow to maturity; if the children do not die, they can live to be a hundred years old.

古文：然为实、兒而死枯者，禀气薄，则虽形体完，其虚劣气少，不能充也。
现代文：然而，长成了果实，生下了子女之所以会枯死短命，那是因为承受的气太稀薄，虽然他们形体完整了，但是由于他们承受的气虚而少，不能充满整个果实和身体。
English: However, when they grow into fruits and give birth to children, their lives are short because the qi they can bear is too thin. Although their bodies are complete, the qi they can bear is too weak to fill the entire fruit and their bodies.

古文：兒生，号啼之声鸿朗高暢者寿，嘶喝湿下者夭。
现代文：婴儿出生，哭喊声宏亮高亢畅通的就会长寿，声音沙哑低小的就会夭折。
English: When a baby is born, the baby with a loud, high-pitched, smooth cry will live longer, while the baby with a hoarse, low-pitched cry will die prematurely.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：禀寿夭之命，以气多少为主性也。
现代文：因为承受长寿、夭折的命，是由气的多少来决定它的。
English: Because it is the amount of qi that determines whether a person will live a long or short life.

古文：妇人疏字者子活，数乳者子死。
现代文：妇女少怀孕，子女就会存活，多生育，子女则活不成。
English: If women have fewer pregnancies, their children will survive; if they have more births, their children will not survive.

古文：何则？
现代文：那又为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：疏而气渥，子坚强；数而气薄，子软弱也。
现代文：因为生育少气充足，子女体质坚强；生育频繁气稀少，子女体质软弱。
English: Because birth is infrequent and the qi is sufficient, the children's physique is strong; birth is frequent and the qi is scarce, the children's physique is weak.

古文：怀子而前已产子死，则谓所怀不活。
现代文：怀孕时，如果先前生下的孩子死了，人们就会认为这次所怀的胎儿活不成，于是命名它叫 殰 。
English: When pregnant, if the previous child dies, people will think that the fetus conceived this time will not survive, so it is named.

古文：名之曰怀，其意以为已产之子死，故感伤之子失其性矣。
现代文：他们的意思认为，早先生下来的孩子死了，所以悲伤时怀的胎儿就会失去他的正常寿命。
English: They mean that the child born prematurely has died, so the foetus in the grieving mother's womb will lose its normal lifespan.

古文：所产子死、所怀子凶者，字乳亟数，气薄不能成也；虽成人形体，则易感伤，独先疾病，病独不治。
现代文：生下孩子死过的人，所怀的胎儿不吉利，生育频繁，由于承受的气稀薄，胎儿不能形成。即使长成人的形体，也容易感染疾病受到伤害，而且唯独他比别人先得疾病，这种疾病唯独又治不好。
English: People who have given birth to children who have died, the fetus they are carrying is unlucky, the birth is frequent, due to the thin air, the fetus cannot be formed. Even if it grows into an adult body, it is susceptible to infection and disease, and it is only he who gets the disease before others, and this disease is only one and cannot be cured.

古文：百岁之命，是其正也。
现代文：活到百岁，是人的正常寿限。
English: To live up to one hundred years old is the normal life expectancy of a person.

古文：不能满百者，虽非正，犹为命也。
现代文：不能活满百岁的，虽然不是正常寿限，但仍是寿命。
English: You can't live to be a hundred, although it's not a normal lifespan, it's still a life.

古文：譬犹人形一丈，正形也，名男子为丈夫，尊公妪为丈人。
现代文：比如人的身高一丈，是正常形体。所以称男子为丈夫，尊称老头，老妇为丈人。
English: For example, if a person is one height, it is a normal shape. Therefore, a man is called a husband, an old man is called an old man, and an old woman is called a mother-in-law.

古文：不满丈者，失其正也，虽失其正，犹乃为形也。
现代文：不满一丈的，就丧失了人的正常身高。即使丧失了人的正常身高，但仍就是人体。
English: If you are not satisfied with one height, you will lose your normal height. Even if you lose your normal height, you are still a human body.

古文：夫形不可以不满丈之故谓之非形，犹命不可以不满百之故谓之非命也。
现代文：身高不能因为不满一丈的缘故，就说他不是人体，如同人的寿命不能因为不满一百岁的缘故，就说他不是寿命。
English: Just as a man's life span cannot be less than one hundred years, it cannot be less than a lifetime.

古文：非天有长短之命，而人各有禀受也。
现代文：不是天支配着人寿命的长短，而是人承受的气各有不同。
English: It is not the heavens that control the length of a person's life, but the qi that a person endures that varies from person to person.

古文：由此言之，人受气命於天，卒与不卒，同也。
现代文：这样说来，人是从天那儿承受气与命，能不能活满百岁，都相同。
English: In this way, it is all the same whether a person receives breath and life from heaven or lives to be a hundred years old.

古文：语曰： 图王不成，其弊可以霸。 
现代文：俗话说： 谋取王业不成，退一步大约能称霸。 
English: As the saying goes: If you do not succeed in gaining the king's business, you can probably dominate by taking a step back.

古文：霸者，王之弊也。
现代文：霸业，比王业次一等。
English: Hegemony is second only to kingship.

古文：霸本当至於王，犹寿当至於百也。
现代文：霸业本来应当达成王业的，就像人的寿命应当活到百岁一样。
English: Hegemony was supposed to lead to kingship, just as people were supposed to live to be a hundred years old.

古文：不能成王，退而为霸；不能至百，消而为夭。
现代文：不能成就王业，退而称霸；不能活到百岁，缩短而为夭折。
English: If you can't achieve a king's career, retreat and dominate; if you can't live to be a hundred years old, shorten it and die young.

古文：以其形体小大长短同一等也。
现代文：王业霸业同是治国之业，只是优劣的不同名称；长寿与短命同是承受一种气，只是寿命时间长短不同。
English: The king's business and the tyrant's business are both the business of governing the country, just different names for superior and inferior; longevity and short life are both to bear a kind of gas, but the length of life is different.

古文：百岁之身，五十之体，无以异也；身体不异，血气不殊；鸟兽与人异形，故其年寿与人殊数。
现代文：怎么知道不满一百岁死去的算夭亡呢？以百岁作人的正常寿命，是因为人身体的大小、高矮都一样。百岁人的身体，与五十岁人的身体，没有什么不同。他们身体一样，血与气也相同。鸟兽与人有不同的形体，所以它们的生命长短与人的寿数不同。
English: How do you know that a person who dies before the age of one hundred is considered to have died young? The reason why one hundred years old is considered to be a normal life span is because the size and height of the human body are the same. The body of a hundred-year-old person is no different from that of a fifty-year-old person. Their bodies are the same, and their blood and breath are the same. Birds and beasts have different shapes from humans, so their life span is different from that of humans.

古文：何以明人年以百为寿也？
现代文：怎么能证明人的年龄以百岁为寿数呢？
English: How can you prove that a person is 100 years old?

古文：世间有矣。
现代文：世间是有的。
English: There are crows in the world.

古文：儒者说曰：太平之时，人民侗长，百岁左右，气和之所生也。
现代文：儒者说： 社会太平的时候，人民身体高大，能活到百岁左右，那是由于阴气阳气调和而成的缘故。
English: Confucians said: When society is peaceful, people are tall and can live to be about 100 years old. This is due to the harmony of yin and yang.

古文：《尧典》曰： 朕在位七十载。 
现代文：《尧典》上说： 我尧在位七十年。 
English: The "Analects" says: I have reigned for seventy years.

古文：求禅得舜，舜征三十岁在位。
现代文：寻求禅让找到了舜，舜被征召二十年后才即位。
English: The search for Zen Zhen found Yao, who was conscripted and only ascended to the throne twenty years later.

古文：尧退而老，八岁而终，至殂落，九十八岁。
现代文：尧退位养老，八年后去世，到死时已是九十八岁。
English: He abdicated to retire and died eight years later, at the age of 98.

古文：未在位之时，必已成人，今计数百有余矣。
现代文：没有在位的时候，一定已经成人，如今计算岁数也该有一百多岁了。
English: When he was not on the throne, he must have been an adult, and now he should be more than a hundred years old.

古文：又曰： 舜生三十，征用三十，在位五十载，陟方乃死。 
现代文：又说： 舜有三十岁，被召用二十年，在位五十年，到去各地巡游时才死。 
English: He also said: Zou was thirty years old, had been summoned for twenty years, had reigned for fifty years, and only died when he was on a tour of various regions.

古文：适百岁矣。
现代文：应当有百岁了。
English: It must be a hundred years old.

古文：文王谓武王曰： 我百，尔九十。吾与尔三焉。 
现代文：文王对武王说： 我一百岁，你九十岁，我给你三岁。 
English: King Wen said to King Wu: I am a hundred years old, you are ninety years old, I will give you three years.

古文：文王九十七而薨，武王九十三而崩。
现代文：那文王就是九十七岁死，武王是九十三岁死。
English: King Namun died at the age of ninety-seven, while King Wu died at the age of ninety-three.

古文：周公，武王之弟也，兄弟相差，不过十年。
现代文：周公，是武王的弟弟，兄弟相差不过十岁。
English: Zhou Gong is the younger brother of King Wu. The brothers are only ten years apart.

古文：武王崩，周公居摄七年，复政退老，出入百岁矣。
现代文：武王死，周公摄政七年，还政退休养老，活到百岁上下。
English: After the death of King Wu, Zhou Gong served as regent for seven years. After returning to power, he retired and lived to the age of 100.

古文：邵公，周公之兄也，至康王之时，尚为太保，出入百有余岁矣。
现代文：邵公，周公的兄长，到康王时，还做了太保，活了一百多岁。
English: Shao Gong, Zhou Gong's elder brother, also served as a bodyguard to King Kang and lived to be more than a hundred years old.

古文：圣人禀和气，故年命得正数。
现代文：圣人承受的是和气，所以年龄都活到了百岁。
English: The saint was blessed with a gentle spirit, which is why he lived to be a hundred years old.

古文：气和为治平，故太平之世多长寿人。
现代文：阴气阳气调和使社会得到安定，天下太平，所以，太平社会多长寿的人。
English: The harmony of yin and yang has made the society stable and the world peaceful. Therefore, people in a peaceful society live longer.

古文：百岁之寿，盖人年之正数也，犹物至秋而死，物命之正期也。
现代文：百岁的寿命，大概是人年龄的正常寿限，就像植物到秋死去，是植物生命的正常期限。
English: A life span of one hundred years is about the normal lifespan for a person's age, just as a plant dying in the autumn is the normal life span of a plant.

古文：物先秋後秋，则亦如人死或增百岁，或减百也；先秋後秋为期，增百减百为数。
现代文：人超过百岁死与不到百岁死也标志正常寿限。植物有的在秋天前死去，有的在秋天后死去，这也同有人超过百岁死，有人不到百岁死一样。植物秋前死与秋后死都算正常期限。
English: People who die over 100 years old and people who die under 100 years old are also signs of a normal lifespan. Some plants die before the fall, some die after the fall, which is the same as people who die over 100 years old and people who die under 100 years old. Plants die before the fall and after the fall are both considered normal.

古文：物或出地而死，犹人始生而夭也；物或逾秋不死，亦如人年多度百至於三百也。
现代文：植物有的长出地面而死，就像人刚出生而夭亡。植物有的过了秋天不死，也同人的年龄超过百岁达到三百岁一样。
English: Some plants grow out of the ground and die, just as people are born and die young. Some plants do not die after autumn, just as people are over a hundred years old and reach three hundred years old.

古文：传称：老子二百余岁，邵公百八十。
现代文：传说老子有二百多岁，邵公有一百八十岁。
English: Legend has it that Laozi is more than two hundred years old, and Shao Gong is one hundred and eighty years old.

古文：高宗享国百年，周穆王享国百年，并未享国之时，皆出百三十四十岁矣。
现代文：高宗在位一百年，周穆王在位一百年，加上没有在位的时间，都超出了一百三四十岁了。
English: Gaozong reigned for a hundred years, King Zhoumu reigned for a hundred years, plus the time he was not on the throne, all of which exceeded one hundred and thirty-four years.

