古文：《齐民要术》：蚕初生，用荻扫则伤蚕。
现代文：《齐民要术》：刚生下来的蚕蚁，用荻叶收扫会让蚕受伤。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": Freshly born silkworm ants, sweeping with a beak leaf will hurt the silkworm.

古文：《博闻录》：用地桑叶细切如丝发，掺净纸上，却以蚕种覆于上，其子闻香自下。
现代文：《博闻录》：把桑叶切成像头发丝一般粗细，在净纸上掺散均匀，然后将蚕种纸覆盖在上面，蚕蚁闻到桑的香味，会自动到桑叶上。
English: "Houwen Biographies": Cut the mulberry leaves to the thickness of a strand of hair, spread them evenly on the clean paper, and then cover them with silkworm seed paper. When the ants smell the fragrance of mulberry, they will automatically land on the mulberry leaves.

古文：切不可以鹅翎扫拨。
现代文：一定不能用鹅毛翎去扫动。
English: You must not use a goose feather duster to sweep.

古文：《务本新书》：农家下蚁，多用桃杖翻连敲打，蚁下之后，却扫聚以纸包裹，秤见分两。
现代文：《务本新书》：农民家中蚕下蚁的方法，大多是用桃木棒，将正在下蚁的蚕连翻转过来敲打，然后将打下来的蚕蚁，扫成堆用纸包好，称分量。
English: "New Book": The method of removing ants from silkworms in farmers' homes is mostly using a peach stick, turning the silkworms that are shedding ants over and beating them, and then sweeping the removed ants into piles, wrapping them in paper and weighing them.

古文：布在箔上已后，节节病生，多因此弊。
现代文：蚕蚁散布到箔上以后，连连生病，大都是因为经不起这些折腾。
English: After the ants have been spread onto the foil, they fall ill one after another, mostly because they can't stand the strain.

古文：今后，比及蚁生，当匀铺蓐草④。蓐宜捣软。
现代文：从今以后，到蚕蚁快要生的时候，应当在箔上均匀地铺上蓐草，蓐草上面还应铺上蓐纸，以免蚁蚕落入蓐草中，蓐草要舂捣柔软。
English: From now on, when the ants are about to be born, the grass should be evenly spread on the foil, and the grass should also be covered with paper, so that the ants do not fall into the grass. The grass should be soft.

古文：煻火内烧枣一二枚。先将蚕连秤见分两，次将细叶掺在蓐上，续将蚕连翻搭叶上。
现代文：在盛放熟火的炝中放上红枣一二颗，预先将蚕连称过分量，然后将切细的桑叶匀撒在蓐纸上，接着把蚕连翻过来搭盖在细叶上面。
English: Place one or two red dates in a skillet over high heat. Weigh the silkworms in advance, then sprinkle the finely chopped mulberry leaves evenly on the baking paper, then turn the silkworms over and place them on top of the leaves.

古文：蚁要匀稀，连必频移。
现代文：若想使蚕蚁稀稠均匀，应当频频地移动蚕连。
English: If you want to thin out the ants evenly, you should move the coils frequently.

古文：生尽之后，再称空连，便知蚕蚁分两。
现代文：等到蚕蚁全部下毕，再称量下过蚁的空连，便可知晓下蚁的分量。
English: Wait until all the silkworms have descended, and then weigh the empty string of the descending ants to know the weight of the descending ants.

古文：依此生蚕，百无一损。
现代文：依照这样的办法生接着收蚁，百分之一的损伤也不会有。
English: According to this method, the ants are born and collected, and there will be no damage of one percent.

古文：今时谓如下蚁三两，往往止布一席；重叠密压，不无损伤。
现代文：现在人们常说，下三两蚕蚁，常常差不多布满一席，致失于过密，堆压拥挤，难免会受到损伤。
English: Now people often say that the next three or two silkworms are often almost covered with a seat, resulting in overcrowding, overcrowding, and will inevitably be damaged.

古文：今后，下蚁三两，决合匀布一箔。
现代文：以后，如果有三两蚕蚁，一定可以均匀地布满一席还多的蚕。
English: In the future, if there are three or two silkworm ants, they will certainly be able to evenly cover one seat with more silkworms.

古文：若分两多少，验此差分。
现代文：若下蚁的分量有多有少，皆可依照这个标准增减。
English: If the weight of the lower ant is more or less, everyone can increase or decrease according to this standard.

古文：又慎莫贪多，谓如己力止合放蚁三两，因为贪多便放四两，以致桑叶、房屋、椽箔、人力、柴薪，俱各不给，因而两失。
现代文：还有一点，养蚕切不要贪图多养，假如自己的力量，只应养三两蚕蚁，因为贪图多养，却养蚁四两，其结果便会造成桑叶、蚕室、蚕椽、蚕箔、人力、柴薪等都不够用，从而导致两失。
English: Another point is that if you want to raise silkworms, you should not be greedy to raise more. If you have the power, you should only raise three or two silkworm ants. Because you are greedy to raise more, but raise four or two ants, the result will be that mulberry leaves, silkworm coils, cocoons, silkworm foils, manpower, firewood, etc. are not enough, resulting in two losses.

古文：《士农必用》：下蚁惟在详款稀匀，使不致惊伤而稠叠。
现代文：《士农必用》：收蚁这件事，全在人的细心周到、动作轻巧，将蚁蚕安放得稀稠均匀合适；既不要使蚁受到惊吓和损伤，也不能让蚁过于稠密，互相重叠挤压。
English: "Essential for farmers and workers": The collection of ants is entirely due to people's careful and thoughtful actions, and the movement is light, and the ant silkworms are placed thinly and evenly; neither should the ants be frightened and damaged, nor should the ants be too dense and overlap each other.

古文：是时蚕母沐浴净衣入蚕屋。
现代文：下蚁时，蚕妇应洗浴净身，更换衣服，才入蚕室。
English: When the ants descend, the female silkworm should take a bath and change clothes before entering the silkworm room.

古文：蚕屋内焚香，又将院内鸡犬孳畜，逐向远处，恐惊新蚁也。
现代文：蚕屋内焚香，院中的鸡、狗、母畜，都要被驱赶到远处去，以免惊吓新生的蚕蚁。
English: In the silkworm house, incense is burned, and the chickens, dogs, and mother animals in the yard are driven far away so as not to frighten the newly born silkworms.

古文：蚁生既齐，取新叶用快利刀切极细，须下蚁时旋切，则叶查上有津；若钝刀预切下，则查干无津。
现代文：蚁蚕一经生齐，就要即时取出新桑叶，用锋利的快刀切细，桑叶要等到收蚁时即时切，那么刀的切口上才会有津液；若使用钝刀，预先切好，切口处便会一点津液都没有。
English: Once the ants and silkworms have been born, it is necessary to immediately remove the new mulberry leaves and cut them finely with a sharp knife. The mulberry leaves should be cut immediately when the ants are collected, then the juice will be on the cut of the knife; if you use a blunt knife and cut it in advance, there will be no juice at the cut.

古文：用筛子筛于中箔蓐纸上，务要匀薄。
现代文：用筛子将切过的细叶，筛在蚕槌中箔的蓐纸上，务必要均匀，筛薄。
English: Use a sieve to sift the finely chopped leaves onto the coarse paper in the middle of the silk pestle. Make sure that the straining is even and the sieve is thin.

古文：须用筛子能匀，不匀则食偏。
现代文：需要用筛子，才能将叶散均匀。
English: You need to use a sieve to spread the leaves evenly.

古文：筛用竹编、苇子亦可，秫黍秸亦可。
现代文：如叶子散不均匀，便会使有的蚁吃得多，有的少。筛子用竹子编制，用苇子编制也可以，秫黍秸也可以。
English: If the leaves are scattered unevenly, it will cause some ants to eat more, some less. The sieve is made of bamboo, it can also be made of bamboo shoots, and the pestle can also be used.

古文：如小碗大，筛底方眼，可穿过一小指也。
现代文：筛子像小碗一般大小，筛底的方孔，可以让小指穿得过去。
English: The sieve is the size of a small bowl, and the square hole at the bottom of the sieve allows your little finger to pass through.

古文：将连合于叶上，蚁自缘叶上。或多时不下连，及缘上连背，翻过又不下者，并连弃了；此残病蚁也。
现代文：将蚕连覆盖在细叶上，蚕蚁自然会爬到叶上；如果有的蚁过了很长的时间仍然不下连，甚或爬到蚕连的背面上，可以将连翻转过来，如果仍然不下连，便可和连纸一起丢弃不要。
English: If a silkworm coil is covered on a thin leaf, the silkworm ants will naturally climb onto the leaf. If some ants still do not descend after a long time, or even climb onto the back of the silkworm coil, the coil can be turned over. If it still does not descend, it can be discarded together with the paper.

古文：一箔蓐上，下蚁三两，蚕至老，可分三十箔。
现代文：这类的蚁不是发育有缺残，便是有病的病蚁。一领箔蓐上面，如果下三两蚁，等到了老蚕期，便可分为三十箔。
English: This kind of ant is not a developmental defect, it is a diseased ant. If three or two ants descend from the top of a foil cocoon, they can be divided into thirty foils when they reach the old silkworm stage.

古文：每蚁一钱，可老蚕一箔也。
现代文：每一钱重的蚕蚁，到老蚕期便可长成一箔。
English: Each silkworm ant, which weighs a lot of money, can grow into a thread by the time it is an old silkworm.

古文：系长一丈阔七尺之箔，如箔小，可减蚁；下蚁多，则蚕稠为后患也。
现代文：箔是指一丈长、七尺阔的箔，如果箔比上面说的要小，还可以减少下蚁量；下蚁多了，蚕长大时便会太稠，以后的麻烦会很多。
English: Foil refers to a length of one foot and a width of seven feet. If the foil is smaller than the above, it can also reduce the amount of lower ants; if there are more lower ants, the silkworm will be too thick when it grows up, and there will be many troubles in the future.

古文：养蚕过三十箔者，可更加下蚁箔。养蚕少者，用筐可也，蓐如前法。
现代文：养蚕的数量超过三十箔时，可以另外增加收蚁箔；养蚕少的，便可将蚁下在筐内，铺垫蚕蓐的方法，同前述。
English: When the number of raised silkworms exceeds thirty foils, you can additionally increase the ant-collecting foil; if the number of raised silkworms is less, you can put the ants in the basket and spread the cocoon, the same method as described above.

