古文：凡兴兵伐敌，所战之地，必预知之。师至之日，能使敌人如期而来，与战则胜。
现代文：凡是要出兵攻打敌人，一定要预先探明战地；部队到达地点后，还能牵制敌军如期到来，这样与敌人交战就能够获胜。
English: Whenever you want to send troops to attack the enemy, you must explore the battlefield in advance; after the troops arrive at the location, they can also deter the enemy troops from arriving as scheduled, so that you can win the battle with the enemy.

古文：知战地，知战日，则所备者专，所守者固。
现代文：这是因为事先知道了作战地点和时间，就能集中力量等待敌人，才能进行坚固的防御。
English: This is because knowing the place and time of the battle in advance, you can concentrate on waiting for the enemy, in order to carry out a solid defense.

古文：法曰： 知战之地，知战之日，则可千里而会战。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 能够预知交战的地点，预知交战的时间，那么，即使相距千里也可以同敌人交战。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: If you can predict the place and time of the engagement, then you can engage the enemy even if they are thousands of miles away.

古文：战国，魏与赵攻韩，韩告急于齐。
现代文：战国时期，魏国联合赵国攻打韩国；韩国急忙向齐国求援。
English: During the Warring States period, Wei and Zhao jointly attacked Korea; Korea hurriedly appealed to Qi for help.

古文：齐用田忌将而往，直走大梁。
现代文：齐国派遣田忌为将率军援救韩国，直趋魏都大梁城。
English: Qi dispatched Tian Bo to lead an army to rescue South Korea, heading straight for the Wei capital of Dalian.

古文：魏将庞涓闻之，去韩而归。
现代文：魏将庞涓听到这个消息后，立马撤军回国。
English: Upon hearing this news, Wei general Pang Jun immediately withdrew his troops and returned to China.

古文：孙膑谓田忌曰： 彼三晋之兵，素悍勇而轻齐，齐号为怯。
现代文：齐国军师孙膑对田忌说： 他们魏国的军队，向来自恃强悍勇猛而轻视齐军，我们齐军被他们称为胆怯懦弱。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the leader of the Qi army, said to Tian Mu: They, the Wei army, despised the Qi army because it was strong and brave. They called our Qi army cowardly and weak.

古文：善战者因其势而利导之。
现代文：善于用兵的将军就应利用这一形势而采取作战策略。
English: Generals who are good at using troops should take advantage of this situation and adopt a combat strategy.

古文：兵法：百里而趋利者，蹶上将；五十里而趋利者，军半至。
现代文：兵法上说： 以急行军奔赶一百里去同敌人争利的，其前军主将就有遭到损折的危险；以急行军奔赶五十里去同敌人争利的，部队也只有半数赶到作战地点。 
English: It is said in the art of war: If an army rushes a hundred miles to compete with the enemy, its former commander will be in danger of being defeated; if an army rushes fifty miles to compete with the enemy, only half of the troops will reach the battle site.

古文：使齐军入魏地为十万灶，明日为五万灶，又明日为三万灶。 
现代文：因此，应使齐军进入魏境后首先垒筑十万个锅灶，第二天垒筑五万个锅灶，第三天垒筑三万个锅灶。 
English: He ordered the army to enter the Wei territory and first build a stove for 100,000 people to cook, the next day build a stove for 50,000 people to cook, and the third day build a stove for 30,000 people to cook.

古文：涓追三日，大喜，曰： 我固知齐军怯，入吾地三日，士卒亡者过半矣。 
现代文：田忌采纳了孙膑这个建议。庞涓率军回国后，追赶齐军走了三天，非常高兴地说： 我本来就知道齐军懦怯，进入我境才三天，它的士兵就已逃亡过半了。 
English: Tianyi accepted Sun Yat-sen's suggestion. After returning to China, Pang Yat-sen led the army and chased the Qi army for three days. He was very happy and said, "I already knew that the Qi army was cowardly. It has only been three days since it entered our territory, and more than half of its soldiers have already fled."

古文：乃弃其步军，与精锐亲兵倍道兼行逐之。
现代文：于是，他就丢下步兵，率领精锐骑兵昼夜兼程地追赶齐军。
English: As a result, he abandoned the infantry and led the elite cavalry to chase the Qi army day and night.

古文：孙膑度其行，暮当至马陵。
现代文：孙膑计算庞涓的行程情况，料定他天黑时候应当进到马陵。
English: Sun Yao calculated Pang Yao's itinerary and determined that he should enter the horse mausoleum when it was dark.

古文：道狭，而旁多阻隘，可伏兵，乃斫大木白而书之曰： 庞涓死此树下 。
现代文：马陵的道路狭窄，两旁多为险崖峭壁，可以埋伏部队，齐军刮去一棵大树的表皮，在其露白之处写道： 庞涓死此树下 字样。
English: The road to the horse mausoleum is narrow, with steep cliffs on both sides, making it possible to ambush the troops. The Qi army scraped off the bark of a large tree and wrote in its exposed place: "Bang Xuan died under this tree."

古文：于是令齐军善射者万弩夹道而伏。期曰： 暮见举火即万弩俱发。 
现代文：于是，田忌命令齐军万名射箭能手，埋伏于道路两旁砍倒的树木之下，约定说： 夜里看见火光亮起，就万箭齐射。 
English: As a result, Tagi ordered ten thousand archery experts from the Qi army to lie in wait under the trees cut down on both sides of the road, and agreed: If you see a fire light up at night, shoot a thousand arrows.

古文：涓果夜至，立木下见白书，乃钻火烛之。读其书未毕，齐军万弩俱发，魏军大乱。
现代文：庞涓于天黑时候追到马陵，站在那棵树下，发现树干露白之处写有字迹，便让人点燃火把照亮写字处，然而在他还没有读完这些字的时候，齐军万箭骤然齐发，魏军顿时乱作一团，彼此失去联系。
English: In the dark, Pang Xuan chased the horse to the mausoleum. Standing under the tree, he found that there was writing on the exposed white part of the tree trunk. He asked someone to light a torch to illuminate the writing place. However, when he had not finished reading these words, the Qi army suddenly launched thousands of arrows. The Wei army was suddenly in a mess and lost contact with each other.

古文：涓自知智穷兵败，乃自刎。
现代文：此时的庞涓知道自己已经智力穷尽，败局已定，就自杀身亡了。
English: At this time, Pang Yao knew that he had exhausted his intelligence and the defeat had been decided, so he committed suicide.

