古文：◎外国八鞑靼
现代文：鞑靼，即蒙古部，是元朝皇族的后裔。
English: The Tartars, i.e. the Mongolians, are the descendants of the imperial family of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：鞑靼，即蒙古，故元后也。太祖洪武元年，大将军徐达率师取元，元主自北平遁出塞，居开平，数遣其将也速等扰北边。
现代文：太祖洪武元年，大将军徐达率军攻打元朝，元朝皇帝从北平逃到塞外，住在开平，屡次派他的将领也速等人骚扰北部边境。
English: In the first year of King Hongwu's reign, the great general Xu Da led an army to attack the Yuan Dynasty. The Yuan Dynasty emperor fled from Peiping to outside of Serbia and lived in Kaiping. He repeatedly sent his generals and others to harass the northern border.

古文：明年，常遇春击败之，师进开平，俘宗王庆孙、平章鼎住。
现代文：第二年，常遇春带兵击败了骚扰的元朝残兵，把军队开进开平，俘虏了元朝的宗王庆孙、平章鼎住。
English: In the second year, the soldiers led by Changyu Chun defeated the harassing Yuan Dynasty remnants, drove the army into Kaiping, and captured the Yuan Dynasty's Zongwang Qingsun and Pingzhang Dingju.

古文：时元主奔应昌，其将王保保据定西为边患。
现代文：此时元朝皇帝逃奔到应昌，他的将领王保保占据定西，成为明朝边境的祸患。
English: At this time, the emperor of the Yuan Dynasty fled to Yingchang, and his general Wang Baobao occupied Dingxi, becoming the scourge of the Ming Dynasty border.

古文：三年春，以徐达为大将军，使出西安捣定西；李文忠为左副将军，冯胜为右副将军，使出居庸捣应昌。
现代文：洪武三年春，明朝拜徐达为大将军，让他从西安出发直捣定西；拜李文忠为左副将军，冯胜为右副将军，让他们从居庸关出发直捣应昌。
English: In the spring of the third year of Hongwu's reign, in the morning, he appointed Xu Da as the general, and asked him to set out from Xi'an to the west; he appointed Li Wenzhong as the left deputy general, and Feng Sheng as the right deputy general, and asked them to set out from Juyongguan to Yechang.

古文：文忠至兴和，擒平章竹贞，复大破元兵于骆驼山，遂趋应昌。未至，知元主已殂，进围其城，克之。获元主孙买的里八剌及其妃嫔、大臣、宝玉、图籍。
现代文：李文忠到兴和时，活捉了平章竹贞，又在骆驼山大破元兵，于是朝应昌进发，还末到应昌时，李文忠获悉元朝皇帝已死，便包围了应昌城，并把它攻克下来，俘虏了元朝皇帝的孙子买的里八剌和他的妃嫔、大臣，缴获了许多宝石和图画书籍。
English: When Li Wenzhong arrived at Xinghe, he captured Pingzhang Zhuzhen alive, and defeated the Yuan soldiers at Camel Mountain, so the court went to Yingchang. When he finally arrived at Yingchang, Li Wenzhong learned that the Yuan emperor was dead. He surrounded Yingchang City, and conquered it. He captured the grandson of the Yuan emperor, Buy Li Bajuan, his concubine and minister, and seized many precious stones and picture books.

古文：太子爱猷识理达腊独以数十骑遁去。
现代文：只有元朝皇帝的太子爱猷识理达腊带了几十个人骑马逃脱。
English: Only the prince of the Yuan emperor, Aizhong Zhelidala, escaped on horseback with dozens of people.

古文：而徐达亦大破王保保兵于沈儿峪口，走之。
现代文：徐达也在沈儿峪口大破王保保，王保保率残兵逃走。
English: Xu Da also defeated Wang Baobao at Shen'er Pass, and Wang Baobao led the remaining soldiers to flee.

古文：太祖封买的里八剌为崇礼侯，谥元主曰顺帝。
现代文：明太祖便封买的里八剌为崇礼侯，称已死的元朝皇帝为顺帝。
English: The founder of the Ming Dynasty then sealed Li Bajiao as Chongli Hou, and called the dead Emperor of the Yuan Dynasty as Shunde.

古文：于是故元诸将江文清等、王子失笃儿等，先后归附。
现代文：这样一来，从前元朝的诸位将领江文清等人和元朝的王子失笃儿等人，先后归顺于明朝。
English: As a result, the generals of the former Yuan Dynasty, such as Jiang Wenqing and others, and the princes of the Yuan Dynasty, such as Zuodu'er, successively surrendered to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：独王保保拥太子爱猷识理达腊居和林，屡诏谕之，不从。
现代文：只有王保保还拥戴元朝太子爱猷识理达腊住在和林。明太祖几次以诏书告谕他们，他们始终不愿归顺明朝。
English: Only Wang Baobao still supported the Yuan Dynasty's Prince Aizhong Zhelidala, who lived in Hailin. Emperor Ming Taizu told them several times in an imperial edict that they would never submit to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：五年春，命大将军徐达、左副将军李文忠、征西将军冯胜率师三道征之。大将军达由中路出雁门，战不利，守塞。
现代文：洪武五年春，明朝派大将军徐达、左副将军李文忠、征西将军冯胜率领军队分三路征讨爱猷识理达腊，大将军徐达由中路出雁门关，征战不利，转守边塞。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Hongwu, the Ming Dynasty sent the general Xu Da, the left deputy general Li Wenzhong, and the general of the Western Expedition Feng Sheng to lead the army in three ways to conquer Ai Xuan and Li Dalat, and the general Xu Da went out of the middle way to the Yanmen Pass, which was unfavorable for the war, and turned to the border fortress.

古文：胜军西次兰州。
现代文：冯胜率兵从西路驻扎兰州。
English: Feng Sheng led the troops stationed in Lanzhou from the west.

古文：右副将军傅友德先进，转战至埽林山，胜等兵合，斩其平章不花，降上都驴等所部吏民八千三百余户，遂由亦集乃路至瓜、沙州，复连败之。
现代文：右副将军傅友德带兵先行，转战到埽林山，与冯胜等人的军队会合后，斩杀元朝的平章不花，降获上都驴等人下属的官吏和平民八千三百多户，又从亦集乃路到瓜州、沙州，再连败元兵。
English: Fu Youde, the right vice-general, led the troops in advance and went to fight in Yulin Mountain. After meeting with the army of Feng Sheng and others, it did not take long to kill the Yuan Dynasty's Pingzhang, and captured more than 8,300 households of officials and civilians subordinated to Shangdu Xie and others. It also went from Yixin Road to Guazhou and Shazhou, and then defeated the Yuan soldiers.

古文：文忠东出居庸至口温，元将弃营遁，乃率轻骑自胪朐河疾驰，进败蛮子哈剌章于土剌河，追及阿鲁浑河，又追及称海，获其官属子孙并军士家属千八百余，送京师。
现代文：李文忠在东路从居庸到口温，元朝兵将弃营而逃，李文忠就率轻骑从胪朐河急速前进，在土剌河打败蛮子哈剌章，又追到阿鲁浑河和称海，俘获元朝官员的子孙和士兵家属共一千八百余人，解送到京师。
English: Li Wenzhong was on the east road from Juyong to Kouwen when the Yuan Dynasty soldiers abandoned the camp and fled. Li Wenzhong led the light cavalry to rapidly advance from the Minhe River, defeat the barbarian Haruzhang in the Tuyun River, and chase to the Arugun River and the Shaoshai Sea. He captured a total of more than 1,800 sons and grandsons of Yuan Dynasty officials and soldiers' families, and deported them to the Beijing Division.

古文：达等寻召还。
现代文：不久徐达等奉召还师。
English: Soon after, Xu Da and others were called back to serve as instructors.

古文：明年春，遣达、文忠等备西北边。
现代文：洪武六年春，派遣徐达、李文忠等守卫西北边陲。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Hongwu, Xu Da, Li Wenzhong and others were sent to guard the northwest border.

古文：元兵入犯武、朔，达遣陈德、郭子兴击破之。
现代文：元兵进犯武州和朔州，徐达派陈德、郭子兴出击，打败元兵。
English: The Yuan soldiers invaded Wuzhou and Shuozhou, and Xu Da sent Chen De and Guo Zixing to attack and defeat the Yuan soldiers.

古文：未几，达等复大破王保保兵于怀柔。
现代文：不久，徐达等又在怀柔大败王保保的军队。
English: Soon, Xu Da and others defeated Wang Baobao's army in Huairou.

古文：时元兵先后犯白登、保德、河曲，辄为守将所败，独抚宁、瑞州被残，太祖乃徙其民于内地。
现代文：这时期元兵曾先后进犯过白登、保德、河曲等地，都被当地守卫的将领打败，只有抚宁、瑞州两地为元兵所破，明太祖便把该两地的平民迁往内地。
English: During this period, the Yuan soldiers had successively attacked Baiden, Baode, Hequ and other places, all of which were defeated by the local guard generals. Only Fuxing and Ruizhou were defeated by the Yuan soldiers, and Ming Taizu moved the civilians of these two places to the mainland.

古文：七年夏，都督蓝玉拔兴和。
现代文：洪武七年夏，都督蓝玉攻克兴和。
English: In the summer of the seventh year of Hongwu's reign, the governor, Lan Yu, set out to conquer Xinghe.

古文：文忠亦遣裨将擒斩其长，而自以大军攻高州大石崖，克之，斩宗王、大臣朵朵失里等，至毡帽山斩鲁王，获其妃蒙哥秃。
现代文：李文忠亦派自己的副将捉拿斩杀元军首长，自己用大部队攻打高州的大石崖，攻克后，斩杀元朝宗王、大臣朵朵失里等，到毡帽山又斩杀元朝的鲁王，俘获他的妃子蒙哥秃。
English: Li Wenzhong also sent his vice-commander to capture and kill the leader of the Yuan army, and he himself attacked the Great Rock Cliff of Gaozhou with a large force. After conquering it, he killed the King of the Yuan Dynasty, the Minister of the Yuan Dynasty, and so on. He also killed the King of Lu of the Yuan Dynasty and captured his concubine, Meng Guo.

古文：秋，太祖以故元太子流离沙漠，父子隔绝，未有后嗣，乃遣崇礼侯北归，以书谕之。
现代文：秋天，明太祖考虑到元朝太子在沙漠中流转离散，父子相互隔绝，没有后代，便让崇礼侯买的里八剌回到北方老家，用书信谕告他。
English: In the autumn, considering that the princes of the Yuan Dynasty had been scattered in the desert, father and son were isolated from each other, and there were no descendants, the Ming Taizu let Chongli Houhai Li Baju return to his hometown in the north and told him by letter.

古文：又二年，其部下九住等寇西边，败去。
现代文：过了二年，他的部下九住等侵犯西部边疆，失败后逃走。
English: Two years later, nine of his subordinates invaded the western frontier, failed, and fled.

古文：洪武十一年夏，故元太子爱猷识理达腊卒，太祖自为文，遣使吊祭。
现代文：洪武十一年夏，元朝太子爱猷识理达腊死，明太祖自己写祭文，派遣使者前往吊唁祭奠。
English: In the summer of the 11th year of Hongwu, the Yuan Dynasty's Prince Aizhong Zhili Darla died. Emperor Ming Taizu himself wrote an offering and sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：子脱古思帖木儿继立。
现代文：爱猷识理达腊的儿子脱古思帖木儿继承了其父的皇位。
English: Aiden's son, Taras, succeeded to his father's throne.

古文：其丞相驴儿、蛮子哈剌章，国公脱火赤，平章完者不花、乃儿不花，枢密知院爱足等，拥众于应昌、和林，时出没塞下。
现代文：其丞相驴儿、蛮子哈剌章、国公脱火赤、平章完者不花和乃儿不花、枢密知院爱足等带领一批人居住在应昌、和林，时常在塞下出没。
English: He led a group of people, including the chancellor Donkey, the barbarian Haruko, the statesman Out of the Flames, the plain-clothed finishers Don't Spend and Don't Spend, and the privy councillor Ai Futu, to live in Yingchang and Hailin, and often went out under the dam.

古文：太祖屡赐玺书谕之，不从。
现代文：明太祖屡次用印有皇帝印信封记的文书诏谕他们，他们不愿归顺。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty repeatedly ordered them not to submit in a document sealed with the imperial seal.

古文：十三年春，西平侯沐英师出灵州，渡黄河，历贺兰山，践流沙，擒脱火赤、爱足等于和林，尽以其部曲归。冬，完者不花亦就擒。
现代文：洪武十三年春天，西平侯沐英从灵川出兵，渡过黄河，经过贺兰山和沙漠地，在和林生擒脱火赤和爱足等人，把他们的军队全带了回来，同年冬天，完者不花也被擒。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year of Hongwu, Xiping marquis Mu Ying sent troops from Lingchuan, crossed the Yellow River, passed through Helan Mountain and the desert, and brought back all of his troops, including Huo Lin Sheng, Tu Huacheng and Ai Futu. In the winter of the same year, those who did not spend were also captured.

古文：明年春，徐达及副将军汤和、傅友德征乃儿不花，至河北，袭灰山，斩获甚众。
现代文：第二年春，徐达和他的副将军汤和、傅友德一起征讨乃儿不花，到了黄河以北地区，袭击了灰山，消灭和俘虏了许多元兵。
English: In the spring of the following year, Xu Da, together with his vice-generals Tang He and Fu Youde, went to the north of the Yellow River to attack Mount Haishan, killing and capturing many veterans.

古文：时王保保已先卒，诸巨魁多以次平定，或望风归附，独丞相纳哈出拥二十万众据金山，数窥伺辽。
现代文：此时王保保已经逝世，各位魁首也相继按次序被平定，有的望风归降，只有丞相纳哈出率二十万人占据金山，几次窥视辽州，伺机偷袭。
English: At this time, Wang Baobao had already passed away, and all the leaders were also successively subdued in order, and some were expected to surrender. Only the prime minister Naha led 200,000 people to occupy Jinshan, peeked at Liaozhou several times, and waited for the opportunity to sneak attack.

古文：二十年春，命宋国公冯胜为大将军，率颍川侯傅友德、永昌侯蓝玉等，将兵二十万征之，还其先所获元将乃剌吾。
现代文：洪武二十年春，明朝派宋国公冯胜为大将军，率颍川侯傅友德、永昌侯蓝玉等，带兵二十万征讨纳哈出，同时把原先俘虏的元朝将领乃剌吾放了回去。
English: In the spring of the 20th year of Hongwu, the Ming Dynasty sent Song Guogong Feng Sheng as a great general, led by Shichuan Hou Fu Youde and Yongchang Hou Lan Yu, and led 200,000 soldiers to conquer Naha. At the same time, he released the originally captured Yuan Dynasty general Nao Xingwu.

古文：胜军驻通州，遣蓝玉乘大雪袭庆州，克之。
现代文：冯胜的军队驻扎在道州，派遣蓝玉乘大雪袭击庆州，并攻克庆州。
English: Feng Sheng's army stationed in Daozhou sent the Blue Jade to attack Gyeongju in the heavy snow and conquered Gyeongju.

古文：夏，师逾金山，临江侯陈镛失道，陷敌死。
现代文：同年夏天，明军越过金山，临江侯陈镛追敌被围战死。
English: In the summer of the same year, the Ming army crossed the Jinshan Mountain, and Linjiang marquis Chen Qi chased the enemy and was besieged and killed.

古文：乃剌吾归，备以朝廷抚恤恩语其众，于是全国公观童来降。
现代文：乃剌吾回去后，把明朝廷抚恤恩典的事全告诉大家，这样全国公观童也来归降。
English: After Nao Xiangwu returned, he told everyone everything about the Ming court's mercy and grace, so that the public opinion of the whole country also came to surrender.

古文：纳哈出因闻乃剌吾之言已心悸，复为大军所迫，乃阳使人至大将军营纳款，以觇兵势。
现代文：纳哈出因听了乃剌吾的话已感到害怕，再则又被明朝的大军所压迫，于是表面上派人至明朝大将军营地投诚，暗地里窥视明军的兵势。
English: After listening to Na Xuan Wu's words, Naha Zi was already afraid, and then he was oppressed by the large army of the Ming Dynasty. Therefore, on the surface, he sent people to the camp of the Ming Dynasty general and secretly peeped into the military situation of the Ming Army.

古文：胜遣玉往受降。
现代文：冯胜派遣蓝玉去受降。
English: Feng Sheng sent Blue Jade to accept the surrender.

古文：使者见胜军还报，纳哈出仰天叹曰： 天弗使吾有此众矣。 
现代文：元兵使者探明冯胜的兵势后回去报告给纳哈出，纳哈出仰天叹息道 ：是上天不让我拥有这么多人啊！ 
English: After the emissary of the former soldiers ascertained Feng Sheng's troop strength, he went back to report to Naha. Naha looked up to heaven and sighed, "God didn't let me have so many people!"

古文：遂率数百骑诣玉纳降。
现代文：于是带数百随从骑马到蓝玉那里投降。
English: So he took hundreds of followers on horseback to surrender to Blue Jade.

古文：已，将脱去，为郑国公常茂所伤不得去。
现代文：投降后不久，纳哈出又想脱离明军而去，被郑国公常茂打伤，因而不能离开。
English: Shortly after the surrender, Nakhade again wanted to leave the Ming army, but was injured by Zheng Guogong Changmao, so he could not leave.

古文：都督耿忠遂以众拥之见胜，胜重礼之，使忠与同寝食。
现代文：都督耿忠就带领众人去拜见冯胜，冯胜以厚重的礼节接待他，并与他一起吃一起睡。
English: Governor Geng Zhong led the crowd to meet Feng Sheng. Feng Sheng received him with heavy etiquette and ate and slept together with him.

古文：先后降其部曲二十余万人，及闻纳哈出伤，由是惊溃者四万人，获辎重畜马亘百余里。
现代文：这样一来先后降获元朝士兵二十余万人，这些降服的士兵听说纳哈出受伤后，受惊溃逃而去的有四万人，缴获军用物资、牲畜马匹横贯达一百多里。
English: As a result, more than 200,000 soldiers of the Yuan Dynasty were surrendered successively. After these soldiers heard that Naha was injured, 40,000 of them fled in panic. Military supplies, livestock and horses were seized across more than one hundred miles.

古文：胜班师，都督濮英以三千骑殿，为溃卒所邀袭，死之。
现代文：冯胜带领出征的军队回去时，都督濮英带三千骑兵殿后，被元朝溃散的军队所拦击，濮英战死。
English: When Feng Sheng led the army back from the war, the governor, Zou Ying, with three thousand cavalrymen, was stopped by the scattered troops of the Yuan Dynasty, and Zou Ying was killed.

古文：秋，胜等表上纳哈出所部官属二百余人，将校三千三百余人，金银铜印一百颗，虎符牌面百二十五事，马二百九十余匹，称贺。太祖封纳哈出为海西侯，先后赐予甚厚，并授乃剌吾千户。
现代文：同年秋天，冯胜等人向皇帝上章奏，献上纳哈出的属吏二百多人，将校三千一百多人，金印银印铜印共一百颗，雕有虎形的符和牌面三百二十五事，马二百九十多匹，称颂祝贺明太祖封纳哈出为海西侯，先后赏赐给他很多东西，同时授予乃剌吾千户人家的赋税。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Feng Sheng and others presented the emperor with more than two hundred subordinate officials, more than three thousand one hundred officers, a total of one hundred gold, silver and bronze seals, three hundred and twenty-five tiger-shaped symbols and plaques, and more than two hundred and ninety horses. They praised and congratulated the Ming Grandfather Fong Naha on becoming the West Sea Prince, and successively rewarded him with many things. At the same time, they granted taxes to more than one thousand households.

古文：纳哈出既降，帝以故元遗寇终为边患，乃即军中拜蓝玉为大将军，唐胜、郭英副之，耿忠、孙恪为左、右参将，率师十五万往征之。
现代文：纳哈出已经投降，明朝皇帝认为元朝残存的军队终究是边境上的祸患，就在军队中拜蓝玉为大将军，封唐胜、郭英为副将军，耿忠、孙恪为左、右参将，率十五万军队去征讨元朝残兵。
English: Naha had already surrendered, and the Ming emperor thought that the remaining troops of the Yuan Dynasty were ultimately a disaster on the border. In the army, Bai Lanyu was the general, Tang Sheng and Guo Ying were the deputy generals, and Geng Zhong and Sun Ke were the left and right sanshin generals. He led 150,000 troops to recruit the remnants of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：冬，元将脱脱等降于玉。
现代文：同年冬天，元朝将领脱脱向蓝玉投降。
English: In the winter of the same year, the generals of the Yuan Dynasty surrendered to the Blue Jade.

古文：明年春，玉以大军由大宁至庆州，闻脱古思帖木儿在捕鱼儿海，从间道驰进，至百眼井哨不见敌，欲引还。
现代文：第二年春，蓝玉率领大军从大宁到庆州，听说脱古思帖木儿在捕鱼儿海，便从偏僻小路急速前进，到百眼井时，没发现敌军，便想率军回去。
English: In the spring of the following year, Blue Jade led a large army from Taining to Gyeongju. Hearing that Degu Si Timur was fishing in the sea, he advanced rapidly from a remote path. When he reached Hyakgyeonggung, he did not find the enemy army, so he wanted to lead the army back.

古文：定远侯王弼曰： 吾等奉圣主威德，提十万余众，深入至此，无所得，何以复命？ 
现代文：这时定远侯王弼说 ：我们奉神圣皇帝的恩威，带领十多万军队出征，深入到这个地方，如果没有任何收获，回去怎么向皇帝交待？ 
English: At this time, Dingyuan Hou Wangyao said, "We, by the grace of the holy emperor, led more than a hundred thousand troops to go to war and penetrated deep into this place. If there is no harvest, how can we go back and report to the emperor?"

古文：玉乃穴地而爨，一夜驰至捕鱼儿海。
现代文：蓝玉便令军队挖地为灶烧火煮饭，一夜之间急速赶到捕鱼儿海。
English: Blue Jade then ordered the army to dig up the ground to cook rice for the stove, and rushed to the fishing sea overnight.

古文：黎明，去敌营八十里。
现代文：黎明时分，距离敌人营地只有八十里远。
English: At dawn they were only eighty miles from the enemy's camp.

古文：时大风扬沙，昼晦，军行无知者，敌不设备。
现代文：此时起大风，沙土飞扬，白天天色也很昏暗，军队前进没人知道，敌人也没防备。
English: At this time, there was a strong wind, the sand was flying, the sky was very dark during the day, no one knew the army was advancing, and the enemy was unprepared.

古文：弼为前锋，直薄之，遂大破其军，斩太尉、蛮子数千人。
现代文：王弼为前锋，直接攻入元军营地，大败元军，斩杀太尉、蛮子数千人。
English: Wang Yao was the forward, directly entered the camp of the Yuan Army, defeated the Yuan Army, and killed thousands of captains and barbarians.

古文：脱古思帖木儿以其太子天保奴、知院捏怯来、丞相失烈门等数十骑遁去，获其次子地保奴及妃主五十余人、渠率三千、男女七万余，马驼牛羊十万，聚铠仗焚之。
现代文：脱古思帖木儿带着太子天保奴、知院捏怯来、丞相失烈门等数十人逃走。
English: Dozens of people fled, including the dean of ancient thought, Timur, who brought with him the crown prince, Tembo, the chancellor of the imperial court, Kichibaku, and the prime minister, Shuremon.

古文：又破其将哈剌章营，尽降其众。
现代文：这样大漠北部的祸患便去除了。
English: In this way, the scourge of the northern desert was eliminated.

古文：于是漠北削平。捷奏至，太祖大悦，赐地保奴等钞币，命有司给供具。
现代文：捷报传到，明太祖非常高兴，用纸币赏赐给地保奴等人，并命令有关官吏陈设食具招待他们。
English: After receiving the news of the victory, Emperor Ming Taizu was very happy and rewarded the local patrons with paper money, and ordered the relevant officials to set up tableware to invite them.

古文：既有言玉私元主妃者，帝怒，妃惭惧自杀。
现代文：不久，有人说蓝玉私藏了地保奴的主妃，皇帝听后发怒，主妃知道后既惭愧又害怕就自杀了。
English: Not long after, someone said that Blue Jade had secretly hidden the mistress of the land guardian. The emperor was angry when he heard this, and the mistress was ashamed and afraid when she found out, so she committed suicide.

古文：地保奴出怨言，帝居之琉球。
现代文：地保奴知道后口出怨言，皇帝便把他流放到琉球。
English: When the landlord's manservant complained, the emperor exiled him to Ryukyu.

古文：脱古思帖木儿既遁，将依丞相咬住于和林，行至土剌河，为其下也速迭儿所袭，众复散，独与捏怯来等十六骑偕。
现代文：脱古思帖木儿已经逃脱，想到和林去依靠丞相咬住，行到土剌河时，被部下也速迭儿所袭击，大家又都逃散，脱古思帖木儿只与捏怯来等十六人在一起。
English: Degu Sittemur had already escaped, and thought of going with Lin to rely on the prime minister to bite him. When they reached the Tuyi River, they were also attacked by their subordinates, and everyone fled. Degu Sittemur was only with 16 people, including Pinchuk.

古文：适咬住来迎，欲共往依阔阔帖木儿，大雪不得发。
现代文：恰好咬住来迎接他们，想一起去投靠阔阔帖木儿，因为大雪而不能出发。
English: I just happened to stop by to greet them, wanting to go and stay with the broad-shouldered Timur, who couldn't set out because of the heavy snow.

古文：也速迭儿兵猝至，缢杀之，并杀天保奴。
现代文：也速迭儿的兵马突然冲至，用绳勒死脱古思帖木儿，并杀死了天保奴。
English: The soldiers and horses in rapid succession suddenly rushed to the scene, strangled Degu Sittemure with a rope, and killed Tian Bao Niu.

古文：于是捏怯来、失烈门等来降，置之全宁卫。
现代文：这样，捏怯来、失烈门等人便投降明朝，明朝把他们安置在全宁卫所。
English: In this way, those who were too scared to come and those who lost their way surrendered in the morning, and in the morning they were placed in the Zenning garrison.

古文：未几，捏怯来为失烈门所袭杀，众溃，诏朵颜等卫招抚之，来降者益众。
现代文：不久，失烈门袭击并杀死捏怯来，捏怯来的部下溃散。皇帝下诏书让朵颜等卫所招抚他们，于是来归降的人更多。
English: Not long after, the gate of the lost souls attacked and killed the cowardly soldiers, and the cowardly soldiers scattered. The emperor issued an edict to let Doan and other guards caress them, so more people came to surrender.

古文：二十三年春，命颍国公傅友德等以北平兵从燕王，定远侯王弼等以山西兵从晋王，征咬住及乃儿不花、阿鲁帖木儿等。
现代文：洪武二十三年春，明朝命令颍国公傅友德等以北平的军队跟随燕王，定远侯王弼等以山西的军队跟随晋王，一起征讨咬住、乃儿不花和阿鲁帖木儿等。
English: In the spring of the 23rd year of Hongwu, the Ming Dynasty ordered the troops of Beiping led by Gu Fu Youde and the troops of Shanxi led by Dingyuan Hou Wang Hui and the troops of Shanxi led by Dingyuan Hou Wang Hui and the troops of Shanxi led by Jin Wang to fight together against the forces of Qizhu, Naerfubao and Arute Mure.

古文：燕王出古北口，侦知乃儿不花营迤都，冒大雪驰进，去敌一碛，敌不知也。
现代文：燕王从古北口出发，侦察了解到乃儿不花在迤都扎营，于是冒着大雪急速进兵，离敌只有一碛远，敌人并不知晓。
English: Yan Wang set out from the ancient north gate, and the reconnaissance learned that he did not spend time camping in Shudu, so he braved the heavy snow and rapidly marched into the army. He was only a block away from the enemy, and the enemy did not know.

古文：先遣指挥观童往，观童旧与乃儿不花善，一见相持泣。
现代文：燕王派遣指挥观童先去敌营。观童与乃儿不花有旧谊，两人一见相互流泪。
English: Yan Wang dispatched the commanding officer Guan Tong to go to the enemy camp first. Guan Tong and Naer have a long-standing friendship, and the two of them shed tears at the sight of each other.

古文：顷之，大军压其营，乃儿不花惊，欲遁，观童止之，引见王，赐饮食慰谕遣还。乃儿不花喜过望，遂偕咬住等来降。
现代文：一会儿后，明军包围了乃儿不花的营地，乃儿不花大惊想逃，观童制止了他，并把他引见给燕王，燕王赏饮料食物给乃儿不花并对他抚慰后又送他回去。乃儿不花大喜过望，于是偕同咬住等人一起来归降。
English: After a while, the Ming army surrounded Naer Baizuo's camp. Naer Baizuo was surprised and wanted to escape. Guan Tong stopped him and introduced him to Yan Wang. Yan Wang gave Naer Baizuo drinks and food and comforted him before sending him back. Naer Baizuo was overjoyed, so he surrendered together with Bite and others.

古文：久之，乃儿不花等以谋叛诛死，敌益衰。
现代文：很久以后，乃儿不花等人因谋叛罪被杀，敌人更加衰弱。
English: After a long time, Naerifuka and others were killed for plotting treason, and the enemy became even weaker.

古文：太祖亦封燕、晋诸王为边藩镇，更岁遣大将巡行塞下，督诸卫卒屯田，戒以持重，寇来辄败之。
现代文：明太祖也分封燕王、晋王等为边境的藩镇，又每年派遣大将在边境要塞巡行，监督各卫所的士兵屯田，保持高度的警戒，外敌一入侵都被当地守军击败。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty also assigned Yan Wang, Jin Wang and others as border towns, and sent generals to patrol the border fortresses every year to supervise the soldiers of each garrison, maintain a high degree of vigilance, and the local defenders were defeated by the invasion of foreign enemies.

古文：而敌自脱古思帖木儿后，部帅纷拏，五传至坤帖木儿，咸被弑，不复知帝号。
现代文：而敌方自脱古思帖木儿以后，各部首领互相争斗，内乱不已。等传了五代到坤帖木儿时，全部被部下所杀，已经不再知晓元朝的皇帝称号了。
English: But since the time of Emperor Xizetmuer, the leaders of various ministries have been fighting each other, and civil strife has continued. By the time five generations have passed to Emperor Xizetmuer, they have all been killed by their subordinates, and they no longer know the title of Emperor of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：有鬼力赤者篡立，称可汗，去国号，遂称鞑靼云。
现代文：后来有一个名叫鬼力赤的人篡位自立，称为可汗，废去国号，于是称为鞑靼。
English: Later, a man by the name of Ghostly Red usurped the position and became independent, called himself Khan, abolished the country's name, and thus became known as Tatar.

古文：成祖即位，遣使谕之通好，赐以银币并及其知院阿鲁台、丞相马儿哈咱等。
现代文：明成祖即皇帝位后，派遣使臣持皇帝的诏谕与他们通好，给鬼力赤可汗和他的知院阿鲁台、丞相马儿哈咱等各赏银币。
English: After Emperor Ming Chengzu ascended to the throne, he sent envoys to negotiate with them according to the emperor's edict, and awarded silver coins to the Red Ghost Khan, his courtier Arutai, and the courtier Malha.

古文：时鬼力赤与瓦剌相仇杀，数往来塞下，帝敕边将各严兵备之。
现代文：此时鬼力赤与瓦剌互相仇杀，屡次在边境要塞地区往来，明成祖下令各边关将领带兵严密防范。
English: At this time, the ghostly red and the corrugated iron mutually vendetta, repeatedly in the border fortress area, Ming Chengzu ordered the border generals and soldiers to closely guard.

古文：永乐三年，头目埽胡儿、察罕达鲁花等先后来归。
现代文：永乐三年，鞑靼的头目埽胡儿、察罕达鲁花等人先后来明朝归附。
English: In the third year of Yongle, the leader of the Tartars, Zhou Er, Chakhandaluhua, and others first joined the Ming Dynasty.

古文：久之，阿鲁台杀鬼力赤，而迎元之后本雅失里于别失八里，立为可汗。
现代文：过了很长一段时间后，阿鲁台杀死鬼力赤，在别失八里这个地方迎接元朝皇帝的后裔本雅失里，把他立为可汗。
English: After a long period of time, Arutai killed the ghostly red dragon and greeted the descendant of the Yuan Dynasty emperor, Benyasuli, in this place, Belyasbali, and made him the khan.

古文：六年春，帝即以书谕本雅失里曰： 自元运既讫，顺帝后爱猷识理达腊至坤帖木儿凡六传，瞬息之间，未闻一人善终者。
现代文：永乐六年春，明成祖修诏书给本雅失里说 ：自从元朝的气运终了以后，顺帝的后代爱猷识理达腊到坤帖木儿传了六代，就好像瞬息之间的事情一样，没有听说他们中有一人是有好结果的。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Yongle, Emperor Mingcheng wrote an imperial edict to Emperor Benya, saying: "Since the end of the Yuan Dynasty, the descendants of Emperor Shun have been passed down for six generations, from Emperor Aizhong to Emperor Kuntetsumu. It's like a matter of a few moments. I haven't heard of one of them having a good outcome."

古文：我皇考太祖高皇帝于元氏子孙，加意抚恤，来归者辄令北还，如遣脱古思帖木儿归，嗣为可汗，此南北人所共知。
现代文：我的亡父太祖高皇帝对元朝人的子孙，总是有意抚慰体恤，凡是来归顺的，总是让他们回到北方老家，例如把脱古思帖木儿送回去，他的子孙成为可汗，这些都是南北方人所共同知晓的。
English: My late great-grandfather, Emperor Gao, was always sympathetic to the descendants of the Yuan Dynasty. He always let them return to their hometown in the north if they came to submit. For example, he sent back Degu Sittemuir, and his descendants became khans. These are things that people in the north and the south know about.

古文：朕之心即皇考之心。
现代文：我的心与我亡父太祖高皇帝的心是一样的。
English: My heart is the same as that of my late father, Emperor Gao.

古文：兹元氏宗祧不绝如线，去就之机，祸福由分，尔宜审处之。 
现代文：元朝皇族的世系像线一样没有断绝，是去是来机会摆在面前，是祸是福就看你们选择。你应该审慎地处理好这件事。 
English: The lineage of the imperial family of the Yuan Dynasty is as unbroken as a thread. Whether you go or come depends on the opportunity in front of you, and whether it is a misfortune or a blessing depends on your choice. You should handle this matter carefully.

古文：不听。
现代文：本雅失里没有听从明成祖的劝告。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：明年，获其部曲完者帖木儿等二十二人，帝因复使给事中郭骥赍书往。
现代文：第二年，明军俘获了本雅失里的士卒完者帖木儿等二十二人，明成祖因此再派给事中郭骥虔诚地修书前往对方处。
English: In the second year, the Ming army captured twenty-two people, including Benya's defeated apprentice and finisher, Timur. Therefore, Ming Chengzu sent Guo Jie to the other side to study religiously.

古文：骥被杀，帝怒。
现代文：郭骥被对方所杀，明成祖很愤怒。
English: Guo Wei was killed by the other side, Ming Chengzu was very angry.

古文：秋，命淇国公丘福为大将军，武城侯王聪、同安侯火真副之，靖安侯王忠、安平侯李远为左、右参将，将精骑十万北讨，谕以毋失机，毋轻犯敌，一举未捷，俟再举。
现代文：同年秋天，命令洪国公丘福为大将军，武城侯王聪、同安侯火真为副将军，靖安侯王忠、安平侯李远为左右参将，带精锐骑兵十万征讨北方，同时告诫他们不要丢失时机，也不要轻易进犯敌方，一次不能成功，可以等第二次。
English: In the autumn of the same year, he ordered Hong Guogong Qufu to be the grand general, Wucheng marquis Wang Cong and Tongan marquis Huizhen to be vice-generals, Jingan marquis Wang Zhong and Anping marquis Li Yuan to be the left and right commanders, and to take 100,000 elite cavalry to conquer the north. At the same time, he warned them not to lose the opportunity and not to attack the enemy easily. If they could not succeed once, they could wait for the second time.

古文：时本雅失里已为瓦剌所袭破，与阿鲁台徙居胪朐河。
现代文：这时的本雅失里已被瓦剌所败，与阿鲁台一起迁徙到胪朐河居住。
English: By this time, Benyasuli had been defeated by the Varangians, and migrated with Arutai to live in the Li River.

古文：福率千骑先驰，遇游兵击破之。
现代文：丘福率领一千骑兵先行，碰到本雅失里的游动散兵并击败他们。
English: Chufu led a thousand cavalry ahead, encountered the wandering stragglers in Benya's loss and defeated them.

古文：军未集，福乘胜渡河追敌，敌辄佯败引去。
现代文：这时明军还没集中，丘福乘胜渡过河流追击敌人，而敌人总假装失败故意引他们深入。
English: At this time, the Ming army was not yet concentrated, and Qufu successfully crossed the river to pursue the enemy, while the enemy always pretended to fail and deliberately led them deeper.

古文：诸将以帝命止福，福不听。
现代文：明军各位将领拿明成祖的告诫制止丘福深入，丘福不听。
English: The generals of the Ming Army took the admonition of Ming Chengzu to stop Qufu from going deeper, but Qufu did not listen.

古文：敌众奄至，围之，五将军皆没。
现代文：大股敌人铺天盖地而来，包围了他们，明朝五位将军全部覆没。
English: A large number of enemies came from all over the world, surrounded them, and completely overwhelmed the five generals in the morning.

古文：帝益怒。
现代文：明成祖听到后更加愤怒。
English: As a result, Emperor Guangwu became increasingly angry.

古文：明年，帝自将五十万众出塞。
现代文：又过了一年，明成祖亲自带领五十万军队出边关。
English: A year later, Ming Chengzu personally led half a million troops out of the pass.

古文：本雅失里闻之惧，欲与阿鲁台俱西，阿鲁台不从，众溃散，君臣始各为部。
现代文：本雅失里听到消息后感到害怕，想和阿鲁台一起往西逃，阿鲁台不愿意，手下的人相继逃散，他们君臣之间开始各自拥有军队。
English: After hearing the news, Benyasuli felt scared and wanted to flee to the west with Arutai. Arutai did not want to, and his men fled one after another. The princes and ministers began to have their own armies.

古文：本雅失里西奔，阿鲁台东奔。
现代文：本雅失里往西逃奔，阿鲁台往东逃奔。
English: Benya ran away to the west, while Alutai ran away to the east.

古文：帝追及斡难河，本雅失里拒战。
现代文：明成祖带兵追到斡难河，本雅失里拒绝出战。
English: Ming Chengzu and his soldiers chased them into the raging river, but Benya refused to fight.

古文：帝麾兵奋击，一呼败之。
现代文：明成祖指挥军队奋勇出击，一声呐喊之下就打败了本雅失里。
English: Ming Chengzu commanded the army to fight bravely, and defeated Benyasuli with a shout.

古文：本雅失里弃辎重孳畜，以七骑遁。
现代文：本雅失里抛弃了物资和牲畜，带着七个人骑马逃走。
English: Benya abandoned his supplies and livestock and fled on horseback with seven men.

古文：斡难河者，元太祖始兴地也。
现代文：斡难河，是元太祖铁木真开始发迹的地方。
English: Uluanhe is the place where the great-grandfather Tiemu Zhen began to make his mark.

古文：班师至静虏镇，遇阿鲁台，帝使谕之降。
现代文：明成祖率领军队回到静虏镇，遇到阿鲁台，明成祖派人送文书给阿鲁台要他来投降。
English: Ming Chengzu led the army back to Jingru Town and met Arutai. Ming Chengzu sent someone to deliver a document to Arutai asking him to surrender.

古文：阿鲁台欲来，众不可，遂战。
现代文：阿鲁台想来，他手下的人不同意，于是发生战斗。
English: According to Arutai, his men disagreed and a fight broke out.

古文：帝率精骑大呼冲击，矢下如注，阿鲁台坠马，遂大败，追奔百余里乃还。
现代文：明成祖率领精锐骑兵大声呼喊着冲击敌人，箭矢像雨点般射向对方，阿鲁台从马上掉了下来，被明军大败，明成祖率兵追了一百多里远才回来。
English: Ming Chengzu led the elite cavalry and shouted loudly to attack the enemy, arrows shot like rain to the other side, Alutai fell off his horse and was defeated by the Ming army, and Ming Chengzu led the troops to chase more than a hundred miles away before returning.

古文：冬，阿鲁台使来贡马，帝纳之。
现代文：同年冬天，派使者向明朝廷贡献马匹，明成祖接纳了。
English: In the winter of the same year, he sent an envoy to offer horses to the Ming court, which Ming Chengzu accepted.

古文：越二年，本雅失里为瓦剌马哈木等所杀。
现代文：过了二年，本雅失里被瓦剌部的马哈木等人所杀。
English: Two years later, Ben Yasuri was killed by Mahagi and others in the corrugated iron section.

古文：阿鲁台已数入贡，帝俱厚报之，并还其向所俘同产兄妹二人。
现代文：阿鲁台已好几次派人向朝廷献贡物，明成祖都以厚礼还报他，并送还原来俘虏的阿鲁台的同母兄妹二人。
English: Arutai has sent people to pay tribute to the imperial court several times, and Mingchengzu has always returned him with a gift, and sent back two brothers and sisters of the same mother of Arutai who were originally captured.

古文：至是，奏马哈木等弑其主，又擅立答里巴，愿输诚内附，请为故主复仇。
现代文：至此，阿鲁台上奏书给明朝廷，说马哈木等人杀了自己的君主，擅自扶立答里巴，因此他愿意诚心依附明朝，请求明朝廷允许他替原来的君主报仇。
English: At this point, Arutai sent a letter to the Ming court, saying that Mahami and others had killed their own monarch and had raised the Throne without permission. Therefore, he was willing to sincerely adhere to the Ming court and ask the Ming court to allow him to take revenge for the former monarch.

古文：天子义之，封为和宁王。
现代文：明成祖认为他很忠义，封他为和宁王。
English: Ming Chengzu thought he was very loyal and named him King He Ning.

古文：自是，岁或一贡，或再贡，以为常。
现代文：从此，阿鲁台每年送一次贡物，或一年送二次贡物，都是常事。
English: Since then, Arutai has sent tribute once a year, or twice a year, which is a regular occurrence.

古文：十二年，帝征瓦剌。
现代文：永乐十二年，明成祖率军征讨瓦剌部落。
English: In the twelfth year of Yongle, Ming Chengzu led an army to conquer the Varangian tribe.

古文：阿鲁台使部长以下来朝会。
现代文：阿鲁台派自己部落长以下的官吏来朝会明成祖。
English: Arutai sent his own officials below the tribal chief to the imperial court to meet Ming Chengzu.

古文：赐米五十石，乾肉、酒糗、彩币有差。
现代文：明成祖各按他们的等级，赏给他们五十石米、干肉、酒糗、彩币若干。
English: According to their rank, each of the Ming Dynasty ancestors rewarded them with 50 koku of rice, dried meat, sake lees, and a number of colored coins.

古文：十四年，以战败瓦剌，使来献俘。
现代文：永乐十四年阿鲁台打败瓦剌，派使者来明朝献俘虏。
English: In the 14th year of Yongle, Alutai defeated the Varangians and sent an envoy to the Ming Dynasty to present the captives.

古文：十九年，阿鲁台贡使至边，要劫行旅，帝谕使戒戢之，由是骄蹇不至。
现代文：永乐十九年，阿鲁台派使者献贡物，到边关时要抢劫行人，明成祖告诫来使应该戒绝收敛这种行为，因这个原因阿鲁台不再顺从明朝，不再朝贡了。
English: In the 19th year of Yongle, Arutai sent an envoy to pay tribute, and when he arrived at the border, he wanted to rob pedestrians. Ming Chengzu warned him that he should refrain from such behavior. For this reason, Arutai no longer obeyed the Ming Dynasty and no longer paid tribute.

古文：阿鲁台之内附，困于瓦剌，穷蹙而南，思假息塞外。
现代文：阿鲁台之依附明朝，是因为他被瓦剌部落所困扰，走投无路才南投，想凭借明朝的势力在塞外休养生息。
English: Arutai's attachment to the Ming Dynasty was due to the fact that he was troubled by the Varangian tribe and had no choice but to go south, hoping to rely on the power of the Ming Dynasty to recuperate outside of Tibet.

古文：帝纳而封之，母妻皆为王太夫人、王夫人。数年生聚，畜牧日以蕃盛，遂慢我使者，拘留之。
现代文：明成祖接纳了他并封他为王，他的母亲、妻子都成了王太夫人、王夫人，经过几年的人口繁殖和物力聚积，其畜牧业一天比一天繁盛，于是就怠慢明朝使者，把使者拘留起来。
English: Ming Chengzu accepted him and made him king. His mother and wife both became Lady Wang and Lady Wang. After several years of population growth and material accumulation, his animal husbandry became more and more prosperous day by day. Therefore, he neglected the Ming Dynasty envoy and detained the envoy.

古文：其贡使归，多行劫掠，部落亦时来窥塞。
现代文：他们派来朝贡的使者回去时，也多有抢劫掠夺的行为，他们的部落也时常到边关地区来窥探动静。
English: When the envoys they sent to pay tribute came back, there was also a lot of looting and plundering, and their tribes often went to the border areas to spy on the goings-on.

古文：二十年春，大人兴和。
现代文：永乐二十年春天，他们大举侵入兴和。
English: In the spring of the 20th year of Yongle, they invaded Xinghe in a big way.

古文：于是诏亲征之。
现代文：于是明成祖下诏亲自征讨他们。
English: Therefore, Emperor Mingcheng issued an edict to personally collect them.

古文：阿鲁台闻大军出，惧，其母妻皆詈之曰： 大明皇帝何负尔，而必为逆！ 
现代文：阿鲁台听到明朝大军出发征讨，感到害怕，他的母亲和妻子也都责骂他 ：大明的皇帝有什么地方对不起你，你却一定要背叛他！ 
English: Arutai was scared when he heard that the Ming Dynasty army was going to invade. His mother and wife also scolded him: "What's wrong with Emperor Daming, you must betray him!"

古文：于是尽弃其辎重马畜于阔滦海侧，以其孥直北徙。
现代文：这样阿鲁台便把他的军用物资、马匹牲畜全部抛弃在阔滦海旁边，只带他的妻子儿女直往北迁徙。
English: In this way, Arutai abandoned all of his military supplies, horses, and livestock on the coast of the Bohai Sea, taking only his wife and children to migrate to the north.

古文：帝命焚其辎重，收其马畜，遂班师。
现代文：明成祖下令烧毁阿鲁台的军用物资，收留他留下的马匹牲畜，就带军队回去了。
English: Ming Chengzu ordered to burn the military supplies of Alutai, take back the horses and livestock he left behind, and returned with the army.

古文：明年秋，边将言阿鲁台将入寇。
现代文：第二年秋天，边关的将领说阿鲁台将要入侵明朝。
English: In the autumn of the following year, the generals at the border gate said that Alutai would invade the Ming Dynasty.

古文：帝曰： 彼意朕必不复出，当先驻塞下待之。 
现代文：明成祖说 ：他意料我一定不会再出去亲征了，我应当先将军队驻扎在边关要地等他。 
English: Ming Chengzu said: He expected that I would never go out personally again, I should first station the army at the border and wait for him.

古文：遂部分宁阳侯陈懋为先锋，至宿嵬山不见敌，遇王子也先土干率妻子部属来降。
现代文：于是就做部署，派宁阳侯陈懋为先锋，到宿嵬山时并没有发现敌人，遇到王子也先土干带着妻子儿子和部下属人来归降。
English: Therefore, they made a deployment, and sent Ningyang marquis Chen Xi as the vanguard. When they arrived at Shukou Mountain, they did not find the enemy. When they encountered the prince, he also came to surrender first with his wife, son and subordinates.

古文：帝封为忠勇王，赐姓名曰金忠。
现代文：明成祖便封也先土干为忠勇王，赏赐他一个姓名叫金忠。
English: Ming Chengzu then also designated him as the Prince of Loyalty and gave him the name Jinzhong.

古文：忠勇王至京师，数请击敌自效。
现代文：忠勇王到京都，屡次请求出击敌人自愿效劳，明成祖说： 暂时等一等吧。 
English: When King Zhongyong arrived in Kyoto, he repeatedly asked the enemy to volunteer for the attack. Ming Chengzu said, "Let's wait for a while."

古文：帝曰： 姑待之。 二十二年春，开平守将奏阿鲁台盗边，群臣劝帝如忠勇王言。
现代文：永乐二十二年春天，守卫开平的将领上奏说阿鲁台在边关抢劫掠夺，各位大臣劝明成祖听忠勇王的话。
English: In the spring of the 22nd year of Yongle, the generals guarding Kaiping reported that Arutai was robbing and plundering at the border, and the ministers advised Ming Chengzu to listen to the words of King Zhongyong.

古文：帝复亲征，师次荅兰纳木儿河，得谍者，知阿鲁台远遁。
现代文：明成祖又亲自出征，军队驻扎在答兰纳木儿河时，抓获一个探子，了解到阿鲁台已经远远地逃走了。
English: Ming Chengzu personally went to the front again. When the army was stationed in the Namur River, they captured a scout and learned that Arutai had fled far away.

古文：帝意亦厌兵，乃下诏暴阿鲁台罪恶，而宥其所部来降者，止勿杀。
现代文：明成祖对兵事也厌倦了，就下诏书公布阿鲁台的罪恶，对于他的部下来归降的，都宽宥他们，不能杀害。
English: Ming Chengzu was also tired of military affairs, so he issued an edict announcing the evils of Arutai, and forgave his subordinates who surrendered, but could not kill them.

古文：车驾还，崩于榆木川。
现代文：明成祖乘马车回京城，当行到榆木川时，逝世。
English: Ming Chengzu took a horse-drawn carriage back to Beijing, and when he reached Zhangmu River, he passed away.

古文：未几，阿鲁台使来贡马，仁宗已登极，诏纳之。
现代文：不久，阿鲁台派使者给明朝廷献贡马，仁宗已经登上皇帝位，下诏接纳他们。
English: Soon after, Arutai sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Ming court, and Emperor Nanzong, who had already ascended to the throne, issued an imperial edict to accept them.

古文：自是，岁修职贡如永乐时。
现代文：从此，他们又像永乐年间一样每年都来进贡物给朝廷。
English: From then on, they came every year to pay tribute to the imperial court, just as they did during the Yongle Dynasty.

古文：时阿鲁台数败于瓦剌，部曲离散。
现代文：这时期阿鲁台屡次被瓦剌部落所打败，他手下的军队也逃离分散了。
English: During this period, Arutai was repeatedly defeated by the Varangian tribes, and his troops fled and dispersed.

古文：其属把的等先后来归，朝廷皆予官职，赐钞币，诏有司给供具。
现代文：他手下的把的等人也先后来归顺明朝，朝廷都封官职给他们，赏赐给他们钞票，让有关官吏供给他们酒食。
English: The people at the top of his staff also surrendered to the Ming dynasty, and the imperial court gave them official positions, rewarded them with banknotes, and had the relevant officials provide them with food and drink.

古文：自后来归者，悉如例。
现代文：从此以后凡来归顺的人，待遇都跟前面一样。
English: From now on, anyone who surrenders will be treated the same as before.

古文：阿鲁台日益蹙，乃率其属东走兀良哈，驻牧辽塞。
现代文：阿鲁台更加走投无路，便带领他的属下人往东逃到兀良哈，在辽州的边关地区放牧。
English: Alutai was even more desperate, so he led his subordinates to flee east to Aoliangha, to graze cattle in the border areas of Liaozhou.

古文：诸将请出兵掩击之，帝不听。
现代文：各位将领请求出兵掩杀他，仁宗皇帝不听。
English: The generals requested that troops be sent to cover up his death, but Emperor Renzong did not listen.

古文：宣德九年，阿鲁台复为脱脱不花所袭，妻子死，孳畜略尽，独与其子失捏干等徙居母纳山、察罕脑剌等处。
现代文：宣德九年阿鲁台再次遭到脱脱不花的袭击，他的妻子儿子被杀，牲畜几乎丧失殆尽，只好与他的儿子失捏干等人迁徙到母纳山、察罕脑剌等地居住。
English: In the ninth year of Xuande's reign, Arutai was once again attacked, his wife and son were killed, and his livestock was almost wiped out. He had to migrate with his son and others to live in Maonashan, Cahangnyeongju and other places.

古文：未几，瓦剌脱懽袭杀阿鲁台及失捏干，于是阿鲁台子阿卜只俺及其孙妻速木答思等丧败无依，来乞内附。帝怜而抚之。
现代文：不久，瓦剌部落的脱飀袭击并杀死了阿鲁台和失捏干，于是阿鲁台的儿子阿卜只俺和孙媳速木答思等无依无靠，来乞求依附于明朝，宣宗皇帝可怜并安抚了他们。
English: Not long after, the Varangian tribe attacked and killed Arutai and Utsubo, so Arutai's son, Abdulai, and granddaughter-in-law, Hayaki Atsushi, came begging to be attached to the Ming Dynasty. Emperor Xuan Zong took pity on them and pacified them.

古文：阿鲁台既死，其故所立阿台王子及所部朵儿只伯等复为脱脱不花所窘，窜居亦集乃路。
现代文：阿鲁台已死，他以前所立的阿台王子及其部属朵儿只伯等人又遭脱脱不花的为难，便逃奔到亦集乃路居住。
English: Arutai was dead, and Prince Atai and his subordinates, including Doer Tuba, whom he had previously set up, were in a desperate situation, so they fled to live in Ichinoe-ro.

古文：外为纳款，而数入寇甘、凉。
现代文：表面上他们投诚明朝，而暗地里几次入侵甘州、凉州。
English: On the surface, they invaded Chengdu in the Ming Dynasty, but secretly, they invaded Ganzhou and Liangzhou several times.

古文：正统元年，将军陈懋败朵儿只伯于平川，追及苏武山，颇有斩获。
现代文：正统元年，将军陈懋在平川打败朵儿只伯，追到苏武山，杀死和俘虏不少敌人。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, General Chen Xi defeated Doer Chubo in Hirakawa, chased him to Suwushan, and killed and captured many enemies.

古文：二年冬，命都督任礼为总兵官，蒋贵、赵安副之，尚书王骥督师，以便宜行事。
现代文：正统二年冬天，明朝任命都督任礼为总兵官，蒋贵、赵安为副总兵官，尚书王骥为督师，率兵看情况相机行事。
English: In the winter of the second year of Zheng Zheng, the Ming Dynasty appointed the governor Renli as the chief military officer, Jiang Gui and Zhao An as the deputy chief military officer, and Shang Shu Wang Qi as the superintendent, and led the soldiers to watch the situation with a camera.

古文：明年夏，复败朵儿只伯等于石城。
现代文：第二年夏天，又在石城打败朵儿只伯等人。
English: In the summer of the following year, he defeated Dorzhu Bo and others in Shicheng.

古文：阿台与朵儿合，复败之兀鲁乃地，追及黑泉，又及之刁力沟，出沙漠千里，东西夹击，敌几尽，先后获其部长一百五十人。
现代文：阿台与朵儿只伯汇合后，又在兀鲁乃地区被明军打败。明军追击到黑泉，又追击他们到刀力沟，出沙漠有千里之远，东西两方夹击，敌人几乎全军被歼，先后俘虏了他们的部落长官达一百五十人。
English: After the confluence of Atai and Dorzhu Bo, they were again defeated by the Ming army in the area of Yalunai. The Ming army chased them to Heiquan, and then chased them to Soligou, thousands of miles away from the desert, sandwiched between the east and west, almost the entire enemy army was wiped out, and one hundred and fifty of their tribal leaders were successively captured.

古文：于是阿台、朵儿只伯等来归。
现代文：这样，阿台、朵儿只伯等人只好来投降明朝。
English: As a result, Adai, Dore Kubo and others had no choice but to surrender in the morning.

古文：未几，脱脱不花捕阿台等杀之。
现代文：不久，脱脱不花捉到了阿台等人，并杀了他们。
English: Not long after, Dedufuhua caught Atai and others and killed them.

古文：脱脱不花者，故元后，鞑靼长也。
现代文：脱脱不花这个人，是以前元朝人的后裔，鞑靼人的酋长。
English: This man is a descendant of the former Yuan dynasty, the chief of the Tatars.

古文：瓦剌脱懽既击杀阿鲁台，悉收其部，兼并贤义、安乐二王之众，欲自立为可汗。
现代文：瓦剌脱飀已经袭击并杀死了阿鲁台，全部收留了阿鲁台的部属，兼并了贤义王、安乐王的人马，想自己立为可汗。
English: Varun Devi has attacked and killed Arutai, taken in all of Arutai's subordinates, and annexed the people and horses of King Xianyi and King Anle. He wants to establish himself as khan.

古文：众不可，乃立脱脱不花，以阿鲁台众属之，自为丞相，阳推奉之，实不承其号令。
现代文：众人认为这样不行，脱飀才立脱脱不花为可汗，把阿鲁台的人马归属给他，自己做丞相，表面上是推奉脱脱不花，实际上并不承接脱脱不花的号令。
English: Many people thought that this was not possible, that it was only by removing the shackles that he could become a khan, that the people of Alutai belonged to him, and that he himself was the prime minister. On the surface, he was promoting the removal of the shackles, but in reality, he did not accept the order to remove the shackles.

古文：脱懽死，子也先嗣，益桀骜自雄，诸部皆下之，脱脱不花具可汗名而已。
现代文：脱飀死后，他的儿子也先继承了父亲的权位，更加桀骜自雄，各部都听命于他，脱脱不花只有可汗的虚名而已。
English: After his death, his son also inherited his father's power first, and was even more arrogant. All the ministries obeyed his orders, and all it took to get rid of him was the false name of Khan.

古文：脱脱不花岁来朝贡，天子皆厚报之，比诸蕃有加，书称之曰达达可汗，赐赉并及其妃。
现代文：脱脱不花每年来朝贡时，明朝皇帝都以厚礼还报他，比其他外族更优待，文书上称他为达达可汗，皇帝对他的赏赐恩及他的妃子。
English: Every year, when he came to pay tribute to the emperor, the emperor of the Ming Dynasty rewarded him with a heavy gift, and treated him better than other foreigners. In the document, he was called Dada Khan, the emperor's reward for him and his concubine.

古文：十四年秋，也先谋大举入寇，脱脱不花止之曰： 吾侪服食，多资大明，何忍为此？ 
现代文：正统十四年秋天，也先谋划大举入侵明朝，脱脱不花制止他说： 我们的吃和穿，大多依赖大明朝，怎么忍心做这种事。 
English: In the autumn of the 14th year of orthodoxy, he also planned a large-scale invasion of the Ming Dynasty, and it cost nothing to stop him. He said: Our food and clothing are mostly dependent on the Ming Dynasty, how can we bear to do such a thing.

古文：也先不听，曰： 可汗不为，吾当自为。 
现代文：也先不听，说： 可汗不愿做，我就自己做。 
English: He didn't listen at first and said, "If Khan doesn't want to do it, I'll do it myself."

古文：遂分道，俾脱脱不花侵辽东，而自拥众从大同入。
现代文：于是两人分路行动，让脱脱不花入侵辽东，自己率领大军从大同入侵明朝。
English: As a result, the two men went their separate ways, letting Dutoit invade Liaodong at his own expense and leading a large army to invade the Ming Dynasty from Datong.

古文：帝亲征之，驾于土木陷焉。
现代文：明英宗皇帝亲自带兵征讨，在土木堡被也先俘虏。
English: Emperor Ming Yingzong personally led the troops to recruit, and was also the first to be captured in the earthen fort.

古文：景皇帝自监国即位，尊帝为太上皇帝。
现代文：景泰皇帝便从原来的监国位置上登极做皇帝，尊奉英宗皇帝为太上皇。
English: Emperor Jingtai ascended to the throne from his original position as overseer of the country, and revered Emperor Yingzong as the supreme emperor.

古文：明年秋，上皇归自也先所。
现代文：第二年秋，太上皇被也先释放回来。
English: In the autumn of the following year, the Retired Emperor was released first.

古文：事载《瓦剌传》。
现代文：这件事在本书《瓦剌传》有记载。
English: This event is recorded in the book "The Story of Corrugated Board."

古文：脱脱不花自上皇归后，修贡益勤。
现代文：自太上皇回归朝廷后，脱脱不花给明朝廷的献贡比以前更勤。
English: Since the Emperor's return to the Imperial Court, the contributions to the Ming Court have been more diligent than before.

古文：尝妻也先姊，生子，也先欲立之，不从。
现代文：脱脱不花以前的妻子是也先的姊，生了个儿子，也先想立他，脱脱不花不愿意。
English: The previous wife was also the first sister to give birth to a son, and she wanted to have him first, but she didn't want to give birth.

古文：也先亦疑其与中国通，将害己，遂治兵相攻。
现代文：也先对脱脱不花与中国通好颇有疑忌，认为这会对自己不利，于是整肃兵马攻打脱脱不花。
English: At first, they were also rather suspicious of getting along well with China, believing that this would be detrimental to themselves, so they cleaned up the troops and horses to attack getting along well.

古文：也先杀脱脱不花，收其妻子孳畜，给诸部属，而自立为可汗。
现代文：也先杀了脱脱不花后，把他的妻子、儿女和牲畜收容起来分配给自己的部属，自己封为可汗。
English: He also killed his wife, children, and livestock first, and then divided them among his subordinates, appointing himself khan.

古文：时景皇帝二年也。
现代文：这是景泰皇帝接位第二年的事。
English: It was the second year of Emperor Jing Tai's reign.

古文：朝廷称也先为瓦剌可汗。
现代文：明朝廷称也先为瓦剌可汗。
English: The Ming court also first claimed to be Vajrakhan.

古文：未几，为所部阿剌知院所杀。
现代文：不久，也先被部下的阿剌知院杀死。
English: Soon after, he was also killed by his subordinate, Ahanchiin.

古文：鞑靼部长孛来复攻破阿剌，求脱脱不花子麻儿可儿立之，号小王子。
现代文：鞑靼部落酋长孛来又打败阿剌，找到脱脱不花的儿子麻儿可儿，立为可汗，号称小王子。
English: The Tatar tribal chieftain came and defeated the imam, found his illegitimate son, Malkor, and installed him as khan, known as the Little Prince.

古文：阿剌死，而孛来与其属毛里孩等皆雄视部中，于是鞑靼复炽。
现代文：阿剌死后，孛来和他的下属毛里孩等人在部落中势力最大，这样鞑靼势力又开始繁盛。
English: After the death of Ah Qin, Qin Lai and his subordinates such as Maurya were the most powerful in the tribe, so the Tatar forces began to flourish again.

古文：景泰六年遣使入贡。
现代文：景泰六年，鞑靼派使者向明朝进贡。
English: In the sixth year of King Taejo, Tatar envoys paid tribute to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：英宗复辟，遣都督马政往赐故伯颜帖木儿妻币。
现代文：明英宗复辟，重登皇帝位，派遣都督马政到鞑靼给从前伯颜帖木儿的妻子送钱币。
English: Emperor Ming Ying Zong was restored to the throne, and the governor Ma Zheng was sent to Tatar to send coins to the wife of the former empress Beguan Timur.

古文：孛来留之，而遣使入贺，欲献玺。
现代文：孛来把马政留下，派遣使者向英宗祝贺，表示要还皇帝的印玺。
English: He sent an envoy to congratulate Emperor Yingzong, saying that he wanted to return the emperor's seal money.

古文：帝敕之曰： 玺已非真，即真，亦秦不祥物耳，献否从尔便。
现代文：英宗皇帝给孛来的诏书说 ：印玺已经不是真的了，即便是真的，也是不祥之物，还与不还随你的便。
English: Emperor Yingzong's imperial edict to Xuan said, "The seal is no longer real. Even if it is real, it is an ominous thing. You can take it or leave it as you please."

古文：第无留我使，以速尔祸。 
现代文：只是你不要扣留我派的使者，否则会更快地降祸于你。 
English: Only do not hold back My messengers, lest disaster overtake you suddenly.

古文：时敌数寇威远诸卫，夏，定远伯石彪败之于磨儿山。
现代文：这时鞑靼人已几次入侵威远等卫所。同年夏天，定远伯石彪在磨儿山打败了入侵的鞑靼人。
English: By this time, the Tatars had invaded Wei Yuan and other sanctuaries several times. In the summer of the same year, Ding Yuan Bo Shibiao defeated the invading Tatars in Muer Mountain.

古文：天顺二年，孛来大举寇陕西，安远侯柳溥御之辄败，而饰小捷以闻。
现代文：天顺二年，孛来带兵大规模地入侵陕西，安远侯柳溥率兵抵抗总是被孛来打败，而柳溥却拿小小的胜利报告皇上以粉饰自己的失败。
English: In the second year of Tianshun, Yan Lai led an army to invade Shaanxi on a large scale. The resistance led by Anyuan Hou Liu Bei was always defeated by Yan Lai, but Liu Bei took a small victory to report to the emperor to whitewash his failure.

古文：明年春，敌入安边营，石彪等破之，都督周贤、指挥李钅监战死。
现代文：第二年春，敌人入侵安边营，石彪率兵破敌，都督周贤和指挥李鉴战死。
English: In the spring of the second year, the enemy invaded the Anbian camp, Shi Biao led the troops to defeat the enemy, and the governor Zhou Xian and the commander Li Jian died in battle.

古文：四年复寇榆林，彰武伯杨信拒却之。
现代文：天顺四年敌人又入侵榆林，彰武伯杨信率兵抵抗打退敌人。
English: In the fourth year of Tianshun, the enemy invaded Yulin again, and Zhangwu Bo Yangxin led the troops to resist and repel the enemy.

古文：再入，败之于金鸡峪。
现代文：再次入侵，又再次在金鸡峪被击退。
English: Invaded again, repulsed again at the Golden Rooster.

古文：未几，复大掠陕西诸边，廷臣请治各守将罪，帝宥之。
现代文：不久，敌人又大肆掠夺陕西的各边关，朝廷的大臣们请求皇帝给这些边关的守卫将领治罪，英宗皇帝都宽恕了他们。
English: Soon, the enemy plundered all the border gates of Shaanxi. The imperial ministers asked the emperor to punish the guards of these border gates. Emperor Yingzong pardoned them all.

古文：五年春，寇入平虏城，诱指挥许颙等入伏，杀之。
现代文：天顺五年春天，敌人入侵平虏城，把指挥许等人诱入伏击圈内，杀死了许。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Tianshun, the enemy invaded Pingru City, lured the commander Xu and others into the ambush circle, and killed Xu.

古文：边报日亟，命侍郎白圭、都御史王竑往视师。
现代文：边关地区的奏报一天比一天急，英宗皇帝命令侍郎白圭、都御史王闳去边关视察军队。
English: The reports from the border areas became more urgent day by day, and Emperor Yeongjong ordered his attendant Baekgye and the governor of the capital, Wang Xi, to go to the border to inspect the troops.

古文：秋，孛来求款，帝使詹升赍敕往谕。
现代文：同年秋天，孛来请求投诚，英宗皇帝派詹升带诏书去见孛来。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Yingzong Emperor sent Zhan Sheng with an imperial edict to Yingzong to ask him to surrender.

古文：孛来遣使随升来贡，请改大同旧贡道，而由陕西兰县入，许之。
现代文：孛来派使者随詹升一起到朝廷献贡，并请求。后献贡不从大同这条旧路走，而要从陕西兰县进来，英宗皇帝答应了他们的请求。
English: Emperor Yongzheng sent an envoy to the imperial court with Zhan Sheng to pay tribute, and requested that the tribute should not follow the old road of Datong, but should come from Shaanxi Province. Emperor Yongzheng agreed to their request.

古文：未几，复纠其属毛里孩等入河西。
现代文：不久，孛来又纠集他手下的毛里孩等人入侵河西。
English: Not long after, Xing Lai gathered his subordinates, such as Mao Hai and others, to invade Hexi.

古文：明年春，圭等分巡西边，圭遇敌于固原川，竑遇敌于红崖子川，皆破之。
现代文：第二年春，白圭等人分别巡视西部边关，白圭在固原川、王闳在红崖子川与敌人遭遇，都打败了敌人。
English: In the spring of the second year, Bai Gui and others separately inspected the western border. Bai Gui encountered the enemy in the Gouyuan River, and Wang Xi encountered the enemy in the Hongyazizi River, and both defeated the enemy.

古文：帝赐玺书奖励，敕孛来使臣仍从大同入贡。
现代文：英宗皇帝赏赐有皇帝印玺的诏书奖励他们，并告诉孛来的使臣，今后入朝廷献贡仍从大同这条路走。
English: Emperor Yingzong rewarded them with an imperial edict stamped with the emperor's seal, and told the envoys who had come to pay tribute to the imperial court that they would still follow the Datong road in the future.

古文：时麻儿可儿复与孛来相仇杀。
现代文：此时期麻儿可儿又与孛来互相仇杀。
English: During this period, Maer Ker and Xing Lai Long also fought against each other.

古文：麻儿可儿死，众共立马可古儿吉思，亦号小王子。
现代文：麻儿可儿死后，众人一起拥立马古可儿吉思，也号称小王子。
English: After the death of Malkor, everyone stood together to support Malkor Gith, also known as the Little Prince.

古文：自是，鞑靼部长益各专擅。
现代文：从此以后，鞑靼各部落长更加擅权自专。
English: Since then, the Tatar tribal chiefs have become more and more autocratic.

古文：小王子稀通中国，传世次，多莫可考。
现代文：小王子很少与中国交通，所传后代情况，大多无法考证。
English: The little prince rarely communicated with China, and most of the information passed down to future generations cannot be verified.

古文：孛来等每岁入贡，数寇掠，往来塞下，以西攻瓦剌为辞，又数要劫三卫。
现代文：孛来等人每年都到朝廷来献贡，也几次入侵掠夺边关，并以向西进攻瓦剌部落为托辞，几次抢劫三个卫所。
English: Xuan Lai and others came to the imperial court every year to pay tribute, invaded and plundered the border several times, and robbed the three sanctuaries several times under the pretext of attacking the Wulai tribe to the west.

古文：七年冬，贡使及关，帝却之，以大学士李贤言乃止。
现代文：天顺七年冬，孛来派来朝廷献贡的使者到边关，英宗皇帝拒绝他入关，大学士李贤进言劝阻，英宗皇帝才放行。
English: In the winter of the seventh year of Tenshun, the envoy sent by Yao to pay tribute to the imperial court arrived at the border. Emperor Yingzong refused to allow him to enter the border. Li Xian, a university scholar, advised and dissuaded him, and Emperor Yingzong released him.

古文：八年春，御史陈选言： 鞑靼部落，孛来最强，又密招三卫诸蕃，相结屯住。
现代文：天顺八年春天，御史陈选进言： 鞑靼各部落，属孛来最强大。他又秘密招收三个卫所中的外族人，相互结集屯居。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of Tenshun, the historian Chen Xuan said: The Tatar tribes are the most powerful. He also secretly recruited foreigners from three sanatoriums and gathered them to live together.

古文：去冬来朝，要我赏宴，窥我虚实，其犯边之情已露。
现代文：去年冬天来上朝，要求赏赐给他们宴席，实际上是窥探我们的虚实，其意欲侵犯我们边关的情况已经显露。
English: Last winter, he came to the DPRK and asked for a banquet to be given to them. In fact, he was spying on us, and his intention to encroach on our border has been revealed.

古文：而我边关守臣，因循怠慢，城堡不修，甲仗不利，军士不操习，甚至富者纳月钱而安闲，贫者迫饥寒而逃窜。
现代文：而我们边关地区的守卫大臣，因循守旧，守备怠慢，城堡不修，兵器不利，士兵也不操练，甚至富裕者每个月交点钱就可以过安逸闲散的生活，贫困者则因饥寒交迫而逃跑。
English: And the Minister of Defense of our border areas, because of the old guard, neglected to maintain, the castle is not repaired, the weapons are not good, the soldiers do not practice, and even the rich can pay a little money every month to live a comfortable and idle life, while the poor are fleeing from hunger and cold.

古文：边备废弛，缓急何恃？
现代文：边防守备废弃懈怠，一旦有轻重缓急之事时就无所倚恃了。
English: If there is a matter of priority, there is nothing to fall back on.

古文：乞敕在边诸臣，痛革前弊。
现代文：因此恳求皇帝陛下给边关的各位大臣下命令，要他们痛心疾首革除上述弊端。
English: Therefore, I implore His Majesty the Emperor to issue an order to the ministers of the frontier to eliminate the above-mentioned drawbacks.

古文：其镇守、备御等官，亦宜以时黜陟，庶能者知奋，怠者知警。
现代文：边关地区的镇守、备御等官员，也应该按时废黜或升降，这样才能使有能力的人奋发，给懈怠的人以警告。
English: Officials such as town guards and reserve officers in border areas should also be dismissed or promoted in a timely manner, so that those who are capable can work hard and those who are slack can be warned.

古文：至厄塞要害之处，或益官军，或设营堡，或用墩台，咸须处置得宜，岁遣大臣巡视，庶边防有备，寇氛可戢。 
现代文：至于重要的边关和要害之处，要么增加国家军队，要么建设军营堡垒，要么筑墩台，都必须处置得当，每年还得派遣大臣去巡视，这样边关地区有了防备，外族想要入侵的气氛才能收敛。 
English: As for the important border gates and key points, either increase the national army, or build military camps and fortresses, or build fortifications, all of which must be handled properly. Every year, a minister must be sent to inspect, so that the border areas are prepared, and the atmosphere of foreigners wanting to invade can be restrained.

古文：报闻。成化元年春，孛来诱兀良哈九万骑入辽河，武安侯郑宏御却之。
现代文：成化元年春天，孛来诱骗兀良哈带九万骑兵侵入辽河，武安侯郑宏率兵打退了他们。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Chenghua era, Zhai came to trick Gong Liangha into invading the Liaohe River with ninety thousand cavalry, and Wu'an Hou Zheng Hong led the troops to repel them.

古文：秋，散掠延绥。
现代文：同年秋天，他们零零散散地抢掠了延绥等地。
English: In the autumn of the same year, they looted Yancheng and other places piecemeal.

古文：冬，复大入。
现代文：同年冬天，又大举入侵明朝。
English: In the winter of the same year, they invaded the Ming Dynasty in a big way.

古文：命彰武伯杨信率山西兵，都御史项忠率陕西兵御之，少却。
现代文：明朝命令彰武伯杨信率领山西的军队，都御史项忠率领陕西的军队抵抗敌人，不多久敌人退却。
English: The Ming Dynasty ordered Zhangwubo Yangxin to lead the troops in Shanxi, and the Grand Duke Xiangzhizhong to lead the troops in Shaanxi to resist the enemy. The enemy soon retreated.

古文：未几，复渡河曲，围黄甫川堡，官军力战，乃引去。
现代文：不久，鞑靼人又渡过河曲，包围了黄甫川堡，守军官兵奋力战斗，才引退而去。
English: Soon, the Tatars crossed the river and surrounded the Huangfuchuan Fort, where the officers and soldiers fought hard before retreating.

古文：始，鞑靼之来也，或在辽东、宣府、大同，或在宁夏、庄浪、甘肃，去来无常，为患不久。
现代文：刚开始时，鞑靼人入侵地点，要么在辽东、宣府、大同，要么在宁夏、庄浪、甘肃，来来去去没有一定，作祸的时间也不长久。
English: At the beginning, the Tatar invasion sites were either in Liaodong, Xuanfu, Datong, or in Ningxia, Zhuanglang, and Gansu. There was no fixed time for them to come and go, and they did not last long.

古文：景泰初，始犯延庆，然部落少，不敢深入。
现代文：景泰初年，才开始进犯延庆，但这时他们的部落还少，不敢深入。
English: It was only in the first year of Jing Tai that they began to invade Yanqing, but at this time their tribe was still small and they did not dare to go deeper.

古文：天顺间，有阿罗出者，率属潜入河套居之，遂逼近西边。
现代文：天顺年间，有个叫阿罗出的人，率领属下人偷偷地进入河套地区居住，这样就逼近了西部边关。
English: In the year of Tianshun, there was a man named Arowa, who led his subordinates to secretly enter the Hetao region to live, thus approaching the western border.

古文：河套，古朔方郡，唐张仁愿筑三受降城处也。
现代文：河套这个地方，是古代的朔方郡，唐朝张仁愿在这里筑有三个受降城。
English: Hetao this place, is the ancient Shuofang County, the Tang Dynasty Zhang Ren is willing to build here, there are three capitals.

古文：地在黄河南，自宁夏至偏头关，延袤二千里，饶水草，外为东胜卫。
现代文：河套地处黄河以南，从宁夏到偏头关，宽广有二千里，水草富饶，其外是东胜卫所。
English: Hetao is located south of the Yellow River, from Ningxia to Yuehou Pass, with a width of two thousand miles, rich in aquatic plants, and the Dongsheng Sanatorium.

古文：东胜而外，土平衍，敌来，一骑不能隐，明初守之，后以旷绝内徙。
现代文：东胜卫所的外面，土地平坦，敌人来犯时，连一匹马也藏不住。明朝初年曾派兵守卫这个地方，后因为该地太空旷就把守军往内迁。
English: In the early years of the Ming Dynasty, soldiers were sent to guard this place, but later the defenders were moved inside because of the vastness of the area.

古文：至是，孛来与小王子、毛里孩等先后继至，掳中国人为乡导，抄掠延绥无虚时，而边事以棘。
现代文：于是，孛来和小王子、毛里孩等人先后到达该地，掳抢中国人做向导，常常抄近路掠夺延绥地区，这样边关的事务就很棘手。
English: As a result, Huan Lai, the Little Prince, Mauri Has and others arrived in succession, abducted and robbed the Chinese to act as guides, and often took shortcuts to plunder the Yancheng region. This made matters at the border very difficult.

古文：二年夏，大入延绥。
现代文：成化二年夏天，鞑靼人大举侵入延绥。
English: In the summer of the second year of Chenghua, the Tatars invaded Yancheng on a large scale.

古文：帝命杨信充总兵官，都督赵胜为副，率京军及诸边卒二万人讨之。
现代文：宪宗皇帝任命杨信为总兵官，都督赵胜为副总兵官，率领京都的军队和各边关的士兵二万人征讨他们。
English: Emperor Gensong appointed Yang Xin as commander-in-chief and the governor of the capital, Zhao Sheng, as deputy commander-in-chief, and led the army of Kyoto and twenty thousand soldiers from various provinces to recruit them.

古文：信先以议事赴阙，未至。
现代文：由于杨信原先被任为议事，到自己的官府去上任了，因此没及时赶到。
English: Since Yang Xin was originally appointed as a deliberator, he went to his own government office to take office, so he did not arrive in time.

古文：敌散掠平凉，入灵州及固原，长驱寇静宁、隆德诸处。
现代文：敌人掠夺了平凉，又攻入灵州和固原，长驱直入侵入静宁、隆德各地。
English: The enemy plundered Pingliang, invaded Lingzhou and Gouyuan, and invaded Jingning and Lund.

古文：冬，复入延绥，参将汤胤绩战死。
现代文：同年冬天，又侵入延绥，参将汤允绩率兵战死。
English: In the winter of the same year, he invaded Yancheng again, and the general Tang Yun died in the battle.

古文：未几，诸部内争，孛来弑马可古儿吉思，毛里孩杀孛来，更立他可汗。
现代文：不久，鞑靼各部落内部争夺，孛来杀死马可古儿吉思，毛里孩又杀孛来，立了其他人做可汗。
English: Soon, the Tatar tribes fought among themselves, the Mongols came to kill Markogulgis, the Moors came to kill the Mongols again, and set up others as khans.

古文：斡罗出者复与毛里孩相仇杀，毛里孩遂杀其所立可汗，逐斡罗出，而遣使入贡。
现代文：斡罗出又与毛里孩互相仇杀，毛里孩便杀死斡罗出所立的可汗，赶走了斡罗出，派遣使臣到明朝献贡。
English: Yorozu and Morihei fought against each other. Morihei killed the khan Yorozu had set up, drove Yorozu away, and sent envoys to the Ming Dynasty to pay tribute.

古文：寻渡河掠大同。三年春，帝命抚宁侯朱永等征之。
现代文：后来又寻机渡过黄河劫掠大同地区，成化三年春，宪宗皇帝命令抚宁侯朱永等带兵征讨。
English: Later, they also searched for an opportunity to cross the Yellow River and plunder the Datong area, and in the spring of the third year, Emperor Xianzong ordered Zhu Yong, Fuxing Hou, and others to lead soldiers to collect.

古文：会毛里孩再乞通贡，而别部长孛鲁乃亦遣人来朝。
现代文：碰上毛里孩再次征求与明朝献贡，而别的部落酋长孛鲁乃也派人来朝见皇帝。
English: When he met Morihei, he once again asked for tribute from the Ming Dynasty, and other tribal chiefs, such as the Qilu, also sent people to the court to meet the emperor.

古文：帝许之，诏永等驻军塞上。
现代文：宪宗皇帝便答应了毛里孩的乞求，让朱永等人把军队驻扎在边关要塞。
English: Emperor Xianzong then agreed to the begging of Mauri, and allowed Zhu Yong and others to station the army at the border fortress.

古文：四年秋，给事中程万里上言： 毛里孩久不朝贡，窥伺边疆，其情叵测。然臣度其有可败者三。
现代文：成化四年秋天，给事中程万里给宪宗皇帝上书说 ：毛里孩已长期没有入朝献贡物了，窥探我边疆地区，其心情不可预测，然而我认为有三个因素，可打败毛里孩。
English: In the autumn of the 4th year of Chenghua, he sent a letter to Emperor Xianzong, saying: "Maurer has not entered the imperial court to offer tribute for a long time, and his mood is unpredictable when he spies on our border regions. However, I think there are three factors that can defeat Maurer.

古文：近我边地才二三日程，彼客我主，一也。
现代文：京都离较近的边关地区才二三天的路程，这样他们是客，我们是主，这是他们第一个不利因素。
English: Kyoto is only two or three days away from the closer border areas, so they are guests, we are the host, and this is their first disadvantage.

古文：兼并诸部，驰驱不息，既骄且疲，二也。比来散逐水草，部落四分，兵力不一，三也。
现代文：毛里孩兼并各部落，到处打仗，这样他们既骄慢又疲劳，这是他们第二个不利因素，他们长期以来都随水草的茂盛与否而迁徙，各部落四下分散，兵力不集中，这是他们第三个不利条件。
English: The second unfavorable factor is that Māori children have annexed tribes and fought wars everywhere, so they are both proud and tired. They have long migrated with the flourishing of aquatic plants. The tribes are scattered and the troops are not concentrated. This is their third unfavorable condition.

古文：宜选精兵二万，每三千人为一军，统以骁将，严其赏罚，使探毛里孩所在，潜师捣之，破之必矣。 
现代文：我们应该选出精兵二万人，把每三千人编成一军，派英勇善战的将领统领，对他们赏罚分明，再派人打探毛里孩的居住地，然后悄悄地派兵捣毁它，这样毛里孩必败无疑。 
English: We should select twenty thousand elite soldiers, form every three thousand people into an army, send brave and warlike generals to command, reward and punish them clearly, and then send people to explore Maura's place of residence, and then quietly send troops to destroy it, so that Maura will undoubtedly lose.

古文：帝壮之，而不能用。
现代文：宪宗皇帝认为这个建议很大胆，但不能用。
English: Emperor Gensong thought that this suggestion was bold, but it could not be used.

古文：冬寇延绥。
现代文：同年冬天，鞑靼人又入侵延绥。
English: In the winter of the same year, the Tatars invaded Yancheng again.

古文：明年春再入。守将许宁等辄击败之。
现代文：第二年春天，再次入侵，被守卫的将领许宁等击败。
English: In the spring of the following year, they invaded again and were defeated by the guarding generals Xu Ning and others.

古文：冬复纠三卫入寇，延绥、榆林大扰。
现代文：该年冬天，他们又纠集三个卫所的外族人入侵边关，大肆骚扰延绥、榆林等地。
English: In the winter of that year, they also gathered foreigners from three nursing homes to invade the border, harassing Yancheng, Yulin and other places.

古文：六年春，大同巡抚王越遣游击许宁击败之；杨信等亦大破之于胡柴氵冓。
现代文：成化六年春，大同巡抚王越派游击许宁打败鞑靼人；杨信等也在胡柴沟大败他们。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the Datong governor Wang Yue sent the guerrilla Xu Ning to defeat the Tatars; Yang Xin and others also defeated them in Huzhaigou.

古文：时孛鲁乃与斡罗出合别部癿加思兰、孛罗忽亦入据河套，为久居计。
现代文：此时孛鲁乃和斡罗出收集别的部落的加思兰、孛鲁忽等也来占据河套，做长期居住的打算。
English: At this time, Qarunai and Luo made arrangements to gather other tribes, such as Qaslan and Qarukwu, to occupy Hetao and plan to live there for a long time.

古文：延绥告急，帝命永为将军，以王越参赞军务，使御敌。永至，数以捷闻，越等皆升赏，论功永世侯，而敌据套自如。
现代文：由于延绥告急，宪宗皇帝任命朱永为将军，任王越为参赞军务，让他抵御敌人，朱永到那里后，几次听到有捷报传来，王越等人都得到提升和奖赏，按功劳封朱永世代为侯，但敌人占据河套地区依然如故。
English: Due to the urgency of the delay, Emperor Xianzong appointed Zhu Yong as a general and appointed Wang Yue as a military counselor to resist the enemy. After Zhu Yong arrived there, he heard several reports of victories. Wang Yue and others were promoted and rewarded, and Zhu Yong's generation was honored according to their merits, but the enemy still occupied the Hetao area.

古文：七年春，永上战守二策，廷议以粮匮马乏，难于进剿，请命边将慎守御以图万全。
现代文：成化七年春，朱永上书皇帝谈出战和守卫的二种方略。朝廷商议的结果认为粮食匮乏马匹缺损，要进剿敌人很困难，因此大臣们都请求皇帝给边关将领下命令，要他们小心守卫以图万全。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Zhu Yong wrote to the emperor to discuss the two strategies of war and guard. The result of the imperial court's deliberation was that food was scarce, horses were defective, and it was difficult to capture the enemy. Therefore, the ministers all asked the emperor to give orders to the border generals, asking them to guard carefully and try their best.

古文：于是吏部侍郎叶盛巡边，偕延绥巡抚余子俊及越议筑边墙，设立台堡。
现代文：这样吏部侍郎叶盛去巡视边防，和延绥巡抚余子俊及王越一起商量在边关筑墙，设立烽火台和堡垒。
English: In this way, Ye Sheng, the attendant of the cadre department, went to inspect the border defense, and discussed with Ye Zijun and Wang Yue, the governors of Yancheng, to build a wall at the border and set up a campfire and a fortress.

古文：冬，敌入塞，参将钱亮败绩，越等不能救。
现代文：同年冬天，敌人侵入边关要塞，参将钱亮战败，王越等人无法救他。
English: In the winter of the same year, the enemy invaded the frontier fortress and defeated the commander Qian Liang. Wang Yue and others were unable to save him.

古文：兵部尚书白圭请择遣大将军专事敌，会盛还，越亦赴京计事，乃集廷议，请大发兵搜套。
现代文：兵部尚书白奎请求挑选一名大将军专门负责对敌作战事宜，碰上叶盛回来，王越也赴京都办事，于是便在朝廷上商议，请求发大军到河套去搜索敌人。
English: Shangshu Bai Kui of the Military Department requested to select a general specifically responsible for the war against the enemy. When Ye Sheng returned, Wang Yue also went to Kyoto to work, so they discussed in the imperial court and requested to send a large army to Hetao to search for the enemy.

古文：帝以武靖侯赵辅为将军，节制诸路，王越仍督师。
现代文：宪宗皇帝任武靖侯赵辅为将军，节制各路军队的行动，王越仍是督师。
English: Emperor Xianzong appointed Wu Jing Hou Zhao Fu as general to control the actions of all armies, and Wang Yue remained as inspector.

古文：敌大入延绥，辅不能御，遂召还，以宁晋伯刘聚代之，聚亦未有功。
现代文：敌人大举入侵延绥，赵辅没有能力抵御，便被召回去了，宁晋伯刘聚取代赵辅的位置。但刘聚没有建功。
English: The enemy invaded Yancheng in a big way, and Zhao Fu was unable to resist, so he was recalled. Ning Jinbo and Liu Ju replaced Zhao Fu. However, Liu Ju did not make any contribution.

古文：而毛里孩、孛鲁乃、斡罗出稍衰，满都鲁入河套称可汗，癿加思兰为太师。
现代文：等毛里孩、孛鲁乃、斡罗出势力稍有衰弱，满都鲁便入据河套地区，自封可汗，扎加思兰为太师。
English: When Maurya, Guru Rinpoche, and Guru Nanak came to power, their power was slightly weakened, and Manduro entered the Sokoto region, proclaimed himself khan, and made Zagasiran his grand master.

古文：九年秋，满都鲁等与孛罗忽并寇韦州。
现代文：成化九年秋天，满都鲁等与孛罗忽一起入侵韦州。
English: In the autumn of the ninth year of Chenghua, Manduru and others invaded Weizhou together with Yao Luogu.

古文：王越侦知敌尽行，其老弱巢红盐池，乃与许宁及游击周玉率轻骑昼夜疾驰至，分薄其营，前后夹击，大破之。
现代文：王越侦察了解到敌人已全部出发，其老弱家属全留在红盐池，便和徐宁及游击周玉一起率轻装骑兵昼夜疾驰到红盐池，分别包围了他们的营地，前后夹击，大破敌人的老巢。
English: Wang Yue reconnaissance learned that the enemy had all set off, and his old and weak family members were all left in Hongyanchi, so he and Xu Ning and guerrilla Zhou Yu together led light cavalry to Hongyanchi day and night, surrounded their camps separately, pinched back and forth, and broke the enemy's nest.

古文：复邀击于韦州。
现代文：之后，王越他们又在韦州邀击了满都鲁。
English: After that, Wang Yue and they invited and defeated Manduro in Weizhou.

古文：满都鲁等败归，孳畜庐帐荡尽，妻孥皆丧亡，相顾悲哭去。自是不复居河套，边患少弭；间盗边，弗敢大入，亦数遣使朝贡。
现代文：满都鲁等人失败而回，牲畜帐篷全都丧失殆尽，妻子儿女也都丧亡了，只好相顾悲泣而去，从此以后，他们不再在河套居住，边关地区的祸患稍有消除；间或也有在边关抢劫的，但都不敢大肆入侵，还数次派使者向朝廷敬献贡物。
English: After the defeat, Manduro and others returned, their livestock tents were all lost, their wives and children were also killed, and they had to leave in sorrow. From then on, they no longer lived in Hetao, and the scourge of the border areas was slightly eliminated. Occasionally, there were robbers at the border, but they did not dare to invade, and they also sent emissaries several times to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：初，癿加思兰以女妻满都鲁，立为可汗。
现代文：当初，扎加思兰把女儿嫁给满都鲁，把他立为可汗。
English: At first, Zagathran married his daughter to Manthulu and made him khan.

古文：久之杀孛罗忽，并其众，益专恣。
现代文：后来他们杀了孛罗忽，兼并了他的部众，更加倍专横恣意。
English: Later, they killed Zhao Luohu, annexed his subordinates, and became even more arbitrary.

古文：满都鲁部脱罗干、亦思马因谋杀之。
现代文：其部属脱罗干、亦思马因此谋杀了满都鲁。
English: As a result, his subordinates, Dero Gan and Isima, murdered Manduro.

古文：寻满都鲁亦死，诸强酋相继略尽，边人稍得息肩。
现代文：由于满都鲁也死了，握有强权的各位酋长已相继灭亡，边疆地区的军民才稍为得到一点安宁。
English: Since the Manchukuo also died, the powerful chiefs have died one after another, and the military and civilians in the border areas have only gained a little peace.

古文：时中官汪直怙恩用事，思以边功自树，王越、朱永附之。
现代文：此时宦官汪直仗着皇帝的恩宠，想以边关立功来抬高自己，王越、朱永便依附于他。
English: At this time, the eunuch Wang Zhi, relying on the emperor's grace, wanted to elevate himself by making contributions, and Wang Yue and Zhu Yonglu clung to him.

古文：十六年春，边将上言，传闻敌将渡河，遽以永为将军。直与越督师至边，未及期，袭敌于威宁海子，大破之，又败之于大同。
现代文：成化十六年春，边关将领上书说，有传闻敌人将渡过黄河内侵，就任朱永为将军，汪直和王越为督军带兵到边关，未到规定期限，就在威宁海子袭击并打败敌人，之后又在大同再次获胜。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of Chenghua, the general of the border gate wrote a letter saying that there was a rumor that the enemy would cross the Yellow River invasion, and appointed Zhu Yong as the general, and Wang Zhi and Wang Yue as the supervisors to lead the troops to the border gate. Before the deadline, they attacked and defeated the enemy in the Weining Sea, and then won again in Datong.

古文：永晋公爵，予世袭，越封威宁伯，直增禄至三百石。
现代文：这样朱永就晋升为公爵，且可以世袭，王越封为威宁伯，汪直的俸禄增到三百石。
English: In this way, Zhu Yong was promoted to duke, and it could be hereditary, Wang Yue was named Weningbo, and Wang Zhi's salary was increased to 300 koku.

古文：未几，诏以越代永总兵。
现代文：不久皇帝下诏书让王越代替朱永掌管军队。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an edict to let Wang Yue take charge of the army in place of Zhu Yong.

古文：于是亦思马因等益纠众盗边，延及辽塞。
现代文：亦思马因等人更加纠集众人在边关地区掠夺，祸害延及辽州。
English: Yishimain and others gathered more people to plunder the border areas, and the scourge extended to Liaozhou.

古文：秋，敌三万骑寇大同，连营五十里，杀掠人畜数万。
现代文：该年秋天，敌人有三万骑兵入侵大同，扎下帐篷有五十里，杀死掠夺的人口和牲畜达数万。
English: In the autumn of that year, the enemy invaded Datong with thirty thousand cavalry, pitched tents for fifty miles, and killed tens of thousands of plundered people and livestock.

古文：总兵许宁御之，兵败，以捷闻。
现代文：总兵许宁带兵抵抗，战败，却向朝廷报胜利。
English: The commander-in-chief, Xu Ning, led the troops to resist and was defeated, but reported the victory to the imperial court.

古文：敌既得利，长驱入顺圣川，散掠浑源、朔诸州。
现代文：敌人得利之后，便长驱直入到顺圣川，掠夺了浑源州、朔州等地。
English: After the enemy made a profit, they drove straight into Shunsheng River and plundered Hunyuan Prefecture, Shuozhou and other places.

古文：宣府巡抚秦纮、总兵周玉力战却之。
现代文：宣府巡抚秦、总兵周玉奋力抗击，才打退敌人。
English: Qin, the procurator of Xuanfu, and Zhou Yu, the general of the army, fought hard to repel the enemy.

古文：山西巡抚边镛，参将支玉等悉力捍御，敌去辄复来，迄成化末无宁岁。
现代文：山西巡抚边镛、参将支玉等尽全力抗击敌人，而敌人去了又来，一直到成化末年，每年都不得安宁。
English: The governor of Shanxi Province, Bencheng, and the deputy commander of Shanxi Province, Zhidama, did their best to resist the enemy, but the enemy came and went, and there was no peace every year until the end of Chenghua.

古文：亦思马因死，入寇者复称小王子，又有伯颜猛可王。
现代文：亦思马因死后，入侵者又称自己为小王子，还有一个叫伯颜猛可王。
English: After the death of Yishima, the intruder also called himself the Little Prince, and another called Bo Yan Meng Ke Wang.

古文：弘治元年夏，小王子奉书求贡，自称大元大可汗。
现代文：弘治元年夏，小王子带书信来明朝要求入贡，自称为大元大可汗。
English: In the summer of the first year of the Hongzhi era, the Little Prince came to the Ming Dynasty with a letter to demand tribute, calling himself the Great Great Khan.

古文：朝廷方务优容，许之。
现代文：朝廷正实施宽容政策，便答应了他们。
English: The imperial court, which was implementing a policy of tolerance, agreed.

古文：自是，与伯颜猛可王等屡入贡，渐往来套中，出没为寇。
现代文：从此，小王子和伯颜猛可王等人屡次到明朝献贡，渐渐在河套地区往来并抢掠。
English: From then on, the little prince and Bo Yan Meng Ke Wang and others repeatedly went to the Ming Dynasty to pay tribute, and gradually came and went in the Hetao area and plundered.

古文：八年，北部亦卜剌因王等入套驻牧。
现代文：弘治八年，北方部落的亦卜剌因王等人进入河套地区放牧。
English: In the eighth year of the Hongzhi era, the northern tribe's Yibujing Wang and others entered the Hetao area to graze.

古文：于是小王子及脱罗干之子火筛相倚日强，为东西诸边患。
现代文：至此小王子与脱罗干的儿子火筛互相依靠日益强大，成为东西方诸边疆地区的祸患。
English: At this point, the Little Prince and the son of Derokan, Fire Sieve, rely on each other to become increasingly powerful, becoming a scourge in the border regions of the East and West.

古文：其年，三入辽东，多杀掠。
现代文：这一年，他们三次入侵辽东，杀人掠夺东西较多。
English: This year, they invaded Liaodong three times, killing and plundering more things.

古文：明年，宣、大、延绥诸境俱被残。
现代文：第二年，宣州、大州和延绥各边境地区都遭到他们的破坏。
English: In the following year, the border areas of Xuanzhou, Dazhou and Yancheng were all destroyed by them.

古文：十一年秋，王越既节制诸边，乃率轻兵袭敌于贺兰山后，破之。
现代文：弘治十一年秋天，王越负责各边关事务，便带轻兵在贺兰山后面袭击并打败了敌人。
English: In the autumn of the 11th year of Hongzhi, Wang Yue, who was in charge of border affairs, attacked and defeated the enemy with light soldiers behind Mount Helan.

古文：明年，敌拥众入大同、宁夏境，游击王杲败绩，参将秦恭、副总兵马升逗遛不进，皆论死。
现代文：第二年，敌人带大队的人马侵入大同、宁夏境内，游击王果战败，参将秦恭、副总兵马升逗留原地不进兵，都被处死。
English: In the second year, the enemy invaded the territory of Datong and Ningxia with a large number of men and horses. The guerrilla Wang Guo was defeated, and the commander Qin Qiong and the deputy commander Sheng Ma stayed in place and did not enter the army. They were all executed.

古文：时平江伯陈锐为总兵，侍郎许进督师，久无功，被劾去，以保国公朱晖、侍郎史琳代之，太监苗逵监军。
现代文：此时，平江伯陈锐为总兵，侍郎许进督军，久而无功，被弹劾离去，保国公朱日军、侍郎史琳代替了他们的位置，太监苗逵做监军。
English: At this time, Pingjiang eunuch Chen Rui was the commander-in-chief, and the eunuch Miao Miao was the commander-in-chief of the army. Miao Miao and Miao Miao's eunuch Miao Miao served as the commander-in-chief of the army. Miao Miao and Miao Miao's eunuch Miao Miao served as the commander-in-chief of the army.

古文：十三年冬，小王子复居河套。
现代文：弘治十三年冬天，小王子又占据河套。
English: In the winter of the thirteenth year of the Hongzhi era, the Little Prince again occupied Hetao.

古文：明年春，吏部侍郎王鏊上御敌八策：一曰定庙算，二曰重主将，三曰严法令，四曰恤边民，五曰广招募，六曰用间，七曰分兵，八曰出奇。
现代文：第二年春天，吏部侍郎王鏊上书皇帝谈对敌防御的八种策略：第一是确定朝廷的重大决策；第二是重视主将；第三是法令严明；第四是体恤边关百姓；第五是广泛招募军队；第六是对敌人用离间计；第七是分兵把守；第八是出奇制胜。
English: In the spring of the following year, the secretary of the General Staff, Wang Qi, sent a letter to the emperor to discuss eight strategies for defense against the enemy: the first was to determine the major decisions of the imperial court; the second was to pay attention to the commander; the third was to have strict laws and regulations; the fourth was to sympathize with the people in the border areas; the fifth was to recruit troops extensively; the sixth was to use spacing against the enemy; the seventh was to divide the troops and control them; and the eighth was to win by surprise.

古文：帝命所司知之。
现代文：孝宗皇帝命令有关官员必须了解这些内容。
English: Emperor Xiaozong ordered that the relevant officials must know these contents.

古文：时敌以八千骑东驻辽塞下，攻入长胜堡，杀掠殆尽。
现代文：此时敌人以八千骑兵往东驻扎在辽州要塞之下，攻进长胜堡后杀戮抢劫一空。
English: At this time, the enemy stationed eight thousand cavalrymen to the east under the Liaozhou fortress, and after attacking the Changsheng Fort, the killing and looting were all over.

古文：秋，晖等以五路之师夜袭敌于河套，斩首三级，驱孳畜千余归，赏甚厚。
现代文：同年秋天，朱晖等带五路兵马在河套夜袭敌人，斩获敌人的首级三个，赶了千余头牲畜回来，皇上给了他甚厚的奖赏。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Zhu Xi and five soldiers and horses attacked the enemy at night in Hetao, captured three of the enemy's heads, and drove more than a thousand head of livestock back. The emperor gave him a very generous reward.

古文：小王子以十万骑从花马池、盐池入，散掠固原、宁夏境，三辅震动，戕杀惨酷。
现代文：小王子又带十万骑兵从花马池、盐池进入边关，在固原、宁夏境内抢劫杀戮无数。
English: The little prince and his hundred thousand cavalrymen entered the border gates from Hanamachi and Yanchi, and carried out countless robberies and killings in the territory of Gouyuan and Ningxia.

古文：十五年，以户部尚书秦纮总制陕西。
现代文：很悲惨残酷，连京城附近都受到震动。弘治十五年派户部尚书秦总管陕西事务。
English: It was so tragic and cruel that even the vicinity of the capital city was shaken. In the 15th year of the Hongzhi era, the household department of Shangshu Qin was assigned to be in charge of Shaanxi affairs.

古文：夏，敌入辽东清河堡，至密云，旋西掠偏头关。
现代文：该年夏天，敌人从辽东的清河堡进入，到密云，不久又往西抢劫偏头关。
English: In the summer of that year, the enemy entered from Qinghe Fort in Liaodong to Miyun, and soon went west to rob Yehou Pass.

古文：秋，复以五千骑犯辽东长安堡，副总兵刘祥御之，斩首五十一级，敌乃退。
现代文：秋天，敌人又以五千骑兵进犯辽东的长安堡，副总兵刘祥率兵抗击，斩获敌人首级五十一个，敌人才退去。
English: In the autumn, the enemy invaded Chang'an Fort in East Liaodong with 5,000 cavalrymen. Liu Xiang, the vice-commander-in-chief, led the troops to fight back and captured 51 enemy soldiers before the enemy retreated.

古文：明年，稍靖。
现代文：第二年，稍为安静一些。
English: The second year, it was a bit quieter.

古文：十七年春，敌上书请贡，许之，竟不至；仍入大同杀墩军，犯宣府及庄浪，守将卫勇、白玉等御却之。
现代文：弘治十七年春天，敌人上书给孝宗皇帝，请求允许他们来上贡，孝宗皇帝答应了他们，最后竟然不来；又侵入大同杀死当地守军，并进犯宣府和庄浪，当地守军将领卫勇、白玉等人带兵打退了敌人。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year of Hongzhi, the enemy sent a letter to Emperor Xiaozong, requesting permission to come to pay tribute. Emperor Xiaozong agreed to them, but in the end he did not come. He also invaded Datong to kill the local defenders, and attacked Xuanfu and Zhuanglang. The local defenders led by Wei Yong, Bai Yu and others drove back the enemy.

古文：明年春，敌三万骑围灵州，复散掠内地，指挥仇钺、总兵李祥击走之。
现代文：第二年春天，敌人以三万骑兵包围了灵川，又进入内地抢劫，指挥仇钺、总兵李祥率军打跑了敌人。
English: In the spring of the following year, the enemy encircled Lingchuan with 30,000 cavalry, and entered the inland to loot. Li Xiang, the commander of the vendetta and the general, led the army to fight and run away from the enemy.

古文：敌大举入寇宣府，总兵张俊御之，大败，裨将张雄、穆荣战殁。
现代文：敌人又大举入侵宣府，总兵张俊抗击入侵，被敌人战败，其副将张雄、穆荣阵亡。
English: The enemy made another large-scale invasion of Xuanfu. The general Zhang Jun resisted the invasion and was defeated by the enemy. His vice-commanders Zhang Xiong and Mu Rong were killed.

古文：武宗嗣位，复命晖、琳出御。
现代文：武宗即皇帝位后，又命令朱晖、史琳带兵防御。
English: After Emperor Wu Zong ascended the throne, he also ordered Zhu Xi and Xilin to lead troops to defend the city.

古文：冬，敌入镇夷所，指挥刘经死之。
现代文：弘治十八年冬天，敌人侵入镇夷所，指挥刘经阵亡。
English: In the winter of the 18th year of the Hongzhi era, the enemy invaded Zhenyi, and commander Liu Jing was killed.

古文：复自花马池毁垣入，掠隆德、静宁、会宁诸处，关中大扰，以杨一清为总制。时正德元年春也。
现代文：敌人又从花马池毁坏城垣而入侵，掠夺隆德、大会宁等地大肆骚扰关中，武宗皇帝便让杨一清总管该地区事务，这是正德元年春天的事。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Zhengde era, the emperor Wu Zong asked Yang Yiching to be in charge of the region's affairs.

古文：刘瑾用事，监军皆阉人，一清不得职去，文贵、才宽相继受事。
现代文：刘瑾掌权，全用宦官充当监军，杨一清感到没有职权，便挂职而去，这样文贵、才宽二人相继被委以该地区事务。
English: Liu Bei was in power and made full use of eunuchs to supervise the troops. Yang Yiqing felt that he had no authority and left his post. Thus, Wengui and Cai Guang were successively entrusted with the affairs of the region.

古文：二年，敌入宁夏、庄浪及定辽后卫诸境，守将皆逮问。
现代文：正德二年，敌人进入宁夏、庄浪和定辽后卫的境内抢掠，守卫这些地方的将领都被抓来问罪。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, the enemy entered the territories of Ningxia, Zhuanglang and Dingliao and plundered them. The generals who guarded these places were all arrested for questioning.

古文：四年，敌数寇大同。
现代文：正德四年，敌人数次入侵大同。
English: In the four years of Zhengde, the enemy invaded Datong several times.

古文：冬，才宽御敌于花马池，中伏死。
现代文：该年冬天，才宽在花马池抗击敌人，结果中了敌人的埋伏而死。
English: In the winter of that year, Zai Guang fought against the enemy in Huama Pond. As a result, he was ambushed and died.

古文：总兵马昂与别部亦孛来战于木瓜山，胜之，斩三百六十五级，获马畜六百余，军器二千九百余。
现代文：总兵马昂在木瓜山与亦孛来率领的另一部敌人战斗，战胜了敌人，斩获首级三百六十五个，缴获马和牲畜六百多头，还收缴军器二千九百多件。
English: In Muguashan, the general soldier Ma'an fought against another enemy group led by Yixuan Lai, defeated the enemy, captured 365 first-class soldiers, seized more than 600 horses and livestock, and collected more than 2,900 pieces of military equipment.

古文：明年，北部亦卜剌与小王子仇杀。
现代文：过了一年，北方部落的亦卜剌与小王子互相仇杀。
English: A year later, the northern tribe's Ibuki and the little prince are at each other's throats.

古文：亦卜剌窜西海，阿尔秃厮与合，逼胁洮西属番，屡入寇。巡抚张翼、总兵王勋不能制，渐深入，边人苦之。
现代文：亦卜剌逃窜到西海，与阿尔秃厮会合后，逼迫威胁洮州西部的外族人屡次入侵，巡抚张翼、总兵王勋没能力制止，他们便渐渐深入，边疆的百姓苦不堪言。
English: Yibutsu fled to the West Sea, and after meeting with Al Zheng, he forced the foreigners who threatened the western part of Ganzhou to repeatedly invade. The governor Zhang Ying and the general Wang Xun were unable to stop them, and they gradually went deeper, and the people of the frontier were miserable.

古文：八年夏，拥众来川，遣使诣翼所，乞边地驻牧修贡。
现代文：正德八年夏天，亦卜剌带领大队人马来到川州，派使者到巡抚府第拜访张翼，乞求允许他们在边疆地区驻扎下来放牧并给朝廷献贡。
English: In the summer of Zhengde's eighth year, Yibu led a large group of men and horses to Sichuan and sent an envoy to the governor's residence to visit Zhang Ying, begging to be allowed to stay in the frontier area to graze and pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：翼啖以金帛，令远徙，亦卜剌遂西掠乌斯藏，据之。
现代文：张翼以金币帛利诱他们往远处迁徙，亦卜剌便往西掠夺并占据了乌斯藏。
English: Zhang Ying lured them to migrate far away with gold coins and money, and Bu Yao went west to plunder and occupy Wusang.

古文：自是洮、岷、松潘无宁岁。
现代文：从此，洮州、岷州、松潘州每年都不得安宁。
English: Since then, Bozhou, Luzhou and Songpan have been plagued by unrest every year.

古文：小王子数入寇，杀掠尤惨。复以五万骑攻大同，趣朔州，掠马邑。
现代文：小王子数次入侵，杀人抢劫都很惨烈，现又以五万骑兵进攻大同，直奔朔州，并掠夺马邑。
English: The little prince invaded several times, killing and robbing were very tragic, and now he attacked Datong with fifty thousand cavalry, went straight to Shuozhou, and plundered Ma'yun.

古文：帝命咸宁侯仇钺总兵御之，战于万全卫，斩三级，而所失亡十倍，以捷闻。
现代文：武宗皇帝命令咸宁侯仇钺带兵抗击，双方在万全卫发生战斗，仇钺等人斩了敌人三个首级，但损失的人则是该数字的十倍，却以捷报上奏皇帝。
English: Emperor Wuzong ordered Xianning Hou Qianlong to lead the troops to resist. The two sides fought in Wanquanwei. Qianlong and others cut off three heads of the enemy, but the losses were ten times that number, but the emperor was praised for the victory.

古文：明年秋，敌连营数十，寇宣、大塞，而别遣万骑掠怀安。
现代文：第二年秋天，敌人在数十里地连着扎营，向宣州、大州的要地进攻，同时派另外一万骑兵去劫掠怀安。
English: In the autumn of the next year, the enemy camped for dozens of miles in a row, attacking important places in Xuanzhou and Dazhou, and at the same time sent another ten thousand cavalry to plunder Huai'an.

古文：总制丛兰告急，命太监张永督宣、大、延绥兵，都督白玉为大将，协兰守御，京师戒严。
现代文：总制丛兰告急，武宗皇帝便命令太监张永监督宣州、大州、延绥的军队，拜都督白玉为大将，协助丛兰守卫，京城的军队也戒严。
English: General Conglan was in a hurry, and Emperor Wuzong ordered the eunuch Zhang Yong to supervise the armies of Xuanzhou, Dazhou, and Yan'an, and to appoint the governor Bai Yu as the general to help guard Conglan. The army of Beijing was also under martial law.

古文：已，敌逾怀安趣蔚州，至平虏城南，兰等预置毒饭于田间如农家饷，而设伏以待。敌至，中毒，伏猝发，多死者。其年，小王子部长卜儿孩以内难复奔据西海，出没寇西北边。
现代文：布置完毕，敌人便越过怀安奔向蔚州，到达平虏城南面。丛兰等人预先在田间放置毒饭，将毒饭装成农民的午饭一样，自己带兵设下埋伏等待敌人，敌人到了都中毒，伏兵突然出击，杀死敌人很多，该年，小王子部落的酋长卜儿孩因为部落内的争斗又逃奔到西海，常入侵西北边境地区。
English: After the layout was completed, the enemy ran across Huai'an to Ulshu and reached the south of Pingru City. Conglan and others placed poisoned rice in the fields in advance, packed the poisoned rice like a farmer's lunch, and set up an ambush with their own soldiers to wait for the enemy. When the enemy arrived, they were all poisoned, and the ambushers suddenly attacked and killed many enemies. In that year, the chief of the Little Prince tribe, Fubei, fled to the West Sea because of the struggle within the tribe, and often invaded the northwest border area.

古文：十一年秋，小王子以七万骑分道入，与总兵潘浩战于贾家湾。
现代文：正德十一年秋天，小王子带七万骑兵分道入侵，与总兵潘浩在贾家湾发生战斗。
English: In the autumn of the eleventh year of Zhengde, the Little Prince invaded separately with seventy thousand cavalry and fought with the general soldier Pan Hao in Jiajia Bay.

古文：浩再战再败，裨将朱春、王唐死之。
现代文：潘浩屡战屡败，副将朱春、王唐都战死。
English: Pan Hao was repeatedly defeated in battle. Vice Generals Zhu Chun and Wang Tang both died in battle.

古文：张永遇于老营坡，被创走居庸。
现代文：张永在老营坡与小王子相遇，被小王子打伤逃到居庸。
English: Zhang Yong met the little prince in Laoyingpo. He was injured by the little prince and fled to Juyeong.

古文：敌遂犯宣府，凡攻破城堡二十，杀掠人畜数万。浩夺三官，诸将降罚有差。
现代文：敌人于是进犯宣府，总共攻破城堡二十个，杀死和掠夺人口牲畜数万，潘浩受到夺三官的处罚，其他各位将领按情况降级处分。
English: The enemy then attacked Xuanwu, breached a total of twenty castles, killed and plundered tens of thousands of people and livestock. Pan Hao was punished by seizing three officials, and other generals were demoted according to the situation.

古文：十二年冬，小王子以五万骑自榆林入寇，围总兵王勋等于应州。
现代文：正德十二年冬天，小王子带五万骑兵从榆林入侵。在应州包围了总兵王勋人等。
English: In the winter of the twelfth year of Zhengde, the little prince invaded from Yulin with fifty thousand cavalry. In Yingzhou, he surrounded the general soldier Wang Xunren and others.

古文：帝幸阳和，亲部署，督诸将往援，殊死战，敌稍却。
现代文：武宗皇帝亲自到阳和部署，监督诸位将领前往援救，经过殊死战斗，敌人才稍为退却一点。
English: Emperor Wuzong personally went to Yanghe and deployed, supervising the generals to rescue. After a desperate battle, the enemy only retreated a little.

古文：明日复来攻，自辰至酉，战百余合，敌引而西，追至平虏、朔州，值大风黑雾，昼晦，帝乃还，命宣捷于朝。
现代文：第二天敌人又来进攻，自辰时到酋时，会战一百多个回合后，敌人才往西引退，明军追到平虏、朔州，碰到天刮大风，黑雾弥漫，白天看不见人，武宗皇帝才率兵回师，命令在朝廷上宣布捷报。
English: The next day, the enemy attacked again. After more than a hundred rounds of fighting from Chenshi to Chenshi, the enemy retreated to the west. The Ming army chased them to Pingru and Shuozhou. When the sky was windy, the fog was thick, and no one could be seen during the day, Emperor Wuzong led the troops back to the division and ordered to announce the successful report in the imperial court.

古文：是后岁犯边，然不敢大入。
现代文：此后，敌人每年仍进犯边关，但都不敢太深入。
English: After that, the enemy still attacked the border every year, but they did not dare to go too deep.

古文：嘉靖四年春，以万骑寇甘肃。
现代文：嘉靖四年春天，敌人骑兵一万侵犯甘肃。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Jiajing, ten thousand enemy cavalry invaded Gansu.

古文：总兵姜奭御之于苦水墩，斩其魁。
现代文：总兵姜在苦水墩带兵抗击，斩杀敌人的魁首。
English: The general soldier Jiang led the soldiers to fight against the enemy in Bitumizu and killed the leader of the enemy.

古文：明年犯大同及宣府，亦卜剌复驻牧贺兰山后，数扰边。
现代文：第二年敌人又侵犯大同和宣府，亦卜剌又在贺兰山后驻扎放牧，数次骚扰边关。
English: In the following year, the enemy invaded Datong and Xuanfu again, and also stationed at the back of Helan Mountain to graze cattle, harassing the border several times.

古文：明年春，小王子两寇宣府。参将王经、关山先后战死。
现代文：过了一年，小王子两次进犯宣府，参将王经、关山先后战死。
English: A year later, the Little Prince attacked Xuanwu twice, leading to the deaths of Wang Jing and Guan Shan.

古文：秋，以数万骑犯宁夏塞，尚书王宪以总兵郑卿等败之，斩三百余级。明年春，掠山西。夏，入大同中路，参将李蓁御却之。冬，复寇大同，指挥赵源战死。
现代文：该年秋天，又有数万敌骑侵犯宁夏要塞，尚书王宪派总兵郑卿等打败敌人，斩获首级三百多个，又过了一年的春天，敌人在山西掠夺；夏天，进犯大同中路，参将李蓁将他们打退；冬天，又侵略大同，指挥赵源战死。
English: In the autumn of the same year, tens of thousands of enemy cavalry invaded the Ningxia fortress. Shangshu Wang Xian sent General Zheng Qing and other soldiers to defeat the enemy and captured more than three hundred first-class soldiers. A year later, in the spring, the enemy plundered Shanxi; in the summer, they attacked Datong Middle Road, and the general Li Xi drove them back; in the winter, they invaded Datong again, and the commander Zhao Yuan died in battle.

古文：十一年春，小王子乞通贡，未得命，怒，遂拥十万骑入寇。总制唐龙请许之，帝不听。
现代文：嘉靖十一年春天，小王子乞求与明朝通好，没有得到答复，一怒之下带十万骑兵入侵，总制唐龙请求皇帝答允他，皇帝不听。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of Jiajing, the little prince begged the emperor to be on good terms with the Ming Dynasty, but received no reply. Out of anger, he invaded with a hundred thousand cavalry. The general Tang Long asked the emperor to agree to his request, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：龙连战，颇有斩获。
现代文：唐龙遂与小王子连续战斗，斩杀俘虏了不少敌人。
English: Tang Long then fought continuously with the Little Prince, killing and capturing many enemies.

古文：时小王子最富强，控弦十余万，多畜货贝，稍厌兵，乃徙幕东方，称土蛮，分诸部落在西北边者甚众。
现代文：此时小王子部最为富强，掌握十余万弓箭，牲畜货币颇多，对战争已稍厌烦，便把营帐迁往东方，称为土蛮，把许多部落分留在西北边疆地区。
English: At this time, the Little Prince's Department was the richest and strongest, with more than a hundred thousand bows and arrows, and a lot of livestock money. They were a little tired of the war, so they moved their camp to the east, called the barbarians, and left many tribes in the northwest frontier area.

古文：曰吉囊、曰俺答者，于小王子为从父行，据河套，雄黠喜兵，为诸部长，相率躏诸边。
现代文：他们中名叫吉囊和俺答的人，是小王子的侄子，占据河套，既勇武又狡黠且喜欢战斗，成为各部落的部落长，相互率人蹂躏边关地区。
English: One of them, named Yoshizaki and Ipatsu, was the nephew of the little prince, who occupied Hetao, was brave and cunning and liked to fight, became the tribal chief of each tribe, and led people to ravage the border area.

古文：十二年春，吉囊拥众屯套内，将犯延绥，边臣有备，乃突以五万骑渡河西，袭亦不剌、卜儿孩两部，大破之。
现代文：嘉靖十二年春天，吉囊带领众人屯驻在河套内，将要进犯延绥，边关地区的大臣有所防备，吉囊便突然以五万骑兵渡过黄河往西，袭击亦不剌、卜儿孩两个部落，大败他们。
English: In the spring of the 12th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Guizang led the people to settle in Hetao, and was about to attack Yancheng. The ministers of the border areas were prepared, and Guizang suddenly crossed the Yellow River to the west with fifty thousand cavalry, attacked and defeated the two tribes.

古文：卜儿孩为庄、宁边患久，亦郎骨、土鲁番诸蕃皆苦之，尝因属番帖木哥求贡市，朝廷未之许。
现代文：卜儿孩长久以来是庄浪、宁夏等边疆地区的祸患，亦郎骨、土鲁番等外族人也深受其害，过去随帖木哥一起要求与明朝通贡物和贸易，朝廷没有答应他。
English: Boer children have long been a scourge in border regions such as Zhuanglang and Ningxia, and foreigners such as Langkang and Turpan have also suffered from it. In the past, together with Timur, he demanded to exchange tribute and trade with the Ming Dynasty, but the imperial court did not agree to him.

古文：至是唐龙以卜儿孩衰败远徙，西海获宁，请无更议款事。
现代文：到此时唐龙认为卜儿孩已衰败远迁了，西海获得了安宁，请求朝廷不要更改他们投诚的事。
English: At this time, Tang Long thought that Bu Rongyao had decayed and moved far away, and the West Sea had gained peace, and he asked the court not to change the matter of their surrender.

古文：吉囊等既破西海，旋窃入宣府永宁境，大掠而去。
现代文：吉囊等人又攻破西海，一会儿偷偷地进入宣府的永宁境内，大肆抢劫而去。
English: Yoshizuku and others also broke through the West Sea, secretly entered the Yongning territory of Xuanfu for a while, and went on a looting spree.

古文：冬，犯镇远关，总兵王效、副总兵梁震败之于柳门，又追败之于蜂窝山，敌溺水死者甚众。
现代文：同年冬天，吉囊等进犯镇远关，总兵王效、副总兵梁震在柳门打败他们，并追到蜂窝山再次打败他们，敌人溺水而死的很多。
English: In the winter of the same year, Yoshizuku and others attacked the town of Yonekuan. The general Wang Huan and the deputy general Liang Zhen defeated them at the willow gate, and chased them to Honeycomb Mountain to defeat them again. Many of the enemy died from drowning.

古文：明年春，寇大同。秋，复由花马池入犯，梁震及总兵刘文拒却之。
现代文：第二年春天，敌人进犯大同，秋天，又从花马池入侵进来，被梁震和总兵刘文打退。
English: In the spring of the following year, the enemy attacked Datong, and in the autumn, they invaded from Huama Pond. They were repulsed by Liang Zhen and General Liu Wen.

古文：十五年夏，吉囊以十万众屯贺兰山，分兵寇凉州，副总兵王辅御之，斩五十七级。
现代文：嘉靖十五年夏天，吉囊带十万人屯居在贺兰山，分兵进犯凉州。副总兵王辅起兵抗击，斩杀五十七个敌人。
English: In the summer of the 15th year of Jiajing, Guizang led 100,000 people to live in Mount Helan. A detachment of soldiers invaded Liangzhou. The deputy commander-in-chief, Wang Fu, raised an army to fight back and killed 57 enemies.

古文：又入庄浪境，总兵姜奭遇之于分水岭，三战三胜之。
现代文：敌人又侵入庄浪境内，总兵姜在分水岭与敌遭遇，打了三仗全胜。
English: The enemy invaded the territory of Zhuanglang again. The general soldier Jiang encountered the enemy at the watershed and won all three battles.

古文：又入延绥及宁夏边。
现代文：不久敌人又侵入延绥和宁夏边境。
English: Soon after, the enemy invaded the border between Yancheng and Ningxia.

古文：冬，复犯大同，入掠宣大塞，总制侍郎刘天和、总督尚书杨守礼及巡抚都御史楚书悉力御之。
现代文：该年冬天，敌又进犯大同，进入宣府、大同要塞掠夺，总督尚书杨守礼和巡抚都御史楚书全力抵抗。
English: In the winter of the same year, the enemy attacked Datong again, entered Xuanwu and plundered Datong Fortress. Governor Shangshu Yang Shouli and Governor of the Capital Shi Chushu resisted with all their might.

古文：十九年秋，书以总兵白爵等三败敌于万全右卫境，斩百余级。
现代文：嘉靖十九年秋天，楚书派总兵白爵等在万全右卫境内三次打败敌人，斩获敌人一百多个。
English: In the autumn of the 19th year of Jiajing, Chu Shuping sent General Bai Jiao and other soldiers to defeat the enemy three times in the territory of Wanquan Right Guard, and captured more than one hundred enemies.

古文：天和以总兵周尚文大破敌于黑水苑，斩吉囊子小十王。
现代文：刘天和派总兵周尚文在黑水苑大败敌人，斩杀吉囊的儿子小十五。
English: Liu Tianhe dispatched the general Zhou Shangwen to defeat the enemy in Heishuiyuan, and killed the son of Jishuang, Xiao Jufu.

古文：明年春，守礼以总兵李义御敌于镇朔堡，以总兵杨信御敌于甘肃，皆胜之。
现代文：第二年春天，杨守礼派总兵李义在镇朔堡抗击敌人，派总兵杨信在甘肃抗击敌人，都胜利了。
English: In the spring of the following year, Yang Shouli sent the general Li Yi to fight the enemy in Zhenshuo Fort, and sent the general Yang Xin to fight the enemy in Gansu. Both were victorious.

古文：秋，俺答及其属阿不孩遣使石天爵款大同塞，巡抚史道以闻，诏却之。
现代文：该年秋天，俺答和其属下的阿不孩派使者石天爵到大同要塞投诚，巡抚史道把该事报告朝廷。
English: In the autumn of that year, I, together with his subordinate Ah Boo, sent the envoy Shi Tian Jue to Datong Fortress to surrender, and the governor Shi Dao reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：以尚书樊继祖督宣大兵，悬赏格购俺答、阿不孩首。
现代文：嘉靖皇帝下诏书拒绝了，并派尚书樊继祖督促宣府、大同的军队，悬赏购买俺答和阿不孩的首级。
English: Emperor Jiajing issued an edict to reject it, and sent Shang Shuxuan to urge the Xuanwu and Datong armies to offer a reward for the purchase of the severed heads of Eta and Aba.

古文：遂大举内犯，俺答下石岭关，趣太原。吉囊田平虏卫入掠平定、寿阳诸处。
现代文：于是他们大举向境内进犯，俺答攻下石岭关，目标对准太原，吉囊从平虏卫进入平定、寿阳等地掠夺。
English: As a result, they launched a large-scale attack on the territory. I responded by attacking Shilingguan, aiming at Taiyuan, and Yoshizuku entered from Pingruwei into Pingding, Shouyang and other places to plunder.

古文：总兵丁璋、游击周宇战死，诸将多获罪，继祖独蒙赏。
现代文：总兵丁璋、游击周宇战死，诸多将领都承担了罪责，只有樊继祖得到皇帝奖赏。
English: The general soldier Ding Xi and the guerrilla fighter Zhou Yu were killed in the battle, and many generals took the blame. Only Zou's step-grandfather was rewarded by the emperor.

古文：二十一年夏，敌复遣天爵求贡。大同巡抚龙大有诱缚之，上之朝，诡言用计擒获。
现代文：嘉靖二十一年夏天，敌人又派石天爵来通好，大同巡抚龙大有把他诱捕起来，上交给朝廷，诡称是自己设计捉拿的。
English: In the summer of the 21st year of Jiajing, the enemy sent Shi Tianzhu to negotiate with him, and Datong's governor Long Dayu trapped him and handed him over to the imperial court, claiming that he had designed and captured him.

古文：帝悦，擢大有兵部侍郎，边臣升赏者数十人，磔天爵于市。
现代文：嘉靖皇帝很高兴，提升龙大有为兵部侍郎，边关地区有数十名大臣受到皇帝的奖赏。
English: Emperor Jiajing was very pleased. Long Daya was promoted to the position of military commissar, and dozens of ministers in the Border Region were rewarded by the emperor.

古文：敌怒，入寇，掠朔州，抵广武，由太原南下，沁、汾、襄垣、长子皆被残；复从忻、崞、代而北，屯祁县。参将张世忠力战，敌围之数重。自巳至申，所杀伤相当。
现代文：石天爵被拉到闹市车裂分尸。敌人很愤怒，涌入边关，掠夺朔州，到广武，又从太原南下，沁州、汾州、襄垣、长子等地都被他们破坏，他们又从忻州、崞州、代州往北，屯居祁县，参将张世忠奋力战斗，敌人把他围成数重，自己时至申时，双方伤亡相当。
English: Shi Tianjue was dragged to the bustling city and his body was split into pieces. The enemy was very angry, pouring into the border, plundering Shuozhou, to Guangwu, and from Taiyuan to the south, they destroyed Bozhou, Bozhou, Xiangyuan, the eldest son, and other places. They also went north from Bozhou, Bozhou, and Daizhou, and settled in Bozhou County. Zhang Shizhong fought hard. The enemy surrounded him in several layers, and when he was himself, the casualties on both sides were equal.

古文：已而世忠矢尽见杀，百户张宣、张臣俱死，敌遂从雁门故道去。
现代文：最后张世忠箭矢用完了被杀，百户张宣、张臣都战死，敌人才从雁门旧道回去。
English: In the end, Zhang Shizhong ran out of arrows and was killed, and hundreds of Zhang Xuan and Zhang Sen were killed in battle, and the enemy only returned from the old road of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：秋，复入朔州。
现代文：同年秋天，敌人又入侵朔州。
English: In the autumn of the same year, the enemy invaded Shuozhou again.

古文：吉囊死，诸子狼台吉等散处河西，势既分，俺答独盛，岁数扰延绥诸边。
现代文：吉囊死后，他的各个儿子狼台吉等散处河西。势力瓜分后，只有俺答最强盛，每年数次骚扰延绥等边境。
English: After the death of Kizuku, his sons, including Wolf Taiji, scattered to the west of Hexi. After the division of power, only I was the strongest, harassing the border of Yancheng several times a year.

古文：二十三年冬，小王子自万全右卫入，至蔚州及完县。京师戒严。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年冬天，小王子自万全右卫入侵，到达蔚州和完县，京都戒严。
English: In the winter of the 23rd year of the Jiajing Emperor, the Little Prince invaded from Wanquan to Wanxian, reaching Ulshu and Wanxian, and Kyoto was placed under martial law.

古文：二十四年秋，俺答犯延绥及大同，总兵张达拒却之。
现代文：嘉靖二十四年秋天，俺答进犯延绥和大同，总兵张达打退了他。
English: In the autumn of the 24th year of Jiajing, I promised to invade Yancheng and Datong, and the general Zhang Da fought him off.

古文：又犯鹁鸽峪，参将张凤、指挥刘钦、千户李瓒、生员王邦直等皆战死。
现代文：不久又进犯鹁鸽峪，参将张凤、指挥刘钦、千户李瓒、生员王邦直等都战死。
English: Soon after, they attacked Shifang and Dafang, and the general Zhang Feng, the commander Liu Qin, Qianhu Li Yao, and the survivor Wang Bangzhi were all killed in the battle.

古文：会总督侍郎翁万达、总兵周尚文严兵备阳和，敌引去。
现代文：在阳和，俺答看到总督侍郎翁万达、总兵周尚文严阵以待，才引退而去。
English: In Yanghe, I saw the governor's aide-de-camp, Weng Wanda, and the commander-in-chief, Zhou Shangwen, waiting patiently before retiring.

古文：明年夏，俺答复遣使诣大同塞，求贡，边卒杀之。
现代文：第二年夏天，俺答又派使者到大同要塞，要求通好，边关的士兵杀了使者。
English: In the summer of the following year, I sent another envoy to the Datong Fortress to ask for a truce, but the soldiers at the border gate killed the envoy.

古文：秋，复来请，万达再疏以闻，帝不许。
现代文：同年秋天，又来请求，翁万达再次上疏给皇帝，皇帝不答应。
English: In the autumn of the same year, he again asked the emperor for permission, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：敌以十万骑西入保安，掠庆阳、环县而东，以万骑寇锦、义。
现代文：敌人便以十万骑兵从西面攻入保安，掠夺了庆阳、环县后往东，以一万骑兵入侵锦州、义州。
English: The enemy then attacked the garrison from the west with a hundred thousand cavalrymen, plundered Qingyang and Huan County, and then went east to invade Jinzhou and Yizhou with ten thousand cavalrymen.

古文：总督三边侍郎曾铣率参将李珍等直捣敌巢于马梁山后，斩百余级，敌始退。
现代文：总督三边侍郎曾铣带领参将李珍等在马梁山后直捣敌人老巢，斩杀敌人一百多人，敌人才开始退兵。
English: The governor's three-sided attendant Zeng Yao led the general Li Zhen and others to directly attack the enemy's lair after the Maliang Mountain, killing more than a hundred enemies, and the enemy began to retreat.

古文：铣议复河套，大学士夏言主之。
现代文：曾铣商议收复河套，大学士夏言亦有此主张。
English: Zeng Yao discussed the restoration of Hetao, and the university scholar Xia Yan also advocated this.

古文：帝方向用言，令铣图上方略，以便宜从事。
现代文：嘉靖皇帝正重用夏言，命令曾铣拿出具体的战略部署，以便相机行事。
English: Emperor Jiajing is reusing Xia Yan, ordering Zeng Yao to come up with a specific strategic plan so that the camera can act.

古文：明年夏，万达复言： 敌自冬涉春屡求贡，词恭，似宜许。 
现代文：又过了一年夏天，翁万达又给皇帝上言： 敌人自去冬到今春屡次乞求通好，言词恭敬，似乎应该答应他们。 
English: Another summer passed, and Onwanda again appealed to the emperor: "Since the winter of last year until this spring, the enemy has repeatedly begged for goodwill, and the words are respectful, it seems that we should agree to them.

古文：不听，责万达罔渎。
现代文：皇帝不听，反而责怪翁万达无知轻慢。
English: The emperor did not listen, but instead blamed Weng Wanda for his ignorance and imprudence.

古文：铣鸠兵缮塞，辄破敌。
现代文：曾铣在边关修缮要塞加强练兵，总是打败敌人。
English: Zeng Yao repaired fortresses on the border and strengthened the training of soldiers, always defeating the enemy.

古文：既而帝意中变，言与铣竟得罪，斩西市。
现代文：后来皇帝的主意中途发生了变化，夏言和曾铣竟被加罪，在西市斩首。
English: Later, the emperor's idea changed midway, and Xia Yan and Zeng Yao were actually convicted and beheaded in Xi'an.

古文：敌益蓄忿思逞，廷臣不敢言复套事矣。
现代文：敌人便更加隐藏锋芒以待时机，朝廷大臣都不敢提收复河套的事了。
English: The enemy hides its sharp edge more and more, waiting for the right moment. The ministers of the imperial court do not dare to mention the matter of recovering the river.

古文：二十八年春，犯宣府滴水崖。
现代文：嘉靖二十八年春天，敌人进犯宣府的滴水崖。
English: In the spring of the 28th year of Jiajing, the enemy attacked the dripping cliff of Xuanfu.

古文：把总指挥江瀚、董旸战死，全军覆，遂犯永宁、大同。
现代文：把总指挥江翰、董战死，守军全军覆没。敌人便入侵永宁、大同。
English: The commander-in-chief Jiang Han and Dong Zhan were killed, and the entire defending army was wiped out. The enemy then invaded Yongning and Datong.

古文：总兵周尚文御之于曹家庄，大败之，斩其魁。会万达自怀来赴援，宣府总兵赵国忠闻警，亦率千骑追击，复连败之。
现代文：总兵周尚文在曹家庄起兵抗击，大败敌人，斩杀了敌人的魁首；碰到自怀来赶来援救的翁万达和听到警报率一千骑兵追击敌人的宣府总兵赵国忠后，又接连打败了敌人。
English: Generalissimo Zhou Shangwen launched a counterattack in Caojiazhuang, defeated the enemy and killed the enemy's leader; after encountering Onwanda, who came to the rescue of his own accord, and Xuanfu Generalissimo Zhao Guozhong, who heard the alarm rate of a thousand cavalry chasing the enemy, he defeated the enemy one after another.

古文：是岁，犯西塞者五。
现代文：这一年，敌人五次进犯西边的要塞。
English: That year, the enemy attacked the western fortress five times.

古文：二十九年春，俺答移驻威宁海子。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年春，俺答转移到威宁海子居住。
English: In the spring of the 29th year of Jiajing, we decided to move to Haizi, Weining.

古文：夏，犯大同，总兵张达、林椿死之。
现代文：同年夏天，进犯大同，总兵张达、林椿战死。
English: In the summer of the same year, the attack on Datong, the soldiers Zhang Da and Lin Qin died in battle.

古文：敌引去，传箭诸部大举。
现代文：敌人引退离开时，传箭令到各部落准备大举进攻。
English: When the enemy retreated, arrows were sent to the tribes to prepare for a large-scale attack.

古文：秋，循潮河川南下至古北口，都御史王汝孝率蓟镇兵御之。
现代文：该年秋天，敌人顺着潮河川南下到古北口，都御史王汝孝率领蓟镇的军队抵抗。
English: In the autumn of that year, the enemy followed the tides and rivers to the south to the ancient Beigou, and the prince of the capital, King Ru Xiao, led the army of the town to resist.

古文：敌阳引满内向，而别遣精骑从间道溃墙入。汝孝兵溃，遂大掠怀柔，围顺义，抵通州，分兵四掠，焚湖渠马房。
现代文：敌人表面上按兵不动，暗地里派遣精锐骑兵从小路破墙而入，王汝孝的军队溃败，敌人便在怀柔大肆抢劫，包围顺义，到通州时又分兵四出抢劫，把湖渠的马房也烧掉。
English: On the surface, the enemy did not move, but secretly dispatched elite cavalry to break through the wall from the path. Wang Ruxiao's army was defeated. The enemy then looted extensively in Huairou, surrounded Shunyi, and when they arrived in Tongzhou, they sent out four detachments to loot and burn down the stable in the lake.

古文：畿甸大震。
现代文：朝野为之震动。
English: Asano shakes with it.

古文：敌大众犯京师，大同总兵咸宁侯仇鸾、巡抚保定都御史杨守谦等，各以勤王兵至。
现代文：敌人大队人马进犯京都，大同总兵咸宁侯仇鸾、巡抚保定都御史杨守谦等都带兵赶来救援王朝。
English: The enemy brigade of men and horses attacked Kyoto, and the Datong general soldiers Xianning, Hou, and Qianqian, and the governor of Baoding, Yang Shouqian, all came with soldiers to rescue the dynasty.

古文：帝拜鸾为大将军，使护诸军。
现代文：皇帝拜仇鸾为大将军，使他指挥各路军队。
English: The emperor made him a great general and put him in charge of all the armies.

古文：鸾与守谦皆軿懦不敢战，兵部尚书丁汝夔恇扰不知所为，闭门守。
现代文：仇鸾和杨守谦都胆小不敢出战，兵部尚书丁汝夔既害怕又担忧不知该怎么办，只好闭门守卫。
English: Both Xuan Zang and Yang Shouqian were too timid to go to war, and the military commander Shang Shuxu and Ding Ruxuan were both afraid and worried and did not know what to do, so they had to guard behind closed doors.

古文：敌焚掠三日夜，引去。
现代文：敌人焚烧抢劫了三天三夜后才退去。
English: The enemy burned and looted for three days and three nights before retreating.

古文：帝诛汝夔及守谦。
现代文：嘉靖皇帝事后杀了丁汝夔和杨守谦。
English: Emperor Jiajing later killed Ding Ruxuan and Yang Shouqian.

古文：敌将出白羊口，鸾尾之。
现代文：敌人将要出白羊口，仇鸾尾随在敌后。
English: The enemy will come out of the mouth of the white sheep, and the enemy will follow behind.

古文：敌猝东返，鸾出不意，兵溃，死伤千余人。敌乃徐由古北口出塞。
现代文：敌人突然朝东返回，仇鸾没有意料和防备，军队溃散，死伤一千多人，敌人便慢慢地从古北口出了要塞。
English: The enemy suddenly returned to the east, the enemy did not expect and did not prepare, the army was scattered, more than a thousand people were killed and injured, and the enemy slowly left the fortress from the ancient north gate.

古文：诸将收斩遗尸，得八十余级，以捷闻。
现代文：各位将领把敌人留下的尸体收起来，把脑袋割下来，共八十多个，冒充胜利上报给皇帝。
English: The generals gathered up the corpses left behind by the enemy and cut off their heads, a total of more than eighty, and reported them to the emperor as a victory.

古文：方俺答薄都城时，纵所掳马房内官杨增持书入城求贡。
现代文：当俺答带兵逼近京都城时，让被他们俘去的马房内官杨增带着书信到都城内要求通好。
English: When I was approaching Kyoto Castle with soldiers, I asked the equerry Yang Zeng, who had been captured by them, to go to the capital with a letter and request a truce.

古文：辅臣徐阶等谓当以计款之，谕令退屯塞外，因边臣以请。
现代文：辅臣徐阶等认为应当以计谋退敌，便让皇帝下诏书让俺答退兵到塞外，让边关上的大臣来替他们请求。
English: The aide-de-camp Xu Qi and others thought that the enemy should be repulsed by means of stratagem, so they asked the emperor to issue an edict to withdraw the troops outside of Tibet, and let the minister at the border come to make a request for them.

古文：俺答归，遣子脱脱陈款。
现代文：俺答回去后，派遣儿子脱脱来谈投诚事宜。
English: After I answered back, I sent my son to get out of the situation and talk about the matter of surrendering.

古文：时鸾方用事，乃议开马市以中敌。
现代文：此时正是仇鸾掌权，便商议与敌人开通马市。
English: At this time, it was the enemy who was in power, and he negotiated with the enemy to open the horse market.

古文：兵部郎中杨继盛上疏争之，不得。
现代文：兵部郎中杨继盛给皇帝上疏认为这样做不妥，没有结果。
English: Yang Jisheng, a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, suggested to Emperor Shang Shou that it would be inappropriate to do so, but to no avail.

古文：明年春，以侍郎史道莅其事，给白金十万，开市大同，次及延、宁。
现代文：过了一年的春天，皇帝派侍郎史道负责与敌人通市的事，史道给敌人送去白金十万，开大同与敌人通贸易，后又开通延绥、宁夏与敌人互市。
English: In the spring of the following year, the emperor sent his attendant, Shi Tao, to be in charge of trading with the enemy. Shi Tao sent 100,000 yuan in platinum to the enemy, opened trade with the enemy in Datong, and later opened trade with the enemy in Yancheng and Ningxia.

古文：叛人萧芹、吕明镇者，故以罪亡入敌，挟白莲邪教，与其党赵全、丘富、周原、乔源诸人导俺答为患。
现代文：叛徒萧芹、吕明镇两人，以前因犯罪逃入敌方，要挟白莲教，与其党徒赵全、丘富、周原、乔源等人一起助俺答为患。
English: The two traitors Xiao Chen and Luming Zhen, who had previously fled to the enemy side for crimes and threatened the White Lotus Sect, helped me with their party members Zhao Quan, Qiu Fu, Zhou Yuan, Qiaoyuan and others.

古文：俺答市毕，旋入掠。边臣责之，以芹等为词。
现代文：俺答贸易完后，又进来抢掠，边关大臣责问他，他就说是萧芹带他们来抢劫的。
English: After I finished the trade, I came in again to loot. When the Minister of Border Affairs reprimanded him, he said that Xiao Qin had brought them to loot.

古文：芹诡有术，能堕城。
现代文：萧芹自称自己有异术，能够让城堡倒塌。
English: Xiao Qin claimed that he had magic and could make the castle collapse.

古文：敌试之不验，遂缚芹及明镇，而全、富等竟匿不出。
现代文：敌人让他试验，不灵，便把萧芹和吕明镇捆绑起来，而赵全、丘富等人竟然躲藏起来不敢出来。
English: The enemy put him to the test, but it didn't work, so they tied up Xiao Qin and Liuming Zhen, while Zhao Quan, Qiu Fu and others actually hid and dared not come out.

古文：俺答复请以牛马易粟豆，求职役诰敕，又潜约河西诸部内犯，堕诸边垣。
现代文：俺答又请求拿牛马换粟米和豆子，要皇帝分封他一个职务，背地里又密约河西各部落向明朝进犯，毁损边关的城墙。
English: I replied and asked him to exchange the cattle and horses for corn and beans, and asked the emperor to assign him a post. Behind the scenes, I also secretly invited the tribes west of the river to attack the Ming Dynasty and damage the city walls of the border.

古文：帝恶之，诏罢马市，召道还。
现代文：皇帝厌恶俺答的行为，下诏停止马市，召史道回来。
English: The emperor was disgusted with my behavior, issued an edict to stop the horse market, and called Shi Tao back.

古文：自是，敌日寇掠西边，边人大困。
现代文：从此，敌人每天在西部边境抢劫，当地百姓大受困扰。
English: Since then, the enemy has been robbing the western border every day, and the local people have been greatly troubled.

古文：三十一年春，敌二千骑寇大同，指挥王恭御之于平川墩，战死。
现代文：嘉靖三十一年春天，敌人以二千骑兵进犯大同，指挥王恭在平川墩抗击敌人，战死。
English: In the spring of the 31st year of Jiajing, the enemy attacked Datong with two thousand cavalrymen. The commander Wang Gong fought against the enemy in Hirakawa and died in battle.

古文：夏，东入辽塞，围百户常禄，指挥姚大谟、刘栋、刘启基等于三道氵冓，四人皆战没。备御指挥王相赴援，大战于寺儿山，杀伤相当，敌舍去。
现代文：夏天，敌人往东进入辽阳要塞，在三道沟包围了百户常禄，指挥姚大谟、刘栋、刘启基，四个人都阵亡，备御指挥王相赶来救援，在寺儿山与敌大战，双方伤亡相当，敌人退却。
English: In the summer, the enemy entered the Liaoyang Fortress to the east, and surrounded the Hundred Households of Changlu in the Three-Way Ditch. The commanders, Yao Damu, Liu Dong, and Liu Qiji, were all killed in action. The reserve commander, Wang Xiang, came to the rescue, and fought with the enemy in Tereshan. The casualties on both sides were equal, and the enemy retreated.

古文：千户叶廷瑞率百人助相。
现代文：千户叶廷瑞带一百人为王相助战。
English: A thousand households of Ye Ting Rui and a hundred people fought for Wang Xiang.

古文：明日，相裹创复邀敌于蜡黎山，殊死斗，矢竭，遂与麾下将士三百人皆死之。
现代文：第二天，王相包扎好伤口又邀敌人在蜡黎山进行殊死战斗，箭矢用完了，便与他手下的将士三百人一起阵亡。
English: The next day, Wang Xiang bandaged up his wounds and invited the enemy to fight a desperate battle on Wuxili Mountain. When he ran out of arrows, he was killed along with 300 soldiers under his command.

古文：廷瑞被创死复苏，敌亦引退。
现代文：叶廷瑞重伤昏死过去又苏醒过来，敌人也退走了。
English: Ye Tingrui was seriously injured, fainted and woke up, and the enemy also retreated.

古文：其年，凡四犯大同，三犯辽阳，一犯宁夏。
现代文：这年，敌人总共侵犯大同四次；侵犯辽阳三次；侵犯宁夏一次。
English: This year, the enemy invaded Datong a total of four times; invaded Liaoyang three times; and invaded Ningxia once.

古文：明年春，犯宣府及延绥。
现代文：第二年春天，敌人又进犯宣府和延绥。
English: In the spring of the following year, the enemy attacked Xuanfu and Yancheng again.

古文：夏，犯甘肃及大同。守将御之辄败。
现代文：夏天，进犯甘肃和大同，守卫的将领抗击时总被打败。
English: In summer, when attacking Gansu and Datong, the guarding generals were always defeated.

古文：秋，俺答复大举入寇，下浑源、灵丘、广昌，急攻插箭、浮图等峪。
现代文：秋天，俺答又大举入侵，攻下浑源、灵丘、广昌，又急攻插箭、浮图等山口。
English: In the autumn, we responded with another large-scale invasion, capturing Hunyuan, Lingqiu, and Guangchang, as well as making a sudden attack on the mountain passes such as Jieye and Fuda.

古文：固原游击陈凤、宁夏游击朱玉率兵赴援，大战却之。
现代文：固原的游击陈凤赶宁夏的游击朱玉率军队赶来援救，经过大战打退敌人。
English: Chen Feng, a guerrilla fighter from Guyuan, drove Zhu Yu, a guerrilla fighter from Ningxia, and his army to come to the rescue. After a great battle, they beat back the enemy.

古文：敌分兵东犯蔚，西掠代、繁畤。
现代文：敌人又分兵往东进犯蔚州，往西劫掠代州和繁。
English: The enemy also sent detachments to the east to invade Ulshu, and to the west to plunder Daizhou and Shifang.

古文：已，驻鹿阝、延二十日，延庆诸城屠掠几遍，乃移营中部，以瞰泾、原，会久雨乃去。
现代文：之后，驻在鹿阝州、延绥二十日，延庆各城都被屠杀抢劫几遍，再把营帐移到中部，想进犯泾州、原州两地，碰上长期下雨才离去。
English: After that, he was stationed in Luzhou, Yancheng on the 20th, and all the cities in Yanqing were slaughtered and robbed several times. He then moved his camp to the center, and wanted to invade Luzhou and Wonju. He only left when it rained for a long time.

古文：时小王子亦乘隙为寇，犯宣府赤城。未几，俺答复以万骑入大同，纵掠至八角堡。
现代文：此时小王子也乘机为寇，进犯宣府的赤城，不久，俺答又以一万骑兵侵入大同，大肆抢劫到八角堡。
English: At this time, the little prince also took the opportunity to be a robber, attacking the Akagi of the Xuanfu, and soon, I answered with ten thousand cavalry invading Datong, and robbing the Octagon Castle.

古文：巡抚赵时春御之，遇敌于大虫岭，总兵李涞战死，军覆，时春仅以身免。
现代文：巡抚赵时春起兵抵抗，在大虫岭与敌相遇，总兵李涞战死，全军覆没，只有赵时春自己逃脱。
English: The governor Zhao Shihchun raised an army to resist and met the enemy at the Big Worm Ridge. The general Li Xi died in the battle, the whole army was destroyed, and only Zhao Shihchun himself escaped.

古文：三十三年春，入宣府柴沟堡。
现代文：嘉靖三十三年春天，敌人侵入宣府的柴沟堡。
English: In the spring of the 33rd year of Jiajing, the enemy invaded Chai Gou Fort of Xuanfu.

古文：夏，复犯宁夏，大同总兵岳懋中伏死。
现代文：夏天，又进犯宁夏，大同总兵岳懋中埋伏而死。
English: In the summer, he attacked Ningxia again, and was ambushed and killed by the Datong general troops.

古文：秋，攻蓟镇墙，百道并进。
现代文：秋天，敌人攻占蓟镇的防卫墙，百路大军一起进发。
English: In autumn, the enemy captured the defense wall of Handan Town, and hundreds of troops marched in together.

古文：警报日数十至，京师戒严。
现代文：警报一天数十次地传到京城，京城的军队都戒严。
English: Dozens of alerts were sent to the capital every day, and the capital's military forces were placed under martial law.

古文：总督杨博悉力拒守，募死士夜砍其营，敌惊扰乃遁。
现代文：总督杨博尽全力抗拒敌人，招募不怕死的勇士深夜砍到敌人的营帐里去，敌人受惊扰后才逃走。
English: Governor Yang Bo did his best to resist the enemy, recruiting warriors who were not afraid to die, and went to the enemy's camp in the middle of the night. The enemy was frightened and fled.

古文：明年数犯宣、蓟，参将赵倾葵、李光启、丁碧先后战死。朝廷再下赏格，购俺答首，赐万金，爵伯；获丘富、周原者三百金，授三品武阶。
现代文：第二年又数次进犯宣府、蓟镇，参将赵倾葵、李光启、丁碧先后战死，朝廷定下悬赏的价格，若买到俺答的首级，赏赐万金，封为伯爵；抓获丘富、周原，得三百赏金，授予三品武官。
English: In the second year, they attacked Xuanfu and Shanzhen several times, and the commanders Zhao Jiankui, Li Guangqi, and Ding Bi were killed in the battle. The imperial court set the price of the reward, and if they bought the first level of Ipchu, they would be rewarded with ten thousand gold and made an earl; if they captured Qufu and Zhouyuan, they would get three hundred reward money and be awarded the rank of three grade military officer.

古文：时富等在敌，招集亡命，居丰州，筑城自卫，构宫殿，垦水田，号曰板升。
现代文：此时丘富等人在敌方招集亡命之徒，居住在丰州，筑城自卫，构建宫殿，开垦水田，称为板升。
English: At this time, Qiu Fu and others were recruiting outlaws on the enemy side, living in Toyosu, building a city for self-defense, constructing a palace, and reclaiming paddy fields, known as Ban Sheng.

古文：板升，华言屋也。
现代文：板升，中国话就是屋子。
English: Pan Sheng, in Chinese, means room.

古文：赵全教敌，益习攻战事。
现代文：赵全教授敌人，使敌人更习惯于攻战之事。
English: Zhao Quan taught the enemy and made the enemy more accustomed to offensive warfare.

古文：俺答爱之甚，每入寇必置酒全所问计。
现代文：俺答非常喜爱赵全，每次入侵时都一定要备酒到赵全的住所去请教。
English: I am very fond of Zhao Quan, every time I invade, I must prepare wine and go to Zhao Quan's residence to ask for advice.

古文：三十五年夏，敌三万骑犯宣府。游击张纮迎战，败死。
现代文：嘉靖三十五年夏天，敌人三万骑兵进犯宣府，游击张纟宏迎战敌人，战败而死。
English: In the summer of the thirty-fifth year of Jiajing, the enemy's thirty thousand cavalry attacked Xuanfu, and the guerrilla Zhang Yuhang confronted the enemy and was defeated and died.

古文：冬，掠大同边，继掠陕西环、庆诸处，守将孙朝、袁正等却之。其年，土蛮再犯辽东。
现代文：冬天，敌人在大同边境掠夺，继而又掠夺陕西的环州、庆州等地，守将孙朝、袁正等打退了敌人，这年，土蛮又再次进犯辽东。
English: In winter, the enemy plundered the Datong border, and then plundered Huanzhou, Gyeongju and other places in Shaanxi. Guardsmen Sun Dynasty, Yuan Zheng and others repelled the enemy. This year, the barbarians once again invaded Liaodong.

古文：明年，敌以二万骑分掠大同边，杀守备唐天禄、把总汪渊。
现代文：第二年，敌人以二万骑兵分头到大同边境劫掠，杀死守备唐天禄、把总汪渊。
English: In the second year, the enemy sent twenty thousand cavalrymen to the Datong border to loot, kill the guard Tang Tianlu, and capture the general Wang Yuan.

古文：俺答弟老把都复拥众数万入河流口，犯永平及迁安，副总兵蒋承勋力战死。
现代文：俺答弟弟老把都又带数万人马进入河流口，进犯永平和迁安，副总兵蒋承勋奋力抗战而死。
English: I and my elder brother both took tens of thousands of men and horses into the estuary to attack Yongping and Qian'an, and the vice-commander-in-chief, Jiang Chengxun, died in the struggle.

古文：夏，突犯宣府马尾梁，参将祁勉战死。
现代文：该年夏天，敌人突然进犯宣府的马尾梁，参将祁勉战死。
English: In the summer of that year, the enemy suddenly attacked Mawei Liang of Xuanfu, and the general Zou Min died in the battle.

古文：秋，复入大同右卫境，攻毁七十余堡，所杀掳甚众。
现代文：该年秋天，又进入大同右卫境内，攻占并毁坏七十多个城堡，杀死和掳走的百姓很多。
English: In the autumn of that year, they entered the territory of Datong Uwei again, captured and destroyed more than seventy castles, and killed and abducted many people.

古文：冬，俺答子辛爱有妾曰桃松寨，私部目收令哥，惧诛来降。
现代文：同年冬天，俺答的儿子辛爱有个妾名叫桃松塞，与其部落的头目收令哥有私情。
English: In the winter of the same year, my son, Xin Ai, had a concubine named Taosongse, who was having an affair with the head of his tribe, Zhuilinggong.

古文：总督杨顺自诩为奇功，致之阙下。
现代文：她害怕被诛杀而投降明朝。总督杨顺自吹自己建了奇功，把她带到朝廷。
English: She was afraid of being killed and surrendered to the Ming dynasty. Governor Yang Shun boasted that he had built a miracle and brought her to the imperial court.

古文：辛爱来索不得，乃纵掠大同诸墩堡，围右卫数匝。
现代文：辛爱来索人不得，便纵兵掠夺大同各墩堡，把右卫围了数圈。
English: Xin Ai couldn't get anyone to come, so his soldiers plundered all the bunkers in Datong and encircled the right guard several times.

古文：顺惧，乃诡言敌愿易我以赵全、丘富。
现代文：杨顺害怕了，便诡称敌人愿意拿赵全、丘富来换桃松塞。
English: Yang Shun was afraid, so he pretended that the enemy was willing to exchange Zhao Quan and Qiu Fu for the peach cork.

古文：本兵许论以为便，乃遣桃松寨夜逸出塞，绐之西走，阴告辛爱，辛爱执而戮之。
现代文：本兵许论认为这样可以，便让桃松塞夜里逃出边塞，骗她往西走，暗地里派人告诉辛爱，辛爱抓到后杀了她。
English: The soldier Xu Xuan thought that this was okay, so he let Taosongjie escape from the border fortress at night, tricked her into going west, and secretly sent someone to tell Xin Ai that he would kill her after catching her.

古文：敌狎知顺无能，围右卫益急，更分兵犯宣、蓟镇。
现代文：敌人从这件事知道杨顺无能，便包围了右卫更急，还分兵进犯宣府、蓟镇。
English: The enemy knew from this incident that Yang Shun was incompetent, so they surrounded the right guard more urgently, and also sent troops to invade Xuanfu and Handan Town.

古文：西鄙震动，右卫烽火断绝者六阅月。
现代文：整个西部边境为之震动，右卫的烽火断绝了整整六个月。
English: The entire western border was shaken, and the bonfire of the Right Guards was interrupted for a full six months.

古文：大学士严嵩与许论议，欲弃右卫。
现代文：大学士严嵩与许论高议，想放弃右卫。
English: College student Yan Song and Xu have a heated discussion and want to give up the right guard.

古文：帝不听，诏诸臣发兵措饷，而以兵部侍郎江东代顺。
现代文：嘉靖皇帝不听，下令各位大臣发兵筹集粮饷。同时以兵部侍郎江东替换杨顺掌管军务。
English: Emperor Jiajing did not listen and ordered the ministers to send troops to collect grain. At the same time, he replaced Yang Shun in charge of military affairs with the military aide Jiang Dong.

古文：时故将尚表以馈饷入围城，悉力捍御，粟尽食牛马，彻屋为薪，士卒无变志。
现代文：此时老将尚表带着一些馈赠的粮饷进围城之中，尽全力抗击敌人，粟米吃完了吃牛马，把房屋拆掉做柴薪，士兵没有叛逃的。
English: At this time, the veteran Shang table entered the besieged city with some donated grain baskets, and tried his best to resist the enemy. After eating corn, he ate cattle and horses, and tore down houses to make firewood. The soldiers did not defect.

古文：表时出兵突战，获俺答孙及婿与其部将各一人。
现代文：尚表时而还出兵突然袭击敌人，抓获俺答的孙子、女婿和部将各一人。
English: He also sent troops to attack the enemy suddenly at times, and captured one of his grandson, son-in-law and general.

古文：会帝所遣侍郎江东及巡抚杨选、总兵张承勋等各严兵进，围乃解。
现代文：碰上皇帝派遣的侍郎江东和巡抚杨选、总兵张承勋等人各带兵进发，包围圈才解开。
English: The encirclement was broken only when the Emperor's attendant Jiang Dong, the inspector Yang Xuan, the general Zhang Chengxun and others, who had been dispatched by the Emperor, marched in with their troops.

古文：复掠永昌、凉州及宣府赤城，围甘州十四日始退。
现代文：敌人又掠夺永昌、凉州和宣府的赤城，包围甘州达十四日后才退去。
English: The enemy also plundered Yongchang, Liangzhou and Xuanfu's Akechi, and besieged Ganzhou for fourteen days before retreating.

古文：土蛮亦数寇辽东。
现代文：土蛮也数次进犯辽东。
English: The barbarians also invaded Liaodong several times.

古文：三十八年春，老把都、辛爱谋大举入犯，驻会州，使其谍诡称东下。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年春天，老把都、辛爱谋划大举入侵，驻兵在会州，让他们的间谍诡称要往东进犯。
English: In the spring of the thirty-eighth year of Jiajing, the old man of the capital, Xin Ai, planned a large-scale invasion, stationed troops in Huizhou, and let their spies pretend to attack the east.

古文：总督王忬不能察，遽分兵而东，号令数易，敌遂乘间入蓟镇潘家口，忬得罪。
现代文：总督王忄予不能察觉他们的阴谋，遂分兵往东，数次变更号令，敌人便乘机进入蓟镇的潘家口，王忄予因此获罪。
English: Governor Wang Huiyu could not detect their plot, so he sent a detachment of soldiers to the east, changed the order several times, and the enemy took the opportunity to enter Panjiakou in Handan Town. Wang Huiyu was convicted for this.

古文：夏，犯大同，转掠宣府东西二城，驻内地旬日，会久雨乃退。
现代文：同年夏天，敌人进犯大同、又转而掠夺宣府的东西二城，驻扎在内地达十日，碰上长期下雨才退走。
English: In the summer of the same year, the enemy attacked Datong, and then turned to plunder the eastern and western two cities of Xuanfu, stationed in the inland for ten days, and only retreated when it rained for a long time.

古文：三十九年，敌聚众喜峰口外，窥犯蓟镇。
现代文：嘉靖三十九年，敌人聚集在喜峰口外，窥视进犯蓟镇。
English: In the thirty-ninth year of Jiajing, the enemy gathered outside the mouth of the Qifeng, peering into the town.

古文：大同总兵刘汉出捣其帐于灰河，敌稍远徙。
现代文：大同总兵刘汉出兵在灰河捣毁敌人的营帐，敌人才稍微远迁了一点。
English: Datong General Liu Han dispatched troops to destroy the enemy's camp in Haihe, and the enemy only moved a little further away.

古文：秋，汉复与参将王孟夏等捣丰州，擒斩一百五十人，焚板升略尽。
现代文：该年秋天，刘汉又与参将王孟夏等直捣丰州，擒获斩杀敌人一百五十人，几乎把板升全烧光。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Liu Han, together with Wang Mengxia and others, made a direct attack on Fengzhou, captured and killed one hundred and fifty enemies, and almost completely burned the plate.

古文：是岁，寇大同、延绥、蓟、辽边无虚日。
现代文：该年，敌人进犯大同、延绥、蓟镇、辽阳。
English: That year, the enemy attacked Datong, Yancheng, Handan and Liaoyang.

古文：明年春，敌自河西踏冰入寇，守备王世臣、千户李虎战死。
现代文：第二年春天，敌人从河西踏冰进犯，守备王世臣、千户李虎战死。
English: In the spring of the following year, the enemy stepped on the ice from the west of the river to attack, and guards Wang Shichen and Qianhu Lihu were killed in the battle.

古文：秋，犯宣府及居庸。
现代文：秋天，敌人进犯宣府和居庸。
English: In autumn, the enemy attacked Xuanfu and Juyang.

古文：冬，掠陕西、宁夏塞。
现代文：冬天，他们又掠夺了陕西、宁夏的要塞。
English: In winter, they plundered the fortresses in Shaanxi and Ningxia.

古文：已，复分兵而东，陷盖州。
现代文：之后，他们又分兵向东，攻陷盖州。
English: After that, they sent another detachment to the east to capture Geizhou.

古文：四十一年夏，土蛮入抚顺，为总兵黑春所败。
现代文：嘉靖四十一年夏天，土蛮入侵抚顺，被总兵黑春打败。
English: In the summer of the 41st year of Jiajing, the barbarians invaded Fushun and were defeated by the general Heichun.

古文：冬，复攻凤凰城，春力战二日夜，死之。
现代文：不久，敌人又攻打凤凰城，黑春奋力战斗了两日两夜，阵亡。
English: Soon after, the enemy attacked Phoenix City again. Heichun fought hard for two days and two nights and was killed.

古文：海、金杀掠尤甚。
现代文：敌杀掠百姓很多。
English: There is a lot of killing and looting of civilians.

古文：冬，俺答数犯山西、宁夏塞。
现代文：冬天，俺答屡次进犯山西、宁夏的边关。
English: In winter, I had to repeatedly invade the borders of Shanxi and Ningxia.

古文：延绥总兵赵岢分部锐卒，令裨将李希靖等东出神木堡，捣敌帐于半坡山，徐执中等西出定边营，击敌骑于荍麦湖，皆胜之，斩一百十九级。
现代文：延绥总兵赵岢分出精锐兵卒，命令副将李希靖等人东出神木堡，在半坡山捣毁敌人的营帐；又命令徐执中等人西出定边营，在收艹麦湖袭击敌骑兵，都取得了胜利，斩首级一百十九个。
English: Yeonpyeong general Zhao Ye separated the elite soldiers and ordered the vice-general Li Xijing and others to go east to the magic wooden fort and destroy the enemy's camp on the half-slope mountain; he also ordered the middle-aged Xu Jie to go west to the fixed-edge camp and attack the enemy cavalry at Jieyumai Lake. Both achieved victory, beheading one hundred and nineteen.

古文：四十二年春，敌入宣府滴水崖，刘汉却之。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年春天，敌人入侵宣府滴水崖，刘汉将他们打退。
English: In the spring of the 42nd year of Jiajing, the enemy invaded the Xuanfu dripping cliff, and Liu Han drove them back.

古文：敌遂引而东，数犯辽塞。
现代文：敌人于是往东，数次进犯辽阳边关。
English: The enemy then moved eastward and attacked the Liaoyang Border Gate several times.

古文：秋，总兵杨照败死。
现代文：秋天，总兵杨照战败而死。
English: In autumn, the general Yang Zhao was defeated and died.

古文：时蓟辽总督杨选囚絷三卫长通罕，令其诸子更迭为质。
现代文：此时蓟镇、辽阳总督杨选囚禁了三卫长通罕，让他的各个儿子轮流来做人质。
English: At this time, Yang Xuan, the governor of Liaoyang, imprisoned Tong Han, the head of the Three Guards, and let his sons take turns as hostages.

古文：通罕者，辛爱妻父也，冀以牵制辛爱，三卫皆怨。
现代文：通罕，是辛爱妻子的父亲。杨选希望以此举来牵制辛爱，三卫的人都有怨言。
English: Tong Han is the father of Xin Ai's wife. Yang Xuan hopes to restrain Xin Ai with this move. The people of Sanwei all have complaints.

古文：冬，大掠顺义、三河。
现代文：该年冬天，敌人大肆掠夺顺义、三河。
English: In the winter of that year, the enemy plundered Shunyi and Sanhe.

古文：诸将赵溱、孙膑战死，京师戒严。
现代文：将领赵溱、孙膑战死，京都戒严。
English: Generals Zhao Wei and Sun Wei died in battle, and Kyoto was placed under martial law.

古文：大同总兵姜应熊御之于密云，败之，敌退。
现代文：大同总兵姜应熊在密云打败敌人，敌人退走。
English: Datong general soldier Jiang Ying Xiong defeated the enemy in Miyun and the enemy retreated.

古文：诏诛选。
现代文：皇帝下诏杀杨选。
English: The emperor issued an edict to kill Yang Xuan.

古文：明年，土蛮入辽东，都御史刘焘上诸将守御功，言海水暴涨，敌骑多没者。帝曰： 海若效灵。 
现代文：第二年，土蛮入侵辽东，都御史刘焘上书皇帝为守卫的诸将请功，说海水暴涨，敌骑淹死很多，皇帝说： 海也显灵了。 
English: The following year, when the barbarians invaded Liaodong, the governor of the capital, Liu Xuan, sent a letter to the emperor asking for help for the guards, saying that the sea had risen sharply and many enemy horsemen had drowned. The emperor said, "The sea has also shown its spirit."

古文：下有司祭告，焘等皆有赏。
现代文：下诏让有关官员对海祭祀祷告。刘焘等人都有奖赏。
English: The following edict ordered the relevant officials to pray for the sea sacrifice. Liu Ye and others were rewarded.

古文：冬，敌犯狭西，大掠板桥、响闸儿诸处。
现代文：该年冬天，敌人进犯陕西，大肆掠夺板桥、向闸儿等地。
English: In the winter of that year, the enemy invaded Shaanxi and plundered Banqiao, Xiangzhaer and other places.

古文：四十四年春，犯辽东宁前小团山，参将线补衮、游击杨维藩死之。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年春天，敌人进犯辽东宁前的小团山，参将线补衮、游击杨维藩战死。
English: In the spring of the forty-fourth year of Jiajing, the enemy invaded Xiaotuan Mountain in front of Liaodongning, and the general died in the guerrilla warfare of Yangwei Domain.

古文：夏，犯肃州，总兵刘承业御之，再战皆捷。
现代文：夏天，敌人进犯肃州，总兵刘承业带兵抗击，两战都胜。
English: In the summer, the enemy invaded Suizhou. Liu Chengye, the commander-in-chief, led the troops to fight back and won both battles.

古文：秋，俺答子黄台吉帅轻骑，自宣府洗马林突入，散掠内地。
现代文：秋天，俺答的儿子黄台吉率轻装骑兵，从宣府洗马林突然入侵，散掠内地。
English: In autumn, Ip's son Huang Taiji led light cavalry from Xuanfu and Shimaring to suddenly invade and plunder the inland.

古文：把总姜汝栋以锐卒二百伏暗庄堡，猝遇台吉，搏之。
现代文：把总姜汝栋以精兵二百人埋伏在暗庄堡，突然碰到黄台吉，便与他们搏斗。
English: He had General Jiang Rudong and 200 elite soldiers lie in ambush at Anzhuang Fort, when he suddenly encountered Huang Taiji and fought with them.

古文：台吉堕马，为所部夺去。
现代文：黄台吉堕落马下，被其部下救走。
English: Huang Taiji fell down and was saved by his subordinates.

古文：台吉受伤，越日始苏。
现代文：黄台吉受了伤，过了一天才苏醒过来。
English: Huang Taiji was injured and did not wake up until a day later.

古文：明年，俺答屡犯东西诸塞。
现代文：第二年，俺答屡次进犯东西要塞。
English: In the second year, I repeatedly attacked the eastern and western fortresses.

古文：夏，清河守备郎得功扼之张能峪口，胜之。
现代文：同年夏天，清河守备郎得功守卫在张能峪口，打败了敌人。
English: In the summer of the same year, Qinghe's garrison commander, Gui Lang, gained the merit of guarding Zhangneng Pass and defeated the enemy.

古文：冬，大同参将崔世荣御敌于樊皮岭，及子大朝、大宾俱战死。
现代文：该年冬天，大同参将崔世荣率领儿子大朝、大宾在樊皮岭抗击敌人，父子三人全阵亡。
English: In the winter of that year, the general of the Datong, Cui Shirong, led his son, Datong, and the chief guest to fight against the enemy in Ganpi Ridge, and all three of them were killed.

古文：时丘富死，赵全在敌中益用事，尊俺答为帝，治宫殿。
现代文：此时丘富已死，赵全在敌营中更受重用。他尊俺答为皇帝，为俺答建宫殿。
English: At this time, Qiu Fu had already died, and Zhao Quan was given more important tasks in the enemy camp. He promised to make me emperor and build a palace for me.

古文：期日上栋，忽大风，栋坠伤数人。
现代文：按预定日子上栋梁时，忽然刮起大风，栋梁坠下来砸伤了数人。
English: When the girders were raised on the scheduled day, a strong wind suddenly blew, and the girders fell down, injuring several people.

古文：俺答惧，不敢复居。
现代文：俺答有点害怕，不敢再在宫殿中央住。
English: I'm a bit scared, I don't dare to live in the middle of the palace anymore.

古文：兵部侍郎谭纶在蓟镇善治兵，全乃说俺答无轻犯蓟，大同兵弱，可以逞。
现代文：兵部侍郎谭纶在蓟镇善于带兵治军，赵全便劝俺答不要轻易进犯蓟镇，认为大同人军队薄弱，可以去逞威风。
English: The attendant of the military department, Tan Xuan, was good at leading troops and governing the army in Handan Town. Zhao Quan advised him not to easily invade Handan Town, believing that the Datong army was weak and could be more powerful.

古文：隆庆元年，俺答数犯山西。
现代文：隆庆元年，俺答数次进犯山西。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, we attacked Shanxi several times.

古文：秋，复率众数万分三道入井坪、朔州、老营、偏头关诸处。
现代文：该年秋天，俺答又率数万人马分三路入侵井坪、朔州、老营、偏头关等地，边关将领无法抵挡。
English: In the autumn of that year, I led tens of thousands of people to invade Jingping, Shuozhou, Laoying, Yehou Pass and other places in three directions, and the border generals could not resist.

古文：边将不能御，遂长驱攻岢岚及汾州，破石州，杀知州王亮采，屠其民，复大掠孝义、介休、平遥、文水、交城、太谷、隰州间，男女死者数万。
现代文：他们便长驱直入进攻岢岚和汾州，攻破石州，杀死知州王亮采，屠杀老百姓。又掠夺孝义、介休、平遥、文水、交城、太谷、隰州等地，男女被杀达数万人。
English: They then drove straight into the attack on Zhang and Zhangzhou, defeated Shizhou, killed Chizhou Wang Liangcai, and massacred the common people. They also plundered Xiaoyi, Jiexu, Pingyao, Wenshui, Jiaocheng, Taiyuan, Zhangzhou and other places, and tens of thousands of men and women were killed.

古文：事闻，诸边臣罚治有差。
现代文：皇帝知道该事后，各按等差处罚了边关的大臣。
English: After the emperor learned of the incident, he punished the ministers of the border gate according to the difference in rank.

古文：而三卫勾土蛮同时入寇，蓟镇、昌黎、抚宁、乐亭、卢龙，皆被蹂躏。游骑至滦河，京师震动，三日乃引去。
现代文：三卫勾结土蛮又同时入侵，蓟镇、昌黎、抚宁、乐亭、卢龙等都遭蹂躏，敌人的骑兵都游到滦河，京师大受震动。三天后敌人才引退。
English: The Sanwei colluded with the barbarians and invaded at the same time. Shantou, Changli, Funing, Leting and Lulong were all ravaged. The enemy's cavalry swam to the Minhe River. Beijing Normal University was shaken. Three days later, the enemy retreated.

古文：诸将追之，敌出义院口。会大雾，迷失道，堕棒槌崖中，人马枕藉，死者颇众，诸将乃趋割其首。
现代文：诸位将领追击，敌人出义院口，碰上大雾，迷失了道路，人马都堕落在棒槌崖中，死者颇多。追击的明军将领便上前割下敌人的首级。
English: Your generals pursued, the enemy came out of the gate of the palace of justice, encountered heavy fog, lost the road, people and horses fell into the cliff, and there were a lot of deaths. The pursuing Ming generals went forward and cut off the heads of the enemy.

古文：二年，敌犯柴沟，守备韩尚忠战死。
现代文：隆庆二年，敌人进犯柴沟，守备韩尚忠战死。
English: In the second year of Longqing, the enemy attacked Chai Ditch, and Han Shangzhong was killed in the battle.

古文：时兵部侍郎王崇古镇西边，总兵李成梁守辽东，数以兵邀击于塞外。
现代文：此时兵部侍郎王崇古镇守西部边关，总兵李成梁镇守辽东，数次在边关外邀击敌人。
English: At this time, the attendant of the military department, Wang Chonggu, guarded the western border, and the general soldier, Li Chengliang, guarded Liaodong, and invited the enemy to attack outside the border several times.

古文：敌知有备，入寇稍稀。
现代文：敌人知道明军已有防备，入侵稍微少些。
English: The enemy knew that the Ming army had prepared, and the invasion was slightly less.

古文：四年秋，黄台吉寇锦州，总兵王治道、参将郎得功以十余骑入敌死。
现代文：隆庆四年秋天，黄台吉入侵锦州，总兵王治道、参将郎得功以十多骑深入敌营，战死。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of Longqing, Huang Taiji invaded Jinzhou. The general Wang Zhi Dao and the general Lang Chenggong achieved the feat of riding more than ten horses deep into the enemy camp and died in battle.

古文：冬，俺答有孙曰把汉那吉者，俺答第三子铁背台吉子也，幼孤，育于俺答妻所。
现代文：该年冬天，俺答的孙子名叫把汉那吉，是俺答第三个儿子铁背台吉的儿子，幼年丧失父母，在俺答妻子的住所养大。
English: In the winter of that year, I gave birth to a grandson named Put Hanakji, the son of my third son Tiebu Taiji, who lost his parents at an early age and was raised in my wife's home.

古文：既长，娶妇比吉。
现代文：长大后，娶比吉为妻，把汉又聘袄儿都司的女儿为妾。
English: When he grew up, he married Bijiro and took Han's daughter as a concubine.

古文：把汉复聘袄儿都司女，即俺答外孙女，貌美，俺答夺之。
现代文：袄儿都司的女儿，是俺答的外孙女，相貌姣美，俺答从把汉手中将他夺过来占为己有。
English: The daughter of 兒都司 is my granddaughter. She is beautiful. I promised to take her from Han and possess her.

古文：把汉恚，遂率其属阿力哥等十人来降。
现代文：把汉很愤恚，于是带其属下阿力哥等十人投降明朝。
English: Put Han was very angry, so he took his subordinate Aligo and ten others to surrender to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：大同巡抚方逢时受之，以告总督王崇古。
现代文：大同巡抚方逢时接纳了他们，并告诉总督王崇古。
English: Datong Governor Fang accepted them at the right time and told Governor Wang Chonggu.

古文：崇古上言： 把汉来归，非拥众内附者比，宜给官爵，丰馆饩，饬舆马，以示俺答。
现代文：王崇古给皇帝上疏时说 ：把汉的归降，与带领部众来依附的人不一样，应该给他官爵，给他好吃好住，给他车马，做给俺答看。
English: Wang Chonggu said to the Emperor Shangzhu: "The Han's surrender is not the same as the one who leads the people to adhere. He should be given an official title, give him good food and a good place to live, give him a car and a horse, and make him answer to me."

古文：俺答急，则使缚送板升诸叛人；不听，即胁诛把汉牵沮之；又不然，因而抚纳，如汉置属国居乌桓故事，使招其故部，徙近塞。
现代文：如果俺答着急了，就让他把板升的各位叛徒绑送来；如俺答不听，就威胁要杀把汉使俺答牵挂沮丧；如果还不行，就安抚接纳把汉，像汉朝建属国居于乌桓的情形一样，让把汉招纳他的旧部，迁到最近的边关去。
English: If I'm in a hurry to answer, I'll ask him to bring all the traitors who have been promoted; if I don't listen, I'll threaten to kill Han, which will make me worry and depressed; if that doesn't work, I'll appease and accept Han, just like the Han Dynasty built a vassal state in Wuhuan, and let Han recruit his old unit and move to the nearest border.

古文：俺答老且死，黄台吉立，则令把汉还，以其众与台吉抗，我按兵助之。 
现代文：俺答老了且快要死了，如果黄台吉即位，就让把汉回去，让他与黄台吉互相抗衡，我们则按兵帮助把汉。 
English: I replied that I was old and about to die, and if Huang Taiji came to the throne, I would send Han back, let him and Huang Taiji compete against each other, and we would help Han as soldiers.

古文：诏可，授把汉指挥使，阿力哥正千户。
现代文：皇帝认为这个建议可以采纳，便给把汉授予指挥使，给阿力哥授正千户。
English: The emperor thought that this suggestion could be accepted, so he awarded Han with the post of commander, and Aligo with the title of chief of a thousand households.

古文：俺答方西掠吐番，闻之亟引还，约诸部入犯，崇古檄诸道严兵御之。
现代文：俺答正在西边抢劫吐番，听到这件事后急忙赶回来，约好各部落进犯明朝。王崇古传书给各路将领，要他们严密防守。
English: After hearing about the incident, I hurried back and arranged for the tribes to attack the Ming Dynasty. Wang Chonggu sent a letter to the generals, asking them to closely defend.

古文：敌使来请命，崇古遣译者鲍崇德往，言朝廷待把汉甚厚，第能缚板升诸叛人赵全等，旦送至，把汉即夕返矣。
现代文：敌人的使者来请命，王崇古派译者鲍崇德去，说朝廷对把汉很好，如果他们能把板升的各位叛徒赵全等人绑起来，早晨把叛徒送到明朝官员手里，把汉傍晚就能回到家。
English: The enemy's emissary came to ask for his life, and Wang Chonggu sent the translator Bao Chongde to go, saying that the imperial court was very good at bringing Han, if they could tie up the traitors Zhao Quan and others who had been promoted, deliver the traitors to the Ming officials in the morning, and bring Han back home in the evening.

古文：俺答大喜，屏人语曰： 我不为乱，乱由全等。若天子幸封我为王，长北方诸部，孰敢为患？
现代文：俺答大喜，屏退众人后说 ：我是不想作乱的，全是赵全等人让我这么做的，如果天子能封我做王，做北方各部落的长官，谁敢在边疆作患呢！
English: I was overjoyed, and after waving everyone away, I said, "I don't want to cause trouble. It was all Zhao Quan and the others who made me do it. If the Son of Heaven can make me king and head of all the tribes in the north, who would dare to cause trouble on the border?"

古文：即死，吾孙当袭封，彼衣食中国，忍倍德乎？ 
现代文：即使我死了，我的孙子也可继承我的王位，他衣食都是中国给的，怎么忍心背叛中国呢？ 
English: Even if I die, my grandson can inherit my throne. He is fed and clothed by China. How can he bear to betray China?

古文：乃益发使与崇德来乞封，且请输马，与中国铁锅、布帛互市，随执赵全、李自馨等数人来献。
现代文：便更加派使者与鲍崇德一起来乞求册封，并请求让他们以马匹与中国人换铁锅、布帛。随即俺答便把赵全、李自馨等数人绑来献给明朝。
English: He even sent an envoy with Bao Chongde to beg for the title, and requested that they exchange horses with the Chinese for iron pots and cloths. I immediately replied and tied up several people, including Zhao Quan and Li Zixin, and offered them to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：崇古乃以帝命遣把汉归，把汉犹恋恋，感泣再拜去。
现代文：王崇古便以皇帝的诏命让把汉回去。把汉还感到恋恋不舍，感激涕零而去。
English: With the Emperor's edict, Wang Chonggu let the Han go back. The Han was still in love with him, and he left with gratitude.

古文：俺答得孙大喜，上表谢。
现代文：俺答得回孙子大喜，给皇帝上表表示谢恩。
English: I replied back to my grandson with great joy, thanking the emperor for the watch.

古文：崇古因上言： 朝廷若允俺答封贡，诸边有数年之安，可乘时修备。
现代文：王崇古因此给皇帝说 ：朝廷若答允俺答封王通贡物的要求，各边关地区有数年的安宁，可利用这个时间来修缮战备。
English: Therefore, Wang Chonggu said to the emperor: If the imperial court agrees to my request to seal Wang Tong's tribute, there will be several years of peace in the border areas, and this time can be used to improve the combat readiness.

古文：设敌背盟，吾以数年蓄养之财力，从事战守，愈于终岁奔命，自救不暇者矣。 
现代文：如果敌人日后背弃盟约，我们可以数年蓄积起来的财力，出战或守卫。这总比一年到头疲于奔命，自救都来不及啊！ 
English: If the enemy reneges on the treaty in the future, we can use the financial resources we have accumulated over the years to go to war or guard. This is always more exhausting than running for our lives all year round, and it's too late to save ourselves!

古文：复条八事以请。一，议封号官爵。
现代文：又陈述八件事请皇上批准：一、商议封号官爵。
English: He also stated eight things to ask the emperor for approval: First, the conferral of the title of nobility.

古文：诸部行辈，俺答为尊，宜锡以王号，给印信。
现代文：各部落的排行辈分，俺答为大，应该赐给他王的称号，给他印信。
English: According to the ranking of each tribe, I replied that it was great, he should be given the title of king, and he should be given a seal.

古文：其大枝如老把都、黄台吉及吉囊长子吉能等，俱宜授以都督。
现代文：他手下的大人物如老把都、黄台吉和吉囊的长子吉能等，都应授予都督称号。
English: The great figures under his command, such as Lao Tsetu, Huang Taiji and Yoshizuku's eldest son Yoshino, should all be awarded the title of Tudor.

古文：弟侄子孙如兀慎打儿汉等四十六枝，授以指挥。
现代文：他的弟侄子孙如兀打儿汉等四十六人，可授予指挥。
English: Forty-six of his younger brothers, nephews and grandchildren, such as Zhaodai Han, can be awarded the command.

古文：其俺答诸婿十余枝，授以千户。
现代文：俺答的各位女婿十多人，可授千户。
English: To the more than ten sons-in-law whom I have answered, I can bestow a thousand households.

古文：一，定贡额。
现代文：二、确定贡额。
English: Second, determine the amount of tribute.

古文：每岁一入贡，俺答马十匹，使十人。
现代文：每岁到朝廷入贡一次，俺答可带马十匹，使臣十人。
English: Once a year I go to pay tribute to the imperial court. I am allowed to bring ten horses and ten envoys.

古文：老把都、吉能、黄台吉八匹，使四人。诸部长各以部落大小为差，大者四匹，小者二匹，使各二人。
现代文：老把都、吉能、黄台吉带马八匹，使臣四人，各部落酋长各以部落大小为等差，大部落酋长可带马四匹，小部落酋长可带马二匹，使臣各为二人。
English: The old chiefs of the capital, Jinnang and Hwang Taiji each brought eight horses and four envoys. The chiefs of each tribe brought four horses, the chiefs of small tribes two horses, and the envoys two each.

古文：通计岁贡马不得过五百匹，使不得过百五十人。
现代文：通计每年入贡的马不能超过五百匹，使臣不能超过一百五十人。
English: The total number of horses to be taxed each year could not exceed five hundred, and the number of envoys could not exceed one hundred and fifty.

古文：马分三等，上驷三十进御，余给价有差，老瘠者不入。
现代文：马匹分为三等，上等好马三十匹，收进皇帝的马房，其余的按等级给价，老瘠之马不要。
English: The horses were divided into three classes. Thirty of the best horses were taken to the emperor's stables, while the rest were priced according to their class.

古文：其使，岁许六十人进京，余待境上。
现代文：他们的使臣，每年容许六十人进京都，其余的全待在边境上。
English: Their envoys allow sixty people to enter Kyoto every year, and the rest all stay on the border.

古文：使还，听以马价市缯布诸物。
现代文：使臣回去时，可任意拿马交换缯布等东西。
English: When the envoys return, they can exchange things such as sackcloth at will.

古文：给酬赏，其赏额视三卫及西蕃诸国。
现代文：给他们的酬赏，赏额大小可与三卫和西蕃各国的相同。
English: The reward given to them can be the same size as that of the Sanwei and Xidi countries.

古文：一，议贡期、贡道。
现代文：三、商量好贡期、贡道。
English: Third, it is good to discuss the tribute period and the tribute road.

古文：以春月及万寿圣节四方来同之会，使人，马匹及表文自大同左卫验入，给犒赏。
现代文：以春月和万寿圣节四方来会的日期为入贡日子。使臣的人、马匹和上表的文书从大同左卫检验后入关，给他们犒赏。
English: The spring month and the date of the four-party meeting of the All Souls' Day are the days of tribute. The envoys, horses and documents of the above table enter the customs after inspection from Datong Zuowei, and they are rewarded.

古文：驻边者，分送各城抚镇验赏。
现代文：待在边关的，分别送到各城巡抚镇将那里验明后给奖赏。
English: If they stay at the border, they will be sent separately to each city's patrol town, where they will be inspected and rewarded.

古文：入京者，押送自居庸关入。
现代文：到京城的，要带他们到居庸关才能进入。
English: In Beijing, you have to take them to Juyongguan to get in.

古文：一，立互市。
现代文：四、确立互相贸易。
English: Fourth, establish mutual trade.

古文：其规如弘治初，北部三贡例。
现代文：互相贸易的规矩就像弘治初年北方部落入贡时的一样。
English: The rules of mutual trade are the same as when the northern tribes paid tribute in the first year of Hongzhi.

古文：蕃以金、银、牛马、皮张、马尾等物，商贩以缎、布匹、釜锅等物。
现代文：外族人可以金、银、牛马、皮毛、马尾等物与商贩的缎轴、布匹、釜锅等物交换。
English: Foreigners can exchange gold, silver, cattle, horses, furs, horse tails, and other items with merchants' reeds, cloths, kettles, and other items.

古文：开市日，来者以三百人驻边外，宣府应于万全右卫、张家口边外，山西应于水泉营边外。
现代文：开市贸易的那天，来的人要以三百人驻在边关外，我们派五百名士兵驻扎在市场内，开市日期为一个月。至于市场，陕西三个边关原来立有场堡，大同应设在左卫北部威远堡的边关外，宣府应设在万全右卫、张家口边关外，山西应设在水泉营边关外。
English: On the day of the opening of the market and trade, the people who came should be stationed outside the border gate with three hundred people. We sent five hundred soldiers to be stationed in the market, and the opening date was one month. As for the market, the three border gates in Shaanxi originally had a field fort, and Datong should be located outside the border gate of Wiyuan Fort in the northern part of Zuoying, Xuanfu should be located outside the border gate of Wanquan Right Gate and Zhangjiakou, and Shanxi should be located outside the border gate of Shuiquan Camp.

古文：一，议抚赏。
现代文：五、商量好安抚和奖赏。
English: V. Discuss appeasement and reward.

古文：守市兵人布二匹，部长缎二匹、二匹。
现代文：守卫市场的兵卒，每人得布二匹，部落长得缎二匹、绸二匹。
English: Each of the soldiers guarding the market received two cloths, and the tribe received two cocoons and two silks.

古文：以好至边者，酌来使大小，量加赏犒。
现代文：如果是友好的人到边关贸易，按来者的大小，酌量加增犒赏。
English: If it is a friendly person who comes to the border to trade, the reward will be increased according to the size of the person.

古文：一，议归降。
现代文：六、商量好归降事宜。
English: Sixth, discuss the matter of surrender.

古文：通贡后，降者不分有罪无罪，免收纳。
现代文：向朝廷通贡物后，归降的人不分是有罪还是无罪，都免予收纳。
English: After the tribute was sent to the imperial court, those who surrendered were exempted from receiving it, regardless of whether they were guilty or innocent.

古文：其华人被掳归正者，查别无窃盗，乃许入。
现代文：其中华人被掳抢去的，现在要回来，查明没有偷盗行为的，可以回来。
English: Among them, the Chinese were abducted and robbed, and now they want to return, and if there is no theft, they can return.

古文：一，审经权。
现代文：七、审经权。
English: Seventh, the right of examination and management.

古文：一，戒狡饰。
现代文：八、戒狡饰。
English: Eighth, stop being crafty.

古文：疏入，下廷臣议。
现代文：皇帝把王崇古的这个上疏，交给朝廷大臣议论。
English: The emperor handed over Wang Chonggu's top secret to the minister of the imperial court for discussion.

古文：帝终从崇古言，诏封俺答为顺义王，赐红蟒衣一袭；昆都力哈、黄台吉授都督同知，各赐红狮子衣一袭、彩币四表里；宾兔台吉等十人，授指挥同知；那木儿台吉等十九人，授指挥佥事；打儿汉台吉等十八人，授正千户；阿拜台吉等十二人，授副千户；恰台吉等二人，授百户。
现代文：最后皇帝终于采纳王崇古的意见，下诏书封俺答为顺义王，赐给红蟒衣一袭；昆都力哈、黄台吉授为都督同知，各赐红狮子衣服一袭；彩币四表里；宾兔台吉等十人授予指挥同知；那木儿台吉等十九人授予指挥佥事；打儿汉台吉等十八人，授予正千户；阿拜台坦克等十二人授予副千户；恰台吉等二人授予百户。
English: In the end, the emperor finally adopted the opinion of Wang Chonggu, and issued the following edict: I am the Shunyi king, and I will give the red coat; Kundu Liha and Huang Taiji are the same as the governor, and they will each give the red lion clothes; four watches; Binhu Taiji and other ten people will be awarded the same as the commander; Namur Taiji and other nineteen people will be awarded the same as the commander; Dacer Han Taiji and other eighteen people will be awarded the same thousand households; Abaitai Tank and other twelve people will be awarded the same thousand households; and Cha Taiji and other two people will be awarded the

古文：昆都力哈，即老把都也。
现代文：昆都力哈，就是老把都。
English: Kundu Liha, that is, the old capital.

古文：兵部采崇古议，定市令。
现代文：兵部采纳王崇古的提议，确定市令。
English: The military department adopted Wang Chonggu's proposal and determined the city ordinance.

古文：秋市成，凡得马五百余匹，赐俺答等彩币有差。
现代文：秋市成立后，凡得到马五百多匹，就按等级差异给俺答等人赏赐彩币。
English: After the establishment of the autumn fair, anyone who got more than five hundred horses would be rewarded with coins according to the difference in rank.

古文：西部吉能及其侄切尽等亦请市，诏予市红山墩暨清水营。
现代文：西部的吉能和他的侄子切尽等也来请求通市，皇帝下诏书将市场设在红山墩暨清水营。
English: In the west, Yoshino and his nephew Chichen also came to request the market, and the emperor issued an imperial decree to set the market in Hongshan Town and Shimizu Camp.

古文：市成，亦封吉能为都督同知。
现代文：市场成立后，亦封吉能为都督同知。
English: After the establishment of the market, Feng Jigang was also known to the governor.

古文：已而俺答请金字经及剌麻僧，诏给之。
现代文：不久俺答又请求要金字经和喇嘛僧，皇帝下诏书给他。
English: Soon I replied and asked for a gold-lettered sutra and a lama, and the emperor gave him an imperial edict.

古文：崇古复请玉印，诏予镀金银印。
现代文：王崇古又请求给他玉印，皇帝下诏给他镀金的银印。
English: Wang Chonggu also asked to give him a jade seal, and the emperor gave him a gold-plated silver seal.

古文：俺答老佞佛，复请于海南建寺，诏赐寺额仰华。
现代文：俺答老了迷信佛教，又请求在海南建寺，皇帝下诏给该寺取名仰华。
English: I replied that I was too old to believe in Buddhism, and asked for a temple to be built in Hainan, and the emperor gave the order to name the temple Yanghua.

古文：俺答常远处青山，二子，曰宾兔，居松山，直兰州之北，曰丙兔，居西海，直河州之西，并求互市，多桀骜。
现代文：俺答常远处青山，二个儿子，一个叫宾兔，居住在兰州正北部的松山，另一个叫丙兔，居住在河州正西面的西海，都要求互通贸易，且桀骜不驯。
English: I often reply that Aoyama is far away, and my two sons, one named Bing Tsoi, who lives in Matsuyama in the north of Lanzhou, and the other named He Tsoi, who lives in the west of Hezhou, both require mutual trade and are unruly.

古文：俺答谕之，亦渐驯。
现代文：俺答说服他们后，也渐渐有所驯服。
English: After I managed to convince them, I gradually got used to it.

古文：而东部土蛮数拥众寇辽塞。
现代文：从此，俺答管束的各部落没有人再侵犯，他们每年都来入贡和贸易。
English: From then on, I promised the tribes under my control that no one would invade them again, and they came every year to pay tribute and to trade.

古文：总兵李成梁败之于卓山，斩五百八十余级，守备曹簠复败之于长胜堡。
现代文：西部边关得到安宁。东部的土蛮几次带人进犯辽阳要塞，总兵李成梁在卓山打败他们，斩获首级五百八十余个。守备曹又在长胜堡打败他们。
English: The western border was pacified. Several times, the eastern barbarians attacked the Liaoyang fortress with men, and the general Li Chengliang defeated them in Zhuoshan, gaining more than 580 first-class soldiers. Guard Cao also defeated them in Changsheng Fort.

古文：神宗即位，频年入犯。
现代文：神宗即皇帝位后，他们每年都有进犯。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Shenzong, they attacked every year.

古文：万历六年，成梁率游击秦得倚等击敌于东昌堡，斩部长九人，余级八百八十四，总督梁梦龙以闻。
现代文：万历六年，李成梁率领游击秦得倚等在东昌堡袭击敌人，斩杀敌人部长九人，其他兵士八百八十四人。总督梁梦龙将此消息告诉皇帝。
English: After six long years, Li Chengliang led the guerrillas Qin Derui and others to attack the enemy at Dongchang Fort, killing nine enemy ministers and 884 other soldiers. Governor Liang Menglong told the emperor this news.

古文：帝大悦，祭告郊庙，御皇极门宣捷。
现代文：皇帝十分高兴，到郊外的祖庙里去祭祀祷告，亲自到皇极门宣布大捷。
English: The emperor was very happy, went to the ancestral temple in the suburbs to offer sacrifices and prayers, and personally went to the imperial gate to announce the great victory.

古文：七年冬，土蛮四万骑入锦川营。
现代文：万历七年冬天，土蛮四万骑兵入侵锦州营。
English: After seven years of winter, forty thousand cavalrymen invaded the Jinzhou camp.

古文：梦龙、成梁及总兵戚继光等已预受大学士张居正方略，并力备御，敌始退。
现代文：梁梦龙、李成梁和总兵戚继光等人已经预先接受了大学士张居正的策略，合力防备抵抗，敌人才退去。
English: Liang Menglong, Li Chengliang and the general soldier Qi Jiguang and others had already accepted the strategy of the university scholar Zhang Juzheng in advance, and they worked together to prevent resistance before the enemy retreated.

古文：自是敌数入，成梁等数败之，辄斩其巨魁，又时袭击于塞外，多所斩获。
现代文：从此，敌人数次入侵，李成梁等人数次打败他们，并斩杀敌人的大首领。同时又经常在塞外袭击敌人，多有收获。
English: Since then, the enemy has invaded several times, and Li Chengliang and others have defeated them several times, and killed the enemy's great leader. At the same time, they often attacked the enemy outside the country, with many gains.

古文：敌畏之，少戢，成梁遂以功封宁远伯。
现代文：敌人害怕了，很少再来杀戮，李成梁便因功封为宁远伯。
English: The enemy got scared and rarely came to kill again, and Li Chengliang was awarded the title of Ningyuan Bo.

古文：俺答既就市，事朝廷甚谨。
现代文：俺答既然与朝廷通贡市后，对朝廷热爱恭谨。
English: I replied that since I had paid tribute to the Imperial Court, I would love and respect the Imperial Court.

古文：部下卒有掠夺边氓者，必罚治之，且稽首谢罪，朝廷亦厚加赏赉。
现代文：他部下士兵如有抢掠边疆百姓东西的，一定处罚治罪，并叩头谢罪，朝廷对他也赏赐很厚。
English: If soldiers under his command plundered the people of the frontier, they would be punished and punished, and they would bow down and apologize. The imperial court also rewarded him very generously.

古文：十年春，俺答死，帝特赐祭七坛、彩缎十二表里、布百匹，示优恤。
现代文：万历十年春天，俺答死，皇帝特赐祭坛七个、彩缎十二表里、布一百匹，以示优恤。
English: In the spring of the tenth year of Wanli, I died, and the emperor specially granted seven altars, twelve table cloths, and one hundred cloths to show his appreciation.

古文：其妻哈屯率子黄台吉等，上表进马谢，复赐币布有差。
现代文：俺答的妻子哈屯带领儿子黄台吉等，上表献马给皇帝表示谢恩，皇帝又按等级各赏赐币、布给他们。
English: My wife, Hatun, led by my son, Huang Taiji, presented horses to the emperor to express their gratitude. The emperor also gave them reward coins and cloth according to their rank.

古文：封黄台吉为顺义王，改名乞庆哈。
现代文：朝廷封黄台吉为顺义王，改名叫乞庆哈。
English: The imperial court named Huang Taiji the King of Shunyi and changed his name to Qian Qing Ha.

古文：立三岁而死，朝廷给恤典如例。
现代文：黄台吉当了三年王死了，朝廷所给的恤典与俺答死时一样。
English: Huang Taiji, who had been king for three years, died, and the royal court gave him the same award as when I died.

古文：十五年春，子撦力克嗣。
现代文：万历十五年春天，黄台吉的儿子扌奢力克继嗣王位。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of Wanli, Huang Taiji's son, Zou Shulik, succeeded to the throne.

古文：其妻三娘子，故俺答所夺之外孙女而为妇者也，历配三王，主兵柄，为中国守边保塞，众畏服之，乃敕封为忠顺夫人，自宣大至甘肃不用兵者二十年。
现代文：他的妻子叫三娘子，就是以前俺答所抢夺来为妾的那个外孙女。她匹配了三个王，主掌兵权，为中国守卫边塞，别人既怕她又服她。朝廷便敕封她为忠顺夫人，从宣大至甘肃一线二十年没有发生过战事。
English: His wife was called the Third Daughter, the same granddaughter whom I had previously robbed and taken as a concubine. She was the match of three kings. She was in charge of the army and guarded the border fortress for China. Others were both afraid of her and obeyed her. The imperial court then sealed her as Mrs. Zhongshun, and there was no war for twenty years from Xuanda to Gansu.

古文：及撦力克西行远边，而套部庄秃赖等据水塘，卜失兔、火落赤等据莽剌、捏工两川，数犯甘、凉、洮、氓、西宁间。
现代文：等到扌奢力克往西远迁后，在河套的部落庄秃赖等人便占据水塘，卜答兔、火落赤等人占据莽剌、捏工两川，数次进犯甘州、凉州、洮州、岷州、西宁等地。
English: After the Xiang Li Ke migrated far to the west, people such as Bald Rai and others in the tribal village of Hetao occupied the reservoir, and people such as Bu Ta Hare and Huo Luo Qi occupied Meng Ya, Pinchong and Liangchuan, and invaded Ganzhou, Liangzhou, Ganzhou, Ganzhou and Xining several times.

古文：他部落亡虑数十种，出没塞下，顺逆不常。
现代文：其他部落有数十个，在边塞地区出没，一会儿顺服朝廷，一会儿又背逆朝廷，反复无常。
English: There are dozens of other tribes that haunt the border region, sometimes obeying the imperial court, sometimes defying the imperial court, and being capricious.

古文：帝恶之，十九年诏并停撦力克市赏。
现代文：皇帝厌恶他们，万历十九年下诏停止给扌奢力克通市的赏赐。
English: The emperor detested them, and issued an edict to stop awarding the city of Kaktong to them in the 19th year of Wanli.

古文：已而撦力克叩边输服，率众东归，独庄秃赖、卜失兔等寇抄如故。
现代文：不久扌奢力克又到边关来表示臣服，带领部下众人往东而归。只有庄秃赖、卜失兔等人像以前一样抢掠。
English: Soon after, Zou Shuliq also went to the border to show his submission, leading all his subordinates to return to the east. Only Zhuang Bailai, Bu Shouqin and others looted as before.

古文：其年冬，别部明安、土昧分犯榆林边，总兵杜桐御之，斩获五百人，杀明安。
现代文：这年冬天，别的部落明安、土昧分别进犯榆林边境，总兵杜桐率兵抗击，杀死明安，斩获五百人。
English: In the winter of that year, two other tribes, the Ming'an and the Tu'mai, separately invaded the Yulin border. General Du Tong led the troops to fight back, killing the Ming'an and capturing five hundred people.

古文：二十年，宁夏叛将哱拜等勾卜失兔、庄秃赖等，大举入寇，总兵李如松击败之。
现代文：万历二十年，宁夏叛将口孛拜等人勾结卜失兔、庄秃赖等，大举入侵，总兵李如松打败了他们。
English: After a lapse of twenty years, the Ningxia renegade general Zou Yibai and others, in collusion with Zhuang Bailai and others, made a large-scale invasion, and the general soldier Li Rousong defeated them.

古文：二十二年，延绥巡抚李春光奏： 套部纳款已久，自明安被戮而寇恨深，西夏党逆而贡市绝，延镇连年多事。
现代文：万历二十二年，延绥巡抚李春光上奏： 河套各部落投诚已久，自明安被杀，他们的仇恨已很深。西夏由于背逆，贡市已经断绝，因此延镇连年多事。
English: In the 22nd year of Wanli, Li Chunguang, the procurator of Yancheng, recited: The tribes of Hetao have been loyal for a long time, since Ming'an was killed, their hatred has been very deep. Due to the rebellion of Western Xia, Gongshi has been cut off, so Yanzhen has been troubled for many years.

古文：今东西各部皆乞款，而卜失兔挟私叵测，边长兵寡，制御为难。
现代文：现今东西边各部落都乞求内附，只有卜失兔藏私心不可预测。边境线长而军队少，要制服敌人保卫国家很难。
English: At present, all the tribes on the east and west are begging for annexation, only the selfishness is unpredictable. The border line is long and the army is small, so it is difficult to subdue the enemy and defend the country.

古文：宜察敌情，审时势。
现代文：因此应该观察敌人情况，审度时势。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to observe the enemy situation and assess the current situation.

古文：敌入犯则血战，偶或小失，应宽吏议。
现代文：敌人进犯则要与他血战，若是偶尔为之的小过失，则应放宽，让小官处理。
English: If the enemy attacks, it is necessary to have a bloody battle with him. If it is an occasional small mistake, it should be relaxed and let the petty officer deal with it.

古文：倘敌真心效顺，相机议抚，不可忘战备也。 
现代文：倘若敌人真心效忠顺服朝廷，可相机安抚他们，但也不可忘记战备啊！ 
English: If the enemy is truly loyal and obedient to the imperial court, the camera can pacify them, but they must not forget to be prepared for battle!

古文：帝命兵部传饬各边。
现代文：皇帝命令兵部把这个意见传达给各边关。
English: The emperor ordered the military department to convey this opinion to all the provinces.

古文：秋，卜失兔入固原，游击史见战死。
现代文：该年秋天，卜失兔入侵固原，游击史见战死。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Bu Luoxin invaded Gu Yuan, and the guerrilla was killed in battle.

古文：延绥总兵麻贵御之，阅月始退。
现代文：延绥总兵麻贵起兵抗击，一个月才退出去。
English: Yancheng's general Ma Gui raised an army to fight back, and only withdrew a month later.

古文：全陕震动。
现代文：此事令全陕西震动。
English: The whole of Shaanxi Province was shaken by this event.

古文：其年，东部炒花犯镇武堡，总兵董一元与战，大破之。
现代文：这年，东部炒花进犯镇武堡，总兵董一元与之交战，大败敌人。
English: This year, the Eastern Fried Flowers invaded the town of Wubo, and the general soldier Dong Yiyuan fought with them and defeated the enemy.

古文：明年春，松部宰僧等犯陕西，总督叶梦熊督却之。
现代文：第二年春天，松山部落的宰僧等进犯陕西，总督叶熊督师打退敌人。
English: In the spring of the following year, the priests of the Matsuyama tribe invaded Shaanxi, and the governor Ye Xiongdu defeated the enemy.

古文：秋，海部永邵卜犯西宁，总督三边李旼檄参将达云、游击白泽暨马其撒、卜尔加诸属番，设伏邀击，大败之，斩六百八十三级。
现代文：该年秋天，海西部落的永邵卜进犯西宁，总督三边李日攵传檄给参将达云、游击白译暨马其撒、卜尔加等所属的外族人，设下埋伏邀击敌人，大胜，斩获敌人首级六百八十三个。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Yong Shaub of the Haixi tribe attacked Xining, and the governor of the three sides, Li Rijun, sent a message to the foreign tribesmen belonging to the general Danyun, the guerrilla Baiyun, and the guerrillas Makisa and Bulga, and set up an ambush to invite the enemy to attack, and won a great victory, winning 683 enemy heads.

古文：捷闻，帝大悦，且以属番效命，追叙前总制郑雒功，赏赉并及雒。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷，皇帝十分高兴，又因为有所属的外族人出力效命，追念到这是以前的总制郑雒的功劳，因而奖赏中也有郑雒的一份。
English: The news of the victory was reported to the imperial court, and the emperor was very happy. He also remembered that this was the merit of the former general Zheng He, because the foreigners who belonged to him had worked hard. Therefore, there was also a part of Zheng He in the reward.

古文：二十四年春，总督李釐以劲兵分三道出塞，袭卜失兔营，共斩四百九级，获马畜器械数千。
现代文：万历二十四年春天，总督李日攵以精兵分三路出边关，袭击卜失兔的营地，共斩杀敌人四百零九个，缴获马匹、牲畜和各种器械数千。
English: In the spring of the 24th year of the Wanli calendar, the governor Li Rihong led his elite soldiers to attack the camp of the Lost Rabbit, killing a total of 409 enemies and capturing thousands of horses, livestock and various equipment.

古文：火落赤部众复窥伺洮州，釐遣参将周国柱等击之于莽剌川脑，斩一百三十六级。
现代文：火落赤部落又窥伺洮州，李日攵派参将周国柱等在莽剌川脑袭击他们，斩获敌人一百三十六人。
English: The fiery red horde also spied on Ganzhou, and Li Rong sent the general Zhou Guozhu and others to attack them in Mengye Chuan Meng, capturing 136 of the enemy.

古文：秋，著力兔、阿赤兔、火落赤等合谋犯西边，炒花亦拥众犯广宁，守将皆严兵却之。
现代文：该年秋天，著力兔、阿赤兔、火落赤等合谋进犯西部边关，炒花也率众人进犯广宁，当地的守将都严阵以待打退了他们。
English: In the autumn of that year, Zhu Liguo, A Chiaqiuo, Huo Luochao and others conspired to attack the western border, and Jianhua also led everyone to attack Guangning. The local guards were in a tight line to repel them.

古文：二十五年秋，海部寇甘镇，官军击走之。
现代文：万历二十五年秋，海西部落进犯甘镇，明朝官军把他们打跑。
English: In the autumn of the 25th year of Wanli, the western part of the sea fell into the town of Fukan, and the government army of the Ming Dynasty drove them away.

古文：冬，炒花纠土蛮诸部寇辽东，杀掠无算。
现代文：冬天，炒花纠集土蛮各部落进犯辽东，杀人掠夺财物无数。
English: In winter, the barbarian tribes invaded Liaodong, killing and looting countless people and property.

古文：明年夏，复寇辽东，总兵李如松远出捣巢，死之。
现代文：第二年夏天，他们又入侵辽东，总兵李如松带兵出去捣敌人老巢，战死。
English: In the summer of the following year, they invaded Liaodong again. General Li Rousong led his troops out to raid the enemy's lair and was killed in the battle.

古文：冬，釐等分道出袭火落赤等于松山，走之，复其地。
现代文：冬天，李日攵等人分道在松山袭击火落赤，把他们打跑，收复了他们占据的地盘。
English: In the winter, Li Rixuan and others went their separate ways to attack the fire in Matsuyama, beat them away, and recovered the territory they occupied.

古文：二十七年诏复撦力克市赏。
现代文：万历二十七年，皇帝下诏恢复扌奢力克的通市赏赐。
English: In the 27th year of Wanli, the emperor issued an edict to restore the market reward for the lucky winner of the lottery.

古文：时釐等筑松山，诸部纷叛，延、宁守臣共击之，杀获甲首几三千。
现代文：此时李日攵等人在松山，各部落纷纷叛变，延绥、宁夏的守卫大臣共同出击，杀死和俘虏敌人近三千人。
English: At this time, Li Rihong and others were in Matsuyama, the tribes mutinied one after another, and the ministers of defense of Yancheng and Ningxia jointly attacked, killing and capturing nearly three thousand enemies.

古文：明年，著力兔、宰僧、庄秃赖等乞通款，不许。
现代文：第二年，著力兔、宰僧、庄秃赖等人乞求投诚，不被允许。
English: In the second year, Zhuang Liguo, Zhaizang, Zhuang Bailai and others begged to be allowed to join, but were not allowed.

古文：边臣王见宾等复为请，诏复套部贡市。
现代文：边关大臣王见宾等人再替他们向皇上请求，皇帝下诏恢复河套部落的入贡和通市贸易。
English: Wang Simbin, the minister of the frontier, and others petitioned the emperor on their behalf, and the emperor issued an edict to restore the tributes and trade of the Hetao tribe.

古文：三十一年，海部数入陕西塞，兵备副使李自实，总兵萧如薰、达云等击走之。
现代文：万历三十一年，海西部落数次入侵陕西的要塞，兵备副使李自实，总兵萧如薰、达云等把敌人打跑。
English: In the 31st year of the lunar calendar, the Western Han Dynasty invaded the fortresses of Shaanxi several times, and the deputy commander Li Zisi, the general Xiao Ruxuan, and the general Da Yun drove the enemy away.

古文：三十三年夏，东部宰赛诱杀庆云堡守御熊钥，诏革其市赏。
现代文：万历三十三年夏天，东边部落宰赛诱杀庆云堡守御熊钅仑。皇帝下诏革除宰赛的通市赏赐。
English: In the summer of the 33rd year of the Wanli calendar, the eastern tribe Zaisei lured the Qingyun Fortress to guard the Xiong Xuan Lun. The emperor issued an edict to remove Zaisei's market reward.

古文：三十五年夏，总督徐三畏言： 河套之部与河东之部不同。
现代文：万历三十五年夏天，总督徐三畏上言 ：河套各部落与黄河东边的各部落不同。
English: In the summer of the thirty-fifth year of the Wanli era, Governor Xu Sanji said: The tribes of Hetao are different from the tribes on the east side of the Yellow River.

古文：东部事统于一，约誓定，历三十年不变。
现代文：东边的各部落做事统一，遵守誓约，经历三十年都不变。
English: The various tribes in the east do things uniformly, abide by the oath, and have remained unchanged for thirty years.

古文：套部分四十二枝，各相雄长，卜失兔徒建空名于上。
现代文：而河套部落有四十二个支系，各支互为雄长，卜失兔在这些部落中只有空名而已。
English: However, the Hetao tribe has forty-two branches, and each branch is as strong as the other. The Lost Rabbit is just an empty name among these tribes.

古文：西则火落赤最狡，要挟最无厌；中则摆言太以父明安之死，无岁不犯；东则沙计争为监市，与炒花朋逞。
现代文：西部以火落赤最狡猾，要挟东西最贪得无厌；中部摆言太因为父亲明安为明军所杀，因此每年都要侵犯；东部则是沙计争当监市，与炒花互相逞勇显威。
English: The western region is the most cunning in using fire and the most insatiable in blackmailing; the central region, because its father, Ming An, was killed by the Ming army, has to be invaded every year; the eastern region, because of the rivalry between the sand and the sautéed flowers.

古文：西陲抢攘非一日矣。
现代文：西部边境的抢掠和攘卫不是一天的事了。
English: The looting and pillaging of the western border is not a one-day affair.

古文：然众虽号十万，分为四十二枝，多者不过二三千骑，少者一二千骑耳。
现代文：虽然他们号称有十万之众，分为四十二个大支系，但多的不超过二三千骑兵，少的只有一二千骑兵而已。
English: Although they claimed to have a hundred thousand people, divided into forty-two large branches, they had no more than twenty-three thousand cavalry, and only twelve thousand cavalry.

古文：宜分其势，纳其款，俾先顺者获赏，后至者拒剿。
现代文：应该分解他们的势力，接受他们的投诚，让先归顺的受奖赏，后归顺的则拒绝或围剿他们。
English: We should break up their forces, accept their surrender, reward those who surrender first, and reject or encircle those who surrender later.

古文：仍须主战以张国威。 
现代文：因此仍然必须主持战争以张扬国威。 
English: Therefore, it is still necessary to wage war to promote national prestige.

古文：时已许宰赛及火落赤诸部复贡市矣。
现代文：此时皇帝已经答应恢复宰赛和火落赤各部落的入贡和通市了。
English: At this time, the emperor had already promised to restore the tributes and markets of the tribes of Zaisei and Hulagu.

古文：未几撦力克死，未有嗣，忠顺夫人率所部仍效贡职。
现代文：不久，扌奢力克死，没有后代即位，忠顺夫人率领所部仍然为明朝效力。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xizang died, and there were no descendants to ascend the throne. Lady Zhongshun, who led the department, still worked for the Ming Dynasty.

古文：西部银定、歹青数拥众犯东西边。
现代文：西部的银定、歹青数次带人进犯东西边关。
English: In the western part of the city, gangsters and youths attacked the eastern and western borders several times.

古文：延绥部猛克什力亦以挟赏故，常沿边抄掠。
现代文：延绥部的锰克什力亦以要挟赏赐为由，常沿边境线抢掠。
English: The Manganese Keshis in Yancheng also frequently pillage along the border line on the grounds that the reward is extorted.

古文：卜失兔欲婚于忠顺，忠顺拒之。
现代文：卜失兔想与忠顺夫人结亲，被忠顺夫人拒绝。
English: The rabbit wants to marry Mrs. Zhongshun, but Mrs. Zhongshun refuses.

古文：其所部素囊台吉、五路台吉等，各不相下，封号久未定。
现代文：他的部下素囊台吉、五路台吉等各不相让，因此他们的封号长期没有定下来。
English: His subordinates, such as Su Cang Taiji and Wu Lu Taiji, did not concede anything to each other, so their seal names were not settled for a long time.

古文：四十一年，卜失兔始婚于忠顺，东、西诸部长皆具状为请封。
现代文：万历四十一年，卜失兔与忠顺夫人结婚，东、西边关各部落的酋长都陈述自己的情况请求朝廷敕封。
English: In the 41st year of the lunar calendar, Pu Shouqin married Mrs. Zhong Shun, and the chiefs of all the tribes in East and West Guan stated their situation and requested the Imperial Court to seal it.

古文：忠顺夫人旋卒，诏封卜失兔为顺义王，而以把汉比吉素效恭顺，封忠义夫人。
现代文：忠顺夫人不久去世，皇帝下诏封卜失兔为顺义王。因为把汉比吉一直很恭顺，皇帝敕封她为忠义夫人。
English: Mrs. Zhongshun died soon after, and the emperor issued a decree to seal the lost rabbit as the Shunyi King. Because Hanbiji had always been very obedient, the emperor sealed her as Mrs. Zhongyi.

古文：卜失兔为撦力克孙，袭封时，已少衰，所制止山、大二镇外十二部。
现代文：卜失兔是扌奢力克的旁系孙子，因袭受封顺义王时，势力已稍有衰弱，他所统治的只有山、大二个镇外面十二个部落。
English: Bu Guoqin was a collateral grandchild of Zou Shuliq. When he was crowned Shunyi King, his power had already weakened slightly, and he ruled only the mountains, two towns and twelve tribes.

古文：其部长五路、素囊及兀慎台吉等，兵力皆与顺义埒。
现代文：他手下的部落酋长五路、素囊和兀慎台吉等所拥有的兵力都与顺义王相当。
English: The strength of his subordinates, such as the tribal chiefs Wulu, Su Zuo and Su Sheng Taiji, was comparable to that of King Shunyi.

古文：朝廷因宣大总督涂宗浚言，各予升赏如例。
现代文：朝廷听从了宣府、大同总督涂宗睿的话，各按以前惯例给以封赏。
English: The imperial court listened to the words of Xuanfu and Datong Governor Tu Zongrui, and each gave a reward according to the previous practice.

古文：其年，炒花纠虎墩兔三犯辽东。
现代文：这年，炒花纠集虎墩兔三次进犯辽东。
English: This year, the scrambled flowers gathered by the tigers and rabbits invaded Liaodong for the third time.

古文：虎墩兔者，居插汉儿地，亦曰插汉儿王子，元裔也。
现代文：虎墩兔，居住在插汉儿，自称插汉儿王子，是元朝的后裔。
English: Tigress, who lives in Jiehan'er and claims to be a prince of Jiehan'er, is a descendant of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：其祖打来孙始驻牧宣塞外，俺答方强，惧为所并，乃徙帐于辽，收福余杂部，数入掠蓟西，四传至虎墩兔，遂益盛。
现代文：他的祖父打来孙开始时在宣府边关外放牧，当时正是俺答强盛之时。打来孙怕被俺答吞并，便把营帐迁到辽阳，收容了福余等杂乱的部落，数次进入蓟镇西部掠夺。传了四代到虎墩兔时，势力就更加强大。
English: His grandfather called him Sun when he was grazing outside the Xuanwu Border Gate at the beginning, at that time it was the time when I was strong. Called Sun was afraid of being swallowed up by me, so he moved his camp to Liaoyang, accommodated the chaotic tribes such as Fuyu, and entered the western part of Handan Town several times to plunder. When it was passed down four generations to Tigress and Rabbit, the power was even stronger.

古文：明年夏，炒花复合宰赛、暖兔以三万骑入掠，至平虏、大宁。
现代文：第二年夏天，又纠合宰赛、暖兔以骑兵三万入侵，到达平虏、大宁。
English: In the summer of the following year, the combined forces of Zaisei and Wenzhu invaded with 30,000 cavalry and reached Pingru and Daning.

古文：既求抚赏，许之。
现代文：之后，又请求安抚赏赐他们，朝廷答应了。
English: After that, they asked to be appeased and rewarded, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：四十二年，猛克什力寇怀远及保宁。
现代文：万历四十二年，猛克什力入侵怀远和保宁。
English: Forty-two years have passed since the invasion of Huaiyuan and Boryeong.

古文：延绥总兵官秉忠等破之。斩二百二十一级。
现代文：延绥总兵官秉忠等人将他们打败，斩获首级二百二十一个。
English: Yancheng's commander-in-chief Bingzhong and others defeated them and won the first rank of 221.

古文：明年，插部数犯辽东。
现代文：第二年，插汉儿数次进犯辽东。
English: In the second year, Zhang Han made several incursions into Liaodong.

古文：已，掠义州，攻陷大安堡，兵民死者甚众。
现代文：之后，又掠夺义州，攻陷大安堡，杀死士兵和百姓很多。
English: After that, they plundered Yizhou and captured Da'an Fort, killing many soldiers and civilians.

古文：四十四年，总兵杜文焕数破套部猛克什力等于延绥边，火落赤、摆言太及吉能、切尽、歹青、沙计东西诸部皆惧，先后来请贡市。
现代文：万历四十四年，总兵杜文焕几次在延绥边关打败河套部落中的猛克什力等人，火落赤、摆言太和吉能、切尽、歹青、沙计等东西边关各部落都害怕，先后要求与朝廷入贡通市。
English: In the forty-fourth year of Wanli, the general soldier Du Wenhuan defeated several times in the Yancheng Border Pass the Monk Keshli and others in the Hetao tribe, and the tribes in the eastern and western border gates were afraid of the fiery red color, the words "too much" and "good luck," "cut out," "evil youth" and "sand gauge," and successively demanded to enter the city of Gongtong with the imperial court.

古文：四十六年，我大清兵起，略抚顺及开原，插部乘隙拥众挟赏。
现代文：万历四十六年，大清起兵，攻占抚顺和开原，插汉儿部乘机率众人要挟请赏。
English: In the 46th year of Wanli, the Qing Dynasty started an army, occupied Fushun and Kaiyuan, and took advantage of the opportunity to threaten everyone.

古文：西部阿晕妻满旦亦以万骑自石塘路入掠蓟镇白马关及高家、冯家诸堡。
现代文：西部边关阿晕的妻子满旦也带一万骑兵从石塘路入侵，抢掠蓟镇的白马关和高家堡、冯家堡。
English: The wife of the western border guard Ahora, Mandan, also invaded from Shitang Road with ten thousand cavalrymen and looted Baimaguan, Gaojia Fort and Fengjia Fort in Handan.

古文：游击朱万良御之，被围。
现代文：游击朱万良带兵抗击，被包围。
English: The guerrilla Zhu Wanliang led the troops to fight back and was surrounded.

古文：羽书日数十至，中外戒严。
现代文：紧急情报一天来数十次，朝廷内外都戒严。
English: Emergency information dozens of times a day, martial law both inside and outside the court.

古文：顷之，满旦亦叩关乞通贡。
现代文：不久，满旦也乞求与明朝廷通贡。
English: Not long after, Mandan also begged for tribute from the Ming court.

古文：四十七年，大清兵灭宰赛及北关金台什、布羊古等。
现代文：万历四十七年，大清军队灭掉宰赛和北关的金台什、布羊古等部落。
English: In the 47th year of Wanli, the Qing Dynasty army wiped out the Zaisei and Beiguan tribes of Jintai Sh, Buyang Gu and others.

古文：金台什孙女为虎墩兔妇，于是蓟辽总督文球、巡抚周永春等以利啖之，俾联结炒花诸部，以捍大清兵，给白金四千。
现代文：金台什的孙女是虎墩兔的妻子，于是蓟镇、辽阳总督文球、巡抚周永春等以利益诱骗她，使她联结炒花各部落，以抵挡大清军队，给她四千白金。
English: The granddaughter of Jintai Shih was the wife of Tigress Hare. Therefore, Shuzhen, Liaoyang Governor Wenqiu, Governor Zhou Yongchun, etc. lured her with profits, made her connect the various tribes of fried flowers to resist the Qing army, and gave her four thousand platinum.

古文：明年，为泰昌元年，加赏至四万。
现代文：第二年，是泰昌元年，给她加赏到四万。
English: In the second year, the first year of Taichang, her reward was increased to forty thousand.

古文：虎乃扬言助中国，邀索无厌。
现代文：虎墩兔就到处说自己是帮助中国，实际邀索财物贪得无厌。
English: Tigress said everywhere that he was helping China, but in fact he was insatiably greedy for wealth.

古文：天启元年秋，吉能犯延绥边，榆林总兵杜文焕击败之。
现代文：天启元年秋天，吉能进犯延绥边境，榆林总兵杜文焕将他打败。
English: In the autumn of the first year of Tianqi, Ji Neng attacked the border of Yan'an, and Du Wenhuan, the general of Yulin, defeated him.

古文：明年春，复大掠延安黄花峪，深入六百里，杀掠居民数万。
现代文：第二年春天，吉能又在延安的黄花峪大肆掠夺，深入内地六百里，杀死掠夺了数万居民。
English: In the spring of the following year, Yoshino again plundered Yan'an's Huanghua County, going as far as 600 miles inland, killing and plundering tens of thousands of residents.

古文：三年春，银定纠众再掠西边，官军击败之。
现代文：第三年春天，银定纠集人马再次掠夺西部边境，明朝官军打败了他们。
English: In the spring of the third year, Yin Ding gathered people and horses to plunder the western border again, and the Ming Dynasty government army defeated them.

古文：明年春，复谋入故巢，犯松山，为守臣冯任等所败。
现代文：又过了一年的春天，他们谋划侵入以前的老巢，进犯松山，为当地守卫大臣冯任等所打败。
English: After another year of spring, they planned to invade their former home and attack Matsuyama, but were defeated by the local Minister of Defense, Feng Ren.

古文：夏，遂纠海西古六台吉等犯甘肃，总兵董继舒击之，斩三百余级。
现代文：同年夏天，他们又纠集海西和古六台吉等人进犯甘肃，总兵董继舒带兵抗击，斩杀敌人三百多人。
English: In the summer of the same year, they also gathered Haixi and Gu Liutaiji and others to attack Gansu. The commander-in-chief, Dong Jishu, led the soldiers to fight back and killed more than 300 of the enemy.

古文：其年，歹青以领赏哗于边，边人格杀之。
现代文：这年，歹青因为领赏的事在边关哗变，边关的人杀死了他。
English: This year, the villainous young man mutinied at the border because of the reward, and the people at the border killed him.

古文：歹青，虎墩兔近属也，边臣议岁给偿命银一万三千有奇，而虎怏怏，益思飏去。未几，大清兵袭破炒花，所部皆散亡，半归于插汉。
现代文：歹青，是虎墩兔的近亲。边关大臣决定每年给他偿命银一万三千两还多，而虎墩兔还是怏怏不乐，更想快点离去，不久，大清军队袭击并打败了炒花，他的部下都逃散了，半数归入到插汉儿那里。
English: He was a close relative of Tigress Rabbit. The Minister of Border Affairs decided to give him more than 13,000 taels of silver per year to pay for his life, but Tigress Rabbit was still unhappy and wanted to leave quickly. Soon, the Qing Dynasty army attacked and defeated Fried Flowers. His subordinates all fled, and half of them were assigned to Jie Han.

古文：时卜失兔益衰，号令不行于诸部，部长干儿骂等岁数犯延绥诸边。
现代文：此时卜失兔更加衰弱，手下各部落已不听他的号令，部落酋长干儿骂等人每年都进犯延绥诸边关达数次。
English: At this time, the losing rabbit was even weaker, the tribes under his command did not listen to his orders, and the tribal chiefs scolded the children and others to attack Yancheng several times a year.

古文：七庆台吉及敖目比吉、毛乞炭比吉等，亦各拥众往来窥伺塞下。
现代文：七庆台吉和敖目比吉、毛乞炭比吉等人，亦各带人在边关地区往来，伺机劫掠。
English: Nanqing Taiji, Shime Biji, Maoqian Charcoal Biji and others also brought people to the border areas to wait for the opportunity to loot.

古文：崇祯元年，虎墩兔攻哈喇嗔及白言台吉、卜失兔诸部，皆破之，遂乘胜入犯宣大塞。
现代文：崇祯元年，虎墩兔攻打哈喇嗔和白言台吉、卜失兔各部落，都取得了胜利，于是便乘胜进犯宣府、大同要塞。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the tribes of Tigress and Rabbit attacked and defeated the tribes of Harajuku, Baiyan, Taiji, and Buhu, all of which achieved victory. Therefore, they used their victory to invade the Xuanfu and Datong fortresses.

古文：秋，帝御平台，召总督王象乾，询以方略，象乾对言： 御插之道，宜令其自相攻。
现代文：该年秋天，皇帝到平台，召总督王象乾来，询问该怎么办。王象乾答说： 防备插汉儿的方法，就是让他们自相攻杀。
English: In the autumn of that year, the emperor went to the platform and summoned the governor Wang Xiangqian to ask what should be done. Wang Xiangqian replied: The way to prevent interference is to let them attack each other.

古文：今卜失兔西走套内，白台吉挺身免，而哈喇嗔所部多被掳，不足用。
现代文：现今卜失兔已往西逃到河套内去了，白言台吉只有自己一人，而哈喇嗔手下的人大多被掳掠走了，这些人已不顶用了。
English: Now, the lost rabbit has fled west to Hetao. Baiyan Taiji is the only one left, and most of Harajuku's men have been captured and taken away. These people are no longer of any use.

古文：永邵卜最强，约三十万人，合卜失兔所部并联络朵颜三十六家及哈喇嗔余众，可以御插汉。
现代文：现今永邵卜最强，约有三十万人，会合卜失兔的部下，并联络朵颜三十六家和哈喇嗔的余部，便可以抵挡插汉儿了。
English: At present, Yongshabu is the strongest, with about 300,000 people. By uniting the subordinates who have lost their way, and contacting the remaining members of the Thirty-Six Daoist Houses and the Harajuku, they can resist the meddling.

古文：然与其构之，水如抚而用之。 
现代文：然而与其图谋他们，还不如招抚和使用他们更好。 
English: However, instead of plotting against them, it is better to cajole and use them.

古文：帝曰： 插汉意不受抚，奈何？ 
现代文：皇帝问 ：要是插汉儿决意不接受招抚，怎么办？ 
English: The emperor asked: What if the meddler is determined not to accept the caress?

古文：对曰： 当从容笼络。 
现代文：王象乾答道： 应当慢慢笼络他们。 
English: Wang Xiangqian replied: You should slowly coax them.

古文：帝曰： 如不款何？ 
现代文：皇帝又问 ：如果他们不投诚又怎么办？ 
English: The emperor asked again, "What if they don't pledge allegiance?"

古文：象乾复密奏，帝善之，命往与督师袁崇焕共计。
现代文：王象乾秘密地向皇帝谈了些什么，皇帝认为他的主意蛮好，命他去与督师袁崇焕共同商量。
English: Wang Xiangqian secretly discussed something with the emperor. The emperor thought his idea was quite good and ordered him to discuss it with the inspector Yuan Chonghuan.

古文：象乾至边，与崇焕议合，皆言西靖而东自宁，虎不款，而东西并急，因定岁予插金八万一千两，以示羁縻。
现代文：王象乾到边关，与袁崇焕的意见相合。他们都说西部干净了东部自然就会安宁，如果虎墩兔不投诚，明朝边关东西两头都很紧急。因此决定第二年给插汉儿金子八万一千两，以表示软化统治。
English: Wang Xiangqian went to the border and agreed with Yuan Chonghuan's opinion. They both said that if the west was clean, the east would naturally be peaceful. If the tigers and rabbits did not surrender, the border between the east and west would be very urgent in the morning. Therefore, it was decided to give 81,000 taels of gold to the intruders in the second year to show the softening of the rule.

古文：大同巡抚张宗衡上言： 插来宣大，驻新城，去大同仅二百里，三阅月未敢近前，饥饿穷乏，插与我等耳。
现代文：大同巡抚张宗衡给皇帝上言 ：插汉儿来到宣府、大同，驻扎在新城，离大同只有二百里，三个整月来不敢再靠前，其饥饿穷乏的状况与我们是一样的了。
English: Zhang Zongheng, the Datong governor, appealed to the emperor: "The intruders came to Xuanfu and Datong, stationed in Xincheng, only two hundred miles from Datong, and have not dared to advance for three whole months. Their hunger and poverty are the same as ours.

古文：插恃抚金为命，两年不得，资用已竭，食尽马乏，暴骨成莽。
现代文：插汉儿依赖安抚金为命根子，两年不给他们，他们的费用就枯竭，粮食吃光，战马困乏，必然尸骨遍野。
English: The insurgents depend on the pacification money as their lifeblood. If they are not given it for two years, their expenses will dry up, their grain will run out, their war horses will be exhausted, and there will inevitably be corpses everywhere.

古文：插炰悖慢，耳目不忍睹闻，方急款尚如是。
现代文：插汉儿盼望投诚，是盼望收入啊。而我们给他们金缯、牛羊、茶果、米谷无数，是我们正好投其所欲了。
English: Those who meddle in the affairs of others, hoping to win their loyalty, are hoping for income. But we give them countless gold ingots, cattle and sheep, tea fruits, and rice grains, and we just give them what they want.

古文：使插士马丰饱，其凭陵狂逞，可胜道哉。 
现代文：一旦让插汉儿士兵和战马吃饮丰足，那他们的狂妄和侵凌逞威，可是无法说的！ 
English: Once the soldiers and horses have been given plenty to eat and drink, their arrogance and arrogance are unspeakable!

古文：象乾言： 款局垂成而复棼之，既示插以不信，亦非所以为国谋。 
现代文：王象乾说 ：投诚的局面快要成了而又毁了它，对插汉儿示以不信任，这也不是为国考虑吧！ 
English: Wang Xiangqian said: the situation of throwing sincerity is about to become and then destroy it, show distrust to meddlers, this is not a consideration for the country!

古文：疏入，帝是象乾议，诏宗衡毋得异同。
现代文：皇帝认为王象乾的建议是对的，叫张宗衡不要再谈异议了。
English: The emperor thought that Wang Xiangqian's suggestion was right, and told Zhang Zongheng to stop talking about objections.

古文：明年秋，虎复拥众至延绥红水滩，乞增赏未遂，即纵掠塞外，总兵吴自勉御却之。
现代文：第二年秋天，虎墩兔又带人到延绥的红水滩，在要求增加赏银的目的没有达到后，就在边塞外大肆抢掠。总兵吴自勉起兵把他们击退。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Tigress and Rabbit took people to the Red Water Beach in Yancheng again. After the goal of demanding an increase in the reward of silver was not achieved, they looted wildly outside the border fortress. General Wu Zimin took up arms to repel them.

古文：既而东附大清兵攻龙门。
现代文：不久他们向东依附于大清军队攻打龙门。
English: Soon, they moved east to join the Qing army to attack Longmen.

古文：未几，为大清兵所击。
现代文：不多久，他们被大清军队所袭击。
English: Not long after, they were attacked by the Qing army.

古文：六年夏，插汉闻大清兵至，尽驱部众渡河远遁。
现代文：崇祯六年夏天，插汉儿听到大清的军队到了，全部把他的部众渡过黄河远远地逃走了。
English: In the summer of the sixth year of Chongzhen, Jie Han heard that the Qing army had arrived, and all of his subordinates crossed the Yellow River and fled far away.

古文：是时，鞑靼诸部先后归附于大清。
现代文：此时，鞑靼各部落先后归顺依附大清。
English: At this time, the Tatar tribes successively surrendered to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：明年，大清兵遂大会诸部于兀苏河南冈，颁军律焉。
现代文：第二年，大清军队在兀苏河南冈大会各部落，颁发军队律令。
English: In the second year, the Qing Dynasty army issued an army regulation to the tribes in the Nangang Assembly of the Bishu River.

古文：而虎已卒，乃追至上都城，尽俘插汉妻孥部众。
现代文：这时虎墩兔已死，于是大清军队追到上都城，全部俘获插汉儿的妻子儿女和部众。
English: At this time, the tiger and the hare had already died, so the Qing army chased them to Shangdu City and captured all the wives, children and subordinates of the meddlers.

古文：其后，套部岁入宁夏、甘、凉境，巡抚陈奇瑜、总兵马世龙、督师洪承畴等辄击败之。
现代文：后来，河套部落每年都入侵宁夏、甘州、凉州，巡抚陈奇瑜、总兵马世龙、督师洪承畴等总是把他们打败。
English: Later, the Hetao tribe invaded Ningxia, Ganzhou, and Liangzhou every year. The governor Chen Qiyu, the general soldier Shilong, and the superintendent Hong Chengzhang always defeated them.

古文：套部干儿骂，亦为总兵尤世禄所斩。
现代文：河套部落的干儿骂，也被总兵尤世禄斩杀。
English: He was scolded by the children of the Hetao tribe, and was also killed by the general Yu Shilou.

古文：迄明世，边陲无宁，致中原盗贼蜂起。
现代文：到明朝一代，边疆没有安宁，致使中原地区盗贼蜂起。
English: By the Ming Dynasty, there was no peace on the frontier, leading to an uprising of thieves in the Central Plains.

古文：当事者狃与俺答等贡市之便，见插之恣于东也，谓岁捐金钱数十万，冀苟安旦夕，且觊收之为用，而卒不得。
现代文：掌权者贪图与俺答互通贡市的便利，看见插汉儿在东部边境恣意横行，就认为每年捐金钱数十万给他们，便可望得到旦夕苟安，并且还妄想把他们收为己用，最终也没有达到目的。
English: Those in power coveted the convenience of exchanging tribute with us, and when they saw the meddlers running amok on the eastern border, they thought that donating hundreds of thousands of money to them every year would bring them instant peace, and they also wanted to use them for their own purposes. In the end, they did not achieve their goal.

古文：迨其后也，明未亡而插先毙，诸部皆折入于大清。
现代文：等到后来，明朝未灭亡，而插汉儿先死，各部落全被收进了大清军队。
English: Later, when the Ming Dynasty did not perish, and the Han Dynasty died first, all the tribes were absorbed into the Qing Army.

古文：国计愈困，边事愈棘，朝议愈纷，明亦遂不可为矣。
现代文：国家的生计越是困难，边疆地区的事务便越是棘手，朝廷里的议论也就越多。明朝从这一点上看，已经不能有所作为了。
English: The more difficult the country's livelihood, the more troublesome the affairs of the border regions, and the more discussions there are in the imperial court. From this point of view, the Ming Dynasty can no longer make a difference.

古文：鞑靼地，东至兀良哈，西至瓦剌。
现代文：鞑靼人的地盘，东至兀良哈，西到瓦剌。
English: The territory of the Tatars, stretching from the east to Buryakha and from the west to Varang.

古文：当洪、永、宣世，国家全盛，颇受戎索，然畔服亦靡常。
现代文：在洪武、永乐、宣德年间，国家全盛，接受了许多外族人，就是这样他们或背叛或降服也没有准则。
English: In the years of Hongwu, Yongle and Xuande, when the country was at its peak, it accepted many foreigners, so there was no standard for them to betray or surrender.

古文：正统后，边备废弛，声灵不振。
现代文：自正统皇帝以后，边疆的防备废弛，声威不显。
English: Since the reign of Emperor Taizong, there has been no noticeable improvement in frontier defences.

古文：诸部长多以雄杰之姿，恃其暴强，迭出与中夏抗。
现代文：外族各部落酋长大多以英雄豪杰的姿态出现，倚仗他们的暴力强劲，频频出来与中原汉族抗衡。
English: Most of the foreign tribal chiefs appeared as heroic heroes, relying on their strong violence, frequently coming out to compete with the Central Plains Han people.

古文：边境之祸，遂与明终始云。
现代文：边境的祸患，便与明朝相始终了。
English: The scourge of the border remained with the Ming Dynasty.

