古文：江总姚察江总，字总持，济阳考城人也，晋散骑常侍统之十世孙。
现代文：江总字总持，是济阳考城人，晋散骑常侍江统的十代孙。
English: Jiang Zongzha Zongzhi is a Jiyang Kaocheng resident, the 10th generation grandson of Jin Sanzhong, a regular attendant of Jiangtong.

古文：五世祖湛，宋左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，忠简公。
现代文：五世祖名湛，是宋左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，谧号忠简公。
English: The fifth generation ancestor, Meitan, was Song Zaganglu's doctor, Kaifu Yi Tong's third secretary, and his posthumous name was Zhong Jian Gong.

古文：祖蒨，梁光禄大夫，有名当代。
现代文：祖父名倩，是梁光禄大夫，在当时有名气。
English: His grandfather, Dr. Liang Guanglu, was famous at the time.

古文：父紑，本州迎主簿，少居父忧，以毁卒，在《梁书孝行传》。
现代文：父亲名钚，是本州迎主簿，年轻时守父丧，哀伤而死，载在《梁书孝行传》上。
English: His father's name, Plutonium, is on the Honshu welcome-home book. When he was young, he mourned his father's death and died in sorrow, which is recorded in the "Biography of Liang Shuling."

古文：总七岁而孤，依于外氏。
现代文：江总七岁就丧父，寄身在外婆家。
English: At the age of seven, Jiang lost his father and lived with his grandmother.

古文：幼聪敏，有至性。
现代文：小时聪明伶俐，有卓绝的品性。
English: He's smart and has a great personality.

古文：舅吴平光侯萧劢，名重当时，特所钟爱，尝谓总曰： 尔操行殊异，神采英拔，后之知名，当出吾右。 
现代文：舅舅吴平光侯萧勘，在当时名望很高，特别钟爱他，曾经对江总说： 你的操守品行很特别，精神风采超人，以后出名，应比我强。 
English: His uncle, Wu Pingguang Hou Xiao Kan, was very famous at that time, and he was especially fond of him. He once said to Jiang Zemin: Your integrity is very special, your spiritual style is superhuman, you will be famous in the future, you should be better than me.

古文：及长，笃学有辞采，家传赐书数千卷，总昼夜寻读，未尝辍手。
现代文：到长大了，苦学有文采，家裹有祖仁留下的朝廷所赐图书数千卷，江总日夜翻查阅读，不曾停止。
English: When he grew up, he was studious and literate, and his home was filled with thousands of volumes of books given to him by the imperial court and left behind by his ancestors. Jiang Zonglu rummaged through the books day and night and never stopped reading.

古文：年十八，解褐宣惠武陵王府法曹参军。
现代文：十八岁时，步入仕途，任宣惠武陵王府法曹参军。
English: At the age of eighteen, he entered the career path and was appointed as the legal officer of Wuling Wangfu.

古文：中权将军、丹阳尹何敬容开府，置佐史，并以贵胄充之，仍除敬容府主簿。
现代文：中权将军、丹阳尹何敬容开建府署，设佐史，都用名门之后担任，就请他任敬容府主簿。
English: General Zhong Quan and Danyang Yin He Jing Rong, both of whom founded the government building department and set up the history department, both of whom held the position after using the prestigious family, asked him to serve as the chief accountant of the Jing Rong government.

古文：迁尚书殿中郎。
现代文：调任尚书殿中郎。
English: Zhang Rui was transferred to the post of Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household.

古文：梁武帝撰《正言》始毕，制《述怀诗》，总预同此作，帝览总诗，深降嗟赏。
现代文：梁武帝撰写《正言》才完，作《述怀诗》，江总同作此题，帝看了江总的诗，深表赞赏。
English: Emperor Liangwu had just finished writing the "Major Speech" when he composed the "Notes on a Poem," which was also written by Jiang Zong. Emperor Liangwu read Jiang Zong's poem and expressed deep appreciation.

古文：仍转侍郎。
现代文：就调任他为侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain.

古文：尚书仆射范阳张缵，度支尚书琅邪王筠，都官尚书南阳刘之遴，并高才硕学，总时年少有名，缵等雅相推重，为忘年友会。
现代文：尚书仆射范阳人张缆，度支尚书琅邪人王筠，都官尚书南阳人刘之遴，都高才博学。江总那时年轻但很有名气，张缵等人都推许看重他，结成忘年友会。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant, Fan Yang's Zhang Cai, Du Zhi's subordinate, Wang Yao, and Nanyang's official, Liu Zharuqi, were all highly talented and erudite. At that time, Jiang Zong was young but very famous. Zhang Yao and others highly valued him and formed a year-end friends' meeting.

古文：之遴尝酬总诗，其略曰： 上位居崇礼，寺署邻栖息。
现代文：刘之遴曾赠给江总诗，诗大致写道： 上位居崇礼，寺署邻栖息。
English: Liu Zizan once presented a poem to Jiang Zongshi. The poem roughly reads: The highest rank is the highest, and the temple office is next to it.

古文：忌闻晓驺唱，每畏晨光赩。
现代文：忌闻晓骝唱，每畏晨光艴。
English: Do not listen to gossip, but listen to the morning light.

古文：高谈意未穷，晤对赏无极。
现代文：高谈意未穷，晤对赏无极。
English: There's so much to talk about, so much to enjoy.

古文：探急共遨游，休沐忘退食。
现代文：探急共遨游，休沐忘退食。
English: The expeditions travel together, and they forget to eat together.

古文：曷用销鄙吝，枉趾觏颜色。
现代文：曷用销鄙吝，枉趾觏颜色。
English: Don't be stingy with the pins, and don't overdo the colors.

古文：下上数千载，扬搉吐胸臆。 
现代文：下上数千载，扬榷吐胸臆。 
English: Down thousands of years, Yang Zhen spits out his chest.

古文：其为通人所钦挹如此。
现代文：他被学识渊博的人钦敬推许到了这种程度。
English: He was held in such high esteem by the learned.

古文：迁太子洗马，又出为临安令，还为中军宣城王府限内录事参军，转太子中舍人。
现代文：调任太子洗马，又出京做临安令，回朝廷任中军宣城王府限内录事参军，转任太子中舍人。
English: He was transferred to the post of Prince Saima, and went to Beijing to make the Lin'an edict. He returned to the imperial court to join the army within the time limit set by the army of the Xuancheng Wangfu, and was transferred to the post of the prince's subordinate.

古文：及魏国通好，敕以总及徐陵摄官报聘，总以疾不行。
现代文：等到与魏国通好，朝廷命江总和徐陵代理官职出使北魏，江总因病未去。
English: When they were on good terms with Wei, the imperial court ordered Jiang Zemin and Xu Ling as acting officials to send envoys to Northern Wei, but Jiang Zemin did not go due to illness.

古文：侯景寇京都，诏以总权兼太常卿，守小庙。
现代文：侯景叛乱进犯京都时，朝廷诏令江总暂兼太常卿，守卫小庙。
English: When the Houjing Rebellion attacked Kyoto, the imperial court ordered Jiang Zong and Tai Changqing to guard the small temple.

古文：台城陷，总避难崎岖，累年，至会稽郡，憩于龙华寺，乃制《修心赋》，略序时事。
现代文：台城陷落后，江总避难一路艰辛，几年后到了会稽郡，住在龙华寺，就创作了《修心赋》，大致记述了当时的事。
English: After the fall of Taichung, Jiang took refuge in the hardships along the way. A few years later, he came to Huiqi County, lived in Longhua Temple, and created "Shuixinfu," which roughly described the events of the time.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：赋中写道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：太清四年秋七月，避地于会稽龙华寺。
现代文：太清四年秋七月，在会稽龙华寺避乱。
English: In the autumn and July of the 4th year of the Taiching Dynasty, there was a riot at Longhua Temple.

古文：此伽蓝者，余六世祖宋尚书右仆射州陵侯元嘉二十四年之所构也。
现代文：这座寺庙，是我六世祖宋代尚书右仆射州陵侯在元嘉二十四年建造的。
English: This temple was built in the 24th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty by my 6th ancestor, the Song Dynasty Shangshu Ubu Shazhou Mausoleum.

古文：侯之王父晋护军将军，昔莅此邦，卜居山阴都阳里，贻厥子孙，有终焉之志。
现代文：州陵侯的祖父是晋护军将军江膨，过去曾来这襄，居住在山阴都阳里，有传留子孙，终老于此的意愿。
English: The grandfather of the prefect of the prefectural mausoleum was the general of the Jin protection army, Jiang Yu, who had come here in the past, lived in the mountains and in the sun, had descendants, and wanted to stay here forever.

古文：寺域则宅之旧基，左江右湖，面山背豁，东西连跨，南北纡萦，聊与苦节名僧，同销日用，晓修经戒，夕览图书，寝处风云，凭栖水月。
现代文：现在寺庙的占地就是旧宅的老基，左面是江右面是湖，前有山后有壑，东西有跨院相连，南北有回廊相通。且与清苦守节的高僧共度时日，早晨诵经修性，夜裹看看图书，安卧在风云中，闲居于水边月下。
English: The land occupied by the temple now is the old foundation of the old house, on the left is the river, on the right is the lake, in front there is a mountain, behind there is a pond, east and west are connected across the hospital, and north and south are connected by a corridor. And they spend time with the high monks of the Qing Ku Shou Festival, chanting scriptures in the morning, studying books at night, lying in the wind and clouds, and living under the moon by the water.

古文：不意华戎莫辨，朝市倾沦，以此伤情，情可知矣。
现代文：不料华夏陷入戎狄，朝廷倾覆，因而伤心，那种感情是可想而知了。
English: Unexpectedly, China fell into the hands of the Japanese, the imperial court was overthrown, and she was heartbroken. You can imagine how she felt.

古文：啜泣濡翰，岂摅郁结，庶后生君子，悯余此概焉。
现代文：涕泪浸笔，怎能舒展郁闷，希望后来的君子，能理解同情我的状况。
English: With tears soaking my pen, how can I relieve my depression? I hope that future gentlemen can understand and sympathize with my situation.

古文：嘉南斗之分次，肇东越之灵秘。表《桧风》于韩什，著镇山于周记。
现代文：遣裹是南斗的分野，东越的灵秘以这裹开始，韩诗中有《桧风》的记载，周代典籍中有主要山脉的记述。
English: Jianwu is the field of Nandou, the secret of East Vietnam begins with this wrap, there is a record of "Fengfeng" in Korean poetry, and there is a description of major mountains in Zhou Dynasty classics.

古文：蕴大禹之金书，镌暴秦之石字。太史来而探穴，钟离去而开笥。
现代文：这裹藏有大禹的钟鼎金书，有暴秦的刻石文字，太史公来探过禹穴，钟离意走出山阴去揭开孔圣的方笥。
English: It contains the Zhongding gold book of Dayu, the carved stone characters of the tyrannical Qin Dynasty, Taishi Gong's exploration of the cave of Dayu, and Zhong Liang's intention to go out of the shadows of the mountain to uncover the sacred square of Kong.

古文：信竹箭之为珍，何珷玞之罕值。
现代文：如果竹箭会是宝物，怎么斌玖那样珍贵。
English: If bamboo arrows can be a treasure, how can Binh Duong be so precious?

古文：奉盛德之鸿祀，寓安禅之古寺。实豫章之旧圃，成黄金之胜地。
现代文：献上对盛德的隆重祭礼，寄寓在安静修禅的古寺，这原是豫章的旧园圃，成了黄金胜地。
English: Offering a grand festival to Shengde, living in a quiet Zen temple, this was originally the old garden of Yu Zhang, and became a golden resort.

古文：遂寂默之幽心，若镜中而远寻。面曾阜之超忽，迩平湖之迥深。
现代文：于是深心静默，像对镜远远追寻，前面层峦叠嶂旷远迷茫，近处深深的湖水那么平静。
English: As a result, the deep heart is silent, like looking at a mirror far away, the front layer of folds is far away and confused, and the deep lake water nearby is so calm.

古文：山条偃蹇，水叶侵淫。挂猿朝落，饥鼯夜吟。
现代文：山林优美，夜露渐重，挂悬在树上的猿早晨滑落地面，饥饿的鼯鼠夜裹发出叫声。
English: The mountains and forests are beautiful, the dew is getting heavier and heavier, the monkeys hanging from the trees slide down to the ground in the morning, and the hungry moles cry out at night.

古文：果丛药苑，桃蹊橘林。梢云拂日，结暗生阴。
现代文：果木成林药材成园，桃林中小径幽幽，橘树多得成林，树梢高入云霄遮掩日光，林中幽暗遍地成荫。
English: Fruit trees become forests, medicinal plants become gardens, small and medium-sized paths in the peach forest become quiet, more orange trees become forests, the treetops reach high into the sky to hide the sun, and the dark in the forest is shaded all over.

古文：保自然之雅趣，鄙人间之荒杂。望岛屿之邅回，面江源之重沓。泛流月之夜迥，曳光烟之晓匝。
现代文：喜爱自然的雅趣，轻视人间的烦杂，遥望岛屿萦回，江河交汇，长夜裹流水泛着粼粼月光，拂晓时雾霭飘来笼罩大地。
English: He loved the beauty of nature, despised the troubles of the human world, gazed at the islands from afar, the confluence of rivers, the long night of the flowing water with the bright moonlight, and the fog at dawn.

古文：风引蜩而嘶噪，雨鸣林而修飒，鸟稍狎而知来，云无情而自合。
现代文：清风引起了蝉唱，雨打丛林声音萧瑟，鸟儿渐渐狎玩近人，烟云无情自然收合。
English: The clear wind caused the cicadas to sing, the rain made the jungle sound bleak, the birds gradually chirped, and the clouds of smoke inexorably closed in.

古文：尔乃野开灵塔，地筑禅居，喜园迢遰，乐树扶疏。
现代文：这就修筑灵塔，建立庙宇，爱这宽广的园苑，乐此树木扶疏。
English: This is why they build cemeteries and temples, love the spacious gardens, and enjoy the sparsity of trees.

古文：经行籍草，宴坐临渠，持戒振锡，度影甘蔬。坚固之林可喻，寂灭之场蹔如。
现代文：走过草地。闲坐溪边，守持戒行，扶着禅杖，恬然度，坚固林可作比况，寂灭场可以相喻。
English: Walking through the meadow, sitting idly by the stream, keeping the precepts, holding the meditation stick, the serenity, the solid forest can be compared, and the quiet place can be compared.

古文：异曲终而悲起，非木落而悲始。岂降志而辱身，不露才而扬己。
现代文：异曲奏毕忧伤起，悲愁非因落叶生，怎能委屈本意身受辱，不想显露才华去扬名。
English: The strange music begins with sadness. The sadness is not caused by the leaf fall. How can one be wronged and humiliated, and not want to show his talent and become famous?

古文：钟风雨之如晦，倦鸡鸣之聒耳。幸避地而高栖，凭调御之遗旨。
现代文：风雨聚集天地昏暗，也厌倦了聒耳的鸡鸣，幸而回避了尘世高隐在这裹，任他帝王降旨也不理。
English: The heavens and the earth were darkened by the gathering storm, and he was also tired of the crowing of the rooster. Fortunately, he avoided the earthly high and hidden here, and he did not care about the emperor's decree.

古文：折四辩之微言，悟三乘之妙理。遣十缠之系缚，祛五惑之尘滓。久遗荣于势利，庶忘累于妻子。感意气于畴日，寄知音于来祀。何远客之可悲，知自怜其何已。
现代文：我为微妙的四辩所折服，悟到了三乘的奥妙禅理，抛开众多绳索的束缚，拂去了迷惑的尘滓，很久以来忘记了势利虚荣，希望忘掉拖累人生的妻子儿女，感喟昔日太重意气，寻觅知音的希望寄托于来年，为何远行的客人可悲，要知道哀怜自己怎有完毕。
English: I was won over by the subtle four arguments, realized the mystery of the Three Vehicle Meditation, cast aside the shackles of many ropes, and brushed away the dust of confusion. For a long time, I have forgotten snobbery and vanity. I hope to forget the wife and children who drag down my life. I feel that the past was too ambitious. The hope of finding a friend is pinned on the next year. Why are the guests who travel far away sad? I want to know how to end my self-pity.

古文：总第九舅萧勃先据广州，总又自会稽往依焉。
现代文：江总的第九舅萧勃原先占据广州，江总又从会稽去依附他。
English: General Jiang's ninth uncle, Xiao Bo, had previously occupied Guangzhou, and General Jiang went to join him.

古文：梁元帝平侯景，征总为明威将军、始兴内史，以郡秩米八百斛给总行装。
现代文：梁元帝戡平了侯景的叛乱，征用江总为明威将军、始兴内史，用郡级俸禄八百斛米给江总做路费。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan quelled the rebellion of Houjing, requisitioned Jiang Zong as Ming Wei General and Shi Xing Naishi, and used the county-level salary of 800 baht to pay Jiang Zong's travel expenses.

古文：会江陵陷，遂不行，总自此流寓岭南积岁。
现代文：恰遇江陵失陷，就没有去，江总从此流落在鲎亩多年。
English: When Gangneung fell, he did not go there, and Jiang Zong was exiled to Shemu for many years.

古文：天嘉四年，以中书侍郎征还朝，直侍中省。
现代文：玉塞四年，以中书侍郎的职务征召回朝，在中书省任职。
English: In the fourth year of his reign, Yuxi was summoned back to the dynasty as the attendant of the Chinese classics, and served in the Ministry of Chinese Classics.

古文：累迁司徒右长史，掌东宫管记，给事黄门侍郎，领南徐州大中正。
现代文：屡次升迁做到司徒右长史，掌管柬宫管记，给事黄门侍郎，领南徐州大中正。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of chief historian of the Southern Xuzhou University, in charge of the records of the Cambodian Palace, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and the leader of the Southern Xuzhou University.

古文：授太子中庶子、通直散骑常侍，东宫、中正如故。
现代文：又授任太子中庶子、通直散骑常侍，东宫、中正等职照旧。
English: In addition, the Prince's junior illegitimate son, Tsuchida Sanzhiyi, was appointed as the Prince's equerry, and the posts of the East Palace and the Vice-regent remained the same.

古文：迁左民尚书，转太子詹事，中正如故。
现代文：又调任左民尚书，转任太子詹事，中正职如旧。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the post of Zuomin Shangshu, and then to the post of Prince Zhanji, but the position of Zhongzheng remained the same.

古文：以与太子为长夜之饮，养良娣陈氏为女，太子微行总舍，上怒免之。
现代文：因为和太子长夜饮酒作乐，养良娣陈氏为女，让太子改装到江总的家襄舆陈旦幽会，皇上震怒免了逗总的官。
English: Because of the long night of drinking and making music with the prince, raising the Chen family as a woman, and letting the prince go to the general's home for a get-together, the emperor was furious and dismissed the general's official.

古文：寻为侍中，领左骁骑将军。
现代文：不久任侍中，领左骁骑将军。
English: He was soon appointed as a chamberlain, leading the left chevron cavalry general.

古文：复为左民尚书领左军将军，未拜，又以公事免。
现代文：又任左民尚书，领左军将军，未正式任命，就又因故免去。
English: He was also appointed as Zuomin Shangshu, the leader of the Left Army General, but he was removed for some reason before he was officially appointed.

古文：寻起为散骑常侍、明烈将军、司徒左长史，迁太常卿。
现代文：不久起用为散骑常侍、明烈将军、司徒左长史，升任太常卿。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to stallion-riding attendant, illustrious general, Shituzo Choshi, and Tai Jokei.

古文：后主即位，除祠部尚书，又领左骁骑将军，参掌选事。
现代文：后主即位，拜他为祠部尚书，又领左骁骑将军，参掌选事。
English: After the enthronement of the Lord, he was worshipped as the chief priest of the shrine, and he led the left-handed cavalry general to participate in the election.

古文：转散骑常侍、吏部尚书。
现代文：转任散骑常侍、吏部尚书。
English: He was transferred to the position of Sanzhi (free-riding) regular attendant and Ribe Shojo.

古文：寻迁尚书仆射，参掌如故。
现代文：接着调任尚书仆射，照旧参掌选事。
English: Next, he was transferred to the position of Shoshuku sho and participated in the election as before.

古文：至德四年，加宣惠将军，量置佐史。
现代文：至德四年，加封为宣惠将军，可按敷设置佐史。
English: After four years in Germany, he was awarded the title of General Xuan Hui, which can be used to set up a history.

古文：寻授尚书令，给鼓吹一部，加扶，馀并如故。
现代文：不久又授任尚书令，赐给他一部鼓吹乐队，加赐扶掖之人，其他职位照旧。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Shang Shuling, and he was given a trumpet band, as well as a helper, and the rest of the positions remained the same.

古文：策曰： 於戏，夫文昌政本，司会治经，韦彪谓之枢机，李固方之斗极。
现代文：策书上说： 呜乎，文昌整治根本，司会管治经济，韦彪被称为国家的关键，李固被比作北斗北极。
English: The policy book said, "Wuhu, Wenchang is in the process of fundamental rectification, the State Council is in charge of the economy, Wei Biao is known as the key to the country, and Li Gu is compared to the North Pole.

古文：况其五曹斯综，百揆是谐，同冢宰之司，专台阁之任。
现代文：何况五曹的总理，靠你主持调济，与冢宰的职责相同，专主台阁重任。
English: What's more, as the prime minister of the five provinces, it is up to you to preside over the transfer of funds, which is the same as the duties of the governor.

古文：惟尔道业标峻，寓量弘深，胜范清规，风流以为准的，辞宗学府，衣冠以为领袖。
现代文：由于你道德术业高超，器宇度量不凡，有美好的规行风范，仪表风度可以作为楷模，又是辞学的宗师，文明礼教能作士大夫的领袖。
English: Because of your excellent moral and academic skills, extraordinary ability and measure, good manners, and good appearance, you can serve as a role model. You are also a master of diction, and a leader of civilization and etiquette.

古文：故能师长六官，具瞻允塞，明府八座，仪形载远，其端朝握揆，朕所望焉。
现代文：所以能率领六卿官员，众望所归，朝内八座重臣，以为模范影响深远，那整肃朝纲掌握政事，是我所希望的。
English: Therefore, I hope to be able to lead six high-ranking officials, who are highly regarded, and eight senior ministers in the imperial court, and I believe that the model will have a far-reaching impact, and that the rectification of the imperial system will control political affairs.

古文：往钦哉，懋建尔徽猷，亮采我邦国，可不慎欤！ 
现代文：过去我是很钦佩你的啊，请努力运用你高明的谋略，辅助我治理好国家，能不谨慎吗! 
English: In the past, I admired you very much. Please try to use your clever strategy to help me govern the country well. Can you not be prudent?

古文：祯明二年，进号中权将军。
现代文：祯明二年，进封爵号中权将军。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he was given the title of General Zhongquan.

古文：京城陷，入隋，为上开府。
现代文：京城陷落后，到隋朝，替皇上开设府署。
English: After the fall of the capital, the Sui Dynasty opened a prefectural office for the emperor.

古文：开皇十四年，卒于江都，时年七十六。
现代文：开皇十四年，死在江都，这年他七十六岁。
English: He died in Jiangdu, 14 years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, at the age of 76.

古文：总尝自叙其略曰：
现代文：江总曾写过自叙，大略说：
English: Jiang Zong once wrote a self-description, roughly saying:

古文：历升清显，备位朝列，不邀世利，不涉权幸。
现代文：历经升迁地位显赫，位至朝廷大臣，但我不贪图钱财，不想弄权受宠。
English: After being promoted to a prominent position, I became a minister of the Imperial Court, but I am not greedy for money and do not want to be favored by power.

古文：尝抚躬仰天太息曰：庄青翟位至丞相，无迹可纪；赵元叔为上计吏，光乎列传。
现代文：我曾抚着躬圭仰天长叹说： 庄青翟官为丞相，历史上却没有记载；赵元叔衹不过是个计簿官，却荣耀地载入列传。 
English: I once patted him on the head and sighed, "Zhuang Qingyuan was a prime minister, but there is no record of him in history; Zhao Yuanshujuan was just a bookkeeper, but he was gloriously recorded in history.

古文：官陈以来，未尝逢迎一物，干预一事。
现代文：我自从在陈做官以来，不曾对某一人一物逢迎，不曾干预某一事。
English: Since I became an official in Chen, I have never attacked anyone or interfered in anything.

古文：悠悠风尘，流俗之士，颇致怨憎，荣枯宠辱，不以介意。
现代文：悠悠尘世中，庸俗的人，很能招来怨忿，荣枯宠辱，我不把它放在心上。
English: In this mundane world, vulgar people are very capable of arousing resentment, honor and disgrace. I don't take it to heart.

古文：太建之世，权移群小，谄嫉作威，屡被摧黜，奈何命也。
现代文：太建的时候，国家权力被一群小人掌握，谄上嫉下作威作福，我几次被他们打击罢黜，无奈何逭是命运。
English: At the time of the Great Leap Forward, the state power was controlled by a group of villains, who bullied, intimidated, and cheated. I was beaten and ousted by them several times, but I had no choice but to accept my fate.

古文：后主昔在东朝，留意文艺，夙荷昭晋，恩纪契阔。
现代文：篷主昔日在东宫，爱好文艺，早年我承蒙超拔，感戴恩德矢志效力。
English: The owner of the canopy used to be in the East Palace, he loved literature and art. In the early years, I was overjoyed and felt grateful for his dedication.

古文：嗣位之日，时寄谬隆，仪形天府，厘正庶绩，八法六典，无所不统。
现代文：后主嗣位以后，时常错爱给我厚恩，我得以标榜于朝廷，掌握众多功业，八法六典，无不归我统管。
English: After succeeding to the throne, I have often been favored by mistaken love. I have been able to flaunt myself in the imperial court, master numerous works, eight laws and six dynasties, and everything is under my control.

古文：昔晋武帝策荀公曾曰 周之冢宰，今之尚书令也 。
现代文：早年置武帝策封荀公曾时说道： 周朝的冢宰，就是当今的尚书令。 
English: In the early years of Emperor Wu's reign, he once said: "The Zhou Dynasty's Zizai is today's Shang Shuling."

古文：况复才未半古，尸素若兹。
现代文：又何况我才能未及古人一半，如此尸位素餐。
English: What's more, my talent is less than half of that of the ancients, so I'm a vegetarian.

古文：晋太尉陆玩云 以我为三公，知天下无人矣 。
现代文：晋太尉陆远说： 用我做三公，可见天下没有贤人了。 
English: Jin Taifu Lu Yuan said: With me as the Three Wise Men, it can be seen that there are no wise men left in the world.

古文：轩冕傥来之一物，岂是预要乎？
现代文：轩车冕服是无意中获得的，哪裹是预先求取的呢?
English: Xuan Che's coronation robe was obtained unintentionally, but where was it obtained in advance?

古文：弱岁归心释教，年二十馀，入钟山就灵曜寺则法师受菩萨戒。
现代文：幼年时信奉佛教，二十多岁，进钟山到灵堕壹拜则法师受了菩萨戒。
English: In his childhood, he believed in Buddhism. When he was in his twenties, he went into the Zhongshan Mountains to pray for a spiritual fall and received the Bodhisattva precepts.

古文：暮齿官陈，与摄山布上人游款，深悟苦空，更复练戒，运善于心，行慈于物，颇知自励，而不能蔬菲，尚染尘劳，以此负愧平生耳。
现代文：晚年在陆为官，与摄山布上人交游，深深领悟了佛教关于苦和空的禅理，越加注意修炼，心裹长存善念，对万物普施仁慈，稍知自勉，但不能安于淡饭粗茶的隐居生活，还是沾染了尘世的拖累，因此感到愧对平生的志愿。
English: In his later years, he was an official on the land, traveled with the people on the mountain cloth, deeply understood the Buddhist meditation on suffering and emptiness, paid more and more attention to cultivation, wrapped his heart in long-lasting good thoughts, was kind to all things, and knew a little about self-restraint, but he could not be satisfied with the secluded life of light meals and coarse tea, and was still contaminated by the drag of the world. Therefore, he felt sorry for his lifelong volunteering.

古文：总之自叙，时人谓之实录。
现代文：江总的自叙，当时的人称为实录。
English: Jiang Zong's autobiography was called a true account by people at the time.

古文：总笃行义，宽和温裕。
现代文：江总坚持施行仁义，性情宽厚和顺。
English: Jiang Zong insisted on carrying out benevolence and righteousness, and his disposition was generous and harmonious.

古文：好学，能属文，于五言七言尤善；然伤于浮艳，故为后主所爱幸。
现代文：好学，会写文章，在五言和七言方面尤其擅长。然而过于浮艳，所以被后主宠爱。
English: He is eager to learn, can write articles, and is particularly good at five and seven syllables. However, he is too flashy, so he is favored by his mother-in-law.

古文：多有侧篇，好事者相传讽玩，于今不绝。
现代文：有许多短文小诗之类，爱好文学的人传诵吟咏，至今不绝。
English: There are many short poems and the like, and people who love literature have been chanting the chant ever since.

古文：后主之世，总当权宰，不持政务，但日与后主游宴后庭，共陈暄、孔范、王瑳等十馀人，当时谓之狎客。
现代文：堕主的时代，作为首辅，不理政务，衹是每与篮主在后院游乐，舆陈暄、孔范、王磋等十余人一起，当时称他们是 狎客 。
English: In the era of the fallen emperor, as the chief aide and not in charge of government affairs, Zhou was always playing with the basket master in the backyard, together with more than ten people such as Miao Chen, Kong Fan, Wang Lian and so on. At that time, they were called "guests."

古文：由是国政日颓，纲纪不立，有言之者，辄以罪斥之，君臣昏乱，以至于灭。
现代文：因此国家政治益颓废，政纲法纪不能建立，若有人劝谏，就用罪名来责斥他，君昏臣乱，落得灭亡的结局。
English: As a result, the country's politics became more and more decadent, and a political program and legal code could not be established. If someone tried to dissuade him, he would be reprimanded with a crime, and the emperor would be confused with his subjects and fall into ruin.

古文：有文集三十卷，并行于世焉。
现代文：江总有文集三十卷，都流传在世上。
English: Jiang Zong has a collection of thirty volumes, all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：长子溢，字深源，颇有文辞。
现代文：他的长子名溢，字深源，颇有文采。
English: His eldest son is well-known, well-spoken, and quite literate.

古文：性傲诞，恃势骄物，虽近属故友，不免诋欺。
现代文：性情桀骛放诞，恃才傲物，即使是故旧亲朋，也难免受他诋毁欺侮。
English: Even his old friends and relatives are not safe from his slander and bullying.

古文：历官著作佐郎、太子舍人、洗马、中书黄门侍郎、太子中庶子。
现代文：历任著作佐郎、太子舍人、洗马、中书黄门侍郎、太子中庶子等职。
English: Successively held the posts of Sakuro, the Prince's concubine, Saima, the Yellow-Door Chamberlain, and the Prince's junior illegitimate son.

古文：入隋，为秦王文学。
现代文：到隋朝，做了秦王的文学侍从。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, he became the literary attendant of King Qin.

古文：第七子漼，驸马都尉、秘书郎、隋给事郎，直秘书省学士。
现代文：他的第七个儿子名淮，任驸马都尉、秘书郎，在隋代任给事郎，直秘书省学士。
English: His seventh son, named Huai, was appointed as the lieutenant of the imperial horse, the secretary, the deputy secretary in the Sui Dynasty, and the direct secretary of the provincial bachelor.

古文：姚察，字伯审，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：姚察字伯审，是吴兴武康人。
English: Yao Zha, the chief judge, is a descendant of Wu Xing Wu Kang.

古文：九世祖信，吴太常卿，有名江左。
现代文：他的九世祖名信，是吴国太常卿，在江左有名望。
English: His ninth-generation ancestor, Mingsin, was Wu Guotai Changqing, who was well-known in Jiangzao.

古文：察幼有至性，事亲以孝闻。
现代文：姚察小时候有卓绝的品性，侍奉双亲因孝行出名。
English: As a child, Yao Zha had an outstanding character. He was famous for his filial piety in serving his parents.

古文：六岁，诵书万馀言。
现代文：六岁，诵书万余字。
English: He is six years old and can recite more than ten thousand words.

古文：弱不好弄，博弈杂戏，初不经心。
现代文：幼年时不喜爱玩耍，赌赛下棋等杂耍，都不放在心上。
English: When he was young, he didn't like to play, and he didn't care about games such as gambling or juggling.

古文：勤苦厉精，以夜继日。年十二，便能属文。
现代文：勤学苦练，夜以继。十二岁，就能写文章。
English: Studying hard, night after night. At the age of twelve, he was able to write articles.

古文：父上开府僧垣，知名梁武代，二宫礼遇优厚，每得供赐，皆回给察兄弟，为游学之资，察并用聚蓄图书，由是闻见日博。
现代文：他父亲就是上开府僧垣，在梁武帝时代有名望，皇宫裹赏赐很多，每次得到赏赐，都拿回给姚察及其兄弟们，作为游学的费用，姚察全用来购买图书，因此见闻日益渊博。
English: His father was a monk from Shangkaifu, who was famous during the reign of Emperor Liangwu. He received many rewards from the imperial palace. Every time he received a reward, he took it back to Yao Cha and his brothers. As travel expenses, Yao Cha used it all to buy books, so he became more and more knowledgeable.

古文：年十三，梁简文帝时在东宫，盛修文义，即引于宣猷堂听讲论难，为儒者所称。
现代文：十三岁，梁简文帝当时在束宫，很重视文章义理，就带着他到宣猷堂听讲和参加论辩，被学者称赞。
English: At the age of thirteen, Emperor Liang Jianwen, who was then in Sokong, attached great importance to the principles of the article, and took him to Xuanwu Hall to listen to lectures and participate in the debate, which was praised by scholars.

古文：及简文嗣位，尤加礼接。
现代文：等到简文帝嗣位，更加对他礼遇。
English: When Emperor Jianwen ascended the throne, they treated him with more courtesy.

古文：起家南海王国左常侍，兼司文侍郎。
现代文：起用他为南海王国的左常侍，兼司文侍郎。
English: He was appointed to the position of Zuo Changzhi of the South Sea Kingdom, as well as Sifan Zhilong.

古文：除南郡王行参军，兼尚书驾部郎。
现代文：授予他为南郡王行参军，兼尚书驾部郎。
English: Awarded to him for joining the army in Wangxing, Nan County, and also for being a driver.

古文：值梁室丧乱，于金陵随二亲还乡里。
现代文：当梁朝王室丧乱时，姚察在金陵随双亲回乡。
English: When the Liang Dynasty royal family was in turmoil, Yao Zha followed his parents back to his hometown in Jinling.

古文：时东土兵荒，人饥相食，告籴无处，察家口既多，并采野蔬自给。
现代文：当时东部由于战争加上饥荒，人们相食，无处买粮，姚察家裹人多，都到外面采野菜来吃。
English: At that time, due to the war and famine in the east, people were eating each other, and there was nowhere to buy grain. There were many people in Yao's family, and they all went out to pick vegetables to eat.

古文：察每崎岖艰阻，求请供养之资，粮粒恒得相继。
现代文：姚家常常经过艰难险阻，寻找供养家人的财物，粮食才能维持没断。
English: The Yao family often goes through hardships and obstacles to find the wealth to support their family, so that the grain can be maintained without interruption.

古文：又常以己分减推诸弟妹，乃至故旧乏绝者皆相分恤，自甘唯藜藿而已。
现代文：他又总是把自己的那份省下来给弟弟妹妹们，以至于亲朋戚友断粮少食的都予以照顾，自己衹有以食野菜为美味了。
English: He always saved his share to give to his younger brothers and sisters, so much so that he took care of his relatives and friends who were short of food, and he found eating vegetables to be delicious.

古文：在乱离之间，笃学不废。
现代文：在荒年离乱中，他坚持学习不止。
English: Amid the chaos of the lean years, he never stopped studying.

古文：元帝于荆州即位，父随朝士例往赴西台，元帝授察原乡令。
现代文：元帝在荆州即位，他父亲与朝臣一律前往中书省听用，元帝授予姚察任原乡县令。
English: Emperor Yuan ascended the throne in Jingzhou, and his father and courtiers all went to Zhongshuo to listen to him. Emperor Yuan awarded Yao Zhaoren the order of the original township and county.

古文：时邑境萧条，流亡不反，察轻其赋役，劝以耕种，于是户口殷盛，民至今称焉。
现代文：当时县内萧条，流亡在外的人没有回来，姚察减轻了赋税徭役，勉励耕种，于是人口增多百姓富足，人们至今称颂他。
English: At that time, the county was in a depression, and the exiles did not return. Yaochao reduced the tax burden and encouraged farming. As a result, the population increased, the people were rich, and people still praise him.

古文：中书侍郎领著作杜之伟与察深相眷遇，表用察佐著作，仍撰史。
现代文：中书侍郎领著作杜之伟与姚察深相爱重，上表任姚察为佐著作，跟随他一起撰史。
English: Du Zhiwei and Yao Zha were deeply in love with each other, and Yao Zha was appointed as a co-author of the above table and followed him to write history together.

古文：永定初，拜始兴王府功曹参军，寻补嘉德殿学士，转中卫、仪同始兴王府记室参军。
现代文：永定初年，授予他为始兴王府功曹参军，不久补为嘉德殿学士，转中卫、仪同始兴王府记室参军。
English: In the first year of Yongding, he was awarded the title of Shixing Wangfu Gong Cao and joined the army. Soon after, he was awarded the title of Jia De Dian Baccalaureate, transferred to the Middle Guard, and joined the army together with the Shixing Wangfu Records Office.

古文：吏部尚书徐陵时领著作，复引为史佐，及陵让官致仕等表，并请察制焉，陵见叹曰： 吾弗逮也。 
现代文：吏部尚书徐陵当时领著作，又引荐他任史佐，连徐陵的让官致仕等表，都请姚察来写，徐陵看到姚察写的文章叹息说： 我不如他啊。 
English: At that time, the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Xuling, was in charge of writing, and recommended him to be appointed as a secretary. Even Xuling's letter of resignation and other forms were asked to be written by Yao Zha. When Xuling saw the article written by Yao Zha, he sighed and said: I am not as good as him.

古文：太建初，补宣明殿学士，除散骑侍郎、左通直。
现代文：太建初年，补为宣明殿学士，授散骑侍郎、左通直。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, he was awarded the title of Xuanming palace bachelor, and was also given the titles of riding attendant and left-handed person.

古文：寻兼通直散骑常侍，报聘于周。
现代文：不久兼任通直散骑常侍，出使到北周。
English: Soon, he also served as Tsuchida Sanshiki no Tsuneishi, and was sent to the Northern Zhou.

古文：江左耆旧先在关右者，咸相倾慕。
现代文：江左的年老旧交先在关右的，都倾慕他。
English: Jiang Zuo's old friends in Guan Zuo all admire him.

古文：沛国刘臻窃于公馆访《汉书》疑事十馀条，并为剖析，皆有经据。
现代文：沛国的刘臻私下公馆询问《汉书》中的疑难之事十多条，姚察都给他分析，全是有经典依据的。
English: Pei's Liu Zhen privately inquired about more than ten difficult things in the "Chinese Book" in the mansion, and Yao Zhan gave him an analysis, all of which were based on the classics.

古文：臻谓所亲曰： 名下定无虚士。 
现代文：刘臻对亲近的人说 盛名之下必定没有虚假的贤士 。
English: Liu Zhen said to those close to him, "There must be no false sages under the name of fame.

古文：著《西聘道里记》，所叙事甚详。
现代文：姚察写的《西聘道里记》，所记的事很详细。
English: The "Record of Xibei Road" written by Yao Zha is very detailed.

古文：使还，补东宫学士。
现代文：出使回来，补为东宫学士。
English: After returning from the mission, he completed his bachelor's degree at Donggong University.

古文：于时济阳江总、吴国顾野王、陆琼、从弟瑜、河南褚玠、北地傅縡等，皆以才学之美，晨夕娱侍。
现代文：于时期济阳的江总、吴国顾野王、陆琼、堂弟堕瑜、河南的褚玠、北地的傅纬等人，都凭着才学好，早晚欢聚侍奉东宫。
English: In the Jiyang period, General Jiang, King Guye of the State of Wu, Lu Qiong, his cousin Gaoyu, Zou of Henan, Fu Wei of the North, and others, all learned well by virtue of their talents, and gathered in the morning and evening to serve the East Palace.

古文：察每言论制述，咸为诸人宗重。
现代文：姚家常谈论著作方面的问题，都被众人信奉推重。
English: Yao Jiajia often talks about the problems in his works, which are highly valued by the public.

古文：储君深加礼异，情越群僚，宫内所须方幅手笔，皆付察立草。
现代文：太子深加礼遇，感情超过那些同僚，宫内所须的重要文件，都交给姚察起草。
English: The prince was very courteous, and his feelings exceeded those of his colleagues. The important documents required by the imperial court were all handed over to Yao Cha for drafting.

古文：又数令共野王递相策问，恒蒙赏激。
现代文：又屡次让他与野王递相设间经典和治国方略，经常受到赞赏鼓励。
English: He also repeatedly asked him to set up a classic and statecraft strategy between him and the wild king, which was often appreciated and encouraged.

古文：迁尚书祠部侍郎。
现代文：调任尚书祠部侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the post of chamberlain of the Shoshu ancestral shrine.

古文：此曹职司郊庙，昔魏王肃奏祀天地，设宫县之乐，八佾之舞，尔后因循不革。
现代文：这个机构职责是掌管天地宗庙等祭祀活动，从前魏王肃奏请祭祀天地时，设置宫悬乐以及八佾舞，这以后都沿袭下来没有创制新乐舞。
English: The responsibility of this organization is to manage the sacrificial activities of the heaven and earth, the ancestral temple and so on. In the past, when the king of Wei Suo invited the sacrifice of heaven and earth, he set up the palace hanging music and the octopus dance. This has been followed down and no new music and dance has been created.

古文：梁武帝以为事人礼缛，事神礼简，古无宫县之文。
现代文：梁武帝认为对人的礼繁，对神的礼简，古代又没有宫悬乐的记载。
English: Emperor Liangwu believed that there was no record of court music in ancient times.

古文：陈初承用，莫有损益。
现代文：陈初年承袭梁的礼仪，没有增减。
English: Chen inherited Liang's etiquette in the first year, and there was no increase or decrease.

古文：高宗欲设备乐，付有司立议，以梁武帝为非。
现代文：高宗想设置完备的祭祀乐礼，让有关部门讨论，认为梁武帝的做法不对。
English: Gaozong wanted to set up a complete ritual music and let the relevant departments discuss it, and thought that Emperor Liang Wu's approach was wrong.

古文：时硕学名儒、朝端在位者，咸希上旨，并即注同。
现代文：当时博学的名儒、首辅重臣，都迎合皇上的意思，一致同意皇上的意见。
English: At that time, the erudite famous Confucian and the chief minister of Shufu all catered to the emperor's will and unanimously agreed with the emperor's opinion.

古文：察乃博引经籍，独违群议，据梁乐为是，当时惊骇，莫不惭服，仆射徐陵因改同察议。
现代文：姚察却广泛引证经典，独排众议，坚持认为梁的乐礼是对的，当时群臣吃惊，没有谁不惭愧佩服，仆射徐陵于是改变而赞同姚察的意见。
English: Yao Zha, however, quoted extensively from the classics, stood out from the crowd, and insisted that Liang's music was correct. At that time, the ministers were surprised, and no one was not ashamed to admire. Thus, Fuxi Xuling changed and agreed with Yao Zha's opinion.

古文：其不顺时随俗，皆此类也。
现代文：姚察不苟同时俗，都与逭事相仿。
English: Yao's meticulous observation and common sense are similar to anecdotes.

古文：拜宣惠宜都王中录事参军，带东宫学士。
现代文：授予宣惠宜都王中录事参军，带东宫学士。
English: Awarded to Xuan Hui Yidu Wang Zhong Luo to join the army, with Donggong Baccalaureate.

古文：历仁威淮南王、平南建安王二府咨议参军，丁内忧去职。
现代文：又历任仁威淮南王、平南建安王这两个王府的谘议参军，因为守母丧而离职。
English: He also served as an adviser to the king of Huainan in Renwei and Jian'an in Pingnan. He left his post because he was attending his mother's funeral.

古文：俄起为戎昭将军，知撰梁史事，固辞不免。
现代文：不久起用为戎昭将军，主持撰写梁朝的史事，坚持推辞而未获准。
English: He was soon appointed as General Rong Zhao, presided over the writing of the history of the Liang Dynasty, insisted on resigning and was not allowed.

古文：后主纂业，敕兼东宫通事舍人，将军、知撰史如故。
现代文：后主继位，命他兼任东宫通事舍人，将军和知撰史的职位不变。
English: Later, when the lord succeeded to the throne, he was ordered to concurrently serve as the secretary of the East Palace, and the position of the general and the historian remained unchanged.

古文：又敕专知优册谥议等文笔。
现代文：又命他专门掌管优册谧议等动笔墨的事。
English: He was also ordered to be in charge of matters such as high-level discussions.

古文：至德元年，除中书侍郎，转太子仆，馀并如故。
现代文：至德元年，授为中书侍郎，又转任太子仆，其他职位照旧。
English: In the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, he was awarded the title of Chusho-sajiro (chancellor's secretary), and was also transferred to the position of Taishi-bushi (servant to the crown prince), with other positions remaining unchanged.

古文：初，梁季沦没，父僧垣入于长安，察蔬食布衣，不听音乐，至是凶问因聘使到江南。
现代文：当初，梁衰微灭亡时，姚察的父亲僧垣流亡到垦宣，型瞳粗食布衣，不听音乐，到逭时父亲的死讯由使者带到江南。
English: At the time of Liang's death, Yao Zha's father, Monk Gao, was in exile in Xuanxuan. He was a poor cloth-wearer and did not listen to music. When he died, the messenger brought the news of his father's death to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：时察母韦氏丧制适除，后主以察羸瘠，虑加毁顿，乃密遣中书舍人司马申就宅发哀，仍敕申专加譬抑。尔后又遣申宣旨诫喻曰： 知比哀毁过礼，甚用为忧。
现代文：当时姚察为母亲韦氏守丧刚除丧服，后主因为姚察瘦弱，怕他到远方奔丧伤害身体，就暗地派中书舍人司马申到姚察的家裹致丧，屡次命司马申特加劝解，以后又派司区空去说明皇上旨意告诫型瞳说： 得知你近来哀伤遇度，很是因此忧虑。
English: At that time, Yao Cha was in mourning for his mother, Wei Shi, and had just taken off his mourning clothes. Because Yao Cha was thin and weak, and his father-in-law was afraid that he would hurt his body by going to a distant place to mourn, he secretly sent the Chinese scholar Sima Shen to Yao Cha's home to wrap him in mourning. He repeatedly ordered Sima Shen to persuade him. Later, he sent the district magistrate to explain the emperor's will to the admonition-type pupil, saying: "I am very worried to know that you have been sad recently.

古文：卿迥然一身，宗奠是寄，毁而灭性，圣教所不许。
现代文：卿如果独去远方，祭奠父亲，伤身丢命，是圣教不允许的。
English: It is not permissible for a saint to go alone to a faraway place, to pay homage to his father, to be wounded and to lose his life.

古文：宜微自遣割，以存礼制。
现代文：应该稍行祭奠而节哀，来保持礼仪。
English: There should be a little ceremony and mourning to maintain the etiquette.

古文：忧怀既深，故有此及。 
现代文：忧思已深，所以我才有这样的安排。 
English: It was only because I was so depressed that I made this arrangement.

古文：寻以忠毅将军起兼东宫通事舍人。
现代文：不久以忠毅将军的职务起用，兼束宫通事舍人。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of General Zhongyi, and concurrently served as a courier for the imperial court.

古文：察志在终丧，频有陈让，并抑而不许。
现代文：型瞳一心想守完父丧，一次又一次地陈情辞让，都得不到允许。
English: Keen to see his father's death through to the end, Kata Hitomi repeatedly asked for concessions, but none were granted.

古文：又推表其略曰： 臣私门祸，并罹殃罚，偷生晷漏，冀申情礼，而尪疹相仍，苴緌秽质，非复人流，将毕苫壤。
现代文：他又上表，大致说： 我家裹遭祸，灾殃齐来，我偷生时曰，就是想尽人子的情和礼。而我体弱多病，又加上服丧期间不祥之身，不可能和人们一样。
English: He also showed his face and said roughly, "My family has been plagued by misfortune and calamity. When I stole my life, I just wanted to live up to the expectations of a son of man. And I am weak and sickly, and I have an ominous body during the mourning period, so I can't be like other people.

古文：岂期朝恩曲覃，被之缨绂，寻斯宠服，弥见惭靦。
现代文：我将守满父丧，怎能希望得到朝廷特别的恩顾，担任官职。若接受圣上遣一恩宠，我更加感到羞愧。
English: How can I hope to receive the special favor of the imperial court and hold an official position when I will be mourning my father's death? I would be even more ashamed if I were to accept the grace of His Holiness.

古文：且宫闼秘奥，趋奏便繁，宁可以兹荒毁所宜叨预。
现代文：而且宫门襄的事隐微难明，进奏频繁，岂能是这样一个因丧伤心的人适合参预的。
English: Moreover, the matter of Gongmenxiang is vaguely unclear and frequently played, can such a person who is saddened by grief be suitable to participate in the preliminaries.

古文：伏愿至德孝治，矜其理夺，使残魂喘息，以遂馀生。 
现代文：诚望大德的明主怜悯我的孝心，以理裁夺，使我这个病弱的人得以喘息，度完我的余生。 
English: I sincerely hope that the noble Lord will have mercy on my filial piety and use reason to allow me, a weak and sick person, to breathe freely and live out the rest of my life.

古文：诏答曰： 省表具怀。
现代文：诏书答覆说： 奏表阅过，悉知，我很感动。
English: The Imperial Rescript replied: "I have read the report form, I am well aware of it, and I am very moved.

古文：卿行业淳深，声誉素显，理徇情礼，未膺刀笔。
现代文：你品行淳厚学识渊博，声誉向来很高，理由本就顺情顺礼，并不是感于你的文笔。
English: Your character is honest, learned and profound, and your reputation has always been high. The reason for this is courtesy, not because of your writing.

古文：但参务承华，良所期寄，允兹抑夺，不得致辞也。 
现代文：衹是到承华殿参预政务，是我深切期盼的，请答应这一不情之请，不要推辞了。 
English: It is my ardent hope that you will come to Chenghua Palace to take part in the pre-election government affairs. Please accept this heartfelt invitation and do not refuse it.

古文：俄敕知著作郎事，服阕，除给事黄门侍郎，领著作。
现代文：当即命他知着作郎事。服丧期满，就授予他给事黄门侍郎，领著作。
English: He was immediately appointed to the post of steward. At the end of the period of mourning, he was awarded the post of Yellow Gate Steward and received a book.

古文：察既累居忧服，兼斋素日久，自免忧后，因加气疾。
现代文：姚察连连守丧，加上斋素日子长，从除丧服后，又添了喘病。
English: Yao Zha Lianlian attended the funeral, coupled with the long day, from the removal of mourning clothes, and added asthma.

古文：后主尝别召见，见察柴瘠过甚，为之动容，乃谓察曰： 朝廷惜卿，卿宜自惜，即蔬菲岁久，可停持长斋。 
现代文：后主曾单独召见，看到姚察骨瘦如柴，不禁伤感，就对姚察说： 朝廷爱惜你，你也应该顾惜自己，已吃素多年，可以停了长斋吧。 
English: The Queen Mother once summoned Yao Zha to see her alone. Seeing that Yao Zha was as thin as wood, she couldn't help but feel sad. She said to Yao Zha: The court loves you, you should also take care of yourself. You have been a vegetarian for many years, you can stop fasting.

古文：又遣度支尚书王瑗宣旨，重加慰喻，令从晚食。
现代文：又派度支尚书王瑗宣旨，特别予以安慰劝说，让王瑗陪姚家用晚饭。
English: He also sent Du Zhiang to write a letter to Wang Qianxuan, especially to comfort and persuade him to let Wang Qianxuan accompany Yao for dinner.

古文：手敕曰： 卿羸瘠如此，斋菲累年，不宜一饭，有乖将摄，若从所示，甚为佳也。 
现代文：亲写敕书说： 你瘦弱到逭地步，吃素多年，不要衹用一餐这样的饭，违背调养，若能听从我的话，那就很好。 
English: "If you are thin to the point of emaciation, and have been a vegetarian for many years, and do not want to eat a meal like this, and go against your upbringing, if you can follow my words, that would be great," wrote Ji.

古文：察虽奉此敕，而犹敦宿誓。
现代文：姚察虽然接受这一手令，但还是坚守原来的誓。
English: Although Yao Zha accepted this order, he still adhered to the original oath.

古文：又诏授秘书监，领著作如故，乃累进让，并优荅不许。
现代文：又下诏授予他秘书监，照旧领著作，他多次进表辞让，都被好言回绝。
English: He also issued an edict awarding him the position of secretary-supervisor, and continued to receive publications. He repeatedly submitted his resignation, but it was politely rejected.

古文：察其秘书省大加删正，又奏撰中书表集。
现代文：姚察在秘书省大量修订，又奏请撰写中书表集。
English: Yao Cha made a large number of revisions in the Ministry of Secretaries, and was also asked to write a collection of Chinese books.

古文：拜散骑常侍，寻授度支尚书，旬月迁吏部尚书，领著作并如故。
现代文：任散骑常侍，接着授度支尚书，一月后调任吏部尚书，领著作等职不变。
English: He was appointed to the rank of samurai, and then he was awarded the title of Shishang, and one month later he was transferred to the title of Shishang of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and his posts remained unchanged.

古文：察既博极坟素，尤善人物，至于姓氏所起，枝叶所分，官职姻娶，兴衰高下，举而论之，无所遗失。
现代文：姚察既有渊博的经典知识，又尤其擅长写人物，甚至于人物有关的姓氏来历，宗族分支，官职婚嫁，兴亡盛衰，全都叙述，没有错漏。
English: Yao Zha not only has a profound knowledge of the classics, but is also particularly good at writing characters. Even the origin of surnames, clan branches, official marriages, and the rise and fall of characters are all described without error.

古文：且澄鉴之职，时人久以梓匠相许，及迁选部，雅允朝望。
现代文：而且审核辨析历史上难题的职务，当时人们长久以来以梓匠称他，等到调任吏部，正合他们的愿望。
English: Moreover, the position of reviewing and analyzing historical problems, when people have long been calling him a carpenter, until he was transferred to the personnel department, was in line with their wishes.

古文：初，吏部尚书蔡徵移中书令，后主方择其人，尚书令江总等咸共荐察，敕答曰： 姚察非唯学艺优博，亦是操行清修，典选难才，今得之矣。 
现代文：当初，吏部尚书蓝征调任中书令，后主正要选择合适的人接替，尚书令江总等人都推荐姚察，皇上答覆说： 姚察不衹是学问好，操守品行也高，任典选职务的难得人才，现在得到了。 
English: At first, the head of the personnel department, Shang Shuling, was transferred to Zhong Shuling, and the successor was about to choose the right person to succeed. Shang Shuling Jiang and others recommended Yao Zha, and the emperor replied: Yao Zha is not only good at learning, but also has high integrity. He is a rare talent for the selection of positions, and now he has got it.

古文：乃神笔草诏，读以示察，察辞让甚切。
现代文：就亲笔草写诏书，读给姚察听，姚察尽力辞让。
English: He wrote the edict in his own handwriting and read it to Yao Zha. Yao Zha did his best to make concessions.

古文：别日召入论选事，察垂涕拜请曰： 臣东皋贱族，身才庸近，情忘远致，念绝修途。
现代文：一天皇上召姚察到宫襄谈论选官的事，姚察流泪叩拜请求说： 我是山野间低下的阶层，身份才能都平庸，情怀不高远，不追求美好前途。
English: When the emperor summoned Yao Zha to the palace to discuss the matter of selecting officials, Yao Zha tearfully prostrated himself and begged: I am from a lower class, my status and talents are mediocre, my feelings are not lofty, and I do not pursue a better future.

古文：顷来忝窃，久知逾分，特以东朝攀奉，恩纪谬加。
现代文：近来愧据职位，早知过分，衹因曾依附东宫，恩惠枉赐。
English: Lately, he has been ashamed of his position, knowing too much too early, and because he had been attached to the East Palace, he was given undeserved favors.

古文：今日叨滥，非由才举，纵陛下特升庸薄，其如朝序何？
现代文：现在滥充朝位，不是因才能而被推举，即使陛下是特地提拔我这庸碌浅薄的人，那又怎么端正朝列呢?
English: Now, the imperial throne is being filled to overflowing, and people are not being promoted according to their abilities. Even if His Majesty were to specially promote me, a mediocre and shallow person, how would it be a proper imperial succession?

古文：臣九世祖信，名高往代，当时才居选部，自后罕有继踪。
现代文：我的九世祖姚信，在前代名望很高，当时仅升到选部，从这以后很少有人能像他一样。
English: My ninth-generation ancestor Yao Xin was very famous in the previous generation. At that time, he was only promoted to the selection department. Since then, few people have been able to be like him.

古文：臣遭逢成擢，沐浴恩造，累致非据，每切妨贤。
现代文：我能遇到提拔，沐浴圣恩，多次升任我不该占据的位置，我总想到这会妨碍贤士入朝。
English: I've been promoted, blessed, and elevated to positions I shouldn't have been in so many times, and I've always thought it would be a hindrance for a sage to enter the imperial court.

古文：臣虽无识，颇知审己，言行所践，无期荣贵，岂意铨衡之重，妄委非才。
现代文：我虽然没有见识，但也稍能自知，言行所追求的，并不想富贵荣华，哪裹想到造选拔官员的要职，错委给我这个不才的人呢。
English: Although I have no insight, I can also slightly know for myself that what I pursue in words and deeds is not to be rich and glorious. How could I have thought of creating an important position for a selection official and mistakenly appointing this incompetent person to me?

古文：且皇明御历，事高昔代，羽仪世胄，帷幄名臣，若授受得宜，方为称职。
现代文：况且圣上英明，事业高过前代，贵族世家，朝廷名臣，若授受恰当，才算足称职的。
English: Moreover, the sage is wise, the cause is higher than the previous generation, the aristocratic family, the court dignitary, if the award is appropriate, it is enough to be competent.

古文：臣夙陶教义，必知不可。 
现代文：我过去就理解教义，明白我是肯定不行的。 
English: I used to understand the doctrine and know I certainly couldn't do it.

古文：后主曰： 选众之举，佥议所归，昔毛玠雅量清恪，卢毓心平体正，王蕴铨量得地，山涛举不失才，就卿而求，必兼此矣。
现代文：后主说： 选择官员的事，是台臣的一致意见，从前毛玢胸襟高洁，卢毓品行端正，王蕴因主选而得到封地，山涛推举而不遣人才，对你来说，一定兼有这些人的美德。
English: Afterward, the lord said, "The selection of officials is a matter of consensus among the Taizhen. In the past, Mao Kun had a noble heart, Lu Xun was upright, Wang Yun received fiefs as a result of the main selection, and the mountains and rivers were selected without sending talents. For you, you must have the virtues of these people.

古文：且我与卿虽君臣礼隔，情分殊常，藻镜人伦，良所期寄，亦以无惭则悊也。 
现代文：而且我与你虽然按礼仪是君臣有别，但情分非比寻常，评判人推举人的事，我深望能托付给你，你也就不要感到惭愧而要明智些。 
English: Moreover, although I am a prince and a minister according to the etiquette, I am different from you, but my feelings are unusual, and I hope that I can entrust you with things that are judged by others, and you should not be ashamed but be wise.

古文：察自居显要，甚励清洁，且廪锡以外，一不交通。
现代文：姚察身居显要，很是注意清正廉洁，并且在俸禄以外，一律不收财物。
English: Yao Zha is in a prominent position, is very careful to be clean and honest, and does not receive any property other than his salary.

古文：尝有私门生不敢厚饷，止送南布一端，花綀一匹。
现代文：曾经有个门生不敢送厚礼，衹送一端南布、一匹花练。
English: There was once a protégé who dared not send a gift, but sent a piece of southern cloth and a horse.

古文：察谓之曰： 吾所衣著，止是麻布蒲綀，此物于吾无用。既欲相款接，幸不烦尔。 
现代文：姚察对他说： 我的衣服，衹是麻布蒲练，这些东西对我没有用处，既然要诚心交往，请不要如此烦劳。 
English: Yao Zha said to him, "My clothes and bag are made of linen. These things are of no use to me. Since you want to have a sincere relationship, please don't be so troublesome.

古文：此人逊请，犹冀受纳，察厉色驱出，因此伏事者莫敢馈遗。
现代文：这个门生好言请求，还是希望他收下，姚察严厉地把他赶走了，于是下属们没有谁敢送礼。
English: This protégé kindly requested, or hoped he would accept, Yao Cha sternly drove him away, so none of the subordinates dared to give gifts.

古文：陈灭，入隋，开皇九年，诏授秘书丞，别敕成梁、陈二代史。
现代文：陈灭亡后到隋朝，开皇九年，文帝下韶授予他秘书丞的职务，另外命他写完梁、陈两代史。
English: After the death of Chen, he came to the Sui Dynasty, and in the ninth year of the emperor's reign, Emperor Wen conferred on him the post of secretary, and also ordered him to write the history of the two generations of Liang and Chen.

古文：又敕于硃华阁长参。
现代文：又命他为朱华合长参。
English: He was also ordered to be Zhu Huahe's chief adviser.

古文：文帝知察蔬菲，别日乃独召入内殿，赐果菜，乃指察谓朝臣曰： 闻姚察学行当今无比，我平陈唯得此一人。 
现代文：文帝了解到姚察吃素，便在某一天单独召进内殿，赐给果菜。文帝指着姚察对朝臣说： 我听说姚察学问品行当今无人能比，我平定陈衹得到这一个人。 
English: When Emperor Wen learned that Yao Zha was a vegetarian, he called him into the inner hall one day and gave him some fruit and vegetables. Emperor Wen pointed to Yao Zha and said to his courtiers: "I heard that Yao Zha's scholarly qualities are unmatched by anyone today. I am sure that Chen Xi has found this person."

古文：十三年，袭封北绛郡公。
现代文：开皇十三年，承袭父职封为北绛郡公。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Emperor's reign, he inherited his father's title of Beilun County.

古文：察往岁之聘周也，因得与父僧垣相见，将别之际，绝而复苏，至是承袭，愈更悲感，见者莫不为之歔欷。
现代文：姚察以前出使周的时候，才得机会与父亲僧垣相见，临别时，死去活来，现在承袭父职，更加悲伤，见到遣情形的人无不为他伤心。
English: When Yao Ca was sent to Zhou before, he only had the opportunity to meet his father, a monk. At the time of parting, he died and came back to life. Now he has inherited his father's position, he is even sadder, and everyone who sees the situation of his departure is sad for him.

古文：察幼年尝就钟山明庆寺尚禅师受菩萨戒，及官陈，禄俸皆舍寺起造，并追为禅师树碑，文甚遒丽。
现代文：姚察幼年曾到钟山明庆寺尚禅师那裹受菩萨戒，等到在陈做官，俸禄都捐给寺裹作修建用，又为禅师补立石碑，碑文写得遒劲华丽。
English: When he was a child, Yao Zha went to Zhongshan Mingqing Temple to receive the Bodhisattva Precepts from the Zen master Shao, and when he became an official in Chen, he donated all his salary to the temple for construction, and also erected a stone monument for the Zen master. The inscription was written with vigor and splendor.

古文：及是，遇见梁国子祭酒萧子云书此寺禅斋诗，览之怆然，乃用萧韵述怀为咏，词又哀切，法俗益以此称之。
现代文：到现在，看到梁时的国子祭酒萧子云写在这个寺裹的禅斋诗，看完后很伤感，就和着萧子云的诗韵，写了一首述怀诗，语言哀切，僧人和俗众更加以此称颂他。
English: Until now, when I saw Liang Shiji's national son sacrifice wine, Xiao Ziyun, write a zen poem wrapped in this temple, I was very sad after reading it. I wrote a poem with Xiao Ziyun's rhyme, the language was sad, and the monks and laity praised him even more.

古文：丁后母杜氏丧，解职。
现代文：为后母杜氏守丧，解去职务。
English: He was relieved of his duties while his stepmother, the toji, was in mourning.

古文：在服制之中，有白鸠巢于户上。
现代文：在服丧期间，有白鸠在门上筑巢。
English: During the period of mourning, egrets built a nest on the door.

古文：仁寿二年，诏曰： 前秘书丞北绛郡开国公姚察，强学待问，博极群典，脩身立德，白首不渝，虽在哀疚，宜夺情礼，可员外散骑常侍，封如故。 
现代文：仁寿二年，诏令说： 前秘书丞北绛郡开国公型瞳，勤学待问，精通群典，注意本身道德的修养，到老不变，虽在丧哀之中，也应根据情理，可以任员外散骑常侍，封号照旧。 
English: In the second year of Ren Shou's life, the imperial edict said: "Former Secretary Jo of Beilun County, founder of the People's Republic of China, Hitomi, diligent in study, proficient in the classics, and careful of his own moral cultivation, will not change until old age. Although he is in mourning, he should, according to circumstances, be allowed to serve as a non-commissioned officer, and his seal will remain unchanged."

古文：又敕侍晋王昭读。
现代文：又命他为晋王昭的侍读。
English: He was also appointed as the attendant of Jin Wang Zhao.

古文：炀帝初在东宫，数被召见，访以文籍。
现代文：灯童当初在束宫，继塞屡次被召见，询问典籍。
English: Candlestick was originally in Sok Palace, and was repeatedly summoned to the palace to inquire about classic books.

古文：即位之始，诏授太子内舍人，馀并如故。
现代文：刚即位，就下诏授姚察为太子内舍人，其他职务照旧。
English: As soon as he ascended the throne, he issued an imperial edict appointing Yao Zha as the crown prince's personal attendant, with other duties remaining unchanged.

古文：车驾巡幸，恒侍从焉。
现代文：皇上乘车巡游时，总是姚察作侍从。
English: When the emperor was on a motorcade, he always had Yao as an attendant.

古文：及改易衣冠，删正朝式，切问近对，察一人而已。
现代文：等到改变朝廷服饰冠冕，修正朝廷仪式，在皇上身边应答的，衹有姚察一个人罢了。
English: Wait until the change of the imperial costume crown, the revision of the imperial ceremony, in the emperor's side to answer, only one person is Yao Zha.

古文：年七十四，大业二年，终于东都，遗命薄葬，务从率俭。
现代文：在七十四岁时，大业二年，死于东都，遣命薄葬，一定要遵从省俭。
English: At the age of seventy-four, two years after the great undertaking, he died in Dongdu and was given a short funeral. He must be frugal.

古文：其略曰： 吾家世素士，自有常法。
现代文：遣书大略说： 我们家世世代代都是普通读书人，自然有平常的生活原则。
English: "Our family has been ordinary readers for generations, so we naturally have an ordinary life principle.

古文：吾意敛以法服，并宜用布，土周于身。又恐汝等不忍行此，必不尔，须松板薄棺，才可周身，土周于棺而已。
现代文：我想用佛衣装殓，全用粗布，以土盖身，又怕你们这些人不忍心这样做，如果一定不这样做，也衹要薄松木板做的棺材，衹要能放下身体，用土把棺材埋住就行了。
English: I want to wear Buddhist robes, use coarse cloth, and cover myself with soil. I'm afraid you people don't have the heart to do this. If you must not do this, I also want a coffin made of thin pine planks. I just want to be able to lay down my body and bury the coffin with soil.

古文：葬日，止粗车，即送厝旧茔北。
现代文：下葬那天，祇用不装饰的车，把灵柩送到墓地北边就行。
English: On the day of the burial, it is enough to take the coffin to the north side of the cemetery in an undecorated car.

古文：吾在梁世，当时年十四，就钟山明庆寺尚禅师受菩萨戒，自尔深悟苦空，颇知回向矣。
现代文：我在梁伐，当时十四岁，到钟业明庆寺堂里面那裹受了菩萨戒，从此深深地领悟了苦空的惮理，稍知回向的禅理。
English: When I was 14 years old in Liangfa, I went to Zhongye Mingqing Temple, where I received the Bodhisattva Precepts. From then on, I deeply understood the wisdom of suffering and emptiness, and knew a little about the wisdom of meditation.

古文：尝得留连山寺，一去忘归。
现代文：曾经住在山寺，一离尘世便忘了归来。
English: He once lived in a mountain temple, and once he left this world, he forgot to return.

古文：及仕陈代，诸名流遂许与声价，兼时主恩遇，宦途遂至通显。
现代文：等到在堕做官，众名流就褒扬了我的名声，加上当时君王厚待，在仕途上就到了显赫地位。
English: When I became an official after the fall, many celebrities praised my reputation. Coupled with the generous treatment of the king at that time, I reached a prominent position on my way to work.

古文：自入朝来，又蒙恩渥。
现代文：从到堕翅以来，又受圣上恩泽。
English: Since the time of the fallen wing, he has been blessed by the divine grace.

古文：既牵缠人世，素志弗从。
现代文：这已是被人世拖累，我的本意不能实现。
English: This has been dragged down by the world, and my original intention cannot be realized.

古文：且吾习蔬菲五十馀年，既历岁时，循而不失。
现代文：况且我习惯素斋五十多年，已是经历多年，照旧不变。
English: Moreover, I have been accustomed to fasting for more than fifty years, and I have experienced it for many years, and it remains unchanged.

古文：瞑目之后，不须立灵，置一小床，每日设清水，六斋日设斋食果菜，任家有无，不须别经营也。 
现代文：死后，不要立灵位，衹设个小床，每天献上清水，六斋就献上素斋果菜，根据家裹实情来办，不要另买。 
English: After death, do not set up a spiritual place, set up a small bed, offer clean water every day, and offer vegetarian fruit and vegetable dishes on the 6th day of the month. Do it according to the actual situation of the family, do not buy another.

古文：初，察愿读一藏经，并已究竟，将终，曾无痛恼，但西向坐，正念，云 一切空寂 。其后身体柔软，颜色如恒。
现代文：当初，逃塞希望读一藏佛经，都已读完想通，临死时，竟无痛苦，祇是面向西方端坐，正念着，说 一切空寂 ，之后身体变得柔软，脸色像平常一样。
English: At first, he hoped to read a Buddhist sutra, but he had already read and thought it all out. When he was about to die, there was no pain, just sitting facing the west, meditating, and saying, "Everything is empty," after which his body became soft and his face looked normal.

古文：两宫悼惜，赗赙甚厚。
现代文：朝廷吊唁，助丧物品很丰厚。
English: The Imperial Court sent condolences, and the funeral goods were plentiful.

古文：察性至孝，有人伦鉴识。
现代文：生性极孝，有人伦明识。
English: They are extremely filial by nature and have a clear sense of ethics.

古文：冲虚谦逊，不以所长矜人。
现代文：恬淡谦虚，不用自己的长处矜夸于人。
English: He is mild and modest, and does not boast of his own merits.

古文：终日恬静，唯以书记为乐，于坟籍无所不睹。
现代文：整天恬静，衹把读书作文当作乐事，对于三坟五典等书籍没有不看的。
English: He is quiet all day, treats reading composition as a pleasure, and does not miss books such as the Three Graves and the Five Classics.

古文：每有制述，多用新奇，人所未见，咸重富博。
现代文：每当有著述，多用新奇的观点材料，是别人没见过的，都注重丰富广博。
English: Whenever there is a publication, it uses more novel point of view materials that others have not seen, and pays attention to richness and breadth.

古文：且专志著书，白首不倦，手自抄撰，无时蹔辍。
现代文：而且专心写书，头发白了也不疲倦，亲手抄录，没有停的时候。
English: Moreover, he concentrated on writing books, and even when his hair turned white, he did not get tired. He copied books with his own hands and never stopped.

古文：尤好研核古今，諟正文字，精采流赡，虽老不衰。
现代文：尤其爱好研究历史。审查订正文字，精采丰富，即使年老也不减。
English: He is especially fond of studying history. He reviews revised texts, which are brilliant and rich, even in his old age.

古文：兼谙识内典，所撰寺塔及众僧文章，特为绮密，在位多所称引，一善可录，无不赏荐。
现代文：又熟悉佛教经典，他写的寺塔和众僧的文章，特别漂亮精彩。任职时多引荐人，衹要有一点长处的人，无不称赞推举。
English: He is also familiar with Buddhist classics, and his articles on temples, pagodas and monks are particularly beautiful and wonderful. When he was in office, he was recommended by many people, and anyone with a little strength was praised and recommended.

古文：若非分相干，咸以理遣。
现代文：若非分求取官职的，都按理打发回去。
English: If they do not seek an official post, they will be sent back according to the law.

古文：尽心事上，知无不为。
现代文：尽心侍奉皇上，自己知道的没有不去做的。
English: He served the emperor wholeheartedly, and there was nothing he did not want to do.

古文：侍奉机密，未尝淹漏。
现代文：对于朝廷机密，从不泄露。
English: As for the secrets of the imperial court, they are never divulged.

古文：且任遇已隆，衣冠攸属，深怀退静，避于声势。
现代文：而且受皇上恩宠很重，朝士瞩目，很想退避求静，回避声望权势。
English: Moreover, he was heavily favored by the emperor, and the courtier attracted attention, and he wanted to avoid seeking tranquility and avoiding prestige and power.

古文：清洁自处，赀产每虚，或有劝营生计，笑而不答。
现代文：以清心洁行的标准来自处，财产总是空乏，有人劝他经营生计，他笑着不回答。
English: He comes from everywhere with the standard of cleanliness and purity, his property is always empty, someone advised him to manage his livelihood, he laughed and did not answer.

古文：穆于亲属，笃于旧故，所得禄赐，咸充周恤。
现代文：恭谨对待亲人和部属，诚恳对待朋友，他所得的俸禄和赏赐，都拿来周济别人。
English: He treated his relatives and subordinates with respect, and his friends with sincerity. He used his salary and rewards to help others.

古文：后主所制文笔，卷轴甚多，乃别写一本付察，有疑悉令刊定，察亦推心奉上，事在无隐。
现代文：后主所写的文章，篇幅很多，就另抄一本给姚察，有问题的地方全让他订正好，姚察也尽心侍奉皇上，事情毫不隐瞒。
English: After the master wrote the article, the length is a lot, so he copied another one for Yao Zha, and let him correct all the problems. Yao Zha also served the emperor wholeheartedly, and did not hide anything.

古文：后主尝从容谓朝士曰： 姚察达学洽闻，手笔典裁，求之于古，犹难辈匹，在于今世，足为师范。
现代文：后主曾缓缓地对朝臣们说： 姚察学问深见识广，文章和对古书的识见，在古人中，也难找到与他相比的，在现在，完全可以做楷模。
English: The late master once said to the courtiers: Yao Cha's knowledge is profound and broad-minded, and it is difficult to find anyone among the ancients who can be compared to him in his writings and insight into ancient books. In the present, he can completely serve as a role model.

古文：且访对甚详明，听之使人忘倦。 
现代文：而且答问时非常详尽清晰，听来教人忘记疲劳。 
English: Moreover, when answering questions, he is very detailed and clear, which teaches people to forget fatigue.

古文：察每制文笔，敕便索本，上曰： 我于姚察文章，非唯玩味无已，故是一宗匠。 
现代文：姚察每次写文章，皇上都要他送上副本，皇上说： 我对于姚察的文章，并不祇是玩味不停，更因为这是一个宗师巨匠。 
English: Every time Yao Zha wrote an article, the emperor asked him to send a copy, and the emperor said: I am not just playing with Yao Zha's article, but also because this is a great master.

古文：徐陵名高一代，每见察制述，尤所推重。
现代文：徐陵名望高过一代，每每一见姚察的文章，尤其推重。
English: Xu Ling's reputation has been high for more than a generation, and every time I see Yao Zha's article, it is particularly important.

古文：尝谓子俭曰： 姚学士德学无前，汝可师之也。 
现代文：他曾经对儿子徐俭说： 姚学士德行学问超过前人，你可以把他当作老师。 
English: He once said to his son Xu Jian: Yao Baozhang is more virtuous and learned than his predecessors, you can take him as a teacher.

古文：尚书令江总与察尤笃厚善，每有制作，必先以简察，然后施用。
现代文：尚书令江总与姚察尤其友好，每次有文章写出来，一定先送给型瞳看一看，这样以后才采用。
English: Shang Shuling Jiang Zong and Yao Cha are particularly friendly. Every time an article is written, it must first be sent to the type of pupil to take a look, so that it can be used later.

古文：总为詹事时，尝制登宫城五百字诗，当时副君及徐陵以下诸名贤并同此作。
现代文：丝缠任詹事时，曾写登宫城五百字的诗，那时副君和徐陵以下众名人都写了这一题材。
English: When he was embroiled in the Zhan Incident, he once wrote a 500-character poem about climbing to the palace. At that time, many famous people, including Vice Jun and Xu Ling, wrote about this subject.

古文：徐公后谓江曰： 我所和弟五十韵，寄弟集内。 
现代文：徐公后来对江总说： 我写的和弟五十韵，编在弟的集子裹。 
English: Later, Xu Gong said to Jiang Zong: I wrote fifty rhymes with my brother and compiled them in my brother's collection.

古文：及江编次文章，无复察所和本，述徐此意，谓察曰： 高才硕学，庶光拙文，今须公所和五百字，用偶徐侯章也。 
现代文：等到辽塑编排文章，没有挑塞和的诗，就向姚塞说了涂堕的意思，他对逃塞说： 你才高博学，希望能让我的文集增添光彩，现在要请你和五百字，用来与徐侯的诗章并美。 
English: When Liao Shu orchestrated the article, without picking up the poems, he said to Yao Ce the meaning of painting. He said to Fu Ce: You are highly erudite and hope to add luster to my anthology. Now I would like to invite you and five hundred words to be used to match the beauty of Xu Hou's poems.

古文：察谦逊未付，江曰： 若不得公此制，仆诗亦须弃本，复乖徐公所寄，岂得见令两失。 
现代文：姚察谦逊没写，丝总说： 如果得不到你这首诗作，我的诗也得抽出来了，这又违背了徐公的寄文美意，怎能让这事两失。 
English: Yao Zha Xianxun didn't write it, and Si always said: If I don't get this poem of yours, my poem will also have to be pulled out. This goes against the beautiful intention of Xu Gong's letter. How can I let this matter go to waste?

古文：察不获已，乃写本付之。
现代文：姚察不得已，就写了付上。
English: Yao felt he had no choice but to write it down.

古文：为通人推挹，例皆如此。
现代文：被同行推许，都像这事。
English: This is what it's like to be recommended by your peers.

古文：所著《汉书训纂》三十卷，《说林》十卷，《四聘》、《玉玺》、《建康三钟》等记各一卷，悉穷该博，并《文集》二十卷，并行于世。
现代文：所著的《漠书训纂》三十卷，《说林》十卷，《西聘》、《玉玺》、《建康三钟》等记各一卷，都尽量清楚丰富，以及《文集》二十卷，都流行于世。
English: The 30 volumes of "Moushu Xuanquan," 10 volumes of "Say Lin" and one volume each of "Xi Bi," "Yu Xi" and "Jian Kang San Zhong" are as clear and rich as possible, and the 20 volumes of "Wenshu" are popular in the world.

古文：察所撰梁、陈史虽未毕功，隋文帝开皇之时，遣内史舍人虞世基索本，且进上，今在内殿。
现代文：姚察所写的梁、陈史虽然没有完成，隋文帝开皇年间，派内史舍人虞世基找到底稿，并且献给皇上，现存在内殿。
English: Although the Liang and Chen histories written by Yao Zha were not completed, during the reign of the Sui Emperor Wen, Yu Shiji found the manuscript and dedicated it to the emperor. It is now in the inner hall.

古文：梁、陈二史本多是察之所撰，其中序论及纪、传有所阙者，临亡之时，仍以体例诫约子思廉，博访撰续，思廉泣涕奉行。
现代文：梁、陈两代史稿多半是姚察所写，那中间的序论和纪、传有些缺漏的，他临死时，屡屡将体例遣教儿子思廉，要他多方询访继续写完，思廉哭着照办。
English: The historical manuscript of the two generations of Liang and Chen was mostly written by Yao Zhan, but there were some omissions in the middle of the introduction, discipline, and biography. When he was about to die, he repeatedly sent the example to his son Siliang, asking him to continue to complete the work through multiple inquiries. Siliang cried and did so.

古文：思廉在陈为衡阳王府法曹参军，转会稽王主簿。
现代文：思廉在陈任衡阳王府法曹参军，转任会稽王主簿。
English: Siliang joined the army when he was appointed as a legal officer of Hengyang royal court.

古文：入隋，补驻王府行参军，掌记室，寻除河间郡司法。
现代文：到隋，补驻王府行参军，掌记室，接着任回盟郡司法。
English: He went to Sui Dynasty, stationed in Wangfu, joined the army, served as a recorder, and then served as a judicial official of Hui Meng County.

古文：大业初，内史侍郎虞世基奏思廉踵成梁、陈二代史，自尔以来，稍就补续。
现代文：大业初年，内史诗郎虞世基举荐墨虚续成凿、速二代史，从逭以后，渐渐完成了补续的任务。
English: In the first year of the great undertaking, Yu Shiji, the inner epic poet, recommended that the ink should be continuously chiseled and the second generation of history should be accelerated. Since then, it has gradually completed the task of supplementing.

古文：史臣曰：江总持清标简贵，加润以辞采，及师长六官，雅允朝望。
现代文：史臣曰：江总具备美好的风范和高贵的气质，又以文采增色，等到他成为六部官员的首脑，正合全体朝臣的愿望。
English: Shi Zhen said: Jiang Zong has a beautiful demeanor and a noble temperament, and adds color to his writing. When he becomes the head of six officials, it is in line with the wishes of all courtiers.

古文：史臣先臣禀兹令德，光斯百行，可以厉风俗，可以厚人伦。
现代文：史臣的先父保持美德，使各行各业都感觉到他的光采，可以用来整肃风气习俗，可以用来使人伦淳朴。
English: Shichen's forefather maintained virtue, so that all walks of life felt his brilliance. It can be used to rectify customs and morals, and can be used to make people look simple.

古文：至于九流、《七略》之书，名山石室之记，汲郡、孔堂之书，玉箱金板之文，莫不穷研旨奥，遍探坎井，故道冠人师，晋绅以为准的。
现代文：至于九流、《七略》的书，名山石室的记载。汲郡、孔堂的书，玉箱金板的珍贵文章，没有不尽求深奥主旨，全都探索了那些疑难，所以能为人师长，朝臣把他当作楷模。
English: As for the books of the ninth stream, the "Seven Sketches," the records of the famous mountain stone room, the books of Kugun and Kongtang, and the precious articles of the Jade Box Gold Plate, they all explored those difficulties without seeking the esoteric theme. Therefore, he can be a teacher, and courtiers regard him as a model.

古文：既历职贵显，国典朝章，古今疑议，后主皆取先臣断决焉。
现代文：已历任要职后，国家朝廷的典章制度，古今书籍和历史上的疑难问题，后主都选我的先父来辨析解决。
English: After holding various important positions, my forefathers were chosen by their successors to analyze and solve the difficult problems in the state imperial court's award system, ancient and modern books, and history.

