古文：夫将之所以战者，兵也；兵之所以战者，气也；气之所以盛者，鼓也。
现代文：将领所以能够指挥作战，依靠的是士兵；士兵所以能够奋勇战斗，依靠的是士气；士气所以能够旺盛不衰，依靠的是鼓动。
English: Generals rely on soldiers to be able to command battles; soldiers rely on morale to be able to fight bravely; and morale relies on agitation to be able to thrive.

古文：能作士卒之气，则不可太频，太频则气易衰；不可太远，太远则力易竭。
现代文：擂动战鼓能够振作部队士气，但是不可太过频繁，太频繁士气容易衰竭；也不能太远，太远则体力容易耗尽。
English: The beating of the war drum can boost the morale of the troops, but it should not be too frequent, too frequent morale is easy to exhaust; it should not be too far away, too far away is easy to exhaust physical strength.

古文：须度敌人之至六七十步之内，乃可以鼓，令士卒进战。
现代文：因此，作战中必须度量敌人进至距我六七十步以内，才可以击鼓，命令士兵奋勇进战。
English: Therefore, in battle, we must measure the enemy's advance to within sixty or seventy paces of us before we can beat the drum and order the soldiers to march into battle.

古文：彼衰我盛，败之必矣。
现代文：在敌人士气衰落，我军士气旺盛的情况下作战，就能打败对方。
English: When the enemy's morale is low and ours is high, we can defeat the other side.

古文：法曰： 气实则斗，气夺则走。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 士气高昂就投入战斗，士气低落就避敌退走。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: When morale is high, go into battle; when morale is low, avoid the enemy and retreat.

古文：春秋，齐师伐鲁，庄公将战，曹刿请从，公与之同乘，战于长勺。
现代文：春秋时期，齐国军队攻打鲁国，鲁庄公准备迎战。武士曹刿请求一同前往，鲁庄公便与他共乘一辆兵车，进至长勺与齐军交战。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, the Qi army attacked Lu, and Lu Zhuang Gong was preparing to fight. The samurai Cao Wei requested to go together, and Lu Zhuang Gong rode with him in a chariot and went to the Long Spoon to fight the Qi army.

古文：公将鼓之，刿曰： 未可。 
现代文：鲁庄公将要击鼓进战，曹刿马上说： 现在不行。 
English: Lu Zhuanggong is about to march into battle to the beat of a drum, and Cao Pi immediately says, "Not now.

古文：齐人三鼓。刿曰： 可矣。 
现代文：齐军三通鼓敲罢，曹刿说： 可以进攻了。 
English: The Qi army beat the drums three times, and Cao Pi said, "We can attack now."

古文：鼓之，齐师败绩。
现代文：于是，鲁庄公击鼓命令部队进战，结果大败齐军。
English: As a result, Luzhuanggong drumming ordered the troops to go to war, and the result was a crushing defeat for the Qi army.

古文：公问其故。刿对曰： 夫战，勇气也。
现代文：鲁庄公将要驰车追击溃败的齐军，曹刿提醒说： 现在不行。 
English: Lu Zhuang Gong is going to chase the routed Qi army by car, Cao Yu reminded: Not now.

古文：一鼓作气，再而衰，三而竭。
现代文：第一次击鼓可以振作士气，再次击鼓士气就衰落了，第三次击鼓士气就枯竭了。
English: The first beating of the drum can boost morale, the second beating of the drum will weaken morale, and the third beating of the drum will deplete morale.

古文：彼竭我盈，是以败之。 
现代文：敌人士气枯竭而我军士气饱满，所以能够打败敌人。
English: The enemy is exhausted and our soldiers are full of morale, so we can defeat the enemy.

