古文：卢君畅元义方平昌井虎头骨法喜寺龙庙豢龙者孔威华阴湫崔道枢
现代文：卢君畅元义方平昌井虎头骨法喜寺龙庙豢龙者孔威华阴湫崔道枢
English: Lu Jun unimpeded Yuan Yifang Pyeongchang Well Tiger Skull Dharma Happy Temple Dragon Temple Dragon Warrior Kong Weihua Yin Zi Cui Douzhu

古文：金龙子黄驯临汉豕烧龙柳翁
现代文：金龙子黄驯临汉豕烧龙柳翁
English: The golden dragon, Huang Taming, is roasted in the Han Dynasty

古文：卢君畅
现代文：卢君畅
English: Lu Junchang

古文：故东都留守判官祠部郎中范阳卢君畅为白衣时，侨居汉上。
现代文：以前东都留守判官祠部郎中范阳的卢君畅还是老百姓的时候，侨居汉水。
English: In the past, when Lu Junchang, the judge of Dongdu left-behind and Fanyang's son-in-law of the ancestral hall, was still an ordinary citizen, he lived in Hanshui.

古文：尝一日，独驱郊野，见二白犬腰甚长，而其臆丰，飘然若坠，俱驰走田间。
现代文：曾经有那么一天，他独自骑马走在郊野，看见两条狗，狗的腰身特别长，胸甚肥厚，好像悬浮着要掉下来。
English: Once there was a day when he was riding alone in the countryside and saw two dogs. The dogs had extraordinarily long waists and very thick chests, as if they were floating and about to fall.

古文：卢惧甚，鞭马而归。未及行数里，衣尽沾湿。
现代文：那两条狗一块跑在田垅上。卢君畅惊讶和一般的狗不同，就勒住马望着那两条狗。
English: The two dogs were running together on the paddock. Lu Junchang was surprised that they were different from ordinary dogs, so he stopped his horse and looked at the two dogs.

古文：方悟二犬乃龙也。
现代文：不一会儿两条狗都跳进一个大水池中，紧接着那池水便波浪汹涌，马上有两条白龙从池子里升起。云气密布当空，风雷大吼大震。卢君畅很害怕，打马往回跑，没跑出几里，衣服全被雨浇湿，才知道那两条狗就是龙。
English: Soon after, both dogs jumped into a large pool, and the water of the pool became choppy. Soon, two white dragons rose from the pool. The clouds were thick in the sky, and the wind and thunder roared and shook. Lu Junchang was very scared, and she ran back to the horse. She did not run for several miles, and her clothes were all wet with rain, before she knew that the two dogs were dragons.

古文：元义方
现代文：元义方
English: Motoyakata

古文：元义方使新罗，发鸡林州。遇海岛，中有泉，舟人皆汲水饮之。
现代文：元义方出使新罗国，从鸡林州出发，遇到一个小岛，岛上有泉水，船上的人都打泉水喝。
English: The Yuan Yi side dispatched to Silla, starting from Jilin Province, encountered a small island. There was spring water on the island, and the people on board drank spring water.

古文：忽有小蛇自泉中出。
现代文：忽然有一条小蛇从泉眼里钻出来。
English: Suddenly, a small snake emerged from the spring.

古文：海师遽曰： 龙怒。 
现代文：海师忙说： 龙生气了！ 
English: The navigator said hurriedly: "The dragon is angry!"

古文：遂发。
现代文：于是立即就出发。
English: So they set off.

古文：未数里，风云雷电皆至，三日三夜不绝。
现代文：未行几里，风云雷电全都到来，三天三夜没有停歇。
English: After a few miles, all the storms and thunderstorms arrived, and there was no break for three days and three nights.

古文：及雨霁，见远岸城邑，乃莱州。
现代文：等到雨过天晴，望见远处对岸的城邑，原来已是莱州。
English: Wait until the rain clears and you can see the towns on the other side of the river in the distance, which turns out to be Laizhou.

古文：平昌井
现代文：平昌井
English: Pyeongchang-dong

古文：平昌城旧与荆水通，有神龙出入焉，故名龙城。
现代文：平易城以前与荆水是通连的，有一条神龙在里边出出入入，所以叫做龙城。
English: Pingyicheng used to be connected to Jingshui, and there was a divine dragon coming and going inside, so it was called Longcheng.

古文：外国有寺曰咀呵罗，寺有神龙住米仓中。
现代文：外国有一座寺叫 咀呵罗 ，寺中有一条神龙住在米仓里。
English: There is a temple in a foreign country called Tsui Horo. In the temple, there is a sacred dragon that lives in a rice silo.

古文：奴取米，龙辄却。
现代文：奴仆去取米，龙就往后退。
English: When the servant went to get the rice, the dragon retreated.

古文：奴若常取米，龙即不与。
现代文：奴仆要是经常取米，龙就不给。
English: If the servant often takes rice, the dragon will not give it.

古文：仓中米若尽，奴向龙拜，仓即盈溢。
现代文：仓里的米用光了，奴仆就向龙跪拜，仓里的粮食就又满了。
English: When the storehouse ran out of rice, the servants bowed to the dragon, and the storehouse was once again full of grain.

古文：虎头骨
现代文：虎头骨
English: Tiger skulls

古文：南中旱，即以长绳系虎头骨，投有龙处。
现代文：南中一带遇上天旱，就用长绳子拴住虎头骨，扔到有龙的地方。
English: When there was a drought in the south-central region, they tied a long rope around the tiger's skull and threw it to a place where there were dragons.

古文：入水，即数人牵制不定。
现代文：虎头骨一入水，就让几个人牵扯着，也无法让它停住。
English: As soon as the tiger skull entered the water, several people were involved and could not stop it.

古文：俄顷，云起潭中，雨亦随降。
现代文：不一会儿，云就从潭中升起，雨也紧接着就下起来。
English: In a short time, the cloud rose from the pond, and the rain began to fall.

古文：法喜寺
现代文：法喜寺
English: Hoki-ji Temple

古文：政阳郡东南有法喜寺。
现代文：政阳郡东南有一座寺庙叫法喜寺。
English: In the southeast of Zhengyang County, there is a temple called Fuxi Temple.

古文：去郡远百里，而正居渭水西。
现代文：这寺离郡一百里远，而正处在渭水之西。
English: The temple is a hundred miles away from the county, just west of Surabaya.

古文：唐元和末，寺僧有频梦一白龙者自渭水来，止于佛殿西楹，蟠绕且久，乃直东而去。
现代文：唐元和年末，寺中有一个和尚频频梦见一条白龙从渭水来，在佛殿西柱子下停住，蟠绕很久，才直奔东方而去。
English: In the Tang and Yuan Dynasties and at the end of the year, a monk in the temple often dreamed of a white dragon coming from Surabaya, stopping under the west pillar of the Buddhist hall, lingering for a long time, and then going straight to the east.

古文：明日则雨。
现代文：做梦第二天就下雨。
English: Dreaming that it will rain the next day.

古文：如是者数矣。
现代文：这种情况已经多次了。
English: This has happened several times.

古文：其僧异之，因语与人。
现代文：那和尚很奇怪，就告诉了别人。
English: That monk was very strange, so he told others.

古文：人曰： 福地盖神祗所居，固龙之宅也。
现代文：那人说： 福地是神灵居住的地方，本来就是龙的住处。
English: The man said, "The blessed land is where the gods live, and it is the dragon's home.

古文：而佛寺亦为龙所依焉。故释氏有天龙八部，其义在矣。
现代文：而佛寺也受到龙的依赖，所以释迦牟尼有天龙八部，它的意义就在这里。
English: And Buddhist temples are also dependent on dragons, so Shakyamuni has the eight parts of the heavenly dragon, and its significance is here.

古文：况郊野外寺，殿宇清敞，为龙之止，不亦宜乎？
现代文：何况郊野之外的寺院，殿宇清洁宽敞，作为龙的住处，不也很合适吗？
English: Besides, isn't a temple outside of the countryside, with a clean and spacious hall, a good place for a dragon to live?

古文：愿以土龙置于寺楹间，且用识其梦也。 
现代文：希望你做一条土龙放到殿柱子之间，将用它来验证一下你的梦。 
English: I hope you will make a clay dragon and place it between the pillars of the hall. You will use it to verify your dream.

古文：僧召工，合土为偶龙，具告其状，而于殿西楹置焉。
现代文：那和尚便召集工匠，用土制作一条龙。他把梦中龙的样子详细地告诉工匠们。做成之后就放在殿西柱子下边。
English: The monk then gathered craftsmen to make a dragon out of clay. He told the craftsmen in detail what the dragon in his dream looked like. After it was made, it was placed under the west pillar of the hall.

古文：功毕，甚得云间势，蜿蜒鳞鬣，曲尽其妙，虽丹青之巧，不能加也。
现代文：做得很像云雾中的活龙，鳞鬣生动，动态蜿蜒，尽得其妙，即使很好的画家，也不能画得比这更像。
English: It is made very much like a live dragon in the clouds, the scales are vivid, dynamic and sinuous, it's amazing, even a good painter can't draw more like this.

古文：至长庆初，其寺居人有偃于外门者，见一物从西轩直出，飘飘然若升云状，飞驰出寺，望谓水而去。
现代文：到长庆年初，一个住在这个寺院里的人，有一天仰卧在门外，见有一个东西从窗出来，轻飘飘的，像一朵云，飞出寺院，向渭水飞去。
English: At the beginning of the year of Changqing, a person who lived in this temple, one day lying on his back outside the door, saw a thing coming out of the window, light and floating, like a cloud, flying out of the temple and flying towards Surabaya.

古文：夜将分，始归西轩下，细而观之，果白龙也。
现代文：天将黑的时候，那东西才回到西窗下。仔细一看，果然是一条白龙。
English: When it was getting dark, the thing came back under the west window. On closer inspection, it was indeed a white dragon.

古文：明日因告寺僧。
现代文：第二天他就告诉了寺中的和尚。
English: The next day he told a monk at the temple.

古文：僧奇之。
现代文：和尚觉得奇怪。
English: The monk felt strange.

古文：又数日，寺僧尽赴村民会斋去。至午方归。
现代文：又过了几天，寺里的和尚全都到村民那里会斋去了，直到晌午才回来。
English: A few days later, the monks of the temple all went to the villagers to have a meal, and did not return until the afternoon.

古文：因入殿视，像龙已失矣。
现代文：进殿一看，用土做的那条龙不见了。
English: On entering the hall, the dragon made of soil disappeared.

古文：寺僧且叹且异，相顾语曰： 是龙也，虽假以土，尚能变化无方，去莫如其适，来莫穷其自。果灵物乎？ 
现代文：和尚们又是惊叹又是奇怪，互相看着说： 这一定是龙。尽管它是用土做的，尚且可以变化不定。去，不知它到什么地方去；来，不知它从什么地方来。果然是灵物吧？ 
English: The monks were both amazed and puzzled. They looked at each other and said, "This must be a dragon. Although it is made of earth, it can still change. Go, I don't know where it is going; come, I don't know where it is coming from. Is it really a spirit animal?"

古文：及晚，有阴云起于渭水，俄而将逼殿宇。
现代文：到了晚上，从渭水飘来阴云，不多时就要逼近殿宇。
English: In the evening, dark clouds drifted in from Surabaya, and it wasn't long before they approached the palace.

古文：忽有一物自云中跃而出，指西轩以入。
现代文：忽然有一个东西从云中跳出来，从西窗飞入。
English: Suddenly, something jumped out of the clouds and flew in through the west window.

古文：寺僧惧惊，且视之，乃见像龙已在西楹上。
现代文：和尚们又惊又怕。走近一看，见那条用土做的龙居然已经附在西柱上了。
English: The monks were shocked and frightened. When they looked closer, they saw that the dragon, made of earth, had actually attached itself to the west pillar.

古文：迫而观之，其龙鬐鬣鳞角，若尽沾湿。
现代文：仔细一看，那龙的鬐、鬣、鳞、角，好像全都湿了。
English: A closer look reveals that the dragon's beak, gills, scales, and horns all appear to be wet.

古文：自是因以铁锁系之。
现代文：从此以后，就用铁链把它锁起来了。
English: Since then, it has been chained up.

古文：其后里中有旱涝，祈祷之，应若影响。龙庙
现代文：这以后里中有了旱涝灾情，向它祈祷，非常灵验。龙庙
English: After this, there were drought and flood disasters in the country, and praying to it was very effective.

古文：汾水贯太原而南注。
现代文：汾水横贯太原而向南流。
English: Surabaya water flows south across Taiyuan.

古文：水有二桥。
现代文：水上有两座桥。
English: There are two bridges over the water.

古文：其南桥下尝有龙见，由是架龙庙于桥下。
现代文：那南边的桥下曾经有龙出现，因此在桥下盖了龙庙。
English: There used to be a dragon under the bridge on the south side, so a dragon temple was built under the bridge.

古文：故相国令狐楚居守北都时，有一龙自庙中出，倾都士女皆纵观。近食顷，方拿奋而去。
现代文：以前相国令狐楚居守北都的时候，有一条龙从庙中出来，全城的男男女女都尽情观看，将近一顿饭的工夫，它才腾跃振奋地离去。
English: In the past, when Fox Chu was in charge of the northern capital, a dragon came out of the temple, and the men and women of the whole city watched it with pleasure. It took nearly a meal for it to leave excitedly.

古文：旋有震雷暴雨焉。
现代文：立刻就有震雷暴雨发生。
English: There was an immediate thunderstorm.

古文：又明年秋，汾水延溢，有一白蛇自庙中出，既出而庙屋摧圮，其桥亦坏。
现代文：另外，第二年秋，汾水水涨，有一条白蛇从庙里出来，一出来庙就倒塌了。那桥也坏了。
English: In addition, in the autumn of the following year, when the flood waters rose, a white snake came out of the temple, and as soon as it came out, the temple collapsed. The bridge was also damaged.

古文：时唐太和初也。
现代文：那时是唐朝太和年初。
English: It was the beginning of the Taihe year in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：豢龙者
现代文：豢龙者
English: The Dragon Slayer

古文：牛僧孺镇襄州日，以久旱，祈祷无应，有处士自云豢龙者，公请致雨。
现代文：牛僧儒镇守襄州的时候，因为久旱，祭祀求雨没见效，听说有一位处士自己说是养龙的，牛公就请他想办法下雨。
English: When the cow-monk Zhu Zhen was guarding Xiangzhou, because of the long drought, the ritual prayer for rain had no effect. I heard that one official said that he was a dragon breeder, and the cow-god asked him to find a way to make it rain.

古文：处士曰： 江汉间无龙，独一湫泊中有之，黑龙也。
现代文：那处士说： 江汉一带没有龙，只有一个水池中有一条，是黑龙。
English: The official said: There are no dragons in the Jianghan region. There is only one black dragon in a pond.

古文：强驱逐之，虑为灾，难制。 
现代文：如果硬逼它出来，担心造成灾害，很难制住它。 
English: If it is forced to come out, it is difficult to stop it for fear of causing disasters.

古文：公固命之。
现代文：牛公坚决让他去做，他就去了。
English: Cowherd resolutely asked him to do it, and he went.

古文：果有大雨，汉水漫涨，漂溺万户。
现代文：果然下了一场大雨，汉水暴涨，淹了上万户人家。
English: Sure enough, a heavy rain fell, and the floodwaters surged, flooding tens of thousands of homes.

古文：处士惧罪，亦亡去。
现代文：那处士怕加罪于他。吓跑了。
English: The officer, afraid of incriminating him, ran away.

古文：孔威
现代文：孔威
English: Kong Wei

古文：唐咸通末，舒州刺史孔威进龙骨一具，因有表录其事状云： 州之桐城具善政乡百姓胡举，有青龙斗死于庭中。
现代文：唐咸通年末，舒州刺史孔威进献龙骨一具，并且有表奏描述这件事说： 舒州所属的桐城县善政乡有一个百姓叫胡举，有青龙斗死在他家的院子里。
English: At the end of the Tang and Hamdan dynasties, Shuzhou's Zishi Kong Wei presented a dragon's bone, and there was a table play describing the event: Shuzhou's Tongcheng County's Zensheng Township has a citizen named Huju, who died in a dragon fight in his family's yard.

古文：时四月，尚有茧箔在庭。
现代文：当时是四月，院子里还有养蚕用的竹筛子。
English: It was April, and there was a bamboo sieve for raising silkworms in the yard.

古文：忽云雷暴起，闻云中击触声，血如酾雨，洒茧箔上，血不氵于箔，渐旋结聚，可拾置掌上。
现代文：忽然间云雷暴起，听到云中有打斗触碰的声音，血就像下雨，洒到养蚕用的竹筛子上。那血不污染筛子，渐渐集中凝结，可以拾起来放到手掌上。
English: All of a sudden, thunder and lightning erupted, and I heard the sound of fighting and touching in the clouds. Blood fell like rain onto the bamboo sieve used for raising silkworms. The blood did not contaminate the sieve, but gradually condensed and could be picked up and placed on the palm of the hand.

古文：须臾，令人冷痛入骨。
现代文：不一会儿就让人感到刺骨般冷痛。
English: It doesn't take long for the biting cold to set in.

古文：初龙拖尾及地，绕一泔桶，即腾身入云。
现代文：一开始，一条龙尾巴拖在地上，围绕着一桶泔水。然后又腾飞钻进云里。
English: At first, a dragon's tail drags on the ground, around a bucket of salty water. Then it soars into the clouds.

古文：及雨，悉是泔也。
现代文：等到下雨，下的全是泔水。
English: Wait until it rains, and all that falls will be rainwater.

古文：龙既死，剖之，喉中有大疮。
现代文：龙死了之后，把它剖开，发现它的咽喉里有一个大疮。
English: After the dragon died, he cut it open and found a large sore in its throat.

古文：凡长十余尺。
现代文：龙共长十多尺。
English: The dragon is more than ten feet long.

古文：身尾相半。
现代文：龙的身和尾巴各占一半。
English: The body and tail of the dragon each account for half.

古文：尾本褊薄。
现代文：尾巴又细又薄。
English: The tail is fine and thin.

古文：鳞鬣皆鱼。
现代文：鳞鬣就像鱼鳞。
English: Scales are like fish scales.

古文：唯有须长二丈。
现代文：只有须子有两丈长。
English: Only the whiskers are longer.

古文：其足有赤膜翳之。
现代文：它的脚有红色的角膜蒙着。
English: Its feet are covered with red corneas.

古文：双角各长二丈。
现代文：两只角都有两丈长。
English: And the two horns were of two different lengths.

古文：其腹相自龃龉。
现代文：它的肚子自相抵触。
English: Its belly is in conflict with itself.

古文：时遣大云仓使督而送州。
现代文：当时派大云仓使指挥人马把死龙送往舒州。
English: At that time, Da Yuncang sent the conductor to send the dead dragon to Shuzhou.

古文：以肉重不能全举，乃剸之为数十段，载之赴官。
现代文：因为龙肉很重，不能整个搬运，就把它割成几十段，载运到州府。
English: Because dragon meat is very heavy and cannot be transported as a whole, it is cut into dozens of sections and transported to the state capital.

古文：华阴湫
现代文：华阴湫
English: Hua Yin Zou

古文：唐咸通九年春，华阴县南十里余，一夕风雷暴作，有龙移湫，自远而至。
现代文：唐朝咸通九年春，华阴县南十里多，一天晚上风雷突然大作，有龙福山造地，是远方而来。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the Tang Dynasty, more than ten miles south of Hamdong, Huayin County, one evening, the wind and thunder suddenly made a big work, and Longfu Mountain was built. It came from far away.

古文：先其崖岸高，无贮水之处，此夕徙开数十丈。
现代文：原先那地方崖岸挺高，没有贮水的地方，这天晚上山崖迁徙，崩裂开几十丈。
English: Originally, the cliff in that area was quite high and there was no place to store water. That night, the cliff migrated and cracked open dozens of meters.

古文：小山东西直南北，峰峦草树，一无所伤。
现代文：东西向的小山变成了南北向的，而峰峦草木一无所伤。
English: The east-west hill became a north-south hill, but the grass and trees on the peak were unharmed.

古文：碧波回塘，湛若疏凿。
现代文：山间新池碧波回荡，清澈得像疏道的渠道。
English: Between the mountains, the blue waves of Xinchi Lake reverberate, as clear as the channel of a canal.

古文：京洛行旅，无不枉道就观。
现代文：京洛的行人旅客，没有不多走路程特意来看的。
English: Pedestrian travelers in Jingluo do not have to walk a long distance to see it.

古文：有好事者，自辇毂蒲津，相率而至。
现代文：有好事的，各自乘车坐船成群结伙而来。
English: When something good happens, they all come in groups by car and boat.

古文：车马不绝音，逮于累日。
现代文：车马的声音不绝，一直持续多日。
English: The sound of horse-drawn carriages was incessant and lasted for several days.

古文：京城南灵应台有三娘湫，与炭谷相近，水波澄明，莫测深浅。
现代文：京城南灵应台有一个水池叫 三娘湫 ，与炭谷相近。这池子里的水，水波澄明，深浅莫测。
English: There is a pool in Jingcheng's South Lingyutai, called the Third Daughter Pool, which is close to the Coal Valley. The water in this pool has clear waves and is unpredictable.

古文：每秋风摇落，常有草木之叶，飘于其上。
现代文：每到秋季秋风摇落树叶，常有一些草木之叶飘落池水之上。
English: Every autumn, the autumn wind shakes the leaves of the trees, and often some leaves of plants and trees float on the water of the pond.

古文：虽片叶纤芥，必而禽衔而去。
现代文：尽管树叶纤细微小，但是必有飞禽把它衔出去。
English: Even though the leaves are tiny and thin, a bird must lead it out.

古文：祷祈者多致花钿锦绮之类，启视投之，歘然而没。
现代文：到这里来祭祀祈祷的，多半喜欢把花钿锦绮之类的东西扔到池里去。
English: Most of the people who come here to worship and pray like to throw things like flowers and brocade into the pond.

古文：乾符初。有朝士数人，同游于终南山，遂及湫所，因话灵应之事。
现代文：开始扔的时候仔细看着，扔下去之后，很快沉下去了。乾符年初，有几个朝中当官的人，一块到终南山游玩，来到这个水池边。
English: At the beginning of the dry season, a few officials from the central government came to this pool after a trip to Nanshan.

古文：其间不信者，试以木石投之，寻有巨鱼跃出波心，鳞甲如雪。
现代文：于是就有人谈到这个池子是如何如何灵验。其中有不相信的，就试探着把石头木块之类扔下去。不久便有大鱼跃出水面，鳞甲雪亮。
English: So some people talked about how this pool was so effective. Some of them didn't believe it, so they tried throwing stones, wood and the like into it. Soon a big fish leapt out of the water, its scales glistening.

古文：俄而风雨晦暝，车马几为暴水所漂。
现代文：不多时便风雨阴暗，车马差点被大水冲走。
English: Not infrequently, it is stormy and gloomy, and cars and horses are almost swept away by the water.

古文：尔后人愈敬伏，莫有犯者。
现代文：此后人们更加敬服，没有敢能触犯的。
English: Since then, people have been more respectful, and no one dares to offend.

古文：崔道枢
现代文：崔道枢
English: Cui Dozhu

古文：唐中书舍人书颜，子婿崔道枢举进士者屡屡。
现代文：唐朝中书舍人韦颜的女婿崔道枢，屡屡参加进士考试。
English: Cui Daozhu, the son-in-law of Wei Yan, a scholar in the Tang Dynasty, repeatedly took the entrance examination.

古文：一年春下第，归宁汉上所居。
现代文：一年春天不第，回家到汉水之畔的住处。
English: In the spring of the same year, he returned home to his residence on the banks of the Han River.

古文：因井渫，得鲤鱼一头长五尺，鳞鬣金色，其目光射人。
现代文：因为淘井，从井里捉到一条五尺长的鲤鱼。这条鱼的鳞和鬣都是金色的，它的目光射人。
English: Because of Taoi, a five-foot-long eel was caught from the well. The scales and gills of this fish are golden, and its eyes are dazzling.

古文：众视异于常鱼。令仆者投于江中。
现代文：大家见它不同于一般的鱼，就让仆人把它投到江里去。
English: When they saw that it was different from ordinary fish, they asked the servant to throw it into the river.

古文：道枢与表兄韦氏，密备鼎俎，烹而食之。
现代文：崔道枢和他的表哥韦氏，偷偷地准备炊具，把它煮着吃了。
English: Cui Daozhu and his cousin Wei Zhu secretly prepared a cooking utensil, cooked it and ate it.

古文：经信宿，韦得疾暴卒。
现代文：两宿之后，韦氏得病突然死去。
English: Two nights later, Wei fell ill and died suddenly.

古文：有碧衣使人引至府舍，廨宇颇甚严肃。
现代文：有一个穿碧色衣服的人把他领到一处府舍，这府舍很是庄严肃穆。
English: A man in a blue suit led him to a stately home.

古文：既入门，见厅事有女子戴金翠冠，着紫绣衣，据案而坐。
现代文：进门之后，他看见一个头戴金翠冠，身穿紫绣衣的女子在厅里据案而坐。
English: After entering the door, he saw a woman with a golden crown on her head and wearing a purple embroidered dress sitting in the hall.

古文：左右侍者皆黄衫巾栉，如宫内之饰。
现代文：左右的侍者都穿黄衣，服饰打扮有如宫中。
English: The waiters on both sides are dressed in yellow, as if they were in a palace.

古文：有一吏人从后执簿领出。及轩陛间，付双环青衣，置于绣衣案上。
现代文：有一个小官吏从后面拿着簿子领韦氏出来，来到廊阶之间，把簿子交给一个梳着双环的婢女，由她放到绣衣女子的桌案上。
English: A minor official came from behind with a book and led Mr. Wei out to the hallway steps, where he handed the book to a servant girl with a comb and two rings, who placed it on the embroidered woman's desk.

古文：吏引韦生东庑曹署，理杀鱼之状。
现代文：小官吏又领着韦氏来到东厢房里的一处官署，审理杀鱼的案子。
English: The petty official also led Mr. Wei to a government office in the east wing to hear the case of killing fish.

古文：韦引过。道枢云： 非某之罪。 
现代文：韦氏把过错推到崔道枢身上，说： 不是我的罪过。 
English: Mr. Wei put the blame on Cui Daozhu and said, "It's not my fault."

古文：吏曰： 此雨龙也，若潜伏于江海湫湄，虽为人所食，即从而可辨矣。
现代文：那个官吏说： 这是一条雨龙。如果它潜伏在江河湖海之中，即使被人吃了，其实可以看出它不是凡品。
English: The official said: This is a rain dragon. If it lurks in the rivers, lakes and seas, even if it is eaten, it can actually be seen that it is not ordinary.

古文：但昨者得之于井中，崔氏与君又非愚昧，杀而食之，但难获免。然君且还，试与崔君广为佛道功德，庶几稍减其过。
现代文：只是前几天你们是从井里得到它的，崔道枢和你又不是愚昧之人，把它杀着吃了，只怕罪责难逃，但是你暂且回去，与崔道枢一起多做一些佛道功德之事试试，也许可以多少减轻一些罪过。
English: It's just that you got it from the well a few days ago. Choi Do-hwan and you are not stupid people. You killed it and ate it, so you should not escape the blame. However, you should go back for the time being and try to do more things of Buddhist virtue with Choi Do-hwan. Maybe you can alleviate some of your sins.

古文：自兹浃旬，当复相召。 
现代文：从现在算起，十天之后我还去找你。 
English: Ten days from now, I'll still be looking for you.

古文：韦忽然而寤，且以所说，话于亲属，命道枢具述其事。
现代文：韦氏忽然醒来，就把那官吏的话说给亲属。亲属让崔道枢详细述说杀鱼之事。
English: Mr. Wei suddenly woke up and told his relatives what the official had said. The relatives asked Cui Daozhu to describe the killing of the fish in detail.

古文：道枢虽怀忧迫，亦未深信。
现代文：崔道枢虽然心中怀有忧虑和压抑，但是也没太相信。
English: Although Cui Daozhu was worried and depressed, he didn't really believe it.

古文：才及旬余，韦生果殁。
现代文：刚到十天，韦氏果然死了。
English: Just ten days later, Wei died.

古文：韦乃道枢之姑子也。
现代文：韦氏是崔道枢姑母的儿子。
English: Wei is the son of Cui Daozhu's aunt.

古文：数日后，寄魂于母云： 已因杀鱼获罪，所至之地，即水府，非久当受重谴。
现代文：几天后，韦氏托梦对母亲说： 儿已经因为杀鱼而获罪，所到的地方就是水府，不久将受到严重的惩罚。
English: A few days later, Wei Tomei said to his mother: "My son has been found guilty of killing fish, the place he has arrived at is Shuifu, and he will soon be severely punished.

古文：可急修黄箓道斋，尚冀得宽刑辞。
现代文：母亲可以赶紧修黄箓作道场，还有希望惩办得宽一些。
English: The mother can quickly repair the jaundice for the dojo, and there is hope that the punishment will be wider.

古文：表弟之过亦成矣，今夕当自知其事。 
现代文：表弟的罪过也已经形成了，今晚他应该自知他的事情。 
English: His cousin's guilt has also developed, and tonight he should be aware of his actions.

古文：韦母泣告道枢。
现代文：韦母哭着把梦中情形告诉了崔道枢。
English: Wei's mother cried and told Cui Daozhu about the dream.

古文：及暝，昏然而寝，复见碧衣人引至公署，俱是韦氏之所述。
现代文：等到天黑，崔道枢昏昏沉沉地睡下，见到穿碧色衣服的人把他领到一个公署，全都像韦氏讲过的那样。
English: When it got dark, Cui Daozhu fell into a drowsy sleep and saw a man in blue clothes lead him to a government office, just as Wei had said.

古文：俄有吏执黑纸丹文书字，立道枢于屏侧，疾趋而入。
现代文：不一会儿有一个拿着黑纸红字文书的个官吏，让崔道枢在屏侧站着，他自己快步走进去。
English: After a while, an official holding a black paper with red characters asked Cui Daozhu to stand on the side of the screen, and he quickly walked in.

古文：俄见绣衣举笔而书讫，吏接之而出，令道枢览之。
现代文：不一会儿又见那个穿绣衣的女子提笔写了些什么，小官吏便接到手里走了出来，让崔道枢看那上面写了些什么。
English: A short while later, he saw the woman in the embroidered dress take up a pen to write something, and the minor official received it in his hand and walked out to let Cui Daozhu see what was written on it.

古文：其初云： 崔道枢官至三品，寿至八十。 后有判云： 所害雨龙，事关天府。原之不可，案罪急追。所有官爵，并皆削除。年亦减一半。 
现代文：崔道枢接过来一看，先写的是，崔道枢官至三品，寿到八十；后边又写道，害死了雨龙，事关天府，不能原谅，案情紧急，所有的官爵全都消除，年寿也削减一半。
English: When Cui Daozhu took a look, he first wrote that Cui Daozhu's rank was up to the third grade and his life expectancy was up to eighty. Later, he wrote that he had killed a rain dragon, it was a matter of heaven, it could not be forgiven, the case was urgent, all officials and nobles were eliminated, and his life expectancy was cut in half.

古文：时道枢冬季，其母方修崇福力，才及春首，抱疾数日而终。
现代文：当时崔道枢去的时候正处在冬季。他的母亲开始修道场做功德。刚到春季，他就卧病不起，几天便死了。
English: At the time of Choe Do-hwan's visit, it was winter, and his mother had begun to do merit-making at the monastery. Just before spring, he fell ill and died a few days later.

古文：时崔妻拿咸在京师，韦颜备述其事。
现代文：那时崔道枢的妻儿老小都在京城。韦颜详细地述说了他的事情。
English: At that time, Cui Daozhu's wife, son and daughter were all in Beijing. Wei Yan described his case in detail.

古文：旧传夔及牛渚矶是水府，未详道枢所至何许。
现代文：旧时传说夔州到牛渚矶是水府，不知崔道枢所去的水府是哪里。
English: In the old days, it was said that the distance from Zhangzhou to Niuzhu is called Shuifu. I don't know where the Shuifu is that Cui Douzu went to.

古文：金龙子
现代文：金龙子
English: The Golden Dragon

古文：唐昭宗文德二年正朔御武德殿，有紫气出于昭德殿东隅，郁郁如烟。
现代文：唐昭宗文德二年正月初一，皇上与群臣在武德殿议事。有一股紫气从昭德殿的东隅冒出来，好像郁郁的浓烟。
English: On the first day of the second month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhaozong of Tang, the emperor and his courtiers were holding a meeting in the Wude Hall. A purple gas emerged from the eastern corner of the Zhaozong Hall, like thick smoke.

古文：令大内留后司寻其所出，得金龙子一枚，长五寸许。
现代文：皇上让宫中留后司寻找发出紫气的地方，寻到了一枚金龙子。这枚金龙子有五寸来长。
English: The emperor asked the palace palace keeper to look for a place that emitted purple gas, and found a golden dragon egg. This golden dragon egg is five inches long.

古文：群臣称贺。
现代文：群臣都向皇上祝贺。
English: All the courtiers congratulated the emperor.

古文：帝曰： 朕不以金龙为祥瑞，以偃息干戈为祥瑞。
现代文：皇上说： 我不认为金龙子是祥瑞之兆，我认为偃息兵戈天下太平才是祥瑞。
English: The emperor said, "I don't think the golden dragon is a sign of auspiciousness. I think it is auspiciousness if there is peace in the world."

古文：卿等各宜尽忠，以体朕怀。 
现代文：你们各自都应该尽忠，以体念我的这种情怀。 
English: Each one of you should be loyal and bear in mind this feeling of mine.

古文：门下奏，请改文德二年为龙纪元年。
现代文：司事官有人禀奏，请求把文德二年改成龙纪元年。
English: The magistrate was interrupted by someone requesting that the second year of the Bunde era be changed to the first year of the Dragon era.

古文：黄驯
现代文：黄驯
English: Huang Jie

古文：荆州当阳县倚山为廨宇。
现代文：荆州当阳县靠山建成官署。
English: Jingzhou Dangyang County built a government office.

古文：内有井极深。
现代文：院中有一口很深的井。
English: There is a deep well in the hospital.

古文：井中有龙窠。
现代文：井中有一个龙的巢穴。
English: There is a dragon's lair in the well.

古文：旁入不知几许。
现代文：任何人不知它有多深。
English: No one knows how deep it is.

古文：欲晴霁及将雨，往往有云气自井而出。
现代文：天要变晴以及将要下雨的时候，往往有云气从井底冒出来。
English: When the sky is about to clear and when it is about to rain, clouds often come up from the bottom of the well.

古文：唐光化中，有道士称自商山来，入井中，取龙窠及草药而去。
现代文：唐朝光化年中，有一个道士自称从商山来，他下到井里，取到龙的巢穴和草药之后离去。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty, there was a Taoist who claimed to come from Shangshan. He went down to the well, took the dragon's nest and herbs, and then left.

古文：其后有令黄驯者，到任之后，常系马于井旁，滓秽流渍，尽入于井中。
现代文：这以后有一个叫黄驯的县令，到任之后，常常把马拴在井边，各种污秽之物全都进入井中。
English: After that, there was a county magistrate named Huang Jie. After taking office, he often tied his horse to the edge of the well, and all kinds of filth came into the well.

古文：或有讥之者，饰词以对。
现代文：有的人指责他，他总是回答些粉饰的话。
English: Some people accused him, but he always answered with some kind of whitewash.

古文：岁余，驯及马皆瞽。
现代文：一年多一点之后，他和他的马全都瞎了眼。
English: A little over a year later, he and his horse were both blind.

古文：临汉豕
现代文：临汉豕
English: Linhan Bridge

古文：邛州临汉县内有湫，往往人见牝豕出入，号曰 母猪龙湫 。
现代文：邛州临汉县内有一个水池，常常有人看见有一只母猪出入，人们便叫它 母猪龙池 。
English: There is a pond in Linhan County, Luzhou. A sow is often seen coming and going, and people call it the "sow dragon pond."

古文：唐天复四年，蜀城大旱，使俾守宰躬往灵迹求雨。
现代文：唐朝天复四年，蜀城大旱，大小官员都到有灵迹的地方去求雨。
English: In the fourth year of the Tang Dynasty, Shucheng suffered from a severe drought, and officials of all ranks went to places with miraculous signs to pray for rain.

古文：于时邑长具牢醴，命邑寮偕往祭之。
现代文：这时候临汉县令也准备了牛羊肉、甜酒之类的供品，让县邑所有僚属一起到母猪龙池去祭祀。
English: At this time, the Linhan County government also prepared offerings such as beef and mutton, sweet wine, and let all the colleagues in the county and town go to the sow Longchi to sacrifice.

古文：三奠迨终，乃张筵于湫上，以神胙客。
现代文：祭奠完了，就在池边摆下酒宴，让神赐福游客。
English: Once the memorial service is over, a wine banquet is set up on the edge of the pool for the gods to bless the tourists.

古文：坐于烈日，铺席。以湫为上，每酒巡至湫，则捧觞以献。
现代文：游客们坐于烈日之下，铺席，把池放在被尊敬的地位，每巡酒来到池边，捧杯向池献酒。
English: Tourists sit under the scorching sun, set up tables, put the pool in a respected position, and come to the poolside every tour, holding a glass and offering wine to the pool.

古文：俟雨沾足，方撤此筵。
现代文：要直等到雨下得淹脚面了才能撤掉此宴。
English: We'll have to wait until it's raining and our feet are soaked before we can cancel this party.

古文：歌吹方酣，忽见湫上黑气如云，氛氲直上，狂电烨然，玄云陡暗，雨雹立至。
现代文：歌声乐声正盛，忽然间池上黑气如云，雾气濛濛地直往上升。狂暴的雷电炸响，黑云密布，雨雹立刻泼撒下来。
English: The singing and music were in full swing, when all of a sudden, black clouds formed over the pond, and the mist rose steadily. Violent thunder and lightning exploded, black clouds gathered, and raindrops immediately showered down.

古文：令长与寮吏，鼓舞去盖，蒙湿而归。
现代文：县令和同僚们欢欣鼓舞，丢掉帷盖，任由雨浇湿了然后才回去。
English: The magistrate and his colleagues cheered, threw down the curtains, let the rain drench them and then went back.

古文：翌日，此一境雨足，他邑依然赤地焉。
现代文：第二天，县境中雨水已足，而其它地方依然是干旱的土地。
English: By the next day, the county had received enough rain, but the rest of the land was still dry.

古文：夫人之至诚，则龙畜亦能感动。
现代文：人极其真诚，那就连龙畜亦能感动。
English: If a person is extremely sincere, then even a beast can be moved.

古文：享德济旱，勿谓不智。
现代文：享有贤德救济旱情，不能说不是明智。
English: It cannot be said that it is not wise to enjoy the virtue of drought relief.

古文：烧龙
现代文：烧龙
English: Roast dragon

古文：太江之南，芦荻之间，往往烧起龙。
现代文：长江以南的芦荻间，往往能烧起龙来。
English: Between the reeds south of the Yangtze River, it is often possible to fire up a dragon.

古文：唐天复中，澧州叶源村民邓氏子烧畬，柴草积于天井，火势既盛，龙突出，腾在半空，萦带为火所燎，风力益壮，狂焰弥炽，摆之不落，竟以仆地而毙。长亘数百步。
现代文：唐天复年中，澧州叶源村一个姓邓的村民耕种前烧荒，把柴草堆在山中的洞穴中，火势着旺以后，有一条龙突然钻出来，腾在半空里。它身上带着一些火焰，因为空中风更大，火焰更旺，又不能赶快熄灭，到底把它烧死了，掉到了地上，有好几百步长。
English: In the middle of the year of the Tang Dynasty, a villager surnamed Deng from Yeyuan Village, Zhangzhou, burned waste before farming and piled firewood and grass in a cave in the mountain. After the fire became strong, a dragon suddenly emerged and soared in mid-air. It carried some flames on its body, because the wind was stronger and the flames were stronger, but it could not be extinguished quickly. In the end, it was burned to death and fell to the ground, several hundred paces long.

古文：村民徙居而避之。
现代文：这个姓邓的村民为了避祸，把家搬到别处去了。
English: The villager, surnamed Deng, moved his family to another place to avoid the disaster.

古文：朱梁末，辰州民向氏因烧起一龙，四面风雷急雨，不能扑灭。寻为煨烬，而角不化，莹白如玉。
现代文：朱梁王朝的末年，辰州一个姓向的居民烧起一条龙，四面风雷急雨都不能扑灭，很快便烧成灰烬，但是龙角没有烧化。
English: At the end of the Zhu Liang Dynasty, a resident of Chenzhou surnamed Xiang Yu set fire to a dragon, which could not be extinguished by the wind, thunder and rain on all sides, and quickly burned to ashes, but the dragon's horn did not burn.

古文：向氏宝而藏之，湖南行军高郁酬其价而强取。
现代文：龙角莹如白玉，姓向的把它当成宝贝珍藏着。湖南行军高郁，给姓向的一点钱就硬把龙角拿走了。
English: Dragon's horn is shining like white jade, surnamed Xiang is treasuring it as a treasure. Hunan marches are high-spirited, and a little money given to surnamed Xiang took away the dragon's horn.

古文：于时术士曰： 高司马其祸乎？安用不祥之物以速之？ 
现代文：当时有个术士就说： 高司马将有大祸临头，怎么还用这种不祥之物来召致祸患的来临呢？ 
English: At that time, a sorcerer said: Gao Sima will have a great calamity on his head, how can he use such an ominous thing to summon the coming of disaster?

古文：俄而被诛。
现代文：不久，高郁果然被杀。
English: Soon after, Gao Yu was indeed killed.

古文：柳翁
现代文：柳翁
English: Liu Weng

古文：天祐中，饶州有柳翁常乘小舟钓鄱阳江中，不知其居处妻子，亦不见其饮食。
现代文：天佑年间，饶州有个姓柳的老头经常坐着小船在鄱阳江里钓鱼，不知他在哪里居住，也不知他的妻子儿女是谁，也没人见过他吃饭喝水。
English: During the years of Heaven's blessing, there was an old man surnamed Liu in Raozhou who often sat in a small boat and fished in the Poyang River. He did not know where he lived, nor did he know who his wife and children were. No one had ever seen him eat or drink.

古文：凡水族之类，与山川之深远者，无不周知之。
现代文：凡是水族之类，以及山川的多深多远，他没有不知道的。
English: He didn't know anything about aquariums and the like, or how deep and far away the mountains and rivers are.

古文：鄱阳人渔钓者，咸谘访而后行。
现代文：鄱阳打渔的人们，全都先问他然后再行动。
English: The people fishing in Shenyang all ask him before they act.

古文：吕师造为刺史，修城掘濠，至城北则雨，止后则晴。
现代文：吕师造任刺史时，他大兴土木，修城挖沟，挖到城北就下雨，一停天就晴。
English: When Lu Shizhi was making history, he was busy with civil engineering, building the city and digging ditches. When he dug to the north of the city, it rained, but as soon as it stopped, the sky became clear.

古文：或问柳翁。
现代文：有人问柳老头这是怎么回事。
English: Someone asked Old Man Liu what was going on.

古文：翁曰： 此下龙穴也。
现代文：柳老头说： 这下面是龙穴。
English: Old Willow said, "Down here is the dragon's den.

古文：震动其上，则龙不安而出穴。龙出则雨矣。
现代文：在它上面吵闹震荡，那么龙就不安，就从穴中跑出来，龙出来就要下雨。
English: If there is noise and vibration above it, the dragon will be uneasy and run out of the hole. If the dragon comes out, it will rain.

古文：掘之不已。必得其穴，则霖雨方将为患矣。 
现代文：不停地挖下去，肯定会挖到龙穴，那就会下雨不止成为灾难了。 
English: If you keep digging, you will surely dig a dragon's den, and then it will not only rain, but also become a disaster.

古文：既深数丈，果得方木长数十尺，交构叠之，累积数十重，其下雾气冲人，不可入而止。
现代文：挖到几丈深之后，果然挖到了。有一些几十尺长的方木，交叉叠摞在一起，累积几十层。那下边黑洞洞的，而且雾气冲人，不能进去，就不挖了。
English: After digging a few feet deep, I finally found it. There were some square trees dozens of feet long, crisscrossed and stacked together, accumulating dozens of layers. There was a black hole below, and the fog was so thick that I couldn't get in, so I didn't dig.

古文：其木皆腥涎萦之，刻削平正，非人力所及。
现代文：那些木头上都缠绕着龙的口水，一股腥味，而且刻削得很平滑，很方正，不是人力所能达到的。
English: There was dragon's saliva all over the wood, a strong smell, and the carving was very smooth, very square, not something that could be done by hand.

古文：自是果霖雨为患。
现代文：从此，果然连连下雨成为灾难。
English: From then on, the continuous rain became a disaster.

古文：吕氏诸子将网鱼于鄱阳江，召问柳翁。
现代文：吕家的几个子弟要到鄱阳江上去捕鱼，把柳老头找来问他哪里有鱼。
English: Several sons of the Lyu family wanted to go fishing on the Poyang River. They asked Old Liu where the fish were.

古文：翁指南岸一处， 今日唯此处有鱼，然有一小龙在焉。 
现代文：柳老头指着南岸一个地方说： 今天只有那个地方有鱼，但是有一条小龙也在那里。 
English: Liu Lao Tou pointed to a place on the south bank and said, "Today, only that place has fish, but there is also a small dragon there.

古文：诸子不信，网之，果大获。
现代文：几个孩子不信，就去下网，果然大有收获。
English: A few children didn't believe it, so they went to look online, and found a great deal.

古文：舟中以巨盆贮之。
现代文：他们把打上来的鱼全都放在船上的一只大盆里。
English: They put all the fish they caught in a large basin on the boat.

古文：中有一鳝鱼长一二尺，双目精明，有二长须，绕盆而行。群鱼皆翼从之，将至北岸。
现代文：其中有一条一二尺长的鳝鱼，两眼精光有神，还有两根长须。它绕盆而行，群鱼都在两边跟着它。
English: Among them was a twelve-foot-long eel, with two bright eyes and two long whiskers. It went around the basin, and the schools of fish followed it on both sides.

古文：遂失所在。
现代文：要到北岸的时候，盆里的鱼全都没了。
English: By the time we got to the north shore, all the fish in the tank were gone.

古文：柳翁竟不知所终。
现代文：姓柳的老头也不知哪去了。
English: The old man surnamed Liu also does not know where he is.

