古文：庄浪土帅鲁麟为甘肃副将，求大将不得，恃其部落强，径归庄浪，以子幼请告。
现代文：原文明代，庄浪土帅鲁麟是甘肃副将，他因为争夺甘肃大将的官职没有成功，便依仗自己部落的势力强大，直接回到庄浪，以儿女年幼为由请假告休。
English: In the era of the original civilization, Zhuanglang earth marshal Lu Lin was the first vice-general of Gansu. Because he did not succeed in competing for the official post of general of Gansu, he relied on the strong power of his tribe and returned directly to Zhuanglang, requesting leave on the grounds that his children were young.

古文：有欲予之大将印者，有欲召还京，予之散地者。
现代文：对此，朝中议论纷纷，有主张把大将印玺授与他的，也有主张召他进京，给他个闲散职务的。
English: In response to this, there was much discussion in the Imperial Court, with some advocating that he be awarded the grand marshal's seal, and others calling for him to be summoned to Beijing and given a sinecure.

古文：刘尚书大夏独曰： 彼虐，不善用其众，无能为也。
现代文：尚书刘大夏排斥众议，说道： 鲁麟性情残暴，不善于使用部下士卒，是没有作为的。
English: Shangshu Liu Daxia rejected the public opinion, saying: Lu Lin's temperament is cruel, he is not good at using subordinates, and he has done nothing.

古文：然未有罪。今予之印，非法；召之不至，损威。 
现代文：然而他没有犯罪，现在，给他将印，是不合法制的；如果召唤他不来，有损帝王威信。 
English: However, he did not commit a crime, and now it is illegal to give him a seal; if he is summoned and does not come, it will damage the emperor's prestige.

古文：乃为疏，奖其先世之忠，而听其就闲。
现代文：于是给皇帝奏议，奖励鲁麟先世的忠勇功绩，对鲁麟却听其就闲。
English: So he petitioned the emperor to reward Lu Lin for his past loyalty and bravery, but Lu Lin did not listen to him.

古文：麟卒怏怏病死。
现代文：后鲁麟最终怏怏病死。
English: Later, Lu Lin eventually died of illness.

古文：黔国公沐朝弼，犯法当逮。
现代文：明黔国公沐朝弼犯法应当逮捕。
English: Ming and Qin emperors should be arrested for breaking the law.

古文：朝议皆难之，谓朝弼纲纪之卒且万人，不易逮，逮恐激诸夷变。
现代文：朝臣们议论时，都觉得这件事情很难办，说沐朝弼府中士卒近万人，不能轻易逮捕，逮捕时恐怕激成兵变。
English: When the courtiers were discussing, they all felt that this matter was very difficult to handle, saying that nearly ten thousand people had served as sergeants in the Imperial Household Agency, and they could not be easily arrested, and if they were arrested, there would probably be a violent mutiny.

古文：居正擢用其子，而驰单使缚之，卒不敢动；既至，请贷其死，而锢之南京，人以为快。
现代文：首辅张居正就提拔了沐朝弼儿子的官职，并专派使者驰往沐府将沐朝弼擒获，府中士卒不敢动手。捉来沐朝弼后，张居正请求赦免他的死罪，而把他禁锢在南京，人们都感到很痛快。
English: Chief Assistant Zhang Juzheng promoted the official position of Mu Zhaohui's son, and sent a special envoy to Mu Fu to capture Mu Zhaohui, but the Fu sergeant did not dare to do anything. After capturing Mu Zhaohui, Zhang Juzheng asked for forgiveness of his capital crime, and imprisoned him in Nanjing, people felt very happy.

古文：奖其先则内愧，而怨望之词塞；擢其子则心安，而巢穴之虑重。
现代文：评译褒奖鲁麟的祖先，这样就使他心有愧疚无法抱怨；提拔沐朝弼的儿子，使他心安而内部出现猜疑之心。
English: The review and translation praised the ancestor of Lu Lin, thus making him feel guilty and unable to complain; promoted the son of Mu Zhaohui, making him feel at ease and suspicious inside.

古文：所以罢之锢之，唯吾所制。
现代文：因而不论是罢黜，还是禁锢，全都在我的掌握中。
English: So whether it's dismissal or suspension, it's all in my hands.

