古文：宪问耻，子曰： 邦有道，谷；邦无道，谷，耻也。 
现代文：原宪问孔子什么是可耻。孔子说： 国家太平时，做官拿俸禄；国家政治黑暗时，还做官拿俸禄，这就是可耻。 
English: The original constitution asked Confucius what was shameful. Confucius said: When the country is at peace, it is shameful to earn a salary as a government official; when the country is in political darkness, it is shameful to earn a salary as a government official.

古文： 克、伐、怨、欲不行焉，可以为仁矣？ 
现代文：原宪又问： 好胜、自夸、怨恨、贪婪，这几种毛病都没有的人,可以算仁吗？ 
English: The original constitution also asked: Can a person who does not have the following faults, such as ambition, boasting, resentment, and greed, be considered a benevolent person?

古文：子曰： 可以为难矣，仁则吾不知也。 
现代文：孔子说： 可以说是难能可贵，至于是否是仁，我就不能断定了。 
English: Confucius said: It can be said that it is difficult to be valuable, but as for whether it is benevolence, I cannot decide.

古文：子曰： 士而怀居，不足以为士矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 士如果留恋家庭的安逸生活，就不配做士。 
English: Confucius said, "If a scholar yearns for the comfortable life of a family, he is not worthy of becoming a scholar."

古文：子曰： 邦有道，危言危行；邦无道，危行言孙。 
现代文：孔子说： 国家政局清明时，应该说话正直，行为正直；政局混乱时，应该行事依旧，但说话要谦逊谨慎些。 
English: Confucius said: When the national political situation is clear, one should speak honestly and act honestly; when the political situation is chaotic, one should act in the same way, but one should speak humbly and cautiously.

古文：子曰： 有德者必有言，有言者不必有德。
现代文：孔子说： 有德行的人一定有善言，有善言的人却不一定有德行。
English: Confucius said: "He who has virtue must have good words, but he who has good words must not have virtue."

古文：仁者必有勇，勇者不必有仁。 
现代文：有仁德的人必然勇敢，但勇敢的人不一定有仁德。 
English: People with benevolence are necessarily brave, but brave people do not necessarily have benevolence.

古文：南宫适问于孔子曰： 羿善射，奡荡舟，俱不得其死然；禹、稷躬稼而有天下。 
现代文：南宫适向孔子问道： 羿擅长射箭，奡善于水战，都没有得到善终。禹和稷亲自耕作庄稼，却得到了天下。 
English: Nan Gong Sui asked Confucius: "You are good at archery, and I am good at water combat, but neither of them has a happy ending. However, Yu Hezhen personally cultivated crops, but he gained the whole world.

古文：夫子不答。
现代文：孔子没有回答。
English: Confucius did not answer.

古文：南宫适出，子曰： 君子哉若人！
现代文：南宫适退出去后，孔子说： 这个人是君子啊！
English: After Nan Gongsu left, Confucius said, "This man is a gentleman!"

古文：尚德哉若人！ 
现代文：这个人崇尚道德啊！ 
English: This man is a moralist!

古文：子曰： 君子而不仁者有矣夫，未有小人而仁者也。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子中也有没有仁德的，而小人之中是不会有有仁德的人的。 
English: Confucius said, "Among the nobles, there are some without benevolence, but among the villains, there are none with benevolence."

古文：子曰： 爱之，能勿劳乎？
现代文：孔子说： 爱他，能不以勤劳相劝勉吗？
English: Confucius said, "If you love him, shouldn't you encourage him to work hard?

古文：忠焉，能勿诲乎？ 
现代文：忠于他，能不以善言来教诲他吗？ 
English: Can you be loyal to him and not admonish him with kind words?

古文：子曰： 为命，裨谌草创之，世叔讨论之，行人子羽修饰之，东里子产润色之。 
现代文：孔子说： 郑国发表的公文，都是由裨谌起草的，世叔研究评论，外交官子羽加以修饰，由子产作最后修改润色。 
English: Confucius said: The official documents issued by Zheng Guo were all drafted by Duyun, the world uncle studied and commented on them, the diplomat Zi Yu embellished them, and the son-in-law did the final touch-up.

古文：或问子产，子曰： 惠人也。 
现代文：有人问子产是个什么样的人。孔子说： 是个宽厚慈惠的人。 
English: When asked what kind of person Zi Hou was, Confucius said, "He was a generous and benevolent person."

古文：问子西，曰： 彼哉，彼哉！ 
现代文：又问子西是个什么样的人。孔子说： 他呀！他呀！ 
English: He also asked Zixi what kind of person he was. Confucius said, "He! He!

古文：问管仲，曰： 人也。夺伯氏骈邑三百，饭疏食，没齿无怨言。 
现代文：又问管仲是什么样的人，孔子说： 他是个仁人，他剥夺了伯氏骈邑三百户的封地，使伯氏只能吃相粮，却至死没有怨言。 
English: When asked what kind of person Guanzhong was, Confucius said, "He was a benevolent person. He deprived three hundred households of the Bo clan of their fiefs, so that the Bo clan could only eat each other's grain, but he did not complain until his death.

古文：子曰： 贫而无怨难，富而无骄易。 
现代文：孔子说： 贫穷没有不满抱怨，是很难做到的，富贵了而不骄纵是容易做到的。 
English: Confucius said: It is difficult to be poor without dissatisfaction and complaint, but it is easy to be rich without arrogance.

古文：子曰： 孟公绰为赵、魏老则优，不可以为滕、薛大夫。 
现代文：孔子说： 孟公绰担任晋国的赵氏、魏氏的家臣是绰绰有余的，但是做不了滕国和薛国这样小国的大夫。 
English: Confucius said: Meng Gongpo is more than enough to serve as a vassal of the Zhao and Wei clans in Jin, but he cannot be the doctor of a small country like Teng and Xue.

古文：子路问成人，子曰： 若臧武仲之知、公绰之不欲、卞庄子之勇、冉求之艺，文之以礼乐，亦可以为成人矣。 
现代文：子路问怎样做才是一个完美的人。孔子说： 像臧武仲那样有智慧，像孟公绰那样不贪求，像卞庄子那样勇敢，像冉求那样有才艺，再用礼乐来增加他的文采，就可以算个完人了。 
English: Zi Lu asked how to be a perfect person. Confucius said: If one has wisdom like Zou Wuzhong, is not greedy like Meng Gongqiao, is brave like Zou Zhuangzi, and has talent like Ran Qi, and then uses liturgical music to enhance his literary skills, he can be considered a perfect person.

古文：曰： 今之成人者何必然？
现代文：孔子又说： 如今的完人何必要这样呢？
English: Confucius also said: Why is it necessary for today's perfect man to do so?

古文：见利思义，见危授命，久要不忘平生之言，亦可以为成人矣。 
现代文：见到利益能想到道义，遇到危险时肯献出生命，长期处在贫困之中也不忘平生的诺言，也就可以算是完人了。 
English: If you can think about morality when you see benefits, are willing to give your life when you encounter danger, and do not forget the promise of your lifetime when you are in poverty for a long time, you can also be considered a perfect person.

古文：子问公叔文子于公明贾曰： 信乎，夫子不言，不笑，不取乎？ 
现代文：孔子向公明贾问到公叔文子，说： 先生他不说话、不笑、不取钱财，是真的吗？ 
English: Confucius asked Gongmingjia about Uncle Fumiko, saying, "Sir, is it true that he does not speak, does not smile, and does not take money?

古文：公明贾对曰： 以告者过也。
现代文：公明贾回答道： 这是告诉你话的那个人的错。
English: Gongming Jia replied, "It's the fault of the person who told you.

古文：夫子时然后言，人不厌其言；乐然后笑，人不厌其笑；义然后取，人不厌其取。 
现代文：先生他到该说话的时候才说，因此别人不厌恶他的话；他等到快乐时才笑，因此别人不厌恶他笑；应该取的时候才取，别人不厌恶他的取。 
English: Sir, he speaks when he ought to speak, and his words are not hated by others; he laughs when he ought to laugh, and his words are not hated by others; he takes when he ought to take, and his words are not hated by others.

古文：子曰： 其然？
现代文：孔子说： 原来这样，难道真是这样吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "Is it really so?

古文：岂其然乎？ 子曰： 臧武仲以防求为后于鲁，虽曰不要君，吾不信也。 
现代文：孔子说： 臧武仲凭借防邑请求鲁君在鲁国替臧氏立后代，即便有人说他不是要挟君主，我不相信。 
English: Confucius said: Zou Wuzhong asked Lu Jun to establish descendants for the Zou family in Lu by virtue of the defense of the city. Even if some people say that he is not a blackmailing monarch, I do not believe it.

古文：子曰： 晋文公谲而不正，齐桓公正而不谲。 
现代文：孔子说： 晋文公诡诈而不正派，齐桓公正派而不诡诈。 
English: Confucius said: Jinwen Gong is cunning but not dishonest, Qi Kuan is just but not cunning.

古文：子路曰： 桓公杀公子纠，召忽死之，管仲不死，曰未仁乎？ 
现代文：子路说： 齐桓公杀了公子纠，召忽自杀以殉，但管仲却没有死。管仲不能算是仁人吧？ 
English: Zi Lu said, "Qi Kuan Gong killed his son Guan, and summoned Guo to commit suicide, but Guan Zhong did not die. Can't Guan Zhong be considered a benevolent person?

古文：子曰： 桓公九合诸侯不以兵车，管仲之力也。
现代文：孔子说： 桓公多次召集各诸侯国盟会，不用武力，都是管仲出的力。
English: Confucius said: King Kan repeatedly convened the League of Nations of the various states, without using force, it was the power to mediate.

古文：如其仁，如其仁！ 
现代文：这就是他的仁德！这就是他的仁德！ 
English: That's his humanity! That's his humanity!

古文：子贡曰： 管仲非仁者与？
现代文：子贡说： 管仲不是仁人吧？
English: Zigong said, "Isn't Guanzhong a benevolent person?

古文：桓公杀公子纠，不能死，又相之。 
现代文：齐桓公杀了公子纠，他不能以死相殉，反又去辅佐齐桓公。 
English: Lord Qi Kuan killed his son Gua, so he could not die as a martyr, but instead went to assist Lord Qi Kuan.

古文：子曰： 管仲相桓公霸诸侯，一匡天下，民到于今受其赐。
现代文：孔子说： 管仲辅佐齐桓公，称霸诸侯，匡正天下一切，人民到现在还受到他的好处。
English: Confucius said: Guan Zhong Fu Suo Qi Huan Gong, dominates the princes, and makes everything right in the world. The people are still benefiting from him.

古文：微管仲，吾其被发左衽矣。
现代文：如果没有管仲，我们大概都会披散着头发，衣襟向左边开了。
English: If it weren't for Guanzhong, we'd probably all have our hair hanging loose and our collars turned to the left.

古文：岂若匹夫匹妇之为谅也，自经于沟渎而莫之知也。 
现代文：难道他要像普通男女那样守着小节小信，在山沟中上吊自杀而没有人知道吗？ 
English: Was he going to hang himself in a ravine, like ordinary men and women, and no one would know?

古文：公叔文子之臣大夫僎与文子同升诸公，子闻之,曰： 可以为 文 矣。 
现代文：公叔文子的家臣僎和文子一同做了卫国的大夫。孔子听说了这件事，说： 他死后可以给他 文 的谥号了。 
English: Confucius heard about this and said, "After his death, I can give him the nickname of "Wen." "

古文：子言卫灵公之无道也，康子曰： 夫如是，奚而不丧？ 
现代文：孔子讲到卫灵公的昏庸无道，季康子说： 既然如此，为什么他没有败亡呢？ 
English: Confucius said that Wei Linggong was a mediocrity, Ji Kangzi said: In this case, why did he not fall?

古文：孔子曰： 仲叔圉治宾客，祝鮀治宗庙，王孙贾治军旅，夫如是，奚其丧？ 
现代文：孔子说： 因为他有仲叔圉主管外交，祝鮀管理宗庙祭祀，王孙贾统率军队，这样还怎么败亡呢？ 
English: Confucius said: Because he has Zhong Shuxuan in charge of diplomacy, Zhu Xi in charge of the ancestral temple's rituals, and Wang Sunjia in command of the army, how can he still be defeated?

古文：子曰： 其言之不怍，则为之也难。 
现代文：孔子说： 说大话不感到惭愧的人，那么他实现这些话就是很困难的了。 
English: Confucius said, "If a man is not ashamed to speak great words, it is difficult for him to carry them out."

古文：陈成子弑简公，孔子沐浴而朝，告于哀公曰： 陈恒弑其君，请讨之。 
现代文：成子杀了齐简公。孔子在家斋戎沐浴后去朝见鲁哀公，告诉哀公说： 陈恒杀了他的君主，请出兵讨伐他。 
English: Cheng Zi killed Qi Jian Gong. After taking a bath at home, Confucius went to see Lu Aigong in the morning and told Aigong: Chen Heng killed his monarch, please send troops to fight him.

古文：公曰： 告夫三子。 
现代文：哀公说： 你去向季孙、仲孙、孟孙三人报告吧！ 
English: Aiko said, "Go and report to Kisun, Nakasone, and Mengsun!"

古文：孔子曰： 以吾从大夫之后，不敢不告也，君曰 告夫三子 者！ 
现代文：孔子退朝后说： 因为我曾经做过大夫，不敢不来报告。可君主却对我说 去向那三人报告 。 
English: Confucius said after his abdication: Because I was once a doctor, I did not dare not to report, but the monarch told me to report to the three.

古文：之三子告，不可。孔子曰： 以吾从大夫之后，不敢不告也。 
现代文：孔子去向那三位大夫报告，但三位大夫不愿派兵讨伐，孔子又说： 因为我曾经做过大夫，所以不敢不来报告呀！ 
English: Confucius went to report to the three doctors, but the three doctors did not want to send troops to fight. Confucius said, "Since I was once a doctor, I dare not not report!"

古文：子路问事君，子曰： 勿欺也，而犯之。 
现代文：子路问怎样事奉君主。孔子说： 不能欺骗他，但是可以直言劝谏。 
English: Zi Lu asked how to serve the monarch. Confucius said, "You can't deceive him, but you can talk to him directly."

古文：子曰： 君子上达，小人下达。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子向上通达仁义，小人向下通达财利。 
English: Confucius said: "A gentleman reaches benevolence and righteousness from above, while a villain reaches money and profit from below."

古文：子曰： 古之学者为己，今之学者为人。 
现代文：孔子说： 古时候的人学习是为了提高自身的修养，现在的人学习是为了向别人炫耀。 
English: Confucius said: In ancient times, people studied in order to improve their self-cultivation. Nowadays, people study in order to show off to others.

古文：蘧伯玉使人于孔子，孔子与之坐而问焉，曰： 夫子何为？ 
现代文：蘧伯玉派使者去拜访孔子。孔子让使者坐下，然后问道： 先生最近在做什么？ 
English: Zou Bo-yu sent an envoy to visit Confucius. Confucius asked the envoy to sit down and then asked: What has your teacher been doing recently?

古文：对曰： 夫子欲寡其过而未能也。 
现代文：使者回答说： 先生想要减少自己的过失但还没能做到。 
English: The messenger replied, "The teacher wants to reduce his mistakes, but he hasn't been able to yet.

古文：使者出，子曰： 使乎！
现代文：使者出去之后，孔子说： 好一位使者呀！
English: After the messenger left, Confucius said, "What a good messenger!

古文：使乎！ 
现代文：好一位使者呀！ 
English: What a messenger!

古文：子曰： 不在其位，不谋其政。 
现代文：孔子说： 不在那个职位上，就不去考虑那个职位上的事。 
English: Confucius said: If you are not in that position, you will not think about the things in that position.

古文：曾子曰： 君子思不出其位。 
现代文：曾子说： 君子考虑事情从来不超出自己的职权范围。 
English: Zeng Zi said: A gentleman never thinks about things beyond his scope of authority.

古文：子曰： 君子耻其言而过其行。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子以说得多，做得少为耻辱。 
English: Confucius said: It is a disgrace for a gentleman to talk too much and do too little.

古文：子曰： 君子道者三，我无能焉：仁者不忧，知者不惑，勇者不惧。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子所循的三个方面，我都没能做到：仁德的人不忧愁，智慧的人不迷惑，勇敢的人不惧怕。 
English: Confucius said: I have not been able to achieve the three aspects that a gentleman follows: a humane person is not sad, a wise person is not confused, and a brave person is not afraid.

古文：子贡曰： 夫子自道也。 
现代文：子贡说道： 是老师对自己的描述。 
English: Zigong said, "It's the teacher's description of himself."

古文：子贡方人，子曰： 赐也贤乎哉？
现代文：子贡评论别人的短处。孔子说： 赐啊，你真的就那么贤良吗？
English: Zigong commented on the shortcomings of others. Confucius said: "Grant, are you really so virtuous?

古文：夫我则不暇。 
现代文：我可没有闲工夫去评论别人。 
English: I don't have time to comment on other people.

古文：子曰： 不患人之不己知，患其不能也。 
现代文：孔子说： 不要担心别人不了解自己，应担心自己没有才能。 
English: Confucius said: Don't worry that others don't understand you, you should worry that you don't have talent.

古文：子曰： 不逆诈，不亿不信，抑亦先觉者，是贤乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 不预先揣度别人在欺诈，也不凭空猜测别人不诚实，却又能及早发觉欺诈与不诚实，这就是贤人了。 
English: Confucius said: "A wise man is one who does not guess in advance that others are cheating, nor does he guess out of thin air that others are dishonest, but is able to detect fraud and dishonesty at an early stage.

古文：微生亩谓孔子曰： 丘何为是栖栖者与？
现代文：微生亩对孔子说： 您为什么如此奔波忙碌呢？
English: Microsheng Mu said to Confucius: Why are you so busy?

古文：无乃为佞乎？ 
现代文：不是为了显示您的才辩吧？ 
English: It's not to show off your skills, is it?

古文：孔子曰： 非敢为佞也，疾固也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我不敢显示我有才辩，只是讨厌那种顽固不化的人。 
English: Confucius said: I do not dare to show that I have the ability to argue, but I hate those who are stubborn.

古文：子曰： 骥不称其力，称其德也。 
现代文：孔子说： 千里马值得称赞的不是它的气力，而是它的品德。 
English: Confucius said, "It is not the horse's strength that is praiseworthy, but its character."

古文：或曰： 以德报怨，何如？ 
现代文：有人说： 用恩德来回报怨恨怎么样？ 
English: Some people say: How about repaying grudges with kindness?

古文：子曰： 何以报德？
现代文：孔子说： 用什么来回报恩德呢？
English: Confucius said, "What should I use to repay your kindness?"

古文：以直报怨，以德报德。 
现代文：用正直来回报怨恨，用恩德来回报恩德。 
English: Use honesty to repay resentment, use kindness to repay kindness.

古文：子曰： 莫我知也夫！ 
现代文：孔子说： 没有人了解我啊！ 
English: Confucius said: No one understands me!

古文：子贡曰： 何为其莫知子也？ 
现代文：子贡说： 怎么能说没有人了解您呢？ 
English: Zigong said: How can you say that no one understands you?

古文：子曰： 不怨天，不尤人，下学而上达。知我者其天乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 我不埋怨天，也不责备人，下学礼乐而上达天命，了解我的只有天吧！ 
English: Confucius said: "I do not complain about heaven, nor do I blame others. I have learned etiquette and reached heaven's destiny. Only heaven knows me!"

古文：公伯寮愬子路于季孙。
现代文：公伯寮向季孙氏控诉子路。
English: The Gongbo dormitory has filed a complaint against the Ji Sun clan.

古文：子服景伯以告，曰： 夫子固有惑志于公伯寮，吾力犹能肆诸市朝。 
现代文：子服景伯把这件事告诉了孔子，说： 季孙氏已经被公伯寮迷惑了，我的力量还能让公伯寮的尸首在街头示众。 
English: Zifu Jingbo told this to Confucius, saying, "The Ji Sun clan has been bewitched by Gongbo Liao. With my strength, I can make Gongbo Liao's corpse be paraded in the streets."

古文：子曰： 道之将行也与，命也；道之将废也与，命也。
现代文：孔子说： 道将要实行，是天命决定的；道将要被废弃，也是天命决定的。
English: Confucius said: "The way will be implemented is determined by fate; the way will be abandoned is also determined by fate."

古文：公伯寮其如命何？ 
现代文：公伯寮能把天命怎么样呢？ 
English: What can Gongbailiao do to fulfill its destiny?

古文：子曰： 贤者辟世，其次辟地，其次辟色，其次辟言。 
现代文：孔子说： 贤人逃避动荡的社会而隐居，其次避开没有教化的地方，再次避开没有教养的脸色，再次避开没有涵养的言语。 
English: Confucius said: A wise man avoids a turbulent society and lives in seclusion. Next, he avoids a place without enlightenment. Next, he avoids an uneducated countenance. Next, he avoids an uneducated speech.

古文：子曰： 作者七人矣。 
现代文：孔子又说： 这样做的已经有七个人了。 
English: Confucius said, "There are already seven people who have done this."

古文：子路宿于石门，晨门曰： 奚自？ 
现代文：子路在石门住宿了一夜。早上守城门的人说： 从哪儿来？ 
English: In the morning, the person guarding the gate said, "Where did you come from?"

古文：子路曰： 自孔氏。 
现代文：子路说： 从孔子家来。 
English: Zilu said, "I come from the Confucius family."

古文：曰： 是知其不可而为之者与？ 
现代文：门人说： 就是那位知道做不成却还要做的人吗？ 
English: The doorkeeper said, "Is he the one who knows he can't do it, but still wants to do it?"

古文：子击磬于卫，有荷蒉而过孔氏之门者，曰： 有心哉，击磬乎！ 
现代文：孔子在卫国，一次正在敲击磬，有一位挑着草筐的人从孔子的门前走过说： 这个磬击打得有深意啊！ 
English: Once, when Confucius was playing the gong in the defense of the country, a man carrying a straw basket passed in front of his door and said, "This gong has a deep meaning!"

古文：既而曰： 鄙哉，硁硁乎！莫己知也，斯已而已矣。
现代文：一会儿又说： 声音硁硁的，真可鄙呀，没有人了解自己，就只为自己就是了。
English: After a while, he said: "A hoarse voice is really despicable. No one understands themselves, they are only for themselves.

古文：深则厉，浅则揭。 
现代文：水深就穿着衣服趟过去，水浅就撩起衣服趟过去。 
English: Wading through the deep water with clothes on, wading through the shallow water with clothes on.

古文：子曰： 果哉！
现代文：孔子说： 说得真干脆，没有什么可以责问他了。 
English: Confucius said: To put it bluntly, there is nothing to reproach him with.

古文：末之难矣。 子张曰： 《书》云， 高宗谅阴，三年不言。 
现代文：子张说： 《尚书》上说， 殷高宗守丧，三年不谈政事。 
English: Zi Zhang said: "It is said in the Shang Shu that Yin Gaozong kept a low profile and did not talk about politics for three years.

古文：何谓也？ 
现代文：这是什么意思？ 
English: What does that mean?

古文：子曰： 何必高宗，古之人皆然。
现代文：孔子说： 不仅是高宗，古人都是这样。
English: Confucius said: Not only Gaozong, but all the ancients were like this.

古文：君薨，百官总己以听于冢宰三年。 
现代文：国君死了，朝廷百官都各管自己的职事，听命于冢宰三年。 
English: The sovereign was dead, and the hundred officials of the court were each in charge of their own duties, and obeyed the command of the eunuch for three years.

古文：子曰： 上好礼，则民易使也。 
现代文：孔子说： 居上位的人遇事依礼而行，那么百姓就容易指使了。 
English: Confucius said: If those in high positions act according to etiquette, it will be easy for the common people to follow their lead.

古文：子路问君子，子曰： 修己以敬。 
现代文：子路问怎样才能成为君子。孔子说： 常常慎重的培养、训练、教育好自己。 子路说： 这样就可以了吗？ 
English: Zilu asked how to become a gentleman. Confucius said, "Always carefully cultivate, train, and educate yourself well." Zilu said, "Is that enough?"

古文：曰： 如斯而已乎？ 曰： 修己以安人。 
现代文：孔子说： 修养自己，使周围的人们安乐。 
English: Confucius said: Cultivate yourself and make the people around you happy.

古文：曰： 如斯而已乎？ 
现代文：子路说： 这样就够了吗？ 
English: Zilu said: Is this enough?

古文：曰： 修己以安百姓。
现代文：孔子说： 修养自己，使所有百姓都安乐。
English: Confucius said: Cultivate yourself, so that all the people are happy.

古文：修己以安百姓，尧、舜其犹病诸！ 
现代文：修养自己使所有百姓都安乐，尧舜还怕难于做到呢？ 
English: Cultivating oneself to make all the people happy, is it difficult to achieve?

古文：原壤夷俟，子曰： 幼而不孙弟，长而无述焉，老而不死，是为贼！ 
现代文：原壤叉开双腿坐着等待孔子。孔子骂他说： 你年幼时不懂礼节，长大了也毫无成就，老了还不死，真是个害人精。 
English: Confucius scolded him, "When you were young, you didn't know proper etiquette, when you grew up, you didn't achieve anything, and when you are old, you still haven't died. You are really a pest.

古文：以杖叩其胫。
现代文：说着，用手杖敲他的小腿。
English: He said, tapping his shin with his cane.

古文：阙党童子将命，或问之曰： 益者与？ 
现代文：阙里的一个童子来向孔子传话。有人问孔子： 这小孩是肯求上进的人吗？ 
English: A boy from Yili came to convey a message to Confucius. Someone asked Confucius: Is this child someone who is willing to ask for advancement?

古文：子曰： 吾见其居于位也，见其与先生并行也。
现代文：孔子说： 我看见他坐在成年人的位子上，又见他和长辈并肩而行。
English: Confucius said: I saw him sitting on the seat of an adult, and I saw him walking side by side with the elders.

古文：非求益者也，欲速成者也。 
现代文：这不是个肯求上进的人，只是一个急于求成的人。 
English: This is not a person who is willing to improve, just a person who is eager to succeed.

