古文：厉王虐，国人谤王。
现代文：周厉王暴虐，百姓纷纷指责他。
English: Zhou Li Wang was a tyrant, and the people blamed him.

古文：邵公告曰： 民不堪命矣。 
现代文：召穆公对厉王说： 老百姓忍受不了暴政了！ 
English: Summoning Mu Gong, he said to King Li: The common people can no longer tolerate tyranny!

古文：王怒，得卫巫，使监谤者，以告，则杀之。
现代文：厉王听了勃然大怒，找到卫国的巫师，让卫国的巫师去监视批评王的人，按照卫国的巫师的报告，杀掉批评王的人。
English: Hearing this, King Liang flew into a rage, found a wizard to protect the country, asked the wizard to monitor the critics of the king, and killed the critics of the king according to the report of the wizard.

古文：国人莫敢言，道路以目。
现代文：国人不敢说话，路上相见，以目示意。
English: Chinese people do not dare to speak, they see each other on the road and make eye contact.

古文：王喜，告邵公曰： 吾能弭谤矣，乃不敢言。 
现代文：周厉王颇为得意，对召穆公说： 我能消除指责的言论，他们已经不敢再吭声了！ 
English: Zhou Li Wang was quite proud of himself and said to Zhao Mu Gong: I can eliminate the accusations, they no longer dare to remain silent!

古文：邵公曰： 是障之也。
现代文：召公回答说： 你这样做是堵住人们的嘴。
English: "What you're doing is silencing people," Zhao Gong replied.

古文：防民之口，甚于防川。
现代文：阻塞老百姓的嘴，好比阻塞河水。
English: Blocking people's mouths is like blocking the river.

古文：川壅而溃，伤人必多，民亦如之。
现代文：河流如果堵塞后一旦再决堤，伤人一定很多，人民也是这样。
English: If a river is blocked and then bursts its banks, many people will be hurt, and so will the people.

古文：是故为川者，决之使导；为民者，宣之使言。
现代文：因此治水的人疏通河道使它畅通，治民者只能开导他们治民者，而让人畅所欲言。
English: Therefore, the people who control the water should clear the river to make it smooth. The people who control the people can only enlighten the people who control the people, and let people speak freely.

古文：故天子听政，使公卿至于列士献诗，瞽献曲，史献书，师箴，瞍赋，矇诵，百工谏，庶人传语，近臣尽规，亲戚补察，瞽史教诲，耆艾修之，而后王斟酌焉。是以事行而不悖。
现代文：所以君王处理政事，让三公九卿以至各级官吏进献讽喻诗，乐师进献民间乐曲，史官进献有借鉴意义的史籍，少师诵读箴言，盲人吟咏诗篇，有眸子而看不见的盲人诵读讽谏之言，掌管营建事务的百工纷纷进谏，平民则将自己的意见转达给君王，近侍之臣尽规劝之责，君王的同宗都能补其过失，察其是非，乐师和史官以歌曲、史籍加以谆谆教导，元老们再进一步修饰整理，然后由君王斟酌取舍，付之实施，这样，国家的政事得以实行而不违背道理。
English: Therefore, the king dealt with political affairs, let the three kings, nine lords and officials at all levels present allegorical poems, musicians present folk music, historians present historical books with reference significance, young teachers recite proverbs, blind people chant poems, blind people with eyes but cannot see read sarcastic sayings, hundreds of workers in charge of construction affairs enter the palace one after another, and commoners convey their opinions to the king. Close attendants perform the duty of persuasion. The king's consorts can make up for their mistakes and investigate the rights and wrongs. Musicians and historians teach with songs and historical books. The elders further modify and organize, and then the king

古文：民之有口，犹土之有山川也，财用于是乎出；犹其原隰之有衍沃也，衣食于是乎生。
现代文：老百姓有口，就像大地有高山河流一样，社会的物资财富全靠它出产；又像高原和低地都有平坦肥沃的良田一样，人类的衣食物品全靠它产生。
English: The common people have mouths, just as the earth has mountain rivers, and the material wealth of society depends entirely on its production; and just as there are flat and fertile good fields in the highlands and lowlands, human clothing and food products depend entirely on it.

古文：口之宣言也，善败于是乎兴。
现代文：人们用嘴巴发表议论，政事的成败得失就能表露出来。
English: People use their mouths to express their opinions, and the success or failure of political affairs can be revealed.

古文：行善而备败，其所以阜财用衣食者也。
现代文：人们以为好的就尽力实行，以为失误的就设法预防，这是增加衣食财富的途径啊。
English: People do their best to implement what they think is good, and try to prevent what they think is a mistake. This is a way to increase the wealth of food and clothing.

古文：夫民虑之于心而宣之于口，成而行之，胡可壅也？
现代文：人们心中所想的人们心中所想的通过嘴巴表达，就自然流露出来，怎么可以堵呢？
English: The thoughts in people's hearts are naturally expressed through their mouths, so how can they be blocked?

古文：若壅其口，其与能几何？ 
现代文：如果硬是堵住老百姓的嘴，那赞许的人还能有几个呢？ 
English: If the people's mouths are to be muzzled, how many people will approve of it?

古文：王不听，于是国莫敢出言。
现代文：周厉王不听，在这种情况下老百姓再也不敢公开发表言论指斥他。
English: Zhou Li Wang did not listen, and under such circumstances, the common people no longer dared to publicly criticize him.

古文：三年，乃流王于彘。
现代文：过了三年，人们终于把这个暴君放逐到彘地去了。
English: After three years, the tyrant was finally banished to the Badlands.

