古文：冯异字公孙，颍川父城人也。
现代文：冯异字公孙，颍川郡父城县人。
English: Feng Yizha Gongsun, a native of Chicheng County, Beichuan County.

古文：好读书，能《左氏春秋》、《孙子兵法》。
现代文：喜爱读书，通晓《左氏春秋》、《孙子兵法》。
English: He likes to read and is familiar with "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi" and "Sun Tzu's Art of War."

古文：汉兵起，异以郡掾监五县，与父城长苗萌共城守，为王莽拒汉。
现代文：汉兵兴起时，冯异以郡掾身份监五县，与父城县长苗萌共同守城，为王莽拒汉兵。
English: When the Han soldiers were on the rise, Feng Ying supervised the five counties as the county magistrate, and guarded the city together with Miao Meng, the chief of Chicheng County, as Wang Meng resisted the Han soldiers.

古文：光武略地颍川，攻父城不下，屯兵巾车乡。
现代文：光武略地颍川，攻父城不下，屯兵巾东乡。
English: Guangwu took advantage of the situation to take control of the Minchuan River. He could not go down to attack the city, so he sent troops to Dongxiang.

古文：异间出行属县，为汉兵所执。
现代文：冯异微行属县，被汉兵捉住。
English: Feng Yinying was captured by the Han soldiers.

古文：时异从兄孝及同郡丁綝、吕晏，并从光武，因共荐异，得召见。
现代文：当时冯异的堂兄冯孝及同郡人丁纟林、吕晏都跟从着光武，于是共同荐举冯异，得到光武召见。
English: At that time, Feng Yiyi's cousin Feng Xiao and fellow county residents Ding Yulin and Lv Yao all followed Guangwu, so they jointly recommended the promotion of Feng Yiyi and were summoned by Guangwu.

古文：异曰： 异一夫之用，不足为强弱。
现代文：冯异说： 我一个人的作用，不足以为强弱。
English: Feng Yin said: My role alone is not enough to be strong or weak.

古文：有老母在城中，愿归据五城，以效功报德。 光武曰： 善。 异归，谓苗萌曰： 今诸将皆壮士屈起，多暴横，独有刘将军所到不虏掠。
现代文：有老母在城中，愿意回去占据五城，以效功报德。 光武说： 好。 冯异回去，对苗萌说： 现在各将领都是壮士崛起，多半暴虐专横，只有刘将军所到之处不虏掠。
English: There was an old woman in the city who was willing to go back and occupy the five cities to repay the favor. Guangwu said, "Good." Feng Yi went back and said to Miao Meng, "Nowadays, all generals are strong men, and most of them are tyrannical. Only General Liu does not plunder wherever he goes."

古文：观其言语举止，非庸人也，可以归身。 苗萌曰： 死生同命，敬从子计。 光武南还宛，更始诸将攻父城者前后十余辈，异坚守不下；及光武为司隶校尉，道经父城，异等即开门奉牛、酒迎。
现代文：看他的言语举止，不是庸碌之人，可以向他归顺。 苗萌说： 我与你死生同命，恭敬地听从你的意见。 光武南归宛，更始诸将前后有十多人率部攻打父城，冯异都坚守不下；等到光武做了司隶校尉，路经父城时，冯异等即开门奉献牛酒迎接。
English: Looking at his words and behavior, he is not a mediocre person, and you can submit to him. Miao Meng said: I am with you in life and death, and I respectfully listen to your opinion. Guangwu returned to the south, and at the beginning of the war, more than ten people led the troops to attack his father's city, and Feng Yinyi could not resist; when Guangwu became the captain of Sili and passed through his father's city, Feng Yinyi and others opened the door to welcome him with cow wine.

古文：光武署异为主簿，苗萌为从事。
现代文：光武令冯异暂为主籍，苗萌为从事。
English: Guangwu ordered Feng Yi to be the head for the time being, and Miao Meng to be in charge.

古文：异因荐邑子铫期、叔寿、段建、左隆等，光武皆以为椽史，以至洛阳。
现代文：冯异于是就推荐同邑人铫期、叔寿、段建、左隆等，光武都以他们为掾史，跟随自己到洛阳。
English: Feng Yiyi then recommended his fellow townsmen, such as Shuzhou, Duan Jian and Zuolong, and Guangwu followed him to Luoyang.

古文：更始数欲遣光武徇河北，诸将皆以为不可。
现代文：更始几次想派遣光武攻取河北，诸将都以为不可。
English: At first, several generals thought it was impossible to send Guangwu to invade Hebei.

古文：是时，左丞相曹竟子诩为尚书，父子用事，异劝光武厚结纳之。
现代文：这时左丞相曹竟的儿子曹诩为尚书，父子当权，冯异劝光武好好与他们父子结纳。
English: At this time, Cao Cao, the son of Cao Cao, the Minister of the Left, was in power, and Feng Yi advised Guangwu to make a deal with his father and son.

古文：及度河北，诩有力焉。
现代文：后来过黄河北往，曹诩帮了大忙。
English: Later, after crossing the Yellow River to the north, Cao Yu helped a lot.

古文：自伯升之败，光武不敢显其悲戚，每独居，辄不御酒肉，枕席有涕泣处。
现代文：自从光武兄伯升被更始杀害后，光武不敢表露出悲戚之情，常独居，不进酒肉，枕席之上常有涕泣。
English: Ever since Guangwu's elder brother Bo Sheng was killed by the rebels, Guangwu has not dared to show his grief. He often lives alone, does not drink, and often cries on his pillow.

古文：异独叩头宽譬哀情。
现代文：冯异独向光武叩头宽心安慰哀情。
English: Feng Yanyin is a one-way kowtow to Guangwu, soothing and comforting sorrow.

古文：光武止之曰： 卿勿妄言。 异复因间进说曰： 天下同苦王氏，思汉久矣。
现代文：光武阻止道： 你不要瞎说。 冯异因而再乘机对光武说： 天下同苦于王莽，思汉已久了。
English: Guangwu stopped him and said, "Don't talk nonsense." Feng Yi then took the opportunity to say to Guangwu, "The whole world is suffering from Wang Mang, I've been thinking about it for a long time.

古文：至邯郸，遣异与铫期乘传抚循属县，录囚徒，存鳏寡，亡命自诣者除其罪，阴条二千石长吏同心及不附者上之。
现代文：现在更始诸将横冲直闯暴虐平民，到哪里抢到哪里，百姓失望，不好拥戴谁。现主公可不经请示而自行其事，施行恩德。有桀纣之乱，就见到商汤武王的功劳；人饥渴久了，容易充饱。应当急切分遣官属，审理释放囚徒，抚养鳏寡，逃亡自首的免除其罪。 暗中把与二千石长吏同一条心及不附他的列上名册呈给光武。
English: Now, more and more generals are on the rampage, violently abusing the common people, grabbing what they can, leaving the people disappointed and unable to embrace anyone. The current lord can do things on his own without being asked to do so, and implement benevolence. If there is a riot, he will see the merits of Shang Tangwu Wang; if people have been hungry and thirsty for a long time, it is easy to be satisfied. It is necessary to urgently dispatch officials and subordinates, try to release prisoners, raise widows and widowers, and absolve those who have fled and surrendered. Secretly present Guangwu with the same heart as the two thousand stone officials and the

古文：及王郎起，光武自蓟东南驰，晨夜草舍，至饶阳无蒌亭。
现代文：等到王郎起，光武自蓟县向东南奔驰，日行夜宿，到了饶阳县的无蒌亭。
English: After waiting for Wang Lang to leave, Guangwu drove south-east from Handan County, traveling day and night, and arrived at Muxian Pavilion in Raoyang County.

古文：时天寒烈，众皆饥疲，异上豆粥。
现代文：这时天气寒烈，部众都饥饿疲乏，冯异献上豆粥。
English: At this time, the weather was cold and the members were hungry and tired. Feng Yizhong presented bean porridge.

古文：明旦，光武谓诸将曰： 昨得公孙豆粥，饥寒俱解 及至南宫，遇大风雨，光武引车入道傍空舍，异抱薪，邓禹热火，光武对灶燎衣。
现代文：第二天一早，光武对诸将说： 昨天得到冯异豆粥，饥寒都解除。 等到了南宫县，遇到大风雨，光武把车引入道傍空舍，冯异抱着柴薪，邓禹把柴薪烧燃，光武对灶烤着衣服。
English: In the morning of the next day, Guangwu said to the generals: "Yesterday, I got Feng's bean porridge, and my cold and hunger were relieved. When I got to Nangong County, I encountered a heavy storm, and Guangwu drove his car into a vacant house on the roadside. Feng Yinyi was holding firewood, Deng Yu was burning firewood, and Guangwu was baking clothes on the stove.

古文：异复进麦饭菟肩。
现代文：冯异再进麦饭菟肩。
English: Feng Yiyi re-enters the wheat noodles.

古文：因复度虖沱河至信都，使异别收河间兵。
现代文：因而再渡过滹沱河到信都，拜冯异为偏将军。
English: Therefore, he crossed the Minhe River to Xindu again, and became a partial general of Bai Fengyi.

古文：还，拜偏将军。从破王郎，封应侯。
现代文：从而破王郎，又封为应侯。
English: As a result, Wangro was defeated, and he was made a vassal.

古文：异为人谦退不伐，行与诸将相逢，辄引车避道。
现代文：冯异为人谦退不自夸己功，在路上与诸将相逢，常常引车避道。
English: Feng Yixing is humble and does not boast of his achievements. On the road, he meets generals and often leads the way.

古文：进止皆有表识，军中号为整齐。
现代文：进退都有标帜，军中号为整齐。
English: There are signs for marching in and out, and the middle ranks of the army are neat.

古文：每所止舍，诸将并坐论功，异常独屏树下，军中号曰 大树将军 。
现代文：每次驻扎休息，诸将们坐在一起论功，冯异独隐藏树下，军中称他为 大树将军 。
English: Every time they camped and rested, the generals sat together and discussed their merits. Feng Yiduo hid under a tree, and the army called him General Big Tree.

古文：及破邯郸，乃更部分诸将，各有配隶。
现代文：后来破了邯郸，就更换了一部分将领，各有配属。
English: Later, when the shackles were broken, a number of generals were replaced, each with his own staff.

古文：军士皆言愿属大树将军，光武以此多之。
现代文：军士都说愿分属于大树将军，光武从此看重冯异。
English: The sergeants all said that the division belonged to General Daiki, and from then on, Guangwu valued Feng Yi.

古文：别击破铁胫于北平，又降匈奴于林闟顿王，因从平河北。
现代文：另击破铁胫于北平，又降匈奴于林顂顿王，因跟从平定了河北。
English: He also broke the iron yoke in Beiping, and reduced the Xiongnu to the King of Lingyutun, thereby pacifying Hebei.

古文：时，更始遣舞阴王李轶、廪丘王田立、大司马朱鲔、白虎公陈侨将兵号三十万，与河南太守武勃共守洛阳。
现代文：这时更始派遣舞阴王李轶、廪丘王田立、大司马朱鲔、白虎公陈侨，统率兵马号称三十万，与河南太守武勃共守洛阳。
English: At this time, he also dispatched Li Qian, the King of Muyin, Wang Tianlu, the King of Qiuqiu, the Grand Master Ma Zhujun, and the White Tiger King Chen Qiao, who commanded 300,000 soldiers and horses, and guarded Luoyang together with the Henan Governor Wubo.

古文：光武将北徇燕、赵，以魏郡、河内独不逢兵，而城邑宗，仓廪实，乃拜寇恂为河内太守，异为孟津将军，统二郡军河上，与恂合执，以拒朱鲔等。
现代文：光武将要北征燕赵，以魏郡、河内没有兵事，城邑完整，仓廪充实，就拜寇恂为河内太守，冯异为孟津将军，统率二郡军于黄河边上，与寇恂合势，以拒朱鲔等。
English: Guangwu will send Yan Zhao to the north, Wei County and Hanoi have no military affairs, the cities and towns are complete, and the granaries are full. He will ask Guo Gan to be the governor of Hanoi, Feng Yan to be the general of Mengjin, and lead the two county army on the edge of the Yellow River, and join forces with Guo Gan to resist Zhu Gan.

古文：异乃遗李轶书曰： 愚闻明镜所以照形，往事所以知今。
现代文：冯异就致书李轶说： 我听说明镜是用来照形的，往事能用来说明今天的道理。
English: Feng Yi wrote to Li Jun and said: I have heard that the mirror is used to reflect the form, and the past can be used to illustrate the truth of today.

古文：昔微子去殷而入周，项伯畔楚而归汉。周勃迎代王而黜少帝，霍光尊孝宣而废昌邑。
现代文：以前微子离开殷商而入周，项伯叛楚而归汉，周勃迎代王而废黜少帝，霍光尊孝宣而废昌邑王刘贺。
English: In the past, Micron left Yin Shang and entered Zhou, Xiang Bo rebelled against Chu and returned to Han, Zhou Bo ushered in the king and deposed the young emperor, and Huo Guang respected Xiaoxuan and deposed Liu He, the king of Chang'e.

古文：彼皆畏天知命，睹存亡之符，见废兴之事，故能成功于一时，垂业于万世也。
现代文：他们都是畏天知命，看到了存亡的征兆，见到了废兴的事实，所以能成功于一时，垂伟业于万世哩！
English: They are all fearless, saw the signs of survival, saw the fact of the collapse of prosperity, so they can succeed in a moment, and achieve greatness in all ages!

古文：苟令长安尚可扶助，延期岁月，疏不间亲，远不逾近，季文岂能居一隅哉？
现代文：假如长安还可以扶助，延期岁月，疏不间亲，远不逾近，你李轶怎么会独居一隅呢？
English: If Chang'an can still support, postpone the years, estranged relatives, far away but not too close, how can you Li Yao live alone in a corner?

古文：今长安坏乱，赤眉临郊，王侯构难。大臣乖离，纲纪已绝，四方分崩，异姓并起，是故萧王跋涉霜雪，经营河北。
现代文：现在长安坏乱，赤眉已临近市郊，王侯们制造灾难，大臣们各怀去意，朝纲法纪已经绝灭，四方分崩离析，异姓并起，所以光武不避艰苦，经营河北。
English: Now Chang'an is in chaos, the Red Eyebrows have approached the outskirts of the city, the princes have created disasters, the ministers have their own wishes, the legal code of the dynasty has been extinguished, the four sides have fallen apart, and different surnames have arisen, so Guangwu does not avoid hardship and manages Hebei.

古文：方今英俟云集，百姓风靡，虽邠歧慕周，不足以喻。
现代文：现在英俊云集，百姓风靡，虽然像、岐归古公父，也不足以比喻。
English: Nowadays, handsome men are gathering, and the people are popular. Although it is similar to the ancient fathers, it is not enough to compare.

古文：季文诚能觉悟成败，亟定大计，论功古人，转祸为福，在此时矣。
现代文：你李轶如果能觉悟成败，及时确定大计，也像微子项伯一样论功成业，转祸为福，就在此时了。
English: If you, Li Wei, can be aware of success and failure, determine the overall plan in time, and also talk about achievement and accomplishment, and turn misfortune into blessing, just like Xiao Bo, this is the time.

古文：如猛将长驱，严兵围城，虽有悔恨，亦无及已。 
现代文：如果等到猛将们长驱直入，严厉的兵众把城围了起来，虽然悔恨，也来不及了。 
English: If you wait until the storm troopers have driven straight in, and the stern soldiers have surrounded the city, you will regret it, but it will be too late.

古文：初，轶与光武首结谋约，加相亲爱，及更始立，反共陷伯升。
现代文：起初，李轶与光武首先结立谋约，加上相亲相爱，等到更始即位，反而共同陷害伯升。
English: At first, Li Qiye and Guangwu first made an agreement and fell in love with each other. However, when Li Qiye ascended to the throne, they conspired to frame Baosheng.

古文：虽知长安已危，欲降又不自安。
现代文：虽明知长安已经很危险，想投降又感到不能自安。
English: Although he knew that Chang'an was already in great danger, he could not bring himself to surrender.

古文：乃报异书曰： 轶本与萧王首谋造汉，结死生之约，同荣枯之计。
现代文：就回书冯异说： 我本来与光武首谋兴汉事宜，结生死之约，同成败之计。
English: Regarding the reply letter, Feng Yi said: I had originally planned with the leader of Guangwu to rejuvenate the Han Dynasty. It was a life-and-death agreement, a plan with the same success or failure.

古文：今轶守洛阳，将军镇孟津，俱据机轴，千载一会，思成断金。
现代文：现在我守洛阳，你镇孟津，都据守要津，这是千载一时的机会，想成断金之交。
English: Now I'm guarding Luoyang, and your town of Mengjin is guarding Yozu. This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, and I want to make a golden friendship.

古文：惟深达萧王，愿进愚策，以佐国安人。 轶自通书之后，不复与异争锋，故异因此得北攻天井关，拔上党两城，又南下河南成皋已东十三县，及诸屯集，皆平之，降者十余万。
现代文：惟请深达光武，愿他进纳我的策略，以佐国安民。 李轶自通书后，就不再与冯异厮杀，所以冯异因此得以北攻天井关，拔上党两城，又南下河南成皋以东十三县，和所有屯聚，都平定了，投降的有十多万。
English: However, I would like to ask Shengda Guangwu to adopt my strategy to keep the country and the people safe. After Li Xi sent the letter, he would no longer fight with Feng Yiming, so Feng Yiming was able to attack the northern border, pull up the party's two cities, and go south to the thirteen counties east of Henan Chenglu, and all the settlements were leveled, and more than one hundred thousand surrendered.

古文：武勃将万余人攻诸畔者，异引军度河，与勃战于士乡下，大破斩勃，获首五千余级，轶又闭门不救。
现代文：与武勃战于士乡下，大破并斩武勃，杀五千余人，李轶又闭门不救。
English: He fought with Wu Bo in the countryside, defeated and decapitated Wu Bo, killed more than five thousand people, and Li Xi closed the door and did not help.

古文：异见其信效，具以奏闻。
现代文：冯异看到李轶守信用，就奏给光武。
English: When Feng Yi saw that Li Yimou was trustworthy, he played a trick on Guangwu.

古文：光武故宣露轶书，令朱鲔知之。
现代文：光武故意宣露李轶的书信，让朱鲔知道。
English: Guangwu purposely leaked Li Yao's letter to let Zhu Rong know.

古文：鲔怒，遂使人刺杀轶。
现代文：朱鲔怒，就派人把李轶刺杀了。
English: Zhu Rong was so angry that he sent someone to assassinate Li Rong.

古文：由是城中乖离，多有降者。
现代文：由此城中人心离散，多有出城投降的。
English: As a result, people in the city dispersed, with many leaving the city and surrendering.

古文：鲔乃遣讨难将军苏茂将数万人攻温，鲔自将数万人攻平阴以缀异。
现代文：朱鲔就派遣讨难将军苏茂率领数万人攻温，朱鲔自率数万人攻平阳县以连缀攻冯异。
English: Zhu Xi dispatched the general Su Mao to lead tens of thousands of people to attack Wen, and Zhu Xi led tens of thousands of people to attack Pingyang County to attack Feng Yi.

古文：异遣校尉护军将兵，与寇恂合击茂，破之。异因度河击鲔，鲔走；异追至洛阳，环城一匝而归。
现代文：冯异派遣校尉护军领兵，与寇恂合击攻破苏茂，冯异因而渡黄河击朱鲔，朱鲔逃走；冯异追到洛阳，环城一周而回。
English: Feng Yiyi dispatched the captain of the escort to lead the troops, and together with Kou Yizhong defeated Sumo. As a result, Feng Yiyi crossed the Yellow River to attack Zhu Xi, Zhu Xi fled; Feng Yiyi chased Luoyang and circled around the city.

古文：移檄上伏，诸将皆入贺，并劝光武即帝位。
现代文：移送檄文呈上文书，诸将都进来祝贺，并劝光武即帝位。
English: After transferring the imperial edict and submitting the document, all the generals came to congratulate and advise Guangwu to take the throne.

古文：光武乃召异诣鄗，问四方动静。
现代文：光武就召冯异回到高阝邑，询问四方动静。
English: Guangwu called Feng Yi back to Gaoyuan to inquire about the situation in the four directions.

古文：异曰： 三王反畔，更始败亡，天下无主，宗庙之忧，在于大王。
现代文：冯异说： 张卬等三王反叛，更始败亡，天下无主，社稷之忧，在大王身上。
English: Feng Yin said: Zhang Ye and the other three kings rebelled and were defeated, the world was without a master, and the society was worried about the great king.

古文：宜从众议，上为社稷，下为百姓。 光武曰： 我昨夜梦乘赤龙上天，觉悟，心中动悸 异因下席再拜贺曰： 此天命发于精神。
现代文：应当听从众人意见，上为社稷，下为百姓。 光武说： 我昨夜梦乘赤龙上天，醒来后，心中跳得很厉害。 冯异于是伏地再拜恭贺说： 这是天命在你精神上的感应，心中跳动，是大王慎重的个性。 
English: It is necessary to listen to the opinions of everyone, from the top to the bottom. Guangwu said, "Last night, I dreamt of riding a red dragon to the sky. When I woke up, my heart leapt violently." Feng Ying then bowed down and congratulated him again, saying, "This is the influence of heaven's destiny on your spirit. Your heart is throbbing. You have a very prudent personality."

古文：心中动悸，大王重慎之性也。 异遂与诸将军议上尊号。建武二年春，定封异阳夏侯。引击阳翟贼严终、赵根，破之。
现代文：冯异就与诸将商定上尊号的问题。建武二年春，定封冯异为阳夏侯。冯异往击阳翟贼严终、赵根，破贼。
English: Feng Yi agreed with the generals on the issue of the honorific title. In the spring of the second year of Jianwu, Feng Yi was appointed as Yang Xia Hou. Feng Yi went to attack Yang Xie Yan, and Zhao Gen broke the thief.

古文：诏异归家上冢，使太中大夫赍牛、酒，令二百里内太守、都尉已下及宗族会焉。
现代文：诏冯异回家上冢祭祀，使太中大夫带着牛酒，令二百里以内的太守、都尉以下及宗族参与祭会。
English: Zhao Fengyin went home to attend the sacrificial rites, and asked the Grand Vice-Marshal to bring cow wine, and ordered the Empress Dowager, the captains and their families within 200 miles to participate in the festival.

古文：时，赤眉、延岑暴乱三辅，郡县大姓各拥兵众，大司徒邓禹不能定，乃遣异代禹讨之。
现代文：这时赤眉、延岑暴虐扰乱三辅，郡县大姓各拥兵众，大司徒邓禹不能平定，就派遣冯异代邓禹讨伐。
English: At this time, the Red Eyebrows and Yan Xun brutally disturbed the Three Auxiliaries, the county and county chiefs all supported the troops, and the chief statesman Deng Yu could not be pacified, so he sent Feng Yisai to fight Deng Yu.

古文：车驾送至河南，赐以乘舆七尺具剑。
现代文：光武送到河南，赐以车舆和七尺具剑。
English: Guangwu was sent to Henan and given a chariot and a seven-feet sword.

古文：敕异曰： 三辅遭王莽、更始之乱，重以赤眉、延岑之酷，元元涂炭，无所依诉。
现代文：命令冯异说： 三辅遭了王莽和更始之乱，又加上受了赤眉、延岑的酷虐，平民百姓灾难困苦，没有地方依靠申诉。
English: Feng Yin said in the order: Sanfu suffered from Wang Mangyu and the chaos at the beginning, and suffered from the cruelty of the Red Eyebrows and Yan Xun, and the common people suffered from disasters and hardships, and there was no place to rely on complaints.

古文：今之征伐，非必略地屠城，要在平定安集之耳。
现代文：现在去征伐他们，不是略取土地或破城后屠杀城中军民，而是要平定战乱，安集百姓。
English: To invade them now is not to grab land or slaughter the soldiers and civilians in the city after breaking the city, but to quell the war and gather the people.

古文：诸将非不健斗，然好虏掠。
现代文：诸将不是不善于战斗，然而好抢劫虏掠。
English: The generals are not brave enough to fight, but they are too fond of robbing and plundering.

古文：卿本能御吏士，念自修敕，无为郡县所苦。 异顿首受命，引而西，所至皆布威信。弘农群盗称将军者十余辈，皆率众降异。
现代文：你是能驾驭吏士的，望你好好领会我的意旨，莫让郡县受苦。 冯异叩头受命，引兵向西，所到之处都广为传播威信，弘农群盗称为将军的有十多起，都率领部众投降冯异。
English: You are able to control the magistrates, I hope you can understand my will well, and do not let the counties suffer.Feng Yiyi was ordered to kowtow and lead the troops to the west, and his prestige was widely spread everywhere he went.There were more than ten cases of the Hongnong group of thieves being called generals, and they all led their subordinates to surrender to Feng Yiyi.

古文：异与赤眉遇于华阴，相拒六十余日，战数十合，降其将刘始、王宣等五千余人。
现代文：冯异与赤眉在华阴相遇，相拒六十多日，战数十回合，赤眉将刘始、王宣等五千余人向冯异投降。
English: Feng Yiyi and Red Eyebrow met in Huayin. They resisted each other for more than sixty days and fought dozens of rounds. Red Eyebrow surrendered Liu Shi, Wang Xuan and more than five thousand people to Feng Yiyi.

古文：三年春，遣使者即拜异为征西大将军。
现代文：建武三年春天，光武派使者即拜冯异为征西大将军。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Jianwu era, the emissaries of the Guangwu faction came to worship Feng Yi as the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：会邓禹率车骑将军邓弘等引归，与异相遇，禹、弘要异共攻赤眉。
现代文：恰逢邓禹率车骑将军邓弘等引兵回来，与冯异相遇，邓禹、邓弘要冯异共攻赤眉。
English: Just as Deng Yu led the cavalry general Deng Hong and others to bring the troops back, they met with Feng Ying. Deng Yu and Deng Hong wanted Feng Ying to attack the Red Eyebrows.

古文：异曰： 异与贼相拒且数十日，虽屡获雄将，余众尚多，可稍以恩信倾诱，难卒用兵破也。
现代文：冯异说： 我与贼相拒已数十天，虽屡次获其雄将，然余众还很多，可慢慢以恩信来引诱他们，难以很快用兵攻破他们。
English: Feng Yin said: I have been resisting the thieves for dozens of days. Although I have repeatedly won their champion, there are still many others. I can slowly lure them with grace, but it is difficult to quickly defeat them with soldiers.

古文：上今使诸将屯黾池要其东，而异击其西，一举取之，此万成计也。 禹、弘不从。
现代文：今皇上使诸将驻扎在黾池以拦断其东归之路，而冯异攻击其西部，一举攻取，这是万成之计。 邓禹、邓弘不从。
English: Now the emperor stationed generals in Dianchi to block its eastward return route, while Fengyi attacked its west and captured it in one fell swoop, which was a foolproof plan. Deng Yu and Deng Hong did not comply.

古文：弘遂大战移日，赤眉阳败，弃辎重走。
现代文：邓弘就与赤眉大战多日，赤眉佯败，抛弃辎重而逃。
English: Deng Hong fought with the Red Eyebrows for several days. The Red Eyebrows were defeated and fled, abandoning their heavy baggage.

古文：车皆载土，以豆覆其上，兵士饥，争取之。
现代文：车上装的是土，以豆子盖在土上面，兵士饿了，争相取豆为食。
English: The truck was loaded with soil, covered with beans on top of the soil. The soldiers were hungry and scrambled to get beans for food.

古文：赤眉引还击弘，弘军溃乱。
现代文：赤眉引兵返回攻击邓弘，邓弘军崩溃乱奔。
English: Akemi's lead troops returned to attack Deng Hong, and Deng Hong's army collapsed and ran amok.

古文：异与禹合兵救之，赤眉小却。
现代文：冯异与邓禹合兵相救，赤眉少退。
English: Feng Yi and Deng Yu joined forces to save themselves, and the Red Eyebrows retreated.

古文：异以士卒饥倦，可且休，禹不听，复战，大为所败，死伤者三千余人。
现代文：冯异以为士卒饥饿疲倦，可暂休息，邓禹不听，再战，为赤眉所大败，死伤三千余人。
English: Feng Yiyi thought that the soldiers were hungry and tired and could rest for a while, Deng Yu did not listen and fought again, resulting in a crushing defeat for the Red Eyebrows, with more than three thousand people killed and injured.

古文：禹得脱归宜阳。异弃马步走上回谿阪，与麾下数人归营。
现代文：邓禹得以逃脱回到宜阳，冯异弃马步行走回奚谷阪，与部下数人回营。
English: Deng Yu was able to escape back to Yiyang, Feng Yi abandoned his horse and walked back to Shibuya-zaka on foot, returning to the camp with several of his subordinates.

古文：复坚壁，收其散卒，招集诸营保数万人，与贼约期会战。
现代文：再坚守壁垒，收回散卒，招集诸营保数万人，与贼约定时间会战。
English: Once again, they held fast to the barriers, recovered the scattered soldiers, called up tens of thousands of people from the camp guards, and agreed on a time to fight with the thieves.

古文：使壮士变服与赤眉同，伏于道侧。
现代文：使帐下壮士穿着与赤眉一样的衣服，埋伏在道路的旁侧。
English: Make the strong men under his charge wear the same clothes as the red eyebrows, and lie in wait on the side of the road.

古文：旦日，赤眉使万人攻异前部，异裁出兵以救之。
现代文：一早，赤眉使万人进攻冯异的前部，冯异故意出少兵相救。
English: Early in the morning, Red Eyebrow sent ten thousand men to attack Feng Yiyi's front, and Feng Yiyi deliberately sent out a small number of soldiers to help.

古文：贼见势弱，遂悉众攻异，异乃纵兵大战。
现代文：贼见冯异军势弱，就全线向冯异进攻，冯异就纵兵大战。
English: Seeing that Feng Yiyi's army was weak, the thief attacked Feng Yiyi along the whole line, and Feng Yiyi started a large-scale battle.

古文：日昃，贼气衰，伏兵卒起，衣服相乱，赤眉不复识别，众遂惊溃。
现代文：太阳偏西时，贼兵气衰，冯异伏兵忽然杀出，衣服与赤眉同，赤眉不能识别，贼众于是惊恐溃败。
English: When the sun was in the west, the bandits were discouraged, and Feng Yi's ambush soldiers suddenly came out. Their clothes were the same as those of the Red Eyebrows, and the Red Eyebrows could not be identified. The bandits were terrified and defeated.

古文：追击，大破于崤底，降男女八万人。
现代文：冯异追击，大破贼兵于崤底，男女八万人都向冯异投降。
English: Feng Yiyi chased and defeated the bandits in Loudi. Eighty thousand men and women surrendered to Feng Yiyi.

古文：余众尚十余万，东走宜阳降。
现代文：余众还有十多万，向东走到宜阳也投降了。
English: There were still more than a hundred thousand people left, and when they went east to Yiyang, they also surrendered.

古文：玺书劳异曰： 赤眉破平，士吏劳苦，始虽垂翅回谿，终能奋翼黾池，可谓失之东隅，收之桑榆。
现代文：光武玺书慰劳冯异说： 赤眉被攻破平定，士吏劳苦，开始时虽败走回奚谷阪，最后终成大功于黾池，可说是失之东隅，收之桑榆。
English: Guangwu Xunshu consoled labor Feng Yi said: the Red Eyebrows were defeated and pacified, the officers worked hard, although they were defeated at the beginning and went back to Shibuya, they finally achieved great success in Shuchi, which can be said to be the lost east corner and the collected mulberry.

古文：方论功赏，以答大勋。 
现代文：正在论功行赏，以酬谢你的大功劳。 
English: We are discussing a merit award to reward you for your great service.

古文：时，赤眉虽降，众寇犹盛：延岑据蓝田，王歆据下邽，芳丹据新丰，蒋震据霸陵，张邯据长安，公孙守据长陵，杨周据谷口，吕鲔据陈仓，角闳据汧，骆延据盩厔，任良据鄠，汝章据槐里，各称将军，拥兵多者万余，少者数千人，转相攻击。
现代文：这时赤眉虽已投降，诸多盗寇还很盛；延岑占据兰田，王歆占据下圭阝，芳丹占据新丰，蒋震占据霸陵，张邯占据长安，公孙守占据长陵，杨周占据谷口，吕鲔占据陈仓，角闳占据，骆延占据稨，任良占据，汝章占据槐里，各自称将军，拥兵多的有万余人，少的也有数千人，互相攻击。
English: At this time, although the Red Eyebrows had surrendered, many thieves and robbers were still thriving; Yan Xun occupied Lantian, Wang Xun occupied Lower Guiyang, Fang Dan occupied Xinfeng, Jiang Zhen occupied Taoling, Zhang Xun occupied Chang'an, Gongsun Guo occupied Changling, Yang Zhou occupied Tanigou, Lyu Xun occupied Chencang, Jiao Xun occupied, Luo Yan occupied Shao, Ren Liang occupied, Ruzhang occupied Shuli, each was called a general, there were more than ten thousand soldiers, and there were thousands of soldiers, attacking each other.

古文：异且战且行，屯军上林苑中。
现代文：冯异边战边走，屯兵于上林苑中。
English: Feng Xiang took the other side of the battlefield, and the troops marched to Shanglinyuan Middle.

古文：延岑既破赤眉，自称武安王，拜置牧守，欲据关中，引张邯、任良共攻异。
现代文：延岑既破赤眉，自称武安王，设置州牧郡守，想占据汉中，引张邯、任良共同攻打冯异。
English: Yan Xuan, who had already raised his eyebrows, called himself the King of Wu'an, set up the governor of Shumu County, wanted to occupy Hanzhong, and brought Zhang Xuan and Ren Liang together to attack Feng Yi.

古文：异击破之，斩首千余级，诸营保守附岑者皆来降归异。
现代文：冯异将他击破，斩首千余级，诸营保守附于延岑的都来向冯异归降。
English: Feng Yiyi defeated him and beheaded more than a thousand of his subordinates. All the soldiers who had been loyal to Yan Xuan surrendered to Feng Yiyi.

古文：岑走攻析，异遣复汉将军邓晔、辅汉将军于匡要击岑，大破之，隆其将苏臣等八千余人。
现代文：延岑走攻析县，冯异派遣复汉将军邓晔、辅汉将军于匡邀击延岑，大破岑，其将苏臣等八千余人向汉军投降。
English: Yancheng went to analyze the county, and Feng Yixing sent Fuxin Han general Deng Qian and Fu Han general Yu Guanzhong to attack Yancheng, which broke the siege, and more than eight thousand people, including Su Chen, surrendered to the Chinese army.

古文：岑遂自武关走南阳。
现代文：延岑就从武关逃到南阳。
English: Yan Xun fled from Wuguan to Nanyang.

古文：时，百姓饥饿，人相食，黄金一斤易豆五升。
现代文：这时百姓饥饿，人吃人，一斤黄金只能换到五升豆子。
English: At this time, the people were starving, people were eating people, and a kilo of gold could only be exchanged for five litres of beans.

古文：道路断隔，委输不至，军士委以果实为粮。
现代文：道路断绝隔离，运输不到，军士都以果实为粮。
English: The roads were cut off, transportation was not possible, and the soldiers had to live on fruit.

古文：诏拜南阳赵匡为右扶风，将兵助异，并送缣谷，军中皆称万岁。
现代文：下诏拜封南阳赵匡为右扶风，率领军队援助冯异，并且送去绢和谷子，军中都称呼万岁。
English: In the following edict, Nanyang Zhao Kuang was given the title of "right wind" and led the army to aid Feng Yixing, and also sent Yu and Yan Zi, both of whom were called "long live" in the army.

古文：异兵食渐盛，乃稍诛击豪杰不从令者，褒赏降附有功劳者，悉遣其渠帅诣京师，散其众归本业。
现代文：冯异兵士粮食逐渐增多，就对不听从命令的豪杰们渐渐加以诛灭打击，而对那些降附后有功劳的人加以表彰赏赐，凡是大帅都遣往京师，凡是部众都散归本业，威德盛行于关中。
English: As the food supply of Fengyi's soldiers gradually increased, he gradually annihilated and cracked down on the heroes who did not obey orders, and commended and rewarded those who had meritorious deeds after the surrender. All the generals were sent to the Beijing Division, all the soldiers were scattered to their own business, and virtue prevailed in Guanzhong.

古文：威行关中，惟吕鲔、张邯、蒋震遣使降蜀，其余悉平。
现代文：只有吕鲔、张邯、蒋震派遣使者投降了蜀，其余全部平定。
English: Only Lv Ying, Zhang Ye, and Jiang Zhen sent envoys to surrender Shu, and the rest were all subdued.

古文：明年，公孙述遣将程焉，将数万人就吕鲔出屯陈仓。
现代文：第二年，公孙述派遣将领程焉，率领数万人从吕鲔出驻陈仓。
English: In the second year, Gongsun Su dispatched a general to lead the way, leading tens of thousands of people from Lvun to Chencang.

古文：异与赵匡迎击，大破之，焉退走汉川。
现代文：冯异与赵匡迎击，大破程焉，程焉退走汉川。
English: Feng Yi and Zhao Kuang counterattacked, made a big breakthrough, and Cheng Yan retreated to Hanchuan.

古文：异追战于箕谷，复破之，还击破吕鲔，营保降者甚众。
现代文：冯异追战于箕谷，再破程焉，回军攻击又破吕鲔，营保投降的很多。
English: Feng Yiyi chased the battle in Shibuya, and then broke through the distance, the attack of the returning army broke through Lvyu, and many camp guards surrendered.

古文：其后蜀复数遣将间出，异辄摧挫之。
现代文：后来蜀又多次派遣将领乘间而出，冯异常给予摧垮挫败。
English: Later, Shu repeatedly dispatched generals to ride out, and Feng unusually gave a crushing defeat.

古文：怀来百姓，申理枉结，出入三岁，上林成都。
现代文：招来百姓，申理冤屈，前后只三年工夫，来上林归附的人很多。
English: It only took three years to invite the people and settle their grievances, and many people came to Shanglin.

古文：异自以久在外，不自安，上书思慕阙廷，愿亲帷幄，帝不许。
现代文：冯异自己以久率兵在外，心不自安，上书说思慕朝廷，愿意相亲于宫室，帝不许。
English: Feng Yi himself was away with his soldiers for a long time and was not at ease. He wrote a letter saying that he admired the imperial court and would like to be intimate with the imperial family, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：后人有章言异专制关中，斩长安令，威权至重，百姓归心，号为 咸阳王 。
现代文：后来有人上奏章说冯异在关中独断专行，杀了长安县令，威望权力很重，百姓心中归服，称他为 咸阳王。 
English: Later, someone inscribed a poem saying that Feng Yi ruled arbitrarily in Guanzhong and killed the county magistrate of Chang'an County. He was very powerful and respected by the people, who called him the King of Xianyang.

古文：帝使以章示异。
现代文：帝派人把奏章给冯异观看。
English: The emperor sent someone to show the score to Feng Yi.

古文：异惶惧，上书谢曰： 臣本诸生，遭遇受命之会，充备行伍，过蒙恩私，位大将，爵通侯，受任方面，以立微功，皆自国家谋虑，愚臣无所能及。
现代文：冯异惶恐害怕，上书谢罪说： 臣本来是个儒生，在战乱中获得受命的机会，充备于行伍之间，过分地蒙受恩私，被拜为大将，封爵为通侯，受任专委西方，以期建立微功，都是从国家利益着想，不计一己之私。
English: Feng Yixuan was afraid and wrote a letter to Xie Sin, saying: The minister was originally a Confucian. He had the opportunity to receive orders during the war. He was well prepared during his military service. He was excessively favored. He was worshiped as a general, knighted as a magistrate, and appointed to the Special Committee of the West, with a view to establishing micro-efforts. All of this was for the sake of national interests, regardless of one's own interests.

古文：臣伏自思惟：以诏敕战攻，每辄如意；时以私心断决，未尝不有悔。
现代文：我俯伏自思：以诏命征讨，常获得如意结果；有时以私心来决断，未尝不有所悔。
English: I fell to my knees and thought to myself: if I act according to the edict of the emperor, I will often get the desired result; if I act selfishly, I will sometimes regret it.

古文：国家独见之明，久而益远，乃知 性与天道，不可得而闻也 。
现代文：皇上独见的明智，久而更加远大，就知道 性与天道，是不可得而闻的了。 
English: The wisdom of the emperor's unique vision, long and more far-reaching, knows that sex and heaven are unattainable and unheard of.

古文：当兵革始起，扰攘之时，豪杰竞逐，迷惑千数。臣以遭遇，托身圣明，在倾危混淆之中，尚不敢过差，而况天下平定，上尊下卑，而臣爵位所蒙，巍巍不测乎？
现代文：当兵革开始兴起，扰攘混乱的时候，豪杰群起竞逐，迷惑的人很多，我在遭遇之中，得以托身在你的麾下，在以前那样危险混乱的形势下，我尚且不敢有过失差错，何况现在天下平定，上尊下卑，而我在受爵恩宠的情况下，还能做出高深莫测的事情吗？
English: When the war began to rise, when chaos and disorder were rampant, when heroes and heroines began to compete, and there were many people who were confused, I was able to rely on you in the midst of the encounter. Under the dangerous and chaotic situation as before, I did not dare to make mistakes. Moreover, now the world is calm, the superior is inferior, and I can do unfathomable things under the grace of the peerage?

古文：诚冀以谨敕，遂自终始。
现代文：我是诚心希望谨慎勤勉，以做到始终如一。
English: I sincerely hope to be prudent and diligent to do so consistently.

古文：见所示臣章，战栗怖惧。
现代文：看了圣上转示给我的奏章，战战兢兢恐怖害怕。
English: When I read the transcript that the Holy Father showed me, I was trembling with fear.

古文：伏念明主知臣愚性，固敢因缘自陈。 诏报曰： 将军之于国家，义为君臣，恩犹父子。
现代文：我想明主知我的愚性，所以才敢于自陈心迹。 光武以诏书回答说： 将军之于国家，义为君臣，恩如父子。
English: I wanted to make it clear that the Lord knew my foolishness, so I dared to confess my sins. Guangwu replied with an edict: "A general is to the country as a prince is to a vassal, as a father is to a son.

古文：何嫌何疑，而有惧意？ 
现代文：有什么嫌疑，而感到害怕呢？ 
English: What is there to be afraid of?

古文：六年春，异朝京师。
现代文：建武六年春天，冯异到京朝帝。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Jianwu's reign, Feng Yi became the emperor of the Beijing Dynasty.

古文：引见，帝谓公卿曰： 是我起兵时主簿也。
现代文：帝引见，对公卿们说： 他是我起兵时的主簿。
English: The emperor introduced him and said to the nobles, "He is the chief accountant when I raised an army.

古文：为吾披荆棘，定关中。 既罢，使中黄门赐以珍宝、衣服、钱、帛。
现代文：为我披荆斩棘，平定关中。 朝罢，使中黄门赐以珍宝、衣服、钱帛。
English: For my sake, I will cut off the thorns, pacify Guanzhong, and in the morning, I will make Zhonghuangmen give me treasures, clothes, and money.

古文：诏曰： 仓卒无蒌亭豆粥，虖沱河麦饭，厚意久不报。 异稽首谢曰： 臣闻管仲谓桓公曰： 愿君无忘射钩，臣无忘槛车。
现代文：诏书说： 仓卒困箏时无蒌亭送我的豆粥，滹沱河送我的麦饭，深情厚意很久没有报答。 冯异叩头谢道： 我听说管仲曾对齐桓公说过： 愿君王不要忘了射钅句的事，我也不要忘了槛车的事。 
English: The imperial edict said, "In my time of despair, Wuyanting sent me bean porridge, and Luohe sent me barley rice, but they did not return my kindness for a long time." Feng Yiyi bowed his head and said, "I heard that Guanzhong once said to King Qi Huan, "May the king not forget the shooting of the sardine, and may I not forget the threshold car."

古文：齐国赖之。
现代文：齐国赖此而强。
English: Qi is strong because of this.

古文：臣今亦愿国家无忘河北之难，小臣不敢忘巾车之恩。 后数引宴见，定议图蜀，留十余日，令异妻子随异还西。
现代文：我今也愿皇上莫忘了河北的灾难，我也不会忘了你赦我于巾车的恩德。 后来几次赐宴引见，商议讨伐公孙述问题，留了十多天，就令冯异的妻室儿女跟随冯异回到西边去。
English: I now also hope that the emperor will not forget the disaster in Hebei, and I will not forget the kindness of you forgiving me for the handkerchief. Later, after several banquets and discussions on the issue of fighting grandchildren, I stayed for more than ten days, and let Feng Yi's wife, children and children follow Feng Yi back to the west.

古文：夏，遣诸将上陇，为隗嚣所败，乃诏异军栒邑。
现代文：夏天，派遣诸将前往陇，被隗嚣打败，光武就诏命冯异进军邑。
English: In summer, dispatching generals to Shao, they were defeated by Shao's clamor, and Guangwu ordered Feng Yi to march into the military town.

古文：未及至，隗嚣乘胜使其将王元、行巡将二万余人下陇，因分遣巡取栒邑。
现代文：还没有到，隗嚣乘胜派他的将领王元、行巡率领二万多人下陇，因而分遣行巡攻取邑。
English: Before they arrived, Yan Han dispatched his general Wang Yuan, who led a patrol of more than 20,000 men, to attack the town.

古文：异即驰兵，欲先据之。
现代文：冯异即刻驱兵，准备抢先占据邑。
English: Feng Yi immediately drove out the soldiers and prepared to occupy the town first.

古文：诸将皆曰： 虏兵盛而新乘胜，不可与争，宜止军便地，徐思方略。 异曰： 虏兵临境，忸忕小利，遂欲深入。
现代文：诸将都说： 隗嚣兵盛而且是乘胜而来，不可与他相争。应在便利的地方把军队停下，慢慢思考方略。 冯异说： 隗嚣兵临境，习惯于争夺小利，就想乘势深入。
English: The generals all said, "If a tyrant is at the height of his military power, and he is taking advantage of his victory, you should not fight with him. You should stop the army at a convenient place and slowly think about the strategy." Feng Yiyi said, "If a tyrant is at the border and is accustomed to competing for small profits, he wants to take advantage of the situation and go deeper.

古文：若得栒邑，三辅动摇，是吾忧也。
现代文：如夺取了邑，就会使三辅动摇，是我的忧虑。
English: My concern is that if we take the county, it will shake up the three auxiliary forces.

古文：夫 攻者不足，守者有余 。
现代文：兵法说 攻者不足，守者有余 。
English: According to the law of war, there are not enough attackers and too many defenders.

古文：今先据城，以逸待劳，非所以争也。 潜往闭城，偃旗鼓。行巡不足，驰赴之。
现代文：现在先占据城邑，以逸待劳，并不是与他相争哩。 就暗中进城关闭城门，偃旗息鼓，行巡不知道，奔往邑。
English: Now therefore, it is not to fight against him, but to occupy the city first, and to occupy it with patience and with labor; and to enter in secretly, and to shut the gates, and to make an end with banners, and not to know the way, and to hasten into the city.

古文：异乘其不意。卒击鼓建旗而出。巡军惊乱奔走，追击数十里，大破之。
现代文：冯异乘其不意，骤然击鼓建旗杀出，行巡军惊慌错乱奔走，冯异追击数十里，大破行巡。
English: Unexpectedly, Feng Yixing suddenly beat the drum and raised the flag, and the marching troops ran around in panic. Feng Yixing chased them for dozens of miles, breaking the marching route.

古文：祭遵亦破王元于汧。
现代文：祭遵也在攻破王元。
English: Saizun is also in the process of defeating Wang Yuan.

古文：于是北地诸豪长耿定等，悉畔隗嚣降。
现代文：于是北地诸豪长耿定等，都叛隗嚣而降汉。
English: As a result, all the powerful people in the north, including Geng Ding, rebelled and surrendered to Han.

古文：异上书言状，不敢自伐。
现代文：冯异上书说明情况，不敢自矜其功。
English: Feng Ying wrote a letter to explain the situation and did not dare to take credit for it.

古文：诸将或欲分其功，帝患之。
现代文：诸将有的想分享其功。光武感到忧虑。
English: Some of them want to share their achievements. Guangwu is worried.

古文：乃下玺书曰： 制诏大司马，虎牙、建威、汉忠、捕虏、武威将军：虏兵猥下，三辅惊恐。
现代文：就颁下玺书说： 诏令大司马，虎牙、建威、汉忠、捕虏、武威将军：虏兵率众下陇，三辅惊恐。
English: Regarding the issuance of the imperial edict, it said: The imperial edict ordered the generals of the great horse, tiger, jianwei, hanzhong, captor, and wuwei: the captors led the troops to the imperial edict, and the three auxiliaries were terrified.

古文：栒邑危亡，在于旦夕。
现代文：邑危亡，在于旦夕。
English: The death of the town is imminent, it is the eve of the New Year.

古文：北地营保，按兵观望。
现代文：北地各营保，都按兵观望。
English: All the camp guards in the north watched from their barracks.

古文：今偏城获全，虏兵挫折，使耿定之属，复念君臣之义。
现代文：现在偏城得以保全，虏兵遭到挫折，使耿定之流，复念君臣之义。
English: Now that the outskirts of the city have been preserved and the Krupp soldiers have suffered setbacks, Geng Ding and his followers are rethinking the righteousness of princes and ministers.

古文：征西功若丘山，犹自以为不足。
现代文：将军征西功如丘山，还自以为不足矜持。
English: The general's achievement in conquering the West is as great as a mountain, but he still thinks he is not good enough.

古文：孟之反奔而殿，亦何异哉？
现代文：与过去的孟之反殿后拒齐兵而不自言其功，又有什么区别呢？
English: What is the difference between this and Meng Zhitang's actions in the past, when he refused to lead an all-out attack and took no credit for it?

古文：今遣太中大夫赐征西吏士死伤者医药、棺敛，大司马已下亲吊死问疾，以崇谦让。 于是使异进军义渠，并领北地太守事。
现代文：现派遣太中太夫赏赐征西吏士死伤者以医药、棺殓，大司马以下亲自吊死问伤，以表谦让。 于是使冯异进军义渠县，并兼北地太守事宜。
English: Now, the Tai-Chung-Tayu was dispatched to reward the dead and wounded Western officials with medicine and coffins, and the Tai-Sima and his subordinates personally hanged themselves to inquire about their injuries, as a gesture of humility. As a result, Feng Yi was sent to march into Yiqu County, and he also served as the governor of the North.

古文：青山胡率万余人降异。
现代文：青山胡率万余人投降冯异。
English: Aoyama Hu led more than 10,000 people to surrender to Feng Yi.

古文：异又击卢芳将贾览、匈奴薁鞬日逐王，破之。
现代文：冯异又攻击卢芳将贾览、匈奴革建日逐王，都攻破了。
English: Feng Yiyi also attacked Lu Fang and defeated Jia Qiang, the king of the Xiongnu Revolution.

古文：上郡、安定皆降，异复领安定太守事。
现代文：上郡、安定都投降，冯异又兼安定太守事宜。
English: Shang County and Ding'an both surrendered, and Feng Yiyi also became the ruler of Ding'an.

古文：九年春，祭遵卒，诏异守征虏将军，并将其营。
现代文：建武九年春，祭遵去世，诏令冯异代理征虏将军，并统率原祭遵部队。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the Jianwu era, Saizun died, and the emperor ordered Feng Yi to act as the conscript general and lead the original Saizun troops.

古文：及隗嚣死，其将王元、周宗等复立嚣子纯，犹总兵据冀，公孙述遣将赵匡等救之，帝复令异行天水太守事。
现代文：等到隗嚣死，隗部将王元、周宗等再立隗嚣儿子隗纯，继续总兵占据冀县，公孙述派遣部将赵匡等往救隗纯，光武再令冯异兼任天水太守。
English: After Gongran's death, Xibe sent Wang Yuan, Zhou Zong, and others to reinstate Gongran's son Gongchun, continued to occupy Ji County with the entire army, sent Zhao Kuang and others to rescue Gongran, and ordered Guangwu to appoint Feng Yi as the governor of Tianshui.

古文：攻匡等且一年，皆斩之。
现代文：进攻赵匡等近一年，把他们都斩了。
English: Zhao Kuang waited for nearly a year to attack, and he cut them all down.

古文：诸将共攻冀，不能拔，欲且还休兵，异固持不动，常为众军锋。
现代文：诸将共攻冀县，不能攻下，准备暂时回兵休整，冯异坚持固守不动，常常为众军先锋。
English: They all attacked Jixian County together, but could not capture it. They prepared to temporarily return to the army for rest and recuperation. Feng Yiyi insisted on holding fast and was often the vanguard of the troops.

古文：明年夏，与诸将攻落门，未拔，病发，薨于军，谥曰节侯。
现代文：第二年夏，与诸将攻落门，没攻下，冯异病发，在军中逝世，赐谥号为节侯。
English: In the summer of the second year, he and other generals attacked the gate, but failed to capture it. Feng Yiyi fell ill and died in the army. He was given the title of "feudal lord."

古文：长子彰嗣。
现代文：长子彰嗣。
English: The eldest son, Akitsugu.

古文：明年，帝思异功，复封彰弟为析乡侯。
现代文：明年，帝思异功，复封彰弟为析乡侯。
English: Next year, in recognition of his outstanding achievements, he will be reinstated as the village head.

古文：十三年，更封彰东缗侯，食三县。
现代文：十三年，更封彰东缗侯，食三县。
English: Thirteen years later, he was given the title of Changdong County Magistrate, with jurisdiction over three counties.

古文：永平中，徙封平乡侯。
现代文：永平中，徙封平乡侯。
English: Yongping Middle School, Yifengping Township.

古文：彰卒，子普嗣，有罪，国除。
现代文：彰卒，子普嗣，有罪，国除。
English: Shouzu, his son, was found guilty and expelled from the country.

古文：永初六年，安帝下诏曰： 夫仁不遗亲，义不忘劳，兴灭继绝，善善及子孙，古之典也。
现代文：永初六年，安帝下诏曰： 夫仁不遗亲，义不忘劳，兴灭继绝，善善及子孙，古之典也。
English: In the sixth year of the Edo period, Emperor Andi issued an edict saying, "Friendship does not forsake relatives, righteousness does not forget labor, prosperity does not fail, kindness and children are the ancient scriptures."

古文：昔我光武受命中兴，恢弘圣绪，横被四表，昭假上下，光耀万世，祉祚流衍，垂于罔极。
现代文：昔我光武受命中兴，恢弘圣绪，横被四表，昭假上下，光耀万世，祉祚流衍，垂于罔极。
English: Long ago, I, Guangwu, was ordered to revitalize and magnify Shengxu, with the four sides of the bedclothes, the top and bottom of the bedclothes, the glory of the world, the prosperity of the world, and the glory of the world.

古文：予末小子，夙夜永思，追惟勋烈，披图案籍，建武元功二十八将，佐命虎臣，谶记有征。
现代文：予末小子，夙夜永思，追惟勋烈，披图案籍，建武元功二十八将，佐命虎臣，谶记有征。
English: The youngest son, always thinking about the future, was awarded the Medal of Honor, was inscribed in the record books, was the 28th General of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, was given the title of "Tiger Minister," and was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：盖萧、曹绍封，传继于今；况此未远，而或至乏祀，朕其愍之。
现代文：盖萧、曹绍封，传继于今；况此未远，而或至乏祀，朕其愍之。
English: Gai Xiao and Cao Shaofeng have been passed down to the present day; besides, this is not far away, and it may not be necessary to worship.

古文：其条二十八将无嗣绝世，若犯罪夺国，其子孙应当统后者，分别署状上。
现代文：其条二十八将无嗣绝世，若犯罪夺国，其子孙应当统后者，分别署状上。
English: Article 28 states that he will die without an heir, and if he commits the crime of seizing the country, his descendants should take over the latter and sign the document separately.

古文：将及景风，章叙旧德，显兹遗功焉。 于是绍封普子晨为平乡侯。
现代文：将及景风，章叙旧德，显兹遗功焉。 于是绍封普子晨为平乡侯。
English: It will be the scenery and the wind, the old virtues will be described, and the achievements will be shown. Therefore, Shao Feng Fuzichen became a Pingxiang Hou.

古文：明年，二十八将绝国者，皆绍封焉。
现代文：明年，二十八将绝国者，皆绍封焉。
English: Next year, the 28 people who will be leaving the country will all be gone.

古文：岑彭字君然，南阳棘阳人也。
现代文：岑彭字君然，南阳郡棘阳县人。
English: Zou Pengzijunran, a native of Spineyang County, Nanyang County.

古文：王莽时，守本县长。
现代文：王莽时，署理棘阳县长。
English: Wang Mengshi, acting head of Spineyang County.

古文：汉兵起，攻拔棘阳，彭将家属奔前队大夫甄阜。
现代文：汉兵兴起后，攻拔了棘阳县，岑彭携带家属奔前队大夫甄阜。
English: After the rise of the Han soldiers, they attacked Spineyang County, and Nie Peng and his family members rushed to the front team doctor Zhen Fu.

古文：阜怒彭不能固守，拘彭母妻，令效功自衬。
现代文：甄阜忿怒岑彭不能固守棘阳，将岑彭的母亲及妻都拘留起来，命令岑彭立功自赎。
English: Zhenfu was furious that Zhaopeng could not hold on to Xichangyang. He detained Zhaopeng's mother and wife and ordered Zhaopeng to redeem himself.

古文：彭将宾客战斗甚力。
现代文：岑彭的部将宾客战斗都很卖力。
English: Nie Peng's captains and guests all fought hard.

古文：及甄阜死，彭被创，亡归宛，与前队贰严说共城守。
现代文：后来甄阜死，岑彭受了伤，逃归宛县，与前线甄阜的副将严说共同守城。
English: Later, Zhenfufu died, Zhou Peng was injured and fled to Wan County, and together with the deputy general of the front line Zhenfufu, Yan said that they would jointly defend the city.

古文：汉兵攻之数月，城中粮尽，人相食，彭乃与说举城降。
现代文：汉兵进攻数月，城中粮尽，人吃人，岑彭就与严说以全城降汉。
English: The Han soldiers attacked for several months, the city ran out of food, people ate people, and Nie Peng and Yan said that the whole city would fall to Han.

古文：诸将欲诛之，大司徒伯升曰： 彭，郡之大吏，执心坚守，是其节也。
现代文：诸将准备杀掉岑彭，大司徒伯升说： 岑彭是郡的大吏，一心坚守，是他的节气。
English: The generals were preparing to kill Nie Peng, and Grand Master Tu Bo Sheng said: Nie Peng is the county's top official, he is single-minded, and he is the spirit of the season.

古文：今举大事，当表义士，不如封之，以劝其后。 更始乃封彭为归德侯，令属伯升。
现代文：现在举兵兴汉，应当表彰义士，不如封他以官爵，这样对以后的降将也可立个榜样。 更始就封岑彭为归德侯，由伯升统领。
English: Now that we are raising an army to revive the Han Dynasty, we should commend the righteous, and it would be better to give him a title of nobility, so that he can set an example for future generations.

古文：及伯升遇害，彭复为大司马朱鲔校尉，从鲔击王莽杨州牧李圣，杀之，定淮阳城。
现代文：后来伯升遇害，岑彭又成为大司马朱鲔的校尉，跟从朱鲔向王莽扬州牧李圣发起攻击，杀了李圣，平定了淮阳城。
English: Later, Bao Sheng was killed, and Zou Peng became the captain of the chief magistrate Ma Zhu Rong. He followed Zhu Rong to launch an attack on Wang Mang Yangzhou Mu Li Sheng, killed Li Sheng, and leveled Huaiyang City.

古文：鲔荐彭为淮阳都尉。
现代文：朱鲔举荐岑彭为淮阳都尉。
English: Zhu Xi recommended Zhai Peng as the captain of Huaiyang.

古文：更始遣立威王张卬与将军徭伟镇淮阳。
现代文：更始派遣立威王张卬与将军徭伟镇抚淮阳。
English: At the same time, he dispatched the king of Liwei, Zhang Ye, and the general, Zou Wei, to subdue Huaiyang.

古文：伟反，击走卬。
现代文：徭伟反叛，把张卬击走。
English: Zou Wei rebelled and drove Zhang Ye away.

古文：彭引兵攻伟，破之。
现代文：岑彭引兵攻徭伟，把徭伟打败。
English: Nie Peng led an army to attack Nie Wei and defeated Nie Wei.

古文：迁颍川太守。
现代文：被迁升为颍川太守。
English: Guanghan moved and appointed Yingchuan governor.

古文：会舂陵刘茂起兵，略下颍川，彭不得之官，乃与麾下数百人从河内太守邑人韩歆。
现代文：恰逢舂陵刘茂起兵，攻下颍川，岑彭没得到官职，就与麾下数百人跟从河内太守同乡人韩歆。
English: At the same time, Liu Mao of Fuling raised an army and conquered Sui River. When Sui Peng did not get an official post, he and hundreds of his subordinates followed Han Xuan, a fellow villager from Hanoi.

古文：会光武徇河内，歆议欲城守，彭止不听。
现代文：刚好光武讨伐河内，韩歆想守城，岑彭劝止不听。
English: Just as Guangwu was attacking Hanoi, Han Xuan wanted to defend the city, but Qu Peng did not listen to his advice.

古文：既而光武至怀，歆迫急迎降。
现代文：后来光武到怀县，韩歆在紧迫无奈的形势下投降。
English: Later, Guangwu went to Huai County, and Han Zheng surrendered under the pressing and helpless situation.

古文：光武知其谋，大怒，收歆置鼓下，将斩之。
现代文：光武知道他守城的谋划，大怒，把韩歆置于旗鼓下面，准备把他杀掉。
English: Knowing of his plan to defend the city, Guangwu flew into a rage and put Han Xuan under the gun, preparing to kill him.

古文：召见彭，彭因进说曰： 今赤眉入关，更始危殆，权臣放纵，矫称诏制，道路阻塞，四方蜂起，群雄竞逐，百姓无所归命。
现代文：召见岑彭，岑彭因此进说道： 今赤眉进了关中，更始岌岌可危，权臣放纵，假传圣旨，道路阻塞，四方蜂起，群雄竞相逐鹿，百姓无所归命。
English: He summoned Zhaopeng, and Zhaopeng said as a result: Now Chao Mei has entered the middle of the pass, it is even more precarious at the beginning, the authorities indulge, falsely preach the holy will, the road is blocked, the four sides rise up, the heroes compete to chase the deer, and the people have nowhere to go.

古文：窃闻大王平河北，开王业，此诚皇天祐汉，士人之福也。
现代文：听说大王平定河北，开创帝王之业，这真是皇天保佑汉朝，百姓的幸福哩！
English: I heard that the great king pacified Hebei and started the emperor's career, which is really the emperor's blessing of the Han Dynasty and the happiness of the people!

古文：彭幸蒙司徒公所见全济，未有报德，旋被祸难，永恨于心。
现代文：岑彭幸蒙司徒公伯升解救，没有报德，后来又遭祸难，永远遗憾在心。
English: Zou Peng, a fortunate monk, was promoted to the rank of bishop, but he did not return the favor. Later, he suffered misfortune again, which he will always regret.

古文：今复遭遇，愿出身自效。 光武深接纳之。
现代文：现在再次遭遇大王，愿舍身效命。 光武愿意接纳岑彭。
English: Now that he has encountered the great king again, he is willing to give up his life to serve the king.

古文：彭因言韩歆南阳大人，可以为用。
现代文：彭因而说韩歆是南阳的大家豪右，可以为大王所用。
English: Peng therefore said that Han Xuan was a great hero in Nanyang and could be used by the great king.

古文：乃贳歆，以为邓禹军师。
现代文：光武就赦免韩歆，让他为邓禹作军师。
English: Guangwu pardoned Han Zheng and allowed him to serve as Deng Yu's strategist.

古文：更始大将军吕植将兵屯淇园，彭说降之，于是拜彭为刺奸大将军，使督察众营，授以常所持节，从平河北。
现代文：更始大将军吕植率领军队驻扎淇园，岑彭说服他投降了光武，于是拜岑彭为刺奸大将军，派他督察各营，授以平时所持的符节，跟随平定河北。
English: At the beginning of the war, the general Lv Zhi led the army stationed in Qiyuan. Zi Peng convinced him to surrender to Guangwu, so he called Zi Peng a traitor general, sent him to inspect the battalions, awarded him with the symbols he usually held, and followed the pacification of Hebei.

古文：光武即位，拜彭廷尉，归德侯如故，行大将军事。
现代文：光武即位，拜岑彭为廷尉，归德侯像过去一样，行使大将军职事。
English: Guangwu was enthroned, Baizhun Peng became a court lieutenant, and Gui Dehu, as in the past, performed the duties of a general.

古文：与大司马吴汉，大司空王梁，建义大将军朱祐，右将军万脩，执金吾贾复，骁骑将军刘植，杨化将军坚镡，积射将军侯进，偏将军冯异、祭遵、王霸等，围洛阳数月。
现代文：与大司马吴汉，大司空王梁，建义大将军朱，右将军万，执金吾贾复，骁骑将军刘植，扬化将军坚镡，积射将军侯进，偏将军冯异、祭遵、王霸等，围洛阳数月。
English: They besieged Luoyang for several months, together with Major-General Ma Wuhan, Major-General Ku Wang Liang, Major-General Jianyi Zhu, Major-General Right Wan, Major-General Jingwujiafu, Major-General Liu Zhi, Major-General Yanghua Jianqian, Major-General Hou Jin, Major-General Feng Yiyi, Major-General Saizun, Major-General Wang Ba, and so on.

古文：朱鲔等坚守不肯下。
现代文：朱鲔等坚守不肯降。
English: Zhu Xi and others stood firm and refused to back down.

古文：帝以彭尝为鲔校尉，令往说之。
现代文：光武以岑彭曾经做过朱鲔校尉，令他去说服朱鲔。
English: Guangwu Yibeng had once been Zhu Yao's lieutenant, and ordered him to persuade Zhu Yao.

古文：鲔在城上，彭在城下，相劳苦欢语如平生。
现代文：朱鲔在城上，岑彭在城下，互相慰问欢谈一如过去。
English: Zhu Xi was on the top of the city, and Zibo Peng was on the bottom of the city, and they were talking and consoling each other as in the past.

古文：彭因曰： 彭往者得执鞭侍从，蒙荐举拔擢，常思有以报恩。
现代文：岑彭因而说： 我岑彭过去得以追随侍从大司马，多蒙大司马荐举为都尉，常想有以报恩。
English: Therefore, Nie Peng said: I Nie Peng used to be able to follow the recommendation of the chief steward Ma, and was recommended by the chief steward Ma to be promoted to captain. I always want to repay the favor.

古文：今赤眉已得长安，更始为三王所反，皇帝受命，平定燕、赵，尽有幽、冀之地，百姓归心，贤俊云集，亲率大兵，来攻洛阳。
现代文：今赤眉已得长安，更始被张卬等三王所反叛而败亡，光武受命，平定了燕、赵，幽、冀之地已尽归其所有，百姓归心，贤俊之士云集，亲率大兵，来攻洛阳。
English: Now Chakmei has gained Chang'an, and was initially defeated by the rebellion of the three kings led by Zhang Ye and others. Guangwu was ordered to pacify Yan, Zhao, Yu, and Hebei, and the land has been fully owned by him. The people have come to their senses, and the wise and handsome men have gathered, and led the soldiers to attack Luoyang.

古文：天下之事，逝其去矣。
现代文：天下的大事，过去的已经是过去了。
English: The great things of the world, the past is the past.

古文：公虽婴城固守，将何待乎？ 鲔曰： 大司徒被害时，鲔与其谋，又谏更始无遣萧王北伐，诚自知罪深。 彭还，具言于帝。
现代文：公虽然绕城固守，还将等待什么呢？ 朱鲔说： 大司徒伯升被害时，我也参与了谋害，又向更始建议不要派遣光武北伐，我知道我的罪很深哩。 
English: Zhu Xi said: When Daishi Tuo Bo Sheng was killed, I also participated in the conspiracy, and I also suggested to the emperor not to send Guangwu to the Northern Expedition. I know that my sin is very deep.

古文：帝曰： 夫建大事者，不忌小怨。
现代文：岑彭回来，把这个情况报告光武。光武说： 建大事业的，不忌讳小的怨恨。
English: When Nie Peng returned, he reported the situation to Guangwu. Guangwu said, "In building a great career, one should not conceal small grudges."

古文：鲔今若降，官爵可保，况诛罚乎？
现代文：朱鲔现在如果归降，官爵可以保住，哪里还会杀他呢？
English: If Zhu Xi now surrenders, the title can be kept, where will he be killed?

古文：河水在此，吾不食言。 彭复往告鲔，鲔从城上下索曰： 必信，可乘此上。 彭趣索欲上。
现代文：黄河水在这里可以作证，我不自食此言。 岑彭再往告朱鲔，朱鲔从城楼上放下一根绳索说： 假使相信，可乘这绳上来。 岑彭靠近绳索准备上。
English: The water of the Yellow River can bear witness here, I don't say this on my own. Zhaopeng then went to tell Zhu Yao, Zhu Yao put down a rope from the tower and said: If you believe, you can use this rope to come up. Zhaopeng approached the rope to get ready.

古文：鲔见其诚，即许降。
现代文：朱鲔见他心诚，即刻许诺投降。
English: Zhu Xi saw his sincerity and immediately promised to surrender.

古文：后五日，鲔将轻骑诣彭。
现代文：五天后，朱鲔率领轻装的骑兵去会见岑彭。
English: Five days later, Zhu Xi led a light cavalry to meet with Zhou Peng.

古文：顾敕诸部将曰： 坚守待我。
现代文：回头命令各部将说： 坚守此城以等待我。
English: And he commanded the people, saying, Stand ye still in the midst of the city, and wait for me.

古文：我若不还，诸君径将大兵上轘辕，归郾王。 乃面缚，与彭俱诣河阳。
现代文：我如果不回来，诸位可直接率领大兵到頧辕去归于郾王。 就自缚，与岑彭同到河阳。
English: If I don't come back, you can directly lead the soldiers to Shao to return to the king of Shao, then tie yourselves together and go to Heyang with Shao Peng.

古文：帝即解其缚，召见之，复令彭夜送鲔归城。
现代文：光武即刻解其缚，召见朱鲔，再令岑彭送朱鲔回城。
English: Guangwu immediately released him, summoned Zhu Xi, and then ordered Yu Peng to send Zhu Xi back to the city.

古文：明旦，悉其众出降，拜鲔为平狄将军，封扶沟侯。
现代文：第二天一早，率领全部部众出城投降，光武拜朱鲔为平狄将军，封扶沟侯。
English: In the morning of the next day, he led all his subordinates out of the city to surrender, and Guangwu Bai Zhu Xi became General Ping Di and was given the title of Mayor of Gulou.

古文：鲔，淮阳人，后为少府，传封累代。
现代文：朱鲔是淮阳人，后来官为少府，子孙传封了几代。
English: Zhu Xi was a native of Huaiyang. Later, he served as a minor prefect, and his descendants have been in power for several generations.

古文：建武二年，使彭击荆州，下犨、叶等十余城。
现代文：建武二年，使岑彭出击荆州，攻下韜县、叶县等十余城。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he sent Zhaopeng out to attack Jingzhou, capturing more than ten cities including Jixian County and Ye County.

古文：是时，南方尤乱。
现代文：当时南方尤其纷乱。
English: At that time, the south was particularly chaotic.

古文：南郡人秦丰据黎丘，自称楚黎王，略十有二县；董讠斤起堵乡；许邯起杏；又，更始诸将各拥兵据南阳诸城。
现代文：南郡人秦丰占据黎丘，自称楚黎王，占领了十二个县；董讠斤起兵堵乡；许邯起兵杏聚；又更始诸将各拥兵占据南阳诸城。
English: Qin Feng, a native of Nan County, occupied Liqiu and claimed to be the King of Chu Li, occupying twelve counties; Dong Shujin started an army to block the township; Xu Shujin started an army to gather; and Zhu Zhizhi began to occupy the cities of Nanyang.

古文：帝遣吴汉伐之，汉军所过多侵暴。
现代文：光武派遣吴汉讨伐，吴汉的军队所过之处多有侵犯暴虐。
English: Guangwu dispatched Wu Han to fight, and Wu Han's army often violated and abused.

古文：时，破虏将军邓奉谒归新野，怒吴汉掠其乡里，遂反，击破汉军，获其辎重，屯据淯阳，与诸贼合从。
现代文：这时破虏将军邓奉请假回到新野，怒恨吴汉掠夺了他的乡里，就造反，击破汉军，缴获了汉军的辎重，屯兵占据氵育阳，与各路贼军联合。
English: At this time, the defeated general Deng Bong asked for leave to return to Xinyo, angry that Wu Han had plundered his village, he rebelled, defeated the Han army, captured the Han army's heavy baggage, and the troops occupied Yan Yuyang and united with the various thief armies.

古文：秋，彭破杏，降许邯，迁征南大将军。
现代文：秋，岑彭破杏聚，许邯投降，迁岑彭为征南大将军。
English: In the autumn, Zi Peng broke the alliance, Xu Qi surrendered, and Zi Peng was transferred to be the general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：复遣朱祐、贾复及建威大将军耿弇，汉忠将军王常，武威将军郭守，越骑将军刘宏，偏将军刘嘉、耿植等，与彭并力讨邓奉。
现代文：又派遣朱、贾复及建威大将军耿弇，汉忠将军王常，武威将军郭守，越骑将军刘宏，偏将军刘嘉、耿植等，与岑彭并力讨伐邓奉。
English: He also dispatched Zhu, Jiafu and Jianwei's General Geng Yao, Hanzhong's General Wang Chang, Wuwei's General Guo Shou, Yueqi's General Liu Hong, Bi General Liu Jia, Geng Zhi, etc. to fight Dengfeng together with Zhaopeng.

古文：先击堵乡，而奉将万余人救董。
现代文：先攻击堵乡，而邓奉率万余人救董讠斤。
English: He attacked Dongxiang first, and Deng Bong led more than ten thousand people to rescue Dongxingjin.

古文：、奉皆南阳精兵，彭等攻之，连月不克。
现代文：董讠斤、邓奉都是南阳精兵，岑彭等进攻，连续几个月也没攻下。
English: Dong Shujin and Deng Bong were both Nanyang elite soldiers, and Zibo and Peng attacked, but they did not attack for several months.

古文：三年夏，帝自将南征，至叶，董讠斤别将将数千人遮首，车骑不可得前。
现代文：建武三年夏，光武亲自率军南征，到达叶县，董讠斤的别将率领数千人拦住去路，车驾骑兵不能前进。
English: In the summer of the third year of Jianwu, Guangwu personally led the army to the south and arrived in Ye County. Dong Shujin's non-commissioned officer led thousands of people to block the road, and the cavalry could not advance.

古文：彭奔击，大破之。
现代文：岑彭追奔进击，大破贼兵。
English: Yao Peng ran after them and attacked them, smashing the bandits.

古文：帝至堵阳，邓奉夜逃归淯阳，董讠斤降。
现代文：光武到达堵阳，邓奉乘夜逃回氵育阳，董讠斤投降。
English: Guangwu arrived in Doyang, Deng Bong took the night to escape back to Shiyouyang, and Dong Shujin surrendered.

古文：彭复与耿弇、贾复及积弩将军傅俊、骑都尉臧宫等从追邓奉于小长安，帝率诸将亲战，大破之。
现代文：岑彭再与耿弇、贾复及积弩将军傅俊、骑都尉臧宫等跟踪追击邓奉于小长安。光武率领诸将亲战，大破邓奉军。
English: Yao Peng, Geng Yao, Jia Fu, and Jieyi generals Fu Jun and cavalry captain Gong Gong followed and pursued Deng Bong at Xiaochang'an. Guangwu led the generals and defeated Deng Bong's army.

古文：奉迫急，乃降。
现代文：邓奉迫急，于是投降。
English: Deng was in a hurry, so he surrendered.

古文：帝怜奉旧功臣，且衅起吴汉，欲全宥之。
现代文：光武怜悯邓奉是旧功臣，而且他造反是由于吴汉官兵侵暴百姓，想赦免他。
English: Guangwu pity Deng Bong is an old hero, and he rebelled because the Wu and Han officials and soldiers violated the people and wanted to pardon him.

古文：彭与耿弇谏曰： 邓奉背恩反逆，暴师经年，致贾复伤痍，朱祐见获。
现代文：岑彭与耿弇都劝谏道： 邓奉背恩反叛，使军队在外暴露经年，致使贾复受伤，朱被获。
English: Nie Peng and Geng Yao both advised him, "Deng Bong rebelled against his benefactor, exposing the army to the outside world, resulting in Jia Fu being injured and Zhu being captured.

古文：陛下既至，不知悔善，而亲在行陈，兵败乃降。
现代文：陛下既已到此，他仍不知悔悟从善，而亲在阵上指挥，直到兵败才被迫投降。
English: Since His Majesty has arrived here, he still does not know how to repent and do good, but he personally commanded the battle, until he was defeated and forced to surrender.

古文：若不诛奉，无以惩恶。 于是斩之。
现代文：如果不杀邓奉，就无以惩罚恶人。 光武于是斩邓奉。
English: Without killing Deng Bong, there was no way to punish the wicked. Guangwu then beheaded Deng Bong.

古文：奉者，西华侯邓晨之兄子也。
现代文：邓奉，是西华侯邓晨哥哥的儿子。
English: Deng Feng was the son of Deng Chen's elder brother, Xihua Hou.

古文：车驾引还，令彭率傅俊、臧宫、刘宏等三万余人南击秦丰，拔黄邮，丰与其大将蔡宏拒彭等于邓，数月不得进。
现代文：光武还京，令岑彭率领傅俊、臧宫、刘宏等三万余人向南攻击秦丰，攻拔黄邮聚，秦丰与他的大将葵宏拒岑彭等于邓，数月不得前进。
English: When Guangwu returned to Beijing, he ordered more than 30,000 people, including Fu Jun, Gong Gong, Liu Hong, and others, led by Nie Peng, to attack Qin Feng to the south and conquer Huangpu. Qin Feng and his general Kwai Hong refused to consider Nie Peng equal to Deng, and were not allowed to advance for several months.

古文：帝怪以让彭，彭惧，于是夜勒兵马，申令军中，使明旦西击山都。
现代文：光武感到奇怪，责让岑彭，岑彭恐惧，于是夜间统率兵马，申令军中，使次日一早西击山都县。
English: Feeling strange, Guangwu ordered Zhaopeng to attack, but Zhaopeng was afraid, so he led the soldiers and horses at night and ordered the troops to attack the west of Shandu County in the morning of the next day.

古文：乃缓所获虏，令得逃亡，归以告丰，丰即采其军西邀彭。
现代文：就放松对俘虏的管理，让他们逃亡，回去告诉秦丰，秦丰就将所有军队向西邀击岑彭。
English: He relaxed the management of the captives, let them escape, and told Qin Feng to go back. Qin Feng then invited all the troops to the west to attack Zhaopeng.

古文：彭乃潜兵度沔水，击其将张杨于阿头山，大破之。
现代文：岑彭却暗中率兵渡沔水，攻击秦丰部将张杨于阿头山，大破张杨。
English: However, Yao Peng secretly led an army to cross the Yanshui River and attacked Zhang Yang, the general of the Qin and Feng Departments, in Mt. Atou, defeating Zhang Yang.

古文：从川谷间伐木开道，直袭黎丘，击破诸屯兵。
现代文：又从山谷间伐木开道，直袭黎丘，击破各路屯兵。
English: He also opened a logging road between the valleys and directly attacked Litchu, defeating the soldiers stationed along the road.

古文：丰闻大惊，驰归救之。
现代文：秦丰闻讯大惊，还军援救。
English: Qin Feng was shocked to hear the news and returned to the army for rescue.

古文：彭与诸将依东山为营，丰与蔡宏夜攻鼓，彭豫为之备，出兵逆击之，丰败走，追斩蔡宏。
现代文：岑彭与诸将依托东山为营，秦丰与蔡宏乘夜间攻岑彭，岑彭预先作好了防备，出兵攻击，秦丰败走，追击斩了蔡宏。
English: Yao Peng and his generals camped on Dongshan. Qin Feng and Cai Hong used the night to attack Yao Peng. Yao Peng prepared in advance and sent troops to attack. Qin Feng was defeated and chased Cai Hong.

古文：更封彭为舞阴侯。
现代文：更封岑彭为舞阴侯。
English: He was given the title of Mai Yin Hou (舞阴侯).

古文：秦丰相赵京举宜城降，拜为成汉将军，与彭共围丰于黎丘。
现代文：秦丰的相赵京举宜城降岑彭，拜赵京为成汉将军，与岑彭共围困秦丰于黎丘。
English: Qin Feng's consort Zhao Jing held up Yicheng to bring down Zhaopeng, and worshipped Zhao Jing as the general of the Han Dynasty. Together with Zhaopeng, they besieged Qin Feng at Lichu.

古文：时田戎拥众夷陵，闻秦丰被围，惧大兵方至，欲降。
现代文：这时田戎拥兵夷陵，听说秦丰被围，害怕大兵将到，准备投降。
English: At this time, Tian Rong was with the soldiers of Yiling, he heard that Qin Feng was surrounded, he was afraid that the soldiers would arrive, and he was ready to surrender.

古文：而妻兄辛臣谏戎曰： 今四方豪杰各据郡国，洛阳地如掌耳，不如按甲以观其变。 戎曰： 以秦王之强，犹为征南所围，岂况吾邪？
现代文：而妻兄辛臣劝谏田戎说： 现在四方豪杰各占据郡国，洛阳地如手心一样，不如按兵不动以观察其变化。 田戎说： 以楚黎王秦丰的强大，还被征南大军所围困，何况我呢？
English: However, his brother-in-law, Sinchen, advised Putian Rong to say, "Now that the four great warriors have occupied the county, Luoyang is like the palm of your hand, it is better to observe its changes by standing still." Tian Rong said, "As the powerful King of Chuli, Qin Feng, was also besieged by the Southern Expeditionary Army, what about me?

古文：降计决矣。 四年春，戎乃留辛臣守夷陵，自将兵沿江溯沔止黎丘，刻期日当降，而辛臣于后盗戎珍宝，从间道先降于彭，而以书招戎。
现代文：我已决定投降了。 建武四年春，田戎就留辛臣守夷陵，自己率领军队沿长江溯沔水止于黎丘，规划了投降的日期，而辛臣在后盗取了田戎的珍宝，从小道先向岑彭投降，反而以书招唤田戎来降。
English: I have decided to surrender. In the spring of the fourth year of the Jianwu era, Tian Rong went to stay with Xin Xiang to guard the Yili Mausoleum. He led the army along the Yangtze River to Liqiu and planned the date of surrender. However, Xin Xiang later stole Tian Rong's precious treasure and surrendered to Zhaopeng from the trail. Instead, he invited Tian Rong to come down in a letter.

古文：戎疑必卖己，遂不敢降，百反与秦丰合，彭出兵攻戎，数月，大破之，其大将伍公诣彭降，戎亡归夷陵。
现代文：田戎怀疑辛臣必定出卖了自己，就不敢投降，而反与秦丰会合。岑彭出兵攻田戎，几个月，大破戎军，他的大将伍公到岑彭处投降，田戎逃亡回到夷陵。
English: Tian Rong suspected that Xin Chen must have betrayed him, so he didn't dare to surrender, and instead joined forces with Qin Feng. Zi Peng sent troops to attack Tian Rong, and after several months, the army was completely defeated. His general Qugong surrendered to Zi Peng, and Tian Rong fled back to Yiling.

古文：帝幸黎丘劳军，封彭吏士有功者百余人。
现代文：光武到黎丘劳军，封岑彭吏士中有功劳的一百多人。
English: Guangwu went to Litchu Labor Corps, and more than a hundred of the meritorious Peng Lishi were promoted.

古文：彭攻秦丰三岁，斩首九万余级，丰余兵裁千人，又城中食且尽。
现代文：岑彭攻秦丰三年，斩首九万余级，秦丰余兵只剩下千人，又城中粮食也将吃尽了。
English: In the three years since Sui and Peng attacked Qinfeng, they had beheaded more than ninety thousand people. Only a thousand of Qinfeng's remaining soldiers were left, and the food in the city would be exhausted.

古文：帝以丰转弱，令朱祐代彭守之，使彭与傅俊南击田戎，大破之，遂拔夷陵，追至秭归。
现代文：光武以秦丰变弱了，就令朱代岑彭围守他，而使岑彭与傅俊向南攻击田戎，大破戎军，于是攻克夷陵，追到秭归。
English: When Guangwu Iqinfeng became weak, he ordered the Zhu Dynasty to encircle and defend him, and he sent Yu Peng and Fu Jun to attack Tian Rong to the south, defeating the Rong army, and then conquered Yiling and chased them back.

古文：戎与数十骑亡入蜀，尽获其妻子士众数万人。
现代文：田戎与数十骑逃亡入蜀，尽获田戎妻子儿女士众数万人。
English: Tian Rong and dozens of horsemen fled to Shu, and tens of thousands of Tian Rong's wives and children were captured.

古文：彭以将伐蜀汉，而夹川谷少，水险难漕运，留威虏将军冯骏军江州，都尉田鸿军夷陵，领军李玄军夷道，自引兵还屯津乡，当荆州要会，喻告诸蛮夷，降者奏封其君长。
现代文：岑彭以即将征伐蜀汉，而川江两岸谷少，水险漕运又很困难，留威虏将军冯骏屯军江州县，都尉田鸿屯军夷陵，领军李玄屯军夷道，自己引兵还屯津乡县，当荆州的咽喉要地，晓谕各蛮夷，投降的奏请封赐其君长。
English: Zhou Peng said that he was about to invade Shuhan, but the valleys on both sides of the Sichuan River were small, and water transport was very difficult. General Liu Weirong of the Fenghuotun Army in Jiangzhou County, the commander of the Tianhongtun Army in Yiling, the leader of the Li Xuantun Army in Yidao, and the leader of the troops in Tunjin Township County, when the throat of Jingzhou, told the barbarians that the surrender should be given to their monarchs.

古文：初，彭与交阯牧邓让厚善，与让书陈国家威德，又遣偏将军屈充移檄江南，班行诏命。
现代文：起初，岑彭与交趾牧邓让厚交亲善，就写信给邓让陈述光武威德，又派遣偏将军屈充传檄文到江南，颁行诏命。
English: At first, Zhaopeng was on friendly terms with Deng Zang, a close confidant, and wrote a letter to Deng Zang stating Guangwu Weide. He also sent General Qu Quanzhong to the south of the Yangtze River to issue the edict.

古文：于是让与江夏太守侯登、武陵太守王堂、长沙相韩福、桂阳太守张隆、零陵太守田翕、苍梧太守杜穆、交耻太守锡光等，相率遣使贡献，悉封为列侯。
现代文：于是邓让与江夏太守侯登、武陵太守王堂、长沙相韩福、桂阳太守张隆、零陵太守田翕、苍梧太守杜穆、交趾太守锡光等，陆续遣使贡献，都封为列侯。
English: As a result, Deng Zhan, together with Jiangxia Governor Hou Deng, Wuling Governor Wang Dong, Changsha Governor Han Fu, Guiyang Governor Zhang Long, Luling Governor Tian Qi, Gorgon Governor Dumu, and Jiaozi Governor Xiguang, successively sent envoys and made contributions, and were all made vassals.

古文：或遣子将兵助彭征伐。
现代文：有的还遣子率兵助岑彭征伐。
English: Some of them also sent their sons and soldiers to help Yan Peng in the campaign.

古文：于是江南之珍始流通焉。
现代文：于是江南的各种珍贵物品开始流通起来。
English: As a result, various precious items from the south of the Yangtze River began to circulate.

古文：六年冬，征彭诣京师，数召宴见，厚加赏赐。
现代文：建武六年冬，征召岑彭到京师，多次召见赐宴，厚加赏赐。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of the Jianwu era, Zhaopeng was summoned to Beijing as an instructor. He was invited to many banquets and was rewarded generously.

古文：复南还津乡，有诏过家上冢，大长称以朔望问太夫人起居。
现代文：再南回津乡县，有诏命他经过家里时为先人上冢，大长秋以初一、十五向太夫人请安。
English: Further south, back in Tsu Township County, he was ordered by imperial edict to greet his ancestors as he passed by their home. On the first and fifteenth day of the first month, he greeted his great-grandmother.

古文：八年，彭引兵从车驾破天水，与吴汉围隗嚣于西域。
现代文：建武八年，岑彭引兵从光武破天水，与吴汉围隗嚣于西城。
English: In the eighth year of the Jianwu era, Nie Peng led an army from Guangwu to break through the sky and water, and clashed with Wu Han in Xicheng.

古文：时，公孙述将李育将兵救嚣，守上邽，帝留盖延、联弇围之，而车驾东归。
现代文：时公孙述部将李育率兵救隗嚣，镇守上圭阝，光武留盖延、耿弇围住上圭阝，光武东归。
English: At that time, Gongsun Shube led Li Yu and his soldiers to rescue Guiyang, the town guard Shangguiyang, Guangwu stayed in Guiyang, Geng Yao surrounded Shangguiyang, and Guangwu returned east.

古文：敕彭书曰： 两城若下，便可将兵南击蜀虏。
现代文：以书令岑彭说： 如果西城、上圭阝都攻下了，就可率兵南击蜀虏。
English: Zhaopeng said in a written order: If Xicheng and Shangguiyuan are conquered, you can lead your soldiers south to attack Shuriku.

古文：人若不知足，既平陇，复望蜀。
现代文：人苦不知足，既平定了陇，又望着蜀。
English: People are never satisfied. They have not only pacified Shao, but are also looking forward to Shu.

古文：每一发兵，头须为白。 彭遂壅谷水灌西城，城未没丈余，嚣将行巡、周宗将蜀救兵到，嚣得出还冀。
现代文：每一次发兵，都急得头发发白。 岑彭就堵塞谷水灌西城，水离城墙还有一丈多，隗嚣将领行巡、周宗率领蜀救兵赶到，隗嚣得以出城回到冀城。
English: Every time he sent out an army, his hair turned white with anxiety. Zhaopeng blocked the valley with water and flooded the west city, and the water was still far away from the city wall. Hanran led the patrol, Zhou Zong led the Shu rescuers to arrive, and Hanran was able to leave the city and return to Jicheng.

古文：汉军食尽，烧辎重，引兵下陇，延、弇亦相随而退。
现代文：汉军粮尽，烧掉辎重，引兵退去，盖延、耿弇也相继退走。
English: The Han army ran out of food, burned their baggage, and withdrew. Gaien and Geng Yao also withdrew one after another.

古文：嚣出兵尾击诸营，彭殿为后拒，故诸将能全师东归。
现代文：隗嚣出兵尾击诸营，岑彭殿后为之掩护，所以诸将能安全退走全师东归。
English: Han Han sent troops to attack Zhu's battalion, and Zi Peng backed him up, so Zhu was able to retreat safely and the whole division returned to the east.

古文：彭还津乡。
现代文：岑彭回师津乡县。
English: Zou Peng returned to his teacher in Tsu Township.

古文：九年，公孙述遣其将任满、田戎、程汎，将数万人乘枋下江关，击破冯骏及田鸿、李玄等。
现代文：建武九年，公孙述派遣将领任满、田戎、程氵凡，率数万人乘坐用竹木编成的桴筏下到江关，击败冯骏及田鸿、李玄等。
English: In the ninth year of the Jianwu era, Gongsun Su dispatched generals led by Man, Tian Rong and Cheng Yufan, and led tens of thousands of people to Jiangguan on a raft made of bamboo, defeating Feng Yu and Tian Hong, Li Xuan and others.

古文：遂拔夷道、夷陵，据荆门、虎牙。
现代文：于是攻拔夷道、夷陵，占据荆州、虎牙。
English: As a result, they attacked Yidu and Yiling, and occupied Jingzhou and Huya.

古文：横江水起浮桥、斗楼，立欑柱绝水道，结营山上，以拒汉兵。
现代文：在长江江面上搭起浮桥、战楼，立下许多木柱以断绝水道，结扎营地在山上，以抗拒汉兵。
English: Floating bridges and battle towers were built on the Yangtze River, many wooden pillars were erected to cut off the waterway, and camps were set up on the mountains to resist the Chinese soldiers.

古文：彭数攻之，不利，于是装直进楼船、冒突露桡数千艘。
现代文：岑彭数次进攻都不利，于是建造可直进的有楼的战船，人在船中，只有楫露在外的战船数千艘。
English: Several attacks were unfavorable to Yao and Peng, so they built warships with buildings that could go straight ahead. There were thousands of warships with people on board, only the prow was exposed.

古文：十一年春，彭与吴汉及诛虏将军刘隆、辅威将军臧宫、骁骑将军刘歆，发南阳、武陵、南郡兵，又发桂阳、零陵、长沙委输棹卒，凡六万余人，骑五千匹，皆会荆门。
现代文：建武十一年春，岑彭与吴汉及诛虏将军刘隆、辅威将军臧宫、骁骑将军刘歆，发动南阳、武陵、南郡的兵马，又发动桂阳、零陵、长沙担任运输任务的水兵，共六万多人，骑五千匹，都在荆门会齐。
English: In the spring of the 11th year of the Jianwu era, Wu Peng and Wu Han, together with the general Liu Long, the general Shu Wei, the general Gong Gong, and the cavalry general Liu Wei, launched the soldiers and horses of Nanyang, Wuling, and Nan County, and also launched the sailors of Guiyang, Luling, and Changsha to serve as transportation missions. A total of more than sixty thousand people, riding five thousand horses, all met at Jingmen.

古文：吴汉以三郡棹卒多费粮谷，欲罢之。
现代文：吴汉以三郡水兵多费粮食，想罢而不用。
English: Wu Han with three counties of sailors to spend more grain, do not want to give up.

古文：彭以蜀兵盛，不可遣，上书言状。
现代文：岑彭以为蜀兵强盛，水兵不可遣散，上书光武说明情况。
English: Yao Peng thought that the Shu soldiers were strong and the sailors could not be dismissed, and sent a letter to Guangwu to explain the situation.

古文：帝报彭曰： 大司马习用步骑，不晓水战，荆门之事，一由征南公为重而已。 彭乃令军中募攻浮桥，先登者上赏。
现代文：光武回答岑彭说： 大司马吴汉习惯于用步骑作战，不晓水战，荆门会战，一切都由征南公岑彭主持。 岑彭下令军中招募勇士攻浮桥，能先登上去的受上赏。
English: Guangwu replied to Yao Peng, saying, "Master Ma Wuhan is accustomed to fighting on foot and on horseback, but he does not know about water battles and the Battle of Jingmen, all of which were presided over by the Southern Expeditionary Force Commander Yao Peng. Yao Peng ordered the army to recruit warriors to attack the pontoon bridge, and those who could climb up first were rewarded.

古文：于是偏将军鲁奇应募而前。时天风狂急，奇船逆流而上，直冲浮桥，而欑柱钩不得去，奇等乘势殊死战，因飞炬焚之，风怒火盛，桥楼崩烧。
现代文：于是偏将军鲁奇应募而向前突击，当时狂风急刮，鲁奇战船逆流而上，直冲浮桥，但被木柱钩住船体不能前进，鲁奇乘势作拼死战，用飞射的火炬去焚烧，风怒火盛，浮桥、斗楼都烧垮了。
English: At that time, the fierce wind was blowing, the Luchi warship went upstream against the current and rushed straight to the pontoon bridge, but the hull was hooked by a wooden pillar and could not advance. Luchi took advantage of the situation to fight to the death, using a flying torch to burn. The wind was furious, and the pontoon bridge and the tower were burned down.

古文：彭复悉军顺风并进，所向无前。
现代文：岑彭再率领全军顺风并进，所向无敌。
English: Yao Peng re-led the whole army to ride the tailwind and march forward, invincible.

古文：蜀兵大乱，溺死者数千人。
现代文：蜀兵大乱，被溺死的达数千人。
English: Shu soldiers rioted, and thousands of people drowned.

古文：斩任满，生获程汎，而田戎亡保江州。
现代文：斩任满，活捉程氵凡，田戎逃命到江州以求自保。
English: After completing his term of office, Cheng Shufan was captured alive, and Tian Rong fled to Jiangzhou for his own safety.

古文：彭上刘隆为南郡太守，自率臧宫、刘歆长驱入江关，令军中无得虏掠。
现代文：岑彭上奏刘隆为南郡太守，自己率臧宫、刘歆长驱直入江关，下令军中不得虏掠。
English: Yao Peng promoted Liu Long to the position of the governor of Nan County. He himself led Yao Gong and Liu Yichang to drive straight into Jiangguan and ordered that no one in the army be allowed to plunder.

古文：所以，百姓皆奉牛、酒迎劳。
现代文：所过之处，百姓都奉献牛酒以示欢迎慰劳。
English: Everywhere they went, the people offered cow wine as a welcome consolation.

古文：彭见诸耆老，为言大汉哀愍巴蜀久见虏役，故兴师远伐，以讨有罪，为人除害。
现代文：岑彭见到各耆老们，就说大汉哀怜巴蜀久遭贼虏奴役，所以兴师远伐，以讨伐有罪之人，为百姓除害。
English: When Yao Peng saw the elders, he said that the great man was sorry for Ba Shu, who had been enslaved by thieves for a long time, so he sent his army far away to fight the guilty and eliminate the harm for the people.

古文：让不受其牛、酒。
现代文：推让不接受百姓所奉的牛酒。
English: He refused to accept the cow wine offered by the common people.

古文：百姓皆大喜悦，争开门降。
现代文：百姓都大为喜悦，争着开门投降。
English: The people were overjoyed and scrambled to open the doors and surrender.

古文：诏彭守益州牧，所下郡，辄行太守事。
现代文：诏令岑彭暂署理益州牧，下面的郡，就由岑彭选任太守。
English: The imperial edict ordered Zou Peng to temporarily sign the Liyi Prefecture, and the following counties were selected by Zou Peng to be the governor.

古文：彭到江州，以田戎食多，难卒拔，留冯骏守之，自引兵乘利直指垫江，攻破平曲，收其米数十万石。
现代文：岑彭到江州，以田戎粮食充足，难以立刻攻取，就留下冯骏守江州，自己却引兵乘胜直指垫江县，攻破平曲，收其米数十万石。
English: Zi Peng went to Jiangzhou, but there was enough grain in Tian Rong and it was difficult to capture it immediately, so he left Feng Xuan to defend Jiangzhou. However, he led the troops to take advantage of the victory and directly pointed to Jiaozhou County to break through the flat curve and collect hundreds of thousands of kilos of rice.

古文：公孙述使其将延岑、吕鲔、王元及其弟恢悉兵拒广汉及资中，又遣将侯丹率二万余人拒黄石。
现代文：公孙述使其将领延岑、吕鲔、王元及弟公孙恢，率所有部队拒守广汉和资中县，又派遣将领侯丹率二万余人拒守黄石。
English: Gongsun said that his generals Yan Rong, Lv Rong, Wang Yuan and his brother Gongsun Hui led all the troops to refuse to defend Guanghan and Zizhong counties, and dispatched more than 20,000 people led by general Hou Dan to refuse to defend Huangshi.

古文：彭乃多张疑兵，使护军杨翕与臧宫拒延岑等，自分兵浮江下还江州，溯都江而上，袭击侯丹，大破之。
现代文：岑彭于是多设疑兵，使护军杨翕与臧宫抗拒延岑等，自己却分兵浮江而下回到江州，溯都江而上，袭击侯丹，大破丹军。
English: Xing Peng then set up more suspicious soldiers, so that the escort troops Yang Jie and Yao Gong resisted Yan Jie and so on, but he himself divided the troops and went down the Fuhe River back to Jiangzhou, up the Dujiang River, attacked Hou Dan, and defeated the Dan army.

古文：因晨夜倍道兼行二千余里，径拔武阳。
现代文：因昼夜兼道而行二千余里，直接攻拔武阳。
English: Due to the day and night, he traveled more than two thousand miles and directly attacked Wuyang.

古文：使精骑驰广都，去成都数十里，势若风雨，所至皆奔散。
现代文：派遣精骑驰骋到广都县，离成都只有数十里地，其攻势如骤风暴雨，所到之处蜀兵都奔逃而散。
English: He sent his horsemen to gallop to Guangdu County, only dozens of miles away from Chengdu. Their offensive was like a sudden storm, and Shu soldiers fled and scattered everywhere they went.

古文：初，述闻汉兵在平曲，故遣大兵逆之。
现代文：起初，公孙述听说汉兵还在平曲，所以派遣大军去抵抗。
English: At first, Gongsun Su heard that the Han soldiers were still fighting, so he sent a large army to resist.

古文：及彭至武阳，绕出延岑军后，蜀地震骇。
现代文：等到岑彭到武阳，绕到了延岑军的后面，蜀地震动惊骇。
English: When Zhaopeng arrived at Wuyang and went around the back of Yan's army, Shu was shocked.

古文：述大惊，以杖击地曰： 是何神也！ 
现代文：公孙述大惊，以杖击地说： 怎么这么神速啊！ 
English: The great-grandson said he was shocked and hit it with his cane, saying: "How is it so fast!

古文：彭所营地名彭亡，闻而恶之，欲徙，会日暮，蜀刺客诈为亡奴降，夜刺杀彭。
现代文：岑彭扎营的地名叫彭亡，岑彭听了很厌恶，准备迁徙，刚好日暮，蜀刺客假冒为亡奴诈降，乘夜刺杀了岑彭。
English: The place where Yao Peng was encamped was called Pengdu. Yao Peng was disgusted by what he heard and prepared to migrate. Just at dusk, the Shu assassins pretended to be the dead slaves and killed Yao Peng in the night.

古文：彭首破荆门，长驱武阳，持军整齐，秋豪无犯。
现代文：岑彭首破荆门，长驱武阳，治军整齐，秋毫无犯。
English: Zou Peng broke through the gate of jade with his head, drove away Wuyang, ruled the army neatly, and committed no crimes in the autumn.

古文：邛穀王任贵闻彭威信，数千里遣使迎降。
现代文：邛谷王任贵听说岑彭的威信，数千里派遣使者迎降。
English: Shibuya King Rengui heard about the prestige of Zhaopeng and sent an envoy thousands of miles to meet the surrender.

古文：会彭已薨，帝尽以任贵所献赐彭妻子，谥曰壮侯。
现代文：恰逢岑彭被刺身死，光武将任贵所献尽数赏赐给岑彭妻子儿女，赐谥号为壮侯。
English: Coinciding with the death of Nie Peng, Guangwu rewarded Nie Peng's wife and children with the amount of money that Ren Gui had donated, and gave Nie Peng the title of grand vassal.

古文：蜀人怜之，为立庙武阳，岁时祠焉。
现代文：蜀人怜慕其德，为岑彭在武阳建立祠庙，按岁时前往祭祀。
English: The people of Shu felt sorry for him and built an ancestral temple for Zhaopeng in Wuyang. They went to the temple according to their age.

古文：子遵嗣，徒封细阳侯。
现代文：子遵嗣，徒封细阳侯。
English: His son, Zunzi, became the lord of Tufeng and Shiyang.

古文：十三年，帝思彭功，复封遵弟淮为穀阳侯。
现代文：十三年，帝思彭功，复封遵弟淮为穀阳侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of Emperor Peng Gong, Emperor Zong's younger brother Huai was reinstated as the Prince of Guiyang.

古文：遵永平中为屯骑校尉。
现代文：遵永平中为屯骑校尉。
English: Junyongping Junior High School is a cadet school captain.

古文：遵卒，子伉嗣。
现代文：遵卒，子伉嗣。
English: Follow me, my son and heir.

古文：伉卒，子杞嗣，元初三年，坐事失国。
现代文：伉卒，子杞嗣，元初三年，坐事失国。
English: His son and heir, who was three years old at the beginning of the year, lost his country in the war.

古文：建光元年，安帝复封杞细阳侯，顺帝时为光禄勋。
现代文：建光元年，安帝复封杞细阳侯，顺帝时为光禄勋。
English: In the first year of Jian Guang, An Di was reinstated as the governor of Jianxiyang, and Shun Di was awarded the Guanglu Honor.

古文：杞卒，子熙嗣，尚安帝妹涅阳长公主。
现代文：杞卒，子熙嗣，尚安帝妹涅阳长公主。
English: The prince's father, his son and heir, and Shang Andi's sister, Neyang, the eldest princess.

古文：少为侍中、虎贲中郎将，朝廷多称其能。
现代文：少为侍中、虎贲中郎将，朝廷多称其能。
English: He served as a chamberlain and vice-commander of the Tiger Regiment, and the Imperial Court praised his abilities.

古文：迁魏郡太守，招聘隐逸，与参政事，无为而化。
现代文：迁魏郡太守，招聘隐逸，与参政事，无为而化。
English: He was transferred to be the governor of Wei County. He was a recluse, and did not participate in politics.

古文：视事二年，舆人歌之曰： 我有枳棘，岑君伐之。
现代文：视事二年，舆人歌之曰： 我有枳棘，岑君伐之。
English: Two years after the incident, a popular song said: "I have thorns, but I am not a thorny thorn."

古文：我有蟊贼，岑君遏之。
现代文：我有蟊贼，岑君遏之。
English: I've got a thief, and I've got to stop him.

古文：狗吠不惊，足下生氂。
现代文：狗吠不惊，足下生氂。
English: The dog barks but does not startle, the grass grows underfoot.

古文：含哺鼓腹，焉知凶灾？
现代文：含哺鼓腹，焉知凶灾？
English: How can you know the calamity when your stomach is full?

古文：我喜我生，独丁斯时。
现代文：我喜我生，独丁斯时。
English: I liked my life when I was single.

古文：美矣岑君，於戏休兹！ 
现代文：美矣岑君，於戏休兹！ 
English: Mei Ying Jun, come to the play Huizi!

古文：熙卒，子福嗣，为黄门侍郎。
现代文：熙卒，子福嗣，为黄门侍郎。
English: His eldest son, Fukutsugu, became a waiter at the Yellow Gate.

古文：贾复字君文，南阳冠军人也。
现代文：贾复字君文，南阳郡冠军县人。
English: Jia Fu Zi Junwen, champion of Nanyang County.

古文：少好学，习《尚书》。
现代文：少年时好学，习《尚书》。
English: When he was a boy, he was eager to learn and studied "Shang Shu."

古文：事舞阴李生，李生奇之，谓门人曰： 贾君之容貌志气如此，而勤于学，将相之器也。 王莽末，为县掾，迎盐河东，会遇盗贼，等比十余人皆放散其盐，复独完以还县，县中称其信。
现代文：从学于舞阴李生，李生惊奇，对弟子们说： 贾君的容貌志气是这样好，又勤于学习，是将相的器材啊。 王莽末年，为县掾，到河东去接盐，恰好遇上盗贼，与他情况相同的十多人都把盐抛弃或散掉了，惟有贾复完完整整运盐回到县里，县中都认为他办事可靠。
English: Li Sheng, who learned from Wuyin Li Sheng, was surprised and said to his disciples: Jia Jun's appearance and spirit are so good, and he is diligent in learning, he is the equipment of the phase. Wang Mang, in his later years, was the county magistrate, went to the east of the river to pick up salt, and happened to meet a thief. More than ten people in the same situation as him abandoned or scattered the salt. However, only Jia Fu returned to the county after the complete shipment of salt. The county all thought that he was reliable.

古文：时，下江、新市兵起，复亦聚众数百人于羽山，自号将军。
现代文：当时下江、新市兵起，贾复也聚众数百人于羽山，自号为将军。
English: At that time, soldiers from Shimoe and Shinichi rose up, and Jia Fu also gathered hundreds of people in Hasan, calling himself a general.

古文：更始立，乃将其众归汉中王刘嘉，以为校尉。
现代文：更始立，就率领其部众归附于汉中王刘嘉，刘嘉以他为校尉。
English: At the beginning of the reformation, he led his followers to attach themselves to Liu Jia, the king of the Han Dynasty, and Liu Jia made him his lieutenant.

古文：复见更始政乱，诸将放纵，乃说嘉曰： 臣闻图尧、舜之事而不能至者，汤、武是也；图汤、武之事而不能至者，桓、文是也；图桓、文之事而不能至者，六国是也；定六国之规，欲安守之而不能至者，亡六国是也。
现代文：贾复看到更始政治混乱，诸将放肆纵虐，就对刘嘉说： 我听说谋求尧舜的事业而不能达到的，是商汤周武王；谋求商汤周武王的事业而不能达到的，是齐桓晋文；谋求齐桓晋文的事业而不能达到的，是六国；确定六国的法度，想各自安守而不能达到的，是六国的灭亡。
English: When Jia Fu saw the political turmoil at the beginning and the unrestrained violence of the generals, he said to Liu Jia: I have heard that the cause of seeking peace and not being able to achieve it is Shang Tang Zhou Wu Wang; the cause of seeking Shang Tang Zhou Wu Wang and not being able to achieve it is Qi Huan Jinwen; the cause of seeking Qi Huan Jinwen and not being able to achieve it is the Six Kingdoms; the cause of determining the laws of the Six Kingdoms and not being able to achieve it is the demise of the Six Kingdoms.

古文：今汉室中兴，大王以亲戚为藩辅，天下未定而安守所保，所保得无不可保乎？ 嘉曰： 卿言大，非吾任也。
现代文：现在汉室中兴，大王以刘氏宗亲而为藩屏辅佐，天下未定而安守所保，所保难道不是有不可保的吗？ 刘嘉说： 你说的事太大，不是我担任得起的。
English: Now that the Han dynasty is flourishing, and the great king is using Liu's ancestor as the assistant of the Han screen, the world is undecided and the peace is guaranteed. Isn't there something that can't be guaranteed? Liu Jia said: What you said is too big, I can't handle it.

古文：大司马刘公在河北，必能相施，第持我书往。 复遂辞嘉，受书北度河，及光武于柏人，因邓禹得召见。
现代文：大司马刘秀在河北，他必定能用，只要持我的手书前往。 贾复于是辞别刘嘉，接受刘嘉书信北渡黄河，追及光武于柏人，由邓禹引见光武。
English: Chief Superintendent Ma Liuxiu is in Hebei, he can certainly use it, as long as he takes my handwritten letter to go. Jia Fu then said goodbye to Liu Jia, accepted Liu Jia's letter to travel north to the Yellow River, pursued Guangwu to Pakren, and was introduced to Guangwu by Deng Yu.

古文：光武奇之，禹亦称有将帅节，于是署复破虏将军督盗贼。
现代文：光武惊奇，邓禹也称赞贾复有将帅的气节，于是暂以贾复为破虏将军督盗贼。
English: Surprised by Guangwu, Deng Yu also praised Jia Fu for having the stamina of a great general, so he temporarily took Jia Fu as the leader of breaking the generals and thieves.

古文：复马羸，光武解左骖以赐之。
现代文：贾复马羸弱，光武解车驾左边的马赏赐给贾复。
English: Jia Fu's horse was weak, and the horse on the left side of Guangwu's chariot was awarded to Jia Fu.

古文：官属以复后来而好陵折等辈，调补鄗尉，光武曰： 贾督有折冲千里之威，方任以职，勿得擅除。 
现代文：官属们因贾复是后来的而且喜欢欺侮挫折同辈，拟调他辅高阝尉，光武说： 贾督有击退敌军于千里之外的威风，刚刚任以要职，不得随意撤除。 
English: Because Jia Fu was a latecomer and liked to bully his frustrated peers, the officials and subordinates planned to transfer him to the second lieutenant of the auxiliary high school. Guang Wu said: Jia Du has the power to repel the enemy army thousands of miles away. He has just been appointed to an important post and must not be removed at will.

古文：光武至信都，以复为偏将军。
现代文：光武到信都，以贾复为偏将军。
English: Guangwu arrived in Xindu, with Jia Fu as his general.

古文：及拔邯郸，迁都护将军。
现代文：攻拔邯郸后，迁都护将军。
English: After the capture of the capital, the capital was transferred to the protection of the general.

古文：从击青犊于射犬，大战至日中，贼陈坚不却。
现代文：从光武攻击青犊于射犬，大战到日中，贼阵势坚固不退却。
English: From the light and armed attack of the youths to the shooting of the dogs, the war to the day, the thief's position is firm and does not retreat.

古文：光武传召复曰： 吏士皆饥，可且朝饭。 复曰： 先破之，然后食耳！ 于是被羽先登，所向皆靡，贼乃败走。
现代文：光武传召贾复说： 官吏士兵们都饿了，可暂吃了饭再说。 贾复说： 先破贼，再吃饭好了。 于是背负鸟羽作为旌旗率先赴敌，所到之处敌都披靡，贼于是败走。
English: Guangwu summoned Jia Fu and said, "The officials and soldiers are all hungry, so let's eat for a while." Jia Fu said, "First break the thief, then eat." So he took the bird's feathers as a banner and went to the enemy first. The enemy was defeated everywhere he went, and the thief was defeated.

古文：诸将咸服其勇。
现代文：诸将都信服他的神勇。
English: The generals were convinced of his bravery.

古文：又北与五校战于真定，大破之。
现代文：又在北面与五校贼战于真定，大破贼军。
English: In the north, he fought against the Five Thieves in Zhending and defeated the Thieves.

古文：复伤创甚。
现代文：贾复受了重伤。
English: Jia Fu was seriously injured.

古文：光武大惊曰： 我所以不令贾复别将者，为其轻敌也。
现代文：光武大惊说： 我之所以不让贾复担任与主力部队配合作战的将领，是因为他轻敌。
English: Guangwu was shocked and said, "The reason why I didn't let Jia Fu serve as the general to coordinate the war with the main force is because he disrespected the enemy."

古文：果然，失吾名将。
现代文：果然，失去了一位名将。
English: Sure enough, we lost a great player.

古文：闻其妇有孕，生女邪，我子娶之，生男邪，我女嫁之，不令其忧妻子也。 复病寻愈，追及光武于蓟，相见甚欢，大飨士卒，令复居前，击邺贼，破之。
现代文：听说他妻子怀了孕，如果生的是女儿，我儿子要娶她，如果生的是男儿，我女儿要嫁给他，不让他为妻子儿女担心哩！ 贾复伤病不久痊愈了，追及光武于蓟，相见后非常欢喜，大宴士卒，令贾复处在前面，攻击邺贼，胜了。
English: I heard that his wife was pregnant. If a daughter is born, my son will marry her. If a son is born, my daughter will marry him. Don't let him worry about his wife and children! Jia Fu recovered from his injury and illness soon. He chased after Guangwu Yuxuan and was very happy to see him. At the grand banquet, Ling Jia Fu was in the front, attacked the bandits and won.

古文：光武即位，拜为执金吾，封冠军侯。
现代文：光武即位，拜为执金吾，封为冠军侯。
English: Guangwu ascended to the throne, bowed to Kingu, and was crowned champion.

古文：先度河攻朱鲔于洛阳，与白虎公陈侨战，连破降之。
现代文：先渡过黄河攻朱鲔于洛阳，与白虎公陈侨战，连连破敌，迫敌投降。
English: He first crossed the Yellow River to attack Zhu Xi in Luoyang, and fought with the White Tiger King Chen Guoqiao, defeating the enemy in succession and forcing the enemy to surrender.

古文：建武二年，益封穰、朝阳二县。
现代文：建武二年，加封穰、朝阳二县。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Jiafeng and Chaoyang counties were added.

古文：更始郾王尹尊及诸大将在南方未降者尚多，帝召诸将议兵事，未有言，沉吟久之，乃以檄叩地曰： 郾最强，宛为次，谁当击之？ 复率然对曰： 臣请击郾。 帝笑曰： 执金吾击郾，吾复何忧！
现代文：更始郾王尹尊及诸多大将在南方没有投降的还很多，光武帝召集诸将商议兵事，没有发言，深思了很久，才以木简叩地说： 郾王尹尊最强，宛为其次，谁可担攻击之责？ 贾复慨然回答说： 臣请命攻击尹尊。 光武帝笑说： 执金吾去攻郾王，我还有什么忧虑呢！
English: At the beginning of the war, Emperor Guangwu summoned the generals to discuss military affairs. They did not speak, and thought for a long time before saying with a wooden stick: "Emperor Jia Fuzhong is the strongest, but who is second, and who is responsible for the attack?" Jia Fuzhong replied with emotion: "Minister, please order me to attack Emperor Yin." Emperor Guangwu smiled and said: "If you order me to attack Emperor Jia, what worries do I have?

古文：大司马当击宛 。
现代文：大司马应去攻宛。 
English: Daisima should go and attack Corman.

古文：遂遣复与骑都尉阴识、骁骑将军刘植南度五社津击郾，连破之。
现代文：于是派遣贾复与骑都尉阴识、骁骑将军刘植南渡五社津击郾，连破郾等。
English: As a result, Jia Fu was dispatched with the cavalry captain Yin Zheng and the cavalry general Liu Zhenan to the Wushejin River to attack the rafts and break the rafts.

古文：月余，尹尊降，尽定其地。
现代文：一月有余，尹尊投降，其地全部平定。
English: After more than a month, Yin Zun surrendered and the whole area was pacified.

古文：引东击更始淮阳太守暴汜，汜降，属县悉定。
现代文：又引兵东击更始淮阳太守暴汜，暴汜投降，各属县全部平定。
English: He also led the troops to attack eastward, and at the beginning of the war, Huaiyang Taishou rebelled violently and surrendered violently, and all the subordinate counties were pacified.

古文：其秋，南击召陵、新息，平定之。
现代文：这年秋，又南击召陵、新息，平定了。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Nan Zhaozhong Mausoleum and Xin Xin were leveled.

古文：明年春，迁左将军，别击赤眉于新城、渑池间，连破之。
现代文：第二年春，迁左将军，另击赤眉于新城、渑池之间，连破赤眉军。
English: In the spring of the second year, General Qian Zuo made another attack on the Red Eyebrows between Xincheng and Dianchi, and the Red Eyebrows were defeated.

古文：与帝会宜阳，降赤眉。
现代文：与光武帝会于宜阳，迫使赤眉投降。
English: He met Emperor Guangwu in Yiyang and forced the Red Eyebrows to surrender.

古文：复从征伐，未尝丧败，数与诸将溃围解急，身被十二创。
现代文：贾复跟从征伐，从来没有丧师失败过，多次与诸将在溃围中解救危急，身上受伤达十二处。
English: Jia Fu followed the conquest, never lost a division and failed. He repeatedly worked with other generals to rescue the critical situation in the siege, and was injured in twelve places.

古文：帝以复敢深入，希令远征，而壮其勇节，常自从之，故复少方面之勋。
现代文：光武帝因贾复敢深入敌军，很少令他远征，而称赞他的勇敢节气，常让他跟随自己，所以贾复少有独当一面的功勋。
English: Because Jia Fu dared to go deep into the enemy army, Emperor Guangwu rarely sent him on an expedition, but praised his brave spirit and often let him follow himself, so Jia Fu rarely had a unique merit.

古文：诸将每论功自伐，复未尝有言。
现代文：诸将每每论功自夸，贾复没有说过自己。
English: The generals boasted about their achievements, but Jia Fu did not say anything about himself.

古文：帝辄曰： 贾君之功，我自知之。 
现代文：光武帝常说： 贾君的功劳，我自己知道。 
English: Emperor Guangwu often said, "I know the merits of Jia Jun.

古文：十三年，定封胶东侯，食郁秩、壮武、下密、即墨、梃、观阳，凡六县。
现代文：建武十三年，定封胶东侯，食邑郁秩、壮武、下密、即墨、梃、观阳，共六县。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, Dingfeng Jiaodonghou, the food towns of Yuchicheng, Zhuangwu, Shimoimi, Jimo, Handan, Guanyang, a total of six counties.

古文：复知帝欲偃干戈，修文德，不欲功臣拥众京师，乃与高密侯邓禹并剽甲兵，敦儒学。
现代文：贾复知道光武帝想偃息干戈，修理文德，不想让功臣拥众在京师，就与高密侯邓禹共同削去甲兵，敦重儒学。
English: Jia Fu knew that Emperor Guangwu wanted to increase the number of soldiers in the army and improve education, and that he did not want to have a large number of heroes and heroines studying in Beijing, so he and Gao Mi Hou Deng Yu jointly reduced the number of soldiers in the army and paid more attention to Confucianism.

古文：帝深然之，遂罢左右将军。
现代文：光武帝深以为然，就罢掉左右将军。
English: Emperor Guangwu was so convinced that he dismissed the left and right generals.

古文：复以列侯就第，加位特进。
现代文：贾复以列侯赐以大第，加位特进。
English: Jia Fu was given the title of prince and grand duke, and he was promoted to the highest rank.

古文：复为人刚毅方直，多大节。
现代文：贾复为人刚毅正直，多大节。
English: Jia Fu is a man of fortitude, honesty and great discipline.

古文：既还私第，阖门养威重。
现代文：既回私第，关门修养威德。
English: After returning to the private sector, it closed its doors to cultivate virtue.

古文：朱祐等荐复宜为宰相，帝方以吏事责三公，故功臣并不用。
现代文：朱等荐举贾复宜为宰相，光武帝正以吏事责让三公，所以对功臣都不重用。
English: Zhu and others recommended Jia Fuxi as prime minister, and Emperor Guangwu was letting the three princes be responsible for the officials, so they were not important to the heroes.

古文：是时，列侯惟高密、固始、胶东三侯与公卿参议国家大事，恩遇甚厚。
现代文：这时的列侯只有高密侯邓禹、固始侯李通、胶东侯贾复三位能与公卿参议国家大事，恩宠待遇甚厚。
English: At that time, only three lords, Gaomi lord Deng Yu, Gushi lord Li Tong and Jia Dong lord Jia Fu, were able to consult with nobles on national affairs, and they were highly favored.

古文：三十一年卒，谥曰刚侯。
现代文：建武三十一年逝世，谥号刚侯。
English: Jianwu died on the 31st year of the Jianwu era, and his posthumous name was Gangu.

古文：子忠嗣。
现代文：子忠嗣。
English: His son, Tadatsugu.

古文：忠卒，子敏嗣。
现代文：忠卒，子敏嗣。
English: His loyal pupil, his son Toshitsugu.

古文：建初元年，坐诬告母杀人。
现代文：建初元年，坐诬告母杀人。
English: In 1861, he falsely accused his mother of murder.

古文：国除。
现代文：国除。
English: His fiefdom was abolished.

古文：肃宗更封复小子邯为胶东侯，邯弟宗为即墨侯，各一县。
现代文：肃宗更封复小子邯为胶东侯，邯弟宗为即墨侯，各一县。
English: Su Zong further appointed his younger son, Zou, as Jiaodonghou, and Zou's younger brother, Zou, as Jiemohou, one county each.

古文：邯卒，子育嗣。
现代文：邯卒，子育嗣。
English: He was a widower and fathered children.

古文：育卒，子长嗣。
现代文：育卒，子长嗣。
English: He was a foster child and the eldest son.

古文：宗字武孺，少有操行，多智略。
现代文：宗字武孺，少有操行，多智略。
English: The family motto is "martial arts, few actions, much wisdom."

古文：初拜郎中，稍迁，建初中为朔方太守。
现代文：初拜郎中，稍迁，建初中为朔方太守。
English: The junior high school, which was the first to be built, was moved a little, and the junior high school was built for Shuo Fang Taishu.

古文：旧内郡徙人在边者，率多贫弱，为居人所仆役，不得为吏。
现代文：旧内郡徙人在边者，率多贫弱，为居人所仆役，不得为吏。
English: In the old Inner County, those who migrated to the outskirts were more likely to be poor and weak. They were servants of the residents and were not allowed to be officials.

古文：宗擢用其任职者，与边吏参选，转相监司，以擿发其奸，或以功次补长吏，故各愿尽死。
现代文：宗擢用其任职者，与边吏参选，转相监司，以擿发其奸，或以功次补长吏，故各愿尽死。
English: Zong Yong used his officials to participate in the election with the border officials, to become the supervisors, to instigate their spies, or to supplement the officials with their ranks, so they were all willing to die.

古文：匈奴畏之，不敢入塞。
现代文：匈奴畏之，不敢入塞。
English: The Xiongnu were so afraid that they dared not enter the city.

古文：征为长水校尉。
现代文：征为长水校尉。
English: He was enlisted as a lieutenant of Changshui.

古文：宗兼通儒术，每宴见，常使与少府丁鸿等论议于前。
现代文：宗兼通儒术，每宴见，常使与少府丁鸿等论议于前。
English: Zong also studied Confucianism, and at every banquet, he often discussed it with Shofu Dinghong and others.

古文：章和二年卒，朝廷愍惜焉。
现代文：章和二年卒，朝廷愍惜焉。
English: Two years after the death of Zhang He, the imperial court mourns his passing.

古文：子参嗣。
现代文：子参嗣。
English: Zosanshi.

古文：参卒，子建嗣。
现代文：参卒，子建嗣。
English: Sang-pyo, son-in-law.

古文：元初元年，尚和帝女临颍长公主。
现代文：元初元年，尚和帝女临颍长公主。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Shang He's daughter, Linyi's eldest princess, was born.

古文：主兼食颍阴、许，合三县，数万户。
现代文：主兼食颍阴、许，合三县，数万户。
English: There are tens of thousands of households in the three counties of Jinyin, Xu and He.

古文：时邓太后临朝，光宠最盛，以建为侍中，顺帝时为光禄勋。
现代文：时邓太后临朝，光宠最盛，以建为侍中，顺帝时为光禄勋。
English: At the time of the enthronement of the Empress Dowager Deng, Guangzhao was at its peak, with Jian as an aide-de-camp and Shun Di as a Guanglu Hon.

古文：论曰：中兴将帅立功名者众矣，惟岑彭、冯异建方面之号，自函谷以西，方城以南，两将之功，实为大焉。
现代文：史官评论说：中兴将帅立功名的很多啊。只有岑彭、冯异建功立业，自函谷以西，方城以南，两将的功劳最大。
English: The historian commented: There are many merits of ZTE's generals. Only Nie Peng and Feng Yijian have made contributions. The two generals have made the greatest contributions west of Hakodate Valley and south of Fangcheng.

古文：若冯、贾之不伐，岑公之义信，乃足以感三军而怀敌人，故能克成远业，终全其庆也。
现代文：如冯异、贾复的不自居功，岑公的义信，真足以感三军而惊敌人，所以他们能够成大业，终能保全荣庆。
English: For example, the selfless contribution of Feng Yiyi and Jia Fu, and the righteous belief of Zou Gong, are really enough to make the three armies feel and surprise the enemy, so they can become a great cause and finally preserve Rongqing.

古文：昔高祖忌柏人之名，违之以全福；征南恶彭亡之地，留之以生灾。
现代文：从前高祖忌 柏人 之名，就离开那里，因此全福；岑彭恶 彭亡 之地，想徙而不得，留在那里遭了灾祸。
English: Once upon a time, there was a man named Gao Zuyi, who left there, and he was blessed. However, he did not want to go back to the place where he died, and he suffered misfortune by staying there.

古文：岂几虑自有明惑，将期数使之然乎？
现代文：难道几微之间自有明惑，而幸与不幸，也许是天命使它这样的吗？
English: Is it possible that there is confusion between the two, and fortune and misfortune, perhaps the fate of the world, made it so?

