古文：主人喟然而叹曰 痛乎风俗之移人也。
现代文：◆班固传，班固字孟坚。九岁时，能连句作文，诵读诗赋，长大后，就广泛通晓典籍，九流百家的言论，没有不深入探讨的。
English: At the age of nine, he was able to write a couplet and recite a poem, and when he grew up, he was widely familiar with classic books and the sayings of hundreds of schools. There was nothing he could not explore in depth.

古文：子实秦人，矜夸馆室，保界河山，信识昭、襄而知始皇矣，恶睹大汉之云为乎。
现代文：他没有固定的老师，不在章句上下功夫，只是掌握大义罢了。性格宽厚和蔼，和众人相容，不因自己有才胜就高人一等，一些儒生因此羡慕他。
English: He does not have a fixed teacher, he does not work hard on the chapters and sentences, he just grasps the great truth. He is generous and amiable, compatible with everyone, and he is not superior because of his talent. Some Confucians envy him for this reason.

古文：夫大汉之开原也，奋布衣以登皇极，繇数期而创万世，盖六籍所不能谈，前圣靡得而言焉。
现代文：永平初年，东平王苍用了至戚替骠骑将军辅政，打开东阁，接纳英雄，这时班固才二十岁，写了报告给苍说： 将军凭着周公、召公的美德，立足于本朝，秉承休明的政策，建立威灵的尊号。从前的周公，现在的将军，《诗》《书》所记载，没有你们三人这样的了。
English: In the first year of Yongping, Dongping King Cang used his relatives to assist the general in politics, opened the East Pavilion, and received heroes. At that time, Ben Gu was only twenty years old. He wrote a report to Cang, saying: The general, with the virtue of Zhou Gong and summoning public, based on this dynasty, adhering to the policy of Hui Ming, established the honorific name of Wei Ling. Former Zhou Gong, current general, "Poem" and "Book" recorded, there are no three of you like this.

古文：当此之时，功有横而当天，讨有逆而顺人，故娄敬度势而献其说，萧公权宜以拓其制。时岂泰而安之哉。计不得以已也。吾子曾不是睹，顾燿后嗣之末造，不亦暗乎。今将语子以建武之理，永平之事，监乎太清，以变子之或志。
现代文：古书说 ：必有非常之人，然后有非常之事；有非常之事，然后有非常之功。 班固幸而生在清明之世，参与视听之末，凭着蝼虫岂的小，私观国政之大，的确赞美将军拥有千载之重任，步先圣之后尘，体弘美之资质，据高明之地位，广采众事，遵循六经，若白黑之别于目，求善永无止境，采择狂夫的言语，不逆负薪的议论。
English: The ancient book says: There must be extraordinary people, and then there must be extraordinary things; there must be extraordinary things, and then there must be extraordinary feats. Ben Gu was born in a clear world, and after participating in the audio-visual, with the help of the maggot, the insect is small, the self-conception of national politics is large, it is true to praise the general for having the important task of a thousand years, the step of the saint after the dust, the quality of the body beauty, according to the high position, the wide range of things, follow the six sutras, if the white and black are different in the eyes, the pursuit of good is endless,

古文： 往者王莽作逆，汉祚中缺，天人致诛，六合相灭。
现代文：我私下见到幕府新开，广延英俊，四方之士，踊跃上前，不顾衣裳颠倒。
English: Privately, I saw the new shogun, Guangyan, handsome, a man of the four quarters, striding forward, despite his clothes upside down.

古文：于时之乱，生民几亡，鬼神泯绝，壑无完柩，郛罔遗室，原野厌人之肉，川谷流人之血，秦、项之灾犹不克半，书契已来未之或纪也。故下民号而上诉，上帝怀而降鉴，致命于圣皇。
现代文：将军应该详考唐、商的举措，体察伊尹、皋陶之荐贤，使远近没有偏私，每个角落的人才都能知晓，目的在于总览贤才，收集明智之士，替国家找到能人，使本朝得到安宁。
English: The general should examine the measures of Tang and merchants in detail, experience the recommended sages of Yi Yin and Jintao, so that there is no partiality between far and near, and talents from every corner can be known. The purpose is to survey talents, collect wise people, and find capable people for the country, so that this dynasty can get peace.

古文：于是圣皇乃握乾符，阐坤珍，披皇图，稽帝文，赫尔发愤，应若兴云，霆发昆阳，凭怒雷震。遂超大河，跨北岳，立号高邑，建都河洛。
现代文：那么将军才会养志和神，优游于庙堂之上，光名宣扬于当代，遗烈永垂于无穷的后世。 我见到故司空椽桓梁，早有宿儒的大名，品德冠于州里，七十岁从心所欲，行为不越规矩是清庙的光辉，当代的英才。
English: It is only then that a general can nurture his spirit and soul, soar above the temple, be glorified in the contemporary era, and have his name immortalized in the infinite future. I saw the late Sikyong Jianhuanliang, a daimyo who had long been a disciple of Confucius, whose moral character was the best in the state, and who was seventy years old and did whatever he wanted, and whose behavior did not exceed the rules, was the glory of the Qing Dynasty, and a contemporary talent.

古文：绍百王之荒屯，因造化之荡涤，体元立制，继天而作。系唐统，接汉绪，茂育群生，恢复疆宇，勋兼乎在昔，事勤乎三五。
现代文：京兆祭酒晋冯，年少时即修身，白了头还不违初志，好古乐道，玄默自守，古人的美好品德，当代人没有能赶上的。扶风椽李育，明经书，行为好，教授百人，客居杜陵，茅屋土阶。
English: Jing Zhao Festival, Jin Feng, self-cultivation at a young age, white head still does not violate the original intention, good ancient music, good silence, good morals of the ancients, contemporary people have not been able to catch up. Fu Feng, Li Yu, Ming scriptures, good behavior, hundreds of professors, guest dwellings, thatched houses.

古文：岂特方轨并迹，纷纷后辟，理近古之所务，蹈一圣之险易云尔哉。
现代文：京兆、扶风两郡都去邀请，因为家贫，几次因病辞去。温故知新，论议通明，廉清修，行能纯备，虽前世名儒，国家之所器重，韦、平、孔、翟，没有再好的了。
English: He was invited by the counties of Jingzhao and Fufeng, but because of his family's poverty, he had to resign several times due to illness. Although he was a famous Confucian scholar in his previous life, Wei, Ping, Kong, and Zou were not as good as he was.

古文：且夫建武之元，天地革命，四海之内，更造夫妇，肇有父子，君臣初建，人伦实始，斯乃虙羲氏之所以基皇德也。
现代文：应叫人考核实绩，来参与万事。京兆督邮郭基，孝行州里闻名，经学被师门称赞，政务的功绩，有特别的功效。
English: It is necessary to invite people to participate in all matters by evaluating their actual performance. The Beijing Zhao post governor Guo Ji is famous for his filial piety, praised by his teachers, and his achievements in government affairs have special effects.

古文：分州土，立市朝，作舟车，造器械，斯轩辕氏之所以开帝功也。
现代文：如果碰上明时，在下僚作事，进能像鸿鸟高飞，退能像杞梁那样以身殉国。
English: If you encounter a bright time and work under a subordinate, you can fly high like a bird and die like a beam.

古文：龚行天罚，应天顺人，斯乃汤、武之所以昭王业也。迁都改邑，有殷宗中兴之则焉。
现代文：氵京州从事王雍，亲身有卞严的节操，加上术艺文章，氵京州的头面人物，没有在王雍之前的了。古时周公举一方之才则其他三方埋怨，说 怎么把我放在后边呢 。
English: Shijiazhuang engaged in Wangyong, personally had strict discipline, coupled with art articles, Shijiazhuang's leading figure, not in front of Wangyong. In ancient times, Zhou Gongzhi was the only one, while the other three parties complained, saying, "How can I be left behind?"

古文：即土之中，有周成隆平之制焉。
现代文：应该及时打开府门，使远方之人得到安慰。
English: Doors should be opened in a timely manner so that those who are far away can be comforted.

古文：不阶尺土一人之柄，同符乎高祖。
现代文：弘农功曹使殷肃，学问通达，见闻很广，才能超人，诵《诗》三百篇，能接待外宾。
English: Gongnong Gong Cao is a scholar, knowledgeable, well-informed, superhuman talent, recites 300 poems, and can receive foreign guests.

古文：克己复礼，以奉终始，允恭乎孝文。
现代文：这六个人，都有特殊品行才干，品德高于当世，如蒙接纳，以辅佐高明，这正是山梁之秋，孔夫子所叹息的呀！
English: These six people all have special qualities and talents, and their moral character is higher than that of the present world. If they are accepted, they will be able to assist and support Gao Ming. This is exactly what Confucius sighed about!

古文：宪章稽古，封岱勒成，仪炳乎世宗。
现代文：从前卞和献宝，被截断脚趾，屈原进献忠言，终于沉于汩罗，可是和氏之璧，千载留下光彩，屈子的遗著，万世称赞。
English: Once upon a time, Kuwahara dedicated a treasure, his toes were cut off, Qu Yuan went on to offer loyal advice, and finally sank into despair, but the brilliance of Mr. and Mrs. Kuwahara has remained for thousands of years, and Qu Zi's posthumous work has been praised for all time.

古文：案《六经》而校德，妙古昔而论功，仁圣之事既该，帝王之道备矣。
现代文：希将军明察秋毫，广伸视听，少降身份，多听下问，使尘埃之中，永远没有荆山、汩罗的遗恨。 
English: General Hsieh observes everything clearly, sees and hears widely, lowers his status less, and listens more, so that there will never be any hatred left by Jingshan and Zhao Luo in the dust.

古文： 至于永平之际，重熙而累洽，盛三雍之上仪，修衮龙之法服，敷洪藻，信景铄，扬世庙，正矛乐。
现代文：东平王苍采纳了班固的意见。
English: Dongping Wangchen adopted the opinion of Banggu.

古文：人神之和允洽，君臣之序既肃。
现代文：父亲班彪死了，回到乡里。班固认为班彪所续写的前史不够详细，于是深入钻研，想完成父亲的遗业。
English: When his father, Ban Biao, died, he returned to the countryside. Ban Gu thought that the history that Ban Biao continued to write was not detailed enough, so he studied it in depth to complete his father's legacy.

古文：乃动大路，遵皇衢，省方巡狩，穷览万国之有无，考声教之所被，散皇明以烛幽。
现代文：不久有人上书显宗，告班固私自改动国史，朝廷有诏书到郡，将班固关在京兆狱，全部抄走他家的书籍。
English: Before long, someone submitted a book to Emperor Xuanzong, accusing Ban Gu and his family of changing the country's history. The imperial court sent an imperial edict to the county, locking up Ban Gu in the Jingzhao Prison and confiscating all of his family's books.

古文：然后增周旧，修洛邑，翩翩巍巍，显显翼翼，光汉京于诸夏，总八方而为之极。
现代文：先有扶风人苏朗伪言图谶之事，被下狱而死。
English: First, there was the case of Su Lang, a wind benefactor, who lied and was sent to prison and died.

古文：是时，圣上固已垂精游神，包举艺文，屡访群儒，谕咨做老，与之乎斟酌道德之渊源，肴核仁义之林薮，以望元符之臻焉。
现代文：班固之弟班超害怕班固被郡里所核考，不能自己辩明是非，于是到朝廷上书，被皇上召见，全部讲述班固著述的本意，而郡里也将他的书呈上，显宗感到很奇异，召班固作校书郎，授职兰台令史，与前睢阳令陈宗、长陵令尹敏、司隶从事孟异共写成《世祖本纪》。后来，升为郎，典校秘书。
English: Pan Gu's younger brother, Pan Chao, was afraid that Pan Gu would be scrutinized by the county, and he couldn't judge for himself, so he went to the imperial court to submit a letter, was summoned by the emperor, and told the whole intention of Pan Gu's writings. The county also presented his book, and Hsien Chung felt very strange. He summoned Pan Gu to be a school scribe, to be appointed to the post of Landai Rongshi, and to write "The Ancestor's Ancestor's Ancestor's Ancestor's Ancestor's Ancestor's Ancestor's Ancestor

古文：既成群后之谠辞，又悉经五繇之硕虑矣。
现代文：班固又撰写功臣、平林、新市、公孙述等人的事迹，作列传、载记二十八篇，奏给皇上。皇上又使他完成以前所著的史书。
English: Ban Gu also wrote about the deeds of meritorious vassals, Hirabayashi, Shinichi, Gongsunsu and other people, and made 28 biographies and records, which he presented to the emperor. The emperor also made him complete his previous history book.

古文：将絣万嗣，炀洪晖，奋景炎，扇遗风，播芳烈，久而愈新，用而不竭，汪汪乎丕天之大律，其畴能亘之哉。
现代文：班固认为汉朝继承唐尧的天运，以建帝业，至于六代，史臣才追述功德，私作本纪，编于百王之末，册于秦汉之列，太初以后，缺而不录，所以探撰前面记载，缀集耳之所闻，写成《汉书》。从高祖开始，到孝平王莽被杀，十有二代，共二百三十年，综合他们的行事，傍贯《五经》，上下洽通，写成《春秋》考纪、表、志、传共百篇。
English: Ban Gu believed that the Han Dynasty inherited the heavenly fortune of Tang Xuan to build an empire. As for the six generations, the scholars only recounted the merits. I made this book, compiled at the end of the hundred kings, listed in the ranks of Qin and Han, after the beginning of the year, missing and not recorded, so I researched the previous records, collected what I heard, and wrote "Hanshu." From Gaozu to the death of Xiaoping Wang Mang, there were ten generations, a total of two hundred and thirty years, integrating their actions, running through the "Five Classics," and communicating up and down, and writing a total of one hundred "Spring and Autumn" examinations, tables

古文：唐哉皇哉，皇哉唐哉。
现代文：班固从永平中年开始受诏，绞尽脑汁，深思二十多年，至建初年间才写成。
English: Ban Gu received the imperial edict in the middle of the Yongping era. He racked his brains and thought about it for more than 20 years before writing it in the first year of construction.

古文：固后以母丧去官。
现代文：当代很重视其书，学者没有不诵读的。班固后因母丧离开官职。
English: Contemporary people attach great importance to his books, and there is no scholar who does not recite them. Ban Guo left his official post after his mother's death.

古文：永元初，大将军窦宪出征匈奴，以固为中护军，与参议。
现代文：永元初年，大将军窦宪出征匈奴，用班固作中护军，与参议。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan Dynasty, the general Dou Xian went to the Xiongnu to serve as a middle-ranking military escort, and he was a councillor.

古文：北单于闻汉军出，遣使款居延塞，欲修呼韩邪故事，朝见天子，请大使。
现代文：北单于听说汉军出来，派使者到居延塞，想继续来一次呼韩邪故事，朝见天子，请派大使。
English: When Beidan heard that the Chinese army had come out, he sent an envoy to Ju Yansei. He wanted to continue to call out Korean evil stories and meet the Son of Heaven in the morning. Please send an ambassador.

古文：宪上遣固行中郎将事，将数百骑与虏使俱出居延塞迎之。
现代文：窦宪上书派班固行中郎将事，率领数百骑兵与虏使者从居延塞出来迎接。
English: Dou Xian sent a letter to Ban Gu Xing Zhong Rong, leading hundreds of cavalry and imperial envoys to come out from Juyansi to meet him.

古文：会南匈奴掩破北庭，固至私渠海，闻虏中乱，引还。
现代文：正逢南匈奴掩破北庭，班固到了私渠海，听说虏中乱，就带兵回来。
English: Just as the Southern Xiongnu broke through the Northern Court, Bangu went to the private canal sea, heard that the captives were in turmoil, and came back with soldiers.

古文：及窦宪败，固先坐免官。
现代文：等到窦宪失败，班固先被免官。
English: After Dou Xian's defeat, Ben Gu was removed from office.

古文：固不教学诸子，诸子多不遵法度，吏人苦之。
现代文：班固不曾教育自己的儿子，儿子们多半不遵守法度，吏人很伤脑筋。
English: Ban Gu did not educate his own sons, most of whom do not abide by the law, and the officials are very nervous.

古文：初，洛阳令种兢尝行，固奴干其车骑，吏椎呼之，奴醉骂，兢大怒，畏宪不敢发，心衔之。
现代文：起初，洛阳令种兢出来巡视，班固的家奴干扰他的车骑，官吏椎呼之，家奴醉后骂人，种兢大怒，害怕窦宪不敢发泄，内心记恨。
English: At first, Luo Yang ordered Zeng Jing to come out for inspection, Ban Gu's family slave interfered with his car and bicycle, the officials shouted at him, the family slave got drunk and cursed, Zeng Jing was furious, he was afraid of Dou Xian and dared not vent, and he felt hatred in his heart.

古文：及窦氏宾客皆逮考，兢因此捕系固，遂死狱中。
现代文：等到窦氏的宾客都被捕考查，种兢因此捕系班固，于是死在狱中。
English: When all of Dou's guests were arrested for examination, Zeng Jing was arrested and died in prison.

古文：时年六十一。
现代文：时年六十一岁。
English: Cai Jun was 61 years old at the time of his death.

古文：诏以谴责兢，抵主者吏罪。
现代文：朝廷下诏谴责种兢，抵主者吏罪。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict condemning Zeng Jing, and those who opposed him were punished as officials.

古文：固所著《典引》、《宾戏》、《应讥》、诗、赋、铭、诔、颂、书、文、记、论、议、六言，在者凡四十一篇。
现代文：班固所著《典引》、《宾戏》、《应讥》、诗、赋、铭、诔、颂、书、文、记、论、议、六言，存在的共四十一篇。
English: There are a total of forty-one works by Banggu, including "An Introduction," "A Game," "A Critique," poems, fus, inscriptions, epigrams, eulogies, books, articles, records, discussions, opinions, and six sayings.

