古文：震雷始于曜电，出师先乎威声。
现代文：雷声的震动，从光耀的闪电开始；军队的出征，要首先传出其威武的声势。
English: The shaking of the thunder begins with the shining of the lightning; the army's departure must first send out its mighty voice.

古文：故观电而惧雷壮，听声而惧兵威。
现代文：因此，看见闪电就畏惧强烈的雷声，听到声势就畏惧军队的威力。
English: Wherefore seeing the lightning, they feared the thunder; and hearing the noise, they were afraid of the multitude.

古文：兵先乎声，其来已久。
现代文：军事行动首先要传出声威，这已经是非常古老的习惯了。
English: It is a very old custom that military operations should be announced first.

古文：昔有虞始戒于国，夏后初誓于军，殷誓军门之外，周将交刃而誓之。
现代文：相传有虞氏便开始警诫国内百姓，夏后氏已开始教训军队，殷代帝王也曾在军门外训示百姓，周武王在交战之前对军队进行过训誓。
English: According to legend, the Yu clan began to warn the domestic people, the Xia Hou clan began to teach the army, the Emperor of the Yin Dynasty also instructed the people outside the military gate, and King Zhou Wu swore at the army before the war.

古文：故知帝世戒兵，三王誓师，宣训我众，未及敌人也。
现代文：由此可见，无论有虞氏的警戒士兵，还是夏、商、周的教训部队，都是宣传教育自己的民众，还没有树立让敌人畏惧的声势。
English: From this, it can be seen that whether there are Yu's alert soldiers, or Xia's, Shang's, and Zhou's teaching troops, they are all propaganda and education of their own people, and have not yet established a reputation that makes the enemy afraid.

古文：至周穆西征，祭公谋父称 古有威让之令，令有文告之辞 ，即檄之本源也。
现代文：到周穆王西征大戎的时候，祭公谋父提出： 古代有威严地谴责敌人的训令，有诰诫对方的文告。 这就是檄文的源头了。
English: At the time of the Western Expedition of King Zhou Mu, the sacrificial public counselor father proposed: In ancient times, there was a command to solemnly condemn the enemy, and there was a message to admonish the other side. This is the source of the slander.

古文：及春秋征伐，自诸侯出，惧敌弗服，故兵出须名。振此威风，暴彼昏乱，刘献公之所谓 告之以文辞，董之以武师 者也。
现代文：到春秋时期的征伐，由于周王朝衰微，出征作战一般由诸侯发动，因为担心对方不服，所以就为出兵寻找正当的名义，用以振奋军队的威风，揭发对方的昏乱；这也就是刘献公所说的： 一方面用文辞告诫对方，一方面用武力强迫对方。 
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, due to the decline of the Zhou Dynasty, war expeditions were generally launched by the princes. Because they were worried that the other side would not accept, they looked for a legitimate name for the dispatch of troops, which could be used to boost the prestige of the army and expose the confusion of the other side. This is what Liu Xiangong said: On the one hand, use words to warn the other side, on the other hand, use force to force the other side.

古文：齐桓征楚，诘苞茅之缺；晋厉伐秦，责箕郜之焚。管仲、吕相，奉辞先路，详其意义，即今之檄文。
现代文：春秋时齐桓公征讨楚国，士借口楚国不向周天子进贡茅草；晋厉公讨伐秦国，曾斥责秦国侵挠焚烧晋国箕、郜等地的罪行；齐国的管仲，晋国的吕相，在齐晋两国出兵之前向敌国的指责，仔细研究它的意义，也就是现在所说的檄文了。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Qi Huan publicly led a crusade against the State of Chu, using the excuse that the State of Chu did not pay tribute to Zhou Tianzi; Jin vigorously led a crusade against the State of Qin, and once rebuked the State of Qin for the crime of encroaching on and burning the State of Jin's fiefs and estates; Guanzhong of the State of Qi, and Luxiang of the State of Jin, before the two countries of Qi and Jin dispatched troops, made accusations against the enemy country, and carefully studied its significance, which is what is now referred to as the imperial edict.

古文：暨乎战国，始称为檄。
现代文：到了战国时期，才正式称这种文辞为 檄 。
English: It was not until the Warring States period that the word was officially called.

古文：檄者，皦也。宣露于外，皦然明白也。
现代文：所谓 檄 ，就是明白，就是把问题宣扬揭示出来，使之明明白白。
English: The so-called , is to understand, is to expose the problem and make it clear.

古文：张仪《檄楚》，书以尺二，明白之文，或称露布。
现代文：张仪的《为文檄告楚相》，是一尺二寸长的简书，因为是明白昭著的文字，所以有的称为 露布 ，用以扩大视听。
English: Zhang Yi's "Writing to Tell the Truth" is a one-foot-two-centimeter-long simple book. Because it is a well-known text, it is sometimes called "Lubu," which is used to expand the audio-visual.

古文：露布者，盖露板不封，播诸视听也。
现代文：军队士用来平定祸乱的，任何个人都不敢自作主张。
English: Soldiers are used to quell the chaos, and no individual dares to stand up for themselves.

古文：夫兵以定乱，莫敢自专，天子亲戎，则称 恭行天罚 ；诸侯御师，则云 肃将王诛 。
现代文：即使皇帝亲自出征，也要说，他是 恭敬地执行上天的惩罚 ；诸侯用兵，就说他是敬奉帝王之命来进行诛伐。
English: Even if the emperor himself goes to war, it should be said that he is respectfully carrying out the punishment of heaven; if the lords use soldiers, it should be said that he is honoring the emperor's order to carry out the campaign.

古文：故分阃推毂，奉辞伐罪，非唯致果为毅，亦且厉辞为武。
现代文：所以，古代帝王遣将出征时，不仅要扶着战车送行，还要发布檄文公布征伐的理由。
English: Therefore, when the ancient emperors sent their generals out to fight, they not only had to be escorted by a chariot, but also had to issue an imperial edict announcing the reasons for the campaign.

古文：使声如冲风所击，气似欃枪所扫，奋其武怒，总其罪人，征其恶稔之时，显其贯盈之数，摇奸宄之胆，订信慎之心，使百尺之冲，摧折于咫书；万雉之城，颠坠于一檄者也。
现代文：奉持正直之辞去讨伐敌人，不仅要使自己的行动果敢坚毅，并且要用有力的檄文，形成强大的威力：使讨敌的声威如暴风袭击，气势如彗星横扫；振奋全军将士的威怒，聚集于讨伐的罪人；在敌人罪恶达到最严重的的时候征讨，显示出敌人无比巨大的罪恶；用以动摇作恶者的胆量，稳定顺服者的决心；使敌人的百尺战车，被咫尺檄文摧毁，让地方坚固的城防，被一纸檄文推倒。东汉隗嚣的《移檄告郡国》，列举王莽 逆天 、 逆地 、 逆人 三大罪状。
English: To fight the enemy with the words of honesty, one should not only make one's own actions bold and firm, but also use powerful sermons to form a strong power: make the voice of fighting the enemy strike like a storm, sweep the momentum like a comet; invigorate the dignity and anger of the soldiers of the whole army, and gather in the sinners of the crusade; when the enemy's evil reaches the most serious, show the enemy's incomparably huge evil; use it to shake the courage of the evil-doers, and stabilize the determination of the obedient; make the enemy's hundred-foot chariot be destroyed by a hundred-foot sermon, and let the

古文：观隗嚣之檄亡新，布其三逆，文不雕饰，而意切事明，陇右文士，得檄之体矣！
现代文：它的文字不加雕饰，但用辞确切，事理明显，这说明隗嚣门下的文士，已掌握檄文的基本体制了。
English: Its text is unadorned, but the words are precise and the reason is obvious, which shows that the scribes under the yakitori have mastered the basic system of the yakitori.

古文：陈琳之檄豫州，壮有骨鲠；虽奸阉携养，章实太甚，发丘摸金，诬过其虐，然抗辞书衅，皦然露骨，敢矣撄曹公之锋，幸哉免袁党之戮也。
现代文：汉未陈琳的《为袁绍檄豫州》，写得理直气壮。虽然其中骂曹嵩是宦官的养子等，对其隐密揭露过分；说曹操设发丘中郎将、摸金校尉从事的挖坟盗墓活动，有点诬过其实，但能以抗直的文辞写其罪过，他的揭露就十分明白了。陈琳敢于对着曹操的锋芒，幸而后来竟免于被曹操当做袁绍的党羽而杀掉。
English: Han Wei Chen Lin's "For Yuan Shao's Capture of Yuzhou" was written in a forthright manner. Although it scolded Cao Song for being the adopted son of a eunuch, it revealed too much about him in secret. It was a bit exaggerated to say that Cao Cao set up a middle-ranking eunuch and engaged in grave-robbing activities, but if he could write about his crimes in a straightforward manner, his revelations would be very clear. Chen Lin dared to confront Cao Cao, and fortunately was later spared from being killed by Cao Cao as Yuan Shao's henchman.

古文：锺会檄蜀，征验甚明；桓温檄胡，观衅尤切，并壮笔也。
现代文：魏国钟会的《移蜀将吏士民檄》，用历史事实作证验，也讲得很明白。东晋桓温的《檄胡文》，着眼于敌人的罪恶更为急切。
English: The Wei Guo Zhong Hui's "Moving to Shuxu Will Lead the Officials and the People," using historical facts to testify and test, is also very clear. The Eastern Jin Kuan Wen's "Shu Hu Wen," focusing on the enemy's evil, is more urgent.

古文：凡檄之大体，或述此休明，或叙彼苛虐。
现代文：以上这些，都是写得很有力的檄文。
English: All of the above is a very well-written obituary.

古文：指天时，审人事，算强弱，角权势，标蓍龟于前验，悬鞶鉴于已然，虽本国信，实参兵诈。
现代文：檄文大致遵循的原则，一是表明我方的美善兴盛，一是揭露对方的暴虐苛政；指明天道，分析人事，计算强弱，衡量权势；引往事以预卜敌方失败的命运，举成例示对方以鉴戒。虽说是基于本国的信用基础，但实际上是有兵不厌诈的成分。
English: The principles roughly followed in this article are, on the one hand, to show the goodness and prosperity of our side, and on the other hand, to expose the tyranny and harshness of the other side; to point out the way of the future, analyze personnel, calculate strength and weakness, and measure power; to introduce the past to predict the fate of the enemy's defeat, and to set an example to show the other side as a warning. Although it is based on the credit foundation of our country, it is actually a component of not being tired of deception.

古文：谲诡以驰旨，炜晔以腾说。
现代文：用巧诈之辞来宣传自己的意旨，用光明有正大的言辞来宣扬自己的主张。
English: They use clever and deceitful words to promote their own intentions, and use bright and upright words to promote their own ideas.

古文：凡此众条，莫之或违者也。
现代文：以上几点，是所有的檄文都不能违背的。
English: All of the above points cannot be violated.

古文：故其植义扬辞，务在刚健。
现代文：因此，檄文的写作，无论确立意义或运用文辞，都必须做到刚健有力。
English: Therefore, the writing of an essay, whether establishing meaning or using words, must be robust and powerful.

古文：插羽以示迅，不可使辞缓；露板以宣众，不可使义隐。
现代文：在檄文上插上羽毛是表示紧急，就不能把文辞写得过于松缓；敞露简板向大众宣传的檄文，是为了向众人宣示主张，不能将意义隐藏起来。
English: Putting a feather in the obituary is to express urgency, and the words cannot be written too loosely; the obituary, which is open to the public, is to make a statement to the public, and the meaning cannot be hidden.

古文：必事昭而理辨，气盛而辞断，此其要也。
现代文：必须把事理写得清楚明白，气势盛大而言辞果断，这就是写檄文的基本要点。
English: It is necessary to write the facts clearly and understandably, and the words must be decisive in terms of momentum. This is the basic point of writing an obituary.

古文：若曲趣密巧，无所取才矣。
现代文：如果写作檄文时卖弄曲折之趣，细密之巧，那就没有什么可采用的价值了。
English: If, when writing an obituary, you show off a penchant for twists and turns, a knack for subtlety, then there is nothing of value to adopt.

古文：又州郡征吏，亦称为檄，固明举之义也。
现代文：此外，州郡征召官吏的文书，也叫做 檄 ，这是在公开表示选拔人才的诚意。
English: In addition, the state and county official recruitment document, also known as, is a public expression of the sincerity of the selection of talents.

古文：移者，易也，移风易俗，令往而民随者也。
现代文：所谓 移 ，就是转变；就是改变风气，更改风俗，颁布法令但民众肯于跟随执行。
English: The so-called "shift" means transformation; it means changing the culture, changing the customs, issuing decrees but the people are willing to follow the implementation.

古文：相如之《难蜀老》，文晓而喻博，有移檄之骨焉。
现代文：西汉司马相如的《难蜀父老》，文辞明白而比喻广博，已具有移和檄的特征。
English: Sima Xiangru's "Difficult Father and Old Man" in the Western Han Dynasty, with its clear words and extensive metaphors, already has the characteristics of shifting and fluctuating.

古文：及刘歆之《移太常》，辞刚而义辨，文移之首也；陆机之《移百官》，言约而事显，武移之要者也。
现代文：到东汉刘歆写的《移太常博士书》，文辞有力而意义明辨，这是政治方面最早的一篇移文。西晋陆机的《移百官》，言辞简约而叙事明显，这是军事方面一篇重要的移文。
English: To the Eastern Han Dynasty, Liu Bei's "The Book of the Emigration of the Taizang Scholars" is the earliest political translation, with powerful words and clear meanings. To the Western Jin Dynasty, Lu Ji's "The Emigration of the Hundred Officials" is an important military translation, with concise words and clear narratives.

古文：故檄移为用，事兼文武；其在金革，则逆党用檄，顺命资移；所以洗濯民心，坚同符契，意用小异，而体义大同，与檄参伍，故不重论也。
现代文：所以，檄和移通用于政治和军事两个方面。
English: Therefore, peace and harmony are used in both political and military aspects.

古文：赞曰∶三驱弛网，九伐先话。
现代文：在军事上，对反对派用檄，对顺从的人则用移。
English: Militarily, to the opposition, go the shackles; to the obedient, go the shackles.

古文：鞶鉴吉凶，蓍龟成败。摧压鲸鲵，抵落蜂虿。
现代文：要狠狠打击罪魁祸首，消灭那害人的毒虫。
English: We must strike hard at the culprits and exterminate the poisonous insects that harm people.

古文：移风易俗，草偃风迈。
现代文：移文确实可以移风易俗，就如草的顺风倒伏。
English: Translation can indeed change customs and habits, just like the grass bending with the wind.

