古文：孙搴陈元康杜弼子台卿房谟子恭懿张纂张亮赵起徐远张曜王峻王纮敬显俊平鉴唐邕白建元文遥赵彦深赫连子悦冯子琮子慈明郎基子茂孙搴，字彦举，乐安人。世寒贱，少励志勤学。
现代文：孙搴，字彦举，乐安人。世代寒微贫贱，从小励志勤奋学习。
English: Sun Yat-sen, Zi Yan-piu, Le An people. Generations of poor and poor, motivated to study hard from an early age.

古文：自检校御史再迁国子助教。
现代文：他从检校御史的职务升为国子助教。
English: He was promoted from the position of school inspector to assistant professor.

古文：太保崔光引修国史。
现代文：太保崔光举荐他撰修国史。
English: Taibao Cui Guang recommended him to study national history.

古文：历行台郎。
现代文：又任行台郎。
English: He was also appointed as Gyodairo.

古文：后预崔祖螭反，逃于王元景家，遇赦乃出。
现代文：后来，因参与崔祖螭的反叛，逃到王元景家里，遇到大赦才出来。
English: Later, because of his participation in the rebellion of Cui Zuyao, he fled to Wang Yuanjing's home, and only came out when he encountered an amnesty.

古文：孙腾以宗情，荐之齐神武，未被知也。
现代文：孙腾因宗族的情分，将他推荐给神武帝高欢，却不被重用。
English: Due to the feelings of his clan, Sun Teng recommended him to Emperor Gao Huan, but he was not reused.

古文：会神武西征，登风陵，命中外府司马李义深、相府城局李士略共作檄文，皆辞，请以搴代。
现代文：神武帝西征，登上风陵，命中外府司马李义深、相府城局李士略两人起草檄文，他们都没有接受，却请求让孙搴代替。
English: When Emperor Jimmu went to the West to conquer the Western Regions and ascended to Fengling, he was hit by the foreign prefectural governor Ma Li Yishen and the prefectural government official Li Shiliu, both of whom drafted an imperial edict. They did not accept it, but asked Sun Yat-sen to replace him.

古文：神武乃引搴入帐，自为吹火，催促之。
现代文：高欢把孙搴领进自己的军帐，亲自替他吹火取暖，催促他赶快写出来。
English: Gao Huan led Sun Yat-sen into his military account, personally blew fire to warm him, and urged him to write it out quickly.

古文：搴神色安然，援笔立就，其文甚美。
现代文：他神色自若，挥笔而就，文章十分华美。
English: He looked self-assured, waved his pen, and the article was very beautiful.

古文：神武大悦，即署相府主簿，专典文笔。
现代文：高欢极为高兴，任他为相府主簿，专门负责起草公文。
English: Gao Huan was extremely pleased and appointed him as the chief secretary of the prime minister's office, specifically responsible for drafting official documents.

古文：又能通鲜卑语，兼宣传号令，当烦剧之任，大见赏重。
现代文：他还精通鲜卑话，兼管传达宣谕命令。担任如此繁多重要的任务，很被高欢赞赏和重用。
English: He is also proficient in colloquial speech, and is also in charge of conveying proclamation orders. He is highly appreciated and reused for such a variety of important tasks.

古文：赐妻韦氏，既士人子女，又兼色貌，时人荣之。
现代文：高欢赐给他韦氏作妻子，她是士宦的女儿，加上长得很漂亮，人们都以他为荣耀。
English: Gao Huan gave him Wei's wife as his wife. She was Shijun's daughter, and she was also very beautiful. People were proud of him.

古文：文襄初欲之鄴总知朝政，神武以其年少，未许。
现代文：文襄帝高澄开初想到邺城总揽朝政，他的父亲高欢认为他年轻，没有同意。
English: Gao Chengkai, the Emperor of Wenzhong, first thought of taking over the government of Shicheng, but his father Gao Huan thought he was too young and did not agree.

古文：搴为致言，乃果行。
现代文：孙搴替他说话，神武帝才答应。
English: Sun Yat-sen spoke for him, and Emperor Jimmu finally agreed.

古文：恃此，自乞特进，文襄但加散骑常侍。
现代文：孙搴依仗这个功劳，自己乞请朝廷封为特进，文襄帝却只加封他为散骑常侍。
English: Relying on this merit, Sun Yat-sen himself begged the imperial court to appoint him as a special envoy, but Emperor Wenzhong only appointed him as a riding attendant.

古文：时大括人为军士，逃隐者，身及主人、三长、守、令罪以大辟，没其家。
现代文：当时，大量征集百姓当兵，凡是逃跑的，自身及其藏匿他的主人和党、里、邻三长，以及郡守县令，都处以大辟罪，家产也被抄没，因此，征集到许多士兵。
English: At that time, a large number of people were recruited as soldiers, and anyone who ran away, himself and his hiding master and the party, village, and neighborhood three leaders, as well as the county governor and county magistrate, were punished with a large fine, and their property was confiscated. Therefore, many soldiers were recruited.

古文：于是所获甚众，搴之计也。搴学浅行薄，邢邵尝谓曰： 须更读书。 
现代文：这些都是孙搴出的主意。孙搴学识浅陋，行为卑薄，邢邵曾对他说 ：你还需要再读书。 
English: These are all the ideas of Sun Xingyu. Sun Xingyu's knowledge is shallow and his behavior is despicable. Zou Shao once said to him: "You still need to study more."

古文：搴曰： 我精骑三千，足敌君嬴座数万。 
现代文：他说 ：我的三千精锐骑兵，足可以抵挡你的数万病弱的军卒。 
English: He said: "My three thousand elite cavalrymen can hold their own against your tens of thousands of weak soldiers.

古文：搴少时与温子升齐名，尝谓子升： 卿文何如我？ 
现代文：他少年时与温子升声望相等，曾对温子升说 ：你的文章怎么能赶得上我的文章？ 
English: When he was a teenager, he had the same reputation as Wen Zisheng. He once said to Wen Zisheng: How can your article catch up with my article?

古文：子升谦曰： 不如卿。 
现代文：子升答 ：是不如你的文章。 
English: Zosheng: Not as good as your article.

古文：搴要其为誓。子升笑曰： 但知劣于卿便是，何劳旦旦？ 
现代文：他却要温子升起誓，子升笑着说： 我只要知道不如你就行了，何必要起誓呢？ 
English: He, however, wanted to swear at Son Seung. Son Seung laughed and said, "I just need to know that I'm not as good as you. Why do I need to swear?

古文：搴怅然曰： 卿不为誓，事可知矣！ 
现代文：他很失望地说： 你不起誓，你的真实想法就可以知道了！ 
English: Disappointed, he said, "If you don't swear, we'll know what you really think!"

古文：搴常服棘刺丸，李谐调之曰： 卿应自足，何假外求？ 
现代文：他还常常服用棘刺丸，李谐对他调侃说： 你自己身上的棘刺已经够多了，何必再向外边去寻求呢？ 
English: He also often took thorn pills. Li Harmony mocked him and said: You already have enough thorns on your own body, why do you need to seek them outside?

古文：坐者皆笑。
现代文：旁边的人听了都会心地笑了。
English: The people next to me laughed heartily when they heard it.

古文：司马子如与高季式召搴饮酒，醉甚而卒。
现代文：司马子如与高季武请孙搴喝酒，他因醉得太厉害而去世。
English: When Sima Zi and Gao Jiwu invited Sun Yat-sen to drink, he died because he was too drunk.

古文：神武亲临之曰： 折我右臂。 
现代文：高欢亲临他家，惋惜地说 ：折去了我的右臂。 
English: Gao Huan went to his house and said regretfully, "I broke my right arm."

古文：赠吏部尚书、青州刺史。
现代文：追赠他为吏部尚书、青州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Rikibu Shosho and the title of Seishu Shishi.

古文：陈元康，字长猷，广宗人也。
现代文：陈元康，字长猷，广宝人。
English: Chen Yuankang, a famous poet, was born in Guangbao.

古文：父终德，魏济阴内史，元康贵，赠度支尚书，谥曰贞。
现代文：父亲陈终德，魏时任济阴内史，元康贵显之后，朝廷赠封终德为度支尚书，谥号为贞。
English: After his father Chen Zhende, Wei Zhen Jiyin Naishi, and Yuan Kang Guixian, the imperial court presented Zhende with the title of Duozhi Shangshu, and his nickname was Zhen.

古文：元康颇涉文史，机敏有干用。
现代文：元康广泛涉猎文学历史，机警敏捷，很有才干。
English: Yuan Kang extensively dabbled in literary history, alert and agile, very talented.

古文：魏正光中，从李崇北伐，以军功赐爵临清男。
现代文：北魏孝明帝正光时，他跟随李崇北伐，因建立军功赐爵为临清男。
English: When Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty was at the height of his power, he followed Li Chong in the Northern Expedition and was awarded a knighthood for his military service.

古文：普泰中，除主书，累迁司徒高昂记室。
现代文：节闵帝普泰时，任主书，又迁任为司徒高昂的记室。
English: When the Emperor Putai was enthroned, he was appointed as the chief scribe, and then he was transferred to the office of Stogao.

古文：初，司马子如、高季式与孙搴剧饮，搴醉死，神武命求好替，子如举魏收。
现代文：司马子如、高季武与孙搴钦酒过量，孙搴醉死，神武帝命令找一个人代替孙搴。司马子如举荐魏收。
English: Sima Ziru, Gao Jiwu and Sun Yujing drank too much wine, Sun Yujing died of drunkenness, and Emperor Shenwu ordered to find someone to replace Sun Yujing. Sima Ziru recommended Wei Wei.

古文：他日，神武谓季式曰： 卿饮杀我孙主簿，魏收作文书，都不称我意。
现代文：过了几天，高欢对高季武说： 你们喝酒害死了我的孙主簿，魏收写的文书都不合我的心意。
English: A few days later, Gao Huan said to Gao Jiwu: "Your drinking has killed my grandchild, Wei's documents are not to my liking.

古文：司徒尝道一人谨密，是谁？ 
现代文：你曾说过一个人处事谨慎严密，这是谁？ 
English: You once said that only one person is careful and meticulous. Who is this?

古文：委式以元康对，曰： 是能夜暗书快吏也。 
现代文：季武说是陈元康，又介绍说： 他能够晚上在黑暗中写字，是一个很敏捷的官吏。 
English: Ji Wu said it was Chen Yuankang, and added: He can write in the dark at night and is a very agile official.

古文：召之，一见便授大丞相功曹，内掌机密。
现代文：高欢召见他，一见面就授给他大丞相功曹的职务，掌管内部的重大机密。
English: Gao Huan summoned him to see him, and as soon as they met, he gave him the post of grand secretary, in charge of major internal secrets.

古文：善陈事意，不为华藻。
现代文：他善于陈述事情的内容，不喜欢用华丽的辞藻粉饰。
English: He's good at telling it like it is, and doesn't like to sugarcoat it with fancy words.

古文：迁大行台都官郎，封安平子。
现代文：他迁任大行台都官郎，封爵为安平子。
English: He was transferred to the position of Daigodai-tokanshiro, and was given the title of Anpishi.

古文：军国多务，元康问无不知。
现代文：军国事务繁巨，他却无所不知。
English: The military and state affairs are complicated, but he knows everything.

古文：神武临行，留元康在后，马上有所号令九十余条，元康屈指数之，尽能记忆。
现代文：高欢出发，让元康跟在后边，高欢在马背上发布命令九十多条，他屈指而数，都能记住。
English: Gao Huan set off, leaving Yuan Kang trailing behind. Gao Huan issued more than 90 orders on horseback, and he was one of the few who could remember them all.

古文：神武甚亲之，曰： 如此人，世间希有，我今得之，乃上天降佐也。 
现代文：高欢十分亲近他，说 ：像这样的人才，世间真是少见。我今天得到了，是上天让他来帮助我呀。 
English: Gao Huan was very close to him and said, "Such a talent is rare in the world. I got it today because God let him help me."

古文：时赵彦深亦知机密，人谓之陈、赵，而元康势居赵前。
现代文：当时，赵彦深也参与机密，人们称之为陈、赵，而陈元康的地位在赵彦深的前面。
English: At that time, Zhao Yanshen also participated in the secret, people called Chen, Zhao, and Chen Yuankang's status was ahead of Zhao Yanshen.

古文：性又柔谨。神武之伐刘蠡升，天寒雪深，使人举氈，元康于氈下作军书，飒飒运笔，笔不及冻，俄顷数纸。
现代文：他的性格温柔谨慎，高欢讨伐刘蠡升，天寒地冻，大雪覆地，高欢命人用手支起毛毯挡住风寒，元康在毯子下起草军书，他挥动毫笔，飒飒有声，笔墨还没有结冰，不大一会儿就写成了几页公文。
English: His character was gentle and prudent. He was happy to fight against Liu Xinsheng, but it was freezing cold and snowing. The happy man held up a blanket to keep out the cold wind. Yuan Kang drafted a military report under the blanket. He waved his little pen and spoke loudly. The ink had not yet frozen, and soon he had written several pages of official documents.

古文：及出，神武目之曰： 此何如孔子邪？ 
现代文：元康从毯下走出，高欢看了军书后说： 这与孔子相比又怎么样呢？ 
English: Yuan Kang stepped out from under the blanket, Gao Huan read the military book and said: How does this compare to Confucius?

古文：神武尝怒文襄，亲加殴蹋，极口肆骂。
现代文：高欢曾对他的儿子高澄发恼，亲自用手打，用脚踢，任意斥骂。
English: Gao Huan used to get angry with his son Gao Cheng Rong, and personally hit him with his hands, kicked him with his feet, and scolded him at will.

古文：以告元康，元康俯伏泣下沾地曰： 王教世子过矣！ 
现代文：他把这情况告诉给陈元康，元康跪在地上哭泣，泪水滴落满地，说： 您这样教训太子，太过分了。 
English: He told this to Chen Yuankang. Yuankang knelt down on the ground and wept, tears falling all over the floor. He said, "You are teaching the prince too much.

古文：神武曰： 我性急，瞋阿惠，常如此。 
现代文：高欢说 ：我性情急躁，教训太子，常常这样。 
English: Gao Huan said: I have a quick temper, and I often lecture the prince.

古文：元康大啼曰： 一度为甚，况常然邪！ 
现代文：元康大声哭泣说： 一次过分，更何况经常如此呢！ 
English: Wailing loudly, Yuan Kang said, "Once is too much, let alone often!"

古文：神武自是为之惩忿。时或恚挞，辄曰： 勿使元康知。 
现代文：高欢从此抑制自己容易发怒的性格，偶尔恼怒殴打太子，便说 ：不要让陈元康知道了。 
English: From then on, Gao Huan restrained his quick-to-anger personality, occasionally beating the prince in anger, and said, "Don't let Chen Yuankang know."

古文：又谓左右曰： 元康用心诚实，必与我兒相抱死。 
现代文：他又对左右的人说 ：陈元康为人诚恳实在，一定与我儿同生共死。 
English: He also said to the people around him: Chen Yuankang is a sincere and real person, and he will surely live and die with my son.

古文：高仲密之叛，神武知其由崔暹，将杀之。文襄匿暹，为之请，神武曰： 我为尔不杀，然须与苦手。 
现代文：高仲密的叛乱，高欢知道原因是由崔暹引起，准备处死崔暹，高澄却将崔暹藏了起来，并为他求情，高欢说 ：我为了你不杀他，然而还需杖责。 
English: Gao Zhongmi's rebellion, Gao Huan knew that the cause was caused by Cui Siam, and prepared to execute Cui Siam. Gao Cheng, however, hid Cui Siam and pleaded for him. Gao Huan said, "In order for you not to kill him, I still need to be punished."

古文：文襄乃出暹而谓元康曰： 暹若得杖，不须见我。 
现代文：高澄便让崔暹出来，对元康说： 崔暹如果被杖责，你以后不要来见我。 
English: Gao Cheng then asked Cui Siam to come out and said to Yuan Kang: "If Cui Siam is punished with the cane, don't come to see me in the future.

古文：及暹见神武，将解衣受罚。
现代文：崔暹见到高欢，准备解开衣服接受惩罚。
English: When Cui Sie saw Gao Huan, she was about to take off her clothes to accept the punishment.

古文：元康趋入，止伍伯，因历阶升曰： 王方以天下付世子，世子有一崔暹不能免其杖，父子尚尔，况世间人邪？ 
现代文：元康赶快进入，先制止住伍长行刑，然后跨上台阶，对高欢说： 您将把天下交给太子掌管，太子要保护一个崔暹却不能免受杖责，父子之间尚且如此，更何况其他人呢？ 
English: Yuan Kang hurriedly entered, first stopping the execution of Zhu Wuchang, and then stepped onto the steps and said to Gao Huan: You will hand over the world to the prince. The prince wants to protect a Cui Siam, but cannot be exempted from the rod. This is still the case between father and son, let alone others?

古文：神武意解： 不由元康，崔暹得一百。 
现代文：高欢情绪缓解，说： 不是元康，崔暹得打一百杖。 
English: The high-spirited mood eased, saying, "If it's not Yuan Kang, then Choi Siam will have to beat him with a hundred sticks."

古文：乃舍之。
现代文：便释放了崔暹。
English: After hearing this, Qi Hou released him.

古文：文襄入辅，居鄴下，崔暹、崔季舒、崔昂等并被任用，张亮、张徽纂并为神武待遇，然皆出元康下。
现代文：高澄入朝辅政，居住在邺城，崔暹、崔季舒、崔昂等都被重用，张亮、张徽篡都被高欢礼遇，然而，他们都在元康之下。
English: Gao Cheng entered the government as an aide to the emperor and lived in Handan City. Choi Siem, Choi Ji Shu, Choi Ang and others were all given important positions, and Zhang Liang and Zhang Huizhou were treated with great courtesy. However, they were all under the control of Yuan Kang.

古文：神武每与元康久语，文襄门外待接之。
现代文：高欢每次与元康长时间交谈，高澄都在门外等待他。
English: Every time Gao Huan had a long conversation with Yuan Kang, Gao Cheng was waiting for him outside the door.

古文：时人语曰： 三崔二张，不如一康。 
现代文：当时人们传说 ：三崔二张，不如一康。 
English: At that time, there was a legend that it was better to have three good results than two bad ones.

古文：左衙将军郭琼以罪死，子妇范阳卢道虔女也，没官。
现代文：左卫将军郭琼因犯罪被处死，他儿子的妻子是范阳卢道虔的女儿，被没籍入官。
English: The left guard general Guo Qiong was executed for his crimes, and his son's wife, the daughter of Fan Yang Lu Daoqian, was stripped of her official status.

古文：神武启以赐元康为妻。
现代文：高欢奏请天子把卢氏赐给元康为妻。
English: Gao Huanso asked God to give Lu to Yuan Kang as his wife.

古文：元康地寒，时以为殊赏。
现代文：元康出身寒微，人们认为这是特殊的恩赏。
English: Yuan Kang came from a humble background, and people think this is a special reward.

古文：元康遂弃故妻李氏，识者非之。
现代文：元康便抛弃了原来的妻子李氏，认识他的人都因此鄙薄他。
English: Yuan Kang abandoned his former wife, Ms. Li, and everyone who knew him despised him for it.

古文：元康便辟善理人，而不能平心处物。
现代文：元康善于阿谀奉承，与人交结，而却不能公平地处理事情。
English: Yuan Kang is good at flattery and getting along with people, but he can't handle things fairly.

古文：溺于财利，受纳金制，不可胜纪，责负交易，遍于州郡，为清论所讥。
现代文：贪于财利，收受的金银布帛多得无法计算，进行的种种不正当的交易遍于各个州郡。因此，他被议论所讥讽。
English: He was ridiculed by the public for his greed for profit, receiving an incalculable amount of gold and silver bullion, and carrying out all kinds of illegal transactions in various states and counties.

古文：从神武于芒山，将战，遗失阵图，元康冒险求得之。
现代文：他跟随高欢到邙山，即将开战，却丢失了作战用的地图，元康冒险找到了它。
English: He followed Gao Huan to Lushan and was about to go to war, but lost the map for the battle. Yuan Kang took the risk to find it.

古文：西师既败，神武会诸将，议进取策。
现代文：西魏军队被打败，高欢与将领们聚会，商议进取的策略。
English: The West Wei army was defeated, and Gao Huan gathered with the generals to discuss an aggressive strategy.

古文：或以为人马疲瘦，不可远追。
现代文：有人认为人马疲劳瘦弱，不能够远追敌人。
English: Some people think that horses and men are too tired and weak to chase the enemy far away.

古文：元康曰： 两雄交争，岁月已久，今得大捷，便是天授，时不可失，必须乘胜追之。 
现代文：元康说： 两国交战已经旷日持久，今天获得大捷，是上天授予我们的良机，机会不可失去，必须乘胜追击。 
English: Yuan Kang said: The war between the two countries has been protracted, and today's great victory is a good opportunity granted to us by heaven. The opportunity must not be lost, and we must pursue it with victory.

古文：神武曰： 若遇伏兵，孤何以济？ 
现代文：高欢问： 如果遇到伏兵，我将怎么办？ 
English: Gao Huan asked: What will I do if I encounter an ambush?

古文：元康曰： 前沙苑还军，彼尚无伏，今者奔败，何能远谋？
现代文：元康说： 前次敌人从沙苑退兵，他们尚且没有埋伏，现在是失败逃跑，怎么会有预先设下埋伏的深谋远虑？
English: Yuan Kang said: The last time the enemy withdrew from Sha Yuan, they had not yet set up an ambush, but now it is a failed escape. How can there be forethought to set up an ambush in advance?

古文：舍之必成后患。 
现代文：丢掉了这个机会不去追击，一定会成为我们的祸患。 
English: If we lose this opportunity and do not pursue, it will definitely be our misfortune.

古文：神武不从。
现代文：高欢没有采纳。
English: Gao Huan was not adopted.

古文：累迁大行台左丞。
现代文：多次升迁，任大行台左丞。
English: He was promoted several times and was appointed to the post of Daigyodai Sajo.

古文：及神武疾笃，谓文襄曰： 芒山之战，不用元康言，方贻汝患，以此为恨，死不瞑目。
现代文：高欢病重，对儿子高澄说 ：邙山之战，没有采纳元康的建议，才把这个祸患留给了你，我因此遗憾不已，死也不能瞑目。
English: Gao Huan was seriously ill, and he said to his son Gao Cheng: "The battle of Lushan began, and you did not take the advice of Yuan Kang before leaving this calamity to you. Therefore, I am deeply sorry, and I cannot bear to die."

古文：事皆当与元康定也。 
现代文：今后遇到事情都要与他一起商量。 
English: In the future, we will have to discuss everything with him.

古文：神武崩，密不发丧，唯元康知之。
现代文：高欢去世，密不发丧，只有元康知道。
English: Gao Huan passed away, but there was no mourning. Only Yuan Kang knows.

古文：文襄嗣事，自晋阳将之鄴，令元康预作神武条教数十纸，留付段孝先、赵彦深，在后以次行之。
现代文：高澄接替父亲管理军中事务。从晋阳将到邺城，命元康预先以高欢的名义写好数十张布告，交给段孝先、赵彦深，在后面路上陆续张贴。
English: Gao Cheng took over his father's management of the affairs of the middle ranks of the army. From Jinyang to Shicheng, Muyuan Kang wrote dozens of proclamations in advance in the name of Gao Huan, handed them to Duan Xiaoxian and Zhao Yanshen, and posted them one after another on the road behind.

古文：别封昌国县公，以从嘉名。
现代文：朝廷另外封他为昌国县公，以使封爵和他美好的名声相符。
English: In addition, the imperial court made him the governor of Changguo County, so that the knighthood would match his good reputation.

古文：侯景反，文襄逼于诸将，欲杀崔暹以谢之。
现代文：侯景反叛，文襄帝高澄在全体将领们面前非要杀死崔暹，以安抚叛军。
English: When Houjing rebelled, Emperor Gaozheng of the Manchukuo Empire had to kill Cui Siam in front of all the generals in order to pacify the rebels.

古文：元康谏曰： 今枉杀无辜，亏废刑典，岂直上负天神，何以下安黎庶？
现代文：元康劝谏道 ：现在枉杀无辜，违背刑典，不但上负苍天神明，又凭什么对下安抚黎民百姓？
English: Yuan Kang advised him, "Nowadays, killing innocent people without reason, violating the Criminal Law, not only offends the gods and goddesses of heaven and earth, but what can we rely on to appease the people of Li?

古文：晁错前事，愿公慎之。 
现代文：汉代晁错的事，希望您能慎重地从中汲取教训。 
English: I hope you can carefully learn from the mistakes of the Han Dynasty.

古文：文襄乃止。
现代文：高澄才不杀崔暹。
English: Gao Cheng didn't kill Choi Siam.

古文：高岳讨侯景未克，文襄欲遣潘相乐副之。
现代文：高岳讨伐侯景，没能取胜，高澄想派潘相乐做高岳的副将去襄办军务。
English: Gao Yue fought against Hou Jing, but failed to win. Gao Cheng wanted to send Pan Sang Le to be Gao Yue's vice-commander to run the military affairs.

古文：元康曰： 相乐缓于机变，不如慕容绍宗。
现代文：元康说 ：相乐机变缓慢，不如慕容绍宗合适。
English: Motoyasu said, "The music is slow, so Murong Shaosong is more suitable."

古文：且先王有命，称堪敌景。 
现代文：并且先王认为他堪与侯景匹敌。 
English: Moreover, the former king thought that he was a match for Hou Jing.

古文：时绍宗在远，文襄欲召见之，恐其惊叛。
现代文：这时慕容绍宗在远方带兵，高澄想召见他，又害怕他受惊叛变。
English: At this time, Murong Shaosong was leading an army in the distance, and Gaocheng wanted to summon him, fearing that he would be frightened into a mutiny.

古文：元康曰： 绍宗知元康特蒙顾待，新使人来饷金，以致诚款。
现代文：元康说 ：绍宗知道我对他特别看重，最近又派人送来钱币，以表达真诚的感情。
English: Yuan Kang said, "Shao Zong knows that I think highly of him, and recently he sent me some coins to express his sincere feelings.

古文：元康欲安其意，故受之而厚答其书，保无异也。 
现代文：我想安定他的心，所以接受了他的馈赠，并写一封热情诚挚的信作答，准保他不会有别的想法。 
English: I wanted to put his mind at rest, so I accepted his gift and wrote a warm and sincere letter in reply, making sure he wouldn't think otherwise.

古文：乃任绍宗，遂破景，赏元康金五十斤。
现代文：高澄便任用慕容绍宗打败了侯景。朝廷赏给元康金五十斤。
English: Gaocheng then appointed Murong Shaosong to defeat Houjing. The imperial court rewarded Yuan Kang with 50 jin of gold.

古文：王恩政入颍城，诸将攻之不能拔。
现代文：王思政入侵颍城，将领们攻打却不能克拔。
English: Wang Shizheng invaded Lucheng. The generals attacked but could not defeat him.

古文：元康进曰： 公自匡朝政，未有殊功，虽败侯景，本非外贼。今颍城将陷，愿公因而乘之，足以取威定业。 
现代文：元康对高澄说 ：您自从辅助朝政，还没有建立特殊的功勋。虽然打败了侯景，但他毕竟不是国外的敌兵，现在颍城即将失陷，愿您利用这个机会将他赶走，足可以树立威信建立功业。 
English: Yuan Kang said to Gao Cheng, "Since you have been assisting the imperial government, you have not established any special merits. Although you have defeated Hou Jing, he is not a foreign enemy soldier after all. Now that the city of Handan is about to fall, I hope you will use this opportunity to drive him away, so that you can establish your prestige and establish your career."

古文：文襄令元康驰驿观之，复命曰： 必可拨。 
现代文：高澄命元康骑快马前去观察情况，他回来说： 一定可以战胜敌人。 
English: Gao Chengmei Yuan Kang rode a fast horse to observe the situation. He came back and said, "We can definitely defeat the enemy."

古文：文襄乃亲征颍川，益发众军，决既至而克之，赏元康金百铤。
现代文：高澄便亲自征讨颍川，调集许多军队，一次决战就将敌人打败，又赏给元康金一百锭。
English: Gao Cheng then personally went to enlist Lugu River, mobilized many troops, defeated the enemy in a decisive battle, and rewarded Yuan Kang with one hundred baht in gold.

古文：初，魏朝授文襄相国、齐王，诸将皆劝恭膺朝命。
现代文：最初，东魏授给高澄相国、齐王的封号，各位将领们都勤勉恭敬，服从朝廷。
English: At the beginning, the Eastern Wei Dynasty conferred the title of King Qi to Gao Cheng, and all generals were diligent and respectful, and obeyed the imperial court.

古文：元康以为未可。
现代文：元康认为这样下去不好。
English: Yuan Kang thinks it's not good to go on like this.

古文：崔暹因间之，荐陆元规为大行台郎，欲分元康权。
现代文：崔暹借机离间元康与高澄的关系。他向高澄推荐陆元规为大行台郎，想削弱元康的权力。
English: Cui Siam took the opportunity to sever the relationship between Yuan Kang and Gao Cheng. He recommended Lu Yuan Gui to Gao Cheng as the grand conciliator, hoping to weaken Yuan Kang's power.

古文：元康既贪货贿，文襄内渐嫌之，又欲用为中书令，以闲地处之，事未施行。
现代文：元康贪于财货，高澄对他渐渐嫌弃，又想任他为中书令，将他闲置起来。事情没有付诸实施。
English: Yuan Kang was greedy for money and goods, and Gao Cheng gradually disliked him. He also wanted to make him a middle-ranking official and leave him idle. However, this did not come to fruition.

古文：属将受魏禅，元康与杨愔、崔季舒并在坐，将大迁除朝士，共品藻之。
现代文：高澄即将接受东魏孝静帝的禅让，元康与杨忄音、崔季舒，同高澄坐在一起，准备大量调整朝臣，共同品评每个人的情况。
English: Gao Cheng is about to accept the Eastern Wei Emperor Xiao Jing's offer of Zen. Yuan Kang, Yang Yuyin, and Cui Jishu are sitting together with Gao Cheng, preparing to make a large number of adjustments to the courtiers and jointly evaluate each person's situation.

古文：文襄家仓头兰固成掌厨，与其弟阿改，谋害文襄。
现代文：高澄家的奴仆兰固成掌管厨房的事，与他的弟弟阿改，阴谋杀死高澄。
English: Lan Gucheng, the manservant of the Gaocheng family, who was in charge of the kitchen, conspired with his brother Akai to kill Gaocheng.

古文：阿改时事文宣，常执刀从，期闻东斋叫，即加刃于文宣。
现代文：阿改这时跟着高澄的弟弟、文宣帝高洋，他常暗藏利刃跟着高洋，等听到东面房子中有喊声，就把高洋杀死。
English: At this time, Akai was accompanied by Takayo, the younger brother of Takasumi, Emperor Wenzhong. He often hid a sharp blade with Takayo, and when he heard shouting in the house to the east, he killed Takayo.

古文：时文宣别有所之，未还而难作。
现代文：这时，高洋到别的地方去，没有回来，而高澄却被杀害。
English: At this time, Gao Yang went to another place and did not return, while Gao Cheng was killed.

古文：固成因进食，置刀盘下，而杀文襄。
现代文：兰固成利用送酒饭的机会把刀放在盘子下面，杀死了高澄。
English: Lan Kucheng took the opportunity of a meal delivery to put the knife under the plate and kill Gao Cheng.

古文：元康抱文襄。文襄曰： 可惜！
现代文：元康抱住了高澄，高澄连声说： 可惜！
English: Motoko hugged Takasumi, and Takasumi said in unison: What a pity!

古文：可惜！ 
现代文：可惜！ 
English: What a pity!

古文：与贼争刀，髻解，被刺，伤重肠出，犹手书辞母，口占祖孝徵陈权宜。
现代文：元康与兰固成搏斗，发髻散开，被刺中，伤势严重，肠子都流了出来，但还写书信辞别老母，口授祖孝征向朝廷陈述权宜处理事变的办法。
English: Yuan Kang fought with Lan Gucheng, his hair fell out, he was stabbed, his injuries were serious, and his intestines came out. However, he also wrote a letter to say goodbye to his mother, and instructed Zu Xiaozheng to present to the imperial court the expedient way to deal with the incident.

古文：至夜而终，时年四十三。
现代文：到晚上去世，时年四十三岁。
English: He died in the evening, aged forty-three.

古文：时杨愔狼狈走出，遗一靴，崔季舒逃匿于厕，库直纥奚舍乐捍贼死，散都督王师罗战伤。
现代文：这时，杨忄音吓得狼狈逃出，丢了一只靴子，崔季舒躲到厕所里不敢出来；库直纥奚舍乐与兰固成拼斗死去；散都督王师罗受伤。
English: At this time, Yang Xuanying panicked and fled, losing a boot, Cui Jishu hid in the toilet and did not dare to come out; Ku Zhiyao Xuele died in a fight with Lan Gucheng; and the governor Wang Shiloh was injured.

古文：监厨仓头薛丰洛率宰人持薪以赴难，乃禽盗。
现代文：监厨的仓头薛丰洛率领掌管膳食的人拿着棍棒赶来，将兰固成擒拿。
English: The head of the kitchen, Xue Fengluo, led by the person in charge of the meal, came with a club to beat Lan into a pulp.

古文：固成一名京，事见齐本纪。
现代文：兰固成又名兰京，详细事迹见《齐本纪》。
English: Lan Gucheng, also known as Lan Jing, is described in detail in the "Qibongji."

古文：密文襄凶问，故殡元康于宫中。
现代文：为了使高澄遇难的事情保密，所以把元康埋在宫中。
English: In order to keep the death of Gao Cheng a secret, Yuan Kang was buried in the palace.

古文：大业初，卒于彭城郡赞务。
现代文：假托他到南部边境巡视，又假装授予他中书令的职务。第二年，追赠为司空，谥号为文穆。
English: The next year, he was posthumously awarded the title of Sikyong, and his posthumous name was changed to Wenmu.

古文：杜弼，字辅玄，中山曲阳人也。
现代文：他去世后，他的母亲李氏因哀伤感发疾病而辞世。杜弼，字辅玄，中山曲阳人。
English: After his death, his mother, Ms. Li, died of a grief-induced illness. Du Xi, Zhe Xuan, Zhongshan Qu Yangren.

古文：祖彦衡，淮南太守。
现代文：祖父杜彦衡，任淮南太守。
English: His grandfather, Du Yanheng, was the governor of Huainan Province.

古文：父慈度，繁畤令。
现代文：父亲杜慈度，任繁时县令。
English: His father, Du Cidu, was the county magistrate at the time.

古文：弼幼聪敏，家贫无书，年十二，寄郡学受业。
现代文：杜弼从小聪明敏捷，家中贫穷买不起书，十三岁那年寄住在郡中的学校内读书。
English: Cuckoo was smart and agile from an early age. His family was poor and could not afford books. At the age of 13, he boarded at a school in the county.

古文：同郡甄琛为定州刺史，简试诸生，见而策问，应答如响，大叹异之，命其二子楷、宽与交。
现代文：同郡人甄琛任定州刺史，考试学校的生员，对他策问，他对答如流，声音响亮。甄琛十分惊叹诧异，命自己的两个儿子甄楷、甄宽与他交往。
English: Zhen Rong, a fellow county resident, appointed as a member of the examination school of Dingzhou, asked him questions, and he answered fluently, with a loud voice. Zhen Rong was very surprised and surprised, and ordered his two sons Zhen Kai and Zhen Guang to interact with him.

古文：州牧任城王澄闻而召问，深相嗟赏，许以王佐之才。
现代文：州牧任城王高澄听说后召见他，询问后也大加叹赏，认为他有辅助天子的才干。
English: After hearing about it, the state's pastoral leader, the city's king, Gao Cheng, summoned him to see him. After questioning him, Gao Cheng also praised him greatly, saying that he had the ability to assist the heavenly son.

古文：澄、琛还洛称之，丞相高阳王等多相招命。但父祖官薄，不获优叙。
现代文：高澄和甄琛到京城洛阳又称赞他，丞相高阳王等多次推荐，但因为他的父亲和祖父官职低微，所以不被征用。
English: Gao Cheng and Zhen Rong also praised him when they came to Luoyang, Beijing, and Gao Yang Wang, the prime minister, recommended him many times. However, because his father and grandfather were low-ranking officials, they were not requisitioned.

古文：以军功起家征虏府墨曹参军，典管记。
现代文：他因建立军功，才离开家任征虏府的墨曹参军，负责记录文书。
English: Because of his military service, he left home to join the army as a conscript, responsible for recording documents.

古文：弼长于笔札，每为时辈所推。
现代文：他善于写文章，常被世人们推崇。
English: He is good at writing articles and is often praised by the world.

古文：孝昌初，除太学博士。
现代文：孝昌初年，任太学博士，又迁任光州曲城县县令。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, he was appointed Doctor of Science, and then moved to the post of county magistrate of Qucheng County, Gwangju.

古文：迁光州曲城令，为政清静，远近称之。弼父在乡，为贼所害，弼居丧六年。
现代文：为政清廉，远近的百姓都称赞他。他的父亲在家乡被贼人害死，他居丧六年。
English: He was praised by people near and far for his political integrity. His father was killed by thieves in his hometown, and he was in mourning for six years.

古文：以常调，除侍御史，台中弹奏，皆见信任。
现代文：因正常调迁，任侍御史，御史台中他写的弹劾奏章，都受到信任和重视。
English: Due to the normal transfer, he was trusted and valued as an attendant to the Emperor, and the impeachment report he wrote in the Emperor's palace was highly valued.

古文：仪同窦泰西伐，诏弼监军。
现代文：仪同窦泰率军西讨，朝廷命杜弼为监军。
English: Yidong Dou Tai led the army westward, and the imperial court ordered Du Xi to supervise the army.

古文：及泰失利自杀，弼与其徒六人，走还陕州。
现代文：窦泰作战失利自杀，杜弼与下属六个人逃至陕州。
English: Dou Tai committed suicide after losing the battle, and Du Yu and his six subordinates fled to Shaanxi.

古文：刺史刘贵锁送晋阳。
现代文：刺史刘贵将他们锁拿，送至晋阳。
English: Liu Gui, the executioner, locked them up and sent them to Jinyang.

古文：神武责以不谏争，赖房谟谏以免。
现代文：神武帝高欢责备他不劝谏窦泰，因房谟劝说，他才免于死罪。
English: Emperor Gao Huan scolded him for not persuading Zang Dou Tai, but he was only spared the death penalty because of Fang Mo's persuasion.

古文：累迁大行台郎中，又引典掌机密，甚见信待。
现代文：多次升迁，他官至大行台郎中，又被神武帝任用，掌管机密，很被信任和厚待。
English: He was promoted many times. He was promoted to the rank of daigotairo, and was appointed by Emperor Jimmu to be in charge of secrets. He was highly trusted and well-treated.

古文：或有造次不及书教，直付空纸，即令宣读。
现代文：神武帝高欢偶尔疏忽没有来得及口授，就让杜弼写文告，只交给他一张白纸，让他装模作样地宣读。
English: Occasionally, Emperor Gao Huan did not have enough time to dictate, so he asked Du Juan to write a proclamation. He only gave him a piece of white paper and let him pretend to read it out.

古文：承间密劝受禅，神武举杖击走之。
现代文：他找机会劝高欢代魏自立，高欢不同意，拿起棍子将他打走。
English: He looked for an opportunity to persuade Gao Huan to stand up for Wei. Gao Huan disagreed and picked up a stick to beat him away.

古文：相府法曹辛子炎咨事云 取署 ，子炎读 署 为 树 ，神武怒其犯讳，杖之于前。弼进 孔子言 徵 不言 在 ，子炎可恕。 
现代文：相府法曹辛子炎咨询事情说了 取署 两个字，他把 署 字读成了 树 ，高欢恼怒他犯了讳，对他进行杖责，杜弼进前解释说：孔子还把 在 读成 征 ，辛子炎可以饶恕。
English: The court magistrate of the sister-in-law's house said that the consultation of the spicy inflammation was a matter of two words, he read the word "signature" as "tree," he was very angry and angry, he made a vow, and he was punished with a cane. Du Qianjin explained: Confucius also read "in" as "sign," spicy inflammation can be forgiven.

古文：神武骂曰： 眼看人嗔，乃复牵经引礼！ 
现代文：高欢骂他说 ：明明知道我在发怒，又引经据典。 
English: Gao Huan scolded him, "You know that I am angry, and you are quoting scriptures.

古文：叱令出去。
现代文：呵斥他出去。
English: yelling at him to get out.

古文：弼行十许步，呼还，子炎亦蒙宥。
现代文：他才走十多步，高欢又将他喊回来，辛子炎也被宽宥。
English: He only walked more than ten steps before Gao Huan called him back again, and the spiciness was forgiven.

古文：文襄在鄴闻之，谓杨愔曰： 王左右赖此人，天下蒙利，岂独吾家也？ 
现代文：高澄在邺城听说后对杨忄音说 ：父王的身边有这样一个人，天下的人都可以得到好处，岂独我一个人呢？ 
English: After hearing about it in Lucheng, Gao Cheng said to Yang Yuyin, "With such a person at my father's side, everyone in the world can benefit. Am I the only one?

古文：初，神武自晋阳东出，改尔硃氏贪政，使人入村，不敢饮社酒。
现代文：当初，高欢从晋阳率兵东进，为改变朱荣贪婪的政风，在行军路上，不让士兵入村骚扰，不饮村社中的酒。
English: At first, Gao Huan led the soldiers from Jinyang to the east, and in order to change Zhu Rong's greedy political style, he did not allow the soldiers to enter the village to harass and did not drink the wine in the village.

古文：及平京洛，货贿渐行。
现代文：平定洛阳之后，贿赂取利之风渐渐盛行。
English: After the pacification of Luoyang, the trend of bribery and profiteering gradually prevailed.

古文：弼以文武在位，罕有廉洁，言之神武。
现代文：杜弼看到在职的文武官员很少有廉洁自守的，把情况告诉了高欢。
English: Du Juan saw that there were few honest and self-sacrificing civil and military officials in office, and told Gao Huan about the situation.

古文：神武曰： 弼来，我语尔。
现代文：高欢说： 你往前来，我对你说。
English: Gao Huan said: Come forward, I'll tell you.

古文：天下浊乱，习俗已久，今督将家属，多在关西，黑獭常相招诱，人情去留未定；江东复有一吴老翁萧衍，专事衣冠礼乐，中原士大夫望之，以为正朔所在。
现代文：天下浑浊动乱，贪取财利的习俗相沿已经很长时间。现在我军将领们的家属大多住在关西，黑獭常常用重利招引诱惑，他们考虑着是去是留，情绪很不稳定；江东还有一个叫萧衍的老头，专门在南梁提倡士大夫的等级和礼仪音乐，中原一带的士大夫都很向往，认为那里是文化的正统所在。
English: Now, most of the families of our army generals live in the Kansai region. They often use heavy interest to attract temptation. They are considering whether to go or stay, and their moods are very unstable. There is also an old man in Jiangdong called Xiao Yan, who specializes in advocating the rank and etiquette music of the shidafu in Nanliang. The shidafu in the Central Plains are very yearning, and think that there is the orthodoxy of culture.

古文：我若急作法网，恐督将尽投黑獭，士子悉奔萧衍，则何以为国？
现代文：我如果急于严肃纲纪法律，恐怕将领都会投奔黑獭，读书人都去投奔萧衍，我还靠什么建立国家？
English: If I rush to pass a serious disciplinary law, I'm afraid the generals will all go to Heihe, and the readers will all go to Xiaoyan. What else can I rely on to build a country?

古文：尔宜少待，吾不忘之。 
现代文：你暂且等一下，我不会忘掉这些的。 
English: You wait a minute, I won't forget this.

古文：及将有沙苑之役，弼又请先除内贼，却讨外寇，指诸勋贵掠夺百姓。
现代文：沙苑之役开战之前，杜弼又请求高欢先除掉内部的贪污腐败分子，再去讨伐外来的敌人，指出许多勋贵要员抢掠百姓的事。
English: Before the Battle of Sha Yuan began, Du Xi also asked Gao Huan to first get rid of the internal corrupt elements, and then go to fight the foreign enemies, pointing out that many nobles and dignitaries robbed the people.

古文：神武不答，因令军人皆张弓挟矢，举刀按矛以夹道，使弼冒出其间，曰： 必无伤也。 
现代文：高欢听后也不答话，便命军士们拉开弓，箭上弦，举起刀，挺起矛，站在道路两旁，让杜弼从中间走过，并宽慰他说 ：一定不会伤害你。 
English: Hearing this, Gao Huan did not reply, and ordered the soldiers to draw their bows, wind up their arrows, raise their swords, straighten their spears, stand on both sides of the road, let the cuckoo pass through the middle, and comfort him by saying, "It will definitely not hurt you."

古文：弼战怵流汗。
现代文：杜弼战战兢兢从中间走过，吓得汗流浃背。
English: The cuckoo walked through the middle, trembling and sweating with fright.

古文：神武然后喻之曰： 箭虽注不射，刀虽举不击，矛虽按不刺，尔犹顿丧魂胆。
现代文：高欢然后劝他说： 箭虽上弦却不射出，刀虽举起而不砍下，矛虽然握在手中却不刺来，你却吓得魂飞胆丧。
English: Gao Huan then advised him: Although the arrow is strung, it does not shoot out, although the knife is raised, it does not cut down, although the spear is held in the hand, it does not stab, but you are scared to death.

古文：诸勋人触锋刃，百死一生，纵其贪鄙，所取处大。 
现代文：那些在战场上建立功勋的人身体碰着敌人锐利的刀刃，百死一生，纵然有贪婪卑鄙的地方，但他们的作用还是很大的。 
English: Those who have built up their merits on the battlefield will meet the enemy's sharp blade and die a hundred deaths, even if there are greedy and despicable places, but their role is still great.

古文：弼顿颡谢曰： 愚人不识至理。 
现代文：杜弼点着头谢罪说 ：我这个愚蠢的人不认识这个深刻的道理。 
English: Cuckoo nodded his head and said, "I, a stupid man, do not know this profound truth."

古文：后破芒山军，命为露布，弼即书绢，曾不起草。
现代文：后来在邙山打败敌人，高欢命他写露布，他立即在丝绢上写成，没有起草。
English: Later, after defeating the enemy in Lushan, Gao Huan Rui wrote a manifesto, which he immediately wrote on silk, without drafting.

古文：以功赐爵定阳县男。
现代文：因建立功劳，被赐爵为定阳县男。
English: He was awarded a knighthood for his contribution to the establishment of Dingyang County.

古文：奉使诣阙，魏帝见之九龙殿，曰： 闻卿精学，聊有所问。
现代文：他奉命到京城拜见天子，魏帝在九龙殿接见他，问： 听说你精于学问，我问一个问题。
English: He was ordered to visit the emperor in Beijing. Emperor Wei received him at the Kowloon Palace and asked: I heard that you are good at learning. I have a question for you.

古文：经中佛性法性，为一为异？ 
现代文：佛经中所说的佛性和法性，是一样还是不一样？ 
English: Is the Buddha nature and the Dharma nature mentioned in the sutras the same or different?

古文：弼曰： 正是一理。 
现代文：杜弼答道 ：二者原为一理。 
English: Du Juan replied, "The two are the same.

古文：又问曰： 说者妄，皆言法性宽，佛性狭，如何？ 
现代文：魏帝又问： 议论的人妄说，都说法性宽宏，佛性偏狭，这种说法对吗？ 
English: Wei Di also asked: The people who talk about it are deluded, they all say that the Buddha's nature is broad and the Buddha's nature is narrow. Is this right?

古文：弼曰： 在宽成宽，在狭成狭，若论性体，非狭非宽。 
现代文：他回答 ：该宽的时候就宽，该狭的时候就狭。如果论起这两者本来的性体，既不宽宏，也不偏狭。 
English: He answered: When it is time to be broad, be broad; when it is time to be narrow, be narrow; and when it comes to the nature of these two, they are neither broad nor narrow.

古文：诏曰： 既言成宽成狭，何得非狭非宽？ 
现代文：魏帝问： 既然说该宽就宽，该狭就狭，怎么还会有既不宽宏，又不偏狭的情况？ 
English: Wei Di asked: Since it is said that the broad is broad and the narrow is narrow, how can there still be a situation that is neither broad nor narrow?

古文：弼曰： 若定是宽，则不能为狭；若定是狭，亦不能为宽。
现代文：他回答： 如果必定是宽宏的，则不能成为偏狭；如果必定是偏狭的，也不能成为宽宏。
English: He replied: If one must be broad-minded, one must not be narrow-minded; if one must be narrow-minded, one must not be broad-minded.

古文：以非宽非狭，所成虽异，能成恆一。 
现代文：至于既不宽宏又不偏狭，形成的原因虽然不同，但能够形成的道理却是一样的。 
English: As for being neither broad-minded nor narrow-minded, although the reasons for their formation are different, the reason why they can be formed is the same.

古文：上称善，引入经库，赐地持经一部，帛百疋。
现代文：魏帝称赞他回答得很好，领他到保存佛经的府库，赐给他《地持经》一部，帛一百匹。
English: Emperor Wei praised him for his good answer, led him to the treasury where Buddhist scriptures were kept, and gave him a copy of "The Land-Holding Sutra" and one hundred yakitori.

古文：弼性好名理，探味玄宗，在军恆带经行。
现代文：杜弼喜好名理佛法，探索其中的奥秘，行军时也常带着经卷。
English: Du Wei likes the Nam-Ri Buddhism, explores the mysteries therein, and often carries scriptures when marching.

古文：注孝子道德经二卷，表上之。
现代文：他注释了老子的《道德经》两卷，上表呈送朝廷。
English: He annotated two volumes of Laozi's Tao Te Ching and submitted the tables to the imperial court.

古文：迁廷尉卿。
现代文：迁任为廷尉卿。
English: He was transferred to the position of Lord-Lieutenant.

古文：会梁贞阳侯萧明等入寇彭城，大都督高岳、行台慕容绍宗讨之，诏弼为军司，摄行台左丞。
现代文：南梁贞阳侯萧明等人领兵入侵彭城，大都督高岳、行台慕容绍宗奉命讨伐。朝廷命杜弼任军司，代理行台左丞。
English: Nan Liang Zhengyang, Hou Xiao Ming and others led the troops to invade Pengcheng, with the grand governor Gao Yue and the governor of Xingtai, Murong Shaosong, being ordered to fight. The imperial court appointed Du Xi as the military commander, acting as the governor of Xingtai.

古文：临发，文襄赐胡马一疋，曰： 此厩中第二马，孤恆自乘，聊以为赠。 
现代文：临出发时，文襄帝高澄赐给他一匹胡马，说 ：这是我马厩中的第二匹好马，我常常自己骑，赠给你聊作纪念。 
English: On the eve of departure, Emperor Gaocheng gave him a horse, saying, "This is the second good horse in my stable. I often ride it myself. I'm giving it to you as a souvenir."

古文：又令陈政要可为鉴诫者，弼曰： 天下大务，莫过刑赏二端。
现代文：又命他陈述为政中需要注意的地方，杜弼说： 天下最重要的事情，都不超过处罚和奖赏两种。
English: Du Juan said: "The most important things in the world are no more than two kinds of punishment and reward.

古文：赏一人使天下之人喜，罚一人使天下之人服，二事得衷，自然尽美。 
现代文：奖赏一个人可以使天下的人都高兴，惩罚一个人可使天下的人都畏服，这两件事处理得恰当，其他事自然尽善尽美。 
English: Rewarding a person can make everyone in the world happy, punishing a person can make everyone in the world afraid, these two things are handled properly, and other things are naturally perfect.

古文：文襄大悦曰： 言虽不多，于理甚要。 
现代文：高澄听了很受启发，高兴地说： 话虽然不多，道理却很重要。 
English: Takasumi was very inspired by what he heard and said happily: Although there are not many words, the truth is important.

古文：握手而别。
现代文：与他握手告辞。
English: Shake his hand and say goodbye.

古文：破萧明回，破侯景于涡阳。
现代文：杜弼随部队打败萧明后，又随军出发，在涡阳打败侯景。
English: After the cuckoo defeated Xiao Ming with the troops, it set off with the troops to defeat Hou Jing in the whirlpool.

古文：后魏帝集名僧于显阳殿讲说佛理，敕弼升师子座，莫有能屈。
现代文：后来，东魏孝静帝召集著名僧人在显阳殿讲说佛教义理，命杜弼坐在老师的座位上，没有人的辩论能使他屈服。
English: Later, Emperor Xiaojing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty summoned famous monks to speak about Buddhist principles at the Xianyang Hall, and ordered Du Juan to sit in the teacher's seat. No one's debate could make him give in.

古文：帝欢曰： 此贤若生孔门，则何如也！ 
现代文：孝静帝感叹道 ：这样的贤才如果生长在孔子的家门，又会怎么样呢！ 
English: Emperor Xiaojing lamented, "What would have happened if such a sage had grown up in the household of Confucius?"

古文：关中遣王思政据颍州，朝廷以弼行颍州，摄行台左丞。及颍州平，文襄曰： 卿试论思政所以禽。 
现代文：西魏派王思政攻占颍州，朝廷派杜弼到颍州，代理行台左丞，颍州的敌兵被打败后，高澄问： 你分析一下王思政为什么会被擒拿？ 
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, Wang Sizheng was sent to occupy Ganzhou. The imperial court sent Du Rong to Ganzhou, acting as the representative of Xingtai Zu Rong. After the enemy soldiers in Ganzhou were defeated, Gao Cheng asked: Why was Wang Sizheng captured?

古文：弼曰： 思政不察逆顺之理，不识大小之形，不度强弱之势，有此三蔽，宜其俘获。 
现代文：他答道 ：王思政不明白逆和顺的道理，不明白大与小的情形，不审度强与弱的态势，有这三种弊端，他必定被俘。 
English: He replied, "Wang Sizheng did not understand the principle of reciprocal and reciprocal, did not understand the big and small situations, and did not judge the strong and weak situations. If he had these three drawbacks, he would definitely be captured."

古文：文襄曰： 古有逆取顺守，大吴困于小越，弱燕能破强齐，卿之三义，何以自立？ 
现代文：高澄说： 古代有逆势而取，顺势而守，国土辽阔的吴国却被小小的越国打败，弱小的燕国却能战胜强大的齐国，你说的这三种道理，怎么能够成立？ 
English: Gao Cheng said: In ancient times, there were those who went against the trend and those who followed the trend. The vast land of Wu was defeated by the small Yue, while the weak Yan could defeat the powerful Qi. How can these three principles you mentioned be established?

古文：弼曰： 王若顺而不大，大而不强，强而不顺，于义或偏，得如圣旨。
现代文：他说 ：君王如果顺人心，军队数量就不必太多。军队数量多但不强壮，军队力量很强但不顺乎人心，情理偏颇，虽然有这些条件，下达的圣旨却是空洞虚无的条文。
English: He said: "If the ruler is popular, the number of troops does not have to be too much. The number of troops is large but not strong, the army is strong but not popular, the situation is biased, although there are these conditions, the decree issued is an empty void.

古文：今既兼备，鄙言可以还立。 
现代文：现在，这三种道理我们都具备。我说的这些是可以成立的。 
English: Now, we all have these three reasons. What I'm saying is valid.

古文：文宣作相，位中书令，仍长史，进爵为侯。
现代文：文宣帝高洋任东魏的宰相，杜弼任中书令，仍兼任长史，又晋封爵位为侯。
English: Gaoyang, the emperor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, was the prime minister of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Du Xi was the middle secretary, still served as the long history, and was promoted to the peerage as a marquis.

古文：弼志在匡赞，知无不为。
现代文：他志在匡扶朝政，所以，知道的无所不说，该做的无所不为。
English: He aspires to support the government, so he will say whatever he knows and do whatever he needs to do.

古文：及受命，以预定策功，迁卫尉卿，别封长安县伯。
现代文：文宣帝受魏孝静帝的禅让，称帝建立北齐，杜弼因参与禅让有功，升任为尉卿，另封为长安县伯。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was inspired by Emperor Wei Xiao Jing's Zen Zhan and said that the emperor established the Northern Qi. Du Xi was promoted to lieutenant and given the title of Count of Chang'an County for his participation in the Zen Zhan.

古文：常与邢邵扈从东山，共论名理。
现代文：他常与邢邵一起跟从文宣帝到山东，共同讨论分析事物的是非和道理。
English: He often followed Emperor Wenxuan to Shandong together with Zou Shao to discuss and analyze the rights and wrongs of things.

古文：邢以为人死还生，恐是为蛇画足。
现代文：邢邵认为人死了还会转生，恐怕是画蛇添足。
English: Zou Shao believes that people will be reincarnated even after death. I'm afraid it's just a smokescreen.

古文：弼曰： 物之未生，本亦无也。
现代文：杜弼说： 生物没有产生，本来就没有。
English: The cuckoo said: If a living thing is not produced, it does not exist in the first place.

古文：无而能有，不以为疑；因前生后，何独致怪？ 
现代文：没有却能会有，不会产生怀疑，因为前面的孕育了后来的，这有什么奇怪的呢？ 
English: What's strange about not having, but being able to have, and not having any doubts, because what came before gave birth to what came after?

古文：邢云： 圣人设教，本由劝奖，故惧以有来，望各遂其性。 
现代文：邢邵说： 圣人创设礼仪教义，本来是为了劝勉奖励世人，所以惧怕死了还会转生，只希望万物各随原来的性情。 
English: Zou Shao said: The sage created the ritual doctrine originally to encourage and reward the world, so he was afraid of dying and being reborn, and only hoped that all things would follow their original disposition.

古文：弼曰： 圣人合德天地，齐信四时，言则为经，行则为法，而云以虚示物，以诡劝人，安得使北辰降光，龙宫韫檀。
现代文：杜弼说 ：圣人的道德合于天地的规范，符合四时变化的要求，说的话都是经典，做的事则成为法则，而你说圣人拿虚无的说教去衡量万物，用诡诈的言词劝勉人们，怎么能使北斗放射光芒，龙宫里蕴藏着盛宝珠的木匣？
English: Du Juan said: The saint's morality conforms to the norms of heaven and earth, meets the requirements of the four-hour change, the words spoken are classics, and the things done become laws, and you say that the saint takes the preaching of nothingness to measure all things, and uses deceitful words to persuade people, how can the Big Dipper radiate light, and the Dragon Palace contain a wooden box containing precious stones?

古文：既如所论，福要可以镕铸性灵，弘奖风教，为益之大，莫极于斯。
现代文：既然如你论说的，设教可以陶冶性情，弘扬奖励风气，为益之大，没有别的方法能超过的。
English: Since, as you said, teaching can cultivate the disposition and promote the reward culture, the benefit is great, and no other method can surpass it.

古文：此即真教，何谓非实？ 
现代文：这就是真正的教育，为什么还说不真实具体？ 
English: This is real education, so why do they say it's not real and concrete?

古文：邢云： 季札言无不之，亦言散尽，若复聚而为物，不得言无不之也。 
现代文：邢邵说 ：吴季札说人死了会无所不至，又说死后形体散尽。如果人死了又能聚集成人，不应该说无所不至啊。 
English: Zou Shao said, "Wu Jizha said that when a person dies, he will be omnipresent, and he also said that after death, the body will be dispersed. If a person dies and can gather adults, it should not be said to be omnipresent."

古文：弼曰： 骨肉下归于土，魂气则无不之，此乃形坠魂游，往而大尽。
现代文：杜弼说 ：人死了，骨肉埋在土里，魂灵则无所不至，这便是形体坠毁，魂魄游动，哪里都可以到达。
English: Du Juan said, "When a person dies, his bones and flesh are buried in the ground, but his soul can reach everywhere. This is the body crashing down, the soul swimming, and it can reach everywhere."

古文：由其尚有，故云无所不之。
现代文：因为灵魂存在，所以说人死了还会无所不至。
English: Because the soul exists, it is said that when a person dies, he will still be omnipresent.

古文：若也全无，之将焉适？ 
现代文：如果说人死了什么都没有了，灵魂将会到哪里去呢？ 
English: If there is nothing after death, where does the soul go?

古文：邢云： 神之在人，犹光之在烛，烛尽则光穷，人死则神灭。 
现代文：邢邵说 ：灵魂对于人来说，就像烛光对于蜡烛，蜡烛燃尽则光亮就会灭掉，人死了灵魂就会消失。 
English: Zou Shao said: "For a person, the soul is like candlelight for a candle. When the candle burns out, the light will be extinguished. When a person dies, the soul will disappear."

古文：弼曰： 烛则因质生光，质大光亦大；人则神不系形，形小神不小。
现代文：杜弼 ：蜡烛因为有材质才会被点亮，体积越大，光亮也越大。人的灵魂则不系于身体，身体小而灵魂不小。
English: Cuckoo: Candles are lit because of the material they are made of. The bigger they are, the brighter they are. The human soul is not related to the body. The body is small, but the soul is not small.

古文：故仲尼之智，必不短于长狄；孟德之雄，乃远奇于崔琰。 
现代文：所以，孔子的智慧一定不比长狄的短浅；曹孟德的雄才大略，远远地超过崔琰。 
English: Therefore, the wisdom of Confucius is certainly not shallower than that of Chang Di; Cao Mengde's genius is roughly, far more than that of Cui Yao.

古文：其后，别与邢书，前后往复再三，邢理屈而止。
现代文：后来，他与邢邵通信，前后信札往返再三，直到邢邵理屈词穷才停止。
English: Later, he corresponded with Zou Shao, sending and receiving letters back and forth repeatedly, until Zou Shao's words were exhausted.

古文：文多不载。
现代文：这些书信的内容许多文章都没有记载。
English: Its words are many and varied.

古文：又以本官行郑州事，未发，为家客告弼谋反，案察无实，久乃见原，因此绝朝见。
现代文：杜弼又以原来的官职任郑州刺史，没有出发上任，就被家里的宾客告发谋反，经过调查没有实据，过了很久才被释放回家，因此不再上朝参拜天子。
English: Du Xuan used his former official position to serve as the chief historian of Zhengzhou. Before he took office, he was accused of plotting a rebellion by guests at his home. After an investigation, there was no evidence. It took a long time before he was released to return home. Therefore, he no longer went to the imperial court to worship the Son of Heaven.

古文：复坐第二子廷尉监台卿断狱稽迟，与寺官俱为郎中封静哲所讼，徙临海镇。
现代文：又因二儿子廷尉监杜台卿处理狱案延误时间，与寺官都被郎中封静哲所诉讼，被流徙到临海镇。
English: In addition, because of the delay in the handling of the prison case by his second son, the courtier and prison warden Du Taiqing, he and the temple officials were sued by his brother-in-law, Jing Zhe, and were exiled to Linhai Town.

古文：时楚州人东方白额谋反，镇为贼帅张绰、潘天命等所攻，弼率厉城人，终得全固。
现代文：这时，楚州人东方白额造反，临海镇被贼兵首领张绰、潘天合等人率兵攻打，杜弼率领全镇人防守，终于使全镇得以保存。
English: At this time, Dongfang, a resident of Chuzhou, openly rebelled, and Linhai Town was attacked by the bandits led by Zhang Zhuo, Pan Tianhe and others. Du Wei led the defense of the whole town, and finally the whole town was saved.

古文：文宣嘉之，敕行海州事。
现代文：文宣帝嘉奖了他，命他管理海州的政务。
English: Emperor Wenxuan praised him and ordered him to manage the government affairs of Haizhou.

古文：后除胶州刺史。
现代文：后来，任命他为海州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Haizhou.

古文：弼所在清静廉洁，为吏人怀之。
现代文：杜弼在所任职的地方，能清静待民，廉洁自守，被官吏百姓怀念。
English: In the places where he served, Du Juan was able to calmly wait for the people, was honest and self-sufficient, and was remembered fondly by the officials and the people.

古文：耽好玄理，注庄子惠施篇并易上下系辞，名曰新注义苑，并行于世。
现代文：他喜好探究老庄道家们幽深微妙的义理，注释了《〈庄子〉惠施篇》和《〈易〉上下系》，合起来称《新注义苑》，刊行于世。
English: He liked to explore the profound and subtle principles of the Lao Zhuang Daoists, and annotated "<Zhuang Zi> Hui Shi" and "<Yi> Xie Xie," together known as "New Chui Yi Yuan," which was published in the world.

古文：性质直，在霸朝多所匡正。
现代文：他的性格坦诚质直，在高欢专权的情况下对朝政进行很多匡助纠正。
English: His character was frank and honest, and he did a lot to help rectify the imperial government in the situation of high-ranking autocracy.

古文：及文宣作相，致位僚首，初闻揖让之议，犹有谏言。
现代文：高澄任他为宰相，位在群僚之首。他听说朝廷有关于礼仪的议论，也表达了自己的看法。
English: Takasumi appointed him as prime minister, at the head of a group of colleagues. He heard that there were discussions about etiquette in the imperial court, and he also expressed his opinion.

古文：帝又尝问弼： 治国当用何人？ 
现代文：文宣帝曾问他 ：治理国家当用什么样的人？ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan once asked him: What kind of person should be used to govern the country?

古文：对曰： 鲜卑车马客，会须用中国人。 
现代文：他答道 ：鲜卑人只能任管理车马的职务，治国应当用中原人。 
English: He replied: Xianbei people can only be allowed to manage chariots and horses, and Central Plains people should be used to govern the country.

古文：帝以为讥已。
现代文：文宣帝认为是在讥讽自己。
English: Emperor Wenxuan thought he was mocking himself.

古文：高德正居要，不能下之，乃至于众前面折德正。
现代文：高德正身居政要，也不能使他屈从。他还在众人面前批评高德正。
English: Gao Dezheng is a political dignitary, and it is impossible to make him yield. He also criticized Gao Dezheng in front of everyone.

古文：德正深以为恨，数言其短。
现代文：德正内心十分忌恨他，多次说他的坏话。
English: De Zheng hated him very much in his heart and spoke ill of him many times.

古文：又令主书杜永珍密启弼在长史日，受人属，大营婚嫁，帝内衔之。
现代文：高德正还命主书杜永珍秘密启奏杜弼任长史时受人嘱托，大肆操办婚嫁，文宣帝也对他怀恨在心。
English: Gao Dezheng also ordered the main writer Du Yongzhen to secretly reveal the long history of Du Xuan's tenure, and he was commissioned to carry out the wedding lavishly. Emperor Wenxuan also held a grudge against him.

古文：后致仕，终于家。
现代文：他倚仗同文宣帝的关系，仍不断陈奏公事。
English: He relied on his relationship with Emperor Xuanwu and continued to play up his official duties.

古文：有集十五卷，撰齐记二十卷，并行于世。
现代文：天保十年夏天，文宣帝因饮酒过量，积累杜弼的过失，派人到海州将他斩首。
English: In the summer of the 10th year of the Tenpo era, Emperor Wenzhong sent someone to Haizhou to behead him for drinking too much alcohol and accumulating faults.

古文：无子。房谟，字敬放，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：不久又后悔，派人骑快马追赶使者，已来不及。房谟，字敬放，河南洛阳人。
English: He soon regretted that it was too late to send someone on a fast horse to chase the messenger.

古文：其先代人，本姓屋引氏。
现代文：他的祖先为代地人，原本姓屋引氏。
English: His ancestor was a local surrogate, whose original surname was Yahui.

古文：少淳厚，虽无造次能，而沈深内敏。
现代文：他从小淳厚端谨，虽然没有异于常人的才能，而却深沉内秀。
English: He has been honest and straightforward since he was a child. Although he has no talent different from that of ordinary people, he has a deep inner beauty.

古文：正光末，历位昌平、代郡太守，所在著廉惠。
现代文：北魏孝明帝正光末年，他历任昌平、代郡的太守，都以廉洁惠民著称。
English: In the last years of the Northern Wei Xiaoming Emperor Zhengguang, he successively served as Changping and deputy county governor, and was known for his integrity and benefiting the people.

古文：及六镇乱，谟率郡人入九峥山，结垒拒守。
现代文：北方六个军镇叛乱，他率领郡中的人进入九峥山，修筑堡垒，抗拒敌兵。
English: Six military towns in the north rebelled, and he led the people of the county into Jiuyuan Mountain to build a fortress and resist the enemy soldiers.

古文：时外无救援，乃率所部奔中山。
现代文：当时没有外援，他率领人马投奔中山。
English: At that time, there was no foreign aid, so he led the people to go to Zhongshan.

古文：遇鲜于修礼之乱，朝廷以谟得北边人情，以为假燕州事。
现代文：又遇上鲜于修礼叛乱，朝廷因为房谟懂得北边的人情地理，任他代理燕州的政务。
English: He also encountered a rebellion that was less than ceremonial, and because the imperial court understood the human geography of the north, he was appointed to represent the government affairs of Yanzhou.

古文：北转至幽州南，为修礼所执，仍陷葛荣。
现代文：他向北转移，到达幽州的南边，被鲜于修礼抓获，后又落入葛荣之手。
English: He moved north to the south of Yuzhou, was captured by the Shurei, and then fell into the hands of Ge Rong.

古文：荣败，尔硃荣启授行冀州事。
现代文：葛荣失败，朱荣启奏朝廷，命他代理冀州的政务。
English: Ge Rong failed, Zhu Rong appealed to the imperial court and ordered him to represent the government affairs of Jizhou.

古文：寻除太宁太守。
现代文：不久，任太宁太守。
English: Soon after, Taining was appointed governor.

古文：荣死，其党征兵，谟不应，前后斩其三使。
现代文：朱荣被朝廷处死，他的党羽纠集军队与朝廷对抗，房谟没有响应，前后共斩杀了朱氏派来的三个使者。
English: Zhu Rong was put to death by the imperial court, and his followers gathered an army to fight against the imperial court. The House of Miao did not respond and killed three emissaries sent by the Zhu clan.

古文：遣弟毓诣阙，孝庄以毓为都督，毓弟钦为行台，并持节诣谟，同为经略。
现代文：他又派弟弟房毓到朝廷拜见，孝庄帝任房毓为都督，任房毓的弟弟房钦为行台，并拿着朝廷的符命到房谟那里，共同经略当地的军事。
English: He also sent his younger brother Fang Zheng to visit the imperial court. Emperor Xiaozhuang appointed Fang Zheng as the governor-general, and appointed Fang Zheng's younger brother Fang Qin as the governor-general. He also took the imperial order to Fang Mo to jointly manage the local military affairs.

古文：及京都沦覆，为贼党建州刺史是兰安定执系州狱。
现代文：京城洛阳沦陷，房谟被朱氏任命的建州刺史是兰安定抓获，关在州中的监狱。
English: Luoyang, the capital, fell, and Lan Danyuan, the governor of Jianzhou, who was appointed by Zhu, was arrested and imprisoned in the middle of the state.

古文：蜀人闻谟被囚，并叛。
现代文：蜀人听说他被囚禁，一起叛变。
English: When the Shu people heard that he had been imprisoned, they mutinied together.

古文：安定于是给谟弱马，令军前慰劳。
现代文：是兰安定于是给他一匹瘦弱的马，让他骑上到军前慰劳当地百姓。
English: It was Ran Yan who gave him a frail horse and let him ride to the front to comfort the local people.

古文：诸贼见谟，莫不遥拜。
现代文：叛变的蜀人看见房谟，无不远远地叩头拜见。
English: When the mutinous Shu people saw Fang Mu, they all bowed down to him from a distance.

古文：谟先所乘马，安定别给将士，战败，蜀人得之，谓谟遇害，莫不悲泣。
现代文：房谟原先骑的那匹马，是兰安定给了他的将士当坐骑。是兰安定失败，当地百姓得到这匹马，都认为房谟已经遇难，无不放声哭泣。
English: The horse that Tommo was originally riding was given to him as a mount by Ranald. When Ranald failed, the local people were given the horse, and they all thought that Tommo had been killed, and they all burst into tears.

古文：善养其马，不听乘骑，兒童妇女，竟投草粟，皆言此房公马也。
现代文：他们精心地饲养这匹马，不允许任何人再骑它，妇女儿童都争着喂它草料，都说这是房公的马呀。
English: They had carefully bred the horse, and no one was allowed to ride it any more. Women and children were competing to feed it grass, saying it was the lord of the manor's horse.

古文：其结爱人心如此。
现代文：他就是这样深得百姓的爱戴。
English: This is how he won the people's love.

古文：尔硃世隆闻而嘉之，舍其罪，以为东北道行台。
现代文：朱世隆听到这些情况十分嘉许，原谅了他的罪过，命他为东北道行台。
English: Hearing these circumstances, Zhu Shilong was very appreciative, forgave his sins, and ordered him to be the leader of the Northeast Corridor.

古文：及尔硃氏败，济州刺史侯景以谟先款附，推谟降首。
现代文：朱氏失败后，洛州刺史侯景认为房谟先归附朱氏，将他作为降官之首。
English: After the defeat of the Zhu clan, the Lozhou magistrate Houjing believed that the House of Miao was first attached to the Zhu clan, and he was the first to be demoted.

古文：谟以受眷尔硃，不宜先为反覆，不从其计。
现代文：房谟认为自己开始只是受朱荣重用，不应该说自己是最早归附朱氏，因而不满意侯景的这种说法。
English: Fang Mo thought that he was only used by Zhu Rong at the beginning. It should not be said that he was the first to join the Zhu clan, so he was not satisfied with this statement of Hou Jinghu.

古文：神武入洛，再迁颍川太守。
现代文：神武帝高欢进入京城洛阳，房谟任颍川太守。
English: Emperor Gao Huan of the Jin Dynasty entered the capital Luoyang, and Miao Miao was appointed the governor of Luochuan.

古文：魏孝武帝入关，神武以谟忠贞，遣其弟毓为大使，持节劳问。
现代文：魏孝武帝被迫西入关内，高欢因房谟忠诚实在，便派他的弟弟房毓为使者，持符节入关慰问。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu was forced to enter the Western Gate, and Gao Huan sent his younger brother Fang Xi as an envoy to the Western Gate to offer condolences.

古文：时军国未宁，征发烦速，至有数使同征一物，公私劳扰。
现代文：当时军国多事，很不安宁，向百姓征调既多又快，以至出现几个人来征收同一样物品的情况，官府和百姓都受到骚扰。
English: At that time, the military state was eventful and very restless, and there were many and quick requisitions from the people, so much so that several people came to collect the same items, and both the government and the people were harassed.

古文：谟请事遣一使，下自催勒，朝廷从之。
现代文：他请求每一样赋税只派一个使者，让下面催征，朝廷听从了他的建议。
English: He requested that only one envoy be sent for each tax to be collected, and the court followed his suggestion.

古文：征为丞相右长史，以清直甚被赏遇。
现代文：朝廷命他为丞相右长史，他因清廉正直而被长官知遇。
English: The imperial court appointed him as chancellor and minister of justice, and he was well-known by his superiors for his integrity.

古文：谟悉心尽力，知无不为。
现代文：他尽职尽责，凡是自己认为该办的事情，无不尽力去办。
English: He is conscientious and diligent, and does his best to do whatever he thinks should be done.

古文：前后赐其奴婢，率多免放，神武后赐其生口，多黥面为房字而付之。
现代文：朝廷前后赏赐给他的奴仆，他大多都将他们放还。高欢后来赐给他的人口，都先在脸上刺上房字再送给他。
English: Most of the slaves given to him by the imperial court were returned to him. The people who were later given to him by Gao Huan were first given to him with the house characters on their faces.

古文：神武讨关右，以谟兼大行台左丞，长史如故，总知府省务。
现代文：高欢讨伐关中，任他兼大行台左丞，长史的职务不变，由他来总领省府的事务。
English: In Gao Huan Duan Guan, he was also appointed as the left assistant of Da Xing Tai, and Chang Shi's position remained unchanged, and he was appointed as the general manager of the provincial government.

古文：天平三年，行定州事。
现代文：不久，他出任为兖州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：请在左右拾遗补阙，固不肯行，神武责而罢之。
现代文：选用清廉的官员。广泛地向官吏和百姓施行恩惠，树立威信。
English: Elect officials who are clean and honest. Extend favors to officials and the people, and establish prestige.

古文：未几，出为兗州刺史。谟选用廉清，广布恩信，僚属守令，有犯必知，虽号细密，百姓安之。
现代文：下属和各州县的守令犯了过失，他都会知道，那些再细小隐蔽的事情也瞒不过他，百姓们都能安居乐业。
English: If any subordinates or state or county officials have made mistakes, he will know that even the smallest and most hidden things cannot be hidden from him, and the people can live and work in peace.

古文：转徐州刺史。
现代文：又转任为徐州刺史。
English: He was also transferred to the Xuzhou Provincial History Museum.

古文：始谟在兗州，彭城慕其政化，及为刺史，合境欣悦。
现代文：开始他在兖州，彭城很羡慕他的政治和教化，他任兖州刺史后，全境官员都欢欣鼓舞，异常兴奋。
English: At the beginning of his time in Zhangzhou, Pengcheng was very envious of his politics and enlightenment. After he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, officials across the country were delighted and extremely excited.

古文：谟为政如在瑕丘。
现代文：房谟为政有如战国时的瑕丘氏。
English: Fomo's politics are like those of the Kokeoka clan during the Sengoku period.

古文：先是，当州兵皆僚佐驱使，饥寒死病，动至千数。
现代文：原先，州兵都被僚佐们随意驱使，忍饥受冻和生病死去的，经常有一千多人。
English: Originally, the National Guard was driven at will by their lieutenants, and more than a thousand people often died of hunger, cold and illness.

古文：谟至，皆加检勒，不令烦扰，以休假番代洗沐，督察主司，亲自检视。
现代文：他上任后，对此加以检查约束，不让地方官吏任意役使他们，让他们轮流休假、洗澡。催促主司们亲自检查看望他们。
English: After he took office, he checked and restricted this, did not allow local officials to arbitrarily make them, let them take turns to take a vacation and take a bath, and urged the bosses to personally check and visit them.

古文：又使佣赁，令作衣服，终岁还家，无不温饱，全济甚多。
现代文：又给他们雇用工匠做衣服，年终允许他们回去探家，将士们无不暖衣饱食，被周全救济的人很多。
English: They also hired craftsmen to make clothes for them. At the end of the year, they were allowed to go back and visit their families. The soldiers were given warm clothes and plenty of food. Many people received comprehensive relief.

古文：时梁、魏和好，使人入其界者，咸称叹之。
现代文：这时，梁魏通好，梁的使者进入他管辖的区域，都赞叹不已。
English: At this time, Liang Wei's communication was good, Liang's envoys entered the area under his jurisdiction, and they were all amazed.

古文：寻兼吏部尚书，魏朝以河南数州，乡俗绢滥，退绢一疋，征钱三百，人庶苦之。谟乃表请钱绢两受，任人所乐，朝廷从之。
现代文：高欢写给各州刺史的书信中，都叙述房谟以及广平太守羊敦、广宗太守窦瑗、平原太守许季良等人清廉能干，以作为对各守土官吏的劝勉。房谟曾启奏高欢，认为天下仍不宁静，应给有功勋的将领赐赠婚姻，以笼络他们，建议被采纳。东魏因黄河南边的几个州，乡间征收绸绢的情况太滥，规定退掉一匹绢，征收三百钱，老百姓大受其害。房谟上表请求钱和绢都可以接受，百姓想交什么就交什么，朝廷采纳了他的建议。
English: In the letters Gao Huan wrote to the provincial governors, he described the integrity and ability of Fang Miao, as well as Guangping's grand marshal Yang Dun, Guangzong's grand marshal Dou Xuan, and Pingyuan's grand marshal Xu Qiliang, as an encouragement to the local officials. Fang Miao had inspired Gao Huan, who believed that the world was still not peaceful, and that meritorious generals should be given the gift of marriage in order to entice them, and his suggestion was adopted. In Eastern Wei, due to the excessive collection of silk and satin in the countryside of several provinces south of the Yellow River, it was stipulated

古文：征拜侍中，监国史。
现代文：朝廷将他征调到朝中任侍中，监修国史。
English: The imperial court conscripted him to serve as an attendant in the court, supervising the national history.

古文：谟无他材学，每求退身，不许。
现代文：他没有这方面的才学，常常请求辞去这个官职，未被允许。
English: He had no aptitude for it and often asked to resign from the post, which was not allowed.

古文：寻兼吏部尚书，加卫大将军。
现代文：不久，他兼任吏部尚书，加封为卫大将军。
English: Soon, he also served as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and was given the additional title of General of the Guards.

古文：以子子远罪，解官。
现代文：因为儿子房子远的罪过，他被免去官职。
English: He was removed from office because of the sins of his son, who lived far away.

古文：久之，诏复本将军，起为大丞相左长史。
现代文：过了很久，朝廷才下诏恢复他的将军职衔，起用为大丞相左长史。
English: It took a long time before the imperial court issued an edict to restore his military rank, and he was appointed to the post of grand chancellor, Sakuchoshi.

古文：后除晋州刺史，加骠骑大将军，又摄南汾州事。
现代文：后来，任晋州刺史，加封为骠骑大将军，又代理南汾州的政务。
English: Later, he was appointed as the official historian of Jinzhou, and was given the title of General of the Horse Cavalry. He also acted as the representative of the government affairs of Nanxunzhou.

古文：先时境接西魏，士人多受其官，为之防守。
现代文：早先，这里与西魏接壤，西魏的读书人大多被封为官职，以示笼络并作为防守的力量。
English: Earlier, it bordered the Western Wei Dynasty, and most of the readers of the Western Wei Dynasty were appointed to official positions to show their loyalty and serve as a defensive force.

古文：至是，酋长、镇将及都督、守、令前后降附者三百余人，谟抚接殷勤，人乐为用。
现代文：房谟任晋州刺史后，西魏的酋长、镇将，以及都督、太守、县令，前后降附的有三百多人。房谟对他们安抚接待得十分周到，人人都乐于为他效命。
English: After he was appointed to Jinzhou, more than 300 Western Wei chieftains and town generals, as well as governors, governors-general, and county magistrates, came and went. He was very considerate in appeasing them, and everyone was happy to serve him.

古文：爰及深险胡夷，咸来归服。
现代文：就是地处偏远险峻的胡人，也都前来归顺。
English: Even the Hu people, who live in a remote and precipitous place, have come to submit.

古文：谟常以己禄物，充其饷赍，文襄嘉之，听用公物。
现代文：房谟常常拿出自己的俸禄和家里的东西奖赏和馈赠给他们。文襄帝高澄极为赞赏他，允许他用公物送给降服的胡人。
English: The Emperor Gaocheng greatly appreciated him and allowed him to use public goods to give to the Hu people who had surrendered.

古文：西魏惧，乃增置城戍。
现代文：西魏对此很是恐惧，又增加了防守的据点。
English: The Western Wei feared this very much and increased their defensive positions.

古文：慕义者，自相纠合，击破之。
现代文：仰慕房谟的义士们自动组织起来，将这些据点打破。
English: Admirers of Tommo have spontaneously organised themselves to break these strongholds.

古文：自是龙门已北，西魏戍皆平。
现代文：从此，龙门以北，西魏戍守的堡垒都被扫平。
English: From then on, the fortresses of the Western Wei Dynasty north of Longmen were razed to the ground.

古文：文襄特赐粟千石，绢二百疋，班示天下。
现代文：高澄特赐给他粟一千石，绢二百匹，以昭示天下。
English: Gaocheng specially gave him a millet of one thousand koku and two hundred yakitori to show the world.

古文：卒于州，州府相帅赠物及车牛，妻子遵其遗志，拒而不纳。
现代文：他死在晋州刺史任上，州府中的将帅们赠送的物品以及车和牛，妻子都遵照他的遗嘱，拒绝接收。
English: He died on the post of Jinzhou chief historian, and his wife refused to accept the gifts of the generals in the state capital, as well as cars and cattle, in accordance with his will.

古文：谟寡嗜欲，贞白自守；然内营家产，足为富赡，不假官俸，是以世称清白。
现代文：房谟很少有个人的嗜好和欲望，廉洁清白，自守其道；然而经营的家产，相当富裕，平常生活不依靠官俸，所以，世人都说他清白。
English: Tiao Mo has few personal hobbies and desires, is clean and innocent, and keeps to his own path; however, the family business he runs is quite wealthy, and he does not rely on government salary for his daily life, so people say he is innocent.

古文：赠司空，谥曰文惠。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为司空，谥号文惠。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed upon him the title of Siku (司空) and the posthumous name of Wenhui (文惠).

古文：谟与子结婚卢氏，谟卒后，卢氏将改适他姓。
现代文：房谟与他的儿子都与卢氏家的女儿结婚，他去世后，妻子卢氏要改嫁到别的人家。
English: Both he and his son married daughters of the Lu family. After his death, Lu's wife wanted to remarry into another family.

古文：有平阳廉景孙者，少厉志节，以明经举郡孝廉，为谟所重，至是讼之，台府不为理。
现代文：有一个平阳人叫廉景孙，从小砥砺自己的志气节操，因精通经书被郡守举荐为孝廉，被房谟器重，这时便向官府诉讼这件事。台府不予理睬。
English: There was a man in Pingyang named Liang Jingsun, who had been honing his self-discipline and self-restraint since childhood. Because of his mastery of the scriptures, he was recommended by the county governor as a filial son and was highly respected. At this time, he filed a lawsuit with the government. The government ignored him.

古文：乃持绳诣神庙前北面大呼曰： 房谟清吏，忠事高祖，及其死也，妻子见陵。
现代文：廉景孙便拿着一条绳子到神庙前面向北大声哭喊 ：房谟是一个清官，忠诚地侍奉高祖皇帝，他死了以后，妻子却要改嫁。
English: Liang Jingsun then took a rope and went to the front of the temple, facing north, and cried loudly: "Boomu was a high-ranking official who served Emperor Gaozhu loyally, but after he died, his wife wanted to remarry.

古文：神而有知，当助申之。
现代文：神灵如果有知，应当帮助他申雪。
English: The gods, if they have knowledge, should help him lift the snow.

古文：今引决，诉于地下。 
现代文：今天我自尽，到地下去告状。 
English: Today I'm going to kill myself and go underground to file a complaint.

古文：便以绳自经于树。
现代文：便要用绳子挂在树上自尽。
English: He then hanged himself from a tree with a rope.

古文：卫士见之，救解送所司。
现代文：卫士看见了，将他救下送到他所在的府衙。
English: When the guards saw him, they rescued him and took him to the palace where he lived.

古文：朝廷哀其至诚，命女归房族。
现代文：朝廷被他的忠诚感动，命卢氏女重归房氏家族。
English: The court was moved by his loyalty and ordered Lu's daughter to return to the Fong family.

古文：谟前妻子子远险薄，谟甚嫌之，不以为子列。
现代文：房谟的前妻生的儿子房子远阴险浅薄，房谟很厌恶他。
English: The son of Momo's ex-wife's son, the house is far away, dangerous and shallow. Momo loathes him.

古文：时以谟为后妻卢氏所谮，神武亦以责谟。
现代文：高欢不相信，亲自收养他，命他和自己的孩子一起读书，过了很久才送他回家。
English: Gao Huan didn't believe him, so he personally adopted him and ordered him to study with his own children. It took him a long time to send him home.

古文：谟陈其恶。神武弗信，自收恤之，令与诸子同学，久乃令还。
现代文：后来他与任胄等人谋杀高欢，事情败露，高欢叹道 ：知子莫若父，真对啊！ 
English: Later, he and Ren Zheng and others murdered Gao Huan, and the affair was exposed. Gao Huan sighed, "Don't be like your father, you're right!"

古文：郭邑大火，城人亡产业，远躬自赴救，对之流涕，仍为经营，皆得安立。
现代文：因而奏报天子，说房谟、郑述祖、李道三家，按理应该依法处治。高欢认为房谟立身行事，清正廉洁，行为忠贞谨慎；郑述祖的儿子长大后才和他生活在一起；李道的儿子不是亲生，是抱来寄养的，本不是李氏的骨肉。对这三家，特乞请只惩处罪犯一人。
English: Therefore, Gao Huan reported to Tian Zi, saying that the three families of Fang Mo, Zheng Shuzu, and Li Dao should be dealt with according to the law. Gao Huan believed that Fang Mo was upright, honest, and prudent; the son of Zheng Shuzu only lived with him when he grew up; the son of Li Dao was not born, but was fostered, and was not the flesh and blood of the Li clan. For these three families, I would like to ask you to punish only one criminal.

古文：卒于卫尉卿。
现代文：魏孝静帝同意了他的请求。
English: Emperor Wei Xiao Jing agreed to his request.

古文：起、远前书并有传，更无异迹，今附此云。张曜，字灵光，上谷昌平人也。
现代文：房谟去世后，他的儿子房广继承家业。张曜，字灵光，上谷昌平人。从小就待人忠贞谨慎。
English: After the death of Fong Mu, his son Fong Guang succeeded the family business. Zhang You, also known as Lingguang, was the son of Shangguan Changping. He was loyal and cautious from an early age.

古文：少贞谨，韩轨为御史劾，州府僚佐及轨左右以赃挂网者百余人，唯曜以清白免。
现代文：韩轨被御史弹劾，州府的官吏以及韩轨的亲信因贪赃触犯法律的一百多人，惟有张曜因清廉免于处罚。
English: Hanraku was impeached by the imperial court, and more than a hundred officials of the state government and Hanraku's cronies violated the law due to corruption. Only Zhang You was exempted from punishment due to his integrity.

古文：天保初，赐爵都乡男，累迁尚书右丞。
现代文：天保初年，朝廷给他封爵为都乡男，逐步升迁，官至尚书右丞。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, the imperial court gave him a knighthood as a man of the capital, and he was gradually promoted to the post of Shangshu Rongjo.

古文：文宣曾近出，令曜居守。
现代文：文宣帝曾经出宫到近处走动，命他留守。
English: Emperor Wenzhong once went out of the palace to walk around the neighborhood and ordered him to stay behind.

古文：帝夜还，曜不时开门，勒兵严备。
现代文：文宣帝夜晚归来，他不让开门，命令士兵严加防守。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan returned at night, he did not allow the door to be opened and ordered the soldiers to defend themselves strictly.

古文：帝驻驿门外久之，催迫甚急。曜以夜深，须火至面识，门乃可开。
现代文：文宣帝在大门外等了很久，催促得十分紧急，他以夜深天黑为理由，提出要用火把照一照面部，认出是文宣帝后才把门打开。
English: Emperor Wenzhong waited outside the gate for a long time, urging him very urgently. On the grounds that it was late at night and dark, he proposed to use a torch to take a look at the face, and only open the door after recognizing Emperor Wenzhong.

古文：于是独出见帝。帝笑曰： 卿欲效郅君章也？ 
现代文：他单独出来叩见文宣帝，文宣帝笑着说： 你想效法东汉忠于职守的郅恽吗？ 
English: He went out alone to knock on the door of Emperor Wenxuan, who smiled and said, "Do you want to follow the example of the Eastern Han Dynasty's eunuchs who were loyal to their duties?"

古文：乃使曜前开门，然后入。
现代文：便让他开门，然后进来。
English: He asked him to open the door and then come in.

古文：嗟赏之，赐以锦采。
现代文：对他大加赞赏，赐给他许多锦缎。
English: He lavished praise on him and gave him many gifts.

古文：大宁初，迁秘书监。
现代文：太宁初年，他迁任秘书监。
English: In the first year of Taining, he was transferred to the post of secretary supervisor.

古文：曜历事累世，奉职恪勤，咸见亲待，未尝有过。
现代文：张曜任职历经几位皇帝，奉职忠诚谨慎，从未有过过失。
English: Zhang You has served several emperors. He is loyal and prudent, and has never made a mistake.

古文：每得禄赐，辄散之宗族。
现代文：每次得到俸禄和赏赐，都分送给宗族中的人。
English: Every time he received a salary or reward, he would distribute it among the members of his clan.

古文：性节俭率素，车服饮食，取给而已。
现代文：他节俭简约，车子、衣服、饮食，仅仅够用而已。
English: He is frugal and simple. His car, clothes and food are just enough.

古文：好读春秋，月一遍，时人比之贾梁道。
现代文：喜欢读《春秋》，每月一定看一遍，人们把他比作汉代的贾逵。
English: He likes to read "Spring and Autumn" and must read it once a month. People compare him to Jia Wei of the Han Dynasty.

古文：赵彦深尝谓之曰： 君研寻左氏，岂求杜、服缪邪？ 
现代文：赵彦深曾对他说 ：你研习《左氏春秋》，怎么能沿袭杜预、服虔错误的成说呢？ 
English: Zhao Yanshen once said to him, "How can you study Zuo's Spring and Autumn and follow Du Yu's erroneous teachings?"

古文：曜曰： 何为其然乎？
现代文：他答道 ：为何要这样说呢？
English: He replied, "Why do you say that?

古文：左氏之书，备叙言事，恶者可以自戒，善者可以庶几。
现代文：《左氏春秋》一书，详细地叙述一代史实，邪恶的人可以用来警戒自己，善良的人可以察觉自己微小的过失。
English: The book "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi" describes a generation of historical facts in detail. Evil people can be used to guard themselves, and good people can be aware of their minor mistakes.

古文：故励已温寻，非欲诋诃古人得失也。 
现代文：所以，为了勉励自己，我才不断温习，不是想诋毁前人的得失啊。 
English: Therefore, in order to encourage myself, I constantly review my studies, not to denigrate the gains and losses of my predecessors.

古文：天统元年，奏事，暴疾，仆于御前。武成下坐临视，呼不应。帝泣曰： 失我良臣也。 
现代文：天统元年，他到朝廷奏事，暴病突发，摔倒在后主的御座前面，后主走下座位亲自看视他，呼喊他也不答应，便哭着说 ：我失去了一位优秀的大臣啊！ 
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he went to the Imperial Court to report on a matter, fell violently ill, and fell down in front of the empress dowager's throne. The empress dowager stepped down from her seat to see him in person, shouted that he would not agree, and then cried, "I have lost an excellent minister!"

古文：王纮，字师罗，太安狄那人也。
现代文：过了十多天去世，追赠为尚书右仆射，谥号为贞简。王纮，字师罗，太安狄那人。
English: He died more than ten days later, and was posthumously given the posthumous names of Shang Shuxu Rongsha, and Zhengjian. Wang Yao, Zhi Luo, was from Taian.

古文：父基，颇读书，有智略。
现代文：父亲王基，酷好读书，很有智谋胆略。
English: His father, Wang Ji, was a great reader and very resourceful.

古文：初从葛荣，与周文帝相知。
现代文：王基最初跟随葛荣，因而与周文帝宇文泰认识。
English: Wang Ji initially followed Ge Rong, and thus became acquainted with Zhou Wendi and Yu Wentai.

古文：及周文据关中，神武遣基与长史侯景同往焉。
现代文：宇文泰据守关中，齐神武帝高欢派王基与长史侯景一同前往。
English: According to Uwentai, when guarding the pass, Emperor Qishenwu Gaohuan sent Wang Ji and Changshi Houjing to accompany him.

古文：周文留基不遣，后乃逃归。
现代文：宇文泰留下王基不让回来，后来他设法逃了回来。
English: Wu Wentai left Wang Ji behind and did not allow him to return. Later, he managed to escape and return.

古文：历南益、北豫二州刺吏，所历皆好聚敛，然性和直，吏人不甚怨苦。
现代文：历任南益、北豫二州的刺史。他在所任职的地方都喜欢聚敛财富，然而性情平和，为人坦率，所以，官吏和老百姓对他不十分怨恨。
English: He has served as governor of the two states of South Yixing and North Henan. He likes to accumulate wealth wherever he serves, but his disposition is peaceful and frank, so officials and ordinary people do not resent him very much.

古文：后为奴所害，赠吏部尚书。
现代文：后来被他的奴仆害死，朝廷追赠他为吏部尚书。
English: Later, he was killed by his slave, and the Imperial Court posthumously awarded him the title of "Officer Shangshu."

古文：纮善骑射，爱文学，性敏捷。
现代文：王纮善于骑马射箭，喜好文学，性情机敏。
English: Wang Yao is good at riding and archery, likes literature, and has a quick temper.

古文：年十三，见扬州乐太原郭元贞，抚其背曰： 读何书？ 
现代文：十三岁那年，见到扬州刺史、太原人郭元贞。郭元贞抚摸着他的脊背问： 在读什么书？ 
English: In his thirteenth year, he met Guo Yuanzheng, a Yangzhou scholar and Taiyuan native. Guo Yuanzheng stroked his back and asked: What book are you reading?

古文：曰： 诵孝经。 
现代文：他回答说： 读《孝经》。 
English: He replied, "Read the Filial Piety Sutra."

古文：曰： 孝经云何？ 
现代文：郭元贞又问 ：《孝经》上讲些什么？ 
English: Guo Yuanzhen also asked, "What does the Filial Piety Sutra say?"

古文：曰： 在上不骄，为下不乱。 
现代文：他对答说 ：地位高的人不要有骄气，地位低的人不要忘了礼节。 
English: He replied, "Those with high status should not be arrogant, and those with low status should not forget etiquette."

古文：元贞曰： 吾岂骄乎？ 
现代文：郭元贞说 ：我难道有骄气吗？ 
English: Guo Yuanzhen said: Do I have any pride?

古文：纮曰： 君子防未萌，亦愿留意。 
现代文：他回答说 ：有修养的人都是在错误没出现时就进行预防，也希望您多加留意。 
English: He replied, "Cultivated people prevent mistakes when they don't occur, and I hope you will pay more attention."

古文：元贞称善。
现代文：郭元贞听了连连称赞他说得好。
English: Guo Yuanzhen listened to the continuous praise and said that he spoke well.

古文：十五，随父在北豫州，行台侯景与人论掩衣法为当左右。
现代文：十五岁时，跟随他的父亲住在北豫州，行台官侯景与别人讨论僧衣袈裟究竟应该披在右边还是左边。
English: At the age of fifteen, when he was living with his father in North Henan Province, the governor of Henan Province, Hou Jing, was discussing with others whether the monk's robe should be worn on the right or on the left.

古文：尚书敬显俊曰： 孔子云： 微管仲，吾其被发左衽。 
现代文：尚书敬显俊说 ：孔子说 ：假如没有管仲，我们还仍然披散着头发，衣襟向左边敞开，过着野蛮的生活。 
English: Shangshu Jing Xianjun said: Confucius said: "If there is no relationship, we will still wear our hair loose, wear our collars open to the left, and live a barbaric life."

古文：以此言之，右衽应是。 
现代文：根据这句话看来，应该将袈裟向右敞开。 
English: According to this sentence, the jaw should be opened to the right.

古文：纮进曰： 国家龙飞朔野，雄步中原，五帝异仪，三王殊制，掩衣左右，何足是非？ 
现代文：王纮进前说 ：现在群雄驰骋于国家的北部原野，逐鹿问鼎于中原腹心。五帝们的礼仪各异，三王们的典章不同，袈裟究竟披在左边或右边，又算得了什么？ 
English: Wang Yujin said, "Nowadays, groups of males gallop across the country's northern plains, chasing deer in the heart of the Central Plains. The five emperors' etiquette is different, the three kings' ceremonies are different, and whether the swastika is worn on the right or the left, what does it matter?

古文：景奇其早慧，赐以名马。
现代文：侯景惊奇他的早慧，将好马送给他。
English: Hou Jing was surprised at his precocity and gave him a good horse.

古文：兴和中，文襄召为库直、奉朝请。
现代文：兴和年间，文襄帝高澄任他为库直、奉朝请。
English: During the Heian period, Emperor Gaocheng appointed him as treasurer and minister to the emperor.

古文：文襄遇祸，纮冒刃捍御。以忠节，进爵平春县男。
现代文：文襄帝被家贼杀害时，王纮冒着横飞的刀刃去保护他，凭着忠诚节义，被晋封为平春县男。
English: When Emperor Wenxiang was killed by a burglar, Wang Xuan braved the flying blade to protect him. With loyalty and righteousness, he was promoted to the man of Pingchun County.

古文：颇为文宣所知，为领左右都督。
现代文：王纮颇为文景帝高洋所赏识，被任命为左右都督。
English: Wang Qian was quite appreciated by the Emperor Gaoyang, and was appointed as the left and right governor.

古文：帝尝与左右饮酒，曰： 快哉大乐！ 
现代文：文宣帝曾与身边的人一起饮酒，高兴地说： 痛快啊，这是人间最大的欢乐！ 
English: Emperor Wenzhong once drank alcohol with the people around him and said happily, "It's great fun, it's the greatest joy on earth!"

古文：纮曰： 亦有大苦。 
现代文：王纮告诫说 ：也有大悲苦。 
English: Wang Zhe cautioned: There is also great sorrow.

古文：帝曰： 何苦？ 
现代文：文宣帝问： 会有什么悲苦？ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan asked: What kind of suffering will there be?

古文：纮曰： 长夜荒饮，不悟国破，是谓大苦。 
现代文：王纮回答说 ：成日成夜沉醉在酒乡中，意识不到国家的破亡，就是所说的大悲苦。 
English: Wang Yao replied, "Being drunk all day and night in the wine country and not being aware of the ruin of the country is the so-called great sorrow.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：文宣帝听后沉默不语。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：后责纮曰： 尔与纥奚舍乐同事我兄，舍乐死，尔何不死？ 
现代文：后来，责问王纮，说： 你与纥奚舍乐一起跟随我的哥哥文襄帝，纥奚舍乐在同家贼争斗时死去，你为什么还会活着？ 
English: Later, he scolded Wang Yao, saying, "You followed my brother Emperor Wenxiang together with Yao Xuele. Yao Xuele died in a fight with a family thief. Why are you still alive?

古文：纮曰： 君亡臣死，自是常节，但贼竖力薄，故臣不死。 
现代文：他回答说： 君主死了，作臣的也一起被杀，自然是合乎情理的事情。但是，凶手力量不强，所以，我没有死掉。 
English: He answered, "It is natural that the sovereign should die, and that his ministers should be killed with him; but the murderer is not strong, and therefore I did not die."

古文：帝使燕子献反缚之，长广王捉头，帝手刃将下。纮呼曰： 杨遵彦、崔季舒逃难，位至仆射、尚书；冒危效命之士，翻见屠戮。旷古未有此事。 
现代文：文宣帝命燕子献将他背过手捆绑起来，让弟弟、长广王高湛按住他的头，亲手举刀要砍下来，王纮大声喊道： 杨遵彦、崔季舒在文襄帝遇难时逃跑，还位至仆射、尚书；而冒着危险效命的人，却反要被杀戮，自古以来没有这样的事。 
English: Emperor Wenzhong ordered Yan Zi to tie him up with his hands behind his back, and let his younger brother, Changguang Wang Gaotan, hold down his head and personally raise his sword to cut it off. Wang Yao shouted loudly: Yang Zunyan and Cui Jishu fled when Emperor Wenzhong was killed, and were still in the position to shoot and write; but those who risked their lives to serve had to be killed, which had not happened since ancient times.

古文：帝投刃于地曰： 王师罗不得杀。 
现代文：文宣帝将刀扔在地上说 ：王纮杀不得。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan threw his sword on the ground and said, "Wang Xuan must not be killed."

古文：遂舍之。
现代文：便释放了他。
English: and they let him go.

古文：后拜骠骑大将军。
现代文：以后他被封为骠骑大将军。
English: After that, he was appointed to the post of general of cavalry.

古文：武平初，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：武平初年，范阳王高绍义加封他为开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Wuping, Fan Yang Wang Gao Shao Yi appointed him as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：上言突厥与周男女来往，必相影响，南北寇边，宜为之备。
现代文：他对范阳王说，突厥人与周朝的男女互相往来，必互相影响。南北两方都将会侵犯边境，应早作防备。
English: He told King Fanyang that the interaction between the Turkic people and the men and women of the Zhou Dynasty would inevitably affect each other. Both the north and the south would violate the border, and precautions should be taken at an early stage.

古文：五年，陈人寇淮南，封辅相议讨之。
现代文：武平五年，南陈军队入侵淮南，封辅相建议讨伐陈军。
English: In the fifth year of Wuping, the Southern Chen army invaded Huainan, and the deputy minister of finance proposed to fight against the Chen army.

古文：纮曰： 若复出顿江、淮，恐北狄西寇，乘弊而来。
现代文：王纮说 ：如果军队屯扎在江淮一带，恐怕北部的突厥进犯，乘着我们空虚进攻过来。
English: Wang Zhe said: If the army is encamped in the area of the Jianghuai River, I am afraid that the Turks in the north will invade and attack us in the void.

古文：莫若薄赋省徭，息人养士，使朝廷协睦，遐迩归心，征之以仁义，鼓之以道德，天下皆当肃清，岂直江南伪陈而已。 
现代文：不如在江淮一带减轻赋税和徭役，让人们休养生息，使他们与朝廷同心同德，协调和睦，远远近近的百姓都愿意归顺。对天下人，用仁义去征服他们，用道德去感动他们，天下自然就会清平，江南小小的陈国还值得去理睬吗？ 
English: It would be better to reduce taxes and corvée in the area of the Huai River, let people recover and live, and make them and the imperial court have the same heart, the same morality, and the same harmony. The people far and near are willing to submit. To the people of the world, conquer them with benevolence and righteousness, and move them with morality, and the world will naturally be smooth. Is the small Chen country south of the river still worth paying attention to?

古文：子子敬嗣，轻险无赖，奸秽所至，禽兽不若。
现代文：右丞相高阿那肱对大家说 ：同意王纮意见的请坐南面。 
English: The Minister of the Right, Gao Anan, said to everyone: If you agree with Wang Yao's opinion, please sit on the south side.

古文：隋开皇中，为晋州行参军，为并州总管秦王所杀。
现代文：朝臣们都同他坐在一起。不久，他兼任侍中，出使北周。
English: The courtiers all sat together with him. Soon, he also served as an aide-de-camp and was sent to the Northern Circuit.

古文：唐邕，字道和，太原晋阳人也。
现代文：归来后即正式被任命为侍中，不久死去。唐邕，字道和，太原晋阳人。
English: After his return, he was officially appointed as a chamberlain, and died soon after.

古文：其先自晋昌徙焉。
现代文：他的祖先自晋昌迁来。
English: His ancestors migrated from Jinchang.

古文：父灵芝，魏寿阳令，邕贵，赠司空公。
现代文：父亲唐灵芝，魏时任寿阳县县令，唐邕贵显之后，赠封他为司空公。
English: After his father, Tang Lingzhi, was appointed the county magistrate of Shouyang County in the Wei Dynasty, and Tang Xi Guixian, he was awarded the title of Sikuo Gong.

古文：邕少明敏，有材干。
现代文：唐邕从小聪明过人，颇有才干。
English: Tang Yao was very clever and talented from a young age.

古文：初直神武外兵曹，以干济见知，擢为文襄大将军督护。
现代文：最初任神武帝高欢的外兵曹，以有干练的办事能力被高欢赏识，被提拔为文襄帝高澄的大将军都护。
English: At first, Gao Huan, the Emperor of Shenwu, was appointed as Gao Huan's foreign sergeant. He was praised by Gao Huan for his capable administrative ability, and was promoted to be the general tutelary of Emperor Gao Cheng, the Emperor of Wenzhou.

古文：文襄崩，事出仓卒，文宣部分将校，镇压四方，夜中召邕支配，造次便了。
现代文：高澄被害，事出仓促，文宣帝高洋命部分将士到四方弹压，防止事变发生。
English: Gaocheng was damaged, and the matter was hasty. Wenzhong Emperor Gao Yangshuo partially sent soldiers to the four directions to prevent the incident from happening.

古文：帝甚重之。天保初，稍迁给事中，兼中书舍人，封广汉乡男。
现代文：夜晚召集唐邕，命他调动人马，他很快就安排妥当。文宣帝也很器重他。天保初年，他迁任给事中，兼中书舍人，封爵为广汉乡男。
English: Tang Xuan was summoned at night and ordered to mobilize men and horses, which he quickly arranged. Emperor Wenzhong also respected him. In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was transferred to the middle of affairs, concurrently a scholar, and was knighted as a Guanghan villager.

古文：及从征奚虏，黄门侍郎袁猛旧典骑兵事，至是为割配迟留，鞭杖一百，仍令邕监骑兵事，以猛赐邕。文宣频年出塞，邕必陪从，专掌兵机，承受敏速。
现代文：参加征讨奚虏，黄门侍郎袁猛过去主管骑兵的事务，这一次因行动迟缓，被鞭打一百，便命唐邕监管骑兵的事务，把袁猛赐给他为奴仆，文宣帝频频出塞征战，唐邕每次都必定陪同，专门掌管用兵的机宜。
English: The Yellow Gate's steward, Yuan Meng, used to be in charge of cavalry affairs. This time, because of his slowness of action, he was whipped a hundred times. He then ordered Tang Xuan to supervise the cavalry affairs and give Yuan Meng to him as a slave. Emperor Wenzhong frequently went to Tibet to fight. Tang Xuan always accompanied him and was in charge of the use of soldiers.

古文：自军吏已上劳效由绪，无不谙练，占对如响。
现代文：他接受战局的变化迅速敏捷。从士兵以上的一切活动他都按照规定安排，没有不熟练通达的。对军中的一切事务他都应口对答，声音干脆响亮。
English: He accepted the changes in the war situation quickly and nimbly. He arranged all activities from soldiers and above in accordance with the regulations, and there was no unskilled person. He answered all matters in the army, and his voice was simply loud.

古文：或御前简阅，邕多不执文簿，唱官名未尝谬误。
现代文：天子检阅部队时，他大多不拿官员和将领们的花名册，呼报每个人的名字没有出过差错。
English: When Tianzi reviewed the troops, he mostly did not take the roster of officials and generals, and called out everyone's name without error.

古文：七年，于羊汾堤讲武，令邕总为诸军节度。
现代文：天保七年，文宣帝在羊汾堤讲习武事，命唐邕负责调动各军。
English: In the seventh year of the Tenpo era, Emperor Wenzhong gave a martial arts lecture at Yangpu Dike and ordered Tang Jun to mobilize the troops.

古文：事毕，仍监宴射之礼。
现代文：讲习完毕，仍命他监管宴会和射箭的礼仪。
English: After the seminar, he was still ordered to supervise the banquet and the etiquette of archery.

古文：亲执其手，引至太后前，坐于丞相斛律金上。
现代文：文宣帝拉着他的手，领他到太后的面前，坐在丞相斛律金座位的上首。
English: Emperor Wenxuan took him by the hand and led him to the front of the empress dowager, where he sat at the top of the golden throne.

古文：启太后云： 邕一人当千。 
现代文：文宣帝对太后说 ：一个唐邕可以相当于一千人。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan said to the empress dowager: "One Tang Jun can be equivalent to one thousand people."

古文：仍别赐钱采。
现代文：特别赐给他钱币锦缎。
English: He was given a specially minted brocade coin.

古文：邕非唯强济明辩，亦善揣上意，是以委任弥重。
现代文：唐邕不仅强干练达，明辨是非，而且善于揣摩上面的意图，所以对他的任用越来越重要。
English: Tang Xuan is not only a strong practitioner, able to distinguish right from wrong, but also good at guessing the above intentions, so his appointment is becoming more and more important.

古文：帝尝白太后云： 邕手作文书，口且处分，耳又听受，实是异人。 
现代文：文宣帝曾对太后说 ：唐邕手中写着文书，嘴里一边吩咐着，耳朵里又聆听着别人的指受，实在是一个奇异的人才。 
English: Emperor Wenzhong once said to the empress dowager: Tang Xuan was a truly extraordinary talent, writing documents with his hands, giving orders with his mouth, and listening to others with his ears.

古文：一日中六度赐物。
现代文：他一天中六次获得赏赐。
English: He was rewarded six times a day.

古文：又尝解所服青鼠皮裘赐邕云： 朕意在与卿共弊。 
现代文：文宣帝又曾脱下自己穿的青鼠皮做的裘皮衣服赏赐给他，说： 我的意图是要与你共同穿一件衣服。 
English: Emperor Wenzhong also once took off a fur coat made of rat skin that he was wearing and gave it to him, saying, "My intention is to wear a coat together with you."

古文：除兼给事黄门、中书舍人。
现代文：封他为兼给事黄门、中书舍人。
English: He was also given the title of Yellow Gate, and became a renunciant of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：文宣尝登并州童子佛寺望并州城，曰： 此何等城？ 
现代文：文宣帝曾登临并州童子佛寺眺望并州城，问： 这是什么样的城池？ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan once visited Nianzhou Doji Buddhist Temple, looked over Nianzhou City, and asked: What kind of city is this?

古文：或曰： 金城汤池，天府之国。 
现代文：有人说： 这是金城汤池，天府之国。 
English: Some people say: This is the golden city of Tangchi, the country of Tianfu.

古文：帝云： 我谓唐邕是金城，此非也。 
现代文：文宣帝说： 我认为唐邕是金城，这座城不是呀！ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan said, "I think that Tang Jun is a golden city, but this city is not!"

古文：后谓邕云： 高德正妄说卿短，而荐主书郭敬，朕已杀之。
现代文：后来文宣帝对唐邕说 ：高德正随便说你的坏话，让推荐主书郭敬代替你，我已将他杀掉。
English: Later, Emperor Wenxuan said to Tang Xuan: Gao De is casually speaking ill of you, let Guo Jing, the recommending author, replace you, I have killed him.

古文：卿劬劳既久，欲除卿作州，频敕杨遵彦求堪代卿者，如卿实不可得，所以遂停。 
现代文：你长时间勤勉辛劳，我想让你去州中任刺史，多次命杨遵彦寻找能够代替你的人，像你这样的人才实在不易得到。所以没有让你到州中任职。 
English: You have been working diligently for a long time, I want you to go to the middle of the state to serve as a secretary, I have repeatedly ordered Yang Zunyan to find someone who can replace you, talents like you are really not easy to get. So I did not let you serve in the middle of the state.

古文：文宣或切责侍臣云： 观卿等，不中与唐邕作奴！ 
现代文：文宣帝有一次责备侍臣们说： 我看你们这些人，还不配给唐邕做奴仆！ 
English: Emperor Wenzhong once scolded his courtiers, saying, "I don't think you people are worthy of being Tang Xuan's slaves!"

古文：其爱遇如此。
现代文：他就是这样受到文宣帝的厚爱。
English: This is how he came to be loved by Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：孝昭作相，署相府司马。
现代文：孝昭帝高演任宰相，唐邕任丞相府的司马。
English: Xiao Zhaodi Gao Ren served as the prime minister, and Tang Jun served as the secretary of the prime minister's office.

古文：皇建元年，除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：皇建元年，他任给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed to the post of Huangmen waiter.

古文：太宁元年，除大司农卿。
现代文：太宁元年，任大司农卿。
English: In the first year of Taining, he was appointed the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：河清元年，突厥入寇，遣邕驿赴晋阳，纂集兵马。
现代文：河清元年，突厥人入侵北齐，朝廷派他驰赴晋阳，召集兵马。
English: In the first year of Heqing, when the Turks invaded North Qi, the imperial court sent him to Jinyang to gather soldiers and horses.

古文：在路闻虏将逼，邕基酌事宜，改敕，更促期会，由此兵士限前毕集。
现代文：在路上听说敌兵将要逼近，他斟酌事态的发展情况，改变朝廷的成命，更改各路兵马会合的日期，军队因此提前集中。
English: On the way, he heard that the enemy soldiers would be approaching. Considering the development of the situation, he changed the order of the imperial court, changed the date of the meeting of soldiers and horses, and the army was concentrated in advance.

古文：后拜侍中、并州大中正、护军将军。
现代文：后来，他被封为侍中、并州大中正、护军将军。
English: Later, he was appointed as a chamberlain, a vice-president of a state university, and a military escort general.

古文：从武成幸晋阳，帝至武军驿，因醉责虞候都督范洪，将杀之。
现代文：他曾跟随武成帝到晋阳，武成帝来到武军驿，因喝醉酒责罚虞侯都督范洪，准备将他杀死。
English: He once followed Emperor Wu Chengdi to Jinyang, and Emperor Wu Chengdi came to Wujunyi to punish the prefect Fan Hong for being drunk and ready to kill him.

古文：邕谏，以为若非酒行戮，族诛人无所怨；假实有大罪，因酒杀人，恐招横议。
现代文：唐邕劝谏，认为如果不是因喝醉酒进行杀戮，被处死的人无所埋怨；假如确有大罪，但借助喝醉将人处死，恐怕会招致不应该有的议论。
English: Tang Xuan advised him that if the killing was not due to drunkenness, the person who was executed would have nothing to complain about; if there was a serious crime, but the person was executed by means of drunkenness, I am afraid that it would lead to inappropriate discussions.

古文：洪因得免死。
现代文：范洪因而免于一死。
English: As a result, Fan Hong was spared death.

古文：邕又以军人教习田猎，依令十二月，月别三围，以为疲弊，请每月两围。
现代文：他又因为派军人教百姓狩猎，按照时令十一个月，每月围猎三次，认为百姓太疲劳，请求改为每月二次。
English: He also sent soldiers to teach the people how to hunt, so they hunted three times a month for eleven months in accordance with the seasons. He thought the people were too tired, so he changed his request to twice a month.

古文：又奏河阳、晋州，与周连境，请于河阳、怀州、永桥、义宁、乌籍各徙六州军人并家，立军府安置，以备机急之用。
现代文：又奏报河阳、晋州与北周接壤，请求朝廷在河阳、怀州、永桥、义宁、乌籍各迁移六州的军人和家庭，设立军府安置他们，以备紧急时征兵防守之用。
English: It was also reported that Heyang and Jinzhou were on the border with North Zhou, and the imperial court was requested to relocate the soldiers and families of the six states in Heyang, Huaizhou, Yongqiao, Yining, and Urumqi, and to set up a military base to accommodate them, in case of emergency, for the purpose of conscription and defense.

古文：帝并从之。
现代文：朝廷全同意了他的这些建议。
English: Emperors obeyed him.

古文：未几，出为赵州刺史，侍中、护军、大中正悉如故。
现代文：不久，他出任为赵州刺史，侍中、护军、大中正的职务不变。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Zhaozhou's chief historian, and his duties as chamberlain, military escort, and vice-president of the university remained unchanged.

古文：谓曰： 朝臣未有带侍中、护军、中正临州者，以卿旧勋，故有此举。
现代文：武成帝对他说： 朝臣中还没有人带着侍中、护军、中正的职务任州刺史的，因为你是过去的勋臣，所以才会这样。
English: Emperor Wucheng said to him, "Among the courtiers, there is no one who has been appointed to the post of prefectural governor with the posts of attendant, escort, and vice-governor. This is because you are a distinguished minister in the past.

古文：放卿百余日休息，至秋间，当即召。 
现代文：我让你出京城休息一百多天，到秋季再将你召回朝廷。 
English: I let you go out of the capital to rest for more than a hundred days, and then I will call you back to the imperial court in the autumn.

古文：邕政颇严酷，然抑挫豪强，公事甚理。
现代文：唐邕为政颇为严酷，然而摧抑豪强劣绅，却处置得公平合理。
English: Tang Xuan's rule was quite harsh, but he dealt with the tyrants fairly and rationally.

古文：寻除中书监，仍侍中，迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：不久，任中书监，仍兼任侍中，又迁任尚书右仆射。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the book supervisor, still concurrently serving as the chamberlain, and then moved to the position of the right-hand man.

古文：武平初，坐断事阿曲，为御史所劾，除名。
现代文：武平初年，因处理事情不公正坐罪，被免去官职。
English: In the first year of Wuping, he was removed from his official post after being found guilty of unfairly handling things.

古文：久之，以旧恩，复除将军、开府，累迁尚书令，封晋昌王。
现代文：过了很久，朝廷念他过去的功劳，又任他为将军、开府，多次升迁，官至尚书令，封他为晋昌王。
English: After a long time, the imperial court remembered his past merits, appointed him as a general, the head of the government, promoted him many times, promoted him to Shang Shuling, and named him the King of Jinchang.

古文：高思好构逆，令邕赴晋阳监勒诸军。
现代文：高思好阴谋叛乱，朝廷命他到晋阳监督和统率那里的军队。
English: Gao thought about plotting a rebellion, and the imperial court ordered him to go to Jinyang to supervise and lead the army there.

古文：事平，录尚书事。
现代文：事变平定后，任他为录尚书事。
English: After the incident was settled, he was assigned to record the proceedings.

古文：属周师攻洛阳，右丞相高阿那肱赴援，邕配割不甚从允，那肱谮之，由是被疏。
现代文：北周的军队进攻洛阳，右丞相高阿那肱率军救援，唐邕因配合得不及时，被高阿那肱诋毁，因此被朝廷疏远。
English: North Zhou's army attacked Luoyang, and the Minister of the Right Gao Ananzhong led the army to the rescue. Because he did not cooperate in a timely manner, Tang Jun was slandered by Gao Ananzhong, and was thus alienated by the imperial court.

古文：七年，车驾将幸晋阳，敕斛律孝卿总骑兵，事多自决。
现代文：武平七年，后主准备到晋阳，命斛律孝卿总领骑兵，事情大多由他自己决定。
English: In the seventh year of Wu Ping, when his successor was preparing to go to Jinyang, he ordered Lv Xiaoqing to lead the cavalry. Most of the things were decided by himself.

古文：邕恃旧，一旦为孝卿所轻，郁怏形于辞色。
现代文：唐邕依恃自己资格老，一旦被斛律孝卿轻慢，因而郁郁不乐而形于颜色。
English: Tang Yao was proud of his qualifications, but once he was slighted by Yao Rui Xiaoqing, he was depressed and unhappy.

古文：帝从平阳败后，狼狈归鄴，邕惧那肱谮醖，恨孝卿轻已，遂留晋阳，与莫多娄敬显等树安德王为帝。
现代文：后主在平阳失败，狼狈逃归邺城，唐邕惧怕高阿那肱诽谤自己，怨恨斛律孝卿轻慢自己，便留在晋阳，与莫多娄敬显等人一起拥立安德王高延宗为帝。
English: After his master's defeat in Pingyang, he fled back to Shicheng in dismay. Tang Yu was afraid of Gao Ananzhong slandering him, and he resented Gao Lixiaoqing's self-deprecation, so he stayed in Jinyang and supported the enthronement of Emperor Gao Yanzong, the King of Ande, together with Moduo Jianxian and others.

古文：寻降周，邕依例授上开府仪同大将军。
现代文：他不久投降北周。按例被任命为上开府仪同大将军。
English: He soon surrendered to the Northern Zhou and was appointed Shangkaifu Yi Tongdao as usual.

古文：再迁户部，转少司马，封安福郡公，迁凤州刺史。
现代文：又迁任为户部尚书，转任少司马，封为安福郡公。又迁任凤州刺史。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of household secretary, transferred to the position of minor secretary, and appointed to the position of Anfu County magistrate. He was also transferred to the position of Fengzhou chief historian.

古文：隋开皇初，卒。
现代文：隋朝开皇初年，去世。
English: He died in the first year of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：邕性识明敏，在齐一代，典执兵机。
现代文：唐邕性情明快敏捷，在北齐一代，一直参与军队行动的机宜。
English: Tang Xuan's disposition is bright and agile, and he has been involved in military operations for generations in Northern Qi.

古文：是以九州军士，四方勇募，强弱多少，番代往还，器械精粗，粮储虚实，精心勤事，莫不谙知。
现代文：所以，他对全国军队和从四面八方招募来勇壮力量的强弱，人数的多少，驻扎地方的往返调动，武器军械的是否精良，粮秣储备的虚实，都精心运筹，无不了如指掌。
English: Therefore, he carefully planned the strength and weakness of the national army and the brave forces recruited from all directions, the number of people, the round-trip mobilization of the stationed places, the quality of weapons and equipment, and the reality and falsity of grain and straw reserves. He knew everything.

古文：自太宁以来，奢侈糜费，比及武平之末，府藏渐虚，邕支度取舍，大有裨益。
现代文：自从武成帝太宁年间以来，朝廷奢侈糜费，比之于武平末年，国库的储备日渐空虚。他严格管理，合理支出，对军队很有补益。
English: Since the reign of Emperor Wucheng in the Taining era, the imperial court has been extravagant in spending, and the reserves of the national treasury are increasingly empty compared to the end of the Wuping era. He strictly manages and spends reasonably, and is very beneficial to the army.

古文：然既被任遇，意气渐高，其未经府寺陈诉越览辞牒，条数甚多，俱为宪台及左丞弹劾，并御注放免。
现代文：然而，由于被朝廷重用，他的意志和气概逐渐高昂，其中有些没有经过府寺申报或同意的公文，而他却批复处理。这样的事情不断发生，他被御史台和左丞弹劾，但都被天子批准免于追究。
English: However, because he was repeatedly used by the imperial court, his will and spirit gradually became high. Some of these official documents were not declared or approved by the government and temples, but he approved and dealt with them. Such things kept happening. He was impeached by the Imperial Historian's Office and the Left Justices, but he was exempted from investigation with the approval of the Emperor.

古文：司空从事中郎封长业、太尉记室参军平涛并为征官钱违限，邕各杖背三十。
现代文：司空从事中郎封长业、太尉记室参军平涛都因为征收官钱超过期限，唐邕各打了他们的脊背三十棍。
English: Siku, who was engaged in the duties of middle-ranking vassal, Fong Changye, and Tai Liao, who was in charge of the record-keeping office and joined the army of Ping Tao, all exceeded the time limit for collecting official money, and Tang Xuan beat their backs with thirty sticks.

古文：次子君彻，中书舍人，隋戎、顺二州刺史，大业中，卒于武贲郎将。少子君德，以邕降周，伏法。齐朝因神武作相，丞相府外兵、骑兵曹，分掌兵马。
现代文：北齐一代的宰相还没有打过朝臣的，这时，大家都非常惊异。齐时因神武帝高欢任宰相，所以，丞相府又设外兵和骑兵曹，分别掌管天下的兵马。
English: At that time, everyone was very surprised that the prime minister of the North Qi generation had not yet fought a courtier. At that time, because Emperor Gao Huan was appointed prime minister by Emperor Jimmu, the Prime Minister's Office also set up foreign soldiers and cavalry sergeants to take charge of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：诸子幼弱，俱为州郡主簿；男女婚嫁，皆得胜流。
现代文：北齐代魏立国后，各司都归尚书省管辖，惟有这两个兵曹没有废除，命唐邕和白建主持，称之为外兵省、骑兵省。
English: After the founding of the State of Wei in the Northern Qi Dynasty, all departments were under the jurisdiction of Shangshu Province. However, these two petty officers were not abolished. They were ordered to be presided over by Tang Jun and Bai Jian, and were called the Foreign Troops Province and the Cavalry Province.

古文：卒，赠司空。元文遥，字德远，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：后来，唐邕、白建的地位声望越来越高，在二省内各置省主，命中书舍人分别掌管二省的事务，所以，世人都称二省为唐、白。元文遥，字德远，河南洛阳人。
English: Later, the prestige of Tang and Bai Jian became higher and higher. In the two provinces, provincial governors were set up in each province, and scholars were appointed to manage the affairs of the two provinces respectively. Therefore, the world called the two provinces Tang and Bai. Yuan Wenyao, Zi Deyuan, Henan Luoyang people.

古文：魏昭成皇帝六世孙也。
现代文：北魏高祖昭成帝什翼犍的第六世孙子。
English: He is the sixth-generation grandson of Northern Wei Emperor Gaozu Zhaocheng.

古文：五世祖常山王遵。
现代文：五世祖为常山王拓跋遵。
English: The fifth-generation ancestor was King Tuoba of Changshan.

古文：父唏，有孝行，父卒，庐于墓侧而终。
现代文：父亲名元，恪守孝道。元的父亲去世，他一直住在墓侧，直到自己去世。
English: After his father's death, he lived next to the grave until his own death.

古文：文遥贵，赠特进、开府仪同三司、中书监，谥曰孝。
现代文：文遥做官显贵后，朝廷追赠元为特进、开府仪同三司、中书监，谥号为孝。
English: After Wenyao became a high-ranking official, the imperial court posthumously awarded Yuan the title of Tejin, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, and Zhongshujuan, and his posthumous name was Xiao.

古文：文遥敏慧夙成，济阴王晖业每云： 此子王佐才也。 
现代文：文遥天生的聪明智慧，济阴王元晖业常常称赞他 ：这孩子是辅助天子的人才啊。 
English: Wenyao's innate cleverness and wisdom have often been praised by Wang Yuanxuan of Jilin Province: "This child is a talent to help the Son of Heaven."

古文：晖业常大会宾客，时有人将何逊集初入洛，诸贤皆赞赏之。
现代文：元晖业经常宴请宾客，当时有人将南梁诗人何逊的文集带入洛阳，文人学士们读了无不称赞。
English: At that time, someone brought the anthology of the Nanliang poet He Xun into Luoyang, and the literati bachelors read it and praised it.

古文：河间邢邵试命文遥诵之，几遍可得。文遥一览诵，时年始十余岁。
现代文：河间的邢邵命文遥诵读，文遥接过一看便放声朗诵，当时他才十多岁。
English: When he was just over ten years old, he would recite the Shao Mingsheng recited by Wen Yao at a distance.

古文：济阴王曰： 我家千里驹，今定如何？ 
现代文：济阴王说 ：这是我家的千里驹，今天你测试的结果怎么样？ 
English: King Jiyin said, "This is my family's milestone. What was the result of your test today?"

古文：邢云： 此殆古来未有。 
现代文：邢邵说 ：这大概是自古以来没有见过的神童。 
English: Zou Shao said: This is probably a child prodigy that has not been seen since ancient times.

古文：起家员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：他被朝廷征辟，离开家任员外散骑侍郎。
English: He was exiled by the imperial court and left home to work as an errand boy.

古文：遭父丧，服阕，除太尉东阁祭酒。
现代文：他的父亲去世，守丧期满后任太尉东阁祭酒。
English: After his father's death, he served as the first lieutenant of Donggak Festival Liquor.

古文：以天下方乱，遂解官侍养，隐于林虑山。
现代文：因天下动乱，便辞去官职，回家奉养母亲，隐居在林虑山。
English: Due to the turmoil in the world, he resigned from his official position, went home to support his mother, and lived in seclusion in Linxi Mountain.

古文：武定中，文襄征为大将军府功曹。
现代文：东魏孝静帝武定时，文襄帝高澄征请他任大将军府功曹。
English: When Emperor Wu of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaozhing, was in residence, Emperor Gaozhen of the Eastern Song Dynasty conscripted him to serve as a major general.

古文：齐受禅，于登坛所授中书舍人，宣传文武号令。
现代文：北齐代魏，文宣帝在登坛受命的地方封文遥为中书舍人，命他宣读朝廷的号令。
English: In the Northern Qi Dynasty of the Wei Dynasty, Emperor Wenzhong gave the order to read out the imperial proclamation to Wenya, who was a Chinese calligrapher, at the place where he received the order.

古文：杨遵彦每云： 堪解穰侯印者，必在斯人。 
现代文：杨遵彦常说： 将来能够像战国时的秦国的穰侯那样挂起一国相印的，必定是这个人。 
English: Yang Zunyan often said: In the future, it must be this person who will be able to hang up a country's seal of approval like the warlord of Qin at the time of the Warring States.

古文：后忽中旨幽执，竟不知所由。
现代文：后来忽然有圣旨将他拘押幽禁，却不知道是什么原因。
English: Later, suddenly, there was a sacred edict to detain and confine him, but it is not known what the reason was.

古文：如此积年。文宣后自幸禁狱，执手愧谢，亲解所著金带及御服赐之，即日起为尚书祠部郎中。
现代文：过了好多年，文宣帝亲自到监狱，握着他的手惭愧地谢罪，并解下身上佩带的金带以及衣服赐给他，从这一天起他被封为尚书祠部郎中。
English: Many years later, Emperor Wenzhong personally went to the prison, shook his hand in shameful repentance, and removed the gold belt he was wearing and gave him clothes. From that day on, he was named a member of the Ministry of Sacred Books.

古文：孝昭摄政，除大丞相府功参典机密。
现代文：孝昭帝管理国家朝政，任他为大丞相府功曹，参与国家的机密。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhaodi managed the state's imperial politics, appointed him as the grand chancellor, and participated in the state's secrets.

古文：及践阼，除中书侍郎，封永乐县伯，参军国大事。
现代文：孝昭帝即位后，任他为中书侍郎，封为永乐县伯，参与军国大事的讨论。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi, he was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and was appointed as the Yongle County magistrate to participate in the discussion of military affairs.

古文：及帝大渐，与平秦王归彦、赵郡王睿等同受顾托，迎立武成。
现代文：孝昭帝病重，他与平秦王高归彦、赵郡王高睿等一起受孝昭帝的委托，迎立武成帝高湛。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao was seriously ill, and he, together with King Gao Guihang of Pingqin and King Gao Rui of Zhao County, was commissioned by Emperor Xiaozhao to usher in Emperor Gao Zhan.

古文：武成即位，任遇转隆，历给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍、侍中、中书监。
现代文：武成帝即皇帝位，对文遥的任命和待遇都很高，他历任给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍、侍中、中书监。
English: Emperor Wu Chengdi, that is, the emperor, appointed and treated Wenyao very highly. He successively appointed Huangmen waiter, horseback riding attendant, attendant, and middle school librarian.

古文：天统二年，诏特赐姓高氏，籍属宗正，子弟依例，岁时入庙朝祀。
现代文：天统二年，后主下诏特给他赐姓为高，户籍隶属皇室正宗，子弟们依例入籍，每年按时到宗庙祭祀。
English: In the second year of Emperor Tenmu's reign, the Empress Dowager issued an imperial edict giving him the surname Gao. His household register belonged to the Imperial Family's legitimate lineage, and his children were naturalized in accordance with the rules, and they went to the ancestral temple on time every year for religious services.

古文：再迁尚书左仆射，进封宁都郡公，仍侍中。
现代文：他又迁任为尚书左仆射，晋封爵号为宁都郡公，仍任侍中。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of Shang Shuxi Zuofu Jia, given the title of Ningdu County Duke, and still served as a chamberlain.

古文：文遥历事三主，明达世务，每入轩大集，多令宣敕，号令文武，声韵高朗，发吐无滞。
现代文：文遥历经三位帝王。他通达时务，天子每次登殿大集群臣，多次命他宣读朝廷的政令，号令文武百官。他的声音高亢响亮，说话流利顺畅，毫不阻滞。
English: Wen Yao experienced three emperors. He was well-versed in current affairs, and every time the Son of Heaven ascended the throne, he gathered a large group of courtiers. He was ordered many times to read out the decrees of the imperial court, and to give orders to hundreds of civil and military officials. His voice was high-pitched and loud, and he spoke fluently and smoothly, without any delay.

古文：然探测上旨，时有委巷之言，故不为知音所重。
现代文：然而发挥天子的旨意，常常有出自民间的俚语，所以，不被了解他的人所看重。
English: However, the expression of the will of the Son of God often comes from folk slang, so it is not valued by those who know him.

古文：齐因魏宰县多用厮滥，至于士流，耻居百里。
现代文：北齐沿袭魏时的制度，县令多任用地位低贱的人。至于望族名门，都耻于掌管方圆百里的小县。
English: Northern Qi followed the system of the Wei Dynasty, and the county governors mostly appointed people of low status. As for the prestigious families, they were all ashamed of the small counties that controlled a hundred-mile radius.

古文：文遥以县令为字人之功，遂请革选。
现代文：文遥认为县令抚养人民，最为重要，便请求朝廷认真加以选择。
English: Wenyao believed that it was most important for the county magistrate to raise the people, so he asked the imperial court to choose carefully.

古文：于是密令搜扬贵游子弟，发敕用之。
现代文：于是，朝廷秘密搜集士大夫和缙绅子弟，下诏任用他们。
English: As a result, the imperial court secretly gathered Shidafu and Shishenshinshi, and issued an edict to appoint them.

古文：犹恐其披诉，总召集神武门，令赵郡王睿宣旨唱名，厚加慰喻。
现代文：为了防止他们到处诉说，便将他们召集在神武门，命赵郡王高睿宣布圣旨，一一喊出他们的姓名，厚加劝慰勉励。
English: In order to prevent them from talking about it everywhere, they gathered them at Shenwu Gate and ordered Zhao Guo Wang Gao Rui to announce the sacred will, call out their names one by one, and give them strong advice and encouragement.

古文：士人为县，自此始也。
现代文：士族到县任职，从这里开始。
English: It is from here that the Shizoku began to hold office in the prefectures.

古文：既与赵彦深、和士开同被任遇，虽沼彦深清贞守道，又不为士开贪淫乱政，在于季孟之间。
现代文：文遥与赵彦深、和士开同被朝廷重用，他虽然不如赵彦深廉洁忠贞，坚守直道，也不像和士开那样贪婪好淫，祸乱朝政。他的品格和地位在季氏与孟氏之间。
English: Although he was not as honest and loyal as Zhao Yanshen, nor did he adhere to the straight path, nor was he as greedy and lecherous as Zhao Yanshen and He Shikai, and his character and status were between that of the Ji clan and the Meng clan.

古文：然性和厚，与物无竞，故时论不在彦深之下。
现代文：然而，因为他的性格温和厚重，与物无竞，所以认为他不在赵彦深之下。
English: However, because his personality is mild and thick, and he is not competitive with others, he is not considered to be inferior to Zhao Yanshen.

古文：初，文遥自洛迁鄴，唯有地十余顷，家贫，所资衣食。
现代文：早先，文遥从洛阳迁到邺城，只有十余顷地，家境贫困，就依靠这些土地为生。
English: Earlier, Wenyao moved from Luoyang to Lucheng, with only more than ten hectares of land. His family was poor, and they depended on this land for their livelihood.

古文：魏之将季，宗姓被侮，有人冒相侵夺，文遥即以与之。
现代文：北魏衰萎，皇族宗室都被侵侮，有人与他争夺土地，他便给了这一家。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty was in decline, and the imperial family was despised. When someone competed with him for land, he gave it to this family.

古文：及贵，此人尚在，乃将家逃窜。
现代文：等他官位显赫，侵夺他土地的这个人还在，吓得带着全家逃跑。
English: The man who usurped his land was still there when he rose to high office, and he fled in terror with his whole family.

古文：文遥大惊，追加慰抚，还以与之，彼人愧而不受。彼此俱让，遂为闲田。
现代文：文遥听说后十分吃惊，追上他加以宽慰，把土地还给他。这人因惭愧而不再接受，彼此互相谦让，这块地竟被闲置起来。
English: After hearing this, Wen Yao was very surprised. He caught up with him to comfort him and return the land to him. The man was ashamed and no longer accepted it. They mutually made allowances for each other, and the land was left idle.

古文：至后主嗣位，赵郡王睿、娄定远等谋出和士开，文遥亦参其议。
现代文：后主即位，赵郡王高睿和娄定远等人密谋将和士开赶出朝廷，文遥也参与了他们的谋划。
English: After the emperor ascended to the throne, Zhao Gu Wang Gaorui and Lu Dingyuan conspired to drive He Shikai out of the imperial court, and Wenyao also participated in their plan.

古文：睿见杀，文遥由是出为西兗州刺史。
现代文：高睿被杀，文遥因此被调出京城，任西兖州刺史。
English: Gao Rui was killed, and as a result, Wen Yao was transferred out of Beijing and appointed to be the chief historian of Xishuanzhou.

古文：诣士开别，士开曰： 处得言地，使元家兒作令仆，深负朝廷。 
现代文：他到和士开那里告别，士开讥讽道： 你处在能在朝廷发言的地位，却不自重，想使元家的后代做别人的仆人，太辜负朝廷的期望。 
English: When he went to bid farewell to Shikai, Shikai said sarcastically, "You are in a position to speak at court, but you have no self-respect. You want the descendants of the Yuan family to be the servants of others, and you are not living up to the expectations of the court."

古文：既言而悔，仍执手慰勉之。
现代文：说罢又感到后悔，便拉着文遥的手慰问勉励。
English: Feeling regretful after saying it, he took Wenyao's hand to comfort and encourage her.

古文：而白掷剧饮，亦天性所得。 行恭弟行如，亦聪慧早成。
现代文：还怕文遥怀疑，就任用文遥的儿子元行恭为尚书郎，以宽慰他的心。
English: Fearing that Wenya was still suspicious, he appointed Wenya's son, Yuan Xingqiong, as his secretary to ease his mind.

古文：武平末，著作佐郎。
现代文：和士开死后，他从东徐州刺史任上被征调入京，竟不被任用。去世。
English: After the death of Kazuchika, he was transferred to Beijing from the post of East Xuzhou chief historian, but was not appointed. He passed away.

古文：赵隐，字彦深，自云南阳宛人，汉太傅喜之后。
现代文：赵隐，字彦深，自称是南阳宛城人，汉朝太傅赵喜的后代。
English: Zhao Yin, a.k.a. Yan Sheng, claimed to be a native of Nanyang Wancheng, a descendant of the Han Dynasty Taifu Zhao Xi.

古文：高祖父难为齐州清河太守，有惠政，遂家焉。
现代文：他的高祖父赵难任齐州清河太守，有突出的政绩，便在清河定居下来。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Zhao Nan, was appointed as the governor of Qinghe, and settled down in Qinghe because of his outstanding political achievements.

古文：清河后改为平原，故为平原人也。
现代文：清河后来改为平原，所以他又是平原人。
English: Qinghe later changed to plain, so he is a plain person again.

古文：隐避齐庙讳，改以字行。
现代文：赵隐为了避讳北齐皇室的隐字，将自己的字彦深改为名字。
English: In order to avoid the hidden Chinese characters of the Northern Qi royal family, Zhao Yin changed his Chinese character "彦深" to his first name.

古文：父奉伯，仕魏，位中书舍人，行洛阳县令。
现代文：父亲赵奉伯，在魏做官，位至中书舍人，任洛阳县县令。
English: His father, Zhao Fengbo, was an official in the Wei Dynasty, a scholar in the Middle Kingdom, and the county magistrate of Luoyang County.

古文：彦深贵，赠司空。
现代文：彦深显贵以后，朝廷赠封他为司空。
English: After Hikobayashi's rise to prominence, the Imperial Court bestowed the title of Siku on him.

古文：彦深幼孤贫，事母甚孝。
现代文：彦深自幼丧父，家境贫穷。
English: Hikobuka lost his father at a young age, and his family was poor.

古文：年十岁，曾候司徒崔光。
现代文：他侍奉母亲十分孝顺。
English: He served his mother very dutifully.

古文：光谓宾客 古人观眸子以知人，此人当必远至。 
现代文：十岁时，他曾遇见司徒崔光，崔光对宾客们说： 古人看人的眼睛便可以了解这个人，这个孩子将来一定有远大的前程。 
English: When he was ten years old, he met Stul Cui Guang. Cui Guang said to the guests, "The ancients could understand a person by looking at his eyes. This child will surely have a great future.

古文：性聪敏，善书计，安闲乐道，不杂交游，为雅论所归服。
现代文：他性情聪明敏捷，长于文字与筹算，安于闲适，乐于修性，不随便与人交往，被正确的议论所推服。
English: He is intelligent and quick-witted, good at writing and calculation, comfortable with leisure, happy to cultivate, does not casually interact with people, and is convinced by correct discussions.

古文：昧爽，辄自扫门外，不使人见，率以为常。
现代文：清晨，常亲自打扫门外，却不愿让别人看见，已习以为常。
English: In the early morning, I often clean the outside of the door myself, but I don't want others to see it, I'm used to it.

古文：初为尚书令司马子如贱客，供写书。
现代文：最初，他任尚书令司马子如的最低级的宾客，专门抄写文书。
English: At first, he was the lowest-ranking guest of Shang Shuling Sima Zi Rong, specializing in copying documents.

古文：子如善其无误，欲将入观省舍。
现代文：司马子如很欣赏他抄写得没有错误，想带他到尚书省参观。
English: Sima Ziru really appreciated that he copied everything without any mistakes and wanted to take him to visit Shangshu.

古文：隐靴无氈，衣帽穿弊，子如给之。
现代文：他的靴子里没有毡，衣服和帽子都很破旧，子如送给他新的。
English: There were no shackles in his boots, and his clothes and hat were so worn out that it was as if he had been given new ones.

古文：用为书令史，月余，补正令史。
现代文：子如任用他为书令史，过了一月多，又补为正令史。
English: After more than a month, his son appointed him as a book historian, and he was also appointed as an official historian.

古文：神武在晋阳，索二史，子如举彦深。
现代文：神武帝高欢在晋阳，要选送两个史才，司马子如推荐了赵彦深。
English: Shenwu Emperor Gao Huan in Jinyang, to select and send two historical talents, Sima Ziru recommended Zhao Yanshen.

古文：后拜子如开府参军，超拜水部郎。
现代文：后来，高欢任子如为开府参军，子如破格任彦深为水部郎。
English: Later, Gao Huan appointed his son Ru to join the army in Kaifu, and his son Ru made an unprecedented appointment to the post of Minister of Water Resources.

古文：及文襄为尚书令摄选，沙汰诸曹郎，隐以地寒被出，为沧州别驾，辞不行。
现代文：文襄帝高澄任尚书令，负责铨选人才，要淘汰曹郎一级的官吏。彦深出身寒微，被调出京城任沧州别驾，他拒绝任职，不去上任。
English: Emperor Gaocheng appointed Shang Shuling, responsible for selecting talent, to weed out officials at the level of Cao Lang. Born in Henan, he was transferred from Beijing to Cangzhou, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：子如言于神武，征补大丞相功曹参军，专掌机密。
现代文：子如告诉了高欢，将他征补为大丞相功曹参军，专门掌管机密。
English: Zi Ru told Gao Huan that he would be conscripted into the army as the grand secretary and minister of war, and would be in charge of secrets.

古文：文翰多出其手，称为敏给。
现代文：文告书札大多由他起草，被称为出手敏捷。
English: Most of the notice boards were drafted by him, and he was known for his quick wit.

古文：神武曾与对坐，遣造军令，以手扪其额曰： 若天假卿年，必大有所至。 
现代文：高欢曾与他对面而坐，让他起草军令，用手摸着他的额头说： 如果上天让你长寿，你一定大有作为。 
English: Gao Huan once sat opposite him and asked him to draft a military order. He touched his forehead with his hand and said, "If Heaven gives you a long life, you will surely achieve great things."

古文：每谓司徒孙腾曰： 彦深小心恭慎，旷古绝伦。 
现代文：高欢还常对司徒孙腾说： 彦深小心谨慎，自古以来就没有像他这样的人才。 
English: Gao Huan also often said to Szeto Sun-teng: "Hikoshin, be careful. Since ancient times, there has never been a talent like him.

古文：及神武崩，秘丧事，文襄虑河南有变，仍自巡抚，乃委彦深后事，转大行台都官郎中。
现代文：高欢去世，他的丧事暂时秘而不发。文襄帝高澄担心黄河以南会发生变乱，便亲自前去巡视安抚，便把后方的事情委托给彦深，任命他为大行台都官郎中。
English: Gao Huan passed away, and his funeral was kept secret for the time being. Emperor Gaocheng of the Manchurian Empire was worried that there would be turmoil south of the Yellow River, so he personally went to inspect and pacify, and then entrusted the matters in the rear to Hikobuka, appointing him as a subordinate of the governor of Dangdai.

古文：临发，握手泣曰： 以母弟相托，幸得此心。 
现代文：临出发时，高澄握着赵彦深的手说： 我把我的亲兄弟托付给你，希望你能理解我的心情。 
English: On the eve of departure, Gao Cheng shook Zhao Yanshen's hand and said: I entrust my brother to you, I hope you can understand my feelings.

古文：既而内外宁静，彦深之力。
现代文：不久，朝廷内外宁静无事，都得力于赵彦深。
English: Soon, there was peace inside and outside the imperial court, all thanks to Zhao Yanshen.

古文：及还发丧，深加褒美，乃披郡县簿为选，封安国县伯。
现代文：等高澄回到京城，为父亲高欢发丧，对彦深大加赞扬，便翻开登记郡县的簿册为他挑选，封他为安国县伯。
English: When Gao Cheng returned to Beijing, he mourned the death of his father Gao Huan and praised Yan Sheng, so he opened the county registration book to select him and made him a county official of An Guo County.

古文：从征颍川，时引水灌城，城雉将没，西魏将王思政犹欲死战。文襄令彦深单身入城告喻，即日降之，便手牵思政出城。
现代文：他跟随高澄征讨颍川，当时引水淹灌城池，城墙上的雉堞都将被淹没。西魏的将领王思政还想死战到底，高澄派彦深只身进入城内去劝谕王思政，第二天全城投降，彦深拉着思政的手一起走出城门。
English: He followed Gaocheng to conquer the Li River. At that time, the diversion of water flooded the city pond, and the moat on the city wall would be submerged. The West Wei general Wang Sizheng still wanted to fight to the death, Gaocheng sent Hikobeng to enter the city to persuade Wang Sizheng. The next day, the whole city surrendered, and Hikobeng pulled Sizheng's hand and walked out of the city gate together.

古文：文襄大悦。
现代文：高澄异常高兴。
English: Takasumi is overjoyed.

古文：先是文襄谓彦深曰： 吾昨夜梦猎，遇一群豕，吾射，尽获之。独一大豕不可得，卿言当为吾取，须臾获豕而进。 
现代文：这之前高澄对他说过 ：我昨夜做梦打猎，遇见一群猪。我用箭射，都被射中获取，独有一头大猪没有得到，你说替我获取，不大一会儿你将这头猪送上。 
English: Before that, Gao Cheng had said to him, "I had a dream last night about hunting, and I met a group of pigs. I shot them with arrows, and I got them all. There was only one big pig that I didn't get. You said you'd get it for me, and in a short while you'll send this pig to me."

古文：至是，文襄笑曰： 梦验矣。 
现代文：这时，高澄笑着说： 昨夜的梦应验了。 
English: At this time, Gao Cheng said with a smile: Last night's dream has come true.

古文：即解思政佩刀与彦深曰： 使卿常获此利。 
现代文：便解下思政的佩刀送给彦深，说： 要使你经常获得这样的好处。 
English: Then he unsheathed the sword of thought and politics and gave it to Hikobayashi, saying, "I want you to obtain such benefits often."

古文：文宣嗣位，仍典机密，进爵为侯。
现代文：文宣帝高洋即皇帝位，彦深仍参与军国机密，被晋封爵位为侯。
English: Emperor Gaoyang of Emperor Wenxuan, still involved in military secrets, was promoted to the peerage as a marquis.

古文：天保初，累迁秘书监。
现代文：天保初年，迁升为秘书监。
English: In the first year of Tenpo, he was promoted to secretary supervisor.

古文：以为忠谨，每郊庙，必令兼太仆，执御陪乘。
现代文：因为他办事忠诚谨慎，天子每次到郊庙祭祀，都命他兼任太仆的职务，担任文宣帝的陪乘。
English: Because of his loyalty and prudence, every time the heavenly son went to the suburban temple to offer sacrifices, he was ordered to also serve as the servant of the emperor, serving as the escort of Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：转大司农。
现代文：他又转任为大司农。
English: He was also transferred to the post of Chief Farmer.

古文：帝或巡幸，即辅赞太子知后事。
现代文：文宣帝有时外出巡游，就命彦深辅助太子管理朝廷的政务。
English: Emperor Wenxuan sometimes went out on a tour, and ordered Hikobayashi to assist the prince in managing the government affairs of the imperial court.

古文：出为东南道行台尚书、徐州刺史。
现代文：后来他调出京城，任东南道行台尚书、徐州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred out of Beijing and served as the governor of Xuzhou and the governor of Xingtai in Southeast China.

古文：为政尚恩信，为吏人所怀。
现代文：为政注重恩惠信誉，被官吏百姓所怀念。
English: He was remembered fondly by officials and the public for his policy of favor and credit.

古文：多所降下，所营军处，士庶追思，号赵行台顿。
现代文：他经常到下面巡视，所率军队驻扎过的地方，士大夫和平民都不断追思，称为赵行台顿。
English: He often inspected the area below, and scholars and civilians alike constantly pored over the places where the troops he led had been stationed, known as Zhao Xingdaidong.

古文：文宣玺书劳勉，征为侍中，仍掌机密。
现代文：文宣帝亲自写玺书对他慰劳勉励，征请他到京城任侍中，仍掌管朝廷机密。
English: Emperor Wenxuan personally wrote an imperial edict to comfort and encourage him, and invited him to Beijing to serve as an attendant, still in charge of the imperial secrets.

古文：河清元年，进爵安乐公。
现代文：武成帝河清元年，他晋爵为安乐公。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu Chenghe of the Qing Dynasty, he was promoted to the peerage as the Prince of Peace and Happiness.

古文：累迁尚书左仆射、齐州大中正，监国史，迁尚书令，位特进，封宜阳王。
现代文：多次迁升，为尚书左仆射、齐州大中正，负责监修国史，又升迁为尚书令，晋位为特进，被封为宜阳王。
English: He was promoted several times. He was Shangshu Zuofu Zha, the vice-president of Chizhou University, responsible for supervising the national history. He was also promoted to Shangshu Ling, promoted to special promotion, and was named King of Yiyang.

古文：武平二年，拜司空。
现代文：后主武平二年，被朝廷授予司空的官职。
English: Two years after the death of Lord Wu Ping, he was awarded the official post of Sikyong by the imperial court.

古文：为祖珽所间，出为西兗州刺史。
现代文：因被祖王廷构陷，调出京城任西兖州刺史。
English: Due to being framed by the ancestor Wang Ting, he was transferred from Beijing to serve as the governor of West Luzhou.

古文：四年，征为司空，转司徒。
现代文：武平四年，重被征进朝廷任司空，又转任司徒。
English: In the fourth year of Wu Ping, he was once again conscripted into the imperial court to serve as a steward, and then transferred to a steward.

古文：丁母忧，寻起为本官。
现代文：母亲去世，因守丧辞去官职，不久，又被朝廷以原来的官职起用。
English: After his mother's death, he resigned from his post due to his grief, and was soon appointed to his former post by the imperial court.

古文：七年六月，暴疾薨，时年七十。
现代文：武平七年六月，他暴病去世，享年七十岁。
English: In June of Wu Ping's seventh year, he died of a violent illness at the age of seventy.

古文：彦深历事累朝，常参机近，温柔谨慎，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：彦深历事几个朝代，好几位皇帝，经常参与朝廷的机密大政。他温柔谨慎，喜怒不形于色。
English: He has lived through several dynasties, several emperors, and has often participated in the secret grand politics of the imperial court. He is gentle and cautious, and his emotions are always the same.

古文：自皇建以还，礼遇稍重，每有引见，或升御榻，常呼官号而不名也。
现代文：自从孝昭帝皇建年以来，朝廷对他的礼遇又有加重，天子每次召见，有时让他坐在御榻上，常常喊他的官职名称而不叫他的名字。
English: Since the founding of Emperor Xiaozhao, the court's courtesy to him has increased. Whenever the emperor summoned him, he sometimes let him sit on his throne, and often called him by his official title instead of his name.

古文：凡诸选贡，先令铨定，提奖人物，皆行业为先，轻薄之徒，弗之齿也。
现代文：凡是选拔人才的事情，都先让他铨选确定。他提携奖励的人物，都以品行学业为主要标准。轻浮浅薄的人，他根本就看不上。
English: In all matters of selecting talents, he first let him make sure of the selection. The people he cooperated with and rewarded were all based on their moral conduct and studies. He did not like frivolous and shallow people at all.

古文：孝昭既执朝权，群臣密多劝进，彦深独不致言。
现代文：孝昭帝掌握朝中大权以后，朝臣们大多秘密劝他即皇帝位，独有彦深却不进言。
English: After Emperor Xiaozhao took control of the supreme power of the dynasty, most of the courtiers secretly advised him to become emperor, but only Hikobayashi did not speak out.

古文：孝昭尝谓王晞云： 若言众心皆谓天下有归，何不见彦深有语？ 
现代文：孝昭帝曾对王日希说： 如果说大家都认为我称帝是天下归心，为什么不见彦深出来说话？ 
English: Emperor Xiaozhao once said to Wang Rixi: If everyone thinks that I am the emperor of the world, why don't you come out and speak?

古文：晞以告，彦深不获已，陈请。
现代文：王日希把这些话告诉给赵彦深，他不得已，才上表陈请孝昭帝称帝。
English: Wang Rixi told these words to Zhao Yanshen, and he had no choice but to ask Emperor Xiaozhao to be proclaimed emperor.

古文：其为时重如此。
现代文：他就是这样被时论所重视。
English: This is how he is valued by the theory of time.

古文：常逊言恭己，未尝以骄矜待物，所以或出或处，去而复还。
现代文：他说话谦逊，不曾用骄矜傲慢的态度对待别人，所以，他或者离开，或者和大家相处，都能长时间互相往来。
English: He spoke humbly and did not treat others with arrogance, so he could either leave or get along with everyone for a long time.

古文：母傅氏，雅有操识。
现代文：他的母亲傅氏，很有节操和见识。
English: His mother, Ms. Fu, was very disciplined and insightful.

古文：彦深三岁，傅便孀居，家人欲以改适，自誓以死。
现代文：彦深三岁时，傅氏便丧夫寡居，家里人想让她改嫁，她以死发誓不从。
English: When Hikoshin was three years old, Fu lost her husband and became a widow. Her family wanted her to remarry, but she swore on her life that she would not do so.

古文：彦深五岁，傅谓之曰： 家贫兒小，何以能济？ 
现代文：彦深五岁时，母亲对他说： 家里贫穷，你年龄又小，我们怎么生活。 
English: When Hikoshin was five years old, his mother said to him, "Our family is poor, you are so young, how can we live?

古文：彦深泣而言曰： 若天哀矜，兒大当仰报。 
现代文：彦深哭着说： 如果上天可怜我们，我长大以后当报答母亲。 
English: Crying, Hikobuka said, "If the heavens have mercy on us, I should repay my mother when I grow up."

古文：傅感其意，对之流涕。
现代文：母亲被他感动，对着他痛哭流涕。
English: His mother was moved by him and wept bitterly over him.

古文：及彦深拜太常卿，还，不脱朝服，先入见母，跪陈幼小孤露，蒙训得至于此。
现代文：彦深任太常卿后还家，不脱朝服，先拜见母子，跪下来陈述自己幼小丧父，蒙母亲教训养育才有今天。
English: When he returned home after being appointed as the Grand Duke, he did not take off his imperial robes. First, he bowed to his mother and son, knelt down and stated that he lost his father when he was very young, and was only brought up by his mother.

古文：母子相泣久之，然后改服。
现代文：母子相对哭泣了很久，然后才换上便服。
English: Mother and son cried for a long time before changing into civilian clothes.

古文：子悦在官，唯以清勤自守，既无学术，又阙风仪，人伦清鉴，去之弥远，一旦居铨衡之首，大招物议。
现代文：傅氏后来被朝廷加封为宜阳国太妃。北齐的宰相善始善终的只有彦深一个人。然而，他奏请朝廷，任命自己的儿子赵叔间为中书郎，颇招致很多议论。
English: Fu was later given the additional title of Princess of Yiyang by the imperial court. The only prime minister of Northern Qi who had a good beginning and a good end was Hikoshin. However, he invited the imperial court to appoint his son, Zhao Shuzhong, as the middle school teacher, which caused a lot of controversy.

古文：由是除太常卿，兼侍中，聘周使主，卒。子仲章，中书舍人。
现代文：当时，冯子琮的儿子冯慈明、祖王廷的儿子祖君信都相继任中书郎，所以，当时有谣谚说 ：冯、祖及赵，弄脏了中书省的凤凰池。 
English: At that time, Feng Ciming, the son of Feng Zixuan, and Zu Junxin, the son of Zu Wangting, were successively appointed as the middle school librarian. Therefore, there was a rumor saying at that time: Feng, Zu and Zhao have polluted the phoenix pond of the middle school librarian.

古文：冯子琮，字子琮，长乐信都人，北燕主冯弘之后也。
现代文：其中，赵叔间的品德和才干最为低劣。冯子琮，字子琮，长乐信都人，北燕主冯弘的后代。
English: Among them, the moral character and talent of Uncle Zhao were the most inferior. Feng Zixuan, Zi Zixuan, Changle Xindu, and the descendants of Northern Yan's master Feng Hong.

古文：祖嗣兴，相州刺史。
现代文：祖父冯嗣兴，任相州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Feng Zixing, was appointed as the chief historian of Xiangzhou.

古文：父灵绍，尚书郎、太中大夫。
现代文：父亲冯灵绍，任尚书郎、太中大夫。
English: His father, Feng Lingshao, was appointed as Shang Shuro and Taizhong Doctor.

古文：子琮贵，赠开府仪同三司。
现代文：子琮官职显贵后，朝廷赠封灵绍为开府仪同三司。
English: After the eunuch's son distinguished himself, the imperial court presented Ling Shao with the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：子琮性识聪敏，为外祖荥阳郑伯猷所异。
现代文：子琮聪明敏捷，被外祖父荥阳人郑伯猷所奇异。
English: Zi Yao is smart and agile. He is fascinated by his maternal grandfather, Zheng Bo Yao.

古文：初袭爵荥阳县子。
现代文：最初继承爵位为荥阳县子。
English: The first to inherit the title was the son of Poyang County.

古文：齐天保初，改为长安县男。
现代文：北齐天保初年，改封为长安县男。
English: In the first year of Beiqi Tianbo, he was renamed as the man of Chang'an County.

古文：皇建初，为尚书驾部郎中，摄库部。
现代文：皇建初年，任尚书驾部郎中，负责库部。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed as the second-in-command of the driving department and was in charge of the treasury department.

古文：孝昭曾阅簿领，试令口陈。子琮谙对无有遗失。
现代文：孝昭帝曾检查府库的簿册，让他用嘴陈述，他对答得没有任何错失。
English: Xiao Zhaodi once checked the books of the prefectural treasury and asked him to make a verbal statement. He did not make any mistakes in his answer.

古文：时梁丞相王琳归国，孝昭诏子琮观其形势。
现代文：这时，南梁的丞相王琳要回国，孝昭帝命子琮同他一起行动，以观察他的动静。
English: At this time, Wang Lin, the chancellor of Nanliang, wanted to return to the country. Xiao Zhaodi's eldest son, Yu, went with him to observe his movements.

古文：琳即与赴鄴，甚见嘉赏。
现代文：王琳即与冯子琮一起到邺城，他很被王琳赞赏。
English: Wang Lin came to Shicheng with Feng Zixuan. He was highly appreciated by Wang Lin.

古文：子琮妻，胡皇后姊也，故诏与胡长粲辅导太子。
现代文：子琮的妻子是胡皇后的妹妹，所以，天子下诏命他与胡长粲辅导太子。
English: Zixuan's wife was the sister of Queen Hu, so the emperor ordered him and Hu Changtao to tutor the prince.

古文：后转太子中庶子。
现代文：后来，他又转任为太子中庶子。
English: Later, he was reappointed as the Prince's middle son.

古文：天统元年，武成禅位后主，谓子琮曰： 少君左右，宜得正人，以卿心存正直，今以后事相委。 
现代文：后主天统元年，武成帝禅位给后主，他对子琮说： 少主的左右，应该安置正派的人。你心地坦荡正直，我现在把后事委托给你。 
English: In the first year of Emperor Tenmu's reign, Emperor Wucheng gave the position of Zen master to Emperor Tenmu. He said to Emperor Zizong, "A decent person should be placed on the right and left of the young master. Your heart is open and honest. I am entrusting the succession to you now."

古文：再迁散骑常侍，奏门下事。
现代文：子琮迁升为散骑常侍，奏报门下省的事情。
English: Zixuan was promoted to the position of horseback riding attendant and reported the matter to the provincial government.

古文：寻兼并省祠部尚书。
现代文：不久，又兼任省祠部尚书。
English: Soon, he also served as the provincial ancestral hall secretary.

古文：后与胡长粲有隙，武成深诫之曰： 脣亡齿寒，勿复如此。 
现代文：后来，他与胡长粲有矛盾，武成帝告诫他说： 唇亡齿寒，不要再这样。 
English: Later, he had a conflict with Hu Changtao, and Emperor Wu Chengdi admonished him: "Your lips and teeth are cold. Don't do that again."

古文：武成在晋阳，既居旧殿，少帝未有别所，诏子琮监造大明宫。
现代文：武成帝在晋阳，居住在原来的宫殿，少帝没有住的地方，便下诏命子琮监造大明宫。
English: Emperor Wu Cheng was in Jinyang, living in the original palace. The young emperor had no place to live, so he issued an edict ordering his son to supervise the construction of the Daming Palace.

古文：成，帝怪其不宏丽，子琮曰： 至尊幼承大业，欲令敦俭，以示万邦。
现代文：宫殿建成后，武成帝嫌不够高大宏丽，子琮说： 陛下您从小就继承管理天下的大业，想养成淳厚节俭的风气，以昭示天下万邦。
English: After the palace was completed, Emperor Wucheng felt that it was not grand and magnificent enough, and Zibo said: Your Majesty, you have inherited the great cause of managing the world from an early age, and you want to develop an honest and frugal ethos to show the world.

古文：兼此北连天阙，不宜崇峻。 
现代文：再加上这座宫殿北面与皇宫相接，不应该过于高大。 
English: In addition, this palace is adjacent to the Imperial Palace in the north, so it should not be too tall.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：武成帝连连称是。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：又诏子琮监议五礼，与赵郡王睿分争异同，略无降下，大为识者所鄙。
现代文：朝廷又命他监修五礼，他与赵郡王高睿互争异同，不分上下，很被人们所鄙视。
English: The imperial court also ordered him to supervise the Five Rites, and he and Zhao Guo Wang Gao Rui fought with each other over differences and similarities, and were despised by the people.

古文：及武成崩，和士开秘丧三日。子琮问其故。士开引神武、文襄初崩，并秘不举丧，至尊年少，恐王公贰，欲追集，然后与详议。
现代文：武成帝驾崩，和士开封锁丧讯三天，子琮问他原因，他援引神武帝高欢、文襄帝高澄最初去世时，都密不发丧的事例，说幼主年幼，恐怕王公大臣会有二心，想把他们集合在一起，然后与他们认真商议。
English: Emperor Wucheng passed away, and Shikai blocked the news of his death for three days. Zixuan asked him the reason. He cited the example that Emperor Shenwu Gaohuan and Emperor Wenzhong Gaocheng did not mourn when they first died. He said that the young lord was young, and I was afraid that the prince minister would have two hearts, and wanted to gather them together, and then seriously discuss with them.

古文：时赵郡王睿先预帷幄之谋，子琮素知士开忌睿及领军娄定远，恐其矫遗诏出睿外任，夺定远禁卫权，因答支： 大行，神武之子，今上又是先皇传位，君臣富贵，皆至尊父子之恩，但令一无改易，必无异望。
现代文：当时，赵郡王高睿早就参与了朝廷大事的谋划，子琮平常知道和士开忌恨高睿和领军娄定远，恐怕他假借武成帝的遗诏把高睿调出京城任外职，夺去娄定远禁卫军的权力，因而对他说： 已故的武成帝是神武帝的儿子，现今的皇上是先皇传位的，群臣的荣华富贵，都是当今皇上他们父子给的。朝廷一旦改易，群臣们一定没有异志。
English: At that time, Zhao County King Gao Rui had long been involved in the planning of major events in the imperial court. Zi Yan usually knew that he hated Gao Rui and the leader of the army, Gao Dingyuan. I am afraid that he used the will of Emperor Wu Cheng as a pretext to transfer Gao Rui from the capital to a foreign post and take away the power of Gao Dingyuan's Imperial Guards. Therefore, he said to him: The late Emperor Wu Chengdi was the son of Emperor Shenwu. The current emperor was the first to be crowned. The glory and wealth of the courtiers were given by their father and son. Once the

古文：世异事殊，不得与霸朝相比。
现代文：时代不同，事情也不一样，今天不能与过去相比。
English: Times are different, things are different, and today cannot be compared to the past.

古文：且公不出宫门，已经数日，升遐之事，行路皆传，久而不举，恐有他变。 
现代文：况且您已有数日不出宫门，先帝辞世升天的事情，走路的人都在传说，长时间不发丧，恐怕会发生别的事变。 
English: Moreover, you have not been out of the palace for several days. People walking by are talking about the former emperor's death and ascension to heaven. If you don't mourn for a long time, I'm afraid something else will happen.

古文：及发丧，元文遥以子琮太后妹夫，恐其奖成太后干政，说赵王睿及和士开出之。
现代文：发丧以后，元文遥因为子琮是胡太后的妹夫，担心他会支持太后干预朝政，便劝说赵郡王高睿以及和士开，将他调出朝廷。
English: After the funeral, Yuan Wenyao, who was worried that Zihong, the sister-in-law of Empress Dowager Hu, would support her interference in imperial politics, persuaded Zhao Gu Wang Gaorui and He Shikai to remove him from the imperial court.

古文：拜郑州刺史。
现代文：任他为郑州刺史。
English: Let him write the history of Zhengzhou.

古文：既非后主本意，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：这不是后主的本意，所以对他赏赐十分丰厚。
English: This was not the intention of the heir, so he was rewarded very generously.

古文：仍转沧州别驾，封宁都县伯。
现代文：他转任为沧州别驾，封为宁都县伯。
English: He was transferred to Cangzhou County and given the title of Ningdu County magistrate.

古文：其妻放纵，请谒公行，贿货填积。
现代文：他的妻子胡氏放纵自己，公开请谒说情，收受的贿赂堆放得到处都是。
English: His wife Hu indulged herself, openly solicited favors, and received bribes that were piled up everywhere.

古文：守宰除授，先定钱帛，然后奏闻。
现代文：地方长官的任命，先讲定送给钱帛的数目，然后再奏闻太后。
English: For the appointment of local governors, the number of gifts to Qian Ye should be decided first, and then reported to the Empress Dowager.

古文：其所通致，事无不允。
现代文：她请求办的事情，没有不成功的。
English: There was nothing she asked for that was not successful.

古文：子琮亦不禁制。
现代文：子琮对她也不加禁止，听之任之。
English: Zeng Yao did not forbid her and let her go.

古文：又广拓傍聆，增修宅宇，以夜继昼，未曾休息。
现代文：他们向旁邻的房宅开拓，扩修家宅屋宇，夜以继日，不曾停工休息过。
English: They opened up to the houses next to them and expanded their houses, day and night, without stopping to rest.

古文：斛律光将兵度玉壁，至龙门。
现代文：斛律光率兵过玉壁，到达龙门。
English: The halo light speed soldier crossed the jade wall and reached the dragon gate.

古文：周有移书，别须筹议。
现代文：北周送来书信，需要另外商议。
English: North Zhou sent a letter, which requires further discussion.

古文：诏子琮乘传赴军，与周将韦教宽面相要结。
现代文：朝廷命子琮乘坐四匹马拉的车赶赴斛律光的军队，与周朝将领韦孝宽当面谈判订约。
English: The imperial court ordered his son Yao to take a four-horse carriage to rush to the army of Yao Ruiguang and negotiate a contract with the Zhou Dynasty general Wei Xiaokuan in person.

古文：龙门等五城，因此内附。
现代文：龙门等五座城池因此归附北齐。
English: As a result, five castles, including Longmen, were annexed to Beiqi.

古文：后主以为子琮之功，封昌黎郡公。
现代文：后主认为这是子琮的功劳，封他为昌黎郡公。
English: The later lord thought that this was the merit of Zixuan, and made him the head of Changli County.

古文：迁尚书右仆射，仍摄选侍中如故。
现代文：迁升为尚书右仆射，仍负责铨选人才，侍中的职务不变。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu Rongshu, still in charge of selecting talents, and his position as a chamberlain remained unchanged.

古文：和士开居要日久，子琮旧所附托，中虽阻异，其后还相弥缝。
现代文：和士开居于显要的位置已经很久。子琮过去曾经依附过他，中间虽然有过嫌隙，后来逐渐弥合。
English: Kazuchika has been in a prominent position for a long time. Tsukuda had been attached to him in the past, although there was a rift in the middle, which was later gradually bridged.

古文：士开弟士休与卢氏成婚，子琮检校趋走，与士开府僚不异。
现代文：士开的弟弟士休与卢家的女儿结婚，子琮为他奔走忙碌，与和士开府中的幕僚没有两样。
English: Shikai's younger brother Shishu married a daughter of the Lu family, and his son-in-law was busy running around for him, just like Shikai's staff in the palace.

古文：时内外除授，多由士开奏拟，子琮既恃内戚，兼带选曹，自擅权宠，颇生间隙。
现代文：其时，朝廷内外官吏的任免，大多由和士开拟议奏报。子琮既依仗有内戚的关系，加上自己负责铨选人才，专擅权力，又受天子的宠爱，与和士开逐渐产生隔阂。
English: At that time, most of the appointments and dismissals of officials inside and outside the imperial court were proposed and reported by He Shikai. Zi Xi not only relied on the relationship between relatives, but was also responsible for selecting talents, had exclusive power, and was favored by the heavenly son. Gradually, there was a gap between Zi Xi and He Shikai.

古文：时陆媪势震天下，太后与之结为姊妹，而和士开于太后有丑声。
现代文：此时，陆苓萱权势震动天下，胡太后与她结为姊妹，而和士开与太后关系暧昧。
English: At this time, Lu Xun's power shook the world. Empress Dowager Hu and Lu Xun became sisters, while the relationship between Empress Dowager Hu and Empress Dowager Shi Kai was ambiguous.

古文：子琮欲阴杀陆媪及士开，因废帝而立琅邪王俨。
现代文：子琮想暗中杀死陆媪及和士开，废除后主而拥立琅邪王高俨。
English: Zixuan secretly wanted to kill Lu Yao and He Shikai, abolish the queen mother and establish the evil king Gao Yao.

古文：以谋告俨，俨许之，乃矫诏杀士开。
现代文：他把这个打算告诉了高俨，高俨同意，便假借天子的诏命杀死和士开。
English: He told this plan to Gao Yao, Gao Yao agreed, and then, under the pretext of the emperor's edict, killed He Shikai.

古文：及俨见执，言子琮教己。
现代文：高俨被捕，供出是子琮教自己这样干的。
English: Gao Yao was arrested and confessed that it was his son who taught him to do it.

古文：太后怒，又使执子琮，遣右卫大将军侯吕芬就内省以弓弦绞杀之。使内参以库车载尸归其家。
现代文：太后恼怒，派人抓来子琮，派右卫大将军侯吕芬在内省用弓弦将他勒死，派宦官用库车载上他的尸体送回他家。
English: The empress dowager was enraged and sent someone to capture Zi Yao. She sent Hou Lufen, the commander of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, to strangle him with a bowstring. She also sent an eunuch to carry his body back to his home in a warehouse truck.

古文：诸子方握槊，闻库车来，以为赐物，大喜，开视乃哭。
现代文：他的儿子正在握槊游戏，听说宫中库车到来，以为又是朝廷赏赐的东西，非常高兴，打开一看是父亲的尸体，便哭了起来。
English: His son, who was playing with a shovel, heard about the arrival of the imperial carriage and thought it was a gift from the court. He was very happy. When he opened his father's body, he burst into tears.

古文：子琮微有识鉴，颇慕存公。
现代文：子琮多少有些鉴别人的能力，颇有公心。
English: Zixuan has more or less the ability to judge others, and is quite conscientious.

古文：及位望转隆，宿心顿改，擢引非类，公为深交，纵其子弟，不依伦次。
现代文：声望隆重显赫之后，完全改变了过去的品格，选拔引荐的官吏大多不是正派人物。只要与他关系密切，就是他们的子弟，也不按照品位次序，予以录用。
English: After he became famous, he completely changed his past character, and most of the officials who were selected and recommended were not decent people. As long as they were closely related to him, they were their children, and they were not hired according to the order of taste.

古文：祖珽先与子琮有隙，于后具奏此事，诸子并坐此除名。
现代文：他又专门给自家的女婿谋求官职。女儿订婚之后，他照例给女婿许诺官爵，不到一个月就能实现。
English: He also specifically sought an official position for his son-in-law. After his daughter's engagement, he usually promised his son-in-law a peerage, which could be achieved in less than a month.

古文：太后以为言，又被擢用。子琮有五子，慈明取知名。慈明字无佚，在刘为中书舍人。隋开皇中，兼内史舍人。
现代文：顿丘的李克、范阳的卢思道、陇西的李胤伯、李子希、荥阳的郑庭坚都是他的女婿，也都被破格提拔，他的骄纵自为就像这一样。冯慈明，字无佚，冯子琮的儿子。慈明在北齐时任中书舍人，隋开皇时，兼任内史舍人。
English: Li Ke in Dongqiu, Lu Sidao in Fanyang, Li Yingbo, Li Zixi in Shaanxi, and Zheng Tingjian in Shenyang were all his sons-in-law, and they were all promoted in an unprecedented manner. His arrogance was just like this. Feng Ciming, the son of Feng Zixuan, was a man of letters. At the time of Northern Qi, Ciming was a scholar of Chinese history, and at the time of the Sui Dynasty, he was also a scholar of Chinese history.

古文：大业中，位尚书兵部郎，加朝请大夫。
现代文：大业时，官至尚书兵部郎，加朝请大夫。
English: In the time of great undertakings, the official was called Shang Shuheiburo, and Kaocho invited the doctor.

古文：十三年，摄江都郡丞事。
现代文：大业十三年，代理江都郡丞事。
English: In the thirteenth year of Daye's reign, he was appointed acting governor of Edo County.

古文：李密之逼东都，诏慈明追兵击密，为密党崔枢所执。
现代文：李密进逼东都洛阳，朝廷命慈明率兵进攻李密，被李密的党羽崔枢抓获。
English: Li Mijin forced the eastern capital Luoyang, the imperial court ordered Ciming to lead an army to attack Li Mijin, and was captured by Li Mijin's party feather Cui Zu.

古文：密延与坐，论以举兵之意。
现代文：李密请他坐下，谈述了自己举兵反隋的想法。
English: Li Mi invited him to sit down and talked about his idea of raising an army against Sui.

古文：慈明曰： 慈明直道事人，有死而已，不义之言，非所敢对。 
现代文：他说： 我以直道对待别人，死了就算了。不仁不义的话不是我敢于回答的。 
English: He said: "I treat others in a straightforward manner, and I don't care if I die. I don't dare to respond to words that are unkind or unjust.

古文：密厚礼之，冀其从己。
现代文：李密用很优厚的礼遇对待他，希望他能顺从自己。
English: Li Mi treated him with great courtesy, hoping that he would obey her.

古文：慈明潜使奉表江都，及致书东都留守，论贼形势。
现代文：他却暗中派人送奏章到江都，以及写信给东都洛阳的留守，叙述李密军中的情形。
English: However, he secretly sent someone to deliver the music chapter to Jiangdu, as well as wrote a letter to those left behind in the eastern capital Luoyang, describing the situation in Li Mi's army.

古文：密知，又义而释之。
现代文：李密知道后，又本于大义将他释放。
English: After Li Mi found out, he released him for the greater good.

古文：出至营门，为贼帅翠让所嗔责。
现代文：他来到军营门口，被义军首领翟让怒目斥责。
English: He arrived at the gate of the military camp and was angrily rebuked by the leader of the rebels.

古文：慈明勃然曰： 天子使我来，正欲除尔辈，不图为贼党所获，我岂从汝求活邪？
现代文：他勃然大怒，说： 天子派我来，正是想除掉你们，不料被你们俘获，我怎么能跟随你们以求活命呢？
English: He flew into a rage and said, "God sent me here to get rid of you, but I was captured by you. How can I follow you to save my life?"

古文：须杀但杀，何须骂詈！ 
现代文：要杀便杀，何须吵骂？ 
English: Kill or be killed, why quarrel?

古文：让益怒，乱刀斩之。
现代文：翟让更加恼怒，乱刀将他杀死。
English: Hao Jian was even more angry, and killed him with a random knife.

古文：梁郡通守杨汪上状，炀帝叹惜之，赠银青光禄大夫，拜其二子怦、惇俱为尚书承务郎。
现代文：梁郡通守杨汪将他死难的情况上奏，隋炀帝感叹惋惜，追赠他为银青光禄大夫，封他的两个儿子都为尚书承务郎。
English: Yang Wang, the common warden of Liang County, reported the circumstances of his death. Emperor Sui lamented and regretted, posthumously awarded him the title of "Silver Qingguanglu Doctor," and made his two sons the successors of Shang Shu.

