古文：◎宣宗上宣宗继天兴统述道勤仁英武圣孝皇帝讳珣，本名吾睹补，显宗长子，母曰昭华刘氏。
现代文：宣宗继天兴统述道勤仁英武圣孝皇帝名珣，本名吾睹补，他是显宗的长子，其母为昭华刘氏。
English: Xuan Zong, the eldest son of Xian Zong, whose mother was Zhao Hua Liu, succeeded Tian Xing as the general secretary of the Tao Qinren Yingwu Shengxiao Emperor Mingzhao.

古文：大定三年癸未岁生，世宗养于宫中。
现代文：完颜繤大定三年生，被金世宗皇帝养在宫中。
English: He was raised in the imperial court by Emperor Kim Sejong.

古文：十八年，封温国公，加特进。
现代文：大定十八年年，他被封为温国公，加为特进。
English: In the 18th year of Dading, he was awarded the title of Wen Guogong and was promoted to the rank of special promotion.

古文：二十六年，赐今名。
现代文：大定二十六年，世宗皇帝赐他现名。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Dading, Emperor Shizong gave him his present name.

古文：二十九年，进封丰王，加开府仪同三司，累判兵、吏部，又判永定、彰德等军。
现代文：大定二十九年，完颜繤进封为丰王，加开府仪同三司，累任判兵、吏部，后又为判永定、彰德等军。
English: In the 29th year of Dading, Guan Yanqin was appointed as Feng Wang, and he was also appointed as Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and successively held the posts of Han soldiers and cadres, and later the posts of Han Yongding and Chang De.

古文：承安元年，进封翼王。
现代文：承安元年，完颜繤进封为翼王。
English: In the first year of the Cheng'an era, Yan Xuan was crowned as the "Wing King."

古文：既至京，亲王、百官上表劝进。
现代文：泰和五年，他被赐改名为从嘉。泰和八年，他进封邢王，又封为升王。
English: In the fifth year of Taihei, he was given a new name, Zongjia. In the eighth year of Taihei, he was given the title of Shao Wang (王) and the title of Shou Wang (升王).

古文：九月甲辰，既皇帝位于大安殿。
现代文：至宁元年八月，卫绍王被杀，徒单铭等在彰德府迎候完颜繤。九月初七，完颜繤在大安殿即皇帝位。
English: In August of the first year of the Ning Dynasty, King Weishao was killed, and Tsuchimoto and others awaited Emperor Yancheng at Changdefu. On the 7th day of the 9th month, Emperor Yancheng was enthroned at the Da'an Palace.

古文：以纥石烈胡沙虎为太师、尚书令兼都元帅，封泽王。
现代文：他任命纥石烈胡沙虎做太师、尚书令兼都元帅，并封为泽王。
English: He appointed Hu Shaguo, a Zou Shi disciple, as Grand Master, Shang Shuling as well as the Marshal of the Capital, and named him the King of Ze.

古文：乙巳，谕尚书省，事有规画者皆即规画，悉依世宗所行行之。
现代文：初八，完颜繤告谕尚书省，凡需规划的事都即刻规划，皆依世宗皇帝所推行的施行。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Yan decreed to the Ministry of Education and Culture that all matters requiring planning should be planned immediately, and implemented in accordance with Emperor Sejong.

古文：丙午，以驸马雄名第赐胡沙虎。
现代文：初九，完颜繤将驸马雄名的宅第赐给胡沙虎。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the new year, Yan Xuan gave Hu Shaguo's famous mansion to him.

古文：丁未，谕宰臣曰： 朕即大位，群臣凡有所见，各直言勿隐。 
现代文：初十，他告谕宰臣说 ：朕即皇帝位，群臣凡是有见解的，要直言不讳。 
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he told the vice-ministers, "I am the emperor, and the ministers who have opinions should be outspoken.

古文：临奠于卫绍王第。
现代文：宣宗皇帝亲临卫绍王府第奠祭。
English: Emperor Xuanzong personally attended the first ceremony of laying wreaths at the Shao Wangfu.

古文：有司奏，旧礼当设坐哭。
现代文：有司奏曰，按旧礼要设座而哭。
English: A master of ceremony said that according to the old etiquette, it is necessary to set up a seat and cry.

古文：上命撤坐，伏哭尽哀。
现代文：宣宗皇帝命令撤去座位，伏下哭得很悲痛。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ordered the seats to be removed, and he fell to the ground and wept bitterly.

古文：敕有司以礼改葬。
现代文：尔后命令有司，按礼制改葬。
English: After that, it was ordered that the funeral should be conducted according to the etiquette.

古文：戊申，御仁政殿视朝。
现代文：十一日，宣宗御驾仁政殿视朝。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Emperor Xuan Zong rode to the Nian Palace to see the Emperor.

古文：赐胡沙虎坐，胡沙虎不辞。
现代文：赏赐胡沙虎坐下，胡沙虎没拒绝。
English: Hu Shaohu was rewarded to sit down. Hu Shaohu did not refuse.

古文：辛亥，封皇子守礼为遂王，守纯为濮王，皇女温国公主。
现代文：十四日，封皇子完颜守礼为遂王，完颜守纯为濮王，皇女为温国公主。
English: On the 14th, the crown prince was crowned King Sui, the crown prince was crowned King Shun, and the princess was crowned Princess Wen.

古文：夔王永升薨，上亲临奠。
现代文：夔王完颜永升死了，宣宗皇帝亲去祭奠。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong went to pay his respects after the death of King Yan Yong Sheng.

古文：大元遣乙里只来。
现代文：元朝派乙里只出使金朝。
English: The Yuan Dynasty only sent envoys to the Jin Dynasty.

古文：壬子，改元贞祐，大赦。
现代文：十五日，改元年号为贞，大赦天下。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first year, her name was changed to Zhen, and she was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：恩赉中外臣民有差。
现代文：赏赐中外臣民不等。
English: The rewards vary between Chinese and foreign subjects.

古文：丙辰，左谏议大夫张行信上章言崇节俭、广听纳、明赏罚三事。
现代文：十九日，左谏议大夫张行信上奏章言及崇尚节俭、广纳言论、赏罚分明三事。
English: On the 19th, Dr. Zhang Xing, a doctor of left-hand speech, wrote a letter in which he clearly mentioned three things: advocating frugality, broad acceptance of speech, and reward and punishment.

古文：尚书右丞相徒单镒进左丞相，封广平郡王。
现代文：尚书右丞相徒单镒进为左丞相，封为广平郡王。
English: Shangshu was promoted to the position of the right chancellor and the left chancellor, and was named the king of Guangping County.

古文：庚申，泽王胡沙虎等议废故卫王为庶人，上曰： 朕徐思之，以谕卿等。 
现代文：二十三日，泽王胡沙虎等议论废除旧卫王为庶人，皇帝宣宗说： 朕慢慢考虑这件事，然后再告知你们。 
English: On the 23rd, when King Ze, King Hu Shahu, and others began to discuss the abolition of the old Emperor Wei as a commoner, Emperor Xuanzong said, "I will consider this matter slowly, and then let you know."

古文：壬戌，授胡虎中都路和鲁忽土世袭猛安。
现代文：二十五日，授胡沙虎中都路和鲁忽土世袭猛安。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, he bestowed a hereditary blessing on the Central Capital and the Luhu County of Hunan Province.

古文：丙寅，诏谕六品以下官，有事可言者言之无隐。
现代文：二十九日，诏谕六品以下官，让有言论的人要知无不言。
English: On the 29th, an edict was issued to lower the rank of officials below the sixth grade, so that those who had something to say would know what to say.

古文：闰月戊辰朔，拜日于仁政殿，自是每月吉为常。
现代文：贞元年闰九月初一，在仁政殿拜日，从此每月如此。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the leap year of the first year of the Zhengyuan era, the worship day was held at the benevolent government hall, and it has been so every month since then.

古文：授尚书左丞相徒单镒中都路迭鲁猛安。
现代文：授尚书左丞相徒单镒中都路迭鲁猛安。
English: The conferment of the honorary title of Zuo Zhengxiao (Left Wing of the Council of Elders) to Duanzhang Zhongtoulu Diiru Mengyuan.

古文：庚午，上复旧名珣，诏所司，告天地庙社。
现代文：初三，皇帝宣宗又用旧名完颜繤，下诏有司，告知天地庙社。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Emperor Xuanzong also used the old name of Guanzhong, and issued an edict to inform the Temple of Heaven and Earth.

古文：前所更名二字，自今不须回避。
现代文：前时所更名的二字，从今不需回避。
English: From now on, there is no need to avoid the two words that were previously renamed.

古文：辛未，诏追尊皇妣为皇太后。
现代文：初四，下诏追尊皇母为皇太后。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the emperor issued an imperial edict proclaiming his mother the empress dowager.

古文：是日，皇妃皇子至自彰德府。
现代文：此日，皇妃皇子从彰德府来到。
English: On this day, the crown prince arrived from Changde.

古文：遣使使宋。
现代文：派使者出使宋朝。
English: He sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty.

古文：己卯，左谏议大夫张行信上疏请立皇太子。
现代文：十二日，左谏议大夫张行信上疏请立皇太子。
English: On the twelfth day, Zhang Xingxin, the doctor of the Left Hand Council, sent a letter requesting the crown prince to be appointed.

古文：甲申，立子守忠为皇太子。
现代文：十七日，宣宗皇帝立儿子完颜守忠为皇太子。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Xuanzong appointed his son, Guan Yan Shou Zhong, as crown prince.

古文：丙戌，诏降故卫王为东海郡侯。
现代文：十九日，下诏降旧卫王为东海郡侯。
English: On the 19th, the old Wei Wang was demoted to the county seat of Donghai County.

古文：甲午，减定监察御史为十二员。
现代文：二十七日，裁减监察御史为十二人。
English: On the 27th, the number of supervisors was reduced to 12.

古文：冬十月丁酉朔，京师戒严。
现代文：十月初一，京师戒严。
English: On the first day of October, martial law was imposed in Beijing.

古文：辛丑，大元乙里只来。
现代文：初五，元朝乙里只来金朝。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, only the Jin Dynasty came to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：乙巳，诏应迁加官赏，诸色人与本朝人一体。
现代文：初九，下诏凡是应升官加赏的人，各个民族的人都与本民族的人一样。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the following edict was issued: All those who should be promoted and rewarded, people of all ethnic groups are the same as people of their own ethnic groups.

古文：庚戌，敕有司，皇太子册礼俟边事息然后举行。
现代文：十四日，命令有司，原定的皇太子册封礼，等到边疆军事平息后再举行。
English: On the 14th, a magistrate was ordered to postpone the originally scheduled crown prince's book launch until the military situation on the border had calmed down.

古文：辛亥，元帅右监军术虎高琪战于城北，凡两败绩而归，就以兵杀胡沙虎于其第，持其首诣阙待罪。
现代文：十五日，元帅右监军术虎高琪战于城北，两次被打败，回到京城他派兵在胡沙虎的府第里杀了胡，持其首级到宫殿待罪。
English: On the fifteenth day, the marshal and overseer of the army, the tiger Gaoqi, fought in the north of the city and was defeated twice. Back in Beijing, he sent soldiers to kill Hu in the palace of the tiger, and took his head to the palace to be punished.

古文：赦之，仍授左副元帅。
现代文：皇帝宣宗赦免了术虎高琪，仍授他左副元帅。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong pardoned the art tiger Gao Qi and still awarded him the title of deputy left field marshal.

古文：壬子，殿前都点检纥石烈特末也等补外。
现代文：十六日，殿前都点检纥石烈特末也等补外任职。
English: On the 16th, all the officials in front of the Great Hall of the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC and the NPC.

古文：甲寅，张行信上封事，言正刑赏、择将帅，及鄯阳、石古乃之冤。
现代文：十八日，张行信上书，说要正刑赏、择将帅，昭雪善阝阳、石古乃之冤案。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Xing wrote a letter, saying that the unjust cases of Zhao Xuezheng, Zhao Xuezheng Yang and Shi Guo Nai should be punished and rewarded, and the generals should be selected.

古文：大元兵下涿州。
现代文：元朝军队攻下涿州。
English: The Yuan Dynasty army captured Zhangzhou.

古文：设京城镇抚弹压官。
现代文：金朝设立京城镇抚弹压官。
English: The Kim dynasty set up the Beijing Town Fuban Pressing Station.

古文：置招贤所。
现代文：建立招贤所。
English: Establish a recruitment center.

古文：癸亥，放宫女百三十人。
现代文：二十七日，放出一百三十名宫女。
English: On the 27th, 130 maids of honor were released.

古文：十一月戊辰，夏人攻会州，徒单丑儿兵击走之。
现代文：十一月初二，西夏人攻打会州，徒单丑儿出兵打跑了西夏人。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the Xixia people attacked Huizhou, and the Ugly One sent troops to beat the Xixia people.

古文：庚午，将乞和于大元，诏百官议于尚书省。
现代文：初四，金朝准备向元朝乞和，诏百官在尚书省议论。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Kim dynasty was preparing to sue for peace from the Yuan dynasty.

古文：以横海军节度使承晖为尚书右丞，耿端义为参知政事。
现代文：任命横海军节度使承晖为尚书右丞，耿端义为参知政事。
English: The appointment of the Vice-Admiral of the Fleet to the post of Vice-Admiral of the Fleet and the appointment of Geng Danyi as the Vice-Admiral of the Fleet to the post of Vice-Admiral.

古文：癸未，诏赠死事裴满福兴及鄯阳、石古乃官。
现代文：十七日，下诏赠授死去的裴满福兴及善阝阳、石古乃的官职。
English: On the 17th, the deceased Pei Man Fu Xing, as well as Zenshu Yang and Shigu Nai, were conferred with official positions.

古文：大元兵徇观州，刺史高守约死之。
现代文：元朝兵占领了观州，刺史高守约为此死去。
English: The former imperial soldiers occupied Gwangju, and Sashitaka died as a result.

古文：又徇河间府、沧州。
现代文：元朝兵又占领了河间府、沧州。
English: The former imperial soldiers also occupied Kawama Prefecture and Cangzhou.

古文：乙未，定亡失告身文凭格。
现代文：二十九日，制定关于遗失委任书、文凭的有关法规。
English: On the 29th, relevant regulations on the loss of power of attorney and diploma were formulated.

古文：十二月丁酉朔，上御应天门，诏谕军士，仍出银以赐之。
现代文：十二月初一，皇帝宣宗御临应天门，告谕军士，并拿出银子赏赐他们。
English: On the first day of December, Emperor Xuan Zong arrived at the Gate of Heaven, told the soldiers, and gave them a reward of silver.

古文：平章政事徒单公弼进尚书右丞相，尚书右丞承晖进都元帅兼平章政事，左副元帅术虎高琪进平章政事兼前职。
现代文：平章政事徒单公弼进升为尚书右丞相，尚书右丞承晖进为都元帅兼平章政事，左副元帅术虎高琪进为平章政事兼前职。
English: Taira no Shosho's political affairs officer, Kinketsu Shonin, was promoted to the post of Vice-Minister of the Right, Shosho's political affairs officer, Shonin Shonin was promoted to the post of Metropolitan Marshal and political affairs officer of Taira no Shosho, and Vice-Marshal Shuguo Gaoqin was promoted to the post of Taira no Shosho's political affairs officer and former post.

古文：二年春正月丁卯朔，以边事未息，诏免朝贺。
现代文：贞二年春正月初一，因为边疆战事未息，下诏免去朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Zhen, because the war on the frontier had not ended, the following edict exempted the morning greeting.

古文：辛未，大元兵徇彰德府，知府事黄掴九住死之。
现代文：初五，元朝军队攻占彰德府，知府事黄掴九住死去。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Yuan Dynasty army conquered Zhangdefu, and the prefect died of yellow fever.

古文：宋人攻秦州，统军使石抹仲温击却之。
现代文：宋朝军队攻打秦州，统军使石抹仲温击退了他们。
English: The Song Dynasty army attacked Qinzhou, and the unified army made Shima Zhongwen repel them.

古文：癸未，有司奏，请权止今年禘享朝献原庙及皇太后册礼，从之。
现代文：十七日，有司上奏，请求暂时停止今年祭祀庙庭及皇太后册礼，皇帝听从了。
English: On the seventeenth day, there was a sermon, requesting a temporary suspension of this year's temple worship and the registration of the empress dowager, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：乙酉，征处士王澮，不至。
现代文：十九日，召征处士王浍，他未到。
English: On the 19th, recruiting officer Wang Qi left, but he did not arrive.

古文：大元兵徇益都府。
现代文：元朝军队占领益都府。
English: The Yuan Dynasty army occupied Yidu Prefecture.

古文：命有司复议本朝德运。
现代文：皇帝宣宗命令有司再议本朝的气数。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong ordered some officials to re-discuss the number of qi in this dynasty.

古文：乙未，大元兵徇怀州，沁南军节度使宋扆死之。
现代文：二十九日，元朝军队占领怀州，沁南军节度使宋死去。
English: On the 29th, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied Waizhou, and Song was killed by the Southern Song Dynasty army.

古文：二月丙申朔。
现代文：二月初一。
English: The first day of February.

古文：壬子，大元乙里只紥八来。
现代文：十七日，元朝乙里只扎八来到金朝。
English: On the seventeenth day of the first month of the Yuan Dynasty, only Zhaba came to the Jin Dynasty.

古文：丙辰，罢按察司。
现代文：二十一日，废除按察司。
English: On the 21st, the post of inspector general was abolished.

古文：壬戌，大元乙只复来。
现代文：二十七日，元朝乙里只又来到金朝。
English: On the twenty-seventh day of the first month of the Yuan Dynasty, Bili only came to the Jin Dynasty again.

古文：三月辛未，遣承晖诣大元请和。
现代文：三月初六，派承晖到元朝去请和。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, they sent Chengyi to the Yuan Dynasty to ask for peace.

古文：丁丑，赦国内。
现代文：十二日，大赦国内。
English: On the 12th, a national amnesty was declared.

古文：癸未，京师大括粟。
现代文：十八日，京城大量收藏粮食。
English: On the 18th, a large amount of grain was collected in Kyoto.

古文：甲申，大元乙里只紥八来。
现代文：十九日，元朝乙里只扎八来到金朝。
English: On the 19th day of the 19th day of the 19th day of the 19th day of the 19th day of the 20th day of the 20th day of the 20th day of the 20th day of the 20th day of the 20th day of the 21st day of the 21st day of the 21st month.

古文：诏百官议于尚书省。
现代文：宣宗诏令百官在尚书省议事。
English: The edict of Emperor Xuan Zong caused hundreds of officials to discuss the matter in Shangshu Province.

古文：戊子，以濮王守纯为殿前都点检兼侍卫亲军都指挥使，权都元帅府事。
现代文：二十三日，任用濮王守纯为殿前都点检兼侍卫亲军都指挥使，掌管都元帅府事。
English: On the 23rd, Shao Wang Shuchun was appointed as the inspector of the front of the palace and the commanding officer of the palace guards, in charge of the affairs of the palace.

古文：庚寅，奉卫绍王公主归于大元太祖皇帝，是为公主皇后。
现代文：二十五日，护送卫绍王公主归于元朝太祖皇帝，这就是公主皇后。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Princess Wei Shao Wang was escorted to the Yuan Dynasty Emperor Taizu, which is the princess queen.

古文：辛卯，诏许诸人纳粟买官。
现代文：二十六日，下诏允许人们交纳粮食买官。
English: On the 26th, the next edict allowed people to pay grain to the government.

古文：京师戒严。
现代文：京城戒严。
English: The capital is under martial law.

古文：壬辰，大元兵下岚州，镇西军节使乌古论仲温死之。
现代文：二十七日，元朝军队攻下岚州。镇西军节度使乌古论仲温死去。
English: On the 27th, the Yuan Dynasty army conquered Zhangzhou. The Western Zhen Army Festival caused the death of Uguon Zhongwen.

古文：夏四月乙未朔，以知大兴府事胥鼎为尚书右丞。
现代文：夏四月初一，任命知大兴府事胥鼎为尚书右丞。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, he was appointed as the vice-president of Shoshu University.

古文：戊戌，奉迁昭圣皇后柩于新寺。
现代文：初四，奉旨迁送昭圣皇后灵柩到新寺。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the coffin of Empress Shoshen was moved to the new temple.

古文：时山东、河北诸郡失守，惟真定、清、沃、大名、东平、徐、邳、海数城仅存而已，河东州县亦多残毁。
现代文：当时山东、河北诸郡失守，只有真定、清、沃、大名、东平、徐、邳、海数城仅存而已，河东州县也多数毁于战火。
English: At that time, the counties of Shandong and Hebei had been lost, and only the cities of Zhending, Qing, Wa, Daming, Dongping, Xu, Handan and Haiji remained. Most counties in Hedong Prefecture were also destroyed in the war.

古文：兵退，命仆散安贞等为诸路宣抚使，安集遗黎。
现代文：元军退后，命令仆散安贞等为诸路宣抚使，安抚集纳遗留下来的百姓。
English: The Yuan army retreated and ordered their servants, such as Anzhen, to go to all parts of the country to pacify and gather the remaining people.

古文：至是以大元允和议，大赦国内。
现代文：至此因为元朝允许金朝的议和请求，大赦国内。
English: At this point, because the Yuan Dynasty allowed the Kim Dynasty's proposal and request, the country was amnestied.

古文：癸卯，权厝昭圣皇后于新寺。
现代文：初九，在新寺埋葬了昭圣皇后。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Empress Shoshen was buried at Shinji Temple.

古文：甲辰，诏有司具阵亡人子孙以备录用。
现代文：初十，皇帝宣宗诏令有司陈报阵亡人的子孙名单以备录用。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to have the Secretary of the General Post Office submit a list of descendants of those who died in the battle to be considered for appointment.

古文：丁未，以都元帅承辉为右丞相。
现代文：十三日，任都元帅承晖为右丞相。
English: On the 13th, Marshal Cheng Yu was appointed as the Minister of the Right.

古文：庚戌，左丞相、监修国史广平郡主徒单镒薨。
现代文：十六日，左丞相、监修国史广平郡王徒单镒死去。
English: On the 16th day of the month, the Left Minister of War and the Supervisor of the National History of Guangping County, Wang Tu Shanjun, died.

古文：乙卯，尚书省奏巡幸南京，诏从之。
现代文：二十一日，尚书省上奏巡视南京，皇帝下诏允许。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shang Shuzo went on a tour of Nanjing, and the emperor gave his permission.

古文：己未，葬卫绍王。
现代文：二十五日，埋葬卫绍王。
English: On the 25th, King Weishao was buried.

古文：五月癸酉，承晖加金紫光禄大夫，封定国公。
现代文：五月初九，承晖加为金紫光禄大夫，封为定国公。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the year, he was promoted to Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor and given the title of Ding Guogong.

古文：尚书左丞抹撚尽忠加崇进，封申国公。
现代文：尚书左丞抹睰尽忠加为崇进，封为申国公。
English: Shangshu Zuorong (尚書左丞) and Magpie Zhenzhong (抹尽忠) were promoted to Chongjin (崇进) and given the title of Shenguogong (申国公).

古文：甲戌，霍王从彝薨。
现代文：初十，霍王从彝死去。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, King Huo died.

古文：乙亥，辍朝。
现代文：十一日，辍朝。
English: On the eleventh day, the sun set.

古文：上决意南迁，诏告国内。
现代文：宣宗皇帝决意南迁，下诏告知国内。
English: Emperor Xuanzong decided to move to the south, and announced it to the country with an imperial edict.

古文：太学生赵昉等上章极论利害，以大计已定，不能中止，皆慰谕而遣之。
现代文：太学生赵窻等上书极论利害，因大计已定，不能中途停止，对他们加以抚慰让他们回去。
English: Students such as Zhao Jun, who wrote about the extreme interests, because the plan has been decided, can not stop halfway, to comfort them and let them go back.

古文：诣原庙奉辞。
现代文：宣宗至太庙原址拜辞。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong paid his respects at the original site of the Great Temple.

古文：戊寅，将发，雨，不果行。
现代文：十四日，准备出发，天下雨不能行动。
English: On the 14th, we were ready to leave, but couldn't because of the rain.

古文：以南京留守仆散端等尝请临幸，及行，先诏谕之。
现代文：因为南京留守仆散端等曾经请求前去，等到出发，先诏谕他们。
English: Because the retainers in Nanjing, such as Zanfang, had requested to go, wait until they leave, and order them to leave first.

古文：辛巳，诏迁卫绍、镐厉王家属于郑州。
现代文：十七日，下诏迁移卫绍、镐历王家属到郑州。
English: On the 17th, it was announced that the families of Wei Shao and Qilian Wang would be relocated to Zhengzhou.

古文：壬午，车驾发中都。
现代文：十八日，车驾发往中都。
English: On the 18th, the car was driven to the capital.

古文：是日雨，至甲申止。
现代文：此日下雨，到二十日停止。
English: It rained that day and stopped on the 20th.

古文：丙戌，次定兴。
现代文：二十二日，到达定兴。
English: On the 22nd, we arrived in Dingxing.

古文：禁有司扈从践蹂民田。
现代文：禁止有司、侍从、护卫人员践踏民田。
English: It is forbidden for officials, attendants, and guards to trample on people's fields.

古文：丁亥，次安肃州，元帅右监军完颜弼以兵迎见。
现代文：二十三日，到达安肃州，元帅右监军完颜弼带兵迎接。
English: On the 23rd, after arriving in Anshu, the marshal of the Right Supervision Army came out to greet the soldiers.

古文：癸巳，次中山府，敕扈从军所践禾稼，计直酬之。
现代文：二十九日，到达中山府，告诫侍从、护卫人员所践踏的庄稼，按价值赔偿。
English: On the 29th, he arrived at Zhongshan Prefecture and warned the attendants and guards that the crops trampled by them should be compensated according to their value.

古文：六月甲午朔，以按察转运使高汝砺为参知政事。
现代文：六月初一，任按察转运使高汝砺为参知政事。
English: On the first day of June, Gao Rucheng was appointed to the post of inspector of transportation.

古文：癸丑，次内丘县。
现代文：二十日，到达内丘县。
English: On the 20th, they arrived in Neichu County.

古文：大元乙里只来。
现代文：元朝乙里只来到金朝。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Bili came only in the morning.

古文：戊午，次彰德府，曲赦其境内。
现代文：二十五日，到达彰德府，大赦其境内。
English: On the 25th, he arrived at Zhangdefu and was amnestied from its territory.

古文：庚申，次钜桥镇。
现代文：二十七日，到达钜桥镇。
English: On the 27th, they arrived in the town of Qiaoqiao.

古文：是日，南京行宫宝镇阁灾。
现代文：这天，南京行宫宝镇阁发生火灾。
English: On this day, a fire broke out in the Treasure Pavilion of the Nanjing Palace.

古文：壬戌，次宜村。
现代文：二十九日，到达宜村。
English: On the 29th, they arrived in Yimura.

古文：黄龙见西北。
现代文：西北方天空出现黄龙星象。
English: A yellow dragon appears in the northwest sky.

古文：秋七月，车驾至南京。
现代文：秋七月，皇帝车驾到南京。
English: In autumn and July, the emperor drove to Nanjing.

古文：诏立元妃温敦氏为皇后。
现代文：皇帝宣宗下诏立元妃温敦氏为皇后。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong decreed that the former Princess Winton should be the empress.

古文：八月甲午，以立后，百官上表称贺。
现代文：八月初二，因为立皇后事，百官上书祝贺。
English: On the second day of August, because of the establishment of the Empress, hundreds of officials sent letters of congratulations.

古文：庚子，皇太子至自中都。
现代文：初八，皇太子从中都到南京。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month, the crown prince went from Zhongdu to Nanjing.

古文：丁未，夏人入边，命移文责之。
现代文：十五日，西夏人侵入边疆，宣宗命写文书谴责他们。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Xixia people invaded the border, and Xuan Zong ordered to write a document to condemn them.

古文：甲寅，罢经略司。
现代文：二十二日，废除经略司。
English: On the 22nd, the Economic Strategy Department was abolished.

古文：应奉翰林文字完颜素兰上书言事。
现代文：应奉翰林文字完颜素兰上书言事。
English: It should be written according to Hanlin's words.

古文：九月壬戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日蚀。皇孙出生。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse. A grandchild is born.

古文：皇孙生。癸亥，山东路报莱州之捷。
现代文：初二，山东路报知莱州大捷。
English: On the second day of the first semester, Shandong Road reported the great victory of Chilaizhou.

古文：辛未，立监察御史升黜格。
现代文：初十，制定监察御史升降条文。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the provisions for supervising the promotion and demotion of officials were formulated.

古文：庚辰，诏训练军士。
现代文：十九日，皇帝宣宗下诏训练军士。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to train military officers.

古文：丁亥，谕宣徽院，正旦生辰不须进物。
现代文：二十六日，告知宣徽院，正旦生辰不须进贡物品。
English: On the 26th, Xuanhuiyuan was informed that no tribute items were required for Zhengdan's birthday.

古文：太白昼见于轸。
现代文：二十七日，禁止军官围猎。
English: On the 27th, officers were prohibited from hunting.

古文：戊子，禁军官围猎。冬十月甲午，诏遣官市木波、西羌马。陕西军户战死者给粮赡其家。
现代文：冬十月初三，宣宗皇帝下诏派官去木波、西羌买马。陕西军士战死的人给粮食以赡养其家。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of winter, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to send officials to Mubo and Xidi to buy horses. The soldiers from Shaanxi who died in the war gave grain to support their families.

古文：丁酉，大元兵徇顺州，劝农使王晦死之。
现代文：初六，元朝军队占领顺州，劝农使王晦死去。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied Shunzhou and persuaded the farmer Wang Hui to die.

古文：壬寅，左副元帅兼尚书左丞抹撚尽忠进平章政事。
现代文：十一日，左副元帅兼尚书左丞抹睰尽忠进升为平章政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Left Vice-Marshal and Vice-Commander-in-Chief of the Left Division of the Imperial General Staff, Magpie Jinzhong, was promoted to the post of Vice-Minister of State.

古文：以御史中丞孛术鲁德裕为参知政事兼签枢密院事。
现代文：任御史中丞孛术鲁德裕为参知政事兼签枢密院事。
English: He was appointed to be a member of the Council of State and a member of the Privy Council.

古文：曲赦中都路。
现代文：大赦中都路辖区。
English: The amnesty is for the Chuo-Dori area.

古文：乙卯，遣参知政事孛术鲁德裕行尚书省于大名府。
现代文：二十四日，派参知政事孛术鲁德裕在大名府行尚书省职权。
English: On the 24th, he dispatched the vice-governor of political affairs, Lu Deyu, to Daimyo-fu to carry out the duties of the Ministry of Education.

古文：丙辰，大元兵收成州。
现代文：二十五日，元朝军队收复成州。
English: On the 25th, the Yuan Dynasty army recaptured Chengdu.

古文：谕大名行省贬损用度。
现代文：告谕大名行省，减少开支。
English: Tell the big names to cut costs.

古文：德州防御使完颜丑奴伏诛。
现代文：德州防御使完颜丑奴被杀。
English: Texas defense gets ugly guy killed.

古文：十一月丁卯，以御史大夫仆散端为尚书左丞相。
现代文：十一月初七，任御史大夫仆散端为尚书左丞相。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the 11th month, Hidehisa Sanda, who had been appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, became the Minister of the Left, Shojo.

古文：曲赦山东路。
现代文：大赦山东路辖区。
English: Amity Shandong Road Jurisdiction.

古文：辛未，诏赐卫绍王家属既禀。
现代文：十一日，宣宗皇帝下诏赏赐卫绍王家属粮食。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict awarding grain to the family members of King Wei Shao.

古文：诏有司答夏国牒。
现代文：下诏有司回复西夏的文牒。
English: The following is Yuji's reply to Xixia's ultimatum.

古文：丙子，许诸色人试武举。
现代文：十六日，允许各族人考试武举。
English: On the 16th, people of all ethnic groups were allowed to take the exam.

古文：兰州译人程陈僧叛，西结夏人为援。
现代文：兰州译人程陈僧反叛，向西联合西夏人作为援助。
English: The translator from Lanzhou, Cheng Chen, rebelled and went west with the aid of the Xixia people.

古文：辛巳，荧惑犯房宿钩钤星。
现代文：二十一日，荧惑星侵犯房宿钩钤星。
English: On the twenty-first day, the fluorescent planet encroached on the house of the hook star.

古文：癸未，曲赦辽东路。
现代文：二十三日，大赦辽东路辖区。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was announced for the Liaodong Road area.

古文：敕罢宣抚司辄拟官。
现代文：命令废除宣抚司辄拟官。
English: An order was issued to abolish the post of "Xuan Fu" priest and the post of "Xuan Fu" prelate.

古文：十二月戊戌，遣真定行元帅府事永锡等援中都。
现代文：十二月初八，派真定行元帅府事永锡等支援中都。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month of the year, he sent Zhengjingxing, the marshal of the prefectural government, to Yongxi to support Zhongdu.

古文：颁劝农诏。
现代文：颁布劝农诏书。
English: and promulgated the "Exhortation to Farmers."

古文：丁未，以和议既定，听民南渡。
现代文：十七日，因为和议已经定下来，听任人民南渡。
English: On the seventeenth day, because peace had been agreed upon, they allowed the people to cross to the south.

古文：乙卯，登州刺史耿格伏诛，流其妻孥。
现代文：二十五日，登州刺史耿格被杀，流放他的妻儿。
English: On the 25th, Dengzhou assassin Geng Ge was killed, and his wife and children were exiled.

古文：大元兵徇懿州，节度使高闾山死之。
现代文：元朝军队攻占懿州，节度使高闾山死去。
English: The troops of the Yuan Dynasty conquered Bozhou, and Setdo caused the death of Gao Bozhan.

古文：三年春正月辛酉朔，宋遣使来贺。
现代文：贞三年春正月初一，宋朝派使者来金祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of Zhen, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to congratulate Jin.

古文：壬戌，遣内侍谕永锡防边，毋以和议为辞。
现代文：初二，派内侍告谕永锡防守边疆，不要用和议作为推辞。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, he sent his palace attendants to tell Yongxi to defend the border, and not to use peace talks as an excuse.

古文：癸亥，曲宴群臣、宋使。
现代文：初三，宴请部分大臣、宋朝使者。
English: On the third day of the first month, some ministers and emissaries of the Song Dynasty were invited to the banquet.

古文：定文武五品以上侍坐员，遂为常制。
现代文：规定文武五品以上的官相伴陪坐，于是作为常规。
English: It was stipulated that officials of the five military ranks and above should be accompanied by an escort, and this became the norm.

古文：乙丑，诏宣抚阿海、总管合住讨贼刘二祖、张汝楫。
现代文：初五，诏宣抚阿海、总管合住讨伐叛贼刘二祖、张汝楫。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict was issued to promote Ahai, and Liu Erzu and Zhang Ruxuan, who were in charge of fighting against the traitors, began to live together.

古文：戊辰，尚书省言： 内外军人入粟补官者多，行伍浸虚。
现代文：初八，尚书省说 ：内外军人交纳粮食补官的人很多，军队空虚。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology said: There are a lot of soldiers at home and abroad who pay food supplements, and the army is empty.

古文：请俟平定，应监差者与三酬，门户有职事者升一等，其子弟应荫者罢之。 
现代文：请求等到平定此事，应监差者给三倍酬劳，门户有职者升一等，其子弟应荫恩的废除。 
English: The request is that until the matter is settled, the supervisor should be given three times the remuneration, the portal official should be promoted to the first grade, and his son should be abolished.

古文：上可其奏。
现代文：皇帝宣宗批准了。
English: The emperor approved his music.

古文：乙亥，夏人犯环州。
现代文：十五日，西夏人侵犯环州。
English: On the 15th, Xixia people invaded Huanzhou.

古文：北京军乱，杀宣抚使奥屯襄。
现代文：北京军队叛乱，杀死宣抚使奥屯襄。
English: The Beijing army mutinied and killed the imperial envoy, Otunxang.

古文：丁丑，右副元帅蒲察七斤以其军降于大元。
现代文：十七日，右副元帅蒲察七斤率部向元朝投降。
English: On the 17th, the Right Vice-Marshal Pucha Shichikin led his troops to surrender to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：辛巳，皇太子疾。
现代文：二十一日，皇太子病了。
English: On the 21st, the crown prince fell ill.

古文：辍朝。
现代文：辍朝。
English: Dropped out of high school.

古文：乙酉，皇太子薨。
现代文：二十五日，皇太子死去。
English: On the 25th, the Crown Prince passed away.

古文：二月辛卯，环州刺乌古论延寿及斜卯毛良虎等败夏人于州境，诏进官有差。
现代文：二月初二，环州刺史乌古论延寿和斜卯毛良虎等在境内打败西夏人，皇帝下诏他们升官。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：大元乙里只来。
现代文：元朝乙里只来朝。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Bili came only in the morning.

古文：壬辰，上临奠皇太子殡所。有司奏辰日不哭，上曰： 父子至亲，何可拘忌！ 
现代文：初三，宣宗皇帝到殡所祭奠皇太子。有司奏辰日不能哭，皇帝说： 父子至亲，何忌讳之有？ 
English: On the third day of the junior high school term, Emperor Xuanzong went to the funeral parlor to pay tribute to the crown prince. On the day of the ceremony, unable to cry, the emperor said, "Father and son are very close, what are the taboos?

古文：命御史中丞李英、元帅左都监乌古论庆寿领兵护饷中都，付以空名宣敕，许视功迁叙，逗挠者治以军律。
现代文：命御史中丞李英、元帅左都监乌古论庆寿领兵保护军饷到中都，并交付他宣布皇帝命令，允许他视功升降官兵，阻挠者军法处治。
English: Li Ying, the vice-commander of the Central Military Commission, and Ugu, the marshal of the Left Central Military Commission, ordered Qing Shou to lead the soldiers to protect the capital, and delivered him to announce the emperor's order, allowing him to promote and demote officers and soldiers according to their merits, and to deal with obstructors according to military law.

古文：乙未，改宁边州隶岚州。
现代文：初六，改宁边州隶属岚州。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the first year of the school year, Chia-Ningbanzhou was subordinated to Ganzhou.

古文：丁酉，诏诸色人迁官并视女直人，有司妄生分别，以违制论，从户部郎中奥屯阿虎请也。
现代文：初八，下诏各族人同女真人一样升官，如果有司妄加分别，以违反制度论处，这是根据户部郎中奥屯阿虎的请求决定的。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that people of all ethnic groups would be promoted in the same way as the Jurchen, and if there was a division, it would be punished as a violation of the system. This was decided according to the request of Otun Ago, the head of the Household Department.

古文：辛丑，敕宰臣馈乙里只酒馔。
现代文：十二日，命令宰臣馈赠乙里只酒馔。
English: On the twelfth day, he ordered the vice-minister to present a second-rank sake lees.

古文：壬寅，颁奖谕官吏军民诏，曲赦，招抚北京作乱者。
现代文：十三日，颁布奖励官吏军队的诏书，局部大赦，以招抚北京叛乱的人。
English: On the 13th, an edict was issued to reward officials and the military, and a partial amnesty was issued to appease those who rebelled against Beijing.

古文：丙午，尚书省以南迁后，吏部秋冬置选南京，春夏置选中都，赴调者不便，请并选于南京。
现代文：十七日，尚书省南迁后，吏部秋冬两季设在南京，春夏两季设在中都，因来回不便，请求四季都设在南京。
English: On the 17th, after the southern relocation of Shangshu Province, the personnel department was located in Nanjing in the autumn and winter, and in the central capital in the spring and summer. Due to the inconvenience of traveling back and forth, it was requested to be located in Nanjing in all four seasons.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝批准了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：武清县巡检梁佐、柳口巡检李咬住以诛飐贼张晖、刘永昌等功进官有差，皆赐姓完颜。
现代文：武清县巡检梁佐、柳口巡检李咬住因为杀叛贼张晖、刘永昌等有功被分别升官，都赐姓完颜。
English: Liang Zu, the inspector of Wuching County, and Li Qizhu, the inspector of Liugou County, were promoted because of their achievements in killing the traitors Zhang Jun and Liu Yongchang, respectively. They were all given the surname of Guan Yan.

古文：丁未，山东宣抚使仆散安贞遣提控仆散留家等破贼杨安儿步骑三万，歼其众，降伪头目三百余人、胁从民三万余户。
现代文：十八日，山东宣抚使仆散安贞派提控仆散留家等打败叛贼杨安儿步骑兵三万，歼其众多士兵，降服伪头目三百多人，收敛百姓三万多户。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Shandong Xuanfu ordered the Minxuan Anzhen faction to take control of the Minxuan residents and defeat the traitor Yang An'er's 30,000 infantry and cavalry, annihilate many of his soldiers, subjugate more than 300 pseudo-leaders, and control more than 30,000 households.

古文：戊申，减沿边州府官资考有差。
现代文：十九日，不同程度地减去沿边州府官资考核。
English: On the 19th, the assessment of government funding in the border prefectures was reduced to varying degrees.

古文：壬子，立保城无虞及捕获奸叛迁赏格。
现代文：二十三日，设立确保城防及捕获奸人叛贼的升迁奖赏标准。
English: On the 23rd, the promotion reward standard for ensuring city defense and capturing traitors was established.

古文：乙卯，敕奏急事不拘假日。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝下诏上奏急事不要受日期约束。
English: On the 25th, the emperor decreed that urgent matters should not be bound by the date.

古文：丁巳，日初出赤如血，欲没复然。
现代文：二十八日，太阳刚出时红如血，快落山时又是那样。
English: On the 28th, when the sun was just rising, it was red as blood, and when it was about to set, it was the same.

古文：戊午，隆德殿鸱尾坏。
现代文：二十九日，大风刮坏隆德殿鸱尾。
English: On the 29th, a strong wind blew down the ridge of the Longde Hall.

古文：三月壬戌，诏河北州县官，令文武五品以上辟举，不听以它事差占，仍勒终任。
现代文：三月初三，宣宗皇帝下诏河北州县官，命令文武五品以上的官员按法规举荐人才，不得以别的事为借口加以推脱，直至卸任为止。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to the county officials of Hebei Province, ordering the civil and military officials above the 5th grade to recommend talents according to laws and regulations, and not to use other things as an excuse to evade it until they left office.

古文：有劳绩者但升遥领之职，应降罚者亦止本处居住。
现代文：有功劳的人升职只在名义上加以升迁，并不调离原职，应降职惩罚的就地解决。
English: The promotion of meritorious people is only nominally promoted, and they are not transferred from their original positions. The punishment of demotion should be resolved on the spot.

古文：时河北残毁，吏治多苟且以求代易，故著是令。
现代文：当时河北被战火摧残，官吏大多苟且以求被代替，故颁布此令。
English: At that time, Hebei was devastated by the war, and most officials were eager to be replaced, so this order was issued.

古文：癸亥，诏百官各陈防边利害，封章以闻。
现代文：初四，诏令百官陈述防守边疆利害，封在奏章里上呈。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered 100 officials to defend the interests of the frontier, which was presented in the report.

古文：丙寅，敕河东、河北、大名长贰官训练随处义兵，邻境有警，责其救援。
现代文：初七，命令河东、河北、大名长贰官训练各处义兵，邻境有警报，责令前去救援。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered the eunuchs of the governors of Hedong, Hebei, and Daming to train volunteers everywhere. There was an alarm in the vicinity, and they were ordered to go to the rescue.

古文：降人自拔归国者迁职，仍列其姓名，以招谕来者。
现代文：投降的人可以升职，并列其姓名，以招知未来者。
English: Those who surrender can be promoted, and their names are listed for future reference.

古文：沿河州县官罢软不胜职任者汰去，令五品已上官公举，仍许今季到部人内先择能者量缓急易之。
现代文：沿黄河州县的官不称职者免职，命令五品以上的官公开地选举，并允许先到各部族挑选有能力的人根据轻重缓急来代替不称职的官。
English: The incompetent officials in counties along the Yellow River should be removed from office, and the officials with more than five grades should be publicly elected, and they should be allowed to go to each tribe to select capable people according to their priorities to replace the incompetent officials.

古文：丁卯，安武军节度使张行信上书言急务四事。
现代文：初八，安武军节度使张行信上书言急务四件事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the festival of the Anwu army made Zhang Xingxin write four urgent matters.

古文：庚午，谕辽东宣抚使蒲鲜万奴选精锐屯沈州、广宁，以俟进止。
现代文：十一日，告谕辽东宣抚使蒲鲜万奴选择精锐部队防守沈州、广宁。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Liaodong Proclamation ordered Pu Xianvannu to choose elite troops to defend Shenzhou and Guangning.

古文：壬申，长春节，宋遣使来贺。
现代文：十三日，万春节，宋朝遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 13th day of the Spring Festival, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to congratulate.

古文：戊寅，谕尚书省，岁旱，议弛诸处碾硙，以其水溉民田。
现代文：十九日，告谕尚书省，今年大旱，废弛各处的石碾，用其水灌溉民田。
English: On the 19th, Shangshu Province announced that this year's drought had caused the waste of stone grinding everywhere to be used to irrigate people's fields.

古文：己卯，雨。
现代文：二十日，下雨。
English: On the 20th, it rained.

古文：庚辰，御史台言： 在京军官及委差官刍粮券例悉同征行，乞减其给。
现代文：从去年冬天没有雨雪，至现在才下雨，劝农使李革说： 河北州县官吏多谋求河南差使以避难，应该派遣他们领戍兵。
English: Since there was no rain and snow last winter, it has only rained until now, said Li Ge, the farmer's envoy: Hebei county officials should seek more refuge from Henan envoys, and they should be sent to lead the soldiers.

古文：枢密院委差有俸有吏，非征行不必给。 
现代文：枢密院有俸禄的委差官，不是远征作战的不一定供给。 
English: Privy Councillors are salaried commissioners, not an optional extra for expeditionary warfare.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：皇帝都听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：敕尚书省，入粟补官者毋括其户为军。
现代文：命令尚书省，交纳粮食补官的人不要征集其户充军。
English: He ordered the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology to instruct those who paid the grain supplement not to conscript their households into the army.

古文：有司议赏军功，毋有所沮格。
现代文：有司建议奖赏军功，不要违背制度。
English: Yushi suggested rewarding military merits, and not to violate the system.

古文：壬午，山东宣抚司报大沫堌之捷，夹谷石里哥及没烈擒贼渠刘二祖等斩之，前后殆贼万计。
现代文：二十三日，山东宣抚司报知大沫大捷，夹谷石里哥和没烈擒获叛贼首领刘二祖等杀了他们。前后射死叛军以万计。
English: On the 23rd, the Shandong Propaganda and Guidance Bureau reported that the rebels had won a great victory, and the rebel leader Liu Erzu, who was killed by Shiligou Shiligou and Mian Ye, shot and killed tens of thousands of rebels.

古文：西京军民变，遣官抚谕之。
现代文：西京军民叛变，金朝派官员前去安抚他们。
English: The military and people of Xijing rebelled, and the Kim dynasty sent officials to pacify them.

古文：己丑，禁州县置刃于杖以决罪人。
现代文：三十日，禁止州县把刀安在棍杖上来处决罪人。
English: On the 30th, the state and county were prohibited from attaching a knife to a stick to execute a criminal.

古文：前年，京兆治中李友直私逃华州，结同知防御使冯朝、河州防御判官郝遵甫、平凉府同知致仕杨庭秀、水洛县主簿宿徽等团集州民，号 忠义扈驾都统府 ，相扌延为乱，杀其防御判官完颜八斤及城中女直人，以书约都统杨圭，为府兵所得。
现代文：前年，京兆治中李友直私自逃到华州，联合同知防御使冯朝、河州防御判官郝遵甫、前平凉府同知杨庭秀、水洛县主簿宿徽等，聚集州民，号称 忠义扈驾都统府 ，乘机叛乱，杀死防御判官完颜八斤和城中的女真人，写信约会都统杨皀，并抓获了他。
English: In the previous year, Li Youzhi, a member of the Beijing Zhao government, fled to Huazhou, and together with Feng Zhao, the defense judge of Hezhou, Zou Zunfu, the former Pingliangfu defense judge, Yang Tingxiu, the main book of Shuiluo County, and others, gathered the people of the state, claiming to be loyal to the central government, took the opportunity to rebel, killed the defense judge and the woman in the city, wrote a letter to the central government and Yang Zhou, and captured him.

古文：圭讳之，请自效，诱友直等执之，麾所招千余人纳仗，坑诸城下。
现代文：杨皀有顾忌，请求效力，诱惑李友直等拘捕他，指挥所招一千多人收纳兵器埋在城下。
English: Yang Hui had scruples, pleaded for effectiveness, tempted Li Youzhi to wait for his arrest, and the command post recruited more than a thousand people to store weapons and bury them under the city.

古文：时京师道路隔绝，安抚司以便宜族友直等，至是以状闻。
现代文：当时京城道路隔绝，安抚司不及请示，灵活处置灭了李友直的家庭。
English: At that time, the capital's roads were cut off, and the pacification department was unable to request and flexibly dispose of the family of Li Youzhi.

古文：乃赠八斤及被害官军十余人各一官，赙钱三百贯。
现代文：于是赠完颜八斤及十多名被害官军各一官职，给三百贯钱。
English: As a result, he gave Yan eight catties and more than ten victims of the official army one official post each, giving three hundred crowns.

古文：夏四月癸巳，河东宣抚使胥鼎言利害十三事。
现代文：夏四月初四，河东宣抚使胥鼎言十三事利害。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：长胜军都统杨圭伏诛。
现代文：长胜军都统杨皀伏诛。
English: Chang Sheng's army marched through the capital Yangcheng.

古文：丙申，河南路蝗，遣官分捕。
现代文：初七，河南路发生蝗灾，派官分别捕杀。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, a locust plague occurred in Henan Road, and officials were dispatched to catch and kill them separately.

古文：上谕宰臣曰： 朕在潜邸，闻捕蝗者止及道傍，使者不见处即不加意，当以此意戒之。 
现代文：皇帝宣宗对宰臣说： 朕在秘密的府邸，听说捕杀蝗虫的人只到道旁，没有使者监督的地方就不努力捕杀，应当用此意告诫他们。 
English: Emperor Xuan Zong said to the Vice-Minister: I am in a secret mansion. I have heard that people who hunt locusts only go to the side of the road. If there is no messenger to supervise, they will not try to hunt and kill. They should be warned in this sense.

古文：权参知政事德升言： 旧制夏至后免朝，四日一奏事。 
现代文：权参知政事德升说 ：旧制是夏至以后免朝，四天一奏事。 
English: Gensanchi Seiji Desho said, "Under the old system, the Emperor was excused after the summer solstice, and the ceremony was held every four days.

古文：上曰： 此在平时可耳。
现代文：皇帝宣宗说： 这在平时可以。
English: Emperor Xuanzong said, "This can be done in peacetime."

古文：方今多故，勿谓朕劳，遂云当免，但使国事无废则善矣。 己亥，曲赦山东路。
现代文：而今多事，不要怕我劳累，但使国事无荒废就好了。 初十，大赦山东路辖区。
English: And now there are many things to do, don't be afraid of my fatigue, but it would be good to make the state affairs not wasteful.

古文：癸卯，籍赴选临当官为军。
现代文：十四日，在籍人士赴选监当官为军。
English: On the 14th, those who were enrolled went to the election supervisors to serve in the army.

古文：乙巳，罢都南行尚书六部。
现代文：十六日，废除都南行尚书六部。
English: On the 16th, the six parts of the Southern Capital Campaign were abolished.

古文：侯挚言九事。
现代文：侯挚上书奏议九件事。
English: Hou Zhengyi made a report on nine matters.

古文：曲赦蒲察七斤胁从之党，募能杀获七斤者，以其官官之。
现代文：大赦蒲察七斤的胁从党羽，征召能杀或捕蒲察七斤的人，用他的官授予此人。
English: He amnestied the coercion of the seven-kilo pouch from the party members, recruited a person who could kill or capture the seven-kilo pouch, and awarded this person with his official.

古文：丙午，以调度不给，凡随朝六品以下官及承应人，罢其从己人力输佣钱。
现代文：十七日，因调度没有供给，凡是随朝六品以下官及承应人，免去其缴纳雇人钱。
English: On the 17th, because there was no supply due to scheduling, all officials and contractors under the rank of six products were exempted from paying employment money.

古文：经兵州、府其吏减半，司、县吏减三之一。
现代文：军队经过的州、府衙官吏减半，司、县减三分之一。
English: The number of officials from prefectures and counties that the troops pass through will be halved, and the number of officials from departments and counties will be reduced by one-third.

古文：其余除开封府、南京转运司外，例减三之一。
现代文：其余除开封府、南京转运司外，都照例减三分之一。
English: The rest, with the exception of Kaifeng Prefecture and Nanjing Transportation Bureau, will be reduced by one-third as usual.

古文：有禄官吏被差不出本境并罢给券，出境者以其半给之。
现代文：有俸禄的官吏出差不出本境者免去补助，出境者给一半。
English: If a salaried official is on a business trip and does not leave the country, he or she will be exempted from the subsidy, and those who leave the country will be given half of the subsidy.

古文：修内司军夫亦减其半。
现代文：修内司军夫也减去一半。
English: Shuneshi Sojunobu also lost half of his pay.

古文：丁未，故皇太子启菆，赐谥曰庄献，戊申，权葬迎朔门外。
现代文：十八日，已故皇太子启葬，赐谥号 庄献 ，十九日，暂时葬在迎朔门外。
English: On the 18th, the late crown prince's funeral was held, and he was given the posthumous name Zhuang Xian. On the 19th, he was temporarily buried outside Yingshuo Gate.

古文：诏自今策论词赋进士，第一甲第一人特迁奉直大夫，第二人以下，经义第一人并儒林郎，第二甲以下征事郎，同进士从仕郎，经童将仕郎。
现代文：皇帝下诏从今始考试词赋进士，第一甲第一人特升为奉直大夫，第二人以下、经义第一人并为儒林郎，第二甲以下为征事郎、同进士从仕郎、经童将仕郎。
English: The emperor decreed that from now on, the examination words would be given to the candidates, and the first person with the highest score would be promoted to the doctor of Feng Zhi, the second person and below, the first person with the highest score would be the doctor of Zhu Lin, and the second and below would be the doctor of solicitation, the student with the highest score would be the secretary, and the student with the highest score would be the secretary.

古文：壬子，芮国公从厚薨。
现代文：二十三日，芮国公从厚死去。
English: On the 23rd, the Duke of Shan died suddenly.

古文：诏遣使同山西宣抚司选其民勇健者为军。
现代文：皇帝宣宗诏令遣使同山西宣抚司选拔强健的百姓参军。
English: Emperor Xuanzong issued an imperial edict to dispatch the Shanxi Propaganda Department to select strong people to join the army.

古文：论有司，勿拒河北避兵之民，所至加存恤。
现代文：告谕有司，不要拒阻河北逃避军队的百姓，所到的人要加倍体恤。
English: An official was told not to obstruct the people of Hebei who were fleeing the army, and to be more sympathetic to those who arrived.

古文：用山东西路宣抚副使完颜弼言，招大沫堌渠贼孙邦佐、张汝楫以五品职，下诏湔洗其罪。
现代文：采用山东西路宣抚副使完颜弼的言论，招大沫贼首孙邦佐、张汝楫给予五品官职，下诏洗涤其罪。
English: Using the speech of the vice-envoy of the Shandong-Tianjin-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebe

古文：乙卯，诏检核朝廷差遣官券历，无故稽留中道者罪之。
现代文：二十六日，诏令检查考核朝廷差遣官券历，无故拖延滞留者治罪。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict ordered the examination and assessment of the imperial court's dispatching officer's ticket calendar, and those who delayed without reason were punished.

古文：丙辰，谕田琢留山西流民少壮者充军，老幼者令就食于邢、洺等州，欲趣河南者听。
现代文：二十七日，告谕田琢留山西流民少壮之人充军，老幼者让他们在邢、等州就食，想去河南的人听便。
English: On the 27th, Tian Taku was told to retain the young and strong Shanxi exiles to join the army, the old and the young to let them eat in Shandong and other provinces, and those who wanted to go to Henan to listen to convenience.

古文：上议遣亲军六千余及所募二千七百人援中都，宰臣以为行宫单弱，亲军不可遣，遂止。
现代文：皇帝宣宗主张派遣六千多亲军及招募的二千七百人支援中都。宰臣认为行宫势单力弱，亲军不可调遣，于是停止了此事。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong advocated the dispatch of more than six thousand pro-army troops and the recruitment of twenty-seven hundred people to support the capital. The aide-de-camp believed that the palace was weak and that the pro-army could not be dispatched, so he stopped the matter.

古文：五月庚申，招抚山西军民，仍降诏谕之。
现代文：五月初二，招抚山西军民，仍降诏告谕他们。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, he summoned the military and civilians of Shanxi Province, and still issued an edict to them.

古文：是日，中都破，尚书右丞相兼都元帅定国公承晖死之。
现代文：这天，中都被攻破，尚书右丞相兼都元帅定国公承晖死去。
English: On this day, the Chinese were defeated, and Shang Shuxu, the Minister of the Right and the Marshal of the Capital, Ding Guo Gong, died.

古文：户部尚书任天宠、知大兴府事高霖皆及于难。
现代文：户部尚书任天宠、知大兴府事高霖都遇难。
English: Hube Shangshu Ren Tiancheng and Zhidaoxing Fu Zhi Gaolin both died in the disaster.

古文：壬戌，降空名宣敕、紫衣师德号度牒，以补军储。辛未，立皇孙铿为皇太孙。
现代文：初四，下发空白委任状给军队作为备用。十二日，立皇孙完颜铿为皇太孙。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, a blank letter of appointment was issued to the army as a backup. On the 12th day, the grandson of the emperor was appointed as the grandson of the emperor.

古文：癸酉，刘炳上书言十事。
现代文：十四日，刘炳上书论十件事。
English: On the 14th, Liu Ye discussed ten things on the book.

古文：辛巳，上谕宰臣： 多事之秋，陈言者悉送省。
现代文：二十二日，皇帝宣宗对宰臣说： 多事之秋，陈述的言论都要送来省察。
English: On the twenty-second day, Emperor Xuanzong said to his aide-de-camp: It's been an eventful autumn, and all statements should be sent for reflection.

古文：恐卿等不暇，朕于宫中置局，命方正官数员择可取者付出施行，何如？ 
现代文：恐怕你们没有时间，朕在宫中设立机构，命令几个方正官选择可取的付诸实行，怎么样？ 
English: I'm afraid you don't have time. How about setting up an agency in the palace and ordering a few officials to choose what should be implemented?

古文：宰臣请如圣谕。
现代文：宰臣说悉听尊旨。
English: The vice-minister said that he would do as he was told.

古文：诏削纳马补官恩例。
现代文：下诏削减交马补官人的恩惠惯例。
English: The next edict is to reduce the practice of granting favors to officials.

古文：戊子，谋代西夏，遣大臣镇抚京兆。
现代文：二十九日，计划攻打西夏，派大臣镇抚京城。
English: On the 29th, the plan to attack Western Xia was set in motion, and a minister was sent to subdue the capital city.

古文：秋七月戊午朔，大元兵收济源县。
现代文：秋七月初一，元朝军队收复济源县。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the Yuan Dynasty army recaptured Jiyuan County.

古文：己未，征弓箭于内外品官，三品以上三副，四品、五品二副，余以等级征之。
现代文：初二，在内外官吏中征集弓箭，三品以上的官交三副，四品、五品的官交二副，其余的按等级征集交纳。
English: In the second year of junior high school, officials at home and abroad were required to collect bows and arrows, those with three or more grades were required to pay three times the amount, those with four or five grades were required to pay two times the amount, and the rest were required to pay according to their rank.

古文：庚申，置陈、颍漕运提举官，以户部勾当官往来督察。
现代文：初三，设置陈、颍漕运提举官，用户部勾当官往来督察。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Chen and Zou Cao Yun were set up as promotion officers, and the user department was set up as a traffic inspector.

古文：有星如太白，色青白，有尾，出紫微垣北极傍，入贯索中。
现代文：有一星像太白星，颜色青白，有尾，出现在紫微垣北极旁，入贯索中。
English: There is a star like a too-white star, the color is blue-white, with a tail, appearing next to the purple micro hedge north pole, entering the rope.

古文：上闻河北讥察官有要求民财始听民渡河者，避兵民至或饿死、自溺，特命御史台体访之。
现代文：宣宗皇帝听说河北讥察官有向百姓索求财物后才让百姓渡黄河之事，且逃避兵事的百姓有的饿死，有的自溺于水，特命御史台前去体察访问。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong heard that the Hebei Censors had demanded money and goods from the people before letting them cross the Yellow River, and that some of the people who had evaded military service had starved to death and others had drowned themselves in the water, he specially ordered the Historian's Office to inspect and visit.

古文：又禁随朝职官夺民碾硙以自营利。
现代文：又禁止随朝官员损民以自利。
English: It also prohibited officials who followed the government from harming the people for their own benefit.

古文：诏河间有孤城，移其军民就粟清州，括民间骡付诸军，与马参用。
现代文：下诏河间孤城把其军民迁到清州生活，搜取民间骡交付军队，与马匹参杂使用。
English: According to the following edict, Kawama Kosei moved its soldiers and civilians to live in Cheongju, collected people's ploughs and delivered them to the army, and used them together with horses.

古文：辛酉，议括官田及牧马地以赡河北军户之徙河南者，已为民佃者俟获毕日付之。
现代文：初四，商议搜取官田及牧马地用以赡养迁到河南的河北军队家属，已经为佃户的人等到收获完了再付给他们报酬。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, they discussed the search for government-owned farmland and horse-breeding land to support the families of the Hebei army who had moved to Henan. They have already paid the tenants until the harvest is over.

古文：群臣迭言其不便，遂寝。
现代文：群臣都说此法不便，于是便搁置下来。
English: The ministers all said that this method was inconvenient, so it was shelved.

古文：癸亥，诏河北郡县军须并减河南之半。
现代文：初六，下诏河北郡县军必须同河南军合并并减去一半。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that the county army of Hebei County must be merged with the army of Henan Province and reduced by half.

古文：定尚书所造诸符：枢密院鹿，宣抚司鱼，统军司虎。
现代文：决定尚书造诸符：枢密院为鹿，宣抚司为鱼，统军司为虎。
English: He decided to write down all the symbols: the Privy Council was a deer, the Propaganda Department was a fish, and the General Staff Department was a tiger.

古文：丙寅，遣参知政事高汝砺往河南，便宜措置粮储。
现代文：初九，派参知政事高汝砺前往河南，便宜购置粮食。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Gao Rucheng, a political advisor to the prefectural governor, was sent to Henan to purchase grain at a low price.

古文：制品官纳弓箭之令，丁忧致仕者免。
现代文：规定官员交纳弓箭的命令，凡是父亲去世和退休的人免去。
English: An order requiring officials to hand in their bows and arrows will be waived for those whose fathers have died or retired.

古文：甲戌，借平阳民租一年。
现代文：十七日，借平阳百姓的租子一年。
English: On the 17th, he borrowed a tenant from the people of Pingyang for one year.

古文：诏职官更兵亡失告身，见任者保识即重给之，妄冒者从诈伪法。
现代文：诏命在职官员因战火遗失委任状及证明文件者，可由现任官员担保重新发给，假冒者按诈骗罪惩治。
English: In the event that a serving official loses his or her power of attorney and supporting documents due to the war, the current official may reissue it with a guarantee. Those who forge the power of attorney will be punished with the crime of fraud.

古文：丙子，尚书省奏给皇太孙岁赐钱，上不从，曰： 襁褓儿安所用之。 
现代文：十九日，尚书省上奏给皇太孙生日赐钱。皇帝不允许，说： 襁褓小儿有什么用。 
English: On the 19th day of the month, Shang Shuxu gave money to the emperor's great-grandson for his birthday. The emperor did not allow it, saying: "What's the use of being a child?"

古文：诏致仕官俸给比南征时减其半。
现代文：诏令退休官员的俸禄比照南征时的给一半。
English: He ordered that the salary of retired officials be increased to half of what it was at the time of the Southern Expedition.

古文：丁丑，肃宗神主至自中都，奉安于明俊殿。
现代文：二十日，肃宗神位从中都请到，安放于明俊殿。
English: On the 20th, Su Zong Sheng was invited from the capital and placed in the Mingjun Hall.

古文：戊寅，月入毕宿中，戊夜犯毕大星。
现代文：二十一日，月亮进到毕宿中，夜里侵犯毕大星。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the moon entered the middle of the zodiac, and invaded the great star at night.

古文：己卯，明德皇后神主至中都。
现代文：二十二日，明德皇后神主自中都来。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Mingde came from Zhongdu.

古文：裁损宫中岁给有差。
现代文：裁减宫中供给不等。
English: Reduce the supply of crabs in the palace.

古文：甲申，诏尚书省，行六部太多，其令各路运司兼之。
现代文：二十七日，诏令尚书省，行政六部太多，命令各路运司兼之。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that there should be no more than six ministries, as there were too many administrative departments, and it was ordered that all road transport departments should also have one.

古文：改交钞名 贞祐宝券 。
现代文：把钞票名字改为 贞宝券 。
English: Change the name of the banknote to "Zhenbao coupon."

古文：八月戊子朔，以陕西统军使完颜合打签枢密院事。
现代文：八月初一，任陕西统军使完颜合打为签枢密院事。
English: On the first day of August, he was appointed as the Shaanxi United Army to complete the signing of the Privy Council.

古文：己丑，制军府庶事枢密院官须与经历官裁决，经历议是而院官不从，许直以闻。
现代文：初二，命令军府事务由枢密院官员与经历官共同裁决，经历官裁定而枢密院官不同意，可直接上报皇上。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, he ordered that the military affairs should be decided jointly by the Privy Council officials and the experienced officers. If the experienced officers decided and the Privy Council officials disagreed, they could report directly to the emperor.

古文：癸巳，诏遣官体究京西路亲迁军户。
现代文：初六，下诏派官员去体恤京西路新迁的军属。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, officials were sent to commiserate with the newly relocated military dependents on West Jing Road.

古文：丙申，谕尚书省，职官犯罪。
现代文：初九，告谕尚书省，官员犯罪，大罪就行刑，小罪先记下，等事情安定后再治其罪。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Shang Shuxin, the Minister of Education and Culture, announced that if an official commits a crime, he will be executed for a major crime, and minor crimes will be recorded first, and the crime will be punished after things are stable.

古文：大者即施行之，小者籍之，事定始论其罪，谕枢密院，撒合辇所签军有具戒僧人，可罢遣之。
现代文：告谕枢密院，撒合辇的军中有僧人，可让他走。
English: Tell the Privy Council that there are monks in Sahagun's army, and they can let him go.

古文：己亥，诏武举官非见任及已从军者，随处调赴京师，别为一军，以备用。
现代文：十二日，诏令非任职武举官及从军的，无论何处的都调往京城，另外成立一军，留作备用。
English: On the 12th, the Emperor issued an edict ordering all non-commissioned military officers and soldiers, no matter where they were, to be transferred to the capital, and another army was established to serve as a reserve.

古文：被荐未授官者，量才任之。
现代文：被举荐未授官的人，量才使用。
English: For those who have been recommended but not appointed, only the amount is used.

古文：庚子，上虑平阳城大，兵食不足，议弃之，宰臣持不可。
现代文：十三日，皇帝宣宗考虑平阳城大，军粮不足，主张放弃，宰臣坚持说不放弃。
English: On the thirteenth day, Emperor Xuanzong considered the lack of military supplies in Pingyang, and advocated giving up. The vice-minister insisted that he would not give up.

古文：赏前冀州教授粘割忒邻，集义兵，出方略，遏土寇，兵后摄州，复立州治，积刍粮，招徕民户至五万，特迁三官，升正五品职。
现代文：奖赏前冀州教授粘割忒邻，集合义兵，出谋略，遏止贼寇，战后建立州治，积累粮草，招来五万民户，特选举三个官员，升为正五品职。
English: The former professor of Jizhou Province was rewarded for cutting down his neighbors, gathering volunteers, devising strategies, deterring thieves and robbers, establishing state governance after the war, accumulating grain and grass, attracting fifty thousand households, specially electing three officials, and being promoted to the position of the fifth grade.

古文：置山东西路总管府于归德府及徐、亳二州。以太常卿侯挚为参知政事，行尚书省于河北东、西两路。
现代文：在归德府及徐、亳二州设置山东西路总管府。任用太常卿侯挚为参知政事，在河北东、西两路行尚书省权。
English: He set up the Shandong East-West Road Administration Headquarters in Guide Prefecture and the two prefectures of Xu and Handan, appointed the Tai Changqing Hou Zhi as the governor, and exercised provincial power in the east and west of Hebei.

古文：太祖御容至自西京，奉安于启庆宫。
现代文：太祖御像自西京迎到，安放于启庆宫。
English: The statue of the great-grandfather arrived from West Beijing and was placed in the Kaiqing Palace.

古文：甲辰，置行枢密院于徐州、归德府。
现代文：十七日，在徐州、归德府设置行枢密院。
English: On the 17th, the Privy Council was set up in Xuzhou and Guide.

古文：诏诸职官不拘何从出身，其才可大用者尚书省具以闻。
现代文：诏令各级官员不论出身如何，其才可以大用的，尚书省要报知皇帝。
English: The imperial rescript decreed that officials at all levels, regardless of their origin, could only be of great use, and that the imperial rescript should be reported to the emperor.

古文：丙午，山东西路宣抚使完颜弼表： 遥授同知东平府事张汝楫将谋复叛，密遣人招同知益都府事孙邦佐。
现代文：十九日，山东西路宣抚使完颜弼表奏 ：遥授同知东平府事张汝楫将谋反，并秘密派人招安同知益都府事孙邦佐。
English: On the 19th, the Shanxi-Tianjin-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei

古文：邦佐斩其人，驰报弼，弼杀汝楫及其党万余。
现代文：孙邦佐杀了招安人，并快马报告完颜弼，完颜弼杀了张汝楫及其党羽一万多人。
English: Sun Bangzo killed Zhao'an, and quickly reported that he had killed Zhang Ruxuan and more than ten thousand of his followers.

古文：承制升邦佐德州防御使，余立功者赏有差。 
现代文：按规定升孙邦佐为德州防御使，其余立功的人不同程度地要给予奖赏。 
English: According to the regulations, Sun Banzo was promoted to the post of Texas defense minister, and the rest of the meritorious people should be rewarded to varying degrees.

古文：上嘉弼功，加崇进，封密国公，诏奖谕之。
现代文：皇帝宣宗嘉奖完颜弼的功绩，加为崇进，封为密国公，下诏奖励告谕。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong commended the merits of Yan Xuan, adding him to the Chongjin and crowning him as the Prince of the Secret State, and issued a reward announcement.

古文：丁未，诏近臣举良将，加孙邦佐昭毅大将军、泰定军节度使，仍官其子。
现代文：二十日，诏令近臣推荐良将，加孙邦佐为昭毅大将军、泰定军节度使，其子也加官。
English: On the 20th, the Emperor issued an edict to his close vassals to recommend good generals, adding Sun Bangso as General Zhao Yi, the military governor of Taiding, and his son was also promoted.

古文：戊申，东平、益都、太原、潞州置元帅府。
现代文：二十一日，东平、益都、太原、潞州设置元帅府。
English: On the 21st, Marshal's Offices were set up in Dongping, Yidu, Taiyuan and Zhangzhou.

古文：大赦。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：己酉，监察御史许古献恢复中都之策。
现代文：二十二日，监察御史许古献上恢复中都的策略。
English: On the 22nd, Inspector General Xu Guo presented a strategy for the restoration of Zhongdu.

古文：红袄贼掠成武，宣抚副使颜盏天泽讨走之，斩首数百级。
现代文：红袄叛贼掠夺成武，宣抚副使颜盏天泽讨伐打跑了他们，斩首级几百。
English: The Red Skull rebels plundered Chengwu, and the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Publicity, Qianqian Tianze, fought and routed them, beheading hundreds of them.

古文：进天泽一官，将校有功者命就迁赏。
现代文：进升颜盏天泽一级官，将校有功的都加以奖赏。
English: For officers promoted to the first rank of Tianze, officers with meritorious service will be rewarded.

古文：命侯挚招邢州贼程邦杰以官，不从则诱其党图之。
现代文：命令侯挚用官职招安邢州叛贼程邦杰，不服从就引诱他的党羽图谋杀死他。
English: He ordered Hou Jui to use his official position to recruit the traitor Cheng Bangjie from Anhui Province, and if he did not obey, he would lure his followers to murder him.

古文：减户部干办官四员及委差官有差。
现代文：裁减户部干办官四名及委差官不等。
English: There will be a reduction in the number of officials in the Household Department from four to three, as well as the number of commissioners.

古文：壬子，置行省于陕西。
现代文：二十五日，在陕西设置行省。
English: On the 25th, the line province was set up in Shaanxi.

古文：乙卯，增沿河阑籴之法，十取其八，以抑贩粟之币，仍严禁私渡。
现代文：二十八日，增加黄河沿岸出入籴米之法规，以压抑贩粮的弊端，仍然严禁私自渡河。
English: On the 28th, the regulations on the entry and exit of glutinous rice along the Yellow River were increased to suppress the drawbacks of grain trafficking. It is still strictly forbidden to cross the river without permission.

古文：增步军万人戍京以西，四万人戍京以东。
现代文：增加步兵一万人，守卫京城以西，四万人守京城以东。
English: 10,000 more infantrymen to guard the west of the capital, and 40,000 to guard the east of the capital.

古文：选陕西骑兵二千，增京畿之卫。
现代文：选取陕西二千骑兵，增强京城周围的保卫。
English: Two thousand cavalrymen from Shaanxi Province were selected to strengthen the defense around Beijing.

古文：谕陕西，坚守延安、临洮、环、庆、兰、会、保安、绥德、平凉、德顺、镇戎、泾原、郦、坊、邠、宁、乾、耀等处要害。
现代文：告谕陕西，坚守延安、临洮、环、庆、兰、会、保安、绥德、平凉、德顺、镇戎、泾原？坊？宁、乾、耀等地要塞。
English: Tell Shaanxi Province to hold fast to the fortresses in Yan'an, Linyi, Tonglu, Huan, Qing, Lan, Huizhou, Baode, Pingliang, Deshun, Zhen Rong, Qibao, Fang, Ning, Qian and Yao.

古文：分渭南州郡步兵屯平凉，令宣抚使治邠州，副使治同州之澄城以统之。
现代文：分派渭南州郡步兵驻守平凉，命令宣抚使治理州，副使治理同州的澄城。
English: The foot soldiers stationed in Binan County were assigned to stand guard in Pingliang, and the order was given to the proconsul to govern the county, and the vice-prefect to govern the county's Chengcheng.

古文：更以步骑守沿渭诸津。
现代文：用步骑兵守卫沿渭水的各个渡口。
English: Guard the ferry ports along Surabaya with infantry.

古文：丙辰，元帅左监军兼知真定府事永锡坐援中都失律，削官爵，杖之八十。
现代文：二十九日，元帅左监军兼知真定府事永锡因为支援中都失败，削去官爵，杖打八十。
English: On the 29th, the marshal of the Left Supervisor of the Army, Chizhen Dingfu, because of the failure of Yongxi in the support, he was stripped of the official title, and the stick was beaten eighty.

古文：九月丁巳朔，户部侍郎奥屯阿虎言： 国家多故，职官往往不仕。
现代文：九月初一，户部侍郎奥屯阿虎说： 国家多事，官员往往不做事。
English: On the first day of September, Otun Aguro, the head of the Household Division, said: The country is full of events, and officials often do not do their jobs.

古文：乞限以两季，违者勿复任用。 
现代文：乞求以两季为限，违者不再任用。 
English: Begging is limited to two seasons, and violators will no longer be appointed.

古文：上嫌其太重，命违限者止夺三官，降职三等，仍永不升注。
现代文：皇帝宣宗嫌此处罚太重，命令违限者只削官三级，且永不升迁。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong thought this punishment was too heavy, and ordered that those who violated the limit would only lose three levels of officials and would never be promoted.

古文：辛酉，除名永锡特迁信武将军、息州刺史。
现代文：初五，特任永锡为信武将军、息州刺史。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Yongxi was specially appointed as the general of Nobutake, and Sesshu was appointed as the historian.

古文：甲子，谕宰臣，沿淮塘路以南地向授民业，今为豪势据夺者，其令有司察之。
现代文：初八，告谕宰臣，沿淮塘路以南的地以前是授给百姓的，现在被豪势之族掠夺，命令有司探察此事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he announced to his vice-ministers that the land along the south of Huai Tong Road, which had previously been granted to the people, was now being plundered by powerful clans, and ordered a division to investigate the matter.

古文：丙寅，枢密院言： 陕西、河东世袭蕃部巡检，昨与世袭猛安谋克例罢其俸。今边事方急，宜仍给之，庶获其用。
现代文：初十，枢密院说 ：陕西、河东世袭猛安谋克照旧例应废除俸禄。但现在边疆战事正急，应该仍然给他们，以便使用他们。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Privy Council said, "The hereditary tributes of Shaanxi and Hedong should be abolished according to the old custom, but now that the frontier war is urgent, they should still be given so that they can be used."

古文：又西边弓箭手有才武出众，获功未推赏者，令宣抚司核实以闻。 
现代文：又说西部边疆有才武出众的弓箭手，有功未赏的人，命令宣抚司核实上报。 
English: He also said that the Western Frontier has talented and outstanding archers, and those who have meritorious deeds have not been rewarded, and ordered the Department of Publicity to verify the report.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝批准了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丁卯，以秋稼未获，禁军官围猎。
现代文：十一日，因为秋庄稼未收，禁止军官围猎。
English: On the 11th day, because the autumn crops had not been harvested, the officers were forbidden to hunt.

古文：诏授隐士王澮太中大夫、右谏议大夫，充辽东宣抚司参谋官。
现代文：下诏授予隐士王浍太中大夫、右谏议大夫，充辽东宣抚司参谋官。
English: The following edict awarded the hermit Wang Xiu Taizhong Doctor, Right Xiu Ying Doctor, and Zhou Liao Dong Xuan Fu Si Staff Officer.

古文：戊辰，遥授武宁军节度副使徒单吾典告平章政事抹撚尽忠逆谋，诏有司鞫之。
现代文：十二日，遥授武宁军节度副使徒单吾典告发平章政事抹睰尽忠叛逆谋反，诏领有司审讯他。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command, the Deputy Apostle of the Far Eastern Military Command

古文：设潼关提控总领军马等官。
现代文：设立潼关提控总领军马等官。
English: the establishment of the general leader of Shaoguan, Ma and other officials.

古文：辛未，置河北东路行总管府于原武、阳武、封丘、陈留、延津、通许、杞诸县，以治所徙军户。
现代文：十五日，在原武、阳武、封丘、陈留、延津、通许、杞等县设置河北东路行总管府，用以治理所迁来的军队及家属。
English: On the 15th, the Hebei East Road Administration Headquarters was set up in Yuanwu, Yangwu, Fengqiu, Chenliu, Yanjin, Tongxu, Handan and other counties to govern the relocated troops and their families.

古文：命司属令和尚等护治巩国公按辰第。
现代文：命令司属令和尚等人保护修理巩国公按辰的宅第。
English: He ordered his subordinates, including monks, to protect and repair the residence of Gong Guoqin.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 按辰所为不慎，或至犯法。
现代文：皇帝对宰臣说 ：按辰所作所为不谨慎，有的会触犯法律。
English: The emperor said to the aide-de-camp: It is not prudent to act according to the clock, and some will violate the law.

古文：舍之则理所不容，治之则失亲亲之道，但当设官以防之耳。 
现代文：舍弃他则理所不容，整治他又失去为亲之道，只有设官来防备。 
English: Abandoning him is not acceptable. If he is corrected, he will lose his way as a relative. The only way to prevent this is to appoint an official.

古文：按辰寻以不法，谪博州防御使。
现代文：不久按辰因为不守法，贬为博州防御使。
English: Soon after, he was demoted to Boshou Defense Envoy for not abiding by the law.

古文：黜卫绍王母李氏光献皇后尊谥，神主在太庙，画像在启庆宫，并迁出之。
现代文：废除卫绍王的母亲李氏光献皇后的谥号。在太庙的神主，在启庆宫的画像，一并迁出。
English: Li Shiguang, the mother of King Wei of Shao, gave up the title of empress. The deities in the Great Temple and the images in the Kaiqing Palace moved out together.

古文：陈州镇防军段仲连进羊三百，诏迁三官。
现代文：陈州镇防军段仲连进献三百只羊，下诏升官三级。
English: Chenzhou Town Defense Military Detachment Zhong Lian donated three hundred sheep, and was promoted to the third level.

古文：命右丞汝砺诣陈州规画粮储。
现代文：命令右丞汝砺到陈州规划粮食储存。
English: He ordered Yu Rong to go to Chenzhou to plan grain storage.

古文：壬申，以苏门县为辉州。
现代文：十六日，把苏门县改为辉州。
English: On the 16th, Sumen County was changed to Huizhou.

古文：癸酉，朝谒世祖、太祖御容于启庆宫，行献享礼，始用乐。
现代文：十七日，在启庆宫朝见世祖、太祖遗容，行献享礼，至此开始采用音乐。
English: On the seventeenth day, in the morning of the Kaiqing Palace, they saw the ancestor and the great-grandfather's remains, made a gift, and began to use music.

古文：赐东永昌姓为温敦氏，包世显、包疙疸为乌古论氏，睹令孤为和速嘉氏，何定为必兰氏，马福德、马柏寿为夹谷氏，各迁一官。
现代文：赐东永昌姓为温敦姓氏，包世显、包疙疸为乌古论姓氏，睹令孤为和速嘉姓氏，何定为必兰姓氏，马福德、马柏寿为夹谷姓氏，各升官一级。
English: Qidong Yongchang's surname is Windun's surname, Bao Shixian's and Bao Jian's surnames are Uguon's surnames, Zheling Guo's surname is He Jia's surname, He Jia's surname is Pilan's surname, Ma Fude's and Ma Bai Shou's surnames are Jiaogu's surname, and each of them was promoted to the first grade.

古文：甲戌，朝谒太宗、熙宗、睿宗御容，行献享礼。
现代文：十八日，朝见太宗、熙宗、睿宗遗容，行献享礼。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizong, Emperor Heizong, and Emperor Ruizong met in the morning and paid tribute.

古文：诏开、滑、浚、济、曹、滕诸州置连珠寨，如卫州。
现代文：诏令开、滑、浚、济、曹、滕等州设置连珠寨，像卫州一样。
English: He ordered the provinces of Kai, Niu, Jian, Jie, Cao, and Teng to set up Lian Zhuzhai, just like Weizhou.

古文：乙亥，诏河北、山东等路及平凉、庆阳、临洮府，泾、邠、秦、巩、德顺诸州经兵，四品以下职事官并以二十月为满。
现代文：十九日，诏令河北、山东等路及平凉、庆阳、临洮府，泾？秦、巩、德顺等州治理军队，四品以下的官员任期为二十个月。
English: On the 19th, Hebei, Shandong and other provinces, as well as Pingliang, Qingyang, Linyi, Shandong, Qin, Qinling, Gong, Deshun and other provinces were ordered to govern the army, and the term of office of officials below the fourth grade was 20 months.

古文：募随处主帅及官军、义军将校，有能率众复取中都者封王，迁一品阶，授二品职。
现代文：招募各地主帅及官军、义军将校，有能力率兵收取中都的人封王，升为一品官阶，授予二品官职。
English: Recruiting commanders from all over the country, as well as officers from the government army and the rebel army, who have the ability to lead soldiers to receive the crown of the central capital, promoted to the first grade of official rank, and awarded the second grade of official position.

古文：能战却敌、善诱降人、取附都州县者，予本处长官、散官，随职迁授，余州县递减二等。
现代文：能战击退敌军、善于引诱他们投降、攻取附近州县的人，给予本地长官、散官，随职升授，收取其余州县递升二个等级。
English: Those who are able to repel the enemy forces in battle, are good at luring them to surrender, and capture the nearby counties and prefectures, will be given local officers and non-commissioned officers, promoted on the job, and the remaining counties and prefectures will be promoted two levels.

古文：红袄贼周元儿陷深、祁州，束鹿、安平、无极等县，真定帅府以计破之，斩元儿及杀其党五百余人。
现代文：红袄贼寇周元儿攻陷深、祁州，束鹿、安平、无极等县，真定帅府用计谋打败了他，杀了周元儿及其党羽五百多人。
English: The Red Army bandit Zhou Yuan'er invaded Shenshen, Zhangzhou, Soklu, Anping, Wuji and other counties, and the Shandong Provincial Government defeated him with stratagems and killed Zhou Yuan'er and more than 500 of his followers.

古文：丁丑，诏司、县官能募民进粮五千石以上，减一资考，万石以上，迁一官，减二资考，二万石以上迁一官，升一等，注见阙。
现代文：二十一日，诏令司、县官员能招募百姓进献五千石以上粮的，减去一次考核，万石以上的，升官一级，减去二次考核，二万石以上的升官一级，考核升一等。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, if the prefectural and county officials are able to recruit people to donate grain worth more than 5,000 koku, they will be deducted one assessment, and if they are worth more than 10,000 koku, they will be promoted to the first grade, minus the second assessment, and if they are worth more than 20,000 koku, they will be promoted to the first grade, and the assessment will be promoted to the first grade.

古文：诸色人以功赐国姓者，能以千人败敌三千人，赐及緦麻以上亲，二千人以上，赐及大功以上亲，千人以上，赐止其家。
现代文：各族人因功可赏赐国姓，能用一千人打败敌人三千人的，赏赐本族亲属，二千人以下的，赏赐同门亲属，一千人以上的，只赏赐其家。
English: People of all ethnic groups can be awarded a national surname for their merits. If they can defeat three thousand enemies with one thousand people, they will be awarded to their relatives. If they have less than two thousand, they will be awarded to their relatives, and if they have more than one thousand, they will only be awarded to their families.

古文：庚辰，陕西宣抚司来上第五将城万户杨再兴击走夏人之捷。
现代文：二十四日，陕西宣抚司来上报第五将城万户杨再兴打跑西夏人的捷报。
English: On the 24th, the Shaanxi Propaganda and Guidance Bureau reported the successful report of the fifth mayor of the city, Yang Zaixing, who defeated the Xixia people.

古文：壬午，以空名宣敕付陕西宣抚司，凡夏人入寇，有能临阵立功者，五品以下并听迁授。
现代文：二十六日，用空白命令交付陕西宣抚司，凡是西夏入侵，有能力上战场立功的人，五品以下的官听任他升授。
English: On the 26th, a blank order was given to the Shaanxi Propaganda and Guidance Department. Any person who invaded Western Xia and had the ability to go to the battlefield and perform meritorious service was allowed to be promoted by officials below the fifth grade.

古文：乙酉，置大名府行总管府于柘城县，以治所徙军户。
现代文：二十九日，在柘城县设置大名府行总管府，用以治理所迁来的军队及家属。
English: On the 29th, the Daimyo Prefecture and the General Administration Office were set up in Licheng County to govern the relocated troops and their families.

古文：冬十月丙戌朔，翰林侍读学士、权参知政事乌古论德升出为集庆军节度使兼亳州管内观察使。
现代文：冬十月初一，翰林侍读学士、权参知政事乌古论德升出朝做集庆军节度使兼亳州管内观察使。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Hanlin, a bachelor's degree student, political advisor to the governor, and Wu Guonde, a politician, ascended to the imperial court to serve as the festival envoy of the army and the observation envoy within the jurisdiction of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁亥，尚书右丞汝砺言： 河北军户之徙河南省，宜以系官闲田及牧马草地之可耕者赐之，使自耕以食，而罢其月粮。 
现代文：初二，尚书右丞汝砺说 ：河北军队家属迁到河南的，应该用可耕种的公家的闲田及牧马草地赏赐他们，使他们自耕自食，从而罢除每月供给他们的粮食。 
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Shang Shuyuan Rong said: If the families of the Hebei army moved to Henan, they should be rewarded with arable idle land and pastureland for horses, so that they can grow their own food, thus eliminating the monthly grain supply to them.

古文：上从其请。
现代文：皇帝宣宗批准了。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong approved.

古文：命右司谏冯开随处按视，人给三十亩。
现代文：命令右司谏冯开到处巡视，每人给三十亩。
English: He ordered his right-hand man, Feng Kai, to inspect everywhere, and each of them was given thirty mu.

古文：夏人入保安，都统完颜国家奴破之；攻延安，戍将又败之。
现代文：西夏人攻入保安，都统完颜国家奴打败了他们。西夏攻打延安，守将又打败了他们。
English: The Western Xia attacked Yan'an, and the defenders defeated them again.

古文：是日，捷至。戊子，以御史中丞徒单思忠为参知政事。
现代文：初三，任御史中丞徒单思忠为参知政事。
English: In the third year of his junior high school career, he was appointed a member of the Council of Elders, and his disciple Shan Sizhong became a member of the Council of Elders.

古文：己丑，平章抹撚尽忠下狱既久，监察御史许古言： 尽忠逮系有司，此必重罪，而莫知其由，甚骇众听。
现代文：初四，平章抹睰尽忠进监狱已经很久了，监察御史许古说： 抹睰尽忠为有司逮捕，这一定是重罪，但不知其由，很骇人听闻。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the new year, it has been a long time since Pingzhang Mugu Jizhong went to prison. Supervisor Gu Shi Xu Gu said: "Mugu Jizhong was arrested as a criminal, which must be a serious crime, but I don't know the reason, it's appalling.

古文：乞遣公正重臣鞫之。
现代文：乞求派公正的重臣审讯他。
English: He was interrogated by his superiors, who begged for justice.

古文：如得其实，明示罪目，以厌中外之心。 
现代文：如果得到了他的实际情况，弄明他的罪状，可以服中外之心。 
English: If you get his actual situation and find out his crime, you can win the hearts of both Chinese and foreigners.

古文：书上，不报。
现代文：奏章送上了，但没有批复。
English: The score was sent, but there was no reply.

古文：庚寅，遂诛尽忠。
现代文：初五，杀了抹睰尽忠。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he killed the maggot Zhenzhong.

古文：癸巳，罪状尽忠告中外。
现代文：初八，向天下公布抹睰尽忠的罪状。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15

古文：诏枢密副使仆散安贞行枢密院于徐州。
现代文：诏令枢密副使仆散安贞在徐州行枢密院事。
English: He ordered the vice-envoy of the Privy Council, San Anzhen, to go to Xuzhou to do the work of the Privy Council.

古文：戊戌，辽东宣抚司报败留哥之捷。
现代文：十三日，辽东宣抚司报捷打败留哥。
English: On the 13th, Liaodong Xuanfushi reported that Jie defeated Liu Ge.

古文：甲辰，诏求广平郡王承晖之后，得其犹子历亭县丞永怀，以为器物直长。
现代文：十九日，下诏寻找广平郡王承晖的后代，找到了他的儿子历亭县丞永怀，任为器物直长。
English: On the 19th, he issued an edict to search for descendants of Wang Chengyao of Guangping County, and found his son, Li Ting County's Jie Yonghuai, who was appointed to the post of Jianlong.

古文：丙午，夏人陷临洮，陕西宣抚副使完颜胡失剌被执。
现代文：二十一日，西夏人攻陷了临洮，陕西宣抚使完颜胡失剌被拘捕。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Western Xia people attacked and captured Linyi, and the Shaanxi proclamation was arrested.

古文：庚戌，诏尚书左丞相仆散端兼都元帅，行尚书省于陕西。
现代文：二十五日，诏令尚书左丞相仆散端兼任都元帅，在陕西行使尚书省之职。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict made Shangshu Zuojo minister's servant Sandan concurrently serve as the capital's marshal, exercising the duties of Shangshu Province in Shaanxi.

古文：辛亥，蒙古纲奏： 昨被旨权山东路宣副使，屯东平。
现代文：二十六日，蒙古纲上奏 ：昨日接旨暂时代理山东路宣抚副使，驻守东平。
English: On the 26th, the Mongolian program was announced: yesterday, the vice-envoy of the proclamation of the provisional administration of Shandong Road was stationed in Dongping.

古文：行至徐北岸，北兵已逼徐，不可往。 
现代文：行到徐北岸，北面的敌兵已经逼近徐，不能前往山东路。 
English: Go to the north bank of Xu, the enemy soldiers on the north side have approached Xu, and can not go to Shandong Road.

古文：诏枢密副使仆散安贞权于沿河任使之。
现代文：诏令枢密副使仆散安贞暂代沿黄河的职务。
English: He ordered the vice-minister of the privy council, San Anzhen, to temporarily take over the duties along the Yellow River.

古文：壬子，以同、华旧屯陕西兵及河南所移步骑旧隶陕州宣抚司者，改隶陕西行省。
现代文：二十七日，把同、华两地旧时驻守陕西的军队及河南所调去的步骑军队而隶属陕西宣抚司的，改为隶属陕西行省。
English: On the 27th, the troops that were stationed in Shaanxi in the past and the cavalry troops that were transferred from Henan and were subordinate to the Shaanxi Propaganda and Guidance Department were transferred to Shaanxi Province.

古文：召中奉大夫、袭封衍圣公孔元措为太常博士。
现代文：召中奉大夫、袭封衍圣公孔元措为太常博士。
English: He was called to serve as a doctor in the middle of his career, and he succeeded to the title of Shingong Kongyuan, and became a doctor of the imperial court.

古文：上初用元措于朝，或言宣圣坟庙在曲阜，宜遣之奉祀。
现代文：皇帝开始在朝中启用孔元措，有人说宣圣的坟庙在曲阜，应该派孔元措去奉祀。
English: The emperor began to use Confucius in the middle of the dynasty. Some people said that the consecrated tomb temple was in Qufu, and Confucius should be sent to worship.

古文：既而上念元措圣人之后，山东寇盗纵横，恐罹其害，是使之奉祀而反绝之也，故有是命。辽东贼蒲鲜万奴僣号，改元天泰。
现代文：不久皇帝考虑孔元措是圣人的后代，山东贼寇多，恐怕他遇害，就没让他去。辽东贼寇蒲鲜万奴假称皇帝年号，改元天泰。
English: Before long, the emperor considered Kong Yuan-tso to be the descendant of a saint. Shandong Kekodo, fearing that he would be killed, did not let him go. Liaodong Kekopu Xianwano pretended to be the emperor's name and changed it to Yuan Tian-tai.

古文：十一月丙辰朔，河北行尚书省侯挚入见。
现代文：十一月初一，河北行尚书省侯挚入见。
English: On the first day of November, he went to Hebei to visit Shangshu Province.

古文：诏河北西路宣抚副使田琢自浚徙其兵屯陕。
现代文：诏令河北西路宣抚副使田琢把他的兵从地迁到陕西驻守。
English: He ordered Tian Taku, the vice-envoy of the Western Hebei Proclamation, to relocate his troops to Shaanxi.

古文：戊午，枢密院进王世安取盱眙、楚州之策，遂以世安为招抚使，与泗州元帅府所遣人同往淮南计度其事。
现代文：初三，枢密院进献王世安攻取盱眙、楚州的策略，于是任王世安为招抚使，与泗州元帅府所派的人一同前往淮南计议其事。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Privy Council proposed to Wang Shian the strategy of conquering Shandong and Chuzhou. Therefore, Wang Shian was appointed as the envoy and went to Huainan to discuss the matter with the people sent by the marshal's office of Zhangzhou.

古文：戊辰，夏人犯绥德之克戎寨，官军败之，犯绥平，又败之。
现代文：十三日，西夏人侵犯绥德的克戎寨，被官军打败，西夏人侵犯绥平，又被打败。
English: On the 13th, the Xixia people invaded Ke Rongzhai in Shunde and were defeated by the government army. The Xixia people invaded Suiping and were defeated again.

古文：赏有功将士告捷者。
现代文：奖赏有功的将士及来报捷的人。
English: To reward meritorious soldiers and those who come to report their success.

古文：参知政事徒单思忠言： 今陈言者多掇拾细故，乞不送省，止令近侍局度其可否发遣。 
现代文：参知政事徒单思忠说 ：现在上书言论的人大多掇拾细微末节，请求不送上查看，只命令近侍局审度是否可以向上呈送。 
English: Sanzhong Shan Sizhong, a member of the Political Affairs Committee, said: Most of the people who submit comments now are picking up the fine details, requesting that they not be sent for review, but only ordering the proximate service bureau to review whether they can be sent up.

古文：上曰： 若尔，是塞言路。
现代文：皇帝宣宗说 ：如果像你说的那样，是阻塞言论之路。
English: Emperor Xuanzong said: If it is as you say, it is a way to block speech.

古文：凡系国家者，岂得不由尚书省乎？ 
现代文：凡是为国家着想的，难道不送达尚书省吗？ 
English: Shouldn't anything that is for the sake of the country be sent to the Ministry of Education and Culture?

古文：庚午，上与尚书右丞汝砺商略遣官括田赐军之利害，汝砺言不便者数端。
现代文：十五日，皇帝宣宗与尚书右丞汝砺商讨派官吏收集田地赐给军队的利害关系，汝砺说有几点不利。
English: On the 15th, Emperor Xuanzong and Shang Shuyuan Rong discussed the interests of sending officials to collect fields to give to the army. Rong said that there were several disadvantages.

古文：乃诏有司罢其令，仍给军粮之半，其半给诣实之价。
现代文：于是下诏有司废除此命令，仍然给一半军粮，另一半付给同价实物。
English: Therefore, the emperor issued an edict to abolish this order, still giving half of the grain to the army, and the other half to pay the same price in kind.

古文：壬申，遣参知政事侯挚祭河神于宜村。
现代文：十七日，派参知政事侯挚在宜村祭祀黄河之神。
English: On the seventeenth day, they sent Sanzhi, Zhengji and Houxin to worship the god of the Yellow River in Yimura.

古文：甲戌，移剌塔不也以军万人破夏人数万于熟羊寨。
现代文：十九日，移剌塔不也用一万军队在熟羊寨打败西夏几万人。
English: On the 19th, Zhifang Tower used 10,000 troops to defeat tens of thousands of people in Western Xia in Rongyang Village.

古文：丙子，诏市民间輓车羸疾牝马置群牧中，以图滋息。
现代文：二十一日，诏令市民把驾车的弱马病马放到牧群中，以图其繁衍。
English: On the 21st, the prefectural government ordered citizens to drive sick horses into the herd in order to breed them.

古文：知临洮府陀满胡土门破夏人八万于城下。
现代文：知临洮府陀满胡土门在城下打败八万西夏军。
English: Chilin Shifu Tuduman Hutu Gate defeated eighty thousand Western Xia troops at the foot of the castle.

古文：丁丑，监察御史陈规劾参知政事侯挚，上不允所言，而慰答之。
现代文：二十二日，监察御史陈规揭发参知政事侯挚的罪状，皇帝不允许他说。
English: On the 22nd, the inspector of imperial history Chen Gui exposed the crime of participating in the political affairs of the governor Hou Xin, but the emperor did not allow him to speak.

古文：庚辰，上谓宰臣曰： 朕恐括地扰民，罢其令矣。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝对宰臣说： 朕恐怕收田地骚扰百姓，废除了此令。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor said to the vice-minister, "I am afraid that I am harassing the people by taking over the fields," and abolished this order.

古文：官荒牧马地军户愿耕者听，已为民承种者勿夺。
现代文：国家荒废的牧马地，军队百姓愿耕种的听便，已经被百姓耕种的不要再夺回来。
English: The country's abandoned pastureland, the army and the people are willing to cultivate the convenience, has been cultivated by the people do not want to recapture.

古文：旧列点检左右将军、近侍局官、护卫、承应人秩满皆赐匹帛，虽所司为之制造，然不免赋取于民，近亦罢之，止给宝券。
现代文：旧规定点检左右将军、近侍局官、护卫、承应人任职期满后都赐予帛衣，由所司为之制造，然而免不了向百姓收取赋税，近期都免了，只给宝券。
English: According to the old regulations, after the expiration of their term of office, the generals, the close attendants, the guards, and the attendants were all given uniforms, which were made by the director. However, it was unavoidable to collect taxes from the people. Recently, they were all exempted, and only the treasure tickets were given.

古文：至于朕所服御，亦以官丝付府监织之，自今勿复及民也。 
现代文：至于朕所穿的衣服，也用国家的丝交付太府监制，到现在不要再连及百姓。 
English: As for the clothes I wear, I also use the state's silk to deliver it to the Taifu Supervision and Production, and now I don't want to be connected to the people.

古文：大元兵徇彰德府，知府陀满斜烈死之。
现代文：元朝军队占领彰德府，知府陀满斜烈死去。
English: The troops of the Yuan Dynasty occupied Zhangdefu, and the prefectural governor, Taman, died a violent death.

古文：十二月乙酉朔，徙朔州民分屯岚、石、隰、吉、绛、解等州。
现代文：十二月初一，把朔州的百姓分别迁到岚、石、隰、吉、绛、解等州屯田。
English: On the first day of December, the people of Shuozhou were relocated to the county towns of Zou, Shishi, Zou, Ji, Zou and He.

古文：戊子，以军事免枢密院官朝拜。
现代文：初四，因为军事免去枢密院的官员朝拜。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, officials of the Privy Council were exempted from paying homage because of the military.

古文：己丑，侯挚复行尚书省于河北。
现代文：初五，侯挚在河北再行尚书省之职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the new year, Hou Zhengyi resumed his duties as the Minister of Education in Hebei Province.

古文：庚寅，太白昼见。
现代文：初八，下诏免去元旦日的朝贺。
English: On the 25th, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：壬辰，诏免元日朝贺。乙未，敕赠昭圣皇后三代官爵。
现代文：十一日，诏令赠昭圣皇后三代官爵。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict presented the third generation of peerages to Empress Shoshen.

古文：太康县人刘全、时温、东平府民李宁谋反，伏诛。
现代文：太康县人刘全、时温，东平府百姓李宁谋反，被杀。
English: Liu Quan and Shi Wen from Taikang County and Li Ning from Dongping Prefecture plotted rebellion and were killed.

古文：戊戌，陕西行元帅府乞益兵，以田琢之众隶之，仍奖谕以诏。
现代文：十四日，陕西行元帅府请求增兵，把田琢的人划归他统管，并下诏嘉奖。
English: On the 14th, he went to Shaanxi to request the marshal's office to increase the number of soldiers, assign the people of Tiantuo to his overall management, and issued an edict of commendation.

古文：壬寅，诏林州刺史惟宏与都提控从坦同经理边事，诸将功赏次第便宜行之。
现代文：十八日，诏令林州刺史惟宏与都提控从坦共同巡视边防，诸将的功赏按次序灵活发给。
English: On the 18th, Linzhou general Shi Weihong was ordered to jointly inspect the border defense with the commander-in-chief of the Tang Dynasty, and the rewards of the generals were flexibly distributed in order.

古文：乙巳，大元兵徇大名府。
现代文：二十一日，元朝军队占领大名府。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the troops of the Yuan Dynasty occupied the Daimyo-fu.

古文：癸丑，皇太孙薨，以殇，无祭享之制，戒勿劳民。
现代文：二十九日，皇太孙死去，因为死时未到成年，不能享受祭享，告诫丧事不要劳民。
English: On the 29th, the great-grandson of the emperor died, because he was not an adult at the time of his death, he could not enjoy the offerings, and he warned the mourners not to work.

古文：谕宣徽院免元日亲王、公主进酒。
现代文：告谕宣徽院免去元日亲王、公主进酒之规定。
English: An announcement was made to the effect that the Prince and Princess would not be allowed to drink alcohol on New Year's Day.

古文：甲寅，礼官奏，正旦宋遣使来贺。不宜辍朝。命举乐、服色如常仪。
现代文：正月初一宋朝派使者来贺，不宜辍朝。命令音乐、服饰像往常礼仪。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the year, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to congratulate, it is not appropriate to abandon the dynasty.

古文：四方多故之秋，弛慢如此，可乎？
现代文：下诏临洮路兵马都总管陀满胡土门升官三级，继续任职。贞四年春正月初九，监察御使田迥秀上书陈述五件事。
English: According to the following edict, the general manager of the Linyi Road Terracotta Warriors and Horses, Tuduman Hutumen, was promoted to the third level and continued to serve. On the ninth day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year, the inspector envoy, Tian Yuxiu, submitted a letter stating five things.

古文：中丞福兴号素谨于官事者，当一诘之。 
现代文：十二日，红袄贼寇侵犯泰安、德、博等州，山东西路行元帅府打败了他们。
English: On the 12th, the Red Kite bandits invaded Tai'an, De, Bo and other provinces, and the Marshal's Office defeated them by marching east and west along the mountains.

古文：己巳，尚书右丞高汝砺进左丞。
现代文：十五日，尚书右丞高汝砺进升为左丞。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Gao Rucheng, the right-hand man of Shangshu, was promoted to the left-hand man.

古文：庚午，大元兵收曹州。
现代文：十六日，元朝军队收取了曹州。
English: On the 16th, the Yuan Dynasty army took over Caozhou.

古文：辛未，参知政事侯挚进尚书右丞。
现代文：十七日，参知政事侯挚进升为尚书右丞。
English: On the seventeenth day, he was promoted to Shoshuu-jo (尚書右丞).

古文：壬申，太原元帅左监军乌古论德升招其民降北者，得四千三百余人。
现代文：十八日，太原元帅左监军乌克论德升招安了投降元朝的百姓，共得四千三百多人。
English: On the 18th, Taiyuan Marshal Zuoying's army, led by Uke Onde Sheng, recruited the people who surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty, a total of more than 4,300 people.

古文：癸酉，诏赐故皇太孙谥曰冲怀。
现代文：十九日，下诏赐给已故皇太孙谥号 冲怀 。
English: On the 19th, the following imperial edict was issued to the late Crown Prince Sun Yat-sen.

古文：更定捕获伪造宝券者官赏。
现代文：决定无论谁抓获了伪造假宝券的人，国家都给予奖赏。
English: It was decided that no matter who caught the person who forged the fake treasure ticket, the state would give a reward.

古文：乙亥，以殿前都点检皇子遂王守礼为枢密使，枢密使濮王守纯为平章政事。
现代文：二十一日，任殿前都点检皇子遂王完颜守礼为枢密使，枢密使濮王完颜守纯为平章政事。
English: On the twenty-first day, before the appointment of the palace, the prince was inspected and the king was appointed as a privy envoy, and the king was appointed as a government official.

古文：己卯，立遂王守礼为皇太子。
现代文：二十五日，立遂王完颜守礼为皇太子。
English: On the 25th, the crown prince was crowned.

古文：庚辰，诏免逃户租。
现代文：二十六日，下诏免去逃亡户的租子。
English: On the 26th, an edict was issued to free tenants who had fled their homes.

古文：壬午，言者请遣官劝农，至秋成，考其绩以甄赏。
现代文：二十八日，有人说请派官劝勉农事，至秋天收成时，考察他们的业绩以区别奖赏。
English: On the 28th, someone said that please send officials to encourage farmers, and when the autumn harvest comes, examine their performance and reward them with distinction.

古文：宰臣言： 民恃农以生，初不待劝，但宽其力，勿夺其时而已。
现代文：宰臣说： 民以农为生，开始不需要劝，只需放松他们的力量，不要剥夺他们的时间罢了。
English: The Vice-Minister said, "People don't need to be persuaded to start making a living as farmers, they just need to relax their strength and not deprive themselves of time."

古文：遣官不过督州县计顷亩、严期会而已。
现代文：派去的官不过是督察州县计算顷亩，严格期限而已。
English: The official sent was just an inspector from the prefecture to calculate hectares and mu, with a strict deadline.

古文：吏卒因为奸利，是乃妨农，何名为劝。 
现代文：小官吏因为奸利，妨碍农业，叫什么劝农。 
English: Petty officials interfere with agriculture because of their profiteering, so what do you call persuading farmers?

古文：上是其言，不遣。
现代文：皇帝认为他说的对，没有派遣劝农官。
English: The emperor thought he was right and did not send an agrarian official to persuade him.

古文：二月甲申朔，日有食之。上不视朝，诏皇太子控制枢密院事。
现代文：二月初一，有日蚀。皇帝不上朝，诏令皇太子控制枢密院事。
English: On the first day of February, there was a solar eclipse. The emperor did not go to court, and the emperor ordered the crown prince to take control of the Privy Council.

古文：大元兵围太原。
现代文：元朝军队围攻太原。
English: The Yuan Dynasty army besieged Taiyuan.

古文：乙酉，以信武将军、宣抚副使永锡签枢密院事，权尚书右丞。
现代文：初二，任信武将军、宣抚副使永锡为签枢密院事，暂代尚书右丞。
English: In the second year of his junior high school, he was appointed as a member of the Privy Council by General Nobutake and the Vice-Minister of Propaganda, Yong Xi, and temporarily assumed the post of Vice-Minister of Education.

古文：皇太子既总枢务，诏有司议典礼，以金铸 抚军之宝 授太子，启禀之际用之。
现代文：皇太子总管中心事务，诏令有司议论典礼，用金铸 抚军之宝 授予太子，让他启禀之时使用。
English: As the crown prince is in charge of the affairs of the center, the imperial edict ordered a ceremony to be held to discuss the matter, and the treasure of the Fuzhou army was awarded to the prince with gold to be used at the time of his enthronement.

古文：平章政事高琪表乞致仕，不允。
现代文：平章政事高琪上表请求退休，没被批准。
English: The request of Pingzhang Gaoqi to retire was not approved.

古文：如枢密院官问所以备御之策。
现代文：召枢密院官询问防御之策略。
English: Privy Councillors were summoned to inquire into the defence strategy.

古文：丁亥，以河东南路宣抚使胥鼎为枢密副使，权尚书左丞，行省于平阳。
现代文：初四，任河东南路宣抚使胥鼎为枢密副使，暂代尚书左丞，在平阳行使职责。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Zhai Ding, the South Hedong Road's propaganda envoy, became the vice-envoy of the Privy Council, temporarily taking the place of Shang Shuzhong, and exercised his duties in Pingyang.

古文：鼎方抗表求退，诏勉谕就职，因有是命。
现代文：胥鼎当时正上表求退，皇诏勉励他就职，因此有此命。
English: At that time, Hao Ding was on the verge of resigning, and the imperial edict encouraged him to take the post, so he was given this order.

古文：行省左丞相仆散端先亦告老，遣太医往镇护视其疾。
现代文：行省左丞相仆散端前时也告老引退，派太医前去医治他的病。
English: Prior to his retirement, the minister of the left of the ministry, Sandan, also retired, and sent a doctor to treat his illness.

古文：戊子，宰臣以皇太子既立，服御仪物悉与已受册同，今边事未宁，请少缓册宝之礼，从之。
现代文：初五，宰臣认为皇太子已立，衣服仪物都与受封时相同，现在边疆还未安宁，请稍微缓缓册封之礼，皇帝同意了。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the vice-minister thought that the crown prince had been enthroned, the clothes and objects were the same as when he was enthroned, and now the frontier was not peaceful. Please slow down the ceremony of enthronement a little. The emperor agreed.

古文：戊戌，免亲王、公主长春节入贺致礼。
现代文：十五日，免去亲王、公主万寿节时入朝致贺礼。
English: On the 15th, the crown prince and princess were excused from entering the Imperial Palace to give a congratulatory gift on the occasion of the longevity festival.

古文：己亥，大元兵攻下霍山诸隘。
现代文：十六日，元朝军队攻下霍山各关隘。
English: On the 16th, the Yuan Dynasty army captured the Huoshan Pass.

古文：甲辰，命参知政事李革为修奉太庙使，礼部尚书张行信提控修奉社稷。
现代文：二十一日，任命参知政事李革为修奉太庙使，礼部尚书张行信提控修奉社稷。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Li Ge, the political secretary of the prefectural government, was appointed as the official of the Great Temple, and Zhang Xingxin, the secretary of the Ministry of Rites, was appointed as the official of the Great Temple.

古文：权祔肃宗神主于世祖室，奉始祖以下神主于随室，祭器以瓦代铜，献官以公服行事，供张等物并从简约。
现代文：暂时在世祖室里附祭肃宗神主，在各室敬奉始祖以下神主，祭器用瓦代铜，献官穿官服做事，供物一并从简。
English: Temporarily in the ancestor's room, the deity of Su Zong was enshrined. In each room, the deities below the ancestor were worshiped. The sacrificial vessels were made of tiles instead of copper. The officials were dressed in official uniforms to perform their duties. The offerings were also reduced.

古文：庚戌，诏凡死节之臣籍其数，立庙致祭。
现代文：二十七日，下诏统计为节而死的大臣，立庙致祭。
English: On the 27th, the death of the minister who died for the festival was recorded in the next imperial edict, and the temple was dedicated.

古文：壬子，任国公玮薨，辍朝。
现代文：二十九日，任国公玮死去，辍朝。
English: On the 29th, Ren Guoguang died and left the imperial court.

古文：是月，同知观州军州事张开复河间府沧、献等州并属县十有三，表请赦旁郡胁从之臣。
现代文：当月，同知观州军州事张开收复了河间府的沧、献等州并属县十三个，上表请求赦免邻郡胁从之臣。
English: In the same month, the Tongzhi and Guanzhou military state affairs opened up and recovered the Cang, Xian and other states of Hema Prefecture and belonged to thirteen counties, and the above table requested the pardon of the subordinates of the neighboring counties.

古文：又请以宣抚司空名宣敕二百道付之，从权署补，仍以粮继其军食。
现代文：又请求发给宣抚司的空白委任状二百张，由其根据具体情况随时签署填发，并请求运送粮草以保障军队的供给。
English: He also requested that 200 blank letters of appointment be issued to the Publicity Secretary, who would sign and issue them at any time according to the specific situation, and requested the transportation of grain and grass to ensure the supply of the army.

古文：诏枢密措画。
现代文：皇帝下诏命枢密院筹划施行。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the Privy Council to carry out the plan.

古文：三月乙卯，以将修太庙，遣李革奏告祖宗神主于明俊殿。
现代文：三月初二，因为将修缮太庙，派遣李革到明俊殿奏告祖宗神主。
English: On the second day of the third month, Li Ge was sent to the Mingjun Hall to report to the Ancestor God because the Great Temple was going to be repaired.

古文：丁巳，曲赦中都、河北等路。
现代文：初四，大赦中都、河北等路。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, there will be an amnesty for Zhongdu, Hebei and other areas.

古文：议军户给地事。
现代文：议论给军队及家属耕地之事。
English: Discussing the issue of giving farmland to the military and their families.

古文：乙丑，延州刺史温撒可喜上疏言： 皇太子宜选正人为师保。 
现代文：十二日，延州刺史温撒可喜上奏说 ：皇太子应选取正人做老师。 
English: On the twelfth day, Yanzhou magistrate Win Sako made a congratulatory speech, saying that the crown prince should choose a righteous person to be his teacher.

古文：丙寅，长春节，宋遣使来贺。
现代文：十三日，长春节，宋朝派人来祝贺。
English: On the 13th day of the Spring Festival, the Song Dynasty sent people to congratulate.

古文：己巳，以将修社稷，遣太子少保张行信预告。
现代文：十六日，因为将要修社稷，派太子少保张行信预告。
English: On the 16th, because of the upcoming social reform, he sent a letter to Zhang Xingxin, the prince's younger brother.

古文：沧州经略副使张文破赵福，复恩州。
现代文：沧州经略副使张文打败赵福，收复恩州。
English: Zhang Wen, vice-commander of the Cangzhou Military Region, defeated Zhao Fu and recovered Enzhou.

古文：丙子，曲赦辽东路。
现代文：二十三日，大赦辽东路。
English: On the 23rd, Liaodong Road was amnestied.

古文：己卯，处士王澮以右谏议大夫复迁中奉大夫、翰林学士，仍赐诏褒谕。
现代文：二十六日，处士王浍以右谏议大夫升迁中奉大夫、翰林学士，并赐诏褒谕。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the clerk, Wang Qian, with his right hand, discussed the promotion of the doctor to the middle-ranking doctor and the Hanlin scholar, and gave a commendation.

古文：庚辰，复邢州捷至。
现代文：二十七日，收复邢州的捷报到了。
English: On the 27th, the report of the successful recovery of Ganzhou arrived.

古文：夏四月己丑，陕西行省来报秦州官军破妖贼赵用、刘高二之捷。
现代文：夏四月初六，陕西行省来报秦州官军打败妖贼赵用、刘高二的捷报。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, he went to Shaanxi Province to report the successful report of the Qin State government army defeating the bandits Zhao Ying and Liu Gaoji.

古文：遣官鞫单州防御使仆散倬之罪，罢其城单州之役。
现代文：派官审讯单州防御使仆散倬的罪状，停止修筑单州城。
English: An officer was sent to interrogate the crime of causing the soldiers to scatter in the defense of Shanzhou, and construction of Shanzhou City was stopped.

古文：癸巳，张开奏复清州等十有一城，诏迁官两阶，赏将士有差。
现代文：初十，张开上奏清州等十一城收复，下诏升官两级，不同程度地奖赏将士。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, eleven cities such as Zhangkai, Shangso and Qingzhou were recaptured, and on the tenth day of the second month, officials were promoted to two levels, and soldiers were rewarded to varying degrees.

古文：甲午，改赐皇太子名守绪。
现代文：十一日，宣宗皇帝赐皇太子新名为守绪。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Xuanzong gave the crown prince a new name, Shoujo.

古文：诏谕陕西路军民。
现代文：下诏告谕陕西路军民。
English: The following edict is issued to the military and civilians of Shaanxi Province.

古文：丙申，河北行省侯挚言： 北商败粟渡河，官遮籴其什八，商遂不行，民饥益甚。
现代文：十三日，河北行省侯挚说： 北面的商人贩粮渡黄河时，官吏拉住籴了其中的十分之八，商贩于是不来，百姓饥饿更甚。
English: On the thirteenth day of the journey to Hebei Province, Hou Zhuang said: When the merchants from the north cross the Yellow River to sell grain, the officials hold back eight-tenths of them, so the merchants do not come, and the people are even hungrier.

古文：请罢其令。 
现代文：请求废除此令。 
English: The petition seeks the quashing of the order.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：河南、陕西蝗。
现代文：河南、陕西蝗灾。
English: Henan, Shaanxi locust plagues.

古文：丁酉，太白昼见于奎。己亥，夏人葩俄族都管汪三郎率其蕃户来归，以千羊进，诏纳之，优给其直。
现代文：十六日，西夏人葩俄族都管汪三郎率其藩户来归顺，拿千只羊进献，皇帝诏令接纳，给了他很优惠的价钱。
English: On the 16th, the Western Xia people and the Russian people all led by Wang Sanzhong and his household to submit, and took a thousand sheep as an offering. The emperor accepted it and gave him a very favorable price.

古文：辛丑，侯挚言： 红袄贼掠临沂、费县之境，官军败之。
现代文：十八日，侯挚说 ：红袄贼寇掠侵临沂、费县境内，官军打败了他们。
English: On the 18th, Hou Zhengyi said: the Red Kite bandits invaded the territory of Linyi and Fei County, and the government army defeated them.

古文：获其党讯之，知其渠贼郝定僣号署官，已陷滕、兖、单诸州，莱芜、新泰等十余县。 
现代文：俘获了他们的党羽审讯，得知贼首郝定假冒帝号设置官府，已经攻陷了滕、兖、单等州，莱芜、新泰等十几县。 
English: They captured their party members and interrogated them, and learned that the leader of the thieves, Yu Ding, had set up a government office with a fake emperor's name, and had invaded more than a dozen counties such as Teng, Min, Shan, Laiwu, and Xintai.

古文：时道路不通，宰臣请谕挚为备。
现代文：当时道路不通，宰臣请求告谕侯挚防备。
English: At that time, the road was impassable, and the vice-consul requested that Houxin be warned to be on the alert.

古文：仍诏枢密招捕。
现代文：并诏令枢密院招安逮捕。
English: He also ordered the arrest of Privy Councillor Zhao An.

古文：蔡、息行元帅府兵拔木陡关，斩首千级。
现代文：蔡、息行元帅府的兵攻下木陡关，斩首千人。
English: The soldiers of Cai and Xingxing's Marshal's Palace captured Shisheng Pass and beheaded a thousand people.

古文：甲辰，有司言，扶风、郿县有騑伤麦。
现代文：二十一日，有司说，扶风、县有蝗灾。
English: On the twenty-first day, a magistrate said, "The wind is picking up and there is a plague of locusts in the county."

古文：五月癸丑朔，礼官言： 太庙既成，行都礼虽简约，惟以亲行祔享为敬，请权不用卤簿仪仗及宫县乐舞。 
现代文：五月初一，礼官说： 太庙已经建成，行都礼很简约，只有以亲行附祭享为敬，请求暂不用卤簿仪仗及宫县乐舞。 
English: On the first day of May, the etiquette officer said, "The Great Temple has been completed, and the ceremony for visiting the capital is very simple. The only way to show respect is to make an offering to the emperor, and we request that you temporarily refrain from the ceremonial war and the palace music and dance."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：山东行省上沂州之捷。
现代文：山东行省报上沂州之捷报。
English: The Shandong Provincial Newspaper reports on the success of Zhangzhou.

古文：甲寅，凤翔之华、汝等州蝗。
现代文：初二，凤翔及华、汝等州蝗灾。
English: On the second day of the first semester, Fengxiang and Hua, Ye and other provinces were affected by the locust plague.

古文：辛酉，以尚书右丞侯挚行省事于东平。
现代文：初九，任尚书右丞侯挚在东平行省事。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, he was appointed as the second-in-command of the Eastern Parallel Province.

古文：己巳，来远镇获夏谍者陈絺等，知夏人将图临洮、巩州，窥长安。
现代文：十七日，来远镇拘捕西夏间谍陈巴山等人，知道夏朝人将图谋临洮、巩州，窥视长安。
English: On the 17th, Laiyuan Town arrested the Western Xia spy Chen Bashan and others, knowing that the Xia people would plot Linyi, Gongzhou, and spy on Chang'an.

古文：命陕西行省严为之备。
现代文：命令陕西行省严加防备。
English: Shaanxi Province was ordered to be on high alert.

古文：丙子，上将以七月行祔享礼，虑时雨有妨，诏改用十月。
现代文：二十四日，皇帝将在七月行纎享礼，考虑当时下雨有妨，下诏改为十月。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor will perform the ceremony in July. Considering the possibility of rain at that time, the next edict will be changed to October.

古文：夏人修来羌城界河桥。
现代文：西夏人修建来羌城界河桥。
English: The Xixia people built the Laiwu River Bridge.

古文：元帅右都监完颜赛不遣兵焚之，俘馘甚多。
现代文：元帅右都监完颜赛不派兵焚烧了它，并俘获了很多敌人。
English: The right-wing marshal supervised the completion of the battle and burned it without sending troops, and captured a lot of enemies.

古文：戊寅，京兆、同、华、邓、裕、汝、亳、宿、泗等州蝗。
现代文：二十六日，京兆、同、华、邓、裕、汝、亳、宿、泗等州蝗灾。
English: On the 26th, the locust plague broke out in Jingzhao, Tong, Hua, Deng, Yu, Ru, Handan, Shuk, Handan and other prefectures.

古文：六月戊子，诏凡进奏帖及申尚书省、枢密院关应大事，私发视者绞，误者减二等，制书应密者如之。
现代文：六月初六，诏令凡是进奏帖及陈述尚书省、枢密院的秘事文书，私自拆封阅视的人绞死，误时的人降二级，装封秘事文书的人也如此。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：壬辰，辽西伪瀛王张致遣完颜南合、张顽僧上表来归。
现代文：初十，辽西伪瀛王张致派完颜南合、张顽僧上表请求归顺。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Zhi, the pseudo-Buddhist king of West Liao, sent Yan Nanhe and Zhang Yu to the table to ask for submission.

古文：诏授致特进，行北京路元帅府事，兼本路宣抚使，南合同知北京兵马总管府，顽僧同知广宁府。
现代文：皇帝宣宗下诏授予张致特进，代理北京路元帅府事，兼本路宣抚使，完颜南合为同知北京兵马总管府，张顽僧为同知广宁府。
English: Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict awarding Zhang Zhitong as a special envoy, acting as the deputy of the Beijing Road Marshal's Office, and acting as the envoy of the Road Marshal's Office. Yanan was merged into the Beijing General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and Zhang Yuxiang became the Guangning Office of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.

古文：丙申，木星昼见于奎，百有一日乃伏。
现代文：十四日，木星出现在奎星旁，一百零一天才隐没。
English: On the 14th, Jupiter appeared next to the Kuiper belt, and it took one hundred and one days for it to disappear.

古文：癸卯，诏有司祈雨。
现代文：二十一日，下诏有司祈雨。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, there was a prayer for rain.

古文：丁未，河南大蝗伤稼，遣官分道捕之。
现代文：二十五日，河南大蝗虫伤害庄稼，派官分道捕杀。
English: On the 25th, the large locusts in Henan damaged crops, and officials were dispatched to separate and kill them.

古文：罢河北诸路宣抚司，更置经略司。
现代文：废除河北诸路宣抚司，更替设置经略司。
English: Abolish the Hebei Provincial Department of Publicity and Guidance, and replace it with the Department of Economic Strategy.

古文：壬子，以旱，诏参知政事李革审决京师冤狱。
现代文：三十日，因为大旱，下诏参知政事李革审讯判决京城的冤案。
English: On the 30th, because of the great drought, the trial court of Li Ge, a political advisor to the governor, issued a verdict on the injustice in Beijing.

古文：秋七月癸丑朔，昭义军节度使必兰阿鲁带复威州及获鹿县。
现代文：秋七月初一，昭义军节度使必兰阿鲁带收复了威州及获鹿县。
English: On the first day of the first month of autumn in July, the festival of the Shouyi Army made Bilan Aru recover Weizhou and gain Deer County.

古文：飞蝗过京师。
现代文：飞蝗过京城。
English: Flying locusts fly over the capital.

古文：甲寅，山东行省槛贼郝定等至京师，伏诛。
现代文：初二，山东行省囚禁的贼寇郝定等押至京城处决。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the bandit Yu Ding, who was imprisoned in Shandong Province, was sent to Beijing for execution.

古文：乙卯，以旱蝗，诏中外。
现代文：初三，因为旱蝗灾，诏告中外。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, because of the locust plague, it was announced to the public.

古文：己未，敕减尚食数品及后宫岁给缣帛有差。
现代文：初七，诏令不同程度地减少食品及后宫的帛物。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the emperor decreed that food and harem goods be reduced to varying degrees.

古文：辛酉，监察御史陈规上章条陈八事。
现代文：初九，监察御史陈规上书陈述八件事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the inspector general of history submitted a written report stating eight things.

古文：闰月壬午朔，日有食之。辛卯，复深州。
现代文：闰七月初一，有日食。初十，收复深州。
English: On the first day of leap July, there was a solar eclipse. On the tenth day of the first month, Shinshu was recovered.

古文：癸巳，翰林学士完颜孛迭进《中兴事迹》。
现代文：十二日，翰林学士完颜孛迭进献《中兴事迹》。
English: On the 12th, Hanlin Scholar presented "ZTE Deeds" in succession.

古文：甲午，命掌军官举奇才绝力之人，提控、都副统等官互举其属。
现代文：十三日，命令掌军官举荐奇才绝力之人，提控、都副统等官要互相举荐其部属。
English: On the 13th, the commanding officers were ordered to recommend the most talented people, and the supervisors, vice-commanders and other officials should recommend their subordinates to each other.

古文：颁举官赏罚格，许功过相除。
现代文：颁布举荐官的赏罚规则，允许功过相抵消。
English: Promulgated the reward and punishment rules for recommending officers, allowing them to offset their merits and demerits.

古文：品官及草泽人有才武者，举荐升降亦如之。
现代文：品官和有才武的百姓，举荐升降也如此。
English: The same applies to the promotion and demotion of officials and talented people.

古文：庚子，诏河南、陕西镇防军应荫及纳粟补官者，当役如旧，俟事定乃听赴铨。
现代文：十九日，诏令河南、陕西镇防军中因荫恩及交粮做官的人，应当像过去一样服役，等边疆战事安定后再赴任。
English: On the 19th, it was decreed that those in the Henan and Shaanxi town defense forces who became officials due to favor and payment of grain should serve as in the past, and wait until the war in the frontier was stable before taking office.

古文：八月甲寅，太子少保兼礼部尚书张行信定祔享亲祀之仪以进。
现代文：八月初三，太子少保兼礼部尚书张行信制定了纎享亲祀之礼仪进上。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month, Zhang Xingxin, the prince's junior bodyguard and the head of the ceremonial department, formulated the etiquette of "enjoying family worship."

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝宣宗很高兴地接受了。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：三原县僧广惠进僧道纳粟多寡与都副威仪及监寺等格，从其言鬻之。
现代文：三原县僧人广惠进献僧道纳粮多少与都副威仪及监寺的规章制度。
English: Guang Huijin, a monk from Mihara County, donated some grain to the monks, and the rules and regulations for the subordination of the capital and the supervision of temples.

古文：夏人入安塞堡，元帅左监军乌古论庆寿遣军败之。
现代文：西夏人侵入安塞堡，元帅左监军乌古论庆寿派军队打败了他们。
English: The Xixia people invaded Anseburg, and the marshal Zuoying's army defeated them.

古文：壬戌，赐张行信宝券二万贯、重币十端，旌其议礼之当。
现代文：十一日，赐张行信二万贯宝券，十端重币，以表彰他制定礼仪的恰当。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhang Xingxin was awarded a 20-million-renminbi treasure ticket and a 10-tang heavy coin in recognition of his proper etiquette.

古文：乙亥，诏论中都民，命大名招抚使募人持诏以往。
现代文：二十四日，诏谕中都百姓，命令大名招抚使招人持诏前往。
English: On the 24th, he issued an edict to the people of the capital, ordering the daimyo to summon people to come to the capital with the edict.

古文：丙子，大元兵攻延安。
现代文：二十五日，元朝军队攻打延安。
English: On the 25th, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Yan'an.

古文：己卯，夏人入结耶觜川，官军击走之。
现代文：二十八日，西夏人侵入结耶觜川，官军打跑了他们。
English: On the 28th, the Xixia people invaded the Yalong River in Jie, and the government army beat them away.

古文：九月辛巳朔，大元兵攻坊州。
现代文：九月初一，元朝军队攻打坊州。
English: On the first day of September, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Bozhou.

古文：以签枢密院事永锡为御史大夫，领兵赴陕西，便宜从事。
现代文：任签枢密院事永锡为御史大夫，领兵奔赴陕西，灵活从事。
English: Appointed the Privy Councillor, Ji Yongxi, as the Imperial Historian, led the troops to Shaanxi, and flexibly engaged.

古文：壬辰，大元兵攻代州。
现代文：十二日，元朝军队攻打代州。
English: On the 12th, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Daizhou.

古文：经略使奥屯丑和尚战没。
现代文：经略使奥屯丑和尚战死。
English: After a bit of maneuvering, the ugly monk of Otun died in battle.

古文：以中卫尉完颜奴婢等充贺宋生日使。
现代文：任用中卫尉完颜奴婢等充贺宋朝生日使者。
English: Lieutenant-Colonel Kanyan was appointed as the birthday messenger of the Song Dynasty.

古文：冬十月己未，亲王、百官奉迎祖宗神主于太庙。
现代文：十月初十，亲王、百官在太庙奉迎祖宗神主。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of October, the prince and hundreds of officials came to worship the ancestor god at the Imperial Temple.

古文：招射生猎户练习武艺知山径者分屯陕、虢要地。
现代文：招募熟悉山路的猎户练习武艺分别驻守陕、虢要地。
English: Recruit hunters who are familiar with mountain roads to practice martial arts and stationed in Shaanxi and Xinjiang respectively.

古文：命元帅左监军必兰鲁带守潼关，遥授知归德府事完颜仲元军卢氏。
现代文：命令元帅左监军必兰阿鲁带守卫潼关，遥授知归德府事完颜仲元驻军卢氏。
English: He ordered the marshal of the Left Supervisor Army, Biraan Aru, to take the guard of Shaoguan, and told Yan Zhongyuan, the former Lu garrison, to return to the German prefecture.

古文：大元兵攻潼关，西安军节度使泥旁古蒲鲁虎战没。
现代文：元朝兵攻打潼关。西安军节度使泥庞古蒲鲁虎战死。
English: Former imperial soldiers attacked Shaoguan. The Xi'an army killed the muddy pang gu bulu tiger.

古文：辛酉，上亲行祔享礼。
现代文：十二日，宣宗亲自行纎享礼。
English: On the twelfth day, Xuanzong himself went to the ceremony.

古文：甲子，祔享礼成。
现代文：十五日，纎享礼完成。
English: On the 15th, the ceremony was completed.

古文：赦。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：乙丑，诏谕河南官吏军民，以赏格募立功之士。命参知政事徒单思忠提控镇抚京师，移剌周剌阿不屯关、陕。
现代文：十六日，诏谕河南官民，用奖赏之规定招募立功的人，命令参知政事徒单思忠提控镇抚京城，移剌周剌阿不驻守关、陕两地。
English: On the 16th, he issued an edict to the officials and people of Henan Province, using the provisions of reward to recruit meritorious people, and ordered the officials and people in charge of political affairs to be single-minded, to take control of the capital city, and to move Zhou Biao away from Guan and Shaanxi.

古文：丙寅，诏京师具防城器械，多凿坎熥，筑垣墙于隙地。
现代文：十七日，诏令京城准备防城的器械，多凿深沟暗井，在空地上建城墙。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict ordered the capital to prepare the equipment for the defense of the city, to dig many deep ditches and wells, and to build the city wall in the open space.

古文：徙卫绍及镐厉王家属于京师。
现代文：把卫绍王和镐厉王的家属迁到京城。
English: The families of King Weishao and King Jianli were moved to the capital.

古文：丁卯，以奉安社稷，遣官预告。
现代文：十八日，因要奉安社稷，派官预告天下。
English: On the 18th, due to the need to hold a memorial service, an official was dispatched to announce it to the world.

古文：戊辰，命张行信摄太尉，奉安社稷，礼乐咸杀其数。
现代文：十九日，任命张行信代理太尉职，奉安社稷，礼仪和乐曲都减少。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Xingxin was appointed acting captain, and the ceremonial and music were reduced.

古文：诏吏、礼、兵、工四部尚书董防城之役。
现代文：诏令吏、礼、兵、工四部尚书监察管理防城的工事。
English: The four departments of officials, etiquette, soldiers, and workers supervised and managed the construction of the city's defense.

古文：大元兵徇汝州。
现代文：元朝军队占领了汝州。
English: Yuan Dynasty troops occupied Ruzhou.

古文：己巳，沿河唯存通报小舟，余皆焚之。
现代文：二十日，沿黄河只留下通讯的小船，其余的都烧了。
English: On the 20th, only small communication boats were left along the Yellow River, and the rest were burned.

古文：庚午，诏宿粮州县屯兵，其签民为兵者就署队长，以自防遏。
现代文：二十一日，诏令存粮的州县屯兵，签名当兵的百姓让其代理队长，用以自保。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the prefectural and county garrisons that stored grain were ordered to let the people who signed up to be soldiers be their acting captains for self-protection.

古文：河东行省胥鼎，遣潞州元帅左监军必兰阿鲁带以军一万，孟州经略使徒单百家以军五千，由便道济河趣关、陕，自将平阳精兵援京师。
现代文：河东行省胥鼎，派潞州元帅左监军必兰阿鲁带率一万军队，孟州经略使徒单百家率五千军队，由小路渡黄河奔赴关、陕两地，自己亲率平阳的精兵支援京城。
English: He went to the province of Shanting in the east of the river, and sent ten thousand troops led by Bozhou Marshal Biraan Aru, the left supervisor of the army, and five thousand troops led by one hundred families of the apostles in Mengzhou, from the small road across the Yellow River to Guan and Shaanxi, and he led the elite soldiers of Pingyang to support Beijing.

古文：命枢府督军应之。
现代文：二十二日，设官员掌握招贤所的事情。
English: On the 22nd, officials were set up to take control of the recruitment office.

古文：辛未，置官领招贤所事。命内外官探访有才识勇略能区画防城者具以闻，得实超任，仍赏举主。
现代文：命令内外官员寻访有才识勇略能谋划防城的人报上来，按实际情况破格任用，并奖赏推荐人。
English: Ordered officials at home and abroad to search for talented and courageous people who can plan the defense of the city, and appointed them according to the actual situation, and rewarded the recommenders.

古文：内负长才不为人所知者，听赴招贤所自陈。
现代文：自己有奇才而不为人知者，自己可前去招贤所自荐。
English: If you have a talent that is not well-known, you can go to the recruitment office to recommend yourself.

古文：壬申，以龙虎卫上将军裴满羊哥知归德府事，行枢密院事。
现代文：二十三日，任龙虎卫上将军裴满羊哥知归德府事，行枢密院事。
English: On the 23rd, General Pei Manyang, who was appointed as the Dragon and Tiger Guards, returned to the German government and performed the duties of Privy Councillor.

古文：癸酉，诏罢遣有司所拘民间输税车牛以运军士衣粮者。
现代文：二十四日，诏令废除派有司收集民间车牛以运军士衣服粮食的命令。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict abolished the order to send officers to collect civilian carts and oxen to transport soldiers' clothes and grain.

古文：甲戌，谕附京民尽徙其刍粮入城，官储并运之。
现代文：二十五日，诏令京城附近的百姓都把自己的粮草迁到城中，国家一并储藏使用。
English: On the 25th, the emperor ordered the people near the capital to move their grain and grass to the city, and the state also stored and used it.

古文：丙子，行枢密院知河南府事完颜合打以征兵失应，坐诛。
现代文：二十七日，行枢密院知河南府事完颜合打因为征兵失败被杀。
English: On the 27th, a member of the Privy Council of Henan Province was killed for failing to enlist.

古文：户部郎中魏琦以没王事，官其子。
现代文：户部郎中魏琦因为死于王事，让他的儿子做官。
English: Because the head of the household, Wei Wei, died in a royal event, his son was made an official.

古文：己卯，议禁京师靡谷，近侍以宝券方行，恐滞其用，不果。
现代文：三十日，议论禁止京城浪费粮食，近侍者认为宝券刚发行，担忧滞止了它的流通，结果不了了之。
English: On the 30th, there was a discussion about banning the waste of grain in the capital. The attendants thought that the treasure ticket had just been issued, and they were worried about its circulation, but it did not work out.

古文：吏部令史韩希祖陈言，曾以战功致身者尽拘京师备用，从之。
现代文：吏部令史韩希祖陈言，把曾因战功取得做官身份的人都留在京城以备用，此建议被采纳。
English: Han Xizou, the chief of the General Staff, suggested that all those who had been promoted to official positions as a result of their war service should be kept in the capital as a reserve, and this suggestion was adopted.

古文：十一月庚辰朔，增定守御官及军人迁赏格。
现代文：十一月初一，增加守御官及军人升迁奖赏的规定。
English: On the first day of November, the provisions for increasing the promotion rewards for military officers and soldiers came into effect.

古文：辛巳，诏止附京农民自撤其庐舍。
现代文：初二，诏令阻止京城附近的农民撤离其家。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, a decree was issued to prevent farmers near the capital from evacuating their homes.

古文：壬午，河东行省胥鼎入援京师，用其言以知平阳府王质权元帅左监军，同知完颜僧家奴权右监军，代镇河东。
现代文：初三，河东行省胥鼎来京城支援，听其言得知平阳府王质代理元帅左监军，同知完颜僧家奴代理右监军，负责镇守河东。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhaoding, the governor of Hedong Province, came to Beijing for support. According to his words, he learned that the acting marshal of Pingyang Prefecture, Wang Quan, was in charge of guarding the east of the river. He also learned that the monk, Guan Yan, was in charge of guarding the west of the river.

古文：拜鼎为尚书左丞兼枢密副使，知归德府完颜伯嘉签枢密院事。
现代文：授予胥鼎为尚书左丞兼枢密副使，知归德府完颜伯嘉签枢密院事。
English: Gong Ding was awarded to Shang Shuxu Zu Rong and the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, and Zhi Gui Defu completed Yan Bai Jia's signing of the Privy Council.

古文：以完颜合打伏诛，诏中外。
现代文：因为完颜合打被杀，诏告中外。
English: Because he was killed in a duel, he was denounced both at home and abroad.

古文：乙酉，元帅右都监完颜赛不来献其提控石盏合喜、杨斡烈等大败夏人于定西之捷，命行省视其功赏之。
现代文：初六，元帅右都监完颜赛不前来进献提控石盏合喜、杨斡烈等在定西大败西夏人的捷报，命令行省视功论赏。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the marshal of the Right Capital Supervision came to present the victory report of the defeat of the Xixia people in Dingxi, such as the control of Shizhen, Hexi and Yang Yulong, after the completion of the beauty contest, and ordered the province to reward the merits.

古文：辛卯，诏立功五品以上官赐馔御前，六品以下官赐馔近侍局。
现代文：元朝军队到达渑池，右副元帅蒲察阿里不孙军溃败而逃，他失掉所佩虎符。初七，前临潢府推官代理元帅右监军完颜合达率官军老幼者从北面回国，他被升为镇南军节度使，进三级官职。
English: The Yuan Dynasty army arrived in Dianchi, and the Right Vice-Marshal Pucha Ali Fusun's army was routed and fled, and he lost the tiger emblem he was wearing. On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the former deputy marshal of Linyi Prefecture, the acting marshal of the Right Supervisor Army, and the old and young men of the official army returned from the north, and he was promoted to the festival envoy of the town's southern army, and entered the third-level official post.

古文：癸巳，上谕皇太子： 京城提控官有以文资充者，彼岂知兵？
现代文：诏令拿出国家的绵绢交给有司补偿那些把衣服用以军衣的人们。这天夜里，月晕木星。初十，制定毁坏防城器具法。十二日，诏令五品以上立功的官在御前赐美食，六品以下的在近侍局赐美食。
English: The Emperor issued an edict to take out the country's money and give it to the Imperial Household Agency to compensate those who used the clothes as military uniforms. On this night, the moon fainted Jupiter. On the 10th day of the first month, the law on the destruction of city defense equipment was enacted. On the 12th day, the Emperor issued an edict that officials who had meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious

古文：其速易之。 甲午，放免诸职官傔从及诸司局射粮兵卒尝选充军者。
现代文：十四日，皇帝告谕皇太子 ：京城提控官哪有用文官充任的，他们难道懂得用兵？要赶快换掉他们。 十五日，免去各职官的侍从及各司局射粮兵曾选为充军的人。
English: On the 14th, the emperor told the crown prince: "If any of the officials in charge of supervising and controlling the capital were appointed by civilians, do they know how to use soldiers? They should be replaced immediately." On the 15th, the attendants of all officials and the people who had been selected by the commissars of the various departments to serve as soldiers were removed.

古文：戊戌，敕诸州县签籍军民，以备土寇。
现代文：十九日，命令各州县登记军民，以防备土寇。
English: On the 19th, he ordered all prefectures and counties to register their soldiers and civilians in preparation for the Turkish invasion.

古文：华州元帅府复潼关。
现代文：华州元帅府收复潼关。
English: The Wa state marshal's office regained Shouguan.

古文：庚子，罢在京防城民军。
现代文：二十一，撤去京城防御军民。
English: On the 21st, the troops and civilians defending the capital were withdrawn.

古文：遣御史陈规等充河南宣差安抚捕盗官。
现代文：派御史陈规等充河南宣差安抚捕盗官员。
English: He sent officials such as the imperial historian Chen Gui to Henan Province to pacify the officials.

古文：河南路统军使纥石烈扫合以发兵后期，坐诛。
现代文：河南路统军使纥石烈扫合因调发军队拖期被杀。
English: The Henan Road Union Army was killed because of the delay in dispatching troops.

古文：甲辰，以尚书工部侍郎和尚等充贺宋正旦使。
现代文：二十五日，用尚书工部侍郎和尚等充任贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 25th, He Song Zhengtan's envoy was appointed by Shang Shuxing's attendant monk and others.

古文：丙午，河南行枢密院从坦言，其族人道哥愿隶行伍以自效。
现代文：二十七日，河南行枢密院从坦说，他的族人道哥愿隶属军队以效力。
English: On the 27th, the Privy Council of Henan Province said from Tan that his ethnic brother was willing to belong to the army to be effective.

古文：上嘉其忠，许之。
现代文：皇帝表扬他的忠诚，批准了。
English: The emperor, praising his loyalty, approved.

古文：内族承立进所获马驼。
现代文：内族承立进献所获的马匹骆驼。
English: The horses and camels that were donated by the local people of Chengli.

古文：上曰： 此军士所得，即以予之可也，朕安用哉。 
现代文：皇帝宣宗说 ：这是军士们获得的，就给他们好了，朕哪里能享用？ 
English: Emperor Xuanzong said, "This is what the soldiers have won, so let them have it. Where can I enjoy it?"

古文：因遍谕诸道将帅，后勿复如是。
现代文：因此晓谕各路将帅，以后不要这样。
English: Therefore, tell the generals not to do this in the future.

古文：十二月辛亥，平章政事术虎高琪加崇进、尚书右丞相。
现代文：十二月初三，平章政事术虎高琪加为崇进、尚书右丞相。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Taira no Shosho (平章) and Koga no Kiki (虎高琪) were promoted to the posts of Minister of the Right (崇进) and Minister of the Left (尚書右丞).

古文：参知政事李革罢。
现代文：参知政事李革被免职。
English: Li Ge, the political secretary of the party secretary, was removed from his post.

古文：癸亥，大元兵攻平阳。
现代文：十五日，元朝军队攻打平阳。
English: On the 15th, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Pingyang.

古文：丙寅，皇太子议伐西夏。
现代文：十八日，皇太子议论攻打西夏。
English: On the 18th, the crown prince discussed attacking Western Xia.

古文：大元兵徇大名府。
现代文：元朝兵占领大名府。
English: Former imperial soldiers occupy the daimyo's residence.

古文：壬申，大元兵进自代州神仙横城及平定承天镇诸隘，攻太原府。
现代文：二十四日，元朝兵进军代州神仙横城及平定承天镇各关隘，攻打太原府。
English: On the 24th, Yuan Dynasty soldiers marched into Shenshen Hengcheng and Pingding Chengtian Town, and attacked Taiyuan Prefecture.

古文：宣抚使乌古论礼遣人间道赍矾书至京师告急。
现代文：宣抚使乌古论礼派人抄近道携带文书到京城告急。
English: Xuan Fu made Wu Gu Rongliang send people to take a shortcut to carry documents to Beijing in a hurry.

古文：诏发潞州元帅府，平阳、河中、绛、孟宣抚司兵援之。
现代文：诏令派遣潞州元帅府，平阳、河中、绛、孟宣抚司的军队支援他。
English: The imperial edict dispatched the Bozhou Marshal's Office, the armies of Pingyang, Hechu, Handan and Meng Xuanfushi to support him.

古文：乙亥，高琪请修南京里城。
现代文：二十七日，高琪请求修理南京的内城。
English: On the 27th, Gao Qi requested that the inner city of Nanjing be repaired.

古文：上曰： 民力已困，此役一兴，病滋甚矣。
现代文：皇帝宣宗说： 民力已困，此工程一兴，疾病就严重滋生。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong said, "The people's strength is exhausted. As soon as this project takes off, diseases will seriously breed.

古文：城虽完固，朕亦何能独安此乎？ 
现代文：城即使很坚固，朕难道能独自安住其中？ 
English: Even if the city is very strong, can I live alone in it?

