古文：滕宗谅，字子京，河南人。
现代文：滕宗谅字子京，河南人。
English: Teng Zongren is from Beijing, Henan Province.

古文：与范仲淹同年举进士，其后仲淹称其才，乃以泰州军事推官召试学士院。
现代文：与范仲淹同年考中进士，后来范仲淹称赏他的才华，于是以泰州军事推官召试学士院。
English: In the same year as Fan Zhongyun, he was promoted to the middle school examination. Later, Fan Zhongyun praised his talent, so he was promoted to the Taizhou Military Officer Recruitment Examination Academy.

古文：改大理寺丞，知当涂、邵武二县，迁殿中丞，代还。
现代文：改任大理寺丞，主管当涂、邵武二县，升为殿中丞，代任后回到京中。
English: He was reappointed as Daliji no jo, in charge of Dangtu and Shouwuji counties, and was promoted to palace junior secretary, and returned to Kyoto after being appointed.

古文：会禁中火，诏劾火所从起，宗谅与秘书丞刘越皆上疏谏。
现代文：逢宫中失火，朝廷下诏追查失火的原因，宗谅与秘书丞刘越都上疏讽谏。
English: Whenever there was a fire in the palace, the imperial court issued an edict to investigate the cause of the fire. The emperor and the secretary Liu Yue both apologized.

古文：宗谅曰： 伏见掖庭遗烬，延炽宫闼，虽沿人事，实系天时。诏书亟下，引咎涤瑕，中外莫不感动。
现代文：宗谅说 ：我看见旁边厅堂遗落的灰烬，扩展燃烧到了宫门，虽说顺应人事，实际上关系着天时，朝廷赶紧颁布诏书，承担错误洗清过失，朝廷内外没有不受感动的。
English: Zongren said: I saw the ashes of the hall next to me, and the fire spread to the palace gate. Although it was in accordance with personnel, it was actually related to the time of day. The imperial court hurriedly issued an edict, took on the error and cleared the fault. There was no one inside and outside the imperial court who was not moved.

古文：然而诏狱未释，鞫讯尚严，恐违上天垂戒之意，累两宫好生之德。
现代文：然而朝廷没有颁布诏书打开监牢，释放囚犯，审讯尚严苛，恐怕违背了上天赐与的警戒之意，牵累两宫好生的德性。
English: However, the imperial court did not issue an edict to open the prison and release the prisoners, and the interrogation was still harsh. I am afraid that it violated the meaning of the warning given by God, and affected the virtuousness of the two palaces.

古文：且妇人柔弱，箠楚之下，何求不可，万一怀冤，足累和气。
现代文：况且妇人本来柔顺软弱，严刑拷打之下什么都可以得到，万一蒙受冤情，足以牵累和气。
English: Moreover, women are naturally soft and weak. They can get anything under severe torture, and if they are wronged, it is enough to affect the harmony.

古文：祥符中，宫掖火，先帝尝索其类置之法矣，若防患以刑而止，岂复有今日之虞哉。
现代文：祥符中，宫中边门失火，先帝曾经求取同类的事情用古法进行处理，如果用刑罚防止忧患，岂会再有现在的担心呢？
English: In Xiangfu, the side door of the palace caught fire, and the former emperor once sought to use the ancient law to deal with the same kind of thing. If you use punishment to prevent sorrow, will there be any worries now?

古文：况变警之来，近在禁掖，诚愿修政以禳之，思患以防之。
现代文：况且灾变警告的出现，近在宫中边门，我衷心希望朝廷能够整治朝政来进行祈祷，以防患于未然来防止它。
English: Moreover, the appearance of the warning of catastrophe is close to the side gate of the palace. I sincerely hope that the imperial court can rectify the government and pray to prevent it in advance.

古文：凡逮系者特从原免，庶灾变可销而福祥来格也。 疏奏，仁宗为罢诏狱。
现代文：凡是被朝廷逮捕捆绑的囚犯特地加以赦免，这样或许灾变可以消除而幸福吉祥得以来临。 上疏奏上，仁宗皇帝因此颁布了释放囚犯的诏书。
English: All the prisoners who were arrested and tied up by the imperial court were specially pardoned, so that perhaps the disaster could be eliminated and happiness and auspiciousness would come. At the opening ceremony, Emperor Nizong therefore issued a decree to release the prisoners.

古文：时章献太后犹临朝，宗谅言国家以火德王，天下火失其性由政失其本，因请太后还政，而越亦上疏。
现代文：当时章献太后还当朝，宗谅上疏说宋朝是以火德而称王，天下火失去其本性是由于国家政治失去了其根本的缘故。因此上疏请求太后还政，而刘越也就此上疏。
English: At that time, Zhang Xian's empress dowager was still in power, and Zong Yue told Shang Soo that the Song Dynasty was a reign of fire and virtue, and that the reason why the world's fire had lost its nature was that the country's politics had lost its foundation. Therefore, Shang Soo asked the empress dowager to return to power, and Liu Yue agreed with Shang Soo.

古文：太后崩，擢尝言还政者，越已卒，赠右司谏，而除宗谅左正言。
现代文：太后去世，朝廷提拔曾经上疏要太后还政的人，这时刘越已逝世，朝廷赠予右司谏，而将宗谅升为左正言。
English: When the empress dowager died, the imperial court promoted Liu Yue, who had been a member of the Shang faction and had wanted the empress dowager to return to power. At that time, Liu Yue had passed away, and the imperial court gave him the title of Right Prelate, while Zongren was promoted to the title of Left Prime Minister.

古文：刘越者字子长，大名人。
现代文：刘越字子长，大名人。
English: Liu Yue, the eldest son, is a celebrity.

古文：少孤贫，有学行，亦宗谅同年进士。
现代文：少年时就失去了父亲，家境贫寒，但学问品行却很好，也是滕宗谅同年进士。
English: He lost his father when he was a boy, and his family was poor, but his academic performance was very good. Teng Zongren was also promoted to a scholar in the same year.

古文：尝知襄城、固始二县，有能名。
现代文：曾经为襄城、固始二县知县，以能干出名。
English: He was once the governor of Xiangcheng and Gushi two counties, and was famous for his ability.

古文：既赠官，又官其一子，赐其家钱十万。
现代文：死后朝廷已给他赠官，又给他的一个儿子封官，赐予他家中钱十万。
English: After his death, the imperial court bestowed an official title on him, an official title on one of his sons, and granted his family one hundred thousand dollars.

古文：宗谅后迁左司谏，坐言宫禁事不实，降尚书祠部员外郎、知信州。
现代文：滕宗谅升为左司谏，后来由于上疏说宫禁事不符实而犯错，降职为尚书祠部员外郎、知信州。
English: Teng Zongren was promoted to Zuo Jian, and later he made a mistake because Shang Shu said that the palace ban was not true, and he was demoted to Gairo, member of the Shoshu Shrine, and Zhishin Prefecture.

古文：与范讽雅相善，及讽贬，宗谅降监池州酒。
现代文：滕宗谅与范讽向来友善，范讽由于上疏被贬，滕宗谅降职监池州酒。
English: Teng Zongren and Fan Lian have always been friendly. Fan Lian was demoted because of his lack of discipline, while Teng Zongren was demoted and sent to Chizhou Liquor.

古文：久之，通判江宁府，徙知湖州。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，任江宁府通判，改任湖州知州。
English: After a long period of time, he was appointed as the chief judge of Jiangning Prefecture and changed to Huzhou Zhizhou.

古文：元昊反，除刑部员外郎、直集贤院、知泾州。
现代文：元昊谋反，升为刑部员外郎、直集贤院、知泾州。
English: Yuan Hao plotted a rebellion and was promoted to the position of a member of the criminal investigation department of Wairo, Zhishixian, and Zhishuzhou.

古文：葛怀敏军败于定州，诸郡震恐，宗谅顾城中兵少，乃集农民数千戎服乘城，又募勇敢，谍知寇远近及其形势，檄报旁郡使为备。
现代文：葛怀敏在定川被叛军击败，滕宗谅看到城中军队很少，就召募数千农民穿上军装登城，又召募勇敢之士，侦察通报叛军的远近及其军情，用文书告诉其他州郡来防备叛军。
English: Ge Huimin was defeated by the rebels in Dingchuan. When Teng Zongyu saw that there were few troops in the city, he recruited thousands of peasants to put on military uniforms and go to the city. He also recruited brave men to reconnoiter and report the distance and proximity of the rebels and their military situation, and to use documents to tell other states and counties to guard against the rebels.

古文：会范仲淹自环庆引蕃汉兵来援，时天阴晦十余日，人情忧沮，宗谅乃大设牛酒迎犒士卒；又籍定州战没者于佛寺祭酹之，厚抚其孥，使各得所，于是边民稍安。
现代文：恰逢范仲淹从环庆率领蕃汉兵来援助，这时连续十余天天气阴沉昏暗，守军心情忧郁，意志颓丧，滕宗谅于是大摆宴席，用牛酒来欢迎、犒劳士卒，又将在定川战役中牺牲的将士造成名册在佛寺中进行祭祀祭奠，对其家小很好地安抚，让他们各得其所，这样边境的民众才逐渐安居下来。
English: When Fan Zhongran led the Han soldiers from Huanqing to help, the weather was gloomy and gloomy for more than ten days in a row. The defenders were in a gloomy mood and discouraged. Teng Zongren then held a grand banquet, welcomed them with cow wine, honored the laborers, and made a list of the soldiers who would be sacrificed in the Battle of Dingchuan. They held a ritual in a Buddhist temple to appease their families and let them have their own place, so that the people on the border could gradually settle down.

古文：仲淹荐以自代，擢天章阁待制，徙庆州。
现代文：范仲淹推荐滕宗谅来代替其职，提升为天章阁待制，调往庆州。
English: Fan Zhongyun recommended Teng Zongren to replace him, and he was promoted to Tianzhangge and transferred to Gyeongju.

古文：上言： 朝廷既授范仲淹、韩琦四路马步军都总管、经略安抚招讨使，而诸路亦带招讨称号，非所宜。 诏罢之。
现代文：上疏说： 朝廷已经授予范仲淹、韩琦四路马步军都总管、经略安抚招讨使，而各路也带有招讨使的称号，不恰当。 
English: Shang Zuo said: It is inappropriate that the imperial court has awarded Fan Zhongran and Han Kuo the titles of the general manager of the four-way horse-marching army and the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy.

古文：御史梁坚劾奏宗谅前在泾州费公钱十六万贯，及遣中使检视，乃始至部，日以故事犒赉诸部属羌，又间以馈遗游士故人。
现代文：于是下诏免掉了各路招讨使的称号。御史梁坚上奏弹劾滕宗谅从前在泾州耗费公钱六十万贯，朝廷立即派遣中使前去检查巡视，中使到达之日，滕宗谅正由于以前的事情犒赏其羌人部属，又偶尔对其游士故人进行馈赠。
English: As a result, the next imperial edict exempted the title of the envoy from all avenues. Goshi Liang Jian made a report to impeach Teng Zongren, who had previously spent 600,000 yuan of public money in Zhangzhou. The court immediately dispatched a middle envoy to inspect the inspection. On the day of the arrival of the middle envoy, Teng Zongren was rewarding his subordinates due to previous events, and occasionally gave gifts to his deceased wanderer.

古文：宗谅恐连逮者众，因焚其籍以灭姓名。
现代文：滕宗谅担心连累其他人而使他们遭逮捕，于是烧掉了花名册，来消除其姓名。
English: Fearing that he would implicate others and get them arrested, Teng Zongren burned the roster to clear his name.

古文：仲淹时参知政事，力救之，止降一官，知虢州。
现代文：范仲淹当时任参知政事，极力挽救滕宗谅，因此滕宗谅只降一官，知虢州。
English: Fan Zhongran, who was a member of the prefectural government at the time, tried his best to save Teng Zongren, so Teng Zongren was only demoted one rank, to Zhiyang Prefecture.

古文：御史中丞王拱辰论奏不已，复徙岳州，稍迁苏州，卒。
现代文：御史中丞王拱辰继续不断上奏，又改调岳州，不久又调到苏州，死。
English: Wang Gongchen continued to play, and was transferred to Yuezhou, and then to Suzhou, where he died.

古文：宗谅尚气，倜傥自任，好施与，及卒，无余财。
现代文：滕宗谅崇尚气节，以不拘于俗自任，喜欢施与，到死的时候，家中没有任何多余的财产。
English: Teng Zongren advocated the spirit of the festival, to be independent of the world, like to give, until the time of death, the family did not have any excess property.

古文：所莅州喜建学，而湖州最盛，学者倾江、淮间。
现代文：滕宗谅所到州县喜欢建立学堂，以湖州最出名，求学的人遍及江、淮之间。
English: Teng Zongren likes to build schools in prefectures. He is most famous for Huzhou, and students come from all over Jiangsu and Huai'an.

古文：有谏疏二十余篇。
现代文：有谏疏二十余篇。
English: There are more than 20 poems.

古文：李防，字智周，大名内黄人。
现代文：李防字智周，大名内黄人。
English: Li Fangzhi Zhou, daimyo of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：举进士，为莫州军事推官。
现代文：考中进士，成为莫州军事推官。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination and became the military commander of Mozhou.

古文：随曹彬入契丹，授忠武军节度推官。
现代文：跟随曹彬出使契丹，授予忠武军节度推官。
English: He followed Cao Bin in dispatching Khitan envoys to confer the title of commander-in-chief on the loyal troops.

古文：括磁、相二州逃户田，增租赋十余万。
现代文：搜求磁州、相州二州的逃户田亩，增加租赋十余万。
English: Search for fugitive farmland in the two prefectures of Gwangju and Seongju, and increase the rent by more than 100,000 mu.

古文：因请均定田税，又请县有破逃五十户者令佐降下考，百户殿三选，二百户停所居官，能招携者旌赏之。
现代文：因此奏请均定田税，又请求一县如有破产逃亡五十户者令佐考核成绩降为下等，百户者令佐为下等中的最末等，二百户者罢免其所任官职，能够招集流民携带流民者加以表彰和赏赐。
English: Therefore, it was requested that the allotment of land tax be equalized, and it was also requested that if there were 50 households in a county that went bankrupt and fled, the result of the Sakao examination would be reduced to the lower grade, 100 households would be assigned to the lowest grade in the lower grade, 200 households would be removed from their official positions, and those who were able to recruit displaced people and carry them would be commended and rewarded.

古文：改秘书省著作佐郎、通判潞州，迁秘书丞。
现代文：改任秘书省著作佐郎、潞州通判，升为秘书丞。
English: He was reappointed as secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and was promoted to secretary.

古文：体量二浙民饥，建言逃户田宜即召人耕种，使人不敢轻去甽亩，而官赋常在。
现代文：体量二浙老百姓的饥荒，建议逃亡户的土田应该立即召人来耕种，使人不敢轻易离开田地，而官府的赋税也可得以保持。
English: Due to the famine of the people in Zhejiang, it is suggested that the fields of fugitive households should be immediately cultivated by people, so that people do not dare to leave the fields easily, and the government's tax can be maintained.

古文：又请京师置折中仓，听人入粟，以江、浙、荆湖物偿之。
现代文：又请求在京师设置折中仓，随意让人储存粮食，用江、浙、荆湖的物产来偿还。
English: He also requested that warehouses be set up in Beijing to store grain, and that the products of Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Jinghu be used to repay the debt.

古文：擢开封府推官，请与判官间三五日即府司军巡院察冤狱。
现代文：提升为开封府推官，请求与判官每隔三五日就到府司军巡院考察蒙受冤屈的案件。
English: Promoted to the post of Kaifeng prefectural governor, he requested the judge to visit the prefectural governor's military patrol hospital every three to five days to investigate cases of grievances.

古文：出为陕路转运副使。
现代文：后来离开京城担任峡路转运副使。
English: Later, he left Beijing to serve as the vice-envoy of gorge road transportation.

古文：先是沿江水递，岁役民丁甚众，颇废农作，防悉以城卒代之。
现代文：在李防上任之前，沿长江岸边江水每年泛滥，每年都要役使大量民众修筑江堤，对农业影响很大，李防用守城的士卒代替民丁。
English: Before Li Fang took office, the river water along the Yangtze River bank flooded every year. Every year, a large number of people had to be helped to build the river dike, which had a great impact on agriculture. Li Fang used soldiers to guard the city instead of the people.

古文：会分川、陕为四路，徙防梓州路转运使，累迁尚书工部员外郎，为三司户部判官。
现代文：恰逢将川、峡分为四路，朝廷将李防调任梓州路转运使，多次升为尚书工部员外郎，为三司户部判官。
English: When the river and gorge were divided into four roads, the imperial court transferred Li Fang to the post of Zizhou Road Transfer Envoy, and he was promoted several times to the member of the Department of Calligraphy, and to the judge of the Third Division of the Household Department.

古文：景德初，江南旱，诏与张知白分东、西路安抚。
现代文：景德初，江南大旱，诏令李防与张知白分东、西路安抚。
English: At the beginning of the reign of King Jingde, there was a great drought in the south of the Yangtze River. Li Fang and Zhang Zhibai were ordered to divide the eastern and western roads to pacify the situation.

古文：上言： 秦羲尝增江、淮、两浙、荆湖榷酤钱，民颇烦扰。
现代文：李防上奏说： 秦羲曾经增加江、淮、两浙、荆湖榷酤钱，老百姓很烦恼忧郁。
English: Li Fangxiang said: Qin Hui once increased the money of Jiang, Huai, Liuzhe and Jinghu, and the people were very troubled and depressed.

古文：江南以岁饥权罢，而淮南、荆湖未被德音。 诏悉罢之，仍诏羲等毋得复增榷酤之利。
现代文：江南因为每年饥荒而暂时免除了榷酤钱，但淮南、荆湖没有覆盖皇上的德音。 皇帝下诏将这些地方的榷酤钱全部罢免，又多次下诏秦羲等不能再增加榷酤之利。
English: Because of the annual famine, Jiangnan was temporarily exempted from the tax, but Huainan and Jinghu were not covered by the emperor's edict. The emperor issued an edict to remove all the taxes in these places, and repeatedly issued an edict that Qin Hui and others could no longer increase the profits of the tax.

古文：遂为江南转运。
现代文：于是担任江南转运使。
English: As a result, he served as the Ganges South Transfer Envoy.

古文：淮南旧不禁盐，制置司请禁盐而官自鬻之，使兵夫辇载江上，且多漂失之患。
现代文：淮南路从前不禁止私盐买卖，制置司请求禁止私盐买卖而只允许官方自己买卖，让士兵沿长江人拉船载，这样经常发生盐被漂失的祸患。
English: In the past, Huainan Road did not prohibit the sale and purchase of illegal salt. The construction and installation department requested a ban on the sale and purchase of illegal salt, but only allowed the government to sell and purchase. Soldiers were allowed to pull boats along the Yangtze River, which often resulted in the loss of salt.

古文：防请令商人入钱帛京师，或输刍粮西北边，而给以盐，则公私皆利，后采用之。徙知应天府，凿府西障口为斗门，泄汴水，淤旁田数百亩，民甚利之。
现代文：李防请求朝廷让商人将钱、丝织品存放在京师，又建议将粮草运送到西北边境，而对运送之人给盐作为报酬，这样，国家老百姓都能得利，后来朝廷采用了李防的建议，改任应天府知府，开凿府西障口作为斗门，让汴水流出，给旁边数百亩田地带来了许多淤泥，老百姓感觉对他们十分有利。
English: Li Fang asked the imperial court to let the merchants store their money and silk fabrics in Beijing Division. He also suggested that the grain and grass should be transported to the northwest border, and the people who transported it should be rewarded with salt. In this way, the people of the country could benefit. Later, the imperial court adopted Li Fang's suggestion, and he was appointed as the prefect of Tianfu. He opened the west gate of the prefecture as a sluice gate to let the floodwater flow out, bringing a lot of silt to the hundreds of acres of fields next to it. The people felt that it was very beneficial to them.

古文：又徙兴元府，入为三司盐铁判官，失举免官。
现代文：又改调兴元府，进入京城担任三司盐铁判官，由于推举有误的过失而被免官。
English: He was also transferred to Yuanfu, and entered Beijing to serve as a judge of the Third Division of Salt and Iron. However, he was removed from his post due to an error in his nomination.

古文：后起通判河南府，徙知宿、延、亳三州，为利州路转运使，累迁兵部郎中、纠察刑狱，擢右谏议大夫、知永兴军，进给事中，复知延州，更耀、潞二州，卒。
现代文：后来又启用为河南府通判，改任宿、延、亳三州知州，为利州路转运使，多次升为兵部郎中、纠察刑狱，提升为右谏议大夫、知永兴军，推举为给事中，又任延州知州，改为知耀、潞二州，去世。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Henan prefectural magistrate, and changed his post to Shuku, Yancheng, and Zhishou of the three prefectures, and became the transfer envoy of the Lishou Road, and was promoted to the vice-minister of the military department, the picket of the penal prison, the doctor of the right council, and the Zhiyongxing Army several times, and was promoted to the middle of the case, and was appointed as the Zhishou of the three prefectures, and changed to the Zhiyang and Zhishou of the two prefectures, and passed away.

古文：防好建明利害，所至必有论奏，朝廷颇施行之。
现代文：李防喜欢上书建议阐明利害，所行之事一定有上疏，朝廷大多能实行他的提议。
English: Li Fang liked to write proposals to clarify the interests, and the things that were done must be superior. The imperial court was mostly able to implement his proposals.

古文：其精力过人。
现代文：李防精力过人。
English: Li Fang is very energetic.

古文：陈贯，字仲通，其先相州安阳人，后葬其父河阳，因家焉。
现代文：李防在江南，晏殊以童子身份拜见他，李防命晏殊作诗，李防让晏殊回家并向朝廷推荐晏殊，后来晏殊官至宰相。陈贯字仲通，其先辈为相州安阳人。后来将其父葬在河阳，因此就在河阳定居。
English: Li Fang was in the south of the Yangtze River, Gongshu met him as a boy, Li Fang ordered Gongshu to write a poem, Li Fang let Gongshu go home and recommended Gongshu to the imperial court, and later Gongshu became the prime minister. Chen Janzhi Zhongtong, whose ancestors were Anyang people from Xiangzhou. Later, he buried his father in Heyang, so he settled in Heyang.

古文：少倜傥，数上疏言边事。
现代文：陈贯年少时卓越不凡，多次上疏议论边防之事。
English: Chen Guanzhong was outstanding when he was young, and he often talked about border defense.

古文：举进士，真宗识贯名，擢置高第。
现代文：考中为进士，真宗皇帝知道陈贯的名字，提拔安排在高等级上。
English: In the middle of the examination, Chen Gang was promoted to the highest rank. Emperor Zhenzong knew Chen Gang's name and promoted him to the highest rank.

古文：为临安县主簿，以秘书省著作佐郎为刑部详覆官，改秘书丞，为审刑院详议官，历知卫州、泾州。
现代文：担任临安县主簿，以秘书省著作郎的身份担任刑部详覆官，后改为秘书丞，为审刑院详议官，历任卫州、泾州刺史。
English: He served as the chief bookkeeper of Lin'an County, as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and later as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and successively as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and the secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：督察盗贼，禁戢不肖子弟，簿书筦库，赋租出入，皆自检核。尝谓僚属曰： 视县官物如己物，容有奸乎？ 州人惮其严。
现代文：督察盗贼，禁止不肖子弟私藏兵器，对所管理的仓库财物全部登记造册，对赋租的收入和支出，都亲自检查核实，曾经对同僚们说 ：将县里的国家财物当作自己的财物，能容忍奸贼存在吗？ 他所在之州的人都害怕他的严厉。
English: An inspector of thieves, he prohibited his sons from hiding weapons, registered all the property of the warehouse he managed, and personally checked and verified the income and expenditure of rent. He once said to his colleagues: Can you tolerate the existence of a thief who treats the county's national property as his own property? People in his state are afraid of his severity.

古文：擢利州路转运使。
现代文：提升为利州路转运使。
English: Promoted to Lizhou Road Transfer Envoy.

古文：岁饥，出职田粟赈饥者，又帅富民令计口占粟，悉发其余。
现代文：饥荒之年，陈贯拿出自己职田的粟米赈济饥荒者，又带领富民们令他们根据人口领取粟米，其余的全部散发给饥民。
English: In the year of famine, Chen Gang took out the corn from his rice fields to feed the starving people. He also led the rich people to let them receive corn according to their population, and distributed the rest to the starving people.

古文：徙陕西，累迁尚书度支员外郎，入为三司盐铁判官。
现代文：调任陕西，多次升为尚书度支员外郎，进入京城成为三司盐铁判官。
English: He was transferred to Shaanxi Province, was promoted several times to Shang Shudu branch member, and entered Beijing to become the judge of the Third Division of Salt and Iron.

古文：领河北转运使，请疏徐、鲍、曹、易四水，兴屯田。
现代文：兼任河北转运使，请求疏通徐、鲍、曹、易四水，大兴屯田。
English: He also served as the Hebei transit envoy, requesting the dredging of the Xu, Bao, Cao and Yi rivers, and the construction of the Daxing Tunnel.

古文：徙河东，历三司户部、盐铁副使，以刑部郎中直昭文馆，知相州。
现代文：调任河东，历任三司户部、盐铁副使，以刑部郎中直昭文馆，知相州。
English: He was transferred to Hedong, successively served as the Third Secretary of the Household Department, the Vice Minister of Salt and Iron, and the Vice Minister of Justice, Naoaki Bunkan, Chisoshu.

古文：还朝卒。
现代文：还朝后逝世。
English: He died the next morning.

古文：贯喜言兵，咸平中，大将杨琼、王荣丧师而归，贯上书曰： 前日不斩傅潜、张昭允，使琼辈畏死不畏法，请自今合战而奔者，主校皆斩；大将战死，裨校无伤而还，与奔军同。
现代文：陈贯喜欢谈论军事，咸平年中，大将杨琼、王荣兵败而归，陈贯上疏说 ：前日不斩杀傅潜、张昭允，使杨琼这些人害怕死而不害怕法律的处罚，请从今天开始与敌人交战而逃跑者，主校都得斩首；大将战死，副校无伤而还的，与逃兵一样治罪。
English: Chen Gang likes to talk about military affairs. In the middle of the Heian and the Heian period, the generals Yang Qiong and Wang Rong returned defeated. Chen Gang said, "The day before yesterday, I did not kill Fu Qian and Zhang Zhaoyun, so that Yang Qiong and these people were afraid of death but not afraid of the punishment of the law. From today, those who fight with the enemy and escape must be beheaded; if the general is killed in battle and the vice-colonel survives unharmed, they will be punished the same as the deserters."

古文：军衄城围，别部力足救而不至者，以逗留论。 真宗嘉纳之。
现代文：军队战败城池被围，别的部队力量能够营救而不救者，以延误军情论处。 真宗认为很好并采纳了他的意见。
English: The army was defeated and the city was besieged, and other forces were able to rescue those who could not be rescued, so as to delay the military situation.

古文：又尝上《形势》、《选将》、《练兵论》三篇，大略言：
现代文：又曾经给皇帝敬献《形势》、《选将》、《练兵论》三篇文章，大略是说：
English: He also once presented the emperor with three articles, "The Situation," "Selecting Generals," and "On Military Training," saying roughly:

古文：地有六害。
现代文：地有六害。
English: There are six harms to the earth.

古文：今北边既失古北之险，然自威虏城东距海三百里，沮泽硗确，所谓天设地造，非敌所能轻入。
现代文：现在北部边境已经失去了古北之险，但从威虏城东距海三百里，地势低湿，土地贫瘠，怪石林立，这就是所谓天设地造，不是敌人能轻易进入的地方。
English: Now the northern border has lost the danger of the old north, but it is three hundred miles from the east of the city of Wairu to the sea, the terrain is low and wet, the land is barren, and there are strange rocks. This is the so-called heavenly creation, not a place where the enemy can easily enter.

古文：由威虏西极狼山不百里，地广平，利驰突，此必争之地。
现代文：由威虏往西到最远的狼山不超过一百里，土地广阔平坦，有利于车马疾行，这是兵家必争之地。
English: It is no more than a hundred miles westward from Weiru to the farthest Wolf Mountain. The land is vast and flat, which is conducive to the speedy movement of horses and carts. This is a must-win place for soldiers.

古文：凡争地之利，先居则佚，后起则劳，宜有以待之。
现代文：大凡争地之利，先占有则容易安逸，后起而争利则容易疲劳，应该用办法来对待这些。
English: In the great competition for land, it is easy to be comfortable when you first occupy the land, and it is easy to get tired when you compete for land later. You should deal with these problems in a proper way.

古文：昔李汉超守瀛州，契丹不敢视关南尺寸地。
现代文：从前李汉超镇守瀛州，契丹不敢对关南的土地有任何非份之想。
English: In the past, Li Hanchao was in charge of Bozhou, and the Khitan did not dare to have any improper thoughts about the land of Guannan.

古文：今将帅大抵用恩泽进，虽谨重可信，卒与敌遇，方略何从而出邪？
现代文：如今将帅的选拔大都是凭借恩泽，虽然谨慎持重能够让人信任，最后与敌人交战，战争谋略又从哪里来呢？
English: Nowadays, the selection of generals is mostly by virtue of grace, although prudence can make people trust, and finally fight with the enemy, where does the war strategy come from?

古文：故敌势益张，兵折于外者二十年。
现代文：因此敌人的势力更加扩张，而我军二十余年来与敌人交战都遭受损失。
English: As a result, the enemy's forces have expanded even more, while our army has suffered losses in more than 20 years of war with the enemy.

古文：方国家收天下材勇以备禁旅，赖廪给赐予而已，恬于休息，久不识战，可以卫京师，不可以戍边境。
现代文：正在国家收罗天下材勇来充备禁旅之时，禁卫军反依赖于军库的供给和皇帝的赏赐而已，安于休息，长期不知道战争之事，虽说可以守卫京师，但不能够戍守边境。
English: At a time when the country was enlisting the world's resources to prepare for the Forbidden Journey, the Imperial Guard was only dependent on the supply of military depots and the emperor's reward, rested peacefully, did not know about the war for a long time, and although it could guard the Beijing Division, it could not guard the border.

古文：请募土人隶本军，籍丁民为府兵，使北捍契丹，西捍夏人。
现代文：请求招募土著之民隶属禁卫军，依靠丁民作为府兵，让他们在北边抵御契丹军队，西边抵御西夏的军队。
English: The request is to recruit the indigenous people to be part of the imperial guard and rely on the Ding people as the capital soldiers, so that they can resist the Khitan army in the north and the Xixia army in the west.

古文：敌之情伪，地势之险易，彼皆素知，可不战而屈人之兵矣。
现代文：敌人军情的真假，地势的险易，这些人向来都十分清楚，这样就可以不用战斗就能使敌军屈服了。
English: The true and false military situation of the enemy, the perilous terrain, these people have always been very clear, so that they can make the enemy surrender without fighting.

古文：绍圣元年卒，年八十一。
现代文：后来陈贯因病而死。著作有《兵略》，很受世人称赞。
English: Later, Chen Guan died of illness. He was the author of "Military Strategy," which was highly praised by the world.

古文：范祥，字晋公，邠州三水人。
现代文：儿子陈安石。范祥字晋公，邠州三水人。
English: The son of Chen Anshi, Fan Xiang, surnamed Jingu, was born in Sanshui, Zhangzhou.

古文：进士及第，自乾州推官稍迁殿中丞、通判镇戎军。
现代文：进士及第，从乾州推官不久升为殿中丞、镇戎军通判。
English: He was promoted to second-rank officer, and soon rose from Kenzhou magistrate to palace vice-commander and general magistrate of town troops.

古文：元昊围城急，详帅将士拒退之。
现代文：元昊围攻守城，情势危急，范祥率领将士顽强抵抗击退了敌军。
English: Yuan Hao besieged and defended the city, the situation was critical, Fan Xiang led the soldiers to fight back the enemy.

古文：请筑刘璠堡、定川砦，从之。
现代文：范祥请求修筑刘堡、定川砦，朝廷听从了他的意见。
English: Fan Xiang requested the construction of Liu Fort and Dingchuan Fort, and the imperial court listened to his opinion.

古文：历知庆、汝、华三州，提举陕西银铜坑冶铸钱。
现代文：范祥先后担任庆州、汝州、华州三州的知州，提举陕西银铜坑冶铸钱。
English: Fan Xiang successively served as the chizhou of the three states of Gyeongju, Ruzhou and Huazhou, and promoted the Shaanxi silver and copper mine to mint money.

古文：祥晓达财利，建议变盐法，后人不敢易，稍加损益，人辄不便，语在《食货志》。
现代文：范祥通晓财利，建议改变盐法，后来的人不敢随便改动，仅仅加以增减，人们就感到很不方便，这些话记载在《食货志》中。
English: Fan Xiang, who was well-versed in finance and interest, proposed to change the salt method, and later people did not dare to change it arbitrarily. Just adding or subtracting it made people feel very uncomfortable. These words are recorded in the "Food Diary."

古文：提点本路刑狱，制置解盐，累迁度支员外郎，权转运副使。
现代文：提点陕西路刑狱，设置解盐法，经多次升迁任度支员外郎，代理转运副使。
English: He raised the issue of the Shaanxi Road Penal Prison, set up the salt-removal method, and after several promotions, he was appointed to the post of branch member, and became the acting deputy envoy for transportation.

古文：古渭砦距秦州三百里，道经哑儿峡，边城数请城之，朝廷以馈饷之艰不许。
现代文：古渭砦离秦州三百里，沿道要经过哑儿峡，边境城市的守兵多次请求在这里修筑城池，但朝廷以粮饷供应困难而未批准。
English: Gushan Fort is three hundred miles away from Qinzhou, passing through Mute Gorge along the way. The guards of the border city repeatedly requested to build a castle here, but the court did not approve due to the difficulty in supplying grain.

古文：祥权领州事，骤请修筑，未报，辄自兴役。
现代文：范祥暂时兼任知州之职，立即请人修筑，范祥没有上奏朝廷，就自己大兴劳役，修筑城池。
English: Fan Xiang temporarily concurrently held the post of Chizhou, and immediately invited someone to build it. Fan Xiang did not report to the imperial court, but he took great pleasure in labor service and building the castle.

古文：蕃部惊扰，青唐族羌攻破广吴岭堡，围哑儿峡砦，官军战死者千余人，坐削一官，知唐州。
现代文：蕃部惊恐忧郁，青唐羌族攻破吴岭堡，包围哑儿峡砦，官军战死者达千余人，范祥因此而被降职一级，任唐州知州。
English: Xibe was terrified and depressed. The Qing and Tang dynasties' Yi people took the lead in breaking through the Wuling Fort and encircling the Mute Gorge Fort. More than a thousand soldiers of the government army were killed in the battle. As a result, Fan Xiang was demoted to the first grade and appointed as the governor of Tangzhou.

古文：后复官，提举陕西缘边青、白盐，改制置解盐使，卒。
现代文：后来又官复原职，提举陕西缘边青、白盐，改任制置解盐使，去世。
English: Later, he was reinstated as an official, promoted to the post of Shaanxi Yuanbianqing and Baiyan, and was reappointed to the post of salt relieving envoy. He died.

古文：嘉祐中，包拯言： 祥通陕西盐法，行之十年，岁减榷货务使缗钱数百万，其劳可录。 官其子孙景郊社斋郎。
现代文：嘉祐中，包拯说： 范祥通晓陕西盐法，施行十年，每年减少榷货务使缗钱数百万，其功绩可著之史册。 使其子孙范景任郊社斋郎。
English: In Jiayu, Bao Zheng said: Fan Xiang is familiar with the Shaanxi salt law, which has been in effect for ten years, reducing the amount of salt shipments and making millions of salt money every year, and his achievements can be written in the history book.

古文：熙宁中，平洮、岷、叠、宕、河州数千里，置郡县，以古渭为通远军。
现代文：熙宁中，安定洮、岷、叠、宕、河州数千里，设置郡县，以古渭为通远军。
English: In Xi'an and Ningxia, thousands of miles of stable ridges, ridges, folds, ridges, and rivers were set up in counties, with ancient ridges being the farthest away.

古文：权陕西转运副使张诜奏： 朝廷复洮、陇故地，自将帅至裨佐悉有功赏。
现代文：代理陕西转运副使张诜上奏说 ：朝廷收复洮、陇故地，从将帅到副将辅助官员都有功劳并给予赏赐。
English: Zhang Xuan, acting deputy envoy of Shaanxi Transportation, said: The imperial court has restored the status quo ante, from the general to the deputy general, the supporting officials have all made contributions and given rewards.

古文：臣见洮、渭父老言，皇祐中，转运使祥因熟羌数被寇掠，其部族愿输土置城以为守御，乃即古渭为砦。
现代文：臣听到洮、渭一带的老百姓说，皇中，转运使范祥由于了解到羌部多次遭受抢劫和掠杀，羌部族愿意修筑城池，派人守卫，防御侵略，这就是古渭成为军寨的缘故。
English: The minister heard the common people around Handan and Handan say that because the Emperor's middle son, the transit envoy Fan Xiang, learned that Handan had been robbed and plundered many times, the Handan tribe was willing to build a castle, send guards, and defend against aggression. This is the reason why Handan became a military camp.

古文：弃之则兰州危，兰州危则熙河有腰膂之忧矣。 又请城李诺平、汝遮川，曰： 此赵充国屯田古榆塞之地也。 不报。
现代文：范祥这一措施完全能够消除宋朝和边境国家的矛盾，可以说范祥懂得攻守的好处。出兵稍受挫败，就被免官而不任用，臣私下感到痛惜。
English: This measure of Fan Xiang can completely eliminate the contradiction between the Song Dynasty and the border countries. It can be said that Fan Xiang understands the advantages of attack and defense. The minister privately felt regret when he was dismissed from his post and not appointed after the troop dispatch was slightly defeated.

古文：入为给事中、户部侍郎，卒。高宗绍兴中，采其抗论弃地及进筑之策，赠宝文阁学士。
现代文：希望推究范祥过去的功劳，稍加赏赐褒奖其忧国之心，让天下老百姓都知道范祥虽然死了仍享受着皇帝的恩泽，从而提倡范祥忠义的气节。 
English: It is hoped that the past merits of Fan Xiang will be investigated, a little reward will be given to reward his sorrow for the country, so that the people of the world will know that Fan Xiang still enjoys the emperor's favor even though he is dead, thus promoting Fan Xiang's loyalty.

古文：田京，字简之，世居沧州，其后徙亳州鹿邑。
现代文：朝廷于是下诏追赠范祥秘书，录用范祥一个未做官的儿子做官。范祥的儿子范育。田京字简之，世世代代都居住在沧州，后来迁移到亳州鹿邑。
English: As a result, the imperial court issued a posthumous award to Fan Xiang's secretary and appointed Fan Xiang's son, Fan Yu, who had never been an official, as an official. Fan Xiang's son, Tian Jing Zi Jian Zhi, had lived in Cangzhou for generations, and later moved to Luye, Ganzhou.

古文：举进士，调蜀州司法参军，自秦州观察推官改秘书省著作佐郎，为大理寺详断官。
现代文：考中进士后，调任蜀州司法参军，以秦州观察推官改任秘书省著作佐郎，为大理寺详断官。
English: After passing the middle school entrance examination, he was transferred to the judiciary of Shuzhou to join the army, and the Qinzhou observation officer was changed to the secretary of the provincial work office, and he was the detailed adjudicator of Dali Temple.

古文：赵元昊反，侍读学士李仲容荐京知兵法，召试中书，擢通判镇戎军。
现代文：赵元昊叛乱，侍读学士李仲容向朝廷推荐田京，认为他懂得兵法，田京奉召应试中书，提升为通判镇戎军。
English: After Zhao Yuanhao's rebellion, Li Zhongrong, an attendant bachelor, recommended Tian Jing to the imperial court, believing that he understood the art of war. Tian Jing was summoned to take the middle school exam and promoted to the military of Tongzhan Town.

古文：夏守赟为陕西经略使，奏兼管勾随军粮料。
现代文：夏守斌贝担任陕西经略使，上奏朝廷让田京兼管随军粮食草料。
English: Xia Shou Binbei served as the envoy to Shaanxi Province, and reported to the imperial court that Tianjing should also be in charge of grain and grass materials for the army.

古文：入对，陈方略，赐五品服。
现代文：田京上朝应答，陈述方法策略，被赐予五品官服。
English: Tian Jing went to the Imperial Court to answer questions, present methods and strategies, and was given five official uniforms.

古文：寻为经略安抚判官。守赟既罢，以武略应运筹决胜科，及试秘阁，与他科偕试六论，京自以记诵非所长，引去。
现代文：不久担任经略安抚判官，夏守斌贝被罢官以后，朝廷把武略应运作为决胜科，等到至秘阁考试时，却和其他各科一样都考试六论，田京自以为记诵不是他的长处，于是就离开了。
English: He soon served as a magistrate to pacify and pacify, and after the dismissal of Xia Shoubinbei, the imperial court made the military strategy as the decisive subject. However, when it came to the secret cabinet examination, it was the same as the other subjects. Tian Jing thought that memorizing and reciting was not his strength, so he left.

古文：又参夏竦军事。
现代文：又参与夏竦的军事谋划。
English: He also participated in Xia Yao's military planning.

古文：会遗翰林学士晁宗悫即军中问攻守孰便，众欲大举入讨，京曰： 夏人之不道久矣，未易破也。
现代文：恰逢朝廷派遣翰林学士晁宗悫到军中询问进攻与防守哪一个有益些，众人都要大举深入进行讨伐，田京说： 西夏人不守道义已很长时间了，不容易攻破他们。
English: At the same time, the imperial court sent Hanlin scholar Zou Zongqi to the army to inquire which one is more beneficial to attack and defense, and everyone had to go deep into the crusade. Tian Jing said: Xixia people have not been moral for a long time, it is not easy to break through them.

古文：今欲驱不习之师，深入敌境，与之角胜负，此兵家所忌，师出必败。 或曰： 不如讲和。 京曰： 敌兵未尝挫，安肯降我哉？ 未几，元昊使黄延德叩延州乞降，以奇兵出原、渭，败大将任福。
现代文：现在要率领不熟悉对方地形的军队，深入敌方境内，与敌人较量胜负，这是兵家所忌讳的，出动军队一定会失败。 
English: Now it is necessary to lead an army that is not familiar with the terrain of the other side, go deep into the enemy's territory, and compete with the enemy for victory and defeat. This is a taboo for soldiers, and the dispatch of the army will certainly fail.

古文：夏竦素不悦京，坐是改通判庐州，徙知邵武军，提点河北路刑狱事。
现代文：有的说： 还不如和西夏人讲和。 田京说 ：敌人军事力量未尝遭到挫败，怎么会降服于我们呢？ 
English: Some said, "It would be better to make peace with the Western Xia people." Tian Jing said, "The enemy's military force has not been defeated, so how can they surrender to us?"

古文：乃上言： 请择要官守沧、卫，凿西山石臼废道以限戎马，义勇聚教，复给粮，置卒守烽燧，用奇正法训兵，徙战马内地以息边费。 凡十余事，仁宗颇嘉纳之。
现代文：不久，赵元昊派黄延德到延州乞求投降，派奇兵出原、渭，打败大将任福。夏竦一直不喜欢田京，由于这次事件改为庐州通判，迁徙为邵武军主管，提点河北路刑狱事。田京于是上奏皇帝说 ：请挑选重要的官员坚守沧州、卫州，开凿西山石臼废道来限制战马的通行，征召义勇之士集中教导，免除他们的赋税徭役，并给他们提供军粮，安排士兵白天夜晚守候烽燧，用奇正法训练士兵，从内地征召战马来停止守边的费用。 总共十余件事，仁宗皇帝很赞赏并采纳了这些建议。
English: Not long after, Zhao Yuanhao sent Huang Yande to Yanzhou to beg for surrender, and sent a strange soldier to go out and defeat General Ren Fu. Xia Yao had always disliked Tian Jing. As a result of this incident, he changed his name to Shanzhou Tongzhan, moved to be the head of the Shaowu Army, and pointed out the Hebei Road torture and imprisonment. Tian Jing then appealed to the emperor: "Please select important officials to stick to Cangzhou and Weizhou, excavate the Xishan Stone Mill waste road to restrict the passage of war horses, recruit volunteers to teach them, exempt them from tax and service, and provide them with

古文：入为开封府判官，坐械囚送狱道死，出知蔡州，徙相、邢二州，复提点河北刑狱事。
现代文：入朝成为开封府判官，由于用木械拘系囚犯，在送往狱中的路上，囚犯死去，田京因此而调离开封，担任蔡州知州，后来又调到相州、邢州，又负责提点河北刑狱事。
English: When he entered the imperial court, he became a judge of Kaifeng Prefecture. Due to the fact that wooden instruments were used to detain prisoners, the prisoners died on the way to the prison. As a result, Tian Jing was transferred from Kaifeng to serve as the governor of Caizhou, and later he was transferred to Xiangzhou and Zhangzhou, and was also responsible for raising the point of Hebei criminal prison.

古文：王则据恩州反，京缒城趣南关，入骁健营抚士卒。
现代文：王则占据恩州反叛，田京从城上用绳子坠下奔向南关，进入骁健营安抚士卒。
English: Wang then occupied the rebel enclave of Enzhou, and Tian Jing raced down from the castle on a rope to Nanguan and entered the camp of Shujian to pacify the rebels.

古文：保州振武兵焚民居欲应贼，京捕斩之乃定。
现代文：保州振武兵焚毁民居想应合叛贼，田京逮捕这些人并加以斩首，振武兵才得以安定。
English: Bozhou Zhenwu soldiers burned and destroyed people's houses in response to the rebels, Tianjing arrested these people and beheaded them, and Zhenwu soldiers were able to stabilize the situation.

古文：贼遣其党崔象伪出降，京以其持妖言惑众，又斩以徇，由是营兵二十六指挥在外者皆慑服，不敢叛。
现代文：叛贼派遣其党徒崔象假装出城投降，田京因为崔象用妖言欺惑大众，又将崔象斩首示众，因此在城外的营兵二十六指挥都感到恐惧而被驯服，不敢再叛乱。
English: The traitor sent his henchmen, Cui Xiang, to pretend to leave the city and surrender. Tian Jing was furious because Cui Xiang deceived the public with magic words and beheaded Cui Xiang in front of the public. As a result, the commanders of the twenty-six battalions outside the city were afraid and tamed, and dared not rebel again.

古文：州之南关，民众多如城中，得不陷贼，京有功焉。
现代文：恩州的南关，老百姓像开封城一样多，能够不被叛贼攻陷，田京功不可没。
English: In Nanguan of Enzhou, there are as many common people as in Kaifeng City. If it can be saved from being taken over by traitors, Tianjing should be given credit.

古文：京督士攻城甚力，贼系京妻子乘城迫使呼曰： 毋亟攻，城中将屠我辈矣。 京叱诸军益进攻，注矢仰射，杀其家四人。
现代文：田京督促士兵用力攻城，叛贼绑住田京的家小登上城墙逼迫他们喊着说 ：不要用力攻城，城内的叛贼将要屠杀我们。 田京大声呵斥士兵更加紧攻城，抬头发箭，射死其家小四人。
English: Tian Jing urged the soldiers to forcefully attack the city, the traitors tied up Tian Jing's family and climbed the city wall to force them shouting: "Don't forcefully attack the city, the traitors in the city will slaughter us." Tian Jing shouted loudly at the soldiers to attack the city more tightly, raised his arrows and shot dead the four children of his family.

古文：贼知京无所顾，乃牵妻子去，恩州平。以不能预察贼，降监郓州税。
现代文：叛贼见此知道田京无所顾忌，于是带领家小离城而去，恩州得以平定，田京由于不能预察会发生叛乱，被降为监郓州税。
English: Seeing this, the traitor knew that Tian Jing had no scruples, so he led his family away from the city, and Enzhou was pacified. Since Tian Jing could not predict that a rebellion would occur, he was reduced to a prison.

古文：先是，驻泊都监田斌亦以贼发不能捕，待罪兵间，及城破，从诸将入，以功迁宫苑副使，而京独被谪。
现代文：在这之前，驻泊都监田斌也由于叛贼发生叛乱而不能预先逮捕叛贼，待罪于军中，后来攻破叛军城池，田斌跟随平叛的将领们进入叛城，由于平叛有功被升为宫苑副使，而田京却独遭贬谪。
English: Prior to this, the governor of the capital, Tian Bin, was also unable to arrest the traitors in advance due to the rebellion of the traitors. He was punished in the army, and later defeated the rebel army. Tian Bin followed the counter-rebel generals into the rebel city, and was promoted to the palace deputy envoy due to his counter-rebel achievements, while Tian Jing was alone demoted.

古文：御史言失察贼过轻，忘家为国义独重，不宜左迁，乃徙通判兖州。
现代文：御史上言说没有预先察知叛贼的行为这个过错并不十分严重，田京忘家小为国家的情义值得表彰，不宜对田京降职处分，于是迁任兖州通判。
English: The imperial edict said that the fault of not having foreknowledge of the traitor's act was not very serious, that Tian Jing forgot his family was small and deserved commendation for the country's cause, and that it was not appropriate to demote Tian Jing, so he was transferred to Zhangzhou General Court.

古文：又徙知江阴军，知密州，历提点淮南刑狱事、京西转运使，累迁兵部员外郎、直史馆、知沧州转运使。
现代文：后来又改为江阴军知州、密州知州，又任提点淮南刑狱事、京西转运使，多次升为兵部员外郎、直史馆、主管沧州转运使。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Jiangyin Military Chizhou and the Mizhou Military Chizhou. He was also appointed as the Huainan Penitentiary and the West Beijing Transfer Envoy. He was promoted to the position of Foreigner of the Military Department, the Direct History Museum, and the Cangzhou Transfer Envoy.

古文：京能招辑流民，为之给田除税租，凡增户万七千，特迁工部郎中。
现代文：田京能够招集安抚流民，给流民们分田并免除他们的租税，大约总共增加户数一万七千户，因此特地升为工部郎中。
English: Tianjing was able to call up and pacify the displaced people, give them allotments of land and exempt them from taxes, and increase the total number of households by about 17,000. Therefore, he was specially promoted to the junior minister of the Ministry of Industry and Trade.

古文：然传者谓流民之数多不实，又强为人田非其所乐，侵民税地，仿古屯田法，其后法不成，所给种钱牛价，民多不偿，鞭笞督责，至累年不能平，公私皆患之。
现代文：但是传送的人说流民的数字许多都不符合实际，又强行发给流民田地而流民并不乐意接受，侵占老百姓的税地，效法古代的屯田法，后来屯田法无法实行，田京发给老百姓种田和耕牛的价钱，老百姓大多得不偿失，鞭笞督责，一直许多年都不能平息，朝廷和老百姓都担心此事。
English: However, the courier said that many of the figures of the displaced people did not correspond to reality, and that they forcibly gave the displaced people fields and the displaced people were not willing to accept them, occupied the tax land of the common people, followed the ancient law of occupied fields, and later the law of occupied fields could not be implemented, Tianjing issued to the common people the price of farmland and cattle, the common people mostly did not pay for it, and the whipping and supervision could not be calmed down for many years. The imperial court and the common people were worried about this.

古文：擢天章阁待制、陕西都转运使，改兵部郎中，复知沧州，拜右谏议大夫，卒。
现代文：提升为天章阁待制、陕西都转运使，改任兵部郎中，又任沧州知州，授予右谏议大夫，去世。
English: He was promoted to Tianzhangge, Shaanxi Provincial Envoy, and was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, as well as the Vice-Minister of Cangzhou and the Vice-Minister of the State Council, and passed away.

古文：京喜论议，然语繁而迂，颇通兵战、历算、杂家之术。为人尚气节，少时与常山董士廉、汾阴郭京相友善，俱以倜傥闻。
现代文：田京喜欢议论，但言事繁琐而说话陈旧不合时宜，田京颇精通兵战、历算、杂家之术，为人崇尚气节，年轻时与常山董士廉、汾阴郭京十分友好，都以不拘于俗而知名。
English: Tian Jing likes to talk, but his speech is cumbersome and his speech is old and out of date. Tian Jing is quite proficient in military warfare, calendars, and miscellaneous household skills. He is a person who respects the seasons. When he was young, he was very friendly with Changshan Dong Shiliang and Yan Ying Guo Jing. They are both known for being unconventional.

古文：著《天人流术》、《通儒子》十数书，又有奏议十卷。
现代文：曾写有《天人流术》、《通儒子》等十数本书，另有奏议十卷。
English: He has written more than ten books, including "The Way of Heaven," "The Way of Confucius," and another ten volumes of lectures.

