古文：裴让之，字士礼。
现代文：裴让之，字士礼。
English: Pei Janzhi, Zha Shi Li.

古文：年十六丧父，殆不胜哀，其母辛氏泣抚之曰： 弃我灭性，得为孝子乎？ 
现代文：十六岁丧父，几乎不胜悲哀，他的母亲辛氏流泪安抚他说： 抛弃我因丧亲过度悲哀而毁灭生命，能够作孝子吗? 
English: At the age of sixteen, he lost his father, which was almost unbearably sad. His mother, Xin Shi, shed tears to soothe him and said, "Can you be a filial son if you abandon me and ruin my life due to excessive grief over the loss of a relative?

古文：由是自勉。
现代文：从此自勉。
English: Let them mourn from now on.

古文：辛氏，高明妇则，又闲礼度。
现代文：辛氏，有高明的作妇人的准则，又熟悉礼节。
English: Ms. Xin has a good sense of femininity and is familiar with etiquette.

古文：夫丧，诸子多幼弱，广延师友，或亲自教授。
现代文：丈夫去世，众子大多年幼弱小，便广邀师友，有时亲自教授。
English: After her husband's death, when her children were mostly small, she invited a wide range of teachers and friends, and sometimes taught them herself.

古文：内外亲属有吉凶礼制，多取则焉。
现代文：内外亲属有吉凶的礼制，多取来效法。
English: Relatives at home and abroad have auspicious and inauspicious etiquette, and they often follow suit.

古文：让之少好学，有文俊辩，早得声誉。
现代文：让之少年好学，有文采，辩才杰出，早年获得声誉。
English: Let the boy be studious, literate, and an outstanding debater, and gain a reputation in his early years.

古文：魏天平中举秀才，对策高第。
现代文：魏天平年间被举荐为秀才，应试对策，名列前茅。
English: During the Wei and Tianping dynasties, he was recommended as an outstanding talent, and his countermeasures were among the best.

古文：累迁屯田主客郎中，省中语曰： 能赋诗，裴让之。 
现代文：几次升任为屯田主客郎中，宫禁之中有这样的话： 能赋诗，裴让之。 
English: He was promoted several times to the position of tonden chujakuro, and there is a saying in the Imperial edict: If you can compose a poem, do so.

古文：为太原公开府记室。
现代文：任太原公开府记室。
English: He was appointed as Taiyuan Prince's record-keeping office.

古文：与杨愔友善，相遇则清谈竟日。
现代文：与杨情友好，见面就清谈终日。
English: He has a close relationship with Yang, and when the two meet, they talk all day.

古文：愔每云： 此人风流警拔，裴文季为不亡矣。 
现代文：杨情常说： 这个人风流敏悟超群，使人惊异，裴文季没有死啊。 
English: Yang Chang said: Let it be fashionable, out of the ordinary, Pei Wenzhi, who was extraordinary in the Three Kingdoms, is still alive!

古文：梁使至，帝令让之摄主客郎。
现代文：梁的使臣到，帝令让之代理主客郎。
English: When Liang's envoys arrived, the emperor gave them the title of acting innkeeper.

古文：第二弟诹之奔关右，兄弟五人皆拘系。
现代文：第二弟诹之逃往关右，兄弟五人都被拘禁。
English: His second brother, Pei Xizhi, was coerced by the West Wei army and was taken to the West Customs, which aroused the suspicion of the imperial court. All five of his brothers were detained.

古文：神武问曰： 诹之何在？ 
现代文：神武问： 诹之在哪裹? 
English: Shenwu asked, "Where is the cocoon?"

古文：答曰： 昔吴、蜀二国，诸葛兄弟各得遂心，况让之老母在，君臣分定，失忠与孝，愚夫不为。
现代文：回答说： 往昔吴、蜀二国，诸葛兄弟二人各自能够遂心，何况让之的老母在世，君臣的职分已定，失去忠与孝，愚夫不为。
English: He replied, "In the past, the two brothers Zhuge of the two kingdoms of Wu and Shu were able to fulfill their hearts, not to mention that their old mother was still alive, the position of the monarch and the minister had already been determined, they lost their loyalty and filial piety, and they were stupid.

古文：伏愿明公以诚信待物，若以不信处物，物亦安能自信？
现代文：我愿明公以诚信待人，如果以不诚信待人，人又怎么能自信?
English: I am willing to treat people in good faith. If I treat people in bad faith, how can people be confident?

古文：以此定霸，犹□行而求道耳。 
现代文：以此来成就霸业，好比倒行而求道罢了。 
English: Using this to achieve hegemony is like going backwards to find the way.

古文：神武善其言，兄弟俱释。
现代文：神武认为他的话说得好，兄弟全都释放了。
English: Emperor Jimmu was moved by his words and released all five of their brothers.

古文：历文襄大将军主簿，兼中书舍人，后兼散骑常侍聘梁。
现代文：历任文襄大将军主簿，兼中书舍人，后来又兼散骑常侍出使梁。
English: He was the chief accountant to successive Generals of the Grand Army of Manhsiang, and also the secretary of the Middle School. Later, he also served as a messenger to the cavalry.

古文：文襄尝入朝，让之导引，容仪蕴藉，文襄目之曰： 士礼佳舍人。 
现代文：文襄曾入朝，让主引导，容仪含蓄，塞襄看着他说： 士礼是个好舍人。 
English: Wenxiang once entered the court, let the Lord guide him, and tolerated him implicitly. Xie Xiang looked at him and said: "Ji Li is a good person.

古文：迁长兼中书侍郎，领舍人。
现代文：迁任长兼中书侍郎，兼任舍人。
English: The imperial court promoted him to the post of director of the Chinese Literature Department, and he was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Literature Department, in charge of all the scholars of the Chinese Literature Department.

古文：齐受禅，静帝逊居别宫，与诸臣别，让之流涕歔欷。
现代文：齐接受惮让，静帝退居别宫，与众臣告别，垄之悲痛流涕。
English: Qianwen Xuandi Gaoyang succeeded the emperor, and the Eastern Wei Xiao Jingdi abdicated and lived in another palace, bidding farewell to the ministers, leaving Pei Jang empty-handed.

古文：以参掌仪注，封宁都县男。
现代文：因参与掌管制度仪节，封空锄圣男。
English: Qi's family put him in charge of etiquette and etiquette, and made him the man of Ningdu County.

古文：帝欲以为黄门郎，或言其体重，不堪趋侍，乃除清河太守。
现代文：帝想用作黄门郎，有人说他身体太胖，不堪奔走侍奉，于是任清河太守。
English: The emperor wanted to use him as Huangmenlang, but some people said that he was too fat to run and serve, so he was appointed as the governor of Qinghe.

古文：至郡未几，杨愔谓让之诸弟曰： 我与贤兄交□，企闻善政。
现代文：至郡没多久，杨情对让之诸弟说： 我与贤兄交往款诚，盼望听到他的政绩。
English: Not long after arriving in the county, Yang Rong said to his younger brothers: I am sincere in my dealings with my elder brother and look forward to hearing about his political achievements.

古文：适有人从清河来，云奸吏敛□，盗贼清靖。
现代文：恰巧有人从清河来，说奸吏收敛恶迹，盗贼清除。
English: It just so happened that someone came from Qinghe, saying that evil-doers should be restrained and thieves eliminated.

古文：期月之期，翻然更速。 
现代文：一个月的时间，焕然一新，变化很快。 
English: A month's time, brand new, changes quickly.

古文：清河有二豪吏田转贵、孙舍兴久吏奸猾，多有侵削，因事遂胁人取财。计赃依律不至死。
现代文：清河有两个豪吏田转贵、孙舍兴长久作官吏，非常奸猾，多有侵夺，因事就挟持人索取财物，计算脏物依法不够死罪。
English: In Qinghe, there are two high-ranking officials, Tian Zenggui and Sun Shexing, who have been officials for a long time. They are very cunning, and many of them have robbed others. For this reason, it is a crime punishable by death to demand money from a hostage-taker, or to count dirty objects.

古文：让之以其乱法，杀之。
现代文：让之因他们执法乱法，杀了他们。
English: Let them be killed for their lawlessness.

古文：时清河王岳为司州牧，遣部从事案之。
现代文：当时，清河王高岳任司州牧。派所部从事查办他。
English: At that time, King Gao Yue of Qinghe, who was in charge of the history of Shizhou, sent his subordinates to investigate the matter.

古文：侍中高德政旧与让之不协，案奏言： 当陛下受禅之时，让之眷恋魏朝，呜咽流涕，比为内官，情非所愿。 
现代文：侍中高德政旧与让之不和，奏章弹劾说： 当陛下受惮之时，让之眷恋魏朝，呜咽流涕，近为内官，非所情愿。 
English: Gao Dezheng, an aide-de-camp to Emperor Gaozong, was at odds with him, and the impeachment report said: "When your majesty was chastised, he was attached to the Wei Dynasty, whimpered, and was close to being an inner official, which was not what he wanted.

古文：既而杨愔请救之，云： 罪不合死。 
现代文：不久杨惰为他求救，说： 罪不该死。 
English: Soon after, Yang Lian asked for his help, saying, "Sin does not deserve death."

古文：文宣大怒，谓愔曰： 欲得与裴让之同□耶！ 
现代文：文宣大怒，对他说： 想与裴让之同埋一个坟墓吗? 
English: Wen Xuan was furious and said to him, "Do you want to bury a grave with Pei Jang?"

古文：于是无敢言者。
现代文：于是没有敢说话的。
English: So no one dared to speak out.

古文：事奏，竟赐死于家。
现代文：事情启奏后，终于赐死家中。
English: After the incident was revealed, he was finally allowed to die at home.

古文：让之次弟诹之。
现代文：让之的次弟叫詉之。
English: The second younger brother of Jang Zhi is called Jang Zhi.

古文：诹之，字士正，少好儒学，释褐太学博士。
现代文：诹之，字十正，年少喜好儒学，始仕为太学博士。
English: Xizhi, the tenth generation, liked Confucianism when he was young, and became a doctor of Taoism.

古文：尝从常景借书百卷，十许日便返。
现代文：曾向常景借书一百卷，十曰左右便送还。
English: He once borrowed a hundred or so volumes from Changjing, and it took more than ten days for all of them to be returned.

古文：景疑其不能读，每卷策问，应答无遗。
现代文：速怀疑他没有读。策问每卷，应答没有遣漏。
English: Changjing suspected that he hadn't read it carefully, so he took out each volume to ask him questions, and they all answered satisfactorily, leaving nothing out.

古文：景叹曰： 应奉五行俱下，祢衡一览便记，今复见之于裴生矣。 
现代文：鲎量赞叹说： 塞奎一日五行，迩蛮遇目成诵，今天在裴生身上重新见到了。 
English: Changjing was greatly amazed and said, "You should be able to memorize the five elements at a glance. Today, their extraordinary talent has once again manifested itself in Pei Xuan."

古文：杨愔阖门改葬，托诹之顿作十余墓志，文皆可观。
现代文：杨惰合门改葬，托付诹之立即写十几个墓志铭，文辞都非常可观。
English: Yang's whole family was reburied, and they asked him to write more than ten epitaphs as soon as possible. Each epitaph was very wonderful.

古文：让之、诹之及皇甫和弟亮并知名于洛下，时人语曰： 诹胜于让，和不如亮。 
现代文：让之、诹之与皇甫和之弟皇甫亮都知名于洛下，当时人有这样的话： 讽胜过让，和不如奎。 
English: Janzhi, Zizhi, Wangfu, and Wangfu's younger brother Wangfu Liang were all well-known in Lower Luo, and people at the time had this to say: Janzhi is better than Janzhi, and Wangfu is worse than Gui.

古文：司空高干致书曰： 相屈为户曹参军。 
现代文：司空产茎给他写信说： 屈遵为户曹参军。 
English: Sikyong Zhouzhu wrote to him, saying, "Kujun should join the army as a householder.

古文：诹之复书不受署。
现代文：趣之覆信不接受任用。
English: I do not accept the appointment in response to your letter.

古文：沛王开大司马府，辟为记室。
现代文：坦设立大司马府，召为记室。
English: He set up a grand secretary's office for horses and called it a record office.

古文：迁邺后，诹之留在河南，西魏领军独孤信入据金墉，以诹之为开府属，号曰 洛阳遗彦。 
现代文：沛王去邺后。认之留在河南，西魏领军独巫售进入占据金撞，让塑主任开府属官，号称 困未任用的才德之士。 
English: After the death of Pei Wang, it was decided that he would stay in Henan, and the Western Wei leader, Du Wu Xie, entered to occupy Jin Bang, and let the plastic director become a subordinate official of the government. He was known as a "poor and unappointed man of virtue."

古文：信败，诹之居南山，洛州刺史王元轨召为中从事。
现代文：独孤信失败，讽之居住在南山，洛州刺史王元轨召任中从事。
English: He lived in Nanshan, Los Angeles, and was engaged in the recruitment of Wang Yuanlu.

古文：西师忽至，寻退，遂随西师入关。
现代文：西方的军队忽然来到，不久又退去，于是就跟随西师入鳃。
English: The western army suddenly arrived and soon retreated, so he followed the western division into the camp.

古文：周文帝以为大行台仓曹郎中，卒。赠徐州刺史。
现代文：固塞蛮让他任大行台仓曹郎中。去世，追赠徐州刺史。
English: Guse Man let him serve as Da Xing Taicang Cao Lang. He died and was posthumously awarded the Xuzhou Sashih.

古文：谳之，字士平，七岁便勤学，早知名。
现代文：谳之，字士平，七岁便勤奋学习，早年知名。
English: Hao Zhi, the character Shi Ping, studied diligently at the age of seven and became famous at an early age.

古文：累迁司徒主簿。
现代文：屡次升任为司徒主簿。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of chief bookkeeper.

古文：杨愔每称叹云： 河东士族，京官不少，唯此家兄弟，全无乡音。 
现代文：杨情常称赞说： 河东士族，在京城作官的不少，惟有此家兄弟，全然没有乡音。 
English: Yang Ronglu often praised: "There are quite a few officials from the East River warrior tribe in Beijing, but this family of brothers has no local dialect at all.

古文：谳之虽年少，不妄交游，唯与陇西辛术、赵郡李绘、顿丘李构、清河崔瞻为忘年之友。
现代文：谳之虽年轻，却不乱交朋友，衹与陇西辛术、趟郡李绘、顿丘李构、清河崔瞻为忘年交。
English: Although he is young, he does not make friends indiscriminately. He has made unforgettable friendships with Xinxiu of Shaanxi, Li Pu of Wugu County, Li Jie of Dongqiu, and Cui Zhan of Qinghe.

古文：昭帝梓宫将还邺，转仪曹郎，尤悉历代故事、仪注，丧礼皆能裁正。
现代文：昭帝灵柩将返回邺，改任仪曹郎，尤其熟悉历代旧事、礼仪制度，丧礼都能裁断订正。
English: Zhao Di's coffin will return to the coffin, and he will be appointed as the eulogist. He is especially familiar with the ancient history and etiquette system, and can judge and revise the funeral.

古文：为永昌太守，客旅过郡，出私财供给，人间所无，预代下出，为吏人所怀。
现代文：任永昌太守，旅客过郡，拿出私人财物供应，民间所没有的，为他们准备，被官吏百姓所怀念。
English: Appointed Yongchang Daju, travelers passed through the county, took out private property supply, which the people did not have, prepared for them, and was remembered by officials and the people.

古文：齐亡仕周，卒伊川太守。
现代文：齐亡后在周作官，在伊川太守的官位上去世。
English: After Qi's death, he became an official in Zhou and died in the official position of the governor of Ikawa Province.

古文：皇甫和，字长谐，安定朝那人，其先因官寓居汉中。
现代文：皇甫和，字长谐，安定朝那人，他祖先因作官寄居汉中。
English: His ancestor, who lived in the Han Dynasty as an official, was a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：祖澄，南齐秦、梁二州刺史。
现代文：祖父皇甫澄，任南齐秦、梁二个州的刺史。
English: His grandfather, Emperor Fucheng, served as the governor of two provinces, Southern Qi, Qin and Liang.

古文：父徽，字子玄，梁安定、略阳二郡守。
现代文：父亲皇甫徽，字子玄，任梁安定、略阳二郡郡守。
English: His father, Emperor Fuhui, was also known as Zixi Xuan, and served as the governor of two counties, Liang'an and Liangyang.

古文：魏正始二年，随其妻父夏侯道迁入魏，道迁别上勋书，欲以徽为元谋。
现代文：魏正始二年，跟随他妻子的父亲夏侯道迁到魏，道迁另上书请功，想让他为主谋。
English: In the first two years of the Wei Dynasty, he followed his wife's father, Xia Hou Dao, and moved to Wei. Dao Qian also wrote a letter to ask for help, wanting him to be the main mastermind.

古文：徽曰： 创谋之始，本不关预，虽贪荣赏，内愧于心。 
现代文：皇甫徽说： 创谋之始本没有参与，即使贪图荣誉奖赏，也内心有愧。 
English: The Empress Dowager Hui said: I did not participate in the beginning of the creation plan. Even if I covet the honor and reward, I feel guilty.

古文：遂拒而不许。
现代文：于是拒绝没有答应。
English: So the refusal was not accepted.

古文：梁州刺史羊灵佑重其敦实，表为征虏府司马，卒。
现代文：梁州刺史羊灵佑看重他的敦厚，上表任他为征虏府司马，去世。
English: Yang Lingyou, the governor of Liangzhou, valued his fortitude, and appointed him as the secretary of the Conscription Headquarters. He passed away.

古文：和十一而孤，母夏侯氏，才明有礼则，亲授以经书。
现代文：皇甫和十一岁丧父，母亲夏侯氏。有才智懂礼节，亲自传授经书。
English: At the age of eleven, Empress Dowager Cixi lost her father, and her mother, Xia Hou, who had the wisdom to understand etiquette, personally taught her the scriptures.

古文：及长，深沉有雅量，尤明礼仪，宗亲吉凶，多相谘访。
现代文：皇甫和到年长，深沉有雅量，尤其深明礼仪，宗族亲戚有了吉凶，多来咨询。
English: When the Emperor and Empress reach old age, they are profound and elegant, especially when it comes to etiquette. When family relatives have good or bad fortune, they often come to consult with them.

古文：卒于济阴太守。
现代文：在济阴太守的官位上去世。
English: He died while holding the title of Jilin governor-general.

古文：李构，字祖基，黎阳人。
现代文：李构，字祖基，黎阳人。
English: Li Jie, Zi Zuki, Li Yangren.

古文：祖平，魏尚书仆射。
现代文：祖父李平，魏尚书仆射。
English: Grandfather Li Ping, Wei Shang Shufu Zhao.

古文：构少以方正见称，释褐开府参军，累迁谯州刺史，卒。
现代文：李构年少时以品德方正著称。始仕任开府参军。屡次升任为谯州刺史，去世。
English: When Li Jie was young, he was known for his moral rectitude. He joined the army when he was first appointed to Kaifu. He was repeatedly promoted to be the governor of Zhangzhou, and passed away.

古文：构从父弟庶，魏大司农谐子。
现代文：李构堂弟李庶，魏大司农李谐的儿子。
English: Li Jie's cousin, Li Zhe, was the son of the Wei general secretary of agriculture, Li Jin.

古文：方雅好学，风流规检，甚有家风。
现代文：雅正好学。风流而举止有度，很有自家的遣风。
English: She is well-educated, has a refined demeanor, and has her own style.

古文：稍迁临漳令。
现代文：逐渐升任坠漳令。
English: Gradually, he was promoted to the post of the order of the fallen eagle.

古文：魏书出，庶与卢斐、王松年等讼其不平，并系狱。
现代文：《魏书》成书，李庶与卢斐、王松年等人为其不公正而争辩，一起被抓进监牢。
English: "Weishu" was completed, and Li Shizhu, along with Lu Fei, Wang Songnian and others, argued for its injustice and were taken to prison together.

古文：魏收书王慧龙自云太原人，又言王琼不善事；卢同附卢玄传；李平为陈留人，云其家贫贱。
现代文：魏收写王慧龙自称太原人，又说王琼不善作事；卢同附在《卢玄传》后；李平是陈留人，说他家贫贱。
English: Wei collected and wrote that Wang Huilong claimed to be a Taiyuan person and said that Wang Qiong was not good at doing things; Lu Tong was attached to "Lu Xuan Biography"; Li Ping was a Chen resident and said that his family was poor.

古文：故斐等致讼，语杨愔云： 魏收合诛。 
现代文：所以卢斐等人表示争辩，告诉杨情说： 魏收该杀。 
English: Therefore, Lu Fei and others argued, telling Yang Rong that: Wei Hui should be killed.

古文：愔党助魏收，遂白显祖罪斐等，并□头鞭二百。
现代文：杨情偏袒支持魏收，就报告显祖治卢斐等的罪，全都剃光了头鞭打二百。
English: Yang Jie, who favored Wei Jie, reported the crimes of Xian Zoji, Lu Fei and others, and they were all shaved and whipped 200 times.

古文：庶死于临漳狱中，庶兄岳痛之，终身不历临漳县门。
现代文：李庶死在临漳监狱中，李庶兄李岳很痛心此事，终身不过临违县衙之门。
English: Li Shou died in Linyi Prison. Li Yue, Li Shou's elder brother, was very distressed about this. However, he never left Linyi County.

古文：张宴之，字熙德。
现代文：张宴之，字熙德。
English: Zhang Yanzhi, also known as Xi De.

古文：幼孤有至性，为母郑氏教诲，动依礼典。
现代文：幼年丧父，天赋品性卓绝，受母亲郑氏的教诲，行为必依礼法。
English: He lost his father at a young age, his natural talent is outstanding, he was taught by his mother Zheng, and he must behave according to etiquette.

古文：从尒朱荣平元颢，赐爵武成子，累迁尚书二千石郎中。
现代文：跟随氽朱荣平定元颢，赐予武成子的爵位，屡次升任为尚书二千石郎中。
English: He followed Zou Zhu Rong in subduing the Yuan Dynasty and gave the title of nobility to Wu Chengzi, and was repeatedly promoted to Shangshu 2,000 kilo middle class.

古文：高岳征颍川，复以为都督中兵参军兼记室。
现代文：高岳出征颖川，又让他作都督中兵参军兼记室。
English: Gao Yue went to conquer Yingchuan, and made him the viceroy's enlisted soldier and secretary.

古文：宴之文士，兼有武干，每与岳帷帐之谋，又常以短兵接刃，亲获首级，深为岳所嗟赏。
现代文：宴之是个文士，兼有军事才能，常与高岳在帷帐中谋划，又常常短兵相接作战，亲获敌人首级，深为高岳所赞赏。
English: Yanzhi was a scribe who also had military talent. He often plotted with Gao Yue behind the curtain, and often fought close to each other. He personally received the enemy's head, which was deeply appreciated by Gao Yue.

古文：天保初，文宣为高阳王纳宴之女为妃，令赴晋阳成礼。
现代文：天保初年，文宣给高阳王娶宴之的女儿为妃，令赴晋阳成婚。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, Wen Xuan gave the daughter of King Gaoyang to marry Ban as his wife, and ordered him to go to Jinyang to get married.

古文：宴之后园陪燕，坐客皆赋诗。
现代文：宴之在后园陪人宴饮，在座客人都赋诗。
English: The banquet was held in the back garden, and all the guests were reciting poetry.

古文：宴之诗云： 天下有道，主明臣直，虽休勿休，永贻世则。 
现代文：宴之赋诗说： 天下有道，主明臣直，虽休勿休，永贻世则。 
English: The poem at the banquet said: There is a way under heaven, the master is clear and the vassal is straight, although they do not rest, they will never rest.

古文：文宣笑曰： 得卿箴讽，深以慰怀。 
现代文：文宣笑着说： 得到你的箴刺讽谏，深深地感到慰藉。 
English: Wen Xuan said with a smile: I am deeply comforted by your sarcasm.

古文：后行北徐州事，寻即真，为吏人所爱。
现代文：后代理北徐州政事，不久授予正式职务，为官吏百姓热爱。
English: Later, he acted as an agent of the North Xuzhou government, and was soon granted official positions. He was loved by officials and the people.

古文：御史崔子武督察州郡，至北徐州，无所案劾，唯得百姓所制清德颂数篇。
现代文：御史崔子武督察州郡，徐州，没有弹劾的案件，衹得到百姓所作的《清德颂》数篇。
English: Supervisor Cui Ziwu of Shuzhou County, Xuzhou, has no impeachment case, and has received several "Ode to Chingde" made by the people.

古文：乃叹曰： 本求罪状，遂闻颂声。 
现代文：于是赞叹说： 本来是查罪状，却听到赞颂之声。 
English: Then he said with admiration: "I was supposed to investigate the charges, but I heard the voices of praise.

古文：迁兖州刺史，未拜，卒。
现代文：升任兖州刺史，没有到任，去世。
English: He was promoted to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian, but did not take up the post and died.

古文：赠齐州刺史。
现代文：追赠齐州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "Chizhou Sashimi Master."

古文：陆卬，字云驹。
现代文：陆印，字云驹。
English: Lu Ying, Ziyun Zong.

古文：少机悟，美风神，好学不倦，博览□书，五经多通大义。
现代文：年少机智聪明，风韵神态美好，好学不倦，博览群书，五经多能通晓大义。
English: He is young, witty and clever, has a charming demeanor, is eager to learn and tireless, is well-versed in books, and is well-versed in the Five Classics.

古文：善属文，甚为河间邢卲所赏。卲又与卬父子彰交游，尝谓子彰曰： 吾以卿老蚌遂出明珠，意欲为□拜纪可乎？ 
现代文：善于写文章，很被河间邢邵所欣赏，邢邵又同坠生的父亲陆子彰交往，曾对王堑说： 我认为你是老蚌出了明珠，想要为群拜纪可以吗? 
English: He was good at writing articles and was greatly admired by Lu Shao, who was also in contact with Lu Zi's father, Lu Zi Zhang, who had passed away. He once said to Wang Yao: "I think you are the pearl of Laojiao. Do you want to be a disciple of the group?"

古文：由是名誉日高，儒雅搢绅，尤所推许。
现代文：从此名声与曰俱增，学识渊博的儒士，尤其推崇赞许。
English: Since then, the reputation has grown with each passing day, and the learned Confucianists have been especially respected and praised.

古文：起家员外散骑侍郎，历文襄大将军主簿，中书舍人，兼中书侍郎，以本职兼太子洗马。
现代文：从家中征召出来任员外散骑侍郎，历任文襄大将军主簿，中书舍人，兼中书侍郎，还以本职兼任太子洗马。
English: He was conscripted from his home to serve as a non-commissioned officer horseback riding attendant, the chief secretary of successive Bunxiang grand generals, the secretary of the Central Committee, and the secretary of the Central Committee, and also served as the prince's horse washer.

古文：自梁、魏通和，岁有交聘，卬每兼官燕接，在帝席赋诗，卬必先成，虽未能尽工，以敏速见美。
现代文：从梁、魏友好，每年相互派使者，陆生每每兼任宴请接待的官吏，在皇帝的宴旧上赋诗，陆印一定先完成，虽然不能全都精巧，却以敏捷迅速见称。
English: From the time of Liang and Wei's friendship, emissaries were sent to each other every year, and Lu Sheng always served as the official to receive the banquet. Lu Yin always finished the poem before the emperor's banquet. Although it can't all be exquisite, it is known for its agility and speed.

古文：除中书侍郎，修国史。
现代文：任中书侍郎，撰修国史。
English: He was appointed to the position of Chusho-sajiro, responsible for compiling the history of the country.

古文：以父忧去职，居丧尽礼，哀毁骨立。
现代文：因父亲去世离任，守丧尽礼，因哀痛身体受损消瘦到极点。
English: Due to the death of his father, he left his post, paid his respects to the dead, and lost weight to the extreme due to grief.

古文：诏以本官起。
现代文：韶令以原来的官职起用。
English: He was appointed to his former post by imperial order.

古文：文襄时镇邺，嘉其至行，亲诣门以慰勉之。
现代文：文襄当时镇守邺，嘉奖他的卓越品行，亲自登门宽慰勉励他。
English: At that time, Wen Xiang was the town watchman, commended his outstanding performance, and personally went to the door to comfort and encourage him.

古文：卬母魏上庸公主，初封蓝田，高明妇人也，甚有志操。
现代文：陆印母是魏上卢公圭，当初封于蓝田，是显贵的妇人，很有志节。
English: Lu Ying's mother was Lu Gonggui in the Wei Dynasty, who was originally sealed in Lantian. She was a distinguished woman with a lot of ambition.

古文：卬昆季六人，并主所生。
现代文：陆印兄弟六人，全是公主所生。
English: Lu Ying's six brothers were all born to the princess.

古文：故邢卲常谓人云： 蓝田生玉，固不虚矣。 
现代文：所以邢邵常对人说： 蓝田生玉，果然名不虚传啊。 
English: Therefore, Zou Shao often said to people: Lantian raw jade, it is indeed a true story.

古文：主教训诸子，皆禀义方，虽创巨痛深，出于天性，然动依礼度，亦母氏之训焉。
现代文：公主教训诸子，都遵循规范和道理，虽然创伤巨大悲痛深重，出于天性，然而行为依照礼度，也是母亲的教训啊。
English: The princess taught all her children to follow the rules and principles. Although the trauma was great and the grief was deep, it was out of nature, but it was also a mother's lesson to behave according to propriety.

古文：卬兄弟相率庐于墓侧，负土成坟，朝廷深所嗟尚，发诏褒扬，改其所居里为孝终里。
现代文：陆印兄弟相跟着在墓侧结庐，背土成坟，朝廷非常赞赏，发布诏令加以褒扬，改他们所住的里为孝终里。
English: The Luyin brothers were buried side by side in the grave, their backs turned into graves. The imperial court was very appreciative, issued a decree to praise them, and changed the village where they lived to the village of filial piety.

古文：服竟当袭，不忍嗣侯。
现代文：服丧完毕应当承袭官爵，却不忍心继承侯爵。
English: After the funeral, he should have succeeded to the peerage, but he could not bear to succeed to the marquisate.

古文：天保初，常山王荐卬器干，文宣面授给事黄门侍郎，迁吏部郎中。
现代文：天保初年，常山王推荐陆印的才干，文宣当面授予给事黄门侍郎，升任吏部郎中。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, King Jangsan recommended Lu Ying's talent, and Wen Xuan personally awarded him the title of Huangmen Chamberlain and promoted him to the position of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：上洛王思宗为清都尹，辟为邑中正，食贝丘县干。
现代文：上洛王思宗任清都尹，召为邑中正，食贝丘县的俸禄。
English: When Shangluo Wang Shizong made Yin the capital of Qing Dynasty, he also recruited him to be the mayor of the town, and the food town was in Beqiu County.

古文：遭母丧，哀慕毁悴，殆不胜丧，至沉笃，顿昧伏枕。
现代文：遭遇母亲丧事，哀伤思慕毁形憔悴，几乎不能承受丧事，极其沉重，困顿昏迷伏于枕上。
English: Encountered his mother's death, sad thoughts of disfigurement, almost unable to bear the loss, extremely heavy, trapped in a coma on the pillow.

古文：又感风疾。
现代文：又感风疾。
English: I've got wind again.

古文：第五弟搏遇疾临终，谓其兄弟曰： 大兄□病如此，性至慈爱，搏之死日，必不得使大兄知之，哭泣声必不可闻彻，致有感恸。 
现代文：第五弟陆搏得病临终前，对他的兄弟们说： 大哥瘦病如此，性格又极其慈爱，我死之曰，一定不能让大哥知道这件事，哭泣声一定不可响彻，使他感伤悲痛。 
English: Before the fifth brother, Lu Bo, died of illness, he said to his brothers: "My elder brother is so thin, and his character is extremely kind. When I die, I must not let my elder brother know about this, and my crying must not be loud enough to make him sad.

古文：家人至于祖载，方始告之。
现代文：家裹人到临葬之时，才告诉他。
English: The family did not tell Lu Yao until the funeral.

古文：卬闻而悲痛，一恸便绝，年四十八。
现代文：陆印听说而悲痛，一痛便断气，当时四十八岁。
English: Lu Ying was forty-eight years old at the time and was heartbroken when she heard the news.

古文：卬自在朝，笃慎固密，不说人短，不伐己长，言论清远，有人伦鉴裁，朝野甚悲惜之。
现代文：陆印自从在朝，忠厚谨慎处事严格，不说人家的短处，不夸耀自己的长处，言谈清明高远，有审察识别人物的才能，朝野之人都非常悲痛惋惜他。
English: Lu Yin had been loyal, prudent and strict since he was in the court. He did not talk about other people's shortcomings, did not boast of his own strengths, spoke clearly and far-reaching, and had the ability to examine and identify other people. The people of the court and the field were very sad and sorry for him.

古文：赠□将军、青州刺史，谥曰文。
现代文：追赠卫将军、青州刺史，谧号为文。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Guards and the title of Grand Historian of Qingzhou. His nickname was Wen.

古文：所著文章十四卷，行于世。
现代文：所著文章十四卷，刊行于世。
English: Fourteen volumes of articles written by him have been circulated among the people.

古文：齐之郊庙诸歌，多卬所制。
现代文：齐的郊庙诸歌，大多为陆印所作。
English: All the songs of the suburb temples are mostly composed by Lu Ying.

古文：子乂嗣，袭爵始平侯。
现代文：儿子陆义继承始平侯爵位。
English: His son, Lu Yi, succeeded to the marquisate of Shi Ping.

古文：王松年，少知名。文襄临并州，辟为主簿，累迁通直散骑常侍，副李纬使梁。
现代文：王松年，年少知名，文襄到并州，召为主簿，屡次升任为通直散骑常侍，给李纬作副使出使梁国。
English: In the year of Wang Song, a well-known young man, Wen Xiang came to Bianzhou and was called to be the chief secretary. He was repeatedly promoted to be a regular attendant, and sent Li Wei as a deputy envoy to Liang Guo.

古文：还，历位尚书郎中。
现代文：返回，历任尚书郎中。
English: Returned, successively in the middle of Sho Shuro.

古文：魏收撰魏书成，松年有谤言，文宣怒，禁止之，仍加杖罚。
现代文：魏收写成《魏书》，松年有诋毁的话，文宣发怒，监禁他，还施加杖罚。
English: Wei collected and wrote "Wei Shu," and when Song Nian said something slanderous, Wen Xuan got angry, imprisoned him, and also imposed a cane punishment.

古文：岁余得免，除临漳令，迁司马、别驾、本州岛大中正。
现代文：一年多才得以赦免，任临漳令，升任司马、别驾、本州大中正。
English: It took more than a year for him to be pardoned, and he was appointed to the post of Linyi, promoted to the posts of Sima, Beidou, and Honshu University Junior High School Principal.

古文：孝昭擢拜给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：孝昭提拔为给事黄门侍郎。
English: Xiao Zhao was promoted to the post of Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：帝每赐坐，与论政事，甚善之。
现代文：帝时常赐坐，与他谈论政事，很称赞他。
English: The emperor often sat with him, talked with him about politics, and praised him very much.

古文：孝昭崩，松年驰驿至邺都宣遗诏，发言涕泗，迄于宣罢，容色无改，辞吐谐韵。
现代文：孝昭逝世，松年乘驿马奔驰到邺都宣读遣韶，开口流泪，直到宣读完，容色没有改变，吐辞谐韵。
English: After the death of Xiao Zhao, Matsu Nian took a horse-drawn carriage to the capital of Shandong Province to read out the funeral eulogy. He opened his mouth and shed tears until the reading was over. His appearance did not change, and his speech was harmonious.

古文：宣讫，号恸自绝于地，百官莫不感恸。
现代文：宣读完毕，号啕痛哭，自己倒在地上，百官没有不感伤哀痛的。
English: After the reading, the magistrate cried bitterly and fell to the ground. There was no one who did not feel sad.

古文：还晋阳，兼侍中，护梓宫还邺。
现代文：回到晋阳，兼任侍中，护送皇帝的灵柩回邺。
English: He returned to Jinyang and served as an aide-de-camp, escorting the emperor's coffin back to the capital.

古文：诸旧臣避形□，无敢尽哀，唯松年哭甚流涕，朝士咸恐。
现代文：众旧臣避免留下形迹，不敢极力表示悲痛，衹有松年痛哭流涕，朝廷官员都很恐惧。
English: The old courtiers avoided leaving any trace, they did not dare to express their grief as much as possible, there were many tears shed, and the court officials were very afraid.

古文：武成虽忿松年恋旧情切，亦雅重之。
现代文：武成虽然对松年恋旧情切表示忿恨，但是也非常敬重他。
English: Although Wu Cheng expressed resentment towards Song Nian's love for his old sweetheart, he also respected him very much.

古文：以本官加散骑常侍，食高邑县干，参定律令，前后大事多委焉。
现代文：以本官加任散骑常侍，食矗旦瑟的俸禄，参加制订律令，前前后后的大事大多委托他。
English: In addition to his official duties, he was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, received a large salary, participated in the formulation of laws and regulations, and was entrusted with most of the important matters before and after.

古文：兼御史中丞。
现代文：兼任御史中丞。
English: He also served as Goshi chujo.

古文：发晋阳之邺，在道遇疾卒。
现代文：从置千出发到邺，在道路上患病去世。
English: He traveled from Jiecheng to Handan and died of illness on the way.

古文：赠吏部尚书、并州刺史，谥曰平。
现代文：追赠吏部尚书、韭刺史，谧号为垩。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "Shang Shu" (尚書) and "Shanshi" (刺史), and his posthumous name was changed to "Zhou."

古文：第三子卲，最知名。
现代文：第三个儿子玉迎，最有名。
English: The third son, Yu Ying, is the most famous.

古文：刘祎，字彦英，彭城人。
现代文：刘祎，字彦英，彭城人。
English: Liu Wei, Aza Yan Ying, from Pengcheng.

古文：父世明，魏兖州刺史。
现代文：父亲世明，魏时为兖州刺史。
English: His father, Shimei, was the governor of Zhangzhou in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：祎性弘裕，有威重，容止可观，虽昵友密交，朝夕游处，莫不加敬。
现代文：刘裨性格宽弘，有威严，容貌举止可观，即使是亲密交往的好友，朝夕相处，没有人不加以敬重。
English: Liu Biao is broad-minded, dignified, and has an impressive appearance and demeanor. Even if they are close friends, they get along with each other in the morning and evening, and no one disrespects them.

古文：好学，善三礼，吉凶仪制，尤所留心。
现代文：好学，擅长《三礼》，吉凶的礼制，尤其是他所留心的。
English: He is eager to learn, good at the "Three Rites," the etiquette of good luck and bad luck, especially he is attentive.

古文：魏孝昌中，释巾太学博士。
现代文：魏孝昌年间，始仕太学博士。
English: During the Wei and Xiaochang dynasties, he was the first to receive a doctorate in theology.

古文：累迁雎州刺史，边人服其威信，甚得疆埸之和。
现代文：屡次升任为雎州刺史，边民佩服他的威信，边疆非常太平。
English: He has been repeatedly promoted to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian. The people along the border admire his prestige. The border is very peaceful.

古文：世宗辅政，降书褒□，云： 以卿家世忠纯，奕代冠冕。贤弟贤子，并与吾共事，怀抱相托，亦自依然。
现代文：世宗辅佐朝政，下诏书赞扬说： 因你家世代忠厚纯正，累世为官，贤弟贤子，都与我共事，怀抱相托，也自然应当如此。
English: The next imperial edict praised her, saying, "Because your family's generation is loyal and pure, and you have been officials for many generations, and you are the son of a wise man, you have worked with me and supported me, and it is only natural that you should do the same.

古文：宜勖心力，以副所委，莫虑不富贵。 
现代文：应竭尽心力，不负委托，不用忧虑不富贵。 
English: You should do your best, do not be entrusted, do not worry about not being rich.

古文：秩满，径归乡里侍父疾，竟不入朝。
现代文：任期届满，直接回到乡里侍奉父亲的疾病，终不再入朝。
English: After his term of office expired, he returned directly to the countryside to serve his father's illness, and eventually did not return to the imperial court.

古文：父丧，沉顿累年，非杖不起。
现代文：父亲去世，重病多年，不拄杖不能起身。
English: My father passed away. He had been seriously ill for many years and could not get up without a cane.

古文：世宗致辟，祎称疾不动。
现代文：世宗发出征召，刘樟称病不动。
English: Sejong issued a call-up, but Liu Ye said he was too ill to go.

古文：五子，璇、、璞、瑗、瓒，并有志节，为世所称。
现代文：五个儿子，刘璇、刘圮、刘璞、刘瑗、刘瓒，全有志向节操，为世人称道。
English: The five sons, Liu Zhen, Liu Zhen, Liu Zhen, Liu Zhen, Liu Zhen, all have the aspiration to be virtuous, and are praised by the world.

