古文：行非恒者，天禁之；爽事，地禁之；失令者，君禁之。
现代文：行事没有一定的准则，为天道所禁止。违背农事徭役的规律，为地道所禁止。背离教令，则为君主所禁止。
English: Conduct without a certain standard is prohibited by heavenly law. Violation of the rules of agricultural work is prohibited by earthly law. Deviation from the edict is prohibited by the monarch.

古文：三者既修，国家几矣。地之禁，不堕高，不增下；毋服川，毋逆土；毋逆土功，毋壅民明。
现代文：上述关于行为的准则、农事与徭役的关系以及教令等等三方面的事情都做好了，国家也就差不多达到治理。关于地道的禁忌，那就是君主在修筑宫室时不要夷平山陵、填充泽壑、堵塞河流、违逆地理。不要违反节令而滥兴土木之功，也不要违背百姓既定的农事规律。
English: The above-mentioned three aspects of the code of conduct, the relationship between agricultural affairs and eunuchs, and the edict, etc. have all been completed, and the country has almost reached governance. Regarding the taboo of tunnels, that is, when the monarch is building a palace, do not raze mountains, fill glaciers, block rivers, and violate geography. Do not violate the festival and abuse civil engineering, and do not violate the established agricultural laws of the people.

古文：进不氐，立不让，径遂凌节，是谓大凶。
现代文：只知进而不知适可而止，立身行事儿不知谦卑逊让，邪僻行事儿超越节度，这些都意味着大凶。
English: Those who only know how to advance but do not know when to stop, those who stand up and act but do not know how to be humble and yield, and those who act wickedly and go beyond moderation, all of these mean great evil.

古文：人道刚柔，刚不足以，柔不足恃。
现代文：人道的规律应是刚柔相济，不能只采用刚，也不可只依赖柔。
English: The rule of humanity should be that the hard and the soft should complement each other. The hard should not be used exclusively, nor should the soft be relied upon exclusively.

古文：刚强而虎质者丘，康沉而流湎者亡；宪古章物不实者死，专利及削浴以大居者虚。
现代文：刚硬强直而秉性威猛的必会困窘，沉湎逸乐淫酗于酒色的必然灭亡；只知效法古事而不合实际的是穷困不通的，侵人之利、夺人之财以扩大自己宅第的其宅第终成废墟。
English: Those who are rigid, strong-willed, and possess a fierce nature are bound to be in trouble, and those who indulge in debauchery, luxury, lewdness, and drunkenness are bound to perish; those who only imitate ancient things and are not practical are impoverished, and those who encroach on people's interests and rob people's wealth in order to expand their homes will end up in ruins.

古文：天道寿寿，播于下土，施于九州。
现代文：天道是平正简易的，它传布于大地，延及于九州。
English: The Way of Heaven is simple and straightforward. It has spread over the earth and extends to Kyushu.

古文：是故王公慎令，民知所由。
现代文：因此王公们应取法天道，慎重地制定施行其法令，使老百姓知道如何去行事。
English: Therefore, the princes should adopt the law of heaven, carefully formulate and implement their decrees, so that the common people know how to act.

古文：天有恒日，民自则之。爽则损命，环自服之。
现代文：天有恒定的法则，人们自然去取法它，如果违背它就会损伤身命，自取败亡。
English: Heaven has a constant law, people naturally follow it, and if they violate it, they will damage their lives and take their own defeat.

古文：天之道也。
现代文：这便是所谓的天道。
English: This is the so-called heavenly way.

