古文：召公既相宅，周公往营成周，使来告卜，作《洛诰》。
现代文：召公已经勘察了宗庙、宫室、朝市的建筑地址，周公前往营建洛邑，派遣使者请周成王来洛邑，把所卜得的吉兆报告给周成王，史官写了《洛诰》。
English: Zhao Gong had already surveyed the building addresses of the ancestral temple, palace, and morning market. Zhou Gong went to build Luoyang, sent an envoy to invite Zhou Cheng Wang to come to Luoyang, and reported the auspicious signs to Zhou Cheng Wang. The historian wrote "Luoyang."

古文：周公拜手稽首曰： 朕复子明辟。
现代文：周公行礼之后说： 我告诉您治理洛邑的重大政策。
English: After the salute, Zhou Gong said: I will tell you the major policies for the governance of Luoyang.

古文：王如弗敢及天基命定命，予乃胤保大相东土，其基作民明辟。
现代文：你却谦逊不敢举行继位大典。我要在太保之后，全面视察了洛邑，你必须开始学会做一个圣明的君主。
English: But you are too modest to hold a grand ceremony of succession. I want you to fully inspect Luoyang after becoming the Grand Prince. You must begin to learn how to be a saintly monarch.

古文：予惟乙卯，朝至于洛师。
现代文：我在乙卯日这天，早晨的时候到了洛邑。
English: On the morning of the second day, I arrived in Luoyang.

古文：我卜河朔黎水，我乃卜涧水东，瀍水西，惟洛食；我又卜瀍水东，亦惟洛食。
现代文：我先占卜了黄河北方的黎水地区，我又占卜了涧水以东、瀍水以西地区，仅有洛地吉利。我又占卜了瀍水以东地区，也仅有洛地吉利。
English: I first divined the Lishui area in the north of the Yellow River, and then I divined the areas east of Surabaya and west of Surabaya, but only Lodi Jili. I also divined the areas east of Surabaya, but only Lodi Jili.

古文：伻来以图及献卜。 
现代文：于是请您来商量，且献上卜兆。 
English: Therefore, I would like to invite you to come and discuss the matter, and to offer some omens.

古文：王拜手稽首曰： 公不敢不敬天之休，来相宅，其作周配，休！
现代文：成王跪拜叩头，回答说： 公不敢不敬重上天赐给的福庆，亲自勘察地址，将营建与镐京相配的新邑，很好啊！
English: Cheng Wang knelt down and bowed, and replied: "A public official would not dare to disrespect the blessing of Fuqing bestowed by God. He will personally investigate the address and build a new town that is compatible with Beijing. That's great!

古文：公既定宅，伻来，来，视予卜，休恒吉。
现代文：公既已选定地址，使我来，我来了，又让我看了卜兆，我为卜兆并吉而高兴。
English: Since the public has chosen the address, let me come, I came, and let me see the omens, I am happy for the omens and good luck.

古文：我二人共贞。
现代文：让我们二人共同承当这一吉祥。
English: Let's both share this good fortune.

古文：公其以予万亿年敬天之休。
现代文：愿公领着我永远敬重上天赐给的福庆！
English: May the emperor lead me to always respect the blessing given by heaven!

古文：拜手稽首诲言。 
现代文：跪拜叩头接受我公的教诲。 
English: Kneel, bow and accept my father's teachings.

古文：周公曰： 王，肇称殷礼，祀于新邑，咸秩无文。
现代文：周公说： 王啊，你在开始举行殷礼接见诸侯，在新邑举行祭祀，都已安排得有条不紊了。
English: Zhou Gong said, "O king, you have arranged everything in an orderly manner, such as holding a grand reception for the princes at the beginning, and holding a religious service in Xinmiao.

古文：予齐百工，伻从王于周，予惟曰： 庶有事。 
现代文：我率领百官，让他们在镐京听取王的意见，我想说您能够同官员一起举行祭祀的大事。
English: I led hundreds of officials to listen to the king's opinion in Beijing. I would like to say that you can hold the important event of the ritual together with the officials.

古文：今王即命曰： 记功，宗以功作元祀。 
现代文：现在王命令道： 记下功绩，让宗人率领功臣举行大祭祀就可以了。 
English: Now the king ordered, "Write down your feats, and let your father-in-law lead his meritorious vassals in a great sacrifice."

古文：惟命曰： 汝受命笃弼，丕视功载，乃汝其悉自教工。 
现代文：王又有命令道： 你接受先王遗命，督导辅助，你全面查阅记功的书，那么你尽力教导百官就行了。  王啊！
English: The king once again ordered, "If you accept the command of the late king, supervise and assist him, and thoroughly read the book of records, then you can do your best to teach the officials. O king!

古文：孺子其朋，孺子其朋，其往！
现代文：您应该同官员一同到洛邑去！
English: You should go to Luoyang with the officials!

古文：无若火始焰焰；厥攸灼叙，弗其绝。
现代文：不要像火刚开始燃烧时那样气势很弱；那燃烧的馀火，决不可让它熄灭。
English: Let it not be so feeble as when first kindled; let it not be extinguished as a dying ember.

古文：厥若彝及抚事如予，惟以在周工往新邑。
现代文：您要像我一样顺从常法，汲汲主持政事，率领在镐京的官员到洛邑去。
English: You should, like me, obey the common law, preside over the affairs of state, and lead the officials in Beijing to Luoyang.

古文：伻向即有僚，明作有功，惇大成裕，汝永有辞。 公曰： 已！
现代文：使他们各就其职，勉力建立功勋，重视大事，完成大业。您就会永远获得美誉。 周公说： 唉！
English: Let them each perform their duties, work hard to establish merit, attach importance to major events, and complete great undertakings. You will always get a good reputation. Zhou Gong said: Alas!

古文：汝惟冲子，惟终。
现代文：您虽然是个年轻人，但是也要考虑完成先王未竟的功业。
English: Although you are a young man, you should also consider completing the unfinished work of the previous king.

古文：汝其敬识百辟享，亦识其有不享。享多仪，仪不及物，惟曰不享。
现代文：您应该认真考察诸侯的享礼，也要考察其中没有享礼的诸侯。享礼注重礼节，假如礼节不正确，就算贡享很多，也没有用。
English: You should carefully examine the feasts of the lords, and also examine the lords who do not have feasts. Feasts focus on etiquette, if the etiquette is not correct, even if there are a lot of tributes, it is useless.

古文：惟不役志于享，凡民惟曰不享，惟事其爽侮。
现代文：因为诸侯对享礼不诚心，老百姓就会认为可以不享。这样，政事将会错乱怠慢。
English: Because the lords are not sincere about enjoying the ceremony, the common people will think that they can not enjoy it. In this way, political affairs will be disorderly and negligent.

古文：乃惟孺子颁，朕不暇听。
现代文：我急想您来分担政务，我已经没有这么多时间来管理这么多事情啊！
English: I am eager for you to share the government affairs, I don't have so much time to manage so many things!

古文：朕教汝于棐民，彝汝乃是不蘉，乃时惟不永哉！
现代文：我教给您辅导百姓的法则，您假如不努力办这些事，您的善政就不会推广啊！
English: I will teach you the principles of advising the people. If you do not work hard to do these things, your good governance will not be promoted!

古文：笃叙乃正父罔不若予，不敢废乃命。
现代文：全像我一样监督诠叙您的官长，他们就不敢废弃您的命令了。
English: Your superiors, who, like me, supervise and interpret your orders, will not dare to disobey them.

古文：汝往敬哉！
现代文：您到新邑去，要认真啊！
English: If you go to Xin'e, be serious!

古文：兹予其明农哉！
现代文：现在我们要奋发努力啊！
English: Now we have to work hard!

古文：被裕我民，无远用戾。 王若曰： 公！
现代文：去教导好我们的百姓。远方的人因此也就归附了。 王这样说： 公啊！
English: To teach our people well, that they which are far off may hearken: thus saith the king, O thou king.

古文：明保予冲子。
现代文：您竭尽全力辅佐我这个年幼的人。
English: You have done your best to support me as a young man.

古文：公称丕显德，以予小子扬文武烈，奉答天命，和恒四方民，居师；惇宗将礼，称秩元祀，咸秩无文。
现代文：扬伟大光显的功德，使我继承文王、武王的事业，尊奉上天的教诲，使四方百姓安居乐业，并定居在洛邑；隆重举行大礼，办理好盛大的祭祀，都有条不紊。
English: His great and brilliant merits have enabled me to inherit the cause of King Wen and King Wu, to respect and follow the teachings of Heaven, to enable the people of the four directions to live and work in peace, and to settle in Luoyang; to hold grand ceremonies, and to conduct grand sacrificial rites, all in an orderly manner.

古文：惟公德明光于上下，勤施于四方，旁作穆穆，迓衡不迷。
现代文：您的功德光照天地，勤劳施于四方，普遍推行美好的政事，虽然遭受到很多不好的事情却不产生差错。
English: Your merit shines brightly in the world, you are diligent in the four directions, and generally promote good politics. Although you have suffered a lot of bad things, you do not make mistakes.

古文：文武勤教，予冲子夙夜毖祀。 
现代文：文武百官努力实行您的教化，我这年幼无知的人就早夜慎重进行祭祀好了。 
English: I, a young and ignorant person, will carefully perform the ritual early in the morning and at night.

古文：王曰： 公功棐迪，笃罔不若时。 
现代文：王说： 公善于辅导，我真的无不顺从。 
English: Wang said, "The government is good at guidance, and I really obey.

古文：王曰： 公！
现代文：王说： 公啊！
English: And the king said, Alas!

古文：予小子其退，即辟于周，命公后。
现代文：我这年轻人就要回去，在镐京就位了，请公继续治理洛。
English: I, a young man, am about to go back and take my place in Beijing. Please continue to govern Luo.

古文：四方迪乱未定，于宗礼亦未克敉，公功迪将，其后监我士师工，诞保文武受民，乱为四辅。 王曰： 公定，予往已。
现代文：四方经过教导治理，还没有安定，宗礼也没有完成，公善于教导扶持，要继续监督我们的各级官员，安定文王、武王所接受的殷民，做我的辅佐大臣。 王说： 公留下吧！我要往镐京去了。
English: Shifang, after being taught and governed, is not yet stable, and the ancestral rites have not been completed. Gong is good at teaching and supporting. It is necessary to continue to supervise our officials at all levels, and Yangmin, who was accepted by King Wen and King Wu, will be my assistant minister. The king said: "Keep Gong! I want to go to Beijing."

古文：以功肃将祗欢，公无困哉！
现代文：公要好好地迅速地进行敬重和睦殷民的工作，公不要让我危困呀！
English: The government should properly and quickly carry out the work of respecting and reconciling the people, and the government should not let me be in danger!

古文：我惟无斁其康事，公勿替刑，四方其世享。 
现代文：我当不懈地学习政事，公要不停地示范，四方诸侯将会世世代代来到周国朝享了。 
English: I should study government affairs tirelessly, and the public should constantly demonstrate, and the princes of the four directions will come to the Zhou Dynasty for generations to enjoy.

古文：周公拜手稽首曰： 王命予来承保乃文祖受命民，越乃光烈考武王弘朕恭。
现代文：周公行礼后说： 王命我承担治理你祖父文王从上天那里接受的保护臣民的任务，以及光大你父亲的遗训大法。
English: After bowing, Zhou Gong said, "The king has ordered me to take on the task of governing and protecting the subjects that your grandfather, King Wen, received from heaven, as well as the great teachings of your father."

古文：孺子来相宅，其大惇典殷献民，乱为四方新辟，作周恭先。
现代文：王来视察洛邑的时候，要使殷商贤良的臣民都惇厚守法，制定了治理四方的新法，作了周法的先导。
English: When the king came to inspect Luoyang, he wanted to make the merchants and virtuous subjects of Yin adhere to the law, formulated a new law to govern the four directions, and became the forerunner of Zhou Law.

古文：曰其自时中乂，万邦咸休，惟王有成绩。
现代文：我曾经说过： 要是从这九州的中心进行治理，万国都会喜欢，王也会有功绩。
English: I once said: If governance is carried out from the center of Kyushu, all nations will like it, and the king will have merits.

古文：予旦以多子越御事笃前人成烈，答其师，作周孚先。 
现代文：我姬旦率领众位卿大夫和治事官员，经营先王的成业，集合众人，作修建洛邑的先导。 
English: I, Hetan, led a number of nobles, doctors and government officials to manage the achievements of the former king and gathered people to lead the construction of Luoyang.

古文：考朕昭子刑，乃单文祖德。
现代文：实现我告诉您的这一法则，就能发扬光大先祖文王的美德。
English: The realization of this principle that I have told you will be able to carry forward the virtues of the great ancestor King Wen.

古文：伻来毖殷，乃命宁予以秬鬯二卣。曰明禋，拜手稽首休享。予不敢宿，则禋于文王、武王。
现代文：您派遣使者来洛邑慰劳殷人，又送来两樽黍酒。使者传达王命说： 明洁地举行祭祀，要跪拜叩头庆幸地献给文王和武王。 
English: You sent an envoy to Luoyang to comfort the laborers, and also brought two barrels of wine. The envoy conveyed the king's order: "Hold the sacrifice clearly, and kneel, bow and prostrate, and give thanks to King Wen and King Wu."

古文：惠笃叙，无有遘自疾，万年厌于乃德，殷乃引考。
现代文：我祈祷说： 愿我很顺遂，不要遇到罪疾，万年饱受您的德泽，殷事能够长久成功。 
English: I prayed: "May I be successful, may I not encounter sin and disease, may I be blessed with your grace for all eternity, and may I be successful in my endeavors for a long time to come."

古文：王伻殷乃承叙万年，其永观朕子怀德。 
现代文： 愿王使殷民能够顺从万年，永远像我们的百姓一样心怀大德不敢叛逆。  
English: May the king make the Yin people be able to obey for thousands of years, and never dare to rebel with a great heart like our people.

古文：戊辰，王在新邑烝，祭岁，文王騂牛一，武王騂牛一。
现代文：戊辰这天，成王在洛邑举行冬祭，向先王报告岁事，用一头红色的牛祭文王，也用一头红色的牛祭武王。
English: On this day, King Cheng held a winter festival in Luoyang to report the year's events to the previous king. He used a red ox to sacrifice King Wen and a red ox to sacrifice King Wu.

古文：王命作册逸祝册，惟告周公其后。
现代文：成王命令作册官名字叫逸的宣读册文，报告文王、武王，周公将继续住在洛邑。
English: Chengwang ordered the registrar, whose name was Yi, to read out the record and report that King Wen, King Wu, and King Zhou would continue to live in Luoyang.

古文：王宾杀禋咸格，王入太室，祼。王命周公后，作册逸诰，在十有二月。
现代文：助祭诸侯在杀牲祭祀先王的时候都来到了，成王命令周公继续治理洛邑，作册官名字叫逸的将这件大事告喻天下，在十二月。
English: The vassals of the princes all arrived at the time of the sacrifice of the first king, Chengwang ordered Zhou Gong to continue to govern Luoyang, and the registrar, whose name was He, announced this great event to the world in December.

古文：惟周公诞保文武受命，惟七年。
现代文：周公留居洛邑担任文王、武王所受的大命，在成王七年。
English: Zhou Gong stayed in Luoyang to serve as King Wen and King Wu for seven years after he became king.

