古文：夫九州之人，言语不同，生民已来，固常然矣。
现代文：九州的百姓说话各不相同，从有人开始就一直是这样了。
English: People in Kyushu speak differently, and this has been the case since time immemorial.

古文：自春秋标齐言之传，离骚目楚词之经，此盖其较明之初也。
现代文：自从《春秋》有了齐国方言的传本之后，《离骚》就被视为楚国方言的经典，这大概就是人们开始明白方言之间有差异的开始。
English: Ever since "Spring and Autumn" introduced the Qigong dialect, "Issao" has been regarded as the classic of the Chu dialect, which is probably the beginning of people's understanding of the differences between dialects.

古文：后有扬雄着方言，其言大备。
现代文：后来扬雄写了一本《方言》，里面的《方言》比较完备。
English: Later, Yang Xiong wrote a "Dialect," and the "Dialect" in it is relatively complete.

古文：然皆考名物之同异，不显声读之是非也。
现代文：但大都为考察事物名称的相同相异，没有表现出读音的对错。
English: However, most of them examined the similarities and differences in the names of things, and did not show the right or wrong pronunciation.

古文：逮郑玄注六经，高诱解吕览、淮南，许慎造说文，刘熹制释名，始有譬况假借以证音字耳。
现代文：到了郑玄为《六经》作注解，高诱解读《吕氏春秋》和《淮南子》，许慎写《说文解字》，刘熹编制《释名》的时候，才开始用譬况、假借的方法来为文字正音。
English: It was not until Zheng Xuan annotated the "Six Classics," Gao Yu interpreted "Lu's Spring and Autumn" and "Hua Nan Zi," Xu Sheng wrote "Saying and Interpreting Words," and Liu Wei compiled "Interpreting Names" that he began to use parables and borrowed methods to make the text positive.

古文：而古语与今殊别，其间轻重清浊，犹未可晓；加以内言外言、急言徐言、读若之类，益使人疑。
现代文：但是古语和现在的语言有很大差别，发音的轻重、清浊还是不清楚；加上用内言外言、急言徐言、读若这一类的方法，更加让人疑惑。
English: However, there are great differences between the ancient language and the current language, and the importance of pronunciation and clarity are still unclear; coupled with the use of such methods as inner speech, outer speech, urgent speech, and reading, it is even more puzzling.

古文：孙叔言创尔雅音义，是汉末人独知反语。
现代文：孙叔言创作了《尔雅音义》，他是汉朝末年唯一一个知道反切注音法的人。
English: Sun Shujin composed "Er Ya Yinyi," and he was the only one who knew the counter-stroke method at the end of the Han Dynasty.

古文：至于魏世，此事大行。
现代文：到了魏国时期，这种方法大行于世。
English: By the time of the Wei Dynasty, this method had become widespread.

古文：高贵乡公不解反语，以为怪异。
现代文：高贵乡公不懂反切注音的方法，被他人视作是怪异的事情。
English: The noble townsman did not understand the method of counterpointing, which was regarded by others as a strange thing.

古文：自兹厥后，音韵锋出，各有土风，递相非笑，指马之谕，未知孰是。
现代文：从此以后，注音一类的书争相出现，因记录各自的方言土音，互相指责讥笑，彼此争辩，不知道哪种说法才是正确的。
English: Since then, books such as Chune have been competing with each other to record the local sounds of their respective dialects, criticizing and ridiculing each other, arguing with each other, and not knowing which statement is correct.

古文：共以帝王都邑，参校方俗，考核古今，为之折衷。
现代文：后来都用帝王所在都城的话音来参校各地的方言俗语，考证古音和现在的读音，最终来调和纷争。
English: Later, they all used the pronunciation of the capital city where the emperor was to participate in dialect slang from all over the country, to verify the ancient pronunciation and the current pronunciation, and finally to reconcile disputes.

古文：搉而量之，独金陵与洛下耳。
现代文：商榷考量之后，发现只有金陵和洛下的方言能够代表南北语音。
English: After deliberation, it was found that only the dialects of Jinling and Luodai could represent the north-south speech.

古文：南方水土和柔，其音清举而切诣，失在浮浅，其辞多鄙俗。
现代文：南方水土柔和，声音清扬高亮但急切，不足之处在于发音浮浅，用词大都较为粗俗。
English: Nanfang soil and water are soft, the voice is clear and high-pitched but urgent, the disadvantage is that the pronunciation is shallow, and the words are mostly vulgar.

古文：北方山川深厚，其音沈浊而钝，得其质直，其辞多古语。
现代文：北方山高水深，声音沉着浑厚，优势是质朴平实，保留了较多的古代词语。
English: Beifang Mountain is high and deep, the voice is calm and rich, the advantage is simple and plain, and more ancient words have been preserved.

古文：然冠冕君子，南方为优；闾里小人，北方为愈。
现代文：士大夫的说话水平，南方要更优一些，坊间百姓的说话水平，北方要更强一些。
English: The level of speech of scholars should be better in the south, and the level of speech of ordinary people should be better in the north.

古文：易服而与之谈，南方士庶，数言可辩；隔垣而听其语，北方朝野，终日难分。
现代文：换了衣服之后再交谈，南方的士大夫和百姓，只要聊上几句就能分辨出来；隔着矮墙听别人说话，北方的朝中人士和乡野村民，听一整天也难以区分开。
English: After changing clothes and having a conversation, it only takes a few words to distinguish between the politicians and the people in the south; listening to others across the low wall, it is difficult to distinguish between the North Korean people and the villagers in the north.

古文：而南染吴、越，北杂夷虏，皆有深弊，不可具论。
现代文：南方语言沾染了吴语、越语的习气，北方语言夹杂了蛮夷外族的语言，都有较多的弊病，不能一概而论。
English: The southern languages are tainted with the habits of Wu and Vietnamese, and the northern languages are mixed with the languages of barbarian foreign ethnic groups. Both have more drawbacks and cannot be generalized.

古文：其谬失轻微者，则南人以钱为涎，以石为射，以贱为羡，以是为舐；北人以庶为戍，以如为儒，以紫为姊，以洽为狎。
现代文：有些是轻微的错误，比如南方人把 钱 读成 涎 ，把 石 读成 射 ，把 贱 读成 羡 ，把 是 读成 舐 ；北人把 庶 读成 戍 ，把 如 读成 儒 ，把 紫 读成 姊 ，把 洽 读成 狎 。
English: Some are minor mistakes, for example, people in the south read 钱 as, read 石 as 射, read 贱 as 羡, and read 是 as 舐; people in the north read 庶 as, read 如 as 儒, read 紫 as 姉, and read 洽 as.

古文：如此之例，两失甚多。
现代文：类似这些的例子，南方北方都有较多的错误。
English: In cases like these, there are more mistakes in the South than in the North.

古文：至邺已来，唯见崔子约、崔瞻叔侄，李祖仁、李蔚兄弟，颇事言词，少为切正。
现代文：我到邺城以来，唯独见过崔子约、崔瞻叔侄，李祖仁、李蔚兄弟对语言颇有研究，可以互相切磋补正。
English: Since I arrived in Lucheng, I have only met Cui Ziyou, Cui Zhan's uncle and nephew, and the brothers Li Zuren and Li Wei, who have done a lot of research on the language and can learn from each other.

古文：李季节着音韵决疑，时有错失；阳休之造切韵，殊为疏野。
现代文：李季节写了《音韵决疑》，里面常常有不恰当的地方。阳休之写了《切韵》，但写得非常粗陋。
English: Li Xixian wrote "Onyun Duxiu," which often contains inappropriate parts. Yang Xuzhi wrote "Cut rhyme," but it was very rough.

古文：吾家儿女，虽在孩稚，便渐督正之；一言讹替，以为己罪矣。
现代文：我家里的儿女，虽然还是孩子，但也要逐渐督促他们纠正发音；一个字说得不对，我都认为这是我的罪过。
English: The children in my family, although they are still children, also gradually urge them to correct their pronunciation; if they misspell a word, I think it is my fault.

古文：云为品物，未考书记者，不敢辄名，汝曹所知也。
现代文：在说物品时，没有在书中考究过的，我就不会擅自命名，你们也知道这一点的。
English: When it comes to objects, I wouldn't presume to name them without having studied them in a book, and you know that.

古文：古今言语，时俗不同；著述之人，楚、夏各异。
现代文：古代、现代的语言，因为时代和风俗而不相同；写文章的人，楚国夏国也各有差异。
English: The ancient and modern languages are different because of the times and customs; the people who write articles are also different in Chu Xia Guo.

古文：苍颉训诂，反稗为逋卖，反娃为于乖；战国策音刎为免，穆天子传音谏为间；说文音戛为棘，读皿为猛；字林音看为口甘反，音伸为辛；韵集以成、仍、宏、登合成两韵，为、奇、益、石分作四章；李登声类以系音羿，刘昌宗周官音读乘若承；此例甚广，必须考校。
现代文：《苍颉训诂》里面， 稗 是 逋卖反 ， 娃 是 于乖反 ；《战国策》给 刎 注音为 免 ，《穆天子传》给 谏 注音为 间 ；《说文解字》给 戛 注音为 棘 ，把 皿 读为 猛 ；《字林》中 看 是 口甘反 ，给 伸 注音为 辛 ；《韵集》中把成、仍、宏、登合并成两个韵部，把为、奇、益、石分到四个韵部；李登写的《声类》用 系 给 羿 注音，刘昌宗的《周官音》读 乘 像读 承 ；这一类的例子很多，必须加以考证校对。
English: In "Heron's Sermon,"  is 卖反, 娃 is 乖反; "Warring States" gives 注音 as 免, "The Story of Mu Tianzi" gives 注音 as 间; "Spoken Word" gives 戛注音 as 棘, read 皿 as 猛; "Forest of Words" gives 看 as 口甘反, gives 伸注音 as 辛; "Rhyme Collection" combines 成,仍,宏,登 into two rhymes, and divides 为,奇,益,石 into four rhymes; Li Deng's "Voice Class" uses

古文：前世反语，又多不切，徐仙民毛诗音反骤为在遘，左传音切椽为徒缘，不可依信，亦为众矣。
现代文：以前的反切注音中有很多是不贴切的，徐仙民的《毛诗音》中把 骤 注音为 在遘反 ，《左传音》中把 椽 注音为 徒缘切 ，这种不可相信的例子也是非常多的。
English: In the past, there were many incongruous diacritics. In Xu Xianmin's "Mao Shiyin," the diacritic for 骤 was changed to 在反, and in "Zuo Chuanyin," the diacritic for  was changed to 徒缘切. There are also many examples of this kind of implausibility.

古文：今之学士，语亦不正；古独何人，必应随其伪僻乎？
现代文：现在的学者也有注音不正的；古人是什么人，必须应当跟随他们的错误吗？
English: Modern scholars have also made mistakes; who were the ancients, and must we follow their mistakes?

古文：通俗文曰： 入室求曰搜。 反为兄侯。然则兄当音所荣反。
现代文：《通俗文》里面说 进入房间寻求东西叫作搜 ，并且把音注成 兄侯反 ，这样一来兄就应该注成 所荣反 。
English: "Popular Literature" says that entering a room to search for something is called a search, and the sound is typed as "brother," so the brother should be typed as "brother."

古文：今北俗通行此音，亦古语之不可用者。
现代文：现在北方的民间通用这种读音，这也是不能沿用古语的例子。
English: This pronunciation, which is now commonly used by people in the north, is also an example of why the old language cannot be used.

古文：玙璠，鲁人宝玉，当音余烦，江南皆音藩屏之藩。岐山当音为奇，江南皆呼为神只之只。
现代文：玙璠是鲁国产的宝玉，注音为 余烦 ，江南一带的人都把它的读音读成 藩屏 的 藩 。 岐山 的 岐 应当注音为 奇 ，江南一带的人都把它读成 神祇 的 祇 。
English: Zhai is a precious stone made in Lu, the pronunciation is boring, people in the south of the Yangtze River read its pronunciation as "Han Ping" of "Han." The "Qi" of "Qishan" should be pronounced as "Wonder," people in the south of the Yangtze River read it as "Ji" of "God."

古文：江陵陷没，此音被于关中，不知二者何所承案。
现代文：江陵被攻陷之后，这两种读音在关中地区流传，不知道这两者是依从了什么关系。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, these two pronunciations were circulated in the Guanzhong area. It is not known what relationship the two had.

古文：以吾浅学，未之前闻也。
现代文：因为我学识浅薄，以前从来没有听说过。
English: Because I'm a slow learner, I'd never heard of it before.

古文：北人之音，多以举、莒为矩；唯李季节云： 齐桓公与管仲于台上谋伐莒，东郭牙望见桓公口开而不闭，故知所言者莒也。
现代文：北方人的口音中，多把 举  莒 念成 矩 ；唯有李季节说： 齐桓公和管仲在台上商讨讨伐莒国的事情，东郭牙远远地望见齐桓公嘴巴张开并且没有闭上，所以知道他们谈论的是莒国。
English: Among the accents of the northerners, most people pronounce the word "hike" as "hoist"; only Li Xiyi said: "Qi Huan and Guanzhong were on the stage discussing the matter of the crusade against Yunnan. Dong Guo Ya could see from a distance that Qi Huan's mouth was open and not closed, so he knew that they were talking about Yunnan."

古文：然则莒、矩必不同呼。 
现代文：这样一来，莒、矩两个字的呼音必定不同。 
English: As a result, the call sounds of the two characters  and 矩 must be different.

古文：此为知音矣。
现代文：这就是懂音韵的人。
English: This is a person who understands phonology.

古文：夫物体自有精麤，精麤谓之好恶；人心有所去取，去取谓之好恶。
现代文：事物本身有精品和粗品之分，精品或粗品就称作好恶；人心对事物有舍弃和保留，舍弃或保留就称作好恶。
English: Things themselves are divided into high-quality and low-quality, and high-quality or low-quality are called likes and dislikes; the human heart has abandonment and reservation for things, and abandonment or reservation is called likes and dislikes.

古文：此音见于葛洪、徐邈。
现代文：后一种 好恶 的读音参见葛洪、徐邈的著作。
English: For the latter kind of "likes and dislikes" pronunciation, see the works of Ge Hong and Xu Xi.

古文：而河北学士读尚书云好生恶杀。
现代文：但黄河以北的读书人在读《尚书》中的 好生恶杀 时读成了 好生恶杀 。
English: However, readers north of the Yellow River read "Good Life, Evil Death" as "Good Life, Evil Death" when reading "Shang Shu."

古文：是为一论物体，一就人情，殊不通矣。
现代文：一种读音说的是物体本身，另一种说的是人的情感，二者之间确实不能相通。
English: One pronunciation speaks of the object itself, the other speaks of human emotions, and there is really no connection between the two.

古文：甫者，男子之美称，古书多假借为父子；北人遂无一人呼为甫者，亦所未喻。
现代文： 甫 是男人的美称，古代的书中多假借为 父 字；北方人竟然没有一个人把它读作 甫 的，也不知道二者之间的关系。
English: "Fu" is a man's honorific. In ancient books, the word "father" is often used as a loanword. No one in the north has ever read it as "fu," nor do they know the relationship between the two.

古文：唯管仲、范增之号，须依字读耳。
现代文：唯有管仲、范增二人的名号需要按照 父 字来读。
English: Only the names of Guan Zhong and Fan Zeng need to be read according to the father's name.

古文：案：诸字书，焉者鸟名，或云语词，皆音于愆反。
现代文：根据考证：诸多字书都认为 焉 是鸟的名字，也有的人说是虚词，都注音为 于愆反 。
English: According to research, many dictionaries believe that 焉 is the name of a bird, while others say that it is a made-up word. Both are pronounced as 反.

古文：自葛洪要用字苑分焉字音训：若训何训安，当音于愆反， 于焉逍遥 ， 于焉嘉客 ， 焉用佞 ， 焉得仁 之类是也；若送句及助词，当音矣愆反， 故称龙焉 ， 故称血焉 ， 有民人焉 ， 有社稷焉 ， 托始焉尔 ， 晋、郑焉依 之类是也。
现代文：从葛洪的《要用字苑》开始，才将焉的注音和意义进行区分：如果训诂成 何 或者 安 ，就当注音成 于愆反 ， 于焉逍遥  于焉嘉客  焉用佞  焉得仁 这一类的句子就是这样；如果是用在句末当助词，就当注音成 矣愆反 ， 故称龙焉  故称血焉  有民人焉  有社稷焉  托始焉尔  晋、郑焉依 这一类句子就是这样。
English: Starting with Ge Hong's "Using the Garden of Words," it is necessary to distinguish between the pronunciation and meaning of 焉: if 训成 is anything or safe, then the pronunciation should be made into 反, into 焉逍遥, into 焉嘉客, into  焉得仁, and so on; if it is used as an auxiliary word at the end of a sentence, then the pronunciation should be made into 矣反, so it is called 龙, so it is called 焉, so it is called blut, so it is called 有民人, so it is called 有社, so it is called 托始, so it is called

古文：江南至今行此分别，昭然易晓；而河北混同一音，虽依古读，不可行于今也。
现代文：江南地区至今仍通行这种分别，意思明显很好理解；但黄河以北的人把这两种读音混为一个音，虽说是依照古代的读法，但不能在当今通行。
English: This distinction is still used in the southern Jiangsu region, and the meaning is clearly well understood; however, people north of the Yellow River confuse these two pronunciations into one sound, although it is in accordance with the ancient reading method, but it cannot be used today.

古文：邪者，未定之词。
现代文： 邪 是表示疑问的语气词。
English: 邪 is the interrogative mood word.

古文：左传曰： 不知天之弃鲁邪？
现代文：《左传》说： 不知天之弃鲁邪？
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: "Who knows if heaven has abandoned evil?

古文：抑鲁君有罪于鬼神邪？ 
现代文：抑鲁君有罪於鬼神邪？ 
English: Is Jiro guilty of witchcraft?

古文：庄子云： 天邪地邪？ 
现代文：《庄子》上说： 天那？地邪？ 
English: "Zhuangzi" said: What is heaven? What is evil on earth?

古文：汉书云： 是邪非邪？ 
现代文：《汉书》上说： 是邪？非邪？ 
English: The "Hanshu" said: Is it evil? Is it not evil?

古文：之类是也。
现代文：这类句子就是这样。
English: That's how these kinds of sentences go.

古文：而北人即呼为也，亦为误矣。
现代文：而北方人却把 邪 字读作 也 ，这也是错误的。
English: Northerners, on the other hand, pronounce the 邪 character as 也, which is also incorrect.

古文：难者曰： 系辞云： 乾坤，易之门户邪？ 
现代文：有人质问我说： 《系辞》上说： 乾坤，易之门户邪？ 
English: Someone asked me, "What does the "Declaration" say, "The creation of matter is the gateway to evil?"

古文：此又为未定辞乎？ 
现代文：这个 邪 字难道又是疑问语气词吗？ 
English: Is this evil word another interrogative?

古文：答曰： 何为不尔！
现代文：我回答说： 怎么不是啊！
English: I replied: Why not!

古文：上先标问，下方列德以折之耳。 
现代文：前面先提出问题，后面才到举事实乾坤之德来下判断回答它。 
English: First, ask a question, and then judge and answer it by citing the facts.

古文：古人云： 膏粱难整。 
现代文：古人说过： 整天享用精美食物的人，很难有品行端正的。 
English: The ancients said: It is difficult for those who enjoy fine food all day to have good manners.

古文：以其为骄奢自足，不能克励也。
现代文：这是因为他们骄横奢侈，自我满足，而不能克制勉励自己。
English: This is because they are arrogant, extravagant, self-satisfied, and cannot restrain themselves from self-encouragement.

古文：吾见王侯外戚，语多不正，亦由内染贱保傅，外无良师友故耳。
现代文：我见到的王侯外戚，语音多不纯正，这也是由於在内受到低贱保傅的感染，在外又没有良师益友的帮助的缘故。
English: Most of the maternal relatives of princes I have met do not have pure voices. This is also due to the fact that they have been infected by lowly tutors and have no good teachers or friends to help them.

古文：梁世有一侯，尝对元帝饮谑，自陈 痴钝 ，乃成 飔段 ，元帝答之云： 飔异凉风，段非干木。 
现代文：梁朝有一位侯王，曾经与梁元帝一起饮酒戏谑，他自称 痴钝 ，却说成 飔段 ，梁元帝戏答他说： 飔不同于凉风，段也不是干木。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, there was a lord of the manor who once drank and joked with Emperor Liang Yuan. He called himself "stupid" but said he was a "dry wood," to which Emperor Liang Yuan jokingly replied: "Different from the cool wind, dry wood is not dry wood."

古文：谓 郢州 为 永州 ，元帝启报简文，简文云： 庚辰吴入，遂成司隶。 
现代文：他又把 郢州 说成 永州 ，梁元帝把此事告知简文帝，简文帝说： 庚辰日吴人进入郢都的郢，却成了后汉的司隶校尉鲍永的永。 
English: He also referred to Bozhou as Yongzhou, and Emperor Liang Yuan told Emperor Jianwen about this. Emperor Jianwen said: On the day of the Geng Chen, the Wu people entered the capital city of Shandong, but became the Han Dynasty's Sili captain Bao Yong Yong.

古文：如此之类，举口皆然。
现代文：像这一类例子，这位侯王张口就是。
English: Like this kind of example, this lord Zhangkou is.

古文：元帝手教诸子侍读，以此为诫。
现代文：梁元帝亲自教授几位儿子的侍读，就以这位侯王的错讹为诫。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan personally taught several of his sons to read and write, and took the prince's mistake as a warning.

古文：河北切攻字为古琮，与工、公、功三字不同，殊为僻也。
现代文：河北地区的人反切攻字为古琮，与工、公、功三字的读音不同，这是大错。
English: People in the Hebei region often mispronounce the word as guzheng, which is different from the pronunciation of the words gu, gu, and gong. This is a big mistake.

古文：比世有人名暹，自称为纤；名琨，自称为衮；名洸，自称为汪；名，自称为獡。
现代文：近代有一个人名为暹，他自称为纤；有一个人名为琨，他自称为衮；有一个人名为洸，他自称为汪；有一个人名为砣，他自称为獡。
English: In modern times, there is a person named Siem, who calls himself Qi; there is a person named Yao, who calls himself Ruan; there is a person named Yao, who calls himself Wang; there is a person named Yao, who calls himself Yao.

古文：非唯音韵舛错，亦使其儿孙避讳纷纭矣。
现代文：不仅音韵有错讹，也使他们的儿孙辈在避讳时纷繁杂乱，不知如何依从。
English: Not only does the rhyme have mistakes, but it also makes their children and grandchildren confused when avoiding taboos, and they don't know how to follow it.

