古文：尉迟敬德，朔州善阳人。
现代文：尉迟敬德，朔州善阳人。
English: Fei Chi Jingde, Shuozhou Zhengyang people.

古文：大业末，从军于高阳，讨捕群贼，以武勇称，累授朝散大夫。
现代文：隋炀帝大业末年，在高阳参军讨伐暴乱兵众，以勇猛闻名，一直提升到朝散大夫。
English: In the last years of the Sui and Qian Dynasties, he joined the army in Gaoyang to fight against the rioting soldiers. He was famous for his bravery, and was promoted to the rank of Chosan doctor.

古文：刘武周起，以为偏将，与宋金刚南侵，陷晋、浍二州。
现代文：刘武周起兵，任用他为偏将，跟宋金刚一起向南进军，攻陷了晋州、浍州。
English: Liu Wuzhou raised an army, appointed him as a partial general, and marched south with Song Jingang, capturing Jinzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：敬德深入，至夏县，应接吕崇茂，袭破永安王孝基，执独孤怀恩、唐俭等。
现代文：尉迟敬德推进到夏县接应吕崇茂，突袭打败了唐朝永安王李孝基，捉拿了独孤怀恩、唐俭等人。
English: Lieutenant Qi Jingde pushed forward to Xia County to meet Lu Chongmao, and defeated the Tang Dynasty Yongan King Li Xiaoji in a surprise attack, and captured Doko Kuai En, Tang Jian and others.

古文：武德三年，太宗讨武周于柏壁，武周令敬德与宋金刚来拒王师于介休。
现代文：唐高祖武德三年，太宗李世民在柏壁城讨伐刘武周，刘武周命令尉迟敬德和宋金刚到介休县抵抗唐军。
English: In the third year of Emperor Gaozong Wude's reign, Emperor Taizong Li Shimin went to fight Liu Wuzhou in Baibi City. Liu Wuzhou ordered Lieutenant Xi Jingde and Song Jingang to go to Jiexiu County to resist the Tang army.

古文：金刚战败，奔于突厥；敬德收其余众，城守介休。
现代文：宋金刚被打败了，逃往突厥，尉迟敬德据守介休县城。
English: Song King Kong was defeated and fled to Turkey, and his lieutenant, Jingde, was forced to leave the county seat.

古文：太宗遣任城王道宗、宇文士及往谕之。敬德与寻相举城来降。
现代文：太宗派遣任城王李道宗、宇文士及去开导他，尉迟敬德和寻相献城投降。
English: Emperor Taizong sent Li Daozong, the appointed king of the city, and U Wenshi to enlighten him, and he later surrendered the city to the emperor.

古文：太宗大悦，赐以曲宴，引为右一府统军，从击王世充于东都。
现代文：太宗非常高兴，在指挥部设私宴接风，任命他为右一府统军，跟随太宗到东都洛阳进攻王世充。
English: Taizong was very pleased, and he had a private banquet at the headquarters to catch wind, and appointed him as the right-wing unified army, and followed Taizong to the eastern capital Luoyang to attack Wang Shichong.

古文：既而寻相与武周下降将皆叛，诸将疑敬德必叛，囚于军中。
现代文：后来寻相和刘武周手下的降将们都叛离了唐军，唐军将领们怀疑尉迟敬德必然叛离，把他关押起来了。
English: Later, both Guoxiang and Liu Wuzhou's subordinate generals defected from the Tang army. The Tang generals suspected that Guoxiang's subordinate, Jingde, would inevitably defect and imprisoned him.

古文：行台左仆射屈突通、尚书殷开山咸言： 敬德初归国家，情志未附。
现代文：行台左仆射屈突通、尚书殷开山都说： 尉迟敬德刚刚投降唐朝，思想感情还没有归顺。
English: Gaotai's left-hand servant, Jia Jue, and Shangshu's right-hand man, Yin Kaishan, both said, "Ling Xi Jingde has just surrendered to the Tang Dynasty, but his thoughts and feelings have not yet surrendered.

古文：此人勇健非常，絷之又久，既被猜贰，怨望必生。
现代文：这人非常勇猛剽悍，关押的时间又长，已被我们猜疑，必然产生怨恨。
English: This man is very brave and tough, he has been detained for a long time, he has been suspected by us, and resentment is bound to arise.

古文：留之恐贻后悔，请即杀之。 
现代文：留着他只怕会留下后患，请立即杀了他。 
English: If you keep him, please kill him immediately.

古文：太宗曰： 寡人所见，有异于此。
现代文：太宗说： 我的看法，跟你们不同。
English: Taizong said, "My opinion is different from yours.

古文：敬德若怀翻背之计，岂在寻相之后耶？ 
现代文：尉迟敬德如果怀有叛离意图，怎么会在寻相之后呢？ 
English: If Lt. Col. Jingde harbored the intention of defecting, how could he do so after the photo session?

古文：遽命释之，引入卧内，赐以金宝，谓曰： 丈夫以意气相期，勿以小疑介意。
现代文：当即命令释放，带进自己的卧室，赏赐给他金银珠宝，对他说： 大丈夫凭着情感志向互相信赖，不必把小小委屈放在心上。
English: He immediately ordered his release, took him into his bedroom, gave him gold, silver and jewels, and said to him: "It's okay to trust each other with emotional aspirations, and you don't have to take small grievances to heart.

古文：寡人终不听谗言以害忠良，公宜体之。
现代文：我终究不会听信谗言去迫害忠臣良将，您应体谅。
English: In the end, I won't listen to those who want to persecute a loyal and good general. You should understand.

古文：必应欲去，今以此物相资，表一时共事之情也。 
现代文：一定认为应当离开，现在就用这些东西资助您，表达我们短暂共事的情谊。 
English: You must think it's time to leave, so I'm giving you this to show our short-lived friendship.

古文：是日，因从猎于榆窠，遇王世充领步骑数万来战。
现代文：这天，尉迟敬德陪同太宗到榆窠打猎，碰上王世充带领几万步兵骑兵前来挑战。
English: On this day, Lieutenant Xi Jingde accompanied Emperor Taizong to Baotou to hunt, and met Wang Shichong leading tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to challenge.

古文：世充骁将单雄信领骑直趋太宗，敬德跃马大呼，横刺雄信坠马。
现代文：王世充的骁勇将领单雄信带领骑兵直奔太宗冲来，尉迟敬德驱马冲上前去，太吼一声，斜刺里一枪把单雄信挑下马来。
English: Wang Shichong's valiant general, Shan Xiongxin, led the cavalry to rush straight to Taizong. The lieutenant, Jingde, drove the horse forward, roared loudly, and shot Shan Xionxin in the oblique spine.

古文：贼徒稍却，敬德翼太宗以出贼围。更率骑兵与世充交战，数合，其众大溃，擒伪将陈智略，获排槊兵六千人。
现代文：敌兵且战且退，尉迟敬德保护太宗杀出包围后，又带领骑兵跟王世充作战，几个回合，敌军狼狈逃散，抓住了敌将陈智略，俘虏手持长矛的骑兵六千人。
English: The enemy soldiers fought and retreated. After the encirclement of Taizong, the lieutenant Jingde protected Taizong, and led the cavalry to fight with Wang Shichong. After several rounds, the enemy troops fled in disarray, captured the enemy general Chen Zhiliu, and captured six thousand cavalrymen armed with spears.

古文：太宗谓敬德曰： 比众人证公必叛，天诱我意，独保明之，福善有征，何相报之速也！ 
现代文：太宗对尉迟敬德说 ：正当人们要我相信您必然叛离的时候，上天开导我怎样向人们验证我的判断，特地予以证实，行善得福已验证了，因果回报何等迅速。 
English: Emperor Taizong said to Lieutenant Qiande, "Just when people want me to believe that you will definitely defect, Heaven has enlightened me on how to validate my judgment to people, specifically to confirm it, the blessing of doing good has been verified, and how quickly the cause and effect return.

古文：特赐金银一箧，此后恩眄日隆。
现代文：特地赐给他金银一箱，此后惠顾日益增加。
English: He was specially given a box of gold and silver, and his patronage has been increasing ever since.

古文：敬德善解避槊，每单骑入贼阵，贼槊攒刺，终不能伤，又能夺取贼槊，还以刺之。
现代文：尉迟敬德善于排除、避开长矛，每当单人匹马冲进敌阵，敌人的长矛一齐刺来，始终不能刺到他，他还能夺过敌人的长矛，回手刺杀敌人。
English: He was good at eliminating and avoiding spears. Whenever a single person rushed into the enemy camp, the enemy's spears came together and could not stab him. He could also take the enemy's spear and stab the enemy back.

古文：是日，出入重围，往返无碍。
现代文：这天，他在敌军的重重包围圈里冲进冲出，畅行无阻。
English: On this day, he rushed in and out of the encirclement of the enemy army, unimpeded.

古文：齐王元吉亦善马槊，闻而轻之，欲亲自试，命去槊刃，以竿相刺。
现代文：齐王李元吉也善于骑在马上使用长矛，听说尉迟敬德也会此道就不以为然，要亲自比试，叫拿掉长矛顶端的刀刃用矛杆刺杀。
English: The king of Qi, Li Yuanji, was also good at riding a horse and using a spear. When he heard that the second-in-command, Jingde, would also use this method, he was not convinced. He wanted to try it himself and asked him to remove the blade at the tip of the spear and stab him to death with a spear shaft.

古文：敬德曰： 纵使加刃，终不能伤。请勿除之，敬德槊谨当却刃。 
现代文：尉迟敬德说： 即使安上刀刃，也刺不着我，请您别拿掉，我的当然要拿掉刀刃。 
English: Lieutenant Xi Jingde said: Even if you attach a blade, you can't stab me. Please don't remove it. Of course, I have to remove the blade.

古文：元吉竟不能中。
现代文：李元吉终究没有刺到他。
English: After all, Li Yuanji did not stab him.

古文：太宗问曰： 夺槊、避槊，何者难易？ 
现代文：太宗问他 ：夺取长矛、避开长矛，哪种难些？ 
English: Taizong asked him: Which is more difficult, to capture the spear or to avoid the spear?

古文：对曰： 夺槊难。 
现代文：尉迟敬德回答说 ：夺取困难些。 
English: Lieutenant Jingde replied, "It's more difficult to capture."

古文：乃命敬德夺元吉槊。
现代文：于是命令他表演夺取李元吉手中的长矛。
English: So he ordered him to perform the capture of the spear in the hands of Li Yuanji.

古文：元吉执槊跃马，志在刺之，敬德俄顷三夺其槊。
现代文：李元吉手执长矛长驱骏马，一心想刺着他，尉迟敬德没一会儿工夫就一连三次夺得了李元吉的长矛。
English: Li Yuanji, holding a spear in his hand, drove the horse away and tried to stab him. The lieutenant Jingde did not take long to capture Li Yuanji's spear three times in a row.

古文：元吉素骁勇，虽相叹异，甚以为耻。
现代文：李元吉一向骁勇，虽然口里赞叹，心里却深深感到耻辱。
English: Li Yuanji has always been courageous. Although he was praised, he felt deeply humiliated.

古文：及窦建德营于板渚，太宗将挑战，先伏李勣、程知节、秦叔宝等兵。
现代文：后来窦建德在板城渚口扎营，太宗准备挑动他出战，预先让李责力、程知节、秦叔宝等人的部队埋伏起来。
English: Later, Dou Jiande set up camp at the mouth of the Bancheng River, and Taizong prepared to provoke him to go to war, and had the troops of Li Ruili, Cheng Zhijie, Qin Shubao and others ambush him in advance.

古文：太宗持弓矢，敬德执槊，造建德垒下大呼致师。
现代文：太宗拿着弓箭，尉迟敬德握着长矛，到窦建德营垒跟前大声呼叫，叫得他全军都听到。
English: Taizong, holding a bow and arrow, and his second-in-command Jingde, holding a spear, went to Dou Jiande's camp and shouted loudly so that his whole army could hear.

古文：贼众大惊扰，出兵数千骑，太宗逡巡渐却，前后射杀数人，敬德所杀亦十数人，遂引贼以入伏内。
现代文：窦建德的将士们惊恐不安，冲出来几千名骑兵，太宗打打退退，前后射死了几个敌人，尉迟敬德也刺死了十多个敌人，就把敌人诱进了伏击圈。
English: Dou Jiande's soldiers were alarmed and uneasy, and several thousand cavalry rushed out. Taizong fought back and shot several enemies, and Gui Xi Jingde also stabbed more than ten enemies, and lured the enemy into the ambush circle.

古文：于是与勣等奋击，大破之。
现代文：于是与李眅等人的部队一起奋力攻打，敌军大败。
English: As a result, together with the troops of Li Xi and others, they fought hard, and the enemy army was defeated.

古文：王世充兄子伪代王琬，使于建德军中，乘隋炀帝所御骢马，铠甲甚鲜，迥出军前以夸众。
现代文：王世充哥哥的儿子、伪夏国的代王王琬叫人到窦建德的营帐，牵来隋炀帝骑过的那匹毛色青白相间的花马骑上，铠甲非常华美，远远地跑在队伍的前头当众炫耀。
English: Wang Shichong's brother's son, the vicar of the pseudo-Xia Kingdom, Wang Wangyao, called people to Dou Jiande's camp, and brought the fur-colored blue-and-white flower horse that the Sui Dynasty had ridden. The armor was very beautiful, and he ran far ahead of the team to show it off to the public.

古文：太宗曰： 彼之所乘，真良马也。 
现代文：太宗说： 那家伙骑的，真是好马。 
English: Taizong said, "That guy is riding a really good horse.

古文：敬德请往取之，乃与高甑生、梁建方三骑直入贼军，擒琬，引其马以归，贼众无敢当者。
现代文：尉迟敬德请求去夺过来，就同高甑生、梁建方共三人驱马直奔敌军，活捉了王琬，牵着那匹马回来，敌军没人敢来阻拦。
English: At the request of Gui Chi Jingde, he went to seize it, and together with Gao Xinsheng and Liang Jianfang, the three of them drove the horse straight to the enemy army, captured Wang Yao alive, and brought the horse back. No one in the enemy army dared to stop them.

古文：又从讨刘黑闼于临洺，黑闼军来袭李世勣，太宗勒兵掩贼，复以救之。
现代文：尉迟敬德又跟随太宗到临氵名讨伐刘黑闼，刘黑闼的军队来袭击李世眅，太宗率领部队偷袭敌军后方以便援救。
English: Lieutenant Ji Jingde also followed Taizong to Linyi to fight Liu Heihe, Liu Heihe's army attacked Li Shijun, and Taizong led the troops to raid the enemy's rear for rescue.

古文：既而黑闼众至，其军四合，敬德率壮士犯围而入，大破贼阵，太宗与江夏王道宗乘之以出。
现代文：刘黑闼的队伍转身回来，四面包围太宗，尉迟敬德率领勇士冲进包围圈，大败敌军，太宗和江夏王李道宗乘机突围。
English: Liu Heyao's team turned around and came back. They surrounded Taizong on all sides, and the lieutenant Qi Jingde led the warriors into the encirclement and defeated the enemy army. Taizong and the King of Jiangxia Li Daozong took the opportunity to break out.

古文：又从破徐圆朗。累有战功，授秦王府左二副护军。
现代文：又跟随太宗打败徐圆朗，多次立下战功，被授予秦王府左二副护军职务。
English: He also followed Taizong in defeating Xu Yuanlang, and was awarded the position of the second-in-command of the left guard of the Qin royal court.

古文：隐太子、巢剌王元吉将谋害太宗，密致书以招敬德曰： 愿迂长者之眷，敦布衣之交，幸副所望也。 
现代文：隐太子李建成、巢王李元吉要谋杀太宗，他们秘密递信叫去尉迟敬德说： 要委屈您给予我们父兄般的照看，同您做一个真诚亲密的朋友，希望您答应我们的要求。 
English: The Hidden Prince Li Jiancheng and the Nest King Li Yuanji wanted to murder Emperor Taizong. They secretly sent a letter to him, saying, "We would like to ask you to give us fatherly care, to be a sincere and close friend with you, and we hope you will agree to our request."

古文：仍赠以金银器物一车。
现代文：接着赠送给他一车金银器物。
English: He was then presented with a truckload of gold and silverware.

古文：敬德辞曰： 敬德起自幽贱，逢遇隋亡，天下土崩，窜身无所，久沦逆地，罪不容诛。
现代文：尉迟敬德说： 我出身低下，遇上隋朝衰亡，天下四分五裂，自己无处藏身，长期陷入叛乱队伍，罪大恶极死有余辜。
English: Lieutenant Xi Jingde said: I am from a lowly background, I encountered the decline and fall of the Sui Dynasty, the world is torn apart, I have nowhere to hide, I have long been caught up in the rebellion, and I have a lot of guilt for the great evil.

古文：实荷秦王惠以生命，今又隶名籓邸，唯当以身报恩。
现代文：结果承蒙秦王给我生命，如今还在秦王府供职，只应以生命报答他的恩情。
English: As a result, I am grateful to King Qin for giving me life, and now I am still serving in the Qin royal court. I should only repay his kindness with my life.

古文：于殿下无功，不敢谬当重赐。
现代文：我对您没有功劳，不敢错受重赏。
English: I owe you nothing, and I dare not fail to be rewarded.

古文：若私许殿下，便是二心，徇利忘忠，殿下亦何所用？ 
现代文：如果私自答应为您效劳，就是背叛，一个为了私利忘掉忠诚的人，您又用他干什么呢？ 
English: If I promised to serve you, it would be a betrayal. What would you do with a man who forgets his loyalty for the sake of personal gain?

古文：建成怒，是后遂绝。
现代文：李建成火了，此后就断绝了交往。
English: Li Jiancheng was furious and broke off the relationship.

古文：敬德寻以启闻，太宗曰： 公之素心，郁如山岳，积金至斗，知公情不可移。
现代文：尉迟敬德很快报告了这事，太宗说： 您纯洁的思想，高于山岳，就是堆起一斗黄金，我知道您也不会改变气节。
English: Subordinate Jingde quickly reported the matter, Taizong said: Your pure thoughts, higher than the mountains, is to pile up a bucket of gold, I know you will not change your temperament.

古文：送来但取，宁须虑也。若不然，恐公身不安。
现代文：他送东西您就接着，不必顾虑。不这样，恐怕您不安全。
English: If he gives you something, you can just go ahead and do it, don't worry. Otherwise, I'm afraid you won't be safe.

古文：且知彼阴计，足为良策。 
现代文：并且了解他们的阴谋，也可以帮助想出好的对策。 
English: And understanding their machinations can also help come up with good countermeasures.

古文：元吉等深忌敬德，令壮士往刺之。
现代文：李元吉等人非常忌恨尉迟敬德，派刺客去暗杀他。
English: Li Yuanji and others were very jealous of the lieutenant Qi Jingde, and sent assassins to assassinate him.

古文：敬德知其计，乃重门洞开，安卧不动，贼频至其庭，终不敢入。
现代文：尉迟敬德知道他们的阴谋，就大开重重门户，若无其事地睡觉，刺客多次走进他家厅堂，终究不敢走进卧室。
English: After learning of their plot, Lieutenant Gui Jingde opened the doors wide and slept peacefully. The assassins walked into the hall of his house several times, but eventually did not dare to enter the bedroom.

古文：元吉乃谮敬德于高祖，下诏狱讯验，将杀之，太宗固谏得释。
现代文：李元吉就在高祖面前诬陷尉迟敬德，高祖下令囚禁审讯，准备杀掉他。太宗坚决劝谏才获得释放。
English: Li Yuanji slandered the lieutenant Ji Jingde in front of Gaozhu, Gaozhu ordered him to be imprisoned for interrogation and prepared to kill him. Taizong resolutely persuaded him to be released.

古文：会突厥侵扰乌城，建成举元吉为将，密谋请太宗同送于昆明池，将加屠害。
现代文：在突厥侵扰乌城时，李建成推荐李元吉为统帅出兵抗敌，密谋请太宗到长安近郊的昆明池一起送行，乘机杀害。
English: When the Turks invaded Wucheng, Li Jiancheng recommended Li Yuanji as the commander to send troops to resist the enemy, and conspired to ask Taizong to accompany him to Kunming Lake in the suburbs of Chang'an, and take the opportunity to kill him.

古文：敬德闻其谋，与长孙无忌遽启太宗曰： 大王若不速正之，则恐被其所害，社稷危矣。 
现代文：尉迟敬德听到个阴谋，同长孙无忌立即禀告太宗说： 您如果不赶紧惩治他们，恐怕要被他们杀害，那么国家政权就危险了。 
English: Hearing of the plot, the second-in-command Jingde, together with his eldest grandson, immediately reported to Emperor Taizong: "If you don't punish them quickly, I'm afraid they'll kill you, and then the state power will be in danger."

古文：太宗叹曰： 今二宫离阻骨肉，灭弃君亲，危亡之机，共所知委。
现代文：太宗叹息说 ：现在他们二人离间陷害同胞兄弟，除灭君主的儿子，这种危机，大家从头至尾都很清楚。
English: Taizong sighed and said, "Now that the two of them have separated to frame up their compatriots and brothers and eliminate the monarch's son, this crisis is clear to everyone from beginning to end."

古文：寡人虽深被猜忌，祸在须臾，然同气之情，终所未忍。
现代文：我虽然深遭他们忌恨，灾祸就在眼前，然而兄弟之情，始终令我不忍下手。
English: Although I am deeply hated by them, and disaster is just around the corner, the feeling of brotherhood has always made me reluctant to take action.

古文：欲待其先起，然后以义讨之，公意以为何如？ 
现代文：我打算在他们先动手后，再按义理惩罚他们，您二位认为怎么样？ 
English: What do you two think of my plan to punish them rationally after they have attacked first?

古文：敬德曰： 人情畏死，众人以死奉王，此天授也。若天与不取，反受其咎。
现代文：尉迟敬德说： 人的本性怕死，大家情愿以死来侍奉您，这是上天的恩赐，如果上天给您却不接受，反而会受罪责。
English: "Human nature is afraid of death. People are willing to die to serve you. This is God's gift. If God gives it to you but you don't accept it, you will be held responsible.

古文：虽存仁爱之小情，忘社稷之大计，祸至而不恐，将亡而自安，失人臣临难不避之节，乏先贤大义灭亲之事，非所闻也。
现代文：虽然顾及了仁爱的私情，却忘掉了国家的大事，灾祸来了不知担忧，快要灭亡却无动于衷，丧失作为人臣不避艰险的气节，不具备前辈圣贤大义灭亲的品德，这些我没听说过。
English: Although he took into account the benevolence and selfishness, he forgot the important affairs of the country, he did not worry when the disaster came, he was apathetic when he was about to die, he lost the spirit of not avoiding hardships as a minister, and he did not have the moral character of his predecessors, the sages and sages, to kill relatives. I have not heard of these.

古文：以臣愚诚，请先诛之。
现代文：我的心愿，是请先下手杀掉他们。
English: My wish is that you kill them first.

古文：王若不从，敬德言请奔逃亡命，不能交手受戮。
现代文：您如果不采纳我的意见，就请让我逃走，我不能坐等别人来杀。
English: If you don't take my advice, please let me escape. I can't wait for someone else to kill me.

古文：且因败成功，明贤之高见；转祸为福，智士之先机。
现代文：再说靠危难成就大业，是圣贤的高明主见；把灾祸变为福祉，是智士的天赋机敏。
English: Moreover, it is the wisdom of sages to achieve great things by relying on danger; it is the talent of sages to turn disaster into well-being.

古文：敬德今若逃亡，无忌亦欲同去。 
现代文：我如果逃走，无忌也要一起逃走。 
English: If I run away, I'll have to run away together.

古文：太宗犹豫未决，无忌曰： 王今不从敬德之言，必知敬德等非王所有。
现代文：太宗还是犹豫不决，长孙无忌说： 您如果不采纳敬德的意见，我们就不再事奉您了。
English: Taizong still hesitated, and the eldest grandson said: "If you do not accept Jingde's opinion, we will no longer serve you."

古文：事今败矣，其若之何？ 
现代文：事情如果失败，您到底怎么办呢？ 
English: If things go wrong, what exactly will you do?

古文：太宗曰： 寡人所言，未可全弃，公更图之。 
现代文：太宗说： 我刚才说的，还不能全然不顾，各位再商议吧。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I cannot completely disregard what I just said, so let's discuss it again."

古文：敬德曰： 王今处事有疑，非智；临难不决，非勇。
现代文：尉迟敬德说： 您现在办事犹犹豫豫，不算明智；面对危难不能果决，不算英勇。
English: Lieutenant Qi Jingde said: You are hesitating to act now, which is not wise; you cannot make a decision in the face of danger, which is not heroic.

古文：王纵不从敬德言，请自决计，其如家国何？
现代文：您即使不采纳我的意见，就请您自己考虑，到底怎样保全国家社稷？
English: Even if you do not accept my opinion, I would ask you to consider for yourself how to preserve the country's social order.

古文：其如身命何？
现代文：到底怎样保全身家性命？
English: How do you save your own life?

古文：且在外勇士八百余人，今悉入宫，控弦被甲，事势已就，王何得辞！ 
现代文：况且外边的八百名勇士，现在已经全都进了皇宫，手握兵器身穿铠甲，事情发展到这一步了您怎么能够拒绝！ 
English: Moreover, the eight hundred warriors outside have now all entered the palace, holding weapons and wearing armor, things have developed to this step, how can you refuse!

古文：敬德又与侯君集日夜进劝，然后计定。
现代文：尉迟敬德又和侯君集日夜进言鼓动，这才下了决心。
English: It was only after he and Hou Junji had been talking and agitating day and night that they made up their minds.

古文：时房玄龄、杜如晦皆被高祖斥出秦府，不得复入。
现代文：当时房玄龄、杜如晦都被高祖逐出了秦王府，不能再来。
English: At that time, Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao were both expelled from the Qin royal palace by Gao Zu, and could not come back.

古文：太宗令长孙无忌密召之，玄龄等报曰： 有敕不许更事王，今若私谒，必至诛灭，不敢奉命。 
现代文：太宗叫长孙无忌去秘密地把他们请来，房玄龄等人回话说 ：皇上诏令规定不许我们再事奉秦王，如果私自拜见，一定会杀我全家，不敢接受秦王的命令。 
English: Emperor Taizong told the eldest grandson to secretly invite them, and Fong Xuanling and others replied: "The imperial edict stipulates that we are no longer allowed to serve King Qin. If I visit him, I will surely kill my whole family. I dare not accept King Qin's order."

古文：太宗大怒，谓敬德曰： 玄龄、如晦岂背我耶？ 
现代文：太宗大发脾气，对尉迟敬德说： 房玄龄、杜如晦难道要背叛我吗？ 
English: Taizong lost his temper and said to Lieutenant Qi Jingde, "Fang Xuanling and Du Rubei, are you going to betray me?"

古文：取所佩刀授敬德曰： 公且往，观其无来心，可并斩其首持来也。 
现代文：取下腰间的宝剑交给尉迟敬德说 ：您去一趟，看见他们没有来的意思，斩下他们的首级带回来。 
English: He took off the sword at his waist and handed it to Lieutenant Xi Jingde, saying, "If you go and see that they don't want to come, cut off their heads and bring them back."

古文：敬德又与无忌喻曰： 王已决计克日平贼，公宜即入筹之。
现代文：尉迟敬德又去通知长孙无忌说： 秦王已决定限期除奸，您应该按时进府筹划。
English: After a while, Lieutenant Jingde went to inform his eldest grandson Mubi and said, "Qin Wang has decided to remove the traitors within a time limit. You should go to the palace on time to plan.

古文：我等四人不宜群行在道。 
现代文：我们四个人不能邀在一起走。 
English: The four of us can't be invited to go together.

古文：于是玄龄、如晦著道士服随无忌入，敬德别道亦至。
现代文：于是房玄龄、杜如晦道士打扮跟着长孙无忌进了秦王府，尉迟敬德也从另一条路进来了。
English: As a result, Fang Xuanling and Du Rongyu, dressed as Taoists, followed the eldest grandson into the Qin Wangfu, and the lieutenant Xi Jingde also came in from another road.

古文：六月四日，建成既死，敬德领七十骑蹑踵继至，元吉走马东奔，左右射之坠马。
现代文：武德九年六月四日，李建成被杀后，尉迟敬德带着七十名骑兵跟着赶到玄武门，李元吉驱马向东逃跑，被乱箭射下马来。
English: After Li Jiancheng was killed on June 4th, Wu De's 9th year, Li Yuanji drove his horse to the east to escape and was shot down by arrows. Li Jiancheng's second-in-command Jing De followed him with 70 cavalrymen to Xuanwu Gate.

古文：太宗所乘马又逸于林下，横被所繣，坠不能兴。
现代文：太宗所骑的马跑进树林，突然缰绳挂到树上被绊倒，不能起来。
English: The horse that Taizong was riding ran into the woods. Suddenly, the bridle got caught on a tree and he tripped and couldn't get up.

古文：元吉遽来夺弓，垂欲相扼，敬德跃马叱之，于是步走，欲归武德殿，敬德奔逐射杀之。
现代文：李元吉追上来抢夺弓箭，俯身下去要掐太宗，尉迟敬德驱马上前大声喝斥，李元吉撒腿就跑，想回武德殿，尉迟敬德赶上去一箭射死了他。
English: Li Yuanji caught up to snatch the bow and arrow, bent down to attack Taizong, and the lieutenant Xi Jingde drove him forward and shouted loudly. Li Yuanji ran away and wanted to return to Wude's palace, and the lieutenant Xi Jingde caught up and shot him dead with an arrow.

古文：其宫府诸将薛万彻、谢叔方、冯立等率兵大至，屯于玄武门，杀屯营将军。
现代文：李建成、李元吉的部将薛万彻、谢叔方、冯立等人率领队伍来了，聚集在玄武门，杀死了屯营将军。
English: Li Jiancheng, Li Yuanji's generals Xue Wanche, Xie Shifang, Feng Li and others led the team, gathered at the Xuanwu Gate, and killed the camp general.

古文：敬德持建成、元吉首以示之，宫府兵遂散。
现代文：尉迟敬德提来李建成、李元吉的首级给他们看，他们就撤走了。
English: Afterward, Lieutenant Jingde brought Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji's heads to show them, and they left.

古文：是时，高祖泛舟于海池。
现代文：这时，高祖在海池上划船游览。
English: At this time, Gao Zu was boating on the sea pool.

古文：太宗命敬德侍卫高祖。
现代文：太宗命令尉迟敬德去保卫高祖。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered Lieutenant Chi Jingde to go and protect Gaozu.

古文：敬德擐甲持矛，直至高祖所。高祖大惊，问曰： 今日作乱是谁？
现代文：他身穿铠甲手执武器，直奔海池。高祖极度震惊，问道： 今天发动叛乱的是谁？
English: Wearing armor and holding a weapon, he ran straight to the sea pool. Gaozhu was extremely shocked and asked: Who started the rebellion today?

古文：卿来此何也？ 
现代文：你到这里来干什么？ 
English: What are you doing here?

古文：对曰： 秦王以太子、齐王作乱，举兵诛之，恐陛下惊动，遣臣来宿卫。 
现代文：尉迟敬德回答说： 秦王由于太子、齐王发动叛乱，派兵杀了他们，他担心皇上受惊，派我来值班警卫。 
English: Lieutenant Qi Jingde replied, "King Qin sent soldiers to kill the Prince and King Qi because they started a rebellion. He was worried that the Emperor would be frightened, so he sent me to be the guard on duty."

古文：高祖意乃安。
现代文：高祖这才放心。
English: This was reassuring to Gaozu.

古文：南衙、北门兵马及二宫左右犹相拒战，敬德奏请降手敕，令诸军兵并受秦王处分，于是内外遂定。
现代文：南衙卫兵、北门羽林军以及东宫、齐王府、秦王府的将士还在混战，尉迟敬德奏请高祖亲笔写了道诏令，命令各部人马一并听从秦王处置，于是宫廷内外都安定了。
English: The guards of Nanlu, the troops of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate of the North Gate

古文：高祖劳敬德曰： 卿于国有安社稷之功。 
现代文：高祖慰劳尉迟敬德说 ：你为国家立下了稳定政权的大功勋。 
English: Gaozu comforted labor lieutenant Chi Jingde and said: You have made a great contribution to the country by establishing a stable regime.

古文：赐珍物甚众。
现代文：赏赐给他很多珍贵物品。
English: He was rewarded with many precious items.

古文：太宗升春宫，授太子左卫率。
现代文：太宗立为太子后，任命他为太子左卫率。
English: After Taizong was enthroned as crown prince, he appointed him as crown prince Sawei.

古文：时议者以建成等左右百余人，并合从坐籍没，唯敬德执之不听，曰： 为罪者二凶，今已诛讫，若更及支党，非取安之策。 
现代文：当时的舆论认为李建成等人的一百多名部属，都应判处胁从罪而没收他们的家产充公，只有尉迟敬德坚持反对，说： 两名罪魁祸首，已经惩罚完毕，如果再株连他们的部属，这不是稳定局势的政策。 
English: At that time, the public opinion believed that more than one hundred subordinates of Li Jiancheng and others should be sentenced to the crime of coercion and confiscation of their family assets. Only the second-in-command, Jingde, insisted on his opposition, saying: The two culprits have already been punished, and if their subordinates are punished again, this is not a policy to stabilize the situation.

古文：由是获免。
现代文：因此都免于处分。
English: Therefore, they are all exempt from punishment.

古文：及论功，敬德与长孙无忌为第一，各赐绢万匹；齐王府财币器物，封其全邸，尽赐敬德。
现代文：后来论功行赏，尉迟敬德和长孙无忌定为头等，每人赏赐了一万匹绢，齐王府的钱财器物，连同整个府第，都赏给了尉迟敬德。
English: Later, in terms of reward for meritorious service, Lt. Xi Jingde and his eldest grandson were designated as the first class, each of whom was awarded ten thousand mules, and the money and wealth of the Qi royal court, together with the entire court, were awarded to Lt. Xi Jingde.

古文：贞观元年，拜右武候大将军，赐爵吴国公，与长孙无忌、房玄龄、杜如晦四人并食实封千三百户。
现代文：太宗贞观元年，授予他右武侯大将军头衔，赐予吴国公爵位，同长孙无忌、房玄龄、杜如晦一齐实封收纳一千三百户租税。
English: In the first year of Taizong Zhenguan, he was awarded the title of General of the Right Wuhou and the title of Duke of Wu, and together with his eldest grandson Mubi, Fong Xuanling and Du Rugao, he collected 1300 households' taxes.

古文：会突厥来入寇，授泾州道行军总管以击之。
现代文：这时，突厥侵犯边境，任命他为泾州道行军总管去攻打突厥。
English: At this time, the Turks invaded the border and appointed him as the chief marshal of the Zhangzhou Road to attack the Turks.

古文：贼至泾阳，敬德轻骑与之挑战，杀其名将，贼遂败。
现代文：敌军到了泾阳，尉迟敬德派轻装骑兵去挑战，杀死了他的名将，于是打败了敌军。
English: When the enemy army arrived at Shenyang, Lieutenant Xi Jingde sent light cavalry to challenge, killed his famous general, and then defeated the enemy army.

古文：敬德好讦直，负其功，每见无忌、玄龄、如晦等短长，必面折廷辩，由是与执政不平。
现代文：尉迟敬德欢喜揭发别人的短处，负功自傲，每当发现长孙无忌、房玄龄、杜如晦等人的过失，必然不讲情面直言指责，因此与宰臣不和。
English: He was always happy to expose the shortcomings of others and was proud of his achievements. Whenever he discovered the faults of his eldest grandson, his son-in-law, his son-in-law, and his son-in-law, he was bound to be blunt and uncompromising. As a result, he did not get along well with his vassal.

古文：三年，出为襄州都督。
现代文：贞观三年，离京任襄州都督。
English: Three years after Zhenguan, he left Beijing to become the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：八年，累迁同州刺史。
现代文：贞观八年，升为同州刺史。
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, he was promoted to the same state.

古文：尝侍宴庆善宫，时有班在其上者，敬德怒曰： 汝有何功，合坐我上？ 
现代文：他曾经在庆善宫陪从太宗饮宴，当时有人座次排在他的前边，他愤怒地说： 你有什么功劳，配坐在我的上席？ 
English: He once accompanied Emperor Taizong to a banquet at Kyongsang Palace. When there was a row of seats in front of him, he angrily said, "What merit do you have to deserve to sit in my seat?"

古文：任城王道宗次其下，因解喻之。
现代文：任城王李道宗坐在他的下位，便向他做解释。
English: The appointed king of the city, Li Daozong, sat below him and explained to him.

古文：敬德勃然，拳殴道宗目，几至眇。
现代文：尉迟敬德勃然大怒，一拳打在他的眼睛上，差点儿打瞎。
English: In a fit of rage, he punched him in the eye, nearly blinding him.

古文：太宗不怿而罢，谓敬德曰： 朕览汉史，见高祖功臣获全者少，意常尤之。
现代文：太宗不高兴，停止了饮宴，对尉迟敬德说： 我读《汉书》，发现汉高祖的功臣能够保全自己的很少，心里常常责怪高祖。
English: Unhappy, Taizong stopped the banquet and said to the second-in-command, Xi Jingde: "I read the "Chinese Book" and found that the heroes of the Han Emperor Gaozu were rarely able to save themselves. In my heart, I often blamed Gaozu.

古文：及居大位以来，常欲保全功臣，令子孙无绝。
现代文：到了登基以后，一直想保全功臣，让他们子孙平安。
English: After he ascended to the throne, he always wanted to preserve his meritorious vassals and keep their descendants safe.

古文：然卿居官辄犯宪法，方知韩、彭夷戮，非汉祖之愆。
现代文：但是你做了高官之后不断触犯国法，才明白韩信、彭越遭到杀戮，不是汉高祖的过失。
English: However, after you became a high-ranking official and continued to violate the law of the country, you came to understand that Han Xin and Peng Yue were killed, and it was not Henkel's fault.

古文：国家大事，唯赏与罚，非分之恩，不可数行，勉自修饬，无贻后悔也。 
现代文：治理国家的重要事情，只有奖赏与处罚。分外的恩惠，不能给得太多，要严格要求自己，别做后悔不及的事。 
English: The important things in governing the country are only rewards and punishments. You can't give too many extra favors, you have to be strict with yourself, and don't do anything you might regret.

古文：十一年，封建功臣为代袭刺史，册拜敬德宣州刺史，改封鄂国公。后历鄜、夏二州都督。
现代文：贞观十一年，分封功臣时给予世袭刺史，诏令授予宣州刺史官职，改封为鄂国公，此后历任鹿阝、夏二州都督。
English: In the 11th year of Zhenguan, when awarding the title of meritorious vassal, he was given the hereditary title of prince, and the imperial edict granted him the official post of prince of Xuanzhou, and he was renamed the prince of Hubei Province. Since then, he has served as the governor of Lugang and Xia Erzhou.

古文：十七年，抗表乞骸骨，授开府仪同三司，令朝朔望。
现代文：贞观十七年，上表请求退职，授予文职闲官第一等级的开府仪同三司名号，让他每月初一、十五进宫朝拜。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, the upper table requested the retirement, and awarded the first-class Kaifu ceremony and the three names to the civilian idler, and let him enter the palace to worship on the first and fifteenth day of each month.

古文：寻与长孙无忌等二十四人图形于凌烟阁。
现代文：不久跟长孙无忌等二十四人被绘制成肖像陈列在专为表彰功臣而修建的凌烟阁。
English: Soon, 24 people, including his eldest grandson, Muji, were painted into portraits and displayed in the Lingyan Pavilion, which was built specifically to honor heroes.

古文：及太宗将征高丽，敬德奏言： 车驾若自往辽左，皇太子又在定州，东西二京，府库所在，虽有镇守，终是空虚。
现代文：太宗要征讨高丽时，尉迟敬德奏议说 ：皇上如果亲自到辽东去，皇太子眼下又在定州，洛阳、长安都是国库所在地，虽然有守卫部队，但兵力还很薄弱。
English: When Emperor Taizong wanted to conquer Goryeo, his lieutenant, Jingde, made a proposal: If the emperor went to Liaodong in person, the crown prince would be in Dingzhou, Luoyang, and Chang'an, where the national treasury was located. Although there were guard troops, the troops were still very weak.

古文：辽东路遥，恐有玄感之变。
现代文：到辽东路途遥远，令人担心发生意外事故。
English: It's a long way to Liaodong, so people are worried about accidents.

古文：且边隅小国，不足亲劳万乘，伏请委之良将，自可应时摧灭。 
现代文：再说征讨一个边远小国，不必麻烦大国御驾亲征，请把这事交给一位优秀将领，自然可以按时摧毁敌人。 
English: As for the conquest of a small and remote country, you don't have to trouble a big country to personally lead the conquest. Please entrust this matter to an excellent general, who can naturally destroy the enemy on time.

古文：太宗不纳，令以本官行太常卿，为左一马军总管，从破高丽于驻跸山。
现代文：太宗没有采纳，命令尉迟敬德以原来的官职身份行使太常卿职权，任左一马军总管，跟随太宗到驻跸山打败了高丽。
English: Emperor Taizong did not accept this, and ordered Lieutenant Qi Jingde to exercise the powers of Emperor Taizong in his original official capacity, to be appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Left One Horse Army, and to follow Emperor Taizong to Lushan to defeat Goryeo.

古文：军还，依旧致仕。
现代文：班师回朝后，他仍旧退职家居。
English: After the teacher returned to the morning, he still retired home.

古文：敬德末年笃信仙方，飞炼金石，服食云母粉，穿筑池台，崇饰罗绮，尝奏清商乐以自奉养，不与外人交通，凡十六年。
现代文：尉迟敬德晚年迷信仙丹，研磨金属矿石，吞服云母矿石粉，挖池圹建楼台，用白色花纹的丝织物予以装饰，学着演奏清商乐曲自我娱乐，不跟外人交往，达十六年之久。
English: In his later years, he was a superstitious fairy godmother, grinding metal ore, swallowing mica ore powder, digging ponds, building towers, decorating them with white patterned silk fabric, learning to play Qing commercial music for self-entertainment, and not interacting with outsiders for 16 years.

古文：显庆三年，高宗以敬德功，追赠其父为幽州都督。
现代文：显庆三年，高宗按尉迟敬德的功勋，追认他的父亲为幽州都督。
English: In the third year of Xianqing, Gao Zong recognized his father's merits as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：其年薨，年七十四。
现代文：尉迟敬德这年逝世，享年七十四岁。
English: Lt. Col. Jingde passed away this year at the age of 74.

古文：高宗为之举哀，废朝三日，令京官五品以上及朝集使赴宅哭，册赠司徒、并州都督，谥曰忠武，赐东园秘器，陪葬于昭陵。
现代文：高宗为他举行悼念活动，三天不临朝理事，通知五品以上的京官和在京的地方官员前去悼念，下诏追认他为司徒、并州都督，谥号为忠武，赐给棺木，陪葬在太宗的昭陵。
English: Gao Zong held a memorial event for him. He did not visit the imperial court for three days, and told the Beijing officials with five or more court ranks and the local officials in Beijing to come to mourn. He issued an imperial edict recognizing him as a tutor and a prefect of a prefecture. His posthumous name was Zhongwu. He was given a coffin and buried in the mausoleum of Emperor Taizong.

古文：子宝琳嗣，官至卫尉卿。
现代文：儿子尉迟宝琳继承封爵，官职做到卫尉卿。
English: His son, Lieutenant Pauline, succeeded to the knighthood and was promoted to Lieutenant of the Guards.

