古文：孙子曰：凡兴师十万，出征千里，百姓之费，公家之奉，日费千金；内外骚动，怠于道路，不得操事者，七十万家。
现代文：孙子说：凡兴兵十万，出征千里，百姓的耗费，国家的开支，每天至少耗资千金；国家内外动荡，民夫兵卒因往来奔波而疲惫不堪，不能安心从事耕作的人多达七十万家。
English: Sun Tzu said: "Where there are a hundred thousand soldiers and a thousand miles to march, the people's expenses and the state's expenses are at least a thousand dollars a day; the country is in and out of turmoil, the people's servants and soldiers are exhausted from running to and fro, and there are as many as seven hundred thousand people who cannot engage in farming with confidence.

古文：相守数年，以争一日之胜，而爱爵禄百金，不知敌之情者，不仁之至也，非人之将也，非主之佐也，非胜之主也。
现代文：战争双方相持数年，是为了胜于一旦，如果吝啬爵禄和金钱不重用间谍，以致不能了解敌人情况而遭受失败，那就太 不仁 了。
English: Both sides of the war have been at each other's throats for several years in order to win more than once, and it would be too unkind not to use spies sparingly in order not to know the situation of the enemy and suffer defeat.

古文：故明君贤将，所以动而胜人，成功出于众者，先知也。
现代文：这样的将帅，不是军队的好将帅，不是国君的好助手；这样的国君，不是能打胜仗的好国君。
English: Such a general is not a good general of the army, not a good assistant of the sovereign; such a sovereign is not a good sovereign who can win the war.

古文：先知者，不可取于鬼神，不可象于事，不可验于度，必取于人，知敌之情者也。
现代文：英明的国君，良好的将帅，之所以一出兵就能战胜敌人，成功地超出众人之上的，其重要原因，在于他事先了解敌情。而要事先了解敌情，不可用迷信鬼神和占卜等方法去取得，不可用过去相似的事情作类比也不可用观察日月星辰运行位置去验证，一定要从了解敌情的人那里去获得。
English: The important reason why a wise sovereign and a good general can defeat the enemy as soon as he sends out troops and succeeds in surpassing all others is that he knows the enemy's situation in advance. To know the enemy's situation in advance, it is not possible to use superstitious ghosts and divination and other methods to obtain it, it is not possible to use similar things in the past as an analogy, and it is not possible to observe the position of the sun, moon and stars to verify it. It must be obtained from those who know the enemy's situation.

古文：故用间有五：有因间，有内间，有反间，有死间，有生间。
现代文：使用间谍有五种：有因间，有内间，有反间，有死间，有生间。
English: There are five ways to use spies: causally, internally, adversely, mortally, and vitally.

古文：五间俱起，莫知其道，是谓神纪，人君之宝也。
现代文：五种间谍同时都使用起来，便敌人莫测高深而无从应付，这是神妙的道理，是国君制胜敌人的法宝。
English: If all five types of spies are used at the same time, the enemy will be overwhelmed and unable to cope. This is a miraculous truth, and is the magic weapon for the sovereign to defeat the enemy.

古文：因间者，因其乡人而用之。
现代文：所谓因间，是指利用敌国乡里的普通人做间谍。
English: The so-called "causality" refers to the use of ordinary people in the countryside of the enemy country as spies.

古文：内间者，因其官人而用之。
现代文：所谓内间，是指收买敌国的官吏做间谍。
English: The so-called "inside job" refers to bribing an official of an enemy country to act as a spy.

古文：反间者，因其敌间而用之。
现代文：所谓反间，是指收买或利用敌方派来的间谍为我效力。
English: The so-called counter-espionage means buying or using spies sent by the enemy to work for me.

古文：死间者，为诳事于外，令吾间知之，而传于敌间也。
现代文：所谓死间，是指故意散布虚假情况，让我方间谍知道而传给敌方，敌人上当后往往将其处死。
English: The so-called dead zone refers to the deliberate dissemination of false information, which is known to our spies and passed on to the enemy, who are often executed after falling for the trick.

古文：生间者，反报也。
现代文：所谓生间，是指派往敌方侦察后能活着回报敌情的。
English: The so-called "lifetime" refers to being able to return hostile feelings alive after being sent to the enemy for reconnaissance.

古文：故三军之事，莫亲于间，赏莫厚于间，事莫密于间。
现代文：所以军队人事中，没有比间谍再亲信的，奖赏没有比间谍更优厚的，事情没有比用间更机密的。
English: Therefore, in military personnel, there is nothing more intimate than a spy, no reward is more generous than a spy, and there is nothing more confidential than an office.

古文：非圣智不能用间，非仁义不能使间，非微妙不能得间之实。
现代文：不是才智过人的将帅不能使用间谍；不是仁慈慷慨的将帅也不能使用间谍；不是用心精细、手段巧妙的将帅不能取得间谍的真实情报。
English: It is not the most intelligent general who cannot use spies; it is not the most benevolent and generous general who cannot use spies; it is not the most careful and skilful general who cannot obtain true information from spies.

古文：微哉！
现代文：微妙啊！
English: Subtle!

古文：微哉！
现代文：微妙啊！
English: Subtle!

古文：无所不用间也。
现代文：真是无处不可使用间谍呀！
English: There is no place for spies!

古文：间事未发，而先闻者，间与所告者皆死。
现代文：用间的计谋尚未施行，就被泄露出去，间谍和知道机密的人都要处死。
English: Secret plans are revealed before they are carried out, and spies and those who know secrets are put to death.

古文：凡军之所欲击，城之所欲攻，人之所欲杀，必先知其守将，左右，谒者，门者，舍人之姓名，令吾间必索知之。
现代文：凡是要攻击的敌方军队，要攻的敌人城邑，要斩杀的敌方人员，必须预先了解那些守城将帅、左右亲信、掌管传达、通报的官员、负责守门的官吏以及门客幕僚的姓名，命令我方间谍一定要侦察清楚。
English: All the enemy troops to be attacked, the enemy cities to be attacked, and the enemy personnel to be killed must know in advance the names of those garrison commanders, right and left confidants, officials in charge of communication and notification, officials responsible for gatekeeping, and gatekeeper staff, and order our spies to investigate clearly.

古文：必索敌人之间来间我者，因而利之，导而舍之，故反间可得而用也。
现代文：必须搜索出敌方派来侦察我方的间谍，以便依据情况进行重金收买、优礼款待，要经过诱导交给任务，然后放他回去，这样，反间就可以为我所用了。
English: We must search out the spy sent by the enemy to spy on our side, so that, according to the situation, we can make heavy money and hospitality, induce him to hand over the task, and then let him go back, so that it can be used for me.

古文：因是而知之，故乡间、内间可得而使也；因是而知之，故死间为诳事，可使告敌。
现代文：从反间那里得知敌人情况之后，所以乡间、内间就可得以使用了。因从反间那里得知敌人情况，所以散布给死间的虚假情况就可以传给敌人。
English: After learning the enemy's situation from the enemy, the village and the village can be used. Because the enemy's situation is learned from the enemy, the false situation spread to the dead can be transmitted to the enemy.

古文：因是而知之，故生间可使如期。
现代文：因从反间那里得知敌人情况，所以生间就可遵照预定的期限，回来报告敌情。
English: Because he learned about the enemy situation from the enemy, he could return to report the enemy situation according to the predetermined time limit.

古文：五间之事，主必知之，知之必在于反间，故反间不可不厚也。
现代文：五种间谍使用之事，国君都必须懂得，其中的关键在于会用反间。所以，对反间不可不给予优厚的待遇。
English: There are five kinds of spies that a sovereign must know how to use, and the key to all of them is knowing how to use spies. Therefore, spies must be treated well.

古文：昔殷之兴也，伊挚在夏；周之兴也，吕牙在殷。
现代文：从前商朝的兴起，是由于重用了在夏为臣的伊尹；周朝的兴起，是由于重用了在殷为官的姜子牙。
English: The rise of the former Shang Dynasty was due to the repeated use of Yi Yin, who was a vassal in Xia; the rise of the Zhou Dynasty was due to the repeated use of Jiang Ziga, who was an official in Yin.

古文：故惟明君贤将，能以上智为间者，必成大功。
现代文：所以，明智的国君、贤能的将帅，能用极有智谋的人做间谍，一定能成就大的功业。
English: Therefore, a wise sovereign, a capable general, who can use a very resourceful person as a spy, will certainly be able to accomplish great feats.

古文：此兵之要，三军之所恃而动也。
现代文：这是用兵作战的重要一着，整个军队都要依靠间谍提供情报而采取行动。
English: This is an important part of using soldiers to fight, and the entire army has to rely on spies to provide information and take action.

