古文：二年春，晋侯使韩起来聘。
现代文：二年春季，晋侯派遣韩起来鲁国聘问。
English: In the spring of the second year, Jinhou sent Han to Lu to ask questions.

古文：夏，叔弓如晋。
现代文：夏季，叔弓去到晋国。
English: In the summer, Shukyu went to Jin Province.

古文：秋，郑杀其大夫公孙黑。
现代文：秋季，郑国杀了自己的大夫公孙黑。
English: In autumn, Zheng Guo killed his own doctor, Gongsun Hei.

古文：冬，公如晋，至河乃复。
现代文：冬季，昭公去晋国，到达河乃就回来了。
English: In the winter, Shoko went to Jin Province and returned to Kawanoe.

古文：季孙宿如晋。
现代文：季孙宿去晋国。
English: Ji Sunjuku went to Jin Province.

古文：二年春，晋侯使韩宣子来聘，且告为政而来见，礼也。
现代文：二年春季，晋平公派韩宣子来鲁国聘问，同时报告他掌握国政，因此来进见，这是合于礼的。
English: In the spring of the second year, Jinping sent Han Xuan Zi to Lu to ask for advice, and at the same time reported that he was in charge of state affairs, so he came to visit, which was proper.

古文：观书于大史氏，见《易象》与《鲁春秋》，曰： 周礼尽在鲁矣。吾乃今知周公之德，与周之所以王也。 
现代文：韩宣子在太史那里观看书籍，看到《易》、《像》和《鲁春秋》，说： 《周礼》都在鲁国了，我现在才知道周公的德行和周朝的所以能成就王业的缘故了。 
English: Han Xuan Zi looked at the books in Taishi, saw "Easy," "Image" and "Lu Chunqiu," and said: "Zhou Li" are all in Lu. I now know the virtue of Zhou Gong and the reason why the Zhou Dynasty was able to achieve kingship.

古文：公享之。季武子赋《绵》之卒章。
现代文：昭公设享礼招待他，季武子赋《绵》的最后一章。
English: Akimoto invited him to a reception, and the last chapter of "Mame" by Ji Mushi Fu was read.

古文：韩子赋《角弓》。
现代文：韩宣子赋《角弓》这首诗。
English: The poem "Horned Bow" by Han Xuan Zi.

古文：季武子拜曰： 敢拜子之弥缝敝邑，寡君有望矣。 
现代文：季武子参拜说： 谨敢拜谢您弥补敝邑，寡君有了希望了。 
English: Jiwuko said, "I dare to thank you for making up for my loss. I now have hope.

古文：武子赋《节》之卒章。
现代文：季武子赋了《节》的最后一章。
English: The last chapter of "Section" was written by Ji Takeko.

古文：既享，宴于季氏，有嘉树焉，宣子誉之。
现代文：享礼完毕，在季武子家里饮宴。有一棵好树，韩宣子赞美它。
English: After the ceremony, there was a banquet at Ji Wuzi's home. There was a good tree, and Han Xuan Zi praised it.

古文：武子曰： 宿敢不封殖此树，以无忘《角弓》。 
现代文：季武子说： 宿岂敢不培植这棵树，以不忘记《角弓》。 
English: Jiwuko said, "How dare the inn not nurture this tree, so as not to forget "Square Bow."

古文：遂赋《甘棠》。
现代文：就赋了《甘棠》这首诗。
English: This is how the poem "Sweet Pea" came into being.

古文：宣子曰： 起不堪也，无以及召公。 
现代文：韩宣子说： 起不敢当，赶不上召公。 
English: Han Xuan Zi said: "I dare not do it, I can't catch up with the call to public service.

古文：宣子遂如齐纳币。
现代文：韩宣子于是就到齐国奉献财礼。
English: As a result, Han Xuan Zi went to Qi Province to offer financial gifts.

古文：见子雅。
现代文：进见子雅。
English: Jinmi Zi Ya.

古文：子雅召子旗，使见宣子。
现代文：子雅召见子旗，让他拜见韩宣子。
English: Zoya summoned Ziqi and asked him to meet Han Xuan Zi.

古文：宣子曰： 非保家之主也，不臣。 
现代文：韩宣子说： 这不是保住家族的大夫，不像个臣子。 
English: Han Xuan Zi said: This is not a doctor who preserves the family, it's not like a courtier.

古文：见子尾。
现代文：进见子尾。
English: Jinmi Zio began to sing.

古文：子尾见彊。
现代文：子尾让彊拜见韩宣子。
English: Zio lets Obai meet Han Xuan Zi.

古文：宣子谓之如子旗。大夫多笑之。唯晏子信之，曰： 夫子，君子也。
现代文：韩宣子对他的评价像对子旗的一样，大夫大多讥笑他，只有晏子相信他，说： 韩先生是个君子。
English: Han Xuan Zi's evaluation of him was like that of a pennant. Most doctors ridiculed him, but only the cripples believed him, saying, "Mr. Han is a gentleman."

古文：君子有信，其有以知之矣。 
现代文：君子有诚心，他是很了解的。 
English: A gentleman has sincerity, he knows it very well.

古文：自齐聘于卫。
现代文：韩宣子从齐国到卫国聘问。
English: Han Xuan Zi went from Qi to Wei.

古文：卫侯享之，北宫文子赋《淇澳》。宣子赋《木瓜》。
现代文：卫襄公设享礼招待他。北宫文子赋《淇澳》这首诗，韩宣子赋《木瓜》这首诗。
English: Wei Xiang publicly held a banquet to invite him. The poem "Qi Ao" by Bei Gong Fanzi Fu, and the poem "Papaya" by Han Xuan Zi Fu.

古文：夏四月，韩须如齐逆女。
现代文：夏季，四月，韩须到齐国迎接齐女少姜。
English: In the summer, in April, Han Su came to Qi Province to meet Qi Nian Shao Jiang.

古文：齐陈无宇送女，致少姜。
现代文：齐国的陈无宇送少姜，把她送到晋国。
English: Chen Wuyu of Qi sent Shao Jiang and she was sent to Jin.

古文：少姜有宠于晋侯，晋侯谓之少齐。
现代文：晋平公宠爱少姜，晋平公称她为少齐。
English: Jinping loved Shao Jiang, and publicly called her Shao Qi.

古文：谓陈无宇非卿，执诸中都。
现代文：认为陈无宇不是卿，把他在中都抓了起来。
English: They thought that Chen Wuyu was not a noble and arrested him in the middle of the street.

古文：少姜为之请曰： 送从逆班，畏大国也，犹有所易，是以乱作。 
现代文：少姜为他请求，说： 送亲的人地位同于迎亲的人。由于害怕大国，还有一些改变，因此才发生了混乱。 
English: Shao Jiang pleaded for him, saying: "The status of those who send relatives is the same as that of those who welcome relatives. Due to the fear of big countries, there are still some changes, which is why the confusion occurred.

古文：叔弓聘于晋，报宣子也。
现代文：叔弓到晋国聘问，这是为了回报韩宣子前来聘问的缘故。
English: Shukyu went to Jin Province to ask questions. This was in return for Han Xuan Zi's coming to ask questions.

古文：晋侯使郊劳。辞曰： 寡君使弓来继旧好，固曰： 女无敢为宾！ 彻命于执事，敝邑弘矣，敢辱郊使？
现代文：晋平公派人在郊外慰劳，叔弓辞谢说： 寡君派弓前来重修过去的友好，坚持说 你不能作为宾客 ，只要把命令上达给执事，敝邑就大有光彩了，岂敢烦劳郊使？
English: Jinping sent people to work in the suburbs, and the uncle bowed his thanks and said: The oligarch sent a bow to come and rebuild the past friendship, insisting that you can not be a guest, as long as you give the order to the deacon, the county will be very glorious, do you dare to bother the suburban envoy?

古文：请辞。 
现代文：请允许辞谢。 
English: Please allow me to thank you.

古文：致馆。辞曰： 寡君命下臣来继旧好，好合使成，臣之禄也。
现代文：请他住宾馆，叔弓辞谢说： 寡君命令下臣前来重修过去的友好，友好结合，使命完成，这就是下臣的福禄了。
English: Inviting him to stay at the hotel, the uncle bowed his head and said, "The widower ordered his vassal to come and restore the past friendship, friendly union, mission accomplished, this is the vassal's blessing."

古文：敢辱大馆？ 
现代文：岂敢住进宏大的宾馆！ 
English: How dare they live in a grand hotel!

古文：叔向曰： 子叔子知礼哉！
现代文：叔向说： 子叔子懂得礼啊！
English: Uncle Xiang said: Uncle Zi knows how to salute!

古文：吾闻之曰： 忠信，礼之器也。卑让，礼之宗也。 
现代文：我听说： 忠信是礼的容器，卑让是礼的根本。 
English: I have heard: Loyalty is the container of etiquette, and deference is the foundation of etiquette.

古文：辞不忘国，忠信也。
现代文：言辞不忘记国家，这是忠信。
English: Words do not forget the country, this is loyalty.

古文：先国后己，卑让也。
现代文：先国家后自己，这是卑让。
English: Putting the country first and oneself second, this is abject surrender.

古文：《诗》曰： 敬慎威仪，以近有德。 
现代文：《诗》说： 不要滥用威仪，以亲近有德的人。 
English: "Poetry" says: Don't abuse your dignity to get close to virtuous people.

古文：夫子近德矣。 
现代文：先生已经接近贤德了。 
English: Sensei is close to being virtuous.

古文：秋，郑公孙黑将作乱，欲去游氏而代其位，伤疾作而不果。
现代文：秋季，郑国的公孙黑准备发动叛乱，想要去掉游氏而代替他的地位，由于旧伤发作，而没有实现。
English: In the autumn, Zheng's Gongsun Hei prepared to launch a rebellion, wanting to remove You and replace his position, but due to old injuries, it did not materialize.

古文：驷氏与诸大夫欲杀之。
现代文：驷氏和大夫们想要杀死公孙黑。
English: Mr. Zou and the doctors wanted to kill Gongsunhei.

古文：子产在鄙闻之，惧弗及，乘遽而至。
现代文：子产正在边境，听说了这件事，害怕赶不到，乘坐了传车到达。
English: Zifang was at the border, heard about the incident, was afraid of not being able to catch up, and took a shuttle bus to arrive.

古文：使吏数之曰： 伯有之乱，以大国之事，而未尔讨也。
现代文：让官吏历数他的罪状，说： 伯有那次动乱，由于当时正致力于事奉大国，因而没有讨伐你。
English: Let the magistrate enumerate his offenses, saying: He committed the sedition, and because he was engaged in the service of a great power, he did not fight against you.

古文：尔有乱心，无厌，国不女堪。
现代文：你有祸乱之心不能满足，国家对你不能容忍。
English: Your mischievous heart cannot be satisfied, and the state cannot tolerate you.

古文：专伐伯有，而罪一也。
现代文：专权而攻打伯有，这是你罪状的第一条。
English: This is the first article of your indictment.

古文：昆弟争室，而罪二也。
现代文：兄弟争夺妻子，这是你罪状的第二条。
English: Sibling rivalry over a wife. That's count two of your indictment.

古文：薰隧之盟，女矫君位，而罪三也。
现代文：薰隧的盟会，你假托君位，这是你罪状的第三条。
English: The League of Infiltrators, you pretend to be a monarch, this is the third article of your crime.

古文：有死罪三，何以堪之？
现代文：有了死罪三条，怎么能够容忍？
English: With three articles of capital punishment, how can it be tolerated?

古文：不速死，大刑将至。 
现代文：你不快点去死，死刑就会到你的头上。 
English: If you don't hurry up and die, the death penalty will be on your head.

古文：再拜稽首辞曰： 死在朝夕，无助天为虐。 
现代文：公孙黑再拜叩头，推托说： 我早晚就死，不要帮着上天来虐待我。 
English: Gongsun He bowed again and said, "I will die sooner or later, don't abuse me with the help of heaven."

古文：子产曰： 人谁不死。
现代文：子产说： 人谁不死！
English: The midwife said, "Whoever doesn't die!

古文：凶人不终，命也。
现代文：凶恶的人不得善终，这是天命。
English: It is the fate of the wicked to meet an untimely end.

古文：作凶事，为凶人。
现代文：做了凶恶的事情，就是凶恶的人。
English: He who does a wicked thing is a wicked man.

古文：不助天，其助凶人乎？ 
现代文：不帮着上天，难道帮着凶恶的人？ 
English: If you do not help heaven, do you help the wicked?

古文：请以印为褚师。
现代文：公孙黑请求让其子印担任褚师的官职。
English: Gongsunhei requested that his son, Yin, be given the official position of gongshi.

古文：子产曰： 印也若才，君将任之。
现代文：子产说：印如果有才能，国君将会任命他。
English: "If there is talent in India, the king will appoint him," he said.

古文：不才，将朝夕从女。
现代文：如果没有才能，将会早晚跟你去。
English: If you don't have talent, it will follow you sooner or later.

古文：女罪之不恤，而又何请焉？
现代文：你对自己的罪过不担心，而又请求什么？
English: What do you ask for when you are not worried about your sins?

古文：不速死，司寇将至。 
现代文：不快点去死，司寇将要来到了。 
English: Hurry up and die, Scrooge is coming.

古文：七月壬寅，缢。
现代文：七月初一日，公孙黑上吊死了。
English: On the first day of July, Gongsun Hei hanged himself.

古文：尸诸周氏之衢，加木焉。
现代文：暴尸在周氏地方的要道上，把写着罪状的木头放在尸体上。
English: On the main road in Zhou's area, the thugs placed a piece of wood with the charges written on it on the corpse.

古文：晋少姜卒。
现代文：晋国的少姜死了。
English: Jin Province's Shao Jiang has died.

古文：公如晋，及河。晋侯使士文伯来辞曰： 非伉俪也。请君无辱！ 
现代文：鲁昭公要到晋国去吊唁，到达黄河，晋平公派士文伯来辞谢，说： 不是正式的配偶，请您不必光临。 
English: Lu Zhaogong wanted to go to Jin Province to offer condolences. When he arrived at the Yellow River, Jin Ping Gong sent Wenbo to thank him and said, "You are not an official spouse, please do not come."

古文：公还，季孙宿遂致服焉。
现代文：昭公回国，季孙宿就送去了少姜下葬的衣服。
English: When Zhaogong returned to China, Ji Sunjuku sent the clothes for Shao Jiang's burial.

古文：叔向言陈无宇于晋侯曰： 彼何罪？
现代文：叔向对晋平公谈论陈无宇说： 他有什么罪？
English: My uncle said to Jin Ping Gong about Chen Wu Yu: What is his crime?

古文：君使公族逆之，齐使上大夫送之。犹曰不共，君求以贪。
现代文：君王派公族大夫迎亲，齐国派上大夫送亲，还说不恭敬，君王的要求也太过分了。
English: The monarch sent a public doctor to meet the relatives, and the Qi government sent a doctor to see off the relatives, and said that it was not respectful, and the requirements of the monarch were too excessive.

古文：国则不共，而执其使。君刑已颇，何以为盟主？
现代文：我国自己就不恭敬，反而把齐国的使者抓起来，君王的刑罚太偏了，怎么做盟主？
English: Our country does not respect itself, but instead arrests the envoys of Qi. The punishment of the monarch is too biased. How should we deal with him?

古文：且少姜有辞。 
现代文：而且少姜曾经为他说过话的。 
English: And Shao Jiang had spoken for him.

古文：冬十月，陈无宇归。
现代文：冬季十月，陈无宇回国。
English: In the winter of October, Chen Wuyu returned to China.

古文：十一月，郑印段如晋吊。
现代文：十一月，郑国的印段到晋国去吊唁。
English: In November, the provincial governor of Zhengzhou went to Jin Province to offer condolences.

