古文：○宇文庆
现代文：○宇文庆
English: ○Uwen Qing

古文：宇文庆，字神庆，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：宇文庆，字神庆，是河南洛阳人。
English: Yu Wenqing, also known as Shenqing, is from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：祖金殿，魏征南大将军，仕历五州刺史、安吉侯。
现代文：祖父宇文金殿是北魏的征南大将军，历任五州刺史，被封为安吉侯。
English: His grandfather, Uwen Jinden, was a general of the Northern Wei Dynasty who conquered the south. He served as the governor of five states and was named the Prince of Anji.

古文：父显和，夏州刺史。
现代文：父亲宇文显和，夏州刺史。
English: His father, Yu Wenxianhe, was a scholar from Xiazhou.

古文：庆沉深有器局，少以聪敏见知。
现代文：宇文庆性格深沉，有器度，从小就以聪明敏捷出名。
English: Yu Wenqing has a deep personality and is organized. He has been famous for his intelligence and agility since he was a child.

古文：周初，受业东观，颇涉经史。
现代文：北周初年，受业于东观，很读了一些经书和史书。
English: In the first year of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he studied at Dongguan University and read a lot of scriptures and history books.

古文：既而谓人曰： 书足记姓名而已，安能久事笔砚，为腐儒之业！ 
现代文：不久，他对人说： 读书只不过记个姓名而已，我怎么能长久和笔墨纸砚打交道，做迂腐儒生的职业呢？ 
English: Before long, he said to someone: "Reading is nothing more than remembering a name. How can I deal with pen, ink and paper for a long time, and be a pedantic Confucian?

古文：于时文州民夷相聚为乱，庆应募从征。
现代文：那时文州的夷民聚集起来叛乱，宇文庆应召入伍，跟随部队打仗。
English: At that time, the barbarians in Wenzhou gathered to rebel, and Yu Wenqing was drafted into the army to fight alongside the troops.

古文：贼据保岩谷，径路悬绝，庆束马而进，袭破之，以功授都督。
现代文：贼兵据守险要的岸谷，没有道路可进去，宇文庆把马蹄裹起来秘密前进，出其不意地打败了贼兵，因为战功被授为都督。
English: The bandits were defending the vital Kishidani valley, and there was no road to enter it. Yu Wenqing wrapped his horse's hooves and secretly advanced. He unexpectedly defeated the bandits, and was awarded the title of governor-general for his war service.

古文：卫王直之镇山南也，引为左右。
现代文：卫王宇文直镇守华山之南，召引宇文庆当近臣。
English: The king of Wei, Uwen Zhi Zhen, guarded the south of Huashan and summoned Uwen Qing to be a close vassal.

古文：庆善射，有胆气，好格猛兽，直甚壮之。稍迁车骑大将军、仪同三司、柱国府掾。
现代文：宇文庆善长射箭，有胆略有气概，喜欢和凶猛的野兽格斗，卫王宇文直认为他是一个了不起的壮士，不久就迁升他为车骑大将军、仪同三司，做柱国府的属官。
English: Yu Wenqing was good at archery, brave and courageous, and liked to fight with ferocious beasts. Wei Wang Yu Wen Zhi thought he was a great strong man. Soon he was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry, the third division of ceremony and etiquette, and a subordinate official of the pillar state capital.

古文：及诛宇文护，庆有谋焉，进授骠骑大将军，加开府。
现代文：到诛杀宇文护，宇文庆曾参与谋划，升为骠骑大将军，加授开府。
English: When it came to the assassination of Uwen Rong, Uwen Qing had participated in the planning, was promoted to the general of the cavalry, and was awarded the post of prefect.

古文：后从武帝攻河阴，先登攀堞，与贼短兵接战，良久，中石乃坠，绝而后苏。
现代文：后来跟从武帝攻打河阴，他率先攀登城上的矮墙，和敌人短兵相接。过了好久，被城上石块击中坠落，昏死，后又苏醒过来。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Wu to attack Heyin. He was the first to climb the low wall on the city, and met the enemy soldiers. After a long time, he was hit by a stone on the city, fell down, fainted, and then woke up.

古文：帝劳之曰： 卿之馀勇，可以贾人也。 
现代文：武帝慰问他说： 你表现得很出色，真可谓余勇可嘉！ 
English: Emperor Wu consoled him, saying, "You have performed very well, and it is truly commendable that you are so brave!

古文：复从武帝拔晋州。其后齐师大至，庆与宇文宪轻骑而觇，卒与贼相遇，为贼所窘。
现代文：宇文庆又跟从武帝攻克晋州，不久北齐的大部队到来，宇文庆和宇文宪率轻骑侦察敌情，猝然和敌兵相遇，被敌人包围，形势窘迫。
English: Wu Wenqing also followed Emperor Wu to conquer Jinzhou, and soon the large forces of Northern Qi arrived. Wu Wenqing and Wu Wenxian rode lightly to investigate the enemy situation, and suddenly encountered the enemy soldiers. They were surrounded by the enemy, and the situation was in dire straits.

古文：宪挺身而遁，庆退据汾桥，众贼争进，庆引弓射之，所中人马必倒，贼乃稍却。
现代文：宇文宪脱身而逃，宇文庆退守汾桥，敌人争相前进，宇文庆拉开弓射击，射一个倒一个，敌人这才渐渐退却。
English: Uwen Xian escaped and fled, Uwen Qing retreated to defend the bridge, the enemy scrambled forward, Uwen Qing pulled the bow and shot, shot one after another, and the enemy gradually retreated.

古文：及破高纬，拔高壁，克并州，下信都，禽高湝，功并居最。
现代文：宇文庆在攻破高纬、拿下高壁、攻克并州、夺取信都、擒住高氵皆这些战斗中，功劳最大。
English: In breaking through the high latitude, winning the high wall, conquering and annexing the prefecture, seizing Xindu, and capturing Gaozhou, Uwenqing has the greatest merit in these battles.

古文：周武帝诏曰： 庆勋庸早著，英望华远，出内之绩，简在朕心。
现代文：周武帝下诏说： 宇文庆功勋卓著，杰出的名望像日光一样照得很远，他所创建的业绩一一在我内心。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu issued a decree saying: "Uwenqing's achievements are outstanding, and his outstanding reputation shines as far away as the sun. The achievements he created are in my heart.

古文：戎车自西，俱总行阵，东夏荡定，实有茂功。
现代文：自从部队从西出发，他总是总领部队。东夏被平定，确实有丰功伟绩。
English: Since the troops set out from the west, he always led the troops. Dongxia was pacified, and there were indeed great achievements.

古文：高位缛礼，宜崇荣册。 
现代文：应该册封他高位，给予他重礼。 
English: He should be ennobled and given a knighthood.

古文：于是进位大将军，封汝南郡公，邑千六百户。
现代文：于是升官为大将军，封为汝南郡公，食邑一千六百户。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the rank of general and appointed as the county magistrate of Runan County, with 1,600 households in the county.

古文：寻以行军总管击延安反胡，平之，拜延州总管。
现代文：不久，又以行军总管的身份攻打延安反叛的胡人，平定了叛乱，于是授给他延州总管的官职。
English: Soon after, he attacked the rebellious Hu people in Yan'an in his capacity as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops, quelled the rebellion, and was then given the official position of the commander-in-chief of Yanzhou.

古文：俄转宁州总管。
现代文：不久转任宁州总管。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Ningzhou General Manager.

古文：高祖为丞相，复以行军总管南征江表。师次白帝，征还，以劳进位上大将军。
现代文：高祖当丞相后，宇文庆又以行军总管的职务征讨江南，驻军白帝，被调回，因功劳升为上大将军。
English: After Gao Zu became chancellor, Yu Wenqing also went to the south of the Yangtze River to recruit troops and garrison Emperor Baidu, and was transferred back, and was promoted to general for his merits.

古文：高祖与庆有旧，甚见亲待，令督丞相军事，委以心腹。寻加柱国。
现代文：高祖和宇文庆有老交情，因此对他很亲近，令他掌管丞相府的军中事务，当作自己的心腹，不久加官为柱国。
English: Gaozu had an old friendship with Uwenqing, so he was very close to him. He put him in charge of the military affairs of the prime minister's office, as his confidant, and soon he was promoted to the pillar state.

古文：开皇初，拜左武卫将军，进位上柱国。数年，出除凉州总管。岁余，征还，不任以职。
现代文：开皇初年，授职为左武卫将军，升任上柱国，几年以后，出任凉州总管，一年多后被征还朝，没有任命他官职。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he was given the post of General Zuowei, promoted to Shangzhuang, and a few years later, he served as the chief administrator of Liangzhou. More than a year later, he was conscripted back to the government, but he was not appointed to an official post.

古文：初，上潜龙时，尝从容与庆言及天下事，上谓庆曰： 天元实无积德，视其相貌，寿亦不长。加以法令繁苛，耽恣声色，以吾观之，殆将不久。
现代文：当初，高祖还没有登基的时候，曾经和宇文庆闲谈天下大事，高祖对宇文庆说： 天元帝没有积什么德，以面相来看他的寿命也不会长，再加上他的法令制度条款又多又苛刻，他又纵情声色，依我看来，他的皇位大概不会长久。
English: At the beginning, when Gaozu had not yet ascended to the throne, he used to chat with Yu Wenqing about the world's major events. Gaozu said to Yu Wenqing: Emperor Tianyuan has not accumulated any virtue. Judging from his face, his life expectancy will not be long. In addition, his laws and regulations are many and harsh, and he is sexually promiscuous. In my opinion, his throne will probably not last long.

古文：又复诸侯微弱，各令就国，曾无深根固本之计。羽翮既剪，何能及远哉！
现代文：再加上诸侯力量微弱，又让他们都到封地去，并无使国家根基稳固的计策，皇上这些羽翼既被翦除，怎么能长久享国呢？
English: Coupled with the fact that the power of the princes was weak, and that they were all allowed to go to their fiefdoms, there was no strategy to make the foundation of the country stable. Once these wings of the emperor had been removed, how could he enjoy the country for a long time?

古文：尉迥贵戚，早著声望，国家有衅，必为乱阶。然智量庸浅，子弟轻佻，贪而少惠，终致亡灭。
现代文：尉迟迥是贵戚，早著声望，国家一旦有什么争端，他必定会成为乱臣，但是他的才智肤浅，子弟们轻薄，对老百姓贪婪而缺少恩惠，最终也将灭亡。
English: If there is any dispute in the country, he will certainly become a chaotic vassal, but his talent is shallow, his children are light, he is greedy for the people and lacks favor, and he will eventually perish.

古文：司马消难反覆之虏，亦非池内之物，变成俄顷，但轻薄无谋，未能为害，不过自窜江南耳。
现代文：司马消难是反复无常的家伙，也不是甘心当池中之鱼的人，时刻都有可能叛变，但是此人轻薄无谋，不足以成为大的祸害，只不过会自己逃窜到长江以南罢了。
English: Sima Qidang is a fickle fellow, and not one who is willing to be a fish in the pond. There is always the possibility of rebellion, but this person is frivolous and reckless, not enough to become a big scourge, but he will escape to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：庸、蜀险隘，易生艰阻，王谦愚蠢，素无筹略，但恐为人所误，不足为虞。 
现代文：庸关、蜀地险要狭隘，很容易成为坚固的屏障，但是身居那里的王谦愚蠢，一向不会筹划方略，只不过怕被别人所利用，他本人不值得担心什么。 
English: Yongguan and Shu are narrow and can easily become a solid barrier, but Wang Qian, who lives there, is stupid and has never been able to plan a strategy, but he is afraid of being used by others, and he himself is not worth worrying about.

古文：未几，上言皆验。
现代文：不久，高祖的话被一一应验了。
English: Soon, all of his predictions came true.

古文：及此，庆恐上遗忘，不复收用，欲见旧蒙恩顾，具录前言为表而奏之曰： 臣闻智侔造化，二仪无以隐其灵；明同日月，万象不能藏其状。
现代文：现在，宇文庆怕高祖忘掉了这些话，再不任用他了，想使皇上看在老交情的份上再宠信自己，于是将高祖以前说的话记下来写成表章，呈给皇上，说： 我听说一个人的智慧如果同自然造化相等齐，那么天地就没法隐埋他的灵气，他像日月一样明亮，世间万物不能隐藏他的形状。
English: Now, fearing that Gao Zu had forgotten these words and would no longer appoint him, Yu Wenqing wanted the emperor to look at him as an old friend and trust him again. So he wrote down Gao Zu's previous words and presented them to the emperor, saying: I heard that if a person's wisdom is equal to that of natural creation, then heaven and earth cannot hide his aura. He is as bright as the sun and moon, and everything in the world cannot hide his shape.

古文：先天弗违，实圣人之体道；未萌见兆，谅达节之神机。
现代文：上天的意志是不能违背的，是圣人能够体验到的，事情没显现出来就能看出它的迹象，您确实明白神机的关键。
English: God's will is inviolable, it can be experienced by a saint, you can see the signs of things before they appear, and you really understand the key to God's plan.

古文：伏惟陛下特挺生知，徇齐诞御，怀五岳其犹轻，吞八荒而不梗，蕴妙见于胸襟，运奇谟于掌握。
现代文：您具有独特的性情和杰出的智慧，超人的敏捷聪颖可以统治天下，胸怀五岳还嫌轻微，气吞八荒而不梗塞，胸中装满雄才伟略，运筹帷幄如举手之劳。
English: You have a unique temperament and outstanding wisdom, superhuman agility and ingenuity can rule the world, the heart of the five mountains is still not light, the breath is swallowed without obstruction, the chest is filled with great talent, and the operation is like lifting a hand.

古文：臣以微贱，早逢天眷，不以庸下，亲蒙推赤。
现代文：我本来微贱，早就承蒙陛下对我恩宠眷顾，不因为我庸俗低下，却向我推心置腹。
English: I am lowly, and I have long been favored by His Majesty. Not because I am vulgar and lowly, but because He has put His heart and soul into me.

古文：所奉成规，纤毫弗舛，寻惟圣虑，妙出蓍龟，验一人之庆有徵，实天子之言无戏。
现代文：您所奉行的成规，一点也没有差错，寻思您的预测，比占卦还要神妙，检验一个人的吉庆是有征兆的，实在是天子无戏言啊！
English: There is nothing wrong with the rules you follow. Looking for your prediction is even more miraculous than divination. There are signs to test a person's auspiciousness. It's really a miracle!

古文：其兄协因奏曰： 皛今已壮，不可在宫掖。 
现代文：可见您当天子是天意，我亲自看见了这些事的验证，实在是荣幸和高兴。 
English: You can see that it was God's will for you to be born on this day. I have personally seen the verification of these things, and it is truly an honor and a pleasure.

古文：帝曰： 皛安在？ 协曰： 在朝堂。 
现代文：皇上看了奏章后非常喜悦，下诏书说： 我与你，本来就很亲密，当时我心中的抱负和心里话，没有什么不对你讲的。
English: The Emperor was very pleased after reading the transcript, and said in the next imperial edict: I was very close to you originally, and there was nothing in my heart's desire and heartfelt words at that time that I did not tell you.

古文：帝不之罪，因召入，待之如初。
现代文：但说这些话是多年以前，你还能记在心中，今天看了表奏，我才回忆起昔日的交谈。
English: But those words were spoken many years ago, and you can still remember them in your heart. Today, when I watched the performance, I only remembered the old conversation.

古文：宇文化及弑逆之际，皛时在玄览门，觉变，将入奏，为门司所遏，不得时进。
现代文：怎么说的那些话，现在都成了实录。古代的人预先知道吉凶祸福，确实是可信的，我的话被验证了，自当属于偶然。
English: What I said is now a matter of record. The ancients knew in advance the auspicious and inauspicious, and it is indeed credible. My words have been verified, and they are accidental.

古文：会日瞑，宫门闭，退还所守。
现代文：你却没有忘记，充分表现了你对我的忠诚，我深深感觉得到你对我的好意，对你嘉尚是没有止境的。 
English: But you have not forgotten, and have fully demonstrated your loyalty to me. I deeply feel your kindness to me. There is no end to your generosity.

古文：俄而难作，皛与五十人赴之，为乱兵所害。
现代文：从这以后，皇上常常给予他优厚的待遇。后来，宇文庆死在家中。
English: From then on, the emperor often gave him generous treatment. Later, Yu Wenqing died at home.

古文：○李礼成
现代文：○李礼成
English: ○ Li Licheng

古文：李礼成，字孝谐，陇西狄道人也。凉王暠之六世孙。
现代文：李礼成，字孝谐，陇西狄道人，是凉王李嵩的第六代孙。
English: Li Licheng, a filial son, a disciple of Xidi Taoism, is the sixth generation grandson of Li Song, the King of Cool.

古文：祖延实，魏司徒。
现代文：他祖父李延实，是魏国的司徒。
English: His grandfather, Li Yanshi, was a monk in Wei.

古文：父彧，侍中。
现代文：他父亲李彧，是侍中。
English: His father, Li Xi, was a chamberlain.

古文：礼成年七岁，与姑之子兰陵太守荥阳郑颢随魏武帝入关。
现代文：礼成七岁时，与姑妈的儿子、兰陵太守荥阳人郑颢，随魏武帝入关。
English: When Li Rongcheng was seven years old, he and his aunt's son, Lanling Daju Yangren Zheng Qi, entered the imperial palace with Emperor Wu of Wei.

古文：颢母每谓所亲曰： 此兒平生未尝回顾，当为重器耳。 
现代文：郑颢的母亲常对亲近的人说： 礼成这孩子，平生不曾回头，以后当为国家的栋梁。 
English: Zheng Qi's mother often said to those close to her: "Li Cheng, this child, has never looked back in his life, and will be the pillar of the country in the future.

古文：及长，沉深有行检，不妄通宾客。
现代文：礼成长大后，深沉而行为检点，不随便交结人。
English: When Li grew up, he was deep-rooted and disciplined in his behavior, and did not socialize with people casually.

古文：魏大统中，释褐著作郎，迁太子洗马、员外散骑常侍。
现代文：西魏大统中，开始为官，当著作郎，升任太子洗马、员外散骑常侍。
English: In the Great Reign of the Western Wei Dynasty, he began to serve as an official, when he was a scribe, he was promoted to the prince's horse-washing, and he rode around as a regular attendant.

古文：周受禅，拜平东将军、散骑常侍。
现代文：北周受禅后，授他平东将军、散骑常侍。
English: After Northern Zhou accepted Zen, he was given the title of General Pingdong and the title of Zangjie Zhengzhu.

古文：于时贵公子皆竞习弓马，被服多为军容。
现代文：那时贵公子都竞相熟习弓马，服饰大多是军人打扮。
English: At that time, noblemen were all competing to become familiar with bows and horses, and most of the costumes were dressed as soldiers.

古文：礼成虽善骑射，而从容儒服，不失素望。
现代文：礼成虽然很善于骑马射箭，却是一身儒士打扮，不失平素的声望。
English: Although Li Cheng is very good at riding and archery, he is dressed as a Confucian and does not lose his reputation.

古文：后以军功拜车骑大将军、仪同三司，赐爵修阳县侯，拜迁州刺史。
现代文：后因军功，拜授车骑大将军、仪同三司，赐爵修阳县侯，授迁州刺史。
English: Later, because of his military exploits, he was awarded the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry, the title of General of the Three Departments, the title of Lord of Xiuyang County, and the title of Provincial Historian.

古文：时朝廷有所征发，礼成度以蛮夷不可扰，扰必为乱，上表固谏。
现代文：当时朝廷调兵，李礼成估计，蛮夷人不可打扰，打扰他们，势必为乱，因此上表朝廷劝谏。
English: At that time, the imperial court mobilized troops, and Li Licheng estimated that barbarians should not be disturbed, and disturbing them would inevitably lead to chaos. Therefore, the imperial court was advised.

古文：周武帝从之。
现代文：周武帝听了他的。
English: Emperor Zhou listened to him.

古文：伐齐之役，从帝围晋阳，礼成以兵击南门，齐将席毗罗率精甲数千拒帝，礼成力战，击退之。
现代文：讨伐北齐，他随皇上包围晋阳，礼成率兵进攻南门，北齐将领席毗罗率精兵几千抵抗周武帝，礼成力战，打退齐军。
English: He went with the emperor to besiege Jinyang, Li Cheng led the troops to attack the South Gate, the North Qi general Viro led thousands of elite soldiers to resist Emperor Zhou, Li Cheng fought hard and beat back the Qi army.

古文：加开府，进封冠军县公，拜北徐州刺史。
现代文：加授礼成开府，晋爵为冠军县公，授他北徐州刺史。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of "Champion County Magistrate" and the title of "Champion of North Xuzhou Province."

古文：未几，征为民部中大夫。
现代文：不久，调他当民部中大夫。
English: Soon, he was transferred to be a junior doctor in the Ministry of People's Affairs.

古文：礼成妻窦氏早没，知高祖有非常之表，遂聘高祖妹为继室，情契甚欢。
现代文：李礼成的妻子窦氏，早就死了。他知隋高祖非同常人，于是娶高祖的妹妹为继室，夫妻俩感情很好。
English: Li Licheng's wife Dou died a long time ago. He knew that Sui Gaozu was not an ordinary person, so he married Gaozu's sister as his second wife. The couple had a good relationship.

古文：及高祖为丞相，进位上大将军，迁司武上大夫，委以心膂。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相后，升他为上大将军，升他当司武上大夫，委以心腹。
English: After Sui Gaozu became the Minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was promoted to Senior General, and he was promoted to Senior Doctor of Sifu, entrusted to his confidant.

古文：及受禅，拜陕州刺史，进封绛郡公，赏赐优洽。
现代文：高祖受禅为帝，授他为陕州刺史，晋爵为绛郡公，给他的赏赐优厚。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen as the emperor, awarded him the title of Shaanxi Provincial Historian, and the title of Jinjie for the Duke of Jixian County, and gave him a generous reward.

古文：寻征为左卫将军，迁右武卫大将军。
现代文：继而调他当左卫将军，升任右武卫大将军。
English: Subsequently, he was transferred to the position of General of the Left Division and promoted to General of the Right Division.

古文：岁馀，出拜襄州总管，称有惠政。
现代文：过了一年多，出京授他当襄州总管，人称有仁惠之政。
English: After more than a year, he was sent to Beijing to serve as the governor of Xiangzhou, which was said to be a benevolent policy.

古文：后数载，复为左卫大将军。
现代文：几年后，又当左卫大将军。
English: A few years later, he became the General of the Left Division.

古文：时突厥屡为寇患，缘边要害，多委重臣，由是拜宁州刺史。
现代文：当时突厥屡屡进犯边塞，边疆的要害之处，大多交给重臣，因此授他为宁州刺史。
English: At that time, the Turks repeatedly attacked the border fortress, and the key points of the frontier were mostly handed over to the chief minister, so he was awarded the history of Ningzhou.

古文：岁馀，以疾征还京师，终于家。
现代文：过了一年多，因病调回京师，在家中去世。
English: After more than a year, he was transferred back to the capital due to illness, and passed away at home.

古文：其子世师，官至度支侍郎。
现代文：他的儿子李世师，官至度支侍郎。
English: His son, Li Shishi, was a high-ranking government official.

古文：○元孝矩弟褒元孝矩，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：○元孝矩元孝矩，河南洛阳人。
English: ○Moto TakanoriMoto Takanori is from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：祖修义，父子均，并为魏尚书仆射。
现代文：祖父元修义，父亲元子均，都是西魏的尚书仆射。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Xiuyi, and his father, Yuan Zijun, were both scholars in the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：孝矩西魏时袭爵始平县公，拜南丰州刺史。
现代文：在西魏时，孝矩袭爵为始平县公，授为南丰州刺史。
English: During the Western Wei Dynasty, Takanori was given the title of Shihei County official and the title of Southern Fuzhou magistrate.

古文：时见周太祖专政，将危元氏，孝矩每慨然有兴复社稷之志，阴谓昆季曰： 昔汉氏有诸吕之变，硃虚、东牟，卒安刘氏。
现代文：当时周太祖专权，将危及西魏元氏天下，孝矩常常慨然有兴复国家的壮志，私下里对众兄弟们说： 过去汉代有诸吕之变，朱虚、东牟最终安定了刘家天下。
English: At that time, Zhou Taizu's absolute power would endanger the Western Wei and Yuan dynasties. Xiao Rui often had a great ambition to recover the country, and said to his brothers in private: In the past Han Dynasty, there were changes in Zhu Lu, and Zhu Hui and Dong Mu finally stabilized the Liu dynasty.

古文：今宇文之心，路人所见，颠而不扶，焉用宗子？
现代文：现在宇文氏的心，连过路人都知道。国家要完了，还不快扶持，还要我们这些宗室干什么？
English: Now, even passers-by know Mr. Uwen's heart. The country wants to end, but it is not happy to support, what do we, the family, want?

古文：盍将图之？ 
现代文：我们将要对付他。 
English: We're going to deal with him.

古文：为兄则所遏，孝矩乃止。
现代文：被他兄长元则阻止，孝矩才作罢。
English: However, he was stopped by his brother Nagamoto, and only then did Takanori give up.

古文：其后周太祖为兄子晋公护娶孝矩妹为妻，情好甚密。
现代文：此后，周太祖为他兄长之子晋公宇文护娶元孝矩的妹妹为妻。夫妻感情很好。
English: After that, Zhou Taizu married the younger sister of his elder brother's son, Jin Gong Uwen, and the couple had a good relationship.

古文：及闵帝受禅，护总百揆，孝矩之宠益隆。
现代文：到北周孝闵帝受西魏禅让后，宇文护总理万机，元孝矩更加得宠。
English: After Emperor Xiaojun of the Northern Zhou Dynasty was ceded to the Western Wei Dynasty, Yuan Xiaojun was favored even more.

古文：及护诛，坐徙蜀。
现代文：宇文护被杀后，元孝矩坐罪流放到蜀。
English: After the murder of Uwen, Yuan Xiao-Ming was exiled to Shu.

古文：数战，征还京师，拜益州总管司马，转司宪大夫。
现代文：几年后，调回京师，授为益州总管司马，转任司宪大夫。
English: A few years later, he was transferred back to Beijing Division, and was awarded the title of Sima, the general manager of Yizhou, and was transferred to the post of Sima Doctor.

古文：高祖重其门地，娶其女为房陵王妃。
现代文：隋高祖很看重元孝矩的门第，娶他女儿为房陵王的王妃。
English: Sui Gao Zu attached great importance to the lineage of Yuan Xiao Jie and married his daughter as the princess of Fang Ling Wang.

古文：及高祖为丞相，拜少冢宰，进位柱国，赐爵洵阳郡公。
现代文：高祖为北周丞相后，授他为少冢宰，进位为柱国，赐爵为洵阳郡公。
English: After Gao Zu became the minister of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Shao Xizai, promoted to the position of pillar state, and given the title of Duke of Shenyang County.

古文：时房陵王镇洛阳，及上受禅，立为皇太子，令孝矩代镇。
现代文：当时房陵王杨勇镇守洛阳，到高祖受北周禅让时，立为皇太子，令孝矩代太子镇守洛阳。
English: At that time, Fangling Wang Yangyong was in charge of Luoyang, and when Gao Zu was ceded by Northern Zhou Zhen, he was made the crown prince, and Xiao Rui became the prince in charge of Luoyang.

古文：既而立其女为皇太子妃，亲礼弥厚。
现代文：继而立他女儿为皇太子妃，对他更加亲近礼遇。
English: He then made his daughter the crown princess, which brought him even closer to her.

古文：俄拜寿州总管，赐孝矩玺书曰： 扬、越氛昆，侵轶边鄙，争桑兴役，不识大猷。
现代文：不久授他为寿州总管，赐他盖有玉玺的书信说： 扬州、越州一带，阴阳相侵，侵犯边疆，争夺桑叶，大动干戈，不识大体。
English: He soon appointed him as the governor of Shoushou, and gave him a letter covered with jade, saying: In Yangzhou and Yuezhou, yin and yang are encroaching, encroaching on the border, competing for mulberry leaves, waging war, and not knowing the general situation.

古文：以公志存远略，今故镇边服，怀柔以礼，称朕意焉。 
现代文：因你心怀远略，所以让你镇守那里，请依礼怀柔，以符合我的心意。 
English: Because your heart is far away, so let you stay there, please follow the etiquette to suit my heart.

古文：时陈将任蛮奴等屡寇江北，复以孝矩领行军总管，屯兵于江上。
现代文：当时陈国将领任蛮奴等人屡次进犯江北，于是又以元孝矩兼任行军总管，驻兵于江上。
English: At that time, Chen Guozhong led the barbarians and others to repeatedly invade the north of the Yangtze River, so he also appointed Yuan Xiao Rui as the general manager of the march and stationed soldiers on the river.

古文：后数载，自以年老，筋力渐衰，不堪军旅，上表乞骸骨。
现代文：几年后，他自因年老，筋力渐衰，不堪军务，上表请求退休。
English: A few years later, he asked to retire because he was too old, his strength was fading, and he couldn't stand military service.

古文：孝矩次弟雅，字孝方，有文武干用。
现代文：转任泾州刺史。高祖下书说： 我知道你执意谦恭，因请求回到故里，我当天子，实在要靠你们这些元勋。
English: Gao Zu said in his letter: I know that you are determined to be humble, and because of your request to return to your hometown, my son, I really have to rely on you, the original heroes.

古文：开皇中，历左领左右将军、集沁二州刺史，封顺阳郡公。
现代文：正想委以重任，怎能让你这么早就赋闲，独自一个当谦谦君子呢？你若以为边境军务繁杂，就应迁到泾郡去，为我养德卧治泾州。 在泾州一年多，在官任上去世，时年五十九岁。谥号叫 简 。
English: If you think that the military affairs along the border are complicated, you should move to Bozhou County to cultivate virtue and govern Bozhou for me. After more than a year in Bozhou, he died in office at the age of fifty-nine. His nickname was Jane.

古文：季弟褒，最知名。
现代文：他儿子元无竭继承爵禄。
English: His son, Yuan Menglu, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：褒字孝整，便弓马，少有成人之量。
现代文：○元褒元褒字孝整，熟习弓马，年少即有成人的度量。
English: ○ Yuan hongyuan hongji filial piety, familiar with the bow and arrow, young people have the measure of adults.

古文：年十岁而孤，为诸兄所鞠养。
现代文：十岁而成为孤儿，为各位兄长所抚养。
English: He was orphaned at the age of ten and raised by his older brothers.

古文：性友悌，善事诸兄。
现代文：他性情友悌，殷勤地侍奉各位兄长。
English: He was a devoted friend and diligently served his brothers.

古文：诸兄议欲别居，褒泣谏不得，家素富，多金宝，褒无所受，脱身而出，为州里所称。
现代文：兄长们商议，想让他分居，他哭泣劝谏，不成。元家一向富有，多有金宝，元褒一样都不要，只身离家，被州里称赞。
English: His brothers and sisters tried to persuade him to separate, but he cried and pleaded with them, but to no avail. The Yuan family had always been rich and had a lot of gold and treasure. They did not want any reward, so he left home alone and was praised by the state.

古文：及长，宽仁大度，涉猎书史。
现代文：长大后，元褒宽厚大度，涉猎书史。
English: After growing up, Yuan Bo was generous and generous, dabbling in book history.

古文：仕周，官至开府、北平县公、赵州刺史。
现代文：仕北周，官至开府、北平县公、赵州刺史。
English: He served as the governor of Beiping County, the governor of Kaifu, the governor of Beiping County and the governor of Zhao Prefecture.

古文：及高祖为丞相，从韦孝宽击尉迥，以功超拜柱国，进封河间郡公，邑二千户。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相后，元褒随韦孝宽进攻尉迟迥，因有军功，越级提升为柱国，晋爵为河间郡公，食邑二千户。
English: After Sui Gaozu became the Northern Zhou Dynasty's prime minister, Yuan Bao followed Wei Xiaokuan to become an attack lieutenant, and because of his military achievements, he was promoted to pillar state, promoted to Kawama County, and served two thousand households.

古文：开皇二年，拜安州总管。
现代文：开皇二年，授为安州总管。
English: In the second year of the emperor's reign, he was awarded the post of Anzhou chief steward.

古文：岁馀，徙原州总管。
现代文：一年多后，调任原州总管。
English: A little more than a year later, he was transferred to the post of the former state chief administrator.

古文：有商人为贼所劫，其人疑同宿者而执之，褒察其色冤而辞正，遂舍之。
现代文：有个商人，被贼人偷窃，这个商人怀疑是一起住的人，而抓了他。元褒看他面有受冤之色而言辞正壮，于是放了他。
English: There was a merchant who was robbed by a thief. The merchant suspected that the thief was a roommate, and arrested him. Yuan Bao thought that he was innocent, so he let him go.

古文：商人诣阙讼褒受金纵贼，上遣使穷治之。
现代文：商人到朝廷告元褒受金放贼，皇上派使者去穷究。
English: The merchant went to the imperial court to report the thief, and the emperor sent an envoy to investigate.

古文：使者与褒俱诣京师，遂坐免官。
现代文：使者责问元褒说： 你为什么贪财而放走窃贼呢？ 
English: The messenger asked Yuanbo: "Why are you greedy and let the thief go?

古文：其盗寻发于他所，上谓褒曰： 公朝廷旧人，位望隆重，受金舍盗非善事，何至自诬也？ 
现代文：元褒立即承认自己这么做了，没有异词。使者与元褒一起到京师，元褒因过错被免职。
English: Yuanbo immediately admitted that he had done so, there was no contradiction. The envoy went to Beijing with Yuanbo, and Yuanbo was dismissed for misconduct.

古文：对曰： 臣受委一州，不能息盗贼，臣之罪一也。
现代文：那个窃贼不久在别处被抓。皇上对元褒说： 你是朝廷的老臣，地位、声望都很高。受金放贼不是好事，你为什么自己诬陷自己呢？ 
English: The thief was soon caught elsewhere. The emperor said to Yuanbao: You are a senior court official with a high status and reputation. It is not a good thing to accept money from a thief. Why did you frame yourself?

古文：州民为人所谤，不付法司，悬即放免，臣之罪二也。
现代文：元褒回答说： 我受托治理一州，不能平息盗贼，这是我的第一个罪过。州民被人诽谤，我不交给司法部门处理，就放了人，这是我的第二个罪过。
English: Yuanbo replied: I am entrusted to govern a state, I cannot quell the thieves, this is my first sin. The people of the state were slandered, I did not hand it over to the judicial department, I released people, this is my second sin.

古文：牵率愚诚，无顾形迹，不恃文书约束，至令为物所疑，臣之罪三也。
现代文：我自以为心里诚实，不避嫌疑，不用文书约束，以至被人怀疑，这是我的第三个罪过。
English: My third sin is to think that I am honest in my heart, that I do not avoid suspicion, that I do not need to be bound by documents, so that I am suspected.

古文：臣有三罪，何所逃责？
现代文：我有此三罪，怎能逃脱罪责？
English: If I have these three crimes, how can I escape culpability?

古文：臣又不言受赂，使者复将有所穷究，然则缧绁横及良善，重臣之罪，是以自诬。 
现代文：我如不说自己受贿，使者必然穷究，这样就会牵连很多好人，加重我的罪过。因此我自己诬陷自己。 
English: If the vassal does not say that he has been bribed, the emissary will certainly continue to pursue relentlessly, so that some innocent and good people will suffer the scourge of prison, which will also aggravate the crime of the vassal, so he falsely identified himself.

古文：上叹异之，称为长者。
现代文：皇上叹赏惊异很久，称赞他是忠厚的长者。
English: The emperor was very surprised and sighed, praising Yuanbo as an elder.

古文：十四年，以行军总管屯兵备边。
现代文：开皇十四年，他以行军总管身份屯兵防守边疆。
English: In the 14th year of the Emperor's reign, he led the troops to defend the frontier as the commander-in-chief.

古文：辽东之役，复以行军总管从汉王至柳城而还。
现代文：辽东战争中，他又以行军总管身份随汉王杨谅，到柳城而回。
English: In the Liaodong War, he followed Han King Yang Peng back to Liucheng as the commander-in-chief.

古文：仁寿初，嘉州夷、獠为寇，褒率步骑二万击平之。
现代文：仁寿初，嘉州的夷人、獠人为寇，元褒率领二万步兵、骑兵，打平了他们。
English: At the beginning of the Ren Shou era, the Jiazhou barbarians and barbarians invaded, and Yuan Bo led twenty thousand infantry and cavalry to defeat them.

古文：炀帝即位，拜齐州刺史，寻改为齐郡太守，吏民安之。
现代文：炀帝即位后，授他齐州刺史，继而改授齐郡太守，吏民很安定。
English: After Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, he was awarded the title of the History of Qizhou, and then the title of the Governor of Qizhou County. The officials and people were very stable.

古文：及兴辽东之役，郡官督事者前后相属，有西曹掾当行，诈疾，褒诘之，掾理屈，褒杖之，掾遂大言曰： 我将诣行在所，欲有所告。 
现代文：到发动辽东战争时，郡官督事前后相连。有个当西曹掾的应上前线，诈称有病，元褒质问他，西曹掾理屈，元褒让人用棍子打他，西曹掾于是大声说： 我将到行宫处去告你！ 
English: When the Liaodong War was launched, the county governors were connected in advance and behind. There was a local official who should go to the front line, fraudulently claimed to be ill, the former praised him, the former praised him, the former praised him, the former praised him, the former praised him, the former praised him, the former praised him, the former praised him, the former praised him, the former praised him, and the former praised him.

古文：褒大怒，因杖百馀，数日而死，坐是免官。
现代文：元褒大怒，因此打了他一百多棍。过了几天，西曹掾死了。
English: Yuan Bao was furious, so he beat him with more than a hundred sticks. A few days later, Xi Cao Rong died.

古文：卒于家，时年七十三。
现代文：元褒坐罪被免职，在家中去世，时年七十三岁。
English: He was removed from office for sedition and died at home at the age of 73.

古文：○郭荣郭荣，字长荣，自云太原人也。
现代文：郭荣字长荣，自称是太原人。
English: Guo Rong, alias Chang Rong, claims to be from Taiyuan.

古文：父徽，魏大统末为同州司马。
现代文：父亲郭徽，在西魏大统末年任同州司马。
English: His father, Guo Hui, served as Tongzhou Sima at the end of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：时武元皇帝为刺史，由是与高祖有旧。
现代文：当时隋高祖的父亲武元皇帝任刺史，因此与高祖有旧。
English: At that time, Sui Gaozu's father, Emperor Wuyuan, was still alive, so he was related to Gaozu.

古文：徽后官至洵州刺史、安城县公。
现代文：郭徽后来官至洵州刺史、安城县公。
English: Guo Hui later served as the governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of Ancheng County.

古文：及高祖受禅，拜太仆卿，数年，卒官。
现代文：到隋高祖受北周禅让时，授郭徽太仆卿。几年后，在官任上去世。
English: When Emperor Gaozu of the Sui Dynasty was transferred to the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was given the title of Guo Hui Taifuqing (太僕卿). A few years later, he died in office.

古文：荣容貌魁岸，外疏内密，与其交者多爱之。
现代文：郭荣体貌魁伟，外表粗心，内实细密，与他父亲交往的人，大多喜欢他。
English: Guo Rong is handsome, careless on the outside, and meticulous on the inside. Most people who interact with his father like him.

古文：周大冢宰宇文护引为亲信。
现代文：北周的大冢宰宇文护把他当作亲信。
English: North Zhou's grand vizier, Uwen Rong, treated him as a close confidant.

古文：护察荣谨厚，擢为中外府水曹参军。
现代文：宇文护发现郭荣谨慎忠厚，提拔他任中外府水曹参军。
English: Yu Wenguo found Guo Rong to be prudent and loyal, and promoted him to join the army.

古文：时齐寇屡侵，护令荣于汾州观贼形势。
现代文：当时北齐屡屡犯边，宇文护让郭荣在汾州观察贼人的形势。
English: At that time, North Qi repeatedly violated the border, and Uwen protection let Guo Rong observe the situation of thieves in Zhangzhou.

古文：时汾州与姚襄镇相去悬远，荣以为二城孤迥，势不相救，请于州镇之间更筑一城，以相控摄，护从之。
现代文：当时汾州和姚襄镇相距甚远，郭荣认为两城孤立，不能互相援救，请在汾州和姚襄镇之间另筑一城，以便控制形势，宇文护接受了这一建议。
English: At that time, Zhangzhou and Yaoxiang Town were very far apart. Guo Rong believed that the two cities were isolated and could not help each other. Please build another city between Zhangzhou and Yaoxiang Town in order to control the situation. Yu Wenzhou accepted this suggestion.

古文：俄而齐将段孝先攻陷姚襄、汾州二城，唯荣所立者独能自守。
现代文：不久齐将段孝先攻陷姚襄镇和汾州城，只有郭荣所筑之城独能自守。
English: Soon after, Duan Xiao first invaded Yaoxiang Town and Zhangzhou City, and only the city built by Guo Rong was able to defend itself.

古文：护作浮桥，出兵渡河，与孝先战。
现代文：宇文护作浮桥，出兵渡过黄河，与段孝先作战。
English: Uwen Guo made a pontoon bridge, sent troops across the Yellow River, and fought with Duan Xiaoxian.

古文：孝先于上流纵大筏以击浮桥，护令荣督便水者引取其筏。
现代文：段孝先在黄河上游放大筏以撞击浮桥，宇文护让郭荣督促习水性者牵开大筏。
English: Duan Xiao first enlarged the raft in the upper reaches of the Yellow River to hit the pontoon, and Uwen protection asked Guo Rongdu to urge water addicts to open the raft.

古文：以功授大都督。
现代文：郭荣因功被授大都督。
English: Guo Rong was awarded the title of Grand Governor for his achievements.

古文：护又以稽胡数为寇乱，使荣绥集之。
现代文：宇文护又因稽胡屡为边患，派郭荣安抚召集他们。
English: Uwen Guo also sent Guo Rong to pacify and convene them because Ji Hu was often a borderline case.

古文：荣于上郡、延安筑周昌、弘信、广安、招远、咸宁等五城，以遏其要路，稽胡由是不能为寇。
现代文：郭荣在上郡、延安修筑周昌、弘信、广安、招远、咸宁等五城，以遏其要路。稽胡从此不能为边患。
English: Guo Rong built Zhouchang, Hongxin, Guang'an, Zhaoyuan, Xianning and other five cities in Shangxian County and Yan'an to block its important route. Jihu can no longer be a border town.

古文：武帝亲总万机，拜宣纳中士。
现代文：周武帝亲统万机，拜郭荣为宣纳中士。
English: Zhou Wudi's relatives are all powerful, and Bai Guorong is Xuanna's sergeant.

古文：后从帝平齐，以战功，赐马二十匹，绵绢六百段，封平阳县男，迁司水大夫。
现代文：后随武帝平定齐国，因为战功，赐马二十匹，绵绢六百段，被封为平阳县男，升任司水大夫。
English: Later, following Emperor Wu's pacification of Qi, because of his war exploits, he was given twenty horses and six hundred pieces of cloth, was named the man of Pingyang County, and was promoted to the position of Sisui doctor.

古文：荣少与高祖亲狎，情契极欢，尝与高祖夜坐月下，因从容谓荣曰： 吾仰观玄象，俯察人事，周历已尽，我其代之。 
现代文：郭荣年少时与隋高祖亲近，感情很好，曾与高祖夜坐月下闲谈，高祖对郭荣说： 我仰观天象，俯察人事，周代将尽，我将取代他。 
English: When Guo Rong was young, he was close to Sui Gao Zu, and their feelings were very good. He used to sit and talk with Gao Zu at night. Gao Zu said to Guo Rong: I look up at the celestial bodies, and look down on people. The Zhou Dynasty is coming to an end, and I will replace him.

古文：荣深自结纳。
现代文：郭荣深深地与高祖结交。
English: Guo Rong deeply befriended Gao Zu.

古文：宣帝崩，高祖总百揆，召荣，抚其背而笑曰： 吾言验未？ 
现代文：周宣帝去世后，高祖总揽朝政，召来郭荣，抚着他的背而笑着说： 我的话验证了没有？ 
English: After the death of Emperor Zhou Xuan, Emperor Gaozong took over the government, summoned Guo Rong, stroked his back and said with a smile, "Have my words been verified?"

古文：即拜相府乐曹参军。
现代文：就拜授郭荣为相府乐曹参军。
English: He asked Guo Rong to join the army as Shofu Le Cao.

古文：俄以本官复领蕃部大夫。
现代文：不久又以本官兼任蕃部大夫。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of chief physician of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

古文：高祖受禅，引为内史舍人，以龙潜之旧，进爵蒲城郡公，加位上仪同。
现代文：高祖受北周禅让，任郭荣为内史舍人，因他是高祖登基前的好友，晋封他为蒲城郡公，升任上仪同。
English: Gaozu was transferred by the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and Guo Rong was appointed as the keeper of internal history, because he was Gaozu's close friend before he ascended to the throne. He was promoted to Pucheng County, and was promoted to Shanggidong.

古文：累迁通州刺史。
现代文：累迁至通州刺史。
English: The history of moving to Tongzhou is well known.

古文：仁寿初，西南夷、獠多叛，诏荣领八州诸军事行军总管，率兵讨之。
现代文：仁寿初，西南方的夷人、獠人大多背叛朝廷，下诏郭荣，让他任八州军事行军总管，率兵进剿。
English: At the beginning of the Ren Shou era, most of the Yi people and Yi people in the southwest betrayed the imperial court, and Guo Rong ordered him to be the head of the eight-state military march and lead the soldiers into the country.

古文：岁馀悉平，赐奴婢三百馀口。
现代文：一年多后全部平定，赐郭荣奴婢三百多口。
English: After more than a year, all of them were pacified, and Guo Rong was given more than three hundred slaves.

古文：炀帝即位，入为武候骠骑将军，以严正闻。
现代文：隋炀帝即位后，郭荣入京任武侯骠骑大将军，因为严厉正直而出名。
English: After the Sui Dynasty ascended to the throne, Guo Rong entered Beijing as the grand general of Wuhou, known for his strictness and honesty.

古文：后数岁，黔安首领田罗驹阻清江作乱，夷陵诸郡，民夷多应者，诏荣击平之。
现代文：几年后，黔安的首领田罗驹阻断清江而造反，夷陵各郡的百姓大多响应，下诏让郭荣击平了他们。
English: A few years later, Tian Luoqi, the leader of Yan'an, blocked the Qingjiang River and rebelled. Most of the people in Yiling counties responded, and ordered Guo Rong to defeat them.

古文：迁左候卫将军。
现代文：郭荣升任左候卫将军。
English: Guo Rong was promoted to General Zuo Wei.

古文：从帝西征吐谷浑，拜银青光禄大夫。
现代文：跟随隋炀帝西征吐谷浑，拜授银青光禄大夫。
English: Sui and Qian dynasties were followed by the Western Emperor Tu Guhun and the Silver Emperor Guanglu.

古文：辽东之役，以功进位左光禄大夫。
现代文：辽东战争中，郭荣因功升任左光禄大夫。
English: In the Liaodong War, Guo Rong was promoted to the post of doctor of the Left Guanglu for his merits.

古文：明年，帝复事辽东，荣以为中国疲敝，万乘不宜屡动，乃言于帝曰： 戎狄失礼，臣下之事。
现代文：次年，炀帝又征辽东，郭荣认为中原疲弊，皇上不应屡屡兴师，于是对炀帝说： 戎狄失礼，这是臣下的事。
English: The following year, Emperor Shun again invaded Liaodong. Guo Rong thought that the Central Plains were exhausted and that the emperor should not repeatedly invade, so he said to Emperor Shun: "Excuse me, this is a matter for the vassals.

古文：臣闻千钧之弩不为鼷鼠发机，岂有亲辱大驾以临小寇？ 
现代文：我听说，千钧大弩不为小小的鼷鼠发机，哪有皇帝亲动而临小寇的道理？ 
English: I've heard it said that a thousand flies don't make a small mole fly, so how is it possible for an emperor to personally attack a small rogue?

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：炀帝不采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：复从军攻辽东城，荣亲蒙矢石，昼夜不释甲胄百馀日。
现代文：郭荣又随炀帝进攻辽东城，郭荣亲自上阵，冒着箭矢、石头，日夜不解甲，达到一百多天。
English: Guo Rong also attacked Liaodong City with Emperor Qian. Guo Rong personally went into battle, braving arrows and stones, day and night without disarming, reaching more than one hundred days.

古文：帝每令人窥诸将所为，知荣如是，帝大悦，每劳勉之。
现代文：炀帝常常让人窥探诸将所为，知道郭荣如此，炀帝非常高兴，常常慰劳、鼓励他。
English: Emperor Gao often let people spy on Guo Rong's every move. When Guo Rong knew this, Emperor Gao was very happy and often consoled and encouraged him.

古文：九年，帝至东都，谓荣曰： 公年德渐高，不宜久涉行阵，当与公一郡，任所选也。 
现代文：大业九年，炀帝到东都，对郭荣说： 你年事渐高，不宜久自征战，我要给你一郡，任你挑选。 
English: In the ninth year of the Taiei era, Emperor Qian went to Dongdu and said to Guo Rong: You are getting old, it is not appropriate for you to fight for a long time, I will give you a county and let you choose.

古文：荣不愿违离，顿首陈让，辞情哀苦，有感帝心，于是拜为右候卫大将军。
现代文：郭荣不愿离开炀帝，叩头陈请，言辞和感情都很哀苦，感动了炀帝，于是授郭荣为右侯卫大将军。
English: Guo Rong didn't want to leave Emperor Zhou, he kowtowed to Chen Bei, and his words and feelings were very sad, which moved Emperor Zhou, who then awarded Guo Rong the title of the Right Marquis of Wei.

古文：后数日，帝谓百僚曰： 诚心纯至如郭荣者，固无比矣。 
现代文：几天后，炀帝对百官们说： 诚心诚意，像郭荣这样的，的确无人与他相比。 
English: A few days later, Emperor Xuan said to the officials: "Sincerely, like Guo Rong, there is really no one comparable to him.

古文：其见信如此。
现代文：他就是这样被信任。
English: That's how he's trusted.

古文：杨玄感之乱，帝令驰守太原。
现代文：杨玄感叛乱时，炀帝让郭荣驰守太原。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, Emperor Gao let Guo Rongchi guard Taiyuan.

古文：明年，复从帝至柳城，遇疾，帝令存问动静，中使相望。
现代文：次年，又随炀帝到柳城，遇上生病，炀帝让人问候他，使者相望于道，络绎不绝。
English: The following year, he accompanied Emperor Xuan to Liucheng, and when he fell ill, Emperor Xuan had people send him greetings. The emissaries looked at each other, and there was no end to their visits.

古文：卒于怀远镇，时年六十八。
现代文：郭荣在怀远镇去世，时年六十八岁。
English: Guo Rong died in Huaiyuan Town at the age of 68.

古文：帝为之废朝，赠兵部尚书，谥曰恭，赠物千段。
现代文：炀帝因郭荣去世而不临朝，追赠他为兵部尚书，谥号叫 恭 ，赠物上千段。
English: Emperor Qian did not visit the imperial court because of Guo Rong's death, and presented him posthumously with a military record book, a nickname called "Kong," and over a thousand pieces of gifts.

古文：有子福善。○庞晃
现代文：○庞晃
English: ○ Pangang

古文：庞晃，字元显，榆林人也。
现代文：庞晃字元显，榆林人。
English: The characters of "Pangkang" are obvious, and they are from Yulin.

古文：父虬，周骠骑大将军。
现代文：父亲庞虬，北周骠骑大将军。
English: His father, Pang Jun, was a general in the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：晃少以良家子，刺史杜达召补州都督。
现代文：庞晃年少时，因是良家子弟，刺史杜达召他补任州里的都督。
English: When Pang Huan was young, because he was the son of a good family, Zhi Shuda called him to serve as the governor of the state.

古文：周太祖既有关中，署晃大都督，领亲信兵，常置左右。
现代文：北周太祖拥有关中后，任庞晃为大都督，率领亲兵，常在太祖左右。
English: Northern Zhou's great-great-grandfather had a relative in the middle, Ren Panghuang as the grand governor, led his own soldiers, and was often around the great-great-grandfather.

古文：晃因徙居关中。
现代文：庞晃因此迁居关中。
English: As a result, Pang moved to Guanzhong.

古文：后迁骠骑将军，袭爵比阳侯。
现代文：后升任骠骑大将军，袭爵任比阳侯。
English: Later, he was promoted to the general of the cavalry and became the lord of Biyang.

古文：卫王直出镇襄州，晃以本官从。
现代文：卫王宇文直出镇襄州，庞晃以本官身份相随。
English: Wei Wang Yuwen went straight out of the town of Xiangzhou, and Pang Ao accompanied him as his own official.

古文：寻与长湖公元定击江南，孤军深入，遂没于阵。
现代文：不久与长湖公元定进攻江南，孤军深入，于是被俘虏。
English: Soon after, with the Yangtze River and the Yangtze Lake, he launched an attack on the south of the Yangtze River. The lone army penetrated deep, and he was captured.

古文：数年，卫王直遣晃弟车骑将军元俊赍绢八百匹赎焉，乃得归朝。
现代文：几年后，卫王宇文直派庞晃的弟弟、车骑将军元隽带着八百匹绵绢，把他赎回，他才得以回到朝廷。
English: A few years later, Emperor Wenzong sent his younger brother, the chariot and cavalry general Yuan Xuan, with 800 horses and mules to ransom him, and he was able to return to the imperial court.

古文：拜上仪同，赐彩二百段，复事卫王。
现代文：朝廷授他上仪同，赐他采织二百段，让他仍然侍奉卫王。
English: The imperial court gave him the title of Shang Yi Tong, and granted him the right to weave two hundred sections, allowing him to continue to serve the king.

古文：时高祖出为随州刺史，路经襄阳，卫王令晃诣高祖。
现代文：当时隋高祖出京任随州刺史，路经襄阳，卫王让庞晃拜访高祖。
English: At that time, Sui Gaozu left Beijing for Suizhou to study history. Passing through Yangyang, Wei Wang asked Pang Xiang to visit Gaozu.

古文：晃知高祖非常人，深自结纳。
现代文：庞晃知道高祖非同常人，与他深深地结交。
English: Pang Huan knew Gao Zu was not an ordinary person and had a deep friendship with him.

古文：及高祖去官归京师，晃迎见高祖于襄邑。高祖甚欢，晃因白高祖曰： 公相貌非常，名在图箓。
现代文：到高祖离任回京时，庞晃在襄阳迎见他，高祖很高兴，庞晃对高祖说： 你相貌非常，名在图录之上。
English: When Gaozu left to return to Beijing, Pang Huan met him in Xiangyang. Gaozu was very happy. Pang Huan said to Gaozu: You are very handsome, your name is on the top of the catalogue.

古文：九五之日，幸愿不忘。 
现代文：你当上皇帝的那一天，请别忘了我。 
English: The day you become emperor, please don't forget me.

古文：高祖笑曰： 何妄言也！ 
现代文：高祖笑着说： 怎么乱说一气呢？ 
English: Gaozu smiled and said, "How can you talk so much?"

古文：顷之，有一雄雉鸣于庭，高祖命晃射之，曰： 中则有赏。然富贵之日，持以为验。 
现代文：过了一会，有只公鸡在庭院里鸣叫，高祖让庞晃射它，说： 射中了有赏，富贵之日，拿这事作为应验。 
English: After a while, there was a rooster crowing in the courtyard. Gaozhu let Pang shoot it, saying, "There is a reward for the shot. On the day of wealth, take this as a fulfillment."

古文：晃既射而中，高祖抚掌大笑曰： 此是天意，公能感之而中也。 
现代文：庞晃射中了公鸡，高祖击掌大笑说： 这是天意，你能感应天意而射中。 
English: Pang shot the rooster, Gao Zu clapped his hands and laughed loudly, saying, "This is God's will, you can sense God's will and hit it."

古文：因以二婢赐之，情契甚密。
现代文：因此赐他两个奴婢，与庞晃感情很好。
English: Therefore, he was given two male and female slaves, and he had a good relationship with Panghuang.

古文：武帝时，晃为常山太守，高祖为定州总管，屡相往来。
现代文：北周武帝时，庞晃为常山太守，高祖为定州总管，二人屡相来往。
English: During the Northern Zhou Dynasty, Pang Xiang was the governor of Changshan, Gao Zu was the governor of Dingzhou, and the two frequently met.

古文：俄而高祖转亳州总管，将行，意甚不悦。
现代文：不久高祖转任亳州总管，分别时，心里很不高兴。
English: Not long after, Gaozu was transferred to the post of the chief administrator of Zhangzhou. When they separated, Gaozu was very unhappy.

古文：晃因白高祖曰： 燕、代精兵之处，今若动众，天下不足图也。 
现代文：庞晃对高祖说： 燕、代是出精兵的地方，今若兴兵动众，天下简直不足以图谋。 
English: Pang Huan said to Gao Zu, "Yan and Dai are the places that produce the best soldiers. If the soldiers are mobilized now, the world is simply not enough to plot.

古文：高祖握晃手曰： 时未可也。 
现代文：高祖握着庞晃的手说： 时机还不成熟啊！ 
English: Gaozou shook the giant's hand and said: The time is not yet ripe!

古文：晃亦转为车骑将军。
现代文：庞晃也转任车骑将军。
English: Pang also transferred to the post of general of cavalry.

古文：及高祖为扬州总管，奏晃同行。
现代文：高祖为扬州总管时，上奏朝廷，请让庞晃同去扬州。
English: When Gaozu was the governor of Yangzhou, he appealed to the imperial court to let Pang Jiao go to Yangzhou with him.

古文：既而高祖为丞相，进晃位开府，命督左右，甚见亲待。
现代文：不久高祖为丞相，升任庞晃为开府，让他督察左右，很被高祖亲信。
English: Soon after, Gaozu was made chancellor, and Pangang was promoted to the position of governor. Gaozu trusted Pangang and made him inspector.

古文：及践阼，谓晃曰： 射雉之符，今日验不？ 
现代文：高祖登基为帝后，对庞晃说： 射公鸡的应验，今天得到证明了没有？ 
English: Gaozhu ascended the throne as empress, and said to Panghuang, "The fulfillment of shooting a rooster, has it been proved today?

古文：晃再拜曰： 陛下应天顺民，君临宇内，犹忆曩时之言，不胜庆跃。 
现代文：庞晃下拜说： 陛下应天顺民，君临天下，还能回忆往日说过的话，让我不胜欢欣。 
English: Pang Xiao bowed down and said, "Your majesty should be in favor of the people and the country, and you can still recall what you said in the past, which makes me very happy."

古文：上笑曰： 公之此言，何得忘也！ 
现代文：皇上笑笑说： 你说的话，怎能忘记？ 
English: The Emperor smiled and said, "How can I forget what you said?

古文：寻加上开府，拜右卫将军，进爵为公，邑千五百户。
现代文：不久加封他为上开府，授他为右卫将军，晋爵位为公，食邑一千五百户。
English: He was soon given the title of Shangkaifu, promoted to the rank of General of the Right Guard, promoted to the rank of Duke, and became the head of 1,500 households.

古文：河间王弘之击突厥也，晃以行军总管从至马邑。
现代文：河间王杨弘进攻突厥时，庞晃以行军总管的身份，随王到马邑。
English: When Wang Yanghong of Kawama attacked the Turks, Pang Huan followed the king to Ma'e as the commander-in-chief.

古文：别路出贺兰山，击贼破之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：另出贺兰山，打败贼人，斩首一千多级。
English: He also went to Helan Mountain, defeated thieves, and beheaded more than a thousand people.

古文：晃性刚悍，时广平王雄当途用事，势倾朝廷，晃每陵侮之。
现代文：庞晃生性刚烈，当时广平王杨雄当道，势力倾盖朝廷，庞晁每每侮辱杨雄。
English: At that time, Yang Xiong, the king of Guangping, was in charge, and his power dominated the imperial court. Pang Xiong was always insulting Yang Xiong.

古文：尝于军中卧，见雄不起，雄甚衔之。
现代文：庞晃曾在军中睡觉，看见杨雄也不起来，杨雄很恨他。
English: Pang Huan used to sleep in the army. When he saw Yang Xiong, he did not get up. Yang Xiong hated him very much.

古文：复与高颎有隙，二人屡谮晃。
现代文：庞晃又与高赹有矛盾，杨、高二人屡屡在皇上面前进庞晃的谗言。
English: Pangang also had conflicts with Gao Yao. Yang and Gao both repeatedly criticized Pangang in front of the emperor.

古文：由是宿卫十余年，官不得进。
现代文：因此，庞晃在宫中当了十几年的宿卫，也不能升官。
English: As a result, Pang Kuan, who had been a palace guard for more than ten years, could not be promoted.

古文：出为怀州刺史，数岁，迁原州总管。
现代文：后出京任怀州刺史，几年后，升任原州总管。
English: After that, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Waizhou, and a few years later, he was promoted to the governor of Wonju.

古文：仁寿中卒官，年七十二。
现代文：仁寿中在官任上去世，七十二岁。
English: He died in office at the age of seventy-two.

古文：高祖为之废朝，赠物三百段，米三百石，谥曰敬。
现代文：高祖因他去世而不临朝，赠他家布帛三百段，米三百石，谥号为 敬 。
English: Gao Zu, who did not attend the imperial court because of his death, gave his family 300 pieces of cloth, 300 kilos of rice, and the nickname "Jing."

古文：子长寿，颇知名，官至骠骑将军。
现代文：他的儿子庞长寿，很出名，官至骠骑将军。
English: His son Pang lived a long life and was very famous, rising to the rank of cavalry general.

古文：○李安
现代文：○李安
English: ○ Lee Ann

古文：李安，字玄德，陇西狄道人也。
现代文：李安字玄德，陇西狄道人。
English: In the first year of Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty, he was named the King of righteousness for his response to Gaozong's performance of raising the banner of righteousness.

古文：父蔚，仕周为朔燕恆三州刺史、襄武县公。
现代文：父亲李蔚，仕北周为朔、燕、恒三州刺史，襄武县公。
English: His father, Li Wei, served the Northern Zhou Dynasty and the Three States of Shuo, Yan and Heng, and was the governor of Xiangwu County.

古文：安美姿仪，善骑射。
现代文：李安很漂亮，善骑马射箭。
English: Li An is very beautiful and good at horse riding and archery.

古文：周天和中，释褐右侍上士，袭爵襄武公。
现代文：北周天和中，开始作官，任右侍上士，袭爵为襄武公。
English: North of Zhou Tian and Zhong, he began to work as an official, serving as a right-handed staff sergeant, inheriting the title of Xiangwu.

古文：俄授仪同、少师右上士。
现代文：不久授仪同、少师右上士。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the rank of Junior Instructor and Junior Staff Sergeant.

古文：高祖作相，引之左右，迁职方中大夫。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相时，把他带到自己身边，升他为职方中大夫。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the Minister of North Zhoucheng, he brought him to his side and promoted him to the post of middle doctor.

古文：复拜安弟悊为仪同。
现代文：又授李安的弟弟李胐为仪同。
English: He also awarded Li An's younger brother, Li Yao, the same honor.

古文：安叔父梁州刺史璋，时在京师，与周赵王谋害高祖，诱悊为内应。
现代文：李安的叔父、梁州刺史李璋，当时在京师，与北周赵王谋害高祖，引诱李胐当内应。
English: Li An's uncle, Liang Zhou's cousin Li Yao, was in Beijing at the time, plotting with Northern Zhou Zhao Wang to kill Gao Zu, and luring Li Yao to become a spy.

古文：悊谓安曰： 寝之则不忠，言之则不义，失忠与义，何以立身？ 
现代文：李胐对李安说： 这种事，不说吧又不忠，说了吧又不义，失去了忠和义，何以在世上安身立命？ 
English: Li Yao said to Li An, "This kind of thing, if you don't talk about it, you're being disloyal, if you do talk about it, you're being unfair, you've lost your loyalty and righteousness, how can you survive in the world?

古文：安曰： 丞相父也，其可背乎？ 
现代文：李安说： 丞相像父亲，怎能背叛？ 
English: Li An said: The prime minister is like a father, how can he betray?

古文：遂阴白之。
现代文：于是偷偷告诉高祖。
English: He told Emperor Wen in private.

古文：及赵王等伏诛，将加官赏，安顿首而言曰： 兄弟无汗马之劳，过蒙奖擢，合门竭节，无以酬谢。
现代文：到赵王等人被杀时，高祖将给李安兄弟加官晋爵，李安叩头说： 我们兄弟没有汗马功劳，过分地承蒙奖赏，即使我全家尽节，也无法酬谢。
English: When Zhao Wang and the others were killed, Gao Zu was about to promote Li An's brothers to higher ranks. Li An bowed his head and said, "Our brothers did not work hard, and they were rewarded excessively. Even if my whole family dies, I cannot repay the gratitude."

古文：不意叔父无状，为凶党之所蛊惑，覆宗绝嗣，其甘若荠。
现代文：不料我叔父无行，被凶党迷惑，犯下了灭族之罪。如蒙保全他的性命，那我们就感到很幸运了。
English: Unexpectedly, my uncle couldn't do anything, was deceived by the evil party, and committed the crime of exterminating the people. If we could save his life, then we would feel very lucky.

古文：蒙全首领，为幸实多，岂可将叔父之命以求官赏？ 于是俯伏流涕，悲不自胜。高祖为之改容曰： 我为汝特存璋子。 
现代文：怎能用叔父的性命来换取官爵呢？ 于是拜伏于地，流泪痛哭，悲不自胜。高祖为之动容，说： 我为你们特别留下李璋的儿子。 
English: How could he exchange his uncle's life for a peerage? So he prostrated himself on the ground, wept bitterly, and was inconsolable. Gao Zu was moved by this and said, "I have especially left you the son of Li Xi."

古文：乃命有司罪止璋身，高祖亦为安隐其事而不言。
现代文：于是下令有关部门，只处罚李璋一个人，不及李家。高祖也为李安隐瞒了泄密之事。
English: So he ordered the relevant departments to punish only Li Yao, not Li Jia. Gao Zu also concealed the leak for Li Anru.

古文：寻授安开府，进封赵郡公，悊上仪同、黄台县男。
现代文：不久授李安开府，晋封为赵郡公；授李胐上仪同、黄台县男爵。
English: Soon, Li Ankaifu was conferred upon him, and he was promoted to Zhao County official; he was also conferred with the title of Li Xuan Shang Yi Tong and the title of Huang Tai County baron.

古文：高祖即位，授安内史侍郎，转尚书左丞、黄门侍郎。
现代文：隋高祖即位后，授李安内史侍郎，转任尚书左丞、黄门侍郎。
English: After Sui Gaozu's accession to the throne, he was given the title of Li An's personal attendant, and transferred to the posts of Shangshu Zuojo and Huangmen personal attendant.

古文：平陈之役，以为杨素司马，仍领行军总管，率蜀兵顺流东下。
现代文：在平定陈国的战争中，朝廷以李安为杨素的司马，仍兼任行军总管，让他率领蜀兵顺江流东下。
English: In the war to pacify Chen Guo, the imperial court took Li An as Yang Su's steward, still concurrently serving as the commander-in-chief of the march, and let him lead the Shu soldiers eastward down the Shun River.

古文：时陈人屯白沙，安谓诸将曰： 水战非北人所长。
现代文：当时陈国兵马屯驻在白沙，李安对诸将说： 打水战，不是北方人的长处。
English: At that time, Chen Guotun was garrisoning Baisha. Li An said to the generals: Naval warfare is not a specialty of northerners.

古文：今陈人依险泊船，必轻我而无备。
现代文：现在陈国人在险要处停船，必定轻视我们而无防备。
English: Now that the Chen people are stopping at a critical point, they must despise us and be unprepared.

古文：以夜袭之，贼可破也。 
现代文：在夜里袭击他们，贼人可以打破。 
English: Attack them at night and the thieves can break in.

古文：诸将以为然。
现代文：诸将以为然。
English: The generals think so.

古文：安率众先锋，大破陈师。
现代文：李安率师为先锋，大破敌军。
English: Li An led the troops as the vanguard and defeated Chen's army.

古文：高祖嘉之，诏书劳曰： 陈贼之意，自言水战为长，险隘之间，弥谓官军所惮。
现代文：高祖嘉奖他，下诏书慰劳他说： 陈国贼人，自认为水战是其长处，在险要之处，更说是官军所害怕的。
English: Emperor Gao Zu commended him and issued an imperial edict to console him, saying: Chen Guozhongren thought that naval warfare was his strength, and in critical situations, it was even feared by the government army.

古文：开府亲将所部，夜动舟师，摧破贼徒，生擒虏众，益官军之气，破贼人之胆，副朕所委，闻以欣然。 
现代文：开府你亲率所部，夜动舟师，打败贼人，活捉敌人，增强了官军的士气，打破了贼人的胆，没辜负我的委托，听说消息后我很高兴。 
English: Kaifu, you led your relatives to the headquarters, and you moved the boat division at night, defeated the thieves, captured the enemy alive, strengthened the morale of the government army, broke the thieves' courage, and lived up to my commission. I am very happy after hearing the news.

古文：进位上大将军，除郢州刺史。
现代文：升李安为上大将军、郢州刺史。
English: Li An was promoted to the rank of senior general, and the history of Zhangzhou was written.

古文：数日，转邓州刺史。
现代文：过了几天，转任邓州刺史。
English: A few days later, he was transferred to the post of Dengzhou magistrate.

古文：安请为内职，高祖重违其意，除左领左右将军。
现代文：李安请求在朝内任职，高祖再次改变本意，任李安为左右将军。
English: Li An requested to serve in the imperial court, Gaozu changed his mind again and appointed Li An as the left and right generals.

古文：俄迁右领军大将军，复拜悊开府仪同三司、备身将军。
现代文：不久，升他为右领军大将军。又授李胐开府仪同三司、备身将军。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the right-hand leading army general. He was also awarded the ceremony of Li Jiankaifu, the same as the three divisions and the general of the bodyguard.

古文：兄弟俱典禁卫，恩信甚重。
现代文：兄弟都掌管禁军，恩典和信任都很重。
English: Both brothers are in charge of the palace guards and are deeply trusted.

古文：八年，突厥犯塞，以安为行军总管，从杨素击之。
现代文：开皇八年，突厥人进犯边塞，朝廷以李安为行军总管，让他随杨素击讨他们。
English: In the eighth year of the Emperor's reign, the Turks attacked the border fortress, and the imperial court made Li An the general manager of the march, and let him fight them with Yang Su.

古文：安别出长川，会虏渡河，与战破之。
现代文：李安率部另出长川，刚好敌人正渡黄河，与敌作战，打败敌军。
English: On another occasion, Li An sent his troops to the Changchuan River, just as the Turkish soldiers were crossing the river, and fought with them, defeating the Turkish soldiers.

古文：仁寿元年，出安为宁州刺史，悊为卫州刺史。
现代文：仁寿元年，让李安出京任宁州刺史，李胐为卫州刺史。
English: In the first year of Ren Shou's reign, Li An was sent out of Beijing to be appointed as the governor of Ningzhou, and Li Jie became the governor of Weizhou.

古文：安子琼，悊子玮，始自襁褓，乳养宫中，至是年八九岁，始命归家。
现代文：李安子李琼、李胐子李玮刚开始还在襁褓之中，在宫中抚养，到这年八、九岁了，才让回家。
English: Li An Zi, Li Qiong, and Li Xun Zi, who were still in their infancy at the beginning, were raised in the palace until they were eight or nine years old, when they were allowed to return home.

古文：其见亲顾如是。
现代文：他们就是这样被亲近看重。
English: That's how they're held in such high regard.

古文：高祖尝言及作相时事，因愍安兄弟灭亲奉国，乃下诏曰： 先王立教，以义断恩，割亲爱之情，尽事君之道，用能弘奖大节，体此至公。
现代文：高祖曾说到为北周丞相时，因此怜爱李安兄弟灭亲奉国，于是下诏说： 先王立教，以义断恩，割舍亲爱之情，以尽事君之道，用以弘扬大节，体察至公。
English: Gao Zu once said that when he was the Minister of Northern Zhou, he pitied the Li An brothers for sacrificing their relatives to serve the country, so he issued the following edict: The previous king established the religion, determined the kindness with righteousness, abandoned the affectionate feelings, did his best to do the way of the king, used it to promote the Grand Festival, and was aware of the public.

古文：往者周历既穷，天命将及，朕登庸惟始，王业初基，承此浇季，实繁奸宄。
现代文：过去周道既尽，天命将及于我隋，我刚被重用，王业刚打基础，承着这季世，实在有很多奸诈之事。
English: The past weeks have been exhausted, the destiny will reach me in the Sui Dynasty, I have just been reused, Wangye has just laid the foundation, holding this quarter of the world, there are really a lot of treacherous things.

古文：上大将军、宁州刺史、赵郡公李安，其叔璋潜结籓枝，扇惑犹子，包藏不逞，祸机将发。
现代文：上大将军、宁州刺史、赵郡公爵李安，他叔父李璋阴结藩王，煽动迷惑小孩子，包藏祸心，将要作乱。
English: Li An, the general of Shang Dynasty, the prince of Ningzhou, the duke of Zhao County, and his uncle, Li Yuyin, the king of the Han Dynasty, incited and confused the children, harbored evil intentions, and were going to make trouble.

古文：安与弟开府仪同三司、卫州刺史、黄台县男悊，深知逆顺，披露丹心，凶谋既彰，罪人斯得。
现代文：李安和他弟弟、开府仪同三司、卫州刺史、黄台县男爵李胐，深知顺逆，披露忠心。凶谋既被披露，罪人这才被抓到。
English: Li An and his younger brother, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Wei Zhou Jian Shi, and Huang Tai County Baron Li Yan, were well aware of the rebellion and revealed their loyalty. The criminal was only caught after the murderous plot was revealed.

古文：朕每念诚节，嘉之无已，懋庸册赏，宜不逾时。
现代文：我每每念及他们的诚实气节，嘉奖不已。予以嘉奖，应不逾时。
English: Every time I think about their honesty, I can't stop praising them. It's time to reward them.

古文：但以事涉其亲，犹有疑惑，欲使安等名教之方，自处有地，朕常为思审，遂致淹年。
现代文：但因事情涉及到他的亲人，还有些疑惑，想使李安等人的名教之方，自处有地，我常为此思考，于是过了好多年。
English: But because the matter involves his relatives, there are still some doubts, and I often think about it because I want to make the famous teaching side of Li An and others have their own place, so many years have passed.

古文：今更详按圣典，求诸往事，父子天性，诚孝犹不并立，况复叔侄恩轻，情礼本有差降，忘私奉国，深得正理，宜录旧勋，重弘赏命。 
现代文：现在重又考察圣典，求之于往事，父子天性，忠孝尚难两全，何况还是叔侄恩轻，情理本来稍差，李安等忘私情、奉国家，深得正理。应该记载他们往日的大功，重重地加以赏赐。 
English: Now, it is important to re-examine the scriptures and look to the past. The nature of father and son, loyalty and filial piety are still difficult to achieve, not to mention that uncle and nephew are lighter, and the reason is a little worse. Li An and others forget their selfishness and serve the country, and they are deeply righteous. Their great achievements in the past should be recorded and rewarded heavily.

古文：于是拜安、悊俱为柱国，赐缣各五千匹，马百匹，羊千口。
现代文：于是拜授李安、李胐都当柱国，各赐缣绢五千匹、马百匹、羊千口。
English: So he made Li'an and Li'an a pillar province, and gave each of them five thousand donkeys, a hundred horses, and a thousand sheep.

古文：复以悊为备身将军，进封顺阳郡公。
现代文：又以李胐为备身将军，晋封顺阳郡公。
English: He also made Li Qian a reserve general and promoted him to Shunyang County.

古文：安谓亲族曰： 虽家门获全，而叔父遭祸，今奉此诏，悲愧交怀。 
现代文：李安对亲族说： 虽然家门被保全，但叔父遭到祸乱，如今接到这一诏书，悲愧交集。 
English: Li An said to his relatives: Although the family was preserved, my uncle suffered a disaster, and now I have received this edict, and I am overwhelmed with sorrow.

古文：因歔欷悲感，不能自胜。
现代文：因此悲叹不已，不能自胜。
English: As a result, I cried bitterly, felt sad, and seemed to be unable to bear it.

古文：先患水病，于是疾甚而卒，时年五十三。
现代文：此前李安患水病，于是病重而死，时年五十三岁。
English: Previously, Li An suffered from dropsy, and died at the age of fifty-three.

古文：谥曰怀。
现代文：谥号叫 怀 。
English: The nickname stuck.

古文：子琼嗣。
现代文：李安子李琼，继承父亲爵禄。
English: His son, Li Qiong, received a knighthood.

古文：少子孝恭，最有名。
现代文：小儿子李孝恭，最有名。
English: The youngest son, Li Xiaogong, is the most famous.

古文：悊后坐事除名，配防岭南，道病卒。
现代文：李胐后来因事受牵连被除名，流放岭南，在路上病死。
English: Li Yao was later expelled from the Communist Party and exiled to Lingnan due to his involvement in the incident. He died of illness on the way.

