古文：塔本塔本，伊吾庐人。
现代文：塔本，伊吾庐人。
English: Tabon, an Iguanodon.

古文：人以其好扬人善，称之曰扬公。
现代文：因好宣扬别人的好处，故又称之为 扬公 。
English: Because he likes to promote the benefits of others, he is also called Yang Gong.

古文：父宋五设托陀，托陀者，其国主所赐号，犹华言国老也。
现代文：其父名宋五设托陀 ，托陀 是其国王赐他的称号，意思是 国老 。
English: His father's name was Song Wushet Todo, Todo was the title given to him by his king, meaning elder statesman.

古文：塔本初从太祖讨诸部，屡厄艰危。复从围燕，征辽西，下平滦、白霫诸城。
现代文：塔本最初随太祖讨平蒙古诸部。以后随军围攻燕，征讨辽西，攻克平滦、白靅诸城。
English: At first, Tabon followed his great-grandfather in conquering all parts of Mongolia. Later, he besieged Yan with his army, conquered western Liao, and conquered the cities of Pingluo and Baekdu.

古文：军士有妄杀人者，塔本戒之曰： 国之本，民也。杀人得地，何益于国。且杀无罪以坚敌心，非上意。 
现代文：蒙古军士滥杀人民，塔本告诫他们 ：国家根本在于人民，如果把人民杀尽，得其地于国何益；而且滥杀无辜，只能更加坚定敌人与我们对抗的决心，这不是皇上的旨意。 
English: The Mongolian sergeant-major killed people indiscriminately, and Tabun warned them: the country basically lies in the people, if the people are killed, what benefit is there to the country; and the indiscriminate killing of innocents can only strengthen the determination of the enemy to oppose us, this is not the emperor's will.

古文：太祖闻而喜之，赐金虎符，俾镇抚白霫诸郡，号行省都元帅，管内得承制除县吏，死囚得专决。
现代文：太祖闻此言大喜，赐塔本金虎符，委任他镇抚白靅诸郡，称为行省都元帅，可依制任命县官，囚犯死罪由他判决。
English: Hearing this, the great-grandfather was overjoyed and gave Taben the Golden Tiger, appointing him as the town marshal of the counties of Baekje, known as the marshal of the provincial capital. He could appoint county officials according to the system, and the death penalty for prisoners would be decided by him.

古文：久之，徙治兴平。
现代文：很久以后，塔本调往兴平。
English: After a long time, Taboto was transferred to Xingping.

古文：兴平兵火伤残，民惨无生意。
现代文：兴平这地方久经战火，民不聊生。
English: Xingping this place has been through the war for a long time, the people do not want to live.

古文：塔本召父老问所苦，为除之，薄赋敛，役有时。民大悦，乃相与告教，无违约束，归者四集。
现代文：塔本至兴平后，召集父老，访问民间疾苦，采行轻徭薄赋等措施，减轻人民负担，人民大喜，奔走相告，并表示不违犯政府法规。
English: After Taben to Xingping, he summoned his parents and elders, visited the suffering of the people, and adopted measures such as light and thin subsidies to reduce the burden on the people. The people were very happy and rushed to tell each other, and said that it did not violate government regulations.

古文：塔本始至，户止七百，不一二年，乃至万户。
现代文：逃亡的人民也都从四面八方归来。塔本初来时，兴平只七百户，不过一二年，增至万户。
English: The people who had fled also returned from all directions. When Tabon first arrived, there were only seven hundred households in Xingping, but in a year or two, there were ten thousand.

古文：出己马以宽驿人；贷廉吏银，其子钱不能偿者，焚其券。农不克耕，亦与之牛，比岁告稔，民用以饶。
现代文：塔本还把自己的马匹交给驿站使用，以减轻驿站人民的负担；还借贷 廉吏银 ，凡利息不能偿还者，将借券焚毁；农民耕种困难，就给他们耕牛，因此连年丰收，家给人足。
English: Taben also gave his horses to the station for use, in order to reduce the burden on the people of the station; he also lent money to corrupt officials, and those who could not repay the interest would burn the loan notes; farmers had difficulties in farming, so he gave them cattle, so they had a bumper harvest year after year, and the family was well fed.

古文：庚寅，诏益中山、平定、平原隶行省。
现代文：太宗二年，朝廷诏令增中山、平定、平原等州，均划归行中书省管辖。
English: In the second year of Emperor Taizong's reign, the imperial court issued a decree adding Zhongshan, Pingding, Plains and other provinces, all of which were placed under the jurisdiction of Xingzhongshuo.

古文：甲午，盗李仙、越小哥等作乱，塔本止诛首恶，宥其诖误。
现代文：太宗六年，李仙、赵小哥等作乱，塔本平息，但只诛首恶，受牵者全部释放。
English: In the sixth year of Taizong, Li Xian, Zhao Xiaoguo and others made a disturbance, which was quelled, but only the dagger was evil, and all the victims were released.

古文：阿里乞失铁木儿，嗣父职，为兴平等处行省都元帅。
现代文：太宗后二年立春日，朝廷大宴群臣，塔本参加宴会回府即病卒。当夜，有星坠落，隐隐有声，塔本逝世。
English: In the second year of Emperor Taizong's reign, on the first day of spring, the imperial court held a grand banquet for all the courtiers. Tabon attended the banquet and immediately fell ill. That night, there was a falling star and a faint sound, and Tabon passed away.

古文：其为治一遵先政，兴学养士，轻刑薄徭，虽同僚不敢私役一民。
现代文：朝廷赠推诚定远佐运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封营国公，谥 忠武 。
English: The Imperial Court presented the title of "Chenchengdingyuan Sasun meritorious subject," "Grand Master," "Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi," "Upper Pillar of the State," "Enfeoffment of Ying Guo Guo Guo," and "Loyal Soldier."

古文：从大军伐高丽有功。岁丙辰卒。
现代文：子阿里乞失贴木儿继承父职，为兴平等处行省都元帅，并遵循父亲兴学养士、轻刑薄徭的政策。
English: His son Ali Beiping inherited his father's position and served as the provincial capital marshal for the rejuvenation of the equality department, and followed his father's policy of rejuvenating students and nurses, and light punishment.

古文：赠宣忠辅义功臣、荣禄大夫、平章政事、柱国，追封营国公，谥武襄。
现代文：定宗元年逝世，赠他为宣忠辅义功臣、荣禄大夫、平章政事、柱国，追封营国公，谥 武襄 。
English: When Sadamune died in the first year of the new year, he was awarded the titles of Xuan Zhong Fu Yi Gongshu, Ronglu Dafu, Pingzhang Zhengji, Zhu Guo, Tsuifeng Ying Guo Guo, and Wu Xiang.

古文：子阿台。阿台，当袭父职，适罢行省为平滦路总管府，丁巳，宪宗命阿台为平滦路达鲁花赤。
现代文：阿台，塔本之孙，阿里乞失贴木儿之子，按规章，阿台应承袭父职，而正逢朝廷改行省为平滦路总管府，于是在宪宗七年任命他为平滦路达鲁花赤。
English: Atai, the grandson of Tabun, the son of Ali Begum, according to regulations, Atai should inherit his father's position, and just as the imperial court changed the province to the General Administration of Pingyao Road, he was appointed as the General Administrator of Pingyao Road in the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong.

古文：始至，请蠲银、盐、酒等税课八之一，细民不征。
现代文：阿台到任后，便奏请减该路银、盐、酒等税课八分之一，而且对小民不征赋税。
English: After Attai took office, he requested that the taxes on silver, salt, and wine be reduced by one-eighth, and that no taxes be levied on commoners.

古文：世祖即位，来朝，赐金虎符。
现代文：世祖即位，阿台入京朝见，赐金虎符。
English: The founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, and A-Tai visited the imperial court in Beijing and was presented with the Golden Tiger Badge.

古文：诸侯王道出平滦，供给费银七千五百两，户部不即偿，阿台自陈上前，尽取偿以归。
现代文：诸侯王路过平滦，该路供给，费银七千五百两，户部不支付，阿台向世祖请求由他自己偿付。
English: The princes and kings passed through Pingyao, and the road was supplied with 7,500 taels of silver. The household did not pay, and Atai asked the patriarch to pay for it himself.

古文：置甲乙籍，籍民丁力，民甚便之。
现代文：至元十年，其官阶进升为怀远大将军。
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of General Huaiyuan.

古文：至元十年，进阶怀远大将军。岁饥，发粟赈民。或持不可，阿台曰： 朝廷不允，愿以家粟偿官。 
现代文：遇灾荒，他主张用府库粮食赈济饥民，有人反对，阿台说 ：朝廷不允许，我愿用自己家中的粮食来偿还官府。 
English: When disaster struck, he advocated using grain from the government storehouse to feed the hungry. Some people objected, but Atai said, "The imperial court will not allow it. I am willing to use grain from my own family to repay the government."

古文：于是全活甚众。
现代文：于是许多人得到拯救。
English: Many people were saved as a result.

古文：僚属始至，阿台必遗之盐、米、羊畜、什器，曰： 非有他也，欲其不剥民耳。 
现代文：凡其僚属来上任，阿台必送他们盐、米、羊、用器等，对他们说 ：我并非有别的意图，只是要你们不剥削百姓而已。 
English: When any of his subordinates came to take office, Atai would send them salt, rice, sheep, utensils, etc. and say to them, "I have no other intention but to ask you not to exploit the people."

古文：姻族穷者，月有常给；民有丧不能葬者，与之棺椁、布帛、资粮。
现代文：其亲戚贫困，他每月给以补贴；百姓有丧葬无力办者，他给棺椁、布帛、钱粮。
English: If his relatives are poor, he will give them a monthly subsidy; if the people are unable to hold a funeral, he will give them a coffin, cloth and money.

古文：滦为孤竹故国，乃庙祀伯夷、叔齐，以励风俗。
现代文：滦为古孤竹国，他建庙祭祀古代圣贤伯夷、叔齐，以淳化风俗。
English: Shandong was an ancient isolated bamboo country. He built a temple to worship the ancient sages such as Bo Yi and Shu Qi, and promoted the Junhua custom.

古文：二十一年，进昭武大将军。
现代文：至元二十一年，进昭武大将军。
English: In the 21st year of the Yuan Dynasty, Jin Shouwu became the general.

古文：赐其妻子钞五百贯、良田千亩，仍诏树碑神道。
现代文：二十四年，乃颜反叛朝廷，阿台献马五百匹以加强军力，世祖大喜。二十五年入朝，病卒。
English: In the 24th year, Naoyan rebelled against the imperial court, and Atai offered 500 horses to strengthen the military, which greatly pleased the patriarch. He entered the imperial court in the 25th year, and died of illness.

古文：哈剌亦哈赤北鲁哈剌亦哈赤北鲁，畏兀人也。
现代文：赐宣力功臣、资德大夫、中书右丞、上护军，追封永平郡公，谥 忠亮 。哈剌亦哈赤北鲁，畏兀人。
English: He bestowed Xuan Li on meritorious vassals, Zide doctors, Zhongshu Rongzheng, Shangguo soldiers, and posthumously conferred the title of Yongping County Prince to Zou Zhongliang. He was also a member of the Hakka Hokulu, and was feared by the Han people.

古文：性聪敏，习事。国王月仙帖木儿亦都护闻其名，自唆里迷国征为断事官。
现代文：性聪敏能干，国王月仙帖木儿亦都护闻其名，自唆里速国征聘为断事官。
English: He was very intelligent and capable, and King Yue Xian and King Timur both knew his name. They both volunteered to be recruited as adjudicators.

古文：月仙帖木儿卒，子八儿出阿儿忒亦都护年幼，西辽主鞠儿可汗遣使据其国，且召哈剌亦哈赤北鲁，至则以为诸子师。
现代文：月仙帖木儿死，其子八儿出阿儿忒亦都护年幼，西辽王鞠儿可汗遣使占据其国，召哈剌亦哈赤北鲁为其诸子之师。
English: The moon god Tamerlane died, and his eight sons, the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the eight sons of the moon god.

古文：阿怜帖木儿都督者，哈剌亦哈赤北鲁婿也。
现代文：八儿出阿儿忒闻知太祖圣明，杀了西辽派来的使臣，又派哈剌亦哈赤北鲁的女婿阿怜帖木儿都督等四人去西辽，告诉他们太祖是圣明之主。
English: Eight sons came out of the hermitage to learn about the great-grandfather Shengming, killed the envoy sent by Xiliao, and sent four people, including the son-in-law of Hebei Lu, A'rei Timur Tuduk, to Xiliao to tell them that the great-grandfather was the lord of Shengming.

古文：具语以其故，于是与其子月朵失野讷驰归太祖，一见大悦，即令诸皇子受学焉。仍令月朵失野讷以质子入宿卫。
现代文：于是哈剌亦哈赤北鲁与其子月朵失野讷一起投奔太祖。太祖一见大喜，即令诸皇子拜他为师，又令月朵失野讷作为人质加入宿卫亲军。
English: As a result, Hachihaka Chiharu and his son Tsukidokoro ran away to join Taizu. At the first sight of great joy, Taizu ordered the princes to worship him as a teacher, and also ordered Tsukidokoro to join his army as a hostage.

古文：从帝西征。至别失八里东独山，是城空无人，帝问： 此何城也？ 
现代文：哈剌亦哈赤北鲁随太祖西征，至别失八里以东之独山，见城空无人。太祖问 ：此是何城？ 
English: The Northern Ru followed the western expedition of the great-great-grandfather, and when they reached the lonely mountain eight miles to the east, there was no one in the sky. The great-grandfather asked: "What city is this?"

古文：对曰： 独山城。往岁大饥，民皆流移之它所。
现代文：哈剌亦哈赤北鲁回答说 ：叫独山城，往年遭到灾害，人民都流移到别处去了。
English: Hebei Ru replied, "It's called Doushan City. In previous years, it suffered from disasters, and people were displaced to other places.

古文：然此地当北来要冲，宜耕种以为备。
现代文：然此地为北来必经之地，应耕种储粮，以备守御。
English: However, this is a place that must be passed through when coming from the north, and grain reserves should be cultivated to prepare for defense.

古文：臣昔在唆里迷国时，有户六十，愿移居此。 
现代文：臣过去在唆里迷国时，有六十户愿移居此地。 
English: In the past, when the vassal lost his way in Sugiri, sixty families were willing to move here.

古文：帝曰： 善。 遣月朵失野讷佩金符往取之，父子皆留居焉。
现代文：太祖认为哈剌亦哈赤北鲁的意见很好，便派月朵失野讷佩金符去占领，父子二人都留居于此。
English: The great-grandfather thought that the opinion of Harun Yahya and the Northern Ruthenians was good, so he sent Yue Yue to occupy the area. Both father and son stayed here.

古文：后六年，太祖西征还，见田野垦辟，民物繁庶，大悦。问哈剌亦哈赤北鲁，则已死矣。
现代文：六年后，太祖西征，路过此地，见田野得到开垦，人民繁多而且富庶，十分高兴，问及哈剌亦哈赤北鲁，才知他已去世了。
English: Six years later, the great-grandfather of the Western Expedition, passing by this place, was very happy to see the fields being reclaimed, the people were numerous and prosperous, and asked about Harun Yahya, only to learn that he had passed away.

古文：速哥为人外若质直，而内实沉勇有谋，雅为太宗所知。
现代文：于是赐月朵失野讷以都督印，兼为独山城达鲁花赤。速哥，蒙古族人，姓怯烈氏，为人外表朴素耿直，而内心沉着，有勇有谋，为太宗所深知。
English: So he bestowed the title of duke on Tsukite, who had strayed from the countryside, and made him the sole ruler of the mountain city of Daluka. Hayago, a Mongolian, whose family name was Kikure, was outwardly a simple and straightforward man, but inwardly he was calm, courageous, and resourceful, and he was well known to Emperor Taizong.

古文：命使金，因俾觇其虚实，语之曰： 即不还，子孙无忧不富贵也。 
现代文：太宗命他出使金朝探听虚实，临行时对他说： 你此去即使不能还，保你子孙不忧富贵。 
English: Emperor Taizong ordered him to send an envoy to the Jin Dynasty to investigate the truth and falsehood, and when he was about to leave, he said to him: "Even if you can't pay it back, go here to ensure that your children and grandchildren are not worried and rich."

古文：速哥顿首曰： 臣死，职耳。奉陛下威命以行，可无虑也。 
现代文：速哥忙拜谢道 ：臣为君死是应当的，今奉使金朝，有陛下神威，无可虑者。 
English: Hayao Busy said, "It is proper for a vassal to die for the king. I am now an envoy to the Kim dynasty, and I have the majesty and authority of the king, so I have no qualms about it."

古文：帝悦，赐所常御马。
现代文：太祖赐他御马。
English: His great-grandfather gave him a horse.

古文：至河，金人闭之舟中，七日始登南岸，又三旬乃达汴。及见金主，曰： 天子念尔土地日狭，民力日疲，故遣我致命，尔能共修岁币，通好不绝，则转祸为福矣。 
现代文：速哥走了三个多月才到达汴京，对金朝皇帝说： 我天子念你国土日益狭小，民力日益疲惫，故遣我来传达王命，若能向我蒙古年年纳贡，永远友好，必转祸为福。 
English: It took him more than three months to reach Beijing. He said to the emperor of the Jin Dynasty: "My heavenly son, your land is getting smaller and smaller, and your people are getting more and more exhausted. Therefore, I have been sent to convey the king's command. If you can pay tribute to Mongolia year after year, and always be friendly, you will turn misfortune into blessing."

古文：谒者令下拜，速哥曰： 我大国使，为尔屈乎！ 金主壮之，取金卮饮之酒曰： 归语汝主，必欲加兵，敢率精锐以相周旋，岁币非所闻也。 
现代文：凡参见皇帝都要行跪拜礼，速哥拒不下跪。金朝皇帝称赞他的刚毅不屈，令取酒赐饮，对他说 ：回去告诉你们国王，若要交兵，我们奉陪到底，年年纳贡则办不到。 
English: Everyone who saw the emperor had to kneel in worship, but Hayakawa refused to kneel. The emperor of the Kim dynasty praised his fortitude and perseverance, ordered him to drink wine, and said to him: "Go back and tell your king that if we want to fight, we will accompany him to the end, but we can't pay tribute every year."

古文：速哥饮毕，即怀金卮以出。
现代文：速哥饮酒毕将金卮揣入怀中辞别回国。
English: As soon as he had finished drinking, he put the gold ingot in his arms and left for home.

古文：速哥虽佯为不智，而默识其地理厄塞、城郭人民之强弱。既复命，备以虚实告，且以所怀金卮献。
现代文：沿途暗暗记下地理形势之险夷，城郭人民的强弱，复命时详述这一切，并献出所怀金杯以表示他的勇谋。
English: Along the way, he secretly wrote down the dangers of the geographical situation and the strengths and weaknesses of the people of the castle. When he was ordered to return, he detailed all of this and presented the gold cup he was carrying to show his courageous strategy.

古文：速哥再拜曰： 幸甚！臣意中原为便。 
现代文：太祖高兴地说： 我从你手中取得金国了！ 
English: The great-grandfather said happily, "I have gained a golden kingdom from your hands!"

古文：帝曰： 西山之境，八达以北，汝其主之。汝于城中构大楼，居其上，使人皆仰望汝，汝俯而谕之，顾不伟乎！ 
现代文：于是下令征兵南伐。亡金后，太宗以金之护驾士五人诏赐速哥，说明这是为了表彰他在金朝廷上之刚毅不屈。
English: After Kim's death, Emperor Taizong gave five of Kim's bodyguards to Prince Hayakusa, explaining that this was in recognition of his unyielding courage at the court of the Kim dynasty.

古文：乃以为山西大达鲁花赤。
现代文：太宗七年，任命他为山西大达鲁花赤。
English: In the seventh year of Taizong's reign, he was appointed as the Shanxi Great Daruhana.

古文：受命方出，有回回六人讼事不实，将抵罪，遇诸途，急止监者曰： 姑缓其刑，当入奏。 复见帝曰： 此六人者，名著西域，徒以小罪尽诛之，恐非所以怀远人也。
现代文：受命后出朝，在回府途中，遇回回六人，因犯诬告罪将受到惩处。速哥忙令暂缓其刑，上朝奏请太宗宽免其罪，并说： 此六人皆西域名流，若因小罪而诛杀，有失朝廷怀柔远人之意。 
English: After receiving the order, he went to the Imperial Court, and on his way back to the capital, he met six returnees who were about to be punished for the crime of making false accusations. He hastily ordered that their punishment be suspended, and went to the Imperial Court to appeal to Emperor Taizong for clemency, and said, "These six people are all from the Western Domain, and if they are killed for a minor crime, it means that the Imperial Court does not care about them."

古文：愿以赐臣，臣得困辱之，使自悔悟迁善，为他日用，杀之无益也。 帝意解，召六人谓之曰： 生汝者速哥也，其竭力事之。 
现代文：请求交他处理。太宗明白他的用意，批准了。速哥将此六人带至云中全部释放。速哥享年六十二岁而卒，赠推忠翊运同德功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封宣宁王，谥 忠襄 。忙哥撒儿，姓察哈札剌儿氏。曾祖名赤老温恺赤，祖名搠阿，父那海，均侍奉烈祖。
English: Emperor Taizong understood his intention and approved it. Sojong took the six people to the clouds and released them all. Sojong passed away at the age of 62, and presented them with the titles of Zhong Xun Tong De Gongsong, Taishi, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Shangzhuang Guo, Xuan Ning Wang, Zou Zhong Xiang, and Busi Brother Sal, surnamed Chaha Zhaer. His ancestor's name was Chao Wen Zhaer, his ancestor's name was Zou Ah, and his father's name was Na Hai. They all served the martyrs.

古文：至云中，皆释之。
现代文：搠阿年幼时就受太祖宠爱。
English: When Yaa was young, he was favored by his great-grandfather.

古文：尝从攻凤翔，首立奇功。
现代文：因精于骑射，太祖称他为 默尔杰 ，意思是最善射的人。
English: Due to his proficiency in horse archery, his great-grandfather called him Murje, meaning the best archer.

古文：定宗升为断事官，刚明能举职。
现代文：随从太祖征乃蛮、蔑里吉等部。忙哥撒儿在睿宗时曾随大军攻凤翔，首立奇功，定宗升他为断事官。
English: He followed his great-great-grandfather in conquering Naaman, Liji, and other provinces. His elder brother, Sar'er, had been with the large army that attacked Fengxiang during the reign of Emperor Ruizong. He was the first to achieve great feats, and Emperor Dingzong promoted him to the post of adjudicator.

古文：宪宗在藩邸，深知其人。
现代文：宪宗在即位前就深知其人。
English: Emperor Genso knew him well before he ascended to the throne.

古文：和斡由是知名。定宗崩，宗王八都罕大会宗亲，议立宪宗。畏兀八剌曰： 失烈门，皇孙也，宜立。
现代文：他还参加征伐斡罗思、阿速、钦察诸部的战斗，常先于诸将出阵，而所俘得的宝玉等战利品又全分给诸将，自己一无所取，宪宗因此更加器重他，让他治理封地的百姓，任命他为断事官之长，相当于汉族的大将军之职，位在三公之上。定宗驾崩，宗王八都罕召集宗亲商议立帝的事，欲立宪宗。畏兀八剌反对，他说 ：应立皇孙失烈门为帝。
English: He also took part in the battles of conquering the provinces of Lhasa, Asao, and Qincha, and often went into battle ahead of the generals. The captured treasure and other spoils were all divided among the generals, and he did not take anything. Therefore, Emperor Xizong valued him more, let him govern the people of the fief, and appointed him as the head of the adjudicator, equivalent to the position of the great general of the Han nationality, and above the three princes. When Emperor Xizong passed away, Emperor Zong and the eight emperors gathered their relatives to discuss the matter of establishing the emperor, and wanted to establish Emperor Xizong. Emperor

古文：且先帝尝言其可以君天下。 
现代文：先帝曾说失烈门可以做君王。 
English: The previous emperor once said that a lost soul can become a king.

古文：诸大臣皆莫敢言。忙哥撒儿独曰： 汝言诚是，然先皇后立定宗时，汝何不言耶？
现代文：诸大臣不敢有异言，惟忙哥撒儿说道： 你的话是对的，但先皇后立定宗时你为什么不讲？
English: The ministers did not dare to speak out, but Brother Sarah said, "You are right, but why didn't you speak out when the Empress was enthroned?

古文：八都罕固亦遵先帝遗言也。
现代文：八都罕也是遵循先帝的遗训。
English: The eight capitals also follow the former emperor's behest.

古文：有异议者，吾请斩之。 
现代文：有异议者，我就杀他。 
English: If anyone objects, I'll kill him.

古文：众乃不敢异，八都罕乃奉宪宗立之。
现代文：众人不敢反对，于是八都罕奉宪宗为帝。
English: No one dared to object, so the eight capitals followed the Emperor.

古文：帝或卧未起，忙哥撒儿入奏事，至帐前，扣箭房，帝问何言，即可其奏，以所御大帐行扇赐之。
现代文：宪宗即位后，察哈台之子及按赤台等人图谋叛乱，忙哥撒儿立即发兵镇压，生擒按赤台，诛杀那些罪行昭著的人。宪宗见他奉法不阿，更加重用，对于罪犯，可先行刑，后奏报，宪宗无不认可。
English: After the enthronement of Gensong, the son of Chahatai and others such as Nach Chakdai plotted a rebellion, and Busy Brother Sar immediately sent troops to suppress it. He was arrested by Chakdai and killed those who had committed crimes. Gensong saw that he did not follow the law, but used it more seriously. For criminals, they could be punished first and reported later. Gensong did not disapprove of this.

古文：其见亲宠如此。癸丑冬，病酒而卒。
现代文：宪宗三年，忙哥撒儿因饮酒过度而卒。
English: In the third year of Kenzong, Busy Brother Sal passed away due to excessive drinking.

古文：帝以忙哥撒儿当国时，多所诛戮，及是，咸腾谤言，乃为诏谕其子，略曰：
现代文：忙哥撒儿执政时，因杀了不少的人，故死后，毁谤之言四起。于是宪宗诏谕他的儿子们说：
English: When Busy Brother Thacker was in power, he killed a lot of people, and when he died, there were four slanders. So the founder of the Jurchen order said to his sons:

古文：汝高祖赤老温恺赤暨汝祖搠阿，事我成吉思皇帝，皆著劳绩，惟朕皇祖实褒嘉之。
现代文： 你们的高祖赤老温恺赤及曾祖父搠阿侍奉我成吉思汗皇帝，都劳绩卓著，受到我皇祖的褒奖。
English: Your great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great

古文：汝父忙哥撒儿，自其幼时，事我太宗，朝夕忠勤，罔有过咎。
现代文：你们的父亲忙哥撒儿，自幼就侍奉太宗，朝夕忠勤，没有过失。
English: Your father, Busy Brothers, has served Emperor Taizong since he was a child. He is loyal morning and evening, and has never done anything wrong.

古文：从我皇考，经营四方。迨事皇妣及朕兄弟，亦罔有过咎。
现代文：后随我皇考定宗经营四方，以及侍奉皇太后及朕兄弟，也从无过错。
English: Later, after I became a member of the Cao Ding Sect, I managed the Four Directions and served the Empress Dowager and my brothers, and I never made a mistake.

古文：暨朕讨定斡罗思、阿速、稳儿别里钦察之域，济大川，造方舟，伐山通道，攻城野战，功多于诸将。俘厥宝玉，大赉诸将，则退然无欲得之心。
现代文：他随朕讨平斡罗思、阿速、稳儿别里钦察诸部时，遇河造舟，逢山开路，攻城夺地，其功多于诸将，而所得宝物则分赏诸将，无自私之心。
English: When he followed me to negotiate for the pacification of Luo Si, Ah Sui, and Yong Rong, and inspected the provinces, he built boats on rivers, opened roads on mountains, and attacked cities to seize land. His achievements were more than those of generals, and the treasures he obtained were rewarded to generals, without selfishness.

古文：惟朕言是用，修我邦宪，治我蒐田，辑我国家，罔不咸乂。
现代文：朕听取他的建议，对治理政务、修建猎场、安定国家，无不有益。
English: If we listen to his advice, it will be beneficial to the governance of government affairs, the construction of hunting grounds and the stability of the country.

古文：惟厥忠，虽其私亲，与朕嫔御，小有过咎，一是无有比私。
现代文：他为人忠心耿直，就是对于私亲和朕之嫔妃的过失，一视同仁，都直率指出，无有私心。
English: He is a loyal and straightforward person, that is, he has pointed out the faults of my relatives and my fiancée in a straightforward manner, without any selfishness.

古文：故朕皇妣，迨朕昆弟，无不嘉赖。
现代文：所以朕之皇太后及众皇兄弟无不嘉奖他。
English: That's why our empress dowager and all the emperor's brothers praised him.

古文：朝之老臣、宿卫耆旧，无不严畏。
现代文：朝廷老臣，近卫军宿将，无不敬服他。
English: All the old courtiers of the Imperial Court, and the guardsmen of the Imperial Guard, respected him.

古文：录其勤劳，命为札鲁忽赤，治朕皇考受民，布昭大公，以辨狱慎民，爰作朕股肱耳目，众无哗言，朕听以安。
现代文：今录其劳绩，命为札鲁忽赤，公布以昭示其大公无私，辨明所理案情之是非曲直，以正视听，以安朕心。
English: This is a record of his service, with the name of Zaloo Quchao as the first, published to show his selflessness, to identify the merits and demerits of the case, to be honest, and to reassure our hearts.

古文：自时厥后，察哈台阿哈之孙，太宗之裔定宗、阔出之子，及其民人，越有他志。
现代文： 自今以后，察哈台阿哈之孙、太宗后裔定宗、阔出之子，以及人民百姓，不要再有其他念头。
English: From now on, let there be no other thoughts in the minds of the descendants of Ahab, the descendants of Taizong Dingzong, the sons of Kuo Zhi, and the people.

古文：赖天之灵，时则有克薛杰者，以告于朕。
现代文：苍天有灵，以克薛杰告于朕。
English: There is a spirit in heaven, and it speaks to me through Xuejie.

古文：汝父肃将大旅，以遏乱略，按赤台等谋是用溃，悉就拘执。
现代文：尔等父亲率领大军平定内乱，军纪严肃，所以按赤台的阴谋被粉碎，罪犯全部落网。
English: He and his father led a large army to quell the civil strife, and military discipline was serious. Therefore, according to the plan of the Red Square, the conspiracy was crushed, and all the criminals were arrested.

古文：朕取有罪者，使辨治之，汝父体朕之公，其刑其宥，克比于法。
现代文：朕将有罪者交你们父亲究办。你父亲体会朕之公心，或用刑或释罪，均合于法。
English: I will refer the guilty to your father for investigation. Your father will understand my public-spiritedness, and either punishment or acquittal will be in accordance with the law.

古文：又使治也速、不里狱，亦克比于法。
现代文：又使他审理也速、不里之狱，也合于法度。
English: He was also given a speedy trial and a short prison sentence, which was also in accordance with the law.

古文：惟尔脱欢、脱儿赤：自朕用汝父，用法不阿，兄弟亲姻，咸丽于宪。
现代文： 尔忙哥撒儿之子脱欢、脱儿赤听着：自朕用汝父，执法不阿，虽兄弟亲戚，均按法办事。
English: Listen to the son of a busy brother and sister: Since I am your father, I will not enforce the law. Although they are brothers and relatives, they all act according to the law.

古文：今众罔不怨，曰 尔亦有死耶 ，若有慊志。人则虽死，朕将宠之如生。
现代文：今有许多人心怀不满，说你们父亲也有死的一天。但是，你父虽死，而朕仍宠爱如生。
English: Now there are many who are discontented and say that your father will also die one day. However, although your father is dead, I still cherish him as if he were alive.

古文：肆朕训汝，尔克明时朕言，如是而有福，不如是而有祸。
现代文：朕今教训你们，要时刻记住朕的训诫，听朕的话则有福，否则有祸。
English: I am teaching you now, always remember my teaching. If you listen to my words, you will be blessed, otherwise, you will be cursed.

古文：惟天惟君，能祸福人；惟天惟君，是敬是畏。立身正直，制行贞洁，是汝之福；反是勿思也。
现代文：因为只有上天和君主才能与人祸福，使人敬畏。尔等为人正直，品行贞洁，是汝之福；不要有相反的念头。
English: For only the heavens and the sovereign can bring good or evil to man, and make him fear. It is your good fortune to be an honest man, and to be chaste in your conduct; do not think to the contrary.

古文：能用朕言，则不坠汝父之道，人亦不能间汝矣；不用朕言，则人将仇汝、伺汝、间汝。
现代文：能听从朕的教训，则不会违背你父亲的处世之道，人们也不能离间你们；若不听从朕的教导，则别人会仇视你们，伺机陷害，离间你们。
English: If you listen to my teaching, you will not go against your father's way of life, and people will not be able to separate you. If you do not listen to my teaching, others will hate you and try to set up a trap to separate you.

古文：怨汝父者，必曰 汝亦与我夷矣 ，汝则殆哉。
现代文：怨恨你们父亲的人，必然会说 ：你们会与我一样，遭到诛杀。 
English: Those who hate your father will say, 'You will be killed just like me.'

古文：汝于朕言，弗慎绎之，汝则有咎；克慎绎之，人将敬汝畏汝，无间伺汝，无慢汝怨汝者矣。
现代文：那时你们将惶惶不安。你等对朕所言若不慎加体会，则将遭到灾难；若深加体会，人们将会尊敬你们，怕你们，没有机会陷害你们，也不会怠慢和怨恨你们了。
English: At that time, you will be in a state of panic. If you are careless about what you say to me, you will suffer disaster; if you are deeply aware, people will respect you, fear you, have no opportunity to frame you, and will not neglect and resent you.

古文：又，而母而妇，有谗欺巧佞构乱之言，慎勿听之，则尽善矣。
现代文：还有，若你们的母亲、妻子有什么欺骗和唆使的话，切勿听信，这样就更好了。 
English: Also, if your mother or wife cheats or instigates anything, don't listen to them, it's better that way.

古文：幼有奇质，年十五，尽通本国书。
现代文：至顺四年，追封忙哥撒儿为兖国公，有子四人，依次为脱欢、脱儿赤、也先帖木尔、帖不儿不花。
English: In the fourth year of the Shun era, Emperor He sealed Busi's brother Sarer as the Duke of Shandong Province. He had four sons, in order of birth: Dechuan, Dechuera, Timur, and Tebeer.

古文：太祖闻之，召至阙下，一见大悦，曰： 此儿目中有火，它日可大用。 以授睿宗，使视显懿庄圣皇后分邑岁赋。
现代文：孟速思，畏兀人，其祖先世代居住在别失八里，这是古北庭都护府之地。孟速思自幼气质不凡，十五岁时就能通本国书籍。太祖闻知，召至朝廷，交付睿宗，使他管理显懿庄圣皇后分地的赋税。
English: Meng Suo Si, a fearless person, whose ancestors lived for generations in Biegu Bailian, this is the place of the ancient Bei Ting capital. Meng Suo Si has had an extraordinary temperament since childhood, and at the age of fifteen he could read books in his own country. Grandfather Wen Ji, summoned to the court, handed Ruizong over to him, so that he could manage the taxation of the holy empress's subdivision in Xianhuangzhuang.

古文：复事世祖于潜藩，日见亲用。
现代文：以后又侍奉太子世祖，并日见重用。
English: Later, he served the prince's ancestor, and was increasingly used.

古文：宪宗崩，孟速思言于世祖曰： 神器不可久旷，太祖嫡孙，唯王最长且贤，宜即皇帝位。 
现代文：宪宗驾崩，孟速思对世祖说： 皇位不可久空，太祖是嫡孙，在诸王中最长，且贤能，应即皇位。 
English: After the death of Emperor Xianzong, Meng Suoxi said to his ancestor: "The imperial throne cannot be empty for long. The great-grandfather is the legitimate grandson, the longest among the kings, and he is capable. He should be the emperor."

古文：诸王塔察儿、也孙哥、合丹等，咸是其言。
现代文：诸王塔察儿、也孙哥、合丹等也都赞成孟速思的意见。
English: All the kings, including Tacharo, Yasunaga, and Hatan, also agreed with Meng Suoxi's opinion.

古文：世祖即位，眷顾益重。南征时，与近臣不只儿为断事官。
现代文：所以世祖即位后对孟速思更加关怀，南征时命他与近臣不只儿同为断事官。
English: Therefore, after the enthronement of the ancestor, he was more concerned about Meng Suoxi. During the Southern Expedition, he and his close vassals were not only the adjudicators.

古文：及诸王阿里不哥叛，相拒漠北，不只儿有二心，孟速思知之，奏徙之于中都，亲监护以往，帝以为忠。
现代文：诸王阿里不哥在漠北反叛世祖，不只儿也有不忠于世祖之心。孟速思察知，奏请将不只儿迁往中都，并亲自监护送往，世祖深知其耿耿忠心。
English: King Ali's younger brother rebelled against his ancestor in the north of the desert, and not only was he disloyal to his ancestor's heart. Meng Suo Si knew that he would not only move to the central capital, but also personally escort him there. The ancestor was well aware of his loyalty.

古文：数命收召豪俊，凡所引荐，皆极其选。
现代文：朝廷多次命他召收天下豪俊之士，凡所引荐的，均是极当的人选。
English: The imperial court has repeatedly ordered him to recruit the world's most talented people. All those recommended are excellent candidates.

古文：诏与安童并拜丞相，固辞。
现代文：朝廷诏命他与安童同时拜为丞相，孟速思始终拒绝。
English: The imperial court decreed that he and Ando become prime ministers at the same time, but Meng Suoxi always refused.

古文：帝语安童及丞相伯颜、御史大夫月鲁那演等曰： 贤哉孟速思，求之彼族，诚为罕也。 
现代文：世祖对安童、丞相伯颜及御史大夫月鲁那演等人说 ：孟速思真是贤人，在畏兀族中是罕见的。 
English: The founder said to Ando, the chancellor Bo Yan and the chief historian Yue Lunayuan: Meng Suo Si is truly a wise man, which is rare among the Hui people.

古文：孟速思为人刚严谨信。
现代文：孟速思为人刚直、严谨、信义。
English: Meng Suisi is a man of uprightness, rigor and sincerity.

古文：蚤居帷幄，谋议世莫得闻。
现代文：早年在世祖藩府中出谋划策，世间不得而知。
English: In the early years, the government of the ancestral domain made a plan, but it is unknown to the world.

古文：至元四年卒，年六十有二。
现代文：至元四年卒，年六十二岁。
English: He graduated in the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty and is 62 years old.

古文：帝尤哀悼，特谥敏惠。
现代文：世祖十分哀悼，特谥为 敏惠 。
English: The patriarch is in deep mourning, especially for Minhye.

古文：武宗朝，赠推忠同德佐理功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封武都王，改谥智敏。
现代文：武宗时，赠推忠同德佐理功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封武都王，改谥 智敏 。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuzong, he bestowed the title of Dedzori on a meritorious subject, the title of Daishi, the title of Kaifu Yi on three officials, and the title of Shangzhu Guo, the title of Wudu Wang, and the title of Zhimin.

古文：子九人，多至大官。
现代文：有子九人，多为大官。
English: He had nine children, most of whom became high-ranking officials.

