古文：马录程启充张逵郑一鹏唐枢杜鸾叶应聪解一贯陆粲邵经邦刘世扬魏良弼马录，字君卿，信阳人。
现代文：马录，字君卿，信阳人。
English: Ma Luo, Zha Junqing, Xinyangren.

古文：正德三年进士。
现代文：正德三年进士。
English: Zhengde is a three-year-old trainee.

古文：授固安知县。
现代文：授官固安知县。
English: He was assigned to Guanchi County.

古文：居官廉明，征为御史，按江南诸府。
现代文：做官廉明，征为御史，巡按江南诸府。
English: He was an incorruptible official, was appointed as the imperial historian, and traveled throughout the provinces south of the Yangtze River.

古文：世宗即位，疏言： 江南之民最苦粮长。
现代文：世宗即位，马录上疏说： 江南之民最苦粮长。
English: When King Sejong ascended to the throne, the inscription on the tablet read: "The people in the south of the Yangtze River are the most hard-up.

古文：白粮输内府一石，率费四五石。
现代文：白粮输送内府一石，大致耗费四五石。
English: White grain transported within the prefecture costs 1 koku, and it generally costs 4 or 5 koku.

古文：他如酒醋局、供应库以至军器、胖袄、颜料之属输内府者，费皆然。
现代文：其他像酒醋局、供应库以至军器、胖袄、颜料之类的东西，输送到内府的，耗费也相同。 
English: Other things, such as wine and vinegar, supply depots, and even military equipment, fats, pigments, and the like, transported to the inner palace, also consume the same amount of money.

古文：户部侍郎秦金等请从录言，命石加耗一斗，毋得苛求。
现代文：户部侍郎秦金等人请求听从马录的话，下令一石只加耗一斗，毋得苛求。
English: The steward of the household, Qin Jin, and others requested to listen to the words of Maru, and ordered that only one stone be added and one bucket consumed, so there was no need to be demanding.

古文：中官黄锦诬劾高唐判官金坡，诏逮之，连五百余人。
现代文：中官黄锦诬告高唐判官金坡，皇帝下诏令逮捕金坡，株连五百多人。
English: Lieutenant-general Huang Jin falsely accused Gaotang judge Jin Po, and the emperor issued a decree to arrest Jin Po and more than 500 of his followers.

古文：录言：祖宗内设法司，外设抚、按，百余年刑清政平。
现代文：马录说 ：祖宗内设法司，外设巡抚、巡按，百多年刑清政平。
English: Ma Luo said: Ancestral internal investigation department, external inspector and inspector, more than 100 years of punishment Qing Zhengping.

古文：先帝时，刘瑾、钱宁辈蛊惑圣聪，动遣锦衣官校，致天下汹汹。
现代文：在先帝时，刘瑾、钱宁之辈蛊惑圣聪，动不动就派遣锦衣官校，导致天下汹汹。
English: In the time of the former emperor, Liu Bei, Channing and their like bewitched the sages and sent them to the imperial court at every turn, which led to chaos in the world.

古文：陛下方勤新政，不虞复有高唐之命。 
现代文：陛下正努力新政，没有预料到有高唐这样的命令。 
English: His Majesty is working hard on the New Deal and did not expect such an order from Gao Tang.

古文：给事中许复礼等亦以为言，狱得少解。
现代文：给事中许复礼等人也这样说，拘狱才得以少解。
English: People such as Xu Fulei, who was involved in the case, also said that it was only after he was taken into custody that he was able to be released.

古文：嘉靖二年大计天下庶官，被黜者多讦抚、按，以录言禁止。
现代文：嘉靖二年考察天下百官，被贬黜的大多是讦攻过抚、按短处的人，因马录的话才被禁止。
English: In the second year of the Jiajing Emperor's reign, he inspected all the officials in the world. Most of those who were demeaned were those who cheated and took advantage of others. It was only because of Maru's words that they were banned.

古文：五年出按山西，而妖贼李福达狱起。
现代文：五年出按山西，此时发生妖贼李福达的案件。
English: Five years ago, according to Shanxi, the case of the thief Li Fuda occurred at this time.

古文：福达者，崞人。初坐妖贼王良、李钺党，戍山丹卫。
现代文：李福达是崞人，起初坐妖贼王良、李钺的党徒之罪，谪戍山丹卫。
English: Li Fuda is a Lushan person. At first, he took the sins of the party members of the demon thief Wang Liang and Li Lushan, and became Lushan Danwei.

古文：逃还，更名午，为清军御史所勾，再戍山海卫。
现代文：逃跑回来，改名李午，被清军御史发现，再戍山海卫。
English: He ran away and came back, changed his name to Li Bao, was discovered by the Qing army's imperial historian, and then became Lushan Haiwei.

古文：复逃居洛川，以弥勒教诱愚民邵进禄等为乱。
现代文：又逃跑居住在洛川，用弥勒教诱使愚民邵进禄等人搞叛乱。
English: He also ran away and lived in Luochuan, using Maitreya's teachings to entice the foolish people of Shao Jinlu and others to rebel.

古文：事觉，进禄伏诛，福达先还家，得免。
现代文：事情被发现，邵进禄伏诛，李福达先回家，得以幸免。
English: The matter was discovered, Shao Jinlu fled, Li Fuda went home first, and was spared.

古文：更姓名曰张寅，往来徐沟间，输粟得太原卫指挥使。
现代文：更改姓名为张寅，在徐沟之间来往，因进献粮食得官太原卫指挥使。
English: He changed his name to Zhang Yin, traveled between Xu and Gou, and was awarded the post of Taiyuan Wei commander due to his contribution of grain.

古文：子大仁、大义、大礼皆冒京师匠籍。
现代文：他的儿子大仁、大义、大礼都冒充京师匠籍。
English: His sons, Dairin, Dayi, and Dairi, all pretended to be craftsmen from Kyoto.

古文：用黄白术干武定侯郭勋，勋大信幸。
现代文：李福达用炼丹术攀附武定侯郭勋，郭勋非常信任宠爱他。
English: Li Fuda used alchemy to cling to Wu Ding Hou Guo Xun, Guo Xun trusted and loved him very much.

古文：其仇薛良讼于录，按问得实。
现代文：他的仇人薛良向马录诉讼这件事，马录进行按问觉得真实。
English: His enemy Xue Liang sued Ma Luo over the incident. Ma Luo thought it was true when he asked about it.

古文：檄洛川父老杂辨之，益信。
现代文：令洛川父老交杂辨认后，更加相信。
English: After recognizing that Luo Chuan and his father were old acquaintances, he was more convinced.

古文：勋为遗书录祈免，录不从，偕巡抚江潮具狱以闻，且劾勋庇奸乱法。
现代文：郭勋因而写信送给马录祈求免查，马录不从，偕同巡抚江潮书写案状上报，并且弹劾郭勋包庇奸人扰乱法律。
English: Guo Xun therefore sent a letter to Ma Luo to ask for exemption from investigation. Ma Luo did not comply, and together with the inspector Jiang Chao, he wrote a case report and impeached Guo Xun for protecting traitors and disturbing the law.

古文：章下都察院，都御史聂贤等覆如录奏，力言勋党逆罪。
现代文：奏章下到都察院，都御史聂贤等人所言又如马录上奏的一样，竭力说郭勋偏袒逆罪。
English: When the record was sent to the Duka-in, the duke's official, Shixian, and others tried to say that Guo Xun was partial to treason, just as the record had said.

古文：诏福达父子论死，妻女为奴，没其产，责勋对状。
现代文：皇帝下令将李福达父子处死，妻女为奴隶，没收他们的财产，责问郭勋回答具体情况。
English: The emperor ordered Li Fuda and his son to be executed, his wife and daughter to be enslaved, their property to be confiscated, and Guo Xun to be interrogated to answer specific questions.

古文：勋惧，乞恩，因为福达代辨，帝置不问。
现代文：郭勋恐惧，乞求皇恩，并替李福达辩解，皇帝置之不理。
English: Guo Xun was afraid, begged for imperial favor, and defended Li Fuda, but the emperor ignored him.

古文：会给事中王科、郑一鹏、程辂、常泰、刘琦、郑自璧、赵廷瑞、沈汉、秦祐、张逵、陈皋谟，御史程启充、卢琼、邵豳、高世魁、任淳，南京御史姚鸣凤、潘壮、戚雄、王献，评事杜鸾，刑部郎中刘仕，主事唐枢，交章劾勋，谓罪当连坐。
现代文：这时给事中王科、郑一鹏、程辂、常泰、刘琦、郑自璧、赵廷瑞、沈汉、秦、张逵、陈皋谟，御史程启充、卢琼、邵豳、高世魁、任淳，南京御史姚鸣凤、潘壮、戚雄、王献，评事杜鸾，刑部郎中刘仕，主事唐枢，都交章弹劾郭勋，说他罪当连坐。
English: At this time, Wang Ke, Zheng Yipeng, Cheng Qi, Chang Tai, Liu Qi, Zheng Zibi, Zhao Ting Rui, Shen Han, Qin, Zhang Qi, Chen Shumu, Gu Shi Cheng Qicheng, Lu Qiong, Shao Qi, Gao Shiqui, Ren Chun, Nanjing Gu Shi Yao Mingfeng, Pan Zhuang, Qi Xiong, Wang Xian, Judge Du Qi, Criminal Department Longzhong Liu Shi, and Chief Tang Zu, all handed in their signatures to impeach Guo Xun, saying that he was guilty.

古文：勋亦累自诉，且以议礼触众怒为言，帝心动。
现代文：郭勋也多次自己申诉，并且说是因为议礼触犯了众怒，皇帝心有所动。
English: Guo Xun also repeatedly appealed on his own, and said that because the appeal offended the public anger, the emperor's heart was moved.

古文：勋复乞张璁、桂萼为援。
现代文：郭勋又求乞张璁、桂萼援助他。
English: Guo Xun also begged Zhang Ye and Gui Cai to help him.

古文：璁、萼素恶廷臣攻己，亦欲借是舒宿愤，乃谓诸臣内外交结，借端陷勋，将渐及诸议礼者。
现代文：张璁、桂萼向来恶恨廷臣围攻自己，也想借这件事舒展宿愤，于是说诸位大臣内外交结，借端陷害郭勋，准备逐渐陷害诸位议礼的人。
English: Zhang Ye and Gui Cale have always hated courtiers besieging them, and they also want to use this incident to extend their long-standing resentment, so they said that you ministers have made internal and external compromises, set up Guo Xun on the other side, and are preparing to gradually set up you negotiators.

古文：帝深入其言，而外廷不知，攻勋益急。
现代文：皇帝深深听信他们的话，但朝廷臣僚不知道这件事，攻击郭勋更加急切。
English: The emperor deeply listened to their words, but the court officials did not know about this and attacked Guo Xun even more eagerly.

古文：帝益疑，命取福达等至京下三法司讯，既又命会文武大臣更讯之，皆无异词。
现代文：皇帝更加怀疑，命令提取李福达等人到京师下三法司审讯，既而又命令会合文武大臣再审讯他，都没有异言。
English: The emperor was even more suspicious. He ordered Li Fuda and others to be taken to Beijing to be interrogated by three magistrates, and ordered the Minister of Education and Culture to interrogate him again. There was no objection.

古文：帝怒，将亲讯，以杨一清之言而止，仍下廷鞫。
现代文：皇帝恼怒，准备亲自审讯，因杨一清的话才止息，仍下廷审讯。
English: The emperor was furious and prepared to personally interrogate him, but only stopped because of Yang Iqing's words, and continued to interrogate him in court.

古文：尚书颜颐寿等不敢自坚，改拟妖言律斩。
现代文：尚书颜颐寿等人不敢自持，改拟妖言律斩。
English: Shang Shuxuan, Yan Shou and others did not dare to stand up for themselves and imitated the demon's words.

古文：帝犹怒，命法司俱戴罪办事，遣官往械录、潮及前问官布政使李璋、按察使李珏、佥事章纶、都指挥马豕等。
现代文：皇帝更愤怒，命令法司都戴罪办事，派遣官员前往拘囚马录、江潮和前此问讯官布政使李璋、按察使李珏、佥事章纶、都指挥马豸等人。
English: The emperor was even more enraged and ordered the Department of Law to take all the blame, dispatching officials to the prisoners Ma Luo and Jiang Chao, as well as the former interrogators Bu Zheng Envoy Li Qian, Ba Zha Envoy Li Qian, An Ji Zhang Qian, and Du Du Commander Ma Qian and others.

古文：时璋、珏已迁都御史，璋巡抚宁夏，珏巡抚甘肃，皆下狱廷讯。
现代文：这时李璋、李珏已迁都御史，李璋巡抚宁夏，李珏巡抚甘肃，都被下狱并当廷审讯。
English: At this time, Li Wei and Li Wei had moved to the capital city, and Li Wei, the governor of Ningxia, and Li Wei, the governor of Gansu, were both sent to prison and tried in court.

古文：乃反前狱，抵良诬告罪。
现代文：于是颠倒前案，要薛良抵偿诬告之罪。
English: As a result, the previous case was reversed and Xue Liang was ordered to pay compensation for the crime of false accusation.

古文：帝以罪不及录，怒甚。
现代文：皇帝因罪没有涉及到马录，非常恼怒。
English: The emperor was very angry because the crime did not involve Maro.

古文：命璁、萼、方献夫分署三法司事，尽下尚书颐寿，侍郎刘玉、王启，左都御史贤，副都御史刘文庄，佥都御史张润，大理卿汤沐，少卿徐文华、顾佖，寺丞汪渊狱，严刑推问遂搜录箧，得大学士贾咏、都御史张仲贤、工部侍郎闵楷、御史张英及寺丞渊私书。
现代文：命令张璁、桂萼、方献夫分署三法司事。将尚书颜颐寿，侍郎刘玉、王启，左都御史聂贤，副都御史刘文庄，佥都御史张润，大理卿汤沐，少卿徐文华、顾亻必，寺丞汪渊等全部下狱，严刑推问，于是搜马录的小箱子，获得大学士贾泳、都御史张仲贤、工部侍郎闵楷、御史张英和寺丞汪渊的私人信件。
English: He ordered Zhang Jun, Gui Caly, and Fang Xianfu, the three magistrates of the branch office of the Legal Affairs Bureau, to send Shang Shuxian, Liu Yu, Wang Qi, Zuo Guo Shi, Liu Wenzhuang, Zhuo Guo Shi, Zhang Run, Dali Kei, Xu Wenhua, Guo Bi, and Wang Yuan, the secretary of the temple, all to prison and interrogate them severely, and then search the small box of the horse records to obtain the personal letters of Jia Ying, the university judge, Zhang Zhongxian, the secretary of the capital, Liu Wenzhuang, the secretary of the factory, Zhang Ying,

古文：咏引罪致仕去，仲贤等亦下狱。
现代文：贾泳引罪辞官离去，张仲贤等人也被下狱。
English: Jia Yong Quan resigned from his post, and Zhang Zhongxian and others were also sent to prison.

古文：萼等上言： 给事中琦、泰，郎中仕，声势相倚，挟私弹事，佐录杀人。
现代文：桂萼等人向皇帝上奏说： 给事中刘琦、常泰，郎中刘仕，声势互相倚恃，挟私仇弹事，帮助马录杀人。
English: Gui Caly and others appealed to the emperor, saying, "During the incident, Liu Ye, Chang Tai, and Liu Shi's son-in-law, all sided with each other, plotted against each other, and helped Ma Luo to commit murder.

古文：给事中科、一鹏、祐、汉、辂，评事鸾，御史鸣凤、壮、雄，扶同妄奏，助成奸恶。
现代文：给事中王科、郑一鹏、秦、沈汉、程辂，评事杜鸾，御史姚鸣凤、潘壮、戚雄，连结妄奏，助成奸恶。
English: Wang Ke, Zheng Yipeng, Qin, Shen Han, Cheng Yao, commentator Du Yao, supervisors Yao Mingfeng, Pan Zhuang, and Qi Xiong, all played a part in the plot, aiding and abetting.

古文：给事中逵，御史世魁，方幸寅就死，得诬勋谋逆，率同连名，同声驾祸。
现代文：给事中张逵，御史高世魁，正希望张寅就死，得以诬陷郭勋谋逆，他们一起连名，同声嫁祸。
English: In the middle of the affair, Zhang Xuan, the world leader of the Imperial History High School, was hoping that Zhang Ying would die so that he could frame Guo Xun for plotting against him. They all joined their names together and blamed him for the disaster.

古文：郎中司马相妄引事例，故意增减，诬上行私。
现代文：郎中司马相乱引事例，故意增减，行私罔上。
English: His son-in-law, Sima Xiang, randomly cited cases, deliberately increased and decreased, and acted selfishly.

古文：迩者言官缔党求胜，内则奴隶公卿，外则草芥司属，任情恣横，殆非一日，请大奋乾断，彰国法。 
现代文：近者言官结党求胜，在朝廷内则以公卿为奴隶，朝廷外则以司属为草芥，任性恣横，恐怕不是一天两天了，请皇上大大振奋干断，以彰国法。 
English: In the recent past, officials formed a party to seek victory. In the imperial court, nobles were used as slaves. Outside the imperial court, subordinates were used as straw and hay. They were capricious and arbitrary. I am afraid it has not been a day or two. I would like to ask the emperor to greatly encourage them to break away in order to uphold the laws of the country.

古文：帝纳其言，并下诸人狱，收系南京刑部。
现代文：皇帝采纳他的话，一并将诸位大臣下狱，收囚在南京刑部。
English: The emperor accepted his words and sent all the ministers to prison, taking them into custody at the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：先是，廷臣会讯，太仆卿汪元锡、光禄少卿余才偶语曰： 此狱已得情，何再鞫？ 
现代文：开始，廷臣会集审讯，太仆卿汪元锡、光禄少卿余才偶尔说道： 此狱已经得情，为何要再审讯？ 
English: At the beginning, the courtiers would gather for the trial, and the great servant Wang Yuanxi and Guanglu Shaoqing Yu Cai would occasionally say: This prison has already been blessed, why do we need another trial?

古文：侦者告萼，以闻，亦逮问。
现代文：侦察的人向桂萼告密，桂萼报告给皇帝知道，也将汪元锡、余才逮捕问罪。
English: The scout informed Gui Calyx, Gui Calyx reported to the emperor, and Wang Yuanxi and Yu Cai were arrested and questioned.

古文：萼等遂肆搒掠。
现代文：桂萼等人于是大肆拷问。
English: Gui Caly and the others then subjected him to extensive interrogation.

古文：录不胜刑，自诬故入人罪。
现代文：马录受不了刑，自己诬陷自己说是故意加罪他人。
English: Unable to bear the punishment, Ma Luo framed himself and said that he intentionally aggravated the crime of others.

古文：萼等乃定爰书，言寅非福达，录等恨勋，构成冤狱，因列诸臣罪名。
现代文：桂萼等人于是定下罪书，说张寅并不是李福达，马录等人怀恨郭勋，构成冤狱，据此列出诸臣罪名。
English: Gui Caly and others then decided on a crime book, saying that Zhang Ying was not Li Fuda, and that Ma Luo and others harbored hatred for Guo Xun, constituting unjust imprisonment, according to which the charges of the ministers were listed.

古文：帝悉从其言。
现代文：皇帝完全听从他的话。
English: The emperor obeyed him completely.

古文：谪戍极边，遇赦不宥者五人：璋、珏、纶、豕、前山西副使迁大理少卿文华。
现代文：谪戍极边，遇到大赦不宽免的有五人：李璋、李珏、章纶、马豸、前山西副使迁大理少卿的徐文华。
English: On the other hand, there are five people who have not been pardoned by the amnesty: Li Wei, Li Wei, Zhang Wei, Ma Wei, and Xu Wenhua, former deputy envoy of Shanxi to China.

古文：谪戍边卫者七人：琦、逵、泰、琼、启充、仕及知州胡伟。
现代文：谪戍边卫的有七人：刘琦、张逵、常泰、卢琼、程启充、刘仕和知州胡伟。
English: There are seven border guards: Liu Wei, Zhang Wei, Chang Tai, Lu Qiong, Cheng Qicheng, Liu Si and Chizhou Hu Wei.

古文：为民者十一人：贤、科、一鹏、祐、汉、辂、世魁、淳、鸣凤、相、鸾。
现代文：被贬斥为民的有十一人：聂贤、王科、郑一鹏、秦、沈汉、程辂、高世魁、任淳、姚鸣凤、司马相、杜鸾。
English: There were eleven people who were denounced as commoners: Yu Xian, Wang Ke, Zheng Yipeng, Qin, Shen Han, Cheng Yu, Gao Shiqui, Ren Jun, Yao Mingfeng, Sima Xiang, and Du Wei.

古文：革职闲住者十七人：颐寿、玉、启、潮、文庄、沐、佖、渊、元锡、才、楷、仲贤、润、英、壮、雄、前大理丞迁佥都御史毛伯温。
现代文：被革除官职闲住的人有十七名：颐寿、刘玉、王启、汉潮、刘文庄、汤沐、顾亻必、汪渊、汪元锡、余才、闵楷、张仲贤、张润、张英、潘壮、戚雄、前大理寺迁佥都御史毛伯温。
English: There are seventeen people who have been removed from their official positions and are living idly: Zou Shou, Liu Yu, Wang Qi, Han Chao, Liu Wenzhuang, Tang Mu, Gu Yibing, Wang Yuan, Wang Yuanxi, Yu Cai, Zou Kai, Zhang Zhongxian, Zhang Run, Zhang Ying, Pan Zhuang, Qi Xiong, and former Dali Temple relocation capital master Mao Bowen.

古文：其他下巡按逮问革职者，副使周宣等复五人。
现代文：其他的人下巡按逮捕问罪被革职的，有副使周宣等五人。
English: Five other people, including deputy envoy Zhou Xuan, were dismissed from their posts after being arrested and questioned.

古文：良抵死，众证皆戍，寅还职。
现代文：薛良抵死罪，众证人都戍边关，张寅复职。
English: Xue Liang has confessed to the crime of capital murder, all witnesses have been released, and Zhang Yin has been reinstated.

古文：录以故入人死未决，当徒。
现代文：马录因故意将人入死罪而未判决，当罚服劳役。
English: Ma Luo was sentenced to forced labor as punishment for intentionally causing a death.

古文：帝以为轻，欲坐以奸党律斩。
现代文：皇帝认为这太轻了，想问他奸党贼律斩。
English: The emperor thought this was too light, and wanted to ask him about the death penalty for traitors.

古文：萼等谓张寅未死，而录代之死，恐天下不服，宜永戍烟瘴地，令缘及子孙。
现代文：桂萼等人说张寅没有死，而马录代替他死，恐怕天下不服，适宜永远守戍烟瘴地，并延及他的子孙。
English: Gui Caly and others said that Zhang Yin did not die, but Ma Luo died instead of him. I am afraid that the world will not accept it. It is appropriate to keep it forever, and extend it to his descendants.

古文：乃戍广西南丹卫，遇赦不宥。
现代文：于是守戍广西南丹卫，遇到大赦也不原宥他。
English: As a result, the governor of Guangxi Province, Nanshan Danwei, did not hesitate to pardon him when he was granted amnesty.

古文：帝意犹未慊，语杨一清等曰： 与其佼及后世，不若诛止其身，从《舜典》 罚弗及嗣 之意。 
现代文：皇帝意犹未足，对杨一清等人说： 与其祸及后世，不如诛止他一身，根据《舜典》 罚不要牵连到后嗣 之意行事。 
English: The emperor's intention was still not enough, and he said to Yang Iqing and others: "Rather than bringing misfortune to future generations, it is better to stop him alone, and act according to the "Law of Succession" so as not to implicate his heirs."

古文：一清曰： 祖宗制律具有成法，录罪不中死律。
现代文：杨一清说： 祖宗制律具有成法，马录的罪没有达到死律。
English: Yang Yiching said: The patriarchal system has a law, but the crime of Maro did not reach the law of death.

古文：若法外用刑，吏将缘作奸，人无所措手足矣。 
现代文：如果法外用刑，官吏将缘借它来作奸，让人手足无措。 
English: If extrajudicial punishment is used, officials will use it to commit treason, leaving people helpless.

古文：帝不得已，从之。
现代文：皇帝不得已，听从了他的话。
English: The emperor reluctantly obeyed his words.

古文：以萼等平反有功，劳谕之文华殿，赐二品服俸、金带、银币，给三代诰命。
现代文：因桂萼等人平反有功，在文华殿中慰劳他们，赏赐二品官服薪俸、金带、银币，给三代诰命。
English: Because Gui Calyx and others made great contributions to the rehabilitation, he consoled them in the Wenhua Hall, rewarded them with second-class official service salaries, gold belts, silver coins, and gave three generations of lives.

古文：乞追夺勋等官爵，优恤马录诸人，以作忠良之气。 
现代文：于是编《钦明大狱录》颁布告示天下。当时是嘉靖六年九月初八。到十六年，皇子降生，全部赦免。
English: Therefore, the compiler of the "Qingming Prison Record" issued a notice to the world. At that time, it was the eighth day of the ninth month of the sixth year of Jiajing. By the 16th year, the prince was born and all were pardoned.

古文：由是，福达狱始明。程启充，字以道，嘉定州人。
现代文：诸位被谪守戍边关的人都被释放回来，只有马录没有赦免，竟然死在边关戍所。程启充，字以道，嘉定州人。
English: All of you who were detained at the border checkpoint were released. Only Maro was not pardoned and died at the border checkpoint detention center. Cheng Qicheng, Zi Yidu, and Jiading people.

古文：正德三年进士。
现代文：正德三年进士。
English: Zhengde is a three-year-old trainee.

古文：除三原知县，入为御史。
现代文：授官三原知县，调入朝廷任御史。
English: He was given a post in Mihara Prefecture and transferred to the Imperial Court to serve as Imperial Historian.

古文：嬖幸子弟家人滥冒军功，有至都督赐蟒玉者。
现代文：当时很多皇上宠爱之臣的子弟家人滥冒军功，有的得到都督职被赐蟒袍玉带。
English: At that time, many of the children and relatives of the emperor's favorite vassals profited from their military exploits, and some were given the post of governor-general and given the imperial robe and jade sash.

古文：启充言： 定制，军职授官，悉准首功。
现代文：程启充上奏说： 定制，军职授官，悉准首功。
English: Cheng Qicheng said in his report: Custom-made, military award, and first merit.

古文：今幸门大启，有买功、冒功、寄名、窜名、并功之弊。
现代文：现在宠癰之门大启，有买功、冒功、寄名、窜名、并功之弊。
English: Now the door of favoritism is wide open, with the drawbacks of buying merits, impersonating merits, sending names, stealing names, and combining merits.

古文：权要家贿军士金帛，以易所获之级，是谓买功。
现代文：权要之家贿赂军士金帛，用来换取所获得的首级，这叫买功。
English: The family of the important person bribed Sergeant Jin Qi in exchange for the head rank he obtained, which is called buying merit.

古文：冲锋斩馘者，甲也，而乙取之，甚者杀平民以为贼，是谓冒功。
现代文：冲锋斩敌首级的是甲，而乙却取去，更有甚者杀平民以为敌贼，这叫冒功。
English: It is A who rushes forward to cut off the enemy's head, while B takes it away, and even more so, those who kill civilians think they are enemy thieves, which is called taking the credit.

古文：身不出门闾，而名隶行伍，是谓寄名。
现代文：身不出门闾，而名子却隶属行伍，这叫寄名。
English: If you don't go to the gate, but your name is in the procession, it's called sending your name.

古文：贿求掾吏，洗补文册，是谓窜名。
现代文：贿赂求属官，洗补文册，这叫窜名。
English: Bribing a subordinate official and padding one's record books are called impersonation.

古文：至有一人之身，一日之间，不出京师，而东西南朔四处报功者，按名累级，骤至高阶，是谓并功。
现代文：以至于有一人之身，一日之间，人不出京师，而东西南北四处报他的功劳，按名累计首级，骤然到达高阶，这叫并功。
English: So much so that there is a person who, in the space of a day, does not leave the capital, and his merits are reported everywhere in the east, west, south and north, accumulating the first level by name, suddenly reaching a higher level, which is called co-benefit.

古文：此皆坏祖宗法，解将士体，乞严为察革。 
现代文：这都是破坏祖宗之法，使将士解体，乞求皇上严为审察进行革除。 
English: These are all methods of destroying the ancestors, disintegrating the soldiers, and begging the emperor to strictly investigate and remove them.

古文：帝不能用。
现代文：皇帝不采用他的意见。
English: Emperor Shun disobeyed.

古文：十一年正旦，群臣待漏入贺，日晡礼始成。
现代文：十一年元旦，群臣半夜入贺，到日已偏西礼才成。
English: On the eleventh New Year's Day, the courtiers entered the celebration in the middle of the night.

古文：及散朝，已昏夜。
现代文：到散朝的时候，已是黄昏黑夜。
English: By the end of the day, it was dusk and night.

古文：众奔趋而出，颠仆相践踏。
现代文：众人奔趋而去，颠仆互相践踏。
English: The crowd surges forward, trampling each other.

古文：将军赵朗者，死于禁门。
现代文：将军赵朗，死在禁门。
English: General Zhao Lang, dead at the forbidden gate.

古文：启充具奏其状，请帝昧爽视朝，以图明作之治。
现代文：程启充详细报告这种情况，请求皇帝清晨视朝，以图明作之治。
English: Cheng Qicheng reported the situation in detail and requested the emperor to visit the North in the morning and make a ruling with the help of the map.

古文：都督马昂进妊身女弟，启充等力争。
现代文：都督马昂进献有身孕妹妹，程启充等人极力争辩。
English: The governor Ma'an Jin dedicated his pregnant sister, Cheng Qichong and others vigorously argued.

古文：既又极陈冗官、冗兵、冗费之弊，乞通行革罢。
现代文：既而又极力陈述冗官、冗兵、冗费的弊端，请求全部进行革罢。
English: At the same time, they also strongly stated the drawbacks of redundant officers, redundant soldiers, and redundant expenses, and requested that all of them be dismissed.

古文：帝皆不省。
现代文：但皇帝都不察看。
English: But the emperor did not look.

古文：腾骧四卫军改编各卫者，奉诏撤回，而各卫遗籍仍支粮，糜仓储八十七万余石。
现代文：腾骧四卫军改卫的，奉诏令撤回，而各卫被遣派的户籍仍然支粮，糜费仓储八十七万多石。
English: When the Tengchong Fourth Guards Army changed the guard, it was withdrawn by imperial edict, but the household registration of each guard still supported grain and stored more than 870,000 kilos of grain.

古文：启充力言之，冒支弊绝。
现代文：程启充极力诉说这件事，冒支弊绝。
English: Cheng Qicheng tried his best to talk about the matter, but it was all in vain.

古文：以忧归。
现代文：因父丧事回家乡。
English: He came back to his hometown because of his father's death.

古文：世宗即位，起故官，即争兴献帝皇号。
现代文：世宗即位，程启充被起用为原官职，就争辩兴献帝皇号。
English: When Sejong ascended to the throne and Cheng Qicheng was appointed to his former official position, they argued about presenting the title of emperor.

古文：嘉靖元年正月郊祀方毕，清宁宫小房火。
现代文：嘉靖元年正月城郊祀祭刚刚完毕，清宁宫小房失火。
English: In the first month of the first year of Jiajing, just after the suburb festival, the small room of the Qingning Palace caught fire.

古文：启充言： 灾及内寝，良由徇情之礼有戾天常，僣逼之名深乖典则。
现代文：程启充说： 火灾到达内寝，是由于徇情之礼违背天常，僭逼之名很悖典则。
English: Cheng Qichong said: The fire reached the inner bed is due to the fact that the bowing ceremony is contrary to nature, and the name of the bowing ceremony is very unconventional.

古文：辅臣执议，礼臣建明，不能敌经生之邪说，佞幸之谀辞，动假母后以箝天下之口。
现代文：辅臣坚执廷议，礼臣明白建言，不能抵挡经生的邪说，佞亻幸的谄谀词语，动不动假母后以钳天下人的言论。
English: Aide-de-Camp adheres to the court's deliberation, the courtiers understand the advice, can not resist the evil sayings, the lucky words, and the remarks of the people around the world.

古文：臣谓不正大礼，不黜邪说，所谓修省皆具文也。
现代文：臣认为不正大礼，不黜邪说，所谓的是修身反省都是形式。
English: The vassal thought that it was all a form of improper etiquette, the so-called self-cultivation and self-reflection.

古文：况迩者旨由中出而内阁不知，奸党狱成而曲为庇护。
现代文：况且近时的旨意是从宫中而出，内阁不知道，奸党案件成立而委曲为其庇护。
English: Moreover, the recent order came from the palace, and the cabinet did not know that a case of treason had been established and they had been appointed to protect it.

古文：谏臣斥逐，耳目有壅蔽之虞；大臣疏远，股肱有痿痹之患。
现代文：诤谏之臣被贬斥驱逐，耳目有被堵塞遮蔽的忧患。大臣被疏远，股肱有痿痹的祸患。
English: The vassal of a vassal is ousted and expelled, the eyes and ears are blocked and covered, the minister is alienated, and the groin is paralyzed.

古文：司礼之权重于宰相，枢机之地委之宦官。
现代文：司礼之权重于宰相，枢机这种关键地方委任宦官。
English: The weight of the priest is greater than that of the prime minister, and the cardinal is the most important locally appointed eunuch.

古文：迩臣贪浊，频有迁除；边帅偾师，不闻谴斥。
现代文：近臣贪浊，频频有升迁授官的。边关将帅师败，听不到被谴责贬斥。
English: Close vassals are greedy, frequently promoted and promoted. Border guards will be defeated, and they will not be condemned and disparaged.

古文：庄田之赏赉过多，潜邸之乞恩未已。
现代文：庄田的赏赐过多，潜邸的乞恩没有停止。
English: Shoda's reward was too much, and the begging of the absconders did not stop.

古文：伏望陛下仰畏天明，俯察众听，亲大臣，肃庶政，以回灾变。 
现代文：伏望陛下仰畏天明，俯察众人之言，亲近大臣，严明庶政，以转变灾祸。 
English: His Majesty looked up to the heavens, listened to the people, befriended the ministers, and strictly managed the affairs of state in order to change the calamity.

古文：报闻。
现代文：皇帝只说知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：寻出按江西。
现代文：不久，出按江西。
English: Soon after, he went on a tour of Beijing and Jiangxi.

古文：得宸濠通萧敬、张锐、陆完等私书，欲亟去孙燧，云： 代者汤沐、梁宸可，其次王守仁亦可。 
现代文：获得宸濠通肖敬、张锐、陆完等人的私人信件，他想急着去掉孙燧，说： 代替他的人汤沐、梁宸可以，其次王守仁也可以。 
English: He received personal letters from Xiao Jing Zhaotong, Zhang Rui, Lu Wan and others, saying that he wanted to get rid of Sun Yat-sen as soon as possible. He said that Tang Mu and Liang Ying could replace him, and Wang Shou-Ren could also replace him.

古文：因论敬、锐等罪，并言守仁党逆，宜追夺。
现代文：因判论肖敬、张锐等人的罪状，并说王守仁袒护叛逆，应当追问剥夺俸禄。
English: For judging the crimes of Xiao Jing, Zhang Rui, and others, and saying that Wang Shouren was a traitor, he should be questioned and deprived of his salary.

古文：给事中汪应轸讼守仁功，言： 逆濠私书，有诏焚毁。
现代文：给事中汪应轸诉说王守仁的功劳，说： 叛逆宸濠的私人信件，有诏令焚毁。
English: In the middle of the matter, Wang Yingyao told Wang Shouren about his merits, saying: "The private letters of the traitor Wang Yingyao were burned by imperial decree.

古文：启充轻信被黜知县章立梅捃摭之辞，复有此奏，非所以劝有功。 
现代文：程启充轻信被贬黜的知县章立梅摘取的言词，才有这样的奏章，不是用来勉励有功的办法。 
English: Cheng Qicheng was gullible enough to believe the words extracted by the disgraced Zhixian Zhang Limei, only to have such a play chapter, not a way to encourage the meritorious.

古文：主事陆澄亦为守仁奏辨。
现代文：主事陆澄也为王守仁上奏辩解。
English: The director, Lu Cheng, also defended Wang Shouren.

古文：御史向信因劾应轸与澄。帝曰： 守仁一闻宸濠变，仗义兴兵，戡定大难，特加封爵，以酬大功，不必更议。 
现代文：御史向信据此弹劾汪应轸和陆澄，皇帝说： 王守仁一听到宸濠政变，仗义兴兵，平定大难，特加封爵，以酬大功，不必更议。 
English: On the basis of this, Wang Yingtao and Lu Cheng were impeached, and the emperor said: As soon as Wang Shouren heard of the coup, he fought for righteousness, raised an army, calmed the great tribulation, was specially knighted, and was rewarded for his great service. There is no need to discuss it further.

古文：帝从太监梁栋请，遣中官督南京织造。
现代文：皇帝听从太监梁栋的请求，派遣中官督南京织造。
English: The emperor obeyed the request of the eunuch Liang Dong and sent the vice-governor to Nanjing to weave.

古文：启充偕同官及科臣张嵩等极谏，不纳。
现代文：程启充偕同官和科臣张嵩等人竭力诤谏，皇帝不加采纳。
English: Cheng Qicheng, his colleagues and the scholar Zhang Song and others tried their best, but the emperor did not approve.

古文：启充素蹇谔，张璁、桂萼恶之。
现代文：程启充向来言语正直，张璁、桂萼厌恶他。
English: Cheng Qicheng has always been honest in speech, and Zhang Ye and Gui Cai loathe him.

古文：寻以言事忤旨，黜为吴江县丞。复坐福达狱逮问，谪戍辽东边卫。
现代文：正巧郭勋庇护李福达的官司，被程启充弹劾，张璁、桂萼因而指责程启充挟私，程启充被谪贬守戍边卫。
English: It just so happened that Guo Xun was protecting Li Fuda in a lawsuit, and was impeached by Cheng Qicheng. As a result, Zhang Ye and Gui Cai accused Cheng Qicheng of being a blackmailer, and Cheng Qicheng was accused of being a border guard.

古文：居十年，母死不得归，哀痛而卒。隆庆初，赠光禄少卿。
现代文：十六年遇赦回来。言官交互推荐他，没有再次被任用，默默死去。隆庆初年，赠官光禄少卿。
English: He was pardoned 16 years later and came back. The gonkan recommended him back and forth, but he was not reappointed and died in silence. In the first year of the Longqing, he was given the title of Shosho-kyo (Junior Secretary) of Guanglu.

古文：郑一鹏，字九万，莆田人。
现代文：郑一鹏，字九万，莆田人。
English: Zheng Yipeng, 90,000 characters, from Putian.

古文：正德十六年进士。
现代文：正德十六年进士。
English: Zhengde entered the priesthood in the 16th year.

古文：改庶吉士。
现代文：改庶吉士。
English: I'm so glad I changed jobs.

古文：嘉靖初，官至户科左给事中。
现代文：嘉靖年初期，官至户科左给事中。
English: At the beginning of the year of Jiajing, officials from the Household Science Department left for the middle.

古文：一鹏性伉直，居谏垣中最敢言。
现代文：郑一鹏性情刚直，是谏官官署中最敢说话的人。
English: Zheng Yipeng has a straightforward temperament and is the most outspoken person in the eunuch's office.

古文：御史曹嘉论大学士杨廷和，因言内阁柄太重。
现代文：御史曹嘉疏论大学士杨廷和，因而说到内阁的权柄太重。
English: On the subject of Yang Tinghe, a university scholar, Chief Secretary Cao Jiazhuo said that the power of the cabinet was too heavy.

古文：一鹏驳之曰： 太宗始立内阁，简解缙等商政事，至漏下数十刻始退。
现代文：郑一鹏驳斥他说： 从太宗开始建立内阁，选拔解缙等人商量政事，到漏下数十刻才退朝。
English: Zheng Yipeng refuted him, saying: From the time of Taizong, the establishment of a cabinet, the selection and dismissal of ministers and other people to discuss political affairs, and the withdrawal of the dynasty only after several decades.

古文：自陛下即位，大臣宣召有几？
现代文：自从陛下即位，大臣被宣召的有多少？
English: Since His Majesty's accession to the throne, how many ministers have been appointed?

古文：张锐、魏彬之狱，献帝追崇之议，未尝召廷和等面论。
现代文：张锐、魏彬之狱，献帝追崇之论，未尝召杨廷和等人当面讨论。
English: Zhang Rui, Wei Bin's prison, the theory of dedicating the emperor and pursuing reverence, did not invite Yang Tinghe and others to discuss face-to-face.

古文：所拟旨，内多更定，未可谓专也。 
现代文：所拟的圣旨，内宫多有更改才定下来，不可以说是专权。 
English: The proposed edict, which was only finalized after many changes in the Inner Court, cannot be said to be an exclusive right.

古文：帝用中官崔文言，建醮乾清、坤宁诸宫，西天、西番、汉经诸厂，五花宫两暖阁、东次阁，莫不有之。
现代文：皇帝采用中官崔文的话，设斋醮于乾清、坤宁诸宫，西天、西番、汉经诸厂，五花宫两暖阁、东次阁，莫不有之。
English: The emperor adopted the words of Lieutenant-General Cui Wen, and set up food stalls in the palaces of Qianqing and Kunning, the factories of Xi Tian, Xi Ban and Han Jing, the two warm pavilions of the Five Flower Palace, and the East Second Pavilion.

古文：一鹏言： 祷祀繁兴，必魏彬、张锐余党。
现代文：郑一鹏说 ：祷祀繁兴，一定是魏彬、张锐的余党作怪。
English: Zheng Yipeng said, "If the prayer service is flourishing, it must be the work of Wei Bin and Zhang Rui.

古文：先帝已误，陛下岂容再误？
现代文：先帝已误，陛下岂能再误？
English: The former emperor made a mistake, how can His Majesty make another mistake?

古文：臣巡视光禄，见一斋醮蔬食之费，为钱万有八千。
现代文：我巡视光禄寺，看见一次斋醮祭祀祈祷的蔬菜食品费用，价值达一万八千两银子。
English: When I toured the Koroku-ji Temple, I saw that the cost of vegetable food for a Buddhist memorial service was 18,000 taels of silver.

古文：陛下忍敛民怨，而不忍伤佞幸之心。
现代文：陛下忍心聚敛以招民怨，而不忍心伤害宠爱佞亻幸之心。
English: His Majesty has the patience to gather people's grievances, but not the patience to hurt the hearts of his beloved and fortunate.

古文：况今天灾频降，京师道殣相望；边境戍卒，日夜荷戈，不得饱食，而为僧道靡费至此，此臣所未解。 
现代文：况且现在天灾频频降临，京师的街道上饿死者相望，边境戍卒，日夜披甲待战，却得不到饱食，而为僧道浪费至此，这是我所不能理解的。 
English: Moreover, now that natural disasters frequently occur, the starving dead look out for each other on the streets of Beijing Division, and the border guards, wearing armor day and night, are waiting for battle, but they do not get enough food, and they waste it for the sake of the Buddhist religion. This is something I cannot understand.

古文：报闻。
现代文：皇帝说知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：东厂理刑千户陶淳曲杀人，论谪戍。
现代文：东厂理刑千户陶淳曲意杀人，被判论守戍边关。
English: In the East Factory, one thousand households were sentenced to Tao Junqu for intentional homicide, and were sentenced to guarding the border.

古文：诏覆案，改拟带俸。
现代文：皇帝下令核查此案，改拟为带俸禄戍边。
English: The emperor ordered that the case be reviewed and that it be rewritten as 边带俸禄.

古文：一鹏与御史李东等执奏，并劾刑部侍郎孟凤，帝不听。
现代文：郑一鹏和御史李东等人向皇上奏说坚持原判，并弹劾刑部侍郎孟凤，皇帝不听。
English: Zheng Yipeng and the imperial historian Li Dong and others appealed to the emperor to uphold the original sentence and impeach Meng Feng, the attendant of the criminal department, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：给事中邓继曾、修撰吕柟、编修邹守益以言获罪，一鹏皆疏救。
现代文：给事中邓继曾、修撰吕木冉、修编邹守益因言论而得罪，郑一鹏都上疏营救他们。
English: During the incident, Deng Jizeng, author Lu Mujan, and editor Zou Shouyi were offended by the remarks, and Zheng Yipeng stepped up to rescue them.

古文：宫中用度日侈，数倍天顺时。
现代文：宫中费用一天比一天奢侈，是天顺时期的数倍。
English: The palace expenses are becoming more and more extravagant day by day, and are several times that of the Tien Shun period.

古文：一鹏言： 今岁灾用诎，往往借支太仓，而清宁、仁寿、未央诸宫，每有赢积，率馈遗戚里。
现代文：郑一鹏说 ：今年灾多费用短缺，往往借支太仓，而清宁、仁寿、未央诸宫，每当有多余的积蓄，一般都馈赠亲戚乡里。
English: Zheng Yipeng said: This year, many disasters have caused a shortage of expenses, often borrowing too much, while the palaces of Qingning, Renshou and Weiyang, whenever they have extra savings, generally give them to relatives in the countryside.

古文：曷若留供光禄，彰母后德？ 
现代文：怎么比得上留供光禄寺，彰大母后恩德。 
English: How can it be compared to leaving offerings to Koroku-ji Temple to show gratitude to the deceased's mother?

古文：帝命乾清、坤宁二宫暂减十之一。
现代文：皇帝命令乾清、坤宁二宫暂时减少十分之一。
English: The emperor ordered Qianqing and Kunning to temporarily reduce the size of the second palace by one tenth.

古文：鲁迷贡狮子、西牛、西狗、西马及珠玉诸物。
现代文：鲁迷进贡狮子、西牛、西狗、西马和珍珠、宝玉等物品。
English: Lu fans brought in tribute lions, Western cattle, Western dogs, Western horses, as well as pearls, precious stones and other items.

古文：一鹏引汉闭玉门关谢西域故事，请敕边臣量行赏赉，遣还国，勿使入京，彰朝廷不宝远物之盛德。不听。
现代文：郑一鹏引借汉朝关闭玉门关谢绝西域的故事，请求皇帝敕诫边臣量行赏赐，遣派回国，不要让他们进入京城，彰显朝廷不珍爱远物的盛德，皇帝不听。
English: Zheng Yipeng borrowed the story of the Han Dynasty's closure of the Yumen Pass and the abandonment of the western region, and asked the emperor to admonish the border retainers to reward them, send them back to the country, and not let them enter the capital, highlighting the virtue of the imperial court not cherishing distant things. The emperor did not listen.

古文：寻伏阙争 大礼 ，杖于廷。
现代文：不久伏在宫殿上争辩 大礼 ，被杖责于朝廷。
English: Before long, he was prostrate on the palace floor, arguing with Dai Li, and was punished by the imperial court with a cane.

古文：侍郎胡瓒、都督鲁纲督师讨大同叛卒，列上功状，请遍颁文武大臣、台谏、部曹及各边抚、按、镇、监赏。
现代文：侍郎胡瓒、都督鲁纲督师讨伐大同的叛乱士兵，列上立功情状，请对文武大臣、台谏、部曹及各边抚、按、镇、监遍行颁赏。
English: The rebel soldiers who fought against Datong led by the attendant Hu Yao, the governor Lu Gang and the inspector are listed in the list of meritorious deeds. Please give awards to the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the governor of Taiwan, the department chiefs and the governors of provinces, prefectures, towns and counties.

古文：一鹏言： 桂勇诛郭监等，在瓒未至之先。
现代文：郑一鹏说： 桂勇诛郭鉴等人，在胡瓒未到之前。
English: Zheng Yipeng said: Gui Yong and Guo Jian and others left before Hu Yao arrived.

古文：徐毡儿等之诛，事由朱振，于瓒无与。
现代文：徐毡儿等人被诛，事由朱振办理，胡瓒没有参与。
English: Xu Yuer and others were beaten, the matter was handled by Zhu Zhen, and Hu Yao did not participate.

古文：瓒欲邀功冒赏，惧众口非议，乃请并叙以媚之。
现代文：胡瓒想邀功冒赏，惧怕众口非议，于是请求一并叙他们功来讨好他们。
English: Hu Yao wanted to take credit, but was afraid of public criticism, so he asked for their achievements to be recited together to please them.

古文：夫自大同构难，大臣台谏谁为陛下画一策者？
现代文：自从大同造成祸难，大臣台谏有谁为陛下谋划过一策？
English: Since the disaster caused by Datong, has any minister of Taisheng ever planned a strategy for His Majesty?

古文：孤城穷寇尚多逋逃，各边镇、抚相去数千里，安在其能犄角也？ 
现代文：孤城穷寇还有多数在逃，各边镇、抚相互之间距离千里之远，他们怎能互相挟击敌人呢？
English: Most of the poor robbers in the lonely city are still on the run. The towns and villages on all sides are thousands of miles away from each other. How can they attack the enemy?

古文：请治瓒等欺罔罪，赏乃不行。
现代文：请求治胡瓒等人欺君之罪。 于是没有行赏。
English: He asked for the punishment of Hu Yao and others for the crime of defrauding the king, but no reward was given.

古文：时诸臣进言多获谴，而一鹏间得俞旨，益发舒言事。
现代文：这时诸臣进言多被谴责，但郑一鹏这期间还得了赞许的圣旨，越发畅言事情。
English: At this time, the ministers were mostly condemned for speaking out, but Zheng Yipeng still received the approval of the Holy Will during this period, and spoke more and more freely about things.

古文：论杨宏不宜推宁夏总兵官；席书不宜讦费宏，留其弟春为修撰；王宪夤缘贵近，邓璋败事甘肃，不宜举三边总督；服阕尚书罗钦顺、请告祭酒鲁铎、被谪修撰吕柟宜召置经筵；廷臣乞省亲养疾，不宜概不许。
现代文：疏论杨宏不适合担任宁夏总兵官；席书不应讦攻费宏、留他的弟弟席春任修撰；王宪攀附贵近大臣，邓璋在甘肃有败事，不宜升举三边总督；丧服期满的尚书罗钦顺、请告祭酒鲁铎、被贬谪修撰吕木冉等人应当召回主讲经筵；廷臣乞求看望亲人或养病，不应当概不允许。
English: Xiao argued that Yang Hong was not suitable to serve as the general officer of Ningxia; Xi Shu should not attack Feihong and leave his brother Xi Chunren to write the book; Wang Xian should not be attached to a close minister; Deng Xiao had a defeat in Gansu and should not be promoted to the governor of the three sides; Shang Shu Luo Qinshun, who had completed the period of mourning, Lu Yao, who had been invited to the sacrificial wine, and Lu Mu Ran, who had been demoted, should be recalled as the main lecturer of the book; courtiers should not be allowed to beg to visit relatives or recover from illness.

古文：诸疏皆侃侃。
现代文：郑一鹏的这些奏疏都侃侃而谈，颇有条理。
English: All of Zheng Yipeng's recitations are eloquent and well-organized.

古文：会武定侯郭勋欲得虎贲左卫以广其第，使指挥王琬等言，卫湫隘不足居吏士，而民郭顺者愿以宅易之。
现代文：正巧武定侯郭勋想得虎贲左卫来扩大自己的住宅，使指挥王琬等人说，卫所潮湿狭隘不足以居住吏士，而平民郭顺愿意用家宅交换。
English: It just so happened that the Wuding lord, Guo Xun, wanted to expand his residence with the help of the tigers, so that the commander, Wang Qi, and others said that the guardhouse was too damp and narrow for officials to live in, while the commoner, Guo Shun, was willing to exchange his home.

古文：顺，勋家奴也，其宅更湫隘。
现代文：郭顺是郭勋的家奴，他的住宅更为潮湿狭隘。
English: Guo Shun is Guo Xun's manservant, and his house is even more damp and cramped.

古文：一鹏与同官张嵩劾勋： 以敝宅易公署，骄纵罔上。
现代文：郑一鹏和同官张嵩弹劾郭勋 ：用敝宅交换公署，骄纵欺上。
English: Zheng Yipeng and his colleague Zhang Song impeached Guo Xun: they exchanged the official residence for a mansion and cheated him.

古文：昔窦宪改沁水园，卒以逆诛。
现代文：过去窦宪改沁水园，终以叛逆诛伐。
English: In the past, Dou Xian changed the water park and eventually became a rebel.

古文：勋谋夺朝廷武卫，其恶岂止宪比？
现代文：郭勋谋夺朝廷的武卫，其恶岂止与窦宪相比。
English: Guo Xun plotted to capture the Imperial Guard, and his evil is nothing compared to Dou Xian.

古文：部臣附势曲从，宜坐罪。 
现代文：部官附势曲从，应当问罪。 
English: If a ministerial officer is found to be following the trend, he should be charged with a crime.

古文：尚书赵璜等因自劾。
现代文：尚书赵璜等人因此而弹劾自己。
English: Shangshu Zhao Jun and others impeached themselves as a result.

古文：诏还所易，勋甚衔之。
现代文：皇帝下诏令收回卫所，郭勋非常怀恨。
English: Guo Xun held a grudge against the emperor, who issued an imperial edict to take back the garrison.

古文：而一鹏复以李福达狱劾勋，桂萼、张璁因坐以妄奏，拷掠除名。
现代文：而郑一鹏又用李福达的官司弹劾郭勋，桂萼、张璁因此问他妄奏之罪，将他拷打除名。
English: But Zheng Yipeng also used Li Fuda's lawsuit to impeach Guo Xun, and Gui Calyp and Zhang Xi therefore asked him about the crime of making a false report, and tortured and expelled him.

古文：九庙灾，言官会荐遗贤及一鹏，竟不复召。
现代文：九庙火灾，言官会集推荐过去的遗贤和郑一鹏，竟没有被再次召用。
English: After the fire at the Nine Temples, Zheng Yipeng, who had been recommended by the Council of Elders, was not reappointed.

古文：久之，卒。
现代文：过了许久，才死去。
English: After a long time, Wang Yao died of illness.

古文：隆庆初复官，赠光禄少卿。
现代文：隆庆初年，为他复官，赠光禄少卿。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he was reinstated and given the title of Shaoqing.

古文：唐枢，字惟中，归安人。
现代文：唐枢，字惟中，归安人。
English: Tang Zu, Zi Wei Zhong, Gui An Ren.

古文：嘉靖五年进士。
现代文：嘉靖五年进士。
English: In the fifth year of Jiajing, he was promoted to a scholar.

古文：授刑部主事。
现代文：授官刑部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the criminal justice department.

古文：言官以李福达狱交劾郭勋，然不得狱辞要领。
现代文：言官因李福达的官司交互弹劾郭勋，然而不得狱辞要领。
English: The speech officer impeached Guo Xun because of Li Fuda's lawsuit, but he was not sentenced to prison.

古文：枢上疏言：
现代文：唐枢上疏说：
English: Tang Zu Shang So said:

古文：李福达之狱，陛下驳勘再三，诚古帝王钦恤盛心。
现代文： 李福达的官司，陛下再三驳斥查问，这真是有古代帝王的钦恤盛心。
English: Li Fuda's lawsuit, His Majesty repeatedly refuted the inquiry, which is really the admiration of the ancient emperors.

古文：而诸臣负陛下，欺蔽者肆其谗，诌谀者溷其说，畏威者变其辞，访缉者淆其真。
现代文：但是诸臣有负陛下，欺蔽的人放肆地说别人的坏话，谄谀的人混淆其说，畏威的人改变自己的言辞，访缉的人隐蔽真情。
English: But courtiers betray their majesties, deceivers speak ill of others, liars confuse their words, cowards change their words, and traitors hide their true feelings.

古文：是以陛下惑滋甚，而是非卒不能明。
现代文：所以陛下的迷惑就更加厉害，而是非终不能明了。
English: Therefore, His Majesty's confusion is even more severe, but it is not finally clear.

古文：臣窃惟陛下之疑有六。
现代文：我心中考虑陛下的疑虑有六项。
English: In my mind, there are six reasons for considering His Majesty's doubts.

古文：谓谋反罪重，不宜轻加于所疑，一也。
现代文：说谋反罪重，不宜随便加以怀疑，这是其一。
English: It is one thing to say that the crime of plotting against the state is serious, but it is not appropriate to casually cast doubt on it.

古文：谓天下人貌有相似，二也。
现代文：说天下的人相貌有相似的，这是其二。
English: This is the second reason why people all over the world are said to have a similar appearance.

古文：谓薛良言弗可听，三也。
现代文：说薛良的话不可以听，这是其三。
English: You can't listen to what Xue Liang says. This is the third.

古文：谓李珏初牒明，四也。
现代文：说李珏当初已经查明，这是其四。
English: This is the fourth thing that Li Yao said that he had found out at the beginning.

古文：谓臣下立党倾郭勋，五也。
现代文：说臣下结党倾轧郭勋，这是其五。
English: This is the fifth time that his vassals have sided with Guo Xun.

古文：谓崞、洛证佐皆仇人，六也。
现代文：说崞、洛地方的证佐之人都是仇人，这是其六。
English: This is the sixth time that people in Luo and Luo's hometown of Jingsa have been labeled as enemies.

古文：臣请一一辨之。
现代文：我请求让我一一加以辩解。
English: I beg to differ.

古文：福达之出也，始而王良、李钺从之，其意何为？
现代文： 李福达的出行，开始有王良、李钺跟随，其意何在？
English: Li Fuda's travel began to be followed by Wang Liang and Li Yao, what is the meaning of this?

古文：继而惠庆、邵进禄等师之，其传何事？
现代文：接着惠庆、邵进禄等人以之为师，其传何事？
English: Then, Hui Qing, Shao Jinlu and others used him as a teacher, what happened to him?

古文：李铁汉十月下旬之约，其行何求？ 我有天分 数语，其情何谋？ 太上玄天，垂文秘书 ，其辞何指？
现代文：与李铁汉十月下旬的约会，其行何求？ 我有天分 数语，其情何谋？ 太上玄天，垂文秘书 ，其辞何指？
English: With Li Tiehan's appointment in late October, what does he seek? I have a talent for mathematics, what is his motive? Too superior to the heavens, a literary secretary, what does his speech mean?

古文：劫库攻城，张旗拜爵，虽成于进禄等，其原何自？
现代文：劫库攻城，张开旗子拜封爵官，虽然邵进禄等人做成的，其本原何在？
English: The looting of storehouses, the siege of the city, and the display of banners to pray for the appointment of noble officials, although made by Shao Jinlu and others, what is the origin of this?

古文：钺伏诛于前，进禄败露于后，反状甚明。
现代文：李钺伏诛在前，邵进禄事情败露在后，反叛的情况非常明显。
English: With Li Shufu in front and Shao Jinlu's defection behind, the situation of rebellion was very obvious.

古文：故陕西之人曰可杀，山西之人曰可杀，京畿中无一人不曰可杀，惟左右之人曰不可，则臣不得而知也。
现代文：所以陕西的人说可杀，山西的人说可杀，京畿中没有一人不说可杀，只有皇上左右的人说不可杀，这就叫我不得而知了。
English: Therefore, the people of Shaanxi say that it is permissible to kill, the people of Shanxi say that it is permissible to kill, and there is no one in Gyeonggi who does not say that it is permissible to kill, and only the people around the emperor say that it is not permissible to kill.

古文：此不必疑一也。
现代文：这是不必疑虑的第一条。
English: This is the first rule that should not be doubted.

古文：且福达之形最易辨识，或取验于头秃，或证辨于乡音，如李二、李俊、李三是其族，识之矣。
现代文： 而且李福达的形貌最容易辨识，或取证于光头，或证辨于乡音，像李二、李俊、李三是他的同族，是认识他的。
English: Moreover, Li Fuda's appearance is the easiest to identify, or to obtain evidence from the bald head, or to distinguish evidence from the local dialect, like Li II, Li Jun, Li San is his compatriot, is to know him.

古文：发于戚广之妻之口，是其孙识之矣。
现代文：从戚广的妻子口中说出的，她是李福达的孙子相识的人。
English: From the mouth of Qi Guang's wife, she is the person whom Li Fuda's grandson met.

古文：始认于杜文柱，是其姻识之矣。
现代文：开始让杜文桂辨认，他是李福达相识的亲家。
English: Du Wenkui began to identify him as a relative of Li Fuda's acquaintance.

古文：质证于韩良相、李景全，是其友识之矣。
现代文：让韩良相、李景全对质证明，他们是李福达相识的朋友。
English: Let Han Liangxiang and Li Jingquan confront each other to prove that they are friends of Li Fuda.

古文：一言于高尚节、王宗美，是鄜州主人识之矣。
现代文：一对证于高尚节、王宗美，他们是州主人认识的。
English: Wang Zongmei, one of the witnesses to the Gaoshang Festival, was known to the state's masters.

古文：再言于邵继美、宗自成，是洛川主人识之矣。
现代文：二对证于邵继美、宗自成，他们是洛川主人认识的。
English: The two pairs of witnesses were Shao Jimei and Zong Zicheng, who were known to the master of Luochuan.

古文：三言于石文举等，是山、陕道路之人皆识之矣。
现代文：三对证于石文举等人，他们是山西、陕西道路行人都认识的。
English: The three pairs of witnesses are Shi Wenju and others, who are well known to pedestrians in Shanxi and Shaanxi.

古文：此不必疑二也。
现代文：这是不必疑虑的第二条。
English: This is the second rule that should not be doubted.

古文：薛良怙恶，诚非善人。
现代文： 薛良坚持作恶，真不是好人。
English: Xue Liang persists in doing evil, he is really not a good person.

古文：至所言张寅之即福达，即李午，实有明据，不得以人废言。
现代文：但他所说的张寅就是李福达，也就是李午，实有明据，不得因人废言。
English: However, what he said about Zhang Ying being Li Fuda, that is, Li Bo, has clear evidence, and should not be dismissed out of hand.

古文：况福达踪迹谲密，黠慧过人，人咸堕其术中，非良狡猾亦不能发彼阴私。
现代文：况且李福达的踪迹诡密，黠慧过人，人们都堕其术中，不是薛良狡猾也就不能揭发他的阴私。
English: Moreover, Li Fuda's trail is intricate, and he is extremely clever. People have fallen into his tricks. It's not because of Xue Liang's cunning that he can't expose his malevolence.

古文：从来发摘告讦之事，原不必出之敦良朴厚之人。
现代文：从来发摘告讦这样的事，原不必出之于敦良朴厚的人。
English: It is not necessary for such a thing to come from a person like Tun Liang and Pu Hou.

古文：此不当疑三也。
现代文：这是不应当疑虑的第三条。
English: This is the third article that should not be doubted.

古文：李珏因见薛良非善人，又见李福达无龙虎形、朱砂字，又见五台县张子真户内实有张寅父子，又见崞县左厢都无李福达、李午名，遂苟且定案，轻纵元凶。
现代文： 李珏因为见薛良不是善人，又见李福达没有龙虎形、朱砂字，又见五台县张子真户内实有张寅父子，又见崞县左厢没有李福达、李午这样的名字，于是苟且定案，轻易放纵元凶。
English: Because Li Wei saw that Xue Liang was not a good person, and also saw that Li Fuda did not have a dragon and tiger shape and cinnabar characters, and also saw that there was actually a father and son Zhang Yin in Zhang Zima's house in Wutai County, and also saw that there were no names such as Li Fuda and Li Bao in the left compartment of Handan County, he was determined and easily indulged the culprit.

古文：殊不知五台自嘉靖元年黄册始收，寅父子忽从何来？
现代文：殊不知五台县是从嘉靖元年黄册才开始收录，张寅父子突然从何而来？
English: We all know that Wutai County was included in the Yellow Book from the first year of Jiajing. Where did Zhang Yin and his son suddenly come from?

古文：纳粟拜官，其为素封必非一日之积，前此何以隐漏？
现代文：交纳粮食封官，其为富户一定不是一日之积累，在此以前为什么会被隐漏呢？
English: The payment of grain tax, which is not a one-day accumulation for rich households, why was it omitted before this?

古文：崞县在城坊既有李伏答，乃于左厢都追察，又以李午为真名，求其贯址，何可得也？
现代文：崞县在城坊既有李伏答，于是在左厢都追察，又以李午为真名，找他的籍贯住址，怎么能够得到呢？
English: In Lixian County, there is a Li Fu answer in the town square, so I searched in the left compartment, and I used Li Wu as my real name to find his home address. How can I get it?

古文：则军籍之无考，何足据也？
现代文：则军籍无从考察，又怎么能作为充足的证据呢？
English: If the military record cannot be examined, how can it be used as sufficient evidence?

古文：况福达既有妖术，则龙虎形、朱砂字，安知非前此假之以惑众，后此去之以避罪？
现代文：况且李福达既有妖术，那么龙虎形、朱砂字，又怎能知道不是先前假借来蛊惑群众，后来去掉以逃避罪名的呢？
English: Moreover, since Li Fuda had magic, how could he know that the dragons and tigers and cinnabar characters were not previously borrowed to deceive the masses, and later removed to escape the blame?

古文：亦不可尽谓薛良之诬矣。
现代文：也不可说薛良全是诬陷他的。
English: Nor can it be said that Xue Liang framed him.

古文：此不当疑四也。
现代文：这是不必疑虑的第四条。
English: This is the undisputed fourth article.

古文：京师自四方来者不止一福达，既改名张寅，又衣冠形貌似之，郭勋从而信之，亦理之所有。
现代文： 京师从四方来的人不只一个李福达，既改名张寅，又衣冠形貌像他，郭勋听从他的话并相信他，这在道理上是说得过去的。
English: Li Fuda is not the only one who came to Beijing from the four directions. He changed his name to Zhang Yin, and his clothes resembled his appearance. Guo Xun listened to his words and believed him, which is reasonable.

古文：其为妖贼余党，亦意料所不能及。
现代文：李福达是妖贼的余党，也是意料所不能及的。
English: Li Fuda is the remnants of the bandits, but also unexpected.

古文：在勋自有可居之过，在陛下既宏议贵之恩，诸臣纵有倾勋之心，亦安能加之罪乎？
现代文：在郭勋来说自有可居之过，在陛下来说既然有宽大权贵之恩，诸臣纵使有倾轧郭勋之心，又怎能加他们的罪呢？
English: As far as Guo Xun was concerned, there was nothing to live for, and as far as His Majesty was concerned, since there was the grace of magnanimity and nobility, how could the courtiers add to their sins, even if they had the heart of Guo Xun?

古文：此不用疑五也。
现代文：这是不用疑虑的第五条。
English: This is the undisputed fifth article.

古文：鞫狱者曰诬，必言所诬何因。
现代文： 审查案件的人称诬，一定要说被诬是什么原因。
English: If the person reviewing the case says that the person has been framed, he or she must say what the reason is for being framed.

古文：曰雠，必言所雠何事。
现代文：如果说是仇恨，一定要说仇恨的是什么事情。
English: If we speak of hatred, we must say what kind of thing hatred is.

古文：若曰薛良，雠也，则一切证佐非雠也。
现代文：如果说薛良有仇恨，那么一切作为佐据证人就不是因为仇恨了。
English: If Xue Liang is said to have hatred, then all the corroborating witnesses are not because of hatred.

古文：曰韩良相、戚广，雠也，则高尚节、屈孔、石文举，非雠也。
现代文：说韩良相、戚广是因为仇恨，那么高尚节、屈孔、石文举就不是因为仇恨了。
English: If Han Ryongsong and Qi Guang are said to be motivated by hatred, then Gao Shangjie, Qu Kong and Shi Wenju are not motivated by hatred.

古文：曰魏泰、刘永振，雠也，则今布按府县官非雠也。
现代文：说魏泰、刘永振是因为仇恨，那么当今的布政司按察司及府县官员则不是因为仇恨了。
English: If Wei Tai and Liu Yong Zhen are said to have come to power because of hatred, then today's Secretary for Political Affairs, Inspector General and prefectural and county officials did not come to power because of hatred.

古文：曰山、陕人，雠也，则京师道路之人非雠也。
现代文：说山西、陕西的人，是因为仇恨，那么京师道路之人就不是因为仇恨了。
English: If people in Shanxi and Shaanxi are said to be motivated by hatred, then people on the Beijing-Shi Road are not motivated by hatred.

古文：此不用疑六也。
现代文：这是不用疑虑的第六条。
English: This is a no-brainer for Article VI.

古文：望陛下六疑尽释，明正福达之罪。
现代文： 望陛下六疑尽释，明正李福达之罪。
English: His Majesty's hope is that all doubts will be cleared, and Li Fuda's crime will be revealed.

古文：庶群奸屏迹，宗社幸甚。
现代文：期望群奸屏迹，宗社幸甚。 
English: Expecting a group of traitors, Sosha was lucky.

古文：疏入，帝大怒，斥为民。
现代文：疏章呈入朝廷，皇帝大怒，将唐枢贬斥为平民。
English: Sosho presented the medal to the imperial court. The emperor was furious and denounced Tang Zu as a commoner.

古文：其后《钦明大狱录》删枢疏不载。
现代文：在这之后《钦明大狱录》删去唐枢的疏章不予登载。
English: After this, the "Qingming Prisoner's Diary" will not be published without the Tang Zu's signature.

古文：枢少学于湛若水，深造实践。
现代文：唐枢少年跟随湛若水学习，深造实践。
English: Tang Zuo's young boys follow Zhan Ruo Shui to study and practice.

古文：又留心经世略，九边及越、蜀、滇、黔险阻厄塞，无不亲历。
现代文：又留心经世方略，九边和越、蜀、滇、黔的险阻厄塞，没有不亲身经历的。
English: He also paid attention to the strategies of the world, and he personally experienced the dangers of the Nine Sides and the Yue, Shu, Qi, and Qi.

古文：蹑屩茹草，至老不衰。
现代文：脚踩草鞋口含野草，到老不衰。
English: Foot trampling grass shoe mouth containing weeds, to old age.

古文：叶应骢，字肃卿，鄞人。
现代文：叶应骢，字肃卿，鄞县人。
English: Ye Yingqian, surnamed Suqing, a native of Jixian County.

古文：正德十二年进士。
现代文：正德十二年进士。
English: Zhengde joined the army at the age of twelve.

古文：授刑部主事。
现代文：授官刑部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the criminal justice department.

古文：偕同官谏南巡，杖三十。
现代文：和同官一起谏阻皇上南巡，被杖责三十。
English: Together with his colleagues, he obstructed the emperor's inspection tour to the south, and was punished with 30 strokes of the cane.

古文：嘉靖初，历郎中。
现代文：嘉靖初年，历官郎中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, he became a junior official.

古文：伏阙争 大礼 ，再下狱廷杖。
现代文：伏在朝门争辩 大礼 ，再次被下狱当廷杖击。
English: Lying prostrate at the imperial gate, arguing with Dai Li, he was once again sent to prison and beaten with the imperial cane.

古文：给事中潮阳陈洸素无赖。
现代文：给事中潮阳陈向来无赖。
English: Chaoyang Chen has always been a scoundrel.

古文：家居与知县宋元翰不相能，令其子柱讦元翰谪戍。
现代文：在家居住与当地知县宋元翰不能和睦相处，他让他的儿子陈柱讦攻宋元翰，结果宋被谪戍边关。
English: He could not get along with Song Yuanhan, who lived at home and was a local magistrate. He had his son, Chen Zhulun, attack Song Yuanhan. As a result, Song was arrested.

古文：元翰摭洸罪及帷薄事刊布之，名《辨冤录》。
现代文：宋元翰收集陈的罪状和私事刊印公布出来，名叫《辨冤录》。
English: Song Yuanhan collected Chen's criminal charges and private affairs and published them in a book called "Record of Dispute Resolution."

古文：洸由是不齿于清议，尚书乔宇出之为湖广佥事。
现代文：陈因此被清议所不齿，尚书乔宇将他调出任湖广佥事。
English: As a result, Chen was disgraced by the disciplinary committee, and Shang Shujiao Qiao Yu transferred him to the post of Hukang Anji.

古文：洸初尝言献帝不可称皇。
现代文：陈当初曾经说献帝不可称皇。
English: At the beginning, Chen once said that the emperor should not be praised.

古文：而是时张璁、桂萼辈以议礼骤显，洸乃上疏言璁等议是，宜急去本生之称，因诋宇及文选郎夏良胜，而称引其党前给事中于桂、阎闳、史道，前御史曹嘉。
现代文：而这时张璁、桂萼之辈因议礼突然显贵，陈于是疏说张骢等人的议礼是对的，应当急切去除本生的称谓；因而诋毁乔宇和文选郎夏良胜，而推举引用他的同党前给事中于桂、阎闳、史道，前御史曹嘉。
English: But at this time, Zhang Xuan and Gui Caly were suddenly distinguished for their speech, so Chen neglected to say that the speech of Zhang Xuan and others was right, and that the native title should be urgently removed; thus, he slandered Qiao Yu and Wen Xuan Lang Xia Liang Sheng, and cited his fellow party members to nominate Yu Gui, Yan Xuan, Shi Dao, and the former chief historian Cao Jia.

古文：帝即还洸等职，谪良胜于外。
现代文：皇帝当即恢复陈等人的官职，将夏良胜谪贬到外地。
English: The emperor immediately restored Chen and others to their official posts and banished Xia Liang Shengkun to a foreign land.

古文：洸遂劾大学士费宏、尚书金献民、赵鉴、侍郎吴一鹏、朱希周、汪伟、郎中余才、刘天民、员外郎薛蕙、给事中郑一鹏悉邪党，而荐廖纪等十五人。
现代文：陈于是弹劾大学士费宏，尚书金献民、赵，侍郎吴一鹏、朱希周、汪伟，郎中余才、刘天民，员外郎薛蕙，给事中郑一鹏都是邪党，而推荐廖纪等十五人。
English: Chen then impeached the university professor Fei Hong, Shang Shujin Xianmin, Zhao, the attendant Wu Yipeng, Zhu Xi Zhou, Wang Wei, the attendant Yu Cai, Liu Tianmin, the attendant Xue Yao, the attendant Zheng Yipeng were all evil parties, and recommended Liao Ji and other fifteen people.

古文：俄又劾吏部尚书杨旦等。
现代文：不久又弹劾吏部尚书杨旦等人。
English: Soon after, Yang Dan and others in the cadre department were impeached.

古文：帝益大喜。
现代文：皇帝更加大喜。
English: The emperor was even more delighted.

古文：立罢旦，擢纪代之。
现代文：立即罢去杨旦，提升廖纪代替他。
English: Immediately dismiss Yang Dan and promote Liao Ji to replace him.

古文：璁、萼辈遂引以击异己。
现代文：张璁、桂萼之辈于是引用他来攻击异己。
English: The likes of Zhang Xuan and Gui Cale then quoted him to attack their opponents.

古文：给事中赵汉、御史朱衣等交章劾洸，而御史张日韬、戴金、蓝田又特疏论之。
现代文：给事中赵汉、御史朱衣等人纷纷上奏章弹劾陈，而御史张日韬、戴金、蓝田又特别上疏论陈之罪。
English: During the incident, Zhao Han, the imperial historian Zhu Yi and others wrote articles to impeach Chen, while the imperial historians Zhang Nichijun, Dai Jin and Lantian also wrote articles to discuss Chen's crime.

古文：田并劾席书，且封上元翰《辨冤录》。
现代文：蓝田并弹劾席书，并且将宋元翰的《辨冤录》封好呈上。
English: Lantian also signed the impeachment report, and sealed and submitted Song Yuanhan's "Record of Dispute Resolution."

古文：都御史王时中请罢洸听勘。
现代文：都御史王时中请求将陈停职审查。
English: At the request of Metropolitan Wang Shi, Chen was suspended from duty for review.

古文：洸奏： 群奸恨臣抗议大礼，将令抚按杀臣，请遣一锦衣往 。
现代文：陈上奏说： 群奸臣恨我抗议大礼，将令抚、按杀我，请皇上派遣一锦衣前往。 
English: Chen Shangsoo said, "A group of treacherous retainers hated me and protested against the grand salute. They ordered me to be stroked and pressed to death, and asked the emperor to send a brocade dress.

古文：洸意，锦衣可利诱也。
现代文：陈的想法是，锦衣可以用利相诱。
English: Chen's idea is that the brocade can be enticed with the use of interest.

古文：得旨遣应骢及锦衣千户李经。
现代文：得旨派遣叶应骢和锦衣千户李经。
English: The results of the dispatch of Ye Ying Zhen and Jin Yi Qian to thousands of households are as follows.

古文：应骢与焚香誓天，会御史熊兰、涂相等杂治，具上洸罪状至百七十二条。
现代文：叶应骢和李经烧香向天起誓，会同御史熊兰、涂相等人一起治理，陈述上奏陈的罪状达到一百七十二条。
English: Ye Yingtao and Li Jing burned incense and swore to the heavens that they would govern together with the magistrates Xiong Lan and Tu Xi, and the number of charges against Chen reached one hundred seventy-two.

古文：除赦前及暧昧者勿论，当论者十三条。
现代文：除去被赦以前和不清楚的不论，应当判论的罪状有十三条。
English: There are thirteen charges that should be judged, regardless of whether they were pardoned before or are unclear.

古文：罪恶极，宜斩，妻离异，子柱绞。
现代文：罪大恶极，应当斩首，将他的妻子离异，将他儿子陈柱绞死。
English: The crime was so heinous that he should be beheaded, his wife divorced, and his son Chen Zhuang hanged.

古文：洸惧，亡诣阙申诉。
现代文：陈惧怕，逃到宫殿前申诉。
English: Chen was afraid and fled to the palace to appeal.

古文：帝持应骢奏不下。
现代文：皇帝拿着叶应骢的奏章没有批复下来。
English: The emperor took Ye Yingtao's score and did not approve it.

古文：尚书赵鉴、副都御史张润、给事中解一贯、御史郑本公等连章执奏。
现代文：尚书赵鉴、副都御史张润、给事中解一贯、御史郑本公等人连章执奏。
English: Shangshu Zhao Jian, vice-governor Zhang Run, and vice-governor Zheng Bengong performed the second and third movements.

古文：帝不得已，始命覆核。
现代文：皇帝不得已，才下令复核勘查。
English: The emperor had no choice but to order a review of the investigation.

古文：郎中黄绾力持应骢议。
现代文：郎中黄绾极力坚持叶应骢的论议。
English: Huang Qi, Ye's brother-in-law, insisted on Ye's argument.

古文：书、萼为居间不能得，要璁共奏，谓洸议礼臣，为法官所中。
现代文：席书、桂萼为其调和不能得，要求张璁与他们共同上奏，说陈是议礼大臣，被法官所中伤。
English: The chairperson and Gui calyx could not be reconciled, so they asked Zhang Ye to play the song together with them, saying that Chen was the minister of debate and was slandered by the judge.

古文：帝入其言，命免罪为民。
现代文：皇帝听进他们的话，下令免罪为平民。
English: The emperor listened to their words and ordered the exoneration of the commoners.

古文：大理卿汤沐及鉴、一贯更争之，不听。
现代文：大理卿汤沐和赵鉴、解一贯再争辩这件事，皇帝不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to the repeated arguments between Tang Mu and Zhao Jian, and the Emperor did not listen.

古文：未几， 大礼 书成，并原洸妻子。
现代文：不久， 大礼 书成，并且原宥了陈的妻子。
English: Soon after, the formalities were completed and Chen's wife was married.

古文：应骢寻迁吉安知府，母丧归。
现代文：叶应骢不久迁吉安知府，因母亲死而回家守丧。
English: Soon after moving to Ji'an Prefecture, Ye Yingjun went home to mourn the death of his mother.

古文：六年，骢、萼益用事。
现代文：六年，张璁、桂萼更加当权。
English: In six years, Zhang Xuan and Gui Cale gained more power.

古文：而萼方掌刑部，廷臣马录等以劾郭勋下狱。
现代文：而桂萼正掌管刑部，廷臣马录等人因弹劾郭勋被下诏狱。
English: However, Gui Caly was in charge of the criminal department, and courtier Ma Luo and others were sent to prison for impeaching Guo Xun.

古文：洸谓乘此故案可反也，上书讦应骢等。
现代文：陈认为乘这个机会将过去的案件反过来，上书讦攻叶应骢等人。
English: Chen thought that he would take this opportunity to reverse the past cases and sue Ye Yingjun and others.

古文：萼因讼洸冤。
现代文：桂萼因而为陈讼诉冤屈。
English: As a result, Katsura filed a complaint.

古文：遂逮洸、应骢、元翰、绾，而令按察使张祐等还籍候命，词连四百人。
现代文：于是逮捕陈、叶应骢、宋元翰、黄绾，而命令按察使张佑等人返还本籍听候命令，言词牵连到四百人。
English: As a result, Chen, Ye Yingtao, Song Yuanhan, and Huang Qi were arrested, and Zhang You, the inspector, and others were ordered to return to their hometowns and await orders. The words of the inspectors implicated four hundred people.

古文：九卿及锦衣卫廷讯，应骢对曰： 某所持者王章耳，必欲直洸，惟诸公命。 
现代文：九卿和锦衣卫当廷审讯，叶应骢回答说： 我所坚持的国家宪章，如果一定要为陈辨冤，唯诸公命是从。 
English: During the court trial of Jiuqing and Jin Rongwei, Ye Yingtao replied: "The national charter that I uphold, if it is necessary to resolve grievances, is to obey the public order.

古文：刑部尚书胡世宁等心知洸罪重，而惩前大狱，不敢执。
现代文：刑部尚书胡世宁等人心知陈罪重，而惩前大狱，不敢坚持。
English: The head of the criminal investigation department, Hu Shining, and others were aware of Chen's serious crimes, but did not dare to insist on punishing him with a long prison term.

古文：会是日黄雾四塞，狱弗竟。
现代文：正巧这一天黄雾四塞，官司不能完结。
English: Coincidentally, it was on this day that the fog rolled in and the court proceedings could not be completed.

古文：次日，又大风拔木。
现代文：第二天，又大风拔起树木。
English: The next day, high winds again uprooted trees.

古文：有诏修省，不用刑。
现代文：有诏令修身反省，不用刑。
English: There is a decree to improve oneself and reflect, and there is no punishment.

古文：乃当应骢按事不实律，为民，元翰、绾及田等贬斥有差，洸授冠带。
现代文：于是判叶应骢按事不实律罪，被削为平民，宋元翰、黄绾和蓝田等人各有不同的贬斥，陈被授与冠带。
English: As a result, Ye Yingtao was found guilty of making a false statement and was reduced to a commoner, while Song Yuanhan, Huang Qi and Lantian were all disparaged in different ways, and Chen was awarded a crown and sash.

古文：霍韬再疏为洸讼不能得，洸益憾应骢。
现代文：霍韬再次上疏为陈讼冤而无结果，陈更加不满意叶应骢。
English: Once again, Huo Gan went to the court to argue Chen's grievances, but to no avail. Chen was even more dissatisfied with Ye Yingjun.

古文：逾数年，更令人奏应骢勘狱时，酷杀无辜二十六人，下巡按李美覆勘。
现代文：过了数年，再让人上奏叶应骢在勘察官司时，残酷杀害无辜二十六人，下到巡按李美复核勘查。
English: A few years later, another person brutally killed 26 innocent people during the investigation of Ye Yingjun in the investigation and prosecution, and went down to patrol Li Mei for review and investigation.

古文：美言死者皆有状，非故杀。
现代文：李美说死的人都有罪状，不是故意杀害。
English: Li Mei said that all those who died were guilty, and it was not intentional killing.

古文：刑部尚书许赞白应骢无罪。
现代文：刑部尚书许赞说叶应骢无罪。
English: The criminal justice department wrote that Ye Yingjun was not guilty.

古文：帝特谪应骢戍辽东。
现代文：皇帝特谪贬叶应骢守戍辽东。
English: The emperor specially recommended that Ye should take charge of Liaodong.

古文：是狱也，始终八载。
现代文：这个官司，前后有八年。
English: This lawsuit has been going on for eight years.

古文：凡攻洸与治洸狱者无不得罪，逮捕至百数十人。
现代文：凡是攻击陈和治陈罪的人没有不获罪的，逮捕到一百数十人。
English: More than a hundred people have been arrested, and those who have attacked and persecuted Chen have not gone unpunished.

古文：天下恶萼辈奸横，益羞言议礼臣矣。
现代文：天下恶恨桂萼之辈的奸横，更羞于言说议礼大臣。
English: The world abhors the treachery of Katsura's generation, and is even more ashamed to call him the Minister of Ceremonies.

古文：应骢赴戍所，道经苏州。
现代文：叶应骢到戍所去，路途经过苏州。
English: Ye Yingxuan went to Xinshe, passing through Suzhou on the way.

古文：知府治具候之，立解维去，致馈不受。
现代文：知府治好酒菜餐具等候他，叶应骢立即起身离去，不受赠送的酒饭。
English: After the prefectural government had prepared the wine, dishes and tableware for him, Ye Yingtao immediately got up and left, refusing to accept the gifts of wine and rice.

古文：家居二十年，卒。陆粲，字子余，长州人。
现代文：陆粲，字子馀，长洲人。
English: Lu Yao, Zi Yao, Changzhou people.

古文：少谒同里王鏊，鏊异之曰： 此子必以文名天下。 
现代文：小时候谒见同里王鏊，王鏊惊异地说： 这个孩子一定以文名扬天下。 
English: When I was a child, I saw Tongli Wang Yao. Wang Yao said in surprise, "This child will surely be famous all over the world as a writer."

古文：嘉靖五年成进士，选庶吉士。
现代文：嘉靖五年成为进士，选庶吉士。
English: In the fifth year of the Jiajing era, he became a member of the Jin Shi.

古文：七试皆第一。
现代文：七次考试都是第一。
English: I got first place in all seven exams.

古文：张璁、桂萼尽出庶吉士为部曹、县令，粲以才独得工科给事中。
现代文：张璁、桂萼将庶吉士全部调出任部曹、县令，陆粲因为才华独得工科给事中。
English: Zhang Qian and Gui Cai transferred all of their subordinates to serve as department chiefs and county magistrates, and Lu Qian was given a job in engineering because of his unique talent.

古文：劲挺敢言。
现代文：他劲挺敢说话。
English: He's not afraid to speak up.

古文：疏言： 我朝太祖至宣宗，大臣造膝陈谋，不啻家人父子。
现代文：他上疏说 ：我朝太祖到宣宗，大臣造膝陈谋，不啻于家人父子。
English: He went on to say: I went to Xuan Zong in the time of my great-grandfather, and the minister made a knee-jerk decision not to interfere with the father and son.

古文：自英宗幼冲，大臣为权宜计，常朝奏事，先日拟旨，其余政事具疏封进，沿袭至今。
现代文：自从英宗幼冲，大臣为权宜计，常常上朝奏事，先一天拟旨，其余的政事写成文字疏章封进，沿袭到如今。
English: Since the time of Yingzong Yuchong, ministers, as a matter of expediency, would often go to the imperial court to report matters, draft an edict the day before, and seal the rest of the government's affairs in a written document, a practice that continues to this day.

古文：今陛下锐意图治，愿每日朝罢，退御便殿，延见大臣；侍从台谏轮日奏对；抚按藩臬廷辞入谢，召访便宜；复妙选博闻有道之士，更番入直，讲论经史，如仁宗弘文阁故事。
现代文：现在陛下锐意图治，希望每日朝罢，即御便殿，延见大臣；侍从台谏轮流不断地奏对；抚按藩臬廷辞入谢，召访便宜；又妙选博闻有道之士，更番入朝面见，讲论经史，像仁宗弘文阁的故事。
English: Now, His Majesty is intent on governing, and hopes to see the minister every morning, that is, the Obedience Hall; the attendants of the Taiyuan Palace take turns to play continuously; Fuzhang resigns from the court, and calls for a visit; and cleverly selects a scholar with a moral, and then enters the court to meet and talk about history, like the story of Ninsong Hongwenge.

古文：则上下情通，而天下事毕陈于前矣。 
现代文：那么上下情况相通，而天下事都陈述到面前。 
English: Then all things are connected, and all things are brought before the face of the world.

古文：帝不能用。
现代文：皇帝不能采用他的话。
English: Emperor Shun disobeyed.

古文：既言资格独重进士，致贡举无上进阶，州县教职过轻，王官终身禁锢，皆宜变通。
现代文：既而说讲资格只重进士，致使贡举的人没有上进的仕途，州县教职过轻，王官终身禁锢，都应当进行变通。
English: Even if it is said that the qualification is only re-enlisted, the person who caused the tribute has no career path, the state and county teaching posts are too light, and the royal official is imprisoned for life, all should be flexible.

古文：因陈久任使、慎考察、汰冗官诸事，而终之以复制科，仿唐、宋法，数岁一举，以待异才： 高者储之禁近，其次分置诸曹，先有官者递进，庶人才毕出，野无遗贤。 
现代文：因而陈述久任使、慎考察、淘汰冗官诸事，最后要求恢复制科，效法唐、宋朝的办法，几年一举，以等待异才： 最好的储蓄在禁近，其次一等的分置诸曹，先有官的人可以递进，这样人才都能显露，在朝廷以外没有被遗漏的贤人。 
English: Therefore, it stated the matters of long-serving officials, careful examination, and elimination of redundant officials, and finally demanded the restoration of the system of sciences, following the methods of the Tang and Song dynasties, in a few years, in order to wait for exceptional talents: the best savings are near the ban, followed by the first-class distribution of Cao, and those with previous officials can gradually advance, so that talents can be revealed, and there are no missing sages outside the imperial court.

古文：寻偕御史郗元洪清核马房钱谷。
现代文：不久和御史郗元洪清查马房钱粮。
English: Not long after, he and Mi Shi Yan Yuanhong Qing checked the stable for money and grain.

古文：抗疏折御马太监阎洪，宿弊为清。
现代文：上疏论御马太监阎洪，宿弊为清。
English: On the subject of Shangzhuo, Mima eunuch Yan Hong was purged of his vices.

古文：与同官刘希简争张福达狱。
现代文：与同官刘希简争辩张福达官司。
English: Zhang Fuda's lawsuit against fellow officer Liu Xijian.

古文：帝怒，俱下诏狱。
现代文：皇帝发怒，将他们都下诏狱。
English: The emperor was so angry that he sent them all to prison.

古文：杖三十，释还职。
现代文：杖击三十，将他释放归还原职。
English: At the stroke of thirty, he will be released and returned to his original position.

古文：事具《熊浃传》。
现代文：事情记录在《熊浃传》上。
English: The incident is recorded in "The Bear's Tale."

古文：张璁、桂萼并居政府，专擅朝事。
现代文：张璁、桂萼并居政府，专权独揽朝事。
English: Zhang Xuan and Gui Cale were both in the government, and they had exclusive power over the affairs of the dynasty.

古文：给事中孙应奎、王准发其私，帝犹温旨慰谕。
现代文：给事中孙应奎、王准揭发他们的隐私，皇帝还温旨对张璁、桂萼进行慰问。
English: In response, Sun Yingkui and Wang Jun revealed their private affairs, and the emperor also extended his warmest condolences to Zhang Ye and Gui Cai.

古文：粲不胜愤，上疏曰：
现代文：陆粲不胜愤怒，上疏说：
English: Lu Yao could not contain his anger. Shang Zuo said:

古文：璁、萼，凶险之资，乖僻之学。
现代文： 张璁、桂萼，资质凶险，学问乖僻。
English: Zhang Xuan, Gui Calyx, dangerous qualifications, eccentric learning.

古文：曩自小臣赞大礼，拔置近侍，不三四年位至宰弼。
现代文：过去以小臣赞大礼，被调拔到近侍，不到三四年官位达于宰辅佐。
English: In the past, he was commended as a junior minister, promoted to a close attendant, and reached the official rank of Deputy Assistant Minister in less than three or four years.

古文：恩隆宠异，振古未闻。
现代文：恩隆宠异，自古未闻。
English: Enron is an unusual favorite, unheard of since ancient times.

古文：乃敢罔上逞私，专权招贿，擅作威福，报复恩仇。
现代文：他们才敢欺罔君上以逞私欲，专权招纳贿赂，擅自作威作福，报恩复仇。
English: They only dare to bully the sovereign with their selfishness, their exclusive power to recruit bribes, their arrogance to do good, and their revenge for favors.

古文：璁狠愎自用，执拗多私。
现代文：张璁凶狠刚愎自用，执拗多私。
English: Zhang Ye is fierce and stubborn, self-serving, and stubbornly selfish.

古文：萼外若宽迂，中实深刻。
现代文：桂萼外表看起来宽迂，而内中实际深刻。
English: Cinnamon calyx looks broad and round on the outside, but it is actually deep inside.

古文：忮忍之毒一发于心，如蝮蛇猛兽，犯者必死。
现代文：嫉妒残酷之毒一发于心，就像毒蛇猛兽，侵犯他的人必死。
English: Jealousy is a cruel poison that springs from the heart; it is like a poisonous snake. Anyone who touches it will die.

古文：臣请姑举数端言之。
现代文：我请求让我姑且列举几例来说明这件事。
English: I beg leave to give a few examples to illustrate the point.

古文：萼受尚书王琼赂遗钜万，连章力荐，璁从中主之，遂得起用。
现代文： 桂萼受尚书王琼的贿赂达上万两银子，于是连连上奏章极力推荐王琼，张璁从中主持这件事，王琼才得以被起用。
English: Gui Cai was bribed by Shang Shu Wang Qiong to the tune of ten thousand taels of silver. Therefore, Lian Lian Shang Songzhang strongly recommended Wang Qiong, and Zhang Ye presided over the matter, and Wang Qiong was able to be appointed.

古文：昌化伯邵杰，本邵氏养子，萼纳重贿，竟使奴隶小人滥袭伯爵。
现代文：昌化伯邵杰，本是邵氏的养子，桂萼收纳他的重贿，竟然使奴隶小人滥袭伯爵。
English: Changhua Bo Shaojie, who was the adopted son of Mr. Shao, accepted his heavy bribe and even made the slave villain attack the count.

古文：萼所厚医官李梦鹤假托进书，夤缘受职，居室相邻，中开便户往来，常与萼家人吴从周等居间。
现代文：桂萼让医官李梦鹤假托进书，攀附受职，居室相邻，中开便门来往，经常和桂萼的家人吴从周等人居间联系。
English: Gui Caly allowed the medical officer Li Menghe to falsely submit the book, clung to the post, the living room was adjacent, the door was opened in the middle, and often contacted the living room of Gui Caly's family member Wu Cong Zhou.

古文：又引乡人周时望为选郎，交通鬻爵。
现代文：又引荐同乡人周时望任吏部侍郎，勾结卖官。
English: He also recommended a fellow villager, Zhou Shihang, to be appointed as an attendant of the cadre department, and colluded with the officials.

古文：时望既去，胡森代之。
现代文：周时望离去，用胡森代替他。
English: Zhou Zhimang left and was replaced by Hussen.

古文：森与主事杨麟、王激又辅臣乡里亲戚也。
现代文：胡森和主事杨麟、王激和辅臣是他的同乡亲戚。
English: Husen and his boss Yang Lin, Wang Qi and his assistant were his relatives from the same village.

古文：铨司要地，尽布私人。
现代文： 考核部门是政府要地，桂萼等尽布私交之人。
English: The appraisal department is an important place for the government, and people with close personal relationships.

古文：典选仅逾年，引用乡故，不可悉数。
现代文：掌管选官之职仅只一年，引用乡里亲故人，不可胜数。
English: He has been in charge of the post of elector for only one year, and there are countless references to deceased relatives in the village.

古文：如致仕尚书刘麟，其中表亲也。
现代文：像退休的尚书刘麟，是他的中表亲。
English: Like retired Shangshu Liu Lin, is his middle cousin.

古文：侍郎严嵩，其子之师也。
现代文：侍郎严嵩是他儿子的老师。
English: His son's teacher is the waiter, Yan Song.

古文：佥都御史李如圭，由按察使一转径入内台，南京太仆少卿夏尚朴，由知府期月遂得清卿，礼部员外张敔假历律而结知，御史戴金承风搏击，甘心鹰犬，皆萼姻党，相与朋比为奸者也。
现代文：佥都御史李如圭，从按察使一转径入内台，南京太仆少卿夏尚朴，从知府期月遂得少卿之职，礼部员外张吾攵假借历律和他结识，御史戴金望风攻击他人，甘心为其鹰犬，都是桂萼的姻亲私党，他们朋比为奸。
English: Li Rugui, the imperial historian of the Qing Dynasty, entered the Inner Court as soon as he was promoted to the post of inspector general; Xia Shangpu, the eunuch of Nanjing, was promoted to the position of Shaoqing in the same month as he was appointed governor; Zhang Wuxuan, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, met him under the pretense of using the lunar calendar; and the imperial historian Dai Jinwangfeng attacked others and was willing to be his eagle dog. They were all in-laws of Gui Calyl, and they were more like brothers than sisters.

古文：礼部尚书李时柔和善逢，猾狡多智，南京礼部尚书黄绾曲学阿世，虚谈眩人，谕德彭泽夤缘改秩，躐玷清华，皆阴厚于璁而阳附于萼者也。
现代文：礼部尚书李时柔和善于逢迎，狡猾多智，南京礼部尚书黄绾曲学阿世，空谈眩人，谕德彭泽攀附而加禄俸，践踏玷污清华之名，都是阴地里帮助张璁而表面上依附桂萼的人。
English: Li Shijiao of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies was good at meeting and greeting, cunning and wise, and the Nanjing Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies was good at learning music from Huang Xing, dazzling people with idle talk, attracting the attention of De Peng Ze and getting a bonus, and trampling on and tarnishing the name of Qinghua. They were all people who helped Zhang Xing in the netherworld and attached themselves to Gui Calyl on the surface.

古文：璁等威权既盛，党与复多，天下畏恶，莫敢讼言。
现代文： 张璁等人威权已经盛大，党羽又多，天下的人畏怕他们的凶恶，不敢讼诉言说。
English: The authority of Zhang Xuan and others is already great, and there are many party wings. People all over the world are afraid of their viciousness and dare not sue them, the complaint said.

古文：不亟去之，凶人之性不移，将来必为社稷患。
现代文：不亟将他们除去，凶人的本性不改，将来必定为患社稷。 
English: If they are not removed immediately, and if the nature of the perpetrators does not change, they will certainly be punished by society in the future.

古文：帝大感悟，立下诏暴璁、萼罪状，罢其相；而以粲不早发，下之吏。
现代文：皇帝大感觉悟，当即下诏令揭露张璁、桂萼的罪状，罢去他们的宰相，陆粲因为没有早揭发他们，而被降官。
English: The emperor felt a great sense of realization, and immediately issued a decree to expose the crimes of Zhang Xuan and Gui Cai, and dismissed their prime minister. Lu Xuan was demoted because he did not expose them earlier.

古文：既而詹事霍韬力诋粲，谓杨一清嗾之。
现代文：既而詹事霍韬极力诋毁陆粲，说是杨一清怂恿他干的。
English: Even though Zhan Zhihuo tried his best to slander Lu Yao, saying that Yang Yiqing instigated him to do it.

古文：希简言： 璁、萼去位由圣断。
现代文：刘希简说： 张璁、桂萼的离去职位是由皇上决断的。
English: Liu Xizhen said: The departure of Zhang Ye and Gui Calyp was decided by the emperor.

古文：且使犬谓之嗾，韬以言官比之犬，侮朝廷。 
现代文：而且使用说犬的词谓 口族 ，这是霍韬将言官比做犬，是对朝廷的侮辱。 
English: Moreover, the use of the word "dog" to describe the oral family is an insult to the imperial court, as it is comparing the speaker to a dog.

古文：而帝竟纳韬言，召璁还，夺一清官，下希简诏狱，释还职，谪粲贵州都镇驿丞。
现代文：但是皇帝竟然采纳霍韬的话，将张璁召回，剥夺杨一清的官职，将刘希简下诏狱，之后释放恢复他的职务，贬谪陆粲为贵州都镇驿丞。
English: However, the emperor actually adopted the words of Huo Xi, recalled Zhang Xuan, deprived Yang Iqing of his official post, sent Liu Xijian to prison, and then released him to resume his post, and demoted Xuan Lujuan to the post of Guizhou capital.

古文：稍迁永新知县。
现代文：他渐迁永新知县。
English: He gradually moved to Yongxin County.

古文：前后获盗数百人，奸猾屏迹。
现代文：前后共捕获强盗数百人，奸猾之人销声匿迹。
English: Hundreds of robbers have been captured, and the treacherous ones have disappeared.

古文：久之，以念母乞归。
现代文：过了很久因想念母亲请求回家乡。
English: After a long time, missing her mother, she asked to go back home.

古文：论荐者三十余疏，皆报罢。
现代文：推荐他的有三十多篇疏章，都被皇帝宣布作罢。
English: He was recommended to write more than thirty commentaries, all of which were rejected by the emperor.

古文：霍韬亦荐粲，粲曰： 天下事大坏憸人手，尚欲以余波污我耶？ 
现代文：霍韬也推荐陆粲，陆粲说： 天下事大坏于奸人之手，你还想用余波来污我吗？ 
English: Fo Yan also recommended Lu Yao. Lu Yao said: The world is much worse than the hands of traitors. Do you still want to use the aftermath to tarnish me?

古文：母殁，毁甚，未终丧而卒。
现代文：母亲死后，他特别哀伤，还没服满丧就死了。
English: After his mother's death, he was particularly sad and died before he had fully mourned.

