古文：甄琛高聪甄琛，字思伯，中山毋极人，汉太保甄邯后也。父凝，州主簿。
现代文：甄琛，字思伯，中山毋极人，汉朝太保甄邯后人。父甄凝，任州主簿。
English: Zhen Rong, also known as Sibo, was born in Zhongshan and was a descendant of Zhen Rong, a Han dynasty official. His father, Zhen Rong, was the state's chief accountant.

古文：琛少敏悟，闺门之内，兄弟戏狎，不以礼法自居。
现代文：甄琛少年时即聪颖捷悟，闺门之内，兄弟嬉戏狎游，他不以礼法事等约束自己。
English: When he was a young boy, Zhenya was bright and quick-witted. When he was in his mother-in-law's house, his brothers played around. He didn't restrain himself with etiquette.

古文：颇学经史，称有刀笔，而形貌短陋，鲜风仪。
现代文：博读经史，笔锋健达，但甄琛却天生形短貌丑，缺少风度气质。
English: He was well-read in history and had a good pen, but Zhen Qi was naturally short and ugly, and lacked good manners and temperament.

古文：举秀才。入都积岁，颇以弈棋弃日，至乃通夜不止。
现代文：参加秀才考试，进入都城都几年了，总以下棋消磨时光，甚至与人通宵达旦地下棋。
English: After taking part in the talent examination and entering the capital for several years, I always played chess to pass the time, and even played chess with people all night long.

古文：手下苍头常令秉烛，或时睡顿，大加其杖，如此非一。
现代文：身边老仆人总是被他指使着秉烛照明，偶尔打起瞌睡，甄琛则愤怒而起，棍杖相加，诸如此类，时常发生。
English: The old servants around him were always instructed by him to light candles, and occasionally fell asleep, and the wrenches were angry, and the sticks were added together, and so on.

古文：奴后不胜楚痛，乃白琛曰： 郎君辞父母，仕宦京师。若为读书执烛，奴不敢辞罪，乃以围棋，日夜不息，岂是向京之意？
现代文：老仆人后来终于忍受不了鞭打之苦，禀告甄琛说： 郎君您辞乡别亲，入京求功名，假若我为您读书秉烛照字，奴才我万不敢推辞，但您却天天拴在棋盘上，没日没夜地下，这哪有入京求官之意？
English: Later, the old servant finally could not bear the pain of the whipping, and wrote an obituary to Zhenya: "Brother-in-law, you left your hometown to be with someone else, and came to Beijing to seek glory. If I were to read for you, holding a candle and reading the words, I would not dare to refuse to be your servant, but you are on the chessboard every day, day and night, what is the meaning of coming to Beijing to seek office?

古文：而赐加杖罚，不亦非理！ 
现代文：我稍有怠慢，您便加我杖罚，说起来，这也太没道理了！ 
English: Isn't it unreasonable to punish me?

古文：琛惕然惭感，遂从许叡、李彪假书研习，闻见益优。
现代文：一番话使甄琛如大梦初醒，幡然悔悟，于是痛改前非，在许睿、李彪那里借书研读，见识越来越广博。
English: One word made Zhen Rong wake up like a big dream and suddenly repent, so he changed his ways and borrowed books from Xu Rui and Li Biao to study, and his knowledge became more and more extensive.

古文：太和初，拜中书博士，迁谏议大夫，时有所陈，亦为高祖知赏。
现代文：太和初年，皇帝拜授他为中书博士，迁任谏议大夫，时时上疏圣上，也被高祖所称道嘉赏。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taizong's reign, the emperor conferred on him the title of Doctor of Chinese Literature, and he was transferred to the position of Doctor of Divination. He was also praised by Gao Zu.

古文：转通直散骑侍郎，出为本州征北府长史，后为本州阳平王颐卫军府长史。
现代文：后又转任通直散骑侍郎，出任本州征北府长史，后又为本州阳平王颐卫军府长史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Tsuchida Sanzhijirō, and served as the governor of Honshu's Northern Expedition, and later as the governor of Honshu's Yangpyeong Wangye Army.

古文：世宗践祚，以琛为中散大夫、兼御史中尉，转通直散骑常侍，仍兼中尉。
现代文：世宗登极，任命甄琛为中散大夫，兼任御史中尉，转任通直散骑常侍，仍然兼任中尉。
English: When Sejong ascended to the throne, he appointed Zhengyi as a middle-ranked doctor, concurrently serving as a lieutenant of imperial history, and he was transferred to the position of a regular attendant of Tongzhizan riding, still concurrently serving as a lieutenant.

古文：琛表曰：
现代文：甄琛上表称：
English: He went on to say:

古文：王者道同天壤，施齐造化，济时拯物，为民父母。
现代文： 王者之道，如皇天后土，雨露养育，济时拯物，为生民父母。
English: The way of the king is like the soil of the empress dowager, the rain and dew nurture, the time to save things, and the parents of the people.

古文：故年谷不登，为民祈祀。
现代文：正因如此，收成不好，王者应为民祈祝祭祀。
English: Because of this, the harvest is not good, and the king should pray and sacrifice for the people.

古文：乾坤所惠，天子顺之；山川秘利，天子通之。
现代文：天地所惠万民的，天子应当顺从天意；山川的财富，天子应通之于世。
English: Heaven and earth benefit all people, the Son of Heaven should obey the will of Heaven; the wealth of mountains and rivers should be passed on to the world by the Son of Heaven.

古文：苟益生民，损躬无吝，如或所聚，唯为赈恤。
现代文：只要有益于百姓万民，损害一点自己的利益应无所吝惜，假如圣上有所聚敛，也只应用来作为赈贫恤困之用。
English: As long as it is beneficial to the people and the people, it should not be spared to damage one's own interests. If there is a sacred gathering, it should only be used for poverty alleviation.

古文：是以《月令》称：山林薮泽，有能取蔬食禽兽者，皆野虞教导之；其迭相侵夺者，罪之无赦。
现代文：所以《月令》上说：山林之中，薮泽里面，如果能从中获取些菜蔬食物、禽鸟走兽之类，那都是大自然为百姓所设造的；有谁与百姓侵吞豪夺的，其罪不赦。
English: Therefore, the "Lunar Diary" said: in the mountains and forests, in Heze, if you can get some vegetables and foods, birds and beasts from them, it is all created by nature for the people; if anyone eats and robs with the people, his sin will not be forgiven.

古文：此明导民而弗禁，通有无以相济也。
现代文：这告诉圣上引导百姓而不禁止，接通有无以济养百姓的道理。
English: This tells the saints to guide the people without prohibiting them, and to connect with the truth that there is no way to feed the people.

古文：《周礼》虽有川泽之禁，正所以防其残尽，必令取之有时。斯所谓障护虽在公，更所以为民守之耳。
现代文：《周礼》中虽然有禁止豪夺山川的条文，那目的正是防备山川之产被很快耗尽，为的是让人民取之有时，这就是所谓保护山川是为公众利益，更是为百姓守住山川财富而已。
English: Although there is a provision in the "Weekly Ritual" prohibiting the seizure of mountains and rivers, the purpose is precisely to prevent the production of mountains and rivers from being quickly exhausted, in order to give the people time to take it. This is the so-called protection of mountains and rivers is for the public interest, and it is more for the people to keep the wealth of mountains and rivers.

古文：且一家之长，惠及子孙；一运之君，泽周天下；皆所以厚其所养，以为国家之富。
现代文：更何况一家之长，恩及子孙，一朝之君，泽被天下，都是说的厚生养财，为国家的兴旺发达打算。
English: What's more, the head of a family, his children and grandchildren, and the prince of a dynasty are all said to be well-off and prosperous, planning for the prosperity of the country.

古文：未有尊居父母，而醯醢是吝；富有万品，而一物是规。
现代文：没有听说过位处父母尊位，但却吝惜食物；富有万物，但却一针一线都动不得。
English: Haven't heard of a place where the parents are revered, but food is scarce; rich in everything, but can't move a needle.

古文：今者，天为黔首生盐，国与黔首障护，假获其利，是犹富专口断不及四体也。
现代文：而今，老天为黎民百姓生盐，国家成为天下万民的障蔽，圣上凭借它获得好处，这就是所谓专任口福而四肢不受益处啊。
English: Today, however, God is the source of salt for the people of Lebanon, the state has become a barrier for all the people of the world, and the Holy One obtains benefits by virtue of it. This is the so-called full-time blessing of the mouth, but the limbs do not benefit.

古文：且天下夫妇岁贡粟帛。
现代文：况且天下百姓每年贡献粮食布匹。
English: Moreover, the people of the world contribute grain cloth every year.

古文：四海之有，备奉一人；军国之资，取给百姓。
现代文：四海所有，奉养陛下一人；军国所需，取自百姓。
English: All the wealth of the four seas, for the support of His Majesty alone; the needs of the military state, taken from the people.

古文：天子亦何患乎贫，而苟禁一池也。
现代文：身为天子，你何必担心贫困，而要禁止百姓去开发一个池子呢。
English: As the son of heaven, why do you not worry about poverty, but want to prohibit the people from developing a pool?

古文：古之王者，世有其民，或水火以济其用，或巢宇以诲其居，或教农以去其饥，或训衣以除其敝。
现代文： 古代君主，都十分爱护百姓，或者利用水火以供百姓之用，或者筑巢造舍教民居住，或者教民耕种以免饥荒之苦，或教民织布以障体保暖。
English: The ancient monarchs were very fond of the people, or they used water and fire to provide for the people, or they built nests to teach the people to live, or they taught the people to cultivate to avoid the suffering of famine, or they taught the people to weave cloth to keep warm.

古文：故周《诗》称 教之诲之，饮之食之 ，皆所以抚覆导养，为之求利者也。
现代文：所以周《诗》称： 教之诲之，饮之食之 ，这都是古代君王抚爱教导百姓，为天下众生谋求实利的例子。
English: Therefore, Zhou's "Poem" said: "Teaching is good, eating and drinking is good, these are all examples of ancient kings caressing and teaching the people, seeking practical benefits for all beings in the world."

古文：臣性昧知理，识无远尚，每观上古爱民之迹，时读中叶骤税之书，未尝不叹彼远大，惜此近狭。
现代文：臣下我天生愚钝，不识道理，见识短浅，每每看到上古帝王爱民实迹，时时读到后来记述君主聚民税收的书，未尝不感叹上古帝王的胸怀远大，后来者的度量狭小。
English: As a subject, I am naturally stupid, unreasonable, and short-sighted. Every time I see the ancient emperors' love for the people, and read the books that later described the monarchs' tax collection, I can't help but feel that the ancient emperors were far-sighted and the later emperors were narrow-minded.

古文：今伪弊相承，仍崇关鄽之税；大魏恢博，唯受谷帛之输。
现代文：而今伪诈弊端相承不断，仍收市肆之税；大魏胸宽，只受粮食布帛的贡奉。
English: Today, the city still collects taxes from businesses, despite the continuous succession of frauds and evils. During the Great Wei Dynasty, the city only received tributes from grain mills.

古文：是使远方闻者，罔不歌德。
现代文：这种举动，使远方百姓听说的，无不歌颂圣上功德。
English: This kind of action, so that the distant people have heard, all praise the sacred merit.

古文：昔亶父以弃宝得民，硕鼠以受财失众。
现代文：过去的父因为不爱财宝而深得民心，《硕鼠》章描述接受财物而失却百姓。
English: The father in the past won the hearts of the people because he did not love wealth. The chapter of "The Rat" describes the acceptance of wealth and the loss of the people.

古文：君王之义，宜其高矣；魏之简税，惠实远矣。
现代文：君王您的道义，如日月高悬；大魏简税政策，实在是惠民深远啊。
English: Your morality, Your Majesty, is as high as the sun and the moon; the Great Wei tax reduction policy is really beneficial to the people.

古文：语称出内之吝，有司之福；施惠之难，人君之祸。
现代文：有说法称财出府库，圣上吝惜，是臣僚们的福分；施与百姓恩惠，举措犹豫，是人君的祸患。
English: There is a saying that it is a blessing for ministers to give money to the government treasury, but a curse for them to be stingy with it; it is a calamity for them to be hesitant in giving favors to the people.

古文：夫以府藏之物，犹以不施而为灾；况府外之利，而可吝之于黔首？
现代文：大凡府库所藏。而且以不肯给予别人为灾祸，更何况府外的好处，哪能吝惜百姓得到什么利益呢？
English: It is stored in the great treasury of the prefecture. Moreover, it is a disaster to refuse to give it to others, let alone the benefits outside the prefecture. How can we begrudge the people any benefits?

古文：且善藏者藏于民，不善藏者藏于府。
现代文：况且善藏财富的藏之于民，不善于藏富的藏于府库。
English: Moreover, those who are good at hiding wealth hide it from the people, while those who are not good at hiding wealth hide it from the government treasury.

古文：藏于民者民欣而君富，藏于府者国怨而民贫。
现代文：藏富于民的，百姓高兴那么君主自然富有，敛财于府库的国怨沸腾而百姓贫困。
English: If you hide wealth from the people, the people are happy, so the monarch is naturally rich, and if you accumulate wealth in the treasury, national resentment boils over and the people are impoverished.

古文：国怨则示化有亏，民贫则君无所取。
现代文：举国上下，怨声载道，那就预示着教化有亏损，百姓贫困那君主也无从取财。
English: If the whole country is filled with complaints, it indicates that the enlightenment has lost money, the people are poor, and the monarch has no way to make money.

古文：愿弛兹盐禁，使沛然远及，依《周礼》置川衡之法，使之监导而已。
现代文：臣下愿圣上您放松盐禁，使陛下恩泽广为被及。陛下可依照《周礼》设置川衡之官的方法，让他们监督引导百姓的行为即可。 
English: Your subjects wish Your Holiness to relax the salt ban, so that Your Majesty's favor will be widely received. Your Majesty can follow the "Weekly Rituals" to set up the officials of Kawahira, so that they can supervise and guide the behavior of the people.

古文：诏曰： 民利在斯，深如所陈。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 百姓利益，深如奏章所陈。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: "The interests of the people are as profound as those of the Song Dynasty.

古文：付八座议可否以闻。 
现代文：将此章交给群臣广为议论，然后定夺。 
English: This chapter will be submitted to the ministers for extensive discussion, and then decided.

古文：司徒、录尚书、彭城王勰，兼尚书邢峦等奏： 琛之所列，富乎有言，首尾大备，或无可贬。
现代文：司徒、录尚书、彭城王元勰，兼尚书邢峦等启奏说： 甄琛所列举的，言论宏富，大体上面面俱到，没有什么可挑剔的。
English: Sitou, Luo Shangshu, Pengcheng Wang Yuanqi, and Jian Shangshuqi said at the opening ceremony: The remarks listed by Zhenyao are rich and comprehensive, and there is nothing to be picky about.

古文：但恐坐谈则理高，行之则事阙，是用迟回，未谓为可。
现代文：但是，我们担心这会不会空坐谈理，道理很好，实行于事，则有欠缺，因此就该采取谨慎的态度，不能过早地说 行 。
English: However, we are worried about whether this will be an empty talk. The reason is good, but the implementation is deficient. Therefore, we should take a cautious attitude and not act prematurely.

古文：窃惟古之善为治者，莫不昭其胜途，悟其远理，及于救世，升降称时。
现代文：臣等私下考虑古代善于治理国家的，没有不明白其胜利的途径，懂得其远大的道理，所以等到拯救世事，便行动合于节度。
English: Privately, courtiers and others considered that the ancients were good at governing the country. They did not fail to understand the means of their victory, and understood their lofty principles. Therefore, they waited until they had saved the world, and then acted in accordance with the rules.

古文：欲令丰无过溢，俭不致敝，役养消息，备在厥中，节约取足，成其性命。
现代文：假若君主想让天下丰盈而不漫溢，节俭而不导致弊端，差使百姓、供养黎民的信息，都在奏疏之中了，节约俭省，取获有度，让百姓生活舒坦，道理大致如此。
English: If the monarch wants to make the world plentiful but not overflowing, frugal but not lead to drawbacks, the poor people and the information to feed the poor people are all in the process of being diluted, the reason is roughly this.

古文：如不尔者，焉用君为？
现代文：假如不像这样，那要君王干什么？
English: If not, what is the prince to do?

古文：若任其生产，随其啄食，便是刍狗万物，不相有矣。
现代文：假如人君听任百姓生产，放任百姓获取所需，那就会出现万物成为刍狗的现象，很可能导致什么都荡然无存的局面。
English: If the people are allowed to produce and obtain what they need, then everything will become a dog-eat-dog situation, which is likely to lead to a situation where nothing remains.

古文：自大道既往，恩惠生焉，下奉上施，卑高理睦。
现代文：从大道理出发，恩惠便会产生，万民奉养君主，君主恩泽万民，卑贱与高贵的道理睦顺通明。
English: Starting from the great principle, benevolence will arise, all people will support the monarch, the monarch will benefit all people, and the humble and noble principles will be harmonious and clear.

古文：然恩惠既交，思拯之术广，恆恐财不周国，泽不厚民。
现代文：然而，实际做起来，虽然恩泽惠施既已交接，拯救万民的措施也很多，但我们仍担心天下之财不济国用，圣上恩泽未必能惠及百姓。
English: However, in actual practice, although there has been a succession of benevolence and beneficence, and there are many measures to save the people, we are still worried that the wealth of the world will not benefit the country, and the holy grace may not benefit the people.

古文：故多方以达其情，立法以行其志。
现代文：所以要心怀多方以了解百姓感情，制定法规以实行圣上意愿。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to think of many ways to understand the feelings of the people and formulate laws and regulations to implement the sacred will.

古文：至乃取货山川，轻在民之贡；立税关市，裨十一之储。
现代文：至于获取山川财货，是因为百姓贡赋不丰；收取市贾之税，是要增加一些国库储备。
English: As for the acquisition of mountain and river wealth and goods, it is because the people's tribute is not abundant; the collection of the city tax is to increase some treasury reserves.

古文：收此与彼，非利己也；回彼就此，非为身也。
现代文：收取这收取那，并不是为了其有利于自己；躲开这接受那，也不是为了奉养己身。
English: Taking this, taking that, is not for one's own benefit; avoiding this, accepting that, is not for one's own benefit.

古文：所谓集天地之产，惠天地之民，藉造物之富，赈造物之贫。
现代文：这就是所谓敛集天地所产，惠施天下万民，假借造物主的财富，赈济造物者某些方面的贫乏。
English: This is the so-called "gathering of the fruits of heaven and earth" to benefit all the people of the world, pretending to use the wealth of the Creator to relieve the Creator's poverty in certain aspects.

古文：彻商贾给戎战，赋四民赡军国，取乎用乎，各有义已。
现代文：征收商人税利是为了提供国家战伐所需，让百姓贡赋目的在赡养卫国力量，取财用财，都有各自的道理。
English: The collection of merchants' tax and interest is to provide for the country's war needs, and the purpose of letting the people pay tribute is to maintain the national defense force, and to make money and use money, all of which have their own reason.

古文：禁此渊池，不专大官之御；敛此匹帛，岂为后宫之资？
现代文：禁止百姓开发这个渊池，不是专从大官的需要出发；敛聚这些布帛，又怎能说是后宫所需呢。
English: The ban on the development of this reservoir by the common people is not exclusively based on the needs of the dignitaries; how can it be said that the gathering of these cloths is necessary for the harem?

古文：既润不在己，彼我理一，犹积而散之，将焉所吝？
现代文：既然好处不在自己，彼我一个道理，就像聚敛与散发财货一样，那有什么可吝惜的呢？
English: Since the benefit is not to oneself, but to others and to oneself, just like the accumulation and distribution of wealth, what is there to be grudged?

古文：且税之本意，事有可求，固以希济生民，非为富贿藏货。
现代文：况且税收的本意，是使事有可求，本来是希望能够济养百姓，并不是为了私自藏贮财货。
English: Moreover, the original intention of taxation is to make things desirable, and it was originally hoped to be able to support the people, not to hide wealth and goods.

古文：不尔者，昔之君子何为然哉？
现代文：不像这样，那过去的贤人们为什么要这样做呢？
English: Otherwise, why would the sages of the past have done so?

古文：是以后来经图，未之或改。
现代文：正因如此，后来治理国家的，没有谁更改此类条文。
English: It is for this reason that no one who later governed the country changed such provisions.

古文：故先朝商校，小大以情，降鉴之流，疑兴复盐禁。
现代文：所以先朝检校类条文，从人情物理出发，大小必校，从鉴如流，仍恢复盐禁。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to check and revise the provisions first, starting from the humanities and physics, the size must be checked, and the salt ban is still restored.

古文：然自行以来，典司多怠，出入之间，事不如法，遂令细民怨嗟，商贩轻议。此乃用之者无方，非兴之者有谬。
现代文：然而自盐禁实行以来，有关部门大多怠惰，实行的时候，往往走了原样，于是便让百姓怨声四起，商贩议论纷纷，这是执行政策的人没有方法，并不是制定政策的人有什么过错。
English: However, since the implementation of the salt ban, the relevant departments have mostly been lazy. When the ban was implemented, they often left things as they were. As a result, the people complained and merchants argued. This is because those who implement the policy have no means, and it is not the fault of those who formulate the policy.

古文：至使朝廷明识，听营其间，今而罢之，惧失前旨。
现代文：而今，此事一出，致使朝廷明识之士，辨其原委，如果就此作罢，臣等担心失信于民。
English: Now, as soon as the matter came to light, the Imperial Court's sages have come forward to dispute the original decision. If this is not done, ministers and others are worried about losing credibility with the people.

古文：一行一改，法若易棋，参论理要，宜依前式。 
现代文：一行一改，法律的实施就像下棋动子一样，那怎么行呢，我们认为应当把条款中最重要的东西检寻出来，照先前做法依旧实施。 
English: One line at a time, the implementation of the law is like playing chess, so how can it be done? We believe that the most important things in the provisions should be searched out and implemented as before.

古文：诏曰： 司盐之税，乃自古通典，然兴制利民，亦代或不同，苟可以富氓益化，唯理所在。
现代文：于是，皇帝下诏书说： 收取盐业之税，本是自古如此，然而各代从有利于百姓而制定政策，政策各代之间也不尽相同，但只要能使民富足，益于教化，便是道理所在。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an edict saying: Collecting taxes from the salt industry has been the case since ancient times. However, each generation has formulated policies to benefit the people. Policies vary from generation to generation, but as long as they can make the people rich and benefit the enlightenment, that is the reason.

古文：甄琛之表，实所谓助政毗治者也，可从其前计，使公私并宜，川利无拥。
现代文：甄琛上的表，的确可称作是有助于治理国家，可照文前半所陈述，让公私并立，山川之利官民一同拥有。
English: The table on the screen can indeed be said to be conducive to the governance of the country. According to the first half of the article, the public and private sectors should be allowed to coexist, and the mountains and rivers should be jointly owned by the public and private sectors.

古文：尚书严为禁豪强之制也。 
现代文：尚书应当在禁止豪强强取豪夺方面痛下功夫。 
English: Shangshu should make great efforts in prohibiting the strong from taking advantage of the strong.

古文：诏琛参八座议事。
现代文：皇帝又下诏书让琛参与八座讨论国事。
English: The emperor also issued an imperial edict to let Yao participate in eight sessions to discuss state affairs.

古文：寻正中尉，常侍如故。
现代文：不久甄琛就当上了中尉，常侍官职如故。
English: Soon after, Zhen Rong was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and his position as a regular attendant remained unchanged.

古文：迁侍中，领中尉。
现代文：又迁任侍中，为中尉。
English: He was also transferred to the position of chamberlain and became a lieutenant.

古文：琛俯眉畏避，不能绳纠贵游，凡所劾治，率多下吏。
现代文：甄琛胆小怕事，所任不能纠治显贵，所有被他弹劾的人中，大都是下层官吏。
English: Zhen Rong was timid and afraid of things. He could not correct the dignitaries. Most of the people he impeached were lower-level officials.

古文：于时赵修盛宠，琛倾身事之。
现代文：当时赵修正得宠，甄琛一头扎进他的怀里，跟他抱成一团。
English: At that time, Zhao Xi was favored, and Zhen Xuan rushed into his arms and hugged him.

古文：琛父凝为中散大夫，弟僧林为本州别驾，皆托修申达。
现代文：甄琛的父亲甄凝任中散大夫，弟僧林为本州别驾，都是托付赵修向上传达的。
English: Zhen Rong's father Zhen Rong, who was a doctor in Zhongshan, and his brother Zhen Ronglin, who was a monk in their home province, both asked Zhao Xiu to help them apply to the imperial court.

古文：至修奸诈事露，明当收考，今日乃举其罪。
现代文：等到奸诈的事情败露，明天准备收审，今天甄琛才列举其罪状。
English: Zhao Shugang's many treacherous and deceitful deeds have been exposed. He will be taken into custody for questioning tomorrow. Today, Zhenya will expose his crimes.

古文：及监决修鞭，犹相隐恻。然告人曰： 赵修小人，背如土牛，殊耐鞭杖。 
现代文：等到他看到刑官抽打赵修，恻隐之心还是油然而生，但等到他对别人说，就成了： 赵修小人，脊背就像土牛一样，特别经得起鞭打。 
English: When he saw the executioner beating Zhao Xiu, his heart of compassion was still born, but when he said to others, it became: Zhao Xiu is a villain, his back is like a cow, and he can withstand whipping.

古文：有识以此非之。
现代文：有识之士对他颇有看法。
English: That's why people with insight criticize him.

古文：修死之明日，琛与黄门郎李凭以朋党被召诣尚书，兼尚书元英、邢峦穷其阿附之状。
现代文：赵修死的第二天，甄琛与黄门郎李凭也以 朋党 之名被召往尚书处，兼尚书元英、邢峦穷究二人阿曲逢迎赵修的情况。
English: On the second day of Zhao Xiu's death, Zhen Qi and Huangmen Lang Li Biao were also summoned to the official records office in the name of the party, and also the official records of Yuan Ying and Zou Qian to investigate the situation of the two A Qu Feng Ying Zhao Xiu.

古文：琛曾拜官，诸宾悉集，峦乃晚至，琛谓峦曰： 卿何处放蛆来，今晚始顾？ 
现代文：甄琛先前拜官，有关官员都来了，邢峦出来晚了些，甄琛对邢峦说： 卿您死到哪里去了，这么晚才出来？ 
English: Zhenya had been to see an official before, and the relevant officials all came. Zhenya came out later. Zhenya said to Zhenya: Sir, where did you go? You came out so late?

古文：虽以戏言，峦变色衔忿。
现代文：说的虽是玩笑话，但邢峦动起火来，一直耿耿于怀。
English: Although he said it as a joke, he has never forgotten it.

古文：及此，大相推穷。
现代文：碰到这次机会，刨根问底，极为仔细地盘问甄琛。
English: At this time, they interrogated him with all their might.

古文：司徒公、录尚书、北海王详等奏曰： 臣闻党人为患，自古所疾；政之所忌，虽宠必诛，皆所以存天下之至公，保灵基于永业者也。
现代文：司徒公、钅录尚书、北海王元详等人启奏说： 为臣听说党人成为祸患，自古以来，为人痛恨；结党成奸，为政所忌讳，即使身为宠臣，只要是党人，一定得诛杀，这些都是为了保存国家大公，保护先王所创基业永固长存的做法。
English: According to the commentary by Prince Szeto, Wang Luo Shangshu, Wang Yuanlu of the North Sea, and others: "Since ancient times, it has been hated by the people for the vassals to hear that the party members have become a scourge; to form a party and become a traitor, to be shunned by the government, even if you are a favorite vassal, as long as you are a party member, you must fight and kill. These are all practices to preserve the country's grand duchy and protect the foundation created by the former king.

古文：伏惟陛下，纂圣前晖，渊鉴幽慝，恩断近习，宪轨唯新，大政蔚以增光，鸿猷于焉永泰。
现代文：我斗胆考虑陛下承袭先王明识，探幽鉴匿，即为近臣，当责不贷，一切都按国法办事，审时度势，这使国家大政蔚增光辉，可保江山永泰平安。
English: I dare to think that Your Majesty inherits the wisdom of the previous king, explores the hidden and the unknown, that is, he is a close vassal, he should not be blamed, everything should be done according to the national law, and he should judge the situation at the time. This makes the national policy more brilliant, and can ensure the everlasting peace and security of the country.

古文：谨按：侍中、领御史中尉甄琛，身居直法，纠擿是司，风邪响黩，犹宜劾纠，况赵修奢暴，声著内外，侵公害私，朝野切齿。
现代文：臣的看法：侍中、领御史中尉甄琛，身居执法高位，纠邪摘非，是其职责，风气不正，都应弹劾纠正，何况赵修奢侈暴虐，恶名远扬，侵吞公有，豪夺私产，朝野上下，切齿痛恨。
English: The minister's view: Zhen Qi, a chamberlain and lieutenant of the imperial court historian, holds a high position in law enforcement. It is his duty to rectify wrongs, and the culture of injustice should be impeached and corrected. In addition, Zhao Xiu is extravagant and tyrannical, his notoriety is far-reaching, he embezzles public property, grabs private property, goes up and down in the court, and hates with his teeth.

古文：而琛尝不陈奏，方更往来，绸缪结纳，以为朋党，中外影响，致其谈誉。
现代文：但甄琛却从不上疏陈奏，反而与其来往密切，交接结党，成为其重要朋党，朝内朝外，互相照应，互相勾结、互相吹捧。
English: However, Zhen Rong never played the role of an outsider. On the contrary, he maintained close contacts with Zhen Rong, joined the party, and became an important friend of Zhen Rong. Both inside and outside the DPRK, they took care of each other, colluded with each other, and touted each other.

古文：令布衣之父，超登正四之官；七品之弟，越陟三阶之禄。
现代文：让本是平民的父亲，跃登正四品的高位；七品之弟，连跳三级官阶。
English: As the father of a commoner, he was promoted to the high rank of the fourth grade; as the younger brother of the seventh grade, he was promoted to the third grade.

古文：亏先皇之选典，尘圣明之官人。
现代文：这种做法，亏损先王所立的选举大法，给圣贤明达的官员脸上抹黑。
English: This practice, the election law established by the loss-making former king, has blackened the face of the wise and sagacious officials.

古文：又与武卫将军、黄门郎李凭相为表里，凭兄叨封，知而不言。
现代文：甄琛又与武卫将军、黄门郎李凭互为表里，凭兄被封官，甄琛知而不说。
English: Zhen Rong and General Wu Wei and Huang Men Lang Li Biao were on the same side. Biao's brother was appointed to an official position, but Zhen Rong did not know about it.

古文：及修衅彰，方加弹奏。
现代文：等到赵修恶迹败露，甄琛方才弹劾。
English: Wait until Zhao Xiu's evil deeds are revealed, and then impeach him.

古文：生则附其形势，死则就地排之，窃天之功以为己力，仰欺朝廷，俯罔百司，其为鄙诈，于兹甚矣。
现代文：赵修生时，甄琛等全都趋炎附势，被诛之后，则又摇身一变，大加批评，窃天之功以为己有，对上瞒欺朝廷；对下哄骗百姓，甄琛的为人卑鄙奸诈，在这一点上，暴露无遗了。
English: When Zhao Xiu Sheng was a child, Zhen Yi and the others were all full of enthusiasm. However, after Zhao Xiu Sheng was arrested, Zhen Yi changed his ways and became very critical. He thought that he had stolen the merits of heaven, and he lied to the imperial court; he deceived the people; Zhen Yi was a despicable and treacherous person. At this point, Zhen Yi was completely exposed.

古文：不实不忠，实合贬黜。
现代文：不诚实，不忠耿，实在应该贬官放逐。
English: Dishonest and disloyal, he really should be demoted and exiled.

古文：谨依律科徒，请以职除。
现代文：谨按刑律规定，请求除去官名。
English: In accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Law, I hereby request the removal of my official title.

古文：其父中散，实为叨越，虽皇族帝孙，未有此例，既得不以伦，请下收夺。
现代文：其父身为中散大夫，实际上是窃居其位，即使是皇族帝孙，也无此先例，这既然来得不伦不类，请求收回官职。
English: Since his father, Dr. Zhongshan, actually stole the throne, which is unprecedented even for the grandson of an emperor, and since this is completely out of character, he requests that the official position be taken back.

古文：李凭朋附赵修，是亲是仗，交游之道，不依恆度，或晨昏从就，或吉凶往来；至乃身拜其亲，妻见其子，每有家事，必先请托。
现代文：甄琛攀附赵修，把他看作亲戚、靠山，跟他交游，不按常规，或是早晚出入赵修府门，或是每逢吉凶之事，便密谋商讨，以至于降低身份，拜揖赵修家人，他的妻子也与赵修儿子相见，甄琛每有家事，一定先托付赵修。
English: Zhenya clung to Zhao Xiu, regarded him as a relative and a patron, and made friends with him. She did not follow the usual routine, either going in and out of Zhao Xiu's house in the morning and evening, or whenever there was a good or bad thing, she would conspire to discuss it, to the point of lowering her status. She courted Zhao Xiu's family, and her wife also met Zhao Xiu's son. Whenever Zhenya had a family matter, she would first entrust it to Zhao Xiu.

古文：缁点皇风，尘鄙正化，此而不纠，将何以肃整阿谀，奖厉忠概！
现代文：如此这般，玷污清明皇风，搅坏世俗风化。这种恶劣的情况都不纠正，那凭什么去纠阿正谀，奖拔忠直之人呢！
English: In this way, the pure imperial style is tarnished, and the worldly manners are spoiled. If this bad situation is not corrected, then what is the basis for correcting the upright and praising the loyal?

古文：请免所居官，以肃风轨。 
现代文：臣请求免去甄琛官职，以正风气。 
English: The vassal requested to be exempted from the post of screening officer, with a positive atmosphere.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏陈被认可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：琛遂免归本郡，左右相连死黜者三十余人。
现代文：甄琛于是被罢去官职，送回家乡，他左右牵连被罢黜官职被处死的有三十多人。
English: As a result, Zhen Rong was removed from his official position and sent back to his hometown. He was implicated in the deaths of more than 30 people.

古文：始，琛以父母年老，常求解官扶侍，故高祖授以本州长史。
现代文：甄琛为官之初，他因为父母年迈力衰，经常请求皇上免去他的官职让他回家服侍，因此，高祖授予他家乡州长史。
English: At the beginning of Zhen Rong's term of office, because his parents were old and weak, he often asked the emperor to relieve him of his official duties and let him go home to serve. Therefore, Gaozu awarded him the title of governor of his hometown.

古文：及贵达，不复请归，至是乃还供养。
现代文：等到甄琛官名显达，不再请归。这次遭际，他才回家专门供养父母。
English: Wait until the name of the eunuch is revealed, and he will no longer be invited back. This time, he came home specifically to support his parents.

古文：数年，遭母忧。
现代文：几年之后，母亲去世。
English: A few years later, my mother died.

古文：母钜鹿曹氏，有孝性，夫氏去家，路逾百里，每得鱼肉菜果珍美口实者，必令僮仆走奉其母，乃后食焉。
现代文：他的母亲是钜鹿曹氏人，有孝性，丈夫家离自己父母家里有百里之遥，每次她弄到鱼肉菜果之类美味佳肴，一定要仆人送些给父母吃，然后她才开始食用。
English: His mother was a filial daughter of the Elk Cao clan, and her husband's home was hundreds of miles away from her parents' home. Every time she got delicious dishes such as fish, meat, vegetables and fruits, the servants must send some to her parents to eat, and then she began to eat.

古文：琛母服未阙，复丧父。
现代文：甄琛母亲丧服没有满期，父亲又去世了。
English: Zhenya's mother's mourning clothes did not expire, and her father passed away.

古文：琛于茔兆之内，手种松柏，隆冬之月，负掘水土。
现代文：琛在父母坟茔内，亲手种下松柏，隆冬腊月，挖土挑水。
English: He planted pine and cypress trees in his parents' grave with his own hands. In the dead of winter, he dug up the soil to collect water.

古文：乡老哀之，咸助加力。
现代文：乡亲父老十分同情他，都来帮忙。
English: The townspeople felt very sorry for him and all came to help.

古文：十余年中，坟成木茂。
现代文：十多年中，坟墓修好，树木葱荣。
English: For more than a decade, it was heavily wooded.

古文：与弟僧林誓以同居没齿。
现代文：甄琛与弟甄僧林发誓兄弟二人一起生活到老。
English: Zhen Rong and his brother Zhen Sang Lin vowed that the two brothers would live together until old age.

古文：专事产业，亲躬农圃，时以鹰犬驰逐自娱。
现代文：在家乡买田置产，亲自耕种，经常呼鹰唤犬，出门打猎，借以自娱。
English: He bought land and property in his hometown, cultivated it himself, often called hawks and dogs, and went out hunting to amuse himself.

古文：朝廷有大事，犹上表陈情。
现代文：朝廷有什么大事，还上书陈奏。
English: When there is a big event in the imperial court, he also states his opinion on the table.

古文：久之，复除散骑常侍、领给事黄门侍郎、定州大中正。
现代文：过了很长时间，皇帝又任命他为散骑常侍，领给事黄门侍郎、定州大中正。
English: After a long time, the emperor also appointed him as a horseback riding attendant, led by Huangmen attendant, Dingzhou Da Zhongzheng.

古文：大见亲宠，委以门下庶事，出参尚书，入厕帷幄。
现代文：又大为皇帝亲近宠幸，黄门内大小事情，全权由他负责，出则参与尚书事务，入则为皇帝出谋划策。
English: He was also a close favorite of the emperor. He was in charge of all matters within the Yellow Gate, both large and small. When he was not in charge, he was involved in the affairs of Shangshu, and when he was in charge, he made suggestions for the emperor.

古文：琛，高祖时兼主客郎，迎送萧赜使彭城刘缵，琛钦其器貌，常叹咏之。
现代文：甄琛，高祖时兼任过主客郎一职，迎送萧赜出使彭城刘缵，甄琛钦佩刘缵的才气风度，经常言于歌诗。
English: Zhenyao, Gao Zu also served as the host guest, welcomed Xiao Yu's envoy Pengcheng Liu Yu, Zhenyao admired Liu Yu's talent and demeanor, often said in poetry.

古文：缵子晰为朐山戍主。晰死，家属入洛。
现代文：刘缵的儿子刘日折任朐山驻守长官，日折死之后，家属迁入洛阳。
English: Liu Yi's son, Liu Yili, served as the garrison commander of Lushan. After Yili's death, his family moved to Luoyang.

古文：有女年未二十，琛已六十余矣，乃纳晰女为妻。
现代文：刘日折有个姑娘，年龄不到二十岁，而甄琛当时已经六十多岁了，他娶姑娘为妻。
English: Once upon a time, Liu had a girl who was less than twenty years old, but Zhenya was already more than sixty years old at that time. He married the girl.

古文：婚日，诏给厨费，琛深所好悦，世宗时调戏之。
现代文：结婚那天，皇帝下诏为甄琛操办酒宴，甄琛十分高兴，世宗经常为这老少配开甄琛的玩笑。
English: On the day of the wedding, the emperor issued an edict to hold a banquet for Zhen Rong. Zhen Rong was very happy, and Shizong often played jokes on Zhen Rong for the old and young.

古文：卢昶败于朐山，诏琛驰驿检按。
现代文：卢昶在朐山战败之后，皇帝下诏让甄琛前往检察调查。
English: After Lu Yao's defeat in Lushan, the emperor issued an edict to let Zhen Yao go to Zengcheng to investigate.

古文：迁河南尹，加平南将军，黄门、中正如故。
现代文：后迁任河南令尹，加平南将军，黄门侍郎、大中正官职照旧。
English: Later, he was transferred to Henan Lingyin, Ga Pingnan General, Huangmen Chamberlain, and served as a high school official as before.

古文：琛表曰： 《诗》称 京邑翼翼，四方是则 者，京邑是四方之本，安危所在，不可不清。
现代文：甄琛上表说： 《诗》说： 京邑翼翼，四方是则。 说的是京师是国家四方的根本，社稷安危都依赖它，不可不清正。
English: Zhen Xuan said on the table: "The poem says: Beijing is the foundation of the country's four sides, social security and danger all depend on it, and it must not be unclear.

古文：是以国家居代，患多盗窃，世祖太武皇帝亲自发愤，广置主司里宰，皆以下代令长及五等散男有经略者乃得为之。
现代文：所以，从前国都在代州时，祸患不断、盗贼众多，世祖太武皇帝亲自发愤图安，广泛设置主司、里宰等官职，这些官员都从那些令长及五等男爵的后代有谋略的人中提拔。
English: Therefore, when all the former countries were in daizhou, there were continuous disasters and many thieves. Emperor Taibu, the founder of the dynasty, was personally angry and set up a wide range of official posts such as the director and the deputy. These officials were promoted from those who had the strategy of the descendants of the commander and the fifth baron.

古文：又多置吏士，为其羽翼，崇而重之，始得禁止。
现代文：又广设吏卒武士，为其羽翼，提高他们的待遇，尊重他们的劳动，这样，不安定因素才得以消除。
English: In addition, officials and soldiers were widely set up as their wings, their treatment was improved, and their labor was respected. In this way, the instability factor was eliminated.

古文：今迁都已来，天下转广，四远赴会，事过代都，五方杂沓，难可备简，寇盗公行，劫害不绝。此由诸坊混杂，厘比不精，主司暗弱，不堪检察故也。
现代文：而今迁都以来，国土面积增加，四面八方，赴会京都，事情超过都处代郡的时候，天下人士，杂集京师，难以一一查明掌握，以致寇盗公行，劫害行为不断出现，究其原因，是因为行市混杂，难分鱼虾，有关部门暗昧软弱，不能胜任检查纠察责任必然产生的结果。
English: However, since the relocation of the capital, the area of the country has increased in all directions. When visiting Kyoto and things exceed the time of representing the county, it is difficult for the people of the world, miscellaneous collection of Beijing division, to ascertain and master one by one. As a result, theft and robbery and acts of robbery continue to occur. The reason for this is that the industry and market are mixed, it is difficult to distinguish between fish and shrimp, and the relevant departments are obscure and weak, and they are not competent to check the inevitable result of picketing responsibility.

古文：凡使人攻坚木者，必为之择良器。
现代文：大凡要人对付坚硬的木头，必定要为他选择好的工具。
English: If you want to deal with hard wood, you must choose a good tool for it.

古文：今河南郡是陛下天山之坚木，盘根错节，乱植其中。
现代文：现在的河南郡是陛下您的坚木，各种人盘根错节，混杂在一起。
English: Today's Henan County is Your Majesty's hardwood, and all kinds of people are intertwined and mixed together.

古文：六部里尉即攻坚之利器，非贞刚精锐，无以治之。
现代文：六部里尉等部门官员便是攻坚的利器，不是贞直刚精锐利无敌的，则无法治理好京都。
English: Departmental officials such as the lieutenant of the Sixth Division are the best tools for attacking the strongholds. If they are not honest, upright, sharp and invincible, they will not be able to govern Kyoto well.

古文：今择尹既非南金，里尉铅刀而割，欲望清肃都邑，不可得也。
现代文：现在陛下您选择的令尹既不是良才，里尉等官也是柔软的铅刀，而陛下想要整顿京邑，恐怕难以达到预期目的。
English: Now, it is impossible to rectify the order in Luoyang if Ling Yin is not an outstanding talent in the south, and the lieutenant treats the prisoners as if he were cutting meat with a lead knife.

古文：里正乃流外四品，职轻任碎，多是下才，人怀苟且，不能督察，故使盗得容奸，百赋失理。
现代文：里正是流外四品之职，职位轻贱，责任琐屑，大都是下等官员，人人苟且偷安，不能行使督察之责，所以才使得盗贼奸邪横行霸道，各种赋税，失去常理。
English: It is precisely the position of the four estates in exile, the position is light, the responsibility is trivial, most of them are lower-level officials, everyone is scrupulous and steals security, and can not exercise the duty of inspector, so it makes the thieves act tyrannically, all kinds of taxes, and lose common sense.

古文：边外小县，所领不过百户，而令长皆以将军居之。
现代文：而边外小县，所统领的人数不过百十来户，但往往却以将军任职。
English: It is a small and remote county, with no more than a hundred households under its jurisdiction, and the shogun is always a general.

古文：京邑诸坊，大者或千户、五百户，其中皆王公卿尹，贵势姻戚，豪猾仆隶，廕养奸徒，高门邃宇，不可干问。
现代文：京都诸坊，大的有千户、五百户之众，而且其中居住的都是王公卿尹、皇亲国戚之类高官显贵，豪绅猾吏，仆役奴隶，杂居其间，这些达官贵人往往私养奸恶之人，而他们高门广宇，不能随便干预。
English: There are thousands of households and 500 households in Kyoto, and all of them are inhabited by high-ranking dignitaries such as Wang Gongqing Yin, relatives of the emperor, courtiers, servants and slaves, and they live together. These high-ranking dignitaries often privately raise evil-doers, and they have a wide range of high-levels, so they cannot intervene casually.

古文：又有州郡侠客，廕结贵游，附党连群，阴为市劫，比之边县，难易不同。
现代文：还有州郡侠胆的人，客居京都，私自交结贵戚，连群结党，暗地里欺行霸市，这比起边境小县，情况要复杂得多。
English: There are also people with the gallantry of prefectural governors, who live in Kyoto as guests, make friends with noble relatives, and even form parties to secretly bully and take over the city. This is a much more complicated situation than that of small border counties.

古文：今难彼易此，实为未惬。
现代文：现在朝廷以边事为难，京师治理容易，实在是不妥的做法。
English: At present, the imperial court is finding it difficult to deal with side issues, while the governance of Beijing is easy. This is really an inappropriate approach.

古文：王者立法，随时从宜，改弦易调，明主所急。
现代文：大凡王都制定法律，都根据情况随时有所改变，改弦易调，是明主当务之急。
English: All great kings have enacted laws, all of which are subject to change at any time according to the situation, and it is clear that it is a top priority.

古文：先朝立品，不必即定，施而观之，不便则改。
现代文：先朝确立品位高下，不是一说就定下来，而是根据实际情况，不合实际便着手更改。
English: The high and low grades were established in the previous government, but they were not set at once, but were changed according to the actual situation.

古文：今闲官静任，犹听长兼，况烦剧要务，不得简能下领？
现代文：现在清闲官职，犹且高官兼任，况且烦杂重要的事务，怎能马马虎虎、拈重如轻，随便委职呢？
English: Now that there is a vacant official post, and a high-ranking official concurrently holds the post, and moreover, there are complicated and important matters, how can it be done carelessly, lightly, and arbitrarily?

古文：请取武官中八品将军已下干用贞济者，以本官俸恤，领里尉之任，各食其禄；高者领六部尉，中者领经途尉，下者领里正。
现代文：我请求选取武官当中八品将军以下精干忠直的人，以本官待遇，任里尉之职，各自享受其应得俸禄，高的任六部尉，中等的任经途尉，下等的任里正。
English: I request that the most capable and loyal of the military attachés below the rank of general of the eighth grade be selected, and that they be appointed to the rank of lieutenant with their own treatment, and that they each enjoy the salary they deserve, the highest being appointed to the rank of lieutenant of the sixth grade, the middle being appointed to the rank of lieutenant of the second grade, and the lowest being appointed to the rank of lieutenant of the first grade.

古文：不尔，请少高里尉之品，选下品中应迁之者，进而为之。
现代文：如不这样，臣请求稍稍提高里尉官职品位，选择本处下品中的本应升迁的人，充当此项官职。
English: Otherwise, I request that you raise the rank of lieutenant slightly, and select the person who should have been promoted from the lower ranks to serve in this post.

古文：则督责有所，辇毂可清。 
现代文：如果这样，则会让他们职重责任也大，京师就会气象太平，陛下身边就会安定。 
English: If this is the case, they will be given greater responsibilities, the capital will be peaceful, and His Majesty's entourage will be stable.

古文：诏曰： 里正可进至勋品，经途从九品，六部尉正九品，诸职中简取，何必须武人也？ 
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 里正可进品位于勋品，经途官员从九品，六部尉从正九品官员中提拔，就不必从武将中选拔这些官员了。 
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: Li Zheng can promote products to the level of decoration, transit officials can be promoted from the level of nine products, and six lieutenants can be promoted from the level of nine products, so there is no need to select these officials from the generals.

古文：琛又奏以羽林为游军，于诸坊巷司察盗贼。
现代文：甄琛又启奏皇上以羽林军作为巡逻力量，巡逻在坊巷之间，纠察盗贼。
English: Zhen Rong also requested that the Ulin Army patrol the capital and arrest the thieves.

古文：于是京邑清静，至今踵焉。
现代文：从这以后，京都治安秩序大为好转，至今仍太平无事。
English: Since then, the security situation in Kyoto has greatly improved, and remains peaceful to this day.

古文：转太子少保，黄门如故。
现代文：转任太子少保，黄门侍郎官职依旧。
English: Zhen Rong was transferred to the position of the Prince's Junior Bodyguard, and Huang Men remained in the same position.

古文：大将军高肇伐蜀，以琛为使持节、假抚军将军，领步骑四万为前驱都督。
现代文：大将军高肇讨伐蜀乱，皇帝任命甄琛为持节使，代抚军将军，统领步、骑兵四万人为前锋都督。
English: The great general Gaozhao fought against the Shu Rebellion, and the emperor appointed Zhen Rong as the envoy to hold the festival, the general of the deputy army, the leader of the march, and the 40,000 cavalry as the vanguard governor.

古文：琛次梁州獠亭，会世宗崩，班师。
现代文：甄琛部队到了梁州獠亭时，适逢世宗逝世，班师回朝。
English: When Zhen Rong's troops arrived at Liangzhou Rongting, it coincided with the death of Shizong, and the team returned to the imperial court.

古文：高肇既死，以琛肇之党也，不宜复参朝政，出为营州刺史，加安北将军。
现代文：高肇死了之后，朝廷认为甄琛是高肇党人，不宜再参与朝政，便命他为营州刺史出任外职，加安北将军。
English: After Gao Zhao's death, the imperial court considered Zhen Yi to be a member of Gao Zhao's party and no longer suitable to participate in imperial politics, so he was appointed to serve as a foreign post for the governor of Yingzhou Province, General Gaanbei.

古文：岁余，以光禄大夫李思穆代之，时年六十五矣。遂停中山，久之乃赴洛。
现代文：一年后，让光禄大夫杨思穆代替他的官职，当时甄琛都六十五岁了，于是他在中山闲居，很久以后，才到京城。
English: A year later, he asked the Guanglu doctor Yang Simu to take over his official post. At that time, Zhen Yidu was sixty-five years old, so he idled in Zhongshan for a long time before coming to Beijing.

古文：除镇西将军、凉州刺史，犹以琛高氏之昵也，不欲处之于内。
现代文：被任命为镇西将军、凉州刺史，朝廷仍然认为他与高肇过从密切，不愿让他留在京师。
English: He was appointed as Zhenxi General and Liangzhou Chief Historian, but the imperial court still believed that he was too close to Gao Zhao and did not want him to stay in Beijing.

古文：寻征拜太常卿，仍以本将军出为徐州刺史。
现代文：不久又征召拜授太常卿，仍然以本将军出任徐州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was called up to serve as Tai Changqing, and still served as the general of Xuzhou.

古文：及入辞肃宗，琛辞以老，诏除吏部尚书，将军如故。
现代文：等到入京辞别肃宗，甄琛以年老体弱为由不愿赴任，皇帝下诏任他为吏部尚书，将军职位照旧。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, Zhen Rong refused to take up the post on the grounds that he was too old and frail. The emperor issued an edict appointing him as the secretary of the personnel department, and the position of general remained unchanged.

古文：未几，除征北将军、定州刺史，衣锦昼游，大为称满。
现代文：不久，又命为征北将军、定州刺史，衣冠锦绣，游历治地，心情大为舒畅。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to be the general of the Northern Expedition and the historian of Dingzhou, and his clothes were decorated with brocade, and he traveled to the provinces. His mood was very comfortable.

古文：治体严细，甚无声誉。
现代文：甄琛治州严厉刻苛，没有声誉。
English: Zhen Rong Zhizhou is harsh and harsh, and has no reputation.

古文：崔光辞司徒之授也，琛与光书，外相抑扬，内实附会也。
现代文：崔光不愿接受司徒之职，甄琛给光写信，表面贬责，实际附和。
English: Cui Guang did not want to accept the post of the magistrate. Zhen Rong wrote a letter to Guang, which was on the surface derogatory, but was actually supportive.

古文：光亦揣其意，复书褒美以悦之。
现代文：崔光揣度他的意图，回信称赞以取悦于他。
English: Cui Guang guessed his intention and replied with praise to please him.

古文：征为车骑将军、特进，又拜侍中。
现代文：不久又征召入京，授予车骑将军、特进等衔，又授官侍中。
English: Soon after, he was drafted into the capital, awarded the titles of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, and Special Envoy, and was also awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：以其衰老，诏赐御府杖，朝直杖以出入。
现代文：因他衰老，皇帝下诏赐给他御府杖，每天早晨拄杖上朝，出入禁中。
English: Because of his old age, the emperor gave him the imperial scepter, and every morning he would carry the scepter up to the palace and enter and leave the palace.

