古文：魏元忠，宋州宋城人也。
现代文：魏元忠，宋州宋城人。
English: Wei Yuanzhong, from Songcheng, Songzhou.

古文：本名真宰，以避则天母号改焉。
现代文：本名真宰，因避讳武则天母亲名号而改名。
English: His real name was Zhenzai, but he changed it to avoid the name of his mother, Wu Zetian.

古文：又今之将吏，率多贪暴，所务唯狗马，所求唯财物，无赵奢、吴起散金养士之风，纵使行军，悉是此属。
现代文：当初，他做太学生时，就志气倜傥，不把举荐放在心上，故累年未能升调。当时有一左史，是銩稨人，姓江名融，他撰写了《九州设险图》，全面记载了古今用兵成败方面的事。
English: At the beginning, when he was a student, he was discouraged and did not care about the recommendation, so he could not be promoted for many years. At that time, there was a left-wing historian, a person from Xing, surnamed Jiang Nanyong, who wrote "Kyushu Set Hazard Map," which comprehensively recorded the success and failure of the use of soldiers from ancient times to the present.

古文：臣恐吐蕃之平，未可旦夕望也。
现代文：魏元忠就对这一内容加以训释解说。仪凤年中，吐番不断地侵犯边土。
English: Wei Yuanzhong expounded on this content. In the middle of the Yifeng period, Tuban constantly invaded the borderlands.

古文：帝甚叹异之，授秘书省正字，令直中书省，仗内供奉。寻除监察御史。
现代文：魏元忠到洛阳上密封奏章，论说朝廷命官用兵作战方面优缺点。唐高宗看了很是惊叹，于是授他为秘书省正字，令他在中书省听调遣，不久任监察御史。
English: Wei Yuanzhong went to Luoyang to seal the record and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the imperial court's use of soldiers. Tang Gaozong was very surprised when he saw it, so he awarded him the title of secretary of the Ministry of Justice, made him listen to the dispatch of the Ministry of Literature, and soon served as the inspector of the history.

古文：文明年，迁殿中侍御史。
现代文：文明年中，他迁任殿中侍御史。
English: In the middle of the Bunmei era, he was transferred to the position of palace chamberlain.

古文：其年，徐敬业据扬州作乱，左玉钤卫大将军李孝逸督军讨之，则天诏元忠监其军事。
现代文：那年，徐敬业占据扬州作乱，左玉钤大将军李孝逸督军讨伐，武则天诏魏元忠监理军事。
English: In that year, Xu Jingye occupied Yangzhou to create turmoil, General Zuo Yuqi led the army of General Li Xiaoyu to fight, and Wu Zetian led the army of General Wei Yuanzhong to supervise the military.

古文：孝逸至临淮，而偏将雷仁智为敬业先锋所败，敬业又攻陷润州，回兵以拒孝逸。
现代文：李孝逸到临淮，而他的偏将雷仁智被徐敬业的先锋部队挫败，接着徐敬业又攻陷润州，回兵来抗击李孝逸。
English: Li Xiaoyi went to Linhuai, but his general Lei Renzhi was defeated by Xu Jingye's vanguard, and then Xu Jingye invaded Renzhou and returned to fight against Li Xiaoyi.

古文：孝逸惧其锋，按甲不敢进。
现代文：李孝逸害怕敌军的力量，按甲不敢进军。
English: Li Xiaoyu was afraid of the enemy's strength and did not dare to advance.

古文：元忠谓孝逸曰： 朝廷以公王室懿亲，故委以阃外之事，天下安危，实资一决。
现代文：魏元忠对李孝逸说 ：朝廷因您是王室懿亲，所以委以这平定叛乱的大事，天下的安危，实在要靠这一次决战。
English: Wei Yuanzhong said to Li Xiaoying: Since you are a close relative of the royal family, the imperial court has entrusted you with this important matter of suppressing the rebellion. The safety of the world really depends on this decisive battle.

古文：且海内承平日久，忽闻狂狡，莫不注心倾耳，以俟其诛。
现代文：况且国内太平日久，忽闻这叛乱，莫不注心倾耳，来等候诛杀叛逆的好消息。
English: Moreover, since the country had been at peace for a long time, when they suddenly heard about this rebellion, they couldn't help but listen attentively, waiting for the good news of fighting and killing the rebels.

古文：今大军留而不进，则解远近之望，万一朝廷更命他将代公，其将何辞以逃逗挠之罪？
现代文：现在大军停而不进，这样对待世人的期望，万一朝廷派另外的将领来代替您，您将用何辞来解脱自己的带兵不前的罪过呢？
English: If the imperial court were to send another general to replace you, what excuse would you use to absolve yourself of the sin of leading the troops in the wrong direction?

古文：幸速进兵以立大效，不然，则祸难至矣。 
现代文：最好是迅速进兵，以立大功。不然，灾祸就要临头。 
English: It is best to enter the army quickly and make a great contribution. Otherwise, disaster will be imminent.

古文：孝逸然其言，乃部勒士卒以图进讨。
现代文：李孝逸认为魏元忠的话对，于是率领部队准备进军讨伐。
English: Li Xiaoyu thought that Wei Yuanzhong's words were right, so he led the troops to prepare for the crusade.

古文：时敬业屯于下阿溪，敬业弟敬猷率偏师以逼淮阴。
现代文：当时，徐敬业驻兵于下阿奚谷，徐敬业的弟弟徐敬猷率领偏师逼进淮阴。
English: At that time, Xu Jingye stationed troops in the lower Aqiu Valley, and Xu Jingye's younger brother, Xu Jingye, led the division into Huaiyin.

古文：元忠请先击敬猷，诸将咸曰： 不如先攻敬业，敬业败，则敬猷不战而擒矣。
现代文：魏元忠请先击徐敬猷，诸将都认为： 不如先攻徐敬业，徐敬业被打败，徐敬猷不战就可以生擒。
English: Wei Yuanzhong, please attack Xu Jingyao first. The generals all thought: It is better to attack Xu Jingyao first, Xu Jingyao will be defeated, and Xu Jingyao can survive without fighting.

古文：若击敬猷，则敬业引兵救之，是腹背受敌也。 
现代文：如果击徐敬猷，那么徐敬业肯定会引兵援救，这样就会造成腹背受敌。 
English: If you hit Xu Jingyao, then Xu Jingye will certainly bring in reinforcements, which will result in a backlash.

古文：元忠曰： 不然，贼之劲兵精卒，尽在下阿，蚁聚而来，利在一决，万一失捷，则大事云矣。
现代文：魏元忠道： 不然，敌人的劲兵精卒，尽在下阿奚谷，像蚂蚁一样拥来，只能一战而胜，否则，那我们就大势去矣。
English: Wei Yuanzhong said, "Otherwise, the enemy's best soldiers are concentrated in the Lower Ajiao Valley, swarming like ants, and we can only win in one battle. Otherwise, we will be defeated."

古文：敬猷本出博徒，不习战斗，其众寡弱，人情易摇，大军临之，其势必克。既克敬猷，我之乘胜而进。彼若引救淮阴，计程则不及，又恐我之进掩江都，必邀我于中路。彼则劳倦，我则以逸待之，破之必矣。
现代文：徐敬猷的军队，既不习战斗，又人少且弱，军心易浮动，我们大军临阵，其势必胜，既打败徐敬猷，我军乘胜而进，徐敬业如援救淮阴，计算行程则赶不到，他又怕我们进军江都，一定会在中途拦击，敌军劳倦，我军以逸待劳，打败他们就成必然之势。
English: Xu Jingyao's army is not used to fighting, it is small and weak, the military spirit is easy to float, our great army is on the verge of battle, it is bound to win, even if it defeats Xu Jingyao, our army will take advantage of the victory, if Xu Jingye rescues Huaiyin, the calculation of the trip will not catch up, he is afraid that we will enter the capital of the river, we will definitely stop in the middle, the enemy army is tired, our army is tired, and it is inevitable to defeat them.

古文：譬之逐兽，弱者先擒，岂可舍必擒之弱兽，趋难敌之强兵？
现代文：这就如追逐野兽，弱者先擒，哪里能舍弃一定可以捉到的弱兽，而去攻打难敌的强兵呢！
English: This is like chasing a wild beast, the weak are the first to flee, where can you abandon the weak beast that you can definitely catch, and attack the strong soldiers of the difficult enemy!

古文：恐未可也。 
现代文：这样恐怕不是善策。 
English: I'm afraid that's not a good idea.

古文：孝逸从之，乃引兵击敬猷，一战而破之，敬猷脱身而遁。
现代文：李孝逸听从了他的意见。于是引兵击徐敬猷，一战而破之，徐敬猷脱身逃遁。
English: Li Xiaoying listened to his advice. So he led an army to attack Xu Jingyao, and the battle was broken, and Xu Jingyao escaped and fled.

古文：孝逸乃进军，与敬业隔溪相拒。前军总管苏孝祥为贼所破，孝逸又惧，欲引退。
现代文：李孝逸于是进军，与徐敬业隔溪相拒，前军总管苏孝祥的守地被敌人攻破，李孝逸又害怕，想带兵退却。
English: Li Xiao-Yi then marched into the army and refused to cross the stream with Xu Jingye. The defense of the former army chief Su Xiaoxiang was broken by the enemy. Li Xiao-Yi was afraid and wanted to retreat with the soldiers.

古文：初，敬业至下阿，有流星坠其宫，及是，有群乌飞噪于阵上，元忠曰： 验此，即贼败之兆也。风顺荻乾，火攻之利。 
现代文：当初，徐敬业带兵到下阿奚谷，有流星坠落他们的军营中，到此时，又有群鸟飞噪于阵上。魏元忠说： 应验此情况，正是贼兵败亡之兆，现在风又顺荻草又干枯，火攻必有利。 
English: At the beginning, Xu Jingye led the soldiers to the lower Ahok Valley. A meteorite fell on their military camp. By this time, there were also flocks of birds flying noisily on the battlefield. Wei Yuanzhong said: In response to this situation, it is the sign of the defeat of the robber soldiers. Now the wind is blowing along the weeds and dry, and the fire attack will be advantageous.

古文：固请决战，乃平敬业。
现代文：坚持请求与敌决战，这样才平定了徐敬业。
English: He insisted on asking for a decisive battle with the enemy, which was the only way to pacify Xu Jingye.

古文：元忠以功擢司刑正，稍迁洛阳令。
现代文：魏元忠因功升任司刑正，又升至洛阳令。
English: For his merits, Wei Yuanzhong was promoted to the post of chief magistrate and then to the post of governor of Luoyang.

古文：寻陷周兴狱，诣市将刑，则天以元忠有讨平敬业功，特免死配流贵州。时承敕者将至市，先令传呼，监刑者遽释元忠令起，元忠曰： 未知敕虚实，岂可造次。 
现代文：不久他被周兴诬陷下狱，将赴刑场行刑，武则天以魏元忠讨平徐敬业有功，特免死而发配贵州，当时传达命令的人将到刑场，先令他人飞往刑场传呼，监刑官马上释放魏元忠要他站起来。魏元忠道 ：还不知道赦令是真是假，岂可随随便便就这样。 
English: Soon after, he was framed by Zhou Xing and sent to prison. He was to be executed at the place of execution. Wu Zetian awarded Wei Yuanzhong with a special exemption from death for his service to Guizhou. The person who conveyed the order at that time would go to the place of execution. Shilling others would fly to the place of execution to call. The prison officer immediately released Wei Yuanzhong and asked him to stand up. Wei Yuanzhong said, "I don't know if the pardon order is true or false. I can't just do whatever I want."

古文：徐待宣敕，然始起谢，观者咸叹其临刑而神色不挠。
现代文：直到他听见了宣布命令，才起立致谢。观看的人都赞叹他临刑而神色不忧。
English: It wasn't until he heard the order announced that he stood to give thanks, and onlookers marveled at his serene expression as he was led away.

古文：圣历元年，召授侍御史，擢拜御史中丞。
现代文：圣历元年，他任侍御史，后升任御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the sacred calendar, he was appointed as an attendant to the imperial historian, and later he was promoted to the position of imperial historian chujo.

古文：又为来俊臣、侯思止所陷，再被流于岭表。
现代文：后来又被来俊臣、侯思止陷害，再度流放于岭表。
English: Later, he was framed again by Lai Junshin and Hou Sidi, and was again exiled to Lingbo.

古文：复还，授御史中丞。
现代文：后来回到京师，授御史中丞。
English: Later, he returned to Beijing as a teacher and was awarded the title of "Mitsushi Chujo."

古文：元忠前后三被流，于时人多称其无罪。
现代文：魏元忠前后三次被流放，当时的人都说他无罪。
English: Wei Yuanzhong was exiled three times, and people at the time said he was innocent.

古文：则天尝谓曰： 卿累负谤铄，何也？ 
现代文：武则天曾对他说： 卿多次遭陷致罪，是何原因？ 
English: Wu Zetian once said to him: Sir, you have been framed for crimes many times. What is the reason?

古文：对曰： 臣犹鹿也，罗织之徒，有如猎者，苟须臣肉作羹耳。
现代文：他回答说： 臣就像一匹鹿，罗织之徒，就像猎人，是想用臣的肉做羹罢了。
English: He replied, "The vassal is like a deer, and the weaver, like the hunter, only wants to use the vassal's meat to make soup.

古文：此辈杀臣以求达，臣复何辜。 
现代文：这些人杀臣是想求得通达，臣又有何罪？ 
English: These people killed the minister in an attempt to gain access, so what is the minister guilty of?

古文：圣历二年，擢拜凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事，检校并州长史。
现代文：圣历二年，他升任凤阁侍郎，任代理宰相，检校并州长史。
English: In the second year of the lunar calendar, he was promoted to Fengge waiter, acting prime minister, inspector of schools and governor of history.

古文：未几，加银青光禄大夫，迁左肃政台御史大夫，兼检校洛州长史。政号清严。长安中，相王为并州元帅，元忠为副。
现代文：未过多久，加授银青光禄大夫，迁任左肃政台御史大夫，兼检校洛州长史，治政清严，长安年中，相王为并州元帅，魏元忠任副职。
English: Not long after, he was awarded the title of "Silver Qing Guanglu Doctor," transferred to the post of "Left Su Zheng Tai Mi Shi Doctor," concurrently held the post of "Inspector of School Lu Guo Guo Shi," and governed the country strictly. In the middle of the Chang'an era, he was appointed as the marshal of the unified state, and Wei Yuanzhong served as his deputy.

古文：时奉宸令张易之尝纵其家奴凌暴百姓，元忠笞杀之，权豪莫不敬惮。
现代文：当时奉宸令张易之曾纵容家奴欺凌百姓。魏元忠按法笞杀了家奴。权贵们莫不敬畏。
English: At that time, Zhang Yizhi, by order of the emperor, allowed his slaves to bully the people. Wei Yuanzhong killed his slaves according to the law. The dignitaries were awestruck.

古文：时突厥与吐蕃数犯塞，元忠皆为大总管拒之。元忠在军，唯持重自守，竟无所克获，然亦未尝败失。
现代文：当时，突厥与吐蕃多次侵犯边土，魏元忠为大总管抗击敌军，魏元忠在军中，持重自守，既未打胜仗，也未打败仗。
English: At that time, the Turks and the Tubo repeatedly invaded the borderland. Wei Yuanzhong was the general manager of the resistance against the enemy army. Wei Yuanzhong was in the army, and he was committed to self-defense. He neither won nor lost the war.

古文：中宗在春宫时，元忠检校太子左庶子。
现代文：中宗为太子时，魏元忠任检校太子左庶子。
English: When Zhongzong was crown prince, Wei Yuanzhong served as the prince's left illegitimate son.

古文：时张易之、昌宗权宠日盛，倾朝附之。元忠尝奏则天曰： 臣承先帝顾眄，受陛下厚恩，不徇忠死节，使小人得在君侧，臣之罪也。 
现代文：当时张易之、张昌宗权宠的状况一天比一天盛，倾朝官员都趋附于他们，而魏元忠曾为此上奏武则天： 臣承蒙先帝看得起，又受陛下的厚恩，不能为忠于国家尽死节，使小人能在君侧，臣之罪也。 
English: At that time, the situation of Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong's power was becoming more and more prosperous day by day, and officials who favored the imperial court were adhering to them, and Wei Yuanzhong once made a speech on this: Subordinates are looked up to by the former emperor, and are favored by his majesty, and cannot be loyal to the country to the death, so that villains can be on the side of the monarch, which is also the sin of a subject.

古文：则天不悦。
现代文：武则天看了很不高兴。
English: Wu Zetian looked very unhappy.

古文：易之、昌宗由是含怒。因则天不豫，乃谮元忠与司礼丞高戩潜谋曰： 主上老矣，吾属当挟太子而令天下。 
现代文：张易之、张昌宗由此含怒，趁武则天身体不好，便诬害魏元忠说他与司礼卿高戬私下同谋道 ：主上老了，我辈当挟太子而令天下。 
English: Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong were enraged by this, and taking advantage of Wu Zetian's poor health, they slandered Wei Yuanzhong, saying that he had secretly conspired with the Secretary Gao Wei: "Master is getting old, and our generation will become the crown prince and rule the world."

古文：则天惑其言，乃下元忠诏狱，召太子、相王及诸宰相，令昌宗与元忠等殿前参对，反复不决。
现代文：武则天听了，便把魏元忠收入狱中，召太子、相王及宰相到朝廷，让张昌宗与魏元忠在殿前对质，反复不能决断。
English: When Wu Zetian heard this, he threw Wei Yuanzhong into prison, summoned the crown prince, the crown prince and the prime minister to the imperial court, and had Zhang Changzong and Wei Yuanzhong confront each other in front of the palace, repeatedly unable to reach a decision.

古文：昌宗又引凤阁舍人张说令执证元忠。说初伪许之，及则天召说验问，说确称元忠实无此语。
现代文：张昌宗又要凤阁舍人张说做证人，张说开始答应了，等到武则天召他到殿前验问时，张说据实说魏元忠实无此证。
English: Zhang Changzong also asked Fengge's concubine Zhang Yan to be a witness. Zhang Yan initially agreed, but when Wu Zetian called him to the front of the hall for questioning, Zhang Yan said that Wei Yuan Zhongzhi did not have this certificate.

古文：则天乃悟元忠被诬，然以昌宗之故，特贬授端州高要尉。
现代文：武则天才明白魏元忠被诬害，但因张昌宗的缘故，特贬授端州高要县尉。
English: Wu Zetian understood that Wei Yuanzhong was falsely persecuted, but because of Zhang Changzong, he specially demoted Duanzhou Gaoyou County Lieutenant.

古文：中宗即位，其日驿召元忠，授卫尉卿、同中书门下三品。
现代文：中宗即位，派驿马专程召回魏元忠，授卫尉卿，任代理宰相。
English: When Emperor Zhongzong ascended to the throne, he sent his steed to summon Wei Yuanzhong, who was awarded the title of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards and appointed acting prime minister.

古文：旬日，又迁兵部尚书，知政事如故。
现代文：十日，又迁任兵部尚书，主管军国大事如故。
English: On the 10th, he was transferred to the Ministry of Military Affairs, and remained in charge of military affairs.

古文：寻进拜侍中，兼检校兵部尚书。
现代文：不久，又进拜侍中，兼检校兵部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to attendant junior high school, and he also served as inspector of the school's military department.

古文：时则天崩，中宗居谅暗，多不视事，军国大政，独委元忠者数日。
现代文：当时武则天死了，中宗居丧，多不视事，军国大政，独委魏元忠代理数日。
English: At that time, Wu Zetian died, Zhong Zong was in mourning, many people did not pay attention to the matter, the military government was in power, and Wei Yuanzhong, the deputy of the Independent Committee, was absent for a few days.

古文：未几，迁中书令，加授光禄大夫，累封齐国公，监修国史。
现代文：未过多久，魏元忠任中书令，加授光禄大夫，封齐国公，监修国史。
English: Not long after, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as the middle secretary, awarded the title of doctor of Guanglu, named the prince of Qi, and supervised the national history.

古文：神龙二年，元忠与武三思、祝钦明、徐彦伯、柳冲、韦承庆、崔融、岑羲、徐坚等撰《则天皇后实录》二十卷。编次文集一百二十卷奏之。
现代文：神龙二年，魏元忠与武三思、祝钦明、徐彦伯、柳氵中、韦承庆、崔融、岑羲、徐坚等撰写《武则天皇后实录》二十卷，编辑文集一百二十卷上奏。
English: In the second year of the Divine Dragon, Wei Yuanzhong, along with Wu Sansi, Zhu Qinming, Xu Yanbo, Liu Xizhong, Wei Chengqing, Cui Rong, Zou and Xu Jian, wrote 20 volumes of "The Record of Empress Wu Zi" and edited 120 volumes of literary works.

古文：中宗称善，赐元忠物千段，仍封其子卫王府谘议参军升为任城县男。
现代文：中宗称善，赐魏元忠五色绸千段。还封他的儿子卫王府咨议参军魏升为任城县男。
English: Zhongzong praised Wei Yuanzhong and gave him a thousand pieces of five-colored silk. He also appointed his son Wei Sheng as the man of Rencheng County to advise Wei Wangfu to join the army.

古文：时元忠特承宠荣，当朝用事。
现代文：当时魏元忠特别受宠于皇上，当朝用事。
English: At that time, Wei Yuanzhong was especially favored by the emperor, and he was in charge of affairs in the imperial court.

古文：初元忠作相于则天朝，议者以为公清。
现代文：当初，魏元忠在武则天朝中做宰相时，议者都认为他公正洁廉。
English: At first, when Wei Yuanzhong was the prime minister of the Wu Zetian Dynasty, the councilors all thought that he was fair and honest.

古文：至是再居政事，天下莫不延首倾属，冀有所弘益。
现代文：到此时再度任宰相，天下人莫不引颈盼望，希望他有所弘扬。
English: At this time, he was re-appointed as prime minister, and people all over the world were full of hope that he would carry it forward.

古文：元忠乃亲附权豪，抑弃寒俊，竟不能赏善罚恶，勉修时政，议者以此少之。
现代文：但魏元忠依附权豪，抑弃寒俊，竟然不能赏善罚恶，勉修时政，议者因此责备他。
English: However, Wei Yuanzhong clung to the powerful, suppressed the poor, could not reward the good and punish the evil, and studied the politics of the time. Therefore, the legislators reproached him.

古文：四年秋，代唐璟为尚书右仆射，兼中书令，仍知兵部尚书事，监修国史。
现代文：四年秋，他代唐王景任尚书右仆射、兼中书令，仍兼兵部尚书，监修国史。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Tang King Jing as well as the second-in-command of calligraphy, and he was also the second-in-command of the military department, supervising the national history.

古文：未几，元忠请归乡拜扫，特赐锦袍一领、银千两，并给千骑四人，充其左右，手敕曰： 衣锦昼游，在乎兹日；散金敷惠，谅属斯辰。 
现代文：不久，魏元忠请求还乡扫墓拜祖，皇上特赐锦袍一领、银千两，并给千骑官四人，充当他的左右随从。并亲书： 衣锦昼游，在乎此日，散多敷惠，谅属斯辰。 
English: Soon, Wei Yuanzhong requested to return to his hometown to sweep the tomb to pay homage to his ancestor. The emperor specially gave him a necklace of brocade robes and a thousand taels of silver, and gave him four thousand cavalry officers to act as his left and right followers. And he wrote: "Dress brocade for a day trip, care about this day, spend more money, and be grateful.

古文：元忠至乡里，竟自藏其银，无所赈施。
现代文：魏元忠到故乡，竟自藏白银，无所救济施舍。
English: When Wei Yuanzhong returned to his hometown, he hid his silver and gave alms.

古文：及还，帝又幸白马寺以迎劳之，其恩遇如此。
现代文：到归朝时，皇上又亲自到白马寺来迎接慰劳他，其恩遇达到如此程度。
English: When he returned to the Imperial Court, the Emperor himself came to Hakuba-ji Temple to greet and console him, and his gratitude reached such a level.

古文：是时，安乐公主尝私请废节愍太子，立己为皇太女。中宗以问元忠，元忠固称不可，乃止。
现代文：这时，安乐公主曾私下请皇上废除节愍太子，立自己为皇太女，中宗以此事问魏元忠，魏元忠坚持说不可，才作罢。
English: At this time, Princess Anle had privately asked the emperor to abolish Prince Jie and establish herself as the crown princess. Zhongzong asked Wei Yuanzhong about this, and Wei Yuanzhong insisted that it was not possible before doing so.

古文：寻迁左仆射，余并如故。
现代文：不久，魏元忠任左仆射，其他职务如故。
English: Soon after, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as Zuoying, and his other duties remained the same.

古文：元忠又嫉武三思专权用事，心常愤叹，思欲诛之。
现代文：魏元忠嫉妒武三思专权用事，心中常生愤慨之情，叹息不已，总想除掉武三思。
English: Wei Yuanzhong was jealous of Wu Sanxi's autocratic actions. He often felt indignant in his heart, sighed endlessly, and always wanted to get rid of Wu Sanxi.

古文：三年秋，节愍太子起兵诛三思，元忠及左羽林大将军李多祚等皆潜预其事。
现代文：三年秋，节愍太子起兵诛武三思，魏元忠及左羽林大将军李多祚等都暗中参与其事。
English: In the autumn of the third year, Prince Jiejun started to think about the army, Wei Yuanzhong and Zuo Yulin's general Li Daojun secretly participated in the matter.

古文：太子既斩三思，又率兵诣阙，将请废韦后为庶人，遇元忠子太仆少卿升于永守门，协令从己。
现代文：太子既斩了武三思，又率领军人到宫门外，将请求废除韦后为庶人，在永安门遇上魏元忠的儿子太仆少卿魏升，便胁迫令他顺从。
English: The prince not only beheaded Wu Sansi, but also led soldiers to the outside of the palace gate to request the abolition of Wei Hou as a commoner. At Yongan Gate, he met Wei Yuanzhong's son, Wei Sheng, and forced him to obey.

古文：太子兵至玄武楼下，多祚等犹豫不战，元忠又持两端，由是不克，升为乱兵所杀。
现代文：节愍太子带兵到玄武楼下，李多祚等犹豫不战，魏元忠又持两端，因此起兵未成功，魏升被乱兵所杀。
English: Prince Jiechi led the troops to the basement of the Xuanwu Mansion, Li Duojun and others hesitated to fight, Wei Yuanzhong also held both ends, so the troops were not successful, and Wei Sheng was killed by the soldiers.

古文：中宗以元忠有平寇之功，又素为高宗、天后所礼遇，竟不以升为累，委任如初。
现代文：中宗以魏元忠有平寇之功，又一向为高宗、武则天所看重，竟没有因魏升的事受累，委任如初。
English: The Chinese government regards Wei Yuanzhong as a pingko, and has always valued Gao Zong and Wu Zetian. However, it has not been affected by Wei Sheng's death, and the appointment remains unchanged.

古文：是时，三思之党兵部尚书宗楚客与侍中纪处讷等又执证元忠及升，云素与节愍太子同谋构逆，请夷其三族，中宗不许。
现代文：此时，武三思的死党。兵部尚书宗楚客与侍中纪处讷等又拿魏升的事，证明魏氏父子与节愍太子同谋叛逆，请求抄斩三族，中宗未允许。
English: At this time, Wu Sanxi's dead party, the military's Shang Shuzong Chu, and the attendants of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection also took Wei Sheng's case to prove that Wei's father and son conspired with Prince Jiechi to rebel, and requested to cut off the three tribes, but the Chinese did not allow it.

古文：元忠惧不自安，上表固请致仕。手制听解左仆射，以特进、齐国公致仕于家，仍朝朔望。
现代文：魏元忠惧怕不能自安，上表坚请告老还乡，皇上亲自手批，免除左仆射，加特进的最高荣誉职，封齐国公告老还乡，但还是初一、十五上朝。
English: Wei Yuanzhong was afraid that he would not be able to return to his hometown, so he asked the emperor for permission to return to his hometown, and the emperor personally approved the request, exempting Zuo Shu from the highest honorary position, and announcing the return to his hometown, but he still went to the imperial court on the first day and the fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：楚客等又引右卫郎将姚庭筠为御史中丞，令劾奏元忠，由是贬渠州员外司马。
现代文：宗楚客等又拉拢右卫郎将姚庭筠要御史中丞举报魏元忠，因此贬为渠州员外司马。
English: Zong Chu and others also coaxed the right guard to report Yao Tingtao to Wei Yuanzhong, and he was demoted to the position of outside secretary.

古文：侍中杨再思、中书令李峤皆依楚客之旨，以致元忠之罪，唯中书侍郎萧至忠正议云当从宽宥。
现代文：侍中杨再思、中书令李峤都依从宗楚客的旨意，来使魏元忠致罪，惟有中书侍郎萧至忠主张对魏元忠从宽原宥。
English: Yang Jiasi, the attendant, and Li Xi, the secretary of the Central Committee, both followed the will of Zong Chu to make Wei Yuanzhong commit a crime. However, Xiao Zhitong, the secretary of the Central Committee, advocated that Wei Yuanzhong be pardoned.

古文：楚客大怒，又遣给事中冉祖雍与杨再思奏言： 元忠既缘犯逆，不合更授内地官。 
现代文：宗楚客大怒，又派给事中冉在雍与杨再思再上奏，说： 魏元忠既有叛逆罪的嫌疑，不适合授内地官。 
English: Zong Chu was furious, and sent Ran Zhaoyong and Yang Zai Si to intervene, saying: Wei Yuanzhong is suspected of treason and is not suitable to be appointed as a mainland official.

古文：遂左迁思州务川尉。
现代文：于是魏元忠又降迁思州务川县尉。
English: As a result, Wei Yuanzhong was demoted to the rank of Shizhou Wuchuan County lieutenant.

古文：顷之，楚客又令御史袁守一奏言： 则天昔在三阳宫不豫，内史狄仁杰奏请陛下监国，元忠密进状云不可。
现代文：过了不久，宗楚客又令御史袁守一上奏 ：武则天过去在三阳宫有疾，内史狄仁杰奏请陛下监国，魏元忠秘密进言说不可。
English: Not long after, Zong Chu also ordered the imperial historian Yuan Shou to make a report: Wu Zetian had been ill at Sanyang Palace in the past, the imperial historian Di Renjie asked His Majesty to supervise the country, and Wei Yuanzhong could not say anything in secret.

古文：据此，则知元忠怀逆日久，伏请加以严诛。 
现代文：据此，就可以知道魏元忠怀叛逆之心由来已久，伏请从严加罪诛除。 
English: According to this, it can be known that Wei Yuan's loyalty and rebellious heart have a long history, and he should be removed from the strict punishment.

古文：中宗谓杨再思等曰： 以朕思之，此是守一大错。人臣事主，必在一心，岂有主上少有不安，即请太子知事？
现代文：中宗对杨再思等说 ：我想这件事，这是袁守一的大错，人臣忠于主上，必在一心，哪里有主上稍有不安，就请出太子来主管国事的？
English: Zhongzong said to Yang Zaisi and others: I think this matter, this is Yuan Shouyi's big mistake. If a person is loyal to the Lord, he must have one heart. If there is a slight uneasiness in the Lord, he will invite the prince to be in charge of state affairs.

古文：乃是狄仁杰树私惠，未见元忠有失。
现代文：这实际上是狄仁杰私心讨好，并不是魏元忠有什么过失。
English: This was actually Di Renjie's selfish attempt to curry favor, not Wei Yuanzhong's fault.

古文：守一假借前事罗织元忠，岂是道理。 
现代文：袁守一假借前事来给魏元忠罗织罪名，这哪是什么判罪的道理。 
English: Yuan Shou fabricated charges against Wei Yuanzhong on the pretext of previous cases. What is the reason for the guilty verdict?

古文：楚客等遂止。
现代文：宗楚客等到此才算罢休。
English: Zongzhu customers wait until this point to call it quits.

古文：元忠行至涪陵而卒，年七十余。
现代文：魏元忠到涪陵去世，享年七十余岁。
English: Wei Yuanzhong died in Fuling at the age of over 70.

古文：景龙四年，追赠尚书左仆射、齐国公、本州刺史，仍令所司给灵舆送至乡里。睿宗即位，制令陪葬定陵。
现代文：景龙四年，追赠魏元忠尚书左仆射，齐国公、本州刺史，又令把他的灵柩送回老家安葬，睿宗即位，又亲旨令魏元忠遗骸陪葬定陵。
English: In the fourth year of Jinglong, Wei Yuanzhong was posthumously awarded the title of Shangshu Zuofu, the Prince of Qi and Honshu, and ordered his coffin to be sent back to his hometown for burial. Ruizong ascended the throne, and his relatives ordered Wei Yuanzhong's remains to be buried with him.

古文：景云三年，又降制曰： 故左仆射、齐国公魏元忠，代协人望，时称国良。
现代文：景云元年，又降旨 ：故左仆射、齐国公魏元忠，代合众望，可称得国之贤良。
English: In the first year of Jingyun, the order was lowered again: the late Zuo Shuai, Qi Guogong Wei Yuanzhong, the representative of Yu Biwang, can be called the virtuous man of the country.

古文：历事三朝，俱展诚效。晚年迁谪，颇非其罪。
现代文：他历事三朝，都极忠诚干练，晚年遭贬谪，并不是他有罪。
English: He experienced three dynasties, was extremely loyal and capable, and was belittled in his later years, but he was not guilty.

古文：宜特还其子著作郎晃实封一百户。 
现代文：应当按功归还他的儿子著作郎魏晃实封一百户。 
English: He should return his son's book, "Lang Wei" to one hundred families.

古文：开元六年，谥曰贞。
现代文：开元六年，谥号为贞。
English: It was founded in the sixth year of the Heian period, and its nickname was Zhen.

古文：二子升、晃。韦安石，京兆万年人，周大司空、郧国公孝宽曾孙也。祖津，大业末为民部侍郎。
现代文：韦安石，京兆万年人，他是北周大司空、郧国公韦孝宽的曾孙。他的祖父韦津，在隋炀帝大业末，做过民部侍郎。
English: Wei Anshi, born in the year of the king, is the great-grandson of Bei Zhou Daisikong and Wei Xiaokang, Duke of Shandong. His grandfather, Wei Jin, worked as a chamberlain in the Ministry of the People at the end of his career as Emperor of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：炀帝之幸江都，敕津与段达、元文都等于洛阳留守，仍检校民部尚书事。
现代文：隋炀帝到江都，命韦津与段达、元文都等在洛阳留守，依旧检校民部尚书事务。
English: When the Sui and Qian Dynasties came to Jiangdu, Wei Jin, Danda, and Yuanwen were all ordered to stay in Luoyang, and the inspection of the school by the Ministry of Civil Affairs was still in progress.

古文：李密逼东都，津拒战于上东门外。兵败，为密所囚，及王世充杀文都等，津独免其难。
现代文：李密逼近东都洛阳时，韦津抵抗敌军战于东门外，兵败，被李密俘获，到王世充杀元文都等，韦津独免其难。
English: When Li Mi approached the eastern capital of Luoyang, Weijin resisted the enemy's battle outside the east gate, was defeated, captured by Li Mi, and waited for Wang Shichong to kill the Yuanwen capital. Weijin was the only one to be spared.

古文：密败，归东都，世充僭号，深被委遇。
现代文：后来，李密战败，韦津回到洛阳，此时，王世充僭号称帝，韦津深受厚待。
English: Later, after Li Mi was defeated, Wei Jin returned to Luoyang. At this time, Wang Shizhong was proclaimed emperor, and Wei Jin was well received.

古文：及洛阳平，高祖与津有旧，征授谏议大夫，检校黄门侍郎。
现代文：到洛阳平定，唐高祖与韦津有旧交，征召韦津授予谏议大夫、检校黄门侍郎之职。
English: After Luoyang was pacified, Tang Gaozu, who had an old friendship with Weizun, summoned Weizun and conferred on him the positions of the doctor of the imperial court and the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：出为陵州刺史，卒。
现代文：后来外任陵州刺史，卒。
English: Later, he was appointed to the position of Lingzhou Jishi, a post.

古文：父琬，成州刺史。叔琨，户部侍郎。琨弟璲，仓部员外。
现代文：韦安石的父亲韦琬，做过成州刺史，叔父韦琨，做过户部侍郎，韦琨弟韦王遂，做过仓部员外。
English: Wei Anshi's father, Wei Wei, worked as a historian in Chengdu, his uncle, Wei Wei, worked as a waiter in the household department, and his younger brother, Wei Wang Sui, worked as a warehouse clerk.

古文：安石应明经举，累授乾封尉，苏良嗣甚礼之。
现代文：唐设六科取士，其中以经义录取的谓之明经。韦安石考明经科而中举，连续授乾封县尉。苏良嗣很看重他，以礼相待。
English: The Tang Dynasty set up six disciplines to select scholars, among which the so-called Ming Dynasty was admitted by the meaning of the scriptures. Wei Anshi was selected by the Ming Dynasty for the study of the scriptures, and was successively awarded the title of County Lieutenant. Su Liangzi valued him very much and treated him with courtesy.

古文：永昌元年，三迁雍州司兵，良嗣时为文昌左相，谓安石曰： 大材须大用，何为徒劳于州县也。 
现代文：永昌元年，三次迁任雍州司兵，苏良嗣当时是文昌左相，他对安石说 ：大才须大用，何必在州县事务上徒劳呢。 
English: In the first year of Yongchang, Su Liangzi, who had been transferred to Yongzhou three times and was then the left minister of Wenchang, said to Anshi, "Great talent must be put to good use. Why should you waste your time on county and prefectural affairs?"

古文：特荐于则天，擢拜膳部员外郎、永昌令、并州司马。
现代文：苏良嗣特意向武则天推荐韦安石，于是被选用，拜膳部员外郎、永昌县令、并州司马。
English: Su Liangzi specially recommended Wei'an stone to Wu Zetian, so he was selected as the vice-governor of Yongchang County, the vice-governor of Yongchang County, and the vice-governor of Yongchang County.

古文：则天手制劳之曰： 闻卿在彼，庶事存心，善政表于能官，仁明彰于镇抚。
现代文：武则天亲书诏令慰问韦安石 ：闻卿在彼，繁事存心，善政表现了自己为官之才能，仁明彰著了自己对民的安抚。
English: Wu Zetian's letter of condolence to Wei Anshi: Wenqing is in him, diligent, good governance has demonstrated his ability as an official, and benevolence has demonstrated his appeasement of the people.

古文：如此称职，深慰朕怀。 
现代文：如此称职，深慰朕心。 
English: It is a great comfort to me that he is so competent.

古文：俄拜并州刺史，又历德、郑二州刺史。
现代文：不久拜并州刺史，又先后任德、郑二州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Gyeongju, and then successively as the governor of De and Jeongju.

古文：安石性持重，少言笑，为政清严，所在人吏咸畏惮之。
现代文：韦安石性格持重，少言笑，为政清廉严肃，他所在的地方官吏百姓都敬畏他。
English: Wei Anshi has a serious character, rarely laughs, is honest and serious in politics, and the local officials and people where he is are in awe of him.

古文：久视年，迁文昌右丞，寻拜鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事，兼太子左庶子。
现代文：久视年，升迁文昌右丞，不久拜鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事兼太子左庶子。
English: In the year of Jiu Jiu, he was promoted to the position of Wenchang Yu Rong, and soon became the attendant of Xingtai, and the left illegitimate child of Tongfeng Pavilion Xingtai Ping Zhang Rong and the prince.

古文：长安三年，为神都留守，兼判天官、秋官二尚书事。后与崔神庆等同为侍读，寻知纳言事。
现代文：长安三年，为神都留守，兼管判天官、秋官二尚书事务，后与崔神庆等同为侍读，又主纳言事务。
English: In the three years of Chang'an, he stayed behind for the gods, concurrently in charge of judging the heavenly official, the autumn official and the two Shangshu affairs, and later he was the same as Cui Shenqing as a reader, and also the main speaker affairs.

古文：是岁，又加检校中台左丞，兼太子左庶子、凤阁鸾台三品如故。
现代文：这年，又加任检校中台左丞，兼太子左庶子，凤阁鸾台三品如故。
English: In the same year, he was appointed to the post of middle-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked senior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked senior-ranked junior-ranked junior-ranked senior-ranked junior-ranked senior-ranked junior-ranked senior-ranked senior-ranked junior-ranked senior-ranked

古文：时张易之兄弟及武三思皆恃宠用权，安石数折辱之，甚为易之等所忌。
现代文：当时，张易之兄弟和武三思皆恃宠滥用职权，肆无忌惮。韦安石多次挫败了他们的傲气，因此很为张易之等所忌恨。
English: At that time, Zhang Yi's brothers and Wu Sanshi were all indulging in abuse of power, unscrupulous. Wei Anshi defeated their arrogance many times, so he was hated by Zhang Yi and others.

古文：尝于内殿赐宴，易之引蜀商宋霸子等数人于前博戏。
现代文：有一次，武则天曾在内殿赐宴，张易之引来四川商人宋霸子等数人，在宴前博戏。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Wu Zetian gave a banquet in the inner hall, and Zhang Yizhi brought Sichuan merchant Song Bazi and several others to play before the banquet.

古文：安石疏奏曰： 蜀商等贱类，不合预登此筵。 
现代文：韦安石跪奏： 蜀商等贱类，不应该登赴此筵。 
English: Wei'an stone kneeling: Shu merchants and other low-class people should not go to this bowl.

古文：因顾左右令逐出之，座者皆为失色。则天以安石辞直，深慰勉之。
现代文：说罢便顾左右，命令赶走这些商人，满座的人皆为之失色，而武则天认为韦安石说话诚直坦率，不但未生气，反而对韦安石深加慰勉。
English: Wu Zetian thought that Wei Anshi spoke honestly and frankly, and not only was he not angry, but he was deeply comforted by Wei Anshi.

古文：时凤阁侍郎陆元方在座，退而告人曰： 此真宰相，非吾等所及也。 
现代文：当时凤阁侍郎陆元方在座，回去后对人赞道： 此真宰相，非吾等所能及也。 
English: Lu Yuanfang, Fengge's chamberlain, was present at the time. After returning home, he praised the man, saying, "This true prime minister is beyond our reach.

古文：则天尝幸兴泰宫，欲就捷路，安石奏曰： 千金之子，且有垂堂之诫，万乘之尊，不宜轻乘危险。此路板筑初成，无自然之固，銮驾经之，臣等敢不请罪。 
现代文：武则天有一次去兴泰宫，欲走捷径，韦安石奏 ：常言家有千金，坐不垂堂；陛下乃万乘之尊，不应当轻乘危险，此路刚建成，未经人行车辗的自然加固，銮驾就要从此经过，臣等斗胆请罪，伏望陛下考虑。 
English: Wu Zetian once went to the Xingtai Palace and wanted to take a shortcut, Wei An Shishuo: As the saying goes, people have a lot of money, but they can't sit in the hall; His Majesty is the most revered, and he should not take risks lightly. This road has just been built, and it has not been reinforced by the nature of the pedestrian and car lanes. A car is about to pass through here. The courtiers and others dared to plead guilty and think about His Majesty.

古文：则天登时为之回辇。
现代文：武则天听了，立即回辇，不走此路。
English: Wu Zetian listened and immediately replied that he would not take this path.

古文：安石俄又举奏易之等罪状，初有敕付安石及夏官尚书唐休璟推问，未竟而事变。
现代文：韦安石不久又举奏张易之等的罪状，开始武则天有令，要韦安石和夏官尚书唐休王景推求审问，未进行而事有变。
English: Wei Anshi soon brought charges against Zhang Yi and others, and began to take martial law by order of heaven, asking Wei Anshi and Xia official Shangshu Tang Xiu Wangjing to push for an interrogation, which did not take place and things changed.

古文：四年，出为扬州大都督府长史。
现代文：长安四年，韦安石出任扬州大都督府长史。
English: In the fourth year of Chang'an, Wei Anshi served as the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：神龙初，徵拜刑部尚书。
现代文：神龙初，征召韦安石拜刑部尚书。
English: At the beginning of the Dragon Dynasty, Wei An Shi Bai was conscripted into the Penal Department.

古文：是岁，又迁吏部尚书，复知政事。
现代文：这年，又迁任吏部尚书，再主持政务。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the Liaison Department of the Shangshu, and then presided over government affairs.

古文：俄代张柬之为中书令，封郧国公，以尝为宫僚，赐实封三百户，又兼相王府长史。
现代文：不久，代张柬之为中书令，封郧国公，来作为太子的宫僚，赐封三百户并接取所封户数租税，又兼相王府长史。
English: Soon, Zhang Kamming, acting on behalf of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, came to serve as the prince's courtier, sealing three hundred households and receiving taxes from the number of households sealed, as well as serving as the prefect of the palace.

古文：俄转户部尚书，复为侍中，监修国史。
现代文：不久又调任户部尚书，再为侍中，监修国史。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Household Division of the Imperial Household Agency, and then became an attendant, supervising the study of national history.

古文：中宗与庶人尝因正月十五日夜幸其第，赐赉不可胜数。
现代文：唐中宗与韦庶人曾经在正月十五日夜到韦安石的宅第，并赐赏给他不可胜数的财物。
English: On the night of the 15th day of the first month of the year, Tang Zhongzong and Wei Shizhong went to Wei Anshi's house and gave him an immeasurable amount of wealth.

古文：又中宗尝幸安乐公主城西池馆，公主具舟楫，请御楼船，安石谏曰： 御轻舟，乘不测，臣恐非帝王之事。 
现代文：又中宗曾经到安乐公主城西池馆，公主准备了舟楫，请驾御楼船，韦安石谏道 ：驾御轻舟，易出现不测之事，臣认为这不是帝王应做的事。 
English: In addition, Zhongzong once went to the West Pool Hall of the Anle Princess Castle. The princess had prepared a boat, so please drive the boat. Wei'an Stone Bridge Road: drive the light boat. It is prone to accidents. The minister thought that this was not what the emperor should do.

古文：乃止。
现代文：这事才作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：睿宗践祚，拜太子少保，改封郇国公。
现代文：睿宗即位祭主，拜韦安石为太子少保，改封为郇国公。
English: Ruizong as the enthronement priest, Bai Wei Anshi as the prince minor protector, and changed his title to the Duke of Shandong.

古文：俄又历侍中、中书令。
现代文：不久，又先后任侍中、中书令。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the posts of Samurai Junior Officer and Chushiro.

古文：景云二年，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：景云二年，又加官为开府仪同三司。
English: In the second year of Jingyun, he was also promoted to the third division of Kaifu ceremony.

古文：时太平公主与窦怀贞等潜有异图，将引安石预其事，公主屡使子婿唐晙邀安石至宅，安石竟拒而不往。
现代文：当时，太平公主与窦怀贞等怀藏谋反之心，将拉拢韦安石参与其事，公主多次派子婿唐腢邀韦安石到她的宅第，韦安石竟然拒而不往。
English: At that time, Princess Taiping and Dou Huai Zhen, who harbored a rebellious spirit, would lure Wei Anshi to participate in the matter. The princess repeatedly sent her son-in-law Tang Jun to invite Wei Anshi to her home, but Wei Anshi refused to go.

古文：睿宗尝密召安石，谓曰： 闻朝廷倾心东宫，卿何不察也？ 
现代文：睿宗曾经密召韦安石，对他说： 听说朝廷大臣都倾心于太子，卿为什么没有察觉呢？ 
English: Ruizong once secretly summoned Wei Anshi and said to him: I heard that the ministers of the imperial court were all in love with the prince, why did you not notice it?

古文：安石对曰： 陛下何得亡国之言，此必太平之计。太子有大功于社稷，仁明孝友，天下所称，愿陛下无信谗言以致惑也。 
现代文：韦安石答道 ：陛下哪里来的这些亡国之言，这一定是太平公主之计谋，太子有大功于国家，仁明孝友，为天下所称赞，愿陛下不要听信谗言以致迷惑。 
English: Wei Anshi replied, "Your Majesty, where did these words about ruining the country come from? This must be Princess Taiping's scheme. The crown prince has made great contributions to the country. He is a benevolent and filial friend, praised by the whole world. I hope that Your Majesty will not be fooled by these words."

古文：睿宗矍然曰： 朕知之矣，卿勿言也。 
现代文：睿宗惊惶地看着韦安石道 ：朕知道了，卿不要说了。 
English: Ruizong looked at Wei An Shihong in dismay: I know, sir, don't say it.

古文：太平于帘中窃听之，乃构飞语，欲令鞫之，赖郭元振保护获免。
现代文：此时太平公主在帘内偷听，于是捏造一些无根据的话诬陷韦安石，想让朝廷究其罪行。幸好靠郭元振保护获免。
English: At this time, Princess Taiping was eavesdropping in the curtain, so she fabricated some unfounded words to frame Wei Anshi and wanted the court to investigate his crimes. Fortunately, she was protected by Guo Yuanzhen.

古文：俄而迁尚书左仆射，兼太子宾客，依旧同中书门下三品，虽假以崇宠，实去其权。
现代文：没多久，韦安石调任尚书左仆射，兼任太子宾客，依旧是同中书门下三品，虽然给予崇宠，但削去了实权。
English: Not long after, Wei Anshi was transferred to the position of Shang Shu's right-hand man, and concurrently served as the prince's guest. He was still the third-ranked scholar in the same school, and although he was revered, he lost his real power.

古文：其冬，罢知政事，拜特进，充东都留守。
现代文：那年冬，罢免他主政事，授给了诸侯王公将军中功德优盛者的散官一一一特进，充任东都留守。
English: In the winter of that year, he was removed from his position as the head of government, and was given the title of "Sankan," a special promotion given to the most meritorious generals among the princes and princes, and he remained in Dongdu.

古文：太常主簿李元澄，即安石之子婿，其妻病死，安石夫人薛氏疑元澄先所幸婢厌杀之。其婢久已转嫁，薛氏使人捕而捶之致死。
现代文：太常主簿李元澄，是韦安石的子婿，他的妻子病死，安石的夫人蒋氏怀疑是李元澄原来所宠爱的婢女以邪恶的诅咒来杀害的，但这个婢女早已经转嫁，蒋氏派人把婢女捉来拷打致死。
English: Li Yuancheng, Wei Anshi's son-in-law, was the most frequent master, but his wife died of illness. Anshi's wife, Mrs. Jiang, suspected that Li Yuancheng's beloved maid had killed her with an evil curse, but this maid had already been passed on. The Chiang clan sent someone to capture the maid and torture her to death.

古文：由是为御史中丞杨茂谦所劾，出为蒲州刺史。
现代文：因此韦安石被御史中丞杨氏谦检举，后降调出京，任蒲州刺史。
English: As a result, Wei Anshi was humbly promoted by the imperial historian, the middle-ranked Yang clan, and was later demoted and transferred out of Beijing to serve as the governor of Gushu.

古文：无几，转青州刺史。
现代文：没多久，又转调青州刺史。
English: It didn't take long before he was transferred to the Aozhou stabbing case.

古文：安石初在蒲州时，太常卿姜皎有所请托，安石拒之，皎大怒。
现代文：韦安石初在蒲州，太常卿姜皎有事拜托韦安石帮忙，韦安石拒绝了他，所以姜皎很是恼火。
English: At the beginning of Wei Anshi's stay in Puzhou, Tai Changqing Jiang Yu asked Wei Anshi for help. Wei Anshi refused him, so Jiang Yu was very angry.

古文：开元二年，皎弟晦为御史中丞，以安石等作相时，同受中宗遗制，宗楚客、韦温削除相王辅政之辞，安石不能正其事，令侍御史洪子舆举劾之。
现代文：开元二年，姜皎的弟弟姜晦任御史中丞，以韦安石等做宰相时，一同接受了中宗的遗留的诏令，造成宗楚客、韦温削除了相王辅政的权力为理由，韦安石又不能拿事实辨清此事，姜晦便要侍御史洪于舆举报。
English: In the second year of the first century, when Jiang Yu's younger brother, Jiang Yu, was appointed as the Vice-President of History, and Wei Anshi was appointed as the Prime Minister, they both accepted the Imperial Edict left behind by the Chinese government, which caused Zong Chu and Wei Wen to remove the power of the King's Vice-President. As Wei Anshi could not clarify the matter with facts, Jiang Yu had to report to Wei Hong.

古文：子舆以事经赦令，固称不可。
现代文：但洪于舆以这件事是已经有赦免令的，坚持称不能举报。
English: However, Hong Yiming insisted that she could not report the matter as it had already been pardoned.

古文：监察御史郭震希皎等意，越次奏之，于是下诏曰： 青州刺史韦安石、太子宾客韦嗣立、刑部尚书赵彦昭等，往在先朝，曲蒙厚赏，因缘幸会，久在庙堂，朋党比周，闻于行路。
现代文：监察御史郭震希、姜皎等人，越级上奏，于是朝廷下诏： 青州刺史韦安石、太子宾客韦嗣立、刑部尚书赵彦昭等人，往日在先朝，蒙受厚恩，因缘而幸会，久在朝廷，朋党相亲营私，路人皆闻。
English: Supervisors Guo Zhenxi, Jiang Qi and others were promoted beyond their ranks, so the imperial court issued an edict: Qingzhou's favorite, Shi Wei Anshi, the prince's guest, Wei Zili, and the head of the criminal investigation department, Zhao Yan Zhao and others, in the previous days of the imperial court, received great favors, and were fortunate to meet due to circumstances. For a long time in the imperial court, friends and parties were close to each other, and passers-by all knew about it.

古文：景龙之末，长蛇纵祸，仓卒之间，人神愤怨，未闻舍生取义，直道昌言，遂削太上皇辅政之辞，用韦氏临朝之策。
现代文：景龙末年，长蛇造成灾祸，仓猝之间，人神怨愤，在当时未闻有舍生取义、正直陈言的，于是导致削太上皇辅政之辞，用韦氏临朝听政。
English: In the last years of the Jinglong Dynasty, a long snake caused a disaster, and people and gods were suddenly angry. At that time, it was unheard of to sacrifice one's life for righteousness and to speak honestly, which led to the cutting of the words of the emperor's assistant and the use of the Wei Dynasty to listen to politics.

古文：比常隐忍，复以崇班，将期愧畏，稍惩前恶，而尚款回邪，苟安荣宠。
现代文：近来常隐忍此事，还对当事者复留高位，将期望其愧畏，稍惩前恶，但是此辈还是留曲邪不正之气，苟安于荣辱宠幸。
English: Recently, this matter has often been tolerated, and high positions have been restored to the parties concerned, and they will be expected to be ashamed and afraid, and slightly punish the previous evil, but this generation still has the spirit of evil and injustice, and is content with the honor and disgrace.

古文：宜从谪官之典，以励事君之节。
现代文：鉴于此情，韦安石等，应当按谪官之典章，予以处理，以磨砺其事君之节义。
English: In view of this situation, Wei'an stone, etc. should be dealt with according to the eunuch's ordinance, in order to sharpen the meaning of the matter.

古文：安石可沔州别驾，嗣立可岳州别驾，彦昭可袁州别驾，并员外置。 
现代文：安石可调沔州别驾、嗣立可调岳州别驾、彦昭可调袁州别驾，均以员外安置。 
English: Anshi can be transferred to Bozhou, Zi Li can be transferred to Yuezhou, and Yan Zhao can be transferred to Yuanzhou, all of which are placed outside the staff.

古文：安石既至沔州，晦又奏云： 安石尝检校定陵造作，隐官物入己。 
现代文：韦安石既到沔州，姜晦又上奏，说 ：韦安石曾经负责定陵的建造工程，有隐藏宫物为己有的贪污行为。 
English: As soon as Wei Anshi arrived in Zhangzhou, Jiang Hui played the harp and said: Wei Anshi was once in charge of the construction project of Dingling Mausoleum, and had hidden palace goods as his own corruption.

古文：敕符下州征赃。安石叹曰： 此祇应须我死耳！ 
现代文：于是朝廷又下令抄收赃物，韦安石叹道 ：这只不过要我死罢了。 
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered the confiscation of the stolen goods. Wei Anshi sighed, "This is just going to get me killed."

古文：愤激而卒，年六十四。
现代文：于是愤激而死去，终年六十四岁。
English: He died in a rage, aged sixty-four.

古文：当时虽不从邕议，而论者是之。巨源与安石及则天时文昌右相待价，并是五服之亲，自余近属至大官者数十人。
现代文：开元十七年，赠蒲州刺史；天宝初年，因为韦安石的儿子地位高，追赠开府仪同三司、尚书左仆射、郇国公，谥号文贞。
English: In the seventeenth year of the first century, he was given the title of Puzhou Sashishi; in the first year of the Tenpo era, because the son of Wei Anshi was of high status, he was posthumously given the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Shang Shuzo Doujia, the Duke of Shizhou, and the posthumous title of Wenzhen.

古文：赵彦昭者，甘州张掖人也。
现代文：韦安石有二子，并早已知名。赵彦昭，甘州张掖人。
English: Wei Anshi had two sons who were already well-known. Zhao Yan Zhao, Gansu Zhang Xuan Ren.

古文：父武孟，初以驰骋佃猎为事。
现代文：他的父亲赵武孟，当初以驰骋打猎为职业。
English: His father, Zhao Wumeng, was originally a hunter.

古文：尝获肥鲜以遗母，母泣曰： 汝不读书而佃猎如是，吾无望矣。 
现代文：他捕获了肥鲜野味就留给母亲，母亲流着泪泣声相告 ：你不读书，只是打猎，像这样下去，我无望了。 
English: He caught a fat game animal and left it to his mother, who cried and cried and told him: "You don't study, you just hunt. If you go on like this, I'm hopeless."

古文：竟不食其膳。武孟感激勤学，遂博通经史。举进士，官至右台侍御史，撰《河西人物志》十卷。
现代文：竟不吃他的野味，赵武孟因此而开始勤学，终于博通经史，后中进士，官至右台侍御史，撰写《河西人物志》十卷。
English: In spite of not eating his game, Zhao Wumeng began to study diligently for this reason, and finally became well-versed in the history of literature. Later, he became a junior high school student, and served as an official of the Right Division of the Imperial Palace, and wrote the "History of the People of Hexi" in ten volumes.

古文：彦昭少以文辞知名。
现代文：赵彦昭少年时代就以文辞知名。
English: As a boy, Zhao Yanyao was known for his prose.

古文：中宗时，累迁中书侍郎、同中书门下三品，兼修国史，充修文馆学士。
现代文：中宗的时候，他累任中书侍郎，代理宰相，兼任国史，充任文学馆士。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhongzong, he repeatedly served as the secretary of the Central Government, acting prime minister, concurrently served as a national historian, and served as a librarian.

古文：景龙四年，金城公主出降吐蕃赞普，中宗命彦昭为使，彦昭以既充外使，恐失其宠，殊不悦。
现代文：景龙四年，金城公主下嫁吐蕃赞普，中宗命赵彦昭为使节，赵彦昭觉得既然充当了外使，担心会失宠，心中很是不高兴。
English: In the fourth year of Jinglong, Jincheng Princess married Tujun Zampu, and Zhongzong ordered Zhao Yanzhao to be the envoy. Zhao Yanzhao felt that since he had served as a foreign envoy, he was worried that he would fall out of favor, and he was very unhappy.

古文：司农卿赵履温私谓曰： 公国之宰辅，而为一介之使，不亦鄙乎？ 
现代文：司农卿赵履温私下对他说 ：您是国之宰辅，却去做一介小小的使节，不是太不像话吗？ 
English: Zhao Liwen, the Secretary of Agriculture, said to him in private: You are the deputy of the country, but to be a small envoy, isn't it too inappropriate?

古文：彦昭曰： 计将安出？ 
现代文：赵彦昭说 ：这该怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhao Yan Zhao said, "What should we do?

古文：履温因为阴托安乐公主密奏留之，中宗乃遣左骁卫大将军杨矩代彦昭而往。
现代文：赵履温就暗中托安乐公主密奏留下赵彦昭，中宗于是另派左骁卫大将军杨矩代他充当了使节。
English: Zhao Liwen secretly left Zhao Yan Zhao to play the secret music of the Princess of Anle, and Zhong Zong then sent another general of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, Yang Jie, to act as an envoy on his behalf.

古文：睿宗时，出为凉州都督，为政清严，将士已下皆动足股栗。又为宋州刺史，入为吏部侍郎，又为刑部尚书、关内道持节巡边使、检校左御史台大夫。
现代文：睿宗时，他出京到凉州任都督，为政清正廉洁，将士以下都很是敬畏，后又任宋州刺史，又入京任吏部侍郎，又任刑部尚书、关内道持节巡边使、检校左御史台大夫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Ruizong, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Liangzhou. He was honest and upright in politics, and soldiers and lower-ranking officers were very much in awe of him. Later, he served as Songzhou's chief historian, and when he went to Beijing, he served as the secretary of the cadre department, and also as the secretary of the criminal department, the border patrol envoy for the Guanzhong Road Festival, and the inspector of the school.

古文：彦昭素与郭元振、张说友善。及萧至忠等伏诛，元振、说等称彦昭先尝密图其事，乃以功迁刑部尚书，封耿国公，赐实封一百户。
现代文：赵彦昭平素与郭元振、张说友好，到萧至忠等被诛时，郭元振、张说等称赞赵彦昭先曾参与揭发萧至忠有功，于是升任刑部尚书，封耿国公，赐实封一百户。
English: Zhao Yan Zhao used to be friendly with Guo Yuan Zhen and Zhang Xie. When Xiao Zhizhong was arrested, Guo Yuan Zhen and Zhang Xie praised Zhao Yan Zhao for his role in exposing Xiao Zhizhong. Zhao Yan Zhao was then promoted to the position of the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, and he was given the title of Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo.

古文：乾坤交泰，宇宙再清，不加贬削，法将安措？
现代文：但殿中侍御史郭震却上奏，说赵彦昭与女巫赵五娘左道乱常，假托是自己的姑母，暗中相助，同恶相济。
English: However, the chambermaid in the palace, Shi Guo Zhen, played a tune, saying that Zhao Yan Zhao and the witch Zhao Wuzhong had a chaotic relationship, pretended to be his aunt, secretly helped each other, and shared the same evil.

古文：请付紫微黄门，准法处分。 
现代文：像今太平圣世，如不对这类加以贬谪严惩，法律还有什么用。请求依法处分。
English: In today's peaceful world, what is the use of the law if it does not severely punish such people? We request that they be dealt with according to the law.

古文：俄而姚崇入相，甚恶彦昭之为人，由是累贬江州别驾，卒。
现代文：不久，姚崇做了宰相，很讨厌赵彦昭的为人，因此累贬江州任别驾，不久去世。
English: Soon after, Yao Chong became the prime minister. He disliked Zhao Yan Zhao very much. As a result, he belittled Jiangzhou and died soon after.

古文：萧至忠，秘书少监德言曾孙也。
现代文：萧至忠，秘书少监萧德言的曾孙。
English: Xiao Zhizhong, the great-grandson of Secretary Xiao Deyan.

古文：少仕为畿尉，以清谨称。
现代文：他少年时就做了京城管辖的卫尉，以清正严谨著称。
English: When he was a young boy, he became an officer of the guard in the jurisdiction of the capital, and was known for his purity and strictness.

古文：尝与友人期于路隅，会风雪冻冽，诸人皆奔避就宇下。至忠曰： 宁有与人期而求安失信乎？ 
现代文：他曾经与朋友相约在路边相候，正碰上风雪冻冽，很多人都到避风的屋檐下去，萧至忠却说： 哪里有与人相约为了怕风雪而失信的呢？ 
English: He once made an appointment with a friend to meet on the side of the road. They were encountering wind, snow and freezing rain, and many people went to the shelter of the roof, but Xiao Zhizhong said: Where is the appointment with people for fear of wind and snow?

古文：独不去，众咸叹服。
现代文：他一人在风雪中不离开，众人都为之叹服。
English: He was the only one who didn't leave in the blizzard, and everyone was impressed.

古文：神龙初，武三思擅权，至忠附之，自吏部员外擢拜御史中丞。
现代文：神龙初年，武三思专权，萧至忠依附他，从吏部员外郎提拔为御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the divine dragon, Wu San thought of exclusive power, Xiao Zhizhong adhered to him, and he was promoted from the member of the administrative department, Wairo, to the vice-president of history.

古文：迁吏部侍郎，仍兼御史中丞。
现代文：后又调任吏部侍郎，仍兼任御史中丞。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of a chamberlain of the cadre department, still serving concurrently as a goshi chujo.

古文：恃武三思势，掌选无所忌惮，请谒杜绝，威风大行。
现代文：他凭靠武三思的势力，掌握选官的大权，无所忌惮，杜绝请托，威风大行。
English: Relying on the power of Wu Sanxi, he grasped the power of electing officials, had no scruples, put an end to patronage, and behaved with great dignity.

古文：寻迁中书侍郎，兼中书令。
现代文：不久，升任中书侍郎，兼中书令。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Chusho-sajiro, also known as Chusho-rei.

古文：节愍太子诛武三思后，有三思党与宗楚客、纪处讷令侍御史冉祖雍奏言： 安国相王及镇国太平公主亦与太子连谋举兵，请收付制狱。 
现代文：节愍太子诛杀武三思后，武三思的余党与宗楚客、纪处讷要侍御史冉祖雍上奏 ：安国相王及镇国太平公主也与节愍太子一起同谋举兵，请把他们收进监狱。 
English: After Prince Jiechi killed Prince Wuzan, the remaining party of Prince Wuzan and the Zongchu guest, the disciplinary department should serve the history of Ran Zuyong: King An Guoxiang and Princess Taiping of Zhenguo also conspired with Prince Jiechi to raise an army, please take them to prison.

古文：中宗召至忠令按其事，至忠泣而奏曰： 陛下富有四海，贵为天子，岂不能保一弟一妹，受人罗织？
现代文：中宗召来萧至忠要他讲实情，萧至忠泣声而奏道： 陛下富有四海，贵为天子，难道连保护一弟一妹都做不到，而遭人罗织他们的罪名。
English: Zhongzong summoned Xiao Zhizhong and asked him to tell the truth. Xiao Zhizhong cried and played: Your Majesty is rich in the four seas and is a precious son of heaven. Can you not even protect a brother and a sister, and yet they are being framed?

古文：宗社存亡，实在于此。
现代文：宗庙社稷的存亡，实在于此。
English: This is the real reason for the survival of the family temple and shrine.

古文：臣虽愚昧，窃为陛下不取。
现代文：臣虽然很愚昧，窃认为陛下不可取。
English: Although the minister was very ignorant, he did not think it was advisable for His Majesty to steal.

古文：《汉书》云： 一尺布，尚可缝，一斗粟，尚可舂，兄弟二人不相容。 
现代文：《汉书》上说 ，一尺布，尚可缝，一斗粟，尚可舂，兄弟二人不相容。 
English: According to the "Hanshu," one foot of cloth can still be sewn, one bucket of millet can still be beaten, and the two brothers are incompatible.

古文：愿陛下详察此言。且往者则天皇后欲令相王为太子，王累日不食，请迎陛下。固让之诚，天下传说，足明冉祖雍等所奏，咸是构虚。 
现代文：愿陛下细细思考这句话，况且以往则天皇后想要相王为太子，相王几天不吃饭，请求迎陛下，本来相王诚心让陛下，天下的人都作为美谈，这也足见冉祖雍等所奏，纯属虚构。 
English: May His Majesty think over this sentence carefully. Moreover, in the past, the Empress Dowager wanted to make the Prince Consort the Crown Prince, the Prince Consort did not eat for several days, and begged to meet His Majesty. Originally, the Prince Consort sincerely let His Majesty, and people all over the world thought it was a beautiful story. This also shows that the story told by Ran Zuyong and others is pure fiction.

古文：帝深纳其言而止。
现代文：中宗深纳他的意见而不再追究。
English: Zhongzong deeply accepted his opinion and no longer pursued it.

古文：寻转黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。至忠上疏陈时政，曰：
现代文：不久，他调任黄门侍郎，代宰相。萧至忠曾上疏论析时政，道：
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Huangmen Zhi Rong, acting prime minister. Xiao Zhizhong once commented on contemporary politics, saying:

古文：臣闻王者列职分司，为人求理，求理之道，必在用贤。
现代文： 臣听说做帝王的列职分司，为人求理，求理之道，必在用贤。
English: The minister heard that to be an emperor's subordinate, one must be reasonable, and the way to be reasonable is to be virtuous.

古文：得其人则公务克修，非其才则厥官如旷。
现代文：得其人就公务洁顺，用非其才就有官如同无官空缺。
English: It is necessary that one's official duties be clean and orderly, and it is not necessary that there be a vacancy for an official position.

古文：官旷则事废，事废则人残，渐至凌迟，率由于此。
现代文：官缺空则事废，事废则人残，慢慢的时政就会衰败，这大概是一条治政的规律。
English: It is probably a rule of governance that when there is a vacancy of officials, things are wasted, and when things are wasted, people are left behind. Gradually, the current government will decay.

古文：顷者选曹授职，政事官人，或异才升，多非德进。
现代文：近来选官授职，多非德进。大多是依靠贵要，互相粉饰。
English: Recently, the selection of officials and the conferment of posts have been more than virtuous. Most of them rely on nobles and whitewash each other.

古文：皆因依贵要，互为粉饰，苟得即是，曾无远图，上下相蒙，谁肯言及？
现代文：即使知道这情况，也不为国家考虑，上下相蒙，哪个肯揭露真相呢？
English: Even if they knew the situation, they would not care about the country, they would cover it up, and who would reveal the truth?

古文：臣闻官爵者公器也，恩幸者私惠也，祇可金帛富之，粱肉食之，以存私泽也。
现代文：臣闻官爵是天下的公器，恩宠实际上是私惠。只能给予金帛让他富裕，吃好穿好，来存私人恩泽。
English: Subordinate vassals are the world's public property, and grace is actually a private benefit. He can only be given gold so that he can be rich, eat well and dress well, and receive private grace.

古文：若以公器为私用，则公议不行，而劳人解体；以小私而妨至公，则私谒门开，而正言路绝，俭人递进，君子道消，日削月朘，卒见凋弊者，为官非其人也。
现代文：如果把国家的职位为私用，那么公道就不通行了。这样以小私来妨碍大公，那么后门之风一开，而正当的言语就被堵绝。小人就当道，君子道消。这样日削月蚀，最终会使国家凋敝，这都是为官非其人的缘故。
English: If the position of the state is used for private purposes, then justice cannot be done. If a petty private person is used to obstruct a grand duke in this way, then once the back door is opened, legitimate speech will be stifled. The villain will be punished, and the gentleman will be eliminated. If the sun and moon are eclipsed in this way, the country will eventually wither away. This is all for the sake of officials.

古文：昔汉馆陶公主为子求郎，明帝谓曰： 郎官上应列宿，出宰百里，苟非其人，则人受其殃。 
现代文：过去汉代的馆陶公主为自己的儿子求一郎官，汉明帝就对她说： 郎官上应天上的星宿，出外管理百里，如果非其人，那百姓就要遭殃了。 
English: In the past, the princess Guantao of the Han Dynasty asked for a vassal for her son, and Emperor Hanming told her: The vassal should be a star in the sky, and go abroad to manage a hundred miles. If it is not a person, then the people will suffer.

古文：赐钱十万而已。
现代文：就赏赐了十万给她的儿子。
English: So she gave the hundred thousand to her son.

古文：此即至公之道不亏，恩私之情无替，良史直笔，将为美谈，于今称之，不辍其口者也。
现代文：这就大公之道未亏损，没有用私情来代替，良史直笔，传为美谈，一直到今天人们还赞不绝口。
English: In this way, the grand duke's way did not lose money, did not use personal feelings to replace, good history, straight writing, passed down as a beautiful story, and people still praise it to this day.

古文：当今列位已广，冗员倍多，祈求未厌，日月增数。
现代文：当今官位很广，冗员倍增，贪求无厌，日月增数。
English: Today, official ranks are very broad, redundancy has doubled, greed is insatiable, and the number of officials is increasing day by day.

古文：陛下降不赀之泽，近戚有无涯之请，卖官利己，鬻法徇私。
现代文：陛下降无法计算的恩泽，近戚又增无涯之请，卖官利己，枉法徇私。
English: His majesty descends with incalculable grace, his relatives increase with boundless invitation, he betrays officials for personal gain, and abuses the law to benefit himself.

古文：台寺之内，硃紫盈满，官秩益轻，恩赏弥数。
现代文：衙门之内，朱紫盈满，官秩皆轻，恩赏更加多。
English: Within the palace gates, the vermilion and purple are abundant, the official ranks are light, and the rewards are more numerous.

古文：俭利之辈，冒进而莫识廉隅；方雅之流，知难而敛分丘陇。
现代文：势利小人，冒进不识廉耻，方雅君子，知难而退避丘陇。
English: Snobs, impudent and shameless, elegant gentlemen, knowing the difficulty and retreating to the hills.

古文：才者莫用，用者不才，二事相形，十有其五。
现代文：才者未用，用者非才，这两种情况相比，十个中就有其五。
English: If talent is not used, the one who uses it is not talented. Compared with these two situations, there are five out of ten.

古文：故人不效力而官匪其人，欲求其理，实亦难哉。
现代文：官非其人，欲求其理，实也难成。
English: Officials are not people, and it is difficult to achieve what one wants.

古文：臣窃见宰相及近侍要官子弟，多居美爵，此并势要亲戚，罕有才艺，递相嘱托，虚践官荣。
现代文： 臣窃见宰相和近侍要官的子弟，多居美爵，远再加上势要的亲戚，递相嘱托，虚践官荣。
English: The children of the chancellor and the close attendants of the dignitaries were often noblemen, and the distant relatives of the important relatives were entrusted to the minister, and the honor of the officials was not practiced.

古文：《诗》云： 东人之子，职劳不赉。西人之子，粲粲衣服。私人之子，百僚是试。或以其酒，不以其浆。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 东人之子，职劳不赍；西人之子，粲粲衣服；私人之子，百僚是试，或以其酒，不以其浆。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The sons of the East are not content with their official duties; the sons of the West are content with their clothes; the sons of the individual are content with their wine, not with their milk.

古文：廛廛佩璲，不以其长。 
现代文：鞘鞘佩王遂，不以其长。 
English: Sheath after sheath, not by its length.

古文：此言王政不平，众官废职，私家之子，列试于荣班，非任之人，徒长其饰佩。
现代文：这讲的是王政不公平，众官废职，私家之子，都混进了官员的行列；非任之人，白白地有着饰佩。
English: This is about the unfairness of the royal government, the dismissal of all officials, the sons of private families have all mixed into the ranks of officials; non-officials have adornments in vain.

古文：臣愚伏愿陛下想居安思危之义，行改弦易张之道。爱惜爵赏，审量材识，官无虚授，人必为官，进大雅于枢近，退小子于闲僻，政令惟一，威恩以信，私不害公，情不挠法，则天下幸甚。
现代文：臣愿陛下要思考居安思危的道理，行改弦易辙之道，要爱惜官爵，审量才识，官无虚授，人要做官，要走正道，杜绝小人的邪道，政令一致，威恩以信，私不害公，情不扰法，这样天下就大幸了。
English: It is the wish of His Majesty's subjects that His Majesty should think about the principle of living in peace and minding the dangers, practice the way of changing the course of action, cherish officials and knights, judge talents and abilities, no official is taught in vain, people should be officials, take the right path, eliminate the evil ways of villains, government decrees should be consistent, honor should be based on faith, do not harm the public interest, and do not disturb the law. In this way, the world will be very fortunate.

古文：臣伏见永徽故事，宰相子弟多居外职者，非直抑强宗、分大族，亦以退不肖、择贤才。
现代文：臣见永徽的旧事，宰相子弟多居外职，这不仅是抑强宗，分大族，也是退不肖，择贤才。
English: According to the old story of Yonghui, the children of the prime minister mostly stay away from work. This is not only to suppress the strong sect and divide the clan, but also to retreat and select the talents.

古文：伏愿陛下远稽旧典，近遵先圣，特降明敕，令宰相已下及诸司长官子弟，并改授外官，庶望分职四方，共宁百姓，表里相统，遐迩人安。
现代文：伏愿陛下远查旧典，近遵先圣，降明旨令宰相以下及诸司长官子弟，都改授外官，希望他们分职四方，共宁百姓，表里相统，远近安宁。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will look into the ancient scriptures from far and near, and issue a clear order to the prime minister and his subordinates, as well as the sons and daughters of department heads, that they all be promoted to foreign ministers. I hope that they will divide their duties into four parts, and work for the common good of the people, and that they will be consistent with each other, and that there will be peace near and far.

古文：疏奏不纳。
现代文：他的疏奏未被采纳。
English: Zhang Kamshi's appeal is not accepted.

古文：明年，代韦巨源为侍中，仍依旧修史。
现代文：第二年，萧至忠代韦巨源任侍中，依旧修史。
English: In the second year, Xiao Zizhong appointed Wei Jiuyuan as an attendant, and continued to study history.

古文：寻迁中书令。
现代文：不久又迁任中书令。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of Chushiro.

古文：时宗楚客、纪处讷潜怀奸计，自树朋党，韦巨源、世再思、李峤皆唯诺自全，无所匡正。
现代文：当时宗楚客、纪处讷暗怀奸计，自树朋党，韦巨源、杨再思、李峤都为保全自己一味顺从，对时政无所匡正。
English: At that time, Zong Chuk, Ji Duan and Ne secretly harbored treacherous plans, and in order to preserve themselves, Wei Jiuyuan, Yang Zai Si and Li Jie all obeyed and did nothing to rectify the current politics.

古文：至忠处于其间，颇存正道，时议翕然重之。
现代文：萧至忠处于其中，颇能坚持正道，当时的评论都很重视他。
English: Among them, Xiao Zhizhong was quite able to adhere to the right path, and the comments at that time were very important to him.

古文：中宗亦曰： 诸宰相中，至忠最怜我。 
现代文：中宗也说： 宰相当中，萧至忠最怜我。 
English: Zhongzong also said: In the middle of the slaughter, Xiao Zhizhong pitied me the most.

古文：韦庶人又为亡弟赠汝南王洵与至忠亡女为冥婚合葬。及韦氏败，至忠发墓，持其女柩归，人以此讥之。
现代文：韦庶人又替她死去的弟弟与萧至忠死去的女儿完成冥婚合葬，到韦氏废除，萧至忠掘墓，把女儿的棺柩抬归，当时人们很讥笑此事。
English: Wei's common-law husband also married her dead brother to Xiao Zhizhong's dead daughter and buried them together. The marriage was annulled by Wei, and Xiao Zhizhong dug the grave and carried her daughter's coffin home. At the time, people laughed at this.

古文：至忠又以女适庶人舅崔从礼之子。成礼日，中宗为萧氏婚主，韦庶人为崔氏婚主，时人谓之 天子嫁女，皇后娶妇 。
现代文：萧至忠又把自己的另一女儿嫁给韦庶人舅崔从礼的儿子，婚礼的那天，中宗为萧氏当主婚人，韦庶人做崔氏的婚主，当时人们都说这是 天子嫁女，皇后取妇 。
English: Xiao Zhizhong also married his other daughter to the son of Wei's uncle, Cui Congli. On the day of the wedding, Zhongzong was the bridegroom of Xiao, and Wei was the bridegroom of Cui. At that time, people said that this was the son of heaven marrying a girl, and the queen taking a wife.

古文：睿宗即位，景云初，出为晋州刺史，甚有能名。
现代文：睿宗即位，在景云初，萧至忠出京任晋州刺史，很有能力。
English: Ruizong ascended the throne, and at the beginning of Jingyun, Xiao Zhizhong went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Jinzhou. He was very capable.

古文：时太平公主用事，至忠潜遣间使申意，求入为京职。
现代文：当时太平公主得势，萧至忠暗中派人向太平公主疏通，想求得入京任职。
English: At that time, the Taiping princess gained momentum, and Xiao Zhi Zhongming sent someone to the Taiping princess to smooth things over, hoping to get a post in Beijing.

古文：诛韦氏之际，至忠一子任千牛，为乱兵所杀，公主冀至忠以此怨望，可与谋事，即纳其请。
现代文：韦庶人被诛之时，萧至忠一个儿子任千牛，被乱兵所杀，太平公主希望至忠因此有怨心，这样就可以参与谋反，所以就接受了萧至忠的请求。
English: At the time of Wei's arrest, one of Xiao Zhizhong's sons, Ren Qian Niu, was killed by rioting soldiers. The Taiping Princess hoped that Zhizhong would have a grudge, so that she could participate in the rebellion, so she accepted Xiao Zhizhong's request.

古文：召拜刑部尚书、右御史大夫，再迁吏部尚书。
现代文：随后召回京拜刑部尚书、右御史大夫，又迁任吏部尚书。
English: Subsequently, he was recalled to Beijing to serve as the head of the criminal investigation department and the right-hand man of the chief historian. He was also transferred to the criminal investigation department.

古文：先天二年，复为中书令。
现代文：先天二年，又任中书令。
English: Two years ago, he was appointed to the post of Chushiro.

古文：是岁，至忠与窦怀贞、魏知古、崔湜、陆象先、柳冲、徐坚、刘子玄等撰成《姓族系录》二百卷，有制加爵赐物各有差。
现代文：这年，萧至忠与窦怀贞、魏知古、崔、陆象先、柳氵中、徐坚、刘子玄等撰写了《姓族系录》二百卷，皇上为此加爵赐物各有不等。
English: In this year, Xiao Zhizhong, Dou Huaizhen, Wei Zhigu, Cui, Lu Xiangsen, Liu Yuzhong, Xu Jian, Liu Zixuan and others wrote 200 volumes of the "Family Tree," and the emperor gave each of them a peerage.

古文：未几，左仆射窦怀贞、侍中岑羲及至忠并户部尚书李晋、太子少保薛稷、左散骑常侍贾膺福、左羽林大将军常元楷、右羽林将军李慈等与太平公主谋逆事泄，至忠遽遁入山寺，数日，捕而伏诛，籍没其家。
现代文：不久，左仆射窦怀贞、侍中岑羲和萧至忠同户部尚书李晋、太子少保薛稷、左散骑常侍贾膺福、左羽林大将军常元楷、右羽林将军李慈等与太平公主谋反事泄漏，萧至忠就逃到山中寺庙，数天之后，被捕而伏诛，籍没其家。
English: Soon after, the left servant, Sho Dou Huai Zhen, the attendant, Zou Zhong, and Xiao Zhizhong, as well as the head of the household, Shang Shu Li Jin, the prince's younger brother, Xue Zhen, the left rider, the attendant, Jia Yifu, the left rider, the general, Zang Yuan Kai, and the right rider, the general, Li Ci, conspired with the Taiping princess to leak the news, and Xiao Zhizhong fled to a temple in the mountains. A few days later, he was arrested and fled, losing his home.

古文：至忠虽清俭刻己，然简约自高，未尝接待宾客，所得俸禄，亦无所赈施。
现代文：萧至忠虽然清俭刻己，但是简约自高，从未接待宾客，所得俸禄，也从不施舍救济。
English: Although Xiao Zhizhong was frugal and hard-working, he was simple-minded and arrogant. He never received guests, earned a salary, and never gave alms.

古文：宗楚客者，蒲州河东人，则天从父姊之子也。兄秦客，垂拱中潜劝则天革命称帝，由是累迁内史。
现代文：到没收他家产时，财帛很多，由此声望顿绝。宗楚客，蒲州河东人，是武则天姑母的儿子，他的哥哥宗秦客，在垂拱初年暗中劝武则天改制称帝，因此累任内史。
English: By the time of the confiscation of his family's property, he had amassed a great deal of wealth, which led to the end of his reputation. Zong Chuk, a native of Pudong, was the son of Wuzetian's aunt. His brother, Zong Qin, secretly persuaded Wuzetian to change the system of naming emperors in the first year of the Hanging Arch, and was consequently appointed to the post of Inner Historian.

古文：后与楚客及弟晋卿并以奸赃事发，配流岭外。
现代文：后来与宗楚客和宗晋卿两个弟弟一起奸赃事发，流配岭外。
English: Later, he had an affair with two younger brothers, Zong Chuk and Zong Jinqing, and was banished to the outskirts of Ling.

古文：秦客死，楚客等寻复追还。楚客累迁夏官侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。神龙初，为太仆卿。
现代文：宗秦客死，宗楚客、宗晋卿不久又召回京师，宗楚客累任夏官侍郎，代理宰相。神龙初年，宗楚客任太仆卿。
English: Zong Qin's death, Zong Chu's and Zong Jin's return to Beijing soon after, Zong Chu's long-term position as a summer official's valet and acting prime minister. In the first year of Shenlong, Zong Chu's position was that of a servant.

古文：武三思用事，引楚客为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品，晋卿累迁将作大匠。
现代文：武三思得宠专权时，引荐宗楚客为兵部尚书，代宰相，宗晋卿任将作大匠。
English: When Wu San thought of getting the exclusive right to be the favorite, he recommended Zong Chu to be the secretary of the military department, the acting prime minister, and Zong Jin to be the master craftsman.

古文：节愍太子既杀武三思，兵败，逃于鄠县，楚客遣使追斩之，仍令以其首祭三思及崇训丧柩。
现代文：节愍太子杀了武三思，兵败，逃到县，宗楚客派人追赶而杀掉了他。并以节愍太子的头来祭奠武三思和武崇训的灵柩。
English: Prince Jiechi killed Wusan Si, was defeated, and fled to the county. Zongchu sent a guest to chase him and killed him. The coffin with Prince Jiechi's head was dedicated to the memory of Wusan Si and Wu Chongxun.

古文：韦庶人及安乐公主尤加亲信，未几，迁中书令。
现代文：韦庶人和安乐公主对他特别亲信。未过多久，任他为中书令。
English: Prince Wei and Princess Anle were particularly close to him, and before long, he was appointed to the position of Chushiro.

古文：楚客虽迹附韦氏，而尝别有异图，与侍中纪处讷共为朋党，故时人呼为宗、纪。
现代文：宗楚客虽然依附韦庶人，但是心怀异图，与侍中纪处讷共为朋党，所以当时人们喊他们为宗纪。
English: Although Zongchuk adhered to Wei, he harbored a different view and was a friend of Zongzhi, so people called them Zongzhi at that time.

古文：景龙中，西突厥娑葛与阿史那忠节不和，屡相侵扰，西陲不安。
现代文：景龙年中，西突厥娑葛与阿史那忠节不和，经常互相侵扰，西边的领土很不安宁。
English: In the middle of the Jinglong period, the West Turkic Xingge and Ashina Zhongjie were at odds with each other, often invading each other, and the territory in the west was very restless.

古文：安西都护郭元振奏请徒忠节于内地，楚客与晋卿、处讷等各纳忠节重赂，奏请发兵以讨娑葛，不纳元振所奏。
现代文：安西都护郭元振奏请役使阿史那忠节到内地，宗楚客与宗晋卿、纪处讷等都接收了阿史那忠节的重赂，奏请朝廷发兵来讨伐娑葛，不采纳郭元振的建议。
English: Guo Yuanzheng, the protector of the Anxi capital, asked for help to bring Ashina Zhongjie to the mainland. Zong Chuak, Zong Jinqing, and Ji Dianna all received heavy bribes from Ashina Zhongjie and asked the imperial court to send troops to fight the Ge, but did not accept Guo Yuanzheng's suggestion.

古文：旧制，大臣有被御史对仗劾弹者，即俯偻趋出，立于朝堂待罪。
现代文：娑葛知道了此情大怒，举兵入侵，造成严重的边患。在这种情况下，监察御史崔琬劾奏宗楚客等。按原有的制度，大臣中有被御史弹劾的，就要低头弯腰站在朝堂待罪。
English: Knowing this, Gan Ge flew into a rage and raised an army to invade, causing a serious border crisis. In this situation, the overseer of the imperial court, Cui Xi, impeached the emperor. According to the original system, if a minister was impeached by the imperial court, he had to bow his head and stand in the imperial court to await punishment.

古文：楚客更咤鳃作色而进，自言以执性忠鲠，被琬诬奏。
现代文：宗楚客却发怒作色而进，自己说自己执法忠鲠，遭到了崔琬的诬陷。
English: Dzongchuk, on the other hand, went into a rage and said that he was loyal to law enforcement and was framed by Choi Min.

古文：中宗竟不能穷核其事，遽令琬与楚客等结为义兄弟以和解之。
现代文：中宗竟不能查清是非，就要崔琬与宗楚客等结为义兄弟来让他们和解。
English: Zhongzong couldn't find out what was right and what was wrong, so he had to make Choe Son and Jong Chuk a brother-in-law in order to reconcile them.

古文：韦氏败，楚客与晋卿等皆伏诛。
现代文：韦庶人事败露，宗楚客和宗晋卿都被诛杀。
English: Wei's subordinates were exposed, and both Zong Chu and Zong Jin were killed.

