古文：起阏逢执徐二月，尽旃蒙大荒落七月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起阏逢执徐二月，尽旃蒙大荒落七月，凡一年有奇。
English: Every year is a strange one, with the beginning of spring in February and the end of summer in July.

古文：齐王中开运元年
现代文：后晋齐王开运元年
English: In the first year of the reign of King Qi of the Later Jin Dynasty

古文：二月，甲辰朔，命前保义节度使石赟守麻家口，前威胜节度使何重建守杨刘镇，护圣都指挥使白再荣守马家口，西京留守安彦威守河阳。
现代文：二月，甲辰朔，后晋朝廷命前保义节度使石把守麻家口，前威胜节度使何重建把守杨刘镇，护圣都指挥白再荣把守马家口，西京留守安彦威把守河阳。
English: In February, Jiachenshuo, after the Jin Dynasty, the pre-victory and victory festivals were held in order to rebuild Yang Liu Town, Baizhe Rong, the commander of the Holy Protection Corps, was held in Majiakou, and An Yanwei, who stayed in West Beijing, was held in Heyang.

古文：未几，周儒引契丹将麻答自马家口济河，营于东岸，攻郓州北津以应杨光远。
现代文：不久，周儒引领契丹将军麻从马家口渡过黄河，在东岸扎营，攻打郓州北津以接应杨光远。
English: Soon, Zhou Ru led the Khitan general Ma from Majiakou across the Yellow River, camped on the east bank, and attacked Beijin in Zhangzhou to meet Yang Guangyuan.

古文：麻答，契丹主之从弟也。
现代文：麻是契丹主耶律德光的堂弟。
English: Maha is the cousin of the Khitan lord Yerudoglu.

古文：乙巳，遣侍卫马军都指挥使、义成节度使李守贞、神武统军皇甫遇、陈州防御使梁汉璋、怀州刺史薛怀让将兵万人，缘河水陆俱进。
现代文：乙巳，后晋派遣侍卫马军都指挥使、义成节度使李守贞、神武统军皇甫遇、陈州防御使梁汉璋、怀州刺史薛怀让统兵万人，沿着黄河水陆并进。
English: At this time, the Later Jin Dynasty dispatched the commander of the Guards and Horse Army, the Yicheng Festival to Li Shuzhen, the Jinwu United Army to the emperor, the Chenzhou Defense Force to Liang Hanju, and the Waizhou Zhishi Xue Huai to the general army of ten thousand people, and marched along the Yellow River.

古文：守贞，河阳；汉璋，应州；怀让，太原人也。
现代文：李守贞是河阳人；梁汉璋是应州人；薛怀让是太原人。
English: Li Shouzhen is from Kheyang; Liang Hanzhong is from Yingzhou; Xue Huajang is from Taiyuan.

古文：丙午，契丹围高行周、符彦卿及先锋指挥使石公霸于戚城。
现代文：丙午，契丹兵在戚城包围了高行周、符彦卿及先锋指挥使石公霸。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the Khitan soldiers surrounded Gao Xing Zhou, Fu Yanqing and the vanguard commander Shi Gongba in Qicheng.

古文：先是景延广令诸将分地而守，无得相救。
现代文：起先，景延广命令诸将分地而守，不许相互救援。
English: At first, Jing Yanguang ordered the generals to defend themselves separately and not to rescue each other.

古文：行周等告急，延广徐白帝，帝自将救之。
现代文：此时，高行周等告急，景延广延缓报告后晋出帝，后晋出帝自己带兵去救援。
English: At this time, Gao Xing Zhou and others were in a hurry, Jing Yan Guan delayed the report and then sent out the emperor, and then the emperor himself led the soldiers to rescue.

古文：契丹解去，三将泣诉救兵之缓，几不免。
现代文：契丹兵围解除退去，三将涕泣地诉说救兵来得太慢，几乎不能免于一死。
English: When the siege of the Khitan soldiers was lifted and they retreated, the three generals cried and said that the rescuers came too slowly and they could hardly avoid death.

古文：戊申，李守贞等至马家口。
现代文：戊申，李守贞等到达马家口。
English: Boshin, Li Shouzhen, etc. arrived at Majiakou.

古文：契丹遣步卒万人筑垒，散骑兵于其外，馀兵数万屯河西，船数十艘渡兵，未已，晋兵薄之，契丹骑兵退走，晋兵进攻其垒，拔之。
现代文：契丹遣派一万步兵修筑堡垒，在其外散布骑兵戍守，其余兵众数万人屯驻在河西，有船数千艘运渡兵卒。没有多久，晋兵迫近他们，契丹的骑兵退走，晋兵进攻其堡垒，攻下了它们。
English: Khitan dispatched ten thousand infantrymen to build a fortress, and spread out cavalry to guard it. The remaining tens of thousands of soldiers were stationed in the west of the river, and there were thousands of ships to transport soldiers. Soon, Jin soldiers approached them, Khitan cavalry retreated, and Jin soldiers attacked their fortresses and captured them.

古文：契丹大败，乘马赴河溺死者数千人，俘斩亦数千人。
现代文：契丹兵大败，骑马过河的人被淹死几千人，被俘、被杀的也有几千人。
English: The Khitan soldiers suffered a crushing defeat. Thousands of horsemen crossing the river were drowned, and thousands more were captured and killed.

古文：河西之兵恸哭而去，由是不敢复东。
现代文：黄河西边的兵痛哭着退走，从此不敢再向东来。
English: The soldiers on the west side of the Yellow River retreated in tears, never daring to come east again.

古文：辛亥，定难节度使李彝殷奏将兵四万自麟州济河，侵契丹之境。
现代文：辛亥，定难节度使李彝殷奏报：统兵四万从麟州渡过黄河，侵入契丹之境。
English: At the end of the 19th century, a difficult festival made Li Yuyan report: 40,000 soldiers crossed the Yellow River from Linzhou and invaded the territory of Khitan.

古文：壬子，以彝殷为契丹西南面招讨使。
现代文：壬子，后晋出帝任命李彝殷为契丹西南面招讨使。
English: On the 9th, Li Yuyin was appointed as the envoy to the southwest of Khitan.

古文：初，契丹主得贝州、博州，皆抚尉其人，或拜官赐服章。
现代文：过去，契丹主取得贝州、博州，都对这个地方的人加以抚慰，或者拜授官职、赐给有纹彩的官服。
English: In the past, when the Khitan lord conquered Bechuan and Bozhou, he would appease the people of these places, or give them official posts and official uniforms with patterns.

古文：及败于戚城及马家口，忿恚，所得民，皆杀之，得军士，燔炙之。
现代文：等在戚城及马家口打了败仗后他就恼恨了，把所虏得的民众都杀了，俘获的军士都烧死。
English: When he was defeated in the battles of Chicheng and Majiakou, he became enraged and killed all the captured civilians and burned all the captured soldiers.

古文：由是晋人愤怒，戮力争奋。
现代文：因此引起晋国人的愤怒，团结合力，奋起斗争。
English: As a result, the anger of the people of Jin was aroused, the group united, and the struggle arose.

古文：杨光远将青州兵欲西会契丹。戊午，诏石赟分兵屯郓州以备之。
现代文：杨光远带领青州兵，想向西与契丹兵会合；戊午，后晋出帝下诏，命令石分出兵马驻扎在郓州，来防备他。
English: Yang Guangyuan led the Qing soldiers and wanted to go west to meet with the Khitan soldiers; in the afternoon, Emperor Jin issued an edict, ordering the soldiers and horses to be stationed in Zhangzhou to guard him.

古文：诏刘知远将部兵自土门出恒州击契丹，又诏会杜威、马全节于邢州。
现代文：后晋出帝诏命刘知远带领本部兵马从土门出恒州，进击契丹，又诏命他在邢州与杜威、马全节会合。
English: Later, Emperor Jinzhi ordered Liu Zhiyuan to lead the headquarters troops and horses out of Hengzhou from Tumen to attack Khitan, and ordered him to meet with Dewey and Ma Quanzhong in Zhangzhou.

古文：知远引兵屯乐平不进。
现代文：刘知远引兵驻扎在乐平不再前进。
English: Liu Zhiyuan stationed troops in Leping and did not advance any further.

古文：帝居丧期年，即于宫中奏细声女乐。
现代文：后晋出帝居丧将近一年，就在宫中演奏细声女乐。
English: After nearly a year of mourning, she performed soft female music in the palace.

古文：及出师，常令左右奏三弦琵琶，和以羌笛，击鼓歌舞，曰： 此非乐也。 
现代文：等到出师北讨时，常常让左右之人奏三弦、琵琶，和以羌笛，击鼓唱歌舞蹈，并说： 这不是作乐啊。 
English: When I got out of the academy, I often asked the people on my right and left to play the three strings, the lute, and the flute, beat the drums, sing, and dance, and said, "This is not making music."

古文：庚申，百官表请听乐，诏不许。
现代文：庚申，百官上表请求听乐，下诏不许。
English: Goshun, hundreds of officials requested to listen to music, but were not allowed to do so.

古文：壬戌，杨光远围棣州，刺史李琼出兵击败之，光远烧营走还青州。
现代文：壬戍，杨光远围困棣州，刺史李琼出兵把他打败，杨光远烧了营寨退回青州。
English: In Ningbo, Yang Guangyuan besieged Luzhou, and Li Qiong sent troops to defeat him. Yang Guangyuan burned the camp and returned to Qingzhou.

古文：癸亥，以前威胜节度使何重建为东面马步都部署，将兵屯郓州。
现代文：癸亥，后晋朝延任命前威胜节度使何重建为东面马步都部署，统兵屯驻郓州。
English: In the Later Jin Dynasty, Emperor Yan appointed the former Wei Sheng Sect to rebuild He as the eastern capital, and the unified army was stationed in Bozhou.

古文：阶、成义军指挥使王君怀帅所部千馀人叛降蜀，请为乡导以取阶、成。
现代文：阶州、成州义军指挥使王君怀率领所部千余人叛晋降蜀，请求当向导去攻取阶、成二州。
English: The commander of the Chaozhou and Chengdu rebel army asked Wang Junhai to lead more than a thousand people from the headquarters to rebel and surrender to Shu, and asked him to be a guide to conquer Cha and Chengdu.

古文：甲子，蜀人攻阶州。
现代文：甲子，蜀人攻打阶州。
English: Kozi, Shu people attack Zhouzhou.

古文：契丹伪弃元城去，伏精骑于古顿丘城，以俟晋军与恒、定之兵合而击之。
现代文：契凡假装舍弃了元城退去，把精锐骑兵埋伏在古顿丘城，来等待晋军与恒州、定州之兵会合之后再迎击它。
English: Chefan pretended to abandon Yuancheng and withdrew, leaving his elite cavalry in ambush at Gutongqiu City to wait for the Jin army to meet the soldiers from Hengzhou and Dingzhou before attacking it.

古文：鄴都留守张从恩屡奏虏已遁去；大军欲进追之，会霖雨而止。
现代文：邺都留守张从恩几次奏报北虏已经遁走，大军打算进击追逐它，后来由于遇上下雨而停止。
English: Zhang Cong'en, who was left in charge of the capital, reported several times that the northern troops had left, and the large army intended to attack and chase it, but later stopped due to rain.

古文：契丹设伏旬日，人马饥疲。赵延寿曰： 晋军悉在河上，畏我锋锐，必不敢前，不如即其城下，四合攻之，夺其浮梁，则天下定矣。 
现代文：契丹设置埋伏十天，人马饥饿疲乏，赵延寿说： 晋军都在河上，惧怕我们的精锐，必定不敢向前；不如就地攻下其城，四面合兵攻打，夺取黄河上的浮桥，那么天下就平定了。 
English: The Khitan set up an ambush for ten days, and the men and horses were exhausted from hunger. Zhao Yanshou said, "The Jin army is on the river, and they are afraid of our elite, so they must not dare to advance. It would be better to capture their city on the spot, attack them with troops on all sides, and seize the floating bridge on the Yellow River, then the world would be leveled.

古文：契丹主从之，三月，癸酉朔，自将兵十馀万陈于澶州城北，东西横掩城之两隅，登城望之，不见其际。
现代文：契丹主听从了他的话，三月，癸酉朔，亲自领兵十余万在澶州城的北面排开阵势，东面和西面横向包围城的两角，登城观望，看不见边际。
English: The Khitan lord listened to his words, and in March, at the beginning of the new year, he personally led more than 100,000 soldiers to set up a position on the north side of Zhangzhou City, encircled the two corners of the city horizontally on the east and west sides, climbed the city to watch, and could not see the edge.

古文：高行周前军在戚城之南，与契丹战，自午至晡，互有胜负。
现代文：高行周的前锋部队在戚城之南，与契丹兵交战，从晌午到日落，互有胜负。
English: Gao Xingzhou's vanguard troops fought against the Khitan soldiers in the south of Qicheng. From midday to sunset, there were victories and defeats.

古文：契丹主以精兵当中军而来，帝亦出陈以待之。
现代文：契丹主耶律德光指挥精兵向着中军进击而来，后晋出帝石重贵也率兵出来摆开阵势等待他过来。
English: The Khitan lord, Yerudoglu, commanded his elite soldiers to attack the Chinese army. Later, Emperor Shigeki also led his soldiers to come out and wait for him to come.

古文：契丹主望见晋军之盛，谓左右曰： 杨光远言晋兵半已馁死，今何其多也！ 
现代文：契丹主望见晋军的盛况，对左右说： 杨光远说晋兵之半数已经饿死，现在为什么还有这么多？ 
English: The Khitan lord looked at the pomp of the Jin army and said to the left and right: Yang Guangyuan said that half of the Jin soldiers had starved to death, why are there still so many?

古文：以精骑左右略陈，晋军不动，万弩齐发，飞矢蔽地。
现代文：使用精锐骑兵从左方和右方攻打，晋军丝毫不动，万弩齐发，飞矢落下遍地都是。
English: Using elite cavalry to attack from both the left and the right, the Jin army did not move at all, and when they did, arrows were falling everywhere.

古文：契丹稍却；又攻晋陈之东偏，不克。
现代文：契丹兵稍向后退；又向晋军的东翼进攻，也攻不下来。
English: The Khitan soldiers retreated a little; they also attacked the eastern flank of the Jin army, but could not break through.

古文：苦战至暮，两军死者不可胜数。
现代文：若战到晚上，两军死亡的不可胜数。
English: If the battle had continued into the evening, the number of deaths in both armies would have been incalculable.

古文：昏后，契丹引去，营于三十里之外。
现代文：天黑以后，契丹引兵后退，在三十里之外扎营。
English: After dark, the Khitans withdrew and camped 30 miles away.

古文：乙亥，契丹主帐下小校窃其马亡来，云契丹已传木书，收军北去。
现代文：乙亥，契丹主帐中的小校盗其马逃来晋军，说契丹已经传递木书信契，收军北去。
English: Yihai, a schoolboy in Khitan's main account, stole his horse and fled to the Jin army, saying that Khitan had passed on a wooden letter, and collected the army to the north.

古文：景延广疑其诈，闭壁不敢追。
现代文：景延广怀疑有诈，关闭军垒不敢追击。
English: Jing Yanguang suspected fraud, closed the barricade and did not dare to pursue.

古文：汉主命中书令、都元帅越王弘昌谒烈宗陵于海曲，至昌华宫，使盗杀之。
现代文：南汉主刘晟命中书令、都元帅越王刘弘昌到海曲进谒烈宗刘隐的陵墓，到了昌华宫后，指使盗贼把他杀了。
English: Liu Hongchang, the ruler of the Southern Han Dynasty, ordered the Grand Marshal Yue Wang to go to the mausoleum of Liu Yin, the founder of the Han Dynasty, in Haichuan. After arriving at the Changhua Palace, he ordered the thieves to kill him.

古文：契丹主自澶州北分为两军，一出沧、德，一出深、冀而归。
现代文：契丹主从澶州向北兵分两路，一支出沧州、德州，一支出深州、冀州而归去。
English: The Khitan lord divided his journey from Bozhou to Beibei into two parts, one going to Cangzhou and Dezhou, and the other going to Shenzhou and Jizhou before returning.

古文：所过焚掠，方广千里，民物殆尽。
现代文：所过的地方，大事焚烧抢掠，方圆面积有一千里，民间财物几乎被抢光了。
English: In the places we passed, there were major incidents of burning, looting and plundering, covering an area of one thousand li, and almost all of the people's property was looted.

古文：留赵延照为贝州留后。
现代文：留下赵延照为贝州留后。
English: After leaving Zhao Yanzhao to stay in Bechu.

古文：麻答陷德州，擒刺史尹居璠。
现代文：麻攻陷德州，捉住刺史尹居。
English: As soon as we invaded Texas, we captured the assassin, Shi Yinju.

古文：闽拱宸都指挥使硃文进，阁门使连重遇，既弑康宗，常惧国人之讨，相与结婚以自固。
现代文：闽国拱宸都指挥使朱文进、阁门使连重遇，杀了康宗王昶以后，常常害怕国人声讨他们，便互相结为婚姻，用来巩固自己的势力。
English: When Zhu Wenzhin, the commander-in-chief of the Ming and Qing dynasties, and Liao Tong, the envoy to the imperial court, met again and killed Kangzong Wangye, they were often afraid that the people of the country would criticize them, so they married each other to consolidate their power.

古文：闽主曦果于诛杀，尝游西园，因醉杀控鹤指挥使魏从朗。
现代文：闽主王曦对诛杀很随便，他曾经游览西园，因为醉酒杀了控鹤指挥使魏从朗。
English: The eagle's master Wang Xi is very casual about the eagle killing. He once visited the West Park, because he drunkenly killed the control crane commander to make Wei Zonglang.

古文：从朗，硃、连之党也。
现代文：魏从朗是朱文进、连重遇的党羽。
English: Wei Zonglang is Zhu Wenjin, a party member who has met repeatedly.

古文：又尝酒酣诵白居易诗云： 惟有人心相对间，咫尺之情不能料。 因举酒属二人。二人起，流涕再拜，曰： 臣子事君父，安有他志！ 
现代文：又曾经在酒兴正浓时吟诵白居易的诗道： 惟有人心相对间，咫尺之情不能料 ，边诵边举酒对着朱、连二人，二人起立，流涕再拜，说： 臣子侍奉君父，哪能有二心！ 
English: He also once recited Bai Juyi's poem when the wine was in full flow: However, when there are people who are in the opposite direction, it is impossible to predict the feelings. While reciting, he raised the wine to Zhu and Lian, and the two stood up and bowed again, saying: How can a vassal serve his father with two hearts!

古文：曦不应。二人大惧。
现代文：王曦没有什么反应，二人大为惶恐。
English: Wang Xi didn't react at all, and the two of them were terrified.

古文：李后妒尚贤妃之宠，欲弑曦而立其子亚澄，使人告二人曰： 主人殊不平于二公，奈何？ 
现代文：李后妒忌尚贤妃受到闽主王曦的宠爱，想要谋杀王曦而立她的儿子王亚澄为帝，派人告诉二人说： 主上对待你们二位很不公平，怎么办？ 
English: Queen Li was jealous of Shang Xianfei's being favored by the tyrant Wang Xi. She wanted to murder Wang Xi and set up her son Wang Yacheng as emperor. She sent someone to tell the two of them: "The Lord is treating you two very unfairly. What should we do?"

古文：会后父李真有疾，乙酉，曦如真第问疾。
现代文：适逢李后的父亲李真生病，乙酉，王曦到李真的府第问候疾病。
English: When Li Zhen's father, Li Zhen, fell ill, Wang Xi went to Li Zhen's residence to greet him.

古文：文进、重遇使拱宸马步使钱达弑曦于马上，召百官集朝堂，告之曰： 太祖昭武皇帝，光启闽国，今子孙淫虐，荒坠厥绪。天厌王氏，宜更择有德者立之。 
现代文：朱文进、连重遇指使拱宸马步使钱达在马上把王曦杀了，召集百官到朝堂，向大家宣告说： 太祖昭武皇帝光辉地开创闽国，现在子孙乱暴虐，使他的遗绪荒废坠落，上天厌弃王氏，应该另外选择有德的人拥立他为皇帝。 
English: Zhu Wenzhong repeatedly met and instructed Gong Zi Ma Bu to make Qian Da immediately kill Wang Xi. He summoned hundreds of officials to the imperial court and announced to everyone, "Emperor Zhaowu's great-grandfather brilliantly created the country, and now his descendants are violent and tyrannical, making his legacy fall into ruin. Heaven abhors the Wang clan, and should choose another virtuous person to support him as emperor."

古文：众莫敢言。
现代文：众人不敢讲话。
English: No one dared to speak.

古文：重遇乃推文进升殿，被衮冕，帅群臣北面再拜称臣。
现代文：连重遇便把朱文进推拥上殿升座，穿上帝王的衣服冠冕，帅领群臣向北面再拜称臣。
English: After repeated encounters, Zhu Wenjin was promoted to the throne, wearing the clothes and crown of the God King, and leading the courtiers to the north to pay homage to him.

古文：文进自称闽主，悉收王氏宗族延喜以下少长五十馀人，皆杀之。
现代文：朱文进自称闽主，把王氏宗族从王曦的弟弟王延喜以下少长五十余人，全部收拘，都杀了。
English: Zhu Wenjin claimed to be the instigator and killed more than 50 members of the Wang clan, from Wang Xi's younger brother Wang Yanxi on down, all of whom were taken into custody.

古文：葬闽主曦，谥曰睿文广武明圣元德隆道大孝皇帝，庙号景宗。
现代文：埋葬了闽主王曦，谥为睿文广武明圣元德隆道大孝皇帝，庙号景宗。
English: King Xi, the ruler of the Han Dynasty, was buried here, as well as Emperor Rui, Wen, Guang, Wu, Ming, Sheng, Yuan, Delong, Da Xiao, and Emperor Jingzong.

古文：以重遇总六军。
现代文：任用连重遇总领六军。
English: Appointed company commander of the Sixth Army.

古文：礼部尚书、判三司郑元弼抗辞不屈，黜归田里，将奔建州，文进杀之。
现代文：礼部尚书、判三司郑元弼言词抗驳不屈服，罢黜他回归田里，在他将要投奔建州时，朱文进把他杀了。
English: Shang Shu of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Third Division of the Third Division of the Court rebutted Zheng Yuanzhang's words and did not give in, and ordered him to return to the field. When he was about to rush to Jianzhou, Zhu Wenjin killed him.

古文：文进下令，出宫人，罢营造，以反曦之政。
现代文：朱文进下令，遣出宫人，停止营建，以此改变王曦的政策。
English: Zhu Wenjin ordered that the palace people be sent out and construction stopped, in order to change Wang Xi's policy.

古文：殷主延政遣统军使吴成义将兵讨文进，不克。
现代文：殷主王延政遣派统军使吴成义领兵征讨朱文进，未能取胜。
English: Wang Yanzheng, the lord of Yin, sent a unified army to make Wu Chengyi lead the army to recruit Zhu Wenjin, but failed to win.

古文：文进加枢密使鲍思润同平章事，以羽林统军使黄绍颇为泉州刺史，左军使程文纬为漳州刺史。
现代文：朱文进加封枢密使鲍思润同平章事，任用羽林统军使黄绍颇为泉州刺史，左军使程文纬为漳州刺史。
English: Zhu Wen entered the imperial court and appointed Bao Syrun as Tongping, appointed Huang Shaopu as Quanzhou, and appointed Cheng Wenyi as Zhangzhou.

古文：汀州刺史同安许文稹，举郡降之。
现代文：汀州刺史同安人许文稹，献出守郡向朱文进投降。
English: Dingzhou stabbed Tongan Xu Wenzhong and offered the county to Zhu Wenzhong.

古文：丁亥，诏太原、恒、定兵各还本镇。
现代文：丁亥，后晋出帝下诏，命令太原、恒州、安州兵各还本镇。
English: Dinghai, after the emperor's abdication, ordered the Taiyuan, Hengzhou and Anzhou soldiers to return to their hometowns.

古文：辛卯，马全节攻契丹泰州，拔之。
现代文：辛卯，马全节攻打契丹的泰州，攻取下来。
English: Xinwu, Ma Quanzhong attacked the Khitan Taizhou and captured it.

古文：敕天下籍乡兵，每七户共出兵械资一卒。
现代文：后晋出帝敕令天下按籍征召乡兵，每七户按一个兵卒共同出兵械钱。
English: After he ascended to the throne, he ordered the whole country to conscript local soldiers according to their nationality, and every seventh household was required to contribute one soldier.

古文：秦州兵救阶州，出黄阶岭，败蜀兵于西平。
现代文：秦州兵救援阶州，出黄阶岭，在西平打败了蜀兵。
English: The Qin soldiers came to the rescue of Chaozhou, went out of Huangjialing, and defeated the Shu soldiers in Xiping.

古文：汉以户部侍郎陈偓同平章事。
现代文：南汉任用户部侍郎陈同平章事。
English: The Southern Han Dynasty appointed Chen Tongping Zhangji, a waiter of the user department.

古文：夏，四月，丁未，缘河巡检使梁进以乡社兵复取德州。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁未，缘河巡检使梁进用乡社兵收复了德州。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Wei, the inspection of the Jianhe River made Liang Jin with the township soldiers recover Texas.

古文：己酉，命归德节度使高行周、保义节度使王周留镇澶州。
现代文：己酉，后晋朝廷命归德节度使高行周、保义节度使王周留镇澶州。
English: After the Jin Dynasty, the imperial court ordered Gao Xing Zhou to return to virtue and Wang Zhou to stay in Bozhou.

古文：庚戌，帝发澶州；甲寅，至大梁。
现代文：庚戍，后晋出帝从澶州出发回师；甲寅，到达大梁。
English: Geng Zheng, the Emperor of Later Jin Dynasty, started from Zhangzhou and returned to the division; Gao Yin, arrived at Daliang.

古文：侍卫马步都指挥使、天平节度使、同平章事景延广，既为上下所恶，帝亦惮其不逊难制；桑维翰引其不救戚城之罪，辛酉，加延广兼侍中，出为西京留守。
现代文：侍卫马步都指挥使、天平节度使、同平章事景延广，既已被将相和军民上下所厌恶，后晋出帝也怕他不驯服，难于控制；桑维翰又提出他不救援戚城之罪，辛酉，给景延广加官兼任侍中，出朝任西京留守。
English: The attendants and guards Ma Budu, Commander-in-Chief, Tianping Jiedu, and Tongping Zhang were all hated by the generals and the military and the people. After the emperor was crowned, they were afraid that he would not be tamed and would be difficult to control. San Wei Han also proposed that he would not help the relatives of the city, and he was harshly punished. He was also appointed as an attendant to Jing Yan Guang, and left for West Beijing.

古文：以归德节度使兼侍中高行周为侍卫马步都指挥使。
现代文：任用归德节度使兼侍中高行周为侍卫马步都指挥使。
English: Appointed the Returning Officer of the Festival and the Attendant of the Junior High School, and the Attendant of the Horse Guards, and the Commander of the Horse Guards.

古文：延广郁郁不得志，见契丹强盛，始忧国破身危，遂日夜纵酒。
现代文：景延广郁郁不得志，看到契丹强盛，开始忧虑国家要破败，自身也危亡，便昼夜放纵饮酒。
English: Depressed and discouraged, Jing Yan Guan began to worry that the country would be ruined and that he himself would be in danger when he saw the Khitan in power, and he indulged in drinking day and night.

古文：朝廷因契丹入寇，国用愈竭，复遣使者三十六人分道括率民财，各封剑以授之。
现代文：后晋朝廷由于契丹入侵，国家财用更加困竭，便又遣派使者三十六人分到各道搜括民间财物，每个使者各封赐给上方宝剑，授以斩杀之权。
English: Due to the invasion of the Khitan, the Later Jin court was even more strapped for cash, so it sent 36 emissaries to collect folk treasures. Each emissary was given a sword and the power to kill.

古文：使者多从吏卒，携锁械、刀仗入民家，小大惊惧，求死无地。
现代文：这些使者带着众多的吏卒随从，拿着锁链刑械、刀杖进入民众家里，小孩大人都很惊怕，想要求死都无路可走。
English: These emissaries, accompanied by a large number of officials, entered people's homes with chains, torture instruments, and canes. Children and adults were terrified, and there was no way to go if they wanted to ask for death.

古文：州县吏复因缘为奸。
现代文：那些州和县的官吏又借此机会为非作歹。
English: The officials of those states and counties also took this opportunity to commit crimes.

古文：河南府出缗钱二十万，景延广率三十七万。
现代文：河南府应出缗钱二十万，景延广增加到三十七万。
English: Henan should pay 200,000 yuan, and Jingyuan should pay 370,000 yuan.

古文：留守判官河南卢亿言于延广曰： 公位兼将相，富贵极矣。
现代文：留守判官卢向景延广进言说： 您高位兼居将相，富贵达到极点了。
English: Lu Xiangjing Yanguang, the judge-in-charge, said: You are both a high-ranking official and a general, and your wealth has reached its peak.

古文：今国家不幸，府库空竭，不得已取于民。公何忍复因而求利，为子孙之累乎！ 
现代文：现在国家不幸，府库空乏竭尽，不得已索取于百姓，您怎么忍心再借机贪求私利，给子孙增加罪累啊！ 
English: Now the country is in misfortune, the treasury is depleted and has to be taken from the people. How can you bear to take advantage of the opportunity to seek personal gain and increase the burden of guilt on your children and grandchildren!

古文：延广惭而止。
现代文：景延广惭愧而停止增赋。
English: Jing Yanquan was ashamed and stopped the increase.

古文：先是，诏以杨光远叛，命兗州修守备。
现代文：以前，后晋朝廷因为杨光远背叛，下诏命令兖州修筑守备设施。
English: In the past, because of Yang Guangyuan's betrayal, the Later Jin Dynasty ordered the construction of defensive facilities in Zhangzhou.

古文：泰宁节度使安审信，以治楼堞为名，率民财以实私藏。
现代文：泰宁节度使安审信用建造城防楼堞的名义，搜括民间财物来充实自己的收藏。
English: In the name of the construction of the city defense tower by the Security Inspection Credit, the Tay Ninh Festival collected folk property to enrich its collection.

古文：大理卿张仁愿为括率使，至兗州，赋缗钱十万。
现代文：后晋朝廷大理寺卿张仁愿受派为括率使，来到兖州，收取缗钱十万。
English: Later, Zhang Ren, the Lord of Dali Temple of the Jin Dynasty, was willing to be sent as the chief envoy and came to Zhangzhou to collect 100,000 yuan.

古文：值审信不在，拘其守藏吏，指取钱一囷，已满其数。
现代文：正适安审信不在，拘捕了他的守藏吏，指令取一个库的钱，便满足了所需之数。
English: When he was not there, the official in charge of safekeeping arrested him and ordered him to withdraw money from a bank, and the required amount was met.

古文：戊寅，命侍卫马步军都虞候、泰宁节度使李守贞将步骑二万讨杨光远于青州，又遣神武统军洛阳潘环及张彦泽等将兵屯澶州，以备契丹。
现代文：五月，戊寅，后晋朝廷命侍卫马步军都虞候和泰宁节度使李守贞统领步骑二万人讨伐青州的杨光远，又遣派神武统军洛阳人潘环及张彦泽统兵屯驻澶州，来防备契丹。
English: In May, Wu Yin, ordered by the Later Jin Dynasty court to guard the horse marching army during the Duyu Festival and the Taining Festival, sent Li Shuzhen to lead 20,000 people to fight against Yang Guangyuan in Qingzhou, and sent Pan Huan and Zhang Yanze, Luoyang people of the Shenwu United Army, to be stationed in Zhangzhou to guard against the Khitan.

古文：契丹遣兵救青州，齐州防御使堂阳薛可言邀击，败之。
现代文：契丹派兵救援青州，晋国齐州防御使堂阳人薛可言迎击，打败了他们。
English: Khitan sent troops to rescue Qingzhou, Jin State Qizhou defense envoy Tongyang people Xue Kechuan counterattacked and defeated them.

古文：丙戌，诏诸州所籍乡兵，号武定军，凡得七万馀人。
现代文：丙戌，后晋朝廷诏令诸州所按户籍征调的乡兵，号称武定军，共得七万余人。
English: According to the imperial edict issued by the Later Jin Dynasty, more than 70,000 soldiers were conscripted and transferred according to their household registration, known as the Wuding Army.

古文：时兵荒之馀，复有此扰，民不聊生。
现代文：当时正值兵荒之余，再有这样的困扰，致使民不聊生。
English: At that time, it was a time of war famine, and such troubles caused the people to not enjoy life.

古文：丁亥，鄴都留守张从恩上言： 赵延照虽据贝州，麾下兵皆久客思归，宜速进军攻之。 
现代文：丁亥，邺都留守张从恩上奏后晋朝廷： 赵延照虽然占据贝州，他指挥下的契丹兵卒都是久客在外思归，应该迅速进军攻打它。 
English: Zhao Yan Zhao, although he occupied Bozhou, the Khitan soldiers under his command had been away for a long time and wanted to return, so he should quickly march to attack it.

古文：诏以从恩为贝州行营都部署，督诸将击之。
现代文：诏令任用张从恩为贝州行营都部署，督率诸将进击。
English: The imperial edict appointed Zhang Congen as the commander of the Beizhou encampment, and he led all the generals to attack.

古文：辛卯，从恩奏赵延照纵火大掠，弃城而遁，屯于瀛、莫，阻水自固。
现代文：辛卯，张从恩奏报赵延照放火大肆抢掠，弃城而逃，屯扎在瀛州、莫州，依水设阻，巩固自己的阵地。
English: Xinwu and Zhang from Enso reported that Zhao Yanzhao set fire to and plundered the city, abandoned the city and fled, camped in Zhangzhou and Mozhou, and set up a barrier along the water to consolidate his position.

古文：硃文进遣使如唐，唐主囚其使，将伐之，会天暑、疾疫而止。
现代文：闽国朱文进遣派使者到南唐，南唐主李把使者囚禁起来，将要征伐闽国，正好遇到天气暑热、疫病流行才停止。
English: Zhu Wen of the State of Shandong sent an envoy to South Tang. The lord of South Tang, Li, imprisoned the envoy and was about to conquer Shandong. However, the hot weather and the epidemic only stopped.

古文：六月，辛酉，官军拔淄州，斩其刺史刘翰。
现代文：六月，辛酉，后晋官军攻克淄州，斩杀杨光远的刺史刘翰。
English: In June, in Xinjiang, the post-Jin government army conquered Zhangzhou and killed Yang Guangyuan's assassin Liu Han.

古文：太尉、侍中冯道虽为首相，依违两可，无所操决。
现代文：后晋太尉、待中冯道虽当首相，但办事模棱两可，什么事都不拿主意。
English: Although the late Jin Taifu and the late Zhong Feng Dao were prime ministers, their actions were ambiguous, and they did not make decisions on anything.

古文：或谓帝曰： 冯道，承平之良相；今艰难之际，譬如使禅僧飞鹰耳。 
现代文：有人对后晋出帝说： 冯道是和平时期的好宰相，现在是艰难之际，比如让参禅僧人去飞鹰搏兔，非其所擅。 
English: Some people said to Emperor Hojin: "Feng Dao is a good prime minister in peacetime, but now is a difficult time. For example, he is not good at letting Zen monks fly eagles and fight rabbits.

古文：癸卯，以道为匡国节度使，兼侍中。
现代文：癸卯，任用冯道出朝为匡国节度使，仍兼侍中。
English: At the same time, Feng Daodu was appointed as the imperial envoy to the Qing Dynasty, and he was still a chamberlain.

古文：乙巳，汉主幽齐王弘弼于私第。
现代文：乙巳，南汉主刘晟在他的私宅里幽禁齐王刘弘弼。
English: At this time, the Southern Han ruler Liu Bei imprisoned the Qi king Liu Hongzhi in his private residence.

古文：或谓帝曰： 陛下欲御北狄，安天下，非桑维翰不可。 
现代文：有人对后晋出帝说： 陛下想要抵御北狄，安治天下，非用桑维翰不可。 
English: Some people said to Emperor Go-Jin: "If His Majesty wants to resist the Northern Di and rule the country peacefully, he must use San Wei Han."

古文：丙午，复置枢密院，以维翰为中书令兼枢密使，事无大小，悉以委之。
现代文：丙午，恢复设置枢密院，任命桑维翰为中书令兼枢密使，事情不论大小，都委托给他。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, the establishment of the Privy Council was resumed, and Sanveihan was appointed as the Chinese scribe and envoy, and all matters, big and small, were entrusted to him.

古文：数月之间，朝廷差治。
现代文：几个月之间，朝廷的事稍见治绩。
English: In the space of a few months, the affairs of the imperial court have improved markedly.

古文：滑州河决，浸汴、曹、单、濮、郓五州之境，环梁山合于汶。
现代文：黄河在滑州决口，淹浸了汴、曹、单、濮、郓五州的地区，环绕梁山合流入汶水。
English: The Yellow River flooded the five prefectures of Handan, Cao, Shan, Handan and Handan at the mouth of the Handan River, and flowed into the Wenshui River around the Liangshan Junction.

古文：诏大发数道丁夫塞之。
现代文：后晋朝廷诏命大规模发动几个道的民夫去堵塞。
English: Later, the imperial court of the Jin Dynasty issued an edict to launch a large-scale mobilization of the people's armed forces of several provinces to block the roads.

古文：既塞，帝欲刻碑纪其事。
现代文：堵塞完成之后，后晋出帝要刻碑记载此事。
English: After the blockage was completed, Emperor Go-Jin set up a monument to record the event.

古文：中书舍人杨昭俭谏曰： 陛下刻石纪功，不若降哀痛之诏；染翰颂美，不若颁罪己之文。 
现代文：中书令舍人杨昭俭进谏说： 陛下刻石记功，不如降下哀痛的诏书；点染翰章歌颂美德，不如颁发责备自己的文告。 
English: Yang Zhaojian, Yang Zhaojian's subordinate, said: "It would be better to issue a sorrowful edict than to carve a stone to record the merits of His Majesty; it would be better to issue a message to reproach oneself than to sing the praises of virtue.

古文：帝善其言而止。
现代文：后晋出帝认为他的话说得好而停止。
English: Emperor Wu thought his words were right and did not punish Gaozong.

古文：初，高祖割北边之地以赂契丹，由是府州刺史折从远亦北属。
现代文：从前，后晋高祖石敬瑭割让北边的地盘来贿赂契丹，于是府州刺史折从远也随郡北属。
English: Once upon a time, after the promotion of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors

古文：契丹欲尽徙河西之民以实辽东，州人大恐，从远因保险拒之。
现代文：契丹想把黄河以西的民众全部迁移去充实辽东，府州民众大为惊恐，折从远便据险抗拒。
English: Khitan wanted to relocate all the people west of the Yellow River to enrich Liaodong. The people of Fuzhou were greatly alarmed and resisted dangerously.

古文：及帝与契丹绝，遣使谕从远使攻契丹。
现代文：等到后晋出帝与契丹绝交，派使者谕告折从远让他攻打契丹。
English: After that, Emperor Jinzhi cut off diplomatic relations with Khitan and sent an envoy to tell him to attack Khitan from afar.

古文：从远引兵深入，拔十馀寨。
现代文：折从远率领兵马深入北境，拔除契丹十多个营寨。
English: He led the troops and horses deep into the northern border and uprooted more than ten camps of the Khitan.

古文：戊午，以从远为府州团练使。从远，云州人也。
现代文：戊午，任用折从远为府州团练使，折从远是云州人。
English: At that time, he was appointed as a prefectural regimental drill sergeant. He was a native of Yunnan.

古文：甲子，复置翰林学士。
现代文：甲子，恢复设置翰林学士。
English: On the 24th, Hanlin College was re-established.

古文：戊辰，以右散骑常侍李慎仪为兵部侍郎、翰林学士承旨，都官郎中刘温叟、金部郎中、知制诰武强徐台符、礼部郎中李澣、主客员外郎宗城范质，皆为学士。
现代文：戊辰，后晋出帝任用右散骑常侍李慎仪为兵部侍郎、翰林学士承旨，都官郎中刘温叟、金部郎中、知制诰武强人徐台符、礼部郎中李浣、主客员外郎宗城人范质，都任用为学士。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu's death, Li Shanyi, the right rider of the imperial cavalry, was appointed as the attendant of the military department, and Hanlin was appointed as the scholar of the military department, and Liu Wenqi, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital, the official of the capital

古文：温叟，岳之子也。
现代文：刘温叟是唐明宗时刘岳的儿子。
English: Liu Wenxuan was the son of Liu Yue when he was a monk in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：秋，七月，辛未朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛未朔，实行大赦，改年号为开运。
English: Autumn, July, Xin Wei Shuo, the implementation of amnesty, the change of the year as the start of the operation.

古文：己丑，以太子太傅刘昫为司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：己丑，后晋朝廷任命太子太傅刘为司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: Later, the imperial court of the Jin Dynasty appointed Liu, the prince's great-grandfather, as a subordinate attendant of Siku and a subordinate attendant of Tongping.

古文：八月，辛丑朔，以河东节度使刘知远为北面行营都统，顺国节度使杜威为都招讨使，督十三节度以备契丹。
现代文：八月，辛丑朔，任用河东节度使刘知远为北面行营都统，顺国节度使杜威为都招讨使，督导十三个节度使来防备契丹。
English: In August, at the stroke of midnight, he appointed Liu Zhiyuan as the North Campaign Capital and appointed Dewey as the North Campaign Capital to supervise the thirteen military commanders to prevent the Khitan invasion.

古文：桑维翰两秉朝政，出杨光远、景延广于外，至是一制指挥，节度使十五人无敢违者，时人服其胆略。
现代文：桑维翰两次执掌朝政，调出杨光远、景延广到外藩，到这时统一指挥权，节度使十五人没有敢违抗者，当时人叹服他的胆略。
English: Sang Wichan twice presided over the government of the dynasty, transferred Yang Guangyuan and Jing Yanquan to foreign domains, and unified the command at this time. The strictness made fifteen people not dare to resist. At that time, people marveled at his audacity.

古文：朔方节度使冯晖上章自陈未老可用，而制书见遗。
现代文：朔方节度使冯晖上奏章陈说自己没有老，还可留用，而后晋出帝下制令时没有提到他。
English: Shuo Fang's edict made Feng Yao write a poem saying that he was not old and could still be retained, but he did not mention him when he issued the imperial edict.

古文：维翰诏禁直学士使为答诏曰： 非制书勿忘，实以朔方重地，非卿无以弹压。
现代文：桑维翰用诏旨让入值禁宫的学士拟写答诏说： 不是制令忽略忘记，实在因为朔方是重要之地，不是你没有别人能够弹压得住。
English: Sang Wei Han used the imperial edict to let the academician who had been admitted to the Forbidden City to write a reply to the imperial edict, saying: It is not that the order is ignored and forgotten, it is because Shuo Fang is an important place, it is not that you have no one else to bounce off.

古文：比欲移卿内地，受代亦须奇才。 
现代文：近来考虑把你移调内地，代替你的人也需要奇才。 
English: Recently, they are considering to transfer you to the mainland. The person who replaces you also needs to be a genius.

古文：晖得诏，甚喜。
现代文：冯晖得到诏书，极为高兴。
English: Feng Rong was extremely happy to receive the imperial edict.

古文：时军国多事，百司及使者咨请辐氵奏，维翰随事裁决，初若不经思虑，人疑其疏略；退而熟议之，亦终不能易也。
现代文：当时，军务、国事很繁重，百官及各地使者来请示、报告的人东水马龙，接连不断，桑维翰随事裁决，起初好像是没有经过思虑人们怀疑他有粗疏忽略，但退下来后仔细斟酌，终于没有可改变的。
English: At that time, military and state affairs were very burdensome, and the hundreds of officials and envoys from all over the country who came to request and report were incessant. Sanveighan arbitrated at random. At first, it seemed that there was no deliberation. People suspected that he had grossly neglected, but after careful consideration, there was finally nothing to change.

古文：然为相颇任爱憎，一饭之恩、睚眦之怨必报，人亦以此少之。
现代文：然而他当宰相时颇以自己的爱憎办事，一饭之恩、瞪眼之怨，必定报复，人们因此对他也有非议。
English: However, when he was prime minister, he acted with his own likes and dislikes, and people criticized him for this.

古文：契丹之入寇也，帝再命刘知远会兵山东，皆后期不至。
现代文：契丹入侵时，后晋出帝再次命令刘知远会师到崤山以东，都过期了还没有到。
English: At the time of the Khitan invasion, Emperor Go-Jin again ordered Liu Zhiyuan to send a division to the east of Lushan, but it has not yet arrived.

古文：帝疑之，谓所亲曰： 太原殊不助朕，必有异图。
现代文：后晋出帝怀疑他，对亲近的人说： 太原很不帮助朕，必然有反叛的图谋。
English: Later, Emperor Jin suspected him and said to those close to him: "Taiyuan is not helping me, there must be a rebel plot."

古文：果有分，何不速为之！ 
现代文：如果有当天子的福份，为什么不早点干！ 
English: If you have the blessing of heaven son, why not do it sooner!

古文：至是虽为都统，而实无临制之权，密谋大计，皆不得预。
现代文：到此时虽然任用他为诸军都统，实际上没有施行指挥的权力，密谋军国大事，都不让他参加。
English: At this time, although he was appointed as the leader of all the armies, in fact he did not have the power to command, and he was not allowed to participate in plotting military affairs.

古文：知远亦自知见疏，但慎事自守而已。
现代文：刘知远也自知被后晋出帝疏远，只是谨慎处事自我守护而已。
English: Liu Zhiyuan also knew that he was estranged from the emperor after he was promoted to the throne. He was just being cautious and protecting himself.

古文：郭威见知远有忧色，谓知远曰： 河东山河险固，风俗尚武，士多战马，静则勤稼穑，动则习军旅，此霸王之资也，何忧乎！ 
现代文：郭威看到刘知远有忧虑之色，对他说： 河东地方山川险要坚固，风俗崇尚勇武，此地多产战马，安静的时候勤于农业生产，动乱的时候勇于练习军事，这是成就霸业和王道的依凭，有什么可忧虑的。 
English: Guo Wei saw that Liu Zhiyuan was worried and said to him: "In the east of the river, the mountains and rivers should be strong, the customs advocate bravery, this place is rich in war horses, when it is quiet, it is diligent in agricultural production, and when it is turbulent, it is brave to practice military. This is the basis for the achievement of hegemony and the royal way. There is nothing to worry about.

古文：硃文进自称威武留后，权知闽国事，遣使奉表称籓于晋。
现代文：朱文进自称威武留后，暂时主持闽国事务，派使者呈奉表章向后晋朝廷称藩。
English: Zhu Wenzhin, after claiming to be a mighty warrior, temporarily presided over the affairs of Shandong Province and sent an envoy to present a certificate to the imperial court to claim the domain.

古文：癸丑，以文进为威武节度使，知闽国事。
现代文：癸丑，后晋朝廷任用朱文进为威武节度使，主持闽国事务。
English: Later, the Jin Dynasty court appointed Zhu Wenzhong as the military envoy to preside over the country's affairs.

古文：癸亥，置镇宁军于澶州，以濮州隶焉。
现代文：癸亥，后晋在澶州设置镇宁军，把濮州隶属其下。
English: In the Heian period, the Later Jin Dynasty set up the Zhenning Army in Bozhou and subordinated Bozhou to it.

古文：初，吴濠州刺史刘金卒，子仁规代之；仁规卒，子崇俊代之。
现代文：当初，吴国濠州刺史刘金死后，他的儿子刘仁规代替了他；刘仁规死后，其子刘崇俊代替了他。
English: At first, after the death of Liu Jin, the governor of Bozhou of the State of Wu, his son Liu Renki replaced him; after the death of Liu Renki, his son Liu Chongjun replaced him.

古文：唐烈祖置定远军于濠州，以崇俊为节度使。
现代文：南唐烈祖李在濠州设置定远军，任用刘崇俊为节度使。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty's patriarch Li set up the Dingyuan Army in Bozhou and appointed Liu Chongjun as its commander.

古文：会清淮节度使姚景卒，崇俊厚赂权要，求兼领寿州。
现代文：正遇上清淮节度使姚景死去，刘崇俊用重礼厚赂朝中权要，要求兼领寿州。
English: During the Qing and Huai dynasties, when Yao Jing died, Liu Chongjun bribed the North Korean and Chinese dignitaries with heavy gifts and demanded to be given Shuzhou as well.

古文：唐主阳为不知其意，徙崇俊为清淮节度使，以楚州刺史刘彦贞为濠州观察使，驰往代之；崇俊悔之。
现代文：南唐主假装不明白他的意思，把刘崇俊调迁为清淮节度使，另任楚州刺史刘彦贞为濠州观察使，赶奔濠州代替了他；刘崇俊很后悔。
English: The lord of Southern Tang pretended not to understand his meaning, and transferred Liu Chongjun to the Qing and Huai dynasties as an envoy, and appointed Liu Yanzhen, a historian from Chuzhou, as an envoy to observe Zhangzhou, and rushed to Zhangzhou to replace him; Liu Chongjun regretted it very much.

古文：彦贞，信之子也。
现代文：刘彦贞是吴国刘信的儿子。
English: Liu Yanzhen was the son of Liu Xin of the State of Wu.

古文：九月，庚午朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，庚午朔，发生日食。
English: In September, at the stroke of dawn, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：丙子，契丹寇遂城、乐寿，深州刺史康彦进击却之。
现代文：丙子，契丹入侵遂城、乐寿，深州刺史康彦进击退了他们。
English: He Zi, Khitan invaded Suicheng, Le Shou, and Shenzhou stabbed Yasuhiko to repel them.

古文：冬，十月，丙午，汉主毒杀镇王弘泽于邕州。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙午，南汉主刘晟在邕州把镇王刘弘泽毒死。
English: In winter, in October, on the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, the Southern Han Emperor Liu Bei poisoned the town's king, Liu Hongze, to death in Zhangzhou.

古文：殷主延政遣其将陈敬佺以兵三千屯尤溪及古田，卢进以兵二千屯长溪。
现代文：殷国国主王延政遣派其将陈敬领兵三千屯驻在尤溪及古田，卢进领兵二千屯驻在长溪。
English: Wang Yan Zheng, the ruler of Yin, sent him Chen Jing to lead 3,000 troops stationed in Youxi and Gutian, and Lu Jin to lead 2,000 troops stationed in Changxi.

古文：泉州散员指挥使桃林留从效谓同列王忠顺、董思安、张汉思曰： 硃文进屠灭王氏，遣腹心分据诸州。
现代文：泉州散员指挥使姚林人留从效对同列为官的王忠顺、董思安、张汉思说： 朱文进屠灭了王氏家族，派遣他的心腹之人分别占据各州。
English: The commander of the Quanzhou scouts told Wang Zhongshun, Dong Sian, and Zhang Hansi, who were also officials, that Zhu Wenjin slaughtered the Wang family and sent his henchmen to occupy each state separately.

古文：吾属世受王氏恩，而交臂事贼，一旦富沙王克福州，吾属死有馀愧！ 
现代文：我们这些人世代蒙受王氏的恩惠，却拱手服从奸贼，一旦富沙王攻下福州，我们死有余愧啊！ 
English: We are the people who have been favored by the Wang family for generations, but have surrendered to the traitors. Once King Fusha conquers Fuzhou, we will be mortally ashamed!

古文：众以为然。
现代文：众人认为他说得对。
English: Everyone thought he had a point.

古文：十一月，从效等各引军中所善壮士，夜饮于从效之家，从效给之曰： 富沙王已平福州，密旨令吾属讨黄绍颇。
现代文：十一月，留从效等各自率领军中所要好的壮士，夜晚在留从效家中饮酒，留从效骗诱他们说： 富沙王已经平定福州，有密旨让我们讨拿黄绍颇。
English: In November, some of the best soldiers in the army, such as the retainers, drank alcohol at the home of the retainers at night, and the retainers tricked them into saying: King Fusha has already conquered Fuzhou, and there is a secret plan for us to capture Huang Shaopu.

古文：吾观诸君状貌，皆非久处贫贱者。
现代文：我看诸位的相貌，都不是久居贫贱之人。
English: From the looks of you, you are not people who have been poor for a long time.

古文：从吾言，富贵可图；不然，祸且至矣。 
现代文：听我的话，富贵可以谋求；不然的话，大祸就要临头了。 
English: If you listen to me, you will be rich; but if you do not listen to me, disaster will overtake you.

古文：众皆踊跃，操白梃，逾垣而入，执绍颇，斩之。
现代文：众人都很积极响应，拿起棍棒，跳墙而入，捉住黄绍颇，把他杀了。
English: Many people responded very positively, picked up sticks, jumped into the wall, caught Huang Shapo and killed him.

古文：从效持州印诣王继勋第，请主军府。
现代文：留从效拿着泉州的印信到王继勋的府第去见他，请他出来主持军府的事务。
English: He went to Wang Jixun's residence to meet him and asked him to come and preside over the affairs of the military government.

古文：从效自称平贼统军使，函绍颇首，遣副兵马使临淮陈洪进赍诣建州。
现代文：留从效自称是平贼统军使，用匣子装了黄绍颇的首级，遣派副兵马使临淮人陈洪进捧着送到建州王延政那里。
English: Remaining obedient, he claimed to be an envoy of the Anti-Japanese United Front, packed the head of Huang Shoupo in a box, and sent the deputy envoy, Linhuai Chen Hongjin, to Wang Yanzheng in Jianzhou.

古文：洪进至尤溪，福州戍兵数千遮道。
现代文：陈洪进到达尤溪，福州方面的戍兵数千人挡住道路。
English: Chen Hongjin arrives at Youxi. Thousands of soldiers from Fuzhou block the road.

古文：洪进绐之曰： 义师已诛硃福州，吾倍道嗣君于建州，尔辈尚守此何为乎？ 
现代文：陈洪进骗他们说： 起义的部队已经诛杀福州的朱文进，我正加倍赶路到建州去迎接君王继承人，你们还戍守在这里干什么呢？ 
English: Chen Hongjin lied to them, saying: The insurgent forces have already killed Zhu Wenjin of Fuzhou, I am hurrying to Jianzhou to meet the royal heir, what are you still doing here?

古文：以绍颇首示之，众遂溃，大将数人从洪进诣建州。
现代文：并把黄绍颇的首级给他们看，这些兵众便逃散了，有几员大将跟随陈洪进到了建州。
English: He also showed them the head of Huang Shoupo, and the soldiers dispersed. Several generals followed Chen Hong into Jianzhou.

古文：延政以继勋为侍中、泉州刺史，从效、忠顺、思安、洪进皆为都指挥使。
现代文：王延政任用王继勋为侍中、泉州刺史，留从效、王忠顺、董思安、陈洪进都任为都指挥使。
English: Wang Yanzheng appointed Wang Jixun as a chamberlain, Quanzhou as a historian, and Remaining Servant, Wang Zhongshun, Dong Sian, and Chen Hongjin were all appointed as capital commanders.

古文：漳州将程谟闻之，立杀刺史程文纬，立王继成权州事。
现代文：漳州将官程谟听说这件事后，也杀了刺史程文纬，扶立王继成暂理州府事务。
English: After hearing about this, Zhangzhou General Cheng Moo also killed Zhang Shi Cheng Wenwei, and Fu Li Wang Jicheng temporarily took charge of the affairs of the state capital.

古文：继勋、继成，皆延政之从子也，硃文进之灭王氏，二人以疏远获全。
现代文：王继勋、王继成都是王延政的本家侄儿，朱文进族灭王氏家族时，这两个人由于关系疏远而得以保全。
English: Wang Jixun and Wang Jicheng were both nephews of Wang Yanzheng's own family, and when Zhu Wenjin's clan destroyed the Wang family, these two people were able to survive because of their distant relationship.

古文：汀州刺史许文稹奉表请降于殷。
现代文：汀州刺史许文稹上表章请求顺降于殷国。
English: Tingzhou prince Xu Wenzhong requested the abdication of Yin Province.

古文：十二月，癸丑，加硃文进同平章事，封闽国王。
现代文：十二月，癸丑，后晋朝廷任命朱文进为同平章事、封为闽国王。
English: In December, the Later Jin Dynasty court appointed Zhu Wenjin as Tongping Zhangji and crowned him as the King of Qi.

古文：李守贞围青州经时，城中食尽，饿死者太半。
现代文：李守贞围攻青州已经很长时间，城中食粮用尽，饿死的人有一大半。
English: Li Shouzhen has been besieging Qingzhou for a long time. The city has run out of food, and most of the people have died of starvation.

古文：契丹援兵不至，杨光远遥稽首于契丹曰： 皇帝，皇帝，误光远矣！ 
现代文：契丹的援兵不来，杨光远向遥远的契丹方向叩拜说： 皇帝啊皇帝！把我杨光远耽误了！ 
English: When the Khitan reinforcements did not come, Yang Guangyu bowed to the distant Khitan direction and said: Emperor! Emperor! Yang Guangyu has delayed me!

古文：其子承勋、承祚、承信劝光远降，冀全其族。
现代文：他的儿子杨承勋、承祚、承信劝杨光远投降，以求能够保全家族。
English: His sons Yang Chengxun, Chengyu and Chengxin advised Yang Guangyuan to surrender in order to save the family.

古文：光远不许，曰： 吾昔在代北，尝以纸钱祭天池而沈，人皆言当为天子，姑待之。 
现代文：杨光远不答应，说： 从前我在代北时，曾经用纸钱祭祀天池，纸钱下沉了，人们都说我应当为天子，姑且等待一下。 
English: Yang Guangyuan did not agree, saying, "Once upon a time, when I was representing the North, I used paper money to worship the Celestial Pool. When the paper money sank, people said that I should be the Son of Heaven. Let's wait a bit."

古文：丁巳，承勋斩劝光远反者节度判官丘涛等，送其首于守贞，纵火大噪，劫其父出居私第，上表待罪，开城纳官军。
现代文：丁巳，杨承勋杀了劝杨光远造反的节度判官丘涛等人，把他们的头送到李守贞处，放火大声喧闹，劫持他父亲住到私人宅第，向后晋朝廷上表等待治罪，开城接进官军。
English: In the meantime, Yang Chengxun killed the court magistrate Qiu Tao and others who advised Yang Guangyuan to rebel, sent their heads to Li Shouzhen, set fire to loud noises, kidnapped his father to live in a private house, went back to the court to wait for punishment, and took the official army to Kaesong.

古文：硃文进闻黄绍颇死，大惧，以重赏募兵二万，遣统军使林守谅、内客省使李廷锷将之攻泉州，钲鼓相闻五百里。
现代文：朱文进听说黄绍颇死了，大为恐惧，用重赏招募兵卒二万人，遣派统军使林守谅、内容省使李廷锷统领他们进攻泉州，钲鼓之声相闻达五百里。
English: When Zhu Wenjin heard that Huang Shao was dead, he was very frightened. He used the reward money to recruit 20,000 soldiers, sent the unified army to Lin Shouwen and Li Tingyao, the content provincial envoy, to lead them to attack Quanzhou. The sound of beating drums was heard up to 500 miles away.

古文：殷主延政遣大将军杜进将兵二万救泉州，留从效开门与福州兵战，大破之，斩守谅，执廷锷。
现代文：殷主王延政派大将军杜进领兵二万救援泉州，留从效打开城门与福州兵交战，把对方打得大败，斩了林守谅，捉住李廷锷。
English: King Yan Zheng sent General Du Jin to lead twenty thousand soldiers to rescue Quanzhou, and he opened the city gate to fight with the Fuzhou soldiers, defeated the other side, cut off Lin Shoufeng, and captured Li Tingyao.

古文：延政遣统军使吴成义帅战舰千艘攻福州，硃文进遣子弟为质于吴越以求救。
现代文：王延政派统军使吴成义率领战船千艘攻打福州，朱文进遣派子弟到吴越作人质，向吴越求救。
English: Wang Yanzheng sent a unified army to send Wu Chengyi to lead a thousand warships to attack Fuzhou, Zhu Wen sent his son to Wu Yue as a hostage and asked Wu Yue for help.

古文：初，唐翰林待诏臧循，与枢密副使查文徽同乡里，循常为贾人，习福建山川，为文徽画取建州之策。
现代文：从前，南唐翰林待诏臧循，与枢密副使查文徽是同乡，臧循常作商贩，熟悉福建的山水情况，替查文徽谋划攻取建州的办法。
English: In the past, South Tang Hanlin followed the edict and was a fellow villager of the vice-envoy of the Privy Council, Cha Wenhui. He was a frequent merchant and was familiar with the landscape of Fujian. He planned a way to build a state for Cha Wenhui.

古文：文徽表请用兵击王延政，国人多以为不可。
现代文：查文徽上表南唐主请求用兵攻打王延政，而南唐国中之人大多数认为不可。
English: The Chawen emblem above represents the request of the Southern Tang ruler to attack Wang Yanzheng with soldiers, but most people in Southern Tang believe that it is impossible.

古文：唐主以文徽为江西安抚使，循行境上，觇其可否；文徽至信州，奏言攻之必克。
现代文：南唐主李任命查文徽为江西安扶使，循行在辖境上，来察看是否可行；查文徽到达信州，上奏称攻击它必定能够取得胜利。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Li, appointed Chawen Hui as an envoy to Jiangxi to travel through the territory under his jurisdiction to see if it was feasible; when Chawen Hui arrived in Shinshu, he reported that attacking it would certainly be able to achieve victory.

古文：唐主以洪州营屯都虞候边镐为行营招讨诸军都虞候，将兵从文徽伐殷。
现代文：南唐主便任命洪州营屯都虞候边镐为行营招讨诸军都虞候，领兵随着查文徽讨伐殷国。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty then appointed the Hongzhou Yingtun Duyu to wait for the borderlands to go to the camp to recruit the troops of the Duyuyu, and led the soldiers to fight against the Yin country with the Chawen emblem.

古文：文徽自建阳进屯盖竹，闻漳、泉、汀三州皆隆于殷，殷将张汉真自镛州将兵八千将至，文徽惧，退保建阳。
现代文：查文徽从建阳进屯盖竹，听说漳州、泉州、汀州都降顺于殷，殷将张汉卿从镛州领兵八千将要来到，查文徽害怕，退保建阳。
English: Chawenhui went from Jianyang to Tuengai Bamboo. He heard that Bozhou, Quanzhou, and Tingzhou had all surrendered to Yin. Yin's general Zhang Hanqing was coming from Bozhou to lead eight thousand soldiers. Chawenhui was afraid and withdrew to Jianyang.

古文：臧循屯邵武，邵武民导殷兵袭破循军，执循送建州斩之。
现代文：臧循屯驻邵武，邵武的百姓引导殷兵袭破臧循的军队，抓获了臧循，送到建州后就把他杀了。
English: Gaozhu stationed in Shauwu, the people of Shauwu led the soldiers to attack Gaozhu's army, captured Gaozhu, sent him to Jianzhou and then killed him.

古文：朝廷以杨光远罪大，而诸子归命，难于显诛，命李守贞以便宜从事。
现代文：后晋朝廷由于杨光远罪大，而他的几个儿子却归服朝廷，难于进行过份的诛杀，便命令李守贞斟酌处理。
English: Since Yang Guangyuan's crime was serious, and several of his sons had submitted to the imperial court, it was difficult for the Later Jin court to carry out an excessive killing, so they ordered Li Shouzhen to handle it carefully.

古文：闰月，癸酉，守贞入青州，遣人拉杀光远于别第，以病死闻。
现代文：闰十二月，癸酉，李守贞进入青州，派人把杨光远在他的别宅拉拽出来杀了，上报说是病死了。
English: On the last day of December, Li Shouzhen entered Qingzhou and sent someone to drag Yang Guangyuan out of his second home and kill him. The report said that he died of illness.

古文：丙戌，起复杨承勋，除汝州防御使。
现代文：丙戍，恢复起用杨承勋，授官为汝州防御使。
English: and Yang Chengxun was reinstated as the defense minister of Ruzhou.

古文：殷吴成义闻有唐兵，诈使人告福州吏民曰： 唐助我讨贼臣，大兵今至矣。 
现代文：殷国吴成义听说南唐兵来了，派人告诉福州的吏民、诈称： 唐兵帮助我们讨伐贼臣，大兵现在到了。 
English: When Wu Chengyi of Yin heard that the Southern Tang soldiers had arrived, he sent someone to inform the officials and people of Fuzhou, falsely saying: The Tang soldiers have helped us to fight against the kleptocrats. The soldiers have now arrived.

古文：福人益惧。乙未，硃文进遣同平章事李光准等奉国宝于殷。
现代文：福州人更加恐惧，乙未，朱文进派同平章事李光准等护送国宝给殷国。
English: The people of Fuzhou were even more afraid. Ying Wei, Zhu Wenjin sent Tongping Zhang, Li Guangjun and others to escort the national treasure to Yin Guo.

古文：丁酉，福州南廊承旨林仁翰谓其徒曰： 吾曹世事王氏，今受制贼臣，富沙王至，何面见之！ 
现代文：丁酉，福州南廊承旨林仁翰对他的徒众说： 我们世世代代侍奉王氏，现在受到贼臣的辖制，富沙王来了，有什么脸面见他！ 
English: Ding Yao, Fuzhou South Corridor successor Lin Renhan said to his disciples: We have served the Wang clan for generations, now we are under the jurisdiction of the vassal, the King of Fusha has come, what a face to see him!

古文：帅其徒三十人被甲趣连重遇第，重遇方严兵自卫，三十人者望之，稍稍遁去。
现代文：于是率领他的徒众三十人披上铠甲奔向连重遇的府第，连重遇正用兵卒严密地保卫自己，这三十个人看到如此情状，稍微后退遁走。
English: So he led thirty of his followers, clad in armour, to the house where the company was meeting. The company was defending itself closely with soldiers. Seeing this situation, the thirty men retreated a little and fled.

古文：仁翰执槊直前刺重遇，杀之，斩其首以示众曰： 富沙王且至，汝辈族矣！
现代文：林仁翰手执长槊直奔向前刺连重遇，把他杀了，砍下他的头来示众说： 富沙王将要来到，你们这些人要全家族灭了！
English: Lin Renhan, holding a long scepter in his hand, ran straight forward and stabbed him repeatedly, killed him, cut off his head to show the public and said: King Fusha is coming, you people want to exterminate the whole family!

古文：今重遇已死，何不亟取文进以赎罪！ 
现代文：现在连重遇已死，为什么还不赶快去攻取朱文进来为自己赎罪！ 
English: Now that Lian Mei has died, why doesn't he hurry to capture Zhu Wen and come to atone for his sins!

古文：众踊跃从之，遂斩文进，迎吴成义入城，函二首送建州。
现代文：众人踊跃地跟着他，从而杀了朱文进，迎接吴成义进城，用匣装了朱、连二人的首级送往建州。
English: The crowd enthusiastically followed him, thus killing Zhu Wenjin, welcoming Wu Chengyi to the city, and sending the heads of Zhu and Lianren to Jianzhou in a box.

古文：契丹复大举入寇，卢龙节度使赵延寿引兵先进。
现代文：契丹再次大举入侵，卢龙节度使赵延寿引领兵马在前面先行进发。
English: The Khitans once again launched a large-scale invasion, and the Lulong Festival made Zhao Yanshou lead the soldiers and horses to advance in front.

古文：契丹前锋至邢州，顺国节度使杜威遣使间道告急。
现代文：契丹前锋到达邢州，后晋顺国节度使杜威派人从小道向朝廷告急。
English: The Khitan vanguard reached Zhangzhou, and after the Jinshun National Day, Dewey sent people from the trail to the imperial court.

古文：帝欲自将拒之，会有疾，命天平节度使张从思、鄴都留守马全节、护国节度使安审琦会诸道兵屯邢州，武宁节度使赵在礼屯鄴都。
现代文：后晋出帝准备亲自统兵进行抗拒，但恰好遇上生病，便命令天平节度使张从恩、邺都留守马全节、护国节度使安审琦会合诸道兵马屯驻邢州，武宁节度使赵在礼屯驻邺都。
English: Later, Emperor Jin prepared to personally lead the troops to resist, but when he happened to fall ill, he ordered the Tianping Sect to make Zhang Cong'en and Shidu stay in Maquan, the National Defense Sect to make the Anji and Shuhei Sect soldiers stay in Shuzhou, and the Wu Ning Sect to make Zhao stay in Leitun.

古文：契丹主以大兵继至，建牙于元氏。
现代文：契丹主耶律德光率领大兵接着来到，在元氏建造牙帐。
English: The Khitan lord Yerudoglu came next, leading his soldiers to build a dental clinic in the Yuan dynasty.

古文：朝廷惮契丹之盛，诏从恩等引兵稍却，于是诸军恟惧，无复部伍，委弃器甲，所过焚掠，比至相州，不复能整。
现代文：后晋朝廷惧怕契丹兵力强盛，下诏令张从恩等稍作退却，因此诸军恐惧，不能形成部伍，丢弃兵器铠甲，所过地方都焚烧抢掠，等退到相州时，已无法再作整顿。
English: The Later Jin Dynasty court was afraid of the Qidan's strong military power, and issued an edict ordering Zhang Cong'en and others to retreat slightly. As a result, the armies were afraid, unable to form units, discarded weapons and armor, burned and looted everywhere they passed, and when they retreated to Sangju, they were no longer able to rectify.

古文：齐王中开运二年
现代文：二年
English: Two years

古文：春，正月，诏赵在礼还屯澶州，马全节还鄴都；又遣右神武统军张彦泽屯黎阳，西京留守景延广自滑州引兵守胡梁渡。
现代文：春季，正月，后晋出帝诏令赵在礼回师驻扎在澶州，马全节还师邺都；又遣派右神武统军张彦泽屯驻黎阳，西京留守景延广从滑州引兵把守胡梁渡。
English: In the spring, the first month, Emperor Jin issued an imperial edict ordering Zhao to station his Li Hui division in Ganzhou, and Ma Quanzhong to station his Shandong capital; he also dispatched Zhang Yanze, commander of the Right Shenwu Unification Army, to Liyang, and left Jing Yanguang in West Beijing to lead troops from Slum to guard Hu Liangdu.

古文：庚子，张从恩奏契丹逼邢州，诏滑州，鄴都复进军拒之。
现代文：庚子，张从恩奏报：契丹逼近邢州，后晋出帝下诏，命滑州、邺都再次进军抗拒。
English: Geng Zi, Zhang Cong Enso reported: Khitan approached Luzhou, and then issued an imperial edict, ordering Luzhou and Handan to march again to resist.

古文：义成节度使皇甫遇将兵趣邢州。
现代文：义成节度使皇甫遇领兵赴邢州。
English: The Yicheng Festival made the emperor lead the troops to Bozhou.

古文：契丹寇邢、洺、磁三州，杀掠殆尽，入鄴都境。
现代文：契丹侵犯邢？磁三州，几乎把那里抢光杀尽，然后进入邺都境内。
English: The Khitans invaded the Three Provinces of Xinjiang, occupied and killed almost all of them, and then entered the territory of Shandong.

古文：壬子，张从恩、马全节、安审琦悉以行营兵数万，陈于相州安阳水之南。
现代文：壬子，张从恩、马全节、安审琦将全部行营兵数万列阵在相州安阳水之南。
English: Ren Zi, Zhang Cong En, Ma Quan Jie, and An Ji Jun will all march tens of thousands of battalions in the south of An Yang Shui, Xiangzhou.

古文：皇甫遇与濮州刺史慕容彦超将数千骑前觇契丹，至鄴县，将渡漳水，遇契丹数万，遇等且战且却。至榆林店，契丹大至，二将谋曰： 吾属今走，死无遗矣！ 
现代文：皇甫遇与濮州刺史慕容彦超率领数千骑兵往前方窥测契丹情况，到了邺县，将要渡过漳水，遇上数万契丹兵，皇甫遇等边战边退；到了榆林店后，契丹大队人马来到，皇甫遇与慕容彦超二将谋议说： 我们现在退走，将会死尽无遗了！ 
English: The emperor met with the governor of Luzhou, Murong Yanyao, and led thousands of cavalry to the front to spy on the situation of the Khitan. When they arrived in Luzhou County, they were about to cross the Surabaya River and meet tens of thousands of Khitan soldiers. The emperor met with them and withdrew from the battlefield. After arriving at the Yulin store, the Khitan brigade came. The emperor met with Murong Yanyao and the two generals discussed and said: We will retreat now, we will die!

古文：乃止，布陈，自午至未，力战百馀合，相杀伤甚众。
现代文：便停止退却，布设军阵，从午时到未时，力战百余回合，相互杀伤很多人。
English: They stopped retreating, set up military lines, and fought more than a hundred rounds from noon to night, killing and wounding many people.

古文：遇马毙，因步战；其仆杜知敏以所乘马授之，遇乘马复战。
现代文：皇甫遇的马战死，便舍马进行步战；他的仆人杜知敏把自己骑的马给了他，皇甫遇乘上马再次进行战斗。
English: The horse that the emperor met died in battle, so he took the horse to fight on foot; his servant Du Zhimin gave him the horse he rode, and the emperor met the horse and fought again.

古文：久之，稍解；顾知敏已为契丹所擒，遇曰： 知敏义士，不可弃也。 
现代文：很长时间之后，危困稍见缓解；寻找杜知敏，已经被契丹擒去，皇甫遇说： 杜知敏是个义士，不能丢弃他。 
English: After a long time, the crisis eased slightly; the search for Du Zhimin, who had been captured by the Khitan, was met by the emperor: Du Zhimin is a righteous man, he cannot be discarded.

古文：与彦超跃马入契丹陈，取知敏而还。
现代文：便与慕容彦超跃马杀入契丹军阵，夺取了杜知敏才回来。
English: Then, he and Murong Yan jumped into the Khitan army and captured Du Zhimin before returning.

古文：俄而契丹继出新兵来战。二将曰： 吾属势不可走，以死报国耳。 
现代文：不一会儿，契丹又派出新兵来战，二位将领说： 我们这些人已经不能退走，只能以死报国了。 
English: Soon after, Khitan sent new soldiers to fight, and the two generals said: "We can no longer retreat, we can only die for our country."

古文：日且幕，安阳诸将怪觇兵不还，安审琦曰： 皇甫太师寂无声问，必为虏所困。 
现代文：太阳将要落山，拒守在安阳的诸将奇怪前去探测的兵马不见回来，安审琦说： 皇甫太师一点消息也听不到，必定是被北虏所围困。 
English: The sun was about to set, and although the soldiers and horses guarding the generals in Anyang, who had come out to investigate, had not returned, An Ziqi said: "I can't hear any news from the emperor's father-in-law, he must be besieged by the northern troops."

古文：语未卒，有一骑白遇等为虏数万所围；审琦即引骑兵出，将救之，张从恩曰： 此言未足信。必若虏众猥至，尽吾军，恐未足以当之，公往何益！ 
现代文：话还未说完，有一人骑马来报，说皇甫遇等人被北兵数万人包围；安审琦立即引领骑兵出来，将要去救援，张从恩说： 此话未必可信，假如虏兵真的蜂拥而至，即使把我军全部派出，恐怕也不足以迎战，您去了能有什么用？ 
English: Before the speech was over, a man on horseback came to report that the emperor and his entourage were surrounded by tens of thousands of North Korean soldiers; An Ji Yong immediately led the cavalry out and would go to the rescue, Zhang Cong En said: This is not necessarily credible, if the Krupp soldiers really swarm, even if we send all our troops, I am afraid it will not be enough to fight, what use can you go?

古文：审琦曰： 成败，天也。万一不济，当共受之。
现代文：安审琦说： 成功或者失败，是天意，万一不管事，理当共同承受其后果。
English: "Success or failure is God's will. If things don't work out, we should all bear the consequences together," An Jianjun said.

古文：借使虏不南来，坐失皇甫太师，吾属何颜以见天下！ 
现代文：假如胡虏不继续向南来侵犯，而把皇甫太师白白丢失了，我们这些人有何面目去见天子！ 
English: If the Khuriks do not continue to invade the south, but lose the imperial father-in-law for nothing, what kind of face will we have when we go to see the Son of God!

古文：遂逾水而进。
现代文：于是渡过安阳水而向北进军。
English: So they crossed the Anyang River and marched north.

古文：契丹望见尘起，即解去。
现代文：契丹兵看到烟尘扬起，便马上解围而逃跑。
English: When the Khitan soldiers saw the smoke rising, they immediately broke the siege and fled.

古文：遇等乃得还，与诸将俱归相州，军中皆服二将之勇。
现代文：皇甫遇等才得以回来，与诸将一起返归相州，军中都叹服皇甫遇与慕容彦超二将的勇烈。
English: It was only then that Emperor Hotei was able to return, and he returned to Shoshu together with the other generals. Everyone in the army was in awe of the bravery of Emperor Hotei and General Murong Hiko.

古文：彦超本吐谷浑也，与刘知远同母。
现代文：慕容彦超本是吐谷浑人，与刘知远是同一民族。
English: Murong Yanchao was originally from the Hun people of Tugu, the same ethnic group as Liu Zhiyuan.

古文：契丹亦引军退，其众自相惊曰： 晋军悉至矣！ 
现代文：契丹也引兵退归，其兵众自相惊恐地说： 晋军全部过来了！ 
English: Khitan also withdrew his troops, and his soldiers said to each other in alarm: "The Jin army has all come!"

古文：时契丹主在邯郸，闻之，即时北遁，不再宿，至鼓城。
现代文：当时契丹主正在邯郸，听说后，立即向北遁走，不敢过夜，一直到了鼓城。
English: At that time, the Khitan master was in Kuching. After hearing the news, he immediately headed north to Kuching, not daring to spend the night, and made it all the way to Gucheng.

古文：是夕，张从恩等议曰： 契丹倾国而来，吾兵不多，城中粮不支一旬，万一有奸人往告吾虚实，虏悉众围我，死无日矣。
现代文：当晚，张从恩等议论说： 契丹把全国人马都调发而来，我们的兵不多，城中粮食不足十天之用，万一奸人到契丹那里去报告我军的虚实，虏兵全部调发来包围我们，没多久我们就会死去。
English: That evening, Zhang Cong'en and others argued: the Khitans have brought all the country's men and horses, our soldiers are not many, the food in the city is not enough for ten days, in case the traitors go to the Khitans to report the truth and falsehood of our army, the invaders have all been sent to surround us, we will die soon.

古文：不若引军就黎阳仓，南倚大河以拒之，可以万全。 
现代文：不如引兵去就食黎阳仓，南面依靠大河来抗拒他，方可以得到万全。 
English: It is better to lead an army to attack Liyangcang, and rely on the big river in the south to resist him.

古文：议未决，从恩引兵先发，诸军继之；扰乱失亡，复如发邢州之时。
现代文：议论未决，张从恩带着兵先出发，诸军跟随着也出发；扰乱丢失，又乱得像从邢州出发时那样。
English: With the dispute still undecided, Zhang Cong'en set out with his army in the lead, and the other armies also set out with him; the disturbance was lost, and the situation was as chaotic as it had been when they set out from Zhangzhou.

古文：从恩等留步兵五百守安阳桥，夜四鼓，知相州事符彦伦谓将佐曰： 此夕纷纭，人无固志，五百弊卒，安能守桥！ 
现代文：张从恩留下步兵五百人守护安阳桥，夜间四更时，主持相州事务的符彦伦对将佐说： 今晚乱哄哄，人们没有坚强的意志，五百个疲惫兵卒，怎能守住桥梁！ 
English: Zhang Cong'en left 500 infantrymen to guard the Anyang Bridge. During the four-hour night watch, Fu Yanlun, who presided over the affairs of Xiangzhou, said to General Zuo: Tonight is chaotic, people do not have a strong will, five hundred tired soldiers, how can they guard the bridge!

古文：即召入，乘城为备。
现代文：便把人招进城来，依靠城池做防备。
English: So he invited people into the city and relied on the city walls for protection.

古文：至曙，望之，契丹数万骑已陈于安阳水北，彦伦命城上扬旌鼓噪约束，契丹不测。
现代文：到天亮，一看，契丹数万骑兵已经列阵在安阳水之北，符彦伦命令城上扬动旌旗鼓噪，兵卒都遵守号令，契丹不能测知城中实情。
English: By dawn, it was clear that tens of thousands of Khitan cavalry were already lined up in the north of Anyangshui. Fu Yanlun ordered the banner to be raised over the city. The soldiers all obeyed the order, and Khitan could not detect the true situation in the city.

古文：日加辰，赵延寿与契丹惕隐帅众逾水，环相州而南，诏右神武统军张彦泽将兵趣相州。
现代文：到了辰时，赵延寿与契丹惕隐率领兵众渡水，环绕相州而向南前进，后晋朝廷诏令右神武统军张彦泽率兵趋赴相州。
English: When the hour came, Zhao Yanshou and Qidan Tiyin led the troops across the water and advanced southward around Xiangzhou. Later, the Jin Dynasty ordered Zhang Yanze, the leader of the Right Divine Military Unification Army, to march to Xiangzhou.

古文：延寿等至汤阴，闻之，甲寅，引还；马全节等拥大军在黎阳，不敢追。
现代文：赵延寿等到达汤阴后得到消息，甲寅，又引退；马全节等拥有大军在黎阳，不敢追赶。
English: Zhao Yanshou and others got the news after arriving in Tangyin, and Jia Yin retired again; Ma Quan Jie and others had a large army in Liyang and did not dare to catch up.

古文：延寿悉陈甲骑于相州城下，若将攻城状，符彦伦曰： 此虏将走耳。 
现代文：赵延寿把武装着的骑兵全部列阵于相州城下，好像要攻城的样子，符彦伦说： 这是胡虏将要退走而已。 
English: Zhao Yanshou lined up all the armed cavalry at the foot of the city of Xiangzhou, as if they were going to attack the city. Fu Yialun said, "It's just that the Huns are going to retreat."

古文：出甲卒五百，陈于城北以待之；契丹果引去。
现代文：派出五百全副武装的士卒，列阵在城北用以等待他们；契丹兵果然退走。
English: Five hundred heavily armed soldiers were sent to wait for them in a line north of the city; the Khitan soldiers did indeed withdraw.

古文：以天平节度使张从恩权东京留守。
现代文：后晋出帝任命天平节度使张从恩暂为东京留守。
English: Later, Emperor Jinzei appointed Tenpyo Seito to make Zhang Congun temporarily stay in Tokyo.

古文：庚申，振武节度使折从远击契丹，围胜州，遂攻朔州。
现代文：庚申，振武节度使折从远进击契丹，包围胜州，接着攻打朔州。
English: Goshun, Zhenwu, and Jiedu led the army to attack Khitan from afar, encircle Shengzhou, and then attack Shuozhou.

古文：帝疾小愈，河北相继告急。
现代文：后晋出帝的病情稍见好转，河北相继告急。
English: Later, Emperor Jin's condition improved slightly, and Hebei was in a state of emergency one after another.

古文：帝曰： 此非安寝之时。 
现代文：后晋出帝说： 现在不是安睡之时！ 
English: Emperor Go-Jin said, "Now is not the time to sleep peacefully!"

古文：乃部分诸将为行计。
现代文：便部署分派诸将为出征作准备。
English: They will be deployed and assigned to prepare for the mission.

古文：更命武定军曰天威军。
现代文：更改武定军名为天威军。
English: Change the name of the Wuding Army to the Tianwei Army.

古文：北面副招讨使马全节等奏： 据降者言，虏众不多，宜乘其散归种落，大举径袭幽州。 
现代文：北面副招讨使马全节等奏报： 据投降的人讲，虏众不多，应该乘着他散归部落的时机，大举发兵直袭幽州。 
English: Report: According to the person who surrendered, there were not many captives, so they should take advantage of the opportunity for him to return to the tribe and send a large number of troops to attack Yuzhou.

古文：帝以为然，征兵诸道。
现代文：后晋出帝以为对，便向诸道征兵。
English: Later, he thought it was right to promote himself to emperor, so he conscripted soldiers from various provinces.

古文：壬戌，下诏亲征；乙丑，帝发大梁。
现代文：壬戌，下诏亲征；乙丑，后晋出帝从大梁出发。
English: Rinchen, the next imperial edict, personally led the march; Yixiu, the next emperor, set out from Daliang.

古文：闽之故臣共迎殷主延政，请归福州，改国号曰闽。
现代文：闽国的旧臣一起迎接殷主王延政；请他回福州，改国号为闽。
English: The former vassals of Fuzhou greeted the lord of Yin, Wang Yanzheng, and invited him to return to Fuzhou and change the country's name to Fuzhou.

古文：延政以方有唐兵，未暇徙都，以从子门下侍郎、同平章事继昌都督南都内外诸军事，镇福州；以飞捷指挥使黄仁讽为镇遏使，将后卫之。
现代文：王延政因为南唐兵正在犯境，顾不上迁都，任用他的侄子门下侍郎、同平章事王继昌都督南都内外诸军事，坐镇福州；任用飞捷指挥使黄仁讽为镇遏使，统兵去防卫。
English: Because the Southern Tang soldiers were invading the territory, Wang Yanzheng did not care about moving the capital, so he appointed his nephew, Wang Jichang, the governor of the southern capital, and the military inside and outside the city, to be stationed in Fuzhou. He appointed Huang Renli, the commander of Fei Jie, as the commander of the town, and the soldiers went to defend.

古文：林仁翰至福州，闽主赏之甚薄。仁翰未尝自言其功。
现代文：林仁翰来到福州，闽主王延政对他的赏赐很微薄；林仁翰也没有自己夸耀自己的功劳。
English: Lin Renhan came to Fuzhou, and the reward given to him by the tyrant Wang Yanzheng was very meager; Lin Renhan did not boast of his own merits.

古文：发南都侍卫及两军甲士万五千人，诣建州以拒唐。
现代文：调发南都侍卫及两军甲士一万五千人到达建州，用来抗拒南唐兵。
English: He dispatched the Nandu bodyguards and 15,000 cavalrymen from the two armies to Jianzhou to resist the Southern Tang soldiers.

古文：二月，壬辰朔，帝至滑州，壬申，命安审琦屯鄴都。
现代文：二月，壬辰朔，后晋出帝北征来到滑州，命令安审琦屯驻邺都。
English: In February, after the Emperor Jin left for the Northern Expedition, he came to Slanting and ordered the Anjin troops to stay in Xindu.

古文：甲戌，帝发滑州；乙亥，至澶州。
现代文：甲戌，后晋出帝从滑州出发，乙亥，到达澶州。
English: Jiuquan, after the Emperor Jin departed from Slanting, Yihai, arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：己卯，马全节等诸军以次北上。
现代文：己卯，马全节等诸军按次序北上。
English: Jiwu, Ma Quanzi and other troops marched north in order.

古文：刘知远闻之曰： 中国疲弊，自守恐不足，乃横挑强胡，胜之犹有后患，况不胜乎！ 
现代文：刘知远听说以后说： 中国疲乏困弊，保全自己还怕来不及；怎么能再去胡乱地挑动强盛的北胡，即使打胜了也免不了后患，况且不能取胜啊！ 
English: Liu Zhiyuan was later heard to say: China is exhausted and impoverished, and it is too late to save itself; how can it go on recklessly provoking the powerful Beihu, even if it wins, it cannot avoid the consequences, and moreover, it cannot win!

古文：契丹自恒州还，以羸兵驱牛羊过祁州城下，刺史下邳沈斌出兵击之；契丹以精骑夺其城门，州兵不得还。
现代文：契丹人从恒州还军，用弱兵驱赶着牛羊经过祁州城下，刺史下邳人沈斌出兵攻击他们；契丹用精锐骑兵夺取了城门，州兵回不了城。
English: The Khitans returned from Hengzhou, using weak soldiers to drive cattle and sheep through the city of Zhangzhou, and Shen Bin attacked them; the Khitans captured the city gate with elite cavalry, and the National Guard could not return to the city.

古文：赵延寿知城中无馀兵，引契丹急攻之；斌在上，延寿语之曰： 沈使君，吾之故人， 择祸莫若轻 ，何不早降！ 
现代文：赵延寿知道城中没有余兵，率领契丹兵紧急攻城；沈斌在城上，赵延寿对他说： 沈使君，你是我的老相识， 择祸不如选择轻的 ，为什么不早早投降！ 
English: Zhao Yanshou knew that there were no soldiers left in the city, and led the Khitan soldiers to urgently attack the city; Shen Bin was on the city, Zhao Yanshou said to him: Shen Zikun, you are my old acquaintance, it is better to choose evil than to choose light, why not surrender early!

古文：斌曰： 侍中父子失计陷身虏庭，忍帅犬羊以残父母之邦；不自愧耻，更有骄色，何哉！
现代文：沈斌说： 侍中父子因为失算陷身在胡虏那边，忍心率引犬羊来摧残父母之邦；自己不认为惭愧和羞耻，反而有骄傲的颜色，这是为什么！
English: Shen Bin said: Because of a miscalculation, the waiter and his son were trapped on the side of the hooligans, and they had the courage to lead the dogs and sheep to destroy their parents' country; they did not think they were ashamed and ashamed, but they had a proud color, that's why!

古文：沈斌弓折矢尽，宁为国家死耳，终不效公所为！ 
现代文：沈斌即使弓折矢尽，宁可为国家去死，最后也不能仿效你的所为！ 
English: Even if Shen Bin is at the end of his rope, he would rather die for the country, but in the end he cannot imitate what you have done!

古文：明日，城陷，斌自杀。
现代文：第二天，城池陷落，沈斌自杀。
English: The next day, the city fell and Shen Bin committed suicide.

古文：丙戌，诏北面行营都招讨使杜威以本道兵会马全节等进军。
现代文：丙戌，后晋出帝诏命北面行营都招讨使杜威率领本道兵马会合马全节等共同进军。
English: After the emperor's edict was issued ordering the troops to march to the north, Du Wei led the local troop and horse association and the whole section of horses to march together.

古文：端明殿学士、户部侍郎冯玉，宣徽北院使、权侍卫马步都虞候太原李彦韬，皆挟恩用事，恶中书令桑维翰，数毁之。
现代文：后晋端明殿学士、户部侍郎冯玉，宣徽北院使、权理侍卫马步都虞候太原人李彦韬，都是依靠自己是皇帝而挟恩当权的，他们厌恶中书令桑维翰，多次诋毁他。
English: In the Later Jin Dynasty, the scholar of the Duanming Palace, the attendant of the household department, Feng Yu, the envoy of the Northern Court of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, the authoritative attendant of the guards, Ma Bu, the governor of the capital, and the Taiyuan person, Li Yanqi, all relied on themselves to be the emperor and take the power. They detested the Chinese calligrapher, Sang Wei Han, and repeatedly slandered him.

古文：帝欲罢维翰政事，李崧、刘昫固谏而止。
现代文：后晋出帝想罢免桑维翰的政务，李崧、刘坚持谏阻而停止。
English: Later, Emperor Jinzhi wanted to dismiss Sang Weihan's government affairs, but Li Gan and Liu insisted on resisting and stopped.

古文：维翰知之，请以玉为枢密副使，玉殊不平。
现代文：桑维翰知道后，请求任用冯玉为枢密副使，冯玉很不平。
English: After San Weihan learned of this, he requested the appointment of Feng Yu as a Privy Vice-Envoy. Feng Yu was very unhappy.

古文：丙申，中旨以玉为户部尚书、枢密使，以分维翰之权。
现代文：丙申，御中下旨任命冯玉为户部尚书、枢密使，用以分削桑维翰的权柄。
English: In response, the Central Committee issued an order to appoint Feng Yu as the household secretary and privy councilor, in order to divide the power of San Weihan.

古文：彦韬少事阎宝，为仆夫，后隶高祖帐下。
现代文：李彦韬年少时侍奉阎宝，当仆夫，后来隶属后晋高祖石敬瑭帐下。
English: When Li Yanjun was young, he served Yan Bao as a servant, and later he was subordinate to Zushi Jingyu after he was promoted to a higher rank.

古文：高祖自太原南下，留彦韬侍帝，为腹心，由是有宠。
现代文：石敬瑭从太原南下，留下李彦韬侍奉出帝，成为心腹，从此就受到宠信。
English: Shi Jingyao went south from Taiyuan, leaving Li Yanqi to serve the emperor, becoming a confidant, and has been favored by the emperor ever since.

古文：性纤巧，与嬖幸相结，以蔽帝耳目，帝委信之，至于升黜将相，亦得预议。
现代文：他为人性格琐屑巧黠，与那些由于亵近而获宠的人相勾结，来蒙蔽出帝耳目；出帝依靠信赖他，以至于提升贬降将相，他也能够参与议论。
English: He is a man of subtlety and cunning, who, in collusion with those who are favoured by his nearness, blinds the eye of the king; and the king relies on his confidence, so that when he raises or lowers a general, he is able to take part in the discussion.

古文：常谓人曰： 吾不知朝廷设文官何所用，且欲澄汰，徐当尽去之。 
现代文：他常常对人说： 我不知道朝廷设置文官有什么用，我想把他们淘汰，慢慢地我将要全部去掉他们。 
English: He often said to people: "I don't know what use it is for the court to set up civil servants, I want to weed them out, slowly I will get rid of them all."

古文：唐查文徽表求益兵，唐主以天威都虞候何敬洙为建州行营招讨马步都指挥使，将军祖全恩为应援使，姚凤为都监，将兵数千会攻建州，自崇安进屯赤岭。
现代文：南唐查文徽上表请求增加兵力，南唐主李任用天威都虞候何敬洙为建州行营招讨马步都指挥使，将军祖全恩为应援使，姚凤为都监，统兵数千会攻建州，从崇安进屯赤岭。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty Chawen Hui requested to increase the number of troops in the above table. The Southern Tang Dynasty's Lord Li appointed Tianwei Duyu, He Jingyao to lead the camp for the establishment of Jianzhou, Ma Bu to command the capital, General Zu Quan En to be the auxiliary envoy, Yao Feng to be the supervisor of the capital, and thousands of soldiers to attack Jianzhou, from Chong'an to Chiling.

古文：闽主延政遣仆射杨思恭、统军使陈望将兵万人拒之，列栅水南，旬馀不战，唐人不敢逼。
现代文：闽主王延政派遣仆射杨思恭、统军使陈望领兵万人进行抗拒，排列栏栅在水的南面，十多天不出战，南唐兵不敢进逼。
English: The warlord Wang Yanzheng dispatched his servant Yang Sikyong and the unified army sent Chen Wang to lead ten thousand soldiers to resist. They lined up the railings on the south side of the water and did not fight for more than ten days. The South Tang soldiers did not dare to advance.

古文：思恭以延政之命督望战。望曰： 江、淮兵精，其将习武事。
现代文：杨思恭用王延政的命令督催陈望出战，陈望说： 江、淮的兵是精锐的，将官熟悉用兵。
English: Yang Sikyong used Wang Yanzheng's order to urge Chen Wang to go to war. Chen Wang said: Jiang and Huai's soldiers are elite, generals are familiar with the use of soldiers.

古文：国之安危，系此一举，不可不万全而后动。 
现代文：国家的安危，全在这一仗，不可不万全而后行动。 
English: The safety of the country is at stake in this war, and we must act accordingly.

古文：思恭怒曰： 唐兵深侵，陛下寝不交睫，委之将军。
现代文：杨思恭生气地说： 南唐兵深入侵犯，陛下睡时不能合眼，把事情委托给将军。
English: Yang Sikyong said angrily: The soldiers of Southern Tang invaded deeply. His Majesty could not close his eyes while sleeping and entrusted the matter to the general.

古文：今唐兵不出数千，将军拥众万馀，不乘其未定而击之，有如唐兵惧而自退，将军何面目见陛下乎！ 
现代文：现在唐兵不出数千，将军拥有兵众万余人，不乘他立足未定而进击他，好像唐兵惧怕而自行退走，将军有何面目去见陛下呢！ 
English: Now there are thousands of Tang soldiers, and the general has more than ten thousand soldiers. If you do not take advantage of his indecision and attack him, it is as if the Tang soldiers are afraid and retreat on their own. What kind of face does the general have to see your majesty!

古文：望不得已，引兵涉水与唐战。
现代文：陈望不得已，引兵涉水与唐兵交战。
English: As a last resort, Chen Wang led his soldiers to wade into the water to engage the Tang soldiers.

古文：全恩等以大兵当其前，使奇兵出其后，大破之。
现代文：祖全恩等用大规模的兵众在前面迎击他，而让奇兵袭击他的后面，把他们打得大败。
English: Zu Quan'en and others confronted him in front with a large number of soldiers, and let the strange soldiers attack him behind, and they were defeated.

古文：望死，思恭仅以身免。
现代文：陈望战死，杨思恭只身免于一死。
English: Chen Wang died in the battle, but Yang Sikyong was spared from death.

古文：延政大惧，婴城自守，召董思安、王忠顺，使将泉州兵五千诣建州，分守要害。
现代文：王延政大为恐惧，绕城自守，招唤董思安、王忠顺，使他们率领五千泉州兵赶赴建州，分守要害之地。
English: Wang Yanzheng was very afraid and went around the city to protect himself. He summoned Dong Sian and Wang Zhongshun, and made them lead the Five Thousand Springs National Guard to rush to Jianzhou to guard the key areas.

古文：初，高祖置德清军于故澶州城，乃契丹入寇，澶州、鄴都之间，城戍俱陷。
现代文：起初，后晋高祖在澶州故城设置德清军，等到契丹入侵时，澶州、邺都之间的城守都陷落了。
English: At first, Emperor Gaozu stationed the German and Qing armies in the ancient city of Ganzhou. By the time of the Khitan invasion, the castle between Ganzhou and Ganzhou had fallen.

古文：议者以澶州、鄴都相去五十里，宜于中涂筑城以应接南北，从之。
现代文：人们议论认为澶州、邺都相去一百五十里，应该在中途修筑城防来应接南北，后晋出帝听从了。
English: People argued that Bozhou and Handan were 150 miles apart, and that the city should be fortified halfway to connect the north and south. Later, Emperor Jinzhi agreed.

古文：三月，戊戌，更筑德清军城，合德清、南乐之民以实之。
现代文：三月，戊戌，另筑德清军城，聚合德清、南乐的民众来充实它。
English: In March, the military city of Deqing was built in Wuyi, and the people of Deqing and Nanle gathered to enrich it.

古文：初，光州人李仁达，仕闽为元从指挥使，十五年不迁职。
现代文：以前，光州人李仁达，在闽国做官任元从指挥使，十五年没有迁调职位。
English: In the past, Li Renda, a native of Gwangju, served as an official in the State of Min and was appointed as a commanding officer, but was not transferred to another position for 15 years.

古文：闽主曦之世，叛奔建州，闽主延政以为将。
现代文：王曦做闽主时，反叛投奔建州，王延政做闽主时用他为将领。
English: When Wang Xi was the tyrant, the rebels rushed to Jianzhou, and when Wang Yanzheng was the tyrant, he used him as a general.

古文：及硃文进弑曦，复叛奔福州，陈取建州之策。
现代文：等到朱文进杀了王曦，又叛离了建州投奔福州，讲述了攻取建州的办法。
English: Wait until Zhu Wen killed Wang Xi, and then defected from Jiangzhou to Fuzhou, and described the method of conquering Jiangzhou.

古文：文进恶其反覆，黜居福清。
现代文：朱文进厌恶他的反复，罢黜他留居在福清。
English: Zhu Wenzhong detested his repetitions and ordered him to stay in Fuqing.

古文：浦城人陈继珣，亦叛闽主延政奔福州，为曦画策取建州，曦以为著作郎。
现代文：浦城人陈继，也是叛离王延政投奔福州的，给王曦谋划攻取建州，王曦用他做著作郎。
English: Chen Ji, a resident of Pucheng, also defected from Wang Yanzheng and went to Fuzhou. He gave Wang Xi a plan to capture Jianzhou, and Wang Xi used him as a scribe.

古文：及延政得福州，二人皆不自安。
现代文：待到王延政取得福州后，二人都感到不能自安。
English: After Wang Yanzheng won Fuzhou, both of them felt uneasy.

古文：王继昌暗弱嗜酒，不恤将士，将士多怨。
现代文：王延政的侄儿王继昌镇守福州，为人愚昧懦弱，嗜酒，不体恤爱护将士，将士多有怨恨。
English: Wang Yanzheng's nephew, Wang Jichang, who was in charge of Fuzhou, was a stupid and cowardly person, fond of alcohol, and had no compassion for or love for soldiers. Many soldiers held grudges.

古文：仁达潜入福州，与继珣说黄仁讽曰： 今唐兵乘胜，建州孤危。
现代文：李仁达潜入福州，游说黄仁讽说： 现在唐兵乘胜而进，建州孤立而危险。
English: Li Rinda sneaked into Fuzhou and lobbied Huang Ren, saying sarcastically: Now the Tang soldiers are advancing with victory, Jianzhou is isolated and dangerous.

古文：富沙王不能保建州，安能保福州！
现代文：富沙王不能保全建州，又怎能保护福州！
English: King Fusha can't protect Jiangzhou, how can he protect Fuzhou!

古文：昔王潮兄弟，光山布衣耳，取福建如反掌。
现代文：从前王氏先祖王潮兄弟，不过是光山的小百姓，他们竟易如反掌地取得福建。
English: Once upon a time, the ancestors of the Wang clan, the Wang Chao brothers, were nothing more than commoners from Guangshan. They were able to acquire Fujian with ease.

古文：况吾辈乘此机会，自图富贵，何患不如彼乎！ 
现代文：何况我们遇到如此的机会，自己谋求富贵，何必担心不如他们呢！ 
English: Moreover, when we encounter such an opportunity to seek wealth for ourselves, why should we worry about not being as good as them!

古文：仁讽然之。
现代文：黄仁讽赞成他。
English: Huang Renxi agreed with him.

古文：是夕，仁达等引甲士突入府舍，杀继昌及吴成义。
现代文：当日傍晚，李仁达等引领甲兵突入府舍，杀了王继昌及吴成义。
English: In the evening of the same day, Li Renda and others led armored soldiers to break into the government office, killing Wang Jichang and Wu Chengyi.

古文：仁达欲自立，恐众心未服，以雪峰寺僧卓岩明素为众所重，乃言： 此僧目重瞳子，手垂过膝，真天子也。 
现代文：李仁达想自立为王，又怕众心不服，由于雪峰寺僧人卓岩明素来被民众所推重，便说： 这个和尚有两个瞳子，手长过膝，是真命天子啊。 
English: Li Rinda wanted to become king on his own, but he was afraid of the public's disapproval. Since the monk of Xuefeng Temple, Zhuo Yanming, had always been highly regarded by the public, he said: This monk has two pupils, his hands are longer than his knees, and he is truly a man of destiny.

古文：相与迎之。
现代文：因此共同把他迎接出来。
English: So we all came out to greet him.

古文：己亥，立以为帝，解去衲衣，被以衮冕，帅将吏北面拜之。然犹称天福十年，遣使奉表称籓于晋。
现代文：己亥，立他做皇帝，脱了僧衣，穿戴帝王衮，率领将吏向着北面朝拜他，但还是称为天福十年，遣派使臣向晋廷上表称藩。
English: Ji Hai made him emperor, took off his monk's robes, put on the imperial scepter, and led the generals to bow to him to the north, but it was still called the Ten Years of Heaven's Blessings, and sent envoys to the Jin court to nominate the domain.

古文：延政闻之，族黄仁讽家，命统军使张汉真将水军五千，会漳、泉兵讨岩明。
现代文：王延政听说以后，族灭了黄仁讽家，命令统军使张汉真统领水军五千人，会合漳州、泉州兵征讨卓岩明。
English: After Wang Yanzheng heard of this, he ordered the unified army to send Zhang Hanzhen to lead a naval force of five thousand men to gather soldiers from Bozhou and Quanzhou to recruit Zhuo Yiming.

古文：乙巳，杜威等诸军会于定州，以供奉官萧处钧权知祁州事。
现代文：乙巳，杜威等诸军在定州会合，任用供奉官萧处钧暂时主持祁州事务。
English: At this time, Dewey and other military leaders met in Dingzhou, and appointed the military attaché Xiao Shizhen to temporarily preside over the affairs of Dingzhou.

古文：庚戌，诸军攻契丹，泰州刺史晋廷谦举州降。
现代文：庚戌，诸军攻打契丹，其泰州刺史晋廷谦带领全州投降。
English: Geng Zang, the armies attacked Khitan, and his Taizhou subordinate Jin Tingqian led the entire state to surrender.

古文：甲寅，取满城，获契丹酋长没剌及其兵二千人。
现代文：甲寅，夺取了满城，擒获契丹酋长没剌以及他的兵众二千人。
English: A Yin, captured Manchukuo, captured the Khitan chieftain Muzang and his army of two thousand.

古文：乙卯，取遂城。
现代文：乙卯，夺取了遂城。
English: Otsu, captured Suisho.

古文：赵延寿部曲有降者言： 契丹主还至虎北口，闻晋取泰州，复拥众南向，约八万馀骑，计来夕当至，宜速为备。 
现代文：赵延寿的亲兵有投降的人说： 契丹主归回到虎北口，听说晋兵袭取泰州，又带领兵众向南进军，约有八万多骑兵，预计明晚应当来到，要赶快作准备。 
English: Some of Zhao Yanshou's soldiers who surrendered said, "The Khitan lord has returned to Hubeikou. I heard that the Jin soldiers attacked Taizhou and led the troops to march south. About 80,000 cavalrymen are expected to arrive tomorrow evening, so we should make preparations as soon as possible."

古文：杜威等惧，丙辰，退保泰州。
现代文：杜威等害怕，丙辰，退守在泰州。
English: Dewey and others were afraid, and Bing Chen retreated to Taizhou.

古文：戊午，契丹至泰州。
现代文：戊午，契丹兵到达泰州。
English: At noon, the Khitan soldiers arrived in Taizhou.

古文：己未，晋军南行，契丹踵之。
现代文：己未，晋军向南撤退，契丹兵跟踪而来。
English: Before long, the Jin army retreated to the south, and the Khitan soldiers followed.

古文：晋军至阳城，庚申，契丹大至。
现代文：晋军到达阳城，庚申，契丹兵大举攻来。
English: The Jin army reached Yangcheng, Goshun, and the Khitan soldiers attacked in a big way.

古文：晋军与战，逐北十馀里，契丹逾白沟而去。
现代文：晋军同之交战，向北驱逐他们十余里，契丹跨过白沟而去。
English: The Jin army fought with them and drove them more than ten miles to the north. Khitan crossed the White Ditch and left.

古文：壬戌，晋军结陈而南，胡骑四合如山，诸军力战拒之。
现代文：壬戌，晋军集结成阵列向南行进，契丹兵从四面合围像山岳一样，后晋诸军极力抗拒。
English: In the morning, the Jin army assembled into an array and marched south. The Khitan soldiers surrounded them from all sides like a mountain range, and the Jin army tried their best to resist.

古文：是日，才行十馀里，人马饥乏。
现代文：这一天，只行军十余里，人马饥乏疲惫。
English: On this day, they had only marched more than ten miles, and they were hungry and tired.

古文：癸亥，晋军至白团卫村，埋鹿角为行寨。
现代文：癸亥，晋军到达白团卫村，埋下鹿角柴障安营为行寨。
English: At the end of the Heian period, the Jin army arrived at Baituenwei village, buried the deer antler firewood barrier and set up camp.

古文：契丹围之数重，奇兵出寨后断粮道。
现代文：契丹兵把它包围了好几层，并派奇兵绕到寨后断绝晋军粮道。
English: The Khitan soldiers encircled it over several levels, and sent a special force around the village to cut off the Jin army's food supply.

古文：是夕，东北风大起，破屋折树；营中掘井，方及水辄崩，士卒取其泥，帛绞而饮之，人马俱渴。
现代文：当天傍晚，东北风大起，刮破房屋，摧折树木；晋营中掘井，刚出水便往往崩坍，士兵只好取带水的泥，用布帛拧绞出水来饮用，人和马都很干渴。
English: In the evening of the same day, a strong northeasterly wind blew up, cracking houses and breaking trees. Wells were dug in the camp, and they often collapsed as soon as the water came out. The soldiers had to take mud with water and wring out the water with a cloth to drink. Both men and horses were very thirsty.

古文：至曙，风尤甚。
现代文：到天亮，风刮得更厉害。
English: By dawn, the wind had picked up.

古文：契丹主坐奚车中，令其众曰： 晋军止此耳，当尽擒之，然后南取大梁！ 
现代文：契丹主坐在从奚地取材做的大车中，对其兵下令说： 晋军只此而已，必当把他们全部擒获，然后向南直取大梁！ 
English: The Khitan lord, sitting in a cart made from the materials of the ploughing field, ordered his soldiers: "The Jin army is nothing more than this, you must capture them all, and then head south to take the girders!"

古文：命铁鹞四面下马，拔鹿角而入，奋短兵以击晋军，又顺风纵火扬尘以助其势。
现代文：命令铁鹞军四面下马，拔除鹿角柴障而入营寨，用短兵器袭击晋军，又顺风纵火扬尘以助其声势。
English: He ordered the Tiehong army to dismount on all sides, pull out the antler firewood barrier and enter the camp, attack the Jin army with short weapons, and set fire to the wind to help its momentum.

古文：军士皆愤怒，大呼曰： 都招讨使何不用兵，令士卒待死！ 
现代文：晋军军士都很愤怒，大呼说： 都招讨使为什么不出兵，让士兵们白白送死！ 
English: The Jin Army sergeants were very angry and shouted: "Why don't you send troops and let the soldiers die in vain!

古文：诸将请出战，杜威曰： 俟风稍缓，徐观可否。 
现代文：诸将请求出战，杜威说： 等待风势稍微转缓后慢慢再看可不可以出战。 
English: When generals asked to go to war, Dewey said, "Wait until the wind dies down a little and then see if you can go to war."

古文：马步都监李守贞曰： 彼众我寡，风沙之内，莫测多少，惟力斗者胜，此风乃助我也；若俟风止，吾属无类矣。 
现代文：马步都监李守贞说： 敌兵人多我们人少，风沙之内，看不清谁多谁少，只有奋力作战的人才可以取胜，这个风正好是帮我们的忙；如果等到风停，我们这些人就剩不下了。 
English: Ma Bokdu Prisoner Li Shuzhen said, "The enemy soldiers are more numerous than we are, but in the wind and sand, it is not clear who is more numerous and who is less. Only those who fight hard can win. This wind is just helping us; if we wait until the wind stops, we will not be able to survive."

古文：即呼曰： 诸军齐击贼！ 
现代文：当即大呼： 诸军齐发向贼兵进击！ 
English: He then shouted loudly to the soldiers: "All soldiers and horses should attack the enemy together!"

古文：又谓威曰： 令公善守御，守贞以中军决死矣！ 
现代文：又对杜威说： 令公您善长守卫，我李守贞用中路军与敌人决一死战了！ 
English: He also said to Dewey: "Your honor, let your good officers stand guard. I, Li Shouzhen, have fought the enemy to the death with the middle-of-the-road army!"

古文：马军左厢都排陈使张彦泽召诸将问计，皆曰： 虏得风势，宜俟风回与战。 
现代文：马军左厢都排陈使张彦泽召集诸将问怎么办好，都说： 胡虏现在正得到顺风，应该等到风往回吹时再同他交战。 
English: The left flank of the horse army was all lined up, so Zhang Yanze called the generals together to ask what to do. They all said, "Huru is now getting a tailwind, we should wait until the wind blows back before fighting him."

古文：彦泽亦以为然。
现代文：张彦泽也认为可以。
English: Zhang also agrees with this view.

古文：诸将退，马军右厢副排陈使太原药元福独留，谓彦泽曰： 今军中饥渴已甚，若俟风回，吾属已为虏矣。
现代文：诸将退出，马军右厢副排陈使太原人药元福独自留下，对张彦泽说： 现在军中饥渴已到极点，如果等到风回，我们这些人已经成了俘虏。
English: All the generals withdrew, and Chen Tong, the deputy platoon commander of the right compartment of the horse army, left the Taiyuan person, Yue Yuanfu, alone, and said to Zhang Yanze: Now the hunger and thirst in the army have reached the extreme, if we wait until the wind returns, we have become prisoners.

古文：敌谓我不能逆风以战，宜出其不意急击之，此兵之诡道也。 
现代文：敌人认为我们不能逆风出战，应该出其不意抓紧攻击他，这是用兵的诡诈之道啊。 
English: The enemy thinks that we cannot go to war against the wind, and that we should attack him unexpectedly. This is a cunning way of using soldiers.

古文：马步左右厢都排陈使符彦卿曰： 与其束手就擒，曷若以身徇国！ 
现代文：马步左右都排陈使符彦卿说： 与其束手就擒，不如以身殉国！ 
English: Chen envoy Fu Yanqing said, "It is better to die for the country than to die with your hands tied!"

古文：乃与彦泽、元福及左厢都排陈使皇甫遇引精骑出西门击之，诸将继至。
现代文：便与张彦泽、药元福及左厢都排陈使皇甫遇带领精锐骑兵出西门进击契丹，诸将接着也跟上来了。
English: Then, together with Zhang Yanze, Yue Yuan Fu and the left compartment, they all lined up to send Emperor Fu Rong to lead the elite cavalry out of the West Gate to attack Khitan, and the generals also followed.

古文：契丹却数百步。
现代文：契丹兵退却几百步。
English: The Khitan soldiers retreated a few hundred paces.

古文：彦卿等谓守贞曰： 且曳队往来乎？直前奋击，以胜为度乎？ 
现代文：符彦卿等对李守贞说： 是拉着队伍往来游弋呢，还是一直向前进击，直到打胜为止呢？ 
English: Fu Yanqing and the others said to Li Shouzhen, "Do you lead the team to travel back and forth, or do you keep moving forward until you win?"

古文：守贞曰： 事势如此，安可回鞚！
现代文：李守贞说： 事情已经到了这个地步，怎么能够调转马头！
English: Li Shouzhen said, "Things have come to this stage, how can we turn things around!

古文：宜长驱取胜耳！ 
现代文：应该长驱直进取得胜利才作罢。 
English: You have to go all the way to win.

古文：彦卿等跃马而去，风势益甚，昏晦如夜，彦卿等拥万馀骑横击契丹，呼声动天地，契丹大败而走，势如崩山。
现代文：符彦卿等跃马而去，风势更加厉害，昏暗得像黑夜。符彦卿等率领一万多骑兵横冲契丹军阵，呼声震动天地，契丹兵大败而走，势如山倒。
English: Lord Fuhiko and others galloped away, the wind became more violent, and it was dark as night. Lord Fuhiko and others led more than ten thousand cavalrymen to rampage through the Khitan army, the cries shook the heavens and the earth, and the Khitan soldiers were defeated and went away.

古文：李守贞亦令步兵尽拔鹿角出斗，步骑俱进，逐北二十馀里。
现代文：李守贞命令步兵把鹿角都拔去，出阵战斗，步兵和骑兵同时进击，把契丹兵向北驱逐二十余里。
English: Li Shouzhen ordered the infantry to pull out the antlers and go into battle. The infantry and cavalry advanced at the same time and drove the Khitan soldiers northward for more than twenty miles.

古文：铁鹞既下马，苍皇不能复上，皆委弃马及铠仗蔽地。
现代文：契丹的铁鹞军下马之后，仓皇之间来不及再上马，把马和铠甲兵仗丢弃得遍地都是。
English: After Khitan's Spade Army dismounted, the emperor was too late to mount his horse again, and the horses and armored soldiers were abandoned everywhere.

古文：契丹散卒至阳城东南水上，稍复布列。
现代文：契丹溃散的兵卒到了阳城东南水上，稍微整复了阵列。
English: The scattered soldiers of Khitan arrived on the water southeast of Yangcheng and slightly restored the array.

古文：杜威曰： 贼已破胆，不宜更令成列！ 
现代文：杜威说： 贼兵已经破胆，不能再让他布成阵列！ 
English: Dewey said, "The brigand has lost his nerve; he can no longer be arrayed!"

古文：遣精骑击之，皆渡水去。契丹主乘奚车走十馀里，追兵急，获一橐驼，乘之而走。
现代文：于是派出精锐骑兵追击他们，契丹兵都渡水逃去，契丹主乘坐奚车奔逃十余里，追兵紧急，捉获一匹骆驼，骑上它逃走。
English: So they sent out elite cavalry to chase them. The Khitan soldiers all fled across the water. The Khitan lord fled more than ten miles in a carriage. He chased the soldiers urgently, caught a camel, rode it and fled.

古文：诸将请急追之。
现代文：晋军诸将请求急速追赶他们。
English: The Jin generals requested that they be pursued quickly.

古文：杜威扬言曰： 逢贼幸不死，更索衣囊邪？ 
现代文：杜威扬言说： 遇上敌人幸而没有死掉，还想进一步索求衣囊吗？ 
English: Dewey threatened: "If you meet an enemy and are lucky enough not to die, do you still want to further claim the bag?

古文：李守贞曰： 两日人马渴甚，今得水饮之，皆足重，难以追寇，不若全军而还。 
现代文：李守贞说： 两天来人和马都渴极了，现在喝上了水，都饱足了而且身子加重，难以追奔，不如保全军队还师。 
English: Li Shouzhen said, "For the past two days, both men and horses have been extremely thirsty. Now that they have drunk water, they are satiated and their bodies have become heavier. It is difficult to run after them. It is better to preserve the army and return the division."

古文：乃退保定州。
现代文：于是退守定州。
English: As a result, he retreated to Dingzhou.

古文：契丹主至幽州，散兵稍集；以军失利，杖其酋长各数百，唯赵延寿得免。
现代文：契丹主到达幽州，逃散的兵众稍见集聚；因为打仗失利，把酋长们各打军杖数百，只有赵延寿得以免打。
English: The Khitan lord arrived in Yuzhou, and the scattered soldiers gathered at a glance; because of the defeat in the war, the chiefs were beaten with hundreds of scepters, and only Zhao Yanshou was spared.

古文：乙丑，诸军自定州引归。
现代文：乙丑，诸军从定州引还。
English: In the second battle, the troops were brought back from Dingzhou.

古文：诏以泰州隶定州。
现代文：后晋出帝诏命把泰州归属于定州。
English: Later, Emperor Jinzhi issued an imperial edict assigning Taizhou to Dingzhou.

古文：夏，四月，辛巳，帝发澶州，甲申，还大梁。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛巳，后晋出帝从澶州出发；甲申，回到大梁。
English: In the summer, in April, Xin Si and Hou Jin Di set out from Bozhou; Jia Shen returned to Dalian.

古文：己丑，复以鄴都为天雄军。
现代文：己丑，恢复邺都为天雄军镇所。
English: Jiuxiu and Jiuquan were restored as Tianxiong's military towns.

古文：闽张汉真至福州，攻其东关。
现代文：闽国张汉真到达福州，向东关进攻。
English: Zhang Hanzhen of Shan State arrived in Fuzhou and attacked Dongguan.

古文：黄仁讽闻其家夷灭，开门力战，大破闽兵，执汉真，入城，斩之。
现代文：黄仁讽听说他的全家被杀灭，开门力战，大破闽兵，抓住张汉真，进城杀了他。
English: Huang Renzhong heard that his whole family had been killed, opened the door and fought hard, defeated the soldiers, caught Zhang Hanzhen, entered the city and killed him.

古文：卓岩明无它方略，但于殿上噀水散豆，作诸法事而已。
现代文：卓岩明没有别的方略，只会在殿上喷水撒豆，作种种法事而已。
English: Zhuo Yiming had no other strategy but to sprinkle water and sprinkle beans on the hall and perform various rituals.

古文：又遣使迎其父于莆田，尊为太上皇。
现代文：又派人到莆田，迎接他的父亲，尊为太上皇。
English: He also sent someone to Putian to welcome his father, revered as the last emperor.

古文：李仁达既立岩明，自判六军诸卫事，使黄仁讽屯西门，陈继珣屯北门。
现代文：李仁达挟立卓岩明之后，自已判领六军诸卫的事务，让黄仁讽屯驻西门，陈继屯驻北门。
English: After Li Rinda appointed Zhuo Yanming, he himself decided to take over the affairs of the six military guards, and let Huang Renshi stay in the West Gate and Chen Jitun stay in the North Gate.

古文：仁讽从容谓继珣曰： 人之所以为人，以有忠、信、仁、义也。
现代文：黄仁讽从容地对陈继说： 人之所以为人，是因为有忠、信、仁、义。
English: Huang Ren calmly said to Chen Ji: People are human because they have loyalty, faith, benevolence and righteousness.

古文：吾顷尝有功于富沙，中间叛之，非忠也；人以从子托我而与人杀之，非信也；属者与建兵战，所杀皆乡曲故人，非仁也；弃妻子，使人鱼肉之，非义也。
现代文：我以前有功于富沙王，中间叛离了他，这是不忠；人家把侄儿托付给我而同别人一起把他杀了，这是不信；下属们与建州兵作战，所杀的都是同乡故人，这是不仁；抛弃妻子儿女，让人像鱼肉一样给宰杀了，这是不义。
English: In the past, I had rendered services to King Fusha, but I betrayed him in the middle, which is disloyalty; people entrusted their nephew to me and killed him together with others, which is disbelief; subordinates fought against the National Guard, and all those killed were fellow countrymen, which is unkindness; abandoning one's wife and children, and having them slaughtered like fish, which is injustice.

古文：此身十沉九浮，死有馀愧！ 
现代文：我这个人十沉九浮，死有余愧啊！ 
English: I'm a man of many faces, and I'm ashamed to die!

古文：因拊膺恸哭。
现代文：因而捧胸大哭。
English: So she burst into tears.

古文：继珣曰： 大丈夫徇功名，何顾妻子！
现代文：陈继说： 大丈夫为了功名而死，哪里顾得上老婆孩子！
English: Chen Ji said, "It's okay for a husband to die for the sake of fame, but how can he take care of his wife and children!"

古文：宜置此事，勿以取祸。 
现代文：应该把这个事放在一边，不要因此而取祸。 
English: This should be put to one side and not made an issue of.

古文：仁达闻之，使人告仁讽、继珣谋反，皆杀之。
现代文：李仁达听说后，指使人告黄仁讽、陈继阴谋造反，把他们都杀了。
English: After hearing this, Li Renda ordered people to accuse Huang Rengni and Chen Jie of plotting to rebel, and killed them all.

古文：由是兵权尽归仁达。
现代文：从此兵权全部归于李仁达。
English: From then on, all military power was vested in Li Renda.

古文：五月，丙申朔，大赦。
现代文：五月，丙申朔，后晋实行大赦。
English: In May, Cui Shengshuo and Hou Jin were granted amnesty.

古文：顺国节度使杜威，久镇恒州，性贪残，自恃贵戚，多不法。
现代文：顺国节度使杜威，镇守恒州很长时间了，性情贪婪残酷，自己依仗是皇室贵戚，常常不守法纪。
English: Due to the Shun Guo Festival, Dewey had been guarding Hengzhou for a long time. His temperament was greedy and cruel. He was a member of the royal family and often did not abide by the law.

古文：每以备边为名，敛吏民钱帛以充私藏。
现代文：时常用边境设防的名义，搜刮官吏、百姓的金钱布帛，用来充实自己的私人腰包。
English: In the name of fortifying the border, they often used to extort money from officials and ordinary people to enrich their own personal pockets.

古文：富室有珍货或名姝、骏马，皆虏取之；或诬以罪杀之，籍没其家。
现代文：富有人家有了珍贵的东西或者出色的美女、好马，都掠夺过来；或者诬加罪名把人杀了，没收他的家产。
English: If a rich man had something precious, or a beautiful woman, or a fine horse, they would plunder it; or they would kill the man on false charges and confiscate his property.

古文：又畏懦过甚，每契丹数十骑入境，威已闭门登陴；或数骑驱所掠华人千百过城下，威但真目延颈望之，无意邀取。
现代文：但他又畏缩怯懦得十分严重，每当契丹几十个骑兵入境，杜威已经关上城门登临高台，或者几个敌人骑兵驱赶着所俘掠千百个中原人从城下经过时，杜威只能睁大眼睛伸长颈项看着，没有阻劫夺取的意思。
English: But he also cowered and was very cowardly. Whenever dozens of Khitan cavalry entered the city and Dewey had already closed the city gates and mounted the dais, or when a few enemy cavalrymen drove the hundreds of plundered Central Plainsmen from under the city, Dewey could only watch with his eyes wide open and his neck stretched out, with no intention of blocking the capture.

古文：由是虏无所忌惮，属城多为所屠，威竟不出一卒救之，千里之间，暴骨如莽，村落殆尽。
现代文：因此，北虏无所忌惮，所辖属的城池常常被虏兵所屠掠，杜威竟然不出一兵一卒去救援，千里之间，尸骨暴露在荒野像草莽一样，村落人家几乎没有了。
English: As a result, the Northern Ruthenians had no scruples. The cities under their jurisdiction were often pillaged by the Ruthenian soldiers. Dewey did not even send a single soldier to rescue them. Thousands of miles away, the corpses were exposed in the wilderness like grass, and there were almost no villages left.

古文：威见所部残弊，为众所怨，又畏契丹之强，累表请入朝，帝不许；威不俟报，遽委镇入朝，朝廷闻之，惊骇。
现代文：杜威看到自己所管辖的部属残破败弊，被众人怨恨又畏惧契丹的强盛，连续上表请求入朝为官，后晋出帝没有答应；杜威不等上报，突然放下军镇入朝，朝廷听说后，很惊怕。
English: Dewey saw that the subordinates under his jurisdiction were in a state of ruin and failure, and was both resented and feared by the people for the strength of the Khitan. He repeatedly requested to enter the court as an official, but the emperor did not agree; Dewey did not wait for the report, suddenly put down the military camp and entered the court, and the court was very frightened after hearing about it.

古文：桑维翰言于帝曰： 威固违朝命，擅离边镇。
现代文：桑维翰对后晋出帝上言说： 杜威顽固地违抗朝廷的命令，擅自离开边镇。
English: Sanveighan said to Emperor Go-Jin: Dewey stubbornly defied the order of the imperial court and left the border town without authorization.

古文：居常凭恃勋亲，邀求姑息，及疆场多事，曾无守御之意；宜因此时废之，庶无后患。 
现代文：平时往往依恃自己是勋爵旧臣而姑息满足他的非份贪求，等到边疆战场多事时，不曾有过守土御敌的表示；应该乘此时罢免废除了他，免得以后发生祸患。 
English: In ordinary times, he often thought of himself as the lord's former vassal and indulged his unreasonable cravings. However, when there were many events on the frontier battlefield, he did not have the expression of defending the land against the enemy; he should be dismissed and abolished at this time, so as to avoid future disasters.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：后晋出帝不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：维翰曰： 陛下不忍废之，宜授以近京小镇，勿复委以雄籓。 
现代文：桑维翰说： 陛下不忍心废除他，应该授给他近京的小镇，不要委任他去辖领雄藩大镇。 
English: Sanveighan said: His Majesty cannot bear to abolish him. He should be given a small town near the capital, rather than appointing him to govern a large town of the Xiong clan.

古文：帝曰： 威，朕之密亲，必无异志；但宋国长公主切欲相见耳，公勿以为疑！ 
现代文：后晋出帝说： 杜威是朕的至密亲戚，一定不会有二心；只是宋国长公主急切想和他相见而已，先生不要对他产生疑惑！ 
English: Emperor Go-Jin said, "Du Wei is my closest relative, there will be no hard feelings; it's just that the First Lady of Song eagerly wants to meet him. Sir, don't have any doubts about him!"

古文：维翰自是不敢复言国事，以足疾辞位。
现代文：桑维翰从此不敢再议论国事，以脚有病辞谢去位。
English: From then on, Sanveikhan no longer dared to discuss state affairs and abdicated the throne due to a foot ailment.

古文：丙辰，威至大梁。
现代文：丙辰，杜威到达大梁。
English: Bing Chen and Dewey reach the girder.

古文：丁巳，李仁达大阅战士，请卓岩明临视。
现代文：丁巳，闽国李仁达大规模检阅战士，请卓岩明亲临视察。
English: Ding Si, Li Renda of Shan State, a large-scale review of soldiers, asked Zhuo Yuming to come and inspect in person.

古文：仁达阴教军士突前登阶，刺杀岩明。
现代文：李仁达暗中教唆军士突然上前，登上台阶，刺杀卓岩明。
English: Li Renda secretly instigated the sergeant to suddenly come forward, climb the steps, and assassinate Zhuo Yiming.

古文：仁达阳惊，狼狈而走。军士共执仁达，使居岩明之坐。
现代文：李仁达假作惊恐，狼狈而走；军士们一起架着李仁达，让他坐在卓岩明的位置上。
English: Li Renda pretended to be alarmed and walked away in disarray; the sergeants held Li Renda together and made him sit in Zhuo Yiming's place.

古文：仁达乃自称威武留后，用保大年号，奉表称籓于唐，亦遣使入贡于晋；并杀岩明之父。
现代文：李仁达便自称威武留后，用保大的年号，向南唐上表称藩，也派使臣向后晋入贡；并且杀了卓岩明的父亲。
English: Li Rinda then claimed to be a mighty warrior and, using Bao Da's era name, went to Southern Tang to claim the domain. He also sent envoys to pay tribute; and he killed Zhuo Yanming's father.

古文：唐以仁达为威武节度使、同平章事，赐名弘义，编之属籍。
现代文：南唐任命李仁达为威武节度使、同平章事，赐名弘义，把他编入李氏属籍。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty appointed Li Renda as the powerful military envoy of the Qing Dynasty, and gave him the name of Hongyi and made him a member of the Li clan.

古文：弘义又遣使修好于吴越。
现代文：李弘义又派使者向吴越修好。
English: Li Hongyi also sent an envoy to Wu Yue to mend fences.

古文：己未，杜威献部曲步骑合四千人并铠仗，庚申，又献粟十万斛、刍二十万束，云皆在本道。
现代文：己未，杜威向后晋朝廷献上部曲步兵和骑兵共计四千人及配备用的铠甲兵仗，庚申，又献粟十万斛，刍草二十万束，说这些东西都在镇守的本道。
English: Before long, Dewey presented to the Jin court a total of four thousand soldiers and cavalry from the upper part of the war, as well as armored soldiers and horses for equipment, and also offered one hundred thousand cormorants and two hundred thousand bunches of rushes, saying that these things were the true way of the town guard.

古文：帝以其所献骑兵隶扈圣，步兵隶护国，威复请以为牙队，而禀赐皆仰县官。
现代文：后晋出帝把他所献的骑兵隶属于扈圣军，步兵隶属于护国军，杜威又请求把这些兵马作为自己的军队，而他们的粮秣供给都由朝廷担负。
English: Later, Emperor Jinzhi subordinated the cavalry he had offered to the Sacred Army, and the infantry to the National Guard. Dewey also requested that these soldiers and horses be used as his own army, and that their food and supplies be borne by the imperial court.

古文：威又令公主白帝，求天雄节钺，帝许之。
现代文：杜威又让宋国长公主向出帝表示，请求让他充任天雄节度使，出帝应许了。
English: Dewey also asked the eldest princess of Song to express her request to the emperor, asking him to act as the messenger of Tianxiong, and the emperor promised.

古文：唐兵围建州，屡破泉州兵。
现代文：南唐兵包围建州，屡次打败泉州兵。
English: Southern Tang soldiers encircled Jianzhou and repeatedly defeated Quanzhou soldiers.

古文：许文稹败唐兵于汀州，执其将时厚卿。
现代文：许文稹在汀州把南唐兵打败，捉住南唐将领时厚卿。
English: Xu Wenzhong defeated the Southern Tang soldiers in Tingzhou and captured the Southern Tang general Shi Houqing.

古文：六月，癸酉，以杜威为天雄节度使。
现代文：六月，癸酉，后晋出帝任命杜威为天雄节度使。
English: In June, Emperor Go-Jin appointed Dewey as the envoy of the Tianxiong Festival.

古文：契丹连岁入寇，中国疲于奔命，边民涂地；契丹人畜亦多死，国人厌苦之。
现代文：契丹连年入侵，中原疲于奔命，边民受尽苦难；契丹的人和牲畜也死了许多，他的民众对这种状况也厌恶和痛苦。
English: Year after year, the Khitans invaded, the Central Plains were exhausted from running for their lives, and the border people suffered greatly; many of the Khitans' people and livestock also died, and his people were disgusted and pained by this situation.

古文：述律太后谓契丹主曰： 使汉人为胡主，可乎？ 
现代文：述律太后对契丹主说： 让汉人来当胡人皇帝行不行？ 
English: The Dowager Empress Su Li said to the Khitan lord: Is it possible for a Han to become a Hu emperor?

古文：曰： 不可。 
现代文：回答说： 不行！ 
English: No, you can't.

古文：太后曰： 然则汝何故欲为汉主？ 
现代文：太后说： 那末你为什么要当汉人的皇帝？ 
English: The empress dowager said: Then why do you want to be the emperor of the Han people?

古文：曰： 石氏负恩，不可容。 
现代文：回答说： 姓石的辜负了对他们的恩义，不能容忍。 
English: He replied, "I can't tolerate the fact that a person with the surname of Shi has betrayed my gratitude to them.

古文：太后曰： 汝今虽得汉地，不能居也；万一蹉跌，悔何所及！ 
现代文：太后说： 你现在虽然取得了汉地，不能居留；万一有了差失，后悔也来不及！ 
English: The empress dowager said: Although you have obtained Han citizenship, you can't stay. If you make a mistake, you won't have time to regret it!

古文：又谓其群下曰： 汉儿何得一向眠！
现代文：又对她的下属众人说： 汉儿哪曾得到过睡一晌好觉！
English: She also said to her subordinates: "Han Er has never had a good night's sleep!

古文：自古但闻汉和蕃，未闻蕃和汉。
现代文：自古只听说汉来和蕃，没有听说过蕃和汉。
English: Since ancient times, people have only heard of the Han Dynasty and the Zhou Dynasty, but not the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉儿果能回意，我亦何惜与和！ 
现代文：汉儿如果能回心转意，我们又何必吝惜与他和好！ 
English: If Han Er can change his mind, why should we begrudge him a reconciliation!

古文：桑维翰屡劝帝复请和于契丹以纾国患，帝假开封军将张晖供奉官，使奉表称臣诣契丹，卑辞谢过。
现代文：桑维翰屡次劝后晋出帝仍然请和于契丹以缓解国家的祸患，后晋出帝借助于开封军将张晖供奉官，让他奉表称臣前去契丹，用谦卑的语言谢过。
English: Sanveihan repeatedly advised the emperor to make peace with Khitan in order to alleviate the country's woes, and the emperor, with the help of the Kaifeng army, offered Zhang Qian to serve as an official, let him go to Khitan as a vassal, and thanked him with humble words.

古文：契丹主曰： 使景延广、桑维翰自来，仍割镇、定两道隶我，则可和。 
现代文：契丹主说： 让景延广、桑维翰亲自来，仍然割让镇州、定州两道归属于我国，就可以和。 
English: The Khitan lord said: Let Jing Yan Guang and San Wei Han come in person, and still cede the two provinces of Zhenzhou and Dingzhou to our country, and we can make peace.

古文：朝廷以契丹语忿，谓其无和意，乃止。
现代文：后晋朝廷认为契丹讲话愤慨，说他没有和意，便停止了。
English: The court of the Later Jin Dynasty considered Khitan's speech to be indignant, saying that he had no intention of making peace, and then stopped.

古文：及契丹主入大梁，谓李崧等曰： 曏使晋使再来，则南北不战矣。 
现代文：后来契丹主耶律德光入主大梁时对李崧等说： 如果当时晋国使者再来我国，那就南北不战了。 
English: Later, when the leader of the Khitan, Yerut Deqin, ascended to the throne, he said to Li Xi et al.: If the envoy of the Jin dynasty had come to our country at that time, then there would have been no war between the North and the South.

古文：秋，七月，闽人或告福州援兵谋叛，闽主延政收其铠仗，遣还，伏兵于隘，尽杀之，死者八千馀人，脯其肉以归为食。
现代文：秋季，七月，闽国有人告发福州赴建州支援的兵众谋反，闽主王延政收缴了他们的铠甲兵器，遣送回福州，设伏兵在归路隘口，全部把他们杀了，死的人有八千多，把他们的肉做成肉脯带回作食品。
English: In the autumn, in July, some people in Fuzhou accused the soldiers who went to Fuzhou to support Jianzhou of plotting a rebellion. The tyrant Wang Yanzheng confiscated their armored weapons, sent them back to Fuzhou, set an ambush at the return pass, killed them all, more than eight thousand people died, and brought their meat back as meat.

古文：唐边镐拔镡州，查文徽之党魏岑、冯延己、延鲁以师出有功，皆踊跃赞成之。
现代文：南唐边镐攻克镡州，查文徽的党羽岑、冯延己、冯延鲁由于师出有功，都欢欣鼓舞地表示赞成。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty conquered Kechengzhou, and the party leaders of Chawenhui, Feng Yanji and Feng Yanlu, all expressed their approval with joy and encouragement due to their outstanding achievements.

古文：征求供亿，府库为之耗竭，洪、饶、抚、信之民尤苦之。
现代文：征调搜求的供应和赏赐，府库都耗竭完了，洪、饶、抚、信诸州的民众尤其蒙受苦难。
English: The supply and reward of solicitation and search have exhausted the government treasury, and the people of Hong, Rao, Fuzhou and Xinzhou have suffered in particular.

古文：延政遣使奉表称臣于吴越，请为附庸以求救。
现代文：王延政遣派使者向吴越上表称臣，请求作吴越的附庸以求得救援。
English: Wang Yan Zheng sent an envoy to Wu Yue to present himself as a vassal and ask to be a vassal of Wu Yue in order to get help.

古文：楚王希范疑静江节度使兼侍中、知朗州希杲得人心，遣人伺之。
现代文：楚王马希范怀疑静江节度使兼侍中、主政朗州的马希杲得人心，派人去窥探他。
English: King Ma Xifan of Chu suspected that the Jingjiang Festival made Ma Xifan, who was also an attendant and the head of Lanzhou, popular, and sent someone to spy on him.

古文：希杲惧，称疾求归，不许；遣医往视疾，因毒杀之。
现代文：马希杲害怕，称病要求归还，楚王不准许，派医生前往察看疾病，因而把马希杲毒杀了。
English: Ma Xizhe was afraid. He claimed that he was ill and asked for his money back. King Chu did not allow this and sent a doctor to inspect the illness. As a result, Ma Xizhe was poisoned to death.

