古文：昼闲人寂，听数声鸟语悠扬，不觉耳根尽彻；夜静天高，看一片云光舒卷，顿令眼界俱空。
现代文：白天清闲人们寂静的时候，听几声鸟儿鸣叫宛转悠扬，就觉得耳根完全清澈；夜晚宁静天空高远，这时看那月光下片片薄云舒展开又聚拢，顿时令眼界完全空旷。
English: During the day, when people are quiet, listening to a few birds chirping and singing, you feel that your ears are completely clear; at night, when the sky is quiet and far away, you can see the thin clouds spread and gather under the moonlight, and suddenly your eyes are completely empty.

古文：世事如棋局，不着得才是高手；人生似瓦盆，打破了方见真空。
现代文：世上的事犹如棋盘局势，不执着的才是高手；人的一生好似陶瓦盆罐，打破了才见真正空无。
English: The things in the world are like the situation on the chessboard. The one who is not persistent is the master. A person's life is like a terracotta pot. It is only when it is broken that it is truly empty.

古文：龙可豢非真龙，虎可搏非真虎，故爵禄可饵荣进之辈，必不可笼淡然无欲之人；鼎镬可及宠利之流，必不可加飘然远引之士。
现代文：可以在家豢养的龙不是真龙，人可以与其搏斗的虎不是真虎，所以说，官爵俸禄可以引诱希望得到荣耀而在仕途升迁的人，但不能笼络淡泊处世无欲无求的人；鼎镬酷刑可以加在追名逐利的人的身上，但不能加在飘然远去脱俗归隐的人的身上。
English: The dragon that can be kept at home is not a real dragon, and the tiger that can be fought with is not a real tiger. Therefore, the salary of a peerage can lure those who hope to be honored and promoted in the career, but it cannot entice those who are indifferent to the world and have no desire; the torture can be applied to those who are chasing fame and profit, but it cannot be applied to those who are far away from the world.

古文：一场闲富贵，狠狠争来，虽得还是失；百岁好光阴，忙忙过了，纵寿亦为夭。
现代文：看似闲适的富贵，费尽心机拼命争夺得来，虽有所得，失去的更多；百年美好的时光岁月，匆匆忙忙地荒度过去，纵然长寿，也如同早亡。
English: Seemingly idle wealth, fought for with all one's might, though one gains, one loses more; a hundred years of beautiful time and years, hurriedly spent, even if one lives a long life, is like an early death.

古文：高车嫌地僻，不如鱼鸟解亲人。驷马喜门高，怎似莺花能避俗。
现代文：高大的马车嫌弃偏僻狭窄的道路，远不如鱼鸟知道亲近人；华丽的马车喜欢门楣高大的宅院，怎能像莺儿花儿让人脱世俗。
English: Tall horse-drawn carriages dislike remote and narrow roads, and are far less familiar with people than fish and birds; ornate horse-drawn carriages like tall houses with doors, and how can they make people escape from the mundane like flowers?

古文：红烛烧残，万念自然厌冷；黄梁梦破，一身亦似云浮。
现代文：红烛残尽，青春已逝，万种念想逐渐冷淡；黄粱梦醒，仕途无望，恍然释负身轻似云。
English: The red candle is exhausted, youth has passed, all kinds of thoughts have gradually cooled down; the jaundiced dream is awake, the career is hopeless, and the body is relieved like a cloud.

古文：千载奇逢，无如好书良友；一生清福，只在碗茗炉烟。
现代文：即使千年难逢的机遇，也不如好书相伴良友相交；尽享一生清闲的幸福，只可在品茶品烟中获得。
English: Even if it is a once-in-a-millennium opportunity, it is not as good as a good book accompanied by good friends; enjoying a lifetime of leisure happiness can only be obtained by tasting tea and smoking.

古文：蓬茅下诵诗读书，日日与圣贤晤语，谁云贫是病？
现代文：茅室蓬户下吟诵诗文研读书籍，天天相与圣人贤哲会晤言语，那个说贫寒就是病患？
English: In the huts, in the huts, in the huts, chanting poetry, studying books, meeting with saints and sages every day, who said that the poor and the poor are the sick?

古文：樽垒边幕天席地，时时共造化氤氲，孰谓非禅？
现代文：酒樽食垒边天作帘幕地作坐席，时刻共同创造化育浓烈气氛，什么叫口福不是禅悦？
English: Sake barrels, food stalls, and benches are set up along the course, creating an intense atmosphere. What is pleasure for the palate if not Zen pleasure?

古文：兴来醉倒落花前，天地即为衾枕。机息坐忘盘石上，古今尽属蜉蝣。
现代文：兴趣来了酣醉卧倒在飘落的花瓣面前，天地就是衾被枕席；机心止息立刻忘记在盘薄的大石上面，古今都是昙花一现。
English: Interest comes, drunk, lying down in front of the falling petals, heaven and earth are the pillow cushions; the wit is immediately forgotten on the top of the thin stone, the past and the present are ephemeral.

古文：昂藏老鹤虽饥，饮啄犹闲，肯同鸡鹜之营营而竞食？
现代文：清高超群的老鹤即使饥饿，饮水啄食也悠闲镇静，怎么会同鸡鸭之辈竞抢争食物！
English: Even if the old crane is hungry, drinking water and eating food, it is leisurely and calm. How can it compete with the ducklings for food!

古文：偃蹇寒松纵老，丰标自在，岂似桃李之灼灼而争妍！
现代文：高耸傲立的寒松纵然苍老，丰采标态也依然保持，怎么能像桃树李树竞相开花争奇斗艳！
English: The tall and proud cold pine, even though it is old, still maintains the standard of abundant harvest. How can it be like the peach tree and the plum tree competing with each other to bloom!

古文：吾人适志于花柳烂漫之时，得趣于笙歌腾沸之处，乃是造化之幻境，人心之荡念也。
现代文：我们在鲜花杨柳绚烂漫天的时候舒适自得，在吹笙唱歌喧腾鼎沸的地方获得趣味，就是制造鲜花的虚幻境界，人心的放荡意念了。
English: We are comfortable and self-satisfied when the poplars and willows are in full bloom, and gain interest in the place where the singing and singing is boisterous, that is, the illusory realm of making flowers, the debauchery of the human heart.

古文：须从木落草枯之后，向声希味淡之中，觅得一些消息，才是乾坤的橐龠，人物的根宗。
现代文：必须在树木凋落花草枯萎以后，从平淡无奇中，寻觅得到一些真谛，这才是天地的本源，人与物的根本大宗。
English: After the trees have fallen and the flowers and plants have withered, we must search for some truth from the prosaic. This is the origin of heaven and earth, the fundamental bulk of people and things.

古文：静处观人事，即伊吕之勋庸、夷齐之节义，无非大海浮沤；闲中玩物情，虽木石之偏枯、鹿豕之顽蠢，总是吾性真如。
现代文：静下心来观察人间事物，即使伊尹吕尚那样的功勋伟绩，伯夷叔齐那样的节操义行，也不过是大海中的泡沫；清闲之中玩味事物之情，虽是树木山石的偏斜枯败，鹿、猪的顽劣愚蠢，才是人的本性之所在。
English: Looking at the things of the world with a calm mind, even the great exploits of Yi Yin Lushang and the righteous deeds of Bo Yizhong are just bubbles in the ocean; playing with the feelings of things in leisure is the nature of human beings, although it is the deviation and decay of trees, mountains and rocks, and the stubborn stupidity of deer and pigs.

古文：花开花谢春不管，拂意事休对人言；水暖水寒鱼自知，会心处还期独赏。
现代文：花开花谢春天是不会过问的，自己有不如意的事情不要对他人倾诉；水暖水寒鱼儿自己知道，遇到会心合意的地方尽可以独自欣赏。
English: Flowers bloom and thank spring is not to be questioned, do not confide in others if you have something you do not like; cold water fish themselves know that when they encounter a place of mutual agreement, they can enjoy it alone.

古文：闲观扑纸蝇，笑痴人自生障碍；静觇竞巢鹊，叹杰士空逞英雄。
现代文：悠闲地观看扑打纸窗的苍蝇，笑话愚痴的人自行产生障碍；静静地窥觇竞争巢穴的鸟鹊，感叹杰出人士凭空自逞英雄。
English: Leisurely watch the flies fluttering on the paper window, joke about the self-created obstacles of the complainers; quietly peep at the birds nesting in the competition nests, and lament that the outstanding people have become heroes out of thin air.

古文：看破有尽身躯，万境之尘缘自息；悟入无怀境界，一轮之心月独明。
现代文：看穿看透具有尽头的身躯，各种尘世因缘自然息灭；悟到无坏的境界，心中犹如明月照耀，清澈敞亮。
English: Seeing through and seeing through the body with an end, all kinds of earthly causes and conditions naturally extinguish; realizing the realm of no evil, the heart is like the bright moon shining, clear and spacious.

古文：木床石枕冷家风，拥衾时魂梦亦爽；麦饭豆羹淡滋味，放箸处齿颊犹香。
现代文：木板床石头枕家风清冷，但拥着被衾的时候梦中灵魂亦然明爽；麦饭豆羹滋味清淡，但放下筷子细品味，仍唇齿清香。
English: The wooden bed and stone pillows are cold, but the soul in the dream is also bright when hugging the bedclothes; the barley bean soup has a light taste, but if you put down your chopsticks and taste it, your lips and teeth will still be fragrant.

古文：谈纷华而厌者，或见纷华而喜；语淡泊而欣者，或处淡泊而厌。
现代文：说起繁华富丽就生厌的人，或许看见繁华富丽就喜欢；言语恬淡寂泊欣喜的人，或许置身恬淡寂泊就厌恶。
English: People who are fed up when talking about prosperity may like prosperity when they see it; people who are happy when they hear about prosperity may be disgusted when they see it.

古文：须扫除浓淡之见，灭却欣厌之情，才可以忘纷华而甘淡泊也。
现代文：必须扫除浓烈或淡雅的偏见，消灭欣喜或厌恶的情绪，这样才可以忘却繁华富丽而甘于淡泊超脱了。
English: It is necessary to sweep away the strong or weak prejudices, to eliminate the emotions of joy or disgust, so that we can forget the prosperity and richness and be willing to be indifferent and detached.

古文： 鸟惊心  花溅泪 ，怀此热肝肠，如何领取得冷风月； 山写照  水传神 ，识吾真面目，方可摆脱得幻乾坤。
现代文： 感时花溅泪，恨别鸟惊心 ，胸怀这样的满腔热情，怎么能获取得到清谈的清风明月；山川写实映照，流水传递神态，认识我们的真实面目，才可以摆划脱离虚幻的袖里乾坤。
English: When feeling the flowers burst into tears, hate the birds, and are shocked, with such full-throated enthusiasm in mind, how can we get the clear wind and bright moon to have a clear conversation; the mountains and rivers are realistically reflected, the flowing water transmits the appearance, and knowing our true face, only then can we get rid of the illusory sleeve.

古文：富贵得一世宠荣，到死时反增了一个恋字，如负重担；贫贱得一世清苦，到死时反脱了一个厌字，如释重枷。
现代文：富贵一世备受恩宠荣耀，到死时反而念念不忘一个 恋 字，犹如担上了重担；贫贱一生相伴清贫困苦，到死时反而摆脱了一个 厌 字，犹如打开沉重的枷锁。
English: The rich and noble live a life of grace and glory, but when they die, they remember a word of love, as if they were burdened with a heavy burden; the poor live a life of poverty and suffering, but when they die, they get rid of a word of disgust, as if they were opening a heavy yoke.

古文：人诚想念到此，当急回贪恋之首而猛舒愁苦之眉矣。
现代文：人们如果真能够想到这些，就会立即回转贪恋的念头，猛然舒展愁苦的眉头了。
English: If people can really think about this, they will immediately turn their greedy thoughts and suddenly stretch their sad frowns.

古文：人之有生也，如太仓之粒米，如灼目之电光，如悬崖之朽木，如逝海之一波。
现代文：人的生命，就如巨大粮仓里的一粒米，犹如耀眼夺目的雷电火光，犹如陡峭山崖的枯朽树木，犹如滚滚大海中一个波浪。
English: Human life is like a grain of rice in a huge granary, like a dazzling thunder and lightning, like dead trees on a steep cliff, like a wave in the rolling sea.

古文：知此者如何不悲？
现代文：了解了这些的人怎能不因生命短暂而悲伤？
English: How can anyone who understands this not be saddened by the shortness of life?

古文：如何不乐？
现代文：怎能不因看破人生而快乐？
English: How can you not be happy by seeing through life?

古文：如何看他不破而怀贪生之虑？
现代文：怎能不看破生命而去贪生怕死？
English: How can one not see through life and be greedy for life and afraid of death?

古文：如何看他不重而贻虚生之羞？
现代文：怎能不看重生命而去虚度一生？
English: How can you waste your life without valuing it?

古文：鹬蚌相持，兔犬共毙，冷觑来令人猛气全消；鸥凫共浴，鹿豕同眠，闲观去使我机心顿息。
现代文：鷸和蚌相争持渔人得利，兔子捕获了猎犬就被烹食，冷眼看这些，让人心灰意冷勇气全无；鸥鸟和野鸭子共同沐浴，鹿和猪一起睡眠，悠闲地看它们和睦相处，争名夺利的心机顿时止息。
English: Pelicans and cormorants compete for the fisherman's profit, rabbits are caught by the hounds and cooked, watching these with cold eyes, people are disheartened and discouraged; ostriches and wild ducks bathe together, deer and pigs sleep together, leisurely watch them get along, and the opportunity to compete for profit stops.

古文：迷则乐境成苦海，如水凝为冰；悟则苦海为乐境，犹冰涣作水。
现代文：过于执迷，快乐生境也会变成人生苦海，犹如水凝结成冰；大彻大悟，人生苦海就会变成快乐生境，就像冰融化成水。
English: If you are too obsessed, the happy habitat will turn into the bitter sea of life, just as water condenses into ice; if you are fully enlightened, the bitter sea of life will turn into a happy habitat, just as ice melts into water.

古文：可见苦乐无二境，迷悟非两心，只在一转念间耳。
现代文：可见，苦与乐不是完全分割的两个境界，执迷与觉悟也不是由两个心分别决定，一切都看你能否转变念头。
English: It can be seen that suffering and happiness are not two completely separate realms, and that attachment and enlightenment are not determined separately by two minds. Everything depends on whether you can change your thoughts.

古文：遍阅人情，始识疏狂之足贵；备尝世味，方知淡泊之为真。
现代文：经历了各种人情世故，才明白率性狂放十分珍贵；体验了各种人生滋味，才知道恬静淡泊最为真实。
English: Experienced all kinds of human relations and world-class, only to understand that spontaneous wildness is very precious; experienced all kinds of tastes of life, only to know that quietness and indifference are the most real.

古文：地宽天高，尚觉鹏程之窄小；云深松老，方知鹤梦之悠闲。
现代文：大地宽阔天空高远，鹏程虽可及万里，仍然让人觉得渺小不足道；云海深厚松树苍老，才知道鹤梦般的隐居生活多么悠闲。
English: The earth is broad and the sky is high and far away. Although Pengcheng can reach thousands of miles, it still makes people feel insignificant; the sea of clouds is deep and the pine trees are old, only to know how leisurely the dream-like seclusion life is.

古文：两个空拳握古今，握住了还当放手；一条竹杖挑风月，挑到时也要息肩。
现代文：两个空拳可以握住古今，但握住了还应当放下手歇歇心思；一条竹杖可以挑起风月，但挑到了也要停下来息息肩头。
English: Two empty fists can hold the past and the present, but when you hold them, you should also put down your hands and rest your mind; a bamboo cane can stir up the wind and the moon, but when it is picked up, you should also stop and rest your shoulders.

古文：阶下几点飞翠落红，收拾来无非诗料；窗前一片浮青映白，悟入处尽是禅机。
现代文：台阶下几片星星点点飞落的绿叶红花，收拾起来都是写诗的素材；窗户外看见一片浮现的青山辉映着白雪，感悟了便都是禅机。
English: A few stars at the bottom of the steps, scattered green leaves and red flowers, when put together, are the material for writing poetry; outside the window, I saw an emerging blue mountain glow reflecting white snow, and when I realized it, I was all zen.

古文：忽睹天际彩云，常疑好事皆虚事；再观山中闲木，方信闲人是福人。
现代文：忽然看到天边的彩云，由此联想到人世间的好事不过是一场梦；再看那山中的闲木，才相信清闲的人是有福气的人。
English: Suddenly seeing colorful clouds on the edge of the sky made me think that all the good things in the world are just a dream; looking at the idle trees in the mountains made me believe that idle people are blessed.

古文：东海水曾闻无定波，世事何须扼腕？
现代文：东海的海水尚有起伏不定的波澜，世事无常又何必扼腕叹息呢？
English: The waters of the East China Sea are still full of ups and downs, so why should we hold our breath?

古文：北邙山未省留闲地，人生且自舒眉。
现代文：北邙山尽埋王侯公卿，几乎留不下空闲地，人生如此，且放宽心，舒展眉头。
English: North Lushan has buried all the princes and noblemen, leaving almost no vacant land. Life is like this, and relax your mind and stretch your eyebrows.

古文：天地尚无停息，日月且有盈亏，况区区人世能事事圆满而时时暇逸乎？
现代文：天和地不停地运转永无止息，日和月有盈又有亏，较天地日月渺小的人世间怎能企求事事圆满时时安逸？
English: Heaven and earth are in constant motion, never ceasing. The sun and the moon have their ups and downs. How can the human world, which is smaller than heaven and earth, the sun and the moon, seek to make everything perfect and comfortable at all times?

古文：只是向忙里偷闲，遇缺处知足，则操纵在我，作息自如，即造物不得与之论劳逸较亏盈矣！
现代文：只不过要学会忙里偷闲，遇到缺欠的地方知道满足，如此则能自我做主，自己调整劳作与休息，这样，即使造物主也不会计较你是辛劳还是安逸，是亏损还是盈满！
English: All you have to do is to learn to be busy while being idle, to find satisfaction where there is a deficiency, so that you can make your own decisions and adjust your work and rest, so that even the Creator will not care whether you are hard-working or easy-going, whether you are a loss or full!

古文： 霜天闻鹤唳，雪夜听鸡鸣， 得乾坤清纯之气。 晴空看鸟飞，活水观鱼戏， 识宇宙活泼之机。
现代文： 霜天里听闻鹤的鸣叫，雪夜里听闻鸡的啼鸣， 此种境界可得天地清纯的气息； 晴空中观看鸟儿飞翔，流水中观赏鱼儿嬉戏， 此种境界可识天地活泼的生机。
English: To hear the cranes chirping in the frosty sky and the roosters crowing in the snowy night is to get the pure breath of heaven and earth; to watch the birds flying in the clear sky and the fishes playing in the flowing water is to know the lively vitality of heaven and earth.

古文：闲烹山茗听瓶声，炉内识阴阳之理；漫履楸枰观局戏，手中悟生杀之机。
现代文：安闲地煮山茶，听瓶中水沸之声，从水与火中认识到宇宙阴阳变化运转的道理；漫不经心地随着棋步的变化观看弈棋游戏，从下棋的手中感悟到世间生存与杀伐的机谋权变。
English: Leisurely boil mountain tea, listen to the sound of water boiling in a bottle, recognize the principle of the universe's yin and yang changes in operation from water and fire; casually watch the game of chess with the changes in chess steps, from the hands of chess players to the world's survival and slaughter.

古文：芳菲园林看蜂忙，觑破几般尘情世态；寂寞衡茅观燕寝，引起一种冷趣幽思。
现代文：花团锦簇的园林里蜜蜂忙着采蜜，人世间忙忙碌碌也不过如此；寂寥落寞的茅屋里燕子恬然寝息，不免在清冷的意趣中引发幽思。
English: Bees are busy gathering honey in the flower-filled gardens, and it is no different in the busy world. Swallows sleep soundly in lonely thatched huts, which inevitably evokes a sense of tranquillity in the chilly mood.

古文：会心不在远，得趣不在多。
现代文：获得情趣不在东西多少，开心会意的地方不在于远处。
English: It's not so much the things that give you pleasure, it's not the faraway places that make you happy.

古文：盆池拳石间，便居然有万里山川之势，片言只语内，便宛然见万古圣贤之心，才是高士的眼界，达人的胸襟。
现代文：一盆清水中置几块拳头大小的石头，就可以造出万里山川的气势，短短的几句话，就能看出万古圣贤的心怀，这才是高尚人士的眼界，通达事理之人的胸怀。
English: A few stones the size of a fist placed in a basin of clear water can create the power of thousands of mountains and rivers. In just a few words, you can see the heart of the sages of all ages. This is the vision of noble people, the heart of people who understand things.

古文：心与竹俱空，问是非何处安脚？
现代文：心胸与竹子一样虚空，试问是是非非能在哪里落脚？
English: My heart is as empty as bamboo. Where can I settle down?

古文：貌偕松共瘦，知忧喜无由上眉。
现代文：外表与苍松一样清瘦，知道忧伤和喜乐没办法表现在眉间。
English: The appearance is as thin as a pine tree, knowing that sadness and joy cannot be expressed between the eyebrows.

古文：趋炎虽暖，暖后更觉寒威；食蔗能甘，甘余便生苦趣。
现代文：靠近火焰虽然暖和，但暖和之后更加感觉寒气逼人；吃些甘蔗能尝到甜味，但甜过之后就会感到别的食物更苦涩。
English: Although it is warm near the flame, it feels even colder after it is warm; eating some sugar cane can taste sweet, but after it is sweet, other foods will feel more bitter.

古文：何似养志于清修而炎凉不涉，栖心于淡泊而甘苦俱忘，其自得为更多也。
现代文：为何不在清静修省中磨练心志以避开人世之炎凉，在恬静淡泊中栖息身心以忘却甘甜苦涩，这样他的收获会更多。
English: Why not sharpen one's mind in the Pure Land of Tranquility to avoid the heat of the world, and forget the sweetness and bitterness by dwelling in the Pure Land of Tranquility to forget the sweetness and bitterness, so that one will gain more.

古文：席拥飞花落絮，坐林中锦绣团裀；炉烹白雪清冰，熬天上玲珑液髓。
现代文：席地而坐身边满是飞花落絮，如同坐在山林中的锦绣褥垫上；用白雪清冰之水烹煮新茶，如同熬炼天上的玲珑液髓。
English: Sitting on the mat while the floor is covered with flying cucumbers is like sitting on a cushion of brocade embroidery in the mountain forest; brewing new tea with snow-white water is like brewing the exquisite liquid marrow of heaven.

古文：逸态闲情，惟期自尚，何事处修边幅；清标傲骨，不愿人怜，无劳多买胭脂。
现代文：安逸的神态，悠闲的心情，只是让自己崇尚满足，何必要处处修饰刻意打扮；清新的姿态，高傲的风骨，并不希求别人的怜爱，无须涂脂抹粉。
English: A relaxed demeanor, a laid-back mood, just let yourself be satisfied, why is it necessary to deliberately dress up everywhere; a fresh attitude, a proud spirit, does not seek the pity of others, no need to apply grease and powder.

古文：天地景物，如山间之空翠，水上之涟漪，潭中之云影，草际之烟光，月下之花容，风中之柳态。
现代文：天地间的景物，比如山间谷地空旷中透出的青翠，水面上微风激起的波纹，水潭中倒映的云影，草丛边蒸腾的云烟，月光下依然娇艳的花容，清风中婀娜多姿的柳丝。
English: Scenery between heaven and earth, such as the greenery that emerges from the open spaces of the mountain valleys, the ripples caused by the breeze on the surface of the water, the reflected cloud shadows in the pools, the smoke that steams along the edges of the grass, the flowers that are still beautiful in the moonlight, and the willows that are colorful in the breeze.

古文：若有若无，半真半幻，最足以悦人心目而豁人性灵。
现代文：这类景致似有似无，半真半幻，最能够愉悦人的心灵，让人感到心胸豁达。
English: This kind of scenery seems to have a semblance of nothing, half true and half illusory, and is most able to delight people's hearts and make people feel open-minded.

古文：真天地间一妙境也。
现代文：这真是天地间绝妙的境界。
English: This is truly a wonderful realm between heaven and earth.

古文： 乐意相关禽对语，生香不断树交花 ，此是无彼无此得真机。 野色更无山隔断，天光常与水相连 ，此是彻上彻下得真意。
现代文： 禽鸟相互鸣叫唱和，一副快乐景象；树木花枝交攀，散发出的香气连绵不断。 这是不分彼此而得真正的生机。 旷野景色无边，不受山岭阻隔；天光映照在水面上，似是天水相连。 这是上下透彻而得真正的意趣。
English: Birds are chirping and singing together, creating a happy scene; trees are intertwined with flowers and branches, and the fragrance emitted is continuous. This is a real vitality that is not separated from each other. The scenery of the wilderness is boundless and is not blocked by mountains; the skylight is reflected on the water surface, and it seems that the sky and water are connected. This is a clear and real meaning of up and down.

古文：吾人时时以此景象注之心目，何患心思不活泼，气象不宽平！
现代文：我们人类如果常常欣赏这类景致，怎会担心心情不开朗活泼，气度不宽宏大量！
English: If we humans often enjoy this kind of scenery, how can we worry that our mood is not cheerful and lively, and our temperament is not magnanimous!

古文：鹤唳、雪月、霜天、想见屈大夫醒时之激烈；鸥眠、春风、暖日，会知陶处士醉里之风流。
现代文：在大雪纷飞、浓霜铺地的天气里听到仙鹤悲鸣，便会想到当年屈原在 众人皆醉我独醒 时的慷慨激烈；在春风荡漾、阳光普照的日子里见到海鸥安眠，便会领悟到当年陶渊明辞官归隐后沉醉时的风流超脱。
English: Hearing the cranes wailing in the heavy snow and thick frost will remind you of Qu Yuan's generosity when everyone was drunk and I was the only one awake. Seeing the seagulls sleeping peacefully on a spring breeze and sun-drenched day will remind you of the virtuousness and detachment when he was drunk after the retirement of Tao Yuanming.

古文：黄鸟情多，常向梦中呼醉客；白云意懒，偏来僻处媚幽人。
现代文：黄鸟多情，常常想唤醒还在做着黄粱梦的浮生过客；白云意懒，偏偏飘到僻静处陪伴幽居之人。
English: The yellow bird is affectionate, and often wants to wake up the floating passers-by who are still dreaming of jaundice; the white cloud is lazy and tends to drift to secluded places to accompany those who live in seclusion.

古文：栖迟蓬户，耳目虽拘而神情自旷；结纳山翁，仪文虽略而意念常真。
现代文：游息在草屋时，见闻虽然狭窄但精神却自然舒畅；和山中的老丈结交，礼节虽然简略但思想意识却往往纯真。
English: When swimming in a grass hut, although the view is narrow, the spirit is naturally comfortable; when making friends with an old man in the mountains, although the etiquette is simple, the ideological consciousness is often pure.

古文：满室清风满几月，坐中物物见天心；一溪流水一山云，行处时时观妙道。
现代文：独坐室内，清爽的风吹满房间，月光洒满几案，此时看室内物件都尽显天意；野外漫步，一条山溪流过，又见山头漂浮薄云，漫步之中时时都会悟到精妙禅理。
English: Sitting alone in the room, the refreshing wind blowing through the room, the moonlight sprinkled with a few cases, at this time, looking at the indoor objects are all showing the will of heaven; outdoor stroll, a mountain stream flows past, and see the mountains floating thin clouds, while walking will always realize the exquisite Zen.

古文：炮凤烹龙，放箸时与虀盐无异；悬金佩玉，成灰处共瓦砾何殊。
现代文：即使烹炒龙凤而食，放下筷子之后也觉与粗茶淡饭没什么差异；生前悬金佩玉好风光，死后化作灰烬，这些金玉同瓦砾又有何区别？
English: Even if you cook fried dragon and phoenix and eat, after putting down the chopsticks, you will feel that there is no difference with the coarse tea and light meal; before life, hanging gold and jade is a good scenery, after death it turns into ashes, what is the difference between these gold and rubble?

古文： 扫地白云来 ，才着工夫便起障。 凿池明月入 ，能空境界自生明。
现代文： 刚刚打扫干净地面，却见白云飘来投下影子 ，修炼工夫难免会遇到魔障。 开凿了池塘，明月总会映照 ，静心修炼达到无我境界，自会心生光明。
English: If you have just cleaned the ground, but see a white cloud floating to cast a shadow, it is inevitable that you will encounter obstacles in your cultivation. If you dig a pond, the bright moon will always reflect it. If you practice meditation to reach the realm of no-self, your mind will become bright.

古文：造化唤作小儿，切莫受渠戏弄；天地丸为大块，须要任我炉锤。
现代文：造物主不过就是个小孩子，千万不要遭受他的戏弄；天地不过是一个大块弹丸，我们尽可任意锻造锤炼。
English: The Creator is but a child, and must not be trifled with; heaven and earth are but a big projectile, and we may forge any temper we please.

古文：想到白骨黄泉，壮士之肝肠自冷；坐老清溪碧嶂，俗流之胸次亦闲。
现代文：总想着死后白骨黄泉景象，即使壮士也会心灰意冷；面对绿水青山长坐修持，即使庸俗之辈也会终有所悟心胸豁达。
English: Always thinking about the scene of the white bones and hell after death, even the strong will be discouraged; in the face of green water, green mountains and long sitting practice, even the vulgar generation will eventually be enlightened and open-minded.

古文：夜眠八尺，日啖二升，何须百般计较；书读五车，才分八斗，未闻一日清闲。
现代文：夜晚睡觉八尺床，白天吃饭二升米，这些何必百般计较；勤奋读书超五车，才分过人达八斗，这些人却又不肯得享一日清闲。
English: Sleeping in an eight-foot bed at night, eating two liters of rice during the day, these have to be considered in a hundred ways; diligently reading more than five cars, only to divide people up to eight, but these people do not want to enjoy a day of leisure.

