古文：贞观二年，太宗谓朝集使曰： 任土作贡，布在前典，当州所产，则充庭实。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对从各地来朝廷进贡的使者说： 根据土地物产确定贡赋，以前已发布典章制度。本州所产，就充贡品。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the emissaries who came from all over the country to pay tribute to the imperial court: The tribute was determined according to the land and property. Previously, the award system had been issued. The production of Honshu was the tribute.

古文：比闻都督、刺史邀射声名，厥土所赋，或嫌其不善，逾意外求，更相仿效，遂以成俗。
现代文：近来我听说有些都督、剌史追求声名，嫌本地的贡赋不好，就越境到外地寻求，各地相互仿效，成为习俗，这样做会劳民伤财。
English: Recently, I have heard that some governors and viceroys are pursuing fame, dislike local tribute is not good, cross the border to seek elsewhere, all over the country to imitate each other, become a custom, this will cause labor and financial losses.

古文：极为劳扰，宜改此弊，不得更然。 
现代文：应该改掉这种弊病，以后不得再这么做了。 
English: This kind of evil should be corrected, and it must not be done again.

古文：贞观中，林邑国贡白鹦鹉，性辩慧，尤善应答，屡有苦寒之言。
现代文：贞观年间，林邑国向唐太宗进奉了白鹦鹉，这只鹦鹉非常聪明，能说很多人话，尤其善于应答，但它在应答之中，竟然经常流露出凄苦无助的言语来。
English: During the Zhenguan period, Lin'i Province presented Tang Taizong with a white parrot. This parrot was very intelligent, could speak many languages, and was particularly good at answering questions. However, in its answers, it often revealed words of great distress and helplessness.

古文：太宗愍之，付其使，令还出于林薮。
现代文：唐太宗很怜悯它，把它交给使者，让使者将它放归于森林。
English: Emperor Taizong took pity on it and gave it to the messenger to release it into the forest.

古文：贞观十二年，疏勒、朱俱波、甘棠遣使贡方物，太宗谓群臣曰： 向使中国不安，日南、西域朝贡使亦何缘而至？
现代文：贞观十二年，西域的疏勒、朱俱波、甘棠国派使者向唐太宗进献特产。唐太宗对各位大臣说： 如果天下不安定，南方的日南、西域各国的朝贡使者怎么会源源不断进入京城呢？
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, the western provinces of Shule, Zhujubo, and Kangtang sent emissaries to Tang Taizong to offer special products. Tang Taizong said to the ministers: If the world is unstable, how can the tributary emissaries from the south of Japan and the western countries continuously enter the capital?

古文：朕何德以堪之？
现代文：我何德何能，能得到这样的礼遇。
English: I'd give anything to have that kind of courtesy.

古文：睹此翻怀危惧。近代平一天下，拓定边方者，惟秦皇、汉武。
现代文：近代以来，能够统一天下，拓宽疆域，安定边关的，只有秦始皇和汉武帝。
English: Since modern times, only the First Emperor of Qin and Emperor Wu of Han were able to unify the country, expand the territory, and stabilize the border.

古文：始皇暴虐，至子而亡。
现代文：但秦始皇残酷暴虐，到他儿子那一代就灭亡了。
English: But Qin Shihuang was cruel and tyrannical, and his son's generation died out.

古文：汉武骄奢，国祚几绝。
现代文：汉武帝骄傲奢侈，国运几乎被断送。
English: Emperor Hanwu was proud and extravagant, and the National Games were almost cancelled.

古文：朕提三尺剑以定四海，远夷率服，亿兆乂安，自谓不减二主也。
现代文：我挥剑克群雄，远方异族纷纷臣服，天下太平，自认为功业不逊于这两位帝王。
English: I wielded my sword and defeated the hordes, the distant foreign tribes submitted in droves, the world was at peace, and I considered my achievements to be no less than those two emperors.

古文：然二主末途，皆不能自保，由是每自惧危亡，必不敢懈怠。
现代文：但是这两个帝王最后都穷途末路，不能保全自己。因此，我每天都害怕国家有危难，不敢有丝毫懈怠。
English: But both of these emperors eventually came to the end of the road and could not save themselves. Therefore, I am afraid of the danger of the country every day and dare not slacken at all.

古文：惟藉公等直言正谏，以相匡弼。
现代文：只希望各位大臣直言进谏，匡扶朝纲。
English: I only hope that the ministers will be forthright and support the program of the government.

古文：若惟扬美隐恶，共进谀言，则国之危亡，可立而待也。 
现代文：如果只是一味地赞美功绩，隐瞒过失，满朝都是阿谀奉承的言辞，那么国家的危亡，就近在咫尺了。
English: If one only praises one's achievements, conceals one's faults, and is full of flattering words, then the country's peril is close at hand.

古文：贞观十八年，太宗将伐高丽，其莫离支遣使贡白金。
现代文：贞观十八年，唐太宗将要攻打高丽，高丽官员莫离支泉盖苏文派使者向大唐进献白金。
English: In the 18th year of Zhenguan, when Emperor Taizong of Tang was about to attack Goryeo, the Goryeo officials sent an envoy to Great Tang to offer platinum.

古文：黄门侍郎褚遂良谏曰： 莫离支虐杀其主，九夷所不容，陛下以之兴兵，将事吊伐，为辽东之人报主辱之耻。
现代文：黄门侍郎褚遂良进谏说： 莫离支杀害了他的国君，为天下所不容，陛下出兵讨伐他，悼唁他们的亡君，是为百姓洗刷国君被杀的耻辱。
English: Huangmen's chamberlain, Zou Suiliang, said: "It is unacceptable for the world that Mo Liuzhi killed his sovereign. His majesty sent troops to fight him and mourn their dead sovereign. This is to wash the people's shame of the sovereign's murder."

古文：古者讨弑君之贼，不受其赂。
现代文：古人讨伐杀害君主的罪人，是不会接受罪人的贿赂的。
English: The ancients would not accept bribes from those guilty of assassinating monarchs.

古文：昔宋督遗鲁君以郜鼎，桓公受之于大庙，臧哀伯谏曰： 君人者将昭德塞违，今灭德立违，而置其赂器于大庙，百官象之，又何诛焉？
现代文：春秋时，宋国宋戴公的孙子送给鲁桓公郜国制造的鼎，鲁桓公接受了，把它放置在大庙里，鲁国大夫臧哀伯进谏说： 国君应该弘扬道德，杜绝邪恶，可是大王却在助长邪恶，损害道德，把受贿的物品供奉在大庙之中，文武百官如果效仿，该以何种理由处死他们呢？
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, the grandson of Song Dai Gong of the Song Dynasty gave Lu Huan Gong a tripod made in Shandong Province. Lu Huan Gong accepted the tripod and placed it in the grand temple. Lu Guo Guo's doctor, Zou Yibo Jinqi, said: The sovereign should promote morality and eliminate evil, but the great king is promoting evil, damaging morality, and enshrining bribed items in the grand temple. If hundreds of civil and military officials follow suit, on what grounds should they be executed?

古文：武王克商，迁九鼎于雒邑，义士犹或非之，而况将昭违乱之赂器置诸大庙，其若之何？ 
现代文：周武王战胜了商朝，把商朝的九鼎迁移到属地，遭到伯夷等义士的责备，更何况把犯上作乱者贿赂的器物放置在大庙里呢？
English: King Zhou Wu defeated the Shang Dynasty, moved the Jiu Ding of the Shang Dynasty to its territory, and was rebuked by the righteous such as Bo Yi. What is more, he placed the bribed objects of the rioters in the Great Temple?

古文：夫《春秋》之书，百王取则，若受不臣之筐篚，纳弑逆之朝贡，不以为愆，将何致伐？
现代文：真不知会产生什么样的后果。 《春秋》这本书，是历代国君取法的典籍，如果接受不义臣子的物品和杀君的叛臣的贡奉，却不惩罚他们，该以何种理由向他们兴师问罪呢？
English: I really don't know what the consequences will be. The book "Spring and Autumn" is a classic of the methods used by successive kings. If you accept the goods of dishonest courtiers and the tribute of traitors who kill you, but do not punish them, on what grounds should they be punished?

古文：臣谓莫离支所献，自不合受。 
现代文：我认为莫离支进献的白金不可接受。 
English: I don't think it's acceptable to give away the platinum.

古文：太宗从之。
现代文：唐太宗听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Taizong followed his advice.

古文：贞观十九年，高丽王高藏及莫离支盖苏文遣使献二美女，太宗谓其使曰： 朕悯此女离其父母兄弟于本国，若爱其色而伤其心，我不取也。 
现代文：贞观十九年，高丽国王高藏和莫离支泉盖苏文派使者向唐太宗进献了两个美女，唐太宗对使者说： 我可怜这两个女子，她们离开了自己的父母兄弟，孤苦无依，如果因为爱她们的美色而使她们伤心，那我不会接受。 
English: In the 19th year of Zhenguan, the Koryo King Gaozang and the Moyizhiquan Emperor Gaisuwen sent an envoy to Tang Taizong to present two beautiful women. Tang Taizong said to the envoy: I pity these two women, they have left their parents and brothers, they are all alone. If I make them sad because I love their beauty, then I will not accept it.

古文：并却还之本国。
现代文：于是把二人送还故土。
English: So the two were sent back to their homeland.

