古文：孝文皇帝，高祖中子也。
现代文：孝文皇帝是高祖的中子。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was Gao Zu's second son.

古文：高祖十一年春，已破陈豨军，定代地，立为代王，都中都。
现代文：高祖十一年春打垮陈豨的军队，平定了代地，孝文皇帝被立为代王，建都中都。
English: In the spring of the 11th year of Gaozu's reign, he defeated Chen Xi's army and pacified the viceregal territory. Emperor Xiaowen was installed as the viceregal king, and the capital was built in Zhongdu.

古文：太后薄氏子。
现代文：他是太后薄氏的儿子。
English: He is the son of Empress Dowager Bo.

古文：即位十七年，高后八年七月，高后崩。
现代文：做代王的第十七年，时值高后八年，这年七月，高后去世。
English: In the seventeenth year of his reign, eight years after Gao's death, Gao died in July of that year.

古文：九月，诸吕吕产等欲为乱，以危刘氏，大臣共诛之，谋召立代王，事在吕后语中。
现代文：九月，吕后的家族吕产等人想要叛乱，推翻刘氏政权，大臣们一起诛灭了吕氏家族，商量召代王来都城，立为皇帝，这件事情记载在《吕太后本纪》中。
English: In September, Emperor Lyu's family, the Lyu clan, and others wanted to rebel and overthrow Liu's regime. The ministers together annihilated the Lyu family, discussed summoning the king to the capital, and established him as emperor. This event is recorded in the "Chronicle of Empress Lyu."

古文：丞相陈平、太尉周勃等使人迎代王。
现代文：丞相陈平、太尉周勃等派人去迎接代王。
English: The chancellor Chen Ping, the lieutenant Zhou Bo and others sent people to meet the acting king.

古文：代王问左右郎中令张武等。
现代文：代王询问左右近臣郎中令张武等人的意见。
English: The acting king inquired about the opinions of the left and right vassals, the vassal lord Zhang Wu and others.

古文：张武等议曰： 汉大臣皆故高帝时大将，习兵，多谋诈，此其属意非止此也，特畏高帝、吕太后威耳。
现代文：张武等人建议说： 汉朝廷中的大臣都是过去高帝时的大将，熟悉军事，多谋善诈，他们的真正意图并不止于此，只是畏惧高帝、吕太后的威势罢了。
English: Zhang Wu and others suggested that: the ministers in the Han court were all generals in the past of Emperor Gao, familiar with military affairs, and good at scheming. Their real intention was not more than this, but they were just afraid of the power of Emperor Gao and Empress Lyu.

古文：今已诛诸吕，新喋血京师，此以迎大王为名，实不可信。
现代文：如今已经诛灭了吕氏宗族，血洗京城，来这里名义上是迎接大王，实际上不可信赖。
English: Now the Lv clan has been annihilated, and blood has been shed in the capital. They came here in the name of welcoming the great king, but in reality they cannot be trusted.

古文：原大王称疾毋往，以观其变。 
现代文：希望大王佯称有病，不要前往京城，坐观事态的变化。 
English: It is hoped that the great king will say that he is ill and not go to the capital to watch the changes in the situation.

古文：中尉宋昌进曰： 群臣之议皆非也。
现代文：中尉宋昌进言说： 群臣的意见都是不对的。
English: Lieutenant Song Changjin said: The opinions of the ministers are all wrong.

古文：夫秦失其政，诸侯豪桀并起，人人自以为得之者以万数，然卒践天子之位者，刘氏也，天下绝望，一矣。
现代文：当秦朝腐败瓦解的时候，诸侯豪杰同时并起，自认为能得到天下的人数以万计，然而最终登上天子之位的是刘氏，天下逐鹿的人断绝了做皇帝的希望，这是第一点。
English: When the corruption of the Qin Dynasty disintegrated, the princes and heroes arose at the same time, and the number of people who thought they could obtain the world was in the tens of thousands. However, it was the Liu clan that finally ascended to the position of the son of heaven. The world's deer hunters cut off the hope of becoming an emperor. This is the first point.

古文：高帝封王子弟，地犬牙相制，此所谓盘石之宗也，天下服其彊，二矣。
现代文：高帝封子弟为王，封国领土犬牙交错，这就是人们所说的磐石一样坚固的宗族，天下的人都屈服于刘氏的强大，这是第二点。
English: The second point is that the descendants of Emperor Gao's fiefs are kings, and the territory of the fiefs is intertwined. This is what people call a rock-solid clan, and people all over the world have succumbed to the power of the Liu clan.

古文：汉兴，除秦苛政，约法令，施德惠，人人自安，难动摇，三矣。
现代文：汉朝兴起，废除秦朝苛刻的政令，简化法令，施德惠于民，人人都生活安宁，难以动摇，这是第三点。
English: The rise of the Han Dynasty, the abolition of the harsh decrees of the Qin Dynasty, the simplification of laws and regulations, the benevolence of the people, everyone lives in peace, and it is difficult to shake. This is the third point.

古文：夫以吕太后之严，立诸吕为三王，擅权专制，然而太尉以一节入北军，一呼士皆左袒，为刘氏，叛诸吕，卒以灭之。
现代文：以吕太后的威严，立吕氏子弟三人为王，擅权专制，然而太尉持节进入北军，一声呼唤，士卒都袒露左臂拥护刘氏，背叛吕氏，结果消灭了吕氏宗族。
English: With the dignity of Empress Dowager Lv, the three sons of the Lv clan were set up as kings, with arbitrary power. However, the captain entered the Northern Army, and called out loudly. The soldiers all showed their left arms to support the Liu clan, and betrayed the Lv clan. As a result, the Lv clan was wiped out.

古文：此乃天授，非人力也。
现代文：这是上天所授，不是人力所能做到的。
English: This is what God has given us, not what man can do.

古文：今大臣虽欲为变，百姓弗为使，其党宁能专一邪？
现代文：现在即使大臣想要叛变，百姓也不肯被他们所驱使，他们的党羽难道能一心一意地团结在一起吗？
English: Now, even if the minister wants to rebel, the people will not be driven by them. Can their followers unite with one heart and one mind?

古文：方今内有硃虚、东牟之亲，外畏吴、楚、淮南、琅邪、齐、代之彊。
现代文：当今京城内有朱虚侯、东牟侯这样的亲族，京城外又畏惧吴王、楚王、淮南王、琅邪王、齐王、代王的强大。
English: Today, there are relatives such as Zhu Wuhou and Dong Mouhou in Beijing, and the powerful Wu King, Chu King, Huainan King, Zhaozhai King, Qi King, and King of Kings are feared outside of Beijing.

古文：方今高帝子独淮南王与大王，大王又长，贤圣仁孝，闻於天下，故大臣因天下之心而欲迎立大王，大王勿疑也。 
现代文：目前高帝的儿子仅有淮南王和大王，大王又年长，贤能、圣德、仁爱、孝顺，闻名天下，所以大臣们顺应天下百姓的心愿，而想迎接大王立为皇帝，大王不要疑虑。 
English: At present, the only sons of Emperor Gao are King Huainan and King Daowang. King Daowang is elderly and famous for his wisdom, virtue, benevolence, and filial piety. Therefore, the ministers should comply with the wishes of the people around the world, and if they want to welcome King Daowang as emperor, they should not hesitate.

古文：代王报太后计之，犹与未定。
现代文：代王报告了太后，进行磋商，犹犹豫豫，没有拿定主意。
English: The acting king reported to the empress dowager, held consultations, hesitated, and did not make up his mind.

古文：卜之龟，卦兆得大横。
现代文：用龟甲来占卜，卦的兆象得到大横。
English: Using tortoiseshell to divination, the signs of divination are greatly improved.

古文：占曰： 大横庚庚，余为天王，夏启以光。 
现代文：兆辞说： 大横预示着更替，我成为天王，像夏启一样发扬光大先帝的事业。 
English: The omen said, "Demonstrability foreshadows change. I will become the heavenly king, and carry forward the great predecessor's cause like Xiaqi."

古文：代王曰： 寡人固已为王矣，又何王？ 
现代文：代王说： 我本来已经是诸侯王了，还要做什么王？ 
English: The acting king said: I am already the prince of princes, what else should I be?

古文：卜人曰： 所谓天王者乃天子。 
现代文：占卜的人说： 所说的天王是天子。 
English: And the diviners said, The King of heaven is called the Son of God.

古文：於是代王乃遣太后弟薄昭往见绛侯，绛侯等具为昭言所以迎立王意。
现代文：于是代王就派遣太后的弟弟薄昭前往京城会见绛侯，绛侯等人把所以要迎立代王的意图全部告诉了薄昭。
English: As a result, the acting king sent the younger brother of the empress dowager, Bo Zhao, to the capital to meet with the vassal lord. The vassal lord and others told Bo Zhao everything about why they wanted to welcome the acting king.

古文：薄昭还报曰： 信矣，毋可疑者。 
现代文：薄昭回来报告说： 情况是真实的，没有什么可怀疑的。 
English: Bo Zhao came back and reported: The situation is real, there is nothing to doubt.

古文：代王乃笑谓宋昌曰： 果如公言。 
现代文：代王于是笑着对宋昌说： 果然像你说的一样。 
English: The acting king then smiled and said to Song Chang: "It's just like you said.

古文：乃命宋昌参乘，张武等六人乘传诣长安。
现代文：就让宋昌在车的右面陪乘，张武等六人乘传车前往长安。
English: Let Song Chang accompany him on the right side of the car, and Zhang Wu and other six people take the shuttle to Chang'an.

古文：至高陵休止，而使宋昌先驰之长安观变。
现代文：到达高陵停息下来，派宋昌先驱车去长安观察局势的变化。
English: When they reached Gaoling, they paused and sent Song Chang's pioneer car to Chang'an to observe the changes in the situation.

古文：昌至渭桥，丞相以下皆迎。
现代文：宋昌到了渭桥，丞相以下的各级官员都前来迎接。
English: When Song Chang arrived in Handan Bridge, officials at all levels from the prime minister on down came to greet him.

古文：宋昌还报。
现代文：宋昌回来向代王作了汇报。
English: Song Chang returned and reported to the acting king.

古文：代王驰至渭桥，群臣拜谒称臣。
现代文：代王驱车来到渭桥，大臣们都来拜见，自称为臣。
English: The king's representative drove to Qianqiao, and the ministers all came to see him, calling themselves vassals.

古文：代王下车拜。
现代文：代王下车答拜。
English: The crown prince alighted from the train to pay his respects.

古文：太尉勃进曰： 原请间言。 
现代文：太尉周勃进见说： 希望单独跟你说话。 
English: Captain Zhou Bo Jinming said, "I hope to talk to you alone."

古文：宋昌曰： 所言公，公言之。
现代文：宋昌说： 所说的属于公事，就公开说。
English: Song Chang said: What is said is a matter of business, so say it openly.

古文：所言私，王者不受私。 
现代文：所说的属于私事，为王的人不接受私情。 
English: What is said is a private matter, and those who are kings do not accept private feelings.

古文：太尉乃跪上天子玺符。
现代文：太尉就跪下奉上天子印玺和符节。
English: The captain kneeled down and offered him the seal of the Son of Heaven and the Festival of the Rune.

古文：代王谢曰： 至代邸而议之。 
现代文：代王辞谢说： 到代国官邸去商议。 
English: The acting king thanked him and said, "Let's go to the official residence to discuss."

古文：遂驰入代邸。
现代文：于是驱车进入代国官邸。
English: He then drove into the official residence of the acting head of state.

古文：群臣从至。
现代文：大臣们也都相随来到代国官邸。
English: The ministers also came to the residence of the acting head of state.

古文：丞相陈平、太尉周勃、大将军陈武、御史大夫张苍、宗正刘郢、硃虚侯刘章、东牟侯刘兴居、典客刘揭皆再拜言曰： 子弘等皆非孝惠帝子，不当奉宗庙。
现代文：丞相陈平、太尉周勃、大将军陈武、御史大夫张苍、宗正刘郢、朱虚侯刘章、东牟侯刘兴居、典客刘揭都再拜后进言说： 皇子刘弘等都不是孝惠帝的儿子，不应做皇帝，奉祀宗庙。
English: After bowing again, Consul Chen Ping, Lieutenant Zhou Bo, Major General Chen Wu, Grand Historian Zhang Cang, Zongzheng Liu Ye, Zhu Hui Hou Liu Zhang, Dongmou Hou Liu Xingju, and Noble Guest Liu Jie all said: Prince Liu Hong and others are not the sons of Emperor Xiao Hui, they should not be emperors, they should be worshipped in the ancestral temple.

古文：臣谨请阴安侯列侯顷王后与琅邪王、宗室、大臣、列侯、吏二千石议曰： 大王高帝长子，宜为高帝嗣。 
现代文：我们和阴安侯、顷王后，以及琅邪王、宗室、大臣、列侯、二千石以上官员商议说： 大王现在是高帝最大的儿子，适合做高帝的继承人。 
English: We discussed with Yin An Hou, He Wang Que, as well as Zha Yadu Wang, his family, ministers, vassals, and officials of more than 2,000 koku, and said: The great king is now the eldest son of Emperor Gao, and is suitable to be Emperor Gao's successor.

古文：原大王即天子位。 
现代文：希望大王即位为天子。 
English: I hope the great king ascends to the throne as the son of heaven.

古文：代王曰： 奉高帝宗庙，重事也。
现代文：代王说： 奉祀高帝宗庙，是一件重大的事情。
English: The acting king said, "It is an important matter to enshrine Emperor Gao's ancestral temple.

古文：寡人不佞，不足以称宗庙。
现代文：我没有才能，不足以奉祀宗庙。
English: I have no talent, not enough to worship the ancestral temple.

古文：原请楚王计宜者，寡人不敢当。 
现代文：希望请楚王考虑一个合适的人，我不敢当此重任。 
English: I hope to ask King Chu to consider a suitable person. I dare not take on such a heavy responsibility.

古文：群臣皆伏固请。
现代文：大臣们都拜伏于地，坚决地请求。
English: The ministers prostrated themselves on the ground and pleaded earnestly.

古文：代王西乡让者三，南乡让者再。
现代文：代王面朝西谦让了三次，面朝南又谦让了两次。
English: The king-in-waiting humbly conceded three times when facing west, and humbly conceded twice when facing south.

古文：丞相平等皆曰： 臣伏计之，大王奉高帝宗庙最宜称，虽天下诸侯万民以为宜。
现代文：丞相陈平等人都说： 我们在下商议，大王奉祀高帝宗庙是最适宜的，就是天下的诸侯和万民百姓也认为是妥当的。
English: Both Premier Chen and others said, "We have discussed it below. It is most appropriate for the emperor to be enshrined in Emperor Gao's ancestral temple. Even the world's princes and all the people think it is appropriate."

古文：臣等为宗庙社稷计，不敢忽。
现代文：我们为宗庙和国家考虑，不敢轻忽从事。
English: For the sake of our ancestral temple and the country, we dare not engage in frivolous activities.

古文：原大王幸听臣等。
现代文：希望大王听从我们的建议。
English: Let's hope the king heeds our advice.

古文：臣谨奉天子玺符再拜上。 
现代文：我们郑重而又恭敬地奉上天子玺印和符节。 
English: We solemnly and respectfully present to you the Imperial Seal of the Son of Heaven and the Festival of the Rune.

古文：代王曰： 宗室将相王列侯以为莫宜寡人，寡人不敢辞。 
现代文：代王说： 宗室、将相、诸王、列侯都以为没有比我更适宜的人选，那么我就不敢再推辞了。 
English: The acting king said, "My family, generals, kings, and princes all thought that there was no one more suitable than me, so I didn't dare to refuse.

古文：遂即天子位。
现代文：于是即位为天子。
English: As a result, he was enthroned as the Son of Heaven.

古文：群臣以礼次侍。
现代文：大臣们按照礼仪，依秩位高下列侍。
English: According to the etiquette, the ministers are ranked according to the highest rank.

古文：乃使太仆婴与东牟侯兴居清宫，奉天子法驾，迎于代邸。
现代文：派太仆夏侯婴和东牟侯刘兴居清除宫廷，用天子法驾去代邸迎接皇帝。
English: He sent his eunuchs Xia Houyou and Dongmou Liu Xingju to clear the palace and use the Heavenly Child Law to drive to the vicarage to meet the emperor.

古文：皇帝即日夕入未央宫。
现代文：皇帝当天晚上进入未央宫。
English: In the evening of the same day, the emperor entered the Miang Palace.

古文：乃夜拜宋昌为卫将军，镇抚南北军。
现代文：夜里任命宋昌为卫将军，镇服和安辑南北军。
English: In the night, Song Chang was appointed as the general of Wei, and the North and South Armies of Zhenfu and Anji were formed.

古文：以张武为郎中令，行殿中。
现代文：以张武为郎中令，巡行殿中。
English: With Zhang Wu as the second-in-command, the procession leaves the palace.

古文：还坐前殿。
现代文：皇帝回到前殿坐朝。
English: The emperor returned to the front hall and sat down.

古文：於是夜下诏书曰： 间者诸吕用事擅权，谋为大逆，欲以危刘氏宗庙，赖将相列侯宗室大臣诛之，皆伏其辜。
现代文：于是当夜下诏说： 近来吕氏子弟专权用事，阴谋叛逆，想要倾危刘氏宗庙，幸亏将相、列侯、宗室、大臣消灭了他们，使他们都得到了应有的惩罚。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict issued that night said, "Recently, the sons of the Lü clan have been taking advantage of their absolute power, plotting and rebelling, and trying to endanger the ancestral temple of the Liu clan. Fortunately, the warlord, the vassal lord, the ancestral house and the minister eliminated them, so that they all received the punishment they deserved.

古文：朕初即位，其赦天下，赐民爵一级，女子百户牛酒，酺五日。 
现代文：我刚刚即位，大赦天下，赐予百姓中的男户主爵一级，女户主每百户给予牛和酒，允许相聚宴饮五天。 
English: I have just ascended the throne, and I have granted amnesty to the whole world, granting the male heads of households among the people the first rank of peerage, and the female heads of households are given cattle and wine for every hundred households, and are allowed to gather for feasting for five days.

古文：孝文皇帝元年十月庚戌，徙立故琅邪王泽为燕王。
现代文：孝文皇帝元年十月一日，徒封原来的琅邪王刘泽为燕王。
English: On October 1st, the first year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, Liu Ze, the original evil king, was enthroned as the King of Swans.

古文：辛亥，皇帝即阼，谒高庙。
现代文：二日，皇帝即位，拜谒高庙。
English: On the second day, the emperor ascended to the throne and paid homage to the high temple.

古文：右丞相平徙为左丞相，太尉勃为右丞相，大将军灌婴为太尉。
现代文：右丞相陈平迁徒为左丞相，太尉周勃担任右丞相，大将军灌婴担任太尉。
English: The minister of the right, Chen Ping Qiantu, was the minister of the left, the lieutenant Zhou Bo was the minister of the right, and the general Guan Yu was the lieutenant.

古文：诸吕所夺齐楚故地，皆复与之。
现代文：吕氏夺取的齐国、楚国旧地，又都归还齐、楚。
English: The former lands of Qi and Chu, which were seized by the Lv clan, were returned to Qi and Chu.

古文：壬子，遣车骑将军薄昭迎皇太后于代。
现代文：三日，派遣车骑将军薄昭到代国迎接皇太后。
English: On the third day, General Bo Zhao was dispatched to meet the empress dowager.

古文：皇帝曰： 吕产自置为相国，吕禄为上将军，擅矫遣灌将军婴将兵击齐，欲代刘氏，婴留荥阳弗击，与诸侯合谋以诛吕氏。
现代文：皇帝说： 吕产自任为相国，吕禄自任为上将军，擅自假托诏令派遣将军灌婴统率军队出击齐国，想要取代刘氏。灌婴停留在荥阳，按兵不动，与诸侯合谋诛除吕氏。
English: The emperor said: "Luzang appointed himself as a neighboring country, Lulu appointed himself as a superior general, and without authorization, he sent General Guan Ying to lead the army to attack Qi, and wanted to replace the Liu clan. Guan Ying stayed in Fenyang, did not move according to the soldiers, and conspired with the princes to eliminate the Lyu clan.

古文：吕产欲为不善，丞相陈平与太尉周勃谋夺吕产等军。
现代文：吕产企图发动叛乱，丞相陈平和太尉周勃使用计策夺取了吕产等人的军权。
English: Liusan attempted to launch a rebellion, and the prime minister Chen Pingping and the lieutenant Zhou Bo used stratagems to seize the military power of Liusan and others.

古文：硃虚侯刘章首先捕吕产等。
现代文：朱虚侯刘章首先捕获吕产等人。
English: Zhu Xuhou and Liu Zhang first captured Liusang and others.

古文：太尉身率襄平侯通持节承诏入北军。
现代文：太尉亲自率领襄平侯纪通持节奉诏进入北军。
English: The captain personally led Xiangping Hou Jitong to enter the Northern Army.

古文：典客刘揭身夺赵王吕禄印。
现代文：典客刘揭亲手夺下了赵王吕禄的印信。
English: The guest of honor Liu Jie personally seized the seal letter of Zhao Wang Lulu.

古文：益封太尉勃万户，赐金五千斤。
现代文：加封太尉周勃食邑一万户，赐予黄金五千斤。
English: Jiafeng Taifeng Zhou Bo provided food to ten thousand households in the village and gave five thousand catties of gold.

古文：丞相陈平、灌将军婴邑各三千户，金二千斤。
现代文：加封丞相陈平、将军灌婴每人食邑三千户，赐予黄金二千斤。
English: In addition, Minister Chen Ping and General Guanzhong each provided 3,000 households with food and 2,000 kg of gold.

古文：硃虚侯刘章、襄平侯通、东牟侯刘兴居邑各二千户，金千斤。
现代文：加封朱虚侯刘章、襄平侯纪通、东牟侯刘兴居每人食邑二千户，限于黄金一千斤。
English: Liu Zhang, Xiangping Hou Jitong, Dongmou Hou Liu Xingju, Zhuxu Hou, were each limited to 1,000 catties of gold.

古文：封典客揭为阳信侯，赐金千斤。 
现代文：封典客刘揭为阳信侯，赐子黄金一千斤。 
English: The guest of the ceremony, Liu Jie, was Yang Xinhou, and gave his son a thousand catties of gold.

古文：十二月，上曰： 法者，治之正也，所以禁暴而率善人也。
现代文：十二月，皇帝说： 法律是治理国家的准则，用它来禁绝残暴，引导人们向善。
English: In December, the emperor said: The law is the standard for governing the country, and it is used to prohibit brutality and guide people to goodness.

古文：今犯法已论，而使毋罪之父母妻子同产坐之，及为收帑，朕甚不取。
现代文：现在犯法定罪后，而使无罪的父母、妻子、兄弟连坐，收没妻子儿女为官府奴婢，我非常不赞成这种做法。
English: I strongly disapprove of the practice of making innocent parents, wives and brothers sit together and confiscating their wives and children as slaves of the government after they have committed a legal crime.

古文：其议之。 
现代文：大家讨论一下。 
English: Let's have a discussion.

古文：有司皆曰： 民不能自治，故为法以禁之。
现代文：官员们都说： 百姓不能治理自己，所以制定法律来约束他们。
English: The officials all say: The people cannot govern themselves, so make laws to restrain them.

古文：相坐坐收，所以累其心，使重犯法，所从来远矣。
现代文：互相连坐，收没妻子儿女为官府奴婢，以此来束缚百姓的心理，使他们不敢轻易触犯法律，这种做法由来已久，像从前一样的做法是适宜的。 
English: It has been a long-standing practice to confiscate the wives and children as slaves of the government in order to bind the people's minds so that they would not easily violate the law. It is appropriate to do the same as in the past.

古文：如故便。 上曰： 朕闻法正则民悫，罪当则民从。
现代文：皇帝说： 我听说法律公正则百姓忠厚，论罪量刑得当则百姓顺从。
English: The emperor said: I have heard that if the law is just, the people will be loyal, and if the crime is judged and the punishment is appropriate, the people will obey.

古文：且夫牧民而导之善者，吏也。
现代文：况且管理百姓而引导他们向善的，是官吏。
English: Moreover, it is the officials who govern the people and guide them to do good.

古文：其既不能导，又以不正之法罪之，是反害於民为暴者也。何以禁之？
现代文：官吏既不能加以引导，又采用不公正的法律去论罪，这反而有害于百姓，使他们为暴作乱，法律怎么能禁止得了呢？
English: How can it be prohibited by law when the officials are unable to guide the people and use unjust laws to convict them, which is harmful to the people and causes them to riot?

古文：朕未见其便，其孰计之。 
现代文：我看不出这种法律有什么方便的地方。你们再深思熟虑。 
English: I don't see where such a law would be convenient. Think about it.

古文：有司皆曰： 陛下加大惠，德甚盛，非臣等所及也。
现代文：官员们都说： 皇帝加于民众的恩惠浩荡，德泽非常深厚，不是我们臣下所能赶得上的。
English: The officials all said: The emperor's benevolence to the people is tremendous, and his virtue is very profound, which is beyond the ability of our vassals.

古文：请奉诏书，除收帑诸相坐律令。 
现代文：让我们谨奉诏书，废除一人有罪，妻室收没为官府奴婢和一些互相连坐的法令。 
English: Let us respectfully issue an imperial edict to repeal the one-person-guilty, one-wife-confiscated-as-slaves-and-servants-of-the-government edict and some other joint edicts.

古文：正月，有司言曰： 蚤建太子，所以尊宗庙。
现代文：正月，官员们进言说： 早些确定太子，是为了尊崇宗庙。
English: In the first month of the year, officials suggested that the crown prince should be determined earlier in order to respect the ancestral temple.

古文：请立太子。 
现代文：请现在置立太子。 
English: Please install the crown prince now.

古文：上曰： 朕既不德，上帝神明未歆享，天下人民未有嗛志。
现代文：皇帝说： 我已是德薄之人，神灵没有享受我的祭礼，天下人民没有感到心满意足。
English: The emperor said: I am already a weak person, the gods have not enjoyed my sacrifice, and the people of the world have not felt satisfied.

古文：今纵不能博求天下贤圣有德之人而禅天下焉，而曰豫建太子，是重吾不德也。谓天下何？
现代文：现在我既不能广泛地寻求天下贤圣有德的人而禅让天下，却说什么要预先确立太子，这是使我更加德薄，叫我向天下人如何交待呢？
English: Now that I am not able to widely search for the world's wise, holy and virtuous people and let the world go by, but I say that I want to establish a crown prince in advance, this makes me more humble, so how should I tell the world?

古文：其安之。 
现代文：以后慢慢再说吧。 
English: Let's talk about it later.

古文：有司曰： 豫建太子，所以重宗庙社稷，不忘天下也。 
现代文：官员们说： 预先确立太子，是以宗庙和国家为重，不忘怀天下。 
English: The officials said, "Establishing the crown prince in advance is based on the importance of the ancestral temple and the country, not forgetting the world."

古文：上曰： 楚王，季父也，春秋高，阅天下之义理多矣，明於国家之大体。
现代文：皇帝说： 楚王是我的叔父，年岁大，阅历丰富，懂得很多天下的道理，明了国家大体。
English: The emperor said: King Chu is my uncle. He is old, experienced, knows a lot about the world, and understands the country as a whole.

古文：吴王於朕，兄也，惠仁以好德。
现代文：吴王是我的哥哥，为人仁惠，喜欢以德待人。
English: King Wu is my elder brother. He is a benevolent person and likes to treat others with virtue.

古文：淮南王，弟也，秉德以陪朕。岂为不豫哉！
现代文：淮南王是我的弟弟，身怀美德来辅佐我，这难道不是预先解决了皇帝的继承人吗！
English: King Huainan is my younger brother, and he has come with virtue to assist me. Isn't this a pre-arranged succession of the emperor?

古文：诸侯王宗室昆弟有功臣，多贤及有德义者，若举有德以陪朕之不能终，是社稷之灵，天下之福也。
现代文：诸侯王、宗室、弟兄、有功的大臣，很多是贤明和有德义的人。如果推举有道德的人来帮助和继承我这不能终位的人，这是社稷神明有灵，天下人的福分。
English: Princes and kings, lineages, brothers, and meritorious ministers, many of them are wise and virtuous. If a virtuous person is chosen to help and succeed me, a person who cannot complete his term, this is a blessing for the society, the gods, and the world.

古文：今不选举焉，而曰必子，人其以朕为忘贤有德者而专於子，非所以忧天下也。
现代文：现在不举，而认为一定要传位于儿子，人们会以为我忘记了贤明有德的人，而专意于自己的儿子，不为天下着想。
English: If I don't mention it now, but think that I must pass it on to my son, people will think that I have forgotten the wise and virtuous people, and concentrate on my son, not for the sake of the world.

古文：朕甚不取也。 
现代文：我很不赞成这种做法。 
English: I strongly disapprove of this practice.

古文：有司皆固请曰： 古者殷周有国，治安皆千馀岁，古之有天下者莫长焉，用此道也。
现代文：官员们都坚决地请求说： 古代殷朝、周朝立国，安治天下都有一千多年，古时拥有天下的人都没有比殷、周立国更长远的了，这是因为殷、周采取了传位于子的方法。
English: The officials all firmly pleaded: "Since the ancient Yin and Zhou dynasties founded the country, Anzhi has ruled the world for more than a thousand years. In ancient times, no one has ruled the world for a longer period of time than Yin and Zhou. This is because Yin and Zhou adopted the method of passing down knowledge to their children.

古文：立嗣必子，所从来远矣。
现代文：一定以自己的儿子为继承人，很久以前就是这样做的。
English: He must make his son his heir, which he did a long time ago.

古文：高帝亲率士大夫，始平天下，建诸侯，为帝者太祖。
现代文：高帝亲自率领军士将佐，平定天下，封建诸侯，成为诸帝的太祖。
English: Gao Di personally led the army sergeants to pacify the world and feudal lords, and became the grandfather of all emperors.

古文：诸侯王及列侯始受国者皆亦为其国祖。
现代文：最初接受封国的诸侯王和列侯也成为自己封国的始祖。
English: The princes and lords who initially accepted the fief also became the ancestors of their own fiefs.

古文：子孙继嗣，世世弗绝，天下之大义也，故高帝设之以抚海内。
现代文：子孙相继嗣位，世世不绝，这是天下大义所在，所以高帝建立传位于子的制度来安定海内。
English: The descendants succeed to the throne one after another, never ending. This is what is most important in the world. Therefore, Emperor Gao established the system of inheriting the throne to stabilize the country.

古文：今释宜建而更选於诸侯及宗室，非高帝之志也。
现代文：现在放弃应当立为继承人的人选，而另从诸侯和宗室里面挑选，这不是高帝的想法。
English: It was not Gao Di's idea to give up the candidate who should be appointed as the heir, and to choose from the princes and the family instead.

古文：更议不宜。
现代文：改立别人的做法是不合适的。
English: It is not appropriate to re-establish someone else's practice.

古文：子某最长，纯厚慈仁，请建以为太子。 
现代文：子某是长子，纯厚仁慈，请立为太子。 
English: The son is the eldest son, pure and benevolent, please make him the crown prince.

古文：上乃许之。
现代文：皇帝答应了。
English: The Emperor agreed.

古文：因赐天下民当代父後者爵各一级封将军薄昭为轵侯。
现代文：并因此赐予天下百姓应当继承父业的长子每人爵一级。封将军薄昭为轵侯。
English: and therefore bestowed upon the people of the world a peerage for each eldest son who should inherit his father's estate. General Bo Zhao was given the title of marquis.

古文：三月，有司请立皇后。
现代文：三月，官员们请求封立皇后。
English: In March, officials requested that the empress be enthroned.

古文：薄太后曰： 诸侯皆同姓，立太子母为皇后。 
现代文：薄太后说： 诸侯王都是同姓，就立太子的母亲为皇后吧。 
English: The Empress Dowager Bo said, "All princes have the same surname, so let's make the prince's mother the empress."

古文：皇后姓窦氏。
现代文：皇后姓窦。
English: The empress's family name was Dou.

古文：上为立后故，赐天下鳏寡孤独穷困及年八十已上孤兒九岁已下布帛米肉各有数。
现代文：皇帝由于立皇后的缘故，赐予天下鳏寡孤独和贫穷困苦的人，以及年龄八十以上的老人、九岁以下的孤儿一定数量的布、帛、米、肉。
English: For the sake of establishing the empress dowager, the emperor granted a certain amount of cloth, straw, rice, and meat to the widows, the lonely, the poor, and the destitute, as well as to the elderly over the age of eighty and orphans under the age of nine.

古文：上从代来，初即位，施德惠天下，填抚诸侯四夷皆洽驩，乃循从代来功臣。
现代文：皇帝从代国来到都城，即位不久，就对天下百姓广施德惠，安抚诸侯和四方少数民族，他们都很欢欣而又融洽，于是依次赏赐从代国跟随来都城的功臣。
English: The emperor came to the capital city from the dynasties, and soon after his enthronement, he began to provide a wide range of benefits to the people of the world, appeasing the princes and the ethnic minorities of the four directions. They were very happy and harmonious, so he rewarded the meritorious vassals who came to the capital city from the dynasties.

古文：上曰： 方大臣之诛诸吕迎朕，朕狐疑，皆止朕，唯中尉宋昌劝朕，朕以得保奉宗庙。
现代文：皇帝说： 当大臣诛灭吕氏子弟迎接我的时候，我犹豫不决，大家都阻拦我，只有中尉宋昌劝我，这样我才能够事奉宗庙。
English: The emperor said, "When I was greeted by Minister Zou Zhicheng, a son of the Lü clan, I hesitated, everyone blocked me, and only Lieutenant Song Chang persuaded me so that I could serve the ancestral temple.

古文：已尊昌为卫将军，其封昌为壮武侯。
现代文：已经尊崇宋昌为卫将军，再封宋昌为壮武侯。
English: He had already revered Song Chang as Wei general, and re-designated Song Chang as Zhuangwu marquis.

古文：诸从朕六人，官皆至九卿。 
现代文：那些随从我来都城的六个人，官职都升到九卿。 
English: The six people who came with me to the capital have all been promoted to the ninth rank.

古文：上曰： 列侯从高帝入蜀、汉中者六十八人皆益封各三百户，故吏二千石以上从高帝颍川守尊等十人食邑六百户，淮阳守申徒嘉等十人五百户，卫尉定等十人四百户。
现代文：皇帝说： 列侯中跟随高帝去蜀、汉中的六十八个人都各加封食邑三百户，过去随从高帝二千石以上的官吏颍川郡郡守尊等十人，各封给食邑六百户，淮阳郡郡守申徒嘉等十人各封给食邑五百户，卫尉定等十人各封给食邑四百户。
English: The emperor said: The sixty-eight people from the Han Dynasty and the sixty-eight people from the Lechu Dynasty who followed Gao Di to Shu, each of them sealed three hundred households in food villages. The ten officials from the Shichuan County and the Shuzun County who followed Gao Di with more than two thousand koku, each sealed six hundred households in food villages, the ten people from the Huaiyang County and the Shentujia County, each sealed five hundred households in food villages, and the ten people from the Wei County and the Shuzun County, each sealed four hundred households in food villages.

古文：封淮南王舅父赵兼为周阳侯，齐王舅父驷钧为清郭侯。 
现代文：封淮南王舅父赵兼为周阳侯，齐王舅父驷钧为清郭侯。 
English: The uncle of Huainan King, Zhao Jian, was named Zhou Yang Hou, and the uncle of Qi King, Zou, was named Qing Guo Hou.

古文：秋，封故常山丞相蔡兼为樊侯。
现代文：秋天，封原来常山国的丞相蔡兼为樊侯。
English: In autumn, Cai Jian, the chancellor of the former Jingshan Kingdom, was appointed as the prince.

古文：人或说右丞相曰： 君本诛诸吕，迎代王，今又矜其功，受上赏，处尊位，祸且及身。 
现代文：有人劝告右丞相说： 你本来是诛除吕氏子弟，迎接代王为天子，现在又靠这些功劳，接受最大的赏赐，处在尊显的地位，不久就要灾难临头。 
English: Someone advised the Minister of the Right, saying, "You were supposed to expel the sons of Lü and welcome the acting king as the Son of Heaven, but now, thanks to these merits, you are receiving the greatest reward and are in a position of prominence, and soon disaster will be at hand.

古文：右丞相勃乃谢病免罢，左丞相平专为丞相。
现代文：右丞相周勃就推托有病，罢免了右丞相职务，左丞相陈平一人专任丞相。
English: Right-hand minister Zhou Bo was dismissed on the grounds that he was ill, and left-hand minister Chen Ping was made a full-time minister.

古文：二年十月，丞相平卒，复以绛侯勃为丞相。
现代文：二年十月，丞相陈平死了，又以绛侯周勃为丞相。
English: In October of the second year, the chancellor Chen Ping died, and Zhou Bo was appointed chancellor.

古文：上曰： 朕闻古者诸侯建国千馀，各守其地，以时入贡，民不劳苦，上下驩欣，靡有遗德。
现代文：皇帝说： 我听说古代诸侯建国数量有一千多个，每人守卫着自己的封土，按规定时间向天子纳贡，百姓不劳苦，上下欢欢喜喜，没有丧失道德的地方。
English: The emperor said: I have heard that in ancient times there were more than a thousand princes who founded a country. Each of them guarded his fief and paid tribute to the Son of Heaven according to the prescribed time. The people did not work hard, they were happy and joyful, and there was no place for loss of morality.

古文：今列侯多居长安，邑远，吏卒给输费苦，而列侯亦无由教驯其民。
现代文：现在列侯大多数往在长安，距离封邑遥远，那里的官吏和士卒供给输送所需物资，费力而又劳苦，列侯也无从教育训导他的民众。
English: Now most of the vassals are in Chang'an, far away from the fiefdoms, where the officials and soldiers supply and transport the necessary materials, laborious and laborious, and the vassal has no way to educate and train his people.

古文：其令列侯之国，为吏及诏所止者，遣太子。 
现代文：命令列侯回到封国去，在朝廷担任官职和有诏令留下的，派遣太子前往封国。 
English: He ordered the feudal lords to return to their fiefs, to take up official positions in the imperial court, and to dispatch princes to their fiefs, if there were any left after the imperial edict.

古文：十一月晦，日有食之。
现代文：十一月的最后一天，发生日食。
English: On the last day of November, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：十二月望，日又食。
现代文：十二月十五日，又发生日食。
English: On December 15, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：上曰： 朕闻之，天生蒸民，为之置君以养治之。
现代文：皇帝说： 我听说上天生育了万民，为他们设置君主来抚养和治理他们。
English: The emperor said, "I have heard that heaven gave birth to all nations, and set over them kings to rule and govern them.

古文：人主不德，布政不均，则天示之以菑，以诫不治。
现代文：君主不仁德，施政不公平，上天就以灾异相示，来告诫他天下没治理好。
English: If a monarch is not benevolent and his administration is not fair, Heaven will show him by signs and wonders to warn him that the world is not well governed.

古文：乃十一月晦，日有食之，適见于天，菑孰大焉！
现代文：十一月末，发生了日食，上天向我显示了谴责之意，灾异没有比这更为严重的了。
English: At the end of November, there was a solar eclipse, and the heavens showed me the meaning of condemnation. There is nothing more serious than this.

古文：朕获保宗庙，以微眇之身讬于兆民君王之上，天下治乱，在朕一人，唯二三执政犹吾股肱也。
现代文：我能够守护宗庙，以渺小的个人处于亿万民众和诸侯王之上，天下治乱，在我一人，只有两三个执政大臣如同我的左膀右臂。
English: I am able to guard the ancestral temple, with a tiny individual to be above hundreds of millions of people and princes, to rule the world, in me alone, only two or three ruling ministers are like my right and left arm.

古文：朕下不能理育群生，上以累三光之明，其不德大矣。
现代文：我对下不能治理和养育万物主灵，对上有损于日、月、星辰的光辉，我的不仁德实在是太严重了。
English: I am unable to govern and nurture the Lord of All Things, and I have damaged the brilliance of the sun, moon, and stars. My lack of benevolence is too serious.

古文：令至，其悉思朕之过失，及知见思之所不及，匄以告朕。
现代文：诏令下达后，都要思考一下我的错误，以及我所知、所见、所想都达不到的地方，请求你们告诉我。
English: After the edict is issued, I would like to think about my mistakes, and where I can't reach what I know, see, and think, and ask you to tell me.

古文：及举贤良方正能直言极谏者，以匡朕之不逮。
现代文：并且推选贤良方正，能够直言极谏的人，来纠正我的过失。
English: And I have chosen a virtuous and upright man, who is able to speak the truth, to correct my mistake.

古文：因各饬其任职，务省繇费以便民。
现代文：趁此机会各自整顿自己担负的职责，力求减少徭役和费用，以便利百姓。
English: Take this opportunity to rectify their respective responsibilities, and strive to reduce labor and costs, so as to benefit the people.

古文：朕既不能远德，故忄间然念外人之有非，是以设备未息。
现代文：我既然不能远施德泽，所以心里很不安，担心边远地区的人们有为非作歹的，由于这一缘故没有解除军事戒备。
English: Since I can't go far from Stettsee, I'm very uneasy in my heart, worried that people in remote areas might do something wrong, and for this reason I haven't lifted the military alert.

古文：今纵不能罢边屯戍，而又饬兵厚卫，其罢卫将军军。
现代文：现在纵然不能罢除边塞的屯戍，而又命令士卒严严实实地保卫我，撤掉卫将军统率的军队。
English: Even though it is not possible to remove the garrison of the frontier fortress, I have ordered the officers and men to defend me strictly and earnestly, and to remove the army led by the guard general.

古文：太仆见马遗财足，馀皆以给传置。 
现代文：太仆现存的马匹留下仅仅够用的，多余的都送给驿站。 
English: The servants left only enough horses to be of use, and the rest were given to the post office.

古文：正月，上曰： 农，天下之本，其开籍田，朕亲率耕，以给宗庙粢盛。 
现代文：正月，皇帝说： 农业是国家的基础，我要开垦籍田，亲自率领耕种，以供给祭祀宗庙时所用的谷物。 
English: In the first month of the year, the emperor said, "Agriculture is the foundation of the country. I will cultivate my ancestral fields and personally lead the cultivation in order to supply the grain used in the worship of the ancestral temple."

古文：三月，有司请立皇子为诸侯王。
现代文：三月，官员们请求立皇子为诸侯王。
English: In March, officials requested that the prince be made vassal king.

古文：上曰： 赵幽王幽死，朕甚怜之，已立其长子遂为赵王。
现代文：皇帝说： 赵幽王被幽禁而死，我非常怜悯他，已经立他的大儿子刘遂为赵王。
English: The emperor said, "Zhao Youwang died under confinement. I have great compassion for him. I have appointed his eldest son Liu Sui as King Zhao.

古文：遂弟辟彊及齐悼惠王子硃虚侯章、东牟侯兴居有功，可王。 
现代文：刘遂的弟弟刘辟疆以及齐悼惠王的儿子朱虚侯刘章、东牟侯刘兴居立有功劳，可以封王。 
English: Liu Sui's younger brother, Liu Bijian, as well as Zhu Xuhou's sons, Liu Zhang and Dongmou's Liu Xingju, who jointly mourned the death of Hui Wang, have made great contributions and can be crowned king.

古文：乃立赵幽王少子辟彊为河间王，以齐剧郡立硃虚侯为城阳王，立东牟侯为济北王，皇子武为代王，子参为太原王，子揖为梁王。
现代文：于是就立赵幽王的小儿子刘辟疆为河间王，以齐国重要的郡地立朱虚侯为城阳王，立东牟侯为济北王，立皇子刘武为代王，皇子刘参为太原王，皇子刘揖为梁王。
English: Therefore, Liu Bijian, the youngest son of King Zhao Yu, was established as the king of Hema, Zhu Xiu, the important county of Qi, was established as the king of Chengyang, Dong Mou, the king of Jibei, Prince Liu Wu, the acting king, Prince Liu San, the king of Taiyuan, and Prince Liu Ye, the king of Liang.

古文：上曰： 古之治天下，朝有进善之旌，诽谤之木，所以通治道而来谏者。
现代文：皇帝说： 古代治理天下，朝廷设有进献善言的旌旗和供书写批评言论的木柱，以此来保持治国之道的畅通，使直言正谏的人前来发表意见。
English: The emperor said: In ancient times, when the emperor ruled the world, the imperial court set up a banner to offer good words and a wooden pillar to write criticisms, so as to keep the road of governing the country smooth and make the outspoken people come to express their opinions.

古文：今法有诽谤妖言之罪，是使众臣不敢尽情，而上无由闻过失也。将何以来远方之贤良？
现代文：现在法律上有诽谤妖言之罪，这就使大臣们不敢畅所欲言，皇帝无从听到自己的过失，这怎么能够使远方的贤良人士来到朝廷呢？
English: Now that there is a legal crime of slandering oracles, which makes ministers afraid to speak freely, and the emperor unable to hear his own faults, how can this make faraway virtuous people come to the imperial court?

古文：其除之。
现代文：应该废除这一法令。
English: It should be abolished.

古文：民或祝诅上以相约结而後相谩，吏以为大逆，其有他言，而吏又以为诽谤。
现代文：百姓当中有人咒诅皇帝，约定互相隐瞒，而后来又相互欺蒙揭发，官吏就认为是大逆不道，如果还有其他言论，官吏又以为是诽谤。
English: If there are people among the common people who curse the emperor, make an agreement to conceal something from each other, and then deceive and expose each other, the officials will consider it to be a great treason, and if there are other remarks, the officials will consider it to be slander.

古文：此细民之愚无知抵死，朕甚不取。
现代文：这些都是小民的愚昧无知，据此治以死罪，我非常不赞成。
English: All of this is the ignorance and stupidity of the common people, and I strongly disapprove of the death penalty based on this.

古文：自今以来，有犯此者勿听治。 
现代文：从今以后，有犯这种罪行的，不要审理和治罪。 
English: From now on, those who commit such crimes should not be tried and punished.

古文：九月，初与郡国守相为铜虎符、竹使符。
现代文：九月，开始把调兵遣将用的铜虎符和使者出入征发的竹使符给与郡守和封国丞相。
English: In September, county governors and provincial secretaries began to receive bronze tiger charms for dispatching troops and bamboo messenger charms for dispatching emissaries.

古文：三年十月丁酉晦，日有食之。
现代文：三年十月三十日，发生日食。
English: On October 30, 2003, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：十一月，上曰： 前日遣列侯之国，或辞未行。
现代文：十一月，皇帝说： 前些时候下诏让列侯前往自己的封国，有的托词不走。
English: In November, the emperor said, "Some time ago, I issued an edict to let the feudal lords go to their own fiefdoms, but some of them made excuses not to go.

古文：丞相朕之所重，其为朕率列侯之国。 
现代文：丞相是我所器重的，应该率领列侯前往封国。 
English: I hold the chancellor in high esteem, and he should lead the vassals to the fief.

古文：绛侯勃免丞相就国，以太尉颍阴侯婴为丞相。
现代文：绦侯周勃免除丞相职务，回到自己的封国，以大尉颖阴侯灌婴为丞相。
English: Gong Hou Zhou Bo was relieved of his duties as chancellor and returned to his fiefdom, with Captain Ying Yin Hou Guan Yu as chancellor.

古文：罢太尉官，属丞相。
现代文：废除太尉这一官职，把它的权限归属丞相。
English: Abolish the post of captain and assign its powers to the prime minister.

古文：四月，城阳王章薨。
现代文：四月，城阳王刘章去世。
English: In April, Liu Zhang, the King of Chengyang, passed away.

古文：淮南王长与从者魏敬杀辟阳侯审食其。
现代文：淮南王刘长和随从人员魏敬杀死了辟阳侯审食其。
English: Liu Chang, the king of Huainan, and Wei Jing, his attendants, killed and ate Biyang Hou.

古文：五月，匈奴入北地，居河南为寇。
现代文：五月，匈奴进入北地郡，占据黄河以南，寇掠为害。
English: In May, the Xiongnu entered Beidai County, occupied the south of the Yellow River, and plundered and pillaged.

古文：帝初幸甘泉。
现代文：皇帝初次幸临甘泉宫。
English: The emperor visited Gansu Palace for the first time.

古文：六月，帝曰： 汉与匈奴约为昆弟，毋使害边境，所以输遗匈奴甚厚。
现代文：六月，皇帝说： 汉朝和匈奴结为兄弟，不让它侵害边境，为此输送匈奴的礼物非常丰厚。
English: In June, the emperor said: "The Han Dynasty and the Xiongnu became brothers and did not let it encroach on the border. Therefore, the gifts sent by the Xiongnu were very rich.

古文：今右贤王离其国，将众居河南降地，非常故，往来近塞，捕杀吏卒，驱保塞蛮夷，令不得居其故，陵轹边吏，入盗，甚敖无道，非约也。
现代文：现在右贤王离开他的国土，带领部众驻扎在黄河以南已经降服汉朝的地区，改变了原来的状态，在边塞地区出入往来，捕杀官吏和士卒，驱逐城堡要塞上的蛮夷，不让他们居住在原地，欺凌边地官吏，进入内地抢劫，非常傲慢无道，违背了过去的约定。
English: Now King Uxian left his country and stationed his troops south of the Yellow River in the areas that had already surrendered to the Han Dynasty. He changed the original state, went in and out of the border areas, killed officials and soldiers, expelled barbarians from the castle fortress, did not allow them to live in the same place, bullied border officials, and robbed inland. He was very arrogant and had no morals, and violated past agreements.

古文：其发边吏骑八万五千诣高奴，遣丞相颍阴侯灌婴击匈奴。 
现代文：调发边境地区的官吏和骑兵八万五千人到高奴，派遣丞相颖阴侯灌婴出击匈奴。 
English: He dispatched 85,000 officials and cavalrymen from the border regions to Gao Niu, and sent the prime minister, Ying Yin, and the viceroy, Guan Yu, to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴去，发中尉材官属卫将军军长安。
现代文：匈奴撤离了边塞。调遣中尉材官归属卫将军，驻扎在长安。
English: The Xiongnu evacuated the border fortress. The dispatched lieutenant officer belonged to General Wei and was stationed in Chang'an.

古文：辛卯，帝自甘泉之高奴，因幸太原，见故群臣，皆赐之。
现代文：二十七日，皇帝从甘泉宫去高奴，顺路驾临太原，接见原来代国的群臣，全都加以赏赐。
English: On the 27th, the emperor went from Ganquan Palace to Gao Nong, passing by Taiyuan on the way, and received the ministers who originally represented the country, and rewarded them all.

古文：举功行赏，诸民里赐牛酒。
现代文：又选取有功劳的大臣另行奖赏，那些里中百姓赐给牛和酒。
English: In addition, the meritorious ministers were selected for a separate reward, and the people in those villages were given cattle and wine.

古文：复晋阳中都民三岁。
现代文：免除晋阳、中都民众三年的徭役和赋税。
English: The people of Jinyang and Zhongdu were exempted from three years of labor and taxes.

古文：留游太原十馀日。
现代文：在太原停留巡游了十多天。
English: It stayed in Taiyuan for more than ten days.

古文：济北王兴居闻帝之代，欲往击胡，乃反，发兵欲袭荥阳。
现代文：济北王刘兴居听说皇帝前往代地，准备出击匈奴，就趁机反叛，调遣军队打算袭击荥阳。
English: When Liu Xingju, the king of northern Jibei, heard that the emperor was preparing to attack the Xiongnu, he took advantage of the opportunity to rebel and dispatch troops to attack Shenyang.

古文：於是诏罢丞相兵，遣棘蒲侯陈武为大将军，将十万往击之。
现代文：于是皇帝下诏让丞相停止进攻匈奴，派遣棘蒲侯陈武为大将军，统率十万军队去攻打济北王。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an edict to the prime minister to stop attacking the Xiongnu, and dispatched Chen Wu, the Prince of Thorns, as a great general to lead a hundred thousand troops to attack the King of the North.

古文：祁侯贺为将军，军荥阳。
现代文：祁侯缯贺为将军，驻扎在荥阳。
English: He was stationed in Shenyang as a general.

古文：七月辛亥，帝自太原至长安。乃诏有司曰： 济北王背德反上，诖误吏民，为大逆。
现代文：七月十八日，皇帝从太原回到长安，就对官员们下诏说： 济北王违背道德，反叛皇帝，连累了官吏和民众，大逆不道。
English: On July 18, when the emperor returned to Chang'an from Taiyuan, he issued an edict to the officials, saying: King Jibei violated morality, rebelled against the emperor, entangled the officials and the people, and committed high treason.

古文：济北吏民兵未至先自定，及以军地邑降者，皆赦之，复官爵。
现代文：如果大军未至，济北官吏和民众自己先安定下来，以及以军队和地方城邑投降的人，一律赦免，恢复原来的官职和爵位。
English: If, before the arrival of the great army, the officials and people of Jibei first settled down, and those who surrendered with the army and local towns were all pardoned and restored to their former official posts and titles.

古文：与王兴居去来，亦赦之。 
现代文：与济北王刘兴居一起反叛又回来的，也予赦免。 
English: Those who rebelled and returned with Liu Xingju, the king of northern Jibei, were also pardoned.

古文：八月，破济北军，虏其王。
现代文：八月，打垮了济北封国的军队，俘虏了济北王。
English: In August, he defeated the army of the feudal state of Jibei and captured the king of Jibei.

古文：赦济北诸吏民与王反者。
现代文：赦免济北封国跟随济北王起来造反的官吏和民众。
English: He pardoned the officials and people of the fiefdom of Jibei who followed the king of Jibei and rebelled.

古文：六年，有司言淮南王长废先帝法，不听天子诏，居处毋度，出入拟於天子，擅为法令，与棘蒲侯太子奇谋反，遣人使闽越及匈奴，发其兵，欲以危宗庙社稷。
现代文：六年，官员们报告淮南王刘长废弃先帝的法令，不听从天子的诏命，居住的宫室不合乎法度，出入时军马仪仗仿照天子的规格，擅自制定法令，和棘蒲侯的太子陈奇阴谋反叛，派人出使闽越和匈奴，征发他们的军队，想要危害宗庙和国家。
English: In the sixth year, the officials reported that Liu Chang, the king of Huainan, had abandoned the decrees of the former emperor, disobeyed the emperor's edict, lived in a palace that was not in accordance with the law, adopted the emperor's specifications when entering and leaving the palace, made decrees without authorization, conspired with Chen Qi, the prince of Nanpu, to rebel, and sent envoys to Suiyue and Xiongnu to conscript their troops, intending to endanger the ancestral temple and the country.

古文：群臣议，皆曰 长当弃市 帝不忍致法於王，赦其罪，废勿王。
现代文：大臣们讨论，都说 刘长应当处死街头，暴尸示众 。皇帝不忍心按法律处理淮南王，赦免了他的罪过，废除了他的王位。
English: The ministers discussed and all said that Liu Chang should be put to death in the street and his corpse displayed to the public. The emperor could not bear to deal with King Huainan according to the law, pardoned his sins, and abolished his throne.

古文：群臣请处王蜀严道、邛都，帝许之。
现代文：大臣们要求把淮南王流放到蜀郡严道邛都一带，皇帝答应了。
English: The ministers requested that Huainan Wang be exiled to the area around Yandao, Shu County, and the emperor agreed.

古文：长未到处所，行病死，上怜之。
现代文：刘长没有到达流放他的地方，就病死在路上，皇帝很怜悯他。
English: Liu Chang did not reach the place where he was exiled, and died of illness on the way. The emperor took pity on him.

古文：後十六年，追尊淮南王长谥为厉王，立其子三人为淮南王、衡山王、庐江王。
现代文：后来第十六年，追尊淮南王刘长，谥号为厉王，封他的三个儿子为淮南王、衡山王、庐江王。
English: Later, in the 16th year of his reign, Liu Chang, the king of Huainan, was named Li Wang, and his three sons were named Huainan Wang, Hengshan Wang, and Liangjiang Wang.

古文：十三年夏，上曰： 盖闻天道祸自怨起而福繇德兴。
现代文：十三年夏天，皇帝说： 我听说祸患起自怨恨，幸福生于美德，这是上天的规律。
English: In the summer of the thirteenth year, the emperor said, "I have heard that evil springs from hatred, and happiness from virtue. This is the law of heaven.

古文：百官之非，宜由朕躬。
现代文：百官的过错，应该由我亲身负责。
English: I should be personally responsible for the mistakes of the officials.

古文：今祕祝之官移过于下，以彰吾之不德，朕甚不取。
现代文：现在秘密祷祝的官员把过错委于下面的大臣，这使我的不道德更加昭彰，我非常不赞成这种做法。
English: The fact that the officials who are now praying in secret are blaming the ministers below only highlights my immorality, and I strongly disapprove of this practice.

古文：其除之。 
现代文：应该予以废除。 
English: It should be abolished.

古文：五月，齐太仓令淳于公有罪当刑，诏狱逮徙系长安。
现代文：五月，齐国的太仓令淳于公犯有罪行，应当遭受刑罚，诏狱把他逮捕后拘系在长安。
English: In May, the Taicang Emperor of the State of Qi decreed that Jun had committed a crime against the public and should be punished. After his arrest, he was detained in Chang'an.

古文：太仓公无男，有女五人。
现代文：太仓公没有男孩子，有五个女儿。
English: Lord Taicang had no sons, but five daughters.

古文：太仓公将行会逮，骂其女曰： 生子不生男，有缓急非有益也！ 
现代文：太仓公被捕临走时，骂他的女儿说： 生孩子而没有生男的，有个缓急事情，一点用处也没有！ 
English: When Lord Taicang was arrested and was about to leave, he scolded his daughter, saying, "If you give birth to a child without giving birth to a man, there is a matter of urgency, and there is no use at all!

古文：其少女缇萦自伤泣，乃随其父至长安，上书曰： 妾父为吏，齐中皆称其廉平，今坐法当刑。
现代文：他的小儿女缇萦独自伤心地哭起来，跟随他的父亲到了长安。她上书说： 我父亲为官，齐国地区的人都称赞他廉洁公平，如今犯法应当受刑。
English: His little daughter and son, both crying alone and sad, followed their father to Chang'an. She wrote, "My father is a government official, and people in Qi Province praise him for his honesty and fairness. Now he should be punished for breaking the law."

古文：妾伤夫死者不可复生，刑者不可复属，虽复欲改过自新，其道无由也。
现代文：我悲伤已经死去的人不能复活，身受刑罚的人不能再把肢体连接起来，虽然想改过自新，也无路可走。
English: I grieve for those who have died and cannot be revived, for those who have been punished and can no longer connect their limbs. Although they want to reform, there is no way out.

古文：妾原没入为官婢，赎父刑罪，使得自新。 
现代文：我愿意被收入官府为奴婢，来抵赎父亲的刑罪，使父亲能改过自新。 
English: I am willing to be taken into the government as a slave, to atone for my father's crime, so that my father can reform.

古文：书奏天子，天子怜悲其意，乃下诏曰： 盖闻有虞氏之时，画衣冠异章服以为僇，而民不犯。
现代文：缇萦的上书送给了皇帝，皇帝哀怜她的心意，就下诏说： 听说有虞氏时期，图画罪犯的衣帽，使与一般人不同，以此来羞辱罪犯，而民众不违犯法令。
English: Her petition was sent to the emperor, who took pity on her and issued an edict saying, "It is said that during the reign of Emperor Yu, criminals were depicted with different clothes and hats to shame them, but the people did not violate the law.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：至治也。
现代文：是因为政治极端清明。
English: It's because politics is extremely clean.

古文：今法有肉刑三，而奸不止，其咎安在？
现代文：现在法律规定有三种肉刑，而奸邪犯法的事情不能禁止，过错在哪里呢？
English: Now the law stipulates that there are three kinds of corporal punishment, but the crime of treason cannot be prohibited. Where is the fault?

古文：非乃朕德薄而教不明欤？
现代文：不就是我的德薄，教化不显著的缘故吗？
English: Isn't it because of my poor morals and lack of education?

古文：吾甚自愧。
现代文：我自己深感惭愧。
English: I am deeply ashamed of myself.

古文：故夫驯道不纯而愚民陷焉。诗曰 恺悌君子，民之父母 。
现代文：所以说教的方法不对就会使百姓陷入愚昧。《诗》中说 和易近人的君子，是民众的父母 。
English: Therefore, if the method of preaching is not right, it will make the people fall into ignorance. In the poem, it says that the gentle and approachable gentleman is the parents of the people.

古文：今人有过，教未施而刑加焉？或欲改行为善而道毋由也。朕甚怜之。夫刑至断支体，刻肌肤，终身不息，何其楚痛而不德也，岂称为民父母之意哉！
现代文：现在人们有了过错，没有进行教育就刑罚加身，有的人想要改过向善，也没有途径可行，我非常怜悯这些人，刑罚之重，至于断裂肢体，刻肌刺肤，终身不能恢复，这是多么痛苦而又不道德啊，哪里符合为民众父母的意思呢！
English: Nowadays, when people make a mistake, they are punished without education. Some people want to change for the better, but there is no feasible way. I have great pity for these people. The severity of the punishment, as for the broken limbs, the cut skin, can not be restored for life. How painful and immoral is this? What is the meaning of being the parents of the people?

古文：其除肉刑。 
现代文：应该废除肉刑。 
English: Corporal punishment should be abolished.

古文：上曰： 农，天下之本，务莫大焉。
现代文：皇帝说： 农业是天下的根本，各项事情没有比这更为重要的了。
English: The emperor said, "Agriculture is the foundation of the world, and there is nothing more important than this.

古文：今勤身从事而有租税之赋，是为本末者毋以异，其於劝农之道未备。
现代文：现在辛勤从事农业生产的人反而要交纳租税，这是把务本和逐未的人没有加以区别，对于劝民务农的方法未能完备。
English: Now, people who are diligently engaged in agricultural production have to pay taxes instead. This is because there is no distinction between those who are working hard and those who are lagging behind, and the methods for persuading people to engage in agriculture are not complete.

古文：其除田之租税。 
现代文：应该免除农田的租税。 
English: Farmland should be exempt from taxes.

古文：十四年冬，匈奴谋入边为寇，攻朝塞，杀北地都尉卬。
现代文：十四年冬天，匈奴密谋入边寇掠，攻打朝那边塞，杀死了北地郡的都尉孙印。
English: In the winter of the 14th year, the Xiongnu plotted to invade and plunder the border, attacked the fortress on the other side of the country, and killed the captain of Beidai County, Sun Yin.

古文：上乃遣三将军军陇西、北地、上郡，中尉周舍为卫将军，郎中令张武为车骑将军，军渭北，车千乘，骑卒十万。
现代文：皇帝就派遣三位将军驻扎在陇西、北地、上郡，中尉周舍为卫将军，郎中令张武为车骑将军，驻扎在渭水北面，统率战车一千辆，骑兵十万。
English: The emperor dispatched three generals to be stationed in Shaanxi, Hubei, and Shangxun. Lieutenant Zhou She was the general of the guards, and his lieutenant Zhang Wu was the general of the cavalry, stationed in the north of Surabaya, commanding a thousand chariots and a hundred thousand cavalry.

古文：帝亲自劳军，勒兵申教令，赐军吏卒。
现代文：皇帝亲自慰劳士卒，训练军队，申明教令，赏赐官兵。
English: The emperor personally consoled the laborers and soldiers, trained the army, affirmed the edict, and rewarded the officers and soldiers.

古文：帝欲自将击匈奴，群臣谏，皆不听。
现代文：皇帝准备亲自带兵出击匈奴，大臣们出来劝阻，他一律不采纳。
English: The emperor was preparing to personally lead an army to attack the Xiongnu. The ministers came out to dissuade him, but he would not accept it.

古文：皇太后固要帝，帝乃止。
现代文：皇太后坚决拦阻皇帝，皇帝才取消了原来的计划。
English: The empress dowager resolutely blocked the emperor, and only then did the emperor cancel the original plan.

古文：於是以东阳侯张相如为大将军，成侯赤为内史，栾布为将军，击匈奴。
现代文：于是以东阳侯张相如为大将军，成侯董赤为内史，栾布为将军，出兵攻打匈奴。
English: Therefore, with Dongyang marquis Zhang Xiangru as the general, Chenghou marquis Dong Chia as the inner historian, and Zibo as the general, they sent troops to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴遁走。
现代文：匈奴逃走了。
English: The Xiongnu fled.

古文：春，上曰： 朕获执牺牲珪币以事上帝宗庙，十四年于今，历日长，以不敏不明而久抚临天下，朕甚自愧。
现代文：春天，皇帝说： 我能够用牺牲玉帛来祭祀上天和宗庙，到现在已有十四年。经过了漫长的岁月，以我这样一个不聪敏不圣明的人而长期抚临天下，深感自愧。
English: In the spring, the emperor said, "It has been fourteen years since I was able to sacrifice Jade Dragonfly to the heavens and the ancestral temple. After such a long period of time, I feel deeply ashamed that I, an unintelligent and unholy person, have been worshipped for so long.

古文：其广增诸祀墠场珪币。
现代文：应该扩大各种祭祀用的墠场和增多祭祀用的玉帛。
English: It is necessary to expand the sacrificial sites for all kinds of rituals and increase the number of ritual gongs.

古文：昔先王远施不求其报，望祀不祈其福，右贤左戚，先民後己，至明之极也。
现代文：过去先王远施恩德而不求报答，举行祭祀而不祈求福佑自己，尊崇贤才，不重亲戚，先民后己，圣明到了极点。
English: In the past, the ancestors of Wangyuan did not seek reward for their kindness, held sacrifices without praying for blessings, respected the wise, did not care about relatives, and followed the people, and the sacredness reached the extreme.

古文：今吾闻祠官祝釐，皆归福朕躬，不为百姓，朕甚愧之。
现代文：现在我听说主管祭祀的官员向神灵祈求福佑时，都只为我一人祈福，不为百姓祈福，我非常惭愧。
English: Now I have heard that when officials in charge of religious services pray to the gods for blessings, they only pray for me and not for the people. I am very ashamed.

古文：夫以朕不德，而躬享独美其福，百姓不与焉，是重吾不德。
现代文：以我这样不德的人，而单独享受神灵的福佑，百姓不能分享，这就加重了我的不德。
English: For an immoral person like me to enjoy the blessings of the gods alone, without the people being able to share them, only increased my immorality.

古文：其令祠官致敬，毋有所祈。 
现代文：现在命令主管祭祀的官员按时向神灵表示敬意，不要为我有所祈祷。 
English: I now order the officials in charge of the rituals to pay their respects to the gods on time and not to pray for me.

古文：是时北平侯张苍为丞相，方明律历。
现代文：这时北平侯张苍为丞相，正在制定乐律和历法。
English: At this time, Beiping marquis Zhang Cang was the chancellor, and he was working out the music and calendar.

古文：鲁人公孙臣上书陈终始传五德事，言方今土德时，土德应黄龙见，当改正朔服色制度。
现代文：鲁地人公孙臣上书讲述五德终始的学说，提出现在是土德时期，土德就会有黄龙出现，应当改变历法正朔、官服颜色和各种制度。
English: The Ludian statesman Sun Zhen wrote a letter describing the theory of the end of the Five Dynasties and the beginning of the Five Dynasties, and proposed that now is the period of the Tudors, there will be a yellow dragon in the Tudors, and it is necessary to change the calendar, the color of the official uniform and various systems.

古文：天子下其事与丞相议。
现代文：皇帝把这件事交下去，让大臣们与丞相讨论。
English: The emperor passed the matter on for the ministers to discuss with the prime minister.

古文：丞相推以为今水德，始明正十月上黑事，以为其言非是，请罢之。
现代文：丞相研究后以为当今是水德，就开始把十月为岁首和崇尚黑色这件事明确下来。
English: After studying, the prime minister thought that today is water virtue, and began to clarify the matter of October as the beginning of the year and advocating black.

古文：十五年，黄龙见成纪，天子乃复召鲁公孙臣，以为博士，申明土德事。
现代文：由于他认为公孙臣上书所说是不正确的，所以要求不采纳公孙臣的建议。十五年，黄龙出现在成纪，皇帝又一次召见鲁地的公孙臣，任命他担任博士，阐明当今应为土德的道理。
English: Because he thought that what Gongsun Chen said in his letter was not correct, he asked that Gongsun Chen's suggestion not be accepted. In 15 years, when the Yellow Dragon appeared in Chengji, the emperor once again summoned Gongsun Chen from Ludi and appointed him as a doctor to clarify the principle that today should be the soil of Germany.

古文：於是上乃下诏曰： 有异物之神见于成纪，无害於民，岁以有年。
现代文：于是皇帝下达诏令说： 有一个奇异的神物出现在成纪，无害于民，今年会有好收成。
English: So the emperor issued a decree saying, "A strange god has appeared in Cheng Ji, it is harmless to the people, and there will be a good harvest this year."

古文：朕亲郊祀上帝诸神。
现代文：我亲自到郊外去祭祀天帝和其他各神。
English: I personally went to the suburbs to worship the Heavenly Emperor and other gods.

古文：礼官议，毋讳以劳朕。 
现代文：掌管礼仪的官员讨论一下所应举行的礼仪，不要怕我劳累而有所隐讳。 
English: Let the officials in charge of etiquette discuss the etiquette that should be held, and don't be afraid of my fatigue and conceal it.

古文：有司礼官皆曰： 古者天子夏躬亲礼祀上帝於郊，故曰郊。 
现代文：大臣和掌管礼仪的官员都说： 古时候天子在夏天亲自到郊外依礼祭祀上天，所以称为 郊 。 
English: Both the minister and the official in charge of etiquette said: In ancient times, the heavenly son himself went to the suburbs in the summer to offer sacrifices to heaven, so it was called "suburbs."

古文：於是天子始幸雍，郊见五帝，以孟夏四月答礼焉。
现代文：于是皇帝初次幸临雍县，郊祀五帝，以夏季四月举行祭礼。
English: As a result, the emperor first visited Linyong County, where the five emperors were worshiped, and held a festival in the summer month of April.

古文：赵人新垣平以望气见，因说上设立渭阳五庙。欲出周鼎，当有玉英见。
现代文：赵地人新垣平以望气之术进见皇帝，趁机劝说皇帝在渭阳修建五帝庙，并说要想发现周朝的传国宝鼎，应当有玉石的精华出现。
English: Niigakidaira, a native of Zhao, visited the emperor with the technique of hope and took the opportunity to persuade the emperor to build the Five Emperor Temple in Fenyang, and said that if you want to discover the national treasure of the Zhou Dynasty, you should have the essence of jade.

古文：十六年，上亲郊见渭阳五帝庙，亦以夏答礼而尚赤。
现代文：十六年，皇帝亲自郊祀渭阳五帝庙，也在夏天举行祭礼，决定崇尚赤色。
English: Sixteen years later, the emperor himself decided to worship the red color in the temple of the Five Emperors in the suburb of Fenyang, and also held a festival in the summer.

古文：十七年，得玉杯，刻曰 人主延寿 。
现代文：十七年，得到了一个玉杯，上面刻 人主延寿 。
English: At the age of seventeen, he received a jade cup inscribed with the Lord's longevity.

古文：於是天子始更为元年，令天下大酺。
现代文：于是皇帝开始把这一年改为后元元年，下令天下百姓举行盛大的聚会，设宴饮酒。
English: So the emperor began to change this year to the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, and ordered the people of the world to hold a grand gathering, set up a banquet and drink alcohol.

古文：其岁，新垣平事觉，夷三族。
现代文：就在同年，新垣平诈骗行为被察觉，处死了他的三族。
English: In the same year, Arakakidaira's fraud was discovered, and his three clans were executed.

古文：後二年，上曰： 朕既不明，不能远德，是以使方外之国或不宁息。
现代文：后元二年，皇帝说： 我并不英明，不能远施德泽，所以致使中原以外的国家不得安宁。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor said: I am not wise, I cannot go far from Shidze, so I have caused countries outside the Central Plains to have no peace.

古文：夫四荒之外不安其生，封畿之内勤劳不处，二者之咎，皆自於朕之德薄而不能远达也。
现代文：四方荒远地区的百姓不能平平稳稳地生活，国内的百姓辛勤劳苦，不得安居，这两种过错，都是由于我缺少道德，不能使德泽流布远方。
English: The people in the remote areas in the four directions cannot live smoothly and steadily, and the people in the country have to work hard and cannot live safely. Both of these faults are due to my lack of morality, and I cannot make virtue spread far and wide.

古文：间者累年，匈奴并暴边境，多杀吏民，边臣兵吏又不能谕吾内志，以重吾不德也。
现代文：最近匈奴连年为害边境，杀死很多官吏和民众，边区的官员和将领又不能理解我内在的心意，以致加重了我的不德。
English: Recently, the Huns have been harming the border for years, killing many officials and people. The officials and generals in the border area cannot understand my inner mind, which has aggravated my immorality.

古文：夫久结难连兵，中外之国将何以自宁？
现代文：这样长期交兵，灾难不解，中原内外的国家如何能得到安宁？
English: How can the countries in and out of the Central Plains obtain peace after such a long-term military engagement and incomprehensible calamity?

古文：今朕夙兴夜寐，勤劳天下，忧苦万民，为之怛惕不安，未尝一日忘於心，故遣使者冠盖相望，结轶於道，以谕朕意於单于。
现代文：如今我早起晚睡，辛苦操劳天下大事，为千千万万的百姓感到愁苦，心里忧惧不安，没有一天能够把这件事情忘却。所以派出的使者，道路上冠盖相望，车辙盘结，让它们去向匈奴单于说明我的想法。
English: Now I get up early and go to bed late, I work hard to deal with the world's major events, I feel sad for thousands of people, my heart is worried and anxious, and there is not a day I can forget this matter. Therefore, the emissaries sent, the roads are crowned and the ruts are intertwined, let them go to the Huns only to explain my thoughts.

古文：今单于反古之道，计社稷之安，便万民之利，亲与朕俱弃细过，偕之大道，结兄弟之义，以全天下元元之民。
现代文：现在单于回到了古代正确的道路上，考虑国家安宁，为千万民众谋求利益，亲自和我一起抛弃那些细小的过失，在正确的原则上团结一致，结下兄弟般的情谊，来保全天下善良的民众。
English: Now, I just want to return to the ancient and correct path, consider national peace, seek the interests of tens of millions of people, personally abandon those small mistakes with me, unite on the correct principles, and form a brotherly friendship to protect the good people of the world.

古文：和亲已定，始于今年。 
现代文：和亲的事情已经确定下来，以今年为开端。 
English: The matter of a reconciliation has been settled, starting this year.

古文：後六年冬，匈奴三万人入上郡，三万人入云中。
现代文：后元六年冬天，匈奴三万人进入上郡，三万人进入云中。
English: In the winter of the sixth year after the Yuan Dynasty, thirty thousand Xiongnu entered Shang County and thirty thousand entered Yunchu.

古文：以中大夫令勉为车骑将军，军飞狐；故楚相苏意为将军，军句注；将军张武屯北地；河内守周亚夫为将军，居细柳；宗正刘礼为将军，居霸上；祝兹侯军棘门：以备胡。
现代文：皇帝以中大夫令勉为车骑将军，驻扎在飞狐；以从前的楚国丞相苏意为将军，驻军句注；将军张武屯守北地；以河内郡郡守周亚夫为将军，驻扎在细柳；以宗正刘礼为将军，屯兵霸上；祝兹侯驻军棘门，来共同防备匈奴。
English: The emperor took Zhongdaifu Lingmeng as the chariot and cavalry general and stationed him at the Flying Fox; the former prime minister of Chu, Suyi, as the general and garrisoned him; the general Zhang Wutun guarded the north; the governor of Hanoi County, Zhou Yafu, as the general and stationed him at Xiliu; the general Zongzheng Liu Li as the general and garrisoned him; and the general Zhu Zhou garrisoned at the Thorny Gate to jointly guard against the Huns.

古文：数月，胡人去，亦罢。
现代文：过了几个月，匈奴人撤走了，各路军队也撤了回来。
English: After a few months, the Huns withdrew, and the various armies also withdrew.

古文：天下旱，蝗。
现代文：全国发生了旱灾，蝗虫为害。
English: Droughts have occurred throughout the country, and locusts have become a pest.

古文：帝加惠：令诸侯毋入贡，弛山泽，减诸服御狗马，损郎吏员，发仓庾以振贫民，民得卖爵。
现代文：皇帝加恩天下，命令诸侯不要向朝廷进贡，废弛对山林湖泽的禁令，减少皇帝的服饰、用具和游玩的狗马，裁减郎官的员数，打开粮仓，赈济贫苦百姓，民间可以卖爵位买粮。
English: The emperor showed his benevolence to the world, ordered the princes not to pay tribute to the imperial court, repealed the ban on mountains, forests and lakes, reduced the emperor's clothing, equipment and dogs and horses for play, reduced the number of officials, opened grain silos to help the poor people, and the people could sell their titles to buy grain.

古文：孝文帝从代来，即位二十三年，宫室苑囿狗马服御无所增益，有不便，辄弛以利民。
现代文：孝文帝从代国来到都城，在位二十三年，宫室、苑囿、狗马、服饰、用具，没有增加过什么，有对百姓不方便的地方，就进行改易，以利百姓。
English: Emperor Xiaowen came to the capital city from the dynasties, and in the 23rd year of his reign, he did not add anything to the palace, courtyards, dogs, horses, clothing, and utensils. If there were places that were inconvenient for the people, he changed them to benefit the people.

古文：尝欲作露台，召匠计之，直百金。
现代文：曾经打算修建露台，叫工匠计算费用，需要黄金一百斤。
English: He once planned to build a terrace and asked a craftsman to calculate the cost, which required a hundred kilos of gold.

古文：上曰： 百金中民十家之产，吾奉先帝宫室，常恐羞之，何以台为！ 
现代文：皇帝说： 一百斤黄金相当于中等百姓十家的产业，我享有先帝的宫室，常常担心会有辱先帝，修建这露台干什么呢！ 
English: The emperor said, "One hundred catties of gold is equivalent to the wealth of ten middle-class families. I enjoy the former emperor's palace, and I often worry that I will offend the former emperor. What is the point of building this terrace?

古文：上常衣綈衣，所幸慎夫人，令衣不得曳地，帏帐不得文绣，以示敦朴，为天下先。
现代文：皇帝经常穿着粗丝衣服，他所宠爱的慎夫人，也不准衣服拖至地面，帏帐不得织文绣锦，以此来表示敦厚质朴，为天下先做出一个表率。
English: The emperor often wore coarse silk clothes, and his favorite wife, Lady Shan, was not allowed to drag her clothes to the ground, and she was not allowed to weave embroidered brocade, in order to express her modesty and simplicity, and to set an example for the world.

古文：治霸陵皆以瓦器，不得以金银铜锡为饰，不治坟，欲为省，毋烦民。
现代文：修建霸陵全部采用瓦器，不许使用金、银、铜、锡作装饰，不修高大的坟墓，想要节省一些，不去烦扰百姓。
English: The tombs were all built with earthenware, and gold, silver, copper, and tin were not allowed to be used for decoration, and tall tombs were not built, in order to save money and not to bother the people.

古文：南越王尉佗自立为武帝，然上召贵尉佗兄弟，以德报之，佗遂去帝称臣。
现代文：南越王尉佗自称为武帝，而皇帝却叫来尉佗的兄弟，赐予高官厚禄，以德相报，尉佗取消了帝号，向汉朝称臣。
English: South Vietnam's King Yeongjo called himself Emperor Wu, but the emperor summoned Yeongjo's brother, gave the high-ranking official a generous stipend, and rewarded him with the title of German minister. Yeongjo cancelled the imperial title and called himself a minister to the Han Dynasty.

古文：与匈奴和亲，匈奴背约入盗，然令边备守，不发兵深入，恶烦苦百姓。
现代文：与匈奴和亲，匈奴违背盟约，入边寇掠，然而皇帝只是命令边塞加强守备，不出兵深入匈奴腹地，害怕烦扰百姓。
English: He made peace with the Huns, but the Huns violated the treaty and plundered the frontier. However, the emperor only ordered the frontier fortress to strengthen its defenses and not to send troops deep into the Hun hinterland for fear of disturbing the people.

古文：吴王诈病不朝，就赐几杖。
现代文：吴王假装有病，不去都城朝见，皇帝立刻赏赐给他坐几和手杖。
English: King Wu pretended to be ill and did not go to the capital to see the emperor. The emperor immediately gave him a chair and a cane.

古文：群臣如袁盎等称说虽切，常假借用之。
现代文：群臣当中如袁盎等人论述事情虽然尖锐而又急切，但皇帝常常以宽容的态度采用他们的建议。
English: Among the courtiers, such as Yuan Ang and others, although they discussed the matter sharply and urgently, the emperor often adopted their suggestions with a tolerant attitude.

古文：群臣如张武等受赂遗金钱，觉，上乃发御府金钱赐之，以愧其心，弗下吏。
现代文：大臣中间如张武等人接受金钱贿赂，发觉后，皇帝就拿出自己府库中的金钱赏赐给他们，使他们内心感到惭愧，不交给官吏治罪。
English: After discovering that some of the ministers, such as Zhang Wu, had accepted bribes, the emperor rewarded them with money from his treasury, so that they would feel ashamed and would not hand over the officials to be punished.

古文：专务以德化民，是以海内殷富，兴於礼义。
现代文：皇帝一心一意地致力于用道德教化百姓，因此，四海之内，殷实富足，兴起了讲究礼义的风气。
English: The emperor single-mindedly devoted himself to using morality to enlighten the people. As a result, all over the world, there was plenty of wealth, and a culture of etiquette arose.

古文：後七年六月己亥，帝崩於未央宫。
现代文：后元七年六月一日，皇帝在未央宫去世。
English: On June 1st, A.D. 77, the emperor passed away at the Miyang Palace.

古文：遗诏曰： 朕闻盖天下万物之萌生，靡不有死。
现代文：临终前遗诏说： 我听说天下万物生长，没有不死亡的。
English: On his deathbed, he said, "I have heard that all things in the universe grow, and that nothing is immortal.

古文：死者天地之理，物之自然者，奚可甚哀。
现代文：死亡是天地间的常理，万物的自然现象，何必过分悲哀。
English: Death is the common sense of heaven and earth, the natural phenomenon of all things, why should it be too sad.

古文：当今之时，世咸嘉生而恶死，厚葬以破业，重服以伤生，吾甚不取。
现代文：现在，世人都好生恶死，大量财物用于安葬，以致倾家荡产，长期服丧，以致伤害了身体，这些做法我是不赞成的。
English: Nowadays, people tend to live and die in a bad way. A large amount of wealth is used for burial, resulting in family ruin, and prolonged mourning, resulting in injury to the body. I do not approve of these practices.

古文：且朕既不德，无以佐百姓；今崩，又使重服久临，以离寒暑之数，哀人之父子，伤长幼之志，损其饮食，绝鬼神之祭祀，以重吾不德也，谓天下何！
现代文：况且我生前不德，无益于百姓，如今死了，又让人们长期服丧哭吊，经历寒暑的变化，使人家的父子悲哀，损伤老幼的心灵，减少饮食，断绝对鬼神的祭祀，这加重了我的不德，怎么能对得起天下百姓呢！
English: Moreover, I was not virtuous when I was alive and was of no benefit to the people. Now that I am dead, I have made people wear mourning clothes for a long time, experience cold and heat changes, make fathers and sons sad, damage the hearts of the old and young, reduce diet, and cut off the worship of absolute ghosts and gods. This has aggravated my immorality. How can I be worthy of the people of the world?

古文：朕获保宗庙，以眇眇之身讬于天下君王之上，二十有馀年矣。赖天地之灵，社稷之福，方内安宁，靡有兵革。
现代文：我能够奉守宗庙，以一个渺小的人凌驾于天下诸侯王之上，至今已有二十多年了，依赖天地的神灵，社稷的福祉，国内安宁，没有战乱。
English: For more than twenty years now, I have been able to keep my ancestral temple and, as a small person, surpass the princes and kings of the world. I rely on the gods of heaven and earth, the well-being of society, domestic peace, and the absence of war.

古文：朕既不敏，常畏过行，以羞先帝之遗德；维年之久长，惧于不终。
现代文：我并不聪敏，常常担心有错误的行为，使先帝的遗德蒙受耻辱；时间长了，更是害怕不能善终。
English: I am not clever, and I often worry about doing something wrong and bringing shame on the legacy of the former emperor. As time goes on, I am even more afraid of not having a happy ending.

古文：今乃幸以天年，得复供养于高庙。朕之不明与嘉之，其奚哀悲之有！
现代文：如今幸运地凭着天年能够供养侍奉高祖于地下，以我这样的不贤明，而有如此好的结果，还有什么可悲哀的呢！
English: Now that I am fortunate enough to be able to support and serve Gao Zu underground with my heavenly years, with such an unwise person like me, but with such a good result, what else is sad!

古文：其令天下吏民，令到出临三日，皆释服。
现代文：向天下官吏和百姓下达命令，命令到达后哭丧三天，然后全部脱掉丧服。
English: An order was issued to all officials and people in the country. After the order arrived, they mourned for three days, and then they all took off their mourning clothes.

古文：毋禁取妇嫁女祠祀饮酒食肉者。
现代文：不要禁止娶妻嫁女、祭祀鬼神和饮酒食肉。
English: Do not forbid to marry a wife or a daughter, to worship demons, to drink alcohol, or to eat meat.

古文：自当给丧事服临者，皆无践。绖带无过三寸，毋布车及兵器，毋发民男女哭临宫殿。
现代文：应该服丧哭吊的人，都不要穿斩衰的丧服，绖带之围不要超过三寸，不能把战车和兵器都披上孝布，不要发动男女民众到宫殿里哭丧。
English: Those who should mourn and weep should not wear faded mourning clothes, the umbilical cord should not exceed three inches, the chariot and weapons should not be covered with filial cloth, and the men and women should not be sent to the palace to mourn.

古文：宫殿中当临者，皆以旦夕各十五举声，礼毕罢。
现代文：宫中应当哭丧的人，在每天的早晨和晚上各哭十五声，尽礼之后就停止。
English: Those who should weep in the palace weep fifteen times in the morning and fifteen times in the evening every day, and they stop weeping when they have performed all the rites.

古文：非旦夕临时，禁毋得擅哭。
现代文：不是早晨和晚上哭丧的时候，不许擅自哭泣。
English: Do not weep in the morning or at night, when it is time to mourn.

古文：已下，服大红十五日，小红十四日，纤七日，释服。
现代文：下葬以后，穿大功丧服十五天，小功丧服十四天，细布丧服七天，然后脱去丧服。
English: After the burial, the mourners should wear the heavy mourning clothes for 15 days, the light mourning clothes for 14 days, and the thin mourning clothes for 7 days, and then take off the mourning clothes.

古文：佗不在令中者，皆以此令比率从事。
现代文：其他没有规定在遗命中的事项，全都根据这一遗命，参照从事。
English: All other matters not specified in the will shall be carried out in accordance with this will.

古文：布告天下，使明知朕意。
现代文：布告天下，使人们明了我的心意。
English: Announce it to the whole world, so that people will know my will.

古文：霸陵山川因其故，毋有所改。
现代文：霸陵地方的山川保持原样，不要有所改变。
English: The mountains and rivers in the Hailing area should remain as they are, and should not be changed.

古文：归夫人以下至少使。 
现代文：后宫夫人以下至少使，都遣散回家。 
English: At least from the harem mistress on down, everyone was sent home.

古文：令中尉亚夫为车骑将军，属国悍为将屯将军，郎中令武为复土将军，发近县见卒万六千人，发内史卒万五千人，藏郭穿复土属将军武。
现代文：任命中尉周亚夫为车骑将军，典属国悍为将屯将军，郎中令张武为复土将军，调发附近各县现有的士卒一万六千人，调发内史现役士卒一万五千人，归将军张武指挥，负责安葬棺椁，穿圹掩埋。
English: He appointed Lieutenant Zhou Yafu as the general of cavalry and cavalry, the general of national valor as the general of garrisons, and the lieutenant general Zhang Wu as the general of soil restoration. He transferred 16,000 existing soldiers and officers from nearby counties, and 15,000 active duty soldiers and officers from history, to the command of General Zhang Wu, and was responsible for burying coffins and burying them in coffins.

古文：乙巳，群臣皆顿首上尊号曰孝文皇帝。
现代文：六月七日，大臣们都叩首至地，对去世的皇帝奉上尊号为孝文皇帝。
English: On June 7, the ministers all bowed their heads to the ground and gave the deceased emperor the honorific title of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：太子即位于高庙。丁未，袭号曰皇帝。
现代文：太子在高庙即位，六月九日袭号为皇帝。
English: The crown prince ascended to the throne at Gaomiao, and assumed the title of emperor on June 9.

古文：孝景皇帝元年十月，制诏御史： 盖闻古者祖有功而宗有德，制礼乐各有由。
现代文：孝景皇帝元年十月，对御史下诏说： 听说古代帝王称祖的是有功的人，称宗的是有德的人，制礼作乐各有一定的原因。
English: In October of the first year of the new year, Emperor Xiao Jing issued an edict to the imperial historian, saying: I have heard that the ancient emperors called their ancestors meritorious people and their descendants virtuous people, and that there was a certain reason for each of them to make music.

古文：闻歌者，所以发德也；舞者，所以明功也。
现代文：又听说乐歌是用来发扬道德的，舞蹈是用来显示功业的。
English: I also heard that music is used to promote morality, and dance is used to show one's merits.

古文：高庙酎，奏武德、文始、五行之舞。
现代文：以醇酒祭祀高庙，表演《武德》、《文治》、《五行》之舞。
English: A ceremony was held in honor of Gao Miao with alcohol, and dances from "Wu De," "Wen Zhi" and "Wu Xing" were performed.

古文：孝惠庙酎，奏文始、五行之舞。
现代文：以醇酒祭祀孝惠庙，表演《文始》、《五行》之舞。
English: A ceremony was held in honor of Takaiei Temple with alcohol, and dances from "The Beginning of the Novel" and "The Five Elements" were performed.

古文：孝文皇帝临天下，通关梁，不异远方。
现代文：孝文皇帝君临天下，使夫塞津梁畅通无阻，远处近处同等对待。
English: Emperor Xiaowen, when he came to the world, made sure that there was unimpeded access to Jinyangliang, and that the far and the near were treated equally.

古文：除诽谤，去肉刑，赏赐长老，收恤孤独，以育群生。
现代文：废除诽谤罪，去掉肉刑，赏赐老人，收养孤独，抚育众生。
English: Abolish the crime of slander, abolish corporal punishment, reward the elderly, adopt loneliness, and nurture sentient beings.

古文：减嗜欲，不受献，不私其利也。
现代文：减少嗜欲，不接受进贡的物品，不私自占有这些利益。
English: Reduce cravings, do not accept tribute items, and selflessly take possession of these benefits.

古文：罪人不帑，不诛无罪。
现代文：犯罪的人，不收没他的妻子儿女，不诛杀无罪的人。
English: He that sinneth, doth not seize his wife, nor his children, nor slay the innocent.

古文：除刑，出美人，重绝人之世。
现代文：废除宫刑，放出后宫美人，很重视绝人后嗣这件事。
English: The abolition of palace punishment, the release of the harem beauty, attaches great importance to the issue of the absolute heir.

古文：朕既不敏，不能识。
现代文：我并不聪敏，对这些不能完全认识。
English: I'm not smart enough to know all that.

古文：此皆上古之所不及，而孝文皇帝亲行之。
现代文：这些事情都是上古帝王所赶不上的，而孝文皇帝却亲自做到了。
English: These things were beyond the reach of the ancient emperors, but Emperor Xiaowen did it himself.

古文：德厚侔天地，利泽施四海，靡不获福焉。
现代文：圣德的浩大如同天地，惠泽流及四海，没有一个人不得到恩惠。
English: Virtue is as vast as the heavens and the earth, and extends to the four winds and the four seas. No one is exempt from benefiting from it.

古文：明象乎日月，而庙乐不称。朕甚惧焉。
现代文：他的圣明宛如日月，而庙中的乐舞并不相称，我很恐惧不安。
English: His holiness is like the sun and the moon, and the music and dance in the temple are not commensurate, I am afraid and uneasy.

古文：其为孝文皇帝庙为昭德之舞，以明休德。
现代文：应该为孝文皇帝庙制作《昭德舞》，用来表彰他那美好的道德。
English: "Zhaode Dance" should be made for Emperor Xiaowen's temple to commend his fine morality.

古文：然后祖宗之功德著於竹帛，施于万世，永永无穷，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：然后把祖宗的功德记载在史册上，流传万世，永无穷尽，我是很称赞的。
English: Then he recorded the merits of his ancestors in the annals of history, which will be passed down for all time and will never be exhausted. I highly commend him for this.

古文：其与丞相、列侯、中二千石、礼官具为礼仪奏。 
现代文：应与丞相、列侯、秩为中二千石的官员和掌管礼制的官员拟定礼仪奏上。 
English: They should work out the etiquette with the chancellor, the vassals, the officials of the middle rank and the officials in charge of the etiquette.

古文：丞相臣嘉等言： 陛下永思孝道，立昭德之舞以明孝文皇帝之盛德。皆臣嘉等愚所不及。
现代文：丞相申徒嘉等人说： 陛下永远想着孝敬先帝，制作了《昭德舞》来显示孝文皇帝盛大的功德，这都是臣子申徒嘉等人由于愚昧而想不到的。
English: Minister Shentujia and others said, "Your Majesty has always thought about showing filial piety to the former emperor, and made "Zhodai Dance" to show the great merits of Emperor Xiaowen. This is something that the courtier Shentujia and others could not have imagined due to their ignorance.

古文：臣谨议：世功莫大於高皇帝，德莫盛於孝文皇帝，高皇庙宜为帝者太祖之庙，孝文皇帝庙宜为帝者太宗之庙。
现代文：臣子郑重而又恭敬地建议：一代的功劳没有大过高皇帝的，德业没有盛过孝文皇帝的，高皇帝庙应该成为皇帝的太祖庙，孝文皇帝庙应该成为皇帝的太宗庙。
English: The courtiers solemnly and respectfully suggested that: if the merit of a generation is not greater than that of Emperor Gao, and if virtue does not prevail over Emperor Xiaowen, Emperor Gao's temple should become the Emperor's ancestral temple, and Emperor Xiaowen's temple should become the Emperor's ancestral temple.

古文：天子宜世世献祖宗之庙。
现代文：天下应当世世代代的献祭祖宗之庙。
English: The world should be a temple of sacrificial ancestors for generations to come.

古文：郡国诸侯宜各为孝文皇帝立太宗之庙。
现代文：各郡国诸侯应当为孝文皇帝建立太宗庙。
English: The princes of all counties and states should build a grand temple for Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：诸侯王列侯使者侍祠天子，岁献祖宗之庙。请著之竹帛，宣布天下。 
现代文：诸侯王、列侯的使者随从天子祭祀，天子每年献祭祖宗之庙，请把这些规定明文记载下来，向全国公布。 
English: Princes and emissaries of princes attend the ritual sacrifice of the heavenly son, and the heavenly son sacrifices the temple of the ancestors every year. Please clearly record these regulations and announce them to the whole country.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：景帝下令说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：太史公曰：孔子言 必世然後仁。
现代文：太史公说：孔子说 一定要经过三十年，然后仁政才能成功。
English: Confucius said that benevolent government can only succeed after 30 years.

古文：善人之治国百年，亦可以胜残去杀 。诚哉是言！
现代文：一个品德好的人治理国家一百年，也可以战胜残暴，废除刑杀 ，这话说的真是正确啊！
English: A person with good moral character can rule the country for a hundred years, and can also defeat cruelty and abolish capital punishment, which is really true!

古文：汉兴，至孝文四十有馀载，德至盛也。
现代文：从汉朝建国到孝文皇帝四十多年，德业兴盛到了极点。
English: From the founding of the Han Dynasty to Emperor Xiaowen for more than forty years, German industry flourished to the extreme.

古文：廪廪乡改正服封禅矣，谦让未成於今。
现代文：渐渐地向修改历法、确定服色、举行封禅这一目标接近了，只是由于文帝谦让，至今没有完成。啊！
English: Gradually, the goal of revising the calendar, determining the color of clothing, and holding the enthronement ceremony came closer, but due to Emperor Wen's concession, it has not yet been completed.

古文：呜呼，岂不仁哉！
现代文：这难道不是仁德吗！
English: Is this not benevolence?

古文：孝文在代，兆遇大横。
现代文：汉孝文帝在代国的时候，占卜得到帝王登基之兆。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Xiaowen, divination was used to predict the emperor's ascension to the throne.

古文：宋昌建册，绛侯奉迎。
现代文：宋昌定下为天子之策，绛侯周勃到城外恭迎。
English: Song Chang decided that it was a divine plan, and he welcomed Zhou Bo outside the city.

古文：南面而让，天下归诚。
现代文：可以做天子他却主动辞让，于是天下人都归心于他。
English: He could have been the son of heaven, but he voluntarily resigned, so the whole world turned to him.

古文：务农先籍，布德偃兵。
现代文：他重视农业，亲自下田耕种；广施恩德，停止武事。
English: He attached importance to agriculture and personally went to the fields to cultivate; he was generous and stopped martial arts.

古文：除帑削谤，政简刑清。
现代文：他去除对人民的掠夺，消除人民的怨言；行政简化怜悯，刑罚公正清明。
English: He removed the plunder of the people and eliminated the complaints of the people; the administration was simplified and compassionate, and the punishment was fair and clear.

古文：綈衣率俗，露台罢营。
现代文：他穿着简朴来引领朴素的风气，停止修建露台。
English: He wore simple clothes to lead a simple lifestyle and stopped building terraces.

古文：法宽张武，狱恤缇萦。
现代文：执法时宽待张武，执行刑罚时怜悯缇萦。
English: When enforcing the law, Zhang Wu will be treated leniently, and when enforcing the punishment, he will be treated with mercy.

古文：霸陵如故，千年颂声。
现代文：到现在霸陵仍然和以前一样，而对汉文帝的歌颂的声音千年仍然不断。
English: To this day, the tyranny remains the same as before, and the sound of praise for Emperor Hanwen has continued for thousands of years.

