古文：张畅，字少微，吴郡吴人，吴兴太守邵兄子也。
现代文：张畅，字少徽，吴郡吴人。吴兴太守张邵哥哥的儿子。
English: Zhang Chang, Shao Hui, Wu County, Wu people. Wu Xing Taimou is the son of Zhang Shao's brother.

古文：父祎，少有孝行，历宦州府，为琅邪王国郎中令。
现代文：父亲张礻韦，年轻时有孝行，长期在州府任职，任琅王牙王国郎中令。
English: His father, Zhang Weiwei, had a filial piety when he was young, and served in the state government for a long time, serving as the second-in-command to the King of Tongs.

古文：从琅邪王至洛。
现代文：随琅笽王到了洛阳。
English: He followed the king to Luoyang.

古文：还京都，高祖封药酒一罂付祎，使密加鸩毒。祎受命，既还，于道自饮而卒。
现代文：回京城后，高祖封了一罐药酒给张礻韦让他偷偷放入毒药，张礻韦受命，回来后在半路上自饮毒酒而亡。
English: After returning to Beijing, Gaozhu sealed a jar of medicinal liquor for Zhang Wei to secretly put poison in. Zhang Wei was ordered to drink the poisoned liquor and died on the way back.

古文：暢少与从兄敷、演、敬齐名，为后进之秀。
现代文：张畅年少时和叔伯兄弟张敷、张渲、张敬齐名，是年轻一辈之中的杰出之士。
English: When Zhang Chang was young, he was as famous as his uncles Zhang Shiki, Zhang Ren and Zhang Jing. He was an outstanding person among the younger generation.

古文：起家为太守徐佩之主簿，佩之被诛，暢驰出奔赴，制服尽哀，为论者所美。
现代文：他一开始任太守徐佩之的主簿，佩之被诛杀，张畅身穿孝服骑马飞驰前去哀悼，为当时品评人物的人所赞赏。
English: At the beginning, he served as the main book of the eunuch Xu Peizhi. When Peizhi was killed, Zhang Chang dressed in filial piety and rode a horse to mourn, which was appreciated by the critics at the time.

古文：弟牧尝为猘犬所伤，医云宜食虾蟆脍，牧甚难之，暢含笑先尝，牧因此乃食，创亦即愈。
现代文：张畅弟弟张牧曾被疯狗咬伤，医生说要吃蛤蟆肉，张牧很不情愿，张畅笑着先尝了一些，张牧才因此吃了下去，伤也痊愈了。
English: Zhang Chang's brother, Zhang Mu, was once bitten by a mad dog. The doctor said he wanted to eat horse meat, but Zhang Mu was very reluctant. Zhang Chang smiled and tasted some first, so Zhang Mu ate it, and the wound healed.

古文：州辟从事，衡阳王义季征虏行参军，彭城王义康平北主簿，司徒祭酒，尚书主客郎。
现代文：州里征召他为从事，衡阳王义季征召他为虏行参军，彭城王刘义康召他做平北主簿、司徒祭酒、尚书主客郎，他都未接受。
English: He did not accept the state's call for him to be engaged, Hengyang King Yizi's call for him to join the army, and Pengcheng King Liu Yikang's call for him to be the main bookkeeper of Pingbei, the priest's sacrificial wine, and the guest book keeper of Shangshu.

古文：未拜，又除度支左民郎，江夏王义恭征北记室参军、晋安太守。
现代文：又升任度支左民郎，江夏王刘义恭征召他为北记室参军、晋安太守。
English: He was also promoted to Du Zhi Zuo Minro, and Liu Yigong, the King of Jiangxia, called him to join the army of the Northern Records Office and became the governor of Jin'an.

古文：又为义季安西记室参军、南义阳太守，临川王义庆卫军从事中郎，扬州治中别驾从事史，太子中庶子。
现代文：又任义季的安西记室参军、南义阳太守、临川王义庆的卫军从事中郎、扬州治中别驾从事史、太子中庶子。
English: He was also appointed as the Anxi office of Yixi to join the army, the governor of South Yiyang, the guard of Linchuan King Yixing to be a middle-man, the governor of Yangzhou to be a historian, and the prince to be an illegitimate child.

古文：世祖镇彭城，暢为安北长史、沛郡太守。
现代文：世祖镇守彭城，张畅担任安北长史、沛郡太守。
English: Shizu Zhen guarded Pengcheng, Zhang Chang served as Anbei Changshi and Pei County Governor.

古文：元嘉二十七年，索虏托跋焘南侵，太尉江夏王义恭总统诸军，出镇彭、泗。
现代文：元嘉二十七年，索虏拓跋焘南侵，太尉江夏王义恭统领各路军队镇守彭城、泗水。
English: In the 27th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the Sorbs invaded the south, and Lieutenant Jiang Xia Wang Yigong led all the armies to defend Pengcheng and Surabaya.

古文：时焘亲率大众，已至萧城，去彭城十数里。
现代文：当时拓跋焘亲率大队人马到达萧城，离彭城十几里路。
English: At that time, Tuoba and his relatives led a large group of people to Xiaocheng, more than ten miles away from Pengcheng.

古文：彭城众力虽多，而军食不足，义恭欲弃彭城南归，计议弥日不定。
现代文：彭城之中虽然人数众多，但军粮不足，义恭想弃城逃回南方，讨论了许多天也定不下主意。
English: Although there were many soldiers in Pengcheng, there was a shortage of food. Yixiong wanted to abandon the city and flee to the south. They discussed this for many days, but could not make up their minds.

古文：时历城众少食多，安北中兵参军沈庆之建议，欲以车营为函箱阵，精兵为外翼。奉二王及妃媛直趋历城；分兵配护军萧思话留守。
现代文：此时历城人少而粮食很多，安北中兵参军沈庆之建议用军车营组成函箱阵，两翼配上精锐部队，保护二王以及妃媛迁到历城，另分一些部队给配护军萧思话留守彭城。
English: At this time, the number of people in Licheng was small, but there was a lot of grain. Shen Qing suggested that a military vehicle battalion be used to form a box formation, and the two wings were equipped with elite troops to protect the two kings and the princess who moved to Licheng. In addition, some troops were assigned to the escort troops who remained in Pengcheng.

古文：太尉长史何勖不同，欲席卷奔郁洲，自海道还京都。
现代文：太尉长史何勖不同意这个建议，想让全部人马开往郁州，从海路回京城。
English: Captain-Major Shi He Yao disagreed with this suggestion and wanted all the men and horses to sail to Iuzhou and return to Beijing by sea.

古文：义恭去意已判，唯二议未决，更集群僚谋之。
现代文：义恭撤离彭城的想法已明确，只是不知该用哪一个建议，就再次召集众幕僚商讨此事。
English: The idea of Yi Gong's withdrawal from Pengcheng was clear, but he didn't know which suggestion to use, so he once again called together his staff to discuss the matter.

古文：众咸惶扰，莫有异议。
现代文：大家都恐慌得很，拿不出别的不同建议。
English: Everyone was so panicked that they couldn't come up with anything different.

古文：暢曰： 若历城、郁洲有可致之理，下官敢不高赞。
现代文：张畅说： 如果有可能撤退到历城、郁州的话，我岂敢不赞成这两个建议。
English: Zhang Chang said: If it is possible to retreat to Licheng and Yuzhou, I dare not disagree with these two proposals.

古文：今城内乏食，百姓咸有走情，但以关扃严固，欲去莫从耳。
现代文：如今彭城内粮食匮乏，老百姓都想逃走，只不过因为城门紧锁，戒备森严走不了罢了。
English: Now there is a lack of food in the city, and the people are in the mood to escape. All they have to do is close the doors, lock them tightly and guard them. Those who want to escape should not be allowed to do so.

古文：若一旦动脚，则各自散走，欲至所在，何由可得。
现代文：假若让人们出城，那众人各自四散奔逃，我们即使想到要去的地方，又怎么能去得了。
English: If we let people out of the city, and they all scatter and flee, how can we even think about where to go?

古文：今军食虽寡，朝夕犹未窘罄，量其欲尽，临时更为诸宜，岂有舍万安之术，而就危亡之道。
现代文：现在虽然军粮不多，但还没有到吃光的地步，就是用尽了到时可再作各种打算，哪有舍弃万分安全的计划而投向危险死亡之境的道理！
English: Now, although there is not much military food, it has not yet reached the point of being eaten up, that is, when it is exhausted, it can make all kinds of plans, and there is no reason to abandon the safe plan and go to the dangerous death!

古文：若此计必用，下官请以颈血汗公马蹄！ 
现代文：如果你一定要执行逃走的计划，下官就死在你的马前。 
English: If you are determined to carry out your escape plan, your subordinate will die in front of your horse.

古文：世祖既闻暢议，谓义恭曰： 阿父既为总统，去留非所敢干。
现代文：世祖听了张畅的想法后对义恭说： 你既然是军队的统帅，是走是守我不敢干涉。
English: After listening to Zhang Chang's thoughts, the ancestor said to Yigong: Since you are the commander of the army, I dare not interfere whether you go or stay.

古文：道民忝为城主，而损威延寇，其为愧恧，亦已深矣。
现代文：我没有才能，作为一城之主，损失威严招来敌人，心中万分惭愧。
English: I have no talent, as the lord of a city, the loss of majesty has attracted enemies, and I am very ashamed.

古文：委镇奔逃，实无颜复奉朝廷，期与此城共其存没，张长史言不可异也。 
现代文：弃城逃跑实在让我没有脸面面对朝廷。我愿与此城共存亡，不能不听从张畅的话。 
English: Abandoning the city and running away really left me without a face to face with the imperial court. I am willing to co-exist with this city and cannot but listen to Zhang Chang.

古文：暢言既坚，世祖又赞成其议，义恭乃止。
现代文：张畅的话十分坚决，再加上世祖的赞成，义恭放弃了弃城逃跑的打算。
English: Zhang Chang's words were very resolute, and together with the approval of the patriarch, Yigong gave up the plan to abandon the city and flee.

古文：时太祖遣员外散骑侍郎徐爰乘驿至彭城取米谷定最，爰既去，城内遣骑送之。
现代文：太祖派员外散骑侍郎徐爰乘驿车到彭城来运装粮食的器具，徐爰走时城内派了骑兵送他。
English: The great-great-grandfather sent out horseback cavalryman Xu Hui to Pengcheng by mule car to transport grain equipment. When Xu Hui left, the city sent cavalry to escort him.

古文：焘闻知，即遣数百骑急追，爰已过淮，仅得免。
现代文：拓跋焘听到这个消息，当即命令数百骑兵追赶徐爰，徐已过淮河刚好摆脱了敌兵追击。
English: When Tuobao heard this news, he immediately ordered hundreds of cavalry to chase Xu Yao. Xu had just crossed the Huai River and got rid of the enemy's pursuit.

古文：初爰去，城内闻虏遣追，虑爰见禽，失米最，虑知城内食少，义恭忧惧无计，犹欲奔走。
现代文：当初徐爰走后，彭城内的人听说敌人派兵追他，都担心他被俘，把装粮食的器具丢了从而让敌人知道城内缺粮。义恭既担忧又害怕束手无策，又想逃跑。
English: At first, after Xu Yao left, the people in Pengcheng heard that the enemy had sent soldiers to chase him. They were worried that he had been captured and had lost the equipment containing grain, thus letting the enemy know that there was a shortage of grain in the city. Yixiong was worried and afraid of being helpless, and wanted to escape.

古文：爰既免，其日虏大众亦至彭城。
现代文：徐爰脱险后，敌军也兵临彭城。
English: After Xu Yao escaped from danger, the enemy army also attacked Pengcheng.

古文：焘始至，仍登城南亚父冢，于戏马台立氈屋。
现代文：拓跋焘刚到时，又登上彭城南面的亚父冢，并在戏马台建帐扎营。
English: When the Tuoba rafts first arrived, they boarded the Yafu raft south of Pengcheng and set up camp in the circus ring.

古文：先是，焘未至，世祖遣将马文恭向萧城，为虏所破，文恭走得免，队主蒯应见执。
现代文：先前拓跋焘还没有到时，世祖派遣将领马文恭去萧城，文恭被敌人打败，他逃了出来而主帅蒯应却被俘虏。
English: Prior to the arrival of Tuobao, the founder sent the general Ma Wenqiong to Xiaocheng. Wenqiong was defeated by the enemy, he escaped, but the head coach Yu Ying was captured.

古文：至小市门曰： 魏主致意安北，远来疲乏，若有甘蔗及酒，可见分。 
现代文：这时蒯应来到彭城小市门下说： 魏主要我转告世祖，他们远行而来非常疲乏，你们如有甘蔗和酒可分一些给他们。 
English: At this time, Zou Ying came to the door of Pengcheng Small Market and said, "Major Wei, I'd like to tell our ancestors that they've come a long way and are very tired. If you have sugar cane and wine, you can give some to them.

古文：时防城队主梁法念答曰： 当为启闻。 
现代文：防城队主梁法令答道： 我会为你禀告世祖。 
English: The leader of the city defense team, Liang De, replied, "I will report this to my ancestors for you."

古文：应乃自陈萧城之败。
现代文：蒯应自己也将萧城之败陈述了一遍。
English: Zou Ying himself also recounted the defeat of Xiaocheng.

古文：又问应： 虏主自来不？ 
现代文：梁又问蒯： 敌人主帅亲自来吗？ 
English: Liang also asked Zou: Did the enemy coach come in person?

古文：曰： 来。 
现代文：蒯应说： 是的。 
English: Zou Ying said: Yes.

古文：问： 今何在？ 
现代文：梁又说： 你们现在在哪里？ 
English: Liang also said: Where are you now?

古文：应举手指西南。
现代文：蒯举手指向西南方向。
English: Raise your finger to the southwest.

古文：又曰： 士马多少？ 
现代文：梁又问： 他们有多少兵马？ 
English: Liang also asked: How many soldiers and horses do they have?

古文：答云： 四十余万。 
现代文：蒯答： 四十余万。 
English: A: More than 400,000.

古文：法念以焘语白世祖，世祖遣人答曰： 知行路多乏，今付酒二器，甘蔗百挺。闻彼有骆驼，可遣送。 
现代文：梁法令将情况禀告世祖，世祖派人对蒯应说： 知道他们一路行军疲乏，现在给他们两桶酒，一百根甘蔗，听说他们有骆驼，可派人送些给我们。 
English: Liang decreed to report the situation to his ancestor. The ancestor sent a person to Liang to say: "Knowing that they are tired from marching all the way, now give them two barrels of wine, a hundred canes of sugar. I heard that they have camels, can send someone to send some to us."

古文：明旦，焘又自上戏马台，复遣使至小市门曰： 魏主致意安北，安北可暂出门，欲与安北相见。
现代文：第二天早上，拓跋焘登上戏马台，又派使者到小市门说： 魏主转告安北，他可以暂时走出城门，魏主想见见他。
English: The next morning, Tuoba Yao boarded the stage of the circus, and sent an envoy to the small city gate to say: Wei Lord told Anbei that he could temporarily leave the city gate, Wei Lord wanted to see him.

古文：我亦不攻此城，安北何劳苦将士在城上。
现代文：我们不会攻打彭城，世祖又何必劳苦将士守城呢！
English: We won't attack Pengcheng, so why should our ancestors have to work hard to defend the city?

古文：又骡、驴、骆驼，是北国所出，今遣送，并致杂物。 
现代文：至于骡子、驴子、骆驼都是北方出产的东西，现在送些给你们，并附送其他杂物。 
English: And as for the mules, and the asses, and the camels, which are of the children of the north, behold, I have brought them forth unto you; and other asses also I have brought forth.

古文：又语小市门队主曰： 既有饷物，君可移度南门受之。 
现代文：使者又对小市门队主说： 您可以移军到南门接受我们的犒劳之物。 
English: The envoy also said to the team leader of the Small Town Gate: You can move your army to the South Gate to accept our reward.

古文：焘送骆驼、骡、马及貂裘、杂饮食，既至南门，门先闭，请龠未出。
现代文：拓跋焘送来骆驼、骡子、马、貂皮大衣以及食品和杂物。他们到了南门，城门关着，请求开门但没成功。
English: They came with camels, mules, horses, mink coats, food and other supplies and arrived at the south gate, which was closed, and unsuccessfully pleaded for it to be opened.

古文：暢于城上视之，虏使问： 是张长史邪？ 
现代文：张畅正在城墙上看着一切，敌使者问： 那是张长史吗？ 
English: Zhang Chang was looking at everything on the city wall, and the enemy envoy asked: Is that Zhang Changshi?

古文：暢曰： 君何得见识？ 
现代文：张畅说： 你怎么知道的？ 
English: Zhang Chang said: How did you know?

古文：虏使答云： 君声名远闻，足使我知。 
现代文：敌使者说： 先生名闻遐迩，我怎么不知道？ 
English: The emissary of the enemy said: Teacher is famous, why don't I know?

古文：暢因问虏使姓，答云： 我是鲜卑，无姓。且道亦不可。 
现代文：张畅就问他的姓氏，敌使者答道： 我是鲜卑人没有姓，况且也不能说出来。 
English: Zhang Chang asked his surname, and the enemy emissary replied: I am a lowly person without a surname, and I can't even say it.

古文：暢又问： 君居何任？ 
现代文：张又问： 您任何职？ 
English: Zhang also asked: Do you have any position?

古文：答云： 鲜卑官位不同，不可辄道，然亦足与君相敌耳。 
现代文：对方答： 鲜卑的官位与你们不同，不能一下子说清楚，但也足以与你的官职相当。
English: The other party replied: "The position of a junior official is different from yours. It cannot be made clear at once, but it is enough to be equivalent to your official position.

古文：虏使复问： 何为匆匆杜门绝桥？ 
现代文：你们为何匆匆关上城门拉起吊桥？ 
English: Why did you hastily close the gates and pull up the drawbridge?

古文：暢答曰： 二王以魏主营垒未立，将士疲劳，此精甲十万，人思致命，恐轻相凌践，故且闭城耳。
现代文：张畅说： 我们二王认为魏主营帐没有建好，将士疲惫劳累，而我们精兵十万，个个都想杀敌立功，因此担心你们的士兵轻易地被杀戮，而暂将城门关上罢了。
English: Zhang Chang said: We two kings think that the main Wei camp is not well built, the soldiers are tired and exhausted, and we are 100,000 elite soldiers, each of whom wants to kill the enemy and make a contribution. Therefore, we are worried that your soldiers will be easily killed, so we will temporarily close the gate.

古文：待彼休息士马，然后共治战场，克日交戏。 
现代文：等到你们得到休息之后我们一起准备战场，定日交战。 
English: After you have rested, we will prepare the battlefield together and fight on the appointed day.

古文：虏使曰： 君当以法令裁物，何用发桥，复何足以十万夸人。
现代文：敌使者说： 你应用法令行事，何必要靠拉吊桥和用十万之众的假话来骗人呢。
English: The enemy envoy said, "You are acting according to the law. Why do you need to pull up the drawbridge and deceive people with the lies of a hundred thousand people?

古文：我亦有良马逸足，若云骑四集，亦可以相拒。 
现代文：我们也有快骑骏马，四方云集的尖锐骑兵也足够与你们抗衡的。 
English: We also have fast-riding horses, and the sharp cavalry gathered in all directions is enough to compete with you.

古文：暢曰： 侯王设嶮，何但法令而已邪。
现代文：张畅答道： 王侯设置险阻何止是法令而已。
English: Zhang Chang replied: It is nothing more than a decree for the prince to set up obstacles.

古文：我若夸君，当言百万。
现代文：我如果骗你应该说百万兵。
English: If I'm lying, you should say a million soldiers.

古文：所以言十万者，政二王左右素所畜养者耳。
现代文：之所以说十万，这恰恰是我们二王身边一向拥有的士兵罢了。
English: The reason for saying 100,000 is that these are just the soldiers that the two kings have always had around them.

古文：此城内有数州士庶，二徒营伍，犹所未论。
现代文：城内有好几个州的军队百姓，有的还没有列在十万之中呢！
English: There are soldiers and civilians from several states in the city, some of whom are not even listed among the hundred thousand!

古文：我本斗智，不斗马足。
现代文：我们本来是要斗智而不斗兵力。
English: We were supposed to be fighting wits, not troops.

古文：且冀之北土，马之所生，君复何以逸足见夸邪！ 
现代文：再说冀州在北方是产马的地方，先生又何必以骏马来说大话呢？ 
English: Besides, Jizhou in the north is a place where horses are bred. Why do you have to use the word "horse" to make a big deal?

古文：虏使曰： 不尔。城守，君之所长；野战，我之所长。
现代文：敌使者说： 并非如此，固守城池是你们擅长的优势，野外战斗则是我们的优势。
English: The emissary of the enemy said: This is not so, holding the city is your advantage, and fighting in the field is our advantage.

古文：我之恃马，犹如君之恃城耳。 
现代文：我们对战马的依赖，也就像你们依赖城池罢了。 
English: We're just as dependent on war horses as you are on chariots.

古文：城内有具思者，尝在北国，义恭遣视之，思识是虏尚书李孝伯。
现代文：城内一个叫具思的人曾在北方生活过，义恭让他来辨认敌使者，具思认得是敌尚书李孝伯。
English: A man in the city named Gu Si had once lived in the north, and Yigong asked him to identify the enemy envoy. Gu Si recognized the enemy as Shangshu Li Xiaobo.

古文：思因问： 李尚书，若行途有劳。 
现代文：具思就问他： 李尚书一路辛苦了。 
English: Gu Si asked him: Li Shangshu has worked hard all the way.

古文：孝伯曰： 此事应相与共知。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 这应是你我皆知的事。 
English: Li Xiaobo said: This should be something that you and I both know.

古文：思答： 缘共知，所以有劳。 
现代文：具思说： 正因为都知道才辛苦你了。 
English: Gu Si said, "It is precisely because everyone knows you that you have had such a hard time.

古文：孝伯曰： 感君至意。 
现代文：孝伯说： 感谢你的盛情。 
English: Xiao Bo said, "Thank you for your hospitality."

古文：既开门，暢屏却人仗，出对孝伯，并进饷物。
现代文：城门打开后张畅让卫兵和仪仗退去，一个人出来见李孝伯，双方都呈上所赠物品。
English: After the city gate was opened, Zhang Chang let the guards and ceremonial guards retreat. One person came out to meet Li Xiaobing, and both sides presented the gifts.

古文：虏使云： 貂裘与太尉，骆驼、骡与安北，蒲陶酒杂饮，叔侄共尝。 
现代文：敌使者说： 貂皮大衣给太尉，骆驼、骡子给安北，葡萄酒及其他饮食，叔侄一起品尝。 
English: The enemy's envoy said: a mink coat for the captain, a camel and a mule for Anbei, wine and other food, uncle and niece to taste together.

古文：焘又乞酒并甘橘。
现代文：拓跋焘又派人来索要酒和甘橘。
English: Tuobao also sent someone to ask for wine and oranges.

古文：暢宣世祖问： 致意魏主，知欲相见，常迟面写。
现代文：张畅向对方宣告世祖的问候： 向魏主致意，我知道魏主想见我，一直在等待他的光临。
English: Zhang Chang declared the greetings of the ancestors to the other party: Greetings to the Lord of Wei, I know that the Lord of Wei wants to see me, I have been waiting for his coming.

古文：但受命本朝，过蒙籓任，人臣无境外之交，恨不暂悉。
现代文：只是我受命于国家，担当边境地区守卫的重任，作为臣子不能与外人交往，所以十分遗憾不能马上相见。
English: However, I was ordered by the state to take on the important task of guarding the border area. As a courtier, I cannot interact with outsiders, so I am very sorry that I cannot see you immediately.

古文：且城守备防，边镇之常，但悦以使之，故劳而无怨耳。
现代文：另外，对城池加以防守戒备是边境城镇的普遍情形，只不过和悦地指挥将士，因而他们虽劳苦而无怨言。
English: In addition, it is a common situation in border towns to be on the alert for the defense of the city, but the commanders are pleasantly directed, so they have no complaints despite their hard work.

古文：太尉、镇军得所送物，魏主意，知复须甘橘，今并付如别。
现代文：我们收到了你们送来的东西，知道魏主还要甘橘，现在送上。
English: We have received what you have sent, and we know that Lord Wei would also like some mandarin oranges, so please send them now.

古文：太尉以北土寒乡，皮绔褶脱是所须，今致魏主。
现代文：太尉认为寒冷的北方离不开皮裤褶脱，现在也送些给魏主。
English: The captain believes that the cold north cannot be separated from the leather trousers, and now he is also sending some to Wei Lord.

古文：螺杯、杂粽，南土所珍，镇军今以相致。 
现代文：螺杯、杂粽是南方珍贵的东西，我现在也将它们送给你们。 
English: Snails and chives are precious things in the south, and I am giving them to you now.

古文：此信未去，焘复遣使令孝伯传语曰： 魏主有诏语太尉、安北，近以骑至，车两在后，今端坐无为，有博具可见借。 
现代文：敌使者还没有送走这个口信，拓跋焘又派使者命令孝伯传话说： 魏主有诏给太尉、安北，近来我们的骑兵先到，车辆还在后面，闲着无事可做，你们如有赌博的工具可以借我们一用。 
English: The enemy envoy had not yet sent this message, so Tuoba sent another messenger to order Xiao Bo to deliver a message, saying: "The Lord of Wei has issued an edict to First Lieutenant An Bei. Recently, our cavalry arrived first, and the vehicles are still behind. They are idle and have nothing to do. If you have gambling tools, you can borrow them from us.

古文：暢曰： 博具当为申启。
现代文：张畅说： 要赌具我可以禀告。
English: Zhang Chang said: I can tell you about the gambling equipment.

古文：但向语二王，已非逊辞，且有诏之言，政可施于彼国，何得称之于此。 孝伯曰： 诏之与语，朕之与我，并有何异。 
现代文：但你们一开始就对我二王出言不逊，现在居然又用 诏 ，你们的统治权力在贵国，怎么能用到我们这儿来？ 孝伯说：  诏 与 告说 ， 朕 与 我 的称呼又有什么区别？ 
English: But from the very beginning, you spoke disparagingly about my two kings, and now you're actually using the word "hanzo" again. Your ruling power is in your country, so how can you use it against us here? Xiao Bo said, "What's the difference between "hanzo" and "hanzo," and what's the difference between calling me and myself?"

古文：暢曰： 若辞以通，可如来谈；既言有所施，则贵贱有等。
现代文：张畅说： 如果用词可以相通当然可以像原先说的那样。但既然语言使用的具体环境不同，总有贵贱等级的。
English: Zhang Chang said: If the words can be used interchangeably, of course, it can be as originally said. However, since the specific environment in which the language is used is different, there are always high and low levels.

古文：向所称诏，非所敢闻。 
现代文：你刚才称 诏 ，并不是我们想听到的。 
English: What you just called a "decree" is not what we want to hear.

古文：孝伯又曰： 太尉、安北是人臣与非？ 
现代文：孝伯说： 太尉、安北是臣子吗？ 张说： 是的。 
English: Xiao Bo said, "Captain, is An Bei a courtier?" Zhang said, "Yes."

古文：暢曰： 是也。 孝伯曰： 邻国之君，何为不称诏于邻国之臣？ 暢曰： 君之此称，尚不可闻于中华，况在诸王之贵，而犹曰邻国之君邪。 
现代文：孝伯说： 邻国的国君为何不能对邻国的臣子用诏？ 张说： 你这种说法连在中原都未听说，何况对我们尊贵的亲王还谈什么邻国之君！ 
English: Xiao Bo said, "Why can't the sovereign of a neighboring country issue an edict to the vassal of a neighboring country?" Zhang said, "You haven't even heard this kind of statement in the Central Plains, let alone talk about the sovereign of a neighboring country to our distinguished prince!"

古文：孝伯曰： 魏主言太尉、镇军并皆年少，分阔南信，殊当忧邑。
现代文：孝伯说： 魏主说太尉、镇军都很年轻，和江南相隔遥远，应该十分想念朝廷。
English: Xiao Bo said: Wei Lord said that the captain and the town army were very young and far away from the south of the Yangtze River, and they should miss the imperial court very much.

古文：若欲遣信者，当为护送；脱须骑者，亦当以马送之。 
现代文：如果你们派人送信到朝廷我们可以护送他们，缺马的话我们也可以送给你们。 
English: If you send messengers to the court, we can escort them, and if there are no horses, we can give them to you.

古文：暢曰： 此方间路甚多，使命日夕往来，不复以此劳魏主。 
现代文：张畅说： 这一带路很多，送信的一天就可来回，就不必以此麻烦魏主了。 
English: Zhang Chang said: There are a lot of ways to do this, and the transmission can be sent back and forth in one day, so there is no need to trouble the owner.

古文：孝伯曰： 亦知有水路，似为白贼所断。 
现代文：孝伯说： 我们知道这里有水路，但似乎被白贼占据了。 
English: Xiao Bo said, "We know that there is a waterway here, but it seems to be occupied by white thieves.

古文：暢曰： 君著白衣，故称白贼邪？ 
现代文：张畅说： 先生穿白衣服，就可称作为白贼吗？ 
English: Zhang Chang said: If a teacher wears white clothes, can he be called a white thief?

古文：孝伯大笑曰： 今之白贼，亦不异黄巾、赤眉。 
现代文：孝伯大笑说： 现在的白贼和黄巾、赤眉没什么两样。 
English: Xiao Bo laughed loudly and said: Today's white thief is no different from the yellow scarf and the red eyebrow.

古文：暢曰： 黄巾、赤眉，似不在江南。 
现代文：张畅说： 黄巾、赤眉好像不是出在江南。 
English: Zhang Chang said: The yellow scarf and red eyebrows do not seem to come from the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：孝伯曰： 虽不在江南，亦不在青、徐也。 
现代文：孝伯说： 虽然不在江南，也不在青州、徐州。 
English: Xiao Bo said: Although it is not in the south of the Yangtze River, it is not in Qingzhou or Xuzhou.

古文：暢曰： 今者青、徐，实为有贼，但非白贼耳。 
现代文：张畅说： 如今青州、徐州确实有贼，只不过不是白贼罢了。 
English: Zhang Chang said: Nowadays, there are indeed thieves in Qingzhou and Xuzhou, but they are not white thieves.

古文：虏使云： 向借博具，何故不出？ 
现代文：这时敌使者问： 刚才向你们借赌具，为什么还未拿来？ 
English: At this time, the enemy emissary asked: I just borrowed gambling equipment from you, why haven't you brought it?

古文：暢曰： 二王贵远，启闻难彻。 
现代文：张畅回答说 我二王离你们路途遥远，奏报一时无法到达。 
English: Zhang Chang replied, "My two kings are far away from you, and I can't reach them at the moment.

古文：孝伯曰： 周公握发吐哺，二王何独贵远？ 
现代文：孝伯说： 周公接待来客洗头时手握湿发、吃饭时吐出口中的饭食迎接客人，你们二王何故独独如此简慢？ 
English: Xiao Bo said: Zhou Gong welcomes guests with wet hair in his hand when washing his hair, and spits out the food in his mouth when eating to welcome guests. Why are you two kings so slow?

古文：暢曰： 握发吐飡，本施中国耳。 
现代文：张畅说： 握发吐哺本来只用在中原。 
English: Zhang Chang said: "Holding hair and spitting was originally only used in the Central Plains.

古文：孝伯曰： 宾有礼，主则择之。 
现代文：孝伯说： 客人有礼，主人就应该以礼待客。 
English: Xiao Bo said: If the guest is polite, the host should treat the guest with courtesy.

古文：暢曰： 昨见众宾至门，未为有礼。 
现代文：张畅说： 昨天我看见诸位客人到此并没有什么礼节！ 
English: Zhang Chang said, "Yesterday, I saw that you guests did not have any etiquette when you came here!

古文：俄顷送博具出，因以与之。
现代文：不久，城中送出赌具给了他们。
English: Soon, the city sent gambling equipment to them.

古文：焘又遣人云： 魏主致意安北，程天祚一介常人，诚知非宋朝之美，近于汝阳身被九创，落在殿外，我手牵而出之。
现代文：拓跋焘又派人来说： 魏主向安北致意，程天祚是一个普通的人，我们确实知道他不是宋的杰出之士。最近他在汝阳身上被刺伤九处，掉在氵殷水里，我亲手把他拉上来，大凡是人亲属离别都思念团聚。
English: Tuobao also sent someone to say: Wei Lord sends greetings to Anbei, Cheng Tianyao is an ordinary person, we really know that he is not an outstanding person of Song. Recently, he was stabbed nine times in Ruyang and fell into the water of Suiyang. I pulled him up with my own hands. Most people who are parted from their relatives miss the reunion.

古文：凡人骨肉分张，并思集聚，辄已语之，但其弟苦辞。今令与来使相见。 
现代文：我们已跟他说了，他只非常想念弟弟。现在可让他弟弟与我们的使者相见。 
English: We have told him that he only misses his brother very much. Now he can meet our envoy.

古文：程天福谓使人曰： 兄受命汝阳，不能死节，各在一国，何烦相见。 
现代文：程天福对使者说： 我哥哥在汝阳执行朝廷的命令，他不能为忠节而死，如今兄弟各在两国，何必麻烦相见呢。 
English: Cheng Tianfu said to the messenger: My brother is in Ryuyang to carry out the order of the imperial court. He cannot die for loyalty. Now the brothers are in two countries, why bother to see each other.

古文：焘又送氈各一领，盐各九种，并胡豉： 凡此诸盐，各有所宜。
现代文：拓跋焘又送来一领毡、九种盐和胡豉，并说： 这些盐各有用途。
English: Tuobao also sent a necklace of gourds, nine kinds of salt and jujube, and said: These salts all have their uses.

古文：白盐是魏主自所食。
现代文：白盐是魏主食用的。
English: White salt was the staple food of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：黑盐治腹胀气懑，细刮取六铢，以酒服之。
现代文：黑盐治腹胀气满，用刀细细刮下六铢，用酒吃下去。
English: Black salt cures a bloated stomach, scrape down six gills with a knife, and eat it with wine.

古文：胡盐治目痛。
现代文：胡盐治眼睛痛。
English: Hu's salt cures sore eyes.

古文：柔盐不食，治马脊创。
现代文：柔盐不能吃，治马背刀伤。
English: You can't eat soft salt. You'll get a knife wound on your horse's back.

古文：赤盐、驳盐、臭盐、马齿盐四种，并不中食。胡豉亦中啖。
现代文：赤盐、马交盐、臭盐、马齿盐四种都不能吃，胡豉则可以嚼食。
English: The four kinds of red salt, horseshit salt, rotten salt, and horse tooth salt cannot be eaten, but wolfberry can be chewed.

古文：黄甘幸彼所丰，可更见分。 
现代文：黄柑是你们盛产的东西，可再分些给我们。 
English: Citrus aureus is something you produce a lot of, so you can give us some more.

古文：又云： 魏主致意太尉、安北，何不遣人来至我间。
现代文：又说： 魏主告诉太尉、安北可派人到我们这儿来。
English: He also said: Lord Wei told the captain that Anbei could send someone to us.

古文：彼此之情，虽不可尽，要须见我小大，知我老少，观我为人。
现代文：我们双方的情义虽然难尽情表露，重要的是看看我身材高低，年纪大小，观察我的为人。
English: Although it is difficult to fully express the feelings of both of us, it is important to look at my height, age, and observe me as a person.

古文：若诸佐不可遣，亦可使僮干来。 
现代文：如果不能派将领来，也可以派精干的僮仆来。 
English: If you can't send a general, you can send a capable servant.

古文：暢又宣旨答曰： 魏主形状才力，久为来往所见。
现代文：张畅又宣布世祖的旨意回答说： 魏主的相貌早已被两国来往的人画下了。
English: Zhang Chang also announced the will of the ancestor and replied: The appearance of the Wei Lord has long been painted by people coming and going between the two countries.

古文：李尚书亲自衔命，不患彼此不尽，故不复遗使信。 
现代文：有李尚书亲自领命行事就不担心我们双方的情义不能尽情表露了，因此我们不必再派遣使者去。 
English: If Li Shangshu personally receives the order to act, there will be no fear that the feelings of both of us cannot be fully expressed, so we do not have to send an emissary.

古文：又云： 魏主恨向所送马，殊不称意。
现代文：敌使者又说： 魏主悔恨先前送给你的马很不合他的心意。
English: The enemy emissary also said, "The horse that the Wei Lord Regretfully sent to you earlier is very much against his wishes.

古文：安北若须大马，当更送之，脱须蜀马，亦有佳者。 
现代文：安北如果要大马我们会再送给你们。另外我们也有好的蜀马。 
English: Anbei, if you want large horses, we will give them to you again. In addition, we also have good Shou horses.

古文：暢曰： 安北不乏良驷，送自彼意，非此所求。 
现代文：张畅说： 安北并不缺少好马，你们送给我们本是你们自己的事，并非我们向你们索要。 
English: Zhang Chang said, "There is no shortage of good horses in Anbei. What you give us is your own business, we are not asking you for anything.

古文：义恭饷焘炬烛十挺，世祖亦致锦一匹，曰： 知更须黄甘，诚非所吝。
现代文：义恭赏给拓跋焘十挺蜡烛，世祖也送他一匹织锦，并说： 知道你们还要黄柑，确实不是我们悭吝，只是送给你们根本不够分给你们所有的将士。
English: The ancestors also gave him a horse of brocade, and said, "Knowing that you also want mandarin oranges, it is true that we are not being stingy, but we simply cannot give you enough to distribute to all of your soldiers."

古文：但送不足周彼一军，向给魏主，未应便乏，故不复重付。 焘复求甘蔗、安石榴，暢曰： 石榴出自鄴下，亦当非彼所乏。 
现代文：原先我们已给魏主送过了，不应该一下子就光了，所以不再送给你们了。 拓跋焘又索要甘蔗、安石榴，张畅说： 石榴产于邺下，你们不应缺少。 
English: Originally, we had already sent it to Lord Wei, but it shouldn't have run out all of a sudden, so we won't send it to you anymore. Tuobao also asked for sugar cane and pomegranates, Zhang Chang said: Pomegranates are produced under the plow, you shouldn't lack them.

古文：孝伯又曰： 君南土膏粱，何为著屩。
现代文：孝伯说： 你们南方出产稻米和小麦，又为何穿皮革的鞋呢。
English: Xiao Bo said, "In the south, you produce rice and wheat, so why do you wear leather shoes?"

古文：君而著此，使将士云何？ 
现代文：你穿着让手下将士说什么呢？ 
English: What do you tell your soldiers to say?

古文：暢曰： 膏粱之言，诚为多愧。但以不武，受命统军，戎阵之间，不容缓服。 
现代文：张畅说： 说起来稻麦确实令人惭愧，只是我没有什么本领却受命统领军队，战场上当然不能穿宽松的服装。 
English: Zhang Chang said, "It is indeed a shame to say that I am a rice farmer, but I have no skills, but I have been ordered to lead the army. Of course, I cannot wear loose clothing on the battlefield.

古文：孝伯又曰： 长史，我是中州人，久处北国，自隔华风，相去步武，不得致尽，边皆是北人听我语者，长史当深得我。 
现代文：孝伯又说： 张长史，我是中州人，长期住在北国，与汉族风俗相隔，两国交兵不能充分表达我的情义，身边都是监视我的人，你应该真正理解我。 
English: Xiao Bo also said: Zhang Changshi, I am from Zhongzhou, I have lived in the north for a long time, and I am separated from the Han customs. The war between the two countries cannot fully express my feelings. I am surrounded by people who are watching me. You should really understand me.

古文：孝伯又曰： 永昌王，魏主从弟，自复常镇长安，今领精骑八万，直造淮南，寿春久闭门自固，不敢相御。向送刘康祖头，彼之所见。
现代文：又说： 永昌王是魏主的叔伯弟弟，本来长期镇守长安，如今率领八万精锐骑兵直抵淮南，寿春一直关闭城门固守不敢出来迎战，先前他看到了我们送去的刘康祖的人头。
English: He also said: Yongchang Wang is the uncle and younger brother of Wei Lord. He was originally the long-term town guard of Chang'an, and now he has led 80,000 elite cavalry straight to Huainan. Shuchun has been closing the city gate and dares not come out to fight. Previously, he saw the head of Liu Kangzu whom we sent.

古文：王玄谟甚是所悉，亦是常才耳。
现代文：王玄谟我们非常了解他，也是一个平常的人罢了。
English: Wang Xuanmu, we know him very well, is just an ordinary person.

古文：南国何意作如此任使，以致奔败。
现代文：宋朝为什么竟派出这样的人，结果总是失败逃跑。
English: Why did the Song Dynasty send such a person? The result was always a failed escape.

古文：自入此境七百余里，主人竟不能一相拒逆。
现代文：自从我们进入你们境内七百多里，你们做主人的竟没有一个能抵抗我们的进攻。
English: Since we entered your territory more than seven hundred miles, not a single one of you masters has been able to resist our attack.

古文：邹山之险，君家所凭，前锋始得接手，崔邪利便藏入穴，我间诸将倒曳脚而出之，魏主赐其生命，今从在此。
现代文：险要的邹山是你们的凭借依靠，我们的先头部队与你们一交手，崔邪利便躲进洞穴，我将领倒拉着他的脚将他拖出来，魏主赐他不死，现在跟着我们到了这儿。
English: The imminent Lushan is your reliance. As soon as our vanguard troops fought with you, Cui Zili hid in a cave. I will drag him out by his feet. The Wei Lord granted him immortality, and now he has followed us here.

古文：复何以轻脱遣马文恭至萧县，使望风退挠邪。
现代文：你们又何必轻率地派马文恭到萧县，令他望风而逃呢？
English: Why did you recklessly send Ma Wenqong to Xiao County to make him run away?

古文：君家民人甚相忿怨，云清平之时，赋我租帛，至有急难，不能相拯。 
现代文：你们的人民都怨声载道，都说： 和平的时候向我们征收赋税，到有国难时却不能保护拯救我们。  
English: Your people complain bitterly, saying, "They tax us in times of peace, but they do not protect us in times of war."

古文：暢曰： 知永昌已过淮南，康祖为其所破，比有信使，无此消息。
现代文：张畅说： 我知道你们永昌王已经过了淮南，刘康祖被他打败，信使来时并无此消息。
English: Zhang Chang said, "I know that your Yongchang Wang has already passed Huainan, and Liu Kangzu was defeated by him, but there was no news of this when the messenger came.

古文：王玄谟南土偏将，不谓为才，但以人为前驱引导耳。
现代文：王玄谟是南方的偏将，算不上有才能的人，只不过因为他是北方人故意让他做先锋引路罢了。
English: Wang Xuanmu is a south side player, not a talented person, but because he is a northerner, he deliberately let him be the pioneer to lead the way.

古文：大军未至而河冰向合，玄谟量宜反旆，未为失机，但因夜回师，致戎马小乱耳。
现代文：大部队还没到而黄河的冰快合拢，王玄谟考虑应该撤兵，这并不是指挥失误，只是因夜里撤兵而使部队有点小混乱罢了。
English: Wang Xuanmu considered withdrawing before the large force arrived and the ice of the Yellow River was about to close. This was not a command error, but just a little confusion caused by the withdrawal of troops at night.

古文：我家玄谟斗城，陈宪小将，魏主倾国，累旬不克。
现代文：我们的悬瓠是斗大的小城，守将陈宪一小将，而你们魏主则是率领全国军队，几十天也攻不下来。
English: Our suspension tower is a small city with a big battle, the guard will be Chen Xian, a small general, while you Wei Lord will lead the national army, and it will not be able to be attacked for dozens of days.

古文：胡盛之偏裨小帅，众无一旅，始济融水，魏国君臣奔迸，仅得免脱，滑台之师，无所多愧。
现代文：胡盛之亦是一偏将小帅，兵员不超过一旅，他刚刚渡过融水，魏国君臣拼命逃奔才侥幸未被擒获，滑台的军队并无多少惭愧。
English: Hu Shengzhi was also a minor general, with no more than one brigade of soldiers. He had just crossed the meltwater. The princes and ministers of Wei fled desperately but were not captured. The troops on the slide were not ashamed.

古文：邹山小戍，虽有微险，河畔之民，多是新附，始慕圣化，奸盗未息，亦使崔邪利抚之而已，今没虏手，何损于国。
现代文：在邹山的小战斗虽然遇到小小的险情，但黄河边的人民大多是刚刚归顺我宋朝的，刚开始接受我文明的熏染，所以总有奸盗犯罪之事，我们也不过派崔邪利抚慰他们罢了，如今落在敌人手里对我国又有什么损伤？
English: Although the small battle in Lushan encountered a small danger, most of the people along the Yellow River had just surrendered to our Song Dynasty and had just begun to accept the contamination of our civilization. Therefore, there were always cases of theft and crime. We only had to appease them by paying evil profits. What kind of damage would it do to our country if it fell into the hands of the enemy?

古文：魏主自以十万师而制一崔邪利，方复足言邪。
现代文：魏主亲自率领十万大军打败一个崔邪利还值得一提吗？
English: Is it worth mentioning that the Lord of Wei personally led a hundred thousand troops to defeat a Cui Zari?

古文：闻萧、相百姓，并依山险，聊遣马文恭以十队示之耳。
现代文：我们听说萧、相百姓都依靠着险要的山川，聊且派马文恭带十队人马去给他们看看罢了。
English: We heard that the people of Xiao and Xiang all rely on the dangerous mountains and rivers, and sent Ma Wenyong with ten teams of people to show them.

古文：文恭谓前以三队出，还走后，大营嵇玄敬以百骑至留城，魏军奔败。
现代文：文恭让前面三队出大队，他走后，大本营的嵇玄敬带领一百多骑兵到了留城，魏军败逃。
English: Wen Gong let the front three teams go out of the battalion. After he left, the base camp's Yu Xuan Jing led more than a hundred cavalry to the city, and the Wei army fled.

古文：轻敌致此，亦非所衄。
现代文：这是轻敌导致的后果，并非是败在你们手里。
English: This is the result of a light enemy, not a defeat at your hands.

古文：王境人民，列居河畔，二国交兵，当互加抚养，而魏师入境，肆行残虐，事生意外，由彼无道。
现代文：我境内的人民散居在黄河岸边，两国交兵应当共同抚慰爱护老百姓，而你们军队进入我们境内恣意残酷破坏，发生这么多不幸实在是因为魏主无道。
English: The people in our country are scattered on the banks of the Yellow River. The two countries should jointly comfort, love and care for the common people, and your army entered our country to arbitrarily and cruelly destroy. So many misfortunes have occurred because the Wei Lord has no way.

古文：官不负民，民何怨人。
现代文：官府对得起老百姓，人民怎么会有怨气？
English: The government is worthy of the people, so how can the people have a grudge?

古文：知入境土，百无相拒，此自上由太尉神算，次在镇军圣略。
现代文：至于你们入境七百里未遇到抵抗，这首先因为太尉的神奇算计，其次是因为镇军的英明谋略。
English: As for your entry seven hundred miles without encountering resistance, this is firstly due to the magical calculation of the captain, and secondly due to the wise strategy of the town's army.

古文：经国之要，虽不豫闻，然用兵有机，间亦不容相语。 
现代文：治国安邦的要领我虽不了解，但用兵打仗的机密现在也不能对你说。 
English: Although I do not understand the essentials of governing the country, I cannot tell you the secret of using soldiers to fight a war.

古文：孝伯曰： 魏主当不围此城，自率众军，直造瓜步。
现代文：孝伯说： 魏主可以不包围彭城，而亲率大军径直进军瓜步。
English: Xiao Bo said: Wei Lord can not encircle Pengcheng, and the pro-led army marched straight into the army.

古文：南事若办，彭城不待围；若不捷，彭城亦非所须也。
现代文：南面的战争如果胜利就无需包围攻打此城了。如果南面不能成功，彭城也不是我们非要不可的。
English: If we win the war in the south, we don't need to encircle and attack this city. If we don't succeed in the south, we don't need Pengcheng.

古文：我今当南饮江湖，以疗渴耳。 
现代文：我如今该到南方畅饮长江之水来解渴了。 
English: Now I have to go to the south to quench my thirst by drinking water from the Yangtze River.

古文：暢曰： 去留之事，自适彼怀。
现代文：张畅说： 是走是留，自然随你们的便。
English: Zhang Chang said, "Whether to go or stay, naturally, it's up to you.

古文：若虏马遂得饮江，便为无复天道。
现代文：如果你们的战马能喝到长江水那就是天理不存了。
English: If your war horses can drink water from the Yangtze River, then the laws of nature no longer apply.

古文：各应反命，迟复更悉。 
现代文：我们应该各自回去复命，以后再领教。 
English: We should each go back and get our lives back, and we'll figure it out later.

古文：暢便回还，孝伯追曰： 长史深自爱敬，相去步武，恨不执手。 
现代文：张畅说完就往回走，孝伯追上来说： 张长史，我深深敬爱尊重您，我们现在相对交兵，真遗憾不能和您手拉手交谈。 
English: After Zhang Chang finished speaking, he walked back, and Xiao Bo caught up with him and said: Zhang Changshi, I deeply respect and respect you. We are now at war with each other. It's a pity that I can't talk to you hand in hand.

古文：暢因复谓曰： 善将爱，冀荡定有期，相见无远。
现代文：张畅就又对他说： 请您好好保重，希望战争一定有结束的一天，你我相见的时候不会遥远。
English: Zhang Chang then said to him, "Please take good care of yourself. I hope the war will end one day. The time when you and I meet will not be far away."

古文：君若得还宋朝，今为相识之始。 
现代文：您如能回归宋朝，那么现在就是你我相识的开始。 
English: If you can return to the Song Dynasty, then now is the beginning of your acquaintance with me.

古文：孝伯曰： 待此未期。 
现代文：孝伯说： 恐怕不会等到这一天。 
English: Takaoka said, "I'm afraid I can't wait for that day."

古文：焘又遣就二王借箜篌、琵琶、筝、笛等器及棋子，义恭答曰： 受任戎行，不赍乐具。在此燕会，政使镇府命妓，有弦百条，是江南之美，今以相致。 
现代文：拓跋焘又派人向二王借箜篌、琵琶、筝、笛子等乐器及围棋，义恭回答说： 受朝廷之命征战在外，未带玩乐的东西，在此宴会时恰好让镇府请了一些歌伎，有弦百条，都是江南的珍品，现在送给你们。 
English: Tuobao also sent people to borrow musical instruments such as gongs, lutes, kites, flutes, and Go games from the two kings, and Yigong replied: "By the order of the imperial court, I was conscripted into the war, but I didn't bring anything to play with. At this banquet, I just happened to have the town government invite some Kabuki, with hundreds of strings, all of which are treasures from the south of the Yangtze River, and now I'm giving them to you."

古文：世祖曰： 任居方岳，初不此经虑，且乐人常器，又观前来诸王赠别，有此琵琶，今以相与。
现代文：世祖说： 我担任地方守卫本没有留意这些东西，何况你们要的那些是乐工的普通乐器。我又检查以往诸王赠送的礼品，发现了这些琵琶，现在给你们。
English: The patriarch said: "I, as a local guard, did not pay attention to these things, and what's more, the ones you want are ordinary musical instruments for musicians. I also checked the gifts given by kings in the past and found these lutes, which are now given to you.

古文：棋子亦付。 
现代文：围棋也一并送上。 
English: A game of Go was also sent.

古文：孝伯言辞辩赡，亦北土之美也。暢随宜应答，吐属如流，音韵详雅，风仪华润，孝伯及左右人并相视叹息。
现代文：李孝伯的语言才能辩论胆识，也可算是北国的骄傲；而张畅随机应答，吐词如流，音韵和雅，风度仪表华朗不凡。李孝伯以及左右两旁的人都对他叹赏不已。
English: Li Xiaobing's language ability to debate courage, can also be regarded as the pride of the north country; and Zhang Chang's random response, fluent speech, musicality and elegance, and magnificent demeanor. Li Xiaobing and people on both sides admire him.

古文：虏寻攻彭城南门，并放火，暢躬自前战，身先士卒。
现代文：敌人不久打到了彭城南门，并在四处燃起大火。张畅亲自到前线参战，身先士卒。
English: The enemy soon reached the south gate of Pengcheng, and fires were lit all around. Zhang Chang personally went to the front to fight, leading the way.

古文：及焘自瓜步北走，经彭城下过，遣人语城内： 食尽且去，须麦熟更来。 
现代文：后来拓跋焘从瓜步北逃时经过彭城，派人对城内喊话说： 我们的粮食用完了暂且回去，等到麦子成熟时会重新南下的。 
English: Later, Tuobao passed through Pengcheng when fleeing from Guabu North, and sent people to shout to the city, saying, "We have run out of grain, please go back for the time being. When the wheat is ripe, we will go south again."

古文：义恭大惧，闭门不敢追。
现代文：义恭非常恐惧，紧闭城门不敢追击敌兵。
English: Yixiong was very afraid and did not dare to chase the enemy soldiers with the gate closed.

古文：虏期又至，议欲芟麦剪苗，移民堡聚，众论并不同，复更会议。镇军录事参军王孝孙独曰： 虏不能复来，既自可保，如其更至，此议亦不可立。
现代文：又到了敌虏要南侵的时候，义恭商量想割去麦苗，将百姓迁到城堡里集中居住，但众人的意见不能统一，就又召集大家商议，唯独镇军录事参军王孝孙说： 敌人不再来，我们就可以安全；如果又来也不能用这个办法。
English: When it came time for the enemy to invade the south, Yigong discussed the idea of cutting the wheat seedlings and moving the people to live in the castle. However, the opinions of all the people could not be unified, so he called everyone together again for discussion. However, the town's military recorder Wang Xiaosun said: "If the enemy does not come again, we can be safe; if they do come again, we cannot use this method."

古文：百姓闭在内城，饥馑日久，方春之月，野采自资，一入堡聚，饿死立至。
现代文：将百姓关在城内，饥饿的时间一长，一到春天可以到野外去采野菜保存自己，但一进入聚居的城堡，马上就会被饿死。
English: If you keep the people in the city, they will be hungry for a long time. In the spring, they can go out to pick vegetables to save themselves, but as soon as they enter the castle where they live together, they will starve to death.

古文：民知必死，何可制邪？
现代文：老百姓知道这是死路一条，怎么能管得住呢？
English: Ordinary people know that this is a dead end, so how can they manage?

古文：虏若必来，芟麦无晚。 
现代文：如果敌虏一定来，到时再割麦子不迟。 
English: If the enemy is sure to come, then it is not too late to cut the wheat.

古文：四坐默然，莫之敢对。
现代文：在场的人都默不作声，没人敢与他辩论。
English: Everyone present fell silent, no one dared to argue with him.

古文：暢曰： 孝孙之议，实有可寻。 
现代文：张畅说： 孝孙的话确实值得考虑。 
English: Zhang Chang said: Xiaosun's words are indeed worthy of consideration.

古文：镇军府典签董元嗣侍世祖侧，进曰： 王录事议不可夺，实如来论。 
现代文：镇军府典谶董元嗣侍立在世祖旁边，上前说： 王录事的建议不能考虑，还该照原先的打算去实行。 
English: Dong Yuan Ci, the town's military governor, stood next to the patriarch and said: Wang Luo's suggestion cannot be considered, and it should be implemented as originally planned.

古文：别驾王子夏因曰： 此论诚然。 
现代文：别驾王子夏就说： 这个意见是对的。 
English: Don't let Prince Xia say: This opinion is right.

古文：暢敛板白世祖曰： 下官欲命孝孙弹子夏。 
现代文：张畅端正手中的笏板对世祖说： 下官要让王孝孙弹劾子夏。 
English: Zhang Changduan said to Shizu with the cutting board in his right hand, "The lower officials want Wang Xiaosun to impeach Zixia."

古文：世祖曰： 王别驾有何事邪？ 
现代文：世祖说： 王别驾有什么错吗？ 
English: The patriarch said, "Is there anything wrong with Wang Beijie?"

古文：暢曰： 芟麦移民，可谓大议，一方安危，事系于此。
现代文：张畅说： 割麦移民可算是重要的大事，一方老百姓的安危就维系在这上面。
English: Zhang Chang said: "Cutting wheat and immigration can be regarded as an important event, while the safety of the people is maintained on this.

古文：子夏亲为州端，曾无同异，及闻元嗣之言，则欢笑酬答，阿意左右，何以事君。 
现代文：王子夏亲为州官，一开始对此事没有任何赞成或反对的表示，等到听了董元嗣的话，就应声附和，讨好世祖左右的人，这怎能侍奉君王？ 
English: Prince Xia, as a prefectural official, did not express any approval or opposition to this matter at the beginning. When he heard Dong Yuan Hei's words, he agreed, pleasing the people around the ancestor. How can this serve the king?

古文：子夏大惭，元嗣亦有惭色。
现代文：子夏十分惭愧，元嗣也不好意思。
English: Zixia was very ashamed, and Yuan He was also embarrassed.

古文：义恭之议遂寝。
现代文：义恭的意见就这样未被采用。
English: As a result, Yigong's opinion was not adopted.

古文：太祖闻暢屡有正议，甚嘉之。
现代文：太祖听说张畅屡次提出正确的建议，非常赞许他。
English: The great-grandfather heard that Zhang Changru repeatedly put forward correct suggestions and highly praised him.

古文：世祖犹停彭城，召暢先反，并使履行盱眙城，欲立大镇。
现代文：世祖仍驻扎在彭城，朝廷命张畅先返回，并让他统管盱眙城。
English: Shizu was still stationed in Pengcheng. The imperial court ordered Zhang Chang to return first, and put him in charge of Lucheng.

古文：时虏声云当出襄阳，故以暢为南谯王义宣司空长史、南郡太守。
现代文：当时敌虏声称要从襄阳南侵，所以朝廷让张畅任南谯王义宣的司空长史、南郡太守。
English: At that time, the enemy claimed to invade the south from Xiangyang, so the imperial court appointed Zhang Chang as the governor of Nanshan Wang Yixuan and the governor of Nanshan County.

古文：又欲暢代刘兴祖为青州及彭城都督，并不果。
现代文：又想让他替代刘兴祖任青州和彭城的都督，但两者都未实行。
English: They also wanted him to replace Liu Xingzu as the governor of Qingzhou and Pengcheng, but neither of these plans came to fruition.

古文：三十年，元凶弑逆，义宣发哀之日，即便举兵，暢为元佐，居僚首，哀容俯仰，廕映当时。举哀毕，改服，著黄韦绔褶，出射堂简人，音姿容止，莫不瞩目，见之者皆愿为尽命。
现代文：元嘉三十年元凶杀君叛逆，义宣在举行哀悼仪式的那天举兵，张畅是元老，位列众官之首，神情悲哀，在当时影响巨大，哀悼完毕，他换了衣服，穿着黄色皮褶子裤，出射堂选兵，其音容举止，无不让人瞩目，见到他的人，都愿意为他效力。
English: In the 30th year of Yuan Jia's murderous rebellion, Yixuan raised an army on the day of the mourning ceremony. Zhang Chang was a veteran, ranked first among all officials, with a sad look and great influence at the time. After the mourning, he changed his clothes, wore yellow leather trousers, and went to the hall to select soldiers. His tone and demeanor were all eye-catching. People who saw him were willing to serve him.

古文：事平，征为吏部尚书，夷道县侯，食邑千户。
现代文：事件平息后，朝廷召他为吏部尚书、夷道县侯，食邑千户。
English: After the incident subsided, the imperial court summoned him to serve as the official of Shangshu, the county seat of Yidu, and a thousand households of Shuei.

古文：义宣既有异图，蔡超等以暢民望，劝义宣留之，乃解南蛮校尉以授暢，加冠军将军，领丞相长史。
现代文：义宣有了不轨的打算后，蔡超等人因为张畅深得百姓的敬仰，劝义宣把他留下来。于是义宣解去南蛮校尉的职务而将这个职位授予张畅，并加冠军将军，领丞相长史。
English: After Yixuan had a devious plan, Cai Chao and others persuaded Yixuan to keep him because Zhang Changcun was deeply admired by the people. Therefore, Yixuan dismissed Zhang Changcun from the post of Nanban captain and awarded him this post, and added the champion general, the leader of the Long History.

古文：暢遣门生荀僧宝下都，因颜竣陈义宣衅状。
现代文：张畅派门生苟僧宝去京城向颜竣报告义宣的可疑之举。
English: Zhang Chang sent his protégé, the monk Guo Bao, to the capital to report Yan Jun's suspicious act of proclamation.

古文：僧宝有私货停巴陵，不时下，会义宣起兵，津径断绝，僧宝遂不得去。
现代文：僧宝有一批私货停在巴陵，不久将东下，正好碰上义宣发动兵变，水陆交通都被截断，僧宝因之无法离开。
English: Monk Bao had a shipment of smuggled goods stopped in Baling and was about to leave for the east, when Yixuan launched a mutiny. Water and land transportation were cut off, making it impossible for Monk Bao to leave.

古文：义宣将为逆，遣嬖人翟灵宝谓暢： 朝廷简练舟甲，意在西讨，今欲发兵自卫。 
现代文：义宣要叛逆之前，派心腹翟灵宝对张畅说： 朝廷正在挑选战船训练士兵就是要西讨我们，我们现在要起兵自卫。 
English: Before declaring his intention to rebel, Zhang Chang was told by his trusted confidant Zou Lingbao: "The imperial court is selecting warships to train soldiers to attack us in the west. We must now raise an army to defend ourselves."

古文：暢曰： 必无此理，请以死保之。 
现代文：张畅说： 肯定不会这样，我愿以死担保。 
English: Zhang Chang said, "This will definitely not happen. I will guarantee it with my life."

古文：灵宝知暢不回，劝义宣杀以徇众。
现代文：灵宝知道张畅不会听他们的，就劝义宣将他杀了示众。
English: Lingbao knew that Zhang Chang would not listen to them, so he persuaded Yixuan to kill him in public.

古文：即遣召暢，止于东斋，弥日不与相见，赖司马竺超民保持，故获全免。
现代文：于是义宣派人召张畅，让他住在东斋，许多天也不见他，幸亏司马竺超民保护他才获得幸免。
English: As a result, Yixuan sent someone to summon Zhang Chang, let him live in Dongzhai, and did not see him for many days. Fortunately, he was spared thanks to Sima Qian's extraordinary protection.

古文：既而进号抚军，别立军部，以收民望。
现代文：义宣又给他进号抚军，别立军部，以此来收买人心。
English: Yixuan also gave him the go-ahead to raise an army and establish a military department in order to win over the people's hearts.

古文：暢虽署文檄，而饮酒常醉，不省文书。
现代文：张畅虽然在任上签署公文，但总是饮酒大醉不管公文如何。
English: Although Zhang Chang signed official documents while in office, he always drank heavily, regardless of the official documents.

古文：随义宣东下，梁山战败，义宣奔走，暢于兵乱自归，为军人所掠，衣服都尽。
现代文：后随义宣东下，在梁山战败，义宣匆忙奔逃。张畅在兵乱之中独自返回，被军兵抢劫，连衣服都被抢光。
English: Later, following Yixuan to the east, defeated in Liangshan, Yixuan hurriedly fled. Zhang Chang returned alone in the midst of the turmoil, was robbed by soldiers, and even his clothes were robbed.

古文：值右将军王玄谟乘舆出营，暢已得败衣，排玄谟上舆，玄谟意甚不悦，诸将欲杀之，队主张世营救得免。
现代文：正碰上右将军王玄谟乘车出大营，张畅已弄了些破旧衣服穿着，推挤着王玄谟上车，玄谟很不高兴，手下一些将领要杀张畅，队主张世营救才得幸免。
English: He was just meeting the right general, Wang Xuanmu, who was leaving the camp by car. Zhang Chang had already put on some worn-out clothes and was pushing Wang Xuanmu to get on the car. Xuanmu was very unhappy. Some of his generals wanted to kill Zhang Chang, but the team insisted on being rescued.

古文：送京师，下廷尉，削爵土，配左右尚方。
现代文：张畅被送到京城，朝廷将他交给狱吏，削除了他的爵位和封地，配左右尚方。
English: Zhang Chang was sent to the capital, the court handed him over to the jailer, stripped him of his title and fiefdom, and assigned him to Shangfang.

古文：寻见原。
现代文：不久被赦免。
English: He was soon pardoned.

古文：复起为都官尚书，转侍中，代子淹领太子右卫率。
现代文：张畅复出任都官尚书，转侍中，代替儿子张淹领太子右卫率。
English: Zhang Changfu assumed the post of the official of the capital, Shangshu, and became the second-in-command, taking the place of his son Zhang Wanzhong as the leader of the prince's guard.

古文：孝建二年，出为会稽太守。
现代文：孝建二年他出任会稽太守。
English: In the second year of Xiao Jian, he became the auditor general.

古文：未拜，卒。
现代文：太明元年死于任上，时年五十岁。
English: Taiming died in his first year in office at the age of fifty.

古文：何偃，字仲弘，庐江灊人，司空尚之中子也。
现代文：谥号为宣子。张畅的儿子张浩，官至义阳王昶的征北咨议参军。何偃，字仲弘，庐江人。司空何尚之的二儿子。
English: His posthumous name was Xuan Zi. Zhang Chang's son, Zhang Hao, was an officer in the Northern Expeditionary Force under the command of Wang Yao of Yiyang. He Yao, also known as Zhong Hong, was a native of Minjiang. He was the second son of Sikuo He Shangzhi.

古文：州辟议曹从事，举秀才，除中军参军，临川王义庆平西府主簿。
现代文：州里征召他为辟议曹从事，举荐他为秀才，任命他为中军参军及临川王刘义庆平西府主簿。
English: He was recruited by the prefecture to engage in advocacy, recommended as an outstanding talent, appointed as a member of the Chinese army and the main book of Linchuan King Liu Yiqing Pingxi Prefecture.

古文：召为太子洗马，不拜。
现代文：又征召他任太子洗马，未接受。
English: He was also conscripted to serve as prince of Saima, but he did not accept.

古文：元嘉十九年，为丹阳丞，除庐陵王友，太子中舍人，中书郎，太子中庶子。
现代文：元嘉十九年，何偃任丹阳丞，升任太子中舍人、中书郎、太子中庶子。
English: In the 19th year of Yuan Jia, He Ying was appointed as Danyang Cho, and was promoted to Prince's Junior Secretary, Junior Secretary, Junior Secretary, and Prince's Junior Secretary.

古文：时义阳王昶任东官，使偃行义阳国事。
现代文：当时义阳刘昶为太子，让何偃处理义阳国的事务。
English: At that time, Liu Ye of Yiyang was the crown prince, and he was left to deal with the affairs of Yiyang.

古文：二十九年，太祖欲更北伐，访之群臣，偃议曰： 内干胡法宗宣诏，逮问北伐。伏计贼审有残祸，犬羊易乱，歼殄非难，诚如天旨。
现代文：元嘉二十九年，太祖想再次北伐，就此事征求大臣们的意见。何偃议论这事认为： 敌人终要灭亡，他们容易混乱，歼灭他们并非难事，这确实是天意。
English: In the 29th year of the Yuan Jia, Taizu wanted to make another Northern Expedition, and he asked the ministers for their opinions on the matter. Commenting on this matter, He Zhen thought: The enemy will eventually perish, they are easily confused, and it is not difficult to destroy them, this is indeed the will of heaven.

古文：今虽庙算无遗，而士未精习。
现代文：可如今虽然朝廷谋划得非常周到，然而士兵没有严格训练好。
English: But now, although the imperial court's plan is very thoughtful, the soldiers are not strictly trained.

古文：缘边镇戍，充实者寡，边民流散，多未附业。
现代文：沿边镇守的部队装备充足的很少，边境地区的人民流亡逃散，大多数没有归附我们。
English: The troops guarding the towns along the border are poorly equipped, and the people in the border areas have fled and dispersed. Most of them have not joined us.

古文：控引所资，取给根本。
现代文：而这两者正是我们生存和进攻所凭借的根本。
English: And these two are the very foundation of our survival and attack.

古文：亏根本以殉边患，宜动必万克。
现代文：损害根本应付边患，结局一定不会成功。
English: The damage is fundamental to deal with the side effects, the outcome will not be successful.

古文：无虑往岁挫伤，续以内衅，侮亡取乱，诚为沛然。
现代文：索虏以往失败后继之而起的就是内乱，最后导致破亡的局面，这是必然的。
English: It was inevitable that civil unrest would follow the failure of the Sorbs in the past, and eventually lead to a ruinous situation.

古文：然淮、泗数州，实亦雕耗，流佣未归，创痍未起。
现代文：淮、泗数州消耗巨大，在外面的民工都还没有返回，战争留下的创伤还未治愈。
English: The Huaihai and Zhangjiakou provinces have huge consumption, the migrant workers outside have not yet returned, and the wounds left by the war have not yet healed.

古文：且攻守不等，客主形异，薄之则势艰，围之则旷日，进退之间，奸虞互起。
现代文：况且，攻与守的情况各异，敌我双方情形不同，我们要进攻他们非常艰难，包围他们又费时间，进退维谷之间会发生许多意想不到的困难。
English: Moreover, the situation of attack and defense is different, the situation of the two sides is different, it is very difficult for us to attack them, it takes time to surround them, and many unexpected difficulties will occur between advancing and retreating.

古文：窃谓当今之弊易衄，方来之寇不深，宜含垢藏疾，以齐天道。 
现代文：所以我认为现在的不利形势很容易导致挫折。敌人威胁并不大，因此我们应该革除自己的弊病，以顺应天道。 
English: Therefore, I think that the current unfavorable situation can easily lead to setbacks. The enemy threat is not great, so we should eliminate our own ills in order to conform to the heavenly way.

古文：迁始兴王浚征北长史、南东海太守。
现代文：何偃升任始兴王刘浚的征北长史、南北海太守。
English: He was promoted to the post of Northern Expeditionary Governor and the Governor of the South and North Seas by Liu Jun, the Prince of Xinxing.

古文：元凶弑立，以偃为侍中，掌诏诰。
现代文：元凶杀君称帝，让何偃任侍中，负责起草诏书及其颁布。
English: The former murderous king was proclaimed emperor, and He Zhen was appointed as an attendant, responsible for drafting the imperial edict and its promulgation.

古文：时尚之为司空、尚书令，偃居门下，父子并处权要，时为寒心；而尚之及偃善摄机宜，曲得时誉。
现代文：当时何尚之任司空、尚书令，何偃在门下省，父子二人同居权要之位，当时的人都为此心寒，因他们擅长权术，赚取了当时舆论的赞扬。
English: At that time, He Shang was appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force, the Secretary of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and the Minister of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs. Both father and son lived together in the important position of power. People at that time were cold-hearted about this, because they were good at the art of power and earned the praise of the public opinion at that time.

古文：会世祖即位，任遇无改，除大司马长史，迁侍中，领太子中庶子。
现代文：世祖即位后，何偃的职位待遇都没有改变，任大司马长史，升侍中、领太子中庶子。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, the position and treatment of He Yao did not change. He was appointed as the grand steward Ma Changshi, promoted to attendant, and became an illegitimate child of the crown prince.

古文：时责百官谠言，偃以为： 宜重农恤本，并官省事，考课以知能否，增俸以除吏奸。
现代文：当时皇帝责令百官直言进谏，何偃提出： 朝廷应该重视农业、体血阝根本，合并官职，减省事务，对官员进行考核来评定其能力高下，增加官员的俸禄以消除官吏贪敛。
English: At that time, the emperor ordered hundreds of officials to speak out, and He Zhen proposed: The imperial court should attach importance to agriculture, body and blood, merge official posts, reduce provincial affairs, assess officials to assess their abilities, and increase officials' salaries to eliminate official greed.

古文：责成良守，久于其职。都督刺史，宜别其任。 
现代文：让好的官员长久任职。都督和刺史应各司其职。 
English: Let good officials serve for a long time. The governor and the chief secretary should each perform their duties.

古文：改领骁骑将军，亲遇隆密，有加旧臣。
现代文：何偃改任领骁骑将军，皇上对他恩遇非同一般，比对前朝旧臣还要亲密。
English: He was appointed as the general leading the cavalry. The emperor treated him with extraordinary kindness and was even closer to him than he was to his former vassals.

古文：转吏部尚书。
现代文：转任吏部尚书。
English: He was transferred to the Rikibu Shosho.

古文：尚之去选未五载，偃复袭其迹，世以为荣。
现代文：尚之离开这铨选之职不满五年，何偃又继其父之后任此要职，世人都认为这是无上的荣耀。
English: Even though it has been less than five years since he left the position of chief selector, the world considers it to be the greatest honor for him to succeed his father in this important position.

古文：侍中颜竣至是始贵，与偃俱在门下，以文义赏会，相得甚欢。
现代文：侍中颜竣也开始发迹，和何偃都在门下省，两人吟赏诗文，宴赏交会，相得甚欢。
English: Yan Shun, a chambermaid, also began to make a name for herself. She and He Yao were both subordinate to the provincial governors. The two of them enjoyed poetry recitals, banquets and fairs, and were very happy with each other.

古文：竣自谓任遇隆密，宜居重大，而位次与偃等未殊，意稍不悦。
现代文：颜竣自以为皇帝格外宠幸他，而应该担任要职，但实际职位却与何偃等人没有什么差别，心里有些不高兴。
English: Yan Shun thought that he was especially favored by the emperor and should hold an important position, but the actual position was no different from He Xuan and others, and he was a little unhappy.

古文：及偃代竣领选，竣愈愤懑，与偃遂有隙。
现代文：到何偃代替他总领铨选时颜竣更加愤懑不平，因此与何偃就有了隔阂。
English: Yan Shun was even angrier when He Yao was chosen to replace him as general leader, so there was a rift with He Yao.

古文：竣时势倾朝野，偃不自安，遂发心悸病，意虑乖僻，上表解职，告医不仕。
现代文：颜竣当时的权势倾动朝野，何偃心中十分不安，因而有心悸的毛病，心事重重，性情乖僻。他上表给皇帝请求辞去职务，称要治病不能做官。
English: At that time, Yan Jun's power was swaying the court and the country, and He Xuan was very uneasy in his heart. As a result, he had a heart palpitation problem, he was preoccupied with many things, and his temperament was eccentric. He sent a letter to the emperor asking to resign from his post, saying that he could not serve as an official if he had to treat his illness.

古文：世祖遇偃既深，备加治疗，名医上药，随所宜须，乃得瘥。
现代文：世祖对何偃非常器重，为他精心治病，名医好药听他使用，何的病终于治好了。
English: The founder of the world was very serious about him. He treated him carefully, and the famous doctor listened to his use of good medicine. He was finally cured of his illness.

古文：时上长女山阴公主爱倾一时，配偃子戢。
现代文：当时皇上的长女山阴公主深得宠爱，皇上将她许配给何偃的儿子何戢。
English: At that time, the emperor's eldest daughter, Princess Sanin, was deeply loved, and the emperor betrothed her to He Yao's son, He Yao.

古文：素好谈玄，注《庄子·消摇篇》传于世。
现代文：何偃平常喜欢谈玄，注释《庄子·逍遥篇》流传于世。
English: He Zhen usually likes to talk about the occult, and the commentary of "Zhuang Zi, Prodigal" has been passed down to the world.

古文：大明二年，卒官，时年四十六。世祖与颜竣诏曰： 何偃遂成异世，美志长往。
现代文：大明二年死于官任上，时年四十六岁，世祖下诏给颜竣说： 何偃虽然死了，其美志长往不返。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Daming died in office, at the age of forty-six. The ancestor sent a message to Yan Shun, saying: Although He Xuan is dead, his ambition will never return.

古文：与之周旋，重以姻媾，临哭伤怨，良不能已。
现代文：我和他相处很好，又加上儿女亲家，痛哭悲伤实在难以自已。
English: I get along with him very well, and with my children and family, it's really hard for me to cry and be sad.

古文：往矣如何！
现代文：他去了，有什么办法啊！
English: He's gone, what can I do!

古文：宜赠散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，本官如故。 
现代文：应赠他散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，原来的官职不变。 
English: He should be given the title of strolling equerry, and the title of gold, purple, and light doctor. His original official position will remain unchanged.

古文：谥曰靖子。
现代文：偃谥号为靖子。
English: Her nickname was Yasuko.

古文：子戢，升明末，为相国左长史。
现代文：儿子戢，开明末年任相国左长史。
English: His son, Zou, was appointed to the post of Minister of State for the Left and Long History at the end of the Enlightenment.

古文：江智渊，济阳考城人，湘州刺史夷弟子。
现代文：江智渊，济阳考城人。湘州刺史江夷的侄子。
English: Jiang Zhiyuan, a native of Kaocheng, Jiyang. Nephew of Shishi Jiang Yi of Hunan.

古文：父僧安，太子中庶子。
现代文：父亲僧安任太子中庶子。
English: He was an illegitimate child of his father, Prince Soan.

古文：智渊初为著作郎，江夏王义恭太尉行参军，太子太傅主簿，随王诞后军参军。
现代文：智渊始任著作郎、江夏王刘义恭的太尉行参军、太子太傅主簿、随王刘诞的后军参军。
English: Zhi Yuan was the first author's son, the lieutenant of Jiangxia King Liu Yigong joined the army, the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of

古文：世父夷有盛名，夷子湛又有清誉，父子并贵达，智渊父少无名问，湛礼敬甚简，智渊常以为恨，自非节岁，不入湛门。
现代文：叔父江夷有盛名，江夷的儿子江湛又有美誉，父子都显贵发达。而智渊的父亲没有什么名气，江湛就对智渊不太礼敬，智渊常常以此为恨，不是节日不到江湛家去。
English: Uncle Jiang Yi was famous, Jiang Yi's son Jiang Zhan had a good reputation, and both father and son were distinguished and developed. While Zhiyuan's father was not famous, Jiang Zhan did not pay much respect to Zhiyuan. Zhiyuan often hated this and would not go to Jiang Zhan's house on holidays.

古文：及为随王诞佐，在襄阳，诞待之甚厚。
现代文：他在随王诞门下任职后，住在襄阳，刘诞十分看重他。
English: After serving under Wang Xizhao, he lived in Xiangyang. Liu Xizhao thought highly of him.

古文：时谘议参军谢庄、府主簿沈怀文并与智渊友善。
现代文：当时咨议参军谢庄、府主簿沈怀文都和智渊关系密切。
English: At that time, Xie Zhuang, who was a member of the advisory council to join the army, and Shen Huaiwen, the chief accountant of the government, had a close relationship with Zhiyuan.

古文：怀文每称之曰： 人所应有尽有，人所应无尽无者，其江智渊乎！ 
现代文：怀文常称赞智渊： 人应当有的都有，不应有的都没有，这就是江智渊啊！ 
English: Huaiwen often praised Zhiyuan: People should have everything, and should not have anything. This is Jiang Zhiyuan!

古文：元嘉末，除尚书库部郎。
现代文：元嘉末年他任尚书库部郎。
English: At the end of Yuan Jia's life, he was appointed as Shang Shukuburo.

古文：时高流官序，不为台郎，智渊门孤援寡，独有此选，意甚不说，固辞不肯拜。
现代文：当时出身名门的人不做台郎这类官，智渊门第孤清，没有援引，独独任此职，心里很不高兴，坚决辞绝不肯接受。
English: At that time, people from prestigious families did not become officials such as Tairo, and Chihiro's family was isolated, not invoked, and he was the only one to hold this position. He was very unhappy in his heart and absolutely refused to accept his resignation.

古文：竟陵王诞复版为骠骑参军，转主簿，随府转司空主簿、记室参军，领南濮阳太守，迁从事中郎。
现代文：竟陵王刘诞又征召他任骠骑将军，转任主簿，随府转任司空主簿。后又任记室参军，领南濮阳太守，调任从事中郎。
English: Liu Xing, the king of mausoleums, even conscripted him to serve as a general of cavalry, and he was transferred to the position of chief bookkeeper, and with the government he was transferred to the position of chief bookkeeper. Later, he was assigned to join the army in the office of recorders, and he was assigned to the position of the governor of Southern Poyang, and he was transferred to the position of middle manager.

古文：诞将为逆，智渊悟其机，请假先反。
现代文：刘诞要叛逆之前，智渊看出他的阴谋，请假预先离开了他。
English: Before Liu Xizhe wanted to rebel, Zhiyuan saw his plot and left him in advance.

古文：诞事发，即除中书侍郎。
现代文：诞叛乱事发后，他就被朝廷任命为中书侍郎。
English: After the occurrence of the mutiny on the day of the Nativity, he was appointed by the imperial court as a chancellery attendant.

古文：智渊爱好文雅，词采清赡，世祖深相知待，恩礼冠朝。
现代文：江智渊爱好文学，文章词采清赡，世祖非常信任赏识他，对他的恩遇超出他人之上。
English: Jiang Zhiyuan was fond of literature, and his prose was clear and eloquent. The founder trusted and appreciated him very much, and he was favored more than others.

古文：上燕私甚数，多命群臣五三人游集，智渊常为其首。
现代文：世祖经常举行私人宴会，总是让三五个大臣随后，智渊总是其中最突出的。
English: The patriarch often held private banquets, always followed by three or five ministers, of whom Chihiro was always the most prominent.

古文：同侣末及前，辄独蒙引进，智渊每以越众为惭，未尝有喜色。
现代文：同来的人还没有近前，皇帝就单独召见他。智渊总是为超越众人而感到惭愧，从没有得意的神色。
English: The Emperor summoned him alone before the others had arrived. Chihiro was always ashamed of surpassing the others, and never looked pleased.

古文：每从游幸，与群僚相随，见传诏驰来，知当呼己，耸动愧恧，形于容貌，论者以此多之。
现代文：他每次和诸大臣一起跟随皇帝游玩，看到皇帝的诏书过来就知道定是召见自己，不安惭愧的心情都表现在脸上，世人因此称赞他。
English: Every time he and his ministers accompanied the emperor on a tour, when he saw the emperor's edict, he knew that he had been summoned. The uneasy and ashamed mood showed on his face, and the world praised him for it.

古文：迁骁骑将军，尚书吏部郎。
现代文：智渊调任骁骑将军、尚书吏部郎。
English: Zhiyuan was transferred to the post of general of cavalry, and Shang Shuli minister.

古文：上每酣宴，辄诟辱群臣，并使自相嘲讦，以为欢笑。
现代文：世祖每当宴会喝酒兴奋时总喜欢辱骂大臣，并且让群臣相互嘲骂从中取乐。
English: Whenever he was in the excitement of drinking at a banquet, he always liked to abuse the minister, and let the ministers mock each other for fun.

古文：智渊素方退，渐不会旨。
现代文：江智渊一向宽厚，渐渐不迎合皇帝的心意。
English: Jiang Zhiyuan had always been generous, but gradually he did not cater to the emperor's wishes.

古文：尝使以王僧朗嘲戏其子景文，智渊正色曰： 恐不宜有此戏。 
现代文：世祖让他以王僧朗嘲笑戏弄其儿子王景文，智渊严肃地说： 恐怕不应这样戏弄取乐。 
English: The patriarch asked him to tease his son, Wang Jingwen, by making fun of him as Wang Monk Lang. Zhi Yuan said seriously, "I'm afraid you shouldn't tease like this for fun.

古文：上怒曰： 江僧安痴人，痴人自相惜。 
现代文：世祖恼怒地说： 江僧安呆痴人，你们痴人相互怜惜。 
English: The patriarch angrily said, "You fools, Jiangzang is safe. You fools, take pity on each other."

古文：智渊伏席流涕，由此恩宠大衰，出为新安王子鸾北中郎长史、南东海太守，加拜宁朔将军，行南徐州事。
现代文：智渊趴在坐席上痛哭不已，从此后世祖对他的恩宠大减。他出朝任新安王刘子鸾的北中郎长史、南东海太守，加拜宁朔将军，管理南徐州事务。
English: Zhi Yuan lay down on the seat and wept bitterly. From then on, the patriarch's favor to him was greatly reduced. He went to the imperial court to serve as the northern middle son of the Xin'an King Liu Zixuan, the governor of the South East China Sea, and the general of Gabai Ningshuo, managing the affairs of South Xuzhou.

古文：初，上宠姬宣贵妃殷氏卒，使群臣议谥，智渊上议曰 怀 。
现代文：当初世祖的爱妃殷氏死了，群臣商议谥号，智渊提出谥 怀 。
English: When the ancestor's beloved Yin died, the courtiers discussed the succession, and Zhi Yuan proposed the succession.

古文：上以不尽嘉号，甚衔之。
现代文：皇帝认为这不是美谥，心中记恨着这事。
English: The emperor thought that this was not a beauty pageant, and he hated it in his heart.

古文：后车驾幸南山，乘马至殷氏墓，群臣皆骑从，上以马鞭指墓石柱谓智渊曰： 此上不容有怀字！ 
现代文：后来皇帝驾幸南山，乘马到殷氏墓地，群臣皆骑马随后，他用马鞭指着墓地石柱对智渊说： 这上面不许有 怀 字！ 
English: Later, the emperor drove to Nanshan, rode to the Yin cemetery, and all the courtiers rode. Then, he pointed to the stone pillar of the cemetery with a horse whip and said to Zhiyuan: "There must not be any 'poor' characters on it!"

古文：智渊益惶惧。
现代文：江智渊愈发惶惑恐惧。
English: Jiang Zhiyuan became more and more confused and fearful.

古文：大明七年，以忧卒，时年四十六。
现代文：大明七年，江智渊忧虑而死，时年四十六岁。
English: In the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, Jiang Zhi Yuan died of worry, at the age of 46.

古文：子季筠，太子洗马，早卒。
现代文：智渊的儿子季筠，任太子洗马，早亡。
English: Ji Ying, the son of Zhiyuan, was appointed the prince to wash horses, but died early.

古文：后废帝即位，以后父，追赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：后来废帝即位追赠他为金紫光禄大夫。
English: Later, the dethroned emperor posthumously bestowed him the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

