古文：率性而行谓之道，得其天性谓之德。
现代文：遵循天性而行叫做道，得到这种天性叫做德。
English: To act in accordance with one's nature is called the Way, and to acquire this nature is called virtue.

古文：性失然后贵仁，道失然后贵义。
现代文：天性丧失以后才崇尚仁，道丧失以后才崇尚义。
English: It is only after the loss of one's nature that one can advocate benevolence, and only after the loss of one's way that one can advocate righteousness.

古文：是故仁义立而道德迁矣，礼乐饰则纯朴散矣，是非形则百姓眩矣，珠玉尊则天下争矣。
现代文：所以仁义树立起来也就说明道德蜕化。礼乐制定施行也就说明纯朴散逸；是非显示反而使百姓迷惑，珠玉尊贵起来致使人们为之互相争夺。
English: Therefore, the establishment of benevolence and righteousness also indicates the decline of morality. The establishment and implementation of etiquette also indicates the simplicity and dispersion; the display of right and wrong, on the other hand, confuses the people, and the precious stones become precious, causing people to compete with each other for them.

古文：凡此四者，衰世之造也，末世之用也。
现代文：所以说，仁义、礼乐、是非、珠玉这四者的产生，说明世道衰落，是末世所利用的东西。
English: Therefore, the emergence of these four things, benevolence and righteousness, ritual music, right and wrong, and jewels, indicate the decline of the world, and are things used in the last days.

古文：夫礼者所以别尊卑，异贵贱；义者所以合君臣、父子、兄弟、夫妻、朋友之际也。
现代文：礼原本是用来区别尊卑、分别贵贱的；义原本是用来协调君臣、父子、兄弟、夫妻、朋友间关系的。
English: Originally, etiquette was used to distinguish between the superior and the inferior, and to distinguish between the high and the low; originally, justice was used to coordinate the relationship between monarchs and subjects, fathers and sons, brothers, husbands and wives, and friends.

古文：今世之为礼者，恭敬而忮；为义者，布施而德。
现代文：但今天讲礼节的人，外表恭敬而内心嫉恨；讲义理的人，施舍他人却希望得到回报。
English: But today's courteous people are outwardly deferential but inwardly resentful; those who are courteous are reasonable, but those who give to others expect to be repaid.

古文：臣以相非，骨肉以生怨，则失礼义之本也，故搆而多责。
现代文：君臣之间互相非难，骨肉之间互相怨恨，这样就失去了原本提倡礼义的目的和意义，反而使人们因结怨而互相责难。
English: Princes and courtiers blame each other, and flesh and blood hate each other. Thus, the original purpose and meaning of advocating etiquette is lost, and instead, people blame each other for harboring grudges.

古文：夫水积则生相食之鱼，土积则生自宂之兽，礼义饰则生伪匿之本。
现代文：水积聚得深广就会产生能互相吞食的大鱼，土堆积成山则会产生互相伤残的猛兽，礼义的制定和施行则会产生伪善君子。
English: The accumulation of water deep and wide will produce big fish that can devour each other, the accumulation of soil into mountains will produce ferocious beasts that injure each other, and the formulation and implementation of etiquette will produce hypocrites.

古文：夫吹灰而欲无眯，涉水而欲无濡，不可得也。
现代文：尘土飞扬、灰尘蒙脸却不想眯眼，过河涉水却不想打湿脚，这实际上是不可能的。
English: It is virtually impossible to walk through the dusty streets with your face covered in dust without wanting to close your eyes, or to wade across a river without wanting to get your feet wet.

古文：古者，民童蒙不知东西，貌不羡乎情，而言不溢乎行，其衣致暖而无文，其兵戈铢而无刃，其歌乐而无转，其哭哀而无声，凿井而饮，耕田而食，无所施其美，亦不求得。
现代文：远古时代，人们混沌幼稚不知 东南西北 ，憨厚质朴无虚伪表情，言词诚实而不夸夸其谈。他们衣着朴素只求保暖，兵器迟钝无需开口，歌谣直抒欢乐不用婉转修饰，哭泣只为表达悲哀故无需故意放声。他们凿井而饮，耕田而食。大家无需用美物来互相赠送以笼络感情，也不想从别人那里得到馈赠。
English: In ancient times, people were chaotic, childish, and ignorant of the southeast and northwest, with thick, simple, and without hypocrisy expressions, and their words were honest and not boastful. They dressed simply to keep warm, their weapons were dull and did not need to open their mouths, their songs were straightforward and joyous without any subtle embellishments, and they did not need to intentionally raise their voices to cry just to express their sadness. They dug wells and drank, and cultivated fields and ate. People did not need to use beautiful things to give gifts to each other to encircle their feelings, nor did they want to receive gifts from others.

古文：亲戚不相毁誉，朋友不相怨德。
现代文：亲戚间不互相毁谤也不互相赞誉，朋友间不互相怨恨也不互相感恩。
English: Relatives do not slander or praise each other, and friends do not hate or thank each other.

古文：及至礼义之生，货材之贵，而诈伪萌兴，非誉相纷，怨德并行，于是乃有曾参孝已之美，而生盗跖、庄蹻之邪。
现代文：但一到礼义产生，有了货物财产的价值观念后，这欺诈伪善就产生了，诋毁赞誉就纷纷兴起，怨恨感恩就结伴而行了，于是也就有了曾参和孝己的所谓 美德 ，也就产生了盗跖、庄的所谓 邪恶 。
English: However, as soon as etiquette and righteousness came into being, and the values of goods and property came into being, this deception and hypocrisy came into being, slander and praise arose one after another, and resentment and gratitude went hand in hand. Thus, the so-called virtue of Zeng Sanzhong and filial piety came into being, and the so-called evil of theft and haughtiness came into being.

古文：故有大路龙旂，羽盖垂緌，结驷连骑，则必有穿窬拊楗、逾备之奸；有诡文繁绣，弱緆罗纨，必有菅屩跐踦、短褐不完者。
现代文：所以是，有了绣龙、垂缨伞盖的大车和结驷连骑的马车，也就有了翻越墙壁、撬门入室、盗墓翻墙的偷窃奸恶行为；有了穿锦绣衣服的人，也就必定有了衣冠破烂不堪的人。
English: Therefore, with the embroidered dragon, the chariot with the coveted umbrella cover and the horse-drawn carriage with the scabbard, there will also be the theft and evil acts of climbing over walls, entering locked doors, and robbing tombs; with the people wearing embroidered clothes, there must also be people with ragged clothes.

古文：故绣高下之相倾也，短修之相形也，亦明矣。
现代文：这就是我们平时说的高低互相依存、长短互相形成的道理，这是再清楚不过的了。
English: This is what we usually call the principle that high and low are interdependent, and that long and short form each other. It couldn't be clearer.

古文：夫虾蟆为鹑，水虿为鹑，皆生非其类，唯圣人知其化。
现代文：虾蟆变成鹌鹑，水虿变为蜻蜓，这是不同类之间的变化。
English: Shrimp pupae turn into pupae, water pupae turn into pupae, which is a change between different species.

古文：夫胡人见黂，不知其可以为布也。越人见毳，不知其可以为旃也。
现代文：也只有圣人知道这之间的变化的道理。胡人看到粗麻，不知道可用它来织布；越人见到毳毛，不知道可用它来制作毛毡。
English: Only the sages know the reason for this change. The Hu people saw the coarse hemp and did not know how to use it to weave cloth; the Viet people saw the mane and did not know how to use it to make felt.

古文：故不通于物者，难与言化。
现代文：所以不能通晓物性的人，就很难和他来谈论变化。
English: So it's hard to talk about change with someone who doesn't understand physics.

古文：昔太公望、周公旦受封而相见，太公问周公曰： 何以治鲁？ 
现代文：以前姜太公吕望、周公姬旦分别受封后见了面，太公问周公： 你打算怎样来治理鲁国？ 
English: In the past, Jiang Taigong Lvang and Zhou Taigong Hidan met each other after they were appointed respectively. The Taigong asked Zhou Taigong: How do you plan to govern Lu?

古文：周公曰： 尊尊亲亲。 
现代文：周公回答说： 尊敬尊长，亲爱爱人。 
English: Zhou Gong replied: "Respect your father, dear beloved.

古文：太公曰： 鲁从此弱矣！ 
现代文：太公说： 鲁国从此要衰弱了。 
English: The grand duke said, "The state of Lu will be weak from now on."

古文：周公问太公曰： 何以治齐？ 
现代文：周公问太公： 那你又打算怎样来治理齐国呢？ 
English: Zhou Gong asked Tai Gong: So how do you plan to govern Qi?

古文：太公曰： 举贤而上功。 
现代文：太公说： 我要举荐贤能，崇尚功绩。 
English: The grand duke said, "Choose the virtuous and reward the meritorious."

古文：周公曰： 后世必有劫杀之君！ 
现代文：周公说： 齐国后代一定有被篡夺弑杀的君主。 
English: Zhou Gong said: The descendants of Qi must have a usurped and murdered monarch.

古文：其后齐日以大，至于霸，二十四世而田氏代之。鲁日以削，至三十二世而亡。
现代文：从那以后，齐国一天天强盛，一直到齐桓公称霸，传二十四代时国政被田氏篡夺；而鲁国日益衰弱，到三十四代亡国。
English: From then on, the state of Qi grew stronger and stronger day by day until the reign of King Qi Huan. It is said that the state was usurped by the Tian clan for 24 generations, while the state of Lu became weaker and weaker until the 34th generation.

古文：故《易》曰： 履霜，坚冰至。 
现代文：所以《易经》上说： 踩在深秋的薄霜上，便就知道结硬冰的寒冬就快到了。 
English: Therefore, "I Ching" says: If you step on the thin frost of late autumn, you will know that the cold winter with hard ice is approaching.

古文：圣人之见终始微言。
现代文：圣人就是能从开头细微的迹象预见到事物发展的结果。
English: A sage is someone who can see the subtle signs of things developing from the start.

古文：故糟丘生乎象，炮烙生乎热斗。
现代文：所以，酒糟堆积成山肇始于用象牙为筷，炮烙之刑肇始于用熨斗烙人。
English: Therefore, the accumulation of mountains of wine lees began with the use of ivory as chopsticks, and the punishment of cannon fire began with the branding of people with irons.

古文：子路撜溺而受牛谢，孔子曰： 鲁国必好救人于患。 
现代文：子路救起溺水者而接受主人答谢的牛，孔子对此事评论说： 鲁国一定会兴起助人为乐的好风气。 
English: Zi Lu rescues a drowning man and receives a thank-you cow from the owner. Confucius commented on this matter: "A good culture of helping others will surely arise in Lu.

古文：子赣赎人而不受金于府，孔子曰： 鲁国不复赎人矣。 
现代文：子赣用钱财赎救出奴隶而不接受官府的钱财，孔子对此事评论说： 鲁国再也不会有自己掏钱财来赎救人的事了。 
English: Confucius commented on the matter, saying, "The state of Lu will never again have to pay money to ransom people.

古文：子路受而劝德，子赣让而止善，孔子之明，以小知大，以近知远，通于论者也。
现代文：子路接受谢礼而能鼓励人们修养善德，子赣推辞赏钱却停止了人们行善。孔子之所以伟大，是能从小处看到大处，从近处看到远处，在这个意义上说，孔子真是一位通晓事理的圣人。
English: Confucius was great because he was able to see the big things from the small things and the far things from the near things. In this sense, Confucius was truly a sage who knew the truth.

古文：由此观之，廉有所在，而不可公行也。
现代文：由此看来，廉洁也有它所适用的范围，而不可不分场合机械地推行。
English: From this point of view, integrity also has its scope of application, and cannot be mechanically implemented regardless of the occasion.

古文：故行齐于俗，可随也。
现代文：所以上述讲到圣人行为要齐同当时当地的礼俗是有道理的，这样可以处事更随顺。
English: Therefore, it is reasonable that the above-mentioned saint's behavior should be in line with the local etiquette at that time, so that things can be handled more smoothly.

古文：事周于能，易为也。
现代文：同样，圣人应按能力将事处理得更缜密一些，这样办事也可更容易些。
English: In the same way, a sage should, according to his ability, handle things a little more carefully, and it will be easier to do so.

古文：矜伪以惑世，伉行以违众，圣人不以为民俗，广厦阔屋，连闼通房。
现代文：反过来说，如装出一副矜持、以虚伪的廉耻模样来欺惑世人，行为上又自视清高、违背民俗，这些行为，圣人认为不是一种齐同习俗的行为。
English: On the other hand, if one pretends to be reserved, deceives the world with a hypocritical appearance of modesty, and behaves in a self-righteous manner, violating folk customs, these actions, the sage believes, are not a common practice.

古文：人之所安也，鸟入之而忧。高山险阻，深林丛薄，虎豹之所乐也，人入之而畏。川谷通原，积水重泉，鼋鼍之所便也，人人之而死。《咸池》《承云》《九韶》《六英》，人之所乐也，鸟兽闻之而惊。深溪峭岸，峻木寻枝，猨狖之所乐也，人上之而慄。
现代文：高大的大厦、开阔的房屋、相通相连的房，这是人们安居的地方，但鸟儿飞入以后，就会感到忧虑不安；高山、险阻、深林、草丛，这是虎和豹的乐园，但人进入以后，就会产生畏惧；山涧湖泊、渊潭重泉，这是鼋鼍自由翔游的地方，但人一旦跌入其中就会淹死；《咸池》《承云》《九韶》《六英》，这是人喜欢的乐曲，但鸟兽闻之就会受到惊吓而逃跑；深溪峭岸、大树长枝，这是猿猴喜欢的地方，但人一旦攀登上去就会感到心惊肉跳。
English: Tall buildings, open houses, and interconnected rooms are places where people live safely, but when birds fly in, they will feel worried and uneasy; mountains, obstacles, deep forests, and grasslands are the paradise of tigers and leopards, but when people enter, they will be afraid; mountain lakes, deep lakes and heavy springs are places where dragonflies can fly freely, but if people fall into them, they will drown; "Salt Pond," "Cheng Yun," "Jiu Xuan" and "Liu Ying" are songs that people like, but birds and animals will be frightened and flee when they hear them; deep creeks, steep banks, and tall trees with long branches are places that

古文：形殊性诡，所以为乐者乃所以为哀，所以为安者乃所以为危也。
现代文：这正是形殊性异，人类引以为快乐的，鸟兽则以为是哀悲的，鸟兽以为安全的，人类则认为是危险的。
English: This is precisely the peculiarity that humans think is happy, birds and beasts think is sad, birds and beasts think is safe, and humans think is dangerous.

古文：乃至天地之所覆载，日月之所照誋，使各便其性，安其居，处其宜，为其能。
现代文：好在上天覆盖、大地承载、日月照亮，才使万物各便其性、各安其居、各处其宜、各为其能。
English: It is good for the heavens to cover, the earth to support, and the sun and moon to illuminate, so that all things have their own convenience, their own security, their own convenience everywhere, and their own ability.

古文：故愚者有所修，智者有所不足。柱不可以摘齿，筐不可以持屋，马不可以眼重，牛不可以追速，铅不可以为刀，铜不可以为弩，铁不可以为舟，木不可以为釜，各用之于其所适，施之于其所宜，即万物一齐而无由相过。
现代文：所以，愚者也有他的长处，智者也有他的不足；木柱是不可以用来剔牙的，发簪是不可以用来撑屋的；马是不宜驭物的，牛是难以追速的；铅不能用来铸刀，铜不能用来制弩；铁不能用来造船，木不能用来制锅。这正好说明事物各有它所适宜的范围，只有将它们放在适宜的地方，才能发挥它们的有用性，而在它们的有用性这点上来看，它们又是一致的。
English: Therefore, the fool has his strengths and the wise man has his weaknesses; a wooden post should not be used to extract teeth, a hairpin should not be used to support a house; a horse should not be ridden, an ox should not be driven; lead should not be used to make a knife, copper should not be used to make a plow; iron should not be used to build a boat, and wood should not be used to make a pot. This just shows that things have their own appropriate range, and only if they are placed in an appropriate place can they exert their usefulness, and in terms of their usefulness, they are the same.

古文：夫明镜便于照形，其于以函食，不奴革，牺牛粹毛宜于庙牲，其于以致雨，不若黑蜧。
现代文：所以对物不能说长道短、厚此薄彼。明镜用来照人是再好也不过的，但将它放在甑里用以蒸食物，其功效就不如炊箅；牺牛毛色纯一，用来作为祭祀的牺牲是再合适不过了，但用它来求雨，就不如神蛇了。
English: Therefore, it is impossible to say how long or short, thick or thin the object is. A bright mirror is good enough to illuminate a person, but if it is placed in a pot to steam food, its effect is not as good as a cooking pot; a pure-colored sacrificial bull is the most suitable sacrifice for a ritual, but if it is used to pray for rain, it is not as good as a divine snake.

古文：由此观之，物无贵贱，因其所贵而贵之，物无不贵也；因其所贱而贱之，物无不贱也。
现代文：由此看来，事物无所谓贵贱，如从它们的有用性、可珍贵这一点来断定它们的贵重，那么就没有什么东西不是贵重的；如抓着它们的无用性、低贱性来判断它们的低贱，那么就没有什么不是低贱的。
English: From this perspective, things do not matter whether they are valuable or not. If their value is determined by their usefulness and preciousness, then there is nothing that is not valuable; if their worthlessness and worthlessness are judged by their worthlessness, then there is nothing that is not worthless.

古文：夫玉璞不厌厚，角不厌薄，漆不厌黑，粉不厌白，此四者相反也，所急则均，其用一也。
现代文：对于玉璞，人们希望它越厚越好，对于角，人们希望它越薄越好；同样，对于漆，人们不会嫌它黑；对于粉，人们不会嫌它白。这四样东西，人们对它们的要求完全相反，但当人们急需用到它们时，就有用性来说又是一致、一样的。
English: For jade, people want it as thick as possible, for horn, people want it as thin as possible; likewise, for lacquer, people will not dislike it black; for powder, people will not dislike it white. These four things, people's requirements for them are completely opposite, but when people urgently need them, they are consistent and the same in terms of usefulness.

古文：今之裘与蓑孰急？
现代文：这就好比裘和蓑，对人来说哪一件更急需？
English: It's like the yakitori and the yakitori, which one is more urgently needed for people?

古文：见雨则裘不用，升堂则蓑不御，此代为常者也。
现代文：这要看情形而定，下雨了就用不上裘衣，而一进屋室就用不到蓑衣。
English: It depends on the situation. When it rains, you don't need a coat, and when you enter the room, you don't need a coat.

古文：譬若舟、车、楯、肆、穷庐，故有所宜也。
现代文：这是因为特殊的环境决定了它们的更替使用。这也就像船、车、楯、肆、穷庐本来就有它们所适宜的地方一样。
English: This is because the special environment determines their replacement use, just as ships, cars, rafts, wagons, and barges have their own suitable places to start.

古文：故老子曰 不上贤 者，言不致鱼于木，沈鸟于渊。
现代文：所以《老子》说 不要崇尚贤能 的意思是说不要将鱼赶到树上、把鸟沉到深渊。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said, "Don't worship virtue," meaning, don't drive the fish up the tree and sink the bird into the abyss.

古文：故尧之治天下也，舜为司徒，契为司马，禹为司空，后稷为大田师，奚仲为工。
现代文：所以尧帝治理天下，是任命舜为司徒，主管教化；任命契为司马，主管军务；任命禹为司空，主管工程建筑；任命后稷为大田，主管农业；任命奚仲为工师，掌管百工。
English: Therefore, Emperor Qian governed the world by appointing Qian as the tutor, in charge of education; appointing Ji as the steward, in charge of military affairs; appointing Yu as the steward, in charge of engineering and construction; appointing Houyi as the daejeon, in charge of agriculture; appointing Qizhong as the engineer, in charge of the hundred craftsmen.

古文：其导万民也，水处者渔，出处者木，谷处者牧，陆处者农。
现代文：尧帝就是这样，特殊情况特殊处理，让住水边的从事渔业，让住山林的从事林业伐木，让住川谷的从事牧业，让住平原的从事农业。
English: This is how Emperor Qian dealt with special cases. He allowed people who lived near water to engage in fishing, people who lived in mountain forests to engage in forestry and logging, people who lived in river valleys to engage in animal husbandry, and people who lived in plains to engage in agriculture.

古文：地宜其事，事宜其械，械宜其用，用宜其人。
现代文：各种地方均有适合它的行业，各种行业又有适合它的器械工具，各种器械工具又均有它的适当用途，各种用途又有适合使用器械的人。
English: Every place has an industry suitable for it, every industry has instruments and tools suitable for it, every instrument and tool has its proper use, and every use has people suitable for using the instruments.

古文：泽皋织网，陵坂耕田，得以所有易所无，以所工易所拙，是故离叛者寡，而听从者众。
现代文：湖泽地区的人编织鱼网，捕鱼捉虾；丘陵地带的人耕种田地，生产衣食。这样就能用自己所有的物品去换回自己所没有的物品，用自己能够生产的物品去换回自己不会生产的物品。因此，离叛的人少而听从的人多。
English: People in the lake region weave fishing nets and catch fish and shrimp; people in the hilly areas cultivate fields and produce food and clothing. In this way, they can use all their goods to exchange for goods they do not have, and use the goods they can produce to exchange for the goods they will not produce. Therefore, the number of people who leave is small, and the number of people who obey is large.

古文：譬若播棋丸于地，员者走泽，方者处高，各从其所安，夫有何上下焉！
现代文：这就好像将棋子和弹丸倒撒在地上，圆形的滚入低洼处，方形的停留在高处，它们各自有了自己的适宜安稳归宿，在这个意义上说，它们有什么高低贵贱之分？
English: It's like scattering pieces and projectiles on the ground, the round ones rolling into the lowlands, the square ones staying in the highlands, they each have their own suitable and safe home, in this sense, what are their highs and lows?

古文：若风之遇箫，忽然感之，各以清浊应矣。
现代文：如同疾风吹过箫管，忽然振动空气，使长短不一的竹管发出高低、清浊不同的乐音。
English: Like a gale blowing through a reed pipe, the air suddenly vibrates, causing the bamboo pipes of different lengths to emit high and low, clear and crisp different musical sounds.

古文：夫猨狖得茂木，不舍而穴；狟狢得埵防，弗去而缘。
现代文：那猿猴得到一片茂密的树林，就不愿舍弃而去打洞；貉与豪猪有了在堤防上挖的洞穴，就不愿离开再去攀援树木筑巢建窝。
English: Once the ape has a dense forest, it does not want to give up and dig a hole; the baboon and the porcupine have a cave dug on the embankment, they do not want to leave and climb trees to build a nest.

古文：物莫避其所利，而就其所害。
现代文：万物都不会避开对自己有利的、而去接受对自己有害的东西。
English: All things do not avoid what is good for them and accept what is bad for them.

古文：是故邻国相望，鸡狗之音相闻，而足迹不接诸侯之境，车轨不结千里之外者，皆各得其所安。
现代文：所以会有邻国居民互相张望、鸡犬之声相闻、足迹无须踏进邻国、车辆不必达到千里、人民各自按本性舒适生活的状况。
English: Therefore, there will be a situation where residents of neighboring countries look out for each other, the voices of chickens and dogs are heard, footprints do not need to step into neighboring countries, vehicles do not need to reach thousands of miles, and people live comfortably according to their own nature.

古文：故治国若虚，乱国若盛，存国若不足，亡国若有余。
现代文：所以混乱的国家好像很兴盛，政治安宁的国家好像很空荡；将灭亡的国家总感不足，长存的国家总觉得有余。
English: That is why countries in turmoil seem to prosper, and countries in political tranquility seem to be empty; countries that are about to perish always feel inadequate, and countries that endure always feel they have enough.

古文：虚者，非无人也，各守其职也；盛者，非多人也，皆徼于末也；不足者，非无货也，欲节而事寡也；有余者，非多财也，民鲜而费多也。
现代文：空空荡荡，并不是人烟稀少，而是人们都在各自持守着他们的本职；兴盛热闹，并不是人丁兴旺，而是人们都在离开本职追求末业。觉得有余，并不是财富特别多，而是人们的欲望相当有限和节制，浪费的事也很少发生；感到不足，并不是说国家财物匮乏，而是人们的欲望相当大且无法控制，浪费的事也经常发生。
English: Empty and desolate does not mean that there are few people, but that people are all holding on to their own duties; prosperous and bustling does not mean that people are thriving, but that people are leaving their duties to pursue their careers; feeling rich does not mean that there is a lot of wealth, but that people's desires are quite limited and restrained, and wasteful things rarely happen; feeling insufficient does not mean that the country is short of goods and materials, but that people's desires are quite large and uncontrollable, and wasteful things often happen.

古文：故先王之法籍，非所作也，其所因也。其禁诛，非所为也，其所守也。
现代文：所以先王的法典，并不是他们凭主观创造出来的，而是他们因循事物的规律制定出来的；他们的禁止、惩罚的措施，也不是任意编造的，而是在严格遵守某种客观实际而设定的。
English: Therefore, the code of the former kings was not created by them subjectively, but they formulated it according to the laws of things; their prohibition and punishment measures were not arbitrarily made up, but were set in strict compliance with a certain objective reality.

古文：凡以物治物者不以物，以睦；治睦者不以睦，以人；治人者不以人，以君；治君者不以君，以欲；治欲者不以欲，以性；治性者不于性，以德；治德者不以德，以道。
现代文：万物的生存发展，不在于万物本身，而取决于土地；而治理土地又不在于土地本身，而取决于人；同样治理人本身不在于人，而在于君王；君王要调治的是欲念，而摒弃欲念不在于消极地压制欲念，是在于对性情的修养；修养性情不限于性情本身，而是想达到 德 的要求和境地；达到 德 的境地还不是最高的境界，能与道体融合才是最好最高的境地。
English: The survival and development of all things does not depend on the things themselves, but on the land; and the governance of the land does not depend on the land itself, but on people; similarly, the governance of people does not depend on people, but on the king; the king wants to regulate the desire, and the abandonment of desire does not depend on the passive suppression of desire, but on the cultivation of temperament; the cultivation of temperament is not limited to temperament itself, but to the requirements and situation of morality; the achievement of morality is not the highest realm, and the ability to integrate with the moral body is the best highest realm.

古文：原人之性，芜秽而不得清明者，物或堁之也。
现代文：追究一下人性的发展变化，可以知道，人性变得杂乱污浊而不清净洁明，是在于受到外界灰尘的污蒙。
English: If we investigate the development and changes of human nature, we can know that human nature has become messy and dirty, rather than clean and clear, because it has been polluted by external dust.

古文：羌氐僰翟，婴儿生皆同声，及其长也，虽重象狄騠不能通其言，教俗殊也。
现代文：羌、氐、僰、翟，他们生出的婴儿哭声相同，但等到他们长大以后，只能通过翻译才能互相通话，离开翻译就不能沟通，这是由于他们从小受的教养和习俗的不同。
English: Moo, moo, moo, moo, they give birth to babies with the same cry, but when they grow up, they can only talk to each other through an interpreter, and they can't communicate without an interpreter, which is due to the difference in their upbringing and customs.

古文：今三月婴儿生而徙国，则不能知其故俗。
现代文：由此看来，衣饰礼仪风俗，不是人生而有之的，而是接受外界的影响后形成的。
English: From this point of view, dress etiquette and customs are not born of life, but are formed after receiving outside influence.

古文：由此观之，衣服礼俗者，非人之性也，所受于外也。夫竹之性浮，残以为牒，束而投之水则沉，失其休也。金之性沉，托之于舟上则浮，势有所支也。
现代文：竹子的特性是能浮于水面，但一旦被砍削成竹简，捆成一束扔入水中，就会沉下去，这是因为经过砍削破坏了竹子中空的特性。金属物入水便沉，但将它们放在船上，有船依托就会随船漂浮水面，这是因为金属物有了船的依托所致。
English: The characteristic of bamboo is that it can float on the surface of the water, but once it is cut into bamboo strips, bundled into a bundle and thrown into the water, it will sink. This is because the hollow characteristics of bamboo are destroyed by cutting. Metal objects sink when they enter the water, but if they are placed on a boat, they will float on the water with the boat. This is because metal objects have the support of the boat.

古文：夫素之质白，染之以涅则黑，缣之性黄，染之以丹则赤。
现代文：原本洁白的绢绸，用涅染过便变黑，原本黄色的绢绸，用朱砂一染就变成了红色。
English: Originally pure white satin, dyed with nia and turned black, originally yellow satin, dyed with cinnabar and turned red.

古文：人之性无邪，久湛于俗则易。易而忘本，合于若性。
现代文：人的本性本来清正无邪，但长期处于坏的习俗中就会濡染而改变，一旦改变也就遗忘掉了原本的本性，反而能和他周围的人群合拍了。
English: A person's nature is originally pure and innocent, but if he is in bad customs for a long time, he will be dyed and changed. Once he is changed, he will forget his original nature, but will be able to fit in with the crowd around him.

古文：故日月欲明，浮云盖之；河水欲清，沙石秽之；人性欲平，嗜欲害之。
现代文：所以说，日月总是想发光明的，但浮云遮盖了它；河水原本应是清澈的，但泥沙污浊了它；人的天性应是平和的，但欲念扰乱了它。
English: Therefore, the sun and the moon always want to shine brightly, but the clouds cover it; the river should be clear, but the sands pollute it; human nature should be peaceful, but desire disturbs it.

古文：惟圣人能遗物而反己。
现代文：正因为这样，只有圣人能抛开外物的诱惑而归回到原本平和的本性。
English: It is for this reason that only a sage can leave behind the temptations of external things and return to his original peaceful nature.

古文：夫乘舟而惑者，不知东西，见斗极则寤矣。
现代文：乘船夜航迷失方向而不辨东西南北，在看到了北斗星和北极星后才醒悟。
English: On a night cruise, he became disoriented and couldn't tell north from south, east from west. He woke up after seeing the Big Dipper and the North Star.

古文：夫性，亦人之斗极也，有以自见也，则不失物之情，无以自见，则动而惑营。
现代文：这人的平和淡泊的本性是人心中的北斗星和北极星。能够发现自己的平和、淡泊本性，就不会丧失事物的常情和常理；不能发现自己的平和淡泊本性，就会在外物的诱惑下迷乱。
English: This person's peaceful and indifferent nature is the North Star and the North Star in people's hearts. If you can find your own peaceful and indifferent nature, you will not lose the common sense and common sense of things; if you cannot find your own peaceful and indifferent nature, you will be confused under the temptation of foreign things.

古文：譬若陇西之游，愈躁沉。
现代文：就好像陇西之游，越急躁越沉重。
English: Just like a trip to Shaanxi, the more impatient you are, the heavier it is.

古文：孔子谓颜回曰： 吾服汝也忘，而汝服于我也亦忘。
现代文：孔子对颜回说： 我以前的那些言行，你可以忘掉；你向我学到的那些言行，我也要忘掉。
English: Confucius replied to Yan: You can forget my previous words and deeds; I will also forget the words and deeds you learned from me.

古文：虽然，汝虽忘乎，吾犹有不忘者存。 
现代文：虽然如此，你忘掉以前的我，我还有可值得记取的新精神保存着呢！ 
English: Nevertheless, if you forget the old me, I still have a new spirit worth remembering!

古文：孔子知其本也。
现代文：这说明孔子是一个懂得返归根本之 道 的人。
English: This shows that Confucius was a man who knew how to return to the fundamental way.

古文：夫纵欲而失性，动未尝正也，以治身则危，以治国则乱，以入军则破。
现代文：如果放纵贪欲而丧失本性，行为举止就不会端正。用这种贪欲来修养心性就更危险，用这种贪欲来治国就会乱套，用这种贪欲来治军就会失败。
English: If you indulge in greed and lose your nature, your behavior will not be correct. Using this greed to cultivate your character is even more dangerous. Using this greed to govern the country will be chaotic, and using this greed to govern the army will fail.

古文：是故不闻道者，无以反性。
现代文：所以不懂 道 的人，是没办法返归本性的。
English: Therefore, those who do not understand the Way cannot return to their true nature.

古文：故古之圣王，能得诸己，故令行禁止，中传后世，德施四海。
现代文：所以古代的君王能持守道体本性，因此能做到有令即行，有禁即止，名声留传后世，德泽遍及四海。
English: Therefore, the ancient emperors were able to maintain the nature of Taoism, and therefore they were able to do what they were ordered to do and stop what they were forbidden to do. Their reputation was passed down to future generations, and their virtue spread all over the world.

古文：是故凡将举事，必先平意清神。
现代文：所以凡办事处事，一定先要平心静气。
English: Therefore, in all office affairs, you must first be calm.

古文：神清意平，物乃可正。若玺之抑植，正与之正，倾与之倾。
现代文：只有平心静气才能正确处事办事，这就像用玉玺按印泥一样，按端正了，留下的图形是正的，按邪歪了，留下的图形也是邪歪的。
English: Only a calm and tranquil mind can handle things correctly. It is like using a jade roller to press the printing mud. If you press it correctly, the image you leave is correct. If you press it incorrectly, the image you leave is also incorrect.

古文：故尧之举舜也，决之于目；桓公之取宁戚也，断之于耳而已矣。
现代文：所以，尧举荐舜，取决于尧用眼睛对舜的观察，齐桓公任用宁戚，取决于齐桓公用耳朵对宁戚哀歌的倾听。
English: Therefore, the recommendation depends on the observation of the cormorant by the cormorant with the eyes, the appointment of the cormorant by the cormorant, and the listening to the lament of the cormorant by the cormorant with the ears.

古文：为是释术数而任耳目，其乱必甚矣。
现代文：如果从上述两件事中得出可以抛弃术数只凭耳目就能判断事物的是与非，那么就一定会出大乱子。
English: If we conclude from the above two things that we can discard the number of operations and can judge the rights and wrongs of things with only our eyes and ears, then there will definitely be a big mess.

古文：夫耳目之可以断也，反情性也。
现代文：要知道凭耳目能对事物作出判断的前提是必须要返归道体本性。
English: You should know that the premise of being able to judge things with your eyes and ears is that you must return to your true nature.

古文：听失于诽誉而目淫于采色，而欲得事正则难矣。
现代文：如果听觉迷惑于诽谤和赞誉，眼睛沉溺于五颜六色，却还想将事情办好，这是不大可能的。
English: If the ears are distracted by slander and praise, and the eyes are addicted to color, but still want to get things done, this is unlikely.

古文：夫载哀者闻歌声而泣，载乐者见哭者而笑，哀可乐者、笑可哀者，载使然也。
现代文：内心充满哀情的人，即使听到欢歌也会流泪哭泣；内心充满喜悦的人，即使看到别人哭也会发笑高兴。面对欢歌仍然悲哀，看到痛哭还是高兴，这是因为内心所怀的感情使他这样子。
English: A person with a sad heart will shed tears and cry even if he hears happy songs; a person with a happy heart will laugh and be happy even if he sees others crying. If he is still sad when he hears happy songs, and happy when he sees bitter tears, it is because the feelings in his heart have made him like this.

古文：是故贵虚。故水击则波兴，气乱则智昏。
现代文：从这喜悲对立反复的现象中可以得出，保持虚静平和的心态是多么地重要啊！
English: How important it is to maintain a calm and peaceful state of mind!

古文：智昏不可以为政，波水不可以为平。
现代文：所以是水流激荡就兴起波浪，神气惑乱就会头脑昏庸，头脑昏庸的人又怎可治理国家，这就像动荡的水不能做水准一样。
English: Therefore, if the current of water is agitated, waves will rise. If the divine spirit is confused, the mind will be dull. How can people with dull minds govern the country? It's just like turbulent water can't be the standard.

古文：故圣王执一而勿失，万物之情既矣，四夷九州服矣。
现代文：所以圣人君主是抓着这一 道体 根本而不丧失，于是万事万物的情理均在他掌握之中，四夷九州也就归顺降服。
English: Therefore, the sage-monarch grasped the essence of this way of life and did not lose it. As a result, the reason for everything was within his grasp, and Shii Kyushu surrendered.

古文：夫一者至贵，无适于天下。
现代文：这说明这一 道体 根本是何等地珍贵啊！掌握就能无敌于天下。
English: This shows how precious this Dharma body really is. Mastering it will make you invincible in the world.

古文：圣人托于无适，故民命系矣。
现代文：正因为圣人君主依据这无敌于天下的治国法宝，所以广大民众才肯将自己的命运交付给他。
English: It is precisely because the sage monarch relied on this invincible national treasure that the broad masses of the people were willing to entrust their fate to him.

古文：为仁者必以哀乐论之，为义者必以取予明之。
现代文：提倡从事仁的人一定是通过哀伤喜乐之情去影响他人的，提倡实施义的人一定是通过施予剥夺让人明白义理的。
English: Those who advocate the practice of benevolence must influence others through feelings of sorrow and joy, and those who advocate the practice of righteousness must make people understand the meaning of righteousness through giving and depriving.

古文：目所见不过十里，而欲遍照海内之民，哀乐弗能给也。无天下之委财，而欲遍赡万民，利不能足也。
现代文：眼睛所能看到的距离不过十来里地，而想以仁慈普照天下百姓，这仅用哀、乐之情是远远不够的；没有积聚到天下所有财富，而想满足天下所有百姓的需求，这仅靠这些利益是远远不够的。
English: The distance that the eye can see is only about ten miles, but it is far from enough to use sorrow and joy to spread kindness to the people of the world; it is not enough to accumulate all the wealth of the world, but to meet the needs of all the people of the world, it is far from enough to rely on these interests alone.

古文：且喜怒哀乐，有感而自然者也。
现代文：况且喜怒哀乐之情，都是人们有了感触才自然形成和流露出来的。
English: Moreover, the feelings of joy, anger, sorrow and music are all naturally formed and revealed when people have feelings.

古文：故哭之发于口，涕之出于目，此皆愤于中而形于外者也，譬若水之下流、烟之上寻也，夫有孰推之者！
现代文：所以哭声发之于口、泪水出之于眼，这都是内心的悲愤之情在外部的表现，这就好比水往低处流，烟往上边冒一样，又有谁去人为地推动它？
English: That is why crying comes out of the mouth and tears come out of the eyes. These are all external manifestations of inner sadness and anger. It is just like water flowing downwards and smoke rising upwards. Who is going to artificially push it?

古文：故强哭者虽病不哀，强亲者虽笑不和，情发于中而声应于外，故厘负羁之壶餐，愈于晋献公之垂棘；赵宣孟之束脯，贤于智伯之大钟。
现代文：所以勉强哭的人，即使哭得精疲力竭，也不会显得悲哀；勉强做出亲善友好的态度，即使脸上堆满了笑容，也不会显得善和。这些都说明只有真情出自内心，外表的声音和行为才会表现得真诚而不虚伪。所以厘负羁馈赠的一壶水泡饭要远远强过晋献公的垂棘之璧；赵宣孟的一束干肉脯要远远胜过智伯的大钟。
English: Therefore, people who are reluctant to cry, even if they are exhausted from crying, will not appear sad; reluctantly make a friendly and friendly attitude, even if their faces are full of smiles, they will not appear peaceful. These all indicate that only true feelings come from the heart, and external voices and actions will show sincerity and not hypocrisy. Therefore, a pot of boiled rice gifted by Li Hongzhu is far better than the thorny gem of Jin Xianguo; Zhao Xuanmeng's bunch of dried meat is far better than Zhi Bo's big clock.

古文：故礼丰不足以效爱，而诚心可以怀远。
现代文：这都说明礼物的丰厚不足以反映爱心，而赤诚的爱意倒足以使远方的人都为之感动而归顺。
English: All this shows that the richness of the gift is not enough to reflect the love, but the sincere love is enough to make people from far away move and submit.

古文：故公西华之养亲也，若与朋友处；曾参之养亲也，若事严主烈君；其于养，一也。
现代文：所以公西华奉养父母，就如同和朋友相处那样随和；曾参侍奉父母，就像侍奉暴烈的国君那样小心翼翼，他们表现出的态度尽管不同，但在奉养父母上的孝心是一样的。
English: Therefore, Gong Xihua is as easy-going in serving his parents as he is with his friends; he has served his parents as carefully as he served the violent sovereign. Although their attitudes are different, their filial piety in serving their parents is the same.

古文：故胡人弹骨，越人契臂，中国歃血也，所由各异，其于信，一也。
现代文：所以，胡人盟誓用头骨装酒，越人盟誓刺臂流血，中原人是歃血而盟，在这里，表现的形式各异，而在表现真诚信义上是一致的。
English: Therefore, the Hu people swear to use skulls to hold wine, the Yue people swear to stab their arms to bleed, and the Central Plains people swear by blood. Here, the forms of expression are different, but they are consistent in expressing sincerity and faith.

古文：三苗髽首，羌人括领，中国冠笄，越人劗鬋，其于服，一也。
现代文：三苗人束发，羌人领口打结，中原人插簪戴冠，而越人剪短发，在这里，他们装饰打扮各异，但服饰和装扮的实用性是一致的。
English: The San Miao people wear their hair in bunches, the Yao people tie their necklines in knots, the Central Plains people wear their hair in braids and crowns, and the Yue people cut their hair short. Here, they dress differently, but the practicality of clothing and dress is the same.

古文：帝颛顼之法，妇人不辟男子于路者，拂之于四达之衢，今之国都，男女切踦，肩摩于道，其于俗，一也。
现代文：古代颛顼帝时有法规定，如果妇女在路上不回避男子，就要在四通八达的道口驱除邪气。而如今的大都市里，街上行人如潮，男女间摩肩接踵也不算什么伤风败俗。
English: In ancient China, there was a law stipulating that if women did not avoid men on the road, they should drive away evil spirits at all intersections. In today's metropolis, the streets are crowded with pedestrians, and it is not considered bad manners for men and women to walk shoulder to shoulder.

古文：故四夷之礼不同，皆尊其主而爱其亲，敬其兄；猃狁之俗相反，皆慈其子而严其上。
现代文：在这里，古今礼节尽管不同，但各有其风俗习惯这是一致的。所以四夷的礼节形式不同，但表现在尊崇君王、爱护亲人、敬重兄长上却又是一样的。而猃狁的风俗则相反，表现出对子孙相当慈爱，对父辈却相当威严。
English: Here, although the ancient and modern etiquette is different, each has its own customs and habits, which are consistent. Therefore, the form of etiquette in Shii is different, but it is the same in terms of respecting the king, loving relatives, and respecting brothers and sisters. On the other hand, the egret's customs, on the contrary, show considerable kindness to children and grandchildren, but are quite dignified to their parents.

古文：夫鸟飞成行，兽处成群，有孰教之！
现代文：那飞鸟成行、兽类群处，这又是谁教它们的？
English: Who has taught the birds to fly and the beasts to run?

古文：故鲁国服儒者之礼，行孔子之术，地削名卑，不能亲近来远。
现代文：所以鲁国采用儒家礼节，施行孔子学说，结果反而国土被削减，名望被削弱，不能使近者亲附，远者归服。
English: Therefore, Lu adopted the Confucian etiquette and implemented the Confucius doctrine. As a result, the country's territory was reduced and its reputation was weakened. It was not possible to make the close ones close and the distant ones submit.

古文：越王勾践劗发文身，无皮弁搢笏之服、拘罢拒折之容，然而胜夫差于五湖，南面而霸天下，泗上十二诸侯皆率九夷以朝。
现代文：越王勾践剃发文身，没有戴皮帽、插笏板上朝的朝服，也没有规规矩矩的仪态，但在太湖一带战胜吴王夫差后，就南面而坐，称霸天下，使泗水之滨的诸侯都率各自管辖的边远小国来朝拜。
English: Yue Wang Ge practised shaving his hair and tattooing, did not wear a leather cap, nor did he wear the imperial robes of the emperor on the cutting board, nor did he have a proper posture, but after defeating Wu Wangfusha in the Taihu area, he sat on the south side and dominated the world, so that the princes of the coast of Surabaya led the remote small countries under their respective jurisdiction to worship.

古文：胡、貉、匈奴之国，纵体拖发，箕倨反言，而国不亡者，未必无礼也。
现代文：北方的胡貉和匈奴，衣服胡乱缠裹，披头散发，又是席地叉腿而坐，说话叽哩呱啦，但国家不会灭亡，这是因为我们看似无礼，实质他们有他们的礼节。
English: The Huns and the Huns of the North, their clothes in disarray, their beards hanging loose, sit cross-legged on the seats, and speak with forked tongues, but the country will not perish, because we seem to be impolite, but in reality they have their propriety.

古文：楚庄王裾衣博袍，令行乎天下，遂霸诸侯。
现代文：楚庄王身穿宽衣长袍，照样发号施令于天下，并终于称霸诸侯。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang, dressed in a broad robe, still gave orders to the world, and finally dominated the princes.

古文：晋文君大布之衣，牂羊之裘，韦以带剑，威立于海内，岂必邹鲁之礼之谓礼乎？
现代文：晋文公衣着粗布，身披羊皮，皮带系宝剑，但照样威名天下。由此看来，哪能说邹鲁的儒家礼节才一定算礼节？
English: Jinwen dressed in coarse cloth, wore sheepskin, and wore a belt with a sword, but he was still famous. From this point of view, how can we say that Jilu's Confucian etiquette is definitely etiquette?

古文：是故入其国者从其俗，入其家者避其讳。不犯禁而入，不忤逆而进，虽之夷狄徒倮之国，结轨乎远方之外，而无所困矣。
现代文：所以到了别的国家就该遵随他们的习俗，到了人家家里就应回避人家的忌讳；不要违反当地的禁令，也不要触犯当地的习俗，这样你就是到了像夷狄这样赤足裸体的落后国家、荒远异域，也不会感到窘困。
English: Therefore, when you go to other countries, you should follow their customs, and when you go to other people's homes, you should avoid other people's taboos; don't violate local prohibitions, and don't violate local customs, so that you won't feel embarrassed when you go to a backward country, such as Yidi, which is barefoot and naked.

古文：礼者，实之文也，仁者，恩之效也。
现代文：礼仪是现实生活中人际关系、感情的表现形式；而仁慈的行为则是内心恩德的真实效验。
English: Etiquette is the expression of interpersonal relationships and emotions in real life; while benevolent behavior is the true test of inner grace.

古文：故礼因人情而为之节文，而仁发恲以见容，礼不过实，仁不溢恩也，治世之道也。
现代文：所以礼仪是依据人的感情而制定，并和感情契合，而仁慈是内心仁爱在人容颜上的流露。正因为这样，礼仪形式不可能超出实际感情，而仁慈的行为也无法超越内心仁德的范围。这是治世的一般道理。
English: Therefore, etiquette is based on people's feelings and accords with their feelings, while benevolence is the expression of inner benevolence on people's faces. Because of this, the form of etiquette cannot exceed the actual feelings, and the act of benevolence cannot exceed the scope of inner benevolence. This is the general principle of ruling the world.

古文：夫三年之丧，是强人所不及也，而以伪辅情也。三月之服，是绝哀而迫切之性也。
现代文：规定子女为父母服三年之丧，这就是勉强人们去做难以做到的事，而人们为了做到这点，就只能以虚假的感情来应付这三年之丧；实际上规定子女为父母服丧三个月倒是切合人性：人们在这三个月中能充分表达哀情。
English: To require children to mourn their parents for three years is to force people to do a difficult thing, and in order to do this, people can only deal with the three-year mourning with false feelings; in fact, it is human nature to require children to mourn their parents for three months: people can fully express their grief in these three months.

古文：夫儒墨不原人情之终始，而务以行相反之制，五缞之服。
现代文：这正说明，儒墨两家不研究人的感情活动的规律，硬是制定出违反人之常情的礼节，并硬性规定丧服等差和期限。
English: This just goes to show that the two schools of Confucianism and Buddhism do not study the laws of human emotional activities, but insist on formulating etiquette that violates human common sense, and rigidly stipulate the difference in funeral attire and the time limit.

古文：悲哀抱于情，葬埋称于养，不强人之所不能为，不绝人之所能已。
现代文：表达悲哀的仪式要合乎实情，安葬父母的葬礼要对得起养育之恩。不强求人做不能做到的事，也不强行阻绝人所不能停止的事，所有礼仪形式的规定要恰如其分，这样就不太会受人非议。
English: The ceremony of expressing grief should be true to the situation, and the funeral of burying parents should be worthy of the grace of upbringing. Do not force people to do things that cannot be done, and do not forcibly prevent things that people cannot stop. All the rules of etiquette should be appropriate, so that they are less likely to be criticized.

古文：度量不失于适，诽誉无所由生。古者非不知繁升降槃还之礼也，蹀《采齐》《肆夏》之容也，以为旷日烦民而无所用，故制礼足以佐实喻意而已矣。
现代文：古人并不是不知道繁琐的尊卑谒见礼节，跳《采齐》《肆夏》那样的舞蹈，而是认识到用这种繁文缛节旷日烦民，实在毫无意义，所以制定礼仪只要能表达真情实意就行。
English: It is not that the ancients did not know the cumbersome dignity and inferiority rules and etiquette, and danced the dances like "Celebrate the Spring" and "Celebrate the Summer," but they realized that using this kind of red tape to annoy the people for a long time is really meaningless, so it is enough to formulate etiquette as long as it can express the true feelings and intentions.

古文：古者非不能陈钟鼓，盛筦箫，扬干戚，奋羽旄，以为费财乱政，制乐足以合欢宣意而已，喜不羡于音。
现代文：古人也并不是不会陈设钟鼓、吹奏管箫、舞动干戚、挥动羽旄、纵情欢乐，而是认识到这样太浪费财物、扰乱政事，所以制定乐礼只要能抒发感情就行而不至于喜庆得沉溺于歌舞之中不能自拔。
English: It is not that the ancients could not set up bells and drums, play gongs, dance, wave feathers, and indulge in joy, but they realized that this was too wasteful of wealth and disrupted political affairs, so they set up music rituals as long as they could express their feelings, rather than being too happy to indulge in song and dance.

古文：非不能竭国麋民，虚府殚财，含珠鳞施，纶组节束，追送死也，以为穷民绝业而无益于槁骨腐肉也，故葬埋足以收敛盖藏而已。
现代文：古人也并不是不会消耗国力、劳民伤财，为达官贵人举行葬礼，让死者口含珠玉、衣着玉衣，用绵丝裹束，以追悼死者，而是认识到这样做只能使百姓更穷困、事业受破坏，而对死者的枯骨腐肉毫无益处，所以安葬只求能够收埋掩盖就行。
English: The ancients also did not mean that they would not consume national strength, work the people and hurt the wealth, hold funerals for dignitaries, let the dead have pearls in their mouths, wear jade clothes, and wrap them in silk to mourn the dead, but realized that doing so would only make the people poorer and the cause damaged, and would be of no benefit to the dead bones and rotting flesh of the dead, so the burial only needed to be able to bury and cover it.

古文：昔舜葬苍梧，市不变其肆；禹葬会稽之山，农不易其亩；明乎生死之分，通乎侈俭之适者也。
现代文：过去舜南巡去世于苍梧，就地埋葬，而且也无国葬仪式，都市店家照样开门营业；禹视察江南死后埋于会稽山，农民照常在田间耕作劳动。他们这些人是真的懂得生死之分的道理，也通晓奢侈和节俭之间的界限。
English: In the past, Gong Nanjun died in Cangwu and was buried on the spot, and there was no state funeral ceremony, and urban stores still opened their doors for business; Yu Inspection Jiangnan died and was buried in Heji Mountain, and farmers still worked in the fields. These people really understand the difference between life and death, and they also understand the boundaries between luxury and frugality.

古文：乱国则不然，言与行相悖，情与貌相反，礼饰以烦，乐优以淫，崇死以害生，久丧以招行，是以风俗浊于世，而诽誉萌于朝，是故圣人废而不用也。义者，循理而行宜也；礼者，体情制文者也。义者宜也，礼者体也。
现代文：乱国就不是这样了，他们说的和做的不一样，内心想的和外表表现不一样；礼仪形式花头花脑，音乐花俏而失去节度；看重死者而损害活人，而服丧三年以孝行哗世则更是束缚人的本性行为。因此世风浑浊，诽谤朝政的事也就时有发生，所以英明的君主就废除他们的那一套而不用。所谓 义 ，就是依循事理而又行为适宜；所谓 礼 ，就是为体现真实感情而制定的仪式。 义 本来的含意就叫 宜 ， 礼 本来的含意就是体现情感。
English: This is not the case in a chaotic country. What they say and do is different, what they think in their hearts is different from what they show on the outside; the form of etiquette is flamboyant, the music is gaudy and loses its moderation; the dead are valued and the living are harmed, and the three years of mourning with filial piety is a natural behavior that binds people. Therefore, the world is turbulent, and things that slander the government happen from time to time, so a wise monarch abolishes their set and does not use it. The so-called righteousness is to follow the facts and act appropriately; the so-called ritual is to embody

古文：昔有扈氏为义而亡，知义而不知宜也；鲁治礼而削，知礼而不知体也。
现代文：过去扈氏就是死抱着过时的 义 而被启杀害，这是因为他只知道 义 而不知道 义 还要适合时宜；鲁国是以孔孟儒家的礼法来治国的，但结果国力日益衰弱，这是因为鲁国国君不知道 礼 是要体现真情实意的。
English: In the past, the Shih clan was killed by the Enlightenment for clinging to outdated righteousness. This was because he only knew righteousness, but did not know that righteousness should also be suitable for the times. Lu used the etiquette of Confucius, Mencius and Confucius to govern the country, but as a result, the national strength was weakening day by day. This was because the prince of Lu did not know that etiquette should reflect true feelings.

古文：有虞氏之祀，其社用土，祀中霤，葬成亩，其乐《咸池》《承云》《九韶》，其服尚黄。
现代文：有虞氏的礼法是：他们用土堆成社神，季夏六月祭祀宅神，人死后埋于耕地下面，音乐则有《咸池》《承云》和《九韶》，而服饰崇尚黄色。
English: The Yu clan's etiquette is as follows: they use mounds of earth to make gods for their communities, they offer sacrifices to the gods of their homes in the summer and in June, and when someone dies, they are buried under the soil. Their music includes "Hamchi" (咸池), "Cheng Yun" (承云) and "Jiu Yao" (九), and their clothing is yellow.

古文：夏后氏，其社用松，祀户，葬墙置翣，其乐《夏籥》《九成》《六佾》《六列》《六英》，其服尚青。
现代文：夏后氏的礼法是：他们用松木做成社神，于春天祭祀户神，丧葬时灵车棺柩四周围上帐幔，并装饰着翣扇样的饰物，音乐则有《夏篇》《九成》《六佾》《六列》和《六英》，而服饰崇尚青色。
English: The etiquette of the Xia Guo clan is as follows: they use pine to make a shrine god, and in the spring they offer sacrifices to the house god. During funerals, the hearse and coffin are surrounded by a curtain and decorated with fan-like ornaments. The music includes "Summer" "90%" "6" "6列" and "6英," and the clothing is blue.

古文：殷人之礼，其社用石，祀门，葬树松，其乐《大濩》《晨露》，其服尚白。
现代文：殷人的礼法是：他们用石头做成社神，在秋季祭祀门神，有在坟上种上松树的丧葬礼法，音乐则有《大濩》和《晨露》，而服饰崇尚白色。
English: The etiquette of the Yin people is: they use stones to make the gods of the community, worship the door gods in the autumn, there is a funeral funeral method of planting pine trees on the grave, the music is "Big Dragonfly" and "Morning Dew," and the dress is white.

古文：周人之礼，其社用栗，祀灶，葬树柏，其乐《大武》《三象》《棘下》，其服尚赤。
现代文：周人的礼法是：他们用栗木做成社神，在夏季祭祀灶神，葬礼有在墓上种松树的习惯，音乐则有《大武》《三象》和《棘下》，而服饰崇尚赤色。
English: The etiquette of the Zhou people is as follows: they use chestnut trees to make shrines, worship the god of the hearth in the summer, the funeral has the habit of planting pine trees on the grave, the music has "Da Wu," "Three Elephants" and "Under the Thorns," and the clothing advocates red.

古文：礼乐相诡，服制相反，然而皆不失亲疏之恩，上下之伦。
现代文：这上述四代的礼乐因时代变迁而发生很大变化，同样服饰也各不相同，但是他们的礼法都体现了亲疏的感情和上下的人伦。
English: The etiquette of the above-mentioned four generations has undergone great changes due to the changes of the times, and the same costumes are also different, but their etiquette all reflects the intimate feelings and the up-and-down human relations.

古文：今握一君之法籍，以非传代之俗，譬由胶柱而调瑟也。
现代文：现在如果死抓住一国之礼法或一君之法籍，以它来否定、非难世代变化了的礼俗，这就好像胶住弦柱而想调瑟一样。
English: Now, to lay hold of the manners of a nation, or the birthright of a prince, and to repudiate them, and to reproach the manners which have changed from generation to generation, is like grasping at the string of a harp, and trying to tune it.

古文：故明主制礼义而为衣，分节行而为带。
现代文：所以英明的君主制定礼仪就像做衣裳，规定节行就像做衣带。
English: That is why wise monarchs make etiquette as if it were clothing, and rules of etiquette as if it were a belt.

古文：衣足以覆形，从典坟，虚循挠，便身体，适行步，不务于奇丽之容，隅眥之削。
现代文：衣能遮身就行，合乎常规即可，能宽松舒适、行走方便就更好；不必追求奇异的外表和裁剪上的花哨。
English: It is enough to be able to cover up, it is enough to conform to the norm, it is better to be loose and comfortable, and it is convenient to walk; there is no need to pursue a bizarre appearance and fancy tailoring.

古文：带足以结纽收衽，束牢连固，不亟于为文句疏短之鞵。
现代文：衣带能够打成纽结、束紧衣襟就行，不必讲究绣上什么别致的花纹图案。
English: The belt can be tied into a knot, the collar can be tightened, and there is no need to pay attention to the unique pattern embroidered on it.

古文：故制礼义，行至德，而不拘于儒墨。
现代文：所以说，制定礼义的根本要求，是帮助人规范思想、道德；在这意义上说，我们也没有必要拘泥于儒墨的那一套伦理了。
English: Therefore, the formulation of the fundamental requirements of etiquette is to help people standardize their thoughts and morals; in this sense, we do not need to stick to the set of ethics of Confucianism.

古文：所谓明者，非谓其见彼也，自见而已。
现代文：所谓 明 ，不是说能看清别人，而是说能认识自己。
English: The so-called "Ming" does not mean being able to see others clearly, but being able to know oneself.

古文：所谓聪者，非谓闻彼也，自闻而已。
现代文：所谓 聪 ，不是说能听见声音，而是说能倾听自己的心声。
English: The so-called "touch" does not mean being able to hear voices, but being able to listen to one's own heart.

古文：所谓达者，非谓知彼也，自知而已。
现代文：所谓 达 ，不是说能了解别人，而是说能自知之明。
English: The so-called attainment does not mean being able to understand others, but being able to know oneself.

古文：是故身者道之所托。身得则道得矣。道之得也，以视则明，以听则聪，以言则公，以行则从。
现代文：所以说只有自己的身心才是 道 所依托的寓所，身心修养得通体透明，那么道也就必定能定居下来。 道 如能与你身心融合，那么凭着它就能视察清晰，凭着它就能聆听聪灵，凭着它就能言论公正，凭着它就能行动顺畅。
English: Therefore, it is said that only one's own body and mind are the dwelling place supported by the Tao, and if one's body and mind are cultivated to be completely transparent, then the Tao will definitely be able to settle down.If the Tao can integrate with your body and mind, then with it you can see clearly, with it you can listen to the intellect, with it you can speak fairly, and with it you can act smoothly.

古文：故圣人裁制物也，犹工匠之斫削凿枘也，宰庖之切割分别也，曲得其宜而不折伤。
现代文：所以圣人处理事物，就如同巧匠砍削木榫，良厨分解牲畜，砍削分解得恰到好处而不损伤刀斧。
English: Therefore, the sage deals with things, just as a craftsman chops a raft, a good cook breaks down livestock, chopping and breaking down just right without damaging the knife and axe.

古文：拙工则不然，大则塞而不入，小则窕而不周，动于心，枝于手而愈丑。
现代文：但笨拙的工匠则不然，木榫砍削得不是大就是小，大的则壅塞而不入，小的则空落不严实。正是心神不宁则手势散乱，越折腾越离谱。
English: But the clumsy craftsman is different. The wooden stake is either large or small, the large one is blocked and does not enter, the small one is empty and not solid. It is the restlessness of the mind that causes the gestures to be scattered, and the more tossing, the more outrageous.

古文：夫圣人之斫削物也，剖之判之，离之散之，已淫已失，复揆以一，既出其根，复归其门，已雕已琢，还反于朴。
现代文：圣人处理事物能判剖自如，处置有序；散乱了则有办法使它整合，离开了则有办法使它复归，雕琢过的可以使它返归质朴。
English: A sage can deal with things in a self-disciplined and orderly manner. If things are scattered, there is a way to integrate them. If they are scattered, there is a way to restore them. If they are carved, they can be returned to simplicity.

古文：合而为道德，离而为仪表，其转入玄冥，其散应无形。
现代文：整合而为道德，离散而为仪表。这样就能转入玄冥之中，散应一切而不留痕迹。
English: Integrate to be moral, and separate to be a device. In this way, you can turn into the mysterious, and scatter everything without leaving a trace.

古文：礼义节行，又何以穷至治之本哉！
现代文：而靠礼义来制约人的行为，又怎么能从根本上治理好社会？
English: But how can a society be governed well from the ground up if it relies on etiquette to regulate people's behavior?

古文：世之明事者，多离道德之本，曰礼义足以治天下，此未可与言术也，所谓礼义者，五帝三王之法籍风俗，一世之迹也。
现代文：世界上有很多所谓的明事理者，实际上大多是离开这一 道德 根本的，说什么 礼义足以治天下 ，这种人是不可以和他谈治国方略的。所谓礼义，实际上是五帝三王制定的法典和习俗，各适合于他们的时代。
English: There are many so-called rationalists in the world, but in fact, most of them have left this fundamental morality. Those who say that etiquette is enough to rule the world should not talk to him about how to govern the country. The so-called etiquette is actually the code and customs established by the five emperors and three kings, each suitable for their era.

古文：譬若刍狗土龙之始成，文以青黄，绢以绮绣，缠以朱丝，尸祝袀袨，大夫端冕以送迎之。
现代文：这就好比祭祀时用的刍狗和祈雨时用的土龙，开始扎塑它们的时候，用青黄色彩涂上装饰，然后用锦绣包裹和丝帛镶边，再用红色丝线缠扎起来，尸祝穿上黑色的祭服，大夫戴着礼帽，非常庄重地迎送它们。
English: This is similar to the hyenas used in sacrifices and the clay dragons used in prayers for rain. When they were first cast, they were decorated with a turquoise-yellow color, then wrapped in brocade and edged with silk ribbon, and then tied with red silk thread. The corpse was dressed in a black ceremonial dress, and the doctor wore a ceremonial hat to welcome them very solemnly.

古文：及其已用之后，则壤土草灾而已，夫有孰贵之？
现代文：但等到使用过它们之后，就如同泥土草芥一样被扔掉，还有谁贵重珍惜它们？
English: But after they have been used, they are thrown away like rubbish. Who else treasures them?

古文：故当舜之时，有苗不服，于是舜修政偃兵，执干戚而舞之。
现代文：所以，在舜的时代，有苗不归服，于是舜修治德政，并停止战争讨伐，将盾牌和大斧用于歌舞之中。
English: Therefore, in the era of Zhai, there were seedlings that refused to submit, so Zhai repaired and governed the country, and stopped the war crusade, and used the shield and the axe in the song and dance.

古文：禹之时，天下大雨，禹令民聚上积薪，择丘陵而外之。
现代文：在禹的时代，天下洪水泛滥，禹命令民众堆聚土壤和积集柴草，选择丘陵高处居住。
English: In Yu's time, the world was flooded, and Yu ordered the people to pile up soil and collect firewood and grass, and choose to live high in the hills.

古文：武王伐纣，载尸而行，海内未定，故不为三年之丧始。
现代文：武王讨伐纣王的时候，用车载着去世不久的父亲的灵柩前去讨伐，等杀死纣王后，海内还没有安定下来，所以武王为文王守三年孝，以表示发扬文王的美德，这样才有了服三年之丧的做法。
English: When King Wu was crusading against King Wen, he used his car to carry the coffin of his father, who had died not long before, to go to the crusade, and then killed the Queen of Sheba. The sea had not yet settled down, so King Wu kept three years of filial piety for King Wen to show the virtue of King Wen. This is how the practice of three years of mourning came about.

古文：禹遭洪水之患，陂塘之事，故朝死而暮葬。
现代文：禹时天下洪水成灾，禹忙于修筑陂塘水库，所以只得早上死人晚上即安葬。
English: At the time of the flood disaster, Yu was busy building the Qutang Reservoir, so he had to bury the dead in the morning and the dead in the evening.

古文：此皆圣人之所以应时耦变，见形而施宜者也。
现代文：这些均是圣人为了顺应时代和客观情况而采取的权宜措施。
English: These are all expedient measures taken by sages in order to conform to the times and the objective situation.

古文：今之修干戚而笑插，知三年非一日，是从牛非马，以徵笑羽也。
现代文：今天如果只赞美干戚之舞而嘲笑锄锹之舞，只知道三年服丧而非议一日丧期，这就好像只赞美牛而非难马一样，也像用徵音来取笑羽音一样。
English: Today, if we only praise the dance of the cowherd and ridicule the dance of the donkey, if we only know the three-year mourning period and do not discuss the one-day mourning period, it is like only praising the ox and not the horse, and it is also like using the audition to make fun of the feather sound.

古文：以此应化，无以异于弹一弦而会《棘下》。
现代文：以一种呆板凝固的礼法来对待日益变化的社会，和以一根琴弦就想弹奏出《棘下》的乐曲没有什么不同。
English: Treating a changing society with a rigid and rigid etiquette is no different from trying to play the music of "Under the Thorn" with a single string.

古文：夫以一世之变，欲以耦化应时，譬犹冬被葛而夏被裘。
现代文：而根据时世的变化而制定的礼法，再用于变化了的时世，就很难做到恰当适宜；如不变化礼法，就会像冬天穿葛布衣、夏天穿皮大衣一样可笑。
English: But the etiquette established according to the changes of the times and then applied to the changed times is difficult to be appropriate; if the etiquette is not changed, it will be as ridiculous as wearing a fur coat in winter and a fur coat in summer.

古文：夫一仪不可以百发，一衣不可以出岁。
现代文：所以调整一次弓弩上的瞄准器是不可能用它来发射一百次的，同样一件衣服也不可能一年穿到头。
English: Therefore, it is impossible to adjust the sight on the crossbow once and use it to fire a hundred times, and the same piece of clothing cannot be worn all year round.

古文：仪必应乎高下，衣必适乎寒暑。
现代文：这说明瞄准器必须根据目标的高低不断调整，人穿的衣服也必须根据气候的变化不断更换。
English: This shows that the sight must be constantly adjusted according to the height of the target, and the clothes worn by people must also be constantly replaced according to changes in the climate.

古文：是故世异则事变，时移则俗易。
现代文：所以说是 世异则事变，时移则俗易 。
English: Therefore, it is said that when there is a change in the world, things change, and when there is a change in time, things change.

古文：故圣人论世而立法，随时而举事。
现代文：因此，圣人是根据世道来制定法规，随应时代来治理国家。
English: Therefore, sages formulate laws and regulations according to the world, and govern the country according to the times.

古文：尚古之王，封于泰山，禅于梁父，七十余圣，法度不同，非务相反也，时世异也。
现代文：古代帝王在泰山上祭过天，在梁父山上祭过地的，有七十多位，他们的法度各不相同，并不是他们有意标新立异，而是因为时代社会变了。
English: There are more than seventy ancient emperors who sacrificed heaven on Mount Tai and earth on Mount Liangzhu, and their laws are all different. It is not that they intentionally set new standards, but because the society of the times has changed.

古文：是故不法其已成之法，而法其所以为法。
现代文：因此，不能照搬他们那些现成的法令，而应该是效法他们制定法令的原则。
English: Therefore, we should not copy their ready-made laws, but should follow the principles on which they made their laws.

古文：所以为法者，与化推移者也。
现代文：而他们制定法令的原则就是根据变化了的时世不断改变法令。
English: And their principle of making laws is to keep changing the laws according to the changing times.

古文：夫能与化推移为人者，至贵在焉尔。
现代文：能够根据时世变化而不断变法，这就是最可贵的精神之所在。
English: It is the most valuable spirit to be able to constantly change the method according to the changes of the times.

古文：故狐梁之歌可随也，其所以歌者不可为也；圣人之法可观也，其所以作法不可原也；辩士言可听也，其所以言不可形也。
现代文：所以，古代狐梁的歌是可以学着唱的，但他唱得如此动人的奥妙却是难以掌握的；古代圣人的法规是可以观摩的，但他们制定法规的缘由却是难以探究的；古代雄辩之士的辩词是可以模仿的，但他们如此善辩的内涵却是难以揭示的。
English: Therefore, the song of the ancient fox Liang can be learned to sing, but the mystery of his singing so moving is difficult to grasp; the laws of ancient sages can be observed, but the reason for their formulation of laws is difficult to explore; the arguments of ancient eloquent men can be imitated, but the connotation of their so eloquent is difficult to reveal.

古文：淳均之剑不可爱也，而欧冶之巧可贵也。
现代文：淳钩之剑是不值得爱惜的，可爱惜珍贵的倒是欧冶的铸剑技术。
English: Junhaku's sword is not worth cherishing, but it is Ouye's sword casting technology that is lovely and precious.

古文：今夫王乔、赤诵子，吹呕呼吸，吐故纳新，遗形去智，抱素反真，以游玄眇，上通云天。
现代文：那王乔和赤诵子吹嘘呼吸、吐故纳新、忘却形骸、摒弃智虑、抱守素朴、返回真纯，遨游于玄眇境地，与上天相通而成仙。
English: That King Qiao and the Red Reciter boast of breathing, giving up the old and accepting the new, forgetting the form, abandoning the wisdom, embracing the simplicity, returning to the pure, wandering in the profound state, communicating with the heaven and becoming immortal.

古文：今欲学其道，不得其养气处神，而放其一吐一吸，时诎时伸，其不能乘云升假亦明矣。
现代文：今天如果有人想学到他们的成仙之道，只模仿他们的一吐一吸、时伸时屈的动作，而没有掌握他们涵养元气、修炼精神的奥妙，要想腾云驾雾升天成仙是不可能的。
English: Today, if someone wants to learn their way of becoming immortal, only imitating their movements of spitting and sucking, stretching and bending, but without mastering the mystery of their cultivation of vitality and cultivation of spirit, it is impossible to ascend to heaven and become immortal.

古文：五帝三王，轻天下，细万物，齐死生，同变化，抱大圣之心，以镜万物这情，上与神明为友，下与造化为人。
现代文：五帝三王他们轻天下，渺视万物，齐生死和同变化，他们怀着无所不容的圣明之心来观照事物的真谛，上与天道为友，下和造化作伴。
English: The five emperors and three kings, they are light under heaven, they look down on all things, they live and die together and change together, they contemplate the true meaning of things with an all-accepting holy heart, they are friends with the heavenly way, and they are companions with creation.

古文：今欲学其道，不得其清明玄圣，而守其法籍宪令，不能为治亦明矣。故曰 得十利剑，不若得欧冶之巧；得百走马，不若得伯乐之数。 
现代文：今天如果有人想学到他们的处世之道，只死守着他们的法典条文，而没有他们那种清静玄冥的精神境界，要想治理天下是不可能的。所以说， 得十把利剑，不如掌握欧冶的铸剑技术；得百匹骏马，不如掌握伯乐的相马技术 。
English: Today, if someone wants to learn their way of doing things, only adhering to the provisions of their code, but without their kind of quiet and mysterious spiritual realm, it is impossible to govern the world. Therefore, to get ten sharp swords, it is better to master Ouye's sword casting technology; to get a hundred horses, it is better to master Bo Le's horse riding technology.

古文：朴至大者无形状，道至眇者无度量，故天之圆也不得规；地之方也不得矩。
现代文：最大的 朴 是没有形状的，最玄妙的 道 是无法度量的。所以天是圆的，而没有什么圆规能够度量它；地是方的，而没有什么方矩能够丈量它。
English: The greatest simplicity is shapeless, the most subtle path is immeasurable. Therefore, the sky is round, and no compass can measure it; the earth is square, and no square can measure it.

古文：往古来今谓之宙，四方上下谓之宇，道在其间而莫知其所。
现代文：古往今来叫做宙，四方上下称做宇。道在宇宙间，但不知它的具体所在。
English: From ancient times to the present, it has been called the cosmos, and the four directions above and below are called yu. Tao is in the universe, but its specific location is unknown.

古文：故其见不远者，不可与语大；其智不闳者，不可与论至。
现代文：所以目光不远大者，是不可以和他谈论大的；智慧不宏大者，是不能和他谈论道的。
English: Therefore, he who is not far-sighted cannot be talked to about the great; he who is not wise cannot be talked to about the Tao.

古文：昔者冯夷得道以潜大川，钳且得道以处昆仑。扁鹊以治病，造父以御马，羿以之射，倕以之所，所为者各异，而所道者一也。
现代文：以前冯夷得了道后便潜入河中成河神；钳且得了道后便升上昆仑山成仙人；扁鹊靠着道来治病，造父凭着道来驾御车马，羿凭着道成了神射手，工靠着道成了能工巧匠。
English: In the past, after Feng Yi won the road, he dived into the river to become a river god; and after he won the road, he ascended to Kunlun Mountain to become a immortal; Bian Que relied on the road to cure the disease, Zou Father relied on the road to drive the chariot and horse, Zou became a sharpshooter with the road, and Gong Que became a skilled craftsman with the road.

古文：夫禀道以通物者，无以相非也，譬若同陂而溉田，其受水均也。
现代文：在这里，他们所做的具体事情各不相同，但得道用道是一致的。秉受了道而通晓万物事理的人，彼此间是不会产生矛盾和非议的，这就好像用同一个水塘的水来灌溉农田一样，所得到水源是相同的。
English: Here, the specific things they do are different, but the way they get and the way they use are the same. People who uphold the way and understand all things will not have conflicts and disputes with each other. It is like using the water from the same pond to irrigate farmland. The water source is the same.

古文：今屠牛而烹其肉，或以为酸，或以为甘，煎熬燎炙，齐味万方，其本一牛之体。
现代文：现在屠宰牛而制作牛肉，有的做成酸的，有的做成甜的，煎熬烧烤，做出各种各样醇美之味，然而它们都出自于同一条牛。
English: Cows are now slaughtered and made into beef, some sour, some sweet, grilled and barbecued to produce all sorts of delicious flavours, but they all come from the same cow.

古文：伐楩柟豫樟而剖梨之，或为棺椁，或为柱梁，披断拨檖，所用万方，然一木之朴也。
现代文：砍下楩楠豫樟，剖开加工，有的做成棺，有的做成柱，剖开锯断，做出各式各样的木器，然而它们都出自于同一树木这原料。
English: Logs are cut, logs are cut, coffins are made, columns are made, logs are cut and sawn, and all kinds of wooden utensils are made, but they all come from the same tree.

古文：故百家之言，指奏相反，其合道一体也，譬若丝竹金石之会乐同也，其曲家异而不失于体。
现代文：所以百家的言论，旨趣相反，但合乎道理是一致的，这就好比丝竹金石各种乐器合奏乐曲，曲子和弹奏不管怎样变换，但它们都不可能脱离曲谱和乐曲本身。
English: Therefore, the opinions of hundreds of people are contrary to the intention, but they are reasonably consistent. This is like the various musical instruments ensemble music. No matter how the music and the playing are transformed, they cannot be separated from the score and the music itself.

古文：伯乐、韩风、秦牙、管青，所相各异，其知马一也。
现代文：同样，伯乐、韩风、秦牙、管青，他们相马的方法各不相同，但了解马性是一致的。
English: Similarly, Bo Le, Han Feng, Qin Fang, and Guan Qing all have different methods of looking like a horse, but they all understand the horse's nature.

古文：故三皇五帝法籍殊方，其得民心均也。
现代文：所以三皇五帝的法令典籍尽管有差异，但他们都得民心是一致的。
English: Therefore, although there are differences in the legal codes of the three emperors and five emperors, they are all consistent in the hearts of the people.

古文：故汤入夏而用其法，武王入殷而行其礼，桀纣之所以亡，而汤武之所以为治。
现代文：所以商汤推翻夏朝以后则用夏朝的基本法规，武王推翻殷朝以后则用殷朝的基本法礼，夏桀和殷纣王用这些礼法导致灭亡，而商汤和武王则凭着这些礼法治理好了天下。
English: Therefore, after Shang Tang overthrew the Xia Dynasty, he used the basic laws and regulations of the Xia Dynasty, and after King Wu overthrew the Yin Dynasty, he used the basic laws and regulations of the Yin Dynasty. King Xia and King Yin used these rules and regulations to bring about their demise, while Shang Tang and King Wu used these rules and regulations to govern the world.

古文：故剞劂销锯陈，非良工不能以制木；炉橐埵坊设，非巧冶不能以治金。
现代文：所以有了各种雕刻的工具，没有优秀的工匠来用它处理木材，还是白搭；有了各种冶炼铸造的设备，没有灵巧的工匠来用它铸炼金属，还是不行。
English: Therefore, with all kinds of carving tools, if there is no excellent craftsman to use it to process wood, it is still useless; with all kinds of smelting and casting equipment, if there is no skillful craftsman to use it to cast metal, it is still impossible.

古文：屠牛吐一朝解九牛，而刀以剃毛；庖丁用刀十九年，而刀如新剖硎。
现代文：屠牛吐一早晨宰杀九头牛，可是他的刀还是能锋利得可以剃下毛发；庖丁的刀用了十九年，可是刀刃还像刚开过口的新刀一样。
English: The butcher kills nine cows in one morning, but his knife is still sharp enough to shave off the hair; the shepherd's knife has been used for nineteen years, but the blade is still like a new knife.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：游乎众虚之间。若夫规矩钧绳者，此巧之具也，而非所以巧也。
现代文：这是由于他们掌握牛体骨骼的规律，使用刀时根本不会碰到骨节，游刃有余。至于那些规矩钩绳，只是发挥技巧的工具，而它们本身并不会产生技巧。
English: This is due to the fact that they have mastered the rules of the bovine skeleton. When using a knife, they do not touch the bone joints at all, and they are well-versed. As for those regular hooks, they are just tools for skills, and they themselves do not produce skills.

古文：故瑟无絃，虽师文不能以成曲，徒弦，则不能悲。
现代文：所以说，瑟如果没有弦，即使是师文这样的高明乐师也不可能弹出乐曲来；但如果光有瑟弦，又不能使人悲伤。
English: Therefore, if there are no strings, even a brilliant musician like Shi Wen cannot play a piece of music; but if there are only strings, it cannot make people sad.

古文：故絃，悲之具也，而非所以为悲也。
现代文：所以，瑟和弦只是弹奏悲曲的工具，但它们本身并不能产生悲曲。
English: Therefore, the chord is only a tool to play the tragic melody, but it cannot produce the tragic melody by itself.

古文：若夫工匠之为连釠，运开、阴闭、眩错，入于冥冥之眇，神调之极，游乎心手众虚之间，而莫与物为际者，父不能以教子；瞽师之放意相物，写神愈舞，而形乎弦者，兄不能以喻弟。
现代文：高明的工匠制造各种机械，其中有明暗机关，错综连通，进入到神奇莫测的境地，运用心神和手的配合来使用工具，根本不须用眼睛去接触具体物件，这种出神入化的技巧就是父子相传也是不可能的。盲乐师靠想象观察事物，运用乐舞的形式来表达它们的神态，配合乐曲的节奏，这种出神入化的技术，即使做兄长的也无法传授给弟弟。
English: Skillful craftsmen make all kinds of machinery, including light and dark organs, intricate connections, enter into unpredictable situations, use the cooperation of mind and hand to use tools, and do not need to use their eyes to touch specific objects at all. This kind of hypnotic technique is impossible to pass on from father to son. Blind musicians observe things by imagination, use the form of music and dance to express their appearance, and match the rhythm of the music. This kind of hypnotic technique cannot be passed on to younger brothers, even if they are older brothers.

古文：今夫为平者准也，为直者绳也。若夫不在于绳准之中，可以平直者，此不共之术也。
现代文：现在一般人都用水准仪器来测准水平，用墨绳来测定直线，如果不使用这些仪器来测平取直，这就不是人人都会的技术了。
English: Nowadays, most people use calibrating instruments to measure the level, and ink cords to measure straight lines. If you don't use these instruments to measure leveling, it's not a technique that everyone can do.

古文：故叩宫而宫应，弹角而角动，此同音之相应也。
现代文：所以叩击宫音而另一只的宫弦也就随之应和起来，叩击角音而另一只的角弦也就随着应和起来，这是同音律应和的现象。
English: Therefore, if you strike the palatal chord and the other palatal chord follows suit, and if you strike the horn chord and the other horn chord follows suit, this is the phenomenon of homophonic harmony.

古文：其于五音无所比，而二十五弦皆应，此不传之道也。
现代文：如果改调成一种与宫、商、角、徵、羽不相对应的音调，当弹奏起这种音调时，另外的同一音调的弦照样会产生应和现象，其中的奥妙道理是无法用言语传授的。
English: If the tuning is changed to a tone that does not correspond to the gong, shang, gong, chime, and feather, when this tone is played, the other strings of the same tone will still produce a response phenomenon, the secret of which cannot be taught by words.

古文：故萧条者，形之君；而寂寞者，音之主也。
现代文：所以说虚静的精神是形体的主宰，而一旦进入到这种静寂的状态，那就什么细微的声音都能感知。
English: Therefore, the spirit of emptiness and stillness is the master of the body, and once it enters this state of stillness, it can perceive any subtle sound.

古文：天下是非无所定，世各是其所是而非其所非，所谓是与非各异，皆自是而非人。
现代文：天下是非没有固定的标准，世人各自以自己的是当成是，把自己的非当成非。他们所认为的是与非各不相同，都以自己为是而以别人为非。
English: There is no fixed standard of right and wrong in the world. People regard their own right as right and their own wrong as wrong. What they think is different from what they think is wrong. They all regard themselves as right and others as wrong.

古文：由此观之，事有合于己者，而未始有是也；有忤于心者，而未始有非也。
现代文：由此看来，事情符合自己心意的就是 是 ，这 是 未必是真正的 是 ；事情不合自己心意的就是 非 ，这 非 未必是真正的 非 。
English: From this point of view, things that are in line with one's own mind are yes, which is not necessarily true; things that are not in line with one's own mind are wrong, which is not necessarily true.

古文：故求是者，非求道理也，求合于已也；去非者，非批邪施也，去忤于心者也。
现代文：所以，追求 是 的人，不真是在追求真理，而只不过是在找符合自己意思的东西；寻找 非 的人，不真是在剔除错误，而只不过是在排除违逆自己心意的东西。
English: Therefore, those who pursue the "yes" are not really pursuing the truth, but are just looking for something that is in line with their own will; those who are looking for the "no" are not really eliminating errors, but are just eliminating things that go against their own will.

古文：忤于我，未必不合于人也；合于我，未必不非于俗也。
现代文：所以说，违逆自己心意的，就不一定不符合别人的心意；符合自己心意的，就不一定不遭世俗所非难。
English: Therefore, to go against one's own will does not necessarily mean that one does not conform to the will of others; to conform to one's own will does not necessarily mean that one will not be criticized by the world.

古文：至是之是无非，至非之非无是，此真是非也。
现代文：最正确的 是 是不存有错误的，最荒谬的 非 是无正确可言的，这才是真正的 是 与 非 。
English: The most correct is that there is no error, and the most absurd is that there is no correct, which is the real yes and no.

古文：若夫是于此而非于彼，非于此而是于彼者，此之谓一是一非也。
现代文：如果 是 在此是对的，而在彼则是 非 的；如果 非 在此是错的，而在彼则是 是 的，这就叫或是或非，是非相对。
English: If here is right and there is wrong, if not here is wrong and there is right, it is all or nothing, it is all relative.

古文：此一是非，隅曲也；夫一是非，宇宙也。
现代文：这种是与非，只适用于一隅、部分；而真正的 是 与 非 则适用于整个宇宙。
English: This kind of right and wrong only applies to a corner, a part; but the real right and wrong applies to the whole universe.

古文：今吾欲择是而居之，择非而去之，不知世之所谓是非者，不知孰是孰非？
现代文：现在我想选择对的来遵循保持它，确定错的来避开它，可又不知道世人说的是与非，到底哪是 是 ，哪是 非 。
English: Now I want to choose the right to follow and keep it, determine the wrong to avoid it, but I don't know what the world says is right and wrong, what is right and what is wrong.

古文：老子曰： 治大国若烹小鲜。 
现代文：《老子》说 治理大国如像烹制小鱼一样 。
English: "Lao Zi" said that governing a big country is like cooking a small fish.

古文：为宽裕者曰：勿数挠。为刻削者曰：致其醎酸而已矣。
现代文：这意思是说，为政宽和的人不会老去翻搅，他懂得翻搅过多会搅烂小鱼的；而为政苛刻的人就一定要做得符合自己的口味才罢休，别的什么也不管。
English: This means that a person who is politically tolerant will not stir things up all the time, he knows that too much stirring up will spoil the little fish; while a person who is politically demanding must do what suits his own taste before he can stop, he does not care about anything else.

古文：晋平公出言而不当，师旷举琴而撞之，跌衽宫壁，左右欲涂之，平公曰： 舍之！以此为寡人失。 
现代文：晋平公讲话不妥，师旷举起琴撞击平公，琴掠过平公的衣襟撞到墙上，平公身边的人准备将撞破的墙补上，平公说： 算了，别补了，留着它可以记着寡人的过失。 
English: Jin Ping Gong's speech was not proper. Shi Yu raised the harp and hit Ping Gong. The harp passed over Ping Gong's coat and hit the wall. The people around Ping Gong were ready to patch up the broken wall. Ping Gong said: Forget it, don't patch it up. Keep it to remember the mistakes of others.

古文：孔子闻之曰： 平公非不痛其体也，欲来谏者也。 
现代文：孔子听到此事后，说： 平公不是不爱惜自己的身体，而想要用这种宽宏大量的态度来鼓励群臣的进谏。 
English: When Confucius heard of this, he said, "It is not that he does not take care of his own body, but he wants to use this magnanimous attitude to encourage the advancement of his ministers.

古文：韩子闻之曰： 群臣失礼而弗诛，是纵过也。
现代文：但后来的韩非却作这样的评价： 群臣失礼而不惩罚，这是在纵容过失。
English: Later, however, Han Fei made the following comment: If ministers are rude without being punished, this is condoning negligence.

古文：有以也夫，平公之不霸也。 
现代文：以后平公之所以不能称霸就是由此引起。 
English: This is the reason why the Taira clan was not able to dominate in the future.

古文：故宾有见人于宓子者，宾出，宓子曰： 子之宾独有三过：望我而笑，是攓也；谈语而不称师，是返也；交浅而言深，是乱也。 
现代文：有位门客给宓子贱引见一位宾客，宾客离开后，宓子贱对他的门客说： 你引见的宾客有三条过失，第一他看到我就嘻皮笑脸，这就是傲慢无礼；第二在谈话中不称我老师，这是违背师道；第三他和我交情浅却无话不谈，这是说话没有分寸。 
English: A doorkeeper introduced a guest to Zou Zi Tian. After the guest left, Zou Zi Tian said to his doorkeeper: The guest you introduced has three faults. The first is that when he saw me, he smiled, which is arrogant and rude. The second is that he did not call me teacher in the conversation, which is against the teacher's way. The third is that he has a shallow friendship with me, but does not talk about anything, which is speaking without measure.

古文：宾曰： 望君而笑，是公也；谈语而不称师，是通也；交浅而言深，是忠也。 
现代文：但门客却这样说： 他看到你便笑，这是恭敬而平和；谈话中不称你为师，这说明他通达；交情浅却无所不谈，这说明他忠厚。 
English: But the doorkeeper said this: He smiles when he sees you, which is respectful and peaceful; he doesn't call you a teacher in conversation, which means he's knowledgeable; he's a shallow friend but talks about everything, which means he's loyal.

古文：故宾之容一体也，或以为君子，或以为小人，所自视之异也。
现代文：那位宾客的容貌举止就这样，但有人认为他是君子，而又有人认为他是小人，这是由于各人都从自己的立场、观点来看问题，由此引出不同的结论。
English: The guest looked and behaved just like that, but some people thought he was a gentleman, while others thought he was a villain, because everyone looked at the problem from their own position, point of view, and drew different conclusions.

古文：故趣舍合，即言忠而益亲，身疏即谋当而见疑。
现代文：所以，志趣投合，言语越忠恳则越亲近；关系疏远，计谋越恰当则越被猜忌。
English: Therefore, when the interests coincide, the more loyal the speech, the closer the relationship; when the relationship is distant, the more appropriate the strategy, the more suspicious.

古文：亲母为其子治扢秃，而血流至耳，见者以为其爱之至也；使在于继母，则过者以为嫉也。
现代文：亲生母亲为儿子治头疮，弄得鲜血流到耳朵上，看见的人认为这是母亲对儿子的关爱；若是继母做这件事，看见的人就会认为这是继母在嫉恨儿子。
English: If the biological mother treated her son's head sores and made blood flow to his ears, people who saw it would think it was the mother's love for her son; if the stepmother did it, people who saw it would think it was the stepmother who was jealous of her son.

古文：事之情一也，所从观者异也。
现代文：事情原本就是这样，但由旁观者看来就有很大的差异。
English: That's how it was, but from the outside it looks very different.

古文：从城上视牛如羊，视羊如豕，所居高也。
现代文：所以，从高处城墙上看地上的牛只有羊那么大，羊只有小猪那么大，这是由于观察者从高处往下看造成的。
English: Therefore, from the height of the city wall, the cattle on the ground are only as big as sheep, and the sheep are only as big as piglets, which is caused by the observer looking down from a height.

古文：窥面于盘水则员，于杯则隋，面形不变其故，有所员、有所隋者，所自窥之异也。今吾虽欲正身而待物，庸遽知世之所自窥我者乎！
现代文：在水盆中看脸的形状是圆的，而在杯子里的脸则是椭圆的。这是由于用来照脸的器具不同造成的。现在我想端正自身而处世待人，但不知道世人又是怎么看待我的？
English: The shape of the face in the basin is round, while the face in the cup is oval. This is due to the different devices used to see the face. Now I want to straighten myself and treat people, but I don't know how the world sees me?

古文：若转化而与世竞走，譬犹逃雨也，无之而不濡。
现代文：所以如果你想用不断改变自己的处世态度来趋附世俗，这就好像躲避下雨，实际上没有哪个地方是会不被淋湿的。
English: So if you want to attach yourself to the world by constantly changing your attitude, it's like avoiding the rain. In fact, there's no place you won't get wet.

古文：常欲在于虚，则有不能为虚矣。若夫不为虚而自虚者，此所慕而不能致也。
现代文：你经常想处于虚静的状态，可它不是靠人为的力量所能达到的；那不是靠人为力量，而是一种自然形成的虚静状态，是一般人所羡慕而难以达到的虚静状态。
English: You often want to be in a state of emptiness, but it is not achievable by human power; it is not by human power, but a naturally formed state of emptiness, a state of emptiness that is envied by ordinary people and difficult to achieve.

古文：故通于道者如车轴，不运于己，而与毂致千里，转无穷之原也。
现代文：也只有通达 道 的人才能达到这种虚静状态。所以通达 道 的人就好像车轴，自己并不运转而是随车毂的转动运行千里，运转于无穷无尽的境地。
English: Only those who are well-versed in the Way can attain this state of emptiness and stillness. Therefore, those who are well-versed in the Way are like the axle of a car, which does not move by itself, but moves with the turning of the wheel for thousands of miles, and moves in an endless state.

古文：不通于道者若迷惑，告以东西南北，所居聆聆，一曲而辟，然忽不得，复迷惑也。
现代文：而不通达 道 的人就像心神迷惑，你告诉他东西南北，他在这地方明白方向，但拐个弯进入偏僻的地方又迷惑了；这种人就像风标随风转动，一辈子为人所奴役，没有片刻的宁静。
English: But he who does not know the way is like one who is bewildered. You tell him east and west, north and south, and he knows the direction in this place, but when he turns a corner into a remote place, he is bewildered again. This kind of person is like a weather vane that turns with the wind. He is enslaved by people all his life, and there is not a moment of peace.

古文：故终身隶于人，辟若伣之见风也，无须臾之间定矣。
现代文：而圣人是与 道 融为一体，返归本性，以不变之 道体 应付万变之世界，这样也就达到免受世俗奴役的境地。
English: The sage, on the other hand, is one with the Tao, returns to his true nature, and copes with the ever-changing world with an unchanging Tao body. In this way, he achieves freedom from worldly slavery.

古文：故圣人体道反性，不化以待化，则几于免矣。治世之体易守也，其事易为也，其礼易行也，其责易偿也。
现代文：在治世，人们坚守本职岗位，它的事情也容易完成，它的礼仪也容易实施，人们间的债务也容易偿还。
English: In the reign, people stick to their posts, it is easy to accomplish things, it is easy to implement etiquette, and it is easy to repay debts between people.

古文：是以人不兼官，官不兼事，士农工商，乡别州异。
现代文：所以，一人不兼任多种官职，一官也不兼任多种事务，士农工商各行其职，在不同的领域从事不同的工作内容。
English: Therefore, one person does not hold multiple official positions, and one official does not hold multiple affairs. Officials, farmers, and businessmen each perform their duties and engage in different work contents in different fields.

古文：是故农与农言力，士与士言行，工与工言巧，商与商言数。
现代文：因此，农夫们在一起谈论劳动力之强弱，士人们在一起讨论德行的高低，工匠们在一起研究工艺技术的精巧，商人们在一起交流生意经。
English: Therefore, farmers talk about the strength and weakness of labor together, scholars discuss the level of virtue together, craftsmen study the sophistication of technology together, and merchants exchange business strategies together.

古文：是以士无遗行，农无废功，工无苦事，商无折货，各安其性，不得相干。
现代文：是时，士人没有失检的行为，农夫没有白费的劳动，工匠没有伪劣的产品，商人没有亏损的买卖，各行各业都安于本性，不得互相干扰。
English: At that time, there was no misconduct on the part of scholars, no wasted labor on the part of farmers, no shoddy products on the part of artisans, and no loss-making business on the part of merchants. All walks of life were at ease with their own nature and were not allowed to interfere with each other.

古文：故伊尹之兴土功也。修胫者使之跖镬，强脊者使之负土，眇者使之准，伛者使之涂，各有所宜，而人性齐矣。胡人便于马，越人便于舟，异形殊类，易事而悖，失处而贱，得势而贵，圣人总而用之，其数一也。
现代文：能够先知先觉、深谋远虑，这自然是人才中的杰出人物，但治世的君主不能用这样的标准去苛求人们。博闻强记、能言善辩，这同样是聪明人中的精英，这圣明的君主同样不能用这种标准去要求下属百官。
English: To be able to foresee and foresight, this is naturally the most outstanding person in the talent, but the reigning monarch can not use such a standard to demand people. Knowledgeable and eloquent, this is also the elite of smart people, this holy monarch also can not use this standard to require subordinate officials.

古文：夫先知远见，达视千里，人才之隆也，而治世不以责于民，博闻强志，口辩辞给，人智之美也，而明主不以求于下：敖世轻物，不汙于俗，士之伉行也，而治世不以为民化；神机阴闭，剞劂无迹，人巧之妙也，而治世不以为民业。故苌弘、师旷先知祸福，言无遗策，而不可与众同职也；公孙龙折辩抗辞，别同异，离坚白，不可与众同道也；北人无择非舜而自投清冷之渊，不可以为世仪；鲁般墨子以木为鸢而飞之，三日不集，而不可使为工也。
现代文：高傲自负，不和世俗同流合污，这是士人的高洁品行，但治世的君主却不能拿这样的品行去教化民众。制造连运开的神奇机械，并不留雕凿的痕迹，这是能工巧匠中的高手，但治世的君主同样不能要求所有百姓掌握这种技巧。所以苌弘、师旷，他们能预先知道祸福，提出的建议也无大失策，因而他们不可能和普通人一样做同一种工作；公孙龙能言善辩，分辨同异、分析坚白，因而他们不能和众人一样掌握同一种学说；北人无择非议指责舜的德行而自投清凉之渊，但这不能以此作为世人的榜样；鲁班、墨子用木料做成鸢鸟，并使鸢鸟在天空飞行三天三夜，但不能让他们做一般的工匠。
English: Arrogance and conceit, not mingling with the world, these are the noble qualities of the scholar, but the reigning monarch cannot use such qualities to enlighten the people. Making a magical machine that runs continuously without leaving traces of carving, this is the best of the skilled craftsmen, but the reigning monarch also cannot require all the people to master this skill. Therefore, Gonghong and Shiguang, they can know the misfortunes and blessings in advance, and the suggestions made are not a big mistake, so they cannot do the same work as ordinary people; Gongsunlong can speak well, distinguish the same and different, and analyze the solid white, so they cannot master the same doctrine as everyone

古文：放高不可及者，不可以为人量；行不可逮者，不可以为国俗。
现代文：所以高不可及的要求，不能以此作为普通民众的标准；高尚的品行，不能拿来作为一国民众的风俗。
English: Therefore, unattainable requirements cannot be used as the standard for ordinary people; high moral conduct cannot be used as the customs of a nation.

古文：夫挈轻重不失铢两，圣人弗用，而县之乎铨衡；视高下不差尺寸，明主弗任，而求之乎浣准。
现代文：那些能用手掂量物体轻重不差铢两的人，圣人也无法来任用他，而只能采用秤来衡量；那些能用眼目测物体高低不差分寸的人，明主也无法任用他，而只能采用仪器来测量。
English: Those who can use their hands to measure the weight and weight of an object cannot be appointed by the sage, but can only be measured with a scale; those who can measure the height and depth of an object with their eyes cannot be appointed by the Lord, but can only be measured with an instrument.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：人才不可专用，而度量可世传也。
现代文：因为不可能长期依赖这些有特殊才能的人，而度量仪器倒是可以世代相传和使用的。
English: Because it is impossible to rely on these people with special talents for a long time, while measuring instruments can be passed down and used from generation to generation.

古文：故国治可与愚守也，而军制可与权用也。
现代文：所以太平盛世可以靠愚钝来保持，而指挥军队打仗则要靠权变的策略来完成。
English: Therefore, peace and prosperity can be maintained by stupidity, while commanding the army to fight depends on the strategy of coup d'état.

古文：夫待騕褭、飞兔而驾之，则世莫乘车；待西施、毛嫱而为配，则终身不象矣。
现代文：如果一定要等到有了和飞兔这样的骏马才驾车，那么天下人就别想乘车了；如果一定要等到有了西施和毛嫱这样的美女才婚配，那么终身也别想成家了。
English: If you have to wait until you have a beautiful horse like Flying Rabbit before driving, then people in the world will not want to take a car; if you have to wait until you have a beautiful woman like Xi Shi and Mao Yao before getting married, then you will not want to start a family for life.

古文：燃非待古之英俊而人自足者，因所有而并用之。
现代文：所以不要指望要出现古代那样的俊才，就当前的这些人才就够了，只是要广泛网罗并充分利用即可。
English: Therefore, don't expect to see the great talents of ancient times, just the current talents are enough, but it's just a matter of extensive trapping and making full use of them.

古文：夫骐骥千里，一日而通，驽马十舍，旬亦至之。
现代文：骐骥这样的骏马能一日千里，但这千里路，一般性的马也能在数日里走完。
English: Such a fine horse can travel a thousand miles in a day, but this thousand-mile road can also be completed by an ordinary horse in a few days.

古文：由是观之，人材不足专恃，而道术可公行也。
现代文：由此看来，治理国家无须专靠特殊人才，而以 道 术治理国家则可以普遍实施长期适用。
English: From this perspective, the governance of the country does not need to rely exclusively on special talents, and the governance of the country by ethics can be universally implemented and applied for a long time.

古文：乱世之法，高为量而罪不及，重为任而罚不胜，危为禁而诛不敢。
现代文：而乱世治国的用人方法就不是这样，它将标准提得极高，并要问罪于那些达不到标准的人；它将任务定得很重，并要惩罚那些完不成任务的人；它将事情复杂化和困难化，并要诛杀那些不敢去做这些事情的人。
English: That is not the way to run a chaotic country. It sets the bar very high and blames those who don't meet it; it sets the tasks very high and punishes those who don't meet them; it makes things complicated and difficult and fights those who don't dare to do them.

古文：民困于三责，则饰智而诈上，犯邪而干免。
现代文：广大民众被上述这三种不切实际的责难弄得窘困万分，于是必然要用智巧来欺诈上面，也必然要用邪道来避免惩罚。
English: The broad masses of the people are embarrassed by the above-mentioned three impractical reproaches, so they must use cleverness to deceive the above, and they must also use evil ways to avoid punishment.

古文：故虽峭法严刑，不能禁其奸。
现代文：所以这样一来，就是有严刑峻法也无法禁止这些邪门奸诈。
English: Therefore, in this way, even if there is a severe punishment, it is impossible to prohibit these evil treacheries.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：力不足也。故谚曰： 鸟穷则噣，兽穷则触，人穷则诈。 
现代文：因为人的能力实在难以达到所定的那些标准和要求。所以谚语这样说： 鸟到穷困时会啄敌，兽到穷困时会触顶，人到穷困时会使诈。 
English: Because it is really difficult for human ability to meet the standards and requirements set, the proverb says: When the bird is poor, it will fight the enemy, when the beast is poor, it will reach the top, and when the man is poor, he will cheat.

古文：此之谓也。道德之论，譬犹日月也，江南河北不能易其指，驰骛千里不能易其处。
现代文：以道和德作为事物的规律和秩序，就好比日月行空，广至江南河北而不改变方向，驰骋千里之外而不变更行迹。
English: Taking Tao and virtue as the law and order of things, it is like the sun and the moon traveling through the sky, reaching as far as the south of the Yangtze River and the north of the Hebei River without changing their direction, and traveling thousands of miles without changing their course.

古文：趋舍礼俗，犹室宅之居也，东家谓之西家，西家谓之东家，虽皋陶为之理，不能定其处。
现代文：而人们所取舍的礼俗，就好像你所居住的住处，从东边看，它在西边，从西边看，它又在东边，是没有固定的方位，就是叫公正的法官一一皋陶来裁决，也无法确定其方位。
English: But the manners and customs that people give up are like the place where you live. If you look at it from the east, it is in the west, and if you look at it from the west, it is in the east. There is no fixed position, that is, it is for an impartial judge to adjudicate one by one, and it is impossible to determine its position.

古文：故趋舍同，诽誉在俗；意行钩，穷达在时。
现代文：所以同样的一种取舍，是得到诽谤还是得到赞誉，取决于习俗；而志向德行相同，是穷困潦倒还是腾达显赫，取决于时世。
English: So the same kind of choice, whether to be slandered or praised, depends on custom; and the same kind of aspiration, whether to be impoverished or distinguished, depends on the times.

古文：汤武之累行积善，可及也；其遭桀纣之世，天授也。
现代文：像汤武那样广积善行，这是人们都能做到的事，但他们碰到像桀纣那样的乱世而得以大显身手，这恰恰是天赐的机遇。
English: It is possible for people to accumulate good deeds like Tangwu, but it is a God-given opportunity for them to show their prowess in the face of a chaotic world like Handan.

古文：今有汤武之意，而无桀纣之时，而欲成霸王之业，亦不几矣。
现代文：如果只有汤武那种志向，无桀纣那样的乱世，要想成就除暴平天下的事业，也只能是空想。
English: If there is only the ambition of Tangwu and the chaotic world of Muxun, it can only be a fantasy to achieve the cause of eliminating violence.

古文：昔武王执戈秉钺以伐纣胜殷，搢笏杖殳以临朝。
现代文：过去武王手持戈钺，以武力讨伐纣王，并战胜殷朝建立周朝，以后便插着笏板、拿着殳杖上朝视事。
English: In the past, King Wu held a scepter in his hand and used force to fight against King Gong, and defeated the Yin Dynasty to establish the Zhou Dynasty. Later, he inserted a scepter and took a cane to see the situation.

古文：武王既没，殷民叛之。周公践东宫，履乘石，摄天子之位，负扆而朝诸侯，放蔡叔，诛管叔，克殷残商，把文王于明堂，七年而致政成王。
现代文：武王病逝后，殷遗民乘机背叛周朝，周公摄政辅佐成王，登东宫代行天子职权，背靠屏风坐在天子的宝座上接受诸侯的朝拜，流放参与叛乱的蔡叔，诛杀作乱的管叔，降服叛乱的殷民，收拾商纣王的侄子武庚，在明堂祭祀文王，并在七年后归政于成王。
English: After the death of King Wu, the Yin people took advantage of the opportunity to betray the Zhou Dynasty, the Zhou regent and assistant to King Cheng, ascended to the East Palace to act as the son of heaven, sat on the throne of the son of heaven with his back to the screen to receive the worship of the princes, exiled Uncle Cai who participated in the rebellion, Uncle Guan who fought and killed, and the Yin people who surrendered to the rebellion, cleaned up the nephew of King Shang, King Wu Geng, sacrificed King Wen in the Ming Hall, and returned to King Cheng seven years later.

古文：夫武王先武而后文，非意变也，以应时也；周公放兄诛弟，非不仁也。
现代文：周武王先是用武力而后用文治，不是志向改变了，而是为了顺应时势；周公放逐兄长诛杀兄弟，不是不仁，而是为了拯救危难中的国家。
English: Zhou Wu Wang first used force and then used civil government, not to change his aspirations, but to conform to the current situation; Zhou Gong banished his elder brother and killed his younger brother, not to be cruel, but to save the country in danger.

古文：以匡乱也。故事周于世则功成，务合于时则名立。
现代文：所以事情合于时世便能成功，行为符合时宜便能树立名声。
English: Therefore, things that are in line with the times can be successful, and actions that are in line with the times can establish a reputation.

古文：昔齐桓公合诸侯以乘车，退诛于国以斧钺；晋文公合诸侯以革车，退行于国以礼义。
现代文：过去齐桓公会合诸侯时用的文车，回到国内又用武力巩固政权；晋文公会合诸侯用的兵车，回到国内又用礼义治理国家。
English: In the past, the chariots used by the princes of the Qihuan Public Association were used to consolidate power by force when they returned home; the chariots used by the princes of the Jin Public Association were used to govern the country with courtesy when they returned home.

古文：桓公前柔而后刚，文公前刚而后柔，然而令行乎天下，权制诸侯钧者，审于势之变也。
现代文：这齐桓公先柔后刚，而晋文公先刚后柔，可他们都能做到号令天下，控制诸侯，这是因为他们能审时度势，随机应变。
English: This is because they are able to judge the situation at the right time and adapt to it at random.

古文：颜阖，鲁君欲相之，而不肯，使人以币先焉，凿培而遁之，为天下显武。
现代文：还有，鲁国的隐士颜阖，鲁国君想用他为相，颜阖不愿意，鲁君又赠给他重礼以想使他转意，但颜阖却凿穿房屋的后墙而溜之大吉，并成为天下著名的人物。
English: Moreover, Yan Xun, a hermit from Lu, Lu Guojun wanted to use him as a portrait, but Yan Xun did not want to. Lu Guojun gave him a heavy gift to make him change his mind, but Yan Xun chiseled through the back wall of the house and escaped, and became a famous person in the world.

古文：使遇商鞅、申不害，刑及三族，又况身乎！
现代文：鲁君也没有追究他的违逆行为。假使颜阖碰到商鞅和申不害这样的法家人物，必定会遭到诛灭三族的惩罚，更何况颜阖自身呢！
English: Lu Jun also did not investigate his act of disobedience. If Yan Qi encountered such legal figures as Shang Qi and Shen Niu, he would certainly be punished by the annihilation of the three tribes, not to mention Yan Qi himself!

古文：世多称古之人而高其行，并世有与同者而弗知贵也，非才下也，时弗宜也。
现代文：世人都称颂古代的圣贤，并推崇他们的德行，而对同时代也具有的这种圣贤人都不知道爱崇他们，这倒不是现代圣贤比不上古代圣贤，而是他们的才德不合时宜。
English: It is not that modern sages are inferior to ancient sages, but that their talents are out of step with the times.

古文：故六骐骥、四駃騠，以济江河，不若窾木便者，处世然也。
现代文：所以驾六匹骐骥或四匹駃騠来渡河，倒不如用一条独木舟来得便当，这是因为所处的环境决定的。
English: Therefore, it is more convenient to use a canoe to cross the river with six or four mules, which is determined by the environment.

古文：是故立功之人，简于行而谨于时。
现代文：所以能建立功绩事业的人，必定行事简约、合于时世。
English: Therefore, those who can build a career of merit must act simply and in accordance with the times.

古文：今世俗之人，以功成为贤，以胜患为智，以遭难为愚，以死节为戆，吾以为各致其所极而已。
现代文：而今的世俗观点是，以完成功业与否作为贤能的标准或尺度，以战胜祸患与否作为聪明的尺度或标准；以为遭灾的必定愚笨，认为死于节义的必定愚戆；但是我们认为以上各种人都达到了自己的目的，无所谓优劣和贤愚。
English: However, today's secular view is that whether or not one has accomplished a successful career is the standard or measure of one's virtue, and whether or not one has overcome a calamity is the standard or measure of one's wisdom; that those who have suffered calamities must be stupid, and that those who have died of righteousness must be stupid; however, we believe that all of the above-mentioned people have achieved their goals, regardless of their merits and demerits, and regardless of their wisdom.

古文：王子比干非不知箕子被发佯狂以免其身也，然而乐直行尽忠以死节，故不为也。
现代文：王子比干不是不知道如像箕子那样披头散发、装疯卖傻可以保全自己，但他就是乐意以直行尽忠来为节义献身，所以他不像箕子那样装疯卖傻。
English: It is not that Prince Bi Gan does not know that he can save himself if he acts like a mule and pretends to be mad, but he is willing to devote himself to righteousness by being loyal, so he does not pretend to be mad like a mule.

古文：伯夷、叔齐非不能受禄任官以致其功也，然而乐离世伉行以绝众，故不务也。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐不是不能接受奉禄、官职来建功立业，但他们就是乐意用高洁的品行远离尘世以绝世俗，所以他们不接受高官厚禄。
English: It's not that Bo Yi and Shu Qi can't accept rewards and official positions to make achievements, but they are willing to use their noble behavior to stay away from the world and be absolutely secular, so they don't accept high-ranking officials' rewards.

古文：许由、善卷非不能抚天下宁海内以德民也，然而羞以物滑和，故弗受也。
现代文：许由、善卷不是无能力安抚天下，使天下太平、造福于民，但他们就是羞于因外物搅乱平和的本性，所以不肯接受帝位。
English: Xu Yue and Zhan Zhuan were not incapable of pacifying the world, making the world peaceful, and benefiting the people, but they were ashamed of their peaceful nature being disturbed by external things, so they refused to accept the imperial throne.

古文：豫让、要离非不知乐家室安妻子以偷生也，然而乐推诚行，必以死主，故不留也。
现代文：豫让、要离不是不知道享受天伦之乐，让妻儿平平安安来苟且偷生，但他们就是乐意忠诚赤胆，为主人献身，所以不留恋人间生活。
English: They do not know how to enjoy the happiness of the heavenly home, let their wives and children come and go peacefully, and live secretly, but they are willing to be loyal and devoted to their masters, so they do not cherish human life.

古文：今从箕子视比干，则愚矣；从比干视箕子，则卑矣；从管、晏视伯夷，则戆矣；从伯夷视管、晏，则贪矣。
现代文：今天如果我们从箕子的角度来看比干，那么比干就显得愚蠢了；从比干的角度来看箕子，那么箕子就显得低卑了；从管仲、晏子的角度来看伯夷，那么伯夷就显得愚戆了；从伯夷的角度来看管仲和晏子，那么管仲、晏子就显得贪婪了。
English: Today, if we look at Bi Gan from the perspective of the mule, then Bi Gan will appear stupid; from the perspective of the mule, then the mule will appear inferior; from the perspective of Guanzhong and mule, Bo Yi will appear stupid; from the perspective of Bo Yi, Guanzhong and mule, then Guanzhong and mule will appear greedy.

古文：趋舍相非，嗜欲相反，而各乐其务，将谁使正之？
现代文：人们的追求、取舍不同，嗜欲爱好相反，而各自都以所做的事为欢乐，在这里又有谁能使他们改弦易辙？
English: People's pursuits and choices are different, their appetites and hobbies are opposite, and each of them is happy with what they do. Who can make them change their ways?

古文：曾子曰： 击舟水中，鸟闻之而高翔，鱼闻之而渊藏。 
现代文：又有谁能对他们所做的事定是非、别优劣？所以曾子这样说： 同是因敲击船板而发出的声音，鸟听了高飞而去，鱼听了藏入深渊。 
English: Who can say whether what they did was right or wrong, or good or bad? So Zeng Zi said: It is the same as the sound made by tapping on the board of a ship. Birds fly away when they hear it, and fish hide in the abyss when they hear it.

古文：故所趋各异，而皆得所便。
现代文：这说明行动各不相同，而为了使自己便利的目的是相同的。
English: This shows that the actions are different, but the purpose is the same, to make themselves useful.

古文：故惠子从车百乘以过孟诸，庄子见之，弃其余鱼。
现代文：所以惠施带着百辆车子经过孟诸泽时，正在钓鱼的庄子看到惠施的那副神色，把自己钓到的鱼都倒到水里去了。
English: So when Hui Shi passed through Meng Zhu Ze with a hundred carts, Zhuangzi, who was fishing, saw Hui Shi's expression and dumped all the fish he caught into the water.

古文：鹈胡饮水数斗而不足，鳝鲔人口若露而死。智伯有三晋而欲不澹，林类、荣启期衣若县衰而意不慊。
现代文：鹈胡饮水数斗都不够，而鲔只须吸入一些露水就足够了；智伯拥有三晋还不满足，林类和荣启期衣衫破烂得像蓑衣都毫无遗憾。
English: Several buckets of drinking water are not enough for the baboon, while the baboon only needs to inhale some dew is enough; Zhi Bo is not satisfied with having three Jin, and the forest and the clothes of the Rongqi period are as tattered as the clothes of the baboon.

古文：由此观之，则趣行各异，何以相非也！
现代文：由此看来，人们的追求、取舍各不相同，又有什么必要互相责难和非议呢？
English: From this perspective, people's pursuits and choices are different, and what is the need to blame and criticize each other?

古文：夫重生者不以利害己，立节者见难不苟免，贪禄者见利不顾身，而好名者非义不苟得。
现代文：看重生命的人，不会为了利益而损害自己；坚持名节操行的人，不会看到危难而苟且逃避的；贪得无厌的人，看到利益就会不顾一切；而珍爱名声的人，是不会随便取获不合道义的东西。
English: Those who value life will not harm themselves for the sake of profit; those who adhere to the etiquette will not see the danger and evade it; those who are insatiably greedy will ignore everything when they see profit; and those who cherish reputation will not casually obtain something immoral.

古文：此相为论，譬犹冰炭钩绳也，何时而合！
现代文：将这些相比较而论，真好比是炭与冰、钩和墨绳，真不知什么时候能使它们吻合相容呢？
English: To compare these is like comparing charcoal to ice, or a hook to ink. How can they ever be made compatible?

古文：若以圣人为之中，则兼覆而并之，未有可是非者也。
现代文：假使让圣人来仲裁，就有可能将此调和、兼容、并蓄、覆盖为一体，无所谓肯定此、否定彼。
English: If we allow the sage to arbitrate, it will be possible to reconcile, be compatible, be inclusive, and cover this as one. It doesn't matter if we affirm this or deny that.

古文：夫飞鸟主巢，狐狸主穴，巢者巢成而得栖焉，穴者穴成而得宿焉。
现代文：飞鸟习惯筑巢而栖息，狐狸习惯洞穴而歇宿；在这里，无论是筑巢栖息还是洞穴歇宿，都是为了找到一个归宿。
English: Birds habitually build nests to roost in, and foxes habitually roost in burrows; here, whether they build nests to roost in or burrows to roost in, it's all about finding a home.

古文：趋舍行义，亦人之所栖宿也。各乐其所安，致其所踱，谓之成人。故以道论者，总而齐之。
现代文：而社会中的人们取舍什么、行动什么，也都想找一种寄托和归宿，各人都在找一个自己乐意舒适的安身之处；而能够实现自己的愿望的人，就算是完人。所以，从 道 的角度来看万事万物，就会将它等而视之、总而齐之。
English: But people in society, no matter what they choose to give up or what they do, are also looking for a kind of sustenance and a home. Everyone is looking for a place where they can feel comfortable; and those who can realize their wishes are even considered to be perfect people. Therefore, from the perspective of the Tao, everything will be seen as equal and the same.

古文：治国之道，上无苛令，官无烦治，士无伪行，工无淫巧，其事经而不扰，其器完而不饰。
现代文：盛世太平国家的治理方法是，君王没有苛刻的法令，官吏没有烦琐的政务，士人没有虚伪的品行，工匠技艺没有淫巧的成分；事务合乎常规而不混乱，器物完美而不雕饰。
English: The governance method of a prosperous and peaceful country is that the king has no harsh laws and regulations, the officials have no cumbersome government affairs, the scholars have no hypocritical behavior, and the craftsmen's skills have no lewd elements; the affairs are in line with the routine but not chaotic, and the utensils are perfect but not carved.

古文：乱世则不然，为行者相揭以高，为礼者相矜以伪，车舆极于雕琢，器用逐于刻搂；求货者争难得以为宝，低文者处烦挠以为慧，争为佹辩，久稽而不诀，无益于治。
现代文：而乱世就不是这样。饰伪品行的人互相吹捧抬高身价，施行礼义的人互相虚伪造作；车辆极力雕琢，器物竞相刻镂；求取财物的人争抢难得之物，并把它们当作宝贝；以文辞互相诋毁的人纠缠于冗长烦琐的事中而自以为聪明。
English: But this is not the case in the chaotic world. Those who practice forgery extol and elevate each other, those who practice etiquette falsify each other; vehicles are painstakingly carved, and objects compete to be engraved; those who seek wealth compete for rare things and treat them as precious; those who slander each other with words are entangled in tedious and tedious things and think they are clever.

古文：工为奇器。历岁而后成，不周于用。故神农之法曰： 丈夫丁壮而不耕，天下有受其饥者。
现代文：官吏们互相争吵诡辩，将政务工作久拖而不处理，这些对治理国家毫无益处；工匠们处心积虑要制作奇异的器具，累月经年才完成，却不适合于使用。所以古代神农的法令这样说： 成年男子如果不从事耕种，那么天下就会有人因此而挨饿；年轻妇女如果不从事纺织，那么天下就会有人因此而挨冻。 
English: For this reason, the ancient decree of the Shennong said: "If adult men do not engage in farming, then people in the world will starve; if young women do not engage in weaving, then people in the world will freeze."

古文：妇人当年而不织，天下有受其寒者， 故身自耕，妻亲织，以为天下先。其导民也，不贵难得之货，不器无用之物。
现代文：因此神农自己亲自耕种，他的妻子亲自纺织，为天下人作出了榜样。神农教导人民，不要有意地珍贵难以得到的货物，不要过分器重无用的物件。
English: Therefore, Shennong cultivated the land himself and his wife did the weaving herself, setting an example for the world. Shennong taught the people not to intentionally treasure hard-to-get goods and not to overweigh useless objects.

古文：是故其耕不强者，无以养生；其织不强者，无以掩形；有余不足，各归其身；衣食饶溢，奸邪不生；安乐无事，而天下均平。
现代文：所以那时代男子非得努力耕种不可，否则将要饿肚子；女子非得勤奋织布不可，否则将无法遮蔽身体；有余和不足，都直接关系到每个人自身；丰衣足食，邪奸就不会产生，大家安居乐业而天下太平。
English: Therefore, in that era, men had to work hard to cultivate, otherwise they would go hungry; women had to work hard to weave cloth, otherwise they would not be able to cover their bodies; surplus and shortage were directly related to each person; rich clothing and foot food, evil traitors would not occur, everyone lived and worked in peace and the world was peaceful.

古文：故孔丘、曾参无所施其善，孟贲、成荆无所行其威。
现代文：所以太平盛世使得孔子和曾参那样的善人没有地方好行善，使得孟贲和成荆这样的勇士没有地方好显威武。
English: Therefore, the prosperous Taiping era left no place for good people like Confucius and Zeng Zang to do good deeds, and no place for warriors like Meng Yao and Cheng Jing to show their might.

古文：衰世之俗，以其知巧诈伪，饰众无用，贵远方之货，珍难得之财，不积于养生之具；浇天下之淳，析天下之朴，牿服马牛以为牢；滑乱万民，以清为浊；性命飞扬，皆乱以营；贞信漫澜，人失其情性。
现代文：而衰败的社会风俗完全不同，大家凭着智巧而弄虚作假，矫饰各种无用的器物，有意珍贵远方的奇货，珍惜难以得到的财宝，却不积聚生活必需品；淳厚的民风被破坏得乱七八糟，纯朴的民性被破坏得支离破碎，牛马被关进栏圈后也没人管理；百姓被弄得心神不定，是非被颠倒，清澈变混浊，人们就像风中蓬草，被刮得飞扬躁乱；忠诚信义的品德流失殆尽，人也跟着失去善良本性。
English: On the other hand, the social customs of the decadent society are completely different. People use their ingenuity to deceive and fake, decorate all kinds of useless utensils, intentionally precious and exotic goods, cherish hard-to-get treasures, but do not accumulate necessities of life; the honest folk customs have been destroyed to chaos, the pure and simple folk nature has been destroyed to fragmentation, and there is no one to manage the cattle and horses after they are locked in the corral; the people have been made to be unsettled, the rights and wrongs have been reversed, and the clarity has become confused. People are like puff grass in the wind, and they have been blown

古文：于是，乃有翡翠犀象、黼黼文章以乱其目，刍豢黍梁、荆吴芬馨以嚂其口，钟鼓管萧丝竹金石以淫其耳，趋舍行义、礼节谤议以营其心。
现代文：于是社会出现了另一幅情景，用翡翠、犀牛角、象牙和美丽的花纹图案来迷惑人的眼睛；以牛羊犬猪、面米细粮和各种风味小吃来满足人的食欲；用钟鼓管箫、丝竹金石等乐器来淫荡人的耳朵；又以讲究礼仪形式、各种流言蜚语来搅乱人的心神。
English: As a result, another scene appeared in society, using jade, rhinoceros horn, ivory and beautiful flower patterns to confuse people's eyes; satisfying people's appetites with cattle, sheep, dogs and pigs, noodles, rice noodles and various snacks; using musical instruments such as bells, drums, pipes, gongs, silk, bamboo and precious stones to seduce people's ears; and paying attention to etiquette forms and various gossips to disturb people's minds.

古文：于是百姓糜沸豪乱，暮行逐利，烦挐浇浅，法与义相非，行与利相反，虽十管仲，弗能治也。
现代文：这样，百姓被搅得纷扰狂乱，日夜为利益奔波追逐，人变得烦躁浅薄，礼法和道义相违，德行和利益冲突，这样的社会，即使有十个管仲也无法治理好。
English: In this way, the people are stirred up into a frenzy, chasing profits day and night, people become irritable and shallow, etiquette and morality contradict each other, and morality and interests conflict. Such a society cannot be governed well even if there are ten regulators.

古文：且富人则车舆衣纂锦，马饰傅旄象，帷幕茵席，绮绣條组，青黄相错，不可为象。
现代文：富人的车辆外用彩绣的车衣围裹，马则用旄牛尾和象牙作装饰，车上的帷幕和褥垫都配用绣绘丝织品，各种色彩交错着，无法形容它的华丽。
English: The rich man's car is covered with embroidered car coats, the horse is decorated with braided cow's tail and ivory, and the curtains and cushions on the car are equipped with embroidered silk fabrics. Various colors are intertwined, and it is impossible to describe its splendor.

古文：贫人则夏被褐带索，含菽饮水以充肠，以支暑热，冬则羊裘解札，短褐不掩形，而炀灶口。
现代文：而穷人夏天穿着粗布短衣，索着粗麻绳，吃豆类食品，喝凉水来填饱肚子，以便能熬过酷暑；冬天则穿着破烂的羊皮衣，粗布衣袍无法遮蔽身体，只得蹲在灶炉口取暖。
English: In the summer, the poor wear coarse cloth shorts with coarse hemp ropes, eat beans and drink cold water to fill their stomachs so that they can survive the heat; in the winter, they wear tattered sheepskin coats, coarse cloth robes cannot cover their bodies, and they have to squat at the stove to keep warm.

古文：故其为编户齐民无以异，然贫富之相去也，犹人君与仆虏，不足以论之。
现代文：所以同是编入户籍的人，会出现如此大的贫富差别，就如同君主和仆人的差别，这真的使人无法比较和言说。
English: Therefore, the same person who is registered in the household will have such a big difference between the rich and the poor, just like the difference between the monarch and the servant, which really makes it impossible to compare and say.

古文：夫乘奇技、伪邪施者，自足乎世之间；守正修理不苟得者，不免乎饥寒之患；而欲民之去未反本，由是发其原而壅其流也。
现代文：那些凭着奇异技巧、伪诈歪邪门道的人，却能在世上过着富裕的日子；而那些品行正道、不肯苟且得利的人，却免不了饥寒的灾患，在这种社会不公平的情况下，要想使人民摒弃末业、返归农业根本，这就像掘开了水源却又堵塞了水流一样。
English: Those who are able to live a prosperous life in the world by virtue of their extraordinary skills, deception, and crooked ways, while those who are virtuous and do not want to seek profit are not immune to the scourge of hunger and cold. Under such a situation of social injustice, trying to make people abandon their livelihoods and return to the fundamentals of agriculture is like digging up a water source and blocking the flow of water.

古文：夫雕琢刻镂，伤农事者也。锦绣纂组，害女工者也。
现代文：社会有意导向雕琢刻镂，必然迫使农民弃农从工，妨碍了农业生产；社会讲究服饰秀美，必然致使妇女精于刺绣，也必然妨碍了一般意义上的纺织业。
English: The society's intentional direction of engraving and carving inevitably forced farmers to abandon farming and work, hindering agricultural production; the society's emphasis on beautiful clothing inevitably caused women to be good at embroidery, and also inevitably hindered the textile industry in a general sense.

古文：农事废，女工伤，则饥之本而寒之原也。
现代文：这农事荒废、纺织受损，必然会有饥寒出现。
English: This agricultural wasteland, textile damage, there will inevitably be cold and hunger.

古文：夫饥寒并至，能不犯法干诛者，古今之未闻也。
现代文：饥寒一旦降临，人们能不触犯法令和禁令，这是从古到今都没有听说过的事。
English: It is unheard of in ancient times that people could go hungry and cold without violating laws and prohibitions.

古文：故仕鄙在时不在行，利害在命不在智。
现代文：所以说人的仁或鄙取决于时势而不取决于个人行为，人得利或受害取决于天命而不取决于人的智力。
English: Therefore, it is said that people's benevolence or meanness depends on the current situation and not on personal behavior, and people's benefit or harm depends on the fate of heaven and not on people's intelligence.

古文：夫败军之卒，勇武遁逃，将不能止也；胜军之陈，怯者死行，惧不能走也。
现代文：败军中的士卒，一旦败下阵来，连勇敢的也跟着败逃，这时将领统帅怎么制止都制止不了；胜军的队伍，一旦获胜，连胆怯的也会跟着冲锋陷阵，拼死前进，生怕赶不上趟。
English: The soldiers of the defeated army, once defeated, even the brave will flee with the defeat, at this time, the generals and commanders can not be stopped; the winning team, once victorious, even the timid will follow the charge, desperately advance, for fear of not being able to catch up.

古文：故江河决，沉一乡，父子兄弟相遗而走，争升陵孤、上高丘，轻足先升，不能相顾也。世乐志平，见邻国之人溺，尚犹哀之，又况亲戚乎！
现代文：所以江河决堤，一乡的父子兄弟弃亲人而不顾，各自逃命，争先恐后跑上高坡山丘，腿脚灵便的先上去，也不顾别人；盛世太平的时候，人们心平气和，看到邻国的人溺水，尚且同情相助，更何况是自己的亲人溺水呢！
English: That is why rivers burst their banks, and fathers, sons and brothers in one village abandoned their relatives and fled for their lives, scrambling up steep hills, running ahead of everyone, regardless of others. In times of peace and prosperity, people are at peace, and when they see people from neighboring countries drowning, they still sympathize and help, let alone their own relatives drowning!

古文：故身安则恩及邻国，志为之灭；身危则忘其亲戚。而入不能解也。
现代文：所以由此可见，自身安稳，恩情就会施及邻国，躁乱的自私心态也会随之消失；反之如自身处在危难之中，就会连亲人都不顾，外人就更不可能去帮助解救了。
English: Therefore, it can be seen from this that if you are stable, you will be kind to your neighbors, and the restless selfish mentality will disappear; on the other hand, if you are in danger, you will not even care about your relatives, and it will be even more impossible for outsiders to help rescue you.

古文：游者不能拯溺，手足有所急也。
现代文：正在忙于游水的人是不可能去解救溺水的人，因为他自己的手脚都忙于划水，没有空闲时间。
English: It is impossible for a person who is busy swimming to rescue a drowning person, because his own hands and feet are busy paddling and have no free time.

古文：灼者不能救人，身体有所痛也。
现代文：被火灼伤的人是不可能去救火的，因为他自己受伤疼痛万分。
English: It is impossible for a person who has been burned by fire to go and put out the fire, because he himself is injured and in great pain.

古文：夫民有余即让，不足则争，让则礼义生，争则暴乱起。
现代文：由此推出，人民丰衣足食就会互相谦让，而人民衣食不足就会互相争抢。互相谦让则礼义产生，互相争抢则暴乱兴起。
English: From this it follows that when the people are well-fed and well-clothed, they will make allowances for each other, but when the people are poorly fed and well-clothed, they will fight with each other. When people make allowances for each other, politeness will arise, and when they fight with each other, riots will arise.

古文：扣门求水，莫弗与者，所饶足也。
现代文：过路人敲门讨水喝，主人没有不给的，因为有的是水。
English: Passers-by knock on the door to ask for water to drink, but the owner does not refuse, because there is plenty of water.

古文：林中不卖薪，湖上不鬻鱼，所有余也。
现代文：在山林中柴薪难以出售，在湖区鱼虾不易出让，因为这种地方有的是这类东西。
English: It is difficult to sell firewood in the mountains and forests, and it is not easy to sell fish and shrimp in the lake area, because there are many such things in this place.

古文：故物丰则欲省，求澹则争止。
现代文：所以说物质丰富了，人们的贪欲会减省；要求得到满足，争夺的事就会止息。
English: Therefore, it is said that when material wealth is abundant, people's greed will be reduced; when demands are satisfied, competition will cease.

古文：秦王之时，或人葅子，利不足也。刘氏持政，独夫收孤，财有余也。
现代文：秦始皇时代，有人宰食自己的儿女，这是因为物财不足；当今刘家执政，独身男子也能收养孤儿，这是因为财物富裕。
English: In the era of Qin Shi Huang, some people sacrificed and ate their own children, this was due to lack of wealth; today, the Liu family is in power, and single men can also adopt orphans, this is due to wealth.

古文：故世治则小人守政，而利不能诱也。世乱则君子为奸，而法弗能禁也。
现代文：所以，天下太平，小人也能规规矩矩过日子，因为没有什么物质利益能驱动他去做坏事；但如世道混乱，君子都会做越轨之事、犯法之事，这时法令也无法制止他。
English: Therefore, when the world is peaceful, the villain can also live a normal life, because there is no material benefit that can drive him to do bad things; but when the world is chaotic, the gentleman will do things that are deviant and illegal, and then the law cannot stop him.

