古文：宋子曰：玉韫山辉，珠涵水媚，此理诚然乎哉，抑意逆之说也？
现代文：宋先生说：藏蕴玉石的山总是光辉四溢，涵养珍珠的水也是明媚秀丽，这其中的道理究竟是本来如此呢，还是人们的主观推测？
English: Mr. Song said: The mountain that contains jade is always radiant, and the water that contains pearls is also bright and beautiful. Is the reason for this really so, or is it people's subjective speculation?

古文：大凡天地生物，光明者昏浊之反，滋润者枯涩之仇，贵在此则贱在彼矣。
现代文：凡是由天地自然化生的事物之中，总是光明与混浊相反，滋润与枯涩对立，在这里是稀罕的东西往往在另一个地方就很平常。
English: In all things that are born naturally from heaven and earth, there is always light as opposed to darkness, moisture as opposed to dryness, and what is rare here is often common in another place.

古文：合浦、于阗行程相去二万里，珠雄于此，玉峙于彼，无胫而来，以宠爱人寰之中，而辉煌廊庙之上，使中华无端宝藏折节而推上坐焉。
现代文：广西合浦与新疆和田，相距约两万里，在这边有珍珠称雄，在那里有玉石傲立，但都很快就聚集过来，在人世间受到宠爱，在朝廷上焕发出辉煌的光彩。这就使得全国各地无尽的宝藏都降低了身价而把珠玉推上宝物的首位。
English: Guangxi's Hepu and Xinjiang's Wada are separated by about 20,000 miles. On one side, pearls reign supreme, and on the other, jade stands proud. However, they are all quickly gathered together, loved by the world and shining brilliantly at the imperial court. This has made the endless treasures across the country lower their value and push the gems to the top of the treasure.

古文：岂中国辉山、媚水者，萃在人身，而天地菁华止有此数哉？
现代文：这难道是中原地区的山光水媚全都聚集在人身上了，而天地之间大自然的精华难道就只有珠玉这两种吗？
English: Could it be that the beauty of the scenery in the Central Plains is all concentrated in the human body, while the essence of nature between heaven and earth is only the two kinds of jewels?

古文：○珠
现代文：珠
English: Beads

古文：凡珍珠必产蚌腹，映月成胎，经年最久，乃为至宝。
现代文：珍珠一定是出产自蚌腹内，映照着月光而逐渐孕育成形，经过很多年后，才能成为宝物。
English: Pearls must be produced in the belly of a dragonfly, reflected in the moonlight and gradually growing into shape, after many years, to become a treasure.

古文：其云蛇蝮、龙颔、鲛皮有珠者，妄也。
现代文：至于传说在蛇的腹内、龙的下颔及鲨鱼的皮中有珍珠，这些说法都是错误的。
English: As for the legends that there are pearls in the belly of a snake, in the jaws of a dragon, and in the skin of a shark, these are all false.

古文：凡中国珠必产雷、廉二池。
现代文：中国的珍珠必定出产在广东海康和广西合浦这两个 珠池 里。
English: China's pearls must be produced in the two pearl pools of Guangdong Haikang and Guangxi Hapu.

古文：三代以前，淮扬亦南国地，得珠稍近《禹贡》 淮夷珠 ，或后互市之便，非必责其土产也。
现代文：在夏、商、周三代以前，淮安、扬州一带对于中原来说也位于南部，得到的珠子比较接近《尚书·禹贡》中所记载的珠，或许只是从互市上交易得来的，不一定是当地出产的。
English: Before the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, the Huai'an and Yangzhou areas were also located in the south of the Central Plains, and the beads obtained were relatively close to the beads recorded in "Shang Shu · Yugong." They may have only been traded on the market, not necessarily produced locally.

古文：金采蒲里路，元采杨村直沽口，皆传记相承之妄，何尝得珠。
现代文：宋代金人采自东北黑龙江克东县乌裕尔河一带，元代采自河北武清到天津大沽口一带的种种说法，都只是误传，这些地方什么时候采得过珍珠呢？
English: The various theories that the gold of the Song Dynasty was mined from the area around the Uyur River in Kedong County, Heilongjiang Province in the northeast, and that the gold of the Yuan Dynasty was mined from the area around the Wuching River in Hebei Province to the mouth of the Daxing River in Tianjin, are just misinformation. When were pearls ever mined in these places?

古文：至云忽吕古江出珠，则夷地，非中国也。
现代文：至于说忽吕古江产珠，那则是少数民族地区，而不是中原地区了。
English: As far as the Pearl River is concerned, it is the ethnic minority areas, not the Central Plains, that produce pearls.

古文：凡蚌孕珠，乃无质而生质。
现代文：从蚌中孕育出珍珠，是一个从无到有的过程。
English: It is a process from scratch to create pearls from cocoons.

古文：他物形小而居水族者，吞噬弘多，寿以不永。
现代文：其他形体小的水生动物，多因天敌太多而被吞噬掉了，所以寿命都不长。
English: Other small-bodied aquatic animals are mostly swallowed up by too many natural enemies, so they do not live long.

古文：蚌则环包坚甲，无隙可投，即吞腹，囫囵不能消化，故独得百年千年，成就无价之宝也。
现代文：蚌却因为有其坚硬的外壳包裹着，天敌没有空子可以钻，即便蚌被吞咽到肚子里，也是囫囵吞枣而不容易被消化掉，所以蚌的寿命很长，也就有了形成无价之宝的可能。
English: However, because the earthworm is wrapped in its hard shell, there is no gap for the natural enemy to drill. Even if the earthworm is swallowed into the stomach, it is the earthworm that swallows the jujube and is not easily digested. Therefore, the life of the earthworm is very long, and there is a possibility of forming a priceless treasure.

古文：凡蚌孕珠，即千仞水底，一逢圆月中天，即开甲仰照，取月精以成其魄。
现代文：蚌孕育珍珠是在很深的水底下，每逢圆月高悬夜空的时候，就打开贝壳接受月光照耀，吸取月光的精华，化为珍珠的形魄。
English: Pearls are incubated under deep water. Every time the full moon hangs high in the night sky, the shell is opened to receive the moonlight, absorbing the essence of the moonlight and transforming into a pearl.

古文：中秋月明，则老蚌犹喜甚。
现代文：尤其是中秋月圆的时候，老蚌就会格外高兴。
English: In particular, when the moon is full in mid-autumn, Laotians will be particularly happy.

古文：若彻晓无云，则随月东升西没，转侧其身而映照之。
现代文：如果通宵无云，它就随着月亮的东升西沉而不断转动它的身体以获取月光的照耀。
English: If there are no clouds all night, it will constantly rotate its body with the rising and setting of the moon to get the shine of moonlight.

古文：他海滨无珠者，潮汐震撼，蚌无安身静存之地也。
现代文：也有些海滨不产珍珠，是因为当地潮汐涨落波涌得过于厉害，蚌没有藏身和静养之地的缘故。
English: Some coasts do not produce pearls, because the local tides are too strong, and the clams have no place to hide or rest.

古文：凡廉州池自乌泥、独揽沙至于青鸾，可百八十里。
现代文：广西合浦的珠池从乌泥池、独揽沙池到青莺池，大约有一百八十里远。
English: Zhuchi Pond in Hepu, Guangxi, is about 180 miles away from Wudi Pond and Duobang Sand Pond to Qingyao Pond.

古文：雷州池自对乐岛斜望石城界，可百五十里。
现代文：广东海康的珠池从乐岛到石城界，总共约有一百五十里。
English: The Pearl Pool of Guangdong Haikang stretches from Leshima to Shichengye, a total of about 150 miles.

古文：户采珠每岁必以三月，时牲杀祭海神，极其虔敬。
现代文：这些地方的水上居民采集珍珠，每年必定是在三月间，到时候还宰杀牲畜来祭祀海神，显得非常虔诚恭敬。
English: The aquatic inhabitants of these places collect pearls, every year certainly in March, and at that time they also slaughter cattle to worship the sea god, appearing very pious and respectful.

古文：户生啖海腥，入水能视水色，知蛟龙所在，则不敢侵犯。
现代文：他们能生吃海腥，在水中也能看透水色，知道蛟龙藏身的地方，于是不敢前去侵犯。
English: They can eat sea urchins raw, can see through the water in the water, and know where the dragon is hiding, so they do not dare to encroach.

古文：凡采珠舶，其制视他舟横阔而圆，多载草荐于上。
现代文：采珠船比其他的船要宽和圆一些，船上装载有许多草垫子。
English: The pearling boat is wider and rounder than the other boats, and it is loaded with a lot of grass mats.

古文：经过水漩，则掷荐投之，舟乃无恙。
现代文：每当经过有旋涡的海面时，就把草垫子抛下去，这样船就能安全地驶过。
English: Whenever passing through swirling waters, throw down the grass mats so that the boat can pass safely.

古文：舟中以长绳系没人腰，携篮投水。
现代文：采珠人在船上先用一条长绳绑住腰部，然后带着篮子潜入水里。
English: On the boat, the pearler first ties a long rope around his waist, and then dives into the water with a basket.

古文：凡没人以锡造弯环空管，其本缺处对掩没人口鼻，令舒透呼吸于中，别以熟皮包络耳项之际。极深者至四五百尺，拾蚌篮中。
现代文：潜水前还要用一种锡做的弯环空管将口鼻罩住，并将罩子的软皮带包缠在耳项之间，以便于呼吸。有的最深能潜到水下四五百尺，将蚌捡回到篮里。
English: Before diving, they also cover the mouth and nose of the cormorant with a kind of bent ring hollow tube made of tin, and wrap the soft belt of the hood between the ear loops to facilitate breathing. Some can dive to a depth of four or five hundred feet and pick up the cormorant back into the basket.

古文：气逼则撼绳，其上急提引上，无命者或葬鱼腹。
现代文：呼吸困难时就摇绳子，船上的人便赶快把他拉上来，命薄的人也有的会葬身鱼腹。
English: When he has difficulty breathing, he shakes the rope, and the people on the boat quickly pull him up. Some people who are desperate will die in the belly of the fish.

古文：凡没人出水，煮热毳急覆之，缓则寒栗死。
现代文：潜水的人在出水之后，要立即用煮热了的毛皮织物盖上，太迟了的话人就会被冻死。
English: When a diver comes out of the water, he must immediately cover it with a boiled fur cloth. If he is too late, he will freeze to death.

古文：宋朝李招讨设法以为耩，最后木柱扳口，两角坠石，用麻绳作兜如囊状。
现代文：宋朝有一位姓李的招讨官还发明了一种采珠网兜，他想办法做了一种齿耙形状的铁器，底部横放木棍用以封住网口，两角坠上石头沉底，四周围上如同布袋子的麻绳网兜，将牵绳绑缚在船的两侧，借着风力张开风帆，继而兜取珠贝。
English: In the Song Dynasty, a recruiting officer surnamed Li also invented a pearl-diving net bag. He tried to make an iron tool in the shape of a gear, with a wooden stick placed horizontally at the bottom to seal the net mouth, the two corners falling on a stone bottom, and a hemp rope net bag like a cloth bag around the four corners. The rope was tied to both sides of the ship, and the sail was opened by the wind, and then the bag was taken.

古文：绳系舶两傍，乘风扬帆而兜取之，然亦有漂溺之患。今户两法并用之。
现代文：这种采珠的办法还有漂失和沉没的危险。现在，水上采珠的居民上述两种方法同时采用。
English: This method of collecting pearls also involves the risk of drifting and sinking. Currently, residents who collect pearls on the water use both of these methods simultaneously.

古文：凡珠在蚌，如玉在璞。
现代文：珍珠生长在蚌的腹内，就像玉生在璞石中一样。
English: The pearl grows in the belly of the dragonfly, just as the jade grows in the oyster.

古文：初不识其贵贱，剖取而识之。
现代文：开始时分不出高低贵贱，等到将它剖开后才知道里面究竟有没有珠子。
English: At the beginning, you can't tell the difference between high and low. It's only when you cut it open that you find out whether there are any beads inside.

古文：自五分至一寸一分经者为大品。
现代文：周长从五分到一寸五分的就算是大珠。
English: Even if the circumference is from a fifth to a fifth of an inch, it is a large bead.

古文：小平似覆釜，一边光彩微似镀金者，此名珠，其值一颗千金矣。
现代文：其中有一种大珠，并不是很完整的圆形，像个倒放的锅一样，一边光彩略微像镀了金似的，名叫珰珠，每一颗都价值千金。
English: Among them, there is a large bead, not a very complete round, like an upside-down pot, while the luster is slightly gold-plated, called the pearl, each one is worth a thousand gold.

古文：古来 明月 、 夜光 ，即此便是。
现代文：这便是过去人们所传说的 明月珠 和 夜光珠 。
English: This is the Pearl of the Moon and the Pearl of the Night that people used to talk about in the past.

古文：白昼晴明，檐下看有光一线闪烁不定， 夜光 乃其美号，非真有昏夜放光之珠也。
现代文：白天天气晴朗的时候，在屋檐下能看见它有一线光芒闪烁不定， 夜光 只不过是对它的赞美之辞，并不是真的能在黑夜中发光。
English: During the day, when the weather is fine, it can be seen under the eaves with a ray of light twinkling, night light is just a compliment to it, it is not really able to shine in the dark.

古文：次则走珠，置平底盘中，圆转无定歇，价亦与珠相仿。
现代文：其次便是走珠，放在平底的盘子里，它就会自己滚动不停止，价值与珰珠差不多。
English: Next is the walking bead, placed in a flat plate, it will roll on its own without stopping, the value is similar to the enamel bead.

古文：次则滑珠，色光而形不甚圆。
现代文：再次的就是滑珠，色泽光亮，形状不是很圆。
English: Once again, it is a gliding bead, the color is bright, and the shape is not very round.

古文：次则累珠，次官雨珠，次税珠，次葱符珠。
现代文：再次的是螺蚵珠、官雨珠、税珠、葱符珠等。
English: The next is the mother-of-pearl bead, the official rain bead, the tax bead, the onion bead and so on.

古文：幼珠如粱粟，常珠如豌豆。
现代文：粒小的珠像小米粒儿，普通的珠像豌豆儿。
English: The small beads look like grains of millet, and the ordinary beads look like peas.

古文：卑而碎者曰玑。
现代文：低劣而破碎的珠叫做玑。
English: The inferior and broken beads are called cormorants.

古文：自夜光至于碎玑，譬均一人身而王公至于氓隶也。
现代文：从夜光珠到碎玑，就好比同样的人却分成从王公到奴隶几个不同等级一样。
English: From glow-in-the-dark beads to crumbs, it's as if the same people are divided into several different classes, from princes to slaves.

古文：凡珠生止有此数，采取太频，则其生不继。
现代文：珍珠自然情况下生产的数量有限，采得太频繁，珠的产量就会跟不上。
English: The number of pearls produced under natural conditions is limited. If they are harvested too frequently, the production of pearls will not keep up.

古文：经数十年不采，则蚌乃安其身，繁其子孙而广孕宝质。
现代文：如果几十年不采，那么蚌可以安身繁殖后代，孕珠也就多了。
English: If they are not harvested for decades, the earthworms can reproduce themselves, and the number of pregnant eels will increase.

古文：所谓珠徙珠还，此煞定死谱，非真有清官感召也。
现代文：所谓 珠去而复还 ，这其实是取决于珍珠固有的消长规律，并不是真有什么 清官 感召之类的神迹。
English: The so-called "pearl going and coming back" actually depends on the inherent law of growth and decay of pearls, and is not really some kind of miracle inspired by the emperor.

古文：○宝
现代文：宝
English: Treasure

古文：凡宝石皆出井中，西番诸域最盛，中国惟出云南金齿卫与丽江两处。
现代文：宝石都产自矿井中，其产地以我国西部地区新疆一带为最多。中原地区就只有云南金齿卫和丽江两个地方出产宝石。
English: Gemstones are all produced in mines, with the western region of China, Xinjiang, being the largest producer. In the Central Plains, only two places, Jinzuwei in Yunnan and Lijiang, produce gemstones.

古文：凡宝石自大至小，皆有石床包其外，如玉之有璞。
现代文：宝石不论大小，外面都有石床包裹，就像玉被璞石包住一样。
English: Gems, no matter how big or small, have a stone bed wrapped around the outside, just like a jade is wrapped around a flint.

古文：金银必积土其上，韫结乃成，而宝则不然，从井底直透上空，取日精月华之气而就，故生质有光明。
现代文：金银都是在土层底下经过恒久的变化而形成的。但宝石却不是这样，它是从井底直接面对天空，吸取日月的精华而形成的，因此能够闪烁光彩。
English: Gold and silver are both formed under the soil layer through permanent changes. However, this is not the case with gemstones. They are formed from the bottom of the well directly facing the sky, absorbing the essence of the sun and the moon, and therefore able to sparkle.

古文：如玉产峻湍，珠孕水底，其义一也。
现代文：这跟玉产自湍流之中，珠孕育在深渊水底的道理是相同的。
English: This is the same principle as gems are born from turbulent currents and pearls are nurtured at the bottom of the abyss.

古文：凡产宝之井即极深无水，此乾坤派设机关。
现代文：出产宝石的矿井，即便很深，其中也是没有水的，这是大自然的刻意安排。
English: The mines that produce gems, even if they are very deep, have no water in them, which is a deliberate arrangement of nature.

古文：但其中宝气如雾，氤氲井中，人久食其气多致死。
现代文：但井中有宝气就像雾一样地弥漫着，这种宝气人呼吸的时间久了多数都会致命。
English: However, there is a precious gas in the well that pervades the well like a mist, and breathing this precious gas for a long period of time is fatal for most people.

古文：故采宝之人，或结十数为群，入井者得其半，而井上众人共得其半也。
现代文：因此，采集宝石的人通常是十多个人一起合伙，下井的人分得一半宝石，井上的人分得另一半宝石。
English: As a result, more than ten people usually work together to collect the gems. The person who goes down the well gets half of the gems, and the person who goes up the well gets the other half.

古文：下井人以长绳系腰，腰带叉口袋两条，及泉近宝石，随手疾拾入袋。
现代文：下井的人用长绳绑住腰，腰间系两个叉口袋，到井底有宝石的地方，随手将宝石赶快装入袋内。
English: The man who went down the well tied his waist with a long rope, and tied two forked pockets around his waist. When he got to the bottom of the well, where there were jewels, he quickly put the jewels into the bag.

古文：腰带一巨铃，宝气逼不得过，则急摇其铃，井上人引ㄌ提上，其人即无恙，然已昏瞢。
现代文：腰间系一个大铃铛，一旦宝气逼得人承受不住的时候，就急忙摇晃铃铛，井上的人就立即拉粗绳把他提上来。这时，人即便没有生命危险，但也已经昏迷不醒了。
English: A large bell is tied around his waist, and as soon as the gas pressure becomes unbearable, the bell is quickly rung, and Inoue's men immediately pull a thick rope to lift him up. At this time, even if there is no danger to his life, he is already unconscious.

古文：止与白滚汤入口解散，三日之内不得进食粮，然后调理平复。
现代文：只能往他嘴里灌一些白开水用来解救，三天内都不能吃东西，然后再慢慢加以调理康复。
English: The only way to save him was to pour some boiled water into his mouth. He couldn't eat for three days, and then he was slowly conditioned and recovered.

古文：其袋内石，大者如碗，中者如拳，小者如豆，总不晓其中何等色。
现代文：口袋里的宝石，有的大得像碗，中等的像拳头，小的像豆子，但从表面上看不出里面是什么样子。
English: Some of the jewels in my pocket are as big as bowls, medium-sized ones are like fists, and small ones are like beans, but you can't see what's inside from the outside.

古文：付与琢工钅虑错解开，然后知其为何等色也。属红黄种类者，为猫精、羯芽、星汉砂、琥珀、木难、酒黄、喇子。
现代文：交给琢工锉开后，才知道是什么宝石。属于红色和黄色的宝石有：猫精、靺羯芽、星汉砂、琥珀、木难、酒黄、喇子等。
English: Only after they have been handed over to the carver can they find out what kind of gems they are. The gems that belong to the red and yellow stones are: cat essence, alfalfa buds, star sand, amber, wood, wine yellow, lazo and so on.

古文：猫精黄而微带红。
现代文：猫精石是黄色而稍带些红色。
English: Cat's claw is yellow with a hint of red.

古文：琥珀最贵者名曰红而微带黑，然昼见则黑，灯光下则红甚也。
现代文：最贵的琥珀叫瑿，红中而微带黑色。但在白天看起来却是黑色的，在灯光下看起来却很红。
English: The most expensive amber is known as ambergris, which is medium red with a slight black tinge. However, it looks black during the day, but looks very red in the light.

古文：木难纯黄色，喇子纯红。
现代文：木难纯属黄色，喇子纯属红色。
English: The tree is pure yellow, and the dragonfly is pure red.

古文：前代何妄人，于松树注茯苓，又注琥珀，可笑也。
现代文：从前不知哪个随口妄言的人在 松树 条目下加注茯苓，又注释为琥珀，真是浅薄可笑！
English: Once upon a time, I don't know which random person added  under the pine tree entry, and also annotated it as amber, which is really shallow and ridiculous!

古文：属青绿种类者，为瑟瑟珠、且母绿、鸦鹘石、空青之类。
现代文：属于蓝色和绿色的宝石有：瑟瑟珠、祖母绿、鸦鹘石、空青等。
English: Blue and green gemstones include: jade, emerald, corundum, azure, etc.

古文：至玫瑰一种如黄豆、绿豆大者，则红、碧、青、黄数色皆具。
现代文：至于玫瑰宝石，则像黄豆或绿豆大小，红色、绿色、蓝色、黄色，各色俱全。
English: As for rose gems, they are the size of soybeans or mung beans, red, green, blue, yellow, all colors.

古文：宝石有玫瑰，如珠之有玑也。
现代文：宝石中有玫瑰，就像珠中有玑一样。
English: There are roses in jewels, just as there are thistles in beads.

古文：星汉砂以上，犹有煮海金丹。
现代文：比星汉砂高一级的，还有一种名为煮海金丹的。
English: There is also a kind of sea cucumber called boiled sea anemone, which is one level higher than star anemone.

古文：此等皆西番产，亦间气出。滇中井所无。
现代文：这些宝石都出产自我国的西部地区，偶然也有随着宝气而出现的，云南中部的矿井中并不出产这类宝石。
English: These gems are all produced in the western region of our country, and occasionally appear with the precious gas. The mines in central Yunnan do not produce such gems.

古文：时人伪造者，唯琥珀易假。
现代文：现在的人们伪造宝石，只有琥珀最容易造假。
English: Nowadays, people forge precious stones, but amber is the easiest to forge.

古文：高者煮化硫黄，低者以殷红汁料煮入牛羊明角，映照红赤隐然，今亦最易辨认。
现代文：高明的造假者用硫黄熬煮，手段低劣的用黑红色的染料煮熬牛角、羊角胶，映照之下隐约可见红光，但现在看来也最容易辨认。
English: Skillful counterfeiters use sulfur to boil, and inferior means use black and red dyes to boil horns and horn glue. Under the reflection, red light is faintly visible, but now it seems to be the easiest to identify.

古文：至引灯草，原惑人之说，凡物借人气能引拾轻芥也。
现代文：至于说琥珀能够吸引小草，那是骗人的说法，物体只有借助人的气息才能吸引轻微的东西。
English: As for amber being able to attract grass, that's a lie. Objects can only attract light things with the help of a person's breath.

古文：自来《本草》陋妄，删去毋使灾木。
现代文：从《神农本草经》开始就有不少荒诞错漏之处传世，这些都应当删去，省得浪费雕版刻印书的木料。
English: Since the beginning of the Shennongbon Cao Jing, there have been many absurd errors and omissions passed down to the next generation. These should all be deleted to avoid wasting the wood of the engraved book.

古文：○玉
现代文：玉
English: Tamaso

古文：凡玉入中国，贵重用者尽出于阗、葱岭。
现代文：贩运到中原内地的玉，贵重的都出在于阗汉代时西域的一个地名，后代叫别失八里，或属于赤斤蒙古，具体名称未详的葱岭。
English: The precious jade that was trafficked to the inland of the Central Plains all originated from a place name in the western region during the Han Dynasty. Its descendants were called "Beipu Baili" or "Jiuling," which belonged to the Mongolian region of "Chakjin" and whose specific name is unknown.

古文：所谓蓝田，即葱岭出玉别地名，而后世误以为西安之蓝田也。
现代文：所谓蓝田，是出玉的葱岭的另一地名，而后世误以为是西安附近的蓝田。
English: The so-called Lantian is another place name of the emerald green hills, but later generations mistakenly thought it was Lantian near Xi'an.

古文：其岭水发源名阿耨山，至葱岭分界两河，一曰白玉河，一曰绿玉河。
现代文：葱岭的河水发源于阿耨山，流到葱岭后分为两条河，一曰白玉河，一曰绿玉河。
English: The water of the Qianling River originates from the Aya Mountain, and after flowing to the Qianling River, it is divided into two rivers, one is the White Jade River, and the other is the Green Jade River.

古文：后晋人高居海作《于阗国行程记》载有乌玉河，此节则妄也。
现代文：后晋人高居诲作《于阗行程记》载有乌玉河，这段记载是错误的。
English: The Wuyu River is mentioned in "Journey to Yunnan" written by Gao Jiuyuan in the late Jin Dynasty, but this account is incorrect.

古文：玉璞不藏深土，源泉峻急激映而生。
现代文：含玉的石不藏于深土，而是在靠近山间河源处的急流河水中激映而生。
English: The jade-containing stones are not hidden in the depths of the earth, but are reflected in the rushing water near the source of the mountain river.

古文：然取者不于所生处，以急湍无着手。
现代文：但采玉的人并不去原产地采，因为河水流急而无从下手。
English: However, people who collect jade do not go to the place of origin to collect it, because the river is so fast that they cannot start.

古文：俟其夏月水涨，璞随湍流徙，或百里，或二三百里，取之河中。
现代文：待夏天涨水时，含玉之石随湍流冲至一百里或二三百里处，再在河中采玉。
English: When the water rises in the summer, the stones containing jade are washed along with the turbulent current to a hundred miles or two or three hundred miles away, and then collect jade in the river.

古文：凡玉映月精光而生，故国人沿河取玉者，多于秋间明月夜，望河候视。
现代文：玉是感受月之精光而生，所以当地人沿河取石多是在秋天明月之夜，守在河处观察。
English: Jade is born by feeling the light of the moon, so most of the local people take stones along the river on the night of the bright moon in autumn and keep them at the river for observation.

古文：玉璞堆聚处，其月色倍明亮。
现代文：含玉之石堆聚的地方，就显得那里的月光倍加明亮。
English: Where the jade-containing stones are piled up, the moonlight appears to be twice as bright.

古文：凡璞随水流，仍错杂乱石浅流之中，提出辨认而后知也。
现代文：含玉的璞石随河水而流，免不了要夹杂些浅滩上的乱石，只有采出来经过辨认而后才知何者为玉、何者为石。
English: Jade-bearing flints flow with the river, inevitably mixed with some of the rocks on the shallows. Only after they have been extracted and identified will it be known which are the gems and which are the stones.

古文：白玉河流向东南，绿玉河流向西北。
现代文：白玉河流向东南，绿玉河流向西北。
English: The White Jade River flows to the southeast, while the Green Jade River flows to the northwest.

古文：亦力把力地，其地有名望野者，河水多聚玉。
现代文：亦力把里地区有个地方叫望野，附近河水多聚玉。
English: There is a place called Bonomo in the Yilidocho-ri area, and the river water nearby is mostly jade.

古文：其俗以女人赤身没水而取者，云阴气相召，则玉留不逝，易于捞取，此或夷人之愚也。
现代文：当地的风俗是由妇女赤身下水取玉，据说是由于受妇女的阴气相召，玉就会停而不流，易于捞取。这或可说明当地人不明事理，当地并不贵重此物，如果沿河再过数百里，路途远，卖不出去，便弃而不用。
English: The local custom is for women to go naked into the water to retrieve the jade. It is said that due to the influence of women, the jade will stop flowing and is easy to retrieve. This may indicate that the local people are unreasonable, the place is not valuable, and if it is hundreds of miles along the river, the road is far, it cannot be sold, and it will be abandoned and not used.

古文：凡玉唯白与绿两色。绿者中国名菜玉。
现代文：玉只有白、绿两种颜色，绿玉在中原地区叫菜玉。
English: There are only two colors of jade: white and green. In the Central Plains, green jade is called "neat jade."

古文：其赤玉、黄玉之说，皆奇石、琅之类，价即不下于玉，然非玉也。
现代文：所谓赤玉、黄玉之说，都指奇石、琅玕之类，虽然价钱不下于玉，但终究不是玉。
English: The so-called "red jade" and "yellow jade" all refer to exotic stones, emeralds and the like. Although the price is no less than jade, they are not jade after all.

古文：凡玉璞根系山石流水，未推出位时，璞中玉软如棉絮，推出位时则已硬，入尘见风则愈硬。
现代文：含玉之石产于山石流水之中，未剖出时璞中之玉软如绵絮，剖露出来后就已变硬，遇到风尘则变得更硬。
English: The jade-containing stone is produced in the flowing water of the mountain. When it is not cut out, the jade in the cocoon is soft like lint. After it is cut out, it has become hard. When it encounters wind and dust, it becomes harder.

古文：谓世间琢磨有软玉，则又非也。
现代文：世间有所谓琢磨软玉的，这又错了。
English: It is wrong to say that there are people in the world who are good at polishing soft balls.

古文：凡璞藏玉，其外者曰玉皮，取为砚托之类，其值无几。
现代文：玉藏于璞中，其外层叫玉皮，取来作砚和托座，值不了多少钱。
English: The jade is stored in the cocoon, and its outer layer is called jade skin, which is used as a cocoon and a base. It is not worth much.

古文：璞中之玉有纵横尺余无瑕玷者，古者帝王取以为玺。
现代文：璞中之玉有纵横一尺多而无瑕疵的，古时帝王用以作印玺。
English: The bead in the seal has a length and width of more than one foot and is flawless. In ancient times, emperors used it to make seals.

古文：所谓连城之璧，亦不易得。
现代文：所谓价值连城之璧，亦不易得。
English: The so-called valuable gems are not easy to obtain.

古文：其纵横五六寸无瑕者，治以为杯，此亦当世重宝也。
现代文：纵横五六寸而无瑕的玉，用来加工成酒器，这在当时已经是重宝了。
English: The flawless jade, measuring five or six inches in length and width, was used for processing into wine vessels, which was already valuable at the time.

古文：此外惟西洋琐里有异玉，平时白色，晴日下看映出红色。阴雨时又为青色，此可谓之玉妖，尚方有之。
现代文：此外，只有西洋琐里产有异玉，平时白色，晴天在阳光下显出红色，阴雨时又成青色，这可谓之玉妖，宫廷内才有这种玉。
English: In addition, only the Western Zohui produced rare jade, usually white, sunny days in the sun appear red, rainy and blue, which can be described as jade demon, the court only have this jade.

古文：朝鲜西北太尉山有千年璞，中藏羊脂玉，与葱岭美者无殊异。
现代文：朝鲜西北的太尉山有一种千年璞，中间藏有羊脂玉，与葱岭所出的美玉没有什么不同。
English: There is a thousand-year-old urn on Mount Taiyi in the northwest of North Korea, with a sheep's fat ball hidden in the middle, which is no different from the beautiful ball made by the green onion ridge.

古文：其他虽有载志，闻见则未经也。
现代文：其余各种玉虽书中有记载，但笔者未曾见闻。
English: Although there are records of the other types of balls in the book, the author has never seen them.

古文：凡玉由彼地缠头回，或溯河舟，或驾橐驼，经庄浪入嘉峪，而至于甘州与肃州。
现代文：玉由葱岭的缠头的回族人其风俗是男人经年在头部裹一层布，故名缠头回人。其上层统治者也是不将头发露在外面，问其原因，则据说一露头发就会年成不好，这种习俗很好笑或者是沿河乘船，或者是骑骆驼，经庄浪卫运入嘉峪关，而到甘肃甘州、肃州。
English: The head-wrapped Hui people of Yujingling, whose custom is that men wrap a layer of cloth around their heads over the years, hence the name head-wrapped Hui people. Their upper-level rulers also do not show their hair outside. If you ask the reason, it is said that if you show your hair, the year will be bad. This custom is very funny, either by boat along the river, or by camel, transported through Zhuang Langwei into Jiayuguan, and then to Gansu, Gansu and Suzhou.

古文：中国贩玉者，至此互市而得之，东入中华，卸萃燕京。
现代文：内地贩玉的人来到这里从互市而得到玉后，再向东运，一直会集到北京卸货。
English: Mainland dealers of jade come here to get the jade queen from the exchange market, and then transport it to the east. They will continue to gather in Beijing to unload the goods.

古文：玉工辨璞高下定价，而后琢之。
现代文：玉工辨别玉石等级而定价后开始琢磨。
English: The jade craftsman began to ponder after distinguishing the jade grade and setting the price.

古文：凡玉初剖时，冶铁为圆盘，以盆水盛沙，足踏圆盘使转，添沙剖玉，逐忽划断。
现代文：良玉虽集中于北京，但琢玉的工巧则首推苏州。开始剖玉时，用铁做个圆形转盘，将水与沙放入盆内，用脚踏动圆盘旋转，再添沙剖玉，一点点把玉划断。
English: Although the best jade is concentrated in Beijing, Suzhou is at the forefront of the craftsmanship of jade cutting. When starting to cut jade, use iron to make a round turntable, put water and sand into the basin, spin the disc with your foot, add sand to cut the jade, and cut the jade little by little.

古文：中国解玉沙，出顺天玉田与真定邢台两邑，其沙非出河中，有泉流出，精粹如面，藉以攻玉，永无耗折。
现代文：剖玉所用的沙，在内地出自顺天府玉田和真定府邢台两地，此沙不是产于河中，而是从泉中流出的细如面粉的细沙，用以磨玉永不耗损。
English: The sand used to cut the jade comes from two places in the inland, Tamada in Shuntianfu and Xingtai in Jindingfu. This sand is not produced in the river, but flows out of the spring as fine as flour. It is used to grind the jade and will never wear out.

古文：既解之后，别施精巧工夫，得镔铁刀者，则为利器也。
现代文：玉石剖开后，再用一种利器镔铁刀施以精巧工艺制成玉器。镔铁也出于新疆哈密的类似磨刀石的岩石中，剖开就能炼取。
English: After the jade is cut open, it is then made into jade with a delicate process using a sharpened tool, a hematite knife. Hematite is also extracted from a rock similar to sharpening stone in Hami, Xinjiang, and can be refined by cutting it open.

古文：凡玉器琢余碎，取入钿花用。
现代文：琢磨玉器时剩下的碎玉，可取来作钿花。
English: The remaining broken beads from polishing the jade can be used to make a chrysanthemum.

古文：又碎不堪者，碾筛和灰涂琴瑟，琴有玉音，以此故也。
现代文：碎不堪用的则碾成粉，过筛后与灰混合来涂琴瑟，由此使琴有玉器的音色。
English: If it is too broken to be used, it is ground into powder, sifted and mixed with ash to coat the harp, thereby giving the harp the tone of a jade instrument.

古文：凡镂刻绝细处，难施锥刃者，以蟾酥填画而后锲之。
现代文：雕刻玉器时，在细微的地方难以下锥刀，就以蟾蜍汁填画在玉上，再以刀刻。
English: When carving jade, it is difficult to use a cone cutter in fine places, so fill the jade with gourd juice, and then carve with a knife.

古文：物理制服，殆不可晓。凡假玉以充者，如锡之于银，昭然易辨。
现代文：这种一物克一物的道理还难弄清。用砆碔冒充假玉，有如以锡充银，很容易辨别。
English: It is still difficult to understand the reason for this one-to-one comparison. It is easy to distinguish between using tungsten to fill fake beads and using tin to fill silver.

古文：近则捣舂上料白瓷器，细过微尘，以白敛诸汁调成为器，干燥玉色烨然，此伪最巧云。
现代文：最近有将上料白瓷器捣得极碎，再用白蔹等汁液粘调成器物，干燥后有发光的玉色，这种作伪方法最为巧妙。
English: Recently, there has been the most ingenious method of forgery, in which the white porcelain is pounded to a pulp, and then mixed with the juice of chalk and other substances to form a ware. After drying, it has a glowing jade color.

古文：凡珠玉、金银，胎性相反。
现代文：珠玉与金银的生成方式相反。
English: Gems are created in the opposite way to gold and silver.

古文：金银受日精，必沉埋深土结成。珠玉、宝石受月华，不受土寸掩盖。
现代文：金银受日精，必定埋在深土内形成；而珠玉、宝石则受月华，不要一点泥土掩盖。
English: Gold and silver, impregnated by the sun, must be buried in the deep soil to form; while gems and precious stones are covered by the moon, not a bit of dirt.

古文：宝石在井上透碧空，珠在重渊，玉在峻滩，但受空明、水色盖上。
现代文：宝石在井中直透青空，珠在深水里，而玉在险峻湍急的河滩，但都受着明亮的天空或河水覆盖。
English: The gems in the mine pierce the blue sky, the beads in the deep water, and the jade in the precipitous beach, but they are all covered by the bright sky or river water.

古文：珠有螺城，螺母居中，龙神守护，人不敢犯。
现代文：珠有螺城，螺母在里面，由龙神守护，人不敢犯。
English: The bead has a conch, the nut is inside, guarded by the dragon god, people dare not commit.

古文：数应入世用者，螺母推出人取。
现代文：那些注定应用于世间的珠，由螺母推出供人取用。
English: Those beads that are destined to be used in the world are pushed out by the nut for people to use.

古文：玉初孕处，亦不可得。
现代文：在原来孕玉的地方，也无法令人接近。
English: In the place of the original gestation, it can not be approached.

古文：玉神推徙入河，然后恣取，与珠宫同神异云。
现代文：只有由玉神将其推迁到河里，才能任人采取，与珠宫同属神异。
English: Only if the Jade God moves it into the river, can it be taken by anyone, and it is the same as the Pearl Palace.

古文：○附：玛瑙水晶琉璃
现代文：附：玛瑙、水晶、琉璃
English: Attached: onyx, crystal, glass

古文：凡玛瑙非石非玉，中国产处颇多，种类以十余计。
现代文：玛瑙：既不是石，也不是玉，中国出产的地方很多，有十几个种类。
English: Agate: It is neither stone nor jade. There are many places in China where it is produced, and there are more than a dozen types.

古文：得者多为簪、钩结之类，或为棋子，最大者为屏风及棹面。
现代文：所得到的玛瑙，多用作发髻上别的簪子和衣扣之类，或者作棋子，最大的作屏风及桌面。
English: The resulting agate is mostly used as other hairpins and clothespins on hairpins, or as chess pieces, and the largest is used for screens and desktops.

古文：上品者产宁夏外徼羌地砂碛中，然中国即广有，商贩者亦不远涉也。
现代文：上等玛瑙产于宁夏塞外羌族地区的沙漠中，但内地也到处都有，商贩不必去那样远贩运。
English: High-grade agate is produced in the deserts of the Qiang areas outside of Ningxia, but it is also available everywhere in the interior, so traders do not have to go that far to transport it.

古文：今京师货者多是大同、蔚州九空山、宣府四角山所产，有夹胎玛瑙、截子玛瑙、锦红玛瑙，是不一类。
现代文：现在在北京所卖的，多产于山西大同、河南蔚县九空山及河北宣化的四角山，有夹胎玛瑙、截子玛瑙、锦江玛瑙，种类不一。
English: The agate now sold in Beijing is mostly produced in Datong, Shanxi Province; Jiu Kuang Mountain, Wei County, Henan Province; and Si Jiao Mountain, Xuanhua County, Hebei Province. There are different types of cleated agate, cleaved agate, and Jinjiang agate.

古文：而神木、府谷出浆水玛瑙、锦缠玛瑙，随方货鬻，此其大端云。
现代文：而陕西神木与府谷所产的是浆水玛瑙、缠丝玛瑙，就地卖出，这是大致情况。
English: However, Shenmu in Shaanxi Province and Fugu in Guizhou Province produce agate syrup and agate twine, which are sold locally. This is the general situation.

古文：试法以砑木不热者为真。
现代文：辨试的方法是用木头在玛瑙上摩擦，不发热的是真品。
English: The way to tell the difference is to rub the wax on the agate with a piece of wood. The real thing does not generate heat.

古文：伪者虽易为，然真者值原不甚贵，故不乐售其技也。
现代文：其余地方山穴中本来就有，而没被发现与采取；或已经发现并采取，而受到官方严禁并封闭。
English: The rest of the places in the mountain cave were originally there, but were not discovered and taken; or they were discovered and taken, and were officially banned and closed.

古文：凡中国产水晶，视玛瑙少杀，今南方用者多福建漳浦产北方用者多宣府黄尖山产，中土用者多河南信阳州与湖广兴国州产，黑色者产北不产南。其他山穴本有之而采识未到，与已经采识而官司厉禁封闭者尚多也。
现代文：例如江西广信地区惧害宫里派的宦官盘削而停采等等。
English: For example, in the Guangxin region of Jiangxi Province, mining was halted for fear of harming the eunuchs of the Guoli faction.

古文：凡水晶出深山穴内瀑流石罅之中，其水经晶流出，昼夜不断，流出洞门半里许，其面尚如油珠滚沸。
现代文：这种情况不在少数。水晶产于深山洞穴内的瀑流、石缝之中，瀑布昼夜不停地流过水晶，流出洞口半里左右，水面上还像油珠那样翻花。
English: This is not a rare occurrence. Crystals are produced in waterfalls and crevices in deep mountain caves. The waterfalls flow through the crystals day and night, flowing out about half a mile from the mouth of the cave. The crystals float like oil droplets on the surface of the water.

古文：凡水晶未离穴时如棉软，见风方坚硬。
现代文：水晶未离洞穴时是绵软的，风吹后才坚硬。
English: The crystal is soft before it leaves the cave, and hardens when the wind blows.

古文：琢工得宜者，就山穴成粗坯，然后持归加功，省力十倍云。
现代文：琢工为了方便，在山穴就地制成粗坯，再带回去加工，可省力十倍。
English: In order to make it more convenient, the chiselers make a rough billet on site in a mountain cave, and then take it back for processing, which can save ten times the effort.

古文：凡琉璃石，与中国水精、占城火齐其类相同，同一精光明透之义。然不产中国，产于西域。
现代文：琉璃石与中国水晶、占城的火齐同类，都光亮透明，但不产于中国内地，而产于新疆及其以西地区。
English: Borosilicate is the same type as Chinese crystal and Zhancheng fire stone, both of which are bright and transparent, but they are not produced in mainland China, but in Xinjiang and its western regions.

古文：其石五色皆具，中华人艳之，遂竭人巧以肖之。
现代文：这种石五色俱全，国内的人都喜欢，遂竭尽工巧来仿制。
English: This stone is available in five colors, and people in China like it, so they tried their best to imitate it.

古文：于是烧瓴商瓦转釉成黄绿色者曰琉璃瓦。
现代文：于是烧成砖瓦，挂上琉璃石釉料成为黄、绿颜色的，叫做琉璃瓦。
English: As a result, they are fired into bricks and tiles, and glazed with borosilicate stone to become yellow and green, and are called borosilicate tiles.

古文：煎化羊角为盛油与笼烛者为琉璃碗。
现代文：将琉璃石与羊角煎化，便制成玻璃碗，用以盛油或作灯罩。
English: After the lapis lazuli and sheep horns were calcined, they were made into glass bowls, which were used to hold oil or as lampshades.

古文：合化硝、铅写珠铜线穿合者为琉璃灯。
现代文：将羊角、硝石、铅与用铜线穿起来的火齐珠合在一起炼化，可制成玻璃灯。
English: A glass lamp can be made by refining lamb's horn, saltpeter, and lead together with fire beads threaded with copper wire.

古文：捏片为琉璃瓶袋。
现代文：用上述材料烧炼后还可捏制成薄片，作成玻璃瓶。
English: After firing with the above-mentioned materials, it can also be made into thin sheets and made into glass bottles.

古文：各色颜料汁任从点染。
现代文：所用硝石用煎炼时结在上面的马牙硝。可用各种颜料汁任意将材料染成颜色。
English: The saltpeter used is made from horse's teeth, which is bound on top during the distillation process. The material can be dyed into any colour using a variety of pigments.

古文：凡为灯、珠皆淮北齐地人，以其地产硝之故。
现代文：制造玻璃灯和玻璃珠的，都是淮北人和山东人，因为这些地方出产硝石。
English: The people who make glass lamps and glass beads are from Huaibei and Shandong, because these places produce saltpeter.

古文：凡硝见火还空，其质本无，而黑铅为重质之物。
现代文：硝石灼烧后便分解而消失，其原来成分便不再存在，而黑铅是重质之物。
English: After the saltpeter is burned, it decomposes and disappears. Its original composition no longer exists, and black lead is a heavy substance.

古文：两物假火为媒，硝欲引铅还空，铅欲留硝住世，和同一釜之中，透出光明形象。
现代文：两种物质通过火的媒介而发生变化，硝吸引铅而自身消失，铅与硝结合以保留其存在，它们与琉璃石、羊角等在同一釜中烧炼而得出透明发光的玻璃。
English: The two substances change through the medium of fire. The glass attracts the lead and disappears by itself. The lead combines with the glass to retain its existence. They are fired in the same kiln as the lapis lazuli and the goat horn to produce transparent and luminous glass.

古文：此乾坤造化隐现于容易地面。《天工》卷末，著而出之。
现代文：此乃自然界隐约的变化机制在该简单过程中之再现。结束《天工开物》之际，特记于此。
English: This is a reproduction of nature's subtle mechanism of change in this simple process.

