古文：苏代自齐献书于燕王曰： 臣之行也，固知将有口事，故献御书而行曰： 臣贵于齐，燕大夫将不信臣；臣贱，将轻臣；臣用，将多望于臣；齐有不善，将归罪于臣；天下不攻齐，将曰善为齐谋；天下攻齐，将与齐兼鄮臣。
现代文：苏代从齐国上书燕昭王说： 我这次到齐国，就知道有人会在燕国进我的谗言，所以临行之前给您呈上书信： 如果将来我在齐国得到显贵的地位，燕国士大夫就再也不会信任我；如果我的地位卑贱，他们就会看不起我；如果我受到重用，他们会怨恨我；齐国对燕国有不好的地方，他们都会归罪于我；若是天下诸侯不进攻齐国，他们又会说我苏代一心为齐国打算；若是天下诸侯进攻齐国，他们会和齐国一起抛弃我。
English: Yan Zhao Wang said: When I came to Qi this time, I knew that some people would criticize me in Yan, so I would present a letter to you before I left: If I get a prominent position in Qi in the future, Yan officials will no longer trust me; if my position is lowly, they will look down on me; if I am reused, they will resent me; if Qi is bad for Yan, they will blame me; if the princes of the world do not attack Qi, they will say that I, Su, intend to fight for Qi; if the princes of the world attack Qi, they will abandon me together with Qi.

古文：臣之所重处卯也。 
现代文：我的处境有累卵之危。 
English: I'm in a precarious situation.

古文：王谓臣曰： 吾必不听众口与谗言，吾信汝也，犹刬者也。
现代文：大王对我说： 我我定不会听信谗言，我的内心会毫不动摇地信任你。
English: The great king said to me, "I will not listen to gossip. My heart will trust you without wavering."

古文：上可以得用于齐，次可以得信于下，苟无死，女无不为也，以女自信可也。 
现代文：请记住，最主要的是在齐国能够得到重用，其次是在下边的群臣中获得信任，最不理想的境况，只要死不了，还能干你想干的事，你自己去办吧。
English: Please remember that the most important thing is to be able to be reused in Qi, and secondly to gain the trust of the lower ranks. The least ideal situation is to be able to do what you want to do as long as you can't die. Do it yourself.

古文：与之言曰： 去燕之齐可也，期于成事而已。 
现代文：大王又和我说： 离开燕国到了齐国就好办了，只期望事情能办成功就行。 
English: The king also said to me, "It's easy to leave Yan and come to Qi, just hope that things can be done successfully."

古文：臣受令以任齐，及五年。
现代文：自从我受命出使齐国，至今已有五年了。
English: It has been five years since I was appointed as the envoy of Qi.

古文：齐数出兵，未尝谋燕。
现代文：其间，齐国多次发兵侵地，但都从未曾图谋燕国。
English: In the meantime, Qi repeatedly sent troops to invade the country, but never attempted to invade Yan.

古文：齐、赵之交，一合一离，燕王不与齐谋赵，则与赵谋齐。
现代文：齐赵两国的邦交，时好时坏，时分时合，燕国不是联合齐国图谋赵国，以离间齐赵的关系；就是我暗地里使燕国帮助赵国图谋齐国，以促成燕国的计谋。
English: The diplomatic relations between the two countries of Qi and Zhao are sometimes good, sometimes bad, and sometimes coincidental. Yan's country is not to unite with Qi to plot against Zhao, so as to sever the relationship between Qi and Zhao; that is, I secretly make Yan's country help Zhao to plot against Qi, so as to facilitate the plot of Yan's country.

古文：齐之信燕也，至于虚北地行其兵。
现代文：然而齐国依旧信任燕国，以致齐国北部边境不设防线，用那里的军队去攻打别的国家。
English: However, Qi still trusted Yan, so that the northern border of Qi did not set up a defense line and used the troops there to attack other countries.

古文：今王信田伐与参、去疾之言，且攻齐，使齐犬马而不信燕。
现代文：近几年以来大王听信田伐、缲去疾的话，准备进攻齐国，而使齐国大为戒备而不信任燕国。
English: In recent years, the great king has listened to the words of field felling and cormorant culling and prepared to attack Qi, and made Qi very wary and distrustful of Yan.

古文：今王又使庆令臣曰： 吾欲用所善。 
现代文：如今，大王又派盛庆告诉我说： 我要任用合我心意的人在齐国工作。
English: Now, the great king has sent Shengqing to tell me: I will appoint people who are in my heart to work in Qi.

古文：王苟欲用之，则臣请为王事之。
现代文：假使大王真想任用那样的人，那么请让我为大王去辅助他。
English: If the king really wants to appoint such a person, then please let me assist him for the king.

古文：王欲醳臣剸任所善，则臣请归醳事。
现代文：如果大王真要罢免我而专任所谓合意的人，那么请让我回国后解除职务。
English: If the king really wants to dismiss me and put someone in charge of the so-called agreement, then please let me be relieved of my duties when I return to my country.

古文：臣苟得见，则盈愿。 
现代文：假如我能够见到大王，也就心满意足了。 
English: If I could see the great king, I would be satisfied.

