古文：七年春，宋皇瑗帅师侵郑。
现代文：七年春季，宋国的皇瑗率领军队攻打郑国。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, the emperor of Song led an army to attack Zheng.

古文：晋魏曼多帅师侵卫。
现代文：晋国的魏曼多率领军队入侵卫国。
English: Weimando of Jin led an army to invade and defend the country.

古文：夏，公会吴于鄫。
现代文：夏季，哀公在鄫地与吴国会见。
English: In the summer, Lu Aigong and Wu Guozhong met in Handan.

古文：秋，公伐邾。
现代文：秋季，哀公出兵攻打邾国。
English: In the autumn, Aiko sent troops to attack Shikoku.

古文：八月己酉，入邾，以邾子益来。
现代文：八月己酉日，进入邾国，将邾娄子益抓到鲁国来。
English: On August 6th, he entered Shandong Province and captured Zang Ziyi to Lu Province.

古文：宋人围曹。
现代文：宋国人包围曹国国都。
English: The Song people surrounded the capital of Cao.

古文：冬，郑驷弘帅师救曹。
现代文：冬季，郑国的驷弘率领军队援救曹国。
English: In the winter, Zheng's Jianhong led the army to rescue Cao.

古文：七年春，宋师侵郑，郑叛晋故也。
现代文：七年春季，宋军入侵郑国，这是因为郑国背叛晋国的缘故。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, the Song army invaded Zheng, because Zheng betrayed Jin.

古文：晋师侵卫，卫不服也。
现代文：晋军入侵卫国，这是因为卫国不顺服。
English: The Jin army invaded the defenders because the defenders were disobedient.

古文：夏，公会吴于鄫。
现代文：夏季，鲁哀公和吴国人在鄫地会见。
English: In the summer, Lu Aigong and Wu Guozhong met in Handan.

古文：吴来征百牢，子服景伯对曰： 先王未之有也。 
现代文：吴国前来要求取牛、羊、猪一百头为享宴品。子服景伯回答说： 先王没有过这样的事。 
English: The kingdom of Wu came to ask for a hundred head of cattle, sheep, and pigs for a banquet. Zifu Jingbo replied, "The previous king never did such a thing."

古文：吴人曰： 宋百牢我，鲁不可以后宋。
现代文：吴国人说： 宋国享我们以牛羊猪各一百头，鲁国不能落在宋国之后。
English: The people of Wu said: Song has given us one hundred head of cattle, one hundred head of sheep and one hundred head of pigs. Lu cannot fall behind Song.

古文：且鲁牢晋大夫过十，吴王百牢，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：而且鲁国享宴晋国大夫超过各十头，给吴王各一百头，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Moreover, it is not out of the question for the Lu Kingdom to enjoy a banquet in which the doctors of the Jin Kingdom each receive more than ten heads, while the kings of the Wu Kingdom each receive a hundred heads?

古文：景伯曰： 晋范鞅贪而弃礼，以大国惧敝邑，故敝邑十一牢之。
现代文：子服景伯说： 晋国的范鞅贪婪而抛弃礼仪，用大国的势力来迫使敝邑恐惧，所以敝邑享他以牛羊猪各十一头。
English: Zifu Jingbo said: Fan Ye of Jin was greedy and abandoned etiquette. He used the power of a great country to force the fear of Yao, so Yao enjoyed eleven heads of cattle, sheep and pigs each.

古文：君若以礼命于诸侯，则有数矣。
现代文：君王如果用礼仪来命令诸侯，那么就有一定的数字。
English: If the monarch uses etiquette to command the lords, then there is a certain number.

古文：若亦弃礼，则有淫者矣。
现代文：如果也抛弃礼仪，那么就太过分了。
English: If you throw out etiquette, too, then you've gone too far.

古文：周之王也，制礼，上物不过十二，以为天之大数也。
现代文：周朝统一天下，制定礼仪，上等的物品数字不过十二，因为这是上天的大数。
English: The Zhou Dynasty unified the country and established the etiquette, but the number of high-class items was only twelve, because this was God's large number.

古文：今弃周礼，而曰必百牢，亦唯执事。 
现代文：现在抛弃周礼，而说一定要太牢一百，也只好听从执事的命令。 
English: Now discard the weekly ritual, and say that you must be too firm, and you have to follow the orders of the deacon.

古文：吴人弗听。景伯曰： 吴将亡矣，弃天而背本。
现代文：吴国人不听，子服景伯说： 吴国快要灭亡了，抛弃上天而违背根本。
English: The people of Wuxi did not listen, and Zifu Jingbo said: "Wuxi is about to perish, abandoning heaven and violating the fundamentals.

古文：不与，必弃疾于我。 
现代文：如果不给，一定要加害于我们。 
English: If they don't give it to us, they will definitely harm us.

古文：乃与之。
现代文：于是就照数给了他们。
English: And he gave them the number.

古文：大宰嚭召季康子，康子使子贡辞。
现代文：太宰嚭召见季康子，康子让子贡去辞谢。
English: Dazai Yan summoned Ji Kangzi, and Kangzi asked Zigong to resign.

古文：大宰嚭曰： 国君道长，而大夫不出门，此何礼也？ 
现代文：太宰嚭说： 国君走了那么远的路程，而大夫不出门，这是什么礼仪？ 
English: Dazaifu said: What kind of etiquette is it for the sovereign to travel such a long distance, but the doctor does not leave the house?

古文：对曰： 岂以为礼，畏大国也。
现代文：子贡回答说： 岂敢把这作为礼仪，只是由于害怕大国。
English: Zigong replied, "I dare not make it a ritual, but only out of fear of the Great Power.

古文：大国不以礼命于诸侯，苟不以礼，岂可量也？
现代文：大国不用礼仪来命令诸侯，如果不用礼仪，其后果小国就不能估计了。
English: Great nations do not use etiquette to command their subjects. If etiquette is not used, the consequences for small nations are incalculable.

古文：寡君既共命焉，其老岂敢弃其国？
现代文：寡君即已奉命前来，他的老臣岂敢丢下国家？
English: Now that the widower has been ordered to come, will his old retainer dare to leave the country?

古文：大伯端委以治周礼，仲雍嗣之，断发文身，臝以为饰，岂礼也哉？
现代文：太伯穿着玄端的衣服戴着委貌的帽子来推行周礼，仲雍继承他，把头发剪断，身上刺上花纹，作为裸体的装饰，难道合于礼吗？
English: Emperor Taibang wore black clothes and a disguised hat to promote the weekly ritual. Zhong Yong inherited him, cut his hair, and embroidered patterns on his body to decorate his naked body. Is it appropriate?

古文：有由然也。 
现代文：因为有原因所以才这样做的。 
English: I did it for a reason.

古文：反自鄫，以吴为无能为也。
现代文：从鄫地回来，季康子认为吴国没有能力做出什么事来的。
English: After returning from Handan, Ji Kangzi thought that Wu had no ability to do anything.

古文：季康子欲伐邾，乃飨大夫以谋之。
现代文：季康子想要攻打邾国，就设享礼招待大夫们来一起商量。
English: Ji Kangzi wanted to attack Shandong Province, so he invited the doctors to come and discuss together.

古文：子服景伯曰： 小所以事大，信也。大所以保小，仁也。
现代文：子服景伯说： 小国用来事奉大国的，是信；大国用来保护小国的，是仁。
English: Zifu Jingbo said: Faith is what a small country uses to serve a big country; benevolence is what a big country uses to protect a small country.

古文：背大国，不信；伐小国，不仁。
现代文：违背大国，这是不信，攻打小国，这是不仁。
English: To disobey a great power is unbelief, to attack a small country is unkindness.

古文：民保于城，城保于德，失二德者，危将焉保？ 
现代文：百姓由城邑来保护，城邑由德行来保护。丢掉了信和仁两种德行，就危险了，还能保护什么？ 
English: The people are protected by the towns, and the towns are protected by virtue. If we lose the two virtues of faith and benevolence, we will be in danger. What else can we protect?

古文：孟孙曰： 二三子以为何如？
现代文：孟孙说： 各位以为怎么样？
English: Meng Sun said: What do you all think?

古文：恶贤而逆之？ 
现代文：哪一种意见好我就采纳。 
English: I'll accept whichever opinion is good.

古文：对曰： 禹合诸侯于涂山，执玉帛者万国。
现代文：大夫们回答说： 大禹在涂山会合诸侯，拿着玉帛的有一万个国家。
English: The doctors replied, "Dayu is at the Tu Mountain Meeting of Princes, and there are ten thousand countries holding the jade scepter.

古文：今其存者，无数十焉。唯大不字小，小不事大也。
现代文：现在还存在的，没有几十个了，就是因为大国不养育小国，小国不事奉大国。
English: There are only a few dozen that still exist, because big countries do not nurture small countries, and small countries do not serve big countries.

古文：知必危，何故不言？ 
现代文：明知必有危险，为什么不说？
English: If you knew there was danger, why didn't you say something?

古文： 鲁德如邾，而以众加之，可乎？ 
现代文：鲁国的德行和邾国一样，而要用大兵来施加压力，行吗？ 
English: Lu's morality is the same as Shao's, but it's necessary to use soldiers to exert pressure, right?

古文：不乐而出。
现代文：不欢而散。
English: They parted on bad terms.

古文：秋，伐邾，及范门，犹闻钟声。
现代文：秋季，鲁国攻打邾国，到达范门，还能听到乐钟的声音。
English: In the autumn, when Lu Province attacked Shandong Province and reached Fanmen, the sound of bells could still be heard.

古文：大夫谏，不听。
现代文：大夫劝谏，邾子不听。
English: The doctor advises the cripple, but the cripple does not listen.

古文：茅成子请告于吴，不许，曰： 鲁击柝闻于邾，吴二千里，不三月不至，何及于我？
现代文：茅成子请求向吴国报告，邾子不答应，说： 鲁国敲打梆子的声音，在邾国可以听到，吴国相距二千里，没有三个月到不了，哪里能管得了我们？
English: Mao Cheng Zi asked to report to Wu, but Zang Zi did not agree, saying, "The sound of Lu beating the cymbals can be heard in Zang. Wu is two thousand miles away and cannot be reached within three months. Who can control us?

古文：且国内岂不足？ 
现代文：而且国内的力量难道就不足够？ 
English: And aren't domestic forces enough?

古文：成子以茅叛。师遂入邾，处其公宫，众师昼掠。
现代文：茅成子领着茅地人叛变了，鲁国的军队就攻进了邾国国都，住在邾子的宫内，各军白天抢劫。
English: Mao Cheng Zi led the Maotians in a mutiny, and the troops of the State of Lu invaded the capital of the State of Yao, living in the palace of Yao Zi, and robbing the troops during the day.

古文：邾众保于绎。
现代文：邾国的军队在绎山守卫。
English: The troops of Shan State are guarding Yuanshan Mountain.

古文：师宵掠，以邾子益来，献于亳社，囚诸负瑕。负瑕故有绎。
现代文：鲁军在夜里抢劫，带了邾子益回来，把他奉献于亳社，囚禁在负瑕，负瑕因此而有了绎山人。
English: The Lu army robbed in the night, came back with Jia Zi Yi, dedicated him to the Jia Society, imprisoned him in the negative defect, and as a result, the negative defect gave rise to the Jia Shan people.

古文：邾茅夷鸿以束帛乘韦，自请救于吴，曰： 鲁弱晋而远吴，冯恃其众，而背君之盟，辟君之执事，以陵我小国。
现代文：邾国的茅夷鸿带了五匹帛四张熟牛皮自己去请求吴国救援，说： 鲁国以为晋国衰弱而吴国遥远，倚仗着他们人多，而背弃了和君王订立的盟约，看不起君王的执事，来欺凌我们小国。
English: Mao Yihong of the State of Min took five mules and four pieces of cooked cowhide with him to ask for help from the State of Wu. He said, "The State of Lu thought that the State of Jin was weak and that the State of Wu was far away. It relied on the fact that there were many people in the State of Jin. Instead, it reneged on the treaty it had signed with the king, despised the king's servant, and bullied our small country.

古文：邾非敢自爱也，惧君威之不立。
现代文：邾国不敢自己爱惜，惧怕的是君王的威信不能建立。
English: The country does not dare to cherish itself, fearing that the prestige of the monarch cannot be established.

古文：君威之不立，小国之忧也。
现代文：君王的威信不能建立，这是小国所担心的。
English: The prestige of the monarch cannot be established, and this is what small states fear.

古文：若夏盟于鄫衍，秋而背之，成求而不违，四方诸侯，其何以事君？
现代文：如果夏天在鄫衍结盟，秋天就背弃它，鲁国得到了所求而没有阻力，四方的诸侯还用什么来事奉君王？
English: If in summer they make an alliance in Shuyan, but in autumn they turn their backs on it, and Lu gets what it wants without resistance, what else will the princes of the four quarters use to serve the king?

古文：且鲁赋八百乘，君之贰也。邾赋六百乘，君之私也。
现代文：而且鲁国拥有战车八百辆是君王的对手，邾国战车六百辆却是君王的部属。
English: Moreover, Lu's 800 chariots are the king's rivals, while Shao's 600 chariots are the king's subordinates.

古文：以私奉贰，唯君图之。 
现代文：把部属去送给对手，请君考虑一下！ 
English: Send your subordinates to the opponent, please think about it!

古文：吴子从之。
现代文：吴王听从了茅夷鸿的话。
English: King Wu listened to Mao Yihong's words.

古文：宋人围曹。郑桓子思曰： 宋人有曹，郑之患也。不可以不救。 
现代文：宋国人包围曹国，郑国的桓子思说： 宋国人如果据有曹国，这是郑国的忧患，不能不救。 
English: The Song people surrounded Cao, and Huan Zixi of Zheng said: If the Song people have Cao, this is the sorrow of Zheng, and they must be saved.

古文：冬，郑师救曹，侵宋。
现代文：冬季，郑军救援曹国，入侵宋国。
English: In winter, Zheng's army came to the rescue of Cao and invaded Song.

古文：初，曹人或梦众君子立于社宫，而谋亡曹，曹叔振铎请待公孙彊，许之。
现代文：当初，曹国有人梦见一伙君子站在国社墙外，商量灭亡曹国。曹叔振铎请求等待公孙彊，众君子答应了。
English: At first, someone in Cao's kingdom dreamed that a group of gentlemen were standing outside the walls of the state shrine, discussing the downfall of Cao's kingdom. Cao Zhenxuan asked them to wait for Gongsun Yao, and the gentlemen agreed.

古文：旦而求之曹，无之。
现代文：早晨起来去寻找，曹国没有这个人。
English: I got up in the morning to look for him, but Cao Guo didn't have this person.

古文：戒其子曰： 我死，尔闻公孙彊为政，必去之。 
现代文：做梦的人告诫他儿子说： 我死以后，你听说公孙彊执政，一定要离开曹国。 
English: The dreamer warned his son: "After my death, if you hear that Gongsun Rong is in power, you must leave Cao.

古文：及曹伯阳即位，好田弋。曹鄙人公孙彊好弋，获白雁，献之，且言田弋之说。
现代文：等到曹伯阳即位，喜欢打猎射鸟，曹国边境上的人公孙彊喜欢射鸟，得到一只白雁，献给曹伯阳，还讲述了打猎射鸟的技巧，曹伯很喜欢他。
English: When Cao Boyang ascended to the throne, he liked to hunt and shoot birds. The man on the border of Cao liked to shoot birds. He got a white goose and dedicated it to Cao Boyang. He also talked about the skills of hunting and shooting birds. Cao Bo liked him very much.

古文：说之。因访政事，大说之。有宠，使为司城以听政。
现代文：由此而向公孙彊询问国家大事，他应对得体，曹伯阳更加喜欢他，加以宠信，让他担任司城执掌国政。
English: As a result, he inquired about national affairs from Gongsun Zhuo, and he responded appropriately. Cao Boyang liked him even more and gave him favor, allowing him to take charge of state affairs.

古文：梦者之子乃行。
现代文：做梦的人的儿子这时就离开曹国。
English: The dreamer's son then left Cao.

古文：彊言霸说于曹伯，曹伯从之，乃背晋而奸宋。
现代文：公孙彊向曹伯讲述称霸的策略，曹伯阳听从了，就背弃晋国而侵犯宋国。
English: Gongsun Yao told Cao Bo about the strategy of seeking hegemony, and Cao Boyang obeyed, turning his back on Jin and invading Song.

古文：宋人伐之，晋人不救，筑五邑于其郊，曰黍丘、揖丘、大城、钟、邘。
现代文：宋国人攻打曹国，晋国人不去救援，公孙彊在国都郊外建造了五个城邑，名叫黍丘、揖丘、大城、钟、邘。
English: The Song people attacked Cao, the Jin people did not come to the rescue, and Gongsun Rong built five towns on the outskirts of the capital, named Mengqiu, Mengqiu, Dasheng, Zhong and Yao.

