古文：仲尼在陈，有隼集于陈侯之庭而死，楛矢贯之，石砮，其长尺有咫。
现代文：孔子在陈国的时候，有一只鹰坠在陈侯的庭院里死了。楛木做的箭射穿了它的身体，箭头是用尖石做的，箭有一尺八寸长。
English: When Confucius was in the State of Chen, an eagle fell to its death in the courtyard of Chen Hou. An arrow made of camphor wood pierced its body. The arrowhead was made of sharp stone. The arrow was a foot and eight inches long.

古文：陈惠公使人以隼如仲尼之馆问之。
现代文：陈惠公派人带着这只鹰，去到孔子住的馆舍询问。
English: Chen Huigong sent someone with the eagle to inquire at the mansion where Confucius lived.

古文：仲尼曰： 隼之来也远矣！此肃慎氏之矢也。
现代文：孔子说： 这只鹰来得很远呢，它身上的箭是北方肃慎氏制造的。
English: Confucius said, "This eagle has come a long way. The arrows on its body were made by Sushen in the north.

古文：昔武王克商，通道于九夷、百蛮，使各以其方贿来贡，使无忘职业。
现代文：从前周武王打败了商，开通了去南北方各少数民族居住地区的道路，命令他们各自拿出本地的土特产进贡，使他们不忘记各自所从事的职业。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Wu defeated the merchants and opened the road to the ethnic minority areas in the north and south, and ordered them to pay tribute with local specialties, so that they would not forget their respective occupations.

古文：于是肃慎氏贡楛矢、石砮，其长尺有咫。
现代文：于是肃慎氏就向周天子进贡楛矢和石砮，箭长一尺八寸。
English: As a result, Shinsui paid tribute with an arrow made of birch as a shaft and stone as an arrowhead, which was one foot eight inches long.

古文：先王欲昭其令德之致远也，以示后人，使永监焉，故铭其栝曰 肃慎氏之贡矢 ，以分大姬、配虞胡公而封诸陈。
现代文：武王为了公开表明他使远方民族归附的威德，告示后人，让他们永远看到自己的权威，所以在箭尾扣弦处刻上 肃慎国进贡之箭 的字样，送给大女儿，并随嫁给虞胡公而带到他所封的陈国。
English: King Wu, in order to publicly demonstrate his virtue of making distant nations adhere to him, and to announce to future generations, so that they would always see his authority, engraved the words "Arrow of tribute from Shushan Kingdom" at the end of the bowstring, gave it to his eldest daughter, and brought it to the Chen Kingdom, which he had sealed, after marrying Prince Yu.

古文：古者，分同姓以珍玉，展亲也；分异姓以远方之职贡，使无忘服也。
现代文：古时候，帝王把珍玉分给同姓，用来表示血缘的亲近；把远方的贡品分给异姓，使他们不忘事奉天子。
English: In ancient times, emperors used to give precious jade to people with the same surname to show that they were close by blood; they also gave distant tributes to people with different surnames so that they would not forget to serve the Son of Heaven.

古文：故分陈以肃慎氏之贡。
现代文：虞胡公是异姓，所以把肃慎国的贡品分给了陈国。
English: Yu Hu Gong is a different surname, so he divided the tribute of Sushen Guo to Chen Guo.

古文：君若使有司求诸故府，其可得也。 
现代文：国君如派管事的去旧府里寻找，大概还能找到。 
English: If you send an official to look for it in the former treasury, you can get it.

古文：使求，得之金椟，如之。
现代文：陈惠公于是派人寻找，果然在用金装饰的木盒里发现了楛矢，像孔子所说的一样
English: Chen Huigong then sent someone to look for it, and sure enough, they found a crossbow arrow in a wooden box decorated with gold, just like Confucius said

