古文：居军三年，吴师自溃。
现代文：越王出兵围困吴国三年后，吴军终于自己崩溃了。
English: Three years after King Yue sent troops to besiege Wu, the Wu army finally collapsed on its own.

古文：吴王帅其贤良，与其重禄，以上姑苏。使王孙雒行成于越，曰： 昔者上天降祸于吴，得罪于会稽。
现代文：吴王带着他的谋臣和贵族们逃到姑苏台上，派王孙雒向越国求和说： 过去上天给吴国降下灾祸，使我在会稽得罪了贵国。
English: The king of Wu, with his advisers and nobles, fled to Gusudai and sent Wang Sunye to sue for peace from Yue, saying, "In the past, the heavens have brought disaster to the kingdom of Wu, so that I have offended your country in the council.

古文：今君王其图不穀，不穀请复会稽之和。 
现代文：现在越王如果肯照顾我的话，我请求恢复当年在会稽实行的和好。 
English: Now, if King Yue is willing to take care of me, I would like to ask for the restoration of the reconciliation that was implemented in the auditor's office that year.

古文：王弗忍，欲许之。
现代文：越王有点不忍心，打算答应讲和。
English: Yue Wang was a little impatient and was going to agree to make peace.

古文：范蠡进谏曰： 臣闻之，圣人之功，时为之庸。
现代文：范蠡进谏说： 我听说圣人的成功，由于他能利用天时。
English: Fan Junjin said, "I have heard that the success of a sage is due to the fact that he can make use of time.

古文：得时不成，天有还形。
现代文：得了天时还不成功，上天就转到相反的方面去了。
English: If you are not successful in gaining heaven, heaven will go to the opposite side.

古文：天节不远，五年复反，小凶则近，大凶则远。
现代文：天时的转变为期不很远，五年转化一次。小的灾难来得快，大的灾难来得慢。
English: The change of the time of day is not very long, it is transformed once every five years. Small disasters come quickly, big disasters come slowly.

古文：先人有言曰： 伐柯者其则不远。 
现代文：前人有一句话说： 砍树干做斧柄，手里拿的斧柄就是式样，不必去远处寻找。 
English: The ancients had a saying: If you chop down a tree trunk to make an axe handle, the axe handle in your hand is the model, you don't have to look far.

古文：今君王不断，其忘会稽之事乎？ 王曰： 诺。 
现代文：现在君王迟迟不能决断，难道忘记了在会稽蒙受的国耻吗？ 越王说： 好吧。 
English: Now the king is hesitant to make a decision. Has he forgotten the national disgrace he suffered at the inspection? King Yue said, "Okay."

古文：不许。
现代文：就不答应与吴国讲和。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：使者往而复来，辞愈卑，礼愈尊，王又欲许之。
现代文：吴国的使者去了又回来，求和的措辞越发谦卑，礼节越发恭敬，越王又打算答应他。
English: The emissary of the State of Wu went and came back, and the wording of the request for peace became more and more humble, the etiquette more and more respectful, and the king more and more intended to agree to him.

古文：范蠡谏曰： 孰使我蚤朝而晏罢者，非吴乎？
现代文：范蠡进谏说： 谁使我们一早就上朝，很晚才罢朝而忧劳国事的呢？
English: Fan Junjin said, "Who made us go to the palace early in the morning, and stay up late worrying about state affairs?

古文：与我争三江、五湖之利者，非吴耶？
现代文：不是吴国吗？同我们争夺三江五湖利益的，不也是吴国吗？
English: Isn't it the State of Wu? Isn't it also the State of Wu that is competing with us for the interests of the three rivers and five lakes?

古文：夫十年谋之，一朝而弃之，其可乎？
现代文：我们辛辛苦苦谋划了十年，一旦丢弃就前功尽弃，怎么可以呢？
English: We have been planning for ten years with great effort. If we give up, we will have given up everything. How can that be?

古文：王姑勿许，其事将易冀已。 
现代文：君王暂且不要答应，事情很快就有转机了。 
English: For the time being, the monarch should not agree, and things will soon take a turn for the better.

古文：王曰： 吾欲勿许，而难对其使者，子其对之。 
现代文：越王说： 我想不答应，但难以答复吴国的使者，你代替我去答复他吧！ 
English: King Yue said, "I don't want to agree, but it is difficult to reply to the messenger from the State of Wu. You should reply to him instead of me."

古文：范蠡乃左提鼓，右援枹，以应使者，曰： 昔者上天降祸于越，委制于吴，而吴不受。
现代文：范蠡于是左手提着鼓，右手拿着鼓槌，答复吴国的使者说： 过去上天给越国降下灾祸，让越国落在吴国的手中，而吴国却不接受。
English: Then Fan Ye, holding a drum in his left hand and a drumstick in his right, replied to the envoy of the State of Wu, saying, "In the past, Heaven sent a calamity to the State of Yue and let the State of Yue fall into the hands of the State of Wu, but the State of Wu did not accept it.

古文：今将反此义而报此祸，吾王敢无听天之命，而听君王之命乎？ 
现代文：现在上天一反此道，让我们能报复吴国。我们君王怎敢不听从上天的命令，而听从吴王的命令呢？ 
English: Now, Heaven has reversed the order, so that we can take revenge on the State of Wu. How dare we kings not obey the order of Heaven, but obey the order of the King of Wu?

古文：王孙雒曰： 子范子，先人有言曰： 无助天为虐，助天为虐者不祥。 
现代文：王孙雒说： 尊敬的范大夫呀！古人有句话说： 不要助天作恶。助天作恶的人不吉祥。 
English: Wang Sun Rong said, "Dear Dr. Fan, the ancients had a saying: Don't help the heavens to do evil. Those who help the heavens to do evil are not auspicious.

古文：今吴稻蟹不遗种，子将助天为虐，不忌其不祥乎？ 
现代文：现在我们吴国的稻和蟹都吃得精光了，您还要助天作恶，不怕遭受厄运吗？ 
English: Now that our rice and crabs in Wuzhong are all eaten up, do you still want to help the heavens do evil and not be afraid of bad luck?

古文：范蠡曰： 王孙子，昔吾先君固周室之不成子也，故滨于东海之陂，鼋鼍鱼鳖之与处，而鼃黾之与同渚。
现代文：范蠡说： 尊敬的王孙大夫呀！从前我们的先君原是周朝不大够格的子爵，所以只能住在东海岸边，和鼋鼍鱼鳖相处，同水边的虾蟆共居。
English: Fan Yu said: "Dear Dr. Wang Sun Rong, once upon a time, our forefather was a minor viscount in the Zhou Dynasty, so he could only live on the east coast, living with eels and shrimps.

古文：余虽然而人面哉，吾犹禽兽也，又安知是浅浅者乎？ 
现代文：我们虽然面貌像人，实际跟禽兽差不多，哪里能懂得您说的这些巧辩的话呢？ 
English: Although we look like humans, we are actually almost like animals, where can we understand these clever words you say?

古文：王孙雒曰： 子范子将助天为虐，助天为虐不祥。
现代文：王孙雒说： 尊敬的范先生一定要助天为恶，助天为恶可是要遭到厄运的。
English: Wang Sun Rong said, "Respected Mr. Fan must help Heaven to do evil, and helping Heaven to do evil will bring bad luck.

古文：雒请反辞于王。 
现代文：请让我再见越王一面向他告辞。 
English: Please let me see Yue Wang again and say goodbye to him.

古文：范蠡曰： 君王已委制于执事之人矣。
现代文：范蠡说： 我们君王已经把全权委托给管事的人了。
English: Fan Ye said, "Our king has entrusted all power to the person in charge.

古文：子往矣，无使执事之人得罪于子。 使者辞反。
现代文：你走吧，免得管事的人得罪你。 吴国使者只得告辞回去。
English: You should leave, lest the person in charge of the matter offend you. The emissary of the State of Wu had to leave and return.

古文：范蠡不报于王，击鼓兴师以随使者，至于姑苏之宫，不伤越民，遂灭吴。
现代文：范蠡不再报告越王，擂起战鼓，出兵跟在吴国使者的后面，一直追到姑苏的吴国王宫，越国没有什么伤亡，就灭掉了吴国。
English: Fan Yu no longer reported to the king of Yue. He raised the war drums and sent troops to follow the envoys of the State of Wu, chasing them all the way to the palace of the King of Wu in Gusu. There were no casualties in the State of Yue, and they eliminated the State of Wu.

