古文：王若曰： 告尔伊旧何父□□□□几耿肃执，乃殷之旧官人序文□□□□，及太史比、小史昔，及百官里居献民□□□来尹师之敬诸戒疾听朕言，用胥生蠲尹王曰：嗟尔众，予言，若敢顾天命，予来致上帝之威命，明罚。
现代文：武王如此说： 告诉你们殷商旧族长口氏、口氏、口氏、口氏、饥氏、耿氏、萧氏、挚氏，以及殷商旧官员，以及太史比、小史昔，以及众贵族、里君、贤民们，要信从新任官员的告诫，快听我的话，以此生出你们的光明前程。武王说： 喂！你们听着，我顺应天命岂敢违背天命?我来这里是执行上帝威严的命令并昭示惩罚，现今是初次诰命你们，要重视它啊。
English: King Wu said: "I tell you, the old heads of the Yin merchants, the Ku, Ku, Ku, Ku, Hung, Geng, Xiao, Wei, and the old officials of the Yin merchants, as well as Taisibi, Xiao Shixiu, and all the nobles, local princes, and wise people, should believe in the admonition of the new officials, listen to my words quickly, and in this way give birth to your bright future." King Wu said: "Hey! Listen to me, do I dare to disobey the fate of heaven? I have come here to carry out God's majestic command and show punishment. This is the first time for you to die

古文：王曰：在昔在昔后稷，惟上帝之言，克播百谷，登禹之绩，凡在天下之庶民，罔不维后稷之元谷用蒸享。
现代文：我的话从头至尾每一句都是明白地教诫你们。武王说： 从前，先祖后稷顺应天命，成功地播种百谷，赶上了大禹的功绩。凡是天下的民众，没有不用先祖后稷的嘉谷去祭祀、去食用。
English: From the beginning to the end of my words, every sentence is a clear warning to you. King Wu said: In the past, the ancestors and descendants obeyed the fate of heaven, successfully sowed a hundred grains, and caught up with the merits of Dayu. All the people in the world did not have to sacrifice and eat the grain of the ancestors and descendants.

古文：在商先誓王明祀上帝□□□□亦维我后稷之元谷用告和用胥饮食。
现代文：商朝的先哲王祭祀上帝、祭祀社稷宗庙，也只用我们后稷的嘉谷以求民和，并用以食用。
English: The earlier Zhe Wang of the Shang Dynasty worshipped God and dedicated shrines and temples, and only used our later Jia Gu to seek peace with the people and to eat.

古文：肆商先誓，王维厥故，斯用显我西土。
现代文：所以，商先哲王因此之故，就显大我们西土。
English: That is why Tetsuo, the merchant forefather, gave prominence to our western land.

古文：今在商纣，昏忧天下，弗显上帝，昏虐百姓，奉天之命，上帝弗显，乃命朕文考，曰殪商之多罪。
现代文：而今商纣王昏乱，使天下忧，残虐百姓，背弃上天之命。上天不佑助他，就命我父文王说： 杀掉商朝多罪的纣王! 
English: But now the merchant king is in turmoil, worrying the whole world, brutalizing the people, and turning his back on God's command. If God does not help him, he ordered my father, King Wen, to say, "Kill the sinful merchant king!"

古文：纣肆予小在发弗敢往天命，朕考胥翕稷政，肆上帝曰：必伐之。
现代文：从前在我们西土，我父全都顺应先祖后稷之政，故上帝说一定要讨伐纣王。
English: Once upon a time, in our western land, my father had all complied with the government of his forefathers and successors, so God said that we must fight the king of Shao.

古文：予惟甲子，克致天之大罚□帝之来革纣之□。
现代文：故我姬发不能忘记天命。我在甲子日执行上天的大罚，蒙上帝恩赐，革了纣王的命。
English: Therefore, I cannot forget the destiny of Heaven. I carried out Heaven's great punishment on the day of the birth of the first son, and I was blessed by God to save the life of the King of Sheba.

古文：予亦无敢违大命，敬诸。昔在我西土，我其有言，胥告商之百无罪。其维一夫。
现代文：我也不敢违背天命。注意啊，我有言相告：商朝的百姓没有罪，有罪的只是纣王一人。
English: I don't dare to go against the destiny of heaven. Pay attention, I have a message for you: the people of the Shang Dynasty are not guilty, only the king of Qi is guilty.

古文：予既殛纣，承天命，予亦来休命，尔百姓里居君子，其周即命。
现代文：我已经诛杀了纣王，秉承天命，我又下达美好的命令给你们百姓、里君、君子，今后要听命于周。
English: I have already killed King Zhou, adhering to the mandate of heaven, and I have also issued a good order to your people, lords and gentlemen. In the future, you must obey the orders of Zhou.

古文：□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□尔冢邦君无敢其有不告见互我有周，其比冢邦君，我无攸爱。上帝曰：必伐之。
现代文：如有不听周命而敢于作乱者，你们大邦君长不敢有不报告我们周人的。即使是大邦君长我们也无所爱怜，因为上帝说一定要讨伐你们。现今我明白告诉你们：我从前追讨纣王，向上帝告以成功，上帝有命令说：你们百姓将获得新生。
English: If there are those who do not listen to Zhou's order and dare to make trouble, you great sovereigns dare not fail to report them to us Zhou people. Even if they are great sovereigns, we have no mercy, because God says we must fight you. Now I clearly tell you: I once pursued the king of She and was successful with God. God has a command to say: Your people will be reborn.

古文：今予惟明告尔，予其往追□纣遂走秦集之于上帝。
现代文：你们自己要重视有此天命，不要让百姓无所求告。我们西土人也厌恶劳累，这样的用兵岂可重复?
English: You yourselves should attach importance to the fact that you have this heavenly calling, and not let the people have nothing to ask for. We Westerners also detest fatigue, so should we repeat this kind of use of soldiers?

古文：天王其有命尔百姓献民其有缀艿。
现代文：如果上天要二次征伐，让我们劳苦兴兵，那是怪罪我们不能使你们与周人一条心。
English: If God wants a second conquest, let us work hard to raise an army, it is to blame us for not being able to make you and Zhou people one heart.

古文：夫自敬其有斯天命，不令尔百姓无告。
现代文：你们各位要人人自重，帮助上天永远嘉美我西土，你们百姓也会在那里得到安身之地。
English: You should all have self-respect, and help Heaven to forever bless our western land, where your people will also find a place to live.

古文：西土疾勤，其斯有何重天维用重勤，兴起我，罪勤我。
现代文：应该审视天命，不要造反作乱，我会保证你们的大安。虽然我是在周土这么讲，说商朝的百姓无罪，而我的命令出自上天。如有人不听从天命，敢于率先作乱，我便要致罪于他。
English: You should examine the fate of heaven, do not rebel and make trouble, I will guarantee your safety. Although I say this in Zhou soil, saying that the people of the Shang Dynasty are not guilty, and my orders come from heaven. If someone does not obey the fate of heaven and dares to be the first to make trouble, I will offend him.

古文：无克乃一心。
现代文：我只是用先王的政令再次治理你们。
English: I'm just using the king's decree to govern you again.

古文：尔多子其人，自敬之类天，永休于我西土，尔百姓其亦有安处在彼。
现代文：超越法度的不是我，而依势作乱的是你们。 武王说： 商朝的百姓们，我听说商朝的先哲王成汤能帮助上帝，保护商民，能利用三德，使商民安定无他想，用以帮助他们的君王。
English: It is not I who overstep the bounds of the law, but it is you who make trouble according to the situation.Wu Wang said: People of the Shang Dynasty, I have heard that the ancient philosopher Wang Chengtang of the Shang Dynasty can help God, protect merchants, can use the three virtues to make merchants stable, and can be used to help their kings.

古文：宜在天命□及恻乱。
现代文：今纣王背弃了成汤的旧典，故上帝命令我们小国说： 革灭商国! 
English: Now that the king has turned his back on the ancient scriptures of Cheng Tang, so God has ordered our small country to say: Destroy the merchant country!

古文：予保奭其介，有斯勿用天命。
现代文：所以我明白告诉你们百姓：如果不听从我的命令，我就要全部杀掉你们。 武王说： 霍!
English: So I clearly told you people: If you don't follow my orders, I will kill all of you.

古文：若朕厣，在周曰：商百姓无罪，朕命在周，其乃先作我肆罪疾，予惟以先王之道御复正尔百姓，越则非朕负乱。
现代文：你们大邦的君长与百姓：我的天命已定，你们要是能从我们周人这里承受上天嘉美，我们小国将有成命而不改变。
English: Princes and people of your great nation: My destiny is set. If you can receive heavenly blessings from the people around us, our small country will be successful and remain unchanged.

古文：惟尔在我王曰：百姓，我闻古商先誓王，成汤克辟上帝，保生商民，克用三德，疑商民，弗怀用辟厥辟。
现代文：当年我们盟津观兵，而上帝佑助商朝，我们怎能享有国家?现在上帝命我伐殷戎，指明百事，给我好的辅臣，我于是灭掉了殷商。
English: At that time, we were allied with Tianjin to watch the soldiers, but God helped Shang Dynasty, how can we enjoy the country? Now, God ordered me to fight Yin Rong, point out the best things, and give me good subordinates, so I eliminated Yin Shang.

古文：今纣弃成汤之典，肆上帝命我小国曰：革商国，肆予明命汝百姓。
现代文：现今我要赐福给你们，而我的太史不同意，实际是看到你们还有疑虑。
English: Now I want to bless you, but my mother-in-law disagrees. In fact, she sees that you still have doubts.

古文：其斯弗用朕命，其斯尔冢邦君，商庶百姓，予则□刘灭之。
现代文：你们都要注意：我讲的这些话敢有不听不信的，我就依上帝的明命。我要流放你们，还要以义用刑。我虽然要回到西陛，可我还会回东方用刑。你们要记住，全都要听我的话，不用再说。 
English: Take heed all of you: whether any hear or believe not these words which I speak, I do according to the commandment of God: I will cast you out, and I will chastise you with righteousness; and though I go unto the west, yet will I come unto the east, and chastise you: remember all these things, and hearken unto me.

