古文：郭药师耶律涂山乌延胡里改乌延吾里补萧恭完颜习不主纥石烈胡剌耶律恕郭企忠乌孙讹论颜盏门都仆散浑坦郑建充乌古论三合移剌温萧仲萧仲宣高松海陵诸子郭药师，渤海铁州人也。辽国募辽东人为兵，使报怨于女直，号曰 怨军 ，药师为其渠帅。
现代文：郭药师，渤海铁州人。辽国招募辽东人当兵，让他们对女真人产生抱怨。
English: Guo Yakushi, a native of Tiezhou in the Bohai Sea. Liaoning Province recruited Liaodong people as soldiers, and let them complain about nymphomania.

古文：斡鲁古攻显州，败药师于城下。
现代文：这些辽东兵号称 怨军 ，郭药师是这支军队的首领。斡鲁古攻打显州，在城下打败了药师的军队。
English: These Liaodong soldiers were known as the Grudge Army, and Guo Yakushi was the leader of this army. Yulong attacked Henzhou and defeated Yakushi's army under the city.

古文：辽帝亡保天德，耶律捏里自立，改 怨军 为 常胜军 ，擢药师诸卫上将军。
现代文：辽国皇帝逃跑去保天德，耶律捏里自称为王，把 怨军 改称 常胜军 ，提升药师诸卫上将军。
English: The emperor of Liao fled to Baotiande, and Yerutpinli proclaimed himself king, renamed the army of grievances to the army of eternal victory, and promoted the pharmacists to the generals of Wei.

古文：捏里死，其妻萧妃称制，药师以涿、易二州归于宋。
现代文：捏里死后，他的妻子萧妃代他行使皇帝的职权，郭药师以涿州和易州为献礼而归顺了宋朝。
English: After Pinch's death, his wife Xiaofei exercised the emperor's authority on his behalf, and Guo Yaoshi submitted to the Song Dynasty with the gifts of Zhangzhou and Yizhou.

古文：药师以宋兵六千人奄至燕京，甄五臣以五千人夺迎春门，皆入城。
现代文：药师带领宋兵六千人忽然逼近燕京，甄五臣带五千人马夺下迎春门，药师带兵都进了城门。
English: Six thousand Song soldiers led by the pharmacist suddenly approached Yanjing, Zhen five ministers and five thousand horses captured Yingchun Gate, and the pharmacist and soldiers entered the gate.

古文：萧妃令闭城门与宋兵巷战。药师大败，失马步走，逾城以免。
现代文：萧妃命令关闭城门，与宋军展开巷战，结果把郭药师的军队打得大败，他的马也丢了，只好步行，翻越城墙才幸免于难。
English: Xiaofei ordered to close the city gate and started a street battle with the Song army. As a result, Guo Yaoshi's army was defeated, his horse was lost, and he had to walk and climb over the city wall to survive.

古文：宋人犹厚赏之。
现代文：但宋人还是厚厚地奖赏他。
English: But the Song people still rewarded him generously.

古文：太祖割燕山六州与宋人，宋使药师副王安中守燕山。
现代文：太祖阿骨打把燕山六州割让给宋人，宋朝派郭药师作为王安中的副将把守燕山。
English: The great-grandfather, Akechi, ceded the six prefectures of Yanshan to the Song people, and the Song Dynasty sent Guo Yakushi as the vice-commander of Wang Anzhong to guard Yanshan.

古文：及安中不能庇张觉而杀之，函其首以与宗望，药师深尤宋人，而无自固之志矣。
现代文：王安中不能庇护张觉而杀了他，并把张觉的首级包起来送给了宗望，药师深深地责怪宋人，然而自己却没有坚强的意志。
English: Wang Anzhong could not protect Zhang Jue and killed him, and wrapped up Zhang Jue's head and gave it to Zongwang. The pharmacist deeply blamed the Song people, but he did not have a strong will.

古文：宗望军至三河，药师等拒战于白河。兵败，药师乃降。
现代文：宗望的军队攻到三河，郭药师带兵在白河抵抗，失败了，就投降了宗望。
English: The army of Zongfang attacked to Sanhe, Guo Yakushi led the army to resist in Baihe, failed, and surrendered to Zongfang.

古文：宗望遂取燕山。
现代文：于是宗望攻取了燕山。
English: As a result, Zongwang captured Yanshan.

古文：太宗以药师为燕京留守，给以金牌，赐姓完颜氏。
现代文：太宗派郭药师留守燕京，授予他金牌，并赐予他姓完颜氏。
English: Guo Yakushi of the Tai sect stayed in Yanjing, awarded him a gold medal, and gave him the surname of Guan Yan.

古文：诏益兵七千，遣吾里补与彰化军节度使宗室璋等七人偕往，以备任使。
现代文：他跟随宗望攻伐宋朝，凡宋兵力虚实情况，郭药师全部知道。宗望能够以孤军深入敌方，驻军汴城下，签订条约，接收税赋，割取土地，全胜而归，原因就在于郭药师能预测宋人的军情并切中他们的要害。
English: He followed Zongwang to attack the Song Dynasty. Guo Yakushi knew everything about the true and false situation of the Song army. The reason why Zongwang was able to penetrate the enemy with a lone army, garrison under the city, sign a treaty, receive taxes, cut off land, and return victorious was that Guo Yakushi could predict the military situation of the Song people and hit their key.

古文：进阶龙虎卫上将军。卒于军中。
现代文：到攻打两镇的时候，已不受任何约束，下令诸将去攻讨，郭药师大破顺安军营，杀敌三千多人。
English: By the time of the attack on the two towns, he was no longer bound by any constraints and ordered the generals to attack. Guo Yaoshi destroyed the Shun'an military camp and killed more than three thousand enemies.

古文：萧恭，字敬之，乃烈奚王之后也。父翊，天辅间归朝，从攻兴中，遂以为兴中尹。师还，以恭为质子。
现代文：海陵王完颜亮即位后，下诏凡原赐各种姓氏的一律恢复本来姓氏，所以药师的儿子安国仍然姓郭氏。萧恭字敬之，是乃烈奚王的后代。萧恭的父亲萧翊，天辅年间归附金朝，随金军攻打兴中，于是任命他为兴中尹。金军撤回，带走萧恭做人质。
English: After King Hailing ascended to the throne, he issued an edict that all surnames given by the emperor would be restored to their original names. Therefore, the son of a pharmacist, An Guo, was still surnamed Guo. Xiao Qiang, a descendant of the King of Martyrs, was named Xiao Qiang. Xiao Qiang's father, Xiao Qiang, became a vassal of the Jin Dynasty during the reign of Emperor Tianyu. When the Jin Army attacked Xingzhong, he was named Xingzhong Yin. The Jin Army retreated and took Xiao Qiang as a hostage.

古文：宗望伐宋，翊当领建、兴、成、川、懿五州兵为万户，军帅以恭材勇，使代其父行，时年二十三。
现代文：完颜宗望攻打宋朝，萧翊担当起领导建、兴、成、川、懿五州军队作为万户，金军统帅认为萧恭智勇双全，命令他代替父亲萧翊出征，萧恭时年二十三岁。
English: After Yan Zongwang attacked the Song Dynasty, Xiao Jiong took charge of leading the five state armies of Jian, Xing, Cheng, Sichuan and Qian as the 10,000 households. The commander of the Jin Army thought that Xiao Jiong was a perfect match and ordered him to go to war in place of his father Xiao Jiong. Xiao Jiong was 23 years old at the time.

古文：至中山，宋兵出战，恭先以所部击败之。
现代文：金军到了中山，宋军出兵迎战，萧恭首先用自己率领的部队打败了宋军。
English: When the gold army reached Zhongshan, the Song army sent troops to meet the battle, and Xiao Qiong first defeated the Song army with his own troops.

古文：经山东，及渡淮，袭康王，皆在军中。
现代文：经过山东、渡过淮河，进攻宋朝康王，萧恭都在金军队伍中。
English: After passing through Shandong, crossing the Huai River, and attacking the Song Dynasty King Kang, Xiao Qiong was in the ranks of the Golden Army.

古文：师还，帅府承制授德州防御使，奚人之屯滨、棣间者皆隶焉。
现代文：金军回国，帅府承制授萧恭为德州防御使，守卫在滨、棣间的奚人都附属于他。
English: When the Golden Army returned to China, Xiao Jiong was awarded the title of Texas Defense Envoy by the General Headquarters, and the guards on the coast and between the dikes were all attached to him.

古文：改棣州防御使。
现代文：后萧恭改任棣州防御使。
English: Later, Xiao Qiong was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou Defense Envoy.

古文：皇统间，改同知横海军节度使。
现代文：皇统年间，萧恭改任同知横海军节度使。
English: During the period of imperial rule, Xiao Qiong was reassigned to the post of naval deputy to Tong Zhiyong.

古文：丁父忧，起复为太原少尹。用廉，迁同知中京留守事。
现代文：萧恭父亲去世后他回家服丧，期满出来后任太原少尹，他廉洁奉公，被提升为同知中京留守事。
English: After the death of Xiao Qiong's father, he went home to mourn. After his term expired, he was appointed as Taiyuan Shao Yin. He served the public with integrity, and was promoted to stay in Beijing.

古文：累迁兵部侍郎，授世袭谋克。
现代文：萧恭直至升到兵部侍郎，授为世袭谋克。
English: Xiao Qiong was promoted to the position of attendant of the military department, and was awarded the title of hereditary strategist.

古文：坐问禁中起居状，决杖，夺一官。贞元二年，为同知大兴尹。
现代文：贞元二年，萧恭做同知大兴尹。
English: In the second year of Zhengyuan, Xiao Qiong became a classmate of Daxing Yin.

古文：岁余，迁兵部尚书，为宋国生日使。
现代文：一年后，升为兵部尚书，做宋朝生日使。
English: A year later, he was promoted to Shangshu of the Military Department and became the birthday envoy of the Song Dynasty.

古文：以母忧去官，起复为侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使。
现代文：后母亲去世萧恭辞官服丧，期满出来后他又任侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使。
English: After his mother's death, Xiao Qiong resigned from his post and went into mourning. After his term of office expired, he was appointed as the commander of the guards of the pro-army Ma Bu army.

古文：正隆四年，迁光禄大夫，复为兵部尚书。
现代文：正隆四年，升为光禄大夫，做兵部尚书。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenglong's reign, he was promoted to the post of Guanglu Doctor and became the secretary of the military department.

古文：是岁，经画夏国边界，还过临潼，失所佩金牌。
现代文：这一年，萧恭度量划分金朝与西夏国的边界，回来经过临潼时，丢失了所佩带的金牌。
English: That year, Xiao Jiong measured the border between the Jin Dynasty and the Western Xia, and when he came back through Linyi, he lost the gold medal he was wearing.

古文：至太原，忧恚成疾。
现代文：等到了太原，萧恭忧郁愤恨成疾。
English: By the time he reached Taiyuan, Xiao Gong's melancholy and resentment had turned into a disease.

古文：时已具其事驿闻于朝，海陵复命给之，仍遣谕恭曰： 汝失信牌，亦犹不谨。
现代文：此时他丢失金牌之事已快马报告给朝廷，金皇帝海陵王再命令给萧恭金牌一枚，并下诏令给萧恭说： 你丢失了信牌，属于不谨慎。
English: At this time, he had quickly reported the loss of the gold medal to the imperial court. The gold emperor Hailing Wang then ordered to give Xiao Qiong a gold medal, and issued an edict to Xiao Qiong saying: You lost the badge, it is imprudent.

古文：朕方俟汝，欲有委使，乃称疾耶？
现代文：朕正等着你回朝，有新的使命委派给你，怎么就称疾呢？
English: I'm waiting for you to return to the North, with a new mission assigned to you, how can you call it a disease?

古文：必以去日身佩信牌，归则无以为辞，欲朕先知耳。 
现代文：你丢失了过去所佩金牌，怕回朝后没法说，想使我先知道罢了。 
English: You lost the gold medal you used to wear, and you're afraid you won't be able to tell me when you get back, so you want me to know first.

古文：使至，恭已疾笃，稽颡受命，俄顷而卒。
现代文：皇帝使臣赶至，萧恭的病已经很严重了，他稽首接了命令，一会儿就死了。
English: When the emperor's envoys arrived, Xiao Qiong's illness was already very serious. He received the order from his superiors and died in a short time.

古文：海陵方遣使与其子护卫九哥驰视，乃戒府官使善护之。至保州，已闻讣矣，海陵深悼惜之。
现代文：与此同时金皇帝海陵王正派遣使臣和萧恭的儿子萧九哥骑马前往看望，告诫沿途府官好好照顾他俩，他俩行至保州，已听到了萧恭死去的讣闻，金皇帝海陵王深深地悼念萧恭。
English: At the same time, Emperor Hailing was sending envoys and Xiao Jiu Ge, the son of Xiao Gong, to visit him on horseback, warning the officials along the way to take good care of them. When they went to Bozhou, they had already heard the news of Xiao Gong's death. Emperor Hailing deeply mourned Xiao Gong.

古文：命九哥护丧以还，所过州府设奠。
现代文：海陵王命令萧九哥护丧回朝，所经过的州府都设奠祭之。
English: King Hailing ordered the funeral escort of Xiao Jiu Ge to return to the imperial court, and all the state capitals he passed through set up a memorial service.

古文：丧至都，命百官致祭。
现代文：萧恭的灵柩回到京城，皇帝命令所有的官员前去祭奠。
English: Xiao Gong's coffin returned to Beijing, and the emperor ordered all officials to pay their respects.

古文：亲临奠，赙赠甚厚，并赐厩马一。
现代文：皇帝也亲自前去祭奠，而且赐给很多财物以办丧事，并赏赐给萧恭御马一匹。
English: The emperor himself also went to pay tribute, and gave a lot of wealth to carry out the funeral, and rewarded Xiao Qiong with a royal horse.

古文：谓九哥曰： 尔父衔命，卒于道途，甚可悼惜。
现代文：皇帝对萧九哥说 ：你的父亲领命行事，不幸死于路途中，很是悲伤惋惜。
English: The emperor said to Xiao Jiu Ge: Your father led the order to act, unfortunately died on the way, very sad and regretful.

古文：朕乘此马十年，今赐汝父，可常控至柩前。
现代文：我乘坐此马已经十年，现在赐赏给你的父亲，你可以常常把它拴在灵柩前。
English: I have ridden this horse for ten years, and now that I have given it to your father, you can often ride it in front of the coffin.

古文：既葬，汝则乘之。 
现代文：到你父亲安葬后，你就可以骑它了。 
English: After your father is buried, you can ride it.

古文：完颜习不主，年十六，从伐宋，攻下怀仁县，功居最。
现代文：完颜习不主，十六岁时跟随金军攻打宋朝，金军攻下怀仁县，完颜习不主功劳最大。
English: At the age of sixteen, he followed the Golden Army to attack the Song Dynasty. The Golden Army conquered Huairen County, and he was the biggest contributor.

古文：从睿宗经略陕西，以兵七百人入丹州诸山，遇盗三千，击败之。
现代文：完颜习不主跟随金睿宗巡视陕西，他用七百人的兵力进入丹州诸山遇到三千强盗，他打败了他们。
English: After the emperor died, he followed Jin Ruizong on a tour of Shaanxi. With seven hundred soldiers, he entered the mountains of Danzhou and encountered three thousand robbers. He defeated them.

古文：又破贼四千，生擒其将帅。
现代文：后来又打败了四千敌军，活捉了敌军将帅。
English: Later, he defeated another four thousand enemy troops and captured the enemy general alive.

古文：出陇州，以兵四百败敌数千。
现代文：出击陇州，完颜习不主用四百人打败了敌军几千人。
English: He attacked Zhangzhou and defeated several thousand enemy troops with only four hundred men.

古文：宋兵七千来取巩州，复击走之。
现代文：宋朝军队派七千兵来夺取巩州，完颜习不主又打跑了他们。
English: The Song Dynasty army sent seven thousand soldiers to conquer Gongzhou, but they were defeated and driven away.

古文：又以五千兵败吴玠之众三万，白塔口遇敌五千，复败之。
现代文：后来完颜习不主又用五千兵打败了吴的三万兵。在白塔口完颜习不主又同五千敌军遭遇，他又打败了他们。
English: Later, he used five thousand soldiers to defeat Wu's thirty thousand soldiers. At the mouth of the White Pagoda, he encountered another five thousand enemy troops and defeated them.

古文：别降定远等寨。
现代文：另外他还降服了定远等寨。
English: In addition, he also conquered Dingyuan and other villages.

古文：皇统二年，授同知临洮尹，以忧去官。
现代文：皇统二年，完颜习不主被授为同知临洮尹，因为母亲去世，他辞去了官职。
English: In the second year of imperial reunification, he was awarded the title of Tongzhi Linyin, because his mother died, he resigned from his official post.

古文：未期，以旧职起复，改孟州防御使，迁临洮尹。
现代文：服孝期未满，完颜习不主又出来做了同知临洮尹。后来完颜习不主改任孟州防御使，提升为临洮尹。
English: Before the period of filial piety was over, he came out and became a friend of Linyi Yin. Later, he was transferred to the Mengzhou Defense Envoy and promoted to Linyi Yin.

古文：复以罪罢。
现代文：后来因为有罪被免去官职。
English: He was later removed from office for his crimes.

古文：正隆三年，起为京兆尹，改河南尹。
现代文：正隆三年，完颜习不主被起用做京兆尹，后改任河南尹。
English: In the third year of Zhenglong, Yan Xiwuzhong was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun, and later as Henan Yin.

古文：卒，年五十八。
现代文：死时五十八岁。
English: He died at the age of fifty-eight, fifteen years after the founding of the Republic of China.

古文：纥石烈胡剌，晦发川唵敦河人，徙西北路。
现代文：纥石烈胡剌，是晦发川耮敦河人，后迁居西北路。
English: Zou Shi Lai Huan, a native of the late Fuchuan and Dunhe River, later moved to the Northwest Road.

古文：识契丹字，为帅府小吏。
现代文：纥石烈胡剌认识契丹文字，做帅府的小官。
English: Zhai Shi Lie Hu Yao knew Khitan characters and was a minor official of Shuaifu.

古文：梁王宗弼复陕西，久不通问。
现代文：梁王完颜宗弼收复陕西，很长时间没有上奏问候。
English: When Liang Wang recovered Shaanxi after Yan Zongkun, he did not play greetings for a long time.

古文：睿宗在燕京，遣胡剌往候之。
现代文：金睿宗在燕京，派纥石烈胡剌前往陕西问候完颜宗弼。
English: Jin Ruizong was in Yanjing, and sent Zou Shi Rong Hu to Shaanxi to greet Yan Zongyuan.

古文：是时，宗弼自凤翔攻和尚原，使胡剌视彼中地形，修道筑城。
现代文：这时，完颜宗弼自凤翔攻打和尚原，派纥石烈胡剌勘察他们的地形，修建道路修筑城墙。
English: At this time, Yan Zongyi attacked Monchohara from Fengxiang, and sent Yan Shi Lihu to survey their terrain, build a road and build a city wall.

古文：天会十二年，往滨州密访南边事体，及观刘豫治齐状，尽得其虚实。
现代文：天会十二年，纥石烈胡剌前往滨州秘密访查南边事情，和观察刘豫治理齐国的情况，他获得了全部情况的虚实。
English: In the twelfth year of the Heaven's Fair, Zou Shi Lie Hu Yao went to Binzhou to secretly visit the southern border and observe the situation of Liu Yu's governance of Qi. He obtained all the facts of the situation.

古文：睿宗甚嘉之。
现代文：睿宗很赞扬他。
English: Ruizong praised him highly.

古文：皇统初，从宗弼渡淮，及下庐、和二州，大破张浚、韩世忠等军。
现代文：皇统初年，纥石烈胡剌跟从宗弼南渡淮河，接连攻下庐州、和州，大败张浚、韩世忠等宋军。
English: In the first year of imperial unification, Zou Shi Liang Hu Yao followed Zong Yao Nan to cross the Huai River, successively conquered Zhangzhou and Hezhou, and defeated Zhang Jun, Han Shizhong and other Song armies.

古文：遣胡剌驰奏，赏以金盂、重彩五端、绢五匹。
现代文：完颜宗弼派纥石烈胡剌快马报奏金熙宗皇帝，金熙宗皇帝赏纥石烈胡剌金盂、彩绸五端、绢五匹。
English: The Kanyan Sect of the Jurchen Dynasty sent five stone-carved horses to the Emperor Kim Hee-jong, and the Emperor Kim Hee-jong admired five stone-carved horses, five pieces of colored silk, and five horses.

古文：七年，授同知景州军州事，以廉，加忠武校尉。
现代文：皇统七年，纥石烈胡剌被授为同知景州军州事，因为他廉洁奉公，被加升为忠武校尉。
English: In the seventh year of imperial rule, Zou Shi Li Hu Yao was awarded the title of Tongzhi Jingzhou Military Provincial Affairs, because he served the public with integrity, and was promoted to the rank of Zhongwu Lieutenant.

古文：天德初，以监察御史分司行台，历同知济州防御使事，入为监察御史。
现代文：天德初年，纥石烈胡剌做监察御史分司行台，历任同知济州防御使事，入朝做监察御使。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, Zou Shi Lai Hu Yao served as the inspector of the History Division of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office.

古文：二年，例赠银青光禄大夫。
现代文：他任期满后又再任。大定二年，升为刑部员外郎，同御史大夫白彦敬前往西北部族买马。
English: After his term of office expired, he was reappointed. In the second year of the Taisho era, he was promoted to the position of a member of the criminal investigation department, and he went to buy a horse from a family in the northwestern part of the country.

古文：郭企忠，字元弼，唐汾阳王子仪之后。
现代文：纥石烈胡剌直至转泗州防御使，多次升为蒲与路节度使，调到宁昌军，后死于军中。郭企忠，字元弼，唐朝汾阳王郭子仪的后代。
English: Guo Qizhong until he became the defense minister of Bozhou, and was promoted several times to the minister of defense of Pu and Lu, transferred to the Ningchang Army, and later died in the army. Guo Qizhong, Ziyuan, descendant of Guo Ziyi, the king of Shenyang in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：郭氏自子仪至承勋，皆节镇北方。
现代文：郭氏从郭子仪到郭承勋，都节制镇守北方。
English: The Guo clan, from Guo Ziyi to Guo Chengxun, were all temperate guardians of the north.

古文：唐季，承勋入于辽，子孙继为天德军节度使，至昌金降为副使。
现代文：唐朝末年，郭承勋归入辽国，子孙继续做天德军节度使，到郭昌金时降为副使。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Guo Chengxun was assigned to Liao Province, and his descendants continued to be the envoys of the German army, and were reduced to deputy envoys when Guo Changjin was crowned.

古文：企忠幼孤，事母孝谨。
现代文：郭企忠幼年父亲去世，他尽心侍奉母亲。
English: Guo Qizhong's father died when he was young, and he devotedly served his mother.

古文：年十三，居母丧，哀毁如成人。
现代文：郭企忠十三岁时，母亲也死了，他像成人一样地过度哀痛。
English: When Guo Qizhong was 13 years old, his mother also died, and he grieved excessively like an adult.

古文：服除，袭父官，加左散骑常侍。
现代文：服丧期满，他继承了父亲的官职，加左散骑常侍。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he inherited his father's official post, and became a samurai.

古文：天辅中，大军至云中，遣耶律坦招抚诸部。
现代文：金朝天辅中期，金朝大军到了云中，金军统帅命令耶律坦招安抚恤辽军各部。
English: In the mid-Tianfu period of the Kim dynasty, when the great army of the Kim dynasty reached the clouds, the commander-in-chief of the Kim army ordered Yerutang to recruit and pacify the various departments of the Liao army.

古文：企忠来降。
现代文：郭企忠前去投降。
English: Guo Qizhong went forward to surrender.

古文：军帅命同勾当天德军节度使事，徙所部居于韩州。
现代文：金军统帅任命他勾当天德军节度使事，带领所部迁居韩州。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Chinese army appointed him to be the German military festival envoy on the same day, leading the headquarters to relocate to South Korea.

古文：及见太祖，问知其家世，礼遇优厚，以白鹰赐之。
现代文：等到郭企忠拜见金太祖，金太祖问询了他的家世后，对他礼遇优厚，用白鹰赏赐给他。
English: After waiting for Guo Qizhong to pay his respects to King Taizu, King Taizu inquired about his family history, treated him courteously and rewarded him with a white eagle.

古文：天会三年，伐宋，领西南诸部番、汉军兵，为猛安，从破雁门，屯兵，加桂州管内观察留后，镇代州。
现代文：天会三年，金朝攻打宋朝，郭企忠统领西南诸军蕃、汉人军兵，任猛安，跟随打下雁门并在此屯兵，任桂州管内观察留后，镇守代州。
English: In the third year of the Heian period, when the Kim dynasty attacked the Song dynasty, Guo Qizhong led the troops of the southwestern states and the Han soldiers. He was assigned to Meng'an, followed by the capture of the Wild Goose Gate and stationed troops here. After serving as an observer in the Guizhou region, he guarded Daizhou.

古文：明年，贼杨麻胡等聚众数千于五台，企忠与同知州事迪里讨平之。
现代文：第二年，贼寇杨麻胡等在五台山聚众几千人，郭企忠与同知州事迪里讨伐平定了他们。
English: In the second year, the bandit Yang Mahu and others gathered several thousand people on Mount Wutai, and Guo Qizhong and his friend Zhi Dili fought and defeated them.

古文：迁知汾州事。
现代文：郭企忠升为知汾州事。
English: Guo Qizhong was promoted to Zhengyang County.

古文：是时汾州初下，居民多为军士掠去，城邑萧然。
现代文：这时，汾州刚刚打下，居民大多被士兵掠走，城邑里很萧然。
English: At this time, Bozhou had just been defeated, most of the residents were taken away by soldiers, and the town was very depressed.

古文：企忠诣帅府力请，愿听其亲旧赎还。帅府从之。
现代文：郭企忠到帅府极力请求，愿意把城里原来的人弄回来，帅府批准了他的请求。
English: Guo Qizhong went to the Shuai Prefecture to make a strong request that he was willing to bring back the original people in the city, and the Shuai Prefecture approved his request.

古文：未几，完实如故。
现代文：不多久，城邑里又像过去一样充实繁荣。
English: It was not long before the town was as prosperous as ever.

古文：以老致仕，卒。赞曰：军旅之事，锋镝在前，不计其死。
现代文：石州的盗贼阎先生率几万人来到汾州城下，幕僚担忧内部有人作乱叛变，请求郭企忠防备。郭企忠说： 我对汾州的人有恩德，保定不会发生其他意外情况。 
English: Mr. Yan, the thief from Shizhou, led tens of thousands of people to the outskirts of Zhangzhou City. The staff members were worried that someone inside would rebel and asked Guo Qizhong to be on guard. Guo Qizhong said: I am kind to the people of Zhangzhou, and there will be no other unexpected situations in Baoding.

古文：耳属金鼓，目属旌旗，心属号令，此行列之任也。
现代文：于是率领官兵守城。适逢援军赶到，内外合击，大败盗贼。
English: He then led the officers and soldiers to defend the city. When reinforcements arrived, they clashed inside and outside and defeated the thieves.

古文：自收国用兵，至于大定和宋以前，用命之士，虽细必录，所以明功也。
现代文：天会六年，郭企忠改任静江军节度留后，后为天德军节度使、汴京步军都指挥使，直至升为金吾卫上将军。任期满后，暂代沁州刺史。到任一年多死去，终年六十八岁。
English: In the sixth year of the Heavenly Assembly, Guo Qizhong was appointed as the commander of the Jingjiang Army, and later as the commander of the Heavenly German Army and the commander of the Beijing Infantry, until he was promoted to the general of Kinguwei. After the expiration of his term, he temporarily served as the governor of Zhangzhou. He died more than a year after taking office, and was 68 years old.

古文：萧仲恭，本名术里者。
现代文：萧仲恭原名萧术里者。
English: Xiao Zhongyong was formerly known as Xiao Shuling.

古文：祖挞不也，仕辽为枢密使，守司徒，封兰陵郡王。
现代文：先祖萧挞不也，在辽国做官为枢密使，守司徒，封为兰陵郡王。
English: The ancestors of Xiao Yifu also served as envoys and guards in Liao, and were crowned as the king of Lanling.

古文：父特末，为中书令，守司空，尚主。
现代文：萧仲恭的父亲叫萧特末，官为中书令，守司空，娶公主为妻。
English: Xiao Zhongxiong's father was named Xiao Temei. He was an official of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and married a princess.

古文：仲恭性恭谨，动有礼节，能被甲超橐驼。
现代文：萧仲恭性情谦恭谨慎，行为很有礼节，能够披铠甲一跃而上骆驼。
English: Xiao Zhongxiong is modest and prudent, and his behavior is very courteous. He can wear armor and jump onto a camel.

古文：辽故事，宗戚子弟别为一班，号 孩儿班 ，仲恭尝为班使，历宫使、本班详稳。
现代文：辽国旧规定，宗族弟子另为一班，叫 孩儿班 ，萧仲恭曾经做过班使，历宫使、本班详稳。
English: According to the old regulations of Liao, the disciples of the clan were divided into two groups: the children's group, which Xiao Zhongxiong had been a member of, and the palace group, which was a member of Xiao Zhongxiong.

古文：辽帝西奔天德，仲恭为护卫太保，兼领军事。
现代文：辽国皇帝天祚被金朝打得西逃天德，萧仲恭做护卫太保，兼领军事。
English: Liao Emperor Tianyao was defeated by the Jin Dynasty and fled to the West, Xiao Zhongyan served as an escort and military leader.

古文：至霍里底泊，大军奄至，仓卒走。
现代文：到了霍里底泊，金朝大军突然追到，辽国皇帝又仓促逃跑。
English: When they arrived at Horidipo, the large army of the Kim dynasty suddenly caught up with them, and the Liao Emperor hastily fled.

古文：仲恭母马乏，不能进，谓仲恭兄弟曰： 汝等尽节国家，无以我为也。 
现代文：萧仲恭母亲的马跑乏了，不能再前进，她对萧仲恭兄弟们说： 你们尽管效忠国家，不要管我。 
English: Xiao Zhonggong's mother's horse was exhausted and could not go any further. She said to Xiao Zhonggong's brothers: "You may be loyal to the country, but leave me alone.

古文：仲恭母，辽道宗季女也。
现代文：萧仲恭的母亲，是辽国皇帝道宗的小女儿。
English: Xiao Zhongxiong's mother was the youngest daughter of Emperor Daozong of Liao.

古文：辽主伤之，命弟仲宣留侍其母。
现代文：辽国皇帝天祚很悲哀，命令萧仲恭的弟弟萧仲宣留下来侍奉他的母亲。
English: The Liao Emperor Tianzhu was very sad and ordered Xiao Zhongxuan, Xiao Zhongxuan's younger brother, to stay and serve his mother.

古文：仲恭从而西。
现代文：萧仲恭跟从皇帝再向西逃。
English: Xiao Zhongyan followed the emperor and fled to the west.

古文：时大雪，寒甚，辽主乏食，仲恭进衣并进干糒。
现代文：当时大雪纷飞，天气寒冷，辽国皇帝又缺少饭吃，萧仲恭于是献上衣食。
English: At that time, it was snowing heavily, the weather was cold, and the Liao Emperor was short of food, so Xiao Zhongyan offered him food and clothing.

古文：辽主困，仲恭伏冰雪中，辽主藉之以憩。
现代文：辽国皇帝困倦了，萧仲恭就伏在冰雪中，辽国皇帝卧在他身上休息。
English: When the Liao Emperor was tired, Xiao Zhongxiong lay down in the snow and ice, and the Liao Emperor lay on top of him to rest.

古文：凡六日，乃至天德，始得食。
现代文：共计六天，才到达天德，至此萧仲恭才得以进食。
English: It took a total of six days to reach Tiande, and only then was Xiao Zhongyan able to eat.

古文：后与辽主俱获，太宗以仲恭忠于其主，特加礼待。
现代文：后来，萧仲恭与辽国皇帝都被金军俘获，金太宗皇帝因为仲恭忠于其主，特以礼相待。
English: Later, both Xiao Zhonggong and the Liao Emperor were captured by the Jin army. Emperor Jin Taizong treated Zhonggong with special courtesy because he was loyal to his master.

古文：天会四年，仲恭使宋。
现代文：天会四年，萧仲恭出使宋朝。
English: Four years after the Heaven's Fair, Xiao Zhonggong sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty.

古文：且还，宋人意仲恭、耶律余睹皆有亡国之戚，而余睹为监军，有兵权，可诱而用之，乃以蜡丸书令仲恭致之余睹，使为内应。
现代文：到了宋朝，宋朝人考虑萧仲恭、耶律余睹都有亡国的悲伤，而耶律余睹作为监军握有兵权，可以诱惑利用他们，于是用蜡丸写信一封让萧仲恭带给耶律余睹，让他作为宋军的内应。
English: In the Song Dynasty, people in the Song Dynasty considered that both Xiao Zhongyan and Yerut Yuzhan were saddened by the death of the country, and Yerut Yuzhan, as the overseer of the army, had the military power to tempt and use them, so they wrote a letter with a wax ball for Xiao Zhongyan to bring to Yerut Yuzhan, and let him be the internal correspondence of the Song Army.

古文：仲恭素忠信，无反覆志，但恐宋人留不遣，遂阳许。
现代文：萧仲恭一向忠诚，没有反叛的意图，但又害怕宋朝扣下他不让他回金朝，于是假装着答应了宋朝的命令。
English: Xiao Zhonggong had always been loyal and had no intention of rebelling, but he was afraid that the Song Dynasty would detain him and not allow him to return to the Jin Dynasty, so he pretended to agree to the Song Dynasty's order.

古文：还见宗望，即以蜡丸书献之。
现代文：萧仲恭回到金朝拜见完颜宗望，就把宋朝的蜡丸信献给了他。
English: When Xiao Zhonggong returned to the Jin Dynasty after paying homage to Yan Zongwang, he dedicated the Song Dynasty wax ball letter to him.

古文：宗望察仲恭无他，薄罚之。
现代文：完颜宗望观察到萧仲恭没有其他的反叛迹象，就轻微地罚了他。
English: Observing that Xiao Zhongxiong showed no other signs of rebellion, Ganyan Zongwang gave him a light punishment.

古文：于是再举伐宋，执二帝以归。
现代文：于是金朝再次攻打宋朝，掳获宋朝二帝回到金朝。
English: As a result, the Kim dynasty once again attacked the Song dynasty, captured the second emperor of the Song dynasty and brought him back to the Kim dynasty.

古文：累迁右宣徽使，改都点检。
现代文：萧仲恭升为右宣徽使，改任都点检。
English: Xiao Zhongyong was promoted to Yu Xuanhui Envoy, and all the changes were inspected.

古文：宗磐与宗干争辩于熙宗前，宗磐拔刀向宗干，仲恭呵之乃止。
现代文：完颜宗磐与完颜宗干在金熙宗面前争辩，完颜宗磐拔刀刺向完颜宗干，萧仲恭呵斥宗磐使他停止了行动。
English: Kanyan Zongban and Kanyan Zonggan argued in front of Kim Xizong. Kanyan Zongban drew his sword and stabbed Kanyan Zonggan. Xiao Zhongyan shouted at Kanyan Zongban to stop the action.

古文：既而宗磐以反罪诛，仲恭卫禁有备，以功加银青光禄大夫，迁尚书右丞。
现代文：不久完颜宗磐因为反叛罪被杀，萧仲恭保卫皇宫有功，加为银青光禄大夫，升为尚书右丞。
English: Soon after, Yan Zongban was killed for the crime of rebellion, and Xiao Zhongyong was awarded the title of "Silver Qingguanglu Doctor" and promoted to "Shang Shu Yu Rong" for his contribution to the defense of the imperial palace.

古文：皇统初，封兰陵郡王，授世袭猛安，进拜平章政事，同监修国史，封济王。
现代文：皇统初年，萧仲恭被封为兰陵郡王，授予世袭猛安，进而被授为平章政事、同监修国史，封为济王。
English: In the first year of imperial rule, Xiao Zhonggyong was named Lanling County King and awarded hereditary protection. He was also awarded the title of Pingzhang for political affairs, the same title for supervising the study of national history, and the title of Jie Wang.

古文：诏葬辽豫王于广宁，仲恭请往会葬，熙宗义而许之。
现代文：金朝皇帝熙宗下诏在广宁埋葬辽国豫王，萧仲恭请求前去参加葬礼，金朝皇帝熙宗认为他有道义而允许了他。
English: Emperor Hezong of the Jin Dynasty issued an edict to bury King Yu of Liao Province in Guangning. Xiao Zhongyan requested to go to the funeral. Emperor Hezong of the Jin Dynasty thought he was moral and allowed him.

古文：改行台左丞相。
现代文：后来萧仲恭改任行台左丞相。
English: Later, Xiao Zhongyong was reappointed as the Minister of the Left of the Central Military Commission.

古文：居无何，入为尚书右丞相，拜太傅，领三省事，封曹王。
现代文：居官没多久，萧仲恭又进朝做尚书右丞相，任太傅，领三省事，封为曹王。
English: Not long after taking office, Xiao Zhongxiong entered the imperial court to serve as the minister of the right of imperial rescript, appointed taifu, led three provincial affairs, and was crowned Cao Wang.

古文：天德二年，封越国王，除燕京留守。
现代文：天德二年，萧仲恭被封为越国王，任命做燕京留守。
English: In the second year of Tiande, Xiao Zhongxiong was crowned the king of Vietnam and was appointed to stay in Yanjing.

古文：贿赂禁绝，奴婢入郡，人莫识其面。
现代文：金海陵王皇帝亲自写文书，把玉山子赏赐给萧仲恭。
English: Emperor Jinhairing personally wrote a document to award the Jade Mountain to Xiao Zhongyan.

古文：朔、潞百姓皆为立祠刻石颂之。
现代文：这一年萧仲恭死去，年仅六十一岁。谥号贞简。
English: In the same year, Xiao Zhongyong died at the age of sixty-one. Her nickname was Zhengjian.

古文：正隆二年，卒，年六十四。
现代文：正隆年间，萧仲恭依旧例降王爵，改为仪同三司、郑国公。
English: During the reign of Zheng Long, Xiao Zhonggyong was still demoted to the rank of prince, and was changed to the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Zheng Guogong.

古文：高松，本名檀朵，澄州析木人。
现代文：萧仲恭有个儿子叫萧拱。高松原名高檀朵，澄州析木人。
English: Xiao Zhongyong had a son named Xiao Gong. He was a famous high dandelion in Takamatsu and a wood sorter in Chengdu.

古文：年十九，从军为蒲辇，有力善战，宗弼闻其名，召置左右，从破汴京及和尚原，累官咸平总管府判官。
现代文：十九岁时从军做蒲辇，他有力善战。完颜宗弼听说他的事后，召他跟随左右，高松从此跟随宗弼大破汴京及和尚原，官到咸平总管府判官。
English: At the age of nineteen, he joined the army as an infantryman. He was strong and good at fighting. After Yan Zonglu heard about him, he called him to follow him around. From then on, Gao Song followed Zonglu to Beijing and He Shangyuan, and became a judge of the General Administration of Hamping.

古文：世宗即位，充管押东京路渤海万户。
现代文：世宗即金朝皇帝位后，高松任充管押东京路渤海万户。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, i.e. the emperor of the Kim dynasty, Takamatsu was appointed as the person in charge of seizing control of tens of thousands of households on Tokyo Road and the Bohai Sea.

古文：兵部尚书可喜谋反，前同知延安尹李老僧曰： 我与万户高松谋之，必从我矣。 
现代文：兵部尚书可喜谋反，先前的同知延安尹李老僧说： 我与万户高松计谋此事，他一定会跟从我们。 
English: Shang Shuxu of the military department may be willing to plot a rebellion. Yan'an Yin Li, a former comrade, said: I have plotted this matter with Wanju Gaosong, and he will surely follow us.

古文：众曰： 若得此军，举事易矣。 
现代文：他军中很多人说 ：若得此军，我们的起义是很容易的。 
English: Many people in his army said: If we get this army, our uprising will be easy.

古文：老僧往见松，说松曰： 君有功旧人，至今不得大官，何也？ 
现代文：李老僧前去会见高松，游说高松说： 你对以前的皇帝有功，到现在没有给你大官做，什么原因？ 
English: The old monk Li went to meet with Gao Song and lobbied him, saying, "You have made contributions to previous emperors, but so far you have not been given a high-ranking position. Why is that?

古文：松曰： 我一县令也，每念圣恩，累世不能报，尚敢有望乎！ 
现代文：高松回答说： 我是一个县令，每每念及皇上圣恩，我这一生都报答不完，还敢有奢望吗？ 
English: Takamatsu replied, "I am a prefectural governor. Every time I think of the emperor's grace, I can never repay it in my lifetime. Do I dare to have extravagant hopes?

古文：老僧遂不敢言。
现代文：李老僧于是不敢劝说高松谋反。
English: So the old monk Li did not dare to persuade Gao Song to rebel.

古文：可喜、布辉、阿琐知事不可成，遂上变，共捕斡论赴有司。
现代文：可喜、布辉、阿琐知道谋反不能成功，于是他们改变谋反意图，共同逮捕了斡论到有司去自首。
English: Koji, Buhui, and Azo knew that the conspiracy could not succeed, so they changed their intention to conspire and jointly arrested the mediator to have him surrender.

古文：松从征窝斡，以功迁咸平少尹，四迁崇义军节度使。
现代文：高松跟从完颜窝斡出征，因为有功升为咸平少尹，四次荣升崇义军节度使。
English: Takamatsu followed Kanenwo's advice to go to the front, and because of his meritorious service, he was promoted to the rank of Xianping Shao Yin, and four times he was promoted to the position of the festival envoy of the Volunteer Army.

古文：卒，年七十四。
现代文：高松四十七岁时死去。
English: He was 74 when he died.

