古文：发兴为闽、广游。
现代文：崇祯皇帝改年号的那年二月，我萌发出游福建、广东的兴致。
English: In February of the year of Emperor Chongzhen's New Year's Day, my interest in visiting Fujian and Guangdong was piqued.

古文：二十日，始成行。
现代文：二十日，才动身启程。
English: On the 20th, they set off on their journey.

古文：三月十一日，抵江山之青湖，为入闽登陆道。
现代文：三月十一日，到达江山县的青湖，是沿进入福建省的陆路走的。
English: On March 11, he reached Qinghu, Jiangshan County, along the overland route into Fujian Province.

古文：十五里，出石门街，与江郎为面，如故人再晤。
现代文：十五里，从石门街出去，和江郎山相遇，就像老朋友又见面一样。
English: Fifteen miles out of Shimen Street, meeting Jiang Langshan was like seeing an old friend again.

古文：十五里，至峡口，已暮。
现代文：走十五里，来到峡口，已是傍晚。
English: After walking for fifteen miles, we arrived at the mouth of the gorge. It was already evening.

古文：又行十五里，宿于山坑。
现代文：又走十五里，在山坑住宿。
English: They walked another fifteen miles and stayed in a mountain pit.

古文：十二日二十里，登仙霞岭。
现代文：十二日走二十里，登上仙霞岭。
English: On the 12th, I walked 20 miles and climbed Xianxia Ridge.

古文：三十五里，登丹枫岭，岭南即福建界。
现代文：走三十五里，登上丹枫岭，岭南是福建境。
English: Go thirty-five miles and climb Danfeng Ridge. The southern part of the ridge is in Fujian Province.

古文：又七里，西有路越岭而来，乃江西永丰道，去永丰尚八十里。
现代文：又走七里，西边有条路越过山岭后伸过来，这是去江西省永丰县的路，距离永丰县还有八十里。
English: After walking another seven miles, there is a road in the west that stretches over the mountains. This is the road to Yongfeng County, Jiangxi Province. Yongfeng County is still eighty miles away.

古文：循溪折而东，八里至梨岭麓，四里登其巅，前六里，宿于九牧。
现代文：沿着溪流转向东，走八里到达梨岭麓，又走四里登上岭顶，往前走六里，在九牧住宿。
English: Turn east along the stream, walk eight miles to the foot of the Pear Ridge, walk four miles to the top of the ridge, walk six miles ahead, and stay in Jiu Mu.

古文：十三日三十五里，过岭，饭于仙阳。
现代文：十三日走三十五里，越过山岭，在仙阳吃饭。
English: On the 13th, we walked 35 miles, crossed the mountains, and had dinner in Xianyang.

古文：仙阳岭不甚高，而山鹃丽日，颇可爱。
现代文：仙阳岭不太高，但杜鹃花盛开，阳光明媚，十分可爱。
English: Xianyangling is not very high, but the rhododendrons are in full bloom, the sun is shining, and it is very lovely.

古文：饭后得舆，三十里抵浦城，日未晡也。
现代文：饭后乘车，行三十里到达浦城县，时间还早，没到黄昏。
English: After the meal, I took a car and drove 30 miles to Pucheng County. It was still early and it was not yet dusk.

古文：时道路俱传泉、兴海盗为梗，宜由延平上永安。
现代文：当时一路上都传着泉州府、兴化府有海盗作梗，应当经过延平府去永安县。
English: At that time, it was rumored that there were pirates in Quanzhou Prefecture and Xinghua Prefecture along the way, and it was necessary to go through Yanping Prefecture to Yongan County.

古文：余亦久蓄玉华之兴，遂觅延平舟。
现代文：我也很久以来就怀有游玉华洞的兴致，于是寻找去延平府的船。
English: For a long time, I have been interested in visiting the Jade Flower Cave, so I looked for a boat to go to Yanpingfu.

古文：十四日舟发四十里，至观前。
现代文：十四日乘船行四十里，到达观前。
English: On the 14th, they traveled forty miles by boat and arrived at the observation point.

古文：舟子省家探望家园早泊，余遂过浮桥，循溪左登金斗山。
现代文：因船夫回家探望而早早停船，我于是渡过浮桥，顺着溪流往左登金斗山。
English: The boat stopped early because the boatman went home to visit, so I crossed the pontoon bridge and followed the stream to the left to climb Mt.

古文：石磴修整，乔松艳草，幽袭人裾。
现代文：石阶道很整齐，松树高大，花草艳丽，幽香袭人。
English: The stone steps are very neat, the pine trees are tall, the flowers and plants are beautiful, and the fragrance is intoxicating.

古文：过三亭，入玄帝宫，由殿后登岭。
现代文：经过三亭，进入玄帝宫，从正殿背后登岭。
English: After passing through the three pavilions, enter the Emperor's Palace, and climb the mountain from behind the main hall.

古文：兀兀中悬，四山环拱，重流带之，风烟欲暝，步步惜别！
现代文：山岭高高突起、悬立在正中，四周被山峰环抱簇拥，一道道溪水如玉带一般，山间雾霭升起，天色将晚，我依依不舍地离去。
English: The mountain range rises high and hangs in the middle, surrounded by the peaks, the water of the stream is like a jade belt, the mist rises between the mountains, the sky will be late, I reluctantly leave.

古文：十五日辨色天微明即行。
现代文：十五日天微微亮就启航。
English: On the 15th, the ship set sail at dusk.

古文：悬流鼓楫奔流的江水趋动舟船，一百二十里，泊水矶。
现代文：水流汹涌，船浆摇动，航行一百二十里，在水边岩石下停泊。
English: The water is turbulent, the boat is swaying, sailing a hundred and twenty miles, anchored under the rocks at the water's edge.

古文：风雨彻旦，溪喧如雷。
现代文：风雨通宵达旦，河流喧腾好似雷鸣。
English: The wind and rain lasted all night, and the river roared like thunder.

古文：十六日六十里，至双溪口，与崇安水合。
现代文：十六日航行六十里，到达双溪口，溪水与崇安县的河流汇合。
English: On the 16th day, they sailed 60 miles and arrived at Shuangxi Mouth, where the streams meet the rivers of Chong'an County.

古文：又五十五里，抵建宁郡。
现代文：又航行五十五里，到达建宁郡。
English: It sailed another fifty-five miles to Jianning County.

古文：雨不止。
现代文：雨没停。
English: The rain hasn't stopped.

古文：十七日水涨数丈，同舟俱阁搁浅不行。
现代文：十七日河水涨起数丈，同行的船只都不启航。
English: On the 17th, the river rose several feet, and none of the accompanying boats set sail.

古文：上午得三板舟，附搭乘之行。
现代文：上午来了一只三板舟，于是搭乘三板舟启程。
English: In the morning, a three-board boat came, so they took the three-board boat and set off.

古文：四十里，太平驿，四十里，大横驿，过如飞鸟。
现代文：航行四十里，到太平骚，又四十里，到大横骚，一路上像鸟一样一飞而过。
English: Sailing forty miles, to Taipingshao, another forty miles, to Dayeonshao, all the way like a bird flew by.

古文：三十里，黯淡滩，水势奔涌。
现代文：三十里，到黯淡滩，水势奔腾汹涌。
English: Thirty miles, to the bleak beach, the water surges and surges.

古文：余昔游鲤湖过此，但见穹石崿山崖峙，舟穿其间，初不谓险；今则白波山立，石悉没形，险倍昔时。
现代文：我以前游九鲤湖时经过此地，只见巨大的岩石相对而立，船从中间穿过，并不觉得险峻；现在则是波涛泛白，山峰矗立，岩石全被河水淹没，地势比从前加倍险峻。
English: When I used to swim in Jiulong Lake, I passed this place and saw huge rocks standing opposite each other. The boat passed through the middle and did not feel steep; now the waves are white, the peaks are standing, the rocks are all flooded by the river, and the terrain is twice as steep as before.

古文：十里，至延平。
现代文：航行十里，到达延平府。
English: Sailing ten miles, they arrived at Yanping Prefecture.

古文：十八日余以轻装出西门，为玉年洞游。
现代文：十八日我从府城西门轻装出发，去游览玉华洞。
English: On the 18th, I set off from the West Gate of Fucheng with light luggage to visit the Jade Flower Cave.

古文：南渡溪，令奴携行囊由沙县上水，至永安相待。
现代文：往南渡过溪后，让奴仆带着行李从沙县走水路，到永安县等待。
English: After crossing the stream to the south, let the servants take the waterway from Sha County with their luggage and wait in Yong'an County.

古文：余陆行四十里，渡沙溪而西。
现代文：我从陆路走，四十里，渡过沙溪往西。
English: I walked forty miles overland, crossing the sand creek to the west.

古文：将乐之水从西来，沙县之水从南来，至此合流，亦如延平之合建溪也。
现代文：将乐县的河水从西边流来，沙县的河水从南边流来，在沙溪口合流后，也如建溪之水在延平汇合一样。
English: The river water of Le County flows from the west, the river water of Sha County flows from the south, and after the confluence at the mouth of Sha Creek, it is the same as the confluence of the water of Jian Creek in Yanping.

古文：南折入山，六十里，宿三连铺，乃瓯宁、南平、顺昌三县之界。
现代文：往南转进山，走六十里，在三连铺住宿，三连铺是贩宁、南平、顺昌三县的分界处。
English: To the south, turn into the mountains, walk sixty miles, and stay at Sanlianpu. Sanlianpu is the demarcation point of Huaning, Nanping and Shunchang counties.

古文：十九日五里，越白沙岭，是为顺昌境。
现代文：十九日走五里，翻越白沙岭，这里已经是顺昌县境内。
English: On the 19th, I walked five miles and climbed over Baisha Ridge. I was now in Shunchang County.

古文：又二十五里，抵县。
现代文：又走二十五里，到达顺昌县城。
English: He walked another twenty-five miles to reach the county seat of Shunchang.

古文：县临水际，邵武之水从西来，通光泽；归化之水从南来，俱会城之东南隅。
现代文：县城靠近水边，邵武府的溪水从西边流来，流到光泽县；归化县的溪水从南边流来，都在县城东南边汇合。
English: The county seat is close to the water's edge. The streams of Shaowu Prefecture flow from the west and flow into Guangze County; the streams of Nahua County flow from the south and converge in the southeast of the county seat.

古文：隔水望城，如溪堤带流也。
现代文：隔溪眺望县城，溪堤如同衣带似地环绕流水。
English: Looking across the creek to the county seat, the creek levee surrounds the flowing water like a girdle.

古文：循水南行三十里，至杜源，忽雪片如掌。
现代文：跟随溪水往南行三十里，到达杜源，忽然飘起手掌大的雪片。
English: I followed the stream for thirty miles to the south, reached Duyuan, and suddenly a snowflake the size of a hand floated up.

古文：十五里至将乐境，乃杨龟山故里也。
现代文：走十五里进入将乐县境，是杨龟山先生的故乡。
English: Go fifteen miles into the territory of Zhele County, which is the hometown of Mr. Yang Guishan.

古文：又十五里，为高滩铺。
现代文：又走十五里，到高滩铺。
English: Walk another fifteen miles to the high beach.

古文：阴霾尽舒，碧空如濯，旭日耀芒，群峰积雪，有如环玉。
现代文：云雾散尽，浅蓝色的天空清澈如洗，旭日闪耀光芒，群峰积雪霭霭，犹如戴着环玉。
English: The clouds have dispersed, the light blue sky is crystal clear, the rising sun shines brightly, the peaks are covered with snow, as if wearing a ring.

古文：闽中以雪为奇，得之春末为尤奇。
现代文：福建以下雪为奇，在春末下雪就更加令人惊异。
English: Snow in Fujian is surprising, and snow in late spring is even more surprising.

古文：村氓市媪老太婆，俱曝日提炉；而余赤足飞腾，良大快也！
现代文：村里的百姓和市里的老年妇女，都晒太阳或提着火炉烤火；而我却光着脚奔跑，真是太痛快了！
English: The people in the village and the old women in the city were out in the sun or carrying stoves for cooking, but I was running barefoot, it was so exhilarating!

古文：二十五里，宿于山涧渡之村家。
现代文：走二十五里，在山涧渡的农民家住宿。
English: They walked twenty-five miles and stayed at a farmer's house in Shambadu.

古文：二十日渡山涧，溯大溪南行。
现代文：二十日渡过山涧，沿大溪溯流南行。
English: On the 20th, we crossed the pass and followed the stream to the south.

古文：两山成门曰莒峡。
现代文：两边的山形成门户，名营峡。
English: The mountains on both sides form a gateway, Meiying Gorge.

古文：溪崖不受趾，循山腰行。
现代文：溪边的崖壁不能落脚，于是沿山腰行。
English: The cliff at the edge of the stream did not allow them to land, so they walked along the mountainside.

古文：十里，出莒峡铺，山始开。
现代文：十里，走出营峡铺，山谷才开阔起来。
English: Ten miles out of the canyon, the valley opens up.

古文：又十里，入将乐。
现代文：又走十里，进入将乐县。
English: I walked another ten miles and entered Zhenle County.

古文：出南关，渡溪而南，东折入山，登滕岭。
现代文：从南关出去，渡过溪水往南走，往东转进山，登滕岭。
English: Go out from the south gate, cross the stream to the south, turn east into the mountain, Dentengling.

古文：南三里，为玉华洞道。
现代文：往南三里，是玉华洞。
English: Three miles to the south is Yuhua Cave.

古文：先是过滕岭即望东南两峰耸立，翠壁嶙峋，迥与诸峰分形异色。
现代文：在这之前，一过滕岭就看到东南边有两座山峰耸立，苍翠的岩壁怪石嶙峋，形态、色彩都和其它众峰迥然不同。
English: Prior to this, as soon as you pass Tengling, you will see two peaks towering in the southeast, with verdant rocky walls and strange rocks. The shape and color are completely different from other peaks.

古文：抵其麓，一尾横曳，回护洞门。
现代文：抵达峰麓，山峰象一条尾巴似的横拖过去，袒护着洞门。
English: When we arrived at the foot of the peak, the mountain dragged past like a tail, protecting the cave entrance.

古文：门在山坳间，不甚轩豁，而森碧上交，清流出其下，不觉神骨俱冷。
现代文：洞门在山坳间，不十分高敞开阔，但葱翠的树木交错在顶上，底下淌出清清的水流，禁不住使人感到凉意。
English: The cave entrance is between the mountains, not very high and open, but the lush green trees are interlaced at the top, and clear water flows out at the bottom, which can not help but make people feel cool.

古文：山半有明台庵，洞后门所经。
现代文：山腰有明台庵，是去玉华洞后门要经过的地方。
English: On the mountainside, there is Myeongtai Hermitage, which is the place to pass through when going to the back entrance of the Jade Flower Cave.

古文：余时未饭，复出道左登岭。
现代文：此时我还没吃饭，又离开道路往左边登岭。
English: At this time, I still hadn't eaten, so I left the road and climbed the mountain on the left.

古文：石磴萦松，透石三里，青芙蓉顿开，庵当其中。
现代文：石阶被松树萦绕，穿石阶三里，芙蓉花一般的青山顿时开阔起来，明台庵位于正中。
English: The stone steps are surrounded by pine trees, and the stone steps are three miles long. Aoyama, which is like a hibiscus flower, suddenly opens up. Mingtai-an is located in the middle.

古文：饭于庵，仍下至洞前门，觅善导者。
现代文：在庵中吃饭后，仍然下到玉华洞前门，寻找到好向导。
English: After eating in the hermitage, I still went down to the front gate of the Jade Flower Cave to find a good guide.

古文：乃碎斫松节置竹篓中，导者肩负之，手提铁络，置松燃火，烬辄益之。
现代文：于是砍碎松节放到竹篓中，向导背着，手提铁丝编的照明器具，把松节放在里面燃烧，燃完后又添加。
English: So he chopped up the pine stumps and placed them in a bamboo basket. The guide carried a light fixture made of wire on his back and placed the pine stumps inside to burn. After burning, they were added to the basket.

古文：初入，历级而下者数尺，即流所从出也。
现代文：一进洞，顺阶梯下去好几尺，就到了水流淌出的地方。
English: As soon as you enter the hole, go down the stairs for several feet and you will reach the place where the water flows out.

古文：溯流屈曲，度木板者数四，倏隘倏穹，倏上倏下，石色或白或黄，石骨或悬或竖，惟 荔枝柱 、 风泪烛 、 幔天帐 、 达摩渡江 、 仙人田 、 葡萄伞 、 仙钟 、 仙鼓 最肖。
现代文：弯转曲折地溯流前进，四次从木板上渡过，山洞忽而狭窄，忽而高敞，道路一会从上，一会从下，岩石色彩有白有黄，石柱或是悬挂空中，或是竖在地上，而 荔枝柱 、 风泪烛 、 慢天帐 、 达摩渡江 、 仙人田 、 葡萄伞 、 仙钟 、 仙鼓 等景物最形象。
English: Winding and zigzagging along the stream, four times crossing the board, the cave is narrow and spacious at the same time, the road is from the top and from the bottom at the same time, the rock color is white and yellow, the stone pillar is either hanging in the air or standing on the ground, and the litchi pillar, the wind tear candle, the slow heavenly tent, the Dharma river crossing, the hermit field, the grape umbrella, the celestial bell, the celestial drum and other scenery are the most vivid.

古文：沿流既穷，悬级而上，是称 九重楼 。
现代文：跟随水流走到尽头，攀登陡悬的石级而上，这景名 九重楼 。
English: Follow the water to the end and climb the steep stone steps to the top, which is known as the Nine Storey Building.

古文：遥望空濛，忽曙色欲来，所谓 五更天 也。
现代文：遥望迷茫的洞中，忽然有一种黎明的天色的感觉，这就是 五更天 的景象了。
English: Looking far and wide into the bewildered cave, I suddenly had a feeling of the sky at dawn. This was the scene of the Five Heavens.

古文：至此最奇，恰与张公洞由暗而明者一致。
现代文：玉华洞走到这里最为奇妙，恰好和江苏省宜兴县的张公洞一样，从黑暗转向光明。
English: The most amazing thing about Yuhua Cave is that, just like Zhang Gong Cave in Yixing County, Jiangsu Province, it turns from darkness to light.

古文：盖洞门斜启，玄朗映彻，犹未睹天碧也。
现代文：大概因为洞门斜开，黑暗中亮光从洞口映透进来。
English: Probably because the cave door is open at an angle, the light in the dark is reflected through the opening of the cave.

古文：从侧岭仰瞩，得洞门一隙，直受圆明。
现代文：但却看不到蓝色的天空。顺洞壁边侧抬头看，看到一丝洞门，阳光直接射到洞口。
English: But I couldn't see the blue sky. I looked up along the side of the cave wall and saw a glimpse of the cave door, with sunlight shining directly into the mouth of the cave.

古文：其洞口由高而坠，弘含奇瑰，亦与张公同。
现代文：其洞口从高处往下坠，宽大而含瑰丽奇特之处，也和张公洞相同。
English: The mouth of the cave plunges down from a high place. It is wide and contains magnificent and peculiar features. It is also the same as Zhanggong Cave.

古文：第张公森悬诡丽者，俱罗于受明之处；此洞眩巧争奇，遍布幽奥，而辟户更拓。
现代文：只是张公洞森然、陡峭、奇异、瑰丽的景物，都列在光亮之处；而玉华洞眩妙精巧、争相献奇，幽深之中景物遍布，并且洞门更加开阔。
English: However, Zhangong Cave's rugged, steep, bizarre, and magnificent scenery are all listed in the bright places; while Yuhua Cave is dazzling and exquisite, competing with each other, and there are many scenes in the depths, and the cave door is more open.

古文：两洞同异，正在伯仲间也。
现代文：比较两洞景物的异同高低，真是不相上下。
English: Comparing the similarities and differences between the scenery of the two holes, it is really on a par.

古文：拾级上达洞顶，则穹崖削天，左右若青玉赪ē红色肤，实出张公所未备。
现代文：沿着石级上到洞顶，高大的山崖陡峭如削，直插云天，左右两侧像翡翠一样，青色赤色相间，实在是张公洞所不具备的。
English: Along the stone steps up to the top of the cave, the tall cliffs are as steep as a chisel, straight into the sky, the left and right sides are like emeralds, and the blue is red, which is really not available in Zhanggong Cave.

古文：下山即为田塍。
现代文：下山就是田埂。
English: Going down the mountain is the beginning of the rice fields.

古文：四山环锁，水出无路，汩然中坠，盖即洞间之流、此所从入也。
现代文：四周群山环绕，水流没有出路，急速地从中坠落，大概玉华洞中的水流，就是从这里坠入的。
English: Surrounded by mountains on all sides, there is no way out for the water flow, and it falls rapidly from there. It is probably from here that the water flow in the Jade Flower Cave falls in.

古文：复登山半，过明台庵。
现代文：又登到山腰，经过明台庵。
English: I climbed up to the mountainside again and passed by Mingtai An.

古文：庵僧曰： 是山石骨棱厉，透露处层层有削玉裁云态，苦为草树所翳，故游者知洞而不知峰。 
现代文：庵中的僧人说： 这座山岩石棱角分明，十分峻峭，凡是岩石外露之处，都有犹如雕凿玉石、裁剪云朵般的峻美形态，可惜被草丛树木遮蔽，所以游人只知道游玉华洞，却不知游览山峰。 
English: The monk in the hermitage said: This mountain has sharp edges and angles, and is very steep. Wherever the rock is exposed, there are beautiful shapes like carved jade and cut clouds. Unfortunately, it is obscured by trees and bushes, so visitors only know how to visit the Jade Cave, but do not know how to visit the peaks.

古文：遂导余上拾鸟道，下披蒙茸，得星窟焉。
现代文：于是带着我找到游山的小路，披开茂密的草丛往下走，来到星窟。
English: So he took me to find a path through the mountains, walked down through the thick grass, and came to the star cave.

古文：三面削壁丛悬，下坠数丈。
现代文：星窟三面刀削一样的崖壁丛聚悬立，往下坠陷达数丈深。
English: The cliff walls of the three sides of the star cave are as if they were cut with a knife.

古文：窟旁有野橘三株，垂实累累。
现代文：窟旁有三棵野橘树，垂挂着累累的果实。
English: Next to the cave, there are three wild orange trees, hanging with loads of fruit.

古文：从山腰右转一二里，忽两山交脊处，棘翳四塞，中有石磴齿齿，萦回于悬崖夹石间。
现代文：从山腰上往右转一二里，忽然看到两座山脊交合的地方，四周荆棘覆盖，中间有齿状的石阶梯，盘旋往复于悬崖和狭窄的岩石之间。
English: A mile or two to the right from the mountainside, you suddenly see a junction of two ridges, covered with thorns on all sides, with a jagged stone staircase in the middle, circling back and forth between the cliff and the narrow rock.

古文：仰望峰顶，一笋森森独秀。
现代文：抬头眺望峰顶，一枝竹笋般的山峰高耸独秀。
English: Looking up at the peak, a bamboo shoot-like mountain soars high.

古文：遂由洞后穹崖之上，再历石门，下浴庵中，宿焉。
现代文：于是从洞后高大的山崖上，第二次经过石门，下到明台庵中沐浴，在庵中住宿。
English: So from the high cliff behind the cave, the second time through the stone gate, down to the Mingtai hermitage to bathe and stay in the hermitage.

古文：二十一日仍至将乐南门，取永安道。
现代文：二十一日又回到将乐县城南门，取道去永安县。
English: On the twenty-first day, he returned to the south gate of Chengle County and took the road to Yongan County.

古文：二十四日始至永安，舟奴犹未至。
现代文：二十四日才到永安县，而乘船的奴仆还没达到。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, they arrived in Yongan County, but the slaves on the boat had not yet arrived.

古文：二十五日坐待奴于永安旅舍。
现代文：二十五日在永安县旅舍中闲坐等待奴仆，于是买来顺昌酒，在楼下喝起来。
English: On the 25th day, he sat idle in the hostel in Yong'an County waiting for the servant, so he bought Shunchang wine and drank it downstairs.

古文：乃市顺昌酒，浮白饮酒楼下。忽呼声不绝，则延平奴也。
现代文：忽然听到不断的呼叫声，是从延平府分道而行的奴仆到了。
English: Suddenly, they heard the incessant call of a servant who had come from Yanping Prefecture.

古文：遂定明日早行计。
现代文：于是决定明天一早启程。
English: So we decided to leave early tomorrow morning.

古文：二十六日循城溯溪，东南二十里，转而南二十五里，登大泄岭，岧峣āá高峻行云雾中。
现代文：二十六日沿县城溯溪而行，往东南走二十里，转向南走二十五里，登大泄岭，在高峻的云雾山中行走。
English: On the 26th, I followed the county seat to trace the creek, walked 20 miles to the southeast, turned south for 25 miles, climbed the Dalie Mountains, and walked in the lofty misty mountains.

古文：如是十五里，得平阪，曰林田。
现代文：像这样一直走了十五里，才到平缓的山坡，名林田。
English: Like this, I walked for fifteen miles until I reached a gentle hillside, a famous forest field.

古文：时方下午，雨大，竟止。
现代文：这时正当下午，雨下得很大，完全不能行走。
English: At this time, in the afternoon, it was raining heavily, and it was completely impossible to walk.

古文：林田有两溪自南来，东浑赤如血，西则一川含绿，至此合流。
现代文：林田有两条从南边流来的溪水，东边的溪水像血一样浑赤，西边的则是一股碧绿的清流，两溪流到林田汇合。
English: Lintian has two streams flowing from the south, the eastern stream is as red as blood, and the western stream is a clear turquoise-green stream. The two streams meet at Lintian.

古文：二十七日溯赤溪行。
现代文：二十七日溯赤色的溪水而行。
English: On the 27th day, we followed the red water of the stream.

古文：久之，舍赤溪，溯澄溪。
现代文：过了一段时间，离开赤溪，溯澄溪而行。
English: After a while, we left the Red Creek and followed the course of the Clear Creek.

古文：共二十里，渡坑源上下桥，登马山岭。
现代文：一共走二十里，渡过坑源上下桥，登马山岭。
English: We walked a total of twenty miles, crossed the Hengyuan up-and-down bridge, and climbed Mount Ma.

古文：转上转高，雾亦转重，正如昨登大泄岭时也。
现代文：山路越转越高，雾气也越转越浓，完全和昨天登大泄岭时一样。
English: The mountain road became higher and higher, and the fog became thicker and thicker. It was exactly the same as when I climbed the Daecheoling yesterday.

古文：五里，透穿过其巅，为宁洋界。
现代文：五里，穿过马山岭顶，是宁洋县边界。
English: Wuli, across the top of Masan Ridge, is the border of Ningyang County.

古文：下五里，饭于岭头。
现代文：往下走五里，在岭头吃饭。
English: Walk down five miles and have dinner in Lingtou.

古文：时旭日将中，万峰若引镜照面。
现代文：此时旭日即将升到正中，万座山峰沐浴在阳光下如同用镜子照面。
English: At this time, the rising sun is about to rise to the middle, and the ten thousand peaks are bathed in sunlight as if looking at the surface with a mirror.

古文：回望上岭，已不可睹，而下方众岫骈列，无不献形履下。
现代文：回头遥望上面的山岭，已经看不到了，而下面群峰并列，千悠百态无不呈现在脚下。
English: Looking back from afar, the mountains above can no longer be seen, but the peaks below are side by side, and the thousand and one states are all present at the foot.

古文：盖马山绝顶，峰峦自相亏蔽，至此始廓然为南标。
现代文：因为马山岭的最高顶上，峰峦自身互相掩蔽，下到这里才在空阔中成为南部最高峰。
English: Because on the highest peak of the Mashan Mountains, the peaks cover each other, it is only down here that it becomes the highest peak in the south in the open.

古文：询之土人，宁洋未设县时，此犹属永安；今则岭北水俱北者属延平，岭南水俱南者属漳州。
现代文：向当地人询问，知道没设宁洋县时，这地方还属于永安县；如今则是岭北的水以及北边隶属于延平府，岭南的水以及南边隶属漳州。
English: If you ask the locals, they will tell you that when Ningyang County did not exist, this place still belonged to Yong'an County; today, the waters to the north of the Ling River and those to the north belong to Yanping Prefecture, and the waters to the south of the Ling River and those to the south belong to Zhangzhou.

古文：随山奠川，固当如此建置也。
现代文：随山的方位确定河流的归属，设置本来就应当如此。
English: The river's location is determined by the position of the mountains, which is the way it should be.

古文：其地南去宁洋三十里，西为本郡之龙岩，东为延平之大田云。
现代文：这里南边距离宁洋县三十里，西边为漳州府的龙岩县，东边是延平府的大田县。
English: It is 30 miles from Ningyang County in the south, Longyan County in Ganzhou Prefecture in the west, and Daejeon County in Yanping Prefecture in the east.

古文：下山十里，始从坑行。
现代文：下山十里，开始顺坑凹的地方走。
English: Ten miles down the mountain, start walking along the pits.

古文：渡溪桥而南，大溪遂东去。
现代文：渡过溪桥往南走，大溪则向东流去。
English: Cross the stream bridge and walk south. The big stream flows east.

古文：逾岭，复随西来小溪南行，二十里，抵宁洋东郭。
现代文：翻过岭，又随着西边流来的小溪往南行，二十里，到达宁洋县的东外城。
English: After climbing over the ridge, we followed the stream flowing from the west to the south, twenty miles, and arrived at Dongwaicheng in Ningyang County.

古文：绕城北而西，则前大溪经城南来，恰与小溪会，始胜舟。
现代文：绕着城北往西走，就看到先前渡过的大溪经城南流来，恰好与小溪汇合，于是通航。
English: Walking around the north of the city to the west, I saw that the big stream that I had crossed before was flowing through the south of the city and coincided with the confluence with the creek, so I sailed through.

古文：二十八日将南下，传盗警，舟不发者两日。
现代文：二十八日准备南下，传来有强盗的警报，船停航两天。
English: On the 28th, while preparing to sail south, a robber alert was received, and the ship was grounded for two days.

古文：四月初一日平明，舟始前，溪从山峡中悬流南下。
现代文：四月初一日天一亮，船便启航，溪流顺山谷倾泻南下。
English: At dawn on the first day of April, the boat set sail and the stream cascaded down the valley to the south.

古文：十余里，一峰突而西，横绝溪间，水避而西，复从东折，势如建瓴意即水势忽而畅，曰石嘴滩。
现代文：航行了十多里，一座山峰向西突立，横断溪流，水避开山峰往西流，然后又朝东转去，水势犹如从高处倾倒瓶水，这里名石嘴滩。
English: After sailing for more than ten miles, a mountain peak juts out to the west, crossing the stream. The water avoids the mountain peak and flows westward, and then turns to the east. The water is like pouring bottled water from a high place. This is the famous Shizhu Beach.

古文：乱石丛立，中开一门，仅容舟。
现代文：一丛丛的乱石耸立，中间开通一道门宽的航线，仅能容一只船通过。
English: Clusters of jumbled rocks rise up, and a wide route opens up in the middle, allowing only one boat to pass.

古文：舟从门坠，高下丈余，余势屈曲，复高下数丈，较之黯淡诸滩，大小虽殊悬，险更倍之也。
现代文：船顺着门道坠下去，落差高达一丈多，其余的河道水势曲折，又有数丈的落差，和黯淡滩等险滩相比较，虽然水势大小悬殊，但却加倍的险峻。
English: The ship fell down along the doorway, the drop was as high as one meter. The rest of the river had twists and turns in the water potential, and the drop was several meters. Compared with the dangerous beaches such as the bleak beach, although the water potential was very different in size, it was twice as dangerous.

古文：众舟至此，俱鳞次以下。
现代文：众多的船只航行到这里，都像鱼鳞一样地排列起来依次而下。
English: Many ships have sailed here, and they are all lined up like fish scales, one after another.

古文：每下一舟，舟中人登岸，共以缆前后倒曳之，须时乃放。
现代文：每当一只船通过时，船上的人都下船上岸，共同用缆绳前前后后地倒拉着船，必须到时才能放开。
English: Whenever a boat passes by, everyone on board disembarks and pulls the boat backwards and forwards with a cable until it is time to let go.

古文：过此，山峡危逼，复嶂插天，曲折破壁而下，真如劈翠穿云也。
现代文：过了此滩后，山谷高耸而狭窄，重叠的山峰直插云天，溪流曲折破壁而下，真好似劈开青山，穿过云雾一样。
English: After passing this beach, the valley is high and narrow, the overlapping peaks pierce the cloudy sky, the stream meanders down the wall, it's like splitting the mountains and passing through the clouds.

古文：三十里，过馆头，为漳平界。
现代文：航行三十里，过了馆头，进入漳平县境。
English: After sailing for 30 miles, it passed the front of the pavilion and entered the border of Suiping County.

古文：一峰又东突，流复环东西折，曰溜水滩。
现代文：又有一座山峰向东突起，溪流又绕东往西转，这里名溜水滩。
English: Another peak rises to the east, and the stream turns around east to west, and this is the famous yakitori beach.

古文：峰连嶂合，飞涛一缕，直舟从云汉，身挟龙湫矣。
现代文：层峦叠嶂之中，一缕腾飞的波涛，载着船只如同从天河中直落而下准旅客都置身于飞瀑之中了。
English: Amidst the layers and layers of ripples, there is a wisp of waves taking off, carrying boats as if they were falling straight down from the heavenly river. Would-be passengers find themselves in the midst of a flying waterfall.

古文：已而山势少开，二十余里，为石壁滩。
现代文：不一会山势逐渐开阔，船行二十多里，到石壁滩。
English: Soon the mountain gradually opens up, and the boat travels more than twenty miles to Shibei Beach.

古文：其石自南而突，与流相扼，流不为却，捣击之势，险与石嘴、溜水而三也。
现代文：这里岩石向南面突起，与水流相阻扼，水流不因此退却，形成冲击的气势，险象和石嘴滩、溜水滩一样而成为第三处险滩。
English: Here, the rocks protrude to the south, blocking the water flow. The water flow does not retreat as a result, forming an impact momentum. The danger is the same as Shizu Beach and Waterfall Beach and becomes the third dangerous beach.

古文：下此，有溪自东北来合；再下，夹溪复至东北来合，溪流遂大，势亦平。
现代文：从石壁滩下去，从东北流来一股溪水汇入；再往下，夹溪又从东北流来汇合，溪流渐渐扩大，水势也慢慢平缓。
English: Going down from the rocky beach, a stream of water flows in from the northeast; further down, the creek merges from the northeast, the stream gradually expands, and the water potential slowly flattens.

古文：又东二十里，则漳平县也。
现代文：又往东航行二十里，则到漳平县。
English: Another twenty miles to the east, and you'll reach Suiping County.

古文：宁洋之溪，悬溜迅急，十倍建溪。
现代文：宁洋县的溪流，河道陡悬，水流迅急，是建溪的十倍。
English: The stream in Ningyang County has a steeply overhanging course and rapid water flow, which is ten times that of Jianxi.

古文：盖浦城至闽安入海，八百余里，宁洋至海澄入海，止三百余里，程愈迫则流愈急。
现代文：因为从浦城县流到闽安镇入海，有八百多里的流程；从宁洋县流到海澄入海，仅三百多里；流程愈短，则流速愈急。
English: Because it takes more than 800 miles to flow from Pucheng County to Jian'an Town into the sea; from Ningyang County to Haizheng into the sea, only more than 300 miles; the shorter the process, the faster the flow.

古文：况梨岭下至延平，不及五百里，而延平上至马岭，不及四百而峻，是二岭之高伯仲也。
现代文：何况从梨岭下到延平府，不到五百里；而从延平府上到马山岭，不到四百里但却很高，这样看来两座山的高度相差不大。
English: Moreover, from Liling down to Yanping, it is less than five hundred miles; and from Yanping up to Masanling, it is less than four hundred miles, but it is very high, so it seems that the height difference between the two mountains is small.

古文：其高既均，而入海则减，雷轰入地之险，宜咏于此。
现代文：高度既然相差无几，但水声如雷，水势之险入海里程却短，原因应当就在于此。
English: Since there is little difference in height, but the sound of the water is thunderous, the danger of the water rushing into the sea is short, the reason should lie in this.

古文：初二日下华封舟。
现代文：初二日乘到华封的船。
English: I took a boat to Huafeng on the first two days.

古文：行数里，山势复合，重滩叠溜，若建溪之太平、黯淡者，不胜数也。
现代文：航行数里后，山势又合拢起来，险滩重重、急流叠起，像建溪太平滩、黯淡滩一样的河道，多得不能一一列举。
English: After sailing for a few miles, the mountains closed up again, the dangerous beaches piled up, the rapids piled up, and the river channels like Jianxi Taiping Beach and Dim Beach were too many to list.

古文：六十里，抵华封，北溪至此皆从石脊悬泻，舟楫不能过，遂舍舟逾岭。
现代文：行六十里，到达华封县，北溪流到这里便沿着石脊悬空倾泻而下，船不能通行，于是下船翻越山岭。
English: After a sixty-mile journey, they arrived in Huafeng County. When they arrived, the waters of the North Stream cascaded down along the rocky ridge. The boat could not pass, so they disembarked and climbed over the mountains.

古文：凡水惟滥觞发源之始，不能浮槎竹筏，若既通，而下流反阻者，止黄河之三门集津，舟不能上下。
现代文：凡是河流，源流都很微小，不能浮起竹筏，如果通航后，到下游反而受阻，只有黄河的三门集津，船只不能上下。
English: In all rivers, the headwaters are very small, and bamboo rafts cannot be floated. If navigation is allowed, it will be blocked downstream. Only the Sanmen set of the Yellow River is blocked, and ships cannot go up and down.

古文：然汉、唐挽漕水道，缆迹犹存；未若华封，自古及今，竟无问津之时。
现代文：然而汉代、唐代利用黄河水道转运粮食，缆绳的遗迹还保存着；不像华封县，从古至今，竟然从没有通航的时候。
English: However, the Han and Tang dynasties used the Yellow River waterway to transport grain, and the remains of the cable are still preserved; unlike Huafeng County, from ancient times to the present, there has never been navigation.

古文：拟沿流穷其险处，而居人惟知逾岭，无能为导。
现代文：我计划沿着河流穷究河道中的惊险地方，但居住在这里的人只知道翻越山岭，不能为我作向导。
English: I plan to follow the river to explore the thrilling places in the river, but the people who live here only know how to cross the mountains and cannot guide me.

古文：初三日登岭，十里至岭巅，则溪水复自西来，下循山麓，俯瞰只一衣带水耳。
现代文：初三日登岭，走十里到岭巅，而溪水又从西边流来，在下面沿山麓流，低头俯视，水道只有一条衣带那么宽。
English: I climbed the ridge on the third day of the first month, walked ten miles to the top of the ridge, and the stream flowed from the west, flowing along the foot of the mountain below, looking down, the waterway was only as wide as a belt.

古文：又五里，则隤坠落然直下，又二里，抵溪。
现代文：又走了五里，就直直地往下坠落，又走两里，来到溪水边。
English: After walking another five miles, he fell straight down, and after walking another two miles, he came to the edge of the stream.

古文：舟行八十里，至西溪。
现代文：乘船行八十里，到达西溪。
English: Travel eighty miles by boat and arrive at Xixi.

古文：西南陆行三十里，即漳郡；顺流东南二十里，为江东渡，乃兴、泉东来驿道也；又顺流六十里，则出海澄入海焉。
现代文：从陆地上往西南行三十里，就是斡州府；顺溪流往东南行二十里，为江东渡，是从东边兴化府、泉州府过来的释道；再顺溪流行六十里，就能出海澄县入海。
English: From the land, if you go southwest for 30 miles, you will reach Yuzhou; if you go southeast along the stream for 20 miles, you will reach the east of the river, which is the explanation for coming from the east of Xinghua and Quanzhou; if you go along the stream for another 60 miles, you will be able to enter the sea in Chengxian.

古文：初四日舆行二十里，入漳之北门。
现代文：初四日乘车行二十里，进入漳州府城的北门。
English: On the fourth day of the first lunar month, they drove 20 miles and entered the north gate of the capital city of Zhangzhou.

古文：访叔司理，则署印南靖，去郡三十里。
现代文：拜访在这里担任推官的族叔，他在南靖县办公，距离府城有三十里。
English: I visited my uncle, who is the governor here. He works in Nanzing County, which is 30 miles away from the capital.

古文：遂雨中出南门，下夜船往南靖。
现代文：于是冒雨从府城南门出发，乘夜船前往南靖县。
English: So they braved the rain and set off from the south gate of Fucheng, taking the night boat to Nanzhing County.

古文：初五日晓达南靖，以溯流迂曲也。
现代文：初五日拂晓才到达南靖县，因为溯流而行，航道迂回曲折。
English: On the morning of the fifth day of the first month, it was dawn before they reached Nanjing County. Because they sailed against the current, the route was circuitous and tortuous.

古文：溪自南平来，到南靖六十里，势于西溪同其浩荡，经漳郡南门，亦至海澄入海。
现代文：溪水从南平县流来，到南靖县有六十里，水势和西溪一样浩荡，流经漳州府城南门，也流到海澄县入海。
English: The stream water flows from Nanping County to Nanjing County for sixty miles, and the water potential is as vast as that of the West Stream. It flows through the southern gate of the city of Zhangzhou, and also flows into the sea in Haicheng County.

古文：不知漳之得名，两溪谁执牛耳也？
现代文：不知道漳州的得名，是哪条溪起了主要作用？
English: I don't know how Zhangzhou got its name. Which stream played the main role?

