古文：○李谔李谔，字士恢，赵郡人也。
现代文：李谔字士恢，赵郡人。
English: Li Junzhihuai, a native of Zhao County.

古文：好学，解属文。
现代文：好学，知道作文章。
English: Good at learning, knows how to write an article.

古文：仕齐为中书舍人，有口辩，每接对陈使。
现代文：仕北齐为中书舍人，有口才，常常接待陈国使者。
English: Shibei Qi was a scholar of Chinese classics, had eloquence, and often received the envoys of Chen Guo.

古文：周武帝平齐，拜天官都上士，谔见高祖有奇表，深自结纳。
现代文：北周武帝平定北齐后，拜授他为天官都上士。李谔见隋高祖有奇貌，于是深深与之结交。
English: After the Northern Zhouwu Emperor subdued the Northern Qi, he awarded him the title of Heavenly Officer and Senior Sergeant. Li Qian saw that Sui Gao Zu had a wonderful appearance, so he made deep friends with him.

古文：及高祖为丞相，甚见亲待，访以得失。
现代文：高祖为北周丞相后，很亲近他，问他为政的得失。
English: After Gao Zu became the minister of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was very close to him and asked him about the pros and cons of politics.

古文：于时兵革屡动，国用虚耗，谔上《重谷论》以讽焉。高祖深纳之。
现代文：那时战争连年，国库空虚，李谔上《重谷论》，以讽劝高祖，高祖全然采纳。
English: At that time, the war had been going on for years, the treasury was empty, and Li Gan wrote "Heavy Valley Theory" and advised Gao Zu with irony. Gao Zu accepted it completely.

古文：及受禅，历比部、考功二曹侍郎，赐爵南和伯。
现代文：高祖受禅后，李谔历任比部、考功两曹的侍郎，赐为南和伯爵。
English: Emperor Wen was succeeded by Emperor Zhen, while Emperor Li Rong appointed him as the head of the imperial household, the second-highest-ranking attendant of the imperial examinations, and conferred peerages on Emperor Nan and Emperor Bo.

古文：谔性公方，明达世务，为时论所推。
现代文：李谔生性公平方正，通晓事务，被人们推重。
English: Li Hongsheng is a fair and upright person, knowledgeable about affairs, and is highly respected by people.

古文：迁治书侍御史，上谓群臣曰： 朕昔为大司马，每求外职，李谔陈十二策，苦劝不许，朕遂决意在内。
现代文：升任治书侍御史。高祖对群臣说： 我过去当大司马时，常求放外任。李谔陈述十二策，苦劝我不要到外地任职，我于是决意在朝内作官。
English: Gaozu said to his courtiers, "In the past, when I was the grand steward, I often asked to be allowed to work outside the palace. Li Qiye advised me not to work outside the palace, and I decided to work in the imperial court.

古文：今此事业，谔之力也。 
现代文：如今这番事业，是李谔出的力啊。 
English: Nowadays, this kind of business relies entirely on the strength of Li Wei.

古文：赐物二千段。
现代文：赐他缣纟采二千段。
English: Li Qiye was given 2,000 pieces of property.

古文：谔见礼教凋敝，公卿薨亡，其爱妾侍婢，子孙辄嫁卖之，遂成风俗。
现代文：李谔见礼教凋敝，公卿刚死，其爱妾、侍婢，就被子孙嫁掉、卖掉，于是形成了风俗。
English: Li Yan saw that etiquette was fading away. When a nobleman had just died, his beloved concubines and servants were married off and sold by his descendants, thus forming a custom.

古文：谔上书曰： 臣闻追远慎终，民德归厚，三年无改，方称为孝。
现代文：李谔上书说： 我听说，追念远逝的人，善始善终，民德才能归于忠厚；三年之丧无改，才称为孝顺。
English: Li Yan said in his letter: I have heard that people who remember those who have passed away are good at the beginning and good at the end, and people's virtue can only be attributed to loyalty; three years of mourning without change is called filial piety.

古文：如闻朝臣之内，有父祖亡没，日月未久，子孙无赖，便分其妓妾，嫁卖取财。
现代文：我听说朝中大臣，有父亲祖父去世，日月还不久，其子孙为无赖之徒，就瓜分他们的的女妓爱妾，嫁了、卖了，以取钱财。
English: I have heard that a father and grandfather of a minister of the Central Korean government, who passed away not long ago, and whose children and grandchildren were ruffians, divided up their female prostitutes and concubines, married them, and sold them in order to get money.

古文：有一于兹，实损风化。
现代文：即使只有一个事例在如今，就实在有损风化。
English: Even if it's just one case today, it's really demeaning.

古文：妾虽微贱，亲承衣履，服斩三年，古今通式。
现代文：爱妾虽然微贱，但亲自承接先人的衣服和鞋子，为之服丧三年，这是古今的通例。
English: Although a concubine is lowly, she should serve three years of filial piety because she personally inherited her father's clothes and shoes. This has been the practice from ancient times to the present.

古文：岂容遽褫缞弊，强傅铅华，泣辞灵几之前，送付他人之室。
现代文：岂能容忍急急脱下丧服，强迫施上粉黛，让她们在先人的灵牌前哭泣告辞，送到他人的房里去？
English: Would it be tolerable for them to hastily take off their mourning clothes, forcibly apply powder to their hair, have them weep farewell in front of the memorial plaques of their ancestors, and send them to other people's homes?

古文：凡在见者，犹致伤心，况乎人子，能堪斯忍？
现代文：凡是看到的旁人，尚且伤心，何况还是人子，怎能如此忍心？
English: For how can any man bear to see his neighbour in trouble, much less the Son of Man?

古文：复有朝廷重臣，位望通贵，平生交旧，情若弟兄，及其亡没，杳同行路，朝闻其死，夕规其妾，方便求娉，以得为限，无廉耻之心，弃友朋之义。
现代文：又有朝廷大臣，位高爵重，他们之间平生交好，情如兄弟。但到朋友死后，却把朋友当作路人，早晨听到朋友死了，傍晚就劝朋友的爱妾改嫁，方便时甚至自己去求聘，以得到他人爱妾为目的，毫无廉耻之心，抛弃朋友的情义。
English: There was also a minister of the imperial court, a high-ranking nobleman, and they were good friends all their lives and felt like brothers. However, when their friend died, they treated their friend as a passer-by. In the morning, they heard that their friend had died, and in the evening, they advised their friend's beloved concubine to remarry. When it was convenient, they even went to apply for employment themselves, with the aim of getting someone else's beloved concubine. They had no sense of shame and abandoned their friend's feelings.

古文：且居家理治，可移于官，既不正私，何能赞务？ 
现代文：而且，治家之法，可拿到官府上，既不能正家，又怎能有助于治国？ 
English: Moreover, the way to govern a family can be obtained from the government, but if it cannot be used to govern a family, how can it be used to govern a country?

古文：上览而嘉之。
现代文：皇上看了表章，很赞赏。
English: After reading the article, Emperor Wen praised Yang Yong.

古文：五品以上妻妾不得改醮，始于此也。
现代文：五品以上官员的妻妾不得改嫁，就是从这时开始的。
English: It was from this time that the wives and concubines of officials of the Fifth Rank and above were not allowed to remarry.

古文：谔又以属文之家，体尚轻薄，递相师效，流宕忘反，于是上书曰：臣闻古先哲王之化民也，必变其视听，防其嗜欲，塞其邪放之心，示以淳和之路。
现代文：李谔又因写作文章的人，崇尚轻薄，转相师法仿效，流宕他途而忘记返回正道，于是上书道：我听说，古代的先贤圣哲教化人民，必须改变他们的视听，防备他们的嗜好欲望，堵住他们的邪恶放荡的心，显示他们以淳朴平和的道路。
English: Because the writer of the article, advocating frivolity, turned to imitate the teacher's method, wandered on his way and forgot to return to the right path, so he wrote: I heard that the ancient sages and sages educated the people, must change their audio-visual, guard against their addictive desires, block their evil and dissolute hearts, and show them the path of simplicity and peace.

古文：五教六行为训民之本，《诗》《书》《礼》《易》为道义之门。
现代文：五教六行，是教训人民的根本；《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《易》，是崇尚道义的门径。
English: The Five Teachings and Six Practices are fundamental to teaching the people; "Poetry," "Scripture," "Rite" and "Ease" are the gateways to advocating morality.

古文：故能家复孝慈，人知礼让，正俗调风，莫大于此。
现代文：所以能够恢复孝顺慈爱，让人人都知道礼让，调正民风民俗，没有比这更重要的了。
English: Therefore, there is nothing more important than being able to cultivate filial piety and benevolence. Everyone knows the etiquette of modesty, the rectification of folk customs, and the adjustment of customs.

古文：其有上书献赋，制诔镌铭，皆以褒德序贤，明勋证理。
现代文：凡有上书献赋，写诔文刻铭文的，都是用来褒扬功德，赞扬贤能，注明功勋，证明大理。
English: If there is a book dedication or a seal engraved with an inscription, it is used to praise virtue, describe sages, mark meritorious deeds, and discuss matters of evidence.

古文：苟非惩劝，义不徒然。
现代文：如非惩恶扬善，于道义上，不让白写白刻这些东西。
English: As long as it is not punishment and reward, it is by no means a wasted effort.

古文：降及后代，风教渐落。
现代文：到了后代，风俗教化逐渐差了。
English: Down to the next generation, the custom and education gradually declined.

古文：魏之三祖，更尚文词，忽君人之大道，好雕虫之小艺。
现代文：曹魏的三祖，更是崇尚文辞，忽视治国大道，喜好雕虫小技。
English: The three forefathers of the state of Wei were more devoted to literature, ignored the great principle of the monarch, and preferred the small skill of carving insects.

古文：下之从上，有同影响，竞骋文华，遂成风俗。
现代文：下面跟从上头，就如影之随形，响之从声，竞比文采，于是成了风俗。
English: The people below follow the people above, like shadows following a voice, vying to show their prowess, and thus a custom is formed.

古文：江左齐、梁，其弊弥甚，贵贱贤愚，唯务吟咏。遂复遗理存异，寻虚逐微，竞一韵之奇，争一字之巧。
现代文：江东的齐、梁二朝，其弊病就更重，无论贵贼贤愚，只求吟诗咏词，于是就不管大理，只求文辞不同，追求清虚，追逐文辞，竞比一韵之奇，争比一字之巧。
English: The two dynasties of Qi and Liang in the East of the Yangtze River had a more serious malady. No matter how noble, wise or foolish, they only sought to chant and recite poetry. Therefore, they did not care about the truth, only sought different words, pursued purity and emptiness, chased words, competed for a rhyme, and competed for a word.

古文：连篇累牍，不出月露之形，积案盈箱，唯是风云之状。
现代文：连篇累牍，但其内容未超出描写月亮的形状；堆满书案，积满书籍，但其内容只是描写风云的形状。
English: It's a long story, and there's nothing better than these images of the moon and dewdrops. There's a lot of work to be done, but it's just scenery like wind and clouds.

古文：世俗以此相高，朝廷据兹擢士。
现代文：世俗以此比高低，朝廷以此选官吏。
English: The world uses these to compare high and low, and the imperial court should select officials according to these.

古文：禄利之路既开，爱尚之情愈笃。
现代文：既然开了文辞可得禄利的道路，世间崇尚文采的感情就更深更重。
English: Now that the road to fame and fortune has been opened, the love and admiration for the dragon is even more solid.

古文：于是闾里童昏，贵游总丱，未窥六甲，先制五言。
现代文：于是，不管是民间的小孩，还是贵族家的孩子，还没有看六甲，就先作五言诗。
English: As a result, no matter whether they are children of the common people or children of aristocratic families, if they haven't seen Rokko, they first make a five-character poem.

古文：至如羲皇、舜、禹之典，伊、傅、周、孔之说，不复关心，何尝入耳。
现代文：至如尧、舜、商、汤的典诰，伊、傅、周、孔的学说，不再关心，何曾入耳？
English: As for the edicts of Emperor Xing, Emperor Zhou, and Emperor Yu, and the teachings of Yi Yin, Fu Sheng, Zhou Gong, and Confucius, they no longer care about them.

古文：以傲诞为清虚，以缘情为勋绩，指儒素为古拙，用词赋为君子。
现代文：以傲慢放任为清虚，以缘情赋诗为勋绩，指责儒士为古拙，把作词赋的当作君子。
English: They regard lofty pride as a lofty nothingness, the expression of emotion as a meritorious achievement, and the moral conduct of Confucians as quaint and clumsy. With the help of words, they become noble people.

古文：故文笔日繁，其政日乱，良由弃大圣之轨模，构无用以为用也。
现代文：所以文笔一天天繁琐，而其政治却一天天混乱，的确因为弃掷了大圣的正道，制作无用的东西而以为有用。
English: Therefore, the multiplicity of articles and the increasing confusion of politics are indeed due to the abandonment of the great saint's model, creating a situation in which the useless is regarded as useful.

古文：损本逐末，流遍华壤，递相师祖，久而愈扇。
现代文：损本逐末，偏爱华章，转相师法，越久越严重。
English: Losses gradually, preferring Huazhang, phase-change teaching method, the longer the more serious.

古文：及大隋受命，圣道聿兴，屏黜轻浮，遏止华伪，自非怀经抱质，志道依仁，不得引预搢绅，参厕缨冕。
现代文：到大隋受命，圣道复兴，摒弃轻浮，遏止虚伪，如非胸有经典，生性质朴，有志于大道，归依于仁孝，不得引入仕途，为官为宦。
English: To the Great Sui Dynasty, it was ordered to revive the sacred path, abandon frivolity, and curb hypocrisy. If one does not have the classics in one's heart, be simple in nature, aspire to the avenue, adhere to benevolence and filial piety, it is not allowed to introduce a career path, and be a bureaucrat.

古文：开皇四年，普诏天下，公私之翰，并宜实录。
现代文：开皇四年，普诏天下，举凡公私文书，并宜实录。
English: In the first four years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the imperial edict was promulgated to the whole country, and all public and private documents were cited and recorded.

古文：其年九月，泗州刺史司马幼之文表华艳，付所司治罪。
现代文：这年九月，泗州刺史司马幼文的表章言辞华丽，交有关部门治罪。
English: In September of the same year, Zhangzhou Zhi Shi Sima Juwen's signature and words were gorgeous, and he was handed over to the relevant departments to deal with the crime.

古文：自是公卿大臣，咸知正路，莫不钻仰坟集，弃绝华绮，择先王之令典，行大道于兹世。
现代文：从此公卿大臣都知走正路，无不崇仰典籍，抛弃华丽虚浮，选择先王的令典，行大道于这个盛世。
English: From then on, nobles and ministers knew how to take the right path. They all admired classic books, abandoned pomp and vanity, and chose the decrees of the previous king to walk the high road in this prosperous age.

古文：如闻外州远县，仍钟敝风，选吏举人，未遵典则，至有宗党称孝，乡曲归仁，学必典谟，交不苟合，则摈落私门，不加收齿；其学不稽古，逐俗随时，作轻薄之篇章，结朋党而求誉，则选充吏职，举送天朝。
现代文：但我听说，外州远县，仍然承袭坏风气，选举官吏，不遵照规矩。以至出现宗族人等称其孝顺，乡里乡亲说他仁义，学习先圣的经典，不随便交友的人，就被摈弃在门外，不加录用的情况；出现学习不师古，追逐时尚，写作轻薄的文章，交结朋党而求声誉，就反被选作官吏，送到朝廷的怪事。
English: But I have heard that people in the outlying prefectures of other prefectures still carry on the bad tradition of electing officials without following the rules, to the extent that clansmen and others call them filial, townspeople say they are benevolent and virtuous, and those who study the classics of the first saints and do not make friends casually are rejected and not recruited; and those who do not study the classics, pursue fashion, write frivolous articles, and seek reputation by making friends with the party are elected as officials and sent to the imperial court.

古文：盖由县令、刺史未行风教，犹挟私情，不存公道。
现代文：这都是因为县令、刺史不行风教，犹讲私情，不讲公道。
English: This is all because the county magistrate and the chief magistrate are not able to teach morality, they only talk about personal feelings, not about fairness.

古文：臣既忝宪司，职当纠察。
现代文：臣下我既然在司法部门充数，我的职责，就应该纠察这类事。
English: Since the vassal lives with the registrar, he should do his duty as a picket.

古文：若闻风即劾，恐挂网者多，请勒诸司，普加搜访，有如此者，具状送台。
现代文：但是，如果闻风即弹劾，恐怕处理的人又太多，请皇上下令有关部门，普遍加以搜寻访查，如有此类情况的，一律写明情况送到台省处置。
English: However, if the rumor is impeachment, I am afraid that there are too many people to deal with. I would like to ask the emperor to order the relevant departments to conduct a general search and inspection. If there is such a situation, the situation will be sent to Taiwan Province for disposal.

古文：谔又以当官者好自矜伐，复上奏曰：臣闻舜戒禹云： 汝惟不矜，天下莫与汝争能；汝惟不伐，天下莫与汝争功。 
现代文：李谔又因当官的好自我吹嘘，又上奏道：我听说舜帝告诫大禹说： 你只有不矜持，天下人才不能与你争比才能；你只有不骄傲称功，天下人才不能与你争功。 
English: Li Qiye also boasted about his good performance as an official, and went on to recite: I heard that Emperor Qian admonished Dayu, saying: "If you are not modest, people in the world cannot compete with your talent; if you are not proud to praise, people in the world cannot compete with you."

古文：言偃又云： 事君数，斯辱矣，朋友数，斯疏矣。 
现代文：言偃又说： 侍奉君王，自数其功，这就要自取其辱；侍奉朋友，自数其功，这就会被朋友疏远。 
English: He also said: "If you serve a king and count your merits, you will be disgraced; if you serve a friend and count your merits, you will be alienated by your friend."

古文：此皆先哲之格言，后王之轨辙。
现代文：这些都是先哲的格言，是后王的正道。
English: These are the maxims of the sages, the righteous path of emperors.

古文：然则人臣之道，陈力济时，虽勤比大禹，功如师望，亦不得厚自矜伐，上要君父。
现代文：那么臣下之道，出力济时，即使勤劳可与大禹相比，功勋有如太公望吕尚高，也不能骄傲自大，要挟君父。
English: Then the way of a vassal, the output of time, even if the hard work can be compared with Dayu, the merits are as high as Taigong and Lv Shanggao, can not be proud and arrogant, threatening your father.

古文：况复功无足纪，勤不补过，而敢自陈勋绩，轻干听览！
现代文：何况还是功劳不足以录下，勤奋不足以补过，却胆敢自述功勋，随意地干扰皇上的视听！
English: What's more, the merit is not enough to record, the diligence is not enough to make up for, but they dare to tell their own merits, and interfere with the emperor's audio-visual at will!

古文：世之丧道，极于周代，下无廉耻，上使之然。
现代文：世间的丧亡之道，到北周就到了极点：下无廉耻，是上头使他这样的。
English: The ruin of the world reaches its climax in the Northern Zhou period: the lower classes are shameless, and it is the upper classes who have made them so.

古文：用人唯信其口，取士不观其行。
现代文：北周用人唯信其口，取士不看其行。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty employed people who only believed in their words, and did not care about their actions.

古文：矜夸自大，便以干济蒙擢；谦恭静退，多以恬默见遗。
现代文：自吹自擂的，就以干练有才而承蒙提拔；谦虚退让的，多因其静默而被遗忘。
English: He who boasts is the most likely to be promoted for his ability; he who is humble is the most likely to be forgotten for his silence.

古文：是以通表陈诚，先论己之功状；承颜敷奏，亦道臣最用心。
现代文：因此，周代大臣上表章表达忠诚，就先论自己的功勋；承受龙颜敷衍上奏，也说： 臣下我最为用心。 
English: Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty minister expressed his loyalty on the badge by first talking about his own merits; he also said, "I am the most diligent of my subjects."

古文：自衒自媒，都无惭耻之色；强干横请，唯以干没为能。
现代文：自我吹嘘，自卖自夸，都无惭愧羞耻之色；强行求官横行要爵，只以把天下搞光为能事。
English: Self-boasting, self-promotion, and self-praise are all shameless and shameless; forcibly seeking office, rampantly demanding a peerage, and only being able to bring the world into the light.

古文：自隋受命，此风顿改，耕夫贩妇，无不革心，况乃大臣，仍遵敝俗！
现代文：自大隋受命以来，此风顿改，甚至连耕田的农夫、贩卖的农妇，也无不洗心革面，何况还是大臣，却仍旧遵从坏风气！
English: Since the Great Sui Dynasty was ordered, this style has suddenly changed, and even the farmers who cultivate the fields and the farmers' wives who sell them have all changed their minds, not to mention the ministers, but they still follow the bad tradition!

古文：如闻刺史入京朝觐，乃有自陈勾检之功，喧诉阶墀之侧，言辞不逊，高自称誉，上黩冕旒，特为难恕，凡如此辈，具状送台，明加罪黜，以惩风轨。
现代文：我听说，刺史入京朝觐皇上，还有自述巴掌大的小功，喧闹于朝廷之上，言辞不逊，自我吹口虚的，对皇上如此轻慢不敬，特别难以饶恕！凡是这样的人，都要写清他们的罪状，送交台省，公开地加罪废黜，以惩风教。
English: I've heard that it's especially hard to forgive those who insult the emperor by entering the imperial court in Beijing, as well as those who claim to have accomplished great feats, who make noise in the imperial court, who are insolent and boast about themselves, and who are so disrespectful to the emperor! All such people should write down their criminal charges, submit them to Taiwan Province, and publicly add to their crimes and depose them in order to punish them.

古文：上以谔前后所奏颁示天下，四海靡然向风，深革其弊。
现代文：皇上把李谔前后所奏颁示天下，四海蔚然成风，深深地革除了弊政旧俗。
English: Emperor Wen promulgated the musical scores before and after Li Xi to the whole world, and all over the world, they tended to follow the tradition, and profoundly eliminated the drawbacks.

古文：谔在职数年，务存大体，不尚严猛，由是无刚謇之誉，而潜有匡正多矣。
现代文：李谔在职几年，务求存大体。他不喜欢严酷激烈，因此无刚正之誉，但他悄悄地却有很多匡正。
English: Li Wei has been in office for a few years, in order to survive in general. He does not like harsh and intense, so he has no reputation for rectitude, but he quietly has a lot of rectitude.

古文：邳公苏威以临道店舍，乃求利之徒，事业污杂，非敦本之义，遂奏高祖，约遣归农，有愿依旧者，所在州县录附市籍，仍撤毁旧店，并令远道，限以时日。
现代文：邳公苏威以为临街的商店客舍，都是求利之徒干的，事情污杂，不是敦本务农之义，于是奏明高祖，要他们归农种田。如有想依旧从商的，所在的州县要把商店客舍录附市籍充公，拆毁商店客舍，并限定时日，令他们到很远的地方去。
English: Gong Su Wei thought that the shops and guesthouses on the street were all made by people seeking profit, and the things were messy and not the essence of farming, so he sent a message to Gao Zu, asking them to return to farmland. If they still wanted to do business, the state and county where they were located would confiscate the shops and guesthouses with city registration, demolish the shops and guesthouses, and set a time limit to make them go far away.

古文：正值冬寒，莫敢陈诉。
现代文：那时正值寒冬，没有哪个敢陈述申诉。
English: It was winter and no one dared to file a complaint.

古文：谔因别使，见其如此，以为四民有业，各附所安，逆旅之与旗亭，自古非同一概，即附市籍，于理不可，且行旅之所托，岂容一朝而废，徒为劳扰，于事非宜，遂专决之，并令依旧，使还诣阙，然后奏闻。
现代文：李谔因有别的事出使外地，见到这个情况，以为士农工商，各有其业，旅店和旗亭，自古都有，情况各异，录附市籍充公，在道理上讲不过去。而且，旅店是旅客的依托，岂容一朝废掉？这么作，白白地劳累烦忧，于事无补又不应该。李谔于是专权决定，一切依旧。他出使完毕回到朝廷，然后报告皇上。
English: Seeing this situation, Li Wei, who was dispatched to a foreign country for other reasons, thought that the peasants, farmers, and merchants all had their own businesses, and that there had been inns and pavilions since ancient times. The situation was different, and the confiscation of the city's citizenship could not be justified. Moreover, the inn was the support of the passengers. Would it be allowed to be abolished once it was built? Doing so would be a waste of effort and trouble, and it would not help matters. Li Wei then made an exclusive decision that everything would remain the same. After his mission, he returned to the imperial court, and then reported to the emperor.

古文：高祖善之曰： 体国之臣，当如此矣。 
现代文：高祖赞赏他说： 治国大臣，应该这样。 
English: Gaozu praised him and said, "Minister of State, this is how it should be.

古文：以年老，出拜通州刺史，甚有惠政，民夷悦服。
现代文：因为年老，李谔出京拜授通州刺史，很有恩惠之政，百姓夷人都很高兴。
English: Because of his old age, Li Hongzhi went to Beijing to confer the Tongzhou sashimi history. It was a very benevolent policy, and the common people were very happy.

古文：后三岁，卒官，有子四人。
现代文：三年后，在刺史任上去世。有儿子四人。
English: Three years later, he died at the post of chief of staff. He had four sons.

古文：大体、大钧，并官至尚书郎。
现代文：李大体、李钅匀，都官至尚书郎。
English: Li Yuanzhong, Li Yuanyuan, all the way up to Shang Shuro.

古文：世子大方袭爵，最有材品，大业初，判内史舍人。
现代文：世子李大方承袭爵禄，最有德才。大业初年，大方任内史舍人。
English: His heir, Li Dafang, inherited the peerage, and was the most virtuous. In the first year of his reign, Dafang was appointed as the official historian.

古文：帝方欲任之，遇卒。
现代文：炀帝正要重用他，碰上他去世了。
English: Emperor Xuan was about to reuse him when he died.

