古文：苏子为赵合从，说魏王曰： 大王之地，南有鸿沟、陈、汝南，有许、鄢、昆阳、邵陵、舞阳、新郪；东有淮、颖、沂、黄、煮枣、海盐、无疏；西有长城之界；北有河外、卷、衍、燕、酸枣，地方千里。
现代文：苏秦为了赵国的合纵联盟游说魏襄王说： 大王的国土，南边有鸿沟、陈地、汝南，还有许地、鄢地、昆阳、召陵、舞阳、新郪；东边有淮水、颍水、沂水、外黄、煮枣、海盐、无踈；西有长城边界；北有河外、卷地、衍地、酸枣，土地纵横千里。
English: Su Qin lobbied Wei Xiang Wang for the longitudinal alliance of Zhao, saying: the land of the great king, the south has a chasm, Chen land, Rongnan, and Xu land, Zou land, Kunyang, Zoling, Maiyang, Xinjiang; the east has Huai water, Zou water, Zou water, outer yellow, boiled jujube, sea salt, no jujube; the west has the Great Wall border; the north has outside the river, rolled land, derived land, sour jujube, the land is thousands of miles long and wide.

古文：地名虽小，然而庐田庑舍，曾无所刍牧牛马之地。
现代文：地方名义上虽然狭小，但房屋田舍十分密集，以致于没有放牧牛马的地方。
English: Although the area is nominally small, the houses and fields are so dense that there is no place to graze cattle and horses.

古文：人民之众，车马之多，日夜行不休已，无以异于三军之众。
现代文：百姓众多，车马成群，日夜奔驰不绝，其声势和三军士兵相比没有什么区别。
English: A large number of people, a large number of horses and chariots, and an incessant stream of cars day and night, their voices are no different from those of the soldiers of the three armies.

古文：臣窃料之，大王之国不下于楚。
现代文：我私下里估计，大王的国力不亚于楚国。
English: Privately, I estimate that the national strength of the Great King is no less than that of Chu.

古文：然横人谋王，外交强虎狼之秦，以侵天下，卒有国患，不被其祸。
现代文：然而那些主张连横的人却劝说大王结交如虎狼一样残暴的秦国，和它一起侵犯天下各国。若国家因此遭受祸患，他们又不肯为您分忧。
English: However, those who advocated the continuation of the war persuaded the king to make friends with Qin, which was as cruel as a tiger and wolf, and together they invaded all the countries of the world. If the country suffered a disaster as a result, they would not share your worries.

古文：夫挟强秦之势，以内劫其主，罪无过此者。
现代文：他们依仗强秦的势力，在国内胁迫君主，所犯下的罪过没有比这更大的了。
English: They relied on the strength of the Qin Dynasty to coerce the monarch domestically, and there is no greater sin than this.

古文：且魏，天下之强国也；大王，天下之贤主也。今乃有意西面而事秦，称东藩，筑帝宫，受冠带，祠春秋，臣窃为大王媿之。
现代文：再说魏国是天下的强国，大王是天下贤明的君主，如今竟有意投向西方服事秦国，自称是秦国东方的属国，建筑秦帝行宫，接受秦的封赏，春秋两季给它进贡助祭，我心里替大王惭愧。
English: Moreover, Wei is a powerful country in the world, and the great king is a wise monarch in the world. Now, he has the intention to serve Qin in the west, claiming to be a vassal state of Qin in the east, building the Qin Emperor's Palace, accepting Qin's reward, and giving it tribute in the spring and autumn. I feel ashamed for the great king.

古文： 臣闻越王勾践以散卒三千，禽夫差于干遂；武王卒三千人，革车三百乘，斩纣于牧之野。
现代文：我听说越王勾践靠着三千残兵败将，在于隧擒获了夫差；周武王也仅有三千士兵，三百辆战车，在牧野杀死了商纣王。
English: I heard that Yue Wang Gochun relied on three thousand remnants of the army to defeat the enemy, because the tunnel had a husband; King Zhou Wu also had only three thousand soldiers and three hundred chariots, and killed the merchant king in Makino.

古文：岂其士卒众哉?
现代文：这难道是他们士兵多吗？
English: Is that how many soldiers they have?

古文：诚能振其威也。
现代文：其实是他们能振奋自己的雄威啊！
English: In fact, it is they who can inspire their own heroism!

古文：今窃闻大王之卒，武力二十余万，苍头二十万，奋击二十万，厮徒十万，车六百乘，骑五千匹。
现代文：如今我听说大王的兵力，训练有素的士兵二十万，青布裹头的士兵二十万，精兵二十万，勤杂部队十万，还有六百辆战车，战马五千匹。
English: And now I have heard of the number of the army of the great king, two hundred thousand footmen, two hundred thousand horsemen, two hundred thousand picked men, one hundred thousand footmen, six hundred chariots, and five thousand horses.

古文：此其过越王勾践、武王远矣。
现代文：这肯定远远超过越王勾践和武王的力量！
English: This is certainly far beyond the power of Yue Wang Gochun and King Wu!

古文：今乃于辟臣之说，而欲臣事秦。
现代文：如今您却迫于谗臣的邪说，想要臣服于秦国。
English: Now, however, you are forced by the evil doctrine of the vassals to submit to Qin.

古文：夫事秦必割地效质，故兵未用而国已亏矣。
现代文：事奉秦国一定得割让土地送上人质，因此军队还没用上而国家的元气已经亏损了。
English: Qin had to cede land and send hostages, so the army had not yet been used and the country's vitality had already been lost.

古文：凡群臣之言事秦者，皆奸臣，非忠臣也。
现代文：群臣之中凡是主张事奉秦国的人，都是奸臣，绝对不是忠臣。
English: Among the vassals, anyone who advocated serving Qin was a traitor and definitely not a loyal vassal.

古文：夫为人臣，割其主之地以求外交，偷取一旦之功而不顾其后，破公家而成私门，外挟强秦之势以内劫其主，以求割地，愿大王之熟察之也。
现代文：作为臣子却割让君主的土地与外国勾结；窃取一时的功名和好处，却不顾及后患；损害国家的利益，去满足个人的私利与欲望；在国外仰仗强秦威势，在国内胁迫自己的君主割让土地，对于卑劣行为，希望大王慎重考虑。
English: As a vassal, he ceded the monarch's land and colluded with foreign countries; stole momentary fame and benefits, but did not care about the consequences; damaged the interests of the country to satisfy personal self-interest and desires; relied on strong Qin authority abroad, and coerced his own monarch to cede land at home. For despicable behavior, I hope the great king will carefully consider.

古文： 《周书》曰： 绵绵不绝，缦缦奈何?
现代文：《周书》说： 微弱时如不及早斩断，等到长大了还能拿它怎么办？
English: "Weekly Shoshu" said: If you do not cut it off early when it is weak, what will you do with it when it grows up?

古文：毫毛不拔，将成斧柯。
现代文：幼苗的时候如果不抓住时机将它铲除，等到将来长大了就要用斧头砍。 
English: If you do not seize the opportunity to uproot seedlings when they are young, you will have to chop them with an axe when they grow up in the future.

古文：前虑不定，后有大患。
现代文：事先不能当机立断，事后就会有大祸等着，到那时不知该怎么办？
English: You can't make a quick decision in advance, there will be a big disaster waiting afterwards, and by then you don't know what to do?

古文：将奈之何? 大王诚能听臣，六国从亲，专心并力，则必无强秦之患。
现代文：如果大王真的能听从我的建议，六国合纵相亲，齐心合力，那么必然不会遭受强秦的侵犯。
English: If the great king can really listen to my suggestion, and the six countries can work together, then he will certainly not be invaded by the strong Qin.

古文：故敝邑赵王使使臣献愚计，奉明约，在大王诏之。 
现代文：因此敝国国君赵王派我来进献愚计，奉上盟约，听凭大王诏令。 
English: Therefore, King Zhao, the sovereign of this country, sent me to present a foolish plan, to offer a covenant, and to obey the great king's edict.

古文：魏王曰： 寡人不肖，未尝得闻明教。
现代文：魏王说： 我不贤能，以前从未听过这样高明的指教。
English: Wei Wang said, "I'm no genius. I've never heard such clever advice before."

古文：今主君以赵王之诏诏之，敬以国从。 
现代文：今天您用赵王的诏令来教导我，我愿意以我的国家来听信你的建议。 
English: Today, you use King Zhao's edict to teach me, and I am willing to listen to your advice with my country.

