古文：张宪，飞爱将也。
现代文：张宪，是岳飞喜爱的部将。
English: Zhang Xian is Yuefei's favorite captain.

古文：飞破曹成，宪与徐庆、王贵招降其党二万。
现代文：岳飞击破曹成，张宪同徐庆、王贵招降曹成党羽两万人。
English: Yue Fei defeated Cao Cheng, and Zhang Xiantong, Xu Qing and Wang Gui recruited 20,000 of Cao Cheng's followers.

古文：有郝政率众走沅州，首被白布，为成报仇，号 白巾贼 ，宪一鼓擒之。
现代文：有一名叫郝政的曹成部将率部逃到沅州，头戴白色毛巾，发誓为曹成报仇，号称 白巾贼 ，张宪一举把他擒获。
English: Zhang Xian captured Cao Chengbu, also known as the White Scarf Thief, who fled to Zhangzhou with a white towel on his head and vowed to avenge Cao Chengbu.

古文：飞遣宪复随州，敌将王嵩不战而遁。
现代文：岳飞派遣张宪收复随州，敌将王嵩不战而逃。
English: Yuefei dispatched Zhang Xian to recover Suzhou, and the enemy general Wang Song fled without a fight.

古文：进兵邓州，距城三十里，遇贼兵数万迎战。
现代文：张宪率兵向邓州进发，距城三十里时，遇到敌军数万人前来迎战。
English: Zhang Jian and his soldiers marched toward Dengzhou. When they were 30 miles from the city, they encountered tens of thousands of enemy troops coming to meet them.

古文：与王万、董先各出骑突击，贼众大溃，遂复邓州。
现代文：张宪同王万、董先各自派出骑兵向敌人发起突击，敌人大溃而散，于是收复邓州。
English: Zhang Xian, Wang Wan, and Dong Xian each sent cavalry to launch a surprise attack on the enemy. The enemy was routed and dispersed, and Dangzhou was recovered.

古文：十年，金人渝盟入侵，宪战颍昌、战陈州皆大捷，复其城。
现代文：绍兴十年，金军背叛盟约入侵南宋，张宪率部在颍昌、陈州同金军大战都获得大胜，收复颍昌、陈州城。
English: In the 10th year of Shaoxing, the Jin Army betrayed the alliance and invaded the Southern Song Dynasty. Zhang Xian and his troops won a great victory in the war with the Jin Army in Fuchang and Chenzhou, and recovered Fuchang and Chenzhou.

古文：兀术顿兵十二万于临颍县，杨再兴与战，死之。
现代文：兀率兵十二万人屯驻在临颍县，杨再兴同敌交战，战死。
English: Yao led 120,000 soldiers stationed in Linyi County. Yang Zaixing fought with the enemy and died in battle.

古文：宪继至，破其溃兵八千，兀术夜遁。
现代文：张宪率兵随后赶到，击败敌军溃兵八千人，兀连夜逃遁。
English: Zhang Jian and his soldiers then arrived, defeated eight thousand enemy soldiers, and fled in the night.

古文：宪将徐庆、李山复捷于临颍东北，破其众六千，获马百匹，追奔十五里，中原大震。
现代文：张宪率徐庆、李山又在临颍东北获得胜利，击破金军六千人，获得战马一百匹，追击逃奔的敌人十五里，中原地区大为震动。
English: Zhang Xian, Xu Qing and Li Shan, led by Zhang Xian, won another victory in the northeast of Linyi, defeating six thousand gold troops, gaining one hundred horses, and chasing the fleeing enemy for fifteen miles. The Central Plains region was greatly shaken.

古文：会秦桧主和，命飞班师，宪亦还。
现代文：恰逢秦桧主持和议，命令岳飞班师，张宪也率部返回。
English: Just as Qin Hui presided over the peace talks, he ordered Yue Feibanshi and Zhang Xian to return with their troops.

古文：未几，桧与张俊谋杀飞，密诱飞部曲，以能告飞事者，宠以优赏，卒无人应。闻飞尝欲斩王贵，又杖之，诱贵告飞。
现代文：不久，秦桧同张俊密谋杀害岳飞，秘密引诱岳飞部下，对能够报告岳飞事情的人，给予优厚的赏赐，但最终没有人响应，听说岳飞曾经要处死王贵，又杖打他，引诱王贵控告岳飞。
English: Soon, Qin Yu and Zhang Jun conspired to murder and kill Yue Fei, secretly seduced Yue Fei's subordinates, and gave generous rewards to those who could report Yue Fei's affairs, but in the end no one responded. It was heard that Yue Fei once wanted to execute Wang Gui, and beat him with a cane to lure Wang Gui to sue Yue Fei.

古文：贵不肯，曰： 为大将宁免以赏罚用人，苟以为怨，将不胜其怨。 桧、俊不能屈，俊劫贵以私事，贵惧而从。
现代文：王贵不肯答应，说： 作为大将岂能不赏罚部下，如果以此抱怨怀恨，那么怨恨就太多了。 秦桧、张俊不能使他屈从，张俊用王贵的私事胁迫他，王贵恐惧而服从。
English: Wang Gui refused to agree, saying, "As a general, can you not reward and punish your subordinates? If you use this as a way to complain and hold grudges, then your grudges will be too much. Qin Hui and Zhang Jun cannot make him submit, Zhang Jun uses Wang Gui's personal affairs to coerce him, Wang Gui is afraid and obeys.

古文：时又有王俊者，善告讦，号 雕儿 ，以奸贪屡为宪所裁。
现代文：当时又有一位名叫王俊的人，善于控告揭发别人，号称 雕儿 ，因为奸诈贪婪多次被张宪所处治。
English: At that time, there was also a person named Wang Jun, who was good at suing and exposing others, known as "Sculptor," who was repeatedly punished by Zhang Xian because of his treachery and greed.

古文：桧使人谕之，俊辄从。
现代文：秦桧派人劝说他，王俊就立即答应了。
English: Qin Hui sent someone to persuade him, and Wang Jun immediately agreed.

古文：桧、俊谋以宪、贵、俊皆飞将，使其徒自相攻发，因及飞父子，庶主上不疑。
现代文：秦桧、张俊密谋认为张宪、王贵、王俊都是岳飞部将，如果使他们之间互相告发，牵连到岳飞父子，才能使皇帝不产生怀疑。
English: Qin Hui and Zhang Jun conspired to think that Zhang Xian, Wang Gui and Wang Jun were all Yuefei generals. If they were to inform on each other and implicate Yuefei and his son, the emperor would not have any doubts.

古文：俊自为状付王俊，妄言宪谋还飞兵，令告王贵，使贵执宪。
现代文：张俊亲自写好状纸交给王俊，胡说张宪企图逼迫朝廷还岳飞兵权，命令王贵，让王贵逮捕张宪。
English: Zhang Jun personally wrote a letter and handed it to Wang Jun, saying that Zhang Xian was trying to force the imperial court to return Yuefei's military power, and ordered Wang Gui to have Wang Gui arrest Zhang Xian.

古文：宪未至，俊预为狱以待之。
现代文：张宪还没到，张俊便预设监狱等待他。
English: Before Zhang Xian arrived, Zhang Jun set up a prison to wait for him.

古文：属吏王应求白张俊，以为密院无推勘法。
现代文：属下官吏王应求告诉张俊，认为枢密院没有推究审问的权力。
English: Wang Yingqiu, a subordinate official, told Zhang Jun that the Privy Council did not have the power to investigate and interrogate.

古文：俊不听，亲行鞫炼，使宪自诬，谓得云书，命宪营还兵计。
现代文：张俊不听，亲自行刑审问拷打，让张宪自己诬陷自己，说收到岳云书信，让张宪筹划交还岳飞兵权的计谋。
English: Zhang Jun did not listen, and he personally carried out the torture and interrogation, and let Zhang Xian frame himself, saying that he had received Yueyun's letter, and let Zhang Xian plan to return Yuefei's military power.

古文：宪被掠无全肤，竟不伏。
现代文：张宪被拷打得体无完肤，依然没有服罪。
English: Zhang Xian was beaten to a pulp and still did not admit his guilt.

古文：俊手自具狱成，告桧械宪至行在，下大理寺。
现代文：张俊亲自布置成冤狱，告诉秦桧将张宪囚械到行营，关押进大理寺。
English: Zhang Jun personally arranged the unjust prison and told Qin Yu to take Zhang Xian to the camp and imprison him in Dali Temple.

古文：桧奏召飞父子证宪事。
现代文：秦桧上奏请召岳飞父子证实张宪事实。
English: Qin Yu's report invited Yue Fei and his son to come and confirm the facts about Zhang Xian.

古文：帝曰： 刑所以止乱，勿妄追证，动摇人心。 桧矫诏召飞父子至。
现代文：高宗说： 刑法是用来禁止叛乱的，不要妄加追究牵连，以免动摇人心。 秦桧违背诏令召来岳飞父子。
English: Gao Zong said: Criminal law is used to prohibit rebellion, so do not pursue and implicate, so as not to shake people's hearts. Qin Hui violated the edict and summoned Yue Fei and his son.

古文：万俟禼诬飞使于鹏、孙革致书宪、贵，令虚申警报以动朝廷，云与宪书规还飞军。
现代文：万俟诬蔑岳飞让于鹏、孙革送信给张宪、王贵，命令他们谎报军情惊动朝廷，岳云给张宪写信规划交还岳飞兵权。
English: Yue Yun sent a letter to Zhang Xian, planning to return Yue Fei's military power, after Yue Fei was slandered by Yu Peng and Sun Ge to Zhang Xian and Wang Gui, ordering them to lie about the military situation to alarm the imperial court.

古文：其书皆无有，乃妄称宪、贵已焚之矣，但以众证具狱。
现代文：这些书信都没有，于是胡说张宪、王贵已经烧掉了，只是以众人的证言构成冤狱。
English: None of these letters were found, so it was nonsense to say that Zhang Xian and Wang Gui had been burned, but it was only the testimony of many people that constituted unjust imprisonment.

古文：语在飞《传》。
现代文：语载在《岳飞传》中。
English: It is recorded in "Yuefei Chuan."

古文：宪坐死，籍家赀。
现代文：张宪连坐而死，家财被抄没。
English: Zhang Xianlian died and his family's wealth was confiscated.

古文：绍兴三十二年，追复龙神卫四厢都指挥使、阆州观察使，赠宁远军承宣使，录其家。
现代文：绍兴三十二年，追认恢复张宪龙神卫四厢都指挥使、阆州观察使职务，赠宁远军承宣使，录用他的家属。
English: In 32nd year of Shaoxing, Zhang Xianlong Shenwei was posthumously reinstated as the commander of the Four Quarters and the observation envoy of Zhangzhou. He was given the title of the ambassador of Ningyuan Army and his family members were recruited.

古文：杨再兴，贼曹成将也。
现代文：杨再兴，原是贼盗曹成的部将。
English: Yang Zaixing was originally a general in Cao Zeng's band of thieves.

古文：绍兴二年，岳飞破成，入莫邪关。
现代文：绍兴二年，岳飞击败曹成，进入莫邪关。
English: In the second year of Shaoxing, Yuefei defeated Cao Cheng and entered Moxa Pass.

古文：第五将韩顺夫解鞍脱甲，以所虏妇人佐酒。
现代文：第五将韩顺夫解除鞍马脱掉盔甲，用所掳掠的妇女在旁助兴喝酒。
English: On the fifth day, Han Shunfu was relieved of his saddle horse, stripped of his armor, and used the women he had captured to help him drink.

古文：再兴率众直入其营，官军却，杀顺夫，又杀飞弟翻。
现代文：杨再兴率领部众直冲韩顺夫营中，官军退却，杨再兴杀死韩顺夫，又杀死岳飞弟弟岳番飞。
English: Yang Zaixing led the troops to directly attack Han Shunfu's camp, and the government troops retreated. Yang Zaixing killed Han Shunfu, and also killed Yuefei's younger brother, Yue Fanfei.

古文：成败，再兴走跃入涧，张宪欲杀之，再兴曰： 愿执我见岳公。 遂受缚。
现代文：曹成失败后，杨再兴跳入深涧，张宪准备杀死他，杨再兴说： 希望你捆绑我去见岳飞。 于是受绑。
English: After Cao Cheng's defeat, Yang Zaixing jumped into the abyss, Zhang Xian prepared to kill him, Yang Zaixing said: "I hope you will tie me up to see Yuefei." So he was tied up.

古文：飞见再兴，奇其貌，释之，曰： 吾不汝杀，汝当以忠义报国。 再兴拜谢。
现代文：岳飞见到杨再兴，惊奇他的像貌，松绑说： 我不杀你，你应该以忠义报效国家。 杨再兴叩拜感谢。
English: When Yuefei saw Yang Zaixing, he was surprised by his appearance and said, "I won't kill you, you should repay the country with loyalty." Yang Zaixing bowed and thanked him.

古文：飞屯襄阳以图中原，遣再兴至西京长水县之业阳，杀孙都统及统制满在，斩五百余人，俘将吏百人，余党奔溃。
现代文：岳飞屯驻襄阳以图谋恢复中原，派遣杨再兴到西京长水县的业阳，杀死敌将孙都统和统制满在，斩杀敌兵五百多人，俘虏官兵一百人，其余的党羽逃散。
English: Yue Fei stationed in Xiangyang in an attempt to restore the Central Plains, and sent Yang Zaixing to Yeyang in Changshui County, West Beijing, to kill the enemy general Sun Duong and his subordinates, killing more than five hundred enemy soldiers, capturing one hundred officers and soldiers, and the rest of the party fled.

古文：明日，再战于孙洪涧，破其众二千，复长水，得粮二万石以给军民，尽复西京险要。
现代文：次日，又同敌人在孙洪涧展开战斗，击败敌人二千人，收复长水县，缴获粮食二万石供给军民，全部收复西京险要地区。
English: The next day, they fought with the enemy in Sun Hongtao, defeated 2,000 enemies, recovered Changshui County, seized 20,000 koku of grain to supply the military and civilians, and recovered all the critical areas in West Beijing.

古文：又得伪齐所留马万匹，刍粟数十万。
现代文：又得到伪齐留下的马匹一千匹，粮草数十万。
English: In addition, a thousand horses and hundreds of thousands of grains and grasses were left behind by the pseudo-Qi.

古文：中原响应。
现代文：中原地区群起响应。
English: The Central Plains region rallied in response.

古文：复至蔡州，焚贼粮。
现代文：又到蔡州，焚毁敌人粮草。
English: He also went to Caizhou to burn the enemy's grain and grass.

古文：飞败金人于郾城，兀术怒，合龙虎大王、盖天大王及韩常兵逼之。
现代文：岳飞在郾城打败金军，兀大怒，会合龙虎大王、盖天大王及韩常的兵力进逼郾城。
English: Yue Fei defeated the gold army in Lucheng, and was so angry that he gathered the forces of the Dragon and Tiger Kings, the Great King of Heaven and Earth, and Han Chang to enter and force Lucheng.

古文：飞遣子云当敌，鏖战数十合，敌不支。
现代文：岳飞派儿子岳云抵挡敌人，激战数十个回合，敌人支撑不住。
English: Yuefei sent his son, Yueyun, to resist the enemy, and the fierce battle lasted for dozens of rounds. The enemy could not be supported.

古文：再兴以单骑入其军，擒兀术不获，手杀数百人而还。
现代文：杨再兴单骑独马冲入敌军之中，准备活捉兀但没有抓到，杀死敌人数百人后返回。
English: Yang Zaixing single-handedly rushed into the enemy army, ready to catch them alive, but did not catch them, killed hundreds of enemies and returned.

古文：兀术愤甚，并力复来，顿兵十二万于临颍。
现代文：兀十分愤怒，集中兵力再次前来，在临颍驻扎了十二万大军。
English: Linyi was very angry and concentrated its forces to come again, stationing 120,000 troops in Linyi.

古文：再兴以三百骑遇敌于小商桥，骤与之战，杀二千余人，及万户撒八孛堇、千户百人。
现代文：杨再兴率领三百名骑兵在小商桥同敌军遭遇，突然向敌人发起冲击，杀死敌兵二千多人以及敌将万户撒八孛堇、千户一百人。
English: Yang Zaixing led three hundred cavalrymen to encounter the enemy army at Xiaoshan Bridge, and suddenly launched an attack on the enemy, killing more than two thousand enemy soldiers and the enemy scattered eight thousand households and one hundred thousand households.

古文：再兴战死，后获其尸，焚之，得箭镞二升。
现代文：杨再兴战死，后来得到他的尸体，焚烧之后，共得到箭镞装满两升。
English: Yang Zaixing was killed in battle, and his body was later retrieved. After it was incinerated, a total of two liters of arrowheads were obtained.

古文：牛皋，字伯远，汝州鲁山人。
现代文：牛皋字伯远，汝州鲁山人。
English: Niu Gan Zi Bo Yuan, a native of Luzhan, Ruzhou.

古文：初为射士，金人入侵，皋聚众与战，屡胜，西道总管翟兴表补保义郎。
现代文：当初是射士，金军入侵时，牛皋因聚众人同金军作战，屡次获胜，西道总管翟兴上表朝廷授予他为保义郎。
English: At first, he was an archer, but when the Chinese army invaded, Niu Yao gathered many people to fight against the Chinese army and won many times. The head of the West Road, Xing Xing, was awarded by the court as a guarantor.

古文：杜充留守东京，皋讨剧贼杨进于鲁山，三战三捷，贼党奔溃。
现代文：杜充任东京留守时，牛皋在鲁山讨伐势力强大的贼寇杨进，三战三胜，贼众奔溃逃命。
English: When Du Chengren was away in Tokyo, Niu Yao led a crusade against the powerful bandit Yang Jin in Lushan. Three battles, three victories, and the bandits fled for their lives.

古文：累迁荣州刺史、中军统领。
现代文：累次升迁为荣州刺史、中军统领。
English: He has been repeatedly promoted to be the leader of the Chinese army in the history of Rongzhou.

古文：金人再攻京西，皋十余战皆捷。
现代文：金军再次进攻京西，牛皋与敌大战十余次都获得胜利。
English: The Chinese army once again attacked west Beijing, and the Cowherd won more than a dozen battles with the enemy.

古文：加果州团练使。
现代文：升为果州团练使。
English: He was promoted to the post of Cangzhou Rehearsal Envoy.

古文：京城留守上官悟辟为同统制兼京西南路提点刑狱。
现代文：京城留守上官悟任命他为同统制兼京西南路提点刑狱。
English: Shangguan Guo, who stayed in Beijing, appointed him as the leader of the dongdang system and the leader of the Beijing Southwest Road.

古文：金人攻江西者，自荆门北归，皋潜军于宝丰之宋村，击败之。
现代文：金军攻江西，自荆门北撤，牛皋率部埋伏在宝丰的宋村，将敌人击败。
English: The gold army attacked the west of Jiangxi and withdrew from Jingmen to the north. The army led by Niu Yao ambushed the Song village of Baofeng and defeated the enemy.

古文：转和州防御使，充五军都统制。
现代文：升和州防御使，充任五军都统制。
English: He was promoted to the post of Hezhou Defense Commissar, and served as the commander of the Five Armies.

古文：又与孛堇战鲁山邓家桥，败之。
现代文：又与金将孛堇战于鲁山邓家桥，将孛堇击败。
English: He also fought against Kim Jong-un in the battle of Dengjiaqiao, Luzhan, and defeated him.

古文：转西道招抚使。
现代文：转任西道招抚使。
English: He was transferred to the post of the West Road Recruitment Envoy.

古文：伪齐乞师于金入寇，皋设伏要地，自屯丹霞以待。
现代文：伪齐向金请师入侵南宋，牛皋在险要之地设置埋伏，自己率军驻扎在丹霞等待来犯之敌。
English: Pseudo-Qi Xiang Jin invited the division to invade the Southern Song Dynasty, Niu Yao set up ambushes in critical places, and stationed his army in Danxia to wait for the enemy to come.

古文：敌兵悉众来，伏发，俘其酋豪郑务儿。
现代文：敌军悉众前来，牛皋伏兵突起，将敌将郑务儿活捉。
English: When the enemy army arrived in full force, the cowherd ambushed and captured the enemy general Zheng Wuerl alive.

古文：迁安州观察使，寻除蔡唐州信阳军镇抚使、知蔡州。
现代文：升为安州观察使，不久任蔡、唐州、信阳军镇抚使、知蔡州。
English: He was promoted to Anzhou observation envoy, and later served as Cai, Tangzhou, Xinyang military town envoy, and Zhizhou Caizhou.

古文：遇敌战辄胜，加亲卫大夫。
现代文：同敌作战总是获胜，加亲卫大夫。
English: You always win when you fight with the enemy, Dr. Gassama.

古文：会岳飞制置江西、湖北，将由襄、汉规中原，命皋隶飞军。
现代文：适逢岳飞制置江西、湖北，将通过襄、汉规划中原，朝廷命令牛皋隶属岳飞军。
English: When Yuefei made Jiangxi and Hubei provinces, and planned the Central Plains through Xiang and Han provinces, the imperial court ordered Niutao to join Yuefei's army.

古文：飞喜甚，即辟为唐邓襄郢州安抚使，寻改神武后军中部统领。
现代文：岳飞十分高兴，当即命令他为唐、邓、襄、郢州安抚使，不久改为神武后军中部统领。
English: Yuefei was very pleased, and immediately ordered him to be the pacifying envoy of Tang, Deng, Xiang, and Zhangzhou, and soon became the commander of the central part of the Jinwu Rear Army.

古文：伪齐使李成合金人入寇，破襄阳六郡。
现代文：伪齐派李成联合金军大举入寇，攻破襄阳六郡。
English: The pseudo-Qi sent Li Cheng and the allied Jin army to invade and conquer six counties in Xiangyang.

古文：敌将王嵩在随州，飞遣皋行，裹三日粮。
现代文：敌将王嵩在随州，岳飞派遣牛皋出征，带三日口粮。
English: The enemy general Wang Song was in Suizhou, and Yuefei sent Niu Jun to the front with three days' rations.

古文：粮未尽，城已拔，执嵩斩之，得卒五千，遂复随州。
现代文：粮食尚未吃完，牛皋已攻拔随州城，抓住王嵩并将其斩首，得到士卒五千人，于是收复随州。
English: The grain had not yet been eaten, but the oxen had attacked Suizhou City, captured Wang Song and beheaded him, gaining five thousand soldiers, and then regained Suizhou.

古文：李成在襄阳，飞遣皋以骑兵击破之，复襄阳。
现代文：李成占据襄阳，岳飞派牛皋率骑兵将其击败，收复襄阳。
English: Li Cheng occupied Yangyang, and Yuefei sent cavalry led by Niu Yao to defeat him and recover Yangyang.

古文：金人攻淮西，飞遣皋渡江，自提兵与皋会。
现代文：金军进攻淮西，岳飞派遣牛皋渡过长江，自己率兵同牛皋会合。
English: The Chinese army attacked Huaxi, and Yuefei sent the oxen across the Yangtze River and led his soldiers to meet the oxen.

古文：时伪齐驱甲骑五千薄庐州，皋遥谓金将曰： 牛皋在此，尔辈胡为见犯？ 众皆愕然，不战而溃。
现代文：当时伪齐派骑兵五千进攻庐州，牛皋遥对金将说： 牛皋在此，你辈为什么前来侵犯？ 敌众都惊慌失措，不战而逃。
English: At that time, the pseudo Qi sent five thousand cavalry to attack Zhangzhou. Niu Yingyao said to the Jin general: Niu Yingyao is here, why did you come to invade? The enemies were panicked and fled without a fight.

古文：飞谓皋曰： 必追之，去而复来，无益也。 皋追击三十余里，金人相践及杀死者相半，斩其副都统及千户五人，百户数十人，军声大振。
现代文：岳飞对牛皋说： 一定要追击，不然敌人卷土重来，对我们不利。 牛皋于是挥兵追击三十多里，金兵自相践踏及被杀伤的各占半数，此战斩杀其副都统及千户五人、百户数十人，军威大振。
English: Yuefei said to Niulong, "We must pursue, otherwise the enemy will make a comeback, which will be unfavorable to us." Niulong then waged a pursuit of more than thirty miles, and the gold soldiers trampled and killed each other, each accounting for half. This battle killed his vice-governor and five people from a thousand households, and dozens of people from a hundred households, and the military prestige was greatly shaken.

古文：庐州平，进中侍大夫。
现代文：庐州平定后，朝廷晋升牛皋为中侍大夫。
English: After Bozhou was pacified, the imperial court promoted Niu Yao to the rank of middle attendant doctor.

古文：从平杨么，破之。
现代文：随从岳飞平定杨么，将杨么击溃。
English: Yue Fei's followers subdued Yang Miao and defeated Yang Miao.

古文：么技穷，举钟子仪投于水，继乃自仆。
现代文：杨么无计可施，将钟子仪举起投入水中，接着自己也跳入水中。
English: With no other choice, Yang lifted the bell into the water and then jumped into the water himself.

古文：皋投水擒么，飞斩首函送都督行府。
现代文：牛皋跳进水中把杨么活捉，岳飞将其斩首传送至都督行府。
English: Cowherd jumped into the water to catch Yang Miao alive, and Yue Fei beheaded him and sent him to the governor's residence.

古文：除武泰军承宣使，改行营护圣中军统制，寻充湖北、京西宣抚司左军统制，加龙、神卫四厢都指挥使。
现代文：朝廷升牛皋为武泰军承宣使，改为行营护圣中军统制，不久任湖北、京西宣抚司左军统制，加任龙、神卫四厢都指挥使。
English: The imperial court promoted Niu Jian to the position of the military envoy of the Thai army, and changed his position to the commanding officer of the Chinese army in the defense of the holy places. He soon became the commanding officer of the left army in Hubei and the west Beijing, and was also appointed as the commanding officer of the Dragon and the Four Quarters of Shenwei.

古文：金人渝盟，飞命皋出师战汴、许间，以功最，除捧日天武四厢都指挥使、成德军承宣使，枢密行府以皋兼提举一行事务。
现代文：金人毁弃盟约，岳飞命令牛皋率师转战于汴京、许昌之间，因为功劳最大，被升为捧日天武四厢都指挥使、成德军承宣使，枢密行府以牛皋管理一切事务。
English: The goldsmith abandoned the alliance, and Yuefei ordered Niulong to lead the division to fight in the battle between Beijing and Xuchang. Because of the greatest merit, he was promoted to the commander of Hupeh, Tianmu and Shifeng, and the ambassador of the German army, and managed all affairs with Niulong.

古文：宣抚司罢，改鄂州驻札御前左军统制，升真定府路马步军副统总管，转宁国军承宣使、荆湖南路马步军副总管。
现代文：宣抚司罢废后，牛皋改为鄂州驻答刂御军左军统制，升真定府路马步军副统总管，转为宁国军承宣使、荆湖南路马步军副总管。
English: After the cancellation of the Propaganda Division, Niu Gan was changed to the left army control system of the Ezhou garrison in Dadu, and promoted to the deputy general manager of the Zhendingfu Horse Trail Army, and became the deputy general manager of the Ningguo Army, and the deputy general manager of the Jinghunan Horse Trail Army.

古文：绍兴十七年上巳日，都统制田师中大会诸将，皋遇毒，亟归，语所亲曰： 皋年六十一，官至侍从，幸不啻足。
现代文：绍兴十七年，都统制田师中宴请诸将，牛皋中毒，急忙回府，对其亲信说 ：我今年六十一岁，官至侍从，托天之幸，也该感到满足了。
English: In the seventeenth year of Shaoxing, when the middle school banquet was held for the generals of the General Staff, he was poisoned with burdock and hurried back to the capital, saying to his relatives: I am sixty-one years old this year, an official and a servant, by the grace of God, I should also feel satisfied.

古文：所恨南北通和，不以马革裹尸，顾死牖下耳。 明日卒。
现代文：遗憾的是南北通好议和，不能以马革裹尸战死沙场，反而死于床牖之上。 次日逝世。
English: Unfortunately, peace was negotiated between North and South Korea, and instead of dying on the battlefield with his body wrapped in a sword, he died on his bed. He died the next day.

古文：或言秦桧使师中毒皋云。
现代文：有人说是秦桧指使田师中毒害牛皋。
English: Some people say that Qin Hui ordered Tian Shi to poison the bull calf.

古文：初，桧主和，未几，金渝盟入侵，帝手札赐飞从便措置。
现代文：起初，秦桧主张和议，不久，金军背信弃义，撕毁盟约向南侵略，高宗亲笔书写诏令赐令岳飞自行处理有关事务。
English: At first, Qin Hui advocated peace talks, but soon, the Chinese army reneged and tore up the treaty to invade the south. Gao Zong personally wrote the edict and ordered Yuefei to handle the relevant affairs on his own.

古文：飞乃命皋及王贵、董先、杨再兴、孟邦杰、李宝等经略东西京、汝、郑、颍、陈、曹、光、蔡诸郡；又遣梁兴渡河，纠合忠义社取河东北州县。
现代文：岳飞于是任命牛皋和王贵、董先、杨再兴、孟邦杰、李宝等经略东西京、汝、郑、颍、陈、曹、光、蔡各州郡；又派梁兴渡河，会合忠义社攻取河东、北州县。
English: Yuefei then appointed Niu Yao and Wang Gui, Dong Xian, Yang Zai Xing, Meng Bangjie, Li Bao and others to plan the east and west of Beijing, You, Zheng, Yao, Chen, Cao, Guang, and Cai counties; he also sent Liang Xing to cross the river and join Zhongyi Company to conquer Hedong and Beizhou counties.

古文：未几，李宝捷于曹州，捷于宛亭，捷于渤海庙；董先、姚政捷于颍昌；刘政捷于中牟。
现代文：不久，李宝在曹州取得大捷，在宛亭取得大捷，在渤海庙取得大捷；董先、姚政在颍昌取得大捷；刘政在中牟取得大捷。
English: Soon, Li Bao won a great victory in Caozhou, a great victory in Wenting, and a great victory in Bohai Temple; Dong Xian and Yao Zheng won a great victory in Fuchang; Liu Zheng won a great victory in Zhongmou.

古文：张宪复颍昌、淮宁府；王贵之将杨成复郑州；张应、韩清复西京。
现代文：张宪收复颍昌、淮宁府；王贵部将杨成收复郑州；张应、韩清收复西京。
English: Zhang Xian recovered Binchang and Huaining Prefecture; Wang Guibe recovered Yangcheng and Zhengzhou; Zhang Ying and Han Qing recovered Xijing.

古文：皋及傅选捷于京西，捷于黄河上。
现代文：牛皋和傅选在京西取得大捷，在黄河上取得大捷。
English: Niu Gan and Fu Xuan achieved great success in the west of Beijing and great success on the Yellow River.

古文：孟邦杰复永安军，其将杨遇复南城军，又与刘政捷于西京。
现代文：孟邦杰收复永安军，他的部将杨遇收复南城军，又与刘政在京西取得大捷。
English: Meng Bangjie recovered the Yongan Army, his subordinate Yang Rong recovered the Nancheng Army, and he and Liu Zheng achieved great success in West Beijing.

古文：梁兴会太行忠义及两河豪杰赵云、李进、董荣、牛显、张峪等破金人于垣曲，又捷于沁水，追至孟州之邵原，金张太保、成太保等以所部降，又破金高太尉兵于济源。
现代文：梁兴会同太行忠义军及两河豪杰赵云、李进、董荣、牛显、张峪等在垣曲打败金军，又在沁水取得大捷，追到孟州的邵原，金张太保、成太保等率军降宋，又在济源打败金军高太尉。
English: Liang Xing, together with the Taigang Loyalist Army and the heroes of the two rivers Zhao Yun, Li Jin, Dong Rong, Niu Xian, Zhang Ye, etc., defeated the Golden Army in Qigu, won a great victory in Surabaya, chased Shaowan in Mengzhou, Jin Zhang Taibao, Cheng Taibao, etc. led the army to the Song Dynasty, and defeated the Golden Army Gao Taifeng in Jiyuan.

古文：乔握坚等复赵州；李兴捷于河南府，捷于永安军；梁兴在河北取怀、卫二州，大破兀术军，断山东、河北金帛马纲之路，金人大扰。
现代文：乔握坚等收复赵州；梁兴在河南府取得大捷，在永安军取得大捷；梁兴在河北攻取怀、卫二州，大败金兀术军，切断山东、河北金帛马纲道路，金军大受困扰。
English: Qiao Jijian and others recovered Zhao Prefecture; Liang Xing achieved great success in Henan Province and great success in the Yongan Army; Liang Xing captured Huai and Weizhou in Hebei Province, defeated the Jin Shi Jiu Army, cut off the Jin Shi Ma Gang Road in Shandong and Hebei Provinces, and the Jin Army was greatly troubled.

古文：未几，岳飞还朝，下狱死，世以为恨云。
现代文：不久，岳飞奉命回朝，下大理寺狱冤死，世人无不痛惜愤恨。
English: Soon after, Yuefei was ordered to return to the North and died an unjust death in the Dali Temple Prison. The world was filled with indignation.

