古文：陈与义，字去非，其先居京兆，自曾祖希亮始迁洛。故为洛人。
现代文：陈与义字去非，祖籍在京兆，从其曾祖父陈希亮始，其家迁至洛阳，所以，陈与义是洛阳人。
English: Chen and Yiyi were born in Beijing and moved to Luoyang from their great-grandfather Chen Xiliang. Therefore, Chen and Yiyi are from Luoyang.

古文：与义天资卓伟，为儿时已能作文，致名誉，流辈敛衽，莫敢与抗。
现代文：陈与义天资聪颖卓越，幼时即能写作文章，并小有名声，同辈皆钦佩他，不敢与他相比。
English: Chen Yiyi was gifted and brilliant. He was able to write articles at a young age, and had a small reputation. His peers all admired him and did not dare to compare with him.

古文：登政和三年上舍甲科，授开德府教授。累迁太学博士，擢符宝郎，寻谪监陈留酒税。
现代文：陈与义于政和三年考中上舍甲科，被授与开德府教授，累迁太学博士，擢升为符宝郎，不久遭贬谪，出监陈留酒税。
English: Chen Yoyi majored in politics and the three-year middle school entrance examination, was awarded a professor of Kade Prefecture, a doctor of great learning, was promoted to a treasure hunter, and was soon demoted, leaving prison Chen to pay liquor tax.

古文：及金人入汴，高宗南迁，遂避乱襄汉，转湖湘，逾岭峤。
现代文：金朝攻陷汴京，高宗南迁，陈与义避难于襄汉，再辗转湖湘，翻越五岭到达岭南。
English: The Kim dynasty captured Baekje, Gaozong moved south, Chen and Yi took refuge in Xianghan, then turned around Hunan and crossed the Wuling Mountains to reach Lingnan.

古文：久之，召为兵部员外郎。
现代文：过了许久，朝廷召其为兵部员外郎。
English: After a long time, the Imperial Court called him to become a member of the military.

古文：绍兴元年夏，至行在。迁中书舍人，兼掌内制。
现代文：绍兴元年夏天，陈与义到了都城临安，升迁为中书舍人，兼掌内制。
English: In the summer of the first year of Shaoxing, Chen Yoyi came to the capital city Lin'an, and was promoted to the position of middle school teacher.

古文：拜吏部侍郎，寻以徽猷阁直学士知湖州。
现代文：后又被拜为吏部侍郎。不久以徽猷阁直学士的身份出知湖州。
English: Later, he was also worshipped as an attendant of the cadre department. Soon, he was known as the direct bachelor of Huiyangge.

古文：召为给事中。驳议详雅。又以显谟阁直学士提举江州太平观。
现代文：之后，被召为给事中，其所做驳议精辟典雅，又以显谟阁直学士提举江州太平观。
English: After that, he was called to give a speech, and his refutation was the most incisive and elegant, and he also raised the Jiangzhou Taiping concept with the honor of being a direct scholar of the Mogao.

古文：被召，会宰相有不乐与义者，复用为中书舍人、直学士院。
现代文：时朝中宰相有不满意陈与义者，因此，陈与义被召回后，再次被用为中书舍人、直学士院。
English: At that time, there were some dissatisfied with Chen Youyi among the chancellors of the Middle Court. Therefore, after Chen Youyi was recalled, he was once again used as a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：六年九月，高宗如平江，十一月，拜翰林学士、知制诰。
现代文：绍兴六年九月，高宗幸临平江，同年十一月，拜陈与义为翰林学士、知制诰。
English: In September of the sixth year of Shaoxing, Gao Zongxing was in Pingjiang, and in November of the same year, Bai Chen and Yi were Hanlin Baccalaureate and Zhizhe Zang.

古文：七年正月，参知政事，唯师用道德以辅朝廷，务尊主威而振纲纪。
现代文：绍兴七年正月，陈与义为参知政事。在任执政期间，陈与义师用道德以辅朝廷，务尊主威而振纲纪。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of Shaoxing's reign, Chen Youyi became the co-premier of the political affairs. During his term of office, Chen Youyi used morality to supplement the imperial court, respected authority and strengthened discipline.

古文：时丞相赵鼎言： 人多谓中原有可图之势，宜便进兵，恐他时咎今日之失机。 上曰： 今梓宫与太后、渊圣皆未还，若不与金议和，则无可还之理。 与义曰： 若和议成，岂不贤于用兵，万一无成，则用兵必不免。 上曰： 然。 三月，从帝如建康。
现代文：当时丞相赵鼎说 ：人们都认为，中原有可图之形势，故宜进军中原，趁势收复失地，如失良机，他日将悔咎莫及。 高宗曰 ：今皇帝之棺与太后、渊圣皆为金扣押未还，如不与金议和，则无可还之理。 陈与义说： 若能签订和议，自然强于用兵，但万一不能议和，则用兵就不可避免。 皇帝说： 是这样的。 
English: At that time, the chancellor Zhao Ding said: People all believe that there is a feasible situation in Central Plains, so it is appropriate to march into Central Plains and take advantage of the situation to recover the lost land. If you lose a good opportunity, there will be no time to regret it. Gao Zong said: Now the emperor's coffin and the empress dowager and Yuan Sheng have not been returned because of gold, if you do not discuss peace with gold, there is no reason to return. Chen Youyi said: If you can sign a peace agreement, it is naturally stronger than using troops, but if you cannot discuss peace, then the use of troops is inevitable.

古文：明年，扈跸还临安。
现代文：绍兴七年三月，陈与义随皇帝到建康。第二年，护从皇帝回临安。
English: In March of the seventh year of Shaoxing, Chen and Yi followed the emperor to Jiankang. In the following year, they escorted the emperor back to Lin'an.

古文：以疾请，复以资政殿学士知湖州，陛辞，帝劳问甚渥，遂请闲，提举临安洞霄宫。
现代文：因患疾病，陈与义告假，复以资政殿学士知湖州，陈与义再表推辞。皇帝对其病情十分关切，遂请闲提举临安洞霄宫。
English: Due to illness, Chen Yiyi took a leave of absence and returned to Huzhou as a scholar of the Palace of the Great Counselor. Chen Yiyi again expressed his resignation. The emperor was very concerned about his illness, so he invited him to visit Lin'an Cave Palace.

古文：十一月，卒，年四十九。
现代文：十一月，陈与义离世，终年四十九岁。
English: In November, Chen Yoyi passed away at the age of 49.

古文：与义容状俨恪，不妄言笑，平居虽谦以接物，然内刚不可犯。
现代文：陈与义容貌庄严敬肃，不苟言笑，平常待人接物儒雅谦恭，然内性刚强，不可冒犯。
English: Chen Youyi's appearance is solemn and serious, he never smiles, he is usually polite and courteous, but he has a strong inner nature and cannot be offended.

古文：其荐士于朝，退未尝以语人，士以是多之。
现代文：陈与义多次举荐士人于朝廷，但从不与人表白自己的举荐之功，士人因此而特别推重他。
English: Chen Youyi repeatedly recommended scholars to the imperial court, but he never acknowledged his recommendation, so scholars gave him special importance.

古文：尤长于诗，体物寓兴，清邃纡余，高举横厉，上下陶、谢、韦、柳之间。
现代文：陈与义特别擅长做诗，写景状物，清新深邃，迂回婉转，洒脱不俗，游离于陶、谢、韦、柳之间。
English: Chen Youyi is particularly good at making poems, writing landscapes, fresh and profound, roundabout and gentle, free and easy, floating between Tao, Xie, Wei and Liu.

古文：尝赋墨梅，徽宗嘉赏之，以是受知于上云。
现代文：陈与义曾以《墨梅》为题赋诗一首，深得徽宗嘉赏，并因此而特别受到皇帝的器重。
English: Chen Youyi once composed a poem with the title "Bloom Plum," which was highly appreciated by Huizong, and was therefore particularly valued by the emperor.

古文：汪藻，字彦章，饶州德兴人。
现代文：汪藻字彦章，饶州德兴人。
English: Wang Mo Zi Yan Zhang, Raozhou De Xingren.

古文：幼颖异，入太学，中进士第。
现代文：幼年即非常聪明，与众不同，后进入太学，又考中进士。
English: At a young age, he was very smart and different from others. Later, he entered Taiyaku and passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：调婺州观察推官，改宣州教授，稍迁江西提举学事司干当公事。
现代文：调任为婺州的观察推官，改宣州教授，稍迁为江西提举学事司干当公事。
English: He was reassigned as an observation officer of Zhangzhou, changed to a professor of Xuanzhou, and moved to Jiangxi to work as a secretary of academic affairs.

古文：徽宗亲制《君臣庆会阁诗》，群臣皆赓进，惟藻和篇，众莫能及。
现代文：徽宗亲自撰写了《君臣庆会阁诗》，群臣纷纷写诗进呈，只有汪藻写的和诗群臣里面没有人能够及。
English: Huizong personally wrote the "Poem for the Celebration of the Emperor and the People," and the courtiers wrote poems one after another. Only Wang Mo's poem and the poems of the courtiers were better.

古文：时胡伸亦以文名，人为之语曰： 江左二宝，胡伸、汪藻。 寻除《九域图志》所编修官，再迁著作佐郎。
现代文：这时胡伸以文章出名，当时的人就编成顺口溜说： 江左二宝，胡伸、汪藻。 没有多久，汪藻被提升为《九域图志》所的编修官，再升著作佐郎。
English: At this time, Hu Shin became famous for his articles, and the people at that time made up a jingle saying: Jiang Zuo Er Bao, Hu Shin, Wang Soo.Not long after, Wang Soo was promoted to the editor of the "Nine Regions Pictorial History" Institute, and then to the author of Saro.

古文：时王黼与藻同舍，素不咸，出通判宣州，提点江州太平观，投闲凡八年，终黼之世不得用。
现代文：当时的宰相王黼与汪藻在太学时是同舍，关系素来不好，这样，汪藻就被迫离开朝廷通判宣州，又提点江州太平观，居此职凡八年，在整个王黼当权的时期不见用。
English: At that time, the Prime Minister Wang Qian and Wang Soo were roommates when they were studying at the University of Taiyuan, and the relationship was not good. As a result, Wang Qian was forced to leave the imperial court to pass judgment on Xuanzhou, and also to mention the Jiangzhou Taiping concept. He held this position for eight years, and was not useful during the entire period of Wang Qian's power.

古文：钦宗即位，召为屯田员外郎，再迁太常少卿、起居舍人。
现代文：钦宗即位，召汪藻为屯田员外郎，再迁任太常少卿、起居舍人。
English: When Emperor Qinzong ascended to the throne, he called Wang Miao to be the foreign field marshal, and then he was transferred to the position of the too-frequent minor lord, and became a layman.

古文：高宗践祚，召试中书舍人。
现代文：高宗即位，召试中书舍人。
English: Gao Zong ascends the throne, but abandons his studies during the examination.

古文：时次扬州，藻多论奏，宰相黄潜善恶之，遂假他事，免为集英殿修撰、提举太平观。
现代文：这时高宗在扬州。汪藻多次上奏章论说事情，宰相黄潜善非常讨厌他，就借其他事情，罢免他的官，让他担任集英殿的修撰、提举太平观。
English: At this time, Gao Zong was in Yangzhou. Wang Mo repeatedly went to the Song Dynasty to discuss the matter. Prime Minister Huang Kuanzhen hated him very much, and took advantage of other matters to dismiss his officials and let him serve as the compiler of the collection and the promotion of the Taiping concept.

古文：明年，复召为中书舍人兼直学士院，擢给事中，迁兵部待郎兼侍讲，拜翰林学士。
现代文：第二年，他又被召为中书舍人兼直学士院，擢升为给事中，又迁兵部侍郎兼侍讲，拜翰林学士。
English: In the second year, he was called to be a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the Chinese Academy of Directing, and was promoted to be a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, the Chinese Academy of Directing, the Chinese Academy of Directing, the Chinese Academy of Directing and the Chinese Academy of Directing.

古文：帝以所御白团扇，亲书 紫诰仍兼绾，黄麻似《六经》 十字以赐，缙绅艳之。
现代文：皇帝以他所御制的白团扇，亲自在上面写了 紫诰仍兼绾，黄麻似《六经》 十个字送给他，士大夫阶级都对他羡慕。
English: The emperor gave him a white fan he had made, and personally wrote on it, "Purple is still bright, and jute is like the Six Classics," ten characters. The scholar-official class all envied him.

古文：属时多事，诏令类出其手。
现代文：适逢当时国家多事，皇帝的诏令多数都出自汪藻之手。
English: At the time, the country was in turmoil, and most of the emperor's edicts were issued by Wang Zhao.

古文：尝论诸大将拥重兵，浸成外重之势，且陈所以待将帅者三事，后十年，卒如其策。
现代文：汪藻曾论奏诸大将手中握有重兵，逐渐形成了国家内轻外重的局面，并且陈说了所以待将帅的三件事，后来十年形势的发展完全证明他所说的。
English: Wang Mo once said that the generals have a heavy army in their hands, gradually forming a situation of light and heavy in the country. He also said that there are three things that need to be done by the generals. The development of the situation in the next ten years fully proves what he said.

古文：又言： 崇、观以来，赀结权幸，奴事阉宦，与开边误国，得职名自观文殿大学士而下直秘阁、官至银青光禄大夫者，近稍镌褫，而建炎恩宥，又当甄复，盍依国初法，止中大夫。 
现代文：他又上奏章说： 崇宁、大观以来，那些用钱贿赂当权的大臣和侍臣，像奴隶一样事奉宦官，以及开拓边境祸国殃民，因而取得职位名称，自观文殿大学士而下至直秘阁和官至银青光禄大夫的人，近年来对他们稍微有些削级和革职，可是从建炎开始，却对他们进行恩赦，现在又该甄别和恢复他们的官职，臣认为，何不依国初的惯例，这些人的官只让他们做到中大夫。 
English: He also wrote: Since the time of Chongning and Taikan, those ministers and courtiers who used money to bribe those in power, served as eunuchs like slaves, and opened up the border to harm the country and the people, and thus obtained the title of the post, from the observation of the palace to the direct secretary cabinet and the official to the doctor of the silver Qing Guanglu, in recent years, they have been slightly downgraded and dismissed, but since the beginning of Jianyan, they have been pardoned, and now they should be screened and restored to their official positions. In my opinion, why not follow the practice at the beginning of the country, and let these people

古文：绍兴元年，除龙图阁直学士、知湖州，以颜真卿尽忠唐室，尝守是邦，乞表章之，诏赐庙忠烈。
现代文：高宗绍兴元年，汪藻升任龙图阁直学士、知湖州。他以颜真卿尽忠唐皇室曾经担任过湖州的太守一事，上疏皇帝，请求褒扬颜真卿。
English: In the first year of Gaozong of Shaoxing, Wang Mo was promoted to the direct bachelor of Longtu Pavilion and Zhihuzhou. He asked Emperor Gaozong to praise Yan Zhenqing for his loyalty to the Tang royal family and for having served as the governor of Huzhou.

古文：又言： 古者有国必有史，古书榻前议论之辞，则有时政记，录柱下见闻之实，则有起居注，类而次之，谓之日历，修而成之，谓之实录。
现代文：皇帝于是下诏，赐颜真卿建忠烈庙。汪藻在疏中又说 ：古代有国家就必定有史书，因此记皇帝书榻前议论的，则有时政记；把柱下所见所闻的事实记下来的，就有起居注；类列而加以编排，就形成了每日大事记；修而成书，就称作实录。
English: The emperor then issued an edict, giving Yan Zhenqing the task of building a temple for the martyrs. Wang Mo also said in his anecdote: In ancient times, if there was a country, there must have been a history book. Therefore, those who recorded the emperor's discussion in front of the couch were sometimes political records; if they recorded the facts seen and heard under the pillar, there would be a departure note; if they were arranged in a similar way, they would form a daily event record; if they were edited and made into a book, they would be called a record.

古文：今逾三十年，无复日历，何以示来世？
现代文：今天已经过了三十年，可是不再看到每日大事记，这怎么能够昭示于来世？
English: Thirty years have passed today, but I no longer see the daily chronicles, how can this be revealed in the afterlife?

古文：乞即臣所领州，许臣访寻故家文书，纂集元符庚辰以来诏旨，为日历之备。 制可。
现代文：臣请求就在臣所主管的湖州，允许臣寻访旧的官宦人家的文书，编集哲宗元符庚辰以来的诏旨，作为编写每日大事记的准备。 
English: In Huzhou, where the minister was in charge, the minister requested that the minister be allowed to search the old official documents and compile the imperial edicts since Zhe Zongyuan and Geng Chen, as a preparation for writing a daily chronicle.

古文：史馆既开，修撰綦崇礼言不必别设外局，乃已。
现代文：皇帝看了他的奏疏后，同意了他的要求。汪藻负责的史馆得以顺利开办。但是修撰綦崇礼却向皇帝上疏说不必在朝廷外面设局，这样湖州史馆就被迫停止。
English: After reading his report, the emperor agreed to his request. The history museum that Wang Mo was in charge of was able to start up smoothly. However, he told the emperor that there was no need to set up outside the court, so the Huzhou History Museum was forced to stop.

古文：郡人颜经投匦诉其敷籴军食，遂贬秩停官。
现代文：与汪藻同郡的人颜经又向朝廷投书控告汪藻购买大量的军食，汪藻因此被贬级停官。
English: Yan Jing, a person from the same county as Wang Soo, also wrote to the imperial court to complain that Wang Soo had purchased a large amount of military food. As a result, Wang Soo was demoted and suspended.

古文：起知抚州，御史张致远又论之，予祠。
现代文：后复起用知抚州，御史张致远又上章弹劾他，他就被授予祠禄官。
English: After the resumption of the use of Zhifu Prefecture, the Grand Historian Zhang Zhiyuan also impeached him on the chapter, and he was awarded the official of the shrine.

古文：六年，修撰范冲言： 日历，国之大典，比诏藻纂修，事复中止，恐遂散逸，宜令就闲复卒前业。 诏赐史馆修撰餐钱，听辟属编类。
现代文：绍兴六年，修撰范冲向皇帝上疏说： 每日大事记，是国家的大典，近来皇帝曾命令汪藻纂修，但事情被迫中止，臣恐资料遂因此散失，应该让他现在就闲职的时间再完成以前的事业。 皇帝于是就下诏颁赐给汪藻史馆修撰的伙食费，听任他自己招聘僚属进行编纂。
English: In the sixth year of Shaoxing, the copyist Fan rushed to the emperor Shang Shou and said: "The Daily Chronicle is a great book of the country. Recently, the emperor had ordered Wang Mo to compile and edit it, but the matter was forced to be suspended. As a result, there was a loss of confidential information. He should be allowed to complete his previous business in his spare time. The emperor then issued an edict to the Wang Mo History Museum to compile the meal expenses, and allowed himself to recruit colleagues to compile it.

古文：八年，上所修书，自元符庚辰至宣和乙巳诏旨，凡六百六十五卷。藻再进官，其属鲍延祖、孟处义咸增秩有差。
现代文：绍兴八年，汪藻向朝廷呈上他所修成的书，该书收集了自哲宗元符庚辰年至徽宗宣和乙巳年所有的皇帝诏旨，共计有六十五卷，汪藻因此再得升官，他的僚属鲍延祖、孟处义也都分别得到加级。
English: In the eighth year of Shaoxing, Wang Zuo presented to the imperial court the book he had compiled. The book collected all the imperial edicts from Zhe Zong Yuan Fu Geng Chen to Hui Zong Xuan and Yi Si, a total of sixty-five volumes. As a result, Wang Zuo was promoted again, and his colleagues Bao Yanzu and Meng Zhiyi were also promoted separately.

古文：藻升显谟阁学士，遣使赐茶药。
现代文：汪藻升任了显谟阁学士，皇帝派使者赏给他茶叶和药。
English: The emperor sent an emissary to present him with tea and medicine.

古文：寻知徽州，逾年，徙宣州。
现代文：不久，汪藻知徽州，过了一年又徙知宣州。
English: Soon, Wang Mo Chihu moved to Huizhou, and a year later, he moved to Xuanzhou.

古文：言者论其尝为蔡京、王黼之客，夺职居永州，累赦不宥。
现代文：谏官弹劾他曾做过蔡京和王黼的客，因此被夺职谪居永州，屡次遇到大赦，都没有得到宽宥。
English: Eunuch impeachment He had been a guest of Cai Jing and Wang Qian, so he was deprived of his post and lived in Yongzhou. He repeatedly encountered amnesty, but did not receive forgiveness.

古文：二十四年，卒。
现代文：绍兴二十四年汪藻终于逝世。
English: Jianwu 24 years old, passed away.

古文：秦桧死，复职，官其二子。
现代文：秦桧死了以后，汪藻得以恢复官职，并授予他两个儿子的官。
English: After Qin Yu's death, Wang Cao was able to restore his official position, and gave his two sons official positions.

古文：二十八年，《徽宗实录》成书，右仆射汤思退言藻尝纂集诏旨，比修实录，所取十盖七八，深有力于斯文。
现代文：绍兴二十八年，《徽宗实录》修成，右仆射汤思退上疏，说汪藻曾纂集过诏旨，近来纂修的实录，所采用的材料十之七八是取自汪藻编的诏旨，汪藻实大有力于这部实录。
English: In the 28th year of Shaoxing, the "Hui Sect Record" was completed, and the right-hand man, Sha Tong, retreated to the upper room, saying that Wang Soo had compiled the edict, and the recently compiled record, the materials used were taken from Wang Soo's edict, and Wang Soo was very powerful in this record.

古文：诏赠端明殿学士。
现代文：皇帝于是下诏追赠汪藻端明殿大学士。
English: The emperor then issued a posthumous imperial edict awarding Wang the title of "Wang So Duan Ming Dian University Scholar."

古文：藻通显三十年，无屋庐以居。
现代文：汪藻做官三十年，却没有房子可住。
English: Wang Mo has been an official for thirty years, but he has no house to live in.

古文：博极群书，老不释卷，尤喜读《春秋左氏传》及《西汉书》。
现代文：他博览群书，到老了仍手不释卷，他特别喜欢读《春秋左氏传》和《两汉书》。
English: He is well-versed in books, and when he is old, he still has his hands full. He especially likes to read "The Life of Shunqiu Zuo" and "Two Chinese Classics."

古文：工俪语，多著述，所为制词，人多传诵。
现代文：汪藻擅长对偶的文辞，一生著述很多，他所写的词，人们都争着传颂。
English: Wang Cao was good at paired words. He wrote a lot in his lifetime, and the words he wrote were highly praised by people.

古文：子六人，恬、恪、憺、怲、懔、憘。
现代文：他有六个儿子，分别取名汪恬、汪恪、汪怛、汪忄丙、汪懔、汪忄喜。
English: He has six sons, named Wang Qi, Wang Guo, Wang Qi, Wang Qi Bin, Wang Qi, and Wang Qi Xi.

古文：叶梦得，字少蕴，苏州吴县人。
现代文：熊克字子复，建宁建阳人，是御史大夫熊博的后代。
English: Xiong Ke Zizi Fu, Jian Ning Jian Yang Ren, is a descendant of the Grand Historian Xiong Bo.

古文：嗜学蚤成，多识前言往行，谈论亹癖不穷。
现代文：熊克出生时，曾有翠鸟飞临室内。
English: When Kumakku was born, a kingfisher flew into the room.

古文：将生，有翠羽雀翔卧内。克幼而翘秀，既长，好学善属文，郡博士胡宪器之，曰： 子学老于年，他日当以文章显。 绍兴中进士第，知绍兴府诸暨县，越帅课赋颇急，诸邑率督趣以应，克曰： 宁吾获罪，不忍困吾民。 他日，府遣幕僚阅视有亡，时方不雨，克对之泣曰： 此催租时耶！ 部使者芮辉行县至其境，谓克曰： 曩知子文墨而已，今乃见古循吏。 为表荐之，入为提辖文思院。
现代文：熊克年幼时，显出天资俊秀，长大后，喜爱学习且善做文章，郡博士胡宪很器重他，说： 只要你坚持学习，将来必能以文章扬名。 熊克于绍兴年间考中进士，初知绍兴府诸暨县，在任职期间，上司征赋颇急，许多县邑官府响应照办。而熊克则说 ：我宁愿得罪上司也不忍心让百姓受苦。 上司派幕僚来巡查征赋情况，时逢久旱不雨，熊克哭泣着对幕僚说 ：这难道是催租的日子吗？ 朝廷使者芮辉行至诸暨，见到熊克后说： 我原来只知道你文章写得好，现在才知道你为官也很出色。 芮辉特上表举荐熊克，熊克因此得以入朝提辖文思院。
English: When Xiong Ke was young, he showed great talent. When he grew up, he loved to study and was good at writing articles. County doctor Hu Xian respected him very much, saying, "As long as you persist in studying, you will be able to make a name for yourself with articles in the future." Xiong Ke passed the junior high school entrance examination in Shaoxing. He first learned of Zhuji County, Shaoxing Province, during his term of office. During his term of office, his superiors' recruitment was quite urgent, and many county and town government offices responded accordingly. And Xiong Ke said, "I would rather offend my superiors than let the people suffer."

古文：尝以文献曾觌，觌持白于孝宗，孝宗喜之，内出御笔，除直学士院。
现代文：熊克曾将文章献给曾觌，曾觌又将其文介绍给孝宗，孝宗看后非常喜欢，并亲命熊克直学士院。
English: Xiong Ke once dedicated an article to Zeng Yao, and Zeng Yao introduced his article to Xiaozong, who liked it very much and personally ordered the Xiong Ke Zhi Academy.

古文：宰相赵雄甚异之，因奏曰： 翰院清选，熊克小臣，不由论荐而得，无以服众论，请自朝廷召试，然后用之。 上曰： 善。 乃以为校书郎，累迁学士院权直，上御选德殿，召谕曰： 卿制诰甚工，且有体，自此燕闲可论治道。 
现代文：宰相赵雄对此很惊异，并上奏说： 熊克作为一个小臣，未经荐举而轻得翰院之职，恐难服众论，请求朝廷对之加以考试，然后起用。 孝宗说： 可以。 于是以熊克为校书郎，累迁学士院权直。孝宗亲临选德殿对熊克说 ：你起草诰文，工整有体，这样朕就可安闲放心了。 
English: Prime Minister Zhao Xiong was very surprised by this, and made a report saying: Xiong Ke, as a junior minister, did not receive a recommendation and was given the post of Han Academy. He was afraid that it would be difficult to obey the public opinion, and asked the court to examine him and then use him. Xiaozong said: Yes. So he used Xiong Ke as a school librarian, and the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of

古文：克自以见知于上，数有论奏。
现代文：熊克知道自己为皇帝所器重，因而多次上奏提出自己的政见和主张。
English: Xiong Ke knew that he was important to the emperor, so he repeatedly submitted his political views and propositions.

古文：尝言： 金人虽讲和，而不能保于他日，今宜以和为守，以守为攻。
现代文：他曾在奏章中说： 金朝虽与我签订了和约，但这决不能保证其将来能始终信守，因此，我们不能掉以轻心，应当以和为守，以守为攻。
English: He once said in a statement: "Although the Kim dynasty signed a peace treaty with me, this is by no means a guarantee that it will always be able to keep it in the future. Therefore, we cannot take it lightly. We should keep the peace and defend ourselves.

古文：当和好之时，为备守之计，彼不能禁吾不为也。边备既实，金人万一猖獗，必不得志于我，退而乘我，曲不在我矣。
现代文：在和好之时，做备守之计。边备如果充实，金人万一猖獗，其阴谋也难得逞，即使其强与我过不去，责任亦不在我方。
English: At the time of reconciliation, make preparations for defense. If the border is full, if the gold people are rampant, their conspiracy will hardly succeed. Even if their strength is too strong for me, the responsibility is not on our side.

古文：且今日之守，莫重淮东。
现代文：今日边防之守，重点应放在淮东。
English: In today's border defense, the focus should be on Huadong.

古文：金犯淮西，负粮自随，其势必难。若犯淮东，清河粮船直下，易耳。
现代文：因为金人如果进犯淮西，须负粮而行，其势必难；而如果进犯淮东，其粮船可顺河而下，就会有助于其攻势的发展。
English: Because if the Jin attacked Huaixi, they would have to carry grain, which would be difficult; but if they attacked Huaidong, their grain ships could sail down the river, which would help the development of their offensive.

古文：然则守淮之策，以垦田、修堰、教民兵为先。
现代文：防守淮河之策，当以垦田、修堰、训练民兵为急务。
English: For the defense of the Huaihe River, the urgent tasks should be to plow fields, repair weirs, and train the militia.

古文：援淮东之策，莫若即江阴建水军，缓急可相应。然骤立一军，虑敌生疑，当托以海道商贾之冲，多夺攘，置一巡检警督之，自此岁增兵，不出十年，隐然一军矣。
现代文：援助淮东之策，首先应当考虑在江阴附近建置水军，势必引起敌人的怀疑与警觉，应当假托一个名义，即海道乃商贾之要路，因多有抢夺事件发生，故需置一巡检警督之，然后，每年渐增兵力，不出十年，便可悄然成立一水军了。
English: As a strategy to aid Huaidong, it is first necessary to consider building a naval force in the vicinity of Jiangyin, which is bound to arouse the suspicion and vigilance of the enemy. It is necessary to assume a name, that is, the highway is an important road for merchants, because there are many robberies, it is necessary to set up a patrol inspector, and then gradually increase the number of troops every year, and within ten years, a naval force can be quietly established.

古文：中兴之际，不患兵不可用，而患将权难收。
现代文：中兴之际，不必担心兵不可用，而是操心将权难收的问题。
English: At the time of ZTE, there is no need to worry about the unavailability of soldiers, but to worry about the problem of power.

古文：今日之弊，不患将不可驭，而患军情易动。
现代文：然现今主要的弊端在于：不是将领不可统驭，而是军情波动不稳。
English: However, the main drawback at present is not that the generals are uncontrollable, but that the military situation is unstable.

古文：往时诸大将拊士卒如家人，自罢诸将兵权，御前主帅，更徙不常，凡军中筦榷之利，所以养士卒者，今皆转而为包苴矣，又朘其余以佐之，得无怨乎！
现代文：过去，诸大将抚护士卒如家人，擅自罢免一些将领的兵权，御前军主帅也是更换无常，凡军中榷之利，原本是用以补养士卒的，现在都变成了贿赂之物，军中士兵能无怨尤吗？
English: In the past, the generals and nurses were like family members, the military power of some generals was arbitrarily removed, and the commander of the imperial army was also replaced impermanently. All the benefits of the army, which were originally used to supplement the soldiers, have now become bribes. Can soldiers in the army have no complaints?

古文：宜严戒将帅，毋纵掊削。 帝嘉其有志，召草明堂赦书。克言： 二浙荐饥，蝗且起，赦文不宜饰词。 帝嘉其识体。
现代文：因此，圣上应该严戒将帅，不要放纵其聚敛贪欲之心。 孝宗看了熊克的奏章后，对其心志给予了嘉勉，并让他起草明堂敕书，熊克说 ：两浙地区有饥荒，且有蝗灾，敕文中不宜有溢美之词。 
English: Therefore, the saint should strictly admonish the generals, and not indulge their greedy hearts. After seeing Kumak's sermon, Xiaozong gave him a commendation for his aspiration, and asked him to draft an edict. Kumak said: There is famine in the two Zhejiang regions, and there are locust plagues, and it is not appropriate to have words of praise in the edict.

古文：除起居郎兼直学士院，以言者出知台州，奉祠。
现代文：孝宗表示同意，并赞扬其识体，拜熊克为起居郎兼直学士院，因别人议论，出知台州，任宫观官。
English: Xiaozong agreed, and praised his discernment. Bai Xiongke was the head of the academy, and because of other people's discussions, he was sent to Taizhou to serve as a palace inspector.

古文：克博闻强记，自少至老，著述外无他嗜。
现代文：熊克博闻强记，学识深厚，一生中除喜爱著述外，别无其他嗜好。
English: Xiong Kebo had a strong memory, profound knowledge, and had no other hobbies in his life except for his love of writing.

古文：尤淹习宋朝典故，有问者酬对如响。
现代文：尤其喜爱钻研宋朝典章制度，遇人提问，必能对答如流。
English: In particular, he likes to study the Song Dynasty legal code system, and when he is asked questions, he will be able to answer them fluently.

古文：家素俭约，虽贵不改，旧所居卑陋，门不容辙，虽部使者、郡守至，必降车乃入。
现代文：其家向来清俭，后来做官身贵也无改变。他所住的房子十分简陋，门前客人的车马停靠不下，所以，即使是朝官、郡守驾到，也只得先下车才进入门庭。
English: His family had always been frugal, and his status as a high-ranking official did not change. The house he lived in was very simple, and guests' cars and horses could not stop in front of the door, so even if a court official or county governor arrived, they had to get off the car first before entering the courtyard.

古文：尝爱临川童子王克勤之才，将妻以女而乏资遣，会草制获赐金，遂以归之，人称其清介。
现代文：熊克曾爱临川童子王克勤之才华，准备将自己的女儿嫁给他，可又缺少陪嫁品，后因起草文诰获赐金，才了却了一桩心愿，人们因此皆称道他的清介。
English: Xiong Ke once loved the talent of the Linchuan boy Wang Keqin, and was ready to marry his daughter to him, but he lacked a wedding gift. Later, he was given money for drafting a document, but he had a wish, so people all praised his Qing Jie.

古文：卒，年七十三。
现代文：熊克去世时七十三岁。
English: He died at the age of 73.

