古文：巢王元吉，高祖第四子也。
现代文：李元吉，是高祖李渊的第四个儿子。
English: Li Yuanji is the fourth son of the great ancestor Li Yuan.

古文：义师起，授太原郡守，封姑臧郡公。
现代文：太原起义后，被任命为太原郡太守，封为姑臧郡公。
English: After the Taiyuan Uprising, he was appointed as the governor of Taiyuan County and was given the title of the governor of Gushan County.

古文：寻进封齐国公，授十五郡诸军事、镇北大将军，留镇太原，许以便宜行事。
现代文：不久晋封为齐国公，任十五郡诸军事、镇北大将军，留下镇守太原，赋予他自行处理军政事务的权力。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the Prince of Qi and appointed as the military commander of the 15 counties and the general of Zhenbei, leaving the town guard of Taiyuan and giving him the power to deal with military and political affairs on his own.

古文：武德元年，进爵为王，授并州总管。
现代文：高祖武德元年，他晋封为齐王，任并州总管。
English: In the first year of Gao Zuwude, he was promoted to the King of Qi and served as the provincial governor.

古文：二年，刘武周南侵汾、晋，诏遣右卫将军宇文歆助元吉守并州。
现代文：武德二年，刘武周向南进攻汾州、晋州，高祖诏令右卫将军宇文歆协助他镇守并州。
English: In the second year of Wu De, Liu Wuzhou attacked Bozhou and Jinzhou to the south. Gao Zu'er ordered the right guard general U Wenjun to assist him in defending the town and annexing the province.

古文：元吉性好畋猎，载网罟三十余两，尝言 我宁三日不食，不能一日不猎 ，又纵其左右攘夺百姓。
现代文：李元吉爱好打猎，装载罗网的车子就有三十多辆，他曾说 我宁可三天不吃东西，不能一天不打猎 ，还放纵他身边的人掠夺百姓的财物。
English: Li Yuanji was fond of hunting, with more than thirty cars loaded with snares. He once said, "I would rather not eat for three days than not hunt for one day," and he also allowed those around him to plunder the people's property.

古文：歆频谏不纳，乃上表曰： 王在州之日，多出微行，常共窦诞游猎，蹂践谷稼，放纵亲昵，公行攘夺，境内六畜，因之殆尽。
现代文：宇文歆多次劝阻但是不听，就向高祖呈递奏表说： 齐王在并州，经常穿上便装出城，和窦诞一起游乐打猎，践踏农田庄稼，放纵身边的人，公开掠夺百姓的财物，境内的家禽家畜，几乎被他们抢光。
English: Uwenwen repeatedly tried to dissuade him, but he did not listen, so he submitted a report to Gao Zu and said: King Qi was in Bianzhou, often put on casual clothes and went out of the city, went hunting with Dou Xue, trampled on farmland crops, indulged the people around him, openly plundered the people's property, and the poultry and livestock in the territory were almost robbed by them.

古文：当衢而射，观人避箭以为笑乐。
现代文：他站在大路中间放箭射人，观赏人们躲避，作为娱乐。
English: He stood in the middle of the road shooting arrows at people and watching them duck for fun.

古文：分遣左右，戏为攻战，至相击刺毁伤至死。
现代文：把兵卒分成左右两方，做打仗游戏，直到互相殴斗砍杀，造成伤残甚至死亡。
English: The soldiers were divided into right and left sides, and war games were played until they fought and hacked each other to death, causing injuries and even death.

古文：夜开府门，宣淫他室。
现代文：夜晚敞开府门，到别人家里公然干些淫猥勾当。
English: Open the door of the house at night, go to other people's homes and openly engage in lewd activities.

古文：百姓怨毒，各怀愤叹。
现代文：黎民百姓怨恨，都是满腔愤怒。
English: The resentment of the Lebanese people is full of anger.

古文：以此守城，安能自保！ 
现代文：凭着这种状况守城，怎么能够守住！ 
English: Defending the city with this situation, how can we hold on!

古文：元吉竟坐免。
现代文：李元吉终于获罪免职。
English: Li Yuanji was finally convicted and removed from office.

古文：又讽父老诣阙请之，寻令复职。
现代文：他又婉转地动员当地德高望重的老人进京为他求情，不久恢复了官职。
English: He also tactfully mobilized a respected local elder to go to Beijing to intercede on his behalf, and soon resumed his official duties.

古文：时刘武周率五千骑至黄蛇岭，元吉遣车骑将军张达以步卒百人先尝之。
现代文：当时刘武周率领五千名骑兵到了黄蛇岭，李元吉派遣车骑将军张达带领一百名步兵先去试探。
English: At that time, Liu Wuzhou led five thousand cavalry to the Yellow Snake Ridge, and Li Yuanji dispatched the cavalry general Zhang Da to lead one hundred infantry to explore first.

古文：达以步卒少，固请不行。
现代文：张达嫌人太少，坚决要求不去。
English: There are too few people who dislike Zhang Da and resolutely request that he not go.

古文：元吉强遣之，至则尽没于贼。
现代文：李元吉强行派遣，一到黄蛇岭就被杀光。
English: Li Yuanji forcibly dispatched them, and they were all killed as soon as they arrived at Huangjialing.

古文：达愤怒，因引武周攻陷榆次，进逼并州。
现代文：张达愤恨恼怒，就为刘武周当向导攻克了榆次县城，进逼并州。
English: Zhang Da was indignant and angry, so he became a guide for Liu Wuzhou to conquer the county seat of Ganzi and force the annexation of the county.

古文：元吉大惧，绐其司马刘德威曰： 卿以老弱守城，吾以强兵出战。 
现代文：李元吉十分恐慌，欺骗他的司马刘德威说 ：您带着年老体弱的人员守城，我带上身强力壮的将士出城作战。 
English: Li Yuanji panicked and deceived his Sima Liu Dewei, saying: "You take the old and weak people to defend the city, I will take the strong soldiers to fight outside the city."

古文：因夜出兵，携其妻妾弃军奔还京师，并州遂陷。
现代文：乘着夜晚部队出城的时机，他带上妻妾丢下军队逃回了长安，并州很快失陷。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity for the troops to leave the city at night, he took his wife and concubine, left the army and fled back to Chang'an, and the state soon fell.

古文：高祖怒甚，谓礼部尚书李纲曰： 元吉幼小，未习时事，故遣窦诞、宇文歆辅之。
现代文：高祖怒火万丈，对礼部尚书李纲说： 元吉年轻，还不熟悉军政事务，所以派窦诞、宇文歆协助他。
English: Gao Zu was furious and said to the head of the ceremonial department, Shangshu Li Gang: Yuanji is young and is not familiar with military and political affairs, so he sent Dou Xing and Uwen Yao to assist him.

古文：强兵数万，食支十年，起义兴运之基，一朝而弃。
现代文：精壮人马好几万，军粮预拨了上十年，我举义旗打江山的发祥地，眨眼之间就丢了。
English: There are tens of thousands of fine people and horses, military food has been reserved for the last ten years, I raised the banner of righteousness to fight the birthplace of the country, and lost it in the blink of an eye.

古文：宇文歆首画此计，我当斩之。 
现代文：宇文歆带头提出这种计策，我要杀掉他。 
English: I'm going to kill Uwenshun, who was the first to come up with this scheme.

古文：纲曰： 赖歆令陛下不失爱子，臣以为有功。 
现代文：李纲说 ：得亏宇文歆才让陛下没有失去爱子，我认为他有功。 
English: Li Gang said: It was thanks to Wu Wenjun that His Majesty did not lose his beloved son, and I think he deserves credit.

古文：高祖问其故，纲封曰： 罪由窦诞不能规讽，致令军人怨愤。
现代文：高祖询问原因，李纲回答说： 罪过出在窦诞没有规劝齐王，致使士卒百姓怨恨愤怒。
English: Gao Zu inquired the reason, Li Gang replied: Guilty of not persuading King Qi at the Dou Festival, causing resentment and anger among the envoys.

古文：又齐王年少，肆行骄逸，放纵左右，侵渔百姓。
现代文：再说齐王年轻，肆无忌惮地干骄横放纵的事，放纵身边的人，掠夺百姓的财物。
English: Moreover, King Qi was young and recklessly indulged himself, indulged those around him, and plundered the people's property.

古文：诞曾无谏止，乃随顺掩藏，以成其衅，此诞之罪。
现代文：窦诞不曾劝谏制止，却放任包庇他，所以造成了祸根，这是窦诞的罪责。
English: Dou Xizhe did not persuade him to stop, but allowed him to cover up, so he caused the root cause, which is Dou Xizhe's responsibility.

古文：宇文歆论情则疏，向彼又浅，王之过失，悉以闻奏。
现代文：宇文歆论感情要疏远些，接近他的时间又短，齐王的过失，他已全部禀奏过了。
English: On the subject of feelings, Yu Wenjun should be more distant. The time to get close to him is short. He has already played out all of King Qi's faults.

古文：且父子之际，人所难言，而歆言之，岂非忠恳？
现代文：何况是父子间的事情，别人不好说话，但宇文歆却说了，难道还不忠诚？
English: What's more, it's a matter between father and son. It's not good for others to speak, but Uwen Yao said it. Isn't he still being loyal?

古文：今欲诛罪，不录其心，臣愚窃以为过。 
现代文：现在要追究他的罪责，不会使他心服，我认为很不恰当。 
English: I don't think it's appropriate to hold him to account now, it's not going to win him over.

古文：翌日，高祖召纲入，升御坐，谓曰： 今我有公，遂使刑罚不滥。
现代文：第二天，高祖请李纲进宫，让他坐到自己身边，说道： 现在我有了您，刑罚就不会失去分寸。
English: The next day, Gao Zu invited Li Gang into the palace, let him sit beside him, and said: Now that I have you, the punishment will not lose its balance.

古文：元吉自恶，结怨于人。
现代文：元吉自己作孽，跟别人结下了怨恨。
English: Motokichi did his own dirty work and developed a grudge against others.

古文：歆既曾以表闻，诞亦焉能禁制？皆非其罪也。 
现代文：宇文歆曾上表禀奏，窦诞还怎能制止，都不是他们的罪错。 
English: It was not their fault that Uwen Zang had played the harp on the table, and how could Dou Xue stop it?

古文：寻加授元吉侍中、襄州道行台尚书令、稷州刺史。
现代文：不久任命李元吉为侍中、襄州道行台尚书令、稷州刺史。
English: Soon, he appointed Li Yuanji as a chamberlain, Shang Shuling of the Xiangzhou Roadside Station, and Shishi of Zhangzhou.

古文：四年，太宗征窦建德，留元吉与屈突通围王世充于东都。
现代文：武德四年，太宗征讨窦建德，留下李元吉和屈突通在洛阳围攻王世充。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Wu De, Emperor Taizong recruited Dou Jiande, leaving Li Yuanji and Qu Jutong to besiege Wang Shichong in Luoyang.

古文：世充出兵拒战，元吉设伏击破之，斩首八百级，生擒其大将乐仁昉、甲士千余人。
现代文：王世充出兵抵抗，李元吉设下埋伏打败了他，斩杀八百人，活捉他的大将乐仁日方、士卒一千多人。
English: Wang Shichong sent troops to resist, Li Yuanji set up an ambush and defeated him, killing eight hundred people, capturing his general Le Ren alive, and more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：世充平，拜司空，余官如故，加赐衮冕之服、前后部鼓吹乐二部、班剑二十人、黄金二千斤，与太宗各听三炉铸钱以自给。
现代文：平定王世充后，李元吉被授予司空头衔，其余官职照旧，另外赐给王侯的衮衣冠冕、前后两部军乐队、二十名仪仗队员、两千斤黄金，跟太宗各赐三座熔炉铸造钱币供自己使用。
English: After Wang Shichong was subdued, Li Yuanji was awarded the title of Sifu, and the rest of the official positions remained the same. In addition, the prince was given a robe and crown, two military bands, twenty honor guards, two thousand pounds of gold, and three furnaces to mint coins for their own use.

古文：六年，加授隰州总管。
现代文：武德六年，授予隰州总管。
English: Wu De for six years, awarded the title of Zhangzhou General Manager.

古文：及与建成连谋，各募壮士，多匿罪人。
现代文：他后来跟李建成联合算计太宗，分头招募勇猛打手，收容逃亡罪犯。
English: Later, he and Li Jiancheng jointly calculated Taizong, separately recruited brave fighters, and accommodated fugitive criminals.

古文：复内结宫掖，递加称誉，又厚赂中书令封伦以为党助。
现代文：还勾结后宫妃嫔，挨个儿奉承，又重金贿赂中书令封伦作为帮凶。
English: He also colluded with the concubines of the harem, flattered them one by one, and bribed the middle-ranking official, Feng Lun, as an accomplice.

古文：由是高祖颇疏太宗而加爱元吉。
现代文：从此高祖疏远太宗偏爱李元吉。
English: From then on, Gaozu alienated Taizong and favored Li Yuanji.

古文：太宗尝从高祖幸其第，元吉伏其护军宇文宝于寝内，将以刺太宗。
现代文：太宗曾经陪同高祖到齐王府，李元吉让自己的护军宇文宝潜伏在卧室，准备暗杀太宗。
English: Emperor Taizong once accompanied Emperor Gaozu to the Qi royal palace. Li Yuanji had his bodyguard, Wu Wenbao, lurk in the bedroom, preparing to assassinate Emperor Taizong.

古文：建成恐事不果而止之，元吉愠曰： 为兄计耳，于我何害！ 
现代文：李建成担心不能成功就制止了，李元吉气愤地说： 只是为你老兄着想而已，对我有什么相干！ 
English: Fearing that Li Jiancheng would not succeed, he stopped him. Li Yuanji angrily said, "I only did it for your brother's sake, what does it have to do with me!"

古文：九年，转左卫大将军，寻进位司徒、兼侍中，并州大都督、隰州都督、稷州刺史并如故。
现代文：武德九年，改授左卫大将军头衔，不久提升为司徒、兼侍中，并州大都督、隰州都督、稷州刺史等官职全部照旧。
English: In the ninth year of Wu De, he was re-awarded the title of General of the Left Division, and was soon promoted to the position of Sitoru, and also to the position of attendant, and the official positions such as the State Grand Governor, the State Governor of Zhangzhou, and the State Historian of Zhangzhou were all the same as before.

古文：高祖将避暑太和宫，二王当从，元吉谓建成曰： 待至宫所，当兴精兵袭取之。
现代文：高祖准备到太和宫去避暑，秦王、齐王应当陪同，李元吉对李建成说： 等我到了太和宫，就派精悍的将士抓住他。
English: Gao Zu was preparing to go to the Palace of the Grand Empress Dowager Cixi to spend the summer. King Qin and King Qi should accompany him. Li Yuanji said to Li Jiancheng, "When I get to the Palace of the Grand Empress Dowager Cixi, I will send some tough soldiers to catch him."

古文：置土窟中，唯开一孔以通饮食耳。 
现代文：把他关进地窖，只开一个洞口递送食物。 
English: Put him in a cellar with only one hole for food.

古文：会突厥郁射设屯军河南，入围乌城。
现代文：恰逢突厥的郁射设统率军队驻扎到黄河南岸，围攻乌城。
English: At the same time, the Turkic Yushasetsu led the army stationed on the south bank of the Yellow River and besieged Wucheng.

古文：建成乃荐元吉代太宗督军北讨，仍令秦府骁将秦叔宝、尉迟敬德、程知节、段志玄等并与同行。
现代文：李建成就推荐李元吉代替太宗督率军队北上讨伐，照旧命令秦王府的猛将秦叔宝、尉迟敬德、程知节、段志玄等人一起出发。
English: Li Jian recommended Li Yuanji to lead the army northward crusade in place of Taizong Viceroy, and ordered Qin Shubao, Fuxi Jingde, Cheng Zhijie, Duan Zhixuan and others to set out together.

古文：又追秦府兵帐，简阅骁勇，将夺太宗兵以益其府。
现代文：还调来秦王府的士卒花名册，挑选精兵强将，准备夺取太宗的人马来充实齐王府。
English: He also transferred the roster of officers and men from the Qin royal palace, selected elite soldiers and strong generals, and prepared to capture Taizong's men and horses to enrich the Qi royal palace.

古文：又谮杜如晦、房玄龄，逐令归第。
现代文：还在高祖面前诬陷杜如晦、房玄龄，将他们赶回了家。
English: He also framed Du Rugao and Fang Xuanling in front of Gao Zu and drove them back home.

古文：高祖知其谋而不制。
现代文：高祖明知是他们的阴谋却不制止。
English: Gaozu knew it was their plot but did nothing to stop it.

古文：元吉因密请加害太宗，高祖曰： 是有定四海之功，罪迹未见，一旦欲杀，何以为辞？ 
现代文：李元吉乘势秘密请求除掉太宗，高祖说 ：这人立有平定天下的功勋，罪行还没有暴露，要是杀他，凭什么理由？ 
English: Li Yuanji took advantage of the situation to secretly request the removal of Emperor Taizong. Gaozu said, "This man has made great contributions to the pacification of the world. His crimes have not yet been exposed. If he is killed, on what grounds?"

古文：元吉曰： 秦王常违诏敕，初平东都之日，偃蹇顾望，不急还京，分散钱帛，以树私惠。
现代文：李元吉说 ：秦王经常违抗诏令。刚刚平定洛阳时，骄横傲慢踌躇满志，不愿赶紧回京，分赏财物，树立个人恩德。
English: Li Yuanji said: King Qin often disobeyed the edict. When he had just pacified Luoyang, he was arrogant and full of ambition, unwilling to return to Beijing in a hurry to distribute rewards and establish personal virtue.

古文：违戾如此，岂非反逆？
现代文：违背抗拒到这种程度，难道不是叛逆？
English: Isn't it rebellious to go against the grain to such an extent?

古文：但须速杀，何患无辞！ 
现代文：只管赶快杀掉，不愁没有理由！ 
English: Just kill them quickly, there's no reason not to!

古文：高祖不对，元吉遂退。
现代文：高祖没有应声，李元吉就退出去了。
English: Gaozu did not respond, and Li Yuanji withdrew.

古文：建成谓元吉曰： 既得秦王精兵，统数万之众，吾与秦王至昆明池，于彼宴别，令壮士拉之于幕下，因云暴卒，主上谅无不信。
现代文：李建成对李元吉说 ：已经夺取了秦王的精锐部队，你统帅着几万兵众，我和秦王到昆明池，在那里为你饯行，命令勇士把他折杀在帷幕后边，就说是暴病死去，估计父皇不会不信。
English: Li Jiancheng said to Li Yuanji: "You have already captured the elite troops of King Qin. You are in command of tens of thousands of soldiers. I and King Qin went to Kunming Pool, where I walked for you and ordered the warriors to kill him behind the curtain. They said he died of a violent illness. I don't think the father emperor would believe it."

古文：吾当使人进说，令付吾国务。
现代文：我再派人劝说父皇，要他把朝政交给我。
English: I then sent someone to persuade my father, the Emperor, to hand over the government of the Imperial Court to me.

古文：正位已后，以汝为太弟。
现代文：登位以后，把你立为皇太弟。
English: After ascending to the throne, I will make you the crown prince's younger brother.

古文：敬德等既入汝手，一时坑之，孰敢不服？ 
现代文：尉迟敬德等人已经落到你的手中，到时活埋掉，谁敢不服？ 
English: Lt. Col. Jingde and others have fallen into your hands, buried alive at the right time, who would not agree?

古文：率更丞王晊闻其谋，密告太宗。
现代文：率更丞王日至听到这个阴谋，秘密报告太宗。
English: When Prince Kanojo heard of the plot, he secretly reported it to Emperor Taizong.

古文：太宗召府僚以告之，皆曰： 大王若不正断，社稷非唐所有。
现代文：太宗召集府中官吏们讲了这事，他们都说 ：大王您如不决断，江山就不属唐朝了。
English: Emperor Taizong called together officials from the central government to discuss the matter. They all said, "If you don't make a decision, the country will no longer belong to the Tang Dynasty."

古文：若使建成、元吉肆其毒心，群小得志，元吉狼戾，终亦不事其兄。
现代文：如果让建成、元吉的罪恶阴谋得逞，那伙小人得志，元吉凶狠暴戾，终究不会侍奉建成。
English: If Jiancheng and Yuanji's evil plot succeeds, that group of villains will be inspired, and Yuanji will be vicious and violent, and will not serve Jiancheng after all.

古文：往者护军薛宝上齐王符箓云： 元吉合成唐字。 
现代文：以前护军薛宝向元吉呈递的符说 ：元吉二字合起来就是唐字。 
English: In the past, Xue Bao, the escort, presented the following characters to Yuan Jie: The two characters of Yuan Jie are Tang characters.

古文：齐王得之喜曰： 但除秦王，取东宫如反掌耳。 
现代文：元吉得到符高兴地说： 只要除掉秦王，夺取太子易如反掌。 
English: Motokichi was overjoyed and said, "As long as we get rid of King Qin, it will be easy to capture the crown prince."

古文：为乱未成，预怀相夺。
现代文：挑起内乱还没有成功，就打好了互相争夺太子的主意。
English: Provoking civil unrest has not yet been successful, so they have come up with the idea of competing for the crown prince.

古文：以大王之威，袭二人如拾地芥。 
现代文：凭着大王您的威望，除掉建成、元吉如拔小草。 
English: With the prestige of your great king, removing the completion and the original good luck is like pulling up the grass.

古文：太宗迟疑未决，众又曰： 大王以舜为何如人也？ 
现代文：太宗迟疑不决，大家又说： 大王您认为虞舜是位什么样的人？ 
English: Taizong hesitated, and everyone said, "Your Majesty, what kind of person do you think that Gu Yao is?"

古文：曰： 浚哲文明，温恭允塞，为子孝，为君圣，焉可议之乎？ 
现代文：太宗说 ：他智慧深邃才华横溢，温和谦恭公正诚实，当儿子孝顺，做君主圣明，怎能随便评论他老人家呢？ 
English: Taizong said: He is wise, profound, talented, gentle, courteous, just and honest. As a dutiful son and a saintly monarch, how can he casually criticize his old man?

古文：府僚曰： 向使舜浚井不出，自同鱼鳖之毙，焉得为孝子乎？
现代文：大家说 ：假使他淘井出不来，像鱼鳖一样淹死，怎能成为孝子呢？
English: Everyone said, "If he can't get out of the well and drowns like a fish, how can he become a filial son?"

古文：涂廪不下，便成煨烬之余，焉得为圣君乎？
现代文：填塞仓库裂墙时下不来，就被烧成了灰烬，怎能成为圣君呢？
English: How can you be a saint if you don't come down to fill the cracked wall of the warehouse and are burned to ashes?

古文：小杖受，大杖避，良有以也。 
现代文：忍受小棍敲击，避开大棒拷打，的确是有谋略的。 
English: There is indeed a strategy to endure the beating of small sticks and avoid the torture of big sticks.

古文：太宗于是定计诛建成及元吉。
现代文：太宗于是定下计谋除掉了李建成和李元吉。
English: Taizong then devised a plan to get rid of Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji.

古文：元吉死时年二十四。
现代文：李元吉死时二十四岁。
English: Li Yuanji was 24 years old when he died.

古文：有五子：梁郡王承业、渔阳王承鸾、普安王承奖、江夏王承裕、义阳王承度，并坐诛。
现代文：他有五个儿子：梁郡王李承业、渔阳王李承鸾、普安王李承奖、江夏王李承裕、义阳王李承度，一起株连被杀。
English: He had five sons: Liang County King Li Chengye, Yuyang King Li Chengtao, Pu'an King Li Chengbo, Jiangxia King Li Chengyu, and Yiyang King Li Chengdu, all of whom were killed.

古文：寻诏绝建成、元吉属籍。
现代文：不久颁发诏令把李建成、李元吉从皇家名册中注销。
English: Soon after, an imperial edict was issued to cancel Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji from the royal register.

古文：太宗践祚，追封元吉为海陵郡王，谥曰剌，以礼改葬。
现代文：太宗登上帝位，追封李元吉为海陵郡王，谥号叫剌，按照礼仪重新安葬。
English: Taizong ascended to the throne of God, followed Li Yuanji as the king of Hailing County, and was reburied in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：贞观十六年，又追封巢王，谥如故，复以曹王明为元吉后。
现代文：贞观十六年，又追封为巢王，谥号依旧，还把曹王李明作为李元吉的继子。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, he was also crowned as the king of the nest, the nickname was still the same, and he also took Cao Wang Li Ming as the stepson of Li Yuanji.

