古文：○淑妃王氏淑妃王氏，邠州饼家子也，有美色，号 花见羞 。
现代文：淑妃王氏，邠州人，家里以卖饼为生，面目俊美，号 花见羞 。
English: Shufei Wang, a native of Zhangzhou, made a living by selling cakes at home. She was beautiful and shy.

古文：少卖梁故将刘鄩为侍兒，鄩卒，王氏无所归。
现代文：年少时卖给梁将刘寻阝当侍儿，寻阝死，王氏无处可归。
English: When he was young, he sold Liu Xingyao to Liang as a servant. Xingyao died, and the Wang family had nowhere to go.

古文：是时，明宗夏夫人已卒，方求别室，有言王氏于安重诲者，重诲以告明宗而纳之。
现代文：那时，明宗夏夫人死，正找适当的人，有人对安重诲讲到王氏，重诲告诉明宗纳为妾。
English: At that time, Ming Zongxia's wife died and they were looking for the right person. Someone told An Chongyao about Wang, and Chongyao told Ming Zongnao that she was a concubine.

古文：王氏素得鄩金甚多，悉以遣明宗左右及诸子妇，人人皆为王氏称誉，明宗益爱之。
现代文：王氏得到寻阝的金银很多，全部送给明宗左右及诸子妇人，人人都讲王氏的好话，明宗更加喜爱她。
English: Wang got a lot of gold and silver from the treasure hunt, all of which was given to Mingzong and his wives. Everyone spoke well of Wang, and Mingzong loved her even more.

古文：而夫人曹氏为人简质，常避事，由是王氏专宠。
现代文：夫人曹氏为人简单质朴，常常怕事，因此王氏专宠。
English: Mrs. Cao is a simple and simple person, often afraid of things, so she is Wang's favorite.

古文：明宗即位，议立皇后，而曹氏当立，曹氏谓王氏曰： 我素多病，而性不耐烦，妹当代我。 
现代文：明宗即帝位，商议立皇后，曹氏当立，曹氏对王氏说： 我多病，性情不耐烦，妹应当代替我当。 
English: Emperor Mingzong was enthroned, and the empress was appointed after consultation with Emperor Cao. Emperor Cao said to Emperor Wang, "I am sickly and impatient, and my younger sister should take my place."

古文：王氏曰： 后，帝匹也，至尊之位，谁敢干之！ 
现代文：王氏说： 后，帝王的匹配，至尊之位，谁敢随便代替呢？ 
English: Mr. Wang said: After all, the match of the emperor, the supreme position, who would dare to replace it?

古文：乃立曹氏为皇后，王氏为淑妃。
现代文：于是立曹氏为皇后，王氏为淑妃。
English: As a result, the Cao clan was established as the empress, and the Wang clan as the concubine.

古文：妃事皇后亦甚谨，每帝晨起，盥栉服御，皆妃执事左右，及罢朝，帝与皇后食，妃侍，食彻乃退，未尝少懈，皇后心亦益爱之。
现代文：妃侍奉皇后很谨慎，每次帝早晨起来洗漱穿衣都是淑妃服侍左右，罢朝，帝与皇后吃饭，淑妃侍左右，食毕才退，从不懈怠。皇后心里也非常喜欢她。
English: The empress was very careful in serving the empress. Every time the emperor got up in the morning to wash and dress, she was at his side. When the emperor and the empress went out to eat, she was at his side. She never slacked off. The empress was also very fond of her.

古文：然宫中之事，皆主于妃。
现代文：然而宫中的事都由妃做主。
English: However, everything in the palace is decided by the empress.

古文：明宗病，妃与宦者孟汉琼出纳左右，遂专用事，杀安重诲、秦王从荣，皆与焉。
现代文：明宗病重，淑妃与宦官孟汉琼左右侍奉，日益专权，杀安重诲、秦王从荣都参与了。
English: Emperor Mingzong was seriously ill, and Su Fei and eunuch Meng Han Qiong served him from left to right, becoming increasingly autocratic. Emperor Qin and Emperor Yongle both took part.

古文：刘鄩诸子，皆以妃故封拜官爵。
现代文：刘寻阝几个儿子都因为淑妃的帮助而封官拜爵。
English: Several of Liu Huanqian's sons were given titles of nobility because of Shu Fei's help.

古文：愍帝即位，册尊皇后为皇太后，妃为皇太妃。
现代文：愍帝即位，册封皇后为皇太后，妃为皇太妃。
English: Emperor Shun ascended the throne, and the empress was named empress dowager and the empress dowager empress.

古文：初，明宗后宫有生子者，命妃母之，是为许王从益。
现代文：起初，明宗后宫有生子的，明宗叫妃收养，就是许王从益。
English: At first, there was a son born in the Ming Dynasty's harem, and the Ming Dynasty asked the empress to adopt him, that is, King Xu Congyi.

古文：从益乳母司衣王氏，见明宗已老而秦王握兵，心欲自托为后计，乃曰： 兒思秦王。 
现代文：从益乳母司衣王氏，见明宗已老而秦王掌握兵权，想为自己日后打算，就说： 儿思秦王。 
English: Seeing that the Ming Dynasty was already old and that the Qin King held the military power, she said, "Son, think about the Qin King."

古文：是时从益已四岁，又数教从益自言求见秦王。
现代文：当时从益已经四岁，又教从益自己说要求见秦王。
English: At that time, Congyi was already four years old, and he taught Congyi to say that he wanted to see King Qin.

古文：明宗遣乳妪将兒往来秦府，遂与从荣私通，从荣因使王氏伺察宫中动静。
现代文：明宗就派她将从益往来秦王府。就与从荣私通，从荣叫王氏观察宫中动静。
English: The Ming Dynasty sent her from Yixing to visit the Qin royal palace. She communicated with Rong Rong, and Rong Rong asked Wang to observe the movement in the palace.

古文：从荣已死，司衣王氏以谓秦王实以兵入宫卫天子，而以反见诛，出怨言。
现代文：从荣已死，司衣王氏认为秦王实际是用兵入宫保卫天子，然而以反叛被诛，口出怨言。
English: Since Rong Rong was dead, the King of Sheba clan thought that the King of Qin actually used soldiers to enter the palace to protect the emperor, but he was arrested for rebellion and complained.

古文：愍帝闻之，大怒，赐司衣王氏死，而事连太妃，由是心不悦，欲迁之至德宫，以太后素善妃，惧伤其意而止，然待之甚薄。
现代文：愍帝听说后大怒，赐司衣王氏死，然而这事和太妃有牵连，因此不高兴，想把她迁到至德宫，因太后和妃从来很好，怕伤害太后的感情而没迁，但是待她很淡薄。
English: When Emperor Xuan heard of the queen's great anger, he ordered the death of Wang Si. However, this involved Princess Toi, so he was not happy and wanted to move her to the Imperial Palace. Since the queen and princess had always been good friends, he did not move for fear of hurting the feelings of the queen, but he treated her very poorly.

古文：废帝入立，尝置酒妃院，妃举酒曰： 愿辞皇帝为比丘尼。 
现代文：废帝即位，曾在妃院设宴，妃举酒杯说 ：愿意辞别皇帝去当尼姑。 
English: When the former emperor ascended to the throne, a banquet was held in the imperial court. The empress raised her glass and said, "I would like to bid farewell to the emperor and become a nun."

古文：帝惊，问其故，曰 小兒处偶得命，若大人不容，则死之日，何面见先帝！ 
现代文：帝大惊，问原因，妃说： 小儿处偶然得命，如果大儿不容，那么到死的时候，有啥脸面去见先帝？ 
English: The emperor was shocked and asked the reason, and the empress said, "The death of a child happens by chance. If the eldest son does not allow it, then when he dies, what face will he have to meet the former emperor?"

古文：因泣下。
现代文：说着哭了。
English: And cry.

古文：废帝亦为之凄然，待之颇厚。
现代文：废帝也为她悲伤，待她很好。
English: Emperor Wudi also grieved for her and treated her well.

古文：石敬瑭兵犯京师，废帝聚族将自焚。
现代文：石敬瑭进攻京城，废帝聚族准备自焚。
English: Shi Jingyao attacked the capital, and the deposed emperors gathered to prepare for self-immolation.

古文：妃谓太后曰： 事急矣，宜少回避，以俟姑夫。 
现代文：妃对太后说： 事急了，应该回避，等候姑夫。 
English: The princess said to the empress dowager: The matter is urgent, you should avoid it and wait for your uncle.

古文：太后曰： 我家至此，何忍独生，妹自勉之！ 
现代文：太后说： 我家到这种地步，我不忍心一个人活着，你自己保重吧！ 
English: The empress dowager said: My family has come to this, I can't bear to live alone, take care of yourself!

古文：太后乃与帝俱燔死，而妃与许王从益及其妹匿于鞠院以免。
现代文：太后与帝自焚死，妃与许王从益及其妹藏在鞠场内得免死。
English: The empress dowager and the emperor self-immolated and died. The empress dowager, Prince Xu, Prince Congyi and his sister were saved from death by hiding in the ball court.

古文：晋高祖立，妃自请为尼，不可，乃迁于至德宫。
现代文：晋高祖即位，妃自己请求当尼姑未成，迁到至德宫住。
English: When Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, the princess did not become a nun as she had requested, and moved to live in the Imperial Palace.

古文：晋迁都汴，以妃子母俱东，置于宫中，高祖皇后事妃如母。
现代文：晋迁都到汴州，妃母子都相随，安置宫中，高祖皇后待她如母。
English: The imperial court was moved to Bozhou, and the empress, mother and son all followed, and were placed in the palace. Empress Gaozhu treated her like a mother.

古文：天福四年九月癸未，诏以郇国三千户封唐许王从益为郇国公，以奉唐祀，服色、旌旗一依旧制。
现代文：天福四年九月十五日，诏以郇国三千户封唐许王从益为郇国公，以奉唐的祭祀，服色、旌旗都依照唐的旧制。
English: On the 15th day of September in the 4th year of Tianfu, the imperial edict was issued to the effect that the three thousand households in the State of Shandong should pay homage to Tang Xu Wang Congyi as the Prince of Shandong, and that they should worship Tang's sacrificial rites, and that their dress and flag should follow Tang's old system.

古文：太常议立庄宗、明宗、愍帝三室，以至德宫为庙；诏立高祖、太宗，为五庙，使从益岁时主祠。
现代文：太常卿商议立庄宗、明宗、愍帝三室，用至德宫为庙；诏立高祖、太宗，为五庙，派从益主持祠庙祭祀。
English: Taizhongqing deliberated on the establishment of the three chambers of Zhuangzong, Mingzong, and Jiandi, and used the German Palace as a temple; Zhao established Gaozu and Taizong as five temples, and sent Congyi to preside over the ancestral temple rituals.

古文：出帝即位，妃母子俱还洛阳。
现代文：出帝即位，妃母子都回到洛阳。
English: The emperor was enthroned, and both mother and daughter returned to Luoyang.

古文：契丹犯京师，赵延寿所尚明宗公主已死，耶律德光乃为延寿娶从益妹，是为永安公主。
现代文：契丹进攻京城，赵延寿所娶明宗公主已经死了，耶律德光就为延寿娶从益妹，称永安公主。
English: The Khitans attacked the capital city. Princess Mingzong, whom Zhao Yanshou had married, had died. Yelu Deguang married a younger sister of Yanshou's, known as Princess Yongan.

古文：公主不知其母为谁，素亦养于妃，妃至京师主婚礼。
现代文：公主不知母亲是谁，由妃抚养长大，妃到京城主持婚礼。
English: The princess did not know who her mother was. She was raised by the princess, who came to the capital to preside over the wedding.

古文：德光见明宗画像，焚香再拜，顾妃曰： 明宗与我约为弟兄，尔吾嫂也。 
现代文：德光见到明宗画像，焚香礼拜，对妃说 ：明宗与我约为弟兄，你是我嫂子。 
English: Seeing an image of Mingzong, Deguang burned incense and said to the princess: "Mingzong and I are about to become brothers. You are my sister-in-law."

古文：已而靳之曰： 今日乃吾妇也。 
现代文：不久欣然说： 现在是我妻了。 
English: Soon he said happily: "She's my wife now."

古文：乃拜从益为彰信军节度使，从益辞，不之官，与妃俱还洛阳。
现代文：就用从益为彰信军节度使，从益推辞不肯当官，和妃都回到洛阳。
English: He used Zou Yi as the festival envoy of the Zhangxin Army, Zou Yi refused to be an official, and he and his wife both returned to Luoyang.

古文：德光北归，留萧翰守汴州。
现代文：德光北归，留萧翰守汴州。
English: Deguang returned to the north, leaving Xiaohan to guard Zhangzhou.

古文：汉高祖起太原，翰欲北去，乃使人召从益，委以中国。
现代文：汉高祖太原起兵，翰想北去，就派人召从益把中原委托给他。
English: Han Gao's ancestor Taiyuan raised an army. Han wanted to go north, so he sent someone to summon Zongyi to entrust the Central Plains to him.

古文：从益子母逃于徽陵域中，以避使者，使者迫之以东，遂以从益权知南朝军国事。
现代文：从益子母逃到徽陵去躲避使者，使者强迫他东来，叫从益权知南朝军国事。
English: He fled from Masuko to Huling to avoid the envoy, who forced him to come east to ask Masuko to inform the Southern Dynasty army about the state affairs.

古文：从益御崇元殿，翰率契丹诸将拜殿上，晋群臣拜殿下。
现代文：从益坐崇元殿，翰率契丹诸将拜殿上，晋群臣拜殿下。
English: From the palace of Emperor Yizong to the palace of Emperor Chongyuan, Han led the Khitan generals to pay homage to the palace, and Jin's vassals to pay homage to the prince.

古文：群臣入谒太妃，妃曰： 吾家子母孤弱，为翰所迫，此岂福邪？
现代文：群臣入见太妃，妃说 ：我家母子孤弱，被翰强迫，这不是福呀！
English: When the courtiers came to see the princess, she said, "My mother and son are alone and weak, and have been forced by Han. This is not a blessing!"

古文：祸行至矣！ 
现代文：祸快到了！ 
English: Woe is coming!

古文：乃以王松、赵上交为左右丞相，李式、翟光鄴为枢密使，燕将刘祚为侍卫亲军都指挥使。
现代文：才以王松、赵上交为左右丞相，李式、翟光邺为枢密使，燕将刘祚为侍卫亲军都指挥使。
English: Wang Song and Zhao Shangjiao were appointed as the left and right ministers, Li Shih and Zou Guangya were appointed as the privy councilors, and Yan appointed Liu Bei as the bodyguard to command the troops.

古文：翰留契丹兵千人属祚而去。
现代文：萧翰留契丹兵一千人归刘祚而北去。
English: Xiao Han left a thousand Khitan soldiers to return to Liu Bei and go north.

古文：汉高祖拥兵而南，从益遣人召高行周、武行德等为拒，行周等皆不至，乃与王松谋以燕兵闭城自守。
现代文：汉高祖率兵南下，从益派人召高行周、武行德等人去抵抗，行周等人都不到，就与王松商议用燕兵闭城自守。
English: Han Gao Zu led his soldiers to the south, and sent people from Yiwu to summon Gao Xing Zhou, Wu Xing De and others to resist. When none of them came, he negotiated with Wang Song to use Yan soldiers to close the city and defend themselves.

古文：妃曰： 吾家亡国之余，安敢与人争天下！ 
现代文：妃说 ：亡国之后，怎敢与别人争天下？ 
English: The empress said, "After the fall of the country, how dare we compete with others for the world?"

古文：乃遣人上书迎汉高祖。
现代文：立即派人上书迎接汉高祖。
English: Immediately send someone to write a letter to welcome the founder of Henkel.

古文：古之知孝者莫如舜，知义者莫如孔、孟，其于君臣父子之际详矣，使其不幸而遭焉，其亦如是而已矣！
现代文：高祖听说他曾召行周，不至，就派郭从义先率兵入京城杀妃母子。妃临死大喊说 ：我家母子有什么罪？为啥不留下我儿子使他每年寒食节拿一盂饭酒到明宗坟上祭祀。 
English: Gaozu heard that he had summoned Xing Zhou, but when he did not arrive, he sent Guo Zong Yixian to lead an army into Beijing to kill the princess and her son. The princess cried out on her deathbed: "What is the sin of my mother and son? Why not leave my son so that he can take a bunch of rice wine to the Ming Dynasty tomb for sacrifice every year during the Cold Food Festival."

古文：从璟之于庄宗，知所从而得其死矣。
现代文：听见的人都感到悲伤。从益死的时候才十七岁。
English: Everyone who heard the news was saddened. Zhou Yi was only 17 when he died.

古文：哀哉！秦王从荣，天成元年，以检校司徒兼御史大夫，拜天雄军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：秦王从荣，天成元年，以检校司徒兼御史大夫，升任天雄军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: Qin Wang Rong Rong, in the first year of Tiancheng, was promoted to the school inspector and chief historian, promoted to the commander of the Tianxiong Army, and promoted to the bookkeeper of the same school.

古文：三年，徙镇河东。
现代文：三年，移镇河东。
English: Three years later, he moved to Hedong Town.

古文：长兴元年，拜河南尹，兼判六军诸卫事。
现代文：长兴元年，当河南尹，兼判六军诸卫事。
English: In the first year of Changxing, when Yin was in Henan Province, he was also awarded the six military guards.

古文：从璟死，从荣于诸皇子次最长，又握兵柄。
现代文：从王景死，从荣在各位皇子中年龄最大，又掌兵权。
English: From the time of Wang Jing's death, Zong Rong was the oldest among the princes and held military power.

古文：然其为人轻隽而鹰视，颇喜儒，学为歌诗，多招文学之士，赋诗饮酒，故后生浮薄之徒，日进谀佞以骄其心。
现代文：然而他的为人轻浮狡猾而狠毒，喜欢儒学，学写诗歌，招集了许多文学之士，赋诗饮酒，所以是轻浮无知的人，每天阿谀奉迎得使他更加骄傲。
English: However, he is a frivolous, cunning and vicious person. He likes Confucianism, learns to write poetry, gathers many literati, makes poetry and drinks alcohol. Therefore, he is a frivolous and ignorant person. Every day, the flattery makes him more proud.

古文：自将相大臣皆患之，明宗颇知其非而不能裁制。
现代文：将相大臣都很忧愁，明宗非常了解他的错误，然而管不了他。
English: The shogun, the prime minister, and the ministers were all saddened. Emperor Mingzong was well aware of his mistake, but he could not control him.

古文：从荣尝侍侧，明宗问曰： 尔军政之余，习何事业？ 
现代文：从荣曾侍奉明宗，明宗问他说 ：你在处理军政大事之后干些什么？ 
English: Cong Rong had served Mingzong. Mingzong asked him, "What do you do after handling military and political affairs?"

古文：对曰： 有暇读书，与诸儒讲论经义尔。 
现代文：回答说： 有空就读书，和各位儒士讲论经义。 
English: He replied, "I read books when I have time, and discuss the meaning of scripture with Confucian scholars.

古文：明宗曰： 经有君臣父子之道，然须硕儒端士，乃可亲之。
现代文：明宗说 ：经里讲的有君臣父子关系的道理，然而只有真才实学为人正直的儒士才应该接近。
English: Mingzong said, "The scriptures speak of the principle of a father-son relationship between a ruler and a subject, but only a true, learned, and honest Confucian should get close.

古文：吾见先帝好作歌诗，甚无谓也。
现代文：我看见先帝喜欢做诗歌，实在没什么好处啊。
English: I saw that the former emperor liked to write poetry, but it really didn't do him any good.

古文：汝将家子，文章非素习，必不能工，传于人口，徒取笑也。
现代文：你是将家之子，平时不学文章，必然不精通，传到别人那里，只能受到取笑。
English: You are the son of the family, usually do not learn articles, must not be proficient, spread to others, can only be ridiculed.

古文：吾老矣，于经义虽不能晓，然尚喜屡闻之，甚余不足学也。 
现代文：我老了，对于经义虽然不晓得，然而喜欢听别人讲讲，其他的就不要学了。 
English: I'm old, and although I don't know the meaning of the sutras, I like to listen to others, and I don't want to learn anything else.

古文：是岁秋，封从荣秦王。
现代文：当年秋，封从荣为秦王。
English: In the autumn of that year, Fuzong Rong became the King of Qin.

古文：故事，诸王受封不朝庙，而有司希旨，欲重其礼，乃建议曰： 古者因禘、尝而发爵禄，所以示不敢专。
现代文：按旧例，诸王受封不朝庙，然而有司为了讨好他，想搞隆重的礼仪，就建议说： 古代因袭祭祀的老规矩，曾因此而给爵禄，所以不朝庙。
English: According to the old custom, kings do not go to the temple when they are enthroned. However, in order to please him, a certain official wanted to have a grand ceremony, so he suggested saying: In ancient times, because of the old rules of worship, people were given a stipend for this, so they do not go to the temple.

古文：今受大封而不告庙，非敬顺之道也。 
现代文：现在受了重大的封爵不朝庙，不是孝敬的做法啊！ 
English: Now that he has received an important knighthood, he does not go to the temple, which is not the way to show filial piety!

古文：于是从荣朝服，乘辂车，具卤簿，至朝堂受册，出，载册以车，朝于太庙，京师之人皆以为荣。
现代文：于是从荣穿朝服，乘大车，记录在簿籍上，到朝堂受册封，出来后，把封册放在车上去朝太庙，京城的人都认为他很光荣。
English: Therefore, from wearing the imperial robes, riding in the carriage, recording it in the ledger, to receiving the imperial seal in the imperial hall, and after coming out, putting the imperial seal in the carriage to go to the imperial temple, people in the capital thought he was very honorable.

古文：三年，加兼中书令。
现代文：长兴三年，加封中书令。
English: Changxing three years, plus the seal of the Central Government.

古文：有司又言： 故事，亲王班宰相下，今秦王位高而班下，不称。 
现代文：有司又说： 旧例，亲王朝班站在宰相之下，现在秦王地位高，却站在宰相之下，不相称。 
English: Yu Si also said: In the old days, the pro-dynasty group stood below the prime minister, but now the Qin king has a high status, but he stands below the prime minister, which is not appropriate.

古文：于是与宰相分班而居右。
现代文：于是和宰相平行分班站在右边。
English: As a result, he stood on the right side in a parallel shift with the prime minister.

古文：四年，加尚书令，食邑万户。
现代文：四年，加封尚书令，食邑万户。
English: Four years later, Shang Shuling was added, and tens of thousands of households were served.

古文：太仆少卿何泽上书，请立从荣为皇太子。
现代文：太仆少卿何泽上书，请立从荣为皇太子。
English: Ozawa, the servant of the young lord, sent a letter to the emperor, asking him to make him crown prince.

古文：是时明宗已病，得泽书不悦，顾左右曰： 群臣欲立太子，吾当养老于河东。 
现代文：那时明宗已得病，看到泽的上书很不高兴，对左右侍奉的人说： 群臣想立太子，我要到河东养老。 
English: At that time, Mingzong had already fallen ill, and was very unhappy to see Ze's letter. He said to his attendants: "The courtiers want to establish a crown prince, and I want to retire to Hedong.

古文：乃召大臣议立太子事，大臣皆莫敢可否。
现代文：就召集大臣们讨论立太子的事，大臣都不敢说可否。
English: When it came to summoning ministers to discuss the matter of the crown prince's investiture, none of the ministers dared to say yes or no.

古文：从荣入白曰： 臣闻奸人言，欲立臣为太子，臣实不愿也。 
现代文：从荣进来自己说 ：臣听奸人说，想立臣为太子，臣实在不愿意呀。 
English: When Rong Rong came in, he said to himself, "O subject, listen to the traitor, if you want to make me the crown prince, I really don't want to."

古文：明宗曰： 此群臣之欲尔。 
现代文：明宗说 ：这是大臣们的意思。 
English: Myochon said, "This is what the ministers mean."

古文：从荣出，见范延光、赵延寿等曰： 诸公议欲立吾为太子，是欲夺吾兵柄而幽之东宫耳。 
现代文：从荣出来见到范延光、赵延寿等人说： 诸位大臣商议想立我为太子，是想夺我兵权而幽禁在东宫吧。 
English: When he came out of Rong, he saw Fan Yanguang, Zhao Yanshou and others saying, "The ministers are discussing whether they want to make me crown prince. Are they trying to take away my military power and imprison me in the East Palace?"

古文：延光等患之，乃加从荣天下兵马大元帅。
现代文：延光等对此很忧虑，就加封从荣天下兵马大元帅。
English: Yan Guang and others were very worried about this, so they added the title of grand marshal of the army and cavalry from the Rong Dynasty.

古文：有司又言： 元帅或统诸道，或专一面，自前世无天下大元帅之名，其礼无所考按。
现代文：有司又说： 元帅有统率诸道的，也有专管一面的，以前没有天下兵马大元帅的名称，庆礼无法考究。
English: Yu Si also said, "A marshal has the power to command all the provinces, and also has the power to exclusively manage one side. Previously, there was no such title as the grand marshal of the world's armies and horses, and the celebration could not be refined.

古文：请自节度使以下，凡领兵职者，皆具橐鞬以军礼庭参；其兼同中书门下平章事者，初见亦如之，其后许如客礼。
现代文：请从节度使以下，凡是有军职的人，都背着装弓箭的袋子用军礼参见；兼同中书门下平章事者开始也这样见礼，以后以客礼相见。
English: Please refer to the following, from the point of view of the ceremony, all those who have military duties wear a bag with a bow and arrow on their back and use the military salute; those who are also in the middle of the book and under the door also begin to see the salute in this way, and later meet each other with a guest salute.

古文：凡元帅府文符行天下，皆用帖。
现代文：凡是元帅府的文符颁行天下都用帖。
English: All letters issued by the marshal's office are stamped with a postmark.

古文：又升班在宰相上。 
现代文：把站班升在宰相之上。 
English: Elevate the stationmaster above the prime minister.

古文：从荣大宴元帅府，诸将皆有颁给：控鹤、奉圣、严卫指挥使，人马一匹、绢十匹；其诸军指挥使，人绢十匹；都头已下，七匹至三匹。
现代文：从荣大宴元帅府，对诸将都给予赏赐：控鹤、奉圣、严卫指挥使，每人马一匹、绢十匹；诸军指挥使每人绢十匹；都头以下七匹至三匹。
English: From the Rongda Banquet of the Marshal's Palace, rewards were given to all generals: one horse and ten mules each for the commanders of the Henan, Bongsheng and Yanwei armies; ten mules each for the commanders of the armies; and seven to three horses for the commanders of the capital and below.

古文：又请严卫、捧圣千人为牙兵，每入朝，以数百骑先后，张弓挟矢，驰走道上，见者皆震慑。
现代文：又请严卫、捧圣千人为牙兵，每次入朝用数百骑兵前后护卫，张弓挟箭，在街道上奔驰，看见的人都很害怕。
English: He also invited Yan Wei and Hou Sheng to form a thousand tooth soldiers, and every time he entered the court, he used hundreds of cavalry to escort him back and forth, with bows and arrows, and galloped through the streets. People who saw this were very afraid.

古文：从荣又命其寮属及四方游士试作《征淮檄》，陈己所以平一天下之意。
现代文：从荣又命令他的僚属及四方游士做征淮檄书，表示自己要平定天下的意思。
English: Cong Rong also ordered his colleagues and subordinates as well as the wanderers of the four directions to write a letter of enlistment, expressing his intention to pacify the world.

古文：言事者请为诸王择师傅，以加训导。
现代文：大臣中有人上书请为诸王选择老师进行教导。
English: One of the ministers wrote to request that a teacher be chosen to teach the kings.

古文：宰相难其事，因请从荣自择。
现代文：宰相对此事不敢决定，请从荣自己选择老师。
English: The vice-principal is afraid to make a decision on this matter, so please choose your own teacher from Rong.

古文：从荣乃请翰林学士崔棁、刑部侍郎任赞为元帅判官。
现代文：从荣要请翰林学士崔腄、刑部侍郎任赞为元帅判官。
English: Zong Rong wanted to invite Hanlin Scholar Cui Wei and the head of the Criminal Investigation Department to be appointed marshals and judges.

古文：明宗曰： 学士代予言，不可也。 
现代文：明宗说： 学士代我说话，不行啊。 
English: Mingzong said, "I can't have a scholar speak for me.

古文：从荣出而恚曰： 任以元帅而不得请属寮，非吾所谕也。 
现代文：从荣出来后愤恨的说 ：叫我当元帅又不得请僚属，这不是对我的训导。 
English: After he emerged from the glory, he said angrily: "To call me a marshal and not to invite my colleagues, this is not a discipline for me.

古文：将相大臣见从荣权位益隆，而轻脱如此，皆知其祸而莫敢言者。
现代文：将相大臣见从荣权位一天比一天显赫，然而这样轻浮，都知道要发生祸乱但不敢说话。
English: The Minister of the Prime Minister is seen as more and more prominent from the position of honor every day, but such frivolity, they all know that there will be a disaster, but they dare not speak.

古文：惟延光、延寿阴有避祸意，数见明宗，涕泣求解枢密，二人皆引去，而从荣之难作。
现代文：只有延光、延寿为了避祸多次进见明宗，哭着要求解除枢密使的职务，二人都辞官而去，不久从荣之乱就发生了。
English: Only Yan Guang and Yan Shou, in order to avoid disaster, repeatedly went to see Mingzong, crying and demanding the dismissal of the envoy's duties. Both of them resigned and left, and soon the Zhu Rong Rebellion occurred.

古文：十一月戊子，雪，明宗幸宫西士和亭，得伤寒疾。
现代文：十一月十六日，雪，明宗到宫的西边士和亭赏雪，得了伤寒病。
English: On the 16th day of the 11th month, when it was snowing, the Westerner who had come to the palace to enjoy the snow got typhoid fever.

古文：己丑，从荣与枢密使硃弘昭、冯赟入问起居于广寿殿，帝不能知人。
现代文：十七日，从荣与枢密使朱弘昭、冯斌贝到广寿殿问候起居，明宗已昏迷得认不得人了。
English: On the 17th, Rong and the envoys Zhu Hongzhao and Feng Binbei went to the Guang Shou Temple to greet the emperor. Mingzong was unconscious and unrecognizable.

古文：王淑妃告曰 从荣在此。 
现代文：王淑妃说 ：从荣在这里。 
English: Wang Shuxi said: Cong Rong is here.

古文：又曰： 弘昭等在此。 
现代文：又说 ：弘昭等在此。 
English: He also said: Hiroaki, wait here.

古文：皆不应。
现代文：明宗都不答应。
English: Neither did the Ming Dynasty agree to this.

古文：从荣等去，乃迁于雍和殿，宫中皆恸哭。
现代文：从荣等人去后，才把明宗迁移到雍和殿，宫中的人都痛哭。
English: It was only after Rong and the others had left that Mingzong was moved to Yonghe Hall, and everyone in the palace was in tears.

古文：至夜半后，帝蹶然自兴于榻，而侍疾者皆去，顾殿上守漏宫女曰： 夜漏几何？ 
现代文：到半夜后，明宗突然醒来，侍候的人都不在身旁，对殿上守夜的宫女说： 夜漏几更？ 
English: After midnight, Emperor Mingzong suddenly woke up, and the attendants were not around. He said to the palace maid who was keeping vigil in the palace, "How many more nightmares will there be?"

古文：对曰： 四更矣！ 
现代文：回答说 ：四更了！ 
English: He answered: "Four times more!"

古文：帝即唾肉如肺者数片，溺涎液斗余。
现代文：帝吐出像肺一样的肉数片，涎液一斗多。
English: The emperor vomited several pieces of flesh that looked like lungs, and more than a bucket of pus.

古文：守漏者曰： 大家省事乎？ 
现代文：守漏的宫女说： 皇帝好些了吗？ 
English: The mistress of the palace, who had kept the secret, said: Is the emperor better?

古文：曰： 吾不知也。 
现代文：明宗说： 我不知道。 
English: He said: I don't know.

古文：有顷，六宫皆至，曰： 大家还魂矣！ 
现代文：过了一会，六宫妃子都到了，说 ：皇帝还魂了！ 
English: After a while, all the concubines of the Sixth Palace arrived and said, "The Emperor is still alive!"

古文：因进粥一器。
现代文：送上一碗稀饭。
English: A bowl of porridge.

古文：至旦，疾少愈，而从荣称疾不朝。
现代文：至早晨，病稍有好转，从荣称病不肯朝见。
English: By the morning, his illness had improved slightly. He refused to see me in the morning, claiming to be ill.

古文：初，从荣常忌宋王从厚贤于己，而惧不为嗣。
现代文：以前，从荣常常忌恨宋王从厚比自己贤能，害怕不能继承皇位。
English: In the past, Zong Rong often resented the fact that King Zong of Song was more powerful than he was, and was afraid that he would not be able to inherit the throne.

古文：其平居骄矜自得，及闻人道宋王之善，则愀然有不足之色。
现代文：他平时骄傲自夸很得意，一听到别人夸宋王好就露出不高兴的神色。
English: He is usually very proud and boastful, and when he hears others praise Song Wang, he shows an unhappy look.

古文：其入问疾也，见帝已不知人，既去，而闻宫中哭声，以谓帝已崩矣，乃谋以兵入宫。
现代文：入宫探望明宗的病，看见明宗昏迷得已经认不得人了，出去后又听到宫中的哭声，认为皇帝已经死了，就商议率兵入宫。
English: After entering the palace, he visited Mingzong's illness and saw that Mingzong was unconscious and unrecognizable. After going out, he heard the cries in the palace and thought that the emperor was dead, so he discussed leading an army into the palace.

古文：使其押衙马处钧告弘昭等，欲以牙兵入宿卫，问何所可以居者。弘昭等对曰： 宫中皆王所可居，王自择之。 
现代文：派押衙马处钧告诉弘昭等人，想用牙兵入宫宿卫，问住在哪里，弘昭等人说： 宫中哪里都可以住，你自己选择。 
English: The police told Hiroaki and the others that if they wanted to use the tooth soldiers to enter the palace, they should ask the palace guards where to live. Hiroaki and the others said, "You can live anywhere in the palace, you choose."

古文：因私谓处钧曰： 圣上万福，王宜竭力忠孝，不可草草。 
现代文：私下对处钧说： 皇帝病情好转，秦王应竭力尽忠孝，不可随便。 
English: Privately, he said to Duanzhang, "The emperor's condition is getting better. King Qin should do his best to be loyal and filial, and should not act arbitrarily."

古文：处钧具以告从荣，从荣还遣处钧语弘昭等曰： 尔辈不念家族乎？ 
现代文：处钧把这话都告诉了从荣，从荣又派处钧对弘昭等人说： 你们不怕灭族吗？ 
English: The local magistrate told all this to Cong Rong, and Cong Rong sent another magistrate to say to Hong Zhao and the others, "Aren't you afraid of ethnic extermination?

古文：弘昭、赟及宣徽使孟汉琼等入告王淑妃以谋之，曰： 此事须得侍卫兵为助。 
现代文：弘昭、斌贝和宣徽使孟汉琼等人进宫告诉王淑妃，商议说： 这件事必须得到侍卫兵的帮助。 
English: Hong Zhao, Bin Bei and Xuan Hui sent Meng Han Qiong and others into the palace to tell Wang Shuxi, and discussed: This matter must be helped by the guards.

古文：乃召侍卫指挥使康义诚，谋于竹林之下。
现代文：就召侍卫指挥使康义诚在竹林下商议。
English: He summoned the commander of the bodyguards and asked Kang Yicheng to negotiate under the bamboo grove.

古文：义诚有子在秦王府，不敢决其谋，谓弘昭曰： 仆为将校，惟公所使尔！ 
现代文：义诚的儿子在秦王府做事，不敢赞成弘昭等人的意见，对弘昭说 ：我是将校，听你们指使！ 
English: Yoshichika's son, who worked at the Qin royal palace, did not dare to agree with the opinions of Hiroaki and others, and said to Hiroaki, "I'm an officer, I'll follow your orders!"

古文：弘昭大惧。
现代文：弘昭大惊。
English: Hiroaki was shocked.

古文：明日，从荣遣马处钧告冯赟曰： 吾今日入居兴圣宫。 
现代文：次日，从荣派马处钧对冯斌贝说： 我今天到兴圣宫居住。 
English: The next day, Zhu Rongpai said to Feng Binbei, "I am going to live in the Xingsheng Palace today.

古文：又告义诚，义诚许诺。
现代文：又告诉义诚，义诚答应了。
English: He also told Yicheng, and Yicheng agreed.

古文：赟即驰入内，见义诚及弘昭、汉琼等坐中兴殿阁议事，赟责义诚曰： 主上所以畜养吾徒者，为今日尔！今安危之机，间不容发，奈何以子故怀顾望，使秦王得至此门，主上安所归乎？
现代文：斌贝即跑到宫里，见义诚及弘昭、汉琼等人坐在中兴殿商议，斌贝责备义诚说 ：皇帝养活我们为的是今天用我们，现在安危的关头已到了一触即发的程度，你为啥因儿子的原因就抱着观望的态度，假若秦王进了这个门，皇帝到哪里去呢？
English: Bin Bei immediately ran to the palace, where he saw Yicheng, Hong Zhao, Han Qiong and others sitting in the Zhongxing Hall and discussing. Bin Bei reproached Yicheng and said, "The emperor feeds us in order to use us today. Now the moment of danger has reached a hair-trigger level. Why do you hold a wait-and-see attitude because of your son? If King Qin entered this gate, where would the emperor go?

古文：吾辈复有种乎？ 
现代文：我们还能不灭族吗？ 
English: Can we do it without exterminating the people?

古文：汉琼曰： 贱命不足惜，吾自率兵拒之。 
现代文：汉琼说 ：贱命不足惜，我自己率兵抵抗。 
English: Han Qiong said: "I'm not sorry for my humble life. I led the soldiers to resist.

古文：即入见曰： 从荣反，兵已攻端门。 
现代文：立即进见明宗说： 从荣造反，兵已攻端门。 
English: Immediately, Jinmi Mingzong said, "Since Rong's rebellion, the soldiers have attacked the front gate.

古文：宫中相顾号泣。
现代文：宫中一片哭声。
English: There was a lot of crying in the palace.

古文：明宗问弘昭等曰： 实有之乎？ 
现代文：明宗问弘昭等人说 ：有这种事吗？ 
English: Myochon asked Hiroaki and others, "Is there such a thing?"

古文：对曰： 有之。 
现代文：回答说 ：有。 
English: Jingdi asked: What is the specific situation?

古文：明宗以手指天泣下，良久曰： 义诚自处置，毋令震动京师。 
现代文：明宗用手指着天哭了，过了一会儿说： 义诚自己处理，不要震动京城。 
English: Mingzong pointed his finger at the sky and cried. After a while, he said, "Yicheng, deal with it yourself, don't shake the capital."

古文：潞王子重吉在侧，明宗曰： 吾与尔父起微贱，至取天下，数救我危窘。
现代文：潞王的儿子重吉在旁边，明宗说 ：我和你父亲出身穷人家，夺天下时多次在危困中救我。
English: Shiori's son, Shigekichi, was by his side, and Mingsong said, "I and your father came from a poor family, and you saved me many times from danger when we conquered the world.

古文：从荣得何气力，而作此恶事！
现代文：从荣出了啥力，却做这种可恶事！
English: What strength comes from glory, but to do such an abominable thing!

古文：尔亟以兵守诸门。 
现代文：你快点率兵把守宫门。 
English: Hurry up and lead your soldiers to guard the palace gate.

古文：重吉即以控鹤兵守宫门。
现代文：重吉立即派控鹤兵守住宫门。
English: Shigeyoshi immediately dispatched soldiers to guard the palace gate.

古文：是日，从荣自河南府拥兵千人以出。
现代文：当日，从荣从河南府率兵千人出来。
English: On the same day, Cong Rong led a thousand soldiers from Henan Province.

古文：从荣寮属甚众，而正直之士多见恶，其尤所恶者刘赞、王居敏，而所昵者刘陟、高辇。
现代文：从荣僚属很多，然而正直的大臣他都厌恶，他最厌恶的是刘赞、王居敏，最亲近的是刘陟、高辇。
English: He has many honorable colleagues, but he loathes all honest ministers. He loathes Liu Zan and Wang Jumin the most, and his closest friends are Liu Wei and Gao Wei.

古文：从荣兵出，与陟、辇并辔耳语，行至天津桥南，指日景谓辇曰： 明日而今，诛王居敏矣！ 
现代文：从荣率兵出来与陟、辇并马低声说话，走到天津桥南，指着太阳对辇说： 明天这时，杀王居敏了！ 
English: He went to the south of Tianjin Bridge, pointed to the sun and said, "Tomorrow at this time, I will kill Wang Jumin!"

古文：因阵兵桥北，下据胡床而坐，使人召康义诚。
现代文：把军队摆在桥北，自己下马坐在胡床之上，派人召康义诚。
English: He placed the army on the north side of the bridge, dismounted and sat on a horse bed, and sent someone to summon Kang Yicheng.

古文：而端门已闭，叩左掖门，亦闭，而于门隙中见捧圣指挥使硃弘实率骑兵从北来，即驰告从荣。
现代文：这时宫门已经关闭，叩左掖门，也关闭了，从门缝中看到捧圣指挥使朱弘实率骑兵从北来，立即飞马报告从荣。
English: At this time, the palace gate was already closed, and the left-hand gate was also closed. From the crack of the door, I saw that the commander of the holy crusade, Zhu Hongzhi, led the cavalry from the north, and immediately reported to Zhu Rong.

古文：从荣惊惧，索铁厌心，自调弓矢。
现代文：从荣吃惊害怕，拿来铁弓，自己调好弓箭。
English: Surprised and scared, Zong Rong brought an iron bow and adjusted the bow and arrow himself.

古文：皇城使安从益率骑兵三百冲之，从荣兵射之，从益稍却。
现代文：皇城使安从益率三百骑兵冲到，从荣兵射箭，从益稍退。
English: The imperial city of Jian'an was rushed to by three hundred cavalrymen from Yixing, shot arrows from the honorable soldiers, and retreated slightly from Yixing.

古文：弘实骑兵五百自左掖门出，方渡河，而后军来者甚众，从荣乃走归河南府，其判官任赞已下皆走出定鼎门，牙兵劫嘉善坊而溃。
现代文：弘实五百骑兵从左掖门出来，刚渡河，后军来的很多，从荣才退回河南府，判官任赞等人都走出定鼎门，牙兵在嘉善坊抢劫后溃散。
English: Five hundred cavalrymen from Hongsheng came out from Zuoying Gate and just crossed the river, many came from the rear, from Rongcai they returned to Henan Prefecture, the judge Ren Zhan and others all came out of Dingding Gate, and the tooth soldiers broke up after robbing Jiashanfang.

古文：从荣夫妻匿床下，从益杀之。
现代文：从荣夫妻藏在床下，被从益捉住杀了。
English: Mr. and Mrs. Cong Rong hid under the bed and were caught and killed by Mr. Cong Yi.

古文：明宗闻从荣已死，悲咽几堕于榻，绝而苏者再。
现代文：明宗听说从荣已经死了，悲哀哭泣得几乎跌落床下，几次昏倒。
English: When Mingzong heard that Cong Rong had died, he cried so much that he almost fell under the bed and fainted several times.

古文：冯道率百寮入见，明宗曰： 吾家事若此，惭见群臣！ 
现代文：冯道率百官进见，明宗说： 我家闹成这个样子，无面目见大臣们！ 
English: Feng Dao led hundreds of officials to enter, Mingzong said: My family is in such a mess, look at the ministers without a face!

古文：君臣相顾，泣下沾襟。
现代文：君臣互相看着，哭得衣襟都湿了。
English: The princes and courtiers looked at each other, their collars wet from crying.

古文：从荣二子尚幼，皆从死。
现代文：从荣两个儿子还小，都被杀了。
English: Rong Rong's two young sons were both killed.

古文：后六日而明宗崩。
现代文：过了六天，明宗也死了。
English: Six days later, Mingzong also died.

