古文：皇甫湜，李翱，虽为韩门弟子，而皆不能诗，浯溪石间有湜一诗，为元结而作，其词云： 次山有文章，可惋只在碎。
现代文：皇甫湜和李翱，虽然是韩愈门下的弟子，却都不太会写诗，在永州浯溪旁的石刻间有皇甫湜的一首诗，是为元结而作的，内容是： 次山有很好的诗篇，可惜失之于碎而不全。
English: Although he was a disciple of Han Yu, both Wang Fuxi and Li Qian were not very good at writing poetry. There is a poem by Wang Fuxi between the stone carvings next to the Yongzhou Lixi River, which was made for the original ending. The content is: There is a good poem in the next mountain, but unfortunately it is lost in fragments and incomplete.

古文：然长于指叙，约洁多余态。
现代文：但是他长于寄托和描叙，写得筒洁而形象。
English: But he is good at setting and describing, writing cleanly and vividly.

古文：心语适相应，出句多分外。于诸作者间，拔戟成一队。中行虽富剧，粹美君可盖。子昂感遇佳，未若君雅裁。
现代文：他也擅长以质直古朴的语言准确地表达自己的思想感情，诗中的警句也常常出人意外，不朝诗人众多，将出类拔萃的诗人排成队伍，在中间那一行众多的诗人里，次山你仍以精粹优美的诗篇盖过他人，陈子昂的感遇诗虽好，也不如你的大作。
English: He is also good at expressing his thoughts and feelings accurately with straightforward and simple language. The epigrams in the poems are often unexpected. Instead of a large number of poets, outstanding poets are lined up in a row. In the middle of the line of many poets, you still surpass others with a refined and beautiful poem. Although Chen Ziang's feeling poem is good, it is not as good as your masterpiece.

古文：退之全而神，上与千年对。
现代文：退之韩愈之字的诗文全而、优美而神奇，只能往前与千年以术的名家相比。
English: The poetry of the words of Han Yu, the retired emperor, is complete, beautiful and magical, and can only be compared with the thousand-year-old masters of the art.

古文：李杜才海翻，高下非可概。
现代文：李白、杜甫的才华是大海翻腾的波涛，其高下不是我一句话可以概括的。
English: The talents of Li Bai and Du Fu are the churning waves of the sea, and their highs and lows cannot be summed up in one sentence.

古文：文于一气间，为物莫为大。先王路不荒，岂不仰吾辈。
现代文：古往今来，诗文以气为主，没有比 气 更重要的了，自《诗经》以来诗歌反映现实的道路不容荒芜，岂不要仰仗我们这一代人的努力吗？
English: From ancient times to the present, poems have been based on qi, and there is nothing more important than qi. Since the "Book of Songs," the path of poetry reflecting reality cannot be allowed to become barren. Should we not rely on the efforts of our generation?

古文：石屏立衙衙，溪口扬素濑。
现代文：浯溪岸边的石屏排列成行，溪口扬起白芭的急流。
English: The stone screens on the banks of the Li River are lined up in rows, and the rapid current of the Bai Ba rises at the mouth of the river.

古文：我思何人知，徒倚如有待。 
现代文：我的思索什么人知道呢，我徘徊踌躇在久久地等待。 
English: Who knows what I was thinking, I lingered and waited for a long time.

古文：味此诗乃论唐人文章耳，风格殊无可采也。
现代文：玩味这首诗是在评论唐代诗文，但在风格上却没有什么特色可取。
English: The playfulness of this poem is a commentary on Tang Dynasty poetry, but there is nothing special about its style.

