古文：王申子韩佽许敬张闲太原小儿李师古孟不疑戴詧杜悰郑絪河北军将
现代文：王申子韩佽许敬张闲太原小儿李师古孟不疑戴詧杜悰郑絪河北军将
English: Wang Shenzi, Han Zheng, Xu Jing, Zhang Rong, Taiyuan's son, Li Shigu, Meng Doubtless wore the cuckoo's beak, Zheng He, the general of the North Hebei Army

古文：宫山僧
现代文：宫山僧
English: Miyayama monk

古文：王申子
现代文：王申子
English: Wang Shenzi

古文：贞观中，望苑驿西有民王申，手植榆于路旁，成林，构茅屋。
现代文：贞观年间，望苑驿站之西有一个平民叫王申。他亲手在路旁栽种榆树，长成树林，盖了几间茅屋。
English: During the Zhenguan era, there was a commoner named Wang Shen in the west of the Wangyuan post station. He planted eucalyptus trees by the roadside with his own hands, grew into a forest, and built several huts.

古文：夏月，常馈浆于行人，官客即延憩具茗。
现代文：夏天，他常常送水给行人喝，遇上官客他就迎接到屋里歇息并献茶。
English: In summer, he often gave water to passers-by to drink, and when he met official guests, he welcomed them to his house to rest and serve tea.

古文：有儿年十三，每令伺客。
现代文：他有个十三岁的儿子。他常常让儿子迎候客人。
English: He has a 13-year-old son, and he often has him greet guests.

古文：一日，白其父，路有女子求水，因令呼入。
现代文：一日，儿子对父亲禀告说，路上有一个女子要水喝。
English: One day, the son reported to his father that there was a woman on the road asking for water.

古文：女年甚少，衣碧襦白幅巾。
现代文：父亲就让儿子把女子叫进来。
English: The father asked his son to call the woman in.

古文：自言家在南十余里，夫死无儿，今服禫矣。将适马嵬访亲情，丐衣食。
现代文：女子特别年轻，穿绿色短衣，戴白色头巾，自己说家在南边十几里的地方，丈夫死了，没有儿子，如今服丧期满了，要到马嵬坡去走亲戚，要点吃的穿的东西。
English: The woman is very young, wearing a green short dress and a white headscarf. She says that her home is more than ten miles to the south. Her husband died and she has no son. Now that the mourning period is over, she wants to go to Malampo to visit relatives and get something to eat and wear.

古文：语言明晤，举止可爱。王申乃留食，谓曰：今日已暮，可宿此，达明去也。
现代文：她的口齿伶俐，举止可爱，王申就留她吃饭，对她说：现在天已经黑了，可以住在这里，明天再走吧！
English: She is articulate and has a lovely demeanor. Wang Shen let her stay for dinner and said to her, "It's dark now, you can stay here, let's go tomorrow!"

古文：女亦欣然从之，其妻内之后堂，呼为妹，倩裁衣数事。自午至戌，悉办。
现代文：女子也就欣然接受。王申的妻子把她安排在后堂，称她为小妹。请她裁衣帮助做事，从午时到戌时，她全做完了。
English: The woman gladly accepted. Wang Shen's wife placed her in the back hall and called her little sister. She asked her to cut clothes to help her do things, and from noon to dusk, she finished everything.

古文：针指细密，殆非人工。
现代文：而且针脚细密，几乎不是人工所能达到的。
English: Moreover, the stitches are very fine, which is almost impossible to achieve by hand.

古文：申大惊异，妻尤爱之。
现代文：王申非常惊异。王申的妻子更喜欢她。
English: Wang Shen was very surprised. Wang Shen's wife likes her more.

古文：乃戏曰：妹能为我作新妇乎？
现代文：王申就开玩笑说：小妹能给我做儿媳妇吗？
English: Wang Shen joked: Can Xiao Mei be my daughter-in-law?

古文：女笑曰：身既无托，愿执井灶。
现代文：女子笑道：我自身已经没有依靠了，愿意操持家务！
English: Woman laughs: I don't have anyone to rely on anymore, I'm willing to do the housework!

古文：王申即日，借衣贯酒，礼纳为新妇。
现代文：王申当天就借新衣服，买酒，举办婚礼娶她为新媳妇。
English: On the same day, Wang Shen borrowed new clothes, bought wine, and held a wedding to marry her as his new daughter-in-law.

古文：其夕暑热，戒其夫，近多盗，不可辟门。
现代文：那天晚上很热，她告戒丈夫说：最近有许多偷东西的，不能开着门睡觉。
English: It was very hot that night, and she warned her husband: "There have been a lot of thieves lately, and you can't sleep with the door open."

古文：即举巨椽，捍户而寝。
现代文：丈夫就拿来一根大椽子，把门顶上睡觉。
English: The husband brought a large latch and slept on top of the door.

古文：及夜半，王申妻梦其子被发诉曰：被食将尽矣！
现代文：到了半夜，王申的妻子梦见儿子披散着头发诉说道：我要被吃完了啦！
English: In the middle of the night, Wang Shen's wife dreamed that her son was wearing his hair loose and said, "I'm going to be eaten up!"

古文：妻惊，欲省其子。
现代文：妻子吃惊，要去看儿子。
English: The wife was surprised and wanted to see her son.

古文：王申曰：渠得好新妇，喜极呓言耶。
现代文：王申说：他得到一个好媳妇，高兴得说梦话呢！
English: Wang Shen said: He got a good daughter-in-law, he is so happy that he is talking in his sleep!

古文：妻还睡，复梦如初。
现代文：妻继续睡觉，又做了同样的梦。
English: My wife went back to sleep and had the same dream.

古文：申与妻秉烛，呼其子及新妇，悉不应。
现代文：王申和妻子拿着蜡烛，喊他们的儿子和新媳妇，全都不答应。
English: Wang Shen and his wife held candles and called out to their son and new daughter-in-law, but neither of them responded.

古文：扣其户，户牢如键。
现代文：敲门，门关得牢牢的。
English: Knock on the door. It's firmly shut.

古文：乃坏门阖。
现代文：于是就把门砸开。
English: He then smashed the door open.

古文：才开，有一物，圆目凿齿，体如蓝色，冲人而去。
现代文：门刚打开，有一个圆目利齿体如蓝色的怪物冲着人跑出去。
English: As soon as the door opened, a round-eyed, sharp-toothed, blue-colored monster ran out at the person.

古文：其子唯余脑骨及发而已。韩佽
现代文：他们的儿子只剩下头骨和头发了。韩佽
English: All that was left of their son was his skull and hair.

古文：韩佽在桂州。妖贼封盈，能为数里雾。
现代文：韩佽在桂州的时候，有个叫封盈的奴贼，能兴起几里的云雾。
English: When Han Wei was in Guizhou, there was a slave thief named Feng Ying, who could raise a few miles of clouds.

古文：先是尝行野外，见黄蝶数十，因逐之，至大树下而灭。
现代文：在这以前，他曾经在野外行走，看到了几十个黄色蝴蝶，于是就去追捕。追到大树下就不见了。
English: Before that, he had been walking in the field and saw dozens of yellow butterflies, so he went after them. He chased them under a big tree and they disappeared.

古文：掘得石函，素书大如臂，遂成左道。
现代文：挖地挖到了一个石匣，匣中有大如手臂的道书，于是他就走上了旁门左道。
English: He dug into the ground and found a stone box. Inside the box was a Taoist text as big as his arm. So he took the side road.

古文：归之如市，乃声言某日收桂州。有紫气者，我必胜。
现代文：回家来到市上，就声言某日某天要收复桂州，有紫气的时候，我必定胜利。
English: When I came home and went to the market, I claimed that I would recover Guizhou one day. When there is a purple atmosphere, I will surely win.

古文：至期，果有紫气如匹帛，亘于州城上。
现代文：到了那时候，果然有紫气象布帛一样，横贯在州城上空。
English: At that time, there was indeed a purple meteorological cloth, which stretched across the sky over the state capital.

古文：白气直冲之，紫气遂散。
现代文：白气直冲向紫气，紫气就散了。
English: The white gas rushed straight towards the violet gas, and the violet gas was dispersed.

古文：忽大雾，至午稍霁。
现代文：忽然起了大雾，到午时略微放了晴。
English: Suddenly there was a heavy fog, and by midday it had cleared slightly.

古文：州宅诸树，滴下铜佛。
现代文：州衙宅院里的每一棵树上，都滴下了铜佛。
English: On every tree in the prefectural government's mansion, a bronze Buddha is sprinkled.

古文：大如麦，不知其数。
现代文：铜佛就象麦粒那么大，无计其数。
English: The bronze Buddha is as big as a grain of wheat, and there are countless of them.

古文：是年韩卒。
现代文：这一年，韩佽死了。
English: In the same year, Han Xuan died.

古文：许敬张闲
现代文：许敬张闲
English: Xu Jing Zhang Jie

古文：唐贞元中，许敬、张闲同读书于偃月山。
现代文：唐朝贞元年间，许敬、张闲同在偃月山读书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan of the Tang Dynasty, Xu Jing and Zhang Xizhong were both studying at Mount Linyi.

古文：书堂两间，人据其一，中隔有丈。
现代文：书堂共两间，两人各占一间，中间隔了有一丈远。
English: There are a total of two libraries, one for each of the two people, separated by a considerable distance.

古文：许西而张东，各开户牖。
现代文：许敬在西，张闲在东，各开各的门窗。
English: Xu Jian in the west, Zhang Xian in the east, each with its own doors and windows.

古文：初敬遽相勖励，情地甚狎。
现代文：起初二人互相敬重，就互相勉励，感情亲密。
English: At first, the two respected each other, encouraged each other, and were emotionally close.

古文：自春徂冬，各秉烛而学。
现代文：从春到冬，各自秉烛而学。
English: From spring to winter, they study by candlelight.

古文：一夜二更，忽有一物，推许生户而入。
现代文：一天夜里二更天，忽然有一个怪物，推开许敬的门走进来。
English: One night, two days later, a monster suddenly pushed open Xu Jing's door and walked in.

古文：初意其张生，而不之意。
现代文：一开始他以为是张闲来了，没有在意。
English: At first, he thought it was Zhang Lai coming, and didn't care.

古文：其物已在案侧立。
现代文：那怪物已经在书案旁边站定。
English: The monster has taken up residence next to the manuscript.

古文：及读书遍，乃回视。
现代文：等到读完一遍才回头看，才看到那怪物。
English: It wasn't until I finished reading it that I looked back and saw the monster.

古文：方见一物，长可五尺余，虎牙狼目，毛如猿玃，爪如鹰鹯，服豹皮褌，见许生顾盼，乃叉手端目，并足而立。
现代文：大约五尺多高，虎牙狼眼，毛像猿猴，爪子像鹰鹞，穿着豹皮裤子。它见许敬转头看，就叉手正眼，并脚站立。
English: About more than five feet tall, tiger teeth, wolf eyes, hair like a monkey, claws like eagle beaks, wearing leopard skin pants. When he saw Xu Jing turn around to look at him, he squinted his eyes and stood with his feet together.

古文：许生恐甚，遂失声，连叫张生相救。
现代文：许敬非常害怕，就失声连连大叫张闲来救他。
English: Xu Jian was very scared, so he lost his voice and shouted for Zhang Lai to come and save him.

古文：如是数百声。
现代文：如此喊了几百声。
English: So shouted several hundred voices.

古文：张生灭烛，柱户佯寝，竟不应之。
现代文：张闲熄了灯，关了门装睡，居然没有答应。
English: Zhang Liang turned off the lights, closed the door and pretended to be asleep, but actually did not agree.

古文：其物忽倒行，就北壁火炉所，乃蹲踞视。
现代文：那怪物忽然倒着走，走近北墙下的火炉附近，就蹲在那里看。
English: The monster suddenly walked backwards, approached the fireplace under the north wall, and crouched there to watch.

古文：许生呼张生不已。
现代文：许敬不停地喊张闲。
English: Xu Jing kept calling out Zhang Liao.

古文：其物又起，于床下取生所用伐薪斧，却回而坐，附火复如初。
现代文：那怪物又站起来，在床下拿起许敬砍柴的斧，退回来坐下，象原先一样守在火炉旁。
English: The monster got up again, picked up Xu Jing's wood-chopping ax under the bed, retreated back and sat down, guarding the stove as before.

古文：良久，许生乃安心定气而言曰：余姓许名敬。辞家慕学，与张闲同到此。不早谒诸山神，深为罪耳。
现代文：许久，许敬才安心静气地说：我姓许名敬，离家来求学，和张闲一块来到这里，没有早一点去拜见各位山神，实在是有罪啊！
English: It took a long time for Xu Jian to calmly say: My name is Xu Nian Jian, I left home to study, and I came here with Zhang Xian. I am really guilty for not visiting the mountain gods earlier!

古文：然浮俗浅识，幸勿责之。
现代文：但是我知识浅薄，请不要怪罪。
English: But please don't blame me for my lack of knowledge.

古文：言已，其物奋起，叉手鞠躬，唯唯而出。
现代文：说完，那怪物一振而起，交叉两手鞠了个躬，唯唯地退出去了。
English: With that, the monster stood up, crossed his arms, bowed, and bowed out.

古文：敬恨张生之甚也，翌日，乃撤书而归。
现代文：许敬恨张生太过分了，第二天就撤书回家了。
English: Xu Jinghong hated Zhang Sheng too much, so he withdrew the book and went home the next day.

古文：于是张生亦相与俱罢，业竟不成。
现代文：于是张闲也和许敬一块都不学了，学业到底没成。
English: As a result, Zhang Lian and Xu Jian did not study at all, and did not complete their studies.

古文：太原小儿
现代文：太原小儿
English: Taiyuan Xia'er sings

古文：严绶镇太原，市中小儿如水际泅戏。忽见物中流流下，小儿争接。
现代文：严绶镇守太原的时候，街市里的小孩到水边游泳嬉戏，忽然看见有一个东西从中流流下来。
English: When Yan Xuan was guarding Taiyuan, the children in the market went to the water's edge to swim and play. Suddenly, they saw something flowing down from the middle of the stream.

古文：乃一瓦瓶，重帛幂之。
现代文：小孩子们争抢着去接，原来是一个瓦罐，用几层帛盖着。
English: Children scrambled to pick it up, but it turned out to be a clay pot covered with several layers of straw.

古文：儿就岸破之，有婴儿长尺余，遂迅走。
现代文：小孩们把它拿到岸上打碎，里边有一个一尺多高的小婴儿，一出来就迅跑。
English: The children took it to the shore and broke it. Inside there was a small baby more than a foot tall, and as soon as it came out, it ran away.

古文：群儿逐之。
现代文：小孩们就去追。
English: The children ran after them.

古文：顷间，足下旋风起，婴儿已蹈空数尺。
现代文：顷刻间，脚下旋风起，婴儿已腾空几尺。
English: In an instant, the whirlwind at his feet, the baby has vacated a few feet.

古文：近岸舟子，遽以篙击杀之。发朱色，目在顶上。
现代文：靠近河岸有一个摆船的，急忙用篙把婴儿打死，一看，他的头发是红的，眼睛长在头顶上。
English: Near the riverbank, a boatman was beating a baby to death with a hoe, when he saw that the baby's hair was red and his eyes were on the top of his head.

古文：李师古
现代文：李师古
English: Li Shigu

古文：李师古治山亭，掘得一物，类铁斧头。
现代文：李师古治理山亭，挖到一个东西，类似铁斧头。
English: Li Shigu ancient governance pavilion, dug into a thing, similar to an iron ax.

古文：时李章武游东平，师古示之。
现代文：当时李章武在东平游览，李师古就把那东西给李章武看。
English: At that time, Li Zhangwu was on an excursion in Dongping, and Li Shigu showed the thing to Li Zhangwu.

古文：武惊曰：此禁物也，可饮血三斗。
现代文：李章武吃惊地说：这是禁物，能喝三斗血！
English: Surprised, Li Zhangwu said, "This is forbidden, I can drink three buckets of blood!"

古文：验之而信。
现代文：经过验证，李师古才相信。
English: After verification, Li Shigu believed.

古文：孟不疑
现代文：孟不疑
English: Meng Doubtless

古文：东平未用兵时，有举人孟不疑客昭义。
现代文：东平没有用兵的时候，有一位名叫孟不疑的举人客居在昭义。
English: When there were no soldiers in Dongping, there was a man named Meng Doubtless who invited people to live in Shoyi.

古文：夜至一驿，方欲濯足，有称淄青张评事者至，仆从数十。
现代文：一天夜里他来到一家驿站，刚要洗脚，有一个自称是淄青张评事的人来到驿站，有几十个仆从。
English: One night, he came to a coach station. Just as he was about to wash his feet, a man who claimed to be a coachman came to the coach station. He had dozens of servants.

古文：孟欲谒之。
现代文：孟不疑想要去拜见他。
English: Meng no doubt wants to visit him.

古文：张被酒，初不顾。
现代文：张评事刚喝过酒，一开始不理睬。
English: Zhang, who had just had a drink, ignored him at first.

古文：孟因退就西间。
现代文：孟不疑于是退回来到西间。
English: Meng no doubt then retreated back to Xi'an.

古文：张连呼驿吏，索煎饼。
现代文：张评事连喊驿站里的官吏，要煎饼。
English: Zhang Yanzhi repeatedly shouted at the officials in the station, asking for pancakes.

古文：孟默窥之，且怒其傲。
现代文：孟不疑默默地看着，对他的傲慢很生气。
English: Meng undoubtedly watched silently, angry at his arrogance.

古文：良久，煎饼至。
现代文：许久，煎饼到了。
English: After a long time, the pancakes arrived.

古文：孟见一黑物如猪，随盘，至灯影而灭。
现代文：孟不疑看到一个黑东西象猪一样，随着盘子来到灯影之下就消失了。
English: Meng undoubtedly saw a black thing like a pig, which disappeared as the plate came under the light and shadow.

古文：如此五六返，张竟不察。
现代文：如此往返了五六次，张评事居然没有察觉。
English: This went back and forth five or six times, and the Zhang reviewers didn't even notice.

古文：孟恐惧不睡。
现代文：孟不疑害怕，没敢睡。
English: Meng was undoubtedly scared and did not dare to sleep.

古文：张寻太鼾。
现代文：张评事不一会儿就发出鼾声。
English: Zhang's commentator beeped the horn soon after.

古文：至三更，孟才寐。
现代文：到了三更，孟不疑才睡下。
English: By the third hour, Meng had no doubt fallen asleep.

古文：忽见一人皂衣，与张角力。
现代文：忽然看见一个黑衣人与张评事摔跤。
English: Suddenly, I saw a black-clad man wrestling with Zhang Junji.

古文：久乃相捽入东偏房，拳声如杵。
现代文：时间长了就互相揪到东偏房，拳击声就象舂米的棒槌声。
English: After a long time, they beat each other to the east side of the room, and the sound of the boxing was like the sound of the hammering of glutinous rice.

古文：顷之，张被发双袒而出，还寝床上。
现代文：过了一会儿，张评事披散着头发坦露着双臂出来了，回到床上睡觉。
English: After a while, Mr. Zhang came out with his hair disheveled and his arms bare, and went back to bed to sleep.

古文：至五更，张乃唤仆使，张烛巾栉。就孟曰：某昨醉中，都不知秀才同厅。
现代文：到了五更，张评事就喊奴仆，点灯，梳头，缠头巾，到孟不疑这里说：我昨天喝醉了，都不知道和您同住在一起！
English: When it came to the fifth generation, Zhang Xuan called his servant, lit the lamp, combed his hair, wrapped his headscarf, and came to Meng Bufu to say: I was drunk yesterday, and I didn't even know I was living with you!

古文：因命食，谈笑甚欢。时时小声曰：昨夜甚惭长者，乞不言也。
现代文：于是让人摆下酒饭，说说笑笑很高兴，时时小声说：昨晚上很对不住长者，请不要说了。
English: So they set out the food and wine, talked and laughed happily, and whispered from time to time: "I'm sorry about last night, elders, please don't say anything."

古文：孟但唯唯。
现代文：孟不疑只是一声声地答应。
English: Meng no doubt just said yes.

古文：复曰：某有故，不可早发。
现代文：张评事又说：我有点事儿，不能早出发。
English: Commentator Zhang also said: I have something to do, I can't leave early.

古文：秀才可先也。
现代文：您可以先走。
English: You can go first.

古文：探靴中，得金一挺，授孟曰：薄贶，乞密前事。
现代文：他探手到靴子里，拿出来一挺金子，送给孟不疑说：小意思，希望为以前的事保密。
English: He reached into his boots, took out a handful of gold, and gave it to Meng, saying, "I'm sorry, but I want to keep this confidential because of what happened before."

古文：孟不敢辞，即前去。
现代文：孟不疑不敢推辞，就提前离开了。
English: Meng did not hesitate to refuse and left early.

古文：行数里，方听捕杀人贼。
现代文：走了几里，才听到追捕杀人的强盗。
English: After walking for several miles, they heard the sound of robbers chasing and killing people.

古文：孟询诸道路，皆曰：淄青张评事，至其驿早发。
现代文：孟不疑向路上的人打听，都说：淄青张评事，到那驿站早早就出发了。
English: Meng no doubt asked people on the road and they all said: "Amei Zhang, you left for the station early.

古文：及明，但空鞍，失张所在。
现代文：到了天明，只剩下空马鞍，不知张评事哪儿去了。
English: By dawn, only an empty saddle was left. I don't know where Zhang Rui went.

古文：骑吏返至驿寻索，驿西阁中有席角。
现代文：骑马的官吏回到驿站寻找，驿站西阁中有一张席子，打开，是白骨而已。
English: The riding officials went back to the post station to look for it. There was a seat in the west pavilion of the post station. It was open, but it was a skeleton.

古文：发之，白骨而已，无泊一蝇肉也。地上滴血无余，唯一只履在旁。
现代文：没剩下苍蝇大小一块肉。地上滴血没有留下，只有一双鞋放在旁边。
English: There was not a fly-sized piece of meat left, not a drop of blood on the ground, only a pair of shoes on the side.

古文：相传此驿旧凶，竟不知何怪。
现代文：相传这个驿站以前很凶，到底不知道是什么怪物。
English: According to legend, this station used to be very ferocious, and it is not known what kind of monster it was.

古文：举人祝元膺尝言：亲见孟不疑说，每诫夜食必须祭也。
现代文：举人祝元膺曾经说：亲自听见孟不疑说，他常常警告夜间吃饭必须祭祀。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang once said: I personally heard Meng undoubtedly say that he often warned that it was necessary to make a sacrifice when eating at night.

古文：祝又言：孟素不信释氏，颇能诗。其句云： 白日故乡远。青山佳句中。
现代文：祝元膺又说：孟不疑一向不信佛教。他很能作诗，有两句诗是： 白日故乡远，青山佳句中。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang also said: Meng undoubtedly has always been a non-believer in Buddhism. He is very capable of writing poetry, and his two poems are: "Far from home in the daytime, in the middle of a beautiful poem in the mountains."

古文：后尝持念。
现代文：后来曾经拿出来吟诵。
English: Later, it was taken out and chanted.

古文：溺于游览，不复应举。
现代文：他沉湎于游览名山大川，不再参加科举考试。
English: He devoted himself to touring famous mountains and rivers, and no longer took part in the imperial examinations.

古文：戴詧
现代文：戴詧
English: Wearing a skullcap

古文：临川郡南城县令戴詧，初买宅于馆娃坊。
现代文：临川郡南城县县令戴詧，当初在馆娃坊买了一处宅子。
English: Dai Yao, the county magistrate of Nancheng County, Linchuan County, initially bought a house in the doll's house.

古文：暇日，与弟闲坐厅中。忽闻外有妇人聚笑声，或近或远。
现代文：闲暇之日，他和弟弟坐在厅堂里，忽然听到外面有妇人聚到一起哄笑的声音，有的近有的远。
English: On a day of leisure, he and his brother were sitting in the hall when they suddenly heard the sound of women laughing together outside, some nearby and some far away.

古文：詧颇异之。
现代文：戴詧觉得很奇怪。
English: I think it's weird to wear braids.

古文：笑声渐近，忽见妇人数十散在厅前，倏忽不见，如是累日，詧不知所为。
现代文：笑声渐渐地近了，忽然看到几十个妇人散站在厅前，忽地又不见了。如此一连几天。戴詧不知为什么会这样。
English: Laughter gradually approached, and suddenly I saw dozens of women standing in front of the hall, and then they suddenly disappeared. This went on for several days. I don't know why it happened.

古文：厅际有枯梨树，大合抱。意其为祥，因伐之。
现代文：厅堂边上有一棵枯梨树，合抱那么粗，认为它是不祥之兆，于是就把它砍了。
English: There was a dead pear tree on the edge of the hall, so thick that it was thought to be an ominous sign, so it was cut down.

古文：根下有石，露如拳。掘之转阔，势如鏊形。
现代文：树根下有一块石头，露出来有拳头大小，向下挖便变大，样子象煎饼鏊子形。
English: At the base of the tree, there is a stone the size of a fist. Digging down, it becomes larger, resembling a pancake dice.

古文：乃烈火其上。沃醋复凿。
现代文：就在它上面点上烈火烧，浇上醋，再凿。
English: Just on top of it, light a hot fire, pour vinegar, and then chisel.

古文：深五六尺，不透。
现代文：凿了五六尺深，也没凿透。
English: They dug five or six feet deep, but they didn't get it all.

古文：忽见妇人绕坑，拊掌大笑，有顷，共牵詧入坑，投于石上。
现代文：忽然看见一个妇人绕着坑拍掌大笑。过了一会儿，她拉着戴詧一块进到坑里，把他扔到石头上。
English: Suddenly, he saw a woman clapping her hands and laughing around the pit. After a while, she pulled the shackled one into the pit and threw him onto the stone.

古文：一家惊惧。
现代文：一家人又惊又怕。
English: The family was shocked and scared.

古文：妇人复还，大笑，詧亦随出。
现代文：妇人又回来了，她放声大笑。戴詧也跟着她走出来。
English: The woman came back, laughing loudly, and Daisuke followed her out.

古文：詧才出，又失其弟。
现代文：戴詧刚走出来，又丢失了他的弟弟。
English: Dai Yao just came out and lost his brother again.

古文：家人恸哭，詧独不哭。
现代文：家人悲伤地大哭。只有戴詧不哭。
English: The family burst into tears of grief. Only Dai Yong did not cry.

古文：曰：他亦甚快活。何用哭也。
现代文：他说：他也很快活，何必要哭呢？
English: He said: "He is also very happy, why should he cry?

古文：詧至死，不肯言其状。
现代文：戴詧一直到死，也不肯说出实情。
English: He wore shackles until the day he died, and refused to tell the truth.

古文：杜悰
现代文：杜悰
English: Cuckoo

古文：杜悰未达时，游江湖间。
现代文：杜悰没有发达的时候，漫游在江湖上。
English: When the cuckoo is not developed, it roams in the jungle.

古文：值一程稍遥，昏暝方达一戍。
现代文：正赶上一段路程比较远，黄昏的时刻才到达一个城堡。
English: We are approaching a stretch of road that is relatively far away, and it is not until dusk that we reach a castle.

古文：有传舍，居者多不安，或怖惧而卒。
现代文：城中有驿站，驿站的客人多数不安，有的由于恐惧而死。
English: There is a post station in the city, and most of the guests of the post station are uneasy, and some die of fear.

古文：驿将见悰骨气非凡，内思之，此或贵人。若宿而无恙，必将相也。
现代文：驿将见杜悰骨气不一般，心里想，这也许是个贵人，如果在这过夜而没有什么灾难，必将做宰相。
English: Seeing that Du Xuan's backbone was not ordinary, he thought to himself that this might be a noble person, and if he spent the night here without any disaster, he would surely become the prime minister.

古文：遂请悰舍于内，供待极厚。
现代文：于是就请杜悰进去住下，对他的待遇很丰厚。
English: So he invited Cuckoo to move in and live with him, and treated him very generously.

古文：到夜分，闻东序隙舍，洶洶如千万人声。
现代文：到了夜半时分，听到东厢的空屋里，沸沸扬扬的好象有千万人的声音。
English: At midnight, the empty room in the east wing was filled with the sound of what sounded like thousands of people.

古文：悰取纸，大署己之名，系于瓦石，掷之喧聒之处，其声即绝。
现代文：杜悰拿出纸来，用大字写出自己的名字，系在瓦石上，扔到喧噪的地方，那声音立刻就停止了。
English: The cuckoo took out a piece of paper, wrote his name in large letters, tied it to a boulder and threw it into the noisy place. The noise immediately stopped.

古文：又闻西序复喧，即如前掷之，寻亦寂然，遂安寝。
现代文：又听到西厢屋里也喧杂，就和东厢一样把名字扔去。
English: He also heard a commotion in the west compartment, and like the east compartment, he threw the name away.

古文：迟明，驿吏问安。
现代文：不一会儿也没声儿了。于是就安眠。
English: Soon there was no more sound. So he went back to sleep.

古文：公具述之，乃知必贵。以束素饯之。
现代文：天将亮，驿吏来问安，杜悰详细述说了夜间发生的事，才知道他一定会富贵，拿出一捆丝绸为他送行。
English: When dawn broke, the bailiff came to say hello, and Cuckoo recounted in detail what had happened during the night. Only then did he know that he would be rich, and he took out a bundle of silk to see him off.

古文：及大拜。即访吏擢用。
现代文：等到杜悰当了大官，就打听当年那个驿吏，把驿吏提拔重用了。
English: When Du Juan became a high-ranking official, he inquired about the eunuch of that year and promoted the eunuch to a higher position.

古文：郑絪
现代文：郑絪
English: Zheng Wei

古文：唐阳武侯郑絪罢相，自岭南节度入为吏部尚书，居昭国里。
现代文：唐朝时，阳武侯郑絪被罢免了丞相职，后来，从岭南节度使入京做了吏部尚书，住在昭国里。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Yangwu marquis Zheng Qi was removed from the post of chancellor, and later, from the Lingnan Festival, he went to Beijing to become the secretary of the personnel department and lived in Zhaoguo.

古文：弟缊为太常少卿，皆在家。
现代文：他弟弟郑缊是太常少卿。
English: His younger brother, Zheng Qi, was a too-frequent minor lord.

古文：厨馔将备，其釜忽如物于灶中筑之，离灶尺余，连筑不已。
现代文：有一天，他和弟弟都在家，厨房的饭菜将齐备的时候，锅忽然像有什么东西在灶中举着，离灶一尺多高，连连举着不停止。
English: One day, when he and his brother were both at home, and the food in the kitchen was about to be prepared, the pot suddenly seemed to be held up by something in the stove, more than a foot high from the stove, and it kept being held up.

古文：其旁有铛十余所，并烹庖将热，皆两耳慢摇。
现代文：那旁边有十几个平底锅，都在煮着东西，将热的时候都两耳慢慢地摇动。
English: There are more than a dozen pans next to it, all of which are cooking something, and both ears slowly shake when they are hot.

古文：良久悉能行，乃止灶上。
现代文：过了好久，这些平底锅都能走路，就停止在灶上。
English: After a long time, these pans are able to walk, they stop on the stove.

古文：每三铛负一釜而行，其余列行引从，自厨中出。
现代文：每三个平底锅架起一口大锅行走，其余的列队作引导的随从，从厨房走出。
English: Every three pans set up a mouthful of cauldron walk, the rest lined up to be guided by the entourage, out of the kitchen.

古文：在地有足折者，有废不用者，亦跳踯而随之。
现代文：在地上有折断脚的，有废弃不用的，也一瘸一拐地跟上去。
English: On the ground there are broken feet, there are abandoned and unused, also limping along.

古文：出厨，东过水渠。诸铛并行，无所碍，而折足者不能过。
现代文：出了厨房，向东过水渠，平底锅们一块行走，没有什么阻碍，而断了脚的过不去。
English: Out of the kitchen, eastward across the canal, the pans walk together, there is no obstacle, but the broken foot cannot pass.

古文：其家大小惊异，聚而视之，不知所为。
现代文：他家老老少少都很惊异，聚集在一起观看，不知怎么办好。
English: Everyone in his family, young and old, was astonished and gathered around to watch, not knowing what to do.

古文：有小儿咒之曰：既能为怪，折足者何不能前？
现代文：有一个小男孩咒骂道：既然能作怪，断了脚的为什么不能往前走？
English: One little boy cursed: "If you can do tricks, why can't you walk with a broken leg?"

古文：诸铛乃弃釜于庭中，却过，每两铛负一折足者以过。
现代文：平底锅们就把大锅扔在院子里，退回来，每两个平底锅架一个断了脚的过水渠。
English: The pans throw the cauldron into the yard and back, and every two pans have a broken foot over the gutter.

古文：往入少卿院堂前，大小排列定。
现代文：走到少卿的院堂前，大小排列站定，就听空中轰轰作响，像房子崩塌。
English: When I walked to the front of the courtyard of the Shosho, I stood in a row and listened to the roar in the air, like a house collapsing.

古文：乃闻空中轰然，如屋崩，其铛釜悉为黄埃黑煤，尽日方定。
现代文：那些平底锅和大锅都变成了土块煤块。闹腾了一整天才安定下来。
English: Those pans and cauldrons were turned into lumps of earth and coal. It took a whole day for the commotion to settle down.

古文：其家莫测其故。
现代文：他们家不能推测这是因为什么。
English: The family can't speculate on what caused it.

古文：数日，少卿卒，相国相次而薨。
现代文：过了几天，太常少卿郑缊死了，相国郑絪也相继死去。
English: A few days later, Zheng Qi, the First Secretary of the Communist Party of China, died, and his brother-in-law, Zheng Qi, also died one after another.

古文：河北军将
现代文：河北军将
English: General of the Hebei Army

古文：湖城逆旅前，尝有河北军将过。
现代文：湖城旅店前，曾经有一个河北的军将打此通过。
English: In front of the Hucheng Hotel, there was once an army from Hebei passing through.

古文：行未数里，忽有旋风如斗器，起于马前。
现代文：走了不几里，忽然有斗器大小的旋风在马前刮起。
English: After walking for a few miles, a cyclone the size of a bucket suddenly blew up in front of the horse.

古文：军将以鞭击之，转大。
现代文：军将用鞭打它，它变得更大了。
English: The general whipped it with a whip and it grew bigger.

古文：遂旋马首，鬣起竖如植。
现代文：于是就转回马头。马的鬃毛像树木一样立了起来。
English: So he went back to the horse's head. The horse's mane stood up like a tree.

古文：军将惧，下马观之。觉鬣长数尺，中有细绠，如红线。
现代文：军将害怕了，下马来看，觉得马的鬃毛长了几尺，其中有细绳，像红线。
English: The general got scared, dismounted and looked at it. He felt that the horse's mane had grown several feet, and there was a thin rope in it, like a red line.

古文：马时人立嘶鸣。
现代文：马时常像人那样立起来嘶鸣。
English: Horses often stand up and neigh like humans.

古文：军将怒，乃取佩刀拂之。
现代文：军将生气了，就拿佩刀砍。
English: When the general became angry, he took out his sword and slashed him.

古文：因风散灭，马亦死。
现代文：于是旋风散灭，马也死了。
English: Then the whirlwind died away, and the horse also died.

古文：军将剖马腹视之，腹中已无肠。
现代文：军将剖开马肚子一看，肚子里已经没有肠子。
English: The general dissected the horse's stomach and saw that there was no intestine in the stomach.

古文：不知何怪。
现代文：不知道那是什么怪物。
English: I don't know what kind of monster it is.

古文：宫山在沂州之西鄙，孤拔耸峭，回出众峰。
现代文：宫山，在沂州之西的边陲上。它孤峰挺拔，高耸陡峭，回然高出众峰。
English: Miyayama, on the edge of the western part of Chenzhou. Its solitary peak is tall and steep, towering above all the other peaks.

古文：环三十里，皆无人居。
现代文：周围三十里，全都没人居住。
English: No one lives within a radius of thirty miles.

古文：贞元初，有二僧至山，荫木而居。精勤礼念，以昼继夜。
现代文：贞元初年，有两个和尚来到山中，在树荫下居住，精心勤苦地礼拜念经，夜以继日。
English: In the first year of Zhenyuan, two monks came to the mountains and lived in the shade of trees, diligently praying and chanting sutras day and night.

古文：四远村落，为构屋室。
现代文：四周村落的人，给他俩建造屋室。
English: The people of the surrounding villages built houses for them.

古文：不旬日，院宇立焉。
现代文：不到十天，院落屋宇就立起来了。
English: In less than ten days, the courtyard building was erected.

古文：二僧尤加悫励，誓不出房，二十余载。
现代文：两个和尚更加勤勉，坚决不出屋，二十多年。
English: The two monks were more diligent and resolutely did not go out of the house for more than twenty years.

古文：元和中，冬夜月明。二僧各在东西廊，朗声呗唱。
现代文：元和年间，冬天的夜晚月光正明，二僧人各在东西廊下高声诵经。
English: During the Yuan and He years, on a winter night when the moon was at its brightest, two monks were chanting loudly under the east and west corridors.

古文：空中虚静，时闻山下有男子恸哭之声。
现代文：空中寂静，时不时听到山下有男子恸哭的声音。
English: There was silence in the air. From time to time, the sound of a man crying could be heard down the mountain.

古文：稍近，须臾则及院门。
现代文：那声音渐渐靠近，不多时便来到院门。
English: The sound came closer and closer, and before long it reached the courtyard door.

古文：二僧不动，哭声亦止。
现代文：二僧人不动，哭声也停止了。
English: The two monks did not move, and the crying stopped.

古文：逾垣遂入。
现代文：那人就跳墙进来。
English: The man jumped over the wall to get in.

古文：东廊僧遥见其身绝大，跃入西廊，而呗唱之声寻辍。
现代文：东廊下的僧人见来者身形非常高大。它跳到西廊下，诵经之声不一会儿就停止了。
English: The monk under the East Corridor saw the visitor, who was very tall. He jumped under the West Corridor, and the chanting stopped in an instant.

古文：如闻相击扑争力之状，久又闻咀嚼啖噬，啜吒甚励。
现代文：好象听到互相打斗拼搏的声音。过了一会儿又听到咀嚼吞吃，吸吮的声音很响。
English: It sounded like they were fighting with each other. After a while, they could be heard chewing, swallowing, and sucking loudly.

古文：东廊僧惶骇突走。
现代文：东廊下的僧人惊恐，急忙冲出逃跑。
English: The monks under the east corridor panicked and rushed out to escape.

古文：久不出山，都忘途路。或仆或蹶，气力殆尽。
现代文：很久不出山，都忘了路途，有时候前仆，有时候后倒，气力几乎净尽。
English: You haven't been to the mountains for a long time, you've forgotten the way, sometimes you're ahead, sometimes you're behind, you've almost run out of energy.

古文：回望，见其人踉跄将至，则又跳迸。
现代文：回头一望，见那人踉踉跄跄将要来到，就又奔逃。
English: And when he looked behind him, he saw the man coming toward him, and he fled.

古文：忽逢一水，兼衣径渡毕，而追者适至。
现代文：忽然遇上一条河，穿着衣服径直渡过去，而追他的人恰好也到了。
English: Suddenly, he came across a river and swam straight across in his clothes, and his pursuers just happened to be there as well.

古文：遥诟曰：不阻水，当并食之。
现代文：那人远远地骂道：要不是被水阻挡，我应该把你一块吃了。
English: The man scolded from a distance: "If I hadn't been blocked by the water, I would have eaten you whole."

古文：东廊僧且惧且行，罔知所诣。
现代文：东廊僧人边走边感到恐惧，不知要到哪里去。
English: The monks in the East Corridor felt fear as they walked, not knowing where to go.

古文：俄而大雪，咫尺昏迷。
现代文：不一会儿下大雪，咫尺之间也昏迷不清。
English: Soon it was snowing heavily, and I was dizzy.

古文：忽得人家牛坊，遂隐身于其中。
现代文：忽然看到一个人家的牛棚，就到里边藏身。
English: Suddenly he saw a person's cow shed and went inside to hide.

古文：夜久，雪势稍晴。
现代文：天黑很长时间，雪势渐渐晴了。
English: It had been dark for a long time, and the snow was gradually clearing.

古文：忽见一黑衣人，自外执刀枪，徐至栏下。
现代文：忽然看见一个黑衣人，拿着刀枪从外面慢慢来到栏下。
English: Suddenly I saw a man in black, holding a knife and a gun, coming slowly from outside under the railing.

古文：东廊僧省息屏气，向明潜窥。
现代文：东廊僧屏住呼吸，向着光亮偷看。
English: The East Corridor Monk held his breath and peeked into the light.

古文：黑衣蜘蹰徙倚，如有所伺。
现代文：黑衣人徘徊往复，好象等候什么。
English: The man in black paces back and forth, as if waiting for something.

古文：有顷，忽院墙中般过两廊衣物之类。黑衣取之，束缚负担。
现代文：过了一会儿，忽然院墙中扔出来两包衣物之类的东西，黑衣人拿起来，捆绑了一下背在肩上。
English: After a while, something like two packages of clothes were suddenly thrown out of the courtyard wall. The man in black picked them up and tied them behind his back.

古文：续有一女子，攀墙而出，黑衣挈之而去。
现代文：接着有一个女子翻墙而出。黑衣人领着她离去。
English: A woman then climbs over the wall and is led away by a man in black.

古文：僧惧涉踪迹，则又逃窜，恍惚莫知所之。
现代文：僧人怕受嫌疑，就又逃窜。恍恍惚惚不知要到什么地方去。
English: Fearing suspicion, the monk fled again, not knowing where he was going.

古文：不十数里，忽坠废井。
现代文：走了不到几十里，忽然掉进一口废井里。
English: After walking less than a few dozen miles, he suddenly fell into a waste well.

古文：井中有死者，身首已离，血体犹暖，盖适遭杀者也。
现代文：井里有一个死人，身和头已经分开，血淋淋的尸体还有温热，大概是刚才被杀的。
English: There is a dead man in the well, his body and head have been separated, the bloody body is still warm, probably he was just killed.

古文：僧惊悸，不知所为。
现代文：僧人惊悸，不知如何是好。
English: The monk was shocked and didn't know what to do.

古文：俄而天明，视之，则昨夜攀墙女子也。
现代文：过一会天亮了，一看，是昨夜翻墙的那个女子。
English: After a while, it dawned on me that it was the woman who climbed over the wall last night.

古文：久之，即有捕逐者数辈偕至。下窥曰：盗在此矣。
现代文：过了一些时候，就有几个追捕的人一块来到，往下一看说：盗贼在这儿呢！
English: After some time, several pursuers arrived together, looked down, and said, "Here is the thief!"

古文：遂以索缒人，就井絷缚，加以殴击，与死为邻。
现代文：于是用绳子往上吊他，在井里把他捆绑起来，加上拳打脚踢，他和死神为邻了。
English: So they hanged him with a rope, tied him up in a well, beat and kicked him, and he became a neighbour of death.

古文：及引上，则以昨夜之事本末陈述。
现代文：等到把他拉上来，他就把昨夜的事从头到尾陈述了一遍。
English: By the time he was pulled up, he had recounted last night's events from start to finish.

古文：而村人有曾至山中，识为东廊僧者。然且与死女子俱得，未能自解，乃送之于邑。
现代文：村里人有曾经到过山中，认识他是东廊僧的，然而把他和死女子一块找到，没办法自己说清楚，就把他送到县里。
English: A villager had been to the mountains and knew him to be a Donglang monk. However, when he found him together with the dead woman, he couldn't explain it to himself, so he sent him to the county.

古文：又细列其由，谓西廊僧已为异物啖噬矣。
现代文：他又细说了事由，说西廊僧已被鬼怪吃了。
English: He also elaborated on the cause of the incident, saying that the monk had been eaten by a ghost.

古文：邑遣吏至山中寻验，西廊僧端居无恙。
现代文：县官派人到山中寻找查验，西廊僧正坐在那里安全无恙。
English: The county officials sent someone to the mountains to investigate, but the West Corridor monks are sitting there safe and sound.

古文：曰：初无物。但将二更，方对持念，东廊僧忽然独去。
现代文：西廊僧说：当初没什么东西，只是到了二更天，二僧才东西相对念经，东廊僧忽然独自离去。
English: The western corridor monk said: At first, there was nothing, but on the second day, the two monks began to chant, and the eastern corridor monk suddenly left alone.

古文：久与誓约，不出院门。
现代文：他很早就和我有誓约，不出院门的。
English: He made a promise to me a long time ago that he wouldn't leave the hospital.

古文：惊异之际，追呼已不及矣。
现代文：惊异的时候，寻喊他就来不及了。
English: When startled, it's too late to call out.

古文：山下之事，我则不知。
现代文：山下的事，我就不知道了。
English: I don't know what happened under the mountain.

古文：邑吏遂以东廊僧诳妄，执为杀人之盗。
现代文：县官于是认为东廊僧撒谎，捉拿为杀人的盗贼。
English: The prefectural official then thought that the Donglang monk was lying and arrested him as a murderous thief.

古文：榜掠薰灼，楚痛备施。
现代文：又是拷打，又是用火烤用烟呛，备受痛苦。
English: They were tortured, roasted with fire and smoked, and suffered a lot of pain.

古文：僧冤痛诬，甘置于死。
现代文：僧人冤枉，痛恨给他捏造的罪名，甘心到死也不肯认罪。
English: The monk had been wronged, hated the accusation that had been fabricated against him, and was willing to die rather than admit his guilt.

古文：赃状无据，法吏终无以成其狱也。
现代文：没人证物证，法吏始终没办法判罪。
English: Without physical evidence, law enforcement officials have been unable to convict him.

古文：逾月，而杀女窃资之盗，他处发败，具得情实。僧乃冤免。
现代文：过了一个月，杀女人偷东西的那个盗贼，在别的地方发案败露，详细地得到了真实情况，僧人才免除了冤枉。
English: A month later, the thief who had killed the woman and stolen the goods was revealed to have committed the crime somewhere else, and the true circumstances were obtained in detail, and the monk was exonerated.

