古文：欢都冶诃骨赧讹古乃蒲查欢都，完颜部人。祖石鲁，与昭祖同时同部同名，交相得，誓曰： 生则同川居，死则同谷葬。 
现代文：欢都，是完颜部人。他的祖父石鲁，与昭祖同时代、同部落，而且同名，彼此情投意合，发誓说： 活着一处居住，死了一处埋葬。 
English: His grandfather, Shilu, who lived at the same time as Shozu, belonged to the same tribe, and had the same name, and they had a mutual affinity, swore: "Live in one place, die and be buried in one place."

古文：土人呼昭祖为勇石鲁，呼石鲁为贤石鲁。
现代文：当地人把昭祖称为勇石鲁，把石鲁称为贤石鲁。
English: Local people call Zhaozhu Yongshilu and Shilu Xianshilu.

古文：初，乌萨紥部有美女名罢敌悔，青岭东混同江蜀束水人掠而去，生二女，长曰达回，幼曰滓赛。
现代文：起初，乌萨扎部有个叫罢敌悔的美女，被青岭东边的混同江蜀束水人抢去，生下两个女儿，长女叫达回，幼女叫滓赛。
English: At first, there was a beautiful woman in the Usazabu who called for repentance and was snatched away by a mixed-up Jiangshu water bearer on the east side of Qingling. She gave birth to two daughters, the eldest daughter was called Dahui, and the little girl was called Yusei.

古文：昭祖与石鲁谋取之，遂偕至岭右，炷火于箭端而射。
现代文：昭祖和石鲁谋算要得到她们，于是一起来到岭右，把箭前端点燃射出去。
English: Zhao Zu and Shi Lu plotted to get them, so they went to the right side of the ridge and fired the front end of the arrow.

古文：蜀束水人怪之，皆走险阻，久之，无所复见，却还所居。
现代文：蜀束水人非常惊骇，都逃向山中险要之地，过了很长时间，没再看见火箭，才退回住地。
English: The Shuquanshui people were very shocked, and fled to the dangerous place in the mountains. After a long time, they did not see the rocket again before they returned to their homes.

古文：昭祖及石鲁以众至，攻取其赀产，虏二女子以归。
现代文：昭祖和石鲁带人来，攻取他们的资产，把那两个女子掳掠回去。
English: Zhaozhu and Shilu brought people, seized their assets, and took the two women back.

古文：昭祖纳其一，贤石鲁纳其一，皆以为妾。
现代文：昭祖娶一个，贤石鲁娶一个，都纳为妾。
English: Zhaozhu married one, Xian Shilu married another, and they all became concubines.

古文：是时，诸部不肯用条教，昭祖耀武于青岭、白山，入于苏滨、耶懒之地，贤石鲁佐之也。
现代文：那时，各部落都不肯使用条律实行统治，昭祖在青岭、白山之间以武功炫示威力，进入苏滨、耶懒的地方，贤石鲁在旁辅佐他。
English: At that time, all tribes refused to use the rule of law to rule. Zhaozhu used martial arts to demonstrate his power between Qingling and Baishan, and entered the places of Subin and Yala. Xian Shilu assisted him.

古文：其后别去。
现代文：后来，贤石鲁离开昭祖。
English: Later, Xian Shilu left Zhao Zu.

古文：至景祖时，石鲁之子劾孙举部来归，居于安出虎水源胡凯山南。
现代文：到了景祖在位的时候，石鲁的儿子劾孙，带领整个部落前来归附，居住在安出虎水的源头胡凯山南边。
English: When Jingzu was on the throne, Shilu's son impeached Sun and led the entire tribe to come and join him, living on the south side of Hukai Mountain, the source of Anzhi Tiger Water.

古文：胡凯山者，所谓和陵之地是也。
现代文：胡凯山，就是叫作和陵的地方。
English: Hukaishan, that is, the place called "Heungling."

古文：欢都，劾孙子。
现代文：欢都，是劾孙的儿子。
English: Huan Du is the son of the grandson of the emperor.

古文：世祖初，袭节度使。
现代文：世祖初年，欢都承袭了节度使的职位。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, Huandu inherited the post of the festival envoy.

古文：而跋黑以属尊，蓄异谋，不可制。
现代文：跋黑因为是皇亲而身份尊贵，他私下存有阴谋，却不能管制。
English: Because he is a relative of the emperor and has a high status, he secretly has a plot, but he cannot control it.

古文：诸部不肯受约束，相继为变。
现代文：各部落都不肯受约束，相继发动事变。
English: Each tribe refused to be restrained and successively launched an uprising.

古文：欢都入与谋议，出临战阵，未尝去左右。
现代文：欢都入朝参与计议，出兵到阵前作战，没有离开过世祖左右。
English: Huandu entered the court to participate in the deliberation, sent troops to the front to fight, and did not leave the ancestors.

古文：斡勒部人杯乃，自景祖时与其兄弟俱居安出虎水之北，及乌春作难，杯乃将与乌春合，间诱斡鲁绀出水居人与之相结，欲先除去欢都。
现代文：斡勒部人杯乃，从景祖时期就与他的兄弟都住在安出虎水以北，到乌春作乱的时候，杯乃要与乌春聚会，离间引诱住在斡鲁绀出水人和他相勾结，想先除去欢都。
English: Since the time of King Jingzhu, Wu Ru and his brothers had been living north of Anzhi and Heshui. When Wu Chun started to make trouble, Wu Ru wanted to meet with Wu Chun and entice Wu Ru and his brothers to collude with him. He wanted to get rid of Huadu first.

古文：会其家被火，阴约隶人不歌束，诡称放火乃欢都、胡土二人，使注都来谓世祖曰： 不歌束来告曰 前日之火，欢都等纵之 。
现代文：恰巧杯乃家中发生火灾，他暗中约定隶人不歌束，谎称放火的是欢都、胡土两个人，又派注都来对世祖说： 不歌束来报告说 前几天的大火，是欢都等人放的 。
English: It just so happened that a fire broke out in his home. He secretly agreed with his subordinates not to sing a song, and falsely claimed that it was Huan Du and Hutu who set the fire. He also sent Zhu Du to say to Shizuo, "Don't sing a song and report that the fire the other day was set by Huan Du and others."

古文：若不弃旧好，其执纵火之人以来。 
现代文：如果您不嫌弃以前和我的友情，就请把放火的人抓来。 
English: If you don't hate your former friendship with me, please catch the arsonist.

古文：世祖疑之。
现代文：世祖十分怀疑。
English: The patriarch was very skeptical.

古文：石卢斡勒勃堇曰： 杯乃兄弟也，岂以一二人之故，而与兄弟构怨乎。
现代文：石卢斡勒勃堇说： 杯乃是兄弟，怎么能因为一两个人，而与兄弟结怨呢？
English: "The cup is a brother," said Burgundy. "How can you quarrel with a brother over one or two people?"

古文：彼自取之，又将尤谁，不如与之便。 
现代文：他们自己出事，又想怨谁，不如随他们的便。 
English: If they have an accident themselves and want to find someone to blame, they'd better do as they please.

古文：欢都被甲执戟而起曰： 彼为乱之人也，若取太师兄弟，则亦与之乎。
现代文：欢都身披盔甲，手拿长戟，起身说道 ：他们是作乱的人，如果想要太师山的兄弟，也随他们吗？
English: Hado, clad in armor and holding a long scepter, stood up and said, "They are troublemakers. If you want the brothers of Mt. Taiji, will you follow them?"

古文：今取我辈，我辈决不可往，若必用战，当尽力致死。 
现代文：现在要抓我们这些人，我们坚决不能去，如果一定要打仗，应当竭力抗争到死。 
English: Now they want to arrest us. We absolutely cannot go. If we must fight, we should fight to the death.

古文：穆宗曰： 壮哉欢都，以我所见，正如此尔。 
现代文：穆宗说： 壮烈呀欢都！我的见解正是这样。 
English: Mu Zong said, "Glorious is Huan Du! This is exactly my opinion.

古文：赠欢都以马，曰： 战则乘此。 
现代文：他把马赠给欢都，说： 打仗就乘坐它吧。 
English: He gave the horse to Hamado and said, "You can ride it into battle."

古文：众皆称善。
现代文：众人都称赞说好。
English: Everyone praised it and said it was good.

古文：世祖乃往见杯乃，隔鳖刺水而与之言曰： 不歌束既告纵火由欢都等，谨当如约。
现代文：世祖于是去见杯乃，隔着鳖剌水对他说道 ：不歌束已经告发纵火的欢都等人，我当然会按约定办事。
English: The patriarch then went to see the cupbearer and said to him from across the stream of water, "If you don't tell Huan Du and the others that I've reported the arson, of course I'll do what I promised.

古文：当先遣不歌束来。 
现代文：你应该先派不歌束过来。 
English: You're supposed to send the no-singing bunch over first.

古文：不歌束至，世祖于马前杀之，使杯乃见之。
现代文：不歌束过来，世祖在马前杀了他，让杯乃看。
English: If he does not come, the ancestor will kill him in front of the horse, so that the cup can be seen.

古文：既而闻之，放火者杯乃家人阿出胡山也，杯乃欲开此衅，故以诬欢都云。
现代文：随后就听说，放火的是杯乃的家人阿出胡山，杯乃想要挑衅，因此这样诬告欢都。
English: Later, it was heard that the arsonist was Kapano's family member, Ahde Hushan. Kapano wanted to provoke, so he falsely accused Huandu.

古文：腊醅、麻产与世祖遇于野鹊水。
现代文：腊醅、麻产与世祖在野鹊水遭遇。
English: Lashun, Asao and Shiso encounter each other in the wild.

古文：日已曛，惟从五六十骑，欢都入敌阵鏖击之，左右出入者数四，世祖中创乃止。
现代文：天色已经昏暗，世祖只带了五、六十个骑兵，欢都冲入敌阵激战，左右进出了四次，世祖受伤，这才停战。
English: It was already dark, and Shizu had only brought fifty or sixty cavalrymen with him. They all rushed into the fierce battle, and went in and out four times. Shizu was injured, and then the war ended.

古文：乌春、窝谋罕据活刺浑水，世祖既许之降，遂还军。
现代文：乌春、窝谋罕占据在活剌浑水，世祖答应投降后，领军回去。
English: Wu Chun and Wo Mu Han occupied the muddy water in the living pond. After the ancestor agreed to surrender, he led the army back.

古文：于是骚腊勃堇、富者挞懒欢胜负不助军，而骚腊、挞懒先曾与腊醅、麻产合，世祖欲因军还而遂灭之，驰马前进。
现代文：当时，骚腊勃堇、富者挞懒坐观胜负却不救助，而骚腊、挞懒以前曾经与腊醅、麻产协同合作，世祖想带军回去后就灭掉他们，在马上疾驰前进。
English: At that time, Sura Burgundy and Rich Man Lazy sat and watched the victory but did not help, while Sura and Lazy had previously cooperated with Lashan and Asan. When Shizuo wanted to take the army back, he eliminated them and galloped forward.

古文：挞懒者，贞惠皇后之弟也。
现代文：挞懒是贞惠皇后的弟弟。
English: Lazy is the younger brother of Empress Zhenhui.

古文：欢都下马执辔而谏曰： 独不念爱弟蒲阳温与弟妇乎。 
现代文：欢都下马，手牵缰绳进谏道 ：难道不想想您的爱弟蒲阳温和弟媳吗？ 
English: Huandu dismounted, hand-in-hand with the reins into the bridle path: Don't you want to think of your beloved brother Puyang and your sister-in-law?

古文：世祖感其言，遂止。
现代文：世祖被他的话所感动，于是作罢。
English: The patriarch was moved by his words, so he stopped.

古文：蒲阳温者，汉语云幼弟也。
现代文：蒲阳温，是汉语里所讲的幼弟。
English: Puyangwen is the Chinese word for little brother.

古文：世祖母弟中穆宗最少，故云然。
现代文：世祖同母的兄弟中，穆宗最小，所以这样说。
English: Among the brothers of the same mother, Mu Zong is the smallest, so he said this.

古文：穆宗德欢都言，后以挞懒女曷罗哂妻其子谷神。
现代文：穆宗感念欢都说这番话的恩德，后来把挞懒的女儿曷罗哂许配给欢都的儿子谷神为妻。
English: Mu Zong was so moved by Ende's words that he later betrothed Endo's lazy daughter, Doraemon, to Endo's son, Gudun.

古文：太祖追麻产，欢都射中其首，遂获之。
现代文：太祖追杀麻产，欢都射中麻产的头颅，抓获了他。
English: The great-grandfather chased and killed Asanobu, shot him in the head, and captured him.

古文：辽人命穆宗、太祖、辞不失、欢都俱为详稳。
现代文：辽国人把穆宗、太祖、辞不失、欢都等都任命为详稳。
English: The people of Liao named Mu Zong, Taizu, Ji Nuzhu, Huandu and so on as detailed and stable.

古文：斡善、斡脱以姑里甸兵来归，使斜钵勃堇抚定之。
现代文：斡善、斡脱带姑里甸的军队前来归顺，皇上派斜钵勃堇去安抚。
English: By means of mediation and good offices, the army of Gurdian came to surrender, and the emperor sent Xianlong Burgundy to appease them.

古文：蒲察部故石、拔石等，诱其众入城，陷三百余人。
现代文：蒲察部的故石、拔石等人，把他的众多军兵引诱进城，困陷了三百多人。
English: Putsabe's followers, including Goseishi and Bukeishi, lured many of his soldiers into the city, trapping more than three hundred people.

古文：欢都为都统，往治斜钵失军之状，尽解斜钵所将军、大破乌春、窝谋罕于斜堆，擒故石、拔石。
现代文：欢都出任都统，去惩治斜钵失掉军队的罪状，全部解除斜钵所统领的部队，在斜堆大破乌春、窝谋罕，擒获故石、拔石。
English: Huan Du took office as Du Du, to punish Xizhao for the crime of losing the army, to disband all the troops under the command of Xizhao, to destroy Wuchun and Wo Mu Han in Xizhe, and to seize the ancient stones and stones.

古文：初，耶悔水纳喝部撒八之弟曰阿注阿，与人争部族官，不得直，来归穆宗。
现代文：早先，耶悔水纳喝部的撒八之弟叫阿注阿，和别人争做部族官，没争到，前来归附穆宗。
English: Earlier, Yahshua's half-brother from the tribe of Naphtali, whose name was Acha, fought with others to become a tribal official. When he did not win, he came to join Moses.

古文：阿注阿之甥曰三滨、曰撒达。
现代文：阿注阿的外甥一个叫三滨，一个叫撒达。
English: A Zha's nephews are named Sambin and Sada.

古文：辞不失破乌春窝谋罕城，获三滨、撒达，并获其母，以为次室，抚其二子。
现代文：辞不失攻克乌春窝谋罕城，抓住三滨、撒达，并抓来他们的母亲当作了偏房，又抚养两个儿子。
English: He did not fail to attack the city of Kuchunwo, Mukhan, capture Sambin, Sada, and capture their mother as a partial house, and raise two sons.

古文：撒达告阿注阿必为变，不信而杀之。
现代文：撒达控告阿注阿必定会叛变，穆宗不相信，反而杀撒达。
English: Sada accused Ajao that he would definitely turn against him, but Mu Zong did not believe him and killed Sadao instead.

古文：撒达临刑叹曰： 后必知之。 
现代文：撒达临刑前叹道 ：以后一定会明白。 
English: Sada sighed before his execution: I'll understand in the future.

古文：至是，阿注阿果为变。
现代文：到后来，阿注阿果真叛变。
English: Later, Achu Agojin mutinied.

古文：因穆宗晨出猎，纠率七八人操兵入宅，夺据寝门，劫贞惠皇后及家人等。
现代文：他趁穆宗早晨出去打猎，纠集七八个人手操兵器闯入穆宗的屋宅，抢占卧室的门口，劫持了贞惠皇后及家人。
English: He took advantage of Mu Zong's morning to go hunting. He gathered seven or eight people to use weapons to break into Mu Zong's house, seize the door to his bedroom, and kidnap Empress Zhengyi and her family.

古文：欢都入见阿注阿曰： 汝辈所谋之事奈何。
现代文：欢都进来看见阿注阿，说： 你们谋划的事情能怎么样呢？
English: Huan Du came in to see Ah Zhu and said, "What will happen to what you have planned?"

古文：闺门眷属岂足劫质，徒使之惊恐耳。
现代文：闺门之中的亲眷家属哪里够得上劫作人质，白白地让他们惊恐而已。
English: The relatives of the girl's family members are nowhere enough to take hostages, and they are only frightened in vain.

古文：汝固识我，盍以我为质也。 
现代文：你本来就认识我，何不拿我当人质？ 
English: You already know me. Why don't you take me hostage?

古文：再三言之，阿注阿从之，贞惠皇后乃得解，而质欢都。
现代文：欢都再三劝说，阿注阿答应下来，贞惠皇后才得以解脱，而欢都做了人质。
English: Huan Du repeatedly persuaded A Zhu A to agree, and only then was Empress Zhengyi able to free herself, while Huan Du became a hostage.

古文：而撒改、辞不失使人告急于猎所。
现代文：撒改、辞不失派人急忙到打猎的地方禀告穆宗。
English: Sakai, not to be outdone, sent someone in haste to the hunting ground to denounce Mu Zong.

古文：穆宗亦心动，罢猎。
现代文：穆宗也因心中有所动，停下打猎回来。
English: Muzong was also moved by something in his heart and stopped hunting and came back.

古文：中途逢告者，日午至，阿注阿谓穆宗曰： 可使系案女直知名官僚相结，送我兄弟亲属由咸州路入辽国，库金厩马与我勿惜，欢都亦当送我至辽境，然后还。 
现代文：中途遇上报信的人，中午到家，阿注阿对穆宗说 ：可以把系案女真的知名官僚捆绑并连结在一起，送我兄弟亲属从咸州路进入辽国，不要吝惜把库中的钱财马匹给我，欢都也应当把我送到辽国边境以后再回来。 
English: In the middle of the way, he met the person who reported the letter, and when he arrived home at noon, A Zhua said to Mu Zong: You can tie up and tie together the case of a really well-known bureaucrat, and send my brothers and relatives from Xianzhou Road into Liaoning Province. Don't begrudge giving me the money and horses in the treasury. You should also send me to the border of Liaoning Province and then come back.

古文：而耍穆宗盟，穆宗皆从之。
现代文：他又要求穆宗立誓，穆宗都顺从了。
English: He also asked Muzong to take an oath, and Muzong complied.

古文：遂执欢都及阿鲁太弯、阿鲁不太弯等七人，以衣裾相结，与阿注阿俱行，至辽境，乃释欢都。
现代文：于是，由欢都与阿鲁太弯、阿鲁不太弯等七个人，把衣带连结绑起来，和阿注阿一同走，到了辽国边境，才释放欢都。
English: As a result, seven people, including Handu, Aru Taibent, Aru Baibent and others, tied their belts together and walked with Achua until they reached the border of Liaoning Province, where they were able to free Handu.

古文：欢都至济州，实黄龙府，使人驰驿要遮阿注阿党属，惟纵其亲人使去。
现代文：欢都到了济州，查实黄龙府，派人驰奔驿馆要拦截阿注阿的朋党家属，只把他的亲眷放走。
English: Huandu arrived in Jeju, verified Huanglongfu, and sent people to the gallop hall to intercept the family members of the party friends of Achu, and only let his relatives go.

古文：遂杀三滨并其母，具报于辽，乞还阿注阿，辽人流之曷堇城。
现代文：之后杀死三滨和他母亲，通报给辽国，请求辽国归还阿注阿，辽人把他流放到曷董城。
English: After that, he killed Mihama and his mother, reported it to Liao Province, and requested Liao Province to return Achua. The Liao people exiled him to Shandong City.

古文：其后，阿注阿怀思乡土，亡归，附于系案女直，因乱其官僚之室，捕之，不伏，乃见杀。
现代文：后来，阿注阿怀念故土，逃回来，归附于系案女真，因为扰乱官僚的屋室，逮捕他，他不顺服，就被杀死了。
English: Later, Ah Ch'u Ah remembered his homeland, fled back, and attached himself to the departmental case woman Zhen. Because he disturbed the bureaucrat's room and arrested him, he disobeyed and was killed.

古文：穆宗袭位之初，诸父之子习烈、斜钵及诸兄有异言，曰： 君相之位，皆渠辈为之，奈何？ 
现代文：穆宗承袭帝位的开初，各位叔父的儿子习烈、斜钵以及各位兄长有别样的议论，说： 君王宰相的位置，都是大人物坐的，有什么法子呢？ 
English: At the beginning of Mu Zong's succession to the imperial throne, the sons of your uncles, Xi Rong, Xie Rong, and your brothers and sisters had a different argument, saying: The position of the king's prime minister is occupied by great men, what is the way?

古文：欢都曰： 汝辈若纷争，则吾必不默默但已。 
现代文：欢都说： 你们如果纷纷起来争夺，那我一定不会沉默不管。 
English: Huan Du said, "If all of you rise up to fight, then I will not remain silent."

古文：众闻之遂帖然，自是不复有异言者。
现代文：众人听到这话就都安定下来，从此不再有说反对话的人。
English: When all the people heard this, they quieted down, and there was no more arguing.

古文：欢都事四君，出入四十年，征伐之际遇敌则先战，广廷大议多用其谋。
现代文：欢都服侍了四位君主，出生入死四十年，征战的时候遇上敌人就率先出击，朝廷上商谈大事的时候大多采用他的计谋。
English: Huandu served four monarchs, from birth to death, for forty years. When he met the enemy during the war, he was the first to attack. When major issues were discussed at the court, his strategies were mostly used.

古文：世祖尝曰： 吾有欢都，则何事不成。 
现代文：世祖曾经说： 我有欢都，什么事做不成呢？ 
English: The founder of the world once said: I have happiness, what can't I accomplish?

古文：肃宗时，委任冠于近僚。
现代文：肃宗在位的时候，委托给他的职位在亲信官僚之首。
English: During the reign of Su Zong, the position entrusted to him was at the head of the crony bureaucracy.

古文：穆宗嗣位，凡图辽事皆专委之。
现代文：穆宗即位后，凡是有关谋取辽国的事情都委派给他。
English: After the enthronement of Mu Zong, all matters related to the pursuit of Liao Guo were assigned to him.

古文：康宗以为父叔旧人，尤加敬礼，多所补益。
现代文：康宗认为他是父亲叔伯信用过的人，更是对他尊敬、以礼相待，更多地施以恩惠。
English: Kangzong thought that he was a person who had been trusted by his father's uncle. Moreover, he respected him, treated him with courtesy, and gave him more favors.

古文：康宗十一年癸巳二月，得疾，避疾于米里每水，薨，年六十三。
现代文：康宗十一年二月，欢都得病，回避到米里每水，在那里逝世，终年六十三岁。
English: In February of the eleventh year of Kangzong's reign, Huan Du fell ill and withdrew to Miripeshi, where he died at the age of sixty-three.

古文：丧归，康宗亲迓于路，送至其家，亲视葬事。
现代文：送葬的队伍回来，康宗亲自在路上迎接，送到家里，又亲自探视丧事。
English: When the funeral procession returned, Kangzong personally greeted them on the road, took them home, and personally visited the funeral.

古文：冶诃子阿鲁补、骨赧、讹古乃、散荅。
现代文：天会十五年，皇上追封欢都为仪同三司、代国公。明昌五年，章宗追封他为开府仪同三司，谥号为 忠敏 。
English: In the 15th year of the Heian era, Emperor Go-Shirakawa posthumously awarded him the title of Hwan-du as the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency and the acting governor of the country. In the 5th year of the Meiji era, Emperor Gojong posthumously awarded him the title of the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency and the posthumous title of Chung-min.

古文：散荅子蒲查。
现代文：欢都的儿子叫谷神、谋演。
English: The son of Happy Town is called Valley God.

古文：阿鲁补，冶诃之子。
现代文：阿鲁补，是神隐水完颜部勃堇冶诃的儿子。
English: Aluthi is the son of Burgundy, the god of hidden water.

古文：为人魁伟多智略，勇于战。
现代文：阿鲁补相貌魁伟，富有智慧和谋略，勇敢善战。
English: Arochi was a great-looking man, full of wisdom and strategy, brave and good at fighting.

古文：未冠从军，下咸州、东京。
现代文：二十岁以前尚未成年他就从了军，随部队下咸州、东京。
English: He joined the army before he was twenty years old, and went to Aras and Tokyo with the army.

古文：辽人来取海州，从勃堇麻吉往援，道遇重敌，力战，斩首千级。
现代文：辽国人来进攻夺取海州，阿鲁补跟随勃堇麻吉前往救援，中途遇到重敌，奋力作战，杀敌斩下首级一千余。
English: The people of Liao came to attack and seize Haizhou, and Arochi followed Burgundy Magee to the rescue. Midway, he encountered a serious enemy, fought hard, and killed more than a thousand enemy heads.

古文：从斡鲁古攻豪、懿州，以十余骑破敌七百，进袭辽主。
现代文：他随从斡鲁古攻打豪州和懿州，带领十多个骑兵打败七百敌人，进而袭击辽主。
English: He followed Zhu Rugu to attack Gozhou and Zhangzhou, and led more than ten cavalry to defeat seven hundred enemies, and then attacked Liaozuo.

古文：阿鲁补徇北地，招降营帐二十四，民户数千。
现代文：阿鲁补率军队巡行北部各地，使二十四座营帐的数千民户降服。
English: Aru Qi led the army to patrol all over the north, subduing thousands of households in twenty-four camps.

古文：时已下西京，阇母攻应州未下，退营于州北十余里，夜遣阿鲁补率兵四百伺敌，城中果出兵三千平袭，阿鲁补道与之遇，斩首百余，获马六十。
现代文：随后他又率领军队下西京，世祖第十一个儿子母攻打应州没打下来，退兵在应州北十余里处扎下营盘，夜间派遣阿鲁补率领四百名士兵看营候敌，应州城果然派了三千兵马前来偷袭，阿鲁补与他们途中相遇，杀敌一百多，获得马匹六十。
English: Subsequently, he led the army to West Beijing. The 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th son of the 11th

古文：后辽兵三万出马邑之境，以千兵击之，斩其将于阵。
现代文：后来辽兵三万大军陈列在马邑边境，阿鲁补用一千人去袭击他们，结果在阵前斩了敌军的大将。
English: Later, Liao's army of thirty thousand soldiers was displayed at the border of Mayi, and Aru Qi attacked them with a thousand people, and as a result, he beheaded the general of the enemy army before the battle.

古文：天会初，宋王宗望讨张觉于平州，闻应州有兵万余来援，遣阿鲁补与阿里带迎击之，斩馘数千而还。
现代文：天会初年，宋王宗望讨伐张觉到平州，听说应州派兵一万多人前来救援张觉，便派遣阿鲁补与阿里带去迎战，阿鲁补等斩下数千名敌人首级凯旋而归。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Reunion, Song Wang Zong wanted to fight Zhang Jue and came to Pingzhou. When he heard that Yingzhou had sent more than 10,000 soldiers to rescue Zhang Jue, he sent Aru Qi and Ali to fight with him. Aru Qi and others cut off the heads of thousands of enemies and returned triumphantly.

古文：复从其兄虞划，率兵三千攻乾州，虞划道病卒，代领其众，至乾州，降其军及营帐三十，获印四十，与仆虺攻下义州。
现代文：阿鲁补又跟随他兄长虞划，率兵三千去攻打乾州，虞划不幸在途中生病身亡，阿鲁补代替兄长统率众人，到了乾州，招降敌军并获其营帐三十座，获其印信四十枚，和仆虺一道攻下了义州。
English: Arochi also followed his elder brother, Yu Zhao, and led 3,000 soldiers to attack Qianzhou. Unfortunately, Yu Zhao fell ill and died on the way. Arochi took the place of his elder brother and led the people to Qianzhou. He recruited and defeated the enemy forces and captured 30 of their camps, 40 of their seal letters, and captured Yizhou together with his retainers.

古文：宗望伐宋，与郭药师战于白河。
现代文：宗望领兵攻伐宋朝军，与郭药师一起与宋军在白河作战。
English: Zongwang led the army to attack the Song Dynasty army, and fought with the Song Army in Baihe together with Guo Yakushi.

古文：宗望命阿鲁补以二谋克先登，奋战，赏赉特异。
现代文：宗望命令阿鲁补二谋克先登，阿鲁补英勇奋战，宗望对他的奖赏异常丰厚。
English: Zongwang ordered Arochi to devise a plan to defeat the enemy, and Arochi fought bravely. Zongwang rewarded him very richly.

古文：至汴，破淮南援兵，斩其二将。
现代文：到汴京，阿鲁补又大破淮南来增援汴京的宋兵，并力斩统领援军的两员大将。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, Aru Bu defeated Huainan to reinforce the Song soldiers in Beijing, and he led the two generals of the reinforcement force.

古文：大军退次孟阳。姚平仲夜以重兵来袭，阿鲁补适当其中，力战败之。
现代文：宗望大军退到孟阳，宋将姚平仲夜间率重兵来袭击，阿鲁补正好在孟阳军中，奋力作战打败了姚平仲的军队。
English: Zongwang's large army retreated to Mengyang. Song dispatched Yao Pingzhong's heavy army at night to attack. Aru Qi happened to be in Mengyang's army and fought hard to defeat Yao Pingzhong's army.

古文：既还，闻大名、开德合兵十余万来争河。
现代文：已经收兵回营，又听说大名、开德两处的宋军合起来有十几万兵马来争夺黄河要道。
English: They had already collected their troops and returned to camp, and they also heard that the Song armies in Daming and Kade had a total of more than 100,000 soldiers and horses to fight for the Yellow River.

古文：至河上，知去敌尚远，乃以轻兵夜发，诘旦至卫县，遇敌，斩首数千级，余皆溃去。
现代文：等阿鲁补到了河上，才知敌人距离尚远，就以装备轻便，行动迅速的小股部队乘夜间出发，第二天天明到达卫县，与敌军遭遇，斩下几千敌人首级，其余敌人皆溃败逃走。
English: When Aru reached the river, he knew that the enemy was still far away, so he set out at night with a small unit of light equipment and quick action. The next day, he arrived at Wei County at dawn, encountered the enemy, cut off thousands of enemy heads, and the rest of the enemy fled in defeat.

古文：师次邢州，滹沱桥已焚，阿鲁补先以偏师营于水上，比军至而桥成。
现代文：宗望军队到达邢州时，滹沱桥已被焚毁，阿鲁补先用偏师在水上营造浮桥，等大军走近而桥已造成。
English: When the Zongwang army arrived in Zhangzhou, the Zhangqiao Bridge had already been burned. Aru first used his division to build a pontoon bridge on the water. When the army approached, the bridge had already been built.

古文：宗望嘉其功，出真定库物赏之，为长胜军千户。
现代文：宗望嘉奖他的功劳，拿出真定库中的宝物赏赐他，封他为长胜军千户。
English: Zongwang commended his merits, took out the treasure in the treasure house to reward him, and made him the leader of a thousand households of the Chang Sheng Army.

古文：及再伐宋，从宗望破敌于井陉，遂下栾城。
现代文：等到再次对宋讨伐，阿鲁补随从宗望在井陉打败敌军，又下栾城。
English: Waiting for the next attack on Song, Aru complements the followers of Zongwang to defeat the enemy army in Jingyao, and then go down to Lucheng.

古文：师自大名济河，阿鲁补屯于洺州之境。
现代文：军队从大名出发到黄河边停止进军，阿鲁补屯扎在州边境上。
English: The army set out from Daimyo and halted at the edge of the Yellow River, while the Aru army camped on the state border.

古文：时康王留相州，大名府以兵来攻我营，阿鲁补乘夜以骑二百潜出其后，反击败之。
现代文：当时康王留守相州，大名府派兵来攻打宗望军营，阿鲁补乘黑夜率骑兵二百人潜入敌后，反身突袭大名府军，击败了这支来攻营的军队。
English: At that time, King Kang stayed in Sangju, and the Daimyo-fu sent soldiers to attack the Zongwang camp. Aru took advantage of the darkness to lead 200 cavalry into the enemy's rear, counterattacked the Daimyo-fu army, and defeated this army that came to attack the camp.

古文：居数日，敌复来，苏统制以兵二万先至，阿鲁补乘其未集，以三百骑出战，大败其众，生擒苏统制，杀之。
现代文：过了数日，敌军又来进攻，宋军统领苏统制率兵二万先行来到，阿鲁补乘其尚未到齐，以三百骑兵迎战，大败苏统制军队，并活捉了苏统制，把他杀了。
English: A few days later, the enemy army attacked again. The Song Army led by the Soviet Union arrived first with 20,000 soldiers. Aru Qi, who had not yet arrived, fought with three hundred cavalry, defeated the Soviet Union army, and captured the Soviet Union alive and killed him.

古文：大军既克汴京，攻洺州，败大名救兵，遂下洺州。
现代文：宗望大军已经攻克了汴京，攻打州，大败大名救兵，于是进军州。
English: Zongwang's large army had already conquered Beijing, attacked the prefecture, defeated the famous soldiers, and then marched into the prefecture.

古文：从挞懒文攻恩州还，洺人复叛，阿鲁补先至城下，城中出兵来战，败之，执其守佐，遂与蒲鲁懽取信德军。
现代文：阿鲁补跟随挞懒攻打恩州归来，州人又搞叛乱，阿鲁补先到城下，城中出兵来战，阿鲁补打败了他们，捉住他们的守佐，于是与蒲鲁飀一起去攻取信德军。
English: Arochi followed Lazy to attack and return to Enshu, and the people of Enshu rebelled again. Arochi went to the city first, and sent troops to fight in the city. Arochi defeated them, captured their garrison, and then went with Prajna to attack the Sindh army.

古文：梁王宗弼取开德，阿鲁补以步兵五千赴之。
现代文：梁王宗弼攻取开德，阿鲁补带领五千步兵奔赴那里。
English: Liang Wang Zonglu conquered Kade, and Aru Qi led five thousand infantrymen to rush there.

古文：大名境内多盗，命阿鲁补留屯其地。
现代文：大名境内强盗多，梁王命阿鲁补留守这个地方。
English: There were many robbers in the territory of the daimyo, and Liang Wang ordered Aru Qi to stay in this place.

古文：贼犯莘县，闻阿鲁补至，即溃去，追袭一昼夜，至馆陶及之，皆俘以归。
现代文：盗贼去掠扰莘县，听说阿鲁补到了，立即溃散而逃，阿鲁补带人追袭一昼夜，到馆陶终于追上这伙盗贼，全部俘获了他们得胜而归。
English: The thieves went to scour Lixian County. When they heard that Aru Miao had arrived, they immediately broke up and fled. Aru Miao and his men pursued them for a day and a night, and finally caught up with the group of thieves in Guentao. They captured all of them and returned home victorious.

古文：从宗弼袭康王，即渡淮，阿鲁补以兵四千留和州，总督江、淮间戍将，以讨未附郡县。
现代文：阿鲁补随宗弼去攻打康王，已经渡过淮河。阿鲁补率兵四千留守和州，总督守卫在江、淮间的戍将，以征讨尚未归附的郡县。
English: Aru Qi, who had crossed the Huai River, accompanied Zonglu to attack King Kang. Aru Qi and his four thousand soldiers stayed in Hezhou, while the governor guarded the warlords between the river and Huai, in order to conquer the counties that had not yet been annexed.

古文：遂攻下太平州，隳其城。
现代文：他们攻下太平州，并毁坏了这座城池。
English: They took Taiping and destroyed the city.

古文：庐州叛，以偏师讨之，败其骑六千，擒三校。
现代文：庐州守军叛变，阿鲁补用偏师讨伐叛军，打败其六千骑兵，擒获其三名校官。
English: The Zhangzhou defenders mutinied, and Aru used his division to fight the rebels, defeating their six thousand cavalry and capturing three of their school officials.

古文：明日复破敌二万于慎县，斩首五百。
现代文：第二天，阿鲁补又率军在慎县破敌二万，斩敌人首级五百。
English: The next day, Aru Cu led the army to defeat twenty thousand enemies in Shen County, and cut off five hundred enemy heads.

古文：张永合步骑数万来战，阿鲁补兵止二千，敌围之，阿鲁补溃围力战，竟败之，追杀四十里，获马三百而还。
现代文：宋将张永合率步兵骑兵数万人来迎战，而阿鲁补兵仅有二千，被数万敌军包围，阿鲁补率军力战突围，竟然打败重围敌军。敌军败逃，阿鲁补又追杀四十里，获战马三百匹大胜而还。
English: Song dispatched Zhang Yonghe and tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to meet the enemy, while Aru Taiping had only two thousand soldiers and was surrounded by tens of thousands of enemy troops. Aru Taiping led the military force to break out of the encirclement, and even defeated the encircled enemy troops. The enemy troops were defeated and fled, and Aru Taiping chased them for another forty miles, and was defeated by three hundred horses and survived.

古文：再攻庐州，与迪古不败敌万众于拓皋，至庐州，骑兵五百出战，败之，斩其二校。
现代文：阿鲁补率军再攻庐州，与迪古不联手在拓皋打败了万众敌人，至庐州，敌方出骑兵五百迎战，阿鲁补等不仅打败了他们，还力斩敌方二名校官，凯旋回师。
English: Aru Qi led the army to attack Bozhou again, and joined hands with Digu Bu to defeat all enemies in Tuoyuan. To Bozhou, the enemy sent 500 cavalry to meet the battle. Aru Qi not only defeated them, but also defeated the enemy's two school officials and the triumphal return division.

古文：师还。宗弼趋陕西，道闻大名复叛，遣阿鲁补经略之，独与译者至城下，招之，大名果降。
现代文：宗弼奔赴陕西，途中得到消息说大名城中又起叛乱，派遣阿鲁补策划处理这件事。阿鲁补单独带领语言翻译到大名城下，采用招抚的办法，大名人果然降服。
English: Zonglu rushed to Shaanxi, and on the way he got the news that there was another rebellion in Daming City, and sent Aru Qi to plan and deal with the matter. Aru Qi alone led the language translation to Daming City, and used the method of persuasion, and the great celebrity actually surrendered.

古文：翌日，下令民间兵器，悉上送官，于是吏民按堵如故。
现代文：第二天，阿鲁补下令凡民间兵器全部上交官府，于是官民都安居如故。
English: The next day, Arochi ordered all civilian weapons to be handed over to the government, so the government and the people lived peacefully as before.

古文：为大名开德路都统。
现代文：阿鲁补被任命为大名开德路都统。
English: Aru Cu was appointed as the daimyo of Kaide Road.

古文：齐国建，阿鲁补屯兵于汴城外。
现代文：齐国建立，阿鲁补屯兵驻守在汴京城外。
English: The State of Qi was established, and the Aruji garrison was stationed outside the city.

古文：天会十五年，诏废齐国，已执刘麟，阿鲁补先入汴京备变。
现代文：天会十五年，金朝皇帝熙宗下诏废掉齐国，已经逮捕了刘鳞，阿鲁补受命先进入汴京城做好应付事变的准备。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Heian era, Emperor Hezong of the Kim dynasty issued an edict abolishing the State of Qi. Liu Qi had already been arrested, and Aru Qi was ordered to first enter the city of Beijing to prepare for the event.

古文：明年，除归德尹。
现代文：第二年，剪除归德府尹。
English: The following year, the excision went to Tokufu Sōin.

古文：割河南地与宋，入为燕京内省使。
现代文：割河南地给宋朝，并入宋朝做了燕京内省使。
English: He gave the Song Dynasty the southern part of Henan Province, and made Yan Jing the provincial envoy to the Song Dynasty.

古文：宗弼复河南，阿鲁补先济河，抚定诸郡，再为归德尹、河南路都统。
现代文：宗弼收复河南，阿鲁补先行渡过黄河，安抚稳定诸郡，再做归德尹、河南路都统。
English: Zonglu recovered Henan, and Aruqun crossed the Yellow River first, pacified and stabilized the counties, and then returned to Deyin and Henan Province.

古文：宋兵来取河南地，宗弼召阿鲁补，与许州韩常、颍州大臭、陈州赤盏晖、皆会于汴，阿鲁补以敌在近，独不赴。
现代文：宋朝派兵来取河南地，宗弼召见阿鲁补，与许州韩常、颍州大白大、陈州赤盏晖都去汴京聚会，阿鲁补以大敌在近为由，独不赴汴。
English: The Song Dynasty sent soldiers to take Henan, and Zonglu summoned Aru to meet him. He went to Beijing to meet with Xu Zhou Han Zang, Zhang Zhou Dabai Rongda, and Chen Zhou Eka Jian, but Aru did not go to Beijing because the great enemy was nearby.

古文：而宋将岳飞、刘光世等，果乘间袭取许颍三州，旁郡皆响应。
现代文：而这时宋朝将领岳飞、刘光世等，果然乘机攻取许、颍、陈三州，旁郡都纷纷响应岳飞等。
English: At this time, Song Dynasty generals Yue Fei and Liu Guangshi took advantage of the opportunity to capture Xu, Yao and Chen Sanzhou, and other counties responded to Yue Fei.

古文：其兵犯归德者，阿鲁补连击败之，复取亳、宿等州，河南平，阿鲁补功最。
现代文：岳飞、刘光世侵犯归德的军队，都被阿鲁补接连击败，并收复亳、宿等州，平定河南，阿鲁补功劳最高。
English: Yue Fei and Liu Guangxing invaded the troops that returned to Germany, and were defeated by Aru Shu successively, and recovered the states such as Handan and Shuku, and pacified Henan. Aru Shu's greatest achievement.

古文：皇统五年，为行台参知政事，授世袭猛安，兼合紥谋克。
现代文：皇统五年，阿鲁补任行台参知政事，被授予世袭猛安，兼合扎谋克。
English: In the fifth year of imperial unification, Aru Qi was appointed to the post of governor of Taiwan, and was awarded a hereditary bounty, as well as a knighthood.

古文：改元帅右监军，婆速路统军，归德军节度使，累阶仪同三司。
现代文：改任元帅右监军、婆速路统军、归德军节度使，累阶仪同三司。
English: He was appointed Marshal of the Right Supervision Army, the Motherland Expressway United Army, and the Returning German Army Festival Envoy.

古文：其在汴时，尝取官舍材木，构私第于恩州，至是事觉，法当 议勋  议亲 。
现代文：阿鲁补在汴京时，曾经动用官舍木材，在恩州建造私人宅第，等到这件事被揭发，按国法应当 议勋 、 议亲 。
English: When Aru Qi was in Beijing, he once used the timber from the official residence to build a private residence in Enzhou. When this matter was revealed, according to the national law, he should be awarded and his relatives should be consulted.

古文：海陵尝在军中，恶阿鲁补，诏曰： 若论勋劳，更有过于此者。况官至一品，足以酬之。
现代文：海陵王曾经在军中嫉妒怨恨阿鲁补，此时下诏说 ：若论他的功劳，更有比他高的，况且官至一品，足以酬报他了。
English: King Hailing once envied and resented Arochi in the army. At this time, he issued an edict saying, "If his merit is higher than him, and he is a high-ranking official, it is enough to reward him."

古文：国家立法，贵贱一也，岂以亲贵而有异也。 
现代文：国家立法，贵贱一视同仁，难道因为他是亲信权贵就有什么特殊吗？ 
English: National legislation does not discriminate between the rich and the poor. Is there something special because he is a close confidant of the powerful?

古文：遂论死。
现代文：于是论处他死。
English: So they sentenced him to death.

古文：年五十五。
现代文：当年阿鲁补五十五岁。
English: Hu Yao was 55 years old.

古文：阿鲁补以将家子从征伐，屡立功，历官有惠爱，得民心。
现代文：阿鲁补以将门子弟的身份从军征伐，屡立战功，历来官有厚爱，深得民心。
English: As the younger son of a general, Aroshu led the army in conquests and repeatedly achieved military success. He has always been loved by officials and won the hearts of the people.

古文：及死，人皆惜之。
现代文：对他的死，人人痛惜。
English: His death is regretted by all.

古文：大定三年，赠仪同三司，诏以其子为右卫将军，袭猛安及亲管谋克，赐银五百两、重彩二十端、绢三百匹。
现代文：大定三年，赠仪同三司，下诏授给他儿子右卫将军，承袭猛安及亲管谋克，赐予白银五百两、重彩二十端、绢三百匹。
English: In the third year of Dading, he bestowed the same ceremony as the three divisions, and the following edict was given to his son, General Uwei, inheriting Meng'an and personally taking charge of the battle, bestowing silver five hundred and two, heavy color twenty ends, and three hundred horses.

