古文：黄帝问曰：五气交合，盈虚更作，余知之矣。
现代文：黄帝问道：五运相互交和主岁，太过不及交替为用，我已经知道了。
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "I already know that the five movements and the main years are too intertwined to be used interchangeably.

古文：六气分治，司天地者，其至何如？
现代文：六气分治一年中，主管司天在泉，其气来时是怎样的？
English: During the year, the person in charge of the division of the six qi is Tian Zi Quan. What is it like when the qi comes?

古文：岐伯再拜对曰：明乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯再拜而回答说：问的多么英明啊！
English: Qibo bowed again and replied, "How wise of you to ask!

古文：天地之大纪，人神之通应也。
现代文：这是自然变化的基本规律，人体的机能活动是与天地变化相适应的。
English: This is the basic law of natural change. The functional activities of the human body adapt to the changes in the world.

古文：帝曰：愿闻上合昭昭，下合冥冥奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：人体与司天在泉之气相适应的情况是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: How does the human body adapt to the flow of Qi in the spring?

古文：岐伯曰：此道之所主，工之所疑也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是受自然规律所主宰的，是一般医生疑惑难明的。
English: Qi Bo said: This is governed by the laws of nature, and it is difficult for ordinary doctors to understand.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其道也。
现代文：黄帝说：请问是何道理？
English: Huang Di said: What is the reason?

古文：岐伯曰：厥阴司天，其化以风；少阴司天，其化以热；太阴司天，其化以湿；少阳司天，其化以火；阳明司天，其化以燥；太阳司天，其化以寒。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴司天，气从风化；少阴司天，气从热化；太阴司天，气从湿化；少阳司天，气从火化；阳明司天，气从燥化；太阳司天，气从寒化。
English: Qi Bo said: Jue Yin s day, gas from weathering; Shao Yin s day, gas from heat; Too Yin s day, gas from humidity; Shao Yang s day, gas from cremation; Yang Ming s day, gas from drying; Sun Yin s day, gas from cold.

古文：以所临藏位，命其病者也。
现代文：根据客气所临的脏位，来确定其疾病。
English: Determine the disease according to the dirty place you have been to.

古文：帝曰：地化奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：在泉之气的气化是怎样的？
English: Huang Di Dao: What is the process of gasification in the spring?

古文：岐伯曰：司天同候，间气皆然。
现代文：岐伯说：与司天同一规律，间气也是如此。
English: Qi Bo said, "The same rule applies to the inter-temporal air as to the inter-temporal air.

古文：帝曰：间气何谓？
现代文：黄帝道：间气是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the atmosphere like?

古文：岐伯曰：司左右者，是谓间气也。
现代文：岐伯说：分司在司天和在泉之左右的，就叫做间气。
English: Qi Bo said: The branching in Siten and around the spring is called the interspace.

古文：帝曰：何以异之？
现代文：黄帝道：与司天在泉有何分别？
English: Huang Di Dao: What is the difference between him and Siten Zaquan?

古文：岐伯曰：主岁者纪岁，间气者纪步也。
现代文：岐伯说：司天在泉主岁之气，主管一年的气化，间气之气，主一步的气化。
English: Qi Bo said: "Siten is the master of the year's qi in the spring, in charge of the gasification of the year, the inter-gas qi, and the gasification of the main step.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：很对！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：岁主奈何？
现代文：一岁之中气化的情况是怎样的呢？
English: What is the situation of gasification during the first year of life?

古文：岐伯曰：厥阴司天为风化，在泉为酸化，司气为苍化，间气为动化。少阴司天为热化，在泉为苦化，不司气化，居气为灼化。太阴司天为湿化，在泉为甘化，司气为黅化，间气为柔化。少阳司天为火化，在泉苦化，司气为丹化，间气为明化。阳明司天为燥化，在泉为辛化，司气为素化，间气为清化。太阳司天为寒化，在泉为咸化，司气为玄化，间气为藏化。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴司天为风化，在泉为酸化，岁运为苍化，间气为动化；少阴司天年为热化，在泉为苦化，岁运不司气化，间气为灼化；太阴司天为湿化，在泉为甘化，间气为柔化；少阳司天为火化，在泉为苦化，岁运为丹化，间气为明化；阳明司天为燥化，在泉为辛化，岁运为素化，间气为清化；太阳司天为寒化，在泉为咸化，岁运为玄化，间气为藏化。
English: Qibo said, "Jueyin is weathering, the spring is acidification, the year is aging, and the interstitial gas is dynamic; Shaoyin is heating, the spring is bittering, the year is unsuitable for gasification, and the interstitial gas is burning; Taiyin is humidifying, the spring is sweet, and the interstitial gas is softening; Shaoyang is burning, the spring is bittering, the year is dan, and the interstitial gas is clarifying; Yangming is drying, the spring is spicy, the year is vegetarian, and the interstitial gas is purifying; Sun is cold, the spring is salty, and

古文：故治病者，必明六化分治，五味五色所生，五藏所宜，乃可以言盈虚病生之绪也。
现代文：所以作为一个治病的医生，必须明了六气所司的气化，以及五味、五色的产生与五脏之所宜，然后才可以对气化的太过、不及和疾病发生的关系有了头绪。
English: Therefore, as a doctor who treats diseases, he must understand the gasification caused by the six qi, as well as the production of the five flavors and five colors and the five viscera, and then he can have a clue about the relationship between too much and too little gasification and the occurrence of diseases.

古文：帝曰：厥阴在泉而酸化先，余知之矣。
现代文：黄帝道：厥阴在泉而从酸化，我早就知道了。
English: Huang Di said: I have known for a long time that Jueyin is in the spring and it is from acidification.

古文：风化之行也，何如？
现代文：风的气化运行又怎样呢？
English: What about the gasification process of the wind?

古文：岐伯曰：风行于地，所谓本也，余气同法。
现代文：岐伯说：风气行于地，这是本于地之气而为风化，其他火湿燥寒诸气也是这样。
English: Qi Bo said: The wind of the culture is in the earth. This is the wind of the culture and the weathering of the wind. This is also true of other fire, moisture, dry and cold winds.

古文：本乎天者，天之气也，本乎地者，地之气也，天地合气，六节分而万物化生矣。
现代文：因为本属于天的，是天之气，本属于地的，是地之气，天地之气相互通化合，六节之气分而后万物才能生化。
English: Because what originally belonged to the heavens is the heavenly air, what originally belonged to the earth is the earthly air, the air of heaven and earth pass through and combine with each other, and the six-syllable air is divided, after which all things can be biochemical.

古文：故曰：谨候气宜，无失病机，此之谓也。
现代文：所以说：要谨慎地察侯气宜，不可贻误病机。就是这个意思。
English: Therefore, it is said that one should carefully consider the temperament and not miss the opportunity of illness. This is the meaning.

古文：帝曰：其主病何如？
现代文：黄帝道：主治疾病的药物怎样？
English: Huang Di Dao: What about the main drugs for treating diseases?

古文：岐伯曰：司岁备物，则无遗主矣。
现代文：岐伯说：根据岁气来采备其所生化的药物，则药物就不会有所遗略了。
English: Qi Bo said: according to the qi of the year to prepare the biochemical drugs, the drugs will not be omitted.

古文：帝曰：先岁物何也？
现代文：黄帝道：为什么要采备岁气所生化的药物？
English: Huang Di said, "Why do you need to prepare the medicine that is biochemicalized by the qi of the year?"

古文：岐伯曰：天地之专精也。
现代文：岐伯说：因其能得天地精专之气，故气全而力厚。
English: Qibo said: Because it can obtain the spirit of heaven and earth, it is full of strength.

古文：帝曰：司气者何如？
现代文：黄帝说：司岁运的药物怎样？
English: Huang Di said: What is the source of the medicine for good luck?

古文：岐伯曰：司气者主岁同，然有余不足也。
现代文：岐伯说：司岁运的药物与主岁的药物相同，然而有太过不及的区别。
English: Qi Bo said: The medicine for the third year is the same as the medicine for the main year, but there is too much difference.

古文：帝曰：非司岁物何谓也？
现代文：黄帝说：不属司岁之气生化的药物，又怎样呢？
English: Huang Di said: If it is not a gas-biochemical drug, what is it?

古文：岐伯曰：散也，故质同而异等也，气味有薄厚，性用有躁静，治保有多少，力化有浅深，此之谓也。
现代文：岐伯说：其气散而不专。所以非司岁和司岁的药物相较，形质虽同，却有等级上的差别，气味有厚薄之分，性能有躁静之别，疗效有多少的不同，药力所及也有浅深之异。
English: Qi Bo said: It is dispersed and not specific. Therefore, compared with the drugs of non-senile and senile, although the characteristics are the same, there are differences in grade, the smell is thick and thin, the performance is different from that of manicure and pedicure, the curative effect is different, and the depth of the potency is also different.

古文：帝曰：岁主藏害何谓？
现代文：就是这个道理。黄帝说：主岁之气伤害五脏，应当怎样来说明？
English: This is the truth. The Yellow Emperor said, "The Lord's anger harms the five internal organs. How should I explain this?"

古文：岐伯曰：以所不胜命之，则其要也。
现代文：岐伯说：以脏气所不胜之气来说明，就是这个问题的要领。
English: Qi Bo said: "To illustrate with the air that is invincible to dirty air is the essence of this problem.

古文：帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样治疗？
English: Huang Di asked: How to treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：上淫于下，所胜平之，外淫于内，所胜治之。
现代文：岐伯说：司天之气淫胜于下的，以其所胜之气来平调之；在泉之气淫胜于内的，以其所胜之气来治疗之。
English: Qibo said: The air of the heaven is superior to that of the earth, and it is used to balance the air; the air of the spring is superior to that of the inside, and it is used to treat the air.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：很好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：平气何如？
现代文：负气平和之年怎样呢？
English: What about the year of negative energy and peace?

古文：岐伯曰：谨察阴阳所在而调之，以平为期，正者正治，反者反治。
现代文：岐伯说：仔细观察阴阳病变之所在，来加以调整，达到平衡为目的。正病用正治法，反病用反治法。
English: Qi Bo said: carefully observe the location of yin and yang lesions, to adjust them, to achieve balance for the purpose.

古文：帝曰：夫子言察阴阳所在而调之，论言人迎与寸口相应，若引绳小大齐等，命曰平，阴之所在寸口何如？
现代文：黄帝说：先生说观察阴阳之所在来调治，医论中说人迎和寸口脉相应，象牵引绳索一样大小相等的，称为平脉。那么阴脉所在寸口应该怎样？
English: Huang Di said, "My master said that it is best to observe the location of yin and yang to adjust the treatment. In medical theory, it is said that the yin and yang correspond to the pharyngeal vein, which is the same size as the traction cord, and is called the pharyngeal vein. So what should the pharyngeal vein be at the pharyngeal opening?

古文：岐伯曰：视岁南北，可知之矣。
现代文：岐伯说：看主岁是南政还是北政，就可以知道了。
English: Qi Bo said, "Whether it is Southern politics or Northern politics depends on the year of the Lord.

古文：帝曰：愿卒闻之。
现代文：黄帝道：我希望全面了解这个道理。
English: Huang Di said, "I hope you can tell me everything in detail."

古文：岐伯曰：北政之岁，少阴在泉，则寸口不应；厥阴在泉，则右不应；太阴在泉，则左不应。
现代文：岐伯说：北政的年份，少阴在泉，则寸口不应；厥阴在泉，则右脉不应；太阴在泉，则左脉不应。
English: Qibo said: In the years of the Northern Dynasties, if there is a little yin in the spring, the mouth should not be narrow; if there is a lot of yin in the spring, the right vein should not be; if there is too much yin in the spring, the left vein should not be.

古文：南政之岁，少阴司天，则寸口不应；厥阴司天，则右不应；太阴司天，则左不应。
现代文：南政的年份，少阴司天，则寸口不应；厥阴司天，则右脉不应；太阴司天，则左脉不应。
English: In the year of Nan Zheng, if it is a little overcast, the tip of the nose should not be prominent; if it is a little overcast, the right vein should not be prominent; if it is a little overcast, the left vein should not be prominent.

古文：诸不应者，反其诊则见矣。
现代文：凡是寸口脉不应的，尺寸倒候或复其手就可以见了。
English: If there is something wrong with the size, you can see the size backwards or forwards.

古文：帝曰：尺候何如？
现代文：黄帝说：尺部之候怎样？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: How is the situation of the ruler?

古文：岐伯曰：北政之岁，三阴在下，则寸不应；三阴在上，则尺不应。
现代文：岐伯说：北政的年份，三阴在泉，则寸部不应；三阴司天，则尺部不应。
English: Qi Bo said: In the year of the Northern Rulers, if the three yin is in the spring, then the inch part should not be; if the three yin is in the sky, then the yard part should not be.

古文：南政之岁，三阴在天，则寸不应；三阴在泉，则尺不应，左右同。
现代文：南政的年份，三阴司天，则寸部不应；三阴在泉，则尺部不应。左右脉是相同的。
English: In the year of Nan Zheng, if the sky is cloudy, the inch part should not be; if the sky is cloudy in the spring, the yard part should not be. The left and right veins are the same.

古文：故曰：知其要者，一言而终，不知其要，流散无穷，此之谓也。
现代文：所以说：能掌握其要领的，用很少的语言就可以介绍完了，如果不知其要领，就会茫无头绪。就是这个道理。
English: Therefore, it is said that: if you can grasp its essentials, you can introduce it in very few languages, and if you do not know its essentials, you will be clueless. This is the reason.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：很对。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：天地之气，内淫而病何如？
现代文：司天在泉之气，淫胜于内而发病的情况是怎样的？
English: What is the situation of the sickness caused by the fact that the heaven is in the air of the spring, and the lewdness is better than the inside?

古文：岐伯曰：岁厥阴在泉，风淫所胜，则地气不明，平野昧，草乃早秀。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴在泉之年，风气淫盛，则地气不明，原野昏暗不清，草类提早结实。
English: Qibo said: Jueyin is in the year of the spring, the customs are prosperous, the geology is unknown, the fields are dark and unclear, and the grasses are early and firm.

古文：民病洒洒振寒，善伸数欠，心痛支满，两胁里急，饮食不下，鬲咽不通，食则呕，腹胀善噫，得后与气，则快然如衰，身体皆重。
现代文：人们多病洒洒然振栗恶寒，时喜伸腰呵欠，心痛而有撑满感，两侧胁里拘急不舒，饮食不下，胸膈咽部不利，食入则呕吐，腹胀，多嗳气，得大便或转矢气后觉得轻快好像病情衰减，全身沉重。
English: People are often ill with shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering, shivering

古文：岁少阴在泉，热淫所胜，则焰浮川泽，阴处反明。
现代文：少阴在泉之年，热气淫盛，川泽中阳气蒸腾，阴处反觉清明。
English: In the year of the spring, there is less yin and more heat. In the middle of the river, there is more yang and more transpiration.

古文：民病腹中常鸣，气上冲胸，喘不能久立，寒热皮肤痛，目瞑齿痛肿，恶寒发热如疟，少腹中痛，腹大，蛰虫不藏。
现代文：人们多病腹中时常鸣响，逆气上冲胸脘，气喘不能久立，寒热，皮肤痛，眼模糊，齿痛，目下肿，恶寒发热如疟状，少腹疼痛，腹部胀大。
English: People are often ill with frequent ringing in the abdomen, chest pounding against the wind, shortness of breath, chills, skin pain, blurred eyes, toothache, swelling under the eyes, chills and fever such as malaria, abdominal pain, abdominal distension.

古文：岁太阴在泉，草乃早荣，湿淫所胜，则埃昏岩谷，黄反见黑，至阴之交。
现代文：气候温热，虫类迟不伏藏。太阴在泉之年，草类提早开花，湿气淫盛，则崦谷之间昏暗浑浊，黄色见于水位，与至阴之气色相交合。
English: The climate is warm and hot, and insects do not hesitate to hide. It is too cloudy in the year of the spring, grasses bloom early, moisture is abundant, then it is dark and cloudy between the valleys, yellow is seen at the water level, and it intersects with the shade.

古文：民病饮积，心痛，耳聋，浑浑焞焞，嗌肿喉痹，阴病血见，少腹痛肿，不得小便，病冲头痛，目似脱，项似拔，腰似折，髀不可以回，膕如结，如别。
现代文：人们多病饮邪积聚，心痛，耳聋，头目不清，咽喉肿胀，喉痹，阴病而有出血症状，少腹肿痛，小便不通，气上冲头痛，眼如脱出，项部似拔，腰象折断，大腿不能转动，膝弯结滞不灵，小腿肚好像裂开样。
English: People often suffer from the accumulation of drinking evil, heartache, deafness, blurred vision, throat swelling, laryngitis, lethargy with bleeding symptoms, less abdominal pain, urinary incontinence, headache on the qi, eyes like escape, neck like pull, waist like broken, thighs can not turn, knee stiffness is not effective, calf belly seems to be cracked.

古文：岁少阳在泉，火淫所胜，则焰明郊野，寒热更至。
现代文：少阳在泉之年，火气淫盛，则郊野烟明，时寒时热。
English: Shao Yang in the year of the spring, the fire is hot, the countryside is smoky, and it is cold and hot at the same time.

古文：民病注泄赤白，少腹痛溺赤，甚则血便，少阴同候。
现代文：人们多病泄泻如注，下痢赤白，少腹痛，小便赤色，甚则血便。其余症候与少阴在泉之年相同。
English: People often have diarrhea, diarrhea is red and white, less abdominal pain, red urine, and even bloody stools. The rest of the symptoms are the same as the year of Shao Yin in the spring.

古文：岁阳明在泉，燥淫所胜，则霿雾清瞑。
现代文：阳明在泉之年，燥气淫盛，则雾气清冷昏暗。
English: The sun is bright in the year of the spring, the dry air is lascivious, and the fog is cold and dim.

古文：民病喜呕，呕有苦，善太息，心胁痛不能反侧，甚则嗌干面尘，身无膏泽，足外反热。
现代文：人们多病喜呕，呕吐苦水，常叹息，心胁部疼痛不能转侧，甚至咽喉干，面暗如蒙尘，身体干枯而不润泽，足外侧反热。
English: People are often sick and nauseous, vomiting bitter water, often sighing, pain in the diaphragm can not be turned to the side, even the throat, face dark as dust, body dry and not moist, foot lateral anti-heat.

古文：岁太阳在泉，寒淫所胜，则凝肃惨慄。
现代文：太阳在泉之年，寒气淫盛，则天地间凝肃惨栗。
English: The sun is in the year of the spring, the cold is in full bloom, and the world is gripped by gloom and doom.

古文：民病少腹控睾，引腰脊，上冲心痛，血见，嗌痛颔肿。
现代文：人们多病少腹疼痛牵引睾丸、腰脊，向上冲心而痛，出血，咽喉痛，颔部肿。
English: People are more likely to suffer from diseases with less abdominal pain, traction of the testicles, lumbar spine, pain when pushing the heart upwards, bleeding, sore throat, and swollen hips.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：对。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：治之奈何？
现代文：怎样治疗呢？
English: How is it treated?

古文：岐伯曰：诸气在泉，风淫于内，治以辛凉，佐以苦，以甘缓之，以辛散之。热淫于内，治以咸寒，佐以甘苦，以酸收之，以苦发之。湿淫于内，治以苦热，佐以酸淡，以苦燥之，以淡泄之。火淫于内，治以咸冷，佐以苦辛，以酸收之，以苦发之。燥淫于内，治以苦温，佐以甘辛，以苦下之。寒淫于内，治以甘热，佐以苦辛，以咸泻之，以辛润之，以苦坚之。
现代文：岐伯说：凡是在泉之气，风气太过而侵淫体内的，主治用辛凉，辅佐用苦味，用甘味来缓和肝木，用辛味来散其风邪；热气太过而侵淫体内的，主治用咸寒，辅佐用甘苦，以酸味收敛阴气，用苦药来发泄热邪；湿气太过而侵淫体内的，主治用苦热，辅佐用酸淡，用苦味药以燥湿，用淡味药以渗泄湿邪；火气太过而侵淫体内的，主治用咸冷，辅佐用苦辛，以酸味药收敛阴气，以苦味药发泄火邪；燥气太过而侵淫体内的，主治用苦温，辅助用甘辛，以苦味泄下；寒气太过而侵淫体内的，主治用甘热，辅助用苦辛，用成以泻水，用辛味以温润，以苦味来巩固阳气。
English: Qi Bo said: "In the spring air, if the wind is too strong and invades the body, the main treatment is to use cold and bitter, the auxiliary treatment is to use bitter, the sweet treatment is to soften the liver, and the pungent treatment is to dissipate the wind and evil; if the hot air is too strong and invades the body, the main treatment is to use cold and salty, the auxiliary treatment is to use sweet and bitter, the sour treatment is to converge the yin and yang, and the bitter treatment is to release the heat and evil; if the humidity is too strong and invades the body, the main treatment is to use bitter heat, the auxiliary treatment

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：对。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：天气之变何如？
现代文：司天之气的变化又怎样呢？
English: What about the changes in the weather?

古文：岐伯曰：厥阴司天，风淫所胜，则太虚埃昏，云物以扰，寒生春气，流水不冰，民病胃脘当心而痛，上支两胁，鬲咽不通，饮食不下，舌本强，食则呕，冷泄腹胀，溏泄，瘕水闭，蛰虫不去，病本于脾。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴司天，风气淫胜，则天空尘埃昏暗，云物扰动不宁，寒季行春令，流水不能结冰，蛰虫不去潜伏。人们多病胃脘，心部疼痛，上撑两胁，咽膈不通利，饮食不下，舌本强硬，食则呕吐，冷泻，腹胀，便溏泄，瘕，小便不通，病的根本在脾脏。
English: Qi Bo said: "When the weather is cloudy and the mood is lascivious, the sky is dusty and dark, the clouds are disturbed and restless, the cold season is spring, the running water cannot freeze, and the maggots do not lurk. People are often sick with stomach cramps, heart pain, upper and lower back pain, sore throat, difficulty in eating, stiff tongue, vomiting when eating, cold diarrhea, bloating, defecation, diarrhea, and difficulty in urinating. The root of the disease is in the spleen.

古文：冲阳绝，死不治。
现代文：如冲阳脉绝，多属不治的死症。
English: If the solar plexus is severed, it is mostly an incurable disease.

古文：少阴司天，热淫所胜，怫热至，火行其政，民病胸中烦热，嗌干，右胠满，皮肤痛，寒热咳喘，大雨且至，唾血血泄，鼽衄嚏呕，溺色变，甚则疮疡胕肿，肩背臂臑及缺盆中痛，心痛肺，腹大满，膨膨而喘咳，病本于肺。
现代文：少阴司天，热气淫胜，则天气郁热，君火行其政令，热极则大雨将至。人们多病胸中烦热，咽喉干燥，右胁上胀满，皮肤疼痛，寒热，咳喘，唾血，便血，衄血，鼻塞流涕，喷嚏，呕吐，小便为色，甚则疮疡，浮肿，肩、背、臂、臑以及缺盆等处疼痛，心痛，肺胀，腹胀满，胸部胀满，气喘咳嗽，病的根本在肺脏。
English: People are often ill with fever in the chest, dry throat, swelling on the right side of the throat, skin pain, cold and fever, coughing and wheezing, saliva, blood in the stool, blood in the sputum, nasal congestion and runny nose, sneezing, vomiting, colored urine, sores, puffiness, pain in the shoulder, back, arm, shin and pelvis, heartache, lung swelling, abdominal distension, chest distension, asthma and cough, and the root of the disease is in the lungs.

古文：尺泽绝，死不治。
现代文：如尺泽脉绝，多属不治的症。
English: If the ulnar nerve is severed, it is mostly an incurable disease.

古文：太阴司天，湿淫所胜，则沉阴且布，雨变枯槁，胕肿骨痛，阴痹，阴痹者，按之不得，腰脊头项痛，时眩，大便难，阴气不用，饥不欲食，咳唾则有血，心如悬，病本于肾。
现代文：太阴司天，湿气淫胜，则天气阴沉，乌云满布，雨多反使草木枯槁。人们多病浮肿，骨痛阴痹，阴痹之病按之不知痛处，腰脊头项疼痛，时时眩晕，大便困难，阳痿，饥饿而不欲进食，咳唾则有血，心悸如悬，病的根本在肾脏。
English: The weather is gloomy when it is too cloudy and humid, when the clouds are thick, and when it rains a lot, the grass withers. People are often sick and swollen, bone pain and palsy, palsy is a disease that does not know where the pain is, pain in the lumbar spine and head, dizziness all the time, difficulty in defecating, impotence, hunger but no desire to eat, coughing and spitting is bloody, heart palpitations, and the root of the disease is in the kidneys.

古文：太谿绝，死不治。
现代文：如太溪脉绝，多属不治的死症。
English: If it is too deep, it is mostly an incurable disease.

古文：少阳司天，火淫所胜，则温气流行，金政不平，民病头痛，发热恶寒而疟，热上皮肤痛，色变黄赤，传而为水，身面胕肿，腹满仰息，泄注赤白，疮疡咳唾血，烦心，胸中热，甚则鼽衄，病本于肺。
现代文：少阳司天，火气淫胜，则温热之气流行，秋金之令不平。人们多病头痛，发热恶寒而发疟疾，热气在上，皮肤疼痛，色变黄赤，传于里则变为水病，身面浮肿，腹胀满，仰面喘息，泄泻暴注，赤白下痢，疮疡，咳嗽吐血，心烦，胸中热，甚至鼻流涕出血，病的根本在肺脏。
English: People are often ill with headaches, fever, chills and malaria, hot air is on the top, the skin is painful, the color turns yellow-red, and it is transmitted to the inside and becomes water sickness, the body is puffy, the abdomen is full, the back is wheezing, the discharge is bursting, the diarrhea is red and white, the sores are ulcerated, the cough is spitting blood, the heart is upset, the chest is hot, and even the runny nose is bleeding, the root of the disease is in the lungs.

古文：天府绝，死不治。
现代文：如天腑脉绝，多属不治的死症。
English: If the umbilical cord is severed, the disease is usually fatal and incurable

古文：阳明司天，燥淫所胜，则木乃晚荣，草乃晚生，筋骨内变，民病左胠胁痛，寒清于中，感而疟，大凉革候，咳，腹中鸣，注泄鶩溏，名木敛，生菀于下，草焦上首，心胁暴痛，不可反侧，嗌干面尘，腰痛，丈夫颓疝，妇人少腹痛，目昧眥，疡疮痤痈，蛰虫来见，病本于肝。
现代文：阳明司天，燥气淫胜，则树木繁荣推迟，草类生长较晚。筋骨发生变化，大凉之气使天气反常，树木生发之气被抑制而郁伏于下，草类的花叶均现焦枯，应该蛰伏的虫类反而出动。人们多病在肤胁疼痛，寒凉清肃之气感受之后则为疟疾，咳嗽，腹中鸣响，暴注泄泻，大便稀溏，心胁突然剧痛，不能转侧，咽喉干燥，面色如蒙尘，腰痛，男子癫疝，妇女少腹疼痛，眼目昏昧不明，眼角疼痛，疮疡痈痤，病的根本在肝脏。
English: When the sun shines brightly and the dry air is at its peak, the prosperity of trees is delayed, and the growth of grasses is late. Muscles and bones change, the cool air makes the weather abnormal, the air of trees is inhibited and depressed, the flowers and leaves of grasses are scorched, and the insects that should be dormant are moved. People are often ill with skin pain, after feeling the cold and clear air, it is malaria, cough, ringing in the abdomen, outpouring diarrhea, loose stools, sudden severe pain in the heart, unable to turn side, dry throat, face like dust, low back pain, men's epilepsy, women

古文：太冲绝，死不治。
现代文：如太冲脉绝，多属不治的死症。
English: If the pulse is too weak, it is often an incurable disease.

古文：太阳司天，寒淫所胜，则寒气反至，水且冰，血变于中，发为痈疡，民病厥心痛，呕血血泄鼽衄，善悲，时眩仆，运火炎烈，雨暴乃雹，胸腹满，手热肘挛，掖肿，心澹澹大动，胸胁胃脘不安，面赤目黄，善噫嗌干，甚则色，渴而欲饮，病本于心。
现代文：太阳司天，寒气淫胜，则寒气非时而至，水多结冰，如遇戊癸火运炎烈，则有暴雨冰雹。人们多病血脉变化于内，发生痈疡，厥逆心痛，呕血，便血，衄血，备塞流涕，善悲，时常眩晕仆倒，胸腹满，手热，肘臂挛急，腋部肿，心悸甚，胸胁胃脘不舒，面赤目黄，善嗳气，咽喉干燥，甚至面黑如炲，口渴欲饮，病的根本在心脏。
English: The sun is bright, the cold is hot, the cold comes from time to time, the water is mostly icy, if the fire is hot, there will be torrential rain and hailstorms. People are often sick with internal changes in the blood, there are abscesses, convulsions, heartache, vomiting blood, blood in the stool, blood in the sputum, ready to stop the flow, compassion, often dizzy, fall down, chest and abdomen are full, hands are hot, elbows are in a hurry, hips are swollen, heart is very sore, chest and stomach are uncomfortable, face is red and yellow, good breath, throat is dry

古文：神门绝，死不治。
现代文：如神门脉绝，多属不治的死症。
English: If the divine portal is severed, it is often a terminal illness.

古文：所谓动气知其藏也。
现代文：所以说，由脉气的搏动，可以测知其脏气的存亡。
English: Therefore, by the pulse of the gas, it is possible to detect the existence of its foul gas.

古文：岐伯曰：司天之气，风淫所胜，平以辛凉，佐以苦甘，以甘缓之，以酸泻之。热淫所胜，平以咸寒，佐以苦甘，以酸收之。湿淫所胜，平以苦热，佐以酸辛，以苦燥之，以淡泄之。湿上甚而热，治以苦温，佐以甘辛，以汗为故而止。火淫所胜，平以酸冷，佐以苦甘，以酸收之，以苦发之，以酸复之，热淫同。燥淫所胜，平以苦湿，佐以酸辛，以苦下之。寒淫所胜，平以辛热，佐以甘苦，以咸泻之。
现代文：岐伯说：司天之气，风气淫胜，治以辛凉，佐以苦甘，以甘味缓其急，以酸味泻其邪；热气淫胜，治以咸寒，佐以苦甘，以酸味收敛阴气；湿气淫胜，治以苦热，佐以酸辛，以苦味药燥湿，以淡味泄湿邪如湿邪甚于上部而有热，治以苦味温性之药，佐以甘心，汗解法恢复其常态而止；火气淫胜，治以咸冷，佐以苦甘，以酸味收敛阴气，以苦味药发泄火邪，以酸味药复其真气，热淫与火淫所胜相同；燥气淫胜，治以苦温，佐以酸辛，以苦味下其燥结；寒气淫胜，治以辛热，佐以苦甘，以咸味药泄其寒邪。
English: Qibo said: "The wind of heaven, the wind of nature, is the best, and it is cured by hot and cold, and it is accompanied by bitter and sweet, and it is cured by sweetness, and it is cured by sourness; the hot air is the best, and it is cured by salty and cold, and it is accompanied by bitter and sweet, and it is cured by sourness; the humid air is the best, and it is cured by bitter and hot, and it is cured by bitter and sweet, and it is cured by sweetness, and it is cured by perspiration; the hot air is the best, and it is cured by salty and cold, and it

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝：对！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：邪气反胜，治之奈何？
现代文：本气不足而邪气反胜所致之病，应当怎样治疗？
English: What should be the treatment for a disease caused by a lack of self-confidence and the triumph of evil?

古文：岐伯曰：风司于地，清反胜之，治以酸温，佐以苦甘，以辛平之。热司于地，寒反胜之，治以甘热，佐以苦辛，以咸平之。湿司于地，热反胜之，治以苦冷，佐以咸甘，以苦平之。火司于地，寒反胜之，治以甘热，佐以苦辛，以咸平之。燥司于地，热反胜之，治以平寒，佐以苦甘，以酸平之，以和为利。寒司于地，热反胜之，治以咸冷，佐以甘辛，以苦平之。
现代文：岐伯说：风气在泉，而反被清气胜的，治以酸温，佐以苦甘，以辛味药平之；热气在泉，而寒气反胜的，治以甘热，佐以苦辛，以咸味药平之；湿气在泉，而热气反胜的，治以苦冷，佐以咸甘，以苦味药平之；或握在泉，而寒气反胜的，治以甘热，佐以苦辛，以咸味药平之；燥气在泉，而热气反胜的，治以平寒，佐以苦甘，以酸味之药平之；以冷热平和为方制所宜；寒气在泉，而热气反胜的，治以咸冷，佐以甘心，以苦味药平之。
English: Qi Bo said: "The wind is in the spring, but it is defeated by the clear air, and it is cured by acid temperature, with bitter sweet, with pungent medicine; the hot air is in the spring, but the cold air is defeated, it is cured by sweet heat, with bitter pain, with salty medicine; the moisture is in the spring, but the hot air is defeated, it is cured by bitter cold, with salty sweet, with bitter medicine; or held in the spring, but the cold air is defeated, it is cured by sweet heat, with bitter pain, with salty medicine; the dry air is in the spring, but the hot air is defeated, it is cured by

古文：帝曰：其司天邪胜何如？
现代文：黄帝问道：司天之气被邪气反胜所致之病，应当怎样治疗？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: How should we treat the illness caused by the defeat of the evil spirits by the heavenly spirits?

古文：岐伯曰：风化于天，清反胜之，治以酸温，佐以甘苦。热化于天，寒反胜之，治以甘温，佐以苦酸辛。湿化于天，热反胜之，治以苦寒，佐以苦酸。火化于天，寒反胜之，治以甘热，佐以苦辛。燥火于天，热反胜之，治以辛寒，佐以苦甘。寒化于天，热反胜之，治以咸冷，佐以苦辛。
现代文：岐伯说：风气司天而清凉之气反胜的，治用酸温，佐以甘苦；热气司天而寒水之气反胜的，治用甘温，佐以苦酸辛；湿气司天而热气反胜的，治用苦寒，佐以苦酸；火气司天而寒气反胜的，治用甘热，佐以苦辛；燥气司天而热气反胜的，治用辛寒，佐以苦甘；寒气司天而热气反胜的，治用咸冷，佐以苦辛。
English: Qibo said, "In the traditional Chinese medicine, if the weather is clear and cool, the acid temperature is used to cure, with sweet and bitter; if the weather is hot and cold, the hot temperature is used to cure, with bitter and sour; if the weather is humid and hot, the hot temperature is used to cure, with bitter and sour; if the weather is hot and cold, the hot temperature is used to cure, with sweet and bitter; if the weather is dry and hot, the hot temperature is used to cure, with bitter and sweet; if the weather is cold and hot, the hot temperature is used to cure, with salty and cold.

古文：帝曰：六气相胜奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：六气偏胜引起人体发病等情况是怎样的？
English: Huang Di Dao: What is the situation of human disease caused by the six-gas partial victory?

古文：岐伯曰：厥阴之胜，耳鸣头眩，愦愦欲吐，胃鬲如寒，大风数举，倮虫不滋，胠胁气并，化而为热，小便黄赤，胃脘当心而痛，上支两胁，肠鸣飧泄，少腹痛，注下赤白，甚则呕吐，鬲咽不通。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴风气偏胜，发为耳鸣头眩，胃中翻腾混乱而欲吐，胃脘横鬲处寒冷；大风屡起，倮虫不能滋生，人们多病胠胁气滞，化而成热，则小便黄赤，胃脘当心处疼痛，上支两胁，肠鸣飧泄，少腹疼痛，利下赤白，病甚则呕吐，咽膈之间阁塞不通。
English: Qi Bo said, "The Jueyin culture prevails. The ears are ringing, the head is dizzy, the stomach is churning with confusion and nausea, the stomach is cold; the winds are frequent, the aphids cannot breed, people are often sick, the qi is stagnant and turns into heat, the urine is yellow-red, the stomach is painful at the heart, the upper and lower branches, the intestines are churning, the lower abdomen is painful, the lower abdomen is red and white, the disease is very vomiting, and the throat is blocked.

古文：少阴之胜，心下热，善饥，齐下反动，气游三焦，炎暑至，木乃津，草乃萎，呕逆躁烦，腹满痛，溏泄，传为赤沃。
现代文：少阴热气偏胜，则病心下热，常觉饥饿，脐下有动气上逆，热气游走三焦；炎暑到来，树木因之流津，草类因之枯萎，人们病呕逆，烦躁，胜部胀满而痛，大便溏泻，传变变成血痢。
English: When yin and yang are in the ascendant, the lower part of the heart is hot, hunger is often felt, there is a dynamic up and down under the armpits, and the hot air travels three joules; when the heat comes, the trees flow because of it, the grasses wither because of it, people are sick and nauseous, irritable, the affected part is swollen and painful, the stool is diarrhea, and it is transformed into bloody diarrhea.

古文：太阴之胜，火气内郁，疮疡于中，流散于外，病在胠胁，甚则心痛，热格，头痛喉痹项强，独胜则湿气内郁，寒迫下焦，痛留顶，互引眉间，胃满，雨数至，燥化乃见，少腹满，腰重强，内不便，善注泄，足下温，头重，足胫胕肿，饮发于中，胕肿于上。
现代文：太阴热湿偏胜，火气郁于内则蕴藏酿成疮疡，流散在外则病生于胠胁，甚则心痛，热气阻格在上部，所以发生头痛，喉痹，项强；单纯由于湿气偏胜而内郁，寒迫下焦，痛于头顶，牵引至眉间，胃中满闷；多雨之后，湿化之象方始出现，少腹满胀，腰臀部重而强直，妨碍入房，时时泄泻如注，足下温暖，头部沉重，足胫浮肿，水饮发于内而浮肿见于上部。
English: It is too hot and humid. If the fire is dense inside, it will accumulate and cause sores. If it is dispersed outside, the disease will be born in the cocoon. It is very painful. The heat is blocked in the upper part, so there are headaches, sore throats, and strong contractions. Simply because of the humidity, it is depressed. It is cold under pressure, it is painful on the top of the head, it is drawn to the eyebrows, and the stomach is full. After a lot of rain, the wetness begins to appear. The abdomen is less full, the waist and hips are heavy and strong, and it hinders entering the room. It

古文：少阳之胜，热客于胃，烦心心痛，目赤欲呕，呕酸善饥，耳痛溺赤，善惊谵妄，暴热消烁，草萎水涸，介虫乃屈，少腹痛，下沃赤白。
现代文：少阳火气偏胜，热气客于胃，烦心，心痛，目赤，欲呕，呕酸，易饥饿，耳痛，小便赤色，易惊，谵妄；暴热之气消烁津液，草萎枯，水干涸，介虫屈伏，人们少腹疼痛，下痢赤白。
English: Less sun, more fire, more heat in the stomach, irritability, heartache, red eyes, nausea, acid reflux, easy hunger, earache, red urine, easily startled, delirium; hot air dissipates fluid, grass withers, water dries up, insects succumb, people have less abdominal pain, diarrhea is red and white.

古文：阳明之胜，清发于中，左胠胁痛，溏泄，内为嗌塞，外发颓疝，大凉肃杀，华英改容，毛虫乃殃，胸中不便，嗌塞而咳。
现代文：阳明燥金偏胜，则清凉之气发于内，左胠胁疼痛，大便溏泄，内则咽喉窒塞，外为臑疝；大凉肃杀之气施布，草木之花叶改色，有毛的虫类死亡，人们病胸中不舒，咽喉窒塞而咳嗽。
English: When the sun is shining and the temperature is high, the cool air is emitted inside, the left side of the throat is painful, the stool is excreted, the throat is choked inside, and the outside is itchy; the cool air is applied, the flowers and leaves of the plants change color, the insects with hair die, people are uncomfortable in the chest, the throat is choked and cough.

古文：太阳之胜，凝凓且至，非时水冰，羽乃后化，痔疟发，寒厥入胃，则内生心痛，阴中乃疡，隐曲不利，互引阴股，筋肉拘苛，血脉凝泣，络满色变，或为血泄，皮肤否肿，腹满食减，热反上行，头项囟顶脑户中痛，目如脱，寒入下焦，传为濡泻。
现代文：太阳寒气偏胜，凝潥之气时至，有非时之冰冻，羽类之虫延迟生化。发病为痔疮，疟疾，寒气入胃则生心病，阴部生疮疡，房事不利，连及两股内侧，筋肉拘急麻木，血脉凝滞，络脉郁滞充盈而色变，或为便血，皮肤因气血否塞而肿，腹中痞满，饮食减少，热气上逆，而头项巅顶脑户等处疼痛，目珠疼如脱出，寒气入于下焦，传变成为水泻。
English: The sun's cold air prevails, the condensed air arrives from time to time, there is occasional freezing, and the winged insects have delayed biochemistry. The onset is hemorrhoids, malaria, the cold air entering the stomach causes heart disease, the genitals cause sores, the housework is unfavorable, the ligaments and the medial side of the two strands, the muscles become numb, the blood vessels become stagnant, the vascular veins become filled and discolored, or it is blood in the stool, the skin is swollen due to gas and blood blockage, the abdomen is engorged, the diet is reduced, the hot air is reversed, and

古文：岐伯曰：厥阴之胜，治以甘清，佐以苦辛，以酸泻之。少阴之胜，治以辛寒，佐以苦咸，以甘泻之。太阴之胜，治以咸热，佐以辛甘，以苦泻之。少阳之胜，治以辛寒，佐以甘咸，以甘泻之。阳明之胜，治以酸温，佐以辛甘，以苦泄之。太阳之胜，治以甘热，佐以辛酸，以咸泻之。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴风气偏胜致病，治用甘清，佐以苦辛，用酸味泻其胜气；少阴热气偏胜致病，治用辛寒，佐以苦咸，用甘味泻其胜气；太阴湿气偏胜致病，治用咸热，佐以辛甘，用苦味泻其胜气；少阳火气偏胜致病，治用辛寒，佐以甘咸，用甘味泻其胜气；阳明燥气偏胜致病，治用酸温，佐以辛甘，用苦味泻其胜气；太阳寒气偏胜致病，治用苦热，佐以辛酸，用咸味泻其胜气。
English: Qibo said, "Jueyin culture is better at causing disease, and cures with sweet and clear, and adds bitter and sour, and relieves with sour; Shaoyin hot culture is better at causing disease, and cures with bitter and salty, and relieves with sweet; Taiyin humid culture is better at causing disease, and cures with salty and hot, and adds bitter and sweet, and relieves with bitter; Shaoyang fire culture is better at causing disease, and cures with bitter and cold, and adds sweet and salty, and relieves with sweet; Yangming dry culture is better at causing disease, and cures with sour and warm, and adds bitter and sweet,

古文：帝曰：六气之复何如？
现代文：黄帝说：六气报复引起人体发病等情况是怎样的？
English: Huang Di said: What is the situation of the human body caused by the retaliation of the six airs?

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：问得真详细啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very comprehensive!

古文：厥阴之复，少腹坚满，里急暴痛，偃木飞沙，倮虫不荣，厥心痛，汗发呕吐，饮食不入，入而复出，筋骨掉眩，清厥，甚则入脾，食痹而吐。
现代文：厥阴风气之复，则发为少腹部坚满，腹胁之内拘急暴痛，树木倒卧，尘沙飞扬，倮虫不得繁荣；发生厥心痛，多汗，呕吐，饮食不下，或食入后又吐出，筋骨抽痛，眩晕，手足逆冷，甚至风邪入脾，食入痹阻不能消化，必吐出而后已。
English: In the case of the return of the yin and yang, the symptoms are: the abdomen is less firm, there is severe pain in the abdomen, the trees are upside down, the dust is flying, and the aphids cannot flourish; there is heartache, excessive sweating, vomiting, inability to eat, or vomiting after eating, muscle and bone cramps, dizziness, cold hands and feet, and even colds enter the spleen, and the food cannot be digested and must be vomited.

古文：冲阳绝，死不治。
现代文：如果冲阳脉绝，多属不治的死症。
English: If the solar plexus is severed, it is mostly an incurable disease.

古文：少阴之复，燠热内作，烦躁鼽嚏，少腹绞痛，火见燔，嗌燥，分注时止，气动于左，上行于右，咳，皮肤痛，暴瘖心痛，郁冒不知人，乃洒淅恶寒，振慄谵妄，寒已而热，渴而欲饮，少气骨痿，隔肠不便，外为浮肿，哕噫，赤气后化，流水不冰，热气大行，介虫不复，病疿胗疮疡，痈疽痤痔，甚则入肺，咳而鼻渊。
现代文：少阴火气之复，则懊侬烦热从内部发生，烦躁，鼻塞流涕，喷嚏，少腹绞痛；火势盛而燔的，咽喉干燥，大便时泄时止，动气生于左腹部而向上逆行于右侧，咳嗽，皮肤痛，突然失音，心痛，昏迷不省人事，继则洒淅恶寒，振栗寒战，谵语妄动，寒罢而发热，口渴欲饮水，少气，骨软萎弱，肠道梗塞而大便不通，肌肤浮肿，呃逆，嗳气；少阴火热之气后化，因此流水不会结冰，热气流行过甚，介虫不蛰伏，病多牖疹，疮疡，痈疽，痤，痔等外症，甚至热邪入肺，咳嗽，鼻渊。
English: Less yin, more fire and gas, then chenon, fever occurs from the inside, irritability, nasal congestion, runny nose, sneezing, less abdominal cramps; fire is strong and itchy, throat is dry, stool is leaking from time to time, kinetic energy is born in the left abdomen and moves up and backwards on the right side, cough, skin pain, sudden loss of voice, heartache, coma, unconsciousness, followed by chills, shivering chills, babbling, cold and fever, thirst for water, shortness of breath, weakened bones, intestinal infarction and faeces, puffy skin, hiccups,

古文：天府绝，死不治。
现代文：如果天腑脉绝，多属不治的死症
English: If the umbilical cord is severed, the disease is usually fatal and incurable

古文：太阴之复，湿变乃举，体重中满，食饮不化，阴气上厥，胸中不便，饮发于中，咳喘有声，大雨时行，鳞见于陆，头顶痛重，而掉瘛尤甚，呕而密默，唾吐清液，甚则入肾窍，泻无度。
现代文：太阴湿气之复，则湿气变化而大行，于是发生身体沉重，胸腹满闷，饮食不消化，阴气上逆，胸中不爽，水饮生于内，咳喘有声；大雨时常下降，洪水淹没了田地，鱼类游行于陆地，人们病友头顶痛而重，抽痛瘛疭更加厉害，呕吐，神情默默，口吐清水，甚则湿邪入肾，泄泻频甚而不止。
English: If it is too cloudy and humid, then the humidity changes dramatically, so the body is heavy, the chest and abdomen are stuffy, the diet is indigestible, the yin and yang are reversed, the chest is uncomfortable, the water is born inside, the coughing is loud; heavy rain often falls, floods flood the fields, the fish parade on the land, people's sick friends have a heavy headache, the convulsions are more severe, vomiting, the expression is silent, the mouth spits clear water, and the very wetness goes into the kidneys, and the diarrhea is frequent.

古文：太谿绝，死不治。
现代文：如果太溪脉绝，多属不治的死症。
English: If it is too deep, it is mostly an incurable disease.

古文：少阳之复，大热将至，枯燥燔，介虫乃耗，惊瘛咳衄，心热烦躁，便数憎风，厥气上行，面如浮埃，目乃瘛，火气内发，上为口麋呕逆，血溢血泄，发而为疟，恶寒鼓慄，寒极反热，嗌络焦槁，渴引水浆，色变黄赤，少气脉萎，化而为水，传为胕肿，甚则入肺，咳而血泄。
现代文：少阳热气之复，则大热将至，干燥灼热，介虫亦死亡。病多惊恐瘛疭，咳嗽，衄血，心热烦躁，小便频数，怕风，厥逆之气上行，面色如蒙浮尘，眼睛因而瞤动不宁，火气内生则上为口糜，呕逆，吐血，便血，发为疟疾，则恶寒鼓栗，寒极转热，咽喉部干槁，渴而善饮，小便变为黄赤，少气，脉萎弱，气蒸热化则为水病，传变成为浮肿，甚则邪气入肺，咳嗽，便血。
English: When the sun is low and the air is hot, there will be a great heat, when it is dry and scorching, the insects will also die. Illnesses are mostly panic attacks, coughing, coughing up blood, hot and irritable, frequency of urination, fear of the wind, the air of rebellion rises, the complexion is like a cloud of floating dust, and the eyes are thus agitated and restless, the endogenous gas of fire rises to be mouth sores, vomiting, vomiting blood, blood in the stool, develops into malaria, then chills, chills turn into heat, the throat is dry, thirsty and good to drink, the urine becomes yellow-red

古文：尺泽绝，死不治。
现代文：如果尺泽脉绝，多属不治的死症。
English: If the ulnar nerve is severed, it is mostly an incurable disease.

古文：阳明之复，清气大举，森木苍干，毛虫乃厉，病生胠胁，气归于左，善太息，甚则心痛否满，腹胀而泄，呕苦咳哕，烦心，病在鬲中，头痛，甚则入肝，惊骇筋挛。
现代文：阳明燥气之复，则清肃之气大行，树木苍老干枯，兽类因之多发生疫病。人们的疾病生于胠胁，燥气偏于左侧，善于叹息，甚则心痛痞满，腹胀而泄泻，呕吐苦水，咳嗽，呃逆，烦心，病在膈中，头痛，甚则邪气入肝，惊骇，筋挛。
English: When the sun shines and the dry air returns, the air of chastity prevails, the trees are old and withered, and the animals are plagued by many diseases. People's diseases are born in the heat, the dry air is on the left side, good at sighing, the heart is full of pain, bloating and diarrhea, vomiting bitter water, coughing, uh reverse, irritation, illness in the throat, headache, the evil spirit enters the liver, shock, muscle cramps.

古文：太冲绝，死不治。
现代文：如果太冲脉绝，多属不治的死症。
English: If the pulse is too weak, it is often an incurable disease.

古文：太阳之复，厥气上行，水凝雨冰，羽虫乃死。
现代文：太阳寒气之复，则寒气上行，水结成雨与冰雹，禽类因此死亡。
English: When the sun's cold air returns, the cold air rises and the water condenses into rain and hail, killing the birds.

古文：心胃生寒，胸膈不利，心痛否满，头痛善悲，时眩仆，食减，腰反痛，屈伸不便，地裂冰坚，阳光不治，少腹控睾，引腰脊，上冲心，唾出清水，及为哕噫，甚则入心，善忘善悲。
现代文：人们的病是心胃生寒气，胸膈不宽，心痛痞满，头痛，容易伤悲，时常眩仆，纳食减少，腰臀部疼痛，屈伸不便，地裂坼，冰厚而坚，阳光不温暖，少腹痛牵引睾丸并连腰脊，逆气上冲于心，以致唾出清水或呃逆嗳气，甚则邪气入心，善忘善悲。
English: People's ailments are chills in the heart and stomach, the chest is not wide, the heart is full of pain, headache, easily sad, often dizzy, reduced appetite, pain in the waist and buttocks, inconvenience in flexion and extension, cleft palate, ice is thick and hard, the sun is not warm, less abdominal pain pulls the testicles and connects the lumbar spine, the opposite gas rushes to the heart, so that it spits out clear water or hiccups, and even the evil spirit enters the heart, forgetfulness and compassion.

古文：神门绝，死不治。
现代文：如果神门脉绝，多属不治的死症。
English: If the divine portal is severed, it is often a terminal illness.

古文：帝曰：善，治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：应该如何治疗？
English: Huang Di Dao: How should I treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：厥阴之复，治以酸寒，佐以甘辛，以酸泻之，以甘缓之。少阴之复，治以咸寒，佐以苦辛，以甘泻之，以酸收之，辛苦发之，以咸軟之。太阴之复，治以苦热，佐以酸辛，以苦泻之，燥之，泄之。少阳之复，治以咸冷，佐以苦辛，以咸軟之，以酸收之，辛苦发之，发不远热，无犯温凉，少阴同法。阳明之复，治以辛温，佐以苦甘，以苦泄之，以苦下之，以酸补之。太阳之复，治以咸热，佐以甘辛，以苦坚之。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴复气所致的病，治用酸寒，佐以甘辛，以酸泻其邪，以甘缓其急；少阴复气所致的病，治用咸寒，佐以苦辛，以甘泻其邪，以酸味收敛，辛苦发散，以成耍坚；太阴复气所致的病，治用苦热，佐以酸辛，以苦泻其邪、燥其湿、渗其湿；少阳复气所致的病，治用成冷，佐以苦辛，以咸味哭坚，以酸味收敛，以辛苦发汗，发汗之药不必避忌热天，但不要触犯温凉的药物，少阴复气所致的病，用发汗药物时与此法相同；阳明复气所致的病，治用辛温，佐以苦甘，以苦味渗泄，以苦味通下，以酸味补虚；太阳复气所致的病，治用咸热，佐以甘辛，以苦味坚其脆弱。
English: Qi Bo said: The diseases caused by juyin and qi should be cured with cold and sour, with sweet and sour, with sour and salty, with sweet and sour, with sweet and sour; the diseases caused by yin and qi should be cured with cold and salty, with bitter and sour, with sweet and sour, with bitter and sour, with bitter and sour; the diseases caused by yin and qi should be cured with hot and bitter, with sour and bitter, with bitter and sour, with sweet and sour, with sweet and sour; the diseases caused by yang and qi should be cured with cold, with bitter and sour, with salty and sour, with sour and sour; the diseases

古文：治诸胜复，寒者热之，热者寒之，温者清之，清者温之，散者收之，抑者散之，燥者润之，急者缓之，坚者耎之，脆者坚之，衰者补之，强者泻之，各安其气，必清必静，则病气衰去，归其所宗，此治之大体也。
现代文：凡治各种胜气复气所致之病，寒的用热，热的用寒，温的用清，清的用温，气散的用收敛，气抑的用发散，燥的使用润泽，急的使用缓和，坚硬的使用柔软，脆弱的使用坚固，衰弱的补，亢盛的泻。用各种方法安定正气，使其清静安宁，于是病气衰退，各归其类属，自然无偏胜之害。
English: For the treatment of diseases caused by various combinations of qi and qi, cold is treated with heat, hot is treated with cold, warm is treated with clear, clear is treated with temperature, dispersion is treated with convergence, suppression is treated with dispersion, dryness is treated with moisturizing, suddenness is treated with softening, hardness is treated with softening, fragility is treated with firmness, weakness is treated with tonic, and vigor is treated with laxity. Various methods are used to stabilize qi and make it clear, quiet, and calm, so that qi and qi decline, each belongs to its own category, and naturally there is no harm of deviation.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：这是治疗上的基本方法。黄帝道：对。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：气之上下，何谓也？
现代文：气有上下之分，是什么意思？
English: What does it mean that qi is divided into up and down?

古文：岐伯曰：身半以上，其气三矣，天之分也，天气主之。身半以下，其气三矣，地之分也，地气主之。
现代文：岐伯说：身半以上，其气有三，是人身应天的部分，所以是司天之气所主持的；身半以下，其气亦有三，是人身应地的部分，所以是在泉之所主持的。
English: Qibo said: Above the midsection, there are three qi, which is the part of the body that responds to the sky, so it is presided over by the qi of the heaven; below the midsection, there are also three qi, which is the part of the body that responds to the earth, so it is presided over by the spring.

古文：以名命气，以气命处，而言其病。半，所谓天枢也。
现代文：用上下来指明它的胜气和复气，用气来指明人身部位而说明疾病。 半 就是指天枢。
English: Use up and down to indicate its victory qi and revival qi, and use qi to indicate parts of the body to indicate diseases.

古文：故上胜而下俱病者，以地名之，下胜而上俱病者，以天名之。
现代文：所以上部的三气胜而下部的三气都病的，以地气之名来命名人身受病的脏气；下部的三气胜而上部的三气都病的，以天气之名来命名人身受病的脏气。
English: Therefore, if the upper three qi prevail and the lower three qi are all sick, the dirty gas that the person is sick is named after the earth qi; if the lower three qi prevail and the upper three qi are all sick, the dirty gas that the person is sick is named after the weather.

古文：所谓胜至，报气屈伏而未发也，复至则不以天地异名，皆如复气为法也。
现代文：以上所说，是指胜气已经到来，而复气尚屈伏未发者而言；若复气已经到来，则不能以司天在泉之名以区别之，当以复气的情况为准则。
English: As mentioned above, it refers to those who have already won the victory but have not yet won the second wind. If the second wind has already arrived, it cannot be distinguished by the name of the heaven in the spring, but should be based on the situation of the second wind.

古文：帝曰：胜复之动，时有常乎？
现代文：黄帝说：胜复之气的运动，有一定的时候吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: Is there a certain time for the movement of the spirit of victory?

古文：气有必乎？
现代文：到时候是否一定有胜复之气呢？
English: Will there be a spirit of revenge at that time?

古文：岐伯曰：时有常位，而气无必也。
现代文：岐伯说：四时有一定的常位，而胜复之气的有无，却不是必然的。
English: Qibo said: There is a certain stability at four o'clock, and the presence or absence of the spirit of victory is not inevitable.

古文：岐伯曰：初气终三气，天气主之，胜之常也。四气尽终气，地气主之，复之常也。
现代文：岐伯说：初之气至三之气，司天之气所主，是胜气常见的时位；四之气到终之气，是在泉气之所主，是复气常见的时位。
English: Qibo said, "From the first qi to the third qi, the master of the qi of heaven, is the common time of the victorious qi; from the fourth qi to the last qi, is the master of the spring qi, is the common time of the reincarnated qi.

古文：有胜则复，无胜则否。
现代文：有胜气才有复气，没有胜气就没有复气。
English: If there is victory, there will be revenge; if there is no victory, there will be no revenge.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：对。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：复已而胜何如？
现代文：复气已退而又有胜气发生，是怎样的？
English: How does it feel to be out of the game and back in the game?

古文：岐伯曰：胜至则复，无常数也，衰乃止耳。
现代文：岐伯说：有胜气就会有复气，没有一定的次数限制，气衰减才会停止。
English: Qi Bo said: If there is a winning qi, there will be a second qi, and there is no certain limit to the number of times the qi will decay.

古文：复已而胜，不复则害，此伤生也。
现代文：因之复气之后又有胜气发生，而胜气之后没有相应的复气发生，就会有灾害，这是由于生机被伤的缘故。
English: As a result, after the reinstatement of qi, there will be a victory of qi, and if there is no corresponding reinstatement of qi after the victory of qi, there will be disasters, which is due to the injury of vitality.

古文：帝曰：复而反病何也？
现代文：黄帝说：复气反而致病，又是什么道理呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the reason that the reinstatement of qi causes illness?

古文：岐伯曰：居非其位，不相得也，大复其胜则主胜之，故反病也，所谓火燥热也。
现代文：岐伯说：复气所至之时，不是它时令的正位，与主时之气不相融洽。所以大复其胜，而反被主时之气所胜，因此反而致病。这是指火、燥、热三气来说的。
English: Qi Bo said: "When the reincarnated qi arrives, it is not in the correct position of the season, and it is not compatible with the main qi. Therefore, it is greatly defeated, but it is defeated by the main qi, so it causes illness. This refers to the three qi of fire, dryness, and heat.

古文：帝曰：治之何如？
现代文：黄帝说：治疗之法怎样？
English: Huang Di said: What is the treatment method?

古文：岐伯曰：夫气之胜也，微者随之，甚者制之。
现代文：岐伯说：六气之胜所致的，轻微的随顺它，严重的制止它；复气所致的，和缓的平调它，暴烈的削弱它。
English: Qibo said: The victory of the six qi results in slight compliance with it and severe suppression of it; the victory of the reinstatement of qi results in gentle leveling of it and violent weakening of it.

古文：气之复也，和者平之，暴者夺之，皆随胜气，安其屈伏，无问其数，以平为期，此其道也。
现代文：都宜随着胜气来治疗其被抑伏之气，不论其次数多少，总以达到和平为目的。这是治疗的一般规律。黄帝道：对。
English: It is advisable to treat the suppressed qi according to the prevailing qi, regardless of the number of times, always with the aim of achieving peace. This is the general rule of treatment. Huang Di Dao: Right.

古文：帝曰：善。客主之胜复奈何？
现代文：客气与主气的胜复是怎样的？
English: What are the reasons for the victory and defeat of courtesy and arrogance?

古文：岐伯曰：客主之气，胜而无复也。
现代文：岐伯说：客气与主气二者之间，只有胜没有复。
English: Qi Bo said, "Between courtesy and arrogance, there is only victory and no return."

古文：帝曰：其逆从何如？
现代文：黄帝道：其逆与顺怎样区别？
English: Huang Di Dao: What is the difference between its reverse and forward?

古文：岐伯曰：主胜逆，客胜从，天之道也。
现代文：岐伯说：主气胜是逆，客气胜是顺，这是自然规律。
English: Qibo said: The master's spirit wins the reverse, and the polite spirit wins the forward, this is the natural law.

古文：帝曰：其生病何如？
现代文：黄帝说：客气与主气相胜所致之病是怎样的？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the illness caused by the victory of courtesy over arrogance?"

古文：岐伯曰：厥阴司天，客胜则耳鸣掉眩，甚则咳；主胜则胸胁痛，舌难以言。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴司天，客气胜则病耳鸣，振掉，眩晕，甚至咳嗽；主气胜则病胸胁疼痛，舌强难以说话。
English: Qi Bo said: Jue Yin s day, polite victory is the disease tinnitus, shake off, dizziness, and even cough; the main victory is the disease chest pain, the tongue is hard to speak.

古文：少阴司天，客胜则鼽嚏颈项强，肩背瞀热，头痛少气，发热耳聋目暝，甚则胕肿血溢，疮疡咳喘；主胜则心热烦躁，甚则胁痛支满。
现代文：少阴司天，客气胜则病鼻塞流涕，喷嚏，颈项强硬，肩背部闷热，头痛，神疲无力，发热，耳聋，视物不清，甚至浮肿，出血，疮疡，咳嗽气喘；主气胜则心热烦躁，甚则胁痛，支撑胀满。
English: In the less cloudy days, the polite ones are more likely to have a stuffy and runny nose, sneezing, stiff neck, stuffy shoulders and back, headache, fatigue, fever, deafness, blurred vision, even edema, bleeding, sores, cough and asthma; the dominant ones are more likely to be irritable, very painful, and full of support.

古文：太阴司天，客胜则首面胕肿，呼吸气喘；主胜则胸腹满，食已而瞀。
现代文：太阴司天，客气胜则病头面浮肿，呼吸气喘；主气胜则病胸腹满，食后胸腹闷乱。
English: If the day is too cloudy, the guest will have a puffy face and shortness of breath; the host will have a full chest and stomach, and the chest and stomach will be stuffy after eating.

古文：少阳司天，客胜则丹胗外发，及为丹熛疮疡，呕逆喉痹，头痛嗌肿，耳聋血溢，内为瘛瘲；主胜则胸满咳仰息，甚而有血，手热。
现代文：少阳司天，客气胜则病赤疹发于皮肤，以及赤游丹毒，疮疡，呕吐气逆，喉痹，头痛，咽喉肿，耳聋，血溢，内症为瘛疭；主气胜则病胸满，咳嗽仰息，甚至咳而有血，两手发热。
English: In the case of Shao Yang Sitian, the winner of the courtesy is the disease of erythema on the skin, as well as the erysipelas of erysipelas, sores, vomiting gas, sore throat, headache, sore throat, deafness, blood spill, and the endemic disease is warts; the winner of the master is the chest full of disease, coughing, and even coughing with blood, and the hands are hot.

古文：阳明司天，清复内余，则咳衄嗌塞，心鬲中热，咳不止而白血出者死。
现代文：阳明司天，清气复胜而有余于内，则病咳嗽，衄血，咽喉窒塞，心鬲中热，咳嗽不止，出现吐白血就会死亡。
English: If the sun shines brightly and the qi is clear and strong, but there is too much of it, then the illness is coughing, coughing up blood, choking of the throat, fever in the middle of palpitations, incessant coughing, and if there is vomiting of white blood, death will occur.

古文：太阳司天，客胜则胸中不利，出清涕，感寒则咳；主胜则喉嗌中鸣。
现代文：太阳司天，客气胜则病胸闷不畅，流清涕，感寒就咳嗽；主气胜则病咽喉中鸣响。
English: The sun rules the day, but if you are polite, you will have a stuffy chest, runny nose, and cough when you feel cold; if you are bossy, you will have a ringing in your throat.

古文：厥阴在泉，客胜则大关节不利，内为痉强拘瘛，外为不便；主胜则筋骨繇并，腰腹时痛。
现代文：厥阴在泉，客气胜就患大关节不利，在内就发生痉挛僵直抽搐，在外就发生动作不便的现象；主气胜就患筋骨摇动强直，腰腹经常疼痛。
English: If the qi and yin are in the spring, the polite qi and shen will suffer from the unfavorable movement of the large joints, and the stiffness and twitching will occur inside, and the inconvenient movement will occur outside; the master qi and shen will suffer from the shaking of the muscles and bones, and the waist and abdomen will often be painful.

古文：少阴在泉，客胜则腰痛,尻股膝髀足病，瞀热以酸，胕肿不能久立，溲便变；主胜则厥气上行，心痛发热，鬲中，众痹皆作，发于胠胁，魄汗不藏，四逆而起。
现代文：少阴在泉，客气胜就患腰痛，尻、股、膝、髀、腨、胻、足等部位都不舒服，无规律地灼热而酸，浮肿不能久立，二便变色；主气胜就患逆气上冲，心痛生热，膈部诸痹都可出现，病发于胠胁，汗多不藏，四肢因之而致厥冷。
English: In the spring, the minor yin suffers from lower back pain, the buttocks, thighs, knees, shins, shins, shins, feet and other parts are uncomfortable, irregularly hot and sour, edema can not stand for a long time, and it will change color; the main qi suffers from the opposite qi, heartache and fever, and hips can appear. The disease is caused by hypothermia, sweat is not hidden, and the limbs are caused by cold.

古文：太阴在泉，客胜则足痿下重，便溲不时，湿客下焦，发而濡泻，及为肿，隐曲之疾；主胜则寒气逆满，食饮不下，甚则为疝。
现代文：太阴在泉，客气胜，就发生足痿之病，下肢沉重，二便不能正常，湿留下焦，就发为濡泻以及浮肿隐曲之疾；主气胜就会寒气上逆、痞满，饮食不多，甚至发生疝痛之病。
English: If the yin is too low in the spring and the gentleness is too high, foot cramps will occur, the lower limbs will be heavy, and the two will not be normal. If the dampness is left scorched, it will cause wet diarrhea and edema; if the gentleness is too high, the cold will be reversed, the stomach will be full, the diet will not be much, and even colic will occur.

古文：少阳在泉，客胜则腰腹痛而反恶寒，甚则下白溺白；主胜则热反上行而客于心，心痛发热，格中而呕。少阴同候。
现代文：少阳在泉，客气胜就患腰腹痛，恶寒，甚至二便色白；主气胜就会热反上行而侵犯到心部、心痛生热，格拒于中，呕吐，其他各种症候与少阴在泉所致者相同。
English: Shao Yang is in the spring, and if you are polite, you will suffer from back and stomach pain, chills, and even diarrhea; if you are not polite, you will be hot and invade the heart, heartache, fever, vomiting, and other symptoms are the same as those caused by Shao Yin in the spring.

古文：阳明在泉，客胜则清气动下，少腹坚满而数便泻；主胜则腰重腹痛，少腹生寒，下为鶩溏，则寒厥于肠，上冲胸中，甚则喘，不能久立。
现代文：阳明在泉，客气胜则清凉之气扰动于下，少腹坚满，屡次便泻；主气胜就患腰重腹痛，少腹部生寒气，在下大便溏泻，寒气逆于肠胃，上冲胸中，甚则气喘不能久立。
English: The sun shines brightly in the spring, the courtesy wins, the cool air disturbs the lower, the small belly is full, and the diarrhea is repeated; the master wins, the waist is heavy, the abdomen is cold, the lower stool is diarrhea, the cold is against the stomach, the upper chest is in the chest, and the asthma cannot stand for a long time.

古文：太阳在泉，寒复内余，则腰尻痛，屈伸不利，股胫足膝中痛。
现代文：太阳在泉，寒复内余，就会腰、尻疼痛，屈伸感到不便，股、胫、足、膝中疼痛。
English: The sun is in the spring, and when the cold returns, there will be pain in the lower back and buttocks, discomfort in flexion and extension, and pain in the thighs, shins, feet, and knees.

古文：岐伯曰：高者抑之，下者举之，有余折之，不足补之，佐以所利，和以所宜，必安其主客，适其寒温，同者逆之，异者从之。
现代文：岐伯说：上冲的抑之使下，陷下的举之使升，有余的泄其实，不足的补其虚，再佐以有利的药物，调以恰当的饮食，使主客之气平和，而适和其寒温。客主同气的，是胜气偏甚，可逆而折之；若客主异气的，当视其偏强偏弱之气从而调之。
English: Qi Bo said: The upward thrust is caused by depression, and the downward thrust is caused by elevation, and the excess is to let go of reality, and the deficiency is to make up for its deficiency, and it is supplemented with beneficial drugs and adjusted with appropriate diet to make the host and guest have a peaceful atmosphere and adapt to its cold temperature. If the host is in the same mood, it is a better mood and can be reversed; if the host is in a different mood, it should be adjusted according to its strong or weak mood.

古文：帝曰：治寒以热，治热以寒，气相得者逆之，不相得者从之，余己知之矣。
现代文：黄帝道：治寒用热，治热用寒，主客气相同的用逆治，相反的用从治，我已经懂得了。
English: The Yellow Emperor Way: To cure cold, use heat, to cure heat, use cold, the same as the Lord's kindness, use reverse cure, the opposite is to follow the cure, I have already understood.

古文：其于正味何如？
现代文：然而对于五行补泄的正味来说又是怎样的呢？
English: However, what about the net effect of the five elements?

古文：岐伯曰：木位之主，其泻以酸，其补以辛。火位之主，其泻以甘，其补以咸。土位之主，其泻以苦，其补以甘。金位之主，其泻以辛，其补以酸。水位之主，其泻以咸，其补以苦。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴风木主气所致的，就用酸味泄之，用辛味补之；少阴君火与少阳相火所致的，就用甘味泄之，用咸味补之；太阴湿土主气所致的，就用苦味泄之，用甘味补之；阳明燥金主气所致的，就用辛味泄之，用酸味补之；太阳寒水主气所致的，就用咸味泄之，用苦味补之。
English: Qibo said, "If it is caused by the dominant qi of the wind and trees, it will be released with sour taste and replenished with pungent taste; if it is caused by the fire of the king and the sun, it will be released with sweet taste and replenished with salty taste; if it is caused by the dominant qi of the soil, it will be released with bitter taste and replenished with sweet taste; if it is caused by the dominant qi of the sun, it will be released with pungent taste and replenished with sour taste; if it is caused by the dominant qi of the sun, it will be released with salty taste and replenished with bitter taste

古文：厥阴之客，以辛补之，以酸泻之，以甘缓之。少阴之客，以咸补之，以甘泻之，以咸收之。太阴之客，以甘补之，以苦泻之，以甘缓之。少阳之客，以咸补之，以甘泻之，以咸軟之。阳明之客，以酸补之。以辛泻之，以苦泄之。太阳之客，以苦补之，以咸泻之，以苦坚之，以辛润之。
现代文：厥阴客气为病，补用辛味，泄用酸味，缓用甘味；少阴客气为病，补用咸味，泄用甘味，收用咸味；太阴客气为病，补用甘味，泄用苦味，缓用甘味；少阳客气为病，补用咸味，泄用甘味，软坚用咸味；阳明客气为病，补用酸味，泄用辛味，泄下用苦味；太阳客气为病，补用苦味，泄用咸味，坚用苦味，润用辛味。
English: Jueyin is a disease, supplementing spicy, discharging sour, and delaying sweetness; Shaoyin is a disease, supplementing salty, discharging sweet, and delaying salty; Taiyin is a disease, supplementing sweet, discharging bitter, and delaying sweetness; Shaoyang is a disease, supplementing salty, discharging sweet, and delaying salty; Yangming is a disease, supplementing sour, discharging bitter, and delaying bitter; Sun is a disease, supplementing bitter, discharging salty, retaining bitter, and softening bitter.

古文：开发腠理，致津液通气也。
现代文：这都是为了疏通腠理，引致津液，宣通阳气啊。
English: This is all for the purpose of clearing the air, bringing in the yin and yang, and promoting the yang.

古文：帝曰：善。愿闻阴阳之三也何谓？
现代文：黄帝道：听说阴阳各有三，这是什么道理？
English: Huang Di said: I heard that there are three yin and yang, what is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：气有多少，异用也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是因为阴阳之气有多有少，它的功用也各不相同。
English: Qibo said, "This is because the amount of yin and yang qi is different, and its functions are also different.

古文：帝曰：阳明何谓也？
现代文：黄帝道：阳明是什么意思？
English: Huang Di said: What does Yang Ming mean?

古文：岐伯曰：两阳合明也。
现代文：岐伯说：太阳、少阳二阳合明，所以称为阳明。
English: Qibo said: The sun, Shao Yang, and the two yang are bright, so it is called Yangming.

古文：帝曰：厥阴何也？
现代文：黄帝道：厥阴是什么意思？
English: Huang Di said: What does Juyin mean?

古文：岐伯曰：两阴交尽也。
现代文：岐伯说：太阴、少阴之气交尽，所以称为厥阴。
English: Qibo said: The air of the yin and yang is exhausted, so it is called Jueyin.

古文：帝曰：气有多少，病有盛衰，治有缓急，方有大小，愿闻约奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：气有多少的不同，病有盛衰的不同，治法有应缓应急的不同，处方有大小的不同，希望听听划分它们的依据是什么。
English: Huang Di said: There are differences in the amount of qi, differences in the rise and fall of diseases, differences in the treatment of emergencies, and differences in the size of prescriptions. I would like to hear the basis for their classification.

古文：岐伯曰：气有高下，病有远近，证有中外，治有轻重，适其至所为故也。
现代文：岐伯说：邪气有高下之别，病有远近之分，症状表现，有在里在外之异，所以治法就需要有轻有重，总而言之，以药力达到病所为准则。
English: Qi Bo said: Evil spirits are of different levels, diseases are of different distances and symptoms, and there are differences between inside and outside. Therefore, the cure needs to be light and heavy. In a word, the criterion is to achieve the disease with the power of medicine.

古文：《大要》曰：君一臣二，奇之制也；君二臣四，偶之制也；君二臣三，奇之制也；君二臣六，偶之制也。
现代文：《大要》说：君药一味，臣药二味，是奇方之法；君药二味，臣药四味，是偶方之法；君药二味，臣药三味，是奇方之法；君药二味，臣药六味，是偶方之法。
English: "Summary" said: "King medicine one flavor, subject medicine two flavor, is the method of the odd side; King medicine two flavor, subject medicine four flavor, is the method of the even side; King medicine two flavor, subject medicine three flavor, is the method of the odd side; King medicine two flavor, subject medicine six flavor, is the method of the even side.

古文：故曰：近者奇之，远者偶之，汗者不以奇，下者不以偶，补上治上制以缓，补下治下制以急，急则气味厚，缓则气味薄，适其至所，此之谓也。
现代文：病在近所用奇方，病在远所用偶方；发汗之剂不用奇方，攻下之剂不用偶方；补上部、治上部的方制宜缓，补下部、治下部的方制宜急；气味迅急的药物其味多厚，性缓的药物其味多薄，方制用药要恰到病处，就是指此而言。
English: Strange medicine should be used when the disease is near, and even medicine should be used when the disease is far away; strange medicine should not be used for perspiration, and even medicine should not be used when the disease is under control; the method of filling the upper part and curing the upper part should be slow, and the method of filling the lower part and curing the lower part should be urgent; the taste of the quick-smelling medicine should be thick, and the taste of the slow-acting medicine should be thin, and the use of the prescription medicine should be just right for the disease, that is to say.

古文：病所远而中道气味之者，食而过之，无越其制度也。
现代文：如果病所远，而在中道药的气味就已缺乏，就当考虑食前或食后服药，以使药力达到病所，不要违背这个规定。
English: If the disease is far away, and the smell of traditional Chinese medicine is already lacking, you should consider taking medicine before or after meals to make the medicine reach the disease site, and do not violate this rule.

古文：是故平气之道，近而奇偶，制小其服也。远而奇偶，制大其服也。
现代文：所以平调病气的规律是：如病所近，不论用奇方或偶方，其制方服量要小；如病所远，不论用奇方或偶方，其制方服量要大。
English: Therefore, the law of equalization of illness is: if the disease is near, regardless of whether the odd or even side is used, the dosage of the preparation should be small; if the disease is far away, regardless of whether the odd or even side is used, the dosage of the preparation should be large.

古文：大则数少，小则数多。
现代文：方制大的，是药的味数少而量重；方制小的，是药的味数多而量轻。
English: If the recipe is large, the number of flavors is small and the quantity is heavy; if the recipe is small, the number of flavors is large and the quantity is light.

古文：多则九之，少则二之。
现代文：味数多的可至九味，味数少的仅用到二味。
English: Up to nine flavours can be used if the number of flavours is large, and only two flavours are used if the number is small.

古文：奇之不去则偶之，是谓重方。偶之不去，则反佐以取之，所谓寒热温凉，反从其病也。
现代文：用奇方而病不去，就用偶方，这叫做重方；用偶方而病仍不去，就用反佐之药以顺其病情来治疗，这就属于反用寒、热、温、凉的药来治疗了。
English: If you use a strange remedy and do not get sick, you should use an even remedy, which is called a heavy remedy; if you use an even remedy and still do not get sick, you should use an antidote to treat according to the condition of the disease. This is the opposite of using cold, hot, warm, and cool medicines to treat.

古文：帝曰：善。病生于本，余知之矣。
现代文：黄帝道：病生于本的，我已经明白了。
English: Huang Di said: I have already understood that illness is born in the body.

古文：生于标者，治之奈何？
现代文：病生于标的怎样治疗呢？
English: How is it treated if the disease is caused by the target?

古文：岐伯曰：病反其本，得标之病，治反其本，得标之方。
现代文：岐伯说：与本病相反的，就可知道这是标病。在治疗时不从本病着眼，那就明白了治标的方法。
English: Qi Bo said: Contrary to the disease, it can be known that this is a standard disease. If you do not focus on the disease during treatment, then you will understand the method of treating the standard.

古文：帝曰：善。六气之胜，何以候之？
现代文：黄帝道：六气的胜气，怎样诊察呢？
English: Huang Di said: How to diagnose the superior qi of the six qi?

古文：岐伯曰：乘其至也。
现代文：岐伯说：这要趁六气到来的时候观察。
English: Qibo said, "This should be observed when the sixth breath comes.

古文：清气大来，燥之胜也，风木受邪，肝病生焉。
现代文：清肃之气大来，是燥气之胜，燥胜则风木受邪，肝病就发生了。
English: When the spirit of purification and purification is strong, it is the victory of dry air, and when it is the victory of dry air, the wind and trees are affected by evil, and liver disease occurs.

古文：热气大来，火之胜也，金燥受邪，肺病生焉。
现代文：热气大来，是火气之胜，火偏胜则金燥受邪，肺病就发生了。
English: When the heat comes, it is the victory of the fire, and when the fire is defeated, it is the evil of the gold, and the lung disease occurs.

古文：寒气大来，水之胜也，火热受邪，心病生焉。
现代文：寒气大来，是水气之胜，水偏胜则火热受邪，心病就发生了。
English: When cold weather comes, water vapor prevails; when water prevails, hot weather prevails, and heart disease occurs.

古文：湿气大来，土之胜也，寒水受邪，肾病生焉。
现代文：湿气大来，是土气之胜，土偏胜则寒水受邪，肾病就发生了。
English: When the humidity is high, it is the victory of the earthy air, and when the earthy air is victorious, the cold water is evil, and kidney disease occurs.

古文：风气大来，木之胜也，土湿受邪，脾病生焉。
现代文：风气大来，是木气之胜，木胜则上湿受邪，脾病就发生了。
English: With the advent of the culture, the victory of wood gas is the victory of wood gas, and the victory of wood is affected by dampness, and spleen disease occurs.

古文：所谓感邪而生病也。
现代文：这些都是所谓感邪而生病的。
English: These are all cases of so-called "psychosis."

古文：乘年之虚，则邪甚也。失时之和，亦邪甚也。遇月之空，亦邪甚也。
现代文：如果正当岁气不足之年，则邪气更甚；如主时之气不和也使邪气更甚；遇月廓空的时候也使邪气更甚。
English: If it is a year with insufficient qi, the evil qi will be worse; if it is a year with insufficient qi, the evil qi will be worse; if it is a year with insufficient qi, the evil qi will be worse; if it is a year with insufficient qi, the evil qi will be worse; if it is a year with insufficient qi, the evil qi will be worse; if it is a year with insufficient qi, the evil qi will be worse.

古文：重感于邪，则病危矣。
现代文：以上三种情况，如果再感受邪气，病就很危险了。
English: In the above three cases, if the evil spirit is felt again, the disease will be very dangerous.

古文：有胜之气，其必来复也。
现代文：凡是有了胜气，相继而来的必定是报复之气。
English: Whenever there is a spirit of victory, the spirit of revenge is sure to follow.

古文：帝曰：其脉至何如？
现代文：黄帝道：六气到来时，脉的体象如何？
English: Huang Di said: When the six qi arrives, how is the body image of the pulse?

古文：岐伯曰：厥阴之至，其脉弦，少阴之至，其脉钩，太阴之至，其脉沉，少阳之至，大而浮，阳明之至，短而濇，太阳之至，大而长。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴之气到来，其脉就应表现为弦；少阴之气到来，其脉应表现为钩；太阴之气到来，其脉应表现为沉；少阳之气到来，其脉应表现为大而浮；阳明之气到来，其脉应表现为短而涩；太阳之气到来，其脉应表现为大而长。
English: Qibo said, "When the Yin Qi arrives, its pulse should appear as a string; when the Yin Qi arrives, its pulse should appear as a hook; when the Yin Qi arrives, its pulse should appear as a sink; when the Yang Qi arrives, its pulse should appear as large and floating; when the Yang Ming Qi arrives, its pulse should appear as short and astringent; when the Sun Qi arrives, its pulse should appear as large and long.

古文：至而和则平，至而甚则病，至而反者病，至而不至者病，未至而至者病，阴阳易者危。
现代文：气至而脉和是正常的，气至而脉太盛的是病，气至而脉相反的是病，气至而脉不至的是病，气未至而脉已至的是病，若阴阳之气变易而脉象交错的就很危险了。
English: When the qi reaches the veins, the balance is normal. When the qi reaches the veins, the balance is too strong, it is a disease. When the qi reaches the veins, the opposite is a disease. When the qi does not reach the veins, it is a disease. When the qi does not reach the veins, it is a disease. If the qi of yin and yang changes and the veins are intertwined, it is very dangerous.

古文：帝曰：六气标本，所从不同，奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：六气的标本，变化不同，是什么原因？
English: Huang Di Dao: Six qi specimens have different changes, what is the reason?

古文：岐伯曰：气有从本者，有从标本者，有不从标本者也。
现代文：岐伯说：六气有从本化的，有从标本的，有不从标本的。
English: Qi Bo said: Six qi comes from natural, from specimens, and from non-specimens.

古文：岐伯曰：少阳太阴从本，少阴太阳从本从标，阳明厥阴，不从标本，从乎中也。
现代文：岐伯说：少阳太阴从本化，少阴太阳既从本又从标，阳明厥阴不从标本而从其中气。
English: Qibo said: Shao Yang and Tai Yin are derived from nature, Shao Yin and Sun are both from nature and from the standard, Yang Ming and Jue Yin are not from the standard but from their qi.

古文：故从本者，化生于本，从标本者，有标本之化，从中者，以中气为化也。
现代文：从本的，是因为病邪生于本气。从标从本的，是因为病的发生有从本的，也有从标的。从中气的，是因为病的发生基于中气。
English: From the original, it is because the disease is born from the original. From the standard, it is because the disease occurs from the original and from the standard. From the middle, it is because the disease occurs based on the middle.

古文：帝曰：脉从而病反者，其诊何如？
现代文：黄帝道：脉象从而病相反的，如何诊断呢？
English: Huang Di said: If the pulse is the opposite of the disease, how to diagnose it?

古文：岐伯曰：脉至而从，按之不鼓，诸阳皆然。
现代文：岐伯说：脉至与症状相一致，但按之不鼓动而无力的，这就不是真正阳病，各种阳证阳脉都是这样。
English: Qi Bo said: the pulse is consistent with the symptoms, but it is not strong and weak, this is not a real yang disease, all kinds of yang syndrome yang veins are like this.

古文：帝曰：诸阴之反，其脉何如？
现代文：黄帝道：凡是阴证而相反的，其脉象怎样？
English: Huang Di said: What is the pulse of all negative and contrary evidence?

古文：岐伯曰：脉至而从，按之鼓甚而盛也。
现代文：岐伯说：脉至与病症相一致，但按之鼓指而极盛的，这就不是正阴病。
English: Qi Bo said: The pulse is consistent with the disease, but if it is in full swing, it is not a positive and negative disease.

古文：是故百病之起，有生于本者，有生于标者，有生于中气者，有取本而得者，有取标而得者，有取中气而得者，有取标本而得者，有逆取而得者，有从取而得者。
现代文：所以各种疾病的起始，有发生于本气的，有发生于标气的，有发生于中气的。在治疗上有治其本气而得愈的；有治其标气而得愈的，有治其中气而得愈的，也有标气本气兼治而得愈的。有逆其势而治愈的，有从其情而治愈的。
English: Therefore, the beginning of all kinds of diseases include those that occur in the original qi, those that occur in the standard qi, and those that occur in the middle qi. In the treatment, there are those that cure the original qi and get better; there are those that cure the standard qi and get better, there are those that cure the middle qi and get better, and there are those that cure both the original qi and the standard qi. There are those that cure against the trend and those that cure from the situation.

古文：逆，正顺也。
现代文：逆，是逆病之情，在治疗上是正治顺治。
English: On the contrary, it is a reversal of the disease, and the treatment is the correct treatment.

古文：若顺，逆也。
现代文：若顺治，表面虽似顺，其实却是逆。
English: If Shunzhi, although the surface seems to be smooth, it is actually the opposite.

古文：故曰：知标与本，用之不殆，明知逆顺，正行无问。
现代文：所以说：知道标与本，在临证时，就能没有危害，明白逆治顺治的道理，就尽管施行治疗而无须询问，就是这个意思。
English: Therefore, it is said that: knowing the target and the book, there can be no harm in the presence of evidence, and understanding the principle of reversing the treatment, it is necessary to carry out the treatment without asking. This is the meaning.

古文：此之谓也。不知是者，不足以言诊，足以乱经。
现代文：不知道这些道理，就不能谈诊断，却足以扰乱经气。
English: If you don't know these principles, you can't talk about diagnosis, but it's enough to disturb the qi.

古文：故《大要》曰：粗工嘻嘻，以为可知，言热未已，寒病复始，同气异形，迷诊乱经，此之谓也，夫标本之道，要而博，小而大，可以言一而知百病之害，言标与本，易而勿损，察本与标，气可令调，明知胜复，为万民式，天之道毕矣。
现代文：所以《大要》上说：庸医沾沾自喜，以为所有病症都已知道了，但一结合临证，他谈论热证尚未终了，寒病征象又开始显现出来了，他不懂得同是一气而所生病变不同，于是心中迷惑，诊断不清，扰乱了经气，就是这个意思。
English: Therefore, the "Summary" said: the quack doctor is complacent, thinking that all the diseases are already known, but when combined with the clinical evidence, he talks about the heat certificate has not yet ended, the cold symptoms have begun to appear again, he does not understand that he is the same and the disease is different, so he is confused, the diagnosis is unclear, and the meridian is disturbed, that is the meaning.

古文：帝曰：胜复之变，早晏何如？
现代文：标本的道理，简要而应用极广，从小可以及大，通过一个例子可以明白一切病的变化。
English: The principle of the specimen, concise and widely applicable, can be applied from childhood to adulthood, and the changes of all diseases can be understood through an example.

古文：岐伯曰：夫所胜者，胜至已病，病已愠愠，而复已萌也。夫所复者，胜尽而起，得位而甚，胜有微甚，复有少多，胜和而和，胜虚而虚，天之常也。帝曰：胜复之作，动不当位，或后时而至，其故何也？
现代文：所以明白了标与本，就容易治疗而不会发生损害；观察属本还是属标，就可使病气调和。明确懂得六气胜复的道理，就可以作为一般医生的榜样，同时对于天地变化之道也就完全了解了。黄帝道：胜气、复气的变动，有早有晚，情况怎样？岐伯说：所谓胜气，胜气到来时人已经病了，而病气蓄积的时候，复气就已经萌发了。那复气，在胜气终了时它乘机而起，得其时位，就会加剧。胜气或轻或重，复气有少有多，胜气平和，复气也就平和，胜气虚，复气也虚，这是天气变化的常规。黄帝道：胜复的发作，有时并不恰合它的时位，有的后于时位而来，这是什么缘故？
English: Therefore, if you understand the standard and the origin, it is easy to treat without causing damage; if you observe the original or the standard, you can reconcile the disease. If you clearly understand the principle of the victory of the six qi, you can serve as a model for general doctors, and at the same time you will fully understand the way of change in heaven and earth. Huangdi Road: The changes of the victorious qi and the rejuvenating qi, there are early and late, what is the situation? Qi Bo said: The so-called victorious qi, when the victorious qi arrives, the person is already sick, and when the diseased qi accumulates, the rejuvenating q

古文：岐伯曰：夫气之生，与其化衰盛异也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是因为六气的发生变化，都有衰和盛的不同。
English: Qi Bo said: This is because of the changes in the six qi, and there is a difference between the ebb and flow.

古文：寒暑温凉盛衰之用，其在四维。
现代文：寒暑温凉盛衰的作用，表现就在四维。
English: The effect of the rise and fall of cold, hot, warm and cool is manifested in four dimensions.

古文：故阳之动，始于温，盛于暑；阴之动，始于清，盛于寒。春夏秋冬，各差其分。
现代文：所以阳气的发动，开始于温暖而极盛于暑热，阴气的发动，开始于清凉而极盛于寒冽，春夏秋冬的气候，各有差别。
English: Therefore, the yang starts in the warm and is at its peak in the heat, the yin starts in the cool and is at its peak in the cold, and the climate in spring, summer, autumn and winter are all different.

古文：故《大要》曰：彼春之暖，为夏之暑，彼秋之忿，为冬之怒，谨按四维，斥候皆归，其终可见，其始可知。
现代文：所以《大要》上说：春天的温暖，发展而为夏天的暑热，秋天的清肃，发展而为冬天的凛冽。谨慎按照四维的变化，侦察其气候的回归，这样，可以见到气的终了，可以知晓气的开始。
English: Therefore, the "Outline" says: the warmth of spring develops into the heat of summer, the cleanliness of autumn develops into the coldness of winter. Carefully follow the changes in the four dimensions and investigate the return of its climate. In this way, you can see the end of the gas and know the beginning of the gas.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：帝曰：差有数乎？
现代文：黄帝道：四时气候的变迁，它的差别有常数吗？
English: Huang Di said: The four-hour climate changes, does its difference have a constant?

古文：岐伯曰：又凡三十度也。
现代文：岐伯说：大概是三十天的光景。
English: Qi Bo said, "It was a scene of about thirty days.

古文：帝曰：其脉应皆何如？
现代文：黄帝道：其脉的相应，都是什么？
English: Huang Di Dao: What are the corresponding parts of its veins?

古文：岐伯曰：差同正法，待时而去也。
现代文：岐伯说：差分之脉见于脉象，与正常的相同，只不过在判断时，将所差的时数去掉而已。
English: Qi Bo said: The difference pulse is seen in the pulse image, the same as normal, but when judging, the difference in the number of hours is removed.

古文：《脉要》曰：春不沉，夏不弦，冬不濇，秋不数，是谓四塞。
现代文：《脉要》说：春脉毫无沉象，夏脉毫无弦象，冬脉毫无涩象，秋脉毫无数象，叫做四时之气闭塞。
English: "Pulse Essentials" said: the spring pulse has no sinking, the summer pulse has no string, the winter pulse has no astringency, and the autumn pulse has no number. It is called the four-hour air blockage.

古文：沉甚曰病，弦甚曰病，涩甚曰病，数甚曰病，参见曰病，复见曰病，未去而去曰病，去而不去曰病，反者死。
现代文：沉而太过的是病脉，弦而太过的是病脉，涩而太过的是病脉，数而太过的是病脉，脉气乱而参差的是病脉，气已去而脉复见的是病脉，气未去而脉先去的是病脉，气去而脉不去的是病脉，脉与气相反的是死脉。
English: Heavy and too much is the diseased vein, string and too much is the diseased vein, astringent and too much is the diseased vein, numeric and too much is the diseased vein, vein turbulent and irregular is the diseased vein, qi is gone and vein double is the diseased vein, qi is not gone and vein first is the diseased vein, qi is gone and vein is not gone is the diseased vein, vein opposite to qi is the dead vein.

古文：故曰：气之相守司也，如权衡之不得相失也。
现代文：所以说四时之气相互联系，各有其职，就像秤砣与秤杆一样，缺一不可。
English: Therefore, it is said that the four elements are interrelated and each has its own function, just like the balance and the scale, which are indispensable.

古文：夫阴阳之气，清静则生化治，动则苛疾起，此之谓也。
现代文：阴阳之气，清静时就会生化安宁，变动时就会产生疾病，说的就是这个意思。
English: Yin and yang qi, when it is calm, there will be biochemical tranquility, when it changes, there will be disease, this is what is meant.

古文：帝曰：幽明何如？
现代文：黄帝道：什么是幽明？
English: Huang Di said: What is Yuming?

古文：岐伯曰：两阴交尽故曰幽，两阳合明故曰明，幽明之配，寒暑之异也。
现代文：岐伯说：两阴之气都尽就称做幽；两阳之气相合就称为明。幽明的配合，成为寒暑的不同。
English: Qi Bo said: When the qi of the two yin is exhausted, it is called yin and yang; when the qi of the two yang is combined, it is called bright; when the qi of the two dim is combined, it becomes the difference between cold and hot.

古文：帝曰：分至何如？
现代文：黄帝道：分至是什么原因？
English: Huang Di Dao: What is the reason for the division?

古文：岐伯曰：气至之谓至，气分之谓分，至则气同，分则气异，所谓天地之正纪也。
现代文：岐伯说：气来叫做至，气去叫做分，气至之时其气是相同的，气分之时其气是不相同的，这就是天地的一般规律。
English: Qibo said, "When the qi comes, it is called zhi; when the qi goes, it is called min; when the qi comes, the qi is the same; when the qi is divided, the qi is different. This is the general law of heaven and earth.

古文：帝曰：夫子言春秋气始于前，冬夏气始于后，余已知之矣。
现代文：黄帝道：你说春秋之气开始于前，冬夏之气开始于后，这我已经知晓了。
English: Huang Di said, "You said that the Spring and Autumn Breeze begins before, and the Winter and Summer Breeze begins after. I already know this.

古文：然六气往复，主岁不常也，其补泻奈何？
现代文：但是六气往复运动，主岁之气又变换无常，其补泄的方法应怎样？
English: However, the six qi are in reciprocating motion, and the master qi is changeable and impermanent. What should be the method of replenishing it?

古文：岐伯曰：上下所主，随其攸利，正其味，则其要也，左右同法。
现代文：岐伯说：司天在泉，上下都有所主，应该随其所利而用补泄，考虑适宜的药物就是治疗的要点。左右间气的治法与此相同。
English: Qi Bo said: Siten in the spring, both up and down have their own, should be used as it is, consider the appropriate drug is the main point of treatment. The treatment of left and right interstitial gas is the same.

古文：《大要》曰：少阳之主，先甘后咸；阳明之主，先辛后酸；太阳之主，先咸后苦；厥阴之主，先酸后辛；少阴之主，先甘后咸；太阴之主，先苦后甘。
现代文：《大要》说：少阳主岁，先用甘药，后用咸药；阳明主岁，先用辛药，后用酸药；太阳主岁，先用咸药，后用苦药；厥阴主岁，先用酸药，后用辛药；少阴主岁，先用甘药，后用咸药；太阴主岁，先用苦药，后用甘药。
English: The "Outline" says: "In the minor Yang year, sweet medicine is used first, followed by salty medicine; in the minor Yang year, spicy medicine is used first, followed by acid medicine; in the minor Sun year, salty medicine is used first, followed by bitter medicine; in the minor Yin year, acid medicine is used first, followed by spicy medicine; in the minor Yin year, sweet medicine is used first, followed by salty medicine; in the major Yin year, bitter medicine is used first, followed by sweet medicine."

古文：佐以所利，资以所生，是谓得气。
现代文：辅以有利的药物，资助其生化之机，这样就算是适应了六气。
English: Supplemented with beneficial drugs to support its biochemical mechanism, this is considered to be adapted to the six qi.

古文：帝曰：善。夫百病之生也，皆生于风寒暑湿燥火，以之化之变也。
现代文：黄帝道：大凡各种疾病，都生于风、寒、暑、湿、燥、火六气的化与变，医书里说，盛就应该泄，虚就应该补。
English: Huang Di said: All kinds of diseases are born from the transformation and change of wind, cold, heat, humidity, dryness and fire. In the medical book, it is said that the strong should be released and the weak should be replenished.

古文：经言盛者泻之，虚者补之，余錫以方士，而方士用之，尚未能十全，余欲令要道必行，桴鼓相应，犹拔刺雪汙，工巧神圣，可得闻乎？
现代文：我把这些方法教给医生，而医生运用后还不能收到十全十美的效果。我想使这些重要的理论得到普遍的运用，能够收到桴鼓相应的效果，治疗疾病好像拔去肉中刺，洗去污浊一样，使一般医生能够达到工巧神圣的程度，可以讲给我听吗？
English: I teach these methods to doctors, but doctors are still unable to obtain perfect results after using them. I want to make these important theories widely used, to be able to receive the corresponding effect of gongs and drums, to treat diseases like pulling out thorns in the flesh and washing away filth, so that ordinary doctors can achieve the level of craftsmanship. Can you tell me?

古文：岐伯曰：审察病机，无失气宜，此之谓也。
现代文：岐伯说：仔细观察疾病的法则，不违背调和六气的原则，就可以达到这个目的。
English: Qi Bo said, "If you carefully observe the laws of disease and do not violate the principle of harmonizing the six qi, you can achieve this goal."

古文：帝曰：愿闻病机何如？
现代文：黄帝道：希望听您说说病机是什么。
English: Huang Di said: I hope to hear from you about the cause of your illness.

古文：岐伯曰：诸风掉眩，皆属于肝。诸寒收引，皆属于肾。诸气膹郁，皆属于肺。诸湿肿满，皆属于脾。诸热瞀瘈，皆属于火。诸痛痒疮，皆属于心。诸厥固泄，皆属于下。诸痿喘呕，皆属于上。诸禁鼓慄，如丧神守，皆属于火。诸痉项强，皆属于湿。诸逆冲上，皆属于火。诸胀腹大，皆属于热。诸躁狂越，皆属于火。诸暴强直，皆属于风。诸病有声，鼓之如鼓，皆属于热。诸病胕肿，疼酸惊骇，皆属于火。诸转反戾，水液浑浊，皆属于热。诸病水液，澄澈清冷，皆属于寒。诸呕吐酸，暴注下迫，皆属于热。
现代文：岐伯说：凡是风病而发生的颤动眩晕，都属于肝；凡是寒病而发生的筋脉拘急，都属于肾；凡是气病而发生的烦满郁闷，都属于肺；凡是湿病而发生的浮肿胀满，都属于脾；凡是热病而发生的视物昏花，肢体抽搐，都属于火；凡是疼痛、搔痒、疮疡，都属于心；凡是厥逆，二便不通或失禁，都属于下焦；凡是患喘逆呕吐，都属于上焦；凡是口噤不开，寒战、口齿叩击，都属于火；凡是痉病颈项强急，都属于湿；凡是气逆上冲，都属于火；凡是胀满腹大，都属于热；凡是躁动不安，发狂而举动失常的，都属于火；凡是突然发生强直的症状，都是属于风邪；凡是病而有声如肠鸣，在触诊时，发现如鼓音的，都属于热；凡是浮肿、疼痛、酸楚，惊骇不安，都属于火；凡是转筋挛急，排出的水液浑浊，都属于热；凡是排出的水液感觉清亮、寒冷，都属于寒；凡是呕吐酸水，或者突然急泄而有窘迫的感觉，都属于热。
English: Qi Bo said: All the tremors and dizziness caused by rheumatism belong to the liver; all the muscle tension caused by colds belong to the kidneys; all the annoyance and depression caused by gas diseases belong to the lungs; all the swelling and swelling caused by wet diseases belong to the spleen; all the blurred vision and limb convulsions caused by heat diseases belong to the fire; all the pain, itching and sores belong to the heart; all the vomiting, diarrhea or incontinence belong to the lower jiao; all the asthma and vomiting belong to the upper jiao; all the mouth sores, chills, and teeth knocking belong to the upper jiao

古文：故《大要》曰：谨守病机，各司其属，有者求之，无者求之，盛者责之，虚者责之，必先五胜，疏其血气，令其调达，而致和平，此之谓也。
现代文：因此《大要》说：要谨慎地注意病机，了解各种症状的所属，有五行之邪要加以推求，没有五行之气也要加以推求，如果是盛要看为什么盛，如果是虚要看为什么虚。一定得先分析五气中何气所胜，五脏中何脏受病，疏通其血气，使其调和畅通，而归于平和，这就是所谓疾病的机理。
English: Therefore, the "Summary" said: we must carefully pay attention to the pathogen, understand the various symptoms of the symptoms, have the evil of the five elements to be inferred, and do not have the five elements to be inferred. If it is strong, it is necessary to see why it is strong, if it is false, it is necessary to see why it is false. We must first analyze which of the five elements is stronger, which of the five organs is affected by the disease, dredge its blood gas, make it harmonious and smooth, and return to peace. This is the mechanism of the so-called disease.

古文：帝曰：善，五味阴阳之用何如？
现代文：黄帝道：药物五味、阴阳的作用是怎样的？
English: Huang Di Dao: What is the role of the five medicinal herbs and yin and yang?

古文：岐伯曰：辛甘发散为阳，酸苦涌泄为阴，咸味涌泄为阴，淡味渗泄为阳。六者或收或散，或缓或急，或燥或润，或軟或坚，以所利而行之，调其气，使其平也。
现代文：岐伯说：辛、甘味的药性是发散的，属阳；酸、苦味的药性是涌泄的，属于阴；咸味的药性也是涌泄的，所以属阴；淡味的药性是渗泄的，所以也属阳；这六种性味的药物，其作用有的是收敛，有的是发散，有的是缓和，有的是迅急，有的是干燥，有的是濡润，有的是柔软，有的是坚实，要根据它们的不同作用来使用，从而调和其气，使之归于平和。
English: Qibo said: The medicinal properties of spicy and sweet are effusive and belong to the yang; the medicinal properties of sour and bitter are effusive and belong to the yin; the medicinal properties of salty are also effusive, so they belong to the yin; the medicinal properties of light taste are exudative, so they also belong to the yang; these six kinds of herbal medicines, some of their effects are convergence, some are diffusion, some are mitigation, some are rapid, some are dry, some are moist, some are soft, some are solid, should be used according to their different effects, so as to reconcile their qi and make it peaceful.

古文：帝曰：非调气而得者，治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：有病不是调气所能治好的，应该怎样治疗？
English: Huang Di said: If a disease cannot be cured by qi adjustment, how should it be treated?

古文：有毒无毒，何先何后？
现代文：有毒的药和无毒的药，哪种先用，哪种后用？
English: Poisonous medicine and non-poisonous medicine, which one to use first, which one to use later?

古文：愿闻其道。
现代文：希望听听这些道理。
English: I would like to hear these reasons.

古文：岐伯曰：有毒无毒，所治为主，适大小为制也。帝曰：请言其制。
现代文：岐伯说：用有毒的药，或用无毒的药，要以能治病为准则，然后根据病情来决定剂量的大小。黄帝道：请你讲讲方制。
English: Qi Bo said, "Whether to use poisonous drugs or non-poisonous drugs, it is necessary to take the ability to cure diseases as the criterion, and then determine the size of the dose according to the condition of the disease. Huang Di said, "Please talk about the prescription system."

古文：岐伯曰：君一臣二，制之小也；君一臣三佐五，制之中也；君一臣三佐九，制之大也。
现代文：岐伯说：君药一味，臣药二味，这是小剂的组成；君药一味，臣药三味，佐药五味，这是中剂的组成；君药一味，臣药三味，佐药九味，这是大剂的组成。
English: Qibo said, "One part of royal medicine, two parts of state medicine, this is the composition of a small dose; one part of royal medicine, three parts of state medicine, five parts of Chinese medicine, this is the composition of a Chinese medicine; one part of royal medicine, three parts of state medicine, nine parts of Chinese medicine, this is the composition of a large dose.

古文：寒者热之，热者寒之，微者逆之，甚者从之，坚者削之，客者除之，劳者温之，结者散之，留者攻之，燥者濡之，急者缓之，散者收之，损者温之，逸者行之，惊者平之，上之下之，摩之浴之，薄之劫之，开之发之，适事为故。
现代文：病属于寒的，要用热药；病属于热的，要用寒药。病轻的，就逆着病情来治疗；病重的，就顺着病情来治疗；病邪坚实的，就减少它；病邪停留在体内的，就驱除它；病属劳倦所致的，就温养它；病属气血郁结的，就加以舒散；病邪滞留的，就加以攻击；病属枯燥的，就加以滋润；病属急剧的，就加以缓解；病属气血耗散的，就加以收敛；病属虚损的，就加以补益；病属安逸停滞的，要使其畅通；病属惊怯的，要使之平静。或升或降，或用按摩，或用洗浴，或迫邪外出，或截邪发作，或用开泄，或用发散，都以适合病情为佳。
English: If the disease is cold, use hot medicine; if the disease is hot, use cold medicine. If the disease is mild, treat it against the disease condition; if the disease is severe, treat it according to the disease condition; if the disease is solid, reduce it; if the disease stays in the body, expel it; if the disease is caused by fatigue, warm it; if the disease is qi and blood, relieve it; if the disease is stagnant, attack it; if the disease is dry, moisturize it; if the disease is acute, relieve it; if the disease is qi and blood dissipation, converge it; if the disease is loss, supplement it; if the disease

古文：帝曰：何谓逆从？
现代文：黄帝道：什么叫做逆从？
English: Huang Di said: What is the opposite of obedience?

古文：岐伯曰：逆者正治，从者反治，从少从多，观其事也。帝曰：反治何谓？
现代文：岐伯说：以热治热，服药宜凉，以寒治寒，服药宜温，补药治中满，攻药治下泄。
English: Qi Bo said: heat cures heat, cold cures cold, cold cures cold, warm cures warm, tonic cures lukewarm, offensive cures leaking.

古文：岐伯曰：热因寒用，寒因热用，塞因塞用，通因通用，必伏其所主，而先其所因，其始则同，其终则异，可使破积，可使溃坚，可使气和，可使必已。
现代文：要制伏其主病，但必先找出致病的原因。反治之法，开始时药性与病情之寒热似乎相同，但是它所得的结果却并不一样，可以用来破除积滞，可以用来消散坚块，可以用来调和气血，可使疾病得到痊愈。
English: It is necessary to control the main disease, but it is necessary to find out the cause of the disease first. The anti-cure method, at the beginning, the medicinal properties and the cold and heat of the disease seem to be the same, but the results it obtains are not the same. It can be used to break the accumulation, can be used to dissipate the hard block, can be used to reconcile the qi and blood, and can cure the disease.

古文：帝曰：善。气调而得者何如？
现代文：黄帝道：有六气调和而得病的，应怎样治？
English: Huangdi Dao: How should we treat a person who is ill due to the combination of the six airs?

古文：岐伯曰：逆之从之，逆而从之，从而逆之，疏气令调，则其道也。
现代文：岐伯说：或用逆治，或用从治，或主药逆治而佐药从治，或主药从治而佐药逆治，疏通气机，使之调和，这是治疗的正道。
English: Qi Bo said, "Either use the opposite treatment, or use the following treatment, or use the main medicine to cure and the adjuvant to cure, or use the main medicine to cure and the adjuvant to cure, dredge the qi machine, and reconcile it. This is the right way of treatment."

古文：帝曰：善。病之中外何如？
现代文：黄帝道：对病的内在外在都该怎样治疗？
English: Huang Di said: How should the internal and external aspects of the disease be treated?

古文：岐伯曰：从内之外者调其内；从外之内者治其外；从内之外而盛于外者，先调其内而后治其外；从外之内而盛于内者，先治其外，而后调其内；中外不相及，则治主病。
现代文：岐伯说：病从内生而后至于外的，应先调治其内；病从外生而后至于内的，应先调治其外；病从内生，影响到外部而偏重于外部的，先调治它的内部，而后治其外部；病从外生，影响到内部而偏重于内部的，先调治它的外部然后调治它的内部；既不从内，又不从外，内外没有联系的，就治疗它的主要病症。
English: Qi Bo said: if the disease is from the endogenous to the external, it should be treated internally first; if the disease is from the exogenous to the internal, it should be treated externally first; if the disease is from the endogenous, it affects the external and focuses on the external, it should be treated internally first, and then it should be treated externally; if the disease is from the exogenous, it affects the internal and focuses on the internal, it should be treated externally first and then it should be treated internally; if it is neither from the inside nor from the outside, and there is no connection between the inside and the outside, it should be treated as its main disease

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：火热复，恶寒发热，有如疟状，或一日发，或间数日发，其故何也？
现代文：火热之气来复，就使人恶寒发热，好像疟疾的症状，有的一天一发，有的间隔数天一发，这是什么缘故？
English: What is the reason for the return of the fiery breath, which makes people feverish and feverish, like the symptoms of malaria, sometimes one day at a time, sometimes several days apart?

古文：岐伯曰：胜复之气，会遇之时，有多少也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是胜复之气相遇的时候有多有少的缘故。
English: Qibo said: This is due to the fact that there are more or less times when the spirit of victory meets.

古文：阴气多而阳气少，则其发日远；阳气多而阴气少，则其发日近。
现代文：阴气多而阳气少，那么发作的间隔日数就长；阳气多而阴气少，那么发作的间隔日数就少。
English: If there is more yin and less yang, the number of days between attacks will be longer; if there is more yang and less yin, the number of days between attacks will be less.

古文：此胜复相薄，盛衰之节，疟亦同法。
现代文：这是胜气与复气相互逼迫，盛衰互为节制的道理。
English: This is the reason why the ascending and descending qi force each other, and the rising and falling qi restrain each other.

古文：帝曰：论言治寒以热，治热以寒，而方士不能废绳墨而更其道也。
现代文：疟疾的原理也是同样。黄帝道：论中曾说，治寒病用热药，治热病用寒药，医生不能废除这个规矩而变更治疗方法。
English: The principle of malaria is also the same. Huang Di Dao: It was said in the discussion that hot medicine is used to treat colds, and cold medicine is used to treat fevers. Doctors cannot abolish this rule and change the treatment method.

古文：有病热者，寒之而热，有病寒者，热之而寒，二者皆在，新病复起，奈何治？
现代文：但是有些热病服寒药而更热的，有些寒病服热药而更寒的，这寒热两种病俱在，反又引起新病，应该怎么治呢？
English: However, some hot diseases take cold medicine and become hotter, and some cold diseases take hot medicine and become colder. These two cold and heat diseases coexist, but on the contrary, they cause new diseases. How should they be treated?

古文：岐伯曰：诸寒之而热者取之阴，热之而寒者取之阳，所谓求其属也。
现代文：岐伯说：凡是用寒药而反热的，应该滋阴，用热药而反寒的，应该补阳，这就是求其属类的治疗之法。
English: Qi Bo said: Anyone who uses cold medicine to counteract heat should create shade, and those who use hot medicine to counteract cold should replenish the sun. This is the method of treatment for its genus.

古文：帝曰：善。服寒而反热，服热而反寒，其故何也？
现代文：黄帝道：服寒药而反热，服热药而反寒，这是什么缘故？
English: Huang Di said, "What is the reason for taking cold medicine to fight fever, and taking fever medicine to fight cold?

古文：岐伯曰：治其王气，是以反也。
现代文：岐伯说：只治其偏亢之气，所以有相反的结果。
English: Qi Bo said, "If we only treat his partiality, we will get the opposite result."

古文：帝曰：不治王而然者何也？
现代文：黄帝道：有的不是治了偏亢之气也出现这种情况，是什么原因？
English: Huang Di said: Some people have not been cured of partiality, and this situation also occurs. What is the reason?

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：问得真细致啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very comprehensive!

古文：不治五味属也。
现代文：这是不治偏嗜五味的一类。
English: This is a type of incurable addiction.

古文：夫五味入胃，各归所喜，攻酸先入肝，苦先入心，甘先入脾，辛先入肺，咸先入肾，久而增气，物化之常也。
现代文：五味入胃以后，各归其所喜的脏器，所以酸味先入肝，苦味先入心，甘味先入脾，辛味先入肺，咸味先入肾，积之日久，便能增加各该脏之气，这是五味入胃后所起气化作用的一般规律。
English: After the five tastes enter the stomach, they all go to the organs they like, so the sour taste first enters the liver, the bitter taste first enters the heart, the sweet taste first enters the spleen, the pungent taste first enters the lungs, and the salty taste first enters the kidneys. After a long time, it can increase the dirty gas of each. This is the general rule of the gasification effect after the five tastes enter the stomach.

古文：气增而久，夭之由也。
现代文：脏气增长日久而形成过胜，这是导致相反的原因。
English: The opposite is true for foul gas, which builds up over time and becomes overpowering.

古文：帝曰：善。方制君臣何谓也？
现代文：黄帝道：制方有君臣的分别，是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di Dao: What is the reason why there is a distinction between lords and subjects in the system?

古文：岐伯曰：主病之谓君，佐君之谓臣，应臣之谓使，非上下三品之谓也。
现代文：岐伯说：主治疾病的药味就是君，辅佐君药的就是臣，供应臣药的就是使，不是上中下三品的意思。
English: Qibo said, "The flavor of the medicine that cures the disease is you, the assistant to your medicine is the minister, and the supply of the minister's medicine is the minister, not the meaning of the upper, middle, and lower tiers.

古文：帝曰：三品何谓/
现代文：黄帝道：三品是什么意思？
English: Huang Di: What does "three dishes" mean?

古文：岐伯曰：所以明善恶之殊贯也。
现代文：岐伯说：所谓三品，是用来说明药性有无毒的。
English: Qi Bo said: The so-called three products are used to indicate whether the drug is toxic or not.

古文：岐伯曰：调气之方，必别阴阳，定其中外，各守其乡。
现代文：岐伯说：调治病气的方法，必须分别阴阳，确定其属内属外，各按其病之所在，在内的治其内，在外的治其外，病轻的调理它，较重的平治它，病势盛的就攻夺它。
English: Qibo said: The method of regulating the morbidity must be divided into yin and yang, determining whether it is internal or external, each according to the location of the disease, including the treatment of the inside, the treatment of the outside, the treatment of the light disease, the treatment of the heavy disease, and the attack of the disease.

古文：内者内治，外者外治，微者调之，其次平之，盛者夺之，汗之下之，寒热温凉，衰之以属，随其攸利，谨道如法，万举万全，气血正平，长有天命。
现代文：或用汗法，或用下法，这要分辨病邪的寒、热、温、凉，根据病气的所属使之消退，这要随其所利。谨慎地遵从如上的法则，就会万治万全，使气血平和，确保天年。
English: Whether you use the sweat method or the lower method, you should distinguish the cold, hot, warm, and cold of the disease. According to the nature of the disease, it should subside, which should be advantageous. If you carefully follow the above rules, you will cure everything, make the qi and blood peaceful, and ensure the heavenly year.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

