古文：豫章文献王豫章文献王嶷，字宣俨，太祖第二子。
现代文：豫章文献王萧嶷字宣俨，是太祖的第二个儿子。
English: According to the Yuanzhang Literature, Wang Xiaozhong, also known as Xuan Zang, was the second son of King Taizu.

古文：宽仁弘雅，有大成之量，太祖特钟爱焉。
现代文：宽厚高雅，有成大器的胸襟太祖非常钟爱他。
English: Generous and elegant, he was loved by his great-grandfather.

古文：起家为太学博士、长城令，入为尚书左民郎、钱唐令。
现代文：起初做太学博士、长城县令，后入朝任尚书左民郎、钱唐县令。
English: At first, he was a doctor of science and the magistrate of the Great Wall County. Later, he was appointed as the magistrate of Shangshu Zuo Minro County and the magistrate of Qiantang County.

古文：太祖破薛索儿，改封西阳，以先爵赐为晋寿县侯。
现代文：太祖击溃薛索儿后，改封到西阳，因先爵封为晋寿县侯。
English: After the great-grandfather defeated Xue Soler, he changed his title to Xiyang, because the previous title was the lord of Jinzhou County.

古文：除通直散骑侍郎，以偏忧去官。
现代文：授予通直散骑侍郎，因为母亲守丧离职。
English: He was awarded the post of Tsuchida sanzhajiro, because he had to leave his post due to his mother's death.

古文：桂阳之役，太祖出顿新亭垒，板嶷为宁朔将军，领兵卫从。
现代文：在平定桂阳王叛乱的战役中，太祖出京驻军新亭垒，韶令萧嶷为宁朔将军，领兵相随警卫。
English: In the campaign to quell the rebellion of King Guiyang, Emperor Taizu went to Beijing to garrison Xin Ting Rong. He ordered Xiao Rong to be the general of Ningshuo, and he led the troops with guards.

古文：休范率士卒攻垒南，嶷执白虎幡督战，屡摧却之。
现代文：休范领士卒进攻垒南，萧嶷拿着白虎幡督战，多次击退他。
English: Hu Fan, the leader of the soldiers, attacked the south side of the fortress, and Xiao Yao, holding the white tiger banner, fought and repelled him many times.

古文：事宁，迁中书郎。
现代文：战争平定后，升中书郎。
English: After the war was over, he was promoted to junior high school teacher.

古文：寻为安远护军、武陵内史。
现代文：不久做了安远护军、武陵内史。
English: He soon became a protector of Anyuan and a historian of Wuling.

古文：时沈攸之责赕，伐荆州界内诸蛮，遂及五溪，禁断鱼盐。
现代文：当时沈攸之向南方蛮族勒索钱财，讨伐荆州地区的各蛮族部落，于是影响到五溪，禁止鱼盐贩卖。
English: At that time, Shen Youzhi extorted money from the southern barbarians and fought against the barbarian tribes in the Jingzhou region, thus affecting Wuxi and prohibiting the sale of fish salt.

古文：群蛮怒，酉溪蛮王田头拟杀攸之使，攸之责赕千万，头拟输五百万，发气死。
现代文：这些部落大怒，酉溪蛮首领田头拟杀了沈攸之的使者，攸之索要赎罪钱千万，头拟送钱五百万，受气而死。
English: These tribes were enraged, and the barbarian chief of Yanxi, Tian Tou, planned to kill Shen Youzhi's messenger. Youzhi demanded ten million yuan to atone for his sins, and Tou planned to send five million yuan, but died of exhaustion.

古文：其弟娄侯篡立，头拟子田都走入獠中。于是蛮部大乱，抄掠平民，至郡城下。
现代文：他弟弟娄侯篡位，头拟的儿子田都逃到僚中，由此蛮族大乱，劫掠百姓，直到郡城外。
English: His younger brother, 侯, usurped the throne, and his eldest son, 田都, fled to his colleagues. As a result, the barbarians wreaked havoc and plundered the people as far as outside the county town.

古文：嶷遣队主张莫儿率将吏击破之。
现代文：萧嶷派队主张莫儿带将士击溃他们。
English: Xiao Yao's troops insisted that Mo Er take the soldiers to defeat them.

古文：田都自獠中请立，而娄侯惧，亦归附。
现代文：田都在僚地内请求朝廷册封他为王，娄侯惶恐，也归降。
English: Tian Du requested the imperial court to crown him as king, but the prince panicked and also surrendered.

古文：嶷诛娄侯于郡狱，命田都继其父，蛮众乃安。
现代文：萧嶷在郡狱中诛杀娄侯，命田都继承他父亲的王位，蛮民才平静下来。
English: It was only after Xiao Yao assassinated Yan Hou in the county jail and Meitian Du succeeded to his father's throne that the people calmed down.

古文：入为宋顺帝车骑谘议参军、府掾，转骠骑，仍迁从事中郎。诣司徒袁粲，粲谓人曰： 后来佳器也。 
现代文：入朝任宋顺帝车骑谘议参军、府掾，调任骠骑，又升为从事中郎拜见司徒袁粲，袁粲对人说： 他将来是要成大器的。 
English: When he entered the imperial court, he was appointed as Song Shundi's chariot and cavalry adviser to join the army and the prefectural government, and was transferred to the post of chariot and cavalry. He was also promoted to be engaged in the middle rank to meet the scholar Yuan Qi. Yuan Qi said to people: He will be a great scholar in the future.

古文：太祖在领军府，嶷居青溪宅。
现代文：太祖在领军府时，萧嶷住在青溪宅。
English: When the great-grandfather was leading the army, Xiao Yao lived in the Qingxi residence.

古文：苍梧王夜中微行，欲掩袭宅内，嶷令左右舞刀戟于中庭，苍梧从墙间窥见，以为有备，乃去。
现代文：苍梧王在夜裹悄悄而来企图偷袭宅府，萧嶷令左右在院中跳持刀戟的武士舞，苍梧王从墙缝中看见，认为已经有戒备就离开了。
English: Cangwu Wang sneaked in at night and tried to attack the mansion. Xiao Yao ordered everyone to dance a samurai dance with swords and maces in the courtyard. Cangwu Wang saw it through the cracks in the wall and thought he was already on the alert, so he left.

古文：太祖带南兖州，镇军府长史萧顺之在镇，忧危既切，期渡江北起兵。
现代文：太祖治理南兖州，镇军府长史萧顺之坐镇时，十分忧虑安危，计划渡水到江北起兵。
English: When the great-grandfather governed Nanluozhou and the town military governor Shi Xiao Shun was in town, he was very worried about his safety and planned to cross the water to the north of the river to raise an army.

古文：嶷谏曰： 主上狂凶，人下不自保，单行道路，易以立功。外州起兵，鲜有克胜。
现代文：萧嶷劝阻说： 君王凶狂，臣下不能自保，我们单兵走在路上，易于成功，在外地起兵，很少有能取胜的。
English: Xiao Yu dissuaded him, saying, "The king is fierce, and his vassals cannot protect themselves. If we go alone, we are likely to succeed. If we take up arms in a foreign country, we are unlikely to win.

古文：物情疑惑，必先人受祸。今于此立计，万不可失。 
现代文：情况不明，一定比别人先遭灾殃在这时谋划事情，万万不可失误。 
English: If the situation is unclear, you must plan things ahead of others, and you must not make any mistakes.

古文：苍梧王殒，太祖报嶷曰： 大事已判，汝明可早入。 
现代文：苍梧工死，太祖给萧嶷回信说： 大局已经明朗，你明天可以早早入朝。 
English: After the death of Cangwu, the great-grandfather wrote back to Xiao Yao, saying, "The overall situation has become clear. You can go to work early tomorrow morning."

古文：顺帝即位，转侍中，总宫内直卫。
现代文：顺帝即位，萧嶷转任侍中，总管宫廷护卫。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, in charge of guarding the palace on duty.

古文：沈攸之之难，太祖入朝堂，嶷出镇东府，加冠军将军。
现代文：沈攸之作乱时，太祖入朝主政，萧嶷坐镇东府，加冠军将军。
English: At the time of Shen Youzhi's rebellion, the great-grandfather entered the main government of the dynasty, Xiao Yu sat in the eastern government, and the champion general was added.

古文：袁粲举兵夕，丹阳丞王逊告变，先至东府，嶷遣帐内军主戴元孙二千人随薛道渊等俱至石头，焚门之功，元孙预焉。
现代文：袁粲起兵当夜，丹阳丞王逊报告变乱的消息，先到束府，萧嶷派部下军主戴元孙带二干人随薛道渊等一起到石头。
English: On the night of Yuan Shikai's rising, Danyang Choen Wang Song reported the news of the mutiny to Shokufu first, and Xiao Shikai sent his subordinate commander Dai Yansun and two cadres to Stone with Xue Daoyuan and others.

古文：先是王蕴荐部曲六十人助为城防，实以为内应也。
现代文：焚门的功劳，元孙参与了原先，王蕴送来部属六十人帮助守城，其实是做内应的。
English: Wang Yun sent sixty of his subordinates to help defend the city. In fact, he did it as a favor to his grandson.

古文：嶷知蕴怀贰，不给其仗，散处外省。
现代文：萧嶷知道王蕴怀有二心，不给那些人兵器，分派在外面。
English: Xiao Yao knew that Wang Yun was of two minds. He did not provide them with weapons and placed them separately outside.

古文：及难作搜检，皆已亡去。
现代文：等到祸乱发生再去搜捕，都已经逃走了。
English: After the incident occurred, the search and inspection team had already fled.

古文：迁中领军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：升任中领军，加散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted to the middle leader of the army, and became a samurai.

古文：上流平后，世祖自寻阳还，嶷出为使持节、都督江州豫州之新蔡晋熙二郡军事、左将军、江州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：江上游的叛乱平定后，世祖从寻阳返回，萧嶷出京任使持节、都督江州豫州的新蔡和晋熙二郡军事、左将军、江州刺史，常侍职未变。
English: After the rebellion in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River was quelled, Shizu returned from Xuanyang, and Xiao Yao went to Beijing to be appointed as the envoy of Xie, the governor of Yuzhou in Jiangzhou, Xin Cai and Jin Xi, the two county military, the left general, and the history of Jiangzhou, and the regular attendant position remained unchanged.

古文：给鼓吹一部。
现代文：赐给鼓吹一部。
English: Part of the trumpet band.

古文：以定策功，改封永安县公，千五百户。
现代文：因决策的功劳，改封永安县公，食邑一千五百户。
English: Due to the merits of the decision-making, Yong'an County was renamed Yong'an County, with 1,500 households in the food village.

古文：仍徙都督荆湘、雍、益、梁、宁、南、北秦八州诸军事、镇西将军、荆州刺史，持节、常侍如故。
现代文：又改任都督荆湘雍益梁宁南北秦八州诸军事、镇西将军、荆州刺史，持节和常侍的职位不变。
English: He was also reappointed as the military governor of the eight states of Jing, Hunan, Yunnan, Liangning, North and South Qin, and the positions of the general of Zhenxi, the general of Jing, the historian, the festival and the regular attendant remained unchanged.

古文：时太祖辅政，嶷务在省约，停府州仪迎物。初，沈攸之欲聚众，开民相告，士庶坐执役者甚众。
现代文：那时太祖辅佐朝政，萧嶷决定一切开支从俭，停用府州仪仗迎送物品当初，沈攸之想聚集人马，让百姓互诉，士族和平民因罪被押被罚苦役的很多。
English: At that time, the great-great-great-grandfather supported the government of the dynasty, and Xiao Yao decided that all expenses should be frugal, and stopped the use of the prefectural ceremonial war to send goods. At the beginning, Shen Yaozhi wanted to gather people and let the people sue each other, and there were a lot of soldiers and civilians who were detained for crimes and punished with hard labor.

古文：嶷至镇，一日遣三千余人。
现代文：萧嶷到任，天就放了三千余人。
English: When Xiao Wei took office, the heavens released more than three thousand people.

古文：见囚五岁刑以下不连台者，皆原遣。
现代文：被囚的凡在五年刑期以下而不牵连政事的，都予释放。
English: All prisoners with a sentence of less than five years who are not implicated in political affairs will be released.

古文：以市税重滥，更定樢格，以税还民。
现代文：因市税又多又重，就重新制定税收牌，把税还给百姓。
English: Because the city tax is too much and too heavy, it will re-establish the tax card and return the tax to the people.

古文：禁诸市调及苗籍。
现代文：禁止多项对商人的征税和苗籍。
English: A number of taxes and taxes on merchants are prohibited.

古文：二千石官长不得与人为市，诸曹吏听分番假。
现代文：二千石俸禄的官长不准直接买卖东西，安排众部曹官吏轮流值事。
English: Officials with a stipend of two thousand koku were not allowed to directly buy and sell things, and it was arranged that officials from various departments would take turns on duty.

古文：百姓甚悦。
现代文：百姓很高兴。
English: The people are happy.

古文：禅让之间，世祖欲速定大业，嶷依违其事，默无所言。
现代文：在惮让的那段时间裹，世担想快些安定大事，盖盛仍然没有那样做，沉默不言。
English: During that period of time, the world wanted to speed up the stabilization of major events, but Kaiseng still did not do that, and remained silent.

古文：建元元年，太祖即位，赦诏未至，嶷先下令蠲除部内升明二年以前逋负。
现代文：建元元年，太祖即位，大赦韶书没到萧塞就提前下令免除境内升明二年以前拖欠的赋税。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, when the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, he ordered in advance to exempt the tax arrears of two years before the rise of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：迁侍中，尚书令，都督扬、南徐二州诸军事，骠骑大将军，开府仪同三司，扬州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：升侍中、尚书令、都督扬南徐二州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，持节的权力不变。
English: He was promoted to the rank of middle-ranked attendant, Shang Shuling, Yang Nan Xu, the military governor of the two states, the general of the cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, Yangzhou stabbing history, and the power of holding the festival remained unchanged.

古文：封豫章郡王，邑三千户。
现代文：封为豫章郡王，食邑三千户。
English: Awarded the title of King of Yuzhang County, serving 3,000 households in the county.

古文：仆射王俭笺曰： 旧楚萧条，仍岁多故，荒民散亡，实须缉理。
现代文：仆射王俭写信给萧嶷说： 故楚国之地萧条不振，连年多灾，饥民流离失所，实在是需要治理。
English: His attendant, Wang Jian, wrote to Xiao Yu, saying, "The land of Chu is in a state of depression and stagnation. There have been many disasters over the years, and starving people have been displaced. It really needs to be governed.

古文：公临莅甫尔，英风惟穆，江、汉来苏，八州慕义。自庾亮以来，荆楚无复如此美政。
现代文：你刚刚到任，社会风气一变而为肃敬，江、汉地区的百姓得到休养生息，其他地区的百姓都表示向往，自从庾亮以来，荆楚就没有如此美政。
English: You have just taken office. The social atmosphere has changed to one of reverence. The people in the Jiangxi and Hunan regions have been able to rest and recuperate. The people in other regions have expressed their longing. There has not been such a beautiful government in Jingchu since Jiao Liang.

古文：古人期月有成，而公旬日致治，岂不休哉！ 
现代文：古人有一个月见成效的，你在十来天裹就治理好了，岂不是美事! 
English: The ancients had one month to see results, and you have been governing for ten days, isn't that a beautiful thing!

古文：会北虏动，上思为经略，乃诏曰： 神牧总司王畿，诚为治要；荆楚领驭遐远，任寄弘隆。
现代文：正逢北虏蠢动，皇上想处理好这方面的事。就下诏说： 有政縯出众的州官总管京城地区，实为重要，荆楚统辖远方，责任重大。
English: At the time of the Northern Rebellion, the emperor wanted to deal with this matter well, so he issued the following edict: It is really important to have a prominent statesman in charge of the capital region, Jing Chu oversees the distant regions, and the responsibility is great.

古文：自顷公私凋尽，绥抚之宜，尤重恒日。 
现代文：不久前公私财物空虚，安抚的措施更比平时重要。 
English: Not long ago, public and private assets were empty, and appeasement measures were even more important than usual.

古文：复以为都督荆、湘、雍、益、梁、宁、南、北秦八州诸军事，南蛮校尉，荆、湘二州刺史，持节、侍中、将军、开府如故。晋宋之际，刺史多不领南蛮，别以重人居之，至是有二府二州。
现代文：又任萧嶷为都督荆湘雍益梁宁南北秦八州诸军事、南蛮校尉、荆湘二州刺史，持节、侍中、将军、开府等职权不变。晋宋之交，刺史大多不管理南蛮，而是另委要人管理，到造时有了二府二州。
English: Xiao Wei was also appointed as the military governor of the eight states of North and South Qin, the military governor of the eight states of North and South Qin, the school captain of South Qin, and the governor of the two states of South Qin, with the same functions and powers of holding festivals, being a chamberlain, a general, and the governor of the capital.

古文：荆州资费岁钱三千万，布万匹，米六万斛，又以江、湘二州米十万斛给镇府；湘州资费岁七百万，布三千匹，米五万斛；南蛮资费岁三百万，布万匹，绵千斤，绢三百匹，米千斛，近代莫比也。
现代文：荆州每年费用钱三千万，布万匹，米六万斛，又把江、湘二州的米十万斛给了镇府，湘州经费每年七百万布三千匹，米五万斛，南蛮经费每年赋税三百万，布万匹，绵千斤，绢三百匹，米千斛，近代没有人能比得上他。
English: Jingzhou's annual expenses are 30 million yuan, cloth 10,000 horses, rice 60,000 baht, and it has also given 100,000 baht of rice from Jiangsu and Hunan to the town government. Hunan's annual funding is 7 million yuan, cloth 3,000 horses, rice 50,000 baht, Nanban's annual tax funding is 3 million yuan, cloth 10,000 horses, cotton 1,000 kg, straw 300 horses, rice 1,000 kg. In modern times, no one can match him.

古文：寻给油络侠望车。
现代文：不久又赐给他一辆油络侠望车。
English: Soon after, he presented the chariot to the knight.

古文：二年春，虏寇司、豫二州，嶷表遣南蛮司马崔慧景北讨，又分遣中兵参军萧惠朗援司州，屯西关。
现代文：二年春天，北虏侵犯司、豫二州，萧嶷上表派南蛮司马崔慧景讨伐北方，又分派中兵参军萧惠朗增援司州，驻西关。
English: In the spring of the second year, when the northern invaders invaded Shizhou and Henan, Xiao Gan sent the Southern Barbarian Sima Cui Huijing to fight in the north, and also sent the Chinese soldiers to join the army of Xiao Huilang to reinforce Shizhou and stationed in Xiguan.

古文：虏军济淮攻寿春，分骑当出随、邓，众以为忧。嶷曰： 虏入春夏，非动众时，令豫、司强守，遏其津要；彼见坚严，自当溃散，必不敢越二镇而南也。 是时纂严，嶷以荆州邻接蛮、蜑，虑其生心，令镇内皆缓服。
现代文：北虏军渡淮水攻寿春，分骑兵从随、邓二地进发，大家对此忧虑，萧嶷说： 进入春夏以后，不再是敌人用兵的好季节，衹要命令豫、司二州坚守重要渡要道，他们看到戒备森严，他们会自己溃散，必然不敢越过这两镇向南进犯 这时正戒严，萧嶷想到荆州与蛮、蛋接壤，怕他们产生二心，就令防区内都穿宽大的衣服。
English: The North Korean army crossed the Huai River to attack Shouchun, and the detachment of cavalry marched from Su Yuan and Deng Er Di. Everyone was worried about this. Xiao Yao said: After entering the spring and summer, it is no longer a good season for the enemy to use soldiers. Yao should order Yu and Si two states to stick to the important waterway. When they saw the tight security, they would break up on their own. They must not dare to cross the two towns to attack the south. At this time, there was a state of siege. Xiao Yao thought that Jingzhou was on the border with Manchukuo and Guizhou. In order to

古文：既而虏竟不出樊、邓，于寿春败走。
现代文：最终北虏没有从樊、邓出兵，在寿春败退了。
English: In the end, the Northern Ruthenians did not send troops from Sui and Deng, and retreated in Shuchun.

古文：寻给班剑二十人。
现代文：不久赐给萧嶷班剑仪仗二十人。
English: Soon, twenty members of Xiao Yao's squad were given ceremonial swords.

古文：其夏，于南蛮园东南开馆立学，上表言状。
现代文：当年夏天，在南蛮园东南开学馆，上表陈述情况。
English: In the summer of this year, a building was built in the southeast of Nanban Park to establish a school. The table above shows the situation.

古文：置生四十人，取旧族父祖位正佐台郎，年二十五以下十五以上补之；置儒林参军一人，文学祭酒一人，劝学从事二人，行释菜礼。
现代文：招收四十个生员，收贵族中父辈或祖辈职位在正副台郎以上的，年龄在二十五岁以下十五岁以上的，设儒林参军一人，文学祭酒一人，劝学从事二人，行入学礼。
English: Forty students were recruited. Among the aristocrats, those whose fathers or forefathers held the positions of vice-president or higher, and who were under the age of twenty-five and over the age of fifteen, were recruited. One was assigned to join the army, one to participate in the literary festival, two to engage in persuasion, and one to perform the entrance ceremony.

古文：以谷过贱，听民以米当口钱，优评斛一百。
现代文：因为当时谷价太低，让他们用米来抵讲费，学得好的给米一百斛。
English: Because the price of grain was too low at that time, they were allowed to use rice to offset the lecture fee, and those who studied well were given 100 baht for rice.

古文：义阳劫帅张群亡命积年，鼓行为贼，义阳、武陵、天门、南平四郡界，被其残破。沈攸之连讨不能禽，乃首用之。
现代文：义阳的贼首张群逃亡多年之后，竟公然成为流寇，义阳、武陵、天门、南平等四郡都受其害，沈攸之接连征讨也没捉住他，就招降了他。
English: After Yiyang's first band of thieves had been on the run for many years, they openly became roving bandits. The four counties of Yiyang, Wuling, Tianmen, and Nanping were all victimized by them. Shen Yu's successive campaigns did not catch him, and he was invited to surrender.

古文：攸之起事，群从下郢，于路先叛，结寨于三溪，依据深险。
现代文：攸之起兵时，张群随他到郢州，在路上先反叛了，在三溪扎寨，依凭深沟高垒。
English: When Yuanzhi raised an army, Zhang Qun followed him to Zhangzhou. On the way, he rebelled first, and set up camp in Sanxi, relying on the high fortress of Shugu.

古文：嶷遣中兵参军虞欣祖为义阳太守，使降意诱纳之，厚为礼遗，于坐斩首，其党数百人皆散，四郡获安。
现代文：萧嶷派中兵参军虞欣祖任义阳太守，让他设法诱其投降，多给礼物，在座中斩了张群，同党数百人四散而去，四郡得到安定。
English: Xiao Yao sent soldiers to join the army of Yu Xin Zu Ren Yiyang Dazhu, let him try to entice him to surrender, give more gifts, beheaded Zhang Qun on the spot, hundreds of party members scattered, and the four counties were stabilized.

古文：入为都督扬南徐二州诸军事、中书监、司空、扬州刺史，持节、侍中如故。
现代文：入朝任都督扬南徐二州诸军事、中书监、司空、扬州刺史，持节、侍中的职权不变。
English: Upon entering the imperial court, Yang Nan Xu, who was appointed as the governor of Yangzhou, had the same powers as the military, the Chinese librarian, the secretary of the imperial court, the Yangzhou court historian, the military governor of the festival, and the chamberlain.

古文：加兵置佐。
现代文：增加兵力设置属员。
English: Increase troop strength to set up subordinates.

古文：以前军临川王映府文武配司空府。
现代文：把前军临王萧映府的文武官员配置到司空府。
English: The civil and military officials of the former army Lin Wang Xiao Yingfu were assigned to Sikuofu.

古文：嶷以将还都，修治廨宇及路陌，东归部曲不得赍府州物出城。
现代文：萧嶷因为就要回京，便修建官舍和道路，规定束归的部属不能带府州的财物出城。
English: Because he was about to return to Beijing, Xiao Wei built official residences and roads, and stipulated that subordinates who had returned home could not leave the city with their property in Fuzhou.

古文：发江津，士女观送数千人，皆垂泣。
现代文：从江津出发，几千百姓都流泪相送。
English: Starting from Jiangjin, thousands of people left in tears.

古文：嶷发江陵感疾，至京师未瘳，上深忧虑，为之大赦，三年六月壬子赦令是也。
现代文：萧嶷到江陵得了病，到京城还没好，皇上很忧虑，为他大赦天下，这就是建元三年六月壬子曰的赦令。
English: Xiao Yao got sick in Jiangling and was not well when he arrived in Beijing. The emperor was very worried and pardoned him. This is the pardoning order of Ren Zi in June of the third year of the first century.

古文：疾愈，上幸东府设金石乐，敕得乘舆至宫六门。
现代文：病好了，皇上到束府举行音乐会，规定萧嶷可以乘车直达宫六门。
English: After recovering from the illness, the emperor held a concert in Sokufu, stipulating that Xiao Yao could take a direct train to Gonglimen.

古文：太祖崩，嶷哀号，眼耳皆出血。
现代文：太祖驾崩，萧嶷哀哭，眼耳都哭出了血。
English: After the death of his great-grandfather, Xiao Yao cried bitterly, and his eyes and ears bled.

古文：世祖即位，进位太尉，置兵佐，解侍中，增班剑为三十人。
现代文：世祖即位，萧嶷晋升太尉，设卫队和辅佐，免去侍中职，增加班剑仪仗到三十人。
English: When the founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, Xiao Yao was promoted to the rank of captain, set up guards and assistants, was exempted from the position of attendant, and increased the number of ceremonial swordsmen to thirty.

古文：建元中，世祖以事失旨，太祖颇有代嫡之意，而嶷事世祖恭悌尽礼，未尝违忤颜色，故世祖友爱亦深。
现代文：建元年间，世祖曾因事失宠，太祖很想让别人取代太子位，但是萧嶷对待世祖敬爱尽礼，从未违抗其意，所以世祖对萧嶷也很情深。
English: During the first year of the Founding of the People's Republic of China, Shizu had fallen out of favor due to an incident, and Taizu was eager to have someone else replace him as crown prince. However, Xiao Yao treated Shizuo with utmost respect and never disobeyed his wishes, so Shizuo was also very affectionate towards Xiao Yao.

古文：永明元年，领太子太傅，解中书监，余如故。
现代文：永明元年拜为太子太傅，免中书监的职，其他职务照旧。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Yongming became the crown prince and was exempted from the post of the book supervisor, and his other duties remained the same.

古文：手启上曰： 陛下以睿孝纂业，万宇惟新，诸弟有序。臣屡荷隆爱，叨授台首，不敢固辞。俛仰祗宠，心魂如失。
现代文：萧嶷自拟手启曰：陛下凭圣明孝道继承大业，万象更新，众兄弟有序，我多蒙厚爱，忝居群臣之首，不敢执意推辞，深思皇上的宠爱，心中茫然如失。
English: Xiao Yao made a self-portrait, saying: "Your Majesty has inherited a great cause by virtue of the holy and filial piety, all things are renewed, all brothers are orderly, I have received much love, I am at the head of the group of ministers, I dare not persist in refusing, I ponder the emperor's favor, and my heart is at a loss.

古文：负重量力，古今同规。
现代文：估量有多大的力就挑多重的担，这个道理古今相同。
English: It is the same in the past as it is in the present: to measure a great power is to lift a great burden.

古文：臣穷生如浮，质操空素，任居鼎右，已移气序。自顷以来，宿疾稍缠，心虑恍惚，表于容状。
现代文：我一生如浮尘，品质德行都很平常，身居重职，已经是不当，不久前，旧病复发，心神恍惚，从外表也能看得出来，我想这样的病情，常怕命不能承受圣恩。
English: My whole life is like floating dust, my qualities and virtues are all ordinary, I am in a heavy job, it is already inappropriate, not long ago, the old disease recurred, my mind was in a trance, I can see it from the outside, I think such a disease, I am often afraid of life and cannot bear the grace.

古文：视此根候，常恐命不胜恩；加以星纬屡见灾祥，虽修短有恒，能不耿介？比心欲从俗，启解今职，但厝辞为鄙，或贻物诮，所以息意缄嘿，一委时运，而可复加宠荣，增其颠坠？
现代文：加上星相多见灾祸之象，虽然寿命有定数，又怎能不放在心上。现在我想成为一般闲人，请求解职，衹是措辞鄙陋，可能为人讥笑，因此一直不说，一切寄托于时运，现在却更加恩宠荣耀，增加我的衰颓。
English: In addition, there are many signs of calamity in the stars, although life expectancy is fixed, how can I not take it to heart. Now I want to be a general idler, requesting dismissal, the wording is despicable, it may be ridiculed, so I have not said that everything is entrusted to the time, but now it is more grace and glory, increasing my decline.

古文：且储傅之重，实非恒选，遂使太子见臣必束带，宫臣皆再拜，二三之宜，何以当此！
现代文：况且太子太傅职责重大，实在不比一般的人选，就让太子见了我定要束带示敬，宫中大臣见了也要拜见，像我这样的常人，凭什么担当得起。
English: Moreover, the duties of the Crown Prince and Grand Duke are very important, and they are really no better than those of an ordinary candidate. If I were to meet the Crown Prince, I would have to wear a tie to show my respect. If I were to meet the Minister of the Imperial Household, I would have to bow to him. How can an ordinary person like me take on this responsibility?

古文：陛下同生十余，今唯臣而已，友于之爱，岂当独臣钟其隆遇！
现代文：陛下兄弟十余人，现在衹有我一个是这样，兄弟亲情，难道就单单我一人受到这样大的恩遇吗?
English: Your Majesty, there are more than ten brothers, but now I am the only one. Brotherly affection, am I the only one to receive such a great blessing?

古文：别奉启事，仰祈恩照。
现代文：特启奏，请求恩准。
English: Special opening, please come.

古文：臣近亦侍言太子，告意子良，具因王俭申启，未知粗上闻未？
现代文：我近日也对太子说了，又给子良说了这个想法，又通过王俭说明，不知皇上有所闻没有?
English: Recently, I also told the crown prince, and I also told Ziliang about this idea, and I also explained it through Wang Jian. I wonder if the emperor has heard anything about this?

古文：福庆方隆，国祚永始，若天假臣年，得预人位，唯当请降貂榼，以饰微躯，永侍天颜，以惟毕世，此臣之愿也。
现代文：国家洪福正盛，国运久长，如果上天能赐我寿命，能继续在世为人，定当请求貂瑺之饰，来装饰我卑微的身躯，永远侍奉皇上，尽我一生，这是我的希望。
English: The country is prosperous and the national fortune is long-lasting. If God can give me a long life and I can continue to be a human being in the world, I will definitely ask for the ornament of the dragonfly to decorate my humble body, serve the emperor forever, and live my life to the full. This is my hope.

古文：服之不衷，犹为身灾，况宠爵乎！
现代文：服饰与德行不相称，会身受其灾，何况是最受恩宠的爵位呢!
English: Clothes are not commensurate with virtue, and you will suffer the consequences, not to mention the most favored titles!

古文：殊荣厚恩，必誓以命请。 
现代文：非凡的荣耀，非常的君恩，我一定誓死相报。
English: Extraordinary glory, extraordinary dignity, I'll pay it back with my life.

古文：上答曰： 事中恐不得从所陈。 
现代文：皇上回答说： 造事恐怕不能使您如愿。 
English: The Emperor replied, "I'm afraid I can't make you do what you want.

古文：宋氏以来，州郡秩俸及供给，多随土所出，无有定准。
现代文：宋氏以后，州郡的俸禄和其他供给，大多根据当地所出产，没有一定的标准。
English: After the Song Dynasty, the state and county salaries and other supplies were mostly based on local production, and there was no certain standard.

古文：嶷上表曰： 循革贵宜，损益资用，治在夙均，政由一典。
现代文：萧嶷上表说：沿革贵在适当，费用的增减，要早早调整平衡。
English: Xiao Wei said on the table: the history is appropriate, the increase and decrease of expenses, it is necessary to adjust the balance as early as possible.

古文：伏寻郡县长尉俸禄之制，虽有定科，而其余资给，复由风俗。东北异源，西南各绪，习以为常，因而弗变。缓之则莫非通规，澄之则靡不入罪。
现代文：政令根据同一法律。我考察郡县长官和尉官的俸禄制度，虽然有明确规定，但是其他的费用，又根据各地情况，东方和北方不同源流，西方和南方各有头绪，习以为常，沿袭不变，往宽处说没有哪一点不是符合规矩的，细细清查没有谁不违法。
English: The government decree is based on the same law. I examined the salary system for county and prefectural governors and lieutenants. Although there are clear regulations, other expenses, according to local conditions, have different sources in the east and north, and different directions in the west and south. They are commonplace and unchanged. There is nothing that is not in line with the rules, and there is no one who is not illegal.

古文：殊非约法明章，先令后刑之谓也。
现代文：这很不符合首先公布法律，先令而后用法的说法。
English: This is very much at odds with the notion that laws are published first, shillings later.

古文：臣谓宜使所在各条公用公田秩石迎送旧典之外，守宰相承，有何供调，尚书精加洗核，务令优衷。
现代文：我认为应该使律令中有关公用公田俸秩和接待的旧律之外，地方长官交接，有哪些供俸，由尚书府精细查核，务必使待遇优厚而又符合实情。
English: In my opinion, in addition to the old law concerning the public land salary rank and reception in the regulation, the transfer of local governors should be made, and what kind of salary should be carefully checked by the Ministry of Education and Culture, so that the treatment should be generous and consistent with the reality.

古文：事在可通，随宜开许，损公侵民，一皆止却，明立定格，班下四方，永为恒制。 
现代文：事情如可行，应马上施行。损害国家侵害百姓的，一律禁止，明确地定下规格，颁布四方，永为制度。
English: If the matter is feasible, it should be implemented immediately. If it harms the state and infringes on the people, it shall be prohibited without exception, the specifications shall be clearly set forth, promulgated by the four parties, and it shall be a permanent system.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：嶷不参朝务，而言事密谋，多见信纳。
现代文：芦昼不参与朝廷政务，但所说的事或机密谋划，多被采纳。
English: Xiao Wei does not participate in the affairs of the DPRK and China, but is generally trusted and accepted.

古文：服阕，加侍中。
现代文：服丧期满，升侍中。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was given the additional title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：二年，诏曰： 汉之梁孝，宠异列蕃，晋之文献，秩殊恒序。
现代文：二年，下韶： 汉代的梁孝王，受宠而不同于其他藩国，置伐的塞麸，俸禄等级非同一般。
English: In the 2nd year, the lower yakitori: Liang Xiao Wang of the Han Dynasty, favored and different from other feudal lords, set up the yakitori, and the salary grade was extraordinary.

古文：况乃地侔前准，勋兼往式！虽天伦有本，而因事增情。
现代文：况且是依据前例，兼有以往的勋劳，虽然本来是兄弟，但也因劳苦增长情谊。
English: Moreover, it is on the basis of precedent, combined with past honors, although they were originally brothers, but also because of their hard work, their friendship grew.

古文：宜广田邑，用申恩礼。 
现代文：应该扩大封邑，以此表明君王的恩情和礼遇。 
English: The fiefdoms should be expanded to show the king's favor and courtesy.

古文：增封为四千户。
现代文：增加封邑为四千户。
English: The number of fiefs was increased to four thousand.

古文：宋元嘉世，诸王入斋阁，得白服裙帽见人主，唯出太极四厢，乃备朝服，自比以来，此事一断。
现代文：宋元嘉时期，众王进入斋合，可以素衣素裙帽见君王，衹在出了太极四厢，才穿朝服，从此以后，这样的事也没有了。
English: During the Song and Yuan Dynasties period, when kings entered the palace, they could see the emperor without clothes, skirts, and hats. Only when the emperor left the Taiji Quadrangle did he wear the imperial robe. Since then, there has been no such thing.

古文：上与嶷同生，相友睦，宫内曲宴，许依元嘉。
现代文：皇上与萧嶷同母所生，关系和睦，宫内的私宴，允许依从元嘉时的规矩。
English: The emperor and Xiao Yao were born of the same mother, the relationship was harmonious, the private banquet in the palace was allowed to follow the rules of Yuan Jia.

古文：嶷固辞不奉敕，唯车驾幸第，乃白服乌纱帽以侍宴焉。
现代文：萧嶷坚决推让不敢奉命，衹有皇上到府第私见时，才穿素服戴乌纱帽陪宴。
English: Xiao Yao resolutely refused to comply with the order, and only wore a plain dress and a black fedora to attend a banquet when the emperor came to the palace for a private meeting.

古文：启自陈曰： 臣自还朝，便省仪刀、捉刀，左右十余亦省，唯郊外远行，或复暂有，入殿亦省。
现代文：启奏说：我自从到朝中，就省去了仪仗，带刀的亲随十多个人也省了，衹有郊外远行时，或许临时使用，入殿也就不要了。
English: Kaiso said, "Since I came to the Imperial Court, I have omitted ceremonial battles, and I have also omitted accompanying more than ten people with a sword. When I travel far away from the suburbs, I may use it temporarily, and I don't need to enter the temple.

古文：服身今所牵仗，二侠毂，二白直，共七八十人。
现代文：现在跟着我的仪仗，两排护卫队，两个随行小吏，共七八十人。
English: Now I am accompanied by a guard of honour, two rows of guards, two accompanying minor officials, a total of seventy or eighty people.

古文：事无大小，臣必欲上启，伏度圣心脱未委曲，或有言其多少，不附事实，仰希即赐垂敕。 
现代文：事情无论大小，我必定要报告皇上，我想皇上或许不知详情，有人说多说少的，与实情不符，希望就能赐教。
English: No matter how big or small the matter is, I must report it to the emperor. I think the emperor may not know the details. Some people say more or less, which is not true. I hope I can give him some advice.

古文：又启： 扬州刺史旧有六白领合扇，二白拂，臣脱以为疑，不审此当云何？
现代文：又奏：扬州刺史原来有六白领合扇，二白拂，我很疑惑，不知怎么说才好。
English: And again: Yangzhou Shishi originally had six white collar fans and two white whisks. I'm very puzzled, I don't know what to say.

古文：行园苑中乘舆，出篱门外乘舆鸣角，皆相仍如此，非止于带神州者，未审此当云何？
现代文：在园苑中乘车，出篱门外乘舆吹号角，都是这样沿袭下来，并不衹是京城长官如此，不明这事当怎样?
English: Riding in a car in a park, and riding out of a gate by blowing a trumpet, have all come down in this way. It is not that the mayor of the capital is like this, and it is not clear what should be done about it?

古文：方有行来，不可失衷。 
现代文：正需有个规定，不能失当。
English: There needs to be a rule that it cannot be done improperly.

古文：上答曰： 仪刀、捉刀，不应省也。
现代文：皇上回答：仪刀、捉刀，不应省去。
English: The emperor replied, "Swordsmanship and sword fighting should not be omitted.

古文：侠毂、白直，乃可共百四五十以还正是耳。
现代文：护卫队、随从可有一百四五十人，回到规矩上罢了。
English: There may be a hundred and forty-five guards and attendants, let's just go back to the rules.

古文：亦不曾闻人道此。
现代文：我也没听人谈过这事。
English: I haven't heard anyone talking about it either.

古文：吾自不使诸王无仗，况复汝耶？
现代文：我当然不能让众王没有仪仗，何况又是你呢?
English: Of course, I can't let the kings go without honor, and what about you?

古文：在私园苑中乘此非疑。
现代文：在私园中乘车那是没疑问的。
English: There's no doubt about that.

古文：郊外鸣角及合扇并拂，先乃有，不复施用，此来甚久。
现代文：在郊外用鸣角以及合扇和拂尘等，原先是有的，后来不再用了，逭已是很久的事了。
English: It's been a long time since the use of horns in the suburbs, as well as fans and dusters, which were originally available, were no longer used.

古文：凡在镇自异还京师，先广州乃立鼓吹，交部遂有辇事，随时而改，亦复有可得依旧者。
现代文：凡是地方长官回京的，先是广州设置鼓乐，变部又有人拉车的仪仗，根据时风改易，也还有可能依照旧例的。
English: Whenever a local governor returns to Beijing, Guangzhou will first set up a drum band, and there will be a ceremonial game of changing the club and someone pulling a cart. According to the style of the time, it may also be changed according to the old practice.

古文：汝若有疑，可与王俭诸人量衷，但令人臣之仪无失便行也。 
现代文：你如有问题，可以和王俭等人商量适当的形式，衹是要使大臣不失礼仪就可以了。又奏：
English: If you have a problem, you can discuss the appropriate form with Wang Jian and others, but only if you want the minister not to lose etiquette.

古文：又启曰： 臣拙知自处，暗于疑访，常见素姓扶诏或著布屩，不意为异。
现代文：我不会处世，见闻也不多，曾经看见老百姓穿着草鞋看政府文告也不感到奇怪。
English: I don't live in the real world, and I don't know much about it, so I wasn't surprised to see people wearing straw sandals to read government announcements.

古文：臣在西朝拜王，仪饰悉依宋武陵事例，有二鄣扇，仍此下都，脱不为疑；小儿奴子，并青布袴衫，臣斋中亦有一人，意谓外庶所服，不疑与羊车相类。
现代文：我在西疆时朝拜王爷，仪仗全是按宋武陵时期的样子，有二个鄣扇，这样子保持在陪都，倘午疑问。小童奴仆，都是青布裤褂，我斋中也有一人，原想是外地的服饰，不想和羊车服饰相似。
English: When I was in Western Xinjiang, I worshiped the emperor. The ceremonial battle was all according to the appearance of the Song Wuling period. There were two fans, so it remained in the capital, in case of doubt. The child slaves were all blue cloth trousers, and there was also one person in my class who thought it was a foreign dress and did not want to be similar to the sheep cart dress.

古文：曲荷慈旨，今悉改易。
现代文：承蒙慈旨教诲，现在全都改过了。
English: Thanks to the teachings of the Compassionate God, everything has changed now.

古文：臣昔在边镇，不无羽卫，自归朝以来，便相分遣，侠毂、白直，格置三百许人，臣顷所引，不过一百。
现代文：我往日在边防，不是没有羽卫，自入朝以来，就遣散了，护卫队、随员，规定有三百来人，我近来所带的不超过一百人。
English: In the past, I used to guard the border, but not without guards. Since I joined the imperial court, I have been demobilized. There are about three hundred guards and attendants, and I have recently brought no more than a hundred people.

古文：常谓京师诸王不烦牵仗，若郊外远行，此所不论。
现代文：我常认为京城众王不怕麻烦带着仪仗，如果郊外远行，造就不说。
English: I often think that the kings of the capital are not afraid of trouble and take the ceremonial battle with them. If they travel far away from the suburbs, they will not say it.

古文：有仗者非臣一人，所以不容方幅启省，又因王俭备宣下情。
现代文：有仪仗的不是我一人，因而冒昧启奏，又通过王俭详述情况。
English: I am not the only one who has the honor, so I took the liberty of opening the concert, and also detailed the situation through Wang Jian.

古文：臣出入荣显，礼容优泰，第宇华旷，事乖素约，虽宋之遗制，恩处有在，犹深非服之惭。威卫之请，仰希曲照。 
现代文：我出入荣耀显赫，礼仪盛大，府第壮丽，行事却违背制度，虽然是宋留下的体例，蒙恩沿用，还是深感不当关于仪仗方面的陈请，仰望皇上体察。
English: I enter and leave with great glory, with grand etiquette and magnificent pomp, but act contrary to the system. Although it is a style left by Song Dynasty, it is still deeply felt that it is inappropriate to ask the emperor about the ceremonial aspects, and look up to the emperor for advice.

古文：上答曰： 传诏台家人耳，不足涉嫌。
现代文：皇上批覆曰：传韶者是奴仆，不必怀疑。
English: The emperor reprimanded him, saying, "There is no need to doubt that the preacher is a slave.

古文：鄣扇，吾识及以来未见，故有敕耳。
现代文：鄣扇之类自我记事以来没见过，所以有令。
English: I haven't seen anything like this since I've been keeping a diary, so I had to do it.

古文：小儿奴子，本非嫌也。吾有所闻，岂容不敕汝知，令致物议耶？
现代文：小童奴仆等，本来就不涉嫌我听到什么话，哪有不告诉你的，而让人非议你呢。
English: Children, slaves, and so on, would not have suspected what I heard, and would not have told you, but would have let you be reproached.

古文：吾已有敕，汝一人不省侠毂，但牵之。
现代文：我已有命令，你一人不省侠毂，衹管用它。
English: I've got an order, you're the only one who can use it, so use it.

古文：吾昨不通仗事，俭已道，吾即令答，不烦有此启。
现代文：我以前不知仪仗的事，王俭已说明了，我当即令回覆，不须再奏。
English: Wang Jian has already explained that I did not know about the matter of honor before, and I immediately ordered a reply, no need to play again.

古文：须间言，自更一二。 
现代文：可私下商量，自行变更一些。
English: You can discuss it privately and make some changes on your own.

古文：又启曰： 违远侍宴，将逾一纪，忧苦间之，始得开颜。
现代文：又奏：离陪侍宴饮时间很久了，将有十来年了，忧苦交替，始得欢愉。
English: And again: It's been a long time since I've had a banquet, it will be more than ten years, sorrow alternates with joy.

古文：近频侍座，不胜悲喜。
现代文：近来常常陪座，不胜欢喜。
English: Recently, he often accompanies the audience and sings with great joy.

古文：沾饮过量，实欲仰示恩狎，令自下知见，以杜游尘。
现代文：有时饮酒过量，实是想表达蒙恩亲近，让下面人看到，以此杜绝轻贱的闲言。
English: Sometimes they drink too much, but they really want to show that they are close, so that the people below can see, and in this way they can stop the trivial gossip.

古文：陛下留恩子弟，此情何异，外物政自强生间节，声其厚薄。
现代文：陛下施恩于子弟，这有什么奇怪，外界正因此而横生枝节，扬言有厚薄之分。
English: His Majesty's kindness to his son, what's so strange about that, the outside world is divided because of it, and the threats vary from mild to severe.

古文：伏度或未上简。
现代文：我想或许还未上达。
English: I think maybe it hasn't been delivered yet.

古文：臣前在东田，承恩过醉，实思叹往秋之谤，故言启至切，亦令群物闻之，伏愿已照此心。
现代文：我上次在东田，承蒙圣恩陪酒，实是因为慨叹去年有人指责我，所以说话恳切，也让其他人听到，我希望已能洞察我肺腑。
English: The last time I was in Higashida, I was given the grace to drink with them. In fact, it was because I lamented that someone had accused me last year, so I spoke earnestly and let others hear. I hope I have been able to see into my innermost being.

古文：前侍幸顺之宅，臣依常乘车至仗后，监伺不能示臣可否，便互竞启闻，云臣车逼突黄屋麾旄，如欲相中。
现代文：前不久随皇上到顺之的家裹，我和往常一样乘车跟在后面，监礼的人不告诉我行不行，就都争着在皇上面前指责我，说我的车子过于靠近皇上车驾，就像在皇帝行列一样。
English: Not long ago, I accompanied the emperor to Shunzhi's home, and as usual, I rode in the car behind him. Without telling me whether it was okay or not, the supervisors all rushed to criticize me in front of the emperor, saying that my car was too close to the emperor's car, just like in the imperial ranks.

古文：推此用意，亦何容易！
现代文：推究这种用意。又是多么明显。
English: How obvious it is to deduce this intention.

古文：仰赖慈明，即赐垂敕；不尔，臣终不知暗贻此累。
现代文：仰仗皇上慈祥圣明，当即下旨；否则，我不会知道暗中留下这个罪名。
English: Relying on the emperor's benevolence and wisdom, I immediately issued the order; otherwise, I would not have known to leave this crime in the dark.

古文：比日禁断整密，此自常理，外声乃云起臣在华林，辄捉御刀，因此更严。度情推理，必不容尔，为复上启知耳。
现代文：近日禁中戒备严密，这自是正理，但外面传言说我曾在华林，总是拿起刀杖，因而更森严戒备，猜测这情理，是一定不能相容了，为此我又报告陛下。
English: Recently, there has been a lot of vigilance in the Forbidden City, which is logical, but the outside rumor that I was in Hualin and always picked up a sword and therefore was even more vigilant, guessing this logic, must be incompatible, for which I will report to Your Majesty.

古文：但风尘易至，和会实难，伏愿犹忆臣石头所启，无生间缝。
现代文：衹因风尘易来，和会实在太难，我希望陛下还是考虑我在石头所奏，不要产生隔阂。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will still consider what I have played on the stone and not create a rift.

古文：此闲侍无次，略附茹亮口宣。
现代文：近来常常陪侍陛下，稍从茹亮所传谕。
English: Lately, he often accompanies His Majesty, with a little help from Zhu Liang.

古文：臣由来华素，已具上简，每欲存衷，意虑不周，或有乖常。
现代文：我一向所处理的朝野事务都已上报，每有要留衷的事，总怕不周到，有失当的地方。
English: I have always dealt with the morning and evening affairs have been reported, every thing to keep in mind, always afraid of inconsiderate, improper place.

古文：且臣五十之年，为玩几时，为此亦复不能以理内自制。
现代文：况且我年近五十，又有何时轻慢了政务呢?为此也不能治好自己的私事。
English: Moreover, I am nearly fifty years old, and since when have I despised government affairs? For this reason, I am unable to handle my personal affairs.

古文：北第旧邸，本自甚华，臣改修正而已，小小制置，已自仰简。
现代文：北边旧府，本很华丽，是我修整的，这小规模的建置，已上报圣上。
English: The old palace on the north side, which was originally very ornate, was renovated by me. This small-scale construction has been reported to the emperor.

古文：往岁收合得少杂材，并蒙赐故板，启荣内许作小眠斋，始欲成就，皆补接为办，无乖格制，要是柽柏之华，一时新净。
现代文：往年收了些杂料，并蒙圣上赐的原来的板料，奏请圣上许建小眠斋，才要修建，都是修补而成，并不违礼，因为这些檀木柏木的纹理华美，一时新鲜。
English: In previous years, some miscellaneous materials were collected, and the original board materials were given by the Holy Father, and it was necessary to ask the Holy Father for permission to build a small dormitory. They were all repaired, and it was not a violation of etiquette, because the texture of these sandals and cypresses was gorgeous and momentarily fresh.

古文：东府又有斋，亦为华屋。
现代文：东府又有斋，也是华丽的房屋。
English: There is also a restaurant in the eastern part of the city, which is also a gorgeous building.

古文：而臣顿有二处住止，下情窃所未安。
现代文：我一时就有了两处住下休息的地方，内心不安。
English: Instantly, I had two places to stay and rest, and I felt uneasy.

古文：讯访东宫玄圃，乃有柏屋，制甚古拙，内中无此斋，臣乃欲坏取以奉太子，非但失之于前，且补接既多，不可见移，亦恐外物或为异论，不审可有垂许送东府斋理否？
现代文：据说东宫的玄圃，就有柏屋，形势古拙，裹面没有这样的房，我就想拆除这个来献给太子，遣又不但失了先前的圣恩，而且修补处已多，不能移动，也怕外臣有人非议，我不知是否有允许我送东府斋的道理。
English: It is said that there is a cypress tree house in the garden of the East Palace. The situation is old-fashioned, and there is no such house in Wafu. I would like to dismantle this one to dedicate it to the prince. Sending it would not only lose the previous grace, but there are already many places to repair it, so it cannot be moved. I am also afraid that the foreign minister will be criticized. I don't know if there is a reason to allow me to send it to the East Palace.

古文：臣公家住止，率尔可安，臣之今启，实无意识，亦无言者，太子亦不知臣有此屋，政以东宫无，而臣自处之，体不宜尔尔。
现代文：我有朝廷例定住处，可以安居，我现在的奏陈，实是没有其他想法，也没有话说，太子也不知我有这个屋，正因为束宫没有，但是我有，按例不应这样。
English: I have a regular residence at the Imperial Court, where I can live in peace and quiet. As I'm telling you now, I don't really have any other ideas, and I don't have anything to say. The crown prince doesn't even know that I have this house, precisely because the Imperial Palace doesn't have one, but I do, and this shouldn't be the case.

古文：所启蒙允，臣便当敢成第屋，安之不疑。陛下若不照体臣心，便当永废不修。
现代文：如所奏蒙皇上恩准，我就会建成房屋，安处不疑，陛下如不体察我的心，就该永远让它废而不修。
English: If what you say is approved by the emperor, I will build a house and live in peace. If your majesty does not consider my heart, it should always be abandoned and not repaired.

古文：臣自谓今启非但是自处宜然，实为微臣往事，伏愿必垂降许。
现代文：我自以为现在奏陈不但使自己处置适当，也实是我的往事，希望一定允许。
English: I believe that playing Chen now is not only the right thing to do, but it is also my past, and I hope it will be allowed.

古文：伏见以诸王举货，屡降严旨，少拙营生，已应上简。
现代文：我看到因为诸王以低价收买货物，陛下数次严命，稍作营生，已上报陛下。
English: I see that because the kings bought the goods at a low price, His Majesty has made several strict orders to earn a little money, and has reported to His Majesty.

古文：府州郡邸舍，非臣私有，今巨细所资，皆是公润，臣私累不少，未知将来罢州之后，或当不能不试学营觅以自赡。
现代文：府州郡的馆舍，不是我私有，现在大小费用，都是皇家恩泽，我私蓄不少，不知免官之后，或许不会学习营利自养。
English: The buildings in Fuzhou County are not my private property. The current size and cost are all royal benefits. I have accumulated a lot of money. I don't know if I will learn to make a profit after I am relieved of my duties.

古文：连年恶疾余，顾影单回，无事畜聚，唯逐手为乐耳。 
现代文：连年以来重病余生，顾影自怜，没有着意聚财，衹是数数指头为乐罢了。
English: After years of serious illness, Gu Ying felt sorry for himself and had no intention of accumulating wealth. He was only interested in counting his fingers.

古文：上答曰： 茹亮今启汝所怀及见别纸，汝劳疾亦复那得不动，何意为作烦长启事！
现代文：皇上答日：茹亮现报告你所想的又看到你的上奏，你虽劳疾又哪能不动，为何想到引起麻烦总是奏陈!
English: Emperor's reply: Zhu Liang now reports what you are thinking and sees your play, although you are laboring and can't move, why do you always think of causing trouble!

古文：凡诸普敕，此意可寻，当不关汝一人也。
现代文：在那些命令中，这类意思可以参照，应不止关系到你一个人的事。
English: In those orders, this kind of meaning can be referenced, should be more than a matter for you alone.

古文：宜有敕事，吾亦必道，顷见汝自更委悉，书不欲多及。屋事慎勿强厝此意，白泽亦当不解何意尔。 
现代文：该有指示的事，我也一定会说，近来看到你格外委悉，不想多写，房屋的事千万不要坚持这一想法，白泽也会不理解你有什么意思。
English: As for things that should have instructions, I will definitely say that I have recently seen that you are extraordinarily knowledgeable and do not want to write more. Do not stick to this idea when it comes to houses. Bai Ze will not understand what you are interested in.

古文：三年，文惠太子讲《孝经》毕，嶷求解太傅，不许。
现代文：三年，文惠太子讲《孝经》之后，萧嶷请求辞太傅职，不准。
English: Three years later, after Prince Wen Hui gave a lecture on the "Book of Filial Piety," Xiao Yu requested permission to resign from his position as grand steward, which was denied.

古文：皇孙婚竟，又陈解，诏曰： 公惟德惟行，无所厝辞。
现代文：皇孙的婚事之后，又奏请辞职。下诏说： 你既有美德又有操守，不要说什么了。
English: After the marriage of the prince's grandson, the emperor again asked him to resign, saying, "You have both virtue and integrity, so don't say anything."

古文：且鲁且卫，其谁与二？
现代文：又是鲁又是卫，谁能相比。
English: Whether it is Lu or Wei, who can compare.

古文：方式范当时，流声史籍，岂容屡秉捴谦，以乖期寄。 
现代文：正应在当今作一楷范，流芳史册。岩能屡次谦让，而违背了我的期望倚重。 
English: Iwakuni should be a role model for today and go down in history. Iwakuni has repeatedly shown meekness, but has defied my expectations.

古文：嶷常虑盛满，又因宫宴，求解扬州授竟陵王子良。
现代文：萧嶷总是怕自己地位太高，又乘宫宴时请求解除扬州授给竞陵王子良。
English: Xiao Yao was always afraid that his status was too high, and he used the occasion of the palace banquet to request that Yangzhou be revoked and awarded to Jingling Prince Liang.

古文：上终不许，曰： 毕汝一世，无所多言。 
现代文：皇上始终不准，说： 直到你整个一生，不要再说了。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Yangzhou Zhishi, you must serve as this official for the rest of your life. Don't say anything more."

古文：世祖即位后，频发诏拜陵，不果行。
现代文：世祖即位后，屡屡降诏要祭拜陵墓，没有成行。
English: After the Emperor ascended the throne, he repeatedly issued an edict to worship the mausoleum, but it was never carried out.

古文：遣嶷拜陵，还过延陵季子庙，观沸井，有水牛突部伍，直兵执牛推问，不许，取绢一匹横系牛角，放归其家。
现代文：派萧嶷去拜陵，归来时拜延陵季子庙，看沸井，有水牛冲撞队伍，卫兵捉住牛追究主人，萧塞制止，用一匹绢系在牛角上，把牛放回家。
English: He sent Xiao Yao to pay homage to the mausoleum. When he returned, he paid homage to the Yanling Ji Zi Temple. He looked at the well. There was a buffalo charging the procession. The guards caught the cow and investigated the owner. Xiao Zao stopped it. He tied a mule to the horn of the cow and let the cow go home.

古文：为治存宽厚，故得朝野欢心。
现代文：他治政宽厚，所以得到朝野的欢心。
English: He was generous in his governance, so he won the favor of the court.

古文：四年，唐宇之贼起，启上曰： 此段小寇，出于凶愚，天网宏罩，理不足论。
现代文：四年，唐寓之叛乱，萧嶷启奏：这股小贼，出于凶恶愚顽，天网恢恢，按理不值一谈。
English: In the fourth year, the rebellion of the Tang family, Xiao Yu's prelude: this petty thief, out of vicious stupidity, Heaven's net is wide open, it is not worth talking about.

古文：但圣明御世，幸可不尔，比藉声听，皆云有由而然。
现代文：衹是圣明君主治国，幸能没有这种事情，近听舆论，都说发生这事是有原因的。
English: It is fortunate that there is no such thing, since it is the rule of the Ming Dynasty. According to public opinion, there is a reason for this.

古文：岂得不仰启所怀，少陈心款？
现代文：我怎能不向陛下说明我的想法。
English: How can I not tell His Majesty what I think?

古文：山海崇深，臣获保安乐，公私情愿，于此可见。
现代文：山求高海求深，臣下得享安乐，可见于公于私都是盼望的。
English: The mountains seek the heights, the sea seeks the depths, and the vassals enjoy peace and happiness. It can be seen that both the public and the private are looking forward to it.

古文：齐有天下，岁月未久，泽沾万民，其实未多，百姓犹险，怀恶者众。
现代文：齐得天下时间不久，百姓蒙恩泽实际上还不多，百姓中心存险恶的人还很多。
English: It has been a short time since the world was unified, but there are still not many people who have been favored by the world, and there are still many people who are evil in the hearts of the people.

古文：陛下曲垂流爱，每存优旨。
现代文：陛下垂爱，常存体恤之意。
English: Your Majesty's affection and constant sympathy.

古文：但顷小大士庶，每以小利奉公，不顾所损者大，擿籍检工巧，督恤简小塘，藏丁匿口，凡诸条制，实长怨府。
现代文：但是大小士族庶民，总是以小利奉上朝廷，不怕大的损失，籍考赋税精细，地方收记塘役，隐瞒人口，许多法令条款，实是增长怨气。
English: However, the common people of the large and small warrior tribes always submitted to the imperial court with small profits and were not afraid of large losses. The nationality examination and taxation were fine, the local government collected taxes, concealed the population, and many laws and regulations actually increased resentment.

古文：此目前交利，非天下大计。
现代文：这衹是眼前的利益，不是治国的大计。
English: These are short-term gains, not the end of the world.

古文：一室之中，尚不可精，宇宙之内，何可周洗！
现代文：一室之中，都还有不能细察的地方，宇宙之内，哪裹能全部感化呢。
English: In a room, there are places that can't be scrutinized, and in the universe, no one can influence everything.

古文：公家何尝不知民多欺巧，古今政以不可细碎，故不为此，实非乖理。
现代文：朝廷何尝不知百姓中多有欺诈奸巧，古今为政都不能过于琐细，因而不这样做，也实在不算违背道理。
English: The imperial court does not know that there is a lot of deception and treachery among the people, and the politics of the past and present cannot be too trivial, so it is not unreasonable to do so.

古文：但识理者百不有一，陛下弟儿大臣，犹不皆能伏理，况复天下悠悠万品！
现代文：但认识到这个道理的不到百分之一，陛下的兄弟儿子大臣们，尚且不能都明白这个道理，更何况天下悠悠万种人呢。
English: But less than one percent realize this truth, and His Majesty's brothers, sons, and ministers cannot all understand this truth, let alone all the people in the world.

古文：怨积聚党，凶迷相类，止于一处，何足不除？脱复多所，便成纭纭。
现代文：怨忿多了便聚集成伙，凶恶与糊涂类似，衹是这一处，为什么不根除，若又有多处这样，便造成纷乱。
English: If there is too much resentment, people will gather in groups. Evil is similar to stupidity. If there is a problem in one area, why not eradicate it? If there are problems in many areas, it will cause chaos.

古文：久欲上启，闲侍无因，谨陈愚管，伏愿特留神思。 上答曰： 欺巧那可容！
现代文：很久就想奏陈陛下，平时侍陪陛下时没有机会，今谨陈愚陋管见，希望陛下格外留心。皇上答覆： 欺诈奸巧岂能容!
English: For a long time, I have wanted to play for His Majesty Chen. Normally, when I am accompanying His Majesty, I do not have the opportunity. Now, I respectfully disagree. I hope that Your Majesty will pay special attention. The Emperor replied, "I cannot tolerate deception and trickery!"

古文：宋世混乱，以为是不？
现代文：宋代的混乱就是这样吧?
English: The chaos of the Song Dynasty is just like that, isn't it?

古文：蚊蚁何足为忧，已为义勇所破，官军昨至，今都应散灭。
现代文：蚊蚁之乱怎值得忧虑，已被地方武装击破，官军前不久去征讨，现在都应已溃灭。
English: The Ants and Mosquitoes Rebellion is a cause for concern. It has been defeated by local armed forces. The government army went to fight it not long ago, but it should have been crushed by now.

古文：吾政恨其不办大耳，亦何时无亡命邪！ 
现代文：我正遣憾不办大事罢了，又何时没有亡命之徒呢。 
English: I'm just regretting not doing big things, and when is there not a desperado?

古文：后乃诏听复籍注。
现代文：后降韶任复籍注。
English: Later, he issued an imperial edict to allow those people to resume their household registration.

古文：五年，进位大司马。
现代文：五年，萧嶷晋位大司马。
English: Five years later, Xiao Wei was promoted to the rank of grand steward.

古文：八年，给皂轮车。
现代文：八年，赐皂轮车。
English: Eight years, give me a soap dispenser.

古文：寻加中书监，固让。
现代文：接着又加中书监，萧嶷坚决辞让。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Central Library Supervisor. He firmly refused.

古文：嶷身长七尺八寸，善持容范，文物卫从，礼冠百僚，每出入殿省，皆瞻望严肃。
现代文：萧嶷身高七尺八寸，善于保持风度，所用车服、旌旗仪仗警卫超过百官。每次出入宫庭和官署，人们都瞻望车驾肃然起敬。
English: Standing seven feet and eight inches tall, Xiao Yao was good at maintaining his demeanor. He used more than a hundred officials for his uniform, flag and guard of honor. Every time he entered and left the palace and government offices, people looked at his car with awe.

古文：自以地位隆重，深怀退素，北宅旧有园田之美，乃盛修理之。
现代文：他自认为位高权重，深怀激流勇退之心，北宅原有园田美景，随之整治。
English: He knows his position is important, and would like to retire to idleness. There used to be a beautiful meadow in the courtyard to the north, which he has spruced up considerably.

古文：七年，启求还第，上令世子子廉代镇东府。
现代文：匕年，奏请回府第，皇上命世子子廉代他镇束府。
English: In the year of the rooster, he was invited to return to the prefecture, and the emperor ordered his heir, the son of the emperor, to represent his town, Sokufu.

古文：上数幸嶷第。
现代文：皇上多次到萧嶷府。
English: The emperor went to Xiao Yu's residence many times.

古文：宋长宁陵遂道出第前路，上曰： 我便是入他冢墓内寻人。 
现代文：宋的长宁陵有墓道通府前的路，皇上说： 我这是到他坟墓裹找人。 
English: Changning Mausoleum of Song Dynasty has a cemetery road leading to the road in front of the palace. The emperor said, "I am going to his tomb to look for someone."

古文：乃徙其表阙骐驎于东岗上。骐驎及阙，形势甚巧，宋孝武于襄阳致之，后诸帝王陵皆模范而莫及也。
现代文：于是迁移那个表坊麒麟到东岗上，麒麟和表坊形状很巧，是宋孝武帝从襄阳弄来的，以后的众帝王陵都以此为样式，但没有比得上的。
English: As a result, the Kirin watch tower was moved to Donggang. The Kirin and the watch tower have a very clever shape. It was Emperor Song Xiaowu who brought them from Xiangyang. The tombs of subsequent emperors were all in this style, but there was nothing comparable.

古文：永明末，车驾数游幸，唯嶷陪从。上出新林苑，同辇夜归，至宫门，嶷下辇辞出，上曰： 今夜行，无使为尉司所呵也。 
现代文：永明末年，皇上多次游玩，祇有萧嶷陪伴，皇上到新林苑，萧嶷同车夜归，到宫门，萧嶷下车辞出，皇上说： 夜里走路，不要让巡察的人呵责了。 
English: At the end of the Yongming era, the emperor made several trips, accompanied only by Xiao Yao. When the emperor went to Xinlinyuan, Xiao Yao returned with the car at night. When he arrived at the palace gate, Xiao Yao got off the car and resigned. The emperor said, "If you walk at night, don't let the inspectors scold you."

古文：嶷对曰： 京辇之内，皆属臣州，愿陛下不垂过虑。 
现代文：萧嶷回答： 京城之内，都是我管辖，请陛下不要过虑。 
English: Xiao Yao replied, "Within the capital, everything is under the jurisdiction of the vassals. I hope Your Majesty does not have to worry about it.

古文：上大笑。
现代文：皇上大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：上谋北伐，以虏所献毡车赐嶷。
现代文：皇上谋伐北魏，把北虏所献的毡车赐给萧嶷。
English: The emperor campaigned in the Northern Wei Dynasty, and gave the carriage donated by the Northern Ruthenians to Xiao Yu.

古文：每幸第清除，不复屏人。上敕外监曰： 我往大司马第，是还家耳。 
现代文：每次到萧嶷府清除道路时，不赶走人，皇上告诉外监： 我到大司马府如!司回家。 
English: Every time he went to Xiaohui Prefecture to clear the roads, instead of driving away people, the emperor told the overseer: "When I go to Daishimafu, I will go home."

古文：嶷妃庾氏常有疾，瘳，上幸嶷邸，后堂设金石乐，宫人毕至。
现代文：萧嶷的庾氏妃常有病，病好了，皇上到萧嶷府祝贺，在后堂设金石乐，宫里人都来了。
English: Xiao Yao's Empress Dowager Cixi was often ill, but she recovered. The emperor came to Xiao Yao's palace to congratulate her. A concert was held in the back hall, and everyone in the palace came.

古文：每临幸，辄极日尽欢。
现代文：皇上每次到萧嶷府，就整日尽欢。
English: Every time the emperor came to Xiaoqifu, he spent the whole day enjoying himself.

古文：嶷谓上曰： 古来言愿陛下寿偕南山，或称万岁，此殆近貌言。如臣所怀，实愿陛下极寿百年亦足矣。 
现代文：萧嶷对皇上说： 按古例要说陛下寿比南山，或者称为万岁，这些都近于虚言，我想实在希望陛下享寿百年也就好了。 
English: Xiao Wei said to the emperor: According to ancient custom, to say that His Majesty's birthday is better than that of Nanshan, or to say "long live," these are all close to lies. I really hope that His Majesty will live to be a hundred years old.

古文：上曰： 百年复何可得，止得东西一百，于事亦济。 
现代文：皇上说： 百岁又怎能得到，衹要西宫束府加起来一百年，也就好了。 
English: The emperor said, "How can it be obtained in a hundred years? As long as the family industry can be continued for a hundred years, the matter will be considered a success."

古文：十年，上封嶷诸子，旧例千户，嶷欲五子俱封，启减人五百户。
现代文：十年，皇上封赠芦塞的几个儿子，照旧例是千户，盖塞想五个儿子都能受封，奏请减为每人五百产。
English: Ten years later, the emperor bestowed the title of nobility on several of his sons. As usual, there were a thousand households. Gessai wanted all five of his sons to receive the title of nobility, so he requested that the number be reduced to 500 per person.

古文：其年疾笃，表解职，不许，赐钱百万营功德。
现代文：那年病重，上表辞职，不准，赐钱百万做佛事。
English: He was seriously ill that year, resigned from his post, was not allowed to return, and was given a million dollars to do Buddhist activities.

古文：嶷又启曰： 臣自婴今患，亟降天临，医走术官，泉开藏府，慈宠优渥，备极人臣。
现代文：萧嶷又奏： 我自从得了遣个病，皇上垂爱，命医官奔走，赐府藏钱财，慈爱恩宠如甘露滋润，到了为人臣所受的极致。
English: Xiao Wei also played: Since I got sick, I have been loved by the emperor, ordered by the medical officer to run, given money and treasure to the government, and been nourished by benevolence and grace like nectar, I have reached the pinnacle of being a vassal.

古文：生年疾迫，遽阴无几。
现代文：但是我生命迫蹙，离死不远。
English: But I'm on life support and I'm not far from death.

古文：愿陛下审贤与善，极寿苍旻，强德纳和，为亿兆御。
现代文：望陛下明察贤良与善行，寿与天齐，修德纳和，为万民之主。
English: Hope that your majesty sees the virtuous and the virtuous, the long life and the heavenly life, the virtuous and the virtuous, and is the lord of all people.

古文：臣命违昌数，奄夺恩怜，长辞明世，伏涕呜咽。 
现代文：我命运不好，忽然夺去陛下恩怜，永远告别人世，不禁流涕呜咽。 
English: My fate is not good, suddenly deprived of His Majesty's mercy, forever condemned to death, I can't help but weep.

古文：薨，年四十九。
现代文：当年去世，终年四十九岁。
English: He was forty-nine when he died.

古文：其日，上再视疾，至薨，乃还宫。
现代文：发病当天，皇上两次探望病情，直到萧嶷死，才回宫。
English: On the day of his illness, the emperor visited him twice to check on his condition. He did not return to the palace until after Xiao Yao's death.

古文：诏曰： 嶷明哲至亲，勋高业始，德懋王朝，道光区县，奄至薨逝，痛酷抽割，不能自胜，奈何奈何！
现代文：下韶： 萧嶷明哲而敬亲，在开国的事业中建立很高功勋，德行激励朝廷，光照家国，突然逝世，我悲痛得心如刀割，不能禁受，怎么办呵怎么办!
English: Lower eyelid: Xiao Yu was a great scholar and respected his relatives. He made great contributions to the founding of the People's Republic of China. His virtues inspired the imperial court and shined a light on his homeland. His sudden death has left me heartbroken. I can't help but grieve. What should I do?

古文：今便临哭。九命之礼，宜备其制。
现代文：今日临哭，九命礼仪应完备地依制办理。
English: Today, we are on the verge of tears, and the nine lives etiquette should be fully implemented in accordance with the system.

古文：敛以衮冕之服，温明秘器，命服一具，衣一袭，丧事一依汉东平王故事，大鸿胪持节护丧事，大官朝夕送奠。
现代文：用衮冕服饰装殓，温明秘器，命服一套，衣一袭，丧事全照汉塞芒玉的旧例，大鸿胪持节监护丧事，大臣早晚祭奠。
English: Decorated with coronation costumes, warm secret utensils, a set of life jackets, one dress at a time, the funeral followed the old example of Hansel and Gretel, the Great Dragon Preservation Festival supervised the funeral, and the minister paid tribute in the morning and evening.

古文：大司马、太傅二府文武悉停过葬。 
现代文：大司马、太傅二二府的文武官员都停下公务去送葬。 
English: Daisima, Taifu, and other cultural and military officials from the two prefectures stopped their official duties to attend the funeral.

古文：竟陵王子良启上曰： 臣闻《春秋》所以称王母弟者，以尊其所重故也。
现代文：竞陵王子良启奏皇上道：我听说《春秋》中称王母弟的原因，足因为尊重。
English: Jingling Prince Liang Qisong said: I heard that in "Spring and Autumn" the reason for calling Wang mother and brother was due to respect.

古文：是以礼秩殊品，爵命崇异，在汉则梁王备出警入跸之仪，在晋则齐王具殊服九命之赠。
现代文：因此礼仪和俸禄等级特别，爵位崇高，漠代就有梁王具有出入宫禁的特权，置伐就有变王得到高爵位的赐赠。
English: Therefore, the etiquette and the salary level are special, and the title of nobility is high. In the desert era, King Liang had the privilege of being banned from entering and leaving the palace, and the king was given a high title of nobility.

古文：江左以来，尊亲是阙，故致衮章之典，废而不传，实由人缺其位，非礼亏省。
现代文：迁到江左以后，没有尊显的亲属，所以拜授王公的典礼，废弃不传，实在是由于没有人能受那个爵位，不是礼仪减省。
English: After moving to Jiangzuo, there are no relatives who respect him, so the ceremony of conferring the title of prince is abandoned. It is really because no one can receive that title, not because of the reduction of etiquette.

古文：齐王故事，与今不殊，缔构王业，功迹不异。凡有变革随时之宜者，政缘恩情有轻重，德义有厚薄。若事筹前规，礼无异则。
现代文：齐王的旧事，与今天没有不同，建立王业，功迹没有不同，衹要有根据时势变革的，正因恩情有轻重，德行道义有厚薄，如事按前代的规矩，礼仪上没有不同。
English: The past of King Qi is no different from that of today. The establishment of the king's career and the achievements are no different. If there is to be a change according to the current situation, it is precisely because the feelings of gratitude are important, and the virtues and moralities are thick and thin. If things are according to the rules of previous generations, there is no difference in etiquette.

古文：且梁、齐阙令终之美，犹飨褒赠之荣；况故大司马仁和著于天性，孝悌终于立身，节义表于勤王，宽猛彰于御物，奉上无艰劬之貌，接下无毁伤之容！
现代文：况且梁王、齐王没有善终的美德，尚且享受褒赠的荣耀；何况先大司马仁义温和出自本性，孝悌感情终其一生，节义表现在对待皇上，宽厚猛烈表现在对待下属，敬奉皇上不知疲倦，对待下属不加伤害，明正廉洁，不喜怒无常，悠然宁静，不争名逐利。
English: Moreover, Liang Wang and Qi Wang do not have the virtue of a good ending, yet they enjoy the honor of a reward; moreover, the former grand steward Ma Renyi is gentle by nature, filial feelings last a lifetime, righteousness is manifested in treating the emperor, generosity is fiercely manifested in treating subordinates, honor the emperor tirelessly, treat subordinates without harm, straightforward and clean, do not like anger and fickleness, leisurely and quiet, do not compete for fame and profit.

古文：淡矣止于清贞，无喜愠之色；悠然栖于静默，绝驰竞之声。
现代文：《诗经》裹说 哪裹不是有好的开头，衹是很少能够坚持到结束 。
English: The "Book of Songs" says that if a poem does not have a good beginning, it is rarely able to stick to the end.

古文：《诗》云 靡不有初，鲜克有终 。
现代文：坚持到底，实是难事，今天这裹有人不损逭一德操。
English: To persevere to the end is really a difficult thing. Today, there are people who do not compromise their ethics.

古文：夫终之者，理实为难，在于令行，无废斯德。东平乐于小善，河间悦于诗书，勋绩无闻，艰危不涉，尚致卓尔不群，英声万代；况今协赞皇基，经纶霸始，功业高显，清誉逾彰，富贵隆重，廉洁弥峻，等古形今，孰类兹美！
现代文：东平王不过喜欢做些小的善事，河板王祇是爱好诗书，没有听说有什么功勋政续，也没有经历过艰危，尚且地位显赫，美名流传；何况现在有协助皇上开基，经营霸业，功高业显，英名远播，富贵隆重，廉洁声名更高，与古代当今都比一比，谁有这样好。
English: Dongping Wang only likes to do some small good deeds. Hepang Wang only likes poetry and books. He has not heard of any political achievements, nor has he experienced any hardships. He still has a prominent position, and his good name has been passed down. What's more, he has assisted the emperor to found a foundation, run a domineering business, achieved great success, and his fame has spread far and wide. He is rich and grand, and his reputation for integrity is higher. It is comparable to ancient times and today. Who has such a good reputation?

古文：臣愚忖度，未有斯例！凡庶族同气，爱睦尚少，岂有仰睹陛下垂友于之性若此者乎？
现代文：照我想来，没有这样的事即使是普通的兄弟，友爱和睦的也少，哪有像陛下这样爱兄弟的呢?
English: As far as I can see, there is no such thing. Even if they are ordinary brothers, there are few who are friendly and harmonious. Is there anyone who loves his brother like His Majesty?

古文：共起布衣，俱登天贵；生平游处，何事不同？分甘均味，何珍不等？未常睹貌而天心不欢，见形而圣仪不悦。
现代文：都起于平民，一起登上高贵地位，平生悠游相处，何事不同，分享甜美，有何珍奇不是共享呢，没有常见面圣上心裹就想念，见到他病的样子皇上又有忧愁。
English: They both started out as commoners, ascended to a noble position together, and spent their lives together. What's different? Sharing is sweet. What's so special about sharing? When there's no common face, the emperor's heart is wrapped around it and he misses it. When he sees him sick, the emperor is sad.

古文：爰及临危舍命，亲瞻喘息，万分之际，没在圣目，号哭动乎天地，感恸惊乎鬼神，乃至撤膳移寝，坐泣迁旦，神仪损耗，隔宿改容，奉瞻圣颜，谁不悲悚！
现代文：等到临终时，皇上亲到他面前，垂危之时皇上守在身边，号哭动天地，感鬼神，竟然不食不睡，坐着哭到天亮，精神耗损，一夜便消瘦许多，看到皇上这样子，谁不悲伤担心呢。
English: When he was on his deathbed, the Emperor came to kiss him. When he was dying, the Emperor stood by his side. He cried, moved heaven and earth, and moved the spirits. He went without food and sleep, sat and cried until dawn. His spirit was exhausted, and he lost a lot of weight overnight. Seeing the Emperor like this, who wouldn't be sad and worried?

古文：历古所未闻，记籍所不载。
现代文：自古以来从未听说过，典籍上从未记载。
English: It has never been heard of since ancient times, and it has never been recorded in the classics.

古文：既有若斯之大德，实不可见典服之赠不彰。如其脱致亏忘，追改为烦，不令千载之下，物有遗恨！
现代文：既然有像这样的大德，实是不能不予以显赫封赠，如果名声亏于实迹，以追赠为烦事，岂不是使千年之后，还留下遗憾吗。
English: Since there is such a great virtue, it is really impossible not to give it a prominent seal. If the reputation is inferior to the actual deed, and it is troublesome to pursue the gift, wouldn't it be a pity to leave it after a thousand years?

古文：其德不具美者，尚荷嘉隆之命；况事光先烈者，宁可缺兹盛典！
现代文：那些德行不美的人，尚且享有很高的荣誉，何况事迹盛大超过古人的，岂能没有这样的盛典。
English: Those who are virtuous and not beautiful, yet enjoy high honor, not to mention deeds more magnificent than the ancients, would not be able to do without such a celebration.

古文：臣恐有识之人，容致其议。
现代文：我怕有识之士会有非议。
English: I'm afraid that people with insight will find fault with it.

古文：且庶族近代桓温、庾亮之类，亦降殊命，伏度天心，已当有在。 
现代文：况且庶族中近代有桓温、庾亮等，也降赠特别荣誉，我想陛下已有了这种想法吧。
English: Moreover, in modern times, commoners such as Kuan-Wen and Su-Liang have also been given special honors, and I think His Majesty has already had this idea.

古文：又诏曰： 宠章所以表德，礼秩所以纪功。
现代文：又降诏道：宠章用来表述功德，礼秩用来纪念勋劳。
English: He also issued an edict: the title of "favorite" is used to express merit, and the title of "courtesy" is used to commemorate meritorious service.

古文：慎终追远，前王之盛策，累行畴庸，列代之通诰。
现代文：慎终追远，所以从前君王有策令，奖励功勋，历代都有诰命。
English: Prudence will eventually catch up with distance, so in the past, the monarchs had policy orders, rewarded merits, and all generations had a hard life.

古文：振风润雨，无諐于时候；恤民拯物，有笃于矜怀。雍容廊庙之华，仪形列郡之观，神凝自远，具瞻允集。朕友于之深，情兼家国。
现代文：原使持节、都督扬南徐二州诸军事、大司马、领太子太傅、扬州刺史、新任中书监、豫章王萧嶷，有美德明智，有仁有义，在年轻时就享有清誉，很早就风标独立，帮助经营霸业，建构皇基，敬上睦亲闻名于乡里，忠诚宽厚闻名于州郡。
English: The original envoys, the governor Yangnan Xu Erzhou military, the grand secretary Ma, the crown prince Taifu, Yangzhou Zhishi, the newly appointed middle school librarian, Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoqi, have virtue and wisdom, have benevolence and righteousness, enjoy a clear reputation at a young age, have been independent for a long time, help to operate the hegemony industry, and build the imperial foundation. Respect for relatives is famous in the village, and loyalty and generosity are famous in the county.

古文：方授以神图，委诸庙胜，缉颂九弦，陪禅五岳，天不慭遗，奄焉薨逝。哀痛伤惜，震恸乎厥心。
现代文：等到凭德行品格，总管国事，承担起人伦教化，总理六府政务，如和风润雨，不误时节，体恤百姓拯救万物，怜悯之情厚诚，雍容大度为朝廷精华，仪态端肃是州郡楷范，精神流远，人们瞻仰、我兄弟情深，兼有家国情谊，正要把治国的方略委托给他，继续治理神州，陪同惮封五岳。天不佑我，使之突然逝世，我心裹非常悲痛震惊。
English: By virtue of virtue and character, he was in charge of state affairs and assumed the responsibility of human relations and education. The prime minister's six government affairs, such as harmony, rain and rain, do not miss the season, sympathize with the people to save all things, compassionate and sincere, graceful and generous is the essence of the imperial court, dignified and solemn is the model of the state and county, the spirit is far away, people admire, my brother is deeply affectionate, and has the friendship of the motherland. I am about to entrust him with the strategy of governing the country, continue to govern the divine state, and accompany the five mountains. God bless me, so that he died suddenly,

古文：今先远戒期，龟谋袭吉，宜加茂典，以协徽猷。
现代文：现在先远定戒期，选择吉日，应加盛典，与他高明的谋略相符。
English: Now it is time to set aside a period of fasting, choose a good day, and add a grand ceremony, which is in line with his clever strategy.

古文：可赠假黄皞、都督中外诸军事、丞相、扬州牧，绿綟绶，具九服锡命之礼，侍中、大司马、太傅、王如故。
现代文：可追赠假黄钹、都督中外诸军事、丞相、扬州牧，苍缘绶带，备办九锡礼仪，侍中、大司马、太傅、王等职依旧。
English: It is possible to posthumously present a fake yellow ribbon, the military, chancellors, ministers, Yangzhou herdsmen, heron ribbons, prepare Jiuxi etiquette, and retain the positions of chamberlain, grand steward, taifu, and king.

古文：给九旒鸾辂，黄屋左纛，虎贲班剑百人，辒辌车，前后部羽葆鼓吹，葬送仪依东平王故事。 
现代文：赐九旒鸾辂，黄屋左纛，虎贲卫队班剑百人，辊鲸车，前后部羽葆鼓吹，葬送仪式按束平王的成例。
English: He was given nine scepters, the left scepter of the Yellow House, a hundred swords of the Tiger Scepter Guard, a whale-drawn chariot, and the front and rear feathered scepters. The funeral ceremony followed the example of King Sukehira.

古文：嶷临终，召子子廉、子恪曰： 人生在世，本自非常，吾年已老，前路几何。
现代文：盖盛临死，召来儿子王庆、子恪说：人生在世本来就不一般，我已年老，前面路不多了。
English: On his deathbed, Gai Sheng summoned his sons Wang Qing and Zi Ke to say: "Life in this world is not normal. I am old, and there is not much road ahead.

古文：居今之地，非心期所及。
现代文：到了现在这个地位，并不是我心裹所希望的。
English: To get to where I am now, it's not what I had in mind.

古文：性不贪聚，自幼所怀，政以汝兄弟累多，损吾暮志耳。
现代文：我素来没有贪心，从小就这样想，衹怕你们兄弟拖累，减损我暮年的志向。
English: I've never been greedy, and I've thought this way since I was a child, so I don't want your brothers to drag me down and impair my ambition in my twilight years.

古文：无吾后，当共相勉厉，笃睦为先。
现代文：我死后，你们要互相勉励，以和睦为重。
English: After my death, encourage one another to live in harmony.

古文：才有优劣，位有通塞，运有富贫，此自然理，无足以相陵侮。
现代文：才能有高有低，仕途有通有塞，运命有富有穷，这是自然的道理，不值得为这些事而相凌侮。
English: Talent has its advantages and disadvantages, position has its advantages and disadvantages, and luck has its advantages and disadvantages. This is a natural principle and should not be used to bully each other.

古文：若天道有灵，汝等各自修立，灼然之分无失也。
现代文：如果天道有灵，你们能各自建功立业，显明的时候终会有的。
English: If there is spirit in the heavenly way, you can each make your own contributions and establish your own karma, and when it is revealed, it will eventually come to be.

古文：勤学行，守基业，治闺庭，尚闲素，如此足无忧患。
现代文：要勉力学业修养德行，守住基业，治理家庭，崇尚淡静平凡，像这样就完全没有忧患了。
English: It is necessary to cultivate virtue, keep the foundation, manage the family, and advocate calm and ordinary. In this way, there is no sorrow at all.

古文：圣主储皇及诸亲贤，亦当不以吾没易情也。
现代文：皇上和太子以及各位亲族贤臣也会不因我死而改变感情。
English: The Emperor, the Crown Prince and your relatives and friends will not change their friendship because of my death.

古文：三日施灵，唯香火、盘水、干饭、酒脯、槟榔而已。
现代文：二日后设置灵堂，衹要香火、槃水、干饭、酒脯、槟榔就行了。
English: Two days later, the funeral hall will be set up. All you need is incense, sprinkling water, dry rice, sake lees, and betel nuts.

古文：朔望菜食一盘，加以甘果，此外悉省。
现代文：初一十五衹要菜食一盘和一盘甘果，其他的全都免了。
English: On the first day of the 15th lunar month, one plate of vegetables and one plate of candied fruits are required, and all others are exempted.

古文：葬后除灵，可施吾常所乘舆扇伞。
现代文：除葬之时，可用我常乘坐的肩舆和常使用的扇伞。
English: After the funeral and the exorcism, I can use the fan and umbrella from the car I usually take.

古文：朔望时节，席地香火、盘水、酒脯、干饭、槟榔便足。
现代文：朔望时节，就地弄些香火、槃水、酒脯、干饭、槟榔就够了。
English: During the New Year's Eve season, it is enough to prepare some incense, water, wine, dried rice, and betel nut on the spot.

古文：虽才愧古人，意怀粗亦有在，不以遗财为累。
现代文：我虽然才能不及古人，但胸襟尚宽，不以遣财为累。
English: Although I am not as talented as the ancients, my mind is still broad and I am not tired of spending money.

古文：主衣所余，小弟未婚，诸妹未嫁，凡应此用，本自茫然，当称力及时，率有为办。
现代文：除了主衣以外。还有你们的小弟未婚娶，几位妹妹未嫁，都应派些用场，本来没有一定，你们该尽力按照时宜，有多少就备办多少。
English: In addition to the main robe, there are your younger brothers who are not married, and your younger sisters who are not married, all of which should be used. Originally, there is no certainty, and you should do your best to prepare as much as possible according to the time.

古文：事事甚多，不复甲乙。
现代文：事情太多，不再一一吩咐了。
English: There are too many things to do, so I no longer give orders one by one.

古文：棺器及墓中，勿用余物为后患也。
现代文：棺中和墓中，不要用多余的物品殉葬而留下后患。
English: In the coffin and in the grave, do not use superfluous items to be buried and left behind.

古文：朝服之外，唯下铁钚刀一口。
现代文：除了朝服之外，衹要放一口铁刨刀。
English: In addition to the morning dress, the bridegroom should wear an iron planer.

古文：作冢勿令深，一一依格，莫过度也。
现代文：造坟墓不要太深，什么事都按规矩办，不要超越限度。
English: Don't dig the grave pit too deep, dig according to the specifications, don't overdo it.

古文：后堂楼可安佛，供养外国二僧，余皆如旧。
现代文：后堂楼可以安置佛像，供养外国两位僧人，其余都照旧。
English: A Buddha statue can be placed in the back hall, two foreign monks can be supported, and the rest are as before.

古文：与汝游戏后堂船乘，吾所乘牛马，送二宫及司徒，服饰衣裘，悉为功德。 
现代文：往和你们游戏后堂的船，以及我乘骑的牛马，送给两宫和司徒，服装饰物等，都作为布施。
English: The boat I used to play with you, the horse I rode, and the clothes and accessories I gave to Ryonomiya and Satoru were all gifts.

古文：子廉等号泣奉行。
现代文：子廉等哭着照办。
English: Crying, Zillian and the others agreed to do so.

古文：世祖哀痛特至，至冬乃举乐宴朝臣，上虚欷流涕。
现代文：世祖特别哀伤，到冬天举乐宴集群臣，皇上欷献流泪。
English: The ancestor was particularly sad. In winter, he held a banquet to gather a group of courtiers, and the emperor shed tears.

古文：诸王邸不得起楼临瞰宫掖，上后登景阳，望见楼悲感，乃敕毁之。
现代文：众王府不能造楼高过宫苑，皇上后来登景阳楼，看到楼感到伤感，就命令拆毁了。
English: The House of the Kings could not build a building taller than the palace garden. The emperor later climbed to the Jingshan Tower, felt sad when he saw it, and ordered it to be demolished.

古文：薨后，第库无见钱，世祖敕货杂物服饰得数百万，起集善寺，月给第见钱百万，至上崩乃省。
现代文：萧嶷死后，府库裹没有现钱，世祖命卖掉杂物服饰等，得到数百万钱，建集善寺，按月给萧嶷府现钱百万，直到皇上去世。
English: After Xiao Yu's death, the prefectural treasury was short of cash. Shizuo sold miscellaneous items, such as clothing, to obtain millions of money, built a collection of good temples, and gave Xiao Yu's prefecture millions of cash every month until the emperor's death.

古文：嶷性泛爱，不乐闻人过失，左右有投书相告，置靴中，竟不视，取火焚之。
现代文：萧嶷性情宽厚爱人，不喜欢听说别人的过失，属下有互相告发的文字，就把状文放到靴子裹，始终不看，用火烧了。
English: Xiao Yan, a generous lover, did not like to hear about other people's faults. If his subordinates had letters to inform on each other, he would wrap the letters in his boots, never look at them, and burn them with fire.

古文：斋库失火，烧荆州还资，评直三千余万，主局各杖数十而已。
现代文：斋库失火，烧掉了荆州的贡品，折价有三千多万，衹是把当班的人各打数十杖罢了。
English: The warehouse caught fire and burned the money and property brought back from Jingzhou, equivalent to a value of more than 30 million yuan, and the parties each had to pay dozens of sticks.

古文：群吏中南阳乐蔼、彭城刘绘、吴郡张稷最被亲礼。
现代文：在群吏中，南阳的乐蔼、彭城的刘绘、吴郡的迟扰最被信任和礼遇。
English: Among the group officials, Nanyang's Le-Ai, Pengcheng's Liu-Ping, and Wu County's Zhihong are the most trusted and respected.

古文：蔼与竟陵王子良笺曰： 道德以可久传声，风流以浸远隳称。
现代文：碧迈给竟陵王王且写信说： 道德因为长久而声名流传，风采因为影响深远而被称道。
English: Bi Mai wrote to King Qianling that: Morality is famous for its longevity, and style is praised for its far-reaching influence.

古文：虽复青简缔芳，未若玉石之不朽；飞翰图藻，岂伊雕篆之无沫！
现代文：虽然青史留芳，不如玉石的不朽，图书笔墨，怎能比得上那雕刻的永久。
English: Although the youthful history remains, it is not as good as the immortality of the jade, the pen and ink of the book, how can it be compared to the eternity of the sculpture.

古文：丞相冲粹表于天真，渊照殆乎机象。
现代文：丞相中和纯正来自天性，深邃光明近似天机万象。
English: Impartiality and purity come from nature, while profundity and brilliance come from heaven.

古文：经邦纬民之范，体国成务之规，以业茂惟贤，功高则哲。
现代文：是经营邦国的风范，治理国务的榜样。所以事业兴盛就是贤，功劳高就是明哲。
English: He is a model for running a state and a role model for governing a state. Therefore, a prosperous career is a virtuous person, and a high achievement is a wise person.

古文：神辉眇邈，睿算不追，感缠奉车，恨百留滞。
现代文：他的精神光辉宏远，智慧谋计无人可及，可叹的是如今已去，遗憾百事受到影响。
English: His spirit was brilliant and far-reaching, and his wisdom and strategy were second to none. It is regrettable that he is gone now, and it is a pity that Pepsi has been affected.

古文：下官夙禀名节，恩义轸慕，望遂结哀，辄欲率荆、江、湘三州僚吏，建碑垄首，庶徽猷有述，茂则方存。
现代文：我早蒙选拔，深慕恩义，远望墓道而伤怀，常想领荆、江、湘三州官员，为他在垄首建碑，记述他的光辉功业，留下崇高的楷模。
English: I was selected early, I deeply appreciate the kindness, I am saddened by the longing for the graveyard, I often want to lead officials from Jing, Jiang and Hunan provinces to build a monument for him in Renchu, to record his brilliant achievements and leave a lofty model.

古文：昔子香淳德，留铭江介，钜平遗烈，堕泪汉南，况道尊前往，惠积联绵者哉！
现代文：往昔王香德高，垦江畔人刻石纪念，钜平忠烈，汉南人为他流泪，何况德行超过前人，绵绵布惠的丞相呢。
English: In the past, Wang Xiangde Gao, a man on the banks of the Li River, was commemorated in stone. He was a great leader, loyal and faithful, and the people of Hannan shed tears for him. What's more, he was more virtuous than his predecessors, and he was a prime minister who was well liked by the people.

古文：下官今便反假，无由躬事刊斫，须至西州鸠集所资，托中书侍郎刘绘营办。 
现代文：我现在就要返假宁亲，无法亲自刊刻，须到西州征集所需资财，委托中书侍郎刘绘操办。 
English: I have to go back to Ningcheng right now. I can't publish and engrave it myself. I have to go to Xizhou to collect the necessary funds and commission Liu Peng, the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：蔼又与右率沈约书曰： 夫道宣余烈，竹帛有时先朽；德孚遗事，金石更非后亡。
现代文：乐蔼又给右率沈约写信说：宣扬忠烈，书籍有时早早腐朽，德高而没有记述，金石更不能永不磨灭。
English: Le Er also wrote a letter to the Right Leader Shen Yu, saying: "Preach loyalty and fidelity, books sometimes decay early, virtue is high but not recorded, and gold and stone cannot be worn away forever.

古文：丞相独秀生民，傍照日月。
现代文：丞相爱顾百姓，光比日月。
English: The prime minister loves to take care of the people, more than the sun and the moon.

古文：标胜丘园，素履穆于忠义；誉应华衮，功迹著于弼谐。
现代文：题名丘园，平民敬仰忠义，华丽的衮服符合盛誉，在辅臣中功勋卓着。
English: Titled Qiuyuan, the commoners admired his loyalty, his gorgeous robes matched his reputation, and he was a distinguished aide-de-camp.

古文：无得而称，理绝照载。
现代文：无法找到适合形式，按理极应记载。
English: It is impossible to find a suitable form, and logically it should be recorded.

古文：若夫日用阒寂，虽无取于锱铢；岁功宏达，谅有寄于衡石。
现代文：如果每日寂静，即使一点钱都不取，却是岁收丰足，就能勒石记功。
English: If every day is quiet, even if you don't take any money, but you have a good harvest, you will be able to record your achievements.

古文：窃承贵州士民，或建碑表，俾我荆南，阅感无地。
现代文：我见贵州郡士族庶民，有的建碑为记，使我们荆南人，感到无地自容。
English: When I see the common people of the Guizhou County Shishi ethnic group, some of whom have erected monuments in their memory, I feel ashamed to be a Jingnan person.

古文：且作纪江、汉，道基分陕，衣冠礼乐，咸被后昆。
现代文：况且我管理江、汉，道基分陕，衣冠礼乐，都影响后人。
English: Moreover, my administration of the Jiang and Han dynasties, the founding of the Shaanxi Province, and the clothing and ceremonial music all influenced later generations.

古文：若其望碑尽礼，我州之旧俗，倾罢肆，鄙土之遗风，庶几弘烈或不泯坠。
现代文：像那望见石碑就表示敬意，是我州的旧俗，倾城瞻仰，是鄙遍地方的遣风，弘烈的英名差不多不会泯灭。
English: It is an old custom in our state to pay respect to a stone monument as soon as one sees it, and to gaze at it with admiration. It is a popular custom throughout the region, and the heroic reputation will almost never be extinguished.

古文：荆、江、湘三州策名不少，并欲各率毫厘，少申景慕。
现代文：荆、江、湘三州出仕的人不少，都要捐献一些，略表仰慕之情。
English: There are many people from Jing, Jiang and Hunan who have served in the three states, and they all have to donate something to show their admiration.

古文：斯文之托，历选惟疑，必待文蔚辞宗，德佥茂履，非高明而谁？
现代文：撰写碑文的人经多次选择都觉得不妥，一定要等文章大师道德高尚行为端正的人，除了您又有谁呢?
English: After several selections, the person who wrote the inscription felt that it was not appropriate, so he had to wait for an article master, a person with high morals and proper behavior. Who else but you?

古文：岂能骋无愧之辞，酬式瞻之望！
现代文：怎能用谦让的话，来酬答我们翘首仰望的诚意。
English: How can we use humble words to reward the sincerity of looking up to us?

古文：吾西州穷士，一介寂寥，恩周荣誉，泽遍衣食。永惟道荫，日月就远，缅寻遗烈，触目崩心。
现代文：我仅是西州的一个没出息的、默默无闻的人，受恩惠获荣耀，蒙泽润享衣食，永远受到荫庇，日月远逝，缅怀忠烈，触目伤心。
English: I am only a worthless, obscure person in Xizhou, who has been honored by grace, enjoyed food and clothing, and has always been overshadowed. The sun and the moon are far away, and the memory of the faithful is sad.

古文：常谓福齐南山，庆钟仁寿。吾侪小人，贻尘帷盖，岂图一旦，遂投此请。 
现代文：平常总想丞相会福比南山，仁寿长久，我等小人，帷盖染尘，哪裹想得到有向你提出这个请求的一天呢?
English: Usually, I always think that the prime minister will be more blessed than the Nanshan Mountain, and the benevolent life will be long. We are waiting for the villain, the curtain is stained with dust. What do you want to get one day when you make this request?

古文：约答曰： 丞相风道弘旷，独秀生民，凝猷盛烈，方轨伊、旦。
现代文：沈约回信：丞相风采德行远播，沾溉蒿民，业绩辉煌，正如伊尹、周公。
English: Shen You replied: the style of the prime minister is to spread virtue far and wide, inspire the people, and perform brilliantly, just like Yi Yin and Zhou Gong.

古文：慭遗之感，朝野同悲。
现代文：他的逝世朝野同悲。
English: His death was mourned by all.

古文：承当刊石纪功，传华千载，宜须盛述，实允来谈。
现代文：应该刻石记功，流传千秋，应要详为记述，传为后世美谈。
English: It should be engraved in stone to record achievements and passed down for generations to come. It should be a detailed account and passed down for posterity.

古文：郭有道汉末之匹夫，非蔡伯喈不足以偶三绝，谢安石素族之台辅，时无丽藻，迄乃有碑无文。
现代文：郭有道衹是汉末的一般人，如非蔡伯喈就会不到两三年就不传了。谢安石是世族宰辅，如果当时没有漂亮的文章，至今也衹是有碑无文。
English: Guo Youdao was an ordinary person at the end of the Han Dynasty. If it wasn't for Cai Boqin, he wouldn't have been passed down for two or three years. Xie Anshi was the leader of the clan. If there wasn't a beautiful article at that time, there is still no monument.

古文：况文献王冠冕彝伦，仪形宇内，自非一世辞宗，难或与比。
现代文：何况文献王人中魁首，世间楷模，如非一代文章大师，难当此任。
English: What's more, if you're not a generation of master writers, it's hard to be the king of literature and a role model in the world.

古文：约闾闬鄙人，名不入弟，欻酬今旨，便是以礼许人，闻命惭颜，已不觉汗之沾背也。 
现代文：我沈约是里巷浅薄的人，名字不登大雅之堂，一时表达回覆的意思，也就是依礼待人，听到你的要求我不禁惭愧，已是不知不觉汗背沾衣了。
English: I'm a shallow person, my name is not on the list of the most elegant, I just wanted to express my reply, that is, to treat people according to etiquette. Hearing your request, I couldn't help but feel ashamed, and I was already drenched in sweat.

古文：建武中，第二子子恪托约及太子詹事孔稚圭为文。
现代文：建武年间，萧塞的第二子王恺委托选钓和太子詹事孔稚珪作文。
English: During the Jianwu period, the second son of Xiao Xie, Wang Yao, commissioned Zengyu and the prince Zhanji Kongzhi to write a composition.

古文：子廉字景蔼。
现代文：王庆字差迈。
English: Wang Qing's handwriting is poor.

古文：初，嶷养鱼复侯子响为世子，子廉封永新侯，千户。
现代文：当初，萧塞收养鱼复堡王飨为世子，土速封为丞盏岖，食邑千户。
English: At the beginning, Xiao Sai adopted Fufufu Castle Wang Yao as his heir, and Dahuofu as his son-in-law, and thousands of households in the town were fed.

古文：子响还本，子廉为世子。
现代文：后来王飨归宗，王庆被立为世子。
English: Later, Wang Xi became the patriarch, and Wang Qing was made the heir.

古文：除宁朔将军、淮陵太守，太子中舍人，前军将军。
现代文：任宁朔将军、进座太守，太子中舍人，前军将军。
English: He was appointed General of Ningshuo, Acting Governor-General, Prince Consort, and General of the former army.

古文：善抚诸弟子。
现代文：他对众兄弟和子侄们很好。
English: He was good to his brothers and nephews.

古文：十一年卒，赠侍中，谥哀世子。
现代文：十一年死，追赠为侍中，谧号哀世子。
English: He died at the age of eleven and was posthumously awarded the title of chamberlain.

古文：第三子子操，泉陵侯。
现代文：第三子名子操，封泉陵侯。
English: The third son, Naishi Matsu, became the lord of the Fusen Necropolis.

古文：王侯出身官无定，准素姓三公长子一人为员外郎。
现代文：王侯出身官不定袭，允许素姓三公的长子一人为员外郎。
English: Princes and officials of royal birth were not eligible, and only the eldest son of the third prince, surnamed Su, was allowed to be a foreign member.

古文：建武中，子操解褐为给事中，自此齐末皆以为例。
现代文：建武年间，子操出仕任给事中，从此齐代末年都作为先例照行。
English: During the Jianwu period, Zi Guo was appointed to the post, and since then, the last years of the Qi Dynasty have followed suit as a precedent.

古文：永泰元年，南康侯子恪为吴郡太守，避王敬则难奔归，以子操为宁远将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：永泰元年，南康侯子恪任吴郡太守，因躲避王敬则作乱的灾难逃回了，所以用子操做宁远将军、吴郡太守。
English: In the first year of the Yongtai era, Nankang Hou Zi Guo served as the governor of Wuxi County. However, he fled back to avoid the disaster caused by Wang Jing's rebellion, so he appointed Zi Guo as the governor of Ningyuan and the governor of Wuxi County.

古文：永元中，为黄门郎。
现代文：永元年间，任黄门郎。
English: In the first year of the Eisho era, he was appointed as Huangmenro.

古文：义师围城，子操与弟宜阳侯子光卒于尚书都座。
现代文：义师围攻城池时，子操和弟弟宜阳侯子光一起死在尚书府。
English: When Yishi besieged Chengchi, Zi Cao and his brother Yiyang Hou Ziguang died together in Shangshufu.

古文：第四子子行，洮阳侯，早卒。
现代文：第四子名子行，封洮阳侯，早死。
English: The fourth son, Naishi, was given the title of Sanyo, but died young.

古文：子元琳嗣，今上受禅，诏曰： 褒隆往代，义炳彝则。
现代文：他儿子元琳袭爵，现在的皇上接受禅位时，下诏： 隆显以前的功勋是符合法典的。
English: When his son, Yuanlin, succeeded to the peerage and the current emperor accepted the zen rank, he issued the following edict: The merits before the rise to prominence are in accordance with the legal code.

古文：朕当此乐推，思弘前典。
现代文：按这一法典推考，想宏扬从前的盛典。
English: According to this code of law, we want to carry forward the previous grand ceremony.

古文：豫章王元琳、故巴陵王昭胄子同，齐氏宗国，高、武嫡胤，宜祚井邑，以传世祀。降新淦县侯，五百户。 
现代文：豫章王元琳、原巴陵王昭胄的儿子萧同，都是齐国的国姓宗族，是高祖、武帝的嫡传，应赐赠采邑，来继承世代的祀典封为新淦县侯，采邑五百户。 
English: Yu Zhang Wang Yuanlin and Xiao Tong, the son of the original Baling King Zhaojun, are both national surnames and clans in Qi. They are the direct descendants of Gao Zu and Emperor Wu. They should be given the title of county seat to inherit the title of county seat for generations. There are five hundred county seats.

古文：史臣曰：楚元王高祖亚弟，无功汉世，东平宪王辞位永平，未及光武之业，梁孝惑于胜、诡，安平心隔晋运。
现代文：史臣曰：楚元王是高祖的异母弟弟，在汉代没有功劳，束平宪王在永平年间辞位，没有在光逮童的事业中建功，銮岂王受圭塍、公遝并的蛊惑，安平王与晋室不能同心。
English: The historian said: Chu Yuan Wang was Gao Zu's half-brother, and had no merit in the Han Dynasty. Sok Ping Xian Wang abdicated during the Yongping era, and did not make any merit in the cause of Guang Fang Tong. King Gong was under the spell of Gui Xuan and Gong Xuan, and King Anping and Jin's wife could not be of the same mind.

古文：蕃辅贵盛，地实高危，持满戒盈，鲜能全德。
现代文：皇族尊贵势大，地位实在太高，在满时要警惕盈溢，很少有能保全德望的。
English: The nobility of the imperial family is very powerful, and their status is too high. In the fullness of time, they should be wary of overflowing, and there are few who can preserve their dignity.

古文：豫章宰相之器，诚有天真，因心无矫，率由远度，故能光赞二祖，内和九族，实同周氏之初，周公以来，则未知所匹也。
现代文：豫章王是宰相之才，确有天性，心裹不骄矜，大概由于有深远谋虑，所以能荣耀前二代祖先，对内能使宗族和睦，实在像是周代初年。从周公以后，就没有人能与他相比了。
English: Prince Yuzhang is a talented prime minister. He is indeed a natural, and his heart is not arrogant. Probably because of his far-sightedness, he is able to glorify the previous two generations of ancestors, and internally he is able to reconcile the clan. It is really like the first year of the Zhou Dynasty. Since Zhou Gong, no one can compare with him.

古文：赞曰：堂堂烈考，德迈前踪。
现代文：赞曰：堂堂忠烈，德行超过前人。
English: He praised: "Dodo is loyal and virtuous, surpassing his predecessors."

古文：移忠以孝，植友惟恭。
现代文：又有忠心又尽孝道，对朋友尊敬。
English: They are loyal and filial, and respect their friends.

古文：帝载初造，我王奋庸。
现代文：帝业刚起步，我王奋发。
English: Imperial was just getting off the ground, and I had to work hard.

古文：邦家有阙，我王弥缝。
现代文：国家有缺憾，我们王爷去弥补。
English: The country has shortcomings, and we princes must make up for them.

古文：道深日用，事缉民雍。
现代文：道德深入于日常用度，整治国事，百姓和顺。
English: Morality is deeply rooted in daily life, the rectification of national affairs, and the harmony of the people.

古文：爱传余祀，声流景钟。
现代文：遣爱传给后嗣，名声像晋景公之钟传播。
English: His love was passed down to his heirs, and his fame spread like the bell of King Jinjing.

