古文：己卯八月初一日余自小腊彝东下山。
现代文：己卯年八月初一日我自小猎彝向东下山。
English: On the first day of August in the year of my birth, I went down the mountain from Xiaohuanyu to the east.

古文：腊彝者，即石甸北松子山北曲之脉，其脊度大石头而北接天生桥，其东垂之岭，与枯柯山东西相夹。
现代文：猎彝，就是石甸北面的松子山往北曲绕的山脉，它的山脊延伸到大石头后往北接到天生桥，它东垂的山岭，与枯柯山东西相夹。
English: The Hunting Ridge is the northward winding mountain range of the Pine Pine Mountain on the north side of the Shidian. Its ridge extends to the big stone and then north to the Tiansheng Bridge. Its east-dipping mountain range is sandwiched between the east and west of the Kuike Mountain.

古文：永昌之水，出洞而南流，其中开坞，南北长四十里，此其西界之岭头也。
现代文：永昌的水，出洞后往南流，其中是开阔的山坞，南北长达四十里，此地是山坞西面一列山的岭头。
English: After emerging from the cave, the water of Yongchang flows southward, among which is an open dock, stretching forty miles from north to south. This place is the ridge of a row of mountains west of the dock.

古文：有大小二腊彝寨，大腊彝在北岭，小腊彝在南岭，相去五里，皆枯柯之属。
现代文：有大、小两个猎彝寨，大猎彝在北岭，小猎彝在南岭，相距五里，都是枯柯的属地。
English: There are two big and small hunting cages, the big hunting cages are in the North Ridge, and the small hunting cages are in the South Ridge. They are five miles apart, and both belong to the withered ko.

古文：自大石头分岭为界，东为顺宁，西为永昌，至此已入顺宁界八里矣。
现代文：从大石头的分水岭为界，东边是顺宁府，西边是永昌府，到此地已进入顺宁府地界八里了。
English: From the watershed of the Great Stone, Shuning Prefecture is to the east, Yongchang Prefecture is to the west, and Shuning Prefecture is eight miles away.

古文：然余忆《永昌旧志》，枯柯阿思郎皆二十八寨之属，今询土人，业虽永昌之产，而地实隶顺宁，岂顺宁设流后畀之耶？
现代文：不过我回忆永昌的旧志书，枯柯、阿思郎都在二十八寨之列，今天询问当地人，已虽是永昌府的产业，但地方实际上隶属于顺宁府，莫非是顺宁设流官后划给它的吗？
English: However, I recall the old history book of Yongchang, Kuike and Asilang are among the twenty-eight villages. Today, I asked the locals, although it is the property of Yongchang Prefecture, the place is actually subordinated to Shuning Prefecture. Is it not Shuning that assigned it to it after the establishment of officials?

古文：又忆《一统志》、《永昌志》二者，皆谓永昌之水东入峡口，出枯柯而东下澜沧。
现代文：又回忆《一统志》、《永昌志》两书，都说永昌的水向东流入峡口，流到枯柯后向东流下澜沧江。
English: He also recalled that the two books "Isshongzhi" and "Yongchangzhi" both said that the water of Yongchang flowed eastward into the mouth of the gorge, flowed to Kaike, and then flowed eastward down the Lancang River.

古文：余按《姚关图说》，已疑之。
现代文：我考察《姚关图说》，已怀疑这种说法。
English: I have examined "Yao Guantu said" and have doubted this statement.

古文：至是询之土人，揽其形势，而后知此水入峡口山，透天生桥，即东出阿思郎，遂南经枯柯桥，渐西南，共四十里而下哈思坳，即南流上湾甸，合姚关水，又南流下湾甸，会猛多罗即勐波罗河，而潞江之水北折而迎之，合流南去，此说余遍访而得之腊彝主人杨姓者，与目之所睹，《姚关图》所云，皆合，乃知《统志》与《郡志》之所误不浅也。
现代文：到这里向当地人打听此事，收揽地理形势，然后了解到此水流入峡口山山下，穿流过天生桥，就向东流出阿思郎，于是往南流经枯柯桥，渐往西南，共四十里后下流到哈思坳，马上往南流到上湾甸，会合姚关的水流，又向南流到下湾甸，会合勋多罗河水，而潞江的水流向北折后迎着它流来，合流后往南流去。这种说法我遍处查访后在猎彝姓杨的房主人处得到它，与眼睛所见到的，《姚关图》所说的，都合得起来，才知道《一统志》与《郡志》的错误不浅。
English: I came here to inquire about the matter from the local people, collect the geographical situation, and then learned that this water flows into the gorge of the mountain, flows through the Tiansheng Bridge, and flows out of the Aslang to the east. Then it flows southward through the Withered Ke Bridge, gradually to the southwest, after a total of forty miles, it flows down to Hasuo, immediately flows southward to Shangwangdian, meets the water flow of Yao Guan, and flows southward to Shangwangdian, meets the water of the Shundoro River, and the water flow of the Li River flows northward to meet it, and flows southward after the conflu

古文：其流即西南合潞江，则枯柯一川，皆首尾环向永昌，其地北至都鲁坳南窝，南至哈思坳，皆属永为是，其界不当以大石头岭分，当以枯柯岭分也。
现代文：它的流向如果在西南与潞江合流，那么枯柯的整条河流，都是首尾向永昌环绕，此地北边到达都鲁坳南窝，南边到达哈思坳，都属于永昌才对，顺宁与永昌的分界不应以大石头岭来划分，应当以枯柯岭来划分了。
English: If it flows in the southwest and joins the Minjiang River, then the entire river of the withered ko will be encircled from end to end in the direction of Yongchang. Here, the north side reaches the South Tower of the South Tower of the South Tower, and the south side reaches the South Tower of the South Tower, both belong to Yongchang. The boundary between Shuning and Yongchang should not be divided by Daishi Ridge, but should be divided by the withered ko ridge.

古文：由岭头东南直下者三里，始望见江水曲折，南流川中。
现代文：由岭头向东南一直下走三里，这才望见曲折的江水，往南流淌在平川中。
English: After walking three miles from Lingtou to the southeast, you can see the meandering river water flowing south in the middle of the Pingchuan River.

古文：其水自阿思郎东向出石崖洞，而西南入哈思坳峡中者，即永昌峡口山入洞之下流也。
现代文：又下走三里，这才抵达江上。有铁锁桥横架在江上，它的形制完全同龙川江的曲石桥一样，但比它窄了那么一半。那江水是自阿思郎石崖的洞穴中向东流出，而后往西南流入哈思坳峡中的，这就是永昌峡口山下流入洞中的下游了。
English: After another three-mile walk, we arrived at the river. An iron lock bridge spans the river. Its shape is exactly the same as that of the Longchuan River's curved stone bridge, but it is about half as narrow. The water of the river flows eastward from the cave of the Asilang rock cliff, and then flows southwest into the Hasidic Gorge. This is the downstream of the Yongchang Gorge mouth flowing into the cave.

古文：按阿思郎在腊彝北二十里，其北有南窝都鲁坳，则此坞极北之回环处也。
现代文：据考察，阿思郎在猎彝北边二十里，它北面有南窝都鲁坳，是此处山坞极北边的回绕之处。
English: According to the investigation, Aas Lang is twenty miles north of the hunting grounds. To the north of it is Nan Wo Du Lu, which is a place around the extreme north side of the mountain dock.

古文：逾岭而北，其下即为沧江东向之曲。
现代文：越到岭北，山下就是澜沧江向东弯曲之处。
English: In the northern part of the ridge, the lower part of the mountain is where the Lancang River bends to the east.

古文：乃知罗岷之山，西南下者尽于笔架，直南下者尽于峡口山，东南挟沧江而东，为都鲁南窝北脊，山从其东复分支焉。
现代文：这才知道罗眠山的山脉，往西南下延的在笔架山到了尽头，一直往南下延的在峡口山到了尽头，东南延伸的傍着澜沧江往东，成为都鲁坳南窝北面的山脊，山从它的东面重又分支。
English: This is how we know that the mountains of the Romye Mountains, which extend down to the southwest, come to an end at the Pen Stand Mountain, which extends all the way down to the south, come to an end at the Gorges Mountain, and the southeast extends along the Lancang River to the east, becoming the ridge on the north side of the South Cave of Duluo, and the mountain branches off again from its east side.

古文：一支濒江而东；一支直南而下，即枯柯之东岭也，为此中分水之脊，迤逦由湾甸、都康而南界澜沧、潞江之中，为孟定、孟艮诸彝，而直抵交趾者也。
现代文：一条支脉濒江往东延；一条支脉一直往南下延，就成为枯柯的东岭了，是这一带分水的山脊，透迄由湾甸、都康往南延，隔在澜沧江、潞江的中间，是孟定、孟良诸地的彝人区域，而后直达交趾。
English: A tributary of the Lianjiang River extends eastward; a tributary extends all the way down to the south, and becomes the east ridge of the Kaike. It is the ridge of this water-distributing belt, extending southward from the Bay of Tian and Dukang, and is separated in the middle of the Lancang River and the Minjiang River. It is the Xiongren region of the Mengding and Mengliang provinces, and then reaches the Jiaozuo.

古文：其濒江东去之支，一包而南，为右甸，再包而南，为顺宁、大侯即今之云州。
现代文：那濒江东去的支脉，一条向南围绕，成为右甸，再次向南围绕，成为顺宁府、大侯州。
English: The branch that went east along the Lijiang River was surrounded to the south to become Uddian, and then again to the south to become Shuningfu and Dahuozhou.

古文：焉。是坞南北二坳北都鲁，南哈恩。相距四五十里，甚狭而深。
现代文：这个山坞南北的两个山坳相距四五十里，非常狭窄而且很深。
English: The two ridges of the north and south of the dock are separated by forty or fifty miles, very narrow and very deep.

古文：濒江两岸俱田，惟僰、儸儸居之，汉人反不敢居，谓一入其地即 发摆 恶性虐疾，寒战头疼也。
现代文：濒江两岸全是农田，唯有焚彝、课锣居住在这里，汉人反而不敢居住，说是一进入此地就 打摆子 ，所以虽有肥沃的土地却把它让给了彝人。
English: Both sides of the Lijiang River are all farmland. Only the Tuobao and the Xuchang live here. The Han people, on the other hand, do not dare to live here. They say that as soon as they enter this place, they start swinging, so although there is fertile land, they have given it to the Yao people.

古文：故虽有膏腴而让之彝人焉。渡桥沿江东岸，西南至哈思坳，共四十里而至亦登；沿江东岸，东南逾冈入峡，六十里而至鸡飞，余初闻有热水溢于石盘中，盘复嵌于台上，皆天成者；又一冷水流而环之，其出亦异。始以为在亦登；问道亦登，又以为在鸡飞；问道鸡飞，又以为瘴不可行，又以为茅塞无路，又以为其地去村迟，绝无居人，晚须露宿。
现代文：过桥后沿江西岸走，往西南到哈思坳，共四十里后到亦登；沿江东岸，向东南越过山冈走入山峡，六十里后到鸡飞。我最初听说有热水从石盘中溢出，盘子又嵌在平台上，都是天然形成的；又有•条冷水环绕的它流淌冷水的流出也很奇异开始以为是存亦登；问去亦登的路，又认为是在鸡飞；间去鸡飞的路，又认为有瘴气不可行，又认为茅草阻塞无路可走，又认为那地方离村庄远，绝无居民，晚上必须露宿。
English: After crossing the bridge, I walked along the west bank of the river, southwest to Hasuzu, after a total of forty miles to Yidang; along the east bank of the river, southeast over the mountains and into the gorge, after sixty miles to Qianfei. At first, I heard that there was hot water overflowing from the stone plate, and the plate was embedded on the platform, all of which were naturally formed; there was also a cold water stream surrounding it, and the outflow of cold water was also very strange. I began to think that it was Yidang; I asked the way to Yidang, and thought it was Qianfei; between the way to Q

古文：余辗然曰： 山川真脉，余已得之，一盘可无问也。 
现代文：我辗然而笑说： 山川的真实脉络，我已得到了，一处石盘可以不必管了。 
English: However, I smiled and said: I have obtained the true lineage of mountains and rivers, and I don't have to worry about a stone plate.

古文：遂从东大路上坡，向枯柯、右甸道。
现代文：于是从东边的大路上坡，走向去枯柯、右甸的路。
English: So I walked uphill from the main road on the east side to the road to Kakuretsu and Udian.

古文：始稍北，遂东上一里，而平行西下之冈，三里，有墟茅三四在冈头，是为枯柯新街。
现代文：开始时稍向北，于是向东上走一里，而后平缓行走在往西下垂的山冈上。三里，有集市茅屋三四间在冈头，这是枯柯新街。
English: At the beginning, I walked a little to the north, then I walked one mile to the east, and then I walked smoothly on the hill that was sloping to the west. For three miles, there were three or four market huts at the top of the hill. This is Kueko New Street.

古文：又东一里，有一树立冈头，大合抱，其本挺植，其枝盘绕，有胶淋漓于本上，是为紫梗树，其胶即紫梗也即紫胶，可制漆，初出小孔中，亦桃胶之类，而虫蚁附集于外，故多秽杂云。
现代文：又往东一里，有一棵树立在冈头，大有合抱，树干挺直，树枝盘绕，有胶湿淋淋的沾在树干上，这是紫梗树，它的胶就是紫梗了，最初从小孔中流出来，也是桃胶之类，但虫子蚂蚁附着聚集在外边，所以杂物脏东西很多。
English: Another mile to the east, there is a tree at the top of the hill, with a large clasp, the trunk is straight, the branches are coiled, and there is glue wet and dripping on the trunk. This is the purple tree, its glue is the purple stalk, it initially flows out of the small hole, it is also peach gum and the like, but the insects and ants are attached and gathered outside, so there are a lot of dirty things.

古文：冈左右俱有坑夹之，北坑即从冈盘窟下，南坑则自东峡而出。
现代文：山冈左右都有坑谷夹住它，北面的坑谷就从山冈往下盘绕成洞窟，南面的坑谷则从东面的山峡中出去。
English: There are valleys on both sides of the mountain to catch it. The valley on the north side coils down from the mountain to form a cave, while the valley on the south side goes out of the canyon on the east side.

古文：于是南转东盘北坑，又半里转东，半里抵东峰下，乃拾级上跻。
现代文：于是由南转向东盘绕北面的坑谷，又走半里转向东，半里抵达东峰下，就沿石阶上登。
English: So he turned from the south to the east to wind around the valley to the north, and then walked half a mile to the east, half a mile to the bottom of the east peak, and then climbed up the stone steps.

古文：三里，始登南突之岭，始望见南峡两山壁夹，自东而西，从此西出，则盘壑而西注于江桥之南，同赴哈思之坳者。
现代文：三里，开始登上南突的山岭，这才望见南边山峡两侧的山墙壁样相夹，自东延向西，从此处向西出去，则是盘绕的壑谷向西注入到江桥之南，一同奔向哈思坳的水流。
English: After three miles, I began to climb the mountains of the southern part of the canyon. It was only then that I saw the mountain walls on both sides of the southern canyon clamped together. From the east to the west, from here to the west, it was the winding valley that flowed to the west to the south of the river bridge, together with the water flow of the Hasidim.

古文：乃知其山之度脊，尚在岭之东上，不可亟问也。
现代文：才知此山延伸的山脊，还在山岭之东的上方，不可急着去考察它。
English: Just know that the mountain's extended ridge is still above the eastern part of the mountain range, and don't rush to investigate it.

古文：此坡之上即为团霸营，盖土官之雄一方者，即枯柯之夜郎矣。
现代文：此坡之上就是团霸营，大概是土官称雄的地方，这就是枯柯的夜郎国了。
English: On top of this slope is the regimental camp, probably the place where the local officials show their prowess. This is the country of the withered ko.

古文：于是循南峡而东蹑，又一里，再登岭头，有一家隐路南，其后竹树夹路。
现代文：从这里沿南边的山峡往东上登，又走一里，再次登上岭头，有一户人家隐藏在路南边，屋子后边竹丛树木夹路。
English: From here, we climbed eastward along the southern mountain gorge, walked another mile, and ascended the ridge again. There was a family hidden on the south side of the road, with bamboo bushes and trees blocking the road behind the house.

古文：从树中东行一里，稍转而北，盘一南突之坳，又向上盘坡而东，有大树踞路旁，下临西出之涧。
现代文：从树林中往东行一里，稍转向北，绕过一个南突的山坳，又向上绕着山坡往东，有棵大树盘踞在路旁，下临西边流出的山涧。
English: From the woods, go east for a mile, turn slightly to the north, go around a hill that juts out to the south, and then go up and around the hillside to the east. There is a large tree on the side of the road, next to the hill that flows out to the west.

古文：其树南北大丈余，东西大七尺，中为火焚，尽成空窟，仅肤皮四立，厚二尺余，东西全在，而南北俱缺，如二门，中高丈余，如一亭子，可坐可憩，而其上枝叶旁覆，犹青青也。
现代文：此树南北大一丈多，东西大七尺，中间被火焚烧，全部成了空洞，仅有树皮四面立着，厚二尺多，东西两面全，部在，可南北两面都缺着，如两道门，门中高一丈多，如一座亭子，可以坐下休息，然而树上枝叶往四旁下覆，仍是青青的。
English: This tree is more than a foot tall from north to south, and seven feet tall from east to west. It was burned in the middle, and all of it became a hollow. Only the bark stands on all four sides, more than two feet thick. It is complete from east to west, and the trunk is there, but the north and south sides are both missing. It is like two doors, and it is more than a foot tall in the middle of the door. It is like a pavilion, and you can sit down and rest. However, the branches and leaves on the tree overlap on all sides, and it is still livid.

古文：是所谓枯柯者，里之所从得名，岂以此耶？由此又东二里，折而北，上一坡，盘其南下之坳。坳北有居庐东西夹峙，而西庐茅檐竹径，倚云临壑，尤有幽思。
现代文：这就是所谓枯柯的地方，里名得名的缘由，难道是由于此树吗全由此又向东二里，折向北，上了一坡，绕过那南下的山坳：山坳北边有居民房屋东西两面夹峙，而西边的房屋是茅草屋，竹丛小径，靠着白云下临壑谷，尤其富于幽雅的意味。
English: This is the place of the so-called withered ko, the reason for the name of the place, is it because of this tree? All of this leads to another two miles to the east, turning to the north, going up a slope, bypassing the south-facing mountains: on the north side of the mountains, there are residential houses sandwiched between the east and west, while the houses on the west side are thatched houses, bamboo paths, leaning against the white clouds of Linyi Valley, especially rich in elegant meaning.

古文：其东有神宇踞坡间，闻鲸音鼓赛出绝顶间，甚异之。
现代文：它东边有神殿盘踞在坡上，听见祭神的钟鼓声飘出于绝顶间，感到十分奇怪。
English: To the east of it, there is a temple perched on the slope, and it is very strange to hear the bells and drums of the gods floating out of the peaks.

古文：有一家踞路南，藩门竹径，清楚可爱。
现代文：有一家人高踞在路南，篱笆门前竹丛小径，清雅可爱。
English: There was a family of stilt walkers on the south side of the road, walking along the bamboo path in front of the gate. They were elegant and lovely.

古文：入问之，曰： 此枯柯小街也 。
现代文：入门问路，说： 此地是枯柯小街。 
English: When asked for directions at the beginning, he said: "This is the small street of Kaike.

古文：距所上坡又二里矣。
现代文：距所上的坡又有二里地了。
English: It's another two miles down the slope from where we started.

古文：于是又东沿北坡平上。
现代文：于是又往东沿北坡平缓上走。
English: So I walked eastward along the north slope.

古文：其南即西出深涧，北乃崇山，竹树蒙蔽，而村庐踞其端，东向连络不绝。
现代文：坡南就是西边流出来的深涧，北面是高山，竹林树木密蔽，而村庄房屋高踞在坡头，面向东方连接不断。
English: The south slope is the deep valley flowing out from the west, the north is the high mountain, the bamboo forest is densely covered with trees, and the village houses are high on the slope, facing the east and connected continuously.

古文：南望峡南之岭，与北峰相持西下，而荞地旱谷，垦遍山头，与云影岚光，浮沉出没，亦甚异也。
现代文：望南面峡谷南边的山岭，与北峰相持向西下延，而荞麦旱谷地垦遍山头，与云雾的光影，相互沉浮出没，也是十分奇异。
English: Looking at the mountains on the south side of the canyon on the south side, they are aligned with the north peak and extend down to the west, while the buckwheat dry valley stretches all over the mountain, and the light and shadow of clouds and fog are intertwined, which is also very strange.

古文：北山之上虽高，而近为坡掩，但循崖而行，不辨其崇坠；而南山则自东西坠，而尽于江桥之南，其东崇巚穹窿，高拥独雄，时风霾ｍáｉ空气中悬浮大量烟、尘的样子蒙翳，出没无定，此南山东上最高之峰，自北岭东度，再突而起者也。
现代文：北山之上虽然高，但近处被山坡遮住，只是沿着山崖走，辨不出它的高处深处；可南山却自东往西下坠，而后在江桥之南到了尽头，它东面弯隆的高峰，高高拥立，独自称雄，此时山风夹尘土一片迷茫，出没不定，这是南山东面上方最高的山峰，从北岭往东延伸，两次突起的山峰。
English: Although it is high above the North Mountain, it is covered by the slope nearby. Just walking along the cliff, it is impossible to discern the depth of its height; but the South Mountain falls from east to west, and then comes to an end in the south of the river bridge. Its eastern curved peak, high and tall, stands alone. At this time, the mountain wind and dust are confused, and the appearance is uncertain. This is the highest peak on the eastern face of the South Mountain, extending from the North Ridge to the east, a peak that protrudes twice.

古文：沿之东行，南瞰深壑，北倚丛巚又东二里有岐：一南下坞中，为垦壑之道；一北上丛岭，为庐坡之居；而路由中东行，南瞰下坳，有水出穴间。
现代文：沿着它往东行，南边下瞰深壑，北面紧靠成丛的山峰。又向东二里有岔路：一条往南下到山坞中，是去壑谷中垦种的路；一条向北上登成丛的山岭，是有居民房屋的山坡；而路由中间向东行，向南俯瞰下方的山坳，有水从洞穴间流出。
English: Follow it to the east, looking down at the deep ravine on the south side, and close to the clustered peaks on the north side. There are two routes to the east: one goes south to the dock, which is the way to go to the oyster seed in the oyster valley; one climbs north to the clustered mountains, which is the hillside with residential houses; and the middle of the route goes east, overlooking the lower mountains to the south, with water flowing from the caves.

古文：又东二里，下瞰南壑，有水一方倚北坡之上，路即由之北向而上，以有峡尚环而东也。
现代文：又往东二里，下瞰南边的壑谷，有一池水依傍在北坡之上，路就经由水池向北上走，这是因为有山峡还环绕在东边。
English: Another two miles to the east, looking down on the southern Shizuku Valley, there is a pool of water on the north slope. The road goes north through the pool, because there are mountain gorges on the east side.

古文：北上里余，又转而东，盘北坳而东上坡，屡上不止，又七里而至中火铺。
现代文：往北上走一里多，又转向东，绕过北面的山坳往东上坡，屡次上走不停，又是七里后来到中火铺。
English: I walked northward for more than a kilometer, then turned to the east, bypassed the mountains in the north and went uphill to the east, repeatedly walking up and down, and seven miles later I came to Zhonghuabu.

古文：其坡南突最高，中临南峡之上，峡脊由其东南环而西下。
现代文：此坡南突的最高处，当中高临在南峡之上，峡脊由它的东南向西环绕而下。
English: The highest point of the southern spur of this slope, the middle of which is high above the South Gorge, and the ridge of the gorge surrounds it from the southeast to the west.

古文：于坡之对崖，南面复耸一峰，高笼云雾间，即前所望东畔穹窿之顶也。
现代文：在山坡对面的山崖上，南面又耸起一座山峰，高高笼罩在云雾间，这就是前边望见过的东边弯隆的山顶了。
English: On the cliff on the opposite side of the slope, to the south, another mountain peak rises, high and shrouded in mist. This is the top of the east-facing hill seen in the foreground.

古文：自枯柯江桥东沿峡坡迤逦而上，约三十里矣。
现代文：自枯柯江桥往东沿峡中的山坡透道上走，约有三十里了。
English: It's about thirty miles from the bridge over the withered Ke River eastward along the mountain pass in the gorge.

古文：踞坡头西瞰江桥峡中，其水曲折西南下，松子山北环之岭，东北而突为腊彝之岭，峡南穹窿之峰，又南亘分支西绕，横截于江桥坞之南，西至哈思坳。
现代文：坐在坡头往西俯瞰江桥所在的峡中，峡中的水曲曲折折向西南下流，松子山往北环绕的山岭，在东北突起成为猎彝的山岭，峡南弯隆之峰，又向南绵亘分支往西绕，横截在江桥所在山坞之南，往西到达哈思坳。
English: Sitting on the slope to the west, overlooking the gorge where the river bridge is located, the water in the gorge twists and turns down to the southwest, the mountain range surrounding Mount Matsuzi to the north, the mountain range that protrudes in the northeast to become a hunting beak, the peak of the gorge south, and the branch to the south to the west, cutting across the south of the dock where the river bridge is located, west to Hasuo.

古文：坳之南复有小支，自腊彝西南湾中东突而出，与横截坞南之山凑，西南骈峙如门。
现代文：哈思坳之南又有小支脉，自猎彝西南的山湾中向东突出来，与横截在山坞南边的山会合，在西南方如门一样对峙。
English: There is also a small branch to the south of the Hasensee, protruding eastwards from the mountain bay in the south-west of the Jochtal, meeting the mountain that cuts across the southern side of the dock, and facing it like a door in the south-west.

古文：门内之湾，即为哈思坳，门外又有重峰西障，此即松子山南下之脊，环石甸于西者也。
现代文：门内的山湾，就是哈思坳，门外又有重重山峰遮挡在西边，这就是松子山往南下延的山脊，在西面环绕着石甸的山。
English: The mountain bay inside the gate is Hasidim, and outside the gate there are many peaks blocking the west side. This is the ridge of Mount Matsuzi extending southward, and the mountains surrounding Shidai on the west side.

古文：自此坡遥望之，午雾忽开，西南五十里历历可睹。
现代文：从此坡遥望群山，中午雾气忽然散开，西南五十里开外历历可睹。
English: From this slope, you can see the mountains in the distance. At noon, the fog suddenly dispersed, and you can see it from fifty miles to the southwest.

古文：坡之东有瓦室三楹，踞冈东南，两旁翼以茅屋，即所谓中火铺。
现代文：山坡之东有瓦房三间，高踞在山冈东南，两旁用茅屋遮护着，这就是所谓的中火铺。
English: There are three tiled houses on the east side of the hillside, and a stilt house on the southeast side of the hill, sheltered by thatched huts on both sides. This is the so-called mid-temperature hut.

古文：有守者卖腐于中，遂就炊汤而饭。
现代文：有守铺的人在屋子中卖豆腐，于是就火烧汤吃饭。
English: A man who owns a souvenir shop sells tofu in his shop, so he cooks soup on the fire to eat.

古文：及出户，则浓雾自西驰而东，其南峡近岭俱不复睹。
现代文：到出门时，就见浓雾自西疾驰向东，那南峡和近处的山岭全都不再看得见了。
English: When I went out, I saw a thick fog rushing from the west to the east, and the South Gorge and the nearby mountains were no longer visible.

古文：东下半里，渡一脊，瞰其南北二峡，环坠如阱，而丛木深翳，不见其底，当犹西下而分注江桥南北者也。
现代文：向东下走半里，越过一条山脊，俯瞰它南北的两条山峡，环绕深坠，如同陷阱，而成丛的林木深深密蔽，不见峡底，应当仍是向西下流而分别注入到江桥南北的水流了。
English: Walking half a mile to the east, crossing a ridge, overlooking the two mountain gorges to the north and south of it, surrounded by deep drops, like a trap, while the clumps of trees are deeply covered, and the bottom of the canyon is not visible, it should still be the westward downstream and separately injected into the water flow of the north and south of the river bridge.

古文：其脊甚狭，度而东，复上坡，山雨倏至。
现代文：那山脊非常狭窄，越到东面，再上坡，山雨突然来临。
English: The ridge is very narrow, and as you go east and uphill, the rain comes suddenly.

古文：从雨中涉之，得雨而雾反霁。
现代文：在雨中涉水，下雨后雾气反而散开。
English: Wading in the rain, after the rain, the fog is dispersed.

古文：一里余，盘崖逾坳，或循北峰，或循南峰，两度过脊，始东上。
现代文：一里多，绕过山崖越过山坳，有时沿北峰走，有时沿南峰走，两次越过山脊，开始向东上走。
English: For more than a mile, I walked around the cliff and over the ridge, sometimes along the north peak, sometimes along the south peak, twice over the ridge, and began to walk eastward.

古文：沿北坡而东，一里余，又涉一南突最高之岭，有哨房一龛踞其上，是为瓦房哨。
现代文：沿北坡往东，一里多，又跋涉过一座向南突最高的山岭，有一间哨房盘踞在岭上，这是瓦房哨。
English: Along the north slope to the east, more than a mile, and trudged through a southward jutting highest mountain ridge, there is a sentry box perched on the ridge, this is a tile sentry box.

古文：于是南临南峡，与峡南穹窿之顶平揖而对瞰矣。
现代文：在这里南临南峡，与峡南弯隆的山顶平视相望。
English: Here, it faces the South Gorge to the south, with the top of the canyon's southern escarpment in plain view.

古文：至是雨晴峰出，复见峡南穹顶直南亘而去，其分支西下者，即横截坞南之冈，西与哈思坳相凑成门者也。
现代文：到此时雨后天晴山峰现出，又见峡南弯隆的山顶向正南绵亘而去，它分支向西下延的，就是横截在坞南的山冈，往西与哈思坳互相会合成门的山？
English: At this time, after the rain, the sunny mountain peak appeared, and the top of the canyon's southward curving peak extended to the due south. Its branch extending to the west is the mountain that is cut across the dock to the south, and the mountain to the west will be combined with the Hasidic gate?

古文：穹顶东环之脉，尚从东度，但其脊稍下，反不若西顶之高，皆由此北坡最高之岭，东下曲而度脉者。
现代文：弯隆山顶往东环绕的山脉，还从东方延伸，但它的山脊稍微低下，反而不如西边山顶那样高，全是由此地北坡最高的山岭，往东曲折下垂延伸的山脉。
English: The mountains that surround the top of the craggy mountain to the east still extend from the east, but its ridge is slightly lower, but not as high as the top of the mountain to the west, all of which are the highest mountains on the northern slope of this place, and the mountains that extend eastward.

古文：始辨都鲁坳东所分南下之脊，至此中突，其分而西者，为中火铺、枯柯寨之岭，其曲而东降者，度脊南转西向而突为穹窿之顶。
现代文：这才辨清都鲁坳东面分支往南下延的山脊，到此地从中突起，那分支向西的，是中火铺、枯柯寨的山岭；那曲折往东下降的，山脊向南延伸转向西后突起成为弯隆的山顶。
English: It was only then that the southwardly extending ridge of the eastern branch of the Duru Mountains could be distinguished. Here, it protrudes from the middle. The branch to the west is the mountain ridge of Zhonghuabu and Wukangzhai. The ridge that twists and falls to the east extends to the south, turns to the west, and then protrudes to become a craggy peak.

古文：此分水之正脉也。
现代文：这是分水岭的正脉。
English: This is a watershed moment.

古文：由瓦房哨东下半里，复东度脊，始见北峡坠坑，为东北而下右甸之上流，是北水之所分也，而南水犹西下南峡。又东度两脊，穿两夹岭，一里，复盘南岭之阴而上。
现代文：由瓦房哨往东下走半里，再向东越过山脊，开始见北峡坠入深坑，成为往东北下流到右甸的上游，这是北面分流的水，而南面的水仍然往西流下南峡•又向东越过两条山脊，穿过两处夹立的山岭，一里，再绕着南岭的北面上去。
English: I walked half a mile eastward from the shingle sentry, and then eastward over the ridge, and began to see the North Gorge fall into a deep pit, becoming the upstream of the northeast downflow to the right delta, which is the water diverted from the north, while the water from the south still flows westward down the South Gorge. • I also went eastward over two ridges, through two mountains, one mile, and then around the north face of the South Ridge.

古文：其处深木丛篁，夹坡笼坳，多盘北坑之上。
现代文：此处深树丛竹，夹住山坡笼罩着山坳，多数回绕在北面坑谷之上。
English: Here is a deep clump of bamboo trees, clinging to the hillside, shrouded in hawthorn, mostly circling above the northern crater valley.

古文：又一里，南转而凌其西下之坳，始逾南峡上流，从其东涉冈东上，始逾南渡之脊，此分水正脉所由度而西转者也。
现代文：又走一里，转向南后越到那西面下延的山坳上，这才越过南峡的上游，从它东边向东上登山冈，这才越过往南延伸的山脊，这是由分水岭的正脉延伸向西转的山脊。
English: A mile further on, turning to the south, he came to the lower ridge of the mountains to the west, and then he crossed the upper reaches of the South Gorge, and from the eastern side of it he climbed the mountain to the east, and then he crossed the ridge extending to the south, which is the ridge extending from the positive vein of the watershed and turning to the west.

古文：又东一里，有草龛踞北冈，是为草房哨。
现代文：又向东一里，有草房高踞在北冈，这是草房哨。
English: Another mile to the east, there is a grass hut in Kitaoka, which is a grass hut post.

古文：从其东又东北下一里，稍转而东南半里，有脊又南度而东转，此右甸南环之岭所由盘礴者也。
现代文：从它东边又向东北下行一里，稍转向东南半里，有山脊又往南延伸后向东转，这是由右甸南面环绕的山岭盘曲延伸而来的山。
English: From its eastern side, it descends one mile to the northeast, turns slightly to the southeast half a mile, and there is a ridge that extends southward and then turns eastward. This is a mountain that extends from the mountain range around the south of the right delta.

古文：于是东向而下二里余，下度一曲，有小水北下成小溪，小桥横涉之。
现代文：从这里向东下行二里多，往下越过一个山湾，有小水流向北下流成小溪，小桥横越过小溪。
English: From here, the trail descends more than two miles to the east, crossing a mountain bay below. A small stream flows north into a creek, and a small bridge crosses the creek.

古文：又东逾一冈，共下四里，始南峡成溪，遂望见右甸城在东坞中，有岐从东北坡去，而大道循南峡东向平下。
现代文：又向东越过一座山冈，共下走四里，南峡中开始形成溪流，于是望见右甸城在东面山坞中，有岔路从东北山坡上前去，而大道沿南峡向东平缓下走。
English: He also crossed a mountain to the east, walking a total of four miles, and a stream began to form in the South Gorge. As a result, he could see the city of Udian in the dock on the east side, and there was a fork in the road from the northeastern slope, and the road slowly went down along the South Gorge to Dongping.

古文：二里，南峡中始有村庐夹坞，舂杵之声相应。
现代文：二里，南峡中开始有村庄房屋夹住山坞，柞臼捣谷的声音互相应和。
English: Two miles away, in the middle of the South Gorge, there are village houses clinging to the docks, and the sounds of the millstones pounding the valley harmonize with each other.

古文：又南三里，遂出坡口。
现代文：又往南三里，便出了坡口。
English: Another three miles to the south and you come to a hillside.

古文：乃更下一里而及坡麓。
现代文：于是再下走一里便到达坡脚。
English: So I walked another mile down and reached the foot of the slope.

古文：路由田塍中东南行，望见右甸之城，中悬南坡之下，甸中平畴一围，聚落颇盛。
现代文：路由田野中往东南行，望见右甸的城墙，当中悬在南坡之下，甸子中圆圆一片平旷的田野，村落相当繁盛。
English: Driving southeast through the fields, you can see the city wall at the top of the valley on the right, which hangs below the southern slope. In the middle of the valley, there is a round expanse of flat fields, and the village is quite prosperous.

古文：四面山环不甚高，都鲁坳东分之脉，北横一支，直亘东去，又南分一支，南环右甸之东；草房哨南度之脉，东环右甸之南，从甸南界东北转，与甸东界南环之支凑；甸中之水，东向而破其凑峡，下锡铅去。
现代文：四面环绕的山不怎么高，都鲁坳东面分支的山脉，北面横出一条支脉，一直向东绵亘而去，又在南边分出一条支脉，向南环绕到右甸之东；草房哨往南延伸的山脉，向东环绕到右甸之南，从甸子南境向东北转，与甸子东境向南环绕的支脉会合；甸子中的水流，向东冲破那凑拢的峡谷，流下锡铅去。
English: The mountains surrounding the city on all sides are not very high. The mountains branching off the east side of the city of Lushan have a branching off to the north, stretching all the way to the east, and a branching off to the south, circling south to the east of the right delta; the mountains extending south of the grass house sentry post, circling east to the south of the right delta, turning northeast from the southern border of the delta, and meeting with the branching off to the south of the eastern border of the delta; the water flow in the delta, breaking through the converging canyon to the east, and flowing down the tin lead.

古文：甸中自成一洞天，其地犹高，而甸乃圆平，非狭嵌，故无热蕴之瘴，居者无江桥毒瘴之畏，而城庐相托焉。
现代文：甸子中自成一处洞天，这里的地势仍然很高，但甸子是圆形的平川，不是狭窄深嵌之地，所以没有郁闷炎热的瘴气，居民没有江桥毒性瘴气的畏惧，而城池居屋互相依托在这里。
English: Tienzi is a cave in itself, and the terrain here is still very high, but Tienzi is a round flat river, not a narrow, deeply embedded place, so there is no depressing hot radon gas, residents do not have the fear of toxic radon gas in Jiangqiao, and the Chengchi HOSPITAL is supported by each other here.

古文：由塍中行，共四里，入其北门。
现代文：由田野中前行，共四里，进入右甸城的北门。
English: From the middle of the field, walk a total of four miles and enter the north gate of Uddian City.

古文：暮宿街心之葛店。
现代文：天黑住宿在街心的葛家客店。
English: It was dark when we stayed at the Gejia Inn in the middle of the street.

古文：葛，江西人。右甸在永昌东一百五十里，在顺宁西一百三十里。
现代文：右甸在永昌东面一百五十里，在顺宁西面一百三十里。
English: Udian is 150 miles east of Yongchang and 130 miles west of Shuning.

古文：其东北邻莽水之境，正与芦塘厂对；其西南邻鸡飞之境，正与姚关对。
现代文：它东北邻境莽水的地域，正与芦塘厂相对；它西南邻境鸡飞的地域，正与姚关相对。
English: Its northeastern border, the area of rough water, is opposite to the Lutang Plant; its southwestern border, the area of chicken fly, is opposite to Yaoguan.

古文：其正南与湾甸对，正北与博南山对，正西与潞江安抚司对，正东与三台山对。
现代文：它正南与湾甸州相对，正北与博南山相对，正西与潞江安抚司相对，正东与三台山相对。
English: It is directly south of and opposite to the Bay of Tianzhou, directly north of and opposite to the Bonan Mountain, directly west of and opposite to the Lijiang River, and directly east of and opposite to the Sandai Mountain.

古文：数年前土人不靖ｊìｎｇ平安，曾杀二卫官之莅其地者，今设城，以顺宁督捕同知驻守焉。
现代文：数年前土人不安定，曾杀了两个治理此地的卫所军官，如今建了城，派顺宁府的督捕同知驻守此地。
English: A few years ago, the natives were unstable and killed two officers of the National Guard who governed the area. Now, they have built a city and sent their friends from Shuning Prefecture to guard the area.

古文：城不大而颇高，亦边疆之雄也。
现代文：城不大但相当高，也算是边疆的雄关。
English: The city is not big but quite high, and it is also a border crossing point.

古文：初二日晨起，雾色阴翳。
现代文：初二日早晨起床，天上雾气阴蔽。
English: I got up in the morning on the first two days of the month, and the sky was shrouded in fog.

古文：方觅饭而夫逃。
现代文：正找饭吃可脚夫逃走了。
English: He was looking for food, but the porter ran away.

古文：再觅夫代行，久之不得。
现代文：再去找脚夫代替，很久找不到。
English: I went to find a porter to replace him, but it took a long time to find one.

古文：雨复狎ｘｉá更迭、交替至，遂郁郁作记寓中者竟日。
现代文：雨又交替着来临，就郁郁不快地在寓所中写了一整天的日记。
English: The rain came again and again, and I wrote in my diary for a whole day in my apartment, depressed and unhappy.

古文：初三日雨复霏霏，又不得夫，坐邸楼郁郁作记竟日。
现代文：初三日雨又霏霏不止，又找不到脚夫，坐在客店的楼上郁郁不欢地写了一整天的日记。
English: For the first three days it rained and rained and rained, and I couldn't find a porter. I sat upstairs in the inn and wrote in my diary for the whole day.

古文：其店主葛姓者，乃市侩之尤，口云为觅夫，而竟不一觅，视人之闷以为快也。
现代文：那店主姓葛的人，是个市侩之徒，口里说是为我找脚夫，可居然不去找一次，坐视别人的困厄以为快乐。
English: The owner of the store, whose surname was Ge, was a philanderer. He said he was looking for a porter for me, but he didn't go looking for one. He thought it was fun to watch other people's troubles.

古文：初四日早雾而晴。
现代文：初四日早晨下雾后晴开。
English: On the morning of the fourth day of the first lunar month, it cleared up after the fog.

古文：顾仆及主人觅夫俱不足恃，乃自行市中。
现代文：顾仆与店主人找脚夫都不值得依靠，只好自己走到集市中。
English: Neither the valet nor the shopkeeper can be relied on to find a porter, so they have to walk to the market themselves.

古文：是日为本甸街子。
现代文：这天是本甸的街子。
English: This day is the end of the world.

古文：仍从北门内南转冈脊，是为督捕同知公署，署门东向，其南即往南门街，而东则曲向东门街，皆为市之地也。
现代文：仍从北门内向南转向冈脊，这里是督捕同知的衙门，衙门大门向东，它南边就是通往南门的街道，而东边则是弯向东门的街道，都是集市所在之地。
English: He still turned from the north gate to the south to the ridge, here is the gate of the inspector, the gate of the gate to the east, the south side of it is the street leading to the south gate, and the east side is the street bending to the east gate, both are the location of the market.

古文：余往来稠人中，得二人，一担往顺宁，一驼往锡铅，皆期日中至葛寓，余乃返。
现代文：我往来于稠密的人群中，找到两个人，一个挑担去顺宁，一个用马驮物去锡铅，都约定正午到葛家寓所，我这才返回来。
English: I went back and forth among the dense crowd, found two people, one to carry the load to Shuning, one to use the horse harness to carry the tin and lead, both agreed to go to Ge's apartment at noon, and only then did I return.

古文：迨午，往锡铅驼骑先至，遂倩之；而往顺宁者亦至，已无及矣。
现代文：到中午，前往锡铅驮物的马匹先到，便请了他；而后去顺宁的人也来到，已来不及了。
English: At midday, the horses on their way to the tin and lead smelter arrived first and called for him, and then the people on their way to Shuning also came, but they were too late.

古文：乃饭，以驼骑行。
现代文：于是吃饭，用马匹驮物上路。
English: So they ate and went on their way with the horses.

古文：出东门，循南坡东向半里，涉东来之坞，渡小溪东，山冈渐折而东南行，四里，遂临东坞。
现代文：走出东门，沿南坡向东半里，涉过东来的山坞，渡到小溪东面，沿山冈渐渐折向东南行，四里，便下临东坞。
English: Out of the east gate, along the south slope to the east half a mile, wading through the east dock, crossing to the east of the creek, along the mountain and gradually turning to the southeast, four miles, then down to the east dock.

古文：东坞者，右甸东南落水之坞尾也。
现代文：东坞，是右甸东南落水的山坞的末端。
English: Dong Dock is the end of the dock in the southeastern part of Udian.

古文：城北大甸圆而东南开此坞，南北西三面之水，皆合而趋之。
现代文：城北的大甸子圆圆地伸向东南敞开此处山坞，南、北、西三面的水流，都会合后流向这里。
English: The large delta in the north of the city stretches roundly to the southeast, opening up a dock here. The water flow from the south, north and west will converge and flow here.

古文：路临其西坡，于是南转二里余，又涉二东北注之坑，复依南麓东行二里余，上北突之嘴，则甸东之山，亦自北南环，与嘴凑峡，于是相对若门，而甸水由其中东注焉。
现代文：路下临它的西坡，从这里往南转二里多，又涉过两处往东北流注的坑谷，再傍着南麓往东行二里多，登上北突的山嘴，就见甸子东面的山，也是自北向南环绕，与山嘴凑拢成为峡谷，与这里相对，如门一般，而甸子中的水经由其中往东流注。
English: The road descends to its western slope, from here it turns south for more than two miles, and passes through two valleys that flow to the northeast, then follows the southern foot east for more than two miles, and ascends to the mouth of the north ridge, to see the mountain east of Dianzi, also surrounded from north to south, and close to the mouth of the mountain to become a canyon, opposite here, like a door, and the water in Dianzi flows through it to the east.

古文：此甸中第一重东锁之钥，亦为右甸东第一重东环南下之分支，虽不峻，而蜿蜒山顶，地位实崇也。
现代文：这是甸子中第一重锁住东面的要地，也是右甸东面第一重往东环绕南下的分支，虽不算高峻，但蜿蜒在山顶，地势实际很高。
English: This is the most important place in the dianzi to lock the east, and it is also the most important branch of the right dian east to the east around the south. Although it is not high and steep, it winds at the top of the mountain, and the terrain is actually very high.

古文：逾嘴东稍下，凑峡之外，复开小坞而东，水由其底，路由其南坡之半。
现代文：越过山嘴往东稍下走，凑拢的峡谷之外，又向东敞开为小山坞，水流经坞底，路由山坞南坡的半中腰走。
English: Cross the mouth of the mountain and walk a little to the east. Beyond the narrow canyon, it opens to the east as a small dock. The water flows through the bottom of the dock and goes halfway down the south slope of the dock.

古文：又东二里余，有数家倚坡，北向坞而庐。
现代文：又往东二里多，有数家人背靠山坡，向着北面的山坞建了房屋。
English: Another two miles to the east, several families have built houses with their backs to the hillside, facing the dock to the north.

古文：过此东南下，有水自南峡出，涉之，上其东坡，遂循坡之南峡东南上，水流其冈北，路由其冈南，于是始不与水见。
现代文：过了此地向东南下走，有水流自南峡中流出，涉过流水，上登它的东坡，就沿山坡南面的峡谷向东南上走，水流在此冈的北边，路经由此冈的南面，从这里起才不与水流见面。
English: After passing this place, walk down to the southeast, there is water flowing out of the South Gorge, wade through the flowing water, climb its east slope, walk along the canyon on the south side of the slope to the southeast, the water flows on the north side of this hill, passes through the south side of this hill, and does not meet the water flow from here.

古文：又东南循冈三里，盘一北下之坳而上冈头，是为玉壁岭。
现代文：又向东南沿山冈走三里，绕过一个往北下伸的山坳后上到冈头，这是玉璧岭。
English: I walked three miles southeast along the mountain ridge, bypassing a ridge that stretched down to the north and then up to the top of the ridge. This is Yubi Ridge.

古文：其岭自南北突，东西俱下分为坑，有两三家驻峰头。
现代文：此岭自南向北突，东西都分别下陷为深坑，有两三家人住在峰头。
English: This ridge juts out from the south to the north, and the east and west are separately sunk into a deep pit. There are two or three families living at the top of the peak.

古文：时日尚高，以前路无可止，遂歇。
现代文：此时太阳还高，因为前边路上无处可住，便休息了。
English: At this time, the sun is still high, because there is nowhere to live on the road ahead, they rested.

古文：初五日平明起，饭而行，宿雾未收。
现代文：初五日黎明起床，吃饭后上路，夜间的雾气还未收住。
English: I got up at dawn on the fifth day of the first month, went on the road after dinner, and the fog in the night had not yet subsided.

古文：下其东坑，涉之，复东南上一里，又循东来之峡，而行夹冈之南。
现代文：下到岭东的深坑中，涉过坑谷，再向东南上一里，又沿东来的峡谷，行走在相夹的山冈之南。
English: I went down to the deep pit in the east of the ridge, waded through the pit valley, then went southeast for a mile, and then along the east canyon, walking in the south of the mountains.

古文：东向四里，度其北过之脊，仍循峡东下，行夹冈之南。
现代文：向东四里，越过那向北延伸而过的山脊，仍沿峡谷往东下走，行走在夹立的山冈之南。
English: Four miles to the east, over the ridge that stretched north, still along the canyon to the east, walking in the south of the mountains.

古文：二里余又稍下，涉北出之水，又循东来之峡，而行夹冈之南。
现代文：二里多又稍下来，涉过北边流出来的水，又沿东来的山峡，行走在夹立山冈之南。
English: Two miles further down, wading through the water flowing from the north, and along the mountain gorge coming from the east, walking in the south of the mountains and hills.

古文：东向二里，复度其北过之脊，于是从脊北东行之支，东向行其上。
现代文：向东二里，再越过那向北延伸而过的山脊，于是经过山脊北边往东延伸的支脉，向东行走在山头上。
English: Two leagues to the east, then over the ridge that stretched northward past the crane, then past the eastward branch of the ridge north of the ridge, walking eastward on the mountain.

古文：半里，有两三家夹道，是为水塘哨。
现代文：半里，有两三家夹住道路，这是水塘哨。
English: Half a mile, there are two or three houses sandwiching the road, this is the reservoir post.

古文：由此东南行山夹间，五里，始坠坡而下。
现代文：由此往东南前行在山峡间，五里，开始坠下山坡。
English: From there, I traveled southeast, and five miles into the canyon, I began to fall down the mountain slope.

古文：其右又坠一峡东下，其左路再随崖东下者二里，西临右峡之上。
现代文：坡右又有一条山峡往东下坠，坡左的路再顺着山崖向东下走二里，西边下临在右边峡谷之上。
English: On the right side of the slope, there is another mountain gorge descending to the east. The road on the left side of the slope then follows the cliff down to the east for two miles, and the west side descends to the right side of the canyon.

古文：而路左忽坠一坑，盘阱而下者二丈，有水沉其底，长二丈，阔八尺，而狭处仅二尺，若琵琶然，渊然下嵌。
现代文：而路左忽然陷成一个深坑，绕着陷阱下去二丈，有水沉在坑底，坑长二丈，宽八尺，而窄处仅有三尺，好似琵琶的样子，渊深下嵌。
English: But the left side of the road suddenly fell into a deep pit. It went around the trap to a depth of two meters. Water sank to the bottom of the pit. The pit was two meters long, eight meters wide, and only three meters at the narrowest point. It looked like a lute, with the abyss below.

古文：左倚危壁，右界片栈，而外即深峡之下盘者，不知此水之何以独止也。
现代文：左边靠着危壁，右边隔着一片栈道，而外边就是在下方盘绕的深峡，不知这里的水为什么唯独停积在此了。
English: On the left, there is a cliff, on the right, there is a boardwalk, and on the outside, there is a deep gorge winding below. I don't know why the water here only stopped accumulating here.

古文：由其南又半里，而蹑嘴下坠者半里，左崖之端遂尽，而右峡来环其前。
现代文：由它南边又走半里，而后上登山嘴下垂处半里，左面山崖的前端于是到了尽头，而右面峡谷前来环绕在它前边。
English: From its southern side, walk another half-mile, and then another half-mile from the upper trailhead to the lower drop-off, so the front end of the cliff on the left comes to an end, and the canyon on the right comes to surround it in front.

古文：还望左崖尽处，丛石盘崖，俨如花簇，而右崖西界大山，亦悬屏削于重树间，幽异之甚。
现代文：回头望左面山崖的尽头处，岩石成丛山崖盘绕，俨然似花簇，而右侧山崖西边连接着大山，也似陡削的屏风悬在重重树林之间，幽深奇异之极。
English: Looking back at the end of the cliff on the left, the rock clumps are coiled around the cliff, resembling flower clusters, while the right side of the cliff is connected to the west side of the mountain. It also looks like a steeply cut screen hanging between the trees, the deepest and strangest.

古文：由峡底又东南行一里，其峡外束如门。
现代文：由峡底又向东南行一里，那峡谷外边紧束如门。
English: From the bottom of the canyon, one mile to the southeast, the outside of the canyon is tightly bunched like a door.

古文：披门南出，稍转东而下坡，半里，有水自东曲而西，大木横架其上，南度之，是为大桥。
现代文：穿过门往南出来，稍转向东下坡，半里，有水流自东曲向西，大树横架在流水上，过到桥南，这是大桥。
English: Go out through the door to the south, slightly turn to the east downhill, half a mile, there is water flowing from the east curve to the west, large trees cross the flowing water, cross to the south of the bridge, this is the bridge.

古文：桥下水即右甸下流即今之右甸河，东行南转，至是西折过桥，又盘西崖南去，已成汤汤之流。
现代文：桥下的水就是右甸河的下游，往东流向南转，到此处向西折过桥下，又绕过西边的山崖往南流去，已成浩浩荡荡的河流。
English: The water under the bridge is the lower reaches of the Udian River. It flows eastward and turns southward. At this point, it turns westward under the bridge, and flows southward around the western cliff. It has become a vast river.

古文：桥南沿流之峡，皆随之为田，而三四家倚桥南东坡上，有中火之馆。
现代文：桥南沿河流的峡谷，全顺流垦为农田，而三四家人紧靠在桥南的东坡上，有中途起火的客馆。
English: In the canyon along the river south of the bridge, the entire downstream is farmland, while three or four families are close to the east slope south of the bridge, and there is a guest house that caught fire halfway.

古文：此右甸第二重东锁之钥，亦为右甸东第二重东环南下之分支，与东南行大脊右甸相对成峡，夹溪南去者也。
现代文：这是右甸第二重锁住东面的要地，也是右甸东面第二重往东环绕南下的分支，是与向东南延伸的大山脊相对形成峡谷，夹住溪流往南延去的山。
English: This is the second important place to lock the east side of the right delta. It is also the second important branch of the east side of the right delta to the east around the south. It is a mountain that forms a canyon opposite the large ridge extending to the southeast, holding the stream to the south.

古文：由桥南即蹑东南坡而上，水由峡直南去，路蹑坡东南升。
现代文：由桥南马上上登东南的山坡，水由峡中一直往南流去，路爬坡向东南上升。
English: From the south of the bridge, the road climbs up the southeastern slope. The water flows from the middle of the gorge all the way to the south, and the road climbs up the slope to the southeast.

古文：一上者二里，凌岭头。
现代文：一口气上走二里，登上岭头。
English: Walk two miles at a stretch and climb to the top of the ridge.

古文：西望夹溪之山，稍南有破峡从西来者，即水塘哨西下之水也；其南夹水一支，亦至是东尽，而有寨盘其上焉；其又南一支，嶙峋独耸，上出层峦，是为杜伟山。
现代文：望西边夹住溪流的山，稍南处有破开峡谷从西面流来的水流，那就是水塘哨向西下流的水了；它南边夹住水流的一条支脉，也是到这里便到了东面的尽头，有山寨盘踞在山上；它再往南的一条山脉，石骨嶙峋，独自高耸，向上高出层层山峦，那是杜伟山。
English: Looking to the west, there is a mountain that holds a stream. A little south, there is a stream that flows from the west through a broken canyon. That is the water flowing down to the west of the reservoir. It is a branch of the stream that holds the water on the south side, and it is also here that it reaches the end of the east, and there is a cottage on the mountain. It is a mountain range further south, a stone skeleton, towering alone, and a higher-tiered mountain up, that is Du Wei Mountain.

古文：此乃右甸南东来之正脊，自草房哨度脉至此，更崇隆而起，转而直南去，而东夹此溪，其脊乃东南下老龙，自云州南下，分澜沧、潞江之脊，而直下交南者也。
现代文：这是右甸南面往东来的主脉山脊，山脉自草房哨延伸到此处，更加高高隆起，转向正南而去，而东面夹住此溪，这条山脊是往东南下延的主脉，自云州向南下延，是澜沧江、潞江分水的山脊，而一直下延到交趾南部。
English: This is the main ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge of the ridge

古文：所望处尚在寨盘顶之东北，从此更夭矫南向，夹溪渐上，又二里而隔溪与寨盘之顶对。
现代文：所望见之处还在山寨盘踞的山顶的东北，从此再屈曲盘绕向南，夹住溪流渐渐上伸，又走二里后隔溪与山寨盘踞的山顶对望。
English: The place to be seen is still in the northeast of the top of the hill where the cottage is located. From there, it bends around to the south, catches the stream and gradually rises, and after walking two miles, the stream separates from the top of the hill where the cottage is located.

古文：又二里，降坡南下，穿坳而东，见其东又坠为小坑，路下而涉之。
现代文：又行二里，从坡上往南下降，穿过山坳往东走，见山坳东边又下坠成小坑，路下走涉过小坑。
English: I walked another two miles, descended from the slope to the south, and walked through the mountains to the east. I saw that the eastern side of the mountains had fallen into a small pit, and I walked through the small pit.

古文：一里，又南逾东坡西环之坳。
现代文：一里，又向南越过东面山坡向西环绕的山坳。
English: One mile, and then south over the eastern slopes of the mountains surrounding the west.

古文：又一里，有数家倚东坡而居，其东又有一溪自东北来，环所庐之坡而注西峡，西峡水自北南下，与此水夹流而合于坡南。
现代文：又是一里，有数家人背靠东面山坡居住，村东又有一条溪水自东北流来，环绕房屋所在的山坡后注入西峡，西峡中的水自北往南下流，与此溪相夹而流，在坡南合流。
English: Another mile away, there are several families living with their backs to the eastern hillside. In the east of the village, there is another stream flowing from the northeast, surrounding the hillside where the house is located and then flowing into the West Gorge. The water in the West Gorge flows down from the north to the south, intertwining with this stream and merging at the south slope.

古文：此坡居庐颇盛，是为小桥，正西与杜伟山对。
现代文：此坡居民房屋十分兴盛，这是小桥，正西与杜伟山相对。
English: Residential housing is flourishing on this slope. This is Xiaoqiao, directly west of and opposite Du Wei Shan.

古文：遥望杜伟山自西北来，至此南转，其挟臂而抱于西南者，皆湾甸州之境，水亦皆西南流；其北峡与寨盘之顶夹而东出者，皆顺宁之境，水皆东南流。
现代文：遥望杜伟山自西北延伸而来，到此地向南转，它在西南似手臂相夹围抱的地方，全是湾甸州的辖境，流水也全是往西南流；它北面的山峡与山寨盘踞的山顶相夹往东出去的地方，全是顺宁府的辖境，流水全是向东南流。
English: Du Wei Mountain, seen from afar, extends from the northwest and turns to the south here. In the southwest, where it seems to be surrounded by arms, it is all under the jurisdiction of Bay State, and the flow of water is all to the southwest; in the north, where it is sandwiched between the mountain gorge and the top of the mountain, it is all under the jurisdiction of Shuning Prefecture, and the flow of water is all to the southeast.

古文：则此山真一方之望，而为顺宁、湾甸之东西界者也。
现代文：那么此山真是这一片地方的名山，而且是顺宁府、湾甸州东西分界的山。
English: So this mountain is really a famous mountain in this area, and it is the mountain that separates Shuning Prefecture and Bay State.

古文：饭于村家，大雨复至。
现代文：在村中农家吃饭，大雨又来临。
English: We were having dinner at a farmer's house in the village when the heavy rain came again.

古文：久而后行，由坡东下，渡北来之溪，小石梁跨之。
现代文：很久后上路，由坡上向东下走，渡过北来的溪水，小石桥跨在溪上。
English: After a long time on the road, walk down the slope to the east and cross the stream coming from the north. A small stone bridge spans the stream.

古文：所谓小者，以别于大溪之桥也。
现代文：所谓的小，是为了与大溪上的桥区别。
English: The so-called small one is to distinguish it from the bridge over the big stream.

古文：复东南上，隔溪对杜伟山而南，下瞰西峡之底，二流相合，盘壑南去。
现代文：再向东南上走，隔溪面对杜伟山往南行，下瞰西峡之底，两条水流互相会合，绕着壑谷往南流去。
English: Then go up to the southeast, facing the Du Wei Mountain to the south, overlooking the bottom of the West Gorge, the two streams meet each other and flow south around the valley.

古文：此山为右甸东第三重东环南下之分支，为锡铅之脉者也。
现代文：此山是右甸东面第三重往东环绕南下的分支，是锡铅的山脉。
English: This mountain is the third-heaviest branch to the east of the right dian, encircling the south, and is a mountain range of tin and lead.

古文：南五里，或穿岭而左，见岭东近峡坠坑，其远峰又环峙而东，又或分而南；穿岭而右，见岭西近峡，西溪盘底，杜伟骈夹。
现代文：往南五里，有时穿到岭左，见岭东近处的山峡坠成深坑，那远峰又在东面环绕耸峙，又有的山分支往南延；穿到岭右，见岭西近处的山峡，西边的溪流盘绕在峡底，杜伟山并列夹峙。
English: Five miles to the south, sometimes crossing to the left of the ridge, you can see the canyon near the east of the ridge falling into a deep pit. The distant peak is also surrounded by a ridge in the east, and some mountain branches extend to the south; crossing to the right of the ridge, you can see the canyon near the west of the ridge, the streams on the west are coiled at the bottom of the canyon, and Du Wei Mountain is juxtaposed.

古文：如是二里，乃坠其南坡，或盘壑西转，或蹑坳东折，或上或下，又五里，有两三家当坳而庐，是为免威哨。
现代文：如此二里，就坠下岭南的山坡，有时绕着壑谷向西转，有时上登山坳往东折，时上时下，又是五里，有两三家在山坳中建了房屋，这是兔威哨。
English: In this way, for two miles, it fell down the southern slope of the ridge, sometimes turning west around the valley, sometimes turning east up the mountain, sometimes up and down, and then five miles. Two or three families built houses in the mountains. This is the Tuxi Sentinel.

古文：于是再上其东坡，则东西壑皆可并睹矣。
现代文：从这里再上登它的东坡，就见东西两面的壑谷都可以一起看到了。
English: From here, climbing up its eastern slope, you can see the valley on both sides of the valley.

古文：西壑直逼西麓而长，以杜伟西屏也；东壑遥盘东谷，其下丛沓，而犹不见底。
现代文：西面的壑谷直逼到西边的山麓而且很长，把杜伟山作为西面的屏障；东边的壑谷远远盘绕成东面的谷地，那下边成丛杂沓，但仍不见底。
English: The west side of the valley reaches the foot of the mountain on the west side and is very long, using Mount Du Wei as a barrier on the west side; the east side of the valley is far coiled into the valley on the east side, and the lower side is a jumble, but it still has no bottom.

古文：其东北有横浮一抹者，此挟江澜沧而东南之岭也；其正东有分支南抱者，此中垂而为顺下之脉也。
现代文：此地东北方有山如一抹横着漂浮的云，这是夹住江流往东南延伸的山岭；它的正东有分支往南围抱的山，此山从中下垂后成为顺宁的山脉。
English: In the northeast of this area, there is a mountain that looks like a cloud floating horizontally. It is a mountain range that extends southeast, clamping the river flow. In the due east, there is a mountain that branches to the south, and this mountain drops down from the middle to become the Shuning Mountains.

古文：从岭渐下，或左或右，岭脊渐狭。
现代文：从岭上渐渐下走，有时在左有时在右，峡脊慢慢变窄。
English: Going down the ridge, sometimes to the left, sometimes to the right, the ridge gradually narrows.

古文：四里，始望见东坞有溪，亦盘折其底，与西峡似；而西界外山，自杜伟顶南，其势渐伏，又纡而南，则东转而环其前；东界外山则直亘南向，与东转前环之岭凑。
现代文：四里，才望见东面山坞中有溪流，也是曲折盘绕在坞底，与西峡相似；而西面外围的山，自杜伟山顶以南，山势逐渐低伏，又往南迂曲，后向东转环绕到它前边；东面外围的山则是一直向南绵亘，与往东转向前环绕的山岭会合。
English: After four miles, a stream can be seen in the dock on the east side, winding around the bottom of the dock, similar to the West Gorge; while the mountains on the western periphery, from the south of the top of Du Wei Mountain, the mountain gradually lowers, and turns southward, and then turns eastward to surround it to the front; the mountains on the eastern periphery are always southward, and meet the mountains that turn eastward.

古文：问东西峡水，则合于锡铅之前，而东南当凑峙之峡而去。
现代文：打听东西两峡的水，就在锡铅之前合流，而后往东南对着凑拢对峙的峡谷流去。
English: The water of the two gorges, east and west, meets just before the tin lead, and then flows to the southeast against the converging canyon.

古文：问顺宁之道，则逾东界之岭而行；有道逾前山南环之岭者，为猛峒道，从猎昔、猛打渡江而至兴隆厂者也。
现代文：打听去顺宁的路，是越过东面的山岭走；有道路翻越前山向南环绕的山岭的，是去猛酮的路，是从猎昔、猛打渡江后到兴隆厂的路。
English: The way to Shuning is to walk across the mountains in the east; if there is a way to climb over the mountains surrounding Qianshan to the south, it is the way to Mammothon, and the way to Xinglong Factory is from Juxian and Mengdu to Yangtze River.

古文：于是从冈脊转东行。
现代文：于是从冈脊上转向东行。
English: As a result, they turned eastbound from the ridge.

古文：其脊甚狭，又二里，西峡之溪直逼南麓下，而东峡溪亦近夹，遂如堵墙上行。
现代文：此脊非常狭窄，又走二里，西峡的溪流直逼到南边山麓下，而且东峡的溪水也在近处相夹，于是便如同在一堵墙上行走。
English: This ridge is very narrow, and after walking two miles, the stream of the West Gorge reaches the foot of the mountain to the south, and the stream of the East Gorge is also sandwiched nearby, so it is like walking on a wall.

古文：又东二里，又东南下者二里，坡尽而锡铅之聚落倚之。
现代文：又向东二里，又往东南下坡二里，坡完后就见锡铅的村落紧靠着山坡了。
English: Another two miles to the east, another two miles to the southeast downhill, and after the end of the slope, you will see the villages of tin lead clinging to the hillside.

古文：此右甸东分支南下第三重之尽处也。
现代文：这是右甸东面分支南下第三重山的尽头处。
English: This is the end of the third mountain ridge south of the eastern branch of the right dian.

古文：其前东西二溪交会，有温泉当其交会之北涘ｓì水边，水浅而以木环其四周，无金鸡、永平之房覆，亦无腾越、左所之石盘，然当两流交合之间而独有此，亦一奇也。
现代文：它前方东西两条溪流互相会合，有温泉位于两溪会合处的北岸，水浅，树木环绕在它的四周，没有金鸡村、永平那样的房屋覆盖，也没有腾越、左所那样的石盘，不过正当两条溪流互相会合之间而独有此泉，也算是一处奇观了。
English: In front of it, the east and west streams meet each other. There is a hot spring located on the north bank of the meeting place of the two streams. The water is shallow and trees surround it. There is no house cover like Jinji village and Yongping, and there is no stone plate like Tengyue and Zuoying. However, just because there is a unique spring between the two streams, it is also a miracle.

古文：是日下午至驼骑，税驾逆旅，先觅得一夫，索价甚贵，强从之，乃南步公馆，即锡铅驿也。
现代文：这天下午来到后，驮物的马匹投宿在客店，先找到一个脚夫，要价太贵，勉强听从了他，就向南步入公馆，就是锡铅骤了。
English: After arriving that afternoon, the stolen horses stayed at the inn. First, they found a porter. The asking price was too high, so they reluctantly listened to him and walked south into the mansion.

古文：返饭于肆，亟南由公馆侧浴于温泉，暮返而卧。
现代文：返回在店中吃饭，急忙往南由公馆侧边到温泉洗澡，天黑返回来睡下。
English: Returned to eat in the restaurant, hurriedly headed south from the side of the mansion to the hot springs to take a bath, came back in the dark and went to sleep.

