古文：陈灌，字子将，庐陵人也。
现代文：陈灌，字子将，庐陵人。
English: Chen Guan, General Zi Zi, and the people of Fuling.

古文：元末，世将乱，环所居筑场种树，人莫能测。
现代文：元末，世道不宁，灌在他房屋周围兴办林场，人们不理解他的这一举动。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, when the world was in turmoil, he decided to build a forest farm around his house. People did not understand this move of his.

古文：后十年，盗蜂起。灌率武勇结屯林中，盗不敢入，一乡赖以全。
现代文：十年后，盗贼蜂起，灌率勇武之士屯驻于林中，盗不敢侵犯，他们这一乡得以安全无事。
English: Ten years later, the thieves revolted, and they were led by brave warriors who settled in the forest. The thieves did not dare to invade, and their town was safe and sound.

古文：太祖平武昌，灌诣军门谒见。与语奇之，擢湖广行省员外郎，累迁大都督府经历。从大将军徐达北征。
现代文：太祖攻占武昌，灌到营前拜见太祖，谈话间，太祖看出此人不凡，提拔为湖广行省员外郎，后升为大都督府经历，随大将军徐达北征。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Wuchang and went to the front of the camp to see the great-grandfather. During the conversation, the great-grandfather saw that this person was extraordinary. He was promoted to the provincial member of Hukangxing, and later to the experience of the great-governor's office. He followed the general Xu to the Northern Expedition.

古文：寻命筑城泰州，工竣，除宁国知府。
现代文：不久，奉命筑泰州城，完工后升为宁国知府。
English: Soon, he was ordered to build Taizhou City, and after its completion, he was promoted to Ning Governor.

古文：时天下初定，民弃《诗》《书》久。灌建学舍，延师，选俊秀子弟受业。
现代文：当时，明朝初建，由于长期战乱，《诗》、《书》长久废置不读，灌在宁国建立学校，聘请老师，选优秀子弟入学读书。
English: At that time, in the early Ming Dynasty, due to the long-term war, "Poetry" and "Book" were long abandoned and not read, and a school was established in Ningguo, teachers were hired, and outstanding children were selected to study.

古文：访问疾苦，禁豪右兼并。创户帖以便稽民。
现代文：他访问民间疾苦，禁止豪强兼并农民土地，创立 户帖 ，以便查核居民。
English: He visited the suffering of the people, banned the annexation of farmers' land by the powerful, and created a household register in order to check the residents.

古文：帝取为式，颁行天下。
现代文：太祖将 户帖 形成制度，在全国施行。
English: Taizu will form a household registration system and implement it nationwide.

古文：伐石筑堤，作水门蓄泄，护濒江田，百姓咸赖。
现代文：灌还组织百姓采石筑堤，做闸门，以便水流排灌，保护沿江农田，百姓因此得以正常耕种。
English: The irrigation also organized the people to quarry stones to build dikes and make gates so that the water flow could be drained and irrigated to protect the farmland along the river, so that the people could cultivate normally.

古文：有坐盗麦舟者，论死数十人。
现代文：有数十人因盗麦船罪而判死刑。
English: Dozens of people have been sentenced to death for the crime of stealing wheat ships.

古文：灌覆按曰： 舟自漂至，而愚民哄取之，非谋劫也。 
现代文：灌进行复查，断定 麦船是漂流来的，百姓争着拿走了船上的麦，并没有预谋抢劫 。
English: It was determined that the wheat ship had drifted, and the people had fought to take the wheat on the ship, and there was no premeditated robbery.

古文：坐其首一人，余悉减死。
现代文：于是只法办了为首一人，其余免死。
English: As a result, only the first person was prosecuted, and the rest were spared death.

古文：灌丰裁严正，而为治宽恤类此。
现代文：灌的裁决严厉而公正，处治宽厚。
English: Guan's ruling was harsh but fair, and the punishment was lenient.

古文：洪武四年召入京，病卒。
现代文：洪武四年，陈灌被召入京，在京病逝。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, Chen Guan was summoned to Beijing, where he died of illness.

古文：方克勤，字去矜，宁海人。
现代文：方克勤，字去矜，宁海人。
English: Fang Keqin, the characters go to, Ninghai people.

古文：元末，台州盗起，吴江同知金刚奴奉行省命，募水兵御之。
现代文：元末，台州人民举起反元义旗，吴江同知金刚奴奉行省命令募水兵抵御。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, the people of Taizhou raised the anti-Yuan banner, and Wujiang Tongzhi Kongong followed the provincial order to recruit sailors to resist.

古文：克勤献策弗纳，逃之山中。
现代文：克勤献策而金刚奴不采纳，便逃入山中。
English: When King Kong didn't take his advice, he fled into the mountains.

古文：洪武二年辟县训导，母老辞归。
现代文：洪武二年，克勤被任命为县训导，因母老辞职归家。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, Keqin was appointed as a county training instructor, but he resigned because of his mother and returned home.

古文：四年征至京师，吏部试第二，特授济宁知府。
现代文：四年召至京师，吏部主试中第二名，特授为济宁知府。
English: Four years later, he was called to Beijing as a teacher. He was the second in the main examination of the cadre department, and was specially awarded to Jining Prefecture.

古文：时始诏民垦荒，阅三岁乃税。
现代文：这时，朝廷诏令百姓垦荒，三年后征税。
English: At this time, the imperial court decreed that the people should plough the land and collect taxes three years later.

古文：吏征率不俟期，民谓诏旨不信，辄弃去，田复荒。
现代文：地方官吏却提前征税，百姓认为政府言而无信，便相继逃亡，田又荒芜。
English: Local officials, however, levied taxes in advance, and the people, believing the government to be untrustworthy, fled one after another, leaving the fields barren.

古文：克勤与民约，税如期。区田为九等，以差等征发，吏不得为奸，野以日辟。
现代文：为了纠正弊端，克勤重申，三年后征税，并把田分为九等，按等级征收田赋，官吏无法从中作弊，于是荒田开垦日多。
English: In order to correct the drawbacks, Kekin reiterated that after three years, the tax would be levied, and the fields would be divided into nine grades, and the land tax would be levied according to the grade, and officials could not cheat from it, so the wasteland was reclaimed more and more.

古文：又立社学数百区，葺孔子庙堂，教化兴起。
现代文：同时，克勤设立社学数百区，修整孔庙，兴办教育。
English: At the same time, Keqin has set up hundreds of social education districts, renovated the Confucius Temple, and established education.

古文：盛夏，守将督民夫筑城，克勤曰： 民方耕耘不暇，奈何重困之畚锸。 
现代文：盛夏农忙时节，济宁守将率民夫筑城，克勤指出： 百姓正忙于耕耘，为何还要增加繁重的劳役？ 
English: At the height of the summer farming season, the governor of Jining will lead the people to build a city. Keqin pointed out: The people are busy with farming, why add heavy labor?

古文：济宁人歌之曰： 孰罢我役？
现代文：请求中书予以免除。这时，大旱逢雨，济宁百姓歌颂他： 谁免去了这次徭役？
English: At this time, when it was raining and there was a drought, the people of Jining sang his praises: Who was exempted from this forced labor?

古文：使君之力。
现代文：是方知府。
English: It's the prefectural capital.

古文：孰活我黍？
现代文：谁使庄稼不遭枯死？
English: Who keeps the crops from withering?

古文：使君之雨。
现代文：是方知府。
English: It's the prefectural capital.

古文：使君勿去，我民父母。 
现代文：方知府是我们父母，千万不要离去。 
English: The prefectural government is our parent. Don't ever leave.

古文：视事三年，户口增数倍，一郡饶足。
现代文：克勤在济宁为官三年，户口增加数倍，家给人足。
English: Keqin has been an official in Jining for three years, the household registration has increased several times, and the family has enough people.

古文：克勤为治，以德化为本，不喜近名，尝曰： 近名必立威，立威必殃民，吾不忍也。 
现代文：克勤为政以德行教化为本，不追求个人名声，曾说： 追求个人名声，必会追求威势，这样必会祸害百姓，我不忍这样做。 
English: He said, "If you pursue personal fame, you will inevitably pursue power, and this will inevitably harm the people. I cannot bear to do this.

古文：自奉简素，一布袍十年不易，日不再肉食。
现代文：他生活简朴，一件布袍穿了十年不换，每天只吃一次荤。
English: He lives a simple life. He wears the same cloth robe for ten years and only eats lettuce once a day.

古文：太祖用法严，士大夫多被谪，过济宁者，克勤辄周恤之。
现代文：太祖对官吏严法重刑，士大夫多被贬谪，凡过济宁者，都受到克勤的周济。
English: The great-great-grandfather severely punished the officials, and most of the scholars and magistrates were demoted. Anyone who failed to pay Jining was subject to Zhou Jizhi.

古文：永嘉侯朱亮祖尝率舟师赴北平，水涸，役夫五千浚河。克勤不能止，泣祷于天。忽大雨，水深数尺，舟遂达，民以为神。
现代文：永嘉侯朱亮祖率水军赴北平，运河水浅，征民夫五千来疏浚河道，克勤无力制止，祈祷于天，忽降大雨，运河水深数尺，船得以通行，百姓视克勤为神。
English: Yongjia Hou Zhu Liang Zu led the navy to Peiping, the canal was shallow, the people's husband was recruited to dredge the river for five thousand, Keqin was powerless to stop it, prayed to heaven, heavy rain suddenly fell, the canal was several feet deep, the ship was able to pass, and the people regarded Keqin as a god.

古文：八年入朝，太祖嘉其绩，赐宴，遣还郡。
现代文：洪武八年入京述职，太祖嘉奖其政绩，赐宴，仍回济宁。
English: In the eighth year of Hongwu's rule, he went to Beijing to report for duty. The great-grandfather praised his political achievements and gave him a banquet, but he still returned to Jining.

古文：寻为属吏程贡所诬，谪役江浦，复以空印事连，逮死。子孝闻、孝孺。
现代文：不久为部属程贡诬告而贬到江浦服役，后去世。其子为方孝闻、方孝儒。
English: Soon after, he was demoted to the Jiangpu service for falsely accusing his subordinate Cheng Gong, and later died. His sons were Fang Xiaowen and Fang Xiaoju.

古文：孝孺，自有传。
现代文：孝儒另有传。
English: There is another legend about Xiaoru.

古文：吴履，字德基，兰溪人。
现代文：吴履，字德基，兰奚谷人。
English: Wu Lui, Zi Deji, Lanlu Valley people.

古文：少受业于闻人梦吉，通《春秋》诸史。
现代文：年少时拜闻人梦吉为师，精通《春秋》及诸史书。
English: When he was young, he studied under Mengji, a famous storyteller, and was well versed in "Spring and Autumn" and other historical books.

古文：李文忠镇浙东，聘为郡学正。
现代文：李文忠镇守浙东，聘他为郡学正。
English: Li Wenzhong, the town guard of East Zhejiang, appointed him as the county education chief.

古文：久之，举于朝，授南康丞。
现代文：以后被荐举授南康县丞。
English: Later, he was recommended to be conferred the title of Nankang County Warden.

古文：南康俗悍，谓丞儒也，易之。居数月，摘发奸伏如老狱吏，则皆大惊，相率敛迹。
现代文：南康民俗强悍，吴履到任数月，惩处一些奸猾之徒，其余不法之人大惊，不敢妄为。
English: Nankang folk customs are strong, Wu Rong has been in office for several months, punishing some treacherous people, and the rest of the lawless people are shocked and dare not act recklessly.

古文：履阅狱问故，立释之，乃白以中。
现代文：履又改行宽大政策，与民休息。知县周以中巡视田野，被一乡民责骂，便将全乡百姓都逮捕问罪。
English: However, he changed to a lenient policy and rested with the people. Zhou Yizhong of Zhixian County inspected the fields, and when he was scolded by a villager, he arrested all the villagers and questioned them.

古文：以中益怒，曰： 丞慢我。 
现代文：履了解情形后，立即释放全部被捕乡民，然后告知周以中。
English: After understanding the situation, immediately release all arrested villagers, and then inform Zhou Yizhong.

古文：履曰： 犯公者一人耳，其邻何罪？
现代文：以中大怒，履解释道： 侵犯你的只有一人，其邻里何罪？
English: With great anger, Lu explained: There is only one person who violated you, what is the crime of his neighbor?

古文：今絷者众，而捕未已，急且有变，奈何？ 
现代文：今天你把一乡人都逮捕问罪，若激起民变，将如何是好？ 
English: Today, you have arrested and charged a villager. If this provokes a popular uprising, what will happen?

古文：以中意乃解。
现代文：以中这才息怒。
English: That's what's so infuriating.

古文：邑有淫祠，每祀辄有蛇出户，民指为神。履缚巫责之，沉神像于江，淫祠遂绝。
现代文：该县沉溺淫祠，每次祭祀就有蛇出来，乡民认为是神出现，履把巫师逮捕惩处，将神像沉于江中，从此淫祠的陋习再没有了。
English: The county indulged in a temple of prostitution, and every time there was a ritual, a snake came out. The villagers thought it was a god, arrested and punished the sorcerer, and sank the statue of the god in the river. Since then, the bad habit of the temple of prostitution has disappeared.

古文：为丞六年，百姓爱之。
现代文：他在南康六年，深受百姓爱戴。
English: He has been in Nankang for six years and is deeply loved by the people.

古文：迁安化知县。
现代文：朝廷升吴履为安化知县。
English: The Imperial Court promoted Wu Li to Anhua County.

古文：大姓易氏保险自守，江阴侯吴良将击之，召履计事。
现代文：大姓易氏据险要之地以自保。江阴侯吴良准备出兵袭击，召履商议。
English: The eldest son, Yi, took refuge in a dangerous place to protect himself. Jiangyin County, Wu Liang, prepared to send troops to attack, and called for negotiations.

古文：履曰： 易氏逃死耳，非反也，招之当来。不来，诛未晚。 
现代文：吴履认为： 易氏只是避难而已，并非谋反。招他来，他若不来，再攻杀也不晚。 
English: Wu Lu thought: Yi is just taking refuge, not plotting rebellion. Invite him, if he doesn't come, it's not too late to attack and kill him.

古文：良从之，易氏果至。
现代文：吴良采纳这个意见，招易氏，易氏果然来了。
English: Wu Liang accepted this suggestion, and invited Mr. Yi, and Mr. Yi came.

古文：良欲籍农故为兵者，民大恐。履曰： 世清矣，民安于农。
现代文：吴良要把从前当过兵的农民登记入册，农民惶恐不安，吴履建议： 世道太平，百姓安于农业。
English: Wu Liang wanted to register the farmers who had been soldiers in the past. The farmers were frightened and uneasy. Wu Lu suggested that the world should be peaceful and the people should be satisfied with agriculture.

古文：请籍其愿为兵者，不愿，可勿强。 
现代文：请只登记那些愿当兵的农民，不愿再当兵的不可强迫。 
English: Please register only those farmers who are willing to be soldiers. Those who no longer want to be soldiers cannot be forced.

古文：迁濰州知州。
现代文：朝廷又升吴履为潍州知州。
English: The imperial court also promoted Wu Li to the title of Zhangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：山东兵常以牛羊代秋税，履与民计曰： 牛羊有死瘠患，不若输粟便。 
现代文：山东常以牛羊代纳秋税，履同潍州农民商议： 用牛羊交税，不死便瘦，不如交纳粮食方便。 
English: Shandong often used cattle and sheep to pay the autumn tax, and discussed with farmers in Zhangzhou: Paying taxes with cattle and sheep will make you thin, and it is more convenient to pay grain.

古文：他日，上官令民送牛羊之陕西，他县民多破家，濰民独完。
现代文：后来，上司令百姓送牛羊去陕西，其他县农民多因此破产，而潍州牛羊肥壮能如数送到。
English: Later, the people of the commander-in-chief sent cattle and sheep to Shaanxi, and many farmers in other counties went bankrupt as a result, while the number of cattle and sheep fattened in Luzhou was as large as it could be.

古文：后建言称旨，擢河南左布政使。
现代文：因改潍州为县，召履回省，临行时潍县百姓含泪送别。
English: Due to the change of Ganzhou into a county and the recall to the province, when leaving, the people of Ganzhou County bid farewell with tears.

古文：史诚祖，解州人。
现代文：履请求辞官归家。史诚祖，解州人。
English: Resigning officer returns home after fulfilling request. Shi Chengzu, a native of Leshou.

古文：洪武末，诣阙陈盐法利弊。太祖纳之，授汶上知县，为治廉平宽简。
现代文：洪武末年到朝廷陈奏盐法之利弊，太祖采纳他的意见，并授他为汶上知县，他为官清廉，政简刑宽。
English: At the end of his life, Hongwu went to the imperial court to explain the advantages and disadvantages of the salt method. The great-grandfather adopted his opinion and awarded him Wenshang County. He was a clean official, and his sentence was lenient.

古文：永乐七年，成祖北巡，遣御史考核郡县长吏贤否，还言诚祖治第一。赐玺书劳之曰： 守令承流宣化，所以安利元元。朕统御天下，夙夜求贤，共图治理。
现代文：永乐七年，成祖北巡，遣御史考核各郡县官吏的才能德行如何，御史奏举史诚祖第一，成祖赐书慰劳，玺书中说 ：我统治天下，日夜求贤，共同治理国家。
English: In the seventh year of Yongle, Cheng Zu went on a northern tour and sent an imperial historian to examine the talents and virtues of officials in each county and prefecture. The imperial historian gave a report on the merits of Cheng Zu, and Cheng Zu gave a letter of consolation. In the letter, he said, "I rule the world, I seek virtue day and night, and we govern the country together."

古文：往往下询民间，皆言苦吏苛急，能副朕心者实鲜。
现代文：因此常常询问民间，都说苦于官吏苛征急敛，能符合我的初衷的官吏太少。
English: Therefore, I often ask the people, and they all say that they are suffering from the officials' harshness and haste, and there are too few officials who can meet my original intention.

古文：尔敦厚老成，恪共乃职；持身励志，一于廉公。平赋均徭，政清讼简，民心悦戴，境内称安。
现代文：你忠厚老成！忠于职守，为官廉洁，为政公允，征派赋徭均平，政治清明，诉讼不多，受百姓爱戴，境内安定，不逊于古代良吏。
English: You are loyal and accomplished! You are loyal to your duties, you are the most honest official, you are fair in politics, you have an even distribution of appointments, your politics are clear, you do not have many lawsuits, you are loved by the people, your territory is stable, and you are not inferior to the good officials of ancient times.

古文：御史又言贪吏虐民无若易州同知张腾，遂征下狱。
现代文：因此，特升你为济宁知州，同时仍兼管汶上县政务。希望你更加专心职守，有始有终，保持良好声誉。 
English: Therefore, you have been specially promoted to Jining Zhizhou, while still being in charge of the government affairs of Wenshang County. I hope you will be more dedicated to your duties, have a beginning and an end, and maintain a good reputation.

古文：诚祖既得旌，益勤于治。
现代文：并赐酒一尊、织金纱衣一套、钞千贯。
English: He also bestowed a gift of wine, a set of gold-woven gauze robes, and thousands of banknotes.

古文：土田增辟，户口繁滋，益编户十四里。
现代文：诚祖受到皇帝嘉奖后，更加勤于政事，致使汶上县农田开垦日广，户口日益增多，扩增十四里。
English: After receiving the emperor's award, Chengzu became more diligent in politics, resulting in the expansion of farmland in Wenshang County, the increasing number of hukou, and the expansion of fourteen miles.

古文：永乐七年，与钱塘知县黄信中、开化知县夏升并九载课最，当迁。其部民相率诉于上官，乞再任，上官以闻。帝嘉之，即擢子襄处州知府，信中杭州，升衢州，俾得治其故县。
现代文：成祖路过汶上，准备将其民户数百家迁往胶州，由于诚祖的奏请而得免。朝廷多次要调他到别处任职，均为当地百姓奏请挽留。他在汶上任职二十九年，逝于任上。当地士民哀悼不已，留葬于城南，百姓每年祭祀。谢子襄，名衮，子襄为其字，新淦人。建文年间，被荐举为青田知县。永乐七年，他与钱塘知县黄信中、开化知县夏升，均任职九年，经考核合格皆当升迁，然而因各县县民请求留任，得到皇帝嘉奖，升子襄为处州知府，信中为杭州知府，夏升为衢州知府，以便他们就近治理原县。
English: Cheng Zu passed through Wenshang, preparing to move hundreds of his households to Jiaozhou, and was exempted due to the request of Cheng Zu. The imperial court repeatedly wanted to transfer him to another post, all of which were requested by the local people. He served in Wenshang for 29 years and died in office. The local people mourned, remained buried in the south of the city, and the people sacrificed every year. Xie Zixiang, famous for his name, Zixiang for his character, and Xinlu people. During the construction of Wenshang, he was recommended to be promoted to Qingtian County. In Yongle in the seventh year, he and Qiantang County

古文：子襄治处州，声绩益著。
现代文：子襄治理处州，成绩卓著。
English: Zixiang governance is in the state, the results are outstanding.

古文：郡有虎患。岁旱蝗。祷于神，大雨二日，蝗尽死，虎亦循去。
现代文：郡内有虎患，每年不是旱灾便是蝗灾，子襄祈祷于神，大雨二日，蝗虫死尽，虎也逃走了。
English: There is a tiger plague in the county. Every year, it is either a drought or a locust plague. My son prayed to God. After two days of heavy rain, the locusts died and the tigers fled.

古文：有盗窃官钞，子襄檄城隍神。盗方阅钞密室，忽疾风卷堕市中，盗即伏罪。
现代文：有人盗窃官钞，子襄传令城隍庙神缉拿罪犯，盗贼刚窥探藏钞密室，忽被大风卷走落入市中，因而伏罪。
English: Someone was stealing official banknotes, and the god of the City God's temple was summoned to hunt down the criminal. The thief had just spied on the secret room where the banknotes were hidden, when he was swept away by a strong wind and fell into the city, thus committing a crime.

古文：民鬻牛于市，将屠之。牛逸至子襄前，俯首若有诉，乃捐俸赎还其主。
现代文：有百姓在集市卖牛，牛将被杀，逃到子襄面前，俯首好像哭泣诉苦一般，子襄将它赎回还归原主。
English: Some people were selling cattle at the market. The cow was about to be slaughtered, so it ran to Zixiang and bowed its head as if weeping and lamenting. Zixiang redeemed it and returned it to its original owner.

古文：叛卒吴米据山谷为乱，朝廷发兵讨之，一郡汹汹。子襄力止军城中毋出，而自以计掩捕之，获其魁，余悉解散。
现代文：叛卒吴米占据山谷造反，朝廷发兵征讨，全州百姓不安，子襄极力劝阻大军住于城内不要到城外去，他自己设计追捕，擒其主犯，其余解散。
English: The rebel Wu Mi occupied the valley and rebelled, the imperial court sent troops to investigate, and the people of the whole state were uneasy. Zixiang tried his best to dissuade the large army from living in the city and not going outside the city. He designed his own pursuit, beat up his main criminal, and disbanded the rest.

古文：升，盐城人。贝秉彝，名恒，以字行，上虞人。
现代文：子襄为人廉洁谨慎，做了三十年的官，从不携带家眷。
English: Zixiang is an honest and prudent person. He has been an official for 30 years and has never brought his family along.

古文：永乐二年进士。
现代文：永乐二十二年逝世。
English: Yongle died 22 years later.

古文：授邵阳知县，以忧去，补东阿。
现代文：贝秉彝，名恒，上虞人。永乐二年考中进士，授邵阳知县，因父母去世而辞官，后补为东阿知县。
English: Bei Bingyao, named Heng, Shangyu people. Yongle two years of high school entrance examination, awarded Shaoyang County, resigned due to the death of his parents, later added to East Achi County.

古文：善决狱，能以礼义导民。
现代文：秉彝善于明断案情，能以礼仪引导民众。
English: He is good at making clear decisions and can guide the public with etiquette.

古文：岁大侵，上平籴备荒议。帝从之，班下郡县如东阿式。
现代文：灾荒之年，他上奏《平籴备荒议》，为成祖所采纳，并颁布于各郡县，均按照东阿县的方式进行救灾。
English: In the year of the disaster and famine, he played "Pingluo prepared for the disaster," which was adopted by Chengzu and promulgated in all counties, all of which carried out disaster relief in accordance with the Donga County method.

古文：邑西南有巨浸，积潦为田害。
现代文：东阿县西南有一大泽，积水淹没田地。
English: There is a swamp in the southwest of Dong'a County, and the standing water has flooded the fields.

古文：秉彝相视高下，凿渠，引入大清河，涸之，得沃壤数百顷，民食其利。
现代文：秉彝察看了地势，开凿沟渠，将积水引入大清河，泽水干涸，获得肥沃田地数万顷，大收其利。
English: Byung-soo inspected the terrain, dug a ditch, and brought the accumulated water into the Daecheong River. The river water dried up, and tens of thousands of hectares of fertile fields were obtained, and great profits were made.

古文：尤善综画，凡废铁、败皮、朽索、故纸悉藏之。暇令工匠煮胶、铸杵、捣纸、绞索贮于库。
现代文：秉彝尤其善于综合规划，凡是废铁、破旧皮革、腐朽绳索、废纸等物，都收集起来，令工匠熬胶、铸铁、捣浆造纸、搓绳贮于库中备用。
English: Bingyao is particularly good at comprehensive planning. All scrap iron, worn leather, rotting ropes, waste paper and other items are collected and stored in the warehouse for the craftsmen to make rubber, cast iron, paper pulp and bridles.

古文：会成祖北巡，敕有司建席殿。秉彝出所贮济用，工遂速竣。
现代文：成祖巡视北方，令地方官府建造大殿，秉彝将平时所贮之物做建殿之用，使工程迅速完成。
English: Chengzu inspected the north, ordered the local government to build a large hall, and insisted that the materials stored in peacetime be used to build the hall, so that the project could be completed quickly.

古文：帝将召之，东阿耆老百余人诣阙自言，愿留贝令，帝许之。
现代文：成祖意欲征召秉彝入朝任职，东阿耆老百余人到朝廷，请求留任秉彝为本县县令，成祖应允。
English: Cheng Zu wanted to recruit Bing Bing to serve in the imperial court, and more than a hundred people from Donga County went to the imperial court to request that Bing Bing remain as the county magistrate of the county, and Cheng Zu agreed.

古文：九载考满入都，诏进一阶，仍还东阿。
现代文：九年任期，考核合格，召入京师进升官阶一级，但仍回东阿。
English: He served a nine-year term, passed the assessment, and was called to the Beijing Division to be promoted to the first rank, but still returned to Dong'a.

古文：尝坐累，罚役京师。民竞代其役，三罚三代，乃复官。
现代文：曾犯错误而罚至京师服役，东阿人民竞相代替他去服役，三罚三代，官复原职。
English: Once he made a mistake and was punished to serve in the Beijing Division, the East African people competed to replace him to serve, three punishments and three generations, and the official was reinstated.

古文：秉彝为吏明察而仁恕。
现代文：秉彝为官能够明察实情，待民宽厚。
English: As an official, he can clearly see the truth and treat the people generously.

古文：素善饮，已仕，遂已之。
现代文：平时好饮酒，做官后戒酒不饮。
English: In normal times, it is good to drink alcohol, but do not drink alcohol after quitting the post.

古文：宣德元年卒官。
现代文：宣德六年逝于任上。
English: Xuan De passed away six years after taking office.

古文：万观，字经训，南昌人。
现代文：万观，字经训，南昌人。
English: Man Guan, Zi Jingxun, Nanchang people.

古文：弱冠成永乐十九年进士。
现代文：永乐十九年考中进士。当时，他只有二十岁。
English: Yongle was only 20 years old when he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：帝少之，令归肄学。
现代文：成祖认为他年少，令他再去学习。
English: Chengzu thought he was too young, and told him to study again.

古文：寻召为御史，改严州知府。
现代文：不久，召入朝廷为御史，后改任严州知府。
English: Soon after, he was called to the Imperial Court as Imperial Historian, and later he was appointed governor of Enshu.

古文：府东境七里泷，有渔舟数百艇，时剽行旅。
现代文：府东境七里泷有渔船数百艘，时常抢劫过往旅客。
English: There are hundreds of fishing boats within seven miles of the eastern border of the prefecture, and they often rob passing passengers.

古文：观编十舟为一甲，令画地巡警。不匝月，盗屏迹。
现代文：观将渔船十只编为一甲，令其分区巡查警戒，不到一月，盗贼不敢出没了。
English: Onlookers organized ten fishing boats into one, and put them on patrol alert in their respective districts. Within a month, the thieves no longer dared to venture out.

古文：乃励学校，劝农桑，奏减织造，以银代丝税，民皆便之。
现代文：他奖励办学，劝民务农，奏请减少织造定额，以银代纳丝税，百姓大感便利。
English: He rewarded the establishment of schools, advised the people to do more in agriculture, requested a reduction in the quota for weaving, and paid the silk tax in silver, which made the people feel very convenient.

古文：九年考绩，治行为海内第一。
现代文：九年任期期满，经考核，其政绩居全国第一。
English: At the end of the nine-year term of office, after assessment, his political performance ranked first in the country.

古文：既以忧去，将除服，严州民豫上章愿复得观为守，金、衢民亦上章乞之。
现代文：因父亲丧而离职，服丧期将满，严州百姓上章奏请万观仍回严州为知府，金、衢州民也分别上章，要求观去任职。
English: Due to his father's death, he left the post, and the mourning period was about to end. The people of Yanzhou petitioned Wangan to return to Yanzhou as governor, and the people of Jin and Zhangzhou also petitioned separately, asking Wangan to serve.

古文：朝廷异焉，补平阳府，政绩益茂。
现代文：朝廷对他更加器重，调任平阳知府，其政绩更加卓著。
English: The imperial court attached more importance to him, and he was transferred to the governorship of Pingyang Province, where his political achievements were even more outstanding.

古文：有芝生尧祠栋上，士民皆言使君德化所致。观曰： 太守知奉职而已，芝，非吾事也。 
现代文：有灵芝生长于 尧祠 栋梁上，士民都说是万观德行感化的结果，万观说： 我只知谨于职守，灵芝与我无关。 
English: Ganoderma lucidum grows on the beams of the Ancestral Ancestral Hall. The scholars and the people all say that it is the result of the influence of Man's View of Virtue. Man's View of Virtue says: I only know to be conscientious in my duties. Ganoderma lucidum has nothing to do with me.

古文：考满，擢山东布政使，卒于官。
现代文：任期满，政绩考核合格，升为山东布政使，逝于任上。
English: At the end of his term of office, he passed the performance appraisal and was promoted to Shandong Bu Political Envoy. He died in office.

古文：叶宗人，字宗行，松江华亭人。
现代文：叶宗人，字宗行，松江府华亭人。
English: Ye Zongren, Zha Zongxing, are from Huating in Matsue Prefecture.

古文：永乐中，尚书夏原吉治水东南。宗人以诸生上疏，请浚范家港引浦水入海，禁濒海民毋作坝以遏其流。
现代文：永乐年间，尚书夏原吉在东南地区治水，宗人上书请疏浚范家港，引浦水入海，禁止沿海居民筑坝阻遏其流。
English: During the Yongle era, Shangshu Xia Yuanji was in charge of flood control in the southeastern region, and his father-in-law submitted a petition to dredge the Fanjia Port, divert the waters of the Pudong River into the sea, and prohibit coastal residents from building dams to stem its flow.

古文：帝令赴原吉所自效。
现代文：成祖命他到原吉那里效力。
English: Chengzu ordered him to go to Hara no kichi to work there.

古文：工竣，原吉荐之，授钱塘知县。
现代文：竣工后，由于夏原吉的荐举而授钱塘知县。
English: After its completion, it was awarded to Tangzhi County on the recommendation of Xia Yuanji.

古文：又常行江中，有死人挂舟舵，推问，则里无赖子所沉者。
现代文：钱塘县为浙江省会所在地，徭役重，豪强之家往往买通猾吏，将徭役转嫁于贫民。宗人将应服役之人编在册子上，依次分派，使徭役负担平均。
English: Qiantang County, the capital of Zhejiang Province, has a heavy burden of forced labor, and the families of the brave and strong often bribe the cunning officials to pass the burden of forced labor on to the poor. The people will compile the people who should serve in the booklet and assign them in turn, so that the burden of forced labor is average.

古文：遂俱伏法，邑民以为神。
现代文：他查明了两起无头谋杀案情，将罪犯依法惩处，深受该县人民敬服。
English: He identified the circumstances of two headless murders, punished the criminals according to law, and was deeply respected by the people of the county.

古文：按察使周新，廉介吏也，尤重宗人。
现代文：按察使周新，是位廉洁官吏，十分器重宗人。
English: According to the inspector general Zhou Xin, he is a clean official and a man of great integrity.

古文：一日，伺宗人出，潜入其室，见厨中惟银鱼腊一裹。新叹息，携少许去。
现代文：有天乘宗人外出，他潜入其居室，见橱中只有银鱼干一包，新不禁叹息宗人为官之清廉。
English: One day, when he sneaked into his father-in-law's room while he was out, he found only a package of dried silverfish in the cupboard. He could not help but sigh that his father-in-law was a corrupt official.

古文：明日召宗人共食，饮至醉，用仪仗导之归。
现代文：第二天召宗人共餐，酒醉，用仪仗队送宗人回府。
English: The next day, he invited his son-in-law to dinner, got drunk, and sent him home with an honor guard.

古文：时呼为 钱塘一叶清 。
现代文：当时称宗人为 钱塘一叶清 。
English: At that time, he was known as Qiantang Ipyeqing.

古文：十五年督工匠往营北京，卒于涂，新哭之累日。
现代文：永乐十五年督率工匠营建北京城，逝于途中，周新闻耗，哭了几天。
English: Yongle supervised the construction of Beijing City for fifteen years and led the craftsmen. He died on the way. He cried for several days.

古文：王源，字启泽，龙岩人。
现代文：王源，字启泽，龙岩人。
English: Wang Yuan, Zha Qizhe, Longyan Ren.

古文：永乐二年擢进士，授庶吉士。改深泽知县。
现代文：永乐二年进士，授庶吉士，后改任深泽知县。
English: Yongle was promoted to Shishi in the second year, awarded the second rank of Kishi, and was later reassigned to Fukasawa Chishian.

古文：修学舍，筑长堤，劝民及时嫁娶，革其争财之俗。
现代文：王源在任深泽知县期间，修学舍，筑长堤，劝民及时嫁娶，革除争要财礼之俗。
English: During Wang Yuan's term of office in Shenzhen Zhixian, he repaired the schoolhouse, built a long embankment, advised the people to marry in time, and eliminated the custom of competing for money and gifts.

古文：数上书论事，被诏征入都，又论时政得失，忤旨下吏。
现代文：多次上书评论时事，被召入朝，又论时政之得失，因违背皇上旨意而贬官，逢国家大赦而复官。
English: He has written several times to comment on current affairs, was summoned to the imperial court, and discussed the merits and demerits of current politics. He was demoted for violating the emperor's will, but was reinstated after a national amnesty.

古文：会赦复官，奏免逋负。
现代文：复官后奏请豁免百姓所欠赋税。
English: Please exempt the people from the tax arrears after the reinstatement.

古文：岁饥，辄发粟振救，坐是被逮。民争先输纳，得赎还。
现代文：在饥荒年月，因私自发放官粮，赈救饥民，而被捕入狱，后纳钱赎罪才得以释放。
English: During the famine years, he was arrested and jailed for illegally distributing government grain to help the starving, and was only released after paying a fine to atone for his sins.

古文：召为春坊司直郎，侍诸王讲读。迁卫府纪善，移松江同知，奏捐积逋数十万石。
现代文：朝廷召为春坊司直郎，为诸王讲读经史，后调任卫府纪善，再调任松江同知。奏请豁免该府所欠田粮数十万石。
English: He was called by the imperial court to serve as Shunbo Shinairo, lecturing on the history of the scriptures for the kings, and was later transferred to the post of Keifu Kisen, and then to the post of Matsue Doshi. He submitted a petition to be exempted from the hundreds of thousands of koku of rice that the prefecture was owed.

古文：以母老乞归养，服阕，除刑部郎中。
现代文：因母亲年迈，请求归家奉养，母亲去世后在家守丧，期满后，朝廷任命为刑部郎中。
English: Due to his mother's old age, he requested to return home to support her. After his mother's death, he held a memorial service at home. After his term expired, the Imperial Court appointed him as a junior member of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：英宗践阼，择廷臣十一人为知府，赐宴及敕，乘传行。
现代文：英宗即位，择选廷臣十一人为知府，源被选为潮州知府。
English: Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, eleven courtiers were selected as prefectures, and Yuan was selected as the prefect of Chaozhou.

古文：城东有广济桥，岁久半圮坏，源敛民万金重筑之。以其余建亭，设先圣、四配、十哲像。刻《蓝田吕氏乡约》，择民为约正、约副、约士，讲肄其中，而时偕僚寀董率焉。
现代文：潮州城东的广济桥，年久失修，源募万金重建，并将余金用来建亭，亭内供奉先圣、四配、十哲像，刻《蓝田吕氏乡约》，从乡民中选任约正、约副、约士，讲解乡规民约。
English: The Guangji Bridge in the east of Chaozhou city fell into disrepair for a long time. The source of funds was raised to rebuild it, and the remaining money was used to build a pavilion. The pavilion was dedicated to the first saint, four pairs, and ten philosophers, engraved with "Lantian Lv's Township Covenant," and elected from the villagers to be the chief, deputy, and clerk of the township to explain the township rules and the people's covenant.

古文：西湖山上有大石为怪，源命凿之，果获石骷髅，怪遂息。乃琢为碑，大书 潮州知府王源除怪石 。
现代文：西湖山上有大石作怪，源命令将石凿开，果得石骷髅，大石再不作怪，于是立下石碑，上刻 潮州知府王源除怪石 。
English: There was a large rock on the mountain of West Lake that was acting as a monster. Yuan ordered that the rock be chiseled away. As a result, the rock was chiseled away, and the large rock no longer acted as a monster. Therefore, a stone monument was erected, inscribed with "Chaozhou Governor Wang Yuan Removes Monster Rock."

古文：会杖一民死，民子诉诸朝，并以筑桥建亭为源罪。
现代文：这时，有一民犯罪受杖刑而死，其子向朝廷诉讼，告王源筑桥、建亭等罪行。
English: At this time, there was a criminal who was caned to death, and his son sued the imperial court, accusing Wang Yuan of building bridges, erecting pavilions and other crimes.

古文：逮至京，罪当赎徒。潮人相率叩阍，乃复其官。
现代文：朝廷将源逮捕至京，定罪流放，潮州人争相到朝廷请求赦免。
English: The imperial court arrested the source to Beijing, convicted and exiled, and the Chaozhou people rushed to the imperial court to request amnesty.

古文：久之，乞休。
现代文：朝廷恩准并恢复王源的官职。
English: The imperial court granted permission and restored Wang Yuan's official post.

古文：潮人奏留不获，祠祀之。
现代文：又过了很久，源奏请退休。潮州百姓奏请挽留，朝廷不准。于是百姓为他建祠祝福。
English: After a long time, Yuan So kindly retired. The people of Chaozhou asked So to stay, but the imperial court did not allow it. So the people built a shrine for him.

古文：翟溥福，字本德，东莞人。
现代文：翟溥福，字本德，东莞人。
English: Fufu, Bende, Dongguan.

古文：永乐二年进士。除青阳知县。
现代文：永乐二年进士，授任青阳知县。
English: Yongle entered the priesthood two years later and was appointed to Qingyang County.

古文：九华虎为患，溥福檄山神，虎即殄。
现代文：九华山有虎为患，溥福令山神消除了虎患。
English: There was a tiger infestation on the Jihua Mountain, but the mountain god eliminated the tiger infestation through good fortune.

古文：久之，移新淦，迁刑部主事，进员外郎，为尚书魏源所器。
现代文：以后，调任新淦知县、刑部主事，晋升为员外郎，为刑部尚书魏源所器重。
English: Later, he was transferred to Xinqizhi County, the head of the criminal department, promoted to a member of the outer circle, and became the most important member of the criminal department.

古文：正统元年七月诏举廷臣堪为郡守者，源以溥福应，乃擢南康知府。
现代文：正统元年七月，朝廷诏令举荐廷臣为州郡太守，溥福由于魏源的荐举而升任南康知府。
English: In July of the first year of the Zhengrun era, the Imperial Court issued a decree recommending that Tingchen be promoted to the position of prefectural governor, and Yanfu was promoted to the position of the prefectural governor of South Kankang as a result of Wei Yuan's recommendation.

古文：先是岁歉，民擅发富家粟，及收取漂流官木者，前守悉坐以盗，当死者百余人。
现代文：南康府歉收，百姓将富家所囤粮食散发饥民，又收取大水漂流而来的官府木材，前任知府将这些人当作盗贼治罪，判处死刑者百余人。
English: Nankangfu had a poor harvest, and the people distributed the grain stolen by the rich to the hungry, and collected the timber of the government office that drifted in from the flood. The former governor punished these people as thieves, sentencing more than a hundred people to death.

古文：溥福阅实，杖而遣之。
现代文：溥福接任后，查清实情，将判死刑者只施以杖刑后一律释放。
English: After Yan Fu took over, he clarified the facts and released all those sentenced to death after only using a cane.

古文：地滨鄱阳湖，舟遇风涛无所泊，为筑石堤百余丈，往来者便之。
现代文：南康府位于鄱阳湖畔，来往船只遇大风大浪无处停泊，溥福督工筑石堤百余丈，船只往来甚为便利。
English: Nankangfu is located on the shore of Poyang Lake. In the event of high winds and big waves, there is nowhere for ships to moor. The governor of Bifu has built more than a hundred-meter-high stone embankments, making it very convenient for ships to come and go.

古文：庐山白鹿书院废，溥福倡众兴复，延师训其子弟，朔望躬诣讲授。
现代文：庐山白鹿书院，年久毁坏，溥福号召群众修复，聘请老师教育本府子弟，每月初一、十五，他亲自去讲课。
English: Lushan Bailu Academy, destroyed for many years, Gongfu called on the masses to repair it, hired teachers to educate the children of this prefecture, and on the first and fifteenth day of each month, he personally went to lecture.

古文：考绩赴部，以年老乞归。
现代文：任职期满，赴刑部，以考核其政绩，溥福年老奏请准予辞职返乡。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, he went to the Criminal Investigation Department to assess his political performance, and asked the elder Fu for permission to resign and return home.

古文：侍郎赵新尝抚江西，大声曰： 翟君此邦第一贤守也，胡可听其去。 
现代文：侍郎赵新曾巡抚江西，声称： 翟君为此郡第一位贤能守臣，不可让他离去。 
English: His attendant Zhao Xin, the governor of Jiangxi Province at the time, declared: "For this reason, Zou Jun is the county's first virtuous retainer, and he must not be allowed to leave."

古文：恳请累日，乃许之。
现代文：溥福恳请辞官多时，才蒙允准。
English: Yan Fu pleaded with the official to give him more time before he was allowed to leave.

古文：辞郡之日，父老争赆金帛，悉不受。
现代文：辞别南康之日，父老乡民争赠金帛，他都谢绝不受。
English: On the day of his farewell to Nankang, his father's fellow villagers competed for the gift of gold ingots, but he refused to accept them.

古文：众挽舟涕泣，因建词湖堤祀之，又配享白鹿书院之三贤祠。
现代文：民众牵船含泪送别，在湖堤边为他建生祠，又在白鹿书院之 三贤 祠内设立他的牌位，与三贤并列。
English: People took boats to bid him farewell with tears in their eyes, built a shrine to his memory on the edge of the lake embankment, and set up a plaque to him in the Three Wise Men's Shrine at Shiroka Academy, placing him alongside the Three Wise Men.

古文：三贤者，唐李渤，宋周敦颐、朱熹也。
现代文：所谓 三贤 ，即唐朝的李渤，宋朝的周敦颐、朱熹。
English: The so-called Three Sages, namely Li Xi of the Tang Dynasty, Zhou Dun and Zhu Xi of the Song Dynasty.

古文：李信圭，字君信，泰和人。
现代文：李信圭，字君信，泰和人。
English: Li Xin Gui, Zi Jun Xin, Tai He Ren.

古文：洪熙时举贤良，授清河知县。
现代文：洪熙时荐举贤良，授信圭为清河知县。
English: At the time of Hong Xi, he recommended the promotion of virtuous people, and the county of Qinghe County was awarded the honorary title of Qinghe County.

古文：县瘠而冲，官艘日相衔，役夫动以千计。
现代文：该县贫瘠却为交通要地，过往官船每天川流不息，首尾相接，役使民夫动以千计。
English: Although the county is barren, it is an important place for transportation. In the past, government ships flowed incessantly every day, side by side, and thousands of people were moved by them.

古文：宣德三年上疏言： 本邑地广人稀，地当冲要，使节络绎，日发民挽舟。丁壮既尽，役及老稚，妨废农桑。
现代文：前任县令常请沭阳县以五百人相助，然这些人离家太远，衣食不便。信圭接任后请求将沭阳助役改为代清河输纳原定课税的三分之二，这样两县都感到方便。宣德三年信圭上疏道： 本县地广人稀，处于交通要冲，每天征发百姓拉船，不仅全部丁壮，连老幼都要服役，妨碍农事。
English: The previous prefectural governor often invited 500 people from Poyang County to help, but these people were too far away from home, and food and clothing were inconvenient. After taking office, Xinyu requested that the Poyang assistant be changed to the Daiqing River to pay two-thirds of the original tax, so that both counties felt convenient. Xuande three years Xinyu on the ditch: This county is sparsely populated, in the traffic rush, every day the people are recruited to pull the boat, not only all Ding Zhuang, even the old and the young have to serve, hindering agricultural affairs.

古文：前年兵部有令，公事亟者舟予五人，缓者则否。
现代文：前年兵部有令，公事急需舟者征派五人，不急则不征派。
English: The previous year, the Ministry of Military Affairs issued an order that five people would be conscripted if they urgently needed a boat for business, but not if it was not urgent.

古文：今此令不行，役夫无限，有一舟至四五十人者。凶威所加，谁敢诘问。
现代文：如今此令不行，征派无限，甚至一船要四五十人，对这些有权有势者，谁敢违抗。
English: Now this order is impossible, the conscription is unlimited, even one ship needs forty or fifty people, who would dare to defy these powerful and influential people.

古文：或遇快风，步追不及，则官舫人役没其所赍衣粮，俾受寒馁。
现代文：行船中如遇顺风，船行加快，役夫徒步追赶不上，便将民夫所带衣粮没收，使他们挨饿受冻。
English: During the voyage, if there is a favorable wind, the boat will speed up, and if the steward cannot catch up on foot, he will confiscate the clothing and grain brought by the steward, causing them to starve and freeze.

古文：乞申明前令，哀此惮人。 
现代文：请求再申兵部前令，可怜这些怕官的小民。 
English: Ask for another order from the military department. Pity these petty people who are afraid of officials.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷允准。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：八年春，又言： 自江、淮达京师，沿河郡县悉令军民挽舟，若无卫军则民夫尽出有司，州县岁发二三千人，昼夜以俟。
现代文：八年春，信圭又上书道： 自江淮至京师，沿运河郡县都要派出军民为过往官船拉纤，无军队的地方，则全部征派民夫，州县每年要征派二、三千人昼夜等候。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Xinyu Xinyu wrote again: From the Huai River to the Beijing Canal, counties and counties along the canal should send soldiers and civilians to pull fiber for the passing government ships. Where there is no army, all civil servants should be conscripted. Every year, counties and counties should conscript two or three thousand people to wait day and night.

古文：而上官又不分别杂泛差役，一体派及。致土田荒芜，民无蓄积。稍遇歉岁，辄老稚相携，缘道乞食，实可悯伤。
现代文：而上级官员征派时不分杂、泛差役。致使田地荒芜，民无积粮，年成稍有歉收，老幼便要出去讨饭，实在可怜。
English: However, when higher-ranking officials conscripted people, they did not distinguish between miscellaneous workers and dispatched workers. As a result, the fields were deserted, the people had no stored grain, the harvest was slightly poor, and the old and the young had to go out to beg for food. It was really pitiful.

古文：请自仪真抵通州，尽免其杂徭，俾得尽力农田，兼供夫役。 
现代文：请求自仪征至通州一线地方，全部免去杂徭，使百姓尽力于农业，兼供力役。 
English: Request the self-assessment to the first-line places in Tongzhou, all free of impurities, so that the people can do their best in agriculture, and at the same time supply labor.

古文：帝亦从之。
现代文：宣宗也照准。
English: The emperor also followed his advice.

古文：自是，他郡亦蒙其泽。
现代文：从此，除清河外，其余郡县也蒙受其利。
English: Since then, in addition to Qinghe, other counties have also benefited.

古文：正统元年，用侍郎章敞荐，擢知蕲州。清河民诣阙乞留，命以知州理县事。
现代文：正统元年，因侍郎章敞的荐举，升信圭为蕲州知州，清河百姓至朝廷请求留任，于是朝廷命信圭以知州衔，专理清河事。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, due to the recommendation of the chamberlain Zhang Zang, Nobuyoshi was promoted to the post of Zhangzhou Chizhou, and the people of Qinghe went to the imperial court to request that he remain in office, so the imperial court ordered Nobuyoshi to use the title of Chizhou to specialize in Qinghe affairs.

古文：民有湖田数百顷，为淮安卫卒所夺，民代输租者六十年。
现代文：该地有湖田数百顷为淮安卫卒所占，而清河百姓却仍纳田税达六十年之久。
English: Hundreds of hectares of lake land in this area are occupied by Huai'an guardsmen, while the people of Qinghe have still been paying land tax for sixty years.

古文：信圭奏之，诏还民。
现代文：经信圭奏请，这些湖田归还清河百姓。
English: These lake lands will be returned to the people of Qinghe as requested by Xin Gui.

古文：饥民攘食人一牛，御史论死八人。信圭奏之，免六人。
现代文：该县饥民偷杀牛一头，御史判八人死刑，信圭奏请朝廷，免死六人。
English: Hungry people in the county stole and killed a cow, and the imperial court sentenced eight people to death. Six people were spared from death after Xinyu appealed to the imperial court.

古文：天久雨，淮水大溢，没庐舍畜产甚众。信圭奏请振贷，并停岁辨物件及军匠厨役、浚河人夫，报可。
现代文：遇淮河水涨，淹没了许多房屋牲畜，信圭奏请赈济，并停征当年应征物品和军、匠、厨役及疏浚河道民夫。
English: When the Huaihe River rose, flooding many houses and livestock, Xin Gui Song asked for help, and suspended the collection of conscripted goods and soldiers, craftsmen, cooks and dredgers of the river.

古文：事闻，宣宗并属吏罪之。
现代文：南北往来之人死于清河途中者，信圭为之安葬。
English: People traveling between the north and south died on the way to Qinghe, and were buried by Xinyu.

古文：自后，部民奏留，率下所司核实云。
现代文：十一年冬，尚书金濂荐举他为处州知府，这时他在清河已二十二年了。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year, Shangshu Jinjun recommended him to be the prefect of the whole state. At that time, he had been in Qinghe for twenty-two years.

古文：张宗琏，字重器，吉水人。
现代文：到处州后去世，清河百姓立祠祭奠。张宗琏，字重器，吉水人。
English: After his death, people in Qinghe built small shrines to pay tribute to him. Zhang Zongyao, known as the "heavyweight," was a man of auspicious water.

古文：永乐二年进士。改庶吉士，授刑部主事，录囚广东。
现代文：永乐二年进士，初为庶吉士，后授刑部主事，负责审察广东囚犯的罪状。
English: Yongle was promoted to sergeant two years later. At first, he was a junior sergeant, and later he was in charge of the Penal Correction Department, responsible for investigating the crimes of prisoners in Guangdong.

古文：仁宗即位，擢左中允。
现代文：仁宗即位，升左中允。
English: Ninsong ascended to the throne and was promoted to the position of Left Middle Counselor.

古文：会诏朝臣举所知，礼部郎中况钟以宗琏名上。
现代文：皇帝令朝臣荐举所知贤才以备任用，礼部郎中况钟荐举宗琏。
English: The emperor ordered courtiers to recommend well-known talents for appointment, and the rector Zhongzheng Zhong recommended the appointment of the patriarch.

古文：帝问少傅杨士奇曰： 人皆举外吏，钟举京官，何也？ 
现代文：仁宗问少傅杨士奇： 别人都举荐外官，而钟举荐京官，何故？ 
English: Renzong asked Young Fu Yang Shiqiu: Others recommend foreign officials, but Zhong recommended Beijing officials. Why?

古文：对曰： 宗琏贤，臣与侍读学士王直将举之，不意为钟所先耳。 
现代文：士奇回答道： 宗琏是个贤才，臣与侍读学士王直正准备荐举，不料况钟先行一步。 
English: Shiqi replied: Zonglu is a genius. The minister and the attendant, Wang Zhi, a bachelor, are preparing to recommend him, but the clock is one step ahead.

古文：帝喜，曰： 钟能知宗琏，亦贤矣。 
现代文：帝高兴地说： 钟能知宗琏，也是个贤才。 
English: The emperor said happily: Zhong Nengzhi Zonglu is also a wise man.

古文：由是知钟，而擢宗琏南京大理丞。
现代文：于是提升宗琏为南京大理丞。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the post of Nanjing Dairyo-jo.

古文：宣德元年，诏遣吏部侍郎黄宗载等十五人出厘各省军籍，宗琏往福建。
现代文：宣德元年，朝廷令吏部侍郎黄宗载等十五人至各省订正军籍，宗琏被派往福建。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, the imperial court ordered 15 people, including Huang Zongzai, the steward of the cadre department, to revise the military registration in various provinces, and Zongzai was sent to Fujian.

古文：明年坐奏事忤旨，谪常州同知。
现代文：第二年因奏事有违皇帝旨意，而贬为常州同知。
English: In the second year, because the report was against the emperor's will, it was downgraded to Changzhou Tongzhi.

古文：朝遣御史李立理江南军籍，檄宗琏自随。
现代文：朝廷遣御史李立去整理江南军籍，令宗琏随从。
English: The imperial court sent the imperial historian Li Li to sort out the military records in the south of the Yangtze River, and ordered Zong Yao to follow.

古文：立受黠军词，多逮平民实伍，宗琏数争之。立怒，宗琏辄卧地乞杖，曰 请代百姓死 ，免株累甚众。
现代文：李立听信一些狡猾军人的话，多强制平民充实军队，宗琏多次反对，立怒，宗琏立即匍伏地下请求鞭打，愿代百姓而死，以免株连众人。
English: Li Li listened to the words of some cunning soldiers and forced more civilians to enrich the army. Zong Yao objected many times and became angry. Zong Yao immediately went underground and asked to be whipped. He was willing to die on behalf of the people, so as not to make everyone suffer.

古文：初，宗琏使广东，务廉恕。至是见立暴横，心积不平，疽废背卒。
现代文：宗琏原出使广东时，就十分廉洁，对人宽恕，现看到李立横暴，内心不平，激愤攻心，终于病逝。
English: When Zong Xuan Yuan was sent to Guangdong, he was very clean and forgiving of people. Now he saw Li Li was violent, his heart was not right, he was angry and aggressive, and finally he died of illness.

古文：常州民白衣送丧者千余人，为建祠君山。
现代文：常州百姓千余人穿着白衣送葬，为他建祠于君山。
English: More than a thousand people from Changzhou dressed in white to attend his funeral, and a shrine was built for him in Junshan.

古文：宗琏莅郡，不携妻子，病亟召医，室无灯烛。
现代文：宗琏在常州为官，不带妻室儿女，病重请医时，室内连灯也没有。
English: Zonglu was an official in Changzhou. He did not bring his wife, wife and children. When he was seriously ill and went to the doctor, there was not even a light in the room.

古文：童子从外索取油一盂入，宗琏立却之，其清峻如此。
现代文：书童从外面要了一盂油来点灯，宗琏令他立即退还，其清贫如此。
English: The schoolboy asked for a spoonful of oil from outside to light the lamp, and Zonglu ordered him to return it immediately, such was his poverty.

古文：李骥，字尚德，郯城人。举洪武二十六年乡试。
现代文：李骥，字尚德，郯城人，洪武二十六年科举乡试中举。
English: Li Yu, surnamed Xiangde, a resident of Licheng, and Hongwu won the junior high school entrance examination in the 26th year of the imperial examination.

古文：入国学，居三年，授户科给事中。
现代文：入国学学习三年后，授户科给事中。
English: After three years of studying at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, he is now in the process of being granted a residence permit.

古文：时关市讥商旅，发及囊箧，骥奏止之。
现代文：市场管理部门盘查商贩旅客，搜查极细极严，因骥奏请而停止。
English: The market management department conducted an inventory of merchants and passengers. The search was extremely detailed and strict, and was stopped due to a request.

古文：寻坐事免。
现代文：不久被告发违纪而免职。
English: The defendant was soon dismissed for disciplinary reasons.

古文：事有病民，辄奏于朝，罢免之。
现代文：建文时，被荐举任新乡知县。他在该县招抚流民，给他们农具，从而返乡复业者数千人。
English: At the time of writing, he was recommended to be appointed to Xinxiang Zhixian. In this county, he attracted the displaced people and gave them agricultural tools, which resulted in thousands of people returning home and resuming their jobs.

古文：有嫠妇子啮死，诉于骥。
现代文：母亲去世，骥辞官归家守丧，该县官民相继四次奏请留任，朝廷未准。
English: After his mother's death, the retired magistrate went home to mourn. The officials and people of the county requested him to stay in office four times in succession, but the imperial court did not approve.

古文：骥祷城隍神，深自咎责。
现代文：永乐初，守丧期满，改任东安知县。
English: At the beginning of Yongle, after the mourning period, he was transferred to Dongan County.

古文：明旦，狼死于其所。
现代文：在任职期间，凡有害于百姓的事，立即请求朝廷废除。
English: During his term of office, he shall immediately request the Imperial Court to abolish anything that is harmful to the people.

古文：侍郎李昶等交荐，擢刑部郎中。
现代文：侍郎李昶等均荐举他，提升为刑部郎中。
English: He was recommended by his chamberlain, Li Yan, and others, and was promoted to vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：奏陈十余事，多见采纳。
现代文：奏陈的十余事多被采纳。
English: Most of the more than ten suggestions were adopted.

古文：坐累，谪役保安。
现代文：后因违法下狱，被贬到保安服役。
English: After being released from prison for violating the law, he was demoted to security service.

古文：洪熙时，有诏求贤，荐为御史。陈经国利民十事，仁宗嘉纳。
现代文：洪熙时，朝廷下诏求贤，李骥被举荐为御史，他陈奏治国利民十事，被仁宗采纳。
English: At the time of Hong Xi, the imperial court was looking for a virtuous person, and Li Xi was recommended as the imperial historian, and he was adopted by the Rinzong.

古文：宣德五年巡视仓场，军高祥盗仓粟，骥执而鞫之。
现代文：宣德五年巡视仓场，军士高祥偷盗仓粮，骥逮高祥审问。
English: Xuande inspected the warehouse for five years. Sergeant Gao Xiang stole grain from the warehouse. Gao Xiang was arrested and interrogated.

古文：祥父妾言，祥与张贵等同盗，骥受贵等贿故独罪祥。
现代文：高祥的父亲散布流言，说高祥与张贵等一同偷盗，骥因受张贵贿赂，故只治高祥之罪。
English: Gao Xiang's father spread a rumor that Gao Xiang and Zhang Gui were stealing together, but because of Zhang Gui's bribe, only Gao Xiang was punished.

古文：刑部侍郎施礼遂论骥死。骥上章自辨，帝曰： 御史即擒盗，安肯纳贿！ 
现代文：刑部侍郎施礼据此论骥死罪，骥上章申辩，仁宗认为： 御史既擒盗，怎肯受贿！ 
English: According to this, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shi Li, said that the crime of stealing was punishable by death, and the defense of the previous chapter began. Nanzong thought: Since the governor was a thief, how could he accept a bribe!

古文：命偕都察院再讯，骥果枉。
现代文：命施礼与都察院再审，果知骥遭冤枉。
English: After a retrial, it was determined that she had been wronged.

古文：帝乃切责礼，而复骥官。
现代文：帝斥责施礼而恢复李骥的官职。
English: The emperor reprimanded and restored Li Xi's official position.

古文：其年十一月，择廷臣二十五人为郡守，奉敕以行。
现代文：这年十一月，皇帝选择廷臣二十五人出任郡守，骥受任河南知府。
English: In November of that year, the emperor selected twenty-five courtiers to serve as county governors, and Zou was appointed governor of Henan Province.

古文：骥授河南知府，肇庆则给事中王莹〗，琼州则户部郎中徐鉴，汀州则礼部员外郎许敬轩，宁波则刑部主事郑珞，抚州则大理寺正王升，后皆以政绩著。河南境多盗，骥为设火甲，一户被盗，一甲偿之。
现代文：他在河南政绩十分突出。该府境内多盗，骥设立火甲制：一户被盗，一甲赔偿。
English: His political achievements in Henan are very outstanding. There are many thefts in the prefecture, and a fire-armor system has been established: one household is stolen, and one armor is compensated.

古文：犯者，大署其门曰盗贼之家。
现代文：查获犯者，在其门上大书 盗贼之家 字样。
English: The arresting officer wrote "House of Thieves" in large letters on his door.

古文：又为《劝教文》，振木铎以徇之。自是人咸改行，道不拾遗。
现代文：他撰《劝教文》，宣扬教化，从此人们都改正不良行为，使境内道不拾遗。
English: He wrote the "Exhortation" and preached edification. Since then, people have corrected their bad behaviors, so that there is no trace of Taoism in China.

古文：郡有伊王府，王数请嘱，不从。
现代文：河南府境内有伊王府，伊王多次以私事托他，骥不从。
English: There is a palace of King Yi in Henan Province. King Yi has repeatedly asked him for help in his private affairs, but he did not comply.

古文：中官及校卒虐民，又为骥所抑，恨甚。
现代文：王府太监及校卒虐害百姓，受到骥的制止。
English: The royal eunuch and the schoolboy abused the people and were stopped by the magistrate.

古文：及冬至，令骥以四更往陪位行礼。
现代文：这些使伊王府对骥恨之入骨。冬至那天，命骥在四更时分去王府陪王行礼。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, the life raft went to the royal palace at four o'clock to accompany the king.

古文：及骥如期往，诬骥后期，执而桎梏之，次日乃释。
现代文：骥如期到达，伊王诬他迟到，把他捆绑起来，第二天才释放。
English: The donkey arrived as scheduled, and the king of Iraq accused him of being late, tied him up, and only released him the next day.

古文：骥奏闻，帝怒，贻书让王，府中承奉、长史、典仪悉逮置于理。
现代文：骥将此事上奏，皇帝大怒，致书谴责伊王，并令将府中承奉、长史、典仪等吏都逮捕审讯。
English: When the matter was reported to the emperor, the emperor was furious and sent a letter to the king condemning him, and ordered the officials in charge of the palace, including the heir to the throne, the chief historian, and the master of ceremonies, to be arrested and interrogated.

古文：李湘，字永怀，泰和人。永乐中，由国子生理刑都察院。
现代文：骥为人端正谨慎，在河南府任职六年后逝世，享年七十，士民祭吊时都失声痛哭。李湘，字永怀，泰和人。永乐年间由国子生入都察院任职，因其才干而升为东平知州。
English: Li Xiang, surnamed Yonghuai, was a man of integrity and prudence. He died at the age of 70 after serving in Henan Province for six years. When he was hanged, the people wept. Li Xiang, surnamed Yonghuai, was a Taihe person. During the Yongle years, he was promoted to Dongping County for his talent.

古文：以才擢东平知州，常禄外一无所取，训诫吏民若家人然。
现代文：任职期间，除平时俸禄外别无收入，平时训诫吏民如同训诫其家人一样。
English: During the term of office, there is no income other than the usual salary, and in peacetime, officials and people are disciplined as if they were their family members.

古文：城东有大村坝，源出岱岳，雨潦辄为民患，奏发丁夫堤之。
现代文：城东有大村坝，其水来自泰山，每逢下雨便成水灾，为害百姓，湘奏请征发民工筑堤。
English: There is a dam in the east of the city, the water of which comes from Mount Tai. Every time it rains, there is a flood. In order to harm the people, Hunan should recruit and dispatch migrant workers to build a dike.

古文：州及所辖五邑，地多荒芜，力督民垦辟，公私皆实。
现代文：本州所辖五县，地多荒芜，湘督促百姓开垦，公私两利。
English: The five counties under the jurisdiction of Honshu are mostly barren, and Hunan supervisors urge the people to reclaim the land, benefiting both the public and private sectors.

古文：会旧官还任，将解去。民群乞于朝，帝从其请。
现代文：任职期满时，将离开东平，百姓向朝廷申请留任，皇帝允准。
English: At the end of his term of office, he will leave Dongping. The people applied to the imperial court to remain in office, and the emperor approved.

古文：成祖晚年数北征，令山东长吏督民转饷，道远多死亡，惟东平人无失所。
现代文：成祖晚年多次北征，令山东地方长官督促百姓运输军饷，因道远，民夫多死亡，惟东平民夫一无所失。
English: In his later years, Cheng Zu made several expeditions to the north, and ordered the local governor of Shandong to urge the people to transport military supplies. Due to the distance, many people died, but the eastern people lost nothing.

古文：奸人诬湘苛敛民财，讦于布政司。县民千三百人走诉巡按御史暨布、按二司，力白其冤。
现代文：奸人向布政司诬告李湘搜括民财，县民一千三百余人去向巡按御史及布政司、按察司申诉，为李湘洗去冤情。
English: The impostor falsely accused Li Xiang of collecting people's money to the Secretary for Political Affairs, and more than 1,300 county residents went to appeal to the Inspector-General of Statistics, the Secretary for Political Affairs, and the Inspector-General of Statistics to clear Li Xiang's grievances.

古文：耆老七十人复奔伏阙下，发奸人诬陷状。
现代文：有耆老七十人到朝廷告发奸人诬陷李湘的罪行。
English: Seventy people came to the imperial court to denounce the traitors who framed Li Xiang.

古文：及布政司系湘入都，又有耆老九十人随湘讼冤。
现代文：布政司将湘逮捕入京，又有耆老九十随同去京为湘申冤。
English: The political secretary of the CPC Central Committee arrested Hunan and brought him to Beijing, and the ninety-year-old Zhu Rong accompanied him to Beijing to seek redress for Hunan.

古文：通政司以闻，下刑曹阅实，乃复湘官，而抵奸人于法。
现代文：通政司将此情上报朝廷，经刑部查实，恢复李湘官职，将诬告者依法治罪。
English: The Ministry of Communications reported this situation to the Imperial Court, and after verification by the Criminal Investigation Department, Li Xiang was restored to his official position, and the false accuser was convicted according to the law.

古文：莅州十余年，至正统初，诏大臣举郡守，尚书胡莅以湘应，遂擢怀庆知府。
现代文：李湘在东平任职十余年，至正统初，朝廷令大臣荐举郡守，尚书胡氵荧推举李湘，于是升任他为怀庆知府。
English: Li Xiang served in Dongping for more than ten years. At the beginning of the orthodox era, the imperial court ordered the minister to recommend Li Xiang as the county governor, and Shangshu Hu Rongfu recommended Li Xiang, so he was promoted to the governor of Huaiqing.

古文：东平民扶携老幼，泣送数十里。
现代文：临行时，东平百姓扶老携幼依依送别数十里。
English: At the time of departure, the Dongping people helped the elderly with their children and sent them dozens of miles away.

古文：怀庆有军卫，素挟势厉民。
现代文：怀庆军卫李东恃势虐待百姓。
English: Li Dongyu, a military guard in Huaiqing, abused the people.

古文：湘随时裁制，皆不敢犯。
现代文：湘到任后，对他们随时裁判，皆服帖不敢违法乱纪。
English: After Hunan came to office, he judged them at any time, and they did not dare to break the law and discipline.

古文：居三年卒。
现代文：湘在怀庆三年而逝。
English: Xiang died three years later in Huaiqing.

古文：赵豫，字定素，安肃人。
现代文：赵豫，字定素，安肃人。
English: Zhao Yu, the character Ding Su, is from Ansu.

古文：燕王起兵下保定，豫以诸生督赋守城。
现代文：燕王朱棣起兵攻下保定后，豫以生员身分而受命催督赋税，守卫城池。
English: After Yan Wang Zhu Xi led an army to capture Baoding, Yu, as a member of the army, was ordered to collect taxes and guard the city.

古文：永乐五年授泌阳主簿，未上，擢兵部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：永乐五年，授为泌阳县主簿，未上任又提升为兵部主事，再升为员外郎。
English: In the fifth year of Yongle, he was awarded the title of the chief accountant of Xuryang County. Before taking office, he was promoted to the chief of the military department, and then to the foreign affairs officer.

古文：内艰起复。洪熙时进郎中。
现代文：母死守丧，期满复职，洪熙时进为郎中。
English: After the death of his mother, he was reinstated at the end of his term, and Hong Xi Shijin became his son-in-law.

古文：宣德五年五月简廷臣九人为知府，豫得松江，奉敕往。
现代文：宣德五年五月，选廷臣五人出任知府，豫被派往松江府。
English: In May of Xuande's fifth year, five court officials were elected to serve as prefectural governors, and Yu was sent to Matsue Prefecture.

古文：时卫军恣横，豫执其尤者，杖而配之边，众遂贴然。
现代文：松江卫军恣意横行，豫到任后将其最恶劣者施以杖刑，流放边疆，其余皆服服帖帖。
English: The defenders of Songjiang acted arbitrarily, and after Yu took office, he punished the worst of them with the cane and banished them to the frontier, while the rest were made to serve hard labor.

古文：一意拊循，与民休息。
现代文：赵豫为政重安抚，与民休息。
English: Zhao Yu appeased the political heavyweights and rested with the people.

古文：择良家子谨厚者为吏，训以礼法。
现代文：挑选良家子弟中谨慎厚道者为吏，以礼法教育他们。
English: Select the prudent and virtuous among the children of good families as officials and educate them in etiquette.

古文：均徭节费，减吏员十之五。
现代文：他还均平徭役，节省费用，裁减吏员十分之五。
English: He also evened out the duties of officials, saved costs, and reduced the number of officials by five-tenths.

古文：巡抚周忱有所建置，必与豫议。
现代文：巡抚周忱有什么举措，都必先与豫商议。
English: Any measures taken by Governor Zhou Zhen must first be discussed with Yu.

古文：及清军御史李立至，专务益军，勾及姻戚同姓。稍辨，则酷刑榜掠。人情大扰，诉枉者至一千一百余人。
现代文：清军御史李立到松江，专为军队利益打算，大量征发百姓入伍，甚至牵连被征发者的亲戚、同姓，稍有异议，就酷刑拷打，一时人情汹汹，申诉冤枉者多达一千一百余人。
English: Li Li, the military governor of the Qing Dynasty, came to Matsue and, with the sole intention of advancing the interests of the army, conscripted a large number of people into the army. He even implicated relatives and people with the same surname as those who were conscripted. If there was the slightest objection, they were tortured and beaten. At that time, people's feelings were turbulent. There were as many as more than 1,100 people who complained of injustice.

古文：盐司勾灶丁，亦累及他户，大为民害。
现代文：盐司稽查盐丁，同时连累到其他民户，大为民害。
English: The salt inspector's inspection of salt dices, while involving other private households, is a great harm to the people.

古文：豫皆上章极论之，咸获苏息。
现代文：豫上书指出这些弊端，均下令废除，使百姓得救。
English: The imperial edict pointed out these drawbacks and ordered that they all be abolished so that the people could be saved.

古文：有诏灭苏、松官田重租，豫所辖华亭、上海二县，减去十之二三。
现代文：朝廷还下令减轻苏州、松江两府官田的重担，豫所管辖的华亭、上海两县减去十分之二、三。
English: The imperial court also ordered to lighten the burden of the government-owned fields in Suzhou and Songjiang prefectures, and the Huating and Shanghai counties under the jurisdiction of Henan were reduced by two or three tenths.

古文：正统中，九载考绩。
现代文：正统中，赵豫在松江九年，任期满，政绩考核合格，应迁升。
English: According to the orthodox theory, Zhao Yu has been in Songjiang for nine years, has completed his term of office, passed the performance appraisal, and should be promoted.

古文：民五千余人列状乞留，巡按御史以闻，命增二秩还任。
现代文：松江百姓五千余人上书请求留任。巡按御史转告朝廷，朝廷增加赵豫官俸两级，命还松江知府。
English: More than five thousand people in Matsue petitioned to remain in office. The Imperial Court was told by the inspector general that the Imperial Court had increased Zhao Yu's official salary by two levels and ordered him to return to Matsue Prefecture.

古文：及十年春，大计群吏，始举卓异之典。豫与宁国知府袁旭皆预焉，赐宴及袭衣遣还。
现代文：正统十年春，朝廷考核全国各地官吏，将政绩卓著者列为典范，豫与宁国知府袁旭都入选。皇帝赐宴及外衣。
English: In the spring of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Zhengrong, the imperial court evaluated officials from all over the country, and listed the political achievements of Zhu Xi as a model. Yuan Xu, the governor of Yu and Ning Provinces, was selected. The emperor gave a banquet and a coat.

古文：在职十五年，清静如一日。
现代文：豫在松江任职十五年，始终清廉。
English: Yu has been working in Matsue for fifteen years and has always been clean and honest.

古文：先后在官十八年，迁至河南布政使。
现代文：离开松江时，老幼挽住车子，要求留下一只鞋作为纪念。
English: When leaving Matsue, the old and the young held the car and asked to leave a shoe as a souvenir.

古文：惟袁旭在宁国为督学御史程富所诬劾，逮死狱中。
现代文：把他的神位供奉于周忱祠内，共享祭祀。松江民俗好诉讼。豫深以为患，凡来诉讼者，他以好言开导，告诉他 明日来 ，于是有 松江太守明日来 的歌谣。
English: He dedicated his god's seat in the Zhouzheng ancestral hall and shared the sacrifice. Matsue folk customs are good for litigation. Yu Sheng thought it was a problem, and he enlightened everyone who came to the lawsuit with kind words, telling him to come tomorrow, so there was a song of Matsue Taishou coming tomorrow.

古文：而宁国人惜之，立祠祀焉。
现代文：过了一夜，起诉者忿怒渐平，或被劝阻，不再来起诉了。
English: Overnight, the accusers" anger subsided, or they were dissuaded from coming forward.

古文：曾泉，泰和人。
现代文：赵豫除政绩斐然外，还以平易近人称著。曾泉，泰和人。
English: In addition to his outstanding achievements in politics, Zhao Yu was also known for his approachability. Zeng Quan, Taihe Ren.

古文：永乐十八年进士。选庶吉士，改御史。
现代文：永乐十八年进士，选为庶吉士，后改任御史。
English: He entered the priesthood in 18th year of the Yongle reign, and was selected as the second-ranked priest, and was later appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：宣德初，都御史邵玘甄别属僚，泉谪汜水典史，卒。
现代文：宣德初年，都御史邵王己甄别官吏，泉被贬为汜水典史，逝于任上。
English: In the first year of Xuande, the governor of the capital, Shao Wang, screened officials, and Quan was relegated to the position of deputy governor of the capital, and died in office.

古文：正统四年，河南参政孙原贞上言： 泉操行廉洁，服官勤敏，不以降黜故有偷惰心。
现代文：正统四年，河南参政孙原员上书称 ：泉行为端正，为官廉洁，勤于政务，办事敏捷，不因被降黜而有怠惰之心。
English: In the fourth year of orthodoxy, Sun Yuan, a member of the Henan Political Consultative Conference, wrote a letter saying: Quan behaved properly, was an honest official, was diligent in government affairs, was quick to do things, and did not have a lazy heart because he was demoted.

古文：躬督民辟荒土，收谷麦，伐材木，备营缮，通商贾，完逋责，官有储积，民无科扰。
现代文：他亲自督促百姓开垦荒地，收割庄稼，砍伐木材以备营造和修理房舍，发展商业，交纳汜水县所欠官课，而且官府还有储备，百姓不受侵扰。
English: He personally urged the people to reclaim wasteland, harvest crops, cut wood to prepare for the construction and repair of buildings, develop business, pay the arrears of Ershui County, and the government also has reserves, so that the people are not disturbed.

古文：造舟楫，置棺椁，胆民器用。
现代文：他还建造船只，备办棺椁，供应百姓日常器物。
English: He also built ships, prepared coffins, and supplied people with daily necessities.

古文：百姓婚丧不给者，咸资于泉。
现代文：百姓婚丧无力举办者，都受到泉的资助。
English: People who are unable to hold weddings or funerals are subsidized by the spring.

古文：死之日，老幼巷哭。
现代文：泉去世之日，老幼痛哭。
English: On the day of Izumi's death, the old and the young cried bitterly.

古文：臣行部汜水，泉没已三年矣，民怀其惠，言辄流涕，虽古循吏，何以加兹。
现代文：臣到汜水时，泉已死三年，而百姓尚怀念他的恩惠，说起来都泪流满面，虽历代良吏也没能胜过他。
English: When the vassal arrived in Surabaya, Quan had been dead for three years, but the people still remembered his kindness, and they were all in tears when they spoke of him. Although the good officials of past generations could not beat him.

古文：吏部尚书王直察举天下廉吏数人，衷为第一。
现代文：如果全国有像曾泉这样的官吏数十人分别治理郡县，则可使朝廷恩德广布于人民。
English: If there are dozens of officials like Zeng Quan in the whole country to govern counties and counties separately, it can make the imperial grace spread to the people.

古文：性至孝，庐父墓，瓜生连枝，有白兔三，驯扰暮侧。乡人莫不高其行。
现代文：曾泉虽为前朝官吏，本朝也应下诏褒奖其德行、德政。可惜未受到重视，其官阶未得到恢复，使泉终身蒙受贬谪之名，不为当代所知，实可怜恤。请求追复泉的官爵，表彰其功绩，以教育未来的官吏。 
English: Although Zeng Quan was an official of the former dynasty, this dynasty should also issue an imperial edict to commend his virtue and politics. Unfortunately, he was not valued, and his official rank was not restored, so that Quan suffered the name of disparagement for life. He is not known to the present generation, which is really pitiful. Request the restoration of Quan's peerage, commend his achievements, and educate future officials.

古文：周济，字大亨，洛阳人。
现代文：英宗采纳这一建议。周济，字大亨，洛阳人。
English: Yingzong accepted the suggestion. Zhou Ji, a tycoon, came from Luoyang.

古文：永乐中，以举人入太学，历事都察院。
现代文：永乐年间以举人身份入太学，后历任都察院官职。
English: During the Yongle years, he entered Taigaku with the status of a person to be promoted, and later he held various posts in the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：都御史刘观荐为御史，固辞。
现代文：都御史刘观荐举他为御史，他坚决辞谢。
English: Liu Guan, the Metropolitan Historian, recommended him as the Metropolitan Historian, and he firmly declined.

古文：宣德时，授江西都司断事。艰归，补湖广。
现代文：宣德时授任江西都司断事，因父母去世而归家守丧。
English: At the time of Xuan De, he was appointed as the Jiangxi Provincial Judge. Due to the death of his parents, he returned home to mourn.

古文：正统初，擢御史。
现代文：后任湖广都司断事。正统初年提升为御史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief judge of Hekido. He was promoted to goshi in the first year of orthodoxy.

古文：大同镇守中官以骄横闻，敕济往廉之。
现代文：镇守大同的宦官骄横无惮，朝廷派周济去调查。
English: The eunuchs guarding Datong were arrogant and unscrupulous, and the imperial court sent Zhou Ji to investigate.

古文：济变服负薪入其宅，尽得不法状，还报，帝大嘉之。
现代文：济装扮为平民，背着薪柴进入这个宦官家中，查明一切不法事实，奏报朝廷，英宗大喜。
English: Ji dressed as a commoner, entered the eunuch's home with firewood on his back, ascertained all illegal facts, reported to the imperial court, and Yingzong was overjoyed.

古文：已，巡按四川。
现代文：随后又巡按四川。
English: He then went on a tour of Sichuan.

古文：威州土官董敏、王允相仇杀，诏济督官兵进讨。
现代文：四川威州土官董敏、王允相互仇杀，朝廷令济督率官兵进讨。
English: The local officials of Sichuan Weizhou, Dong Min and Wang Yun, killed each other in a vendetta, and the imperial court ordered the governor to lead the officers and soldiers to discuss the matter.

古文：济曰： 朝廷绥安远人，宜先抚而后征。 
现代文：济建议 ：朝廷安抚远方之人，应先抚而后征。 
English: He suggested that the imperial court should appease people from far away first before conscripting them.

古文：驰檄谕之，遂解。
现代文：朝廷采纳，速传令劝告他们，使两家和解。
English: Adopted by the imperial court, the express order advised them to reconcile the two families.

古文：十一年出为安庆知府，岁比不登，民间鬻子女充衣食，方舟而去者相接。
现代文：正统十一年，周济出任安庆知府。这年安庆府收成不好，百姓卖儿售女维持生活，乘船去他乡者接连不断。
English: In the eleventh year of the Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Ji became the governor of Anqing. This year, the harvest in Anqing was not good, the people sold their sons and daughters to sustain their lives, and people continued to go to other villages by boat.

古文：济借漕粮以振，而禁鬻子女者。
现代文：济借漕粮赈济，并禁止卖儿售女。
English: They had to borrow grain to buy food and were forbidden to sell their children.

古文：且上疏请免租，诏许之，全活甚众。
现代文：与此同时，他又上书请求免征租税，得到朝廷的批准。
English: At the same time, he also submitted a request for tax exemption, which was approved by the Imperial Court.

古文：又为定婚丧制，禁侈费，愆嫁葬期者有罚，风俗一变。
现代文：他制定出婚丧礼制，禁止奢侈，迟嫁缓葬者受罚，安庆风俗为之一变。
English: He formulated a wedding and funeral system, prohibiting extravagance, late marriage and delaying burial were punished, and Anqing customs were completely changed.

古文：饥民聚掠富家粟，富家以盗劫告。济下令曰： 民饥故如此，然得谷当报太守数，太守当代尔偿。 
现代文：饥民聚集抢夺富家食粮，富家以强盗抢劫而告官，济下令： 百姓饥饿才抢粮，应将所抢粮食数量报告太守，太守代为偿还。 
English: The starving people gathered to rob the rich families of grain. The rich families sued the government for robbery. The government ordered: The people are hungry before they rob the grain. They should report the amount of grain they robbed to the governors, and the governors should reimburse them.

古文：掠者遂解散。
现代文：于是抢粮者解散。
English: So the looters disbanded.

古文：济卒官，民皆罢市巷哭云。范希正，字以贞，吴县人。
现代文：周济逝于任上，百姓关门闭户停业为之恸哭。范希正，字以贞，吴县人。
English: Zhou Ji died in office, and the people wept as they closed their doors and businesses. Fan Xizheng, also known as Yizhen, was from Wuxian.

古文：宣德三年举贤良方正，授曹县知县。
现代文：宣德三年，被荐举为贤良方正，授曹县知县。
English: In the third year of Xuan De, he was recommended as a virtuous Fang Zheng and awarded the title of Cao Xian Zhixian.

古文：有奸吏受赇，希正按其罪，械送京师。
现代文：有奸吏受贿，希正审判其罪，押送京师。
English: There are corrupt officials who accept bribes, hope to be tried for their crimes, and are escorted to Beijing.

古文：吏反诬希正他事，坐逮。
现代文：该奸吏反以他事诬告希正，希正因此遭监禁。
English: The impostor falsely accused Hizheng of something else, and Hizheng was imprisoned as a result.

古文：曹民八百余人诣京白通政司，言希正廉能，横为奸吏诬枉。
现代文：曹县平民八百余人到京师呈奏通政司，说希正廉洁能干，为奸吏所诬。
English: More than 800 civilians from Cao County went to Beijing to appeal to the Secretary of State, saying that he was honest, capable, and not a crook.

古文：侍郎许廓以公事过曹，曹父老二百余人遮道稽颡，泣言朝廷夺我贤令。
现代文：侍郎许廓因公路经曹县，曹县父老百余人拦道痛诉朝廷夺去了他们的贤能县令。
English: Because of the road passing through Cao County, more than a hundred people in Cao County complained bitterly that the imperial court had taken away their virtuous county magistrate.

古文：事并闻，帝乃释希正使还县。
现代文：这两件事均呈报到朝廷，宣宗令释放希正并让他回曹县任职。
English: Both of these matters were reported to the imperial court, and Emperor Xuanzong ordered the release of Xizheng and his return to Cao County.

古文：正统十年，山东饥。惟曹以希正先积粟，得无患。
现代文：正统十年，山东闹灾荒，只有曹县因希正预先储备粮食，故无饥患。
English: In the orthodox decade, Shandong was ravaged by natural disasters. Only Cao County was able to avoid famine because it was able to stockpile grain in advance.

古文：大理寺丞张骥振山东，闻之。因请升曹县为州，而以希正为知州，从之。
现代文：大理寺丞张丞到山东赈灾时，闻知曹县情形，奏请朝廷升曹县为州，以希正为知州，得到朝廷同意。
English: When Zhang Zheng, the abbot of Dali Temple, heard about the situation in Cao County when he was in Shandong during the earthquake and tsunami, he petitioned the imperial court to elevate Cao County to a prefecture, and to make Xizheng a prefecture, which was approved by the imperial court.

古文：时州民负官马不能偿，多逃窜。
现代文：这时曹州百姓久欠官马，无力偿还，多逃亡。
English: At this time, the people of Caozhou were long in arrears, unable to repay, and many fled.

古文：希正节公费代偿九十余匹，逃者皆复业。
现代文：希正节省官府费用，代以偿还官马九十余匹，逃亡者都返家复业。
English: He is saving government expenses to repay more than 90 official horses, and the fugitives have all returned home to resume their careers.

古文：吉水人诬曹富民杀其兄，连坐甚众。
现代文：吉水有人诬告曹州某富民杀其兄，株连甚众。
English: In Yoshimizu, someone falsely accused a rich man from Caozhou of killing his brother, and there were a lot of people involved.

古文：及卒，宁民祀之狄仁杰祠中。
现代文：希正暗中致函吉水，核查诬告者姓名，均是假冒，所谓 杀兄 之事大白。
English: Hizheng secretly sent a letter to Yoshimizu to verify that the names of the false accusers were fake, and the so-called murder of his brother was a whitewash.

古文：其孙，即大学士宇也。段坚，字可大，兰州人。
现代文：希正治曹先后二十三年，历任知县、知州，深得民心。
English: He Zhengji Cao has been in office for 23 years, successively serving in Zhixian and Zhizhou, and has won the hearts of the people.

古文：早岁受书，即有志圣贤。
现代文：晚年辞官归家。段坚，字可大，兰州人。年少读书时即有圣贤之志。
English: In his later years, the judge returned home. Duan Jian, the character can be large, is from Lanzhou. When he was a young student, he had the aspirations of a sage.

古文：举于乡，入国子监。
现代文：乡试中举，入国子监。
English: He passed the township junior high school entrance examination and entered the National Children's Center.

古文：景泰元年，上书请悉征还四方监军，罢天下佛老宫。
现代文：景泰元年，上书请求召还四方监军，取缔全国各地佛道寺观，未获批准。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, a petition was submitted requesting the return of the four-party supervisory army and the banning of the Buddhist view of the temple throughout the country, but it was not approved.

古文：疏奏，不行。五年成进士，授福山知县。
现代文：五年中进士及第，授福山知县。
English: In the past five years, Shanshi County has been awarded the first place and the second place.

古文：刊布小学，俾士民讲诵。俗素陋，至是一变，村落皆有纟玄诵声。
现代文：他在本县刊印《小学》，在士民中讲诵，素来鄙陋的民俗为之一变，村落皆有弹琴唱歌和诵读之声。
English: He published and printed "Elementary School" in this county, and lectured among the scholars and the common people. The vulgar folk customs have been completely changed, and the villages all have the sound of playing the piano, singing and reciting.

古文：成化初，赐敕旌异，超擢莱州知府。
现代文：成化初，段坚受到特别表彰，破格提升为莱州知府。
English: At the beginning of the formation, Duan Jian received a special commendation and was promoted to the governor of Laizhou in an unprecedented manner.

古文：期年，化大行。
现代文：仅仅一年，其教化大行。
English: In just one year, his indoctrination was complete.

古文：以忧去，服除，改知南阳。
现代文：因守父母丧而离职，守丧期满，改任南阳知府。
English: He left the post due to attending his parents' funerals, and upon the expiration of the mourning period, he was appointed as the governor of Nanyang.

古文：召州县学官，具告以古人为学之指，使转相劝诱。
现代文：他在南阳招集州县学官，向他们讲述古人为学之道，让他们转相劝勉。
English: In Nanyang, he summoned state and county academic officials, told them about the ancient way of learning, and let them persuade each other.

古文：创志学书院，聚秀民讲说《五经》要义，及濂、洛诸儒遗书。
现代文：创立 志学书院 ，聚集优秀之士，讲解《五经》要义，及宋儒周敦颐、程颢等人的遗书。
English: He founded the Zhi Xue Academy, gathering outstanding people to explain the essentials of the Five Classics, as well as the last wills of Song Confucius, Zhou Dunyao, Cheng Yao and others.

古文：建节义祠，祀古今烈女。
现代文：建节义祠，祭祀古今烈女。
English: Built a temple for the festival, dedicated to the ancient and modern martyrs.

古文：讼狱徭赋，务底于平。
现代文：经过教化，该府诉讼渐少，赋役均平，数年全府大治。
English: As a result of enlightenment, the number of lawsuits in the prefecture gradually decreased, the amount of forced labor was evened out, and the entire prefecture was ruled by the government for several years.

古文：子炅，进士，翰林检讨。
现代文：他称病辞官而去，士民哭泣一直送至境外。
English: He called in sick, resigned and left, and the people sent him crying all the way abroad.

古文：谄附焦芳，刘瑾败，落职，隤其家声焉。陈钢，字坚远，应天人。
现代文：闻知他病逝，为他立祠，春秋祭祀。段坚是河东薛王宣的私淑弟子，注重探求道理，身体力行，他不愿借别人对他阿谀奉承来取得自己的声誉，故能以儒家学说来整顿吏治。陈钢，字坚远，应天人。
English: Upon hearing of his death, a small shrine was built for him, and spring and autumn sacrifices were held. Duan Jian was a disciple of Hedong Xue Wangxuan. He paid attention to the search for truth and practiced hard. He did not want to use others to flatter him to gain his own reputation, so he was able to rectify the government by the Confucian doctrine. Chen Gang, the word is firm, should be a man of God.

古文：举成化元年乡试，授黔阳知县。
现代文：成化元年，乡试中举，授黔阳知县。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he won the junior high school examination in his hometown and was awarded the title of Yangzhi County.

古文：楚俗，居丧好击彭歌舞。钢教以歌古哀词，民俗渐变。
现代文：楚地民俗，守丧期间好击鼓歌舞，陈钢教他们唱古代哀歌，民俗渐度。
English: Chu folk customs, during the mourning period, good drumming song and dance, Chen Gang taught them to sing ancient elegy, folk gradually.

古文：县城当沅、湘合流，数决，坏庐舍。
现代文：县城位于沅、湘两江汇合之处，多次决堤，毁坏房屋。
English: The county seat is located at the confluence of the Min River and the Hunan River. The river has burst its banks many times, destroying houses.

古文：钢募人采石甃堤千余丈，水不为害。
现代文：钢募人采石筑堤千余丈，防止了水患。
English: Steel recruited people to quarry stone to build a thousand-plus-foot dike to prevent flooding.

古文：南山崖官道数里，径窄甚，行者多堕崖死。
现代文：南山崖官道数里窄狭难行，旅客多不幸坠崖身亡。
English: Nanshan cliff official road is narrow and difficult to walk for several miles, and many passengers unfortunately fell to their deaths.

古文：钢积薪烧山，沃以醯，拓径丈许，行者便之。
现代文：钢令人拓宽道路丈余，便于来往旅客通行。
English: Steel makes the road wider and longer, facilitating the passage of passengers.

古文：钢病，民争吁神，愿减已算益钢寿。
现代文：钢患病，百姓争相祈祷，愿神灵以缩短他们自己的寿命以换取陈钢的益寿延年。
English: When Chen Gang fell ill, the people prayed for the gods to shorten their own lives in exchange for Chen Gang's longevity.

古文：迁长沙通判，监修吉王府第。工成，王赐之金帛，不受。请王故殿材修岳麓书院，王许之。
现代文：后调任长沙通判，监修吉王府，竣工后，吉王赐他金银丝帛，他辞谢不受，只请求将吉王旧府的建筑材料用来修 岳麓书院 ，吉王应允。
English: Later, he was transferred to Changsha Tongzhan to supervise the renovation of the Jiefang Mansion. After completion, the King of Jiefang gave him gold, silver and silk brocade. He did not accept his resignation. He only requested that the building materials of the former Jiefang Mansion be used to renovate the Yuelu Academy. The King of Jiefang agreed.

古文：弘治元年丁母忧归。
现代文：弘治元年，母亲去世，陈钢辞官守丧。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Chen Gang's mother passed away, and Chen Gang remained in retirement.

古文：卒，黔阳、长沙并祠祀之。子沂，官侍讲，见《文苑传》。
现代文：不久逝世于家乡。黔阳、长沙两地百姓均为他建祠祭祀。子陈沂，官至侍讲，见《文苑传》。
English: He died not long after in his hometown. The people of both Shenyang and Changsha built shrines for him. His son, Chen Zhen, was an official and a lecturer, see "Wen Yuan Biography."

古文：丁积，字彦诚，宁都人。
现代文：丁积，字彦诚，宁都人。
English: Ding Zi, Aza Hikonshen, Ningdu people.

古文：成化十四年进士。
现代文：成化十四年进士，授新会知县。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 14th year of Chenghua, and was conferred the new title of Hechi County.

古文：授新会知县，至即师事邑人陈献章。为政以风化为本，而主于爱民。
现代文：到任后，立即拜本县陈献章为师。丁积为政以教化为本，主要是爱民。
English: After taking office, he immediately followed Chen Xianzhang of this county as his teacher. Ding Jie's politics is based on enlightenment, and he mainly loves the people.

古文：中贵梁芳，邑人也，其弟长横于乡，责民逋过倍，复诉于积。
现代文：有权有势的太监梁芳，也是该县人，其弟梁长横行乡里，强迫百姓加倍偿还债款，而且向丁积告状。
English: The powerful and influential eunuch Liang Fang, also from the county, and his brother Liang Chang rampaged through the countryside, forcing the people to double the repayment of debts, and accumulating complaints against Ding.

古文：积追券焚之，且收捕系狱，由是权豪屏迹。
现代文：积将借据全部烧毁，又将梁长逮捕下狱，使得权豪们再不敢胡作非为。
English: He burned all the IOUs and had Liang Chang arrested and sent to prison, so that the powerful would no longer dare to do anything wrong.

古文：申洪武礼制，参以《朱子家礼》，择耆老诲导百姓。
现代文：积提倡洪武礼制，参照《朱子家礼》，挑选耆老来教导百姓。
English: He advocated the Hongwu etiquette system, referring to the "Zhu Zi family etiquette," and selected eunuchs to teach the people.

古文：良家子堕业，聚庑下，使日诵小学书，亲为解说，风俗大变。
现代文：良家子弟中游手好闲者，丁积把他们集聚在大堂两边廊下，每天读《小学》，并亲自为他们讲解，新会风俗大变。
English: Ding Zi gathered the idle middle-class children of good families in the hallways on both sides of the hall, read "Elementary School" every day, and personally explained to them. The customs of the new association have changed dramatically.

古文：民出钱输官供役，名均平钱。
现代文：新会百姓出钱交官府以代其力役，名为 均平钱 。
English: The people of the new association pay money to the government to do the work on their behalf, which is called "even money."

古文：其后吏贪，复令甲首出钱供用，曰当月钱，贫者至鬻子女。
现代文：后来官吏贪婪，又令甲首出钱供他们使用，名为 当月钱 。致使贫困人家卖儿卖女。
English: Later, officials became greedy, and ordered the head of the family to pay money for them to use, which was called the money of the month. As a result, poor families sold their sons and daughters.

古文：积一切杜绝。
现代文：丁积将这些一律取消。
English: Ding Ye cancelled all of them.

古文：俗信巫鬼，为痛毁淫祠。
现代文：民间相信巫术、鬼神，丁积捣毁所有淫祠。
English: The people believe in witchcraft, ghosts and gods, and they want to destroy all the temples.

古文：既而岁大旱，筑坛圭峰顶。昕夕伏坛下者八日，雨大澍。
现代文：有年大旱不雨，积在圭峰顶筑坛，自己早晚伏于坛下，连续八天，天降大雨，而积却因此病故。
English: There was a year of great drought and no rain. He built an altar on the top of Mount Gyeongbokgung. Sooner or later, he prostrated himself under the altar. For eight consecutive days, the sky rained heavily. As a result, he died of illness.

古文：而积遂得疾以卒，士民聚哭于途。有一妪夜哭极哀，或问之，曰： 来岁当甲首，丁公死，吾无以聊生矣。 
现代文：士民哀悼不已，有一老妇人夜间失声恸哭，有人问她为何如此，她说： 丁公一死，我生活失去了依靠。 
English: There was an old woman who lost her voice and cried in the night. When someone asked her why, she said, "Once Ding Gong died, I lost my livelihood."

古文：田铎，字振之，阳城人。
现代文：田铎，字振之，阳城人。
English: Tian Qi, Zha Zhen Zhi, Yangcheng people.

古文：成化十四年进士。授户部主事，迁员外郎、郎中。
现代文：成化十四年进士，授户部主事，后升员外郎、郎中。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of 14 and was in charge of the household registration department. Later, he was promoted to the position of outside retainer and junior retainer.

古文：弘治二年奉诏振四川，坐误遗敕中语，谪蓬州知州。
现代文：弘治二年奉诏前往四川赈灾，在宣读诏书时，因遗漏了其中的语句，而被贬谪为蓬州知州。
English: In the second year of Hongzhi's reign, he went to Sichuan to relieve the disaster. When the imperial edict was read out, he was relegated to Pengzhou Chizhou due to the omission of a sentence.

古文：州东南有江洲八十二顷，为豪右所据，铎悉以还民。
现代文：该州东南有江州八十二顷，为豪强侵占，铎将这些土地收来全部还给人民。
English: In the southeast of the state, there are 82 hectares of Jiangzhou, which were occupied by the strong and powerful, and these lands were all returned to the people.

古文：建大小二十四桥，又凿三溪山以便行者。
现代文：他在蓬州建立大小桥二十四座，凿开三溪山以便利通行。
English: He built twenty-four large and small bridges in Pengzhou and hewed open the Sanxi Mountain to facilitate traffic.

古文：御史行部至蓬，寂无讼者，讶之。已，乃知州无冤民也，太息而去。
现代文：御史行至蓬州，未见有诉讼之事，十分惊讶，其后才知该州竟无贫民，不禁叹息而去。
English: When he went to Pengzhou, he was very surprised to see that there was no lawsuit. Later, he learned that there were no poor people in the state. He couldn't help but sigh and leave.

古文：荐于朝，擢广东佥事。
现代文：田铎被荐至朝廷，提升为广东佥事。
English: Tian Xuan was recommended to the imperial court and promoted to the post of Guangdong anecdote.

古文：迁四川参议，不赴，以老疾告归。
现代文：后调任四川参议，未赴任。因年老多病，辞官归家。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Sichuan councillor, but did not take up the post. Due to old age and illness, he resigned and returned home.

古文：正德时，刘瑾矫诏，言铎理广东盐法，簿牒未明，逮赴广。
现代文：正德时，刘瑾假传圣旨，说铎在广东办理盐务，账目不清，将他逮至广东，尚未启程，刘瑾就被朝廷诛杀。
English: At the time of Zhengde, Liu Ye falsely preached the holy will, saying that he was in Guangdong to handle salt affairs, and his accounts were unclear. He was arrested in Guangdong, and before he left, Liu Ye was killed by the imperial court.

古文：未就道而瑾诛，或劝铎毋行，铎不听，行次九江卒，年八十二矣。
现代文：有人劝铎不要去广东，铎执意不听，行至九江而逝，享年八十二岁。
English: Some people advised him not to go to Guangdong, but he did not listen and went to Jiujiang, where he died at the age of 82.

古文：唐侃，字廷直，丹徒人。
现代文：唐侃，字廷直，丹徒人。
English: Tang Kan, Ting Zhi, Dantou Ren.

古文：正德八年举于乡，授永丰知县。
现代文：正德八年乡试中举，授永丰知县。
English: Zhengde won the eighth year of the township examination, and was awarded Yongfeng County.

古文：之官不携妻子，独与一二童仆饭蔬豆羹以居。
现代文：赴任不带妻室，随身只有一二童仆。日常饭菜只有蔬菜豆腐而已。
English: He does not take his wife with him to work, and only has one or two servants with him. His daily meal consists only of vegetable tofu.

古文：久之，吏民信服。
现代文：长期如此，全县官民对他十分敬服。
English: This has been the case for a long time, and the officials and people of the whole county have great respect for him.

古文：永丰俗刁讼，尚鬼，尤好俳优，侃禁止之。
现代文：永丰习俗好诉讼，崇拜鬼神，尤好歌舞演戏，侃一律禁止。
English: Yongfeng customs good lawsuits, worship ghosts and gods, especially good song and dance performances, speaking out is strictly prohibited.

古文：进武定知州。
现代文：侃晋升为武定知州。
English: Kan was promoted to Wuding Chizhou.

古文：会清军籍，应发遣者至万二千人。侃曰： 武定户口三万，是空半州也 。
现代文：朝廷清查军籍，要在武定征兵一万二千人，侃说 ：武定户口只有三万，征去一万二千，就会使半个州空旷无人。 
English: The imperial court checked the military records and wanted to recruit 12,000 soldiers in Wuding, saying sarcastically: Wuding's population is only 30,000, and to conscript 12,000 would leave half of the prefecture empty.

古文：力争之。
现代文：因而极力争取少征。
English: Therefore, they tried their best to reduce the number of conscripts.

古文：又有议徙州境徒骇河者，侃复言不宜朘民财填沟壑。
现代文：有人提议将境内徒骇河改道，侃认为这是劳民伤财，坚决反对。
English: Some people proposed to reroute the Tuakhe River within the territory, arguing that this would hurt the people's labor and wealth, and resolutely opposed.

古文：事并得寝。章圣皇太后葬承天，诸内奄迫胁所过州县吏，索金钱，宣言供张不办者死，州县吏多逃。
现代文：章圣皇太后安葬于承天，宦官们借 供帐 之名向所经州县搜括钱财，违则处死。州县官吏大多逃避。
English: Empress Dowager Zhang Sheng was buried in Chengdian. The eunuchs collected money from the prefectures they passed through in the name of providing accounts, and were executed for violating the rules. Most of the prefectural and county officials fled.

古文：侃置空棺旁舍中，奄迫之急，则经至棺所，指而造之曰： 吾办一死，金钱不可得也。 
现代文：侃则将空棺置于衙门旁一空房内，太监逼急了，侃便把他们引到放棺材的房中，然后宣称： 你们办我死罪可以，要钱没有。 
English: Kan, on the other hand, placed the empty coffin in an empty room next to the gate. The eunuchs were in a hurry, so Kan led them to the room where the coffin was placed, and then declared: You can give me the death penalty, but I don't want any money.

古文：诸奄皆愕眙去。
现代文：宦官们惊得目瞪口呆，只得离去。
English: The eunuchs were dumbfounded and had to leave.

古文：稍迁刑部主事，卒。
现代文：不久，升为刑部主事，不幸去世。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the head of the criminal investigation department, but unfortunately passed away.

古文：初，侃少时从丁玑学。
现代文：侃年少时，跟从丁玑学习。
English: When he was young, he studied under Ding Jun.

古文：其操行贞洁，盖性成也。
现代文：邻家女子夜间跑到他的住所来，侃拒绝她入室。
English: A neighbor came to his house at night and refused to let her in.

古文：汤绍恩，安岳人。父佐，弘治初进士，仕至参政。
现代文：侃父被监禁，他请求代父受罪，未准，便在监牢边铺草而卧，时达一年之久，直至其父被释为止。
English: When his father was imprisoned, he asked his father to take the blame on his behalf. When he was not allowed to do so, he slept on the grass at the edge of the prison for a year until his father was released.

古文：绍恩以嘉靖五年擢第。
现代文：由此可见唐侃的品行。汤绍恩，字汝承，安岳人。嘉靖五年进士。
English: From this, we can see Tang Kan's moral conduct. Tang Shaun, Zi Rucheng, An Yue Ren. He was promoted to Jiajing for five years.

古文：十四年由户部郎中迁德安知府，寻移绍兴。
现代文：十四年由户部郎中调任德安知府，不久改为绍兴知府。
English: In 1914, he was transferred to De'an Prefecture by his stepfather, and was soon transferred to Shaoxing Prefecture.

古文：为人宽厚长者，性俭素，内服疏布，外以父所遗故袍袭之。
现代文：绍恩为人宽厚，禀性俭朴，内穿粗布，外罩父亲遗留的旧袍。
English: Shane is a generous and frugal person, wearing a coarse cloth inside and an old robe left by his father on the outside.

古文：始至，新学宫，广设社学。
现代文：他到绍兴后，建立学宫，各地设立社学。
English: After he came to Shaoxing, he established a school palace and set up social studies in various regions.

古文：岁大旱，徒步祷烈日中，雨即降。
现代文：当年大旱，他徒步在烈日下祈雨。
English: There was a drought that year, and he walked under the scorching sun to pray for rain.

古文：缓刑罚，恤贫弱，旌节孝，民情大和。
现代文：不轻易施用刑罚，赈恤贫民，表彰节孝，使百姓和睦相处。
English: It is not easy to impose criminal penalties, show sympathy to the poor, commend the festival of filial piety, and make the people live in harmony.

古文：山阴、会稽、萧山三邑之水，汇三江口入海，潮汐日至，拥沙积如丘陵。遇霪潦则水阻，沙不能骤泄，良田尽成巨浸，当事者不得已决塘以泻之。塘决则忧旱，岁苦修筑。
现代文：山阴、会稽、肖山三县之水汇合于三江口入海，潮汐之日，海水积沙如丘陵，每逢阴雨，河水被沙丘阻塞不能及时泄出，致使良田尽被淹没，当局不得已只有采取决塘泄洪的办法，但塘决后水干又不能防旱，遇旱只得再填决口蓄水。每年决填，苦于修筑。
English: The waters of the three counties of Shanyin, Huiqi and Xiaoshan converge at the mouth of the Sanjiang River and flow into the sea. On the day of the tide, the seawater accumulates sand like hills. Whenever it rains, the river water is blocked by sand dunes and cannot be released in time, resulting in the flooding of all the good fields. The authorities had no choice but to take the method of breaking the pond and releasing the flood. However, after the pond is broken, the water is dry and cannot prevent drought. In the event of drought, they only have to fill the opening to store water. It is filled every year, and it is difficult to build.

古文：绍恩遍行水道，至三江口，见两山对峙，喜曰： 此下必有石根，余其于此建闸乎？ 
现代文：绍恩亲自勘查各水道，至三江口，见两山对峙，高兴地说： 山下有基石，何不在此建闸。 
English: Shao En personally surveyed the waterways, and when he arrived at the mouth of the Sanjiang River, he saw the confrontation between the two mountains and said happily: There is a foundation stone under the mountain, why not build a gate here.

古文：募善水者探之，果有石脉横互两山间，遂兴工。
现代文：于是招募熟习水性的人去勘探，果有石脉横亘于两山之间，于是兴工修闸。
English: So they recruited people who were familiar with water to explore. As a result, there was a stone vein between the two mountains, so they started to repair the locks.

古文：先投以铁石，继以笼盛甃屑沉之。
现代文：先向水中投下铁块大石，然后将装满碎砖的笼子沉入水中，以截其流。
English: First, a large iron boulder is thrown into the water, and then a cage filled with broken bricks is sunk into the water to stop the current.

古文：工未半，潮冲荡不能就，怨讟烦兴。
现代文：工程进行不到一半，因潮水冲击不能继续施工，怨声四起。
English: Less than half of the project has been carried out, but construction cannot continue due to the impact of the tide, and complaints are widespread.

古文：绍恩不为动，祷于海神，潮不至者累日，工遂竣。
现代文：绍恩却毫不动摇，祈祷海神。潮水多日不来袭击，水闸得以竣工。
English: Shorn, however, did not waver and prayed to the god of the sea. The tide did not come for many days, and the lock was completed.

古文：修五十余寻，为闸二十有八，以应列宿。于内为备闸三，曰经溇，曰撞塘，曰平水，以防大闸之溃。
现代文：共修堤四五十丈，建闸二十八处。其中内闸三座，分别为经氵娄、撞塘、平水，其作用是防止大闸崩溃。
English: A total of forty-five dikes were repaired and twenty-eight gates were built, of which three inner gates were built to prevent the gates from collapsing.

古文：闸外筑石堤四百余丈扼潮，始不为闸患。
现代文：闸外筑石堤四百余丈，以便阻挡潮水，使闸不受冲击。
English: A stone dike was built outside the lock, four hundred metres long, in order to hold back the tide and protect the lock from impact.

古文：刻水则石间，俾后人相水势以时启闭。
现代文：在闸边石上刻出水涨水落度数，以便后人观察水势开关闸门。
English: The water rise and fall rates were engraved on the stone of the gate, so that later generations could observe the water potential switch of the gate.

古文：初，绍恩之生也，有峨嵋僧过其门，曰： 他日地有称绍者，将承是儿恩乎？ 
现代文：从此以后，三县方圆数百里内再无水患。士民为歌颂绍恩的德政，特在闸左为他立庙，每年按时奉祀。多次调任山东右布政使，直到退休归家。
English: Since then, there have been no more floods within a radius of several hundred miles around the three counties. The people of Shao'an have been singing the praises of Shao'an's good governance, and a temple has been built especially for him on the left side of the gate, where he is worshipped on time every year. He was transferred to the post of Shandong Right Branch Political Envoy many times until he retired and returned home.

古文：因名绍恩，字汝承，其后果验。徐九思，贵溪人。
现代文：享年九十七岁。徐九思，贵溪人。
English: He died at the age of ninety-seven. Xu Jiusi, Guixi native.

古文：嘉靖中，授句容知县。
现代文：嘉靖年间授句容知县。
English: During the Jiajing Dynasty, Yongchi County was the first to be awarded the title.

古文：始视事，恂恂若不能。
现代文：初理政事，谦虚谨慎，似乎不大胜任工作。
English: He is modest and prudent at the beginning of his political career, and seems to be not very competent at work.

古文：俄有吏袖空牒窃印者，九思摘其奸，论如法。
现代文：一次，有吏盗窃县印盖在空白公文纸上，九思揭发其奸诈行为，依法论罪。
English: On one occasion, an official stole a county seal and stamped it on a blank piece of official paper. Jiu Si exposed his treacherous behavior and was convicted according to law.

古文：郡吏为叩头请，不许，于是人人惴恐。
现代文：郡吏为此人叩头说情，九思坚决不允，于是人人敬畏。
English: The county officials kowtowed to this man and pleaded for his release, but Jiuxi resolutely refused, so everyone was awestruck.

古文：为治于单赤务加恩，而御豪猾特严。
现代文：他对于孤老贫困者，加倍抚恤，而对豪猾之人管制严厉。
English: He doubled the pensions of the lonely, the old, and the poor, and kept a tight rein on the bold.

古文：讼者，抶不过十。
现代文：凡来投诉者，责打不过十下。
English: Anyone who came to complain received no more than ten lashes.

古文：诸所催科，预为之期，逾期，令里老逮之而已，隶莫敢至乡落。
现代文：征收赋税，预先规定交纳日期，过期只令里老逮捕问罪，衙役不敢进入乡村。
English: Taxes are levied, the payment date is set in advance, and the expiration only leads to the arrest and questioning of the villagers, and the bailiffs dare not enter the village.

古文：县东西通衢七十里，尘土积三尺，雨雪，泥没股。
现代文：县东西大路七十里积尘土三尺厚，每逢雨雪，烂泥达数尺深。
English: Seventy miles of the county's East-West Highway have accumulated three feet of dust. Whenever it rains or snows, the mud is several feet deep.

古文：九思节公费，甃以石，行旅便之。
现代文：九思想法节省官府开支，将节余款项用来修路，方便行人旅客。
English: The Nine Thought Law will save government expenses, and the surplus funds will be used to repair roads and facilitate pedestrians.

古文：朝廷数遣中贵醮神三茅山，县民苦供应。
现代文：朝廷多次派遣权势宦官在三茅山打醮求神，县民深受供应之苦。
English: The imperial court repeatedly sent powerful eunuchs to pray in Sanmaishan, and the people of the county suffered from the lack of supplies.

古文：九思搜故牒，有盐引金久贮于府者，请以给尝，民无所扰。
现代文：九思清查旧时公文，见有盐引金久存贮于府库中，便奏请用此作为求神所需经费，使百姓不再受侵扰。
English: Jiuxi checked the old-time official documents and saw that there was salt withdrawal money stored in the government treasury for a long time, and then asked to use this as the required funds for praying to God, so that the people would no longer be disturbed.

古文：岁侵，谷涌贵。巡抚发仓谷数百石，使平价粜而偿直于官。
现代文：当年年成歉收，谷价猛涨，巡抚发放仓谷数百石，以平价出售。
English: In that year, the annual harvest was poor, grain prices soared, and the governor issued hundreds of stones to the granaries and sold them at a fair price.

古文：九思曰： 彼籴者，皆豪也。贫民虽平价不能籴。 
现代文：九思认为， 来买粮的都是富豪，虽平价贫民也无力购买 。
English: Jiuxi believes that it is only the rich who come to buy grain, although the poor cannot afford to buy it even if it is at a reasonable price.

古文：乃以时价粜其半，还直于官，而以余谷煮粥食饿者。
现代文：于是将其一半按时价出售，以偿还官府，其余煮粥以赈饥民。
English: So they sold half of it at the current price to repay the government, and boiled the rest to feed the hungry.

古文：谷多，则使称力分负以去，其山谷远者，则就旁富人谷，而官为偿之，全活甚众。尝曰： 即天子布大惠，安能人人蠲租赐复，第在吾曹酌缓急而已。 
现代文：远在山谷中的贫民，则就近向富家贷谷，官府代为偿还。因此使许许多多人免于饿死。九思曾说 ：即使天子施大恩于民，哪能人人都可以减免赋役，关键是在于我们这些做官的，在施行时能否斟酌缓急而已。 
English: The poor, who were far away in the valley, came close to the rich in the valley of loans, and the government paid on their behalf. As a result, many people were saved from starving to death. Jiu Si once said: Even if the Son of Heaven is very kind to the people, everyone can reduce and exempt the forced labor, the key is whether we, the officials, can consider the priority when implementing it.

古文：久之，与应天府尹不合，为巡抚所劾，吏部尚书熊浃知其贤，特留之。
现代文：后来，因与应天府尹不合，为巡抚所弹劾，而吏部尚书熊浃知他贤能，特令他留任。
English: Later, because of his disagreement with Yin Ying Tianfu, he was impeached by the procuratorate, but Shang Shuxiong of the cadre department knew of his ability and ordered him to remain in office.

古文：积九载，迁工部主事，历郎中，治张秋河道。
现代文：九思在句容为官九年，期满升任工部主事，又升为郎中，奉命治理张秋河道。
English: Jiuxi served as an official for nine years in Qunrong, and was promoted to the head of the engineering department at the end of the term, and was also promoted to the middle brother, and was ordered to govern the Zhangqiu River.

古文：漕河与盐河近而不相接，漕水溢则泛滥为田患。
现代文：漕运河道与盐河相近，但不相通，漕河水涨则泛滥成灾。
English: The Cao Canal Road is close to the Salt River, but it is not connected, and the rising water of the Cao River leads to flooding.

古文：九思议筑减水桥于沙湾，俾二水相通，漕水溢，则有所泄以入海，而不侵田，少则有所限而不至于涸。
现代文：九思提议在沙湾修建分洪渠，勾通漕河与盐河，漕河水涨则可流入盐河，排泄入海，不致淹没田地，水落也不致干涸。
English: Jiuxi proposed to build a flood diversion channel in Shawan to connect the Caohe River and the Salt River. When the water of the Caohe River rises, it can flow into the Salt River and discharge into the sea, so that the fields will not be flooded and the water will not dry up.

古文：工成，遂为永利。
现代文：此项工程的完成，使该地永久受益。
English: The completion of this project will bring permanent benefits to the area.

古文：时工部尚书赵文华视师东南，道河上。九思不出迎，遣一吏赍牒往谒，文华嫚骂而去。
现代文：当时工部尚书赵文华巡视东南，路经这里，九思不出来迎接，只派一吏拿着公文去拜见，被文华骂走。
English: At that time, Shangshu Zhao Wenhua of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce was on a tour of the southeast, and when he passed by here, he couldn't help but come out to greet him. He only sent one official to visit him with official documents, and was scolded by Wenhua.

古文：会迁高州知府。
现代文：时逢九思升任高州知府。
English: At the right time, Jiuxi was promoted to governor of Gaozhou.

古文：文华归，修旧怨，与吏部尚书吴鹏合谋构之，遂坐九思老，致仕。
现代文：文华怀怨在心，回京后与吏部尚书吴鹏合谋陷害九思，九思被迫辞官。
English: Wenhua harbored a grudge in his heart, and after returning to Beijing, he conspired with Shangshu Wu Peng of the Personnel Department to frame Jiuxi, and Jiuxi was forced to resign.

古文：句容民为建祠茅山。
现代文：句容百姓为他建祠于茅山。
English: The people of Guzong built a shrine for him in Maoshan.

古文：子贞明，自有传。
现代文：九思辞官后在家闲居二十二年，八十五岁病故。
English: Jiu Si lived at home idly for 22 years after his retirement, and died of illness at the age of 85.

古文：庞嵩，字振卿，南海人。
现代文：庞嵩，字振卿，南海人。
English: Pang Song, Zi Zhenqing, Nanhai people.

古文：嘉靖十三年举于乡。
现代文：嘉靖十三年乡试中举。
English: The 13th Jiajing Township Junior High School Entrance Examination.

古文：讲业罗浮山，从游者云集。
现代文：其后在罗浮山讲学，来往的人络绎不绝。
English: After that, he lectured in Luofu Mountain, and the number of people coming and going was endless.

古文：二十三年历应天通判，进治中，先后凡八年。府缺尹，屡摄其事。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年后的八年内，历任应天通判、治中。应天知府空缺，嵩多次代行知府事。
English: In the eight years after the 23rd year of Jiajing, the successors should be judged by Tiantong and governed by the middle. In response to the vacancy of Tianzhi Prefecture, Song repeatedly acted as governor.

古文：始至，值岁饥，上官命督振。
现代文：初任代理应天知府时，正遇荒年，上司传令赈济。
English: When the first agent, Ying Tianchi Fu, was in the midst of a bad year, his boss sent him an order to help out.

古文：公粟竭，贷之巨室富家，全活者六万七千余人。
现代文：当时公粮已尽，他向富家借贷，赈救了六万七千余人。
English: At that time, public rations had run out, so he borrowed money from rich people and rescued more than 67,000 people.

古文：乃蠲积逋，缓征徭，勤劳徕，复业者又十万余人。
现代文：接着又免去多年所欠赋税，缓征徭役，不断招抚流民，返乡复业者达十万余人。
English: Then, it exempted taxes that had been owed for many years, delayed the levying of forced labor, and continued to attract displaced people. More than 100,000 people have returned home and resumed work.

古文：留都民苦役重，力为调剂，凡优免户及寄居客户、诡称官户、寄庄户、女户、神帛堂匠户，俾悉出以供役，民困大苏。
现代文：留都南京百姓苦于重役，庞嵩竭力调剂，凡优免户及寄居客户、冒称官户、寄庄户、女户、神帛堂匠户都要服役，从而大大减轻百姓力役负担。
English: The people of Nanjing, who remained in the capital, struggled with the heavy duty, and tried their best to adjust it. All privileged exempt households and sojourning customers, pretending to be government households, farm households, women's households, and Shenshudo craftsmen's households had to serve, thus greatly reducing the burden of forced labor on the people.

古文：江宁县葛仙、永丰二乡，频遭水患，居民止存七户。
现代文：江宁县葛仙、永丰二乡常遭水灾，居民外逃，只剩七户。
English: Gexian and Yongfeng Second Township in Jiangning County are often flooded, and residents have fled. Only seven households remain.

古文：嵩为治堤筑防，得田三千六百亩，立惠民庄四，召贫民佃之，流移尽复。
现代文：嵩修筑堤防，得田三千六百亩，建立四所 惠民庄 ，召集贫民佃耕，因此流民纷纷回乡复业。
English: The embankment was built with great effort, 3,600 mu of farmland were acquired, four "Favorable Villages" were established, and the poor were summoned to work the land. As a result, the displaced people returned to their hometowns one after another to resume their livelihoods.

古文：屡剖冤狱，戚畹王涌、举人赵君宠占良人妻，杀人，嵩置之法。
现代文：他多次平息冤狱。外戚王涌、举人赵君宠强占良人妻子，肆意杀人，嵩依法处置。
English: He has quelled unjust imprisonment many times. His maternal relatives Wang Yong and Zhao Jun, who were accused of forcibly seizing the wife of a loved one, wantonly killed people and were dealt with according to the law.

古文：早游王守仁门，淹通《五经》。集诸生新泉书院，相与讲习。
现代文：嵩早年求学于王守仁，通晓《五经》，曾招集生员聚于 新泉书院 ，相互切磋学问。
English: In his early years, Song studied under Wang Shouren and was well versed in the Five Classics. He once convened students to gather at Xinquan College to learn from each other.

古文：岁时单骑行县，以壶浆自随。京府佐贰鲜有举其职者，至嵩以善政特闻。
现代文：每年他都自带饮食行游县境。南京各府副职，很少有被举荐者，而庞嵩却将他们的政绩上报朝廷。
English: Every year, he took his own food and drink with him on a tour of the prefectural borders. Very few people were recommended for vice-prefectural posts in Nanjing, but Pang Song reported their achievements to the imperial court.

古文：府官在六年京察例，而复与外察。嵩谓非体，疏请止之，遂为永制。
现代文：各府官也随同京官每六年考核一次，此外，还要随同其他地方官吏进行考核，嵩认为这样不合制度，奏请停止，朝廷采纳了他的建议，并立为永久制度。
English: All prefectural officials were also evaluated every six years along with the Beijing officials, and in addition, they were also evaluated along with other local officials. Song believed that this was not in accordance with the system, and requested that it be stopped. The Imperial Court adopted his suggestion and established it as a permanent system.

古文：迁南京刑部员外郎，进郎中。
现代文：随后，嵩调任为南京刑部员外郎，又晋升为郎中。
English: Subsequently, he was appointed as the second-in-command of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department, and was promoted to the second-in-command.

古文：撰《原刑》、《司刑》、《祥刑》、《明刑》四篇，曰《刑曹志》，时议称之。
现代文：撰有《原刑》、《司刑》、《祥刑》、《明刑》四篇，合称《刑曹志》，受到普遍的称赞。
English: He authored four works, "Original Punishment," "Judge Punishment," "Good Punishment" and "Clear Punishment," collectively known as "Torturer's Diary," which have been widely praised.

古文：迁云南曲靖知府，亦有政声。
现代文：后调任云南曲靖知府，政绩卓著。
English: Later, he was transferred to Yunnan Qujing Prefecture, where he made outstanding achievements.

古文：中察典，以老罢，而年仅五十。
现代文：因年老辞官归乡，其实年仅五十。
English: Due to his old age, the dictionary returned to his hometown. In fact, he was only fifty years old.

古文：复从湛若水游，久之卒。
现代文：又与湛若水交游。
English: It also swims with the warm water.

古文：应天、曲靖皆祠之名宦，葛仙乡专祠祀之。
现代文：他逝世后，应天、曲靖两地人民均把他的灵位供奉于名宦祠内，葛仙乡还专为他修建祠堂，定时祭祀。
English: After his death, the people of both Yingtian and Qujing offered his spiritual position in the Meilun ancestral hall. Gexian Township also built an ancestral hall especially for him and held regular sacrifices.

古文：张淳，字希古，桐城人。
现代文：张淳，字希古，桐城人。
English: Zhang Jun, surnamed Xigu, from Tongcheng.

古文：隆庆二年进士，授永康知县。
现代文：隆庆二年进士，授永康知县。
English: In the second year of Longqing, he became a scholar and was awarded Yongkangchi County.

古文：吏民素多奸黠，连告罢七令。
现代文：永康县的一些奸诈吏民曾连续控告使朝廷先后罢黜七个县令。
English: Some treacherous officials and citizens of Yongkang County had successively sued the imperial court to revoke seven county orders.

古文：淳至，日夜阅案牍。讼者数千人，剖决如流，吏民大骇，服，讼浸减。
现代文：淳到任后，日夜审阅公文，前来投诉的有数千人，淳迅速判决，吏民大为佩服，从此诉讼之事渐少。
English: After Atsushi took office, he reviewed official documents day and night, and thousands of people came to complain. Atsushi quickly made a judgment, which was greatly admired by officials and the public. Since then, there have been fewer and fewer lawsuits.

古文：凡赴控者，淳即示审期，两造如期至，片晷分析无留滞。
现代文：此后，淳对于投诉皆能立时公布审判日期，使原告被告都按期到堂听审，片刻做出明确断决，毫不拖延。
English: After that, the court can immediately announce the trial date for the complaint, so that the plaintiff and the defendant can attend the court hearing on schedule and make a clear decision without delay.

古文：乡民裹饭一包即可毕讼，因呼为 张一包 ，谓其敏断如包拯也。
现代文：一件诉讼案，只须乡民裹一包饭的时间即可处理完毕，因而时人称他为 张一包 ，说他断案敏捷如同包拯。
English: A lawsuit can be handled in the time it takes a villager to wrap a packet of rice, so people called him Zhang Yibao at that time, saying that he was as quick as Bao Zheng to solve the case.

古文：巨盗卢十八剽库金，十余年不获，御史以属淳。淳刻期三月必得盗，而请御史月下数十檄。
现代文：大盗卢十八剽劫官库金银，官府十余年未能侦破，御史让淳破案，淳许诺三月内捕获盗贼卢十八，并请御史一月之内下捕盗令数十次。
English: The government failed to detect the theft of gold and silver from the government treasury by the great thief Lu Jiaxiong for more than ten years. The imperial historian asked Jun to solve the case. Jun promised to capture the thief Lu Jiaxiong within three months, and asked the imperial historian to issue arrest orders dozens of times within one month.

古文：及檄累下，淳阳笑曰： 盗遁久矣，安从捕。 
现代文：待捕盗令下过多次后，淳笑道： 强盗早已逃走了，如何捕获。 
English: After being ordered to wait for arrest several times, Jun smiled and said, "The robbers have already fled. How can we catch them?"

古文：寝不行。
现代文：自此，不再提捕盗一事。
English: Since then, there has been no further mention of the theft.

古文：及报御史，仅两月耳。民有睚眦嫌，辄以人命讼。淳验无实即坐之，自是无诬讼者。
现代文：一个与卢十八有奸情的永康县某吏之妻，将张淳的话传给了卢十八，十八误以为平安无事了。随后，淳进一步施计将他擒获，其间只用了两个月时间。小民之间稍有小忿小怨，即去诬告。淳查无实据，就将告状人监禁起来，因此，没人再敢诬告了。
English: The wife of a certain official in Yongkang County, who was having an affair with Lu Jie, relayed Zhang Jun's words to Lu Jie, and Lu Jie mistakenly thought that everything was fine. Subsequently, Jun made further efforts to capture him, which only took two months. There was a slight grudge between the commoners, that is, to make a false accusation. Jun did not find any evidence, so he imprisoned the accuser, so no one dared to make a false accusation.

古文：永人贫，生女多不举。
现代文：永康人贫困，女婴多被遗弃。
English: Yongkang people are poor, and baby girls are mostly abandoned.

古文：淳劝诫备至，贫无力者捐俸量给，全活无数。
现代文：淳多方劝诫，并拿出自己的俸禄，资助无力抚养的人家。
English: Jun was admonished by many people, and he took out his salary to support the families of those who were unable to support themselves.

古文：岁旱，劫掠公行，下令劫夺者死。
现代文：大旱之年，出现了公开抢劫现象。淳下令，抢劫者皆处以死刑。
English: In the year of the great drought, there was a phenomenon of open robbery. Jun ordered that all the robbers be sentenced to death.

古文：有夺五斗米者，淳佯取死囚杖杀之，而榜其罪曰 是劫米者 ，众旨慑服。
现代文：有人抢了五斗米，淳把一个已判死刑的人处死，张榜公布说此人是抢米罪犯，众人畏服。
English: Someone robbed five buckets of rice, and Jun executed a person who had been sentenced to death. A notice board announced that this person was a criminal who robbed rice, and everyone was awestruck.

古文：久之，以治行第一赴召去永，甫就车，顾其下曰： 某盗已来，去此数里，可为我缚来。 
现代文：后因其政绩卓著而被朝廷召往京师，上车离开永康时，对下属说 ：某盗来了，离此地只有数里，去把他逮捕归案。 
English: Later, because of his outstanding political achievements, he was summoned by the imperial court to the Beijing division. When he got on the bus to leave Yongkang, he said to his subordinates: "A thief has come, it is only a few miles from here, go and arrest him."

古文：如言迹之，盗正濯足于河，系至，盗服辜。
现代文：衙役按照他所指的路线追捕，果见该盗正在河边洗脚，即将他逮捕入狱。该盗服罪。
English: The bailiff chased him along the route he indicated, and found that the thief was washing his feet by the river, arresting him and sending him to prison. The thief pleaded guilty.

古文：永人骇其事，谓有神告。
现代文：永康人对此事十分惊异，认为是神灵通报。
English: Yongkang people were very surprised by this and thought it was a divine announcement.

古文：淳曰： 此盗捕之急则遁，今闻吾去乃归耳。
现代文：张淳解释说： 若追捕过急，该盗便逃走了。今听说我要离开永康，必又回来。
English: Zhang Jun explained: If the pursuit is too hasty, the thief will escape. Now I have heard that I want to leave Yongkang, I will definitely come back.

古文：以理卜，何神之有。 
现代文：这是推理判断的，并非什么神灵通报。 
English: This is a deductive judgment, not a divine announcement.

古文：擢礼部主事，历郎中，谢病去。
现代文：张淳至京师后，升为礼部主事，又历任郎中，因病辞官。
English: After Zhang Jun became a teacher in Beijing, he was promoted to the head of the etiquette department, and he also served as a junior high school teacher, but resigned due to illness.

古文：起建宁知府，进浙江副使。
现代文：后起用为建宁知府，晋升为浙江副使。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Jianning and promoted to the vice-envoy of Zhejiang.

古文：时浙江有召募兵，抚按议散之，兵皆汹汹。
现代文：这时浙江有招募的士兵若干，抚按打算将他们遣散，他们便大肆喧闹。
English: At this time, Zhejiang has recruited a number of soldiers, Fudan intends to dismiss them, and they make a lot of noise.

古文：淳曰： 是忄乔悍者，留则有用，汰则叵测。
现代文：淳建议： 凡是骄悍者，留下来还有用，不留则后果不堪设想，不如淘汰老弱，留下壮勇。
English: Jun's advice: If you're a proud person, it's still useful to stay. If you don't stay, the consequences are unimaginable. It's better to eliminate the old and weak and keep the brave.

古文：从之，事遂定。官终陕西布政。
现代文：这样一来，留下的不想作乱，淘汰的不能作乱。 这一意见被采纳实施。后任陕西布政使，逝于任期。
English: As a result, those who remained did not want to make trouble, and those who were eliminated could not make trouble. This opinion was adopted and implemented. The successor of the political envoy of Shaanxi Province, passed away during his term.

古文：陈幼学，字志行，无锡人。
现代文：陈幼学，字志行，常州府无锡人。
English: Chen Ju Xue, Zhixing, a native of Wuxi, Changzhou.

古文：万历十七年进士。授确山知县。政务惠民，积粟万二千石以备荒，垦莱田八百余顷，给贫民牛五百余头，核黄河退地百三十余顷以赋民。里妇不能纺者，授纺车八百余辆。
现代文：为此他积粟一万二千石备荒。开垦荒地八百余顷，给贫民耕牛五百余头，核实黄河退水滩地一百三十余顷，分给无地农民。村中妇女不能纺织者，授纺车八百余辆。
English: To this end, he accumulated 12,000 koku of millet to prepare for famine, reclaimed more than 800 hectares of wasteland, gave more than 500 heads of cattle to the poor, verified more than 130 hectares of the Yellow River receding beach land, and distributed it to landless farmers. Women in the village who cannot weave are given more than 800 spinning wheels.

古文：置屋千二百余间，分处贫民。
现代文：建屋一千二百余间分给贫民居住。
English: More than 1,200 houses were built for the poor to live in.

古文：建公廨八十间，以居六曹吏，俾食宿其中。
现代文：建官署八十间，供六曹吏役食宿。
English: Eighty rooms were built for the government office, providing accommodation and meals for six officials.

古文：节公费六百余两，代正赋之无征者。
现代文：将节省下来的公费银六百余两，代贫困百姓交纳赋税。
English: The government will use the savings of more than RMB600,000 to pay taxes on behalf of the poor.

古文：栽桑榆诸树三万八千余株，开河渠百九十八道。
现代文：此外，还栽种桑榆等树三万八千余株，开河渠一百九十八条。
English: In addition, more than 38,000 mulberry and other trees were planted, and 198 canals were opened.

古文：布政使刘浑成弟灿成助妾杀妻，治如律。
现代文：布政使刘浑成之弟刘灿成助妾杀妻，幼学将他法办。
English: Liu Cancheng, the younger brother of the Chinese envoy to Bhutan, Liu Huncheng, helped his concubine to kill his wife.

古文：行太仆卿陈耀文家人犯法，立捕治之。
现代文：行太仆卿陈光日文家人犯法，幼学立即将其逮捕惩处。
English: The kindergarten immediately arrested and punished Chen Guang's family members for violating the law.

古文：汝宁知府邱度虑幼学得祸，言于抚按，调繁中牟。
现代文：汝宁知府丘度怕因此招祸，建议抚按调他至中牟。
English: Ru Ning, the governor of Zhifu County, feared that this would bring misfortune, and suggested that Fujian transfer him to Zhongmou.

古文：秋成时，飞蝗蔽天。幼学捕蝗，得千三百余石，乃不为灾。
现代文：中牟县秋收时节遇到蝗灾，幼学发动群众捕捉蝗虫达一千三百余石，消灭了虫灾。
English: During the autumn harvest season in Zhongmou County, there was a plague of locusts. The kindergarten mobilized the masses to catch more than 1,300 locusts, eliminating the plague.

古文：县故土城，卑且圮。
现代文：中牟县旧系土城，城墙低且多已损坏。
English: Zhongmou County is an old earthen city. The city walls are low and mostly damaged.

古文：给饥民粟，俾修筑，工成，民不知役。
现代文：幼学用以工代赈之法，发给饥民口粮，让他们修筑城垣，竣工后饥民还不知是服了力役。
English: The kindergarten used the method of work-for-the-dole to distribute rations to the starving people and let them build the city wall. After it was completed, the starving people still did not know whether they had performed forced labor.

古文：县南荒地多茂草，根深难垦。
现代文：他鼓励百姓在县南荒地开垦，得肥沃田地数百顷，全数分给农民。
English: He encouraged the people to reclaim the wasteland in the southern part of the county, resulting in hundreds of hectares of fertile fields, all of which were given to farmers.

古文：令民投牒者，必入草十斤。未几，草尽，得沃田数百顷，悉以畀民。有大泽，积水，占膏腴地二十余里。幼学疏为河者五十七，为渠者百三十九，俱引入小清河，民大获利。大庄诸里多水，为筑堤十三道障之。
现代文：县内有一大泽，积水占去肥沃土地二十余里，幼学督率群众疏导河流五十七道，开渠一百三十九条，将积水引入小清河，百姓大获其利。大庄许多地方常被水淹，幼学组织民众筑堤十三道，挡住流水。
English: There is a large lake in the county, and the accumulated water occupies more than 20 miles of fertile land. The kindergarten supervisors led the masses to divert 57 rivers and open 139 canals to introduce the accumulated water into the Xiaoqing River, and the people benefited greatly. Many places in Dashuang are often flooded, and the kindergarten organized the people to build 13 dikes to block the flowing water.

古文：给贫民牛种，贫妇纺具，倍于确山。
现代文：他还给贫民发放耕牛、种子，给贫妇纺织工具，政绩卓著。
English: He also distributed oxen and seeds to the poor, and textile tools to poor women. His political achievements were outstanding.

古文：越五年，政绩茂著。以不通权贵，当考察拾遗，掌道御史拟斥之，其子争曰： 儿自中州来，咸言中牟治行无双。今予殿，何也？ 
现代文：但由于他不结纳权贵，在考核政绩时，掌道御史却要贬斥他的政绩，其子不服，辩论道 ：儿自中州来，都说中牟县的政绩无与伦比，今为何要排在最后？ 
English: However, because he did not associate with the powerful, when assessing his political achievements, the head of the imperial history wanted to disparage his political achievements. His son was not convinced and argued: "Children from Chuzhou all say that the political achievements of Zhongmou County are unparalleled. Why should they be in last place now?

古文：乃已。稍迁刑部主事。
现代文：经过力争，御史才不得不将其列为头等。
English: Only after a struggle did the Imperial Historian have to rank it as first class.

古文：中官采御园果者，怒杀园夫母，弃其尸河中。
现代文：不久，幼学升为刑部主事，宦官采摘御园果实时，怒杀园夫之母，弃尸河中。
English: Soon, the kindergartener was promoted to the head of the criminal justice department, the eunuch picked the fruits of the imperial garden in real time, killed the mother of the gardener, and abandoned the corpse in the river.

古文：幼学具奏，逮置之法。
现代文：幼学如实奏报，将肇事宦官依法处置。
English: According to the report, the kindergarten will deal with the eunuch who caused the incident in accordance with the law.

古文：嘉兴人袁黄妄批削《四书》、《书经集注》，名曰《删正》，刊行于时。
现代文：嘉兴人袁黄妄自批删《四书》、《书经集注》，名为《删正》，刊行于世。
English: Yuan Huangli, a resident of Jiaxing, self-censored the "Four Books" and "Annotated Collection of Classics," which was called "Censorship," and was published.

古文：幼学驳正其书，抗疏论列。
现代文：幼学予以驳正，并上疏直言不讳地列论其谬误。
English: It was refuted and corrected by the kindergarten, and Shang Suo bluntly listed its fallacies.

古文：疏虽留中，镂板尽毁。
现代文：幼学的上疏虽被廷臣扣留，但《删正》的刻板全被烧毁。
English: Although the nursery school's upper class was detained by courtiers, the stereotype of "Censorship" was completely burned.

古文：以员外郎恤刑畿辅，出矜疑三百余人。
现代文：幼学曾以员外郎之职对畿辅罪犯审慎用刑，将案情不明而又值得同情的三百余人全部释放。
English: The kindergarten, in its role as a guardian, had carefully punished the criminals in Kii-Fu, releasing all of the more than three hundred people whose cases were unknown but worthy of sympathy.

古文：进郎中。
现代文：其后晋升为郎中。
English: He was later promoted to a junior vassal.

古文：迁湖州知府，甫至，即捕杀豪恶奴。
现代文：幼学调任湖州知府，一到任便捕杀豪强恶奴。
English: He was transferred from kindergarten to the post of governor of Huzhou, and as soon as he took office, he hunted and killed the brave and strong villains.

古文：有施敏者，士族子，杨升者，人奴也，横郡中。
现代文：士人之子施敏、某富豪家奴杨升，横行郡中。
English: Shi Min, the son of a nobleman, and Yang Sheng, the slave of a rich man, are rampant in the county.

古文：幼学执敏置诸狱。敏赂贵人嘱巡抚檄取亲鞫，幼学执不予，立杖杀之。
现代文：幼学将施敏下狱，施敏买通权贵，嘱咐巡抚亲自审理，幼学不允，即刻将施敏用棍杖击毙。
English: The kindergarten put Shimin in prison, Shimin bought his way into power, and ordered the inspector to try him in person. The kindergarten did not agree, and immediately killed Shimin with a stick.

古文：敏狱辞连故尚书潘季驯子廷圭，幼学言之御史，疏劾之，下狱。
现代文：施敏供词中株连到故尚书潘季驯之子潘廷圭，幼学将此案情告诉御史，上章弹劾，将廷圭逮捕入狱。
English: In Shimin's confession, the son of the late Shangshu Panji's trainer, Pan Tinggui, was implicated in the case. He was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：他奸豪复论杀数十辈，独杨升畏祸敛迹，置之。
现代文：其他奸豪论罪处死者数十人。唯独杨升畏罪潜逃。
English: Dozens of other traitors were sentenced to death. Only Yang Shengji escaped.

古文：已，念己去，升必复逞，遂捕置之死，一郡大治。
现代文：幼学想到，若自己离开湖州，杨升必再来逞凶，终于将他逮捕处死。从此一郡太平。
English: The kindergarten thought that if he left Huzhou, Yang Sheng would come back and finally arrest him and put him to death. Since then, the county has been peaceful.

古文：霪雨连月，禾尽死。幼学大举荒政，活饥民三十四万有奇。
现代文：湖州阴雨连月，禾苗尽死，幼学施行救荒措施，被赈饥民达三十四万余人。
English: In Huzhou, it rained for months on end, the crops died, the kindergarten implemented famine relief measures, and more than 340,000 people were starved to death.

古文：御史将荐之，征其治行，推官阎世科列上三十六事，御史以闻。
现代文：御史准备向朝廷举荐他，收集其政绩，推官阎世科列举了三十六事，上报朝廷。
English: The imperial historian was preparing to recommend him to the imperial court and collect his political achievements, and the superior Yan Shike listed thirty-six things and reported them to the imperial court.

古文：诏加按察副使，仍视郡事。
现代文：朝廷下诏加官为按察副使，仍管湖州政事。
English: Under the imperial court, Zhaojia was appointed as the vice-envoy of inspection, and he was still in charge of politics in Huzhou.

古文：久之，以副使督九江兵备。幼学年已七十，其母尚在，遂以终养归。
现代文：以后，幼学以副使职总督九江兵备，这时他已七十高龄，其母尚在，故请求辞官归家奉养母亲。
English: Later, when he was seventy years old and his mother was still alive, he asked his father-in-law to return home to support his mother.

古文：母卒，不复出。
现代文：母亲去世后他不肯出来任职。
English: After his mother's death, he refused to take up his post.

古文：天启三年起南京光禄少卿，改太常少卿，俱不赴。
现代文：天启三年，朝廷起用他为光禄少卿，又改为太常少卿，他都未赴任。
English: In the third year of the Apocalypse, the Imperial Court appointed him as Guanglu Shaoqing, and he was also changed to Taizang Shaoqing, but he did not take up the post.

古文：明年卒，年八十四矣。
现代文：四年逝世，享年八十四岁。
English: He died four years later, aged 84.

古文：中矣、湖州并祠祀之。
现代文：中牟县、湖州均建祠纪念他。
English: Both Zhongmou County and Huzhou have built shrines in his memory.

