古文：马援字文渊，扶风茂陵人也。
现代文：◆马援传马援字文渊，扶风茂陵人。
English: ◆Ma Yuan Chuan, Ma Yuan Zi Wen Yuan, Fu Feng Murying Ren.

古文：其先赵奢为赵将，号曰马服君，子孙因为氏。
现代文：他的先祖赵奢为赵将，爵号马服君，子孙因以为氏。
English: His ancestor, Zhao Cao, was Zhao Zheng, his title was Ma Fu Jun, and his descendants are the Inan family.

古文：武帝时，以吏二千石自邯郸徙焉。
现代文：武帝时，以吏二千石自邯郸迁到茂陵。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, he moved to Murye with a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：曾祖父通，以功封重合侯，坐兄何罗反，被诛，故援再世不显。
现代文：曾祖父马通，以功封为重合侯，因兄长何罗谋反遭连累被杀，所以马援的祖父及父辈不得为显官。
English: Matong's great-grandfather, who was awarded the title of Gongfu, was killed because his brother, He Luo Mu, was implicated in the rebellion, so Ma Yuan's grandfather and his parents were not allowed to be high-ranking officials.

古文：援三兄况、余、员，并有才能，王莽时皆为二千石。
现代文：马援的三个哥哥马况、马余、马员都有才能，王莽时都为二千石。
English: Ma Yuan's three brothers, Ma Zhou, Ma Yu, and Ma Jian, were all talented, and Wang Muxi was worth two thousand koku.

古文：援年十二而孤，少有大志，诸兄奇之。
现代文：马援十二岁时就成了孤儿，年少而有大志，几个哥哥认为他很奇特。
English: Ma Yuan was orphaned at the age of twelve. He was young and ambitious, and several of his brothers thought he was strange.

古文：尝受《齐诗》，意不能守章句，乃辞况，欲就边郡田牧。
现代文：曾教他学齐诗，但马援心志不能拘守于章句之间，就辞别兄长马况，想到边郡去耕作放牧。
English: He had taught him to learn Qi poetry, but Ma Yuan could not keep his mind between chapters and sentences, so he said goodbye to his brother Ma Quan and thought of farming and grazing in Bian County.

古文：况曰： 汝大才，当晚成。
现代文：马况说： 你有大才，当晚些时才能成。
English: Ma Jian said, "You have a great talent, but you will be able to make it later that day."

古文：良工不示人以朴，且从所好。 
现代文：好的工匠不告诉人以大木材，暂且听从你所喜爱。 
English: A good craftsman does not tell people to use large pieces of wood. For the time being, listen to what you like.

古文：会况卒，援行服期年，不离墓所；敬事寡嫂，不冠不入庐。
现代文：适逢马况去世，马援身着丧服一周年，不离开墓所；敬侍寡嫂，不结好发戴好帽就不进庐舍。
English: On the first anniversary of the death of Ma Zhou, Ma Yuan, dressed in mourning clothes, did not leave the cemetery; to honor his widow, he would not enter the tomb without tying his hair and wearing a good hat.

古文：后为郡督邮，送囚至司命府，囚有重罪，援哀而纵之，遂亡命北地。
现代文：后来作了郡的督邮，解送囚犯到司命府，囚犯有重罪，马援可怜他将他放了，就逃亡北地。
English: Later, he became the postmaster of the county and sent prisoners to the governor's office. The prisoner had committed a serious crime, but Ma Yuan took pity on him and released him, and he fled to the north.

古文：遇赦，因留牧畜，宾客多归附者，遂役属数百家。
现代文：赦免后，就留下牧畜，宾客们多归附于他，于是拥役属数百家。
English: After he was pardoned, he left his livestock behind, and most of his guests joined him. As a result, there are hundreds of families who own horses.

古文：转游陇汉间，常谓宾客曰： 丈夫为志，穷当益坚，老当益壮。 
现代文：转游陇汉间，常对宾客们说： 大丈夫的志气，应当在穷困时更加坚定，年老时更加壮烈。 
English: When traveling among the Han people, he often said to his guests: The ambition of a good husband should be more firm when he is poor, and more vigorous when he is old.

古文：因处田牧，至有牛、马、羊数千头，谷数万斛。
现代文：因从事耕作放牧致有牛马羊数千头，谷数万斛。
English: Due to farming and grazing, there are thousands of cattle, horses and sheep, and tens of thousands of gulls.

古文：既而叹曰： 凡殖货财产，贵其能施赈也，否则守钱虏耳。 
现代文：既而又叹道 ：凡是从农牧商业中所获得的财产，贵在能施救济于人，否则就不过是守财奴罢了！ 
English: At the same time, he lamented: All the property obtained from agriculture, animal husbandry and commerce should be able to provide relief to people, otherwise it is just a miser!

古文：乃尽散以班昆弟故旧，身衣羊裘皮裤。
现代文：于是将财产尽分散给了哥哥和故旧。身上穿着羊裘皮裤过日子。
English: So he distributed all his property to his brother and the old man. He wore sheepskin trousers to get by.

古文：王莽末，四方兵起，莽从弟卫将军林广招雄俊，乃辟援及同县原涉为掾，荐之于莽。
现代文：王莽末，四方兵起，王莽从弟卫将军王林广招英雄豪杰，就征马援及同县原涉为掾吏，推荐给王莽。
English: At the end of Wang Mang, from the four-sided soldiers, Wang Mang recruited heroes and heroines from his younger brother, General Wang Lin Guang, and recommended them to Wang Mang.

古文：莽以涉为镇戎大尹，援为新成大尹。
现代文：王莽以原涉为镇戎大尹，以马援为新成大尹。
English: Wang Mang took Yuan Zhu as Zhenwu Dayin and Ma Yuan as Xincheng Dayin.

古文：及莽败，援兄员时为增山连率，与援俱去郡，复避地凉州。
现代文：等到王莽败，马援的哥哥马员这时为增山连率，与马援都离开郡，又逃避到凉州。
English: When Wang Mang was defeated, Ma Yuan's brother Ma Jian, in order to increase the mountain company's rate, left the county with Ma Yuan and fled to Liangzhou.

古文：世祖即位，员先诣洛阳，帝遣员复郡，卒于官。
现代文：世祖即位，马员先到洛阳，帝遣马员回去仍为增山连率，死于官。
English: When the founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, the equerry went to Luoyang first. When the emperor sent the equerry back, he was still a member of the Zengshan Company and died in office.

古文：援因留西州，隗嚣甚敬重之，以援为绥德将军，与决筹策。
现代文：马援因而留在西州，隗嚣很敬重他，以他为绥德将军，与他共同筹划决策。
English: As a result, Ma Yuan stayed in Xizhou. He was held in high esteem by the general public, who regarded him as the general of Zhengde and made plans and decisions together with him.

古文：是时，公孙述称帝于蜀，嚣使援往观之。
现代文：这时公孙述称帝于蜀，隗嚣派马援去蜀观察。
English: At this time, Gongsun said that the emperor was in Shu, and sent horses to Shu to observe.

古文：援素与述同里闬，相善，以为既至当握手欢如平生，而述盛陈陛卫，以延援入，交拜礼毕，使出就馆，更为援制都布单衣、交让冠，会百官于宗庙中，立旧交之位。
现代文：马援与公孙述是同乡，素来相好，以为他去后公孙述会与他握手像过去一样高兴，而这次公孙述却盛陈御林军，引马援相见，交拜完毕，把马援引至馆舍，再为马援制都布衣，给他帽子，会见百官在宗庙中，立上旧交的座位。
English: Ma Yuan was a fellow villager of Gongsun Su, and they had always been friendly with each other. They thought that after he left, Gongsun Su would be as happy to shake hands with him as in the past. However, this time, Gongsun Su invited Ma Yuan to meet with the troops of the Imperial Forestry Corps. After the meeting, they bowed to each other, and Ma Yuan was summoned to the palace. He then made clothes for Ma Yuan, gave him a hat, met with hundreds of officials in the ancestral temple, and set up the seat of the old friend.

古文：述鸾旗旄骑，警跸就车，磬折而入，礼飨官属甚盛，欲授援以封侯大将军位。
现代文：公孙述拥着皇帝用的銮旗和旄骑，左右侍卫之人全都像皇帝一样上车，屈身如磬而入，掌管仪礼和宴会的官员都很多，想授予马援以封侯大将军爵位。
English: Gongsun said that he was holding the imperial banner and horse-drawn carriage, and all the attendants on the left and right got on the carriage like the emperor, bending down to enter. There were many officials in charge of ceremonies and banquets, and they wanted to award Ma Yuan with the title of grand marshal.

古文：宾客皆乐留，援晓之曰： 天下雄雌未定，公孙不吐哺走迎国士，与图成败，反修饰边幅，如偶人形。此子何足久稽天下士乎！ 
现代文：宾客们都乐于留下，马援晓示众人说： 天下胜负未定，公孙述不殷勤礼让以迎国中有才能之士，以共商成败，反修饰边幅，像木偶一样，此子何足以久留天下的人才呢？ 
English: The guests were all happy to stay. Ma Yuanxiao said to the crowd, "The world is still undecided. The great-grandson said that it is not courteous to welcome the talented people in the country, to discuss success and failure, but to decorate the edges, like a puppet. Why is this child enough to stay the world's talent for a long time?

古文：因辞归，谓嚣曰： 子阳井底蛙耳，而妄自尊大，不如专意东方。 
现代文：因而辞归。告隗嚣说 ：公孙述只不过是个井底之蛙，而他却妄自尊大，您不如专意经营东方。 
English: Therefore, he resigned. He said: Gongsun Su is just a frog at the bottom of the well, but he is arrogant, you might as well concentrate on running the East.

古文：建武四年冬，嚣使援奉书洛阳。
现代文：建武四年冬，隗嚣使马援奉书到洛阳。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of Jianwu, the clamor caused Ma Yuan Bonshu to go to Luoyang.

古文：援至，引见于宣德殿。
现代文：马援到，帝在宣德殿接见他。
English: Ma Yuan arrived, and the emperor received him at Xuande Hall.

古文：世祖笑谓援曰 卿遨游二帝间，今见卿，使人大惭。 
现代文：世祖出迎，笑着对马援说： 你奔走周旋于二帝之间，现在见到你，使人大感惭愧。 
English: The ancestor greeted him and said to Ma Yuan with a smile, "You have been running around and meddling with the two emperors. Seeing you now makes people feel very ashamed.

古文：援顿首辞谢，因曰： 当今之世，非独君择臣也，臣亦择君矣。
现代文：马援叩头辞谢。因而说 ：现在的世界，不独君主选择臣子，臣子也选择君主呢。
English: Ma Yuan bowed his head and said, "In today's world, not only does the sovereign choose the vassal, but the vassal also chooses the sovereign."

古文：臣与公孙述同县，少相善。臣前至蜀，述陛戟而后进臣。
现代文：我与公孙述同县，年少时相友善，我前次去蜀，公孙述令近臣持戟卫于两侧而后召我进见。
English: I am from the same county as Gongsun Su, and we were friendly when we were young. The last time I went to Shu, Gongsun Su ordered his close vassals to stand guard on both sides and then called me in.

古文：臣今远来，陛下何知非刺客奸人，而简易若是？ 
现代文：我今远来，你怎么知道我不是刺客奸人，而如此粗心？ 
English: I'm so far away, how do you know I'm not a double-crossing assassin, and so careless?

古文：帝复笑曰： 卿非刺客，顾说客耳。 
现代文：帝又笑道 ：你不是刺客，不过是个说客罢了。 
English: Ti Mata laughed and said, "You are not an assassin, but a lobbyist."

古文：援曰： 天下反覆，盗名字者不可胜数。今见陛下，恢廓大度，同符高祖，乃知帝王自有真也。 
现代文：马援说 ：天下反反复复，窃取名字的人多如牛毛，今见陛下，宽宏大量，与高祖一样，就知道帝王自然有真的了。 
English: Ma Yuan said, "The world repeats itself, and there are as many people who steal names as there are cows' hair. Now that I have seen Your Majesty, who is magnanimous, just like Gao Zu, I know that the emperor is real.

古文：帝甚壮之。
现代文：帝甚赞其言。
English: The emperor was full of praise.

古文：援从南幸黎兵，转至东海。
现代文：马援从帝到黎丘，又转到东海。
English: Ma Yuan went from the emperor to Li Qiu, and then to the East Sea.

古文：及还，以为待诏，使太中大夫来歙持节送援西归陇右。
现代文：回后，让他暂时待命，派太中大夫来歙持节送马援西归陇右。
English: After his return, he was put on temporary standby, and the Taizhong Doctor was sent to Xizhi to escort the horse to the west and return to the right.

古文：隗嚣与援共卧起，问以东方流言及京师得失。
现代文：隗嚣与马援同卧同起，问他在东方听到的消息及京师方面的得失。
English: Gong Han and Ma Yuan got out of bed together and asked him about the news he had heard in the East and the gains and losses of the Beijing division.

古文：援说嚣曰： 前到朝廷，上引见数十，每接宴语，自夕至旦，才明勇略，非人敌也。
现代文：马援对隗嚣说： 前次到朝廷，帝十多次接见我，每次与帝宴间谈话，从夜谈到清晨，帝的才能勇略，不是别人所能匹敌的，且坦白诚恳，无所隐瞒。
English: Ma Yuan said to Gong Han: The last time I went to the imperial court, the emperor received me more than ten times. Every time I had a conversation with the emperor during the banquet, from the evening to the early morning, the emperor's talent is bold, not comparable to others, and it is frank and sincere, with nothing to hide.

古文：且开心见诚，无所隐伏，阔达多大节，略与高帝同。经学博览，政事文辩，前世无比。 
现代文：胸怀阔达而有大节，大抵与高帝相同，而其经学之渊博，处理政事和文章辞辩，在前世无人可比。 
English: He is broad-minded and big-hearted, mostly the same as Gao Di, and his profound learning, dealing with politics and arguments, is unparalleled in previous lifetimes.

古文：嚣曰： 卿谓何如高帝？ 
现代文：隗嚣说： 你说，他比高帝怎么样？ 
English: "What do you mean, he's better than Gao Di?

古文：援曰： 不如也。
现代文：马援说 ：不如。
English: Ma Yuan said: Not so good.

古文：高帝无可无不可；今上好吏事，动如节度，又不喜饮酒。 
现代文：高帝上天入地无所不能为；而光武喜爱政事，处理政务能恰如其份，又不喜欢饮酒。 
English: Gao Di is omnipotent; while Guangwu likes politics, can handle politics properly, but does not like drinking.

古文：嚣意不怿，曰： 如卿言，反复胜邪？ 
现代文：隗嚣不高兴，说 ：像你这样说，光武倒胜过高祖了？ 
English: Furious and displeased, he said, "Are you saying that Guangwu is better than Gao Zu?"

古文：然雅信援，故遂遣长子恂入质。
现代文：然而极为信任马援，因而派遣长子隗恂到京师作为人质。
English: However, he trusted Ma Yuan very much, so he sent his eldest son Zou to Beijing as a hostage.

古文：援因将家属随恂归洛阳。
现代文：马援因此携家属随隗恂同归洛阳。
English: As a result, Ma Yuan returned to Luoyang with his family.

古文：居数月而无它职任。
现代文：住了几个月没有接到新的任命。
English: He did not receive a new appointment for several months.

古文：援以三辅地旷土沃，而所将宾客猥多，乃上书求屯田上林苑中，帝许之。
现代文：马援以三辅地广土沃，而所带宾客杂多。就上书请求在上林苑中屯田。
English: Ma Yuan used the vast fertile land of Sanfu to bring many guests. He sent a request to build a pavilion in the middle of Shanglin Courtyard.

古文：会隗嚣用王元计，意更狐疑，援数以书记责譬于嚣，嚣怨援背己，得书增怒，其后遂发兵拒汉。
现代文：光武准许了。适逢隗嚣用王元计，更加狐疑起来，马援几次用书文责让晓谕隗嚣。隗嚣恨马援背叛了他，得信后更增仇怨，后来就发兵拒汉。
English: Guangwu gave his permission. When Yanran used the Wangyuan strategy, he became even more suspicious. Ma Yuan several times wrote to Yanran to reprimand him. Yanran hated Ma Yuan for betraying him, and his hatred increased even more after he gained Yanran's trust. Later, he sent troops to repel Han.

古文：援乃上疏曰： 臣援自念归身圣朝，奉事陛下，本无公辅一言之荐，左右为容之助。
现代文：马援就向光武上疏说 ：我自念归身圣朝，敬侍陛下，本来没有三公辅相一句话的推荐，也没有左右的人为我先言。
English: Ma Yuan said to Guangwu Shangsuo, "I consider myself a member of the Holy Dynasty, and I respect and serve Your Majesty. Originally, I did not have a single word of recommendation from the three princes, nor did anyone around me have a word of advice for me.

古文：臣不自陈，陛下何因闻之。
现代文：我自己不说，陛下何能听到。
English: I won't say it myself, Your Majesty can't hear me.

古文：夫居前不能令人轾，居后不能令人轩，与人怨不能为人患，臣所耻也。
现代文：居前不能令人分高低，居后不能令人分轻重。招人怨不能为人患，这是臣感到羞耻的。
English: Before taking up residence, one should not make people feel superior or inferior, and after taking up residence, one should not make people feel inferior or inferior. It is shameful for a vassal to invite people's resentment.

古文：故敢触冒罪忌，昧死陈诚。
现代文：所以敢于触冒罪忌，冒死陈述至诚。
English: Therefore, dare to break the taboo and make a sincere statement.

古文：臣与隗嚣，本实交友。
现代文：我与隗嚣，本来是朋友。
English: I'm originally friends with Gong Han.

古文：初，嚣遣臣东，谓臣曰： 本欲为汉，愿足下往观之。于汝意可，即专心矣。
现代文：当初，隗嚣派臣来洛阳，对我说： 本来是想为汉，请你先去看看，如果你以为可以，我就专心事汉了。 
English: At first, Yan Han sent a minister to Luoyang and said to me: I originally wanted to be Han, please go and see first. If you think you can, I will concentrate on Han affairs.

古文：及臣还反，报以赤心，实欲导之于善，非敢谲以非义。
现代文：等到我回去，以赤心报隗嚣，想真心实意诱导他从善，不敢挑唆他以为不义之举。
English: Wait until I get back, report the disturbance with a pure heart, sincerely want to induce him to do good, and do not dare to instigate what he considers to be an unjust act.

古文：而嚣自挟奸心，盗憎主人，怨毒之情遂归于臣。
现代文：而隗嚣自挟奸心。私下憎恨陛下，而把这种怨恨之情归结到我身上。
English: But he harbors a secret grudge. He secretly hates His Majesty, and he attributes this grudge to me.

古文：臣欲不言，则无以上闻。
现代文：我如果不说，意见就无从上达。
English: If I don't say it, there will be no feedback.

古文：愿听诣行在所，极陈灭嚣之术，得空匈腹，申愚策，退就陇亩，死无所恨。 
现代文：我愿亲到你那里，陈述消灭隗嚣的策略，能够把想说的话统统说完，申述我的浅见，然后退回老家去种田，死无所恨。 
English: I would like to come to you in person, present the strategy for eliminating the hustle and bustle, be able to say everything I want to say, express my shallow views, and then return to my hometown to farm, and die without hatred.

古文：帝乃召援计事，援具言谋画。
现代文：帝于是召马援议事，马援为之出谋划策。
English: The emperor then summoned Ma Yuan to discuss the matter, and Ma Yuan came up with a plan.

古文：因使援将突骑五千，往来游说嚣将高峻、任禹之属，下及羌豪，为陈祸福，以离嚣支党。
现代文：因此使马援率领突击骑兵五千，往来游说隗嚣将领高峻、任禹之属，下及羌中的英杰，为他们剖析形势说明祸福，以离间隗嚣的党羽。
English: Therefore, he ordered Ma Yuan to lead five thousand assault cavalry, and lobbied the turbulent generals Gao Jun, Ren Yu's subordinates, and subordinate and junior heroes, to analyze the situation for them to explain the misfortunes and blessings, and to separate the turbulent party feathers.

古文：援又为书与嚣将杨广，使晓劝于嚣，曰：
现代文：马援又写信给隗嚣将杨广，要杨广去劝导隗嚣。说 ：春卿无恙。
English: Ma Yuan also wrote to the warlord Yang Guang, asking Yang Guang to persuade the warlord, saying: "Chunqing is invulnerable.

古文：春卿无恙，前别冀南，寂无音驿。援间还长安。因留上林。
现代文：前在冀南分别，一直未通音信。马援乘间回到长安，因此留在上林。
English: They had been separated in the south of Hebei and had not been in contact. Ma Yan Rong had returned to Chang'an, so he stayed in Shanglin.

古文：窃见四海已定，兆民同情，而季孟闭拒背畔，为天下表的。
现代文：我见四海已定，兆民同心，而隗嚣闭拒背叛，为天下所指射。
English: I see that the four seas have been determined, the trillions of people are of the same mind, and the clamor to close down and refuse to betray is the world's best shot.

古文：常惧海内切齿，思相屠裂，故遗书恋恋，以致恻隐之计。
现代文：时常害怕海内对他恨之切齿，恨不得要将他杀了分尸，所以写信给他。恋恋之情，以致恻隐之计。
English: She was often afraid of hatred towards him at home and wanted to kill him, so she wrote to him.

古文：乃闻季孟归罪于援，而纳王游翁谄邪之说，自谓函谷以西，举足可定，以今而观，竟何如邪？
现代文：听说隗嚣归罪于我，而接受王元奸邪之说，自以为函谷关以西，举足可定，以现在的形势来看，究竟怎样呢？
English: I heard that Yanran blamed me, but I accepted Wang Yuan's treachery and said that I thought that west of Hakodate, I could make a move. In view of the current situation, what is it?

古文：援间至河内，过存伯春，见其奴吉从西方还，说伯春小弟仲舒望见吉，欲问伯春无它否，竟不能言，晓夕号泣，婉转尘中。
现代文：马援曾到河内，看望伯春，见到其奴吉从西方回来，说伯春小弟仲舒望见吉，想问伯春有没有意外，竟不能讲话，早晚号泣，婉转风尘之中。
English: Ma Yuan once went to Hanoi to visit Bo Chun and saw his nephew returning from the West. He said that Bo Chun's younger brother, Zhong Shu, wanted to see him and wanted to ask Bo Chun if there was an accident. However, he couldn't speak, cried in the morning and evening, and was lost in the wind and dust.

古文：又说其家悲愁之状，不可言也。
现代文：又说他家悲愁的情况，不可言说。
English: It is impossible to say what the sad state of his family is.

古文：夫怨仇可刺不可毁，援闻之，不自知泣下也。
现代文：怨与仇可刺而不可毁，马援听了，不知不觉也泣下了。
English: Grudges and enmities can be pricked, but they cannot be destroyed. Ma Yuan listened, and unknowingly began to cry.

古文：援素知季孟孝爱，曾、闵不过。
现代文：马援素知隗嚣孝爱，虽曾参、闵子蹇也不会超过他。
English: Ma Yuan, Su Zhizhong, Ren Ren and Xiao Ai, although they have participated in the competition, will not surpass him.

古文：夫孝于其亲，岂不慈于其子？
现代文：对亲孝顺的人岂能不对儿子慈爱呢？
English: For if a man be dutiful to his father, will he not be dutiful to his son?

古文：可有子抱三木，而跳梁妄作，自同分羹之事乎？
现代文：哪有忍心让儿子身带刑枷，而为父亲的还在强横妄作，像乐羊一样忍心吃用儿子的肉做成的羹汤呢？
English: How could he bear to have his son in chains, while his father was still acting like a tyrant and eating soup made from his son's flesh like a sheep?

古文：季孟平生自言所以拥兵众者，欲以保全父母之国而完坟墓也，又言苟厚士大夫而已。
现代文：隗嚣平生自己说他之所以拥兵众，只是想保全父母之国而使先人坟墓完整，又说苟且厚待士大夫罢了。
English: He said that the reason why he supported the soldiers all his life was that he just wanted to preserve the country of his parents and make the graves of his ancestors complete. He also said that he only wanted to be kind to the doctor.

古文：而今所欲全者将破亡之，所欲完者，将毁伤之，所欲厚者将反薄之。
现代文：而现在想保全的将要破亡了，想完整的也将毁掉了，想厚待的将反而薄待了。
English: But now those who want to preserve will be ruined, those who want to be complete will be destroyed, and those who want to be treated well will be treated poorly.

古文：季孟尝折愧子阳而不受其爵，今更共陆陆，欲往附之，将难为颜乎？
现代文：隗嚣曾经挫辱过公孙述而不接受公孙述的封赐，现在则与公孙述同流合污，还想归附于他，不感到难为情吗？
English: Do you not feel embarrassed that you once humiliated Gongsunsu and did not accept Gongsunsu's conferment, but now you are in cahoots with Gongsunsu and still want to attach yourself to him?

古文：若复责以重质，当安从得子主给是哉！
现代文：假若公孙述要隗嚣送儿子到洛阳当人质，他从何处得儿子呢？
English: If Gongsun Shu wanted to send his son to Luoyang as a hostage, where would he get a son from?

古文：往时子阳独欲以王相待，而春卿拒之；今者归老，更欲低头与小儿曹共槽枥而食，并肩侧身于怨家之朝乎？
现代文：以前公孙述想封你为王，你拒不接受，现在老了，倒还想低着头与小儿辈们共槽而食，并肩侧身于怨家的朝廷吗？
English: In the past, your great-grandson said that he wanted to make you king. You refused to accept it. Now that you are old, do you still want to bow your head and eat with your children, and stand shoulder to shoulder with the imperial court that hates your family?

古文：男儿溺死何伤而拘游哉！
现代文：男儿淹死为什么拘束于游泳呢？
English: Why are boys drowning tied to swimming?

古文：今国家待春卿意深，宜使牛孺卿与诸耆老大人共说季孟，若计画不从，真可引领去矣。
现代文：现在国家对你有深意，你应当使牛孺卿与各位耆老大人共同说服隗嚣，如计划不被接受，就可以引领而去了。
English: Now that the country has deep intentions for you, you should make Sir Beef Tong and all the elders work together to convince the public. If the plan is not accepted, you can lead it away.

古文：前披舆地图，见天下郡国百有六所，奈何欲以区区二邦以当诸夏百有四乎？
现代文：前展阅地图，见天下郡国共一百零六所，奈何想以区区的两个邦以抵挡天下的一百零四个邦呢？
English: Look at the map in front of you. There are a total of 106 counties and states in the world. Why would you want to defend the world's 104 states with just two states?

古文：春卿事季孟，外有君臣之义，内有朋友之道。
现代文：你事隗嚣，外有君臣之义，内有朋友之道。
English: You are full of hubbub. On the outside, you have the righteousness of a prince and a minister, but on the inside, you have the way of a friend.

古文：言君臣邪，固当谏争；语朋友邪，应有切磋。
现代文：以君臣而言，应当面谏争议；以朋友而言，应当商量切磋。
English: As far as princes and ministers are concerned, they should face disputes; as far as friends are concerned, they should discuss and learn from each other.

古文：岂有知其无成，而但萎腇咋舌，叉手从族乎？
现代文：岂有明知其不能成功，而软弱不敢开口，叉手跟着他刑及父母兄子呢？
English: Is there anyone who knows that he will not succeed, but is too weak to open his mouth, and the hand of the oppressor goes after him to chastise him and his father and his mother?

古文：及今成计，殊尚善也；过是，欲少味矣。
现代文：如现在计划成功，待遇还是优厚的；失了这个机会，就很可惜了。
English: If the current plan succeeds, the treatment will still be generous; it would be a pity to lose this opportunity.

古文：且来君叔天下信士，朝廷重之，其意依依，常独为西州言。
现代文：且来君叔是天下的信士，朝廷敬重他，他时常为西州说话，有依依不舍之情。
English: Moreover, Uncle Lai Jun is a believer in the world, the court respects him, he often speaks for Xizhou, and has a sense of attachment.

古文：援商朝廷，尤欲立信于此，必不负约。
现代文：我猜想朝廷，尤其想立信于此事，必不至于负约。
English: I suspect that the Imperial Court, especially if it wants to place its trust in this matter, will not renege on the agreement.

古文：援不得久留，愿急赐报。
现代文：马援不会久留，愿你快点回信。 
English: Ma'an won't stay long. I hope you'll write back soon.

古文：广竟不答。
现代文：杨广竟然不答复。
English: Yang Guang did not reply at all.

古文：八年，帝自西征嚣，至漆，诸将多以王师之重，不宜远入险阻，计冘豫未决。
现代文：八年，帝亲自西征隗嚣，到达漆县，各将领都认为王师重要，不宜深入险阻，计划犹豫不决。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor personally led the West Conquest and arrived in Urushi County. The generals all thought that Wang Shi was important and that it was not appropriate to go deep into dangerous obstacles, and the plan was hesitant.

古文：会召援，夜至，帝大喜，引入，具以群议质之。
现代文：召马援，马援夜至，帝大喜，引入，就告以大家议论的意见征求他的决策。
English: Ma Yuan was summoned, Ma Yuan arrived in the evening, the emperor was overjoyed, he was ushered in, and asked for everyone's opinion to discuss his decision-making.

古文：援因说隗嚣将帅有土崩之势，兵进有必破之状。
现代文：马援因此说隗嚣将帅有土崩瓦解之势，进兵就有必破之状。
English: Ma Yuan therefore said that the clamor of the generals has the potential to collapse and disintegrate, and it is inevitable that the soldiers will enter the ranks.

古文：又于帝前聚米为山谷，指画形势，开示众军所从道径往来，分析曲折，昭然可晓。
现代文：并在帝面前聚米以为山谷模型，指画形势，指出众军应从哪条山道进去又从哪条山道出来，分析曲折，明明白白。
English: And in front of the emperor, they gathered rice to make a valley model, pointed out the situation, pointed out which mountain road the troops should enter and which mountain road they should leave, analyzed the twists and turns, and made it clear.

古文：帝曰： 虏在吾目中矣。 
现代文：帝说 ：敌虏已在我眼中了。 
English: The emperor said, "The enemy is already defeated in my eyes."

古文：明旦，遂进军至第一，嚣众大溃。
现代文：第二天早晨，就进军到第一，隗嚣众大溃。
English: The next morning, they marched to the first place and defeated the crowd.

古文：九年，拜援为太中大夫，副来歙监诸将平凉州。
现代文：九年，拜马援为太中大夫，助来歙监诸将平定凉州。
English: In the ninth year, Baima Yuan became the grand vice-premier, and helped to subdue Liangzhou.

古文：自王莽末，西羌寇边，遂入居塞内，金城属县多为虏有。
现代文：自王莽末年，西羌侵犯边境，就移居塞内，金城属县多被羌人占有。
English: Since Wang Mang's last years, when Xidi encroached on the border, he moved to Seinai. Jincheng's counties were mostly occupied by Xidi people.

古文：来歙奏言陇西侵残，非马援莫能定。
现代文：来歙奏言陇西被侵残地，非马援不能定。
English: He said that the western part of Shaanxi Province had been invaded and remained in ruins, and it was impossible to determine whether or not there would be assistance from Malaysia.

古文：十一年夏，玺书拜援陇西太守。
现代文：十一年夏，玺书拜马援为陇西太守。
English: In the summer of the eleventh year, Zou Shu Bai Ma Yuan became the governor of Shaanxi.

古文：援乃发步骑三千人，击破先零羌于临氵兆，斩首数百级，获马、牛、羊万余头。
现代文：马援就发步兵骑兵三千人，击破先零羌于临洮，斩首数百级，获马牛羊万余头。
English: Ma Yuan dispatched three thousand infantry and cavalry, defeated the first few bands in Linyi, beheaded hundreds, and won more than ten thousand heads of cattle and sheep.

古文：守塞诸羌八千余人诣援降，诣种有数万，屯聚寇抄，拒浩亹隘。
现代文：守塞羌八千多人向马援投降。有各族数万人，屯聚攻击掠夺，拒守浩隘。
English: More than 8,000 defenders of Saigon surrendered to Ma'an. Tens of thousands of people from all ethnic groups gathered to attack and plunder, refusing to defend Hoan Kiem.

古文：援与扬武将军马成击之。
现代文：马援与扬武将军马成发起攻击。
English: Ma Yuan and Yangwu General Ma Cheng launched an attack.

古文：羌因将其妻子辎重移阻于允吾谷，援乃潜行间道，掩赴其营。
现代文：羌于是将其妻子辎重移阻于允吾谷，马援偷偷走小路，突然袭击其营。
English: He then moved his wife's baggage to Yungu Valley, where Ma Yuan stole a path and suddenly attacked his camp.

古文：羌大惊坏，复远徙唐翼谷中，援复追讨之。
现代文：羌人大惊，再远迁到唐翼谷中，马援再追击。
English: To everyone's surprise, he moved further away to the middle of the Tang Valley, and Ma Yuan gave chase.

古文：羌引精兵聚北山上，援陈军向山，而分遣数百骑绕袭其后，乘夜放火，击鼓叫噪，虏遂大溃，凡斩首千余级。
现代文：羌引精兵屯北山上，马援陈军向上，而分遣数百骑绕到羌兵背后，乘夜放火，击鼓呼叫，羌兵大溃，共斩首千余级。
English: Gong led the elite soldiers to the north hill, Ma assisted Chen's army to go up, and dispatched hundreds of horsemen to go around behind the Gong soldiers, setting fire at night, beating drums, and routing the Gong soldiers, with a total of more than a thousand heads.

古文：援以兵少，不得穷追，收其谷粮畜产而还。
现代文：马援以兵少，不得穷追，收其粮谷畜产而回。
English: As Ma Yuan had few soldiers, he could not pursue them relentlessly, and returned to collect his grain, grain and livestock.

古文：援中矢贯胫，帝以玺书劳之，赐牛、羊数千头，援尽班诸宾客。
现代文：马援被羌人射穿小腿，帝以玺书慰劳，赐牛羊数千头，马援尽分发给各宾客。
English: Ma Yuan was shot through the calf, and the emperor consoled him with a letter of condolence, and gave him thousands of cattle and sheep. Ma Yuan was distributed to all the guests.

古文：是时，朝臣以金城破羌之西，涂远多寇，议欲弃之。
现代文：这时，朝臣以金城在破羌之西，路途遥远又多盗寇，商议想放弃掉。
English: At this time, the courtier wanted to give up the idea of negotiating with Jincheng in the west of the ruined city, where the road was far and there were many robbers.

古文：援上言，破羌以西城多完牢，易可依固；其田土肥壤，灌溉流通。
现代文：马援上书说，破羌以西城多完好牢固，易于防守；其田土肥壤，灌溉流通。
English: Ma Yuan said in his petition that the broken reed and the west city are mostly intact and solid, easy to defend; its fields are fertile soil, irrigation circulation.

古文：如令羌在湟中，则为害不休，不可弃也。
现代文：如让羌人在湟中，那就为害不止，不可放弃。
English: If you let a deaf person in the cocoon, it will do more harm than good, and you must not give up.

古文：帝然之，于是诏武威太守，令悉还金城客民。
现代文：帝同意，于是诏武威太守，令在武威的金城客民都回金城去。
English: The emperor agreed, so he issued an edict to the governor of Wuwei, ordering the Qincheng guests in Wuwei to return to Qincheng.

古文：归者三千余口，使各反旧邑。
现代文：归者三千余口，使他们都回到自己原来的旧邑去。
English: There are more than three thousand returnees, so they all go back to their original old towns.

古文：援奏为置长吏，缮城郭，起坞候，开导水田，劝以耕牧，郡中乐业。
现代文：马援奏表他们派置长吏，修缮城郭，建立小城镇，开导水田，劝以耕牧，郡中得以安居乐业。
English: They appointed officials, repaired the castle, established small towns, opened up paddy fields, and encouraged farming and animal husbandry, so that the county could live and work in peace.

古文：又遣羌豪杨封譬说塞外羌，皆来和亲。
现代文：又遣羌族富豪杨封晓谕劝说塞外羌民，都来和亲。
English: He also sent Yang Fengxiao, a wealthy member of the Yao tribe, to persuade the Yao people outside of Tibet to make peace with their relatives.

古文：又武都氐人背公孙述来降者，援皆上复其侯王君长，赐印绶，帝悉从之。
现代文：又武都氏人背叛公孙述来投降的，马援都奏请恢复他们的侯王君长，赐给印绶，帝都照准。
English: In addition, when the Wu Du clan betrayed the Gong Sun and surrendered, Ma Yuan Du requested that their princes and kings be restored, granted the seal, and the emperor agreed.

古文：乃罢马成军。
现代文：撤消马成军。
English: Withdraw Ma Chengjun.

古文：十三年，武都参狼羌与塞外诸种为寇，杀长吏。
现代文：十三年，武都参狼羌与塞外诸族为寇，杀长吏。
English: In the thirteenth year, the armed forces joined forces with other ethnic groups outside of Tibet and killed the chieftains.

古文：援将四千余人击之，至氐道县，羌在山上，授军据便地，夺其水草，不与战，羌遂穷困，豪帅数十万户亡出塞，诸种万余人悉降，于是陇右清静。
现代文：马援率领四千余人攻击他们，到了氐道县，羌在山上，马援军占据有利地形，夺了羌军的水草，不与他们交战，羌军就穷困了，富豪们率领数十万户逃出塞外，诸族万余人全部投降，于是陇右就清静了。
English: Ma's reinforcements led more than four thousand people to attack them. When they arrived at Shantou County, they camped in the mountains. Ma's reinforcements occupied favorable terrain and seized the water and grass of the Shan army. If they did not fight with them, the Shan army would be impoverished. The rich people led hundreds of thousands of households to escape from the province, and more than ten thousand people of all ethnic groups surrendered, so the Shan right was quiet.

古文：援务开恩信，宽以待下，任吏以职，但总大体而已。
现代文：马援注重广开恩信，宽以待下，按职务任吏，而他自己则只抓大事而已。
English: Ma'an pays attention to the wide opening of the letter of gratitude, is patient, and appoints officials according to their duties, while he himself only pays attention to important matters.

古文：宾客故人，日满其门。
现代文：宾客故人，日渐集中到他的门下。
English: The guests of the deceased, increasingly concentrated at his door.

古文：诸曹时白外事，援辄曰： 此丞、掾之任，何足相烦。
现代文：属官们有时谈到外面的事，马援总是说： 这是长史、掾史们的任务，不用告诉我。
English: When the subordinate officials sometimes talked about external affairs, Ma Yuan always said: "This is the task of the Long History and Historians, you don't have to tell me."

古文：颇哀老子，使得遨游。
现代文：哀怜老子，使得清闲游乐。
English: Pity the old man, make leisure fun.

古文：若大姓侵小民，黠羌欲旅距，此乃太守事耳。 
现代文：如果是大姓欺侮小民，狡黠的羌民不服从，那是太守的事罢了。 
English: If it is a case of a senior official bullying a minor, or a cunning person forcing people to disobey, it is just a matter for the governor.

古文：傍县尝有报仇者，吏民惊言羌反，百姓奔入城郭。
现代文：邻县曾有报仇的，吏民们惊慌失措说是羌民造了，百姓奔入城郭。
English: Neighbouring counties once had a vendetta, the officials and people panicked and said that it was created by the people, and the people rushed into the castle.

古文：狄道长诣门，请闭城发兵。援时与宾客饮，大笑曰： 烧虏何敢复犯我。
现代文：狄道长登门，请求闭城门发兵讨伐，这时马援正与宾客饮酒，大笑说： 烧羌怎敢再来进犯我。
English: Di Daochang went to the gate and asked for the gate to be closed to send troops to fight. At this time, Ma Yuan was drinking with the guests and said with a loud laugh, "How dare you come to attack me again."

古文：晓狄道长归守寺舍，良怖急者，可床下伏。 
现代文：晓谕狄道长回去守舍，胆小怕死的，可躲到床下去。 
English: Tell Di Daochang to go back and guard the house. If you are scared to death, you can hide under the bed.

古文：后稍定，郡中服之。
现代文：后来风波平静了，郡中人对马援的胆识都口服心服。
English: Later, the storm calmed down, and the people in the county were all impressed by Ma Yuan's courage.

古文：视事六年，征入为虎贲中郎将。
现代文：他在陇西视事六年，征召回去拜为虎贲中郎。
English: He served in Shaanxi Province for six years, and was called back to serve as the middle brother of Tigress.

古文：初，援在陇西上书，言宜如旧铸五铢钱。
现代文：起先，马援在陇西时曾上书，说应当像过去一样铸造五铢钱。
English: At first, Ma Yuan wrote a letter when he was in Shaanxi, saying that the five-baht coin should be minted as in the past.

古文：事下三府，三府奏以为未可许，事遂寝。乃援还，从公府求得前奏，难十余条，乃随牒解释，更具表言。
现代文：朝廷将此事转交给太尉、司徒、司空设立的府署办理，三府奏报认为不可，此事就被搁置下来，等到马援回京师，从公府求得以前三府的奏书，辩论十多条，随牒解释，再上表章申述理由。
English: The Imperial Court referred the matter to the prefectural office established by Taifu, Sito, and Sikuo for handling. The three prefectural reports considered it impossible, and the matter was put on hold until Ma Yuan returned to Beijing to obtain the reports of the three prefectures from the public office, debate more than ten articles, explain the ultimatum, and then submit a petition to explain the reasons.

古文：帝从之，天下赖其便。
现代文：帝同意了，天下赖其方便。
English: The emperor agreed, and the whole world relied on its convenience.

古文：援自还京师，数被进见。
现代文：马援自回到京师，多次被召见。
English: Ma Yuan returned to Beijing and was summoned several times.

古文：为人明须发，眉目如画，闲于进对，尤善述前世行事。
现代文：马援为人注意修饰须发，眉目容貌如画。善与人对答，特别长于讲述前世故事。
English: Ma Yuan takes care to groom his beard and hair, and his facial features are picturesque. He is good at responding to people, and is particularly good at telling stories about his previous life.

古文：每言及三辅长者，下至闾里少年，皆可观听。
现代文：每每讲到三辅长者，下至乡里少年，都很动听。
English: Every time he talked about the three auxiliary elders and the young people in the countryside, it was very moving.

古文：自皇太子、诸王侍闻者，莫不属耳忘倦。
现代文：自皇太子、诸王的侍从们听到，莫不竖耳爱听而忘倦。
English: Since the crown prince and the attendants of kings have heard it, they cannot help but prick up their ears, love to listen, and forget to get tired.

古文：又善兵策，帝常言 伏波论兵，与我意合 ，每有所谋，未尝不用。
现代文：又善于用兵方策，帝曾说： 伏波论兵，与我意见相合。 每有出谋划策，没有不被采纳的。
English: He was also good at using military strategy, and the emperor once said: "Fubo's military strategy is in line with my opinion.

古文：初，卷人维汜，訞言称神，有弟子数百人，坐伏诛。
现代文：起初，卷人维汜，妖言惑众说自己是神，有弟子数百人，都坐罪杀头。
English: In the beginning, he had hundreds of disciples, but they were all killed for their sins.

古文：后其弟子李广等宣言汜神化不死，以诳惑百姓。
现代文：后来弟子李广等宣言维汜神化不死，以诳惑百姓。
English: Later, his disciple Li Guang and others proclaimed that Wei Xuan was immortal and deified, in order to deceive the people.

古文：十七年，遂共聚会徒党，攻没晥城，杀晥侯刘闵，自称 南岳大师 。
现代文：十七年，就纠集徒党，攻下皖城，杀皖侯刘闵，自称 南岳大师 。
English: In the seventeenth year, he rallied his followers, captured Lucheng, killed Liu Ye, the lord of Lucheng, and called himself the master of Nangyue.

古文：遣谒者张宗将兵数千人讨之，复为广所败。
现代文：朝廷派谒者张宗率兵数千人讨伐，又被李广打败。
English: The imperial court sent Zhang Zong, a dissident, to lead thousands of soldiers in a crusade, but he was defeated by Li Guang.

古文：于是使援发诸郡兵，合万余人，击破广等，斩之。
现代文：于是派马援组织诸郡的兵，共一万多人，击破李广等并将他斩首。
English: As a result, more than ten thousand soldiers from all counties of the Ma'an Aid Organization were sent to defeat Li Guang and decapitate him.

古文：又交阯女子徵侧及女弟徵贰反，攻没其郡，九真、日南、合浦蛮夷皆应之，寇略岭外六十余城，侧自立为王。
现代文：又交阝止女子征侧及妹征贰造，攻下郡城，九真、日南、合浦蛮夷都响应她，侵掠岭外六十余城，征侧自立为王。
English: In addition, Jiuzhen, Nichinan, and Hapu barbarians all responded to her, invaded and plundered more than 60 cities outside the ridge, and the conquering side became the king.

古文：于是玺书拜援伏波将军，以扶乐侯刘隆为副，督楼船将军段志等南击交阯。
现代文：于是以皇帝玺书拜马援为伏波将军，以扶乐侯刘隆为副，总楼船将军段志等南征交阝止。
English: As a result, the emperor's imperial edict named Ma Yuan as the general of Fubo, Liu Long, the governor of Funen, as his deputy, and the general of the fleet, Duan Zhi, as the general of the fleet, and so on.

古文：军至合浦而志病卒，诏援并将其兵。
现代文：军到合浦而段志病逝，诏马援统率其兵。
English: When the army arrived at Hapu, Duanzhi died of illness, and Zhao Ma led his soldiers to support the unification.

古文：遂缘海而进，随山刊道千余里。
现代文：于是缘海路前进，随山开道千余里。
English: As a result, they advanced along the coast, following the mountains for more than a thousand miles.

古文：十八年春，军至浪泊上，与贼战，破之，斩首数千级，降者万余人。
现代文：十八年春，军到流泊上，与贼接战，攻破贼军。斩首数千级，降者万余人。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, the army went to Ryudomari, fought with the bandits, and defeated the bandits. Thousands were beheaded, and more than 10,000 people were demoted.

古文：援追徵侧等至禁谿，数败之，贼遂散走。
现代文：马援追征侧等至禁溪，几次打败贼军，贼于是分散逃走。
English: Ma Yuan waited for the pursuing side to reach the Forbidden Creek, defeated the thief army several times, and the thieves dispersed and fled.

古文：明年正月，斩徵侧、徵贰，传首洛阳。
现代文：第二年正月斩征侧、征贰，把首级带到洛阳。
English: In the first month of the second year, he cut off the side of the enlistment and the enlistment, and brought the head to Luoyang.

古文：封援为新息侯，食邑三千户。
现代文：封马援为新息侯，食邑三千户。
English: Fongma Yuan is a new county seat, with 3,000 households in the county.

古文：援乃击牛酾酒，劳飨军士。
现代文：马援就杀牛斟酒，慰劳军士。
English: Ma Yuan killed a cow, poured wine, and consoled the labor sergeant.

古文：从容谓官属曰： 吾从弟少游常哀吾慷慨多大志，曰： 士生一世，但取衣食裁足，乘下泽车，御款段马，为郡掾史，守坟墓，乡里称善人，斯可矣。
现代文：从容地对官属们说： 我的从弟少游常哀我慷慨多大志，说 士生一世，只要有吃有穿，能乘坐在沼泽中行走的短毂车，驾御着行动缓慢的马，做一个郡的掾史，守住祖先的坟墓，乡里人都称赞说是个好人，这样就可以了。
English: He calmly said to the officials: My younger brother, Shao You, often laments my generosity and great ambition, saying that as long as the first generation of judges have food and clothing, they can take a short-wheeled cart that sits in the swamp and drives a slow-moving horse, make a county history, guard the graves of their ancestors, and the villagers are praised as a good man, so that's fine.

古文：致求盈余，但自苦耳。
现代文：至于追求更多的东西，那就是自找苦吃了。 
English: As for the pursuit of more things, that is self-inflicted suffering.

古文：当吾在浪泊、西里间，虏未灭之时，下潦上雾，毒气重蒸，仰视飞鸢跕跕堕水中，卧念少游平生时语，何可得也！
现代文：当我在浪泊、西里之间，贼未灭之时，下面是水上面是雾，毒气熏蒸，仰望天上巨鹰踮踮坠落水中，回想少游平生对我说的话，真不知怎样才能得到呢！
English: When I was between Nampo and Xili, when the thief was not extinguished, below was water, above was fog, poison gas fumigation, looking up at the sky, the giant eagle's beak fell into the water, recalling what Shao Yu told me in my lifetime, I really don't know how to get it!

古文：今赖士大夫之力，被蒙大恩，猥先诸君纡佩金紫，且喜且惭。 
现代文：如今幸赖大家的共同努力，被蒙大恩，侥幸在诸君之先封侯晋爵，我真是既高兴又惭愧啊。 
English: Now, thanks to everyone's joint efforts, I have been blessed with great grace, and I was lucky enough to be the first to be made a Marquis. I am really both happy and ashamed.

古文：吏士皆伏称万岁。
现代文：吏士们都伏地称万岁。
English: The magistrates all bowed down and said hooray.

古文：援将楼船大小二千余艘，战士二万余人，进击九真贼徵侧余党都羊等，自无功至居风，斩获五千余人，峤南悉平。
现代文：马援楼船大小二千余艘，战士两万多人，进击九真贼征侧余党都羊等，从无功到居风，斩获五千多人，岭南全部平定。
English: There were more than two thousand ships of the size of Ma Yuan Lou, more than twenty thousand soldiers, and more than five thousand people were captured in the attack on the Nine Thieves and the rest of the party and the sheep, from futile to successful, and all of Lingnan was pacified.

古文：援奏言西于县户有三万二千，远界去庭千余里，请分为封溪、望海二县，许之。
现代文：马援奏言西于县有三万二千户，边界离县庭一千多里，请分划为封溪、望海二县，帝同意了。
English: Ma Yuan said that there are 32,000 households in Xiyu County, and the border is more than 1,000 miles away from the county seat. Please divide it into two counties, Fongxi and Wanghai. The emperor agreed.

古文：援所过辄为郡县治城郭，穿渠灌溉，以利其民。
现代文：马援每到一处都为郡县治城郭，挖渠灌溉，以利其民。
English: In each place, Ma Yuan governed the county, dug canals for irrigation to benefit his people.

古文：条奏越律与汉律驳者十余事，与越人申明旧制以约束之，自后骆越奉行马将军故事。
现代文：又奏明越律与汉律不完全相同的十几件事，与越人申明旧的制度来加以约束，自此以后骆越都遵守马将军旧制。
English: He also reported more than a dozen cases in which the Viet Law was not exactly the same as the Han Law, and the Viet people affirmed the old system to restrict it. Since then, the Luo and Viet have all adhered to the old system of General Ma.

古文：二十年秋，振旅还京师，军吏经瘴疫死者十四五。赐援兵车一乘，朝见位次九卿。
现代文：二十年秋，整顿军旅回京师，军吏经瘴疫病死的十有四五，赏赐马援兵车一乘，朝见时地位仅次于九卿。
English: In the autumn of the 20th year, the rectification of the military trip back to Beijing division, the military officials died after the epidemic of cholera, and were rewarded with a horse-drawn ambulance, and their status was second only to that of the nine nobles.

古文：援好骑，善别名马，于交阯得骆越铜鼓，乃铸为马式，还上之。
现代文：马援喜爱骑马，善于识别名马，在交阝止得到骆越铜鼓，就以之铸造马的模型，回后献给了皇帝。
English: Ma Yuan loved to ride horses and was good at identifying famous horses. He obtained a Luo Yue bronze drum at the end of a quarrel and used it to cast a model of a horse, which he later presented to the emperor.

古文：因表曰： 夫行天莫如龙，行地莫如马。
现代文：并上表章说 ：在天上走莫如龙，在地上走莫如马。
English: And the last chapter says: "It is impossible to walk in the sky like a dragon, or on the earth like a horse."

古文：马者甲兵之本。国之大用。
现代文：马是兵甲战争的根本，国家的大用。
English: The horse is the foundation of armored warfare and the great use of the country.

古文：安宁则以别尊卑之序，有变则以济远近之难。
现代文：国家太平时可用以识别尊卑顺序，国家有变乱时可以克服远近的患难。
English: When the country is at peace, it can be used to identify the order of superiority and inferiority, and when the country is in turmoil, it can overcome near and far difficulties.

古文：昔有骐骥，一日千里，伯乐见之，昭然不惑。
现代文：过去有麒麟，一日可行千里，伯乐见了，明白不疑。
English: In the past, there was a unicorn that could travel a thousand miles in a day, and Bo was happy to see it, no doubt.

古文：近世有西河子舆，亦明相法。
现代文：近代有西河子舆，也明相法。
English: In modern times, there is Saigawa Zi Myou and Ming phase method.

古文：子舆传西河仪长孺，长孺传茂陵丁君都，君群传成纪杨子阿，臣援尝师事子阿，受相马骨法。
现代文：子舆传给了西河仪长孺，长孺传给了茂陵丁君都，君都传给了成纪杨子阿，我曾经拜子阿为师，接受了相马骨法。
English: Zoumou was passed down to Xihe Yi Changyu, Changyu was passed down to Maolin Ding Jundu, and Jundu was passed down to Chengji Yang Zi'a. I once looked up to Zi'a as a teacher and received the Soma bone method.

古文：考之于行事，辄有验效。
现代文：在事实上考验，时见功效。
English: When tested in reality, it works.

古文：臣愚以为传闻不如亲见，视景不如察形。
现代文：我以为传闻不如亲见，视影不如察形。
English: I thought that hearsay is not as good as seeing in person, and seeing is not as good as observing.

古文：今欲形之于生马，则骨法难备具，又不可传之于后。
现代文：今想以活马为形，则骨法难备于一马之身，又不可传于后世。
English: Now, if you want to make a living horse, the bone method is difficult to prepare in a horse's body, and it cannot be passed on to future generations.

古文：孝武皇帝时，善相马者东门京铸作铜马法献之，有诏立马于鲁班门外，则更名鲁班门曰金马门。
现代文：孝武皇帝时，善相马者东门京，铸作铜马法献上，皇帝下诏把此马立于鲁班门外，并把鲁班门改名为金马门。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, a good friend of the horse presented a bronze horse outside the East Gate of Beijing. The emperor ordered that the horse be placed outside the Luban Gate, and the Luban Gate was renamed the Golden Horse Gate.

古文：臣谨依仪氏〈革奇〉，中帛氏口齿，谢氏唇鬐，丁氏身中，备此数家骨相以为法。 
现代文：我现在严谨地依据仪氏的马络头，中帛氏的口齿，谢氏的嘴唇马鬣，丁氏的身中，把这数家骨相集中在一个模型上以为法度。 
English: I am now rigorously basing on Yi's horsehair head, Zhongluo's mouth, Xie's lips, and Ding's body, and I think it is reasonable to concentrate these several bone phases on one model.

古文：马高三尺五寸，围四尺五寸，有诏置于宣德殿下，以为名马式焉。
现代文：马高三尺五寸，宽四尺五寸。帝下诏立此马模型于宣德殿下，以作为名马的标准模式。
English: The horse is three feet five inches tall and four feet five inches wide. The emperor gave this horse model to His Imperial Highness Emperor Xuande to serve as the standard model for famous horses.

古文：初，援军还，将至，故人多迎劳之。平陵人孟冀，名有计谋，于坐贺援。
现代文：起初，马援军回来，将到，朋友故旧多欢迎慰劳，平陵人孟冀，以有计谋著名，在坐贺马援。
English: At first, the horse reinforcements came back and were about to arrive, and the old friends mostly welcomed the consolation. Meng Jie, a Pingling man famous for his cunning, was congratulating the horse reinforcements.

古文：援谓之曰： 吾望子有善言，反同众人邪？
现代文：马援对他说： 我希望你有善言勉励我，你反而同众人一样么？
English: Ma Yuan said to him, "I hope you have some kind words to encourage me, but are you just like everyone else?

古文：昔伏波将军路博德开置七郡，裁封数百户；今我微劳，猥飨大县，功薄赏厚，何以能长久乎？
现代文：过去伏波将军路博德开置七郡，才封了数百户；现在我只有微小功劳，却食邑三千户，功劳小赏赐厚，何以能长久呢？
English: In the past, Fubo General Lubo Bode opened seven counties, only to seal hundreds of households; now I only have a small merit, but I have eaten three thousand households, the merit is small and the reward is rich, how can I last long?

古文：先生奚用相济？ 
现代文：先生有什么能帮助我呢？ 
English: What can you do to help me?

古文：冀曰： 愚不及。 
现代文：孟冀说 ：我没有想到。 
English: Meng Jie said: I didn't think of it.

古文：援曰： 方今匈奴、乌桓尚扰北边，欲自请击之。男儿要当死于边野，以马革裹尸还葬耳，何能卧床上在儿女子手中邪！ 
现代文：马援说： 现在匈奴、乌桓还在北部侵扰，我想请求去讨伐，男儿应当死于边野，以马革裹着尸体回来安葬，哪能睡在床上守着妻子儿女呢？ 
English: Ma Yuan said, "Now that the Xiongnu and Wuhuan are still invading the north, I would like to ask you to go to the battlefield. Men should die in the fields and return with their bodies wrapped in horse leather to be buried. How can you sleep in bed and protect your wife and children?"

古文：冀曰： 谅为烈士，当如此矣 
现代文：孟冀说 ：真正的烈士，应当是这样的。 
English: Meng Jie said: A true martyr should be like this.

古文：还月余，会匈奴、乌桓寇扶风，援以三辅侵扰，园陵危逼，因请行，许之。
现代文：回来后一个多月，恰逢匈奴、乌桓侵犯扶风，马援以三辅侵骚，园陵危逼，请求出兵，被准许。
English: More than a month after returning, when the Xiongnu and Wuhuan encroached on Fufeng, Ma'an encroached on Sanfu, and the garden was in danger, he requested to send troops and was granted.

古文：自九月至京师，十二月复出屯襄国。
现代文：自九月到京，十二月又出兵屯襄国。
English: He arrived in Beijing in September, and in December he sent troops to Xiangyang Province.

古文：诏百官祖道。援谓黄门郎梁松、窦固曰： 凡人为贵，当使可贱，如卿等欲不可复贱，居高坚自持，勉思鄙言。 
现代文：诏百官饯行，马援对黄门郎梁松、窦固说： 凡人成显贵，也要能成贫贱，如果你们不能再贫贱，处在高位上要能自持自控，我劝你们想到我的嘱咐。 
English: When the hundred officials were leaving, Ma Yuan said to Huangmen Lang, Liang Song and Dou Gu: Ordinary people can become poor when they become prominent. If you can no longer be poor, you should be able to maintain self-control when you are in a high position. I advise you to think about my instructions.

古文：松后果以贵满致灾，固亦几不免。
现代文：梁松后来果然以过贵遭灾，窦固也差点不免。
English: Liang Song later died in prison because he was complacent with his prominent position and committed defamation. Dou Gu was also implicated by his brother and could hardly be spared.

古文：明年秋，援乃将三千骑出高柳，行雁门、代郡、上谷障塞。
现代文：第二年秋，马援就率三千骑出高柳，行雁门、代郡、上谷等边塞。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Ma Yuan led three thousand horsemen out of Gaoliu to march to the border fortresses such as Ganmen, Daigun, and Shanggu.

古文：乌桓候者见汉军至，虏遂散去，援无所得而还。
现代文：乌桓探马见汉军到，便逃散了，马援无所得而回。
English: Seeing the arrival of the Han army, Wu Kuan's horse ran away, and Ma Yuan returned with nothing.

古文：援尝有疾，梁松来候之，独拜床下，援不答。
现代文：马援曾经卧病，梁松来问候，拜见于床下，马援不答礼。
English: Ma Yuan used to be ill, Liang Song came to greet him, and they met under the bed, but Ma Yuan did not return the salute.

古文：松去后，诸子问曰： 梁伯孙帝婿，贵重朝廷，公卿已下莫不惮之，大人奈何独不为礼？ 
现代文：梁松去后，儿子们问道 ：梁松是帝的女婿，贵重朝廷，公卿以下莫不害怕，大人为何独不答礼他？ 
English: After Liang Song left, his sons asked: Liang Song is the emperor's son-in-law, he is valuable to the imperial court, he is not afraid of nobles, why don't the adults bow to him?

古文：援曰： 我乃松父友也。虽贵，何得失其序乎？ 
现代文：马援说 ：我是梁公父亲的朋友，虽贵，怎能失掉长幼的辈份呢？ 
English: Ma Yuan said, "I am a friend of Liang Gong's father. Although I am expensive, how can I lose the senior and junior generations?

古文：松由是恨之。
现代文：松由此恨马援。
English: As a result, Song came to hate Ma'an.

古文：二十四年，武威将军刘尚击武陵五溪蛮夷，深入，军没，援因复请行。
现代文：二十四年，武威将军刘尚击武陵五溪蛮夷，深入，军队遭到覆灭，马援因此又请求出兵。
English: In the 24th year, Wuwei General Liu Shang attacked Wuling Wuxi and penetrated deeply, the army was destroyed, and Ma Yuan therefore requested the dispatch of troops.

古文：时年六十二，帝愍其老，未许之。
现代文：马援这时已六十二岁，帝怜他年老，不同意。
English: Ma Yuan was sixty-two years old at the time, and the emperor, who pitied him for his old age, did not agree.

古文：援自请曰： 臣尚能披甲上马。 帝令试之。
现代文：马援自请说： 臣还能披甲上马。 帝令他试试。
English: Ma Yuan said to himself, "The minister can still put on armor and mount a horse. The emperor ordered him to try."

古文：援据鞍顾眄，以示可用。
现代文：马援在马上据着马鞍左顾右盼，以表明可用。
English: On the horse, Ma'an is leaning on the saddle, looking left and right to show that she is available.

古文：帝笑曰： 瞿铄哉是翁也！ 
现代文：帝笑着说 ：这个老头好健康啊！ 
English: The emperor smiled and said, "This old man is so healthy!"

古文：遂遣援率中郎将马武、耿舒、刘匡、孙永等，将十二郡募士及弛刑四万余人征五溪。
现代文：于是派遣马援率领中郎将马武、耿舒、刘匡、孙永等。率领从十二个郡招募来的士兵及解除枷锁的刑徒四万多人征五溪。
English: So he dispatched Ma Yuan, led by Zhong Lang, to recruit Ma Wu, Geng Shu, Liu Kuang, Sun Yong, etc. He led more than 40,000 soldiers recruited from 12 counties and prisoners released from shackles to conquer Wuxi.

古文：援夜与送者诀，谓友人谓者杜愔曰： 吾受厚恩，年迫余日索，常恐不得死国事。今获所愿，甘心瞑目，但畏长者家儿或在左右，或与从事，殊难得调，介介独恶是耳。 
现代文：马援夜间与送行的人诀别，告友人谒者杜谙说 ：我受厚恩，年龄紧迫余日已经不多，时常以不能死于国事而恐惧，现在获得出征机会，死了也心甘瞑目，害怕的是一些长者家儿或在左右，或参与后事，特别难以调遣，我独为此耿耿于心啊。 
English: At night, Ma Yuan bid farewell to those who were escorting him, and said to his friend Du Juan, who was absent, "I have received many favors, I am getting old, and I do not have much time left. I often feared that I would not be able to die in national affairs. Now that I have the opportunity to go to war, I am willing to die. What I am afraid of is that some elderly people are either around, or involved in the aftermath. It is particularly difficult to maneuver. I am only concerned about this.

古文：明年春，军至临乡，遇贼攻县，援迎击，破之，斩获二千余人，皆散走入竹林中。
现代文：第二年春，军到临乡，遇贼攻县城，马援往迎击，破贼，斩获二千余人，贼都分散走入到竹林中去了。
English: In the spring of the second year, the army arrived in Linxiang, encountered thieves attacking the county seat, horses went to meet the attack, broke the thieves, and captured more than two thousand people. The thieves all dispersed into the bamboo forest.

古文：初，军次下隽，有两道可人，从壶头则路近而水崄，从充则涂夷而运远，帝初以为疑。
现代文：起初，军抵下隽，有两条路可进入，一条从壶头进入路近但水险，一条从充县进入路宽敞安全但运输路程远，帝开始有点怀疑。
English: At first, the army arrived at the lower moat, there were two roads to enter, one from the kettle head into the road is close but water hazard, one from the county into the road is spacious and safe but the transportation distance is far, the emperor began to be a little suspicious.

古文：及军至，耿舒欲从充道，援以为弃日费粮，不如进壶头，扼其喉咽，充贼自破。
现代文：等到军到，耿舒要从充县而入，马援以为路远拖延时间长而费粮多，不如从壶头进，扼其咽喉，充贼自破。
English: When the army arrived, Geng Shu wanted to enter from Chengxian. Ma Yuan thought that the road was far away, the delay time was long, and the cost of grain was more. It was better to enter from the pot head, strangle his throat, and break the thief.

古文：以事上之，帝从援策。
现代文：以此奏帝，帝从马援策。
English: In this way, the emperor plays a supporting role.

古文：三月，进营壶头。
现代文：三月，进军壶头。
English: In March, they marched into Hukutou.

古文：贼乘高守隘，水疾，船不得上。
现代文：贼乘高扼守险隘，因水流过速，船不能上。
English: Thieves ride high to guard the narrow straits, because the water flow is too fast, the boat can not be boarded.

古文：会暑甚，士卒多疫死，援亦中病，遂困，乃穿岸为室，以避炎气。
现代文：恰逢酷暑，士卒多患病而死，马援自己也患了病，于是受困，就在河岸凿洞为室，以避酷暑。
English: Coinciding with the intense heat, many of the soldiers fell ill and died, and Ma Yuan himself also fell ill, so he was stranded and dug a hole on the riverbank to shelter from the intense heat.

古文：贼每升险鼓噪，援辄曳足以观之，左右哀其壮意，莫不为之流涕。
现代文：贼每每升到险处击鼓叫喊，马援常拖着病腿去察看，左右被他这种壮志所感动，莫不为之流涕。
English: Every time the thief climbed to a dangerous place, he beat the drum and shouted. Ma Yuan often dragged his sick leg to inspect it. He was moved by this kind of ambition and could not help but shed tears.

古文：耿舒与兄好畤侯弇书曰： 前舒上书当先击充，粮虽难运而兵马得用，军人数万争欲先奋。
现代文：耿舒与兄好侯耿书信说 ：前次我上书建议当先进攻充县，粮虽难运而兵马得以展开使用，军人数万争先奋进。
English: Geng Shu and his brother Geng Hou wrote a letter saying: The last time I wrote a letter, I suggested that we should attack Chengxian first. Although the grain was difficult, the soldiers and horses were able to use it, and tens of thousands of soldiers rushed forward.

古文：今壶头竟不得进，大众怫郁行死，诚可痛惜。
现代文：今困在壶头不得进，大众忧郁将死，实可痛惜。
English: Now we are stuck at the bottom of the pot, unable to get in, and the public is dying of melancholy, which is a real pity.

古文：前到临乡，贼无故自致，若夜击之，即可殄灭。
现代文：前次到临乡，贼无故自己到来，当时如果乘夜攻击，就可消灭掉。
English: The last time I was in Linxiang, the thieves came by themselves without any reason. At that time, if they attacked at night, they could be eliminated.

古文：伏波类西域贾胡，到一处辄止，以是失利。
现代文：伏波用兵像西域的贾胡，到一处后就止步不前，因此失利。
English: Fubo's soldiers are like the Jahu of the western region. When they get to a certain place, they stop moving and therefore lose.

古文：今果疾疫，皆如舒言。 弇得书，奏之。
现代文：今果然困于疾疫，都如我所预言的一样。 
English: Now I am stuck with the disease, just as I predicted.

古文：帝乃使虎贲中郎将梁松乘驿责问援，因代监军。
现代文：好侯得书，奏于帝，帝就派虎贲中郎将梁松从驿道责问马援，且代为监军。
English: The emperor sent the middle brother of the Tiger Clan to ask Liang Song for help and act as a supervisor of the troops.

古文：会援病卒，松宿怀不平，遂因事陷之。
现代文：恰逢马援病逝，梁松因以前看望马援疾病时马援不答礼而怀恨在心，于是借机陷害马援。
English: Coinciding with Ma Yuan's death from illness, Liang Song took the opportunity to frame Ma Yuan because he held a grudge against Ma Yuan for not returning his compliments when he visited Ma Yuan during his illness.

古文：帝大怒，追收援新息侯印绶。
现代文：帝大怒，追收马援的新息侯印绶。
English: The emperor was furious, and the new governor, Hou Yingxuan, went after Ma Yuan.

古文：初，兄子严、敦并喜讥议，而通轻侠客。
现代文：起初，马援兄之子马严、马敦都喜欢讥议时事，而与侠客们轻相交往。
English: At first, Ma Yan and Ma Dun, the sons of Ma Yuan's elder brother, both liked to ridicule current affairs, and lightly interacted with the knights.

古文：援前在交阯，还书诫之曰： 吾欲汝曹闻人过失，如闻父母之名，耳可得闻，口不可得言也。
现代文：马援以前在交阝止，写信回家训诫道： 我想你们听到人家过失，要像听父母之名一样，耳可以听到，口不可说啊。
English: Ma Yuan used to stop communicating with others, and wrote home to admonish: I think that when you hear people's faults, you should be like listening to the names of your parents. Your ears should be able to hear, but your mouth should not speak.

古文：好论议人长短，妄是非正法，此吾所大恶也，宁死不愿闻子孙有此行也。
现代文：喜欢议论人的长短，乱讥刺时政，这是我最厌恶的，我是宁肯死也不愿听到子孙们有这种行为的。
English: I like to discuss the merits and demerits of people, and mock current politics. This is what I detest the most. I would rather die than hear my children and grandchildren behave like this.

古文：汝曹知吾恶之甚矣，所以复言者，施衿结衤离，申父母之戒，欲使汝曹不忘之耳。
现代文：你们知道我非常厌恶此事，我之所以要再次讲到此事要像男女婚嫁时施衿结衤离一样，申明父母的训诫，要使你们牢记不忘。
English: You know that I detest this very thing, and the reason I am bringing it up again is to remind you of your parents' admonition, just as a man and woman should separate when they get married.

古文：龙伯高敦厚周慎，口无择言，谦约节俭，廉公有威，吾爱之重之，愿汝曹效之。
现代文：龙伯高敦厚周到谨慎，口无异言，谦约节俭，清廉公正有威望，我很爱他敬重他，愿你们向他学习。
English: Long Bo Gaodun is thoughtful and prudent, he never utters a word, he is modest and thrifty, he is honest and fair, and he has prestige. I love him and respect him very much. I hope you can learn from him.

古文：杜季良豪侠好义，忧人之忧，乐人之乐，清浊无所失，父丧致客，数郡毕至，吾爱之重之，不愿汝曹效也。
现代文：杜季良豪侠好讲义气，忧人之忧，乐人之乐，好人坏人都合得来，父亲死了，几个郡的人都来吊唁，我爱他敬重他，但不愿你们向他学习。
English: Dujiliang Hero is good at conveying the spirit of righteousness, the sorrow of the people, the joy of the people, the good people and the bad people are compatible, his father died, people from several counties came to offer condolences, I love him and respect him, but I don't want you to learn from him.

古文：效伯高不得，犹为谨敕之士，所谓刻鹄不成尚类鹜者也。
现代文：学习龙伯高不到家，还是一个谨慎勤勉的人，所谓雕刻鸿鹄不成可以像一只鹜哩。
English: He is a cautious and diligent person when he is not at home, and the so-called carving giant can be like a dragonfly.

古文：效季良不得，陷为天下轻薄子，所谓画虎不成反类狗者也。
现代文：学习杜季良不到家，就堕落成为天下的轻薄儿，所谓画虎不成反像犬了。
English: If you don't study Dudilyang until you get home, you will fall into the world of frivolity, and the so-called painting tiger will become like a dog.

古文：迄今季良尚未可知，郡将下车辄切齿，州郡以为言，吾常为寒心，是以不愿子孙效也。 
现代文：到现在为止杜季良还不可知，郡里的将领们一下车就切齿恨他，州郡都说他，我常为他寒心，所以我不愿子孙们学他。 
English: Up to now, Dudilya is still unknown, the generals in the county hate him with all their teeth as soon as they get off the train, the state and county all say that he is, I often feel cold for him, so I don't want my children and grandchildren to learn from him.

古文：季良名保，京兆人，时为越骑司马。
现代文：杜季良名保，京兆人，当时是越骑司马。
English: Du Jiliang Mingbao, a resident of Beijing and Shandong Province, was a yue jockey at that time.

古文：保仇人上书，讼保 为行浮薄，乱群惑众，伏波将军万里还书以诫兄子，而梁松、窦固以之交结，将扇其轻伪，败乱诸夏 。
现代文：杜季良仇人上书，状告他 行为轻薄，乱群惑众，伏波将军从万里外写信回来以他训诫兄子，而梁松、窦固与之交往，将煽动轻佻虚伪，败乱我中华。 
English: Du Jiliang's enemies wrote to him, accusing him of frivolous behavior and misleading the public. General Fubo wrote back from thousands of miles away to reprimand his brother, and Liang Song and Dou Gu interacted with him, inciting frivolity and hypocrisy, and ruining my China.

古文：书奏，帝召责松、固，以讼书及援诫书示之，松、固叩头流血，而得不罪。
现代文：书奏，帝召梁松、窦固而责让，以状纸和马援诫书给他们看，梁松、窦固叩头流血，而得以不加罪。
English: The emperor summoned Liang Song and Dou Gu and ordered them to surrender. He showed them the paper and the book of exhortation. Liang Song and Dou Gu bowed their heads and bled, but were not punished.

古文：诏免保官。
现代文：诏令免除杜季良官职。
English: The imperial edict removed Du Jiliang from his post.

古文：伯高名述，亦京兆人，为山都长，由此擢拜零陵太守。
现代文：龙伯高名述，也是京兆人，为山都县长，因此提升为零陵太守。
English: Long Bo Gao Mingzhu, also a native of Beijing and Shandong, was the governor of Shandu County, and was thus promoted to the position of the governor of Jilin Province.

古文：初，援在交阯，常饵薏苡实，用能轻身省欲，以胜瘴气。
现代文：起初，马援在交阝止，常吃薏米，因薏米能除瘴气，久服能轻身省欲。
English: At the beginning, Ma Yuan often ate glutinous rice, because glutinous rice can remove bad breath, and long clothing can lighten the body and reduce appetite.

古文：南方薏苡实大，援欲以为种，军还，载之一车。
现代文：南方薏苡果实大，马援想作为种子，回军时，载了一车。
English: Nanfangluo fruit large, Ma Yuanxiang as a seed, when returning to the army, carrying a car.

古文：时人以为南士珍怪，权贵皆望之。
现代文：当时人们以为这是南方土产的奇珍怪物，权贵们都观望着。
English: At the time, people thought it was a rare monster native to the south, and dignitaries looked on.

古文：援时方有宠，故莫以闻。
现代文：马援当时受帝宠信，所以没人敢报告朝廷。
English: Ma'an was favored by the emperor at the time, so no one dared to report it to the imperial court.

古文：及卒后，有上书谮之者，以为前所载还，皆明珠文犀。
现代文：等到马援死，有人上书诬告，说马援以前从南方载回来的，都是明珠彩犀一类珍宝。
English: After Ma Yuan's death, someone falsely accused him in a letter, saying that all the pearls and rhinoceroses that Ma Yuan had brought back from the south were precious treasures.

古文：马武与於陵侯侯昱等皆以章言其状，帝益怒。
现代文：马武与于陵侯侯昱等，都以奏章说明其形状，帝更怒。
English: Mawu and Yuling Hou Houjun both used musical scores to illustrate their shapes, which infuriated the emperor even more.

古文：援妻孥惶惧，不敢以丧还旧茔，裁买城西数亩地槁葬而已。
现代文：马援妻和儿子们惶恐畏惧，不敢把马援灵柩运回旧坟地安葬，只买了城西的几亩地草草埋葬了事。
English: Panicked and afraid, Ma'an's wife and sons did not dare to take Ma'an's coffin back to the old cemetery for burial. They only bought a few acres of land in the west of the city and buried it.

古文：宾客故人莫敢吊会。
现代文：宾客们也不敢去吊唁。
English: The guests didn't dare to go to the funeral.

古文：严与援妻子草索相连，诣阙请罪。帝乃出松书以示之，方知所坐，上书诉冤，前后六上，辞甚哀切，然后得葬。
现代文：马严与马援妻子草索相连，到朝廷请罪，帝拿出梁松的诬告书相示，才知是挟怨诬告，就上书诉冤，前后六次，辞意哀切，然后才得以安葬。
English: Ma Yan and Ma Yuan's wife were connected by a straw rope, and they went to the imperial court to plead guilty. The emperor took out Liang Song's false accusation letter and showed it to him. Only then did he know that it was a false accusation, and he wrote a letter to complain about his wrongdoings, six times back and forth, with a sad farewell, before being buried.

古文：又前云阳令同郡朱勃诣阙上书曰：臣闻王德圣政，不忘人之功，采其一美，不求备于众。
现代文：又前云阳令同郡朱勃向皇帝上书说： 我听说王者之德，圣人之政，不忘人的功劳，取人之一美，并不求全责备。
English: Another time, Yunyang ordered Zhu Bo from the same county to write a letter to the emperor, saying: I have heard that the king's virtue, the saint's government, does not forget people's merits, takes one's beauty, and does not seek full blame.

古文：故高祖赦蒯通而以王礼葬田横，大臣旷然，咸不自疑。
现代文：所以高祖赦免蒯通而用王礼安葬田横，大臣们心中旷然，都不自感疑惑。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gaozong pardoned Shantong and used Wang Lian to bury Tian Yang. The ministers were so excited that they didn't have any doubts.

古文：夫大将在外，谗言在内，微过辄记，大功不计，诚为国之所慎也。
现代文：大将在外，谗言在内，专门挑剔人家小过，而不计人家的大功劳，这是国家所应慎重的。
English: It is prudent for the country that generals, including the prime minister, should be especially critical of people's shortcomings, regardless of their great merits.

古文：故章邯畏口而奔楚，燕将据聊而不下。
现代文：所以章邯害怕谗言而降了项羽，燕将攻下聊城后因害怕谗言而不敢回去。
English: Therefore, Zhang Ye was afraid of Yan Yan and lowered his banner. After Yan Ye captured Liaocheng, he was afraid of Yan Yan and did not dare to go back.

古文：岂其甘心末规哉，悼巧言之伤类也。窃见故伏波将军新息侯马援，拔自西州，钦慕圣义，间关险难，触冒万死，孤立群贵之间，傍无一言之佐，驰深渊，入虎口，岂顾计哉！
现代文：难道他们是甘心出此下策吗，可恨的是巧言伤害善人啊。 我看到已故伏波将军新息侯马援，是从西州选拔出来，钦慕圣贤忠义，崎岖险难，冒着万死，孤立在群贵之间，得不到一句帮助他的话，奔驰在深渊，进入虎口，他顾计什么呢？
English: I saw the late Fubo General Xin Xi Houma Yuan, who was selected from Xizhou, admired the sages and saints, was rugged and dangerous, risked death, was isolated among the nobles, and could not get a word of help, galloped into the abyss, into the tiger's mouth, what was he thinking?

古文：宁自知当要七郡之使，徼封侯之福邪？
现代文：难道他知道要当七郡的使臣，得到封侯的福荫吗？
English: Did he know that he was to be the envoy of seven counties and receive the blessing of a feudal lord?

古文：八年，车驾西讨隗嚣，国计狐疑，众营未集，援建宜进之策，卒破西州。
现代文：八年，帝西讨隗嚣，大家都拿不定主意，众营也没有集结，马援提出进军路线并建议速进的策略，很快就攻破了西州。
English: In the year of eight, when there was an uproar in Daxi, everyone was undecided, and the battalions were not assembled. Ma Yuan proposed an advance route and suggested a fast-forward strategy, and soon broke through Xizhou.

古文：及吴汉下陇，冀路断隔，惟独狄道为国坚守，士民饥困，寄命漏刻。援奉诏西使，镇慰边众，乃招集豪杰，晓诱羌戎，谋如涌泉，势如转规，遂救倒县之急，存几亡之城，兵全师进，因粮敌人，陇、冀略平，而独守空郡，兵动有功，师进辄克。
现代文：后来吴汉攻下陇西，冀路隔绝，只有狄道为国坚守，士民又饥又困，生死存亡悬于顷刻之间，马援奉诏西使，镇慰边塞群众，于是招集豪杰，晓谕诱导羌戎，谋略像涌泉一样涌现出来，形势像转圆石于万仞之山，这才解了倒悬之急，保存了几将失去的城邑，兵全师进，就地取得粮食，使陇冀都平定了，而马援独守空郡，出兵有功，进军就克敌制胜。
English: Later, when the Western Han Dynasty was conquered by the Western Han Dynasty, Ji Road was cut off, and only Di Dao held out for the country. The scholars and the people were hungry and poor, and their lives and deaths hung in the balance. Ma Yuan sent an envoy to the Western Han Dynasty to comfort the people along the border. He then summoned great heroes, told and guided the Qiong Rong, and the strategy emerged like a gushing spring. The situation was like a turning stone in the mountains of Manchukuo. This was the only way to solve the urgent situation and save several cities that would be lost. The whole army advanced and obtained grain on the spot, so that the Western Han

古文：铢锄先零，缘入山谷，猛怒力战，飞矢贯胫。
现代文：在击破先零羌的战斗中，马援潜行山谷之中，奋怒猛战，小腿被箭射穿。
English: In the battle of breaking the first few shackles, Ma Yuan sneaked into the valley, fought furiously, and his calf was pierced by an arrow.

古文：又出征交阯，土多瘴气，援与妻子生诀，无悔吝之心，遂斩灭徵侧，克平一州，间复南讨，立陷临乡，师已有业，未竟而死，吏士虽疫，援不独存。
现代文：又出征交阝止，地多瘴气，马援与妻子离别，无悔吝苟活之心，于是斩灭征侧，使全州得到克服平定。紧接着又南讨，很快攻下临乡，师已有了业绩，但马援没有完成南讨任务就身死了，吏士们虽然罹疫，马援并没有独存。
English: He went to the south again, and soon captured Linxiang. The division had already achieved results, but Ma Yuan died before completing the southward campaign. Although the officials were infected with the disease, Ma Yuan did not survive alone.

古文：夫战或以久而立功，或以速而致败，深入未必为得，不进未必为非。
现代文：战争有时时间长而立了功，有时速进而遭到失败，深入敌境不一定就能取胜，不进不见得就错了。
English: In war, sometimes it takes a long time to achieve success, sometimes it is defeated quickly, it is not necessarily possible to win if you go deep into the enemy territory, and it is not necessarily wrong if you do not advance.

古文：人情岂乐久屯绝地，不生归哉！
现代文：人情哪个愿意久屯绝地而不想生归呢！
English: Which human being would like to stay in the wilderness for a long time and not want to return alive?

古文：惟援得事朝廷二十二年，北出塞漠，南度江海，触冒害气，僵死军事，名灭爵绝，国土不传。
现代文：只有马援在朝廷二十二年，北去边塞沙漠，南渡江海，触冒疫气，死于职事，名灭爵绝，国中不传。
English: Only Ma Yuan, in the 22nd year of the imperial court, went north to the border fortress desert, crossed the river and sea to the south, contracted the plague, died in the line of duty, his name was extinguished, and he was not passed down in the country.

古文：海内不知其过，众庶未闻其毁，卒遇三夫之言，横被诬罔之谗，家属杜门，葬不归墓，怨隙并兴，宗亲怖栗。
现代文：海内不知他有何过错，百姓没有听说他有毁伤，终于遭到小人诬罔，横遭谗害，家属闭门，葬不归墓，怨隙并兴，宗亲战栗。
English: Haiwei did not know what fault he had, and the people did not hear that he had been injured. Finally, he was falsely accused by villains and was abused, his family members closed their doors, he was not allowed to return to his grave, resentment and resentment coexisted, and his relatives trembled.

古文：死者不能自列，生者莫为之讼，臣窃伤之。夫明主醲于用赏，约于用刑。
现代文：死者不能陈述是非的实际情况，生者又没有人敢为他申冤，臣实感到悲哀。 明智的君主厚于用赏，薄于用刑。
English: The deceased could not state the actual situation of right and wrong, and the living did not dare to seek redress for him. The subjects felt sad. The wise monarch was more generous with rewards than with punishments.

古文：高祖尝与陈平金四万斤以间楚军，不问出入所为，岂复疑以钱谷间哉？
现代文：高祖曾与陈平四万斤金来贿赂离间楚军，不问这些金怎样使用，难道是疑惑这些钱谷闲着没有用处吗？
English: Gaozu and Chen Ping once took forty thousand catties of gold to bribe the disgruntled Chu army, without asking how to use this money. Is it a suspicion that these money valleys are idle and useless?

古文：夫操孔父之忠而不能自免于谗，此邹阳之所悲也。
现代文：孔子那样忠诚也不能免于季孙之谗，这是邹阳感到悲痛的。
English: As loyal as Confucius was, he was not immune to the scorn of his grandchildren, which grieved Shanyang.

古文：《诗》云： 取彼谗人，投畀豺虎。
现代文：《诗·小雅》说： 把那个诽谤者抓来，丢去喂豺狼虎豹。
English: "Poet Xiaoya" said: "Catch that slanderer and throw him away to feed the jackals and tigers."

古文：豺虎不食，投畀有北。
现代文：豺狼虎豹不吃，就丢到北国不毛之地。
English: If you don't feed the tiger, the viper will eat you.

古文：有北不受，投畀有昊。 
现代文：北国不要，说把他交给上天惩罚。 
English: Do not want to go to the north, and say that he will be punished by heaven.

古文：此言欲令上天而平其恶。
现代文：这是要让上天平息其恶。
English: This is to let the heavens calm down the evil.

古文：惟陛下留思竖儒之言，无使功臣怀恨黄泉。
现代文：诸陛下留心小子之言，不要使功臣怀恨在黄泉之下。
English: Your majesties, pay attention to the words of the boy, and do not let the hero bear a grudge under the yellows.

古文：臣闻《春秋》之义，罪以功除；圣王之祀，臣有五义。
现代文：我闻《春秋》之义，犯了罪可以将功抵罪；圣王的祭祀，臣子有五种是应祀的。
English: I have heard of the righteousness of "Spring and Autumn," and if you commit a crime, you can atone for it with merit; there are five kinds of vassals that should be worshipped in the holy king's sacrifice.

古文：若援，所谓以死勤事者也。
现代文：像马援，就是五祀中以死勤事的一种。
English: Like Ma'an, it is one of the five deities of death.

古文：愿下公卿平援功罪，宜绝宜续，以厌海内之望。臣年已六十，常伏田里，窃感栾布哭彭越之义，冒陈悲愤，战栗阙庭。
现代文：愿陛下让公卿们评价马援的功和罪，看是应该绝嗣呢还是应该续嗣，以满足海内人的愿望。 臣年已六十，常伏居田里，因感叹栾布哭祀彭越的义气，冒死痛陈悲愤。战忄栗在阙庭之上。 
English: May His Majesty let the nobles evaluate the merits and sins of Ma Yuan, and see whether he should be disinherited or whether he should be succeeded to satisfy the wishes of the people of Hainan. He has been a subject for sixty years, always living in the fields, and because of his lamentation for the loyalty of Peng Yue, he has risked death and sorrow. He is trembling in the courtyard.

古文：书奏，报，归田里。
现代文：书呈上后，报给了皇帝，朱勃就回到乡下去了。
English: After the book was submitted and reported to the emperor, Zhu Bo returned to the countryside.

古文：勃字叔阳，年十二能诵《诗》、《书》。
现代文：朱勃字叔阳，年十二岁就能朗诵《诗》、《书》。
English: Zhu Boji Shuyang, 12 years old, can recite "Poetry" and "Book."

古文：常候援兄况。
现代文：曾侍候马援兄马况。
English: He once waited on Ma Yuan's elder brother Ma Quan.

古文：勃衣方领，能矩步。辞言娴雅，援裁知书，见之自失。
现代文：朱勃穿着学者方领衣服，走路规规矩矩，言辞娴雅深静，马援刚学书文，见了自感不如。
English: Zhu Bo was wearing scholar's square-necked clothes, his walk was orderly, his speech was elegant and deep, Ma Yuangang was studying literature, and he felt inferior.

古文：况知其意，乃自酌酒慰援曰： 朱勃小器速成，智尽此耳，卒当从汝禀学，勿畏也。 
现代文：马况知他的意思，就自己酌酒安慰马援说 ：朱勃器局小，成得快，但才智就止于此了，将来当跟你学习，不要怕。 
English: The horse knew what he meant, so he consoled Ma Yuan with a drink and said: Zhu Bo's equipment is small, it is fast, but the talent stops here. In the future, you should study with you, don't be afraid.

古文：朱勃未二十，右扶风请试守渭城宰，及援为将军，封侯，而勃位不过县令。
现代文：朱年未二十，右扶风请他试做渭城县宰，后来马援做了将军，封了侯，而朱勃的官职不过是小小县令。
English: In Zhu's early twenties, Zu Fufeng asked him to try to be the governor of Shicheng County. Later, Ma Yuan made him a general and made him a marquess, while Zhu Bo's official position was just a small county magistrate.

古文：援后虽贵，常待以旧恩而卑侮之，勃愈身自亲，及援遇谗，唯勃能终焉。
现代文：马援后来虽然显贵，时常待朱勃以旧恩而卑事他，朱勃更自亲爱，待到马援遇谗害，只有朱勃挺身而出以终友谊之情。
English: Later, although Ma'an was a prominent person, he often treated Zhu Bo with old grace and treated him with contempt. Zhu Bo was even more dear to him. When Ma'an was killed, only Zhu Bo stepped forward to end the friendship.

古文：肃宗即位，追赐勃子谷二千斛。
现代文：肃宗即位，追赐朱勃儿子谷二千斛。
English: Emperor Suzong ascended to the throne and posthumously awarded Zhu Bo's son, Gu, 2,000 baht.

古文：初，援兄子婿王磐子石，王莽从兄平阿侯仁之子也。
现代文：起初，马援兄的子婿叫王盘字子石，是王莽从兄阿侯王仁的儿子。
English: At first, the son-in-law of Ma Yuan's brother was called Wang Pan Zi Shi, who was the son of Wang Meng's brother Ahou Wang Ren.

古文：莽败，磐拥富资居故国，为人尚气节而爱土好施，有名江淮间，后游京师，与卫尉阴兴，大司空朱浮、齐王章共相友善。
现代文：王莽败，王磐子石拥有财产住在故居，为人讲气节爱惜人才喜欢施舍，在江淮间有名气。后来游京师与卫尉阴兴、大司空朱浮、齐王章共相友善。
English: Wang Mangfei, Wang Iwatsishi owned property and lived in the former residence, preached the spirit of the season to the people, cherished the talents and liked to give alms, and was famous among the Jianghuai. Later, the Beijing tour guide was friendly with the guard officer Yin Xing, the chief officer Ku Zhu Fu, and Qi Wang Zhang.

古文：援谓姊子曹训曰： 王氏，废姓也。子石当屏居自守，而反游京师长者，用气自行，多所陵折，其败必也。 
现代文：马援对姐姐的儿子曹训说 ：王氏，现在是垮了台的家族，子石当隐居自守，现在他反而与京师权贵交游，用气自行其是，多有凌人之举，以后必败。 
English: Ma Yuan said to his sister's son, Cao Xun, "The Wang clan is now a ruined family. Zi Shi should live in seclusion to protect himself. Now, on the contrary, he is mingling with the Beijing masters and dignitaries, using his energy to do as he pleases. He is often domineering, and he will be defeated in the future."

古文：后岁余，磐果与司隶校尉苏邺、丁鸿事相连，坐死洛阳狱。
现代文：后一年多，王磐果与司隶校尉苏邺、丁鸿事相连累，获罪死于洛阳狱中。
English: More than a year later, Wang Bangguo was implicated in the case of Sili lieutenants Su Xi and Ding Hong, and he was convicted and died in Luoyang Prison.

古文：而磐子肃复出入北宫及王侯邸第。
现代文：王磐的儿子王肃再次出入北宫及王侯邸第。
English: Wang Yan's son Wang Su once again entered and left the North Palace and the Prince's Residence.

古文：援谓司马吕种曰； 建武之元，名为天下重开。
现代文：马援对司马吕种说： 建武之元，名为天下重开。
English: Ma Yuan said to Sima Lucheng, "The founding of Jianwu is called the reopening of the world.

古文：自今以往，海内日当安耳。
现代文：自今以后，国内将日趋安定。
English: From now on, the country will become increasingly stable.

古文：但忧国家诸子并壮，而旧防未立，若多通宾客，则大狱起矣。卿曹戒慎之！ 
现代文：可忧的是国家的诸侯王子都长大了，而诸侯王子不许私交宾客的规矩没有确立，如多通宾客，就要犯下大罪，你们要警戒慎重啊。 
English: What is worrying is that the country's princes have grown up, but the rule that princes are not allowed to have guests has not been established. If you have too many guests, you will commit a serious crime. You have to be careful.

古文：及郭后薨，有上书者，以为肃等受诛之家，客因事生乱，虑致贯高、任章之变。
现代文：等到郭后死，有人上书，认为王肃等是受诛的家室，宾客们因事生乱，恐怕将导致贯高、任章那种暗杀陛下的祸事发生。
English: When Guo Hou died, someone wrote a letter, saying that Wang Su and others were the family to be executed, and that the guests were in turmoil because of the incident. I am afraid that this will lead to the evil of assassinating His Majesty like Guan Gao and Ren Zhang.

古文：帝怒，乃下郡县收捕诸王宾客，更相牵引，死者以千数。
现代文：帝怒，下令郡县收捕王姓宾客，彼此牵累，死者以千数计。
English: Enraged by the emperor, he ordered the county to arrest the guests with the surname of Wang. They were implicated in each other, and the death toll was in the thousands.

古文：吕种亦豫其祸，临命叹曰： 马将军诚神人也！ 
现代文：吕种也连累致祸，临死前叹息说： 马将军真是神人啊！ 
English: Lyu Zeng was also implicated in causing the disaster. Before his death, he sighed and said, "General Ma is truly a man of God!

古文：永平初，援女立为皇后，显宗图画建武中名臣、列将于云台，以椒房故，独不及援。
现代文：永平初年，马援的女儿被立为皇后。显宗将光武时期的名臣列将绘成图像，列于云台。因皇后的原故，图像中独缺马援。
English: In the first year of the Yongping era, Ma Yuan's daughter was made empress. Emperor Xuanzong drew a picture of the famous vassals of the Guangwu period and listed them in Yuntai. Due to the reason of the empress, Ma Yuan was not included in the picture.

古文：东平王苍观图，言于帝曰： 何故不画伏波将军像？ 
现代文：东平王刘苍看图，对帝说： 为什么不画伏波将军的像呢？ 
English: Dongping King Liu Cang looked at the picture and said to the emperor: Why not draw a portrait of General Fubo?

古文：帝笑而不言。
现代文：帝笑而不言。
English: The emperor smiled and said nothing.

古文：至十七年，援夫人卒，乃更修封树，起祠堂。
现代文：到永平十七年，马援夫人去世，就更为其聚土为坟，植树为标记，建筑祠堂。
English: By the 17th year of Yongping, when Mrs. Ma Yuan passed away, it was even more important to gather soil as a grave, plant trees as a mark, and build an ancestral hall.

古文：建初三年，肃宗使五官中郎将持节追策，谥援曰忠成侯。
现代文：建初二年，肃宗派五官中郎将持节追加策封，谥封马援为忠成侯。
English: In the second year of the Jianchu era, the five-ranked middle-ranking official of the Su Sect will hold the additional seal of the festival, and the seal of Ma Yuan will be Zhong Cheng Hou.

古文：四子：廖、防、光、客卿。
现代文：四子：马廖、马防、马光、马客卿。
English: The four sons: Ma Liao, Ma Bo, Ma Guang, Ma Keqing.

古文：客卿幼而歧嶷，年六岁，能应接诸公，专对宾客。
现代文：马客卿幼年聪慧，年六岁，能应接诸公长者，独立酬宾客。
English: Ma Keqing was an intelligent child, six years old. He was able to receive guests independently.

古文：尝有死罪亡命者来过，客卿逃匿不令人知。
现代文：曾有犯了死罪的亡命徒来看他，客卿躲避起来不让人知道。
English: Once, an outlaw who had committed a capital crime came to see him, but he avoided letting anyone know.

古文：外若讷而内沈敏。
现代文：外表看来不善于言辞而内质沉着机敏。
English: Outwardly he is not good at rhetoric, but inwardly he is calm and quick-witted.

古文：援甚奇之，以为将相器，故以客卿字焉。
现代文：马援很赞赏他，以为是将相的材料，所以取名为客卿。
English: Ma Yuan appreciated him very much and thought that he was the material for the portrait, so he named him Hakka Ching.

古文：援卒后，客卿亦夭没。
现代文：马援去世后，客卿也夭折早死。
English: After Ma Yuan's death, Prince Hakka also died prematurely.

古文：论曰：马援腾声三辅，遨游二帝，及定节立谋，以干时主，将怀负鼎之愿，盖为千载之遇焉。
现代文：史官评论道：马援腾声名于三辅，周旋于二帝，至定计立谋，以辅佐天子，怀着为国效劳的愿望累立战功，这是千载一时的机遇啊。
English: The historian commented, "Ma Yuanteng was famous for the Three Assistants, negotiated with the two emperors, and made a determined plan to assist the Son of God, and with the desire to serve the country, he made war exploits. This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity."

古文：然其戒人之祸，智矣，而不能自免于谗隙。
现代文：然马援戒人之祸，是很明智的。但他却不能自免于谗隙。
English: It is wise for the horse to help and warn the people, but he cannot help himself.

古文：岂功名之际，理固然乎？
现代文：难道功名之际，就是这么一条规律吗？
English: Is it really the case that such a pattern emerges on the occasion of a great achievement?

古文：夫利不在身，以之谋事则智；虑不私己，以之断义必厉。
现代文：由于利不关己，为人谋事就明智；考虑事情不私于己，断义必定严厉。
English: Since profit is not self-interested, it is wise to do things for others; considering things not self-interested, the verdict must be severe.

古文：诚能回观物之智而为反身之察，若施之于人则能恕，自鉴其情亦明矣。
现代文：如真正能回观事物的智慧而为自己反躬自问的省察，这样对人就能宽恕对己就有自知之明了。
English: If you can truly reflect on the wisdom of looking back on things and questioning yourself, then you can forgive others and have self-knowledge.

