古文：十有一年春，王正月，作三军。
现代文：十一年春季，周历正月，编定三个军。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, the first month of the lunar calendar, three armies were compiled.

古文：夏四月，四卜郊不从，乃不郊。
现代文：夏季四月，鲁国四次占卜祭祀天地的吉日，都不吉利。
English: In the summer of April, the four auspicious days of Lu's divination and worship of heaven and earth are all unlucky.

古文：郑公孙舍之帅师侵宋。
现代文：于是不举行祭祀天地的仪式。郑国大夫公孙舍率领军队进攻宋国。
English: As a result, the ritual of offering sacrifices to heaven and earth was not held. Zheng Guotai Gongsun She led the army to attack Song.

古文：公会晋侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、齐世子光、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子伐郑。
现代文：襄公又会同晋侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、齐世子光、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子一起攻打郑国。
English: Prince Xiang would also attack Zheng together with Prince Jin, Prince Song, Prince Wei, Prince Cao, Prince Qi, Prince Ziguang, Prince Yao, Prince Yao, Prince Teng, Prince Xue, Prince Yao, and Prince Xiao.

古文：秋七月己未，同盟于亳城北。
现代文：秋季七月己未日，在亳城北一起结盟。
English: Autumn and July have not yet arrived, and they have allied together in the north of Lucheng.

古文：公至自伐郑。
现代文：襄公从攻打郑国的地方回来。
English: Prince Xiang returned from the battlefield of the attack on Zheng.

古文：楚子、郑伯伐宋。
现代文：楚子、郑伯一起攻打宋国。
English: Chu Tzu and Zheng Bo attacked Song together.

古文：会于萧鱼。公至自会。
现代文：在萧鱼这个地方会晤。
English: They met at Xiao Yu's place.

古文：楚人执郑行人良霄。
现代文：襄公从萧鱼回到鲁国。楚国人拘捕了郑国的使者良霄。
English: Prince Xiang returned to the State of Lu from the State of Xiao Yu. The people of the State of Chu arrested the emissary of the State of Zheng, Liang Xiao.

古文：冬，秦人伐晋。
现代文：冬季，秦国人攻打晋国。
English: In winter, the Qin attacked Jin.

古文：十一年春，季武子将作三军，告叔孙穆子曰： 请为三军，各征其军。 
现代文：十一年春季，季武子准备编定三个军，告诉叔孙穆子说： 请编三个军，每家管一个军。 
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, Ji Wuzi was about to organize three armies, and told his uncle Sun Mu Zi: "Please organize three armies, one army for each family."

古文：穆子曰： 政将及子，子必不能。 
现代文：叔孙穆子说： 政权将要轮到您执掌，您一定办不好的。 
English: Uncle Sun Muzi said, "It will be your turn to hold the reins of power, and you will certainly not do a good job.

古文：武子固请之，穆子曰： 然则盟诸？ 
现代文：季武子坚决请求，叔孙穆子说： 那么结个盟吧。 
English: Ji Wu Zi made a firm request, and Uncle Sun Mu Zi said: Then let's form an alliance.

古文：乃盟诸僖闳，诅诸五父之衢。
现代文：于是就在僖公宗庙门口订立盟约，在五父之衢发誓。
English: So they entered into a covenant at the entrance to the Shingon Sect Temple, swearing by the Five Patriarchs.

古文：正月，作三军，三分公室而各有其一。
现代文：正月，编定三个军，把公室的军队一分为三，而各家掌握一军。
English: In the first month, the three armies were compiled, and the army of the office was divided into three, and each family controlled one army.

古文：三子各毁其乘。季氏使其乘之人，以其役邑入者，无征；不入者，倍征。
现代文：三家各自把原有私家车兵合并，季氏让他私人武装中的成员参加军队的免除征税，不参加的人加倍征税。
English: Each of the three companies amalgamated their former private chariot soldiers. Ji allowed members of his private army to participate in the army without paying taxes, while those who did not participate were taxed twice.

古文：孟氏使半为臣，若子若弟。
现代文：孟氏让他的私邑士兵中的一半，或子或弟做奴隶兵。
English: Mr. Meng let half of his private soldiers, or his son or brother, become slave soldiers.

古文：叔孙氏使尽为臣。不然，不舍。
现代文：叔孙氏仍然把他私邑士兵全编为奴隶兵，不这样，就不并入所分的公室军队里。
English: Uncle Sun still organized all his private soldiers as slave soldiers. Otherwise, they would not have been integrated into the public army.

古文：郑人患晋、楚之故。诸大夫曰： 不从晋，国几亡。
现代文：郑国人担心晋国和楚国，大夫们说： 不顺从晋国，国家几乎灭亡。
English: The people of Zheng worried about Jin and Chu. The doctors said, "If you don't obey Jin, the country will almost be destroyed."

古文：楚弱于晋，晋不吾疾也。
现代文：楚国比晋国弱，而晋国并不急于争夺我国。
English: Chu Province is weaker than Jin Province, and Jin Province is not eager to compete for our country.

古文：晋疾，楚将辟之。
现代文：如果晋国急于争夺我国，楚国会避开他们的。
English: If Jin is eager to compete for our country, Chu will avoid them.

古文：何为而使晋师致死于我，楚弗敢敌，而后可固与也。 
现代文：怎么才能让晋军出死力攻打我们，楚国就不敢抵挡，然后才能够坚决依附晋国。 
English: How can we make the Jin army attack us with deadly force, Chu country will not dare to resist, and then we can firmly adhere to Jin country.

古文：子展曰： 与宋为恶，诸侯必至，吾从之盟。
现代文：子展说： 向宋国挑衅，诸侯必然来到，我们跟从他们结盟。
English: Zichen said: If we provoke the Song Dynasty, the princes will inevitably come, and we will ally with them.

古文：楚师至，吾又从之，则晋怒甚矣。
现代文：楚军来到，我们又跟从楚国，这样晋国就更要生气了。
English: The Chu army came, and we followed from Chu, so Jin was even more angry.

古文：晋能骤来，楚将不能，吾乃固与晋。 
现代文：晋国如果能不断地前来，楚国将会不能抵挡，我们就坚决依附晋国。 
English: If Jin can continue to advance, Chu will not be able to resist, and we will resolutely cling to Jin.

古文：大夫说之，使疆埸之司恶于宋。
现代文：大夫们对这计划表示高兴，派边境的官吏向宋国挑衅。
English: The doctors were pleased with the plan and sent border officials to provoke Song.

古文：宋向戌侵郑，大获。
现代文：宋国的向戌入侵郑国，俘获甚多。
English: The Song Dynasty's Xiang Zang invaded Zheng and captured much of the country.

古文：子展曰： 师而伐宋可矣。
现代文：子展说： 可以出兵攻打宋国了。
English: Zotan said: We can send troops to attack Song.

古文：若我伐宋，诸侯之伐我必疾，吾乃听命焉，且告于楚。
现代文：如果我们进攻宋国，诸侯进攻我们必然努力攻击。我们就听从命令，同时报告楚国。
English: If we attack Song, if the princes attack, we will certainly attack hard. We will obey orders and report to Chu.

古文：楚师至，吾又与之盟，而重赂晋师，乃免矣。 
现代文：楚军来到，我们就和他们结盟而又重重地贿赂晋军，就可以免于祸患了。 
English: When the Chu army came, we allied with them and bribed the Jin army heavily, so that we could be spared the disaster.

古文：夏，郑子展侵宋。
现代文：夏季，郑国的子展率军入侵宋国。
English: In the summer, Zheng's son Zhan led an army to invade Song.

古文：四月，诸侯伐郑。
现代文：四月，诸侯联军进攻郑国。
English: In April, the allied forces of the princes attacked Zheng.

古文：己亥，齐大子光、宋向戌先至于郑，门于东门。
现代文：十九日，齐国太子光、宋国向戌先到达郑国，驻军在东门外。
English: On the 19th, Prince Guang of Qi and Xiang Yu of Song arrived in Zheng first, and the garrison was stationed outside the East Gate.

古文：其莫，晋荀罃至于西郊，东侵旧许。
现代文：当天晚上，晋国荀罃到达西郊，往东进攻许国的旧地。
English: In the evening of the same day, the Jin Guozhen arrived at the western suburbs and attacked the old land of Xu Guozhen to the east.

古文：卫孙林父侵其北鄙。
现代文：卫国孙林父进攻郑国的北部边境。
English: Sun Lin's father, the defender of the country, attacked the northern border of Zheng.

古文：六月，诸侯会于北林，师于向，右还次于琐，围郑。
现代文：六月，诸侯在北林会见，军队驻扎在向地。又转向西北，驻扎在琐地。
English: In June, the princes met in Beilin, and the army was stationed in Xiangdi. It then turned northwest and was stationed in Zuoji.

古文：观兵于南门，西济于济隧。
现代文：包围郑国，在南门外显示军力。
English: They encircled Zheng Guo and displayed their military strength outside the South Gate.

古文：郑人惧，乃行成。
现代文：又有军队从西边渡过济隧。郑国人畏惧，就向诸侯求和。
English: Another army crossed the Jizhong Tunnel from the west. The people of Zheng were afraid, so they sued for peace from the lords.

古文：秋七月，同盟于亳。
现代文：秋季，七月，各诸侯和郑国在毫地结盟。
English: In the autumn, in July, all the lords and Zheng Guo formed an alliance at Milli.

古文：范宣子曰： 不慎，必失诸侯。
现代文：范宣子说： 如果盟辞不谨慎，必然失去诸侯。
English: Fan Xuan Zi said: If the alliance is not prudent, it will inevitably lose the provinces.

古文：诸侯道敝而无成，能无贰乎？ 
现代文：诸侯来往疲乏而没有得到成功，能够没有二心吗？ 
English: Can the princes go back and forth wearily without success, can they not be double-minded?

古文：乃盟，载书曰： 凡我同盟：毋蕴年，毋壅利，毋保奸，毋留慝，救灾患，恤祸乱，同好恶，奖王室。
现代文：于是就盟誓。盟书说： 凡是我们同盟国家，不要囤积粮食，不要垄断利益，不要庇护罪人，不要收留坏人。救济灾荒，安定祸患，统一好恶，辅助王室。
English: Then they swore an oath. The covenant said: "All the countries of our alliance, do not hoard grain, do not monopolize profits, do not shelter sinners, do not take in bad people. Relief of disasters, stabilization of disasters, unification of likes and dislikes, assistance to the royal family.

古文：或间兹命，司慎司盟，名山名川，群神群祀，先王先公，七姓十二国之祖，明神殛之。俾失其民，队命亡氏，踣其国家。 
现代文：有人触犯这些命令，司慎、司盟的神，名山、名川的神，各种天神，先王、先公，七姓十二国的祖宗，明察的神灵诛戮他，使他失去百姓，丧君灭族，灭国亡家。 
English: If anyone disobeyed these orders, the gods of Shizhen and Shimen, the gods of famous mountains and rivers, various angels, past kings and princes, the ancestors of seven families and twelve nations, and the gods of discernment would kill him, causing him to lose his people, lose his prince, lose his tribe, and lose his country and family.

古文：楚子囊乞旅于秦，秦右大夫詹帅师从楚子，将以伐郑。
现代文：楚国的子囊向秦国请求出兵，秦国的右大夫詹率领军队跟随楚共王，由楚王率领进攻郑国。
English: Zizou of Chu requested Qin to send troops, and Zhan, the right doctor of Qin, led the army to follow the king of Chu, and the king of Chu led the attack on Zheng.

古文：郑伯逆之。
现代文：郑简公前去迎接表示顺服。
English: Zheng Jian Gong went to meet them to show his obedience.

古文：丙子，伐宋。
现代文：七月二十七日，进攻宋国。
English: On July 27th, they attacked Song.

古文：九月，诸侯悉师以复伐郑。郑人使良霄、大宰石毚如楚，告将服于晋，曰： 孤以社稷之故，不能怀君。
现代文：九月，诸侯用全部兵力再次进攻郑国，郑国人派良霄、太宰石ò去到楚国，告诉说准备对晋国顺服，说： 孤由于国家的缘故，不能怀念君王了。
English: In September, the princes attacked Zheng again with all their forces. The Zheng people sent Liang Xiao and Dazai Shi to Chu to tell them that they were ready to obey Jin. They said, "For the sake of the country, we can't miss the king."

古文：君若能以玉帛绥晋，不然则武震以摄威之，孤之愿也。 
现代文：君王如果能够用玉帛安抚晋国，不这样，那就用武力对他们加以威慑，这都是我的愿望。 
English: If the monarch can use the Jade Scepter to pacify Jin, if not, then use force to deter them, this is my wish.

古文：楚人执之。
现代文：楚国人囚禁了他们。
English: The people of Chu imprisoned them.

古文：书曰 行人 ，言使人也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 行人 ，这是说他们是使者 不应该有罪 的意思。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that pedestrians, which means that they are messengers, should not be guilty.

古文：诸侯之师观兵于郑东门，郑人使王子伯骈行成。
现代文：诸侯联军在东门外示威，郑国人派王子伯骈求和。
English: The allied forces of the princes demonstrated outside the East Gate, and the people of Zheng sent Prince Bo Xuan to sue for peace.

古文：甲戌，晋赵武入盟郑伯。
现代文：九月二十六日，晋国的赵武进入郑国和郑简公结盟。
English: On September 26, Zhao Wu of Jin entered into an alliance with Zheng and Zheng Jiangong.

古文：冬十月丁亥，郑子展出盟晋侯。
现代文：冬季十月初九日，郑国的子展出城和晋悼公结盟。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, Zheng Guozhencheng and Jin Yigong formed an alliance.

古文：十二月戊寅，会于萧鱼。
现代文：十二月初一日，在萧鱼会见。
English: On the first day of December, they will meet in Xiao Yu.

古文：庚辰，赦郑囚，皆礼而归之。
现代文：初三日，赦免郑国的俘虏，都给以礼遇放回去。
English: On the third day of the first month, the prisoners of Zheng were pardoned and sent back with courtesy.

古文：纳斥候，禁侵掠。
现代文：收回巡逻兵，禁止掠夺。
English: Withdraw patrols. No looting.

古文：晋侯使叔肸告于诸侯。
现代文：晋悼公派叔肸通告诸侯。
English: The princes were notified of the death of their uncle.

古文：公使臧孙纥对曰： 凡我同盟，小国有罪，大国致讨，苟有以藉手，鲜不赦宥。寡君闻命矣。 
现代文：鲁襄公派臧孙纥回答说： 凡是我们同盟国家，小国有了罪过，大国派兵讨伐，如果稍有所得，很少对小国不加赦免的，寡君听到命令了。 
English: Sun Yat-sen replied, "In all our allied countries, if a small country has committed a crime, the big country will send troops to fight, and if there is a little gain, it is rare for the small country not to be pardoned.

古文：郑人赂晋侯以师悝、师触、师蠲，广车、车淳十五乘，甲兵备。凡兵车百乘，歌钟二肆，及其镈磬，女乐二八。
现代文：郑国人赠给晋悼公师悝、师触、师蠲；配对的广车、軘车各十五辆，盔甲武器齐备，和其他战车一共一百辆；歌钟两架以及和它相配的鎛和磬；女乐两佾十六人。
English: The people of Zheng gave the following to the Jin Dynasty: the Gongshi Gong, the Shizhu Gong, and the Shizhu Gong; fifteen paired broad-wheeled chariots and armored chariots each, complete with armor and weapons, and a total of one hundred other chariots; two singing bells and their matching gongs and cymbals; and sixteen women's musical cymbals.

古文：晋侯以乐之半赐魏绛，曰： 子教寡人和诸戎狄，以正诸华。八年之中，九合诸侯，如乐之和，无所不谐。请与子乐之。 
现代文：晋悼公把乐队的一半赐给魏绛，说： 您教寡人同各部落戎狄讲和以整顿中原诸国，八年中间九次会合诸侯，好像音乐的和谐，没有地方不协调，请和您一起享用快乐。 
English: Jin Yue Gong gave half of the orchestra to Wei Wei, saying: You have taught countless people to speak with the tribes and to rectify the Central Plains countries. The nine meetings of the princes in the middle of the eight years are like the harmony of music. There is no place that is not coordinated. Please enjoy the happiness with you.

古文：辞曰： 夫和戎狄，国之福也。
现代文：魏绛辞谢说： 同戎狄讲和，这是国家的福气。
English: Wei Zhi Jie Xie said: It is the country's blessing to make peace with the army.

古文：八年之中，九合诸侯，诸侯无慝，君之灵也，二三子之劳也，臣何力之有焉？
现代文：八年中间九次会合诸侯，诸侯顺从，这是由于君王的威灵，也是由于其他人员的功劳，下臣有什么力量？
English: In the middle of the eight years, the nine meetings of the princes, the princes obeyed, this was due to the will of the monarch, but also due to the merits of other personnel, what power did the vassals have?

古文：抑臣愿君安其乐而思其终也！
现代文：然而下臣希望君王既安于这种快乐，而又想到它的终了。
English: However, the vassal hopes that the monarch will not only be content with this happiness, but also think about its end.

古文：《诗》曰： 乐只君子，殿天子之邦。
现代文：《诗》说： 快乐啊君子，镇抚天子的家邦。
English: "Poetry" says: Happy are you, gentleman, when you are at home with the Son of Heaven.

古文：乐只君子，福禄攸同，便蕃左右，亦是帅从。 
现代文：快乐啊君子，他的福禄和别人同享。治理好附近的小国，使他们相率服从。 
English: Happy is the gentleman who shares his good fortune with others, and governs well the small states in his vicinity, so that they obey him.

古文：夫乐以安德，义以处之，礼以行之，信以守之，仁以厉之，而后可以殿邦国，同福禄，来远人，所谓乐也。《书》曰： 居安思危。 
现代文：音乐用来巩固德行，用道义对待它，用礼仪推行它，用信用保守它，用仁爱勉励它，然后能用来安定邦国、同亨福禄、召来远方的人，这就是所说的快乐。《书》说： 处于安定要想到危险。 
English: Music is used to consolidate virtue, to treat it with morality, to promote it with etiquette, to preserve it with trust, to encourage it with benevolence, and then it can be used to stabilize the country, to prosper, and to bring people from afar, which is the so-called happiness.

古文：思则有备，有备无患。
现代文：想到了就有防备，有了防备就没有祸患。
English: If you think about it, you will be prepared. If you are prepared, there will be no disaster.

古文：敢以此规。 
现代文：谨以此向君王规劝。 
English: I would like to take this opportunity to advise the king.

古文：公曰： 子之教，敢不承命。
现代文：晋悼公说： 您的教导，岂敢不承受命令！
English: Jin Yue Gong said: Your teaching, how dare you not take orders!

古文：抑微子，寡人无以待戎，不能济河。
现代文：而且要是没有您，寡人无法对待戎人，又不能渡过黄河。
English: And without you, no one would have been able to treat the soldiers and cross the Yellow River.

古文：夫赏，国之典也，藏在盟府，不可废也。
现代文：赏赐，是国家的典章，藏在盟府，不能废除的。
English: The award is a national award, hidden in the League of Nations, and cannot be abolished.

古文：子其受之！ 
现代文：您还是接受吧！ 
English: Just accept it!

古文：魏绛于是乎始有金石之乐，礼也。
现代文：魏绛从这时开始才有了金石的音乐，这是合于礼的。
English: It was only from this time that Wei Zheng began to have Jin Shi's music, which is appropriate.

古文：秦庶长鲍、庶长武帅师伐晋以救郑。
现代文：秦国庶长鲍、庶长武领兵进攻晋国来救援郑国。
English: Qin's second-in-command Bao and second-in-command Wu led the troops to attack Jin and came to the rescue of Zheng.

古文：鲍先入晋地，士鲂御之，少秦师而弗设备。
现代文：鲍先进入晋国国境，士鲂抵御他，认为秦军人少而不加防备。
English: Bao Xian entered the border of Jin, Shi Yan resisted him, believing that Qin soldiers were few and did not take precautions.

古文：壬午，武济自辅氏，与鲍交伐晋师。
现代文：十二月初五日，武从辅氏渡河，和鲍夹攻晋军。
English: On the fifth day of early December, the Wuzhong Fu clan crossed the river and attacked the Jin army with Bao Ji.

古文：己丑，秦、晋战于栎，晋师败绩，易秦故也。
现代文：十二日，秦军和晋军在栎地作战，晋军大败，这是由于轻视秦军的缘故。
English: On the 12th, the Qin army and the Jin army fought at Fengtian, and the Jin army was defeated. This was due to the contempt for the Qin army.

