古文：《齐民要术》：春耕寻手劳郎到反，古曰： 耰 ，今曰 劳 。
现代文：《齐民要术》：春天耕过的地，应随时摩劳郎到反，古时称 耰 ，今称为 劳 。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": The land cultivated in spring should be ploughed at any time. In ancient times, it was called, now it is called 劳.

古文：《说文》曰： 耰，摩田器。 今人亦名 劳 曰 摩 。
现代文：《说文》将 耰 解释为 摩田的器具 ，今人亦将 劳 称为 摩 。
English: The "Analects" interprets  role as a tool of 摩 field, and modern people also refer to 劳 as 摩.

古文：秋耕待白背劳。
现代文：秋天耕过的地，须待白背时劳摩。
English: The land that has been ploughed in autumn has to be worked hard when it is white.

古文：春既多风，若不寻劳，地必虚燥。秋田塌实，湿劳令地硬。
现代文：春天多风，耕后若不随时摩劳，地土空虚，必容易干燥；秋天田土塌实，耕后随即趁湿摩劳，便会使地土结成硬块。
English: Spring is windy. If you don't mulch after ploughing, the soil will be empty and easy to dry. In autumn, the soil will be compacted. If you use wet mulching immediately after ploughing, the soil will become hard.

古文：谚曰： 耕而不劳，不如作暴。 
现代文：农谚说： 只耕不劳，不如听任泽水自行跑掉。 
English: An agricultural proverb says: It is better to let the water run away than to plough without effort.

古文：盖言泽难遇，喜天时故也。
现代文：农谚是说：喜天降时雨，应即行耕劳保墒。
English: An agricultural proverb says: When the weather is good and rain is falling, we should immediately go to work to protect the crops.

古文：桓宽《盐铁论》曰： 茂木之下无丰草，大块之间无美苗。 
现代文：桓宽《盐铁论》说： 茂密的林木下面，不会有丰美的青草；大个的土块中间，不会有良好的禾苗。 
English: Kuan Kuan, "On Salt and Iron," said: There will be no lush grass under the dense forest; there will be no good grass seedlings in the middle of large soil blocks.

古文：踏，直辄反，田实也。
现代文：塌，直辄反，田土湿实之意。
English: meaning "land is wet and solid"

古文：暴，音曝，耗也。
现代文：暴，音曝，损耗。
English: Violent, sound exposure, loss.

古文：凡秋耕欲深，春夏欲浅；犂欲廉，劳欲再。
现代文：秋耕，要耕深些；春耕、夏耕，要耕浅一些；犁起土的宽幅要廉仄，要耕一遍劳两遍。
English: Autumn ploughing should be ploughed deeper; spring and summer ploughing should be ploughed shallower; the width of the ploughed soil should be less, and it should be ploughed once or twice.

古文：犂廉耕细，牛复不疲；再劳地熟，旱亦保泽也。
现代文：犁廉，既可耕得细，牛也不疲劳。劳两遍，使地熟，土壤无块，天旱亦可以保墒。
English: The plough can be ploughed thinly, and the oxen are not tired. Work twice, so that the ground is ripe, the soil is clod-free, and drought can also protect the plough.

古文：秋耕埯同埯青者为上。
现代文：秋耕，以能埯同掩青为最好。
English: For autumn farming, it is best to be able to cover the green with straw.

古文：比至冬月，青草复生者，其美与小豆同。
现代文：等到冬初，将新长出的嫩草压青，其美好与用小豆压青相同。
English: Wait until the beginning of winter to compost the newly grown tender grass, the beauty of which is the same as composting with red beans.

古文：初耕欲深，转地不深，地不熟；转不浅，动生土也。
现代文：第一遍耕要深，转地要浅。初耕不深，不能使地熟；转耕不浅，容易翻动生土。
English: The first ploughing should be deep, and the turning should be shallow. If the first ploughing is not deep, the soil cannot be ripened; if the turning is not shallow, it is easy to turn the raw soil.

古文：菅茅之地，宜纵牛羊践之；践则根浮。
现代文：生长着菅茅的地方，宜将牛羊放入田中去践踏，经过牛羊践踏，草根浮动。
English: In places where cattails grow, it is advisable to put cattle and sheep into the middle of the field to trample them. After the cattle and sheep trample, the grass roots float.

古文：七月耕之，则死。
现代文：七月间翻耕过后，便会死掉。
English: After the ploughing in July, the plants will die.

古文：非七月复生矣。
现代文：不是七月翻耕的，耕过仍将复生。
English: If it is not ploughed in July, it will still be revived after ploughing.

古文：凡美田之法，绿豆为上；小豆、胡麻次之。
现代文：使地力肥壮的方法，用绿豆压青为最好，小豆和胡麻稍次。
English: To make the soil fertile, it is best to use mung beans for compaction, and azuki beans and sesame seeds for the second step.

古文：悉皆五、六月中冀美懿反；漫种也。
现代文：皆宜在五六月间冀美懿反，是一种撒播漫种法。
English: It is advisable to sow in May and June, which is a method of spreading seeds.

古文：种；七月、八月，犂埯杀之，为春谷田，则亩收十石；一石大约今二斗七升；十石，今二石七斗有余也。
现代文：种，七八月，翻犁入土，埯杀压青，来年种春谷，一亩可收十石；一石大约折合今二斗七升，十石约当元制二石七斗多。
English: sowing, in July and August, turning the stalks into the soil, killing the young shoots, and sowing spring valleys next year, one mu can collect ten stones; one stone is approximately equivalent to two doos and seven liters today, and ten stones is about two stones and seven doos more than in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：后《齐民要术》中 石 、 斗 仿此。
现代文：后面凡是《齐民要术》书中的 石 和 斗 ，均照此比率折算。
English: In the following, all the stones and buckets in the book "Qi Min Yao Shu" are converted according to this ratio.

古文：其美与蚕矢、熟粪同。
现代文：这样的肥田方法，同使用蚕屎或腐熟的人粪尿一样好。
English: This method of fertilizing fields is just as good as using silkworm excrement or rancid human excrement.

古文：《氾胜之书》曰：凡耕之本，在于趣时、和土、务粪泽，早锄早获。
现代文：《氾胜之书》说：耕作的基本法则，在于不误农时，使土壤强弱适中；施肥和灌溉，保持土壤的肥沃与水分；锄苗要早，收获要早。
English: "The Book of Inundation and Victory" said: The basic rule of farming is to make the soil strong and weak at the right time; fertilize and irrigate to maintain the fertility and moisture of the soil; plant seedlings early and harvest early.

古文：春冻解，地气始通，土一和解；夏至，天气始暑，阴气始盛，土复解；夏至后九十日昼夜分，天地气和；以此时耕田，一而当五，名曰 膏泽 ；皆得时功。
现代文：立春后，土地解冻，地气开始通达，是为土壤首次和解；夏至后，天气开始暑热，阴气兴起于下，土壤再一次和解；夏至后九十日，昼夜的时间长短相等，天气和地气相和。在以上所说的时间耕地，耕一遍相当平时耕五遍，名为 膏泽 ，这皆是 赶上农时 的功效。
English: After the beginning of spring, the land thaws and the natural gas begins to reach the ground, which is the first reconciliation for the soil; after the summer solstice, the weather begins to be hot, the gloomy air rises from below, and the soil is reconciled again; ninety days after the summer solstice, the length of day and night is equal, and the weather and the natural gas phase are reconciled. At the above-mentioned time, the land is cultivated, and it is cultivated once and five times at a fairly ordinary time, which is called ointment, which is the effect of catching up with the agricultural time.

古文：春，地气通，可耕坚硬强地黑垆土，辄平摩其块以生草；草生，复耕之；天有小雨，复耕和之，勿令有块，以待时；所谓强土而弱之。
现代文：立春后，地气开始通达，可耕坚硬的强地黑垆土，翻耕过随即将土块摩平摩碎，使萌生杂草；草长出来，再耕一遍；遇天有小雨，再耕一遍，令土壤协和顺适，不要有土块，以等待时用。这就是常说的使强土变弱的方法。
English: After the beginning of spring, the earth's atmosphere begins to permeate, and the hard, strong, black loam soil can be cultivated. The soil is then flattened and crushed to make weeds sprout; the grass grows out and is cultivated again; if there is light rain, it is cultivated again to make the soil harmonious and smooth, and there is no soil block, so it can be used while waiting. This is often said to be a method of making strong soil weak.

古文：春候地气始通，土块散，陈根可拔。
现代文：立春的物候是：地气开始通达，土块散开，土中的陈根可用手拔出。
English: The signs of the beginning of spring are: the earth's atmosphere is beginning to permeate, the soil is spreading, and the old roots in the soil can be pulled out by hand.

古文：此时二十日以后，和气去，即土冈。
现代文：立春以后二十天，和气即行消失，土质变得刚强。
English: Twenty days after the beginning of spring, the harmony disappears and the soil becomes hard.

古文：以时耕，一而当四；和气去耕，四不当一。
现代文：趁和气在时耕，耕一遍顶上平时耕四遍；和气消失后耕，耕四遍顶不上耕一遍。
English: Take advantage of the harmony in the time of ploughing, plough once at the top, usually plough four times; after the harmony disappears, plough, plough four times, do not plough once at the top.

古文：杏始华荣，辄耕轻土、弱土。望杏花落，复耕；耕辄劳之。
现代文：杏花盛开时，即可耕土质松散的轻土、弱土；等杏花落时，再耕一次，要求随耕随劳。
English: When the apricot blossoms are in full bloom, you can plow the loose loose light soil, weak soil; when the apricot blossoms fall, plow again, and ask to work with the plow.

古文：草生，有雨泽，耕，重劳之。
现代文：候田中的杂草生长起来，天降雨泽，再耕，并且要用重劳劳摩。
English: Wait for the weeds in the field to grow up, the weather is rainy, and then plow, and use heavy labor.

古文：土甚轻者，以牛羊践之，如此则土强；此谓弱土而强之也。
现代文：如土质过于松散，可以将牛羊赶到地中去践踏。以上方法，可使土质变强，即所谓使弱土变强的方法。
English: If the soil is too loose, cattle and sheep can be driven into the ground to trample on it. The above method can make the soil stronger, that is, the so-called method of making weak soil stronger.

古文：《杂说》：凡人家营田，须量己力，宁可少好，不可多恶。
现代文：《杂说》：凡是种田的人家，必须正确地估计自己的能力，宁可种少种好，切不可贪多种不好。
English: "Miscellaneous": Every family that cultivates fields must correctly estimate their ability. It is better to plant a few good seeds than to covet many bad ones.

古文：凡地有薄者，即须加粪粪之。
现代文：凡发现有的土地瘠薄，便应即时加粪使之肥沃。
English: If any land is found to be poor, manure should be added immediately to make it fertile.

古文：其 踏粪 法：秋收治田后，场上所有谷穰等，并须收贮一处。
现代文：踏粪法：秋收秋播后，打谷场上的谷穰等物，应即行收集一处，贮藏保管。
English: Stomp method: After the autumn harvest and autumn sowing, the grain stalks and other things on the threshing field should be collected immediately and stored.

古文：每日布牛脚下，三寸厚；古一尺，大约今一尺三寸有余。
现代文：每天用它向圈中牛脚下撒三寸厚的一层。古一尺，约合今一尺三寸有余。
English: Every day, it is used to spread a three-inch-thick layer at the foot of the cow in the circle.

古文：后《齐民要术》 尺 、 寸 仿此。
现代文：凡《齐民要术》书中所说的 尺 、 寸 ，均按这一比例计算。
English: All the "shaku" and "sun" mentioned in the book "Qi Min Yaoshu" are calculated according to this ratio.

古文：每平旦，收聚堆积之；还依前布之，经宿即堆聚。
现代文：第二天清早，收取堆聚一处；复照上法铺上一层，经过一夜即行堆聚。
English: In the morning of the next day, the collection was piled up in one place; the duplicate was piled up on the first floor, and it was piled up overnight.

古文：至十二月、正月之间，即载粪粪地。
现代文：至年终十二月或来年正月，即可将踏好的粪拉去上地。
English: Until the end of December or the first month of next year, you can pull the well-trodden manure to the ground.

古文：《种莳直说》：古农法，犁一棍六。
现代文：《种莳直说》：古时农作的经验，是犂一遍，要耙六遍。
English: "Seed germination straightly said": the ancient experience of farming is to germinate once, to germinate six times.

古文：今人只知犁深为功，不知棍细为全功。
现代文：现在的人只知道以犁深为胜，而不知道将泥土耙细才是全部功劳。
English: People nowadays only know how to win by digging deep, but they don't know that it's all about digging out the dirt.

古文：棍功不到，土粗不实。下种后，虽见苗，立根在粗土，根土不相着，不耐旱；有悬死、虫咬、干死等诸病。
现代文：耙地的功夫不精到，土有粗块，地中空不实，下种后，虽然能出苗，但苗根着生在粗土，根和土不能紧密地相附着，不耐旱，而且常有悬死、虫咬、干死等许多毛病。
English: The work of ploughing is not precise enough, the soil is coarse, the ground is hollow and not solid. After planting, although seedlings can emerge, the seedlings are rooted in the rough soil, the roots and soil cannot adhere closely, they are not drought-resistant, and there are often many problems such as hanging death, insect bites, and dry death.

古文：棍功到，土细又实，立根在细实土中；又碾过，根土相着，自耐旱，不生诸病。
现代文：耙地的功夫到了，土壤细柔又紧实，苗根着生在细柔、紧实的土壤之中，而且播种时又经过碾压，根和土紧紧地相附着，就会耐旱，不容易发生各种病害。
English: The work of ploughing has arrived, the soil is soft and firm, the seedling roots grow in the soft and firm soil, and when sowing, they are crushed, and the roots and soil are tightly adhered, it will be drought-resistant, and it is not easy for various diseases to occur.

古文：《韩氏直说》：为农大纲，一则牛欺地，二则人欺苗。
现代文：《韩氏直说》：务农的要旨，一是牛功要胜过土地，二是人功要胜过苗稼。
English: "Han's Straight Talk": The essence of farming is that, on the one hand, cattle work is more important than land, and on the other hand, human work is more important than seedlings.

古文：牛欺地则所种不失其时；人欺苗，则省力易办；反是，则徒劳无益矣。
现代文：牛功胜过土地，播种就不会误了农时；人功胜过苗稼，便会不太费力地将庄稼种好；反之，便是白费力气，不会得到好的收获。
English: If the cow's effort is better than the land, the sowing will not miss the farming time; if the man's effort is better than the seedling, the crops will be planted well without much effort; otherwise, it is a waste of effort and will not get a good harvest.

古文：凡地，除种麦外，并宜秋耕。
现代文：所有的耕地，除种冬麦的以外，都应当进行秋耕。
English: All cultivated land, with the exception of winter wheat, should be cultivated in autumn.

古文：先以铁齿概纵横概之，然后插犂细耕，随耕随捞。
现代文：先用铁齿耙纵横耙过，然后再用犂细细地翻耕，耕毕随时摩劳。
English: First, use the iron tooth hoe to hoe it lengthwise and crosswise, and then use the hoe to plough it finely. After ploughing, it can be worked at any time.

古文：至地大白背时，更橇两遍。
现代文：等到地面呈现大白背时，再耙两遍。
English: Wait for the ground to turn white, then hoe it twice more.

古文：至来春地气透时，待日高复棍四五遍。
现代文：到来年春天，地气通达时，趁太阳升高后再耙四五遍。
English: By the next spring, when the earth's atmosphere is permeable, take advantage of the sun's rise and repeat the process four or five times.

古文：其地爽润，上有油土四指许；春虽无雨，时至便可下种。
现代文：这样的土地，土质爽疏而湿润，表层有四指厚的油土即便春季不降雨，只要农时一到，便可照常下种。
English: Such land, the soil quality is sparse and moist, the surface layer has four fingers thick oil soil, even if there is no rainfall in spring, as long as the farming time arrives, it can be planted as usual.

古文：秋耕之地，荒草白少，极省锄工。
现代文：另外，经过秋耕的土地，杂草自然要减少，亦可极大地节省耘锄工。
English: In addition, after the autumn ploughing of the land, the weeds should naturally be reduced, and the weeding work can also be greatly saved.

古文：如牛力不及，不能尽秋耕者，除种粟地外，其余黍、豆等地，春耕亦可。
现代文：如若牛力不足，不能全部进行秋耕，除种粟的土地非耕不可外，其余种黍、豆等地，亦可考虑采用春耕。
English: If the cow's strength is insufficient and autumn farming cannot be carried out in full, spring farming may also be considered for the rest of the fields where millet and beans are grown, in addition to the land where millet must be cultivated.

古文：大抵秋耕，宜早，春耕宜迟。
现代文：一般说来，秋耕应早，春耕宜迟。
English: Generally speaking, autumn farming should be started early, and spring farming should be delayed.

古文：秋耕宜早者，乘天气未寒，将阳和之气。掩在地中，其苗易荣。
现代文：秋耕要早，是为了趁着天气尚未寒冷，将阳和之气掩埋在地中，将来苗稼容易生长茂盛。
English: Autumn farming should be early, in order to take advantage of the weather not yet cold, bury the sun and the air in the ground, and the seedlings will grow well in the future.

古文：过秋，天气寒冷，有霜时，必待日高，方可耕地，恐掩寒气在内，令地薄，不收子粒。
现代文：过了秋季，天气寒冷，遇降霜日，必须等候太阳升起后方可耕地，怕的是将寒气掩盖土中，使地力变得瘠薄，收不到粮食。
English: After the autumn, the weather is cold, and in the event of a frosty day, we must wait for the sun to rise before we can cultivate the land. The fear is that the cold air will be covered in the soil, making the soil become thin and unable to harvest grain.

古文：春耕宜迟者，亦待春气和暖，日高时，依前耕耙。
现代文：春耕要迟，也是为了等候春天阳和的暖气，太阳升高后，依照前法耕耙。
English: Spring ploughing should be delayed in order to wait for the spring sun and warmth. After the sun rises, plough according to the previous method.

