古文：太一在冬至之日有变，占在君；太一在春分之日有变，占在相；太一在中宫之日有变，占在吏；太一在秋分之日有变，占在将；太一在夏至之日有变，占在百姓。所谓有变者，太一居五宫之日，病风折树木，扬沙石，各以其所主，占贵贱。因视风所从来而占之，风从其所居之乡来为实风，主生，长养万物；从其冲后来为虚风，伤人者也，主杀，主害者。谨候虚风而避之，故圣人日： 避虚邪之道，如避矢石然，邪弗能害。 
现代文：平时应密切注视这种异常气候，谨慎地加以预防。所以圣人说： 避开虚邪之风的来路，要像避开飞来的矢石那样，虚风邪气就不能伤害人体了。 圣人说的正是这个意思。
English: In normal times, this abnormal weather should be closely monitored and carefully prevented. Therefore, the sage said: Avoid the path of the evil wind, like avoiding flying arrows, and the evil wind cannot harm the human body. This is exactly what the sage said.

古文：此之谓也。是故太一入徙立于中宫，乃朝八风，以占吉凶也。
现代文：太一位居于天极中央，成为定向的中心坐标，根据北斗星旋转的指向，以中宫巡临八宫，从而定八风的方位，来推测气候的正常与异常。
English: Too one lives in the center of the celestial pole, becoming the central coordinate of the direction. According to the direction of the rotation of the Big Dipper, the middle palace passes through the eight palaces, thus determining the position of the eight winds, to predict the normal and abnormal climate.

古文：风从南方来，名曰大弱风，其伤人也，内舍于心，外在于脉，气主热。
现代文：从南方来的风，名叫大弱风，它伤害到人体，内可侵入于心，外在于血脉，因属于南方火热之邪，所以其气主热证。
English: The wind that comes from the south is called the great weak wind. It harms the human body. It can invade the heart from the inside and the blood vessels from the outside. Because it belongs to the fiery evil of the south, it is the main symptom of qi.

古文：风从西南方来，名曰谋风，其伤人也，内舍于脾，外在于肌，其气主为弱。
现代文：从西南方来的风，名叫谋风，它伤害到人体，内可侵入于脾，外则在于肌肉，脾为后天之本，所以其气主虚性病证。
English: The wind that comes from the southwest, called the wind, it harms the human body, the inside can invade the spleen, the outside is in the muscle, the spleen is the result of the day after tomorrow, so its qi is the main deficiency disease.

古文：风从西方来，名曰刚风，其伤人也，内舍于肺，外在于皮肤，其气主为燥。
现代文：从西方来的风，名叫刚风，它伤害到人体，内可侵入于肺，外则留于皮肤之间，由于西方属金，风性刚烈，所以其气主燥性病证。
English: The wind that comes from the west is called the strong wind. It harms the human body. It can invade the lungs on the inside, but it remains between the skin on the outside. Since the west is gold and the wind is strong, its gas is the main symptom.

古文：风从西北方来，名曰折风，其伤人也，内舍于小肠，外在于手太阳脉，脉绝则溢，脉闭则结不通，善暴死。
现代文：从西北方来的风，名叫折风，它伤害到人体，内可侵入小肠，外在于手太阳经脉，如果脉气竭绝，说明疾病恶化而深陷扩散；如果其脉气闭塞，气机聚结不通，往往会形成猝然死亡。
English: The wind from the northwest, called the wind, it harms the human body, can invade the small intestine internally, and the solar meridians outside the hand. If the pulse is exhausted, it means that the disease has worsened and spread deeply. If the pulse is blocked and the gas engine does not coalesce, it often leads to sudden death.

古文：风从北方来，名曰大刚风，其伤人也，内舍于肾，外在于骨与肩背之膂筋，其气主为寒也。
现代文：从北方来的风，名叫大刚风，它伤害到人体，内可侵入于肾，外在于骨骼和肩背的肌腱部；因为北风阴寒至盛，遏伤肾阳，所以其气主寒性病证。
English: The wind that comes from the north is called the gale. It harms the human body. It can invade the kidneys from the inside, and the tendons of the bones and shoulder girdle from the outside. Because the north wind is cold from the shade to the peak, it injures the kidney and the sun, so its gas is the main cold pathology.

古文：风从东北方来，名曰凶风，其伤人也，内舍于大肠，外在于两胁腋骨，下及肢节。
现代文：从东北方来的风，名叫凶风，它伤害到人体，内可侵入大肠，外在于两胁腋骨下及肢体关节。
English: The wind that comes from the northeast is called the evil wind. It harms the human body. It can invade the large intestine from the inside, and lie under the shinbones and limb joints from the outside.

古文：风从东方来，名曰婴兀风，其伤人也，内舍于肝，外在于筋纽，其气主为身湿。
现代文：从东方来的风，名叫婴儿风，它伤害到人体，内可侵入于肝，外在于筋的连结之处，因为东方为水乡湿地，东风多雨，所以其气主湿性病证。
English: The wind that comes from the east is called baby wind. It harms the human body. It can invade the liver on the inside, and the outside is where the sinews are connected. Because the east is a watery wetland, and the east wind is rainy, its gas is the main wet disease.

古文：风从东南方来，名曰弱风，其伤人也，内舍于胃，外在肌肉，其气主体重。
现代文：从东南方来的风，名叫弱风，它伤害到人体，内可侵入于胃，外在于肌肉，因为东南湿盛，其气重浊，所以其气主身体困重不扬之病证。
English: The wind that comes from the southeast is called weak wind. It harms the human body. It can invade the stomach on the inside and the muscles on the outside. Because the southeast is humid, its qi is heavy, so its qi is the main symptom of the body.

古文：此八风皆从其虚之乡来，乃能病人。
现代文：上面所说的八种风，凡是从当令节气相对的方向而来的，都属于虚风贼邪，因为是违背时令的不正之气，所以它能使人发生疾病。
English: The eight kinds of wind mentioned above, all of which come from the direction opposite to the current solar terms, are all false winds and evil spirits. Because they are against the unseemliness of the season, they can make people sick.

古文：三虚相搏，则为暴病卒死。
现代文：如是再遇上岁气不足、月缺无光、气候失和这三虚率相逼迫，就会得暴病，猝然死亡。
English: If you are forced to suffer from the lack of vitality, the lack of moonlight, and the mismatch of weather, you will get a violent disease and die suddenly.

古文：两实一虚，病则为淋露寒热。
现代文：如果三虚之中只犯一虚，也能发生疲劳困倦，寒热相兼的病证。
English: If only one of the three is defective, fatigue and drowsiness can also occur, as well as symptoms of both cold and heat.

古文：犯其两湿之地，则为痿。
现代文：如果冒雨或涉水，或久居潮湿之地，感受湿邪，伤于肌肉，便会发生痿病。
English: If you are exposed to rain or wading in water, or if you live in a damp place for a long time, feel dampness, and injure your muscles, rickets will occur.

古文：故圣人避风，如避矢石焉。
现代文：所以圣人躲避风邪，就像躲避矢石一样。
English: Therefore, the sage avoids the wind and cold, just as he avoids the arrow stone.

古文：其有三虚而偏中于邪风，则为击仆偏枯矣。
现代文：不然的话，如果恰逢三虚相遇又偏中于邪风，就会导致突然昏厥仆倒、或半身不遂一类的病症。
English: Otherwise, if it coincides with the meeting of the three eclipses and is caught in an ill wind, it will lead to sudden fainting, falling down, or a condition such as paralysis.

