古文：沈七颍阴日者王栖岩路生邹生五明道士黄贺邓州卜者
现代文：沈七颍阴日者王栖岩路生邹生五明道士黄贺邓州卜者
English: Shen Qixuan, the man of the cloudy day, Wang Jiyanlu, the man of the sun, Wu Ming, the Taoist, Huang He, and Deng Zhou, the diviner

古文：沈七
现代文：沈七
English: Shen Qi

古文：有沈七者，越州人，善卜。
现代文：沈七，是越州人，擅长占卜。
English: Shen Qi, a native of Yuezhou, is good at divination.

古文：李丹员外谓之曰：闻消息，李侍郎知政事，某又得给事中，如何？
现代文：李丹员外对他说：听说侍郎要重新主持政务，我还能升任给事中，你说可能吗？
English: Li Danzhong said to him: I heard that the chamberlain wants to preside over government affairs again, can I still be promoted to the middle of things, do you think it is possible?

古文：沈七云：李侍郎即被追，不得社日肉吃，后此无禄。
现代文：沈七说：李侍郎会即将让朝廷追请回来的。但是他却吃不到社日庆祝的宴席了。
English: Shen Qi said: Li Jilang will soon be called back by the court, but he will not be able to eat the banquet celebrating the company day.

古文：公亦未改，不得给事中。
现代文：他从此不能再拿朝廷的俸禄，你的官职也没有变动，不能升任给事中。
English: From now on, he can no longer receive a salary from the imperial court. Your official position has not changed, and you cannot be promoted to a middle-ranking position.

古文：其时去社才十四日，果有敕追李侍郎。
现代文：说这话的时候离社日只有十四天，果然朝廷下诏召见李侍郎进京。
English: When he said this, he was only fourteen days away from the date of the company, and indeed the Imperial Court issued an imperial edict summoning Li Zhi Lang to come to Beijing.

古文：去社两日而上道，至汴卒。
现代文：李侍郎离社日还两天上路赴京，赶到汴京死去。
English: On the day he left the company, Li Jirong went on the road to Beijing for two days and died in Beijing.

古文：李亦不得给事中。
现代文：李丹也没有升任给事中。
English: Li Dan has not been promoted either.

古文：又天宝十四年，王诸应举，欲入京。于越州沈七处卜。
现代文：又：唐玄宗天宝十四年，王诸参加科举考试，想进京，在越州沈七那儿占卜。
English: Also: In the 14th year of Tang Xuan Zong's Heavenly Treasure, Wang Zhu took the imperial examination and wanted to go to Beijing. He divined at Shenqi in Yuezhou.

古文：得纯乾卦，下四位动，变观卦。
现代文：得一纯乾卦，下四位动，变为观卦。
English: Get a pure Qian Gua, move the next four places, and become a Guan Gua.

古文：沈云：公今应举，得此卦，观国之光，利用宾于王，本是嘉兆。
现代文：沈七说：你现在进京去参加科举考试，卜得此卦，观赏国都的风光，作为宾客的你会借助皇上而发达，这原本是好的兆头。
English: Shen Qi said, "You are now going to Beijing to take the imperial examination, recite this poem, and enjoy the scenery of the capital. As a guest, you will be developed with the help of the emperor. This was originally a good omen.

古文：然交动，群阴咸阳。
现代文：然而，逢遇动乱，众奸小都阳气旺盛。
English: However, whenever there is turmoil, the traitorous petty tyrants are exuberant.

古文：下成乾卦，上变至四，又不至五。
现代文：下成乾卦，上变到第四位，而没有变到第五位。
English: The lower became dry and the upper became the fourth, but not the fifth.

古文：五是君位，未得利见大人。
现代文：五位主君，不能顺利地见到皇帝。
English: The five lords did not succeed in seeing the emperor.

古文：恐公此行，不至京而回。
现代文：从这种卦象上看，你这次进京参加考试，恐怕你没有到京就得中途返回。
English: Judging from this conundrum, if you come to Beijing to take the exam this time, I'm afraid you will have to return halfway if you don't go to Beijing.

古文：果至东京。属安禄山反。
现代文：果然，王诸走到东都洛阳，时逢安禄山反叛起兵，唐玄宗仓皇出走西蜀。
English: Sure enough, Wang Zhu walked to the eastern capital Luoyang, at the time of the Anlu Mountain rebellion, Tang Xuan Zongcang Emperor fled to Xishu.

古文：奔走却归江东。
现代文：于是他只好连忙回到江东来。
English: So he had to hurry back to Jiangdong.

古文：颍阴日者
现代文：颍阴日者
English: Those with a cloudy day

古文：陈澍为颍阴太守。属安禄山反，遣县尉姓孙向东京。
现代文：颍阴太守陈澍，在安禄山起兵叛乱时，派孙县尉去东都洛阳向朝廷报告。
English: When the An Lushan Rebellion broke out, Chen Xi, the governor of Yin, sent a Sun County lieutenant to Luoyang, the eastern capital, to report to the imperial court.

古文：孙不肯行。陈怒挞之。
现代文：孙县尉不肯去，陈澍一怒之下鞭打了他。
English: Lieutenant Sun refused to go, and Chen Xi whipped him in anger.

古文：至东京，遇禄山，请往颍阳取陈澍头。
现代文：孙县尉到达洛阳后，正逢叛军已攻占了洛阳。于是，孙县尉立即投靠叛军，并向安禄山请求派他前往颍阴取陈澍脑袋。
English: After Lieutenant Sun Xian arrived in Luoyang, the rebels had already captured Luoyang. Therefore, Lieutenant Sun Xian immediately sided with the rebels and asked Anlu Mountain to send him to Suyin to take Chen Xian's head.

古文：禄山补孙为颍阴太守，赐绯，并领二十余人取澍。
现代文：安禄山补任孙县尉为颍阴太守，赏赐给他红服，让他带领二十多个军校士卒去取陈澍人头。
English: Anlu Shan appointed Lieutenant Sun County as the governor of Suyin, gave him a red uniform, and asked him to lead more than 20 cadets to take Chen Xuan's head.

古文：澍闻便欲至，薄晚，出城走。
现代文：陈澍听到孙县尉就要到达颍阴了，傍晚，离城出去。
English: Chen Yao heard that Sun Xianfei was about to arrive in Jinyin. In the evening, he left the city.

古文：录事参军扣马令回。
现代文：但是录事参军拉住他的马头命令他回到城里去。
English: But the soldiers grabbed him by the scruff of the neck and ordered him back to the city.

古文：澍忧闷。服痢药讬疾。令一日者卜之。
现代文：陈澍很是惊恐担心，假称拉痢疾吃药躲在家中不出来，暗中找来一个会占卜的人为他卜算一下凶吉。
English: Chen Yao was very frightened and worried. He pretended to have dysentery and took medicine to hide at home. He secretly found a person who could tell fortunes for him to calculate his bad luck.

古文：曰：从今五日，当有家便，未取公。
现代文：占卜人说：从今天起五天以后，你全家就会平安顺利了。
English: The fortuneteller said, "Five days from today, your whole family will be safe and sound."

古文：然有五百车禄在，必亦不死。
现代文：孙县尉他们拿不走你的人头，你还有五百车的俸禄呢，肯定死不了。
English: Sun County Lieutenant, they can't take away your head, you still have a salary of five hundred chariots, you definitely can't die.

古文：至七日食时，公无恙矣。
现代文：到第七天吃饭的时候，你就会平安无事了。
English: By the time you eat on the seventh day, you will be fine.

古文：然当去此，求住不得。
现代文：但是，应当离开家里，这儿住不得。
English: But you have to leave home, you can't live here.

古文：后五日孙到，陈于是潜以库物遗诸衙内人。
现代文：五天后，孙县尉带领二十多人到颍。陈澍暗中将府库中的资财送给府内的同僚与下属，将这些人收买住。
English: Five days later, Lieutenant Sun led more than 20 people to Handan. Lieutenant Chen secretly sent the funds in the government treasury to his colleagues and subordinates in the government to bribe them to live there.

古文：至夜后，伪作敕书。
现代文：到了晚上，他伪造了一份假的皇帝诏书。
English: In the evening, he forged a fake imperial edict.

古文：令向西两驿上，差人逆来。
现代文：让人带着这份假诏书出城去京都，走了两驿站再返回来。
English: Someone went out of the city to Kyoto with this fake imperial edict, walked two stations and then returned.

古文：夜半敕书至。
现代文：到了半夜，假诏书到了。
English: At midnight, the fake edict arrived.

古文：明早，召集诸官宣。便令手刃就馆中诛杀孙，并手刃二十余人。杀录事参军。
现代文：天明后，陈澍将府内全体官员召集到一起，当面宣读诏书，之后下令处死孙县尉，就在驿馆中将孙杀死，并且杀了他带来的那二十多人，和阻挡他离城出走的录事参军。
English: After daybreak, Chen Xi called together all the officials in the prefecture, read out the edict in person, then ordered the execution of Lieutenant Sun, killed Sun in the pavilion, and killed the more than 20 people he brought with him, and blocked him from leaving the city to join the army.

古文：其孙尉先令人取妻及女等，夜半齐到，明日平明，尽杀之。
现代文：在这之前，孙县尉派人去接他的妻、女家眷。这天半夜，他的家眷都到了颍阴，天亮后全部被陈澍下令斩杀。
English: Prior to this, Lieutenant Sun County sent someone to pick up his wife and female family members. In the middle of the night, his family members all arrived in Shuyin. After dawn, they were all ordered to be beheaded by Chen Qi.

古文：令上住知州事，便发入京。以官绢五匹赏卜者。
现代文：陈澍让人拟好自己继续留任太守执掌颍阴的军政要务的奏折，立即发往京城，并从官衙库中取出五匹绢赏给占卜人。
English: Chen Yu asked someone to prepare a report on the important military and political affairs in which he would continue to remain the eunuch in charge of Gu Yin, immediately sent it to the capital, and took out five horses from the official storehouse to reward the diviner.

古文：王栖岩
现代文：王栖岩
English: Wangsui Rock

古文：王栖岩自湘川寓江陵鹭白湖，善治易，穷律候阴阳之术。
现代文：王栖岩从湘川移居在江陵鹭白湖，擅长用《易经》占卜，精通四候节令的变化和阴阳相术。
English: Wang Qiyan moved from Xiangchuan to Gangneung and settled in Baihu. He is good at divination with the "I Ching" and is proficient in the changes of the four seasons and yin and yang.

古文：所居桃杏手植成数十列，四蕃其宇。
现代文：他在住屋周围亲手栽植桃树、李树几十行，将他的住屋围在当中。
English: He personally planted dozens of rows of peach and plum trees around his house, enclosing his house in the middle.

古文：时人比董奉。
现代文：邻人们说他以三国时的吴人董奉自比。
English: Neighbors said he compared himself to the Wu ruler Dong Bong during the Three Kingdoms period.

古文：栖岩笑曰：吾独利其花核，祛风导气耳。
现代文：王栖岩笑着说：我是想用它们的花与果核为药，来去除风邪导引气息啊。
English: Wang Jiyan said with a smile, "I want to use their flowers and fruit kernels as medicine to get rid of the bad breath caused by colds."

古文：安取迹古人余事。
现代文：怎么效取古人的轶事呢。
English: How can you use the anecdotes of the ancients?

古文：每清旦布蓍，为人决事。
现代文：王栖岩每天早晨起来就为人占卜算卦，排解求卦人的忧虑疑难。
English: Wang Qiyan gets up every morning to do divination and calculation for people, and to solve the worries and difficulties of people seeking divination.

古文：取资足一日为生，则闭斋治园。
现代文：收取的费用够一天的花费用度后，就停止占卜，关闭院门，专心莳弄果园。
English: After collecting enough fees to cover one day's expenses, he stopped divination, closed the courtyard door, and concentrated on tending the orchard.

古文：大历中，尝有老父持百钱求筮。
现代文：唐代宗大历年间，有位老者拿着一百文来到王栖这儿求卜。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was an old man who came to Wangqi with a hundred coins to pray.

古文：卦成，参验其年。栖岩惊曰：家去几何？
现代文：卦成后，核验老者提供的生辰八字，王栖岩大惊异，问：你家离这儿多远？
English: After the conclusion of the riddle, Wang Qiyan was surprised by the verification of the eight characters of the birthday provided by the elderly, and asked: How far is your home from here?

古文：父往矣。
现代文：老人家，按卦上说你早已经死了。
English: Old man, by all accounts you're already dead.

古文：不然，将仆于道。
现代文：不然，也将死在回家途中啊。
English: Otherwise, they will also die on their way home.

古文：老父出，栖岩顾百钱，乃纸也。
现代文：老者离去后，王栖岩看看老者给他的卜资，是纸钱。
English: After the old man left, Wang Qiyan took a look at the money the old man had given him. It was paper money.

古文：因悟其所验之辰，则栖岩甲子。
现代文：这才想到老者提供的生辰八字正是自己的啊！
English: It only occurred to me that the eight characters of the old man's birthday were his own!

古文：乃叹曰：吾虽少而治《易》，不自意能幽入鬼鉴。
现代文：王牺岩感叹地说：我虽然从少年时就研习《易经》，却没有想到能够让阴界的鬼来提醒自己啊。
English: Wang Zhuoyan said with a sigh: Although I have been studying the I Ching since I was a boy, I did not expect to be able to remind myself of the ghosts of the underworld.

古文：死复何恨？
现代文：我死了又有什么值得遗憾的呢？
English: What's there to regret if I'm dead?

古文：乃沐浴更新衣，与妻子诀。
现代文：于是沐浴换上新衣，跟妻子话别，过了一会就去世了。
English: So he showered, put on a new suit, said goodbye to his wife, and died a short while later.

古文：少时而卒。路生
现代文：路生
English: Road students

古文：赵自勤尝选，访卜于长安县路生。
现代文：赵自勤在等候选官期间，向长安县一个叫路生的卜人问卜他这次能选任个什么官职？
English: While waiting for a candidate to emerge, Zhao Ziqin asked a soothsayer in Chang'an County named Lu Sheng what official position he could choose this time.

古文：路云：公之官，若非重日，即是重口。
现代文：路生说：你这次被任命的官职不是重日，就是重口。
English: Lu Sheng said, "The official position you have been appointed to this time is either heavy-handed or heavy-mouthed.

古文：后六月六日又卜。
现代文：六月六日，他又去问卜。
English: On June 6th, he went to pray again.

古文：路云：公之官，九日不出，十二日出。
现代文：路生说：你被选派的官职九日不公布，十二日肯定能公布。
English: Lu Sheng said, "The official position you have been selected for will not be announced on the 9th, but it will definitely be announced on the 12th."

古文：至九日，宰相果索吏部由历，至十二日敕出，为左拾遗。
现代文：到了九日那天，宰相向吏部要去待选人员的履历档案。到了十二日那到，朝廷颁发了任职命令，赵自勤被选任左拾遗。
English: On the ninth day, the prime minister asked the personnel department to retrieve the curriculum vitae file of the person to be elected. On the twelfth day, the imperial court issued an appointment order, and Zhao Ziqin was selected as the person to collect the remains.

古文：拾遗之字，各有一口。
现代文：拾遗二字，各有一个口字，果然应验了重口之说。
English: Each of the two characters in "Gleanings from the Wastes" has a mouth, which truly fulfills the saying of "heavy mouth."

古文：又补缺王晃，七月内访卜于路生。
现代文：在京都等候补缺的王晃，七月里向路生问卜。
English: In July, Wang Akira, who was waiting to fill a vacancy in Kyoto, asked a passer-by for advice.

古文：路云：九月当入省，官有礼字。
现代文：路生说：九月你命当入省，你的官职有 礼 字。
English: Lu Sheng said, "In September, you should go to the provincial government. Your official position has the word of honor.

古文：时礼部员外陶翰在座，乃曰：公即是仆替人。
现代文：当时礼部员外陶翰就在旁边坐着，说：你就是接替我的职务啊。
English: At that time, the member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Tao Han, was sitting next to him and said, "You are taking over my position."

古文：九月，陶病请假，敕除王礼部员外。
现代文：九月，陶翰因病告退，朝廷任命王晃为礼部员外。
English: In September, Tao Han retired due to illness, and the imperial court appointed Wang Huan as a member of the ritual department.

古文：后又令卜，云：必出当为 仓 字官。
现代文：后来，王晃又让路生为他卜算一卦。路生说：这回你将出任 仓 字官。
English: Later, Wang Akira asked the passer-by to tell him a story. The passer-by said: "This time you will be the warehouse clerk."

古文：果贬温州司仓。
现代文：后来，王晃果然被降职为温州司仓。
English: Later, Wang Akira was indeed demoted to the post of Wenzhou secretary.

古文：既而路生以其二子讬晃。
现代文：过了一些时日，路生将自己的两个儿子托付给王晃。
English: After some time, Lu Sheng entrusted his two sons to Wang Ao.

古文：晃又问：毕竟当何如？
现代文：王晃问：你到底让我怎么办？
English: Wang Xiao asked: What exactly do you want me to do?

古文：路云：某所以令儿讬公，其意可知也。
现代文：路生说：我所以将两个儿子托付给你，其中的用意就明白了。
English: "That's why I entrusted my two sons to you," the man said.

古文：邹生
现代文：邹生
English: 生

古文：武宗朝，宰相李回旧名喱，累举未捷。
现代文：唐武宗在位期间，宰相李回，原名李喱，在没有担任官职前，曾经屡次参加科举考试而没有考中。
English: During the reign of Tang Wuzong, Prime Minister Li Hui, whose original name was Li Jie, had repeatedly participated in the imperial examinations before taking office, but failed to pass the examination.

古文：尝之洛桥，有二术士。
现代文：当年，洛桥有二位占卜人。
English: At that time, there were two soothsayers in Luoqiao.

古文：一能筮，一能龟。
现代文：一位用蓍草占卜，一位用龟板占卜。
English: One used reeds for divination, another used a turtle board.

古文：乃先访筮者曰：某欲改名赴举，如之何？
现代文：李回，先问用蓍草占卜的人，说：我想改换个名子参加科考怎么样？
English: Li Hui, first asked the diviner with the reed, saying: I want to change my name, how about taking part in the scientific examination?

古文：筮者曰：改名甚善。
现代文：回答说：改名很好。
English: He replied: "It's good to change your name.

古文：不改，终不成事也。
现代文：不改名字，始终考取不上。
English: If you don't change your name, you'll never pass the entrance exam.

古文：又访龟者邹生。
现代文：又问用龟板占卜的邹生。
English: He also asked about the origin of divination using the tortoise board.

古文：生曰：君子此行，慎勿易名，名将远布矣。
现代文：邹生说：你这次参加科举考试，切记不要改名。你这个名字将要传播到很远的地方。
English: The student said, "When you take the entrance examination this time, remember not to change your name. Your name will spread far and wide."

古文：然则成遂之后，二十年终当改名。
现代文：然而，考中之后二十年，最后还得改名。
English: However, twenty years after the middle school entrance examination, they finally had to change their name.

古文：今则已应玄象，异时方测余言。
现代文：现在你已经应了天象，得到以后才能测试出我后边的话是否灵验。
English: Now that you've answered the riddle, it's time to test the validity of what I've just said.

古文：将行。又戒之曰：郎君必策荣名，后当重任。
现代文：李回临走时，用龟板占卜的术士又告戒他说：你此去一定会荣列金榜，它年定当重任。
English: When Li was about to leave, the sorcerer who used the tortoise-shell divination board warned him again: "You will definitely win the gold medal this time. It will be an important task.

古文：接诱后来，勿以白衣为隙。
现代文：但是你担当重任后，不要跟没有科举出身的人闹矛盾。
English: However, when you are in charge of a heavy responsibility, don't quarrel with people who don't have a degree in science.

古文：他年必为深衅矣。
现代文：如果闹了矛盾以后会结深仇的。
English: If there is a conflict, it will lead to a bitter feud.

古文：长庆二年，李及第。
现代文：唐穆宗长庆二年，李回考中。
English: In the second year of Tang Mu Zong Changqing, Li re-examined in middle school.

古文：至武宗登极。与上同名，始改为回。
现代文：到武宗登极继承皇位时，因为与武宗同名，才换去缠字，改名叫李回。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, he changed his name to Li Hui because he had the same name as Emperor Wuzong.

古文：乃曰：筮短龟长，邹生之言中矣。
现代文：李回说：用蓍草占卜的那个人技艺不行，还是用龟板占卜的邹生卜的准啊，果然被他言中了。
English: Li replied, "The person who used the reed to tell fortunes did not have the best skills, but the person who used the turtle to tell fortunes was right. He was right."

古文：李公既为丞郎，魏謩为给事。
现代文：后来，李回任丞郎，魏謩在门下省任给事中。
English: Later, Li was reinstated as chancellor, and Wei Wei was appointed to a provincial post under him.

古文：因省会，谓回曰：昔求府解，侍郎为试官。
现代文：一次，三省在一起集会议事，魏謩对李回说：当年我在京都参加会试，李侍郎任考试官。
English: On one occasion, when the three provinces gathered together for a meeting, Wei Wei replied to Li: "That year, I took the entrance examination in Kyoto, and Li Jirong was the examiner.

古文：送一百二人，独小生不蒙一解。
现代文：进京来应试的举子共计一百零二人，唯独我你一道试题也没有考问过。
English: A total of one hundred and two students came to Beijing to take the exam, but I did not ask any exam questions.

古文：今日还忝金章，厕诸公之列也。
现代文：现在我惭愧地位列国家重臣，跟诸位要员在一块就座啊。
English: Now I'm ashamed to be listed as a national chief minister, sitting with all of you dignitaries.

古文：合坐皆惊此说，欲其逊客。
现代文：魏謩的这番话，让在座的重臣要员深感吃惊，都想让李回退让一下。
English: Wei Wei's words made the chief ministers and dignitaries present here deeply surprised, and they all wanted Li to back down and concede.

古文：回曰：如今脱却紫衫，称魏秀才，仆为试官，依前不送公。
现代文：李回说：现在就请你脱去紫袍官服，改称魏秀才，我马上再考考你。如果考的不合格，照旧不选送你。
English: Li replied, "Now, please take off your purple robe and official uniform, and change your name to Wei Xucai. I will examine you again immediately. If you fail the examination, I will still not select you."

古文：公何以得旧事相让耳。
现代文：看你还怎么用过去的事情责难人？
English: See how you're still using the past to blame people?

古文：回乃寻秉独坐之权，三台肃畏。
现代文：于是李回开始寻找机会独握大权。中书省门下省、尚书省的官员们都敬畏惧怕他。
English: So Li Hui began to look for an opportunity to hold on to power. The officials of the subordinate and subordinate provinces of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China were in awe of him.

古文：而升相府。
现代文：李回终于升任宰相。
English: Li Hui was finally promoted to prime minister.

古文：后三五年，魏公亦自同州入相，而回累被贬谪。
现代文：又过了三、四年，魏謩也由同州升任宰相。而李回却屡次遭受贬降，奔波在朝外。
English: Three or four years later, Wei Wei was also promoted to chancellor from the same state. However, Li Hui was repeatedly demoted and traveled outside the imperial court.

古文：跋涉江湖，喟然叹曰：洛桥先生之诫，吾自取尤耳。
现代文：李回喟叹地说：洛桥邹生早就告诫我了，我是自己找不是呢。
English: Li Hui said with a sigh: Luo Qiao's son had warned me a long time ago, I was looking for it myself.

古文：然亦命之所牵也。
现代文：这也是命中注定的啊。
English: It was also predestined.

古文：五明道士
现代文：五明道士
English: Woming Taoist Temple

古文：长庆之代，邺中有五明道士者不知何许人，善阴阳历数，尤攻卜筮。
现代文：唐穆宗长庆年间，邺中有个五明道士，不知他是什么地方的人，俗名叫什么。他擅长阴阳历数，尤其精通占卜。
English: During the reign of Tang Mu Zong Changqing, there was a five-year-old Taoist in the imperial palace. I don't know where he was from, or what his common name was. He was good at counting the yin and yang, and was especially adept at divination.

古文：成德军节度田弘正御下稍宽，而冒于财贿，诛求不息。民众怨咨。
现代文：成德军节度田弘正对下属放纵治军不严。而且他贪取财物、敲诈勒索无尽无休，百姓们都非常怨恨他。
English: The commander of the German army, Tian Hong, was indulgent with his subordinates and lax in his military discipline. Moreover, he was greedy for money and extorted endlessly. The people resented him very much.

古文：时王庭凑为部将，遣使于邺。
现代文：当时王庭凑在他属下任部将，被田派到邺中。
English: At that time, Wang Tingchu was assigned to be a subordinate general under him, and was sent to Shanzhong by Tian.

古文：既至，忽有微恙。
现代文：王庭凑到达邺中后，忽然身患小病。
English: After Wang Tingpai arrived at the middle school, he suddenly fell ill.

古文：数日，求医未能愈。因诣五明，究平生否泰。
现代文：过了几天，找医生治疗不见效，于是到五明道士那里问凶吉和一生的命运。
English: After a few days, finding a doctor to treat him didn't work, so he went to the Wu Ming Daoist to ask about bad luck and the fate of his life.

古文：道士即为卜之，卦成而三钱并舞，良久方定。而六位俱重。
现代文：五明道士当即为他卜卦，三枚卜钱同时施出，好长时间才停下来，而且六爻俱重。
English: The five-eyed Taoist immediately began to pray for him. Three prayer coins were given out at the same time. It took a long time for him to stop, and it was six times heavier.

古文：道士曰：此卦纯乾，变为坤。
现代文：五明道士说：这是纯乾卦变为坤卦。
English: Woming Taoist said, "This is the transformation of pure Qian Gua into Kun Gua.

古文：坤土也，地也。
现代文：坤乃是土地。将军不久就会手握大权。
English: Kun is land. The general will soon be in power.

古文：大夫将来秉旄不远，兼有士地山河之分。事将集矣，宜速归乎。
现代文：兼有部分疆土为一方的主宰。事情很快就会到来的，还是急速回去为好。
English: He is the ruler of a part of the territory at the same time. Things will come soon, so it's better to go back quickly.

古文：庭凑闻其言，遽自掩其耳。
现代文：王庭凑听五明道士这样讲，赶忙用手捂住双耳。
English: Wang Ting listened attentively to what Wu Ming Daoist said and quickly covered his ears with his hands.

古文：是夜，又梦白须翁形容伟异，侍从十余人，皆手持小玉斧。
现代文：这天夜里，他又梦见一个容貌伟岸的白须老翁，身边有侍从十多人，每人手持一把小玉斧。
English: That night, he also dreamed of a great-looking white-bearded old man, surrounded by more than ten attendants, each holding a small jade axe.

古文：召王公而前，谓曰：患难将及，不可久留。
现代文：老翁召见王庭凑到身边，对他说：灾难就要降临了，此地不可久留。
English: The old man called Wang Ting to his side and said to him, "A disaster is about to happen. You can't stay here for long.

古文：既觉，庭凑疑惧，即辞魏帅而回。
现代文：接着就醒来了。王庭凑很疑惑惧怕，立即告辞将帅回到他的驻地。
English: Then he woke up. Wang Tingpai was very suspicious and afraid, and immediately bid farewell to the commander and returned to his station.

古文：比及还家，未逾旬，值军民大变。
现代文：待他回到驻地没过去十天，就发生了军士和百姓的哗变。
English: Ten days after his return to the garrison, there was a mutiny of sergeants and civilians.

古文：弘正为乱兵所害。士大夫将校，共推廷凑。
现代文：田弘正为乱军所杀，文武属员共同举王庭凑为节度使。
English: Tian Hongzheng was killed by the rebel army, and members of the civil and military forces jointly raised Wang Tingchuan as the festival envoy.

古文：庭凑再三退让，众不听，拥胁而立之。
现代文：王庭凑再三退让不接受，众人不听，用强制的手段硬立他为节度使。
English: The royal court repeatedly refused to accept the concession, and the people did not listen, and used coercive means to force him to be the commander of the festival.

古文：翌日，飞章上奏。
现代文：第二天，将拥立王庭凑为节度使这件事报告朝廷。
English: The next day, the royal court was summoned to report the matter to the imperial court.

古文：朝廷闻之大骇，征兵攻讨。以裴度为元帅。
现代文：朝廷闻听异常惊恐，立即派兵征讨，委派裴度为兵马大元帅。
English: Hearing this, the imperial court was extremely alarmed and immediately sent soldiers to enlist, appointing Pei Du as the grand marshal of the soldiers and horses.

古文：赵人拒命二年。王师不能下。
现代文：王庭凑及手下将士拒不接受朝廷的命令据守赵地两年，朝廷的军队也没有剿灭掉他们。
English: Wang Tingpiao and his subordinates refused to accept the order of the imperial court and remained in Zhao for two years. The imperial army did not annihilate them.

古文：俄而敬宗即世，文皇帝嗣位。
现代文：二年后，敬宗死去，文宗皇帝李昂继承皇位。
English: Two years later, Emperor Keizong died, and Emperor Wenzong succeeded to the throne.

古文：诏曰：念彼生灵，久罹涂炭。虽元凶是罪，而赤子何辜。
现代文：颁发诏书说：念你们这些百姓长期遭受战争的苦难，罪在元凶，你们是无辜的，因此，赦你们无罪，就委任王庭凑为节度使。
English: The imperial rescript issued said: "Remembering that you, the people, have been suffering from the war for a long time, and that guilt is the culprit, and that you are innocent, therefore, forgiving your innocence, I have appointed Wang Tingpiao as the envoy of the festival.

古文：宜一切数而宥之。就加节制。仍诏庭凑子元逵入侍。因以寿春公主妻焉。
现代文：后来文宗皇帝又诏王庭凑的儿子王元逵进京入朝奉侍，又将寿春公主许配给他作妻子。
English: Later, Emperor Wenzong also decreed that Wang Yuanzhang, the son of Wang Tingqiao, would enter Beijing to serve the imperial court, and he also betrothed Princess Shuchun to him as his wife.

古文：庭凑既立，甚有治声，朝廷称之。
现代文：王庭凑被拥立为节度使后，很有政绩，朝庭非常称赞他。
English: After Wang Tingpai was appointed as the envoy to the festival, he had a lot of political achievements, and the court praised him very much.

古文：在位十三年卒。
现代文：他在任十三年而死去。
English: He died after 13 years in office.

古文：赠太师。
现代文：死后赠封太师。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：子元逵继立，官至太尉。二十六年薨。
现代文：他的儿子王元逵承父业，一直升任太尉，历任二十六年去世。
English: His son, Wang Yuanjun, followed in his father's footsteps and was promoted to the rank of captain. He died after 26 years of service.

古文：长子绍懿立二年，荒淫暴乱，众议废而杀之。立其弟绍鼎。
现代文：王元逵的长子王绍懿接任节度使。二年后因为他荒淫暴乱被属下众人废掉杀死，立他的弟弟王绍鼎为节度使。
English: Wang Yuanzhang's eldest son, Wang Shaoqin, took over as the festival envoy. Two years later, he was killed by his subordinates because of his immorality, and his brother, Wang Shao Ding, was appointed as the festival envoy.

古文：绍鼎立六年卒。
现代文：六年后，王绍鼎死去。
English: Six years later, Wang Shaoding died.

古文：子景崇立十三年，官至中书令。
现代文：他的儿子王景崇承继父业，一直升任到中书令，封为常山王，在位十三年。
English: His son, Wang Jingsong, succeeded his father and was promoted to the position of Zhongshuling and was named the King of Changshan. He reigned for 13 years.

古文：爵常山王卒，子镕立，即赵王也。后恣横不道，为下所杀。
现代文：王景崇死后，他的儿子王镕承继父业。封为赵王，在位四十一年，后因恣横无道被下属杀死。
English: After Wang Jingsong's death, his son Wang Rong succeeded his father. He was named King Zhao and reigned for 41 years. He was later killed by his subordinates for his high-handedness.

古文：立四十一年。自庭凑至镕，凡五世六主，一百余年灭。
现代文：自王庭凑被拥立为节度起，到王镕被杀止，共历五代君王，一百多年。
English: The five generations of emperors lived together for more than a hundred years, from the time when Wang Tianzhong was enthroned as emperor to the time when Wang Yao was killed.

古文：初庭凑之立也，遣人诣邺，取五明置于府。
现代文：王庭凑被拥立之初，他派人到邺中将五明道士接来。
English: At the beginning of Wang Tingpai's rise to power, he sent someone to Yingzhong to fetch Wu Ming Taoist.

古文：为营馆舍，号五明先生院。
现代文：并且，新建一套馆舍给五明道士住，起名叫五明先生院。
English: In addition, a new set of buildings was built to house the Woming Taoists, called the Woming Master's House.

古文：公曾从容问曰：某今已忝藩侯，将来禄寿，更为推之。
现代文：王庭凑曾问：我现在已经位列藩侯，将来的寿禄，还望先生给推算一下。
English: Wang Tingqian once asked: I have now been ranked as the lord of the domain, and I would like you to calculate my future longevity.

古文：道人曰：三十年。
现代文：五明道人说：主人你有三十年的禄寿。
English: The five sages said, "Master, you have thirty years to live.

古文：愿明公竭节勤王，爱民恤物。
现代文：希望你能尽忠奉侍皇上，爱惜百姓体恤财物。
English: I hope that you will faithfully serve the emperor and be considerate of the people and their property.

古文：次则保神啬气，常以清俭为心。必享殊寿。
现代文：其次要保养精神珍惜元气，经常将清廉节俭放在心上，就一定会主高寿的。
English: Secondly, it is necessary to maintain the spirit, cherish vitality, and always keep cleanliness and frugality in mind, which will surely lead to a long life.

古文：后裔兼有二王，皆公余庆之所致也。
现代文：你的后代会有二人封王，都是明公余下的福分所给与他们的啊。
English: Your descendants will have two crowned kings, both given to them by Ming Gong's remaining blessings.

古文：《春秋》所谓五世其昌，八世之后，莫之与京。
现代文：《春秋》上说五世昌盛，八世之后就不能相比了。
English: "Spring and Autumn" said that the fifth generation was prosperous, and after the eighth generation, it could not be compared.

古文：公曰：幸事已多，素无勋德，此言非所敢望。
现代文：王庭凑说：现在值得庆幸的事情已经够多的了。我们王家向来没有积下什么勋业功德，你刚才讲的那些不是我敢希望的啊。
English: Wang Tingqian said, "There are already enough things to be happy about. Our royal family has never accumulated any meritorious deeds. What you just said is not what I dare to hope for."

古文：因以数百金为寿。道士固辞不受。
现代文：王庭凑送给五明道士几百两黄金祝他长寿，五明道士坚决辞谢不接受，王庭凑一定要送给他。
English: Wang Tingpai gave several hundred taels of gold to Wu Ming Daoist to wish him a long life. Wu Ming Daoist resolutely refused to accept the gift. Wang Tingpai must give it to him.

古文：公亦固与之，载归其室。数日尽施之，一无留焉。
现代文：五明道士将这些黄金带回住室后，几天之内都布施给他人了，一点也不留。
English: After Wu Ming Taoist brought the gold back to his room, he gave it away to others within a few days, leaving nothing behind.

古文：二王：景崇封常山王。镕为赵王也。黄贺
现代文：所谓有二人封王，即王庭凑的重孙王景崇封常山王，他的重孙的儿子王镕封赵王。黄贺
English: It is said that there were two fief kings, that is, Wang Tingzhi's great-grandson Wang Jingzong fiefed the King of Changshan, and his great-grandson's son Wang Shifeng fiefed the King of Zhao. Huang He

古文：唐昭宗时，有黄贺者，自云巩洛人也。
现代文：唐昭宗在位时期，有个叫黄贺的人，自称是巩洛人，因躲避战乱，渡过黄河来到赵地。
English: During the reign of Tang Zhaozong, a man named Huang He, who claimed to be from Gongluo, crossed the Yellow River to Zhao Di to escape the war.

古文：因避地来，涉河游赵，家于常山，以卜筮为业。而言吉凶必效。
现代文：黄贺来到赵地后，居住在常山，从事占卜，而且他占卜吉凶都极准，事后一定应验。
English: After Huang He came to Zhao Di, he lived in Changshan and engaged in divination. Moreover, his divination of auspicious and inauspicious events was extremely accurate and must have been fulfilled afterwards.

古文：时赵王镕方在幼冲，而燕军寇北鄙。王方选将拒之。有勇士陈立、刘干投刺于军门。愿以五百人尝寇，必面缚戎首。
现代文：当赵王李镕还在幼年时，一次燕军进犯北部边境，赵王刚要选派将领去抵挡，有两个叫陈立、刘干的勇士向军帐投递名帖，说愿意率领五百军士跟敌寇一战，一定当面虏获敌军的首领。
English: When Zhao Wang Lijun was still in his infancy, once the Yan army invaded the northern border, Zhao Wang just wanted to choose a general to resist. Two warriors named Chen Li and Liu Gan submitted a famous postcard to the military account, saying that they were willing to lead five hundred sergeants to fight against the enemy, and they would definitely capture the leader of the enemy in person.

古文：王壮而许之。
现代文：赵王鼓励了二人一番，批准了他们的请战。
English: Zhao Wang encouraged the two and approved their request to fight.

古文：翌日，二夫率师而出，夜击燕垒。
现代文：第二天，二位勇士率领军队出征，当夜袭击燕军营寨，获得大捷。
English: The next day, the two warriors led the army to go to war. That night, they attacked Yan's camp and won a great victory.

古文：大振捷音。燕人骇而奔退。
现代文：燕军惊恐地四处逃窜，赵军乘胜追击折杀燕军。陈立战死，刘干率部队凯旋而归。
English: Yan's army fled everywhere in fear, and Zhao's army took advantage of the victory to pursue and kill Yan's army. Chen Li died in battle, and Liu Gan led the troops to a triumphant return.

古文：立卒于锋刃之下。干即凯唱而还。
现代文：赵王大悦，赏赐给刘干几匹御马和相应的黄金布帛。
English: Zhao Wang Daye, rewarded Liu Gan with several imperial horses and the corresponding gold cloth.

古文：王悦，赐上厩马数匹。金帛称是。俄为阉人所谮曰：此皆陈立之功。非干之效。
现代文：但是，过不多久，有个太监向赵王进谗言，说：这次大胜敌军都是战死疆场的陈立的功劳，不是刘干效的力。
English: However, not long after, a eunuch spoke harshly to Zhao Wangjin, saying, "This great victory over the enemy army is all the merit of Chen Li, who died on the battlefield, not Liu Gan's strength.

古文：王母何夫人闻之曰：不必身死为君。
现代文：赵王的母亲何夫人听到后说：不必要都战死才算报效国君。
English: After hearing this, Zhao Wang's mother, Lady He, said, "It is not necessary to die in battle in order to be considered a national hero.

古文：未若全身为国。
现代文：战死还不如活着全力奋起保卫国家。
English: It is better to die in battle than to live and do one's best to defend the country.

古文：即赐锦衣银带，加钱二十万，擢为中坚尉。
现代文：于是，王太后又尝赐给刘干锦衣银带，外加钱十二万，并提升刘干为中坚尉。
English: As a result, the empress dowager also gave Liu Gan brocade clothes and a silver belt, plus 120,000 yuan, and promoted Liu Gan to lieutenant.

古文：初干曾诣贺卜。
现代文：在出击燕军之前，刘干曾到黄贺这儿来问卜凶吉。
English: Before setting out to attack Yan's army, Liu Gan had come to Huang He to ask for fortune-telling.

古文：卦成而谓干曰：是卦也，火水未济，终有立也。
现代文：卦成后黄贺对刘干说：这卦啊，水与火没有相遇，最终一定有所成立。
English: Huang He said to Liu Gan after the conclusion of the riddle: This riddle, ah, water and fire did not meet, in the end, something must have been established.

古文：九二之动，曳轮贞吉。
现代文：阳爻第二爻动，见龙在田，君德广施，予示着你将大承恩泽。
English: The second throbbing of impotence, seeing the dragon in the field, and being virtuous and generous, foreshadow that you will receive great blessings.

古文：以正救难，往有功也。
现代文：贞吉是正，以正来解救危难，出师一定会建立功勋的。
English: Zhengyi is positive, to be positive to solve the crisis, to be a teacher will certainly build a meritorious.

古文：变而之晋，明出地中。
现代文：变化后又成为晋卦，光明出在地中。
English: After the change, it became Jin Gua again, and the light appeared in the ground.

古文：奋发光扬，恩泽相接。
现代文：奋发光扬，将会连续得到恩泽。
English: Strive to shine brightly, and you will continue to receive grace.

古文：子令行也，利用御戎，大获庆捷。
现代文：壮士今日出击，有利于打击敌寇，一定能大获全胜。
English: Today's valiant attack is conducive to cracking down on enemy bandits, and will surely win a sweeping victory.

古文：王当有车马之赐。其间小衅，不足忧之。
现代文：赵王必定赐给你车马等物，中间有些小差错，不必忧虑。
English: King Zhao will surely give you chariots, horses, and other things. There will be some small mistakes in the middle, so don't worry.

古文：行军司马路晏，曾夜适厕，有盗伏焉。
现代文：行军司马路晏，一次夜间上厕所，发现有一个盗贼藏在那儿。
English: A traffic policeman went to the toilet one night and found a thief hiding there.

古文：晏忽心动。取烛照之。盗即告言！请无惊惧。其禀命有自。
现代文：路晏急忙取烛火照看，这位盗贼出来告诉他：请将军不要惊惧，我是奉命来刺杀你的。
English: Passepartout hastened to fetch a candle, and the thief came out and said to him: "General, do not be alarmed, I have been ordered to assassinate you."

古文：察公正直。不忍待刃。
现代文：但是得知将军为人公正耿直，不忍心出手相刺。
English: But when he learned that the general was a fair and upright man, he could not bear to attack him.

古文：即匣剑而去。
现代文：说完还剑于鞘内转身离去。
English: After saying that, he put his sword back in its sheath, turned around and left.

古文：晏由是昼夜警惕，以备不虞。
现代文：路宴从此昼夜警惕，防备再出现意外的事情。
English: From now on, the roadside banquet will be vigilant day and night to prevent accidents from happening again.

古文：召黄生筮之。卦成贺曰：惕号暮夜，有戎勿恤。察象征辞，人有害公之意。然难已过矣。
现代文：并召请黄贺问卜，卦成后黄贺说：有刺客而没有惊恐，观卦象看征兆，是有人想加害将军，但此难已经过去了。
English: Huang He was also summoned to ask for divination. After the battle, Huang He said, "There are assassins, but I am not alarmed. Watching the battle is like seeing a sign. It is someone who wants to harm the general, but this difficulty has passed."

古文：但守其中正，请释忧心。
现代文：只要将军你坚守为人的中正之道，请你放宽心吧。
English: As long as you stick to the right path as a human being, please relax.

古文：晏亦终无患也。
现代文：从这以后，路晏始终再没遇到什么祸患。
English: Since then, Lu Yao has never encountered any misfortune.

古文：又赞皇县尉张师曾卧病经年。
现代文：又：赞皇县尉张师曾经身患重病，一年多不见好转。
English: Also: Zhang Shi, a lieutenant of Zanhuang County, was once seriously ill and did not improve for more than a year.

古文：日觉危殆，良医不复进药。
现代文：而且感觉一天重似一天，最好的医生都不给他开处方下药了。
English: And it feels like day after day, the best doctors are not prescribing him medication.

古文：请贺卜之。
现代文：张师请黄贺来给他算一卦。
English: Zhang invited Huang He to give him a piece of advice.

古文：卦就，黄生告曰：无妄之疾，勿药有喜。
现代文：卦成后，黄贺告诉他说：不是什么病，不用药还有喜事。
English: After the conclusion, Huang He told him: "It's not a disease, there are good things about not taking medicine.

古文：请停理疗五日，必大瘳也。
现代文：请你停止治疗五天，一定会完全康复的。
English: Please stop the treatment for five days. You will definitely make a full recovery.

古文：师果应期而愈。
现代文：张师的病果然到第六天就痊愈了。
English: Zhang Shishi's illness was cured on the sixth day.

古文：又数十年，师梦白鸟飞翔，坠入云际。
现代文：又过了几十年，张师梦见一只鸟，飞着飞着就从云端坠落下来。
English: Decades later, Master Zhang dreamed of a bird that flew and flew and then fell from the clouds.

古文：既觉，心神恍惚。召贺卜算之。
现代文：梦醒，他感到心神恍惚，召请黄贺卜算一卦。
English: Waking from a dream, he felt dizzy and summoned Huang He to recite a poem.

古文：贺即决卦。
现代文：黄贺当即给他卜算。
English: Huang He immediately gave him the answer.

古文：惨然而问师曰：朝来寝息，不有梦乎？
现代文：卦成，神色惨然地说：你早晨睡觉时作了一个梦吧。
English: "You must have had a dream when you went to bed this morning," Guacheng said miserably.

古文：必若有梦，其飞禽之象乎？
现代文：若是作梦一定梦见鸟飞了。
English: If you dream, you must dream that the bird has flown.

古文：且雷振山上，鸟坠云间，声迹两消，不可复见。
现代文：雷震山上，鸟坠云间，声迹两消，不可能再见到了。
English: Thunder on the mountain, birds falling among the clouds, the sound disappears, it is impossible to see it again.

古文：愿加保爱。乐天委命而已。
现代文：希望你自己多加保重，乐天听命吧。
English: I hope you take good care of yourself.

古文：张竟不起，时年七十一也。
现代文：张师竟然没再起来，享年七十一岁。
English: Zhang Shi never got up again and died at the age of seventy-one.

古文：又有段诲者，任藁城镇将。
现代文：还有一个叫段诲的人，官任藁城镇将。
English: There is also a person called Duan Yan, who is an official and a town marshal.

古文：曾夜宿邮亭，马断缰而逸，数日不知所适。
现代文：一次，段诲夜里睡在邮亭里，他的坐骑挣断缰绳走了，好几天了也不知道它究竟跑到哪里去了。
English: Once, when he was sleeping in the post office in the middle of the night, his horse broke the bridle and ran away, and for several days he did not know where it had gone.

古文：使人诣肆而筮之。贺曰：据卦睽也。
现代文：派人到市场黄贺的卦摊去卜算，黄贺说：这是睽卦，主小事吉利。
English: He sent someone to Huang He's fortune-telling stall in the market to do some calculations. Huang He said, "This is a fortune-telling stall.

古文：初九动者，应有亡失之事。无乃丧马乎？
现代文：起始九动，应有丢失的事情发生，不就是丢马了吗？
English: At the beginning of the nine movements, there should be lost things happening, isn't it just losing a horse?

古文：勿逐自复。
现代文：不用去找它自己会回来的。
English: You don't have to look for it, it will come back on its own.

古文：必有絷而送之者也。
现代文：一定有人会牵着马给你送回来的。
English: I'm sure someone will bring it back to you on a horse.

古文：回未及舍，已有边鄙恶少，牵而还之。
现代文：去问卜的人还没有回到府上，就有一个边境上的顽劣少年牵着这匹走失的马送上家门。
English: Before the soothsayer returned to the house, a naughty boy from the border took the lost horse and brought it to the house.

古文：贺所占卜，皆此类也。
现代文：黄占卜的大都是这一类的卦，都非常灵验。
English: Most of Huang's divinations are of this type, and they are very effective.

古文：时人谓之易圣公。
现代文：当时人称他为易圣公。
English: At that time, he was known as Yi Sheng Gong.

古文：刘岩曾诣之。生谓曰：君他日必成伟器，然勿以春日为恨。
现代文：有个叫刘岩的人，到黄贺那儿去问卜，黄贺告诉他：你日后一定能成为一个大人物，然而不要以春日为遗憾。
English: A man named Liu Yan went to Huang He to ask for advice. Huang He told him: You will surely become a great man in the future, but don't regret the Spring Festival.

古文：初不晓其意，及老悟。盖迟迟之谓也。
现代文：到老了的时候才醒悟过来；原来是自己迟迟没有功成名就，直到老了才成就了一番事业。
English: It was only when he was old that he came to his senses; it turned out that he was late in achieving fame, and it was not until he was old that he achieved a great career.

古文：邓州卜者
现代文：邓州卜者
English: The Dangzhou Pilgrims

古文：有书生住邓州。
现代文：有一位读书人家住在邓州。
English: There is a reader who lives in Dengzhou.

古文：尝游郡南，数月不返。
现代文：一次，他到郡南去野游，好几个月没回家。
English: Once, he went to the south of the county for a field trip and did not return home for several months.

古文：其家诣卜者占之。卜者观卦曰：甚异。
现代文：他的家里人到一个占卜人那去算一卦，占卜人看着卦象说：奇怪呀！
English: A member of his family went to a fortuneteller to calculate a fortune. The fortuneteller looked at the fortune-teller and said: "How strange!

古文：吾未能了，可重祝。
现代文：我决断不了，重祈祷一下。
English: I can't decide. Let's pray.

古文：祝毕。拂龟改灼。复曰：君所卜行人，兆中如病非病，如死非死。
现代文：祷告完了，改用龟卜，砍一块龟板烧灼，说：你们问卜的这个人，在龟卜的显象中象似病了却没有病，好象死了却没有死。
English: When he had finished praying, he used a tortoise, cut a tortoise plate and heated it, saying: "This man, whom you asked for a tortoise, in the tortoise's appearance is as if he were ill but not ill, as if he were dead but not dead.

古文：逾年自至矣。
现代文：过了年，他自己会回来的。
English: After a year, he will come back on his own.

古文：果半稔，书生归云：游某山深洞，入值物蛰。
现代文：果然过了半年，这位读书人回到家来。说：我进入山中的一个深洞里，让一种东西蛰了一下，象患了病，四肢不能动弹。
English: After half a year, the reader returned home and said, "I went into a deep cave in the mountains, and something gave me a jolt. It felt like I was ill, and I couldn't move my limbs.

古文：如中疾，四支不能动，昏昏若半醉。见一物自明入穴中，却返。
现代文：脑袋昏昏沉沉的，象喝醉了酒。后来，看见一个怪物从明处爬进洞里，又返回去。
English: His head was dizzy, as if he had drunk wine. Later, he saw a monster crawl into the cave from a bright place and return.

古文：良久又至，直附身，引颈临口鼻。
现代文：过了好一会儿，又来了，一直爬到我身边，伸出脖颈贴近我的嘴和鼻子。
English: After a while, it came again, crawling all the way to me, stretching its neck close to my mouth and nose.

古文：细视之，乃巨龟也。
现代文：我仔细一看，原来是一只巨龟。
English: When I took a closer look, it turned out to be a giant turtle.

古文：十息顷方去。
现代文：停了约喘十口气的工夫才离去。
English: He paused for about ten breaths before leaving.

古文：书生酌其时日。其家卜时吉焉。
现代文：家里人将当时问卜的情形告诉给这位书生，书生算了一下时间，正是在他见到巨龟的时候，家里为他占的卜。
English: The family member told the student about the fortune-telling. The student calculated the time, and it was when he saw the giant turtle that the family divined the fortune for him.

