古文：崔斌崔斌，字仲文，马邑人。
现代文：崔斌字仲文，马邑人。
English: Cui Bin, surnamed Zhongwen, Ma'e people.

古文：性警敏，多智虑，魁岸雄伟，善骑射，尤攻文学，而达政术。
现代文：机敏多智，体格魁梧，善于骑射，对于文学深有造诣，能晓政治。
English: He is quick-witted and witty, has a huge physique, is good at riding and shooting, is well-versed in literature, and understands politics.

古文：世祖在潜邸召见，应对称旨，命佐卜怜吉带，将游骑戍淮南。
现代文：世祖还是太子时就召见了他，命他辅助卜怜吉带率领游骑戍守淮南。
English: The ancestor summoned him when he was still a prince and ordered him to assist Bu Rongji to lead the cavalry to defend Huainan.

古文：斌负才略，卜怜吉带甚敬礼之。
现代文：斌颇有才略，卜怜吉带甚是敬重他。
English: Bin was quite talented, and Bu Rongji respected him very much.

古文：兵驻扬州西城，俾斌领骑兵觇敌形势，斌视敌兵乱，潜出袭之，多所杀获。
现代文：蒙古大军驻于扬州西城，令斌领一支人马侦察敌情，斌见敌军混乱，进行偷袭，斩获甚多。
English: The Mongolian army was stationed in Xicheng, Yangzhou. Ling Bin led a team to reconnoiter the enemy situation. Bin saw the confusion of the enemy army, carried out a sneak attack, and made a lot of gains.

古文：俄丁父忧，袭授金符，为总管。
现代文：父亲去世，斌服丧期满，授金符为总管。
English: After his father's death, Bin's mourning period expired, and he became the general manager of the gold certificate.

古文：中统元年，改西京参议宣慰司事。
现代文：中统元年，改任西京参议宣慰司事。
English: In the first year of the unified China, he was transferred to the post of secretary of the West Beijing Senate.

古文：世祖尝命安童举汉人识治体者一人，安童举斌。
现代文：世祖曾命安童举荐汉人中懂政治者一人，安童推举崔斌。
English: The ancestor once ordered Ando to recommend a politician among the Chinese, and Ando recommended Cui Bin.

古文：入见，敷陈时政得失，曲中宸虑。
现代文：斌入见世祖，陈述他对当时政治得失的意见，世祖满意。
English: Bin Rong met with Shizu and stated his opinion on the political gains and losses at that time. Shizu was satisfied.

古文：帝幸上都，尝召斌，斌下马步从。
现代文：当时，世祖锐意图治，斌敢于直言，是非分明，无所避讳。
English: At that time, Shizuru intended to govern, Bin dared to speak out, was clear about the rights and wrongs, and did not shy away from anything.

古文：帝命之骑，因问为治大体，今当何先。
现代文：世祖在上都，曾召斌问他安邦治国首要的事是什么。
English: In Shangdu, the patriarch once summoned Bin and asked him what was the most important thing in governing the country.

古文：斌以任相对。
现代文：斌说是任命一个好的宰相。
English: Bin said that the appointment of a good prime minister.

古文：帝曰： 汝其为我举可为相者。 
现代文：世祖说 ：你为我荐举可以为相的人。 
English: The ancestor said, "Recommend me someone who can be my successor."

古文：斌以安童、史天泽对，帝默然良久。斌曰： 陛下岂以臣猥鄙，所举未允公议，有所惑欤？
现代文：斌推荐了安童、史天泽等。世祖沉默了许久，斌有些不安地说 ：陛下岂是认为臣是卑下之人，所举荐不合公议，有所怀疑？
English: Bin recommended Ando, Shi Tianze, and others. Shizuru was silent for a long time, and Bin said somewhat uneasily: Does your majesty think that the vassal is a lowly person, that the recommendation is not open to public discussion, and that he has doubts?

古文：今近臣咸在，乞采舆言，陛下裁之。 
现代文：今近臣都在这里，请让我收集大家的意见，由陛下裁决。 
English: Now that the courtiers are here, please let me collect everyone's opinions and let His Majesty decide.

古文：帝俞其请，斌立马扬言曰： 有旨问安童为相，可否？ 
现代文：帝同意他的请求。斌立在马上高声问道： 皇上有旨，问安童为相可否？ 
English: The emperor agreed to his request. Bin Li immediately asked in a loud voice: The emperor has a will, is it possible to ask Ando for a match?

古文：众欢然呼万岁。
现代文：众人欢腾表示赞同，并高呼万岁。
English: The crowd cheered in approval and chanted "long live the revolution."

古文：帝悦，遂以二人并为相。除斌左右司郎中。
现代文：世祖十分高兴，便以安童、史天泽二人为相，任斌为左右司郎中。
English: The patriarch was very happy, so he took Ando and Shi Tianze as his two attendants, and Ren Bin as his right and left attendants.

古文：每论事帝前，群言终日不决者，斌以数言决之。
现代文：朝臣们每次在帝面前论事，议论终日，最后没有决断，斌以数言就决断了。
English: Every time the courtiers argued in front of the emperor, they argued all day long, and in the end there was no decision, and Bin decided with a few words.

古文：进见，必与近臣偕，其所献替，虽密近之臣，有不得与闻者，以此人多忌之。
现代文：每次进见皇帝，必与近臣一道，其对皇帝劝善改过的意见，虽最亲近的侍臣也不得而知，因此人们多忌刻他。
English: Every time he visited the emperor, he would, together with his close vassals, persuade the emperor to change his mind, although the closest vassal did not know, so people were more afraid of him.

古文：会阿合马立制国用使司，专总财赋，一以掊克为事，斌曰： 与其有聚敛之臣，宁有盗臣！ 
现代文：阿合马设立制国用使，专管财政，勒索百姓。斌说： 与其有搜括百姓之臣，不如有盗窃国库之臣。 
English: Ahma set up a special envoy to manage the finances and blackmail the people. Bin said: "It is better to have a minister who steals the treasury than to have a minister who collects money from the people."

古文：于帝前屡斥其奸恶。
现代文：多次在世祖面前斥责阿合马的奸恶。
English: He repeatedly rebuked Ahma's treachery in front of the patriarchs.

古文：至元四年，出守东平。
现代文：至元四年，出京去任东平府太守。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Dongping Prefecture.

古文：五年，大兵南征，道寿张。
现代文：五年，大军南征，路过寿张。
English: Five years later, the Southern Expedition passed through Shouzhang.

古文：卒有撤民席，投其赤子于地以死，诉于斌。斌驰谓主将曰： 未至敌境，而先杀吾民，国有常刑，汝亦当坐。 
现代文：一兵卒撤毁百姓卧席，将初生婴儿丢在地上致死，百姓投诉于斌，斌去对主将说 ：还未到敌境便杀自己的百姓，国有刑法在，你也要问罪。 
English: A soldier removed the people's couch and threw the newborn baby on the ground to death. The people complained to Bin. Bin went to the commander-in-chief and said, "You killed your own people before reaching the enemy's territory. The national criminal law is in place, and you will also be charged with a crime."

古文：于是下其卒于狱，自是莫敢犯。
现代文：于是将该卒下狱，从此以后再无人敢侵犯百姓。
English: As a result, the officer was sent to prison, and from then on, no one dared to violate the people.

古文：岁大昆，征赋如常年，斌驰奏以免，复请于朝，得楮币十万缗，以赈民饥。
现代文：这年歉收，而赋税如常年一样征收，斌奏请免征，还向朝廷请求救济款纸币十万缗，用以赈济饥民。
English: This year's harvest was poor, but taxes were levied as usual, Bin So requested exemption, and also requested the court for relief money of 100,000 baht to help the hungry.

古文：六年，除同佥枢密院事。
现代文：六年，任同佥枢密院事。
English: Six years later, he was appointed a peer of the Privy Council.

古文：襄樊之役，命斌佥河南行省事。
现代文：襄樊之战时，斌任佥河南行省事。
English: During the Battle of Xiangfan, Bin Renzhen went to Henan Province for provincial affairs.

古文：方议攻鹿门山，斌曰： 自岘山西抵万山，北抵汉江，筑城浚堑，以绝饷援，则襄阳可坐制矣。 
现代文：蒙军计划攻鹿门山，斌建议： 自岘山西至万山，北至汉江，筑城堡，深挖濠，断绝敌军粮饷和援军，则襄阳垂手可得。 
English: The Mongolian army planned to attack Lumen Mountain, Bin suggested: From the west of Lushan Mountain to Wanshan, north to the Han River, build castles, dig trenches, cut off the enemy's food supply and reinforcements, then Xiangyang is at hand.

古文：时调曹、濮民丁，屯田南阳。斌议罢曹、濮屯民，以近地兵多者补之，民以为便。
现代文：这时，调曹州、濮州壮丁屯田南阳，斌建议不用征调曹、濮百姓屯田，以附近兵多者去屯田，百姓都认为这样好。
English: At this time, Bin suggested that there was no need to conscript and force the people to go to Nanyang, and that more soldiers from the surrounding areas should go to Nanyang. The people all thought this was a good idea.

古文：又议户部给滨、棣、清、沧盐券，付行省，募民以米贸之，仍增价和籴。
现代文：又提议，由户部将滨州、棣州、清州、沧州的盐券付与行省，用盐券增价收购民间米粮。
English: It was also proposed that the Ministry of Households should give salt coupons from Binzhou, Zhangzhou, Qingzhou and Cangzhou to the provinces, and use the salt coupons to purchase private rice grains at a higher price.

古文：远近输贩者辐辏，馈饷不劳而集。
现代文：于是远近贩米来卖者，络绎不绝，军粮不费多大气力就征集起来了。
English: As a result, there was an endless stream of rice sellers from near and far, and the army rations were collected without much effort.

古文：有旨：河南四路，籍兵二万，以益襄樊。
现代文：朝廷命河南四路征兵二万人以增加襄樊的兵力。
English: The imperial court ordered the Henan Fourth Route to recruit 20,000 soldiers to increase the strength of Xiangfan.

古文：斌即驰奏曰： 河南户少，而调度繁多，实不堪命，减其半为宜。 
现代文：斌忙奏报朝廷 ：河南户口少，而且调度频繁，人民承受不了，减少一半为好。 
English: Bin hurriedly reported to the imperial court: Henan has few hukou, and the dispatching is frequent, the people can't bear it, it's better to reduce it by half.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷依从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：襄阳既下，转嘉议大夫，仍佥行中书省。
现代文：襄阳攻克后，斌转为嘉议大夫，仍佥行中书省事。
English: After conquering Xiangyang, Bin turned into a doctor of commendation, but he still kept a low profile.

古文：十年，诏丞相伯颜总兵南征，改行省为河南宣慰司，加中奉大夫，赐金虎符，充宣慰使。
现代文：至元十一年，诏令丞相伯颜统领大军南征宋朝，改行省为河南宣慰司，任斌为宣慰使，加中奉大夫，赐金虎符。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor ordered the chancellor, Bo Yan, to lead the Southern Expedition of the Song Dynasty, and he was transferred to the province as the Henan Consolation Division, Ren Bin as the Consolation Envoy, and Zhong Bong as the Doctor, and he was awarded the Golden Tiger.

古文：是时，襄阳、正阳诸军，悉道河南，供亿虽繁，而事无缺失。
现代文：当时，襄阳、正阳诸军都经过河南，供给虽然繁多，但从无短缺。
English: At that time, the armies of Xiangyang and Zhengyang all passed through Henan. Although the supply was abundant, there was never a shortage.

古文：伯颜既渡江，分阿里海牙定湖南，诏斌贰之，拜行中书省参知政事。
现代文：伯颜渡江后，派阿里海牙去平定湖南，朝廷令斌辅助，拜斌为行中书省参知政事。
English: After Bo Yan crossed the river, he sent Ali Hague to pacify Hunan, assisted by the imperial court, and Bai Bin was the governor of the province.

古文：十月，围潭州，斌攻西北铁坝。阿里海牙中流矢，不能军，斌以军夜集栅下，黎明毕登，不利。斌曰： 彼军小捷而骄弛，吾今焚其角楼，断其援道，堑城为三周，如此则城可得。 
现代文：十二年十月，元军围攻潭州，斌攻西北铁坝，阿里海牙中箭受伤不能指挥，斌夜间集中兵力于栅下，黎明发起攻击，不利，斌曰： 敌军取得小胜，必然骄傲，放松戒备，我们乘机烧掉他们望楼，断绝其援兵的通道，围城挖三道壕沟，这样则城可攻破。 
English: In October of the twelfth year, the Yuan army besieged Tanzhou, Bin attacked the Northwest Iron Dam, Ali Hague was injured by an arrow and could not command, Bin concentrated his forces under the gate at night, and launched an attack at dawn, which was unfavorable, Bin said: The enemy army won a small victory, must be proud, and relaxed their guard. We took the opportunity to burn their watchtower, cut off their reinforcement channel, and dig three trenches around the city, so that the city could be broken.

古文：诸将然之。乃誓师，衔枚潜登铁坝，人赍刍秸，梯其楼火之，且竖木栅城上。
现代文：诸将赞同，于是誓师进军，令一部人偷登铁坝，每人带薪柴一捆去烧望楼，竖木栅于城上。
English: The generals agreed, so the oath-takers marched in, ordered some of them to climb the dam, and each of them was paid a bundle of firewood to burn the watchtower, and the wooden lattice on the castle.

古文：诘旦，布云梯鼓噪而上，斌挟盾先登。
现代文：天明时大军一起攻城，斌持盾先登，攻占铁坝。
English: At dawn, the large army attacked the city together. Bin, holding a shield, was the first to climb up and capture the iron dam.

古文：阿里海牙持酒劳曰： 取此城，公之力也。 
现代文：阿里海牙持酒慰劳斌道： 取此城，是公的力量。 
English: Ali Hague consoled Laobin with a drink: "Taking this city is a public power.

古文：斌自语阿里海牙曰： 潭人胆破矣。若敛兵不进，许其来降，则土地人民皆我有，自重湖以南，连城数十，可传檄而定。
现代文：斌向阿里海牙建议 ：现在潭州人已吓破了胆，若我们停止进攻，让他们来降，则其土地人民皆我们所有，而且自重湖以南的数十城，只需一道命令，他们便拱手投降。
English: Bin suggested to Ali Hague: Now that the people of Tanzhou have lost their nerve, if we stop the attack and let them surrender, then we will own all their land and people, and from the dozens of cities south of the heavy lake, they will surrender with just one order.

古文：若纵兵急攻，彼无噍类，得一空城何益！ 
现代文：若下令猛攻，他们一个人也活不了，那我们只是得一座空城而已。 
English: If we order a full-scale attack and they don't survive, we'll just have an empty city.

古文：从之。明日，即遣开示祸福，城中争出降。
现代文：阿里海牙赞同，第二天向潭州守军讲明祸福，他们都争相投诚。
English: Ali Haiga agreed, and the next day he told the Tanzhou defenders about the good and bad luck, and they all rushed to join him.

古文：诸将怒其抗敌持久，咸欲屠之。斌喻以兴师本意，诸将曰： 编民当如公说，敌兵必诛之。 
现代文：诸将忿恨潭州军民持久抵抗，要把他们都杀掉，斌耐心向他们讲明兴师南伐的本意，不是杀人，而是取得土地和民众。诸将还要求 ：百姓按照公所说不杀，敌兵则必全诛。 
English: The generals resented the persistent resistance of the military and people of Tanzhou and wanted to kill them all. Bin patiently explained to them that the intention of the Ming Xing division's southern campaign was not to kill people, but to acquire land and people. The generals also demanded that the people should not be killed in accordance with the public, and the enemy soldiers must be completely killed.

古文：斌曰： 彼各为其主耳，宜旌之，以劝未附者，且杀降不祥。 
现代文：斌又劝道 ：他们也是为自己的朝廷，现在投降了，应表彰他们，这样会影响那些尚未归附的军民，也像他们一样归降。而且杀死投降者是不祥之事。 
English: Bin also advised, "They also fought for their own imperial court, and now they have surrendered. They should be commended. This will influence those soldiers and civilians who have not yet surrendered, and will also surrender like them. Moreover, it is ominous to kill those who have surrendered."

古文：诸将乃止。
现代文：诸将又听了他的劝告。
English: The generals again heeded his advice.

古文：捷闻，帝嘉之，进资善大夫、行中书省左丞，潭人德之，为立生祠。
现代文：报捷朝廷，世祖很高兴，进升斌为资善大夫、行中书省左丞。潭州人也尊敬他，为他立生祠祝福。
English: The ancestor was very happy to report the victory to the imperial court. Jin Shengbin was a doctor of medicine and a scholar. The people of Tanzhou also respected him and gave him the blessing of establishing a shrine.

古文：十一年，奉旨抚谕广西，寻命还治湖南。
现代文：十三年，斌奉旨抚安广西，不久又回湖南。
English: In the thirteenth year, Bin was sent to Guangxi, and soon returned to Hunan.

古文：潭属邑安化、湘乡、衡山以南，贼周龙、张唐、张虎等，所在蜂起，斌驻兵南岳。
现代文：潭州所属之安化、湘乡、衡山三县以南的人民，在周龙、张唐、张虎等人领导下，抗击元兵。斌驻军于南岳。
English: Under the leadership of Zhou Long, Zhang Tang, Zhang Hu and others, the people of Anhua, Xiangxiang and Hengshan, three counties belonging to Tanzhou, fought against the Yuan soldiers. Bin stationed troops in Nanyue.

古文：凡来降者，同僚议欲尽戮，以惩反侧，斌但按诛其首恶，胁从者尽释之。
现代文：对凡来降的军民，同僚主张全部处死，以惩戒他们的抗拒。斌则只诛其首领，其余一律释放。
English: For all the soldiers and civilians who came to surrender, his colleagues advocated that they should all be put to death in order to punish their resistance. Bin, on the other hand, only beat their leaders, and released the rest.

古文：十五年，被召入觐。
现代文：十五年，斌被召入朝。
English: Fifteen years later, Bin was called to the imperial court.

古文：斌对以治安之道在得人，今所用多非其人，因极言阿合马奸蠹。
现代文：当时阿合马执政，专横跋扈，廷臣无可奈何。斌随世祖至察罕脑儿，帝问他江南各省抚治情形，斌回答说： 关键在于用人得当，而今所用之人多不称职。 接着便揭发阿合马的奸诈作为。
English: At that time, Ahama was in power, he was domineering and domineering, and the courtiers could do nothing. Bin followed his ancestor to Chahan. The emperor asked him about the situation of governance in the provinces south of the Yangtze River. Bin replied: The key is to employ people properly, but many of the people used now are incompetent. Then he exposed Ahama's treacherous actions.

古文：帝乃令御史大夫相威、枢密副使孛罗按问之，汰其冗员，黜其亲党，检核其不法，罢天下转运司，海内无不称快。
现代文：帝令御史大夫相威、枢密副使孛罗去调查处理，裁汰多余又不称职的官员，清除阿合马的亲党，核查其不法行为，撤销天下转运司。这些都得到人民的普遍称赞。
English: The Emperor ordered the Imperial Historian and the Deputy Privy Councilor to investigate and deal with the matter, to remove superfluous and incompetent officials, to purge the pro-party of Ahama, to check his illegal acts, and to abolish the Department of World Transportation, all of which were widely praised by the people.

古文：适尚书留梦炎、谢昌元言： 江淮行省事至重，而省臣无一人通文墨者。 
现代文：尚书留梦炎、谢昌元报告说 ：江淮行省十分重要，而该省臣中无一通文墨的人。 
English: Shang Shululumengyan and Xie Changyuan reported: Jianghuai Province is very important, and there is not a single literate person among the provincial officials.

古文：乃命斌迁江淮行省左丞。
现代文：于是命斌为江淮行省左丞。
English: As a result, Muibin became the left-hand man of Jianghuai Province.

古文：年五十六。至大初，赠推忠保节功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司，追封郑国公，谥忠毅。
现代文：斌到任后，加以整顿，纠正那些有害于国于民的弊政。阿合马怕对他不利，找了一些小事，诬陷崔斌致死，年仅五十六岁。
English: After Bin took office, he rectified and corrected the bad policies that were harmful to the country and the people. Ahamah, fearing that it would be detrimental to him, found some small things and framed Cui Bin to death. He was only 56 years old.

古文：子三人，良知、威、恩。
现代文：天下人都认为这是一桩冤案。
English: People all over the world believe that this is a case of injustice.

古文：孙一人，敬。皆为大官。
现代文：至大初年，赠推忠保节功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司，追封郑国公，谥 忠毅 。
English: In the first year of the university, he was awarded the title of Zheng Guogong, the title of Taifu, the title of Kaifu Yi, and the title of Zhongyi.

古文：崔彧崔彧，字文卿，小字拜帖木儿，弘州人。
现代文：崔彧字文卿，小字拜帖木儿，弘州人。
English: Cui Hongzhi, also known as Wenqing, and Bai Timur, both from Hongzhou.

古文：负才气，刚直敢言，世祖甚器重之。
现代文：为人自负有才，刚直敢言，深受世祖的器重。
English: He is a man of great self-assurance and talent, a man who dares to speak his mind, and is deeply influenced by the wisdom of the ancestors.

古文：至元十六年，奉诏偕牙纳木至江南，访求艺术之人。
现代文：至元十六年，奉诏与牙纳木到江南访求阴阳占卜之人。
English: In the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Feng Zhao and Ganmu went to the south of the Yangtze River to visit a person who divined yin and yang.

古文：明年，自江南回，首言忽都带儿根索亡宋财货，烦扰百姓，身为使臣，乃挈妻子以往，所在取索鞍马刍粟。
现代文：第二年从江南回京，向朝廷报告使臣忽都带儿追索原宋朝的财货，烦扰百姓等情形。世祖尚不能判断其言之虚实，故未处理。
English: In the second year, he returned to Beijing from the south of the Yangtze River and reported to the imperial court that the envoys had suddenly brought their children to reclaim the wealth and goods of the original Song Dynasty, disturbing the people. Shizu was not yet able to judge the truth of his words, so he did not deal with it.

古文：十九年，除集贤侍读学士。
现代文：十九年，任集贤侍读学士。
English: Nineteen years later, Ren Jixian graduated with a bachelor's degree.

古文：彧言于世祖，谓： 阿合马当国时，同列皆知其恶，无一人孰何之者；及既诛，乃各自以为洁，诚欺罔之大者。
现代文：彧对世祖说 ：阿合马当权时，同朝官员都知他奸恶，但无一人提出要怎么办；阿合马被处死后，这些人又各自表示自己的清白，这是最大的欺骗。
English: Zou said to Shizu: When Ahma was in power, the officials of the same dynasty all knew that he was treacherous, but no one suggested what to do; after Ahma was executed, these people each expressed their innocence, which is the biggest deception.

古文：先有旨，凡阿合马所用之人皆革去，臣以为守门卒隶亦不可留。
现代文：前已有令，凡阿合马所用之人统统革职，臣以为就是连守门的小卒也可不留。
English: There had been a previous order that all those employed by Ahma were to resign, and the vassal thought that even the gatekeeper could not remain.

古文：事竟之时，朕与汝别有言也。 又请以郝祯剖棺戮尸，从之。
现代文：参知政事阿里，请求准许阿散承袭其父职。如果批准了他的请求，其害又说不完。陛下英明，洞察其奸，拒不允准。
English: Ali, the sultan's counsellor, requested permission for Ashan to succeed his father. If his request was approved, the damage would be incalculable. His Majesty was wise, discerning his treachery, and refused permission.

古文：寻奉旨钩考枢密文牍，遂由刑部尚书拜御史中丞。
现代文：臣已陈奏其奸恶行为十余事，请召阿里来廷与他当面辩论。 世祖同意。不久，奉旨检阅枢密院文牍，于是由刑部尚书拜御史中丞。
English: The vassal had recounted more than ten cases of his treacherous behavior, and invited Ali to come to the court to debate with him face to face. The patriarch agreed. Soon, he was ordered to review the Privy Council document, so the criminal department wrote to him.

古文：彧言： 台臣于国家政事得失，生民休戚，百官邪正，虽王公将相，亦宜纠察。
现代文：彧上书道 ：御史台臣僚的职责关系到国家政事之得失，百姓之祸福，百官之邪正，虽王公将相也要纠察。
English: 上書道:The duties of the ministers of the Imperial Historian's Office are related to the gains and losses of national politics, the misfortunes and blessings of the people, and the evils and virtues of the officials.

古文：近唯御史得有所言，臣以为台官皆当建言，庶于国家有补。
现代文：近来有人说只有御史才能进谏，臣认为御史台的官员们都可进谏，这样才对国家有利。
English: Recently, some people have said that only the Imperial Historian can enter the Imperial Throne, but I believe that all officials of the Imperial Historian's Office can enter the Imperial Throne, which is good for the country.

古文：选用台察官，若由中书，必有偏徇之弊，御史宜从本台选择，初用汉人十六员，今用蒙古十六员，相参巡历为宜。 
现代文：选用台察官，若由中书省进行，则必然有偏颇徇私之弊。御史应从本台选择，原来用汉人十六员，今用蒙古人十六员，相互参差巡察为好。 
English: The selection of Taiwanese inspectors, if carried out by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, will inevitably have the disadvantage of being biased and self-serving. The history should be selected from this station. Originally, 16 Han people were used, but now 16 Mongolians are used. It is better to have inspections that are different from each other.

古文：皆从其言。
现代文：朝廷采纳这意见。
English: The Imperial Court accepted this opinion.

古文：二十年，复以刑部尚书上疏，言时政十八事：一曰开广言路，多选正人，番直上前，以司喉舌，庶免党附壅塞之患。
现代文：二十年，又以刑部尚书之职上书，提出有关政事的十八条意见：一、广开言路，多选用正人，轮流值班作为朝廷喉舌，以避免结党和堵塞言路之患。
English: Twenty years later, he also submitted a letter as a member of the Ministry of Justice, and put forward 18 opinions on political affairs: First, open up the way of speech, choose more upright people, and take turns on duty as the mouthpiece of the imperial court, in order to avoid the danger of party formation and blocking the way of speech.

古文：二曰当阿合马擅权，台臣莫敢纠其非，迨其事败，然后接踵随声，徒取讥笑。
现代文：二、阿合马专权，台臣不敢纠察其为非作歹，而等到他失败之后，便接二连三地随声附和，徒取讥笑。
English: Second, the Ahma monopoly, the Taiwanese did not dare to picket him for wrongdoing, and when he failed, he followed up in succession, making fun of him.

古文：宜别加选用，其旧人除蒙古人取圣断外，余皆当问罪。
现代文：应选人任用，原阿合马所用的那班人，除蒙古人由皇上决定外，其余的人应当问罪。
English: Candidates should be appointed, and except for the Mongolians, who should be appointed by the emperor, the rest of the people should be brought to justice.

古文：三曰枢密院定夺军官，赏罚不当，多听阿合马风旨。
现代文：三、枢密院对军官的取舍、赏罚，原多听阿合马的意见。
English: Thirdly, the Privy Council used to listen to Ahma's opinions on the selection of officers and their rewards and punishments.

古文：五曰郝祯、耿仁等虽在典刑，若是者尚多，罪同罚异，公论未伸，合次第屏除。六曰贵游子弟，用即显官，幼不讲学，何以从政。
现代文：现在应该择有声望的人来主管枢密，这样才能号令明白赏罚得当。四、翰林院也曾为阿合马颂德。应广泛访求南北年老而有声望的儒生，从中选任翰林学士。五、在执法中应排除罪同而罚异，未伸张公论的不良倾向。六、王公子弟，幼未学习即任显官，他们如何能从政？
English: Now it is time to select a person with prestige to be in charge of the Privy Council, so that he can clearly reward and punish appropriately. Fourth, the Hanlin Academy was also a tribute to Ahama. It is necessary to widely visit the old and prestigious Confucian students in the north and south, and select the Hanlin scholar from them. Fifth, in law enforcement, it is necessary to eliminate the same crime but different punishment, and the bad tendency of not advocating public opinion. Sixth, Wang Gongzi's younger brother, who was appointed as a dignitary when he was young, how can they go into politics?

古文：得如左丞许衡教国子学，则人才辈出矣。
现代文：希望有像左丞许衡这样的人在国子学中任教，则人才辈出。
English: It is hoped that if someone like Zuo Xu Heng teaches at Kuniko Gakuin, then talent will emerge from generation to generation.

古文：七曰今起居注所书，不过奏事检目而已。宜择蒙古人之有声望、汉人之重厚者，居其任，分番上直，帝王言动必书，以垂法于无穷。
现代文：七、今《起居注》所写的不过是一些奏事的目录而已，应挑选蒙古人中之有声望、汉人中持重厚道的人担任其事，轮流值班，凡皇帝的一些重要言行都要记载下来，传于后世。
English: Seventh, what is now written in the "Resident's Note" is merely a catalogue of records. People who are reputable among the Mongols and respectable among the Han people should be selected to take charge of the matter, and they should take turns on duty. All the important words and deeds of the emperor should be recorded and passed down to future generations.

古文：八曰宪曹无法可守，是以奸人无所顾忌。宜定律令，以为一代之法。
现代文：八、各地方官府无法可依，故奸人得为所欲为，应制定律令，作为一代之法律。
English: Eighth, the local governments cannot be obeyed, so the traitors can do whatever they want, and they should formulate laws and regulations as the law of a generation.

古文：九曰官冗，若徒省一官员，并一衙门，亦非经久之策。
现代文：九、对于处理多余官员，若只裁撤一官或合并一衙门，不是长久之计。
English: Ninth, in dealing with redundant officials, it is not a long-term solution if only one official is abolished or one department is merged.

古文：宜参众议，而立定成规。
现代文：应参考廷臣们的意见，制定一持久的成规。
English: The opinion of the courtiers should be taken into account in order to draw up a lasting set of rules.

古文：十曰官僚无以养廉，责其贪则苛。
现代文：十、官僚没有俸禄无以养廉，因此责罚他们爱财是苛求了。
English: Ten, bureaucrats have no salary to raise corruption, so it is demanding to punish them for their love of money.

古文：乞将诸路大小官，有俸者量增，无俸者特给。
现代文：请对各路大小官员，有俸者量予增加，无俸者给予俸禄。
English: For officials of all ranks and sizes, please increase the amount for those with salaries, and give salaries to those without salaries.

古文：然不取之于官，惟赋之于民，盖官吏既有所养，不致病民，少增岁赋，亦将乐从。
现代文：然不取之于官，而取之于民。官吏有了俸禄，不至于再去剥削百姓，凡负担了官俸的百姓，不再增加他的赋税，这样百姓也乐意。
English: However, it is not taken from the officials, but from the people. When officials have a salary, they will no longer exploit the people. If the people are burdened with a government salary, they will no longer increase their taxes, and the people are happy about this.

古文：十一曰内地百姓流移江南避赋役者，已十五万户。
现代文：十一、中原百姓流亡到江南以逃避繁重赋役者已有十五万户。
English: 11. There are already 150,000 households of Central Plains people who have fled to the south of the Yangtze River to escape the onerous labor.

古文：去家就旅，岂人之情，赋重政繁，驱之致此。
现代文：离乡背井，流落他方，并非他们情愿如此，是繁重的赋役迫使他们不得不如此。
English: They did not leave their hometowns and go to live in other countries because they wanted to, but because they were forced to do so by heavy taxation.

古文：乞特降诏旨，招集复业，免其后来五年科役，其余积欠并蠲，事产即日给还。
现代文：请求特下诏书，号召百姓归乡复业，免除他们今后五年的租税和劳役，以及所欠债务，发还他们原来的产业。
English: The petition specifically issued a decree, calling on the people to return to their hometowns and resume their businesses, exempting them from taxes and labor service for the next five years, as well as debts owed, and returning their original properties.

古文：民官满替，以户口增耗为黜陟，其徙江南不归者，与土著一例当役。
现代文：各地官吏任满的考核，以其所管辖户口的增减作为升降的依据。凡迁到江南不回来的百姓，与当地百姓一样服劳役。
English: The assessment of the completion of the term of office of officials in various regions is based on the increase or decrease of the hukou under their jurisdiction. All the people who moved to the south of the Yangtze River and did not return serve as laborers like the local people.

古文：十二曰凡丞相安童迁转民臣，悉为阿合马所摈黜，或居散地，或在远方，并令拔擢。
现代文：十二、凡丞相安童所升调的良臣，都被阿合马所排除，或散居于各地，或迁到远方，请将他们复职并加提拔。
English: 12. All the good ministers who were promoted by Vice-Minister Ando have been expelled by the Ahma, or dispersed to various places, or moved far away. Please reinstate them and promote them.

古文：十三曰簿录奸党财物，本国家之物，不可视为横得，遂致滥用。宜以之实帑藏、供岁计。
现代文：十三、没收奸党的财物，原本为国家所有，不可视为横财而滥用，应如实交国库储存，以备国家每年的财用。
English: 13. Confiscation of the property of a traitor, which was originally owned by the state, cannot be regarded as a windfall and abuse. It should be truthfully deposited in the state treasury for annual financial use by the state.

古文：十四曰大都非如上都，止备巡幸，不应立留守司，此皆阿合马以此位置私党。
现代文：十四、上都是皇帝巡视才到，故设留守司。而大都不同于上都，是朝廷所在，阿合马也设留守司，是为了安置其党徒。
English: 14. In most of the capitals, the Emperor's inspection did not arrive until later, so there was a stay-behind officer. In contrast to the capitals, the imperial court was located in most of the capitals, and Ahama also had a stay-behind officer in order to accommodate its party members.

古文：今宜易置总管府。
现代文：现应把留守司改为总管府。
English: Now it is time to change the Residual Division into the General Administration Office.

古文：十五曰中书省右丞二，而左丞缺。
现代文：十五、中书省右丞有二人，而左丞缺。
English: Fifteen, there are two right-hand assistants in the Central Calligraphy Department, but there are no left-hand assistants.

古文：宜改所增右丞置诸左。
现代文：应减去一右丞而补左丞一人。
English: One to the right should be subtracted and one to the left should be added.

古文：十六曰在外行省，不必置丞相、平章，止设左右丞以下，庶几内重，不致势均。
现代文：十六、在外行省不必设丞相、平章，只设左右丞以下官员，这样朝廷力量加重而免于内外力量均衡之弊。
English: Sixteenth, there is no need to set up a chancellor or a high-ranking official in the provinces, and only set up officials below the left and right chancellors. In this way, the strength of the imperial court will increase and it will be free from the disadvantages of the balance of power between the inside and outside.

古文：彼谓非隆其名不足镇压者，奸臣欺罔之论也。
现代文：有人说不加重地方力量不足以镇压百姓的反抗，这是奸党的欺人之谈。
English: Some people say that it is not enough to suppress the people's resistance without strengthening the local forces. This is a deceitful talk of the traitors.

古文：十七曰阿剌海牙掌兵民之权，子侄姻党，分列权要，官吏出其门者，十之七八，其威权不在阿合马下。
现代文：十七、阿剌海牙在湖广掌握了军政大权，把其子侄亲戚都安置在要害位置，当地官吏有十之七八都属他的部属，其权威不在阿合马之下。
English: Seventeen, Imam Hague seized military and political power in Hukang, and placed his sons, nephews and relatives in key positions. Seventy-eight of the local officials were his subordinates, and their authority was not under Imam.

古文：宜罢职理算，其党虽无污染者，亦当迁转他所，勿使久据湖广。
现代文：应罢他的官职，进行清算，其党羽虽无违法乱纪行为，也应转调别的地方，不要让他久据湖广。
English: He should be dismissed from his official position and liquidated. Although his followers have no illegal or undisciplined behavior, they should also be transferred to other places. Don't let him stay in Hukang for a long time.

古文：十八曰铨选类奏，贤否莫知。
现代文：十八、官吏的选拔与任命，不先考其贤与不贤，这是不应该的。
English: 18. It is improper for officials to be selected and appointed without first being examined as to their merits and demerits.

古文：自今三品已上，必引见而后授官。
现代文：自今以后，凡三品以上官员，必先引见皇帝，考其贤愚，然后授官。
English: From now on, all officials with three or more court ranks must first be presented to the emperor, tested for their wisdom, and then promoted.

古文：疏奏，即日命中书行其数事，余命与御史大夫玉昔帖木儿议行之。
现代文：这份奏疏进呈后，世祖即命中书省先择其中立即可行者施行，其余与御史大夫玉昔帖木儿商议后再付诸实行。
English: After this report was submitted, Shizu immediately ordered the Ministry of Education to choose the first of them to be implemented immediately, and the rest to be implemented after consultation with the Imperial Historian, Gyokuseki Timur.

古文：又言： 江南盗贼，相挻而起，凡二百余所，皆由拘刷水手与造海船，民不聊生，激而成变。
现代文：崔彧又陈奏： 江南盗贼的兴起，凡二百余处，都是由于征发水手和造海船弄得民不聊生所激成的。
English: Cui Wei and Chen Zhao: The rise of the Southern Ganges bandits, in more than 200 places, was caused by the conscription of sailors and the construction of sea-going ships.

古文：日本之役，宜姑止之。
现代文：因此，征讨日本的事应暂停止。
English: Therefore, the requisition of Japan should be suspended for the time being.

古文：又江西四省军需，宜量民力，勿强以土产所无。
现代文：另外，江西四省军需，应按百姓负担力所能及来征调，不要强迫他们交纳本地所不产的物品。
English: In addition, the military requisitioners of the four provinces of Jiangxi should be recruited according to the ability of the people to afford, and should not force them to pay for goods that are not produced locally.

古文：凡给物价与民者，必以实，召募水手，当从其所欲，伺民气稍苏，我力粗备，三二年后，东征未晚也。 
现代文：凡向百姓购买，必须付与实际价钱。
English: Whoever buys from the people must pay the actual price.

古文：世祖以为不切，曰： 尔之所言如射然，挽弓虽可观，发矢则非是矣。 
现代文：召募水手，应当本着自愿的原则。讨日本的事，等三二年后，那时百姓的生产得到恢复，我们军力加强了，再出兵东征也不算晚。 世祖认为崔彧的话不切实际 ，如同射箭一样，拉弓的架势虽然可观，但发出的箭却未中目标 。
English: The recruitment of sailors should be based on the principle of voluntariness. The Japanese issue should be discussed after three or two years, when the production of the people has been restored, our military strength has been strengthened, and it is not too late to send troops to the East. The ancestors thought that Cui Yong's words were unrealistic, just like archery, although the posture of the bow was impressive, the arrows sent out did not hit the target.

古文：彧又言： 昨中书奉旨，差官度量大都州县地亩，本以革权势兼并之弊，欲其明白，不得不于军民诸色人户，通行核实。
现代文：彧又多次上书说： 昨中书省奉旨差遣官员丈量大都路各州县的土地，以便革除权贵们兼并之弊。为了丈量清楚，不得不把一般军民人户的土地也进行核实。
English: Zou also wrote several times, saying: Yesterday, the Ministry of Education and Culture sent officials to measure the land of each prefecture and county on Datu Road, in order to eliminate the drawbacks of annexation by the powerful. In order to measure clearly, it was necessary to verify the land of ordinary military and civilian households.

古文：又因取勘畜牧数目，初意本非扰民，而近者浮言胥动，恐失农时。
现代文：调查牲畜的数目，初意不是要侵扰百姓。近来有一些流言，使百姓不安，恐怕会因此耽误了农业耕种。
English: The original intention of surveying the number of livestock was not to disturb the people. Recently, there have been some rumors that have made the people uneasy, and I am afraid that this will delay agricultural cultivation.

古文：乞降旨省谕诏中书即行之。 
现代文：请旨令中书省切实注意。 
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture should pay close attention to the order.

古文：又言： 建言者多，孰是孰否，中书宜集议，可行者行之，不可则明谕言者为便。 
现代文： 建议很多，谁是谁非，请中书省加以议论，择其可行者付诸实行，不可行者也要说清楚为什么不行。 
English: There are a lot of suggestions, who is right and who is wrong, please discuss with the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, choose the feasible one and put it into practice, and if it is not feasible, explain clearly why it is not feasible.

古文：又言： 各路每岁选取室女，宜罢。 
现代文： 应停止在各路每年挑选未出嫁女子入宫的事。 
English: There should be an end to the annual practice of selecting unmarried women from all walks of life to enter the imperial palace.

古文：皆从之。二十一年，彧劾奏卢世荣不可居相职，忤旨，罢。
现代文： 宋文思院以小口斛出纳官粮，无所隐瞒，这办法我朝也可实行。 这些意见都被采纳。至元二十一年，彧劾奏卢世荣，指出他不可以为相。这违反了皇帝旨意，被罢官。
English: Song Wen Si Yuan used a small spoon to dispense the official grain, and there was nothing to hide, and this method could also be implemented in my reign. These opinions were all adopted. In the 21st year of the Yuan Dynasty, he impeached Lu Shirong and pointed out that he could not be a consort. This violated the emperor's will, and he was dismissed.

古文：二十三年，加集贤大学士、中奉大夫、同佥枢密院事。
现代文：后复官，二十三年，加集贤大学士、中奉大夫、同佥枢密院事。
English: After his reinstatement, in 23 years, he was promoted to Ji Xian University Scholar, Zhongfeng Doctor, and Tonglu Privy Councillor.

古文：寻出为甘肃行省右丞。
现代文：不久，出任甘肃行省右丞。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Gansu Provincial Vice-Governor.

古文：召拜中书右丞。
现代文：又召回朝拜中书右丞。
English: He also recalled Chushu Ujo from morning prayers.

古文：与中书平章政事麦术丁奏曰： 近者桑哥当国四年，中外诸官，鲜有不以贿而得者。其昆弟故旧妻族，皆授要官美地，唯以欺蔽九重、朘削百姓为事。
现代文：他与中书平章政事麦术丁联名陈奏 ：近来，桑哥当政四年，朝廷内外官员，很少不是花钱买来的，其同族兄弟，亲戚朋友，都授以要职，赠以良田，以欺骗皇上、剥削百姓为能事。
English: He and the Chinese calligrapher Pingzhang and the politician Mei Zhuting jointly played the role of Chen: Recently, Sango has been in power for four years. Officials inside and outside the imperial court are rarely bought with money. His ethnic brothers, relatives and friends have all been awarded important positions and given good fields, and they are able to deceive the emperor and exploit the people.

古文：又奏： 桑哥所设衙门，其闲冗不急之官，徒费禄食，宜令百司集议汰罢，及自今调官，宜如旧制，避其籍贯，庶不害公。
现代文：应令中书、尚书两省严加考察，凡桑哥官员中有受贿赂的，也依法罢官，削职为民。 又奏 ：桑哥所设衙门，其闲散和不急需的官吏，只是白费俸禄，宜令各官府讨论裁汰。自今以后的官员调任，应按旧制，不论籍贯，这样不至于损害公家。
English: The two provinces of Zhongshu and Shangshu should be ordered to carry out a strict investigation, and any Sango officials who have received bribes should also be dismissed according to law, and their duties should be reduced to the people. Another report: The gate set up by Sango, its idle and not urgently needed officials, is just a waste of salary, and it is advisable for all government offices to discuss the decision. From now on, officials should be transferred according to the old system, regardless of their origin, so as not to damage the public sector.

古文：又大都高赀户，多为桑哥所容庇，凡百徭役，止令贫民当之。
现代文：又，大都的富户多为桑哥所庇护，一切徭役只令贫民承担。
English: In addition, most of the rich households in the capital are protected by Sango, and only the poor are made to bear all the labor.

古文：今后徭役，不问何人，宜皆均输，有敢如前以贿求人容庇者，罪之。
现代文：今后徭役，不论何人均得负担，有敢于像从前那样求人庇护者，一律论罪。
English: From now on, anyone who dares to ask for asylum, as in the past, will be treated as a criminal.

古文：又，军、站诸户，每岁官吏非名取索，赋税倍蓰，民多流移。
现代文：又，军、站诸户，每年被官吏在正税之外进行敲诈勒索，其数额是正税的几倍，迫使人民逃亡他乡。
English: In addition, every year, officials from the military and government departments extort money from households in addition to the official tax, and the amount is several times the official tax, forcing people to flee their hometowns.

古文：请自今非奉旨及省部文学，敢私敛民及役军匠者，论如法。
现代文：请自今以后，非奉皇帝圣旨及省部公文，敢于私自征收赋税及强迫军匠服役者，依法论罪。
English: Please, from now on, those who dare to collect taxes and force military artisans to serve without the emperor's will and the official documents of the ministries and departments will be punished according to law.

古文：又，忽都忽那颜籍户之后，各投下毋擅招集，太宗既行之，江南民为籍已定，乞依太宗所行为是。 
现代文：又，忽都忽那颜清查登记户口之后，不得再招纳民户为奴婢，这在太宗时已做了规定。今江南百姓户口也已登记在册，请依照太宗的规定办理。 
English: Moreover, it was already stipulated by Emperor Taizong that no more households could be enlisted as slaves and maids after the household registration had been checked and registered. Now, the household registration of the people in the south of the Yangtze River has also been registered. Please follow the regulations of Emperor Taizong.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：这些意见都得到采纳。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：二十八年，由中书右丞迁御史中丞，彧奏： 太医院使刘岳臣，尝仕宋，练达政事，比者命其参议机务，众皆称善。
现代文：二十八年，彧由中书右丞升为御史中丞。彧上书言道： 太医院使刘岳臣，曾在宋朝为官，此人对于政事很老练，近来命他参议机务，都认为他还不错。
English: In 28th year, Zou was promoted from Zhongshu Yuanzheng (中書右丞) to Gushi Zhongzheng (御史中丞). Zou's last letter said: Liu Yuechen, who was once an official in the Song Dynasty, is a very experienced person in politics. Recently, he was appointed as a senator, and everyone thought he was good.

古文：乞以为翰林学士，俾议朝政。 
现代文：请任他为翰林学士，使参议朝政。 
English: He was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin and made a councilor of the Imperial Court.

古文：又言： 行御史台言： 建宁路总管马谋，因捕盗延及平民，搒掠至死者多；又俘掠人财，迫通处女，受民财积百五十锭。
现代文：又奏： 据行御史台报告： 建宁路总管马谋，在捕盗时株连平民，拷打至死者甚多；又劫掠百姓财物，强奸处女，受人贿赂共五十锭。
English: Another report: According to the Executive History Channel, Ma Mu, the head of Jianning Road, tortured and killed many civilians during the robbery; he also looted people's property, raped virgins, and accepted bribes totaling 50 yuan.

古文：狱未具，会赦。
现代文：尚未法办就被大赦。
English: He was amnestied before he could be prosecuted.

古文：如臣等议，马谋以非罪杀人，不在原例。 
现代文：臣等认为，马谋以无辜杀人，不应在大赦范围之内。 
English: Ministers and others believe that Ma Zhao's killing of innocent people should not be covered by the amnesty.

古文：宜令行台诘问，明白定罪。 
现代文：应诏令行御史台审问明白，依法定罪。 
English: The imperial edict should be carried out, and the trial should be clear, according to the statutory crime.

古文：又言： 昔行御史台监察御史周祚，劾尚书省官忙兀带、教化的、纳速剌丁灭里奸赃；纳速剌丁灭里反诬祚以罪，遣人诣尚书省告桑哥。
现代文：又说 ：往日行御史台监察御史周祚，弹劾尚书省忙兀带、教化的、纳速剌丁灭里等贪赃枉法。而纳速剌丁灭里却反诬告周祚，遣人到尚书省报告了桑哥。
English: He also said, "In the past, the History Channel monitored the historian Zhou Qi, and accused the Ministry of Education of being too busy, too educated, too hasty, and so on. However, the Ministry of Education falsely accused Zhou Qi, and sent people to the Ministry of Education to report Sango.

古文：桑哥暧昧以闻，流祚于憨答孙，妻子家财并没入官。
现代文：桑哥含糊其词地报告了朝廷，判祚流放于憨答孙，其妻室儿子及财产全部没收。
English: Sango reported vaguely to the imperial court, which sentenced him to exile, and confiscated his wife, son, and all of his property.

古文：祚至和林遇乱，走还京师。
现代文：祚至和林遇到兵乱，逃回京师。
English: When Shizhi and Lin encountered a mutiny, they fled back to the capital.

古文：桑哥又遣诣云南理算钱谷，以赎其罪。
现代文：桑哥又遣他去云南清理钱粮，以赎其罪。
English: Sango also sent him to Yunnan to clean up the grain to atone for his sin.

古文：今自云南回，臣与省臣阅其伏词，为罪甚微，宜复其妻子。 
现代文：今自云南回京，臣与省臣审阅其口供，其罪很小，应归还其妻子儿女。 
English: Now that he has returned to Beijing from Yunnan, ministers and provincial ministers have reviewed his confession. His crime is minor, and his wife and children should be returned to him.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：这些意见均被采纳。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：二十九年，彧偕御史大夫玉昔帖木儿等奏： 四方之人，来聚阙下，率言事以干进。
现代文：二十九年，彧又同御史大夫玉昔帖木儿等奏： 四方之人都来到京城，说是向国家提出他们的意见并以此求得官职。
English: In the 29th year of his reign, Zou, together with the imperial historian, Yuxi Timur, and others, wrote: People from all over the country came to the capital, saying that they wanted to present their opinions to the state and thereby obtain official positions.

古文：国家名器，资品高下，具有定格。
现代文：国家官爵，其品位高下俱有规定。
English: There are stipulations for the rank of the national official nobility.

古文：臣等以为，中书、枢密，宜早为铨定，应格者与之，不当与者，明语其故使去。
现代文：臣等认为，中书省、枢密院对这些人应及早审定，凡合格者给予官职，不应给予官职的，也说明原因，让他们回去。
English: In the opinion of the ministers, the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and the Privy Council should verify these people as early as possible. Those who are qualified should be given official positions, and those who should not be given official positions should also explain the reasons and let them go back.

古文：又言事有是非当否，宜早与详审言之。
现代文：对于他们所提的意见，也及早详细审查其是非当否。
English: As for the opinions they put forward, they should also be examined in detail as early as possible.

古文：当者即议施行，或所陈有须诘难条具者，即令其人讲究，否则罢遣。 
现代文：凡恰当的，即讨论后施行；如果有什么不明白的，令本人讲明白，否则就让他们回去。 
English: Whatever is appropriate will be implemented after discussion; if there is anything unclear, let the person clarify, otherwise let them go back.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：帝认为这些意见很好，加以采纳。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：又奏： 纳速剌丁灭里、忻都、王巨济，党比桑哥，恣为不法，楮币、铨选、盐课、酒税，无不更张变乱之；衔命江南，理算积久逋赋，期限严急，胥卒追逮，半于道路，民至嫁妻卖女，殃及亲邻，维扬、钱塘受害最惨，无故而殒其生五百余人。
现代文：又奏 ：纳速剌丁灭里、忻都、王巨济等，与桑哥结成同党，恣意妄为，对于纸币、官制、盐课、酒税，胡乱改变祖宗的规定；奉命到江南去清理拖欠已久的赋税，限定短期内交纳，吏卒追索，使百姓嫁妻卖女来偿还，还株连到亲戚邻里，维扬、钱塘受害最惨，无故而被逼死者达五百余人。
English: Add: Nahao, Dingzhu, Shidu, Wang Jiji, etc. formed a same-party with Sango, acted arbitrarily, and arbitrarily changed the rules of the ancestors for banknotes, official system, salt class, and liquor tax; they were ordered to go to the south of the Yangtze River to clear the long-delayed tax payment, limit the payment within a short period of time, pursue the officials, make the people marry and sell their daughters to repay, and also go to relatives and neighbors, Viyang and Qiantang suffered the worst, and more than 500 people were forced to die for no reason.

古文：近者阇里按问，悉皆首实请死，士民乃知圣天子仁爱元元，而使之至此极者，实桑哥及其凶党之为也，莫不愿食其肉。
现代文：士民们深知天子圣明，爱护百姓，使百姓遭此大难，是桑哥及其凶党所造成的。天下之人恨之入骨，莫不要食其肉。
English: The people knew very well that the Son of Heaven, who loved and cared for the people, caused the people to suffer this great hardship. It was caused by Sangho and his evil party. People all over the world hated him to the bone, so they should not eat his flesh.

古文：臣等其议：此三人者既已伏辜，宜令中书省、御史台从公论罪，以谢天下。 
现代文：臣等共同认定：此三人既已伏法，宜令中书省、御史台公布其罪状于天下。 
English: The ministers agreed that since the three had already been arrested, it was appropriate to order the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the History Channel to publicize their criminal charges to the world.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝采纳这意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：又言： 河西人薛阇干，领兵为宣慰，其吏诣廉访司，告其三十六事，檄佥事簿问。
现代文：又奏： 河西人薛干，领兵为宣慰使。其属吏到廉访司来指控三十六事。廉访司令佥事查询。
English: And again: Xue Gan, a man from the west of the river, led the troops as a messenger of consolation. His subordinates came to the Lying and Cheating Investigation Division to accuse 36 cases. The Lying and Cheating Investigation Commander inquired about the cases.

古文：而薛阇干率军人禽问者辱之，且夺告者以去。
现代文：薛干将去查访的人逮捕起来进行侮辱，又把告发的人抢了去。
English: Xue Gan arrested and insulted the person who went to investigate, and snatched the informant.

古文：臣议：从行台选御史往按问薛阇干，仍先夺其职。 
现代文：臣等认为，应由行台选派御史去审问薛干，而且先夺其官职。 
English: In the opinion of the ministers, it should be Gangdai Xuan who should send the imperial historian to interrogate Xue Gan, and seize his official position first.

古文：又言： 行台官言：去岁桑哥既败，使臣至自上所者，或不持玺书，口传圣旨，纵释有罪，擅籍人家，真伪莫辨。
现代文：又说： 据行台官报告，去年桑哥倒台后，有从朝廷派去的使臣，没有皇上诏书，只是口传圣旨，释放罪犯，擅自没收人家的财产，真伪莫辨。
English: He also said: According to the report of the Taiwan Affairs Office, after the fall of Sango last year, there were envoys sent from the imperial court. There was no imperial edict, but only oral transmission of the sacred will, release of criminals, and unauthorized confiscation of other people's property. It is impossible to distinguish the true from the false.

古文：臣等请：自今凡使臣，必降玺书，省、台、院诸司，必给印信文书，以杜奸欺。 
现代文：臣等请求：从今以后，凡朝廷派出使臣，必须持有盖有皇帝玉玺的诏书和省、台、院诸衙门盖印的有关方面的文书，以杜绝奸诈欺骗。 
English: Request from ministers: From now on, all envoys sent by the imperial court must hold the imperial rescript stamped with the emperor's jade seal and the relevant documents stamped by the provincial, Taiwanese, and imperial courts, in order to prevent fraud and deception.

古文：帝曰： 何人乃敢尔耶？ 
现代文：世祖问： 何人敢如此胆大妄为？ 
English: The Ancestor asked: How many people dare to act so boldly?

古文：对曰： 咬剌也奴、伯颜察儿，比尝传旨纵罪人。 
现代文：回答说： 有咬剌也奴、伯颜察儿，他们曾传旨释放罪犯。 
English: He replied, "There are some people, such as Niu Yanyan and Bo Yanchaer, who have issued orders to release the criminals.

古文：帝悉可其奏。
现代文：帝批准彧等所陈奏的意见。
English: The emperor allowed them to play.

古文：又奏： 松州达鲁花赤长孙，自言不愿为钱谷官，愿备员廉访司，令木八剌沙上闻。
现代文：又奏： 松州达鲁花赤长孙，自言不愿为管钱粮官，愿到廉访司任职，令木八剌沙上报朝廷。
English: Also played: The eldest grandson of Songzhou Daruhana, who said that he did not want to be the official in charge of money and grain, but would like to work in the Independent Investigation Department and report to the imperial court.

古文：传旨至台，特令委用，台臣所宜奉行。
现代文：朝廷传旨至御史台，特令委用，台臣且遵旨执行。
English: The Imperial Court sent an order to the Imperial History Channel, which was commissioned by special order, and the channel complied with the order.

古文：但径自陈献，又且尝有罪，理应区别。 
现代文：但他不经一定程序而直接陈奏，且曾有罪，理应加以区别对待。 
English: However, he should be treated differently because he did not go through a certain procedure and made a direct statement, and he was guilty.

古文：帝曰： 此自卿事，宜审行之。 
现代文：帝曰： 这是你职务内的事，由你斟酌处理。 
English: The emperor said, "This is a matter within your duties, and it is up to you to handle it as you see fit.

古文：又奏： 江南李淦言叶李过愆，被旨赴京以辩，今叶李物故，事有不待辨者。
现代文：又奏 ：江南李淦说叶李有过失，奉旨赴京讲明情形。今叶李已死，已不需申辩了。
English: Repetition: Jiangnan Li Yao said that Ye Li was at fault and ordered him to go to Beijing to clarify the situation. Now that Ye Li is dead, there is no need to argue.

古文：李淦本儒人，请授以教官，旌其直言。 
现代文：李淦本为儒生，请授以教官之职，以表彰其敢于直言。 
English: Li Yiming is a Confucian scholar. Please grant him the position of instructor in recognition of his courage to speak out.

古文：又奏： 鄂州一道，旧有按察司，要束木恶其害己，令桑哥奏罢之。
现代文：又奏： 鄂州一道，旧有按察司，要束木认为对他不利，令桑哥奏请撤销。
English: Also played: Along with Ezhou, there is an old inspector, and if Sokki thinks it is unfavorable to him, please cancel the song.

古文：臣观鄂州等九郡，境土亦广，宜复置廉访司。
现代文：臣认为鄂州等九郡，境域广大，应恢复其廉访司。
English: The minister believed that nine counties such as Ezhou, with a vast territory, should restore their anti-corruption bureau.

古文：行御史台旧治扬州，今扬州隶南京，而行台移治建康；其淮东廉访司旧治淮安，今宜移治扬州。 
现代文：行御史台原在扬州，今扬州隶属于南京，因而行台也移到建康。淮东廉访司在淮安，请令移到扬州。 
English: The Guiding History Platform was originally in Yangzhou, but now Yangzhou is subordinate to Nanjing, so the Guiding Platform has also moved to Jiankang. The HuaiDong Independent Investigation Department is in Huai'an, please move it to Yangzhou.

古文：又奏： 诸官吏受赇，在朝则诣御史台首告，在外则诣按察司首告，已有成宪。
现代文：又奏： 诸官吏受贿，在朝则到御史台告发；在外则到按察司告发。这已成为定制。
English: And again: All officials accept bribes, and in the case of the government, they report to the Imperial History Channel; in other countries, they report to the Public Prosecutor's Office. This has become a custom.

古文：自桑哥持国，受赇者不赴宪台宪司，而诣诸司首，故尔反覆牵延，事久不竟。
现代文：但自桑哥持政，对受贿官吏，不到御史台和按察司去告发，而由行政衙去受理，致使案件反复拖延，长期不能得到处理。
English: However, since Sango has been in power, officials who have accepted bribes have not been reported to the Imperial Historical Records Bureau and the Public Prosecution Department, but have been accepted by the Executive Yuan, resulting in repeated delays in the case and long-term inability to deal with it.

古文：臣谓宜如前旨，惟于本台、行台及诸道廉访司首告，诸司无得辄受。
现代文：臣认为应遵照以前规定，只能到御史台、行御史台及诸道廉访司去告发，行政衙门不能受理。
English: The minister believed that the previous regulations should be followed, and that it was only possible to go to the Imperial History Station, the Imperial History Station and the various Lying and Cheating Investigation Departments to make a report, and that an administrative complaint was not acceptable.

古文：又监察御史塔的失言：女直人教化的，去岁东征，妄言以米千石饷阇里铁木儿军万人，奏支钞四百锭，宜令本处廉访司究问，与本处行省追偿议罪。 
现代文：据监察御史塔的失说，女真人教化的，去年东征时妄言以米千石交里铁木儿军万人为军饷，奏请先付与他钞四百锭。这事应令本处廉访司去查问明白，与本处行省一同追回，并定其罪。 
English: According to the misconduct of the supervising magistrate, the woman, who was indoctrinated by a real person, made a false statement during the Eastern Expedition last year that the military man of the Iron Wood Army was a military man, and asked to pay him a bill of 400 baht in advance. This matter should be investigated and clarified by the Independent Investigation Division of this office, recovered together with the province of this office, and convicted.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：这些意见世祖也都一一采纳。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：三月，中书省臣奏，请以彧为右丞，世祖曰： 崔彧不爱于言，惟可使任言责。 
现代文：至元二十九年三月，中书省臣奏请任彧为本省右丞。世祖说 ：崔彧敢于直言，唯他可任为台谏官员。 
English: In March of the 29th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Chinese Minister of Literature and Calligraphy asked Ren Ren to be the provincial right-hand man. The ancestor said: "Cui Ren dares to speak out, only he can be appointed as a Taiwanese official."

古文：闰六月，又同御史大夫玉昔帖木儿奏： 近耿熙告：河间盐运司官吏盗官库钱，省台遣人同告者杂问，凡负二万二千余锭，已征八千九百余锭，犹欠一万三千一百余锭。
现代文：闰六月，彧又同御史大夫玉昔帖木儿奏 ：近据耿熙报告，河间盐运司官吏盗窃官库钱，中书省与御史共同审讯，得知该盐运司亏欠盐税二万二千余锭，已征八千九百余锭，尚欠一万三千一百余锭。
English: In the intercalary month of June, Zou and the Imperial Historian, Dr. Yuxi Timur, made the following report: According to Geng Xi's recent report, the officials of the Salt Transportation Department of Kawama stole money from the treasury. The Ministry of Education and Culture and the Imperial Historian jointly investigated and learned that the Salt Transportation Department owed more than 22,000 baht in salt tax, had collected more than 8,900 baht, and still owed more than 13,100 baht.

古文：运使张庸，尝献其妹于阿合马，有宠；阿合马既没，以官婢事桑哥，复有宠。
现代文：盐运使张庸，曾将其妹献与阿合马，因得宠信。阿合马死后，他又以官府奴婢献与桑哥，再次得宠。
English: Zhang Yong, the envoy of salt transport, once dedicated his younger sister to Ahama, and was favored by the emperor. After Ahama's death, Zhang Yong dedicated his younger sister to Sango, and was again favored by the emperor.

古文：故庸夤缘戚属，得久居漕司，独盗三千一百锭。
现代文：张庸攀附亲属，得以久居盐运司官位，他一人盗官库钱三千一百锭。
English: Zhang Yong clung to relatives and was able to hold the post of salt transport officer for a long time. He alone stole 3,100 baht from the official treasury.

古文：臣等议：宜命台省遣官，同廉访司倍征之。 
现代文：臣等认为，应命御史台与中书省各遣官吏，与廉访司一同去加倍征收。 
English: The minister and others believed that, in response to the order, the History Channel and various officials from the Ministry of Culture and Literature were sent to double the levy together with the Corruption Eradication Division.

古文：又言： 月林伯察江西廉访司官术儿赤带、河东廉访司官忽儿赤，擅纵盗贼，抑夺民田，贪污不法，今月林伯以事至京，宜就令诘问。 
现代文：又言 ：月林伯察知江西廉访司官术儿赤带、河东廉访司官忽儿赤，擅自释放盗贼，占夺民田，贪污违法。今月林伯因事至京，请下令向他查问。 
English: He also said: "Yue Lin Bo noticed that Jiangxi corrupt official Zhuerao, a red belt, and Hedong corrupt official Ku'erao, a red belt, released thieves without authorization, occupied people's land, and violated the law of corruption. This month, Lin Bo came to Beijing because of the matter, please order him to investigate."

古文：又言： 扬州盐运司受财，多付商贾盐，计直该钞二万二千八百锭，臣等以谓追征足日，课以归省，赃以归台，斟酌定罪，以清蠹源。 
现代文：又言： 扬州盐运司受贿，多付商贾盐，计值二万二千八百锭。臣等认为，盐课已经征足交中书省，盐运司所得赃款应交御史台，受贿官吏应分别判罪，以清贪污之源。 
English: He also said: Yangzhou Salt Transportation Division took bribes and overpaid merchants Jia salt, with a value of 22,800 baht. The ministers and others believed that the salt levy had been collected and handed over to the Central Book Ministry, the bribe money received by the Salt Transportation Division should be handed over to the State History Channel, and the bribe-taking officials should be convicted separately to clear the source of corruption.

古文：并从之。
现代文：以上两条意见均被采纳。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：又奏： 江西詹玉，始以妖术致位集贤。当桑哥持国，遣其掊核江西学粮，贪酷暴横，学校大废。
现代文：彧又奏： 江西詹玉，始以妖术而官至集贤学士，这是正值桑哥执政，派他去核查江西学粮。他在江西贪婪横暴，使学校大遭破坏。
English: 又奏: Jiangxi Zhan Yu, began with magic and became an official to collect scholars. This was when Sango was in power and sent him to inspect Jiangxi school grain. He was greedy and violent in Jiangxi and caused great damage to the school.

古文：近与臣言：撒里蛮、答失蛮传旨，以江南有谋叛者，俾乘传往鞫；明日，访知为秃速忽、香山欺罔奏遣。
现代文：近来他对臣说：撒里蛮、答失蛮传旨，因江南有人谋反，令我速去审理。第二天，经打听知是秃速忽、香山的谎报。
English: Recently, he said to his minister: "I was misinformed, and I made a mistake when I transmitted the order. Because someone south of the Yangtze River was plotting a rebellion, I was ordered to go to court immediately. The next day, upon inquiry, I learned that it was a false report by Bald Haku and Fragrant Mountain.

古文：玉在京师，犹敢诳诞如此，宜亟追还讯问。 
现代文：詹玉在京师还敢如此以谎言骗人，应立即追还审讯。 
English: If Zhan Yu still dares to deceive people with lies in Beijing, he should be brought back for trial immediately.

古文：帝曰： 此恶人也，遣之往者，朕未尝知之。
现代文：世祖说： 这是个恶人，派他去朕不知道，速将他擒回。 
English: The patriarch said, "This is an evil man. I don't know who sent him, but bring him back immediately."

古文：其亟禽以来。 三十年，彧言： 大都民食唯仰客籴，顷缘官括商船载递诸物，致贩鬻者少，米价翔踊。
现代文：至元三十年，彧上书言： 大都之民，其食粮全赖商人供给，近来因官府将商船征去运载朝廷的各种物资，致使粮商稀少，米价暴涨。
English: In the thirtieth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the following commentary was inscribed: Most of the people in the capital depend entirely on merchants for their food supply. Recently, because the government has requisitioned merchant ships to carry various supplies for the imperial court, grain merchants are scarce, and rice prices have skyrocketed.

古文：有旨就辩中书。
现代文：臣等认为，请令官府不要征发民船。 朝廷允准。
English: In the opinion of the courtiers, the government should be ordered not to requisition civilian ships, and the Imperial Court gave its approval.

古文：彧已书简等所告与己宜对者为牍袖之，视而后对。
现代文：宝泉提举张简及其子乃蛮带，指控彧曾受邹道源、许宗师的贿赂银五千两；张简的另一儿子知微指控彧违法十余事。朝廷传旨，令在中书省进行辩论。
English: Bao Quan brought up Zhang Jian and his son Nao Mandi, accusing Zou of having been bribed with 5,000 taels of silver by Zou Daoyuan and Xu Zongshi; another son of Zhang Jian, Zhi Wei, accused Zou of more than ten illegal things. The imperial court issued an order to hold a debate in China's Book Province.

古文：简父子所告皆无验，并系狱，简瘐死，仍籍其家一女入官；乃蛮带、知微皆坐杖罪除名。
现代文：经查实，简父子的指控皆无证据，将他们以诬告罪下狱。简在狱中死亡，乃没其家一女入官；乃蛮带与知微皆判杖刑，开除官职。
English: After investigation, it was found that there was no evidence for any of the accusations made by Jian and his son, and they were sent to prison for making false accusations. Jian died in prison, but none of his family members, including his daughter, were appointed to official positions; both Nao Manto and Zhibo were sentenced to caning and dismissed from official positions.

古文：三十一年，成宗即位。
现代文：三十一年，成宗即位。
English: Thirty-one years later, Shingon ascended to the throne.

古文：先是，彧得玉玺于故臣紥剌氏之家，其文曰 受命于天，既寿永昌 ，即以上之徽仁裕圣皇后。
现代文：在此以前，彧从老臣扎剌氏家得一玉玺，玺文是 受命于天，既寿永昌 。彧将此玺奉进给徽仁裕圣皇后。
English: Prior to this, Yao had received a jade brooch from the family of Zha Yu, an old retainer of the Zha Yu clan, with the inscription "Commanded by Heaven to live forever." Yao presented this brooch to Empress Hui Ren Yu Sheng.

古文：至是，皇后手以授于成宗。
现代文：现成宗即位，皇后亲手授与成宗。
English: Emperor Go-Jong ascended to the throne, and the Empress personally bestowed the title of Emperor Go-Jong.

古文：彧以久任宪台，乞迁他职，不许。成宗谕之曰： 卿若辞避，其谁抗言哉！ 
现代文：彧认为他已久任御史台官员，请求调任他职。成宗不准，对他说： 卿若辞去此职，谁敢来秉忠直言！ 
English: Zou thought that he had been an official of the Imperial Historian's Office for a long time, and asked to be transferred to his post. Chengzong did not allow him, and said to him: If you resign from this post, who would dare to be loyal and outspoken!

古文：彧言： 肃政廉访司案牍，而令总管府检劾，非宜。 
现代文：彧报告说： 肃政廉访司的公文令总管府审核，这是不当的。 
English: The report said: It is improper for the General Administration of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television to review the official document of the Anti-Corruption Bureau.

古文：成宗曰： 朕知难行，当时事由小人擅奏耳，其改之。 
现代文：成宗说： 朕知不好办，是当时小人奏请才这样办的，现改正就是了。 
English: Chengzong said: "I know it's not easy to do, it was only done this way at the time of the little man's request, now it's time to correct it."

古文：大德元年，彧又条陈台宪诸事，皆见于施行。
现代文：大德元年，彧又条陈若干意见，均见于施行。
English: In the first year of the Great Patriotic War, a number of opinions were issued, all of which were implemented.

古文：于是彧居御史台久，又守正不阿，以故人疾之，监察御史斡罗失剌，劾奏 中丞崔彧，兄在先朝尝有罪，还其所籍家产非宜 等事，成宗怒其妄言，笞而遣之。
现代文：彧由于在御史台居官日久，又守正不屈，不逢迎任何人，许多人视为眼中钉。监察御史斡罗失剌，劾奏 中丞崔彧，兄在先朝曾有罪，而归还其被没收的家产，是不应该的 等事，成宗斥责斡罗失剌是胡说八道，鞭笞驱出。
English: Many people regarded him as an eyesore because he had been in office for a long time at the Imperial Historian's Office, and because he was a staunch defender of justice and did not meet with anyone. Supervision of the Imperial Historian's Office's failure, impeachment of Chujo Choei, his brother had been guilty in the previous dynasty, and the return of his confiscated family property was not appropriate, etc. Chengzong's reprimand of the Imperial Historian's Office's failure was nonsense, and the whip was driven out.

古文：十一月，御史台奏： 大都路总管沙的，盗支官钱，及受赃计五千三百缗，准律当杖百七，不叙，以故臣子从轻论。 
现代文：十一月，御史台奏： 大都路总管沙的，盗支官钱及受贿共计五千三百缗，按律当杖一百零七，削夺官职，念其为老臣之子，请从轻惩处。 
English: In November, the historical record shows that the head of Datu Road, Sand, stole a total of 5,300 baht of official money and accepted bribes. According to the law, he should pay 107 baht. He also took away official posts. He was considered to be the son of an old minister. Please give him a light punishment.

古文：而成宗欲止权停其职，彧与御史大夫只而合郎执不可。
现代文：成宗只准暂停其职。彧与御史大夫只而合郎坚持不可。
English: Chengzong was only allowed to suspend his duties. He could not insist on being the only one with the title of goshi daibu.

古文：已而御史又奏： 彧任中丞且十年，非所宜。 
现代文：其后，御史又奏： 彧任御史中丞已十年，不宜再任。 
English: After that, Mishi also said, "It has been ten years since I was appointed as Mishi Chujo, and it is not appropriate to be reappointed."

古文：诸不至及失仪者，殿中司、监察御史同纠之。 
现代文：彧便称病辞职。成宗对他说： 卿要辞退是可以的，但要勉力为朕再留任几年。 
English: Shingzong told him, "It's okay for you to resign, but you should try to stay on for a few more years.

古文：二年，加荣禄大夫、平章政事，寻与御史大夫秃赤奏： 世祖圣训，凡在籍儒人，皆复其家。
现代文：大德元年闰十二月，彧兼领侍仪司事。与太常卿刘无隐共同奏请皇帝新年照常规到大万安寺接受朝贺。二年，加荣禄大夫、平章政事，与御史大夫秃赤奏 ：世祖训示，凡在籍儒人，其全家皆不服劳役。
English: In the leap December of the first year of the Great Tokugawa Shogunate,  concurrently led the steward of the ceremony. Together with the grand chancellor Liu Muyin, he played a song to invite the emperor to receive New Year's greetings at Dawanan Temple as usual. In the second year, Dr. Garonglu, Dr. Pingzhang, and Dr. Goshi played a song: The ancestor instructed that all Confucian students and their families should not accept labor service.

古文：今岁月滋久，老者已矣，少者不学，宜遵先制，俾廉访司常加勉励。 
现代文：今岁月已久，老者已死，少者不学。应遵循先朝制度，使廉访司去常加勉励。 
English: It has been a long time, the old people have died, and the young people do not learn. We should follow the system of the previous government, so that the Corruption Eradication Division should go to work more often.

古文：成宗深然之，命彧与不忽木、阿里浑撒里同翰林、集贤议，特降诏条，使作成人材，以备选举。
现代文：成宗深以为然，命彧与不忽木、阿里浑撒里同翰林、集贤共同商议，特降诏令，使这些儒人努力学习，成为人才，以备选用。
English: Chengzong was deeply convinced that he should consult with Fuhu Mu, Ali Hunsari, Hanlin and Ji Xian to make these Confucians study hard and become talents to be used as alternatives.

古文：彧以是岁九月卒。
现代文：彧于是年九月卒。
English: He graduated in September of that year.

古文：至大元年七月，赠推诚履正功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司，追封郑国公，谥忠肃。
现代文：至大元年七月，赠推诚履正功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司，追封郑国公，谥 忠肃 。
English: In July of the first year of the Republic of China, he was awarded the titles of Zheng Guogong, Taifu, Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：叶李叶李，字太白，一字舜玉，杭州人。
现代文：叶李字太白，一字舜玉，杭州人。
English: Ye Li's character is too white, one character is enameled, and he is from Hangzhou.

古文：李乃与同舍生康棣而下八十三人，伏阙上书，攻似道，其略曰： 三光舛错，宰执之愆。
现代文：自幼天资不凡，拜太学博士义乌施南学为师，补京学生。世祖南伐，蒙古军屯驻江上，宋朝命贾似道领兵抵御。因宪宗崩，世祖班师北还，解鄂州之围。
English: He was gifted from a young age. He was taught by Yiwu Shennan, a doctor of Chinese classics, and studied in Beijing. His ancestor went to the south, the Mongolian army was stationed on the river, and the Song Dynasty ordered Jiaxing Dao to lead the troops to resist. Because of the collapse of the Jianzong Dynasty, his ancestor also went to the north to lift the siege of Ezhou.

古文：似道缪司台鼎，变乱纪纲，毒害生灵，神人共怒，以干天谴。 
现代文：贾似道把蒙古军北撤作为自己功劳，欺骗宋朝皇帝，得以再任宰相，而且更加专横跋扈，创立公田，滥发纸币，压榨人民，宋朝内外无人敢于指责非议。
English: Jia Lidao took the withdrawal of the Mongolian army to the north as his own merit, deceived the Song Dynasty emperor, was reappointed as prime minister, and was even more domineering, created public land, issued paper money indiscriminately, and oppressed the people. No one inside or outside the Song Dynasty dared to criticize.

古文：似道大怒，知书稿出于李，嗾其党临安尹刘良贵，诬李僣用金饰斋扁，锻炼成狱，窜漳州。似道既败，乃得自便。
现代文：叶李与国子监的同学康棣等八十三人，向宋朝皇帝上书，攻击贾似道。似道大怒，得知给朝廷的上书是由叶李起草的，便唆使其党徒临安府尹刘良贵诬告叶李，造成冤案，把李贬到漳州，直到贾似道倒台后，他才能自由行动。
English: Eighty-three people, including Ye Li and Kang Xi, a classmate of Guozijian, sent a letter to the Emperor of the Song Dynasty to attack Jia Linduo. Linduo was furious when he learned that the letter to the imperial court was drafted by Ye Li, so he instigated his party member Yin Liu Liangui of Lin'an Prefecture to falsely accuse Ye Li, causing an unjust case and relegating Li to Zhangzhou. He could not act freely until after the fall of Jia Linduo.

古文：会宋亡，归隐富春山。
现代文：宋亡后，他隐居于富春山。
English: After Song's death, he lived in seclusion in Fuchun Mountain.

古文：江淮行省及宣、宪两司争辟之，署苏、杭、常等郡教授，俱不应。
现代文：江淮行省及宣抚司、行御史台争相召聘，使任苏、杭、常等郡教授。他都拒绝。
English: He refused to be appointed as a professor in Su, Hang, Chang and other counties as the Jianghuai Province, the Propaganda Department, and the History Department were competing for his appointment.

古文：至元十四年，世祖命御史大夫相威行台江南，且求遗逸，以李姓名上。
现代文：至元十四年，世祖命御史大夫相威主持江南行御史台工作，并访求宋朝遗臣。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Grand Historian Xiang Wei presided over the work of the Southern Yangtze River Grand Historian Station, and visited the remains of the Song Dynasty.

古文：初，李攻似道书，其末有 前年之师，适有天幸，克成厥勋 之语，世祖习闻之，每拊掌称叹。
现代文：相威举荐了叶李。以前叶李攻击贾似道的奏章中，其末有 前年之用兵，适逢天幸，才有保住宋朝半壁江山之功 之语。
English: Ye Li was recommended by Sangwei. In Ye Li's previous attack on Jia Li Dao, at the end of the song, there was a reference to the previous year's use of troops, which was a stroke of luck that preserved the Song Dynasty's half of the country.

古文：及是，其姓名闻，世祖大悦，即授奉训大夫、浙西道儒学提举。
现代文：世祖对这句话大加称赞，现在听说相威举荐了叶李，十分高兴，即授李为奉训大夫、浙西道儒学提举。
English: The founder of the world highly praised this sentence. Now that I have heard that Ye Li was recommended by Xiang Wei, I am very happy, that is, Li was awarded the doctor of training and the West Zhejiang Confucianism.

古文：李闻命，欲遁去，而使者致丞相安童书，有云： 先生在宋，以忠言谠论著称，简在帝心。
现代文：李闻知又准备隐避，而使者已至，除诏书外还附有丞相安童给他的信，信中说道： 先生在宋以忠言直谏为世人所称赞，皇帝非常关注，今授以五品官爵。
English: In addition to the imperial edict, there was also a letter from the prime minister, Ando, to him, in which he said: In the Song Dynasty, my teacher was praised by the world for his loyalty to the emperor, and the emperor was very concerned, and now he has been awarded a five-rank official title.

古文：今授以五品秩，士君子当隐见随时，其尚悉心，以报殊遇。 
现代文：有才德的人，当隐则隐，当出仕则应出仕，要尽全力以报答殊遇之恩。 
English: Talented people, when it is hidden, it is hidden, when it is served, it should be served, and they should do their best to repay the grace of the special occasion.

古文：李乃幡然北向再拜曰： 仕而得行其言，此臣夙心也，敢不奉诏！ 
现代文：李立即改变其隐避的打算，拜谢世祖的知遇，表示： 能为官治国，这是我的心愿，怎敢不接受皇帝的诏令。 
English: Li immediately changed his evasive plan, thanked his ancestor for his wisdom, and said: It is my heart's desire to be able to govern the country, how dare I not accept the emperor's edict.

古文：二十三年，侍御史程文海，奉命搜贤江南。
现代文：至元二十三年，侍御史程文海奉命去江南访求贤才。
English: In the 23rd year of the Yuan Dynasty, the chamberlain Cheng Wenhai was ordered to visit the south of the Yangtze River to recruit talents.

古文：世祖谕之曰： 此行必致叶李来。 
现代文：世祖叮嘱他，这次去一定要把叶李请来。
English: The patriarch told him that he must invite Ye Li this time.

古文：李既至京师，敕集贤大学士阿鲁浑撒里馆于院中。
现代文：李到京师后，皇帝命集贤大学士阿鲁浑撒里把他安置于集贤院中。
English: After Li arrived in Beijing, the emperor ordered the scholar Aru Hunsari to place him in Jixian Academy.

古文：它日，召见披香殿，劳问 卿远来良苦 ，且曰： 卿向时讼似道书，朕赏识之。 
现代文：过了几天，在披香殿召见，慰问他远道辛苦，对他说： 卿从前指责贾似道的书，我曾看到了。 
English: A few days later, he was summoned to the Phi Xiang Palace, where he was consoled for his long and arduous journey, and told him: Sir, I once saw the book that accused Jia Li Dao.

古文：更询以治道安出。
现代文：询问关于治国安邦之道。
English: Ask about the way to govern the country.

古文：李历陈古帝王得失成败之由，世祖首肯，赐坐锡宴，更命五日一入议事。
现代文：叶李讲述了历代帝王得失成败的原因。世祖连连点头称是，规定每五天入宫议事一次。
English: Ye Li recounted the reasons for the success or failure of the emperors in the past. The ancestor nodded and said that he was required to enter the palace for deliberation once every five days.

古文：时各道儒司悉以旷官罢，李因奏曰： 臣钦睹先帝诏书，当创业时，军务繁夥，尚招致士类。
现代文：当时，各道管理儒学的官府，都认为是闲职而被撤销。李为此而上书说 ：臣怀着敬佩之心阅读了先帝的诏书，看到朝廷在创业之时，军务繁重的情形下，还招纳儒士。
English: At that time, the government offices that managed Confucianism in each province were considered to be idle and were abolished. Li wrote a letter to this effect, saying: The minister read the former emperor's edict with admiration and saw that when the imperial court was starting up, it also recruited Confucianists under heavy military burdens.

古文：今陛下混一区宇，偃武修文，可不作养人才，以弘治道？
现代文：今陛下已统一天下，息武重文，难道不需要培养人才，弘扬圣上的治国之道么？
English: Now that your majesty has unified the country, do you not need to cultivate talent and promote the sacred way of governing the country?

古文：各道儒学提举及郡教授，实风化所系，不宜罢。
现代文：各道儒学提举及各郡教授，肩负教化民众的重任，不应废除。
English: The promotion of Confucianism in each province and the teaching of Confucianism in each county, which shoulder the heavy responsibility of educating the public, should not be abolished.

古文：请复立提举司，专提调学官，课诸生，讲明治道，而上其成才者于太学，以备录用。
现代文：请恢复提举司，专设提调学官，以教育诸生，讲明治国之道，而向太学提供培养人材，以备朝廷录用。
English: Please restore the Office of the Vice-Chancellor, and set up a special Vice-Chancellor to educate people, to teach the way of the Meiji State, and to provide Taigaku with trained personnel to prepare for employment by the Imperial Court.

古文：凡儒户徭役，乞一切蠲免。 
现代文：凡儒户的徭役，请完全豁免。 
English: Any Confucian overseers, please completely exempt.

古文：可其奏。
现代文：世祖允准。
English: The ancestor consented.

古文：是时，乃颜叛北边，诏李庭出师讨之，而将校多用国人，或其亲昵，立马相向语，辄释仗不战，逡巡退却。
现代文：这时，乃颜在北部起兵反叛朝廷，朝廷诏令叶李领军征讨。当时军中将校多是蒙古人，他们与乃颜本同族，不肯出战。世祖深为忧虑。
English: At this time, Naoyan raised an army in the north to rebel against the imperial court, and the imperial court ordered Ye Li to lead the army to fight. At that time, most of the officers in the army were Mongolians, and they were of the same race as Naoyan, and they refused to go to war. Shizu was deeply worried.

古文：帝患之。李密启曰： 兵贵奇，不贵众，临敌当以计取。
现代文：李秘密向世祖启奏 ：用兵之道在于奇而不在于人多，临敌当以计取。
English: Li Shizhong revealed to his ancestor: The way to use soldiers is to be surprising, not to have many soldiers. When facing an enemy, you should take a calculated approach.

古文：彼既亲昵，谁肯尽力？徒费陛下粮饷，四方转输甚劳。
现代文：将校既与乃蛮同族，谁肯尽力作战，徒费陛下粮饷。
English: Since the officer was of the same race as Naomaru, anyone willing to fight to the best of his ability would be wasting His Majesty's rations.

古文：臣前用汉军列前步战，而联大车断其后，以示死斗。
现代文：臣请用汉军作为前军进行步战，以大车断其退后之路，以示死战。
English: Minister, please use the Chinese army as the vanguard to carry out the foot battle, and use the cart to cut off its retreat path to show the death battle.

古文：彼尝玩我，必不设备，我以大众踣之，无不胜矣。 
现代文：敌人轻视我军，必不设防，我以压倒优势大军进攻，战无不胜。 
English: The enemy despises our army and will not set up a defense. I will attack with an overwhelmingly superior army, invincible.

古文：帝以其谋谕将帅，师果奏捷。自是帝益奇李，每罢朝，必召见论事。
现代文：帝用这一战略，果获大捷，从此以后，世祖更加认为叶李是个奇才，每次罢朝之后，必另召见论事。
English: The emperor used this strategy and achieved great success. From then on, the ancestor believed that Ye Li was a genius. After each visit to the emperor, he would be summoned to another meeting.

古文：二十四年，特拜御史中丞，兼商议中书省事。
现代文：二十四年，特拜叶李为御史中丞兼商议中书省事。
English: In 1924, he was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History as well as the Vice-Minister of Consultation.

古文：李固辞曰： 臣本羁旅，荷蒙眷知，使备顾问，固当竭尽愚衷。
现代文：李极力辞谢道 ：臣本流落之人，蒙陛下知遇，备作顾问，本当竭力尽忠。
English: Li tried his best to express his gratitude, saying, "A person who was exiled as a vassal, who was favored by His Majesty and prepared to serve as an advisor, really tried his best to be loyal."

古文：御史台总察中外机务，臣愚不足当此任。
现代文：然御史台要总察朝廷内外的机务，臣愚不足担此重任。
English: However, the Imperial Historian's Office needed to inspect the inner and outer workings of the imperial court, and a vassal was not enough to carry out this important task.

古文：且臣昔窜瘴乡，素染足疾，比岁尤剧。 
现代文：且臣过去到过瘴疠之地，染上足疾，近年尤为厉害。 
English: In addition, the minister has been to places where there is a lot of bad weather, and he has contracted a foot disease, which has been particularly severe in recent years.

古文：帝笑曰： 卿足艰于行，心岂不可行耶？ 
现代文：世祖笑道： 卿足艰于行走，心岂不可行吗？ 
English: The patriarch laughed and said, "My lord, your feet are too heavy to walk. Shouldn't your heart be able to walk?

古文：李固辞，得许。因叩首谢曰： 臣今虽不居是职，然御史台天子耳目，常行事务，可以呈省。
现代文：李辞意坚决，得到允许，叩首谢恩，并奏 ：臣今虽不居御史中丞之职，然御史台是天子的耳目，平常事务可呈陛下省察。
English: Li resigned resolutely, and when he was allowed to do so, he bowed his head in gratitude and said, "Although the minister is not currently in the position of Imperial Historian, the Imperial Historian is the eyes and ears of the Son of Heaven, and ordinary affairs can be submitted to His Majesty's inspection."

古文：至若监察御史奏疏、西南两台咨禀，事关军国，利及生民，宜令便宜闻奏，以广视听，不应一一拘律，遂成文具。
现代文：至于监察御史的奏疏、西南两台的禀报，事关军国要务，与百姓的利害息息相关，应令随时呈奏，以广视听，不应什么事都要按章进行，使奏报成为形式。
English: As for the report on the supervision of imperial history and the false report of the two southwestern stations, it is related to the important tasks of the military state and is closely related to the interests of the people. It should be ordered to present the report at any time, and it should be broadcast on television and audio. Everything should be carried out in accordance with the regulations, so that the report becomes a form.

古文：臣请诏台臣言事，各许实封，幸甚。 
现代文：臣请皇上诏令各台臣，各据实奏报。 
English: The vassal requested the emperor to issue an imperial edict to all Taiwan vassals to report to the emperor.

古文：又曰： 宪臣以绳愆纠缪为职，苟不自检，于击搏何有！
现代文：又说 ：监察官员是以纠正错误为其职责，若对自己不严格要求，又如何纠察别人。
English: He also said: "Supervisory officials are responsible for correcting mistakes. If they are not strict with themselves, how can they picket others?"

古文：其有贪婪败度之人，宜付法司增条科罪，以惩欺罔。 
现代文：其中如有贪婪和破坏法纪的人，应交刑法机关加罪惩处，以惩戒其对朝廷的欺蒙之罪。 
English: If any of them are greedy and violate legal discipline, they should be handed over to the criminal law organs for additional punishment to punish their crime of defrauding the imperial court.

古文：制曰： 可 。由是台宪得实封言事。
现代文：这些都得到皇帝的肯定，从此以后，御史台的官员们都可如实奏报皇帝。
English: These were all affirmed by the emperor, and from then on, the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office could report to the emperor truthfully.

古文：会尚书省立，授李资善大夫、尚书左丞，李复固辞，以谓 论臣资格，未宜遽至此 。
现代文：朝廷设尚书省，授叶李为资善大夫、尚书左丞。李又坚决辞谢道： 论臣资格，不宜担此重任。 
English: The imperial court set up the Ministry of Education and Culture, awarding Ye Li the title of Senior Scholar and Vice-Minister of Education and Culture. Li also firmly declined, saying, "In terms of my qualifications as a minister, it is not appropriate for me to take on such a heavy responsibility."

古文：帝曰： 商起伊尹，周举太公，岂循格耶！
现代文：世祖道： 商朝起用伊尹，周朝举用太公，岂都是按资格？
English: World Ancestor Way: Is it true that Yi Yin was appointed by the Shang Dynasty and Tai Gong was appointed by the Zhou Dynasty based on qualifications?

古文：唐、虞、三代，咸有胄学，汉、唐明主，数幸辟雍，匪为观美也。 
现代文：尚书肩负着天下重任，朕烦卿担任，卿切不可推辞。 赐大小车各一，许乘小车入宫，扶上大殿。
English: Shangshu shouldered the heavy responsibilities of the world, I am tired of serving the lord, the lord must not be dismissed. Give one large and small car each, allowed to take a small car to enter the palace and climb up to the main hall.

古文：乃荐周砥等十人为祭酒等官，凡庙学规制，条具以闻，帝皆从之。
现代文：他开始制定至元钞法，又请建立太学，培养人才。他向皇帝陈述历史上历朝对教育的重视，人才辈出，从而使圣上恩德及于人民。他举荐周砥等十人为祭酒，制定学校规章制度，这些，世祖都一一批准。
English: He began to formulate the yuan banknote law, and requested the establishment of a university to train talents. He told the emperor that all dynasties in history have attached great importance to education, and talents have emerged from generation to generation, thus bringing the sacred grace to the people. He recommended Zhou Tong and other ten people to sacrifice wine and formulate school rules and regulations. These were all approved by the ancestors.

古文：时帝欲徙江南宋宗室及大姓于北方，李乘间言： 宋已归命，其民安于田里。今无故闻徙，必将疑惧，万一有奸人乘衅而起，非国之利也。 
现代文：世祖计划把江南宋朝的宗族及大姓迁到北方来，李劝谏说： 宋朝已归顺大元，其民安于农业，今无故要迁徙，必将引起疑惧，万一有奸人乘机造乱，于国家不利。 
English: The ancestor planned to move the clan and the great family name of the Song Dynasty from the south of the Yangtze River to the north. Li Xuanqi said: The Song Dynasty has been subordinated to Shun Dayuan, and its people are safe in agriculture. There is no reason to migrate now. It will certainly cause suspicion. In the unlikely event that a traitor takes the opportunity to create chaos, it will be unfavorable to the country.

古文：帝大悟，事遂寝。
现代文：世祖被提醒了，放弃原来的计划。
English: The patriarch was warned to give up his original plan.

古文：升尚书右丞，转资德大夫。
现代文：升李为尚书右丞，转为资德大夫。
English: Sheng Li was promoted to Shang Shuxu Rongcheng, and later to Zide Dafu.

古文：时淮、浙饥馑，谷价腾踊，李奏免江淮租税之半，运湖广、江西粮十七万石至镇江，以赈饥民。
现代文：淮、浙发生饥荒，谷价腾贵，李奏请减少江淮租税的一半，运湖广、江西粮十七万石至镇江，以赈济饥民。
English: Famine occurred in Huai and Zhejiang, grain prices soared, Li So asked to reduce the Jianghuai tax by half, and transported 170,000 kilos of grain from Hukang and Jiangxi to Zhenjiang to feed the hungry.

古文：帝欲伐交趾，召李入议，李曰： 遐方远夷，得之无益，军旅一兴，费縻巨万，今山路险巇，深入敌境，万一蹉跌，非所以威示远人也。 
现代文：世祖欲征伐交趾，召李商议，李认为 ：这远方小国，得之无益，大军去征讨，必耗费大量财物，且山路艰险，深入敌境，万一受到挫折，有损对远人的威望。 
English: The ancestor of the world wanted to conquer Kota Kinabalu, and called Li for consultation. Li thought: This small faraway country is of no use, and a large army to conquer it will consume a lot of wealth, and the mountain road is difficult and dangerous, and it will go deep into the enemy territory. If it is frustrated, it will damage the prestige of the distant people.

古文：乃止。二十五年，升平章政事，李固辞，许之。赐以玉带，视秩一品，及平江田四千亩。
现代文：世祖听取了他的意见，停止征讨。二十五年，升李为平章政事，李又坚决不肯，皇帝尊重他的意见，赐玉带及平江田四千亩，升官爵一级。
English: The patriarch listened to his opinion and stopped the solicitation. In the 25th year, Li was promoted to Pingzhang government affairs, but Li resolutely refused. The emperor respected his opinion, gave him the jade belt and four thousand mu of Pingjiang fields, and promoted him to the first level of official peerage.

古文：于是桑哥为尚书丞相，颛擅国政，急于财利，毒及生民，事具《桑哥传》。
现代文：桑哥为尚书省丞相，政权独揽，搜刮财利，毒害人民，事见《桑哥传》。
English: Sango was the prime minister of Shangshu Province, monopolized power, scrounged money and poisoned the people, see "Sango biography."

古文：李虽与之同事，然莫能有所匡正。
现代文：李虽与桑哥同事，但对他的错误政策不能纠正。
English: Although Li is a colleague of Sango, he cannot correct his wrong policy.

古文：会桑哥败，事颇连及同列。
现代文：桑哥失败后，同朝臣僚受到牵连。
English: After Sango's defeat, he was implicated with court officials.

古文：久之，李独以疾得请南还。
现代文：而李一人因病回到江南。
English: Li, however, returned to the south of the Yangtze River due to illness.

古文：扬州儒学正李淦上书言： 叶李本一黥徒，受皇帝简知，可为千载一遇。
现代文：扬州儒学正李淦上书说 ：叶李本是个受黥刑的罪犯，受皇帝知遇，可谓千载难逢。
English: Yangzhou Confucian scholar Li Xuan wrote: Ye Liben was a criminal who was flogged, and the emperor knew about it, which is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：而才近天光，即以举桑哥为第一事；禁近侍言事，以非罪杀参政郭佑、杨居宽；迫御史中丞刘宣自裁，锢治书侍御史陈天祥，罢御史大夫门答占、侍御史程文海，杖监察御史；变钞法，拘学粮，征军官俸，减兵士粮；立行司农司、木绵提举司，增盐酒醋税课，官民皆受其祸。
现代文：刚受到天子的恩德，就举荐桑哥，据宫廷近侍官说，他以莫须有的罪名杀参政郭佑、杨居宽，迫使御史中丞刘宣自杀，囚禁治书侍御史陈天祥，罢黜御史大夫门答占、侍御史程文海，鞭打监察御史；他还改变钞法、扣减学粮，征收军官俸禄，减少兵士口粮；设立司农司、木绵提举司，增收盐、酒、醋的税额，官民皆受其祸。
English: As soon as he received the benevolence of the heavenly son, he recommended Sango. According to the palace aide-de-camp, he killed Guo You and Yang Ju Kuan, who were involved in politics, on trumped-up charges, forced Liu Xuan, the vice-chairman of the imperial history, to commit suicide, imprisoned Chen Tianxiang, the vice-chairman of the imperial history, dismissed the vice-chairman of the imperial history, Cheng Wenhai, the vice-chairman of the imperial history, and whipped the vice-chairman of the imperial history. He also changed the banknote law, reduced school rations, levied officers' salaries, and reduced

古文：尤可痛者，要束木祸湖广，沙不丁祸江淮，灭贵里祸福建。
现代文：尤其痛心的是，让要束木为患于湖广，沙不丁为害于江淮，灭贵里为害于福建。
English: What is particularly distressing is that so-called bunchwood is harmful to Hukang, sandbiting is harmful to Jianghuai, and the destruction of Guili is harmful to Fujian.

古文：又大钩考钱粮，民怨而盗发，天怒而地震，水灾洊至。
现代文：他又大肆清理钱粮，使民怨而为盗，天怒而地震，水灾一次又一次的发生。
English: He also cleaned up money and grain on a large scale, causing people's grievances to turn into theft, the wrath of heaven to turn into earthquakes, and floods to occur again and again.

古文：尚赖皇帝圣明，更张政化。
现代文：好在皇帝圣明，改变其错误政策。
English: Fortunately, Emperor Shengming changed his erroneous policy.

古文：人皆知桑哥用群小之罪，而不知叶李举桑哥之罪。
现代文：人们都知桑哥用一般小人之罪，而不知叶李举荐桑哥之罪。
English: People all know Sango's crime of using a common villain, but they don't know Ye Li's crime of recommending Sango.

古文：叶李虽罢相权，刑戮未加，天下往往窃议，宜斩叶李以谢天下。 
现代文：叶李虽罢黜相权，但未法办，天下人往往私下议论，认为应斩叶李以谢天下。 
English: Although Ye Li was deprived of the power of the prime minister, he was not prosecuted. People around the world often privately discussed that Ye Li should be executed to thank the world.

古文：书闻，帝矍然曰： 叶李廉介刚直，朕所素知者，宁有是耶！ 
现代文：世祖看了这个奏章后，惊异地说： 叶李廉洁刚直，朕所素知，哪有这些事？ 
English: After the founder of the world saw this piece of music, he said in surprise: Ye Li Li Ren Jie Gang Zhi, as far as I know, what are these things?

古文：有旨驿召淦诣京师。
现代文：传旨召李淦至京师查问。
English: An order was issued to summon Li Yan to the capital for questioning.

古文：二十九年二月，李南还，至临清，帝遣使召之，俾为平章政事，佐丞相完泽治省事，李上表力辞。
现代文：至元二十九年二月，李南还，行至临清，帝遣使召回，使任平章政事，辅助丞相完泽管理中书省事。李上表力辞。
English: In February of the 29th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Nan also went to Linqing, and the emperor sent an envoy to recall him, and he was assigned to the government of Pingzhang, and assisted the prime minister in the management of the book. Li Shang made a strong speech.

古文：未几，卒，年五十一。
现代文：不久去世，终年五十一岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 51.

古文：李既卒而淦至，诏以淦为江阴路教授，以旌直言。
现代文：李死后，李淦至京，诏令淦为江阴路教授，以表彰他敢于直言。
English: After Li's death, Li Yao went to Beijing, where he was awarded the title of Jiangyin Road Professor in recognition of his courage to speak out.

古文：帝尝问兵部郎中赵孟頫，李与留梦炎孰优，孟頫对： 梦炎优。 
现代文：世祖曾问兵部郎中赵孟兆页，叶李与留梦炎谁好，孟兆页说 梦炎好 。
English: The founder of the world once asked Zhao Mengzhao, a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, who is better, Ye Li or Remyongyan. Mengzhao said that Remyongyan is better.

古文：帝笑曰： 不然，梦炎以抡魁位宰相，而附贾似道，病民误国，伴食中书，无所可否；李旧由诸生，力诋似道，其过梦炎甚远。
现代文：帝笑道 ：不然，梦炎以状元而做了宰相，却依附于贾似道，殃民祸国，而自己只是个 伴食宰相 ，遇事不置可否，李原为儒生，力斥似道的罪过，比梦炎要强得多。
English: The emperor laughed and said, "Otherwise, Mengyan became the prime minister by virtue of his position, but he clung to Jia Lijiao, who was a scourge to the people and the country, while he himself was only a companion prime minister, who did not hesitate in the face of adversity. Li Yuan was a Confucian, and he strongly rejected the sins of Jia Lijiao, which was much stronger than Mengyan.

古文：然其性刚直，人不能容，而朕独爱之也。 
现代文：然其性刚直，人不能容他，而只有朕爱他。 
English: Of course, because of his upright nature, people can't tolerate him, but only I love him.

古文：李前后被赐之物甚多，而自奉甚俭。尝戒其子曰： 吾世业儒，甘贫约，唯以忠义结主知。
现代文：李先后受赐之物甚多，而自己生活俭朴，曾告诫其子说： 我家世代书香，甘于贫简生活，唯以忠义奉献君主。
English: Li, who received many gifts in succession and lived a frugal life himself, once admonished his son, saying, "My family has been living frugally for generations. We are willing to live a simple and poor life, but we must be loyal to the monarch."

古文：汝曹其清慎自持，勿增吾过。 
现代文：你们也要清白谨慎，不要给我脸上抹黑。 
English: You should also be careful not to tarnish my reputation.

古文：指所赐物曰： 此终当还官也。 
现代文：指着那些赏赐物说 ：这些将来都要还给公家的。 
English: Pointing to the gifts, he said: "These will all be returned to the public sector in the future."

古文：比卒，悉表送官，一毫不以自私。
现代文：死后，把这些统统交了官，丝毫不留。
English: After his death, he handed all of this over to the authorities, leaving nothing behind.

古文：至正八年，赠资德大夫、江浙等处行中书省右丞、上护军，追封南阳郡公，谥文简。
现代文：至正八年，赠资德大夫、江浙行中书省右丞、上护军，追封南阳郡公，谥 公简 。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiping era, he was awarded the title of Nanyang County magistrate.

古文：至元十三年，世祖既平江南，帅臣板授同知赣州事。
现代文：燕公楠字国材，南康之建昌人，宋礼部侍郎燕肃之七世孙。公楠十岁能写文章，但两次乡试都未中。后曾任赣州通判。至元十三年，世祖平定江南，授公楠为赣州同知。
English: Yan Gongnan was a national treasure, the founder of Nankang, and the seventh-generation grandson of Yan Su, the attendant of the Song Ministry of Ceremonies. At the age of ten, Gongnan was able to write articles, but he did not pass the two township examinations. Later, he served as the judge of Zhangzhou. In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the founder of Pingding Jiangnan, awarded Gongnan as the same acquaintance of Zhangzhou.

古文：十四年，以平广南功，迁同知吉州路总管府事。
现代文：十四年，因平广南有功，升为吉州路总管府同知。
English: In the 14th year, due to Ping Guangnan's meritorious service, he was promoted to the chief administrator of Jizhou Road.

古文：二十二年夏，召至上都，奏对称旨，世祖赐名赛因囊加带，命参大政，辞，乞补外。
现代文：二十二年夏，召至上都，世祖赐名赛因囊加带，命参与国家政务。
English: In the summer of 1922, he was summoned to Shangdu, and the patriarch gave him the name of Saiin Bagge, and ordered him to participate in state affairs.

古文：除佥江浙行中书省事，俄移江淮。尚书省立，就佥江淮行尚书省事。
现代文：他辞谢，请求授他外省官职，于是任命佥江浙行中书省事，不久又调佥江淮行中书省事。朝廷设立尚书省，公楠就任佥江淮行尚书省事。
English: He withdrew his thanks and asked to be given an official post in another province, so he was appointed to the post of the Minister of Education and Culture of the Zhejiang Province, and was soon transferred to the post of the Minister of Education and Culture of the Jiangxi Province. The imperial court established the Ministry of Education and Culture, and Gongnan was appointed to the post of the Minister of Education and Culture of the Jiangxi Province.

古文：江淮在宋为边陲，故多闲田，公楠请置两淮屯田，劝导有方，田日以垦。
现代文：江淮原为宋朝的边疆，多有闲田，公楠在这里实行屯田，由于领导有方，荒田得到大量开垦。
English: Jianghuaiyuan was the frontier of the Song Dynasty. There were a lot of idle fields. Here, Gongnan implemented the practice of tuning fields. Thanks to the leadership, a large number of barren fields were reclaimed.

古文：二十五年，除大司农，领八道劝农营田司事。
现代文：二十五年，任公楠为大司农，统领八道劝农营田司事。
English: In the 25th year, Gongnan was appointed as the chief secretary of farmers, leading the eight-way persuasion of farmland.

古文：按行郡县，兴利举弊，绩用大著。
现代文：他巡视各郡县，兴利除弊，政绩卓著。
English: He inspected all counties and counties, eliminating the disadvantages, and achieving outstanding political results.

古文：劾江西营田使沙不丁贪横，罢之。
现代文：弹劾江西营田使沙不丁贪婪横暴，罢了沙不丁的官。
English: The impeachment of Jiangxi Yingtian made Sabutin greedy and violent, and he was removed as Sabutin's official.

古文：二十七年，拜江淮行中书省参知政事。
现代文：二十七年，拜江淮行中书省参知政事。
English: In the 27th year, Bai Jianghuai was appointed as the vice-governor of Shuzhou Province.

古文：桑哥既败，而蠹政未尽去，民不堪命。
现代文：桑哥专政虽终失败，但其弊政并未完全消除，百姓还受压榨。
English: Although the Zangger dictatorship ultimately failed, its maladministration has not been completely eliminated, and the people are still being oppressed.

古文：公楠赴阙，极陈其故，请更张以固国本。世祖悦。
现代文：公楠到朝廷详细报告桑哥弊政所造成的危害，请示进行彻底的改变以巩固国家基础，世祖对他的建议很满意。
English: Gongnan went to the imperial court to report in detail the harm caused by Sango's maladministration, and asked for a radical change to strengthen the foundation of the country. The patriarch was very satisfied with his suggestion.

古文：会欲易政府大臣，以问公楠，公楠荐伯颜、不灰木、阇里、阔里吉思、史弼、徐琰、赵琪、陈天祥等十人。
现代文：正要更换朝廷大臣，世祖征询公楠的意见，公楠举荐伯颜、不灰木、里、阔里吉思、史弼、徐琰、赵琪、陈天祥等十人。
English: When it was time to replace the imperial court minister, King Sejong asked Gongnan for advice, and Gongnan recommended Bo Yan, Fuhai Mu, Li, Kuo Lijis, Shi Min, Xu Wei, Zhao Qi, Chen Tianxiang, and ten others.

古文：又问孰可以为首相，对曰： 天下人望所属，莫若安童。 
现代文：又问他谁可任宰相，公楠说： 天下人心所向者，莫若安童。 
English: He also asked who could be appointed prime minister. Gongnan said, "Whoever the hearts of the people of the world are drawn to, should not be Andong.

古文：问其次，曰： 完泽可。 明日，拜完泽为丞相，以公楠及不灰木为平章政事，固辞。改江浙行中书省参知政事，赐弓矢及卫士十人以行。
现代文：又问他其次还有谁，他说 完泽可以 ，于是第二天拜完泽为丞相，以公楠及不灰木为平章政事，公楠坚决辞谢，改为江浙行中书省参知政事。三十年，又任命为大司农。
English: He also asked him who else there was, and he said, "Kanze can," so the next day, Baikanze became the prime minister, with Gongnan and Fuhai as the ministers, Gongnan resolutely declined, and was changed to the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province. Thirty years later, he was also appointed as the chief minister of agriculture.

古文：三十年，复为大司农，得藏匿公私田六万九千八百六十二顷，岁出粟十五万一千一百斛、钞二千六百贯、帛千五百匹、麻丝二千七百斤。
现代文：他在职期间，清查出隐瞒的公私田地六万九千八百六十二顷，五年，增加国库收入粟十五万一千一百斛、钞二千六百贯、帛一千五百匹、麻丝二千七百斤。
English: During his term of office, 69,862 hectares of concealed public and private fields were identified, and in five years, the state treasury's income increased by 151,100 mu of millet, 2,600 yuan of banknotes, 1,500 mu of straw, and 2,700 kg of flax.

古文：元贞元年，进河南行省右丞，厘正盐法，民便之。
现代文：元贞元年，晋升河南行省右丞。他在河南改正了盐法，使人民得到了利益。
English: In the first year of Yuan Zhen, he was promoted to Henan Provincial Right-hand Man. He corrected the salt law in Henan, so that the people benefited from it.

古文：赙赠有加，特命朝臣护丧南归。
现代文：五年，召还朝，不久去世。成宗甚为哀悼，赐安葬费，特命朝臣护丧南归。
English: In the fifth year, he was summoned back to the court, and died soon after. Chengzong was very saddened, gave him funeral expenses, and ordered his courtiers to escort him back to the south.

古文：马绍马绍，字子卿，济州金乡人，从上党张播学。丞相安童入侍世祖，奏言宜得儒士讲论经史，以资见闻。
现代文：马绍字子卿，济州金乡人，拜上党张播为师，丞相安童向世祖建议，延聘儒士来讲经论史，以增加见闻。
English: Marshall Ziziqing, a native of Jinxiang in Jeju, worshipped the party Zhang Bo as his teacher, and the prime minister Ando suggested to his ancestor that he should hire a Confucian scholar to talk about the history of the scriptures in order to increase his knowledge.

古文：平章政事张启元以绍应诏，授左右司都事。
现代文：平章政事张启元举荐马绍，于是授绍为左右司都事，后出任单州知府。
English: Zhang Qiyuan, a member of the Pingzhang Political Bureau, recommended Mashao, so Zhushao became the capital of the Left and Right Divisions, and later served as the governor of a single state.

古文：出知单州，民刻石颂德。
现代文：绍在单州颇有政绩，百姓刻碑歌颂其功德。
English: Shao had quite a number of political achievements in Shan State, and the people carved a monument to praise his merits.

古文：至元十年，佥山东东西道提刑按察司事。
现代文：至元十年，负责山东东西道提刑按察司的政务。
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was in charge of the government affairs of Shandong East-West Criminal Investigation Bureau.

古文：益都宁海饥，绍发粟赈之。
现代文：益都宁海发生饥荒，绍开仓赈济饥民。
English: There was a famine in Ninghai, the capital of Yidu, and Shaokai Cang was used to feed the hungry.

古文：十三年，移佥河北河南道提刑按察司事。
现代文：十三年改任佥河北河南道提刑按察司事。
English: Thirteen years later, he was transferred to the post of deputy chief inspector of the Penal Correction Department of Henan Province, Heibei Province.

古文：未行，属江淮甫定，选官抚治，迁同知和州路总管府事，民赖以安。
现代文：尚未启程赴任，正值江淮刚平定，需派官员去抚治，于是改任绍为和州路总管府同知。
English: He had not yet set off for his new post when the Yangtze River had just been pacified and officials needed to be sent to govern it, so he changed his post to Shao, which was the same as that of the State Highway Administration.

古文：十九年，诏割隆兴为东宫分地，皇太子选署总管，召至京师，为刑部尚书。
现代文：至元十九年，朝廷将隆兴划为太子的分地，为选任分地总管，皇太子召绍至京，绍回京后却任命为刑部尚书。
English: In the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court designated Longxing as the prince's branch and appointed him as the head of the branch. The crown prince summoned Shao to Beijing, but after Shao returned to Beijing, he was appointed as the head of the criminal department.

古文：万亿库吏盗绒四两，时相欲置之重典，绍言： 物情俱轻，宜从贷减。 
现代文：管万亿库的官吏偷了绒线四两，宰相要予以重惩，绍认为按其情节，应从轻发落，只予以杖刑。
English: The official in charge of the trillion-yuan treasury stole forty-two yarns, and the prime minister wanted to punish him severely. Shao thought that according to the circumstances, he should be punished lightly, and only be punished with a cane.

古文：乃决杖释之。河间李移住妄言惑众，谋为不轨，绍被檄按问，所全活几百人。
现代文：河间地方李移住妄言惑众，图谋不轨，绍奉命去审理，使受牵连的几百人免于死刑。
English: Li migrated to the Hema region, where he spoke and misled the public and plotted illegal activities. Shao was ordered to go to trial, so that the hundreds of people implicated were spared the death penalty.

古文：二十年，参议中书省事。
现代文：二十年，参议中书省事。
English: Twenty years on, the councillor is no longer in charge.

古文：二十二年，改兵部尚书。逾年，复为刑部尚书。
现代文：二十二年，改任兵部尚书，第二年又任刑部尚书。
English: Twenty-two years later, he was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and the following year he was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：平章政事桑哥怒曰： 杜璠何人，敢沮吾钞法耶！ 欲当以重罪。
现代文：二十四年，设立尚书省，升绍为参知政事。桑哥当政，改行至元宝钞。前信州三务提举杜反对，平章政事桑哥大怒，要将杜治罪。
English: In 1924, Shangshu Province was established, and Shengshao became a political advisor to the governor. Sango became a politician and changed his profession to that of a banker. The former Shinshu Sanmu opposed Du's nomination, and Pingzhang political advisor Sango was furious and wanted to punish Du.

古文：绍从容言曰： 国家导人使言，言可采，用之；不可采，亦不之罪。今重罪之，岂不与诏书违戾乎？ 
现代文：绍从容劝阻说 ：国家正是要使人敢于讲话，其言可采用则用，不可采用也不为罪，如今对杜治以重罪，岂不是与朝廷诏书本意相违背？ 
English: Shao calmly dissuaded him, saying, "The state just wants to make people dare to speak. Their words can be used or not used, but they are not a crime. Now, to punish them with a serious crime, isn't that contrary to the original intention of the imperial edict?"

古文：璠得免。
现代文：因得免罪。
English: He was acquitted.

古文：拜尚书左丞。
现代文：拜绍为尚书左丞。
English: Baisho is Shoshu's assistant.

古文：亲王戍边，其士卒有过支廪米者，有司以闻，帝欲究问加罪。绍言： 方边庭用兵，罪之，惧失将士心。
现代文：亲王领军戍边，其士卒多领了粮饷，世祖要追查问罪。绍劝谏说： 现在正值边疆用兵之时，为此事治罪，恐怕失将士之心。
English: The prince led the troops to the border, and his soldiers received more rations, and the patriarch wanted to investigate and ask about the crime. Shao advised Zou that: Now is the time for soldiers to be used on the border, and I am afraid that if I were to punish this matter, I would lose the soldiers' hearts.

古文：所支逾数者，当嗣年之数可也。 
现代文：凡超支者，可抵明年的粮饷数。 
English: Anyone who overspends can get next year's grain harvest.

古文：制可。
现代文：世祖点头称是。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：宗亲海都作乱，其民来归者七十余万，散居云、朔间。
现代文：宗亲海都作乱，而所统治下的居民却来归附朝廷，共七十余万，散居于云、朔之间。
English: Zongcheng and Hai both caused turmoil, but the residents under their rule came to join the imperial court, a total of more than seven hundred thousand, scattered between Yun and Shuo.

古文：桑哥议徙之内地就食，绍持不可。
现代文：桑哥打算把他们迁往内地，绍坚持不可。
English: Sango plans to move them to the mainland, but Shao insists.

古文：桑哥怒曰： 马左丞爱惜汉人，欲令馁死此辈耶？ 
现代文：桑哥大怒道 ：马左丞爱惜汉人，要把蒙古人饿死吗？ 
English: Sango said angrily, "Ma Zu Rong cherishes the Han people, but wants to starve the Mongolians to death?

古文：绍徐曰： 南土地燠，北人居之，虑生疾疫。
现代文：绍从容不迫地说 ：南方天气炎热，北方人来居住不习惯，恐会生病。
English: "The weather in the south is hot, and people from the north aren't used to living here, so they might get sick," Shao said calmly.

古文：若恐馁死，葛若计口给羊马之资，俾还本土，则未归者孰不欣慕。
现代文：若说怕他们饿死，何不按人头给他们买羊马的钱，让他们回到本土去，那些未来归附的人一看，谁不羡慕。
English: If they say that they are afraid of starving to death, why not give them money to buy sheep and horses according to the number of people and let them return to the mainland. When you look at those who will be annexed in the future, who would not envy them?

古文：言有异同，丞相何以怒为？
现代文：我们意见不同，丞相何必大发脾气？
English: We have different opinions. Why does the prime minister have to lose his temper?

古文：宜取圣裁。 
现代文：最好请皇上圣裁。 
English: It is best to ask the Emperor's Holiness.

古文：乃如绍言以闻，帝曰： 马秀才所言是也。 
现代文：他们各自向皇帝说明自己的意见，皇帝说： 马秀才的话是对的。 
English: They each explained their opinions to the emperor. The emperor said, "Ma Xiucai's words are right.

古文：桑哥集诸路总管三十人，导之入见，欲以趣办财赋之多寡为殿最。帝曰： 财赋办集，非民力困竭必不能。
现代文：桑哥召集诸路总管三十人，引导他们去朝见皇帝，是想让他们在皇帝面前报告所征财赋多少，来表明他们各自征收财赋的能力，取得皇帝的称赞。
English: Sango called together thirty chief administrators of all roads and led them to the imperial court. He wanted them to report to the emperor the amount of wealth they had collected, to show their ability to collect wealth, and to win the emperor's praise.

古文：然朕之府军，岂少此哉！ 
现代文：而世祖说 ：要多征收财赋，非使百姓贫困不堪不可，然朕之府库岂少这些财赋？ 
English: The founder of the world said, "If we want to collect more wealth, we must make the people's poverty unbearable. But where does our treasury get all this wealth?"

古文：绍退至省，追录圣训，付太史书之。
现代文：绍退朝后，将世祖的话记下来交给太史馆写出来作为圣训。
English: After Shao retired, he wrote down the words of his ancestor and handed them over to the National Museum of History to be written down as a hadith.

古文：议增盐课，绍独力争山东课不可增。
现代文：朝廷欲增加盐课，绍竭力坚持山东盐课不可再有增加。
English: The imperial court wanted to increase the salt lesson, and Shao tried his best to insist that the Shandong salt lesson should not be increased.

古文：议增赋，绍曰： 苟不节浮费，虽重敛数倍，亦不足也。 
现代文：朝廷敛田赋，绍又认为： 若不节省不需要的开支，虽把田赋增加数倍也是不够用的。 
English: The imperial court reduced the amount of rice allotment, and Shao also thought: If we do not save unnecessary expenses, even if we increase the rice allotment several times, it will not be enough.

古文：桑哥既败，乃曰： 使吾早信马左丞之言，必不至今日之祸。 
现代文：桑哥失败后才有所省悟地说 ：如果我早听马左丞之言，也不至于遭今日之祸。 
English: After Sango's defeat, he reflected and said, "If I had listened to Mazucho earlier, I wouldn't have suffered today's misfortune."

古文：帝曰： 马左丞忠洁可尚，其复旧职。 
现代文：世祖指示： 马左丞为官忠心廉洁，为大家榜样，恢复其原职。 
English: The Ancestor instructed: Ma Zu Rong is a loyal and honest official, set an example for everyone, and resume his original position.

古文：尚书省罢，改中书左丞，居再岁，移疾还家。
现代文：废尚书省，改绍任中书左丞。第二年因病告假回家。
English: He resigned from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. The following year, he went home on sick leave.

古文：元贞元年，迁中书右丞，行江浙省事。
现代文：元贞六年升为中书右丞，负责江浙行省事。
English: In the sixth year of his reign, Yuan Zhen was promoted to the position of the Second Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, responsible for the administration of Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces.

古文：大德三年，移河南省。
现代文：大德三年负责河南行省事。
English: Dade has been in charge of Henan province affairs for three years.

古文：明年卒。
现代文：大德四年卒。
English: He died the following year.

古文：有诗文数百篇。
现代文：有诗文数百篇。
English: There are hundreds of poems.

