古文：河间王弘
现代文：○河间王弘
English: ○Kawama Wanghiro

古文：河间王弘，字辟恶，高祖从祖弟也。
现代文：河间王杨弘，字辟恶，隋高祖的堂弟。
English: Kawama Wang Yanghong, a cousin of Sui Gaozu.

古文：祖爱敬，早卒。
现代文：他的祖父杨爱敬，死得很早。
English: Grandfather Ai Jing. He died young.

古文：父元孙，少孤，随母郭氏养于舅族。
现代文：父亲杨元孙，很小就成为孤儿，随母亲郭氏在舅父家养大。
English: His father, Yang Yuan-sun, was orphaned at a young age and was fostered with his mother, Guo, in the family of his in-laws.

古文：及武元皇帝与周太祖建义关中，元孙时在鄴下，惧为齐人所诛，因假外家姓为郭氏。
现代文：隋高祖的父亲武元皇帝杨忠与周太祖在关中起义，当时杨元孙在邺下，怕被北齐人所杀，因而假借外祖父家的姓氏，改姓郭。
English: Sui Gaozu's father, Emperor Wuyuan, Yang Zhong and Zhou Taizu revolted in Guanzhong. At that time, Yang Yansun was under his command, and he was afraid of being killed by the North Qi people, so he borrowed the surname of his grandfather's family and changed his surname to Guo.

古文：元孙死，齐为周所并，弘始入关，与高祖相得。
现代文：元孙死后，北齐被北周吞并，杨弘才入关，与高祖相处得很好。
English: After the death of Yuan Sun, North Qi was annexed by North Zhou, and Yang Hongcai entered the customs, and got along well with Gao Zu.

古文：高祖哀之，为买田宅。
现代文：高祖很喜欢他，为他买田地房屋。
English: Gaozu liked him very much and bought a farmhouse for him.

古文：弘性明悟，有文武干略。
现代文：杨弘生性明悟，有文才武略。
English: Hong Sheng is intelligent and insightful, with a literary and military background.

古文：数从征伐，累迁开府仪同三司。
现代文：几次随高祖征讨，累功升为开府仪同三司。
English: He often followed Emperor Wen in his conquests, and was promoted to Kaifu Yi and the Third Division many times.

古文：高祖为丞相，常置左右，委以心腹。
现代文：高祖为丞相时，常让他在左右，让他当心腹。
English: When Gao Zu was chancellor, he often had Gao Zu on his right and left, and told him to beware of his vassal.

古文：高祖诣周赵王宅，将及于难，弘时立于户外，以卫高祖。
现代文：高祖到北周赵王府上去，将遭难，杨弘当时站在门外，以保卫高祖。
English: Gao Zu went to the Northern Zhou Zhao Wangfu and was in trouble. Yang Hong was standing outside the door to protect Gao Zu.

古文：寻加上开府，赐爵永康县公。
现代文：不久加授他上开府，赐爵为永康县公。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Shangkaifu and given the title of Yongkang County Governor.

古文：及上受禅，拜大将军，进爵郡公。
现代文：高祖受北周禅让后，授他为大将军，晋爵为郡公。
English: After Gao Zu was ceded by Northern Zhou Zen, he was given the title of general and promoted to county magistrate.

古文：寻赠其父为柱国、尚书令、河间郡公。
现代文：不久追赠他父亲为柱国、尚书令、河间郡公爵。
English: Soon after, his father gave him the title of pillar country, Shang Shuling, Duke of Kawama County.

古文：其年立弘为河间王，拜右卫大将军。
现代文：这年立杨弘为河间王，授为右卫大将军。
English: In this year, Yang Hong was appointed as the King of Kawama and promoted to the General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards.

古文：岁余，进授柱国。
现代文：一年多后，升任柱国。
English: More than a year later, it was promoted to pillar country.

古文：时突厥屡为边患，以行军元帅率众数万，出灵州道，与虏相遇，战，大破之，斩数千级。
现代文：当时突厥屡为边患，杨弘以行军元帅身份，率领几万人马出灵州道，与突厥相遇，交战，大破敌军，斩首几千级。
English: At that time, the Turks were often a problem on the border. Yang Hong, as a marching marshal, led tens of thousands of people out of Lingshou Road, met and fought with the Turks, defeated the enemy army, and beheaded thousands of people.

古文：赐物二千段，出拜宁州总管，进位上柱国。
现代文：赐他缣采二千段，出京授为宁州总管，升任上柱国。
English: He was awarded a 2,000-dan medal, sent to Beijing to serve as the governor of Ningzhou, and promoted to the highest post in the country.

古文：弘在州，治尚清静，甚有恩惠。
现代文：杨弘在宁州，无为而治，很有恩惠。
English: In Ningzhou, Yang Hong ruled without doing anything, and was very favored.

古文：后数载，征还京师。
现代文：几年后，调回京师。
English: A few years later, he was transferred back to the capital.

古文：未几，拜蒲州刺史，得以便宜从事。
现代文：不久，授为蒲州刺史，让他见机行事。
English: Soon, he was given the title of "Puzhou's chief historian" and was allowed to act as he saw fit.

古文：时河东多盗贼，民不得安。
现代文：当时河东很多盗贼，百姓不得安宁。
English: At that time, there were many thieves in Hedong, and the people had no peace.

古文：弘奏为盗者百余人，投之边裔，州境帖然，号为良吏。
现代文：杨弘上奏，把那些为盗贼的一百多人，流放到边疆去，蒲州从此安宁，他被称为良吏。
English: Yang Hong played the leading role and exiled more than a hundred people who were thieves to the frontier. From then on, there was peace in Puzhou, and he was known as a good official.

古文：每晋王广入朝，弘辄领扬州总管，及晋王归籓，弘复还蒲州。
现代文：每每晋王杨广入朝，杨弘就代理扬州总管，等晋王回到扬州，杨弘又回蒲州。
English: Every time the Jin king Yang Guang entered the imperial court, Yang Hong would act as the Yangzhou governor-general. When the Jin king returned to Yangzhou, Yang Hong would return to Puzhou.

古文：在官十余年，风教大洽。
现代文：他在官十几年，风俗教化都很融洽。
English: He has been an official for more than ten years, and the customs and education are very harmonious.

古文：炀帝嗣位，征还，拜太子太保。
现代文：炀帝继位后，调他回京，授为太子太保。
English: After Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, he was transferred back to Beijing and given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：岁余，薨。
现代文：一年多后去世。
English: He died more than a year later.

古文：大业六年，追封郇王。
现代文：大业六年，追封他为郇王。
English: After six years of hard work, he was crowned the king of the eunuchs.

古文：子庆嗣。
现代文：他儿子杨庆继承爵位。
English: His son Yang Qing succeeded to the title.

古文：庆倾曲，善候时变。
现代文：杨庆生性诡曲，善于见机行事。
English: Yang Qingsheng has a cunning nature and is good at acting opportunistically.

古文：帝时猜忌骨肉，滕王纶等皆被废放，唯庆获全。
现代文：当时炀帝猜忌骨肉，滕王杨纶等都被废黜、放逐，只有杨庆得以保全。
English: At that time, Emperor Xizong, Emperor Gaozhi and King Teng Yang Di were all deposed and exiled, and only Yang Qing was spared.

古文：累迁荥阳郡太守，颇有治绩。
现代文：累次升迁到荥阳郡太守，颇有政绩。
English: He has been repeatedly promoted to the governor of Fenyang County, with considerable achievements.

古文：及李密据洛口仓，荣阳诸县多应密，庆勒兵拒守。密频遣攻之，不能克。
现代文：李密占据洛口仓后，荥阳各县大多响应李密，杨庆领兵拒守，李密频频进攻，打不下来。
English: After Li Mi occupied the Lokou warehouse, most of the counties in Fenyang responded to Li Mi, Yang Qing refused to lead the troops, Li Mi frequently attacked and could not be beaten down.

古文：岁余，城中粮尽，兵势日蹙。
现代文：一年多后城中粮尽，形势一天天窘迫。
English: After more than a year, the city ran out of food, and the situation became increasingly dire.

古文：密因遗庆书曰：自昏狂嗣位，多历岁年，剥削生民，涂炭天下。
现代文：李密于是派人送信给杨庆，说：自从昏君继位，经历了很多年岁。他剥削人民，使天下生灵涂炭。
English: Li Mi then sent a message to Yang Qing, saying, "Many years have passed since Comrade Dou took the throne. He exploited the people and made the world a living hell.

古文：璇室瑶台之丽，未极骄奢；糟丘酒池之荒，非为淫乱。
现代文：室瑶台的美丽，不能极尽他的骄奢；糟丘酒池的荒淫，还不能算他的淫乱。
English: The beauty of Murodake-dai cannot exhaust his pride; the lewdness of Kazuchuko-zakucho cannot be counted as his adultery.

古文：今者共举义旗，勘剪凶虐，八方同德，万里俱来，莫不期入关以亡秦，争渡河而灭纣。
现代文：现在我们共举义旗，消灭暴君，八方同德，万里都来。大家没有不相约入关以消灭暴秦，争渡黄河以消灭纣王的。
English: Now we all raise the banner of righteousness, eliminate the tyrant, and come from all over the world. We have not entered the customs to eliminate the tyrant Qin, and fought to cross the Yellow River to eliminate the tyrant.

古文：东穷海、岱，南洎江、淮，凡厥遗人，承风慕义，唯荥阳一郡，王独守迷。
现代文：东到海、岱，南到江、淮，凡是他没杀完的人，无不承风慕义，惟有荥阳一郡，王爷你独自执迷不悟。
English: East to the sea, to the Yangtze River, south to the Yangtze River, and to the Huai River, all the people he did not finish killing are all worthy of admiration. However, there is only one county in Shiyang, and Wang Ye cannot be obsessed with it alone.

古文：夫微子纣之元兄，族实为重，项伯籍之季父，戚乃非疏，然犹去朝歌而入周，背西楚而归汉。
现代文：那微子，是纣王的长兄，实是族中的元老；项伯，是项籍的小叔，并非远亲。但微子仍然离开朝歌而到周国，项伯仍然背叛西楚而归大汉。
English: Na Wuzi, the eldest brother of King Zhao, was actually the patriarch of the clan; Xiang Bo, the younger uncle of Xiang Zi, was not a distant relative. However, Wuzi still left Chaoga and went to Zhou, and Xiang Bo still betrayed Xi Chu and returned to Dahan.

古文：岂不眷恋宗祊，留连骨肉，但识宝鼎之将移，知神器之先改。
现代文：他们难道不眷恋祖庙、留连骨肉？只因知道国运已尽，神器已改罢了。
English: Don't they yearn for the ancestral temple, to stay connected to the bones and flesh? Only because they know that the national fortune has been exhausted, and the artifact has been changed.

古文：而王之先代，家住山东，本姓郭氏，乃非杨族。
现代文：而王爷你的祖先，家住华山之东，本来姓郭，不是杨家人。
English: But your ancestor Wang Ye, who lived east of Huashan, was originally surnamed Guo, not Yang.

古文：止为宿与隋朝先有勋旧，遂得预沾盘石，名在葭莩。
现代文：只因你先代对隋朝有功勋，于是预瞮盘石，名在杨家。
English: It was only because your predecessor had meritorious service to the Sui Dynasty that he was given the pre-eminent place in the Yang family.

古文：娄敬之与汉高，殊非血胤，吕布之于董卓，良异天亲，芝焚蕙叹，事不同此。
现代文：娄敬与汉高祖，远非血族；吕布与董卓，本非天亲。芝草被烧，蕙草叹息，人世的事与此不同。
English: Yu Jing and Han Gao Zu are far from being blood relatives; Lv Bu and Dong Zhuo are not close to heaven. The grass is burned, the weeds sigh, and the things of the world are different from this.

古文：又王之昏主，心若豺狼，仇忿同胞，有逾沉、阏，惟勇及谅，咸磬甸师，况及族类为非，何能自保！
现代文：又，王爷你那昏庸的君主，心如豺狼，仇恨同胞，超过沉、阏。想那杨勇和杨谅，都被杀死，何况你本非他的族类，何以能够自保！
English: Moreover, your prince, your mediocre monarch, has the heart of a jackal, and hates his countrymen more than Shen and Zhou. Imagine that Yang Yong and Yang Peng were both killed, and what's more, you are not of his race, how can you protect yourself!

古文：为王计者，莫若举城从义，开门送款，安若太山，高枕而卧，长守富贵，足为美谈，乃至子孙，必有余庆。
现代文：为王爷你考虑，不如举城从义，打开城门，表示诚意。这样就安如泰山，高枕无忧，可以长保富贵，传为美谈。至于你的子孙，必有余庆。
English: If you think about the prince, it is better to lift the city to righteousness, open the city gate, and show sincerity. In this way, you will be as safe as Mount Tai, you will have no worries, you can keep your wealth for a long time, and it will be a beautiful story. As for your children and grandchildren, there will be more celebrations.

古文：今王世充屡被摧蹙，自救无聊，偷存晷漏，讵能支久？
现代文：现在那王世充屡被攻击，自救无暇，苟且偷生，岂能支持很久？
English: Now that Wang Shijian has been attacked many times, he has no time to save himself, and he has to steal a living, can he support it for a long time?

古文：段达、韦津，东都自固，何暇图人？
现代文：段达和韦津，他们自保东都，哪有功夫管别人？
English: Duanda and Weijin, they are the self-protection of Dongdu, how can they manage others?

古文：世充朝亡，达便夕灭。
现代文：如果王世充早晨灭亡，段达等人就会晚上完蛋。
English: If Wang Shichong perished in the morning, Dangda and the others would be finished in the evening.

古文：又江都荒湎，流宕忘归，内外崩离，人神怨愤。
现代文：另外，江都的那个昏君荒淫无耻，沉溺酒色，在那里玩耍，忘了回家。隋朝可谓内外分崩离析，人神怨恨。
English: In addition, the dim prince of Jiangdu was shamelessly debauched, indulged in drinking, played there, and forgot to go home. The Sui Dynasty was falling apart inside and out, and people resented God.

古文：上江米船，皆被抄截，士卒饥馁，半菽不充，事切析骸，义均煮弩。
现代文：上江的米船，都被拦截了，你的士兵们饥饿，连野菜都不能吃个半饱，只能折骨煮弩为食。
English: The rice ships on the Shangjiang River have all been intercepted. Your soldiers are starving. They can't even eat half a plate of vegetables. They can only eat boiled eels.

古文：举烽火于骊山，诸侯莫至；浮胶船于汉水，还日未期。
现代文：隋朝现在是举烽火于骊山，诸侯不到；浮胶船于汉水，回家之日无期。
English: The Sui Dynasty is now holding a bonfire in Lushan, the princes can't get there; the floating rubber boat is in Hanshui, and the day of returning home is indefinite.

古文：王独守孤城，绝援千里，餱粮之计，仅有月余，敝卒之多，才盈数百，有何恃赖，欲相拒抗！
现代文：王爷你独守孤城，绝援于千里之外，粮食只能够吃一个多月，疲惫不堪的士兵只有几百人，有什么依靠而相抗拒？
English: Prince, you are the sole defender of an isolated city, with no help from thousands of miles away, food can only be eaten for more than a month, and there are only a few hundred exhausted soldiers. What can you rely on to resist?

古文：求枯鱼于市肆，即事非虚；因归雁以运粮，竟知何日。
现代文：在大街找枯鱼，这事倒不假，但叫归雁运粮食，哪天才能运到？
English: Looking for dead fish in the street, this is not a lie, but it is called returning to the geese to transport grain, when can it be transported?

古文：然城中豪杰，王之腹心，思杀长吏，将为内启。
现代文：但城中的豪杰，都是你的心腹，连他们都想杀长官，将为内应。
English: But the heroes in the city are all your confidants. Even if they want to kill you, you will have to deal with them.

古文：正恐祸生匕首，衅发萧墙，空以七尺之躯，悬赏千金之购，可为寒心，可为酸鼻者也。
现代文：正恐你祸生于匕首，灾起于萧墙。你空以七尺之躯，而被人悬赏千金收购，真让人寒心，真让人伤心！
English: I am afraid that your calamity was born from the dagger, and the disaster originated from Xiaowan. You are empty with a seven-foot body, and you are being offered thousands of dollars. It is really chilling, and it is really sad!

古文：幸能三思，自求多福。
现代文：请你三思，自求多福。
English: Please think twice and seek your own good fortune.

古文：于时江都败问亦至，庆得书，遂降于密，改姓为郭氏。
现代文：当时，江都失败的消息也传来了。杨庆得到了李密的书信，于是投降李密，改姓郭。
English: At that time, the news of Jiangdu's defeat also came. Yang Qing received Li Mi's letter, so he surrendered to Li Mi and changed his surname to Guo.

古文：密为王世充所破，复归东都，更为杨氏，越王侗不之责也。
现代文：李密被王世充打败后，杨庆又回到东都，仍为杨姓，越王杨侗不怪他。
English: After Li Mi was defeated by Wang Shichong, Yang Qing returned to Dongdu, still with the surname Yang. Yue Wang Yang Ye did not blame him.

古文：及侗称制，拜宗正卿。
现代文：杨侗登基后，授他为宗正卿。
English: After Yang Di ascended to the throne, he was given the title of Zong Zhengqing.

古文：世充将篡，庆首为劝进。
现代文：王世充将要篡夺皇位，杨庆首先劝他这么干。
English: Wang Shichong was going to usurp the throne, and Yang Qing was the first to persuade him to do so.

古文：世充既僭伪号，降爵郇国公，庆复为郭氏。
现代文：世充称帝后，杨庆降爵为郇国公，又改姓郭。
English: Shizhong was named empress, Yang Qing was demoted to the title of Duke of Shandong, and changed his surname to Guo.

古文：世充以兄女妻之，署荥州刺史。
现代文：世充把哥哥的女儿嫁给他，任他为荥州刺史。
English: Shifeng married his brother's daughter to him and allowed him to write the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：及世充将败，庆欲将其妻同归长安，其妻谓之曰： 国家以妾奉箕帚于公者，欲以申厚意，结公心耳。
现代文：世充将要失败，杨庆想带妻子回长安去。他妻子对他说： 皇上把我嫁给你，只是想表达对你的深情厚意，与你交好罢了。
English: Yang Qing wanted to take his wife back to Chang'an. His wife said to him, "Your Majesty, I only married you to express my deep affection for you and to be friends with you."

古文：今叔父穷迫，家国阽危，而公不顾婚姻，孤负付属，为全身之计，非妾所能责公也。
现代文：如今我叔父穷迫，家国危急，而你不顾婚姻，辜负嘱咐。你只为全身之计，这不是我能责怪你的。
English: Now that my uncle is poor and my country is in danger, and you have disregarded your marriage and disobeyed my orders, I can't blame you for doing what you wanted to do.

古文：妾若至长安，则公家一婢耳，何用妾为！
现代文：我若到长安，只是你家里的一个奴婢罢了，何必要我呢？
English: If when I get to Chang'an, I'm just a servant in your house, why do you need me?

古文：愿得送还东都，君之惠也。 
现代文：望你送我回东都去，这是你给我的恩惠。 
English: I hope you will send me back to Dongdu, this is your favor to me.

古文：庆不许。
现代文：杨庆不答应。
English: Guo Qing did not agree to his wife's request.

古文：其妻遂沐浴靓妆，仰药而死。
现代文：他妻子于是梳妆打扮好，吃药而死。
English: His wife then dressed up and took a pill and died.

古文：弟处乐，官至洛州刺史。
现代文：杨庆归顺大唐，任宜州刺史、郇国公，又改姓杨。
English: Yang Qing returned to the Great Tang Dynasty in Shun, and was appointed as the governor of Yizhou, and changed his surname to Yang.

古文：汉王谅之反也，朝廷以为有二心，废锢不齿。○杨子崇
现代文：他生母元太妃，年老，双目失明，王世充因杨庆背叛自己而杀了她。○杨子崇
English: His birth mother, Yuan Taifei, was old and blind, and Wang Shichong killed her because Yang Qing had betrayed him.

古文：杨子崇，高祖族弟也。
现代文：杨子崇是高祖的族弟。
English: Yang Zizong is Gao Zu's younger brother.

古文：父盆生，赠荆州刺史。
现代文：父亲杨盆生，被追赠为荆州刺史。
English: His father, Yang Bonsheng, was posthumously awarded the title of "Wang Shi Shi" of Jingzhou.

古文：子崇少好学，涉猎书记，有风仪，爱贤好士。
现代文：子崇小时候就喜欢学习，博览群书，有风度，喜欢结交贤士。
English: When Zi Chong was a child, he liked to study, read a lot of books, had good manners, and liked to make friends with sages.

古文：开皇初，拜仪同，以车骑将军恆典宿卫。后为司门侍郎。
现代文：开皇年间，被授为仪同，以车骑将军的身份一直掌管值宿警卫，后来作了司门侍郎。
English: During the reign of the emperor, he was awarded the title of gitong, and as a chariot and cavalry general, he was always in charge of the guards on duty. Later, he became the steward of the gate.

古文：炀帝嗣位，累迁候卫将军，坐事免。
现代文：炀帝继位后，子崇累功升到候门将军，后因事牵连而被免官。
English: After Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, Zi Chong was promoted to the position of general-in-waiting for his meritorious service. Later, he was relieved of his duties due to his involvement in the incident.

古文：未几，复令检校将军事。从帝幸汾阳宫，子崇知突厥必为寇患，屡请早还京师，帝不纳。
现代文：不久，又出任检校将军，跟从炀帝巡幸汾阳宫，子崇预见到突厥必定侵犯边关，多次请求炀帝早回京师，炀帝没有采纳他的意见。
English: Soon after that, he was appointed as the inspector general of the imperial school, and followed Emperor Gong to tour the Poyang Palace. Zi Chong foresaw that the Turks would certainly encroach on the border, and repeatedly asked Emperor Gong to return to Beijing as soon as possible. Emperor Gong did not accept his opinion.

古文：寻有雁门之围。及贼退，帝怒之曰： 子崇怯软，妄有陈请，惊动我众心，不可居爪牙之寄。 
现代文：不久炀帝在雁门被围，等到敌军被击退，炀帝发怒道： 子崇胆小怕事，没有根据就胡乱上表，惊扰我军心，不能做大臣。 
English: Soon, Emperor Gong was besieged at the Wild Goose Gate. When the enemy army was repulsed, Emperor Gong became angry and said, "Son Chong is timid and afraid of things. He made a wild statement without any basis, disturbing our military spirit. He cannot be a minister."

古文：出为离石郡太守，治有能名。
现代文：于是就贬子崇为离石郡太守。因为治理有方，而远近闻名。
English: As a result, he demoted his son, Takashi, to the position of the governor of Ishi County. He is known far and wide for his skillful governance.

古文：自是突厥屡寇边塞，胡贼刘六兒复拥众劫掠郡境，子崇上表请兵镇遏。
现代文：这以后，突厥多次侵犯边塞，胡人刘六儿又带兵抢掠州郡，子崇上表请求朝廷派兵镇守遏制敌军。
English: After this, the Turks repeatedly invaded the border fortress, and Liu Liu'er of the Hu people led the troops to plunder the county of Zhou. Zi Chong requested the court to send soldiers to guard the town to contain the enemy army.

古文：帝复大怒，下书令子崇巡行长城。子崇出百余里，四面路绝，不得进而归。
现代文：炀帝又大怒，下诏书令子崇率兵巡行视察长城，子崇带人走出一百多里后，四面就没路可走，无法前进而返回。
English: Emperor Qian was furious again, and issued an edict ordering Zi Chong to lead the troops on a patrol to inspect the Great Wall. After Zi Chong and his men walked more than a hundred miles, there was no way to go in all directions, they could not advance and returned.

古文：时百姓饥馑，相聚为盗，子崇前后捕斩数千人。
现代文：当时正闹饥荒，百姓聚在一起做了土匪，子崇先后捕杀了几千人。
English: At that time, famine was raging, the people gathered together and became bandits, and Zi Chong successively captured and killed several thousand people.

古文：岁余，朔方梁师都、马邑刘武周等各称兵作乱，郡中诸胡复相啸聚。
现代文：这年年末，朔方的梁师都、马邑的刘武周等各自起兵作乱，离石郡的各部胡人又相互呼应并聚集在一起。
English: At the end of the year, Liang Shidu of the Shuo faction and Liu Wuzhou of the Mayi faction each raised an army to rebel, and the Hu people from all parts of Shixi County responded to each other and gathered together.

古文：子崇患之，言欲朝集，遂与心腹数百人自孟门关将还京师。辎重半济，遇河西诸县各杀长吏，叛归师都，道路隔绝，子崇退归离石。
现代文：子崇很担忧，声言要回京师去，于是和心腹几百人从孟门关回京师，车马行到半路，正赶上河西各县叛兵杀死长吏，反叛后归附师都，因此前进的道路被隔绝。
English: Zizong was very worried and said that he wanted to go back to Beijing Division, so he and his henchmen took several hundred people from Mengmenguan back to Beijing Division. The car and horse traveled halfway, just in time for the rebels from all the counties in Hexi to kill the officials, and after the rebellion, the capital was annexed, so the way forward was cut off.

古文：所将左右，既闻太原有兵起，不复入城，遂各叛去。
现代文：子崇只好退回离石郡，所带的几百人得知太原起兵了，就不再进城，纷纷叛离了子崇。
English: Zizong had no choice but to retreat back to Yishi County. When the hundreds of people he brought with him learned that Taiyuan had raised an army, they no longer entered the city and one after another left Zizong.

古文：子崇悉收叛者父兄斩之。
现代文：子崇就把背叛士兵的父兄杀死了。
English: Zi Chong then killed his father and brother, who had betrayed the soldiers.

古文：后数日，义兵夜至城下，城中豪杰复出应之。城陷，子崇为仇家所杀。
现代文：几天后，义军在夜里打到城下，城中的豪杰也出来接应，离石郡失陷了，子崇被仇人所杀。
English: A few days later, the rebels attacked the city at night, and the heroes in the city also came out to meet them. Shishigun fell, and Zizong was killed by the enemy.

古文：○观德王雄弟达
现代文：○观德王雄弟达
English: ○ Kung Tak Wang and his younger brother

古文：观德王雄，初名惠，高祖族子也。
现代文：观德王杨雄，初名杨惠，是隋高祖的族子。
English: Guan De Wang Yang Xiong, first name Yang Hui, is a descendant of Sui Gao Zu.

古文：父绍，仕周，历八州刺史、傥城县公，赐姓叱吕引氏。
现代文：其父杨绍，仕北周，历任八州刺史、傥城县公，被赐姓叱吕引氏。
English: His father, Yang Shao, served the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and successively served as the governor of eight states and the governor of Lucheng County. He was given the surname Yu Lyuqiu.

古文：雄美姿仪，有器度，雍容闲雅，进止可观。
现代文：杨雄长相漂亮，有器度，雍容典雅，举止有度。
English: Yang Xiong is good-looking, well-groomed, elegant, and well-mannered.

古文：周武帝时，为太子司旅下大夫。
现代文：周武帝时，杨雄任太子司旅下大夫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Wu, Yang Xiong served as the prince's traveling doctor.

古文：帝幸云阳宫，卫王直作乱，以其徒袭肃章门，雄逆拒破之。
现代文：武帝巡幸云阳宫，卫王宇文直造反作乱，率其徒众袭击肃章门，杨雄迎战破之。
English: Emperor Wu was on a tour of Yunyang Palace, Wei King Yuwen directly created a rebellion and led his followers to attack the Suizhang Gate, and Yang Xiong led the battle to break it.

古文：进位上仪同，封武阳县公，邑千户。
现代文：他因此升任上仪同，封为武阳县公，食邑千户。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the position of Shang Yi Tong, appointed as the governor of Wuyang County, and served thousands of households in the county.

古文：累迁右司卫上大夫。
现代文：累功升任右司卫上大夫。
English: He was promoted to the post of Right Division of the Department of Public Health.

古文：大象中，进爵邗国公，邑五千户。
现代文：大象中，晋爵为邗国公，食邑五千户。
English: Among the elephants, Jinjie is the lord of the country, and feeds five thousand households.

古文：高祖为丞相，雍州牧毕王贤谋作难，雄时为别驾，知其谋，以告高祖。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相时，雍州牧毕王宇文贤谋划造反，杨雄当时作宇文贤的别驾，知道他的阴谋，告诉了高祖。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty, Yongzhou Mu Bi Wang Yu Wenshen plotted a rebellion. Yang Xiong was a close friend of Yu Wenshen at the time, knew of his plot, and told Gaozu.

古文：贤伏诛，以功授柱国、雍州牧，仍领相府虞候。
现代文：宇文贤被杀，杨雄因功拜授柱国、雍州牧，仍兼任相府虞侯。
English: Uwen Xian was killed, but Yang Xiong was awarded the title of pillar state and Yongzhou pastoralist for his service, and he still concurrently held the post of prefectural governor.

古文：周宣帝葬，备诸王有变，令雄率六千骑送至陵所。进位上柱国。
现代文：周宣帝被安葬时，为防备诸王有变，高祖令杨雄率领六千骑兵护送灵柩到宣帝陵墓，后升任上柱国。
English: When Emperor Xuan of Zhou was buried, Gao Zu ordered Yang Xiong to lead six thousand cavalrymen to escort the coffin to Emperor Xuan's mausoleum in order to prevent the kings from changing. Later, Gao Zu was promoted to Shangzhuang.

古文：高祖受禅，除左卫将军，兼宗正卿。
现代文：高祖受北周禅位，杨雄任左卫将军，兼宗正卿。
English: Gao Zu was given the title of Northern Zhou Zen, Yang Xiong was appointed General of the Left Division, and Jianzong Zhengqing was promoted.

古文：俄迁右卫大将军，参预朝政。
现代文：不久升任右卫大将军，参预朝政。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards and became involved in pre-imperial politics.

古文：进封广平王，食邑五千户，以邗公别封一子。
现代文：进而封为广平王，食邑五千户，另封一子为邗公。
English: He was then given the title of Guangping Wang (广平王), with 5,000 households in his domain, and another son was given the title of Xingguo (公).

古文：雄请封弟士贵，朝廷许之。
现代文：杨雄请求封他的弟弟杨士贵任邗公，朝廷同意。
English: Yang Xiong requested that his younger brother, Yang Shigui, be appointed as regent, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：或奏高颎朋党者，上诘雄于朝。
现代文：有人上奏高赹结朋党，皇上在朝廷上问杨雄可有此事。
English: The Emperor asked Yang Xiong about this at the Imperial Court.

古文：雄对曰： 臣忝卫宫闱，朝夕左右，若有朋附，岂容不知！
现代文：杨雄说： 我忝卫宫廷，朝夕在皇上左右，若有朋党，怎会不知道！
English: Yang Xiong said, "I guard the court, and I am around the emperor in the morning and evening. If I have friends and comrades, how could I not know!

古文：至尊钦明睿哲，万机亲览，颎用心平允，奉法而行。
现代文：皇上圣明睿哲，万机亲览，高赹用心公平，奉法行事。
English: Emperor Shengming Ruizhe is familiar with all kinds of machines. Gao Yao is fair-minded and follows the law.

古文：此乃爱憎之理，惟陛下察之。 
现代文：这是爱憎的道理，但愿陛下明察。 
English: This is a principle of love and hate. I hope His Majesty will see it clearly.

古文：公辅之寄，民具尔瞻，宜竭乃诚，副兹名实，是用命尔为司空。
现代文：高祖深以为然。杨雄当时显贵受宠，冠绝一时，他与高赹、虞庆则、苏威并称 四贵 。杨雄为人宽容，礼贤下士，朝野倾心，瞩目于他。
English: Gao Zu was deeply convinced. At that time, Yang Xiong was favored by the nobles, and for a brief moment, he and Gao Jun, Yu Qing Zi, and Su Wei were called the four nobles. Yang Xiong was a tolerant person, a courteous corporal, and the court was attracted to him.

古文：往钦哉！光应宠命，得不慎欤！ 
现代文：高祖厌恶他得众人之心，私下里忌恨他，不想让他执掌兵马。
English: Gaozu loathed him in the hearts of the people, secretly hated him, and did not want him to lead the army.

古文：外示优崇，实夺其权也。
现代文：于是下策书，授杨雄为司空。外表上好像是提拔他，实际是上夺他的兵权。
English: As a result, he issued a policy paper, awarding Yang Xiong the title of Sikuo. On the surface, it seemed to be promoting him, but in reality, it was to seize his military power.

古文：雄无职务，乃闭门不通宾客。
现代文：杨雄没有实际职务，于是闭门谢客。
English: Yang Xiong did not have an actual position, so he thanked the guests behind closed doors.

古文：寻改封清漳王。
现代文：不久改封他为清漳王。
English: He was soon crowned the King of Qing Dynasty.

古文：仁寿初，高祖曰： 清漳之名，未允声望。 
现代文：仁寿初，高祖说： 清漳王这个名号，与杨雄的声望不符合。 
English: At the beginning of his life, Gao Zu said, "The title of Qingyu King is not consistent with Yang Xiong's reputation.

古文：命职方进地图，上指安德郡以示群臣曰： 此号足为名德相称。 
现代文：让职方进上地图，皇上指着安德郡，对群臣们说： 这个名号，才与杨雄的名德相符。 
English: Allowing the staff to enter the map, the emperor pointed to Ande County and said to the courtiers: This name is only consistent with Yang Xiong's reputation.

古文：于是改封安德王。
现代文：于是改封他为安德王。
English: So he changed his title to King Ender.

古文：大业初，授太子太傅。
现代文：大业初年，授杨雄为太子太傅。
English: In the first year of his reign, Yang Xiong was given the title of crown prince.

古文：及元德太子薨，检校郑州刺史事。
现代文：及元德太子去世，杨雄检校郑州刺史事。
English: After the death of Prince Yuan De, Yang Xiong inspected schools in Zhengzhou.

古文：岁余，授怀州刺史。寻拜京兆尹。
现代文：过了一年多，授他怀州刺史，不久又授他京兆尹。
English: After more than a year, he was awarded the Waizhou History Prize, and soon he was awarded the Beijing Zhaoyun Prize.

古文：帝亲征吐谷浑，诏雄总管浇河道诸军。
现代文：皇上亲征吐谷浑，下诏杨雄总管浇河道各路军马。
English: The emperor personally conscripted Tugu Gun, and Yang Xiong, the commander-in-chief, issued an edict to pour horses and chariots from all directions along the river.

古文：及还，改封观王。
现代文：到回京时，改封他为观王。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he changed his name to Guan Wang.

古文：上表让曰： 臣早逢兴运，预班末属，有命有时，藉风云之会，无才无德，滥公卿之首。
现代文：杨雄上表辞让王位，说： 我早年恰逢隋朝兴起，有幸被列入官列之末。有此天命，有此时运，凭借的是风云际会；我无德无才，忝列公卿之首。
English: Yang Xiong abdicated the throne, saying: In my early years, I coincided with the rise of the Sui Dynasty, and I was fortunate to be included in the official list. I have this fate, this time, by virtue of the wind and clouds; I have no virtue and no talent, and I am the first among the nobles.

古文：蒙先皇不次之赏，荷陛下非分之恩，久紊台槐，常虑盈满，岂可仍叨匪服，重窃鸿名！
现代文：承蒙先皇帝的特别赏赐和陛下的特别恩典，我长久地混在台省中作官，常常担心我得到的赏赐太多了，哪里够再叨鸿恩，重窃大名？
English: With the special reward of the previous emperor and the special grace of His Majesty, I have been working as an official in Taiwan Province for a long time. I often worry that the reward I have received is too much. How can I repay the great favor and steal the great name?

古文：臣实面墙，敢缘往例，臣诚昧宠，交惧身责。
现代文：我实在应该面墙自省，冒昧地想按以前的通例办事；我实在冒受了陛下的宠爱，因此十分担心自己履行不了职责。
English: I really ought to examine myself, and have the temerity to act according to the former custom; I have really risked His Majesty's favour, and am therefore very much afraid that I shall not be able to perform my duties.

古文：昔刘贾封王，岂备三阶之任，曹洪上将，宁超五等之爵？
现代文：过去刘贾封王，哪里具备三阶的重任？曹洪任上将，怎能超过五等的爵位？
English: In the past, when Liu Jiafeng was king, where did he have the heavy responsibility of the third rank? When Cao Hong was an admiral, how could he exceed the rank of the fifth rank?

古文：况臣衮章逾于帝子，京尹亚于皇枝，锡士作籓，钮金开国，于臣何以自处，在物谓其乖分。
现代文：我的官服超过了帝子，我任京兆尹仅仅次于皇室子孙，赐我疆土，让我作藩王，我官服上以金为纽扣，开国治事，这让我这个做臣下的何以自处，在他人看来肯定会说我得到了非分的官爵。
English: My official uniform surpasses that of the emperor. I was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun, second only to the royal family's descendants. He gave me the territory and made me the king of the domain. My official uniform had gold buttons, and I began to govern the country. This made me feel at home as a subject. In the eyes of others, they would certainly say that I received a peerage.

古文：是以露款执愚，祈恩固守。
现代文：因此我表示我的愚诚，求恩让我固守。
English: Therefore, I express my foolishness and ask for grace to let me stick to it.

古文：伏愿陛下曲留慈照，特鉴丹诚。
现代文：请陛下特别关照，特别考虑我的一片诚心。
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to pay special attention and give special consideration to my sincerity.

古文：频触宸严，伏增流汗。 
现代文：我屡屡麻烦圣上，惶恐得直流冷汗。 
English: I repeatedly troubled the priest, panicking and sweating profusely.

古文：优诏不许。
现代文：诏书不许他辞王位。
English: Emperor Cheng issued an imperial edict of consolation, but they did not agree.

古文：辽东之役，检校左翊卫大将军，出辽东道。次泸河镇，遘疾而薨，时年七十一。
现代文：辽东之战，杨雄检校左翊卫大将军，出辽东道，部队在泸河镇驻扎，他发病而去世，当时七十一岁。
English: In the Battle of Liaodong, Yang Xiong, the general of the inspection school Zuoying Wei, went to Liaodong, and the troops were stationed in Luohe Town. He died of illness, at the age of seventy-one.

古文：帝为之废朝，鸿胪监护丧事。
现代文：炀帝因他去世而不上朝，让鸿胪监护他的丧事。
English: Emperor Qian did not ascend to the throne because of his death, so he asked Hongyao to oversee his funeral.

古文：有司考行，请谥曰懿。
现代文：有关部门考查他的行事，请求给他 懿 的谥号。
English: The relevant departments examined his actions and requested that he be given the nickname of.

古文：帝曰： 王道高雅俗，德冠生人。 
现代文：炀帝说： 观王德性高于凡俗，品德超过生民。 
English: Emperor Qian said: Guan Wang's moral character is higher than that of ordinary people. His moral character surpasses that of ordinary people.

古文：乃赐谥曰德。
现代文：于是赐给他 德 的谥号。
English: So he was given the nickname "Dede."

古文：赠司徒、襄国武安渤海清河上党河间济北高密济阴长平等十郡太守。
现代文：追赠他司徒之职，和襄国、武安、渤海、清河、上党、河间、济北、高密、济阴、长平等十郡的太守。
English: He was posthumously awarded the post of the steward, and the governorship of ten counties including He Xianguo, Wu'an, Bohai, Qinghe, Shangdang, Hama, Jibei, Gaomi, Jiyin, and Changping.

