古文：孙子曰：凡火攻有五：一曰火人，二曰火积，三曰火辎，四曰火库，五曰火队。
现代文：孙子说：火攻的作战方式有五种：一是焚烧敌军的人马，二是焚烧敌军的粮草积聚，三是焚烧敌军的辎重，四是焚烧敌军的仓库，五是焚烧敌军的运输设施。
English: Sun Tzu said: "There are five methods of fighting a fire attack: one is to burn the enemy's horses and men, the second is to burn the enemy's grain and grass accumulation, the third is to burn the enemy's baggage, the fourth is to burn the enemy's warehouse, and the fifth is to burn the enemy's transportation facilities.

古文：行火必有因，烟火必素具。
现代文：实施火攻必须具备一定的条件，火攻的器材必须事先就准备好。
English: The implementation of the fire attack must meet certain conditions, and the fire attack equipment must be prepared in advance.

古文：发火有时，起火有日。
现代文：火攻要看准天时，选好有利的日子。
English: The timing of the attack depends on the weather, so choose a favorable day.

古文：时者，天之燥也；日者，月在箕、壁、翼、轸也。凡此四宿者，风起之日也。
现代文：所谓有利的时候，是指天气干燥；所谓有利的日期，指月亮运行到箕、壁、翼、轸四个星宿的位置，凡是月亮运行到这四个星宿位置时，就是起风的日子。
English: The so-called favorable time refers to the dry weather; the so-called favorable date refers to the moon moving to the position of the four stars of the beak, wall, wing and beak. Whenever the moon moves to these four star positions, it is the day of the wind.

古文：凡火攻，必因五火之变而应之。
现代文：凡用火攻，必须根据上述五种火攻所造成的情况变化，灵活部署兵力策应。
English: When attacking with fire, it is necessary to flexibly deploy forces according to the changes in the situation caused by the above-mentioned five types of fire attacks.

古文：火发于内，则早应之于外。
现代文：如果从敌人内部放火，就要早早派兵从外面策应。
English: If the fire is set from within the enemy, it is necessary to send troops from outside early.

古文：火发兵静者，待而勿攻，极其火力，可从而从之，不可从而止。
现代文：如果敌人内部火已烧起，但敌军仍然保持镇静的，要观察等待，不要马上进攻；等火势烧到最旺的时候，再根据具体情况作出决策，可以进攻就发起进攻，不可以进攻就停止。
English: If the enemy's internal fire has flared up, but the enemy still remains calm, it is necessary to observe and wait, do not attack immediately; wait for the fire to be at its peak, and then make a decision according to the specific situation, you can attack and launch an attack, you can not attack and stop.

古文：火可发于外，无待于内，以时发之。
现代文：火也可以从敌营的外部放，那就不必等待内应，只要有合适的时机就可以放火。
English: Fire can also be set from outside the enemy camp, then there is no need to wait for internal response, as long as there is a suitable opportunity to set fire.

古文：火发上风，无攻下风。
现代文：从上风放火，不可从下风进攻。
English: Set fire from the upper wind, do not attack from the lower wind.

古文：昼风久，夜风止。
现代文：白天风刮久了，到了夜晚风就很容易停止。
English: The wind has been blowing for a long time during the day, and it is easy to stop the wind in the evening.

古文：凡军必知有五火之变，以数守之。
现代文：大凡指挥军队作战，都必须懂得灵活运用上述五种火攻形式，等待时机成熟，然后实施火攻。
English: When commanding an army in battle, one must know how to flexibly use the above-mentioned five forms of fire attack, wait for the time to be ripe, and then carry out the fire attack.

古文：故以火佐攻者明，以水佐攻者强。
现代文：所以说，用火来辅助进攻，明显地容易取胜；用水来辅助进攻的，攻势可以加强。
English: Therefore, if fire is used to support the attack, it is obviously easy to win; if water is used to support the attack, the offensive can be strengthened.

古文：水可以绝，不可以夺。
现代文：水可以分割、隔绝敌人，但是不如火攻那样，可以焚毁敌人的各种军用物资。
English: Water can divide and isolate the enemy, but it is not as good as fire attack, which can burn all kinds of enemy military supplies.

古文：夫战胜攻取，而不修其功者凶，命曰费留。
现代文：凡打了胜仗，攻取了许多土地、城池，而不能够巩固胜利，都是很危险的，这就叫做 费留 。
English: Anyone who has won a battle and conquered many lands and cities, but is unable to consolidate the victory, is very dangerous. This is called fei liu.

古文：故曰：明主虑之，良将修之。
现代文：因此明智的君主要慎重地考虑这个问题，贤良的将帅必须认真处理这个问题。
English: Therefore, a wise prince should carefully consider this issue, and a wise general should seriously deal with this issue.

古文：非利不动，非得不用，非危不战。
现代文：对国家不利，就不要采取军事行动；没有取胜的把握，就不要随便用兵；不到危急紧迫之时，就不要轻易开战。
English: Do not take military action if it is unfavorable to the country; do not use troops arbitrarily if you are not sure of winning; do not start a war easily unless there is a critical situation.

古文：主不可以怒而兴师，将不可以愠而致战；合于利而动，不合于利而止。
现代文：国君不能因为一时的愤怒就发动战争，将帅不能因为一时的气愤就贸然下令出战。符合国家利益就行动，不符合国家利益就停止。
English: The sovereign cannot start a war because of a momentary anger, and the general cannot order a war because of a momentary anger. If it is in the national interest to act, if it is not in the national interest to stop.

古文：怒可以复喜，愠可以复悦；亡国不可以复存，死者不可以复生。
现代文：恼怒可以重新欢喜，怨愤可以重新高兴，国亡了就不能再存，人死了不能再活。
English: Anger can rejoice again, resentment can be happy again, the country can no longer exist, the dead can no longer live.

古文：故明君慎之，良将警之，此安国全军之道也。
现代文：所以明智的国君要慎重对待战争，贤良的将帅应该小心警惕贸然作战，这都是安定国家保全军队的根本原则！
English: Therefore, a wise sovereign should treat war cautiously, and a wise general should be careful not to fight rashly. These are the fundamental principles of a stable country and the preservation of the army!

