古文：武王问太公曰： 吾与敌人临境相拒，彼可以来，我可以往，陈皆坚固，莫敢先举，我欲往而袭之，彼亦可来，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王询问太公说： 我军与敌人在国境线上相互对峙。敌人可以打过来，我也可以打过去，双方的阵势都很坚固，谁也不敢轻举妄动。我想前去袭击敌人，但又担心敌人来袭击我军，遇上这种情况应该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke, "Our army and the enemy are facing each other on the border. The enemy can attack from here, and I can attack from there. The positions of both sides are very strong, and no one dares to make any rash moves. I want to attack the enemy, but I'm worried that the enemy will attack our army. What should I do in this situation?"

古文：太公曰： 分兵三处，令军前军深沟增垒而无出列旌旗，击鼙鼓，宛为守备；令我后军，多积粮食，无使敌人知我意；发我锐士，潜袭其中，击其不意，攻其无备，敌人不知我情，则止不来矣。 
现代文：太公答道： 在这种情况下，就把我军分为前、中、后三部。指挥前军深挖战壕，高筑壁垒，但不要出战，而是布列旌旗，敲击鼙鼓，为防卫做好准备；指挥后军多储存粮食，不要让敌人侦查到我军意图。然后，派遣我中军精锐部队偷袭敌军中央，击其不意，攻其无备。敌人无法了解我军情况，就会止步不前，不敢反攻。 
English: Taigong replied: In this case, we will divide our army into three parts: front, middle and rear. Command the front army to dig deep trenches and build high barriers, but not to go to war, but to display banners, beat gongs and drums, and prepare for defense; command the rear army to store more grain, and not let the enemy detect our army's intentions. Then, send the elite troops of our Chinese army to raid the center of the enemy army, hit it by surprise, and attack it unprepared. If the enemy cannot understand the situation of our army, it will stop and dare not counterattack.

古文：武王曰： 敌人知我之情，通我之谋，动而得我事，其锐士伏于深草，要隘路，击我便处，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王又问道： 如果敌军已经掌握了我军情况，洞察我军企图，我军一有行动，敌人就知道要做什么，因而派出他的精锐部队埋伏在草木茂盛的地方，在我必经的隘路上实施截击，占据有利的地形攻打我军，又该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Wu also asked: What if the enemy has already grasped the situation of our army, insight into our army's intentions, and once our army takes action, the enemy knows what to do, so he sends his elite troops to lie in wait in a place with lush vegetation, intercepts on the narrow road I must pass through, and occupies favorable terrain to attack our army?

古文：太公曰： 令我前军，日出挑战，以劳其意；令我老弱，曳柴扬尘，鼓呼而往来，或出其左，或出其右，去敌无过百步，其将必劳，其卒必骇。
现代文：太公回答说： 命令我方前军，每天前去向敌人挑战，以使敌人的斗志懈怠；命令我方老弱士卒，拖动树枝，扬起尘土，击鼓呐喊，来回奔跑，壮大声势。进行挑战时，我方部队或出现在敌人左边，或出现在敌人右边，距离敌人不超过百步。在我方不断骚扰下，敌人的将领必定疲于应付，敌人的士卒也必定惊恐不安。
English: The Grand Duke replied, "Order our vanguard to go out and challenge the enemy every day, so as to weaken the enemy's fighting spirit; order our old and weak soldiers to drag branches, raise dust, beat drums, shout, run back and forth, and make loud noises. When challenging, our troops may appear on the enemy's left or on the enemy's right, with a distance of no more than a hundred paces from the enemy. Under our constant harassment, the enemy's generals must be exhausted, and the enemy's soldiers must be frightened and uneasy.

古文：如此，则敌人不敢来。
现代文：这样，敌人就不敢前来进攻我军了。
English: In this way, the enemy will not dare to come and attack our army.

古文：吾往者不止，或袭其内，或击其外，三军疾战，敌人必败。 
现代文：我军如此不停地袭扰敌军，或袭击他的内部，或攻击他的外部，然后，全军疾速地投入战斗，敌人必败无疑。 
English: Our army so constantly harasses the enemy, or attacks him internally, or attacks him externally, and then the whole army rushes into battle, the enemy will undoubtedly be defeated.

