古文：命之修短有数，人之富贵在天。
现代文：人寿命的长短自有定数，人的富贵全取决于天意。
English: The length of a person's life has its own constants, and a person's wealth depends entirely on God's will.

古文：惟君子安贫，达人知命。
现代文：只有君子才能安贫乐道，乐观的人才能了解命运顺其自然。
English: Only a gentleman can be happy in poverty, and an optimistic person can understand that fate will take its natural course.

古文：贯朽粟陈，称羡财多之谓；紫标黄榜，封记钱库之名。
现代文： 贯朽粟陈 ，是羡慕别人多财的说法。 紫标黄榜 ，是封闭钱库、标明钱数的标记。
English: "贯朽粟陈" is a saying of envying other people's wealth. "紫标黄榜" is a sign of a closed bank, indicating the amount of money.

古文：贪爱钱物，谓之钱愚；好置由宅，谓之地癖。
现代文：贪爱钱财叫做钱愚；喜欢置办田产，叫做 地癖 。
English: The love of money is called money foolishness; the love of purchasing farmland is called land addiction.

古文：守钱虏，讥蓄财而不散；落魄夫，谓失业之无依。
现代文：守钱虏是讥讽财富多而又吝啬的人。落魄夫是指贫困失业无所依靠的人。
English: A miser is someone who sneers at people who have a lot of wealth and are stingy. A loser is someone who is poor, unemployed and has nothing to rely on.

古文：贫者地无立锥，富者田连阡陌。
现代文：贫穷的人连块锥尖大小的土地都没有，富人的田地则南北相连非常广阔。
English: Poor people do not even have a piece of land the size of the tip of a cone, while the fields of the rich are very vast, stretching from north to south.

古文：室如悬磬，言其甚窘；家无儋石，谓其极贫。
现代文： 室如悬磬 ，是形容生活极为窘迫； 家无儋石 ，是形容人穷困到了极点。
English: Room like a hanging basket, is to describe the life of extreme distress; Home without a flint, is to describe people in extreme poverty.

古文：无米曰在陈，守死曰待毙。
现代文：断绝了粮米叫 在陈 ，坐着等死叫 待毙 。
English: Cut off the grain and rice is called in Chen, sitting and waiting for death is called Wait to die.

古文：富足曰殷实，命蹇曰数奇。
现代文：家境富裕钱粮充足称为殷实，命运不佳遇事不顺称做数奇。
English: A wealthy family with plenty of money and grain is called affluent, and one with a bad fortune and bad luck is called lucky.

古文：苏涸鲋，乃济人之急；呼庚癸，是乞人之粮。家徒壁立，司马相如之贫；扊扅为炊，秦百里奚之苦。
现代文：援助危难中的人称为苏涸鲋，向人借贷钱粮，隐称登山高呼庚癸之神。 家徒壁立 ，是说司马相如如此贫穷； 扊扅为炊 ，是说百里奚的生活曾经极为困苦。
English: Aid to people in distress is called Su Sui, lending money and grain to people, implicitly known as mountaineering, chanting the god of Geng Shu. Home, standing on the wall, is to say that Sima Xiangru is so poor; Yu for cooking, is to say that Bailiyu's life was extremely difficult.

古文：鹄形菜色，皆穷民饥饿之形；炊骨爨骸，谓军中乏粮之惨。
现代文： 鹄形菜色 ，是形容穷人饥饿的模样； 炊骨爨骸 ，是形容军中缺粮时的惨状。
English: 形菜色, is to describe the appearance of hunger of the poor; 炊骨骸, is to describe the misery of the army when there is a shortage of grain.

古文：饿死留君臣之义，伯夷叔齐；资财敌王公之富，陶朱倚顿。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐宁愿饿死也不食周粟，以留君臣大义，千古以来只有伯夷和叔齐二人。陶朱、猗顿善于经营，资产比得上王公贵族之富有。
English: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi would rather starve to death than eat cornflowers, with the principle of keeping the king and the court being paramount. From time immemorial, only Bo Yi and Uncle Qi were the only two. Tao Zhu and Gu Dong were good at business, and their assets were as rich as those of princes and aristocrats.

古文：石崇杀妓以侑酒，恃富行凶；何曾一食费万钱，奢侈过甚。
现代文：石崇以美女陪酒，客人不饮便将歌妓杀死，这是富豪横蛮的做法。一顿饭吃下来花费万金，实在是过分奢华。
English: Shi Chong takes a beautiful woman to accompany the wine, and the guests kill the singing prostitute without drinking, which is a barbaric practice of the rich. It costs a million dollars to eat a meal, which is really too luxurious.

古文：二月卖新丝，五月粜新谷，真是剜肉医疮；三年耕而有一年之食，九年耕而有三年之食，庶几遇荒有备。
现代文：二月蚕尚未吐丝就已预先出售，五月稻谷尚未成熟便已出卖，真是剜心头肉医眼前疮；耕种三年的田地，就可以积蓄一年的粮食，耕种九年就可储备三年的粮食，即使遇到灾荒，也可以有备无患。
English: February's silkworms have been sold in advance before they have spun silk, and May's rice grains have been sold before they have matured, which is truly a heartbreaking sight; if you cultivate a field for three years, you can save one year's grain, and if you cultivate it for nine years, you can reserve three years of grain. Even if you encounter a disaster, you can be prepared.

古文：贫士之肠习黎苋，富人之口厌膏梁。
现代文：贫苦人的肠胃习惯了野菜粗食，富贵人家吃腻了肥肉细粮。
English: The stomachs of the poor have become accustomed to a coarse diet of vegetables, while the rich are fed up with a diet of fatty meats and refined grains.

古文：石崇以蜡代薪，王恺以饴沃釜。
现代文：石崇以蜂蜡当柴火烧，王恺用饴糖洗锅。
English: Shi Chong used beeswax as firewood for cooking, while Wang Qian used maple syrup to wash the pot.

古文：范丹土灶生蛙，破甑生尘；曾子捉襟见肘，纳履决踵，贫不胜言。
现代文：范丹穷困断炊，锅里可以用来养鱼，这样，岂不是很清廉吗？曾子安贫乐道，衣服破损了，提整衣襟就会露出手肘，鞋子破了，露出后脚跟。
English: Fan Dan is destitute and broke, the pot can be used to raise fish, in this way, isn't it very clean? Zeng Zi is poor and happy, the clothes are damaged, the collar of the dress will reveal the elbow, the shoes are broken, revealing the heel.

古文：子路衣敝缊袍，与轻裘立；韦庄数米而饮，称薪而爨，俭有可鄙。
现代文：子路衣衫褴褛，这是穷苦的士子常有的事。韦庄生性吝啬，做饭要数了米粒才下锅，柴薪要称了分量，才拿去烧煮，过分的吝啬是会惹人鄙薄的。
English: Zi Lu was dressed in rags, which is a common occurrence for poor scholars. Wei Zhuang was born with a stingy nature. When cooking, he had to count the grains of rice before putting it in the pot, and he had to weigh the firewood before taking it to boil. Excessive stinginess would arouse disdain.

古文：总之饱德之士，不愿膏梁；闻誉之施，奚图文绣。
现代文：总而言之富于仁义德行的人，不羡慕美味佳肴；名望声誉卓著的人，怎么会去谋求绣花的衣服呢？
English: To sum up, people who are full of benevolence and virtue do not envy delicious food; how can people with great fame and reputation seek embroidered clothes?

