古文：回鹘上回纥，其先匈奴也，俗多乘高轮车，元魏时亦号高车部，或曰敕勒，讹为铁勒。
现代文：回纥，其祖先是匈奴，民间多乘有高轮的车子，后魏时也称之为高车部，或称为敕勒，讹传为铁勒。
English: Back to the Xiongnu, whose ancestors were the Xiongnu, the people mostly rode a cart with a high wheel. In the late Wei Dynasty, it was also called a high carriage, or a mule, and the mule was passed down as a tiller.

古文：其部落曰袁纥、薛延陀、契苾羽、都播、骨利干、多览葛、仆骨、拔野古、同罗、浑、思结、斛薛、奚结、阿跌、白，凡十有五种，皆散处碛北。
现代文：其部落有袁纥、薛延陀、契絆羽、都播、骨利干、多览葛、仆骨、拔野古、同罗、浑、思结、斛薛、奚结、阿跌、白靅，共十五种，都散居在碛北。
English: Its tribes include Yuan Xuan, Xue Yanta, Ke Kizong Yu, Du Bo, Bone Li Gan, Du Shan Ge, Servant Bone, Bajuanggu, Tongluo, Hun, Si Jie, Jie Xue, Jie Jie, Ah Dui, Bai Jie, a total of 15 species, all scattered in the north of Anhui Province.

古文：袁纥者，亦曰乌护，曰乌纥，至隋曰韦纥。
现代文：袁纥，也叫乌护，或叫乌纥，隋朝时叫韦纥。
English: Yuan Qi, also called Wugo, or Wu Qi, was called Wei Qi during the Sui Dynasty.

古文：其人骁强，初无酋长，逐水草转徙，善骑射，喜盗钞，臣于突厥，突厥资其财力雄北荒。
现代文：人民骁勇强悍。起初没有酋长，逐水草而居，长于骑马射箭，好抢掠，臣服于突厥，突厥曾帮助财力使他们称雄北荒。
English: The people were brave and strong. At the beginning, there were no chiefs, they lived from hand to mouth, they were good at riding horses and archery, good at looting, and they were subject to the Turks, who had helped them conquer the Northern Desert with their financial resources.

古文：大业中，处罗可汗攻胁铁勒部，裒责其财，既又恐其怨，则集渠豪数百悉坑之，韦纥乃并仆骨、同罗、拔野古叛去，自为俟斤，称回纥。
现代文：隋大业年间，突厥君主处罗可汗攻打胁迫铁勒部落，勒索财物，后来又怕他们怨恨，于是召集他们的豪酋几百人都坑杀了。韦纥就与仆骨、同罗、拔野古一同叛突厥而去，自任俟斤，称为回纥。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, the Turkic monarch sent Luo Khan to attack and coerce the Tiele tribe, extorting property, and later, fearing their resentment, he gathered several hundred of their great chiefs and killed them. Wei Wei went to rebel against the Turks together with his servants, Tong Luo, and Battanoko, and became a self-proclaimed warlord, known as Hui Wei.

古文：回纥姓药罗葛氏，居薛延陀北娑陵水上，距京师七千里。
现代文：回纥姓药罗葛，居于薛延陀北的娑陵水上，距京师七千里。
English: He lived in Fuling Shui, north of Xueyantuo, 7,000 miles away from Beijing.

古文：众十万，胜兵半之。
现代文：有民十万，一半是精兵。
English: There are a hundred thousand people, half of whom are elite soldiers.

古文：地碛卤，畜多大足羊。
现代文：居地多砂石盐碱，牲畜多大足羊。
English: The habitat is sandy, rocky and saline, and the livestock consists of big-footed sheep.

古文：有时健俟斤者，众始推为君长。
现代文：大家推举时健俟斤为君长。
English: Everyone voted for Jian Jian Jin to be the king.

古文：子曰菩萨，材勇有谋，嗜猎射，战必身先，所向辄摧破，故下皆畏附，为时健所逐。
现代文：其子名菩萨，勇武有谋，好打猎，战争中必身先士卒，战无不胜，所以下属都敬畏依附，但却被时健驱逐。
English: His son's name was Bodhisattva, he was brave, resourceful, and good at hunting. In war, he was always the first to go, and he was invincible. Therefore, his subordinates were in awe of him, but they were expelled by Shi Jian.

古文：时健死，部人贤菩萨，立之。
现代文：时健死，部落中人认为菩萨贤能，立他为君长。
English: When Jikken died, the people of the tribe thought that Bodhisattva was wise and set him up as the ruler.

古文：母曰乌罗浑，性严明，能决平部事。
现代文：其母叫乌罗浑，为人严明，能决断处理部落内部事务。
English: His mother's name is Urohun, and she is a strict person who can deal with internal affairs of the tribe decisively.

古文：回纥繇是浸盛。
现代文：回纥因此逐渐强盛。
English: As a result, eelgrass gradually became more and more popular.

古文：与薛延陀共攻突厥北边，颉利遣欲谷设领骑十万讨之，菩萨身将五千骑破之马鬣山，追北至天山，大俘其部人，声震北方。
现代文：与薛延陀合攻突厥北疆。颉利派欲谷设率十万骑兵征讨，菩萨自带五千骑兵在马鬣山打败了他们，直追至天山，俘获了大批人马，威震北方。
English: He joined forces with Xue Yantu to invade the northern Turkic territory. The Qili faction in Zhogu set a quota of 100,000 cavalry to be recruited, and Bodhisattva defeated them with his own 5,000 cavalry on Mount Malang, pursued them all the way to Tianshan, captured a large number of men and horses, and terrorized the north.

古文：繇是附薛延陀，相脣齿，号活颉利发，树牙独乐水上。
现代文：从此与薛延陀互为唇齿。号称活颉利发，在独乐水上树起牙旗。
English: From then on, he and Xue Yanta were each other's lips and teeth. He was known as "Lively Fang Li Fa" (活利发) and raised a tooth flag on the Dule Water Tree.

古文：贞观三年，始来朝，献方物。
现代文：贞观三年，开始入朝，贡献方物。
English: Zhenguan three years, began to enter the court, contributed square objects.

古文：突厥已亡，惟回纥与薛延陀为最雄强。
现代文：其时突厥已亡，仅回纥与薛延陀最强盛。
English: At that time, the Turks had already died, and only Hui Xuan and Xue Yanta were the most powerful.

古文：菩萨死，其酋胡禄俟利发吐迷度与诸部攻薛延陀，残之，并有其地，遂南逾贺兰山，境诸河。
现代文：菩萨死后，其酋长胡禄俟利发吐迷度合同各部落攻打并吞并了薛延陀，接着于贞观二十年南越贺兰山，临近黄河。
English: After the death of the Bodhisattva, his chieftain, Huluguli, issued a contract for all the tribes to attack and annex Xueyantuo, followed by twenty years of Zhenguan on Mount Helan in South Vietnam, near the Yellow River.

古文：遣使者献款，太宗为幸灵州，次泾阳，受其功。
现代文：派使者来通好。太宗为此到达灵州，驻于泾阳，召见他们。
English: Emperor Taizong therefore arrived in Lingzhou, stationed in Shenyang, and summoned them.

古文：于是铁勒十一部皆来言： 延陀不事大国，以自取亡，其下麕骇鸟散，不知所之。
现代文：铁勒十一部都来，说： 延陀不侍奉大国，自取灭亡，其下属已作鸟兽散，不知去向。
English: All the eleven divisions of Tiele came and said: Yanda did not serve the great country, he destroyed himself, his subordinates have been scattered like birds and beasts, and they do not know where they are going.

古文：今各有分地，愿归命天子，请置唐官。 
现代文：现我们各有领地，愿归顺天子，请为我们设立唐官。 
English: Now that we each have our own territory, we are willing to submit to the Son of Heaven. Please set up a Tang official for us.

古文：有诏张饮高会，引见渠长等，以唐官官之，凡数千人。
现代文：诏令设宴大聚会，引见各位大君长，封以唐官，共有几千人。
English: A grand banquet was held in accordance with the imperial edict, and several thousand people came to see the emperors and emperors who had been appointed as Tang officials.

古文：明年复入朝。乃以回纥部为瀚海，多览葛部为燕然，仆骨部为金微，拔野古部为幽陵，同罗部为龟林，思结部为卢山，皆号都督府；以浑为皋兰州，斛薛为高阙州，阿跌为鸡田州，契苾羽为榆溪州，奚结为鸡鹿州，思结别部为带林州，白为窴颜州；其西北结骨部为坚昆府，北骨利干为玄阙州，东北俱罗勃为烛龙州；皆以酋领为都督、刺史、长史、司马，即故单于台置燕然都护府统之，六都督、七州皆隶属，以李素立为燕然都护。
现代文：第二年再次入朝，于是定回纥部为瀚海都督府，多览葛部为燕然都督府，仆骨部为金微都督府，拔野古为幽陵都督府，同罗部为龟林都督府，思结部为卢山都督府；定浑为皋兰州，斛薛为高阙州，阿跌为鸡田州，契絆羽为榆溪州，奚结为鸡鹿州，思结别部为林州，白靅为颜州；定西北的结骨部为坚昆都督府，北面的骨利为玄阙州，东北的俱罗勃为烛龙州，均任其酋领为都督、刺史、长史、司马。就在以前的单于台设燕然都护府统辖，六都督七州均隶属之。委派李素立为燕然都护。
English: The following year, he returned to the imperial court, and designated the Hanhai as the provincial capital, the Yanran as the Yanran provincial capital, the Bago as the Jinwei provincial capital, the Bago as the Yuling provincial capital, the Tongluo as the Guilin provincial capital, the Jiankui as the Lushan provincial capital, the Dinghun as the Hulan provincial capital, the Xue as the Gaozhou provincial capital, the Adu as the Jitian provincial capital, the Ge as the Yanran provincial capital, the Bago as the Jinwei provincial capital, the Bago as the Yuling provincial capital, the Tongluo as the Guilin provincial

古文：其都督、刺史给玄金鱼符，黄金为文，天子方招宠远夷，作绛黄瑞锦文袍、宝刀、珍器赐之。
现代文：新任的都督刺史们均给玄金鱼符，以黄金为文。当时天子对边民采取招徕及远避两手政策。所以做绛黄瑞锦文袍、宝刀、珍器等赐之。
English: The newly-appointed Tudors and Scribes all gave him gold fish charms, with gold as the text. At that time, the Emperor adopted a policy of both inviting and avoiding the border people. Therefore, he gave him a yellow brocade robe, a sword, and other precious objects.

古文：帝坐秘殿，陈十部乐，殿前设高坫，置硃提瓶其上，潜泉浮酒，自左阁通坫趾注之瓶，转受百斛镣盎，回纥数千人饮毕，尚不能半。
现代文：皇帝坐于秘殿，演十部乐，殿前设高台，上置朱提瓶，以暗泉输酒，从左阁通到台基注入朱提瓶，再转斟入白金巨盆，回纥几千人都喝遍了，还未喝去一半。
English: The emperor sat in the secret hall and performed ten pieces of music. In front of the hall, a high platform was set up, a jute bottle was placed on top, and the wine was infused with a hidden spring. From the left gable to the base, the jute bottle was infused, and then transferred to a huge platinum basin. Several thousand people drank it all, but they had not drunk half of it.

古文：又诏文武五品官以上祖饮尚书省中。
现代文：后来又诏令文武五品官以上的到尚书省为他们饯行。
English: Later, he also ordered the officials of the five grades of civil and military affairs and above to go to Shangshu for them.

古文：渠领共言： 生荒陋地，归身圣化，天至尊赐官爵，与为百姓，依唐若父母然。
现代文：酋领们同声说： 我等生于边远蛮荒之地，如今归身圣人教化之处，天至尊又赐我等官爵，视我等为唐国百姓。我等依唐，如依父母。
English: The chiefs said in unison: "We were born in a remote and wild land, and now we are in a place where we have been educated by a saint. Heaven's highest authority has also given us titles and ranks, and regards us as the people of Tang. We follow Tang as if it were our parents.

古文：请于回纥、突厥部治大涂，号 参天至尊道 ，世为唐臣。 
现代文：请在回纥、突厥部中开筑大道，称为 参天至尊道 ，我等世世代代均为唐臣。 
English: Please build an avenue in the middle of the Uighur and Turkic regions, called the "Supreme Way to the Heavens," which has been followed by Tang Dynasty emperors for generations.

古文：乃诏碛南弟鸟泉之阳置过邮六十八所，具群马、湩、肉待使客，岁内貂皮为赋。
现代文：于是诏令在南辟鸟鹈泉之北设置邮驿六十八所，驿站内准备群马、乳、肉以待使客，每年进贡貂皮作为赋税。
English: As a result, the Emperor issued a decree to set up sixty-eight post offices in the north of Nanzhi's Jiaozhuan Spring, preparing horses, milk, and meat in the post office to wait for the envoys, and the annual tribute of donkey skins as a tax.

古文：乃拜吐迷度为怀化大将军、瀚海都督；然私自号可汗，署官吏，壹似突厥，有外宰相六、内宰相三，又有都督、将军、司马之号。
现代文：又委派吐迷度为怀化大将军、瀚海都督。不过吐迷度私下里自称可汗，委派官吏，与当年的突厥一样，有外宰相六人，内宰相三人，还有都督、将军、司马等。
English: He also appointed Tokimido as the general of Huaihua and the governor of Hanhai. However, Tokimido privately called himself a khan and appointed officials, like the Turks of that year, including six foreign chancellors, three interior chancellors, a governor, a general, and a shaman.

古文：帝更诏时健俟斤它部为祁连州，隶灵州都督，白它部为居延州。
现代文：皇帝又诏令时健俟斤的别部为祁连州，隶属灵州都督；白靅的别部为居延州。
English: The emperor also decreed that the other part of Shijian Yujin was Qilian Prefecture, which belonged to the governor of Lingzhou; the other part of Baiyun was Jiyang Prefecture.

古文：吐迷度兄子乌纥烝吐迷度之妻，遂与俱陆莫贺达干俱罗勃谋乱而归车鼻可汗，二人者皆车鼻婿，故乌纥领骑夜劫吐迷度杀之。
现代文：吐迷度的侄子乌纥与吐迷度的妻子有私情，乃与俱陆莫贺达干俱罗勃打算叛乱后去归附车鼻可汗，这两人都是车鼻的女婿。乌纥夜晚领骑兵劫杀了吐迷度。
English: Thubten's nephew, U Thubten, was having an affair with Thubten's wife. He was planning to rebel against the Mughal emperor and join the Khans. Both of them were Thubten's sons-in-law. Thubten's cavalry killed Thubten in the night.

古文：燕然副都护元礼臣遣使绐乌纥，许白为都督，乌纥不疑，即往谢，因斩以徇。
现代文：燕然副都护元礼臣派人去乌纥处，假报请他为都督。乌纥不疑，即去致谢，元礼臣即将他斩首示众。
English: Yan Ran, the vice-governor of the capital, and the former courtier sent a man to Wu Xuan's place, falsely asking him to be the governor. Wu Xuan undoubtedly went to thank him, but the former courtier was about to behead him in public.

古文：帝恐诸部携解，命兵部尚书崔敦礼持节临抚，赠吐迷度左卫大将军，赙祭备厚，擢其子婆闰左骁卫大将军，袭父所领。
现代文：皇帝担心其他各部生离心，派兵部尚书崔敦礼持节去安抚，追赠吐迷度为左卫大将军，奠仪极为丰厚，又升任其子婆闰为左骁卫大将军，承袭乃父爵职。
English: The emperor was worried about the centrifugation of other subordinates, and sent the commander of the military department, Shangshu Cui Dun, to appease them. He gave him the posthumous title of General Zuo Wei, and the ceremony was very rich. In addition, he promoted his son, Bai Lie, to General Zuo Wei, inheriting his father's title.

古文：俱罗勃既入朝，帝不遣。
现代文：俱罗勃入朝后，皇帝留之不遣归。
English: After Kuroko entered the imperial court, the emperor did not send him back.

古文：阿史那贺鲁之盗北庭，婆闰以骑五万助契苾何力等破贺鲁，收北庭；又从伊丽道行军总管任雅相等再破贺鲁金牙山，迁右卫大将军，从讨高丽有功。
现代文：永徽二年，阿史那贺鲁入寇北庭时，婆闰带五万人马助契絆何力等击败贺鲁，收复北庭；又跟随伊丽道行军总管任雅相等在金牙山再破贺鲁，升右卫大将军。后来随王师讨高丽再建功。
English: In the second year of Yonghui, when Ashina Heru invaded the Northern Court, she defeated Heru and recovered the Northern Court with the help of 50,000 men, horses, bonds, and other forces; she also followed the general manager of the march of Yili Road, Ren Yaxiang, to defeat Heru again in Jinya Mountain and ascended to the General of the Right Division. Later, she followed Wang Shi to rebuild Korea.

古文：婆闰死，子比栗嗣。
现代文：婆闰死，子比栗继立。
English: The mother-in-law dies, the daughter-in-law succeeds.

古文：龙朔中，以燕然都护府领回纥，更号瀚海都护府，以碛为限，大抵北诸蕃悉隶之。
现代文：龙朔年间，因燕然都护府辖领回纥，故改称瀚海都护府，以大碛为限，北方各蕃一般都隶属之。
English: During the Long Shuo period, because Yanran was under the jurisdiction of the Capital Protection Prefecture, it was renamed as the Hanhai Capital Protection Prefecture, limited to Dalat, and all the provinces in the north were generally subordinate to it.

古文：比栗死，子独解支嗣。
现代文：比栗死，子独解支继立。
English: When the chestnut tree died, its son, the soluble branch, took over.

古文：武后时，突厥默啜方强，取铁勒故地，故回纥与契苾、思结、浑三部度碛，徙甘、凉间，然唐常取其壮骑佐赤水军云。
现代文：武后时，突厥默啜正强，夺取了铁勒旧地。因此回纥与契絆、思结、浑三部渡过砂碛，迁到甘州、凉州之间。唐常调取其精壮人马助赤水军作战。
English: When Wu Guo was in power, the Turks were still strong and conquered the old land of Tiele. Therefore, Hui Xuan and the three branches of Qi, Qi, and Hun crossed the Sand Dunes and moved between Ganzhou and Liangzhou. The Tang Dynasty often mobilized its elite men and women to help the Red Water Army in battle.

古文：独解支死，子伏帝匐立。
现代文：独解支死，子伏帝匐继立。
English: After the death of Duolai Zhi, his son Fu Di Zhi succeeded him.

古文：明年，助唐攻杀默啜，于是别部移健颉利发与同罗、等皆来，诏置其部于大武军北。
现代文：第二年，助唐攻杀默啜。于是别部移健颉利发与同罗、靅等都迁来，诏令安置他们在大武军北。
English: In the second year, there was no mention of helping to invade and kill Tang. Therefore, the other departments moved Jian, Li, Tong, Luo, and so on, and ordered them to be placed in the north of the Great Military Army.

古文：伏帝匐死，子承宗立，凉州都督王君诬暴其罪，流死瀼州。
现代文：伏帝匐死，子承宗立，凉州都督王君耯诬陷他有罪，流放死于氵襄州。
English: Emperor Fudai died, his son Zongli died, the Yangzhou governor Wang Junyi framed him, and he died in exile in Zhangyang.

古文：当此时，回纥稍不循，族子瀚海府司马护输乘众怨，共杀君，梗绝安西诸国朝贡道。
现代文：其时回纥渐生不满，族子瀚海府司马护输利用众怨共杀王君耯，阻绝安西各国朝贡的道路。
English: At that time, there was a gradual dissatisfaction among the Hui, and the son of the Hanhai Prefecture, Sima Guotang, took advantage of the public resentment to kill Wang Junya, blocking the tribute road of the Anxi countries.

古文：久之，奔突厥，死。
现代文：后来，承宗等投奔突厥，死于彼处。
English: Later, Chojong and others defected to the Turks and died there.

古文：子骨力裴罗立。
现代文：子骨力裴罗继立。
English: The son of bone power, Pero, succeeded to the throne.

古文：会突厥乱，天宝初，裴罗与葛逻禄自称左右叶护，助拔悉蜜击走乌苏可汗。
现代文：恰逢突厥内乱。天宝初年，裴罗与葛逻禄自称为左右叶护，助拔悉蜜击走乌苏可汗。
English: It coincided with the Turkish civil war. In the first year of the Tenpo era, Pero and Geroglu declared themselves to be the guardians of the left and right, and helped to defeat and drive away Usu Khan.

古文：后三年，袭破拔悉蜜，斩颉跌伊施可汗，遣使上状，自称骨咄禄毘伽阙可汗，天子以为奉义王，南居突厥故地，徙牙乌德鞬山、昆河之间，南距西城千七百里，西城，汉高阙塞也，北尽碛口三百里，悉有九姓地。
现代文：三年后，击破拔悉蜜，斩杀颉跌伊施可汗，派使者上书朝廷说明情况，自称骨咄禄毗伽阙可汗，天子封他为奉义王，南居突厥的故土，徙牙庭至乌德革建山与昆河之间，南距西城一千七百里。西城，即汉时的高阙塞。北至碛石口三百里，九姓之地全在内。
English: Three years later, he defeated and killed the Ishkhan Khan and sent an envoy to the imperial court to explain the situation. He claimed to be the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of the bone of

古文：九姓者，曰药罗葛，曰胡咄葛，曰啒罗勿，曰貊歌息讫，曰阿勿嘀，曰葛萨，曰斛嗢素，曰药勿葛，曰奚牙勿。
现代文：九姓，即药罗葛、胡咄葛、口屈罗勿、貊歌息讫、阿勿嘀、葛萨、斛素、药勿葛、奚邪勿。
English: There are nine surnames, namely the medicine Luo Ge, Hu Yi Ge, Kou Qu Luo Bei, Xing Guo Xing, Abai Ge, Ge Sa, Xing Su, Medicine Baizhe Ge, and Xing Yaizhe Ge.

古文：药罗葛，回纥姓也，与仆骨、浑、拔、野古、同罗、思结、契苾六种相等夷，不列于数，后破有拔悉蜜、葛逻禄，总十一姓，并置都督，号十一部落。
现代文：药罗葛是回纥姓，与仆骨、浑、拔野古、同罗、思结、契絆六族相等同。后来又击破拔悉蜜、葛逻禄，总共十一姓，并置都督，号称十一部落。
English: Zheluo Ge is an Uighur family name, which is equivalent to the six clans of Buken, Hun, Bajuang, Tongluo, Sijie and Keqian. Later, Baju Sijie and Ge Luoluo were cracked, a total of eleven surnames, and a governor was placed, known as the eleventh clan.

古文：自是，战常以二客部为先锋。
现代文：从此，每战常以两客部为先锋。
English: Since then, two guest clubs have often been the vanguard in every battle.

古文：有诏拜为骨咄禄毘伽阙怀仁可汗，前殿列仗，中书令内案授册使者，使者出门升辂，至皇城门，降乘马，幡节导以行。
现代文：诏授骨力裴罗为骨咄禄毗伽阙怀仁可汗。在前殿陈列仪仗，由中书令内案授册使者，使者出门乘专车到皇城门，改乘马，由幡节在前导路。
English: Emperor Zhaozong bestowed the title of Bone Power Pero to Bone Strength Vijayapati, the son of Huairen Khan. The ceremonial battle was displayed in the front hall, and the envoys were registered according to the Chinese imperial edict. The envoys took a special car to the Imperial City Gate, changed to a horse, and led the way from the Flag Festival.

古文：凡册可汗，率用此礼。
现代文：凡册封可汗，均用此礼。
English: This salute is used when a Khan is enthroned.

古文：明年，裴罗又攻杀突厥白眉可汗，遣顿啜罗达干来上功，拜裴罗左骁卫员外大将军，斥地愈广，东极室韦，西金山，南控大漠，尽得古匈奴地。
现代文：第二年，裴罗又攻杀突厥的白眉可汗，派顿啜罗达干来朝报功。委任裴罗为左骁卫员外大将军。回纥拓地越来越广：东接室韦，西至金山，南控大漠，尽得古匈奴的领地。
English: The following year, Pei Lo attacked and killed the Turkic Bai Mei Khan, and sent Dondong Luo Dagan to report his exploits to the imperial court. Pei Lo was appointed as the left wing guard grand general. He expanded his territory more and more widely: east to Muxi, west to Jinshan, south to the control desert, and gained all the territory of the ancient Xiongnu.

古文：裴罗死，子磨延啜立，号葛勒可汗，剽悍善用兵，岁遣使者入朝。
现代文：裴罗死，子磨延啜继立，号称葛勒可汗，他英武剽悍，善于用兵，每年均派使者入朝。
English: Pero died, and his son, known as Gorkhan, rose to prominence. He was brave and skillful in the use of troops, and sent envoys to the imperial court every year.

古文：肃宗即位，使者来请助讨禄山，帝诏燉煌郡王承寀与约，而令仆固怀恩送王，因召其兵。
现代文：肃宗即位，回纥派使者来，愿意帮助讨伐安禄山。诏令敦煌郡王承肕与之商约，令仆固怀恩护送郡王，同时召集其兵士。
English: Su Zong ascended to the throne, and Hui Yao sent an envoy to help him fight against Anlu Mountain. He ordered Dunhuang County King Cheng Yao to negotiate with him, and ordered his servant Gu Hui En to escort the county king and gather his soldiers at the same time.

古文：可汗喜，以可敦妹为女，妻承寀，遣渠领来请和亲，帝欲固其心，即封虏女为毘伽公主。
现代文：可汗喜，将可敦之妹做女儿嫁给承肕。
English: Khan Xi married Kedon's younger sister, a daughter, to Cheng Ye.

古文：于是可汗自将，与朔方节度使郭子仪合讨同罗诸蕃，破之河上。
现代文：又派大头领来朝求和亲。皇帝想拴住他的心，就封回纥女为毗伽公主。于是可汗亲自带兵与朔方节度使郭子仪合力讨伐同罗各部，在河上将他们击败，然后与郭子仪在呼延谷相会。
English: The emperor wanted to win his heart, so he sealed his daughter as Princess Viga. Therefore, the khan himself led the troops with the help of Shuo Fang and ordered Guo Ziyi to fight against the Tonglu and defeat them on the river, and then meet Guo Ziyi in the Huyan Valley.

古文：与子仪会呼延谷，可汗恃其强，陈兵引子仪拜狼纛而后见。
现代文：可汗恃其兵马强盛，陈列兵仗，引郭子仪先拜大狼旗然后相见。
English: The Khan boasted of the strength of his soldiers and horses, displayed his war trophies, and invited Guo Ziyi to bow before the great wolf flag and then meet him.

古文：帝驻彭原，使者葛罗支见，耻班下，帝不欲使鞅鞅，引升殿，慰而遣。
现代文：其时肃宗驻彭原，可汗的使者葛罗支来朝见，耻于立于众臣之后。皇帝不想使他不高兴，叫人引他上殿相见，抚慰后送他回去。
English: At that time, Emperor Suzong was in Pengyuan, and the khan's envoy, Grotius, came to see the emperor, ashamed to stand behind all the courtiers. The emperor did not want to make him unhappy, so he asked someone to bring him to the palace for a meeting, comfort him, and then send him back.

古文：俄以大将军多揽等造朝，及太子叶护身将四千骑来，惟所命。
现代文：后来又派大将军多揽等入朝，又让太子叶护带四千人马来，听任调遣。
English: Later, he sent a general to bring more troops to the imperial court, and asked Prince Ye to escort four thousand horses to be dispatched at his discretion.

古文：帝因册毘伽公主为王妃，擢承寀宗正卿；可汗亦封承寀为叶护，给四节，令与其叶护共将。
现代文：皇帝册封毗伽公主为王妃，升承肕为宗正卿；可汗也封承肕为叶护，给四符节，要他与叶护共同统军。
English: The emperor made Princess Viga a princess and promoted Zong Zhengqing to Zong Zhengqing; the khan also made Zong Zhengqing a Yegu and gave him four tributes, asking him to unite the army with Yegu.

古文：帝命广平王见叶护，约为昆弟，叶护大喜，使首领达干等先到扶风见子仪，子仪犒饮三日。
现代文：皇帝又命广平王与叶护相见，约为兄弟。叶护大喜，派首领达干等先到扶风见郭子仪，郭子仪设宴犒劳三日。
English: The emperor also ordered Guangping Wang to meet Ye Gou, who was about his brother. Ye Gou was overjoyed and sent the leader Dagan to Fufeng to meet Guo Ziyi first. Guo Ziyi held a banquet for three days.

古文：叶护辞曰： 国多难，我助讨逆，何敢食！ 
现代文：叶护辞谢说 ：国家有难，我是来帮助讨伐逆贼的，哪敢沉溺宴饮！ 
English: Ye Jiexie said: The country is in difficulty, I am here to help fight the traitors, how dare you indulge in feasting!

古文：固命，乃留。
现代文：郭子仪坚持留饮，乃留。
English: Guo Ziyi insisted on staying to drink.

古文：既行，日赐牛四十角、羊八百蹄、米四十斛。
现代文：出发后，每日供应其军牛二十头、羊二百只、米四十斛。
English: After his departure, he was supplied with 20 head of cattle, 200 sheep, and 40 bushels of rice daily.

古文：香积之战，阵澧上，贼诡伏骑于王师左，将袭我，仆固怀恩麾回纥驰之，尽翦其伏，乃出贼背，与镇西、北庭节度使李嗣业夹之，贼大败，进收长安。
现代文：香积之战中，列阵澧水，贼埋伏骑兵在王师之东，准备偷袭。仆固怀恩指挥回纥兵驰去救援，将伏兵全部歼灭。接着从贼兵背后与镇西、北庭节度使李嗣业夹攻，贼大败，进而收复长安。
English: During the War of Incense Accumulation, the battle lines were drawn at Surabaya, and the bandits ambushed the cavalry in the east of Wangshih, preparing for a sneak attack. The servant Gu Wai En commanded the soldiers to rush to the rescue and annihilate all the ambushers. Then, from behind the bandits, the west of the town and the north courtyard of the festival, Li Siye made a pincer attack, the bandits were defeated, and Chang'an was recovered.

古文：怀恩率回纥、南蛮、大食众缭都而南，壁浐东，进次陕西，战新店。
现代文：仆固怀恩率领回纥、南蛮、大食的兵绕长安南行，建垒东，进驻陕州西，战于新店。
English: Minion Gu Wai'en led the soldiers who had returned from Yunnan, Nanman and Taiping to travel around Chang'an in the south, build a fortress in the east, enter Shaanxi in the west, and fight in Xindian.

古文：初，回纥至曲沃，叶护使将军鼻施吐拨裴罗旁南山东出，搜贼伏谷中，歼之，营山阴。
现代文：当初，回纥兵到曲沃，叶护派将军鼻施吐拨裴罗沿南山东而出，搜索埋伏谷中之贼，全部歼灭，驻军山北。
English: At first, when the Uighur soldiers arrived at Quwo, the general of the Yegu faction went out along the east of Nanshan, searched for the thieves in the ambush valley, and annihilated all of them, and garrisoned the north of the mountain.

古文：子仪等与贼战，倾军逐北，乱而却，回纥望见，即逾西岭，曳旗趋贼，出其后，贼反顾，遂大溃，追奔数十里，人马相腾蹂，死者不可计，收仗械如丘。
现代文：郭子仪等人与贼战，全军追击。贼阵乱退却，回纥望见，即越过西岭，扯着军旗趋奔贼兵击其后背，贼回头应战，大败。王师追奔几十里，人马相互蹂践，死者不可计数，收缴兵械堆积如山。
English: Guo Ziyi and others fought with the bandits, and the whole army pursued them. The bandits retreated in disarray, and when they looked back, they crossed the West Ridge, took the military flag and ran towards the bandits to attack their backs. The bandits turned back to fight, and were defeated. Wang Shi ran for dozens of miles, men and horses trampled each other, the dead were incalculable, and the collected weapons piled up like a mountain.

古文：严庄挟安庆绪弃东京北度河，回纥大掠东都三日，奸人导之，府库穷殚，广平王欲止不可，而耆老以缯锦万匹赂回纥，止不剽。
现代文：严庄扶持安庆绪弃东京北渡黄河。回纥兵在东京大掠三天。又有坏人引导，以致府库被劫殆尽。广平王欲禁不得，城中父老以罗锦万匹酬谢回纥，才停止搜夺。
English: He solemnly supported An Qingxu to abandon Tokyo and go north to the Yellow River. The Hui soldiers looted Tokyo for three days. They were also led by bad men, so that the government treasury was completely looted. Guangping Wang could not help it, and the father of the city stopped the looting with a reward of 10,000 pieces of brocade.

古文：叶护还京师，帝遣群臣劳之长乐，帝坐前殿，召叶护升阶，席酋领于下，宴且劳之，人人赐锦绣缯器。
现代文：叶护回京师，皇帝派群臣在长乐犒劳。皇帝坐前殿，召叶护上阶，众酋领则在殿下入席。人人都赐给锦绣及金银器皿。
English: Ye Guo returned to Beijing, and the emperor sent a group of courtiers to work in Changle. The emperor sat in the front hall and called Ye Guo to the upper level, and all the chiefs were seated in the palace. Everyone was given brocade and gold and silver utensils.

古文：叶护顿首言： 留兵沙苑，臣归料马，以收范阳，讫除残盗。 
现代文：叶护叩谢说 ：我们的兵留在沙苑，臣回去取马，再来助收范阳，除尽残贼。 
English: Ye Youba Xie said, "Our soldiers stayed in Shayuan, and the minister went back to fetch the horses, and then came back to help collect Fan Yang and eliminate the remaining thieves."

古文：帝曰： 为朕竭义勇，成大事，卿等力也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 为我竭忠尽义以成大事，是你等的力量啊。 
English: The emperor said, "You have the power to accomplish great things by being loyal to me.

古文：诏进司空，爵忠义王，岁给绢二万匹，使至朔方军受赐。
现代文：诏升叶护为司空，封爵忠义王，每年给绢二万匹，让他去朔方军受赐。
English: Emperor Zhao promoted Ye Guo to the rank of Siku, knighted him as the King of Loyalty, and gave him twenty thousand yakitori every year, so that he could go to Shao Fang's army to receive it.

古文：乾元元年，回纥使者多彦阿波与黑衣大食酋阁之等俱朝，争长，有司使异门并进。
现代文：乾元元年，回纥使者多彦阿波与黑衣大食酋长阁之等一同入朝，争为长，有司让他们从东、西两门同时进入。
English: In the first year of the Qianyuan era, the envoy of the Hui Dynasty, Duan Abo, entered the imperial court together with the black-clad chiefs of the Great Feasts, vying for supremacy. A steward allowed them to enter simultaneously from the east and west gates.

古文：又使请昏，许之。
现代文：回纥又求婚，获准。
English: He proposed to her again, and she accepted.

古文：帝以幼女宁国公主下嫁，即册磨延啜为英武威远毘伽可汗，诏汉中郡王瑀摄御史大夫为册命使，以宗子右司郎中巽兼御史中丞为礼会使，并以副瑀，尚书右仆射裴冕送诸境。
现代文：皇帝将幼女宁国公主下嫁，即册封磨延啜为英武威远毗伽可汗，诏令汉中郡王蠫代任御史大夫为册命使，派宗子右司郎中巽兼御史中丞为礼会使，且做蠫的副手，尚书右仆射裴冕送到边境。
English: The emperor married off his young daughter, the princess of Ningguo, and named him Yingwuweiyuanfiguagakhan. He also appointed Wang Xi of Hanzhong County as the envoy of the envoy, and sent his son, the right-hand man of the imperial secretary, Zhong Xi, and the right-hand man of the imperial secretary, Zhong Zhi, as the envoy of the envoy, and sent his deputy, the right-hand man of the imperial secretary, Shang Shuxu, to the border.

古文：帝饯公主，因幸咸阳，数尉勉，主泣曰： 国方多事，死不恨。 
现代文：皇帝为饯别公主，到达咸阳，多所慰勉。公主流泪说： 国家正多事，我虽死亦无恨。 
English: The emperor had many words of consolation for the farewell princess, who arrived in Xianyang. The prince said with tears: The country is going through many things, and I have no hatred even though I am dead.

古文：瑀至虏，而可汗胡帽赭袍坐帐中，仪卫光严，引瑀立帐外，问曰： 王，天可汗何属？ 
现代文：蠫到达回纥，可汗戴胡帽着赭袍端坐帐中，仪卫整肃威严，引蠫立于帐外，问： 王，是天可汗的什么人？ 
English: When he arrived in Huizhou, the khan, wearing a bearded cap and a long robe, was sitting in the tent. The guards were solemn and stood outside the tent, asking: "Wang, who is the heavenly khan?"

古文：瑀曰： 从昆弟也。 
现代文：蠫答 ：是天子的堂弟。 
English: Answer: He is the cousin of the Son of Heaven.

古文：时中人雷灵俊立瑀上，又问： 立王上者为谁？ 
现代文：当时中人雷灵俊站在蠫的上手，又问： 站在王上手的是什么人？ 
English: At that time, the middle-aged man, Lei Lingjun, stood on the upper hand of the shovel, and asked: Who is the person standing on the upper hand of the king?

古文：瑀曰： 中人也。 
现代文：蠫答： 是中人。 
English: A: It's the middle one.

古文：可汗曰： 中人奴尔，顾立郎上乎？ 
现代文：可汗说： 中人，是奴仆，怎么可以站在郎君上手？ 
English: The khan said, "The middle man is a slave, how can he stand at the right hand of his master?"

古文：灵俊趋下。
现代文：灵俊只得走到下位。
English: Lingjun had to go to the bottom.

古文：于是引瑀入，瑀不拜，可汗曰： 见国君，礼无不拜。 
现代文：于是引蠫入帐，蠫不拜。可汗说： 见国君，没有不拜之礼。 
English: The khan said, "See, your majesty, there is no such thing as not bowing."

古文：瑀曰： 天子顾可汗有功，以爱女结好。
现代文：蠫说： 天子顾念可汗有功，以爱女与可汗以结姻好。
English: Zou said, "The Heavenly Son is mindful of the merits of the khan, and it is good to marry the khan to his beloved daughter."

古文：比中国与夷狄婚，皆宗室子。今宁国乃帝玉女，有德容，万里来降，可汗天子婿，当以礼见，安踞受诏邪？ 
现代文：近来中国与夷狄通婚的都是宗室子女，今宁国公主乃天子玉女，有才有德有貌，万里来下嫁，可汗是天子的女婿，该以礼相见，岂能踞坐受诏？ 
English: In recent times, all the common-law marriages between China and the Yiddish Diaspora have been between the children of the same family. Now, the princess of Ningguo is the daughter of Heaven. She is talented, virtuous and beautiful. She has come thousands of miles to get married. The Khan is the son-in-law of the Son of Heaven. They should meet each other with courtesy. Will they be able to sit down and receive the imperial edict?

古文：可汗惭，乃起奉诏，拜受册。
现代文：可汗惭愧，随即起身跪拜奉诏受册。
English: Embarrassed, Khan immediately got up and knelt down to be ordained.

古文：翌日，尊主为可敦。瑀所赍赐物，可汗尽与其牙下酋领。
现代文：第二天，尊公主为可敦，蠫所带来的赐物，可汗全部送给帐下酋领。
English: The next day, the khan gave all the gifts brought by the princess to the chieftain.

古文：瑀还，献马五百匹、貂裘、白氈等。
现代文：蠫返回时，献马五百匹、貂裘、白棉布等。
English: When the cormorants return, they offer 500 horses, crickets, white cotton cloth, and so on.

古文：乃使王子骨啜特勒、宰相帝德等率骑三千助讨贼，帝因命仆固怀恩总之。
现代文：又派王子骨啜特勒、宰相帝德等率骑兵三千帮助讨贼，皇帝即命仆固怀恩统领。
English: In addition, he sent Prince Bone Sutler, Prime Minister Teide, and 3,000 cavalry to help find the thieves, led by the emperor's trusted servant, Gu Huai'en.

古文：又遣大首领盖将军与三女子谢婚，并告破坚昆功。
现代文：后来回纥又派大首领盖将军与三女子来谢婚，并报告击破坚昆之功。
English: Later, Hui Xuan sent the great leader General Gao and three women to thank them for their marriage, and reported the achievement of defeating Jiankun.

古文：明年，骨啜与九节度战相州，王师溃，帝德等奔京师，帝厚赐尉其意，乃还。
现代文：第二年，骨啜与九节度战于相州，王师败，帝德等人奔回京师，皇帝厚赐抚慰后回去。
English: In the second year, the Bone Soaker and the Nine Divisions fought in Sangju, Wang Shih was defeated, and Teide and others rushed back to Beijing Shih, and the emperor consoled and comforted them.

古文：俄而可汗死，国人欲以公主殉，主曰： 中国人婿死，朝夕临，丧期三年，此终礼也。
现代文：不久，可汗死，国人欲将公主殉葬。公主说： 中国人夫婿亡故，早晚祭奠，丧期三年，此后礼毕。
English: Soon after, the khan died, and the people of the country wanted to bury the princess as a martyr. The princess said, "When a Chinese husband and wife die, there is a memorial service in the morning and in the evening. The period of mourning is three years, after which there is a ceremony.

古文：回纥万里结昏，本慕中国，吾不可以殉。 
现代文：回纥不远万里以结婚姻，本为仰慕中国。我不可殉葬。 
English: I came all the way to China to get married because I admire China. I can't be buried alive.

古文：乃止，然剺面哭，亦从其俗云。
现代文：事作罢，不过也从其习俗，割面流血而哭。
English: He did not do anything, but from his custom, he cut his face, bled and cried.

古文：后以无子，得还。
现代文：后因无子，归唐。
English: Later, because he had no children, he returned to Tang.

古文：始叶护太子前得罪死，故次子移地健立，号牟羽可汗，其妻，仆固怀恩女也。
现代文：先前，叶护太子因获罪被杀，所以此时次子移地健即位，称牟羽可汗。其妻是仆固怀恩之女。
English: Previously, Prince Ye Guo was killed for a crime, so at this time, the second son, Mudi Jian, ascended to the throne, calling himself Muwa Khan. His wife was the daughter of the servant Gu Huai'en.

古文：始可汗为少子请昏，帝以妻之，至是为可敦。
现代文：当初，可汗为小儿子求婚，皇帝将仆固女许配给他，现在成了可敦。
English: At first, Khan proposed marriage for his youngest son, and the emperor betrothed the maidservant to him, and now it is Kedon.

古文：明年，使大臣俱录莫贺达干等入朝，并问公主起居，使人通谒于延英殿。
现代文：第二年，派大臣俱录莫贺达干等入朝，并问候宁国公主安好，皇帝在延英殿接见使者。
English: In the second year, he sent ministers such as Moga Dagan to the imperial court, and sent greetings to the princess of Ning as well. The emperor received the envoys at Yan Ying Palace.

古文：代宗即位，以史朝义未灭，复遣中人刘清潭往结好，且发其兵。
现代文：代宗即位，因史朝义尚未歼灭，又派中人刘清潭去修旧好，征调其兵。
English: When the Daizong ascended the throne, because the history of the dynasty had not yet been annihilated, he also sent Liu Qingtan, a man from the Middle Kingdom, to mend fences and recruit his soldiers.

古文：比使者至，回纥已为朝义所訹，曰： 唐荐有丧，国无主，且乱，请回纥入收府库，其富不赀。 
现代文：及使者到达，回纥已听信了史朝义的谎言，说是：唐室接连有大丧事，国内无主，将大乱。请回纥发兵入唐，收取府库，其财富不可胜数。
English: When the emissary arrived, Hui Xuan had already believed the lies of Shi Chao Yi, saying: Tang Dynasty suffered a series of great tragedies, there was no ruler in the country, and there would be great turmoil. Please Hui Xuan send troops to Tang and collect the government treasury, its wealth is countless.

古文：可汗即引兵南，宝应元年八月也。
现代文：可汗即领兵南下。这是宝应元年八月的事。
English: Khan immediately led his troops south. This happened in August of the first year of Baoying.

古文：清潭赍诏至其帐，可汗曰： 人言唐已亡，安得有使邪？ 
现代文：刘清潭带了诏书到可汗牙帐，可汗说： 人家说唐已亡了，怎么还会有使者来呢？ 
English: Liu Qingtan brought the edict to the khan, and the khan said: People say that Tang is dead, so how can there still be an envoy?

古文：清潭为言： 先帝虽弃天下，广平王已即天子位，其仁圣英武类先帝，故与叶护收二京、破安庆绪者，是与可汗素厚，且唐岁给回纥缯绢，岂忘之邪？ 
现代文：刘清潭说 ：先帝虽说弃天下而去，广平王已即天子位，其为人仁圣英武与先帝一样，就是当年与叶护共同收复二京、击破安庆绪的人。与可汗一向交往甚厚，况且唐室每年给回纥绢匹，难道忘了吗？ 
English: Liu Qingtan said: Although the former emperor said that he abandoned the world, King Guangping has become the son of heaven. He is a benevolent saint Yingwu, just like the former emperor. He was the one who, together with Ye Gu, regained the Second Capital and broke the Anqingxu. He has always been in close contact with the khan. Moreover, the Tang Dynasty gave him a horse every year. Have you forgotten that?

古文：是时，回纥已逾三城，见州县榛莱，烽障无守，有轻唐色。
现代文：这时，回纥兵已越过三城，见州县荒芜，烽烟障垒无守兵，有轻视唐室之意。
English: At this time, the Uighur soldiers had already crossed the three cities, seeing the desolation of the prefectures, and there were no guards at the smoke barriers, with the intention of despising the Tang dynasty.

古文：乃遣使北收单于府兵、仓库，数以语凌靳清潭。
现代文：可汗派使北收单于府的兵马仓粮，多次用言语轻慢刘清潭。
English: The Khan's faction made Bei Jie single out the army and horse storehouse grain in the capital, and repeatedly used words to belittle Liu Qingtan.

古文：清潭密白帝： 回纥兵十万向塞。 
现代文：清潭秘密派人报告皇帝 ：回纥兵十万即将入塞。 
English: Cheongdam secretly sent someone to report to the emperor that 100,000 Uighur soldiers were about to enter the city.

古文：朝廷震惊，遣殿中监药子昂迎劳，且视军，遇于太原，密识其兵裁四千，孺弱万余，马四万，与可敦偕来。
现代文：朝廷震惊，派殿中监药子昂迎师犒军，细察实况。在太原与回纥兵相遇，察得其兵才四千人，老少相兼有一万多，马四万匹，与可敦同来。
English: The imperial court was shocked and sent the palace middle warden, Aung Ying, to inspect the situation. When he met the Uighur soldiers in Taiyuan, he found that they had only four thousand soldiers, more than ten thousand old and young, and forty thousand horses, together with Kedon.

古文：帝令怀恩与回纥会。
现代文：皇帝派仆固怀恩去回纥，说服可汗。
English: The emperor sent his servant Gu Wai Yan to persuade the khan.

古文：因遣使上书，请助天子讨贼。
现代文：可汗乃派使者上书，愿助天子讨贼。
English: The khan sent an envoy with a letter, offering to help the prince track down the thief.

古文：回纥欲入蒲关，径沙苑而东，子昂说曰： 自寇乱来，州县残虚，供亿无所资，且贼在东京，若入井陉，以取邢、洺、卫、怀，收贼财帑，乃鼓而南，上策也。 
现代文：回纥欲入蒲关，经沙苑而东向破贼。药子昂建议： 自寇乱以来，州县残破虚乏，供应难继。且贼人在东京，若从井陉入关，直取邢、洛、卫、怀等州，收缴贼人财币，再进军南下，是为上策。 
English: He suggested: Since the rebellion, the states and counties have been depleted, and the supply is unsustainable. And if the thieves are in Tokyo, if they enter the pass from the well, they will directly take the states such as Min, Luo, Wei, and Huai, collect the thieves' money, and then march south, it is the best strategy.

古文：不听。
现代文：可汗不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：子昂曰： 然则趋怀太行道，南据河阳，扼贼喉衿。 
现代文：子昂说： 那么取怀州太行路，南据河阳，可扼贼咽喉。 
English: Zi'ang said, "Then, take the Taihang Road of Huaizhou, south of Heyang, you can strangle the thief's throat.

古文：又不听。
现代文：又不听。
English: Saburo doesn't listen, and soon a fierce wind blows.

古文：曰： 食太原仓粟，右次陕，与泽潞、河南、怀郑兵合。 
现代文：子昂再说 ：那么食用太原仓的粮草，东驻陕州，与泽潞、河南、怀郑的兵会合。 
English: Ziang Zai said: Then eat the grain and grass of Taiyuan Cang, east to Shaanxi, and meet with the soldiers of Zeyu, Henan and Huizheng.

古文：回纥从之。
现代文：回纥同意。
English: I agree.

古文：诏以雍王为天下兵马元帅，进子昂兼御史中丞，与右羽林卫将军魏琚为左右厢兵马使，中书舍人韦少华为元帅判官，御史中丞李进为行军司马，东会回纥。
现代文：诏令雍王为兵马元帅，升药子昂兼御史中丞，与右羽林卫将军魏琚为左右厢兵马使，任中书舍人韦少华为元帅判官，御史中丞李进为行军司马，去东会回纥。
English: The edict named Yong Wang as the field marshal of the army and cavalry, Shang Yuzi's son, Ang, as the vice-commander of the army and cavalry, and Wu Linwei's general, Wei Wei, as the vice-commander of the army and cavalry, Wei Shaohua as the marshal of the army and cavalry, and Li Jin, the vice-commander of the army and cavalry, as the marshal of the army and cavalry.

古文：敕元帅为诸军先锋，与诸节度会陕州。
现代文：敕令元帅为诸军先锋，与诸节度在陕州相会。
English: As the vanguard of all the armies, Marshal Yu Ling met with all the statesmen in Shaanxi.

古文：时可汗壁陕州北，王往见之，可汗责王不蹈舞。
现代文：当时，可汗驻军陕州北，雍王去见他，可汗责雍王不蹈舞，礼不恭。
English: At that time, the Khan was stationed in the north of Shaanxi Province, and the Yong Wang went to see him. The Khan rebuked the Yong Wang for not dancing and not being polite.

古文：子昂辞曰： 王，嫡皇孙，二宫在殡，礼不可以蹈舞。 
现代文：药子昂辩解 ：雍王，是嫡皇孙，乃父乃祖殓而未葬，礼不可以蹈舞。 
English: Dang Zi Ang defended: King Yong, is the legitimate grandson of the emperor, but his father is the ancestor and has not been buried, it is not allowed to dance.

古文：回纥廷诘曰： 可汗为唐天子弟，于王，叔父行也，容有不蹈舞乎？ 
现代文：回纥宰相当廷诘问 ：可汗是唐天子之弟，对王来说，是叔父辈，岂可相见不蹈舞的呢？ 
English: In reply to the imperial eunuch's question: Khan is the younger brother of Tang Tianzi, and for the king, he is an uncle. How can they meet and not dance?

古文：子昂固拒，即言： 元帅，唐太子也，将君中国，而可舞蹈见可汗哉？ 
现代文：子昂坚持拒绝说 ：元帅，是唐太子，将为中国的君主，岂可蹈舞见可汗？ 
English: Ziang persistently refused, saying: "Marshal, you are the crown prince of Tang, you will be the monarch of China, how can you dance with the khan?

古文：回纥君臣度不能屈，即引子昂、进、少华、琚搒之百，少华、琚一夕死，王还营。
现代文：回纥君臣估计不能使唐使屈服，即将药子昂、李进、韦少华、魏琚各打一百板。韦少华、魏琚一夜即死，雍王还营。
English: It was estimated that Hui Xuan's princes and ministers would not be able to make the Tang envoys give in, that is, Dang Zi Ang, Li Jin, Wei Shao Hua and Wei Wei each played a hundred boards. Wei Shao Hua and Wei Wei died overnight, and the Yong Wang returned to battle.

古文：官军以王见辱，将合诛回纥，王以贼未灭止之。
现代文：官军因雍王被辱，准备合力诛杀回纥。雍王因史朝义之乱未平，阻止了莽动。
English: The government army was humiliated by King Yong and prepared to work together to fight and kill him back. King Yong, because of the historical chaos of the dynasty, stopped the reckless move.

古文：于是，怀恩与虏左杀为先驱。
现代文：当时，仆固怀恩与回纥左杀为先驱。
English: At that time, Min Gu Wai Yan and Hui Xuan Zuo were the pioneers.

古文：朝义使反间，左杀执以献，与诸将同击贼，战横水，走之，进收东都。
现代文：史朝义使反间计，左杀捉住奸细献给王师并与诸将共同击贼，战于横水，赶走朝义，进而收复东都。
English: Shih Chao Yi made a counter-plan, killed and captured the spies dedicated to Wang Shi and fought with the generals against the thieves, fought in Hengshui, drove away the Chao Yi, and then recovered the eastern capital.

古文：可汗使拔贺那贺天子，献朝义旗物。
现代文：可汗派拔贺那向天子贺喜，献上史朝义的旗帜等物。
English: The Khan's faction raised banners of congratulations to the heavenly child, presented banners of historical justice, and so on.

古文：雍王还灵宝，可汗屯河阳，留三月，屯旁人困于剽辱。
现代文：雍王回灵宝，可汗屯河阳，留驻三个月，屯旁人民苦于剽掠侮辱。
English: The Yong Wang returned to Lingbao, and the Khan stayed in Tunheyang for three months. The people around the settlement suffered from the plunder and humiliation.

古文：仆固瑒率回纥兵与朝义挐战，蹀血二千里，枭其首，河北悉平。
现代文：仆固率回纥兵与朝义苦战，血战二千里，斩了朝义的头，河北全部平定。
English: Min Gu led the Hui soldiers in a hard-fought, bloody battle of two thousand miles, decapitated the head of the court, and Hebei was completely pacified.

古文：怀恩道相州西山崞口还屯，可汗出泽、潞，与怀恩会，道太原去。
现代文：仆固怀恩自相州西山崞口回屯，可汗出泽、潞与怀恩会合，经太原而去。
English: The servant Gu Wai Yan returned to the town from Xishan Hekou, Xiangzhou. The khan went to the lake, and the donkey met with Wai Yan and left via Taiyuan.

古文：初，回纥至东京，放兵攘剽，人皆遁保圣善、白马二祠浮屠避之，回纥怒，火浮屠，杀万余人，及是益横，诟折官吏，至以兵夜斫含光门，入鸿胪寺。
现代文：起先，回纥到东京，纵兵掠夺。人们都到圣善寺、白马寺两佛寺躲避。回纥怒，纵火烧佛寺，杀死一万多人。至此更加蛮横，垢骂侮辱官吏，甚至夜晚带兵斫开含光门，入鸿胪寺。
English: At first, he returned to Tokyo and plundered with his soldiers. People fled to two Buddhist temples, Shozen-ji Temple and Hakuba-ji Temple. He was enraged and set fire to the Buddhist temple, killing more than 10,000 people. He became even more violent, swearing and insulting officials, and even took soldiers to open the door at night to enter Honjo-ji Temple.

古文：方其时，陕州节度使郭英乂留守东都，与鱼朝恩及朔方军骄肆，因回纥为暴，亦掠汝、郑间，乡不完庐，皆蔽纸为裳，虐于贼矣。
现代文：那时，陕州节度使郭英耣留守东都，与鱼朝恩及朔方军都骄横恣肆。见回纥暴掠也掠夺于汝州、郑州之间，以致乡无完屋，人民以纸为衣，其为虐比贼更甚。
English: At that time, the Shaanxi Festival made Guo Yingtao stay in Dongdu, and he arrogantly and arbitrarily sided with Yu Chaon and Shuo Fang's army. I saw that the Uighurs also plundered between Ruzhou and Zhengzhou, so that there were no houses in the village, and the people were dressed in paper. They were more cruel than thieves.

古文：帝念少华等死，故赠少华左散骑常侍，琚扬州大都督，赐一子六品官。
现代文：皇帝顾念韦少华等死难，追赠少华左散骑常侍，追赠魏琚扬州大都督，各赐一子六品官。
English: The emperor, mindful of Wei Shaohua's death and other hardships, posthumously presented Wei Shaohua with the title of Left Cavalryman, Wei Shaohua with the title of Yangzhou Grand Governor, and each of them was given a six-rank official.

古文：于是册可汗曰颉咄登里骨啜蜜施合俱录英义建功毘伽可汗，可敦曰娑墨光亲丽华毘伽可敦，以左散骑常侍王翊使，即其牙命之，自可汗至宰相共赐实封二万户。又以左杀为雄朔王，右杀宁朔王，胡禄都督金河王，拔鉴将军静漠王，十都督皆国公。
现代文：册封可汗为颉咄登里骨啜蜜施合俱录英义建功毗伽可汗，封可敦为娑墨光亲丽华毗伽可敦，派左散骑常侍王翊出使，至回纥牙庭册命。自可汗至宰相共赐实封二万户，又封左杀为雄朔王，右杀为宁朔王，胡禄都督为金河王，拔览将军为静漠王，十都督均封国公。
English: Khan was awarded the title of,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

古文：永泰初，怀恩反，诱回纥、吐蕃入寇。
现代文：永泰初年，仆固怀恩反，引诱回纥、吐蕃入寇。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, the servant Gu Wai En rebelled, lured back the cormorant, spit the cormorant into the cormorant.

古文：俄而怀恩死，二虏争长，回纥首领潜诣泾阳见郭子仪，请改事。
现代文：不久。怀恩死，二虏争为长。回纥首领暗中到泾阳见郭子仪，要求任他手下。
English: Soon after, Huai'en died, and the two warlords fought for supremacy. The leader of Hui'an secretly went to Shenyang to meet with Guo Ziyi and asked to be allowed to be his subordinate.

古文：子仪率麾下叩回纥营。
现代文：郭子仪率左右来到回纥营。
English: Guo Ziyi came to the camp around the same time.

古文：回纥曰： 愿见令公。 
现代文：回纥人说 ：希望见到令公。 
English: The egret said, "I hope to see my lord."

古文：子仪出旗门，回纥曰： 请释甲。 
现代文：子仪出旗门，回纥人说： 请脱去盔甲。 
English: When Zi Yi went out of the gate, Hui Xuan said, "Please take off your armor."

古文：子仪易服。
现代文：子仪脱去战袍。
English: Zi Yi takes off his battle robe.

古文：酋长相顾曰： 真是公矣！ 
现代文：酋长们相顾说 ：真是郭公啊。 
English: The chiefs looked at each other and said, "This is really Guo Gong."

古文：时李光进、路嗣恭介马在侧，子仪示酋长曰： 此渭北节度使某，朔方军粮使某。 
现代文：当时李光进、路嗣恭牵着战马在旁边，子仪向酋长们介绍说 ：这位是渭北节度使李太保，这位是朔方军粮使路大夫。 
English: At that time, Li Guangjin and Lu Zikong were holding horses next to each other. Zi Yi introduced them to the chiefs, saying, "This is Li Taibao, the chief of the Northern Song Dynasty, and this is Lu Daifu, the chief of the Northern Song Dynasty.

古文：酋长下马拜，子仪亦下见之。
现代文：酋长下马拜，子仪也下马答礼。
English: The chieftain dismounted and bowed, and Zi Yi also dismounted and bowed.

古文：虏数百环视，子仪麾下亦至，子仪麾左右使却，且命酒与饮，遗以缠头彩三千，召可汗弟合胡禄等持手，因让曰： 上念回纥功，报尔固厚，何负而来？
现代文：虏兵几百人围着看，子仪的兵众也来了。子仪挥左右让兵退去，且命设宴与之共饮。赠缠头彩三千匹，召可汗弟合胡禄等来，拉着他们的手责备说： 皇上念叨回纥的功劳，报答你们十分丰厚，为什么背叛来犯？
English: Several hundred captors looked on, and Zi Yi's soldiers also came. Zi Yi waved his right and left to make the soldiers retreat, and ordered a banquet to be set up to drink with them. He gave them three thousand horses, called the Khan's younger brother, He Hulu, and so on, and took them by the hand and reproached them, saying, "The emperor has rewarded you very richly for your service in reclaiming Yunnan. Why did you betray the invaders?"

古文：今即与汝战，何遽降也？
现代文：现在即将交战，又为何突然投降？
English: Now that war is imminent, why the sudden surrender?

古文：我将独入尔营，虽杀我，吾将士能击汝。 
现代文：我单身来你们营中，你们虽能杀我，我的将士们也将会击杀你们。 
English: I come alone to your camp. If you kill me, my men will kill you.

古文：酋长詟服曰： 怀恩诡我曰 唐天子南走，公见废 ，是以来。
现代文：酋长们都折服，说： 怀恩骗我们说： 唐天子已南逃，公也遭废。 这样我们才来。
English: The chiefs all gave in and said, "Wai Yan lied to us and said, 'Tang Tianzi has fled south, and the government has been abolished.' That's how we came.

古文：今天可汗在，公无恙，吾等愿还击吐蕃以报厚恩。
现代文：如今天可汗在，公也无恙。我等愿意回击吐蕃以报厚恩。
English: If the Khan were here today, there would be no public disorder. We would like to return the favour by fighting back against the rioters.

古文：然怀恩子，可敦弟也，愿赦死。 
现代文：不过，怀恩的儿子，是可敦之弟，希望能赦其死。 
English: But Wine's son, Khodun's younger brother, hopes to be spared his death.

古文：于是子仪持酒，胡禄请盟而饮，子仪曰： 唐天子万岁，回纥可汗亦万岁，二国将相如之。
现代文：于是子仪持酒，胡禄请求盟誓后饮。子仪誓曰： 唐天子万岁，回纥可汗也万岁，两国的将相也一样。
English: So Ziyi took the wine, Hu Lu asked for an oath and drank it. Ziyi swore: Long live Tang Tianzi, long live Hui Khan, and the same goes for the generals of the two countries.

古文：有如负约，身死行阵，家屠戮。 
现代文：如谁负约，身死阵前，家人遭屠戮。 
English: If anyone reneges on the agreement, his family will be slaughtered before he dies.

古文：方时，虏宰相磨咄莫贺达干、顿莫贺达干等闻言皆夺气，酒至其所，辄曰： 无易公誓。 
现代文：那时，回纥宰相磨咄莫贺达干、顿莫贺达干等听了子仪的誓言都肃然，酒轮到他们喝时，就说 ：如令公的誓言一样。 
English: At that time, Huizhou chancellors such as Mao Mogao Dagan and Dong Mogao Dagan were awestruck when they heard Ziyi's oath. When it was their turn to drink wine, they said, "It's just like the emperor's oath."

古文：始，虏有二巫，言 此行必不战，当见大人而还 ；及是相顾笑曰： 巫不吾绐也。 
现代文：当初，回纥有二巫，预言： 这次出行定不会交战，该与大人相会而回。 至此，众人相顾而笑： 巫没有骗我们。 
English: At first, there were two witches in Huizhou, predicting: This trip will definitely not be a war, it is time to meet the adults and return. At this point, everyone looked at each other and laughed: The witch did not lie to us.

古文：朔方先锋兵马使白元光合回纥兵于灵台，会雪雰严晦，吐蕃闭营撤备，乃纵击之，斩首五万级，生禽万人，获马、橐它、牛、羊，收所俘唐户五千。
现代文：朔方先锋兵马使白元光与回纥合兵灵台，正遇大雪严寒，吐蕃关门撤哨，乃纵兵袭击，斩首五万，活捉万人，获马、骆驼、牛、羊无数，还收回被俘的唐户五千。
English: The vanguard soldiers and horses of the Shuo side sent Baiyuan Guang and Hui Yu to join the soldiers' cemetery. It was snowing heavily and freezing cold. Tuyun closed the gate and withdrew the sentry. It was a longitudinal attack. They beheaded 50,000 people, captured 10,000 people alive, captured countless horses, camels, cattle, and sheep, and also recovered 5,000 Tang households that were captured.

古文：仆固名臣降，合胡禄都督等二百人皆来朝，赐与不可计。
现代文：仆固名臣降，与胡禄都督等二百人都来朝见。皇帝赐物不可胜数。
English: Two hundred people came to see the emperor, including the vassals of Emperor Go-Daigo, and the governor of the capital, Huluk. The emperor's gifts were countless.

古文：子仪以名臣见。
现代文：郭子仪领仆固名臣入见。
English: Guo Ziyi led his servant Gu Nian into the audience.

古文：名臣，怀恩兄子，锐将也。
现代文：名臣，是怀恩哥哥之子，是一名勇将。
English: He is the son of Wine's brother and a brave general.

古文：大历三年，光亲可敦卒，帝遣右散骑常侍萧昕持节吊祠。
现代文：大历三年，光亲可敦死，皇帝派右散骑常侍萧昕持节前往祭吊。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, when a close relative died unexpectedly, the emperor sent the right horseback riding attendant Xiao Xizhi to the festival.

古文：明年，以怀恩幼女为崇徽公主继室，兵部侍郎李涵持节册拜可敦，赐缯彩二万。
现代文：第二年，封怀恩的幼女为崇徽公主，嫁与可汗为继室。兵部侍郎李涵持节去册封可敦，赠彩绸二万。
English: In the second year, the young daughter of Huai'en was given the title of Princess of Chonghui, and she married the Khan as her step-sister. The attendant of the military department, Li Han, went to record the title of Kedun on the festival, and was given 20,000 pieces of colored silk.

古文：是时，财用屈，税公卿骡、橐它给行，宰相饯中渭桥。
现代文：其时帑藏空虚，征用公卿的骡马骆驼载物。宰相在中渭桥为之饯行。
English: At that time, the imperial treasury was empty, and the noble's horse and camel were requisitioned to carry the goods. The prime minister walked across the bridge in the middle.

古文：回纥之留京师者，曹辈掠女子于市，引骑犯含光门，皇城皆阖，诏刘清潭慰止。
现代文：回纥留在京师的一些兵众，在坊市掠人子女，引骑兵冲撞含光门。皇城都闭门，诏令刘清潭前去劝止。
English: Some soldiers who remained in the Beijing Division returned to the capital, and in the city of Fang, they plundered the children of the people, and led the cavalry to ram the light-bearing gate. The imperial city was closed, and Liu Qingtan was ordered to go and dissuade them.

古文：复出暴市物，夺长安令邵说马，有司不敢何诘。
现代文：后来他们又强夺货物，抢长安令邵说的马。有司不敢严责。
English: Later, they forcibly took the goods and seized the horse mentioned by Chang An Ling Shao. Yushi did not dare to severely reprimand them.

古文：自乾元后，益负功，每纳一马，取直四十缣，岁以数万求售，使者相蹑，留舍鸿胪，骀弱不可用，帝厚赐欲以愧之，不知也。
现代文：自乾元年后，更以功自负，每进献一马，就要价四十匹缣。每年带几万马来卖，使者接连不断地来，都留宿鸿胪，送来的马又骀弱无用。皇帝特意厚赐，希望他们能自愧，然回纥不知其意，又带了万匹马来。
English: Since the first year of the Qian dynasty, he was even more proud of his achievements. For every horse he presented, he demanded a price of forty horses. Every year, he brought tens of thousands of horses to sell. Envoys came one after another, and they all stayed in Hongya. The horses they brought were weak and useless. The emperor was especially generous, hoping that they would feel ashamed. However, he did not know what to do, so he brought another ten thousand horses.

古文：复以万马来，帝不忍重烦民，为偿六千。
现代文：皇帝不忍增加百姓的负担，买下六千匹。
English: The emperor could not bear to increase the burden on the people and bought six thousand horses.

古文：十年，回纥杀人横道，京兆尹黎干捕之，诏贷勿劾。
现代文：大历十年，回纥在道中杀人，京兆尹黎干抓了凶手，皇帝诏令放了不计罪。
English: In the 10th year of the lunar calendar, Hui Xuan killed someone on the road. Emperor Jing Zhao and Yin Li Gang arrested the murderer, but Emperor Dahal let him go without charge.

古文：又刺人东市，缚送万年狱，首领劫取囚，残狱吏去，都人厌苦。
现代文：后来又在东市杀人，市人将凶手绑送万年狱，其首领来劫狱，斫伤狱吏，都中人厌而苦之。
English: Later, he killed another person in Higashi-shi. The townspeople tied up the murderer and sent him to prison for ten thousand years. The leader of the group came to rob the prison and stabbed a prison officer. People in the capital were disgusted and suffered.

古文：十三年，回纥袭振武，攻东陉，入寇太原。
现代文：大历十三年，回纥袭击振武，攻东径，入侵太原。
English: In the 13th year of the lunar calendar, the Hui Dynasty attacked Zhenwu, attacked Dongbei, and invaded Taiyuan.

古文：河东节度使鲍防与战阳曲，防败绩，残杀万人。
现代文：河东节度使鲍防与之在阳曲一战，鲍防败，回纥残杀万人。
English: Hedong Jiedu made Bao Fang fight with him in Yangqu, Bao Fang was defeated and killed tens of thousands of people in Huizhou.

古文：代州都督张光晟又战羊虎谷，破之，虏乃去。
现代文：代州都督张光晟又与之战于羊虎谷，胜，回纥兵始退。
English: Zhang Guangyao, the governor of Daizhou, fought against them again in the Sheep and Tiger Valley and won, and the Hui soldiers began to retreat.

古文：德宗立，使中人告丧，且脩好。
现代文：德宗立，派中人前去告丧且修旧好。
English: De Zongli sent a middle-ranking official to pay his respects and mend fences.

古文：时九姓胡劝可汗入寇，可汗欲悉师向塞，见使者不为礼。
现代文：当时九姓胡劝可汗入寇，可汗打算倾巢入塞，见使者不行礼。
English: At that time, nine surnamed Hu advised the khan to invade, the khan planned to invade, and it was not polite to see the messenger.

古文：宰相顿莫贺达干曰： 唐，大国，无负于我。
现代文：宰相顿莫贺达干说 ：唐，是大国。从没有亏待过我们。
English: Prime Minister Don Moga Dagan said: "Tang is a big country. It has never treated us badly.

古文：前日入太原，取羊马数万，比及国，亡耗略尽。
现代文：前次入太原，夺取了几万羊马，但回到国内，几乎全部死去或走散。
English: The last time they entered Taiyuan, they captured tens of thousands of sheep and horses, but when they returned to China, almost all of them died or dispersed.

古文：今举国远斗，有如不捷，将安归？ 
现代文：如今要举国远征，万一不能取胜，还有何处可归？ 
English: Now we have to go on a national expedition. If we don't win, where can we go?

古文：可汗不听，顿莫贺怒，因击杀之，并屠其支党及九姓胡几二千人，即自立为合骨咄禄毘伽可汗，使长建达干从使者入朝。
现代文：可汗不听，顿莫贺怒，击杀可汗，并杀其支党及九姓胡近二千人，自立为合骨咄禄毗伽可汗，派长建达干随唐使者入朝。
English: The khan did not listen, he flew into a rage, killed the khan, and killed his branch party and nine surnamed Hu, nearly two thousand people, and established himself as a united khan. He sent the commander Jian Dagang to the Tang Dynasty with the Tang envoy.

古文：建中元年，诏京兆少尹源休持节册顿莫贺为武义成功可汗。
现代文：建中元年，诏令京兆少尹源休持节册封顿莫贺为武义成功可汗。
English: In the first year of Jianzhong, the emperor ordered Jing Zhao Shao Yin Yuan to suspend the holding of the festival book, and Moga was crowned as the successful khan of Wuyi.

古文：始回纥至中国，常参以九姓胡，往往留京师，至千人，居赀殖产甚厚。
现代文：当初回纥来中国，常有九姓胡同来，往往留在京师，多达千人，积聚了不少产业。
English: At the beginning, there were as many as a thousand people who came back to China, often with nine surnames from the hutongs, and often stayed in Beijing. They accumulated a lot of industries.

古文：会酋长突董、翳蜜施、大小梅录等还国，装橐系道，留振武三月，供拟珍丰，费不赀。
现代文：其时酋长突董、翳蜜施、大小梅录等回国，装点行装上路，滞留振武三个月，供给甚丰，费用甚大。
English: At that time, chiefs such as Tu Dong, Yu Mingshi, and Da Da Mei Luo returned to the country, decorated the line, loaded the road, and stayed in Zhenwu for three months. The supply was very abundant and the cost was very large.

古文：军使张光晟阴伺之，皆盛女子以橐，光晟使驿吏刺以长锥，然后知之。
现代文：军使张光晟暗中窥察，发现行囊里装的是女子。这是张光晟让驿吏用长锥刺行囊才得知的。
English: Zhang Guangyao, the military envoy, peered into the darkness and discovered that the bag contained a woman. Zhang Guangyao only found out about this when he asked the officials to prick the bag with a long cone.

古文：已而闻顿莫贺新立，多杀九姓胡人，惧不敢归，往往亡去，突董察视严亟。
现代文：接着听说顿莫贺新立，杀了许多九姓胡人，因此不敢回去，常常要逃走，但突董监视甚严。
English: Then I heard that Dong Moga Xinli had killed many Hu people, so I didn't dare to go back. I often had to escape, but the guards were very strict.

古文：群胡献计于光晟，请悉斩回纥，光晟许之，即上言： 回纥非素强，助之者九胡尔。
现代文：胡人们向张光晟献计，请他斩尽回纥人。光晟同意，向皇帝报告： 回纥并非原来就强大，只是因为有九姓胡人相助而已。
English: The Hu people presented a plan to Zhang Guangyao, asking him to completely defeat the Hu people. Guangyao agreed and reported to the emperor: The Hu people were not originally strong, but only because there were nine Hu people to help.

古文：今其国乱，兵方相加，而虏利则往，财则合，无财与利，一乱不振。
现代文：现在他国中自相鱼肉。虏人本性惟利是视，无财无利就散乱不振。
English: Now he is a fish out of water in his own country. People's nature is to see profit, and if there is no money or profit, it will be scattered and stagnant.

古文：不以此时乘之，复归人与币，是谓借贼兵，资盗粮也。 
现代文：如果不趁此时机降服他们而送他们回去，又给钱财，这恰如俗语所说 借武器给寇人，送粮草给盗寇 了。 
English: If we do not take advantage of this opportunity to subdue them and send them back, and give them money and wealth, this is just like the saying "lending weapons to robbers, and giving grain and grass to robbers."

古文：乃使裨校阳不礼，突董果怒，鞭之。
现代文：于是让副将们对回纥不礼貌，突董果然发怒，鞭打副将。
English: So the vice generals were impolite to Hui Yao, and suddenly Dong got angry and whipped the vice general.

古文：光晟因勒兵尽杀回纥群胡，收橐它、马数千，缯锦十万，且告曰： 回纥抶大将，谋取振武，谨先诛之。 
现代文：光晟就此召集士兵杀尽回纥群胡，收缴骆驼、马几千，绸绢十万，且传言： 回纥鞭打我大将，想夺取振武，所以先杀了他们。 
English: Guangyi then called out his soldiers to kill all of Hui's camels and horses, confiscate thousands of camels and horses, and 100,000 pieces of silk and brocade, and spread the rumor: Hui had whipped my generals and wanted to capture Zhenwu, so he killed them first.

古文：部送女子还长安。
现代文：派兵送被掳女子回长安。
English: Troops were sent to escort the abducted woman back to Chang'an.

古文：帝召光晟还，以彭令方代之，遣中人与回纥使聿达干往言其端，因欲与虏绝。
现代文：皇帝召张光晟回京，派彭令方代职。派中人与回纥使者聿达干回去说明原委，也想就此与回纥断绝。
English: The emperor called Zhang Guangyao back to Beijing and sent Peng Lingfang to take his place. He sent the Chinese people and Hui Yao's emissary Gan Da to go back and explain the original committee, and also wanted to break with Hui Yao.

古文：敕源休俟命太原。明年，乃行，因归突董等四丧。
现代文：令源休在太原待命，第二年才启程，送回突董等四人的灵柩。
English: Lingyuan Hui was on standby in Taiyuan and did not leave until the following year, when he sent back the coffins of four people, including Tu Dong.

古文：突董，可汗诸父也。
现代文：突董，是可汗的叔父。
English: Tutong is Khan's uncle.

古文：源休至，可汗令大臣具车马出迎，其大相颉干迦斯踞坐责休等杀突董事，休言： 彼自与张光晟斗死，非天子命。 
现代文：源休到，可汗令大臣备车马出迎，其大相颉干迦斯，踞坐，责源休等人杀死突董。源休说： 是他与张光晟格斗而死，不是天子的命令。 
English: When Yuan Hui arrived, the khan ordered the minister to prepare a chariot and horses to meet him. His close friend, Gan Qas, sat down and ordered Yuan Hui and others to kill Tu Dong. Yuan Hui said: He died in a fight with Zhang Guangyao, not by order of the Son of Heaven.

古文：又曰： 使者皆负死罪，唐不自戮，何假手于我邪？ 
现代文：大相又说： 使者都有死罪，唐不自己制裁，为什么要假手于我？ 
English: Daso also said, "All the emissaries are guilty of capital crimes. If Tang doesn't impose sanctions on himself, why is he pretending to punish me?

古文：良久罢去，休等几死。
现代文：很久，才挥之使去。源休等人几乎被处死。
English: It was a long time before he was sent away. Genkyu and others were almost executed.

古文：留五旬，卒不见可汗。
现代文：逗留了五十天，始终未见着可汗。
English: They stayed for fifty days and never saw the khan.

古文：可汗传谓休曰： 国人皆欲尔死，我独不然。
现代文：可汗让人传话给源休： 国人都要杀你报仇，只我不想杀你。
English: Khan had someone pass on a message to Genkyu: "Everyone in my country wants to kill you in revenge, but I don't want to kill you."

古文：突董等已亡，今又杀尔，犹以血濯血，徒益污。
现代文：突董等人已死，现在杀你，就像以血洗血，只会加污。
English: Tu Dong and the others are dead, killing you now is like washing blood with blood, it will only make it dirty.

古文：吾以水濯血，不亦善乎？
现代文：吾用水洗血，不也很好吗？
English: I wash my blood with water, isn't that good too?

古文：为我言有司，所负马直一百八十万，可速偿我。 
现代文：替我转告有司，所欠的售马款一百八十万，快些还来。 
English: I was told by a steward that I owed 1.8 million for the sale of my horse, and that I should pay it back as soon as possible.

古文：遣散支将军康赤心等随休来朝。
现代文：可汗派散支将军康赤心等随源休来朝。
English: The khan dispatched General Kang Chik-shin and others to accompany Yuan Hui to the north.

古文：帝隐忍，赐以金缯。
现代文：皇帝容忍了，赐以财币。
English: The emperor tolerated him and gave him money.

古文：后三年，使使者献方物，请和亲。
现代文：三年后，回纥又派使者来贡献，要求和亲。
English: Three years later, Ulu sent another envoy to make a contribution and ask for a reconciliation.

古文：帝蓄前恚未平，谓宰相李泌曰： 和亲待子孙图之，朕不能已。 
现代文：皇帝对前事还心中不平，对宰相李泌说： 和亲之事等到子孙辈时再说吧，我不能答应。 
English: The emperor was still not happy about the past, and said to the prime minister, Li Xiu: "Let's wait until the grandchildren are born before we talk about family matters. I can't agree to that."

古文：泌曰： 陛下岂以陕州故憾乎？ 
现代文：李泌说： 陛下是还记恨前次陕州之事吗？ 
English: Li Rui said, "Does Your Majesty still remember the previous incident in Shaanxi Province?

古文：帝曰： 然。
现代文：皇帝说 ：是的。
English: Taizong said, "Yes."

古文：朕方天下多难，未能报，且毋议和。 
现代文：我正天下多难，未能雪耻，现在谈不上议和。 
English: I'm in the middle of the world's most difficult time, and I've failed miserably, and now there's no talk of negotiating a peace.

古文：泌曰： 辱少华等乃牟羽可汗也，知陛下即位必偿怨，乃谋先苦边，然兵未出，为今可汗所杀矣。
现代文：李泌说： 侮辱韦少华等人，是牟羽可汗干的。他知道陛下即位定要报怨，所以打算先入寇边界。不过兵还未出，就被现在的可汗杀了。
English: Li Xiu said: It was Muwa Khan who insulted Wei Shaohua and others. He knew that His Majesty would certainly complain when he ascended the throne, so he planned to invade the border first. However, before the soldiers left, he was killed by the current Khan.

古文：今可汗初立，遣使来告，垂发不翦，待天子命。
现代文：现在的可汗初立，派使者来，披散头发自作罪人，待天子发落。
English: When the present khan first came to power, he sent an envoy to shave off his hair and declare himself a sinner.

古文：而张光晟杀突董等。虽幽止使人，然卒完归，则为无罪矣。 
现代文：张光晟杀害突董等，虽他们曾扣留使者，但终于安全而归，也就无罪可言了。 
English: Zhang Guangyao is not guilty of killing Xu Dong and others, although they had detained the envoy, but finally returned safely.

古文：帝曰： 卿言则然，顾朕不可负少华等，奈何？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 你的话虽有道理，但我不可辜负少华等人，怎么办？ 
English: The emperor said, "Although what you say is reasonable, I must not let Shao Hua and others down. What should I do?

古文：泌曰： 臣谓陛下不负少华，少华负陛下。
现代文：李泌说： 臣认为陛下没有辜负少华，而是少华对不起陛下。
English: Li Rui said, "I believe that His Majesty did not fail Shao Hua, but Shao Hua failed His Majesty."

古文：且北虏君长身赴难，陛下在籓，春秋未壮，而轻度河入其营，所谓冒豺虎之场也。
现代文：何况北虏君长亲身来赴国难，当时陛下在藩，年纪尚轻，轻易就渡河入其营垒，是冒险入豺虎之地。
English: Not to mention, Hokku Juncho himself came to the country when it was difficult. At that time, His Majesty was in the domain, he was still young, and he easily crossed the river into his camp. It was a place of adventure into the tiger.

古文：为少华等计，当先定会见礼，臣犹危之，奈何孑然赴哉？
现代文：从少华等人来说，应该先与回纥商定会见礼仪。为臣者尚冒着几分险，陛下怎能贸然独身而去？
English: From the point of view of Shao Hua and others, the meeting etiquette should first be agreed with Hui Yao. As a subject, how can His Majesty risk being single?

古文：臣昔为先帝行军司马，方叶护来，先帝祗使宴于府。及议征讨，则不见也。
现代文：臣以前任先帝的行军司马，遇叶护太子来，先帝只令臣在元帅府设宴招待，不到讨论征讨事，不与之相见。
English: When Ye Guo, the crown prince, arrived, the emperor only ordered him to host a banquet at the marshal's residence, not to discuss the matter or meet with him.

古文：叶护邀臣至营，帝不许，使好谓曰： 主当劳客，客返劳主邪？ 
现代文：当时叶护邀臣到他营垒，皇上都不许，要我好言相辞： 主人应慰劳来客，怎能反让来客请主人呢？ 
English: At that time, Ye You invited his vassals to his camp, but the emperor did not allow it. He wanted me to say: The master should comfort the guest, but how can the guest invite the master?

古文：东收京师，约曰： 土地、人众归我，玉帛、子女予回纥。 
现代文：至东收京师，与之相约 ：土地人众归我，玉帛子女赠回纥。 
English: He went to the east to collect the capital division, and made an agreement with it: the land and people belong to me, and the children of Tamakazura will give back the scepter.

古文：战胜，叶护欲大掠，代宗下马拜之，回纥乃东向洛。
现代文：香积战事得胜，叶护准备大肆掳掠，广平王下马跪拜请免，回纥才东趋洛阳。
English: After the victory of the war, Ye Guo prepared to plunder extensively, Guangping Wang dismounted and knelt down to pray for forgiveness, and only then did Hui Xuan move eastward to Luoyang.

古文：臣犹恨以元帅拜叶护于马前，为左右过，然先帝曰： 王仁孝，足办朕事。 
现代文：即使如此，臣还懊恼大唐元帅拜叶护于马前，这是左右的过错。但先帝说 ：广平王仁孝，能替我办好事。 
English: Even so, the vassal still chafed at the Great Tang marshal Bai Ye Xuan, which was the fault of both sides. But the former emperor said: Guangping Wang Renxiao, can do good things for me.

古文：下诏尉勉。
现代文：下诏慰勉。
English: The following is a message of consolation.

古文：叶护乃牟羽诸父也，牟羽之来，陛下以元子不拜于帐下，而可汗不敢少有失于陛下，则陛下未尝屈矣。
现代文：叶护乃牟羽的叔父，牟羽来时，陛下以嫡长子身份不拜于帐下，可汗也不敢对陛下略有失礼，此可见陛下未尝屈折。
English: Ippo is Muwa's uncle. When Muwa came, His Majesty, as the eldest son, did not bow down to him. Khan did not dare to be a little disrespectful to His Majesty. This shows that His Majesty was not offended.

古文：先帝拜叶护，全京城，陛下乃不拜可汗，固伸威于虏，何恨焉？
现代文：先帝拜叶护，是为了保全京城；陛下不拜可汗，确已示威于虏人了，还有什么可憾的呢？
English: The previous emperor worshipped Ye Zhou in order to preserve the capital city; his majesty did not worship the khan, and indeed demonstrated this to the people of Ruijin, so what is there to regret?

古文：然计香积、陕州事，以屈己为是乎？
现代文：计较香积、陕州的事，究竟屈己是正确的，还是示威是正确的呢？
English: Considering the situation in Xiangzi and Shaanxi, is it right to give in, or is it right to demonstrate?

古文：伸威为是乎？藉令少华等以陛下见可汗，闭壁五日，与陛下张饮，天下岂不寒心哉？
现代文：假设少华等让陛下与可汗相见，可汗留陛下在帐中欢饮五日，天下岂不胆战心寒？
English: Suppose that Shao Hua and others let His Majesty meet with the Khan, and the Khan keeps His Majesty in his account for five days of drinking, will the world not be afraid?

古文：而天助威神，使豺狼驯服，牟羽母捧陛下以貂裘，叱左右促命骑，躬送出营。
现代文：幸天助威神，使豺狼驯服，牟羽母奉貂裘献陛下，叱退左右，促陛下上马并亲自送出大营。
English: Fortunately, the heavens aided and abetted the god, taming the jackal. Muwa's mother offered a yakitori to His Majesty, scolded him right and left, urged His Majesty to mount a horse, and personally sent him out of the camp.

古文：此少华等负陛下也。
现代文：就此事看，是少华等有负陛下。
English: As far as this matter is concerned, it is Shao Hua and others who have failed His Majesty.

古文：假令牟羽为有罪，则今可汗已杀之，立者乃牟羽从父兄，是为有功，渠可忘之邪？
现代文：假如认为牟羽有罪，则今可汗已将他杀死。现即位者是牟羽的堂兄，是有功之人，岂可忘记？
English: If Muwa was found guilty, the Khan would have killed him by now. The man who is now on the throne is Muwa's cousin, a man of merit. How can we forget that?

古文：且回纥可汗铭石立国门曰： 唐使来，当使知我前后功 云。
现代文：何况回纥可汗刻石立于国门，上写 唐使来，当使知我前后之功 。
English: What's more, the Hui Khan carved stone stands at the gate of the country, inscribed with Tang envoys, and should be made aware of the work before and after.

古文：今请和，必举部南望，陛下不之答，其怨必深。
现代文：如今来请和，一定举部南望，若陛下不回答，其怨定深。
English: If His Majesty does not reply, his resentment will be deep.

古文：愿听昏而约用开元故事，如突厥可汗称臣，使来者不过二百，市马不过千，不以唐人出塞，亦无不可者。 
现代文：希望能循开元时故例，允许和亲而与之约，如：突厥可汗称臣，每次来使不得超过二百人，售马不得超过千匹，不带唐人出塞等。这样就没什么不行的了。 
English: It is hoped that the precedent of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty will be followed, and it will be allowed to make an appointment with a relative, such as: the Turkic khan praises a vassal, no more than two hundred people can come each time, no more than a thousand horses can be sold, and no Chinese can be taken out of the country.

古文：帝曰： 善。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：有理。 
English: Mutei said, "That's well said."

古文：乃许降公主，回纥亦请如约。
现代文：乃同意下嫁公主，回纥也同意唐室的约定。
English: He agreed to marry the princess, and Hui Xuan also agreed to the agreement of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：诏咸安公主下嫁，又诏使者合阙达干见公主于麟德殿，使中谒者赍公主画图赐可汗。
现代文：诏令咸安公主嫁与可汗，又诏令回纥使者合阙达干在麟德殿与公主相见，并派中谒者带了公主的画像去赠给可汗。
English: He ordered Princess Haman to marry the khan, and ordered the emissary to meet the princess at the palace, and sent a messenger with a picture of the princess to present to the khan.

古文：明年，可汗遣宰相跌都督等众千余，并遣其妹骨咄禄毘伽公主率大酋之妻五十人逆主，且纳聘。
现代文：第二年，可汗派宰相跌都督等千余人，还派妹妹骨咄禄毗伽公主率领大酋们的妻子五十人来迎接公主，送上聘礼。
English: The following year, the khan sent more than a thousand people, including the prime minister and the governor of the capital, as well as his younger sister, Princess Kostiroviga, who led fifty wives of the great chiefs to greet the princess and present her with a betrothal gift.

古文：夹跌至振武，为室韦所钞，战死。
现代文：跌到振武，被室韦所劫，战死。
English: He fell to Zhenwu, was robbed by Shuwaei, and died in battle.

古文：有诏其下七百，皆听入朝，舍鸿胪，帝御延喜门见使者。
现代文：诏令跌以下七百人皆可入朝，舍于鸿胪。皇帝到延喜门接见使者。
English: According to the imperial edict, all seven hundred people below that number could enter the imperial court, and the emperor went to the Yanxi Gate to receive the envoy.

古文：是时，可汗上书恭甚，言： 昔为兄弟，今婿，半子也。
现代文：此时，可汗上书甚恭 ：昔为兄弟，今为女婿。
English: At this time, Khan wrote to Jigong: Once a brother, now a son-in-law.

古文：陛下若患西戎，子请以兵除之。 
现代文：婿为半子，陛下若有西戎的兵患，为子者当请求派兵除害。 
English: His son-in-law is a half-son, and if His Majesty has a military disaster in Sijon, he should ask his son to send soldiers to eliminate the damage.

古文：又请易回纥曰回鹘，言捷鸷犹鹘然。
现代文：又请求将 回纥 复原为 回鹘 ，意思是本民族轻捷剽悍如鹘。
English: They also requested that the word "Wuye" be restored to "Wuye," which means that this nation is as light and nimble as a dragonfly.

古文：帝欲飨回鹘公主，问礼于李泌，对曰： 肃宗于敦煌王为从祖兄，回鹘妻以女，见帝于彭原，独拜廷下，帝呼曰 妇 而不名 嫂 也。
现代文：皇帝想宴请回鹘公主，问李泌该行何礼。李泌说 ：肃宗是敦煌王共祖父的堂弟。回鹘将女儿嫁王，在彭原晋见皇帝，独在廷下拜见，皇帝称她为 妇 ，而不称 嫂 。
English: The emperor wanted to invite Princess Ipyeong to a banquet and asked Li Seul how to perform the ceremony. Li Seul said, "Suzong is the cousin of the grandfather of King Dunhuang. Ipyeong married his daughter to the king, met the emperor in Pengyuan, and only met him at court. The emperor called her his wife, but not his sister-in-law."

古文：当艰虞时，方藉其用，犹以臣之，况今日乎？ 
现代文：当时正处困难，正要借用他们的力量尚且行君臣礼，何况今日。 
English: At that time, they were in a difficult situation, and it was necessary to borrow their strength while still performing the duties of a prince, let alone today.

古文：于是引回鹘公主入银台门，长公主三人候诸内，译史传导，拜必答，揖与进。
现代文：于是领回鹘公主入银台门，长公主三人在门内迎接，译者引导，公主拜，长公主等答礼，揖请而进。
English: Then, she led Princess Zou back into the gate of the silver platform, and the three eldest princesses greeted her inside the gate. The translator guided her, the princess bowed, the eldest princess answered the salute, and Zou was invited to enter.

古文：帝御秘殿，长公主先入侍，回鹘公主入，拜谒已，内司宾导至长公主所，又译史传问，乃与俱入。
现代文：皇帝在秘殿，长公主先入侍，回鹘公主入，谒见皇帝毕，内司宾引导到长公主处，又由译史传译问答，与之同入。
English: The emperor is in the inner sanctum. The eldest princess enters first, followed by the crown princess, who is given an audience with the emperor. The inner secretary leads the guests to the eldest princess's place, and the translator interprets the Q&A and enters with them.

古文：至宴所，贤妃降阶俟，回鹘公主拜，贤妃答拜。
现代文：到宴会处，贤妃下阶迎，回鹘公主拜，贤妃答拜。
English: At the banquet hall, the princesses welcomed the guests, the princesses bowed to them, and the princesses bowed back.

古文：又拜召已，由西阶升，乃坐。
现代文：又拜谢皇帝召见，然后由西阶上来落座。
English: He also thanked the emperor for his invitation, and then came up from the west steps to take his seat.

古文：有赐则降拜，非帝赐则避席拜，妃、公主皆答拜。
现代文：遇皇帝有所赐，必下阶拜谢，不是皇帝所赐则离席拜谢，妃、公主都答拜。
English: In the event of a gift from the emperor, the next in line must bow. If the gift is not from the emperor, the next in line must bow.

古文：讫归，凡再飨。
现代文：礼毕而归，共盛宴两次。
English: They bowed and returned, and the feast was celebrated twice.

古文：帝又尽建咸安公主官属，视王府。
现代文：皇帝又命建咸安公主官属，制同王府。
English: The emperor also ordered the construction of Princess Haman's official residence and the establishment of the royal palace.

古文：以嗣滕王湛然为昏礼使，右仆射关播护送，且将册书拜可汗为汩咄禄长寿天亲毘伽可汗，公主为智惠端正长寿孝顺可敦。
现代文：任嗣滕王湛然为婚礼使，右仆射关播护送，且带册书，封可汗为汨咄禄长寿天亲毗伽可汗，公主为智惠端正长寿孝顺可敦。
English: His heir Teng Wang Tianzhong was the wedding messenger, his right-hand man Shiguan Bao was the escort, and he brought a record book. The crowned khan was Zhaoyu Luo Longevity Tianjin Khan, and the princess was Zhihui Duanzhong Longevity Xiaozhun Ke Tun.

古文：贞元五年，可汗死，子多逻斯立，国人号 泮官特勒 ，以鸿胪卿郭锋持节册拜爱登里逻汩没蜜施俱录毘伽忠贞可汗。
现代文：贞元五年，可汗死，子多逻斯立，国人称之为泮官特勒。派鸿胪卿郭锋持节前往册封为爱登里逻汨没蜜施俱录毗伽忠贞可汗。
English: In the fifth year of the Zhengyuan era, the khan died, and his son Duoluos was established, and the Chinese people called him the eunuch Teller. He sent the eunuch Guo Feng to go to the festival to be canonized as the beloved Viga Zhengyuan khan.

古文：初，安西、北庭自天宝末失关、陇，朝贡道隔。
现代文：当初，安西、北庭两处自天宝末年关、陇失守以后，朝贡路断。
English: At the beginning, after Anxi and Beiting lost control of the two places since the end of the Tenpo era, the tribute road was cut off.

古文：伊西北庭节度使李元忠、四镇节度留后郭昕数遣使奉表，皆不至。
现代文：伊西北庭节度使李元忠、四镇节度留后郭昕多次派使者奉表入朝，都不能到达。
English: After the festival in the northwest courtyard of Yiwu kept Li Yuanzhong and the festival in the four towns, Guo Gan repeatedly sent envoys to the imperial court, but they were unable to arrive.

古文：贞元二年，元忠等所遣假道回鹘，乃得至长安。
现代文：贞元二年，元忠等的使者借道回鹘，这才到达长安。
English: In the second year of the Zhengyuan era, the envoys of Yuan Zhong and others took a detour to return to Yunnan, and only then did they reach Chang'an.

古文：帝进元忠为北庭大都护，昕为安西大都护。
现代文：皇帝升李元忠为北庭大都护，郭昕为安西大都护。
English: Emperor Sheng Li Yuanzhong was the protector of the Northern Court, and Guo Gan was the protector of the Western Court.

古文：自是，道虽通，而虏求取无涘。
现代文：从此，路虽能通，但回鹘的索求无止境。
English: Since then, although the road has been able to pass, the demands of the reclamation are endless.

古文：沙陀别部六千帐，与北庭相依，亦厌虏裒索，至三葛禄、白眼突厥素臣回鹘者尤怨苦，皆密附吐蕃，故吐蕃因沙陀共寇北庭，颉干迦斯与战，不胜，北庭陷。
现代文：沙陀别部六千帐与北庭相依，也不满回鹘的勒索。三个葛禄、白眼突厥一向臣附回鹘的更是怨声载道，都秘密依附吐蕃。故而吐蕃邀沙陀共侵北庭，颉干迦斯与之战，不胜，北庭陷落。
English: Six thousand units of the Sataw branch depended on the Northern Court, and they were also dissatisfied with Hui Gan's blackmail. The three Gorus and White-eyed Turks, who had always been attached to Hui Gan, were even more complaining, and they all secretly depended on Tu Gan. Therefore, Tu Gan invited Sataw to invade the Northern Court, and Gan Qas fought against it, but failed, and the Northern Court fell.

古文：于是都护杨袭古引兵奔西州。
现代文：都护杨袭古率兵奔西州。
English: Capital guard Yang Heiguo led the troops to rush to Xizhou.

古文：回鹘以壮卒数万召袭古，将还取北庭，为吐蕃所击，大败，士死太半，迦斯奔还。袭古挈余众将入西州，迦斯绐曰： 弟与我俱归，当使公还唐。 
现代文：回鹘以精兵几万人召袭古，准备回转收取北庭，被吐蕃袭击，大败，士兵死了大半，迦斯逃回，袭古带领余众将入西州，迦斯骗他说 ：你只管与我一同归帐，定送你回唐。 
English: Hui Quan summoned tens of thousands of elite soldiers to attack Gu, preparing to turn around and take the north courtyard. He was attacked by Tu Quan, defeated, and most of the soldiers died. Qas fled back. Hui Quan led the rest of the people to enter Xizhou. Qas lied to him and said, "Just settle accounts with me and I'll definitely send you back to Tang."

古文：袭古至帐，杀之。
现代文：待袭古到牙帐，竟杀了他。
English: They waited until the last minute to kill him.

古文：葛禄又取深图川，回鹘大恐，稍南其部落以避之。
现代文：葛禄又攻取深图川。回鹘恐惧，将其部落稍稍南迁以避之。
English: Gelu also captured the Shentu River. Fearing a backlash, he moved his tribe slightly south to avoid it.

古文：是岁，可汗为少可敦叶公主所毒死，可敦亦仆固怀恩之孙，怀恩子为回鹘叶护，故女号叶公主云。
现代文：这一年，可汗被少可敦叶公主毒死。可敦也是仆固怀恩的孙女。怀恩的儿子是回鹘的叶护，所以女儿称为叶公主。
English: In that year, the khan was poisoned to death by Princess Ye, who was also the granddaughter of Wynn's servant, Gu Wynn. Wynn's son was Yegu of Uluwatu, so his daughter was called Princess Ye.

古文：可汗之弟乃自立。
现代文：可汗之弟于是自立。
English: Khan's brother then set up on his own.

古文：迦斯方攻吐蕃，其大臣率国人共杀篡者，以可汗幼子阿啜嗣。
现代文：迦斯正攻吐蕃，其大臣率国人合力杀死篡位者，拥戴可汗的幼子阿啜即位。
English: Qas was attacking Tochigi, and his ministers and people of the country joined forces to kill the usurper and enthrone the Khan's young son, Ahso.

古文：迦斯还，可汗等出劳，皆俯伏言废立状，惟大相生死之。
现代文：迦斯回来，可汗等人出而劳军，都俯伏报告废立之事，并说听凭大相处置。
English: When Qas came back, the khan and others went out to work, and they all prostrated themselves to report the abrogation of the constitution, and said that they would listen to the general's disposition.

古文：悉发郭锋所赐器币饷迦斯。
现代文：又将郭锋所赐的全部财物送给迦斯。
English: He also gave all the wealth that Guo Feng had given to Qas.

古文：可汗拜且泣曰： 今幸得继绝，仰食于父也。 
现代文：可汗边拜边泣说 ：今天有幸能继立，全仰仗于相父。 
English: Khan bowed and cried as he said, "Today I am fortunate to be able to succeed my father, and I am completely dependent on my father."

古文：迦斯以其柔屈，乃相持哭，遂臣事之，以器币悉给将士，无所私，其国遂安。
现代文：迦斯因阿啜谦恭柔顺，与可汗相扶而哭，自己称臣，将所得财物全部分给战士，自己一点不留，国内安定。
English: Because of Ah So's humility and meekness, Qas wept with the khan, declared himself a vassal, gave all his property to the soldiers, and did not keep anything for himself, and the country was stable.

古文：遣达北特勒梅录将军来告，且听命。
现代文：派达北特勒梅录将军来朝报告，且听命处理。
English: Send General North Tranmeiro to report to the DPRK and follow his orders.

古文：诏鸿胪少卿庾鋋册阿啜为奉诚可汗。
现代文：皇帝诏鸿胪少卿庾钅延持节册封阿啜为奉诚可汗。
English: Emperor Zhao Hongzhang and Shaoqing Yan Yan held a festival to confer the title of Bongcheng Khan on Ah So.

古文：俄以律支达干来告少宁国公主之丧。
现代文：不久，律支达干来报少宁国公主之丧。
English: Not long after, Luchida Gan came to report the death of the princess of Shoning.

古文：主，荣王女也。
现代文：公主，是荣王之女。
English: The princess is the daughter of King Rong.

古文：始宁国下嫁，又以媵之。
现代文：当初宁国公主下嫁，后又以荣王之女嫁作媵妾。
English: At first, Princess Ningkoku married down, and later married the daughter of King Rong as a concubine.

古文：宁国后归，因留回鹘中为可敦，号 少宁国 ，历配英武、英义二可汗。
现代文：宁国公主后来归国，荣王女就留在回鹘做了可敦，称为 少宁国 。历配英武、英义两可汗。
English: Ningguo princess later returned to China, Rongguo princess stayed in Urumqi and made Kedun, known as Shao Ningguo. Historically, it was associated with two khans, Yingwu and Yingyi.

古文：至天亲可汗时，始居外。
现代文：至天亲可汗时，才迁外居住。
English: It was not until the time of Khan that they moved out.

古文：其配英义生二子，皆为天亲所杀。
现代文：当她嫁英义时生二子，都被天亲杀害。
English: When she married Ying Yi, she gave birth to two sons, both of whom were killed by the Heavenly Parent.

古文：是岁，回鹘击吐蕃、葛禄于北庭，胜之，且献俘。
现代文：这一年，回鹘攻吐蕃、葛禄，胜，献俘入朝。第二年，派药罗葛炅来朝。
English: In the same year, Huizhou attacked and defeated Tuobao and Gulu, and sent captives to the imperial court. In the following year, it sent medicine Luo Gulu to the imperial court.

古文：明年，使药罗葛炅来朝，炅本唐人吕氏，为可汗养子，遂从可汗姓。
现代文：炅本来是吕姓唐人，是可汗的养子，所以随可汗姓。
English: He was originally a Tang man with the surname Lu and was the adopted son of a khan, so he took the khan's surname.

古文：帝以其用事，赐赍殊优，拜检校尚书右仆射。
现代文：皇帝因他在国内当权，故赠赐优厚，任命他为检校尚书右仆射。
English: Because he was in power in the country, the emperor gave him a generous gift and appointed him as the inspector of the school.

古文：十一年，可汗死，无子，国人立其相骨咄禄为可汗，以使者来，诏秘书监张荐持节册拜爱滕里逻羽录没蜜施合胡禄毘伽怀信可汗。
现代文：贞元十一年，可汗死，无子，国人立其相骨咄禄为可汗。派使者来朝，诏令秘书监张荐持节册封为爱滕里逻羽录没蜜施合胡禄毗伽怀信可汗。
English: In the eleventh year of the Zhengyuan era, the khan died without a son, and the people of the country set up his heir as the khan. They sent an envoy to the DPRK, and the secretary of the imperial edict recommended Zhang to hold the festival and be awarded the title of the khan.

古文：骨咄禄本夹跌氏，少孤，为大首领所养，辩敏材武，当天亲时数主兵，诸酋尊畏。
现代文：骨咄禄本是跌氏，少年丧父，被大首领收养，思维敏捷，辩才犀利，武功超群。天亲可汗时多次主管军事，众酋长都甚敬畏。
English: He was a descendant of the Udi clan, a boy who lost his father and was adopted by a great chieftain. He was a quick thinker, a sharp debater, and an outstanding martial artist. He was in charge of the military many times when he was a relative of the Khan, and all the chieftains were in awe of him.

古文：至是，以药罗葛氏世有功，不敢自名其族，而尽取可汗子孙内之朝廷。
现代文：至此，因药罗葛氏世代有功，不敢让自己族人扬名，而尽取可汗的子孙送到朝廷。
English: At this point, because of the achievements of the Luo Ge generation, he did not dare to make his people famous, and sent all the descendants of the khan to the imperial court.

古文：永贞元年，可汗死，诏鸿胪少卿孙杲临吊，册所嗣为滕里野合俱录毘伽可汗。
现代文：永贞元年，可汗死，诏令鸿胪少卿孙杲前往祭吊，册封即位者为滕里野合俱录毗伽可汗。
English: In the first year of Yongzheng, when the khan died, it was decreed that Hongwu Shaoqing Sun Yat-sen would go to the memorial service, and the enthroned person would be Tengrino Hekubo Viga Khan.

古文：元和初，再朝献，始以摩尼至。
现代文：元和初，再次来朝贡献，开始偕摩尼来。
English: At the end of the Yuan and the beginning of the Heian period, he once again came to the DPRK to make contributions and began to collect money.

古文：其法日晏食，饮水茹荤，屏湩酪，可汗常与共国者也。
现代文：摩尼的习惯每日只晚上吃一餐，饮水吃荤，但不吃乳酪。是可汗常与之商讨国事的人。
English: It was Mani's habit to eat only one meal a day in the evening, drinking water and eating lettuce, but not cheese. He was a person with whom Khan often discussed state affairs.

古文：摩尼至京师，岁往来西市，商贾颇与囊橐为奸。
现代文：摩尼到京师，每年往来于西市，商贾颇有用其为奸者。
English: Mani went to Beijing and came and went to Xi'an every year. Merchants used him as a spy.

古文：三年，来告咸安公主丧。
现代文：元和三年，来报咸安公主之丧。
English: Yuan and three years, to report the death of Princess Haman.

古文：主历四可汗，居回鹘凡二十一岁。
现代文：公主一生共历四位可汗，住在回鹘二十一年。
English: The princess lived through four khans in her lifetime and lived in Ulan Ude for 21 years.

古文：无几，可汗亦死，宪宗使宗正少卿李孝诚册拜爱登里罗汨蜜施合毘伽保义可汗。
现代文：不久，可汗也死。宪宗派宗正少卿李孝诚持节册封爱登里罗汨蜜施合毗伽保义可汗。
English: Not long after, the khan also died. Li Xiaocheng, the younger brother of Li Zongzheng, the leader of the Constitutionalist Sect, made a dedication ceremony for the khan.

古文：阅三岁，使者再朝，遣伊难珠再请昏，未报。
现代文：过了三年，回鹘使者第二次入朝，派伊难珠再次请婚，没有回答。
English: Three years later, when the emissary of the Hui Dynasty entered the imperial court for the second time, he once again proposed marriage to Yi Nanzhu, but she did not respond.

古文：可汗以三千骑至鹈泉，于是振武以兵屯黑山，治天德城备虏。
现代文：可汗以三千骑兵到辟鸟鹈泉，振武乃派兵屯守黑山，修治天德城备战。
English: The khan sent three thousand cavalrymen to the spring of Pidvogel, and Zhenwu sent soldiers to guard the Black Mountain, and to repair and prepare for battle the city of Tiantecheng.

古文：礼部尚书李绛奏言： 回鹘盛强，北边空虚，一为风尘，则弱卒非抗敌之夫，孤城为不守之地。
现代文：礼部尚书李绛上书说：回鹘盛而我北方边地空虚，一旦风尘起，弱兵不足以抗敌，孤城亦无以自保。
English: Li Xuan, the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said in his letter: "The Hui Dynasty is prosperous, while our northern border is empty. Once the wind and dust rise, the weak soldiers are not enough to resist the enemy, and the lonely city cannot protect itself.

古文：傥陛下怀此，增甲兵，饬城垒，中夏长策，生人大幸也。
现代文：如果陛下思虑及此，增甲兵，修城堡，是我中华的长久之计，是我生民的保安之策。
English: If His Majesty thinks about this, increasing the number of armored soldiers and repairing the castle is a long-term strategy for China and a security strategy for my people.

古文：臣观今日处置，未得其要。
现代文：臣以为今日的处置，未抓住关键。
English: I think today's decision misses the mark.

古文：夫边忧有五，请历言之：北狄贪没，唯利是视，比进马规直，再岁不至，岂厌缯帛利哉？
现代文：边忧有五：北狄贪婪，惟利是视。送马来规定价格后，第二年就不再来。难道是他们不喜欢绸帛之利吗？
English: There are five worries: the Northern Di is greedy, but profit-oriented. After sending horses to determine the price, they will not come the next year. Do they not like the profit of silk?

古文：殆欲风高马肥，而肆侵轶。
现代文：倘若掠夺边界州县，我方调兵遣将，常需一月以上。
English: If we plunder the border states and counties, it will often take more than a month for us to send troops.

古文：故外攘内备，必烦朝廷，一可忧；兵力未完，斥侯未明，戈甲未备，城池未固，饰天德则虏必疑，虚西城则碛道无倚，二可忧；夫城保要害，攻守险易，当谋之边将，今乃规河塞之外，裁庙堂之上，虏猝犯塞，应接失便，三可忧；自脩好以来，山川形胜，兵戍满虚，虏皆悉之，贼掠诸州，调发在旬朔外，其系累人畜在旦夕内，比王师至则虏已归，寇能久留，役亦转广，四可忧；北狄西戎，素相攻讨，故边无虞，今回鹘不市马，若与吐蕃结约解仇，则将臣闭壁惮战，边人拱手受祸，五可忧。
现代文：他们则役使人畜只在旦夕之间。待到王师赶到，虏贼已回去了。故而他们能久留，战役也渐扩广。此四可忧。北狄西戎，一向彼此攻讨，所以边界无事。现回鹘不售马，倘若与吐蕃消仇结约，我们的文臣武将只会闭关恐惧，边民束手遭蹂躏。此五可忧。
English: On the other hand, they only use people and animals between dusk and dawn. By the time Wang Shi arrived, the robbers had already gone back. Therefore, they could stay for a long time, and the battle gradually expanded. These four things are worrying. North Disi Rong has always attacked each other, so the border is fine. Now, horses are not for sale, but if we make a treaty with Tubo, our civil servants and generals will only be afraid, and the border people will be ravaged. These five things are worrying.

古文：又淮西吴少阳垂死，可乘其变，诸道兴发，役且十倍。
现代文：既安定了北方，可集中精力解决淮右之事，招抚残贼。此其二。北虏自恃是我亲戚，则西戎的怨恨愈深。
English: Now that the north has been stabilized, we can concentrate on resolving the Huaiyu issue and appease the remnants of the bandits. This is the second point. If the Hokuriku people consider themselves to be my relatives, the resentment of Xi Rong will deepen.

古文：臣谓宜听其婚，使守蕃礼，所谓三利也；和亲则烽燧不惊，城堞可治，盛兵以畜力，积粟以固军，一也；既无北顾忧，可南事淮右，申令于垂尽之寇，二也；北虏恃我戚，则西戎怨愈深，内不得宁，国家坐受其安，寇掠长息，三也。
现代文：他们内部不得安宁而国家则可坐享太平，边患不生。此其三。
English: They can't have peace within, but the country can enjoy peace without any problems. This is the third.

古文：今舍三利，取五忧，甚非计。
现代文：现舍三利而取五忧，不是上策。
English: It is not the best policy to give up the three benefits and take the five worries.

古文：或曰降主费多，臣谓不然。
现代文：有人说，公主下嫁所费甚多。臣以为不然。
English: Some people said that it was very expensive for a princess to get married. My father-in-law thought otherwise.

古文：我三分天下赋，以一事边。
现代文：若将天下所缴赋税三分之，用三分之一处理边事。
English: If you take one-third of the taxes paid by the world and use one-third to deal with side issues.

古文：今东南大县赋岁二十万缗，以一县赋为婚赀，非损寡得大乎？
现代文：今东南大县每年上缴二十万缗，以一县的赋税做婚资，岂不是损小费而得大利吗？
English: Nowadays, southeastern large counties pay 200,000 baht every year, and a county's tax is used as marriage capital. Isn't it a loss of tips and a gain of money?

古文：今惜婚费不与，假如王师北征，兵非三万、骑五千不能捍且驰也。
现代文：如今舍不得婚嫁费用而不同意，假若要王师北伐，非得三万步兵五千骑兵不能济事。
English: Now they are reluctant to agree to the marriage fee. If Wang Shi is to lead the Northern Expedition, 30,000 infantry and 5,000 cavalry cannot help.

古文：又如保十全之胜，一岁辄罢，其馈饷供儗，岂止一县赋哉？ 
现代文：又如要保十全之胜，一年才罢，所需馈饷供给，岂止一县之赋所能应付的呢？
English: And if it only takes a year to secure complete victory, will the necessary supplies be more than a county's resources can handle?

古文：帝不听。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：回鹘之请昏，有司度费当五百万，帝方内讨强节度，故遣宗正少卿李诚、太常博士殷侑往谕不可。
现代文：回鹘的请结婚姻，有司估算当需费用五百万。此刻皇帝正忙于讨伐强悍的节度，所以派宗正少卿李诚、太常博士殷侑前去告知不行。
English: A division of the court estimated the cost of the marriage to be 5 million yuan. At this time, the emperor was busy fighting against the strong government, so it was not possible to send Zongzheng Shaoqing Li Cheng and Taizang Dr. Yin Qi to inform him.

古文：穆宗立，回鹘又使合达干等来固求昏，许之。
现代文：穆宗立，回鹘又派合达干等人来坚持请求，乃同意。
English: Mu Zongli, Huizong, and sent Heda Gan and others to insist on the request, but agreed.

古文：俄而可汗死，使者临册所嗣为登啰羽录没蜜施句主毘伽崇德可汗。
现代文：不久，可汗死，使者去册封即位者为登口罗羽录没蜜施句主毗伽崇德可汗。
English: Not long after, the khan died, and the envoy went to record the enthronement of the ascendant, Vijay Chandra Khan.

古文：可汗已立，遣伊难珠、句录、都督思结等以叶护公主来逆女，部渠二千人，纳马二万、橐它千。
现代文：可汗即位后，派伊难珠、句录、都督思结等以叶护公主的名义来迎公主。部酋等二千人，献马二万，骆驼一千。
English: After the Khan ascended to the throne, he sent Iñárritu, Züñücü, and Tuduksüzü to welcome the princess in the name of Princess Ye. There were two thousand chiefs, twenty thousand horses, and one thousand camels.

古文：四夷之使中国，其众未尝多此。
现代文：四夷使臣来中国的，人数从来没有这么多过。
English: The number of foreign envoys to China has never been so large.

古文：诏许五百人至长安，余留太原。
现代文：诏许五百人到长安，其余皆留在太原。
English: About 500 people went to Chang'an, while the rest stayed in Taiyuan.

古文：诏以太和公主下降。
现代文：皇帝决定将太和公主下嫁。
English: The Emperor decided to marry off the Empress Dowager and the Princess.

古文：主，宪宗女也。
现代文：公主，是宪宗的女儿。
English: The princess is the daughter of Emperor Kenzo.

古文：帝为主建府，以左金吾卫大将军胡证、光禄卿李宪持节护送，太府卿李说为昏礼使，册拜主为仁孝端丽明智上寿可敦，告于庙，天子御通化门饯主，群臣班辞于道。
现代文：皇帝为公主建府，派左金吾卫大将军胡证、光禄卿李宪持节护送，太府卿李说为婚礼使，册封公主为仁孝端丽明智上寿可敦，祭告宗庙。天子到通化门饯别公主，群臣列班道旁辞别。
English: The emperor built a palace for the princess, sent Zuo King Wu Wei General Hu Sheng and Guanglu Emperor Li Xian to escort her on the day of the wedding, said that the Grand Empress Dowager Li was the wedding messenger, named the princess as Ren Xiao, Duan Li Zhi, Shang Shou Ke Tun, and dedicated to the ancestral temple. Tianzi went to Tonghua Gate to bid farewell to the princess, and the vassals lined up to bid farewell.

古文：公主出塞，距回鹘牙百里，可汗欲先与主由间道私见，胡证不可，虏人曰： 昔咸安公主行之。 
现代文：公主出塞后，距回鹘牙廷还有百里时，可汗想先与公主由小道私下见面。胡证不同意。回鹘人说： 以前咸安公主就是这样的。 
English: After the princess left the country, when she was still a hundred miles away from the court of Huizhou, Khan wanted to meet the princess privately by the side of the road. Hu Zhen did not agree. The Huizhou people said: This is what Princess Xian'an used to be like.

古文：证曰： 天子诏我送公主授可汗，今未见，不可先也。 
现代文：胡证说： 天子命我护送公主授于可汗。今未见可汗，公主不可以先走。 
English: Hu Xian said: "By God's will, I will escort the princess to Khan. If I don't see Khan now, the princess can't go first."

古文：乃止。
现代文：此要求作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：于是可汗升楼坐，东向，下设毳幔以居公主，请袭胡衣，以一姆侍出，西向拜已，退即次，被可敦服，绛通裾大襦，冠金冠，前后锐，复出拜已，乃升曲舆，九相分负，右旋于廷者九，降舆升楼，与可汗联坐，东向，群臣以次谒。
现代文：到牙廷后，可汗登楼坐，面向东，下设毡帐让公主坐，请公主穿胡服，由一妇女侍候出来，向西拜，再退入毡帐，穿可敦服：绛色的宽摆大袄，头戴金冠，前后均尖形，再出来拜可汗。然后坐进垂帘的密轿，由九位相合抬，在廷中右旋九次。出轿登楼，与可汗并排坐，面向东，群臣按次序谒见。
English: After arriving at the imperial court, the khan went upstairs to sit, facing east. A curtain was set up to seat the princess. The princess was asked to wear a gothic dress, and a woman waited for her to come out and bow to the west. She then went back into the curtain and wore a gothic dress: a dark blue wide-swinging coat, a gold crown on her head, pointed at the front and back, and then came out to bow to the khan. She then sat in a curtained limousine, carried by nine people in tandem, and turned right nine times in the middle of the court. She went out of the limousine and sat side by side with

古文：可敦亦自建牙，以二相出入帐中。
现代文：以后可敦亦自建牙帐，有二相出入照应。
English: Later, Kedon also built his own braces, and received a two-phase response.

古文：证等归，可敦大宴，悲啼眷慕。
现代文：胡证等人归唐前，可敦大设宴，恋恋不舍，涕泣不止。
English: Before Hu Zhen and others returned to Tang, they held a grand banquet, fell in love with each other, and cried a lot.

古文：可汗厚赠使者。
现代文：可汗厚赠使者。
English: The Khan generously sent an emissary.

古文：是时，裴度方伐幽、镇，回鹘使渠将李义节以兵三千佐天子平河北，议者惩艾前患，不听，兵已及丰州，使者厚赐乃去。
现代文：那时，裴度正讨伐幽、镇，回鹘派大将李义节带三千人马帮助天子平定河北，朝中有人担心又发生以前的麻烦，不要他们，但兵已到丰州，派使者厚赏后让他们回去。
English: At that time, Pei Du was battling Yu and Zhen, and Li Yijie, the general of the Uighur faction, brought three thousand horses to help Tianzi pacify Hebei. Some people in the court were worried that the previous troubles would happen again, and did not want them, but the soldiers had arrived in Fuzhou, and sent the envoys after a heavy reward to let them go back.

古文：敬宗即位之年，可汗死，其弟曷萨特勒立，遣使者册为爱登里罗汨没密施合毘伽昭礼可汗，赐币十二车。
现代文：敬宗即位那年，可汗死。其弟曷萨特勒继立。派使者册封为爱登里口罗汨没蜜施合毗伽昭礼可汗，赐币十二车。
English: In the year of Emperor Keizong's enthronement, the khan died and was succeeded by his younger brother, Satler. An envoy was sent to confer the title of Idenrikulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulokulok

古文：文宗初，又赐马直绢五十万。
现代文：文宗初年，又赐绢五十万做马价。
English: In Wenzong's first year, he was also given 500,000 to buy a horse.

古文：大和六年，可汗为其下所杀，从子胡特勒立，使者来告。
现代文：大和六年，可汗被下属所杀，侄子胡特勒立，派使者来报告。
English: In the sixth year of the Yamato era, the khan was killed by his subordinates, and his nephew, Huttler, sent an envoy to report it.

古文：明年，遣左骁卫将军唐弘实与嗣泽王溶持节册为爱登里罗汨没蜜施合句录毘伽彰信可汗。
现代文：第二年，派左骁卫将军唐弘实与嗣泽王溶持节去册封为爱登里口罗汨没蜜施合句禄毗伽彰信可汗。
English: In the second year, he sent General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards Tang Hongsheng and his heir, King Ze, to be canonized as the Khan of Aideng Liguo, Luoyang, Mingshi, Heking, Lukwiga, and Changxin.

古文：开成四年，其相掘罗勿作难，引沙陀共攻可汗，可汗自杀，国人立馺特勒为可汗。
现代文：开成四年，其相掘罗勿作难，引沙陀兵共攻可汗。可汗自杀，国人立稨马及特勒为可汗。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Kaifeng, Luo Bao, who wanted to make trouble, led the Sandu soldiers to attack the khan. The khan committed suicide, and the people of the country appointed Baima and Telle as khans.

古文：方岁饥，遂疫，又大雪，羊、马多死，未及命。
现代文：正遇歉年又疫病流行，且遇大雪，羊、马很多冻饿死，未能册封。
English: It was a bad year, plagues were rife and there was heavy snow. Many sheep and horses froze and starved to death and could not be registered.

古文：武宗即位，以嗣泽王溶临告，乃知其国乱。
现代文：武宗即位，派嗣泽王溶去告知，才知其国内有乱。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, he sent his heir, Ze Wangyong, to inform them, only to learn that there was unrest in the country.

古文：俄而渠长句录莫贺与黠戛斯合骑十万攻回鹘城，杀可汗，诛掘罗勿，焚其牙，诸部溃其相馺职与厖特勒十五部奔葛逻禄，残众入吐蕃、安西。
现代文：不久，渠长句录莫贺勾结邻部黠戛斯领十万兵马攻破回鹘城，杀死可汗及掘罗勿，焚毁其牙廷，各部溃散。其相马及职与特勒十五部奔葛逻禄，残众则入吐蕃、安西。
English: Soon, the canal chief Moga, in collusion with the neighboring  Kās, led a hundred thousand soldiers and horses to break through back to  city, kill the khan and dig Luo Bai, burn his palace, and the various departments were dispersed. His horse and servant and 15 departments ran to Ge Luo Luo, and the remnants went to Tubo and Anxi.

古文：于是，可汗牙部十三姓奉乌介特勒为可汗，南保错子山。
现代文：此时，可汗牙部十三姓奉乌介特勒为可汗，南走保守错子山。
English: At this time, the thirteenth khan of the Department of Jaws, surnamed Bongwu Jitler, became the khan and went south to the wrong mountain.

古文：黠戛斯已破回鹘，得太和公主；又自以李陵后，与唐同宗，故遣使者达干奉主来归。
现代文：黠戛斯已攻破回鹘，获太和公主；又自称是李陵后裔，与唐同宗，故派使者达干护送公主归来。
English: He claimed to be a descendant of Li Ling and a member of the same family as Tang, so he sent an envoy, Dagan, to escort the princess back.

古文：乌介怒，追击达干杀之，劫主南度碛，边人大恐。
现代文：乌介怒，追击达干并杀之，劫持公主南度大碛，边民大骇。
English: Wuxia was enraged, chased Dagan and killed him, kidnapped Princess Nandu, and the border people were terrified.

古文：进攻天德城，振武节度使刘沔屯云伽关拒却之。
现代文：乌介进攻天德城，振武节度使刘沔屯兵云伽关抵御，将他打退。
English: Usuke attacked Tiandecheng, and Zhenwu Jiedu made Liu Yutun's soldiers resist Yungaguan and beat him back.

古文：宰相李德裕建言： 回鹘曩有功，今饥且乱，可汗无归，不可击，宜遣使者赡安之。 
现代文：宰相李德裕建议说 ：回鹘过去有功，现在遭灾又罹乱，可汗无处可归，不可打，应派使者给财物招抚他。 
English: The prime minister, Li Deyu, suggested, "Ukran has been successful in the past, but is now suffering from disasters and turmoil. The khan has nowhere to return to, and must not be beaten. An envoy should be sent to entice him with wealth."

古文：帝用兵部郎中李拭行边刺状。
现代文：皇帝采用兵部郎中李拭的建议，从旁侦察其情伪。
English: The emperor took the advice of Li Wuchi, a member of the military department, and watched the match from the sidelines.

古文：于是，其相赤心与王子嗢没斯、特勒那颉啜将其部欲自归，而公主亦遣使者来言乌介已立，因请命。
现代文：此时，其相赤心与王子没斯、特勒那颉啜欲率部自来归附，公主也派使者来说乌介已立，请赐册命。
English: At this time, the prince and the princess were heartbroken, and the princess sent an envoy to say that Utsuke had already been established, so please give him the order.

古文：又大臣颉干伽思等表假振武居公主、可汗。
现代文：又有大臣颉干伽思等上表请借振武城让公主与可汗居住。
English: In addition, the above table was requested by ministers such as Gong Gang Gath to borrow Zhenwu City to let the princess and the khan live.

古文：帝乃诏右金吾卫大将军王会持节慰抚其众，输粮二万斛，不许借振武，令中人好语开谕；又诏使者持册往，潜稽其行，须变。
现代文：皇帝派右金吾卫大将军王会持节抚慰，运去粮食二万斛，然不允许借振武。令中人好言说明，又派使者前去册封，暗中侦察其行动，防变。
English: The emperor sent the grand general Wang Hui (王会) to keep the festival and send 20,000 mu of grain, but he was not allowed to borrow weapons. He ordered the people in the middle to explain in kind words, and sent an envoy to go and seal the book, secretly investigate his actions, and prevent changes.

古文：明年，回鹘奉主至漠南，入云、朔，剽横水，杀掠甚众，转侧天德、振武间，盗畜牧自如。
现代文：第二年，回鹘护送公主到漠南，入云州、朔州，剽夺横水，肆意屠杀掠夺，辗转在天德、振武之间，任意盗窃牛羊牲畜。
English: In the second year, Huizhou escorted the princess to the south of the desert, into Yunnan and Shuozhou, plundered Hengshui, wantonly slaughtered and plundered, wandered between Tiande and Zhenwu, and arbitrarily stole cattle and sheep.

古文：乃召诸道兵合讨。
现代文：于是召集诸道之兵合力征讨。
English: Therefore, soldiers from all walks of life were summoned to join forces to fight.

古文：嗢没斯以赤心奸桀，难得要领，即密约天德戍将田牟，诱赤心斩帐下。
现代文：没斯因为赤心奸狡桀骜，难以控制，乃密约天德戍将田牟，诱赤心到牙帐，设伏击杀。
English: There was no way to control him because he was so cunning and difficult to control, so he made a secret agreement with Tian Deguan to take Tamu, lure him into an ambush, and kill him.

古文：那颉啜收赤心众七千帐东走振武、大同，因室韦、黑沙南窥幽州，节度使张仲武破之，悉得其众。
现代文：那颉啜收集赤心遗众共七千帐东走振武、大同，联结室韦、黑沙南犯幽州。节度使张仲武击败他们，收缴全部人众。
English: At that time, he collected a total of seven thousand tents of the remaining people in Chixin and marched east to Zhenwu and Datong, and then linked up with Shumei and Heshan to invade Yuzhou. The festival made Zhang Zhongwu defeat them and seize all the people.

古文：那颉啜走，乌介执而杀之。
现代文：那颉啜逃走，乌介捉住并杀了他。
English: The baboon ran away, but Usuke caught it and killed it.

古文：然乌介兵尚强，号十万，驻牙大同北闾门山。
现代文：其时乌介兵尚强，号称十万。牙廷设在大同北闾门山。
English: At that time, the Wuxi Imperial Army was still strong, reputed to be 100,000 strong. The imperial court was located in Datong North Gate Mountain.

古文：而特勒厖俱遮、阿敦宁等凡四部，及将军曹磨你众三万，因仲武降，嗢没斯亦附使者送款。
现代文：特勒俱遮、阿敦宁等四部及将军曹磨你三万人马均降张仲武。没斯也派使者送降表。
English: The four divisions, including Telekubzha and Aduning, and the 30,000-strong army of General Cao Miao all surrendered to Zhang Zhongwu. Meng Si also sent an envoy to deliver the surrender list.

古文：帝欲使助可汗复国，而可汗已攻云州，刘沔与战，败绩。
现代文：皇帝准备要没斯帮助可汗复国，谁知可汗去攻云州，与刘沔战，大败。
English: The emperor was preparing to help the khan restore the country. Who knew that the khan would attack Yunnan, fight with Liu Bei, and suffer a crushing defeat.

古文：嗢没斯率三部及特勒、大酋二千骑诣振武降。
现代文：没斯率领三部及特勒、大酋等二千人到振武投降。
English: Meng Si led two thousand people to Zhenwu to surrender.

古文：诏拜嗢没斯为右金吾卫大将军，爵怀化郡王，以天德为归义军，即拜归义军使；阿历支宁边郡公，习勿啜昌化郡公，乌罗思宁朔郡公，并为冠军大将军、左威卫大将军；爱邪勿宁塞郡公，为右领军大将军。
现代文：诏任没斯为右金吾卫大将军，封爵怀化郡王，即以天德军为归义军，没斯任归义军使；封其弟阿历支为宁边郡公，习勿啜为昌化郡公，乌罗思为宁朔郡公，都任冠军大将军、左威卫大将军；封爱邪勿为宁塞郡公，任右领军大将军。
English: Zhao Ren Mingshi was appointed as the grand general of the Right Jinwuwei and was given the title of the king of Huaihua County, that is, he took the Tiande Army as the Guiwei Army and was appointed as the Guiwei Envoy; his brother Alizhi was appointed as the governor of Ningbo County, Xi Buxu was appointed as the governor of Changhua County, Urosi was appointed as the governor of Ningshuo County, and both were appointed as the grand general of Champion and the grand general of Zuo Weiwei; and his brother Ai Yibei was appointed as the governor of Ningsai County and was appointed as the grand general of

古文：加赐嗢没斯牙旗、豹尾、刀器诸物，给其属冠带。
现代文：加赐没斯牙旗、豹尾、刀器等物，赐属下冠带。
English: In addition, he bestowed upon his subordinates the Muxian banner, the leopard's tail, knives, and other items, as well as the crown belt.

古文：诏宰相德裕采秦、汉以来兴殊俗、忠效卓异者凡三十人，为《异域归忠传》宠赐之。
现代文：诏令宰相德裕采集秦、汉以来振兴边区，效忠朝廷成绩卓异的共三十人，编为《异域归忠传》赐以示宠。
English: He ordered the prime minister, Deyu, to collect a total of 30 people from the Qin and Han dynasties who had made outstanding achievements in revitalizing the border regions and were loyal to the imperial court, and compiled them into the "History of Loyalty in Foreign Regions" as a token of his favor.

古文：嗢没斯请留族太原，率昆弟为天子捍边，帝命刘沔为列舍云、朔间处其家。
现代文：没斯要求留族人在太原，自己则率兄弟为天子捍卫边陲。皇帝命刘沔在云、朔间建房舍安顿他们的家。
English: Meng Si asked the Rui people to stay in Taiyuan, while he led his brothers to defend the borderlands for the Son of Heaven. The emperor ordered Liu Bei to build houses between Yun and Shuo to settle their homes.

古文：可汗遣使者藉兵欲还故廷，且假天德城，帝不许。
现代文：可汗派使者借兵想回故廷，还要借天德城，皇帝不许。
English: The khan sent an envoy to borrow soldiers to return to the old court, but also to borrow the city of Tiande. The emperor would not allow it.

古文：可汗恚，进略大同川，转战攻云州，刺史婴壁不敢出。
现代文：可汗恼怒，侵略大同川，转战攻云州，云州刺史坚壁不敢出。
English: The khan was angry, invaded Datong River, and turned to attack Yunnan. Yunnan did not dare to attack the historical wall.

古文：诏益发诸镇兵屯太原以北。
现代文：皇帝令增发各镇的兵力屯守太原以北。
English: The emperor issued an order to increase the troop strength of each town to garrison the north of Taiyuan.

古文：嗢没斯等既朝，皆赐李氏，名嗢没斯曰思忠，阿历支曰思贞，习勿啜曰思义，乌罗思曰思礼；爱邪勿曰弘顺，即拜归义军副使。
现代文：没斯等人既入朝，都赐姓李，赐名没斯叫思忠，阿历史叫思贞，习勿啜叫思义，乌罗斯叫思礼，爱邪勿叫弘顺，任为归义军副使。
English: After Meng Si and others entered the imperial court, they were all given the surname Li, the given name Meng Si was called Sizhong, the history was called Sizhen, the custom was called Siyi, the Uros was called Sirei, the love of evil was called Hongshun, and they were appointed as deputy envoys of the Guiyi Army.

古文：于是，诏刘沔为回鹘南面招抚使，张仲武东面招抚使，思忠为河西党项都将、西南面招讨使，沔营雁门。
现代文：诏命刘沔任回鹘南面招抚使，张仲武任东面招抚使，思忠任河西党项都将、西南面招讨使，刘沔驻扎雁门。
English: The imperial edict ordered Liu Bei to be appointed as the envoy to the south of Hubei Province, Zhang Zhongwu as the envoy to the east of Hubei Province, Sizhong as the envoy to the west of Hebei Province, and Liu Bei as the envoy to the southwest of Hubei Province. Liu Bei was stationed in Ganmen.

古文：又诏银州刺史何清朝、蔚州刺史契苾通，以蕃、浑兵出振武，与沔、仲武合，稍逼回鹘。
现代文：又诏令银州刺史何清朝、蔚州刺史契絆通带领蕃、浑兵出振武，与刘沔、张仲武会合，渐渐逼近回鹘。
English: He also ordered Yinzhou's Zhang Shi He Qing Dynasty and Ulzhou's Zhang Shi Qi Kizundong to lead their troops out of Zhenwu, and to meet with Liu Zhen and Zhang Zhongwu, gradually approaching Yulin.

古文：思忠数深入谕降其下。
现代文：思忠多次深入劝降其下属。
English: Sizhong repeatedly urged his subordinates to surrender.

古文：沔分沙陀兵益思忠，河中军以骑五百益弘顺。
现代文：刘沔分沙陀兵增加思忠的力量，河中军也分五百骑兵给弘顺。
English: Liu Bei assigned five hundred horsemen to Hongshun, and Liu Bei assigned five hundred soldiers to Shatou to increase Shizhong's strength.

古文：沔进次云州，思忠屯保大栅率河中、陈许兵与回鹘战，败之。
现代文：刘沔进驻云州，思忠屯守保大栅，率领河中、陈许的兵与回鹘战，取胜。
English: Liu Bei was stationed in Yunnan, and Shizhong kept watch at Baodi, and led the soldiers of Hezhong and Chen Xu to fight against the Hui and win.

古文：明年，又为弘顺所破。
现代文：明年，回鹘又被弘顺击破。
English: The next year, Hui Yao was defeated by Hong Shun again.

古文：沔与天德行营副使石雄料劲骑及沙陀、契苾等杂虏，夜出云州，走马邑，抵安众塞，逢虏，与战破之。
现代文：刘沔与天德行营副使石雄挑选精骑以及沙陀、契絆等兵力夜里出云州奔马邑，抵达安众塞遇回鹘兵，交战得胜。
English: Liu Bei and the vice-commander of the Tiande Campaign, Shi Xiong, selected horsemen as well as soldiers such as Sadu and Qi Kizong to go out of Yunnan Benma Town at night, arrived at Anzhongsi, met the Hui soldiers, and won the battle.

古文：乌介方薄振武，雄驰入，夜穴垒出鏖兵，乌介惊，引去，雄追北至杀胡山，乌介被创走。
现代文：乌介正逼近振武，石雄驰入振武，夜里凿穿垒壁涌出悍军，乌介惊，引兵退走，石雄直追到杀胡山，乌介受伤而逃。
English: Wu Jie is approaching Zhenwu, Shi Xiong rushes into Zhenwu, at night he cuts through the foundation wall and a fierce army rushes out, Wu Jie is startled, the soldiers withdraw, Shi Xiong chases straight to kill Hu Shan, Wu Jie is injured and escapes.

古文：雄遇公主，奉主还，降特勒以下众数万，尽收辎帑及所赐诏书。
现代文：石雄遇见公主，护卫公主回朝，招降特勒以下几万人马，收缴全部辎重财物及过去所赐诏书。
English: Shi Xiong met the princess, escorted the princess back to the imperial court, recruited tens of thousands of men and women under Teller, and confiscated all the heavy property and the imperial edict that had been given in the past.

古文：可汗收所余往依黑车子，诏弘顺、清朝穷蹑。
现代文：可汗收集余众去依附黑车子。皇帝诏令弘顺、清朝穷追不舍。
English: The khan gathers the rest of the people to follow the black chariot. The emperor issues an edict to Hongshun, and the Qing dynasty relentlessly pursues him.

古文：弘顺厚啖黑车子以利，募杀乌介。
现代文：弘顺厚赂黑车子，召募杀乌介者。
English: Hong Shun Hou bribed the black car and called for the recruitment of the murderers.

古文：初，从可汗亡者既不能军，往往诣幽州降，留者皆饥寒痕夷，裁数千。
现代文：当初，随可汗而逃散的人成不了队伍，常常到幽州投降，留下的也都饥寒交迫，疾病缠身，只几千人。
English: At first, the people who fled with the khan could not form a team, they often surrendered to Yuzhou, and those who remained were also starving and cold, riddled with disease, only a few thousand.

古文：黑车子幸其残，即杀乌介。
现代文：黑车子趁他们残败，杀了乌介。
English: He took advantage of their defeat and killed Utsuke.

古文：其下又奉其弟遏捻特勒为可汗。
现代文：其下属又拥戴其弟遏捻特勒为可汗。
English: His subordinates, in turn, supported his younger brother, Uthman, as khan.

古文：帝诏德裕纪功铭石于幽州，以夸后世。
现代文：皇帝诏令德裕刻石纪功立于幽州，用以夸示后代。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered Deyu to carve stone carvings in Yuzhou to show off to future generations.

古文：思忠等以国亡，皆愿入朝，见听，遂罢归义军，擢思忠左监门卫上将军兼抚王傅，两禀其奉，赐第永乐坊，分其兵赐诸节度。
现代文：思忠等人因国已亡，皆愿入朝，获准。于是撤消归义军，提拔思忠为左监门卫上将军兼抚王傅，厚赐永乐坊做第宅，分其兵赐各节度。
English: Since Sizhong and the others had passed away, all of them were willing to enter the imperial court and were allowed to do so. Therefore, the order to return to the rebel army was revoked, Sizhong was promoted to the left supervisor, gatekeeper general and tutor of the king, Yonglefang was generously given the first house, and the soldiers were divided into sections.

古文：虏人惮隶食诸道，据滹沱河叛，刘沔坑杀三千人。
现代文：虏人害怕分属各道，乃据滹沱河叛变，刘沔坑杀三千人。
English: The Ruthenians were afraid of being divided into different sects, but according to Luo He's mutiny, Liu Qiankeng killed three thousand people.

古文：诏回鹘营功德使在二京者，悉冠带之。
现代文：诏令回鹘营功德使在二京者，全部入官。
English: According to the imperial edict, all meritorious envoys stationed in Beijing will be promoted to official posts.

古文：有司收摩尼书若象烧于道，产赀入之官。
现代文：有司搜集摩尼的书及像在大道烧毁，其资产没收入官。
English: A company that collected Mani's books and statues was burned in the street, and its assets were confiscated.

古文：遏捻可汗裒残部五千，仰食于奚大酋硕舍朗。
现代文：遏捻可汗收集残部得五千人，依靠奚大酋硕舍朗。
English: It took five thousand people to collect the remnants of the twisted khan, relying on the great chief Shao Shulang.

古文：大中初，仲武讨奚，破之，回鹘浸耗灭，所存名王贵臣五百余，转依室韦。
现代文：大中初年，张仲武讨伐奚，奚溃败。回鹘渐渐耗灭，所余名王贵臣五百多人转而依附室韦。
English: In the first year of junior high school, Zhang Zhongwu fought against the Wei, and the Wei was defeated. The Wei was gradually depleted, and the remaining more than five hundred eminent princes and dignitaries turned to rely on the Murowe.

古文：仲武谕令羁致可汗等，遏捻惧，挟妻葛禄、子特勒毒斯驰九骑夜委众西走，部人皆恸哭。
现代文：仲武又晓谕各处，令招留可汗等人，遏捻害怕，带了妻子葛禄、儿子特勒毒斯等夜里丢下众人西走，部人都痛哭。
English: Zhongwu also spoke everywhere, ordered the Khans and others to stay away, scared them away, took his wife Gulu, his son Trevose, and so on, and left everyone in the night to go west. His subordinates were crying bitterly.

古文：室韦七姓析回鹘隶之。
现代文：室韦七姓将回鹘分散隶属之。
English: The seven surnames of Muroto will be dispersed and subordinated to each other.

古文：黠戛斯怒，与其相阿播将兵七万击室韦，悉收回鹘还碛北。
现代文：黠戛斯怒，与其相阿播领兵七万攻室韦，收集全部回鹘人回到碛北。
English: Enraged by this, he led 70,000 troops to attack Shuxiuwei, gathering all the Uighur people to return to the north of Xinjiang.

古文：遗帐伏山林间，狙盗诸蕃自给，稍归厖特勒。
现代文：伏处山林间，以打击各蕃自给，渐归附特勒。
English: Hiding in the mountains and forests, in order to combat the self-sufficiency of each county, gradually attached to Teller.

古文：是时，特勒已自称可汗，居甘州，有碛西诸城。
现代文：这时，特勒已自称可汗，居处甘州，拥有碛西诸城。
English: At this time, Teller had already called himself Khan, lived in Ganzhou, and owned cities in western Shaanxi.

古文：宣宗务绥柔荒远，遣使者抵灵州省其酋长，回鹘因遣人随使者来京师，帝即册拜嗢禄登里逻汨没蜜施合俱录毘伽怀建可汗。
现代文：宣宗那时采取怀柔荒远的策略，派使者到灵州看望其酋长。回鹘就此派人随使者来京师，皇帝即册封特勒为禄登里逻汨没蜜施合俱录毗伽怀建可汗。
English: At that time, Xuanzong adopted the strategy of Huairou and the wilderness, and sent an envoy to Lingzhou to visit his chief. Huizhou then sent someone to Beijing with the envoy, and the emperor immediately made Futler the khan of Luodeng.

古文：后十余年，一再献方物。
现代文：以后十来年，一再来贡献。
English: For the next ten years, he continued to make contributions.

古文：懿宗时，大酋仆固俊自北庭击吐蕃，斩论尚热尽取西州、轮台等城，使达干米怀玉朝且献俘，因请命，诏可。
现代文：懿宗时，回鹘大酋仆固俊自北庭击吐蕃，杀论尚热，尽取西州、轮台等城，派达干米怀玉入朝，且献俘请册封。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xizong, Gu Jun, a retainer of the Grand Chief of the Hui Dynasty, struck a thunderbolt from the north courtyard. He was enthusiastic about killing, and made every effort to capture cities such as Xizhou and Luntai. He sent rice to the imperial court, and requested a seal for the captives.

古文：其后王室乱，贡会不常，史亡其传。
现代文：皇帝诏许。后来王室乱，入贡入朝均无定时，史失其传。
English: Emperor Zhaoxu. Later, the royal family was in turmoil, and there was no fixed time for the entry of tribute into the dynasty, and the history was lost.

古文：昭宗幸凤翔，灵州节度使韩逊表回鹘请率兵赴难，翰林学士韩偓曰： 虏为国仇旧矣。自会昌时伺边，羽翼未成，不得逞。
现代文：昭宗至凤翔，灵州节度使韩逊上表说回鹘请求领兵赴国难。翰林学士韩亻屋说： 虏人作为国仇已有日了，自会昌，时时窥视边界，但羽翼未成，故不能得逞。
English: From Zhaozong to Fengxiang, the Lingzhou Festival made Han Xun say on the table that it was difficult to reply to the request to lead the troops to the country. Han Yingya, a scholar of Hanlin, said: The Krup people have been a national enemy for a long time, and since Huichang, they have always peered at the border, but the wings have not been completed, so they cannot succeed.

古文：今乘我危以冀幸，水可开也。 
现代文：今乃欲乘我有难而图侥幸，不可同意。 
English: Now they want to take advantage of my difficulties and try to get lucky. I cannot agree to this.

古文：遂格不报。
现代文：于是搁下不答。
English: So he put it on the back burner.

古文：然其国卒不振，时时以玉、马与边州相市云。
现代文：后来其国终于未能振兴，只是时时以玉及马与边市贸易。
English: Later, his country finally failed to revitalize, only to trade with the border city with jade and horses.

古文：薛延陀者，先与薛种杂居，后灭延陀部有之，号薛延陀，姓一利咥氏。
现代文：薛延陀，先与薛族杂居，后灭了延陀部据有其地，号薛延陀，姓一利氏。
English: Xue Yanta, first mixed with the Xue people, after the extinction of the Yantu Department, according to its land, called Xue Yanta, surname Yili.

古文：在铁勒诸部最雄张，风俗大抵与突厥同。
现代文：在铁勒各部中是最雄健的一部，风俗一般与突厥同。
English: Of all the tribes of the Tille, they are the most robust, and their customs are generally the same as those of the Turks.

古文：西突厥处罗可汗之杀铁勒诸酋也，其下往往相率叛去，推契苾哥楞为易勿真莫贺可汗，据贪汗山，奉薛延陀乙失钵为野咥可汗，保燕末山。
现代文：西突厥处罗可汗杀了铁勒各酋后，其下属常常相率叛离而去，推举契絆哥楞为易勿真莫贺可汗，据贪汗山；奉薛延陀乙失钵为野可汗，占有燕末山。
English: After Luo Khan of the West Turkic Department killed the Tiler chieftains, his subordinates often rebelled and went away. They elected Kizunda Gohan as Yimuchan Moga Khan, according to the Mountain of Greed; Bong Xueyanta B lost as a wild khan, occupying the Mountain of the End of the World.

古文：而突厥射匮可汗复强，二部黜可汗号往臣之。
现代文：突厥射匮可汗再次振强，这二部就废了可汗的称号而去臣服。
English: With the Turkic khan once again ascendant, the two sides renounced the title of khan and submitted.

古文：回纥、拔野古、阿跌、同罗、仆骨、白在郁督军山者，东附始毕可汗；乙失钵在金山者，西役叶护可汗。
现代文：回纥、拔野古、阿跌、同罗、仆骨、白靅等部在郁督军山，就东附始毕可汗；乙失钵在金山，则西投叶护可汗。
English: Huiyan, Bajuanggu, Ahdui, Dongluo, Ducheng, Baiyun and other departments are in the Yudokun Mountain, and the East is attached to the First Khan; the Second is in Jinshan, and the West is attached to the Yegu Khan.

古文：贞观二年，叶护死，其国乱，乙失钵孙曰夷男，率部帐七万附颉利可汗。
现代文：贞观二年，叶护死，其国乱，乙失钵的孙子名夷男，率部帐七万去依附颉利可汗。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Ye Guo died, the country was in turmoil, and the grandson of Yi lost his fief, named Yi Man, led 70,000 people to attach himself to Geli Khan.

古文：后突厥衰，夷男反攻颉利，弱之，于是诸姓多叛颉利，归之者共推为主，夷男不敢当。
现代文：后来突厥衰微，夷男反攻颉利，使突厥更弱，于是各姓人很多叛离颉利归附夷男，共推他为君主，夷男不敢当。
English: Later, when the Turks were in decline, the barbarians counterattacked and made the Turks even weaker. As a result, many people of various surnames defected from the Turks and joined the barbarians, pushing him to be the monarch. The barbarians did not dare to do so.

古文：明年，太宗方图颉利，遣游击将军乔师望昽路赍诏书、鼓纛，册拜夷男为真珠毘伽可汗。
现代文：第二年，太宗正打算控制颉利，派游击将军乔师望走小道带了诏书、鼓纛前往册封夷男为真珠毗伽可汗。
English: In the second year, Emperor Taizong was planning to take control of Goryeo and sent the guerrilla general Qiao Shifang along the trail with an edict and a drum to go to the capital and crown the barbarian as the Pearl Vijayakhan.

古文：夷男已受命，遣使谢，归方物，乃树牙郁督军山，直京师西北六千里，东靺鞨，西叶护突厥，南沙碛，北俱伦水，地大众附，于是回纥等诸部莫不伏属。
现代文：夷男受命后派使者入朝致谢，贡献物产。于是在郁督军山树牙旗建牙廷。距京师西北六千里，其东为，西为叶护突厥，南是沙碛，北为俱伦水。地大众心附，于是回纥等部莫不臣服。
English: After he received the order, he sent an emissary to the imperial court to express his gratitude and contribute to the production of goods. As a result, the imperial court was built in Shanshu Dajian, Ikutoku's army, 6,000 miles northwest of Beijing. To the east is Yegu Turk, to the west is Yegu Turk, to the south is Shajing, and to the north is Qulunshui. The local people were impressed, so Huizhou and other provinces had no choice but to submit.

古文：其弟统特勒入朝，帝以精刀、宝鞭赐之曰： 下有大过者，以吾鞭鞭之。 
现代文：其弟统特勒入朝，皇帝赐以精刀、宝鞭，说： 下属如有大过错，就用此鞭鞭之。 
English: When his younger brother Tottori entered the imperial court, the emperor gave him a fine sword and a precious whip, saying, "If a subordinate commits a serious fault, he should be whipped with this whip."

古文：夷男以为宠。
现代文：夷男以此为宠。
English: This is the favorite of the barbarians.

古文：颉利可汗之灭，塞隧空荒，夷男率其部稍东，保都尉楗山独逻水之阴，远京师才三千里而赢，东室韦，西金山，南突厥，北瀚海，盖古匈奴地也。
现代文：颉利可汗亡后，边塞空荒，夷男率其部属东移，保据都尉楗山独逻水之南，距京师才三千多里，东接室韦，西连金山，南临突厥，北靠瀚海，乃古匈奴之地。
English: After the death of the Qili Khan, the border fortress was empty and barren, and the barbarians led by their subordinates moved to the east. According to the guarantee, the south of the capital, Shaoshan, was only 3,000 miles away from Beijing, east of Muxi, west of Jinshan, south of Turku, and north of the vast sea. It was the land of the ancient Xiongnu.

古文：胜兵二十万，以二子大度设、突利失分将之，号南、北部。
现代文：有雄兵二十万，派两个儿子大度设及突利失分别统率，称为南、北部。
English: There were 200,000 strong soldiers, and he sent his two sons to be generously placed and ruthlessly defeated respectively, known as the south and the north.

古文：七年间，使者八朝。
现代文：以后七年间，八次派使者入朝。
English: Over the next seven years, envoys were sent to the imperial court eight times.

古文：帝恐后强大为患，欲产其祸，乃下诏拜其二子皆为小可汗。
现代文：皇帝担心以后强大了成为祸患，欲消弭其祸，就下诏任其二子皆为小可汗。
English: The emperor was worried that he would become a scourge if he became powerful in the future, and in order to eliminate his scourge, he decreed that his two sons would both be minor khans.

古文：十五年，帝以李思摩为可汗，始度河，牙于漠南。
现代文：贞观十五年，皇帝册封李思摩为可汗，这才渡过黄河，设牙廷于漠南。
English: In the fifteenth year of Zhenguan, the emperor made Li Sima the khan. Only then did he cross the Yellow River and set up his court in the south of the desert.

古文：夷男恶之，未发。
现代文：夷男不乐意，但未有所动作。
English: The barbarian was not happy, but did not make any move.

古文：方帝幸洛阳，将遂封泰山，夷男与其下谋曰： 天子封泰山，万国皆助兵，悉会行在，边鄣空单，思摩可取也。 
现代文：皇帝驾临洛阳，将封泰山，夷男与其下属商议 ：天子封泰山，万国皆发兵助威，均在行宫会合，边障空虚，可乘机袭思摩。 
English: The emperor arrived in Luoyang to seal Mount Tai, and the eunuch discussed with his subordinates: the Son of Heaven sealed Mount Tai, all nations sent troops to help, and they all met at the palace, the border barriers were empty, and they could take the opportunity to attack Sima.

古文：乃使大度设勒兵二十万，南绝漠，壁白道川，率一兵得四马，击思摩。
现代文：于是派大度设选兵二十万南渡沙漠屯扎白道川，袭击思摩。思摩逃到朔州，告急，求援。
English: Therefore, he sent two hundred thousand generously selected soldiers to the Nandu desert to camp at Baidu River and attack Sima. Sima fled to Shuozhou, panicked and called for help.

古文：思摩走朔州，言状，且请师。于是诏营州都督张俭统所部与奚、、契丹乘其东，朔州道行军总管李勣众六万、骑三千，营朔州，灵州道行军总管李大亮众四万、骑五千，屯灵武，庆州道行军总管张士贵众万七千出云中，凉州道行军总管李袭誉经略之。
现代文：诏命营州都督张俭统率所属部并奚、靅、契丹的兵马压其东境，朔州道行军总管李责力率步兵六万骑兵三千驻扎朔州，灵州道行军总管李大亮率步兵四万骑兵五千屯守灵武，庆州道行军总管张士贵率一万七千人马从云中出兵，凉州道行军总管李袭誉总策划指挥。
English: Zhao ordered the governor of Yingzhou, Zhang Jianzhong, to lead his subordinate departments to march together with the soldiers and horses of the Qiang, Qiang and Khitan to suppress its eastern border. The general manager of the march of Shuozhou Road, Li Ruili, led 60,000 infantry and 3,000 cavalry stationed in Shuozhou, the general manager of the march of Lingzhou Road, Li Dayang, led 40,000 infantry and 5,000 cavalry to Lingwu, the general manager of the march of Qingzhou Road, Zhang Shigui, led 17,000 soldiers and horses to march from Yunzhong, and the general manager of the march of Liangzhou Road, Li Qiy

古文：帝敕诸将曰： 延陀度漠，马已疲。
现代文：皇帝命令各将 ：延陀渡沙漠，马已疲惫。
English: The emperor ordered his generals: "Let's cross the desert to Yantadu. The horses are tired."

古文：夫用兵者，见利疾进，不利亟去。
现代文：用兵之道，有利则速进，不利则急退。
English: The way of using soldiers, the advantage is to advance rapidly, and the disadvantage is to retreat rapidly.

古文：今虏不急击思摩，又不速还，势必败，卿等勿与战，须其归，可击也。 
现代文：现在虏人不急击思摩，又不速归，其势必败。你们不要交战，待其归，再出去。 
English: If the enemy does not attack Sima soon and does not return quickly, he is bound to be defeated. Don't fight, wait for him to return and then go out.

古文：既而延陀使者来，求与突厥平。
现代文：后来，延陀的使者来，求与突厥言和。
English: Later, Endo's envoys came to sue for peace with the Turks.

古文：帝曰： 我约漠以北，延陀制之，漠以南，突厥专之，有辄相掠，诛不赦。
现代文：皇帝说： 我曾与你们约定：大漠以北，延陀统领，大漠以南，突厥专管。如有相互攻掠的，诛杀不赦。
English: The emperor said, "I had an agreement with you: the north of the desert would be ruled by Yenda, and the south of the desert would be ruled by the Turks. If there were any invaders, there would be no mercy.

古文：延陀父事我而首违诏，得非乱邪？
现代文：延陀奉我为父而首先违诏，这不是谋乱吗？
English: Isn't it plotting a riot when he first violated the edict by calling me his father?

古文：而曰与突厥和，乃故约也，尚何请？ 
现代文：至于与突厥和好，本是原约内容，何需请求？ 
English: As for the reconciliation with the Turks, it is part of the original agreement, so why the request?

古文：不报。
现代文：不回答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：大度设次长城，思摩已南走，大度设度不可得，乃遣人乘长城骂之。
现代文：大度设到达长城，思摩已南逃。大度设估计捉不住他，乃派人登长城诟骂。
English: Greatly expecting to reach the Great Wall, Sima had fled south. Greatly expecting that he could not be caught, he sent people to climb the Great Wall to abuse him.

古文：适会勣兵至，行盍属天，遽率众走赤柯，度青山，然道回远，勣选敢死士与突骑径腊河，趣白道，及大度设，尾之不置。
现代文：正碰上李责力兵到，尘埃蔽天。大度设迅速率众北逃赤柯，渡青山，然而道路遥远。李责力选敢死队与突厥轻骑越腊河，赶向白道，穷追大度设不舍。
English: When Li Ruili's soldiers arrived, the dust covered the sky. Li Ruili generously offered to lead the North Korean people to escape from Chaka and cross the Qinghai Mountains, but the road was far away. Li Ruili selected a death squad and the Turk lightly rode across the Lahe River and rushed to the White Road. He was not willing to give up the pursuit.

古文：大度设顾不脱，度诺真水，阵以待。
现代文：大度设眼见不得脱身，渡过诺真水，严阵以待。
English: He tried his best, but he couldn't get away. He crossed the Nuo Zhen water and waited in a tight line.

古文：先是，延陀击沙钵罗及阿史那社尔，皆以徒战胜，至是却骑不用，率五人为伍，一执马，四前斗，令曰： 胜则骑而逐，负者死，没其家以偿战士。 
现代文：以前，延陀击沙钵罗及阿史那社，都以步兵胜，此时也不用骑兵。编五人为伍，一人牵马，四人前斗。命令： 战胜就骑马追赶，败则死，抄没其家以补偿战士。 
English: In the past, when Yentao defeated Sasaro and Ashina, he used infantry to win, but this time he did not use cavalry. He had five men, one of whom led the horse, and four of whom fought in front. The order: If you win, you will ride on horseback to catch up, if you lose, you will die, and your house will be confiscated to compensate the soldiers.

古文：及战，突厥兵迮，延陀腾逐，勣救之，延陀纵射，马辄死。
现代文：及至交战，突厥兵仓促不能胜，延陀飞马追赶，李责力来救。延陀万箭齐发，马多射死。
English: At the time of the battle, the Turkish soldiers were in a hurry and could not win. Yondu's flying horse chased them, and Li Liuli came to the rescue. Yondu fired thousands of arrows, and shot Mado to death.

古文：勣乃以步士百人为队，捣其罅，虏溃，部将薛万彻率劲骑先收执马者，故延陀不能去，斩首数千级，获马万五千。
现代文：李责力乃令步兵一百人为一队，直捣其虚空处，延陀溃败。部将薛万撤率精骑先攻取牵马者，延陀失马不能逃，被杀几千人马，被获一万五千。
English: Li Li Li Li ordered a hundred infantrymen to form a team, and they went straight to the empty place, and Yanta was defeated. The commander Xue Wan led the cavalry to capture the first horse, and Yanta could not escape, several thousand horses were killed, and fifteen thousand were captured.

古文：大度设亡去，万彻追弗及。
现代文：大度设逃走，薛万撤追而不及。
English: He tried his best to run away, but Xue Wan chased after him and could not catch him.

古文：残卒奔漠北，会雪甚，众皲踣死者十八。
现代文：延陀散兵奔漠北，正遇天大雪，冻死者约十分之八。
English: In the north of the desert, the isolated soldiers of Yenda were experiencing heavy snowfall, and about eight out of ten died from the cold.

古文：始延陀能以术禬神致雪，冀困勣师，及是反自敝云。
现代文：当初延陀能以巫术祭神招雪来，希望用以困住李责力的队伍，至此反而困住了自己。
English: At first, Endo was able to attract snow with the help of a witchcraft deity, hoping to use it to trap Li Youli's team, but instead trapped himself.

古文：勣还入定襄，天子遣使者赍玺书劳问，赏功恤死。延陀之使留待命者，帝悉还之，曰： 归语尔可汗，尔自负其强，以突厥为弱，厚诛敛之，又取首领以为质，且我为天下主，渠尝赋发于尔邪？
现代文：李责力班师入定襄，天子派使者带了玺书来慰劳，奖有功、吊死者，让全部留京师待命的延陀使者回去，说： 回去告诉你们可汗；你们自负强大，认为突厥弱小，多方责求，又取其首领为人质。我是天下的主宰，他曾经加兵于你吗？
English: Li Li Li Li ordered the division to enter Dingxiang, and the Son of Heaven sent an emissary with a copy of the Book of the Dead to offer consolation, reward the meritorious, and hang the dead. He ordered all the emissaries from Yan'ta, who had remained in Beijing on standby, to return, saying: "Go back and tell the khans; you are conceited and powerful, you think the Turks are weak, you have made many demands, and you have taken their leader hostage. I am the ruler of the world. Has he ever sent additional troops to you?

古文：后有利害，当谨思，毋遽也。 
现代文：以后举措利害，该多方思考，不可草率。 
English: Future measures are at stake, this multi-party thinking should not be hasty.

古文：延陀乃遣使谢罪，又遣其仲父沙钵罗献马三千，因请昏。
现代文：延陀乃派使者来谢罪，又派叔父沙钵罗献马三千，同时求婚。
English: Yentana sent an emissary to apologize, and also sent his uncle Saraswati to offer three thousand horses and propose marriage.

古文：帝曰： 延陀本一俟斤，我则立之，度其力孰与颉利比，而敢桡边乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 延陀本来是一个俟斤，是我扶立了他，估计他的力量与颉利相等，而竟然敢在边陲生事。 
English: The emperor said, "Yan Tuo was originally a weakling. I supported him and estimated his strength to be equal to that of Xun Li, but he dared to stir up trouble on the border.

古文：不许昏。
现代文：不许婚。
English: Not allowed to marry.

古文：明年，以使来益献马、牛、羊、橐它，固求昏。
现代文：第二年，延陀派使者加献马、牛、羊、骆驼，再三求婚。
English: In the second year, Enta sent an envoy to offer horses, cattle, sheep, and camels, and repeatedly proposed marriage.

古文：帝与大臣计曰： 延陀屈强，朕策顾有二：选士十万击之，使无遗种，百年计也；绝昏羁縻，使无边忧，三十年计也。
现代文：皇帝与大臣计议： 延陀倔犟，我有两个办法：一，精选十万人马猛击之，斩草又除根，这是百年之计；二，拒绝婚姻，但笼络敷衍，要他们不再犯边，这是三十年之计。
English: The emperor and the minister deliberated: Yan Dahua, I have two ways: First, select one hundred thousand people to slam it, cut the grass and uproot it, this is a hundred-year plan; second, refuse marriage, but coax them to stop trespassing, this is a thirty-year plan.

古文：然则孰利？ 
现代文：哪种办法好呢？ 
English: Which approach is better?

古文：房玄龄曰： 今大乱余氓，痍破未完，战虽胜，犹危道也。
现代文：房玄龄说： 现在大乱之后的余民，战争的创伤还未痊愈，与延陀作战虽能取胜，然是一条险路。
English: Fang Xuanling said: Now the remaining people after the turmoil, the trauma of the war has not yet healed, and although the battle with Yandu can be won, it is a dangerous road.

古文：不如和亲。 
现代文：不如和亲。 
English: I'd rather be with my family.

古文：帝曰： 善。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：说得对。 
English: Mutei said, "That's well said."

古文：许以新兴公主下嫁，召突利失大享，群臣侍，陈宝器，奏《庆善》、《破阵》盛乐及十部伎，突利失顿首上千万岁寿。
现代文：允许将新兴公主下嫁。召来突利失大亨，群臣列侍，陈列宝器，奏《庆善》、《破阵》等盛乐，并演十部乐舞。突利失叩头祝寿。
English: The newly-born princess was allowed to be married off. Turkish tycoons were summoned, and a group of courtiers waited on them, displayed their treasures, played "Glorious Goodness," "Breaking the Ranks" and other music, and performed ten pieces of music and dance. The Turks bowed their heads in celebration.

古文：诏夷男亲迎，帝将幸灵州以成昏事。
现代文：诏嘱夷男亲迎，皇帝将去灵州完成其婚事。
English: The emperor will go to Lingzhou to consummate his marriage.

古文：夷男大喜，诧曰： 我铁勒部人耳，上以我为可汗，公主以女我，乘舆为我幸边，谁与我荣？ 
现代文：夷男大喜，但又十分诧异 ：我本是铁勒部的小帅。皇帝封我为可汗，又把公主嫁给我，还为我特意到边地来，谁有我这样的荣幸？ 
English: The barbarian was overjoyed, but also very surprised: I used to be a petty officer in the tiller department. The emperor made me khan, married the princess to me, and came to the edge of the land especially for me. Who has such an honor?

古文：乃搜赋诸下羊马为赀。
现代文：于是广搜下属的羊、马为聘礼。
English: As a result, the subordinates' sheep and horses were widely collected as a betrothal gift.

古文：或说夷男曰： 可汗与唐，皆一国主，奈何往朝？
现代文：有人对夷男说 ：可汗与唐，都是一国的君主，为什么要去朝见他。
English: Someone said to the barbarian: "Khan and Tang are both monarchs of the same country, why should I go to see him?"

古文：有如见款，尚可悔？ 
现代文：如果被迫降，还可追悔吗？ 
English: If you are forced to surrender, can you still regret it?

古文：夷男曰： 不然。
现代文：夷男说 ：你说的不对。
English: The barbarian said, "You're wrong.

古文：吾闻唐天子有德，四方共臣之，藉独留我，碛北亦须有主，然舍我而求它，非计也。 
现代文：我听说唐天子有德，四方之人均臣服，为什么我不这样？碛北也需要有主，舍我而找别人，不是办法。 
English: I've heard that Tang Tianzi is virtuous, and that everyone in the four directions is submissive. Why shouldn't I be like that? North Gansu also needs to have a master, and there's no way to find someone else besides me.

古文：下乃不敢言。
现代文：手下人这才不敢再说什么。
English: That's why his subordinates don't dare to say anything.

古文：时帝诏有司受所献，延陀无府库，调敛于下，不亟集，又度碛，水草乏，马羊多死，纳贡后期，帝亦止行。
现代文：当时皇帝诏令有司接受夷男所献。延陀没有府库，临时向下征调，不能很快集中，又要渡过大碛，缺乏水草，马、羊死了好多。纳贡不能如期，皇帝也停止灵州之行。
English: At that time, the emperor issued a decree to have a division accept the offering of the barbarians. There was no government treasury in Yandu, and it was temporarily transferred downwards. It could not be concentrated quickly, and it had to pass through Dalat. There was a lack of water and grass, and many horses and sheep died. The tribute could not be paid as scheduled, and the emperor also stopped his trip to Lingzhou.

古文：畜口耗死仅半，议者谓： 夷狄尝为中国私，今礼不具而与昏，恐后有轻中国心。 
现代文：牲口耗死了一半，有人议论说： 夷狄曾是中国的属下，如今礼不备而与之婚嫁，恐怕以后会生轻慢中国之心。 
English: Half of the cattle died, and some people said: "Yidi was once a subordinate of China, and now she married him without proper etiquette. I'm afraid she will make China's heart proud in the future."

古文：乃下诏绝昏，谢其使。
现代文：于是下诏拒绝婚姻，辞送使者。
English: So the emperor refused the marriage and dismissed the envoy.

古文：或曰： 既许之，信不可失。 
现代文：有人说： 既然允许了，就不可失信。 
English: Some people say: Since it is permitted, it must not be discredited.

古文：帝曰： 公等计非也。
现代文：皇帝说 ：你等的看法错了。
English: The emperor said, "You are wrong.

古文：昔汉匈奴强，中国不抗，故饰子女嫁单于。
现代文：过去汉时匈奴强，中国不能敌，所以遣女子嫁单于。
English: In the past, when the Han Dynasty ruled, the Xiongnu were strong, and China was no match for them, so they sent their women to marry foreigners.

古文：今北狄弱，我能制之，而延陀方谨事我者，顾新立，倚我以服众。
现代文：今北狄弱，我能控制。延陀现今如此恭敬事我，只是因为他新立，倚仗我来服众。
English: I can control him now that he is weak, and it is only because he is newly-established and relies on me to serve the public that he is so respectful to me now.

古文：彼同罗、仆骨力足制延陀而不发，惧我也。
现代文：那些同罗、仆骨的力量足以对付延陀而无动作，那是因为怕我。
English: Those dongra and henchmen have enough strength to deal with Yanduo, but they do nothing, because they are afraid of me.

古文：我又妻之，固中国婿，名重而援坚，诸部将归之，戎狄野心，能自立则叛矣。
现代文：我又把公主嫁给他，他就成了中国的女婿，名分重、靠山强，其他各部将会依附。戎狄包藏野心，一旦能自立就会叛变。
English: I will marry the princess to him, and he will become the son-in-law of China. He will have a high reputation and strong support, and other ministries will be attached to him. Eun Di is full of ambition and will rebel as soon as he can stand on his own.

古文：今绝昏，使诸姓闻之，将争击延陀，亡可待也。 
现代文：如今我绝婚，其他各姓听说后将会争着去袭击延陀，延陀之亡就指日可待了。 
English: Now that I am no longer married, all the other clans will fight to attack Yondu when they hear about it. Yondu's death is just around the corner.

古文：李思摩果侵掠之。
现代文：李思摩果然去侵掠延陀。
English: Li Sima went to invade and plunder Yenda.

古文：延陀遣突利失寇定襄，诏李勣逐出塞。
现代文：延陀派突利失入侵定襄，诏令李责力赶他们出塞。
English: Enda sent the Turks to invade Dingxiang, but they lost, so he ordered Li to drive them out of the fortress.

古文：俄遣使请率师助伐高丽，以刺帝意，帝引使者谓曰： 归语尔可汗，我父子东征，能寇边者可即来。 
现代文：后来，又派使者来请允许率兵助伐高丽，刺探皇帝的意思。皇帝对使者说： 回去对你们可汗说，我父子去东征，想来侵扰边域的只管来。 
English: Later, an envoy was sent to ask permission to lead an army to aid in the conquest of Korea and to spy on the emperor's intentions. The emperor said to the envoy: "Go back and tell you khans that my father and son are going to the East, and if you want to invade the border areas, just come."

古文：夷男沮缩，不敢谋，以使谢，固请助军。
现代文：夷男知后十分懊丧，不敢有所动作，派使者来谢罪，坚持要求助战。
English: After learning of this, the barbarians were very disappointed and did not dare to take any action. They sent an envoy to apologize and insisted on assistance in the war.

古文：帝嘉答。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: The emperor agreed.

古文：高丽莫离支令靺鞨以厚利啖夷男，欲与连和，夷男气素索，不发，亦会病死，帝为祭于行。
现代文：高丽莫离支让厚赂夷男，欲和他联手。夷男胆怯，不敢发兵，亦正病死，皇帝为之祭奠。
English: Goryeo wanted to join forces with the barbarian, who was cowardly and did not dare to send troops. He was also dying of illness, and the emperor paid homage to him.

古文：始延陀请以庶子曳莽为突利失可汗，统东方；嫡子拔灼为肆叶护可汗，统西方。
现代文：当初，延陀要求以庶子曳莽为突利失可汗，统领东方；嫡子拔灼为肆叶护可汗，统领西方。
English: At first, Enda requested that his illegitimate son, Hikimaru, become Turibisu Khan and rule the East, and that his legitimate son, Bakkai, become Wabi-Sabi Khan and rule the West.

古文：白道之役，曳莽实为之谋，国人多怨。
现代文：白道之战是曳莽的主意，国人多埋怨。
English: The Battle of the White Road is a reckless idea, and many Chinese people complain about it.

古文：及会葬，曳莽亟还部，拔灼分兵袭杀之，自立为颉利俱利失薛沙多弥可汗。
现代文：及至夷男入葬，曳莽急急回部，拔灼分兵击杀了他，自立为颉利俱利失薛沙多弥可汗。
English: And when the barbarian was buried, he hurried back to the emergency department, pulled out the fire brigade and killed him, and became a self-supporting member of the Shaoli Club.

古文：方是时，王师犹在辽，因即寇边。
现代文：当时，王师尚在辽，拔灼就此侵扰边境。
English: At that time, Wang Shishi was still in Liao, and Pluck and Burn invaded the border.

古文：帝遣江夏王道宗屯朔州，代州都督薛万彻与左骁卫大将军阿史那社尔屯胜州，左武候大将军萨孤吴仁屯灵州，执失思力与突厥掎角塞下，虏知有备，乃去。
现代文：皇帝派江夏王道宗屯驻朔州，代州都督薛万撤与左骁卫大将军阿史那社屯驻胜州，左武侯大将军萨孤吴仁屯灵州，执失思力与突厥在塞下成掎角。拔灼知有备，撤走。
English: The emperor sent Jiangxia King Daozong to be stationed in Shuozhou, the governor of Daizhou, Xue Wanqiu, to be stationed in Shengzhou with Zuo Wei General Ashina She, and Zuo Wuhou General Sakuo Wu Ren to be stationed in Lingzhou. Perseverance and the Turks were at loggerheads. They were well prepared and withdrew.

古文：拔灼性卞克，多杀父时贵臣而任所亲昵，国人不安，而阿波设与唐使者遇于靺鞨东鄙，小战不利，还怖国人曰： 唐兵至矣！ 
现代文：拔灼生性急躁忌刻，杀了很多父亲时的贵臣而任用亲信，国人不安。阿波设与唐使者在东交相遇，小战不利，回国吓唬国人说 ：唐兵来了。 
English: He killed many of his father's dignitaries and appointed his cronies, which made the Chinese people uneasy. Aposhet and the Tang envoy met in the East, the skirmish was unfavorable, and he returned home to scare the Chinese people saying: The Tang soldiers are coming.

古文：众大扰，诸部遂溃。
现代文：众人惊恐不安，各部均溃散。
English: Everyone was alarmed and uneasy, and all the ministries broke up.

古文：多弥可汗以十余骑遁去，依阿史那时健，俄为回纥所杀，尽屠其宗，众五六万奔西域，立真珠毘伽可汗昆弟子咄摩支，号伊特勿失可汗，遣使者上言： 愿保郁督军山。 
现代文：多弥可汗只带了十多骑逃走，依附阿史那时健，不久被回纥所杀，其宗族尽遭屠戮，手下五六万人都逃奔西域，扶立真珠毗伽可汗兄弟之子咄摩支，称伊特勿失可汗。派使者向皇帝报告 ：希望能保郁督军山而守之。 
English: Dami Khan fled with only a dozen or so horsemen, clinging to Ashti Thakken, and was soon killed by Hui Xuan. His clan was slaughtered, and his 560,000 men fled to the Western Regions. The son of Dami Khan's brother, Gu Mo, called Ittabuchi Khan. He sent an envoy to report to the emperor: I hope you can keep the army and keep it.

古文：常诏兵部尚书崔敦礼与李勣尉安之，俾定其国。
现代文：皇帝诏令兵部尚书崔敦礼与李责力去安抚，使能安定其国。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered the generals Shangshu Cui Dunli and Li Rongli to pacify and stabilize the country.

古文：铁勒诸部素伏延陀，而咄摩支虽衰孑，尚臣畏之。
现代文：铁勒各部过去一向臣伏延陀，咄摩支虽弱且孤，依旧畏惧臣服。
English: In the past, all branches of the Tiele had always been vassals of the Fuyenda. Although the Guma branch was weak and isolated, it was still afraid of submission.

古文：帝恐卒为患，诏勣等曰： 降则抚之，叛则击之。 
现代文：皇帝担心终将为患，诏令李责力 ：延陀若降，就安抚他们；若叛逆，就狠击之。 
English: The emperor was worried that there would be trouble in the end, and ordered Li Zhili: If Yanda fell, he would pacify them; if they rebelled, he would strike them down.

古文：勣至，咄摩支大骇，阴欲拒战，外好言乞降。
现代文：李责力到，咄摩支大骇。私心想拒战，嘴上却好言乞降。
English: Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li Li.

古文：勣知之，纵兵击，斩五千余级，系老孺三万，遂灭其国。
现代文：到郁督军山，见有两个人，说： 我是神，薛延陀将要灭亡了。 
English: When he arrived at Ikutoku's army hill, he saw two men and said, "I am a god. Xueyanta is about to perish."

古文：咄摩支闻天子使者萧嗣业在回纥，身诣嗣业丐降，入朝，拜右武卫将军，赐田宅。初，延陀将灭，有丐食于其部者，延客帐中，妻视客人而狼首，主不觉，客已食，妻语部人共追之，至郁督军山，见二人焉，曰： 我神也，薛延陀且灭。 追者惧，却走，遂失之。
现代文：追的人害怕，退走，就不见了那二人。
English: The pursuers were afraid, and fled; and they were not found.

古文：至是果败此山下。
现代文：这时，果然败在此山下。
English: At this time, we were defeated at the foot of this mountain.

古文：帝以延陀灭，欲并契苾等降之，复遣道宗率阿史那社尔等分部穷讨，帝幸灵州，节度诸将。
现代文：皇帝因延陀已灭，想就此降服契絆等，又派道宗率领阿史那社等人分部穷打。皇帝到达灵州指挥各将。
English: The emperor, because of the death of Yantra, wanted to surrender the bond of obedience and so on, and sent Daozong to lead the Ashina Society and other branches to fight. The emperor arrived in Lingzhou to command the generals.

古文：于是铁勒十一部皆归命天子，请吏内属。
现代文：于是铁勒十一部全臣服于天子。
English: As a result, all of the eleven tribes of the Tyreites submitted to the Son of God.

古文：道宗等径碛击延陀余众阿波达干，斩首千余级，逐北二百里。
现代文：道宗等经大碛追击延陀余众阿波达干，杀千余人，追赶二百里。
English: Daozong et al. pursued the remnants of the people of Abodagan in Yenda via the Great Wall, killed more than a thousand people, and chased them for two hundred miles.

古文：万彻抵北道，谕降回纥诸酋。
现代文：薛万撤到达北道，晓谕回纥诸酋降伏。
English: Xue Wanju arrived in the North Road and ordered all the chiefs to surrender.

古文：虏所遣使踵及帝行在，凡数千人，上言： 天至尊为可汗，世世以奴事，死不恨。 
现代文：虏人所派的使者跟踪到行宫，共有几千人。上奏说： 天至尊为可汗，世世代代愿为奴仆，死而无憾。 
English: The emissaries sent by the Khut people followed him to the palace, a total of several thousand people. The preamble said: Heaven's highest honor is the khan, generations of generations are willing to be slaves, and there is no regret in death.

古文：帝剖其地为州县，北荒遂平。
现代文：皇帝剖析其地置州县，北方遂平定。
English: The emperor dissected his land into prefectures, and the north was pacified.

古文：诸姓有来朝者，帝劳曰： 尔来，若鼠得穴、鱼得泉，我为尔深广之。 
现代文：诸姓中有入朝的，皇帝都慰劳说： 你们来，就像老鼠有了洞，鱼得到泉水，我替你们使洞深，使泉广。 
English: The emperor consoled all those who had entered the imperial court, saying: "Come, you are like mice with a hole and fish with a spring. I will make the hole deeper and the spring wider for you."

古文：又曰： 我在，天下四夷有不安安之，不乐乐之，如骥尾受苍蝇，可使日千里也。 
现代文：又说： 我在，天下四夷不安定的，我将使其安定；有不乐业的，我将使其乐业。就像苍蝇附在骥尾上，也将日行千里。 
English: He also said, "I am the one who will make the four corners of the earth stable. If there is any unpleasant work, I will make it enjoyable. Just like a fly attaches to the appendix, it will also travel thousands of miles a day.

古文：于是告功太庙，赐民三日酺。
现代文：于是到太庙告功，赐宴百姓三天。
English: So he went to the Imperial Temple to report his achievement and gave a banquet to the people for three days.

古文：后三年，余部叛，以右领军大将军执失思力讨平之。
现代文：三年后，延陀余部叛变，皇帝派右领军大将军执失思力讨平。
English: Three years later, the rest of Yenda rebelled, and the emperor sent the right leading general to settle the matter.

古文：至永徽时，延陀部亡散者悉还，高宗为置嵠弹州处安之。
现代文：到永徽时，延陀部逃散的全部都回来了。高宗设山奚弹州安顿他们。
English: By the time they arrived in Yonghui, all those who had fled from the Yangtze Division had returned. Gao Zong set up a mountain camp and settled them there.

古文：拔野古一曰拔野固，或为拔曳固，漫散碛北，地千里，直仆骨东，邻于靺鞨。
现代文：拔野古又称拔野固，或叫拔曳固，漫散在碛北。地千里，处于仆骨之东，与为邻。
English: Bajiao Gu, also known as Bajiao Gou, or Bajiao Gou, is scattered in the north of Shandong. It is a thousand miles away, in the east of Hubei, and is a neighbor.

古文：帐户六万，兵万人。
现代文：帐户六万，兵一万。
English: Sixty thousand accounts, ten thousand soldiers.

古文：地有荐草，产良马、精铁。
现代文：地里产荐草，有良马、精铁。
English: The farmland produces recommended grasses, good horse radish, and fine iron.

古文：有川曰康干河，断松投之，三年辄化为石，色苍致，然节理犹在，世谓康干石者。
现代文：有条康干河，如砍一段松树丢在河里，三年后即化为石，颜色苍致，但木节纹理依旧，即俗称康干石的。
English: There is a dry river in Kang, for example, if a pine tree is cut and thrown into the river, it will turn into stone after three years. The color is pale, but the texture of the wood is still the same. It is commonly known as Kang dry stone.

古文：俗嗜猎射，少耕获，乘木逐鹿冰上。
现代文：民俗喜好打猎，很少耕种。冬天在冰上有鹿拉木橇。
English: The local people like to hunt and rarely farm. In winter, there are deer pulling rafts on the ice.

古文：风俗大抵铁勒也，言语少异。
现代文：风俗大体与铁勒相同，语言略有差异。
English: The customs are generally the same as in Tille, but the language is slightly different.

古文：贞观三年，与仆骨、同罗、奚、同入朝。
现代文：贞观三年，与仆骨、同罗、奚、靅一同入朝。
English: For three years, Zhenguan entered the imperial court together with his servants, Tongluo, Zou and Zou.

古文：二十一年，大俟利发屈利失举部内属，置幽陵都督府，拜屈利失右武卫大将军，即为都督。
现代文：贞观二十一年，大俟利发屈利失举部来内附。设置幽陵都督府，任屈利失为右武卫大将军，任都督职。
English: In the 21st year of Zhenguan, Daxing Li sent Qu Li to the capital, and he was appointed as the governor of Yuling. Qu Li was appointed as the grand marshal of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards and the governor of Yuling.

古文：显庆时，与思结、仆固、同罗叛，以左武卫大将军郑仁泰击之，斩其渠首。
现代文：显庆年间，与思结、仆固、同罗一起叛变。皇帝派左武卫大将军郑仁泰还击，斩了大将首级。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianqing, he mutinied together with Shijie, Dugu and Tongluo. The emperor sent Zeng Rintai, the General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, to fight back and beheaded the general.

古文：至天宝间，能自来朝。
现代文：到天宝年间，又来朝。
English: In the Tenpo era, he came to the Imperial Court again.

古文：仆骨亦曰仆固，在多览葛之东。
现代文：仆骨，也叫仆固，位于多览葛之东。
English: The Servant's Bone, also called the Servant's Fort, is located to the east of the Tozan kudzu.

古文：帐户三万，兵万人。
现代文：帐户三万，兵一万。
English: Thirty thousand accounts, ten thousand soldiers.

古文：地最北，俗梗骜，难召率。
现代文：地在最北，民俗犟直桀骜，很难召集统率。
English: It is located in the far north, and it is difficult to summon a leader because of the folk customs.

古文：始臣突厥，后附薛延陀。
现代文：起初臣服于突厥，后来依附薛延陀。
English: At first, it submitted to the Turks, and later it followed Xueyantuo.

古文：延陀灭，其酋娑匐俟利发歌滥拔延始内属，以其地为金微州，拜歌滥拔延为右武卫大将军、州都督。
现代文：延陀灭亡，其酋长娑匐俟利发歌滥拔延才内附唐廷。就以其地设置金徽州，任歌滥拔延为右武卫大将军、州都督。
English: After the demise of Yanta, its chieftain Jili sent Gao Zangbai to Tang Dynasty. He set up Jinhui Province in its place, and appointed Gao Zangbai as the right guard general and provincial governor.

古文：开元初，为首领仆固所杀，诣朔方降，有司诛之。
现代文：开元初年，被其首领仆固杀害。仆固到朔方投降，有司将其诛杀。
English: In the first year of the first year of the first century, he was killed by his leader, Mugu. Mugu surrendered to the Shuo side, and Yushi killed him.

古文：子曰怀恩，至德时以功至朔方节度使，自有传。
现代文：其子名怀恩，至德年间因功升任朔方节度使。
English: His son's name was Wai Yan, and he was promoted to the post of Shuo Fang's special envoy to Germany for his achievements.

古文：同罗在薛延陀北，多览葛之东，距京师七千里而赢，胜兵三万。
现代文：同罗，在薛延陀北多览葛之东，距京师七千多里，有强兵三万。
English: Tongluo, in the north of Xueyanta and the east of Gezhan, more than seven thousand miles away from Beijing, has a strong army of thirty thousand.

古文：贞观二年，遣使者入朝。
现代文：贞观二年，派使者入朝。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, he sent an envoy to the imperial court.

古文：久之，请内属，置龟林都督府，拜酋俟利发时健啜为左领军大将军，即授都督。
现代文：很久以后，请求内附，为之设置龟林都督府，任酋长俟利发时健啜为左领军大将军，任都督职。
English: After a long time, the request was enclosed, for which the Guilin Governor's Office was set up, and the chief was appointed as the leader of the left army, and the governor was appointed as the governor.

古文：安禄山反，劫其兵用之，号 曳落河 者也。
现代文：安禄山反，强征其兵，即称为 曳落河 的。
English: Anlu Mountain rebelled, forced conscription of its soldiers, that is known as "pulling down the river."

古文：曳落河，犹言健儿云。
现代文：曳落河，就像我们称健儿一样。
English: Dragging down the river, as we call it.

古文：浑在诸部最南者。
现代文：浑，是诸部最南端的。
English: Hun is the southernmost of the provinces.

古文：突厥颉利败时，有俟利发阿贪支款塞。
现代文：突厥颉利败时，有俟利发阿贪支前来请求通好。
English: When the Turks were soundly defeated, one of their generals came to ask for a truce.

古文：薛延陀之灭，大俟利发浑汪举部内向，以其地为皋兰都督府，后分东、西州。
现代文：薛延陀灭亡后，大俟利发浑汪带领全部落内附。即以其地为皋兰都督府，后分为东、西州。
English: After the death of Xue Yanta, Daju Lifa Hunwang led all of them to be annexed to Luoyang. That is, his land became the capital of Luoyang, which was later divided into East and West Provinces.

古文：太宗以阿贪支于汪属尊，遣译者讽汪，汪欣然避位。
现代文：太宗认为阿贪支较浑汪位尊，派译者暗示给汪，汪欣然让位。
English: Emperor Taizong thought that Agongzhi was more worthy of the throne than Wang, so he sent a translator to hint to Wang, and Wang gladly gave up the throne.

古文：帝嘉其让，以阿贪支为右领军卫大将军、皋兰州刺史，汪云麾将军兼俟利发为之副。
现代文：皇帝赞赏他的谦让，任阿贪支为右领军卫大将军、皋兰州刺史，任汪为云麾将军兼俟利发做阿贪支的副手。
English: The emperor appreciated his gentleness. He appointed Ah Guozhi as the right-hand leader of the army, General Weidai, and Ulan Zhou as the leader of the army, and appointed Wang as the vice-leader of Ah Guozhi, who was also the general of Yunnan Province.

古文：阿贪支死，子回贵嗣。
现代文：阿贪支死，子回贵即位。
English: Ah Qian Zhi died, and his son Huigui ascended the throne.

古文：回贵死，子大寿嗣。
现代文：回贵死，子大寿即位。
English: Kaigui died, and his son, Daisuke, ascended the throne.

古文：大寿死，子释之嗣。
现代文：大寿死，子释之即位。
English: The death of Emperor Taizu and the enthronement of Emperor Shihaku.

古文：释之鸷勇不凡，从哥舒翰拔石堡城，迁右武卫大将军，封汝南郡公。
现代文：释之骁勇不凡，跟随哥舒翰攻克石堡城，升任右武卫大将军，封爵汝南郡公。
English: Xie Zhi's bravery was extraordinary. He followed Goshukhan in conquering Shibao City and was promoted to General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards. He was knighted as the Duke of Runan County.

古文：李光弼保河阳，释之以朔方都知兵马使为裨将，进宁朔郡王，知朔方节度留后。
现代文：李光弼保河阳，释之以朔方都知兵马使的身份为副将，进封为宁朔郡王，知朔方节度留后。
English: Li Guangya was appointed as the deputy commander of Heyang, and he was given the status of the envoy of the Shuo Fangdu Zhima, and he was appointed as the king of Ningshuo County. He stayed behind after the Shuo Fangdu Festival.

古文：仆固怀恩之走，声为归镇。
现代文：仆固怀恩逃来，声称归镇。
English: The servant, Gu Wai Yan, escaped and claimed to have returned to the town.

古文：释之曰： 是必众溃。 
现代文：释之说 ：一定是众人溃散了。 
English: Explanation: The crowd must have dispersed.

古文：将拒之，其甥张韶曰： 彼如悔祸还镇，渠可不纳？ 
现代文：想拒绝不纳。其外甥张韶说 ：他如因悔恨而还镇，怎可不接纳？ 
English: If he wanted to refuse, he couldn't. His nephew Zhang Jun said, "If he is remorseful and returns to town, how can he not be accepted?"

古文：释之信之，乃纳怀恩。
现代文：释之听信了，接纳仆固怀恩。
English: The release was accepted, and the servant, Gu Wai Yan, was admitted.

古文：怀恩已入，使韶杀释之，收其军。
现代文：怀恩入镇后，指使张韶杀释之，收缴了他的军队。
English: After Wynn entered the town, he ordered Zhang Xuan to kill and release him, and confiscated his army.

古文：已而恶韶，骂曰： 若负舅，肯忠于我？ 
现代文：后来又厌恶张韶，骂他 ：你能背叛你舅舅，怎会忠于我？ 
English: Later, he detested Zhang Ye and scolded him: "If you can betray your uncle, how can you be loyal to me?"

古文：折其胫，囚死弥峨城。
现代文：打折了他的腿骨，囚死在弥峨城。
English: He broke his leg bone and died as a prisoner in the city of Miaga.

古文：释之子瑊，建中功臣也，自有传。契苾亦曰契苾羽，在焉耆西北鹰娑川，多览葛之南。
现代文：释之之子蠨，是建中时的功臣。契絆，也叫契絆羽，在焉耆西北的鹰娑川，多览葛之南。
English: The son of Shaku, Kyo, was a hero during the construction of the middle school. Kiekizuna, also known as Kiekizuna Ura, is located in the northwest of Yancheng, in the Yingluo River, mostly south of Ge.

古文：其酋哥楞自号易勿真莫贺可汗，弟莫贺咄特勒，皆有勇。
现代文：其尊长哥楞自称是易勿真莫贺可汗，弟名莫贺咄特勒，两人都英勇。
English: His eldest brother Zou claimed to be the real Moga Khan, and his younger brother was called Moga Hittler, both of whom were heroic.

古文：莫贺咄死，子何力尚纽率其部来归，时贞观六年也。
现代文：莫贺咄死，子何力率领其部属归附。这是贞观六年的事。
English: After Moga's death, his son He Li led his subordinates to annexation. This was a matter of six years for Zhenguan.

古文：诏处之甘、凉间，以其地为榆溪州。
现代文：诏使居处甘州、凉州之间，即以其地置榆溪州。
English: The residence of the Emperor's envoys was located between Ganzhou and Liangzhou, that is, it was located in Lixizhou.

古文：永徽四年，以其部为贺兰都督府，隶燕然都护。
现代文：永徽四年，以其部属建贺兰都督府，隶属燕然都护。
English: In the fourth year of Yonghui, he built the Helan Governor's Office with his subordinates, and subordinated to Yan Ran.

古文：何力有战功，忠节臣也。
现代文：何力有战功，是忠义有节操之臣。
English: He who has military exploits is a loyal and disciplined vassal.

古文：大和中，其种帐附于振武云。
现代文：大和年间，其族依附振武。多览葛，也叫多滥。
English: During the Yamato era, his clan was attached to Zhenwu. Tozange, also known as Tozan.

古文：多览葛亦曰多滥，在薛延陀东，滨同罗水，胜兵万人。
现代文：位于薛延陀东，同罗水边，有精兵一万人。
English: Located in the east of Xueyantuo, on the edge of the Tongluo River, there are ten thousand elite soldiers.

古文：延陀已灭，其酋俟斤多滥葛末与回纥皆朝，以其地为燕然都督府，授右卫大将军，即为府都督。
现代文：延陀灭亡后，其酋长俟斤多滥葛末与回纥皆入朝。即以其地置燕然都督府，任多滥葛末为右卫大将军，任都督职。
English: After the demise of Yenda, his chiefs, Shujin, Doshi, Katsumatsu and Hui, all entered the imperial court. That is to say, Yanran was made the governor-general's residence, and Doshi was appointed the grand marshal of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards and the governor-general.

古文：死，以多滥葛塞匐为大俟利发，继为都督。
现代文：他死后，以多滥葛塞匐为大俟利发，继为都督。
English: After his death, he was succeeded by Dabang Gethsemane as Dajibari and later as the governor of the capital.

古文：阿跌，亦曰诃咥，或为鞬跌。
现代文：阿跌，也叫诃，或称跌。
English: A跌, also known as  or 稱跌.

古文：始与拔野古等皆朝，以其地为鸡田州。
现代文：起初与拔野古等一同入朝，以其地置鸡田州。
English: At first, he entered the imperial court together with Battanoko and others, and was placed in Kotanshu.

古文：开元中，鞬跌思泰自突厥默啜所来降。
现代文：开元年间，跌思泰自突厥默啜处来降。
English: At the beginning of the year, Pusitai descended from the Turkic muezzin.

古文：其后，光进、光颜皆以战功至大官，赐李氏，附属籍，自有传。
现代文：后来，光进、光颜都以战功而任大官，赐姓李，附属籍。
English: Later, both Guangjin and Guangyan were promoted to high-ranking officials for their military exploits, given the surname Li, and made subordinate citizens.

古文：葛逻禄本突厥诸族，在北庭西北、金山之西，跨仆固振水，包多怛岭，与车鼻部接。
现代文：葛逻禄本是突厥族之一，位于北庭西北、金山之西，跨仆固振水两岸，包容多怛岭，与车鼻部接壤。
English: Ge Lu Lu was originally one of the Turkic tribes, located in the northwest of Beiting, west of Jinshan, straddling the two banks of the Gushan River, encompassing the Dadu Mountains, and bordering the prow of the chariot.

古文：有三族：一谋落，或为谋刺；二炽俟，或为婆匐；三踏实力。
现代文：共有三族：一为谋落，或称谋剌；二为炽俟，或称婆匐；三为踏实力。
English: There are a total of three tribes: one is "Mou Lu" or "Mou Lu"; the second is "Gao Lu" or "Bao Lu"; and the third is "Mou Lu" or "Mou Lu."

古文：永徽初，高偘之伐车鼻可汗，三族皆内属。
现代文：永徽初年，高亻品讨伐车鼻可汗，三族皆归附。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, the three ethnic groups were all annexed by the three tribes.

古文：显庆二年，以谋落部为阴山都督府，炽俟部为大漠都督府，踏实力部为玄池都督府，即用其酋长为都督。
现代文：显庆二年，在谋落部置阴山都督府、炽俟部置大漠都督府，踏实力部置玄池都督府，就用其酋长为都督。
English: In the second year of Hsien Ching, the governor's office of Yin Mountain was set up in the strategic department, the governor's office of the Great Desert was set up in the strategic department, and the governor's office of the Great Desert was set up in the strategic department, and the governor's office of the Great Pond was set up in the strategic department.

古文：后分炽俟部置金附州。
现代文：后来从炽俟部分出一部分置金附州。
English: Later, a part of the investment money from Blazing Saddles went to Fuzhou.

古文：三族当东、西突厥间，常视其兴衰，附叛不常也。
现代文：三族都在东、西突厥之间，常因其兴衰，或叛或附。
English: All three tribes are between the East and West Turkic, often because of their rise and fall, or rebel or attach.

古文：后稍南徙，自号 三姓叶护 ，兵强，甘于斗，廷州以西诸突厥皆畏之。
现代文：后来渐南迁，自称是 三姓叶护 。他们兵强，喜欢争战，廷州以西各突厥族都怕他们。
English: Later, they gradually moved to the south, claiming to be the three surnames Ye You. They are strong and like to fight, and all the Turkic tribes west of Tingzhou are afraid of them.

古文：开元初，再来朝。天宝时，与回纥、拔悉蜜共攻杀乌苏米施可汗，又与回纥击拔悉蜜，走其可汗阿史那施于北庭，奔京师。
现代文：开元初年，两次来朝，天宝时与回纥、拔悉蜜合力攻杀乌苏米施可汗，又与回纥攻击拔悉蜜，将其可汗赶到北庭，后至京师。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, Tian Baozhi came to the DPRK twice. He joined forces with Hui Zhuang and Ba Siyi Mei to attack and kill Usumish Khan. He also attacked Ba Siyi Mei with Hui Zhuang and drove his khan to Beiting, and then to Beijing.

古文：葛禄与九姓复立回纥叶护，所谓怀仁可汗者也。
现代文：葛禄与九姓再次立回纥叶护，即怀仁可汗。
English: Gulu and the nine surnames once again returned to the protection of the imperial court, that is, Huairen Khan.

古文：于是葛禄之处乌德犍山者臣回纥，在金山、北庭者自立叶护，岁来朝。
现代文：那时，葛禄族中居于乌德犍山的臣伏回纥，在金山、北庭的自立叶护。每年来朝贡。
English: At that time, the vassals of the Gulu tribe who lived in the Udheshan Mountains fled to the mountains, and the ones who lived in the Jinshan Mountains and the North Garden set up their own garrisons. They came to pay tribute every year.

古文：久之，叶护顿毘伽缚突厥叛酋阿布思，进封金山郡王。
现代文：后来，叶护顿毗伽捉住了突厥的叛酋阿布思。进而封爵为金山郡王。
English: Later, Yehudonbiga captured the Turkic rebel chief Abu Si, and was subsequently knighted as the King of Jinshan County.

古文：天宝间，凡五朝。
现代文：天宝年间，五次来朝。
English: He came to Japan five times during the Tenpo era.

古文：至德后，葛逻禄浸盛，与回纥争强，徙十姓可汗故地，尽有碎叶、怛逻斯诸城。
现代文：至德年后，葛逻禄渐强，与回纥争胜，将十姓人迁至可汗的旧地，占有碎叶、怛逻斯等城。
English: After the German invasion, Ge Luo Lu became stronger and stronger, and competed with Hui Xuan for victory. He moved the ten surnamed people to the old land of the khan, and occupied the cities of Broken Leaf and Ge Luo Si.

古文：然限回纥，故朝会不能自达于朝。
现代文：但限于是回纥之属，所以朝会时不能独立朝拜。
English: However, it is limited to those who belong to the Uighurs, so they cannot independently worship during the imperial meeting.

古文：拔悉蜜，贞观二十三年始来朝。
现代文：拔悉蜜，贞观二十三年才入朝。
English: It took 23 years for Zhenguan to enter the imperial court.

古文：天宝初，与回纥叶护击杀突厥可汗，立拔悉蜜大酋阿史那施为贺腊毘伽可汗，遣使者入谢，玄宗赐紫文袍、金钿带、鱼袋。
现代文：天宝初，与回纥叶护击杀突厥可汗。立拔悉蜜大酋阿史那施为贺腊毗伽可汗，派使者入朝，玄宗赐紫文袍、金钿带、鱼袋。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, he fought against and killed the Turkic khan with the protection of Hui Xuan Ye. He appointed Semei Great Chief Ashina Shi as Horabihiga khan, sent an envoy to the imperial court, and gave Emperor Xuanzong a purple robe, a gold sash, and a fish bag.

古文：不三岁，为葛逻禄、回纥所破，奔北庭。
现代文：不到三年，被葛逻禄、回纥击破，逃奔北庭。
English: Less than three years later, he was defeated by Ge Lu Lu and Hui Yao and fled to Beiting.

古文：后朝京师，拜左武卫将军，地与众归回纥。
现代文：后入朝京师，被委任为左武卫将军，其土地人众均归回纥。
English: Later, he entered the Imperial Capital Division and was appointed as the General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, and his people all returned to the capital.

古文：都播，亦曰都波，其地北濒小海，西坚昆，南回纥，分三部，皆自统制。
现代文：都播，也叫都波，其地北临小海，西接坚昆，南连回纥，分为三部分，都自己统制。
English: Duowang, also known as Duobo, is divided into three parts, with Xiaohai to the north, Jiankun to the west, and Nanlianhui to the south, all of which are self-governed.

古文：其俗无岁时。
现代文：其习俗不分节季。
English: Its customs are seasonal.

古文：结草为庐。
现代文：结草为房舍，既无畜牧，也不知耕种。
English: Knots of grass serve as houses, and there is neither animal husbandry nor farming.

古文：无畜牧，不知稼穑，土多百合草，掇其根以饭，捕鱼、鸟、兽食之。衣貂鹿皮，贫者缉鸟羽为服。
现代文：地里多长百合草，挖其根当饭，另捕鱼、鸟、兽充饥。穿貂、鹿皮，贫穷的就编羽毛为衣服。
English: The land abounds in long lily grasses, the roots of which are dug up for food, and fish, birds, and animals are caught to satisfy hunger. People wear sable and deerskin, and the poor knit feathers for clothing.

古文：其昏姻，富者纳马，贫者效鹿皮草根。
现代文：结婚时，有钱人给马，穷人家给鹿皮草根。
English: When marrying, the rich give horses, the poor give deerskin roots.

古文：死以木敛置山中，或系于树，送葬哭泣，与突厥同。
现代文：死了装在木匣中搁置山中，或系在树上。送葬时哭泣，与突厥一样。
English: When they die, they are placed in a wooden box and left in the mountains, or tied to a tree. When they are buried, they cry, just like the Turks.

古文：无刑罚，盗者倍输其赃。
现代文：没有刑罚，偷盗的被抓后罚加倍的钱财。
English: There is no penalty, but if you are caught stealing, the fine is doubled.

古文：贞观二十一年，因骨利干入朝，亦以使通中国。
现代文：贞观二十一年，因骨利干入朝，也就派使者与中国相通。
English: In the twenty-first year of Zhenguan, he sent an emissary to communicate with China because of his interest in entering the court.

古文：骨利干处瀚海北，胜兵五千。
现代文：骨利干地处瀚海北，有强兵五千。
English: It is located in the northern part of the vast sea, with a strong army of five thousand.

古文：草多百合。
现代文：地多百合草。
English: The ground is mostly lily grass.

古文：产良马，首似橐它，筋骼壮大，日中驰数百里。
现代文：产良马，马头似骆驼，筋骼壮大，半天就能奔驰几百里。
English: A well-bred horse, with a head like a camel and strong muscles, can gallop hundreds of miles in half a day.

古文：其地北距海，去京师最远，又北度海则昼长夜短，日入亨羊胛，熟，东方已明，盖近日出处也。
现代文：太阳落山后煮羊腿，肉熟，天也亮了，乃因靠近日出之处。入朝以后，诏派云麾将军康苏蜜回访慰劳，即以其地置玄阙州。
English: After the sun set, the lamb shank was cooked, the meat was cooked, and the sky was bright, because it was close to the sunrise. After entering the morning, the emperor sent the general of Yunqi, Kang Su Mei, to pay a return visit for consolation, that is, to set up Xuanwuzhou with his land.

古文：既入朝，诏遣云麾将军康苏蜜劳答，以其地为玄阙州。其大酋俟斤因使者献马，帝取其异者号十骥，皆为美名：曰 腾霜白 ，曰 雪骢 ，曰 凝露骢 ，曰 县光骢 ，曰 决波騟 ，曰 飞霞骠 ，曰 发电赤 ，曰 流金瓜 ，曰 翔麟紫 ，曰 奔虹赤 ，厚礼其使。
现代文：其大酋俟斤派使者来献马，皇帝取马中特异者称为十骥，皆起美名：腾霜白、皎雪马忽、凝露马忽、县光马忽、决波马俞、飞霞骠、发电赤、流金马瓜、翔麟紫、奔虹赤，并厚赏使者。
English: Its great chiefs sent emissaries to offer horses, and the emperor called the special ones among the horses as ten horses, all of which were given beautiful names: Teng frost white,  snow horse, 凝露 horse, 县光 horse, 决波 horse, 飞霞 horse, 发电 red, 流金 horse, 翔麟 purple, 奔虹 red, and rewarded the emissaries.

古文：龙朔中，以玄阙州更为余吾州，隶瀚海都督府。
现代文：龙朔年间，将玄阙州改为余吾州，隶属瀚海都督府。
English: During the Long Shuo era, Xuanzang State was changed to Yugu State, which was under the jurisdiction of the Hanhai Governor's Office.

古文：延载初，亦来朝。
现代文：延载初，也来朝。
English: For the first time in a long time, I also came to the morning.

古文：白居鲜卑故地，直京师东北五千里，与同罗、仆骨接。
现代文：白靅居于鲜卑故地，距京师东北五千里，与同罗、仆固接壤。
English: Egrets live in Xianbei, five thousand miles northeast of Beijing, bordering Tongluo and Dugu.

古文：避薛延陀，保奥支水、冷陉山，南契丹，北乌罗浑，东靺鞨，西拔野古，地圆袤二千里，山缭其外，胜兵万人。
现代文：避开薛延陀，保而守奥支水、冷陉山，南连契丹，北接乌罗泽，东邻，西临拔野古。属地方圆二千里，周围是山，有强兵万人。
English: Avoid Xueyanta, and keep safe Oshishui, Lengyu Mountain, Qidan in the south, Urozhe in the north, the eastern neighbors, and Babeno in the west. It is a local circle of two thousand miles, surrounded by mountains, with strong soldiers.

古文：业射猎，以赤皮缘衣，妇贯铜钏，以子铃缀襟。
现代文：以射猎为业，以赤皮做衣边，妇女戴铜钏，用子铃饰衣襟。
English: With shooting as a profession, with red leather as the edge of clothing, women wear bronze brooches, with cymbals to decorate the collar.

古文：其部有三：曰居延，曰无若没，曰潢水。
现代文：有三部落：居延、无若没、潢水。
English: There are three tribes: Juyan, Muwa, and Surabaya.

古文：其君长臣突厥颉利可汗为俟斤。
现代文：其君长臣服突厥颉利可汗，任俟斤。
English: Its emperors were subordinate to the Turkic khan, and served as his subordinates.

古文：贞观中再来朝，后列其地为寘颜州，以别部为居延州，即用俟斤为刺史。
现代文：贞观年间两次来朝。后列其地为蜫颜州，别部置为居延州，即任俟斤为刺史。
English: Zhenguan came to the DPRK twice during the year. The following is the list of Zhenan Prefecture, the next is the list of Jiyang Prefecture, and the next is the list of Jianjin.

古文：显庆五年，授酋长李含珠为居延都督。
现代文：显庆五年，委任酋长李含珠为居延都督。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Xianqing, he appointed the chief Li Hanju as the governor of Jiyan.

古文：含珠死，弟厥都继之。后无闻焉。
现代文：含珠死，弟厥都继任，后来没有消息了。
English: When Han Zhu died, his younger brother Jue Du succeeded him, but there was no news of him after that.

古文：斛薛处多滥葛北，胜兵万人。
现代文：斛薛，居于多滥葛北，有强兵一万人。
English: Xue Xue, who lived in Dabang Gebei, had a strong army of ten thousand soldiers.

古文：奚结处同罗北，思结在延陀故牙，二部合兵凡二万。
现代文：奚结，在同罗北，思结，在延陀的旧庭。二部合兵有二万。
English: Xie Jie, in the north of Tongluo, and Xie Jie, in the old courtyard of Yendao. The two armies have twenty thousand soldiers.

古文：既来朝，列其地州县之。
现代文：入朝后，将其地列为州县。
English: After entering the imperial court, its territory was classified as a prefecture.

古文：太宗时，北狄能自通者，又有乌罗浑，或曰乌洛侯，曰乌罗护，直京师东北六千里而赢，东靺鞨，西突厥，南契丹，北乌丸，大抵风俗皆靺鞨也。
现代文：太宗时，北狄能自己来朝的还有乌罗浑，或称乌洛侯、乌罗护，距京师东北六千多里。东挨，西接突厥，南连契丹，北邻乌丸。风俗一般与同。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, Bei Dineng himself came to North Korea from Urohun, or Urohun, Urohu, more than six thousand miles northeast of Beijing. To the east, Turku to the west, Qidan to the south, and Umaru to the north. Customs are generally the same.

古文：乌丸或曰古丸。
现代文：乌丸或叫古丸。
English: It is called "Umaru" or "Kumaru."

古文：又有鞠，或曰祴，居拔野古东北，有木无草，地多苔。
现代文：还有鞠，或叫礻戒，居于拔野古东北。有树无草，地多生苔。
English: There is also a so-called "Ji" or "Ju," who lived in the ancient northeastern part of the village. There are no trees or grass, and the ground is covered with moss.

古文：无羊马，人豢鹿若牛马，惟食苔，俗以驾车。
现代文：没有羊、马，人像畜养牛马一样养鹿，鹿只吃苔。
English: There are no sheep or horses. People raise deer like cattle and horses. Deer only eat moss.

古文：又以鹿皮为衣，聚木作屋，尊卑共居。
现代文：当地人也用鹿驾车，用鹿皮做衣，用木料盖房子，尊卑共居。
English: Local people also use deer to drive cars, make clothes from deer skins, build houses from wood, and live together in a hierarchical society.

古文：又有俞折者，地差大，俗与拔野古相埒。
现代文：还有俞折，地尚大，民俗与拔野古相近。
English: There are also twists and turns, the land is still large, and the folk customs are similar to those of ancient Battan.

古文：少羊马，多貂鼠。
现代文：少羊、马，多貂鼠。
English: Few sheep, horses, more weasels.

古文：又有驳马者，或曰弊剌，曰遏罗支，直突厥之北，距京师万四千里。随水草，然喜居山，胜兵三万。
现代文：还有驳马，或称弊剌、遏罗支。在突厥北，距京师一万四千里，逐水草而居，不过喜欢住山里。有强兵三万。
English: In the north of Turkey, 14,000 miles away from Beijing, they live from place to place, but like to live in the mountains. They have 30,000 strong soldiers.

古文：地常积雪，木不雕。
现代文：地常积雪，树不凋落。
English: The ground is often covered with snow, and the trees do not fall.

古文：以马耕田，马色皆驳，因以名国云。
现代文：用马耕田，马毛皆杂色，就以此为国名。
English: The country's name comes from the fact that horses are used to plough the fields and the horse's hair is variegated.

古文：北极于海，虽畜马而不乘，资湩酪以食。
现代文：北连海。虽养马但不乘坐，只为取乳制酪。
English: North Lianhai. Although they keep horses, they do not ride them, only to pick up yakitori cheese.

古文：好与结骨战，人貌多似结骨，而语不相通。
现代文：好与结骨作战。人的相貌很多像结骨人，但言语不通。
English: He is good at fighting with the Skeletons. He looks a lot like the Skeletons, but he can't talk.

古文：皆劗发，桦皮帽。
现代文：都剪发，戴桦皮帽。
English: They all cut their hair and wear mink hats.

古文：构木类井干，覆桦为室。
现代文：用木料架成个井圈样的东西，盖上桦皮做房子。
English: Use the wood to frame a hoop-like thing, cover it with sable fur, and make a house.

古文：各有小君长，不能相臣也。
现代文：各有小君长，彼此都不臣服。
English: Each has a petty ruler, and they do not submit to each other.

古文：大汉者，处鞠之北，饶羊马，人物颀大，故以自名。与鞠俱邻于黠戛斯剑海之濒。
现代文：大汉，在鞠之北，多产羊马，人高大魁梧，所以就用自身形象命国名，与鞠都在黠戛斯剑海之滨。
English: Dakan, in the north of Kame, is rich in sheep and horses, and the people are tall and burly, so they named the country with their own image. Both Kame and Kame are on the coast of the Kame Sea.

古文：此皆古所未宾者，当贞观逮永徽，奉貂马入朝，或一再至。
现代文：这些都是古时没有宾服的。从贞观直到永徽，他们奉貂、马入朝，有的来不止一次。
English: In ancient times, there was no guest dress for these people. From Zhenguan to Yonghui, they came to the imperial court on horses and donkeys, some of them more than once.

古文：黠戛斯，古坚昆国也。
现代文：黠戛斯，即古代坚昆国。
English: 戛斯, that is, the ancient Jiankun country.

古文：地当伊吾之西，焉耆北，白山之旁。
现代文：地处伊吾之西，焉耆之北，白山之旁。
English: It is located west of Igo, north of Enso, and next to Mt. Hakusan.

古文：或曰居勿，曰结骨。
现代文：或名居勿、结骨。
English: or a house of fame, not a house of bones.

古文：其种杂丁零，乃匈奴西鄙也。
现代文：种族杂有丁零人，乃匈奴西边鄙。
English: There are some mixed races, but the Huns dominate the west side.

古文：匈奴封汉降将李陵为右贤王，卫律为丁零王。
现代文：匈奴封汉降将李陵为右贤王，卫律为丁零王。
English: The Xiongnu enthroned Han and demoted Li Ling to the right-hand king, and Wei Lu to the left-hand king.

古文：后郅支单于破坚昆，于时东距单于廷七千里，南车师五千里，郅支留都之。
现代文：后来郅支单于攻破坚昆，那时东距单于廷七千里，南距车师五千里，郅支留下以之为都。
English: At that time, the east was seven thousand miles away from the court, and the south was five thousand miles away from the coachman, leaving the city as the capital.

古文：故后世得其地者讹为结骨，稍号纥骨，亦曰纥扢斯云。
现代文：所以后代得那块地讹称为结骨，渐变成纥骨，也叫纥扌乞斯。
English: So the offspring get that piece of the mantle called the scapula, which gradually turns into the tibia, also called the tibia.

古文：众数十万，胜兵八万，直回纥西北三千里，南依贪漫山。
现代文：拥有人民十万，强兵八万。距回纥西北三千里，南依贪漫山。
English: It has 100,000 people and 80,000 strong soldiers. It is 3,000 miles northwest of Hubei Province and surrounded by mountains to the south.

古文：地夏沮洳，冬积雪。
现代文：其地夏季低湿，冬季积雪。
English: The area has low humidity in summer and snow cover in winter.

古文：人皆长大，赤发、析面、绿瞳，以黑发为不祥。
现代文：人都魁梧，赤发、白脸、绿眼珠，视黑发为不祥。
English: Everyone is burly, with red hair, a white face and green eyes. Black hair is seen as ominous.

古文：黑瞳者，必曰陵苗裔也。
现代文：黑眼珠的，就说是李陵的后裔。
English: Those with black eyes are said to be Li Ling's descendants.

古文：男少女多，以环贯耳，俗趫伉，男子有男黥其手，女已嫁黥项。
现代文：男少女多，戴耳环。民俗矫捷粗犷，男子勇敢者在手上刺花纹，妇女结婚后在颈上刺花。
English: There are many boys and girls, wearing earrings. Folk customs are brash and rough, with brave men having embroidered patterns on their hands, and women having embroidered patterns on their necks after marriage.

古文：杂居多淫佚。
现代文：杂居，男女之事很随便。
English: We live in a mixed household, so it's very casual between men and women.

古文：谓岁首为茂师哀，以三哀为一时，以十二物纪年，如岁在寅则曰虎年。
现代文：称岁首为茂师，称月为哀。以三哀为一时，用十二样物件纪年。如岁在寅称虎年。
English: The first day of the year is called Maoshi, and the last day of the month is called Ai. The first day of the year is called Sanai, and twelve objects are used to mark the year. The first day of the year is called Tiger, and the last day of the year is called Nian.

古文：气多寒，虽大河亦半冰。
现代文：气候寒冷，即使大河，也多半结冰。
English: The climate is cold, and even large rivers are mostly frozen.

古文：稼有禾、粟、大小麦、青稞，步硙以为面糜。
现代文：庄稼有禾、粟、大小麦、青稞，用石磨磨成粉。
English: The crops include wheat, millet, barley, and barley, which are ground into powder with a stone grinder.

古文：穄以三月种，九月获，以饭，以酿酒，而无果蔬。
现代文：三月种糜子，九月收获，用以做饭、酿酒，没有果子、蔬菜。
English: The hazelnuts are planted in March and harvested in September. They are used for cooking and brewing wine. There are no fruits or vegetables.

古文：畜，马至壮大，以善斗者为头马，有橐它、牛、羊，牛为多，富农至数千。
现代文：牲畜中马极壮大，以善斗者做头马，还有骆驼、牛、羊，以牛为多，富农多到几千头。
English: Among the livestock, horses are extremely large, with good fighters as head horses, as well as camels, cattle, and sheep. Cattle are more common, and rich farmers have thousands of them.

古文：其兽有野马、骨咄、黄羊、原羝、鹿、黑尾，黑尾者似麞，尾大而黑。
现代文：野兽有野马、骨咄、黄羊、羊原羝、鹿、黑尾。黑尾的样子像獐，尾大而黑。
English: The beasts were the wild horse, the wild ox, the yellow sheep, the wild goat, the deer, and the blacktail. The blacktail looked like a roe deer, with a large black tail.

古文：鱼，有蔑者长七八尺，莫痕者无骨，口出颐下。
现代文：鱼，有的长七八尺，有的无骨，口在颌下。
English: Fish, some seven or eight feet long, some boneless, mouth under the gills.

古文：鸟，雁、鹜、乌鹊、鹰、隼。
现代文：鸟有雁、鹜、乌鹊、鹰、隼。
English: Birds include geese, kites, blackbirds, eagles, and cormorants.

古文：木，松、桦、榆、柳、蒲。
现代文：树有松、桦、榆、柳、蒲。
English: The trees are pine, oak, birch, willow, and poplar.

古文：松高者仰射不能及颠，而桦尤多。
现代文：松树高的，人仰射都达不到树颠，桦树特多。
English: Pine trees are tall, people can't reach the top of the tree with a rifle, and there are many eucalyptus trees.

古文：有金、铁、锡，每雨，俗必得铁，号迦沙，为兵绝犀利，常以输突厥。
现代文：矿产有金、铁、锡，每次下雨，俗称一定得铁，称之为迦沙，做成兵器极为锋利，常卖给突厥。
English: Minerals include gold, iron, and tin. Every time it rains, it is commonly known that iron is obtained, which is called gasa. It is made into extremely sharp weapons and is often sold to the Turks.

古文：服贵貂、豽，阿热冬帽貂，夏帽金扣，锐顶而卷末，诸下皆帽白氈，喜佩刀砺，贱者衣皮不帽，女衣毳毼、锦、罽、绫，盖安西、北庭、大食所贸售也。
现代文：君主称 阿热 ，全族就姓阿热氏。建了面大旗，一般的旗做红色，绘以部落标记。服装以貂、豸内为贵重者。阿热冬天戴貂帽，夏天戴金扣帽，尖顶卷边；下属则戴白毡帽。喜欢佩刀砺。低贱者穿皮衣而不戴帽，妇女穿毳曷毛、锦、和绫等，这些都是安西、北庭、大食拿来卖的。
English: The monarch is called Ager, and the whole family is called the Ager clan. A large flag is set up, the general flag is red, and it is painted with tribal markings. Clothing is made of cocoons and cocoons for the nobles. Ager wears a straw hat in winter, a gold-buttoned hat with a pointed brim in summer; his subordinates wear a white felt hat. He likes to carry a sword. The low-born wear leather clothes without a hat, and women wear wool, brocade, and felt, all of which are sold in Anxi, Beiting, and Dashi.

古文：阿热驻牙青山，周栅代垣，联氈为帐，号 密的支 ，它首领居小帐。
现代文：阿热的牙廷建在青山，周围用木栅代替墙垣。用毡做帐，称之为 密的支 ，其他首领住小帐。
English: Age's court was built in Aoyama, surrounded by a wooden fence instead of a wall. It was made of straw, and was called "Himitsu no shi," while other chieftains lived in "Koteki."

古文：凡调兵，诸部役属者悉行。
现代文：每遇调兵，各部隶属者都要随行。
English: Whenever there is a transfer of troops, the subordinates of all ministries must accompany them.

古文：内貂鼠、青鼠为赋。
现代文：以貂鼠、青鼠做赋捐。
English: Donations were made in the form of muskrats and green mice.

古文：其官，宰相、都督、职使、长史、将军、达干六等。
现代文：其官职有宰相、都督、职使、长史、将军、达士六级。
English: His official positions included prime minister, governor, envoy, chief historian, general, and Dashi of the sixth grade.

古文：宰相七，都督三、职使十，皆典兵；长史十五，将军、达干无员。
现代文：宰相七人，都督三人，职使十人，都掌管军事；长史十五人，将军、达干不定数。
English: Seven chancellors, three governors-general, and ten officials were in charge of military affairs; fifteen chancellors, and an indefinite number of generals and governors-general.

古文：诸部食肉及马酪，惟阿热设饼饵。
现代文：各部落吃肉及马乳酪，只有阿热有面饼点心。
English: All tribes eat meat and horse cheese, but only the Aare have noodle cakes and pastries.

古文：乐有笛、鼓、笙、觱篥、盘铃。
现代文：乐器有笛、鼓、笙、醏篥、盘铃。
English: Musical instruments include flutes, drums, gongs, cymbals, and bells.

古文：戏有弄驼、师子、马伎、绳伎。
现代文：娱乐有驯驼、狮子，还有马技、绳技。
English: Entertainment includes llamas and lions, as well as equestrian and rope skills.

古文：祠神惟主水草，祭无时，呼巫为 甘 。
现代文：祭神只奉水、草神，祭无定时，称巫为 甘 。
English: The enshrined deities are only water and grass deities, and there is no fixed time for the festival. The deity is called Gan.

古文：昏嫁纳羊马以聘，富者或百千计。
现代文：婚嫁用羊、马做聘礼，富人可多到几百上千头。
English: When a bride and groom use a sheep or horse as a betrothal gift, the rich can get as many as hundreds or thousands of them.

古文：丧不剺面，三环尸哭，乃火之，收其骨，岁而乃墓，然后器泣有节。
现代文：死了人，居丧时不割面，只绕尸三匝而哭，随后火化，收其骨，一年后埋入墓中，然后哭泣成礼。
English: The dead, when in mourning, do not cut the face, only cry around the corpse, then cremated, collect their bones, buried in the grave a year later, and then weep.

古文：冬处室，木皮为覆。
现代文：冬天住在房子里，屋顶用树皮覆盖。
English: In winter, they live in a house with a roof covered with tree bark.

古文：其文字言语，与回鹘正同。
现代文：其文字语言与回鹘相同。
English: Its written language is the same as that of the Uighurs.

古文：法最严，临阵桡、奉使不称、妄议国若盗者皆断首；子为盗，以首着父颈，非死不脱。
现代文：法制极严，战争中胆怯、任使者不称职、非议国事的都要斩首；若儿子为盗，就将儿子的头系在父亲的颈子上，不死不得解脱。
English: The legal system is very strict. Those who are cowardly in war, incompetent at being an emissary, or who criticize state affairs must be beheaded. If a son is a thief, the son's head is tied to the father's neck until he dies.

古文：阿热牙至回鹘牙所，橐它四十日行。
现代文：阿热的牙廷到回鹘的牙廷，骆驼要走四十天。
English: It takes a camel forty days to travel from the court of Agha to the court of Uighur.

古文：使者道出天德右二百里许抵西受降城，北三百里许至鹈泉，泉西北至回鹘牙千五百里许，而有东、西二道，泉之北，东道也。
现代文：使者出天德往东二百里左右可到西受降城，北行三百里则到辟鸟鹈泉，再西北行到回鹘牙廷约一千五百里。其间有东、西两条路，泉之北是东道。
English: The envoys could travel about two hundred miles to the east to West Jiefang City, three hundred miles to the north to Fidoushan Spring, and then about fifteen hundred miles to the northwest to Huiyang Palace. There are two roads in between, east and west, and the north of the spring is the host.

古文：回鹘牙北六百里得仙娥河，河东北曰雪山，地多水泉。
现代文：从回鹘牙廷北行六百里可到仙娥河，河东北是雪山，地多水泉。
English: It is possible to travel the six hundred miles north from Hubei to the Xian'e River. The northeast of the river is covered with snow-capped mountains and has many springs.

古文：青山之东，有水曰剑河，偶艇以度，水悉东北流，经其国，合而北入于海。
现代文：青山之东，有条剑河，有双艇渡河，河水东北向流经其国，合众水北流入海。
English: In the east of Aoyama, there is a Jianhe River, and there is a double boat crossing. The river water flows through the country in the northeast, and the United States water flows into the sea in the north.

古文：东至木马突厥三部落，曰都播、弥列、哥饿支，其酋长皆为颉斤。
现代文：向东可到木马突厥三部落：都播、弥列、哥饿支，其酋长都是颉斤。
English: To the east, you can see the three tribes of the Trojan Turks: Doubang, Mirei, and Gohangzhi, whose chiefs are all Qinjin.

古文：桦皮覆室，多善马，俗乘木马驰冰上，以板藉足，屈木支腋，蹴辄百步，势迅激。
现代文：用桦树皮做屋顶，多好马，习俗在冰上乘木马奔驰。所谓木马，即用板系在脚上，用弯木支在腋下，一使劲就可溜出百步，既快又有力。
English: Eucalyptus bark is used to make roofs, and it is customary to ride a wooden horse on the ice. The so-called wooden horse, which is attached to the feet with a board and supported under the armpits with bent wood, can slip out of a hundred paces with one effort. It is fast and powerful.

古文：夜钞盗，昼伏匿，坚昆之人得以役属之。
现代文：夜里出来抢劫，白天伏处不出，坚昆人将他们作为自己的奴属。
English: They come out at night to rob, during the day they hide, and the Jenkun treat them as their slaves.

古文：坚昆，本强国也，地与突厥等，突厥以女妻其酋豪，东至骨利干，南吐蕃，西南葛逻禄。
现代文：坚昆，本是个强国，地与突厥相等，突厥将女儿嫁给他们的酋豪。东接骨利干，南临吐蕃，西南连葛逻禄。
English: Jiankun was originally a powerful country, equal in size to the Turks, who married their daughters to their chieftains. It is bordered by Lixian in the east, Tubo in the south, and Liange Luolu in the southwest.

古文：始隶薛延陀，延陀以颉利发一人监国。
现代文：起初隶属薛延陀，延陀用颉利发一人监国。
English: At first, it was subordinated to Xue Yenda, and Yenda used the post to send one person to supervise the country.

古文：其酋长三人，曰讫悉辈，曰居沙波辈，曰阿米辈，共治其国，未始与中国通。
现代文：酋长有三人：讫悉辈、居沙波辈、阿米辈，共同治理国家，未与中国互通往来。
English: There are three chiefs: Jinshidjian, Jushabo and Ami, who jointly govern the country and do not interact with China.

古文：贞观二十二年，闻铁勒等已入臣，即遣使者献方物，其酋长俟利发失钵屈阿栈身入朝，太宗劳享之，谓群臣曰： 往渭桥斩三突厥，自谓功多，今俟利发在席，更觉过之。 
现代文：贞观二十二年，听说铁勒等已入臣，就派使者来献物产，酋长俟利发失钵屈阿栈亲自入朝。太宗设宴犒劳，席中对群臣说 ：往日渭桥斩三突厥，自认功多，如今俟利发左座，觉得更有过之。 
English: In the 22nd year of Zhenguan, when Emperor Taizong heard that Tiler and others had entered the imperial court, he sent an envoy to offer gifts. The chieftain, Qili, sent his son, Quatang, to the imperial court in person. Emperor Taizong held a banquet to reward their efforts. At the banquet, he said to the courtiers, "In the past, you killed three Turks at Qiaoqiao, and you thought you had accomplished a lot. Now that Qili has left the imperial court, you feel that you have done more than enough.

古文：俟利发酒酣，奏愿得持笏，帝以其地为坚昆府，拜俟利发左屯卫大将军，即为都督，隶燕然都护。
现代文：俟利发酒酣，奏请愿持笏为臣。皇帝就以其地建坚昆府，授俟利发左屯卫大将军衔，任都督，隶属燕然都护。
English: The emperor then built Jiankun Prefecture on his land, bestowed the rank of General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards on Jianli, appointed him as the governor, and subordinated him to Yanran.

古文：高宗世，再来朝。
现代文：高宗时两次来朝。
English: Gao Zongji came to the DPRK twice.

古文：景龙中，献方物，中宗引使者劳之曰： 而国与我同宗，非它蕃比。 
现代文：景龙年间，献物产。中宗引见使者慰劳说 ：你们国家与我同宗，非其他蕃人可比。 
English: During the reign of King Gyeongryong, there was an offering of goods. Chungjong introduced the emissary as a consolation prize and said, "Your country is the same as mine, and there is no one like you."

古文：属以酒，使者顿首。
现代文：赐酒，使者拜谢。
English: Give wine, and the messenger will thank you.

古文：玄宗世，四朝献。
现代文：玄宗时四次来贡献。
English: Xuanzong contributed four times.

古文：乾元中，为回纥所破，自是不能通中国。
现代文：乾元年间，被回纥击破，从此不能与中国往来。
English: During the first year of the Qian Dynasty, it was destroyed by a hailstorm, and since then it has not been able to trade with China.

古文：后狄语讹为黠戛斯，盖回鹘谓之，若曰黄赤面云，又讹为戛戛斯。
现代文：后来狄语讹为黠戛斯，用回鹘话的意思，即黄赤脸，又讹为戛戛斯。
English: Later, "Di" was changed to "Kangas," meaning "yellow and red-faced," and "Kangas" was changed to "Cangas."

古文：然常与大食、吐蕃、葛禄相依杖，吐蕃之往来者畏回鹘剽钞，必住葛禄，以待黠戛斯护送。
现代文：常与大食、吐蕃、葛禄相依仗。吐蕃往来的人害怕回鹘抢劫，一定住在葛禄，以待黠戛斯护送。
English: People who come and go from Tibet are afraid of being robbed in Guizhou, so they always stay in Guizhou to wait for the escort from Tibet.

古文：大食有重锦，其载二十橐它乃胜，既不可兼负，故裁为二十匹，每三岁一饷黠戛斯。
现代文：大食有一种重锦，要二十匹骆驼才驮得动。不可能二十匹骆驼共载而行，所以裁为二十匹。每三年送黠戛斯一次。
English: There is a saying in the food industry that it takes 20 camels to move a donkey. It is not possible for 20 camels to travel together, so the number was reduced to 20. Donkeys are transported to Kasa once every three years.

古文：而回鹘授其君长阿热官为 毘伽顿颉斤 。
现代文：回鹘授官给其君长阿热为 毗伽顿颉斤 。
English: Huizong bestowed the title of "Vigatun" on his ruler, A-Re.

古文：回鹘稍衰，阿热即自称可汗。
现代文：回鹘渐渐衰微，阿热就自称可汗。
English: As his popularity gradually waned, he began to call himself a khan.

古文：其母，突骑施女也，为母可敦；妻葛禄叶护女，为可敦。
现代文：其母是突骑施的女儿，称母可敦；其妻是葛禄叶护的女儿，称可敦。
English: His mother was the daughter of Tujiaishi, called mother Kedon; his wife was the daughter of Gelu Yeguo, called Kedon.

古文：回鹘遣宰相伐之，不胜，挐斗二十年不解。
现代文：回鹘派宰相讨伐他，不能胜。往来争战二十年不能和解。
English: The prime minister of the Uighur faction fought against him and could not win. The two-decade-long war could not be reconciled.

古文：阿热恃胜，乃肆詈曰： 尔运尽矣！
现代文：阿热仗着自己战胜，就肆意谩骂： 你们的气数尽了。
English: A hotly defends himself against defeat, and then swears wildly: You've run out of gas.

古文：我将收尔金帐，于尔帐前驰我马，植我旗，尔能抗，亟来，即不能，当疾去。 
现代文：我将收取你们的金帐，在你们的帐前跑我的马、树我的旗。你们能较量，那就来；如不能，那就趁早滚开。 
English: I will take your money-box, run my horse before your money-box, plant my flag. If you can compete, then come; if not, then get out of the way.

古文：回鹘不能讨，其将句录莫贺导阿热破杀回鹘可汗，诸特勒皆溃。
现代文：回鹘没力量讨伐，其大将句录莫贺引阿热击杀回鹘可汗，各特勒都溃散。
English: The Uighurs had no strength to fight, so their general, Moga, led the Aryans to kill the Uighur khan, and the Uighurs dispersed.

古文：阿热身自将，焚其牙及公主所庐金帐者，回鹘可汗常坐也。
现代文：阿热亲自将兵，烧毁其牙廷及公主所住的金帐，那是回鹘可汗常坐的地方。
English: He personally led the soldiers to burn down his palace and the golden treasury where the princess lived. It was the place where the Uighur khan often sat.

古文：乃悉收其宝赀，并得太和公主，遂徙牙牢山之南。
现代文：收缴其全部资财，并得到太和公主。于是将牙廷迁到牢山之南。
English: He confiscated all of his property and wealth, and was given the title of grand duchess and princess. Therefore, he moved the imperial court to the south of Doosan.

古文：牢山亦曰赌满，距回鹘旧牙度马行十五日。
现代文：牢山，也叫赌满，距回鹘的旧牙廷估计马行十五日。
English: Duoshan, also known as Zhuman, is estimated to be 15 days away from the old imperial court in Huizhou.

古文：阿热以公主唐贵女，遣使者卫送公主还朝，为回鹘乌介可汗邀取之，并杀使者。
现代文：阿热因公主是唐的贵女，派使者卫送公主回朝。被回鹘乌介可汗在半路上拦劫，使者被杀。
English: Princess Ajain was a noblewoman of the Tang Dynasty. She sent an emissary, Wei, to escort the princess back to China. The emissary was robbed by the Hui Ujie Khan in the middle of the road and was killed.

古文：会昌中，阿热以使者见杀，无以通于朝，复遣注吾合素上书言状。注吾，虏姓也；合，言猛；素者，左也，谓武猛善左射者。
现代文：会昌年间，阿热因使者被杀，失掉了与朝廷相通的媒介，于是派注吾合素上书说明情况。 注吾 ，是虏人之姓， 合 ，意思是猛， 素 ，意为左，即武猛善于左射。
English: During the Huichang Emperor's reign, the envoy of the Emperor He was killed and lost the medium of communication with the imperial court, so he sent a letter to the emperor to explain the situation. "chugo," is the surname of the emperor, "chugo," means fierce, "chugo," means left, that is, Wu Meng is good at left-handed shooting.

古文：行三岁至京师，武宗大悦，班渤海使者上，以其处穷远，能脩职贡，命太仆卿赵蕃持节临慰其国，诏宰相即鸿胪寺见使者，使译官考山川国风。
现代文：他走了三年才到京师，武宗很高兴，让他站在渤海使者的上手。因为他们地处偏僻荒远而能保持职守，不时贡献，命太仆卿赵蕃持节前往慰抚，诏令宰相在鸿胪寺见使者，派译官考察其山川国风。
English: It took him three years to get to Beijing. Emperor Wuzong was pleased and put him at the disposal of the Bohai envoys. Since they were in a remote and desolate place, they were able to maintain their duties and make contributions from time to time. He ordered his servant Zhao Bingzhi to go to comfort the envoys. He also ordered the prime minister to meet the envoys at Hongye Temple and send an interpreter to investigate their mountain and river customs.

古文：宰相德裕上言： 贞观时，远国皆来，中书侍郎颜师古请如周史臣集四夷朝事为《王会篇》。
现代文：宰相李德裕进言： 贞观年时，远国都来朝，中书侍郎颜师古建议效周史臣集四夷朝事的情况写成《王会篇》。
English: Prime Minister Li Deyu said: In the year of Zhenguan, when faraway countries came to the North, the Chinese scribe Yan Shigu suggested that Zhou Shi Sheng should compile the situation of the Siyi Dynasty into the "King's Meeting."

古文：今黠戛斯大通中国，宜为《王会图》以示后世。 
现代文：现黠戛斯大通中国，该画《王会图》以晓谕后代。 
English: Now on display at the Great Hall of the People in China, the painting "King's Banquet" will be passed down to future generations.

古文：有诏以鸿胪所得缋著之。又诏阿热著宗正属籍。
现代文：皇帝即诏令将鸿胪会见的情况画下来，又诏令将阿热编入宗室正属籍。
English: The emperor ordered the situation of the meeting with Hung Ho to be drawn down, and ordered that Ah Ye be included in the family register.

古文：是时，乌介可汗余众托黑车子，阿热愿乘秋马肥击取之，表天子请师。
现代文：那时，乌介可汗的余众依附黑车子。阿热想乘秋马肥壮之时攻取他们，上表天子请发王师。
English: At that time, the remnants of Ushiekhan's army clung to the black chariot. Arye wanted to take advantage of the time when the horse was fat and strong to attack them, so he asked the king to send an army.

古文：帝令给事中刘濛为巡边使，朝廷亦以河、陇四镇十八州久沦戎狄，幸回鹘破弱，吐蕃乱，相残啮，可乘其衰。
现代文：皇帝令给事中刘氵蒙为巡边使，朝廷也因为河、陇的四镇十八州长久以来沦于戎狄，现在回鹘破弱，吐蕃内乱，互相残杀是个可乘之机。
English: The emperor ordered Liu Yimeng to act as a border patrol envoy in the matter. The imperial court has long been reduced to a military dictatorship because of the eighteen governors of the four towns of He and Handan. Now that the Hubei Province is weak and the Tubo Province is in civil strife, killing each other is a good opportunity.

古文：乃以右散骑常侍李拭使黠戛斯，册君长为宗英雄武诚明可汗。
现代文：就派右散骑常侍李拭出使黠戛斯，册封其君长为宗英雄武诚明可汗。
English: He dispatched his right rider, Li Wi, to send an envoy to Gansu, and crowned its ruler as the Zong hero, Wu Chengming Khan.

古文：未行，而武宗崩。
现代文：尚未启行而武宗崩。
English: However, he died before the journey could begin.

古文：宣宗嗣位，欲如先帝意，或谓黠戛斯小种，不足与唐抗，诏宰相与台省四品以上官议，皆曰： 回鹘盛时有册号，今幸衰亡，又加黠戛斯，后且生患。 
现代文：宣宗继立，准备完成先帝的意思，有人说黠戛斯是个小种族，不能与唐直接相通。诏令宰相与台省四品以上的官讨论。大家都说 ：回鹘强盛时曾有册封称号，如今有幸衰亡了。如再加封黠戛斯，将生后患。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong was preparing to fulfill the wishes of the former emperor by establishing a line of succession. Some people said that the Qiang people were a small race and could not communicate directly with the Tang. The emperor ordered the prime minister to discuss the matter with the officials of more than four provinces in Taiwan. Everyone said, "When the Qiang people were strong, they had the title of a vassal state, but now they have been fortunate to decline and die. If the Qiang people are added to the line of succession, they will suffer in the afterlife."

古文：乃止。
现代文：册封之事作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：至大中元年，卒诏鸿胪卿李业持节册黠戛斯为英武诚明可汗。
现代文：至大中元年，还是诏鸿胪卿李业持节前去册封黠戛斯为英武诚明可汗。
English: By the middle of the first year of the Great Leap Forward, it was still Zhao Hongzhi's Li Yingzhi who went to record and seal Xi Xi as Yingwu Chengming Khan before the festival.

古文：逮咸通间，三来朝。
现代文：直至咸通年间，三次来朝。
English: He came to the DPRK three times until the Hamdang period.

古文：然卒不能取回鹘。
现代文：然而终究不能夺取回鹘。
English: In the end, however, it was not possible to recapture the city.

古文：后之朝聘册命，史臣失传。
现代文：后来的朝聘及册命情况，史臣失传。
English: The subsequent appointment to the court and the circumstances of the appointment are lost to history.

古文：赞曰：夷狄资悍贪，人外而兽内，惟剽夺是视。
现代文：评论：夷狄本性剽悍贪婪，人面兽心，只知剽窃掠夺。
English: Comment: Yidi's nature is fierce and greedy, with a human face and a beast's heart. He only knows how to steal and plunder.

古文：故汤、武之兴，未尝与共功，盖疏而不戚也。
现代文：所以商汤周武之兴，未尝与他们有共事，因为关系疏远。
English: Therefore, Shangtang Zhouwujing did not try to work with them, because the relationship was distant.

古文：太宗初兴，尝用突厥矣，不胜其暴，卒缚而臣之。
现代文：太宗初兴，曾用突厥的力量，但不胜暴虐，终究要使之臣服。
English: Taizong Xinxing once used the power of the Turks, but he was defeated by tyranny and eventually had to be subdued.

古文：肃宗用回纥矣，至略华人，辱太子，笞杀近臣，求索无倪。
现代文：肃宗曾用回纥之力，以致回纥侵掠华人、侮辱太子、鞭杀近臣、索取无尽。
English: Su Zong had used the power of Hui Xuan, so that Hui Xuan invaded and plundered the Chinese, insulted the prince, whipped his close vassals, and made endless demands.

古文：德宗又用吐蕃矣，劫平凉，败上将，空破西陲。
现代文：德宗又用吐蕃，后来吐蕃攻劫平凉、打败上将、蹂躏西方边陲。
English: Dezong also used the spade, and later the spade to attack and plunder Pingliang, defeat the admiral, and ravage the western borderlands.

古文：所谓引外祸平内乱者也。
现代文：这些都是引外祸来平内乱的例子。
English: These are all examples of foreign mischief-making to quell civil unrest.

古文：夫用之以权，制之以谋，惟太宗能之。
现代文：以权势驾驭他们而用之，以谋略控制他们而调遣，只有太宗能做到。
English: It is only Taizong who can harness them with power and use them, and control them with strategy and dispatch them.

古文：若二主懦昏，狃而狎之，乌胜其弊哉！
现代文：像肃宗、德宗昏庸懦弱，不加提防地亲近他们，用其利怎能制其害呢？
English: If, like Su Zong and De Zong, you are weak and timid, and approach them without caution, how can you use their benefit to control their harm?

古文：彼亲之则责偿也多，慊而不满则滋怨，化以仁义则顽，示以法则忿，熟我险易则为患也博而惨，疗馁以冶葛，何时可哉？
现代文：对他们亲，他们要求的也多，若有不满就生怨恨。用仁义去教化他们，则顽钝不知恩，戒之以法令规则，则忿怒不驯服。掌握了我们的山川险易，为起患来广而且厉，用毒冶葛来充饥，能有好结果吗？
English: For their relatives, they also demand a lot, and if there is dissatisfaction, resentment will arise. If they are educated with benevolence and righteousness, they will be obtuse and ungrateful, and if they are disciplined with laws and regulations, their anger will not be tamed. If they have mastered our mountains and rivers, and they are dangerous and easy to control, and they are wide and strong for causing trouble, and they use poisonous yakitori to satisfy their hunger, can there be a good result?

古文：故《春秋》许夷狄者，不一而足，信矣。
现代文：所以《春秋》里说 许夷狄者，不一而足 。
English: Therefore, in "Spring and Autumn," it is said that Xu Yidi is one and the same.

