古文：士冠礼。筮于庙门。
现代文：士加冠的礼仪：在祢庙门前占筮加冠的吉日。
English: The etiquette of the crowning of a monk: in front of the gate of your temple, take advantage of the auspicious day of the crowning.

古文：主人玄冠，朝服，缁带，素□，即位于门东，西面。有司如主人服，即位于西方，东面，北上。
现代文：主人头戴玄冠，身穿朝服，腰束黑色大带，饰白色蔽膝，在庙门的东边就位，面朝西方；主人的属吏身着与主人相同的礼服，在庙门的西边就位，面朝东方。以北为上首。
English: The master, wearing a black crown on his head, a court dress, a large black sash around his waist, and a white knee cover, takes his place on the east side of the temple gate, facing west; the master's retainers, wearing the same ceremonial dress as the master, take their place on the west side of the temple gate, facing east, with north at the top.

古文：筮与席、所卦者，具馔于西塾。
现代文：蓍草、蒲席和记爻、记卦所用的卜具，都陈放在庙门外的西塾中。
English: The divination tools used for writing the Lotus Sutra, the Lotus Sutra Seat and the Lotus Sutra and the Lotus Sutra are all displayed in the West Juku outside the temple gate.

古文：布席于门中，闑西阈外，西面。
现代文：约在门外的中部，即门槛外，门中所竖短木偏西的地方布设筮席，筮席面朝西方。
English: About in the middle of the outside of the door, that is, outside the threshold, in the place west of the short tree in the middle of the door, a table was set up, with the table facing west.

古文：筮人执策，抽上韇，兼执之，进受命于主人。
现代文：筮人手持蓍草，抽开装着蓍草的蓍筒盖，一手持盖，一手持蓍筒下部，进前接受主人的吩咐。
English: The ploughman, holding a ploughshare, pulls open the lid of the ploughshare containing the ploughshare, holding the lid in one hand and the lower part of the ploughshare in the other, and steps forward to receive his master's command.

古文：宰自右少退，赞命。
现代文：宰在主人右方稍靠后的地方佐主人发布占筮之命。
English: After slaughtering the horse to the owner's right, slightly behind, the owner of Sa issued the order to kill the horse.

古文：筮人许诺，右还，即席坐，西面。
现代文：筮人应答后右转弯回到筮席，就席坐下，面朝西方。
English: After the eunuch answered, he turned right to return to the table, sat down, and faced west.

古文：卦者在左。
现代文：卦者的位置在筮人的左边。
English: At this time, the sorcerer is on the left of the eunuch.

古文：卒筮，书卦，执以示主人。
现代文：占筮完了，筮人将筮得的卦写在版上，拿去给主人看。
English: When the fortune-telling is over, the teller writes down the secret riddle on the board and shows it to the master.

古文：主人受□，反之。
现代文：主人接过去看毕，还给筮人。
English: The owner took it over, looked at it, and gave it back to the man.

古文：筮人还，东面，旅占，卒，进，告吉。
现代文：筮人回至筮席，面向东方，与他的属下共同占筮，占筮完毕，进前报告主人筮得吉卦。
English: The eunuch returned to the table, facing east, and together with his subordinates occupied the table. When they had finished occupying the table, they went forward to report that the host had won the game.

古文：若不吉，则筮远日，如初仪。
现代文：如果占筮结果不吉，就占筮以后的日期，其仪式与前相同。
English: If the result of the divination is unfavorable, the next date of the divination will be the same as the previous one.

古文：彻筮席。宗人告事毕。
现代文：占筮结束，撤去筮席，宗人宣布筮日之事结束。
English: The occupation ended, the banquet was removed, and the patriarch announced the end of the event.

古文：主人戒宾。宾礼辞，许。
现代文：主人至众宾家门告以 冠礼 日期，并请参加，他们辞谢一次便应许了。
English: The host announced the date of the coronation ceremony to all the guests and invited them to attend. They thanked him once and then accepted.

古文：主人再拜，宾答拜。
现代文：主人两拜宾，宾答拜。
English: The guest should decline first and make a promise. The host should bow twice and the guest should bow in return.

古文：主人退，宾拜送。
现代文：主人回，宾拜送主人。
English: The host stepped back, and the guest of honor was ushered out.

古文：前期三日，筮宾，如求日之仪。
现代文：在将行加冠礼之前三日，举行占筮正宾的仪式，与占筮日期的仪式相同。
English: Three days before the crowning ceremony, the ceremony for the chief guest is held, which is the same as the ceremony for the date of the crowning.

古文：乃宿宾。
现代文：于是，主人再次前往邀请正宾。
English: As a result, the host once again went to invite the guests.

古文：宾如主人服，出门左，西面再拜。主人东面答拜，乃宿宾。
现代文：正宾身穿与主人相同的礼服，迎出大门外东方，面朝西方两拜主人，主人面朝东答拜正宾。
English: The guest of honor, wearing the same dress as the host, faces east out of the gate, bows twice to the host facing west, and the host bows to the guest of honor facing east.

古文：宾许，主人再拜，宾答拜。
现代文：然后主人邀请正宾，正宾应许。主人对正宾两拜，正宾答拜。
English: Then the host invites the guest of honor, and the guest of honor accepts. The host bows twice to the guest of honor, and the guest of honor bows back.

古文：主人退，宾拜送。
现代文：主人退下，正宾拜送。
English: The host stepped back, and the guest of honor was ushered out.

古文：宿赞冠者一人，亦如之。
现代文：邀请赞冠者一名，仪式与邀请正宾相同。
English: Invite one person to praise the champion, and the ceremony is the same as inviting the guest of honor.

古文：厥明夕，为期于庙门之外。
现代文：第二天，即行加冠礼前一天的傍晚，举行约定行冠礼时辰的仪式，地点在庙门外。
English: The next day, that is, the evening of the day before the crowning ceremony, the ceremony of the agreed crowning ceremony was held, outside the temple gate.

古文：主人立于门东，兄弟在其南，少退，西面，北上。
现代文：主人站立在门外东边，众亲戚站在主人南边稍靠后一些的地方，面朝西方，以北为上首。
English: The owner stood outside the door on the east side, and the relatives stood on the south side of the owner, a little further back, facing west, with the north at the top.

古文：有司皆如宿服，立于西方，东面，北上，摈者请期，宰告曰： 质明行事。 
现代文：主人的属吏都身穿朝服，站在庙门外西边，面朝东方，以北为上首。摈者请问加冠礼的时辰。宰告知说： 明晨正天明时举行。 
English: The master's attendants were all dressed in imperial robes, standing on the west side outside the temple gate, facing east, with the north at the top. If you don't know, please ask for the time of the crowning ceremony. The priest informed: "It will be held tomorrow morning at dawn."

古文：告兄弟及有司。
现代文：摈者转告亲戚和众属吏。
English: The deceased told his relatives and all his subordinates.

古文：告事毕。
现代文：宗人宣布约期的仪式结束。
English: Sohito announced the end of the ceremony.

古文：摈者告期于宾之家。
现代文：摈者到众宾家通告行加冠礼的时辰。
English: The bridegroom went to the house of the guests to announce the time of the coronation.

古文：夙兴，设洗，直于东荣，南北以堂深，水在洗东。
现代文：清晨早起，在正对东屋翼的地方设置洗，洗与堂之间的距离与堂深相等。水设置在洗的东边。
English: Get up early in the morning, and set the washer in the place directly opposite the wing of the east building. The distance between the washer and the hall is equal to the depth of the hall. The water is set on the east side of the washer.

古文：陈服于房中西墉下，东领，北上。
现代文：礼服陈设在东房内西墙下，衣领朝东方，以北为上首。
English: The gowns are displayed in the east room, under the west wall, with the collars facing east, with the north at the top.

古文：爵弁服，纁裳，纯衣，缁带，韎韐。
现代文：先是爵弁服：浅绛色裙、丝质黑色上衣、黑色大带、赤黄色蔽膝。
English: First, the gown: pale navy skirt, silky black blouse, black sash, red and yellow knee cover.

古文：皮弁服：素积，缁带，素□。
现代文：其次是皮弁服：白色裙、黑色大带、白色蔽膝。
English: Next is the leather dress: white skirt, black belt, white knee cover.

古文：玄端，玄裳，黄裳、杂裳可也，缁带，爵□。
现代文：再次是玄端服：黑裙、黄裙、杂色裙都可以，黑色大带、赤黑色蔽膝。
English: Once again, it's the dress code: black skirts, yellow skirts, multi-colored skirts are all fine, black belts, red and black knee-length skirts.

古文：缁布冠，缺项，青组缨，属于缺；缁纚，广终幅，长六尺。皮弁笄，爵弁笄，缁组紘，纁边，同箧。
现代文：然后是加缁布冠所用的頍项、系结在頍上的青色冠缨、六尺长整幅宽的黑色束发巾、加皮弁所用的簪子、加爵弁所用的簪子、镶着浅红色边饰的黑色丝质冠带，以上物品同装于一只箱子里。
English: Then, in a single box, the hairpiece for the crest, the blue crest tied to the hairpin, the six-foot-long, full-width black hair-towel, the pigtails for the leather belt, the pigtails for the checkered belt, and the black silk sash with the red border.

古文：栉实于箪。
现代文：梳子放在箪中。
English: The comb is placed in the urn.

古文：蒲筵二，在南。
现代文：蒲苇席两张，放置在南边。
English: Two palanquin seats, placed on the south side.

古文：侧尊一甒醴，在服北。
现代文：在礼眼的北边，单独设置一甒醴。
English: On the north side of the ceremonial eye, a separate rim is set up.

古文：有篚实勺、觯、角柶。脯醢，南上。
现代文：又有勺、觯、角制的小匙，盛在筐篚中，还有干肉和肉酱，以南为上首。
English: There was also a spoon, a ladle, and a small horn-shaped spoon, set in a basket, and there was also dried meat and meat sauce, the southern part at the top.

古文：爵弁、皮弁、缁布冠各一匴，执以待于西坫南，南面，东上。宾升则东面。
现代文：爵弁、皮弁、缁布冠，各盛在一个冠箱里，主人的属吏各持一只冠箱，等候在西坫的南边，面朝南，以东方为上首，正宾登堂后则转而面朝东方。
English: The lord's bier, the leather bier, and the crown of embroidered cloth were each placed in a crown box. The master's attendants each held a crown box and waited on the south side of the west gallery, facing south, with the east at the top. After the chief guest entered the hall, they turned to face the east.

古文：主人玄端爵□，立于阼阶下，直东序，西面。
现代文：主人身着玄端，赤黑色蔽膝，站立在东阶下边正对东序的地方，面朝西方。
English: The owner is dressed in black and red, kneeling, standing at the bottom of the east staircase, facing west.

古文：兄弟毕袗玄，立于洗东，西面，北上。
现代文：众亲戚全都身着黑色的衣裳，站在洗的东面，面朝西方，以北为上首。
English: The relatives, all dressed in black, stood on the east side of the laver, facing west, with the north at the top.

古文：摈者玄端，负东塾。
现代文：摈者身穿玄端，背朝东塾站立。
English: The deaf person is dressed in black and stands with his back to the East Juku.

古文：将冠者采衣，紒，在房中，南面。
现代文：将冠者身穿采衣，头梳发髻，站在房中，面朝南方。
English: The champion, dressed in formal attire, with his hair combed back, stood in the room, facing south.

古文：宾如主人服，赞者玄端从之，立于外门之外。
现代文：正宾身穿与主人相同的礼服，赞冠人身着玄端相随，站立在大门外边。
English: The guest of honor, dressed in the same gown as the host, and the person praising him, dressed in the same way as the host, stand outside the gate.

古文：摈者告。
现代文：摈者出门请宾入内，并通报主人。
English: The host goes out to invite the guests in, and notifies the host.

古文：主人迎，出门左，西面，再拜。宾答拜。
现代文：主人出至大门东边迎接，面朝西两拜，正宾答拜。
English: The host goes out to the east side of the gate to greet, face west and bow twice, and the guest of honor bows.

古文：主人揖赞者，与宾揖，先入。
现代文：主人向赞冠人作揖行礼，又与正宾相对一揖，然后先进入大门。
English: The host made a bow to the winner, bowed to the guest of honor, and then entered the gate first.

古文：每曲揖。至于庙门，揖入。
现代文：每到转弯的地方，主人必与宾相对一揖。至庙门前，主人揖请正宾进入庙门。
English: Every time you come to a corner, the host must bow to the guest. When you reach the temple gate, the host should invite the guest to enter the temple gate.

古文：三揖，至于阶，三让。主人升，立于序端，西面。
现代文：如此相对三揖，到达堂前阶下，相互谦让三次，主人上堂，站立在东序南端，面朝西方。
English: In this way, relative to the three folds, when reaching the bottom of the front steps of the hall, the mutual modesty is three times, and the master enters the hall, standing at the southern end of the east row, facing west.

古文：宾西序，东面。
现代文：宾的位置在西序，面朝东方。
English: The guest's position is on the west row, facing east.

古文：赞者盥于洗西，升，立于房中，西面，南上。
现代文：赞冠人在洗的西边洗手后，登堂站立在房中，面朝西，以南边为上首。
English: After the praiseworthy person washes his hands on the west side of the sink, he enters the hall and stands in the room, facing west, with his head on the south side.

古文：主人之赞者筵于东序，少北，西面。
现代文：佐助主人的人在东序边稍靠北的地方布设筵席，面朝西方。
English: Sasuke's host set up the table facing west, a little north of the eastern row.

古文：将冠者出房，南面。
现代文：将冠者从房内出至堂上，面朝南方。
English: The winner is brought out of the room onto the hall, facing south.

古文：赞者奠纚、笄、栉于筵南端。
现代文：赞冠人把束头巾、簪子、梳子等物放置在席的南端。
English: The winner placed a bunch of headscarves, hairpins, combs, etc. on the south end of the seat.

古文：宾揖将冠者，将冠者即筵坐。
现代文：正宾对将冠者拱手一揖。将冠者即席坐下。
English: The guest of honor shakes hands with the champion, who promptly sits down.

古文：赞者坐，栉，设纚。
现代文：赞冠人也坐下，为将冠者梳理头发，并用头巾束发。
English: The champion's admirer also sat down and combed the champion's hair and tied it up with a headscarf.

古文：宾降，主人降。宾辞，主人对。
现代文：正宾下堂，主人也下堂，宾辞谢，主人应答。
English: When the guest leaves the hall, the host also leaves the hall. When the guest says thank you, the host responds.

古文：宾盥，卒，壹揖，壹让，升。
现代文：正宾洗手完毕，与主人相对一揖，相互谦让一番，然后上堂。
English: After the guests have washed their hands, they shake hands with the host, bow to each other, and then enter the hall.

古文：主人升，复初位。
现代文：主人也上堂，回到原位。
English: The master also went to the hall and returned to his original position.

古文：宾筵前坐，正纚，兴，降西阶一等。
现代文：正宾在筵席前坐下，为将冠者整理束发巾。
English: The chief guest sits down in front of the banquet and sorts out a bunch of hair towels for the winner.

古文：执冠者升一等，东面授宾。
现代文：然后站起，由西阶下一级台阶，持冠的人升上一级台阶，面向东把缁布冠交给正宾。
English: Then stand up, from the west step to the next step, the person holding the crown rises to the first step, facing east to give the satin crown to the main guest.

古文：宾右手执项，左手执前，进容，乃祝，坐如初，乃冠，兴，复位。
现代文：正宾右手持冠的后端，左手持冠的前端，仪容舒扬地前行至席前，然后致祝辞，如先前一样坐下，为将冠者加缁布冠。
English: The guest of honor holds the back end of the crown in his right hand and the front end of the crown in his left hand. He walks forward gracefully to the front of the table, then delivers a congratulatory speech, sits down as before, and adds a cloth crown to the winner.

古文：赞者卒。
现代文：然后起立，回到原来的位置。
English: Then stand up and return to your original position.

古文：冠者兴，宾揖之。
现代文：赞冠人为冠者加頍项，系好冠缨，完毕。
English: The winner's praise is the winner's addition, tie a good crown, and it's over.

古文：适房，服玄端爵□，出房，南面。
现代文：冠者站起，正宾对他作揖行礼。冠者进入房内，穿上玄端服、赤黑色蔽膝，从房中出来，面朝南方。
English: The winner stood up, and the guest of honor bowed to him. The winner entered the room, put on a black suit and a red and black knee-length skirt, and came out of the room, facing south.

古文：宾揖之，即筵坐。
现代文：正宾对冠者行揖礼，冠者即席坐下。
English: The guest of honor bowed to the winner, who promptly sat down.

古文：栉，设笄。宾盥、正纚如初，降二等，受皮弁，右执项，左执前，进、祝、加之如初，复位。
现代文：赞冠人为他梳理头发，插上簪子，正宾下堂洗手，然后为他整理束发巾，都与初加冠的仪式相同。正宾由西阶下两级台阶，接过皮弁，右手持冠后端，左手持前端，进前致祝辞，为冠者戴上，仪式与初加冠相同。正宾回到原位。
English: The champion combs his hair, puts in the braids, the chief guest washes his hands in the hall, and then arranges a bunch of hair towels for him, all of which are the same as the ceremony of the first crowning. The chief guest takes the two steps down from the west step, takes the flap, holds the back end of the crown in his right hand and the front end in his left hand, steps forward to make a congratulatory speech, and puts it on for the champion, the ceremony is the same as the first crowning. The chief guest returns to his original position.

古文：赞者卒紘。
现代文：赞冠人为冠者结好皮弁冠的纽带。
English: The winner's praise is the tie that binds the winner.

古文：兴，宾揖之。
现代文：冠者站起，正宾对他拱手作揖。
English: The winner stood up, and the guest of honor bowed to him.

古文：适房，服素积素□，容，出房，南面。
现代文：冠者进房内，穿上白色裳、白色蔽膝，仪容端正，从房中出来，面朝南方站立。
English: The winner enters the room, puts on a white gown, white knee-length dress, neat appearance, comes out of the room and stands facing south.

古文：宾降三等，受爵弁，加之，服纁裳韎韐，其他如加皮弁之仪。
现代文：正宾由西阶下三级台阶，接过爵弁为冠者戴上。冠者穿上浅色红裙、赤黄色蔽膝。其他与加皮弁冠的仪式相同。
English: The chief guest descends three steps from the west step, takes the gavel and puts it on for the winner. The winner puts on a light red dress and a red-and-yellow knee cover. The rest of the ceremony is the same as the crowning of the gavel.

古文：彻皮弁、冠、栉、筵入于房。
现代文：撤去皮弁冠、缁布冠、梳子、筵席等物，进入房中。
English: Remove the leather valve crown, satin cloth crown, comb, table and other things, and enter the room.

古文：筵于户西，南面。
现代文：佐助主人的人在室门西边堂上布设筵席，面朝南方。
English: Sasuke's master's people set up a table in the hall on the west side of the door, facing south.

古文：赞者洗于房中，侧酌醴；加柶，覆之，面叶。
现代文：赞冠人在房中洗觯，独自斟醴，把小匙口朝下放在觯上，匙头朝前。
English: The praiseworthy person washes the bowl in the room, pours the bowl alone, puts the small spoon mouth down on the bowl, and the spoon head faces forward.

古文：宾揖，冠者就筵，筵西，南面。
现代文：正宾对冠者作揖行礼，冠者即席，在席西端，面朝南方。
English: The guest of honor gives a bow to the winner, who is seated at the western end of the table, facing south.

古文：冠者即筵坐，左执觯，右祭脯醢，以柶祭醴三，兴；筵末坐，啐醴，建柶，兴；降筵，坐奠觯，拜；执觯兴。
现代文：赞冠人把干肉和肉酱进置于席前。冠者即席坐下，左手持觯，右手祭干肉和肉酱。然后用角质的小匙祭醴三番，站起。在席的西头坐下，尝醴。把小匙插置觯中，起立。然后走下筵席，坐下，把觯放在地上，对正宾行拜礼，手持醴觯起立。
English: The person praising the champion places the dried meat and meat sauce in front of the table. The champion sits down at the table, holds the gong in his left hand, and offers the dried meat and meat sauce in his right hand. Then he offers the gong three times with a horny spoon and stands up. Sit down at the west end of the table, taste the gong. Insert the spoon into the gong and stand up. Then walk down the table, sit down, put the gong on the ground, worship the chief guest, and stand up holding the gong.

古文：宾答拜。
现代文：正宾答拜。
English: Sit down, put down the wine goblet, bow, take the goblet and stand up.

古文：冠者奠觯于荐东，降筵；北面坐取脯；降自西阶，适东壁，北面见于母。
现代文：冠者把觯放在笾豆东边地上，走下筵席，面朝北坐下取干肉。然后从西阶下堂，行至东墙闱门外，面朝北拜见母亲。
English: The champion placed the yakitori on the ground to the east of the peas, walked down from the yakitori table, sat down facing north, and took the dried meat. Then he walked from the west steps of the hall to the outside of the east wall gate, facing north to visit his mother.

古文：母拜受，子拜送，母又拜。
现代文：母亲拜受干肉，冠者拜送，母亲再次拜冠者。
English: The mother bowed to receive the dried meat, the champion bowed to send it off, and the mother bowed again to the champion.

古文：宾降，直西序，东面。
现代文：正宾下堂，在与西序相对的地方站定，面朝西方。
English: The chief guest goes down the hall and stands in the place opposite the west row, facing west.

古文：主人降，复初位。
现代文：主人下堂，回至原来上台阶前的位置。
English: The host went down the hall and returned to his original position before going up the steps.

古文：冠者立于西阶东，南面。
现代文：冠者站立在西阶东边，面朝南方。
English: The winner stands on the east side of the west steps, facing south.

古文：宾字之，冠者对。
现代文：正宾为冠者命字，冠者应答。
English: The guest of honor is the word of the champion, and the champion answers.

古文：宾出主人送于庙门外。请醴宾，宾礼辞，许。
现代文：正宾退出，主人送出庙门外，请以醴礼酬正宾。
English: If the guest withdraws and the host sends them out of the temple, please reward the guest with a gong.

古文：宾就次。
现代文：正宾辞让一次后应许，至更衣处等候。
English: The guest of honor promised to leave after one concession and wait in the locker room.

古文：冠者见于兄弟，兄弟再拜，冠者答拜。
现代文：冠者拜见众亲戚，亲戚向冠者两拜，冠者答拜。
English: The champion bows to the relatives, the relatives bow twice to the champion, and the champion bows in return.

古文：见赞者，西面拜，亦如之。
现代文：然后拜见赞冠人。冠者面朝西行拜礼，仪式与拜见亲戚相同。
English: The winner faces west and goes to worship. The ceremony is the same as visiting relatives.

古文：入见姑、姊，如见母。
现代文：又进寝宫拜见姑母、姊姊，仪式与拜见母亲时相同。
English: They also went into the bedchamber to visit their aunt and sister, and the ceremony was the same as when they visited their mother.

古文：乃易服，服玄冠、玄端、爵□，奠挚见于君。
现代文：于是冠者更换礼服，戴玄冠，穿玄端服，饰赤黑色蔽膝。冠者进献礼物，朝见国君。
English: As a result, the winner changed his dress, wore a brown crown, wore a black dress, decorated with red and black, and covered his knees. The winner presented a gift and met the sovereign.

古文：遂以挚见于乡大夫、乡先生。
现代文：接着携礼物晋见卿大夫和乡先生。
English: Next, he brought gifts to meet the doctor and Mr. Xiang.

古文：乃醴宾，以一献之礼。
现代文：主人以壹献之礼宴请正宾。
English: The host invites the chief guest to a banquet.

古文：主人酬宾，束帛、俪皮。
现代文：主人以一束锦、两张鹿皮酬谢正宾。
English: The host rewarded the guest with a bunch of brocade and two deer skins.

古文：赞者皆与。赞冠者为介。
现代文：众宾也都参加宴饮。赞冠人担任正宾介。
English: All the guests also took part in the banquet. The winner was the chief guest.

古文：宾出，主人送于外门外，再拜；归宾俎。
现代文：正宾退出，主人送到大门外，向宾行再拜礼。
English: The guests leave, the host sends them outside the gate, and they bow to the guests again.

古文：若不醴，则醮用酒。
现代文：并且派人把醴宾用的牲肉送到宾家。如果不用醴法，则可用酒行醮礼。
English: In addition, a person is sent to deliver the meat to the guest's house. If you don't use the roasting method, you can make a toast with alcohol.

古文：尊于房户之间，两甒，有禁，玄酒在西，加勺，南枋。
现代文：在房和室门之间设置两只酒甒，甒下设有酒禁，玄酒放在西边，上边放置勺子，勺柄朝南。
English: Two wine racks are placed between the room and the door, with alcohol prohibited under the racks, the wine is placed on the west side, and a spoon is placed on the top, with the spoon handle facing south.

古文：洗，有篚在西，南顺。
现代文：在庭东洗的西边设置筐篚，篚的首端朝北而尾顺向南。
English: Set up baskets on the west side of the east-washed garden, with the first end of the basket facing north and the tail facing south.

古文：始加，醮用脯醢；宾降，取爵于篚，辞降如初；卒洗，升酌。
现代文：第一次加缁布冠，行醮礼用干肉和肉酱。正宾下堂从篚中取爵；主人也下堂，正宾辞让，与前述仪式相同。
English: For the first time, the cloth crown is added, and dried meat and meat sauce are used for the ceremony. The guest of honor comes down the hall to take the crown from the bowl; the host also comes down the hall, and the guest of honor resigns, which is the same as the above-mentioned ceremony.

古文：冠者拜受，宾答拜如初。
现代文：正宾洗爵完毕，上堂斟酒。冠者拜接酒爵，正宾答拜，仪式与之前相同。
English: After the guest of honor is knighted, the wine is poured in the hall. The champion bows to the baron, the guest of honor bows back, and the ceremony is the same as before.

古文：冠者升筵，坐；左执爵，右祭脯醢，祭酒，兴；筵末坐，啐酒；降筵，拜。宾答拜。
现代文：冠者即席坐下，左手持爵，右手祭干肉和肉酱，然后祭酒。冠者起立，在席西端坐下尝酒。下筵席向正宾行拜礼，正宾答拜。
English: The winner sits down at the table, holding a knight in his left hand, offering dried meat and meat sauce in his right hand, and then offering wine. The winner stands up, sits down at the west end of the table and tastes the wine. At the end of the meal, he bows to the guest of honor, and the guest of honor bows back.

古文：冠者奠爵于荐东，立于筵西。
现代文：冠者的东边在笾豆的放下酒爵，站立在筵席的西面。
English: On the east side of the champion, there is a wine baron standing on the western side of the banquet.

古文：彻荐、爵，筵尊不彻。
现代文：撤去笾豆和酒爵，筵席和酒尊不撤。
English: Take away the peas and the wine, but the feast and the wine remain.

古文：加皮弁，如初仪；再醮，摄酒，其他皆如初。
现代文：二加皮弁，仪式与初次加冠相同。第二次行醮礼，要对酒加以整理、添益。
English: For the second crowning, the ceremony is the same as for the first crowning, but the wine must be sorted out and improved.

古文：加爵弁，如初仪；三醮，有乾肉折俎，哜之，其他如初。北面取脯，见于母。
现代文：其他仪式与前述相同。
English: Other ceremonies are the same as above.

古文：若杀，则特豚，载合升，离肺实于鼎，设扃鼏。
现代文：加爵弁的仪式也与前相同。三行醮礼，有干肉、折节盛于俎的牲体，品尝它，其他仪式也与前边相同。
English: The ceremony for awarding a knighthood is also the same as the previous one. There are three lines of bowing, there is dried meat, a piece of animal stuffed in a bowl, taste it, and other ceremonies are the same as the previous one.

古文：始醮，如初。
现代文：冠者面向北取干肉拜见母亲。
English: The winner faces north to pick up dried meat and visit his mother.

古文：再醮，两豆，葵菹、蠃醢；两笾，栗、脯。
现代文：第二次行醮礼，用两只豆，盛腌菜和蜗牛肉酱；两只笾，盛栗脯。
English: For the second bowl, use two beans, a serving of stew and beef stew sauce; two clams, a serving of chestnuts.

古文：三醮，摄酒如再醮，加俎，哜之，皆如初，哜肺。
现代文：三行醮礼，整理、添酒与第二次相同，有牲体，尝牲，都与前述仪式相同。并尝肺。
English: The three parts of the ceremony are the same as the previous ceremony, including the preparation and serving of the wine, the presence of the animal, and the tasting of the animal. The lungs are also tasted.

古文：卒醮，取笾脯以降，如初。
现代文：行醮礼完毕，冠者取出笾中的干肉下堂等仪式，也都与前述相同。
English: After the ceremony, the champion will take out the dried meat from the yakitori and walk down the hall, and other ceremonies will also be the same as those mentioned above.

古文：若孤子，则父兄戒、宿。
现代文：如果将冠者是孤儿，则由他的伯父叔父或堂兄代为通知和召请宾客。
English: If the best man is an orphan, his uncle or cousin will inform and invite guests on his behalf.

古文：冠之日，主人紒而迎宾，拜，揖，让，立于序端，皆如冠主；礼于阼。
现代文：加冠那天，将冠者束发髻迎宾。拜、揖、让，站立在东序南端，都与冠者父亲所行的仪式相同。
English: On the day of the crowning, the winner is welcomed with a bunch of hair bows. The bowing, kneeling, and bowing, standing at the southern end of the east row, are the same as the ceremony performed by the champion's father.

古文：凡拜，北面于阼阶上，宾亦北面于西阶上答拜。
现代文：在阼阶上行礼。凡行拜礼，都在阼阶上，面朝北方。正宾也同样在西阶上答拜。
English: Perform the prostration on the rung of the stairs. Everyone who performs the prostration does so on the rung of the stairs, facing north. The chief guest also performs the prostration on the west step.

古文：若杀，则举鼎陈于门外，直东塾，北面。
现代文：如果是杀牲，则抬鼎陈放在庙门外边，正对着东塾，面朝北。
English: If it is a sacrificial animal, it is placed on the outside of the temple gate, facing the East Juku, facing north.

古文：若庶子，则冠于房外，南面，遂醮焉。
现代文：如果冠者是庶子，则在房外加冠，面朝南方，然后行醮礼。
English: If the crown is an illegitimate child, it is crowned outside the house, facing south, and then bowed.

古文：冠者母不在，则使人受脯于西阶下。
现代文：如果冠者母亲因故不在家，则使人在西阶下代母亲接受冠者所献上的干肉。
English: If the winner's mother is not at home for some reason, the winner's mother will be asked to accept the dried meat offered by the winner.

古文：戒宾，曰： 某有子某。将加布于其首，愿吾子之教之也。 
现代文：告宾时致辞说： 某人有儿子名某某，将要为他加缁布冠，希望先生能前往教导。 
English: In his speech to the guests, he said, "Someone has a son named so-and-so, and they are going to crown him with a crown. I hope Mr. So-and-so will come to teach."

古文：宾对曰： 某不敏，恐不能共事，以病吾子，敢辞。 
现代文：宾致答辞说： 某人不才，恐怕不能胜任此事，有辱先生，所以冒昧推辞。 
English: In his reply, Mr. Bing said, "Someone is incompetent, I'm afraid I can't do the job, it's a disgrace, so I'm taking the liberty to decline.

古文：主人曰： 某犹愿吾子之终教之也！ 
现代文：主人说： 某人仍然期望先生终能前去指教。 
English: The owner said: "Some people still hope that my husband will come to teach.

古文：宾对曰： 吾子重有命，某敢不从？ 
现代文：宾回答说： 先生再次吩咐，某人怎敢不遵从！ 
English: Bing replied, "Once again, sir, how dare someone disobey an order!

古文：宿，曰： 某将加布于某之首，吾子将莅之，敢宿。 
现代文：召请正宾时致辞说： 某人将为某某加缁布冠，先生将光临，冒昧前来恭请。 
English: When summoning the chief guest, he made a speech, saying, "Someone will be crowned with such-and-such a gallon of cloth, a gentleman will be present, please come and pay your respects."

古文：宾对曰： 某敢不夙兴？ 
现代文：正宾回答说： 某人不敢不早起前往！ 
English: The guest of honor replied, "Someone dared to get up early to go!"

古文：始加，祝曰： 令月吉日，始加元服。弃尔幼志，顺尔成德。寿考惟祺，介尔景福。 
现代文：初次加缁布冠，致祝辞说： 选择善月吉日，为你戴上缁布冠，去掉你的童稚之心，慎修你成人的美德，属你高寿吉祥，昊天降予大福。 
English: For the first time, he added a crown of scarlet cloth, and said in his congratulatory speech: Choose a good month and a good day, put on a crown of scarlet cloth for you, get rid of your childish heart, and carefully cultivate your adult virtues. It is auspicious for your longevity, and the day is given to great fortune.

古文：再加，曰： 吉月令辰，乃申尔服。敬尔威仪，淑慎尔德。眉寿万年，永受胡福。 
现代文：二加皮弁致辞说： 选择吉月良辰，为你再戴皮弁冠，端正你的容貌威仪，敬慎你内心的德性，愿你长寿万年，天永远降你福祉。 
English: He said in his speech, "Choose a good time in the auspicious month, wear a leather valance crown again for you, straighten up your appearance and dignity, be cautious of your inner virtue, may you live forever, and may the heavens forever bless your well-being."

古文：三加，曰： 以岁之正，以月之令，咸加尔服。兄弟具在，以成厥德。
现代文：三加爵弁致辞说： 在这吉祥的年月，为你完成加冠的成年礼，亲戚都来祝贺，成就你的美德。
English: In his speech, the 3rd Baronet said: In these auspicious years, relatives have come to congratulate you on the completion of your crowning rite of passage and the achievement of your virtue.

古文：黄耇无疆，受天之庆。 
现代文：愿你长寿无疆，承受上天的赐福。 
English: May you live a long and prosperous life and receive God's blessings.

古文：醴辞曰： 甘醴惟厚，嘉荐令芳。拜受祭之，以定尔祥。
现代文：醴礼的致辞说： 醴酒味美醇厚，干肉肉醢芳香，拜受醴荐祭先祖，诚敬以定吉祥。
English: The eulogy speech said: The eulogy speech said: The eulogy speech said: The eulogy speech said: The eulogy speech said: The eulogy speech said: The eulogy speech said: The eulogy speech said: The eulogy speech said: The eulogy speech said: The eulogy speech said:

古文：承天之休，寿考不忘。 
现代文：托庇皇天福佑，永保美名不忘。 
English: With the blessing of God, Emperor Topi will always be remembered for his beauty.

古文：醮辞曰： 旨酒既清，嘉荐亶时。
现代文：醮礼的致辞说： 美酒清洌，芳香的脯醢进献及时。
English: The speech of the toast said: Fine wine is clear, fragrant gourd is timely.

古文：始加元服，兄弟具来。
现代文：初加缁布冠，亲戚都来赞礼。
English: The first time I wore the crown, all my relatives came to congratulate me.

古文：孝友时格，永乃保之。 
现代文：极尽孝友之道，定可永久安保。 
English: The way of extreme filial piety and friendship will ensure permanent security.

古文：再醮，曰： 旨酒既湑，嘉荐伊脯。乃申尔服，礼仪有序。
现代文：第二次行醮礼致辞说： 美酒清洁，脯醢芳香，再加皮弁冠，礼仪井然有秩序。
English: The second salute speech said: "The wine is clean, the gourd is fragrant, the crown is leather, and the etiquette is in order.

古文：祭此嘉爵，承天之祜。 
现代文：执此美酒来祭祝，恭承昊天降大福。 
English: Hold this fine wine to celebrate and celebrate the blessing of Hao Tianru Daifu.

古文：三醮，曰： 旨酒令芳，笾豆有楚。咸加尔服，肴升折俎。
现代文：第三次行醮礼致辞说： 美酒甘醇芬芳，笾豆陈列馨香，为你完成成年礼，佳肴具陈有折俎。
English: The speech for the third coming-of-age ceremony said: "The wine is sweet and fragrant, the peas are fragrant, and you have completed the coming-of-age ceremony.

古文：承天之庆，受福无疆。 
现代文：恭承昊天之庆，秉受无疆福禄。 
English: Celebrating the anniversary of Haotian, adhering to the boundless fortune.

古文：字辞曰： 礼仪既备，令月吉日，昭告尔字。
现代文：命字致辞说： 礼仪已行齐备，在这善月吉日，宣告你的表字。
English: "The etiquette has been completed. On this auspicious day, announce your name.

古文：爰字孔嘉，髦士攸宜。
现代文：表字十分美好，正与俊士相配。
English: The calligraphy on the watch is very beautiful and matches the watch.

古文：宜之于假，永受保之，曰伯某甫。 仲、叔、委，唯其所当。
现代文：取字以适宜为大，禀受永远保有它，称呼伯某甫、仲某甫、叔某甫、季某甫，唯其适当为美称。 
English: It is best to choose a word that is appropriate, and you should always keep it, and call it Bo Mou Fu, Zhong Mou Fu, Uncle Mou Fu, Ji Mou Fu. However, its appropriateness is a beautiful name.

