古文：郎顗襄楷
现代文：◆郎顗传
English: ◆Rohaku-den

古文：郎顗字雅光，北海安丘人也。
现代文：郎顗字雅光，北海安丘人。
English: Lang Hao Zi Yaguang, a native of Anqiu in the North Sea.

古文：父宗，字仲绥，学《京氏易》，善风角、星算、六日七分，能望气占候吉凶，常卖卜自奉。
现代文：父郎宗，字仲绥，学习《京氏易》，长于风角、星算、六日七分，能望气候占候吉凶，常卖卜养活自己。
English: His father, also known as Zhongyi, studied "The Book of Changes of the Capital," and was good at wind angle, star calculation, six days and seven minutes, could predict the weather, and often sold magic to support himself.

古文：安帝征之，对策为诸儒表，后拜吴令。
现代文：安帝召他，对策为诸儒表率，后来拜为吴县令。
English: An Di called him, the countermeasure was to set an example for all Confucians, and later he became the Wu County Governor.

古文：时卒有暴风，宗占知京师当有大火，记识时日，遣人参候，果如其言。
现代文：这时猝然有风暴，郎宗占卜得知京师当有大火，记识时日，派人打听，果然如他所言。
English: At this time, there was a sudden storm, and Langzong divination learned that there was a big fire in Beijing. He knew the time and date, and sent someone to inquire. It was as he said.

古文：诸公闻而表上，以博士征之。
现代文：诸公听了用表上闻，朝廷用博士召他。
English: The princes listened to his words, and the imperial court called him with the title of doctor.

古文：宗耻以占验见知，闻征书到，夜县印绶于县廷而遁去，遂终身不仕。
现代文：郎宗认为因占验被知为耻，听得召书到了，晚上将印绶挂在县廷而逃去，于是终身不做官。
English: Lang Zong thought that it was a shame to be known as a result of the occupation test, and when he heard the summons, he hung the seal at the county court in the evening and fled, so he did not work as an official for life.

古文：顗少传父业，兼明经典，隐居海畔，延致学徒常数百人。
现代文：郎顗少时传习父亲的学业，兼明经典，隐居海边，教学徒常达数百人。
English: When he was young, Lang Yao studied his father's schoolwork and classics, lived in seclusion by the sea, and taught hundreds of students.

古文：昼研精义，夜占象度，勤心锐思，朝夕无倦。
现代文：白天研究精义，晚上占卜象度，勤心苦思，早晚不知疲倦。
English: Study the essence of the essence during the day, at night divination, diligent and hard-working, tireless in the morning and evening.

古文：州郡辟召，举有道、方正，不就。
现代文：州郡辟召，举他做有道、方正，不去就职。
English: The state and county have summoned him to be a virtuous and upright person, but he will not take up the post.

古文：顺帝时，灾异屡见，阳嘉二年正月，公正征，顗乃诣阙拜章曰：臣闻天垂妖象，地见灾符，所以谴告人主，责躬修德，使正机平衡，流化兴政也。
现代文：顺帝时，灾异屡次出现，阳嘉二年正月，公车征召，郎顗便到朝庭拜上奏章说： 臣听说天降妖象，地现灾符，为的是谴告人主，责躬修德，使正机得到平衡，流化兴政。
English: When Emperor Shun was on the throne, disasters and calamities occurred repeatedly. In the first month of the second year of Yang Jia, when a bus was called out, Lang Jie went to the imperial court to pay homage and recite the following poem: "I have heard that there is a demonic elephant descending from the heavens, and a calamity symbol appearing on the ground, in order to reprimand the human masters, to enjoin the cultivation of virtue, to balance the right opportunity, and to promote the flow of politics.

古文：《易内传》曰： 凡灾异所生，各以其政。
现代文：《易内传》说： 凡灾异所生，各以其政。
English: "I Nei Chuan" said: All born of disaster, each with its own politics.

古文：变之则除，消之亦除。 
现代文：变之则除，消之亦除。 
English: Change is excluded, elimination is also excluded.

古文：伏惟陛下躬日吴之听，温三省之勤，思过念咎，务消祇悔。
现代文：想到陛下亲自日昃之听政，温习曾子三省其身之勤，思过念咎，务消大悔。 
English: I thought of His Majesty personally listening to politics, reviewing the diligence of his three great-grandsons in the three provinces, thinking about the guilt, and avoiding major regrets.

古文：方今时俗奢佚，浅恩薄义。
现代文： 当前时俗奢侈淫佚，浅恩薄义。
English: At present, vulgarity, extravagance, lasciviousness, and shallow gratitude are rampant.

古文：夫救奢必于俭约，拯薄无若敦厚，安上理人，莫善于礼。
现代文：救奢必须俭约，拯薄不如敦厚，安抚上面，理顺百姓，没有比用礼再好的。
English: There is no better way to save the rich than to be frugal, to save the poor than to be generous, to appease the higher-ups than to straighten out the people.

古文：修礼遵约，盖惟上兴，革文变薄，事不在下。
现代文：修礼遵约，只有上面带头，改变文薄，事情不在下面。
English: Only the higher-ups can take the lead in performing rituals and fulfilling contracts, and things cannot be changed from below.

古文：故《周南》之德，《关雎》政本。
现代文：所以《周南》之德，《关睢》是为政之本。
English: Therefore, the virtues of "Zhou Nan" and "Guanzhang" are the basis for politics.

古文：本立道生，风行草从，澄其源者流清，混其本者末浊。
现代文：本立就道生，风行则草从，澄其水源则流水必清，混其根本则末必浊。
English: The original is the way of life, the trend is the grass, the clear water is the source of the water, and the mixed water is the root.

古文：天地之道，其犹鼓，以虚为德，自近及远者也。
现代文：天地之道，和鼓硁相似，以虚为德，自近及远。
English: The way of heaven and earth is similar to the way of the drum and gong, with the virtue of emptiness, from near and far.

古文：伏见往年以来，园陵数灾，炎光炽猛，惊动神灵。
现代文：臣下看到往年以来，园陵数次现灾，火光很旺，惊动神灵。
English: The vassals saw that since the past years, there had been several disasters in the garden, and the flames were very bright, which alarmed the gods.

古文：《易天人应》曰： 君子不思遵利，兹谓无泽，厥灾孽火烧其宫。 
现代文：《易天人应》说： 君子不思遵利，兹谓无泽，厥灾孽火烧其宫。 
English: "Yi Tianren Ying" said: A gentleman does not think about profit, so he is dull, and misfortune and evil will burn his palace.

古文：又曰： 君高台府，犯阴侵阳，厥灾火。 
现代文：又说 ：君高台府，犯阴侵阳，厥灾火。 
English: He also said, "Jun Gao Taifu, commit yin and yang, cause fire and disaster."

古文：又曰： 上不俭，下不节，炎火并作烧君室。 
现代文：又说 ：上不俭，下不节，炎火并作烧君室。 
English: He also said: "The upper class is not frugal, the lower class is not punctual, and the flames burn down the prince's house."

古文：自顷缮理西苍，修复太学，宫殿官府，多所构饰。
现代文：近来治理西苑，修复太学，宫殿官府，建造许多。
English: Recently, the administration of the West Garden, the restoration of Taigaku, the palace government, and the construction of many buildings.

古文：昔盘庚迁殷，去奢即俭，夏后卑室，尽力致美。
现代文：从前盘庚迁殷，去奢侈，即俭约，夏后卑室，尽力致美。
English: From the former Pan Geng to Yin, to luxury, that is, frugality, after the summer to the lowly, and strive to be beautiful.

古文：又鲁人为长府，闵子骞曰： 仍旧贯，何必改作。 
现代文：又鲁国人为长府，闵子骞说： 仍旧贯，何必改作。 
English: Lu Guomin was also the prefect of the prefecture, and Zou Ziqi said, "If it is still the same, why change it?"

古文：臣愚以为诸所缮修，事可省减，禀恤贫人，赈赡孤寡，此天之意也，人之庆也，仁之本也，俭之要也。
现代文：臣愚认为这些缮修，事可省俭，用仓廪救济贫人，赈济孤儿寡妇，这是天意，人之福庆，仁之根本，俭之要义。
English: Zhenwu believed that these repairs and renovations could be done economically, and that the use of granaries to help the poor and orphans and widows was the will of heaven, the blessing of mankind, the foundation of benevolence, and the essence of thrift.

古文：焉有应天养人，为仁为俭，而不降福者哉？
现代文：哪有应天养人，为仁为俭，而不降福的呢？ 
English: For who is there that provideth for a stranger, and for the fatherless, and for the widow, and for him that hath no helper?

古文：土者地祇，阴性澄静，宜以施化之时，敬而勿扰。
现代文： 土是地礻氏，阴性澄静，宜用施化之时节，敬而不扰。
English: The earth is the earthworm's, the negative is clear and quiet, it is appropriate to use the time to perform the incarnation, respectfully but not disturb.

古文：窃见正月以来，阴暗连日。
现代文：正月以来，阴暗连日。
English: Since the first month of the year, it has been gloomy for days on end.

古文：《易内传》曰： 久阴不雨，乱气也，《蒙》之《比》也。
现代文：《易内传》说 ：久阴不雨，乱气也，《蒙》之《比》也。
English: "Yi Nai Chuan" said: "Long time no rain, turbulent air, and the "ratio" of "monsoon."

古文：蒙者，君臣上下相冒乱也。 
现代文：蒙者，君臣上下相冒乱也。 
English: Monks, lords and ministers are also in turmoil.

古文：又曰： 欲德不用，厥异常阴。 
现代文：又说 ： 欲德不明，厥异常阴。 
English: He also said, "If one's desire and virtue are not clear, one will not be virtuous."

古文：夫贤者化之本，云者雨之具也。
现代文：贤人是化的根本，云是雨的具现。
English: The sage is the root of humanization, and the cloud is the embodiment of rain.

古文：得贤而不用，犹久阴而不雨也。
现代文：得了贤人而不用，好比久阴而不下雨。
English: To have a wise man and not to use him is like having long shade and no rain.

古文：又顷前数日，寒过其节，冰既解释，还复凝合。
现代文：前数月，寒过其节，冰已解化，又凝结起来。
English: In the past few months, the cold weather has passed, the ice has dissolved, and it has congealed again.

古文：夫寒往则暑来，暑往则寒来，此言日月相推，寒暑相避，以成物也。
现代文：寒往就暑来，暑往就寒来，这是说日月相推，寒暑相避，以促成事物。
English: When it is cold, it is hot, and when it is hot, it is cold. This is to say that the sun and the moon push each other, and the cold and the heat avoid each other, so as to facilitate things.

古文：今立春之后，火卦用事，当温而寒，违反时节，由功赏不至，而刑罚必加也。
现代文：现在立春之后，火卦用事，常温而寒，违反时节，由于功赏不至，而刑罚必加。
English: Now, after the first day of spring, fire divination, normal temperature and cold, in violation of the season, because the reward is not forthcoming, and the punishment must be increased.

古文：宜须立秋，顺气行罚。
现代文：应等立秋，顺气行罚。 
English: It should wait for the beginning of autumn, and the punishment should be carried out smoothly.

古文：臣伏案《飞侯》，参察众政，以为立夏之后，当有震裂涌水之害。
现代文： 臣伏案《飞候》，参察众政，认为立夏之后，当有震裂涌水之害。
English: Subordinate to the case of "Flying," he consulted the people's government and thought that after the start of summer, there should be the harm of water splashing.

古文：又比荧惑失度，盈缩往来，涉历舆鬼，环绕轩辕。火精南方，夏之政也。
现代文：又荧惑星常失度，盈缩往来，涉历与鬼，环绕轩辕，火精南方，夏之政。
English: In addition, the fluorescent planet often loses its degree, gains and shrinks, involves history and ghosts, surrounds Xuan Xuan, the fire spirit of the south, and the summer government.

古文：政有失礼，不从夏令，则荧惑失行。
现代文：政有失礼，不从夏令，则荧惑逆行。
English: If the government is impolite and does not follow the summer time, it will be retrograde.

古文：正月三日至乎九日，三公卦也。
现代文：正月三日到九日，三公卦。
English: From the 3rd to the 9th day of the first month, the Three Noble Truths are performed.

古文：三公上应台阶，下同元首。
现代文：三公上应台阶，下同元首。
English: The three princes should go up the steps and come down with the head of state.

古文：政失其道，则寒阴反节。 节彼南山 ，咏自《周诗》； 股肱良哉 ，著于《虞典》。
现代文：政失其道，那么寒阴反节。 节彼南山 ，咏自《周诗》 ；股肱良哉 ，著于《虞典》。
English: Politics has lost its way, so cold and gloomy is the opposite. 節彼南山, from "Chou Shi";股良哉, written in "Gyudon."

古文：而今之在位，竞托高虚，纳累钟之奉，忘天下之忧，栖迟偃仰，寝疾自逸，被策文，得赐钱，即复起矣。
现代文：可现在在位之人，争托高虚之位，取很多俸禄，却忘了天下之忧，悠游自得，过得安逸，被策文，得赐钱，就又起来了。
English: But those who are currently in power, who are vying for a lofty position, who take a lot of salary, but forget the worries of the world, travel freely, live comfortably, are promoted, and are given money, will rise again.

古文：何疾之易而愈之速 以此消伏灾眚，兴致升平，其可得乎？
现代文：怎么得病快又好得快？用这消除灾害，得到升平，能做到吗？
English: How to get sick faster and get better faster? Can we use this to eliminate disasters and get a rise?

古文：今选举牧守，委任三府。
现代文：今选举牧守，委任三公。
English: Now is the time to elect a Patriarch and appoint the three Patriarchs.

古文：长吏不良，既咎州郡，州郡有失，岂得不归责举者？
现代文：长吏不良，归咎于州郡，州郡有过失，难道不归罪于选举的人？
English: If the officials are bad, blame the state and county. If the state and county are at fault, blame the voters.

古文：而陛下崇之弥优，自下慢事愈甚，所谓大网疏，小网数。
现代文：可是陛下崇之弥优，自下慢事更厉害，所谓大网疏，小网密。
English: However, His Majesty's reverence is excellent, and his arrogance is even more powerful. The so-called big network is sparse, and the small network is dense.

古文：三公非臣之仇，臣非狂夫之作，所以发愤忘食，恳恳不已者，诚念朝廷欲致兴平，非不能面誉也。
现代文：三公不是臣的仇人，臣也不是狂夫之作，发愤忘食，恳恳不止，想的是想朝廷兴致太平，不是不能面誉哩。 
English: The three princes are not the enemies of the minister, and the minister is not the work of a madman, who loses his temper, forgets to eat, and never stops pleading. What he wants is for the imperial court to be interested in peace, and not to lose face.

古文：臣生长草野，不晓禁忌，披露肝胆，书不择言。
现代文： 臣生长在草野之中，不晓得什么是禁忌，披露肝胆，书不择言。
English: A vassal grows up in the middle of the grassland, does not know what is taboo, discloses his heart and soul, and does not hesitate to say anything.

古文：伏锧鼎镬，死不敢恨。
现代文：甘受死罪，决不悔恨。
English: Accept the death penalty without remorse.

古文：谨诣阙奉章，伏待重诛。
现代文：谨伏阙奉上奏章，等到降下死罪。 
English: I humbly offer my compliments, and wait for the death penalty to be handed down.

古文：书奏，帝复使对尚书。
现代文：书奏上，皇帝又使郎顗与尚书对话。
English: On the subject of calligraphy, the emperor also brought Lang Xi into a dialogue with Shang Shu.

古文：顗对曰：臣闻明王圣主好闻其过，忠臣孝子言无隐情。
现代文：郎顗说道： 臣听说明王圣主好听其过失，忠臣孝子言无隐情。
English: Lang Hao said, "The vassal listened to the explanation that the holy king was willing to listen to his fault, and the loyal subject and filial son had no hidden feelings.

古文：臣备生人伦视听之类，而禀性愚悫，不识忌讳，故出死亡命，恳恳重言。
现代文：臣备生人伦视听之类，可秉性愚笨诚悫不知忌讳，所以出死忘命，恳恳再说。
English: Such as subject preparation, life ethics, and audio-visual, can be characterized by stupidity, sincerity, and ignorance of taboos, so if you forget your life, sincerely say it again.

古文：诚欲陛下修乾坤之德，开日月之明，披图籍，案经典，览帝王之务，识先后之政。
现代文：想陛下修乾坤之德，开日月之明，披阅图籍，查看经典，观帝王之务，知先后之政。
English: I want His Majesty to cultivate the virtue of perseverance, open the sun and moon, read books, view classics, view the emperor's duties, and know the succession of politics.

古文：如有阙遗，退而自改。
现代文：如果有缺遗，退下自行改正。
English: If there are any omissions, withdraw and correct them yourself.

古文：本文、武之业，拟尧、舜之道，攘灾延庆，号令天下。
现代文：本文武之业，比尧舜之道，除灾纳福，号令天下。
English: In this article, the cause of martial arts, the way of comparison, the elimination of disasters and the attainment of benefits, are the call of the world.

古文：此诚臣顗区区之愿，夙夜梦寤，尽心所计。
现代文：这确是臣郎顗的小小心愿，早晚梦寐以求，尽心所计。
English: This is indeed a small wish of the retainer, a dream sooner or later, a heartfelt plan.

古文：谨条序前章，暢其旨趣，条便宜七事，具如状对：一事：陵园至重，圣神攸冯，而灾火炎赫，迫近寝殿，魂而有灵，犹将惊动。
现代文：谨条序前章，畅其旨趣，陈述七件事情，如实对答： 第一件事：陵园极为重要，圣神之所凭依，而灾火发生，烧近寝殿，魂而有灵，犹将惊动。
English: The first chapter of the preamble of the preamble, which is full of interest, states seven things, and answers truthfully: The first thing: the cemetery is extremely important, the Holy Spirit depends on it, and if a fire occurs and burns near the sleeping hall, the soul and the spirit will be alarmed.

古文：寻宫殿宫府，近始永平，岁时未积，便更修造。
现代文：宫殿官府，近来建自永平，时间不长，又要修造。
English: The palace and government office, recently built in Yongping, has been under construction for a short period of time.

古文：又西苑之设，禽畜是处，离房别观，本不常居，而皆条精土木，营建无已，消功单贿，巨亿为计。
现代文：又建西苑，是为了养禽兽，那些离房别观，本来不是常住人的，可是都要大兴土木，营建不止，耗费财力，达到巨亿。
English: The West Garden was also built in order to raise animals. Those who live away from the house are not permanent residents, but they have to build a lot of civil engineering, build more and more, and consume huge amounts of money, reaching billions.

古文：《易内传》曰： 人君奢侈，多饰宫室，其时旱，其灾火。 
现代文：《易内经》说： 人君奢侈，多饰宫室，其时旱，其灾火。 
English: "The Book of Changes" says: "If a man is extravagant and adorns his palace with many ornaments, if there is drought, there will be fire.

古文：是故鲁僖遭旱，修政自敕，下钟鼓之县，休缮治之官，虽则不宁，而时雨自降。
现代文：因此鲁僖公遭旱灾，修政自敕，下钟鼓之县，停止修治之官，虽则不宁，而时雨大降。
English: As a result, Lushan was hit by drought, the government was reluctant to reform, the county was in turmoil, the government was reluctant to reform, and it rained a lot.

古文：由此言之，天之应人，敏于景响。
现代文：这样说来，天之应人，比影响还敏捷。
English: In this way, God's response to man is more rapid than his influence.

古文：今月十七日戊午，征日也，日加申，风从寅来，丑时而止。
现代文：本月十七日戊午，征日，在申时，风从寅来，丑时才止。
English: On the seventeenth day of this month, at noon, the day of the enlistment, at the time of the lunar month, the wind comes from the tiger, and only stops at the time of the ugly.

古文：丑、寅、申皆征也，不有火灾，必当为旱。
现代文：丑、寅、申，都是征兆，不有火灾，必当旱灾。
English: Ugly, Yin, and Yin are all signs. If there is no fire, it must be a drought.

古文：愿陛下校计缮修之费，永念百姓之劳，罢将作之官，减雕文之饰，损疱厨之馔，退宴私之乐。
现代文：愿陛下算一算缮修之资，永念百姓的劳苦，罢将作之官，减雕文的装饰，损庖厨的肴馔，退宴私之乐。
English: May His Majesty calculate the cost of renovation, remember the hard work of the people, dismiss the officials, reduce the decoration of the carvings, damage the dishes of the kitchen, and return the pleasure of the banquet.

古文：《易中孚传》曰： 阳感天，不旋日。 
现代文：《易中孚传》说： 阳感天，不旋日。 
English: "Yizhong Fu Chuan" said: The sun is always shining.

古文：如是，则景云降集，眚息矣。
现代文：像这样，那么景云降集，灾气必息了。
English: Like this, then the clouds will gather, and the calamity will end.

古文：二事：去年以来，《兑卦》用事，类多不效。
现代文：第二件事：去年以来，《兑卦》用事，类多不效。
English: The second thing: Since last year, "Dengwa" has been used for other purposes, and it is mostly ineffective.

古文：《易传》曰： 有貌无实，佞人也；有实无貌，道人也。 
现代文：《易传》说 ：有外表，无实际，口才伶俐的小人。有实际，无外表，有道之君子。 
English: "I Ching" says: There is appearance, no reality, and a small man of eloquence. There is reality, no appearance, and a gentleman of the Tao.

古文：寒温为实，清浊为貌。
现代文：寒温为实，清浊为貌。
English: The cold temperature is real, and the appearance is clear.

古文：今三公皆令色足恭，外厉内荏，以虚事上，无佐国之实，故清浊效而寒温不效也，是以阴寒侵犯消息。
现代文：现在的三公都是伪善的容貌，十足的恭顺，外表严厉而内里柔弱，用虚假事上，没有辅佐国家的实际本领，所以清浊效而寒温不效，因此阴阳侵犯消息，臣子侵犯君权。
English: The current three princes are all hypocritical in appearance, completely obedient, stern on the outside but soft on the inside, and have no practical ability to assist the country with false things. Therefore, they are effective at keeping things clean, but ineffective at keeping things cold. Therefore, yin and yang encroach on news, and courtiers encroach on royal power.

古文：占曰： 日乘则有妖风，日蒙则有地裂。 
现代文：占辞说： 日乘则有妖风，日蒙则有地裂。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "In the case of the Nikko, there is an evil wind, and in the case of the Nichimoku, there is a crack in the ground."

古文：如是三年，则致日食，阴侵其阳，渐积所致。
现代文：这样三年之内，就有日食，阴侵其阳，臣犯其君，渐渐积累而成。
English: In this way, within three years, there will be a solar eclipse, the yin will invade the yang, and the vassal will commit crimes against the lord, gradually accumulating.

古文：立春前后温气应节者，诏令宽也。
现代文：立春前后温气应节，诏令宽厚。
English: Around the first day of spring, the weather is warm, and the imperial edict is lenient.

古文：其后复寒者，无宽之实也。
现代文：后来又寒冷，没有宽厚之实。
English: Later, it was cold again, and there was no generous fruit.

古文：夫十室之邑，必有忠信，率土之人，岂无贞贤，未闻朝廷有所赏拔，非所以求善赞务，弘济元元。
现代文：十室的地方，必有忠信之人，全境的百姓中间，岂无贞贤之人，没听说朝廷有所赏赐提拔，这不是求善赞务，拯济百姓的办法。
English: In the tenth house, there must be a faithful person, and among the people of the whole territory, is there not a virtuous person? I have not heard that the imperial court has rewarded and promoted. This is not a way to seek good praise and save the people.

古文：宜采纳良臣，以助圣化。三事：臣闻天道不远，三五复反。
现代文：应采纳良臣的意见，来帮助圣化。 第三件事：臣听说天道不远，三五复反。
English: It is necessary to adopt the opinions of good ministers to help sanctify.Third thing: If a minister hears that the heavenly way is not far away, he will repent at thirty-five.

古文：今年少阳之岁，法当乘起，恐后年已往，将遂惊动，涉历天门，灾成戊已。
现代文：今年少阳之岁，法当乘起，恐怕后年已往，将遂惊动，涉历戍亥之间的天门，灾成戊己。
English: This year, at the age of Shao Yang, the Fa should be taken advantage of, I am afraid that the year after has passed, it will finally be alarmed, involving the gates of heaven between the year of the Rooster and the Year of the Pig, and become a disaster.

古文：今春当旱，夏必有水，臣以六日七分候之可知。
现代文：今年春旱，夏天必有水灾，臣用六日七分的方法可以测算出来。
English: This year, there will be drought in the spring and floods in the summer, which can be calculated by the minister using the method of six days and seven minutes.

古文：未灾眚之来，缘类而应。
现代文：灾眚的到来，引起连锁反应。
English: The arrival of the disaster caused a chain reaction.

古文：行有玷缺，则气逆于天，精感变出，以戒人君。
现代文：人之行为有缺点，那么气逆于天，精感变化，儆戒人君。
English: If a person's behavior has shortcomings, then the qi is against the heavens, the essence changes, and the precepts of the precepts of the precepts.

古文：王者之义，时有不登，则损滋彻膳。
现代文：王者的意思，年岁收成不好，就减少膳食。
English: According to the king's will, since the annual harvest is not good, the meal is reduced.

古文：数年以来，谷收稍减，家贫户馑，岁不如昔。
现代文：数年以来，谷收有减少，百姓饥馑，不如往昔之岁。
English: Over the past few years, the grain harvest has decreased, and the people are hungry, which is not as good as in the past.

古文：百姓不足，君谁与足？
现代文：百姓衣食不足，君王怎能丰足？
English: The living conditions of the common people are inadequate, so how can the monarch obtain wealth?

古文：水旱之灾，虽尚未至，然君子远览，防微虑萌。
现代文：水旱之灾，虽还没到来，然而君子应有远见，防微于萌芽状态。
English: Although the disaster of floods and droughts has not yet arrived, however, a gentleman should have foresight to prevent them from sprouting.

古文：《老子》曰： 人之饥也，以其上食税之多也。 
现代文：《老子》说 ：人之饥也，以其上食税之多也。 
English: "Lao Zi" said: People's hunger is also due to the amount of tax on food.

古文：故孝文皇帝绨袍革舄，木器无文，约身薄赋，时致升平。
现代文：所以孝文皇帝身穿厚而滑泽的绨袍，脚穿皮做的鞋，兵木无刃，衣无文，自身俭约，薄征赋税，成了太平世界。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaowen wore a thick and shiny silk robe, his feet wore shoes made of leather, his soldiers had no blades, his clothes had no cloth, he was frugal, and he did not levy taxes. It became a peaceful world.

古文：今陛下圣德中兴，宜遵前典，惟节惟约，天下幸甚。
现代文：今陛下圣德中兴，应遵照前典，讲究节约，那么天下就幸运得很。
English: Now that His Majesty's virtue is on the rise, we should follow the precepts and be thrifty. Then the world will be very fortunate.

古文：《易》曰： 天道无亲，常与善人。 
现代文：《易经》说： 天道无亲，常与善人。 
English: "I Ching" says: The heavenly way has no relatives, it is often associated with good people.

古文：是故高宗以享福，宋景以延年。四事：臣窃见皇子未立，储宫无主，仰观天文，太子不明。
现代文：因此高宗能够享福，宋景公得以延长寿命。 第四件事：臣私见皇太子未确立，储君无主，仰观天文，前星不明朗。
English: As a result, Gao Zong was able to enjoy good fortune, and Song Jing Gong was able to prolong his life.The fourth matter: Privately, the vassals thought that the crown prince had not been established, that the crown prince had no master, that they were looking up at the sky, and that the foreground stars were unclear.

古文：荧惑以去年春分后十六日在娄五度，推步《三统》，荧惑今当在翼九度，今反在柳三度，则不及五十余度。
现代文：荧惑星去年春分之后十六天在娄五度，按《三统》推步，荧惑星应在翼星九度，现在反在柳星三度，则不及五十余度。
English: Sixteen days after the vernal equinox last year, the fluorescent planet was at minus five degrees. According to the "Three Laws" deduction, the fluorescent planet should be at nine degrees in the pterosaur, but now it is at three degrees in the willow star, which is less than fifty degrees.

古文：去年八月二十四日戊辰，荧惑历舆鬼东入轩辕，出后星北，东去四度，北旋复还。
现代文：去年八月二十四日戊辰，荧惑星历与鬼星向东进入轩辕，出后星北，东去四度，北旋又回转来。
English: On August 24 last year, the day of Pentecost, the fluorescent planetary calendar and the ghost star moved eastward into the sky, and then the star moved north, eastward by four degrees, and the north spin came back.

古文：轩辕者，后宫也。
现代文：轩辕，是后宫。
English: Huanqian, is the harem.

古文：荧惑者，至阳之精也，天之使也，而出入轩辕，绕还往来。
现代文：荧惑，至阳之精，天之使者，而出入于后宫，绕还往来。
English: Fluorescence, the essence of the sun, the messenger of heaven, goes in and out of the harem, and circulates back and forth.

古文：《易》曰： 天垂象，见吉凶。 
现代文：《易经》说： 天垂象，见吉凶。 
English: "I Ching" says: The heavens droop like an elephant, and fortune and misfortune appear.

古文：其意昭然可见矣。
现代文：这个意思很明白可见了。
English: The meaning is very clear.

古文：礼，天子一娶九女，嫡媵毕县。
现代文：礼，天子一娶九女，嫡媵完全具备。
English: As a matter of fact, the Son of Heaven married nine daughters, so he is fully qualified to be the heir.

古文：今宫人侍御，动以千计，或生而幽隔，人道不通，郁积之气，上感皇天，故遣荧惑入轩辕，理人伦，垂象见异，以悟主上。
现代文：现在宫人侍御，数目以千计，有的一生隔离，人道不通，郁积之气，上感皇天，所以派荧惑星入轩辕后宫，理人伦，垂象显示奇异，使主上觉悟。
English: Now the palace attendants, numbering in the thousands, have a lifetime of isolation, lack of human understanding, depression, and are impressed by the emperor, so they send a fluorescent planet into the tumultuous harem, reason with people, and show strange phenomena, so that the Lord will be enlightened.

古文：昔武王下车，出倾宫之女，表商容之间，以理人伦，以表贤德，故天授以圣子，成王是也。
现代文：从前周武王入殷，放走商纣的宫女，表彰商容之闾，来理顺人伦，表彰贤德之人，所以老天授给他圣子一一一成王。
English: From the previous week, King Wu entered Yin, released the concubines of the merchants, commended the concubines of the merchants, rationalized the human relations, and commended the virtuous people, so God gave his holy son a king.

古文：今陛下多积宫人，以违天意，故皇胤多夭，嗣体莫寄。
现代文：今陛下养这么多宫女，违背天意，所以皇子多数夭折，后嗣无人。
English: It is against the will of heaven for His Majesty to have so many concubines, so most of the princes have died young, leaving no heirs.

古文：《诗》云： 敬天之怒，不敢戏豫。 
现代文：《诗经》说 ：敬天之怒，不敢戏豫。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Respect the wrath of heaven, and do not hesitate."

古文：方今之福，莫若广嗣，广嗣之术，可不深思？
现代文：当前之福，没有比广嗣更重要，而广嗣的方法，可不深深考虑么？
English: The current blessing is no more important than Guangzhi, and the method of Guangzhi, can it not be deeply considered?

古文：宜简出宫女恣其姻嫁，则天自降福，子孙千亿。
现代文：应该放出一些宫女，让她们嫁人，那么天将降福，子孙会多多的。
English: They should send out some maids of honour and let them marry, then heaven will bestow blessings and there will be many descendants.

古文：五事：臣窃见去年闰月十七日已丑夜，有白气从西方天苑趋左足，入玉井，数日乃灭。
现代文：希望陛下再三思虑，在这点上多多留神。左右宠幸之人，也应想想臣下的话，使陛下醒悟。古之善言对今天有益，天之善言对人也有用。希望访问百官，如认为臣言不对，臣当受苟言之罪。 第五件事：臣私下看到去年闰十月十七日己丑夜，有白气从西方天苑趋左足，入玉井数天后不见了。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will think twice and pay more attention to this point. Those who are favored on the right and left should also think about the words of their subjects to make Your Majesty wake up. The good words of the past are beneficial to today, and the good words of heaven are also useful to people. I hope to visit a hundred officials, if you think that the words of the subject are not right, the subject should be punished. Fifth thing: The subject privately saw the ugly night of October 17th last year, and there was white gas coming from the west heaven to the left foot, and it disappeared after entering Tamai a few days later.

古文：《春秋》曰： 有星孛于大辰。大辰者何？
现代文：《春秋》说： 有星孛于大辰，大辰者何？
English: "Spring and Autumn" said: If a star shines on a great clock, what will the great clock do?

古文：大火也。
现代文：大火也。
English: The fire is out, too.

古文：大火为大辰，伐又为大辰，北极亦为大辰。 
现代文：大火为大辰，伐又为大辰，北极也为大辰。 
English: A great fire is a great event, a great felling is a great event, and the North Pole is also a great event.

古文：所以孛一宿而连三宿者，言北辰王者之宫也。
现代文：所以孛一宿而连三宿，就是说北辰为王者之宫。
English: Therefore, it is said that Beichen is the palace of the king.

古文：凡中宫无节，政教乱逆，威武衰微，则此三星以应之也。
现代文：凡中宫无节，政教乱逆，威武衰微，那么这三星就有反应。
English: Whenever there is a lack of discipline in the middle palace, political and religious turmoil, and the decline of military might, the three stars will have a reaction.

古文：罚者白虎，其宿主兵，其国赵、魏，变见西方，亦应三辅。
现代文：罚是白虎，它主管兵，地处赵、魏之间，变化出现在西方，也反应在三辅。
English: Penalty is a white tiger, it is in charge of soldiers, located between Zhao and Wei, changes appear in the west, and are also reflected in the three auxiliary.

古文：凡金气为变，发在秋节。
现代文：凡金气为变，发在秋节。
English: All fortune changes, starting with the autumn festival.

古文：臣恐立秋以后，赵、魏、关西将有羌寇畔戾之患。宜豫宣告诸郡，使敬授人时，轻徭役，薄赋敛，勿妄缮起，坚仓狱，备守卫，回选贤能，以镇抚之。
现代文：臣恐怕立秋以后，赵、魏、关西将有羌寇反叛入侵之患，应预先宣告各郡，要他们掌握季节，轻征徭役，薄收赋税，不要随便建造，坚守仓狱，加强守卫，选拔贤能，镇抚他们。
English: The minister feared that after the beginning of autumn, Zhao, Wei and Kansai would suffer from the invasion of rebel raiders. The counties should be announced in advance, and they should control the season, lightly recruit guards, lightly collect taxes, do not build casually, adhere to the warehouse prison, strengthen the guard, select talents, and pacify them.

古文：金精之变，责归上司。
现代文：金精的变，责任在于上司。
English: If the situation changes, the responsibility lies with the boss.

古文：宜以五月丙午，遣太尉服干戚，建井，书玉板之策，引白气之异，于西郊责躬求愆，谢咎皇天，消灭妖气。
现代文：应在五月丙午，派太尉持盾牌斧头，建井韄，在玉板上写祝辞，引白气之异，在西郊自我检讨，对皇天谢罪，消灭妖气。
English: It should be in the afternoon of May 3rd, send a captain with a shield and an axe, build a well, write a congratulatory message on the jade board, lead the white gas difference, self-examination in the western suburbs, thank the emperor for the sin, and eliminate the evil spirit.

古文：盖以火胜金，转祸为福也。
现代文：因为火能胜金，可转祸为福。
English: Because fire can win over gold, it can turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：六事：臣窃见今月十四日乙卯巳时，白虹贯日。
现代文： 第六件事：臣私下看见今月十四日乙卯巳时，白虹贯日。
English: The sixth matter: When I privately saw the 14th day of this month, the white rainbow stretched across the sky.

古文：贯日中者，侵太阳也；见于春者，政变常也。
现代文：凡日傍气色白而纯的叫虹。贯日中，侵犯太阳。出现在春天，表示政变反常。
English: A rainbow, white and pure in color, is seen every day. During the day, it encroaches on the sun. When it appears in the spring, it indicates an abnormal coup.

古文：方今中官外司，各各考事，其所考者，或非急务。
现代文：当前中官外司，各自考劾。所考劾的，有些并非急务。
English: At present, the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs have each been impeached. Some of the impeachments are not urgent.

古文：又恭陵火灾，主名未立，多所收捕，备经考毒。
现代文：又恭陵火灾，延火者姓名尚未定立，收捕了许多人，经过严刑拷打。
English: There was also a fire in Gongling. The name of the person who started the fire has not yet been determined. Many people were arrested and severely tortured.

古文：寻火为天戒，以悟人君，可顺而不可违，可敬而不可慢。
现代文：寻火为天之警戒，使人君觉悟，可顺而不可违，可敬而不可慢。
English: Seeking fire is heaven's warning, makes people aware, can be complied with but not violated, can be respected but not tolerated.

古文：陛下宜恭已内省，以备后灾。
现代文：陛下应恭己内省，来防备以后发生灾害。
English: His Majesty should humbly introspect and prepare for future disasters.

古文：凡诸考察，并须立秋。
现代文：那些考劾之案，都放在立秋去办。
English: Those impeachment trials are all scheduled for early autumn.

古文：又《易传》曰： 公能其事，序贤进士，后必有喜。 
现代文：《易传》说 ：公能其事，序贤进士，后必有喜。 
English: "I Chuan" says, "If you are able to do something, you will be promoted to a higher rank, and you will have joy in the future."

古文：反之，则白虹贯日。
现代文：反之，就出现白虹贯日。
English: On the other hand, a white rainbow appears throughout the day.

古文：以甲乙见者，则谴在中台。
现代文：在甲乙东方出现的，就是谴责中台。
English: What has emerged in East A and East B is the denunciation of Central Taiwan.

古文：自司徒居位，阴阳多谬，久无虚已进贤之策，天下兴议，异人同咨。
现代文：自司徒居位，阴阳多有谬误，很久没有虚己进贤的策略，天下议论，不同的人都在嗟叹。
English: There are many fallacies in the position of the self-righteous, the yin and yang, and there has not been a strategy of pretending to be virtuous for a long time. The whole world is talking about it, and different people are lamenting.

古文：且立春以来，金气再见，金能胜木，必有兵气，宜黜司徒以应天意。
现代文：且立春以来，金气再次出现，金能胜木，必有兵气，应该罢免司徒以应天意。
English: And since the beginning of spring, gold has re-emerged, gold can beat wood, there must be military strength, and Sito should be dismissed in accordance with God's will.

古文：陛下不早攘之，将负臣言，遗患百姓。
现代文：陛下如不早安排，将辜负臣之所言，遗患于百姓。
English: If His Majesty does not arrange it soon, he will live up to the words of his vassal and bequeath suffering to the people.

古文：七事：臣伏惟汉兴以来三百三十九岁。
现代文： 第七件事：臣想到汉兴以来三百三十九岁。
English: The seventh thing: I remember that it has been 339 years since the Han Dynasty.

古文：于《诗三基》，高祖起亥仲二年，今在戌仲十年。
现代文：按《诗三基》推算，高祖起于亥仲二年，今在戌仲十年。
English: According to the "Three Foundations of Poetry," Gao Zu started in the second year of Heizhong and has been in Heizhong for ten years.

古文：《诗汜历枢》曰： 卯酉为革政，午亥为革命，神在天门，出入候听。 
现代文：《诗汜历枢》说： 卯酉为革政，午亥为革命，神在天门，出入候听。 
English: "Poetry and History" said: "Dragonfly for revolutionary politics, morning boar for revolution, God is at the gate of heaven, waiting to listen.

古文：言神在戌亥，司候帝王兴衰得失，厥善则昌，厥恶则亡。
现代文：就是说神在戌亥，专管帝王的兴衰得失，如果行善就昌盛，行恶就灭亡。
English: That is to say, God is in charge of the emperor's rise and fall. If he does good, he will prosper, and if he does evil, he will perish.

古文：于《易雄雌秘历》，今值困乏。
现代文：在《易雄雌秘历》，现在正值困乏之时。
English: In "The Secret History of I Ching," it's a time of scarcity.

古文：凡九二困者，众小人欲共困害君子也。
现代文：凡九二困，众小人想共困害君子的意思。
English: In every ninety-two troubles, all the villains want to share the troubles and harm the gentleman's will.

古文：《经》曰： 困而不失其所，其唯君子乎！ 
现代文：《经书》说： 困而不失其所，其唯君子乎！ 
English: "Scripture" says: If you are in trouble, but do not lose your place, then you are a gentleman!

古文：唯独贤圣之君，遭困遇险，能致命遂志，不去其道。
现代文：意思说只有圣贤之君，遭受困难危险，能够致命遂志，不离其道。
English: It means that only the prince of saints and sages, suffering from difficulties and dangers, can fatally achieve his goal and not leave his path.

古文：陛下乃者潜龙养德，幽隐屈厄，即位之元，紫宫惊动，历运之会，时气已应。
现代文：陛下是潜龙养德之君，幽隐屈厄，即位之初，紫宫惊动，历运之会，时气已应。
English: His majesty is the prince of the hidden dragon of virtue, the hidden Yue Yue, the beginning of the enthronement, the purple palace alarm, the historical meeting, the time has come.

古文：然犹恐妖祥未尽，君子思患而豫防之。
现代文：但还怕妖祥未尽，君子应思患而预防之。
English: However, fearing that the evil omen is not yet exhausted, the gentleman should think about the problem and prevent it.

古文：臣以为戌仲已竟，来年入季，文帝改法，除肉刑之罪，至今适三百载。
现代文：臣认为戌仲已完，来年入季，文帝改变法制，废除肉刑之罪，至今已三百年。
English: The vassal thought the match was over. The following year, Emperor Wen changed the legal system and abolished the crime of corporal punishment. It has been more than three hundred years since then.

古文：宜因斯际，大蠲法令，官名称号，舆服器械，事有所更，变大为小，去奢就俭，机衡之政，除烦为简。
现代文：应趁这个时际，大蠲法令，官名称号，与服器械，事有所更，变大为小，去奢就俭，机衡之政，变繁为简。
English: It is necessary to take advantage of this period of time to amend major laws and decrees, official names and titles, and apparel and equipment, to make things better, to make big things smaller, to make extravagant things frugal, and to make complex things simple.

古文：改元更始，招求幽隐，举方正，征有道，博采异谋，开不讳之路。臣陈引际会，恐犯忌讳，书不尽言，未敢究暢。
现代文：改元为更始，招求幽隐之士，举为方正，征召有道之人，博采异谋，广开不讳的言路。 臣陈引际会，怕犯忌讳，书不尽意，不敢畅所欲言。 
English: Change the era to a new beginning, invite secluded people, elevate them to the position of Founder, recruit virtuous people, make use of conspiracies, and open up the way of speech. Minister Chen leads the meeting, afraid of committing taboos, the book is not satisfactory, and dare not speak freely.

古文：台诘顗曰： 对云 白虹贯日，政变常也。 
现代文：尚书质问郎顗道： 你说 白虹贯日，政变常也 。
English: Shang Shuxu questioned Lang Sheng Dao: You said that the white rainbow lasts for days, and there are often coups.

古文：朝廷率由旧章，何所变易而言变常？
现代文：朝廷按旧章办事，为什么叫做变常？
English: The imperial court operates according to the old rules, so why is it called change?

古文：又言 当大蠲法令，革易官号 。
现代文：你又说： 当大蠲法令，革易官号 。
English: You also said, "When the edict of the Great Council is issued, the title of officials will be changed."

古文：或云变常以致灾，或改旧以除异，何也？
现代文：有人说变常以致灾，有的又改旧以除异，这是为什么？
English: Some people say that changing the old ways will bring disaster, while others change the old ways to eliminate differences. Why is this?

古文：又阳嘉初建，复欲改元，据何经典？
现代文：又阳嘉年间初建不久，又想改元，根据什么经典？
English: It was also built in the Yangjia era, but soon after it was built, it wanted to change its name, according to what classic?

古文：其以实对。 
现代文：希望你老实回答。 
English: I hope you'll answer honestly.

古文：顗对曰：方春东作，布德之元，阳气开发，养导万物。
现代文：郎岂页答道： 春季东方发作，布德的开始，阳气开发，养导万物。
English: Lang Xizhe replied: Spring is the onset of the East, the beginning of Bud, the development of yang, and the nurturing of all things.

古文：王者因天视听，奉顺时气，宜务崇温柔，尊其行令。
现代文：王者就天之视听，奉顺天时气候，应当崇尚温柔，遵照天意来行令。
English: The king should listen to the voice of heaven, obey the weather, be gentle, and carry out orders according to the will of heaven.

古文：而今立春之后，考事不息，秋冬之政，行乎春夏，故白虹春见，掩蔽日曜。
现代文：可现在立春之后，考事不止，秋天冬天之政，改在春夏天实行，所以白虹出现在春天，掩蔽了太阳。
English: But now, after the beginning of spring, there are more and more examinations, and the autumn-winter policy is implemented in spring and summer, so the white rainbow appears in spring, covering the sun.

古文：凡邪气乘阳，则虹霓在日，斯皆臣下执事刻急所致。殆非朝廷优宽之本。
现代文：凡邪气乘阳，就出现虹霓在日的现象，这都是臣下执事刻急造成的，不是朝廷优宽政治的本意。
English: Whenever evil spirits take advantage of the sun, there is a phenomenon of the rainbow appearing in the sun. This is all caused by the eagerness of the vassal deacons, and is not the original intention of the imperial court's policy of favoritism.

古文：此其变常之咎也。
现代文：这就是变常的过错。
English: This is the fault of change.

古文：又今选举皆归三司，非有周、召之才，而当则哲之重，每有选用，辄参之掾属，公府门巷，宾客填集，送去迎来，财货无已。
现代文：又现在选举官吏都在三司，不是周公、召公之才能，而当知人则哲之重任，每有选用，就预先在掾属中考虑，公府门巷，宾客塞满了，送去迎来，财货不止。
English: And now the election officials are in the three departments, not the ability of Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong, but when the acquaintance is the important task of Zhe. Whenever there is a selection, it is considered in advance among the relatives. The doors and alleys of the government are full of guests, and there are more than enough goods to send and welcome.

古文：其当迁者，竞相荐谒，各遣子弟，充塞道路，开长奸门，兴致浮伪，非所谓率由旧章也。
现代文：那些当升迁的，争相推荐谒见，各派子弟，充塞道路，广开奸邪之门，形成浮伪，不是所谓 率由旧章 哩。
English: Those who should be promoted and promoted are competing to recommend and see each other, and the children of various sects are filling up the roads, opening wide the door to treachery and evil, and forming deception. This is not the so-called separation from the old chapter.

古文：尚书职在机衡，宫禁严密，私曲之意，羌不得通，偏党之恩，或无所用。选举之任，不如还在机密。
现代文：尚书的职责在于机密权衡，宫禁严密，私曲的意见，不能通过，偏党之恩，无所用处，选举的任务，不如仍由尚书掌握机密为好。
English: Shangshu's duties lie in confidential weighing, the palace ban is strict, the private opinion cannot be passed, the favor of the party is useless, and the task of the election is better for Shangshu to master the secrets.

古文：臣诚愚戆，不知折中，斯固远近之论，当今之宜。
现代文：臣的确愚蠢，不知道折中，这本来是远近人们的议论，也是当今之所宣。
English: The minister is really stupid, he does not know the middle ground, this was originally a discussion among people near and far, and it is also what is being proclaimed today.

古文：又孔子曰： 汉三百载，斗历改宪。 
现代文：又孔子说； 汉三百载，斗历改宪。 
English: Confucius also said that the Han Dynasty lasted for three hundred years, and it took three hundred years to amend the Constitution.

古文：三百四岁为一德，五德千五百二十岁，五行更用。
现代文：三百四岁为一德，五德千五百二十岁，五行更用。
English: Three hundred and four years old is one virtue, five virtues are one thousand five hundred and twenty years old, and five lines are even more useful.

古文：王者随天，譬犹自春徂夏，改青服绛者也。
现代文：王者随从天意，等于从春到夏，改青色服红色一样。
English: If a king follows the will of heaven, it is the same as changing blue clothes to red from spring to summer.

古文：自文帝省刑，适三百年，而轻微之禁，渐已殷积。
现代文：自汉文帝减肉刑，刚好三百年，而轻微之禁，渐已殷积。
English: It has been exactly three hundred years since Emperor Hanwen reduced corporal punishment, and the slight ban has gradually increased.

古文：王者之法，譬犹江河，当使易避而难犯也。
现代文：王者的法，好像江河，当使人们容易避开而难触犯。
English: The laws of kings, like rivers, should be easy to avoid and difficult to cross.

古文：故《易》曰： 易则易知，简则易从，易简而天下之理得矣。 
现代文：所以《易经》说： 易则易知，简则易从，易简而天下之理得矣。 
English: Therefore, "I Ching" says: Easy is easy to know, simple is easy to follow, easy is simple, and the world is right.

古文：今去奢即俭，以先天下，改易名号，随事称谓。
现代文：今去奢侈，从俭约，做在天下人之先，改易名号，随事称谓。
English: Now go to luxury, from frugality, to be ahead of the world, to change names, to be called by any name.

古文：《易》曰： 君子之道，或出或处，同归殊涂，一致百虑。 
现代文：《易经》说 ；君子之道，或出或处，同归殊途，一致百虑。 
English: "I Ching" says that the way of a gentleman is to go out or to go somewhere, to go the same way, and to have the same concerns.

古文：是知变常而善，可以除灾，变常而恶，必致于异。
现代文：这就是知道变常而善，可以除灾，变常而恶，必致于异。
English: This is to know that changeable and good, can eliminate disasters, changeable and evil, will result in different.

古文：今年仲竟，来年入季，仲终季始，历运变改，故可改元，所以顺天道也。
现代文：今年仲竟，明年入季，仲终季始，历运变改，所以可改元，这是顺天道。
English: This year's mid-season, next year's beginning of the season, the end of the season, the beginning of the season, the history of change, so you can change the original, this is the way of heaven.

古文：臣顗愚蔽，不足以答圣问。
现代文：臣岂页愚蔽，不足以答圣问。 
English: It is not enough for a minister to be fooled by a page of nonsense to answer a sacred question.

古文：顗又上书荐黄琼、李固，并陈消灾之术曰：臣前对七事，要政急务，宜于今者，所当施用。
现代文：郎顗又上书推荐黄琼、李固，并陈述消灾的方法道： 臣前面所答对的七件事，都是要政急务，合于当前需要，应该施行采用。
English: Lang Wei also submitted a letter recommending Huang Qiong and Li Gu, and stated the method of disaster relief: The seven things that the minister answered correctly earlier are urgent political affairs, meet current needs, and should be implemented and adopted.

古文：诚知愚浅，不合圣听，人贱言废，当受诛罚，征营惶怖，靡知厝身。臣闻刳舟剡楫，将欲济江海也；聘贤选佐，将以安天下也。
现代文：的确自知是愚浅之见，不合皇上的圣听，人贱言废，应受诛罚，非常害怕，不知道身体该放在何处。 臣听说刻舟制桨，为了过江海之用；聘贤选佐，为了安定天下。
English: Indeed, he knew himself that his views were foolish and shallow, that they did not meet with the emperor's approval, that his words were worthless and should be punished, that he was very afraid and did not know where to put his body.

古文：昔唐尧在上，群龙为用，文、武创德，周、召作辅，是以能建天地之功，增日月之耀者也。
现代文：古时唐尧在上，群臣替他效劳，文武创德，周公、召公作辅弼之用，因此能建天地之功，增日月之光耀。
English: In ancient times, Tang Xuan was on the top, and a group of courtiers served him. He was a great creator of literature and martial arts, and used Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong as assistants. As a result, he was able to build the heavens and the earth, and increase the brightness of the sun and the moon.

古文：《诗》云： 赫赫王命，仲山甫将之。邦国若否，仲山甫明之。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 赫赫王命，仲山甫将之，邦国若否，仲山甫明之。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "If it is the king's command, then it is Nakayama's command; if it is a nation's command, then it is Nakayama's command."

古文：宣王是赖，以致雍熙。
现代文：周宣王依靠了仲山甫，以致出现和谐的局面。
English: Zhou Xuanwang relied on Zhongshan Fu, resulting in a harmonious situation.

古文：陛下践祚以来，勤心庶政，而三九之位，未见其人，是以灾害屡臻，四国未宁。
现代文：陛下登基以来，勤心庶政，而三公九卿之位，未见其人，因此灾害迭见，四方之国不得安宁。
English: Since His Majesty ascended to the throne, he has diligently conducted politics, and there has been no one at the top of the three nobles and nine nobles. As a result, we have seen repeated disasters, and the country in all directions cannot have peace.

古文：臣考之国典，验之闻见，莫不以得贤为功，失士为败。
现代文：臣考查国典，验之所见所闻，没有不是得到贤人就会立功，失去才智之士就失败。
English: When a minister examines the national classics and checks what he has seen and heard, if he does not obtain what he has seen and heard, a wise man will make merit, and a man who has lost his talent will fail.

古文：且贤者出处，翔而后集，爵以德进，则其情不苟，然后使君子耻贫贱而乐富贵矣。
现代文：况且贤者的出来与否，像飞鸟一般翔而后集，依德给以爵位，那么其情不苟，然后使君子以贫贱为耻，而以富贵为乐了。
English: Moreover, whether or not a wise man comes out, he flies like a bird and gathers behind him. If virtue is given a title, then it is meticulous, and then the gentleman is ashamed of being poor, but is happy with being rich.

古文：若有德不报，有言不酬，来无所乐，进无所趋，则皆怀归薮泽，修其故志矣。
现代文：如有德不报，有言不酬，来了没有爵赏之乐，进了没有什么指望，那么贤士都怀归薮泽之中，修其故志了。
English: If virtue is not reported, if words are not rewarded, if there is no joy of award, and if there is no hope of entry, then the sages have returned to the middle of the world, and have revised their old beliefs.

古文：夫求贤者，上以承天，下以为人。
现代文：求贤之人，上面是秉承天意，下面是顺乎人心。
English: Those who seek virtue, the top is to uphold the will of heaven, the bottom is to follow the will of the people.

古文：不用之，则逆天统，违人望。
现代文：不用它，就违背天统，违反人望。
English: If you don't use it, you will go against Heaven's order and go against people's expectations.

古文：逆天统则灾眚降，违人望则化不行。
现代文：违天统就有灾害降临，违人望就风化不行。
English: If you go against the order of heaven, disasters will befall you. If you go against people's expectations, you cannot be civilized.

古文：灾眚降则下呼嗟，化不行则君道亏。
现代文：灾害到来那么下面呼嗟怨恨，风化不行就君道亏损。
English: When the disaster comes, then the resentment will come from below, and if it can't be weathered, it will be a loss.

古文：四始之缺，五际之厄，其咎由此。
现代文：《诗经》上的 四始 之废缺， 五际 之灾，过错就在这里。
English: In the "Book of Songs," the defect of the four beginnings, the disaster of the five ages, the fault is here.

古文：岂可不刚健笃实，矜矜栗栗，以守天功盛德大业乎？臣伏见光禄大夫江夏黄琼，耽道乐术，清亮自然，被褐怀宝，含味经籍，又果于从政，明达变复。
现代文：难道不可以刚健笃实，矜矜忄栗忄栗，来遵守天功盛德的大业么？ 臣下看到光禄大夫江夏黄琼，深深爱上道术，主张清亮自然，披着粗布衣，怀着宝玉；对经籍深有钻研体味，又果敢于从政，明于变异消复之术。
English: Isn't it possible to be strong, virtuous, and virtuous in order to abide by the great cause of heavenly merit? When the vassals saw the Guanglu doctor Jiangxia Huangqiong, they fell deeply in love with Taoism, advocated clean and natural, wore coarse cloth, and carried precious stones; they had a deep understanding of the scriptures, and dared to be in politics, and were familiar with the art of eliminating variations.

古文：朝廷前加优宠，宾于上位。
现代文：朝廷前加优宠，延为上宾。
English: He was a favorite of the imperial court and was invited as a guest of honor.

古文：琼入朝日浅，谋谟未就，因以丧病，致命遂志。
现代文：黄琼入朝时间不长，谋猷尚无表现，因为丧病，致命遂志。
English: Huang Qiong's time in the imperial court was not long, and he had not yet shown any signs of plotting to overthrow the emperor. However, due to his death from illness, he was able to achieve his ultimate goal.

古文：《老子》曰： 大音希声，大器晚成。 
现代文：《老子》说： 大音希声，大器晚成。 
English: "Lao Zi" said: "Loud voice, late success."

古文：善人为固，三年乃立。
现代文：善人治理国家，三年才见成效。
English: Good people govern the country, but it takes three years to see results.

古文：天下莫不嘉朝廷有此良人，而复怪其不时还任。
现代文：天下人没有不高兴朝廷有此好人，可又觉得他不时还任为可怪。
English: The people of the world are not unhappy that the imperial court has such a good man, but they also find it strange that he is still allowed to do so from time to time.

古文：陛下宜加降崇之恩，极养贤之礼，征反京师，以慰天下。
现代文：陛下应加赐隆崇之恩典，尽养贤之礼，召他回到京师，来安慰天下之人。
English: His majesty should bestow the grace of exaltation on him, nurture his virtue, and call him back to Beijing to comfort the people of the world.

古文：又处士汉中李固，年四十，通游、夏之艺，履颜、闵之仁。
现代文：又有处士汉中李固，年四十岁，精通子游、子夏之文艺，实践颜渊、闵子骞之仁德。
English: There is also a clerk, Li Gu, in his forties, who is proficient in the literature and art of Ziyu and Zixia, and practices the benevolence of Yan Yuan and Zou Zixuan.

古文：洁白之节，情同璬日，忠贞之操，好是正直，卓冠古人，当世莫及。
现代文：洁白的品节，如同白天，忠贞的操守，爱好正直，在古人中也不多见，当代人更没有谁能赶上。
English: Whiteness of taste, like daylight, faithfulness of conduct, love of honesty, are not common among the ancients, and no one can catch up with the present generation.

古文：元精所生，王之佐臣，天之生固，必为圣汉，宜蒙特征，以示四方。
现代文：天精所生之人，王者辅佐之臣，天生这个李固，一定为了圣汉，应该特别征召，来显示于四方之人。
English: A man born of a celestial spirit, a king's assistant and a vassal, born this Li Gu, must, for the sake of the holy man, be specially summoned to appear in the four quarters.

古文：夫有出伦之才，不应限以官次。
现代文：有了出类之才，不应限以官次。
English: If you have exceptional talent, you should not be limited to a position.

古文：昔颜子十八，天下归仁；子奇稚齿，化阿有声。
现代文：从前颜子十八岁，天下归服他的仁德；齐国子奇年十八岁，做阿邑之宰，邑内大化。
English: Once upon a time, Yan Zi was eighteen years old, and the whole world submitted to his benevolence; Qi Guo Zi was eighteen years old in a strange year, and he became the mayor of the village and the mayor of the village.

古文：若还琼征固，任以时政，伊尹、傅说，不足为此，则可垂景光，致休祥矣。
现代文：如果召回黄琼，征召李固，委以时政，伊尹、傅说，不能和他们相比，那么可留下好光景，制造吉祥了。
English: If Huang Qiong is recalled, Li Gu is conscripted, and the current government is appointed, Yi Yin and Fu said that they cannot be compared with them, then they can leave a good scene and make it auspicious.

古文：臣顗明不知人，伏听众言，百姓所归，臧否共叹。
现代文：臣岂页明不知人，听到众人所言，百姓所归，好歹要看共同的评价。
English: The minister does not know the people, he hears what the people say, and what the people think, well, we have to see the common evaluation.

古文：愿泛问百僚，核其名行，有一不合，则臣为欺国。
现代文：希望广泛询问百官，核实他们的名行，有一点不合实际，那就是臣犯了欺国之罪。
English: It is unrealistic to expect to interrogate hundreds of officials extensively to verify their reputation and actions. What is unrealistic is that the minister has committed the crime of defrauding the state.

古文：惟留圣神，不以人废言。谨复条便宜四事，附奏于左：一事：孔子作《春秋》，书 正月 者，敬岁之始也。
现代文：希望留神，不因人废言。 谨复条陈四件政事，附奏于左：第一件事：孔子作《春秋》，写 正月 ，敬岁之开始。
English: I would like to remind you of four political events, appended to the left: The first event: Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" in the first month of the year, marking the beginning of the new year.

古文：王者则天之象，因时之序，宜开发德号，爵贤命士，流宽大之泽，垂仁厚之德，顺助元气，含养庶类。如此，则天文昭烂，星辰显列，五纬循轨，四时和睦。
现代文：王者以天象为法则，顺着时令的次序，应开发德号，用爵位给贤士，流宽大的恩泽，垂仁厚之大德。顺助天地之元气，含养众人，这样一来，那就天文明烂，星辰显列，五纬循轨而行，四时和睦而变。
English: The king should take the celestial phenomenon as the rule, and follow the order of the season to develop the virtue name, use the title to give the sage, the flow of generous grace, and the benevolence of the great virtue. Help the vitality of heaven and earth, and nurture the people. In this way, the sky is civilized, the stars appear to be lined up, the five latitudes follow the track, and the four o'clock changes harmoniously.

古文：不则太阳不光，天地混浊，时气错逆，霾雾蔽日。
现代文：不然，太阳不放光明，天地浑浊不清，时气错乱，霾雾遮蔽太阳。
English: Otherwise, the sun will not shine, the sky and the earth will be cloudy, the time will be chaotic, and the sun will be covered by haze.

古文：自立春以来，累经旬朔，未见仁德有所施布，但闻罪罚考掠之声。
现代文：自立春以来，经过旬朔，没有看到布施什么仁德之政，只听见罪罚拷掠之声。
English: Since the beginning of spring, after a long period of time, we have not seen any benevolent policy, only heard the voice of crime and punishment.

古文：夫天之应人，疾如景响，而自从入岁，常有蒙气，月不舒光，日不宣曜。
现代文：天之应人，比影之随形、响之随声还要快，而自从入岁，常有蒙气，月亮不放光芒，太阳不见光彩。
English: He who answers to heaven is swifter than the shadow that follows the shape and the sound that follows the sound, and since the beginning of the year, he is often gloomy, the moon does not shine, and the sun does not shine.

古文：日者太阳，以象人君，政变于下，日应于天。
现代文：日即太阳，君王的象征。政治变动于下面，日应在天上。
English: The day is the sun, the symbol of the king. Political changes are below, the day should be in the sky.

古文：清浊之占，随政抑扬。
现代文：清浊之占，随着政治之抑扬而反应。
English: The occupation of the Qing Dynasty reacted with the rise of politics.

古文：天之见异，事无虚作。
现代文：天上出现奇异，事情必非虚作。
English: When strange things appear in the sky, they must be real.

古文：岂独陛下倦于万机，帷幄之政有所阙欤？
现代文：难道是陛下忙于日理万机，帷幄之政有缺陷么？
English: Could it be that His Majesty is busy with the day-to-day running of the country, and that the government is flawed?

古文：何天戒之数见也！
现代文：为什么天戒连续出现呢？
English: Why do the heavenly rings appear one after another?

古文：臣愿陛下发扬乾刚，援引贤能，勤求机衡之寄，以获断金之利。
现代文：臣愿陛下发扬乾刚之气，援引贤能之人，勤求机衡之寄托，来获取同心断金之利。
English: It is the wish of His Majesty's subjects to carry forward the spirit of self-reliance, to invoke the person of virtue, to diligently seek the trust of the balance of power, and to obtain the benefit of concentric breaking of gold.

古文：臣之所陈，辄以太阳为先者，明其不可久暗，急当改正。
现代文：臣之所陈，常以太阳为先，说明太阳不可久暗，急当改正。
English: According to the minister, the sun is often the first to rise, indicating that the sun will not be dark for long and should be urgently corrected.

古文：其异虽微，其事甚重。
现代文：它的变异不大，但其事情却重要。
English: Its variation is small, but its cause is important.

古文：臣言虽约，其旨甚广。
现代文：臣的话虽然简约，其旨意却很广。
English: Although the minister's words are simple, his intention is very broad.

古文：惟陛下乃眷臣章，深留明思。二事：孔子曰： 雷之始发《大壮》始，君弱臣强从《解》起。 
现代文：希陛下眷念臣的章奏，多多考虑。 第二件事：孔子说： 雷之始发《大壮》始，君弱臣强从《解》起。 
English: The second thing: Confucius said: The beginning of thunder is the beginning of "Big and Strong," and the weak emperor, the strong vassal, is the beginning of "Solution."

古文：今月九日至十四日，《大壮》用事，消息之卦也。
现代文：今月九日至十四日，《大壮》用事，消息之卦。
English: From the 9th to the 14th of this month, "Dazang" will be in the news.

古文：于此六日之中，雷当发声，发声则岁气和，王道兴也。
现代文：在这六天之内，雷当发声，发声就岁气和，王道兴起。
English: Within these six days, the thunder should sound, the sounding is the year of harmony, and the royal road arises.

古文：《易》曰： 雷出地奋，豫，先王以作乐崇德，殷荐之上帝。 
现代文：《易》说 ：雷出地奋，豫，先王以作乐崇德，殷荐之上帝。 
English: "Yi" said: "Thunder comes out of the ground, and Yu, the first king to make music, is revered as a god.

古文：雷者，所以开发萌牙，辟阴除害。
现代文：雷，开发萌芽，辟阴除害。
English: Thunder, development sprout, remove the negative and eliminate the harm.

古文：万物须雷而解，资雨而润。
现代文：万物须雷而解。靠雨来滋润土地。
English: Everything is solved by lightning. The land is moistened by rain.

古文：故《经》曰： 雷以动之，雨以润之。 
现代文：所以《经》说： 雷以动之，雨以润之。 
English: Therefore, the "Ching" says: Thunder is caused by movement, rain is caused by rain.

古文：王者崇宽大，顺春令，则雷应节，不则发动于冬，当震反潜。
现代文：王者崇尚宽大，顺着春令，那么雷就应节而发，不然发动于冬天，应当震而不震。
English: The king advocates magnanimity and follows the Spring Festival, so the thunder should be set off according to the season, otherwise it should be set off in winter, and it should shake without shaking.

古文：故《易传》曰： 当雷不雷，太阳弱也。 
现代文：所以《易传》说： 当雷不雷，太阳弱也。 
English: Therefore, "Easy Biography" said: When thunder does not thunder, the sun is weak.

古文：今蒙气不除，日月变色，则其效也。
现代文：现在蒙气不除，日月变色，这就是效应。
English: Now the haze is not removed, the sun and moon change color, this is the effect.

古文：天网恢恢，疏而不失，随时进退，应政得失。
现代文：天网恢恢，疏而不失，随着时令而进退，应看政治之得失。
English: Heaven's net is wide, slips but does not lose, advances and retreats with the times, should look at the gains and losses of politics.

古文：大人者，与天地合其德，与日月合其明，琁玑动作，与天相应。
现代文：大人，应与天地合其德，与日月合其明，璇玑动作，与天相应。
English: Adults, you should act in accordance with heaven and earth, with the sun and moon, and with the heavens.

古文：雷者号令，其德生养。
现代文：雷是一种号令，其德在于生养万物。
English: Thunder is a kind of call, and its virtue lies in giving birth to and nurturing all things.

古文：号令殆废，当生而杀，则雷反作，其时无岁。
现代文：号令殆废，应当生而杀，那么雷就反作，年成不好。
English: The slogan is almost useless, it should be born and killed, then the thunder is counterproductive, the year is not good.

古文：陛下若欲除灾昭祉，顺天致和，宜察臣下尤酷害者，亟加斥黜，以安黎元，则太皓悦和，雷声乃发。
现代文：陛下如果想除灾求福，顺天致和，应该考察臣下中间特别残酷害人的人，赶快罢黜，以安百姓，那么东方之神就悦和，雷声就应时而发。
English: If His Majesty wants to eliminate disasters and seek blessings, and make peace with the heavens, he should investigate those who are particularly cruel and harmful among his subjects, quickly dismiss them, and keep the people safe. Then the gods of the East will be pleased with peace, and thunder will occur from time to time.

古文：三事：去年十月二十日癸亥，太白与岁星合于房、心。
现代文： 第三件事：去年十月二十日癸亥，太白星与岁星会合于房星、心星。
English: The third event: On October 20th of last year, in the Year of the Boar, the Taibai Star and the Year Star met at the House Star and the Heart Star.

古文：太白在北，岁星在南，相离数寸，光芒交接。
现代文：太白在北面，岁星在南面，相距数寸，光芒交接。
English: Too white in the north, the New Year's star in the south, a few inches apart, the light handing over.

古文：房、心者，天帝明堂布政之宫。
现代文：房星和心星，天帝明堂布政之宫。
English: The star of the house and the star of the heart, the palace of Bu Zheng of the Heavenly Emperor Ming Tang.

古文：《孝经钩命决》曰： 岁星守心年谷丰。 
现代文：《孝经钩命决》说： 岁星守心年谷丰。 
English: "The Book of Filial Piety" says, "The year of the horse is the year of the heart."

古文：《尚书洪范记》曰： 月行中道，移节应期，德厚受福，重华留之。 
现代文：《尚书洪范记》说 ：月行中道，移节应期，德厚受福，重华留之。 
English: "Shangshu Hongfan Ji" said: The moon is in the middle of the road, the transfer of the festival is due, the virtue is blessed, and the importance is retained.

古文：重华者，谓岁星在心也。
现代文：重华，指岁星在心。
English: Chonghua, the finger of the year star in the heart.

古文：今太白从之，交合明堂，金木相贼，而反同合，此以阴陵阳，臣下专权之异也。
现代文：今太白从之，交合于明堂，金木相贼害，可是反同合一起，这是以阴凌阳，臣下专权的变异。
English: Now it is too white from it, intersecting in the bright hall, the gold and wood are harmful to thieves, but anti-coincidence, this is a variation of yin and yang, the vassal's dictatorship.

古文：房、心东方，其国主宋。
现代文：房星、心星在东方，其国主宋。
English: Fangxing and Xinxing are in the East, and their ruler is Song.

古文：《石氏经》曰： 岁星出左有年，出右无年。 
现代文：《石氏经》说： 岁星出左有年，出右无年。 
English: "Shishi Sutra" says: "When the year star rises, there is a year on the left, but no year on the right.

古文：今金木俱东，岁星在南，是为出右，恐年谷不成，宋人饥也。
现代文：现在金星木星都在东方，岁星在南方，这是出右，恐年岁谷物长不好，宋人将挨饿。
English: Now Venus and Jupiter are in the east, and the year star is in the south, which is out of the right. I am afraid that the grain will not grow well, and the Song people will starve.

古文：陛下宜审详明堂布政之务，然后妖异可消，五纬顺序矣。四事：《易传》曰： 阳无德则旱，阴僭阳亦旱。 
现代文：陛下应审详明堂布政的情况，然后妖异可消，五纬才会顺序运行了。 第四件事：《易传》说： 阳无德则旱，阴潜阳亦旱。 
English: His majesty should examine the situation of the promulgation of the policy in detail, and then the evil can be eliminated, and the five dimensions will run in sequence.The fourth thing: Yi Zhuan said: Yang without virtue is dry, Yin diving is also dry.

古文：阳无德者，人君恩泽不施于人也。
现代文：阳无德，说明人君的恩泽不施于百姓。
English: Yang has no virtue, which indicates that the benevolence of man is not bestowed on the people.

古文：阴僭阳者，禄去公室，臣下专权也。
现代文：阴潜阳，禄去公室，臣下专权的意思。
English: The meaning of "shadow lurking in the sun," "reward going to the office," and "subordinate dictatorship."

古文：自冬涉春，讫无嘉泽，数有西风，反逆时节。
现代文：自冬季到春季，一直没有嘉泽，数次有西风，违反时令气节。
English: From winter to spring, there has been no Jiazawa, and there have been several westerly winds, which is against the seasons.

古文：朝廷劳心，广为祷祈，荐祭山川，暴龙移市。
现代文：朝廷劳心，广为祈祷，祭奠山川，暴龙移市。
English: The imperial court worked hard, praying widely, dedicating mountains and rivers, and moving the city.

古文：臣闻皇天感物，不为伪动，灾变应人，要在责已。
现代文：臣听说皇天感动万物，不为伪动，灾变应人，重要在于责己。
English: The vassal heard that Emperor Heaven moves all things, not as a false move, but as a cataclysm, and the important thing is to be responsible.

古文：若令雨可请降，水可攘止，则岁无隔并，太平可待。
现代文：如果雨可请降，水可攘止，那么年岁没有隔并，太平年可以等待而至。
English: If the rain can please fall, and the water can be stopped, then the years are not separated, and the Taiping Year can wait.

古文：然而灾害不息者，患不在此也。
现代文：然而灾害不止，可见患不在此。
English: However, as disasters continue, it is clear that the problem is not here.

古文：立春以来，未见朝廷赏录有功，表显有德，存问孤寡，赈恤贫弱，而但见洛阳都官奔车东西，收系纤介，牢狱充盈。
现代文：立春以来，没看到朝廷赏录有功之人，表彰有德之士，存问孤寡之家，赈恤贫弱之人，只看到洛阳都官奔车由东到西，收集很小的罪行，使牢狱关满了囚犯。
English: Since the beginning of spring, I have not seen the imperial court award meritorious people, commend virtuous people, inquire about the homes of the widows and orphans, and sympathize with the poor and weak. I have only seen Luoyang officials rushing from east to west, collecting very small crimes, so that the prison was full of prisoners.

古文：臣闻恭陵火处，比有光曜，明此天灾，非人之咎。
现代文：臣听说恭陵火灾，光耀不断，说明这是天灾，不是人之罪过。
English: The minister heard that the fire in Gongling was blazing continuously, indicating that this was a natural disaster, not a human sin.

古文：丁丑大风，掩蔽天地。
现代文：丁丑发大风，掩蔽天地。
English: Ding ugly hair gale, cover the world.

古文：风者号令，天之威怒，皆所以感悟人君忠厚之戒。
现代文：风是号令，天之威怒的表现，都是用来感悟人君要行忠厚之道。
English: The wind is a signal, and the manifestation of heaven's might and fury is used to impress people to be loyal.

古文：若臣言不用，朝政不改者，立夏之后乃有澍雨，于今之际未可望也。
现代文：又连月无雨，将害宿麦。如果一谷无收成，那么饥饿之人就有十分之三四了。陛下的确应该广被恩泽，以应天功。如果臣言不被采用，朝政不改革，立夏之后才有时雨，于今没有指望了。
English: If there is no rain for months on end, it will harm the barley. If there is no harvest in the valley, then there will be three or four out of ten people who are hungry. Your majesty should indeed be widely appreciated, in response to the merits of heaven. If the vassal's words are not adopted, the government is not reformed, and it rains only sometimes after the beginning of summer, there is no hope now.

古文：若政变于朝而天不雨，则臣为诬上，愚不知量，分当鼎镬。
现代文：如果朝政有改革而天仍不下雨，那么臣是诬上，愚蠢不知份量，应当鼎镬之罪。 
English: If there is a reform in the government and the sky still does not rain, then the minister is a fake, stupidity does not know the weight, and should be punished.

古文：书奏，特诏拜郎中，辞病不就，即去归家。
现代文：书奏上去，特诏拜为郎中，郎顗辞病不就职，立即回家。
English: The calligraphy was played, and a special greeting was given to the roju. The roju resigned from his post due to illness, and immediately returned home.

古文：至四月京师地震，遂陷。
现代文：到四月京师地震，于是陷落。
English: In April, the capital was shaken by an earthquake and fell.

古文：其夏大旱。
现代文：这年夏天大旱。
English: There was a drought this summer.

古文：秋，鲜卑入马邑城，破代郡兵。
现代文：秋天，鲜卑人进犯马邑城，破代郡之兵。
English: In the autumn, the Xianbei people invaded Ma'i City, and the soldiers of the broken county followed.

古文：明年，西羌寇陇右。
现代文：第二年，西羌进犯陇右。
English: In the second year, the West Bank invaded the right bank.

古文：皆略如顗言。
现代文：都大致如郎顗所说的那样。
English: It all went roughly as Lang Yao had said.

古文：后复公车征，不行。
现代文：后来朝臣又用公车召他，不肯出来。
English: Later, the courtier summoned him by bus, but he refused to come out.

古文：同县孙礼者，积恶凶暴，好游侠，与其同里人常慕顗名德，欲与亲善。
现代文：同县人孙礼，积恶凶暴，喜欢游侠，与他同里之人常羡慕郎顗之名德，想与他亲善。
English: Sun Li, a fellow resident of the same county, is vicious and violent, and likes rangers. People in his village often envy him and want to be friends with him.

古文：顗不顾，以此结怨，遂为礼所杀。
现代文：郎顗不理睬他们，因此结了仇，于是郎顗被孙礼杀掉。
English: Lang Hao ignored them, so they had a feud, and Lang Hao was killed by Sun Li.

古文：襄楷字公矩，平原隰阴人也。
现代文：◆襄楷传襄楷字公矩，平原隰阴人。
English: ◆Xiang Kai Chuan, Xiang Kai Zi, Gong Rong, Plain, Yin Ren.

古文：好学博古，善天文阴阳之术。
现代文：好学习，博通古书，会天文阴阳之术。
English: Good at studying, well versed in ancient books, knows astrology and the art of Yin and Yang.

古文：桓帝时，宦官专朝，政刑暴滥，又比失皇子，灾异尤数。
现代文：桓帝时，宦官专揽朝政，政刑残暴泛滥，又连续死去皇子，灾异尤其多见。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kan, eunuchs dominated court politics, political punishments were rampant, and princes died one after another. Disasters were especially common.

古文：延熹九年，楷自家诣阙上疏曰：臣闻皇天不言，以文象设教。
现代文：延熹九年，襄楷离家到朝廷上疏道： 臣听说皇天不讲话，用天文象形设教。
English: In the ninth year of Yancheng, Xiang Kai left home and went to the imperial court. He said, "I heard that the emperor does not speak, so I taught him with astronomical pictograms."

古文：尧、舜虽圣，必历象日月星辰，察五纬所在，故能享百年之寿，为万世之法。
现代文：尧舜虽是圣人，一定观察历象日月星辰，观察五纬所在位置，所以能享百年之寿命，成为万世之榜样。
English: Although he was a saint, he always observed the calendar, the sun, the moon and the stars, and observed the position of the five meridians, so he could enjoy a hundred-year life span and become an example for all ages.

古文：臣窃见去岁五月，荧惑入太微，犯帝座，出端门，不轨常道。
现代文：臣私下看到去年五月，荧惑星侵入太微星，犯帝座，出端门，不照常道运行。
English: Last May, the minister privately saw a fluorescent planet invade the faint star, violate the constellation of the Emperor, exit the portals, and not operate as usual.

古文：其闰月良辰，太白入房，犯心小星，震动中耀。
现代文：闰月庚辰，太白星侵入房星，犯心小星，震动中耀。
English: Leap month Geng Chen, too white star invades house star, offended heart small star, shines in vibration.

古文：中耀，天王也；傍小星者，天王子也。
现代文：中耀是天王；旁边的小星，是天王之子。
English: The middle star is the heavenly king; the small star next to it is the heavenly king's son.

古文：夫太微天廷，五帝之坐，而金火罚星扬光其中，于占，天子凶；又俱入房、心，法无继嗣。
现代文：太微天廷，五帝之座，而金星火星罚星扬光在里面，按占卜，天子主凶；又都进入房星心星，法无继嗣。
English: The heavenly court, the seat of the five emperors, is too small, and Venus, Mars, and the punishment star shine in it. According to divination, the heavenly son is the main villain; and they all enter the house star heart star, and the law has no successor.

古文：今年岁星久守太微，逆行西至掖门，还切执汉。
现代文：今年岁星久守太微，逆行西至掖门，还迫近执法。
English: This year, Xingjiu Shou is too weak, retrograde west to Shimen, and still close to law enforcement.

古文：岁为木精，好生恶杀，而淹留不去者，咎在仁德不修，诛罚太酷。
现代文：岁为木星，好生恶杀，可停留不去，过错在于仁德不修，诛罚太残酷。
English: Age is Jupiter, good birth and evil death, can stay and not go, the fault lies in not cultivating benevolence, and the punishment is too cruel.

古文：前七年十二月，荧惑与岁星俱入轩辕，逆行四十余日，而邓皇后诛。
现代文：前七年十二月，荧惑星与岁星都进入轩辕，逆行四十多天，而邓皇后被杀。
English: In December 7 BC, both the planet and the star went retrograde for more than 40 days, and Empress Deng was killed.

古文：其冬大寒，杀鸟兽，害鱼鳖，城傍竹柏之叶有伤枯者。
现代文：那年冬天大寒，杀鸟兽，害鱼鳖，城边竹柏的叶子有伤枯的。
English: It was very cold that winter, which killed birds and animals and was harmful to fish. The leaves of the bamboo and cypress trees on the edge of the city were damaged and withered.

古文：臣闻于师曰： 柏伤竹枯，不出三年，天子当之。 
现代文：我听得师父说： 柏伤竹枯，不出三年，天子当之。 
English: I heard Master say, "If it takes three years for the bamboo to wither, it is the Son of Heaven who should do it."

古文：今洛阳城中人夜无故叫呼，云有火光，人声正喧，于占亦与竹柏枯同。
现代文：今洛阳城中人晚上无故喊叫，说有火光转行，人们互相惊噪，在占卜时也与竹柏枯叶相同。
English: Nowadays, people in Luoyang city shout at night without reason, saying that there is fire and light, people startle each other, and it is the same as the dead leaves of bamboo and cypress in divination.

古文：自春夏以来，连有霜雹及大雨雷，而臣作威作福，刑罚急刻之所感也。太原太守刘质、南阳太守成瑨，志除奸邪，其所诛剪，皆合人望，而陛下受阉竖之谮，乃远加考逮。
现代文：自春夏以来，连续有霜雹和大雨雷电，可能是臣子作威作福，刑罚急刻之所感应哩。 太原太守刘王质，南阳太守成王晋，立志除去奸邪之徒，他们所杀之人，都符合大家的愿望，可陛下听信阉竖的谗言，竟远加考逮。
English: Since spring and summer, there have been continuous frosts, heavy rains, and thunder and lightning, which may have been caused by courtiers' arrogance and punishment. Taiyuan Daju Liu Wangguo, Nanyang Daju Chengwangjin, determined to remove the traitors, and the people they killed were in line with everyone's wishes, but His Majesty listened to the insults and was caught by surprise.

古文：三公上书乞哀质等，不见采察，而严被谴让。
现代文：三公上书请求原谅刘王质等人，不见采察，而严被谴责。
English: Three letters to the emperor asking for forgiveness for Liu Wangxi and others were not accepted, but were severely condemned.

古文：忧国之臣，将遂杜口矣。臣闻杀无罪，诛贤者，祸及三世。
现代文：忧国之忠臣，将被杜塞嘴巴，不说话了。 臣听说杀了无罪之人，杀了贤良之士，灾祸延及三代。
English: The loyal vassals who are worried about the country will be silenced by Du Du. The vassals have heard that innocent people have been killed, that good people have been killed, and the calamity has extended to three generations.

古文：自陛下即位以来，频行诛伐，梁、寇、孙、邓，并见族灭，其从坐者，又非其数。
现代文：自陛下即位以来，连续杀人，梁冀、寇荣、孙寿、邓万世等，都被灭族，那些牵连犯罪的，又不知多少。
English: Since His Majesty's accession to the throne, serial killers, including Liang Ji, Kou Rong, Sun Shou, and Deng Mansei, have all been exterminated, and those implicated in crimes are unknown.

古文：李云上书，明主所不当讳，杜众乞死，谅以感悟圣朝，曾无赦宥，而并被残戮，天下之人，咸知其冤。
现代文：李云上书，明主所不当讳，杜众乞死，谅以感悟圣朝，竟没有赦宥，而都被杀戮，天下的人，都知道他们冤枉。
English: Li Yun wrote a letter, confessing that the Lord had not been honest, begging for the death of the people, and pardoning them to feel the Holy Spirit. However, there was no forgiveness, and they were all killed. Everyone in the world knew that they had been wronged.

古文：汉兴以来，未有拒谏诛贤，用刑太深如今者也。永平旧典，诸当重论皆须冬狱，先请后刑，所以重人命也。
现代文：汉朝兴起以来，没有拒谏诛贤，用刑太甚像现在的。 永平年间旧典，对那些重犯都要冬狱，先请示后用刑，为的是重视人命。
English: Since the rise of the Han Dynasty, there has been no refusal to execute the virtuous, and the use of punishment is too much like the present. During the Yongping era, the old code required that those who committed serious crimes should be sent to winter prison, and they should first ask for instructions and then use punishment, in order to value human life.

古文：顷数十岁以来，州郡玩习，又欲避请谳之烦，辄托疾病，多死牢狱。
现代文：近几十年来，州郡玩忽职守，又想避免对疑案须请示廷尉的麻烦，常托疾病，多死在牢狱。
English: In recent decades, states and counties have been negligent in their duties, and in order to avoid the trouble of having to request a court marshal for suspicious cases, they have often contracted diseases and died in prison.

古文：长吏杀生自己，死者多非其罪，魂神冤结，无所归诉，淫厉疾疫，自此而起。
现代文：长吏掌握生杀大权，死者多非其罪，魂神含冤，无处申诉，淫厉疾疫，从此而起。
English: Chiefs hold the power of life and death, the dead are mostly not guilty, the soul and the gods are wronged, there is nowhere to appeal, and lewdness is rampant.

古文：昔文王一妻，诞至十子，今宫女数千，未闻庆育。
现代文：古时周文王一个妻子，生了十个儿子，现在宫女数千人，没听说有生育儿女的。
English: In ancient times, King Zhouwen had one wife and gave birth to ten sons. Today, there are thousands of concubines, but no one is known to have given birth to children.

古文：宜修德省刑，以广《螽斯》之祚。
现代文：应该修德省刑，来求多子多孙之福。
English: It is necessary to cultivate virtue, save punishment, and seek the blessing of more children and grandchildren.

古文：又七年六月十三日，河内野王山上有龙死，长可数十丈。
现代文： 又延熹七年六月十三日，河内野王山上有条龙死了，长约数十丈。
English: On June 13, 1877, a dragon about several dozen meters long died on Wang Mountain in Hanoi.

古文：扶风有星陨为石，声闻三郡。
现代文：扶风有星陨落为石，声音听到三郡。
English: A star falls to stone in Fufeng, and the sound is heard in three counties.

古文：夫龙形状不一，小大无常，故《周易》况之大人，帝王以为符瑞。
现代文：龙的形状不一，小大没一定，所以《周易》比作大人，帝王以为符瑞。
English: The shapes of dragons vary, and there is no such thing as a small or large one, so "Zhou Yi" is compared to an adult, and the emperor thinks it is a dragon.

古文：或闻河内龙死，讳以为蛇。
现代文：有人听见河内龙死，讳以为蛇。
English: Some people thought it was a snake when they heard that the Hanoi Dragon had died.

古文：夫龙能变化，蛇亦有神，皆不当死。
现代文：龙是能变化的，蛇也有神，都不当死。
English: The dragon can change, and the snake has a spirit. Both of them do not deserve to die.

古文：昔秦之将衰，华山神操璧以授郑客，曰 今年祖龙死 ，始皇逃之，死于沙丘。
现代文：从前秦将衰亡，华山神拿块玉石授给郑客，说道： 今年祖龙将死。 始皇逃避它，死在沙丘。
English: Before the Qin Dynasty fell, Huashan God took a piece of jade and gave it to Zheng Ke, saying: This year, the ancestor dragon will die. The first emperor escaped it and died in the sand dunes.

古文：王莽天凤二年，讹言黄山宫有死龙之异，后汉诛莽，光武复兴。
现代文：王莽天凤二年，讹言黄山宫有死龙的怪事，后来汉朝杀了王莽，光武帝复兴。
English: In the second year of Wang Mang Tianfeng, there was a rumor that there was a strange thing about a dead dragon in Huangshan Palace. Later, the Han Dynasty killed Wang Mang, and Emperor Guangwu revived.

古文：虚言犹然，况于实邪？
现代文：虚言还是这样，况实言么？
English: Is it a lie or is it the truth?

古文：夫星辰丽天，犹万国之附王者也。
现代文：星辰附丽在天，好像万国之附于王一样。
English: The stars of heaven sing for joy, as do all the kings of the earth.

古文：下将畔上，故星亦畔天。
现代文：下边将反叛上级，所以星象也叛于天。
English: The lower will rebel against the higher, and so the stars will rebel against the heavens.

古文：石者安类，坠者失势。
现代文：石者安类，坠落的失势。
English: The stone man and the class, the downfall of the fall.

古文：春秋五石陨宋，其后襄公为楚所执。
现代文：春秋时期有五块石头落在宋国，后来宋襄公被楚国抓住。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, five stones fell in Song, and later Song Xianggong was captured by Chu.

古文：秦之亡也，石陨东郡。
现代文：秦国的灭亡，石落在东郡。
English: The downfall of Qin fell on Dong County.

古文：今损扶风，与先帝园陵相近，不有大丧，必有畔逆。案春秋以来及古帝王，未有河清及学门自坏者也。
现代文：现在陨石落在扶风，与先帝园陵相近，不有大丧，必有叛逆。 按春秋以来以及古代帝王，没有黄河水清和学门自坏的事。
English: Now that the meteorite has landed in Fufeng, which is close to the former emperor's garden and tomb, there will be no great loss, but there will be rebellion. According to the Spring and Autumn Period and ancient emperors, there is no such thing as the Yellow River being clear and the students being self-destructive.

古文：臣以为河者，诸侯位也。清者属阳，浊者属阴。
现代文：臣认为黄河象征诸侯之位，清的属阳，浊的属阴。
English: The minister believed that the Yellow River symbolized the position of the princes, the Qing was the yang, and the Yao was the yin.

古文：河当浊而反清者，阴欲为阳，诸侯欲为帝也。
现代文：河当浊而反清，就是阴想成阳，诸侯想称帝。
English: When the river is turbulent but clear, it means that the yin wants to become the yang, and the princes want to be emperor.

古文：太学，天子教化之宫，其门无故自坏者，言文德将丧，教化废也。
现代文：太学，是天子教化之宫，它的门无故自坏，说明文德将丧，教化废弛。
English: Taigaku is the palace of God's enlightenment. Its gate is self-destructing for no reason, which indicates that literature and virtue will be lost, and enlightenment will be wasted.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 河水清，天下平。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 河水清，天下平。 
English: Jing Fang of "Easy Biography" said: The river is clear and the sky is flat.

古文：今天垂尽，地吐妖，人厉疫，三者并时而有河清，犹春秋麟不当见而见，孔子书之以为异也。臣前上琅邪宫崇受干吉神书，不合明听。
现代文：现在天垂异象，地吐妖气，人遭厉疫，三项同时出现而加上黄河水清，等于春秋时麒麟不当出现而出现一样，孔子写在史书认为是灾异哩。 臣以前上书说琅笽宫崇受干吉神书，不合明主所听。
English: At present, the sky is full of visions, the earth is spewing forth evil spirits, and man is stricken with pestilence. If these three things occur at the same time and the Yellow River is clear, it is equivalent to the appearance of the unseemly appearance of the unicorn in spring and autumn. Confucius wrote in his history book that this was a calamity. The minister had previously written that the palace was revered by Ganji, but this was not what the Lord wanted to hear.

古文：臣闻布谷鸣子孟夏，蟋蟀吟于始秋，物有微而志信，人有贱而言忠。
现代文：臣听说布谷鸟在孟夏叫，蟋蟀在初秋叫，物虽微小而不失信，人有卑贱而言忠。
English: The minister heard that the cuckoo calls in Mengxia and the stork calls in early autumn. Although things are small, they do not lose their credibility. People are humble and loyal.

古文：臣虽至贱，诚愿赐清闲，极尽所言。
现代文：臣虽然极微贱，诚心愿赐清闲时间，极尽所言。 
English: Although the minister is very humble, he sincerely wishes to give leisure time to the best of his ability.

古文：书奏不省。
现代文：书奏上去不被皇上省察。
English: When the calligraphy is played, it cannot be reflected upon.

古文：十余日，复上书曰：臣伏见太白北入数日，复出东方，其占当有大兵，中国弱，四夷强。
现代文：过十多天，又上书道： 臣下伏见太白金星北入数日，又出于东方，按占卜当有大兵出现，中国弱，四夷强。
English: After more than ten days, he wrote again: "Our vassals prostrate themselves when they see the great white planet Venus enter the north for a few days and leave the east. According to divination, when a great army appears, China will be weak and the barbarians will be strong.

古文：臣又推步，荧惑今当出而潜，必有阴谋。
现代文：臣又推步，荧惑星今当出现而潜伏不出，必有阴谋。
English: The minister also suggested that the fluorescent planet should appear now and not lurk, there must be a conspiracy.

古文：皆由狱多冤结，忠臣被戮。
现代文：都由于狱中多冤结之案，忠臣被杀害。
English: All of these were due to cases of wrongful conviction in prison, in which loyal retainers were killed.

古文：德星所以久守执法，亦为此也。
现代文：德星久守执法的原因，也是这个。
English: This is also the reason why Dexing has kept law enforcement for so long.

古文：陛下宜承天意，理察冤狱，为刘质、成瑨亏除罪辟，追录李云、杜众等子孙。夫天子事天不孝，则日食星斗。
现代文：陛下应承天意，理察冤狱，为刘王质，成王晋亏除罪辟，追录李云、杜众等人的子孙。 天子侍天不孝，则出现日食星斗的现象。
English: His majesty should accept the will of heaven, investigate the unjust imprisonment, become Liu Wang Chao, become Wang Jin to eliminate the crime, and trace the descendants of Li Yun, Du Zong and other people. If the Son of Heaven is not filial to Heaven, the phenomenon of eclipse stars will occur.

古文：比年日食于正朔，三光不明，五纬错戾。
现代文：近年日食于正朔，日、月、星三光不明，五纬错戾。
English: In recent years, solar eclipses have occurred on New Year's Eve, when the position of the sun, moon and stars is unknown, and the five meridians are out of phase.

古文：前者宫崇所献神书，专以奉天地顺五行为本，亦有兴国广嗣之术。
现代文：前些时宫崇所献神书，专以奉天地顺五行为根本，也有兴国广嗣的方法。
English: Some time ago, the book dedicated to the gods of the palace worship was dedicated to the five fundamental acts of obeying heaven and earth, and there was also a method of reviving the country.

古文：其文易晓，参同经典，而顺帝不行，故国胤不兴，孝冲、孝质频世短祚。臣又闻之，得主所好，自非正道，神为生虐。
现代文：它的文字明白易晓，参同经典，而顺帝不行，所以国胤不兴，孝冲、孝质两帝连续短命。 臣又听说，得主所好，自非正道，神明为之生虐。
English: Its text is clear and easy to understand, it is in line with the classics, but it is not possible to follow the emperor, so the country is not happy, and the two emperors of filial piety and filial piety are short-lived. The minister also heard that the winner is good, he is not the right way, and the gods are cruel to him.

古文：故周衰，诸侯以力征相尚，于是夏育、申休、宋万、彭生、任鄙之徒生于其时。
现代文：所以周朝衰亡，诸侯以武力征伐为时尚，于是夏育、申休、宋万、彭生、任鄙这班人生在那个时代。
English: Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty declined and died, and it became fashionable for the princes to conquer by force. Therefore, Xia Yu, Shen Xiu, Song Wan, Peng Sheng, and Ren Ming were all in that era.

古文：殷纣好色，妲已是出。
现代文：殷纣王好色，妲己就出来了。
English: If the king of the harlots is lustful, the harlots will come out.

古文：叶公好龙，真龙游廷。
现代文：叶公好龙，真龙游于庭院。
English: Ye Gongxiao dragons, real dragons swim in the courtyard.

古文：今黄门常侍，天刑之人，陛下爱待，兼倍常宠，系嗣未兆，岂不为此？
现代文：今黄门常侍，受过天刑之人，陛下爱待他们，加倍宠信，嗣续不出生，难道不是这个原故？
English: Isn't this the reason why the attendants of the Yellow Gate, those who have been punished by heaven, are treated with love and double favor by His Majesty, and are never born again?

古文：天官宦者星不在紫宫而在天市，明当给使主市里也。
现代文：天官宦者星不在紫宫而在天市，明言应当给使主市里。
English: The heavenly magistrate did not place the star in the Purple Palace, but in the heavenly city, and explicitly said that it should be placed in the city of the envoy.

古文：今乃反处常伯之位，实非天意。又闻宫中立黄、老、浮屠之祠。
现代文：现在竟反处常伯之位置，实非天意所在。 又听说宫中立了黄老、浮屠的祠。
English: Now, however, it is actually located in the position of Changbo, which is really not the will of heaven. I also heard that Huanglao and Fudu's ancestral hall have been built in the palace.

古文：此道清虚，贵尚无为，好生恶杀，省欲去奢。
现代文：这道主张清虚，贵尚虚无，好生恶杀，省私欲，去奢侈。
English: This line of thought advocates purity and emptiness, nobleness and nothingness, love of life and hate of death, avoidance of selfishness, and avoidance of extravagance.

古文：今陛下嗜欲不去，杀罚过理，既乖其道，岂获其祚哉！
现代文：今陛下嗜欲不除，杀罚过理，既乖其道，岂能得福？
English: Now, your majesty, if you indulge in your lusts, kill and punish excessively, and follow your own path, will you be able to obtain blessings?

古文：或言老子入夷狄为浮屠。
现代文：有人说老子入夷狄，始为浮屠之化。
English: Some people say that when Lao Zi entered Yidi, he began to turn into a barbarian.

古文：浮屠不三宿桑下，不欲久生恩爱，精之至也。
现代文：浮屠不三宿于桑下，不想久生恩爱之心，精之极点。
English: Under the mulberry tree, floating in the pond, not wanting to live for a long time, the heart of love, the pinnacle of essence.

古文：天神遗以好女，浮屠曰： 此但革囊盛血。 
现代文：天神派好女来，浮屠说； 这只是皮袋子装着血罢了。 
English: The gods have sent a good woman, said Flounder; it's just a leather bag containing blood.

古文：遂不眄之。其守一如此，乃能成道。
现代文：连看也不看。他之守一如此，才能成道。
English: He doesn't even look at it. If he keeps it like this, he can attain enlightenment.

古文：今陛下淫女艳妇，极天下之丽，甘肥饮美，单天下之味，奈何欲如黄、老乎？
现代文：今陛下嫔女艳妇，极尽天下之华丽，甘肥饮美，尽天下之美味，怎么想成为黄老呢？ 
English: Now, Your Majesty, you are a glamorous woman, the most gorgeous in the world, sweet, fat and beautiful, and the most delicious in the world. How would you like to be old and yellow?

古文：书上，即召诣尚书问状。
现代文：书奏上，皇上立即召尚书来问情况。
English: On the occasion of the calligraphy performance, the Emperor immediately summoned Shosho to inquire about the situation.

古文：楷曰： 臣闻古者本无宦臣，武帝末，春秋高，数游后宫，始置之耳。
现代文：襄楷说 ：臣听说古代本来没有宦臣，武帝末年，年岁已高，数次游后宫，才开始没立宦官。
English: Xiang Kai said: "I heard that there were no eunuchs in ancient times. Emperor Wu was in his last years and was already very old. He visited the harem several times before he started to appoint eunuchs.

古文：后稍见任，至于顺帝，遂益繁炽。
现代文：后来慢慢见任，到了顺帝，更加多起来。
English: Later, I slowly saw the appointment, and when I came to Shunde, it was even more.

古文：今陛下爵之，十倍于前。
现代文：今陛下用爵位给他们，比以前增加十倍。
English: Now, Your Majesty has given them ten times more titles than before.

古文：至今无继嗣者，岂独好之而使之然乎？ 
现代文：到现在没有皇子接班，难道不是爱好他们而这样么？ 
English: Up until now, there has been no prince to take over. Isn't that what happens when you love them?

古文：尚书上其对，诏下有司处正。
现代文：尚书把他的话奏上去，诏书下交有司处正。
English: Shang Shu played up his words, and under the imperial edict, he was given the title of imperial secretary.

古文：尚书承旨奏曰： 其宦者之官，非近世所置。
现代文：尚书接旨奏道 ：那些宦者的官位，不是近代所设置。
English: Shangshu Zengzhi Sodeo: The official ranks of those eunuchs were not established in modern times.

古文：汉初张泽为大谒者，佐绛侯诛诸吕；孝文使赵谈参乘，而子孙昌盛。
现代文：汉朝初年张泽做大谒者，帮助绛侯杀诸吕；孝文帝使赵谈参乘，而子孙昌盛。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Zhang Ze was the grand eunuch and helped Yan Hou to kill Zhu Lv; Emperor Xiaowen made Zhao Dan participate in the trip, and his son and grandson became prosperous.

古文：楷不正辞理，指陈要务，而析言破律，违背经艺，假借星宿，伪托神灵，造合私意，诬上罔事。请下司隶，正楷罪法，收送洛阳狱。 
现代文：襄楷不正辞理，指陈国家要务，而析言破律，违背经艺，假借星宿，伪托神灵，造合私意，诬蔑圣上误了国事，请交给司隶，正楷的罪法，关进洛阳狱。 
English: Xiang Kai's words were not in accordance with the truth, referring to the important tasks of the state, and his analysis broke the law, violated the law, borrowed the stars, falsely supported the gods, made up his own will, slandered the sacred, and misjudged the state affairs. Please hand it over to Sili, the criminal law of Xiang Kai, and put him in Luoyang Prison.

古文：帝以楷言虽激切，然皆天文恒象之数，故不诛，犹司寇论刑。
现代文：皇帝认为襄楷言词虽然激切，然而都是天文恒象之数，所以不杀他，还交司寇论刑。
English: The emperor thought that although Xiang Kai's words were fierce, they were all the number of astronomical constants, so he did not kill him, but also handed him over to Scrooge for punishment.

古文：初，顺帝时，琅邪宫崇诣阙，上其师干吉于曲阳泉水上所得神书百七十卷，皆缥白素朱介青首朱目，号《太平清领书》。
现代文：起初，顺帝时，琅笽宫崇到朝廷，奉上他的师父干吉在曲阳泉水上所得神书百七十卷，都用缥白素朱介青首朱目，叫做《太平清领书》。
English: At first, when Emperor Shun was on the throne, Gong Gong was brought to the imperial court and presented with the 170 volumes of the Divine Book that his master Ganji had obtained from the Quyang Spring. All of them were written in Zhu Jie Qing Shou Zhu M, called the "Taiping Qing Lian Zhi."

古文：其言以阴阳五行为家，而多巫觋杂语。
现代文：他的语言是以阴阳五行为家，而多巫觋杂语。
English: His language is based on the five elements of yin and yang, and is mostly a mixture of witchcraft and sorcery.

古文：有司奏崇所上妖妄不经，乃收臧之。
现代文：有司奏称宫崇所上之书妖妄不经，于是收藏起来。
English: U Siso said that the book on which the palace was built was a delusion, so he started to collect it.

古文：后张角颇有其书焉。
现代文：后来张角颇有其书。
English: Later, Zhang Kuan was quite prolific.

古文：及灵帝即位，以楷书为然。
现代文：到灵帝即位，认为襄楷的书是对的。
English: After the enthronement of Ling Di, he thought that Xiang Kai's book was right.

古文：太傅陈蕃举方正，不就。
现代文：太傅陈蕃举他做方正，他不就职。
English: Grand Master Chen Jun promoted him to the position of Founder, but he did not take up the post.

古文：乡里宗之，每太守至，辄致礼清。
现代文：乡里宗之，每逢太守到任，常用礼节请他。
English: He lived in the village, and whenever the governor arrived, he was invited with common courtesy.

古文：中平中，与荀爽、郑玄俱以博士征，不至，卒于家。
现代文：中平年间，与荀爽郑玄都以博士征召，没有去，死在家中。
English: During the years of Zhongping, both Zheng Xuan and Zhao Shuang were conscripted as doctors, but they did not go and died at home.

