古文：又东至华容县西，夏水出焉。
现代文：又往东流到华容县西边，夏水从这里分出。
English: It also flows eastward to the west of Huarong County, and the summer water is separated from here.

古文：江水左迤为中夏水，右则中郎浦出焉。
现代文：江水向左边分支流出，是中夏水，右边有中郎浦分出。
English: The water of the river flows out to the left branch, which is the middle summer water, and the right side has the middle Langpu branch.

古文：江浦右迤，南派屈西，极水曲之势，世谓之江曲者也。
现代文：港汉通向右边，南支流向西弯，流势极度弯曲，世人称为江曲。
English: The Hong Kong-Han River flows to the right, and the south tributary bends to the west. The current is extremely curved, and the world is called the river bend.

古文：又东南当华容县南，涌水入焉。
现代文：又往东南流，在华容县南边有涌水注入。
English: It also flows to the southeast, and surges of water are injected into the southern edge of Huarong County.

古文：江水又东，涌水注之。
现代文：江水又往东流，有涌水注入。
English: The water of the river flowed eastward again, and there was an influx of water.

古文：水自夏水南通于江，谓之涌口。
现代文：涌水从夏水分派南流与江相通，汇流处叫涌口。
English: The inflow of water from the summer moisture sends the south stream to connect with the river, and the confluence is called the inlet.

古文：二水之间，《春秋》所谓阎敖游涌而逸者也。
现代文：二水之间就是《春秋》所说的阎敖游涌而奔逃的地方。
English: Between the two waters is the place where "Spring and Autumn" said that demons swam and fled.

古文：江水又径南平郡孱陵县之乐乡城北，吴陆抗所筑，后王濬攻之，获吴水军督陆景于此渚也。
现代文：江水又流经南平郡屏陵县乐乡城北边，此城是吴陆抗所筑。以后王浚攻城，就在诸上俘虏了吴水军督陆景。
English: The river also flows through the northern side of Le Xiangcheng, Pingling County, Nanping County. This city was built by Wu Lucheng. After that, Wang Jun attacked the city and captured the Wushui military governor Lu Jie in Zhuang.

古文：又东南，油水从东南来注之。
现代文：又往东南流，油水从东南流来注入。
English: It also flows to the southeast, and oil and water are injected from the southeast.

古文：又东，右合油口，又东径公安县北。
现代文：江水又往东流，右边汇合于油口；又往东流经公安县北面。
English: The river then flows eastward, meeting at Yaukou on the right; it then flows eastward through the northern part of Public Security County.

古文：刘备之奔江陵，使筑而镇之。曹公闻孙权以荆州借备，临书落笔。
现代文：刘备奔逃到江陵时，派人筑城镇守；曹操正在写信，听说孙权把荆州借给刘备，吃了一惊，不觉把笔掉在地上。
English: When Liu Bei fled to Jiangling, he sent someone to build a town guard. Cao Cao was writing a letter and heard that Sun Quan had lent Jingzhou to Liu Bei. Cao Cao was surprised and dropped the pen on the ground.

古文：杜预克定江南，罢华容置之，谓之江安县，南郡治。
现代文：杜预平定江南后，撤废华容，另行设县，叫江安县，是南郡治所。
English: After Du Yu settled the south of the Yangtze River, Huarong was abolished and a separate county was set up, called Jiang'an County, which was the southern county seat.

古文：吴以华容之南乡为南郡，晋太康元年改曰南平也。
现代文：吴把华容南乡设为南郡，晋太康元年，改名南平。
English: Wu set Huarong South Township as Nan County, and in the first year of Jin Taikang, it was renamed Nanping.

古文：县有油水，水东有景口，口即武陵郡界。
现代文：县里有油水，水东有景口，靠近武陵郡边界。
English: There is oil and water in the county, and there is a scenic spot to the east of the water, near the border of Wuling County.

古文：景口东有沦口，沦水南与景水合。
现代文：景口东有沦口，沦水往南流与景水汇合，又往东流，与澄水和各湖塘相通。
English: In the east of the scenic spot, there is a waterfall, and the waterfall flows southward to meet the scenic spot, and flows eastward to connect with the clear water and lakes.

古文：又东通澧水及诸陂湖，自此渊潭相接，悉是南蛮府屯也。
现代文：从这里开始，深潭接连不断，岸上全都是南蛮府驻军的地方。
English: Starting from here, the deep pools continue one after another, and on the shore are all the places where the troops of Nanban Prefecture are stationed.

古文：故侧江有大城，相承云仓储城，即邸阁也。
现代文：旧时江边有大城，相传是仓储城，就是存放军粮、军需物资的仓库。
English: In the old days, there was a large town on the banks of the river, which was said to be a storage town, that is, a warehouse for storing military grain and munitions.

古文：江水左会高口，江浦也，右对黄州。
现代文：江水左岸汇合于高口，是个牛扼湖，与右岸的黄州相望。
English: The left bank of the river converges at Gaokou, which is a cowpatch lake, and looks across to Huangzhou on the right bank.

古文：江水又东得故市口，水与高水通也。
现代文：江水又往东流到故市口，这里的水与高水相通。
English: The water of the river flows eastward to the former city gate, where the water is connected to the high water.

古文：江水又右径阳岐山北，山枕大江，山东有城，故华容县尉旧治也。
现代文：江水右边又流经阳岐山北面。阳岐山靠近大江，东边有城，是旧时华容县尉的治所。
English: On the right side of the river, it flows through Yangqi Mountain to the north. Yangqi Mountain is close to the big river, and there is a city on the east side. It was the former Huarong County Governor's residence.

古文：大江又东，左合子夏口。
现代文：大江又往东流，左边汇合于子夏口。
English: The big river flows eastward again, and merges at Zixiakou on the left.

古文：江水左迤北出，通于夏水，故曰子夏也。
现代文：江水左岸分出支流，奔向北方，与夏水相通，所以叫子夏。
English: The tributary of the left bank of the river flows to the north and is connected to the Xia water, so it is called Zixia.

古文：大江又东，左得侯台水口，江浦也。大江右得龙穴水口，江浦右迤也。北对虎洲。
现代文：大江又往东流，左岸有侯台水口，是个牛扼湖；右岸有龙穴水口，也是牛辘湖，有港汉通入右岸，水口北对虎洲。
English: The big river flows eastward again. On the left bank, there is the Houtai water outlet, which is a cowpatch lake. On the right bank, there is the Long An water outlet, which is also a cowpatch lake. There is a Hong Kong and Han pass into the right bank. The water outlet faces the tiger island to the north.

古文：又洲北有龙巢，地名也，昔禹南济江，黄龙夹舟，舟人五色无主。
现代文：珊北有龙巢，是个地名。古时禹南下渡江，游来两条黄龙，把船夹在中间，船夫吓得丧魂落魄。
English: Shanbei has a dragon's nest, which is a place name. In ancient times, when Yunan went to cross the river, two yellow dragons swam in and sandwiched the boat in the middle. The boatman was scared out of his wits.

古文：禹笑曰：吾受命于天，竭力养民，生，性也，死，命也，何忧龙哉？
现代文：禹笑道：我受上天之命，竭尽全力为百姓谋福利。求生是天性，死是天命，又何必怕龙呢？
English: Yu smiled and said, "I was ordered by Heaven to do my best to seek the welfare of the people. To live is one's nature, to die is one's destiny, and why should one be afraid of dragons?

古文：于是二龙弭鳞掉尾而去焉，故水地取名矣。
现代文：于是二龙收敛起鳞甲，摇摆着尾巴游去。水名和地名就是因此而来的。
English: As a result, the two dragons converged, raised their scales, and swam away with their tails swinging. The water name and place name came from this.

古文：江水自龙巢而东，得俞口，夏水泛盛则有，冬无之。
现代文：江水从龙巢往东流，有俞口，夏天水大时才有水，冬天就干涸无水了。
English: The river water flows from the dragon's nest to the east, there is an estuary, in summer there is water only when the water is high, in winter it dries up and there is no water.

古文：江之北岸，上有小城，故监利县尉治也。
现代文：江北岸有个小城，先前是监利县尉的治所。
English: There is a small town on the north bank of the Yangtze River. It was once the seat of the county magistrate of Jianli.

古文：又东得清阳土坞二口，江浦也。
现代文：又往东流，有清阳、土坞两个水口，都是牛扼湖。
English: It also flows eastward, with Qingyang and Dockyard as its two outlets, both of which are part of Niuhu Lake.

古文：大江右径石首山北，又东径赭要。
现代文：大江右边流经石首山北边，又往东流经过储要。
English: The right side of the big river flows through the northern side of Shishou Mountain, and flows eastward through the reservoir.

古文：赭要，洲名，在大江中，次北湖洲下。
现代文：储要是洲名，在大江中接近北湖州下端。
English: If the reservoir is on the mainland, it is in the middle of the big river and close to the lower end of North Huzhou.

古文：江水左得饭筐上口，秋夏水通下口，上下口间，相距三十余里。
现代文：江水左岸有饭筐上口，夏秋间水通下口，上下口之间，相距三十余里。
English: On the left bank of the river, there is the upper mouth of the rice basket, the lower mouth of the water channel between summer and autumn, and between the upper and lower mouths, a distance of more than thirty miles.

古文：赭要下即杨子洲，在大江中，二洲之间，常苦蚊害。
现代文：储要以下就是扬子洲，位于大江中央，两洲之间，常常苦于蛟龙为害。
English: The following is the Yangtze River, located in the middle of the river, between the two continents, often suffering from dragonflies.

古文：昔荆佽飞济此，遇两蚊，斩之，自后罕有所患矣。
现代文：从前荆饮飞在这里过渡，碰到两条蛟龙，他挥剑斩了蛟龙，从此以后，就很少再有蛟害了。
English: Once upon a time, Jing Yunfei was passing through here, when he encountered two dragons. He swung his sword and cut off the dragons. Since then, there have been very few accidents.

古文：江之右岸则清水口，口上即钱官也。
现代文：大江右岸有清水口，口上就是钱官所驻处。
English: There is a clear water outlet on the right bank of the Dajiang River, and on the outlet is the residence of the tax office.

古文：水自牛皮山东北通江，北对清水洲，洲下接生江洲，南即生江口，水南通澧浦。
现代文：此水从牛皮山往东北通大江，水口北对清水洲，洲的下端与生江洲相接；南边就是生江口，有水南通澄浦。
English: This water flows from the Cowhide Mountains to the Northeast Dajiang River. The water outlet faces the Clear Water Isthmus to the north, and the lower end of the isthmus is connected to the Ikecho Isthmus. The south side is the Ikecho Isthmus, and there is water south of the Clear Water Isthmus.

古文：江水左会饭筐下口，江浦所入也。
现代文：江水左边又汇合饭筐下口，是牛扼湖的入口。
English: On the left side of the river, it meets the lower mouth of the rice basket, which is the entrance to Niuhu Lake.

古文：江水又右得上檀浦，江溠也。
现代文：江水右岸又有上檀浦，是一条小港汉。
English: On the right bank of the river is Shangdanpu, a small port town.

古文：江水又东径竹町南，江中有观洋溠，溠东有大洲，洲东分为爵洲，洲南对湘江口也。
现代文：江水又往东流经竹盯南边，江中有观洋搓；这条港汉以东有大洲，大洲东头又分隔成一个爵洲；洲南与湘江口相望。
English: The river also flows eastward through the southern side of the bamboo grove, and there are ornamental pheasants in the river; there is a continent to the east of this Hong Kong and Han Dynasty, and the eastern end of the continent is separated into a barony; the south of the continent and the mouth of the Hunan River face each other.

古文：又东至长沙下隽县北，澧水、沅水、资水合东流注之。
现代文：又往东流到长沙郡下隽县北边，澄水、沉水、资水汇合后，往东流注入。
English: It also flows eastward to the north of Xiamen County, Changsha County. After the clear water, the sinking water and the resource water converge, the eastward flow is injected.

古文：凡此诸水，皆注于洞庭之陂，是乃湘水，非江川。
现代文：以上诸水都注入洞庭湖的肢泽。这些都是湘地的江河，不是江水的支流。
English: The above-mentioned waters are all injected into the limb of Lake Dongting. These are all rivers in Hunan, not tributaries of rivers.

古文：湘水从南来注之。
现代文：湘水从南边流来注入。
English: The Honshu water flows in from the south.

古文：江水右会湘水，所谓江水会者也。
现代文：江水右岸汇合湘水，就是所谓江水会。
English: The right bank of the river merges with the Xiangshui River, forming the so-called "River Water Association."

古文：江水又东，左得二夏浦，俗谓之西江口。
现代文：江水又往东流，左岸有两处夏季牛扼湖，俗称西江口。
English: The river also flows eastward, and there are two summer oxbow lakes on the left bank, commonly known as the West River Mouth.

古文：又东径忌置山南，山东即隐口浦矣。
现代文：又往东流经忌置山南边，忌置山东边就是隐口浦。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern side of Imoji Mountain, and the eastern side of Imoji Mountain is Hekikuchiura.

古文：江之右岸有城陵山，山有故城，东接微落山，亦曰晖落矶。江之南畔名黄金濑，濑东有黄金浦，良父口，夏浦也。
现代文：江水右岸有城陵山，山上有个老城，东边与微落山相接―微落山又称晖落矶；大江南岸江边叫黄金懒，獭东有黄金浦、良父口，都是夏季牛扼湖。
English: On the right bank of the river, there is Chengling Mountain, and there is an old city on the mountain. On the east side, it is connected to Weilu Mountain - Weilu Mountain, also known as Yingli Rocky Mountains. On the south bank of the Yangtze River, the river is called the Golden Lazy Mountains. On the east bank of the Yangtze River, there are Huangguangpu and Liangfukou, both of which are summer cattle lakes.

古文：又东径彭城口，水东有彭城矶，故水受其名，即玉涧，水出巴丘县东玉山玉溪，北流注于江。
现代文：又往东流经彭城口，水东有彭城矶，所以水也因矶而得名。这条水就是玉涧水，发源于巴丘县东边玉山的玉溪，北流注入江水。
English: It also flows eastward through the mouth of the Pengcheng River. To the east of the water is the Pengcheng Islet, so the water is also named after the islet. This water is the Yulun Water. It originates from the Yulong River in Yushan on the eastern edge of Bachu County, and the north stream is injected into the river water.

古文：江水自彭城矶东径如山北，北对隐矶，二矶之间，有独石孤立大江中，山东江浦，世谓之白马口。
现代文：江水从彭城矶往东流，经过如山北边。如山北对隐矶，二矶之间有一整块巨石，孤零零地屹立在大江中。如山东边是个牛扼湖，世人称为白马口。
English: The river flows from the Pengcheng Rock to the east, passing through the northern side of the mountain. For example, on the northern side of the mountain, there is a huge rock between the two rocks, standing alone in the big river. On the eastern side of the mountain, there is a cattle lake, known to the world as the White Horse Mouth.

古文：江水又左径白螺山南，右历鸭兰矶北，江中山也。
现代文：江水左岸又流经白螺山南边，右岸流过鸭兰矶北边，这是一座江中的山。
English: The left bank of the river also flows through the southern side of Bai Lushan, and the right bank flows through the northern side of Yalan Key, which is a mountain in the middle of the river.

古文：东得鸭兰、治浦二口，夏浦也。
现代文：往东有鸭兰、治浦两个水口，都是夏季牛扼湖。
English: To the east, there are the two water outlets of Yalan and Jipu, both of which are summer cattle lakes.

古文：江水左径上乌林南，村居地名也。
现代文：江水左边流经上乌林南边，是个村落地名。
English: The left side of the river flows through the southern part of Shangwulin, which is the name of a village.

古文：又东径乌黎口，江浦也，即中乌林矣。
现代文：又往东流经乌黎口，是个牛扼湖，即中乌林。
English: It also flows eastward through Ulikou and becomes Niuhu Lake, i.e. Middle Ulin.

古文：又东径下乌林南，吴黄盖败魏武于乌林，即是处也。
现代文：又往东流经下乌林南边。吴将黄盖在乌林打败魏武帝，就是这地方。
English: It also flows eastward to the south of Wulin. This is the place where Wu defeated Huang Gai in Wulin.

古文：江水又东，左得子练口，北通练浦，又东合练口，江浦也。
现代文：江水又往东流，左岸有子练口，北与练浦相通；又往东流汇合于练口，是个牛扼湖。
English: The water of the river flows to the east, and the left bank has the Niu Zhenkou, and the north is connected to the Niu Pu; and the eastward flow converges at the Niu Zhenkou, which is a cattle lake.

古文：陆水又径蒲矶山，北入大江，谓之刀环口。
现代文：练口南面正对练洲，练口一名就是由此而来的。江水右岸有蒲矶口，就是陆口。
English: The south side of the mouth of the river faces the island of Suizhou, which is where the name Suizhou comes from. On the right bank of the river, there is the mouth of the Pu River, which is the land entrance.

古文：又东径蒲矶山北，北对蒲圻洲，亦曰擎洲，又曰南洲，洲头即蒲圻县治也，晋太康元年置。
现代文：此口的水发源于下隽县西面的三山溪，溪水往东流经陆城北边，又东经下隽县南边，这是旧时长沙郡的旧县，就是王莽的闰隽。宋元嘉十六年所置，洲的上游有白面洲，洲南有憬口。
English: The water of this outlet originates from the Sanzhan Creek in the west of Heshan County. The stream water flows eastward through the north of Lucheng, and eastward through the south of Heshan County. This is the old county of Changsha County in the old days, that is, Wang Mang's Leap Bridge. It was built in the 16th year of Song Yuan Jia. The upstream of the island has a white-faced island, and the south of the island has a gape.

古文：洲上有白面洲，洲南又有澋口，水出豫章艾县，东入蒲圻县，至沙阳西北鱼岳山入江，山在大江中，扬子洲南，孤峙中洲。
现代文：憬口的水发源于一豫章艾县，往东流入蒲沂县境，到沙阳西北鱼岳山注入大江。鱼岳山在大江中扬子洲的南面，孤峰屹立于洲上。
English: The water of Jingkou originates in Zhang'ai County, Yunnan Province, and flows eastward into the territory of Pu'er County. It then flows into the Yangtze River at Yuyue Mountain, northwest of Shayang. Yuyue Mountain is located in the southern part of Yanzizhou in the Yangtze River, and stands alone on the continent.

古文：江水左得中阳水口，又东得白沙口，一名沙屯，即麻屯口也。本名蔑默口，江浦矣。
现代文：江水左岸有中阳水口，又东有白沙口，又名沙屯，就是麻屯也口，原名蔑默口，是个牛扼湖。
English: On the left bank of the river, there is the Zhongyang water outlet, and in the east, there is the Bai Sha outlet, also known as Shatun, that is, the Matunya outlet, originally known as the Zhili silent outlet, is a cattle lake.

古文：南直蒲圻洲，水北入百余里，吴所屯也。
现代文：白沙口南面正对蒲析洲，水口有水北流百余里，是吴屯过兵的地方。
English: The south side of Baishakou is facing Pudong Chau, and the water outlet has water flowing north for more than 100 miles. It is the place where Wu Tun had soldiers.

古文：又径鱼岳山北，下得金梁洲。
现代文：又流经鱼岳山北，下流有金梁洲。
English: It also flows through the northern part of Uoyake Mountain, with Jinliangzhou downstream.

古文：洲东北对渊洲，一名渊步洲。
现代文：金梁洲东北与渊洲相望，渊洲又名渊步洲。
English: Northeast of Jinliangzhou, overlooking Yuanzhou, Yuanzhou is also known as Yuanbuzhou.

古文：江濆从洲头以上，悉壁立无岸，历蒲圻至白沙，方有浦，上甚难。
现代文：江边从洲头开始，一直向上游延伸过去，全是削壁，没有低岸；过了蒲析到白沙以后才有牛扼湖，上水一十分困难。
English: The river's edge begins at the head of the island and extends all the way upstream. It is all hewn rock, with no low bank. After passing through Puye to Baisha, there is only Lake Niuhu, and it is very difficult to get to the water.

古文：江中有沙阳洲，沙阳县治也。县本江夏之沙羡矣。晋太康中改曰沙阳县。
现代文：江中有沙阳洲，是沙阳县治所在地•沙阳县本来是江夏的沙羡，晋太康年间被划归巴陵郡。
English: There is Shayangzhou in the Yangtze River, which is the administrative seat of Shayang County. Shayang County was originally Shasen in Jiangxia, and was transferred to Baling County during the Jin Taikang era.

古文：宋元嘉十六年，割隶巴陵郡。江之右岸有雍口，亦谓之港口。东北流为长洋港。又东北径石子冈，冈上有故城，即州陵县之故城也。庄辛所言左州侯国矣。
现代文：江水右岸有雍口，也叫港口；江水往东北流，就是长洋港；又往东北流经石子冈，冈上有个旧城，即州陵县的旧城，庄辛所说的左有州侯国，就是这地方。
English: On the right bank of the river, there is the Yongkou, also known as the port; the river flows to the northeast, that is, the Changyang Port; it also flows to the northeast through the Shizi Hill. There is an old city on the hill, that is, the old city of Shuling County. This is the place that Zhuang Xin called the left-hand state.

古文：又东径州陵新治南，王莽之江夏也。
现代文：又往东流经州陵县新治所南边，就是王莽的江夏。
English: It also flows eastward through the south side of Xinzhi Town in Zhuling County, which is Wang Mang's Jiangxia.

古文：港水东南流注于江，谓之洋口。
现代文：港水往东南流，注入江水，汇流处称为洋口。
English: The harbor water flows to the southeast, injecting river water, and the confluence is called the western mouth.

古文：南对龙穴洲，沙阳洲之下尾也。
现代文：洋口南对龙穴洲，是沙阳洲的下端。
English: South of Yangkou is Long An Chau, the lower end of Shayang Chau.

古文：洲里有驾部口，宋景平二年，迎文帝于江陵，法驾顿此，因以为名。
现代文：洲里有驾部口，宋景平二年，在江陵迎接文帝，车驾曾在这里歇宿，因此得名。
English: There is a driver's entrance on the island. In the second year of Song Jingping, Emperor Wen was welcomed in Gangneung. The driver used to stay here, hence the name.

古文：文帝车驾发江陵。至此黑龙跃出，负帝所乘舟，左右失色。
现代文：文帝车驾从江陵出发，到了这里，腾跃出一条黑龙，把文帝所乘的船背负起来。
English: Emperor Wen drove from Jiangling, and when he arrived here, a black dragon leapt out and carried the boat that Emperor Wen was on.

古文：上谓长史王昙首曰：乃夏禹所以受天命矣，我何德以堪之？
现代文：旁边的侍臣都吓坏了。文帝对长史王昙首说：夏禹就是这样受命于天的，我有什么恩德担当得起呢？
English: The attendants next to him were terrified. Emperor Wen said to Prince Changshi: "This is how Xia Yu was ordered by heaven. What kind of grace can I bear?

古文：故有龙穴之名焉。
现代文：因此有龙穴的地名。
English: Therefore, the place name "Dragon's Den" came into being.

古文：江水又东，右得聂口，江浦也，左对聂洲。
现代文：江水继续往东流，右岸有聂口，是个牛扼湖；聂口左对聂洲。
English: The water of the river continues to flow eastward. There is an inlet on the right bank, which is a cattle lake; the inlet on the left is a reed bank.

古文：江水左径百人山南，右径赤壁山北，昔周瑜与黄盖诈魏武大军处所也。
现代文：江水左边流经百人山南边，右边流经赤壁山北边，这就是从前周瑜和黄盖诈降蒙骗魏武帝大军的地方。
English: The left side of the river flows through the south side of the Hundred People's Mountain, and the right side flows through the north side of the Chibi Mountain. This is the place where Zhou Yu and Huang Gai cheated the Wei Emperor's army.

古文：江水东径大军山南。山东有山屯，夏浦江水左迤也。
现代文：江水往东流经大军山南，山的东面有屯垦区，还有个牛扼湖，港汉里夏季江水可向左岸通入。
English: The water of the river flows eastward through the vast southern part of the mountain. On the east side of the mountain, there is a settlement area and a cattle lake. In the summer, the water of the river can flow to the left bank.

古文：江中有石浮出，谓之节度石。
现代文：江中有一块岸石露出水面，叫节度石。
English: In the middle of the river, there is a rock jutting out of the water, called the Jiedu Rock.

古文：右则涂水注之，水出江州武昌郡武昌县金山，西北流径汝南侨郡故城南，咸和中，寇难南逼，户口南渡，因置斯郡，治于涂口。
现代文：右岸有涂水注入。涂水发源于江州武昌郡武昌县的金山，往西北流经汝南侨郡旧城南边。咸和年间，敌寇向南进逼，家家户户渡江南下避难，因此设置这个侨郡：治所在涂口。
English: The right bank is filled with water. The water originates from the Jinshan Mountain in Wuchang County, Wuchang County, Jiangsu Province, and flows northwest through the southern part of the old city of Ru'nan Qiao County. During the Han Dynasty, the enemy invaded the south, and every family took refuge in the south of the river. Therefore, this Qiao County was set up: the seat of government was in Tuikou.

古文：涂水历县西，又西北流注于江。
现代文：涂水经县西又向西北流，注入江水。
English: The coated water flows through the west of the county and flows to the northwest, injecting river water.

古文：江水又东径小军山南，临侧江津，东有小军浦。
现代文：江水又往东流经小军山南边，近旁有个渡口，东边有小军浦。
English: The river also flows eastward through the south side of the small army mountain, near there is a ferry, and on the east side there is a small army pool.

古文：江水又东径鸡翅山北，山东即土城浦也。
现代文：江水又往东流经鸡翅山北边，山的东边就是土城浦。
English: The river also flows eastward through the northern side of the Chicken Wing Mountain, and the eastern side of the mountain is Tucheng Pu.

古文：又东北至江夏沙羡县西北，沔水从北来注之。
现代文：又往东北流到江夏郡沙羡县西北，河水从北方流来注入。
English: It also flows northeast to the northwest of Shasen County, Jiangxia County, and the river water is injected from the north.

古文：黄鹄山东北对夏口城，魏黄初二年孙权所筑也。
现代文：沌水上流承接沌阳县的太白湖，往东南流就是沌水。沌水流经沌阳县南边，注入江水，汇流处叫沌口，沌阳都尉治所就在这里。
English: The upper reaches of the Chaoyang River flow into Taibai Lake in Chaoyang County, and the southeastern flow is the Chaoyang River. The Chaoyang River flows through the southern part of Chaoyang County, injecting river water. The confluence is called Chaoyang Mouth, and the Chaoyang Governor's Office is located here.

古文：依山傍江，开势明远，凭墉藉阻，高观枕流，上则游目流川，下则激浪崎岖，实舟人之所艰也。
现代文：晋永嘉六年孙权所筑，倚山临江，凭险建城，视野开阔，高高的城楼俯临江流，城楼上可以眺望奔流的大江，城楼下是激浪汹涌的险流。船夫在这里航行实在非常艰苦。
English: It was built by Sun Quan in the sixth year of Jin Yongjia. It is built on a hill facing the river, and it was built by taking risks. The view is wide, and the high city tower overlooks the river flow. On the city tower, you can see the rushing river, and below the city tower, there is a dangerous river with raging waves. It is really difficult for sailors to navigate here.

古文：对岸则人沔津，故城以夏口为名，亦沙羡县治也。
现代文：对岸可通河水，所以城以夏口为名，也是沙羡县的治所。
English: The opposite bank of the river can flow, so the city is named after the summer estuary, and is also the administrative center of Shaanxi County.

古文：江水左得湖口，水通太白湖，又东合滠口，水上承溳水于安陆县而东径滠阳县北，东流注于江。
现代文：江水左岸有湖口，水通太白湖；又往东流，汇合于摄口。摄水上流在安陆县承接埙水，往东流经摄阳县北边，东流注入江水。
English: On the left bank of the river, there is a mouth, and the water flows into Lake Taibai; it also flows eastward and converges at the inlet. The upstream of the inlet receives the salty water in Anlu County, and flows eastward through the north of Zhengyang County, and the eastward flow injects the river water.

古文：江水又东，湖水自北南注，谓之嘉吴。
现代文：江水继续东流，湖水从北面向南流注，称为嘉吴江。
English: The water of the river continues to flow eastward, and the water of the lake flows southward from the north, which is called the Jiahu River.

古文：江右岸频得二夏浦，北对东城洲西，浦侧有雍伏戍。
现代文：右岸接连有两处夏季牛扼湖，北面正对东城洲西侧，牛扼湖旁有雍伏戍。
English: On the right bank, there are two summer Niuhu Lake in succession. The north side is facing the west side of Dongchengzhou, and there is a Yongfujing next to Niuhu Lake.

古文：江之右岸，东会龙骧水口，水出北山蛮中。
现代文：江水右岸，东汇合于龙骤水口，龙嚷水发源于北山蛮中；左岸有武口，水的上流通安陆的延头。
English: On the right bank of the river, the eastern confluence is at the dragon's sudden water outlet, and the dragon's rushing water originates in the middle of the North Mountain; on the left bank, there is the Wu mouth, and the head of the upstream flow of water is Anlu.

古文：江之左有武口，水上通安陆之延头，宋元嘉二年，卫将军、荆州刺史谢晦，阻兵上流，为征北檀道济所败，走奔于此，为戍主光顺之所执处也。
现代文：宋元嘉二年，卫将军荆州刺史谢晦拥兵于上流，被征北大将军檀道济打败，逃到这里，被戍主光顺之抓住。两水往南流到武城，都注入大江。
English: In the second year of Song Yuan Jia, Wei general Jing Zhou stabbed Shi Xie Yu's army in the upstream, was defeated by the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force Dang Daoji, fled here, and was caught by the tyrant Guang Shun. Both waters flowed south to Wucheng, and both flowed into the big river.

古文：南至武城，俱入大江。南直武洲，洲南对杨桂水口，江水南出也，通金女、大文、桃班三治。
现代文：武城南对武洲，武洲南对杨桂水口，从这里经港汉南流，与金女、大文、桃班三处治所相通。
English: Wucheng South is connected to Wuzhou, Wuzhou South to Yangguizhikou, and from here, via Hong Kong, to the South Han River, and to the three provincial capitals of Jinmei, Dawen and Taoban.

古文：吴旧屯所在，荆州界尽此。
现代文：这是从前吴军的屯垦区，荆州的疆域就到此为止了。
English: This is the former Wu Army's Tunlu District, and the territory of Jingzhou ends here.

古文：江水东径若城南。
现代文：江水往东流经若城南边。
English: The river flows eastwards through the southern part of the town.

古文：庾仲雍《江水记》曰：若城至武城口三十里者也。
现代文：庚仲雍《江水记》说：若城到武城口三十里。
English: Geng Zhongyong's "Record of the River" said: It is 30 miles from Wucheng to Wucheng.

古文：南对郭口夏浦，而不常泛矣。
现代文：若城南对郭口，是一条夏季才有水的港汉，不是常年有水流通的。
English: If the south of the city is opposite the gate, it is a summer only water supply, not a year-round water supply.

古文：东得苦菜夏浦，浦东有苦菜山，江径其北，故浦有苦菜之名焉，山上有菜苦可食。
现代文：往东流到苦菜夏浦，东边有苦菜山。江水从北面流过，所以港汉有苦菜之名。山上有苦菜，味苦，可以吃。
English: It flows eastward to Bitter Vegetable Xiapu, and there is Bitter Vegetable Mountain on the east. The river water flows from the north, so Hong Kong and Han have the name of bitter vegetables. There are bitter vegetables on the mountain, taste bitter, and can be eaten.

古文：江水左得广武口江浦也。
现代文：江水左岸有广武口，是个牛扼湖。
English: On the left bank of the river, there is the Guangwu estuary, which is a cattle lake.

古文：江之右岸有李姥浦，浦中偏无蚊蚋之患矣。
现代文：江水右岸有李姥浦，这里没有蚊子为患。
English: On the right bank of the river is Li Ubapu, where mosquitoes are not a problem.

古文：北对峥嵘洲，冠军将军刘毅破桓玄于此洲，玄乃挟天子西走江陵矣。
现代文：李姥浦北对峥嵘洲，冠军将军刘毅就在洲上大败桓玄，于是桓玄就胁持皇帝向西逃到江陵去。
English: Li Ubapu north of Luzhou, champion general Liu Yi defeated Huan Xuan on Luzhou, so Huan Xuan threatened the emperor to flee west to Gangneung.

古文：又东过邾县南，江水东径白虎矶北，山临侧江濆，又东会赤溪夏浦浦口，江水右迤也。
现代文：又往东流过邾县南边，江水往东流经白虎矶北边，这座山就靠着江边；又往东流，与赤溪汇合，这是一条夏季有水的港汉水口，江水就从这里通向右岸。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Handan County, and the river flows eastward through the northern part of Baihu Mountain, which is adjacent to the river; it also flows eastward and merges with the Chaxi River, which is a waterway with water in the summer, and the river water leads to the right bank from here.

古文：又东径贝矶北，庾仲雍谓之沛岸矣。
现代文：又往东流经贝矶北边，就是庚仲雍所谓的沛岸。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern side of Beiji, which is the so-called Pei Bank of Gengzhongyong.

古文：江右岸有秋口，江浦也，又东得鸟石水，出乌石山，南流注于江。
现代文：江水右岸有秋口，是个牛扼湖。又往东流，汇合了乌石水。乌石水发源于乌石山，南流注入江水。
English: On the right bank of the river, there is an autumn estuary, which is a cow-choked lake. It flows to the east and merges with the Black Rock Water. The Black Rock Water originates from the Black Rock Mountain, and the south stream flows into the river.

古文：江水右得黎矶，矶北亦曰黎岸也。
现代文：江水右岸流经黎矶，矶北也叫黎岸。
English: The right bank of the river flows through Lijiang, and the north of Lijiang is also called Lijiang.

古文：山东有夏浦，又东径上碛北，山名也，仲雍谓之大小竹碛也。
现代文：山的东边有个夏季牛扼湖。又往东流经上啧北边，上债是山名，庚仲雍称为大竹债和小竹债。
English: On the east side of the mountain, there is a summer Ushihu Lake. It flows eastward through the northern part of Shangyu. Shangyu is the name of the mountain, and Gengzhongyong is called Big Bamboo and Small Bamboo.

古文：北岸峰火洲，即举洲也。
现代文：北岸是烽火洲，就是举洲，北与举口相望。
English: The north shore is Bonfire Island, that is, Ho Chau, and the north and Ho Chau face each other.

古文：北对举口，仲雍作莒字，得其音而忘其字，非也。
现代文：庚仲雍把举字写作营字，读音虽听准了，但把字却忘了，其实不对。
English: Geng Zhongyong used the raised letter to write the camp word. Although the pronunciation was accurate, he forgot the word, which was actually wrong.

古文：举水出龟头山，西北流径蒙茏戍南，梁定州治，蛮田秀超为刺史。
现代文：举水发源于龟头山，往西北流经蒙龙戍南，是梁定州的治所，蛮族人田秀超当刺史。
English: The raised water originates from Mount Gyuto and flows northwest through the southern part of Menglong County. It is the judicial center of Liangding County, and the barbarian tribesman Tian Xiu Chao is the history of stabbing.

古文：举水又西流，左合垂山之水，水北出垂山之阳，与弋阳淠水同发一山，故是水合之。
现代文：举水又往西流，左边汇合了垂山之水。此水发源于北方的垂山南麓，与弋阳啤水发源于同一座山，与啤水汇合。
English: This water originates from the southern foot of Mt. Tsuizan in the north, and originates from the same mountain as the Shenyang beer, and merges with the beer.

古文：水之东有南口戍，又南径方山戍西，西流注于举水。
现代文：垂山之水东有南口戍，又往南流经方山戍西边，西流注入举水。
English: The water of the mountains to the east has a south outlet, and flows southward through the west side of the mountains, and the west stream injects water.

古文：又西南径梁司、豫二州东，蛮田鲁生为刺史，治湖陂城，亦谓之水城也。
现代文：举水又往西南流，经过梁司、豫二州东边，蛮族人田鲁生当刺史，治所在湖肢城，也叫水城。
English: The raised water flowed to the southwest, passing through Liangshi and Henan on the east side of the two prefectures, and the barbarian Tian Lusheng was stabbed to death. It is governed by Huluncheng, also known as Shuicheng.

古文：举水又西南径颜城南，又西南径齐安郡西，倒水注之。
现代文：举水又往西南流经颜城南边；又往西南流经齐安郡西边，有倒水注入。
English: The raised water flowed to the southwest through the south side of Yancheng; it also flowed to the southwest through the west side of Qi'an County, and there was backwater injection.

古文：水出黄武山，南流径白沙戍西，又东南径梁达城戍西，东南合举水，举水又东南历赤亭下，谓之赤亭水，又分为二水，南流注于江，谓之举口。
现代文：倒水发源于黄武山，往南流经白沙戍西边，又往东南流经梁达城戍西边，往东南与举水汇合。举水又往东南流经赤亭下，叫赤亭水。以下分成两条水，一条南流注入江水，汇流处叫举口，南边与举洲相望。
English: Pouring water originates from Huangwu Mountain, flows southward through the west side of Baishajing, flows southeastward through the west side of Liangda Township, and converges with lifting water to the southeast. Lifting water also flows southeastward through Chatei, called Chatei water. It is divided into two streams, one flowing south into the river water, the confluence is called Hukou, and the south side faces Huzhou.

古文：南对举洲，《春秋左传》定公四年，吴、楚陈于柏举。
现代文：《春秋左传》：定公四年，吴、楚两军在柏举列阵。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": In the fourth year of Ding Gong, the two armies of Wu and Chu lined up in Bai.

古文：京相璠曰：汉东地矣。
现代文：京相潘说：这是汉东地区。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: "This is the Hantong region.

古文：江夏有溳水，或作举，疑即此也。
现代文：江夏有汇水，有人把汇字写作举字，可能就是这条水。
English: There is a water conduit in Jiangxia. Some people write the word "water conduit" and hold it up. It may be this water.

古文：左水东南流入于江。江浒曰文方口。
现代文：左边的水往东南流，注入江水，江边那地方叫文方口。
English: The water on the left flows to the southeast, injecting river water. The place by the river is called Wenfangkou.

古文：江之右岸有凤鸣口，江浦也。浦侧有凤鸣戍。
现代文：江水右岸有凤鸣口，是个牛扼湖，旁边有凤鸣戍。
English: On the right bank of the river there is Fengmingkou, which is a cattle lake, and next to it there is Fengmingyu.

古文：江水又东径邾县故城南，楚宣王灭邾，徒居于此，故曰邾也。
现代文：江水又往东流经郑县老城南边。楚宣王灭邻国，把郑人迁到这里居住，所以叫郑。
English: The river also flows eastward through the south of the old city of Zheng County. Chu Xuan Wang destroyed the neighboring countries and moved the Zheng people to live here, so it is called Zheng.

古文：汉高帝元年，项羽封吴芮为衡山王，都此。
现代文：汉高帝元年前，项羽封吴茵为衡山王，建都在这里。
English: Before the first year of the Hango Emperor, Xiang Yu sealed Wu Yin as the King of Hengshan, and all the buildings were built here.

古文：晋咸和中，庾翼为西阳太守，分江夏立。
现代文：晋咸和年间一，庚翼当西阳太守，把江夏分开，另设邻县。
English: In the first year of the Jin and Han dynasties, when Geng Ying was the governor of Xiyang, he separated Jiangxia and set up a neighboring county.

古文：咸康四年，豫州刺史毛宝，西阳太守樊俊共镇之，为石虎将张格度所陷，自尔丘墟焉。
现代文：咸和四年，豫州刺史毛宝、西阳太守樊俊共同镇守此城，被石虎的大将张格度攻陷，自此以后，成为一片废墟。
English: In the four years of the Haman and Heian dynasties, Mao Bao, the governor of Yuzhou, and Shunjun, the governor of Xiyang, jointly defended this city. It was conquered by Zhang Guodu, the general of Shihu, and since then, it has become a ruin.

古文：城南对芦洲，旧吴时筑客舍于洲上，方便惟所止焉，亦谓之罗洲矣。
现代文：老城南对芦洲，从前孙吴时在洲上建造客店，方便行旅歇宿。这个江中水清，也叫罗洲。
English: To the south of the old city, on the island of Luzhou, an inn was built on the island in the time of Sun Wuxi to facilitate travel and accommodation. This clear water in the middle of the river is also called Luzhou.

古文：鄂县北，江水右得樊口，庾仲雍《江水记》云：谷里袁口，江津南入，历樊山上下三百里，通新兴、马头二治。
现代文：鄂县北边，江水右岸有樊口，庚仲雍《江水记》说：谷里的袁口，江水支流从这里向南通入，经过樊山上下三百里，与新兴、马头两个治所相通。
English: On the north side of E County, there is a mouth on the right bank of the river. Geng Zhongyong, the author of "River Diary," said: "Yuankou in the valley, the tributary of the river flows southward from here, passing through three hundred miles up and down the Lushan Mountain, and connects with the emerging and horse-head two government offices.

古文：樊口之北有湾。昔孙权装大船，名之曰长安，亦曰大舶，载坐直之士三千人，与群臣泛舟江津，属值风起，权欲西取芦洲。谷利不从，乃拔刀急上，令取樊口薄舶船，至岸而败，故名其处为败舶湾。
现代文：樊自北面有湾，从前孙权造了一艘大船，名叫长安，又名大舶，载了当值兵士三千人，与群臣在江上畅游。不巧大风骤起，孙权想西航去芦洲，谷利却不听他，于是拔刀急忙上前，命令开到樊口停舶，可是船到岸时却撞毁了，所以把这地方取名为败舶湾。
English: From the north, there is a bay. Once upon a time, Sun Quan built a large ship called Chang'an, also known as the Great Ship, which carried three thousand soldiers on duty and swam with his ministers on the river. Unfortunately, a gale suddenly arose, and Sun Quan wanted to sail west to Luzhou, but Gu Li did not listen to him, so he drew his sword and hurried forward, ordering the ship to stop at Hekou. However, when the ship reached the shore, it crashed, so this place was named the Shipwreck Bay.

古文：因凿樊山为路以上，人即名其处为吴造岘，在樊口上一里，今厥处尚存。
现代文：船毁后，他们就在樊山开路上去，人们就把这地方叫吴造晚，地点就在樊口上流一里，现在还在。
English: After the ship was wrecked, they went on the Lushan open road. People called this place Wu Zouwan. It was located one mile upstream from the estuary, and it is still there.

古文：江水又左径赤鼻山南，山临侧江川。
现代文：江水又在左边流经赤鼻山南边，山在江边。
English: On the left, the river flows through the southern side of Mount Akahana, with the mountain on the river's edge.

古文：又东径西阳郡南，郡治即西阳县也。
现代文：又往东流经西阳郡南边，郡治就在西阳县城。
English: It also flows eastward through the south of Xiyang County, and the county seat is in Xiyang County.

古文：《晋书地道记》以为弦子国也。
现代文：《晋书•地道记》认为那就是弦子国。
English: "Jinshu•Jindoki" believes that it is the country of Zushi.

古文：江之右岸有鄂县故城，旧樊楚地，《世本》称熊渠封其中子红为鄂王。《晋太康地记》以为东鄂矣。
现代文：江水右岸有鄂县老城，旧时属樊楚地域。《世本》说，熊渠封他的第二个儿子熊红为鄂王，晋《太康地记》以为那地方就是东鄂。
English: On the right bank of the river, there is the old town of E County, which used to belong to the Shuangchu region. "World Book" said that Xiongqiu sealed his second son Xiong Hong as the king of E, and Jin "Tai Kang Di Ji" thought that the place was East E.

古文：《九州记》曰：鄂，今武昌也。
现代文：《九州记》说，鄂，就是现在的武昌。
English: "The Kyushu Chronicle" says that E is the present Wuchang.

古文：南历蛮中，吴时，旧立屯于水侧，引巴水以溉野。又南径巴水戍，南流注于江，谓之巴口。又东径噡县故城南，故弦国也。《春秋》僖公五年秋，楚灭弦，弦子奔黄者也。
现代文：孙权在魏黄初元年从公安迁到这里，改为武昌县，把鄂县的治所迁到袁山东面去，当年又设立为江夏郡，从建业居民中分出一千家来补充它的人口。到了黄龙元年秋，楚灭弦国，弦子逃奔到黄国。
English: In the first year of the Wei and Huang Dynasties, Sun Quan moved from the public security bureau to Wuchang County, and moved the government office of H County to the east of Yuanshan Mountain. In the same year, it was established as Jiangxia County, and a thousand families were selected from the residents of Jianye to supplement its population. In the autumn of the first year of the Yellow Dragon Dynasty, Chu destroyed Zeng Guo, and Zeng Zi fled to Huang Guo.

古文：汉惠帝元年，封长沙相利仓为侯国，城在山之阳，南对五洲也。
现代文：汉惠帝元年前，把这地方封给长沙相利仓，立为侯国。城在山的南边，南对五洲。
English: Before the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Hui gave this place to Changsha Sangli Cang and established it as a vassal state. The city is on the south side of the mountain, south of Wuzhou.

古文：江中有五洲相接，故以五洲为名。
现代文：江中有五个相连的沙洲，所以名叫五洲。
English: There are five connected sandbanks in the river, hence the name Wuzhou.

古文：宋孝武帝举兵江州，建牙洲上，有紫云荫之，即是洲也。
现代文：宋孝武帝在江州起兵，在洲上竖起牙旗，有紫云遮在旗上，说的就是此洲。
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu raised an army in Jiangzhou, erected a banner on the continent, and there was a purple cloud on the flag, saying that it was this continent.

古文：东会希水口，水出灊县霍山西麓。
现代文：江水又往东流，在希水口汇合希水。希水发原于潜县霍山西麓，山北有潜县老城。
English: The water of the river flows eastward and meets the Xishui River at the mouth of the Xishui River. The Xishui River originated at the western foot of Mount Huo in Qian County and the old city of Qian County in Shandong Province.

古文：山北有灊县故城，《地理志》曰：县南有天柱山。即霍山也。有祠南岳庙。
现代文：《地理志》说：县南有天柱山，就是霍山，那里有个南岳庙。潜，音潜。
English: "Geography" said: In the south of the county, there is Tianzhu Mountain, that is, Huoshan, where there is a Nanyue Temple.

古文：音潜。齐立霍州治此。
现代文：齐设置霍州，治所就在潜县。
English: All of them are located in Huozhou, and the administrative center is in Qianxian.

古文：西南流分为二水，枝津出焉。
现代文：希水往西南流，分成两条，伸出一条支流。
English: The Xishui River flows to the southwest, splits into two, and a tributary emerges.

古文：希水又南，积而为湖，谓之希湖。湖水又南流，径噡县东而南流注于江，是曰希水口者也。
现代文：希水又往南流，蓄积成湖，称为希湖，湖水又往南流经软县东边，南流注入大江，汇流处叫希水口。
English: Xishui also flows southward, accumulating into a lake, known as Xishu, and the lake water flows southward through the east of Soft County, and the south stream is injected into the big river, and the confluence is called Xishuikou.

古文：然水流急濬，霖雨暴涨，漂滥无常，行者难之。
现代文：但水流湍急深沉，每逢时雨连绵，河水暴涨，泛滥无定，行人往来很感困难。
English: However, the water is very deep and fast-flowing. Whenever there is continuous rain, the river rises sharply and floods indiscriminately. Pedestrian traffic is very difficult.

古文：江水左得赤水浦，夏浦也。江水又东径南阳山南，又曰芍矶，亦曰南阳矶，仲雍谓之南阳圻，一名洛至圻，一名石姥，水势迅急。
现代文：大江右岸有厌里口、东乐浦，从这里到武昌，掌管宫中器物制作的尚方官署所设的作坊点，连接不断地散布在江岸一带。又往东流，有桑步，是个埠头，下流有章浦，原来是西阳郡的治所，现在已经完全荒芜了。江水左岸有赤水浦，是个夏季牛扼湖，江水又往东流经南阳山南边。南阳山又名芍矶，也叫南阳矶，庚仲雍称为南阳忻，又名洛至沂，又名石姥，矶下水势湍急。
English: On the right bank of the Yangtze River, there are Zuo Likou and Donglepu. From here to Wuchang, the workshops set up by the Shangfang Government Office, which is in charge of the production of palace utensils, are continuously connected and spread around the riverbank. Further east, there is Sangbu, which is a wharf. Downstream, there is Zhangpu, which was originally the seat of Xiyang County, and is now completely deserted. On the left bank of the river, there is Chashui Pu, which is a summer cattle lake. The river also flows eastward through the south side of Nanyang Mountain. Nanyang Mountain is also known as

古文：江水又东径西陵县故城南，《史记》秦昭王遣白起伐楚，取西陵者也。
现代文：江水又往东流，经过西陵县旧城南边。《史记》载，秦昭王派遣白起去攻楚，占领西陵，就是此城。
English: The river flowed eastward again, passing the southern edge of the old city of Xiling County. According to "Histories," Qin Zhao Wang sent Baiqi to attack Chu and occupy Xiling, which is this city.

古文：汉章帝建初二年，封阴堂为侯国。
现代文：汉章帝建初二年，把西陵封给阴堂，立为侯国。
English: In the first two years of the reign of Emperor Han Zang, the Western Tomb was given to the Ying Dynasty and established as a vassal state.

古文：江水东历孟家溠。江之右岸有黄石山，水径其北，即黄石矶也。一名石茨圻，有西陵县。县北则三洲也。
现代文：江水东流经孟家磋，右岸有黄石山，就是黄石矶，又名石茨忻，江水就从矶北流过，西陵县县城就在这里，城北是三洲。
English: The east stream of the river flows through Mengjia Liao, and there is Huangshi Mountain on the right bank, that is, Huangshi Qiao, also known as Shizhuang. The river water flows from Qiao to the north. The county seat of Xiling County is here, and the north of the city is Sanzhou.

古文：山连延江侧，东山偏高，谓之西塞，东对黄公九矶，所谓九圻者也。
现代文：江边山岭连绵，东面的山偏高，称为西塞，东边与黄公九矶相对，就是所谓九沂。
English: The mountains along the river are continuous, and the mountains in the east are high, known as Xisei. The east side is opposite Huangguo Jiuye, which is the so-called Jiuye.

古文：于行小难，两山之间为阙塞。
现代文：这里山路难行，两山之间是网塞，从这里过渡，可到土复。
English: The mountain road here is difficult to travel, and there is a gridlock between the two mountains. From here, it is possible to transition to Tudou.

古文：从此济于土复，土复者，北岸地名也。
现代文：土复是北岸的地名。
English: Tudofu is the name of a place on the northern shore of Mt.

古文：又东过蕲春县南，蕲水从北东注之。
现代文：又往东流过薪春县南边，薪水从北向东方流来注入。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Zhuchun County, and the salary is injected from the north to the east.

古文：江水又得苇口，江浦也。
现代文：江水又流到苇口，是个牛扼湖。
English: The water of the river flows to Hekou, which is a cattle lake.

古文：浦东有苇山，江水东径山北。北崖有东湖口，江波左边，流结成湖，故谓之湖口矣。
现代文：牛扼湖东边有苇山，江水往东流经山北，北崖有东湖口，江水有港汉通向左岸，积聚成湖，所以叫湖口。
English: On the east side of Niuhu Lake, there is Lushan Mountain, the river water flows eastward through the north of Shanbei, the north cliff has the East Hukou, and the river water has the Ganghan Pass to the left bank, accumulating into a lake, so it is called Hukou.

古文：江水又东得空石口，江浦在右，临江有空石山，南对石穴洲，洲上有蕲阳县治。
现代文：江水又往东流，有空石口，右岸是个牛扼湖；濒江有空石山，南与石穴洲相对，洲上有薪阳县县城。
English: The river also flows eastward, there is an empty stone mouth, and the right bank is a cowpoke lake; there is an empty stone mountain on the edge of the river, opposite the south and the stone pit, and there is the county seat of Tuyang County on the island.

古文：又东，蕲水注之。
现代文：又往东流，有薪水注入。
English: Another eastward flow, with an infusion of salaries.

古文：江水又东，径蕲春县故城南。
现代文：江水又往东流，经过薪春县老城南边。
English: The river then flows eastward, passing the southern edge of the old city of Tsuchiharu.

古文：世祖建武三十年，封陈俊子浮为侯国。
现代文：世祖建武三十年，把这里封给陈俊的儿子陈浮，立为侯国。
English: In the thirtieth year of Jianwu, the ancestor of the Jianwu Dynasty, he assigned this place to Chen Jun's son, Chen Fu, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：江水又东，得铜零口，江浦也。
现代文：江水又往东流，有铜零口，是个牛扼湖。
English: The water of the river flows to the east, there is a small copper outlet, and it is a cattle lake.

古文：大江右径虾蟆山北，而东会海口。
现代文：大江右边流经虾蟆山北边，往东流汇合于海口。
English: The right side of the big river flows through the north side of Shimoqiao Mountain, and the eastward flow converges at Haikou.

古文：水南通大湖，北达于江。
现代文：此口的水南通大湖，北到大江，左右两岸都是山岭。
English: At this entrance, the water flows south to the Great Lake, north to the Dajiang River, and both sides of the river are mountainous.

古文：左右翼山，江水径其北，东合臧口，江浦也。
现代文：江水流经山岭北面，东流与减口汇合，这是个牛扼湖。
English: The river water flows through the mountains to the north, and the east stream converges with the mouth of the river. This is a cow-choked lake.

古文：江水又左径长风山南，得长风口，江浦也。
现代文：江水又在左边流经长风山南边，有长风口，是个牛扼湖。
English: On the left, the river flows through the southern side of the Changfeng Mountain. It has a long outlet and is a cattle lake.

古文：江水又东径积布山南，俗谓之积布矶，又曰积布圻，庾仲雍所谓高山也。此即西阳、寻阳二郡界也。
现代文：江水又往东流经积布山南边，俗称积布矶，又叫积布沂，也就是庚仲雍所说的高山，是西阳和寻阳二郡间的分界。
English: The river also flows eastward through the southern edge of Jibu Mountain, commonly known as Jibu Mountains, also known as Jibu Mountains, that is, the high mountains mentioned by Geng Zhongyong, is the boundary between Xiyang and Xiangyang counties.

古文：右岸有土复口，江浦也。
现代文：右岸有土复口，是个牛扼湖。
English: On the right bank, there is a muddy bayou, which is a cattle lake.

古文：夹浦有江山，山东有护口，江浦也。庾仲雍谓之朝二浦也。
现代文：牛扼湖两侧是江山，山的东边有护口，是个牛扼湖，庚仲雍称为朝二浦。
English: Niuhu Lake is flanked by mountains on both sides, and there is a mouth on the east side of the mountain, which is Niuhu Lake. Gengzhongyong is called Chaonipura.

古文：又东过下雉县北，利水从东陵西南往之。
现代文：又往东流过下难县北边，利水从东陵西南注入。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Shimonoseki, and the beneficial water is injected from the southwestern part of Dongling.

古文：江水东径琵琶山南，山下有琵琶湾。又东径望夫山南，又东得苦菜水口，夏浦也。
现代文：江水往东流经琵琶山南边，山下有琵琶湾；又往东流经望夫山南边；又往东流，有苦菜水口，是个夏季有水的牛扼湖。
English: The water of the river flows eastward through the southern side of Mount Biwa, and there is Biwa Bay at the foot of the mountain; it also flows eastward through the southern side of Mount Mofu; it also flows eastward, and there is a bittern water outlet, and it is a cattle lake with water in summer.

古文：江之有岸，富水注之，水出阳新县之青湓山，西北流径阳新县，故豫章之属县矣。
现代文：江水右岸，有富水注入。富水发源于阳新县的青谧山，往西北流经阳新县，是旧时豫章的属县。
English: On the right bank of the river, there is rich water injection. The rich water originates from Qingyaoshan in Yangxin County and flows northwest through Yangxin County, which is a county of old Shiyuzhang.

古文：地多女鸟。《玄中记》曰：阳新男子，于水次得之，遂与共居，生二女，悉农羽而去。
现代文：那一带地方女鸟很多，《玄中记》说：阳新有个男人，在水边碰到了女鸟，就和她同居，生了两个女儿，都长了羽毛飞去。
English: There are a lot of female birds in that area, and "The Tale of Genji" says: There was a man in Yangxin who met a female bird on the water's edge, lived with her, and had two daughters, both of whom grew feathers and flew away.

古文：豫章间养儿，不露其衣，言是鸟落尘于儿衣中，则令儿病，故亦谓之夜飞游女矣。
现代文：豫章一带居民抚养孩子，都不让孩子的衣服暴露在外面，说这种鸟把尘土落在孩子的衣服上，就会使孩子得病，所以也称女鸟为夜飞游女。
English: Residents in the Yuzhang area raise their children and do not allow their children's clothes to be exposed to the outside. They say that if this bird puts dust on the child's clothes, it will make the child sick, so they also call the female bird a nocturnal wanderer.

古文：又西北径下雉县，王莽更名之润光矣，后并阳新。
现代文：又往西北流经下锥县，王莽改名为润光，后来并入阳新县。
English: It also flowed to the northwest through Shimo-Kui County, and Wang Mang was renamed as Runguang, and later merged into Yangxin County.

古文：水之左右，公私裂溉，咸成沃壤。旧吴屯所在也。
现代文：富水左右两岸，无论公田私田，只要有水灌溉，就都成为良田沃土，从前是吴屯田的地方。
English: Rich in water on both sides of the river, regardless of whether it is public or private land, as long as there is water irrigation, it will become a fertile land. It used to be the place of Wu Tun Tian.

古文：江水又东，右得兰溪水口。
现代文：江水又往东流，右岸有兰溪水口，也是牛扼湖。
English: The water of the river flows eastward, and on the right bank there is the Lanxi estuary, which is also Niuhu Lake.

古文：并江浦也。
现代文：又往东流，左岸在青林口，汇合青林水。
English: It flows eastward again, and the left bank is at Qinglinkou, where it meets the Qinglin Water.

古文：又东，左得青林口，水出庐江郡之东陵乡，江夏有西陵县，故是言东矣。《尚书》云江水过九江至于东陵者也。
现代文：青林水发源于庐江郡东陵乡。江夏有西陵县，所以这里称为东陵。这就是《尚书》说约：江水经过九江流到东陵。
English: Qinglin Water originated in Dongling Township, Minjiang County. Jiangxia has Xiling County, so it is called Dongling. This is what "Shangshu" said about: River water flows through Jiujiang to Dongling.

古文：西南流，水积为湖，湖西有青林山。
现代文：水往西南流，积聚成为湖泊，湖西有青林山。
English: The water flows to the southwest, accumulating into lakes, with Qinglin Mountain to the west of the lake.

古文：宋太始元年，明帝遣沈攸之西代子勋，伐栅青山，睹一童子甚丽，问伐者曰：取此何为？
现代文：宋泰 太始元年，明帝派遣沈效之西征，讨伐子勋，在青山伐木作桩。看到一个十分清秀的孩子，间伐木人道：你们砍这些树做什么用？
English: In the first year of the Song and Tai Dynasties, Emperor Ming dispatched the Western Expedition led by Emperor Shengke to fight against the sons of loggers who were cutting down trees to make piles in the Qingshan Mountains. Seeing a very handsome child, a lumberjack said to him, "What are you cutting down these trees for?"

古文：答欲讨贼。
现代文：答道：用来打叛贼。
English: He answered: To fight against traitors.

古文：童子曰：下旬当平，何劳伐此？在众人之中，忽不复见。
现代文：孩子说：下旬就该可以平定了，何必麻烦砍树呢卫说罢在人群中忽然一闪就不见了。
English: The child said, "We should be able to settle this by the end of the month. Why bother cutting down the trees?" Wei Wei suddenly disappeared from the crowd in a flash.

古文：故谓之青林湖。
现代文：山名青林山，所以湖就叫青林湖。
English: The mountain is called Qinglin Mountain, so the lake is called Qinglin Lake.

古文：湖有鲫鱼，食之肥美，辟寒暑，湖水西流，谓之青林水。
现代文：湖中有卿鱼，吃起来又肥又鲜，并能抵御寒暑。湖水往西流，称为青林水。
English: In the lake, there are Qingling fish, which are fat and fresh to eat, and can withstand cold and heat. The water of the lake flows westward and is called Qinglin water.

古文：又西南，历寻阳，分为二水：一水东流，通大雷。一水西南流注于江，《经》所谓利水也。
现代文：又往西南流经寻阳，分成两条水：一条往东流，通大雷，一条往西南流，注入江水，就是《水经》里所说的利水。
English: It also flows to the southwest through Huan Yang, and is divided into two streams: one flows to the east, through Dalai, and one flows to the southwest, injecting river water, which is the beneficial water mentioned in the "Water Sutra."

古文：右对马头岸，自富口迄此五十余里，岸阻江山。
现代文：寻阳右边与马头岸相对，自富口到这里五十余里，两岸山重水复，路途多险阻。
English: The right side of Huan Yang is opposite Ma Tou Bank. It is more than 50 miles from Fukou to here. The mountains on both sides of the river are heavy with water, and there are many dangerous obstacles on the way.

