古文：邯郸之难，昭奚恤谓楚王曰： 王不如无救赵，而以强魏。
现代文：邯郸之战，昭奚恤对楚宣王说： 君王不如不援救赵国，而使魏国的力量增强。
English: In the Battle of Zhaozhou, Zhaozhou said to King Chu Xuan: "It would be better for the king not to save Zhao, but to strengthen Wei."

古文：魏强，其割赵必深矣。
现代文：魏国的力量强大，恐怕割取赵国的土地一定很多了。
English: Wei's power is strong, and I'm afraid that the amount of land taken from Zhao must be huge.

古文：赵不能听，则必坚守，是两弊也。 
现代文：赵国不顺从，那么必定坚守，这是使他们两败俱伤的好办法。 
English: If Zhao Guo does not comply, then he must stick to it. This is a good way to make them both lose.

古文：景舍曰： 不然。
现代文：景舍说： 不是这样。
English: Keishe said, "That's not true.

古文：昭奚恤不知也。
现代文：昭奚恤的做法是不明智的。
English: It would be unwise to do so.

古文：夫魏之攻赵也，恐楚之攻其后。
现代文：魏国攻打赵国，担心楚国从后面进攻它。
English: Wei attacked Zhao, fearing that Chu would attack it from behind.

古文：今不救赵，赵有亡形，而魏无楚忧。是楚、魏共赵也，害必深矣，何以两弊也?
现代文：观在不援救赵国，赵国就有灭亡形迹，而魏国没有楚国攻其后的忧虑，这是楚国、魏国共同攻打赵国，对赵国的危害一定很深重！凭什么说是两败俱伤？
English: Viewed from this perspective, if Zhao was not rescued, Zhao would be doomed, while Wei would not have to worry about Chu attacking Zhao. This is because Chu and Wei attacked Zhao together, and the damage to Zhao must have been very serious! How can it be said that both were defeated?

古文：且魏令兵以深割赵，赵见亡形，而有楚之不救己也，必与魏合而以谋楚。
现代文：况且魏国已经命令士兵割取了赵国很多土地，赵国已经显露出灭亡的征兆，而内心有了楚国不援救自己的想法，必然与魏国联合起来而图谋楚国。
English: Moreover, Wei had already ordered soldiers to seize a lot of land from Zhao. Zhao was already showing signs of its demise, and had the idea that Chu would not come to its rescue, and would inevitably unite with Wei to plot against Chu.

古文：故王不如少出兵，以为赵援。
现代文：所以君王不如少出些军队，作为赵国的援兵。
English: Therefore, it would be better for the king to send fewer troops as reinforcements from Zhao.

古文：赵恃楚劲，必与魏战。
现代文：赵国依仗楚国的强大有力，必定与魏国死战。
English: The state of Zhao, relying on the strong and powerful state of Chu, was bound to fight to the death with the state of Wei.

古文：魏怒于赵之劲，而见楚救之不足畏也，必不释赵。
现代文：魏国被赵国的顽强抵抗精神所激怒，而且看到楚国的援救不值得畏惧，一定不肯放弃灭亡赵国的机会。
English: Enraged by the tenacious resistance spirit of Zhao, and seeing that the rescue of Chu was not to be feared, Wei would not give up the opportunity to destroy Zhao.

古文：赵、魏相弊，而齐、秦应楚，则魏可破也。 
现代文：赵国、魏国互相拚得两败俱饬，而齐国、秦国乘楚国援救赵国之机起兵攻打魏国，那么魏国是可以打败的。 
English: Zhao and Wei suffered two defeats, while Qi and Qin took the opportunity of Chu's rescue of Zhao to attack Wei, so Wei could be defeated.

古文：楚因使景舍起兵救赵。
现代文：楚国因此派景舍领兵援救赵国。
English: As a result, Chu sent Jing She to lead the troops to rescue Zhao.

古文：邯郸拔，楚取睢、濊之间。
现代文：赵国的邯郸被魏国攻占以后，楚国占取了睢水、涉水之间的大片土地。
English: After the state of Zhao conquered the state of Wei, the state of Chu occupied a large area of land between the state of Zhao and the state of Wei.

