古文：二年春，王正月戊申，宋督弑其君与夷，及其大夫孔父。
现代文：二年春季，周历正月戊申日，宋国的华父督杀死了其国君与夷和大夫孔父嘉。
English: In the spring of the second year, on the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, the Chinese patriarch of Song killed his sovereign and the doctor Kong Chujia.

古文：滕子来朝。
现代文：滕国国君来鲁国朝见。
English: Teng Guo Guo Jun met with the Emperor of Lilu.

古文：三月，公会齐侯、陈侯、郑伯于稷，以成宋乱。
现代文：同年三月，鲁国国君与齐侯、陈侯、郑伯在稷地会面，谋划平息宋国之叛乱。
English: In March of the same year, Lu Guo Guojun met with Qi Hou, Chen Hou and Zheng Bo in Handan to plan to quell the rebellion in Song.

古文：夏四月，取郜大鼎于宋。
现代文：夏季四月，鲁国拿走了宋国的郜大鼎。
English: In the summer of April, the State of Lu took away the Song Dynasty's Zou Dading.

古文：戊申，纳于大庙。
现代文：戊申这一天,鲁国把鼎放入其太庙之中。
English: On this day of Boshin, the state of Lu put the tripod into its imperial temple.

古文：秋七月，杞侯来朝。
现代文：秋季七月，杞国国君来鲁国朝见。
English: In the autumn of July, the Emperor of Shikoku came to see the Emperor of Lu.

古文：蔡侯、郑伯会于邓。
现代文：蔡侯、郑伯在邓这个地方会见。
English: Cai Hou and Zheng Bo met in Deng's place.

古文：九月，入杞。
现代文：九月，鲁军进入杞国。
English: In September, the Russian army entered Shandong Province.

古文：公及戎盟于唐。
现代文：鲁公与戎在唐地结盟。
English: Lu Gong and Rong made an alliance in Tang.

古文：冬，公至自唐。
现代文：冬天鲁公从唐地回国。
English: In winter, Lu Gong returned to China from Tang.

古文：二年春，宋督攻孔氏，杀孔父而取其妻。
现代文：二年春，宋国卿大夫华父督攻打孔氏，杀死孔父而夺取其妻。
English: In the spring of the second year, Song Guoqing's doctor Hua Fadu attacked Kong, killed Kong Fadu and seized his wife.

古文：公怒，督惧，遂弑殇公。
现代文：宋殇公发怒，华父督惧怕，随后杀害宋殇公。
English: Song Shigong was angry, Hua Fadu was afraid, and then he killed Song Shigong.

古文：君子以督为有无君之心而后动于恶，故先书弑其君。
现代文：君子认为华父督心里早就没有国君，然后才会产生这种邪恶，所以先记载杀害其国君。
English: The nobles thought that the Emperor did not have a king in his heart for a long time before this evil occurred, so they first recorded the killing of their king.

古文：会于稷以成宋乱，为赂故，立华氏也。
现代文：集会于稷地，为的是平定宋国混乱，由于赠送财物的缘故，便立华氏为君。
English: The assembly was held in Handan in order to quell the chaos in the Song Dynasty. As a result of the gift of property, the Hua clan was established.

古文：宋殇公立，十年十一战，民不堪命。
现代文：宋殇公即位后，十年间经历十一次战争，民众不堪此命运。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Song of Han, the country experienced eleven wars in ten years, and the people could not bear this fate.

古文：孔父嘉为司马，督为太宰，故因民不堪命，先宣言曰： 司马则然。 
现代文：当时孔父嘉为司马，华父督为大宰，因为民众不堪此命运，华父督就先宣传说： 这是司马造成的。 
English: At that time, Kong Chijia was Sima, and Hua Chidu was Dazai, because the people could not bear this fate, Hua Chidu first publicized that: This was caused by Sima.

古文：已杀孔父而弑殇公，召庄公于郑而立之，以亲郑。
现代文：已杀害孔父嘉而后杀害宋殇公，便把庄公从郑国召回而立庄公为国君，以亲近郑国。
English: After he had killed Kong Chih-chia and then Song Yu-gong, he recalled Zhuang-gong from Zheng and made Zhuang-gong the ruler of the country in order to be close to Zheng.

古文：以郜大鼎赂公，齐、陈、郑皆有赂，故遂相宋公。
现代文：并把郜国大鼎赠送给鲁桓公，齐国、陈国、郑国都赠送礼物，所以华父督就担任了宋国的相国。
English: He also presented the Great Seal of the State of Min to King Lu Huan, and the State of Qi, the State of Chen, and the State of Zheng all presented gifts, so Emperor Huan served as the consort of the State of Song.

古文：夏四月，取郜大鼎于宋。戊申，纳于大庙。
现代文：夏四月，鲁桓公从宋国取来郜国大鼎。戊申日，置于太庙。
English: In the summer of April, King Lu Huan took the Great Seal of the State of Song from the State of Song, and placed it in the Great Temple on the Day of the Great Seal.

古文：非礼也。
现代文：这不符合社会行为规范。
English: But he added: "It's so rude.

古文：臧哀伯谏曰： 君人者将昭德塞违，以临照百官，犹惧或失之。故昭令德以示子孙。
现代文：臧哀伯劝谏说： 统治人民的人，要显扬规律堵塞违法，以治理显示百官，仍然担心有所失误，所以显扬美善的规律以示范于子孙。
English: Zou Yibo advised Zou that: Those who govern the people should show the laws to block the illegal, and show the officials by governance. They are still worried about making mistakes, so they should show the laws of beauty and goodness to demonstrate to their descendants.

古文：是以清庙茅屋，大路越席，大羹不致，粢食不凿，昭其俭也。
现代文：因此纯洁的太庙铺以茅草屋顶，大的车辆铺以草席，大的羹汤不加调料，祭祀用的粮食不加工，以显扬俭朴。
English: Therefore, the pure ancient temple is covered with a thatched roof, the large vehicle is covered with a straw seat, the large soup is not seasoned, and the grain for sacrifice is not processed to show frugality.

古文：衮、冕、黻、珽，带、裳、幅、舄，衡、紞、纮、綖，昭其度也。
现代文：礼服、礼帽、祭服、大圭、腰带、下裳、绑腿、木鞋、横木、帽带、帽垂、玉带等，要显扬其度数。
English: Ceremonial dress, ceremonial hat, ceremonial dress, loincloth, belt, petticoat, gaiters, wooden shoes, crossbar, hat band, hat hook, jade belt, etc., should show their frequency.

古文：藻率、鞞、鞛，鞶、厉、游、缨，昭其数也。
现代文：五彩丝绳、丝网、刀鞘、刀鞘饰物、大带子、磨刀石、旗旒、旗缨等，要显扬其数。
English: Colorful silk cords, silk screens, scabbards, scabbard ornaments, large ribbons, sharpening stones, flagpoles, flagpoles, etc., should show their number.

古文：火、龙、黼、黻，昭其文也。
现代文：画火、画龙、绣黼、绣黻，要显扬其文明。
English: Painting fire, drawing dragons, embroidered cocoons, embroidered cocoons, should show their civilization.

古文：五色比象，昭其物也。
现代文：五色和同于形象，要显扬其选择。
English: Five colors and the same as the image, to show their choice.

古文：锡、鸾、和、铃，昭其声也。
现代文：锡铃、鸾铃、衡铃、旗铃等，要显扬其声音。
English: Tin bells, cymbals, weighted bells, flag bells, etc. should show their sound.

古文：三辰旂旗，昭其明也。
现代文：画有日月星三辰的旌旗，要显扬其明亮。
English: The national flag with the sun, moon and three stars should be brightly displayed.

古文：夫德俭而有度，登降有数。
现代文：那规律，俭朴而有度，升降而有数。
English: That rule is thrifty but has a degree, ascending and descending but has a number.

古文：文物以纪之，声明以发之，以临照百官，百官于是乎戒惧而不敢易纪律。
现代文：文明教化以治理，用声音明亮来发扬，以治理显示百官，百官于是而有戒惧而不敢改变治理之律。
English: Civilization and enlightenment are carried out by governance, with a bright voice to carry forward, with governance showing a hundred officials, and a hundred officials are afraid to change the law of governance.

古文：今灭德立违，而寘其赂器于大庙，以明示百官，百官象之，其又何诛焉！
现代文：如今废弃规律树立违法之事，而把送来的礼器置于太庙，以明示百官，百官都来效法，还能惩罚谁呢？
English: Now they are abandoning the law to establish illegal things, and placing the ceremonial objects sent to them in the imperial temple, to make it clear that hundreds of officials, hundreds of officials are to follow suit, and who can be punished?

古文：国家之败，由官邪也，官之失德，宠赂章也。
现代文：国家的败亡，是从官员的邪恶开始的。官府失去规律，就是宠爱与贿赂彰显。
English: The downfall of a country begins with the evil of its officials. When the government loses its discipline, favoritism and bribery come to the fore.

古文：郜鼎在庙，章孰甚焉？
现代文：郜国的大鼎在太庙，彰显什么呢？
English: What does the Great Ding of the State of Shandong show in the Great Temple?

古文：武王克商，迁九鼎于雒邑，义士犹或非之，而况将昭违乱之赂器于大庙，其若之何？ 
现代文：武王攻克殷商，把九鼎迁到雒邑，有最佳行为方式的读书人或有非议，何况是将显扬违法乱纪的礼器置于太庙，这又该怎么办？ 
English: King Wu conquered Yin merchants and moved Jiuding to Zouyun. Readers with the best behavior may have objections. What's more, the ceremonial tool that showed the violation of laws and disciplines was placed in the ancient temple. What should we do?

古文：公不听。
现代文：鲁桓公不听。
English: Prince Xiang doesn't listen to anyone's opinion.

古文：周内史闻之曰： 臧孙达其有后于鲁乎！
现代文：周国的内史听说后，说： 臧孙达的后代在鲁国可能长享福禄吧。
English: After hearing about the internal history of Zhou, he said: It is possible that the descendants of Sun Da will enjoy long-term prosperity in Lu.

古文：君违，不忘谏之以德。 
现代文：君主违礼，不忘劝谏以规律。 
English: If the monarch violates etiquette, don't forget to advise him to do so regularly.

古文：秋七月，杞侯来朝，不敬。
现代文：秋七月，杞侯来朝见，不恭敬。
English: In autumn and July, Zhou Hou came to see me in the morning, disrespectfully.

古文：杞侯归，乃谋伐之。
现代文：杞侯归去后，桓公就策划征伐他。
English: After Gong Hou's return, King Kan planned to conquer him.

古文：蔡侯、郑伯会于邓，始惧楚也。
现代文：蔡侯、郑伯在邓地会见，开始畏惧楚国。
English: Cai Hou and Zheng Bo met in Deng Di and began to fear Chu.

古文：九月，入杞。讨不敬也。
现代文：九月，攻入杞国，声讨杞侯的不恭敬。
English: In September, he invaded Goryeo and denounced Goryeo's disrespect.

古文：公及戎盟于唐，修旧好也。
现代文：桓公与戎国人在唐地会见，是为了重修友好。
English: Prince Kan and the Edo people met in Tang in order to renew their friendship.

古文：冬，公至自唐，告于庙也。
现代文：冬，桓公从唐地回来，在太庙祷告。
English: In winter, Emperor Kan returned from Tang and prayed at the Imperial Temple.

古文：凡公行，告于宗庙。反行，饮至、舍爵，策勋焉，礼也。
现代文：凡是国君出行，都要祷告宗庙；返回，饮食、放置酒杯、鞭策功勋，都是社会行为规范。
English: Whenever the king travels, he must pray to the ancestral temple; returning, eating, placing wine glasses, and encouraging meritorious deeds are all social behavioral norms.

古文：特相会，往来称地，让事也。
现代文：单独相见，往来只述说地名，这是对事情的谦让。
English: Seeing each other alone and only exchanging place names is a sign of humility.

古文：自参以上，则往称地，来称会，成事也。
现代文：会见的国君有三个以上，那么去时就述说地方，回来就述说会见，这是成就事情。
English: There are more than three sovereigns to meet, so when you go, you should describe the place, and when you come back, you should describe the meeting. This is an accomplishment.

古文：初，晋穆侯之夫人姜氏以条之役生大子，命之曰仇。
现代文：当初，晋国穆侯的夫人姜氏在条地战役的时候生了太子，取名叫做仇。
English: At first, the wife of the prince of Jin, Jiang, gave birth to a prince at the time of the Jochi Campaign, and named him Qiu.

古文：其弟以千亩之战生，命之曰成师。
现代文：仇的兄弟在千亩战役中出生，取名叫做成师。
English: The enemy's brother was born during the Battle of the Thousand Mu, and was named Cheng Shi.

古文：师服曰： 异哉，君之名子也！夫名以制义，义以出礼，礼以体政，政以正民。
现代文：师服说： 奇怪呀，君主替儿子取名，那取名要裁断于最佳行为方式，最佳行为方式出自于社会行为规范，社会行为规范体现于政事，政事用于端正民众。
English: Teacher clothing said: It is strange that the monarch named his son. The naming should be judged on the best way of behavior. The best way of behavior comes from the social code of conduct. The social code of conduct is reflected in politics. Politics is used to correct the people.

古文：是以政成而民听，易则生乱。
现代文：因此政事成就而民众听从，改变就会产生混乱。
English: Therefore, if the government succeeds and the people obey, the change will produce chaos.

古文：嘉耦曰妃，怨耦曰仇，古之命也。
现代文：美好的夫妻叫做配偶，怨恨的夫妻叫做仇，这是古人命名的方法。
English: A good spouse is called a concubine, an enemy is called a foe, and this is how it was called in ancient times.

古文：今君命大子曰仇，弟曰成师，始兆乱矣，兄其替乎？ 
现代文：如今君主给太子命名叫做仇，弟弟命名叫做成师，这是预兆混乱，兄弟恐怕要替代了。 
English: Nowadays, when a monarch names a prince, he calls him a foe, and when he names a younger brother, he calls him a mentor. This is an omen of chaos, and the brother may have to be replaced.

古文：惠之二十四年，晋始乱，故封桓叔于曲沃，靖侯之孙栾宾傅之。
现代文：鲁惠公二十四年时，晋国开始混乱，所以将曲沃作为桓叔的封地赐给他以晋靖侯的孙子栾宾辅佐曲沃桓叔。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Lu Hui, the Jin state began to be chaotic, so Quwo was given to him as Uncle Huan's fief, with the grandson of Jin Jing Hou, Yu Bin, assisting Uncle Quwo Huan.

古文：师服曰： 吾闻国家之立也，本大而末小，是以能固。
现代文：师服说： 我听说国家的建立，根本大而枝节小，因此能够牢固。
English: Teacher said: I have heard that the foundation of the country is large and the branches are small, so it can be solid.

古文：故天子建国，诸侯立家，卿置侧室，大夫有贰宗，士有隶子弟，庶人工商各有分亲，皆有等衰。
现代文：所以天子建立国家，诸侯建立家庭，卿立下级之卿或大夫，大夫设立下级大夫或 属大夫 ，士以其子弟为隶级，庶人不再分等级而以亲疏为若干等级之别。
English: Therefore, the heavenly sons established the country, the lords established the family, the nobles established the lower-level nobles or doctors, the doctors established the lower-level doctors or doctors, the scholars with their children as subordinate grades, the commoners no longer divided into grades, and the relatives were separated into several grades.

古文：是以民服事其上而下无觊觎。
现代文：因此民众服从侍奉上级，而下面的人也不会有非分的希望或企图。
English: Therefore, the people obey and serve their superiors, and those below do not have any hope or intention to do so.

古文：今晋，甸侯也，而建国。本既弱矣，其能久乎？ 
现代文：如今的晋国，只是天子郊外的诸侯，而另外建国，根本既已衰弱，怎么还能长久呢？ 
English: Today's Jin Kingdom is just a vassal state on the outskirts of Tianzi, and since the founding of another country has already weakened, how can it last?

古文：惠之三十年，晋潘父弑昭侯而纳桓叔，不克。
现代文：鲁惠公三十年时，晋国潘父杀昭侯而接纳桓叔，没有成功。
English: When Lu Huigong was thirty years old, his father Pan killed Zhao Hou and accepted Uncle Huan, but it was not a success.

古文：晋人立孝侯。
现代文：晋国人立孝侯为君主。
English: The people of Jin established Takaharu as the monarch.

古文：惠之四十五年，曲沃庄伯伐翼，弑孝侯。
现代文：鲁惠公四十五年时，曲沃庄伯征伐晋国，杀死孝侯。
English: When Lu Huigong was forty-five years old, Qu Wo Zhuangbo invaded Jin Province and killed Xiao Hou.

古文：翼人立其弟鄂侯。
现代文：晋国人立孝侯的弟弟鄂侯为君主。
English: The younger brother of Jin statesman Xiaohou, Ehou, became the monarch.

古文：鄂侯生哀侯。
现代文：鄂侯生哀侯。
English: E Hou is in mourning.

古文：哀侯侵陉庭之田。
现代文：哀侯侵犯陉庭地方的田土。
English: Lai Hou encroached on the fields of Xingting.

古文：陉庭南鄙启曲沃伐翼。
现代文：陉庭南部边境的人打开边境与曲沃共同攻伐晋国。
English: The people at the southern border of Xingting opened the border and jointly attacked Jin Province with Quwo.

