古文：田仓临海人陈甲麻姑谢盛李婴许宪益州人章安人元稚宗王昙略
现代文：田仓临海人陈甲麻姑谢盛李婴许宪益州人章安人元稚宗王昙略
English: Chen Jia Ma Gu, a resident of Tagura Linhai, Xie Sheng, Li Ying, Xu Xian, a resident of Yizhou, Zhang An, a resident of Yuan Chih Zong, Wang Yao, and

古文：广州人东兴人陈莽沛国人齐朝请伍寺之苏巷阮倪邵文立梁元帝
现代文：广州人东兴人陈莽沛国人齐朝请伍寺之苏巷阮倪邵文立梁元帝
English: The people of Guangzhou, Dongxing, Chen Mangpei and the people of the country jointly invited Su Xiang, Nguyen Ni, Thao Wen and Liang Yuan to the Wu Temple

古文：望蔡令僧昙欢释僧群竺法惠冀州小儿
现代文：望蔡令僧昙欢释僧群竺法惠冀州小儿
English: Wang Cai ordered the monks to celebrate the release of the monks and the law to benefit the children of Hebei

古文：田仓
现代文：田仓
English: Tagura

古文：后汉溪夷田强，遣子鲁，居上城；次子玉，居中城，小子仓，居下城。三垒相次，以拒王莽。
现代文：后汉时溪夷人田强，派儿子田鲁据守上城；派二儿子田玉，守中城；小儿子田仓，守下城，三个堡垒依次排开，当时是为了阻挡王莽。
English: In the late Han Dynasty, Tian Qiang, a barbarian from Xixi, sent his son, Tian Lu, to guard the upper city; sent his second son, Tian Yu, to guard the middle city; and sent his youngest son, Tian Cang, to guard the lower city. The three fortresses were lined up one after another in order to block Wang Mang.

古文：光武二十四年，遣威武将军刘尚征之，尚未至。
现代文：光武二十四年，派威武将军刘尚征讨他们，刘尚的军队还没有到达。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Guangwu, he sent General Liu Shang to conquer them. Liu Shang's army has not yet arrived.

古文：仓获白鳖为臛，举烽请两兄，兄至无事。
现代文：田仓曾抓住一只白鳖作羹汤，点起烽火请两个哥哥来，两个哥哥来到后并没有什么事。
English: Tagura once caught an egret to make soup, lit a bonfire and invited two brothers to come. After the two brothers came, nothing happened.

古文：及刘尚军来，仓举火，鲁等以为不实，仓遂战死焉。
现代文：等到刘尚的军队真的来了，田仓命令点起烽火，田鲁等兄长以为不真实，没有援救，田仓就战死了。
English: When Liu Shang's army actually arrived, Tanakura ordered a bonfire to be lit, but his elder brothers, including Tian Lu, thought this was not true. Without help, Tanakura died in the battle.

古文：临海人
现代文：临海人
English: People from Linhai

古文：吴末，临海人入山射猎。
现代文：吴代末年，临海人进山打猎。
English: In the last years of the Wu Dynasty, people from the coastal areas went into the mountains to hunt.

古文：夜中，有人长一丈，着黄衣白带，来谓射人曰： 我有仇，克明当战，君可见助，当有相报。 
现代文：半夜时分，有一个人身长一丈，穿黄色衣服系着黄腰带，前来对猎人说： 我有仇敌，明天要与我决战，你看见后要帮助我，我自当报答你。 
English: In the middle of the night, a man of great stature, dressed in yellow and wearing a yellow sash, came to the hunter and said: "I have an enemy, tomorrow I will fight him. If you see him, help me, and I will repay you."

古文：射人曰： 自可助君耳，何用谢为？ 
现代文：猎人说： 自然要帮助你了，何必谈报答的话。 
English: The huntsman said, "Of course I'm going to help you, why should I talk about a reward?"

古文：答曰： 明食时，君可出溪边。
现代文：那人说： 明天早饭后。
English: The man said, "Tomorrow after breakfast."

古文：敌从北来，我南往应，白带者我，黄带者彼。 
现代文：你可去小河边，我的仇敌从北边来，我从南边出来迎敌，佩白带的是我，佩黄带的是我的仇敌。 
English: You can go to the small river, my enemy came from the north, I came from the south to meet the enemy, I am wearing white, and my enemy is wearing yellow.

古文：射人许之。
现代文：猎人答应了。
English: The hunter agreed.

古文：明出，果闻岸北有声，状如风雨，草木四靡，视南亦尔。
现代文：天亮之后，果然听到河岸北边有声音，像狂风暴雨，草木都四面倒下，再看南岸，也是如此。
English: After dawn, I heard a sound on the north bank of the river, like a raging storm, and the plants and trees all fell down. Looking at the south bank, it was the same.

古文：唯见二大蛇，长十余丈，于溪中相遇，便相盘绕，白鳞势弱。射人因引弩射之，黄鳞者即死。
现代文：只见两条大蛇，长十多丈，在河边相遇，就互相盘绕着打起来，蛇身有白鳞的渐渐敌不住了，猎人就拉弓搭箭射那条黄鳞的，黄鳞的蛇当时就被射死。
English: He saw two large snakes, more than ten meters long, meet on the riverbank, and they began to coil around each other and fight. The snake with white scales gradually became invincible, and the hunter shot the yellow-scaled snake with a bow and arrow. The yellow-scaled snake was shot dead at that time.

古文：日将暮，复见昨人来辞谢，云： 住此一年猎，明年以去，慎勿复来，来必有祸。 射人曰： 善。 
现代文：傍晚，又看见昨天来的那人来答谢，说： 你可以在这里打猎一年，过年就不要来了，一定记住，再来一定有大祸临头。 猎人说： 好。 
English: In the evening, he saw the man who had come the day before, and he thanked him and said, "You can hunt here for a year, but don't come for the New Year. You must remember that if you come again, a great disaster will befall you." The hunter said, "Good."

古文：遂停猎。
现代文：于是就不在这里打猎了。
English: So I stopped hunting here.

古文：数年后，忽忘前言，更往猎。复见白带人告曰： 我语君不能见用，仇子已甚，今必报君，非我所知。 
现代文：几年以后，竟忘记了那人说的话，又前去打猎，又看见佩白带子的人告诉他说： 我说的话你不听，现在要报仇杀你的人怨恨太大，一定会报复你，什么时间，怎样报复不是我所能知道的。 
English: A few years later, he forgot what the man had said and went hunting again. He saw the man with the white ribbon and told him: "You didn't listen to what I said. The people who want to avenge you now have too much hatred and will definitely avenge you. I don't know when or how they will avenge you."

古文：射人闻之甚怖，便欲走，乃见三乌衣人，俱张口向之，射人即死。
现代文：猎人听说后非常害怕，刚要走，就看到三个穿黑色衣服的人，都张着大口对着他，猎人当时就死了。
English: The hunter was very scared when he heard about it. As he was about to leave, he saw three people dressed in black, all with their mouths wide open, facing him. The hunter died at that moment.

古文：陈甲
现代文：陈甲
English: Chen Jia

古文：吴郡海盐县北乡亭里，有士人陈甲，本下邳人。
现代文：吴郡海盐县北乡亭里，有一个士人叫陈甲，原籍是下邳人。
English: In Beixiangting, Haiyan County, Wuxian County, there is a scholar named Chen Jia, who is originally from Lower Yanling.

古文：晋元帝时，寓居华亭，猎于东野大薮。
现代文：晋元帝时，搬到华亭居住，常去东野的大湖边打猎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin Yuan, he moved to Huating and lived there. He often went to the Great Lake in Higashino to go deer hunting.

古文：欻见大蛇长六七丈，形如百斛船，玄黄五色，卧冈下，士人即射杀之，不敢说。
现代文：有一天打猎时，忽然看见一条大蛇长约六七丈，其形状像只大船，黑黄五色，盘卧在冈下。陈甲就拉弓射死了它。
English: One day while hunting, Chen Jia suddenly saw a big snake about six or seven meters long. It was shaped like a big ship, black and yellow, and was lying under a hill. Chen Jia drew his bow and shot it dead.

古文：三年后，与乡人共猎，至故见蛇处，语同行云： 昔在此杀大蛇。 
现代文：但他不敢向别人说起这件事。三年以后，陈甲与同乡在一起打猎，到了从前看见大蛇的地方，就对同乡说： 三年前我在这儿杀了一条大蛇。 
English: But he did not dare to tell anyone about it. Three years later, Chen Jia was hunting with a fellow villager. When he came to the place where he had seen the big snake, he said to the fellow villager: "Three years ago, I killed a big snake here.

古文：其夜梦见一人，乌衣黑帻，来至其家，问曰： 我昔昏醉，汝无状杀我。吾昔醉，不识汝面，故三年不相知，今自来就死。 
现代文：当天晚上就梦见一个人，黑衣服黑头巾，来到他家，问他说： 当年我昏醉时，你无缘无故杀了我，因为那时我醉了，看不清你的面目，所以三年了，我也不知道是谁杀了我，没想到今天你自己来送死。 
English: That same night, I dreamed of a man, dressed in black and wearing a black hood, who came to my house and asked me: "When I was drunk, you killed me for no reason. Because I was drunk at the time, I couldn't see your face clearly. So for three years, I didn't know who killed me. I didn't expect you to send me to my death today.

古文：其人即惊觉，明旦腹痛而卒。
现代文：陈甲当时惊醒。第二天早晨患肚子疼病死了。
English: Chen Jia woke up with a start. The next morning, he had a stomach ache and died.

古文：麻姑
现代文：麻姑
English: Maku

古文：晋孝武大元八年，富阳民麻姑者，好噉脍。
现代文：晋孝武帝大元八年，富阳有个叫麻姑的人，好吃鱼汤。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, there was a man in Fuyang named Ma Gu, who made delicious fish soup.

古文：华本者，好噉鳖臛。
现代文：还有个叫华本的人，好吃鳖汤。
English: There is also a man called Huabon, who makes delicious bean soup.

古文：二人相善。
现代文：两个人很要好。
English: The two are very close.

古文：麻姑见一鳖，大如釜盖，头尾犹是大蛇，系之。
现代文：有一天，麻姑看见一只大鳖，大如锅盖，但头和尾像大蛇。
English: One day, Ma Gu saw a large dragonfly, as big as the lid of a pot, but with a head and tail like a large snake.

古文：麻姑遂噉一脔，便大恶心，吐逆委顿，遂生病，喉中有物，塞喉不下。
现代文：抓到后绑起来，经过一个月，全变成鳖了，就拿来作了肉汤，告诉华本来吃，味道很香，但麻姑不肯吃，华本就强让她吃，麻姑只好吃了一小块，吃后就很恶心，呕吐一顿，就生病了。觉得喉咙里有东西，塞在喉咙里咽不下去，张开口让华本看。
English: After catching it, they tied it up. After a month, it had all turned into maggots, so they used it to make broth. They told Hua that they wanted to eat it. The taste was very fragrant, but Ma Gu didn't want to eat it, so Hua Ben forced her to eat it. Ma Gu had to eat a small piece, and after eating it, she felt very nauseous. She vomited once, and became ill. She felt that there was something in her throat, and she couldn't swallow it, so she opened her mouth to let Hua Ben see.

古文：开口向本，本见有一蛇头，开口吐舌。本惊而走，姑仅免。
现代文：华本看见有一条蛇，张开嘴吐着舌信，华本吓得逃跑了，后来总算病好了。
English: When Huabon saw a snake with its mouth open and tongue hanging out, he was so scared that he ran away. He eventually recovered from his illness.

古文：本后于宅得一蛇，大二围，长五六尺，打杀作脍，唤麻姑。麻姑得食甚美，苦求此鱼。本因醉，唤家人捧蛇皮肉来。麻姑见之，呕血而死。
现代文：华本后来在家里抓到一条大蛇，粗约六七寸，长五六尺，打死后作了汤，说是用鱼肉做的，招呼麻姑来吃，麻姑觉得味道特别好，一再要求华本把蛇拿来看看，华本因为喝醉了，让家人捧着蛇皮蛇肉给麻姑看，麻姑一看，便吐血而死。
English: Later, Hua Ben caught a big snake at home. It was about sixty-seven inches thick and fifty-six feet long. After he killed it, he made soup, saying it was made of fish meat. He invited Magu to eat it. Magu thought the taste was particularly good and repeatedly asked Hua Ben to take a look at the snake. Because Hua Ben was drunk, he asked his family members to hold up the snake skin and show the snake meat to Magu. When Magu saw it, she vomited blood and died.

古文：谢盛
现代文：谢盛
English: by Xie Sheng

古文：晋安帝隆安中，曲阿民谢盛，乘船入湖采菱。
现代文：晋安帝隆安年间，曲阿百姓谢盛，有一天坐船到湖里采菱角。
English: During the reign of Emperor Longan of Jin and An, the people of Qu'a, thanking Sheng, one day took a boat to the lake to collect crabs.

古文：见一蛟来向船，船回避。又从其后，盛便以叉杀之，惧而还家。
现代文：看见一条蛟龙向船边游来，谢盛就划船躲开，但蛟龙又尾随在船后，谢盛便用鱼叉叉死了它。回到家里还很害怕。
English: Seeing a dragon swimming towards the side of the boat, Xie Sheng rowed away, but the dragon followed the boat, and Xie Sheng killed it with a harpoon. He was still very scared when he got home.

古文：至兴宁中，普天亢旱，盛与同族数人，步至湖中，见先叉杀在地，拾取之，云： 此是我叉。 
现代文：到了元兴年间，普天大旱，谢盛和同路的几个人步行走到湖中，只见当年叉死蛟龙的叉子还在地上，就拾起来说： 这是我的叉子。 
English: In the Genxing era, when there was a severe drought across the country, Xie Sheng and several people on the same road walked to the lake on foot. They saw that the fork of the dead dragon was still on the ground. They picked it up and said, "This is my fork."

古文：人问其故，具以实对。
现代文：别人问他是怎么回事，他就把当年的事如实说了。
English: When others asked him what had happened, he told them the truth about that year.

古文：行数步，乃得心痛，还家，一宿便死。
现代文：没走几步，就觉得心痛，回到家里一宿就死了。
English: After walking a few steps, I felt heartache, and I died as soon as I got home.

古文：李婴
现代文：李婴
English: Li Rong

古文：东晋义熙中，鄱阳李婴、李滔兄弟二人，善于用弩，尝射大塵，解其四足，悬著树间，以脏为炙。方欲共食，遥见山下有人，长三丈许，鼓步而来，手持大囊。既至，敛取塵头骼皮骨，并火上杂肉，悉内囊中，径负入山。
现代文：东晋安帝义熙年间，鄱阳李婴、李滔兄弟二人，善使弩箭。曾射死一只驼鹿，砍下四条腿，悬挂在树上，然后烤着脏器，正要一块儿吃，看见山下走过来一个人，身长有三丈多，那人迈着大步，手里拿着一个大口袋，来到后就收拾起那只驼鹿的头、骨骼和皮，还有正在火上烤着的杂肉，一起装到那个大口袋里，径直背着下山去了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the two brothers Li Ying and Li Tao of Fenyang were good at using the crossbow. They had shot a moose, cut off its four legs, hung it on a tree, and then roasted its entrails. They were about to eat it together when they saw a man of great height coming down the mountain. The man was striding with a large bag in his hand. When he arrived, he picked up the head, bones, and skin of the moose, as well as the meat that was being roasted on the fire, put them together in the large bag, and went straight down the mountain.

古文：婴兄弟须臾俱卒。
现代文：李婴兄弟俩不一会儿全死了。
English: The two Li brothers died in an instant.

古文：许宪
现代文：许宪
English: Xu Xizhen

古文：晋义熙中，余杭县有仇王庙。
现代文：晋义熙年中，余杭县有座仇王庙。
English: In the middle of the Jin and Yixi dynasties, there was a Qiuwang Temple in Yuhang County.

古文：高阳许宪为县令，宪男于庙侧放火猎，便秽祠前。
现代文：高阳人许宪任余杭县令。许宪的儿子在仇王庙旁边放火围猎，并在祠堂前大便。
English: Xu Xian, a Goyang resident, was appointed as the governor of Yuhang County. Xu Xian's son set a fire next to the Qiuwang Temple and defecated in front of the ancestral hall.

古文：忽有三白獐从屋走出，男引弓射，忽失所在。复以火围之，风吹火反，覆其面，欲去莫从，遂烧死。
现代文：忽然有三只白獐从屋中跑出，许宪的儿子拉弓射它们，忽然看不见獐子的踪影，许宪的儿子又用火烧围猎，但火反向他扑面而来，他想要逃跑却不知向哪里跑，不一会儿就被烧死了。
English: Suddenly, three egrets ran out of the house. Xu Xian's son shot them with a bow and arrow. Suddenly, he couldn't see any trace of the egrets. Xu Xian's son also used fire to hunt, but the fire came back at him. He wanted to run away but didn't know where to go. He was burned to death in no time.

古文：而宪以事免官。
现代文：许宪后来也因为过错而被免职。
English: Xu Xian was later removed from his post for misconduct.

古文：益州人
现代文：益州人
English: People from Imzhou

古文：宋元嘉初，益州刺史遣三人入山伐樵。
现代文：南朝宋国元嘉初年，益州刺史派三个人进山砍柴。
English: In the first year of Yuan Jia of the Southern Song Dynasty, three men sent by Yizhou Jishi went into the mountains to cut firewood.

古文：路迷，忽见一龟，大如车轮，四足各蹑一小龟而行，又有百余黄龟从其后，三人叩头，请示出路。
现代文：这三个人在山里迷了路，忽然看见一只大龟，大得好像车轮，四只脚各踩一只小龟朝前走。还有一百多只小黄龟跟在它的后边。三人向大龟叩头请大龟指示出路。
English: The three men lost their way in the mountains and suddenly saw a large turtle, as big as a wheel, stepping on a small turtle with each of its four feet to move forward. More than a hundred small yellow turtles followed behind it. The three men bowed to the big turtle and asked the big turtle to show them the way out.

古文：龟乃伸颈，若有意焉。因共随逐，即得出路。
现代文：大龟伸了伸脖子，好像明白了他们的意思，三个人就跟着大龟走，终于找到了出山的道路。
English: The tortoise stretched his neck, as if he understood what they meant. The three of them followed the tortoise and finally found their way out of the mountain.

古文：一人无故取小龟，割以为臛，食之。
现代文：其中有一个人无缘无故抓了一只小龟，宰杀后做了龟汤吃了。
English: One of them caught a small turtle for no reason, butchered it, made turtle soup and ate it.

古文：须臾暴死，唯不啖者无恙。章安人
现代文：不一会突然死了。只有没吃龟肉的人没有什么意外。章安人
English: He died suddenly not long after. Only those who didn't eat turtle meat didn't have any accidents.

古文：宋元嘉中，章安县人尝屠虎。
现代文：南朝宋元嘉年间，章安县有个人曾杀过虎。
English: During the Southern Song Dynasty, a man in Zhang'an County once killed a tiger.

古文：至海口，见一蟹，匡大如笠，脚长三尺，取食甚美。
现代文：到海口时，看见一只大螃蟹，像大草帽一样，蟹脚就有三尺多长。
English: When I got to Haikou, I saw a large crab, like a large straw hat, with crab feet more than three feet long.

古文：其夜，梦一少妪语云： 汝噉我肉，我食汝心。 
现代文：他把它抓来煮吃，味道美极了。当天晚上，这人就作了一个梦，梦一少妇对他说： 你吃了我的肉，我要吃你的心。 
English: That night, the man had a dream in which a young woman said to him, "You have eaten my flesh, but I will eat your heart."

古文：明日，其人为虎所食。
现代文：第二天，这个人就被老虎吃了。
English: The next day, the man was eaten by a tiger.

古文：元稚宗
现代文：元稚宗
English: Motochika sect

古文：宋元穆宗者，河东人也。
现代文：南朝宋国的元稚宗，河东人。
English: He was a member of the Southern Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Yuan Zhi sect and a native of Hedong.

古文：元嘉十六年，随钟离太守阮愔在郡，愔使稚宗行至远村，郡吏葢苟、边定随焉。
现代文：元嘉十六年，跟随钟离太守阮愔在郡中任职。阮愔派稚宗到很远的一个村子去。郡中役吏盖苟、边定二人随从。
English: In the 16th year of Yuan Jia, he served in the county with the Zhongli Governor Nguyen Xuan. Nguyen Xuan sent the children to a village far away. He was accompanied by two county officials, Gaiguo and Bianding.

古文：行至民家，恍惚如眠，便不复寤。民以为死，舁出门外，方营殡具，经夕能言。
现代文：走到一百姓家，忽然恍惚好像睡着了，过了很长时间也不醒，这家老百姓以为死了，把他抬出门外，正要准备殡葬用的东西。
English: He went to a villager's house and suddenly fell into a trance, as if he had fallen asleep. After a long time, he did not wake up. The villager thought he was dead and carried him out the door. He was about to prepare something for the funeral.

古文：说初有一百许人，缚稚宗去，数十里至一佛图，僧众供养，不异于世。
现代文：但稚宗经一晚又能说话了。稚宗说，当初有一百多人，把稚宗捉走，去了几十里地到了一个佛院，众僧人行止饮食，和世间没有什么两样。
English: However, he was able to speak again overnight. He said that more than a hundred people took him away and went dozens of miles to a Buddhist monastery, where the monks were eating and drinking, just like in the real world.

古文：有一僧曰： 汝好猎，今应受报。 
现代文：其中有一个和尚说： 你好打猎，现在应该受到报应。 
English: One of the monks said, "You are a good hunter, and now you should be punished."

古文：便取稚宗，皮剥脔截，具如治诸性兽之法。复纳于澡水，钩口出之，剖破解切，若为脍状。又镬煮炉灸，初悉糜烂，随以还复，痛恼苦毒，至三乃止。
现代文：说着就拉过稚宗，扒皮剥肉，完全像对待牲畜那样，又把他放到热水里洗，拽着嘴弄出来，剖切一顿，好像要剁成肉酱，再放到大锅里煮，放在火上烤，都已熟烂了，又让他恢复原样，他痛苦万分。经过多次这样折腾才停止。又问他： 你想活不想活了？ 
English: With that, he pulled over Zhaozong, skinned and peeled his flesh, exactly as if he were treating livestock, then washed him in hot water, pulled his mouth out, cut it into pieces, as if to make meat sauce, then boiled it in a large pot, roasted it on the fire, it was all rotten, and let him return to his original state, he was in great pain. After many times of such tossing and turning, he stopped. He also asked him: Do you want to live or not?

古文：问欲活否，稚宗便叩头请命，道人令其蹲地，以水灌之，云： 一灌除罪五百。 
现代文：稚宗吓得连忙磕头请求饶命。于是一个和尚让他蹲在地上，用水浇灌他，说： 灌一次除掉五百个罪过。 
English: Frightened, Choson quickly bowed his head and begged to be spared. So a monk made him squat on the ground and doused him with water, saying, "If you pour it once, it will remove five hundred sins."

古文：稚宗苦求多灌，沙门曰： 唯三足矣。 
现代文：稚宗苦苦哀求要多灌几次。沙门说： 只要灌三次就行了。 
English: Chokjong pleaded for more than three times. Shamen said, "Just three times is enough."

古文：见有蚁类数头，道人曰： 此虽微物，亦不可杀，无复论巨此者也，鱼肉自此可戒耳。斋会之日，悉著新衣，无新可浣也。 
现代文：这时看见有几只蚂蚁，道人说： 这虽然是小生命，也不可以杀，更不要说比它大的了。鱼肉从此就戒掉吧，到了斋会的时候要穿新衣服，没有新的洗干净的也可以。 
English: At this time he saw a few ants, and the Taoist said: Although this is a small life, it cannot be killed, let alone bigger than it. Let's stop eating fish from now on. When it comes to the feast, we should wear new clothes, even if they are not new and have been washed.

古文：稚宗因问： 我行旅有三，而独婴苦，何也？ 
现代文：稚宗趁这个机会问他： 和我同行的有三个人，唯独我遭此苦难。
English: Choson took the opportunity to ask him: "There were three people traveling with me, but I was the only one who suffered.

古文：道人曰： 彼二人自知罪福，知而无犯。唯尔愚豪，不识缘报，故以相戒。 
现代文：是什么原因？ 道人说： 那两个人已经知道自己的罪过，知道后再也没有犯，只有你愚蠢糊涂，不知道怎样改悔，所以今天用这种办法惩戒你。 
English: What was the reason? The man said, "Those two people already knew their sins and never committed them again. Only you are stupid and confused and don't know how to repent, so I'm punishing you in this way today."

古文：因而便苏，数日能起，由是遂断渔猎云。
现代文：然后就苏醒了，过了几天能起床下地，从此稚宗再也不打渔狩猎了。
English: Then he woke up, and after a few days he was able to get out of bed and walk. From then on, he never went fishing or hunting again.

古文：王昙略
现代文：王昙略
English: Wang Xiliu

古文：宋谯国城父人王昙略，常以牛作脯为业。
现代文：宋朝谯国城有一个叫王昙略的人，平常杀牛做成牛肉干卖。
English: In the Song Dynasty, there was a man named Wang Xuanliao in Kuncheng, who used to kill cows to make beef jerky and sell it.

古文：欲杀一牛，牛见刀，辄跳踯欲走去。昙略怒，乃先以刀刺牛目。
现代文：有一天，又要杀一头牛，这头牛看见刀，就跳着不肯前进想要逃跑，昙略很生气，就先用刀刺瞎了牛眼。
English: One day, he wanted to kill another cow. When the cow saw the knife, it jumped, refused to go forward and tried to run away. The donkey was a little angry and first stabbed the bull in the eye with the knife.

古文：经少时，其人眼无故血流出。
现代文：过了不一会儿。昙略的眼睛无缘无故也流出了血。
English: A short while later, blood also flowed from Yan Liang's eyes for no reason.

古文：广州人
现代文：广州人
English: People from Guangzhou

古文：宋元嘉中，广州有三人，共在山中伐木。
现代文：南朝宋国元嘉年间，广州有三个人一起到山上去伐木。
English: During the Southern Song Dynasty, three men from Guangzhou went to the mountains to cut down trees.

古文：忽见石窠有三卵，大如升，取煮之。
现代文：忽然，他们看见在石窠里有三个蛋，有量米用的升那么大。
English: Suddenly, they saw three eggs in the stalagmite, the size of a liter of rice.

古文：汤始热，闻林中如风雨声，须臾，一蛇大十围，长四五丈，迳来汤中，衔卵而去。
现代文：他们拿回来煮着吃，刚刚把水烧热，就听到树林里发出了像刮风下雨的声音。不一会儿，一条大蛇出来了，粗约三尺，长约四五丈。直奔大锅而来，衔着三个蛋就走了。
English: They took it back and boiled it and ate it. As soon as they had heated the water, they heard a noise in the woods that sounded like wind and rain. Soon, a big snake came out, about three feet thick and about four or five feet long. It went straight to the cauldron and left with three eggs.

古文：三人无几皆死。
现代文：后来三个人不久都死了。
English: All three died soon after.

古文：东兴人
现代文：东兴人
English: Dongxing people

古文：临川东兴，有人入山，得猿子，便将归。
现代文：临川东兴，有一个人进山，抓到一只小猿猴，就带回家。
English: In Dongxing, Linchuan, a man went into the mountains, caught a small monkey, and took it home.

古文：猿母自后逐至家，此人缚猿子于庭中树上，以示之。
现代文：母猿随后追到这人的家。这人把小猿猴吊在院中的树上，给它看。
English: The mother ape then chased the man to his home, where he hung the baby ape from a tree in his yard for the ape to see.

古文：其母便搏颊向人，若哀乞，直是口不能言耳。
现代文：母猿便拍着脸颊对着人，像哀求他放掉小猿，只是不能说话罢了。
English: The mother ape then slaps her cheek at the man, as if begging him to let go of the little ape, but she can't speak.

古文：此人既不能放，竟击杀之，猿母悲唤，自踯而死。
现代文：这人坚决不放，后来竟然把小猿打死。母猿悲伤地呼唤着，一跳多高，落在地上死了。
English: The man did not let go, and later killed the little ape. The mother ape sadly called out how high to jump, fell to the ground and died.

古文：此人破肠视之，皆断裂矣。
现代文：这人破开母猿的肚子一看，肠子全都断裂了。
English: When the man opened the belly of the mother ape, he saw that the intestines were all ruptured.

古文：未半年，其人家疫，一时死尽灭门。
现代文：未到半年的时间，这人的全家都得了瘟疫，不长时间满门死尽。陈莽
English: Less than half a year later, the man's entire family was stricken with the plague, and within a short period of time, they were all dead.

古文：陈莽临川陈莽，少以射猎为业。
现代文：临川的陈莽，少年就以射猎为职业。
English: Chen Rong, a boy from Linchuan, took up shooting as a career.

古文：与人逐鹿入山，有一大树，可三十围，莽息其下。
现代文：有一天，和别人一起追鹿进山，看见一棵大树，直径有九尺多。
English: One day, together with others, he chased a deer into the mountains and saw a large tree with a diameter of more than nine feet.

古文：忽有白气，去地十丈许，莽因射之，若有所中，洒血布地。闻空中语云： 正中大王。 
现代文：陈莽在树下休息，忽然有一团白气，离地面约有十多丈，陈莽连忙用箭射，好像射中了什么，满地淌血，这时听到空中有人说： 正好射中大王。 
English: Chen Mang was resting under a tree. Suddenly, there was a cloud of white gas, about ten meters above the ground. Chen Mang quickly shot an arrow, as if he had hit something, and blood streamed all over the ground. At that time, someone in the sky said, "I just hit the king."

古文：俄见一大蛇挂树，身有箭。
现代文：不一会儿，看见一条大蛇挂在树上，身上有一支箭。
English: After a while, he saw a big snake hanging from a tree with an arrow in its body.

古文：顷刻。有群蛇辏辐向莽，莽虽驱击，而来者数多，盘绕莽身，咂咂有声，须臾散去。视莽，唯见一聚白骨。
现代文：立刻，就有一群蛇从四面包围过来。陈莽虽然奋力驱赶击打，然而来的蛇太多，都盘绕在陈莽的身上，发出咂咂的声音，一会儿就四散而去，这时再看陈莽，只见一堆白骨了。
English: Immediately, a group of snakes surrounded Chen Mang from four directions. Although Chen Mang tried his best to drive them away and beat them, there were too many snakes coming. They all coiled around Chen Mang's body, emitting a rattling sound, and soon dispersed. At this time, Chen Mang could only see a pile of white bones.

古文：沛国人
现代文：沛国人
English: Pei Guojin

古文：沛国有一士人，同生三子，年将弱冠，皆有声无言。
现代文：沛国有一个读书人，他的妻子一胎生了三个儿子，快要二十岁了，都只能发声不会说话。
English: There is a reader in Pei Province. His wife gave birth to three sons, who are almost twenty years old. They can only utter sounds and cannot speak.

古文：忽有一人从门过，因问曰： 此是何声？ 
现代文：有一天，忽然有一个人从门前经过。见此情景，就问： 这是什么声音？ 
English: One day, a man suddenly passed in front of the door. Seeing this scene, he asked, "What is that sound?"

古文：答曰： 是仆之子，皆不能言。 
现代文：主人回答说： 是我的儿子，都不会说话。 
English: And he answered, He is my son; he cannot speak.

古文：客曰： 君可内省，何以致此？ 
现代文：客人说： 你自己反省一下，为什么会这样？ 
English: The guest said: Reflect on yourself, why is this happening?

古文：主人异其言，思忖良久，乃谓客曰： 昔为小儿时，当床上有燕巢，中有三子，其母从外得哺，三子皆出口受之，积日如此。
现代文：主人很惊异，思考很久，才对客人说： 我小的时候，床头上有燕窝，里面有三只小燕雏，它们的母亲从外面找到食物喂它们，三小燕雏都张开嘴接着，每天都是如此。
English: The host was surprised and thought for a long time before he said to his guest: When I was little, there was a bird's nest on the head of the bed, with three little swallow chicks inside. Their mother found food from outside to feed them, and the three little swallow chicks opened their mouths and followed, just like every day.

古文：试以指内巢中，燕雏亦出口受之。
现代文：我就把手指伸到燕窝里，燕雏也张开嘴来接。
English: I stuck my finger into the nest and the chicks opened their mouths to receive it.

古文：因以三蔷茨食之，既而皆死。
现代文：于是我就用三根蔷刺喂它们，它们就都死了。
English: So I fed them with three thorns and they all died.

古文：昔有此事，今实悔之。 
现代文：过去有这样的事，现在太后悔了。 
English: It happened in the past, and I regret it so much now.

古文：客曰： 是也。 
现代文：客人说： 这就是了。 
English: The guest said: That's it.

古文：言讫，其三子之言语，忽然周稳，盖能知过之故也。
现代文：说完，沛国人的三个儿子都会说话了。这大概是能知过的原因吧。
English: Having said that, all three of Mr. Pei's sons are able to speak. This is probably the reason why they are able to communicate.

古文：齐朝请
现代文：齐朝请
English: Morning all, please.

古文：齐国有一奉朝请，家甚豪侈，非手杀牛，则噉之不美。
现代文：齐国有个叫奉朝请的人，家中豪华奢侈，如不是自己亲手杀的牛，就觉得不好吃。
English: In Qi Province, there is a man named Feng Chaozhu, who lives in a luxurious home. If it is not a cow that he has killed with his own hands, he finds it unpalatable.

古文：年三十许，病笃，见大牛来，举体如被刀刺，叫呼而终。
现代文：到三十多岁时，得了病，当病势沉重时，看见一头大牛向他奔来，他全身就像被刀刺一样，大叫而死。
English: When he was in his thirties, he fell ill, and when he was gravely ill, he saw a big bull running towards him, and he died screaming as if he had been stabbed with a knife.

古文：又江陵高伟，入齐凡数年，向幽州淀中捕鱼。
现代文：又有一个江陵人高伟，到齐国共有几年了，一向到幽州的大淀里捕鱼。
English: Gao Wei, a native of Jiangling, has been in Qi Province for several years and has always fished in Yuzhou's Dadongli.

古文：后病，每见群鱼啮之而死。
现代文：后来也得了病。每天都觉得群鱼咬他，也死了。
English: Later, he also fell ill. Every day, he felt that the shoal of fish was biting him, and he also died.

古文：伍寺之
现代文：伍寺之
English: Temple of Wo

古文：南野人伍寺之，见社树上有猴怀孕，便登树摆杀之。
现代文：南野人伍寺之，看见树上有一个怀孕的猴子，就登上树摇晃着把猴弄死了。
English: When a man from the Minamino village of Wuji saw a pregnant monkey in a tree, he climbed up and shook the monkey to death.

古文：梦一人称神，责以杀猴之罪，当令重谪。
现代文：有一天作梦，梦到一个人自称是神，责问他为什么杀猴，应该受重责。
English: One day I had a dream about a man who claimed to be a god. I asked him why he killed a monkey. He should be held responsible.

古文：寺之乃化为大虫，入山，不知所在。
现代文：伍寺之就化为一只老虎，进入山中，现在不知在哪里。
English: Wu Terauchi was turned into a tiger, went into the mountains, and now I don't know where.

古文：苏巷
现代文：苏巷
English: Su Xiang

古文：新野苏巷，常与妇佃于野舍。
现代文：新野有个叫苏巷的人，经常同妻子到野外去种地。
English: There is a man named Su Xiang in Niino. He and his wife often go to the field to farm.

古文：每至田时，辄有一物来，其状似蛇，长七八尺，五色光鲜，巷异而饷之。
现代文：每次到庄稼地里时，就会有一个形状像蛇的动物来，长有七八尺。全身发出五色之光。苏巷很奇怪，就给它食物吃，经过几年都是如此。
English: Every time he went to the fields, there would come an animal shaped like a snake, seven or eight feet long, emitting five-colored light all over its body. Su Xiang was very strange, so he gave it food to eat, and this went on for several years.

古文：径数载，产业加焉。
现代文：苏巷的产业逐渐增加了。
English: The industry in Su Alley has gradually increased.

古文：妇后密打杀，即得能食之病，进三斛饭，犹不为饱。少时而死也。
现代文：他妻子后来偷偷地打死了它。从此就得了能吃的病。每天吃十五斗饭还不饱，不多时就死了。
English: His wife later secretly killed it. From then on, he developed an eating disorder. He was not satisfied with eating fifteen buckets of rice a day, and died soon after.

古文：阮倪
现代文：阮倪
English: Nguyen Ni

古文：阮倪者，性特忍害。
现代文：阮倪，性情非常残忍狠毒。
English: Nguyen Ni has a very cruel and vicious nature.

古文：因醉出郭，见有放牛，直探牛舌本，割之以归，为炙食之。
现代文：有一天喝醉酒出了城，看见一头不知谁放的牛，他就拿刀直伸到牛的舌根，割下来回家用火烤着吃了。
English: One day, drunk, he went out of the city and saw a cow that had been set free by someone. He took a knife and reached right to the base of the cow's tongue, cut it off and went home to roast it on the fire and eat it.

古文：其后倪生一子，无舌，人以为牛之报也。
现代文：这以后阮倪有了一个儿子，这孩子生来就没有舌头。人们都认为是他残害牛的报应。
English: After that, Nguyen Ni had a son who was born without a tongue, which was believed to be his punishment for killing a cow.

古文：邵文立
现代文：邵文立
English: Shao Wenli

古文：梁小庄严寺，在建业定阴里，本是晋零陵王庙地，天监六年，度禅师起造。
现代文：梁时的小庄严寺，坐落在建业定阴里，原来是晋朝零陵王庙地。梁武帝天监六年，由度禅师监督修造。
English: Liangshi's small solemn temple, located in Jianye Dingyin, was originally the site of the imperial mausoleum of the Jin Dynasty. Liangwu Emperor Tianjun for six years, supervised by the Zen master Du.

古文：时有邵文立者，世以烹屠为业，尝欲杀一鹿。鹿跪而流泪，以为不祥，鹿怀一麂，寻当产育，就庖哀切，同被刳割。
现代文：当时有个叫邵文立的人，世代都以屠宰牲畜为职业，有一次，要杀一只鹿，这只鹿跪着流出眼泪，知道自己要被杀死，但因那鹿怀揣着一只小鹿，不久就要临产了，就跪着哀求，其声凄切，邵文立没有饶过它，它就同小鹿一同被宰割了。
English: At that time, there was a man named Shao Wenli, who had been slaughtering livestock for generations. Once, he wanted to kill a deer. The deer knelt down and shed tears, knowing that he was going to be killed. But because the deer was carrying a fawn and was about to give birth, he knelt down and pleaded, his voice was terrible. Shao Wenli did not spare it, and it was slaughtered together with the fawn.

古文：因斯患疾，眉须皆落，身疮并坏。
现代文：而邵文立就因此而得了病，眉毛胡须脱落干净，身上也生了很多疮。
English: As a result, Shao Wenli became ill, his eyebrows and whiskers fell off, and he also had many sores on his body.

古文：后乃深起悔责，求道度禅师，发大誓愿，罄舍家资，回买此地，为立伽兰。
现代文：他后悔不已，深深地责怪自己，到度禅师那里求道，并发下宏大誓愿，把家产卖光，买了这块地皮，建此佛庙。
English: Deeply remorseful and blaming himself, he sought guidance from a Zen master and made a grand vow to sell all of his family's possessions, buy this piece of land and build this Buddhist temple.

古文：梁元帝
现代文：梁元帝
English: Emperor Liang Yuan

古文：梁元帝讳绎，母阮修容，曾失一珠。
现代文：梁元帝名绎，母亲叫阮修容，曾经丢失一粒珍珠。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan's mother, named Ruan Xiu Rong, once lost a pearl.

古文：元帝时绝幼，吞之，谓是左右所盗，乃炙鱼眼以厌之。
现代文：元帝当年还很小，是他把珍珠咽到肚子里，反说是左右侍人偷去了，于是就烧烤鱼眼来诅咒偷珠人。
English: Emperor Yuan was still very young at the time. He swallowed the pearl into his stomach, but the attendants around him stole it, so he barbecued the fish eyes to curse the pearl thief.

古文：信宿之间，珠便出，帝寻一目致眇，盖鱼之报也。
现代文：过了一宿珍珠就找到了，而元帝也立刻瞎了一只眼。这大概是鱼的报复吧。
English: After an overnight stay, the pearl was found, and the emperor was immediately blinded in one eye. This was probably the fish's revenge.

古文：望蔡令
现代文：望蔡令
English: Wang Cai Ling

古文：梁孝元在江州时，有人为望蔡县令。经刘敬躬乱，县廨被焚，寄寺而住。
现代文：梁孝元帝在江州的时候，有一个人任望蔡县县令，经刘敬叛乱，县衙被焚烧了，县令寄住在一座寺庙里。
English: When Emperor Liang Xiaoyuan was in Jiangzhou, there was a man named Wang Cai, who became the county magistrate. After Liu Jing rebelled, the county seal was burned, and the county magistrate lived in a temple.

古文：民将牛酒作礼，县令以牛击杀，屏除像设，铺陈床座，于堂上接宾客。
现代文：百姓用牛和酒作礼物送去，县令让人把牛杀了，拆除了佛像和其它陈设，铺床安凳，就在厅堂上接待起宾客来。
English: The people sent gifts of oxen and wine, and the prefectural government ordered that the oxen be slaughtered, the Buddha statues and other furnishings be removed, beds and benches be made, and the guests be received in the hall.

古文：未杀之顷，牛解，径来至阶而拜，县令大笑，遂令左右宰之。
现代文：而那条牛还没有被杀的时候自己解开绳索一直走到台阶下下拜请求免死，县令感到很可笑，就命令左右把牛杀了。
English: But when the cow had not yet been killed, he untied the rope and went all the way to the bottom of the steps to bow down and beg to be spared death. The county magistrate felt very ridiculous and ordered the cow to be killed.

古文：饮噉醉饱，便卧于檐下，及醒，即觉体痒，爬搔隐疹，因而成癞，十许年死。
现代文：酒足饭饱，县令躺在屋檐下休息，不知不觉睡了一觉。等醒了以后觉得浑身发痒，抓搔一阵好像出疹子似的，后来变成癞疮，十多年后死了。
English: Full of wine and food, the county magistrate lay down under the eaves to rest, and unconsciously fell asleep. When he woke up, he felt itchy all over his body. He scratched his itch for a while as if he had a rash, and later it turned into scabies. He died more than ten years later.

古文：僧昙欢
现代文：僧昙欢
English: 僧欢

古文：后周武帝时，敷州义阳寺僧昙欢有羊数百口，恒遣沙弥及奴放于山谷。
现代文：后周武帝时，敷州的义阳寺有个和尚叫昙欢，他有几百只羊，每天都派小和尚和寺里的雇工到山谷中放牧。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhou, there was a monk at the Yiyang Temple in Shikizhou called Gong Huan. He had several hundred sheep, and every day he sent a minor monk and temple employees to graze them in the valley.

古文：后沙弥云： 频有人来驱逐此羊。 
现代文：后来，有个小和尚说： 经常有个人来驱赶我们的羊。 
English: Later, a little monk said, "A man often comes to drive our sheep.

古文：欢乃多将手力，自往伺之。
现代文：昙欢觉得蹊跷，有一天多带了几个人，亲自去看一看。
English: Yu Huan felt embarrassed, so one day he took a few more people to go and have a look for himself.

古文：后见此人，立于东岸树下，遥谓欢曰： 汝之畜养猪羊，其罪最甚，不久自知，何劳护惜。 
现代文：果然看见有一个人站在东岸的大树下，很远就对昙欢说： 你当和尚的畜养猪羊，罪过太大了，你不久的将来就会知道。
English: He actually saw a man standing under a big tree on the east bank of the river, and he said to Gong Huan from far away: You should be a monk's animal and raise pigs and sheep. Your sin is too great, and you will know in the near future.

古文：欢骤马绕谷就之，而觅不见。
现代文：何必还费力护卫呢 昙欢听了很生气，驱马绕过山谷想找他理论，但到了那地方根本找不到踪影。
English: Why bother escorting him? Gong Huan was very angry when he heard this. He drove his horse around the valley to look for him, but when he got there, he couldn't find him at all.

古文：少时灭法教，资财并送官府，公私牵挽，并皆分散。
现代文：过了不长时间，朝廷取缔佛教，财产也被没收，公私的事也牵扯不清，资财被分净光。
English: After a short period of time, the imperial court banned Buddhism, property was confiscated, public and private affairs were not clear, and assets were divided.

古文：欢还俗，贫病而死。
现代文：昙欢被迫还俗后，因贫病而死。
English: After Gong Huan was forced to return to the secular world, she died of poverty and disease.

古文：释僧群
现代文：释僧群
English: The Shie Monk Troupe

古文：释僧群，清贫守节，蔬食持经。居罗江县之霍山，构立茅屋，孤在海中。
现代文：释僧群清贫守节，仅吃蔬菜等素食，住在罗江县霍山上，自己修建茅屋，在海中孤独地住着。
English: A group of Buddhist monks in Luojiang live in a hut on the Huoshan Mountain in Luojiang County. They live alone in the middle of the sea.

古文：上有石盂，水深六尺，常有清流。古老相传，是群仙所宅，群因绝粒。
现代文：他的住处山上面有个大石盂，盂中的水深有六尺，平常有清清的溪流流出来，这个地方风景秀丽，古时相传，是仙人居住的地方，僧群于是也不食人间烟火了。
English: His place of residence is a large stone cocoon on the top of the mountain. The water in the cocoon is six feet deep, and usually a clear stream flows out. This place has a beautiful landscape and has been passed down from ancient times. It is a place where immortals live. The monks therefore do not eat human fireworks.

古文：其庵舍与石盂，隔一小涧，常以木为梁，由之以汲水，年至一百三十。
现代文：他的房屋到石盂中间隔着一条小山涧，平常用一根木头作小桥。过了小桥到石盂去打水，已经一百三十年了。
English: There is a small ridge between his house and the crag, and he usually uses a piece of wood to make a small bridge. It has been a hundred and thirty years since he crossed the small bridge to get to the crag to fetch water.

古文：忽见一折翅鸭，舒翼当梁头，群将举锡拨之。
现代文：这一天也太巧了，忽然看见一个折了翅膀的鸭子，舒展着翅膀挡在桥头。和尚想用锡杖把它拨走，又怕伤害了它，没办法只好回去。
English: This day was also very fortuitous, when he suddenly saw a duck with broken wings, stretching its wings to block the bridge. The monk wanted to use a tin cane to move it away, but he was afraid of hurting it, so he had no choice but to go back.

古文：恐有转伤，因此回归，遂绝水数日而终。临终，谓左右曰： 我少时，曾折一鸭翅，验此以为报也。 
现代文：这样和尚断了水几天就死了。临死的时候对左右的人说： 我少年的时候，曾经折断了一只鸭的翅膀。 发生这件事就是报应啊。
English: In this way, the monk broke the water for a few days and died. When he was dying, he said to the people around him: When I was young, I once broke the wings of a duck. If this happened, it was retribution.

古文：竺法惠
现代文：竺法惠
English: 法惠

古文：竺法惠，本关中人，方直有戒行。
现代文：竺法惠和尚，本来是关中人，为人耿直道行很高。
English: Gong Fa Hui, a monk, was originally from Guanzhong. He was a very upright person.

古文：行至嵩高山，忽谓弟子法昭曰： 汝过去时，折一鸭脚，其殃即至。 
现代文：有一天走到嵩高山，忽然对身边的弟子法昭说： 你过去曾折断一只鸭脚，这事带来的灾祸就要来了。 
English: One day, he went to Songgao Mountain, and suddenly said to his disciple Fa Zhao: You once broke a duck's foot, and the calamity brought about by this is about to come.

古文：俄而昭为人所掷物折脚，遂永疾废焉。冀州小儿
现代文：不一会法昭就被别人扔的东西折断了小腿，于是造成了终生残疾。冀州小儿
English: Not long after, Fa Zhao's lower leg was broken by something thrown by others, which caused a lifelong disability.

古文：隋开皇初，冀州外邑中，有小儿，年十三，常盗邻卵，烧煨食之。
现代文：隋开皇初年，冀州城外，有一个小孩，十三岁，经常偷邻居家的禽蛋，烧烤着吃。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, outside the city of Jizhou, there was a child, thirteen years old, who often stole eggs from a neighbor's house and barbecued them.

古文：翌日侵旦，有人叩门，呼此儿声。父令儿出应之，见一人云： 官唤汝。 
现代文：第二天早晨，有人敲门招呼这个小孩，小孩的父亲让他出去看看，只见一个人对他说： 官府让你去。 
English: The next morning, someone knocked on the door to say hello to the child. The child's father let him out to take a look, only to see a man say to him: "The authorities want you to go."

古文：儿曰： 呼我役者，入取衣粮。 
现代文：小孩就说： 叫我去服劳役吧，我去拿点衣服和干粮。 那人说： 不用。 
English: And the child said, Send me away that I may go and get me a little food and raiment: and he said, No.

古文：使者曰： 不须也。 因引儿去。
现代文：就带着小孩走了，村南边过去是桑田，已经耕完还没下种。
English: They took their children and left. The south side of the village used to be a mulberry field, but it has not yet been ploughed.

古文：村南旧是桑田，耕讫未下种，此小儿忽见道右有一小城，四面门楼，丹素甚严，此儿怪曰： 何时有此城？ 
现代文：走到这里时小孩忽然看见道的右边有一个小城，四面是门楼，油漆着红色很庄严。小孩很奇怪，说： 什么时候有了这个城？ 
English: When he came here, the child suddenly saw a small city on the right side of the road, with gatehouses on all sides, painted red and very solemn. The child was very strange and said: When did this city come into being?

古文：使者呵之勿言，因至城北门，令小儿前入。
现代文：那人呵斥他说： 不要说话！ 
English: The man shouted at him: "Don't talk!

古文：小儿入阃，城门忽闭，不见一人，唯是空城，地皆热灰碎火，深才没踝。
现代文：这样走到城的北门，那人让小孩进去，小孩刚迈进门槛，城门突然关闭了，一个人影也没有，只是座空城，地上都是热灰和小碎火，也不深，才没过脚踝。
English: So he went to the north gate of the city, and the man let the child in. As soon as the child stepped onto the threshold, the city gate suddenly closed, and there was not a single person to be seen. It was just an empty city, with hot ashes and small fires on the ground, and it was not deep, just below the ankles.

古文：小儿忽呼叫，走趋南门，垂至即闭。
现代文：小孩哭喊着往南门跑，刚到南门，南门又突然关闭。
English: The child ran crying and screaming to the south gate. Just after reaching the south gate, the south gate suddenly closed again.

古文：又走趋东西，亦皆如是，未到则开，既至便阖。
现代文：又往东门、西门跑，也都是刚到即关。没跑到时开着，等跑到了就关上。
English: I also ran to the east gate and west gate, but they were both closed as soon as I arrived. They were open when I didn't arrive, and closed when I arrived.

古文：时村人出田采桑，男女甚众，皆见儿在耕田中啼泣，四方驰走，皆相谓曰： 此儿狂耶？
现代文：当时村里人都出来种田采桑，男男女女人很多。都看见小孩在耕地里哭，又四面奔走。都说： 这小孩疯了吗？
English: At that time, everyone in the village went out to the fields to pick mulberries, and there were many men and women. They all saw a child crying in the fields and running around. They all said, "Is this child crazy?"

古文：旦来如此，游戏不息。 
现代文：一大早就上这儿来玩也不休息。 
English: They come here early in the morning to play and don't take a break.

古文：至于食时，采者皆归，儿父问曰： 见吾儿否？ 
现代文：到了该吃饭的时候，采桑的人都回来了，小儿的父亲就问： 看见我家孩子了吗？ 
English: When it was time to eat, the mulberry pickers returned, and the boy's father asked: "Have you seen my child?"

古文：桑人答曰： 父儿在村南走戏，唤不肯来。 
现代文：采桑人回答说： 你的孩子在村南跑着玩，招呼他也不肯回来。 
English: The San tree picker replied, "Your child is running and playing in the south of the village. When I called him, he refused to come back.

古文：父出村外，遥见儿走，大呼其名，一声便住，城灰忽然不见。
现代文：父亲就跑到村外，很远就看见小孩还在跑。于是大声招呼他的名字，只叫了一声小孩就停住了，城里的灰火也突然不见。
English: The father ran to the outskirts of the village, saw the child still running in the distance, and called out his name. The child stopped after just one cry, and the city's gray fire suddenly disappeared.

古文：父儿倒，号泣言之。
现代文：小孩倒在地上，嚎哭着对父亲说了经过。
English: The child fell to the ground, sobbing, and told his father what had happened.

古文：视其足，半胫已上，血肉焦干，膝已下，红烂如炙。
现代文：父亲一看他的脚，半个小腿以上，血肉焦干，膝盖以下，红烂得像用火烤了一样。
English: When his father saw his foot, more than half of the calf was charred, and the flesh below the knee was red and rotten, as if it had been roasted with fire.

古文：抱归养疗，髀已上肉如故，膝已下遂为枯骨。
现代文：父亲把小孩抱回家治疗养伤。大腿以上的肉还同以前一样，膝盖往下成了枯骨。
English: The father took the child home to treat the injury. The flesh above the thigh was still the same as before, and the knee became a dead bone.

古文：邻里闻之，看其走处，足迹通利，了无灰火，良因实业，触处见狱。
现代文：邻居们听说这件事，都到那小孩跑的地方看，只见脚印还很清楚，根本没有什么灰火。做好事就会有好结果，做坏事就会到处是地狱。
English: When the neighbors heard about this, they went to the area where the child had run and saw that the footprints were still very clear and there was no fire at all. If you do good things, you will have good results, and if you do bad things, it will be hell everywhere.

古文：有道惠法师，本冀州人，与小儿邻邑，亲见其事。
现代文：有一个道惠法师，原来是冀州人。与小孩家不远，亲眼看见这件事。
English: There is a Tao Hui mage, originally from Jizhou, who is not far from the child's home and saw the incident with his own eyes.

