古文：李靖，本名药师，雍州三原人也。
现代文：李靖本名药师，是雍州三原人。
English: Li Jing is a pharmacist by profession and a native of Sanyuan, Yongzhou.

古文：祖崇义，后魏殷州刺史、永康公。
现代文：他的祖父李崇义，任后魏殷州刺史、永康公。
English: His grandfather, Li Chongyi, served as Wei and Yin prefectural governor and Yongkang prince.

古文：父诠，隋赵郡守。
现代文：他的父亲李诠，是隋朝赵郡太守。
English: His father, Li Yan, was the governor of Zhao County in the Sui Dynasty.

古文：靖姿貌瑰伟，少有文武材略，每谓所亲曰： 大丈夫若遇主逢时，必当立功立事，以取富贵。 
现代文：李靖身材魁伟容貌端秀，少年时就有文才武略，他常常对亲近的人说： 大丈夫如果遇到圣明的君主和时代，应当建立功业求取富贵。 
English: Li Jing was tall and handsome. As a young boy, he had a talent for literature. He often said to people close to him: "It's okay. If you meet a saintly monarch and era, you should establish a career to seek wealth.

古文：其舅韩擒虎，号为名将，每与论兵，未尝不称善，抚之曰： 可与论孙、吴之术者，惟斯人矣。 
现代文：他的舅舅韩擒虎号称名将，每次与李靖谈论用兵的事，总是说他说得精辟，他总是抚摸着李靖说： 可以在一起谈论孙子、吴子的兵法的，只有这个人了。 
English: His uncle, Han Binghu, was a famous general. Every time he talked with Li Jinglong about the use of soldiers, he always said that he spoke brilliantly. He always stroked Li Jing and said, "This is the only one who can talk about Sun Tzu's and Wu Zi's military methods together."

古文：初仕隋为长安县功曹，后历驾部员外郎。
现代文：李靖起初在隋朝任长安县功曹，后历驾部员外郎。
English: At first, Li Jing served as a gong cao of Chang'an County in the Sui Dynasty, and later he became a driver.

古文：左仆射杨素、吏部尚书牛弘皆善之。
现代文：左仆射杨素、吏部尚书牛弘都喜欢他。
English: His left-hand man, Yang Su, and the head of the personnel department, Shang Shuxiu, both liked him.

古文：素尝拊其床谓靖曰： 卿终当坐此。 
现代文：杨素曾经抚摸着自己的座位说 ：李靖终究应当坐到这个位置上来。 
English: Yang Su once stroked his seat and said: Li Jing should eventually sit in this position.

古文：大业末，累除马邑郡丞。
现代文：大业末年，李靖多次拜官受职，任马邑郡丞。
English: In the final years of his career, Li Jing was appointed to various posts and served as the county magistrate of Ma'i County.

古文：会高祖击突厥于塞外，靖察高祖，知有四方之志，因自锁上变，将诣江都，至长安，道塞不通而止。
现代文：适逢高祖在塞外进击突厥，李靖观察高祖，发现他有统一天下的志向，于是自己戴上刑具上京密告这一事件，准备到江都去，到了长安，由于道路阻塞不通就停下来。
English: When Gaozu invaded the Turks outside of Tibet, Li Jing observed Gaozu and found that he had the ambition to unify the world. He then put on the torture device and went to Beijing to report the incident. He was preparing to go to the capital of the Yangtze River. When he arrived in Chang'an, he stopped because the road was blocked.

古文：高祖克京城，执靖将斩之，靖大呼曰： 公起义兵，本为天下除暴乱，不欲就大事，而以私怨斩壮士乎！ 
现代文：高祖攻克京城长安，抓住李靖准备处死他，李靖大声喊道： 公举兵起事，本来是为天下除暴乱，难道不想成就大事，反而因为私怨杀壮士吗？ 
English: Gao Zu conquered the capital Chang'an, seized Li Jing and prepared to execute him. Li Jing shouted loudly: Publicly raising an army to rise up, was originally for the world to remove riots. Don't you want to achieve great things, but kill strong men because of personal grudges?

古文：高祖壮其言，太宗又固请，遂舍之。
现代文：高祖认为他的话有豪气，太宗又坚持为他讲情，于是高祖释放了李靖。
English: Gaozu thought his words were courageous, and Taizong insisted on pleading for him, so Gaozu released Li Jing.

古文：太宗寻召入幕府。
现代文：太宗接着把他召入幕府。
English: Emperor Taizong then summoned him to the Shogunate.

古文：武德三年，从讨王世充，以功授开府。
现代文：武德二年，李靖跟从太宗讨伐王世充，因为立功授开府。
English: In the second year of Wu De, Li Jing followed Taizong's crusade against Wang Shichong, and because of his meritorious service, he was awarded the capital.

古文：时萧铣据荆州，遣靖安辑之。
现代文：这时萧铣占据荆州，高祖派遣李靖去安抚他。
English: At this time, Xiao Yao occupied Jingzhou, Gao Zu sent Li Jing to appease him.

古文：轻骑至金州，遇蛮贼数万，屯聚山谷。庐江王瑗讨之，数为所败。
现代文：李靖的轻骑到金州，遇异族贼寇数万驻扎聚集在山谷，庐江王李瑗讨伐蛮贼，数次被敌军打败。
English: Li Jing rode lightly to Jinzhou, and in the event of foreign thieves and robbers, tens of thousands were stationed and gathered in the valley. Li Gan, the king of the Min River, fought against the barbarians and was defeated several times by the enemy.

古文：靖与瑗设谋击之，多所克获。
现代文：李靖与李瑗一起设计攻击蛮贼，多次进攻获胜。
English: Li Jing and Li Yao worked together to design an attack on the bandits, and the attack won several times.

古文：既至硖州，阻萧铣，久不得进。
现代文：李靖率唐军到达硖州，被萧铣的军队阻挡，旷日持久，迟迟不能开进夔州。
English: Li Jing led the Tang army to arrive in Ganzhou, but was blocked by Xiao Yu's army. It took a long time, and it was too late to drive into Ganzhou.

古文：高祖怒其迟留，阴敕硖州都督许绍斩之。
现代文：高祖得知李靖滞留硖州非常恼怒，暗地命令硖州都督许绍把他处死。
English: Gaozhu was very angry when he learned that Li Jing was detained in Ganzhou, and secretly ordered the governor of Ganzhou, Xu Shao, to execute him.

古文：绍惜其才，为之请命，于是获免。
现代文：许绍很爱惜李靖的才干，为他上奏请求赦免，于是李靖才获免一死。
English: Xu Shao was very fond of Li Jing's talent and petitioned for him to be pardoned, so Li Jing was spared death.

古文：会开州蛮首冉肇则反，率众寇夔州，赵郡王孝恭与战，不利。
现代文：这时适逢开州少数民族首领冉肇则反叛，率兵侵犯夔州，驻守夔州的赵郡王李孝恭迎战失利。
English: At this time, Ran Zhaozhe, the leader of the ethnic minorities in Kizhou, rebelled and led troops to invade Zhangzhou. Zhao Guowang Li Xiaogong, who was stationed in Zhangzhou, was defeated.

古文：靖率兵八百，袭破其营，后又要险设伏，临阵斩肇则，俘获五千余人。
现代文：李靖率领八百士兵，偷袭攻破冉肇则的大营，后来又在地势险要处设下埋伏，在阵前杀死冉肇则，俘获敌军五千多人。
English: Li Jing led eight hundred soldiers in a sneak attack to break through Ran Zhaozhe's large camp, and later set up an ambush at a critical point in the terrain, killing Ran Zhaozhe before the battle and capturing more than five thousand enemy troops.

古文：高祖甚悦，谓公卿曰： 朕闻使功不如使过，李靖果展其效。 
现代文：高祖非常高兴，对大臣们说 ：朕听说使用有功劳的人不如使用有过失的人，李靖果然立了大功。 
English: Gaozu was very happy and said to the ministers, "I have heard that it is not as good to use a person with merits as it is to use a person with faults. Li Jing really did a great service.

古文：因降玺书劳曰： 卿竭诚尽力，功效特彰。
现代文：因此下玺书劝勉李靖说： 卿竭诚尽力，功绩特别卓著。
English: Therefore, Li Jing said in the letter of exhortation: Sir, you have made every effort, and your achievements are particularly outstanding.

古文：远览至诚，极以嘉赏，勿忧富贵也。 
现代文：天长日久才发现卿无限忠诚，尽量给你嘉奖赏赐，卿不必担心功名利禄了。 
English: It took me a long time to discover that Sir is infinitely loyal and will do his best to reward you. Sir, you don't have to worry about fame and fortune.

古文：又手敕靖曰： 既往不咎，旧事吾久忘之矣。 
现代文：又下手令给李靖说： 既往不咎，以前的事我早就忘了。 
English: He also ordered Li Jing to say: I don't blame you, I have long forgotten what happened before.

古文：四年，靖又陈十策以图萧铣。
现代文：武德四年，李靖又陈述了十条攻取萧铣的策略。
English: In the fourth year of Wude, Li Jing also stated ten strategies to capture Xiao Yu.

古文：高祖从之，授靖行军总管，兼摄孝恭行军长史。
现代文：高祖采纳了他的策略，任命李靖为行军总管，兼任李孝恭的行军长史。
English: Gaozhu adopted his strategy and appointed Li Jing as the general manager of the march, and also served as Li Xiaogong's march leader.

古文：高祖以孝恭未更戎旅，三军之任，一以委靖。
现代文：高祖因为考虑到李孝恭没有指挥过大规模的战争，把三军的重任，一起委托给李靖。
English: Gaozu, considering that Li Xiaogong had never commanded a large-scale war, entrusted the heavy responsibility of the three armies to Li Jing.

古文：其年八月，集兵于夔州。
现代文：当年八月，李靖在夔州聚集军队。
English: In August of that year, Li Jing gathered an army in Ganzhou.

古文：铣以时属秋潦，江水泛涨，三峡路险，必谓靖不能进，遂休兵不设备。
现代文：萧铣认为当时正值秋汛时期，江水泛滥暴涨，三峡道路险阻，断言李靖不可能进兵，于是令军队休息不加防备。
English: Xiao Yao thought that it was the time of the autumn solstice, the river was flooding and surging, the Three Gorges Road was dangerous, and asserted that Li Jing could not enter the army, so he ordered the army to rest without precaution.

古文：九月，靖乃率师而进，将下峡，诸将皆请停兵以待水退，靖曰： 兵贵神速，机不可失。
现代文：九月，李靖率领军队向江陵进发，顺流而下将要到三峡时，其他所有的将领都要求等江水退落以后再进军，李靖说 ：兵贵神速，机不可失。
English: In September, Li Jing led the army to march to Jiangling, and when they were about to reach the Three Gorges downstream, all the other generals asked to wait for the river water to recede before marching in. Li Jing said: The soldiers are very fast, and the opportunity must not be lost.

古文：今兵始集，铣尚未知，若乘水涨之势，倏忽至城下，所谓疾雷不及掩耳，此兵家上策。
现代文：现在军队刚刚集结，萧铣还不知道，如果我们乘江水猛涨出师，顺流东下，突然出现在江陵城下，正是所说的迅雷不及掩耳，这是兵家上策。
English: Now that the army has just been assembled, Xiao Yao still does not know that if we take advantage of the river water to surge out of the division, flow eastward, and suddenly appear under the city of Jiangling, it is precisely the said thunderbolt that can not be hidden, which is the soldiers' best strategy.

古文：纵彼知我，仓卒征兵，无以应敌，此必成擒也。 
现代文：纵然萧铣得知我将出师的消息，仓促调集军队，也无法应战，这样擒获萧铣定可一举成功。 
English: Even if Xiao Yao learned the news that I would join the army and hastily mobilized troops, he would not be able to fight. In this way, the capture of Xiao Yao would be a success.

古文：孝恭从之，进兵至夷陵。
现代文：李孝恭采纳了李靖的意见，进兵直抵夷陵。
English: Li Xiaogang adopted Li Jing's opinion and marched straight to the Yili Mausoleum.

古文：铣将文士弘率精兵数万屯清江，孝恭欲击之，靖曰： 士弘，铣之健将，士卒骁勇，今新失荆门，尽兵出战，此是救败之师，恐不可当也。
现代文：萧铣大将文士弘率领精兵数万屯集驻扎在清江，孝恭准备立即攻击敌军，李靖说： 文士弘，是萧铣的健将，士卒精锐骁勇，现在荆门刚刚失守，他把精锐兵力全都派出来迎战，这是救败的军队，恐怕锐不可挡。
English: Xiao Yao's general Wen Shihong led tens of thousands of elite soldiers stationed in Qingjiang, and Xiao Gong was ready to attack the enemy army immediately. Li Jing said: Wen Shihong is Xiao Yao's strong general, and his soldiers are elite and brave. Now Jingmen has just been lost, and he has sent all his elite troops to fight. This is a defeated army, and I am afraid it is unstoppable.

古文：宜自泊南岸，勿与争锋，待其气衰，然后奋击，破之必矣。 
现代文：我们应当暂且把战船停泊在长江南岸，不与敌人交锋，等到他们士气衰落，然后出击决战，一定能攻破敌军。 
English: We should temporarily moor our warships on the south bank of the Yangtze River, not engage the enemy, wait for their morale to decline, and then launch a decisive battle. We will surely defeat the enemy.

古文：孝恭不从，留靖守营，率师与贼合战。孝恭果败，奔于南岸。
现代文：孝恭不听，留李靖驻守军营，自己率领军队与敌军交战，不出李靖所料，孝恭果然战败，奔回南岸的军营。
English: However, Li Jing did not listen to him and left Li Jing to guard the military camp, leading the army to fight the enemy. As Li Jing expected, Li Jing was defeated and ran back to the military camp on the south bank.

古文：贼舟大掠，人皆负重。
现代文：敌军弃船上岸大肆抢掠财物，个个都背着重重的包裹。
English: The enemy abandoned the ship on the shore and plundered the property. Everyone was carrying heavy packages.

古文：靖见其军乱，纵兵击破之，获其舟舰四百余艘，斩首及溺死将万人。
现代文：李靖发现敌军阵势混乱，立即指挥士兵乘机出击，一举击败文士弘的军队，缴获战船四百余艘，敌军被斩首、溺死的有一万多人。
English: Li Jing found that the enemy forces were in disarray and immediately ordered his soldiers to attack, defeating the army of Wenshihong, capturing more than four hundred warships, and beheading and drowning more than ten thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：孝恭遣靖率轻兵五千为先锋，至江陵，屯营于城下。
现代文：李孝恭命令李靖率领精兵五千做先锋，到达江陵，驻扎在江陵城下。
English: Li Xiaogang ordered Li Jing to lead five thousand elite soldiers to be the vanguard, arrive in Gangneung, and be stationed at the foot of Gangneung Castle.

古文：士弘既败，铣甚惧，始征兵于江南，果不能至。
现代文：文士弘战败以后，萧铣非常恐惧，这时刚刚在江南征召士兵，结果征召的士兵不能如期赶到。
English: After the defeat of Wen Shihong, Xiao Yao was very afraid. At that time, soldiers had just been conscripted in the south of the Yangtze River. As a result, the conscripted soldiers could not arrive as scheduled.

古文：孝恭以大军继进，靖又破其骁将杨君茂、郑文秀，俘甲卒四千余人，更勒兵围铣城。
现代文：李孝恭带领大军继续进攻，李靖又击败萧铣的骁勇大将杨君茂、郑文秀，俘获士卒四千多人，李靖进而率领士兵围困萧铣的城池。
English: Li Xiaogong led the army to continue the attack, Li Jing also defeated Xiao Gan's generals Yang Junmao and Zheng Wenshu, captured more than four thousand soldiers, Li Jing then led the soldiers to besiege Xiao Gan's castle.

古文：明日，铣遣使请降，靖即入据其城，号令严肃，军无私焉。
现代文：第二天，萧铣派遣使者请求投降，李靖立即率军进城占据江陵城，李靖号令严肃，军不掠私。
English: The next day, Xiao Yu sent an envoy to request surrender. Li Jing immediately led an army into the city to occupy Jiangling City. Li Jing issued a stern order that the army should not plunder.

古文：时诸将咸请孝恭云： 铣之将帅与官军拒战死者，罪状既重，请籍没其家，以赏将士。 
现代文：当时所有的将领都向李孝恭请求说 ：萧铣的将帅及与唐军交战而死的人，罪状已经很重，请没收他们的家产，用来赏赐我们的将士。 
English: At that time, all the generals pleaded with Li Xiaogong, saying: Xiao Yu's generals and those who died in battle with the Tang army have serious crimes, please confiscate their family property and use it to reward our soldiers.

古文：靖曰： 王者之师，义存吊伐。
现代文：李靖说： 王者之师，应保持抚慰人民，讨伐罪恶的节义。
English: Li Jing said: The king's teacher should maintain the principle of appeasing the people and fighting against evil.

古文：百姓既受驱逼，拒战岂其所愿？
现代文：百姓已经受到战事的驱逼，抵抗作战难道是他们的愿望。
English: The people have been driven by the war, is it their wish to resist the war?

古文：且犬吠非其主，无容同叛逆之科，此蒯通所以免大戮于汉祖也。
现代文：况且狗自然会对不是自己主人的人吠叫，为萧铣战死的人，死为其主，不能与叛逆者同等看待，这就是蒯通之所以在高祖面前免除死罪的原因啊。
English: Moreover, a dog will naturally bark at someone who is not its master, and those who died fighting for Xiao Yao cannot be treated the same as the rebels. This is the reason why Yan Tong was exempted from the death penalty in front of Gao Zu.

古文：今新定荆、郢，宜弘宽大，以慰远近之心，降而籍之，恐非救焚拯溺之义。
现代文：现在刚平定荆州、江陵，应当采取宽大的政策，来抚慰远近的民心，投降了我们而还要没收他们的家产，恐怕不是救焚拯溺的道义。
English: Now that we have just pacified Jingzhou and Jiangling, we should adopt a lenient policy to soothe the hearts of the people near and far. If they surrender to us but still want to confiscate their family property, I am afraid it is not the morality of saving lives.

古文：但恐自此已南城镇，各坚守不下，非计之善。 
现代文：只怕从此其他城镇的敌将，拼死抵抗都坚守不降，这不是好的决策。 
English: This is not a good decision, even if the enemy generals in other towns continue to hold out and fight to the death.

古文：于是遂止。
现代文：于是马上制止了莽撞的行动。
English: The execution was then halted.

古文：江、汉之域，闻之莫不争下。
现代文：江汉之间萧铣所属的州县，听到这些消息都争相投降了唐军。
English: Upon hearing this news, all the states and counties that Xiao Yao belonged to between the Han Dynasty and the Jiang Dynasty capitulated to the Tang Army.

古文：以功授上柱国，封永康县公，赐物二千五百段。
现代文：李靖因功授任上柱国，封永康县公，赐物二千五百段。
English: For his merits, Li Jing was awarded the title of Shangzhu Guo, the title of Yongkang County, and a gift of twenty-five hundred dan.

古文：诏命检校荆州刺史，承制拜授。
现代文：高祖下诏命李靖检校荆州刺史，并授予代表朝廷按国家制度任命地方官吏的特权。
English: Gao Zu issued an imperial edict ordering Li Jing to examine and record the history of Jingzhou, and granted the representative of the imperial court the privilege of appointing local officials according to the national system.

古文：乃度岭至桂州，遣人分道招抚，其大首领冯盎、李光度、宁真长等皆遣子弟来谒，靖承制授其官爵。
现代文：于是李靖越过南岭到达桂州，派遣使者分头招抚各州，当地首领冯盎、李光度、宁真长等都派子弟来拜谒李靖，李靖代表唐王朝授予他们官爵。
English: As a result, Li Jing crossed the Nanling to Guizhou and sent emissaries to each state separately. Local leaders such as Feng Ang, Li Guangdu, and Ning Zhenchang all sent their sons and brothers to pay homage to Li Jing. On behalf of the Tang Dynasty, Li Jing awarded them official peerages.

古文：凡所怀辑九十六州，户六十余万。
现代文：共招抚了南方九十六州，得到六十余万户。
English: A total of ninety-six states in the south have been affected, and more than 600,000 households have been affected.

古文：优诏劳勉，授岭南道抚慰大使，检校桂州总管。
现代文：唐高祖下诏慰劳勉励李靖，任命他为岭南道抚慰大使、检校桂州总管。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to encourage Li Jing and appointed him as the ambassador of Lingnan Province and the chief inspector of Guizhou.

古文：十六年，辅公祏于丹阳反，诏孝恭为元帅、靖为副以讨之，李勣、任瑰、张镇州、黄君汉等七总管并受节度。
现代文：武德六年，辅公礻石在丹阳起兵反唐，唐高祖诏令李孝恭为元帅，李靖为副帅统兵讨伐辅公礻石。李勣、任瑰、张镇州、黄君汉等七总管都接受他俩指挥。
English: In the sixth year of Wudeh, Fu Gong Zhi Shi raised an army against the Tang Dynasty in Danyang. Emperor Gaozhu of the Tang Dynasty ordered Li Xiaogong to be the field marshal and Li Jing to be the deputy field marshal to lead the soldiers to fight Fu Gong Zhi Shi. The seven commanders including Li Qian, Ren Gui, Zhang Zhenzhou, and Huang Junhan all accepted their commands.

古文：师次舒州，公祏遣将冯惠亮率舟师三万屯当涂，陈正通、徐绍宗领步骑二万屯青林山，仍于梁山连铁锁以断江路，筑却月城，延袤十余里，与惠亮为犄角之势。
现代文：唐军驻扎在舒州，辅公礻石派大将冯惠亮率水军三万屯泊在当涂，陈正通、徐绍宗率领步骑兵二万屯驻在青林山，同时在梁山用连接的铁锁链切断江上的水路，修筑却月城，延伸达十余里，与冯惠亮的水军构成犄角之势。
English: The Tang army was stationed in Shuzhou, and the auxiliary government sent the general Feng Huiliang to Dangtu with the navy of 30,000 troops. Chen Zhengtong and Xu Shaozong led the infantry cavalry of 20,000 troops stationed in Qinglin Mountain. At the same time, they used the connected iron chain to cut off the waterway on the river in Liangshan and built the moon city, which extended for more than ten miles, forming a conflict with Feng Huiliang's navy.

古文：孝恭集诸将会议，皆云： 惠亮、正通并握强兵，为不战之计，城栅既固，卒不可攻。
现代文：李孝恭召集诸将在一起商议对策。诸将都说： 冯惠亮、陈正通都掌握了强大的兵力，是想守险不战，因此构城筑垒而固守，仓猝之间是不能攻取的。
English: Li Xiaogang called all the generals together to discuss countermeasures. All the generals said: Feng Huiliang and Chen Zhengtong have mastered a strong military force. They want to avoid danger without fighting. Therefore, they will build a city and fortify it, and they will not be able to attack in a hurry.

古文：请直指丹阳，掩其巢穴，丹阳既破，惠亮自降。 
现代文：不如直指丹阳，掩袭辅公礻石的巢穴，丹阳一旦攻破，冯惠亮等人自然不战而降。 
English: It would be better to point directly at Danyang, cover up the lair of Fu Gongzhuo, and once Danyang is broken, Feng Huiliang and others will naturally surrender without a fight.

古文：孝恭欲从其议。
现代文：李孝恭想采纳诸将的意见。
English: Li Xiaogang wanted to adopt the opinions of the generals.

古文：靖曰： 公祏精锐，虽在水陆二军，然其自统之兵，亦皆劲勇。
现代文：李靖说 ：辅公礻石的精锐兵力，虽然集中在水、陆二军，然而他自己统帅的军队，也都是骁勇的士卒。
English: Li Jing said: Although the elite troops of Fu Gong and Zhi Shi were concentrated in the army and navy, the troops he commanded were also brave soldiers.

古文：惠亮等城栅尚不可攻，公祏既保石头，岂应易拔？
现代文：冯惠亮等驻守的城栅尚且不能攻取，辅公礻石已经固守的石头城，难道是可以轻易攻取的吗？
English: Feng Huiliang and the other keepers of the city gate have not yet been able to capture the stone city, which has been firmly defended by the auxiliary stone, can it be easily captured?

古文：若我师至丹阳，留停旬月，进则公祏未平，退则惠亮为患，此便腹背受敌，恐非万全之计。
现代文：如果我军直奔丹阳，旬月之间都不能攻下而滞留在那里，前面的辅公礻石没有平定，后边的冯惠亮也是一大隐患，这样我们就会腹背受敌，恐怕不是万全之计。
English: If our army goes straight to Danyang, it cannot attack and stay there for a month or two, the front of Fu Gongshen is not settled, and the rear of Feng Huiliang is also a big hidden danger, so we will suffer from the enemy, I am afraid it is not a perfect solution.

古文：惠亮、正通皆是百战余贼，必不惮于野战，止为公祏立计，令其持重，但欲不战，以老我师。
现代文：冯惠亮、陈正通都是身经百战的贼将，决不会害怕野战，只因为辅公礻石立下计谋，命令他们持重防守，只想不出战拖延时间使我军疲劳。
English: Both Feng Huiliang and Chen Zhengtong were experienced in hundreds of battles and would never be afraid of a field battle. It was only because the vice-premier made a plan and ordered them to maintain a strong defense that they could not think of delaying the battle and making our army tired.

古文：今欲攻其城栅，乃是出其不意，灭贼之机，唯在此举。 
现代文：现在如果我们进攻冯惠亮、陈正通的城栅，就可以打他个出其不意，消灭敌贼的机会，只在此一举。 
English: Now, if we attack Feng Huiliang and Chen Zhengtong at the city gate, we can take him by surprise and eliminate the enemy. This is the only way.

古文：孝恭然之。
现代文：李孝恭认为李靖的意见很有道理。
English: Li Xiaogang thought that Li Jing's opinion was very reasonable.

古文：靖乃率黄君汉等先击惠亮，苦战破之，杀伤乃溺死者万余人，惠亮奔走。
现代文：于是李靖率领黄君汉等先攻打冯惠亮的城栅，经过苦战攻下城栅，杀伤、溺死敌军一万多人，冯惠亮弃城奔逃。
English: As a result, Li Jing led Huang Junhan and others to attack Feng Huiliang's city gate first. After a hard battle, they captured the city gate, killed and drowned more than 10,000 enemy troops, and Feng Huiliang abandoned the city and fled.

古文：靖率轻兵先至丹阳，公祏大惧。
现代文：李靖亲自率轻兵先到丹阳，辅公礻石得知战败的消息十分恐惧。
English: Li Jing personally led the light soldiers to Danyang first, and Fu Gong Zhi Shi was very afraid to learn the news of the defeat.

古文：先遣伪将左游仙领兵守会稽以为引援，公祏拥兵东走，以趋游仙，至吴郡，与惠亮、正通并相次擒获，江南悉平。
现代文：先派贼将左游仙率兵据守会稽的有利地势作为救助，辅公礻石自己带兵弃城东奔，向左游仙据守的会稽撤退，逃到吴郡，与冯惠亮、陈正通一起相继被唐军擒获，东南地区全都平定了。
English: He first sent the bandits to take advantage of the favorable situation of the left-traveling hermit and his soldiers as a rescue. Fu Gong Zhi Shi himself led the troops to abandon the city, withdrew to the left-traveling hermit and his soldiers, and fled to Wu County. Together with Feng Huiliang and Chen Zhengtong, they were successively captured by the Tang army. The southeastern region was all leveled.

古文：于是置东南道行台，拜靖行台兵部尚书，赐物千段、奴婢百口、马百匹。
现代文：于是朝廷在丹阳设置东南道行台，拜李靖为行台兵部尚书，赐物千段、奴婢百人、马百匹。
English: As a result, the imperial court set up a southeastern road station in Danyang, and paid tribute to Li Jing as the station's military commander, bestowing thousands of goods, hundreds of slaves, and hundreds of horses.

古文：其年，行台废，又检校扬州大都督府长史。
现代文：当年，废除行台制度，又改授李靖为检校扬州大都督府长史。
English: In that year, the inspection system was abolished, and Li Jing was re-assigned as the inspector of the Yangzhou Governor's Office.

古文：丹阳连罹兵寇，百姓凋弊，靖镇抚之，吴、楚以安。
现代文：丹阳地区连年遭受战乱之灾，经济凋敝、民不聊生，李靖派官吏到各地抚慰百姓，使吴地、楚地的民心很快安定下来。
English: Danyang region suffered from war for years on end, the economy withered and the people did not enjoy life. Li Jing sent officials to various regions to comfort the people, so that the people's hearts in Wudi and Chu quickly settled down.

古文：八年，突厥寇太原，以靖为行军总管，统江淮兵一万，与张瑾屯大谷。
现代文：武德八年，突厥进犯太原，李靖被任命为行军总管，率江淮兵一万，与张瑾驻守在太谷。
English: In the 8th year of Wude, when the Turks invaded Taiyuan, Li Jing was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops. He led ten thousand soldiers from Jianghuai and stationed in Taiyuan with Zhang Ye.

古文：时诸军不利，靖众独全。
现代文：当时诸军都出师不利，只有李靖的军队得以保全。
English: At that time, all the armies were unfavorable, and only Li Jing's army was preserved.

古文：寻检校安州大都督。
现代文：不久朝廷授任李靖为检校安州大都督。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Li Jing as the governor of Anzhou.

古文：高祖每云： 李靖是萧铣、辅公祏膏肓，古之名将韩、白、卫、霍，岂能及也！ 
现代文：高祖常常说 ：李靖是萧铣、辅公的膏肓之病，古代名将韩信、白起、卫青、霍去病，没有一个能比得上李靖！ 
English: Gao Zu often said: Li Jing is the illness of Xiao Qi and Fu Gong. The ancient famous generals Han Xin, Bai Qi, Wei Qing and Huo De fell ill. No one can match Li Jing!

古文：九年，突厥莫贺咄设寇边，征靖为灵州道行军总管。
现代文：武德九年，突厥莫贺咄设进犯边关，朝廷任李靖为灵州道行军总管。
English: In the ninth year of Wu De, the Turk Moga set out to attack the border, and the imperial court appointed Li Jing as the head of the Lingzhou Road march.

古文：颉利可汗入泾阳，靖率兵倍道趋豳州，邀贼归路，既而与虏和亲而罢。
现代文：颉利可汗进逼泾阳，李靖率精兵兼程而行直奔豳州，阻截贼寇的归路，接着唐朝与突厥结盟，颉利可汗才撤兵。
English: The Qili Khan entered and besieged Fenyang, Li Jing led his elite soldiers and marched straight to Fanzhou, blocking the return route of the bandits, and then the Tang Dynasty allied with the Turks, and the Qili Khan withdrew his troops.

古文：太宗嗣位，拜刑部尚书，并录前后功，赐实封四百户。
现代文：太宗即位后，拜李靖为刑部尚书，把他前后的功绩都记载在一起，赐给他实封四百户。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, Bai Li Jing wrote a book for the Ministry of Justice, recorded his past and future achievements together, and gave him a solid seal of four hundred households.

古文：贞观二年，以本官兼检校中书令。
现代文：贞观二年，李靖以刑部尚书的职务兼任检校中书令。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Li Jing was promoted to the post of inspector of schools with the post of inspector of the Penal Department.

古文：三年，转兵部尚书。
现代文：贞观三年，转任兵部尚书。
English: Three years after Zhenguan, he was transferred to the Military Department of Shangshu.

古文：突厥诸部离叛，朝廷将图进取，以靖为代州道行军总管，率骁骑三千，自马邑出其不意，直趋恶阳岭以逼之。
现代文：这时突厥各属国之间矛盾激化，上下离心，朝廷准备乘此时机谋划进取突厥，任命李靖为代州道行军总管，李靖亲自率领三千精锐骑兵，从马邑出发，出其不意地直奔恶阳岭进逼敌军。
English: At this time, the conflict between the Turkic states intensified, and the two sides became estranged. The imperial court was ready to take advantage of this opportunity to plan the invasion of the Turkic states, and appointed Li Jing as the general manager of the march on behalf of the State Road. Li Jing personally led three thousand elite cavalrymen, starting from Ma'i, and unexpectedly went straight to Koyangling to force the enemy army.

古文：突利可汗不虞于靖，见官军奄至，于是大惧，相谓曰： 唐兵若不倾国而来，靖岂敢孤军而至？ 
现代文：颉利可汗没有料到李靖会来，唐军官兵突然深入突厥境内，于是大惊，对人说 ：如果唐军不是倾国而来，李靖怎么敢孤军深入到此？ 
English: Qili Khan did not expect Li Jing to come, Tang officers and soldiers suddenly penetrated into the Turkish territory, so he was shocked and said to people: If the Tang army did not come to the country, how could Li Jing dare to penetrate here alone?

古文：一日数惊。
现代文：突厥军中一日数惊。
English: The Turkish army was taken by surprise.

古文：靖候知之，潜令间谍离其心腹，其所亲康苏密来降。
现代文：李靖得知这个情况，暗中派间谍潜入敌军离间颉利可汗的心腹亲信，颉利可汗的亲信康苏密归降了唐朝。
English: When Li Jing learned of this situation, he secretly sent spies to infiltrate the enemy army and split up the close confidants of Gong Li Khan. Gong Li Khan's close confidant, Kang Sumi, surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：四年，靖进击定襄，破之，获隋齐王暕之子杨正道及炀帝萧后，送于京师，可汗仅以身遁。
现代文：贞观四年，李靖率兵进攻定襄，大获全胜，俘获了在突厥避难的隋朝齐王日柬的儿子杨正道和隋炀帝的萧皇后，并把他们送到京师，颉利可汗只身逃走。
English: In the four years of Zhenguan, Li Jing led an army to attack Dingxiang, and won a complete victory. He captured Yang Zhengdao, the son of the Sui Dynasty's King Qi Nichikam, who had taken refuge in Turkey, and Empress Xiao of the Sui Dynasty, and sent them to the Beijing Division. Gong Li Khan fled alone.

古文：以功进封代国公，赐物六百段及名马、宝器焉。
现代文：李靖因立功晋封为代国公，得到朝廷赐物六百段及名贵的马匹、宝器等奖赏。
English: For his meritorious service, Li Jing was promoted to acting governor and received a gift of six hundred dan from the imperial court, as well as valuable horses and treasures.

古文：太宗尝谓曰： 昔李陵提步卒五千，不免身降匈奴，尚得书名竹帛。
现代文：太宗曾经对大臣们说 ：汉朝李陵带领五千步卒进攻匈奴，最后落得归降匈奴的下场，尚且得以留名青史。
English: Emperor Taizong once said to his ministers: Li Ling of the Han Dynasty led five thousand foot soldiers to attack the Xiongnu, and finally ended up surrendering to the Xiongnu, yet he was able to leave his name in history.

古文：卿以三千轻骑深入虏庭，克复定襄，威振北狄，古今所未有，足报往年渭水之役。 
现代文：李靖以三千骑兵深入敌境，攻克定襄，威振北狄，这是古今所没有的奇勋，足以雪往年在渭水与突厥结盟之耻。 
English: Li Jing went deep into the enemy territory with three thousand cavalrymen and defeated Ding Xiang and Wei Zhen Bei Di. This is a miracle that has never been seen before and is enough to erase the shame of allying with the Turks in Surabaya in previous years.

古文：自破定襄后，颉利可汗大惧，退保铁山，遣使入朝谢罪，请举国内附。
现代文：自李靖攻破定襄之后，颉利可汗非常恐惧，退驻铁山，以保根本，派遣使者到京都长安谢罪，请求举国归附唐朝。
English: After Li Jing's attack on Dingxiang, the Qili Khan was very afraid, withdrew to Tieshan to protect the capital, and sent an envoy to Kyoto Chang'an to apologize and request the whole country to be annexed to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：又以靖为定襄道行军总管，往迎颉利。
现代文：朝廷又任命李靖为定襄道行军总管，前去迎接颉利可汗。
English: After receiving the news of the surrender, Emperor Taizong appointed Li Jing as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops, and went to meet the Qili Khan.

古文：颉利虽外请朝谒，而潜怀犹豫。
现代文：颉利可汗虽然表面上请求入朝谢罪归附唐朝，但却暗怀不测之心。
English: Although he ostensibly pleaded guilty to the crime of joining the Tang Dynasty, he secretly harbored a sense of foreboding.

古文：其年二月，太宗遣鸿胪卿唐俭、将军安修仁慰谕，靖揣知其意，谓将军张公谨曰： 诏使到彼，虏必自宽。
现代文：当年二月，唐太宗派遣鸿胪卿唐俭、将军安修仁去抚慰颉利可汗，李靖揣摩到唐太宗这样做的真实意图，对将军张公谨说 ：朝廷的使者到了颉利可汗那里，突厥必定会放松戒备。
English: In February of that year, Emperor Taizong of Tang dispatched Emperor Hongzhi, Emperor Tangjian, and General An Xuren to appease the Qili Khan. Li Jing guessed the real intention of Emperor Taizong to do so and said to General Zhang Gongyong: When the imperial envoy arrives at the Qili Khan, the Turks will surely relax their guard.

古文：遂选精骑一万，赍二十日粮，引兵自白道袭之。 
现代文：我们就乘此良机，选拔精骑一万，携带二十天的军粮，带兵从白道袭击突厥。 
English: We took advantage of this good opportunity to select ten thousand horsemen, carry twenty days of rations, and lead soldiers to attack the Turks from Baidu.

古文：公谨曰： 诏许其降，行人在彼，未宜讨击。 
现代文：张公谨说： 皇上已经下诏准许颉利可汗归降，朝廷派去的使者也在那里，恐怕不宜去讨伐进击。 
English: Zhang Gongyan said, "The emperor has issued an edict to allow the Qili Khan to surrender, and the emissary sent by the imperial court is also there. I'm afraid it's not appropriate to go and attack."

古文：靖曰： 此兵机也，时不可失，韩信所以破齐也。
现代文：李靖说： 这正是用兵的良机，时机不可错过，这就是韩信之所以消灭齐国的道理。
English: Li Jing said: This is a good opportunity to use troops, the time should not be missed, this is the reason why Han Xin eliminated Qi.

古文：如唐俭等辈，何足可惜。 
现代文：像唐俭等使者即使因此遭到不测，又有什么可惜的呢。 
English: Even if emissaries such as Tang Jian suffered misfortune as a result, what a pity.

古文：督军疾进，师至阴山，遇其斥候千余帐，皆俘以随军。
现代文：于是督军疾进，军队行进到阴山，遇到颉利可汗的哨兵千余帐，把他们全部俘获，并押着他们随军行动。
English: As a result, the governor's army rushed forward, the army marched to Yin Mountain, encountered more than a thousand sentries of the Qili Khan, captured them all, and held them to follow the army.

古文：颉利见使者，大悦，不虞官兵至也。
现代文：颉利可汗见到朝廷使者心中大喜，根本没有料到唐军官兵会来。
English: Qili Khan was overjoyed to see the emissary of the imperial court. He did not expect the Tang officers and soldiers to come.

古文：靖军将逼其牙帐十五里，虏始觉。
现代文：李靖率领的唐军进逼到距颉利可汗的牙帐十五里的地方，突厥才发觉。
English: The Tang army led by Li Jing advanced to a place fifteen miles from the molar of the Qili Khan, and the Turks only discovered the trick.

古文：颉利畏威先走，部众因而溃散。
现代文：颉利可汗畏惧唐军的威力，抢先上马落荒而逃，敌军因失去主帅，部众立即溃散。
English: Qili Khan was afraid of the power of the Tang army, so he jumped on his horse and ran away. The enemy army immediately dispersed because they lost their commander.

古文：靖斩万余级，俘男女十余万，杀其妻隋义成公主。
现代文：李靖斩杀敌军一万余人，俘获男女十万余人，杀死颉利可汗的妻子隋义成公主。
English: Li Jing killed more than ten thousand enemy soldiers, captured more than one hundred thousand men and women, and killed Princess Sui Yicheng, the wife of Hari Khan.

古文：颉利乘千里马将走投吐谷浑，西道行军总管张宝相擒之以献。
现代文：颉利可汗企图逃往吐谷浑，被西道行军总管张宝相抓获押送京师。
English: Qili Khan attempted to flee to Tuyagun, but was captured by Zhang Bao Xiang, the general in charge of the westward march, and sent to the capital.

古文：俄而突利可汗来奔，遂复定襄、常安之地，斥土界自阴山北至于大漠。
现代文：不久突利可汗投奔了唐朝，于是恢复定襄、常安等领地，扩大的疆界西起阴山北到大漠。
English: Soon after, the Turi Khan defected to the Tang Dynasty, restoring the territories of Dingxiang and Chang'an, and expanding the borders from the west to the mountains and deserts in the north.

古文：太宗初闻靖破颉利，大悦，谓侍臣曰： 朕闻主忧臣辱，主辱臣死。
现代文：唐太宗一听到李靖击败颉利可汗的消息，心中非常高兴，对左右的大臣说： 我听说君主忧愁臣觉得耻辱，君主受辱臣甘愿赴死。
English: As soon as Tang Taizong heard the news of Li Jing's defeat of the Qili Khan, he was very happy and said to the ministers around him: I heard that the monarch's grieving ministers felt humiliated, and the monarch's humiliated ministers were willing to die.

古文：往者国家草创，太上皇以百姓之故，称臣于突厥，朕未尝不痛心疾首，志灭匈奴，坐不安席，食不甘味。
现代文：从前大唐草创之时，太上皇因为百姓的缘故，向突厥称臣，我为此常常痛心疾首，立志要剪灭匈奴，为此坐不安席，食不甘味。
English: Once upon a time, at the time of the founding of the Great Tang Dynasty, the last emperor, for the sake of the people, offered his allegiance to the Turks. For this reason, I often shook my head bitterly, determined to exterminate the Xiongnu. For this reason, I did not sit at my seat, and my food was not sweet.

古文：今者暂动偏师，无往不捷，单于款塞，耻其雪乎！ 
现代文：现在只暂时调动一部分军队，就无往不胜，使单于归顺，终于洗雪当年称臣的耻辱！ 
English: Now, only temporarily mobilizing a part of the army, it is invincible, so that the humiliation of being a subordinate is finally washed away!

古文：于是大赦天下，酺五日。
现代文：于是太宗大赦天下，祝酒五天。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong pardoned the whole country and made a five-day toast.

古文：御史大夫温彦博害其功，谮靖军无纲纪，致令虏中奇宝，散于乱兵之手。
现代文：御史大夫温彦博妒忌李靖的功绩，暗地向太宗密告李靖治军无方，纵兵掳掠突厥的奇珍异宝，致使珍宝都散落入乱军之手。
English: The chief historian Wen Yanbo was jealous of Li Jing's achievements, and secretly tipped off Emperor Taizong that Li Jing had no way to control the army, and the soldiers plundered the rare treasures of the Turks, causing the treasures to fall into the hands of the rebels.

古文：太宗大加责让，靖顿首谢。
现代文：太宗狠狠地训责李靖，李靖叩首谢罪。
English: Emperor Taizong severely reprimanded Li Jing, and Li Jing bowed his head in apology.

古文：久之，太宗谓曰： 隋将史万岁破达头可汗，有功不赏，以罪致戮。
现代文：过了好久，太宗对李靖说 ：隋朝的将领史万岁打败了达头可汗，可是隋朝对有功的不加以奖赏，因此导致灭亡。
English: After a long time, Emperor Taizong said to Li Jing: The generals of the Sui Dynasty defeated the great khan, but the Sui Dynasty did not reward the meritorious, which led to their downfall.

古文：朕则不然，当赦公之罪，录公之勋。 
现代文：我就不是这样，应当赦免你治军无方的罪，记录你击败突厥的功勋。 
English: That's not how I see it. You should be pardoned for the crime of leading an ineffectual army, and your exploits in defeating the Turks should be recorded.

古文：诏加左光禄大夫，赐绢千匹，真食邑通前五百户。
现代文：于是下诏加封李靖为左光禄大夫，赐绢千匹，增加封地连同以前的达到五百户。
English: As a result, Li Jing was given additional fiefs as the doctor of the Left Guanglu, and he was given thousands of horses, increasing the fiefs together with the previous ones to reach five hundred households.

古文：未几，太宗谓靖曰： 前有人谗公，今朕意已悟，公勿以为怀。 
现代文：不久，太宗又对李靖说： 以前有人诽谤你，现在朕已经明白了真相，你千万不要把这事放在心里。 
English: Not long after, Emperor Taizong said to Li Jing, "Someone slandered you before, but now I have understood the truth. You must not keep this in your heart."

古文：赐绢二千匹，拜尚书右仆射。
现代文：这时又赐给李靖绢二千匹，提升他为尚书右仆射。
English: At this time, two thousand horses were given to Li Jingxuan, and he was promoted to Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：靖性沉厚，每与时宰参议，恂恂然似不能言。
现代文：李靖生性沉稳厚重，平时与大臣一起参议国事时，总是蠕动着嘴唇，像是不会说话一样。
English: Li Jingsheng has a calm and dignified nature. When he usually consults with ministers on state affairs, he always moves his lips, as if he could not speak.

古文：八年，诏为畿内道大使，伺察风俗。
现代文：贞观八年，太宗诏封李靖为畿内道大使，视察风俗。
English: In the 8th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong made Li Jing the ambassador of Kinai Province, and he inspected the customs.

古文：寻以足疾上表乞骸骨，言甚恳至。
现代文：不久李靖以脚病为理由上表请求辞官，言辞非常恳切。
English: Soon after, Li Jing asked to be relieved of his post on the grounds of a foot ailment, and his words were very earnest.

古文：太宗遣中书侍郎岑文本谓曰： 朕观自古已来，身居富贵，能知止足者甚少。
现代文：太宗派中书侍郎岑文本对李靖说 ：朕纵观自古至今的历史，身处富贵而能知足的人很少。
English: In the text, the secretary of the Tai sect said to Li Jing: Looking at the history from ancient times to the present, there are very few people who are rich and can be content.

古文：不问愚智，莫能自知，才虽不堪，强欲居职，纵有疾病，犹自勉强。
现代文：他们不论愚智，都不能有自知之明，才能即使不能胜任，也竭力想要任职，纵然有疾病，还自己勉强为官，不肯放弃职权。
English: No matter how stupid they are, they cannot have self-awareness, so that even if they are not competent, they try their best to hold office, and even if they are ill, they still reluctantly hold office and refuse to give up their powers.

古文：公能识达大体，深足可嘉，朕今非直成公雅志，欲以公为一代楷模。 
现代文：您能够识大体，见识深远够得上是可嘉的了，朕现在不仅成全您的美德，还想让您成为一代楷模。 
English: It is commendable for you to be able to see broadly, and it is commendable for you to be able to see far enough. I now not only fulfill your virtues, but also want you to become a model for the next generation.

古文：乃下优诏，加授特进，听在第摄养。赐物千段、尚乘马两匹，禄赐、国官府佐，并依旧给，患若小瘳，每三两日至门下、中书平章政事。
现代文：于是下了优待的诏书，加授李靖为特进，听任他在自己的府第养生，赐绢帛千段、上乘马二匹，俸禄、国官府吏一起都依照从前的惯例供给，脚病如果稍有好转，每隔三两天参与门下、中书商量处理政事。
English: Therefore, an imperial edict was issued to give preferential treatment to Li Jing, awarding him the title of "special promotion," allowing him to take care of his health in his own palace, awarding him a thousand dan and two high-ranking horses, and providing him with a salary and government officials in accordance with the previous practice. If his foot disease improved slightly, he would participate in his disciples' meetings every three or two days to discuss and deal with political affairs.

古文：九年正月，赐靖灵寿杖，助足疾也。
现代文：贞观九年正月，太宗赐给李靖灵寿木手杖，用这帮助他脚不方便时使用。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong gave Li Jingling a wooden cane to help him use it when his feet were uncomfortable.

古文：未几，吐谷浑寇边，太宗顾谓侍臣曰： 得李靖为帅，岂非善也！ 
现代文：不久，吐谷浑侵犯边疆，唐太宗环顾身边的侍臣对他们说： 能够让李靖为帅，难道不是很好吗？ 
English: Not long after, Tuyuhun invaded the frontier. Tang Taizong looked around at the attendants around him and said to them, "Isn't it great to be able to make Li Jing handsome?"

古文：靖乃见房玄龄曰： 靖虽年老，固堪一行。 
现代文：李靖得知后拜见房玄龄说： 我虽年老，尚可一征。 
English: After learning of this, Li Jing went to see Fong Xuanling and said, "Although I am old, I can still be drafted."

古文：太宗大悦，即以靖为西海道行军大总管，统兵部尚书、任城王道宗、凉州都督李大亮、右卫将军李道彦、利州刺史高甑生等三总管征之。
现代文：太宗十分欣喜，当即任命李靖为西海道行军大总管，率兵部尚书侯君集、刑部尚书任城王李道宗、凉州都督李大亮、右卫将军李道彦、利州刺史高甑生等五总管出征吐谷浑。
English: Taizong was very pleased, and immediately appointed Li Jing as the general manager of the West Road Campaign. He led the five general managers, including Shang Shuhou Junji of the Military Department, Shang Shuhou of the Criminal Department, Li Daozong, the king of the city, Li Dailiang, the governor of Liangzhou, Li Daohan, the right guard general, and Li Zhi Gao Ying Sheng of Li Zhou, to go to Tugu Hun.

古文：九年，军次伏俟城，吐谷浑烧去野草，以餧我师，退保大非川，诸将咸言春草未生，马已羸瘦，不可赴敌。
现代文：贞观九年，唐军驻扎在伏俟城，吐谷浑烧去野草，使唐军战马无饲料陷入饥疲之中，自己退守大非川。唐军各将领都说春草未生，战马已经很瘦弱，不可奔赴战阵。
English: In the ninth year of Zhenguan, the Tang army was stationed in Fuxi City, and the Tuyuan horses burned the weeds, so that the Tang army's war horses were without feed and fell into starvation, and they retreated to Dafu River. All the generals of the Tang army said that the spring grass was not yet born, and the war horses were already very weak, and they could not go to battle.

古文：唯靖决计而进，深入敌境，遂逾积石山。
现代文：只有李靖坚决主张进军追击，深入敌境，于是率军越过积石山。
English: Only Li Jing resolutely advocated marching in pursuit and going deep into the enemy territory, so he led the army over Jishan Mountain.

古文：前后战数十合，杀伤甚众，大破其国。
现代文：前后与敌军交战几十个回合，杀伤了很多敌军，攻克了敌国。
English: He fought with the enemy for dozens of rounds back and forth, killed and wounded many enemy troops, and conquered the enemy country.

古文：吐谷浑之众遂杀其可汗来降，靖又立大宁王慕容顺而还。
现代文：吐谷浑的部将就杀了他们的可汗归降唐朝，李靖立大宁王慕容顺为吐谷浑王，然后率军凯旋而归。
English: The generals of Tugu Hun killed their khan and returned to the Tang Dynasty, Li Jing established the Great Ning King Murong Shun as the king of Tugu Hun, and then led the army to a triumphant return.

古文：初，利州刺史高甑生为盐泽道总管，以后军期，靖薄责之，甑生因有憾于靖。
现代文：当初，利州刺史高甑生任盐泽道总管时，因为延误军期，李靖曾轻微地责罚过他，高甑生为此而怀恨李靖。
English: At the beginning, when Lizhou Gao Xinsheng was the general manager of Yanze Road, Li Jing had slightly punished him for delaying his military service, and Gao Xinsheng held a grudge against Li Jing for this.

古文：及是，与广州都督府长史唐奉义告靖谋反。
现代文：到了这时，便与广州都督府长史唐奉义诬告李靖谋反。
English: At this time, he and the governor of Guangzhou, Shi Tang, falsely accused Li Jing of plotting against him.

古文：太宗命法官按其事，甑生等竟以诬罔得罪。
现代文：太宗命令法官查验这件事，高甑生等最终因诬告获罪。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered a judge to investigate the matter, and Gao Xingsheng and others were eventually convicted of making false accusations.

古文：靖乃阖门自守，杜绝宾客，虽亲戚不得妄进。
现代文：李靖从此闭门自守，杜绝宾客，即使亲戚也不能随便进入家门。
English: From then on, Li Jing closed the door and kept to himself, barring guests. Even relatives were not allowed to enter the house.

古文：十一年，改封卫国公，授濮州刺史，仍令代袭，例竟不行。
现代文：贞观十一年，太宗改封李靖为卫国公，授濮州刺史，依旧命他世袭爵位，后因子孙丧命而未执行。
English: In the 11th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong changed Li Jing's title to the Prince of National Defense, and conferred him the title of the Prince of Bozhou. He was still ordered to inherit the title, but it was not carried out because Sun died later.

古文：十四年，靖妻卒，有诏坟茔制度，依汉卫、霍故事；筑阙象突厥内铁山、吐谷浑内积石山形，以旌殊绩。
现代文：贞观十四年，李靖的妻子去世，太宗诏令坟茔规格依照汉代卫青、霍去病的旧例，把坟墓修筑成突厥境内的铁山、吐谷浑境内的积石山的形状，以此表彰李靖特殊的战绩。
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, Li Jing's wife died, and Emperor Taizong ordered that the tomb be built into the shape of an iron mountain in the territory of Turkey and a rock mountain in the territory of Tuyugun, in accordance with the old examples of Wei Qing and Huo Chaozhou in the Han Dynasty, in order to commend Li Jing's special achievements.

古文：十七年，诏图画靖及赵郡王孝恭等二十四人于凌烟阁。
现代文：贞观十七年，太宗诏令将李靖及赵郡王李孝恭等二十四人的肖像画在凌烟阁上。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong ordered that the portraits of 24 people, including Li Jing and Zhao County King Li Xiaogong, be painted on Lingyan Pavilion.

古文：十八年，帝幸其第问疾，仍赐绢五百匹，进位卫国公、开府仪同三司。
现代文：贞观十八年，皇帝亲自到李靖的府第问候病情，还赐绢五百匹，晋封卫国公、开府仪同三司。
English: In the 18th year of Zhenguan, the emperor himself came to Li Jing's palace to greet the illness, and also gave him 500 horses, the promotion of the prince of the defense of the country, the ceremony of opening the palace, and three divisions.

古文：太宗将伐辽东，召靖入阁，赐坐御前，谓曰： 公南平吴会，北清沙漠，西定慕容，唯东有高丽未服，公意如何？ 
现代文：太宗准备征伐辽东，召李靖入宫，赐座在皇帝坐位之前，对他说： 您在南边平定吴会，北边扫清沙漠突厥，西边安定吐谷浑慕容，只有东边的高丽没有征服，您意下如何？ 
English: Emperor Taizong was preparing to invade Liaodong, called Li Jing into the palace, and gave him a seat before the emperor sat down. He said to him: You have pacified Wuhui in the south, cleared the Turkic desert in the north, stabilized Tuyun in the west, and only conquered Goryeo in the east. What do you think?

古文：对曰： 臣往者凭藉天威，薄展微效，今残年朽骨，唯拟此行。
现代文：李靖回答说 ：我过去凭借天子的威力，做了点微小的贡献，现在已是残年朽骨，只打算这次出征。
English: Li Jing replied, "I made a small contribution in the past by relying on the power of the Son of Heaven, and now I am a rotten bone, and I only plan to go on this expedition."

古文：陛下不弃，老臣病期瘳矣。 
现代文：陛下如果不嫌弃的话，我的病可望痊愈。 
English: Your Majesty, if you do not give up, I hope my illness will be cured.

古文：太宗愍其羸老，不许。
现代文：太宗怜惜他衰老，没有准许。
English: Taizong took pity on his old age and did not allow him to go.

古文：二十三年，薨于家，年七十九。
现代文：贞观二十三年，李靖病死在家中，终年七十九岁。
English: In the 23rd year of Zhenguan, Li Jing died of illness at home, at the age of 79.

古文：册赠司徒、并州都督，给班剑四十人、羽葆鼓吹，陪葬昭陵，谥曰景武。
现代文：朝廷册赠李靖为司徒、并州都督，供给手持班剑的仪仗队四十人、羽葆仪仗的吹鼓乐手，让李靖陪葬昭陵，赐谥号景武。
English: The imperial court book presented Li Jing as a scholar and the provincial governor, provided a ceremonial guard of forty people armed with swords, and a drum player for the feathered ceremonial battle, let Li Jing accompany the funeral of Zhaoling, and gave the scepter to Jingwu.

古文：子德謇嗣，官至将作少匠。
现代文：李靖的儿子德謇继承世封，官至将作少将。
English: Li Jing's son, Deyu, succeeded to the hereditary title, and was promoted to the rank of major general.

古文：靖弟客师，贞观中，官至右武卫将军，以战功累封丹阳郡公。
现代文：李靖的弟弟客师，贞观年间，官至右武卫将军，因为有战功封为丹阳郡公。
English: Li Jing's younger brother and guest teacher, Zhenguan years, the official to the right of General Wuwei, because of the war was awarded the title of Danyang County.

古文：永徽初，以年老致仕，性好驰猎，四时从禽，无暂止息。
现代文：永徽初年，因年老退休。他生性喜好骑马狩猎，四季任意捕禽猎兽，没有停止过。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, he retired due to old age. His natural inclination was to ride a horse and hunt, and he did not stop hunting at any time of the year.

古文：有别业在昆明池南，自京城之外，西际澧水，鸟兽皆识之，每出则鸟鹊随逐而噪，野人谓之 鸟贼 。
现代文：他有别墅在昆明池南，从京城以外，到西边的沣水，所有的鸟兽他都熟识，每当他出猎就有鸟鹊跟随着呼叫，山野的人称他为 鸟贼 。
English: He has a villa in the south of Kunming, from the outskirts of the capital to Surabaya in the west. He is familiar with all the birds and beasts. Whenever he goes hunting, the beak follows the call. People in the mountains call him the bird thief.

古文：总章中卒，年九十余。
现代文：总章年间，客师去世，终年九十余岁。
English: During the period of the general chapter, the guest teacher passed away, at the age of more than ninety.

古文：客师孙令问，玄宗在籓时与令问款狎，及即位，以协赞功累迁至殿中少监。
现代文：客师的孙子李令问，玄宗做临淄郡王时与令问关系亲密，到即位时，因令问协同赞助他有功，升任令问到殿中少监。
English: Li Lingtao, the guest teacher's grandson, said that when Xuanzong became the king of Linyi County, he had a close relationship with Lingtao. When he ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the junior superintendent of the palace because of the co-sponsorship of Lingtao.

古文：先天中，预诛窦怀贞等功，封宋国公，实封五百户。
现代文：先天年间，参预诛伐窦怀贞等有功，封令问为宋国公，封地五百户。
English: During the year before yesterday, the prefect of the Song Dynasty, Song Guogong, was awarded 500 fiefs.

古文：令问固辞实封，诏不许。
现代文：令问坚决推辞封地，诏令不许他推辞。
English: The imperial edict resolutely refused the fief, and the imperial edict did not allow him to refuse.

古文：开元中，转殿中监、左散骑常侍，知尚食事。
现代文：开元年间，转任殿中监、左散骑常侍，担任尚食事。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the new year, he was transferred to the position of palace middle supervisor, left horseback riding attendant, and served as Shang meal.

古文：令问虽特承恩宠，未尝干预时政，深为物论所称。
现代文：令问虽然特别承受玄宗的恩宠，却不曾干预当时的政事，很受舆论的称赞。
English: Although he was particularly favored by Emperor Xuanzong, he did not interfere in the political affairs of the time and was highly praised by the public.

古文：然厚于自奉，食馔丰侈，广畜刍豢，躬临宰杀。
现代文：然而令问对自己奉养丰厚，享用的食物丰盛奢侈，大量地饲养牲畜，亲自去宰杀牲口。
English: However, he treated himself lavishly, enjoyed rich and luxurious food, raised a large number of livestock, and personally slaughtered livestock.

古文：时方奉佛，其笃信之士或讥之。令问曰： 此物畜生，与果菜何异？胡为强生分别，不亦远于道乎？ 
现代文：当时正信奉佛教，虔诚信奉佛教的人士有的因此讥讽他，令问说： 这牲口畜生，与瓜果蔬菜有什么不同，何必勉强制造出差别，不也是远离道理吗？ 
English: At that time, he was a Buddhist, and some pious and sincere followers of Buddhism mocked him for this, asking: What is the difference between this animal and animal, and the fruits and vegetables, and why should they be forced to make a difference? Isn't this also far from the truth?

古文：略不以恩眄自恃，闲适郊野，从禽自娱。
现代文：令问一点也不因为皇帝的恩宠眷顾作为自己的倚靠，过着闲适的郊野生活，纵情狩猎娱乐。
English: It was not at all because of the emperor's favor and patronage that they lived a leisurely country life, indulging in hunting and entertainment.

古文：十五年，凉州都督王君跂奉回纥部落叛，令问坐与连姻，左授抚州别驾，寻卒。
现代文：开元十五年，凉州都督王君奏告回纥部落反叛，令问因为与回纥部落联姻的缘故，被降任为抚州别驾，不久去世。
English: In the fifteenth year of the first century, Wang Junso, the governor of Liangzhou, declared a rebellion against the Uighur tribe. Because of his marriage with the Uighur tribe, he was demoted to the position of Fuzhou governor and died soon after.

古文：大和中，令问孙彦芳，凤翔府司录参军，诣阙进高祖、太宗所赐卫国公靖官告、敕书、手诏等十余卷，内四卷太宗文皇帝笔迹，文宗宝惜不能释手。
现代文：太和年间，令问的孙子彦芳任凤翔府司录参军，他赴皇帝的殿廷进献高祖、太宗所赐给卫国公李靖的官告、敕书、手诏等十余卷，其中四卷太宗皇帝的笔迹，文宗珍惜喜爱得舍不得放手。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, his grandson, Yan Fang, joined the army as the secretary of Fengxiang Prefecture. He went to the emperor's court to present more than ten volumes of official report, imperial edict, handwritten edict, etc. given by Gao Zu and Emperor Taizong to Li Jing, the guardian of the country. Four of them were written by Emperor Taizong. Wen Zong cherished and loved them so much that he could not bear to part with them.

古文：其佩笔尚堪书，金装木匣，制作精巧。
现代文：那佩笔还可以书写，金装木匣，制作精巧。
English: The pen can also be used for writing, and the gold-plated wooden box is exquisitely crafted.

古文：帝并留禁中，令书工模写本还之，赐芳绢二百匹、衣服、靴笏以酬之。
现代文：皇帝把它们一起留在宫中，命令书法家模仿抄写本还给彦芳，赐给彦芳绢二百匹、衣服、靴、上朝时执的手板来酬谢他。
English: The emperor left them together in the palace, ordered the calligrapher to imitate the copy and return it to Yan Fang, and gave Yan Fang two hundred horses, clothes, shoes, and a hand board from the last dynasty to thank him.

古文：李勣，曹州离狐人也。
现代文：李勣，曹州离狐人。
English: Li Yao, Caozhou Foxman.

古文：隋末徙居滑州之卫南。
现代文：隋朝末年，迁居到滑州卫南县。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, he moved to the south of Weizhou County.

古文：本姓徐氏，名世勣，永徽中，以犯太宗讳，单名勣焉。
现代文：原本姓徐，名世勣，永徽年间，因为触犯太宗的名讳，改用单名勣。
English: Originally, his family name was Xu, which was famous throughout the ages, but during the Yonghui era, he changed it to a single name because it offended the reputation of Emperor Taizong.

古文：家多僮仆，积粟数千钟，与其父盖皆好惠施，拯济贫乏，不问亲疏。
现代文：家里很多奴仆，积粮数十万斗，李勣与他的父亲都好施恩惠，救济贫苦人，不管关系亲疏。
English: There were many servants in the family, and they accumulated hundreds of thousands of barrels of grain. Li Xuan and his father were both good at granting favors and helping the poor, regardless of their relationship.

古文：大业末，韦城人翟让聚众为盗，勣往从之，时年十七，谓让曰： 今此土地是公及勣乡壤，人多相识，不宜自相侵掠。
现代文：大业末年，韦城人翟让聚众做强盗，李勣去跟从他，当时只十七岁，李勣对翟让说： 如今这片土地是你和我的家乡，人大多都相识，不应当自相侵夺。
English: In the last years of the Taiei era, the people of Weicheng gathered together to become robbers, and Li Ying followed him. Li Ying was only 17 years old at the time. Li Ying said to Ying Yang, "Today, this land is your hometown and mine. Most people know each other, and we should not encroach on each other."

古文：且宋、郑两郡，地管御河，商旅往还，船乘不绝，就彼邀截，足以自相资助。 
现代文：况且宋、郑两郡辖区中有御河，商人旅客往返，船只车辆不绝，到那里拦截财物，足可以自己资助自己。 
English: Moreover, Song and Zheng counties have their own rivers, merchants and passengers travel back and forth, and ships and vehicles are incessant. If you go there to intercept property, you can fully support yourself.

古文：让然之，于是劫公私船取物，兵众大振。
现代文：翟让认为李勣说得对，于是拦劫公私船只掠取财物，兵马非常振奋。
English: Xuan Zhan thought that Li Qiye was right, so he stopped the hijacking of public and private ships to plunder property. The soldiers and horses were very excited.

古文：隋遣齐郡通守张须陀率师二万讨之，勣与频战，竟斩须陀于阵。
现代文：隋朝派遣齐郡通守张须陀率兵二万讨伐翟让，李勣与他多次交战，终于在阵上杀死了须陀。
English: The Sui Dynasty dispatched Zhang Suda, the general of Qi County, to lead twenty thousand soldiers in a crusade against Xuan Zang. Li Xi fought with him many times, and finally killed Suda in the battle.

古文：初，李密亡命在雍丘，浚仪人王伯当匿于野，伯当共勣说翟让奉密为主。
现代文：起初，李密逃亡到雍丘，浚仪人王伯当隐匿在乡野，伯当和李勣一同劝说翟让尊奉李密为首领。
English: At first, Li Mi fled to Yongqiu, and the dredger Wang Bo-tang went into hiding in the countryside. Together, Bo-tang and Li Yao persuaded Yao to make Zunbong Li Mi the leader.

古文：隋令王世充讨密，勣以奇计败世充于洛水之上，密拜勣为东海郡公。
现代文：隋朝命令王世充讨伐李密。李勣用奇计在洛水上打败了王世充，于是李密拜李勣为东海郡公。
English: The Sui Dynasty ordered Wang Shicheng to fight against Li Mi. Li Xi defeated Wang Shicheng on the Luoshui River with a magic trick, and Li Mi became the governor of Donghai County.

古文：时河南、山东大水，死者将半，隋帝令饥人就食黎阳，开仓赈给。
现代文：当时河南、山东发大水，死的人将近一半，隋朝皇帝命令饥民到黎阳仓去求食，官府在那里开仓赈济灾民。
English: At that time, Henan and Shandong were flooded, and nearly half of the people died. The Emperor of the Sui Dynasty ordered the starving people to go to Liyang warehouse to ask for food. The government opened a warehouse there to help the victims.

古文：时政教已紊，仓司不时赈给，死者日数万人。
现代文：当时政治教化已经紊乱，掌管仓库的官吏不按时发放赈济粮，饿死的人每天有数万人。
English: At that time, political indoctrination was already in disarray, the officials in charge of the warehouse did not distribute food grains on time, and tens of thousands of people died of starvation every day.

古文：勣言于密曰： 天下大乱，本是为饥，今若得黎阳一仓，大事济矣。 
现代文：李勣对李密说 ：天下大乱，本是因为饥饿，现在如果得到黎阳一仓，我们的大事就可以成功了。 
English: Li Wei said to Li Mi: The world is in chaos, this is because of hunger, now if we get a warehouse in Liyang, our big event will be successful.

古文：密乃遣勣领麾下五千人自原武济河掩袭，即日克之，开仓恣食，一旬之间，胜兵二十万余。
现代文：李密就派遣李勣率领部下五千士兵从原武渡过黄河突袭黎阳仓，当天就占领了它，开仓听任饥民领粮，十天之内，兵力发展到二十多万。
English: Li Mi dispatched 5,000 soldiers led by his subordinate Li Jun to cross the Yellow River from Yuanwu to raid Liyang Cang. They occupied it on the same day and opened the warehouse to let the starving people receive grain. Within ten days, the number of soldiers had grown to more than 200,000.

古文：经岁余，宇文化及于江都弑逆，拥兵北上，直指东郡。
现代文：过了一年多，宇文化及在江都反叛杀君，聚集军队北上，直指东郡。
English: After more than a year, the Yu culture rebelled and killed the prince in Jiangdu, and gathered the army to go north, straight to Dong County.

古文：时越王侗即位于东京，赦密之罪，拜为太尉，封魏国公；授勣右武候大将军，命讨化及。
现代文：当时越王侗在东郡即位，赦免了李密的罪，拜他为太尉，封魏国公，授李勣为右武侯大将军，命令他们讨伐宇文化及。
English: At that time, Emperor Yue ascended to the throne in Dong County, pardoned Li Mi's crime, made him a lieutenant, named him Wei Guogong, conferred on Li Mi the title of Uwuhou Grand General, and ordered them to fight against Western culture and imperialism.

古文：密遣勣守仓城，勣于城外掘深沟以固守，化及设攻具，四面攻仓，阻堑不得至城下，勣于堑中为地道，出兵击之，大败而去。
现代文：李密派李勣守仓城，李勣在城外挖深沟用来固守；宇文化及准备攻城器具，四面攻仓，被壕沟阻隔不能到达城下。李勣在壕沟中挖地道出兵偷袭敌军，宇文化及大败而去。
English: Li Mi sent Li Qian to guard Cangcheng, Li Qian dug a deep ditch outside the city to hold on; Yu Qian and the equipment to prepare for the siege attacked Cangcheng on all sides, but were blocked by the ditch and could not reach the city. Li Qian dug a tunnel in the ditch and sent soldiers to attack the enemy, and Yu Qian was defeated and left.

古文：武德二年，密为王世充所破，拥众归朝。
现代文：武德二年，李密被王世充打败，聚集余兵归顺唐朝。
English: In the second year of Wu De, Li Mi was defeated by Wang Shichong and gathered the remaining soldiers to surrender to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：其旧境东至于海，南至于江，西至汝州，北至魏郡，勣并据之，未有所属，谓长史郭孝恪曰： 魏公既归大唐，今此人众土地，魏公所有也。吾若上表献之，即是利主之败，自为己功，以邀富贵，吾所耻也。
现代文：李密原来管辖的地盘东到大海，南到长江，西到汝州，北到魏郡，都被李勣占据，没有具体归属，李勣对长史郭孝恪说： 魏公已经归附大唐，如今这里的人民土地，是属魏公所有，我如果上表献出它们，就是借主人的失败得利，自己为自己邀功，用来求取富贵，是我认为耻辱的。
English: The territory under Li Mi's original jurisdiction extended east to the sea, south to the Yangtze River, west to Ruzhou, and north to Wei County, all of which were occupied by Li Wei, without specific attribution. Li Wei said to the chief historian Guo Xiao: Wei Gong has been attached to Datang, and now the people's land here is owned by Wei Gong. If I offer them up, it is to take advantage of my master's failure, to claim credit for myself, and to use it to seek wealth. I think it is shameful.

古文：今宜具录州县名数及军人户口，总启魏公，听公自献，此则魏公之功也。 
现代文：现在应当一五一十地记录州县的名称数量和军民的户口，全部报告魏公，让魏公自己献给朝廷，这样就是魏公的功劳了。 
English: Now it is time to record the names and numbers of prefectures and counties, as well as the household registration of soldiers and civilians, and report everything to Wei Gong. Let Wei Gong dedicate himself to the imperial court. This is the merit of Wei Gong.

古文：乃遣使启密。
现代文：于是派使者报告李密。
English: So they sent an envoy to report to Li Mi.

古文：使人初至，高祖闻其无表，惟有启与密，甚怪之。
现代文：使者初到朝廷，高祖听说李勣没有奏表，只有信给李密，非常奇怪。
English: When the envoy first arrived at the imperial court, Gaozu heard that Li Xi did not have a transcript, only a letter to Li Mi, which was very strange.

古文：使者以勣意闻奏，高祖大喜曰： 徐世勣感德推功，实纯臣也。 
现代文：使者把李勣的本意上奏给高祖，高祖非常高兴地说 ：徐世勣感怀主人的恩德、推辞功劳，确实是一个纯厚的臣子。 
English: The messenger relayed Li Xi's intention to Gao Zu. Gao Zu was very pleased and said, "Xu Shixin was impressed by his master's benevolence and recognition of his service. He was indeed a pure-hearted courtier."

古文：诏授黎阳总管、上柱国，莱国公。
现代文：下诏封他为黎阳总管、上柱国、莱国公。
English: He was given the title of Governor-General of Liyang, Shangzhu and Lai Provinces.

古文：寻加右武候大将军，改封曹国公，赐姓李氏，赐良田五十顷，甲第一区。
现代文：不久加授右武侯大将军，改封曹国公，赐姓李氏，赐良田五十顷，上等宅第一所。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Uwuhou Grand General, his title was changed to Cao Guogong, he was given the surname Li, he was given 50 hectares of good farmland, and he became the first to have a first-class residence.

古文：封其父盖为济阴王，盖固辞王爵，乃封舒国公，授散骑常侍、陵州刺史。
现代文：封他的父亲李盖为济阴王，李盖坚决辞去王爵，于是改封为舒国公，授散骑常侍、陵州刺史。
English: His father, Li Gai, was named the King of Jilin. Li Gai resolutely resigned from the title of prince, so he was renamed the Prince of Shuguo, and was given the titles of knight-in-waiting, and prince of Lingzhou.

古文：令勣总统河南、山东之兵以拒王世充。
现代文：命令李勣统领河南、山东的军队抵抗王世充。
English: He ordered Li Xi to lead the armies of Henan and Shandong to resist Wang Shichong.

古文：及李密反叛伏诛，高祖以勣旧经事密，遣使报其反状。
现代文：等到李密反叛朝廷被杀，高祖因为李勣过去曾经侍奉李密，派遣使者告诉李勣李密反叛朝廷的情况。
English: After Li Mi rebelled against the imperial court and was killed, Gaozu sent an emissary to Li Hongzhi to inform him of Li Mi's rebellion against the imperial court because Li Tongzhi had served Li Mi in the past.

古文：勣表请收葬，诏许之。
现代文：李勣上表请求收葬李密，高祖下诏许可他的请求。
English: Li Rongli made a request to bury Li Mi on the table, and the imperial court issued an edict and agreed with him.

古文：勣服衰绖，与旧僚吏将士葬密于黎山之南，坟高七仞，释服而散，朝野义之。
现代文：李勣披麻带孝，和李密原来的僚属将士一起把李密安葬在黎山的南面，坟高五丈，丧期过了才散去，朝廷民间都认为李勣有义气。
English: Li Hongzhi and Li Mi's former colleagues and subordinates buried Li Mi's body on the south side of Mount Li. The grave was five stories high, and it was only after the period of mourning had passed that they dispersed. The people of the imperial court all believed that Li Hongzhi was a man of integrity.

古文：而窦建德擒化及于魏县，复进军攻勣，力屈降之。
现代文：不久，窦建德在魏县捉住了宇文化及，又进军攻打李勣，李勣力竭投降了窦建德。
English: Not long after, Dou Jiande captured U Cultura in Wei County and marched to attack Li Qian. Li Qian surrendered to Dou Jiande with all his might.

古文：建德收其父，从军为质，令勣复守黎阳。
现代文：建德逮捕了他的父亲，放在军中当作人质，命令李勣还是镇守黎阳。
English: Jiande arrested his father, put him in the army as a hostage, and ordered Li Yan to guard Liyang.

古文：三年，自拔归京师。
现代文：武德三年，李勣自己抽身回到京师。
English: After three years of martial arts, Li Yao pulled himself out and returned to Beijing.

古文：四年，从太宗伐王世充于东都，累战大捷。
现代文：武德四年，跟从太宗在东都讨伐王世充，屡次交战都获大胜。
English: In the fourth year of Wude, he followed Taizong to fight against Wang Shicheng in Dongdu, and repeatedly won victories.

古文：又东略地至武牢，伪郑州司兵沈悦请翻武牢，勣夜潜兵应接，克之。擒其伪刺史荆王行本。
现代文：又向东夺取土地到虎牢关，伪郑州司兵沈悦请求献出虎牢关反正，李勣夜间埋伏军队接应，占领了虎牢关，抓获了伪郑州刺史荆王王行本。
English: He also seized land to the east to the Tiger Stronghold, and the pseudo-Zhengzhou Sifu Shen Yue requested to present the Tiger Stronghold anyway. Li Qian's ambush army responded at night, occupied the Tiger Stronghold, and captured the pseudo-Zhengzhou Sifu Jing Wang Wang Xing Ben.

古文：又从太宗平窦建德，降王世充，振旅而还。
现代文：又跟从太宗平定窦建德，降伏王世充，整顿军队回朝。
English: He also followed Emperor Taizong in pacifying Dou Jiande, surrendering Wang Shichong, and reorganizing the army to return to the imperial court.

古文：论功行赏，太宗为上将，勣为下将，与太宗俱服金甲，乘戎辂，告捷于太庙。
现代文：论功行赏，太宗为上将，李勣为下将，李勣和太宗一起穿着金甲，乘着兵车到太庙去报捷。
English: Regarding the reward for meritorious deeds, Taizong was the commander-in-chief, and Li Xi was the second-in-command. Li Xi and Taizong wore gold armor together and rode a chariot to the Great Temple to report their success.

古文：其父自洺州与裴矩入朝，高祖见之大喜，复其官爵。
现代文：李勣的父亲从铭州和裴矩一起入朝，高祖见到他们后非常高兴，恢复了李盖的官职爵位。
English: Li Gan's father entered the imperial court together with Mingzhou and Pei An. Gao Zu was very happy to see them and restored Li Gais official title.

古文：勣又从太宗破刘黑闼、徐圆朗，累迁左监门大将军。
现代文：李勣又跟从太宗打败刘黑闼、徐圆朗，连续升迁为左监门大将军。
English: Li Qian also followed Taizong to defeat Liu Heixin and Xu Yuanlang, and was continuously promoted to the left guard gate general.

古文：圆朗重据兗州反，授勣河南大总管以讨之，寻获圆朗，斩首以献，兗州平。
现代文：圆朗又占据兖州造反，朝廷封授李勣为河南大总管去讨伐圆朗，不久抓获圆朗，斩下他的首级献给朝廷，兖州就平定了。
English: Yuen Long also occupied Bozhou and rebelled. The imperial court appointed Li Jun as the general manager of Henan Province to fight against Yuen Long. Soon he captured Yuen Long, cut off his head and dedicated it to the imperial court, and Bozhou was pacified.

古文：七年，诏与赵郡王孝恭讨辅公祏，孝恭领舟师巡江而下，勣领步卒一万渡淮，拔其寿阳，至硖石。
现代文：武德七年，高祖下诏命李勣与赵郡王李孝恭一起讨伐辅公礻石，孝恭率领水师沿长江而下，李勣率领步兵一万渡过淮水，攻取了辅公礻石占据的寿阳，到了峡石。
English: In the seventh year of Wude, Gao Zu issued an order to Li Qian and Zhao County King Li Xiaogong to fight against Fu Gong Shishi together. Xiaogong led the sailors down the Yangtze River, Li Qian led the infantry of ten thousand across the Huai Shui, captured the Shouyang occupied by Fu Gong Shishi, and reached the canyon.

古文：公祏之将陈正通率兵十万屯于梁山，又遣其大将冯惠亮帅水军十万，锁连大舰以断江路，仍于江西结垒，分守水陆，以御王师。
现代文：公礻石的将领陈正通率兵十万屯驻在梁山，又派他的大将冯惠亮统帅水师十万。用锁链连接大战船，用来阻断长江的航路，还在长江西岸构筑堡垒，分守水陆两路，以此抵御官军。
English: Chen Zhengtong, the general of the Gongye Shi, stationed 100,000 soldiers in Liangshan, and sent his general Feng Huiliang to command 100,000 sailors. He connected large warships with chains to block the Yangtze River route, and also built a fortress on the west bank of the Yangtze River to guard the water and land routes, in order to resist the government army.

古文：勣攻其垒，寻克之。惠亮单舼而遁。
现代文：李勣攻击筑在长江西岸的堡垒，不久就攻下了它，惠亮单独乘小船而逃。
English: Li Qian attacked the fortress built on the west bank of the Yangtze River and soon captured it. Huiliang fled alone in a small boat.

古文：勣乘胜逼正通，大溃，以十余骑奔于丹阳。
现代文：李勣乘胜追逼，正通的军队败散瓦解，正通带着十多名骑兵奔逃到丹阳。
English: Li Yu chased after the victory, Zheng Tong's army was defeated and disintegrated, Zheng Tong fled to Danyang with more than ten cavalrymen.

古文：公祐弃城夜遁，勣纵骑追斩之于武康，江南悉定。
现代文：公礻石弃城夜逃，李勣纵马追击，在武康杀了他，江南都平定了。
English: He abandoned the city and fled at night. Li Xun chased him on horseback and killed him in Wukang. The southern part of the Yangtze River was leveled.

古文：八年，突厥寇并州，命勣为行军总管，击之于太谷，走之。
现代文：武德八年，突厥侵犯并州，朝廷命李勣为行军总管，在太谷攻击突厥，驱走了敌人。
English: In the 8th year of Wude, the Turks invaded and annexed the prefecture, and the imperial court ordered Li Xi to be the commander-in-chief of the march to attack the Turks in Taiyuan and drive away the enemy.

古文：太宗即位，拜并州都督，赐实封九百户。
现代文：太宗即位，拜李勣为并州都督，赐封邑九百户。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, made Li Jie the governor of the unified state, and bestowed fiefs on nine hundred households in the county.

古文：贞观三年，为通漠道行军总管。至云中，与突厥颉利可汗兵会，大战于白道。
现代文：贞观三年，任通汉道行军总管，到云中，与突厥颉利可汗的军队相遇，在白道大战。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, he was appointed as the general manager of the march of Tonghan Road, and went to Yunzhong, where he met the army of the Turkic Qili Khan, and fought in the White Road War.

古文：突厥败，屯营于碛口，遣使请和。
现代文：突厥战败，在沙漠的入口处扎营，派使者请求讲和。
English: Defeated, the Turks camped at the entrance to the desert and sent envoys to ask for peace.

古文：诏鸿胪卿唐俭往赦之。
现代文：朝廷下诏命鸿胪卿唐俭前去赦免突厥。
English: The imperial court issued an edict ordering Hongyuqing Tang Jian to pardon the Turks.

古文：勣时与定襄道大总管李靖军会，相与议曰： 颉利虽败，人众尚多，若走渡碛，保于九姓，道遥阻深，追则难及。
现代文：李勣当时与定襄道大总管李靖的军队会合，他与李靖商议说： 颉利虽然战败，人马还多，如果走过沙漠，得到九姓铁勒的庇护，道路遥远险阻，就很难追上他们了。
English: At that time, Li Xuan met with the army of Li Jing, the general manager of Dingxiang Road. He discussed with Li Jing and said: Although Xili was defeated, there were still many people and horses. If you walk through the desert and get the shelter of the nine surnames Tiler, the road is far and dangerous, it is difficult to catch up with them.

古文：今诏使唐俭至彼，其必弛备，我等随后袭之，此不战而平贼矣。 
现代文：如今下诏派唐俭到那里去，突厥必定放松戒备，我们随后去袭击，这样就可以不战而平定贼寇了。 
English: Now that the emperor has sent Tang Jian there, the Turks will surely relax their guard, and we will then attack, so that the bandits can be subdued without a fight.

古文：靖扼腕喜曰： 公之此言，乃韩信灭田横之策也。 
现代文：李靖握着手腕高兴地说： 您的这番话，就是韩信灭田横的策略啊。 
English: Holding his wrists, Li Jing said happily, "Your words are the strategy of Han Xin to destroy Tian You."

古文：于是定计。
现代文：于是一起定下计谋。
English: So they decided on a plan together.

古文：靖将兵逼夜而发，勣勒兵继进。
现代文：李靖率兵连夜出发，李勣带兵续后前进。
English: Li Jing and his soldiers set out overnight, while Li Xi and his soldiers continued to advance.

古文：靖军既至，贼营大溃，颉利与万余人欲走渡碛。
现代文：李靖的军队到了碛口，贼寇溃散奔逃，颉利与一万多人想逃过沙漠。
English: When Li Jing's army arrived at the pass, the bandits scattered and fled, leaving Gong Li and more than ten thousand people trying to escape across the desert.

古文：勣屯军于碛口，颉利至，不得渡碛，其大酋长率其部落并降于勣，虏五万余口而还。
现代文：李勣在沙漠路口驻兵，颉利逃到那里，无法越过沙漠，他的大酋长率领自己的部落一起投降李勣，李勣俘虏五万多人而归。
English: Li Qiye stationed troops at the junction of the desert road. Qili fled there, unable to cross the desert. His great chief led his tribe to surrender to Li Qiye. Li Qiye took more than 50,000 prisoners and returned.

古文：时高宗为晋王，遥领并州大都督，授勣光禄大夫，行并州大都督府长史。
现代文：当时高宗为晋王，遥领并州大都督，授李勣为光禄大夫，代理并州大都督府长史。
English: At that time, Gao Zong was the king of Jin, and he led the merger of the state and the grand governor, and awarded Li Xi as the doctor of Guanglu, and acted as the governor of the merger of the state and the grand governor.

古文：父忧解，寻起复旧职。
现代文：因父丧离职，不久又起用恢复旧职。
English: He resigned due to the death of his father, but was soon reinstated to his old position.

古文：十一年，改封英国公，代袭蕲州刺史，时并不就国，复以本官遥领太子左卫率。
现代文：贞观十一年，改封英国公，世袭蕲州刺史，当时世袭刺史都不到州郡就任，又以并州大都督府长史的官职遥领太子左卫率。
English: In the 11th year of Zhenguan, he was made an English prince, and became the hereditary prefect of Zhangzhou. At that time, the hereditary prefect of Zhangzhou was not appointed to the post of prefect of the prefecture, and he was appointed to the post of prefect of the prefecture and the prefect of the prefect of the prefecture.

古文：勣在并州凡十六年，令行禁止，号为称职。
现代文：李勣在并州共十六年，令行禁止，被称为称职。
English: Li Wei has been in the merged state for a total of 16 years. He was banned by the order and was called competent.

古文：太宗谓侍臣曰： 隋炀帝不能精选贤良，安抚边境，惟解筑长城以备突厥，情识之惑，一至于此！
现代文：太宗对侍臣说： 隋炀帝不能精选贤良的人才，安抚边境，只知道筑长城来防备突厥，对世情认识的糊涂，一直到这个样子。
English: Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers: Emperor Sui and Qian could not select good talents and pacify the border, but only knew how to build the Great Wall to guard against the Turks, and his understanding of the world was muddled. It has been like this.

古文：朕今委任李世勣于并州，遂使突厥畏威遁走，塞垣安静，岂不胜远筑长城耶？ 
现代文：朕现在委任李勣在并州，就使突厥畏惧他的威名逃走，边塞安静，难道不是远远地胜过筑长城吗？ 
English: Is it not far better than building the Great Wall to let the Turks, who are afraid of his prestige, run away and keep the border quiet?

古文：十五年，征拜兵部尚书，未赴京，会薛延陀遣其子大度设帅骑八万南侵李思摩部落。
现代文：贞观十五年，李勣被征调入朝任兵部尚书，还没有启程赴京，正遇上薛延陀派他的儿子大度设率骑兵八万南侵李思摩部落。
English: In the fifteenth year of Zhenguan, Li Qian was drafted and transferred to Shangshu, the military department of the imperial court. He had not yet set off for Beijing when he met Xue Yanta, who sent his son Du Du to lead 80,000 cavalry south to invade the Li Sima tribe.

古文：命勣为朔州行军总管，率轻骑三千追及延陀于青山，击大破之，斩其名王一人，俘获首领，虏五万余计，以功封一子为县公。
现代文：朝廷命李勣为朔州行军总管，率轻骑三千在青山追上薛延陀的骑兵，进击并大破敌军，杀死敌军名王一人，俘获敌军首领，俘虏敌军五万多，因为立功封李勣的一个儿子为县公。
English: The imperial court ordered Li Qian to be the general manager of the march in Shuozhou. He led 3,000 cavalrymen who rode lightly to catch up with Xue Yanta in Qingshan, attacked and defeated the enemy army, killed one famous king of the enemy army, captured the leader of the enemy army, and captured more than 50,000 enemy troops. Because of his meritorious service, one of Li Qian's sons was made the county magistrate.

古文：勣时遇暴疾，验方云，须灰可以疗之，太宗乃自翦须，为其和药。
现代文：李勣当时得了急病，验方说胡须烧的灰可以治疗这个病，太宗就自己剪下胡须，为他和药。
English: At that time, Li Yao was suddenly ill. The tester said that the ashes from the burnt beard could cure the disease. Taizong cut off his own beard to cure him.

古文：勣顿首见血，泣以恳谢，帝曰： 吾为社稷计耳，不烦深谢。 
现代文：李勣叩头见血，哭泣着诚恳地感谢太宗，皇帝说： 我是为国家考虑，不必麻烦你深切地感谢。 
English: Li Qiye bowed his head in tears and sincerely thanked Emperor Taizong. The emperor said, "I am thinking about the country. I don't need to trouble you to express my deep gratitude."

古文：十七年，高宗为皇太子，转勣太子詹事兼左卫率，加位特进，同中书门下三品。
现代文：贞观十七年，高宗做皇太子，改封李勣当太子詹事兼左卫率，加位特进、同中书门下三品。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Gaozong became the crown prince, and changed the title of Li Xi to the prince Zhanji and Zuo Wei, and was promoted to the special promotion, and was awarded the third prize in the middle school.

古文：太宗谓曰： 我兒新登储贰，卿旧长史，今以宫事相委，故有此授。
现代文：太宗对他说： 我的儿子刚当上太子，卿原来是他的长史，如今把宫中的事情委托给卿，所以有这样的任命。
English: Emperor Taizong said to him, "My son has just become the crown prince. He has been a courtier for a long time, and now he entrusts the affairs of the palace to the courtier, which is why he was appointed.

古文：虽屈阶资，可勿怪也。 
现代文：虽然委屈了卿的阶位、资历，可不要见怪啊。 
English: Although the rank and seniority of the lord have been wronged, don't be surprised.

古文：太宗又尝闲宴，顾勣曰： 朕将属以幼孤，思之无越卿者。
现代文：太宗又曾经在闲暇中设宴，望着宴上的李勣说： 我准备把年幼的太子托付给大臣，想来想去没有比卿更适合的人。
English: Taizong also once held a banquet in his spare time. Looking at Li Lan at the banquet, he said, "I am ready to entrust the young prince to the minister. I can think of no one more suitable than you."

古文：公往不遗于李密，今岂负于朕哉！ 
现代文：你过去不遗弃李密，现在难道会有负于朕吗？ 
English: If you could not forget Li Mi in the past, how could you do such a thing to me now!

古文：勣雪涕致辞，因噬指流血。俄而沉醉，乃解御服覆之，其见委信如此。
现代文：李勣拭泪致辞，因此咬破手指流出血来，一会儿沉醉不醒，太宗就脱下自己的御服给他盖上，李勣受太宗委托，被信赖就像这样。
English: Li Gan wiped his tears as he gave a speech, so he bit his finger and it bled. He was so drunk for a moment that Emperor Taizong took off his robe to cover him. Li Gan was entrusted by Emperor Taizong and trusted just like this.

古文：十八年，太宗将亲征高丽，授勣辽东道行军大总管，攻破盖牟、辽东、白崖等数城，又从太宗摧殄驻跸阵，以功封一子为郡公。
现代文：贞观十八年，太宗准备亲自征伐高丽，任命李勣为辽东道行军大总管，攻破盖牟、辽东、白崖等数城，又跟从太宗摧毁了驻跸山下的敌阵。因为立功，封李勣的一个儿子为郡公。
English: In the 18th year of Zhenguan, Taizong prepared to personally conquer Goryeo, appointed Li Xi as the commander-in-chief of the marching army of Liaodong, conquered several cities such as Gaimu, Liaodong and Baiyao, and destroyed the enemy camp under Lushan Mountain with Taizong. Because of his meritorious service, one of Li Xi's sons was named the county magistrate.

古文：二十年，延陀部落扰乱，诏勣将二百骑便发突厥兵讨击。
现代文：贞观二十年，薛延陀的部落发生内乱，朝廷下诏命李勣率二百名骑兵乘便发动突厥的军队前去讨伐。
English: Twenty years after Zhenguan, civil strife broke out in Xue Yanta's tribe, and the imperial court ordered Li Xi to lead 200 cavalrymen to lead the Turkic army to fight.

古文：至乌德鞬山，大战破之。
现代文：到乌德革建山，大战敌军，打败了他们。
English: To Uddege Jianshan, the great war of the enemy army, defeated them.

古文：其大首领梯真达于率众来防，其可汗咄摩支南窜于荒谷，遣通事舍人萧嗣业招慰部领，送于京师，碛北悉定。
现代文：薛延陀的大首领梯真达官率部下投降，薛延陀的可汗咄摩支往南逃窜到荒谷，朝廷派遣通事舍人萧嗣业招慰他的部属，送到京师，于是漠北全都平定了。
English: The great leader of Xueyantuo, Tizhenda, and his subordinates surrendered, the khan of Xueyantuo, Dima, fled south to the barren valley, and the imperial court sent the courier Xiao Siye to comfort his subordinates and send them to the capital, so the north of the country was completely leveled.

古文：二十二年，转太常卿，仍同中书门下三品。
现代文：贞观二十二年，李勣转任太常卿，仍然同中书门下三品。
English: In the 22nd year of Zhenguan, Li Qian was transferred to the post of Tai Changqing, and he was still under the Third Class of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：旬日，复除太子詹事。
现代文：过了十天，又拜太子詹事。
English: Ten days later, it was back to the crown prince.

古文：二十三年，太宗寝疾，谓高宗曰： 汝于李勣无恩，我今将责出之。
现代文：贞观二十三年，太宗卧病，对高宗说： 你对李勣没有什么恩惠，我现在准备贬他为外官。
English: In the 23rd year of Zhenguan, when Taizong was ill in bed, he said to Gao Zong: You have no favor for Li Xi, I am now preparing to demote him to foreign minister.

古文：我死后，汝当授以仆射，即荷汝恩，必致其死力。 
现代文：我死后，你应当授给他仆射的官职，他就蒙受了你的恩惠，必定为你尽死力。 
English: After my death, you should appoint him as your aide-de-camp. He has gained your favor and will surely do his best for you.

古文：乃出为叠州都督。
现代文：于是派李勣出任叠州都督。
English: As a result, Li Xi was sent to serve as the governor of Yamen.

古文：高宗即位，其月，召拜洛州刺史，寻加开府仪同三司，令同中书门下，参掌机密。
现代文：高宗即位，当月，召他入朝拜洛州刺史，接着又加封开府仪同三司，命他任同中书门下，参与执掌机要事务。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne, and that month, he called him into the history of Bai Luo Prefecture, and then he added the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and ordered him to be under the tutelage of Tong Zhongshu and participate in the important affairs of the office.

古文：是岁，册拜尚书左仆射。
现代文：这一年，又册拜为尚书左仆射。
English: In the same year, he was once again praised for his left-footed shooting.

古文：永徽元年，抗表求解仆射，仍令以开府仪同三司依旧知政事。
现代文：永徽元年，李勣上表请求免除自己仆射的职务，高宗还是命他以开府仪同三司的职务依旧执掌政事。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, Li Qiye requested to be exempted from the post of his subordinate, but Gao Zong still ordered him to take charge of government affairs with the ceremony of opening the government and the post of the three departments.

古文：四年，册拜司空。
现代文：永徽四年，册拜为司空。
English: In the fourth year of Yonghui, he was awarded the title of Sifu.

古文：初，贞观中，太宗以勋庸特著，尝图其形于凌烟阁，至是，帝又命写形焉，仍亲为之序。
现代文：当初，贞观年间，太宗因为他功勋卓著，曾在凌烟阁上为他画像，到这个时候，皇帝又命令为他画像，还亲自为画像作序。
English: At first, during the Zhenguan era, Emperor Taizong had a portrait of him painted on the Lingyak Pavilion because of his outstanding merits. At this time, the emperor also ordered a portrait of him and personally made a preface for the portrait.

古文：显庆三年，从幸东都，在路遇疾，帝亲临问。
现代文：显庆三年，跟从皇帝到东都，在路上得病，皇帝亲自慰问。
English: In the third year of Hianqing, he followed the emperor to Dongdu. He fell ill on the way, and the emperor personally offered his condolences.

古文：麟德初，东封泰山，诏勣为封禅大使，乃从驾。
现代文：麟德初年，东封泰山，皇帝诏封李勣为封禅大使，于是随从皇帝东去。
English: In the first year of Lin De's reign, Taishan was assigned to the East, and the emperor made Li Qian the ambassador of Zen Buddhism, so he followed the emperor to the East.

古文：次滑州，其姊早寡，居勣旧闾，皇后亲自临问，赐以衣服，仍封为东平郡君。
现代文：途中在滑州住宿，李勣的姐姐很早守寡，住在李勣的旧宅，皇后亲临她的住所慰问，赐给她衣服，还封她为东平郡君。
English: On the way, they stayed in Nanzhou. Li Yao's sister was widowed at an early age and lived in Li Yao's old house. The empress visited her home to offer her condolences, gave her clothes, and made her the ruler of Dongping County.

古文：又坠马伤足，上亲降问，以所乘赐之。
现代文：李勣又坠马伤脚，皇上亲自下问，把自己乘坐的马赐给他。
English: Li Qian fell off his horse again and hurt his foot. The emperor personally inquired and gave him the horse he was riding.

古文：乾封元年，高丽莫离支男产为其弟男建所逐，保于国内城，遣子献城诣阙乞师。
现代文：乾封元年，高丽莫离支男生被他的弟弟男建驱逐，在国内城固守，派儿子献城入宫求请救兵。
English: In the first year of the Qianfeng Dynasty, a boy from the Liushi District of Goryeo was expelled by his younger brother, Nangjian. He held fast to the inner city and sent his son to the palace to ask for help.

古文：总章元年，命勣为辽东道行军总管，率兵二万略地至鸭绿水。
现代文：总章元年，皇帝任命李勣为辽东道行军总管，率兵二万掠取土地到了鸭绿江。
English: In the first year of the General Chapter, the emperor appointed Li Xi as the general manager of the Liaodong Host March, and led twenty thousand soldiers to plunder the land to the Yalu River.

古文：贼遣其弟来拒战，勣纵兵击败之，追奔二百里，至于平壤城。
现代文：男建派他的弟弟来抵抗，李勣发兵打败了他。追赶敌军跑了二百里，到达平壤城。
English: Manjian sent his younger brother to resist, but the soldiers of Ri Yong Fat defeated him and chased the enemy army for two hundred miles to reach Pyongyang City.

古文：男建闭门不敢出，贼中诸城骇惧，多拔人众遁走，降款者相继。
现代文：男建关闭城门不敢出战，敌军所有的城堡都惊骇不安，很多人离城逃走，来投降的人络绎不绝。
English: The men closed the gates and dared not go out to fight. All the enemy castles were alarmed and uneasy. Many people fled from the city, and those who came to surrender were incessant.

古文：勣又引兵围平壤，辽东道副大总管刘仁轨、郝处俊、将军薛仁贵并会于平壤，犄角围之。经月余，克其城，虏其王高藏及男建、男产，裂其诸城，并为州县，振旅而旋。
现代文：李勣又带兵包围平壤，辽东道副大总管刘仁轨、郝处俊，将军薛仁贵都在平壤会合，分路夹击平壤，经过一个多月，攻克了平壤，俘虏高丽王高藏及男建、男产，分割高丽所有的城，都立为唐的州县，整顿军队凯旋。
English: Ri Yong also led his troops to encircle Pyongyang. Liao Dongdao's vice-governor Liu Renlu, Gong Duanjun, and general Xue Rengui all met in Pyongyang and made a pincer attack on Pyongyang. After more than a month, they conquered Pyongyang, captured Goryeo's King Gaozang and his generals, divided all the cities of Goryeo, and established them as Tang's prefectures and counties. The army was reorganized and returned in triumph.

古文：令勣便道以高藏及男建献于昭陵，礼毕，备军容入京城，献太庙。
现代文：皇上命令李勣顺路把高藏和男建献给昭陵，献俘的礼仪结束后，整顿军容后进入京城，到太庙献俘。
English: The emperor ordered Li Qian to offer Gao Zang and Nang Jian to Zhaoling along the way. After the ceremony of offering captives was over, he entered the capital after rectifying his military appearance and went to the Great Temple to offer captives.

古文：二年，加太子太师，增食实封通前一千一百户。
现代文：总章二年，李勣被加封太子太师，增赐封邑连同以前的有一千一百户。
English: In the second year of the General Chapter, Li Xi was given the additional title of Crown Prince and Grand Master, as well as an additional fiefdom along with the previous eleven hundred households.

古文：其年寝疾，诏以勣为司卫正卿，使得视疾。
现代文：这一年，李勣卧病，皇帝诏封李勣的弟弟晋州刺史李弼为司卫正卿，让他能够在京城照看哥哥的病。
English: In the same year, Li Rong was ill in bed, and the emperor had Li Rong's younger brother, Jinzhou Zhishi Li Rong, appointed as Swei Zhengqing, so that he could take care of his brother's illness in Beijing.

古文：寻薨，年七十六。
现代文：不久李勣去世，享年七十六岁。
English: Li Yao died soon after, at the age of seventy-six.

古文：帝为之举哀，辍朝七日，赠太尉、扬州大都督，谥曰贞武，给东园秘器，陪葬昭陵。令司平太常伯杨昉摄同文正卿监护。
现代文：皇帝为他举办丧事，停止上朝七天，赠太尉、扬州大都督，赐谥号叫贞武，赐给棺木，让他陪葬在昭陵，命司平太常伯杨日方摄同文正卿监护丧事。
English: The emperor held a funeral for him, stopped the ascension to the emperor for seven days, gave him the title of captain and Yangzhou grand governor, gave him the nickname Zhenwu, gave him a coffin, and let him be buried with him in Zhaoling.

古文：及葬日，帝幸未央古城，登楼临送，望柳车恸哭，并为设祭。
现代文：到了下葬的那天，皇帝到未央古城，登楼为他送葬，望着灵车痛哭，并为他安置祭奠。
English: On the day of the funeral, the emperor went to the ancient city of Weiyang, climbed the tower to attend his funeral, looked at the hearse and cried bitterly, and arranged a memorial service for him.

古文：皇太子亦从驾临送，哀恸悲感左右。
现代文：皇太子也跟着皇帝给李勣送葬，悲痛到极点，使左右的人都受到感动。
English: The crown prince also followed the emperor to send Li Qiye to the funeral, grief to the extreme, so that people on both sides were moved.

古文：诏百官送至故城西北，所筑坟一准卫、霍故事，象阴山、铁山及乌德鞬山，以旌破突厥、薛延陀之功。
现代文：皇帝命令百官送到旧城西北，所筑的坟都依卫青、霍去病的先例为准，仿照阴山、铁山及乌德革建山，用来表彰他击败突厥、薛延陀的功劳。
English: The emperor ordered hundreds of officials to be sent to the northwest of the old city. The graves built were all based on the precedents of Wei Qing and Huo Ke, and were modeled on Yin Shan, Iron Mountain and Udege Mountain, and were used to commend his achievements in defeating the Turks and Xue Yanta.

古文：光宅元年，诏勣配享高宗庙庭。
现代文：光宅元年，皇帝下诏让李勣在高宗庙陪从受祭。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Kōtaku, the emperor issued an edict that Li Qiye be allowed to accompany the emperor to the memorial service at the Gaozong Temple.

古文：勣前后战胜所得金帛，皆散之于将士。
现代文：李勣前后战胜所得到的黄金、丝帛，都分发给将士。
English: The gold and silk brocade won by Li Yao during and after his victory were all distributed to his soldiers.

古文：初得黎阳仓，就仓者数十万人。
现代文：刚到黎阳仓时，去领粮的人有数十万人。
English: When I first arrived in Liangcang, there were hundreds of thousands of people who went to collect grain.

古文：魏徵、高季辅、杜正伦、郭孝恪皆游其所，一见于众人中，即加礼敬，引之卧内，谈谑忘倦。及平武牢，获伪郑州长史戴胄，知其行能，寻释于竟，推荐咸至显达，当时称其有知人之鉴。
现代文：魏征、高季辅、杜正伦、郭孝恪都到黎阳仓做客，他们一出现在众人之中，李勣就恭敬地以礼相待，把他们引到卧室里，谈笑而忘记了疲倦，到平定虎牢关，抓获伪郑州长史戴胄，知道了他的品行、才能，很快就释放了，这些人一一受到李勣的推荐，都做到了显贵的高官，当时人们称李勣有知人之明。
English: Wei Zheng, Gao Ji Fu, Du Zhenglun and Guo Xiao Ke all came to visit Li Yangcang. As soon as they appeared in the crowd, Li Gan treated them with respect and courtesy. He led them to the bedroom, talked and laughed and forgot his tiredness. To calm the tiger, he captured the fake Zheng governor Shi Daiquan, knew his character and talent, and soon released. These people were recommended by Li Gan, and all of them became prominent high-ranking officials. At that time, people said that Li Gan knew everyone.

古文：又，初平王世充，获其故人单雄信，依例处死，勣表称其武艺绝伦，若收之于合死之中，必大感恩，堪为国家尽命，请以官爵赎之。
现代文：又刚平定王世充，俘获李勣过去的相知单雄信，依例叛处死刑，李勣上表称赞单雄信武艺绝伦，如果从处死的人中收留他，一定会感恩戴德，能为国家效命，请求用自己的官爵赎雄信的死罪，高祖不准许。
English: He had just subdued Wang Shichong, captured Li Yan's past acquaintance, Shan Xiongxin, and sentenced him to death for treason. Li Yan praised Shan Xiongxin's martial arts on the table. If he were to receive him from among those who were executed, he would surely be grateful and would be able to serve the country. He asked to use his official title to redeem the capital crime of Shan Xiongxin, which Gao Zu would not allow.

古文：高祖不许，临将就戮，勣对之号恸，割股肉以啖之，曰： 生死永诀，此肉同归于土矣。 
现代文：临到就要受刑的时候，李勣对着雄信号啕痛哭，割下自己大腿上的肉给雄信吃，说： 生死永别，这肉和你一起入土吧。 
English: When it was time for him to be punished, Li Yao wept bitterly at the male signal, cut off the flesh on his thigh and gave it to Xiong Xin to eat, saying: Farewell to life and death, let this meat go into the ground with you.

古文：仍收养其子。
现代文：于是收养了雄信的儿子。
English: As a result, the son of Wu Xiongxin was adopted.

古文：每行军用师，颇任筹算，临敌应变，动合事机。
现代文：李勣每次指挥行军作战，很能筹划，临敌应变，行动都合乎机宜。
English: Every time Li Lan commanded marching operations, he was very capable of planning, adapting to the enemy, and acting opportunistically.

古文：与人图计，识其臧否，闻其片善，扼腕而从。事捷之日，多推功于下，以是人皆为用，所向多克捷。
现代文：与人一起谋划计策，能辨别它的好坏，听到别人一点好的计谋，就握住手腕高兴地听从，作战取得胜利的时候，多把功劳推让给部下，因此人都愿意为他效力，指挥军队所到的地方，多能破敌取胜。
English: He plans strategies together with others, and can distinguish between good and bad. When he hears a good strategy from others, he grips his wrist and happily obeys. When a battle is won, he gives more credit to his subordinates. Therefore, everyone is willing to work for him. Wherever he commands the army, he can defeat the enemy and win.

古文：洎勣之死，闻者莫不凄怆。
现代文：到李勣去世，听到消息的人没有不悲痛伤感的。
English: By the time of Li Yao's death, no one who heard the news was not sad and sentimental.

古文：与弟弼特存友爱，闺门之内，肃若严君。
现代文：李勣与弟弟李弼特别友爱，家门以内，李勣严肃得像父亲一样。
English: Li Yao and his brother Li Yao are particularly friendly. Within the family, Li Yao is as serious as his father.

古文：自遇疾，高宗及皇太子送药，即取服之；家中召医巫，皆不许入门。
现代文：自从得病，高宗和皇太子送药，就拿来服用；家里请医生、巫师，他都不许进门。
English: Ever since he got sick, Gaozong and the crown prince have been sending him medicine, and he has been taking it. The family has invited doctors and sorcerers, but he is not allowed to enter the door.

古文：子弟固以药进，勣谓曰： 我山东一田夫耳，攀附明主，滥居富贵，位极三台，年将八十，岂非命乎？
现代文：他的子弟坚决送药给他服用，李勣对他们说： 我只不过是山东的一个田夫，攀附英明的君主，过度占取富贵，地位达到了三公的顶点，年纪将近八十，这难道不是命吗？
English: His son resolutely sent medicine for him to take, and Li Lan said to them: I am just a farmer in Shandong, clinging to a wise monarch, excessively occupying wealth and nobility, reaching the peak of the Three Princes, and nearly eighty years old. Isn't this life?

古文：修短必是有期，宁容浪就医人求活！ 
现代文：寿命的长短必定是有期限的，怎么能随便就医求活命呢？ 
English: The length of life must have a time limit, how can you casually seek medical treatment to survive?

古文：竟拒而不进。
现代文：竟然拒不服药。
English: He actually refused to take his medication.

古文：忽谓弼曰： 我似得小差，可置酒以申宴乐。 
现代文：有天，李勣忽然对李弼说： 我的病好像稍微好些了，可设酒宴来娱乐一下。 
English: One day, Li Zhen suddenly said to Li Zhen: My illness seems to be a little better, let's have a wine banquet to entertain ourselves.

古文：于是堂上奏女妓，檐下列子孙。
现代文：于是堂上女乐工奏乐，檐下罗列子孙。
English: As a result, female musicians played music in the hall and listed their children and grandchildren.

古文：宴罢，谓弼曰： 我自量必死，欲与汝一别耳。
现代文：酒宴结束，李勣对李弼说： 我自己估量一定是要死的，想与你诀别罢了。
English: At the end of the wine banquet, Li Yao said to Li Yao: I myself estimate that I must be dying, I just want to say goodbye to you.

古文：恐汝悲哭，诳言似差，可未须啼泣，听我约束。
现代文：恐怕你悲伤哭泣，骗你说病好像好些了，你不要哭，听我立规矩。
English: I'm afraid you'll cry with sadness and lie to yourself that your illness seems to be getting better. Don't cry, just listen to me and follow the rules.

古文：我见房玄龄、杜如晦、高季辅辛苦作得门户，亦望垂裕后昆，并遭痴兒破家荡尽。
现代文：我看房玄龄、杜如晦、高季辅辛辛苦苦建成家业立起门户，也希望把家业传给后辈子孙，结果都被愚蠢的儿子败家荡尽。
English: I see Fong Xuanling, Du Rugao and Gao Jifu working hard to build a family business and establish a portal, and also hope to pass on the family business to their grandchildren in the future. As a result, they were all defeated by their stupid sons.

古文：我有如许豚犬，将以付汝，汝可防察，有操行不伦、交游非类，急即打杀，然后奏知。
现代文：我有这些犬子，要托付给你，你可要加意防察，有操行不轨、交结邪恶的，立即打死，然后告诉我。
English: I have these puppies to entrust to you. You should be on the lookout for bad behavior and evil associations. Kill them immediately and let me know.

古文：又见人多埋金玉，亦不须尔。
现代文：又见人死后多埋藏黄金、宝玉，也不必这样。
English: It is also unnecessary to see how many gold and precious stones are buried after death.

古文：惟以布装露车，载我棺柩，棺中敛以常服，惟加朝服一副，死倘有知，望著此奉见先帝。
现代文：只用麻布覆盖的车，载我的棺木，棺中装殓用平常穿的衣服，只加朝服一套，死后如果有知觉，希望穿上它拜见先帝。
English: The car, which was only covered with linen, carried my coffin. The coffin was decorated with the clothes I normally wear, plus a set of imperial robes. When I die, if I am conscious, I hope to wear it to visit the former emperor.

古文：明器惟作马五六匹，下帐用幔布为顶，白纱为裙，其中著十个木人，示依古礼刍灵之义，此外一物不用。
现代文：随葬的器物只做马五六匹，地宫里的帷帐用黑布做顶，四周围白纱，帐里放十个木偶，表示依照古礼用草人草马殉葬的意思，此外一物不用。
English: Only five or six horses were buried with him. The curtain in the underground palace was topped with black cloth, surrounded by white gauze. Ten puppets were placed in the curtain, representing the meaning of the ancient ritual of using a straw man to bury a horse. There was no need for anything else.

古文：姬媪已下，有兒女而愿住自养者，听之；余并放出。
现代文：姬妾以下，有子女愿意留下自己养育的听任自便，其余的全都放她们离开。
English: After the concubines, any children willing to stay and raise themselves were left to their own devices, while the rest were allowed to leave.

古文：事毕，汝即移入我堂，抚恤小弱。
现代文：丧事办完，你就搬进我家居住，抚恤小儿弱女。
English: When the funeral is over, you will move into my home and live with me, and you will take care of my children.

古文：违我言者，同于戮尸。 
现代文：违背我的话的，就如同刺杀我的尸体。 
English: Whoso rejecteth my word is as he that killeth my body.

古文：此后略不复语，弼等遵行遗言。
现代文：说完后什么话也不再说了，李弼等遵行他的遗言。
English: After he finished, he didn't say anything else, and Li Yao and the others followed his last words.

古文：勣少弟感，幼有志操。
现代文：李勣最小的弟弟李感，自幼就有操守、志向。
English: Li Yan's youngest brother, Li Gan, has had ethics and aspirations since he was a child.

古文：李密之败也，陷于王世充，世充逼令以书召勣，感曰： 家兄立身，不亏名节，今已事主，君臣分定，决不以感造次改图。 
现代文：李密战败的时候，被王世充抓获，王世充逼迫他写信要李勣投降自己，李感说 ：我哥哥立身做事，不损害自己的名誉、节操，他现在已经侍奉了君主，君臣的名分已经定了，决不会因为我的缘故随便改变计划。 
English: When Li Mi was defeated, he was captured by Wang Shicheng. Wang Shicheng forced him to write a letter asking Li Yao to surrender himself. Li Xuan said, "My brother stands up for himself and does things without compromising his honor and integrity. He has now served the monarch, and the title of monarch and minister has been determined. He will never change his plan because of me."

古文：卒不肯。世充怒，遂害焉，时年十五。
现代文：终不肯写信，王世充发怒，就杀害了李感，死的时候才十五岁。
English: When he finally refused to write, Wang Shicheng became angry and killed Li Xuan. He was only fifteen years old when he died.

古文：勣长子震，显庆初官至桂州刺史，先勣卒。
现代文：李勣的长子李震，显庆初年官做到梓州刺史，比李勣先去世。
English: Li Rong's eldest son, Li Zhen, died before Li Rong, the first year of Xianqing to make history in Zizhou.

古文：勣孙敬业。
现代文：李勣的孙子李敬业。
English: Li Yan's grandson, Li Jingye.

古文：高宗崩，则天太后临朝，既而废帝为庐陵王，立相王为皇帝，而政由天后，诸武皆当权任，人情愤怨。
现代文：高宗去世后，武则天太后临朝听政，不久废唐中宗为庐陵王，立相王李旦为睿宗皇帝，而朝政由武则天裁决，武氏家族各人都当权受任用，人们心怀愤怨。
English: After the death of Gao Zong, Empress Dowager Wu Zetian came to the imperial court to listen to politics. Soon, Tang Zhong Zong was abolished as King of Fuling, and Emperor Li Dan was established as Emperor Ruizong. However, the imperial court was ruled by Wu Zetian, and all members of the Wu family were appointed to positions of power. People harbored resentment.

古文：时给事中唐之奇贬授括苍令，长安主簿骆宾王贬授临海丞，詹事司直杜求仁黝县丞，敬业坐事左授柳州司马，其弟盩啡令敬猷亦坐累左迁，俱在扬州。
现代文：当时给事中唐之奇贬为括苍令，长安主簿骆宾王贬为临海县丞，詹事司直杜求仁为黝县县丞，李敬业因事降为柳州司马，他的弟弟周至令李敬猷也因为他的连累被降职，都在扬州。
English: At the time of the incident, Tang Zhiqi was demoted to Zheng Cangling, Wang Luo Bin, the main book of Chang'an, was demoted to Linhai Cangling, Zhan Zhizhi Zhidu Cujin was demoted to Jixian Cangling, Li Jingye was demoted to Liuzhou Cangling, and his brother Zhou Zhiling Li Jingye was also demoted because of his involvement, all in Yangzhou.

古文：敬业用前盩啡尉魏思温谋，据扬州。
现代文：李敬业采用前周至尉魏思温的计谋，占据扬州。
English: Li Jingye took advantage of Wei Siwen's stratagem of the previous week to occupy Yangzhou.

古文：嗣圣元年七月，敬业遣其党监察御史薛璋先求使江都，又令雍州人韦超诣璋告变，云 扬州长史陈敬之与唐之奇谋逆 ，璋乃收敬之系狱。
现代文：嗣圣元年七月，李敬业派他的同党监察御史薛璋先请求出使江都，又命令雍州人韦超到薛璋那里去告发兵变，说 扬州长史陈敬之与唐之奇谋反 ，于是薛璋把陈敬之抓进监狱。
English: In July of the following year, Li Jingye sent his fellow party member and inspector Shi Xuejun to request the dispatch of an envoy to Jiangdu, and ordered Wei Chao from Yongzhou to go to Xuejun to denounce the mutiny, saying that Yang governor Shi Chen Jingzhi had conspired with Tang Ziqi, so Xuejun arrested Chen Jingzhi and put him in prison.

古文：居数日，敬业矫制杀敬之，自称扬州司马，诈言 高州首领冯子猷叛逆，奉密诏募兵进讨。 
现代文：过了几天，李敬业假传皇帝的命令杀陈敬之，自称是扬州司马，谎说 高州首领冯子猷谋反，奉皇帝密诏招募士兵前去讨伐 。
English: A few days later, Li Jingye falsely claimed to be Yangzhou Sima, and falsely said that Gaozhou leader Feng Zixuan was plotting a rebellion and recruiting soldiers to go to the crusade according to the emperor's secret decree.

古文：是日开府库，令士曹参军李宗臣解系囚及丁役、工匠，得数百人，皆授之以甲。
现代文：当天打开府库，命令士曹参军李宗臣释放囚犯和丁役、工匠，得到数百人，都发给铠甲。
English: On the same day, he opened the prefectural treasury and ordered Li Zongcheng, a member of Cao's army, to release prisoners and Dingyong and craftsmen, which resulted in the release of hundreds of people, all of whom were sent to Gansu.

古文：录事参军孙处行拒命，敬业斩之以徇。
现代文：录事参军孙处行拒不从命，李敬业杀了他示众。
English: Sun Shuanxing, a member of the army, refused to obey orders, and Li Jingye killed him in public.

古文：遂据扬州，鸠聚民众，以匡复庐陵为辞。
现代文：终于占据扬州，纠集民众，以匡复庐陵王中宗皇帝为借口。
English: Finally, they occupied Yangzhou and rallied the people under the pretext of restoring Emperor Goryeo to power.

古文：乃开三府：一曰匡复府，二曰英公府，三曰扬州大都督府。
现代文：于是设置三府：一个叫作匡复府，二个叫作英公府，三个叫作扬州大都督府。
English: As a result, three prefectures were established: one was called Kuangfu Prefecture, two were called Yinggong Prefecture, and three were called Yangzhou Dadu Prefecture.

古文：敬业自称匡复府上将，领扬州大都督，以杜求仁、唐之奇、骆宾王为府属，余皆伪署职位。
现代文：李敬业自称是匡复府上将，担任扬州大都督，把杜求仁、唐之奇、骆宾王作为各府官属，其余的都非法安置职位。
English: Li Jingye claimed to be the general of Kuangfufu, served as the Yangzhou grand governor, and made Du Qiren, Tang Zhiqi, and Luo Bin Wang subordinate officials of various prefectures. The rest were illegally placed in positions.

古文：旬日之间，胜兵有十余万。
现代文：十天之内，增加兵士有十万多。
English: Within ten days, there were more than a hundred thousand additional soldiers.

古文：仍移檄诸郡县曰：
现代文：他们还传递檄文到各郡县说：
English: They also distributed leaflets to all counties, saying:

古文：伪临朝武氏者，人非温顺，地实寒微。
现代文： 非法临朝听政的武则天，为人不温顺，出身实在寒微低贱。
English: Wu Zetian, who illegally sat in the imperial court and listened to the government, was not a docile person, and he was from a lowly background.

古文：昔充太宗下陈，尝以更衣入侍。洎乎晚节，秽乱春宫。密隐先帝之私，阴图后庭之嬖。
现代文：过去充当过太宗的下等宫女，曾经因为给太宗更衣受到宠幸，到了后来，在太子宫中淫乱放荡，周密地隐瞒太宗对她的偏爱，暗地谋求成为后宫受宠的人。
English: In the past, she had served as a low-ranking courtesan of Emperor Taizong. Once, she had been favored because she had dressed Emperor Taizong. Later, she had been lascivious and debauched in the emperor's womb, carefully concealing Emperor Taizong's preference for her, and secretly seeking to become a favorite of the harem.

古文：入门见嫉，蛾眉不肯让人；掩袖工谗，狐媚偏能惑主。
现代文：新入选的嫔妃一进门就遭到她的嫉妒，凭着美貌不肯让人；暗地里善于说别人的坏话，狡猾谄媚偏偏能迷惑君主。
English: The newly-elected Empress Dowager was envied as soon as she walked through the door. She refused to let anyone in because of her beauty. She was secretly good at saying bad things about others, and her cunning and charm were able to confuse the monarch.

古文：践元后于翚翟，陷吾君于聚麀。
现代文：登上皇后的位子穿上皇后的礼服，引诱我们的君主陷入父子乱伦的境地。
English: To take the queen's place, to wear the queen's robes, to seduce our sovereign into father-son incest.

古文：加以虺蝎为心，豺狼成性，近狎邪僻，残害忠良，杀姊屠兄，弑君鸩母。
现代文：加上她怀着蛇蝎心肠，豺狼成性，亲近奸诈邪恶之徒，残害忠良之士，杀害姐妹兄弟，杀害人君毒死母亲。
English: In addition, she has the heart of a snake and the nature of a wolf, getting close to treacherous and evil people, destroying loyal and good people, killing sisters and brothers, killing people, and poisoning her mother.

古文：人神之所同嫉，天地之所不容。
现代文：人和神对她的作为同样憎恨，天和地也不能容忍。
English: Man and God alike hate what she has done, and heaven and earth cannot tolerate it.

古文：犹复包藏祸心，窥窃神器。
现代文：她还又包藏祸心，窥视着皇帝的宝座。
English: She also harbored evil thoughts and peered at the emperor's throne.

古文：君之爱子，幽之于别宫；贼之宗盟，委之以重任。
现代文：君王心爱的儿子，被幽禁在另外的地方；武贼宗族中的人，被委派担任重要的职位。唉！
English: The king's beloved son is imprisoned elsewhere; members of the rebel clan are appointed to important positions. Alas!

古文：呜呼！霍子孟之不作，硃虚侯之已亡。燕啄皇孙，知汉祚之将尽；龙漦帝后，识夏廷之遽衰。
现代文：霍子孟不会起来，朱虚侯已经死了。由 燕啄皇孙 的民谣，知道汉朝将要灭亡；从 龙嫠帝后 的情况，明白夏朝急剧衰落的原因。
English: Huo Zi Meng would not get up, Zhu Xuhou had already died. From the ballad of the grandson of Emperor Yan Xun, we knew that the Han Dynasty was about to perish; from the situation of Empress Longyu, we understood the reasons for the sharp decline of the Xia Dynasty.

古文：敬业皇唐旧臣，公侯冢胤，奉先君之成业，荷本朝之旧恩。
现代文： 我李敬业，是大唐旧臣，公侯的长子，继承先辈的功业，蒙受本朝的旧恩。
English: I, Li Jingye, am an old minister of the Great Tang Dynasty, the eldest son of a prince, inheriting the achievements of my predecessors and receiving the old grace of this dynasty.

古文：宋微子之兴悲，良有以也；袁君山之流涕，岂徒然哉！
现代文：宋微子产生悲伤的感情，确实是有原因的；袁君山流泪悲啼，难道是没有缘故的吗？
English: There is indeed a reason for Song Weizi to have sad feelings; is there no reason for Yuan Junshan to shed tears of sorrow?

古文：是用气愤风云，志安社稷，因天下之失望，顺宇内之推心。爰举义旗，誓清妖孽。
现代文：因此气愤怨恨像风云一样壮烈，立志安定国家，趁着天下人对武则天的失望，接受全国人民对我的信任，于是举起正义的旗帜，发誓清除妖孽。
English: Therefore, my anger and resentment were as strong as the wind and clouds. I resolved to stabilize the country, take advantage of the world's disappointment with Wu Zetian, and accept the trust of the people of the whole country, so I raised the banner of justice and vowed to eliminate the witchcraft.

古文：南连百越，北尽三河，铁骑成群，玉舳相接。
现代文：南连北越，北到三河，铁骑成群，战车首尾相接。
English: From the South to the North of Vietnam, and from the North to the Three Rivers, there were hordes of cavalry, and the chariots were lined up end to end.

古文：海陵红粟，仓储之积靡穷；江浦黄旗，匡复之功何远！
现代文：海陵的陈粟，仓库里的存储堆积得无法用尽，江边上空黄旗一样的祥云，匡复唐朝的功业不久就会成功。
English: Hailing's old corn, the storage in the warehouse piled up inexhaustible, the sky over the river like a yellow flag, the work of the Tang Dynasty will soon be successful.

古文：班声动而北风起，剑气冲而南斗平。
现代文：战马嘶叫北风卷起，剑气冲天把南斗六星扫平。
English: The north wind whistles, and the south wind sweeps the six-pointed star skyward.

古文：喑呜则山岳崩颓，叱咤则风云变色。
现代文：吞声悲咽就使山岳崩塌，怒吼高呼可让风云变色。
English: If you swallow your sorrow, the mountains will collapse, and if you shout your anger, the clouds will change color.

古文：以此制敌，何敌不摧？
现代文：用这种力量制服敌人，什么样的敌人不能摧毁？
English: Use this power to subdue the enemy, what kind of enemy can not be destroyed?

古文：以此图功，何功不克？
现代文：用这种力量谋求功业，什么样的功业不能成就？
English: Using this power to pursue a career, what kind of career can not be achieved?

古文：公等或家传汉爵，或地协周亲，或膺重寄于爪牙，或受顾命于宣室。
现代文： 你们有的有世袭的爵位，有的处在与王室至亲的地位，有的是领受先帝重托的将领，有的是接受先帝遗命的重臣。
English: Some of you have hereditary titles, some are in the position of being close relatives of the royal family, some are generals entrusted by the former emperor, and some are senior ministers who accept the orders of the former emperor.

古文：言犹在耳，忠岂忘心？
现代文：先帝的话好像还在耳边响着，心里难道就忘了对大唐的忠诚？
English: It seems that the words of the former emperor are still ringing in their ears. Have they forgotten their loyalty to the Great Tang Dynasty?

古文：一抔之土未干，六尺之孤何托？
现代文：高宗乾陵一扌不黄土还没有干，他六尺高的孤儿在哪里呢？
English: Gaozong Qianling's tomb has not yet dried, where is his six-foot-tall orphan?

古文：倘能转祸为福，送往事居，共立勤王之师，无废旧君之命，凡诸爵赏，同裂山河。
现代文：倘若你们能转祸为福，送别死者为幼君效劳，一起共建救援国君的功勋，不废弃高宗的遗命，凡是封爵赏赐的事，我们可一同指着山河起誓。
English: If you can turn misfortune into blessing, bid farewell to the dead and serve the young prince, work together to build the merit of rescuing the prince, and do not abandon Gaozong's last will and testament, we can swear together by the mountains and rivers that we will be knighted.

古文：请看今日之域中，竟是谁家之天下！
现代文：如果谁留恋处于困境的孤城，在歧路上徘徊不定，看不清预先出现的征兆，就会因迟到而被杀头。
English: If anyone lingers in a lonely city in a difficult situation, wanders uncertainly on the wrong road, and does not see clearly the signs that appear in advance, he will be killed for being late.

古文：则天命左玉钤卫大将军李孝逸将兵三十万讨之，追削敬业祖、父官爵，剖坟斫棺，复本姓徐氏。
现代文：请看今天的国家，究竟是谁家的天下！ 武则天命令左玉钤卫大将军李孝逸带兵三十万讨伐李敬业，追削革除敬业祖父、父亲的官爵，破开他家的坟墓砍击死者的棺木，责令恢复原来的姓氏重新姓徐。
English: Wu Zetian ordered General of the Left Jade Army Li Xiaoying to lead 300,000 soldiers in a crusade against Li Jingye, to hunt down and remove the official title of Jingye's grandfather and father, to open the graves of his family, to chop up the coffins of the dead, and to order the restoration of the original surname and the renaming of Xu.

古文：初，敬业兵集，图其所向，薛璋曰： 金陵王气犹在，大江设险，可以自固。且取常、润等州，以为霸基，然后治兵北渡。 
现代文：起初，敬业聚集兵力，策划向哪里进攻，薛璋说： 金陵那个地方的帝王之气还在，长江地势险要，可以凭借这坚守，再夺取常、润等州，作为称霸的基础，然后整顿军队北渡淮河。 
English: At first, Jingye gathered troops and planned where to attack. Xue Yao said: The imperial spirit of that place in Jinling is still there, the Yangtze River terrain is precarious, you can rely on this adherence, and then seize Chang, Run and other states as the basis for hegemony, and then rectify the army north of the Huaihe River.

古文：魏思温曰： 兵贵神速，但宜早渡淮而北，招合山东豪杰，乘其未集，直取东都，据关决战，此上策也。 
现代文：魏思温说 ：兵贵神速，只宜早渡淮河而北上，招募聚合山东豪杰，乘那里没有安定，直取东都洛阳，占据关口与敌军作战，这是上策。 
English: Wei Siwen said: The soldiers are very fast, it is only advisable to cross the Huaihe River early and go north, recruit Shandong heroes, there is no stability there, directly take the eastern capital Luoyang, occupy the pass and fight with the enemy army, this is the best strategy.

古文：敬业不从。
现代文：敬业不听从。
English: Dedication not obedience.

古文：十月，率众渡江，攻拔润州，杀刺史李思文。
现代文：十月，率领众兵渡过了长江，攻取润州，杀死刺史李思文。
English: In October, he led the soldiers across the Yangtze River, captured Renzhou, and killed the assassin Li Siwen.

古文：先是，太子贤为天后所废，死于巴州，敬业乃求状貌似贤者，置于城中，奉之为主，云贤本不死。
现代文：在这以前，太子贤被武则天废黜，死在巴州，于是敬业寻找身材相貌像太子贤的，安置在城里，尊奉他为君主，说太子贤原来没有死。
English: Prior to this, Prince Xian was deposed by Wu Zetian and died in Bazhou, so he dedicated himself to finding someone who looked like Prince Xian, placed him in the city, honored him as a monarch, and said that Prince Xian had not died.

古文：孝逸军渡淮，至楚州，敬业之众狼狈还江都，屯兵高邮以拒之。
现代文：孝逸的军队渡过淮河，到达楚州，敬业的队伍狼狈逃回江都扬州，驻兵高邮抵抗孝逸。
English: Xiaoyi's army crossed the Huai River and arrived in Chuzhou. The dedicated team fled back to Yangzhou, the capital of Jiangsu Province, and the soldiers stationed in Gaoyou resisted Xiaoyi.

古文：频战大败，孝逸乘胜追蹑。
现代文：多次交战被打得大败，孝逸乘胜追踪。
English: He has been defeated many times in battle, and Xiao Yat pursues the victory.

古文：敬业奔至扬州，与唐之奇、杜求仁等乘小舸，将入海投高丽。
现代文：敬业赶到扬州，与唐之奇、杜求仁等乘大船，准备入海投奔高丽。
English: Dedication rushed to Yangzhou, with Tang Zhiqi, Du Qiren and others on a large ship, ready to enter the sea and go to Goryeo.

古文：追兵及，皆捕获之。
现代文：追兵赶到，把他们全都抓获。
English: The pursuers arrived and captured them all.

古文：初，敬业传檄至京师，则天读之微哂，至 一抔之土未干 ，遽问侍臣曰： 此语谁为之？ 
现代文：当初，敬业传递檄文到京师，武则天读着檄文微笑，到 一扌不之土未干 ，马上问侍臣说： 这句话是谁写的？ 
English: At the beginning, Jingye passed the imperial edict to the Beijing division, and Wu Zetian read the imperial edict with a smile. When the earth was not dry, he immediately asked the courtier, "Who wrote this sentence?"

古文：或对曰： 骆宾王之辞也。 
现代文：有人回答说 ：是骆宾王的句子。 
English: Someone replied, "It's a sentence from King Lockjaw."

古文：则天曰： 宰相之过，安失此人？ 
现代文：武则天说： 这是宰相的过失，怎么失去了这个人才？ 
English: Wu Zetian said: This is the prime minister's fault, how did we lose this talent?

古文：中宗返正，诏曰： 故司空勣，往因敬业，毁废坟茔。
现代文：中宗复位，下诏说： 死去的司空李勣，过去因为敬业的缘故，捣毁坟墓。
English: Zhongzong was reinstated, and the following edict was issued: The deceased Sikuo Lijun had his grave destroyed in the past because of his dedication.

古文：朕追想元勋，永怀佐命。
现代文：朕追想先朝元勋，永远怀念他辅佐朝廷的忠诚。
English: I think back to the founder of the former imperial court, and will always miss his loyalty to the imperial court.

古文：昔窦宪干纪，无累安丰之祠；霍禹乱常，犹全博陆之祀。
现代文：过去窦宪犯法，没有连累安丰的祠堂，霍禹破坏伦常，还保全了博陆的祀庙。
English: In the past, Dou Xian violated the law, did not involve Anfeng's ancestral hall, Hoyu destroyed Lunchang, and also preserved Bolu's temple.

古文：罪不相及，国之通典。
现代文：罪过不相牵连，是国家通行的法律。
English: Guilt without implication is the law of the land.

古文：宜特垂恩礼，令所司速为起坟，所有官爵，并宜追复。 
现代文：应当特别施给恩惠礼遇，命令掌管这事的迅速为李勣修造坟墓，他所有的官职爵位，都应当恢复。 
English: Special grace and courtesy should be given, and the person in charge of the matter should be ordered to quickly build a tomb for Li Xuan, and all his official titles and ranks should be restored.

古文：勣诸子孙坐敬业诛杀，靡有遗胤，偶脱祸者，皆窜迹胡越。
现代文：李勣所有的子孙因敬业的罪遭到诛杀，没有留下后代，侥幸逃脱灾祸的，都窜逃到边远的少数民族地区。
English: All of Li Yan's children and grandchildren were killed for the crime of dedication, leaving no descendants. Those who managed to escape the disaster fled to remote ethnic minority areas.

古文：贞元十七年，吐蕃陷麟州，驱掠民畜而去。
现代文：贞元十七年，吐蕃攻陷麟州，驱逐掠取百姓牲畜离去。
English: In the 17th year of Zhengyuan, Tubo invaded Linzhou, expelled and plundered the people and livestock, and left.

古文：至盐州西横槽烽，蕃将号徐舍人者，环集汉俘于呼延州，谓僧延素曰： 师勿甚惧，予本汉五代孙也。属武太后斫丧王室，吾祖建义不果，子孙流落绝域，今三代矣。
现代文：到盐州西面的横槽峰，蕃将中有个叫徐舍人的，把汉俘聚集在呼延州，对僧人延素说： 师父不要过于害怕，我本来是汉人，是司空、英国公的第五代孙，时值武太后摧残王室，我祖上建立正义却得不到善果，子孙流落在边远的地域，至今已经三代了。
English: On the way to Heng Chau Peak on the west side of Yanzhou, one of the generals, named Xu Sheren, gathered the Han prisoners in Huyan Prefecture and said to the monk Yan Su: Master, don't be too afraid. I am originally a Han, the fifth generation grandson of Siku, the British prince. At that time, Empress Dowager Wu destroyed the royal family. My ancestors established justice but did not get good results. Their descendants have been living in remote areas for three generations.

古文：虽代居职任，掌握兵要，然思本之心，无忘于国。
现代文：虽然世代做官，掌握兵权，然而思念本原的心，没有忘记自己的国家。
English: Although they have been officials for generations and hold military power, they still miss the original heart and have not forgotten their own country.

古文：但族属已多，无由自拔耳。
现代文：但族属已经多了，没有缘由自己脱身。
English: But there are already too many families, and there is no reason for them to escape.

古文：此地蕃汉交境，放师还乡。 
现代文：这里是蕃汉交界的地方，可以放师父回乡。 
English: This is the place where the Shih-Han border meets. Master can be released to return to his hometown.

古文：数千百人，解缚而遣之。
现代文：松绑遣散了他们数千百人。
English: Hundreds of thousands of them were released.

