古文：曰： 同。 
现代文：桓公问道： 古今的天时相同么？ 
English: King Kan asked: Is the time of day the same in the past and the present?

古文： 其人同乎？
现代文：管仲回答说： 相同。  那么。
English: Guanzhong replied, "It's the same.

古文：不同乎？ 曰： 不同。 
现代文：人事是否相同呢？ 回答说： 不同。 
English: Are the personnel the same? Answer: They are different.

古文：可与？
现代文：这可表现在政与刑两个方面。
English: This can be seen in both the political and criminal spheres.

古文：政其诛。俈尧之时，混吾之美在下，其道非独出人也。
现代文：早在帝喾、帝尧的时代，昆吾山的美金埋藏在地下都无人开采。他并非用了什么出人头地的办法。
English: As early as the era of Emperor Xizong and Empress Dowager Cixi, no one mined the gold of Kunwushan, which was buried underground. He did not use any methods to get ahead.

古文：山不童而用赡，泽不獘而养足。
现代文：因为那时山上的林木不用采伐光人们就可以够用，河中的水产还未打捞完人们就可以够吃。
English: Because at that time, there was no need to cut down the forest trees on the mountain, and people could have enough to eat, and the aquatic products in the river could be eaten without being salvaged.

古文：耕以自养，以其余应良天子，故平。
现代文：人们耕以自养。用所余的供应天子，所以天下太平。
English: People farmed to feed themselves, and used the rest to feed the gods, so the world was at peace.

古文：牛马之牧不相及，人民之俗不相知，不出百里而来足，故卿而不理，静也。
现代文：人们放牧牛马都互不相遇，习俗也互不相知，不出百里就可以满足各项需要，所以有公卿而无需办事、生活是平静的。
English: People grazing cattle and horses do not meet each other, and customs are not known to each other. They can meet various needs within a hundred miles. Therefore, there are nobles without having to do anything, and life is calm.

古文：其狱一踦腓一踦屦而当死。
现代文：那时的罪刑，使犯罪者一脚穿草鞋一脚穿常履就可以代替死刑。
English: At that time, the punishment of the crime, so that the offender can wear a pair of sandals and a pair of shoes can replace the death penalty.

古文：今周公断指满稽，断首满稽，断足满稽，而死民不服，非人性也，敝也。
现代文：然而现今的周公时代，断指、断足和断头积满台阶，被处死的人们还是不服从。这并不是人性不怕死，而是极度贫困的原故。
English: However, in today's Zhou era, broken fingers, feet and heads are piled up on the steps, and people who are executed still disobey. This is not because human nature is not afraid of death, but because of extreme poverty.

古文：地重人载，毁敝而养不足，事末作而民兴之；是以下名而上实也，圣人者，省诸本而游诸乐，大昏也，博夜也。
现代文：土地贵重，人口增多，生活破败贫困而且食养不足。发展了奢侈性的工商末业，人民生活才振兴起来，这是不重虚名而注重实际的措施。圣明的君主，观察研究农业生产的情况而发展游乐事业，甚至整日整夜地进行。 
English: Land is precious, the population is increasing, life is dilapidated and poor, and food is insufficient. Only after the development of luxury industry and commerce can people's lives be revitalized. This is a measure that does not attach importance to false names but focuses on reality. The holy monarch, observing and studying the situation of agricultural production and developing the amusement business, even all day and all night.

古文：问曰： 兴时化若何？ 
现代文：桓公接着发问说： 如何根据时代不同而改变政策呢？ 
English: Prince Kan went on to ask: How can policies be changed according to the times?

古文：莫善于侈靡；贱有实，敬无用，则人可刑也。
现代文：回答说： 最好的办法是发展侈靡消费。 不看重 有实 之物，而看重 无用 之物，可以使国人就范而服从管教。
English: He replied, "The best way is to develop extravagant consumption, not valuing tangible things, but valuing useless things, which can make the Chinese people conform and submit to discipline.

古文：故贱粟米而如敬珠玉，好礼乐而如贱事业。
现代文：这就是说，不看重粮食而着重珠玉，提倡礼乐制度而看轻生产事业，就是发展农业的开始。
English: That is to say, it is the beginning of the development of agriculture to attach importance to precious stones instead of grain, and to advocate the ritual music system while deemphasizing the production enterprise.

古文：本之殆也，珠者阴之阳也，故胜火。玉者阴之阴也，故胜水。
现代文：珠，是阴中之阳，所以胜过火；玉是阳中之阴，所以胜过水。
English: The pearl is the sun in the shade, so it is better than fire; the jade is the shade in the sun, so it is better than water.

古文：其化如神。
现代文：它们都是变化如神的。
English: They are all changing like crazy.

古文：故天子臧珠玉，诸侯臧金石，大夫畜狗马，百姓臧布帛。
现代文：因此，天子必须贮备作为货币的珠玉，至于诸侯则是贮备钟声等乐器，大夫则是贮备狗马等玩物，百姓则是贮备布帛等物资。
English: Therefore, the emperor must store precious stones as currency, while the princes store musical instruments such as bells, the doctors store toys such as dogs and horses, and the common people store cloth and other materials.

古文：不然，则强者能守之，智者能牧之，贱所贵而贵所贱。不然，鳏寡独老不与得焉，均之始也。
现代文：不然的话，强大的人将占有珠玉，智慧狡黠的人将操纵珠玉，市场物价就会波动；不然的话，鳏寡独老之人也就不得生计了。
English: Otherwise, powerful people will possess jewels, clever and cunning people will manipulate jewels, and market prices will fluctuate; otherwise, those who are widowed will not be able to make a living.

古文：政与教庸急？
现代文：都是重要措施，政令与教化哪个最为急需呢？
English: Both are important measures, but which is most urgently needed, the decree or the education?

古文：管子曰：夫政教相似而殊方，若夫教者，标然若秋云之远，动人心之悲；蔼然若夏之静云，乃及人之体，□然若謞之静。动人意以怨，荡荡若流水，使人思之。
现代文：管仲说：政令与教化相似而方法不同。教化，好象秋云的高远，能激起人的悲心；又好像夏天的静云，能浸及人的身体；深造得好象皓月的寂静，激动着人的怨思；平易如流水，使人思念又令人神往。
English: Guanzhong said: The government order is similar to the edification, but the methods are different. The edification is like the lofty autumn cloud, which can arouse people's compassion; it is also like the summer's quiet cloud, which can immerse people's bodies; it is as profound as the silence of the crescent moon, which excites people's grievances; it is as easy as running water, which makes people think and is fascinating.

古文：人所生往，教之始也，身必备之。辟之若秋云之始见，贤者不肖者化焉。
现代文：教化的开始，必须是在上者以身作则，就如同秋云在上空出现，无论贤者、不肖者都同时感化。
English: The beginning of edification must be to lead by example in the above, just as autumn clouds appear in the sky, and both the wise and the ugly are influenced at the same time.

古文：敬而待之，爱而使之，若樊神山祭之。贤者少。不肖者多。使其贤，不肖恶得不化。
现代文：严肃地对待人们，挚爱地使用人们，就像在神山上筑起篱笆祭神的气氛一样，贤人虽少，不肖者虽多，但教化使人转贤，不肖者怎么能不变化呢？
English: Treating people seriously and using them lovingly is like building a fence on a sacred mountain to worship the gods. Although there are few sages and many unsavory people, enlightenment makes people turn into sages. How can unsavory people not change?

古文：今夫政则少则，若夫成形之征者也，去则少可使人乎。
现代文：至于政令，则与此稍有不同。它是以强力和刑罚为其特征的。没有这点，政令对人们还能略加驱使么？
English: As for the decree, it is slightly different from this. It is characterized by force and punishment. Without this, can the decree drive people a little?

古文：用贫与富，何如而可，曰：甚富不可使，甚贫不知耻，水平而不流，无源则遫竭，云平而雨不甚，无委云，雨则遫已。政平而无威，则不行。
现代文：如何使用贫者和富者呢？回答说：人太富了，不好使用，太穷则不知羞耻。水平则不流，没有泉源，水很快枯竭；云平则无大雨，没有稠云，雨就很快停止；政令也是只平和而没有权威，它就不能贯彻了。
English: How are the poor and the rich to be used? he replied: A man is too rich to be of any use; too poor, he knows no shame; the level has no stream, no spring, the water soon dries up; the plain has no heavy rain, no thick clouds, the rain soon stops; a government decree is only peaceful and has no authority, it cannot be carried out.

古文：爱而无亲则流。
现代文：用人只泛爱而不分亲疏，则流于一般。
English: If you employ people who are only affectionate and do not differentiate between relatives and estranged relatives, then you will flow in the general direction.

古文：亲左有用，无用则辟之，若相为有兆怨。
现代文：但只亲左右近臣，进用无用之材，就好比以盲导盲，必然使人生怨。
English: However, only close relatives and close subordinates, and the use of useless materials, is like the blind leading the blind, which will inevitably lead to resentment in life.

古文：上短下长，无度而用，则危本不称。
现代文：重其短而弃其长，无法度用人，则是危害国家根本的。
English: Emphasizing the short and discarding the long, and not being able to employ enough people, is a fundamental harm to the country.

古文：而祀谭次祖，犯诅渝盟伤言。
现代文：不称其位而主持祭礼，是欺骗先祖。触犯盟誓和背弃盟约，则有伤信言。
English: To officiate at a festival without claiming one's position is to deceive one's ancestors, and to break one's oath and renounce one's covenant is to break one's word.

古文：敬祖祢，尊始也。
现代文：敬祖先是尊重根本。
English: Respect for ancestors is fundamental.

古文：齐约之信，论行也。
现代文：守盟约是讲求德行。
English: To keep the covenant is to be virtuous.

古文：尊天地之理，所以论威也。
现代文：提倡天地尊卑的道理，是为了明示权威。
English: To advocate the principle of the superiority and inferiority of heaven and earth is to express authority.

古文：薄德之君之府囊也。
现代文：薄德，是人群的败类。
English: Thin virtue is the scum of the crowd.

古文：必因成形而论于人，此政行也，可以王乎？
现代文：必须以威刑晓谕国人，这才是为政之道。怎样才可以成就王业？
English: It is necessary to tell the people of the country by means of punishment. This is the only way to govern. How can the king's business be accomplished?

古文：请问用之若何？
现代文：请问其做法如何？
English: What is its approach?

古文：必辨于天地之道，然后功名可以殖。
现代文：必须明白天地事物的规律，然后才可以发展功业与名声。
English: You must understand the laws of heaven, earth and things before you can develop your career and reputation.

古文：辨于地利，而民可富。通于侈靡，而士可戚。
现代文：懂得地利，可以使人民富有；懂得侈靡消费，可以团结士人。
English: If you know the geography, you can make the people rich; if you know extravagant consumption, you can unite the scholars.

古文：君亲自好事，强以立断，仁以好任。
现代文：人君须亲理大事，强明果断，而仁爱用人。
English: People must be responsible for their own affairs, strong and decisive, and benevolent.

古文：人君寿以政年，百姓不夭厉，六畜鞍育，五谷鞍熟，然后民力可得用。
现代文：还必须祈祷丰年，使百姓无灾疫，六畜繁育，五谷丰熟，然后，民力就可以调动起来。
English: It is also necessary to pray for a good year, so that the people are free from disasters and epidemics, six animals are bred, and the grain is plentiful. Then, the people's power can be mobilized.

古文：邻国之君俱不贤，然后得王。
现代文：在邻国之君都不贤的条件下，这样就可以成就王业了。
English: Under the condition that the sovereigns of neighboring countries are not virtuous, this can be achieved.

古文：俱贤若何？
现代文：若是邻国之君都很贤明又将如何呢？
English: What if the rulers of neighboring countries are all wise?

古文：曰：忽然易卿而移，忽然易事而化，变而足以成名。承獘而民劝之，慈种而民富，应言待感，与物俱长，故日月之明，应风雨而种。天之所覆，地之所载，斯民之良也，不有而丑天地，非天子之事也。
现代文：回答说：或者迅速改换大臣，或者迅速改革政事，肯改变就可以成就功名，拯救弊政则人民鼓舞，发展农业则人民富裕；适应天时的变化，顺应万物的生长；象日月放出光明，象风雨起降合宜，如天之覆，如地之载，具备这些条件，就是人民爱戴的君长。没有这些业绩而硬要比配天地，就不是天子当为之事了。
English: He replied, "Either change the ministers quickly, or reform the government affairs quickly. If you change, you can achieve fame. If you save the bad government, the people will be inspired. If you develop agriculture, the people will be rich. Adapt to the changes of the times, conform to the growth of all things. Like the sun and the moon emit light, like the wind and the rain, like the overthrow of the heavens, like the carrying of the earth. If you have these conditions, you are a ruler loved by the people. If you do not have these achievements, and if you are hard to match the heavens and the earth, it is not what the Son of Heaven should do.

古文：民变而不能变，是棁之傅革，有革而不能革，不可服。民死信，诸侯死化。
现代文：人民思变而不能适应变革，就好比木头外面包一层皮革，叫作有皮革而不能变革，那是不会悦服并取信于人民的。
English: If the people want to change and cannot adapt to change, it is like wrapping a layer of leather around a piece of wood and calling it leather and not being able to change. That will not please and win the people's trust.

古文：请问诸侯之化獘，獘也者，家也。
现代文：各国诸侯都保有财货，请问各国诸侯的货币情况如何？货币，是表示物价的。
English: The lords of all countries keep goods. What is the monetary situation of the lords of all countries? Currency is a representation of prices.

古文：家也者，以因人之所重而行之。
现代文：物价是依据人们对该物的重视程度而定的。
English: The price depends on how much people value the item.

古文：吾君长来猎君长虎豹之皮用。
现代文：我们国君若重视打猎，就重视虎豹的皮张。
English: If our sovereign attaches importance to hunting, he will attach importance to the fur of tigers and leopards.

古文：功力之君上金玉币，好战之君上甲兵。甲兵之本，必先于田宅。
现代文：耗用功力的国君，重视金玉的货币。好战的国君，重视盔甲和兵器；而甲兵的来源，又首先在于田宅。
English: The hardworking sovereigns valued the money of gold and jewels. The warlike sovereigns valued armour and weapons; and the source of armourers, in the first place, lay in the fields and houses.

古文：今吾君战，则请行民之所重。
现代文：现在我们国君要从事战争，就要举办人民所重视的事情。
English: Now, if our sovereign is to engage in war, it is necessary to hold events that are important to the people.

古文：饮食者也，侈乐者也，民之所愿也，足其所欲，赡其所愿，则能用之耳。
现代文：饮食、侈乐是人民的愿望，满足他们的欲求和愿望，就可以使用他们。
English: Food and luxury are the wishes of the people, and they can be used to satisfy their wants and desires.

古文：今使衣皮而冠角食野草，饮野水，庸能用之？
现代文：假使只是让他们身披兽皮，头戴牛角，吃野草，喝野水，怎么能够使用他们呢？
English: If they are only allowed to wear animal skins and horns, eat wild grass and drink wild water, how can they be used?

古文：伤心者不可以致功。
现代文：心情不舒畅的人是做不好工作的。
English: People who are not in a good mood do not do well at work.

古文：故尝至味，而罢至乐。而雕卵然后瀹之，雕橑然后爨之。
现代文：所以，要提倡吃最好的饮食，听最好的音乐，把蛋品雕画了然后煮食，把木柴雕刻了然后焚烧。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to advocate eating the best diet, listening to the best music, carving eggs and then cooking, carving firewood and then burning.

古文：丹沙之穴不塞，则商贾不处。
现代文：丹砂矿产的洞口不要堵塞，使商贾贩运不要呆滞。
English: Don't block the openings of the Tanzanite mines, and don't slow down the merchant traffic.

古文：富者靡之，贫者为之，此百姓之怠生百振而食非，独自为也，为之畜化。
现代文：让富人奢侈消费，让穷人劳动就业。这样，百姓就能安居乐业，百般振奋而有饭吃。这不是百姓可以单独做到的，需要在上者替他们蓄积财货。
English: Let the rich consume extravagantly, and let the poor work and be employed. In this way, the people will be able to live and work in peace, be excited in every way, and have food to eat. This is not something that the people can do alone, they need the upper class to accumulate wealth and goods for them.

古文：用其臣者，予而夺之，使而辍之，徒以而富之，父系而伏之，予虚爵而骄之。收其春秋之时而消之，有集礼我而居之。时举其强者以誉之。
现代文：使用臣下的方法应当是：有所赐又有所夺，有所任又有所免；既赐与人徒使其富有，又备有刑戮使其慑服；既赐与空头爵位骄纵他们，又收取春秋财税削弱他们；既采用繁杂的礼仪来限制他们，又经常标举精明强干的典型来表扬他们。
English: The methods of using vassals should be: giving and taking, allowing and exempting; giving people to make them rich, and having torture to deter them; giving them empty knighthoods to make them proud, and collecting taxes to weaken them; using complex etiquette to restrict them, and often praising them with examples of shrewdness and strength.

古文：强而可使服事。辩以辩辞，智以招请，廉以摽人，坚强以乘六，广其德以轻上，位不能使之而流徙，此谓国亡之郤。
现代文：对于精明强干的人，可因材任事：能言者用他做舌辩外交的工作，有智者用他做侦查性的工作，性行廉正者用他做监督人的工作。对于性行顽强而欺凌属下的人，无德而轻蔑上级的人，则不加使用而流徒外地，因为这些人都是亡国的祸因。
English: For those who are shrewd and strong-willed, they can be assigned according to their talents: those who can speak well use them to do the work of diplomacy, those who are wise use them to do investigative work, and those who are sexually honest use them to supervise people. For those who are sexually tenacious and bully subordinates, and those who are immoral and despise superiors, they are not used and go abroad, because these people are the cause of the country's downfall.

古文：故法而守常，尊礼而变俗，上信而贱文，好缘而好駔，此谓成国之法也。
现代文：巩固法制而遵守传统，提倡礼节而改革民俗，重信用而贱虚伪，好柔顺而嫌粗暴，这都是立国的原则。
English: Consolidating the legal system while observing tradition, advocating etiquette while reforming folk customs, valuing trust but despising hypocrisy, being flexible but not rude, these are all principles for founding a country.

古文：为国者，反民性，然后可以与民戚，民欲佚，而教以劳。民欲生，而教以死。劳教定而国富，死教定而威行。
现代文：凡治理国家，先要违反人民的习性，然后才可以与民相亲。人民图安逸，偏要教之以劳动；人民贪生，偏要教之以殉死。 劳动教育 成功了，国家可以致富； 殉死教育 成功了，国家可以扬威。
English: Whoever governs the country must first violate the people's habits, and only then can he be close to the people. The people seek comfort, but must be taught by labor; the people are greedy for life, but must be taught by martyrdom. If labor education is successful, the country can become rich; if martyrdom education is successful, the country can gain prestige.

古文：圣人者，阴阳理，故平外而险中；故信其情者伤其神，美其质者伤其文，化之美者应其名，变其美者应其时，不能兆其端者菑及之。
现代文：圣明君主，更善于协调事物的矛盾，所以表面平易而内心要求严格。看起来，放任情性者伤其精神，修美质地者伤其文采，变化得最好的也必须合于名分，改革得最好的也必须应合时势发展：不能预见事物端倪者，是要遭灾的。
English: The enlightened monarch is better at reconciling the contradictions of things, so he is easy on the surface and strict in his heart. It seems that the permissive person hurts his spirit, the aesthetic person hurts his literary style. The best change must also fit the name, and the best reform must also be in line with the development of the times. If you can't foresee things, you will suffer disaster.

古文：故缘地之利，承从天之指，辱举其死，开国闭辱，知其缘地之利者，所以参天地之吉纲也；承从天之指者，动必明。辱举其死者，与其失人同公事，则道必行。开其国门者，玩之以善言。柰其斝辱，知神次者，操牺牲与其珪璧，以执其斝。家小害，以小胜大。
现代文：因此，要顺应地利，服从天的意旨，厚祀祖先，打开国门，并且丰厚地祭告诸神。顺应地利，是因为可以参悟天地的规律；服从天的意旨，是因为保证行动方向明确；厚把祖先，是因为保持与先人同道：祭祀祖先合乎礼节，祖宗成法也必然实行；开放国门，是因为可以研讨外国的高明言论；丰厚地祭告诸神，是因为可以利用祭品，执杯酒而避小灾，这样以小胜大而加强其内部。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to conform to the country, obey the will of heaven, honor the ancestors, open the door of the country, and richly worship the gods. Conform to the country is because you can understand the laws of heaven and earth; obey the will of heaven is to ensure that the direction of action is clear; honor the ancestors is to keep the same path as the ancestors: the sacrifice of the ancestors is in line with etiquette, and the ancestral law is also necessarily implemented; open the door of the country is because you can study the wise words of foreign countries; richly worship the gods is because you can use the offerings, hold a glass of wine and avoid minor disasters, thus strengthening

古文：员其中，辰其外。
现代文：至于发展到外面，还要威慑强者，旌表谦虚。
English: As far as outward development is concerned, it is necessary to deter the strong and be modest.

古文：而复畏强，长其虚，而物正以视其中情。公曰：国门则塞，百姓谁敢敖，胡以备之？
现代文：这样，全社会都将归正，臣民坦示其内心而来。桓公说： 国门阻塞，百姓喧噪不安，如何防备？ 
English: In this way, the whole society will return to righteousness, and the subjects will openly show their hearts.Han Gong said: The national gate is blocked, the people are noisy and uneasy, how to prevent it?

古文：择天下之所宥，择鬼之所当，择人天之所戴，而前付其身，此所以安之也。
现代文：回答说： 选拔上天保佑、鬼神赐福、人民爱戴的人，付之以重任，就可以安定百姓了。 
English: He replied, "Selecting those who are blessed by heaven, blessed by ghosts and gods, and loved by the people, and entrusting them with heavy responsibilities, can stabilize the people."

古文：强与短而立，齐国之若何？
现代文： 如果良臣与劣臣同处齐国朝中，又将如何处理呢？ 
English: If a good minister and a bad minister are together in the middle of the Qi dynasty, how will it be handled?

古文：高予之名而举之，重予之官而危之，因责其能以随之，犹傶则疏之，毋使人图之，犹疏则数之，毋使人曲之，此所以为之也。
现代文： 可给以崇高的荣誉来表彰良臣，用重要职位来显异良臣，这是根据他们的才能来分别对待的。假使他是出身于亲族的，那就；要保持一定的距离，免使人嫉妒陷害；假使他是出身于疏远的，那就要多多接近一些，免使：人挑拨冤枉。这都是用来保护良臣的措施。 
English: A good minister may be honored with high honors and distinguished with important positions, and they are treated differently according to their talents. If he is from a relative, it is necessary to maintain a certain distance, so as not to make people jealous; if he is from a distant place, it is necessary to get closer and closer, so as not to provoke injustice. These are all measures to protect a good minister.

古文：大有臣甚大，将反为害，吾欲优患除害，将小能察大，为之奈何？
现代文：大臣的地位太高了，反容易受人谗害，我想消除这种祸患，以求得防患于未然，怎么办呢？
English: The minister's position is too high, but he is easily bullied. I want to eliminate this scourge in order to prevent it from happening in the first place. What should I do?

古文：潭根之毋伐，固蒂之毋乂，深黎之毋涸，不仪之毋助，章明之毋灭，生荣之毋失。
现代文：这要象爱护古木一样，延深其根基而不去砍伐，加固其蒂蔓而不去割别，深犁其根土而不使枯竭，高育其树身而不加剪除，加强其日照而不使昏暗，帮助其生长繁茂而不使有所损伤。
English: It is like caring for an ancient tree, deepening its roots without cutting it down, strengthening its branches without pruning them, deepening its soil without drying it out, nourishing its trunk without pruning it, strengthening its sunlight without darkening it, and helping it to grow and flourish without damaging it.

古文：十言者不胜此一，虽凶必吉，故平以满。
现代文：君主左右的进谗言者，不能胜过此六项保护措施之一，虽遇凶也必将化吉，所以是会安定而圆满的。
English: Those who meddle in the affairs of the monarch cannot overcome this one of the six protective measures, and even if they are attacked, they will be successful, so they will be stable and complete.

古文：无事而总，以待有事，而为之若何？
现代文：无事积财，以待有事，其做法应当是怎样的呢？
English: What should be the practice of accumulating wealth for nothing and waiting for something to happen?

古文：积者立余日而侈，美车马而驰，多酒醴而靡，千岁毋出食，此谓本事。
现代文：积财者应拿出余粮大量消费，美饰车马尽情驰乐，多置酒醴尽情享用，这样一千年都不会讨口。
English: Those who accumulate wealth should take out surplus grain to consume a large amount, decorate cars and horses to enjoy themselves, and enjoy more wine, so that they will not complain for a thousand years.

古文：县人有主，人此治用，然而不治，积之市，一人积之下，一人积之上，此谓利无常。
现代文：因为这样做正是促进了农业生产。县的收入也有主持其事的，收取财物以满足需用，若不以此项满足需用，便放在市场上积累生利。但有时收入则愈积愈少，有时可愈积愈多，这叫作营利无常。
English: Because doing so promotes agricultural production. The county revenue also presides over the matter, collecting property to meet the needs, and if it does not meet the needs, it will be placed on the market to accumulate profits. However, sometimes the income accumulates less and less, and sometimes it can accumulate more and more, which is called profiteering.

古文：百姓无宝，以利为首。一上一下，唯利所处。
现代文：老百姓别无什么宝物，只是把求利看得最重，上下奔波，唯利所趋。
English: Ordinary people do not have any other treasure, but they regard the pursuit of profit as the most important thing, rushing up and down, striving for profit.

古文：利然后能通，通然后成国。
现代文：有财利然后能流通，有流通然后成立城市。
English: If there is money and profit, then there will be circulation. If there is circulation, then a city will be established.

古文：利静而不化，观其所出，从而移之。
现代文：假使财利呆滞而交易不畅，那就要查出原因，从而转移门路。
English: If the financial profits are sluggish and the transactions are not smooth, then it is necessary to find out the reasons, so as to divert the way.

古文：视其不可使，因以为民等。
现代文：看到不堪使用的官员，就应该削职为民。
English: If you see officials who are not up to the job, you should make them resign.

古文：择其好名，因使长民；好而不已，是以为国纪。
现代文：选择其名声良好的，使用他为民之长；一贯地表现良好，即可为治国之人才了。
English: If you choose a person with a good reputation, you can use him as a leader of the people; if you consistently perform well, you can be a talent for governing the country.

古文：功未成者，不可以独名；事未道者，不可以言名。
现代文：功业未成的不可以独享名位，事业未治的不可以谈及名位。
English: Unaccomplished merits cannot enjoy the fame alone, and unhealed causes cannot talk about the fame.

古文：成功然后可以独名，事道然后可以言名，然后可以承致酢。
现代文：功成然后可以独享名位，事治然后可以谈及名位，这然后才可以享受祭肉的赐予。
English: Achievement can then enjoy the prestigious position, governance can then talk about the prestigious position, and only then can you enjoy the gift of sacrificial meat.

古文：先其士者之为自犯，后其民者之为自赡。
现代文：事事把士大夫放在前面，是自己犯过错；事事把人民放在后面，是自己抹黑。
English: It is one's own fault if one puts the scholar-bureaucrats in front; it is one's own fault if one puts the people behind.

古文：轻国位者国必败，疏贵戚者谋将泄。
现代文：看轻国位的君主，其国必败；疏远贵戚的君主，其谋必泄。
English: The monarch who despises the throne of his country is sure to fail; the monarch who alienates his noble relatives is sure to fail.

古文：毋仕异国之人，是为失经。
现代文：不可用异国之人当官，那是背弃常规。
English: It would be a departure from the norm not to have someone from a foreign country in office.

古文：毋数变易，是为败成。
现代文：不可朝令夕改，那将会败坏成业。
English: You can't change things from one day to the next. That will ruin your career.

古文：大臣得罪，勿出封外，是为漏情。
现代文：大臣犯了罪，就不可使之出国，那将泄漏国家的内情。
English: If a minister has committed a crime, he should not be allowed to leave the country. That would reveal the state's inner workings.

古文：毋数据大臣之家而饮酒，是为使国大消。三尧在，臧于县，返于连，比若是者，必从是儡亡乎！辟之若尊觯，未胜其本，亡流而下不平。
现代文：不可常在大臣家饮酒作乐，那将使国运大消；饮酒逍遥，荒亡流连，经常如是，国家就由此败亡了好比一个酒器，上部大而底部小，酒既流失而底又不会平稳。
English: One should not often drink and make merry at the minister's house, for that will ruin the country's fortune; one should not drink and make merry, for that will ruin the country. If one does so often, the country will be ruined. It is like a wine vessel, the upper part is large, but the bottom is small. The wine will be lost, but the bottom will not be stable.

古文：令苟下不治，高下者不足以相待，此谓杀。
现代文：一个国家法令下达而无效，上下的关系不能维持下去，这就叫作败亡。
English: If a state decree is issued and is invalid, and the relationship between the upper and lower levels cannot be maintained, this is called defeat.

古文：事立而坏，何也？
现代文：事业建成而中途败坏，为什么？
English: Why is it that a project is built and then ruined halfway through?

古文：兵远而畏，何也？
现代文：兵陈远地而不能威敌，为什么？
English: The soldiers are far away and cannot overpower the enemy. Why?

古文：民已聚而散，何也？
现代文：百姓已经聚居而又逃散，为什么？
English: The people have already gathered and fled. Why?

古文：辍安而危，何也？
现代文：安定之局中断而陷入危难，为什么？
English: Why did the stable situation break down and fall into a crisis?

古文：功成而不信者，殆；兵强而无义者，残；不谨于附近而欲求远者，兵不信。略近臣合于其远者，立。
现代文：一个国家，功业刚有成就便不讲信用，是危险的；军队很强而不讲正义，是残暴的；不团结近国还想要征服远国，军队是没有威信的；再加上疏于近臣而亲于远者，这就会导致 事业建成而中途败坏了 。
English: A country is dangerous if it does not give credit to its achievements as soon as they are achieved; the army is strong but does not speak of justice and is cruel; if it does not unite with its neighbors and still wants to conquer distant countries, the army has no prestige; coupled with those who neglect their close vassals but are close to those far away, this will lead to the completion of the cause and the mid-course corruption.

古文：亡国之起，毁国之族，则兵远而不畏。
现代文：一个国家，失掉了治国的大臣，毁灭了国君的宗族，就会导致 兵陈远地而不能威敌了 。
English: If a country loses its minister of state and destroys the family line of the sovereign, it will lead to the soldiers being too far away to be able to dominate the enemy.

古文：国小而修大，仁而不利，犹有争名者，累哉是也！
现代文：一个国家，自己本来很小而妄行大国之政，行一点仁政不见功效，还想同别国争名，简直是自寻苦恼!
English: A country that is too small to be a great power, that does not practice benevolent politics, and that wants to compete with other countries, is just asking for trouble!

古文：乐聚之力，以兼人之强，以待其害，虽聚必散。
现代文：但他还热衷于积聚武力妄想过人的强大，以致受害，这就会导致 百姓已经聚居而又逃散了 。
English: However, he was also keen on amassing power and imagined that he was powerful, which led to suffering, which would lead to the people who had already gathered and fled.

古文：大王不恃众而自恃，百姓自聚；供而后利之，成而无害。
现代文：当然，人君若亲民克己，百姓还是会归附聚居，奉献力量而利其治理，助成其功业而无所加害的。
English: Of course, if the ruler is kind to the people and restrains himself, the people will still adhere to live together, contribute their strength to benefit their governance, and support their work without causing harm.

古文：疏戚而好外，企以仁而谋泄，贱寡而好大，此所以危。
现代文：一个国家，疏于近亲而亲于外人，企慕仁政，但所谋又多泄露，轻视小事而好大喜功，这些都是 陷入危难 的原因。
English: A country that neglects its close relatives but is friendly to outsiders, that pursues benevolent policies but leaks many of its plans, that despises trifles but rejoices in great feats - these are all reasons for falling into peril.

古文：众而约，实取而言让，行阴而言阳，利人之有祸，言人之无患，吾欲独有是，若何？
现代文：本来多而表示少，实取于人而表示推让，行为诡秘而言语堂皇，利在人之有祸，唯恐人之无患，我的欲念竟存在这些东西，怎么办呢？
English: Originally more but expressed less, actually taking from others but expressing concession, acting in a mysterious way, speaking grandly, benefiting others, but fearing no harm, my desire actually exists these things, what to do?

古文：是故之时，陈财之道可以行。
现代文：这些致财之道，在古时尚可一行。
English: These ways of making money can be done in the old fashioned way.

古文：今也利散而民察，必放之身然后行。
现代文：现今财利散于下，从从察见，一定要实行放散资财的办法才行。
English: Nowadays, wealth and interests are scattered all over the country. Therefore, it is necessary to implement the method of distributing capital and wealth.

古文：公曰：谓何？
现代文：桓公说：这是什么意思？
English: Prince Kan said, "What does this mean?"

古文：长丧以毁其时，重送葬以起身财，一亲往，一亲来，所以合亲也。
现代文：使丧期长久以消磨富者的时间，使葬礼厚重以耗用富者的钱财，让他们亲往亲来，以借此增进和睦。
English: Let the funeral be long, that it may consume the time of the rich; and let it be large, that it may consume the wealth of the rich; and let them come and go, that they may increase peace.

古文：此谓众约。
现代文：这样也就相约成风了。
English: In this way, it has become a common practice.

古文：问，用之若何？
现代文：桓公又问：具体做法如何？
English: Prince Kan also asked: What is the specific approach?

古文：巨瘗堷，所以使贫民也；美垄墓，所以使文明也；巨棺椁，所以起木工也；多衣衾，所以起女工也。
现代文：挖掘巨大的墓室，使穷人有工作做；装饰堂皇的墓地，使雕、画工匠有工作做；制造巨大的棺停，使木工发家；多用随葬的衣被，使女红得利。
English: Digging huge burial chambers, so that the poor have work to do; decorating magnificent cemeteries, so that carving and painting craftsmen have work to do; making huge coffins, so that carpenters can make a fortune; using more burial quilts, so that women can make a profit.

古文：犹不尽，故有次浮也，有差樊，有瘗藏。
现代文：这还不够，还有各种祭奠包袱、各种仪仗与各种殉葬物品。
English: This is not enough, there are also all kinds of ceremonial burdens, all kinds of ceremonial battles and all kinds of funerary objects.

古文：作此相食，然后民相利，守战之备合矣。
现代文：用这些办法使贫者维持生活，然后使人民都被其利。无论国家的守战都可以搞好了。
English: Use these methods to keep the poor alive, and then the people will all benefit. Regardless of the country's defense, it can be done well.

古文：乡殊俗，国异礼，则民不流矣；不同法，则民不困；乡丘老不通睹，诛流散，则人不眺安乡乐宅，享祭而讴吟称号者皆诛，所以留民俗也。
现代文：尊重各乡不同的风俗和各城不同的礼节，人民就不会流动迁徒；实行不同的法度，人民就不会感到困窘；使各地区老死不相往来，并惩罚流散人口，人民就不会外逃。让人们安乡乐宅、祭神祭祖的颂词与称呼不求一致。也就是为了保留民俗的。
English: Respecting the different customs of each township and the different etiquette of each city, the people will not move and migrate; implementing different laws, the people will not feel embarrassed; making the regions old and dead, and punishing the scattered population, the people will not flee. Let people have a happy home, and the eulogies of the gods and ancestors do not seek consistency with the name. That is, in order to preserve folk customs.

古文：断方井田之数，乘马甸之众，制之。
现代文：确定并田的地数和军赋的多少。
English: Determine the number of fields to be annexed and the amount of military equipment.

古文：陵溪立鬼神而谨祭。皆以能别以为食数，示重本也。
现代文：使之成为制度；在山陵溪涧立庙谨祭鬼神；对大小人等都能使之得到相应的衣食，这些都是表示重视农业生产的。
English: To make it a system; to erect a temple in the mountains and creeks to solemnly worship ghosts and gods; to make it possible for people of all ages to receive appropriate clothing and food, these are all expressions of the importance attached to agricultural production.

古文：故地广千里者，禄重而祭尊。
现代文：拥有千里土地的国君，臣下的俸禄自然丰厚而祭祀规格也高。
English: For a sovereign with thousands of miles of land, the salary of his subjects is naturally plentiful and the standard of sacrifice is also high.

古文：其君无余地与他若一者，从而艾之。
现代文：至十没有剩余土地而只有荒地的围君，就只好进行开荒。
English: By the tenth year, there was no surplus land and only the wasteland was left, so they had no choice but to clear the wasteland.

古文：君始者艾若一者，从乎杀。
现代文：处在开荒时期的国君。其禄赏与祭祀规格，自然应随着降低。
English: He was a sovereign in the beginning of the barbarian period. Naturally, his reward and sacrificial offerings should have decreased accordingly.

古文：与于杀若，一者从者艾若一者，从于杀。
现代文：被降低禄赏的臣下，与开荒口才期的国君一样，也随着逐级下降。最后被降低者。
English: The vassals whose reward was reduced, like the king who was too young to speak out, also went down step by step. The last to be reduced was the last.

古文：与于杀若，一者从无封始，王者上事，霸者生功，言重本。
现代文：简直与没有封地的庶人一样。
English: They are just like commoners without fiefdoms.

古文：是为十禺，分免而不争，言先人而自后也。
现代文：固然。王者上事，霸者生功 这两句话说明重视土地生产是为了军事；但是 分地而不争 这句话则是要求更应坚持先人后己的原则。
English: Of course, these two sentences show that the emphasis on land production is for military purposes; but the division of land without dispute This sentence is a requirement to adhere to the principle of forefathers and posterity.

古文：官礼之司，昭穆之离先后功器事之治，尊鬼而守故；战事之任，高功而下死；本事，食功而省利；劝臣，上义而不能与小利。
现代文：对于百官的管理。要先论功绩而后定名位；对十亲族序列及祭祀的管理，要尊重死者而严守祖宗旧法；对于战事的管理，要提倡立功而鄙视徒然送死；对于农业的管理。要酬赏实功而观察效益：对于劝勉臣下的管理。要注重大义而不与小利。
English: For the management of the hundred officials, it is necessary to first discuss the merits and then determine the ranks; for the management of the ten kinship sequences and sacrifices, it is necessary to respect the dead and strictly abide by the old law of the ancestors; for the management of the war, it is necessary to promote meritorious service and despise sending death in vain; for the management of agriculture, it is necessary to reward real merit and observe benefits: for the management of exhorting vassals, it is necessary to pay attention to great righteousness and not small profits.

古文：五官者，人争其职，然后君闻。
现代文：这五种管理。可以使人们争尽其职。然后国君的名声远闻。
English: These five kinds of management can make people compete to do their duty. Then the reputation of the sovereign will be known far and wide.

古文：祭之，时上贤者也，故君臣掌。
现代文：人君察问细事，是自恃贤能的表现。这样。将导致君臣共管细事。
English: It is a sign of virtuous self-discipline for a man to inquire into details. This will lead to the co-management of details by the prince and the minister.

古文：君臣掌则上下均，此以知上贤无益也，其亡兹适。
现代文：君臣共管则等于地位拉平。可见，君主自恃贤能是没有好处的，适足以造成危亡。
English: The co-governance of prince and vassal is equal to the leveling of status. It can be seen that it is not good for the monarch to claim to be virtuous, but it is enough to cause peril.

古文：上贤者亡，而役贤者昌。
现代文：人君自恃贤能者国亡，而使用贤能者国昌。
English: People like to say that the country of the virtuous will perish, but the country of the virtuous will prosper.

古文：上义以禁暴，尊祖以敬祖，聚宗以朝杀，示不轻为主也。
现代文：倡导正义而禁止暴行。尊奉祖先而敬事祖先，团结同族而昭明等次。
English: Advocating justice and prohibiting violence, honoring ancestors and honoring ancestors, uniting the same people and clarifying, and so on.

古文：能摩故道新道，定国家，然后化时乎？
现代文：抓这些大事才表明不轻为一国之君。能揣摩旧办法与新办法。安定国家。然后按时代改变政策么？
English: It is only by grasping these major events that we can show that we do not take lightly being the ruler of a country. We can figure out the old way and the new way. We can stabilize the country. And then change the policy according to the times?

古文：国贫而鄙富，苴美于朝市国；国富而鄙贫，莫尽如市。
现代文：城市贫穷而农村富裕，没有比朝廷更实惠的；城市富裕而农村贫穷，没有比市场更繁荣的。
English: If the city is poor and the countryside is rich, there is nothing more profitable than the imperial court; if the city is rich and the countryside is poor, there is nothing more prosperous than the market.

古文：市也者，劝也。
现代文：市场，是一种鼓舞力量。
English: The market is an inspirational force.

古文：劝者，所以起。
现代文：鼓舞，是为厂发展。
English: Encouraged, is for the factory development.

古文：本善而末事起。
现代文：农业完善而工商末业也得到发展。
English: Agriculture has been perfected and industry and commerce have also been developed.

古文：不侈，本事不得立。
现代文：不进行侈靡消费，农业生产就站不住脚。
English: Without extravagant consumption, agricultural production cannot be sustained.

古文：贤举能不可得，恶得伐不服？
现代文：得不到贤能之士，怎么能征伐不服之国呢？
English: How can you conquer a rebellious nation without a virtuous man?

古文：用百夫无长，不可临也；干乘有道，不可修也。
现代文：百人之众，而且没有头领。都不可轻易对待；干乘之国，并且治理有方，更不能妄加侵犯。
English: A hundred men without a leader are not to be trifled with, and a country well governed cannot be trifled with.

古文：夫纣在上，恶得伐不得？
现代文：象纣王那样的君主在上主政，怎么能征伐不服者呢？
English: How can a monarch like King Zou conquer those who do not submit to his rule?

古文：钧则战，守则攻，百盖无筑，千聚无社，谓之陋，一举而取。
现代文：双方势均力敌则战，一方处于守势则攻。成百的房舍没有建筑，成千的村落没有神庙，这种情况就叫作 破败 。对这样的国家是可以一举而取的。
English: When the two sides are of equal strength, the enemy is at war, and the side on the defensive is on the offensive. Hundreds of houses have no buildings, and thousands of villages have no temples. This situation is called "ruined." Such a country can be taken at one stroke.

古文：天下有一事之时也，万诸侯钧，万民无听，上位不能为功更制，其能王乎？
现代文：在天下有事的时候，各国诸侯同起。万民无所适从，居上位者如不能创立功业，变革法制，还能够乘时统一天下么？
English: When there is trouble in the world, princes of all countries rise together. All the people are at a loss. If those at the top cannot create merits and change the legal system, can they still use time to unify the country?

古文：缘故修法，以政治道，则约杀子吾君，故取夷吾谓替。
现代文：遵守旧法，修订新法，以匡正各国诸侯的治国之道，在这方面谁都不如我国的国君，因此需要我管仲代谋此事。
English: To abide by the old law, to amend the new law, to rectify the way of governing the country by the princes of all countries, in this respect, no one is better than the sovereign of our country, so I need to be in charge of this matter.

古文：公曰：何若？
现代文：桓公发问说：此事如何进行？
English: Prince Kan asked, "How is this going to be handled?"

古文：对曰：以同。
现代文：管仲回答说：实行同化政策。
English: Guanzhong replied: to carry out the policy of assimilation.

古文：公曰：同临？
现代文：用充分的时间监临管理，到时候就可以立见功效。
English: If you spend enough time supervising on-site management, you will be able to see the effect immediately.

古文：所谓同者，其以先后智渝者也。
现代文：桓公说，何谓监临管理？回答说，所谓同化政策，那是以先进后进之间才智超越为根据的。
English: He replied that the so-called assimilation policy was based on the superiority of intelligence between advanced and backward countries.

古文：钧同财争，依则说，十则从服，万则化。
现代文：彼此才智相同者，自然争斗，但超过一倍则对方悦服，超过十倍则服从，超过万倍那就归化了。
English: Those who have the same intelligence as each other naturally fight, but if it is more than double, the other party will be pleased, if it is more than ten times, they will obey, and if it is more than ten thousand times, they will be naturalized.

古文：成功而不能识，而民期然后，成形而更名，则临矣。
现代文：完成功业于不识不知之中，百姓都期待这样人立为君主，并且建立霸王之业而正名，这就完成监临管理的作用了。
English: The people are expecting such a person to become the monarch and establish the cause of the overlord to justify his name. This will complete the role of supervision and management.

古文：请问为边若何？
现代文：请问应如何守护边疆？
English: How should we guard the border?

古文：对曰：夫边日变，不可以常知观也。
现代文：回答说：边事多变，不可用一般见识推断。
English: He replied: "Circumstances change, and you can't use common sense to extrapolate.

古文：民未始变而是变，是为自乱。
现代文：边民本无变乱而采取应变措施，这叫作庸人自扰。
English: Border residents take contingency measures in the absence of turmoil, which is called meddling.

古文：请问诸边而参其乱，任之以事，因其谋。
现代文：要请教边地人们以了解变乱原因，要使他们任事并用其谋划。
English: It is necessary to consult the people in the outlying areas to understand the causes of the turmoil, to let them take charge and use them to plan.

古文：方百里之地，树表相望者，丈夫走祸，妇人备食，内外相备。
现代文：在方百里的土地上，在树立标志可以互见之处，男人疾辞应征，妇人准备饭食，内外都应当有所戒备。
English: On the land of a hundred miles square, in places where signs can be set up so that they can be seen by each other, men are eager to enlist, women are preparing meals, and both inside and outside should be alert.

古文：春秋一日，败曰千金，称本而动。
现代文：在春种秋收季节，战争一日。等于耗费千金，所以要衡量农业情况而动兵。
English: In the season of spring planting and autumn harvest, one day of war is equivalent to spending a lot of money, so it is necessary to measure the agricultural situation and mobilize troops.

古文：候人不可重也，唯交于上，能必于边之辞。
现代文：侦察人员不可擅离岗位，要向上报告边情，一定要克尽守护边境的职守。
English: Reconnaissance personnel must not leave their posts without authorization, they must report the border situation to higher levels, and they must fulfill their duties of guarding the border.

古文：行人可不有私，不有私，所以为内因也。
现代文：外交人员可否怀有私心呢？
English: Can diplomats be self-interested?

古文：使能者有主，矣而内事。
现代文：当然不可。如有私心，就可能成为内奸。
English: Of course not. If you are selfish, you may become a mole.

古文：万世之国，必有万世之实。
现代文：要使有才能的人主持此事，做好其分内工作。传之万世的国家，必有传之万世的国宝。
English: It is necessary to have talented people preside over this matter and do their part. A country that has been passed down for centuries must have a national treasure that has been passed down for centuries.

古文：必因天地之道，无使其内使其外，使其小毋使其大。
现代文：这国宝，就是坚决遵循天地的规律，勤于内政而不务向外侵略。谨小慎微而不务好大喜功。
English: This national treasure is to resolutely follow the laws of heaven and earth, to be diligent in domestic affairs but not to invade abroad, and to be cautious but not too cautious to make great achievements.

古文：弃其国宝使其大，贵一与而圣；称其宝使其小，可以为道。
现代文：如果弃其国宝而向外侵略，则将脱离盟国而失败。发扬其国宝而谨小慎微，则可以实现其治国之道。
English: If it abandons its national treasure and invades abroad, it will break away from its allies and fail. If it develops its national treasure and is cautious, it can realize its way of governing the country.

古文：能则专，专则佚。
现代文：对能臣就应当专任。
English: For capable ministers, it should be a full-time position.

古文：椽能逾，则椽于逾。
现代文：专任能臣为上者可以逸而不劳。
English: A full-time able minister is a superior who can escape without effort.

古文：能宫，则不守而不散。众能，伯；不然，将见对。
现代文：依靠能臣是愉快的，被依靠者也与之同样愉快。有能者为官，虽不管，事情也不会乱。能者多，国家可成霸业；不然,将适得其反。
English: It is pleasant to rely on a capable minister, and it is equally pleasant to be relied on. When a capable person is in office, things will not be chaotic, no matter what. If there are many capable people, the country can achieve hegemony; otherwise, it will be counterproductive.

古文：君子者，勉于糺人者也，非见糺者也。
现代文：人君，要善于使用臣民，而不要什么事情都自己去干。
English: People, be good at using your subjects, and don't do everything yourself.

古文：故轻者轻，重者重，前后不慈。
现代文：如果秤上轻的一方自管其轻，重的一方自管其重，前后就不会平衡。
English: If the lighter side of the scale takes care of itself, and the heavier side takes care of itself, there will be no balance.

古文：凡轻者操实也，以轻则可使；重不可起轻，轻重有齐。
现代文：凡轻的一方都是可以操纵重物的。因为轻的秤锤可以运用，重的一方反不能操纵轻的秤锤，轻重之间是存在一定比例关系的。
English: All the light side can manipulate heavy objects. Because the light scale hammer can be used, but the heavy side cannot manipulate the light scale hammer. There is a certain proportional relationship between light and heavy.

古文：重以为国，轻以为死。
现代文：如果说重的一方是国家，那么，轻的一方就好比祭礼中神保的重要地位。
English: If the heavy side is the state, then the light side is like the important position of the divine protector in the ritual.

古文：毋全禄，贫国而用不足；毋全赏，好德恶亡使常。
现代文：人君在使用臣民时，俸禄要有所限制，否则，国贫而财用不足；赏赐不可普遍施行，防止把人君的好德务施流为平常的事情。
English: When the prince uses his subjects, the reward should be limited. Otherwise, the country will be poor and the financial use will be insufficient. The reward should not be universally implemented to prevent the good deeds of the prince from becoming commonplace.

古文：请问先合于天下而无私怨，犯强而无私害，为之若何？
现代文：请问倡导联合天下而不因私结怨，反抗强暴而不因私害人怎样才能做到呢？
English: How can we advocate the unification of the world without causing resentment, and oppose violence without harming people?

古文：对曰：国虽强，令必忠以义；国虽弱，令必敬以哀。
现代文：回答说：对手如是强国，自己的辞令必须是诚恳而有道义；对手是弱国，自己的辞令也必须是恭敬而有感情。
English: He replied: If the opponent is a strong country, his words must be sincere and moral; if the opponent is a weak country, his words must also be respectful and emotional.

古文：强弱不犯，则人欲听矣。
现代文：强、弱都不得罪，人们就愿意听从了。
English: Both the strong and the weak are not guilty, and people are willing to obey.

古文：先人而自后而无以为仁也，加功于人而勿得，所橐者远矣，所争者外矣。
现代文：先人后己而不自夸为仁厚，加功于人而不自居为有德，那样，所包容的范围就会很大，所争取的领域也就很广阔了。
English: In that way, the scope of tolerance will be large, and the areas to be fought for will be very broad.

古文：明无私交，则无内怨；与大则胜，私交众则怨杀。
现代文：表明自己是大公无私，没有特别的偏袒。别人便不至心怀怨恨。盟国多，就是胜利；偏袒多，就会因怨恨而引起杀伐。
English: Show that you are selfless and have no special preferences. Others will not hold grudges. More allies mean victory; more preferences will cause slaughter due to resentment.

古文：夷吾也，如以予人财者，不如毋夺时；如以予人食者，不如毋夺其事，此谓无外内之患。
现代文：我管仲的主张是：与其给人钱财，不如不耽误农时；与其给人饮食，不如不使他失业。这是防止产生内外忧患的力、法。
English: Guanzhong's proposition is: rather than giving people money, it is better not to delay farming time; rather than giving people food, it is better not to make them unemployed. This is a force and method to prevent internal and external troubles.

古文：事故也，君臣之际也；礼义者，人君之神也。
现代文：忠敬是维持君臣关系的。礼仪是人君保有尊严的条件。
English: Loyalty is to maintain the relationship between the monarch and the subjects. Etiquette is the condition for people to maintain their dignity.

古文：且君臣之属，也；亲戚之爱，性也。
现代文：君臣的关系靠道义，父母的情感是天性。
English: The relationship between a prince and a vassal depends on morality, while the emotions of parents are natural.

古文：使君亲之察同索，属故也。
现代文：使人君和父母的关系相同，必须靠君臣相敬。
English: To make the relationship between a man and his parents equal, it is necessary to rely on the mutual respect between the ruler and the subject.

古文：使人君不安者，属际也，不可不谨也。
现代文：使人君不安的原因，是君臣互相戒备，这是不可不加以注意的。
English: The reason for people's uneasiness is that monarchs and ministers are wary of each other, which cannot be ignored.

古文：贤不可威，能不可留，杜事之于前，易也。
现代文：对贤者不可威制。对能者不可淹滞不用，防患于未然，总是容易的。
English: The wise should not be intimidated, the capable should not be overwhelmed, and it is always easy to prevent problems before they occur.

古文：水鼎之汩也，人聚之；壤地之美也，人死之。
现代文：水源所流之地，人们都来聚居；土壤肥沃之处，人们都不肯离去。
English: Wherever the water flows, people come to live together; wherever the soil is fertile, people refuse to leave.

古文：若江湖之大也，求珠贝者，不令也。
现代文：这就好象寻求珠贝的人不肯离开广大的江湖一样。
English: It's as if people looking for pearls refuse to leave the vast expanse of the country.

古文：逐神而远热，交觯者不处，兄遗利夫！
现代文：在逐神仪式燃放火炬的时候，交杯酬饮者不肯稳坐不动，何况追逐遗利的人们呢？
English: When the torch is lit during the exorcism ceremony, the recipients of the cup of reward are not willing to sit still, let alone the people chasing the lost profits?

古文：事左中国之人，观危国过君而弋其能者，岂不几于危社主哉！
现代文：使举国人众策看危国过君强显其能，岂不接近于危害国家么？
English: Isn't it close to endangering the country to make the nation-wide people's policy see the danger of the country over the king and show its ability?

古文：利不可法，故民流；神不可法，故事之。
现代文：利不可废，所以人们从事流通；神不可废，所以人们都来供奉。
English: Profit cannot be wasted, so people are engaged in circulation; God cannot be wasted, so people come to worship.

古文：天地不可留，故动，化故从新。
现代文：宇宙是不停留的，故经常变动而化故从新。
English: The universe does not stand still, so it is constantly changing and changing, so it is always new.

古文：是故得天者高而不崩，得人者卑而不可胜。
现代文：得天助者，居高位不会倒台；得人心者，居低位也是不可战胜的。
English: With the help of heaven, those who occupy high positions will not fall; those who win the hearts of the people are also invincible in low positions.

古文：是故圣人重之，人君重之。
现代文：圣人和人君都重视这个道理。
English: This is a principle that is held in high regard by saints and kings alike.

古文：故至贞生至信，至言往至绞。
现代文：最真诚可以产生最大的信任，最信任可以产生最深的交谊。
English: The greatest sincerity can produce the greatest trust, and the greatest trust can produce the deepest friendship.

古文：生至自有道，不务以文胜情，不务以多胜少，不动则望有廧，旬身行。
现代文：产生这些最高境界自然是有办法的；不讲求用花招掩盖真情，不讲求用贪多排斥精少，君子俨然不动，望者如墙，立身行事均平正直就是了。
English: Of course, there is a way to produce these highest realms; it is not a matter of seeking to use tricks to cover up the truth, it is not a matter of seeking to use greed to exclude the few, the gentleman is immovable, the watcher is like a wall, and it is just a matter of being upright and honest.

古文：法制度量，王者典器也；执故义道，畏变也。
现代文：法制度量是王者治国的准则和工具。坚持过时的仪法和道德，就是害伯变革。
English: The legal system is the standard and tool for the king to govern the country. Adhering to outdated etiquette and morality is harmful to reform.

古文：天地若夫神之动。化变者也，天地之极也。
现代文：天地就好象神在那里推动着，变化，乃是天地的最大特征。
English: Heaven and earth seem to be driven by God, and change is the greatest feature of heaven and earth.

古文：能与化起而王用，则不可以道山也。
现代文：能参与变化而善于运用变化的人，切不可中途停顿。
English: Those who can participate in change and are good at using change must not stop in the middle.

古文：仁者善用，智者善用，非其人，则与神往矣。
现代文：仁者、智者都是善于运用变化的。不是这样的人，变化的良机就空自与神逝去了。
English: The benevolent and the wise are good at using change. For those who are not, the opportunity for change is lost.

古文：衣食之于人也，不可以一日违也，亲戚可以时大也。
现代文：衣食对于人，不可能一日离开，父母兄弟却是终将失去的。
English: For people, it is impossible to leave food and clothing for a day, but parents and siblings will eventually be lost.

古文：是故圣人万民艰处而立焉。人死则易云，生则难合也。
现代文：所以圣人教导百姓节衣缩食以自立。人死易亲，活着则难投合。
English: Therefore, the sage taught the people to live frugally in order to become self-reliant. It is easy to be close to the dead, but it is difficult to be close to the living.

古文：故一为赏，再为常，三为固然。
现代文：行赏之事，行一次人们看作 赏 ，二交则看作常规，三次则看成当然的事情。
English: When it comes to appreciation, doing something once is regarded as "appreciation," doing it twice is regarded as routine, and doing it three times is regarded as a matter of course.

古文：其小行之则俗也，久之则礼义。
现代文：小行则人们满意，久之则变成一般的礼法制度了。
English: People are satisfied with the small line, and it has become a general etiquette system over time.

古文：故无使下当上必行之，然后移商人于国，非用人也，不择乡而处，不择君而使，出则从利，入则不守。
现代文：在上者必须在行赏之后善于有所转移。商人对于国家，并不是无所作为的人。他们居处不挑选什么乡，事奉不挑选什么君主。他们卖出就是为了谋利，买进也不保守惜售。
English: Merchants are not people who do nothing for the country. They do not choose which township to live in, and they do not choose which monarch to serve. They sell in order to make a profit, and they do not keep what they buy.

古文：国之山林也，则而利之。
现代文：国家的山林资源，取过来就去营利，使国家的市场税收成倍增长。
English: The country's mountain forest resources will be taken over for profit, so that the country's market tax revenue will increase exponentially.

古文：市塵之所及，二依其本。故上侈而下靡，而君臣相上下相亲，则君臣之财不私藏。然则贪动枳而得食矣。
现代文：朝中上下都可以奢侈消费，君、臣、相上下相亲，君臣的财产都不会窖藏不动，这样贫民也就有工作而有饭吃了。
English: Both the emperor and the people of the middle and lower classes can spend extravagantly. The emperor, the ministers, and their peers are all related to each other, and the property of the monarchs and ministers will not be kept in a vault. In this way, the poor will have work and food to eat.

古文：徙邑移市，亦为数一。
现代文：此外，把有田邑的迁移入市，也是解决问题的一种办法。
English: In addition, the relocation of Arita into the city is also a way to solve the problem.

古文：问曰：多贤可云？
现代文：桓公问道：如何与众贤亲近呢？
English: Prince Kaneko asked, "How can I get close to all the sages?"

古文：对曰：鱼鳖之不食咡者，不出其渊；树木之胜霜雪者，不听于天；士能自治者，不从圣人，岂云哉？
现代文：回答说：不吃钓饵的鱼鳖，不出深水；不畏霜雪的树木，不怕天时；自己有办法的贤士，就不肯听从君主，还谈什么亲近呢？
English: He answered, "If you do not eat the bait of the hook, you will not get out of the deep water; if you do not fear the frost and snow of the trees, you will not fear the weather; if you have the means of a sage, you will not listen to the monarch, so what is there to talk about closeness?

古文：夷吾之闻之也，不欲，强能不服，智而不牧。若旬虚期于月，津若出于一，明然，则可以虚矣。
现代文：我管仲听说过，如果人无所求，用强力不能制服，用智巧不能治理，这就好象月亮的盈虚有定期，音乐的韵律有定式一样。懂得这一点，就可以处理好了。
English: I have heard from Guanzhong that if a person has no aspirations, cannot be subdued by force, and cannot be governed by cleverness, it is just like the waxing and waning of the moon has a regularity, and the rhythm of music has a set pattern. If you understand this, you can deal with it.

古文：故阨其道而薄其所予，则士云矣。
现代文：所以，控制发展出路而禄赏不使过厚，士人就来亲近了。
English: Therefore, the way out is to control the development, and the reward should not be too rich, and the scholar will come closer.

古文：不择人而予之，谓之好人；不择人而取之，谓之好利。
现代文：不择人而给予禄赏叫作 空仁 ；不择人而进行敛取，竭泽而渔，就叫作 空利 。
English: To give a reward without choosing a person is called empty-mindedness; to accumulate without choosing a person and to fish with all one's strength is called empty-mindedness.

古文：审此两者，以为处行，则云矣。
现代文：明白这两条，并且作为行事准则，就可使人们亲近了。
English: Understanding these two, and using them as a guide, can bring people closer together.

古文：不方之政，不可以为国；曲静之言，不可以为道。
现代文：不正确的政治措施，不能治国；局限于静止的理论，不能说明事物的道理。
English: Incorrect political measures cannot govern the country; a static theory cannot explain things.

古文：节时于政，与时往矣。
现代文：掌握好时代与政事的关系，就可以随着时代的发展而前进了。
English: If we grasp the relationship between the times and politics, we can move forward with the development of the times.

古文：不动以为道，齐以为行，避世之道，不可以进取。
现代文：把不动无为看作道，把所谓 齐 的思想看作 德 ，这种消极避世主义，是谈不上进取的。
English: This passive eschewal of the world, which regards passivity and inaction as the Tao, and the so-called Qi thought as virtue, is not progressive.

古文：阳者进谋，几者应感，再杀则齐，然后运可请也。
现代文：对于显明的事物，加以谋划；对于隐幽的事物，力求感应。经过一试再试而成功，然后就发展起来，这是为什么呢？
English: Why is it that things that are obvious are planned for, things that are subtle are sensed for, things that are tried and tried and succeeded in, and then developed?

古文：对曰：夫运谋者，天地之虚满也，合离也，春秋冬夏之胜也，然有知强弱之所尤，然后应诸侯取交，故知安危国之所存。
现代文：回答说：关于运用谋划，由于掌握天地的盈虚与离合，理解春秋冬夏的交替，还了解各国强弱差别，然后再应合各国诸侯；取得交往经验，这样就知道国家安危的关健所在了。
English: He replied, "Regarding the use of planning, by mastering the interplay of the heavens and the earth, understanding the alternation of spring, autumn, winter and summer, and also understanding the differences between the strengths and weaknesses of various countries, and then corresponding with the princes of various countries, and gaining experience in exchanges, we know where the key to national security lies.

古文：以时事天，以天事神，以神事鬼，故国无罪而君寿，而民不杀智运谋而杂橐刃焉。
现代文：按照合宜的时节祭袍天，按照祭天的时节祭祀神，又按照祭神的时节祭祀鬼，这样国无灾荒、国君安寿，而黎民百姓免于瘟疫；再加上智者运用谋划，也就避免刀兵之祸了。
English: According to the appropriate season, they should offer sacrifices to the heavens, and according to the season of offering sacrifices to the heavens, they should offer sacrifices to the gods, and according to the season of offering sacrifices to the gods, they should offer sacrifices to the ghosts. In this way, the country would be free from disaster, the king would have a safe life, and the people would be spared from plagues. Coupled with the use of plans by the wise, they would also avoid the scourge of swords and soldiers.

古文：其满为感，其虚为亡，满虚之合，有时而为实，时而为动。
现代文：满是减弱的开始。虚是新生的开始，这种满虚结合的发展过程，有时表现为事物的实体，有时表现为运动。
English: Fullness is the beginning of weakening, emptiness is the beginning of rebirth, and the development process of this combination of fullness and emptiness is sometimes manifested as the substance of things, and sometimes as movement.

古文：地阳时贷，其冬厚则夏热，其阳厚则阴寒。
现代文：阴阳的运动是经常交替的，冬有极寒则夏热，阳气极厚则阴寒。
English: The movement of yin and yang is often alternating. If there is extreme cold in winter, it will be hot in summer, and if the yang is extremely thick, it will be cold.

古文：是故王者谨于日至，故知虚满之所在，以为政令。已杀生，其合而未散，可以决事。
现代文：所以王者极为注意冬至和夏至两个节令，由此了解虚、满的情况，据以确定政令，如已到深秋杀生的时节，天气聚合而不散，可以决行狱事。
English: Therefore, the king paid great attention to the two festivals of winter solstice and summer solstice, and thus understood the false and full situation, according to which to determine the decree, if it has reached the late autumn killing season, the weather is concentrated and not dispersed, the prison can be executed.

古文：将合，可以禺其随行以为兵，分其多少以为曲政。
现代文：秋气将合的初秋时节，可以配合时势动静进行战争，考虑军力大小以安排军事活动。
English: In the early autumn, when the autumnal equinox is approaching, wars can be conducted in accordance with the current situation, and military activities can be arranged according to the size of the military force.

古文：请问形有时而变乎？
现代文：请问物之形类有天时的灾变么？
English: Does the shape of things change with the weather?

古文：对曰：阴阳之分定，则甘苦之草生也。
现代文：回答说：由阴阳的份量不同所定，就生出甘草和苦草。
English: He answered, "Licorice and bitter grass grow according to the different weight of yin and yang.

古文：从其宜，则酸咸和焉，而形色定焉，以为声乐。
现代文：只有顺应四时所宜，才可以调和酸咸，确定形色，从而产生各种声调和音乐。
English: Only by following the four seasons can the salty and sour be adjusted and the shape be determined, thus producing a variety of tones and music.

古文：夫阴阳进退，满虚亡时，其散合可以视岁。
现代文：关于阴阳的消长变化，其满与虚的时间，很难说定，但从它的分散与集合的现象上，可以看出年景的丰歉。
English: It's hard to say for sure when the yin and yang of waxing and waning changes, when it's full and when it's empty, but from the phenomenon of its dispersion and concentration, we can see the richness of the year.

古文：唯圣人不为岁，能知满虚，夺余满，补不足，以通政事，以赡民常。
现代文：只有圣人不为年景的丰歉所困，他可以夺余满，补不足，使政令得以贯彻，民用得以满足。
English: Only a sage is not trapped by the abundance of the year, he can seize the surplus and make up for the shortage, so that the government decree can be implemented and the civilian population can be satisfied.

古文：地之变气，应其所出；水之变气，应之以精，受之以豫；天之变气，应之以正。
现代文：地发现灾变之气，可在其出现之处祈祷解决；水发现灾变之气，要用精诚之心对待并需要预有所备；天发现灾变之气，则唯有坚守正道来对待。
English: If earth finds the spirit of disaster, it can pray for a solution wherever it appears; if water finds the spirit of disaster, it should be treated with sincerity and needs to be prepared in advance; if heaven finds the spirit of disaster, it can only be dealt with by adhering to the right path.

古文：且夫天地精气有五，不必为沮，其亟而反，其重陔动毁之进退，即此数之难得者也，此形之时变也。
现代文：天地问运动的精气有五种，不应阻碍其气运之最旺盛者而反其动向。不过，人们审知它们的运动、毁灭、前进、后退等过程，就是很准办到的。这样，物之形类就出现天时性的灾变了。
English: There are five kinds of spirits in the movement of heaven and earth, and one should not obstruct the movement of the most vigorous one. However, people know that their movement, destruction, advance, retreat and other processes are very accurate. In this way, the shape of things will have a catastrophic change.

古文：沮平气之阳，若如辞静。
现代文：正气的兴起受阻碍，如何制止静止的阻力？
English: The rise of righteousness is hindered, how to stop the static resistance?

古文：余气之潜然而动，爱气之潜然而哀，胡得而治动？
现代文：日的残余之气暗中思动，旧的隐蔽之气暗中哀怨，如何制止它们的蠢动？
English: The sun's lingering breath broods, the old hidden breath laments, how to stop their drifting?

古文：对曰：得之衰时，位而观之，佁美然后有辉。修之心，其杀以相待，故有满虚哀乐之气也。
现代文：回答说：在主德既衰之时，就按照五德转移的依次来观察处理问题，相信而重视此理，就可以保持气运。因为修心立志，用五德相杀的道理来对待形势，那就有由满到虚和由哀到乐之气的出现。
English: He replied, "When one's virtue has waned, one should observe and deal with problems according to the order of the transfer of the five virtues. If one believes and attaches importance to this principle, one can maintain one's qi fortune. Because if one resolves to cultivate one's mind and treats the situation according to the principle of the conflict of the five virtues, one's qi will appear from fullness to emptiness and from sorrow to joy.

古文：故书之帝八，神农不与存，为其无位，不能相用。
现代文：所以，经奢记载，古代帝王有八个，神农不在其中，这是因为他不在五德之位，不能用来参与五德终始的原故。
English: Therefore, according to ancient records, there were eight emperors in ancient times, but Shennong was not among them. This was because he was not in the position of the five virtues, and could not be used to participate in the origin of the five virtues.

古文：问：运之合满安臧？
现代文：问：国家命运的全部奥秘何在？
English: Q: What is the secret of the country's destiny?

古文：二十岁而可广，十二岁而聂广，百岁伤神。
现代文：二十年而政权发展壮大，十二年而摄政之权发展壮大，但百年之后则令人伤心。
English: In twenty years, the power of the government has grown, in twelve years, the power of the regency has grown, but after a hundred years, it is sad.

古文：周郑之礼移矣，则周律之废矣，则中国之草木有移于不通之野者。
现代文：周郑之礼仪改易了，而周朝的律法也破坏了，中国的文化英华被转移到落后地区。
English: The etiquette of Zhou Zheng was changed, and the law of the Zhou Dynasty was also destroyed. Chinese culture Yinghua was transferred to backward areas.

古文：然则人君声服变矣，则臣有依驷之禄，妇人为政，铁之重反旅金。
现代文：于是人君的声乐、服饰改变了，臣下可以有干乘的高禄，妇人可以主政，铁的介值高于青铜。
English: As a result, the vocal music and clothing of the prince changed, the vassal could have a high income, the woman could govern, and the value of iron was higher than that of bronze.

古文：而声好下曲，食好咸苦，则人君日退。
现代文：而且听的喜欢下里巴人的曲周，吃的喜欢咸苦之味的饮食，由是人君地位日退。
English: Moreover, those who listen to Quchu, who like people with lower ribs, and those who eat food with a salty-bitter taste, are losing their status as people's lords.

古文：亟则溪陵山谷之神之祭更，应国之称号亦更矣。
现代文：甚至溪陵山谷之神的祭法改变了，其应祭国家的称号也改变了。
English: Even the sacrificial method of the god of the Kailing Valley has changed, and the title of its sacrificial country has also changed.

古文：视之示变，观之风气。古之祭，有时而星，有时而星熺，有时而熰，有时而朐。
现代文：要视察天象的变化，要观测风向与云气，古代的祭祀情况不同：有时祭来睛朗的天气，有寸祭来光明的日照，有时祭来高热，也有时祭来微温。
English: It is necessary to observe the changes in celestial phenomena, to observe the direction of wind and clouds, and the situation of ancient sacrifices is different: sometimes the sacrifice comes from bright weather, sometimes the sacrifice comes from bright sunshine, sometimes the sacrifice comes from high heat, and sometimes the sacrifice comes from low temperature.

古文：鼠应广之实，阴阳之数也。华若落之名，祭之号也。
现代文：收获有小有大，那是阴阳的定数决定的；名称有美有恶，那是用作祭祀标记的。
English: The harvest has small and large, which is determined by the constant of yin and yang; the name has beauty and evil, which is used as a sacrificial mark.

古文：是故天子之为国，图具其树物也。
现代文：因此，历朝天子主持国家，都谋求具有本朝特色的祭坛树木与本朝祭祀所用的服色。
English: Therefore, all the dynasties in which the heavenly son presided over the country sought to have altar trees with the characteristics of this dynasty and the color of the clothes used in the rituals of this dynasty.

