古文：马郁，其先范阳人。
现代文：马郁，他的祖先是范阳人。
English: Ma Yu, his ancestor is Fan Yangren.

古文：郁少警悟，有俊才智数，言辩纵横，下笔成文。
现代文：马郁年少时机警敏悟，有俊才智谋，言语辩论纵横无碍，下笔成文。
English: At a young age, Ma Yu was alert to opportunities, talented and resourceful, able to debate verbally, and able to write down his thoughts.

古文：乾宁末，为府刀笔小吏。
现代文：乾宁末年，任幽州府刀笔小吏。
English: At the end of Qianning's life, he was appointed as a petty officer of Yuzhou Prefecture.

古文：李匡威为王镕所杀，镕书报其弟匡俦。匡俦遣使于镕，问谋乱本末，幕客为书，多不如旨。
现代文：李匡威被王杀害后，王写信告诉他的弟弟李匡俦，李匡俦派使者去王那里询问谋乱的详细经过，幕客写信，大多不能表达清楚意思。
English: After Li Kuangwei was killed by Wang, Wang wrote a letter to his brother Li Kuangyao. Li Kuangyao sent an emissary to Wang to inquire about the details of the plot. Most of the people in the crowd who wrote letters could not express their thoughts clearly.

古文：郁时直记室，即起草，为之条列事状，云可疑者十，词理俊赡，以此知名。
现代文：马郁这时正任记室，即刻起草信稿，列举事状，陈列可疑者十条，词语条理俊秀丰赡，因此而知名。
English: At that time, Ma Yu was in charge of the record room. He immediately drafted a letter, listed the facts, displayed ten suspicious items, and was well-known for his eloquence.

古文：尝聘王镕于镇州，官妓有转转者，美丽善歌舞，因宴席，郁累挑之。
现代文：曾在镇州聘问于王，官妓中有一名叫转转的，美丽善歌舞，在宴席上，马郁多次挑逗她。
English: Once in Zhenzhou, he hired a courtesan named Zu Zu, who was beautiful and good at singing and dancing. At the banquet, Ma Yu repeatedly teased her.

古文：幕客张泽亦以文章名，谓郁曰： 子能座上成赋，可以此妓奉酬。 
现代文：幕客张泽也以文章出名，对马郁说： 你能在座席上写成一篇赋，就可以把这个妓女作为酬谢。 
English: The curtain caller, Zhang Ze, also famous for his articles, said to Ma Yu: If you can write a fu on the seat, you can take this prostitute as a reward.

古文：郁抽笔操纸，即时成赋，拥妓而去。
现代文：马郁拿出纸笔，立刻写成一篇赋，搂着妓女就走了。
English: Ma Yu took out a pen and paper, immediately wrote a fufu, and walked away with the prostitute.

古文：郁在武皇幕，累官至检校司空、秘书监。
现代文：马郁在武皇幕中，当官当到检校司空、秘书监。
English: In the Emperor Wu's palace, Ma Yu served as the official inspector of schools and the inspector of secretaries.

古文：武皇与庄宗礼遇俱厚，岁时给赐优异。
现代文：武皇和庄宗对他的待遇都很优厚，赏赐很多。
English: Emperor Wu and Emperor Zhuang treated him very well and rewarded him a lot.

古文：监军张承业，本朝旧人，权贵任事，人士胁肩低首候之。郁以滑稽侮狎，其往如归，有时直造卧内。
现代文：监军张承业是唐朝旧臣，以权贵身份管事，人们都胁肩低头侍候他，马郁对他滑稽侮狎，到他家就像到自己家一样，有时直接闯进他的卧室。
English: Zhang Chengye, the military overseer, was an old minister of the Tang Dynasty. He was in charge as a dignitary. People waited on him with their shoulders hunched, and Ma Yu mockingly insulted him. When he came to his home, it was like coming to his own home, sometimes directly breaking into his bedroom.

古文：每宾僚宴集，承业出珍果陈列于前，食之必尽。
现代文：每次宾客幕僚宴会，张承业把珍果放在前面，都被马郁吃光。
English: At every guest and staff banquet, Zhang Chengye put the rare fruit in front, and it was eaten up by Ma Yu.

古文：承业私戒主膳者曰： 他日马监至，唯以乾藕子置前而已。 
现代文：张承业私下告诫主管膳食的人说： 以后马郁来了，只用干藕子放在前面算了。 
English: Zhang Chengye privately admonished the person in charge of the meal, saying: In the future, if Ma Yu comes, just put the dried hazelnuts in front of him.

古文：郁至，窥其不可啖；异日，靴中出一铁楇，碎而食之。承业大笑曰： 为公设异馔，勿败余食案。 
现代文：马郁来到，看到它不能吃，下一次来，就从靴中拿出一把铁锤，敲碎而吃掉它，张承业大笑说 ：我还是为你摆上珍果，不要打坏我的饭桌。 
English: Ma Yu came, saw that it could not be eaten, and the next time he came, he took out a hammer from his shoe, broke it and ate it. Zhang Chengye laughed and said, "I will still put the rare fruit on the table for you, don't break my table."

古文：其俊率如此。
现代文：他往往总是这样率直幽默。
English: He tends to always be so direct and humorous.

古文：郁在庄宗幕，寄寓他土，年老思乡，每对庄宗欷歔，言家在范阳，乞骸归国，以葬旧山。
现代文：马郁在庄宗幕下时，寄住他乡，年老时思念故乡，常常对着庄宗叹气，说家在范阳，请求回归故国，以便安葬在家乡山间。
English: When Ma Yu was under the guise of Zhuangzong, he stayed in another hometown. When he was old, he missed his hometown. He often sighed to Zhuangzong, saying that his home was in Fanyang, and asked to return to his homeland so that he could be buried in the mountains of his hometown.

古文：庄宗谓之曰： 自卿去国已来，同舍孰在？
现代文：庄宗对他说： 自你离开故国以来，同村同室的还有谁在？
English: Zhuangzong said to him, "Since you left your home country, who else from your village is here?

古文：弼家人诉于执政，并下御史府劾之。弼虽伏法，廷隐以所奏不实，并流永州，续敕赐自尽，时人冤之。
现代文：刘守光不能容忍自己的父亲，还能容得下你吗？我不是舍不得你走，只是你去了死也不得其所。 
English: Liu Shouguang can't tolerate his own father, can he tolerate you? I'm not reluctant to let you go, but if you die, you won't have a place to go.

古文：萧希甫，宋州人也。
现代文：马郁既然没了归路，痛心呜咽，终于死在太原。萧希甫，宋州人。
English: Since Ma Yu had no way back, he cried bitterly and finally died in Taiyuan. Xiao Xifu, a native of Songzhou.

古文：少举进士，为梁开封尹袁象先书记。
现代文：少年中进士，任梁朝开封尹袁象先的文书。
English: As a junior high school student, he was appointed by the Liang Dynasty to unseal the documents of Yin Yuanxiang.

古文：象先为青州节度使，以希甫为巡官，希甫不乐。乃弃其母妻，变姓名，亡之镇州，自称青州掌书记，进谒王镕。
现代文：袁象先当青州节度使时，任萧希甫为巡官，萧希甫不高兴，于是离开母亲妻子，改姓换名，流亡到镇州，自称是青州掌书记，进见王。
English: When Yuan Xiang first served as the Qingzhou Festival envoy, he appointed Xiao Xifu as the inspector. Xiao Xifu was not happy, so he left his mother and wife, changed his name, and exiled to Zhenzhou. He claimed to be the secretary of Qingzhou and went to see the king.

古文：镕以希甫为参军，尤不乐，居岁余，又亡之易州，削发为僧，居百丈山。
现代文：王任他为参军，萧希甫更加不高兴，过了一年多，又逃到易州，剃去头发当了和尚，住在百丈山。
English: Wang appointed him to join the army, and Xiao Xifu was even more unhappy. After more than a year, he fled to Yizhou, shaved off his hair, became a monk, and lived in Baizhang Mountain.

古文：庄宗将建国，置百官，李绍宏荐为魏州推官。
现代文：庄宗将要建立后唐，设置百官，李绍宏推荐萧希甫为魏州推官。
English: Zhuangzong was going to establish the Later Tang Dynasty and set up hundreds of officials. Li Shaohong recommended Xiao Xifu to be the Wei prefect.

古文：同光初，有诏定内宴仪，问希甫枢密使得坐否，希甫以为不可。
现代文：庄宗同光初年，有诏书要求议定内宴仪礼，询问萧希甫枢密使能否在内宴时上坐，他认为不可以。
English: In the first year of Zhuangzong Tongguang, there was an edict demanding that the inner banquet ceremony be agreed upon, and asking whether Xiao Xifu's envoy could sit at the inner banquet. He thought it was impossible.

古文：枢密使张居翰闻之怒，谓希甫曰： 老夫历事三朝天子，见内宴数百，子本田舍兒，安知宫禁事！ 
现代文：枢密使张居翰听说后发怒，对他说： 老夫我历事三朝天子，见过数百次内宴，你原来不过是个乡下佬，怎么知道宫禁中的事？ 
English: After hearing this, the envoy Zhang Juhan became angry and said to him: "Old man, I have experienced three dynasties and have seen hundreds of inner banquets. You were originally just a countryman. How did you know about the palace ban?

古文：希甫不能对。
现代文：萧希甫不能回答。
English: Xiao Xifu could not answer.

古文：初，庄宗欲以希甫知制诰，宰相豆卢革等附居翰，共排斥之，以为驾部郎中。希甫失志，尤怏怏。
现代文：起初，庄宗想任萧希甫为知制诰，宰相豆卢革等人附和张居翰，共同排挤他，任为驾部郎中，萧希甫失意，更加怏怏不乐。
English: At first, Zhuang Zong wanted to appoint Xiao Xifu as the chancellor, and Prime Minister Zhu Ruge and others sided with Zhang Juhan and jointly ousted him. Xiao Xifu was disappointed and even more unhappy when he was appointed as the chauffeur.

古文：庄宗灭梁室，遣希甫宣慰青、齐，希甫始知其母已死，妻袁氏亦改嫁。
现代文：庄宗消灭梁朝后，派萧希甫到青、齐二州宣示慰劳，这时他才知道自己母亲已死，妻子袁氏也改嫁了。
English: After Zhuang Zong destroyed the Liang Dynasty, he sent Xiao Xifu to Qing and Qi Erzhou to express his condolences. It was only then that he learned that his mother had died and his wife Yuan had remarried.

古文：希甫乃发哀服丧，居于魏州。
现代文：萧希甫于是发哀服丧，住在魏州。
English: Xiao Xifu then went into mourning and lived in Weizhou.

古文：人有引汉李陵书以讥之曰： 老母终堂，生妻去室。 
现代文：有人引用汉朝李陵信中的句子讥讽他说 ：老母死在堂上，生妻离开家室。 
English: Someone quoted a sentence from Li Ling's letter to the Han Dynasty to ridicule him: "My mother died in the hall, and my wife left the house."

古文：天成初，欲召为谏议，豆卢革、韦说沮之。
现代文：明宗天成初年，准备想召他为谏议，被豆卢革、韦说阻止住。
English: In the first year of Mingzong Tiancheng, he was ready to call him for a discussion, but was stopped by Zhu Ruge and Wei Xian.

古文：明宗卒以希甫为谏议大夫，复为匦函使。
现代文：明宗去世后任萧希甫为谏议大夫，又为匦函使。
English: After the death of Emperor Mingzong, Xiao Xifu was appointed as the doctor of the imperial edict and the envoy of the imperial edict.

古文：其后革、说为安重诲所恶，希甫希旨，诬奏革纵田客杀人，而说与邻人争井，井有宝货。
现代文：后来豆卢革、韦说受到安重诲的厌恶，萧希甫迎合安重诲的意思，诬奏豆卢革纵容庄客杀人，又说韦说和邻居争井，井里有宝贝。
English: Later, Zhu Ruge and Wei said that they were disgusted by An Chongyun, Xiao Xifu catered to the meaning of An Chongyun, falsely played Zhu Ruge and condoned the killing of Zhuangguo, and also said that Wei said that there was a treasure in the well with the neighbors.

古文：有司推勘井中，惟破釜而已，革、说卒皆贬死。
现代文：官员们勘查井中，只有一个破锅而已，豆卢革、韦说后来都受惩罚致死。
English: Officials said that there was only one broken pot in the exploration well, and that both Zhu Ruge and Wei were later punished to death.

古文：希甫拜左散骑常侍，躁进尤甚，引告变人李筠夜扣内门，通变书云： 修堤兵士，欲取郊天日举火为叛。 
现代文：萧希甫官拜左散骑常侍，更加急切想往上爬，带着举报人李筠夜里敲开内门，递上举报信说： 修堤的士兵，想在祭天的时候举火叛乱。 
English: Officer Xiao Xifu bowed to the left strolling attendant, more eager to climb up, and took the informant Li Yan to knock on the inner door in the night and handed in a report saying: The soldiers who repaired the embankment want to set fire to rebel at the time of the festival.

古文：安重诲不信之。
现代文：安重诲不相信此事，杀了举报人。
English: An Chongzheng did not believe this and killed the informant.

古文：斩告变者，军人诉屈，请希甫啖之。
现代文：修堤士兵要求伸冤，要吃掉萧希甫。
English: The soldiers who were repairing the dike demanded justice and wanted to eat Xiao Xifu.

古文：既而诏曰： 左散骑常侍、集贤殿学士判院事萧希甫，身处班行，职非警察，辄引凶狂之辈，上陈诬骫之词，逼近郊禋，扇摇军众。
现代文：后来下诏说： 左散骑常侍、集贤殿学士判院事萧希甫，身处朝官，职非警察，却领来凶狂之人，陈述诬告之词，逼近郊礼，动摇军心。
English: Later, the imperial edict said: Zuo Sanzhong riding a regular attendant, Shixian palace bachelor judge Xiao Xifu, who was a court official, not a police officer, but brought a ferocious person, made a false accusation, approached the suburb ceremony, and shook the military heart.

古文：马缟知礼院时，不曾论定，今遽上疏驳令式，罪人也。 罗贯，不知何许人。
现代文：李筠既然应当杀掉，萧希甫怎么能免于贬谪流放，可贬为岚州司户参军，仍由驰驿遣送。 长兴年中，死在被贬的地方。罗贯，不知是哪里人。
English: Since Li Xuan should be killed, how could Xiao Xifu be exempted from exile, he could join the army as the governor of Zhangzhou and still be sent by Qi Gong. In Changxing year, he died in the place where he was exiled. Luo Ran, I don't know where he was.

古文：进士及第，累历台省官，自礼部员外郎为河南令。
现代文：进士及第，历任台省官，自礼部员外郎任为河南县令。
English: He was appointed as Henan County magistrate by Jin Shi and Dai, the successive provincial officials of Taiwan, and by Wei Lang, the member of the ceremonial department.

古文：贯为人强直，正身奉法，不避权豪。
现代文：罗贯的为人强硬刚直，正身守法，不避权贵。
English: Luo Ran is a tough and upright person, abides by the law, and does not shy away from power.

古文：时宦官伶人用事，凡请托于贯者，其书盈阁，一无所报，皆以示郭崇韬，因奏其事，由是左右每言贯之失。
现代文：当时宦官伶人掌权，凡是向罗贯请托的书信，堆满桌子，全无回音，都拿给郭崇韬看，并且报告这些事，因此身边的人总是说罗贯的过失。
English: At that time, the eunuchs were in power, and all the letters sent to Luo Chun, which were piled up on the table and had no response, were shown to Guo Chongyao and reported these things, so the people around him always said that Luo Chun was at fault.

古文：先是，梁时张全义专制京畿，河南、洛阳僚佐，皆由其门下，事全义如厮仆。
现代文：在这之前，梁朝张全义专权管制京城及附近地方，河南、洛阳的僚佐，都出自他的门下，服侍张全义就像仆人似的。
English: Prior to this, the Liang Dynasty and Zhang Zhengyi's exclusive control of Beijing and the surrounding areas, Henan and Luoyang's aide-de-camp, all came from his door, serving Zhang Zhengyi like a servant.

古文：及贯授命，持本朝事体，奉全义稍慢，部民为府司庇护者，必奏正之。
现代文：到罗贯受任为河南令时，按照本朝的体制行事，奉侍张全义稍有点怠慢，部下民众被府司庇护的，必上奏纠正。
English: When Luo Quan was appointed as the Henan governor, he acted in accordance with the system of this dynasty. He was a little negligent in serving Zhang Quanyi. If his subordinates were sheltered by the prefectural governor, they must be corrected.

古文：全义怒，因令女使告刘皇后从容白于庄宗，宦官又言其短，庄宗深怒之。
现代文：张全义发怒，便通过女使告诉刘皇后，皇后从容说给庄宗听，宦官又说他的短处，庄宗十分恼怒他。
English: Zhang Quanyi became angry and told Empress Liu through her maid. The Empress calmly told Zhuangzong what to do, and the eunuch also told him of his shortcomings. Zhuangzong was very angry with him.

古文：会庄宗幸寿安山陵，道路泥泞，庄宗访其主者，宦官曰； 属河南县。 促令召贯至，奏曰： 臣初不奉命，请诘禀命者。 
现代文：碰上庄宗到寿安山陵，道路泥泞，庄宗问是谁管理这里，宦官说属河南县，急令罗贯赶来，上奏说 ：我事先没接到命令，请询问受命的人。 
English: When he met Zhuangzong on his way to Shouan Mountain, the road was muddy. Zhuangzong asked who was in charge of this place. The eunuch said it belonged to Henan County. He sent Luo Ran to come. Luo Ran said, "I didn't receive an order in advance, please ask the person who received the order."

古文：帝曰： 卿之所部，反问他人，何也？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 是你管的部分，反而问别人，什么道理？ 
English: The emperor said, "You are in charge of the part, but you ask others, what is the reason?"

古文：命下府狱，府吏榜笞，促令伏款。
现代文：命令关在狱中，府吏鞭打他，要他认罪。
English: He was ordered to be kept in prison, and government officials whipped him to force him to confess.

古文：翌日，传诏杀之。
现代文：第二天，下诏令杀他。
English: The next day, an order was issued to kill him.

古文：郭崇韬奏曰： 贯别无赃状，桥道不修，法未当死。 
现代文：郭崇韬上奏说 ：罗贯并没有别的罪状，桥道没有修理，按法律也不够死罪。 
English: Guo Chongzhen said in his report: Luo Gang has no other charges, the bridge road has not been repaired, and according to the law, it is not enough to be sentenced to death.

古文：庄宗怒曰： 母后灵驾将发，天子车舆往来，桥道不修，是谁之过也？ 
现代文：庄宗怒道： 母后灵柩就要运来，天子的车辆往来，桥道不修理，是谁的罪过？ 
English: Zhuang Zong said angrily, "My mother's coffin is about to be transported, the vehicles of the heavenly sons are coming and going, and the bridge road is not repaired. Whose fault is it?

古文：崇韬奏曰： 贯纵有死罪，俟款状上奏，所司议谳，以朝典行之，死当未晚。
现代文：郭崇韬说 ：罗贯即使有死罪，也应等供状出来，由有关官员议定，按朝廷法典施行，那时处死也不晚。
English: Guo Chongyao said: Even if Luo Ran is guilty of a capital crime, he should wait for a confession to be made, agreed upon by the relevant officials, and implemented in accordance with the Imperial Code. Then it is not too late to execute him.

古文：今以万乘之尊，怒一县令，俾天下人言陛下使法不公矣！ 
现代文：现在您以万乘之尊，对一县令发怒，会使天下人说陛下使用法律不公正！ 
English: Now you, with the veneration of ten thousand Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, are angry at a county ordinance, which will make the world say that His Majesty's use of the law is unjust!

古文：庄宗曰： 既卿所爱，任卿裁决。 
现代文：庄宗说 ：既然是你喜爱的人，任凭你去裁决。 
English: Zhuangzong said, "Since it's someone you like, it's up to you to decide."

古文：因投袂入宫。
现代文：说完拂袖入宫去了。
English: After saying this, the prince went into the palace.

古文：崇韬从而论列，庄宗自阖殿门，不得入。
现代文：郭崇韬跟在后面还要讲理，庄宗自己关上殿门，不能进去。
English: Guo Chongyong had to be reasonable when he followed behind. Zhuangzong closed the hall door himself and couldn't get in.

古文：即令伏法，曝尸于府门，冤痛之声，闻于远迩。
现代文：随即对罗贯行刑，曝尸府门之外。冤叹痛惜之声，远近相传。
English: Luo Ran was immediately executed and his body was exposed outside the gate of the morgue. The outpouring of grief and regret has been passed down from generation to generation.

