古文：梁惠王曰： 寡人之于国也，尽心焉耳矣。
现代文：梁惠王说： 我对国家的治理，真的是尽心竭力了！
English: Liang Hui Wang said: I have really made every effort to govern the country!

古文：河内凶，则移其民于河东，移其粟于河内。
现代文：河内发生灾荒，就把那里的灾民迁移到河东，把河东的粮食运到河内。
English: When a natural disaster occurred in Hanoi, the victims of the disaster were moved to the east of the river and the grain from the east of the river was transported to Hanoi.

古文：河东凶亦然。
现代文：当河东发生灾荒的时候，我也是这样做的。
English: I did the same thing when there was a natural disaster in Hedong.

古文：察邻国之政，无如寡人之用心者。
现代文：看看邻国的君主主办政事，没有谁像我这样尽心竭力。
English: If you look at the monarchs of neighboring countries who preside over the affairs of state, there is no one who makes such an effort as I do.

古文：邻国之民不加少，寡人之民不加多，何也？ 
现代文：可是邻国的百姓并不见减少，而我的百姓并不见增多，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Why is it that my neighbor's people do not decrease, and my people do not increase?

古文：孟子对曰： 王好战，请以战喻。
现代文：孟子回答道： 大王您喜欢打仗，请允许我让我用打仗来做比喻。
English: Mencius replied, "Great King, you like to fight, so please allow me to use fighting as a metaphor.

古文：填然鼓之，兵刃既接，弃甲曳兵而走。或百步而后止，或五十步而后止。
现代文：战鼓敲响，战场交战激烈了，战败的士兵丢盔弃甲拖着武器逃跑，有的跑了上百步才停下，有的跑了五十步就停了下来。
English: The war drums were beating, the battlefield battle was fierce, the defeated soldiers threw off their armor, abandoned their armor and dragged their weapons to run away. Some ran for hundreds of steps before stopping, and some ran for fifty steps before stopping.

古文：以五十步笑百步，则何如？ 曰： 不可。
现代文：跑了五十步的人因此就去讥笑跑了一百步的人，您觉得怎么样呢？ 梁惠王说： 不行。
English: What do you think of a man who has run fifty paces mocking a man who has run a hundred? Liang Hui Wang said: No.

古文：直不百步耳，是亦走也。 
现代文：他只不过没有逃跑到一百步罢了，但也是逃跑！ 
English: He only did not run a hundred paces, but he did run!

古文：曰： 王如知此，则无望民之多于邻国也。
现代文：孟子说： 大王您既然懂得这个道理，就不必去期望您国家的民众比邻国多啦。
English: Mencius said, "Since you, great king, understand this truth, you need not expect that the people of your country will be more numerous than those of your neighbors.

古文：不违农时，谷不可胜食也；数罟不入洿池，鱼鳖不可胜食也；斧斤以时入山林，材木不可胜用也。
现代文：只要不违背农时，那粮食就吃不完；密孔的渔网不入池塘，那鱼鳖之类水产就吃不完；砍伐林木有定时，那木材便用不尽。
English: As long as they don't violate the agricultural time, the cormorants can't eat all the grain; if the fishing nets with tight holes don't enter the pond, they can't eat all the fish bait and other aquatic products; if there is a fixed time for cutting down the trees, the wood can't be exhausted.

古文：谷与鱼鳖不可胜食，材木不可胜用，是使民养生丧死无憾也。
现代文：粮食和鱼类吃不完，木材也用不尽，这样便使老百姓能够养活家小，葬送死者而无遗憾了。
English: There is more than enough grain and fish to eat, and wood is inexhaustible, so that the people can feed their families and bury their dead without regret.

古文：养生丧死无憾，王道之始也。
现代文：老百姓养生送死没有缺憾，这正是王道的开始。
English: Ordinary people have no regrets when they die, and this is the beginning of the royal road.

古文：五亩之宅，树之以桑，五十者可以衣帛矣。鸡豚狗彘之畜，无失其时，七十者可以食肉矣。
现代文：在五亩大的宅田上，种上桑树，上了五十岁的人就可以穿丝织品的衣服了；鸡鸭猪狗不失时节地繁殖饲养，上了七十岁的人就可以经常吃到肉食了。
English: On the five-acre homestead, mulberry trees are planted, and people over the age of fifty can wear silk clothing; chickens, ducks, pigs and dogs are bred and raised without missing the season, and people over the age of seventy can often eat meat.

古文：百亩之田，勿夺其时，数口之家可以无饥矣。
现代文：一家一户所种百亩的田地不误农时得到耕种，数口之家就不会闹灾荒了。
English: A hundred mu of farmland planted by each family will be cultivated without fail, and several families will not be affected by the drought.

古文：谨庠序之教，申之以孝悌之义，颁白者不负戴于道路矣。
现代文：注重乡校的教育，强调孝敬长辈的道理，须发花白的老人们就不再会肩挑头顶，出现在道路上了。
English: If schools are built conscientiously, and students are repeatedly taught the principles of filial piety and respect for their elders, people with gray hair will not be burdened on the road.

古文：七十者衣帛食肉，黎民不饥不寒，然而不王者，未之有也。
现代文：年满七十岁的人能穿上丝绸、吃上鱼肉，老百姓不缺衣少食，做到了这些而不称王于天下的是决不会有的。
English: People who have reached the age of seventy can wear silk and eat fish, and the common people do not lack clothing and food. There will never be anyone who can do these things without being called a king in the world.

古文：狗彘食人食而不知检，涂有饿莩而不知发；人死，则曰： 非我也，岁也。 
现代文：现在，猪狗吃的是人吃的食物而不知道设法制止，路上出现饿死的人而不知道赈济饥民，人死了反而说 与我无关，是年成不好的缘故 。
English: Now, pigs and dogs eat the food eaten by people without knowing how to stop it, people who starve to death appear on the road without knowing how to feed the hungry, and people who die say that it has nothing to do with me, it is due to a bad harvest.

古文：是何异于刺人而杀之，曰： 非我也，兵也。 
现代文：这和把人杀了反而说 与我无干，是武器杀的 又有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between this and killing someone and then saying that it was not my fault, it was the weapon that killed him?

古文：王无罪岁，斯天下之民至焉。 
现代文：大王您要能够不归罪于荒年，这样，普天下的百姓便会涌向您这儿来了。 
English: Great King, if you can avoid blaming yourself for the famine, then people from all over the world will flock to you.

