古文：客卿为韩谓秦王曰： 韩珉之议，知其君不知异君，知其国不知异国。
现代文：韩国的一位客卿为韩国对秦王说： 韩珉议论政事，只了解自己的国君不了解别国国君，只了解自己的国家而不了解其他国家。
English: A guest of honor from South Korea said to King Qin on behalf of South Korea, "When Han Xuan talks about politics, he only understands his own country and not other countries. He only understands his own country and not other countries.

古文：彼公仲者，秦势能诎之。
现代文：那个公仲，秦国的势力就能使他折服。
English: That Gongzhong, the power of the Qin state can make him submit.

古文：秦之强，首之者，珉为疾矣。
现代文：秦国强大的时候，韩国竟敢首先进攻，韩珉是在自讨失败。
English: When Qin was strong, South Korea dared to attack first. Han Yu was beating himself up for his failure.

古文：进齐、宋之兵至首坦，远薄梁郭，所以不及魏者，以为成而过南阳之道，欲以四国西首也。
现代文：韩国曾让齐、宋两国军队攻到魏阐的首垣，逼近大梁城郊，没有进一步攻占魏国的原因，是认为同魏国讲和就可以通过南阳的道路，想用韩、齐、宋、魏四国的力量向西攻秦。
English: The reason why Korea once let the armies of Qi and Song conquer the first wall of Wei and close in on the outskirts of Dalian, but did not further conquer Wei, was that it thought that it could make peace with Wei by passing through the Nanyang Road, and wanted to use the strength of Korea, Qi, Song and Wei to attack Qin in the west.

古文：所以不者，皆曰以燕亡于齐，魏亡于秦，陈、蔡亡于楚，此皆绝地形，群臣比周以蔽其上，大臣为诸侯轻国也。
现代文：没有进攻的原因，是人们都说燕国被齐国攻破，魏国被秦国攻破，陈国、蔡国被楚国攻破，这些都是土地大小地形险要相差悬殊，群臣结党营私蒙蔽君王，大臣为了别的诸侯而轻视自己国家的结果。
English: The reason why there was no attack was that people said that Yan was invaded by Qi, Wei was invaded by Qin, and Chen and Cai were invaded by Chu. These were all the results of the disparity in land size and terrain, the blinding of the king by a group of vassals who were partisan, and the minister's contempt for his own country for the sake of other lords.

古文：今王位正，张仪之贵，不得议公孙郝，是从臣不事大臣也；公孙郝之贵，不得议甘戊，则大臣不得事近臣矣。贵贱不相事，各得其位，辐凑以事其上，则群臣之贤不肖，可得而知也。
现代文：现在大王端正了贵贱不同的名位，张仪那样显贵也不能私下议论公孙郝，这是使外臣不得干涉大臣的事；公孙郝那样显贵也不能私下议论甘茂，这就是大臣不得干涉近臣行事，贵贱不互相干涉，各得其位，像辐条集予车轴一样共同侍奉自己的君王，那么群臣贤能与无能，就可以知道了。
English: Now that the great king has rectified the different positions of nobles and commoners, it is not possible for a dignitary like Zhang Yi to privately discuss the public Sun Yat, which means that the foreign minister must not interfere with the affairs of the minister; it is not possible for a dignitary like the public Sun Yat to privately discuss the Kam Mao, which means that the minister must not interfere with the actions of his close ministers, the nobles and commoners do not interfere with each other, each takes his place, and they serve their king together like the spokes are set to the axle, then the ability and inability of the ministers can be known.

古文：王之明一也。
现代文：这是大王第一个圣明之处。
English: This was the king's first sacred place.

古文：公孙郝尝疾齐、韩而不加贵，则为大臣不敢为诸侯轻国矣。
现代文：公孙郝曾加紧联合齐、韩两国，大王并没有加以奖赏，那么做大臣的也就不敢为了别的诸侯而轻视本国利益了。
English: King Sun Yat-sen had intensified the unification of Korea and Korea, and the great king did not reward him, so the minister did not dare to despise the interests of his country for the sake of other princes.

古文：齐、韩尝因公孙郝而不受，则诸侯不敢因群臣以为能矣。
现代文：齐、韩两国曾想通过公孙郝来利用秦国，秦王没有答应，那么诸侯就不敢再通过群臣为自己求利了。
English: The two countries of Qi and Han had wanted to take advantage of the State of Qin through Gongsun Ren, but the King of Qin did not agree, so the lords no longer dared to seek profit for themselves through their vassals.

古文：外内不相为，则诸侯之情伪可得而知也。
现代文：内外不互相勾结，那么诸侯的内情真伪就可以知道了。
English: If there is no collusion between the inside and the outside, then the true nature of the lords can be known.

古文：王之明二也。
现代文：这是大王第二个圣明的地方。
English: This is the second sacred place of the great king.

古文：公孙郝、樗里疾请无攻韩，陈四辟去，王犹攻之也。
现代文：公孙郝、樗里疾请求不要攻打韩国，韩国军队的行列因没有遭到进攻而解散，大王如同打败了韩国一样。
English: Emperor Gongsun Rong and Emperor Bao Li Zi begged not to attack South Korea, and the ranks of the South Korean army were disbanded because they were not attacked. It was as if the emperor had defeated South Korea.

古文：甘茂约楚、赵而反敬魏，是其讲我，茂且攻宜阳，王犹校之也。
现代文：甘茂约定楚、赵两国攻打魏国，却反过来恭敬魏国，这是同我们韩国结怨，甘茂要进攻宜阳，大王还是衡量了攻伐与讲翻的利害得失。
English: Gammao agreed that Chu and Zhao would attack Wei, but they in turn respected Wei. This was a grudge with us, Korea. Gammao wanted to attack Yiyang, but the great king weighed the pros and cons of attacking and overthrowing.

古文：群臣之知，无几于王之明者，臣故愿公仲之国以于於王，而无自左右也。 
现代文：群臣的智慧同大王的圣明相比相差甚远，所以臣下愿意让公仲用自己的国家来侍奉大王，而不要从左右的人那里求得谋略。 
English: The wisdom of the courtiers is far from the wisdom of the great king, so the courtiers are willing to let the courtiers use their own country to serve the great king, rather than seeking advice from those around them.

