古文：苏竟杨厚
现代文：◆苏竟传
English: ◆Su Jingzhuan

古文：苏竟字伯况，扶风平陵人也。
现代文：苏竟字伯况，扶风郡平陵人。
English: Su Jingzhe is a native of Pingling, Fufeng County.

古文：平帝世，竟以明《易》为博士讲《书》祭酒。
现代文：平帝之世，苏竟以通晓《易》为博士讲《书》祭酒。
English: In the era of Emperor Ping, Su actually used his knowledge of Yi to become a doctor to teach the Book of Sacrifices.

古文：善图纬，能通百家之言。
现代文：善图纬，能通百家之书。
English: A good map is worth a hundred books.

古文：王莽时，与刘歆等共典校书，拜代郡中尉。
现代文：王莽时，与刘歆等共典校书，拜为代郡中尉。
English: Wang Mangshi, who co-authored the school book with Liu Yao and others, was promoted to acting county lieutenant.

古文：时匈奴扰乱，北边多罹其祸，竟终完辑一郡。
现代文：当时匈奴扰乱，北部边疆多罹其祸，而苏竟的代郡竟完整平安。
English: At that time, the Huns were in turmoil, and the northern borderlands were mostly affected by their misfortune, while the Soviet Union's vicinities were completely safe.

古文：光武即位，就拜代郡太守，使固塞以拒匈奴。
现代文：光武即位，就拜他为代郡太守，让他强固边塞以拒匈奴。
English: When Guangwu ascended the throne, they worshiped him as the acting county governor, and asked him to fortify the border to repel the Xiongnu.

古文：建武五年冬，卢芳略得北边诸郡，帝使偏将军随弟屯代郡。
现代文：建武五年冬，卢芳掠得北边诸郡，帝派遣偏将军随弟屯兵代郡。
English: In the winter of the fifth year of Jianwu, Lu Fang plundered the counties in the north, and the emperor sent a partial general with his younger brother to garrison the county.

古文：竟病笃，以兵属弟，诣京师谢罪。
现代文：苏竟病重，将兵马交给随弟，自己到京师谢罪。
English: After all, Su was seriously ill. He handed over the soldiers and horses to his younger brother and went to Beijing to apologize.

古文：拜侍中，数月，以病免。
现代文：被拜为侍中，几个月后，因病被免职。
English: He was worshipped as an attendant, and a few months later he was removed from his post due to illness.

古文：初，延岑护军邓仲况拥兵据南阳阴县为寇，而刘歆兄子龚为其谋主。
现代文：起初，延岑护军邓仲况拥兵占据南阳的阴县为盗寇，而刘歆的侄子刘龚为邓仲况作军师。
English: At first, the Yancheng Protector Deng Zhongzheng's followers occupied Yin County in Nanyang as robbers, while Liu Bei's nephew Liu Bei acted as Deng Zhongzheng's military instructor.

古文：竟时在南阳，与龚书晓之曰：君执事无恙。
现代文：苏竟当时在南阳，就写信给刘龚晓谕他说：君左右安好。
English: Su was actually in Nanyang at the time, and he wrote a letter to Liu Yao, telling him: "You are safe and sound.

古文：走昔以摩研编削之才，与国师公从事出入，校定秘书，窃自依依，末由自远。
现代文：我从前以揣摩编简之才，与你叔叔刘歆在一起共事，校定秘书，我只是在你叔父的提携下，自己无多建树。
English: I used to work with your uncle, Liu Wei, as a proofreader and proofreader with my talent of guessing and compiling. I only worked in partnership with your uncle, and I didn't do much myself.

古文：盖闻君子愍同类而伤不遇。
现代文：我听说君子怜悯同类而伤其不遇。
English: I've heard it said that a gentleman shows no mercy to his fellow man.

古文：人无愚智，莫不先避害然后求利，先定志然后求名。
现代文：人不管是愚或是智，莫不先避害然后求利，先定志而后求名。
English: No matter whether a person is stupid or wise, he must first avoid harm and then seek profit, first make up his mind and then seek fame.

古文：昔智果见智伯穷兵必亡，故变名远逝，陈平知项王为天所弃，故归心高祖，皆智之至也。
现代文：以前智果看到智伯好战必亡，于是改名换姓而远走他方，陈平知项羽为天所弃，所以归心刘邦，这都是绝顶聪明的人。
English: In the past, Zhi Guo saw that Zhi Bo's belligerence would lead to his death, so he changed his name and went far away. Chen Ping knew that Xiang Yu was abandoned by heaven, so he turned his heart to Liu Bang. These are all extremely clever people.

古文：闻郡前权时屈节，北面延牙，乃后觉悟，栖迟养德。
现代文：听说你以前曾经暂时屈节，臣事延岑，后来觉悟了，就不复事延岑。
English: I've heard that you once had a temporary knuckle-dragging attitude and procrastinated on important matters. Later, when you came to your senses, you no longer procrastinated.

古文：先世数子，又何以加。
现代文：以前的智果、陈平，也没有高过于你。
English: The previous wisdom, Chen Ping, is not higher than you.

古文：君处阴中，土多贤士，若以须臾之间，研考异同，揆之图书，测之人事，则得失利害，可陈于目，何自负畔乱之困，不移守恶之名乎？
现代文：你住在阴中，那里贤士很多，若能花点时间，研究考察异同的人和事，从图书中加以揣度，从人事中加以测量，那么得失利害，可一目了然，何至于背着叛乱的困惑，不移志于守恶的名分呢？
English: You live in the dark, where there are many sages. If you can spend some time studying and investigating people and things that are different and similar, deduce them from books, and measure them from people, then the gains and losses can be seen at a glance. What about the confusion behind the rebellion and the desire to keep the reputation of evil?

古文：与君子之道，何其反也？
现代文：与君子的道德行为，为什么相反呢？
English: As opposed to the moral conduct of a gentleman, why not?

古文：世之俗儒末学，醒醉不分，而稽论当世，疑误视听。
现代文：世上迂腐的儒生们的肤浅学问，醒与醉都分辨不清，而他们却要考究评论当世之事，疑惑和误人视听。
English: The superficial knowledge of the world's pedantic Confucians cannot tell the difference between being sober and being drunk, but they want to comment on current affairs, doubt and mislead.

古文：或谓天下迭兴，未知谁是，称兵据土，可图非冀。
现代文：或者说天下更替而兴，不知谁当兴起，拥兵割据，可以图得非分的奢望。
English: Or to say that the world is changing and rising, I don't know who should rise, supporters are divided, you can try to get a lot of extravagant expectations.

古文：或曰圣王未启，宜观时变，倚强附大，顾望自守。
现代文：或者说圣王还没有启示，暂时还应观察时事的变化，倚附强大，观望自守。
English: Or to put it another way, the holy king has not received any revelation yet. For the time being, he should observe the changes in current affairs, rely on the powerful, and watch and beware.

古文：二者之论，岂其然乎？
现代文：这两种论调，难道是对的吗？
English: Are these two arguments right?

古文：夫孔丘秘经，为汉赤制，玄包幽室，文隐事明。
现代文：孔丘的纬书，为汉赤制，纬书玄秘，藏于幽室，文虽微隐，事甚明验。
English: The books of Confucius are in the Han and Red Dynasties. The books of Confucius are secret and are kept in a secluded room. Although the texts are obscure, the things are very clear.

古文：且火德承尧，虽昧必亮，承积世之祚，握无穷之符，王氏虽乘间偷篡，而终婴大戮，支分体解，宗氏屠灭，非其效欤？
现代文：而且大德是继承尧，虽遭王莽篡夺，今光武中兴，必复明亮，继承世代的皇位，掌握无穷的符瑞，王莽虽乘机篡夺，终究招致杀身之祸，肢分体解，宗氏屠灭，不正是效验吗？
English: Moreover, the great virtue is to inherit the throne, although it was usurped by Wang Mang, now Guangwu is flourishing, it will be bright again, inherit the throne of generations, grasp the infinite wealth, although Wang Mang took the opportunity to usurp, it will eventually lead to the disaster of killing, dismemberment, and the slaughter of the clan, is not it a test?

古文：皇天所以眷顾蜘蹰，忧汉子孙者也。
现代文：皇天所以眷顾踟蹰，是忧大汉子孙哩。
English: That's why the emperor is so concerned about him. He's the descendant of a great man.

古文：论者若不本之于天，参之于圣，猥以《师旷杂事》轻自眩惑，说士作书，乱夫大道，焉可信哉？
现代文：议论的人如果不本之于天，参之于圣，随便以《师旷杂事》来轻易迷惑，妄作纬书以相游说，离经背道，岂可相信吗？
English: If those who are talking about it do not base it on Heaven, but on the Holy, and are easily misled by the "Master of Sorrows and Misfortunes," and make up books to persuade others, and deviate from the scriptures, can they be believed?

古文：诸儒或曰：今五星失晷，天时谬错，辰星久而不效，太白出入过度，荧惑进退见态，镇星绕带天街，岁星不舍氐、房。
现代文：腐儒们有的说：现在东南西北中五星失常，天时发生乖错，辰星长期出入失度，太白星出入过度，荧惑星进退见态，镇星绕带天街，岁星不舍氐、房。
English: Some corrupt Confucians said: now the five stars in the southeast and northwest are abnormal, the time of the day is irregular, the hour star is long-term in and out of error, the white star is too much in and out, the fluorescent planet is advancing and retreating, the town star is surrounded by the sky street, the year star is not reluctant, and the house.

古文：以为诸如此占，归之国家。
现代文：以为这些征兆，应归之于国家。
English: These are signs that should be attributed to the state.

古文：盖灾不徒设，皆应之分野，各有所主。
现代文：灾难不是徒然设置的，都是与地上州、国的位置相对应的，是各有所主的。
English: The disasters are not set up in vain. They all correspond to the position of the above-ground states and countries, and each has its own role to play.

古文：夫房、心即宋之分，东海是也。
现代文：那房、心即是宋的位置，是东海。
English: That room, the heart, is Song's location, the East Sea.

古文：尾为燕分，渔阳是也。
现代文：尾为燕的位置，是渔阳。
English: The tail is the swallow's position, the fisherman's yang.

古文：东海董宪迷惑未降，渔阳彭宠逆乱拥兵，王赫斯怒，命将并征，故荧惑应此，宪、宠受殃。
现代文：东海董宪迷惑不降，渔阳彭宠拥兵谋反，皇上勃然大怒，派遣大将去征讨，所以荧惑应此，董宪、彭宠应受灾殃。
English: In the East China Sea, Dong Xian was puzzled and would not surrender, Yuyang Peng Jia led the troops to rebel, and the emperor was furious and sent a general to collect, so Fu Zha should do so, and Dong Xian and Peng Jia should suffer disaster.

古文：太白、辰星自亡新之末，失行算度，以至于今，或守东井，或没羽林，或裴回籓屏，或踯躅帝宫，或经天反明，或潜臧久沈，或衰微暗昧，或煌煌北南，或盈缩成钩，或偃蹇不禁，皆大运荡除之祥，圣帝应符之兆也。
现代文：太白、辰星自从王莽败亡以来，运行不规则，一直到现在，或守在东井，或没于羽林，或萦绕淹留两旁之星，或在帝宫上下不去，或经天反明，或潜藏久沉，或者衰微暗昧，或者在南北通亮，或者缩成钩形，或者高而明亮无所禁制，这些都是乱臣们大数已到活该荡除的符，圣帝应符的吉兆。
English: Since Wang Mang's defeat, the Taibai and Chensing have been running irregularly until now, either staying in the east well, or not in the forest of feathers, or haunting the stars on both sides, or not going up and down in the imperial palace, or passing through the heavens, or lurking for a long time, or fading dimly, or shining in the north and south, or shrinking into a hook shape, or high and bright without any prohibition. These are all signs that the majority of unruly subjects have come to live and should be eliminated, and are auspicious signs for the holy emperor.

古文：贼臣乱子，往往错互，指麾妄说，传相坏误。
现代文：乱臣贼子，往往互相交错，指挥瞎说，以讹传讹。
English: Rogue ministers and thieves often intertwine with each other, commanding nonsense and spreading lies.

古文：由此论之，天文安得遵度哉！
现代文：这样看来，天文还有什么遵守的法度呢？
English: In this light, what other laws should be observed in astronomy?

古文：乃者，五月甲申，天有白虹，自子加午，广可十丈，长可万丈，正临倚弥。
现代文：从前，五月甲申，天有白虹，自子时到午时，有十丈宽，万丈长，正临倚弥。
English: Once upon a time, in May of Jiaxun, the sky had a white rainbow, and from the morning to the afternoon, it was ten meters wide, ten meters long, and it was approaching the noon.

古文：倚弥即黎丘，秦丰之都也。
现代文：倚弥即黎丘，秦丰的都城。
English: Yishi is Lichu, the capital of Qinfeng.

古文：是时月入于毕。
现代文：这时月入于毕。
English: At this time, the new moon is over.

古文：毕为天网，主网罗无道之君，故武王将伐纣，上祭于毕，求助天也。
现代文：毕是天网，象征网罗无道之君，所以周武王将伐商纣，上祭于毕，以求天助。
English: Bi is heaven's net, symbolizing the trapping of the king without a path, so King Zhou Wu will cut the merchant's yoke and offer it to Bi to ask for heaven's help.

古文：夫仲夏甲申为八魁。
现代文：仲夏甲申为是八魁。
English: In the middle of the summer, Jia Shen is the leader of the eight.

古文：八魁，上帝开塞之将也，主退恶攘逆。
现代文：八魁，是上天开塞之将，负责退恶人攘逆贼。
English: The Eight Emperors are the generals of heaven, responsible for driving away evil people and traitors.

古文：流星状似蚩尤旗，或曰营头，或曰天枪，出奎而西北行，至延牙营上，散为数百而灭，奎为毒螫，主库兵。
现代文：流星形状像蚩尤旗，或叫营头，或叫天枪，出奎而西北行，到延牙营上，散为数百流星而灭。奎为毒螫，主武库之兵。
English: The meteor is shaped like a banner, or a camp head, or a heavenly gun. It comes out of Kui and travels northwest to the Yangtze camp, where it scatters into hundreds of meteors and disappears. Kui is a drug lord, a soldier of the main arsenal.

古文：此二变，郡中及延牙士众所共见也。
现代文：这两个变化，郡中及延牙士众都看到了。
English: Both of these changes have been seen by everyone in the county and in Yenga.

古文：是故延牙遂之武当，托言发兵，实避其殃。
现代文：所以延牙到了武当，名义上说是发兵，实际上是躲避灾殃。
English: Therefore, Yanja arrived in Wudang, nominally to send troops, but actually to avoid disaster.

古文：今年《比卦》部岁，《坤》主立冬，《坎》主冬至，水性灭火，南方之兵受岁祸也。
现代文：今年《比卦》部岁，《坤》主立冬，《坎》主冬至，水性灭火，南方的兵今岁要遭灾了。
English: This year is the year of "Bigua," "Kun" is the main winter, "Kan" is the main winter solstice, water-based fire extinguishing, and the soldiers in the south will suffer disasters this year.

古文：德在中宫，刑在木，木胜土，刑制德，今年兵事毕已，中国安宁之效也。
现代文：德在中宫，刑在木，木胜土，刑制德，今年兵事结束后，中国就可得安宁的效验了。
English: Virtue is in the palace, punishment is in the wood, and the wood is better than the earth. When the war is over this year, China will be able to experience the effect of peace.

古文：五七之家三十五姓，彭、秦、延氏不得豫焉。
现代文：五七之家三十五姓，彭、秦、延氏不得参与。
English: There are 35 surnames in the 57 families, and the Peng, Qin and Yan families are not allowed to participate.

古文：如何怪惑，依而恃之？
现代文：为什么怪惑而依赖呢？
English: Why the weird reliance on it?

古文：《葛累》之诗， 求福不回 ，其若是乎！
现代文：《葛累》之诗说，光明正大求取福禄，就是这样的吗！
English: Is this what the poem in "Gray" says, that one should be honest and seek one's fortune?

古文：图谶之占，众变之验，皆君所明。
现代文：图谶的占卜，众变的效验，你都是明白的。
English: You understand the meaning of divination and the effect of changes.

古文：善恶之分，去就之决，不可不察。无忽鄙言！
现代文：善与恶的区别，去与留的决定，不可不察，莫忽视我的劝告啊！
English: The difference between good and evil, the decision to go and stay, must not be overlooked, do not ignore my advice!

古文：夫周公之善康叔，以不从管、蔡之乱也；景帝之悦济北，以不从吴濞之畔也。
现代文：周公之所以善待康叔，是因为康叔不参与管叔蔡叔的叛乱；汉景帝之喜欢济北王刘志，是因刘志不肯从吴王刘濞的叛乱。
English: The reason why Zhou treated Uncle Kang kindly was because Uncle Kang did not participate in the rebellion led by Uncle Cai; Emperor Han Jing's liking for Liu Zhi, King of Northern Qi, was because Liu Zhi refused to join the rebellion led by King Liu Xuan of Wu.

古文：自更始以来，孤恩背逆，归义向善，臧否粲然，可不察欤！
现代文：自从更始以来，负恩背逆的，归义向善的，处置断然不同，能不考察吗？
English: Since the reformation, the treatment of those who are ungrateful and disobedient, and those who convert to righteousness and do good, has been decidedly different. Can we not examine this?

古文：良医不能救无命，强梁不能与天争，故天之所坏，人不得支。
现代文：良医不能挽救无命的人，强梁不能与天抗争，所以天要毁坏，人是支持不了的。
English: A good doctor cannot save a lifeless person, and a strong man cannot fight against heaven. Therefore, heaven must be destroyed, and man cannot support it.

古文：宜密与太守刘君共谋降议。
现代文：你应秘密地与太守刘君共同商议投降事宜。
English: You should secretly discuss the matter of surrender with the daimyō Liu Jun.

古文：仲尼栖栖，墨子遑遑，忧人之甚也。
现代文：孔子栖栖，墨子遑遑，忧人之甚。
English: Confucius, Mozi, Zong, and Zong are even more worrisome.

古文：屠羊救楚，非要爵禄；茅焦干秦，岂求报利？
现代文：屠羊救楚，不是为了升官发财；茅焦谏秦始皇，难道是求赏赐？
English: Slaughtering sheep and saving Chu is not for the purpose of promotion and wealth; is it for reward that Mao Jiao killed Qin Shihuang?

古文：尽忠博爱之诚，愤懑不能已耳。
现代文：尽忠博爱的诚心，愤懑不能自已而已。
English: The sincerity of loyalty and fraternity, the indignation can not be self-sufficient.

古文：又与仲况书谏之，文多不载，于是仲况与龚遂降。
现代文：又写信邓仲况劝谏，其文多未记载，于是邓仲况与刘龚就投降了。
English: He also wrote a letter to Deng Zhongzhang to persuade him, but most of it was not recorded, so Deng Zhongzhang and Liu Xi surrendered.

古文：龚字孟公，长安人，善论议，扶风马援、班彪并器重之。
现代文：刘龚字孟公，长安人，长于议论，扶风马援、班彪都很器重他。
English: Liu Xingzhe Menggong, a Chang'an man, is good at discussion, and Fu Feng Ma Yuan and Ban Biao are very important to him.

古文：竟终不伐其功，潜乐道术，作《记诲篇》及文章传于世。
现代文：苏竟不邀其功，潜心乐于道术，作《记诲篇》及文章传于世。
English: However, Su did not invite him to do so, but devoted himself to Daoism, and wrote the "Memorial" and other articles that have been passed down to the world.

古文：年七十，卒于家。
现代文：七十岁时，在家去世。
English: He died at home at the age of seventy.

古文：杨厚字仲桓，广汉新都人也。
现代文：◆杨厚传杨厚字仲桓，广汉郡新都人。
English: ◆Yang Hou passed on Yang Hou's surname Zhonghuan, a native of Xintuo, Guanghan County.

古文：祖父春卿，善图谶学，为公孙述将。
现代文：祖父杨春卿，善于图谶学，为公孙述的部将。
English: His grandfather, Yang Chunqing, was good at map-making and seal-studying, and was the commander of the Imperial Grandson Division.

古文：汉兵平蜀，春卿自杀，临命戒子统曰： 吾绨帙中有先祖所传秘记，为汉家用，尔其修之。 
现代文：汉兵平定蜀，杨春卿自杀，临终前告儿子杨统说 ：我的绨中，有先祖所传的秘记，为汉家用，你当好好学习。 
English: Han soldiers pacified Shu, Yang Chunqing committed suicide, and on his deathbed, he told his son Yang Tong, "In my book, there are secrets passed down by my ancestors. As a Han family, you should study hard."

古文：统感父遗言，服阕，辞家从犍为周循学习先法，又就同郡郑伯山受《河洛书》及天文推步之术。
现代文：杨统感激先父遗言，服丧满三年后，辞家跟从犍为周循学习先人之法，又从同郡人郑伯山受《河洛书》及天文推步之术。
English: Yang Tong was grateful for his father's last words. After three years of mourning, he left home and followed Zhou Zou to learn the ancestor's law. He also learned "The Book of Helo" and the art of astronomical deduction from fellow county resident Zheng Baoshan.

古文：建初中为彭城令，一州大旱，统推阴阳消伏，县界蒙泽。
现代文：建初中为彭城县令，一州遭大旱，杨统推行阴阳消伏之术，县界蒙雨泽。
English: The junior high school was built by order of Pengcheng County, a state suffered from drought, Yang Tong implemented the Yin and Yang subduing technique, and the county border was covered with rain.

古文：太守宗湛使统求为郡求雨，亦即降澍。
现代文：太守宗湛让杨统为郡求雨，也降了甘霖。
English: Governor Zongzhan asked Yang Tong to pray for rain for the county, and the rain came down.

古文：自是朝廷灾异，多以访之。
现代文：自此以后朝廷凡有灾异，多访求于他。
English: From then on, whenever there was a disaster, the imperial court would visit him.

古文：统作《家法章句》及《内谶》二卷角说，位至光禄大夫，为国三老。
现代文：杨统作《家法章名》及《内谶》二卷解说，官至光禄大夫，为国三老。
English: Yang Tong is the author of the two-volume commentary on "Family Law Chapter Names" and "Internal Regulations." He is a high-ranking official, a doctor of Guanglu and one of the three elders of the country.

古文：年九十卒。
现代文：九十岁才去世。
English: He died at the age of ninety.

古文：统生厚。
现代文：杨统生子杨厚。
English: Yang Tong's son Yang Hou.

古文：厚母初与前妻子博不相安，厚年九岁，思令和亲，乃托疾不言不食。
现代文：杨厚母亲与前妻儿子杨博不和睦，杨厚年九岁，想让他们和好，就借口有病不说话不进食。
English: Yang Hou's mother did not get along with her ex-wife's son Yang Bo. Yang Hou, nine years old, wanted to make them get along, so he did not speak or eat on the pretext of illness.

古文：母知其旨，惧然改意，恩养加笃。
现代文：母亲知道他的用意，就改变原来的态度，对前妻儿子恩养加深。
English: When his mother learned of his intentions, she changed her attitude and became more supportive of her ex-husband's son.

古文：博后至光禄大夫。
现代文：杨博后来官至光禄大夫。
English: Yang Bo later rose through the ranks to become a doctor in Guanglu.

古文：厚少学统业，精力思述。
现代文：杨厚从小学习杨统学业，精力思述。
English: Yang Hou has been studying Yang Tong's schoolwork since he was a child, and his energy is focused on thinking.

古文：初，安帝永初三年，太白入斗，洛阳大水。
现代文：初，安帝永初三年，太白入北斗，洛阳大水。
English: At the beginning of the year, in the first three years of Andi Yongchun, Taibai entered the Beidou, Luoyang Dashui.

古文：时统为侍中，厚随在京师。
现代文：当时杨统为侍中，杨厚跟随在京师。
English: At that time, Yang Tong was a chamberlain, and Yang Hou followed him in Beijing.

古文：朝廷以问统，统对 年老耳目不明，子厚晓读图书，粗识其意 。
现代文：朝廷以此问统，杨统推托说自己年老耳目不明，儿子杨厚通晓图书，可知其意。
English: The imperial court asked Yang Tong about this, and Yang Tong said that he was old and deaf and blind, and his son Yang Hou was familiar with books, which is understandable.

古文：邓太后使中常侍承制问之，厚对以为 诸王子多在京师，容有非常，宜亟发遣各还本国。 
现代文：邓太后使中常侍秉承后意问杨厚，杨厚回答： 诸王子多在京师，可能发生异变，应赶快发遣他们各归本国。 
English: After the Empress Dowager Deng asked Yang Hou what he meant, Yang Hou replied: Princes are mostly trained in Beijing, there may be a mutation, they should be sent to their home countries as soon as possible.

古文：太后从之，星寻灭不见。
现代文：太后听从了，太白星不久就不见了。
English: The empress dowager obeyed, and Taibai Xing soon disappeared.

古文：又克水退期日，皆如所言。
现代文：洛阳大水也自退出，都如杨厚所言。
English: Luoyang Dashui has also withdrawn, as Yang Hou said.

古文：除为中郎。
现代文：于是以杨厚为中郎。
English: As a result, Yang Hou was chosen as the middle brother.

古文：太后特引见，问以图谶，厚对不合，免归。
现代文：太后特别引见，问他图谶的事，杨厚所对不合太后意旨，免职回家。
English: The empress dowager specially introduced him to Yang Hou, and asked him about the painting. Yang Hou did not agree with the empress dowager, and was dismissed from his post and sent home.

古文：复习业犍为，不应州郡、三公之命，方正、有道、公正特征，皆不就。
现代文：再习业于犍为，不应州郡及三公之命，方正、有道、公车特相征召都不就。
English: It is not in accordance with the orders of prefectures and counties and the Three Kingdoms to recruit students from Shantou, and it is not in accordance with the order to recruit students from Fangzheng, Youdao and Bus Special Phase.

古文：永建二年，顺帝特征，诏告郡县督促发遣。
现代文：永建二年，顺帝特征，诏令郡县督促发遣。
English: In the second year of Yongjian, with the characteristics of Emperor Shun, the county was ordered to dispatch dispatch dispatches.

古文：厚不得已，行到长安，以病自上，因陈汉三百五十年之厄，宜蠲汉改宪之道，及消伏灾异，凡五事。
现代文：杨厚不得已，行到长安，以有病自陈，因陈说汉三百五十年的厄运，应修明改良法律法令的道理，及消除灾异，共五事。
English: As a last resort, Yang Hou went to Chang'an, claiming to be ill, because Chen said that the bad luck of Han three hundred and fifty years, should clarify the principle of improving laws and regulations, and eliminate disasters, a total of five things.

古文：制书褒述，有诏太医致药，太宫赐羊酒。
现代文：制书褒述，有诏令太医致药看病，令太官赏赐羊酒。
English: The book was praised, and there was an imperial edict ordering the imperial physician to administer medicine to the sick, and ordering the emperor to reward them with sheep's wine.

古文：及至，拜议郎，三迁为侍中，特蒙引见，访以时政。
现代文：等他到后，即拜议郎，三迁为侍中，特蒙引见，访问以时政。
English: When he arrived, he was immediately greeted by the chancellor, and three times he was transferred to the chamber of attendants. He was given a special introduction, and the visit focused on current politics.

古文：四年，厚上言 今夏必盛寒，当有疾疫蝗虫之害 。
现代文：四年，杨厚上言： 今夏必有大寒，当有疾疫蝗虫之灾害。 
English: In 2004, Yang Hou said, "This summer will be very cold, and there will be a plague of locusts."

古文：是岁，果六州大蝗，疫气流行。
现代文：这年，果然六州蝗害大作，疫气流行。
English: This year, locust plagues hit six states, and the plague became endemic.

古文：后又连上 西北二方有兵气，宜备边寇 。
现代文：后又连上 西北二方有兵气，宜备战边寇 。
English: The two sides in the northwest have the military strength, and it is advisable to prepare for border incursions.

古文：车驾临当西巡，感厚言而止。
现代文：车驾原准备西巡，感杨厚之言而止。
English: The driver was preparing for a westward tour, which made Yang Hou speechless.

古文：至阳嘉三年，西羌寇陇右，明年，乌桓围度辽将军耿晔。
现代文：至阳嘉三年，西羌侵犯陇右，明年，乌桓围困辽将军耿晔。
English: In the third year of the reign of Yang Jia, the Western Wei invaded the Southern Wei, and the next year, the Wu Huan besieged the Liao general Geng Qi.

古文：永和元年，复上 京师应有水患，又当火灾，三公有免者，蛮夷当反畔 。
现代文：永和元年，杨厚又上 京师应有水患，又当有火灾，三公有免职的，蛮夷当反叛 。
English: In the first year of the Yonghe era, Yang Hou again went to Beijing to teach that there should be floods, there should be fires, the three nobles should be dismissed, and the barbarians should rebel.

古文：是夏，洛阳暴水，杀千余人；至冬，承福殿灾，太尉庞参免；荆、交二州蛮夷贼杀长吏，寇城郭。
现代文：当年夏，洛阳暴水，死千余人；到冬天，承福殿失火，太尉宠参免；荆州、交州蛮夷贼杀死长吏，侵犯城郭。
English: In the summer of that year, Luoyang was flooded, killing more than a thousand people; in the winter, Chengfu Hall caught fire, and the captain was killed; Jingzhou and Jiaozhou barbarians killed officials and invaded the city.

古文：又言 阴臣、近戚、妃党当受祸。 
现代文：又言 阴臣、近戚、妃党当受灾 。
English: He also said that vassals, relatives and concubines should be affected by the disaster.

古文：明年，宋阿母与宦者褒信侯李元等遘奸废退；后二年，中常侍张逵等复坐诬罔大将军梁商专恣，悉伏诛。
现代文：明年，宋阿母与宦者褒信侯李元等通奸被废退；后二年，中常侍张逵等又因诬罔大将军梁商专政罪被伏诛。
English: In the next year, Song Amo and her accomplice Bo Xun, Hou Li Yuan and others were deposed for adultery; two years later, Vice-Chamberlain Zhang Xi and others were also arrested for the crime of falsely accusing General Liang Shang of dictatorship.

古文：每有灾异，厚辄上消救之法，而阉宦专政，言不得信。
现代文：每有灾，杨厚动辄呈上消救的办法，而阉宦专政，所言不能得到信任。
English: Every time there is a disaster, Yang Hou readily presents a remedy, but his dictatorship cannot be trusted.

古文：时大将军梁冀威权倾朝，遣弟侍中不疑以车马、珍玩致遗于厚，欲与相见。
现代文：当时大将军梁冀威权倾朝，遣其弟侍中梁不疑以车马、珍珠玩物送给杨厚，想与他相见。
English: At that time, General Liang Jie was authoritarian and pro-imperialist, and he sent his younger brother, Liang Zhongru, to present Yang Hou with a carriage, horses, and pearl toys, hoping to meet him.

古文：厚不答，固称病救退。
现代文：杨厚不答，坚决称有病求退。
English: Yang Hou did not answer, but firmly said that he was ill and wanted to withdraw.

古文：帝许之，赐车马钱帛归家。
现代文：帝准许，赏赐车马钱帛回家。
English: With the emperor's permission, he was rewarded with a carriage and money to take him home.

古文：修黄、老，教授门生，上名录者三千余人。
现代文：修黄老之术，教授门生，上名录者三千多人。
English: There are more than three thousand people who have mastered Huanglao's art and taught it to their students.

古文：太尉李固数荐言之。
现代文：太尉李固几次推荐。
English: Second Lieutenant Li Gu recommended it several times.

古文：本初元年，梁太后诏备古礼以聘厚，遂辞疾不就。
现代文：本初元年，梁太后诏书备古礼以聘请杨厚，杨厚称病辞不就。
English: In the first year of this year, the Empress Dowager Liang issued an edict to prepare an ancient ceremony to hire Yang Hou. Yang Hou said that his illness was not enough.

古文：建和三年，太后复诏征之，经四年不至。
现代文：建和三年，太后又下诏征聘，经四年不到。
English: It took three years to establish peace, and the empress dowager issued an imperial edict to recruit, less than four years later.

古文：年八十二，卒于家。
现代文：年八十二岁，在家去世。
English: He died at home at the age of 82.

古文：策书吊祭。
现代文：皇帝以策书吊祭。
English: The emperor held a hanging ceremony for the scroll.

古文：乡人谥曰文父。
现代文：乡人赠谥号叫文父。
English: He was given the nickname "Wenfu" by the villagers.

古文：门人为立庙，郡文学掾史春秋飨射常祠之。
现代文：学生为他立庙，郡文学掾史春秋飨射常祭祀他。
English: Students built a temple for him, and the county's literature, history and art circles often hold memorial services for him.

