古文：司空图，字表圣，河中虞乡人。
现代文：司空图，字表圣，河中虞乡人。
English: Siku, the word for saint, and the townsfolk of the middle reaches of the river.

古文：父舆，有风干。
现代文：父名舆，干练有风采。
English: My father's name is Ume. He is a capable and elegant wrestler.

古文：当大中时，卢弘正管盐铁，表为安邑两池榷盐使。
现代文：大中年间卢弘止管盐铁，上表向皇帝推荐他任安邑两池榷盐使。
English: During his college and junior high school years, Lu Hongzhi became a salt iron pipe, and the above table recommended to the emperor that he be appointed as a salt envoy to the two ponds in Anyi.

古文：先是，法疏阔，吏轻触禁，舆为立约数十条，莫不以为宜。
现代文：起初，法令很粗疏，官吏对触犯禁令不在乎，司空舆加订了几十条细则，大家都认为订得好。
English: At first, the decree was very rough, officials did not care about violating the ban, and the civil aviation authority added dozens of rules, which everyone thought was good.

古文：以劳再迁户部郎中。
现代文：因他的功绩，升官为户部郎中。
English: Because of his achievements, he was promoted to the post of junior secretary of the Household Department.

古文：图，咸通末擢进士，礼部侍郎王凝所奖待，俄而凝坐法贬商州，图感知己，往从之。
现代文：司空图咸通末年考中进士，礼部侍郎王凝对他特别赞许。不久，王凝犯法贬为商州刺史。司空图感激他知己之恩，跟他同去商州。
English: Siku Tu Hamdong passed the final year of junior high school examination, and Wang Ge, the attendant of the etiquette department, praised him highly. Soon, Wang Ge violated the law and was relegated to the history of Shangzhou. Siku Tu was grateful for his friend's kindness and went to Shangzhou with him.

古文：凝起拜宣歙观察使，乃辟置幕府。
现代文：后来王凝被起用任宣歙观察使，于是召他入幕府。
English: Later, Wang Geng was appointed as Xuan Zang observation envoy, so he was called to the shogunate.

古文：召为殿中侍御史，不忍去凝府，台劾，左迁光禄寺主簿，分司东都。
现代文：皇帝召司空图任殿中侍御史，他不忍离开王凝府，台官指斥他误期之罪，于是贬为光禄寺主簿，分管东都。
English: The emperor called upon Siku To to serve as the palace's chief historian, but he could not bear to leave Wanggefu. The officials blamed him for missing the deadline, and he was demoted to the position of the chief bookkeeper of the Guanglu Temple, in charge of the eastern capital.

古文：卢携以故宰相居洛，嘉图节，常与游。
现代文：卢携以原宰相的身份住在洛阳，赏识司空图的气节，常与之交往。
English: Lu lived in Luoyang with the identity of the former prime minister, appreciated the temperament of Sikuotu, and often interacted with him.

古文：携还朝，过陕虢，属于观察使卢渥曰： 司空御史，高士也。 
现代文：卢携回朝时经过陕虢，叮嘱观察使卢渥说： 司空御史，是志行高洁的人。 
English: When Lu Tzu returned to the imperial court, he passed through Shaanxi and Shandong Provinces, and his admonition and observation made Lu Wo say: Sikuo Guoshi is a person who aspires to be noble and pure.

古文：渥即表为僚佐。
现代文：渥即刻上表请任图为同僚官佐。
English: Awo immediately sent a request to be appointed as a colleague and assistant.

古文：会携复执政，召拜礼部员外郎，寻迁郎中。
现代文：正逢卢携重新执政，委任图为礼部员外郎，不久，升为郎中。
English: At the time of Roh's return to power, Thu was appointed as a member of the Ceremonial Affairs Department, and was soon promoted to vice-chairman.

古文：黄巢陷长安，将奔，不得前。
现代文：黄巢攻陷长安，司空图将随天子避难，但未成行。
English: Huang Chao captured Chang'an. Sikuotu would take refuge with Tianzi, but did not make the trip.

古文：图弟有奴段章者，陷贼，执图手曰： 我所主张将军喜下士，可往见之，无虚死沟中。 
现代文：司空图的弟弟有个仆人段章在贼军中，拉着司空图的手说： 我所辖的张将军喜欢结交读书人，可以去见他，不要冤枉送命。 
English: Siku's younger brother had a servant, Duan Zhang, who was in the bandits' army. Duan Zhang took Siku's hand and said, "General Zhang, whom I am in charge of, likes to make friends with readers. You can go to see him. Don't take your life unjustly."

古文：图不肯往，章泣下。
现代文：司空图不肯去，段章为之落泪。
English: Siku refused to go, and Duan Chu burst into tears.

古文：遂奔咸阳，间关至河中。
现代文：司空图去咸阳，历尽艰险到达河中。
English: Siu Kuang went to Xianyang and went through all the hardships to reach the middle of the river.

古文：僖宗次凤翔，即行在拜知制诰，迁中书舍人。
现代文：此时僖宗住在凤翔，就在行宫委任他为知制诰，升为中书舍人。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizong was living in Fengxiang, and he appointed him to the position of Chisei Jie and promoted him to the position of the second secretary of the Central Government.

古文：后狩宝鸡，不获从，又还河中。
现代文：后来皇帝巡狩宝鸡，没要司空图随从，图就又回到河中。
English: Later, when the emperor went on a treasure-hunting tour, he didn't want Siku to accompany him, so he went back to the river.

古文：龙纪初，复拜旧官，以疾解。
现代文：龙纪初年，他官复原职，因病辞官。
English: In the first year of Longji, he was reinstated to his post, but resigned due to illness.

古文：景福中，拜谏议大夫，不赴。
现代文：景福年间又委任他为谏议大夫，也不到任。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongbokgung, he was also appointed as a doctor of the Imperial Court, but he did not take up the post.

古文：后再以户部侍郎召，身谢阙下，数日即引去。
现代文：后来又召他为户部侍郎。司空图到朝廷致谢，几天后又走了。
English: Later, he was called to serve as a household attendant. Tsukoto went to the Imperial Court to express his gratitude, but left a few days later.

古文：昭宗在华，召拜兵部侍郎，以足疾固自乞。
现代文：昭宗在华州，召他为兵部侍郎，他说自己腿有病坚持请辞。
English: In Huazhou, Akimune called him to be an attendant of the military department. He insisted on resigning, saying that he had a bad leg.

古文：会迁洛阳，柳璨希贼臣意，诛天下才望，助丧王室，诏图入朝，图阳堕笏，趣意野耄。
现代文：那时迁都洛阳，柳璨迎合贼人的旨意，陷害有才能有声望的人，帮助削弱王室。诏令司空图入朝。司空图假装失态掉笏，意趣粗野。
English: At that time, the capital was moved to Luoyang, and Liu Bei pandered to the will of the thieves, set up talented and prestigious people, and helped weaken the royal family. He ordered Sikuo Tu to enter the imperial court. Sikuo Tu pretended to make a blunder, and his intention was crude.

古文：璨知无意于世，乃听还。
现代文：柳璨知他无意于仕途，于是任凭他回山。
English: Knowing that he had no intention of pursuing a career, Yanagisawa allowed him to return to the mountains.

古文：图本居中条山王官谷，有先人田，遂隐不出。
现代文：司空图原住中条山王官谷，有祖上的田产，于是隐居不出。
English: Tsukutu originally lived in Wangkang Valley, Zhongjoshan, and had an ancestral farm, so he could not live in seclusion.

古文：作亭观素室，悉图唐兴节士文人，名亭曰休休，作文以见志曰： 休，美也，既休而美具。
现代文：建造了简陋的亭观等房子。在亭中画下唐兴以来全部有节操者及知名文人的图像，并题名为 休休亭 ，还写文章表述心志： 辞官，是美事。既安闲自得，美也就有了。
English: He built a simple pavilion and other houses. In the pavilion, he painted all the images of the disciplinarians and famous writers since Tang Xing, and titled it Xiu Xiu Pavilion. He also wrote an article expressing his heart: A dictionary is a beautiful thing. Both leisure and self-sufficiency have beauty.

古文：故量才，一宜休；揣分，二宜休；耄而聩，三宜休；又少也惰，长也率，老也迂，三者非济时用，则又宜休。 
现代文：本来，衡量我的才能，一宜辞官；估量我的素质，二宜辞官；我老而昏聩，三宜辞官；再，我年轻时懒散，长大后马虎，老了后迂腐。这三者都不是治世所需要的，所以更宜辞官了。 
English: Originally, to measure my talent, one should be a diplomat; to measure my quality, two should be a diplomat; I am old and confused, three should be a diplomat; furthermore, I was lazy when I was young, sloppy when I grew up, and pedantic when I got old. These three are not needed to rule the world, so it is more appropriate to be a diplomat.

古文：因自目为耐辱居士。
现代文：还自称为 耐辱居士 。
English: He also calls himself a "tolerant lay practitioner."

古文：其言诡激不常，以免当时祸灾云。
现代文：他的言语奇特古怪，以此来免祸。
English: His language is peculiar and eccentric, and he avoids trouble in this way.

古文：豫为冢棺，遇胜日，引客坐圹中赋诗，酌酒裴回。
现代文：他预先准备了棺材坟地，遇到好天气就领客人们坐在墓穴里饮酒赋诗。
English: He has prepared a coffin graveyard in advance, and when the weather is good, he invites guests to sit in the grave and drink alcohol.

古文：客或难之，图曰： 君何不广邪？
现代文：客人觉得难堪，司空图说： 你为什么看不开呀。
English: The guest felt embarrassed, and Skytree said, "Why can't you open your eyes?"

古文：生死一致，吾宁暂游此中哉！ 
现代文：生与死本是一回事，我哪里只是在此暂游呢？ 
English: Life and death are one and the same thing. Where am I just passing through?

古文：每岁时，祠祷鼓舞，图与闾里耆老相乐。
现代文：每年过年时，村里集合击鼓跳舞祝祷。司空图与乡里老人们同乐。
English: Every year at the time of the Chinese New Year, the village gathers to play drums, dance and pray. Skytu joins in the fun with the old people in the village.

古文：王重荣父子雅重之，数馈遗，弗受。
现代文：王重荣父子非常看重他，多次送东西给他，他都不收。
English: Wang Chong Rong and his son think very highly of him. They have sent him things many times, but he does not accept them.

古文：尝为作碑，赠绢数千，图置虞乡市，人得取之，一日尽。
现代文：为了做碑，王重荣赠绢几千匹，司空图把绢放在虞乡市上，任人拾取，一天就拿光了。
English: In order to make a monument, Wang Chong Rong gave away several thousand yakitori. Siku Tu placed the yakitori on the Yuxiang market and let people pick it up. It was all gone in one day.

古文：时寇盗所过残暴，独不入王官谷，士人依以避难。
现代文：当时寇盗所过之处都抢掠烧杀，就独不去王官谷。不少读书人都去那里避难。
English: At that time, robbers and thieves plundered and burned everywhere they passed, so they did not go to Wangan Valley. Many readers went there to take refuge.

古文：硃全忠已篡，召为礼部尚书，不起。
现代文：朱全忠篡位，召司空图为礼部尚书，他不去。
English: Zhu Quanzhong usurped the throne, and summoned Zikutu to be the ceremonial secretary, but he did not go.

古文：哀帝弑，图闻，不食而卒，年七十二。
现代文：哀帝被杀，司空图听说后，绝食而死，享年七十二岁。
English: After hearing that Emperor Aidi had been killed, Sikuthu went on a hunger strike and died at the age of 72.

古文：图无子，以甥为嗣，尝为御史所劾，昭宗不责也。
现代文：司空图没有儿子，以外甥为后嗣，曾遭御史指控，昭宗并不加责。
English: Tsukutu did not have a son, and his nephew was his heir. He was once accused by the Emperor, but Akimune did not punish him.

