古文：王正君黄霸卖馅媪苏氏女武后李淳风杨贵妃姜皎常衮刘禹锡郑朗令狐绹门僧僧处弘范氏尼任之良殷九霞相手板庾道敏李参军龙复本
现代文：王正君黄霸卖馅媪苏氏女武后李淳风杨贵妃姜皎常衮刘禹锡郑朗令狐绹门僧僧处弘范氏尼任之良殷九霞相手板庾道敏李参军龙复本
English: Wang Zhengjun, Huang Baizhong, Li Chunfeng, Yang Guifei, Jiang Qian, Liu Yuxi, Zheng Lang, Ling Xuanmen, Dang Fan, Ni Ren Ziliang, Yin Jiuxia, Pan Xuan, Dao Min, Li Jianjun, Long Fu, Reproduction

古文：王正君
现代文：王正君
English: Wang Zhengjun

古文：汉王莽姑正君许嫁，至期当行时，夫辄死。
现代文：汉朝王莽的姑姑王正君许配给人家，到了应结婚的那天，她丈夫就死了。
English: Wang Zhengjun, the reckless aunt of a Han dynasty king, was engaged to be married, but on the day of the wedding, her husband died.

古文：如此者再。乃献之赵王，未取又薨。后又与正君父稚君善者过相正君曰：贵为天下母。
现代文：后来有位与王正君的父亲王稚君很要好的人来给她看相，说：你这个女儿将来贵为国母。
English: Later, a close friend of Wang Zhengjun's father, Wang Wuzhikun, came to see her and said, "This daughter of yours will become the mother of the nation."

古文：是时宣帝世，元帝为太子。
现代文：这时是汉宣帝在位时期，汉元帝是太子。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Xuan was on the throne, and Emperor Han Yuan was the crown prince.

古文：稚君乃因魏郡尉纳之太子，太子幸之，生子。
现代文：后来，因为王稚君任魏郡的郡尉，太子娶了王正君。太子很宠爱王正君，婚后王正君生下一儿子。
English: Later, because Wang Zhiqun was a county official of Wei County, the prince married Wang Zhengjun. The prince was very fond of Wang Zhengjun, and after the marriage, Wang Zhengjun gave birth to a son.

古文：宣帝崩，太子立正君为皇后，上为太子。
现代文：汉宣帝驾崩，太子继承帝位，为汉元帝，立王正君为皇后，立王正君的儿子为太子。
English: Emperor Han Xuan passed away, and the crown prince succeeded to the throne as Emperor Han Yuan. Wang Zhengjun was made empress, and Wang Zhengjun's son was made crown prince.

古文：元帝崩，太子立，是为成帝。
现代文：汉元帝驾崩，太子继承帝位，就是汉成帝。
English: Emperor Hanyuan passed away, and the crown prince succeeded to the throne, that is, Emperor Hancheng.

古文：正君为皇太后，竟为天下母。
现代文：王正君成为皇太后，真的成为国母。
English: When Wang Zhengjun became the empress dowager, she truly became the mother of the nation.

古文：黄霸
现代文：黄霸
English: Huangba

古文：黄霸为阳夏游徼，与善相者同车俱行。
现代文：黄霸担任阳夏乡里的游徼小吏时，一日，他与一位擅长相术的人乘坐一辆车同行，途中遇见一个女子，年约十七八岁。
English: One day, when Huang Ba was working as a tour guide in Yangxia Township, he was traveling in a car with a person who was good at dating. On the way, he met a woman who was about 17 or 18 years old.

古文：见一妇人年十七八，相者指之曰：此妇人当大富，为封侯者夫人。
现代文：相人指着这个女子说：这个女人将来必定大富大贵，成为公侯的夫人。
English: Pointing to the woman, the man said: "This woman will certainly be very rich and noble in the future, and will become the wife of a prince.

古文：公止车，审视之。
现代文：黄霸停下车，仔细察看这个女子。
English: Huang Ba stopped the car and carefully examined the woman.

古文：相者曰：今此妇人不富贵，卜书不用也。
现代文：相人说：如果这个女子将来不富贵，从今以后我再也不给人相面了。
English: The other person said: "If this woman is not rich and famous in the future, from now on I will no longer meet anyone.

古文：次公问之，乃其傍里人巫家子也，即娶为妻。
现代文：黄霸询问了这个女子，知道她是附近乡里一个巫术人家的女儿，当天就娶了这位女子做妻子。
English: Huang Ba inquired about the woman and found out that she was the daughter of a witchcraft family in a nearby village. He married the woman the same day.

古文：其后次公果大富贵，位至丞相，封为列侯。
现代文：后来，黄霸果然大富大贵，一直升任到丞相被封为列侯。
English: Later, Huangba was indeed very rich and noble, and was promoted to chancellor and made a vassal lord.

古文：卖馅媪
现代文：卖馅媪
English: Selling stuffing tots

古文：唐马周字宾王，少孤贫，明诗传。
现代文：唐朝人马周，字宾王，少年时父母双亡，家庭生活非常贫困。
English: Zhenma Zhou, Zi Bin Wang of the Tang Dynasty, lost both his parents when he was a boy, and his family life was very poor.

古文：落魄不事产业，不为州里所重。
现代文：马周通晓《诗》、《传》，为人放荡不羁，不能治理家业，不被州里人所看重。
English: Ma Zhou was well versed in "Poetry" and "Biography" and was a licentious person, unable to manage the family business and not valued by the people of Zhouzhou.

古文：补博州助教，日饮酒。刺史达奚怒，屡加咎责。
现代文：补任博州助教后，仍然每日喝酒，刺史达奚很生气，多次责备过他。
English: After taking up the post of assistant teacher in Bozhou, he still drank alcohol every day. Zhi Shidao was very angry and reproached him many times.

古文：周乃拂衣南游曹汴之境。
现代文：他一气之下，南行游历曹州、汴州去了。
English: Enraged, he traveled south to Caozhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：因酒后忤浚仪令崔贤，又遇责辱。
现代文：然而，因酒触犯了浚仪县令崔贤，又遭到责辱。
English: However, Cui Xian was reprimanded again for violating the Dzhungyi County order due to drinking.

古文：西至新丰，宿旅次。主人唯供设诸商贩人，而不顾周。
现代文：马周西行走到新丰时，投宿客栈，店主人只给那些商贩们端酒送菜，对马周却置之不理。
English: When Ma Zhou went west to Xinfeng, he stayed at an inn. The owner of the inn only served wine and food to the merchants, but ignored Ma Zhou.

古文：周遂命酒一斗，独酌。
现代文：于是他命店家上酒一斗，自斟自饮。
English: So he ordered a barrel of wine from the store and poured himself a drink.

古文：所饮余者，便脱靴洗足，主人窃奇之。
现代文：饮完后，脱下靴子用剩下的酒洗脚，店主人暗暗惊奇。
English: After drinking, he took off his boots and washed his feet with the rest of the wine, to the surprise of the owner.

古文：因至京，停于卖馅媪肆。
现代文：马周到了京城，留宿在卖蒸饼女老板的店铺里。
English: Ma Zhou arrived in Beijing and stayed in a shop run by a woman who sold steamed cakes.

古文：数日，祈觅一馆客处，媪乃引致于中郎将常何之家。
现代文：过了几天，他想找个做门客的地方，卖蒸饼的女老板把他引荐到中郎将常何的家中。
English: A few days later, he wanted to find a place to work as a doorman, and the woman who sold steamed buns introduced him to the home of the middle manager, Chang Ho.

古文：媪之初卖馅也，李淳风、袁天纲尝遇而异之。皆窃云：此妇人大贵，何以在此。
现代文：这位女老板刚卖蒸饼时，李淳风、袁天纲等当时著名的相士曾经遇到过她，并都感到惊异，私下说：这妇人是位大富大贵的人，怎么在这里卖蒸饼呢？
English: When this female boss was just selling steamed buns, Li Chunfeng, Yuan Tiangang and other famous couples at the time once met her, and they were all surprised and said privately: This woman is a very rich and valuable person, how can she sell steamed buns here?

古文：马公寻娶为妻。
现代文：不久，马周娶了这位卖蒸饼的女老板做他的妻子。
English: Soon after, Ma Zhou married the owner of the steamed cake shop as his wife.

古文：后有诏，文武五品官已上，各上封事。
现代文：后来，皇帝颁下诏书：文武官员，五品以上的，各自都要上书奏事。
English: Later, the emperor issued an edict: all civil and military officials with five or more titles were required to submit a written report.

古文：周陈便宜二十条事，遣何奏之。
现代文：马周不拘陈规，陈述有利国家，合乎时宜的建议二十条，让常何上奏圣上。
English: Ma Zhou did not stick to the stereotype, and made 20 timely suggestions that were beneficial to the country.

古文：乃请置街鼓，乃文武官绯紫碧绿等服色，并城门左右出入，事皆合旨。
现代文：奏折上有请求在街道设置警夜鼓，和让文武百官都穿上各自应穿的绯、紫、碧、绿等各色朝服，每次早朝都在城门附近等候这些建议都和圣上的想法完全一致。
English: According to the report, there were requests to set up night drums in the streets, and to have all the civil and military officials wear their respective imperial robes of blue, purple, turquoise, green, and other colors, and to wait near the city gate every morning. These suggestions are completely consistent with the thoughts of the Holy Father.

古文：太宗怪而问何所见，何对曰：乃臣家客马周所为也。
现代文：唐太宗感到奇怪，就问常何怎么想到的这些事情。常何回答说：这些都是我的门客马周提出来的。
English: Tang Taizong was puzzled and asked Chang He how he thought of these things. Chang He replied, "These were all suggested by my disciple Ma Zhou."

古文：召见与语，命直门下省。
现代文：唐太宗召见马周问话，让他直接去门下省，让房玄龄考问他明经和策对。之后。
English: Tang Taizong summoned Ma Zhou for questioning, asked him to go directly to the province under his control, and asked Fang Xuanling to ask him about the Ming and Qing dynasties.

古文：仍令房玄龄试经及策，拜儒林郎，守监察御史。
现代文：授任马周儒林郎，暂时署理监察御史的工作。
English: He was appointed Ma Zhou Ruling Lang, temporarily acting as the supervisor of the work of history.

古文：以常何举得其人，赐帛百匹。
现代文：因为常何举荐马周有功，唐太宗赏赐给他丝织品一百匹。
English: Because he often recommended horses to Zhou for meritorious service, Emperor Taizong of Tang rewarded him with one hundred silks.

古文：周后转给事中中书舍人，有机辩，能敷奏。深识事端，动无不中。
现代文：后来，马周又转任给事中、中书舍人。他机智、权变，善于陈述奏进，深识事体，每次行动没有不达到目的的。
English: Later, Ma Zhou was reassigned to be in charge of the middle and middle of the book. He was witty, powerful, good at making statements and making progress, knowledgeable about the matter, and every action did not fail to achieve the goal.

古文：岑文本见之曰：吾见马君，令人忘倦。
现代文：岑文本见了马周后，说：我见了马周感到他能使人忘记疲倦。
English: After meeting Ma Zhou, Zouwen said: I saw Ma Zhou and felt that he could make people forget their tiredness.

古文：然鸢肩火色，腾上必速，但恐不能久耳。
现代文：但是，马周双肩上耸象老鹰，面呈火红色。这种人一定会很快发达起来，只怕是不能长久啊！
English: However, Ma Zhou has an eagle on his shoulders and a fiery red face. This kind of person will surely develop quickly, but not for long!

古文：数年内，官至宰相，其媪亦为妇人。
现代文：仅仅几年内，马周就升任为宰相，这位卖蒸饼的女老板也做了宰相夫人。
English: In just a few years, Ma Zhou was promoted to prime minister, and the female owner of the steamer also became the prime minister's wife.

古文：后为吏部尚书，病消渴，弥年不瘳。年四十八而卒。
现代文：后来，马周又任吏部尚书，患了糖尿病，经年不愈，四十八岁时病逝。
English: Later, Ma Zhou, who was also the secretary of the cadre, suffered from diabetes and died of the disease at the age of 48.

古文：追赠右仆射高唐公。
现代文：死后，追赠右仆射唐公。
English: After his death, his right-hand man Sho Tang Gong was posthumously awarded.

古文：苏氏女
现代文：苏氏女
English: Su's daughter

古文：苏某，信都富人，有女十人，为择良婿。
现代文：苏某，信都的富翁，有十个女儿，他要给女儿们挑选称心如意的女婿。
English: Su Mou, a wealthy man from Xindu, has ten daughters, and he wants to choose a son-in-law who is a good match for his daughters.

古文：张文成往见焉，苏曰：此虽有才，不能富贵。
现代文：张文成想娶苏家的女儿，前去苏家求婚。苏某说：这个人虽然有才学，但不能富贵。
English: Zhang Wencheng wanted to marry the daughter of the Su family and went to the Su family to propose marriage. Su said: Although this person is talented, he cannot be rich.

古文：幸得五品，即当死矣。
现代文：他幸运的话能得个五品官，就该死了。
English: If he's lucky enough to get a five-star rank, he deserves to die.

古文：魏知古时已及第，然未有官。
现代文：魏知古当时参加科举考试已经榜上有名，但还没有授任官职。
English: At that time, Wei Zhigu was already famous for taking the imperial examinations, but had not yet been appointed to an official post.

古文：苏云：此虽形质黑小，然必当贵。
现代文：苏某见了他之后说：这个人虽然个子矮小，肤色又黑，但是将来一定能富贵。
English: After seeing him, Su said: Although this person is short and has a dark complexion, he will definitely be rich in the future.

古文：遂以长女嫁之。
现代文：于是把大女儿嫁给了他。
English: So she married off her eldest daughter to him.

古文：其女发长七尺，黑光如漆，诸妹皆不及。
现代文：这位大女儿蓄着七尺长的美发，象漆似的又黑又亮，她的妹妹们都不如她。
English: The eldest daughter had seven feet of beautiful hair, lacquered black and shiny, and her sisters were no match for her.

古文：有相者云：此女富，不啮宿食。
现代文：有位相士给她看相，说：这姑娘生就的富贵相，将来不吃隔夜的饭食。
English: A fortune teller read her fortune and said: "This girl was born rich and will not eat overnight meals in the future."

古文：诸妹笑知古曰：只是贫汉得米旋煮，故无宿饭。
现代文：妹妹们取笑魏知古，说：因为丈夫穷，现买来米煮饭，所以没有隔夜的饭食喽！
English: The sisters made fun of Wei Zhigu, saying, "Because my husband is poor, he now buys rice to cook, so there is no overnight meal!"

古文：其后魏为宰相，每食，一物已上官供。
现代文：后来，魏知古做了宰相，每顿饭，一种食品以上的都是官府里供给。
English: Later, when Wei Zhigu became the prime minister, more than one kind of food was provided by the government for every meal.

古文：武后
现代文：武后
English: Wu Guo

古文：武士彟之为利州都督也。
现代文：武士彟任利州都督。
English: Samurai Shō was appointed as the governor of Lisu.

古文：敕召袁天纲诣京师，途经利州。
现代文：皇帝下诏书召袁天纲到京城去，途经利州。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict calling Yuan Tiangang to go to Beijing, passing through Lishu.

古文：士彟使相其妻杨氏，天纲曰：夫人骨法非常，必生贵子。
现代文：武士彟让袁天纲给她妻子杨氏看相。袁天纲说：尊夫人的骨相不一般，一定能生贵子。
English: The samurai asked Yuan Tiangang to take a look at his wife Yang's bones. Yuan Tiangang said, "Your wife's bones are not ordinary, and she will definitely be able to give birth to a precious son."

古文：遍召其子，令相元庆、元爽。
现代文：武士彟把它的儿子全都召唤出来，让袁天纲给他的儿子武元庆、武元爽相面。
English: The samurai clan summoned all of its sons and asked Yuan Tiangang to meet his sons, Wuyuan Qing and Wuyuan Shuang.

古文：曰：可至刺史。终亦屯否。
现代文：袁天纲说：这两位公子，官位可以做到刺史，但最后要遇到艰难困苦的。
English: Yuan Tiangang said: These two gentlemen can make history with their official positions, but in the end they will encounter hardships.

古文：见韩国夫人，曰：此女夫贵，然不利其夫。
现代文：看过韩国夫人的面相后说：这位姑娘能嫁个富贵的丈夫，然而他命中克夫，对丈夫不利。
English: After seeing the face of the Korean lady, he said: This girl can marry a rich husband, but he hit Kefu, which is not good for her husband.

古文：武后时衣男子之服，乳母抱于怀中。天纲大惊曰：此郎君男子，神彩奥澈，不易知。
现代文：当时武则天皇后穿着男孩的衣服，由奶妈抱在怀中，袁天纲看见后，神色为之一震，说：这个小男孩，神色深奥，目光清澈，不容易看透啊！
English: At that time, Empress Wu Zetian was wearing a boy's clothes and was being held in her arms by her wet nurse. When Yuan Tian Gang saw her, she was shocked and said, "This little boy has a profound look, and his eyes are clear. It's not easy to see through him!"

古文：遂令后试行床下，天纲大惊曰：日角龙颜，龙睛凤颈。伏牺之相，贵人之极也。
现代文：于是让武后在床下试着走几步，袁天纲大为吃惊，说：额骨中央隆起，形状如日，龙眼、凤颈，这是伏羲的面相，他将来的富贵可以达到人中最高的程度。
English: Therefore, Yuan Tiangang was very surprised when Wu Wu tried to walk a few steps under the bed. He said, "The central bulge of the frontal bone is shaped like a sun, with a dragon's eye and a phoenix's neck. This is the face of Fuxi. His future wealth can reach the highest level among people."

古文：更转侧视之，又惊曰：若是女，当为天下主也。
现代文：袁天纲又转身从侧面看武后，又是大吃一惊，说：如果是女孩，将来必定成为天下人主！
English: Yuan Tiangang also turned to look at the Empress Dowager Wu from the side, and was again taken aback, saying, "If it is a girl, she will surely become the ruler of the world in the future!"

古文：李淳风
现代文：李淳风
English: Li Junfeng

古文：武后之召入宫，李淳风奏云：后宫有天子气。
现代文：武则天皇后被召入宫时，李淳风向唐太宗进言，说：后宫出现了天子的气象。
English: When Empress Wu Zi was summoned to the palace, Li Junfeng suggested to Emperor Taizong of Tang that the weather of the heavenly son had appeared in the harem.

古文：太宗召宫人阅之，令百人为一队。问淳风，淳风云：在某队中。
现代文：唐太宗召集宫人察看，让嫔妃们每一百个人排成一队，问李淳风天子气在哪里，李淳风说：在某队中。
English: Tang Taizong called the palace people to inspect, let the concubines line up in one line for every hundred people, and asked Li Chunfeng where the son of heaven was. Li Chunfeng said: in a certain line.

古文：太宗又分为二队，淳风云：在某队中，请陛下自拣择。
现代文：唐太宗让人将这队嫔妃分成两队，李淳风说：在某队中，请陛下自己挑选吧。
English: Emperor Taizong had this group of concubines divided into two groups. Li Chunfeng said, "In a certain group, please let Your Majesty choose for yourself."

古文：太宗不识，欲尽杀之。
现代文：唐太宗分辨不出来，想将这队嫔妃全部杀掉。
English: Tang Taizong couldn't tell the difference and wanted to kill all the concubines.

古文：淳风谏不可，陛下若留，虽皇祚暂缺，而社稷延长。
现代文：李淳风劝谏太宗皇上说：不可以都杀了，陛下如果留下她。虽然皇位暂时让别人占据着，但是李氏江山可以延长。
English: Li Chunfeng advised Emperor Taizong of the Han Dynasty, saying, "You can't kill them all. Your Majesty can keep her. Although the throne is temporarily occupied by someone else, the reign of the Li Dynasty can be extended."

古文：陛下若杀之，当变为男子，即损减皇族无遗矣。
现代文：陛下要是杀了她，会出现一位男人来代替他。那样的话，大唐江山就会减短，李家皇族就会被灭绝啊！
English: If His Majesty were to kill her, a man would appear to replace him. In that case, the Great Tang Dynasty would be shortened, and the Li royal family would be exterminated!

古文：太宗遂止。
现代文：于是，唐太宗不再追究这件事情了。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong of Tang did not pursue the matter any further.

古文：杨贵妃
现代文：杨贵妃
English: Yang Guifei

古文：贵妃杨氏之在蜀也，有野人张见之云：当大富贵，何以在此。
现代文：杨贵妃住在蜀中时，有个隐居在山野中的姓张的隐士，看到她时说：这个女孩将来能大富大贵，怎么住在这里呢？
English: When Yang Guifei lived in Shuzhong, there was a hermit surnamed Zhang who lived in seclusion in the mountains and fields. When he saw her, he said, "This girl will be very rich and valuable in the future. How can she live here?"

古文：或问至三品夫人否？
现代文：杨家有人问：能做三品夫人吗？
English: Someone in the Yang family asked: Can you be a third-class wife?

古文：张云：不是。
现代文：张隐士说：不是。
English: Zhang Yinshi said, "No."

古文：一品否？
现代文：问：一品夫人吗。
English: Q: Is there a Mrs. Ippon?

古文：曰：不是。
现代文：回答说：不是。
English: And he answered, No.

古文：然则皇后耶？
现代文：问：那么能成为皇后了？
English: Q: So can she become queen?

古文：曰：亦不是，然贵盛与皇后同。
现代文：回答说：也不是。然而这女孩尊贵、显赫的程度，跟皇后一样啊！
English: "No," he answered, "but this girl is as great and illustrious as a queen!"

古文：见杨国忠，云：公亦富贵位，当秉天下权势数年。
现代文：张隐士看到贵妃的哥哥杨国忠，说：您也是富贵面相，将来能掌握几年朝中大权啊！
English: Seeing Yang Guozhong, the older brother of Guifei, the Zhang hermit said, "You are also rich and noble-looking, and in the future you will be able to hold the supreme power of the dynasty for several years!"

古文：后皆如其说。
现代文：后来，杨氏兄妹果然都象张隐士说的那样，一个贵为贵妃，一个官任宰相。
English: Later, the Yang brothers and sisters were indeed, as the Zhang hermit said, one of them became a noble consort, and one of them was appointed prime minister.

古文：姜皎
现代文：姜皎
English: Jiang Chen

古文：姜皎之未贵也，好弋猎。
现代文：姜皎还没富贵的时候，喜欢狩猎。
English: When Jiang Chen was not rich, he liked to go hunting.

古文：猎还入门，见僧。
现代文：一次打猎归来进入家门，见到一位和尚。
English: On returning from a hunting trip, he entered a house and saw a monk.

古文：姜曰：何物道人在此。
现代文：姜皎问：和尚你在这儿要什么东西啊？
English: Jiang Yu asked: Monk, what do you want here?

古文：僧云：乞饭。
现代文：和尚说：请施主布施贫僧一些吃的。
English: The monk said, "Please ask the benefactor to give the poor monk some food."

古文：姜公令取肉食与之。
现代文：姜皎让人拿肉给和尚吃。
English: The ginger maggot made people take meat to the monk to eat.

古文：僧食讫而去，其肉并在。
现代文：和尚吃完离去，那肉竟然还在。
English: When the monk finished eating and left, the meat was still there.

古文：姜公使人追问，僧云：公大富贵。
现代文：姜皎派人将和尚追回来询问。和尚说：您能大富大贵。
English: Jiang Chen sent someone to bring the monk back for questioning. The monk said, "You can be very rich and very valuable.

古文：姜曰：如何得富贵？
现代文：姜皎问：怎么样才能得到富贵？
English: Jiang Rong asked: How can I get rich?

古文：僧曰：见真人即富贵矣。
现代文：和尚说：见到真人就能富贵了。
English: The monk said, "If you see a real person, you can become rich."

古文：姜曰：何时得见真人？
现代文：姜皎问道：什么时候能见到真人呢？
English: Jiang Chen asked, "When can I see a real person?"

古文：僧举目看曰：今日即见真人。
现代文：和尚抬眼看了看姜皎说：今天就能见到真人。
English: The monk looked up at Jiang Chen and said, "Today I can see a real person."

古文：姜手臂一鹞子，直二十千。
现代文：姜皎手臂上架着一只鹞鹰，值二十千钱。
English: On Jiang Chen's arm is a bald eagle, worth twenty thousand yuan.

古文：与僧相随骑马出城，偶逢上皇亦猎，时为临淄王。
现代文：他骑马跟随和尚出城去了，正好遇上了唐玄宗也在狩猎。
English: He rode out of the city with the monk and happened to meet Tang Xuan Zong, who was also hunting.

古文：见鹞子识之曰：此是某之鹞子否？姜云是。
现代文：这时的唐玄宗还是临淄王，他看见姜皎臂上架着的鹞鹰，很在行地问：这是你的鹞鹰吗？姜皎说：是。
English: At this time, Tang Xuan Zong was still the king of Linyi. When he saw the eagle on Jiang Chen's arm, he asked, "Is this your eagle?" Jiang Chen said, "Yes."

古文：因相随猎。
现代文：于是姜皎跟随临淄王一同打猎。
English: So Jiang Chen went hunting with King Linyi.

古文：俄而失僧所在。
现代文：不一会，不知道和尚到哪里去了。
English: After a while, I didn't know where the monk had gone.

古文：后有女巫至，姜问云：汝且看今日有何人来。
现代文：后来，有一天有个女巫来到姜皎的家，姜皎问：你说说看，今天有什么人来？
English: Later, one day, a witch came to Jiang Chen's home. Jiang Chen asked, "Tell me, who is coming today?"

古文：女巫曰：今日天子来。
现代文：女巫说：今天有天子来。
English: The sorceress said, "Today the Son of God is coming."

古文：姜笑曰：天子在宫里坐，岂来看我耶。
现代文：姜皎笑着说：天子在皇宫里坐着，怎么能来看我呢？
English: Jiang Chen smiled and said, "Heavenly Father is sitting in the palace, how can he come to see me?

古文：俄有叩门者云：三郎来。
现代文：不一会儿有人叩门，说：三郎来了！
English: Soon someone knocked on the door and said, "Saburo is here!"

古文：姜出见，乃上皇。
现代文：姜皎出去一看，原来是那天在一块儿打猎的临淄王。
English: When Jiang Chen went out to take a look, it turned out to be the king of Linyi, who was hunting together that day.

古文：自此倍加恭谨，钱马所须，无敢惜者。
现代文：从此以后，姜皎对临淄王倍加恭敬有礼，金钱、马匹，凡是临淄王需要，姜皎都慷慨地奉送，从不吝惜。
English: From then on, Jiang Chen was more respectful and courteous to the King of Linyi. Whenever the King of Linyi needed money or horses, Jiang Chen would generously give it to him, never grudgingly.

古文：后上皇出潞府，百官亲旧尽送，唯不见姜。上皇怪之。
现代文：后来，玄宗皇帝离开潞州，文武百官和亲朋故友都来送行，唯独不见姜皎，玄宗皇帝有些不高兴。
English: Later, when Emperor Xuanzong left Zhangzhou, hundreds of officials and relatives came to see him off. However, they did not see Jiang Chen. Emperor Xuanzong was not happy.

古文：行至渭北，于路侧，独见姜公供帐，盛相待。
现代文：待到玄宗皇帝走到渭水北边，只见姜皎在道边陈设帷帐，为他举行隆重送行仪式。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong walked to the north side of Surabaya, he saw Jiang Chen setting up curtains on the roadside and holding a grand send-off ceremony for him.

古文：上皇忻然与别，便定君臣之分。
现代文：玄宗皇帝高高兴兴地与姜皎道别。从此以后，两人便结下了君、臣的缘分。
English: Emperor Xuanzong cheerfully bade farewell to Jiang Chen. From then on, the two of them were bound by the fate of prince and vassal.

古文：后姜果富贵。
现代文：后来，姜皎果然大富大贵。
English: Later, Jiang Chen became very rich.

古文：常衮
现代文：常衮
English: Changchun

古文：常衮之在福建也，有僧某者善占色，言事若神。
现代文：常衮在福建，有个僧人擅长通过察看人的气色，来推测气数、命运，每次推算都象神一样灵验。
English: In Fujian, there is a monk who is good at estimating the number of qi and destiny by observing people's appearance. Each estimation is as effective as a god.

古文：衮惜其僧老，命弟子就其术。
现代文：常衮怜惜僧人年事已高，让他收个弟子继承他的相术。
English: Chang Kuo took pity on the old monk and let him take on a disciple to inherit his sorcery.

古文：僧云：此事天性，非可造次为传。
现代文：僧人说：这种事全凭天性，不可以轻易地传授给别人。
English: The monk said, "This kind of thing comes from nature and cannot be easily taught to others.

古文：某尝于君左右，见一人可教。
现代文：我在你身边的人中，发现有一个可以传授。
English: Of all the people around you, I found one who could teach you.

古文：老僧遂于暗室中，致五色采于架，令自取之。
现代文：常衮召集所有身边的人，这位老僧人选中了一个叫黄彻的小吏，于是常衮让他跟随僧人学习相术。
English: Chang Juan called all the people around him. The old monk chose a minor official named Huang Che, so Chang Juan let him follow the monk to learn the art of dating.

古文：曰：世人皆用眼力不尽，但熟看之，旬日后，依稀认其白者。
现代文：老僧人在一间暗室将五种颜色的丝织品悬挂架上，让黄彻把它们挑选出来。
English: In a dark room, the old monk hangs five colors of silk fabric on a rack and lets Huang Che pick them out.

古文：后半岁，看五色。
现代文：老僧说：一般人都不能充分地发挥自己的眼力。
English: The old monk said, "Ordinary people cannot give full play to their eyesight.

古文：即洞然而得矣。命之曰：以若暗中之视五采，回之白昼占人。
现代文：只要你仔细地看他，十天以后可以隐约地辨别出白色；半年以后，就能看清楚五种颜色了。老僧教导黄彻说：如果能在黑暗中辨别清楚五色彩丝，回去就可以在白天为人相面，预测未来了。
English: As long as you look at him carefully, after ten days you can vaguely distinguish white; after half a year, you can see five colors clearly. The old monk taught Huang Che that: if you can clearly distinguish five colors in the dark, you can go back in the daytime and predict the future.

古文：因传其方诀，且言后代当无加也。
现代文：于是，老僧人把相面的秘诀传授给黄彻，并且预言说后人没有谁可以超过他。
English: As a result, the old monk taught Huang Che the secret of face-to-face contact, and prophesied that no one in the future could surpass him.

古文：李吉甫云：黄彻之占，袁许之亚也。
现代文：李吉甫说：黄彻相面，仅次于袁天纲和许藏秘！
English: Li Jifu said: Huang Che is second only to Yuan Tiangang and Xu Zangbi!

古文：刘禹锡
现代文：刘禹锡
English: Liu Yuxi

古文：宾客刘禹锡为屯田员外郎。
现代文：太子宾客刘禹锡任屯田员外郎。
English: The prince's guest, Liu Yuxi, served as the foreign minister.

古文：时事稍异，旦夕有腾趠之势。
现代文：当时的政事，稍稍有点变化，好象在短时间内他就有飞黄腾达的希望。
English: At that time, the political situation had changed a little bit, and it seemed that in a short time he had the hope of soaring to fame.

古文：知一僧术数极精，寓直日，邀之致省。方欲问命，报韦秀才在门。
现代文：刘禹锡刚想问僧人自己的官运怎样，忽然有人通报，说韦秀才在门外等候求见。
English: Liu Yuxi had just wanted to ask the monk how his career was going, when someone suddenly announced that Wei Xiucai was waiting outside the door to see him.

古文：公不得已且见，令僧坐帘下。
现代文：刘禹锡不得已，只好让韦秀才进来相见，让僧人先坐在帘下等候。
English: As a last resort, Liu Yuxi had to let Wei Xiucai come in to meet him, and let the monk sit under the curtain and wait.

古文：韦秀才献卷已，略省之，意气殊旷。韦觉之，乃去。
现代文：韦秀才进来后送上自己的文卷，刘禹锡粗略地看了一下，精神特别不集中，韦秀才发觉后就告退离去。
English: Wei Xiucai came in and handed in his paper. Liu Yuxi took a cursory look at it. He was particularly unfocused. Wei Xiucai noticed this and left.

古文：却与僧语，僧不得已，吁叹良久，乃曰：某欲言，员外必不惬，如何？
现代文：刘禹锡向僧人询问自己的官运。僧人无奈，长吁短叹了许久，才说：我要说的话，员外一定不高兴。
English: Liu Yuxi asked the monk about his government career. The monk was helpless and sighed for a long time before saying, "If I say something, the outsiders will not be happy."

古文：公曰：但言之。
现代文：您看我还说吗？
English: You see what I'm saying?

古文：僧曰：员外后迁，乃本行正郎也。
现代文：刘禹锡说：你尽管说吧僧人说：员外以后升迁，是你现在职位的正职。
English: Liu Yuxi said, "Just say it," and the monk said, "Promotion after retirement is the official position of your current position."

古文：然须待适来韦秀才知印处置。
现代文：但是，得等到方才进来的那位韦秀才掌权以后来安排你。
English: However, we have to wait for Wei Xiu, who has just entered, to take power to arrange you later.

古文：公大怒，揖出之。
现代文：刘禹锡听后大怒，拱手一揖，请僧人出去。
English: Hearing this, Liu Yuxi flew into a rage, threw up his hands, and asked the monk to leave.

古文：不旬日贬官。
现代文：不到十天，刘禹锡被降职。
English: Less than ten days later, Liu Yuxi was demoted.

古文：韦秀才乃处厚相也，后二十余年，在中书，为转屯田郎中。
现代文：韦秀才就是后来的宰相韦处厚。以后二十多年，韦处厚一直任中书令，主掌朝政。韦处厚为刘禹锡转成屯田郎中这一正职。
English: Wei Shucai was the later chancellor Wei Shucao. For more than twenty years, Wei Shucao served as the chancellor and was in charge of the imperial government. Wei Shucao was transformed into the official position of the tutor of Tonden by Liu Yuxi.

古文：郑朗
现代文：郑朗
English: Zheng Lang

古文：郑朗相公初举，遇一僧善色。谓曰：郎君贵极人臣，然无进士及第之分。
现代文：宰相郑朗第一次参加科举考试时，遇到一位擅长通过观察人的气色来推测气数、命运的僧人，对郑朗说：年轻人呵。你的官位能达到人臣的最高一级，但是你没有考中进士的缘分。
English: When Prime Minister Zheng Lang was taking the imperial examination for the first time, he met a monk who was good at observing people's appearance to predict the number of qi and fate. He said to Zheng Lang: "Young man, your official position can reach the highest level of minister, but you do not have the fate of the middle school entrance examination."

古文：若及第，则一生厄塞。
现代文：如果科举考试考中了，你的一生将窘困艰难，不会有好运的。
English: If you pass the exam, your life will be difficult and you will not have good luck.

古文：既而状元及第，贺客盈门，唯此僧不至。
现代文：不久，郑朗考中状元，前来祝贺的人挤满了屋门，只有这位僧人没有来。
English: Soon after, Zheng Lang took the entrance exam for middle school, and people who came to congratulate him crowded the door, but the monk did not come.

古文：及重试退黜，唁者甚众，而此僧独贺曰：富贵在里。
现代文：待到复试时，郑朗状元被取消了，人们又纷纷来安慰他。只有这位僧人前来表示祝贺，说：你的富贵就在这里！
English: When it came to the retest, Zheng Lang was disqualified, and people came to comfort him. Only this monk came to congratulate him, saying: Your wealth is here!

古文：既而竟如年卜。令狐绹门僧
现代文：过了不久，竟然真的象这位僧人预言的那样，郑朗做了当朝宰相。令狐绹门僧
English: Soon after, Zheng Lang actually became the prime minister of the dynasty, as the monk had predicted.

古文：令狐赵公绹在相位，马举为泽潞小将。
现代文：赵国公令狐绹，任宰相时，马举在泽潞担任低级武官。
English: When Zhao Guogong was appointed prime minister, Ma Jiu served as a low-ranking military attaché in Zhejiang.

古文：因奏事到宅，会公有一门僧，善声色。
现代文：一次，因禀报公事，来到赵国公府上，正遇上赵国公的一位门僧。
English: On one occasion, he came to Zhao Guogong's residence because he was on official business and happened to meet a disciple of Zhao Guogong.

古文：偶窥之，谓公曰：适有一军将参见相公，是何人？
现代文：这位僧人擅长通过观察人的声音、气色，推测出气数、命运。这位僧人偶然看了马举几眼。马举走后，僧人对赵国公说：方才有一位低级武官来拜见您，是什么人？
English: This monk is good at observing people's voices, appearance, and speculating on the number of qi and fate. This monk happened to glance at Ma Hui a few times. After Ma Hui left, the monk said to Zhao Guogong: Just now, a low-ranking military attaché came to see you. Who is he?

古文：公以举名语之，僧曰：窃视此人，他日当与相公为方镇交代。
现代文：赵国公把马举的姓名告诉了僧人，僧人说：贫僧暗中仔细观察了这个人，以后将接替您为一方镇守使。
English: Zhao Guogong told the monk the name of Maqiu, and the monk said: "The poor monk has carefully observed this person in secret, and will later succeed you as one of the town guards."

古文：公曰：此边方小将，纵有军功，不过塞垣一镇。
现代文：赵国公说；他不过是一名边塞地方的低级武官，纵然有军功，也不过担任边塞的总兵而已，怎么能接替我的职位？
English: Zhao Guogong said that he was just a low-level military attaché in the border fortress, and even if he had military merits, he was only the general soldier of the border fortress. How could he take over my position?

古文：奈何与老夫交代？僧曰：相公第更召与语，贫道为细看。
现代文：僧人说：大人姑且再召他进来，再和他说几句话，贫僧再仔细看看。
English: The monk said, "Let the adults call him in again, and say a few words to him, and let the poor monk take a closer look."

古文：公然之。
现代文：赵国公同意了，又召马举进来。
English: Baidu agreed.

古文：既去，僧曰：今日看更亲切，并恐是扬汴。
现代文：不一会儿，马举走了，僧人说：这次看得更真切了，恐怕是在扬州或汴州接替你。
English: After a while, the horse moved away, and the monk said, "This time I can see it more clearly. I'm afraid I'll have to replace you in Yangzhou or Zhangzhou."

古文：公于是稍接之矣。
现代文：于是赵国公较好地接待了马举。
English: As a result, Zhao Guogong received Ma Zhuo well.

古文：咸通九年公镇维扬，举破庞勋有功。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通九年，赵国公镇守维扬，率兵剿灭庞勋有功。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Tang Xizong's reign, Zhao Guo Gongzhen guarded Viyang and led the troops to defeat Pang Xun.

古文：先是懿宗面许，功成，与卿扬州。
现代文：当初，懿宗皇帝当面许诺，功成之后。
English: At first, Emperor Yeongjong made the promise in person, but later reneged on it.

古文：既而难于爽信，却除举淮南行军司马。
现代文：授任他为扬州节度使，过后又很难做到不失信，却解除他代理节度使的职务，任用他为淮南行军司马。
English: He was appointed as Yangzhou Festival Delegate, after which it was difficult for him not to lose his credibility, but he was relieved of his duties as acting Festival Delegate and appointed as the Sima for the Huainan Campaign.

古文：公闻之，既处分所司。排比迎新使。
现代文：赵国公听说后，立即处理他所管辖的工作，准备迎接新任节度使的到来。
English: After hearing the news, Zhao Guogong immediately dealt with the work under his jurisdiction and prepared to welcome the arrival of the new ambassador.

古文：群下皆曰：此一行军耳。
现代文：赵国公的部下都问：这是要出发吗？
English: Zhao Guogong's subordinates all asked: Is this the start?

古文：公乃以其事白之。
现代文：赵国公就把当年僧人看相的事情告诉了他们。
English: Zhao Guogong told them the story of the monk's look that year.

古文：果如所言。
现代文：事情果然象当年僧人所预测的那样，接替令狐绹的新任扬州节度使正是马举。
English: He did exactly as he was told.

古文：僧处弘
现代文：僧处弘
English: Monk Tsuchihiro

古文：僧处弘习禅于武当山。
现代文：僧人处弘在武当山出家，学习禅理、禅法、禅学。
English: The monk Tsukihiro became a monk on Mt. Wudang and studied Zen philosophy, Zen law, and Zen studies.

古文：王建微时贩鹾于均房间，仍行小窃，号曰贼王八。
现代文：王建未发达时，在均房一带贩卖盐，还小偷小摸，绰号贼王八。
English: When Wang Jian was still undeveloped, he sold salt in the area of the average house, and he was also a petty thief, nicknamed the Thief King Eight.

古文：处弘见而勉之曰：子他日位极人臣，何不从戎。别图功业。而夜游昼伏，沾贼之号乎？
现代文：处弘看见王建勉励他说；你日后能为人臣子的最高一级，你为什么不去参军，另建功业，而非要象现在这样夜里出游，白天藏起来，让人骂你是贼呢？
English: Chenghong saw Wang Jian encouraging him, saying, "You can be the highest level of a courtier in the future. Why don't you join the army and build another career, instead of traveling at night and hiding during the day, so that people call you a thief?

古文：建感之，投忠武军，后建在蜀。弘拥门徒入蜀。
现代文：王建很感激处弘僧人，听从了他的劝告，参加了忠武军。后来，王建在蜀中称王，建立前蜀。
English: Wang Jian was very grateful to Duan Hong, he listened to his advice and joined the Loyalist Army. Later, Wang Jian became the king of Shu and established Qian Shu.

古文：为构精舍以安之，即弘觉禅院也。
现代文：处弘僧人带领门徒也来到了蜀中，王建给他们营造了僧舍让他们居住，就是现在的弘觉禅院。
English: Wang Jian built a monastery for them to live in, which is now the Hong Jie Zen Temple.

古文：江西钟傅微时亦以贩鹾为事，遇上蓝和尚教其作贼而克洪井。
现代文：江西的钟傅贫寒时也以贩卖盐为职业。他遇到了上蓝和尚，教他做贼，而克洪井。
English: When Jiangxi's Zhong Fu was poor, he also sold salt as a profession. He met Shanglan Monk, who taught him to be a thief, and Ke Hongjing.

古文：自是加敬，至于军府大事，此僧皆得参之也。范氏尼
现代文：从此，王建更加敬重处弘僧人，甚至军国大事，僧人处弘全都参加。范氏尼
English: From then on, Wang Jian paid more respect to the monks of Zhukong, and even in military affairs, the monks of Zhukong all participated.

古文：天宝中，有范氏尼，乃衣冠流也，知人休咎。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝年间，有位姓范的尼姑，是有知识的人，能预测人的吉凶。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a nun with the surname Fan. She was a knowledgeable person who could predict people's fortunes.

古文：鲁公颜真卿妻党之亲也。
现代文：鲁郡公颜真卿的妻子和姓范的尼姑是同族亲戚。
English: The wife of Gongyan Zhenqing of Lu County and the nun surnamed Fan are relatives of the same family.

古文：鲁公尉于醴泉，因诣范氏尼问命曰：某欲就制科，再乞师姨一言。
现代文：鲁郡公在醴泉任县尉时，到姓范的尼姑那里去问自己的前途。说：我想参加科举考试，请求师姨指点迷津，再给我预测一下。
English: When Lu Guogong was serving as a county lieutenant in Luquan, he went to a nun surnamed Fan Ruan to ask about his future. He said, "I want to take the imperial examinations. I'd like to ask my teacher and aunt to give me some pointers and predictions."

古文：范氏曰：颜郎事必成。
现代文：范尼姑说：你参加科举考试一定能成功。
English: Fan Nigu said: You will definitely succeed in the entrance examination.

古文：自后一两月必朝拜，但半年内。
现代文：从现在开始，一两个月内一定能入朝做官。
English: From now on, I will definitely be able to enter the North Korean government within a month or two.

古文：慎勿与外国人争竞，恐有谴谪。
现代文：但是在半年之内，要小心，一定不要与外国人争斗，恐怕因此会被贬官或流放。
English: However, within half a year, be careful not to fight with foreigners, for fear of being demoted or exiled.

古文：公又曰：某官阶尽，得及五品否？
现代文：鲁郡公又问：我的官职最高一级，能得到五品吗？
English: Lu County also asked: My official position is the highest level, can I get five prizes?

古文：范笑曰：邻于一品，颜郎所望，何其卑耶！
现代文：范尼姑笑着说：接近一品，你的希望怎么这样低呢？
English: Fan Niu said with a smile, "Close to one dish, how can your hope be so low?"

古文：鲁公曰：官阶尽，得五品，身着绯衣，带银鱼，儿子补斋郎，某之望满也。
现代文：鲁郡公说：官职最高一级能得个五品，身着红色官服，带银鱼袋佩饰，儿子补上个太常斋郎，我就心满意足了。
English: Lu Guogong said, "If I can get a five-star official at the highest level, wearing a red official uniform, with a silver fish bag adornment, and my son makes up a Taizhang Jairo, I will be satisfied."

古文：范尼指坐上紫丝布食单曰：颜郎衫色如此，其功业名节称是。寿过七十。
现代文：范尼姑指着座位上的紫色丝布食单说：你穿的官服的颜色就是这样的，你的功业、名节都称得上是好的，寿数超过七十岁。
English: Fan Niu pointed to the purple silk cloth menu on the seat and said, "The color of the official uniform you are wearing is like this. Your achievements and festivals are good. Your life expectancy is over seventy years old."

古文：已后不要苦问。
现代文：以后不要再苦苦追问了。
English: Don't ask me any more hard questions.

古文：鲁公再三穷诘，范尼曰：颜郎聪明过人，问事不必到底。
现代文：鲁郡公再三追问，范尼姑说：你这个人聪明过人，问事不要追根问底。
English: Lu County repeatedly asked, Fan Niu said: You are a very clever person, don't ask questions.

古文：逾月大酺。
现代文：过了一个月，正逢国家喜庆之日，举国同庆。
English: A month later, coinciding with the National Day of Joy, the whole country celebrated together.

古文：鲁公是日登制科高等，授长安尉。
现代文：这一天鲁郡公科举考中高等，授任长安尉。
English: On this day, Lu County public science entrance examination for middle and high school, awarded the rank of Chang'an lieutenant.

古文：不数月，迁监察御史，因押班。
现代文：过了不几个月，升任监察御史，于是在百官朝会时担任领班。
English: A few months later, he was promoted to inspector of imperial history, and then served as foreman at the meeting of the hundred officials.

古文：中有喧哗无度者，命吏录奏次，即歌舒翰也。
现代文：一次朝会，有个人无节制地恣意喧哗，鲁郡公让吏录奏了一本。这个人原来是胡人哥舒翰。
English: At a meeting of the Imperial Court, there was a person who was excessively and wantonly noisy, and the Lu County Concession Officer made a recording of it. This person turned out to be Hu Rongge Shuhan.

古文：翰有新破石堡城之功，因泣诉玄宗。
现代文：哥舒翰因为新近攻破石堡城有功，就哭泣着向玄宗诉苦。
English: Goshukhan cried and complained to Xuanzong because he had recently made a great achievement in breaking through Shibao Castle.

古文：玄宗坐鲁公以轻侮功臣，贬蒲州司仓。
现代文：唐玄宗判鲁郡公轻侮功臣罪，将他贬职为蒲州司仓。
English: Tang Xuan Zong found Lu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu.

古文：验其事迹，历历如见。
现代文：范尼姑的预言果然都应验了，桩桩件件，好象就在眼前。
English: All of Fan Niu's prophecies have come true. It's as if everything is right in front of us.

古文：及鲁公为太师，奉使于蔡州。
现代文：鲁郡公任太师时，奉命出使蔡州。
English: When he was the public daishi of Lu County, he was ordered to go to Caizhou.

古文：乃叹曰：范师姨之言，吾命悬于贼必矣！
现代文：他感叹地说：范师姨说得不错，我的命必定操在贼人手里啊！
English: He sighed and said, "Auntie Fan said it right, my life must be in the hands of thieves!"

古文：任之良
现代文：任之良
English: Ren Zhi Rong

古文：任之良应进士举，不第，至关东店憩食。
现代文：任之良参加进士的科举考试，没有考中，到关东店休息，吃饭。
English: Ren Zhi Liang took part in the entrance examination, but did not take the middle school entrance examination. He went to the Kanto store to rest and eat.

古文：遇一道士亦从西来，同主人歇。
现代文：在店中遇见一位道士也是从西边来的。和店主人坐在一起休息。
English: In the shop, I met a Taoist monk, also from the West, who sat down to rest with the owner.

古文：之良与语，问所从来。
现代文：任之良走上前与道士说话，问他从什么地方来。
English: Ren Zhi Liang stepped forward to speak with the Taoist priest and asked him where he was from.

古文：云：今合有身名称意，何不却入京？
现代文：道士说：现在应该是你名誉和地位都称心如意的时候了，为什么不回转京城去？
English: The moralist said, "Now should be the time for your reputation and status to be satisfactory, why not go back to Beijing?"

古文：任子辞以无资粮，到京且无居处。
现代文：任之良推辞说因为没有盘缠，到了京城又没有地方住。
English: Ren Zhi Liang said that because there was no cocoon, there was no place to live in Beijing.

古文：道士遂资钱物，并与一贴，令向肃明观本院中停。
现代文：于是道士资助他钱与物品，并给他一张名片，让他到肃明观本院中住。
English: So the Taoist sponsored him with money and goods, and gave him a business card so that he could live in the monastery.

古文：之良至京，诣观安置。偶见一道士读经，谓良曰。
现代文：任之良返回京城，来到肃明观中住下来，偶然遇见一道士正在读经。
English: Ren Zhi Liang returned to Beijing, came to live in Su Ming Guan, and happened to meet a monk who was reading the Bible.

古文：太上老君二月十五日生。
现代文：道士对任之良说：太上老君二月十五日生。
English: The moralist said to Ren Zhi Liang: "Grandmaster Laojun was born on February 15th.

古文：因上表，请以玄元皇帝生日燃灯。
现代文：于是任之良上奏一份表章，奏请在太上老君生日这天为他燃灯祝寿。
English: As a result, Ren Zhi Liang played a watch chapter, and asked that the lantern be lit for him on the day of his birthday to celebrate his birthday.

古文：上皇览表依行，仍令中书召试，使与一官。
现代文：玄宗皇帝看完奏章后，采纳了这项建议，还让中书令召见任之良来面试。根据他的才能授任他一个官职。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong read the play, he accepted the suggestion and had Ren Zhiliang summoned for an interview. He was appointed to an official post according to his ability.

古文：李林甫拒，乃与别敕出身。
现代文：中书令李林甫没有遵从皇帝的旨意，却把官职授给了另一个人。
English: Li Linfu did not obey the emperor's will, but gave the post to another person.

古文：殷九霞
现代文：殷九霞
English: Yin Jiuxia

古文：张侍郎某为河阳乌重裔从事，同幕皆是名辈。
现代文：侍郎张某任河阳乌重裔的从事，同他一起在乌重裔这里做幕僚的都是很有名气的人。
English: Zhang's servant, a certain member of the Hebei Wushong Clan, is engaged in the business, and those who work with him in the Wushong Clan here are very famous people.

古文：有道流殷九霞来自青城山，有知人之鉴。
现代文：其中有位道士殷九霞，来自青城山，他有预测人未来的能力。
English: Among them, there is a Taoist Yin Jiuxia, from Qingcheng Mountain, who has the ability to predict people's future.

古文：乌公问己年寿官禄，九霞曰：司徒贵任蕃服，所望者秉持钧轴，封建茅土。
现代文：乌重裔向他问自己的年寿和官禄。殷九霞说：司徒您已经是镇守一方的封疆大吏，您所希望的不就是能执掌大权，封侯列士吗！
English: Wu Chongxiong asked him about his age and rank. Yin Jiuxia said: "Stu, you are already a great official of the fief territory on the side of the town guard. Isn't what you want is to be able to wield great power and fief the nobles!"

古文：唯在保守庸勳，苞贮二义。享福隆厚，殊不可涯。
现代文：只要您保持住功勋，积聚仁义，您有享不尽的荣华富贵。
English: As long as you maintain your merits and accumulate benevolence and righteousness, you will enjoy inexhaustible glory and wealth.

古文：既而遍问宾僚，九霞曰：其间必有台辅。
现代文：之后，乌重裔又询问每个宾僚的情况，殷九霞说：其中肯定有人将来能做宰相。
English: Afterward, Wu Chongzhu inquired about each of the guests. Yin Jiuxia said, "There must be someone who can be the prime minister in the future."

古文：时乌公重一裴副使，应声曰：裴中丞是宰相否？
现代文：当时乌重裔特别器重一位裴副使，他接过殷九霞的话头问：裴中丞能做宰相不？
English: At that time, a Bae vice-envoy, who was of Wu Chung descent, asked Yin Jiuxia: "Can Bae Zhongzheng be the prime minister?

古文：九霞曰：若以目前人事言之，当如尊旨。
现代文：殷九霞说：如果按现在的人事情况来说，该象您的意愿那样。
English: Yin Jiuxia said: If it is according to the current personnel situation, it should be as you wish.

古文：以某所观，即不在此。
现代文：但是以我所见，就不是这样了。
English: But from what I've seen, that's not the case.

古文：时夏侯相孜为馆驿巡官，且形质低粹。乌因戏曰：莫是夏侯巡官？
现代文：当时宰相夏侯孜任官驿巡官，又相貌不佳，因此乌重裔戏谑说：莫不是夏侯巡官？
English: At that time, the prime minister, Xia Houzhe, was appointed as the inspector of the imperial court, and he was not good-looking. Therefore, the Wu Chong people joked and said: Isn't he the inspector of the imperial court?

古文：对曰：司徒所言是矣。
现代文：殷九霞回答说：司徒说对了！
English: Yin Jiuxia replied: "Stu is right!

古文：乌公抚掌而笑曰：尊师莫错否？
现代文：乌重裔拍手笑着说：大师没看错吗？
English: The ethnic Uighurs clapped their hands, smiled and said, "Didn't the master read it wrong?

古文：九霞曰：某山野之人，早修直道，无意于名宦金玉。盖以所见，任真而道耳。
现代文：殷九霞说：我是山野之人，早修正道，无意于功名利禄，只是将我的看法，都真实地说出来罢了。
English: Yin Jiuxia said, "I am a man of the mountains and the countryside. I have corrected my path early. I have no intention to gain fame and fortune. I just want to express my views truthfully."

古文：乌公曰：如此则非某所知也。
现代文：乌重裔说：这样说来就不是我所能知道的了。
English: "That's not for me to know," the black-haired man said.

古文：然其次贵达者为谁？
现代文：那么，其次能显贵发达的是谁呢？
English: So, who will be the next to become prominent and developed?

古文：曰：张支使虽不居廊庙，履历清途，亦至荣显。
现代文：殷九霞说：张支使虽然不是朝廷正式任职的官员，经历清贵的仕途，也能达到荣耀显贵。
English: Yin Jiuxia said: Although Zhang Zhiqi is not an official official of the imperial court, he can achieve glory and prominence after experiencing a noble career.

古文：既出，遂造张侍郎所居，从容谓曰：支使神骨清爽，气韵高迈。
现代文：殷九霞从乌重裔那里出来，立即到张支使的住处去，从容地对他说：张支使您神骨清爽，气韵高逸，如果在官场中操劳，也就是在尘世间生活那么二三十年。
English: Yin Jiuxia came from the Wu family and immediately went to Zhang Zhicheng's residence. She calmly said to him, "Zhang Zhicheng has made your spirit fresh and your temperament high. If you work in the government, you will live in the world for twenty or thirty years."

古文：若以绂冕累身，止于三二十年居于世俗。
现代文：如果您能够摆脱尘世的喧嚣，跟随我一起学道，二十年内就能炼成仙，升入天界。
English: If you can get rid of the hustle and bustle of the world and study the Tao together with me, you will be able to become a immortal and ascend to the heavenly world within twenty years.

古文：傥能摆脱嚣俗，相随学道，即二十年内白日上升。某之此行，非有尘虑，实亦寻访修真之士耳。
现代文：我这次来，并非有贪恋红尘的念头，实在是为了寻访能够修行成道的人啊。然而，我看了很多人，没有象支使您这样与道家有缘的人啊！
English: I did not come this time with the idea of being greedy for red dust, but really to search for people who can practice and attain enlightenment. However, I saw a lot of people, but no one with a connection to the Taoist family like you!

古文：然阅人甚多，无如支使者。
现代文：张支使认为殷九霞的话是有意虚浮夸张，只是点头称是而已。
English: Zhang Zhiqi thought that Yin Jiuxia's words were deliberately false and exaggerated, but only nodded.

古文：张以其言意浮阔，但唯唯然。将去复来，情甚恳至。
现代文：殷九霞刚离开河阳就又返回来，用心特别真诚恳切。
English: As soon as Yin Jiuxia left Heyang, she came back again. She was very sincere and earnest.

古文：审知张意不回，颇甚嗟惜。
现代文：当他看到支使心意没有改变，颇为感叹婉惜。
English: When he saw that the supporter's mind had not changed, he was quite regretful.

古文：因留药数粒，并黄纸书一缄而别云：药服之可以无疾，书纪宦途所得，每一迁转，密自启之。
现代文：于是留下几粒药和黄纸书一册，向张支使告辞说：服用这药可以不生病，黄纸书上记载着你在仕途上应该得到的。每次升迁或转任，你就秘密地把书打开看看，上面是怎么记载的。
English: So he left behind a few pills and a yellow paper book, and bade farewell to Zhang Zhiguo, saying: "You can take this medicine without getting sick. The yellow paper book records what you should get on the way to work. Every time you are promoted or transferred, you should secretly open the book to see how it is recorded.

古文：书穷之辰。当自相忆。
现代文：待到这本书都看完的时候，你再好好想想今天的事情吧。
English: When you have finished reading this book, think about what happened today.

古文：其后谯公显赫令名，再居台铉。
现代文：后来，夏侯孜显赫扬名，继而位居宰辅重臣。
English: Later, Xia Houzhe became famous, and then became the chief vassal of Zaiyu.

古文：张果践朝列，出入台省，佩服朱紫，廉察数州。书载之言，靡不祥悉。
现代文：张支使果然成为朝廷正式授任的官员，在御史台和中书省门下任职，身着代表显赫地位的朱、紫朝服，视察过好几个州府，道士留下的那册书上记述的都很详细。
English: Zhang Zhiqi did indeed become an official officially appointed by the imperial court. He served under the Imperial Historian's Office and the Ministry of Chinese Literature. Wearing the red and purple imperial robes that represented his prominent status, he inspected several provincial capitals. The book left behind by the Taoist describes everything in great detail.

古文：年及三纪，时为户部侍郎。纸之所存，盖亦无几。
现代文：到了第三十六年，张支使做了户部侍郎，书上的记载已经所剩无几了。
English: By the 36th year, Zhang Shizhi became a household servant, and there are only a few records left in the book.

古文：虽名位通显，而齿发衰退。
现代文：这时，张支使虽然已经功成名就，通达显贵，但是也已经齿落发白了。
English: At this time, Zhang Shizhi, although he had achieved fame and achieved prominence, had also lost his teeth.

古文：每以道流之事，话于亲知，追想其风，莫能及也。
现代文：张支使每当把当年殷九霞劝他入道修行的事情，讲给亲属和朋友听时，回忆起殷九霞道士当年的仙风道骨，再看看老朽的自己，真是没法相比啊！
English: Whenever Zhang Zhiqi told his relatives and friends about the time when Yin Juxia advised him to enter the Buddhist path, he would recall Yin Juxia's immortal spirit and look at his decrepit self. It was incomparable!

古文：相手板庾道敏
现代文：相手板庾道敏
English: The opponent board  Michitoshi

古文：宋山阳王休祐屡以言话忤颜。
现代文：宋时山阳人王休祐多次因为说话触犯皇上。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Wang Xiuyu, a Sanyang man, offended the emperor many times because of his speech.

古文：有庾道敏者善相手板。
现代文：有位叫庾道敏的人，擅长相看官员们上朝拿的手板。
English: There is a man called Gong Daomin, who is good at looking at the hand plates that officials take to the emperor.

古文：休祐以手板讬言他人者，庾曰：此板乃贵，然使人多忤。
现代文：王休祐让别人把自己手板拿给庾道敏相看。庾道敏说：这块手板是贵相，但是能使主人触犯皇上。
English: Wang Xiuyu let others show his tablet to Gong Daomin. Gong Daomin said, "This tablet is valuable, but it can make the owner offend the emperor."

古文：休祐以褚渊详密，乃换其手板。
现代文：王休祐与褚渊非常熟悉关系密切，就和他换了手板。
English: Wang Xiuyu is very familiar with Yu Yuan and has a close relationship with him, so he switched hands with him.

古文：别日，褚于帝前称下官，帝甚不悦。
现代文：另外有一天，诸渊手持这只手板上朝，在皇上面前称自己为下官，皇上非常不高兴。
English: On another day, Zhu Yuan went to the emperor with this tablet in his hand and called himself a subordinate officer in front of the emperor. The emperor was very unhappy.

古文：李参军
现代文：李参军
English: Lee Joins the Army

古文：唐李参军者善相笏，知休咎必验，皆呼为李相笏。
现代文：唐朝有位李参军，擅长相看手板，能够从手板上预测出吉凶祸福，而且每次都很灵验，大家都称他为李相笏。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a Li who joined the army. He was good at looking at the tablet, and was able to predict good, evil, misfortune and fortune from the tablet, and he was very effective every time. Everyone called him Li Xiangyao.

古文：盐铁院官陆遵以笏视之。
现代文：盐铁院的官员陆遵拿着笏板让他相看。
English: Lu Zun, an official from the Salt Iron Institute, holds up a chopping board for him to look at.

古文：云：评事郎君见到。
现代文：李参军说：你的儿子要来了。
English: Li Shanjun said, "Your son is coming."

古文：陆遵笑曰：是子侄否？
现代文：陆遵听后笑着说：是侄儿吗？
English: After listening, Lu Zun smiled and said, "Is he your nephew?"

古文：曰：是评事郎君。
现代文：李参军说：是你的儿子！
English: Li Shanjun said, "It's your son!

古文：陆君曰：足下失声名矣，某且无儿。
现代文：陆遵说：阁下你可要丢名声了，我没有儿子。
English: Lu Zun said, "Your excellency, you are about to lose your reputation. I don't have a son."

古文：乃更将出帘下看：必有错。
现代文：李参军拿着笏板走到门帘处光线明亮的地方仔细看看，说：你一定有问题。
English: Taking the cutting board, Li Shanjun walked to the brightly lit place at the door curtain to take a closer look and said: You must have a problem.

古文：陆君甚薄之，以为诈。
现代文：陆遵很瞧不起李参军，认为他在骗人。
English: Lu Zun looked down on Li Shanjun and thought he was lying.

古文：陆君先有歌姬在任处，其月有妊，分娩果男子也。龙复本
现代文：先前，陆遵在他任职的地方与一位歌妓住在一起。这位歌妓已经身怀有孕，不久后果然为陆遵生一个男孩。龙复本
English: Previously, Lu Zun lived with a geisha at the place where he worked. The geisha was pregnant and soon gave birth to a boy.

古文：开成中，有龙复本者无目，善听声揣骨。
现代文：唐文宗开成年间，有位叫龙复本的人双目失明，擅长用辨别声音，揣摸骨骼的方法推断人的吉凶祸福。
English: When Tang Wenzong was an adult, there was a blind man named Long Fu Yuan, who was good at using the method of distinguishing voices and guessing bones to deduce people's good luck, evil and misfortune.

古文：每言休咎，无不必中。
现代文：每次推断都非常准确，事后一定应验。
English: Each deduction is very accurate, and it must be confirmed afterwards.

古文：凡有象简竹笏，以手捻之，必知官禄年寿。
现代文：凡是象牙手板、竹手板，他只需放在手上把玩一会儿，一定能测出人的年寿、官禄。
English: With any ivory or bamboo fingerboard, he just needs to hold it in his hand and play with it for a while, and he will surely be able to measure a person's age and rank.

古文：宋祁补缺有盛名于世，缙绅之士无不倾属。屈指翘足，期于贵达。
现代文：补缺宋祁在当时负有盛名，士大夫们没有不想跟他交往的，很快就可望显贵发达。
English: To make up for the lack of Song Xuan, he had a great reputation at that time. Scholars and scholars did not want to associate with him, and it was expected that he would soon become prominent and developed.

古文：时永乐萧相置亦居谏署，同日诣之，授以所持竹笏。复本执萧公笏良久，置于方案上曰：宰相笏。
现代文：当时永乐人萧相置也在谏署衙门，一天宋祁与萧相置一同到龙复本那里去，把他们用的手板给龙复本，让他揣摸、推断。
English: At that time, Yongle's person Xiao Shuangjie was also at the door of the police station. One day, Song Yu and Xiao Shuangjie went to the dragon copy together, and gave the dragon copy the hand board they used, and let him guess and deduce.

古文：次至宋补缺者曰：长官笏。
现代文：龙复本拿着萧相置的竹手板揣摸了很长时间，把竹手板放在书案上，说：这是宰相用的手板！
English: Holding the dragon copy and the bamboo fingerboard with a square top, he fumbled for a long time. He put the bamboo fingerboard on the book case and said, "This is the fingerboard for the prime minister!"

古文：宋闻之不乐。
现代文：然后摸宋祁用的手板，说：这是长官用的手板！
English: Then he touched the tablet used by Song Tao and said, "This is the tablet used by the commander!

古文：萧曰：无凭之言，安足介意。
现代文：宋祁听了后很不高兴。萧相置对宋祁说：没有根据的话，何必放在心上。
English: After hearing this, Song Tao was very unhappy. Xiao Xiangqi said to Song Tao: "If there is no basis, why should you care?

古文：经月余，同列于中书候见宰相。
现代文：过了一个多月，宋祁与萧相置二人同时升任中书省，一块等候宰相接见。
English: After more than a month, Song Tao and Xiao Fangqian were both promoted to the Ministry of Literature at the same time, waiting for the prime minister to receive them.

古文：时李朱崖方秉钧轴，威镇朝野。
现代文：当时，李朱崖刚刚任职宰相掌管朝廷大权，声威震摄朝野。
English: At that time, Li Zhuyao had just assumed the post of prime minister in charge of the power of the imperial court.

古文：未见间，伫立闲谈。互有谐谑。
现代文：宋、萧二人在等待接见的时间里，站着闲聊，相互开着玩笑。
English: Song and Xiao stood chatting and joking with each other while waiting for the interview.

古文：顷之丞相遽出，宋以手板障面，笑未已。
现代文：不一会儿，李丞相突然从里面走出来。正赶上宋祁用竹手板遮着脸，笑声不止。
English: Soon after, Premier Li suddenly came out from inside. He was catching up with Song Tao, who was covering his face with a bamboo board and laughing.

古文：朱崖目之，回顾左右曰：宋补缺笑某何事？
现代文：李朱崖很注意地看了看宋祁，回头问身边的人，说：宋补缺笑我什么事？
English: Li Zhuyao looked at Song Tao attentively, turned around and asked the people around him, saying: "What's wrong with Song Tao's lack of smile?

古文：闻之者莫不心寒股慓。
现代文：听到李朱崖这样问，没有人不胆寒心惊，双腿颤抖。
English: Hearing Li Zhuya ask such a question, no one would not be scared, and their legs would tremble.

古文：未旬曰，出为清河县令。岁余，遂终所任。
现代文：这件事过去不到十天，宋祁被派出京城，到清河县任县令，一年以后死在任上。
English: Less than ten days after the incident, Song Tao was sent to Beijing to serve as the county magistrate of Qinghe County. He died in office a year later.

古文：其后萧公扬历清途，自浙西观察使入判户部，非久遂居廊庙。
现代文：后来，萧相置官运亨通，从浙西观察使调入京中主持户部的工作。不久，升任宰相，主掌朝政。
English: Later, Xiao Xiangqin, a successful official, was transferred from the Western Zhejiang Observation Mission to Beijing to preside over the work of the Household Department. Soon, he was promoted to prime minister and was in charge of the imperial government.

古文：俱如复本之言也。
现代文：一切都如龙复本所预测的那样。
English: Everything was as the dragon copy had predicted.

