古文：十有一年春，王正月。
现代文：十一年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏，楚子、陈侯、郑伯盟于辰陵。
现代文：夏季，楚子、陈侯、郑伯在辰陵盟会。
English: In the summer, Chu Tzu, Chen Hou, and Zheng Bo are at the Chenling Alliance.

古文：公孙归父会齐人伐莒。
现代文：公孙归父联合齐国一起攻打莒国。
English: Gongsun Guifu united with Qi to attack Han.

古文：秋，晋侯会狄于欑函。
现代文：秋季，晋侯在欑函与狄国会面。
English: In the autumn, Jin Hou met with Di in Shihankan.

古文：冬十月，楚人杀陈夏徵舒。
现代文：冬季十月，楚国人杀掉了陈国的夏徵舒。
English: In the winter of October, the people of Chu killed Xia Zhengshu, the ruler of Chen.

古文：丁亥，楚子入陈。
现代文：丁亥日，楚庄王攻入了陈国。
English: On Dinghai Day, the king of Chu Zhuang invaded Chen Province.

古文：纳公孙宁、仪行父于陈。
现代文：将公孙宁、仪行父收进陈国。
English: Gongsun Ning and Yi Xingfu were taken to Chen Province.

古文：十一年春，楚子伐郑，及栎。
现代文：十一年春季，楚庄王发兵进攻郑国，到达栎地。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, the king of Chu Zhuang sent an army to attack Zheng Guo, and arrived at Fengtian.

古文：子良曰： 晋、楚不务德而兵争，与其来者可也。
现代文：子良说： 晋国、楚国不讲德行，而用武力争夺，谁来我们就接近他。
English: Ziliang said: Jin and Chu do not talk about virtue, but use force to compete. Whoever comes, we will approach him.

古文：晋、楚无信，我焉得有信。 
现代文：晋国、楚国没有信用，我们哪里能够有信用？ 
English: If Jin and Chu don't have trust, where can we have trust?

古文：乃从楚。
现代文：于是就跟从楚国。
English: So he followed the lead of Chu.

古文：夏，楚盟于辰陵，陈、郑服也。
现代文：夏季，楚国在辰陵会盟，这是由于陈、郑两国都顺服了。
English: In the summer, the state of Chu formed an alliance with the state of Chenling. This was because Chen and Zheng both submitted.

古文：楚左尹子重侵宋，王待诸郔。
现代文：楚国的左尹子重袭击宋国，楚庄王住在郔地等待。
English: Zuo Yin Zizhong of Chu attacked Song, and Chu Zhuang Wang waited in the valley.

古文：令尹蒍艾猎城沂，使封人虑事，以授司徒。
现代文：令尹蒍艾猎在沂地筑城，派遣主持人考虑工程计划，将情况报告给司徒。
English: He ordered Yin Qiaihan to build a city in Handan, dispatched the host to consider the project plan, and reported the situation to the scholar.

古文：量功命日，分财用，平板榦，称畚筑，程土物，议远迩，略基趾，具餱粮，度有司，事三旬而成，不愆于素。
现代文：计量工程，规定日期，分配材料和用具，放平夹板和支柱，规定土方和器材劳力的多少，研究取材和工作的远近，巡视城基各处，准备粮食，审查监工的人选，工程三十天就完成，没有超过原定的计划。
English: Measure the project, set the date, allocate materials and tools, level the splints and pillars, determine the amount of earthwork and equipment labor, study the coverage and the distance of the work, inspect all parts of the city foundation, prepare the grain, and review the supervisor. The project was completed in 30 days and did not exceed the original plan.

古文：晋郤成子求成于众狄，众狄疾赤狄之役，遂服于晋。
现代文：晋国的郤成子向狄人各部族谋求友好。狄人各部族憎恨赤狄对他们的役使，于是顺服晋国。
English: The sons of Jin sought friendship with the tribes of the Di people. The tribes of the Di people hated Red Di's service to them, so they obeyed Jin.

古文：秋，会于欑函，众狄服也。
现代文：秋季，在欑函会见，狄人各部族都来顺服。
English: In the autumn, they met in Shihang, and all the tribes of the Di people came to obey.

古文：是行也，诸大夫欲召狄。
现代文：在这次欑函之行以前，大夫们要召集狄人前来。
English: Before this trip, the doctors wanted to call the Di people to come.

古文：郤成子曰： 吾闻之，非德莫如勤，非勤何以求人？
现代文：郤成子说： 我听说，没有德行，就只能勤劳；没有勤劳，如何能要求别人服从我？
English: Hao Cheng Zi said: I have heard that without virtue, one can only work hard; without hard work, how can I ask others to obey me?

古文：能勤有继，其从之也。《诗》曰： 文王既勤止。 
现代文：能够勤劳，就有成果，还是到狄人那里去吧。《诗》说： 文王已经做到勤劳。 
English: If you can work diligently, you will get results, or go to Di people. "Poetry" said: King Wen has achieved diligence.

古文：文王犹勤，况寡德乎？ 
现代文：文王尚且勤劳，何况缺少德行的人呢？ 
English: Even though King Wen is hardworking, what about those who lack virtue?

古文：冬，楚子为陈夏氏乱故，伐陈。
现代文：冬季，楚庄王由于陈国夏氏作乱的缘故，进攻陈国。
English: In winter, the king of Chu Zhuang attacked Chen as a result of the rebellion of the Chen Guoxia clan.

古文：谓陈人无动，将讨于少西氏。
现代文：对陈国人说： 不要惊俱，我将要讨伐少西氏。 
English: To the people of Chen: Don't be alarmed, I'm going to fight the Shaoxi clan.

古文：遂入陈，杀夏徵舒，诸栗门，因县陈。
现代文：就进入陈国，杀了夏征舒，把他五马分尸在栗门。因而就把陈国设置为县。
English: He entered Chen Province, killed Xia Zhenshu, and divided his body into five parts at the Li Gate. Therefore, Chen Province was set up as a county.

古文：陈侯在晋。
现代文：这时陈成公正在晋国。
English: At this time, Chen Chenggong was on his way to Jin.

古文：申叔时使于齐，反，复命而退。
现代文：申叔时在齐国出使，回国，向楚庄王复了命以后就退下去。
English: When Uncle Shen was on a mission in Qi, he returned to China and retired after he had restored the life of the king of Chu.

古文：王使让之曰： 夏徵舒为不道，弑其君，寡人以诸侯讨而戮之，诸侯县公皆庆寡人，女独不庆寡人，何故？ 
现代文：楚庄王派人责备他说： 夏征舒无道，杀死他的国君。我带领诸侯讨伐而杀了他，诸侯、县公都庆贺我，你独独不庆贺我，什么缘故？ 
English: The king of Chuzhuang sent a person to reproach him, saying, "Xia Zhenshu had no choice but to kill his sovereign. I led the lords in a crusade and killed him. The lords and county officials all congratulated me. You alone did not congratulate me. Why?

古文：对曰： 犹可辞乎？ 王曰： 可哉！ 
现代文：申叔时回答说： 还可以申述理由吗？ 楚庄王说： 可以呀！ 
English: Uncle Shen replied, "Can I still appeal for reasons?" Chu Zhuang Wang said, "Yes!

古文：曰： 夏徵舒弑其君，其罪大矣，讨而戮之，君之义也。
现代文：申叔时说： 夏征舒杀死他的国君，他的罪恶是是很大了；讨伐而杀了他，这是君王所应当做的事。
English: Uncle Shen said, "When Xia Zhenshu killed his sovereign, his crime was great; when he killed him in battle, it was what a sovereign should do.

古文：抑人亦有言曰： 牵牛以蹊人之田，而夺之牛。 
现代文：不过人们也有话说： 牵牛践踏别人的田地，就把他的牛夺过来。 
English: But people also have a saying: If a cowherd tramples on someone else's field, take his cow away.

古文：牵牛以蹊者，信有罪矣；而夺之牛，罚已重矣。
现代文：牵牛践踏田地的人，肯定是有过错的了；但夺走他的牛，惩罚就太重了。
English: The man whose ox tramples the field is certainly at fault; but to take away his ox is too severe a punishment.

古文：诸侯之从也，曰讨有罪也。
现代文：诸侯跟从君王，说是讨伐有罪的人。
English: The princes followed the king, saying that they would fight against the guilty.

古文：今县陈，贪其富也。
现代文：现在把陈国设置为县，这就是贪图一国的富有。
English: Now that Chen Guo has been set up as a county, this is coveting the wealth of a country.

古文：以讨召诸侯，而以贪归之，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：用伐罪号召诸侯，而以贪婪来告终，恐怕不可以吧？ 
English: I'm afraid you can't use the crime of deforestation to call out the lords and end up with greed, can you?

古文：王曰： 善哉！
现代文：楚庄王说： 好啊！
English: Chu Zhuang Wang said: Good!

古文：吾未之闻也。反之可乎？ 
现代文：我没有听说过这些话。归还陈国的土地，可以吗？ 
English: I haven't heard these words. Is it okay to return Chen Guo's land?

古文：对曰： 可哉！吾侪小人所谓取诸其怀而与之也。 
现代文：申叔时回答说： 这就是我们这一班小人所说的 从怀里拿出来给他 呀。 
English: Uncle Shin then replied, "That's what our group of villains said. Take it out of your arms and give it to him."

古文：乃复封陈，乡取一人焉以归，谓之夏州。
现代文：楚庄王就重新封立陈国，从每个乡带一个人回楚国，集中住在一地，称为夏州。
English: The king of Chuzhuang re-annexed Chen Province and brought one person from each township back to Chuzhou to live in one place, called Xiazhou.

古文：故书曰： 楚子入陈，纳公孙宁、仪行父于陈。 
现代文：所以《春秋》记载说 楚子入陈，纳公孙宁、仪行父于陈 ，这是表扬这一举动合于礼。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" records that Chu Zi entered Chen, Na Gong Sun Ning, and Yi Xingfu entered Chen, which is a praise of this action.

古文：书有礼也。厉之役，郑伯逃归。
现代文：厉地这一战役，郑襄公逃走回国。
English: After this battle, Zheng Xianggong fled back to China.

古文：自是楚未得志焉。
现代文：从这时候以来，楚国就没有得志。
English: Since then, the state of Chu has not been able to achieve its goal.

古文：郑既受盟于辰陵，又徼事于晋。
现代文：郑国既然在辰陵接受盟约，又要求事奉晋国。
English: Since Zheng accepted the covenant at Chenling, he also demanded to serve Jin.

