古文：吴子曰： 夫总文武者，军之将也，兼刚柔者，兵之事也。
现代文：吴子说： 文武兼备的人，才可以胜任将领。能刚柔并用，才可以统军作战。
English: Wu Zi said: Only those who are both literate and armed can be competent as generals. Only those who can be both tough and soft can lead the army in battle.

古文：凡人论将，常观于勇，勇之于将，乃数分之一尔。
现代文：一般人对于将领的评价，往往是只看他的勇敢，其实勇敢对于将领来说，只是应该具备的若干条件之一。
English: The average person's evaluation of a general is often based solely on his bravery. In fact, for a general, bravery is just one of several conditions that should be met.

古文：夫勇者必轻合，轻合而不知利，未可也。
现代文：单凭勇敢，必定会轻率应战，轻率应战而不考虑利害是不可取的。
English: Bravery alone will inevitably lead to reckless challenges, and reckless challenges without considering the interests are not advisable.

古文：故将之所慎者五：一曰理，二曰备，三曰果，四曰戒，五曰约。
现代文：所以，将领应当注重的有五件事：一是理，二是备，三是果，四是戒，五是约。
English: Therefore, there are five things that generals should pay attention to: one is reason, the second is preparation, the third is result, the fourth is precept, and the fifth is covenant.

古文：理者，治众如治寡；备者，出门如见敌；果者，临敌不怀生；戒者，虽克如始战；约者，法令省而不烦。
现代文：理，是说治理众多的军队如象治理少数军队一样地有条理。备，是说部队出动就象面对敌人一样地有戒备。果，是说临阵对敌不考虑个人的死生。戒，是说虽然打了胜仗还是如同初战时那样慎重。约，是说法令简明而不烦琐。
English: "Reason" means that the management of a large number of troops is as orderly as the management of a small number of troops. "Preparation" means that the troops are on the alert as if they were facing the enemy. "Result" means that the enemy does not consider the life and death of individuals. "Prevention" means that although the war is won, it is still cautious as in the First World War. "About" means that the instructions are concise and not tedious.

古文：受命而不辞，敌破而后言返，将之礼也。
现代文：受领任务决不推诿，打败了敌人才考虑田师，这是将领应遵守的规则。
English: It is a rule for generals to abide by that they should never shirk their assigned tasks, and only consider field divisions after defeating the enemy.

古文：故师出之日，有死之荣，无生之辱。 
现代文：所以自出征那一天起，将领使应下定决心，宁可光荣战死，绝不忍辱偷生。 
English: Therefore, from the day of departure, generals and envoys should make up their minds that they would rather die with honor than live in disgrace.

古文：吴子曰： 凡兵有四机：一曰气机，二曰地机，三曰事机，四曰力机。
现代文：吴子说： 用兵有四个关键：一是掌握士气，二是利用地形，三是运用计谋，四是充实力量。
English: Wu Zi said: There are four keys to the use of soldiers: one is to master morale, the second is to use terrain, the third is to use strategy, and the fourth is to enrich strength.

古文：三军之众，百万之师，张设轻重，在于一人，是谓气机。
现代文：三军之众，百万之师，掌握士气的盛衰，在于将领一人，这是掌握士气的关键。
English: The key to mastering the morale of three armies and a million soldiers lies in one general.

古文：路狭道险，名山大塞，十夫所守，千夫不过，是谓地机。
现代文：利用狭路险道，名山要塞十人防守，千人也不能通过，这是利用地形的关键。
English: Taking advantage of narrow roads and dangerous roads, famous mountain fortresses can only be defended by ten people, and a thousand people can not pass. This is the key to using the terrain.

古文：善行间谍，轻兵往来，分散其众，使其君臣相怨，上下相咎，是为事机。
现代文：善于使用间谍离间敌人，派遣轻装部队，反复骚扰敌人，以分散其兵力，使其君臣互相埋怨，上下互相责难，这是运用计谋的关键。
English: Being good at using spies to split the enemy, dispatching light troops, repeatedly harassing the enemy to disperse its forces, making its princes and ministers complain about each other, and blaming each other up and down, is the key to using stratagems.

古文：车坚管辖，舟利橹楫，士习战陈，马闲驰逐，是谓力机。
现代文：战车的轮轴插销要做得坚固，船只的橹、桨要做得适用，士卒要熟习战阵，马匹要熟练驰骋，这就是充实力量的关键。
English: The axle pins of chariots should be made strong, the oars and oars of ships should be made suitable, the soldiers should be familiar with the battle formation, and the horses should be skilled in galloping. This is the key to full strength.

古文：知此四者，乃可为将。
现代文：懂得这四个关键，才可以为将。
English: If you understand these four keys, you will be able to succeed.

古文：然其威、德、仁、勇，必足以率下安众，怖敌决疑。
现代文：而且他的威信、品德、仁爱、勇敢，都必须足以表率全军，安抚士众，威慑敌军，决断疑难。
English: Moreover, his prestige, moral character, benevolence, and bravery must be sufficient to lead the whole army, pacify the soldiers, deter the enemy army, and resolve the difficulties.

古文：施令而下不犯，所在寇不敢敌。
现代文：发布的命令，部属不敢违犯，所到的地方，敌人不敢抵抗。
English: Where orders are issued, subordinates dare not disobey, and where they arrive, the enemy dares not resist.

古文：得之国强，去之国亡。
现代文：得到国家就强盛，失去他，国家就危亡。
English: If a country gains him, it prospers; if it loses him, it perishes.

古文：是谓良将。 
现代文：这就叫做良将。
English: That's called a good captain.

古文：吴子曰： 夫鼙鼓金铎，所以威耳；旌旗麾帜，所以威目；禁令刑罚，所以威心。
现代文：吴子说：鼙鼓金铎，是用来指挥军队的听觉号令。旌旗麾帜，是用来指挥军队的视觉号令。禁令刑罚，是用未约束全军的法纪。
English: Wu Zi said: "Beating the drum is an auditory signal used to command the army. Hoisting the flag is a visual signal used to command the army. Prohibitory punishment is the use of unconstrained legal discipline for the whole army.

古文：耳威于声，不可不清；目威于色，不可不明；心威于刑，不可不严。
现代文：耳朵听命于声音，所以声音不可不清楚。眼睛听命于颜色，所以颜色不可不鲜明。军心受拘束于刑罚，所以，刑罚不可不严格。
English: The ear is subject to the voice, so the voice must not be unclear. The eyes are subject to the color, so the color must not be unclear. The military mind is bound by the punishment, so the punishment must not be strict.

古文：三者不立，虽有其国，必败于敌。
现代文：三者如果不确立，虽有国家必败于敌。
English: If the three are not established, even if there is a country, it will be defeated by the enemy.

古文：故曰：将之所麾，莫不从移，将之所指，莫不前死。 
现代文：所以说，将领所发布的命令，部队没有不依令而行的。将领所指向的地方，部队没有不拼死向前的。 
English: Therefore, the troops did not disobey the orders issued by the generals. Where the generals pointed, the troops did not rush forward.

古文：吴子曰： 凡战之要，必先占其将而察其才，因形用权，则不劳而功举。
现代文：吴子说： 一般说作战最重要的是，首先探知敌将是谁，并充分了解他的才能。根据敌人情况，采取权变的方法，不费多大力气，就可取得成功。
English: Wu Zi said: Generally speaking, the most important thing in combat is to first detect who the enemy will be and fully understand his talents. According to the enemy's situation, taking the method of change, without much effort, can achieve success.

古文：其将愚而信人，可诈而诱。
现代文：敌将愚昧而轻信于人，可用欺骗的手段来引诱他。
English: The enemy takes a foolish and gullible person and uses deception to lure him.

古文：贪而忽名，可货而赂。
现代文：敌将贪利而不顾名誉，可用财物收买他。
English: The enemy will be greedy for profit, regardless of reputation, and can be bought off with money.

古文：轻变无谋，可劳而困。
现代文：轻率变更计划而无深谍远虑的，可以疲困他。
English: Changing plans rashly without forethought can wear him out.

古文：上富而骄，下贫而怨，可离而间。
现代文：上级富裕而骄横，下级贫穷而怨愤的，可以离间它。
English: The superior rich and arrogant, the inferior poor and resentful, can tear it apart.

古文：进退多疑，其众无依，可震而走。
现代文：选退犹豫不决，部队无所适从的，可震憾吓跑它。
English: The withdrawal is hesitant, the troops are at a loss, but it can be shocked and scared away.

古文：士轻其将而有归志，塞易开险，可邀而取。
现代文：士卒藐视其将领而急欲田家的，就堵塞平坦道路，佯开险阻道路，用拦击消灭它。
English: The soldiers despised their generals and were eager for Tian Jia, so they blocked the flat road, broke through the dangerous road, and destroyed it with interception.

古文：进道易，退道难，可来而前。
现代文：敌人进路平易，退路艰难，可引诱它前来予以消灭。
English: The enemy has an easy way in and a difficult way out. It can be lured to come and be eliminated.

古文：进道险，退道易，可薄而击。
现代文：敌人进路艰难，退路平易，可以迫近攻击它。
English: The enemy has a hard way to advance and an easy way to retreat, so you can attack it from close by.

古文：居军下湿，水无所通，霖雨数至，可灌而沈。
现代文：敌人处于低洼潮湿的地方，水道不通，大雨连绵，可以灌水淹没它。
English: The enemy is in a low-lying, damp place, with no running water and continuous heavy rain, so it can be flooded.

古文：居军荒泽，草楚幽秽，风飚数至，可焚而灭。
现代文：敌军处于荒芜的沼泽地，草木丛生，常有狂风，可用火攻消灭它。
English: The enemy was in a barren marshland, thick with vegetation and often windy, and could be destroyed by fire.

古文：停久不移，将士懈怠，其军不备，可潜而袭。 
现代文：敌军久住一地而不移动，官兵懈怠，戒备疏忽，可以偷袭它。
English: If the enemy troops stay in one place for a long time and do not move, the officers and soldiers will be slack and their alertness will be negligent, and they may attack it by surprise.

古文：武侯问曰： 两军相望，不知其将，我欲相之，其术如何？ 
现代文：武侯问： 两军对阵，不知敌将的才能，想要查明，用什么方法? 
English: Wu Hou asked: The two armies are facing each other, I do not know the talent of the enemy general, I want to find out, what method should I use?

古文：起对曰： 令贱而勇者，将轻锐以尝之，务于北，无务于得。
现代文：吴起答： 令勇敢的下级军官，率领轻锐部队去试攻敌人。
English: Wu Qian replied: Let the brave junior officers lead the light troops to attack the enemy.

古文：观敌之来，一坐一起，其政以理，其追北佯为不及，其见利佯为不知，如此将者，名为智将，勿与战矣。
现代文：务必败退，不要求胜，以观察敌人前来的行动。如果敌人每次前进和停止，指挥都有条不紊，追击假装追不上，见到战利品装做没看见，象这样的将领是有智谋的，不要和他交战。
English: If the enemy advances and halts at regular intervals, if he commands in an orderly manner, if he pursues and pretends not to pursue, if he sees spoils of war and pretends not to see them, if he is a tactful general, do not engage him.

古文：若其众哗，旌旗烦乱，其卒自行自止，其兵或纵或横，其追北恐不及，见利恐不得，此为愚将，虽众可获。 
现代文：如果敌人喧哗吵闹，旗帜纷乱，士卒自由行动，兵器横七竖八，追击惟恐追不上，见利惟恐得不到，这是愚昧的将领，敌军虽多也可以把他擒获。 
English: If the enemy is noisy and noisy, the flags are disorderly, the soldiers move freely, the weapons are all over the place, the pursuit may not be able to catch up, and the benefit may not be obtained, this is a foolish general, although the enemy army is large, he can also be captured.

