古文：周世盛德，有铭诔之文。
现代文：周代帝王的德泽盛大，所以有铭诔产生。
English: Emperor Dezhe of the Zhou Dynasty was a great man, which is why there was a Ming Dynasty.

古文：大夫之材，临丧能诔。
现代文：古人说过：能胜任大夫的人材，遇有丧事必须能写出诔文来。
English: The ancients said: a person who can be a competent doctor must be able to write a funeral obituary.

古文：诔者，累也，累其德行，旌之不朽也。
现代文：所谓 诔 ，就是积累；就是列举死者的德行，加以表彰而使之永垂不朽。
English: The so-called , is accumulation; it is to enumerate the virtues of the dead, to commend them and to immortalize them.

古文：夏商以前，其词靡闻。
现代文：夏、商两代以前，没有关于诔的传闻。
English: Two generations ago, there were no rumors about the dragonfly.

古文：周虽有诔，未被于士。又贱不诔贵，幼不诔长，其在万乘，则称天以诔之。
现代文：周代虽然有诔，也不盛行，因为在当时诔还不能用于普通官吏，并且低贱的人不能为高贵的人作诔，幼辈也不可给长辈作诔；所以帝王死后，只能说由上天来诔他。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, although there was the imperial scepter, it did not prevail, because at that time the imperial scepter could not be used for ordinary officials, and the lowly people could not make the imperial scepter for the noble people, and the younger generation could not make the imperial scepter for the elders; therefore, after the death of the emperor, it could only be said that the emperor was crowned by heaven.

古文：读诔定谥，其节文大矣。
现代文：宣读诔文，定立谥号，那时在礼仪上是有一套严格规定的。
English: There was a strict set of rules in the etiquette at that time.

古文：自鲁庄战乘丘，始及于士；逮尼父之卒，哀公作诔，观其慭遗之辞，呜呼之叹，虽非睿作，古式存焉。
现代文：自从春秋时鲁庄公战败于乘丘而错怪驾车的人，诔才开始用到下级官吏。孔子死后，鲁哀公给他作了诔文。从其中所讲 上天不愿留下这位老人 ，和 呜呼哀哉 的悲叹来看，虽然不算很高明的作品，但古代诔文的基本格式已经具备。
English: After the death of Confucius, Lu Aigong wrote an obituary for him. Judging from what is said in the obituary, "Heaven did not want to leave this old man," and the lamentation "Woo woo woo," although it is not a very good work, the basic format of an ancient obituary is already available.

古文：至柳妻之诔惠子，则辞哀而韵长矣。
现代文：到鲁国柳下惠的妻子作《柳下惠诔》，就是文辞悲哀而篇幅较长的作品了。
English: "Yanagishita Hiei" written by the wife of Yanagishita Hiei, who came to Lu, is a sad and lengthy work.

古文：暨乎汉世，承流而作。扬雄之诔元后，文实烦秽，沙麓撮其要，而挚疑成篇，安有累德述尊，而阔略四句乎！
现代文：到了汉代，继承前人来写作：如扬雄的《元后诔》，文辞本来是相当繁杂的；《汉代·元后传》中只摘要提到 沙麓之灵 四句，晋代挚虞却怀疑是《元后诔》的全文。岂有累述尊贵者的德行，只写寥寥四句呢？
English: In the Han Dynasty, he succeeded his predecessors to write: For example, Yang Xiong's "Yuan Hou Xuan," the vocabulary was originally quite complex; "Han Dynasty · Yuan Hou Biography" only mentioned the spirit of Shafu in four sentences, but the Jin Dynasty sincerely doubted that it was the full text of "Yuan Hou Xuan." Is there such a thing as recounting the virtues of dignitaries, only writing four sentences?

古文：杜笃之诔，有誉前代；吴诔虽工，而他篇颇疏，岂以见称光武，而改盼千金哉！
现代文：东汉杜笃的诔文，在前代颇负声誉。他的《吴汉诔》虽然不错，其他诔文却比较粗疏。怎能因《吴汉诔》一篇受到光武帝的称赞，就使他的全部作品变得贵重起来？
English: Eastern Han Du Du's wuxia had a good reputation in the previous generation. Although his "Wu Han Yu" was good, his other wuxia were rather rough. How could the praise of Emperor Guangwu for one article of "Wu Han Yu" make all of his works valuable?

古文：傅毅所制，文体伦序；孝山、崔瑗，辨絜相参。
现代文：傅毅所写的诔，文辞体制，颇有伦次；苏顺、崔瑗二人的作品，也还写得明白而简要。
English: Fu Yi's, the writing system, is quite coherent; Su Shun and Cui Yao's works are also written clearly and concisely.

古文：观其序事如传，辞靡律调，固诔之才也。
现代文：看他们的诔文，叙事如史传，文辞细致，音律协调，的确是具有写诔之才。
English: Looking at their poems, the narrative is like a historical legend, the words are meticulous, the melody is coordinated, and it is indeed a talent for writing.

古文：潘岳构意，专师孝山，巧于序悲，易入新切，所以隔代相望，能徽厥声者也。
现代文：晋代潘岳，在构思上专学苏顺，善于叙述悲伤之情，能很容易地写得新颖而亲切。所以，和汉代的苏顺比较起来，潘岳就能获得更为美好的声誉。
English: Pan Yue of the Jin Dynasty specialized in Su Shun in terms of ideas, was good at describing sadness, and could easily write novel and intimate. Therefore, compared with Su Shun of the Han Dynasty, Pan Yue could get a better reputation.

古文：至如崔骃诔赵，刘陶诔黄，并得宪章，工在简要。
现代文：至如东汉崔骃的《诔赵》文，刘陶的《诔黄》文，都掌握了写诔的方法，好在简明扼要。
English: For example, the Eastern Han Dynasty's Cui Zhao's "赵" text and Liu Tao's "黄" text have mastered the method of writing, and the best way is to be concise.

古文：陈思叨名，而体实繁缓。文皇诔末，百言自陈，其乖甚矣！
现代文：三国时的曹植，虽然享有盛名，其实，他的诔文，文繁而势缓；在《文帝诔》的最后，用一百多字来表白自己，这就很不符合诔的写作规则了。
English: Cao Zhi at the time of the Three Kingdoms, although he enjoyed a high reputation, in fact, his imperial edicts were complex and slow; at the end of "Emperor Wen," he used more than a hundred words to express himself, which was very inconsistent with the imperial writing rules.

古文：若夫殷臣咏汤，追褒玄鸟之祚；周史歌文，上阐后稷之烈；诔述祖宗，盖诗人之则也。
现代文：此外，如殷代人对商汤王的诔，是在《玄鸟》诗中追颂其祖先的洪福；周代史官对周文王的歌颂，是在《生民》等诗中追述后稷的功业。累述祖宗之德，这是诗人的表达方法。
English: In addition, for example, the praise of Shang Tang Wang by the Yin generation is to praise the Hongfu of their ancestors in the poem "The Blackbird"; the praise of Zhou Dynasty historians to King Zhouwen is to recount the exploits of the latter in poems such as "Living People." To recount the virtues of the ancestors is the poet's way of expression.

古文：至于序述哀情，则触类而长。
现代文：至于叙述哀伤之情，那就要根据有关的事物加以发挥。
English: As for the description of sadness, it should be played out according to the relevant things.

古文：傅毅之诔北海，云 白日幽光，淫雨杳冥 。
现代文：如傅毅的《北海王诔》，其中讲到北海王死后， 白日的光辉为之暗淡，暴雨下得天昏地暗 。
English: For example, Fu Yi's "King of the North Sea," which tells of the death of the king of the North Sea, the brightness of the day is dim, and the sky is dark under the rainstorm.

古文：始序致感，遂为后式，影而效者，弥取于工矣。
现代文：《北海王诔》又开始在序中写了令人感伤之情，这就成了诔文的榜样；后来的摹仿者，就从而写得更好了。
English: "King of the North Sea" also began to write sentimental feelings in the preface, which became the model for the poem; later imitators thus wrote better.

古文：详夫诔之为制，盖选言录行，传体而颂文，荣始而哀终。
现代文：仔细研究诔这种文体的写作方法，大致是选录死者的言论，记叙死者的德行；以记传的体制而用颂的文辞；开始是称赞死者的功德，最后表达哀伤的情意。
English: A careful study of the writing method of this style, roughly speaking, is to select the speech of the deceased and describe the virtues of the deceased; to use the eulogy with the system of biography; to begin by praising the merits of the deceased, and finally to express sadness.

古文：论其人也，暧乎若可觌，道其哀也，凄焉如可伤：此其旨也。
现代文：讲到这个人，就要使人隐隐约约看得见；叙述悲哀，就要使其凄怆之情令人感到伤痛。
English: To speak of this man is to make him vaguely visible; to describe his sorrow is to make it painfully poignant.

古文：碑者，埤也。
现代文：这就是写诔文的基本要求。所谓 碑 ，就是附助。
English: This is the basic requirement for writing an obituary.

古文：上古帝王，纪号封禅，树石埤岳，故曰碑也。
现代文：古代帝王受命，就封禅于泰山，刻石记功，所以叫碑。
English: The ancient emperors were ordered to seal Zen on Mount Tai and to engrave stones to record their achievements, hence the name of the monument.

古文：周穆纪迹于弇山之石，亦古碑之意也。
现代文：相传周穆王曾在弇山上刻石记其行迹，这就是 碑 的意思了。
English: According to legend, King Zhou Mu once carved a stone on Lushan Mountain to record his whereabouts. This is the meaning of the monument.

古文：又宗庙有碑，树之两楹，事止丽牲，未勒勋绩。
现代文：还有宗庙阶前的碑，树立两根石柱在庙堂中庭，只是作为系牲畜之用，并不在上面铭刻功绩。
English: There is also a monument in front of the steps of the ancestral temple, and two stone pillars are set up in the atrium of the temple, but they are only used as livestock, and their merits are not inscribed on them.

古文：而庸器渐缺，故后代用碑，以石代金，同乎不朽，自庙徂坟，犹封墓也。
现代文：后来，记功的庸器逐渐少用，所以，后代就常用石碑记住功劳；用石碑代替铜器，同样可以保持长久。
English: Later, the tools used to record achievements were gradually used less and less, so future generations often used stone tablets to remember achievements; using stone tablets instead of copperware can also be kept for a long time.

古文：自后汉以来，碑碣云起。
现代文：这和聚土而成坟墓一样，宗庙的碑和坟墓的碑都可长期保存。
English: This is the same as the accumulation of soil into a grave, the monument of the ancestral temple and the monument of the grave can be preserved for a long time.

古文：才锋所断，莫高蔡邕。
现代文：从东汉以后，方形和圆顶形的石碑大量出现了。
English: After the Eastern Han Dynasty, a large number of square and dome-shaped stone monuments appeared.

古文：观杨赐之碑，骨鲠训典；陈郭二文，词无择言；周胡众碑，莫非精允。
现代文：汉代写碑文最有才力的，莫过于蔡邕。如他的《太尉杨赐碑》，学习《尚书》而写得端正有力；他的《陈寔碑》、《郭泰碑》两篇，都无亏于所称扬的人；此外，《汝南周勰碑》、《太傅胡广碑》等篇，无不写得清晰允当。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was no one more talented at inscribing inscriptions than Cai Qi. For example, his "Taifeng Yang Zi Hei" was written neatly and powerfully after studying the "Shang Shu"; his "Chen Zi Hei" and "Guo Tai Hei" were both written to the credit of the person being praised; in addition, his "Runan Zhou Zi Hei" and "Taifu Hu Guang Hei" were all written clearly and appropriately.

古文：其叙事也该而要，其缀采也雅而泽；清词转而不穷，巧义出而卓立；察其为才，自然至矣。
现代文：蔡邕的碑文，在叙事上全面而扼要；词采上雅正而润泽；文词清晰而又变化无穷，新义巧出而又超然卓立。考察他写碑文的才能，是自然而来的。
English: Cai Xuan's epitaphs are comprehensive and concise in narrative; the words are elegant and smooth; the words are clear and infinite in variety, the new meaning is ingenious and transcendent. It is natural to examine his ability to write epitaphs.

古文：孔融所创，有摹伯喈；张陈两文，辨给足采，亦其亚也。
现代文：孔融写碑文，就有学习蔡邕的地方。他的《卫尉张俭碑铭》和《陈碑》两文，言辞巧捷，文采丰富，可算是仅次于蔡邕的作品了。
English: When Kong Rong wrote epitaphs, there was a place to learn from Cai Qi. His "Guardsman Zhang Jian's Epitaph" and "Chen's Epitaph," both of which are skillful and rich in words, can be considered second only to Cai Qi's works.

古文：及孙绰为文，志在于碑；温王郗庾，辞多枝杂；《桓彝》一篇，最为辨裁矣。
现代文：到晋代孙绰，有志于碑诔的写作，他的《温峤碑》、《丞相王导碑》、《太宰郗监碑》和《太尉庾亮碑》等，辞多枝蔓，杂乱无章；只有《桓彝碑》一篇，最为简洁。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, Sun Qiao was interested in writing inscriptions. His "Wen Qiao Inscription," "Joshuang Wang Gui Inscription," "Dazai Qiao Jiao Inscription" and "Taifeng Qiao Liang Inscription," etc., are multi-stranded and disorganized; only "Kuan Qiao Inscription" is the most concise.

古文：夫属碑之体，资乎史才，其序则传，其文则铭。
现代文：关于碑文写作的主要点，是要具有史家的才能。它的序文近于传体，碑文近于铭体。
English: The main point about the writing of the inscription is to have the ability of a historian. Its preamble is close to the biography, and the inscription is close to the inscription.

古文：标序盛德，必见清风之华；昭纪鸿懿，必见峻伟之烈：此碑之制也。
现代文：突出叙述死者的盛德，必须显示其美好的清风；明白记叙死者巨大的优点，必须表现其宏伟的功绩：这就是碑文的基本写作法则。
English: To highlight the virtues of the deceased, it is necessary to show its beautiful breeze; to clearly describe the great merits of the deceased, it is necessary to show its magnificent achievements: this is the basic writing rule of the inscription.

古文：夫碑实铭器，铭实碑文，因器立名，事先于诔。
现代文：碑是铭刻器物，碑文也就是铭；是根据石碑这个器物来确立 碑 的名称，碑的产生自然先于铭诔。
English: A stele is an inscribed object, and an inscription is also an epitaph; the name of a stele is established based on this object, and the creation of a stele naturally precedes that of an epitaph.

古文：是以勒石赞勋者，入铭之域；树碑述亡者，同诔之区焉。
现代文：所以，用石刻来赞颂功勋的就属于铭，树石立碑来讲述死者的事就属于诔。
English: Therefore, those who use stone carvings to praise meritorious deeds belong to Ming, and those who erect stone monuments to tell the story of the deceased belong to Zhou.

古文：赞曰∶
现代文：总结：
English: What is this word? Summary:

古文：写远追虚，碑诔以立。
现代文：描写过去的事迹，再现死者的容仪，碑诔为此而建立。
English: The monument was built to depict the events of the past and to recreate the appearance of the dead.

古文：铭德纂行，光采允集。
现代文：铭刻美德，记叙言行，文采的运用应当适宜。
English: It is appropriate to inscribe virtues, record words and deeds, and use literature.

古文：观风似面，听辞如泣。
现代文：写其清风，要能如亲见其面；听其文辞，要能如悲声哭泣。
English: To write about its fresh breeze, you should be able to see its face as if it were your own; to listen to its words, you should be able to cry as if it were a sad voice.

古文：石墨镌华，颓影岂戢。
现代文：碑诔的美好文辞，使人流风余韵，永无止息。
English: The beautiful words of the monument, make people flow with style and rhyme, and never stop.

