古文：高德基，字元履，辽阳渤海人。
现代文：高德基，字元履，辽阳渤海人。
English: Gao Deji, Zhi Yuanlu, Liaoyang Erhai people.

古文：皇统二年登进士第。
现代文：皇统二年，高德基登进士第。
English: In the second year of imperial unification, Gao Deji was promoted to the position of scholar.

古文：六年，为尚书省令史。
现代文：皇统六年，高德基为尚书省令史。
English: In the sixth year of imperial unification, Gao Deji was appointed Minister of Education.

古文：海陵为相，专愎自用，人莫敢拂其意，德基每与之详辨。
现代文：海陵做丞相时，刚愎自用，没有人敢违背他的意旨，高德基却常常与他争辩。
English: When Hae-ling was prime minister, he was stubborn and self-serving. No one dared to go against his wishes, but Gao Deji often argued with him.

古文：及篡位，命左司郎中贾昌祚谕旨曰： 卿公直果敢，今委卿南京行省勾当。 
现代文：等到海陵篡取了皇位，命令左司郎中贾昌祚告知高德基说： 你公正果敢，现在委任你掌管南京行省的事情。 
English: When Hailing usurped the imperial throne, he ordered his left-hand man, Zhongjia Changyu, to inform Gao Deji, saying, "You are fair and courageous. I now entrust you with the affairs of Nanjing Province.

古文：未行，会海陵欲都燕京，命德基摄燕京行台省都事。
现代文：高德基还没前去赴任，适逢海陵皇帝想建都燕京，于是命令高德基掌管燕京行台省都事。
English: Gao Deji had not yet taken office when the Emperor of Hailing wanted to build the capital of Yanjing, so he ordered Gao Deji to take charge of Yanjing and the affairs of the provincial capital.

古文：改摄右司员外郎，除户部员外郎，改中都路都转运副使，迁户部郎中。
现代文：高德基后改为摄右司员外郎，授予户部员外郎，改任中都路都转运副使，升为户部郎中。
English: After Gao Deji, he was changed to the deputy director of photography, the deputy director of the household department, the deputy deputy director of the transportation of the central capital, and the deputy director of the household department.

古文：正隆三年，诏左丞相张浩、参知政事敬嗣晖营建南京宫室。
现代文：正隆三年，海陵皇帝诏令左丞相张浩、参知政事敬嗣晖营建南京宫室。
English: In the third year of Zhenglong, Emperor Hailing issued an imperial edict to build a palace in Nanjing for the chancellor of the Left, Zhang Hao, and the senator and statesman, Keizhi.

古文：明年，德基与御史中丞李筹、刑部侍郎萧中一俱为营造提点。
现代文：第二年，高德基与御史中丞李筹、刑部侍郎萧中一都被任命为燕京营建提点。
English: In the second year, Gao Deji, Li Qiao, the Vice-Minister of History, and Xiao Zhongyi, the Secretary of the Department of Criminal Law, were all appointed as the starting points for the construction of Yanjing.

古文：海陵使中使谓德基等曰： 汝等欲乘传往邪？
现代文：海陵皇帝派中使对高德基说 ：你们是想乘车前往？
English: Emperor Hailing sent an envoy to Gao Deji and said, "Do you want to go by car?

古文：欲乘己马往邪？
现代文：还是想骑马前往？
English: Or do you want to go on horseback?

古文：银牌可于南京尚书省取之。 
现代文：银牌可到南京尚书省取。 
English: The silver medal can be taken from Nanjing Shangshuo.

古文：筹乞先降银牌，复遣中使谓筹曰： 牌之与否，当出朕意，尔敢辄言，岂以三人中官独高邪？ 
现代文：李筹乞求先发下银牌，海陵又派中使对李筹说： 银牌给与不给，应当是出自朕的意思，你怎么敢说话，难道在你们三人中，独你的官高吗？ 
English: Li Che begged to be awarded the silver medal first, and Hailing also sent an envoy to Li Che to say, "Whether you give me the silver medal or not should be up to me. How dare you speak like that. Are you the only high-ranking official among the three of you?

古文：遂杖之三十，遣乘己马往，德基、中一乘传往。
现代文：于是打李筹三十下，派他骑马前往，高德基、萧中一乘车前往。
English: So he gave Li Qiao 30 points and sent him on horseback, while Gao Deji and Xiao Zhong went by car.

古文：转同知开封尹。
现代文：高德基转任同知开封尹。
English: Gao Deji was transferred to a friend, Kaifeng Yin.

古文：大定三年，以察廉治状不善，下迁同知北京路都转运使事。
现代文：大定三年，高德基因为廉政管理不善，降职为同知北京路都转运使事。
English: In the third year of Dading, Gao Deji was demoted because of the poor management of the integrity of the government.

古文：是年秋，土河泛滥，水入京城，德基遽命开长乐门，疏分使入御沟，以杀其势，水不能为害。
现代文：这年秋天，土河泛滥，洪水进到京城，高德基于是命令打开长乐门，把洪水疏导分流到御沟，以减轻水势，洪水没有造成危害。
English: In the autumn of that year, when the Tu River overflowed and the floodwaters entered the capital, Gao Deji ordered the Changle Gate to be opened and the flood channel to be diverted to Gou to reduce the water potential. The flood did not cause any harm.

古文：迁刑部侍郎。
现代文：高德基升为刑部侍郎。
English: He was promoted to Samurai of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：七年，改中都路都转运使。
现代文：大定七年，高德基改任中都路都转运使。
English: In the seventh year of Dading, Gao Deji was reappointed as the transfer envoy of Zhongdu Road.

古文：九年，转刑部尚书。
现代文：大定九年，高德基转任刑部尚书。
English: In the ninth year of Dading, Gao Deji was transferred to the Penal Department of Shangshu.

古文：有犯罪当死者，宰相欲从末减，德基曰： 法无二门，失出犹失入也。 
现代文：有犯罪当处死的人，宰相想从轻发落，高德基说： 法律没有第二种。 没有听从。
English: When the prime minister wanted to commute the sentences of those who had committed crimes punishable by death, Gao Deji said, "There is no second law.

古文：不从。及奏，上曰： 刑部议，是也。 
现代文：等到上奏，金世宗皇帝说： 刑部的决议是正确的。 
English: At the beginning of the recital, Emperor Kim Il Sung said, "The decision of the Ministry of Justice is correct.

古文：因召诸尚书谕之曰： 自朕即位以来，以政事与宰相争是非者，德基一人而已。
现代文：因此召知诸尚书说 ：自朕即位以来，因为政事与宰相争论是非的，只有高德基一个人。
English: Therefore, Zhao Zhizhong said: Since I ascended the throne, only Gao Deji has been the only one to argue with the prime minister about politics.

古文：自今部上省三议不合，即具以闻。 为宋主生日使。
现代文：自今部上省三议不统一，就应该让我详细知道。 高德基为宋朝君主生日使。
English: Since there is no uniformity in the three resolutions of the current ministry, I should know in detail. Gao Deji is the birthday envoy of the Song Dynasty monarch.

古文：及还，宋人礼物外附进腊茶三千胯，不亲封署。
现代文：等到回国，宋朝人送给礼物外带腊肉茶叶三千胯，没有签封。
English: When he returned to China, the Song Dynasty people gave him a gift of 3,000 baht of bacon and tea, which was not signed.

古文：德基曰： 侄献叔，而不署，是无名之物也。 
现代文：高德基说： 侄子进献叔叔礼物，而不签名，这是没有名义的东西。 
English: Gaodeki said, "A nephew presents a gift to his uncle without a signature. This is something without a name.

古文：却之。十一年，改户部尚书。
现代文：大定十一年，高德基改任户部尚书。
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, Gao Deji was reappointed as the head of the household.

古文：德基上疏，乞免军须房税等钱，减农税及盐酒等课，未报。
现代文：高德基上奏章，请求免去军房税等钱，减少农税及盐酒等赋税，未有被批复。
English: Gao Deji raised a petition, requesting exemption from military housing tax and other money, reduction of agricultural tax and salt wine and other taxes, but was not approved.

古文：随朝官俸粟折钱，增高市价与之，多出官钱几四十万贯。上使人谕之曰： 卿为尚书，取悦宰执近臣，滥出官钱。
现代文：高德基把当朝官员的俸禄粮食折成钱，按市场上的高价给他们，官府多拿出了几乎四十万贯的钱，金世宗皇帝派人告诉他说： 你身为尚书，为取悦宰执近臣，滥出官府的钱。
English: Gao Deji converted the salary grain of the officials of the time into money and gave it to them at a high price in the market. The government took out almost four hundred thousand yuan. Emperor Kim Sejong sent someone to tell him: You are a scholar, and in order to please the emperor and his close ministers, you have squandered the government's money.

古文：卿之官爵，一出于朕，奈何如此。 
现代文：你的官爵，是朕给的，为什么要这样？ 
English: Your title of nobility was given to you by me. Why is that?

古文：于是决杖八十，户部郎中王佐、员外郎卢彦冲、同知中都转运使刘兟、副使石抹长寿、支度判官韩镇、左警巡使李克勤、右警巡使李宝、判官强锐昌、姚宗奭、尼庞古达吉不，皆决杖有差。
现代文：于是决定打高德基八十板，户部郎中王佐、员外郎卢彦冲、同知中都转运使刘先先、副使石抹长寿、支度判官韩镇、左警巡使李克勤、右警巡使李宝、判官强锐昌、姚宗、尼庞古达吉不，都不同程度地被打。
English: Therefore, it was decided to beat Gao Deji with eighty boards, and Liu Xianxian, vice-commander of the stone, Han Zhen, left-wing police inspector Li Keqin, right-wing police inspector Li Bao, judges Qiang Ruichang, Yao Zong, and Nie Pang Gu Da Jifu, were all beaten to varying degrees.

古文：还朝未及入对，以疾卒，年五十三。
现代文：金世宗皇帝下诏从大定十一年十一月冬至大赦后，尚书省、御史台、户部、转运司、警巡院多支出的俸禄粮食折成的钱，都追回。
English: After the winter solstice amnesty issued by Emperor Kim Sejong on November 11, Daejeon, the money spent by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Office of the Historian, the Household Ministry, the Department of Transportation, and the National Police Agency, which was converted into salary grain, was all recovered.

古文：彦忠性孝友，尝使宋，所得金帛，尽分兄弟亲友。赠荣禄大夫，命有司致祭，并以银绢赐其家。
现代文：高德基降为兰州刺史，王佐降为大兴府推官，卢彦冲为河北西路户籍判官，刘先先为东京警巡使，石抹长寿为东京留守推官，韩镇为河东南路户籍判官，李克勤为通远县令，李宝为清水县令，强锐昌、姚宗、尼庞古达吉不都授予司候。大定十二年，高德基死去，终年五十四岁。
English: Gao Deji was relegated to the post of Lanzhou magistrate, Wang Zuo to the post of Daxing prefectural magistrate, Lu Yanchong to the post of Hebei West Road household registration magistrate, Liu Xianxian to the post of Tokyo police inspector, Shimao Longevity to the post of Tokyo resident magistrate, Han Zhen to the post of South Hedong Road household registration magistrate, Li Keqin to the post of Tongyuan County magistrate, Li Bao to the post of Shimizu County magistrate, and Qiang Ruichang, Yao Zong, and Nipang Guo

古文：张九思，字全行，锦州人。
现代文：他的儿子叫高锡。张九思，字全行，锦州人。
English: His son's name is Gao Xi. Zhang Jiusi is fluent in all Chinese characters and is from Jinzhou.

古文：皇统初，补行台省女直译史，除同知易州事，三迁亳州防御使、归德尹。
现代文：皇统初年，他补行台省女真译史，授予同知易州事职务，三次调为亳州防御使、归德尹。
English: In the first year of imperial unification, he made amends for the translation of the history of Taiwan Province by Jianzhen, granted Tongzhi the position of Ezhou affairs, and was transferred to the defense envoy of Zhangzhou three times and returned to Deyin.

古文：刘仲延受宋国岁贡于泗州，九思副之。
现代文：刘仲延在泗州接受宋朝的年贡，张九思帮助他。
English: Liu Zhongyan received the land tax of the Song Dynasty in Bozhou, and Zhang Jiusi helped him.

古文：往岁受岁贡者，每以币物不精责宋使者，宋使者私馈银币各直数百千以为常，九思独不肯受，仲延从之，自是私馈遂绝。
现代文：以往接受岁贡的人，每当因为进贡的钱物不精就斥责宋朝使者，宋朝使者就私下送给他们价值几百几千的钱币已是常事，张九思独独不肯接受宋使的私赠，刘仲延也随他一同拒绝私赠，从此私下馈赠的事就杜绝了。
English: In the past, people who received the annual tribute scolded the Song Dynasty emissaries whenever the tribute money was insufficient. It was common for the Song Dynasty emissaries to privately give them hundreds of thousands of coins. Zhang Jiusi alone refused to accept the Song envoy's private gift, and Liu Zhongyan also refused the private gift with him. Since then, the private gift has been eliminated.

古文：自大理评事，再迁大理少卿。
现代文：张九思从大理评事，再升为大理少卿。
English: Zhang Jiusi was promoted from Dali critic to Dali junior minister.

古文：清池令双申自陈： 父虔，天眷初，知永安军，遇叛寇孟邦杰，执而胁之，不从，遂被害。
现代文：清池令双申自己陈述 ：我的父亲双虔，天眷初年，知永安军，遇到叛贼孟邦杰，他们拘捕了父亲并威胁他，我父不顺从他们，于是被杀害。
English: My father, Shuangqian, who was born in the first year of Heaven's favor and knew the Yongan Army, encountered the traitor Meng Bangjie. They arrested my father and threatened him. My father disobeyed them and was killed.

古文：乞正班用荫。 
现代文：请求正式颁布给我做官的特权。 
English: Requesting that the privileges of my office be formally promulgated.

古文：大理寺议，虔子止合杂班叙，九思曰： 虔奋不顾身，守节以死，其子正班用荫，以劝忠孝。 
现代文：大理寺的建议是，双虔的儿子只给合杂班叙，张九思说： 双虔奋不顾身，守节而死，他的儿子应给予做官的特权，以此来勉励忠孝之人。 
English: The suggestion of Dali Temple was that Shuangqian's son should only be given the title of Hezangban. Zhang Jiusi said: Shuangqian was so enthusiastic that he didn't care about his own life, and died to keep the festival. His son should be given the privilege of being an official, so as to encourage those who are loyal and filial.

古文：世宗从九思议。
现代文：金世宗皇帝听从了张九思的建议。
English: Emperor Kim Sejong followed the advice of Zhang Jiusi.

古文：改工部郎中，大兴少尹，同知中都都转运使事，转刑部侍郎，改工部。
现代文：张九思改任工部郎中、大兴少尹、同知中都都转运使事，转刑部侍郎，后调到工部。
English: Zhang Jiusi was transferred to the Ministry of Labor, Daxing Shaoyin and Tongzhi Zhongdu were transferred to the Ministry of Labor, and then transferred to the Ministry of Justice.

古文：九思所守清约，然急于进取，一切以功利为务，率意任情不恤百姓。
现代文：张九思恪守清规戒律，然而又急于进取，一切都以功利为追求，轻率任性不体恤百姓。
English: Zhang Jiusi adhered to clear rules and regulations, yet he was eager to forge ahead. Everything he did was in pursuit of utilitarianism. He was thoughtless and capricious and had no compassion for the people.

古文：诏检括官田，凡地名疑似者，如皇后店、太子庄、燕乐城之类，不问民田契验，一切籍之，复有邻接官地冒占幸免者。
现代文：皇帝金世宗诏令张九思检查国家的田地，他把凡是地名迷惑相似的，像皇后店、太子庄、燕乐城之类，不管民田的契约凭证，一切都收归国有。
English: Emperor Jin Shizong ordered Zhang Jiusi to inspect the country's fields, and he nationalized all the place names that were confusingly similar, such as Queens Store, Prince Village, and Yanle City, regardless of the contract documents of the people's fields.

古文：世宗闻其如是，召还戒之曰： 如辽时支拨地土，及国初元帅府拘刷民间指射租田，近岁冒为己业，此类当拘籍之。
现代文：金世宗听说后把他召回来告诫他 ：如辽国时支拨的土地，建国初元帅府指射的租田，近年冒充自己的田业，此类的收归国有。
English: After hearing this, Kim Sejong called him back and warned him: "For example, the land allocated during the Liao Dynasty, the leased land pointed out by the Marshal's Office at the beginning of the founding of the country, and the farmland that has been passed off as one's own in recent years, such land will be nationalized.

古文：其余民田，一旦夺之则百姓失业，朕意岂如此也。 
现代文：其余的民田，一旦收回老百姓就会失业，朕意难道是那样？ 
English: Once the rest of the people's fields are recovered, the people will lose their jobs. Is that what I mean?

古文：转御史中丞。
现代文：张九思转为御史中丞。
English: He was promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：九思言屯田猛安人为盗征偿，家贫辄卖所种屯地。
现代文：张九思说屯田猛安人为盗贼的要征收他们的土地税来补偿国家。
English: Zhang Jiusi said that the robbers of Tonden and Meng'an should collect their land tax to compensate the state.

古文：凡家贫不能征偿者，止令事主以其地招佃，收其租入，估贾与征偿相当，即以其地还之。
现代文：凡是家贫不能按规定交纳的人，就令他招收佃户，收取租佣用以交纳，所交纳的估价与赋税相等的，就把他的地还给他。
English: Anyone whose family is poor and cannot pay according to the regulations will be ordered to recruit tenants, collect rent for payment, and return his land to him if the assessed value paid is equal to the tax.

古文：临洮尹完颜让亦论屯田贫人征偿卖田，乞用九思议，诏从之。
现代文：临洮尹完颜让也议论屯田贫人征收偿还卖田，请求用张九思的建议，皇帝金世宗下诏同意。
English: Linyi Yin Can Yan Zhan also discussed the collection of the poor in the field and the reimbursement of the sale of the field, and requested the use of Zhang Jiusi's suggestion, which was approved by Emperor Kim Sejong.

古文：迁工部尚书。
现代文：张九思升工部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the Ministry of Works.

古文：年高，愈自用，上谓左丞张汝弼曰： 九思耄矣，颇执强自用，欲令外补，何如？ 
现代文：年高的他越来越自信，皇帝金世宗对左丞张汝弼说： 张九思老了，很刚愎自用，想让他出朝做官，怎么样？ 
English: As he grew older, he became more and more confident. Emperor Jin Shizong said to Zhang Rucheng: Zhang Jiu Si is old, very stubborn and self-serving, and you want him to become an official, how about that?

古文：于是，九思男若拙为尚书省令史，冒填诏敕，事觉，亡命。
现代文：此时，张九思的儿子张若拙为尚书省令吏，他假冒填写诏敕文书，事情败露后，他逃跑了。
English: At this time, Zhang Jiusi's son, Zhang Ruoshu, was an official of the Provincial Government of Shangshu. He pretended to fill out the imperial edict document. After the affair was exposed, he ran away.

古文：汝弼因奏其事，上曰： 九思岂不知若拙处邪？
现代文：张汝弼因此上奏，皇帝金世宗说： 张九思难道不知道张若拙在哪？
English: As a result, Zhang Ruxuan started to play, and Emperor Jin Shizong said, "Doesn't Zhang Jiusi know where Zhang Ruoshu is?

古文：可免其官，捕若拙，获日授职。 
现代文：可免去他的官职，逮捕张若拙，抓到后再授职。 
English: He can be relieved of his official position, Zhang Ruoshu can be arrested, and he can be re-appointed after he is caught.

古文：九思闻命惶惧，因感疾，卒。
现代文：张九思听到这个命令很害怕，因此染病而死。
English: Zhang Jiusi was very scared when he heard this order, so he got sick and died.

古文：高衎，字穆仲，辽阳渤海人。
现代文：高衎，字穆仲，辽阳渤海人。
English: Gao Wei, Zha Mu Zhong, Liaoyang Bohai people.

古文：敏而好学，自少有能赋声，同舍生欲试其才，使一日赋十题戏之，衎执笔怡然，未暮，十赋皆就，彬彬然有可观。
现代文：他聪颖好学，从小就能做曲，同宿舍的人想试试他的才能，让他一天做十个曲子来戏弄他，高衎欣然提笔，不到晚上就做完了，且文雅顺畅。
English: He is clever and eager to learn. He has been able to compose music since he was a child. The people in his dormitory wanted to test his talent and let him make ten pieces of music a day to tease him. Gao Yao gladly picked up the pen and finished it in the evening. It was elegant and smooth.

古文：年二十六登进士第，乞归养，逾二年方调漷阴丞。召为尚书省令史，除右司都事。
现代文：高衎二十六岁时登进士第，但他乞求回乡生活，二年后他调任誋阴丞，后召进京城任尚书省令史，授予右司都事。
English: At the age of twenty-six, Gao Jun was promoted to the rank of scholar, but he begged to return to his hometown. Two years later, he was transferred to the post of Jinying, and later he was called to Beijing to serve as the secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and was awarded the post of the right secretary of the capital.

古文：母丧去官，起复吏部员外郎，摄左司员外郎。
现代文：高衎母亲去世时，他辞官服孝，孝期满后出任吏部员外郎，摄左司员外郎。
English: When Gao Yao's mother passed away, he resigned from his post to show his filial piety. After his period of filial piety was over, he served as the clerk's assistant, and the photographer's assistant.

古文：王彦潜、常大荣、李庆之皆在吏部选中，吏部拟彦潜、大荣皆进士第一，次当在庆之上，彦潜洺州防御判官，大荣临海军节度判官，庆之沈州观察判官。
现代文：王彦潜、常大荣、李庆之都在吏部官职人选中，吏部考虑王彦潜、常大荣都是进士第一名，位次应当在李庆之之上。王彦潜任州防御判官，常大荣任临海军节度判官，李庆之任渖州观察判官。
English: Wang Yanqian, Chang Dayong and Li Qingzhi are all in the selection of officials of the Personnel Department, and the Personnel Department considers Wang Yanqian and Chang Dayong to be the first to be promoted, and the rank should be above Li Qingzhi. Wang Yanqian is appointed as the state defense judge, Chang Dayong is appointed as the judge of the festival of the Navy, and Li Qingzhi is appointed as the judge of the observation of Zhangzhou.

古文：左司郎中贾昌祚挟私，欲与庆之洺州，诡曰： 洺虽佳郡，防御幕官在节镇下。 
现代文：左司郎中贾昌祚心藏私念，想派李庆之到州，他欺诈说： 州虽是佳郡，但防御判官却在节镇之下。 
English: Zuo Shi Lang Zhong Jia Changjun harbored a secret desire to send Li Qingzhi to the prefecture, he fraudulently said: Although the prefecture is Jia County, but the defense judge is under Jie Town.

古文：乃改拟彦潜临海军，大荣沈州，庆之洺州。
现代文：于是改授王彦潜为临海军节度判官、常大荣为渖州观察判官，李庆之为州防御判官。
English: As a result, Wang Yanqian was re-awarded as the adjudicator of the Navy Festival, Chang Dayong as the observation adjudicator of Zhangzhou, and Li Qingjing as the state defense adjudicator.

古文：庆之初赴选，昌祚以庆之为会试诠读官，而庆之弟庆云为尚书省令史，多与权贵游，海陵心恶之，尝谓左右司 昌祚必与庆之善阙 。
现代文：李庆之开始选拔时，昌祚任李庆之为会试诠读官，而李庆之弟弟李庆云任尚书省令史，多与权贵结交，海陵王很讨厌他，曾经对左右司说 ：昌祚一定同李庆之关系好。 
English: At the beginning of Li Qingzhi's selection, Chang Ying was Li Qingzhi's probationary interpreter, while Li Qingzhi's younger brother, Li Qingyun, was Li Qingzhi's secretary. He mostly made friends with the powerful. King Hailing disliked him very much. He once said to the left and right secretary: Chang Ying must have a good relationship with Li Qingzhi.

古文：大奉国臣者，辽阳人，永宁太后族人，先为东京警巡院使，以赃免去，欲因太后求见，海陵不许。
现代文：大奉国臣是辽阳人，永宁太后同族的人，先任东京警巡院使，因为贪赃而被免职，他想依靠太后求见，海陵王皇帝没有答应。
English: The great vassal statesman was from Liaoyang, a member of the same family as the Yongning Empress Dowager. He was the first Tokyo police inspector, but was dismissed for corruption. He wanted to rely on the Empress Dowager to see him, but Emperor Haering did not agree.

古文：衎与奉国臣有乡里旧，拟为贵德县令。
现代文：高衎与大奉国臣有乡情，准备授予他贵德县令。
English: Gao Yao and Dabong Guotian have hometown feelings, and they are preparing to grant him the Guide County Order.

古文：海陵大怒，于是昌祚、衎、吏部侍郎冯仲等，各杖之有差，庆云决杖一百五十，罢去。
现代文：海陵皇帝大怒，于是昌祚、高衎、吏部侍郎冯仲等，不同程度地被杖打，李庆云被打一百五十下，免去职务离朝。
English: Emperor Hailing was enraged, and as a result, Changyu, Gaozhu, and Feng Zhong, the attendant of the cadre department, were beaten with canes to varying degrees. Li Qingyun was beaten 150 times and removed from his post and left the court.

古文：未几，仲、昌祚、庆云皆死，衎降为清水县主簿，兵部员外郎摄吏部主事杨邦基降宜君县主簿，吏部主事宋仝降漷阴县主簿，尚书省知除杨伯杰，降闾阳县主簿。
现代文：不久，冯仲、昌祚、李庆云都死了，高衎降为清水县主簿，兵部员外郎摄吏部主事杨邦基降为宜君县主簿，吏部主事宋仝降为誋阴县主簿，尚书省知除杨伯杰降为闾阳县主簿。
English: Soon after, Feng Zhong, Chang Yi, and Li Qingyun all died. Gao Wei was demoted to the main record of Qingshui County, Yang Bangji, member of the military department, was demoted to the main record of Yijun County, Song Yi, head of the personnel department, was demoted to the main record of Yin County, and Yang Bojie, member of the military department, was demoted to the main record of Yangyang County.

古文：居二年，为大理司直，迁户部员外郎，同知中都都转运使，太常少卿，吏部郎中。
现代文：二年后，高衎为大理司直，升户部员外郎、同知中都都转运使、太常少卿、吏部郎中。
English: Two years later, Gao Yao became the Dai Li Sinao, the second son of a member of the promotion department, the second son of a friend who was transferred to an envoy, the second son of a junior minister and the second son of a member of the cadre department.

古文：大定初，转左司郎中。
现代文：大定初年，转为左司郎中。
English: In the first year of Taisho, he was transferred to Sasiro Junior High School.

古文：世宗孜孜求谏，群臣承顺旨意，无所匡正，上曰： 朕初即位，庶政多未谙悉，实赖将相大臣同心辅佐。
现代文：金世宗皇帝孜孜求谏，群臣顺承旨意，没有什么改正，金世宗皇帝说： 朕刚即位，政事大多不熟悉，实在依赖将相大臣们同心辅助。
English: Emperor Kim Il-sung diligently solicited advice, the ministers complied with the will, and there was nothing to correct. Emperor Kim Il-sung said: I have just ascended the throne, I am not familiar with most of the government affairs, and I really rely on the ministers to assist me.

古文：百姓且上书言事，或有所补。
现代文：老百姓况且上奏章指出政事不足，于政事有所补正。
English: Moreover, the people pointed out that the government affairs were insufficient in the report, and made some corrections in the government affairs.

古文：夫听断狱讼，簿书期会，何人不能，如唐、虞之圣，犹曰 稽于众，舍己从人 。
现代文：仅仅审理案件，处理日常公文，何人不能胜任？就如唐尧、虞舜之圣明，犹言 征集考察众人的意见，不固执己见，择善而从 。
English: Just hearing cases and dealing with daily official documents, who is not competent? Just like Tang Xuan and Gu Yao's holy light, Yu Yan solicited and examined the opinions of many people, did not stick to his own opinion, and chose the good and followed.

古文：正隆专任独见，不谋臣下，以取败乱。
现代文：海陵王独断专行，遇事不与大臣们商议，因此自取灭亡。
English: King Hailing acted arbitrarily and did not consult with his ministers in times of need, and thus brought about his own demise.

古文：卿等其体朕意。 
现代文：希望卿等体察朕的心意。 
English: I hope you can feel my heart.

古文：使洁传诏台省百司曰： 凡上书言事，或为有司沮遏，许进表以闻。 
现代文：皇帝让高衎传诏台省百司说： 凡上书说政事，假如被有司阻止，允许他上奏让我知道所说政事。
English: The emperor told Gao Jun to go and preach to the hundred magistrates of Tai Province, saying, "Whoever writes to say something about politics, if he is stopped by a magistrate, allow him to write to let me know what he said about politics.

古文：迁吏部尚书。
现代文：高衎升为吏部尚书。
English: He was also promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：每季选人至，吏部托以检阅旧籍，谓之检卷，有滞留至后季犹不得去者。
现代文：每季都选拔人才到吏部，吏部借故检阅旧名册，这叫检契约，有的人被滞留到下一季还不能到任。
English: Every quarter, the selection of talents is sent to the personnel department. The personnel department takes the opportunity to review the old roster, which is called the inspection contract. Some people are detained until the next quarter and cannot take office.

古文：衎三为吏部，知其弊，岁余铨事修理，选人便之。
现代文：高衎了解吏部的这种弊病，年终选拔官吏治理。
English: Gao Gan understands this malady of the cadre department, and the year-end selection of officials is the best way to manage it.

古文：五年，为贺宋国生日使，中道得疾，去职。
现代文：大定五年，高衎为贺宋朝生日使，中途得病罢职。
English: In the fifth year of Dading, Gao Jun, the birthday envoy of the He Song Dynasty, became ill and resigned.

古文：大定七年，卒。
现代文：大定七年，高衎死去。
English: In the seventh year of the Taisho era, Takahata died.

