古文：魏之先，出自黄帝轩辕氏。黄帝子曰昌意，昌意之少子受封北国，有大鲜卑山，因以为号。
现代文：魏的祖先出自黄帝轩辕氏，黄帝的儿子名叫昌意，昌意的小儿子被封在北方立国，国中有座大鲜卑山，因此就以山名为号。
English: Wei's ancestors came from the Huangdi Xuanwu clan. The son of the Yellow Emperor was named Changyi. The youngest son of Changyi was sealed in the north to establish the country. There is a Daxingbei Mountain in the country, so it is named after the mountain.

古文：其后世为君长，统幽都之北广莫之野，畜牧迁徙，射猎为业，淳朴为俗，简易为化，不为文字，刻木结绳而已。
现代文：此后各代的君主，管辖着幽都以北广袤的原野，他们放牧牲畜，四处迁徙，骑射狩猎是他们的本业，淳朴忠厚是他们的风俗，简单易行是他们的习惯，他们不使用文字，以刻木和结绳的方法记事而已。
English: Subsequent generations of monarchs ruled over the vast plains north of the capital. They herded livestock and migrated around. Shooting and hunting was their main occupation. Simple and loyal was their custom. Simple and easy to do was their habit. They did not use written language, but recorded everything by chopping wood and tying ropes.

古文：时事远近，人相传授，如史官之纪录焉。
现代文：不论是远古的还是当前所发生的重大事情，都由人们口耳传授，就像是史官的记录一样。
English: Important events, both ancient and modern, are passed down by word of mouth, like a chronicler's record.

古文：黄帝以土德王。北俗谓土为托，谓后为跋，故以为氏。
现代文：黄帝是因土德而得成王的，北方的习惯称土为拓，称后代为跋，所以用拓跋为姓氏。
English: The Yellow Emperor was made king by virtue of his native land. In the north, it is customary to call the soil Tuo and the descendants Waba, so the surname is Tuo Waba.

古文：其裔始均，仕尧时，逐女魃于弱水，北人赖其勋，舜命为田祖。
现代文：黄帝的后裔名叫始均的，曾经当过尧帝的官，他把旱魔女魃驱逐到弱水去，北方的人靠他的功绩而得益，所以舜帝便让他当了田祖。
English: The descendant of the Yellow Emperor was named Shi Jun, who once served as an official of Emperor Gong. He banished the drought sorcerer Gong to Weak Water. People in the north benefited from his achievements, so Emperor Gong made him the ancestor of Tianzu.

古文：历三代至秦、汉，獯鬻、猃狁、山戎、匈奴之属，累代作害中州。而始均之裔不交南夏，是以载籍无闻。
现代文：其后经历夏、商、周三代直至秦、汉，北方有獯鬻、犭佥狁、山戎、匈奴之类，历代为害中原，而始均的后代因此和南方的华夏不相交往，所以历代史籍中没有记载。
English: Later, through the Xia, Shang, and San dynasties to the Qin and Han dynasties, the North had the likes of the Mongols, Mongols, Mongols, Mongols, and Xiongnu, all of which harmed the Central Plains. As a result, the descendants of the first generation did not interact with the Southern Chinese, so there is no record in the historical records.

古文：积六七十代，至成皇帝讳毛立，统国三十六，大姓九十九，威振北方。
现代文：累计过了六七十代，到成皇帝叫毛的继位时，统辖三十六国，大姓九十九族，威震北方。
English: After a total of sixty or seventy generations, when Emperor Cheng called Mao to succeed him, he presided over thirty-six countries and ninety-nine ethnic groups, dominating the north.

古文：成帝崩，节皇帝贷立。
现代文：成帝死后，节皇帝贷立。
English: After the death of Emperor Chengdi, the Emperor Zong was established.

古文：节帝崩，庄皇帝观立。
现代文：节帝死，庄皇帝观立。
English: Emperor Jie died and Emperor Zhuang ascended to the throne.

古文：庄帝崩，明皇帝楼立。
现代文：庄帝死，明皇帝楼立。
English: Zhuang Di died, and the Ming Emperor was enthroned.

古文：明帝崩，安皇帝越立。
现代文：明帝死，安皇帝越立。
English: Emperor Ming died and Emperor An ascended to the throne.

古文：安帝崩，宣皇帝推寅立。
现代文：安帝死，宣皇帝推寅立。
English: After the death of Emperor An, Emperor Xuan promoted Yin to the throne.

古文：宣帝南迁大泽，方千余里，厥土昏冥沮洳，谋更南徙，未行而崩。
现代文：宣皇帝领着国人南迁到大泽，这里有一千多里宽的水面，地上昏黑低湿，便打算继续南迁，可是还未起程便去世了。
English: Emperor Xuan led the Chinese people to move south to Osawa, where there is a water surface more than a thousand miles wide, and the ground is dark and wet. He planned to continue moving south, but he died before he started.

古文：景皇帝利立。
现代文：景皇帝利继位。
English: Emperor Jing was succeeded by Emperor Li.

古文：景帝崩，元皇帝俟立。
现代文：景帝死后，元皇帝俟立。
English: After the death of Emperor Jing, the former emperor stood up.

古文：元帝崩，和皇帝肆立。
现代文：元帝死，和皇帝肆立。
English: The Yuan emperor died, and the emperor rebelled.

古文：和帝崩，定皇帝机立。
现代文：和帝死，定皇帝机立。
English: When the emperor dies, the emperor rises.

古文：定帝崩，僖皇帝盖立。
现代文：定帝死，僖皇帝盖立。
English: Emperor Ding died, and Emperor Jie ascended to the throne.

古文：僖帝崩，威皇帝侩立。
现代文：僖帝死，威皇帝侩立。
English: Emperor Qian died, Emperor Wei rose.

古文：威帝崩，献皇帝邻立。
现代文：威帝死，献皇帝邻立。
English: When Emperor Wei died, Emperor Xian stood next to him.

古文：时有神人，言此土荒遐，宜徙建都邑。
现代文：这时，有位神人说，这个地方过于偏僻荒远，应当迁徙到合适的地方营建都城。
English: At this time, a god said that this place was too remote and desolate, and they should move to a suitable place to build a capital city.

古文：献帝年老，乃以位授于圣武皇帝，命南移。
现代文：献帝已经年老了，他便把皇位传给了儿子圣武皇帝，命他带人南移。
English: Emperor Xian was already old, so he passed the imperial throne to his son Emperor Shenwu and ordered him to move south.

古文：山谷高深，九难八阻，于是欲止。有神兽，似马，其声类牛，导引历年乃出，始居匈奴故地。
现代文：一路上山高水深，历尽了艰难险阻，他们正准备止步不前时，忽见有头神兽，模样像马，叫声像牛，在前头领路，一直走了一年多才出了高山深谷，从此居住在匈奴故地。
English: Along the way, they went through all the hardships and obstacles, and when they were about to stop, they suddenly saw a divine beast, looking like a horse and calling like a cow, leading the way in front. It took more than a year to get out of the high mountains and deep valleys, and since then they have been living in the Hun homeland.

古文：其迁徙策略，多出宣、献二帝，故时人并号曰推寅，盖俗云钻研之义。
现代文：由于南迁的策略多出自宣帝和献帝，所以当时的国人把两人同时叫做推寅，也就是俗话中所说的钻研的意思。
English: Since the strategy of moving south mostly came from proclaiming the emperor and offering the emperor, the Chinese people at that time called the two at the same time Tsui Yin, that is, the meaning of "study hard" in the saying.

古文：圣武皇帝讳诘汾，尝田于山泽，欻见辎軿自天而下。
现代文：圣武皇帝名诘汾。他曾经在山泽中田猎，忽然见到一辆有帐盖的大车从天而降。
English: He was once hunting in Nakata, Yamazawa, when he suddenly saw a covered cart descend from the sky.

古文：既至，见美妇人自称天女，受命相偶。
现代文：当大车降到他跟前时，只见有一位美丽绝伦的女子从车中走出，她自称是天上的仙女，受天帝的命令下凡和圣武皇帝结为夫妇。
English: When the chariot came down to him, he saw a stunningly beautiful woman step out of the chariot. She claimed to be a fairy from heaven, who had been ordered by the Heavenly Emperor to marry the Holy Emperor.

古文：旦日请还，期年周时复会于此，言终而别。
现代文：第二天，天女请求返回天庭，并约定一周年后仍然在这里相会。说完两人就分别了。
English: The next day, the celestial maiden asked to return to the heavenly garden, and they agreed to still meet here after the first anniversary. After saying this, the two separated.

古文：及期，帝至先田处，果见天女，以所生男授帝，曰： 此君之子也，当世为帝王。 
现代文：到一周年时，圣武皇帝来到先前田猎的地方，果然见到天女。她把所生的男孩交给圣武皇帝，对他说： 这是君王的儿子，今后当世世为帝王。 
English: At the time of the first anniversary, Emperor Shomu came to the place where they used to go hunting, and indeed saw the celestial maiden. She gave the boy she had given birth to to Emperor Shomu and said to him, "This is the son of the king, and from now on he will be the emperor."

古文：语讫而去。
现代文：说完就离去了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：即始祖神元皇帝也。
现代文：这孩子就是始祖神元皇帝。
English: This child was Emperor Shingen.

古文：故时人谚曰： 诘汾皇帝无妇家，力微皇帝无舅家。 
现代文：所以当时国人传说 ：诘汾皇帝无妇家，力微皇帝无舅家。 
English: Therefore, at that time, the local people had a legend: Emperor Zou had no wife, and Emperor Liwei had no brother-in-law.

古文：帝崩，神元皇帝立。
现代文：圣武帝死后，神元皇帝立。
English: After the death of Emperor Shenwu, Emperor Shenyuan was established.

古文：神元皇帝讳力微。
现代文：神元皇帝名叫力微。
English: Emperor Jingen's name was Rikuo.

古文：元年，岁在庚子，先是西部内侵，依于没鹿回部大人窦宾。
现代文：即位后的元年，正是庚子年。起初，由于西部人入侵，便投靠了没鹿回部的大人窦宾。
English: In the first year after the enthronement, it was the year of Geng Zi. At first, due to the invasion of westerners, Dou Bin, an adult from Muxuhai, took refuge.

古文：神元有雄杰之度，后与宾攻西部，宾军败，失马步走，神元使以所乘骏马给之。
现代文：神元皇帝有英雄豪杰的风度。后来，他和窦宾攻打西部落人。窦宾的军队被打败，马也没有了，他只得徒步行走。神元皇帝让人把自己所骑的骏马交给窦宾。
English: Emperor Shenyuan had the demeanor of a heroic hero. Later, he and Doubin attacked the Westerners. Doubin's army was defeated, his horse was gone, and he had to walk on foot. Emperor Shenyuan had people give the horse he rode to Doubin.

古文：宾归，求马主，帝隐而不言。
现代文：窦宾回来以后，便寻找送给他马匹的主人，可是，力微隐瞒了真相没有说出。
English: After Dou Bin returned, he looked for the owner of the horses that were given to him, but he did not tell the truth.

古文：宾后知，大惊，将分国之半奉帝，帝不受，乃进其爱女。
现代文：后来窦宾知道了，大为惊讶，便要分出国土的一半送给力微。力微不肯接受，于是，窦宾把爱女嫁给他。
English: Later, Dou Bin found out and was very surprised. He wanted to give half of the country to Lihai. Lihai refused to accept, so Dou Bin married his beloved daughter to him.

古文：宾犹思报恩，乃从帝所欲，徙所部北居长川。
现代文：窦宾仍然想报答力微的救命之恩，便听从了力微的意见，把他的部落迁徙到北面的长川。
English: Dou Bin still wanted to repay the life-saving grace of Li Wei, so he listened to the opinion of Li Wei and moved his tribe to the north of Changchuan.

古文：积数年，旧部人咸来归附。
现代文：过了几年，力微的旧部都来归附他。
English: After a few years, the weak old part came to belong to him.

古文：及宾临终，戒其二子，使谨奉神元。
现代文：当窦宾临终时，告诫他的两个儿子，让他们好好对待力微。
English: When Dou Bin was on his deathbed, he told his two sons to treat Li Wei well.

古文：其子不从，乃阴谋逆。
现代文：可是，他的两个儿子不听，在暗地里策谋叛乱。
English: However, his two sons did not listen and plotted a rebellion in secret.

古文：帝召杀之，尽并其众。
现代文：力微把他们召来以后都杀掉了。全部兼并了他们的部人。
English: After summoning them by force, they killed them all. They annexed all of their subordinates.

古文：诸部大人悉服，控弦之士二十余万。
现代文：各部落的首领也都服从力微的号令，于是，神元皇帝手下有精兵二十多万人。
English: The leaders of each tribe also obeyed the orders of the weak, so Emperor Jingen had more than 200,000 elite soldiers under his command.

古文：三十九年，迁于定襄之盛乐。
现代文：即位三十九年，部落迁移到定襄的盛乐。
English: In the 39th year of his reign, the tribe moved to Dingxiang.

古文：四月祭天，诸部君长皆来助祭，唯白部大人观望不至。
现代文：四月间举行祭天大典，各部落的首领都来助祭，只有白部的大人旁观而不肯前来。
English: In April, a grand festival was held, and the chiefs of all the tribes came to assist the priest. Only the adults in the white section stood by and did not want to come.

古文：征而戮之，远近肃然。
现代文：力微派人把他召来后杀掉了，于是，远近部落都对神元皇帝十分恭敬。
English: They sent someone to summon him and then killed him. As a result, the tribes near and far were very respectful of Emperor Shingen.

古文：帝乃告诸大人，为与魏和亲计。
现代文：力微便传告各部落大人，准备和魏国和亲。
English: With little effort, he announced to the adults of each tribe that they should prepare to unite with Wei.

古文：四十二年，遣子文帝如魏，且观风土。
现代文：四十二年，神元皇帝派儿子文帝前往魏国，并观察风土人情。
English: In 42, Emperor Jinguan sent his son Emperor Wen to Wei to observe the local customs.

古文：是岁，魏景元二年也。
现代文：这一年，是魏景元二年。
English: This year is the second year of Wei Jingyuan.

古文：文帝讳沙漠汗，以国太子留洛阳。
现代文：北魏文帝名叫沙漠汗，他以鲜卑国太子的身份留居洛阳。
English: The Northern Wei Emperor was named Desert Khan, and he stayed in Luoyang as the crown prince of Xianbei.

古文：后文帝以神元春秋已高，求归。晋武帝具礼护送。
现代文：后来，沙漠汗因为神元皇帝年纪已大，便请求回国，晋武帝送给礼物并派人加以护送。
English: Later, because Emperor Jingen was old, Desert Khan asked to return to China. Emperor Jinwu gave him a gift and sent someone to escort him.

古文：五十六年，文帝复如晋，其冬还国。
现代文：五十六年，沙漠汗又到晋国，这年冬天回国。
English: In 1956, Desert Sweat went to Jin Province again, and returned this winter.

古文：晋征北将军卫瓘以文帝雄异，恐为后患，请留不遣。
现代文：晋朝的征北将军卫馞认为沙漠汗是个英雄豪杰，与众不同，恐怕他回国后成为晋朝的后患，便请晋朝把他留下不让回去。
English: The Jin dynasty's general of the Northern Expedition, Wei Wei, thought that the Desert Khan was a heroic hero and different from others. He was afraid that he would become a problem for the Jin dynasty after returning to China, so he asked the Jin dynasty to keep him and not let him go back.

古文：复请以金锦赂国之大人，令致间隙。
现代文：又请求用金钱锦缎等物品贿赂鲜卑各部的大人，让他们彼此间有嫌隙。
English: He also asked for money, brocade and other items to bribe the adults of the subordinate departments, so that they would have a rift between each other.

古文：五十八年方遣帝。
现代文：直到五十八年才让沙漠汗回国。
English: It was not until 1958 that Desert Sweat was allowed to return home.

古文：神元使诸部大人诣阴馆迎帝。
现代文：神元皇帝让各部大人到阴馆迎接沙漠汗。
English: Emperor Jinguang let the adults of all departments go to the gloomy hall to meet the desert sweat.

古文：酒酣，帝仰视飞鸟，飞丸落之。
现代文：酒酣时，沙漠汗抬头望见天上的飞鸟，便用飞弹把鸟射落。
English: While drinking wine, Desert Sweat looked up at a bird in the sky and shot it down with a missile.

古文：时国俗无弹，众大惊，相谓曰： 太子被服同南夏，兼奇术绝人。若继国统，变易旧俗，吾等必不得志。 
现代文：当时鲜卑国里没有弹弓，众人见到这个场面后都大为吃惊，相互议论说： 太子如今服装都和南方夏人相同，更兼有奇术过人，如果让他继承王位，改变旧俗，我们这些人肯定都没有好处。 
English: At that time, there were no slingshots in Xianbei, and everyone was very surprised to see this scene and said to each other: The prince is now dressed in the same clothes as the Nanfangxia people, and he is also an excellent magician. If he is allowed to inherit the throne and change the old customs, it will definitely not benefit any of us.

古文：乃谋危害帝，并先驰还，曰： 太子引空弓而落飞鸟，似得晋人异法。 
现代文：便一起设谋伤害太子。他们都一齐先跑回来，对神元皇帝说： 太子手里拿着一把空的弓，而能将飞鸟射落，好像是得到了晋朝的邪术。 
English: They all ran back together and said to Emperor Jingen, "The prince is holding an empty bow in his hand, and he can shoot down flying birds. It seems that he has obtained the magic of the Jin Dynasty."

古文：自帝在晋后，诸子爱宠，神元颇有所惑。及闻诸大人请，因曰： 当便除之。 
现代文：自从沙漠汗到晋朝以后，其他几位王子都得到神元皇帝的宠爱，所以对于继位的人选，神元皇帝也拿不定主意。
English: From the time of the Desert Sweat to the Jin Dynasty, several other princes were favored by Emperor Shenyuan, so Emperor Shenyuan was undecided as to who should succeed him.

古文：于是诸大人驰诣塞南，矫害帝。
现代文：于是，各部大人带人驰往塞南，假传旨意杀害了沙漠汗。
English: As a result, adults from various ministries took people to Senan, and the false legend killed Desert Sweat.

古文：其年，神元不豫。
现代文：这一年，神元皇帝病。
English: That year, Emperor Jingen fell ill.

古文：乌丸王库贤亲近任势。先受卫瓘之货，欲沮动诸部，因于庭中砺钺斧，曰： 上恨汝曹谗杀太子，欲尽收诸大人长子杀之。 
现代文：乌丸王库贤是神元帝的亲信之人，他执掌大权，事先已收下卫馞送来的礼物，想要把各部众分散，便在大庭中磨着大斧，并说 ：皇上恨你们进谗言害死了太子，准备要把各部大人的长子都抓来杀掉。 
English: Kumaru King Kugen was a close confidant of Emperor Jingen. He wielded great power and had previously received a gift from the Wei court. He wanted to disperse the people of the various ministries, so he sharpened a large axe in the courtyard and said, "The emperor hates you for slandering and killing the crown prince, and he is preparing to capture and kill the eldest son of each minister."

古文：大人皆信，各各散走。
现代文：各部落的首领们都听信他的话，纷纷领着部众出走了。
English: The leaders of each tribe believed his words and led their followers away.

古文：太祖道武皇帝讳珪，昭成皇帝之嫡孙，献明帝之子也。
现代文：不久，神元帝死去，他共在位五十八年，活了一百零四岁。当道武帝即位后，尊封他为始祖。太祖道武皇帝名珪，是昭成皇帝的嫡孙子，献明帝的儿子。
English: Soon after, Emperor Jingu died. He reigned for a total of 58 years and lived to be 104 years old. When Emperor Daowu ascended the throne, he was revered as the founder. Emperor Daowu's great-great-grandfather, Emperor Mingzong, was the legitimate grandson of Emperor Zhaoxing and the son of Emperor Xianming.

古文：母曰献明贺皇后，初因迁徙，游于云泽。寝梦日出室内，寤而见光自牖属天，欻然有感。以建国三十四年七月七日生帝于参合陂北，其夜复有光明。
现代文：母亲是献明贺皇后，起初因为迁徙而到云泽游玩，睡觉时，梦见太阳从住室里升起，醒来后只见红光从窗口一直射到天上，忽然心有所动，于建国三十四年七月七日在参合陂北生下道武帝，当夜又见光芒四射。
English: His mother was the Empress Keng Myung He. At first, because of migration, she went to Yunze to play. When she slept, she dreamed that the sun rose from her living room. When she woke up, she saw only red light shining from the window all the way to the sky. Suddenly, her heart was moved. On July 7th, the 34th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Daowu was born in Zhanhe Bei. That night, she saw the sun shining brightly.

古文：昭成大悦，群臣称庆，大赦，告于祖宗。
现代文：昭成皇帝很高兴，众臣也都前来庆贺，于是大赦天下，并祭告祖宗。
English: Emperor Akechi was very pleased, and all his ministers came to celebrate, so he pardoned the whole world and honored his ancestors.

古文：保者以帝体重倍于常兒，窃独奇怪。
现代文：保姆觉得这孩子的体重成倍于寻常的孩子，私下里独自感到怪异。
English: The nanny thought the child weighed twice as much as a normal child and privately felt alone and strange.

古文：明年有榆生于藏胞之坎，后遂成林。
现代文：第二年，有棵榆树从埋着胎胞衣的地方长出来，后来便长成了一片树林。
English: The following year, an elm tree sprouted from the place where the placenta was buried and later grew into a forest.

古文：帝弱而能言，目有光曜，广颡大耳。
现代文：道武帝很小时就会讲话，双目灼灼有光，宽额大耳。
English: Emperor Daowu could speak at a very young age. His eyes were bright and shining, and he had a broad forehead and large ears.

古文：六岁而昭成崩，苻坚遣将内侮，将迁帝长安，赖燕凤乃免。
现代文：六岁时，昭成皇帝死去，苻坚派兵入侵，准备把拓跋皀带到长安，幸亏燕凤劝说才作罢。
English: When he was six years old, Emperor Zhaocheng died. Yan Jian sent troops to invade and prepare to take Tuobao to Chang'an. Fortunately, Yan Feng persuaded him to stop.

古文：坚军既还，国众离散。
现代文：苻坚军队返回后，国内各部便分散了。
English: After the return of Yan Jian's army, the domestic ministries were dispersed.

古文：坚使刘库仁、刘卫辰分摄国事。
现代文：苻坚让刘库仁、刘卫辰分掌国中大事。
English: Yu Jian let Liu Kuren and Liu Weichen take charge of the country's major events.

古文：南部大人长孙嵩及元他等尽将故人众南依库仁，帝于是转在独孤部。
现代文：南部大人长孙嵩和元他等便把原有的部众全带到南面依附刘库仁，道武帝便转往独孤部。
English: The head of the southern adults, Sun Song and Yuan, and others brought all the original members to the south to adhere to Liu Kuren, and Emperor Daowu moved to the isolated department.

古文：元年，葬昭成皇帝于金陵，营梓宫木柿尽生成林。
现代文：元年，埋葬昭成皇帝于金陵，所砍伐来建造棺材的木料长成树林。
English: In the first year of the year, Emperor Zhaocheng was buried in Jinling, and the wood felled to build the coffin grew into a forest.

古文：帝虽冲幼，而嶷然不群。
现代文：道武帝虽然年幼，却超然特立，不同凡响。
English: Although Emperor Daowu was young, he was outstanding and extraordinary.

古文：刘库仁常谓其子曰： 帝有高天下之志，必兴复洪业。 
现代文：刘库仁常对他儿子说 ：皇帝有高踞天下的大志，必定会重新兴复大业。 
English: Liu Curen often said to his son: The emperor has a lofty ambition, and he will surely revive the great cause.

古文：七年十月，晋败苻坚于淮南。
现代文：七年十月，晋人在淮南打败了苻坚。
English: In October of the seventh year, the Jin people defeated the Shujian in Huainan.

古文：慕容文等杀刘库仁，弟眷代摄国部。
现代文：慕容文等人杀了刘库仁，由他的弟弟刘眷代管旧部。
English: Murongwen and others killed Liu Kuren, and his brother Liu Jing took over the old ministry.

古文：八年，慕容弟冲僭立。
现代文：八年，慕容日韦的弟弟冲篡位自立为帝。
English: Eight years later, Murong Rihwei's younger brother Chong usurped the throne and became emperor.

古文：姚苌自称大单于、万年秦王。
现代文：姚苌自称为大单于、万年秦王。
English: Yao Yao called himself the Great King of Qin.

古文：慕容垂僭称燕王。
现代文：慕容垂自称燕王。
English: Murong Du claims to be the King of Swallows.

古文：九年，刘库仁子显杀眷而代之，乃将谋逆。
现代文：九年，刘库仁的儿子刘显杀了刘眷而带领部众，便打算叛变。
English: In the ninth year, Liu Kuren's son Liu Xian killed Liu Xin and led his subordinates to plan a mutiny.

古文：商人王霸知之，履帝足于众中，帝乃驰还。
现代文：商人王霸得知消息，在人众之中用脚踩道武帝。
English: When the merchant Wang Ba heard the news, he stepped on Emperor Daowu's foot in the crowd.

古文：是时，故大人梁盆子六眷为显谋主，尽知其计，密使部人穆崇驰告。
现代文：道武帝便奔回。当时，原大人梁盆的儿子六眷为刘显主谋策划，所以他详知刘显的预谋，便秘密派遣部落中的人穆崇飞奔来报告。
English: Emperor Daowu then ran back. At that time, Liu Xian's mastermind was Liang Bin's son Luo Guan, so he knew Liu Xian's premeditation in detail and secretly sent a member of the tribe, Mu Chong, to report to him.

古文：帝乃阴结旧臣长孙犍、元他等，因幸贺兰部。
现代文：道武帝便暗中联合旧臣长孙犍、元他等人，一起到贺兰部去。
English: Emperor Daowu then secretly joined forces with his former vassals Sun Yat-sen, Yuan Shikai and others to go to Helanbu.

古文：其日，显果使人杀帝，不及。
现代文：当天，刘显果然派人来杀道武帝，但未能追及。
English: On the same day, Liu Xian did indeed send someone to kill Emperor Daowu, but he was unable to catch up.

古文：语在《献明太后传》。
现代文：详细记载在《献明皇后传》中。
English: It is described in detail in "Kenmyo Kyounen."

古文：是岁，乞伏国仁私署秦、河二州牧、大单于。
现代文：这一年，乞伏国仁私自称为秦州和河州的刺史、大单于。
English: In the same year, he called himself the "priest of Qin" and "priest of He."

古文：姚苌杀苻坚，坚子丕僭即皇帝位于晋阳。
现代文：姚苌杀死苻坚，苻坚的儿子苻丕自称为皇帝，即位于晋阳。
English: Yao Jian killed Jian Jian, and Jian Jian's son Jian Jian proclaimed himself emperor, that is, Jian Jian was located in Jinyang.

古文：登国元年春正月戊申，帝即代王位，郊天建元，大会于牛川。
现代文：登国元年春正月初六，道武帝即位，称代王。郊祀天帝，建年号，大会各部落首领于牛川。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Emperor's enthronement, Emperor Daowu ascended the throne and was proclaimed the acting king. Suburbs worshipped the Heavenly Emperor, the founding year, and the leaders of all tribes gathered in Ushikawa.

古文：复以长孙嵩为南部大人，以叔孙普洛为北部大人。
现代文：又让长孙嵩任南部大人，由叔孙普洛任北部大人。
English: He also appointed his eldest grandson, Song, as the Southern Grandmaster, and his great-uncle, Puro, as the Northern Grandmaster.

古文：是月，慕容垂僭即皇帝位于中山，国号燕。
现代文：当月，慕容垂称帝于中山，国号燕。
English: That month, Murong Zhuang was proclaimed Emperor of Zhongshan, and the country's name was Yan.

古文：二月，幸定襄之盛乐，息众课农。
现代文：二月，道武帝前往定襄的盛乐，安顿部众，从事农耕。
English: In February, Emperor Daowu went to Dingxiang's Shenle to settle his followers and engage in farming.

古文：慕容冲为其部下所杀。
现代文：慕容冲被他的部下杀死。
English: Murongchong was killed by his subordinates.

古文：夏四月，改称魏王。
现代文：夏四月，改称为魏王。
English: In the summer of April, he was renamed Wei Wang.

古文：五月，姚苌僭即皇帝位于长安，国号大秦。
现代文：五月，姚苌自称皇帝，即位于长安，国号大秦。
English: In May, Yao Wei proclaimed himself emperor, that is, located in Chang'an, the country of the Great Qin.

古文：秋八月，刘显遣弟亢泥迎皇叔父窟咄于慕容永，以兵随之，来逼南境。
现代文：秋八月，刘显派弟弟亢泥从慕容永那里接来道武帝的叔父窟咄，派大兵随他前来入侵南部边境。
English: In autumn and August, Liu Hsien sent his younger brother Hao Mude from Murong Yong to fetch Emperor Daowu's uncle Wu Wu, and sent soldiers to follow him to invade the southern border.

古文：帝左右于桓等与诸部大人谋应之。事泄，诛造谋者五人，余悉不问。
现代文：道武帝身旁的于桓等人和各部大人谋划策应他，事情泄露了，道武帝杀了策划者五人，其他的一律不追究。
English: Emperor Daowu was accompanied by Yu Huan and others, as well as adults from various ministries, who plotted a strategy to deal with him. The matter leaked out, and Emperor Daowu killed five of the plotters. No one else was prosecuted.

古文：帝虑内难，乃北逾阴山，幸贺兰部，阻山为固。
现代文：道武帝担心有内乱，便北越阴山，前去贺兰部，以高山作为固障。
English: Emperor Daowu was worried that there would be civil unrest, so he went to Helanbu in the northern Vietnam mountains, using the high mountains as a solid barrier.

古文：遣行人安同、长孙贺征师于慕容垂。垂令其子贺驎率师随同等。
现代文：他派使者安同、长孙贺到慕容垂那里请求援军，慕容垂便派他的儿子慕容贺领兵跟着安同等前来。
English: He sent his emissary, An Tong, and his eldest grandson, He, to Murongtli to request reinforcements. Murongtli then sent his son, Murong He, to lead the troops to follow An Tong.

古文：军未至而寇逼。于是北部大人叔孙普洛等十三人及诸乌丸亡奔卫辰。
现代文：可是，援兵未到而敌寇已经进逼，于是北部大人叔孙普洛等十三人以及那些乌丸部人都奔走投靠刘卫辰。
English: However, before the reinforcements arrived, the enemy raiders had already advanced, so thirteen people from the north, including adult uncle and grandson Puro, as well as those from Wumaru, all rushed to support Liu Weichen.

古文：帝自弩山幸牛川，屯于延水，南出代谷，会贺驎于高柳，大破窟咄，悉收其众。
现代文：道武帝从弩山前往牛川，屯兵于延水，南出代谷，和慕容贺会兵于高柳，大破窟咄的部众，全部招降了他的人马。
English: Emperor Daowu traveled from Shaoshan to Niu Chuan, setting up troops in Yeonshui and Nandedai Valley, and Murong He's soldiers gathered in Gaoliu, all of whom were his subordinates.

古文：十二月，慕容垂遣使奉帝西单于印绶，封上谷王。帝不纳。
现代文：冬十月，苻丕被晋将冯该所杀。慕容永称帝，在长子登皇帝位。十一月，苻登在陇东称帝。十二月，慕容垂派使者带着西单于的印玺送给道武帝，封他为上谷王，道武帝不肯接受。
English: In the winter of October, Shun was killed by the Jin general Feng Gaizhe. Murong Yong proclaimed himself emperor, and his eldest son ascended to the throne. In November, Shun ascended to the throne in Shandong. In December, Murong Du sent an envoy with the seal of Xidan Yu to Emperor Daowu, naming him Shangguo King, but Emperor Daowu refused to accept it.

古文：二年夏五月，遣安同征兵于慕容垂。垂遣子贺驎率众来会。
现代文：二年夏五月，又派安同向慕容垂请求派兵，慕容垂派儿子慕容贺领兵来会合。
English: In the summer and May of the second year, An Tong also sent a request to Murong Diao to send troops, and Murong Diao sent his son Murong He to lead the troops to the meeting.

古文：六月，帝亲征刘显，显奔慕容永，尽收其部落。
现代文：六月，道武帝亲自征讨刘显，刘显逃奔慕容永，道武帝招降了他全部落的人。
English: In June, Emperor Daowu personally recruited Liu Xian, Liu Xian fled to Murongyong, and Emperor Daowu recruited and demoted all his subordinates.

古文：冬十二月，巡松漠，还幸牛川。
现代文：冬十二月，巡视松漠，回来时前去牛川。
English: In the winter of December, he inspected Songpan, and when he returned, he went to Ushikawa.

古文：三年夏五月癸亥，北征库莫奚，大破之。
现代文：三年夏五月初四，北征库莫奚，大败该部。
English: In the summer of the third year, on the fourth day of the fifth month, the Northern Expedition was defeated by the Kuomintang.

古文：六月，乞伏国仁死，其弟乾归立，私署河南王。
现代文：六月，乞伏国仁死去，他的弟弟乾归继立，自称河南王。
English: In June, Guozhu Guoren died, and his younger brother Qian Guizhong succeeded him, calling himself the King of Henan.

古文：秋七月，库莫奚部帅鸠集遗散，夜犯行宫，纵骑扑讨，尽灭之。
现代文：秋七月，库莫奚部首领纠集的剩余部众，在夜间攻打行宫。道武帝命令骑兵穷追猛打，全部消灭来犯的贼寇。
English: In the autumn of July, the remaining troops gathered by the leader of the Kuumo clan attacked the palace at night. Emperor Daowu ordered the cavalry to pursue and destroy all the invading robbers.

古文：八月，使九原公仪于慕容垂。
现代文：八月，派九原公拓跋仪前去慕容垂处。
English: In August, he sent Kuwahara no Kimi Takubasugi to the Murong sagging place.

古文：冬十月，垂遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月，慕容垂派使者前来朝贡。
English: In the winter of October, Murong Du sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：四年春正月甲寅，袭高车诸部落。
现代文：四年春正月甲寅，袭击高车各部落。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of spring, Kato attacked all the tribes.

古文：二月癸巳，遂至女水，讨叱突邻部。
现代文：二月初九，到达女水，征讨叱突邻部。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, they arrived in Yeosu and started to collect money from their neighbors.

古文：并大破之。
现代文：把他们都打得大败。
English: Beat them all soundly.

古文：是月，吕光自称三河王。
现代文：当月，吕光自称为三河王。
English: That month, Luguang called himself the king of the three rivers.

古文：夏五月，使陈留公虔于慕容垂。
现代文：夏五月，派陈留公虔去见慕容垂。
English: In the summer of May, Chen sent Liu Gongqian to see Murongdeli.

古文：冬十月，垂遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月，慕容垂派使者来朝贡。
English: In the winter of October, Murong Du sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五年春三月甲申，西征，次鹿浑海，袭高车袁纥部，大破之。
现代文：五年春三月甲申，西征到达鹿浑海，袭击了高车的袁纥部，大破该部。
English: In March of the spring of the fifth year of Jiaxing, the Western Expedition reached the Deer Mud Sea, attacked the Yuan Ying Department of the high-speed railway, and severely damaged the department.

古文：慕容垂遣子贺驎来会。
现代文：慕容垂派儿子慕容贺前来会合。
English: Murong Du sent his son Murong He to come to the meeting.

古文：夏四月丙寅，行幸意辛山，与贺驎讨贺兰、纥奚诸部落，大破之。
现代文：夏四月丙寅，行军到达意辛山，和贺一起攻打贺兰、纥奚各部落，大败他们。
English: In the summer of April, Hsin-yin marched to Yixing Mountain, and together with He, attacked the tribes of Helan and Yunnan, and defeated them.

古文：秋八月，还幸牛川。
现代文：秋八月，回军到了牛川。
English: In autumn and August, the returning troops arrived in Ushikawa.

古文：使秦王觚于慕容垂。
现代文：派秦王觚为使者去见慕容垂。
English: He sent Qin Wangtao as an emissary to see Murongdiao.

古文：九月壬申，讨叱奴部囊曲水，破之。
现代文：九月二十六日，到囊曲水征讨叱奴部，打败了它。
English: On September 26th, he went to Cangqu Shui to recruit scolds and defeated them.

古文：冬十月，讨高车豆陈部于狼山，破之。
现代文：冬十月，征讨高车的豆陈部，在狼山打败它。
English: In the winter of October, the bean stump of the high-wheeled vehicle was collected, and it was defeated in the Wolf Mountain.

古文：十二月，帝还次白漠。
现代文：十二月，道武帝回到漠北。
English: In December, Emperor Daowu returned to the north.

古文：六年春正月，幸纽垤川。
现代文：六年春正月，前往纽垤川。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, I went to Nyuyu River.

古文：三月，遣九原公仪、陈留公虔等西讨黜弗部，大破之。
现代文：三月，派九原公仪、陈留公虔等西征黜弗部，大败他们。
English: In March, he sent Jiuhara Gongyi, Chen Ruigongyan and others to lead the westward expedition and defeated them.

古文：夏四月，祭天。
现代文：夏四月，祭天。
English: In summer, in April, there is a festival.

古文：秋七月壬申，讲武于牛川。
现代文：秋七月二日，在牛川讲习武艺。
English: On the second day of autumn in July, martial arts classes began in Ushikawa.

古文：慕容垂止秦王觚而求名马，帝绝之。
现代文：慕容垂留下秦王觚而要求道武帝送去名马，道武帝拒绝了。
English: Murong Du left Qin Wang Yao and asked Emperor Daowu to send a famous horse, but Emperor Daowu refused.

古文：乃遣使于慕容永，永使其大鸿胪慕容钧奉表劝进尊号。
现代文：于是，魏派使者去见慕容永，慕容永派他的大鸿胪卿慕容钧送表前来劝道武帝称帝。
English: As a result, Wei sent an envoy to see Murong Yong, and Murong Yong sent his great-great-grandson Murong Yong to send a letter to persuade Emperor Daowu to proclaim himself emperor.

古文：九月，帝袭五原，屠之，收其积谷。
现代文：九月，道武帝攻打五原，杀掉了那里的人，夺取了他们屯积的粮食。
English: In September, Emperor Daowu attacked Wuhuan, killed the people there, and seized the grain they had accumulated.

古文：还纽垤川，于棝阳塞北树碑记功。
现代文：回兵到纽垤川，在木固阳塞北部立碑记功。
English: He returned to Nyuwei River and erected a monument in the northern part of Muguyang.

古文：冬十月戊戌，北征蠕蠕，追破之于大碛南商山下。
现代文：冬十月戊戌，北征蠕蠕，追击并在大漠南的商山下面打败它。
English: In winter and October, the Northern Expedition, chasing and defeating it under the Shangshan Mountains in the south of the desert.

古文：十一月戊辰，还幸纽垤川。
现代文：十一月戊辰，回兵至纽垤川。
English: In November, the troops returned to Niuye River.

古文：戊寅，卫辰遣子直力鞮寇南部。
现代文：九日，卫辰派他的儿子直力入侵南部。
English: On the 9th, Wei Chen sent his son Zuo Zhili to invade the south.

古文：壬午，帝大破之于铁歧山南，卫辰父子奔遁。
现代文：道武帝大败刘卫辰于铁岐山南面，刘卫辰父子奔逃。
English: Emperor Daowu defeated Liu Weichen in the south of Mount Tieqi. Liu Weichen and his son fled.

古文：十二月，灭之，卫辰少子屈丐亡奔薛于部。
现代文：十二月，消灭了刘卫辰部，他的小儿子刘屈丐逃奔薛干部。
English: In December, Liu Weichen was eliminated, and his youngest son, Liu Quigai, fled to cadres in Xue.

古文：自河以南，诸部悉平。
现代文：这样，黄河以南各部都被讨平。
English: In this way, all the provinces south of the Yellow River were levelled.

古文：收卫辰子弟宗党无少长五千余人，尽杀之。
现代文：抓了刘卫辰的子弟宗族同党不分老少共五千多人，全部杀掉。
English: They arrested Liu Weichen's sons and brothers, and killed more than 5,000 people of the same clan and the same party, regardless of age.

古文：是岁，起河南宫。
现代文：这一年，营建了河南宫。
English: In this year, Henan Palace was built.

古文：七年春正月，幸木根山，遂次黑盐池，飨群臣，北之美水。
现代文：七年春正月，巡幸木根山，到达黑盐池，大宴群臣，又北到美水。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, he made a tour of Mt. Kibune, arrived at Kurotsuchi, held a grand banquet for his retainers, and went north to Misui.

古文：三月，还幸河南宫。
现代文：三月，回归河南宫。
English: In March, he returned to Henan Palace.

古文：秋七月，行幸漠南，仍筑巡台。
现代文：秋七月，出行前往漠南，仍修建巡台。
English: In autumn and July, he traveled to the south of the desert, still building a patrol platform.

古文：冬十二月，慕容永遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十二月，慕容永派使者来朝贡。
English: In the winter of December, Murong Yong sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：八年春正月，南巡。
现代文：八年春正月，南巡。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eighth year, the southern tour began.

古文：二月，幸羖羊原，赴白楼。
现代文：二月，到达羊殳羊原，又奔往白楼。
English: In February, he arrived in Yangshuo Yangyuan, and then rushed to Bai Lou.

古文：夏六月，北巡。
现代文：夏六月，北巡。
English: In the summer of June, the Northern Patrol.

古文：秋七月，临幸新坛。
现代文：秋七月，观看新建的祭坛。
English: In autumn and July, watch the newly built altar.

古文：先是卫辰子屈丐奔薛干部，征之不送。
现代文：起初，刘卫辰的儿子屈丐投奔薛干部，道武帝去讨人，薛干部不肯送出。
English: At first, Liu Weichen's son, Qu Gai, voted for Cadre Xue, Emperor Daowu went to persuade people, and Cadre Xue refused to send him.

古文：八月，帝南征薛干部，屠其城。
现代文：八月，道武帝南征薛干部，杀了全城人。
English: In August, Emperor Daowu marched south to recruit cadres from Xue and killed the entire city.

古文：九月，还幸河南宫。
现代文：九月，回到河南宫。
English: In September, he returned to Henan Palace.

古文：九年春三月，北巡。
现代文：九年春三月，北巡。
English: In March of the spring of the ninth year, the northern tour began.

古文：使东平公元仪屯田于河北五原，至于棝阳塞外。
现代文：派东平公元仪在河北面的五原屯田，一直屯到木固阳塞外。
English: He sent Dongping to live in Wuhara Tuntian in northern Hebei Province, and stayed there until outside the city of Muguyang.

古文：夏五月，田于河东。
现代文：夏五月在河东田猎。
English: In the summer and in May, I hunted trout in the fields of the eastern part of the river.

古文：秋七月，还幸河南宫。
现代文：秋七月，回归河南宫。
English: In autumn and July, he returned to Henan Palace.

古文：冬十月，蠕蠕社仑等率部落西走。
现代文：冬十月，蠕蠕部社仑等率部落人西走。
English: In the winter of October, the tribal people headed west at the rate of half a percent.

古文：是岁，姚苌子兴僭立，杀苻登。
现代文：这一年，姚苌的儿子姚兴称帝，杀了苻登。
English: In the same year, Yao Xing, the son of Yao Xing, proclaimed himself emperor and killed Xing Deng.

古文：慕容垂灭永。
现代文：慕容垂灭了慕容永。
English: Murong has extinguished Murong Yong.

古文：十年秋七月，慕容垂遣其子宝来寇五原。
现代文：十年秋七月，慕容垂派儿子慕容宝进犯五原。
English: In the autumn and July of the tenth year, Murong Diao sent his son, Murong Bao, to invade Wuhuan.

古文：八月，帝亲兵于河南。
现代文：八月，道武帝亲自领兵前往河南。
English: In August, Emperor Daowu personally led the troops to Henan.

古文：冬十月辛未，宝烧船夜遁。
现代文：冬十月二十五日，慕容宝烧船后乘夜间逃走。
English: On the 25th day of winter in October, Murong Bao burned the boat and fled at night.

古文：己卯，帝进军济河。
现代文：十一月三日，道武帝挥师前进，渡过黄河。
English: On November 3, Emperor Daowu waved his army forward and crossed the Yellow River.

古文：乙酉夕，至参合陂。
现代文：九日夜间，到达参合陂。
English: On the night of the 9th, we arrived in Sanghejing.

古文：丙戌，大破之，禽其王公以下文武将吏数千人。
现代文：十日，大破敌军，抓获了从王公以下的文武官员几千人。
English: On the 10th, they defeated the enemy army and captured several thousand civil and military officials from the prince on down.

古文：于俘虏中擢其才识者贾彝、贾闰、晁崇等参谋议，宪章故实。
现代文：在俘虏中选用了有才能和有见识的如贾彝、贾闰、晁崇等人参加谋议和制定宪章等。
English: Talented and insightful prisoners, such as Jia Jun, Jia Lie and Jia Chong, were selected to participate in the deliberation and formulation of the charter.

古文：十二月，还幸云中之盛乐。
现代文：十二月，回兵到达云中的盛乐。
English: In December, the returning soldiers arrived in the clouds.

古文：皇始元年春正月，大蒐于定襄，因东幸善无北陂。
现代文：皇始元年春正月，到定襄举行大规模狩猎，因而东行到达善无北陂。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the emperor, a large-scale hunting was held in Dingxiang, so the eastbound trip reached the North Pole.

古文：三月，慕容垂寇桑乾川，陈留公虔死之。
现代文：三月，慕容垂入侵桑干川，陈留公虔死去。
English: In March, Murongdol invaded the Mulberry River, and Chen Ruigongyan died.

古文：垂遂至平城西北，闻帝将至，乃筑城自守。
现代文：慕容垂便北至平城西北，当听说道武帝将领兵到达时，就筑城防守。
English: Murongtui went north to the northwest of Pingcheng, and when he heard that Emperor Wu had arrived to lead the army, he built a defense of the city.

古文：疾甚，遂遁，死于上谷。
现代文：但因病重，便逃回，死在上谷。
English: However, due to serious illness, he fled back and died in Kamitani.

古文：子宝秘丧，还至中山乃僭立。
现代文：慕容垂的儿子秘密地不发丧，回到中山以后才宣布丧事并继位。
English: Murongdeli's son secretly did not mourn, and only announced his mourning and succession after returning to Zhongshan.

古文：夏六月丁亥，皇太后贺氏崩。
现代文：夏六月十五日，皇太后贺氏去世。
English: On the 15th day of the 6th month of the summer, Empress Dowager He passed away.

古文：是月，葬献明太后。
现代文：当月，埋葬了献明太后。
English: That month, Empress Dowager Xianming was buried.

古文：吕光僭称天王，国号凉。
现代文：吕光自称天王，国号为凉。
English: Luguang called himself the Heavenly King, and his country's name was Liang.

古文：秋七月，左司马许谦上书劝进尊号，于是改元，始建天子旌旗，出警入跸。
现代文：秋七月，左司马许谦上表请进帝号，于是改年号，开始打出皇帝的旗帜，进出严加戒备。
English: In the autumn and July, Left Division Marshal Xu Qian changed the year's name to the year of the emperor, and began to display the emperor's flag. The entrance and exit were strictly guarded.

古文：八月己亥，大举讨慕容宝。
现代文：八月二十八日，大举讨伐慕容宝。
English: On August 28, a large-scale campaign was launched against Murongbao.

古文：帝亲勒六军四十余万南出马邑，逾句注，旌旗络绎二千余里，鼓行而前，人屋皆震。
现代文：道武帝亲自带领六军四十多万人南出马邑，越过句注，旌旗络绎不绝，前后二千多里远，一路上擂动战鼓前进，人屋都受到震动。
English: Emperor Daowu personally led more than 400,000 people of the Six Armies south out of Mayi. After the battle, the flags were unceasingly waved, more than two thousand miles away. The drums of war were beaten along the way, and people's houses were shaken.

古文：别诏将军封真等从东道袭幽州，围蓟。
现代文：他又另传旨让将军封真等人从东路攻打幽州，围困蓟州。
English: He also sent another order to General Fuzhen and others to attack Yuzhou from the east and besiege Ganzhou.

古文：九月戊午，次阳曲，乘西山，临观晋阳。
现代文：九月十八日，到达阳曲，登上西山，以观察晋阳。
English: On September 18th, they arrived at Yangqu and climbed the West Mountain to observe Jinyang.

古文：宝并州牧、辽西王农弃城遁，并州平。
现代文：慕容宝的并州刺史、辽西王农弃城逃跑，并州被讨平。
English: The history of Murongbao's annexation of the state, Liaoxi Wang Nong abandoned the city and fled, and the annexation was leveled.

古文：初建台省，置百官，封拜公、侯、将军、刺史、太守。尚书郎以下悉用文人。
现代文：这时，开始设立台、省，设置文武百官，封拜公、侯、将军，刺史、太守、尚书郎以下都用文人。
English: At this time, Taiwan and provinces began to be set up, and hundreds of civil and military officials were set up, including the feudal lord, lord of the manor, general, scribe, governor-general, and Shang Shuro.

古文：帝初拓中原，留心慰纳。诸士大夫诣军门者，无少长皆引入，人得尽言，苟有微能，咸蒙叙用。
现代文：道武帝初次开拓中原土地，很留心安抚和接纳各种人才，所有的士大夫们只要到军营中来的，不论老少都被引见，人人畅所欲言，只要有一点才能，都被任用。
English: Emperor Daowu was the first to explore the Central Plains, and he was very careful to appease and accept all kinds of talents. All officers and men who came to the military camp, regardless of age, were introduced, everyone was free to speak, and as long as they had a little talent, they were appointed.

古文：己未，诏辅国将军奚牧略地晋川，获慕容宝、丹杨王买得等于平陶城。九月，晋孝武帝殂。
现代文：十九日，传旨让辅国将军奚牧攻打晋川，在平陶城俘虏了幕容宝的丹杨王买得等人。九月，晋孝武帝死去。
English: On the 19th, an order was sent to the general of the Auxiliary State, Han Mu, to attack Jinchuan, and Danyang Wang Baide and others, who had captured the treasure of the curtain, were captured in Pingtao City. In September, Emperor Jinxiao Wu died.

古文：冬十一月庚子朔，帝至真定。自常山以东，守宰或捐城奔窜，或稽颡军门，唯中山、鄴、信都三城不下。
现代文：冬十一月初一，道武帝到达真定，常山以东各地的那些太守、县宰们或者弃城逃窜，或者到军营投降。只有中山、邺和信都三座城市没有攻下。
English: On the first day of November in winter, Emperor Daowu arrived in Jinding. The governors-general and prefectural governors-general in the regions east of Changshan either fled or surrendered to the military camp. Only the three cities of Zhongshan, Handan and Xindu were not conquered.

古文：别诏东平公仪攻鄴，冠军将军王建、左军将军李栗等攻信都，军所行不得伤桑枣。
现代文：道武帝另传诏书令东平公元仪攻打邺城，冠军将军王建、左军将军李栗等攻打信都，行军时不得损伤桑树和枣树。
English: In another imperial edict, Emperor Daowu ordered the Dongping Dynasty to attack Shicheng, and the champion general Wang Jian, the left army general Li Li and others to attack Xindu. When marching, they must not damage mulberry trees and date trees.

古文：戊午，进军中山。
现代文：十九日，进军中山。
English: On the 19th, they marched into Zhongshan.

古文：己未，围之。
现代文：十六日，包围了它。
English: On the 16th, they surrounded it.

古文：帝曰： 朕量宝不能出战，必凭城自守，急攻则伤士，久守则费粮，不如先平鄴、信都，然后还取中山。 
现代文：道武帝说： 我估计慕容宝不会出城应战，必定据城固守。强攻就会损伤许多将士，久守就会耗费许多粮食，不如先攻下邺城和信都，然后回来夺取中山。 
English: Emperor Daowu said: I estimate that Murong Bao will not go out of the city to fight, but will certainly hold on to the city. A strong attack will injure many soldiers, and a long stay will consume a lot of grain. It is better to first capture Lucheng and Xindu, and then return to seize Zhongshan.

古文：诸将称善。
现代文：众将都认为是好主意。
English: The generals all thought it was a good idea.

古文：丁卯，车驾幸鲁口城。
现代文：二十八日，皇帝的车驾到达鲁口城。
English: On the 28th, the emperor's carriage arrived at Lukou City.

古文：二年春正月壬戌，帝引骑围信都。
现代文：二年春正月十四日，道武帝率领骑兵围困信都。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the second year of the Spring, Emperor Daowu led the cavalry to besiege Xindu.

古文：其夜，宝冀州刺史、宜都王慕容凤逾城奔中山。
现代文：当晚，慕容宝的冀州刺史、宜都王慕容凤越城逃往中山。
English: That night, Murong Bao's Jizhou prince and Yidu king, Murong Feng Yuecheng, fled to Zhongshan.

古文：癸亥，宝辅国将军张骧、护军将军徐超举城降。
现代文：十五日，慕容宝的辅国将军张骧、护军将军徐超献城投降。
English: On the 15th, Murongbao's auxiliary general Zhang Qian and escort general Xu Chao surrendered the city.

古文：是月，鲜卑秃发乌孤私署大单于、西平王。
现代文：当月，鲜卑的秃发乌孤自封为大单于、西平王。
English: That month, the despicable bald-headed Wu Kuo self-appointed himself as the Great Monk Yu, the King of Xiping.

古文：二月丁丑，帝军于钜鹿之柏肆坞，临滹沱水。
现代文：二月九日，道武帝驻军于巨鹿的柏肆坞，临近滹沱河。
English: On February 9, Emperor Daowu garrisoned his troops at the Great Deer's Bay Harbor, near the Li River.

古文：其夜，宝悉众犯营，燎及行宫，兵人骇散。
现代文：当晚，慕容宝带领所有人马前来偷营，放火延烧到行宫，士兵们都吓得跑掉了。
English: That night, Murong Bao led all the horses to steal the camp, set fire to the palace, and the soldiers were scared and ran away.

古文：帝惊起，不及衣冠，跣出击鼓。俄而，左右及中军将士稍集。
现代文：道武帝受惊而起，来不及穿衣整冠，光脚走出敲响战鼓，一会儿左右军和中军都会集前来。
English: Emperor Daowu was startled and got up before he had time to put on his robe and crown. He went out barefoot and beat the war drums. In a short time, both the left and right armies and the Chinese army would gather.

古文：帝设奇阵，列烽营外，纵骑冲之。
现代文：道武帝设置了奇异的阵势，在军营外排列烽火，放开骑兵冲击敌人。
English: Emperor Daowu set up a strange formation, lined up bonfires outside the camp, and let the cavalry charge the enemy.

古文：宝众大败，走还中山，获其器械数十万计。
现代文：慕容宝的军队大败，退回中山。缴获各种武器、器具几十万件。
English: Murongbao's army suffered a crushing defeat and retreated to Zhongshan. Hundreds of thousands of weapons and tools were captured.

古文：宝尚书闵亮、秘书监崔逞等降者相属，赐拜职爵各有差。
现代文：慕容宝的尚书闵亮、秘书监崔逞等前来投降的人连接不断，道武帝分别封给他们职务和赐给爵位不等。
English: The people who came to surrender, such as Murong Bao's Shang Shuxin Liang and Secretary Supervisor Cui Gang, were constantly connected, and Emperor Daowu gave them different positions and titles.

古文：三月己酉，车驾次卢奴。
现代文：三月十一日，道武帝到达卢奴。
English: On March 11, Emperor Daowu arrived in Lunwu.

古文：宝求和，请送秦王觚，割常山以西奉魏，乞守中山以东。
现代文：慕容宝求和，请求送还秦王觚，割常山以西土地给魏国，要求让他留守中山以东的土地。
English: Murong Bao sued for peace, requested the return of Qin Wangtao, gave the land west of Changshan to Wei, and asked him to stay in the land east of Zhongshan.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：道武帝答应了。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：已而宝背约。
现代文：可是慕容宝很快便背弃盟约。
English: But Murongbao soon reneged on the agreement.

古文：辛亥，车驾次中山，命将围之。
现代文：十三日，道武帝再到中山，命令部队准备把中山围住。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Daowu went to Zhongshan again and ordered the troops to prepare to encircle Zhongshan.

古文：是夜，宝弟贺驎将妻子走西山。
现代文：当晚，慕容宝的弟弟慕容贺带着妻子逃往西山。
English: That night, Murong Bao's younger brother, Murong He, fled to the West Mountain with his wife.

古文：宝恐贺驎先据和龙，壬子夜，北遁。
现代文：慕容宝担心慕容贺先据守和龙，便在十五日夜间北逃。
English: Murong Bao was worried that Murong Hexian would keep the peace, so he fled north on the night of the 15th.

古文：城内共立慕容普邻为主。
现代文：城内人共立慕容普邻为帝。
English: The people of the city jointly established Murong Pu neighbor as the emperor.

古文：夏四月，帝以军粮不继，诏东平公仪罢鄴围，徙屯巨鹿。
现代文：夏四月，道武帝因军粮不足，下诏让东平公元仪撤了邺城的包围，迁部队屯守巨鹿。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Daowu, due to the shortage of military food, issued an edict to let Dongping Rongyi withdraw the encirclement of Lucheng and relocate the troops to garrison the huge deer.

古文：五月庚子，帝以中山城内为普邻所胁，乃招喻之。
现代文：五月初三，道武帝认为中山城里人都是被慕容普邻所胁迫的，便对他们进行招降和劝告。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Emperor Daowu thought that the people in Zhongshan City were being coerced by Murong Pu's neighbors, so he invited them to surrender and advised them.

古文：甲辰，曜兵扬威，以示城内，命诸军罢围南徙，以待其变。
现代文：初八，大耀军威，让城里人能够看到，又命令各部队撤了包围圈南迁，以等待发生变化。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he made a great display of military power, so that the people in the city could see it, and ordered the troops to withdraw from the encirclement and move south to wait for changes.

古文：甲寅，以东平公仪为左丞相，封卫王。
现代文：十七日，任命东平公元仪为左丞相，封为卫王。
English: On the seventeenth day, he appointed Dongping Rongyi as the Minister of the Left and named him the King of Guards.

古文：进襄城公题爵为王。
现代文：晋封襄城公题的爵位为王。
English: The knighthood of Shangfeng Xiangcheng Guotai is king.

古文：秋七月，普邻遣乌丸、张骧率五千余人出城求食，寇灵寿。
现代文：秋七月，慕容普邻派乌丸张骧带着五千多人出城寻找食物，侵入到灵寿。
English: In autumn and July, Murong Pu's neighbor Wu Maru Zhang Ye took more than five thousand people out of the city to look for food and invaded Ling Shou.

古文：贺驎自丁零中入军，因其众，复入中山，杀普邻而自立。
现代文：慕容贺从丁零来到张骧的军队中，便用这支人马，再入中山，杀掉慕容普邻自立为帝。
English: Murong He came to Zhang Ye's army from Ding Zi's army, and he used this army to enter Zhongshan again, kill Murong Pu's neighbors, and establish himself as emperor.

古文：八月丙寅朔，帝进军九门。
现代文：八月初一，道武帝进军至九门。
English: On the first day of August, Emperor Daowu marched to the Nine Gates.

古文：时大疫，人马牛死者十五六，中山犹拒守，群下咸思北还。
现代文：这时，大瘟疫流行，人、马、牛死去十分之五六，中山城仍在固守。群臣都想北归。
English: At this time, a great plague was spreading, and people, horses and cattle were dying at a rate of five to six out of ten. Zhongshan City was still holding out, and the retainers all wanted to return to the north.

古文：帝知之，谓曰： 斯固天命，将若之何！
现代文：道武帝知道以后，对他们说： 这本是天命注定的，又能有什么办法呢？
English: When Emperor Daowu found out, he said to them, "This was predestined by heaven, so what can we do?

古文：四海之人皆可与为国，在吾所以抚之耳，何恤乎无人！ 
现代文：天下的人我都可以和他们一起立国，全在进行安抚罢了，何必害怕没有人！ 
English: I can build a country with anyone in the world, it's just a matter of appeasement, why be afraid of no one!

古文：群臣乃不敢言。
现代文：群臣这才不敢再说什么。
English: The courtiers did not dare to say anything.

古文：九月，贺驎饥穷，率三万余人寇新市。
现代文：九月，慕容贺又饥饿又穷困，便带领三万人入侵新市。
English: In September, starving and destitute, Murong He led 30,000 men to invade Xincheng.

古文：甲子晦，帝进军讨之。
现代文：二十九日是甲子日，晚上，道武帝命令军队进攻。
English: On the evening of the 29th, Emperor Daowu ordered the army to attack.

古文：太史令晁崇奏曰： 不吉。 
现代文：太史令晁崇奏道 ：不吉利。 
English: Taishi Rinzai chanted, "It is unlucky.

古文：帝曰： 何也？ 
现代文：道武帝问 ：为什么？ 
English: Emperor Daowu asked: Why?

古文：对曰： 纣以甲子亡，兵家忌之。 
现代文：回答说 ：商纣王在甲子日灭亡的，所以兵家都把这一天作为忌日。 
English: He replied, "King Shangdi died on the day of the Goat, so the soldiers all regard this day as the day of his death."

古文：帝曰： 周武不以甲子胜乎？ 
现代文：道武帝问 ：周武王不就是在甲子这一天取胜的吗？ 
English: Emperor Daowu asked, "Didn't King Zhouwu win on this day in Jiazi?"

古文：崇无以对。
现代文：晁崇无话可答。
English: Hao Chong had nothing to say.

古文：冬十月丙寅，帝进军新市，贺驎退阻泒水，依渐洳泽以自固。
现代文：冬十月初二，道武帝进军新市，慕容贺退往水，依靠渐洳泽作为防守的阵地。
English: On the second day of October in winter, Emperor Daowu marched into Xincheng. Muronghe retreated to the water, relying on Zhanluze as a defensive position.

古文：甲戌，帝临其营，战于义台坞，大破之。
现代文：初十，道武帝来到慕容贺的军营，双方在义台坞作战，大败慕容贺军。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Emperor Daowu came to Murong He's military camp, and the two sides fought in Yidai dock, defeating the Murong He's army.

古文：贺驎单马走鄴，慕容德杀之。
现代文：慕容贺单身骑马逃往邺城，被慕容德杀死了。
English: Murong He, a single man, fled to Lucheng on horseback and was killed by Murong De.

古文：甲申，贺驎所署公卿尚书将吏士卒降者二万余人。
现代文：二十日，慕容贺所设的公卿、尚书、将军和兵士们投降的有两万多人。
English: On the 20th, more than 20,000 nobles, officials, generals and soldiers surrendered to Murong He.

古文：其将张骧、李沈、慕容文等先来降，寻皆亡还，是日复获之，皆赦而不问。
现代文：他的部将张骧、李沈、慕容文等人原来都曾投降过，后来又跑回去了。这天又俘虏了他们，但道武帝都赦免他们的罪责不加追究。
English: His subordinates Zhang Xuan, Li Shen, Murongwen and others had all surrendered and later ran back. They were captured again on this day, but Emperor Daowu pardoned them without investigation.

古文：获其所传皇帝玺绶、图书、府库珍宝。
现代文：缴获了所传下来的皇帝印玺、图书、府库中的各种珍宝。
English: They seized imperial seals, books, and various treasures in the prefectural treasury that had been handed down.

古文：中山平。
现代文：中山被讨平。
English: Zhongshan was leveled.

古文：乙酉，襄城王题薨。
现代文：二十一日，襄城王题去世。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xiangcheng Wangqi passed away.

古文：天兴元年春正月，慕容德走保滑台，卫王仪克鄴。
现代文：天兴元年春正月，慕容德退守滑台，卫王仪攻占邺城。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Tianxing, Murongde retreated to defend the slide platform, and Wei Wangyi captured Lucheng.

古文：庚子，行幸真定，遂幸鄴。
现代文：初七日，道武帝来到真定，同时前往邺城。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Emperor Daowu came to Jinding and at the same time went to Lucheng.

古文：百姓有老病不能自存者，诏郡县振恤之。
现代文：百姓中有因年老多病不能自理生计的，传旨让地方上加以救济。
English: Among the people, there are people who are unable to make their own living due to old age and illness, and the order was sent to the local government to provide relief.

古文：帝至鄴，巡登台榭，遍览宫城，将有定都之志，乃置行台。
现代文：皇帝到邺城以后，巡视台榭，把宫城看了一遍，有准备在这里定都的想法，便设置了行台。
English: After the emperor arrived in Lucheng, he inspected the platform, looked over Miyagi, and had the idea of preparing to establish the capital here, so he set up the platform.

古文：遂还中山，所过存问百姓。
现代文：于是，他返回中山，沿途慰问百姓疾苦。
English: As a result, he returned to Zhongshan, along the way to sympathize with the suffering of the people.

古文：诏大军所经州郡皆复赀租一年，除山东人租赋之半。
现代文：传旨凡是大军所经过的州郡免除百姓一年的口赋，免除山东人一半的租赋。
English: It was decreed that all counties and prefectures through which the great army passed would be exempted from paying a year's tribute to the people, and half of Shandong people would be exempted from paying rent.

古文：车驾将北还，发卒万人通直道，自望都铁关凿恆岭至代五百余里。
现代文：当皇帝车驾准备北回时，派兵士一万人修通直线的道路，从望都铁关开凿恒岭直到代州，共五百多里长。
English: When the emperor was preparing to return north by car, he sent ten thousand soldiers to build a straight road, from Bodu Tieguan to Hengling to Daizhou, a total of more than five hundred miles long.

古文：帝虑还后山东有变，乃于中山置行台，诏卫王仪镇之，使略阳公遵镇勃海之合口。
现代文：道武帝担心山东以后会发生新的变故，便在中山设置行台，命令卫王仪镇守，派略阳公遵镇守渤海的合口。
English: Emperor Daowu was worried that there would be new changes after Shandong, so he set up a platform in Zhongshan, ordered Wei Wang Yi to guard the town, and sent Yang Gong Zun to guard the mouth of the Bohai Sea.

古文：右军将军尹国先督租于冀州，闻帝将还，谋反，欲袭信都，安南将军长孙嵩执送，斩之。
现代文：右军将军尹国原来在冀州催租，听说皇帝准备回代州，便谋反，打算袭击信都，安南将军长孙嵩把他抓获送往朝廷，将他斩首。
English: The right-wing army general Yin Guo was originally in Jizhou to collect rent. When he heard that the emperor was preparing to return to Taizhou, he plotted a rebellion and planned to attack Xindu. Annan's chief general, Sun Song, captured him and sent him to the imperial court, where he was beheaded.

古文：辛酉，车驾发中山，至于望都尧山。
现代文：二十八日，道武帝从中山出发，到达望都尧山。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Daowu set out from Zhongshan and arrived at Bodu Lushan.

古文：徙山东六州人吏及徒何、高丽杂夷、三十六署百工伎巧十余万口以充京师。
现代文：迁移山东六州的民众官吏以及徒何、高丽各种夷人和三十六署的百工、艺人十多万人以充实京都。
English: More than 100,000 civil servants from six prefectures in Shandong, as well as various barbarians from Tu Ho and Goryeo, and hundreds of workers and artists from 36 districts were relocated to enrich Kyoto.

古文：车驾次于恆山之阳。博陵、勃海、章武诸郡群盗并起，略阳公遵等讨之。
现代文：当道武帝来到恒山山南时，博陵、渤海、章武几郡的盗贼大起，略阳公遵等人加以征讨。
English: When Emperor Daowu came to the southern part of Hengshan Mountain, thieves from Boling, Bohai, and Zhangwu counties rose up, and Liao Yang Gongzun and others went to collect them.

古文：是月，慕容德自称燕王，据广固。
现代文：这个月，慕容德自称燕王，占领广固。
English: This month, Murongde claimed to be the King of Swallows and occupied Guanggu.

古文：二月，车驾至自中山。
现代文：二月，车驾从中山到达京城。
English: In February, I drove from Zhongshan to Beijing.

古文：幸繁畤宫。
现代文：驾临繁宫。
English: We arrived at Shingong Palace.

古文：更选屯卫。
现代文：重新挑选宫中禁卫人员。
English: The palace guards will be reselected.

古文：诏给内徙新户耕牛，计口受田。
现代文：给内迁的新户下配耕牛，并按人口分给田地。
English: Cattle will be distributed to new households moving in, and fields will be allocated according to population.

古文：三月，征左丞相、卫王仪还京师，诏略阳公遵代镇中山。
现代文：三月，召左丞相、卫王仪回京都，传诏令略阳公遵代卫王仪镇守中山。
English: In March, he summoned the Left Minister of War, Wei Wang Yi, back to Kyoto, and issued an edict ordering Liangyang Gong to succeed Wei Wang Yi as the town guard of Zhongshan.

古文：夏四月壬戌，以历阳公穆崇为太尉，钜鹿公长孙嵩为司徒，进封略阳公遵为常山王，南安公顺为毗陵王。祭天于西郊，旗帜有加焉。
现代文：夏四月初一，任命历阳公穆崇为太尉，巨鹿公长孙嵩为司徒，晋封略阳公遵为常山王，南安公顺为毗陵王，在西郊祭天，比过去增加了许多旗帜。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Liyang Gong Mu Chong was appointed as the first lieutenant, Jugu Gong Sun Song was appointed as the steward, Jingu Liaoyang Gong Zun was appointed as the king of Changshan, Nan'an Gong Shun was appointed as the king of Vihailing, and Tian Festival was held in the western suburb, with many more flags than before.

古文：广平太守、辽西公意列谋反，与郡人韩奇矫假谶图，将袭鄴城。
现代文：广平太守、辽西公意列谋反，他和同郡的人韩奇制造假的谶纬图，并准备偷袭邺城。
English: Guangping Dazhong and Liaoxi Gongyi plotted a rebellion. He and his fellow county man Han Qi created a fake map of Yunnan and prepared to attack Yunnan.

古文：诏反者就郡赐死。
现代文：道武帝下诏把谋反的人就地处死。
English: Emperor Daowu decreed that anyone who plotted a rebellion would be executed on the spot.

古文：是月，兰汗杀慕容宝而自立为大单于、昌黎王。
现代文：当月，兰汗杀慕容宝而自立为大单于、昌黎王。
English: That month, Lan Han killed Murong Bao and established himself as the Great Monk Yu, the King of Changli.

古文：六月丙子，诏有司议定国号。
现代文：六月十六日，诏令有关部门商议确定国号。
English: On June 16, the relevant departments were ordered to discuss and determine the country name.

古文：群臣奏曰： 昔周、秦以前，帝王居所生之土，及王天下，即承为号。
现代文：群臣上奏说 ：过去，在周、秦以前，帝王居住在出生地，当他成为天下之王时，便沿用地名为国号。
English: The group of courtiers reported, "In the past, before Zhou and Qin, the emperor lived in the place where he was born, and when he became the king of the world, he continued to use the name of the country.

古文：今国家启基云、代，应以代为号。 
现代文：如今我国是从云、代作为基业的开端，应当以代作为国号。 
English: Today, our country is from the cloud, the generation as the beginning of the foundation, should be the generation as the country name.

古文：诏曰： 昔朕远祖总御幽都，控制遐国，虽践王位，未定九州。
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：以前我的远祖总管幽都，控制远方诸国，虽然登上王位，但未能平定九州。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "In the past, my distant ancestor was in charge of Yuto, controlling distant countries. Although he ascended to the throne, he was unable to subdue Kyushu.

古文：逮于朕躬，扫平中土，凶逆荡除，遐迩率服，宜仍先号为魏。 
现代文：到我这时，扫平中土，荡除叛逆和凶顽之徒，远近都归顺，应当仍用原来的国号称魏。 
English: At this time, after sweeping the Middle Earth, eliminating the traitors and evil-doers, and winning the allegiance of people from near and far, we should still use the original country name of Wei.

古文：秋七月，迁都平城，始营宫室，建宗庙，立社稷。
现代文：秋七月，迁都平城，开始营建宫殿，修造宗庙，以立社稷。
English: In autumn and July, the capital was moved to Pingcheng, and the construction of the palace and the construction of the ancestral temple to establish the shrine began.

古文：慕容宝子盛杀兰汗而自立为长乐王。
现代文：慕容宝的儿子慕容盛杀兰汗而自立为长乐王。
English: Murong Bao's son Murong Sheng killed Lanhan and established himself as the king of Changle.

古文：八月，诏有司正封畿，制郊甸，端径术，标道里，平五权，较五量，定五度。
现代文：八月，诏令有关部门确定封畿范围，划定郊、甸各服地域，端正测量方法，设立道、里的标记，平均五权，校正五量，审定五度。
English: In August, the relevant departments were ordered to determine the scope of Fongji, delineate the suburb and dian clothing areas, correct the measurement method, set up road and village signs, average five rights, calibrate five quantities, and verify five degrees.

古文：遣使循行郡国，举奏守宰不法者，亲览察黜陟之。
现代文：派使者巡行各郡国，举奏违法的地方官员，由皇帝亲自审阅查验加以升降职务。
English: Envoys were sent to every county and province to report local officials who had broken the law, and the emperor personally reviewed and inspected them and promoted and demoted them.

古文：冬十月，起天文殿。
现代文：冬十月，建天文殿。
English: In the winter of October, the Tenmonden hall was built.

古文：十一月辛亥，尚书吏部郎中邓彦海典官制，立爵品，定律吕，协音乐。仪曹郎中董谧撰郊庙、社稷、朝觐、飨宴之仪。三公郎中王德定律令，申科禁。太史令晁崇造浑仪，考天象。吏部尚书崔宏总裁之。
现代文：十一月十三日，由尚书吏部郎中邓元海主管制定官制，确立爵级品位，审定音律，协和音乐；由仪曹郎中董谧撰写有关祭祀、社稷、朝见、宴飨的仪礼；由三公郎中王德制定法律条令、申明禁令；由太史令晁崇制作浑天仪，以考察天象；吏部尚书崔宏总管裁定。
English: On November 13th, the official system was formulated by Deng Yuanhai, the head of the Shangshu Li Department, to establish the peerage grade, verify the music, and harmonize the music; the ceremony of sacrifice, social gathering, morning meeting, and banquet was written by Dong Xi, the chief of the ceremony department; the legal regulations and prohibitions were formulated by Wang De, the chief of the three princes; the instrument of the sky was made by Taishi Ling Yuxong to inspect the celestial objects; and the decision was made by Cui Hong, the head of the Shangshu Li Department.

古文：闰月，左丞相卫王仪及王公卿士，诣阙上书曰： 臣等闻宸极居中，则列宿齐其晷。帝王顺天，则群后仰其度。
现代文：闰十一月，左丞相卫王仪和王公大臣们到朝廷上书说 ：臣等听说太极居于中天，则列宿齐其轨；帝王顺天，则群臣仰其度。
English: In leap November, the left-handed chancellor Wei Wang Yi and Wang Gong ministers went to the imperial court to submit a letter saying: when the ministers heard that Taiji lived in Zhongtian, they would stay there; when the emperor went to Shuntian, the ministers would go there.

古文：伏惟陛下德协二仪，道隆三五，仁风被于四海，盛化塞于天区，泽及昆虫，恩沾行苇，讴歌所属，八表归心。而躬履谦虚，退身后己，宸仪未彰，衮服未御，非所以上允皇天之意，下副乐推之心。
现代文：陛下德配阴阳二仪，道隆于三皇五帝，仁风吹于四海，王化塞满天地，德泽及于昆虫，恩情沾至草木，民众讴歌，八表归心；而您躬行谦虚，退身居后，帝王之仪未行，兖旒之服未用，这上不合皇天之意，下不符群臣推戴之心。
English: His majesty's virtue matches the yin and yang of the two rites, the virtue of the three emperors and the five emperors, the benevolent wind blows in the four seas, the kingship fills the heavens and the earth, the virtue of the insects, the grace of the grass and the trees, the people sing songs, and the eight watches return to the heart; and you are modest, after retiring, the emperor's rite has not been performed, and the imperial robe has not been used, which is not in line with the will of the emperor, and does not match the hearts of the courtiers.

古文：臣等谨昧死以闻。 
现代文：臣等谨冒死奏闻。 
English: Our vassals have risked their lives to report the news.

古文：帝三让乃许之。
现代文：皇帝再三谦让，这才应允了。
English: The emperor yielded again and again, and the request was granted.

古文：十二月己丑，帝临天文殿。太尉、司徒进玺绶，百官咸称万岁。
现代文：十二月初二，皇帝亲临天文殿，太尉、司徒进上玉玺印绶，百官都高呼万岁。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month, the emperor himself came to the Astronomical Hall, and the lieutenant and the scholar went in to receive the imperial seal, and all the officials shouted "long live."

古文：大赦，改元，追尊成帝以下及后号谥，乐用《皇始之舞》。
现代文：大赦天下，改年号，追尊成帝以下以及皇后的封号和谥号，奏《皇始之舞》的乐曲。
English: The amnesty of the world, the change of the year, the honoring of the emperor and the empress, and the music of the "Dance of the Beginning of the Empire" were played.

古文：诏百司议定行次，尚书崔宏等奏从土德，服色尚黄，数用五，祖以未，腊以辰，牺牲用白，五郊立气，宣赞时令，敬授人时，行夏之正。
现代文：诏令百官议定五行三序，尚书崔宏等上奏说应从土德，服色用黄色，数用五，祖祭以未时，腊祭以辰时，祭祀的牲畜用白色的，在五郊立气，宣布时令，敬授民时，使用夏历。
English: According to the imperial edict, the officials agreed on five lines and three sequences, and Shangshu Cuihong and other top officials said that it should be from the soil and morality, the color of the dress should be yellow, the number should be five, the ancestral sacrifice should be in the morning, the wax sacrifice should be in the afternoon, the sacrificial animals should be white, the five suburbs should be in the morning, the season should be announced, and the summer calendar should be used when honoring the people.

古文：徙六州二十二郡守宰豪杰吏人二千家于代都。
现代文：迁徙六州二十二郡的守宰、地方豪杰、吏人两千家至代都。
English: He migrated from six prefectures to twenty-two counties, and became the guardian, local hero, and official of two thousand families.

古文：二年春正月甲子，初祀上帝于南郊，以始祖神元皇帝配，降坛视燎，成礼而反。
现代文：二年春正月初七，首次在南郊祭祀上天，并由始祖神元皇帝配祀，皇帝下了祭坛后又观看了火燎的情况，礼成而回。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the second year of spring, for the first time in the southern suburbs, a sacrifice was offered to the heavens, and it was accompanied by the ancestor god emperor. After the emperor came down from the altar, he watched the flames and returned with a bow.

古文：乙丑，赦京师。
现代文：初八，在京都实行大赦。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, an amnesty was implemented in Kyoto.

古文：始制三驾之法。
现代文：开始设立帝王的 三驾 之法。
English: He began to establish the Emperor's Three Vehicles Law.

古文：庚午，北巡。
现代文：十三日，北巡。
English: On the 13th, the northern tour began.

古文：分命诸将大袭高车，常山王遵三军从东道出长川，高凉王乐真等七军从西道出牛川，车驾亲勒六军从中道自駮髯水西北出。
现代文：命令各大将分兵大举攻打高车：常山王遵的三军从东路出长川，高凉王乐真等七军从西道出牛川，皇帝亲自统率的中路六军从驳髯水西北出兵。
English: He ordered the generals to send large detachments of soldiers to attack the carts: the three armies of Changshan Wang Zun left the Yangtze River from the east, the seven armies of Gao Liang Wang Le Zhen and others left the Niu River from the west, and the six armies of the middle road, led by the emperor himself, sent troops from the northwest of the Decheng Water.

古文：二月丁亥朔，诸军同会，破高车杂种三十余部。
现代文：二月初一，各路军队会合，打败了高车杂种胡人三十多部落。
English: On the first day of February, the armies of various provinces met and defeated more than 30 tribes of the high-wheeled mongrel Hu people.

古文：卫王仪督三将别从西北绝漠千余里，破其遗迸七部。
现代文：卫王仪指挥三位将军走另一条路由西北追进沙漠一千多里，打败了高车余下的七个部落。
English: Wei Wangyi commanded the three generals to follow another route northwest into the desert for more than a thousand miles, defeating the remaining seven tribes.

古文：还次牛川，及薄山，并刻石纪功。
现代文：回军牛川，到达薄山，并刻石记下这次战功。
English: They returned to Ushikawa, arrived at Usan, and wrote down their war exploits in stone.

古文：以所获高车众起鹿苑于南台阴，北距长城，东苞白登，属之西山，广轮数十里，凿渠引武川水，注之苑中，疏为三沟，分流宫城内外。
现代文：让所俘虏的高车的部众在南台北面建造鹿苑，北接长城，东包白登，连到西山，长宽各几十里。开凿水渠引武川的水注入鹿苑中，又开挖三条沟，让水分流到宫城的内外。
English: Let the captives of the carts build a deer park in the south of Taipei, connected to the Great Wall in the north, and Baidu in the east, connected to the West Mountain, with a length and width of dozens of miles. Dig a canal to bring the water of the Wuchuan River into the deer park, and dig three ditches to let the water flow in and out of Miyagi.

古文：又穿鸿雁池。
现代文：又开凿鸿雁池。
English: He also excavated the Wild Goose Pond.

古文：三月己未，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：三月初三，皇帝北伐归来。
English: On the third day of March, the emperor returned from the Northern Expedition.

古文：甲子，初令《五经》群书各置博士，增国子太学生员三千人。
现代文：初八，首次下令《五经》群书都设立博士，增补国子监中的太学生三千人。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he ordered for the first time that all the books of the "Five Classics" be set up as doctorates, adding three thousand students in the middle school of the State Children's Supervision.

古文：是月，氐人李辩叛慕容德，求援于鄴。
现代文：当月，氐人李辩反叛慕容德并向邺城方面求援。
English: In the same month, Li Yan rebelled against Mu Rongde and asked for help from the city of Handan.

古文：行台尚书和跋以轻骑应之，克滑台，收德宫人府藏。
现代文：行台尚书和跋派出轻骑前去接应，攻下了滑台，俘获慕容德的宫人和府库中储存的物品。
English: Gaotai Shangshu and Waba sent light cavalry to respond, captured the slide, captured Murongde's courtiers and the items stored in the government warehouse.

古文：秋七月，起天华殿。
现代文：秋七月，建造天华殿。
English: In autumn and July, the construction of Tianhua Hall began.

古文：辛酉，大阅于鹿苑。
现代文：初七，在鹿苑大阅兵。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, there was a large military parade in Rokuon.

古文：八月，增启京城十二门，作西武库。除州郡人租赋之半。
现代文：八月，增开京城的十二座城门，建造西武库，免除各州郡人民一半租赋。
English: In August, the twelve gates of the capital were opened, the West Arsenal was built, and the people of all states and counties were exempted from half of the rent.

古文：辛亥，诏礼官备撰众仪，著于新令。
现代文：二十八日，诏令礼部官员详细写好各种礼仪规定，编成新的政令。
English: On the 28th, the officials of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies wrote down all kinds of etiquette regulations in detail and compiled them into a new decree.

古文：范阳人卢溥聚众海滨，称幽州刺史，攻掠郡县，杀幽州刺史封沓干。
现代文：范阳人卢溥在海边聚众叛乱，自称幽州刺史，攻掠各郡县，杀死幽州刺史封沓干。
English: Lu Wei, a Fanyang man, rallied a crowd to rebel on the seashore. He called himself Yuzhou Jishi, attacked and plundered various counties, and killed Yuzhou Jishi Fongyuan.

古文：是月，秃发乌孤死，其弟利鹿孤立，遣使朝贡。
现代文：当月，秃发乌孤死去，他的弟弟利鹿孤继立，派使者来朝贡。
English: In the same month, Bald Wukong died, and his younger brother, Lilu Wukong, sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月，太庙成，迁神元、平文、昭成、献明皇帝神主于太庙。
现代文：冬十月，建成太庙，把神元、平文、昭成、献明皇帝的牌位迁入太庙。
English: In winter and October, the Great Temple was completed, and the plaques of Emperor Jingen, Emperor Pingwen, Emperor Zhaocheng, and Emperor Xianming were moved into the Great Temple.

古文：十二月，天华殿成。
现代文：十二月，天华殿建成。
English: In December, Tianhua Hall was completed.

古文：吕光立其子绍为天王，自称太上皇，及死，庶子纂杀绍而僭立。
现代文：吕光立他的儿子绍为天王，自己称太上皇，当他死时，庶出的儿子纂杀了吕绍而自立。
English: Lü Guang set up his son Shao as the heavenly king, calling himself the supreme emperor. When he died, his illegitimate son, Zangan, killed Lü Shao and became independent.

古文：三年春正月戊午，材官将军和突破卢溥于辽西，获之，及其子焕传送京师，轘之。
现代文：三年春正月初七，材官将军和突在辽西击败了卢溥，俘虏了他，连同他的儿子卢焕一并送到京城，被五马分尸。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Spring, the generals and generals defeated Lu Yao in the west of Liao, captured him, and sent him to Beijing together with his son Lu Huan, who was killed by five horses.

古文：癸亥，祀北郊。
现代文：十二日，在北郊祭祀。
English: On the 12th, a religious service was held in the northern suburbs.

古文：分命诸官循行州郡，观风俗，察举不法。
现代文：分别任命各官员到州郡中巡行，观察民风世俗，视察并检举违法乱纪者。
English: The officials were separately appointed to patrol the county, observe the folk customs, and inspect and report the violators of laws and regulations.

古文：二月丁亥，诏有司祀日于东郊。始耕籍田。
现代文：二月初五，诏令有关部门在东郊祭祀日神，并开始耕作天子的籍田。
English: On the fifth day of the second month, the relevant departments were ordered to worship the sun god in the eastern suburbs, and began to cultivate the birthplace of the son of heaven.

古文：壬寅，皇子聪薨。
现代文：二十日，皇子聪去世。
English: On the 20th, Prince Satoshi passed away.

古文：三月戊午，立皇后慕容氏。
现代文：三月初六，立慕容氏为皇后。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the Murong clan was proclaimed empress.

古文：是月，穿城南渠通于城内，作东西鱼池。
现代文：当月，挖开城南水渠通入城内，挖了东西鱼池。
English: In the same month, the southern city canal was dug to enter the city, and the fish pond was dug.

古文：夏四月，姚兴遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏四月，姚兴派使者前来朝贡。
English: In the summer of April, Yao Xing sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五月戊辰，诏谒者仆射张济使于兴。
现代文：五月十七日，令谒者仆射张济去见姚兴。
English: On May 17th, Zhang Jie went to see Yao Xing.

古文：己巳，东巡，遂幸涿鹿，遣使者以太牢祀帝尧、帝舜庙。
现代文：十八日，东巡，到达涿鹿，派使者用太牢的礼节祭祀尧帝和舜帝的庙。
English: On the 18th, the Eastern Patrol arrived in Menglu, and sent an emissary to worship Emperor Xuan and Emperor Xuan's temple with great ceremony.

古文：西幸马邑，观氵垒源。
现代文：又西行到达马邑，观看了飈水的源头。
English: We drove west to Ma'eup and saw the source of Surabaya's water.

古文：六月庚辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。秋七月，姚兴大败乞伏乾归。
English: In June, the first day of the Gengchen, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：秋七月，乞伏乾归大为姚兴所破。壬子，车驾还宫。起中天殿及云母堂、金华室。
现代文：初二，皇帝回宫，兴建中天殿和云母堂、金华室。
English: On the second day of the first month, the emperor returned to the palace to build the Middle Heaven Hall, the Mica Hall, and the Jinhua Room.

古文：时太史屡奏天文错乱，帝亲览经占，多云宜改王易政，于是数革官号，欲以防塞凶狡，消弭灾变。
现代文：当时，太史多次陈奏说天象发生错乱，道武帝亲自阅读有关经书和占卜术的书籍，大多数都说应当改换王位或变更朝政。于是，朝廷几次变革官职名称，想以此来防止和杜绝凶顽狡诈之徒的阴谋，消除和止息可能出现的灾害与变故。
English: At that time, Emperor Taishi repeatedly said that the celestial bodies were in disorder, Emperor Daowu personally read books on scriptures and divination, and most of them said that the throne should be changed or the government of the dynasty should be changed. Therefore, the imperial court changed the names of official positions several times in order to prevent and put an end to the machinations of vicious and cunning people, and to eliminate and stop possible disasters and accidents.

古文：已而虑臣下疑惑，冬十二月丙申，下诏述成败之理，鉴殷、周之失，革秦、汉之弊，以喻臣下。
现代文：不久又担心引起群臣的疑虑，便在冬十二月二十，下诏陈述成败的道理，借鉴殷、周治政的失误教训，革除秦、汉的弊端，以晓喻群臣。
English: Soon, fearing to arouse the doubts of the ministers, he issued an imperial edict on December 20th, stating the reasons for success or failure, drawing on the mistakes and lessons of Yin and Zhou's governance, eliminating the drawbacks of the Qin and Han dynasties, and enlightening the ministers.

古文：是岁，河右诸郡奉、凉武昭王李玄盛为秦凉二州牧、凉公，肇兴霸业，年号庚子。
现代文：这一年，河西各郡都拥奉凉武昭王李玄盛为秦、凉二州刺史、凉公，以创建和兴盛霸业，建年号为庚子。
English: In this year, all counties in Hexi honored Li Xuan Sheng, the king of Liangwuzhao, as Qin, Liang Erzhou Shishi, and Liang Gong, with the creation and prosperity of the industry, and the founding year as Geng Zi.

古文：四年春二月丁亥，命乐师入学习舞，释菜于先圣、先师。
现代文：四年春二月十二日，诏令乐师到太学合舞，以释莱之礼祭祀先圣先师。
English: On February 12th, the fourth year of spring, the Emperor ordered the musicians to come to Taigaku for a dance, and to perform the Shirai ritual for the first saint.

古文：丁酉，分命使者巡行州郡，听察辞讼，纠劾不法。
现代文：二十二日，分别派出使者巡行各州郡，听理和检查各种陈述和诉讼，纠正错误和弹劾不法之徒。
English: On the 22nd, envoys were sent to each state and county to listen to and examine various statements and lawsuits, correct mistakes and impeach wrongdoers.

古文：是月，吕光弟子隆弑吕纂而自立。
现代文：这月，吕光的儿子吕隆杀了吕纂而自立。
English: This month, Lü Guang's son Lü Long killed Lü Zuo and became independent.

古文：三月，帝亲渔，荐于寝庙。
现代文：三月，道武帝亲自捕鱼，以祭祀太庙。
English: In March, Emperor Daowu himself went fishing to offer a sacrifice to the Great Temple.

古文：夏四月辛卯，罢鄴行台。
现代文：夏四月十七日，撤去邺城设置的行台。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of summer, the procession platform set up in Fucheng was removed.

古文：诏有司明扬隐逸。
现代文：诏令有关部门公开显扬隐逸之士。
English: The relevant departments were ordered to publicly display the recluses.

古文：五月，起紫极殿、玄武楼、凉风观、石池、鹿苑台。
现代文：五月，建紫极殿、玄武楼、凉风观、石池、鹿苑台。
English: In May, the Shiji Hall, the Genbu Building, the Cool Breeze View, the Stone Pond, and the Deer Park were built.

古文：六月，卢水胡沮渠蒙逊私署凉州牧、张掖公。
现代文：六月，卢水胡人沮渠蒙逊自封为凉州刺史、张掖公。
English: In June, Lushui Hujin dethroned Mengxun and proclaimed himself the prince of Liangzhou and Zhangye.

古文：秋七月，诏兗州刺史长孙肥南徇许昌、彭城。
现代文：秋七月，诏令兖州刺史长孙肥南取许昌、彭城。
English: In autumn and July, he ordered Sun Hui, the chief historian of Zhangzhou, to take Xuchang and Pengcheng.

古文：诏赐天下镇戍将士布帛各有差。
现代文：诏令赏赐天下镇守国土的将士们布帛，数量不等。
English: The imperial edict rewarded the soldiers who defended the country with cloth bags, the number of which varied.

古文：八月，段兴杀慕容盛，叔父熙尽诛段氏，僭即皇帝位。
现代文：八月，段兴杀了慕容盛，慕容盛的叔叔慕容熙把段氏全家都杀光，自立为皇帝。
English: In August, Duan Xing killed Murong Sheng, and Murong Sheng's uncle, Murong Xi, killed Duan's entire family and declared himself emperor.

古文：冬十二月，集博士儒生比众经文字，义类相从，凡四万余字，号曰《众文经》。
现代文：冬十二月，聚集了博士和儒生们比照群经的文字，以义类相从，共四万多字，号称《众文经》。
English: In the winter of December, scholars and Confucianists gathered to compare the texts of the group scriptures and follow them according to the categories of meaning, a total of more than 40,000 words, known as "Zhongwenjing."

古文：是岁，凉武昭王、沮渠蒙逊并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，凉武昭王、沮渠蒙逊都派使者来朝贡。
English: In that year, King Liangwu Zhao and King Deshu Mengsong both sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：五年春正月，帝闻姚兴将寇边，庚寅，大简舆徒，诏并州诸军积谷于平阳乾壁。
现代文：五年春正月，道武帝听说姚兴准备进犯边境，便大举挑选吏卒，诏令并州各军储藏粮食放在平阳乾壁。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, Emperor Daowu heard that Yao Xing was preparing to invade the border, so he made a large-scale selection of officials, and ordered the state armies to store grain in the dry wall of Pingyang.

古文：三月，秃发利鹿孤死。
现代文：三月，秃发利鹿孤死去。
English: In March, the bald-headed Deerslayer died.

古文：夏五月，姚兴遣其弟义阳王平来侵平阳，攻陷乾壁。
现代文：夏五月，姚兴派他的弟弟义阳公姚平来侵犯平阳，攻占了乾壁。
English: In the summer of May, Yao Xing sent his younger brother, Yiyang Gong Yao Ping, to invade Pingyang and seize the dry wall.

古文：秋七月戊辰朔，车驾西讨。
现代文：秋七月初一，道武帝西征。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Emperor Daowu began the Western Expedition.

古文：八月乙巳，至乾壁，平固守，进军围之。
现代文：八月初九，到达柴壁。姚平坚守不出，道武帝进军围城。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, they arrived at Chaibai. Yao Ping could not hold out, and Emperor Daowu marched into the besieged city.

古文：姚兴悉举其众来救。
现代文：姚兴全军出动前来救援。
English: Yao Xing's entire army came to the rescue.

古文：甲子，帝度蒙坑，逆击兴军大破之。
现代文：二十八日，道武帝越过蒙坑，进击姚兴军，把他打得大败。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Daowu crossed Mengken and attacked Yao Xing's army, defeating him soundly.

古文：冬十月，平赴水而死，俘其余众三万余人，获兴尚书左仆射狄伯支以下四品将军以上四十余人。
现代文：冬十月，姚平跳水而死，俘虏了他的剩余部众三万多人，被俘的人中有姚兴的尚书左仆射狄伯支以下四品将军以上官员四十多人。
English: In the winter of October, Yao Ping died in a diving accident, and more than 30,000 of his remaining followers were captured. Among those captured were more than 40 officials above the rank of four-star general, including Yao Xing's left-hand man, Shang Shuxu, and Di Bo Zhi.

古文：获前亡臣王次多、靳勒，并斩以徇。
现代文：抓住了原从北魏逃跑的臣子王次多、靳勒，把他们一齐斩首示众。
English: He caught the vassals Wang Jiduo and Zhele, who had originally fled from the Northern Wei Dynasty, and beheaded them all in public.

古文：兴频使请和，帝不许。
现代文：姚兴多次派人前来请和，道武帝不答应。
English: Yao Xing repeatedly sent people to ask for peace, but Emperor Daowu did not agree.

古文：群臣请进平蒲坂，帝虑蠕蠕为难，戊申，班师。
现代文：群臣又请求乘胜进攻蒲坂，道武帝担心蠕蠕从中作梗，十三日，班师回朝。
English: The group of courtiers also requested to take advantage of the victory to attack Pusaka. Emperor Daowu was worried that Cormorant would interfere. On the 13th, the team returned to the imperial court.

古文：十一月，车驾次晋阳。
现代文：十一月，道武帝到达晋阳。
English: In November, Emperor Daowu arrived in Jinyang.

古文：征相州刺史庾岳为司空。
现代文：召相州刺史庾岳为司空。
English: He summoned Xiangzhou Shishi Xingyue as his subordinate.

古文：十二月辛亥，至自西征。
现代文：十二月二十五日，西征回京。
English: On December 25th, Xi Zheng returned to Beijing.

古文：越勒莫弗率其部万余家内属。
现代文：越勒莫弗领着部众一万多家内附。
English: There are more than ten thousand people in the Yerushalayim-Mofo region, he added.

古文：六年春正月辛未，朔方尉迟部别帅率万家内属，入居云中。
现代文：六年春正月初七，原居住在朔方的尉迟部的别帅率领万户人家内附，入居于云中郡。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 6th year of the Spring, the second-in-command, who was originally a lieutenant of the Shuo faction, led thousands of people to live in Yunzhong County.

古文：夏四月癸巳朔，日有蚀之。五月，大简舆徒，将略江淮。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。五月，大举选拔吏卒，准备进取江淮地区。
English: In summer, on the first day of April, there is a solar eclipse. In May, officials are selected on a large scale to prepare to enter the Jianghuai region.

古文：秋七月，镇西大将军、司隶校尉、毗陵王顺有罪，以王还第。
现代文：秋七月，镇西大将军、司隶校尉、毗陵王顺有罪，仍以王爵回府闲居。
English: In autumn and July, Zhenxi General, Sili Lieutenant, and Viling Wang Shun were found guilty, but they still returned to the capital to live idly.

古文：戊子，北巡，筑离宫于豺山，纵士校猎，东北逾罽岭，出参合、代谷。
现代文：二十七日，道武帝北巡，在豺山修筑离宫，让官兵们纵情狩猎，东北越过岭，出参合、代谷。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Daowu went on a tour to the north, built a detached palace in Shaoshan, and let the officers and soldiers indulge in hunting. They crossed the ridge in the northeast, and went to Sanzhou and Daitang.

古文：九月，行幸南平城，规度氵垒南夏屋山，背黄瓜堆，将建新邑。
现代文：九月，到达南平城，规划在飈河南面的夏屋山，背靠黄瓜堆的地方，修建一座新城。
English: In September, he arrived at Nanping City and planned to build a new city on Xiaya Mountain, south of the Fen River, where it backs up against a pile of cucumbers.

古文：辛未，车驾还宫。
现代文：十一日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 11th day, he drove back to the palace.

古文：冬十月，起西昭阳殿。
现代文：冬十月，建西昭阳殿。
English: Winter October, Jianxi Shoyang Palace.

古文：乙卯，立皇子嗣为齐王，加车骑大将军，位相国。绍为清河王，加征南大将军。熙为阳平王，曜为河南王。
现代文：二十五日，立皇子嗣为齐王，加号车骑大将军，位居丞相；立绍为清河王，加封征南大将军；立熙为阳平王，立曜为河南王。
English: On the 25th, the prince's son was appointed as the king of Qi, plus the general of the cavalry and cavalry, and the prime minister; the king of Qinghe was appointed as the king of Shao, and the general of the Southern Expedition was appointed; the king of Yangping was appointed as the king of Xi, and the king of Henan was appointed as the king of Liyou.

古文：封故秦愍王子夔为豫章王，陈留桓王子悦为硃提王。
现代文：封已故的秦愍王的儿子夔为豫章王，陈留桓王的儿子悦为朱提王。
English: The son of the late Qin Shi Wang, Yan, was named Yu Zhang Wang, and the son of Chen Liu Kuan, Yue, was named Zhu Ti Wang.

古文：丁巳，晋人来聘。
现代文：二十七日，晋派人来聘问。
English: On the 27th, Jin sent someone to ask questions.

古文：十一月庚午，将军伊谓大破高车。
现代文：十一月十一日，将军伊谓大败高车部。
English: On the 11th of November, General Ito is said to have defeated the high cavalry.

古文：十二月，晋桓玄废其主司马德宗为平固王而自立，僭号楚。
现代文：十二月，晋桓玄废去晋帝司马德宗，改称为平固王，自立为帝，国号为楚。
English: In December, Jin Emperor Huan Xuan abolished the Jin Emperor Sima Dezong, changed his name to Pinggu Wang, established himself as emperor, and changed the country's name to Chu.

古文：天赐元年春二月，晋刘裕起兵诛桓玄。
现代文：天赐元年春二月，晋将刘裕起兵杀了桓玄。
English: By the grace of God, in the spring and February of the first year, Jin dispatched Liu Yu to kill Kuan Xuan.

古文：三月，初限县户不满百罢之。
现代文：三月，初次下令每县户数不足一百的就撤去县级建制。
English: In March, for the first time, the number of households per county was ordered to be less than one hundred, and the county-level organization system was removed.

古文：夏五月，置山东诸冶，发州郡徒谪造兵甲。
现代文：夏五月，在山东设置冶炼场，征发各州郡罪犯制作兵器和甲胄。
English: In the summer of May, a smelting plant was set up in Shandong, and criminals from every state and county were conscripted to make weapons and armor.

古文：秋九月，帝临昭阳殿，分置众职，引朝臣文武亲自简擢，量能叙用。制爵四等，曰王、公、侯、子，除伯、男之号。追录旧臣，加封爵各有差。
现代文：秋九月，道武帝在昭阳殿临朝听政，分别设置各种职务，亲自选拔和擢升朝中文武大臣，根据才能而任用官职；设立四等的爵位，称王、公、侯、子，去掉了伯和男两种爵号；追赠及录用旧臣，分别加封不同的爵位。
English: In autumn and September, Emperor Daowu listened to the government in front of the Zhoyang Palace, and set up various positions, personally selected and promoted the Chinese Minister of Military Affairs, and appointed officials according to their talents; set up four-class titles, called Wang, Gong, Hou, and Zi, and removed the two titles of Bo and Baron; posthumously awarded and recruited former ministers, and respectively added different titles.

古文：是秋，江南大乱，流人繦负奔淮北者行道相寻。
现代文：这年秋天，江南大乱，沿路逃亡的人群中背着孩子奔往淮北而来的络绎不绝。
English: In the autumn of this year, the south of the Yangtze River was in turmoil, and there was an endless stream of people fleeing along the road, carrying their children on their backs and rushing to Huaibei.

古文：冬十月辛巳，大赦，改元。
现代文：冬十月二十八日，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In winter, on October 28th, there was a general amnesty and the name of the year was changed.

古文：筑西宫。
现代文：修建西宫。
English: The West Palace was built.

古文：十一月，幸西宫，大选臣僚，令各辨宗党，保举才行，诸部子孙失业赐爵者二千余人。
现代文：十一月，前往西京，大举选拔臣子和僚属。让各人区分各自的宗族派别，保举有才能的人，各部落子孙原失去家业而这次得到爵位的有二千多人。
English: In November, he went to West Beijing to conduct a large-scale selection of courtiers and colleagues. Let everyone distinguish their own clan factions, and promote talented people. There are more than two thousand descendants of various tribes who lost their family businesses and received peerages this time.

古文：二年春正月，晋主司马德宗复位。
现代文：二年春正月，晋帝司马德宗复位。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, Jin Emperor Sima Dezong was restored to the throne.

古文：夏四月，祀西郊，车旗尽黑。
现代文：夏四月，在西郊祭祀，所用车、旗都染成黑色。
English: In the summer of April, a religious service was held in the western suburbs, and the car and flag used were both dyed black.

古文：冬十月，慕容德死。
现代文：冬十月，慕容德死去。
English: In the winter of October, Murongde died.

古文：三年春正月甲申，北巡，幸豺山宫，校猎，还至屋孤山。
现代文：三年春正月初八，北巡，前往豺山宫，围猎，回到屋孤山。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the third year of spring, the northern patrol went to the Lushan Palace, hunted around, and returned to the lonely mountain.

古文：二月乙亥，幸代园山，建五石亭。
现代文：二月二十九日，巡幸代园山，建五石亭。
English: On February 29th, he made a tour of the garden and built a five-stone pavilion.

古文：三月庚子，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月十五，皇帝回宫。
English: On March 15, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：夏四月庚申，复幸豺山宫。
现代文：夏四月十五日，又前往豺山宫。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of summer, he went to Shaoshan Palace again.

古文：占授著作郎王宜弟造《兵法孤虚立成图》三百六十。
现代文：口授著作郎王宜弟撰写《兵法孤虚立成图》三百六十篇。
English: Wang Yi's younger brother Wang Yi dictated and wrote 360 articles of "The Art of War."

古文：时遂登定襄角史山，又幸马城。
现代文：并登上定襄的角史山，又到马城。
English: He also climbed the Kakushi Mountain in Dingxiang and went to Macheng.

古文：甲戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十九日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 29th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：六月，发八部五百里内男丁筑氵垒南宫，门阙高十余丈。引沟穿池，广苑囿。规立外城方二十里，分置市里，经途洞达。
现代文：六月，征发八部的五百里以内成年男子修建飈南宫，宫殿门阙高达十多丈；开沟挖池，扩大苑囿的范围；规划建外城，方圆二十里，中间分别设置集市和里巷，经行的道路畅通无阻。
English: In June, adult men within 500 miles of Hachibu were requisitioned and dispatched to build the Hunan Palace, with the palace door lintel reaching more than 10 meters in height; ditches were dug to enlarge the area of the garden moat; an outer city was planned to be built, with a radius of 20 miles, with a market and alleyways set up in the middle, and the roads passing through unimpeded.

古文：三十日罢。
现代文：三十日停工。
English: The work was suspended on the 30th.

古文：秋七月，太尉穆崇薨。
现代文：秋七月，太尉穆崇去世。
English: In autumn and July, Lieutenant Mu Chong passed away.

古文：八月甲辰，行幸豺山宫，遂至青牛山。
现代文：八月初一，行至豺山宫，进而到青牛山。
English: On the first day of August, I went to Shaoshan Palace and then to Qingyushan.

古文：丙辰，西登武要北原，观九十九泉，造古亭，遂之石漠。
现代文：十三日，登西边的武要北原，观看九十九泉，在这里建筑石亭，又由这里到石漠。
English: On the thirteenth day, he climbed to the west side of the military commander Kitahara, watched the ninety-nine springs, built a stone pavilion here, and went from here to the stone desert.

古文：九月甲戌朔，幸漠南盐池。
现代文：九月初一，出巡到漠南的盐池。
English: On the first day of September, he went on a tour to Yanchi in the south of the country.

古文：壬午，至漠中，观天盐池。
现代文：初九，来到漠中，观看天盐池。
English: On my ninth day of junior high school, I went to the desert to see the salt ponds.

古文：度漠北，之吐盐池。
现代文：又越过沙漠到漠北的吐盐池。
English: And across the desert to the salt ponds of the desert north.

古文：癸巳，南还长川。
现代文：二十日，南还至长川。
English: On the 20th, it went as far south as Nagakawa.

古文：丙申，临观长陂。
现代文：二十三日，临近观看长陂。
English: On the 23rd, I watched the long-tailed egrets up close.

古文：冬十月庚申，车驾还宫。
现代文：冬十月十八日，车驾回宫。
English: In the winter, on October 18th, I drove back to the palace.

古文：四年春二月，封皇子修为河间王，处文为长乐王，连为广平王，黎为京兆王。
现代文：四年春二月，封皇子为河间王，皇子处文为长乐王，皇子连为广平王，皇子黎为京兆王。
English: In the spring and February of the fourth year, Prince Fong became the King of Kawama, Prince Shimon became the King of Changle, Prince Lian became the King of Guangping, and Prince Lai became the King of Jingzhao.

古文：夏五月，北巡，自参合陂东过蟠羊山，大雨，暴水流辎车数百乘，杀百余人。
现代文：夏五月，北巡，从参合陂东行经过蟠羊山，遇到大雨，山洪冲掉辎重车几百辆，淹死一百多人。
English: In the summer of May, the Northern Patrol, traveling from the east of Shanhaiguan and passing through the Qiangyang Mountain, encountered heavy rain. The mountain torrents washed away hundreds of heavy vehicles and drowned more than a hundred people.

古文：遂东北逾石漠，至长川，幸濡源。
现代文：便从东北方越过石漠，到达长川，前往濡源。
English: They crossed the stone desert from the northeast, reached the Nagakawa River, and headed for the wetland.

古文：常山王遵有罪赐死。
现代文：常山王遵有罪被赐死。
English: King Zun of Changshan was found guilty and sentenced to death.

古文：六月，赫连屈丐自称大单于、大夏天王。
现代文：六月，赫连屈丐自称为大单于、大夏天王。
English: In June, Herien Kugei claimed to be the king of summer.

古文：秋七月，西幸参合陂。
现代文：秋七月，西行至参合陂。
English: In autumn and July, westbound to Sanghejing.

古文：筑北宫垣，三旬而罢，乃还宫。
现代文：建北宫城墙，三十天停工。皇帝回宫。
English: The construction of the north palace wall was halted for 30 days. The emperor returned to the palace.

古文：慕容宝养子高云杀慕容熙而自立，僭号天王。
现代文：慕容宝的养子高云杀了慕容熙而自立，自称为天王。
English: Murong Bao's adopted son Gao Yun killed Murong Xi and became independent, calling himself the Heavenly King.

古文：八月，诛司空庾岳。
现代文：八月，杀司空庾岳。
English: In August, the killing of the sky-high Mt.

古文：五年春正月，行幸豺山宫，遂如参合陂，观渔于延水，至宁川。
现代文：五年春正月，行至豺山宫，便又去参合陂，在于延水观看捕鱼，进至宁川。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, he went to the Lushan Palace, then went to the Sanhe Courtyard, watched the fishing in the Yangtze River, and went to the Ning River.

古文：三月，姚兴遣使朝贡。
现代文：三月，姚兴派使者朝贡。
English: In March, Yao Xing sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月戊戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。秋十月，秃发亻辱檀继凉王之位。
English: In autumn and July, the first day of spring, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：冬十月，秃发傉檀僭即凉王位。六年夏，帝不豫。初，帝服寒食散，自太医令阴羌死后，药数动发，至此愈甚。
现代文：六年夏天，道武帝身体不适。过去，道武帝曾服用寒食散，自从太医阴羌死后，药力经常大发作，到这时越来越厉害。
English: In the summer of the sixth year, Emperor Daowu was unwell. In the past, Emperor Daowu had taken cold medicine, and since the death of the Grand Physician, the potency of the medicine often flared up, becoming more and more severe at this time.

古文：而灾变屡见，忧懑不安，或数日不食，或不寝达旦，归咎群下，喜怒乖常。
现代文：而灾害和变故屡屡发生，道武帝忧烦不安，有时几天不吃饭，有时通宵达旦不睡，归罪于下面的人，喜怒异于寻常。
English: But disasters and upheavals repeatedly occurred, Emperor Daowu was worried and anxious, sometimes not eating for days, sometimes not sleeping all night, blaming the people below, and his emotions were unusual.

古文：谓百僚左右不可信，虑如天文之占，或有肘腋之虞。
现代文：他认为百官和身边的人都不可信，担心会出现天文异常所预示的灾难，或者就在身边出现不测之祸。
English: He does not trust the authorities or the people around him, fearing a catastrophe foretold by an astronomical anomaly, or an unforeseen calamity around him.

古文：追思既往成败得失，终日竟夜独语不止，若傍有鬼物对扬者。
现代文：他常追想以往的成败得失，整天整夜自言自语不停，就像身边有鬼魂对话似的。
English: He often thinks about his past successes and failures, and talks to himself all day and all night, as if there were ghosts around him.

古文：朝臣至前，追其旧恶，便见杀害。其余或以颜色变动，或以喘息不调，或以行步乖节，或以言辞失措，帝以为怀恶在心，变见于外，乃手自殴击。
现代文：大臣们前来见他，他便想起这个人过去的过错，就把他杀死；其他人或因为神色变化，或者喘息不自然，或者行走的脚步不合节度，或者对话时惊慌失措，道武帝便认为这些人心怀恶意，所以就表露在外形外貌上，便亲手痛打他们。
English: When the ministers came to see him, he remembered the man's past mistakes and killed him; others, because of changes in their complexion, or breathing unnaturally, or walking at an uncoordinated pace, or panicking during a conversation, Emperor Daowu thought that these people were malicious, so he showed it in their appearance and beat them with his own hands.

古文：死者皆陈天安殿前。
现代文：被打死的人都陈放到天安殿前。
English: All those who were killed were laid out in front of Tian'anmen Square.

古文：于是朝野人情各怀危惧，有司废怠，莫相督摄，百工偷劫，盗贼公行，巷里之间，人为稀少。
现代文：于是，朝廷内外人心惶惶不安，有关府衙也都荒废和怠惰，不再互相监督管理，各行各业的人明抢暗偷，盗贼公然横行不法，里巷之中，行人越来越少。
English: As a result, people inside and outside the imperial court were panicked and anxious, the relevant government offices were also desolate and lazy, no longer supervising and managing each other, people from all walks of life were stealing openly, thieves were openly rampant, and there were fewer and fewer pedestrians in the alleys.

古文：帝亦闻之，曰： 朕故纵之使然，幸过灾年，当更清整之耳。 
现代文：道武帝也知道这种情况，但他说： 我是故意放纵他们才会这样的，等过了灾年，自当再行清理和整治他们。 
English: Emperor Daowu was also aware of the situation, but he said, "I deliberately let them go on like this. After the disaster year, I will clean up and rectify them myself."

古文：秋七月，慕容氏支属百余家谋欲外奔，发觉，伏诛死者三百余人。
现代文：秋七月，慕容氏的旁支一百多家准备要外逃，被发觉后，被杀死的有三百多人。
English: In autumn and July, more than a hundred members of the Murong clan's branch prepared to flee the country. When they were discovered, more than three hundred people were killed.

古文：八月，卫王仪谋叛，赐死。
现代文：八月，卫王仪策谋叛乱，被赐死。
English: In August, Wei Wangyi plotted a rebellion and was sentenced to death.

古文：十月戊辰，清河王绍作乱，帝崩于天安殿，时年三十九。
现代文：十月十三日，清河王绍叛乱，道武帝死于天安殿，享年三十九岁。
English: On October 13th, the Qing King Shao rebelled, and Emperor Daowu died at the age of 39.

古文：永兴二年九月甲寅，上谥曰宣武皇帝，葬于盛乐金陵，庙号太祖，泰常五年改谥曰道武。
现代文：永兴二年九月初五，上谥号为宣武皇帝，埋葬在盛乐金陵，庙号为太祖。泰常五年改谥号为道武。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the 2nd year of Yongxing, his posthumous name was Emperor Xuanwu, and he was buried in Shenle Jinling. His temple name was Taizu. In the 5th year of Taizhang, his posthumous name was changed to Daowu.

古文：太宗明元皇帝讳嗣，道武皇帝之长子也。母曰刘贵人，登国七年，生于云中宫。
现代文：太宗明元帝名嗣，道武皇帝的长子，母亲是刘贵人，登国七年出生于云中宫。
English: The eldest son of Emperor Taizong Mingyuan, the eldest son of Emperor Daowu, his mother was Liu Guijin. He was born in Yunzhong Palace in the seventh year of his reign.

古文：道武晚有男，闻而大悦，乃大赦。
现代文：道武帝很晚才有男孩，知道消息以后非常高兴，便大赦天下。
English: Emperor Daowu had a boy very late in life. He was very happy when he heard the news and pardoned the whole world.

古文：帝明睿宽毅，非礼不动。
现代文：明元帝聪明睿智宽宏刚毅，不合乎礼节的事不做。
English: Emperor Mingyuan was intelligent, wise, broad-minded, and strong-willed. He would not do anything that was against etiquette.

古文：天兴六年，封齐王，拜相国。
现代文：天兴六年，被封为齐王，任丞相。
English: In the sixth year of Tianxing, he was given the title of Qi Wang and appointed as the prime minister.

古文：初，帝母既赐死，道武召帝告曰： 昔汉武将立其子而杀其母，不令妇人与国政，汝当继统，故吾远同汉武。 
现代文：当初，明元帝的母亲被赐死之后，道武帝召明元帝来，对他说： 过去汉武帝准备立太子时就杀了太子的母亲，目的是不让妇人干预国政，你应当继承帝位，所以我也和汉武帝采用同种方法。 
English: At first, after the death of Emperor Mingyuan's mother, Emperor Daowu summoned Emperor Mingyuan and said to him: In the past, when Emperor Hanwu was preparing to install a crown prince, he killed the crown prince's mother in order to prevent the woman from interfering in state affairs. You should inherit the throne, so I also used the same method as Emperor Hanwu.

古文：帝素纯孝，哀不自胜。
现代文：明元帝一向十分孝顺，听到消息后悲伤得难以自制。
English: Emperor Mingyuan had always been very filial, and it was difficult for him to control his grief after hearing the news.

古文：道武怒。
现代文：道武帝非常生气。
English: Emperor Daowu was very angry.

古文：帝还宫，哀不自止，道武知而又召帝。
现代文：明元帝回宫后，仍然悲伤不已，道武帝知道后又召明元帝。
English: After Emperor Mingyuan returned to the palace, he was still grief-stricken. Emperor Daowu summoned Emperor Mingyuan after learning of this.

古文：帝欲入，左右谏，请待和解而进，帝从之。
现代文：明元帝打算进去，周围的人都劝谏说，请等皇帝气消以后再进去。明元帝听从了。
English: Emperor Mingyuan intended to go in, but the people around him urged him to wait until the emperor had passed away before going in. Emperor Mingyuan complied.

古文：及元绍之逆，帝还而诛之。
现代文：当清河王绍叛乱时，明元帝回朝杀掉了他。
English: When King Shao of Qinghe rebelled, Emperor Mingyuan returned to China and killed him.

古文：永兴元年冬十月壬午，皇帝即位，大赦改元，追尊皇妣为宣穆皇后。
现代文：永兴元年冬十月二十七日，皇帝继位，大赦天下，改年号，追封母亲为宣穆皇后。
English: Yongxing in the winter of the first year of the October 27th, the emperor succeeded to the throne, pardoned the world, changed the year, and made his mother the Empress Xuanmu.

古文：公卿大臣先罢归第者，悉复登用之。
现代文：公卿大臣中过去被罢黜回家的，全部重新起用。
English: Of the ministers of state who had been dismissed in the past, all were reinstated.

古文：诏南平公长孙嵩、北新侯安同对理人讼，简贤任能。
现代文：诏令南平公长孙嵩、北新侯安同共同审理案件，选贤任能。
English: It was decreed that Sun Song, the governor of Nanping, and Beixin Hou'an would jointly try the case, and the selection would be made on merit.

古文：是月，冯跋弑其主高云，僭号天王，国号北燕。
现代文：当月，冯跋杀他的主人高云，自称天王，国号为北燕。
English: In the same month, Feng Badu killed his master Gao Yun, who claimed to be the King of Heaven, and his country's name was Beiyan.

古文：闰十月丁亥，硃提王悦谋反，赐死。
现代文：闰十月初三，朱提王悦谋反，被赐死。
English: On the third day of the tenth month of the leap year, King Yue of Jutian plotted a rebellion and was sentenced to death.

古文：诏都兵将军山阳侯奚斤巡诸州，问人疾苦。
现代文：诏令郑兵将军山阳侯奚斤巡视各州，访问民间疾苦。
English: Zheng He ordered General Sanyang Hou Rongjin to make a tour of all the states to visit the suffering of the people.

古文：十二月戊戌，封卫王仪子良为南阳王，进阴平公列爵为王，改封高凉王乐真为平阳王。
现代文：十二月十五日，封卫王仪的儿子拓跋良为南阳王，晋封阴平公烈的爵位为王爵，改封高良王乐真为平阳王。
English: On December 15th, Tuoba Liang, the son of Gui Wangyi, was named the King of Nanyang, Yin Ping, the son of Gui Wangyi, was given the title of Duke, and Gao Liang, the son of Gui Wangyi, was named the King of Pingyang.

古文：己亥，帝始居西宫，御天文殿。
现代文：十六日，皇帝才住进西宫，坐在天文殿听政。
English: On the 16th, the emperor moved into the West Palace and sat in the Astronomical Hall to listen to the government.

古文：蠕蠕犯塞。
现代文：蠕蠕入侵边塞。
English: Creep creep invade the border.

古文：是岁，乞伏乾归自称秦王。
现代文：当年，乞伏乾归自称秦王。
English: At that time, Qianfu called himself the King of Qin.

古文：二年春正月甲寅朔，诏南平公长孙嵩等北征蠕蠕，因留屯漠南。
现代文：二年春正月初二，诏令南平公长孙嵩等人北征蠕蠕，因而驻军在漠南。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of spring, the emperor ordered Nanping Gongchang Sun Song and others to march to the north, and thus the garrison moved to the south.

古文：夏五月，嵩等自大漠还，蠕蠕追围之于牛川。
现代文：夏五月，长孙嵩等从大漠回朝，蠕蠕追到后把他们包围在牛川。
English: In summer and May, Chosun Song and others returned to the North from the desert, and after chasing them, surrounded them in Ushikawa.

古文：壬申，帝北伐，蠕蠕闻而遁走。
现代文：二十日，皇帝出兵北伐，蠕蠕听到消息后退走。
English: On the 20th, the emperor sent troops to the Northern Expedition. Upon hearing the news, Cree Cree retreated.

古文：车驾还幸参合陂。
现代文：车驾回来时到了参合陂。
English: When the driver came back, he arrived at Sanghaewon.

古文：六月，晋将刘裕灭慕容超。
现代文：六月，晋将刘裕灭掉慕容超。
English: In June, Jin eliminated Liu Yu from Murong Chao.

古文：秋七月丁巳，立射台于陂西，仍讲武。
现代文：秋七月初九，在陂西设立射台，仍讲习武艺。
English: On the ninth day of the seventh month of the autumn, a shooting range was set up in Shaanxi, and martial arts were still being taught.

古文：乙丑，至自北伐。
现代文：十五日，北伐归来。
English: On the 15th, the Northern Expedition returned.

古文：三年春二月戊戌，诏简宫人非御及伎巧者，悉以赐鳏人。
现代文：三年春二月二十一日，诏令挑选宫女中没有侍奉过皇帝以及从事伎艺的人，全部赐给鳏夫。
English: On the 21st of February in the spring of the third year, the imperial edict gave the widower all the palace maids who had not served the emperor or practiced magic.

古文：己亥，诏北新侯安同等持节巡行并、定二州及诸山居杂胡、丁零，问其疾苦，察举守宰不法者。
现代文：二十二日，诏令北新侯安同等持节巡行并州、定州两个州和各部居住在山区的杂种胡人、丁零人，访问他们的疾苦，纠察和检举太守、县宰中违法乱纪者。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered Beixin Hou'an to hold a parade on the same day, and to visit the mountainous areas inhabited by the mixed-breed Hu people and Ding people in the two states of Anhui and Dingzhou, to visit their sufferings, and to picket and report the illegal and undisciplined people in the governor and the county government.

古文：辛丑，简宫人工伎之不急者出，赐人不能自存者。
现代文：二十四日，挑选宫女中不急于使用的技工出宫，赐给那些不能成家的人。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the maids of honor who were not eager to be used were selected and sent out of the palace to be given to those who could not have a family.

古文：三月己未，诏侍臣常佩剑。
现代文：三月十三日，诏令侍臣们平时可以佩剑。
English: On the 13th of March, the Emperor issued an edict ordering his courtiers to wear swords at all times.

古文：夏五月丙寅，复出宫人赐鳏人。
现代文：夏五月二十一日，又选宫女出宫赐给鳏夫。
English: On the 21st day of the fifth month of the summer, the maiden of the palace was chosen to go out of the palace and be given to the woodcutter.

古文：丁卯，车驾谒金陵于盛乐。
现代文：二十二日，皇帝前往盛乐拜谒金陵。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor went to Shenle to pay homage to the Jinling Mausoleum.

古文：己巳，昌黎王慕容伯兒谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，昌黎王慕容伯儿谋反，被杀。
English: On the 24th, Murong Bo'er, the king of Changli, plotted a rebellion and was killed.

古文：六月，姚兴遣使朝贡。
现代文：六月，姚兴派使者朝贡。
English: In June, Yao Xing sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月戊申，赐卫士酺三日。
现代文：秋七月初四，赐卫士们聚饮三天。
English: On the fourth day of the seventh lunar month, the guards were given three days to gather and drink.

古文：冬十一月丁未，大阅于东郊。
现代文：冬十一月初四，在东郊大阅兵。
English: In winter, on the fourth day of the first month of November, there is a large military parade in the eastern suburbs.

古文：四年春二月癸未，登兽圈，射猛兽。
现代文：四年春二月十二日，登上专供野兽生长的兽圈，射猎猛兽。
English: On February 12th, the fourth year of spring, he climbed onto the animal enclosure, which was specially designed for the growth of wild animals, to shoot wild beasts.

古文：夏四月乙未，宴群臣于西宫，使各献直言，勿有所讳。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，在西宫宴请群臣，让各人直言进谏，无所讳忌。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of the summer, he invited a group of ministers to a banquet at the Western Palace.

古文：六月，乞伏乾归为兄子公府所弑。
现代文：六月，乞伏乾归被他哥哥的儿子公府所杀。
English: In June, he was killed by his brother's son, Gongfu.

古文：闰月丙辰，大阅于东郊。秋七月己巳朔，东巡。
现代文：闰六月十七日，在东郊大检阅。秋七月初一，东巡。
English: On the 17th of leap June, there was a large-scale inspection in the eastern suburbs. On the first day of autumn in July, there was an eastward inspection.

古文：置四厢大将，又放十二时，置十二小将。
现代文：设置四方大将，又按照十二时辰，设置十二位小将。
English: Set up a four-way general, and according to the twelve o'clock, set up twelve minor generals.

古文：以山阳侯奚斤、元城公屈行左右丞相。
现代文：由山阳侯奚斤、元城公屈兼左、右丞相。
English: From Sanyo Hō Shinkin, Motojo Kinkaku assumed the positions of Left and Right chancellor.

古文：己卯，大獼于石会山。
现代文：十一日，大猎于石会山。
English: On the 11th day, the big hunt started in Shikai Mountain.

古文：戊子，临去畿陂观渔。
现代文：二十日，到去畿陂观渔。
English: On the 20th, I went to Gyeongbokgung to watch fishing.

古文：庚寅，至于濡源，西巡，幸北部诸落。
现代文：二十二日，到达濡源，西巡，前往北部的各村落。
English: On the 22nd, they arrived at Nureyuan and started their westward patrol, going to various villages in the north.

古文：八月壬子，幸西宫，临板殿，大飨群臣，命百姓大酺三日。
现代文：八月十四日，到西宫，在板殿大宴群臣，诏令百姓聚饮三天。
English: On August 14th, he went to the West Palace, where he held a grand banquet for his vassals in the main hall, and ordered the common people to gather and drink for three days.

古文：乙卯，赐王公以下至宿卫将士布各有差。
现代文：十六日，赏赐王公以下直至卫戍部队将士布帛不等。
English: On the 16th, rewards ranged from the rank of prince to the rank of garrison sergeant.

古文：冬十一月己丑，赐宗室近属南阳王良以下至于缌麻亲布帛各有差。
现代文：冬十一月二十三日，赏赐皇家宗室近亲南阳王拓跋良以下直到五服以内亲属多少不等的布帛。
English: On the 23rd day of the 11th month of the winter, cloth bags were given to the close relatives of the royal family, from Nanyang Wang Tuo Deliang down to the relatives within five years of service.

古文：是月，沮渠蒙逊僭称河西王。
现代文：当月，沮渠蒙逊自称河西王。
English: In the same month, Deshu Mengxun claimed to be the king of Hexi.

古文：十二月丁巳，北巡，至长城而旋。
现代文：十二月二十一日，北巡，直到长城而回。
English: On December 21st, I went on a tour of the north and returned to the Great Wall.

古文：五年春正月己巳，大阅畿内，男年十二以上悉集。
现代文：五年春正月初三，在京畿内大阅兵，男子年龄十二以上的都聚合起来。
English: On the third day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, in a large military parade in Gyeonggi Province, men over the age of twelve were gathered together.

古文：己卯，幸西宫。
现代文：十三日，前往西宫。
English: On the 13th, I went to Nishinomiya.

古文：頞拔大渠帅四十余人诣阙奉贡，赐以缯帛锦罽各有差。
现代文：安页拔等大首领四十多人到朝廷进贡，赏赐给他们缯帛锦数量不等。
English: More than forty great leaders such as Anzheybat paid tribute to the imperial court, and they were rewarded with varying amounts of brocade.

古文：乙酉，诏诸州，六十户出戎马一匹。
现代文：十九日，诏令各州，每六十户人家出战马一匹。
English: On the 19th, each state was ordered to send one war horse for every sixty households.

古文：庚寅，大阅于东郊，署将帅，以山阳侯奚斤为前军，众三万；阳平王熙等十二将各一万骑；帝临白登，躬自校览。
现代文：二十六日，在东郊大阅兵，分设将帅，由山阳侯奚斤为前军，领三万人；阳平王熙等十二位将领各带一万骑兵；皇帝亲临白登，亲自训练和检阅。
English: On the 26th, a grand military parade was held in the eastern suburb. The generals were set up, with Shanyang Hou Rongjin as the vanguard, leading 30,000 people; Yangping Wang Xi and other twelve generals each led 10,000 cavalry; the emperor himself came to Baiden to personally train and review.

古文：二月庚戌，幸高柳川。
现代文：二月十五日，前往高柳川。
English: On February 15, he went to Takayanagawa.

古文：癸丑，穿鱼池于北苑。庚午，姚兴遣使朝贡。
现代文：十八日在北苑开鱼池。二十五日，姚兴派使者朝贡。
English: On the 18th, the fish pond was opened in the North Garden. On the 25th, Yao Xing sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己卯，诏使者巡行天下，招延俊彦，搜扬隐逸。
现代文：己卯日，诏令使者巡行天下，招揽各类杰出人才，寻求和显扬隐逸人士。
English: On the same day, the emperor ordered emissaries to travel around the world to recruit all kinds of outstanding talents, and to seek and promote hidden people.

古文：夏四月乙卯，西巡。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，西巡。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of summer, the western inspection began.

古文：五月乙亥，行幸云中旧宫之大室。
现代文：二月十一日，巡行到达云中的旧宫内的大室。
English: On February 11th, the procession arrived at the Great Hall of the Old Palace in the clouds.

古文：丙子，大赦。
现代文：十二日，大赦天下。
English: Bongzi, amnesty to the whole world.

古文：六月，西幸五原，校猎于骨罗山，获兽十万。
现代文：六月，西行到五原，在骨罗山围猎，得到野兽十万头。
English: In June, he went west to the Wuhuan and hunted in the Jiao Luo Mountains, obtaining 100,000 wild beasts.

古文：秋七月己巳，还幸薄山。
现代文：秋七月初六，回来到达薄山。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, I came back and arrived in Wushan.

古文：帝登观宣武游幸刻石颂德之处，乃于其旁起石坛而荐飨焉，赐从者大酺于山下。
现代文：皇帝登山观看宣武帝当年巡游到这里刻石赞颂功德的地方，在石碑旁边建造石坛祭祀，赐随从们在山下聚饮。
English: The emperor climbed the mountain to see the place where Emperor Xuanwu had come to carve a stone to praise his merits. He built a stone altar next to the stone monument, and gave his followers a drink at the bottom of the mountain.

古文：前军奚斤等破越勒倍泥部落于跋那山西，徙二万余家而旋。
现代文：前军奚斤等人在跋那山西部打败了越落倍泥部落，把二万多户迁回内地，凯旋而归。
English: In the western part of the Banya Mountain, the former army's Xing Jin and others defeated the Yue Li Baili tribe, moved more than twenty thousand households back to the mainland, and returned home in triumph.

古文：丙戌，车驾自大室西南巡诸部落，遂南次定襄大洛城，东逾七岭山，田于善无川。
现代文：二十三日，皇帝从大室西南巡视各部落，便南巡到达定襄的大洛城，东越七岭山，在善无川田猎。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor toured the tribes from the southwest of Omuro, and then went on a southern tour to the Greater Luo City in Dingxiang, the Qili Mountains in East Yue, and hunted in Zhenwu County.

古文：八月癸卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：八月十一日，车驾回宫。
English: On August 11, he drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：癸丑，奚斤等班师。
现代文：二十一日，奚斤等回师。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Hao Jin waited for the coach to return.

古文：甲寅，帝临白登山，观降人，数军实。
现代文：二十二日，皇帝前往白登山，观看投降的人员，统计军用物资。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor went to Mount Paektu to watch the surrendering soldiers and count the military supplies.

古文：置新人于大宁，给农器，计口受田。
现代文：把新来的人安置在大宁，分给农具，按人口给田。
English: The new arrivals will be settled in Taining, given farm tools, and given land according to their population.

古文：冬十一月癸酉，大飨于西宫。
现代文：冬十一月十二日，在西宫大摆筵席宴请群臣。
English: On the 12th day of the 11th month of winter, a grand banquet was held in the West Palace for a group of courtiers.

古文：姚兴遣使朝贡，请进女，帝许之。
现代文：姚兴派使者朝贡，请求送女进宫，皇帝答应了。
English: Yao Xing sent an emissary to pay tribute and requested that a woman be sent to the palace. The emperor agreed.

古文：神瑞元年春正月辛酉，以祯瑞频集，大赦改元。
现代文：神瑞元年春正月初一，因为有许多吉祥的瑞兆，便大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Shen Rui, because there are many auspicious auspicious signs, the world will be amnestied and the year number will be changed.

古文：辛巳，行幸繁畤。赐王公以下至于士卒百工布帛各有差。
现代文：二十一日，前往繁宫，赏赐王公以下直至士兵百工布帛，数量多少不等。
English: On the twenty-first day, he went to the palace to reward the hundred craftsmen from the prince down to the soldiers, with the number varying somewhat.

古文：二月戊戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：二月初八，车驾回宫。
English: On the eighth day of the second month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：乙卯，起丰宫于平城东北。
现代文：二十六日，在平城东北修建丰宫。
English: On the 26th, the Fenggong Palace was built in the northeast of Pingcheng.

古文：夏六月，乞伏炽盘灭秃发傉檀。
现代文：夏六月，乞伏炽盘灭掉秃发亻辱檀。
English: In the summer of June, the begging bowl will be extinguished.

古文：秋七月，晋将硃龄石灭蜀。
现代文：秋七月，东晋将军朱龄石灭蜀。
English: In autumn and July, the Eastern Jin Dynasty general Zhu Lingshi defeated Shu.

古文：八月戊子，诏马邑侯元陋孙使于姚兴。
现代文：八月初一，诏令马邑侯元陋孙出使姚兴。
English: On the first day of August, the imperial command sent Yao Xing to Ma'i.

古文：姚兴遣使朝贡。
现代文：姚兴也派使者朝贡。
English: Yao Xing also sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：九月丁巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of September, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：冬十一月壬午，诏使者巡行诸州，校阅守宰资财，非自家所赍，悉簿为赃。
现代文：冬十一月二十六日，诏令使者巡行各州，检查地方太守县宰们的资产，不是自家所有的，全部造簿登记视为赃物。
English: On the 26th day of the 11th month of winter, the emissary of the imperial edict went on a tour of the states to inspect the assets of the local daimyos and county magistrates. The assets were not owned by their families, and all the book registrations were considered stolen property.

古文：守宰不如法，听百姓诣阙告之。
现代文：太守县宰等不依法行事的，允许百姓到朝廷告状。
English: People are allowed to go to the imperial court to file a complaint against the county governor and other officials who do not act in accordance with the law.

古文：十二月丙戌朔，蠕蠕犯塞。
现代文：十二月初一，蠕蠕进犯边境。
English: On the first day of December, the Cree invaded the border.

古文：丙申，车驾北伐。
现代文：十一日，皇帝北征。
English: On the 11th day, the emperor started the Northern Expedition.

古文：二年春正月丙辰，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：二年春正月初二，皇帝北伐回来。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of spring, the emperor returned from the Northern Expedition.

古文：二月丁亥，大飨于西宫。
现代文：二月初三，在西宫大摆筵席宴请群臣。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, a grand banquet was held in the West Palace for a group of courtiers.

古文：甲辰，立宣武庙于白登西。
现代文：二十日，在白登山西侧修建宣武帝庙。
English: On the 20th, the temple of Emperor Xuanwu was built on the west side of Mount Paektu.

古文：三月丁丑，诏以刺史守宰率多逋惰，今年赀调县违者，谪出家财以充，不听征发于人。夏四月，晋人来聘。
现代文：三月二十四日，下诏说，因为刺史、太守和县宰们大多拖拉和怠惰，今年的人口税再有拖欠的，将贬谪并以他们的家产充抵赋税，不得再向民众征收。夏四月，晋人前来聘问。
English: On March 24th, the next imperial edict said that because of the procrastination and laziness of most of the princes, governors and county magistrates, if there were any arrears in this year's population tax, it would be deducted and their family income would be used to offset the tax, and it would no longer be levied on the people. In the summer of April, Jin people came to ask questions.

古文：己卯，北巡。
现代文：二十七日，北巡。
English: On the 27th, the northern inspection began.

古文：五月丁亥，次于参合，东幸大宁。
现代文：五月初五，到达参合，东至大宁。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, it reached Sangao and went as far east as Daning.

古文：丁未，田于四岬山。
现代文：二十五日，在四岬山打猎。
English: On the 25th, I went hunting in the Four Capes Mountains.

古文：六月戊午，临去畿陂观渔。
现代文：六月初七，到去畿陂观渔。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, I went to Gyeongbokgung to watch the fishing.

古文：辛酉，次于濡源，立蜯台。
现代文：初十，到达濡源，建虫奉台。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, they arrived at the source of the water and built a platform.

古文：遂射白熊于颓牛山，获之。
现代文：便到颓牛山射白熊，并捕获了它。
English: He went to the Snail Mountain to shoot a white bear and caught it.

古文：丁卯，幸赤城，亲见长老，问人疾苦，复租一年。
现代文：十六日，前往赤城，亲自接见当地长老，访问人民疾苦，免除一年租税。
English: On the 16th, he went to Akechi, met with local elders in person, visited people in need, and was exempted from paying taxes for one year.

古文：南次石亭，幸上谷，问百年，访贤俊，复田租之半。
现代文：南行到石亭，至上谷，慰问百岁老人，寻访贤俊之士，减免一半田租。
English: They went south to Shitei, to the upper valley, to offer condolences to centenarians, to seek out virtuous people, and to reduce and waive half of the farm rent.

古文：壬申，幸涿鹿，登峤山，观温泉，使以太牢祠黄帝、唐尧庙。
现代文：二十一日，到涿鹿，登上峤山，观看温泉，让人用太牢的祭礼祭祀黄帝、唐尧的庙。
English: On the twenty-first day, they went to Moji, climbed Mount Lushan, watched the hot springs, and had people use the Taiji festival to worship the temples of the Yellow Emperor and Tang Dynasty.

古文：癸酉，幸广宁，事如上谷。
现代文：二十二日，到广宁，和上谷一样行事。
English: On the 22nd, he went to Guangning and did the same as Shanggu.

古文：己卯，登广宁之历山，以太牢祠舜庙，帝亲加礼焉。
现代文：二十八日，登上广宁的历山，以太牢的祭礼祭于舜庙，皇帝亲自行礼。
English: On the 28th, after climbing Mount Leshan in Guangning, the solemn ceremony was held in the Temple of Heaven, and the emperor himself performed the ritual.

古文：庚辰，幸代。
现代文：二十九日，至代郡。
English: On the 29th, Zhidai County.

古文：秋七月癸未，车驾还宫，复所过田租之半。
现代文：秋七月初二，车驾回宫，凡所经过的地方均减免一半田租。
English: On the second day of the first month of autumn in July, the car drove back to the palace, and half of the field rent was reduced and waived wherever it passed.

古文：八月庚辰晦，日有蚀之。九月，京师人饥，听就食山东。
现代文：八月二十九，日食。九月，京城发生饥荒，让城中人到山东求食。
English: On August 29, there was a solar eclipse, and in September, a famine occurred in Beijing, causing people in the city to seek food in Shandong.

古文：冬十月壬子，姚兴使奉其西平公主至，帝以后礼纳之。
现代文：冬十月初二，姚兴的使者护送西平公主到达，皇帝以皇后的礼节和她成婚。
English: On the second day of October in winter, Yao Xing's envoy escorted Xiping Princess to arrive, and the emperor married her with the etiquette of an empress.

古文：辛酉，行幸沮洳城。
现代文：十一日，前往沮洳城。
English: On the 11th day, he went to Deguan City.

古文：癸亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：十三日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 13th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：丙寅，诏以频遇霜旱，年谷不登，命出布帛仓谷以振贫穷。
现代文：十六日，下诏书说，由于连遭霜、旱灾害，连年谷物歉收，命令各地拿出布帛和官仓中谷物以赈济贫穷的民众。
English: On the 16th, the next imperial edict said that due to consecutive frosts, droughts, and poor grain harvests for several years, all regions were ordered to take out cloth bags and grain in government warehouses to help the poor people.

古文：泰常元年春二月丁未，姚兴死。
现代文：泰常元年春二月丁未，姚兴死去。
English: In the spring and February of the year of Taizhang, Yao Xing died.

古文：三月己丑，长乐王处文薨。
现代文：三月十三日，长乐王处文死去。
English: On March 13, Changle Wang Duwen passed away.

古文：夏四月壬子，大赦改元。
现代文：夏四月初五，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of summer, the world was amnestied, and the year was changed.

古文：庚申，河间王修薨。
现代文：十三日，河间王去世。
English: On the 13th, King Kawama passed away.

古文：五月甲申，彗星二见。
现代文：五月初八，彗星两度出现。
English: In May in Jiaxing, the comet appeared twice.

古文：六月丁巳，北巡。
现代文：六月十一，北巡。
English: June 11th, Northern Patrol.

古文：秋七月甲申，大狝于牛川，登釜山，临殷繁水，南观于九十九泉。
现代文：秋七月初九，在牛川大猎，登上釜山，到殷繁水，南行观看了九十九泉。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, I went hunting in the Ushikawa River, went to Busan, went to Incheon, and went south to see the 99 Springs.

古文：戊戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十三日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 23rd, they drove back to the palace.

古文：辛亥晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：辛亥日为晦日，日食。
English: On the eve of the Chinese New Year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：九月，晋刘裕溯河伐姚泓，遣部将王仲德从陆道至梁城。
现代文：九月，东晋刘裕沿河而上攻击姚泓，派部将王仲德从陆路到达梁城。
English: In September, Liu Yu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty went up the river to attack Yao Wei, and sent a detachment to take Wang Zhongde by land to Liangcheng.

古文：兗州刺史尉建畏懦，弃守北渡，仲德遂入滑台。
现代文：兖州刺史尉建胆怯，放弃守城而北渡黄河，王仲德便攻入滑台。
English: Zhangzhou Sashifu Jian was timid and gave up the defense of the city and crossed the Yellow River to the north. Wang Zhongde then broke into the slide.

古文：诏将军叔孙建等度河曜威，斩尉建于城下。
现代文：诏令将军孙叔建等渡河显耀军威，斩尉建于城下。
English: He ordered the general Sun Shujian and others to cross the river to show their military power, and the sub-branch was built under the castle.

古文：冬十一月戊寅，起蓬台于北苑。
现代文：冬十一月初五，在北苑建造蓬台。
English: In winter, on the fifth day of the first month of November, a pavilion was built in the North Garden.

古文：十二月，南阳王良薨。
现代文：十二月，南阳王拓跋良去世。
English: In December, Nanyang King Tuoba Liang passed away.

古文：二年春正月甲戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二年春正月初一，日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the second year of spring.

古文：二月丙午，诏使者巡行天下，观风俗，问其所苦。
现代文：二月初四，诏令使者巡行天下，观察民间风俗，慰问民众疾苦。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, the emperor ordered the envoys to travel around the country, observe folk customs, and offer condolences to the people.

古文：是月，凉武昭王薨。
现代文：当月，凉武昭王去世。
English: In the same month, King Yangwu Zhao passed away.

古文：五月，西巡至云中，遂济河，田于大漠。
现代文：五月，西巡到达云中。于是渡河，在大漠打猎。
English: In May, the West Patrol arrived in the middle of the clouds. So they crossed the river and hunted in the desert.

古文：秋七月乙亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：秋七月初五，车驾回宫。
English: Autumn On the fifth day of the seventh month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：乙酉，起白台于城南，高二十丈。
现代文：十五日，在城南建造白台，高二十丈。
English: On the 15th, a white platform was built in the south of the city, with a height of 20 meters.

古文：是月，晋刘裕灭姚泓。
现代文：当月，晋将刘裕灭了姚泓。
English: That month, Liu Yu, the promoted general, defeated Yao Xi.

古文：冬十月癸丑，豫章王夔薨。
现代文：冬十月十五日，豫章王夔去世。
English: On the 15th day of October in winter, Yu Zhang Wang Yao passed away.

古文：十二月己酉，诏河东、河内购泓子弟播越人间者。
现代文：十二月十二日，下诏在河东、河内悬赏，寻求逃亡在民间的姚泓的子弟。
English: On December 12, a reward was offered in Haedong and Hanoi to find the son of the fugitive civilian Yao Xuan.

古文：三年春三月，晋人来聘。
现代文：三年春三月，晋人前来探问。
English: In the spring and March of the third year, Jin people came to inquire.

古文：庚戌，幸西宫。
现代文：十五日，到西宫。
English: On the 15th, to the West Palace.

古文：以勃海、范阳郡去年水，复其租税。
现代文：因渤海、范阳郡去年受水灾，免去租税。
English: Due to floods in Bohai Sea and Fanyang County last year, the city was exempted from tax.

古文：夏四月己巳，徙冀、定、幽三州徒何于京师。
现代文：夏四月初四，迁冀州、定州、幽州的徒何人到京都。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the summer, some students from Jizhou, Dingzhou and Yuzhou moved to Kyoto.

古文：五月壬子，东巡至濡源，及甘松。
现代文：五月十七日，东巡到濡源，并前往甘松。
English: On the 17th of May, the Eastern Inspection Team went to Nureyuan and then to Kanmatsu.

古文：遣征东将军长孙道生帅师袭冯跋，遂至龙城，徙其居人万余家而还。
现代文：派征东将军长孙道生领军队攻击冯跋，进至龙城，迁移其中的居民一万多家后回兵。
English: Sun Daosheng, the leader of the army sent to conquer the East, led the army to attack Fengba, marched into Longcheng, and relocated more than ten thousand of its residents as returning soldiers.

古文：秋七月戊午，车驾至京师。
现代文：秋七月二十四日，皇帝回到京城。
English: Autumn On July 24, the emperor returned to the capital.

古文：八月，雁门、河内大雨水，复其租税。
现代文：八月，雁门、河内遭受严重水灾，免去两地租税。
English: In August, when Yanmen and Hanoi suffered serious floods, the two regions were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：冬十月戊辰，筑宫于西苑。
现代文：冬十月初六，在西苑建造宫室。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, the palace room was built in the west courtyard.

古文：十一月，赫连屈丐克长安。
现代文：十一月，赫连屈丐攻占长安。
English: In November, the Qianbei of Helian captured Chang'an.

古文：十二月，晋安帝殂。
现代文：十二月，晋安帝去世。
English: In December, Emperor Jin died.

古文：四年春正月壬辰朔，车驾临河，大蒐于犊渚。
现代文：四年春正月初一，车驾到黄河边，在犊渚大举狩猎。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the car drove to the edge of the Yellow River and went on a large-scale hunting trip in Zhaozhuang.

古文：癸卯，还宫。
现代文：十二日，回宫。
English: On the 12th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：三月，赫连屈丐僭即皇帝位。
现代文：三月，赫连屈丐即位称帝。
English: In March, Emperor Kerensky ascended to the throne.

古文：癸丑，筑宫于蓬台北。
现代文：二十三日，在蓬台北修建宫室。
English: On the 23rd, a palace was built in Taipei.

古文：夏四月庚辰，享东庙，远蕃助祭者数百国。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，祭祀东庙，远方蕃国前来助祭的有几百个国家。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of summer, the East Temple was dedicated, and hundreds of countries came from far and wide to assist in the ceremony.

古文：辛巳，南巡，幸雁门，赐所过无出今年租赋。
现代文：二十二日，南巡，到达雁门，赐所经过的地区不交当年租税。
English: On the 22nd, the southern inspection team arrived at the Wild Goose Gate, and the areas they passed through did not pay the tax for the year.

古文：己亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：五月初一，到飈水观渔。初十，车驾回宫。
English: On the 14th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：秋八月辛未，东巡，遣使祠恆岳。
现代文：秋八月十三日，东巡，派使者祭祀恒岳。
English: On the 13th day of the 8th month of autumn, the Eastern Patrol sent an emissary to worship Hengduk.

古文：甲申，车驾还宫，赐所过无出今年田租。
现代文：二十六日，车驾回宫，赐所经过地方不交当年田租。
English: On the 26th, driving back to the palace, he did not pay the current year's field rent.

古文：九月甲寅，筑宫于白登山。
现代文：九月二十七日，在白登山修建宫室。
English: On September 27th, the palace was built in Baidong Mountain.

古文：冬十一月丁亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十一月初一，日食。
English: Winter, the first day of November, a solar eclipse.

古文：十二月癸亥，西巡，至云中，逾白道，北猎野马于辱孤山。至于黄河，从君子津西度，大狩于薛林山。
现代文：十二月初七，西巡，到达云中，越过白道，在北面的辱孤山猎野马，直到黄河，从君子津西渡，在薛林山大举狩猎。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, the western patrol reached the middle of the clouds, crossed the white road, and hunted wild horses in the north-facing lonely mountain, until the Yellow River. From Junzijin westward, they hunted in Xuelin Mountain.

古文：五年春正月丙戌朔，自薛林东还。至屋窦城，飨劳将士，大酺二日，班禽以赐之。
现代文：五年春正月初一，从薛林山东回，到达屋窦城，犒劳将士，聚饮两天，把禽鸟分给他们。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, from Xuelin Mountain eastward, arriving at Yadoucheng, the laborers gathered for two days to drink and distribute the birds to them.

古文：己亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：十四日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 14th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：三月丙戌，南阳王意文薨。
现代文：三月初二，南阳王意文去世。
English: On the second day of March, Nanyang Wang Yiwen passed away.

古文：夏四月丙寅，起氵垒南宫。
现代文：夏四月十二日，建飈南宫。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of summer, the Southern Palace was built.

古文：五月乙酉，诏曰： 宣武皇帝体得一之玄远，应自然之冲妙，大行大名，未尽盛美。
现代文：五月初二，下诏说： 宣武皇帝体味了得一的深远之义，回应了自然的冲妙之理，驾崩时所谥的大名，未能全部表达他的盛德之美。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, the next imperial edict said: Emperor Xuanwu tasted the profound meaning of unity and responded to the charm of nature. The daimyo, who was killed at the time of death, could not fully express the beauty of his virtue.

古文：今启纬图，始睹尊号，其更上尊谥曰道武皇帝，以章灵命之先启，圣德之玄同。 
现代文：今日开启纬图，始见尊号，对他尊谥号更改为道武皇帝，以显明灵命之先验，圣德之大同。 
English: Today, open the latitude and longitude map, you will see the honorific title for the first time, and change his honorific title to Daowu Emperor, to show the transcendence of spiritual life and the universality of holiness.

古文：庚戌，淮南侯司马国璠、池阳侯司马道赐等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十七日，淮南侯司马国、池阳侯司马道赐谋反，被杀。
English: On the 27th, Huainan Hossima Guo and Chiyang Hossima Dao conspired to rebel and were killed.

古文：六月丙寅，幸翳犊山。
现代文：六月十三日，前往翳犊山。
English: On June 13, he went to Lushan.

古文：是月，晋恭帝禅位于宋。
现代文：当月，晋恭帝禅位于宋朝。
English: In the same month, Emperor Jinguang passed away in the Song Dynasty.

古文：秋七月丁酉，西至五原。
现代文：秋七月十五日，西行至五原。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of the autumn, I went west to Gohara.

古文：丁未，幸云中大室，赐从者大酺。
现代文：二十五日，住在云中的大室，赐随从人员聚饮。
English: On the 25th, Omuro, who lives in the clouds, gave his entourage a drink.

古文：八月癸亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：八月十一日，皇帝车驾回宫。
English: On August 11, the emperor drove back to the palace.

古文：闰月甲午，阴平王烈薨。
现代文：闰八月十四日，阴平王烈去世。
English: On the 14th day of the 8th month, Yinping Wang Rong passed away.

古文：是岁，西凉亡。
现代文：这一年，西凉灭亡。
English: In the same year, Xi Liang passed away.

古文：六年春二月己亥，诏天下户二十输戎马一匹、大牛一头。
现代文：六年春二月二十，诏令天下每二十户人家交战马一匹，大牛一头。
English: On the 20th day of the 2nd month in the spring of the 6th year, the emperor decreed that every 20 households in the world should have one war horse and one ox.

古文：三月甲子，阳平王熙薨。
现代文：三月十六日，阳平王熙去世。
English: Yangping Wangxi passed away on March 16.

古文：乙亥，制六部人羊满百口者调戎马一匹。
现代文：二十七日，规定六部落的人和羊数每满百口的交战马一匹。
English: On the 27th, it was decided that the people of the six tribes and the number of sheep should have one war horse for every hundred mouths.

古文：发京师六千余人筑苑，起自旧苑，东苞白登，周回四十余里。
现代文：招发京城中的六千多人修筑御苑，从旧苑开始，东面包住白登山，周围长四十多里。
English: More than six thousand people in the capital were invited to build the imperial garden. Starting from the old garden, the east side is inhabited by white mountaineers, and the surrounding area is more than forty miles long.

古文：夏六月乙酉，北巡，至于蟠羊山。
现代文：夏六月初八，北巡，到达蟠羊山。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of summer, the Northern Patrol arrived at Qiangyang Mountain.

古文：秋七月乙卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：秋七月初九，车驾回宫。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, I drove back to the palace.

古文：癸酉，西巡。猎于祚山，亲射猛兽，获之。
现代文：二十七日，西巡，到祚山狩猎，亲自射猛兽，捕获了。
English: On the 27th, he went to Lushan for hunting during his western inspection. He personally shot a ferocious beast and captured it.

古文：遂至于河。
现代文：便进至黄河。
English: and then into the Yellow River.

古文：八月庚子，大獼于犊渚。
现代文：八月二十四，大猎于犊渚。
English: On the 24th of August, the big hunt started at the cliff.

古文：九月庚戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月初五，车驾回宫。
English: On the fifth day of the ninth month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：壬申，宋人来聘。
现代文：二十七日，宋人前来聘问。
English: On the 27th, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：冬十月己亥，行幸代。
现代文：冬十月二十四日，巡行至代郡。
English: In winter, on October 24th, the parade went to Daigun.

古文：十二月丙申，西巡于云中。
现代文：十二月二十二日，西巡到达云中。
English: On December 22nd, the West Patrol arrived in Yunzhong.

古文：七年春正月甲辰朔，自云中西幸屋窦城，赐从者大酺三日。
现代文：七年春正月初一，从云中西行到达屋窦城，赐随从人员聚饮三天。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of spring, he traveled westward from Yunzhong and arrived at Yadoucheng. He gave his attendants three days to gather and drink.

古文：二月丙戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：二月十三日，车驾回宫。
English: On February 13, he drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：三月乙丑，河南王曜薨。
现代文：三月二十三，河南王曜去世。
English: On March 23, Wang You of Henan Province passed away.

古文：夏四月甲戌，封皇子焘为太平王，拜相国，加大将军；丕为乐平王，加车骑大将军；弥为安定王，加卫大将军；范为乐安王，加中军大将军；健为永昌王，加抚军大将军；崇为建宁王，加辅国大将军；俊为新兴王，加镇军大将军；献怀长公主子嵇敬为长乐王，拜大司马、大将军。
现代文：夏四月初二，封皇子焘为太平王，职位为丞相，加封大将军；皇子丕为乐平王，加封车骑大将军；皇子弥为安定王，加封卫大将军；皇子范为乐安王，加中军大将军；皇子健为永昌王，加封抚军大将军；皇子崇为建宁王，加封辅国大将军；皇子俊为新兴王，加封镇东大将军；献怀长公主的儿子嵇敬为长乐王，官拜大司马、大将军。
English: On the second day of the second month of the fourth month of the summer, Prince Fong Zi Yi was named King Taiping, with the post of Minister of War, and was promoted to General of the General Staff; Prince Fong Zi Yi was named King Leping, and was promoted to General of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff

古文：初，帝服寒食散，频年发动，不堪万机，五月，立太平王焘为皇太子，临朝听政。
现代文：当初，明元帝服用寒食散，药性连年发作，无法日理万机。五月，立太平王焘为皇太子，临朝听政。
English: At first, Emperor Mingyuan took cold medicine, and the medicinal properties occurred for years, which could not be cured. In May, he appointed Taiping Wangye as crown prince and listened to politics in the imperial court.

古文：是月，宋武帝殂。
现代文：这个月，宋武帝死去。
English: This month, Emperor Songwu passed away.

古文：秋九月，诏司空奚斤等帅师伐宋。
现代文：秋九月，诏令司空奚斤等领兵伐宋。
English: In the autumn and September, the emperor ordered Sikyong Shujin to lead the army to attack Song.

古文：乙巳，幸氵垒南宫，遂如广宁。
现代文：初五，前往飈南宫，进至广宁。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, they went to the South Palace and then to Guangning.

古文：己酉，诏皇太子率百国以法驾田于东苑，车乘服物皆以乘舆之副。
现代文：初九，诏令皇太子带着百国使者依照帝王所用的法驾之礼在东苑打猎。车马、服饰、器物都是皇帝平时备用的。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the emperor ordered the crown prince to take the emissaries of hundreds of countries to hunt in the East Garden in accordance with the driving ceremony used by the emperor. Chariots and horses, clothing, and utensils are all used by the emperor in peacetime.

古文：辛亥，筑平城外郭，周回三十二里。
现代文：十一日，修建平城的外城，周围长三十二里。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the outer city of Pingcheng was built, with a circumference of 32 miles.

古文：辛酉，幸峤山，遣使者祠黄帝、唐尧庙。
现代文：二十一日，到达峤山，派使者祭祀黄帝和唐尧的庙宇。
English: On the twenty-first day, he arrived at Lushan and sent an envoy to worship the temples of the Yellow Emperor and Tang Xuan.

古文：因东幸幽州，见耆年，问其所苦，赐以爵号。
现代文：便东至幽州，接见老年人，慰问他们的疾苦，并赐给爵号。
English: He then traveled east to Yuzhou to meet with the elderly, offer condolences for their suffering, and bestow a title of nobility on them.

古文：分遣使者巡行州郡，观察风俗。
现代文：又分派使者到各州郡巡察，观看各地民风民俗。
English: It also dispatched emissaries to inspect every prefecture and county to observe the folk customs of various regions.

古文：冬十月甲戌，车驾还宫，复所过田租之半。
现代文：冬十月初五，车驾回宫，减免所经过地方的一半田租。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October in winter, driving back to the palace, half of the land rent of the place passed by the reduction and exemption.

古文：奚斤等济河，攻滑台不拔，求济师，帝怒不许。
现代文：奚斤等人渡过黄河，进攻滑台，不能攻克，请求增援。皇帝大怒不允许。
English: Shujin and others crossed the Yellow River, attacked the slide, could not conquer it, and asked for reinforcements. The emperor was furious and did not allow it.

古文：议亲南征，为其声援。
现代文：便商议亲自南征，作为对奚斤的声援。
English: He then discussed the Southern Expedition in person, as a show of solidarity with Shujin.

古文：壬辰，南巡，出自天门关，逾恆岭，四方蕃附大人各帅所部从者五万余人。
现代文：二十三日，南巡，从天门关出兵，越过恒岭，归附朝廷的四方蕃人首领和酋长们各自领着本部人马前来，共有五万多人。
English: On the 23rd, during the Southern Inspection, troops were dispatched from Tianmen Pass and crossed the Hengling Mountains. The leaders and chiefs of the four provinces that were annexed to the imperial court each led their headquarters to come, with a total of more than 50,000 people.

古文：十一月，皇太子亲统六军镇塞上，安定王弥与北新公安同居守。
现代文：十一月，皇太子亲自统领六军镇守边塞，安定王弥和北新公安同镇守京城。
English: In November, the crown prince personally led the six military towns to guard the border fortress, and Wang Wangya and Beixin Public Security together guarded the capital.

古文：丙午，曲赦司州殊死以下。
现代文：初七，特赦各州斩刑以下的罪犯。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, all states granted amnesty to criminals sentenced to death or less.

古文：丙辰，次于中山，问人疾苦。
现代文：十七日，到达中山，慰问民间疾苦。
English: On the 17th, he arrived at Zhongshan to offer condolences to the suffering of the people.

古文：十二月丙戌，行幸冀州，存问人俗。
现代文：十二月十八日，巡行至冀州，探视民间风俗。
English: On December 18th, the parade went to Jizhou to visit folk customs.

古文：遣寿光侯叔孙达等率众自平原东度，徇下青、兗诸郡。
现代文：派寿光侯叔孙建等率领部众从平原东渡黄河，攻下青州和兖州各郡。
English: He sent Shouguang Houshu, Sun Jian and other leaders to cross the Yellow River from the east of the plain to conquer Qingzhou and Zhangzhou counties.

古文：八年春正月丙辰，行幸鄴，存问人俗。
现代文：八年春正月十八日，巡行至邺郡，探访民俗。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the eighth year of the Spring, the parade went to Zou County to visit folk customs.

古文：司空奚斤既平兗、豫，还围武牢，宋守将毛德祖距守不下。
现代文：司空奚斤在平定兖州和豫州之后，兵围武牢关。宋守将毛德祖坚守，无法攻下。
English: After Sikuo Shujin had pacified Bozhou and Yuzhou, his soldiers surrounded Wudongguan. Song Shou held on to Mao Zedzu and was unable to capture him.

古文：蠕蠕犯塞。
现代文：蠕蠕入侵边塞。
English: Creep creep invade the border.

古文：二月戊辰，筑长城于长川之南，起自赤城，西至五原，延袤二千余里，备置戍卫。
现代文：二月初一，在长川以南修筑长城，起自赤城，西到五原，延续两千多里，设置守卫部队。
English: On the first day of February, the Great Wall was built in the south of Nagakawa, starting from Akagi, west to Gohara, extending more than two thousand miles, and guard troops were set up.

古文：三月乙卯，济自灵昌。
现代文：三月十八日，从灵昌渡河。
English: March 18th, crossing the river from Lingchang.

古文：夏四月丁卯，幸成皋，观武牢。
现代文：夏四月初一，到达成皋，观察武牢关。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, when the summer solstice was reached, Wu Dangguan was observed.

古文：而城内乏水，县绠汲河。
现代文：城内缺水，挂着绳索到河中汲水。
English: There is a shortage of water in the city, and ropes are used to draw water from the river.

古文：帝令连舰，上施轒巉，绝其汲路；又穿地道，以夺其井。
现代文：皇帝命令把舰船连接起来，上面装有攻城使用的战车，断绝城中取水的水路。又开掘地道，以抢夺水井。
English: The emperor ordered the ships to be linked together, and chariots mounted on them to be used to attack the city, cutting off the city's water supply and digging tunnels to rob wells.

古文：丁丑，幸洛阳，观石经。
现代文：十一日，到达洛阳，观看石经。
English: On the 11th day, arrived in Luoyang, watched the stone sutra.

古文：闰月丁未，还幸河内，北登太行，幸高都。
现代文：闰四月十一日，回至河内，北登太行山，到达高都。
English: On April 11, he returned to Hanoi and climbed Mount Taihang in the north to reach the capital.

古文：己未，武牢溃。
现代文：二十三日，武牢关被攻破。
English: On the 23rd, Wudangguan was breached.

古文：士众大疫，死者十二三。
现代文：军队中发生大瘟疫，病死的有十分之二三。
English: A great plague broke out in the army, and two-thirds of the soldiers died of the disease.

古文：辛酉，幸晋阳，班赐王公以下至于厮役。
现代文：二十五日，到达晋阳，颁赏从王公以下的官员直到杂务人员。
English: On the 25th, he arrived in Jinyang and presented awards to officials from the king to the clerks.

古文：五月丙寅，还次雁门，皇太子率留台王公迎于句注之北。
现代文：五月初一，回到雁门关。皇太子带领留镇行台的王公们到句注的北面迎接。
English: On the first day of May, they returned to Yanmen Pass. The crown prince led the princes who had stayed in the town to the north side of the pass to welcome them.

古文：庚寅，车驾至自南巡。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝车驾南巡而归。
English: On the 25th, the emperor drove south and returned.

古文：六月己亥，太尉、宜都公穆观薨。
现代文：六月初四，太尉、宜都公穆观去世。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, Taijun and Yidukong Muqun passed away.

古文：丙辰，北巡，至参合陂。
现代文：二十一日，北巡，到参合陂。
English: On the twenty-first day, the northern tour came to Sanghaebao.

古文：秋七月，幸三会屋侯泉，诏皇太子率百官以从。
现代文：秋七月，巡行到三会屋侯泉，诏令皇太子带领百官随从。
English: In autumn and July, the procession went to Sankaiya Hosen, and the crown prince led a retinue of a hundred officials.

古文：八月，幸马邑，观于氵垒源。
现代文：八月，到达马邑，观看飈源。
English: In August, arrived in Mayeup to watch the dragonfly source.

古文：九月乙亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月十一日，车驾回宫。
English: On September 11, he drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：冬十月癸卯，广西宫，起外墙，周回二十里。
现代文：冬十月初十，扩大西宫，修建外墙，周围长二十里。
English: In the tenth month of winter and the tenth month of October, the West Palace was expanded, the outer wall was built, and the surrounding area was twenty miles long.

古文：是岁饥，诏所在开仓振给。
现代文：当年发生饥荒，诏令所在的地方官员开仓赈济百姓。
English: When a famine occurred that year, the local officials where the imperial edict was issued opened their warehouses to help the people.

古文：十一月己巳，帝崩于西宫，时年三十二。
现代文：十一月初六，皇帝在西宫逝世，享年三十二岁。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, the emperor died in Xigu, at the age of thirty-two.

古文：遗诏以司空奚斤所获军实赐大臣自司徒长孙嵩以下，至于士卒各有差。
现代文：遗诏把司空奚斤所缴获的军事物资赏赐给大臣，从司空长孙嵩以下直至士兵们，数量多少不等。
English: The edict rewarded the minister with the military materials captured by the air marshals, from the air marshal Sun Song down to the soldiers, in varying amounts.

古文：十二月庚子，上谥曰明元皇帝，葬于云中金陵，庙称太宗。
现代文：十二月初八，上谥号为明元皇帝，安葬在云中的金陵，庙号为太宗。
English: On the 8th day of the 12th month, Emperor Mingyuan was enthroned and buried in Jinling in the clouds, and the temple name was Taizong.

古文：帝兼资文武，礼爱儒生，好览史传，以刘向所撰《新序》、《说苑》于经典正义多有所阙，乃撰《新集》三十篇，采诸经史，该洽古义云。
现代文：明元皇帝兼有文武之才，对儒生以礼相待，关心和爱护他们，喜欢读史书传记文章。他认为刘向所撰写的《新序》、《说苑》和经典中的正义有所缺漏，便撰写了《新集》三十篇，从经史中采引资料，使之合乎古义。
English: Emperor Mingyuan was both a man of letters and a man of war. He treated Confucians with courtesy, cared about and cherished them, and liked to read biographical articles in history books. He thought that Liu Xiang's "New Preface," "Saying Garden" and justice in the classics were missing, so he wrote 30 "New Collection" and extracted information from history to make it conform to the ancient meaning.

