古文：王存，字正仲，润州丹阳人。
现代文：王存字正仲，润州丹阳人。
English: Wang Cunza Zhengzhong, from Danyang, Rongzhou.

古文：幼善读书，年十二，辞亲从师于江西，五年始归。
现代文：从小善于读书，十二岁时，辞别亲人在江西拜师，五年才归。
English: From childhood, he was good at reading. At the age of twelve, he left his relatives to study in Jiangxi, and only returned five years later.

古文：时学者方尚雕篆，独为古文数十篇，乡老先生见之，自以为不及。
现代文：当时读书人正崇尚雕饰文辞，王存惟独写古文几十篇，乡老先生见到这些古文，自认为不及。
English: At that time, readers were advocating carving and decorating literature. Wang Cunhu alone wrote dozens of ancient texts. When the old man saw these ancient texts, he thought they were not good enough.

古文：庆历六年，登进士第，调嘉兴主簿，擢上虞令。
现代文：庆历六年，登进士第，调任嘉兴主簿，提升为上虞县令。
English: In the sixth year of Qingli, he was promoted to the rank of scholar, transferred to the Jiaxing master book, and promoted to the Shangyu County.

古文：豪姓杀人，久莫敢问，存至，按以州吏受赇，豪赂他官变其狱，存反为罢去。
现代文：豪门大族杀人，很久没有人敢过问，王存到任，审察到是州吏接受贿赂，豪门大族于是贿赂其他官员变改其狱案，王存反而被免职离去。
English: For a long time, no one dared to question the murder of a member of the wealthy elite. When Wang Cunren took office, the investigation found that it was a state official who accepted bribes. The wealthy elite then bribed other officials to change his prison case. Wang Cunren, on the other hand, was dismissed and left.

古文：久之，除密州推官。
现代文：过了很长时间，王存被授予密州推官。
English: After a long time, Wang Cun was awarded the title of Misshou.

古文：修洁自重，为欧阳修、吕公著、赵概所知。
现代文：王存洁身自重，被欧阳修、吕公著、赵概所知遇。
English: Wang Cunjie is self-respecting, and has been met by Ouyang Xiu, Lu Gong, and Zhao You.

古文：治平中，入为国子监直讲，迁秘书省著作佐郎，历馆阁校勘、集贤校理、史馆检讨、知太常礼院。
现代文：治平年中，入为国子监直讲，升任秘书省著作佐郎，历任馆阁校勘、集贤校理、史馆检讨、知太常礼院。
English: In the middle of the Heian period, he was appointed as the direct lecturer of the National Children's Supervisor, and was promoted to the secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and successively served as the curator of the museum, the curator of the museum, the curator of the museum, the curator of the history museum, and the curator of the Chita Jorei-in.

古文：存故与王安石厚，安石执政，数引与论事，不合，即谢不往。
现代文：王存原来与王安石相厚，王安石当权，多次引荐相互论事，意见不合，就辞谢没有前去。
English: Originally, Wang Cun and Wang Anshi were close, and Wang Anshi was in power. They repeatedly introduced each other and discussed things. When they disagreed, they did not go forward.

古文：存在三馆历年，不少贬以干进。
现代文：王存在三馆累年，没有稍稍贬低别人以希求进用。
English: Wang has been living in the three mansions for many years, and he has never belittled others in hopes of being promoted.

古文：尝召见便殿，累上书陈时政，因及大臣，无所附丽，皆时人难言者。
现代文：皇帝曾在便殿召见他，连连上书指陈时政，因而涉及大臣，无所附会，都是当时人难以说出的事情。
English: The emperor once summoned him to the emperor's residence, and repeatedly wrote about Chen Shizheng, thus involving the minister, without any accompanying meeting. These were things that were difficult to say at the time.

古文：元丰元年，神宗察其忠实无党，以为国史编修官、修起居注。
现代文：元丰元年，神宗察知他忠实不偏私，以他为国史编修官、修起居注。
English: In the first year of the Genpo era, the Shinshu sect noticed his loyalty and selflessness, and made him an editor of the national history and a preceptor.

古文：时起居注虽日侍，而奏事必禀中书俟旨。
现代文：当时起居注虽然每天侍随，但奏事必须禀承中书等待旨令。
English: At that time, although he was a daily attendant, he had to wait for the order in writing.

古文：存乞复唐贞观左右史执笔随宰相入殿故事，神宗韪其言，听直前奏事，自存始也。
现代文：王存请求恢复唐代贞观左右史执笔随宰相入殿的成例，神宗赞成王存的意见，听任直接上前奏事，这是从王存开始的。
English: Wang Cun (王存) requested the restoration of the Tang Dynasty's tradition of Zhenguan (貞观) writing the history of the left and right to accompany the chancellor into the hall. Shenzong (神宗) agreed with Wang Cun (王存) and allowed him to report directly. This began with Wang Cun (王存).

古文：明年，以右正言、知制诰、同修国史兼判太常寺。
现代文：第二年，王存以右正言、知制诰、同修国史的身份兼判太常寺。
English: In the second year, Wang Cun was also appointed as the judge of Taijo-ji Temple, holding the positions of Ujishogen, Chisetsuko, and a practitioner of national history.

古文：论圜丘合祭天地为非古，当亲祠北郊如《周礼》。
现代文：论在祭坛合祭天地为不符合古制，应像《周礼》规定的那样亲自祭祀北郊。
English: On the issue of combining the altar with the heaven and earth, it does not conform to the ancient system, and one should personally offer sacrifices to the northern suburbs as stipulated in the "Weekly Rituals."

古文：官制行，神宗切于用人，存请自熙宁以来群臣缘论事得罪，或诖误被斥而情实纳忠非大过者，随材召擢，以备官使。
现代文：官制实行，神宗急于用人，王存请求自熙宁年以来众臣因论事获罪，或者因贻误被贬斥但真心忠诚没有大的过失的人，随其才能召用提升，以备官府差使。
English: With the implementation of the official system, Shenzong was in a hurry to employ people. Wang Cunxu requested that since the time of Xi Ning, all ministers who had been found guilty of discussing matters, or who had been disparaged for making mistakes, but who were sincere and loyal and had no major faults, should be promoted according to their ability, in order to prepare government officials.

古文：语合神宗意。收拔者甚众。
现代文：王存的话符合神宗的心意，因此而收录提拔了很多人。
English: Wang Cun's words are in line with the spirit of Shenzong, so many people have been included and promoted.

古文：又言： 赦令出上恩，而比岁议法治狱者，多乞不以赦降原减。
现代文：王存又说： 赦令出自陛下的恩惠，但近年议论法令治理狱案的人，多请求不用赦降原减。
English: Wang Cun also said: The pardon order came from the grace of His Majesty, but in recent years, those who have discussed the laws and regulations governing prison cases have often requested that the pardon should not be reduced.

古文：官司谒禁，本防请托，而吊死问疾，一切杜绝，皆非便也。 执政不悦。
现代文：官衙禁止进见，本来是防止请托，但吊祭死者慰问疾病，一切都予杜绝，都不是适宜的。 执政大臣不高兴。
English: It is not appropriate for government officials to ban public gatherings, which was originally intended to prevent begging, but it is not appropriate to stop everything, such as offering a hanging sacrifice to the dead to console the sick. The ruling minister is not happy.

古文：五年，迁龙图阁直学士、知开封府。
现代文：元丰五年，升任龙图阁直学士、知开封府。
English: In the fifth year of Yuanfeng, he was promoted to the direct bachelor of Longtu Ge, Chikaifu.

古文：京师并河居人，盗凿汴堤以自广，或请令培筑复故，又按民庐侵官道者使撤之。
现代文：京城傍河的居民，谋取开凿汴河堤防以自行扩大地盘，有人请命培植修筑恢复原样，又审察百姓屋舍侵占官道的使退还。
English: Residents of riverside areas in Beijing are seeking permission to break through the dike of the Min River in order to expand their own land. Some people have asked to cultivate and restore the original buildings, and to inspect the houses that encroach on the official road and return them.

古文：二谋出自中人，既有诏矣。
现代文：这二个计谋出自宦官，已有诏命了。
English: These two stratagems come from the eunuchs and have been decreed.

古文：存曰： 此吾职也。 入言之。
现代文：王存说： 这是我的职责。 入朝上言此事。
English: Wang Cun said, "This is my duty. I will go to the Imperial Court to appeal this matter."

古文：即曰驰其役，都人欢呼相庆。
现代文：当天驰放筑堤的工役，京城人欢呼互相庆贺。
English: On the same day, the construction workers who were building the embankment were released, and the people of Beijing cheered and congratulated each other.

古文：进枢密直学士，改兵部尚书，转户部。
现代文：王存进官枢密直学士，改任兵部尚书，转任户部尚书。
English: Wang Cunjin was promoted to the post of privy councilor and directly became an academician. He was appointed as the secretary of the military department and the secretary of the household department.

古文：神宗崩，哲宗立，永裕陵财费，不逾时告备，宰相乘间复徙之兵部。
现代文：神宗去世，哲宗即位，永裕陵财政费用，没有超过时间即宣告备办，宰相乘机又把王存移任兵部尚书。
English: Shenzong died, Zhezong ascended the throne, Yongyuling's financial expenses were declared to be prepared without exceeding the time limit, and the prime minister took the opportunity to transfer Wang Cun to the military department of Shangshu.

古文：太仆寺请内外马事得专达，毋隶驾部。
现代文：太仆寺请求内外马事得专线通达，不要隶属驾部。
English: Taipu Temple requests that the internal and external equestrian affairs should have a special line of communication, and should not be affiliated with the driving department.

古文：存言： 如此，官制坏矣。
现代文：王存说 ：这样，官制破坏了。
English: Wang Cun said: In this way, the official system was destroyed.

古文：先帝正省、台、寺、监之职，使相临制，不可徇有司自便，而隳已成之法。 元祐初，还户部，固辞不受。
现代文：先帝纠正省、台、寺、监的职权，使互相牵制，不可以曲从有关部门便利，而败坏已经形成的制度。 元初年，王存还任户部尚书，坚决辞谢不接受。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Cun was also appointed as the head of the Household Department, but he refused to accept the resignation.

古文：二年，拜中大夫、尚书右丞。
现代文：元二年，授任中大夫、尚书右丞。
English: In 1902, he was awarded the position of junior doctor, Shoshu Ujo.

古文：三年，迁左丞。
现代文：元三年，升任尚书左丞。
English: In 1931, he was promoted to Shoshu Sojo.

古文：有建议罢教畿内保甲者，存言： 今京师兵籍益削，又废保甲不教，非国家根本久长之计。
现代文：有人建议废除京畿内保甲，王存说： 现在京师兵员越来越削弱，又废除保甲不予教练，这不是国家根本长久之计。
English: Some people have suggested abolishing the Gyeonggi internal military reserve. Wang Cunrong said: Now that the soldiers of the Beijing division are getting weaker and weaker, and the abolition of the military reserve is not given to the coach, this is not a long-term plan for the country.

古文：且先帝不惮艰难而为之，既已就绪，无故而废之，不可。 门下侍郎韩维罢，存言： 去一正人，天下失望，忠党沮气，谗邪之人争进矣。 又论杜纯不当罢侍御史，王觌不当罢谏官。
现代文：何况先帝不畏艰难而为之，既然已经就绪，无故而废除它，这不行。 门下侍郎韩维被罢免，王存说： 除去一个正直的人，天下失望，忠臣丧气，谗言邪佞之人将争相进用了。 又论杜纯不应罢免侍御史，王觌不应罢免谏官的职务。
English: Moreover, the previous emperor did it without fear of hardship, and since it was already prepared, it is not possible to abolish it without reason. The servant Han Wei was dismissed, and Wang Cun said: "If you remove an honest person, the world will be disappointed, loyal servants will be discouraged, and those who speak ill of others will compete for it. Also, Du Chun should not dismiss the attendant, and Wang Yao should not dismiss the eunuch's duties.

古文：四方奏谳大辟，刑部援比请贷，都省屡以无可矜恕却之。
现代文：四方各地上奏审判定案大法，刑部援引旧例请求宽大，尚书省屡以无可宽恕拒绝。
English: All over Shifang, the final judgment of the trial was submitted to the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and the Criminal Law Department invoked the old cases to request leniency. Shangshu Province repeatedly rejected the request, saying that it was unforgivable.

古文：存曰： 此祖宗制也。
现代文：王存说 ：这是祖宗的制度。
English: Wang Cun said: This is the ancestral system.

古文：有司欲生之，而朝廷破例杀之，可乎？ 又言： 比废进士专经一科，参以诗赋，失先帝黜词律、崇经术之意。 河决而北几十年，水官议还故道，存争之曰： 故道已高，水性趋下，徒费财力，恐无成功。 卒辍其役。
现代文：官员想救他，但朝廷破例杀他，可以吗？ 又说 ：近来废除进士专经一科，杂试诗赋，有失先帝贬退词律、崇尚经术的心意。 黄河决口向北流已几十年，水官建议归回旧有的河道，王存争论说： 原有的河道已经增高，水性趋下，白白浪费财力，恐怕不会成功。 最终停止了这一工役。
English: The official wanted to save him, but the imperial court made an exception and killed him, is that okay? He also said, "Recently, the abolition of a special subject for entering the priesthood, and the miscellaneous poetry exam, is a result of the former emperor's intention to deprecate the words and rites and advocate the study of the scriptures. The Yellow River has been flowing northward for decades, and the water official suggested returning to the old river channel. Wang Cun argued, "The original river channel has increased in height, and the water quality has declined. It is a waste of financial resources, and I am afraid it will not be successful." Eventually, this labor service was

古文：蔡确以诗怨讪，存与范纯仁欲薄其罪，确再贬新州，存亦罢，以端明殿学士知蔡州。
现代文：蔡确以写诗怨恨毁谤获罪，王存与范纯仁想减轻他的罪行，蔡确再贬新州，王存也被罢免，以端明殿学士的身份知蔡州。
English: Cai Zhengyi was convicted of writing a poem of resentment and defamation, Wang Cunlan and Fan Chunren wanted to mitigate his crime, Cai Zhengyi again disparaged Xinzhou, Wang Cunlan was also dismissed, and he knew Cai Zhou as a scholar of the Tangming Palace.

古文：始，存之徙兵部，确力也。
现代文：开始，王存移任兵部，是蔡确之力。
English: At the beginning, Wang Cun was transferred to the military department, which was the strength of Cai Jizhen.

古文：至是，为确罢，士大夫善其能损怨。
现代文：到这时，因为蔡确而被罢免，士大夫称赞王存能不记前嫌。
English: At this time, because Cai Zhengyi was dismissed, the magistrate praised Wang Cuneng for not remembering the previous grudge.

古文：岁余，加资政殿学士、知扬州。
现代文：一年多后，加官资政殿学士、知扬州。
English: More than a year later, he was promoted to the post of vice-governor and received a bachelor's degree from Zhiyang Prefecture.

古文：扬、润相去一水，用故相例，得岁时过家上冢，出赐钱给邻里，又具酒食召会父老，亲与酬酢，乡党传为美谈。
现代文：扬州、润州相距一条河，用以前宰相的旧例，王存得以在逢年过节时访家上坟，拿出皇帝赐给的钱分给邻里，又备办酒食召见父老，亲自与他们互相敬酒，家乡人传为美谈。
English: Yangzhou and Rongzhou are separated by a river. Using the old example of the former prime minister, Wang Cun was able to visit his family's grave at the time of the New Year, take out the money given by the emperor and distribute it to his neighbors. He also prepared wine and food to invite his parents, and personally toasted with them. People in his hometown said that it was a beautiful conversation.

古文：召为吏部尚书。
现代文：召为吏部尚书。
English: He was called to be a member of the cadre.

古文：时，在廷朋党之论浸炽，存为哲宗言： 人臣朋党，诚不可长，然或不察，则滥及善人。
现代文：当时，在朝廷朋党之论渐烈，王存对哲宗说： 人臣各树党羽，互相倾轧，诚然不可助长，但如果不明察，那么滥及好人。
English: At that time, when the theory of cronyism in the imperial court was becoming increasingly popular, Wang Cun said to Zhezong: It is true that it is not good to encourage party members to fight with each other, but if you do not notice it, then you will offend good people.

古文：今日果有进此说者，愿陛下察之。 由是复与任事者戾，除知大名府，改知杭州。绍圣初，请老，提举崇禧观，迁右正议大夫致仕。
现代文：庆历年中，有人指责韩琦、富弼、范仲淹、欧阳修为朋党，幸赖仁宗圣明，不为所迷惑。今天果真有进此说的，希望陛下明察。 绍圣初，因年老请求辞官，提举崇禧观，迁右正议大夫致仕。
English: During the mid-year celebration, some people accused Han Zheng, Fu Zheng, Fan Zhongran, and Ouyang Xiu of being friends of the party, but Sheng Lai Renzong Sheng Ming was not confused. Today, if there is really something to this, I hope His Majesty can see it clearly. Shao Sheng Chu, due to his old age, asked the dictionary officer to promote Chong Xikun, and moved to the right to serve as a doctor.

古文：旧制，当得东宫保傅，议者指存尝议还西夏侵地，故杀其恩典，既而降通议大夫。
现代文：按照旧制，应得太子少保、少傅，议者指责王存曾建议归还西夏侵地，所以减除他的恩典，不久降为通议大夫。
English: According to the old system, Wang Cun was accused of having proposed the return of the Western Xia invasion land, so his grace was deducted, and he was soon reduced to a mediator.

古文：存尝悼近世学士贵为公卿，而祭祀其先，但循庶人之制。
现代文：王存曾经悲伤近世学士贵为公卿，但祭祀其先人，只遵循平民的礼制。
English: Wang Cun was once a sad modern scholar and nobleman, but he only followed the civil etiquette when he offered sacrifices to his ancestors.

古文：及归老筑居，首营家庙。
现代文：等到告老回乡建筑居所，首先营造家庙。
English: Wait until you are old enough to return to your hometown to build a residence, and first build a family temple.

古文：建中靖国元年，卒，年七十九。
现代文：建中靖国元年，王存去世，终年七十九岁。
English: In the first year of Jianzhong's reign, Wang Cun passed away at the age of seventy-nine.

古文：赠左银青光禄大夫。
现代文：赠左银青光禄大夫。
English: The left silver medal was presented to Doctor Qingguanglu.

古文：存性宽厚，平居恂恂，不为诡激之行，至其所守，确不可夺。
现代文：王存性情宽厚，平素居处谦恭谨慎，不做欺诈过激的事，至于他所坚守的，则刚强不可以剥夺。
English: Wang Cunxu is generous in nature. He lives modestly and prudently, and does not do anything excessive. As for what he adheres to, he is strong and cannot be deprived.

古文：司马光尝曰： 并驰万马中能驻足者，其王存乎！ 
现代文：司马光曾说 ：一同在万马奔驰中能驻足的人，当数王存啊！ 
English: Sima Guang once said: Together with those who can stop in Wanma Benz, when several kings exist!

古文：孙固，字和父，郑州管城人。
现代文：孙固字和父，郑州管城人。
English: Sun Guzi and his father, a resident of Guancheng, Zhengzhou.

古文：幼有立志。九岁读《论语》，曰： 吾能行此。 徂徕石介一见，以公辅期之。
现代文：从小立有志向，九岁读《论语》，说： 我能行此道。 徂徕石介一见到他，寄之以王公辅臣之望。
English: He had an ambition from an early age. At the age of nine, he read the Analects of Confucius and said, "I can walk this path." As soon as he saw him, Shioriishi no Suke sent him to the prince's aide.

古文：擢进士第，调磁州司户参军。
现代文：及进士第，调任磁州司户参军。
English: and promoted to the rank of sergeant, and transferred to the position of magingzhou steward to join the army.

古文：从平贝州，为文彦博言胁从罔治之义，与彦博意协，故但诛首恶，余无所及。
现代文：参予平定贝州，向文彦博进言胁从者不治罪的建议，与文彦博的意见相一致，所以只杀了首犯，其余的没有治罪。
English: His advice to attend the subduing of Baizhou and to advise Fenyonbo to threaten followers with impunity was consistent with Fenyonbo's opinion, so he only killed the first offender, and did not punish the rest.

古文：转霍邑令，迁秘书丞，为审刑详议官。
现代文：转任霍邑县令，升任秘书丞，为审刑详议官。
English: He was transferred to the post of Huoyi County magistrate, promoted to the post of secretary, and became a detailed deliberation officer.

古文：宰相韩琦知其贤，谕使来见，固不肯往。
现代文：宰相韩琦知道他的贤能，派使者来求见，孙固不肯前去。
English: Prime Minister Han Zheng knew of his ability and sent an envoy to see him, but Sun Gu refused to go.

古文：琦益器重之，引为编修中书诸房文字。
现代文：韩琦更加器重他，引用为编修中书诸房文字。
English: Han Zheng paid more attention to him, and quoted Zhu Fang's words as an editor of Chinese books.

古文：治平中，神宗为颍王，以固侍讲；及为皇太子，又为侍读。
现代文：治平年中，神宗为颍王，以孙固侍读。等到为皇太子，孙固又为侍读。
English: During the Heian period, Shinso was the king of eunuchs, with Sun Gu as his attendant. When he became the crown prince, Sun Gu was also the attendant.

古文：至即位，擢工部郎中、天章阁待制、知通进银台司。
现代文：到即皇帝位，提拔孙固为工部郎中、天章阁待制、知通进银台司。
English: Immediately after the emperor's enthronement, Sun Gu was promoted to the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry, Tian Zhangge was put on standby, and Zhitong was promoted to the director of the Bank of China.

古文：种谔取绥州，固知神宗志欲经略西夏，欲先事以戒，即上言： 待远人宜示之信，今无名举兵，非计之得。
现代文：种谔攻取绥州，孙固知道神宗立志想策划处理西夏事务，打算事先予以劝戒，就上言： 对待外族人应示之以信义，现没有名义举兵，非计谋之所得。
English: When Sun Quan wanted to conquer Zhangzhou, he knew that Shensong was determined to plan and deal with the affairs of Western Xia and intended to give him a warning in advance, so he said: Treat foreigners with sincerity, there is no nominal raising of troops, no income from scheming.

古文：愿以汉韩安国、魏相、唐魏征论兵之略，参校同异，则是非炳然矣。
现代文：希望以汉韩安国魏相、唐魏征论兵的策略，参考同异，那么是与非显而易见了。
English: It is hoped to use the strategies of Han, Han, An, Wei, and Tang and Wei to recruit and discuss soldiers, referring to similarities and differences, then it is obvious what is right and what is wrong.

古文：兵，凶器也，动不可妄，妄动将有悔。 大臣恶其说，出知澶州。
现代文：用兵，是凶器，不可妄动，如果妄动将会后悔。 大臣厌恶他的意见，让他出任澶州知州。
English: Using soldiers is a deadly weapon, you should not act rashly, if you do, you will regret it. The minister was disgusted with his opinion and made him the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：还知审刑院，复领银台、封驳兼侍读，判少府监。
现代文：回朝任知审刑院，又掌领银台司、封驳兼侍读，判少府监。
English: He returned to the imperial court and was appointed to the Chisun Penal Institute, and also served as the head of the Bank of Taiwan, the seal and the attendant, and was sentenced to be a minor prefectural inspector.

古文：神宗问： 王安石可相否？ 对曰： 安石文行甚高，处侍从献纳之职，可矣。
现代文：神宗问： 王安石能不能当宰相？ 孙固回答说 ：王安石文学才能很高，处于侍从献纳的职位，是可以的。
English: Shenzong asked: Can Wang Anshi be the prime minister? Sun Gu replied: Wang Anshi has a high literary talent, and it is possible to be in the position of attendant.

古文：宰相自有其度，安石狷狭少容。必欲求贤相，吕公著、司马光、韩维其人也。 凡四问，皆以此对。
现代文：宰相自有宰相的度量，王安石气量狭小不能容人，必想求得贤明的宰相，吕公著、司马光、韩维是适合的人选。 共四次问这问题，孙固都是这样对答。
English: The prime minister has his own measure of the prime minister, Wang Anshi's stamina is too small to accommodate people, and he must seek a wise prime minister. Lu Gongzhu, Sima Guang and Han Wei are suitable candidates. Asked this question a total of four times, Sun Gu always answered in this way.

古文：及安石当国，更法度，固数议事不合；青苗法出，又极陈其不便。
现代文：等到王安石当权，改革法令制度，孙固多次议事与王安石不合，青苗法出笼孙固又极力陈述此法不适宜。
English: When Wang Anshi came to power and reformed the legal system, Sun Gu repeatedly disagreed with Wang Anshi, and Sun Gu insisted that this law was not appropriate.

古文：及韩琦疏至，神宗感动，谓固曰： 朕熟计之，诚不便。 固出语执政曰： 及上有意，宜亟图之，以福天下。 既而竟从安石。
现代文：等到韩琦的奏疏到，神宗感动，对孙固说 ：朕经久而周密地计议，青苗法确实不适宜。 孙固出来告诉执政大臣说： 等到皇上有意，应赶快图谋，以造福天下。 不久神宗终于听从王安石的意见。
English: When Han Xuan's report arrived, Shenzong was moved and said to Sun Gu: "I have deliberated for a long time and thoroughly, and the Young Seedlings Law is really not appropriate." Sun Gu came out and told the ruling minister: "Wait until the emperor has an idea, we should quickly make plans to benefit the world." Soon, Shenzong finally listened to Wang Anshi's opinion.

古文：固复领银台司。
现代文：孙固再掌领银台司。
English: Sun Gu is back in charge of the Taiwan Banking Bureau.

古文：孔文仲对制策忤时政，报罢。
现代文：孔文仲应对皇帝的制策触犯时政，朝廷拒不采纳，宣令退去。
English: Kong Wenzhong's response to the emperor's plan violated the current political situation. The imperial court refused to accept it and ordered him to withdraw.

古文：固言： 陛下以名求士，而士以实应，今反过之，何哉？
现代文：孙固说： 陛下以名求士，而士据实回答，现在反而责怪他，这是为什么呢？
English: Sun Gu said, "Your Majesty asked for a judge by name, and the judge answered truthfully, but now you are blaming him. Why is that?

古文：今谓文仲之言以惑天下，臣恐天下不惑文仲之言，以文仲之黜为惑也。 胡宗愈坐言事逐，苏颂、陈荐以论李定罢，固皆引谊争之。
现代文：现在认为孔文仲的话蛊惑天下，我恐怕天下不被孔文仲的话所迷惑，而对孔文仲的被贬退迷惑不解。 胡宗愈因言事被贬逐，苏颂、陈荐因论李定被罢免，孙固都引义争辩。
English: It is now believed that the words of Kong Wenzhong have bewitched the world. I am afraid that the world will not be bewitched by the words of Kong Wenzhong, but will be bewildered by the disparagement of Kong Wenzhong. Hu Zongyu was disparaged for his words and deeds, Su Song and Chen Ruiqi were dismissed for their views on Li Ding, and Sun Gu was drawn into a dispute over righteousness.

古文：时议尊僖祖为始祖，固议曰： 汉高以得天下与商、周异，故太上皇不得为始封；光武中兴，不敢祖舂陵而祖高帝。
现代文：当时议论尊奉僖祖为始祖，孙固议论说 ：汉高祖因得天下与商、周不同，所以太上皇不得为始祖；汉光武帝中兴，不敢以舂陵为始祖而以汉高祖为始祖。
English: At that time, it was argued that the founder of the Han Dynasty should be revered as the founder of the Han Dynasty, and Sun Gu argued that the founder of the Han Dynasty should be different from Shang and Zhou, so the Emperor should not be the founder of the Han Dynasty; Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty did not dare to take the founder of the Han Dynasty as the founder of the Han Dynasty.

古文：宋有天下，传之万世，太祖功也，不当替其祀；请以为始祖，而为僖祖别立庙。
现代文：宋朝拥有天下，传之万世，都是太祖的功劳，不应取代他的祀位；请以太祖为始祖，而替僖祖另外立庙。
English: The Song Dynasty owns the whole world, which has been passed down for thousands of years. It is all the merit of the great-grandfather, and should not replace his place of worship. Please regard the great-grandfather as the founder, and build another temple for the great-grandfather.

古文：禘祫之日，奉其祧主东向以伸其尊，合所谓祖以孙尊、孙以祖屈之意。 韩琦见而叹曰： 孙公此议，足以不朽矣。 
现代文：始祖远祖祭祀的那天，尊奉其庙远祖神主朝东向以明其尊隆，符合所谓祖因孙尊贵，孙因祖委屈的意思。 韩琦看到后感叹说 ：孙公此建议，足以不朽。 
English: On the day of the ancestor's sacrifice, the worship of the temple's distant ancestor deity moved eastward to the east, in line with the meaning of the so-called ancestor's honor and Sun's grievance. After seeing this, Han Zheng sighed and said: Sun Gong's suggestion is enough for immortality.

古文：加龙图阁直学士、知真定府。
现代文：加封龙图阁直学士、知真定府。
English: Gafong Longtu Ge's direct bachelor, Chizhen Dingfu.

古文：辽人盗耕解子平地，岁且久，吏争弗能还。
现代文：辽国人盗耕解子平地方，年岁已久，胥吏争辩没能归还。
English: Liao Guo's people have been stealing and ploughing land in Zhiping for a long time, and the officials have not been able to return it.

古文：固微得其要领，折愧之，正疆地二百里。
现代文：孙固稍微得其要领，挫辱辽人，夺回疆地二百里。
English: Sun Gu slightly got the gist of it, humiliated the Liao people, and won back 200 miles of territory.

古文：熙宁末，以枢密直学士知开封府。
现代文：熙宁末年，以枢密直学士的身份知开封府。
English: At the end of Xi Ning's life, he went to Chihkaifu as a privy scholar.

古文：元丰初，同知枢密院事。
现代文：元丰初年，任同知枢密院事。
English: In the first year of Yuanfeng, Tongzhi was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：时征安南，建顺州，其地瘴疠不堪守，固请弃之，内徙者二万户。
现代文：当时征讨安南，建立顺州，此地有瘴气不堪守御，孙固请求放弃顺州，向内地迁移二万户。
English: At that time, Annan was solicited to establish Shunzhou, and there was a backlash here that was too strong to resist. Sun Gu requested that Shunzhou be abandoned and that 20,000 households be relocated to the mainland.

古文：谍者告夏人幽其主，神宗欲西讨，固数言举兵易，解祸难。
现代文：间谍报告西夏人幽禁其国王，神宗打算对西边征讨，孙固多次说兴兵容易，解除祸患难。
English: The spies reported that the Xixia people had imprisoned their king, that Shenzong was planning to invade the west, and that Sun Gu had repeatedly said that it was easy to raise an army and solve the problems.

古文：神宗曰： 夏有衅不取，则为辽人所有，不可失也。 固曰： 必不得已，请声其罪薄伐之，分裂其地，使其酋长自守焉。 神宗笑曰： 此真郦生之说尔。 时执政有言便当直度河，不可留行。
现代文：神宗说 ：西夏国势有机可乘，不去攻取，那么就会被辽国人所有，不可失此机会。 孙固说： 必不得已，请声讨其罪行迫近讨伐，分裂它的土地，使其酋长自守于此。 神宗笑着说 ：这真是郦生之说而已。 当时执政大臣有人说只当径直渡过黄河，不可以停留。
English: Shenzong said, "The situation in Western Xia can be taken advantage of. If we don't attack it, it will be owned by the Liao people. We must not miss this opportunity." Sun Gu said, "If we have to, please denounce its crimes, approach the crusade, divide its land, and let its chieftains defend themselves here." Shenzong smiled and said, "This is really just a truism. At that time, the ruling minister said that we should just cross the Yellow River directly and not stay.

古文：固曰： 然则孰为陛下任此者？ 神宗曰： 朕已属李宪。 固曰： 伐国，大事也，岂可使宦官为之！
现代文：孙固说： 但谁替陛下担此责任呢？ 神宗说： 朕已委托李宪。 孙固说： 征伐国家，是大事，怎么能够让宦官担此大任！
English: Sun Gu said, "But who will take on this responsibility for Your Majesty?" Shen Zong said, "I have entrusted Li Xian." Sun Gu said, "Conquering a country is a big deal, how can you let a eunuch take on such a big responsibility!"

古文：今陛下任李宪，则士大夫孰肯为用乎？ 神宗不悦。
现代文：孙固说： 吕公著所说的是对的。 开始议论五路入讨，在灵州会合。
English: Sun Gu said, "What Lyu Gongzhu said is right," and they began to discuss the Five-Way Talks and met in Lingzhou.

古文：他日，固又曰： 今五路进师而无大帅，就使成功，兵必为乱。 神宗曰： 大帅诚难其人。 吕公著曰： 既无其人，曷若已之。 固曰： 公著言是也。 初议五路入讨，会于灵州，李宪由熙河入，辄不赴灵州，乃自开兰、会，欲以弭责。固曰： 兵法期而后至者斩。
现代文：李宪从熙河进入，就不往灵州，乃自行开拓兰、会州，打算以此消除责任。
English: When Li Xian entered from Xihe, he did not go to Lingzhou, but explored Lanzhou and Huizhou on his own, intending to eliminate his responsibility.

古文：今诸路皆进，而宪独不行，虽得兰、会，罪不可赦。 神宗不听，其后师果无功。
现代文：孙固说 ：兵法约定时日而后到者斩首。现在各路都前进，而李宪惟独不向前，虽然得兰、会州，但罪不可赦免。 神宗不同意，其后军队果然无功而返。
English: Sun Gu said, "The laws of war stipulate that anyone who arrives later than the appointed time will be beheaded. Now, all roads are moving forward, but Li Xian is the only one who is not moving forward. Although he has conquered Lanka and Huizhou, his crime cannot be pardoned." Shenzong disagreed, and the army eventually returned without any results.

古文：神宗曰： 朕始以孙固言为迂，今悔无及矣。 
现代文：神宗说 ：朕开始认为孙固的话迂阔，现在后悔也来不及了。 
English: Shenzong said: I began to think that Sun Gu's words were careless, and now it's too late to regret it.

古文：改太中大夫、枢密副使，进知院事，以疾避位，拜观文殿学士、知河阳，寻提举嵩山崇福宫。
现代文：改任太中大夫、枢密副使，升任知枢密院事，因病辞官隐退，授官观文殿学士、知河阳，不久提举嵩山崇福宫。
English: He was reappointed as the Grand Vice-Marshal, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, was promoted to the Secretary of the Privy Council, resigned due to illness, was awarded the title of "Master of the Academy of Confucianism," the title of "Master of Confucianism," the title of "Master of Confucianism," the title of "Master of Confucianism," the title of "Master of Confucianism," and the title of "Master of Confucianism."

古文：哲宗即位，以正议大夫知河南府，徙郑州。
现代文：哲宗即皇帝位，以正议大夫的身份知河南府，移任郑州。
English: Zhezong, that is, the emperor, knew Henan Prefecture as a doctor of law and moved to Zhengzhou.

古文：元祐二年，召除侍读、提举中太一宫，遂拜门下侍郎。
现代文：元二年，召授侍读、提举中太一宫，于是任门下侍郎。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was summoned to be an attendant and promoted to Chutai Ichinomiya, whereupon he was appointed as a junior attendant.

古文：哲宗与太皇太后矜其年高，每朝会豫节拜仪，听休于幄次。
现代文：哲宗与太皇太后怜悯他年纪大，每次朝会参与礼节跪拜仪式，听任他在篷帐中休息。
English: Zhezong and the empress dowager took pity on him because he was old. Every time the imperial court met, they participated in the ceremonial kneeling ceremony and allowed him to rest in the tent.

古文：固数乞骸骨，太皇太后曰： 卿，先帝在东宫时旧臣。
现代文：孙固多次请求告老辞官，太皇太后说： 你是先帝在东宫时的旧臣。
English: Sun Gu repeatedly asked for the resignation of the old official, and the Grand Empress Dowager said: You are the old minister of the former emperor when he was in the East Palace.

古文：今帝新听政，勉留辅导；或体中未安，取文书于家治之可也。 固感激，强起视事，复知枢密院事，累官右光禄大夫。
现代文：现在皇帝刚听政，勉留你辅佐开导；有时身体不好，可以取文书在家治事。 孙固感激，勉强起来处理政事，恢复知枢密院事，累官右光禄大夫。
English: Now, the emperor has just listened to the government, and has reluctantly kept you as an assistant to enlighten him; sometimes your health is not good, so you can take a document to manage things at home. Sun Gu was grateful, and reluctantly got up to deal with government affairs, resumed the affairs of the Privy Council, and was appointed doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：五年，卒，年七十五。
现代文：元五年，孙固去世，终年七十五岁。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Sun Gu died at the age of 75.

古文：哲宗、太皇太后皆出声泣。
现代文：哲宗、太皇太后都失声哭泣。
English: Tetsuzo and the grand empress dowager both broke down crying.

古文：时文彦博致仕归洛，将宴饯崇政殿，以固在殡，罢之。
现代文：当时文彦博辞官回洛阳，将要在崇政殿设宴饯行，因孙固在丧期，取消了这一宴请。
English: At that time, when Fumihiko Hakuin returned to Luoyang, he was going to hold a banquet at the Palace of Supreme State Power. However, this banquet was cancelled because Sun Gu was in the period of mourning.

古文：辍视朝二日，赠开府仪同三司，谥曰温靖。
现代文：停止上朝二天，赠开府仪同三司，谥号叫 温靖 。
English: Two days after his ascension to the throne, he was given the title of prefect and the title of the third secretary. His posthumous name was Wen Jing.

古文：固宅心诚粹，不喜矫亢，与人居久而益信，故更历夷险，而不为人所疾害。
现代文：孙固忠诚纯粹存于心中，不喜欢假托高傲，与人同居，时间一长更受人信任，因此经历多次平安危险，而不被他人所憎恨迫害。
English: Sun Gu's loyalty is purely in his heart, he does not like to pretend to be arrogant, he lives with people, and he is more trusted over time, so he has experienced many safety hazards without being hated and persecuted by others.

古文：尝曰： 人当以圣贤为师，一节之士，不足学也。 又曰： 以爱亲之心爱其君，则无不尽矣。 司马光退处，固每劝神宗召归；及光为陈州，过郑，固与论天下大事至数十，曰： 公行且相，宜视先后缓急审处之。 傅尧俞铭其墓曰： 司马公之清节，孙公之淳德，盖所谓不言而信者也。 世以为确论。
现代文：他曾说 ：人当以圣贤为老师，一节之士，不值得学习。 又说 ：用爱父母的心去爱君主，那么就会无所不尽了。 司马光隐退待职，孙固每每劝神宗召回司马光；等到司马光任陈州知州，经过郑州，孙固与他议论天下大事多至几十条，说： 您将要当宰相，应视先后缓急审慎处理。 傅尧俞为他写墓志铭说 ：司马公的清节，孙公的淳德，大概是所谓不言而信了。 当时人认为是中肯的结论。
English: He once said: "People should take the sages as teachers, a man of one verse is not worth learning." He also said: "If you love the monarch with the heart of loving your parents, then you will do everything." Sima Guang retired from his duties, and Sun Gui always advised the sect to recall Sima Guang; until Sima Guang was appointed to Chenzhou Chizhou, after passing through Zhengzhou, Sun Gu discussed with him as many as dozens of major events in the world, saying: "You are going to be the prime minister, you should treat it with urgency and prudence." Fu Xi wrote an epitaph for him, saying: Sima Gong's Qing Festival,

古文：绍圣时夺遗泽，元符二年，夺所赠官，列元祐党籍。
现代文：绍圣年间削夺遗留恩泽，元符二年，削夺所赠的官爵，列入元党籍。
English: During the reign of Emperor Shoshen, the remaining benefits were taken away, and in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the official title given was taken away and included in the former party membership.

古文：政和中，徽宗以固尝为神宗宫僚，特出籍，悉还所夺。
现代文：政和年中，徽宗认为孙固曾经为神宗在东宫的僚臣，特地把他撤出元党籍，全部归还所削夺的遗泽赠官。
English: In the middle of the 17th century, Huizong believed that Sun Guorong had once been a vassal of Shenzong in the East Palace, and specifically withdrew him from the former party membership and returned all the bequeathed officials.

