古文：起强圉作噩，尽屠维大渊献，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。
English: A total of three years.

古文：高宗宣皇帝中之下太建九年
现代文：陈宣帝太建九年
English: Emperor Chen Xuandi died nine years ago

古文：春，正月，乙亥朔，齐太子恒即皇帝位，生八年矣；改元承光，大赦。
现代文：春季，正月，乙亥朔，北齐太子高恒即皇帝位，当时出生才八年；改年号为承光，大赦全国。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the second month of the year, Prince Gao Heng of Northern Qi, the emperor, was only eight years old at the time of his birth; the year was changed to Chengguang, and the whole country was amnestied.

古文：尊齐主为太上皇帝，皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为太上皇后。
现代文：尊称北齐后主为太上皇帝，皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为太上皇后。
English: The honourable title of the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi is the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager is the Empress Dowager, and the Empress is the Empress Dowager.

古文：以广宁王孝珩为太宰。
现代文：任命广宁王高孝珩为太宰。
English: Appointed Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojun as Dazai.

古文：司徒莫多娄敬显、领军大将军尉相愿谋伏兵千秋门，斩高阿那肱，立广宁王孝珩。会阿那肱自它路入朝，不果。
现代文：司徒莫多娄敬显、领军大将军尉相愿预谋在千秋门埋伏士兵，杀死高阿那肱，拥立广宁王高孝珩当皇帝，恰巧高阿那肱从另一条路入朝上殿，所以没有成功。
English: Stumo Modo, the commander of the army, and the captain of the leading army plotted to ambush the soldiers at the Qianqiu Gate, kill Gao Ananyuan, and support the Guangning King Gao Xiaojuan as emperor. It just so happened that Gao Ananyuan entered the imperial palace from another road, so it was not successful.

古文：孝珩求拒周师，谓阿那肱等曰： 朝廷不赐遣击贼，岂不畏孝珩反邪？
现代文：高孝珩请求抗拒北周军队，对高阿那肱等人说： 朝廷不派我去打击敌人，难道不怕我高孝珩起来造反吗？
English: Gao Xiaolu requested to resist the Northern Zhou army, and said to Gao Anaxun and others: If the imperial court does not send me to fight the enemy, am I not afraid that Gao Xiaolu will rise up and rebel?

古文：孝珩若破宇文邕，遂至长安，反亦何预国家事！
现代文：高孝珩如果打败宇文邕，便到了长安，即便造反也干预不了国家的事情！
English: If Gao Xiaojuan defeats Uwen Yao, he will arrive in Chang'an. Even if he rebels, he cannot interfere in the affairs of the state!

古文：以今日之急，犹如此猜忌邪！ 
现代文：象今天这样的危急，竟还如此猜忌！ 
English: In such a critical situation as today, there is still such suspicion!

古文：高、韩恐其为变，出孝珩为沧州刺史。
现代文：高阿那肱、韩长鸾怕他要叛变，便派高孝珩出任沧州刺史。
English: Gao Ananyuan and Han Changyu were afraid that he would mutiny, so they sent Gao Xiaojuan to serve as the governor of Cangzhou.

古文：相愿拔佩刀斫柱，叹曰： 大事去矣，知复何言！ 
现代文：尉相愿气得拔出佩刀砍柱子，叹息说： 大事已去，还有什么可说的？ 
English: The lieutenant was so enraged that he pulled out his sword and slashed the pillar. He sighed and said, "The important thing is over. What else can I say?

古文：齐主使长乐王尉世辩，帅千余骑觇周师，出滏口，登高阜西望，遥见群乌飞起，谓是西军旗帜，即驰还；比至紫陌桥，不敢回顾。
现代文：北齐国主派长乐王尉世辩率领一千多骑兵窥测北周军队的情况，出了滏口，登上土山向西面了望，远远地看见一群乌鸦腾空而起，以为是北周军队的旗帜，立即驰马返回；到了紫陌桥，还不敢回头看。
English: The ruler of Northern Qi dispatched more than a thousand cavalrymen led by Changle Wangfei to spy on the situation of the Northern Zhou army. They went out of the gate, climbed the hill and looked west. They saw a group of crows flying in the sky in the distance. They thought it was the flag of the Northern Zhou army and immediately returned on horseback. When they reached Ziguo Bridge, they did not dare to look back.

古文：世辩，粲之子也。
现代文：尉世辩是尉粲的儿子。
English: Yeongseyeon is the son of Yeongyeong.

古文：于是黄门侍郎颜之推、中书侍郎薛道衡、侍中陈德信等劝上皇往河外募兵，更为经略；若不济，南投陈国。
现代文：于是黄门侍郎颜之推、中书侍郎薛道衡、侍中陈德信等劝太上皇帝到黄河以南一带招募士兵，再作策划；如果不成功，就向南投奔陈朝。
English: As a result, the Yellow Gate attendant Yan Zhudu, the Chinese book attendant Xue Daoheng, and the attendant Chen Deshin persuaded the emperor to recruit soldiers in the area south of the Yellow River and then make plans; if unsuccessful, they would go south to the Chen Dynasty.

古文：从之。
现代文：得到同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：道衡，孝通之子也。
现代文：薛道衡是薛孝通的儿子。
English: Xue Doheng is the son of Xue Xiaotong.

古文：丁丑，太皇太后、太上皇后自鄴先趣济州；癸未，幼主亦自鄴东行。
现代文：丁丑，太皇太后、太上皇后从邺城先去济州；癸未，北齐幼主也从邺城向东进发。
English: Ding Qiu, the great empress dowager, and the great empress dowager went to Jeju from Lucheng first; before long, the young lord of Beiqi also set out from Lucheng to the east.

古文：己丑，周师至紫陌桥。
现代文：己丑，北周军队到了邺城城外的紫陌桥。
English: As a result, the Northern Zhou army reached the Zi Miao Bridge outside the city of Licheng.

古文：辛卯，上祭北郊。
现代文：辛卯，陈宣帝到北郊祭地。
English: Xinwu, Chen Xuandi went to the northern suburb festival site.

古文：壬辰，周师至鄴城下；癸巳，围之，烧城西门。
现代文：壬辰，北周军队到了邺城城下；癸巳，包围了邺城，焚烧邺城的西门。
English: In Imjin, the Northern Zhou army arrived at the foot of Licheng; in Shiji, they encircled Licheng and burned the West Gate of Licheng.

古文：齐人出战，周师奋击，大破之。
现代文：北齐士兵出城作战，北周军队奋勇攻击，大破北齐军队。
English: North Qi soldiers went out of the city to fight, and the North Zhou army made a valiant attack and defeated the North Qi army.

古文：齐上皇从百骑东走，使武卫大将军慕容三藏守鄴宫。
现代文：北齐太上皇帝由上百名骑兵跟从向东出走，派武卫大将军慕容三藏守卫邺城的宫室。
English: The Northern Qi Empress Dowager was followed by more than a hundred cavalrymen to the east, and sent Wuwei General Murong Sanzang to guard the palace of Lucheng.

古文：周师入鄴，齐王、公以下皆降。
现代文：北周军队进入邺城，北齐的王、公以下的官员都向北周投降。
English: The Northern Zhou army entered Lucheng, and the king of Northern Qi and officials below the rank of prince all surrendered to Northern Zhou.

古文：三藏犹拒战，周主引见，礼之，拜仪同大将军。
现代文：慕容三藏还抗拒战斗，北周国主召见他，待之以礼，拜仪同大将军。
English: Murong Sanzang still resisted the battle, and the Lord of the Northern Zhou Kingdom summoned him to see him, and he bowed down and worshiped with the great general.

古文：三藏，绍宗之子也。
现代文：慕容三藏是慕容绍宗的儿子。
English: Murong Sanzang was the son of Murong Shaosong.

古文：领军大将军渔阳鲜于世荣，齐高祖旧将也。
现代文：领军大将军渔阳鲜于世荣，是神武帝时的老将。
English: The leading general, Yuyang, was younger than Shierong and was a veteran of the time of Emperor Shenwu.

古文：周主先以马脑酒钟遗之，世荣得即碎之。
现代文：北周国主先送给他们玛瑙酒杯，鲜于世荣得到后立即将杯子打碎。
English: The ruler of North Zhou first gave them agate wine glasses, but soon after Shi Rong received them, he immediately broke the glasses.

古文：周师入鄴，世荣在三台前鸣鼓不辍，周人执之；世荣不屈，乃杀之。
现代文：北周军队进入邺城时，鲜于世荣在三台前不断地击鼓，被北周军队捉住；鲜于世荣不肯屈服，被杀死。
English: When the Northern Zhou army entered Lucheng, Sheng Yu Shirong kept beating the drum in front of the three stages and was caught by the Northern Zhou army; Sheng Yu Shirong refused to give in and was killed.

古文：周主执莫多娄敬显，数之曰： 汝有死罪三：前自晋阳走鄴，携妾弃母，不孝也；外为伪朝戮力，内实通启于朕，不忠也；送款之后，犹持两端，不信也。
现代文：崐北周国主捉到莫多娄敬显，数说他： 你有三条死罪：以前你从晋阳去邺城，携带小老婆同行而抛弃母亲，这是不孝；表面替齐国效力，实际上从内部向朕送情报，这是不忠；向我们表示诚意以后，却还在两者之间动摇不定，这是不信。
English: You have committed three capital offenses: in the past, when you went from Jinyang to Lucheng, you took your little wife with you and abandoned your mother. This is not filial piety. On the surface, you worked for Qi Guo, but in reality, you sent us information from within. This is disloyalty. After you expressed your sincerity to us, you still vacillated between the two. This is unbelief.

古文：用心如此，不死何待！ 
现代文：这样的用心，不死还等侍什么！ 
English: With this kind of dedication, what are you waiting for to become immortal!

古文：遂斩之。
现代文：便将他杀死。
English: With that, he too was beheaded.

古文：使将军尉迟勤追齐主。
现代文：派将军尉迟勤追赶北齐国主。
English: He sent a lieutenant to catch up with the ruler of Northern Qi.

古文：甲午，周主入鄴。
现代文：甲午，北周国主进入邺城。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty entered Shicheng.

古文：齐国子博士长乐熊安生，博通《五经》，闻周主入鄴，遽令扫门。
现代文：北齐的国子博士长乐熊安生，博学精通《五经》，听到北周国主到了邺城，马上叫人打扫门庭。
English: Dr. Changle Xiong Ansheng, the son of the Northern Qi sovereign, was well versed in the "Five Classics." When he heard that the Northern Zhou sovereign had arrived in Handan, he immediately asked someone to clean the courtyard.

古文：家人怪而问之，安生曰： 周帝重道尊儒，必将见我。 
现代文：家人感到奇怪问他为什么，熊安生说： 周帝重道尊儒，一定会来看我。 
English: His family members were puzzled and asked him why. Xiong Ansheng said: Zhou Di respected Confucianism and would definitely come to see me.

古文：俄而周主幸其家，不听拜，亲执其手，引与同坐；赏赐甚厚，给安车驷马以自随。
现代文：不多久北周国主亲临熊家，不让熊安生叩拜，亲自搀住他的手，叫熊安生和自己坐在一起；赏赐给他很多东西，还送给他小车和马匹供他乘用。
English: Not long after, the Lord of the Northern Zhou Kingdom came to Xiong's home in person. He did not allow Xiong An Sheng to bow, but personally held his hand and asked Xiong An Sheng to sit with him. He gave him many things, and also gave him a carriage and horses for his use.

古文：又遣小司马唐道和就中书侍郎李德林宅宣旨慰谕，曰： 平齐之利，唯在于尔。 
现代文：又派小司马唐道和去北齐的中书侍郎李德林的住处宣读圣旨加以慰问，说： 讨平齐国后得到的利益，就在于得到你。 
English: He also sent Xiao Sima, Tang Dao, and Li Delin, who had gone to the residence of the Chinese envoy to Northern Qi, to read out the Holy Will and offer condolences, saying: "The benefit gained after leveling Qi is to get you.

古文：引入宫，使内史宇文昂访问齐朝风俗政教，人物善恶。
现代文：带李德林进宫，派内史宇文昂向他请教北齐的风俗政教，人物的善恶。
English: He took Li Delin to the palace, and sent Shi Yuwenang to ask him about the customs, politics and religion of Northern Qi, and the good and evil of the characters.

古文：即留内省，三宿乃归。
现代文：留他在门下省，住了三个晚上才让他回家。
English: They kept him in the province, and he stayed there for three nights before they let him go home.

古文：乙未，齐上皇渡河入济州。
现代文：乙未，北齐太上皇帝渡过黄河到济州。
English: In the 18th century, the Northern Qi Empress Dowager crossed the Yellow River to Jeju.

古文：是日，幼主禅位于大丞相任城王湝。
现代文：这一天，幼主把皇位让给大丞相任城王高。
English: On this day, the young lord abdicated the imperial throne to the grand chancellor, Shingwang Gao.

古文：又为湝诏：尊上皇为无上皇，幼主为宋国天王。
现代文：又替高下诏：尊称太上皇为无上皇，幼主为宋国天王。
English: He also issued the following edict in place of the higher and lower ones: the respected title of the retired emperor is "absolute emperor," and the young lord is "the heavenly king of Song."

古文：令侍中斛律孝卿送禅文及玺绂于瀛州，孝卿即诣鄴。
现代文：命令侍中斛律孝卿把禅位的文书和系有丝带的受命玉玺送到瀛州，斛律孝卿立即前往邺城。
English: He ordered the chamberlain, Yao Lv Xiaoqing, to send the zen scriptures and the ordered jade bracelet with a ribbon to Zhangzhou. Yao Lv Xiaoqing immediately went to Zhangcheng.

古文：周主诏： 去年大赦所未及之处，皆从赦例。 
现代文：北周国主诏令： 去年大赦所没有执行地方，一律遵照赦例执行。 
English: Decree of the Governor of North Zhou Province: Last year, where the amnesty was not implemented, it will be implemented in accordance with the amnesty.

古文：齐洛州刺史独孤永业，有甲士三万，闻晋州败，请出兵击周，奏寝不报；永业愤慨。
现代文：北齐的洛州刺史独孤永业有三万名甲士，听到晋州陷落，请求朝廷允许自己发兵攻击北周，但奏章被压下没有上报；独孤永业很愤慨。
English: Luozhou, in the north of Qi, was besieged by 30,000 Jia soldiers led by Duolong Yongye. Hearing of the fall of Jinzhou, Duolong Yongye asked the imperial court for permission to send troops to attack North Zhou, but the petition was suppressed and not reported; Duolong Yongye was very indignant.

古文：又闻并州陷，乃遣子须达请降于周，周以永业为上柱国，封应公。
现代文：又听到并州陷落，便派儿子独须孤达向北周请求投降，北周任命独孤永业为上柱国，封应公。
English: He also heard of the fall of Anhui Province, and sent his son Duxu Kuoda to the Northern Zhou Dynasty to request surrender. The Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Duxu Kuoda as the upper pillar state, with the title of Yingguo.

古文：丙申，周以越王盛为相州总管。
现代文：丙申，北周任命越王宇文盛为相州总管。
English: Bishin, North Zhou appointed Yue Wang Yu Wensheng as the chief administrator of Xiangzhou.

古文：齐上皇留胡太后于济州，使高阿那肱守济州关，觇候周师，自与穆后、冯淑妃、幼主、韩长鸾、邓长颙等数十人奔青州。
现代文：北齐太上皇帝把胡太后留在济州，派高阿那肱镇守济州关，观察北周军队的动静，自己和穆后、冯淑妃、幼主、韩长鸾、邓长等几十人逃奔青州。
English: Emperor Beiqi left Empress Dowager Hu in Jeju and sent Gao Ananyan to guard Jeju Pass and observe the movements of the North Zhou army. He and dozens of people including Empress Dowager Mu, Feng Shufei, his son, Han Changtao, and Deng Chang fled to Qingzhou.

古文：使内参田鹏鸾西出，参伺动静；周师获之，问齐主何在，绐云： 已去，计当出境。 
现代文：又派太监田鹏鸾去西部，刺探动静；他被北周军队抓获，问他北齐国主在哪里，田鹏鸾骗他们说： 已经离开原地，估计应当出了国境。 
English: He also sent eunuch Tian Pengyao to the west to spy on the movement; he was captured by the North Zhou army and asked him where the North Qi sovereign was. Tian Pengyao lied to them and said: "He has left the original place, and it is estimated that he should have left the border."

古文：周人疑其不信，捶之。
现代文：北周人怀疑他的话不可信，对他拷打。
English: The North Zhou people suspected that his words were not credible and tortured him.

古文：每折一支，辞色愈厉，竟折四支而死。
现代文：每打断一根肢体，田鹏鸾的话和脸色就愈加严厉，最后打断了四肢而死去。
English: With each broken limb, Tian Pengyao's words and countenance became harsher and harsher. Finally, he broke all four limbs and died.

古文：上皇至青州，即欲入陈。
现代文：北齐太上皇帝到了青州，就要进入陈朝的国境。
English: When the Northern Qi Empress Dowager arrived in Qingzhou, she was about to enter the border of the Chen Dynasty.

古文：而高阿那肱密召周师，约生致齐主，屡启云： 周师尚远，已令烧断桥路。 
现代文：而高阿那肱秘密和北周军队联络，约定一起活捉北齐国主，却屡次向太上皇帝启奏道： 周朝的军队还离得很远，我已经下令烧桥断路。 
English: However, Gao Anaxun secretly communicated with the Northern Zhou army and agreed to capture the ruler of Northern Qi alive together, but repeatedly said to the Emperor: The Zhou army is still far away, I have ordered to burn the bridge and cut off the road.

古文：上皇由是淹留自宽。
现代文：太上皇帝因此在青州停留宽慰自己。
English: Emperor Taizong therefore stopped in Qingzhou to console himself.

古文：周师至关，阿那肱即降之。
现代文：北周军队到达关隘，高阿那肱就向他们投降。
English: When the Northern Zhou army reached the pass, Gao Ananyu surrendered to them.

古文：周师奄至青州，上皇囊金，系于鞍后，与后、妃、幼主等十余骑南走。己亥，至南邓村。尉迟勤追及，尽擒之，并胡太后送鄴。
现代文：北周军队很快到了青州，北齐太上皇帝高纬用袋子装了金子，系在马鞍上，和皇后、妃子、幼主等乘了十几匹马向南逃走，己亥，到南邓村，尉迟勤追上他们，全部活捉，连同胡太崐后一起送往邺城。
English: The Northern Zhou army soon arrived in Qingzhou. The Empress Dowager of Northern Qi, Emperor Gaoyu, loaded a bag with gold and tied it to his saddle. He fled south with the empress, his concubines, and his young son on more than a dozen horses. When he arrived at Nan Deng Village, his officers diligently caught up with them, captured them all alive, and sent them to Lucheng together with Hu Daoyi.

古文：庚子，周主诏： 故斛律光、崔季舒等，宜追加赠谥，并为改葬，子孙各随廕叙录。家口田宅没官者，并还之。 
现代文：庚子，北周国主诏令： 已故的斛律光、崔季舒等，应追加封赠谥号，并将他们改葬，他们的子孙各随门荫按规定的等级次第授给官职，被没收充公的奴婢田地房产，一并发还。 
English: Geng Zi, the ruler of Northern Zhou, issued an edict: The deceased Bao Riguang, Cui Jishu, etc. should be given additional seals and posthumous names, and they should be reburied, and their descendants should be awarded official posts according to the prescribed level, and the slaves and farmland properties confiscated from the public should be returned at the same time.

古文：周主指斛律光名曰： 此人在，朕安得至鄴！ 
现代文：北周国主指着斛律光的名字说： 这个人如果还在，朕怎能来到邺城！ 
English: North Zhou pointed to the name of Baoliguang and said: If this person is still alive, how can I come to Baocheng!

古文：辛丑，诏： 齐之东山、南园、三台，并可毁撤。
现代文：辛丑，诏令： 齐国的东山、南园、三台，都可以拆除。
English: Xin ugly, imperial edict: the East Mountain, South Park, and Three Dynasties in Qi Province can all be demolished.

古文：瓦木诸物，可用者悉以赐民。
现代文：瓦片木材一类物件，可以利用的全部赏赐给百姓。
English: Objects such as tiles and wood, which can be used, are all given to the people.

古文：山园之田，各还其主。 
现代文：山园所占用的土地，各还原主。 
English: The land occupied by the mountain garden will be returned to its original owners.

古文：二月，壬午，上耕藉田。
现代文：二月，壬午，陈宣帝到藉田举行耕种的仪式。
English: In February, at Renpo, Chen Xuandi went to the borrowed field to hold a ceremony of cultivation.

古文：丙午，周主宴从官将士于齐太极殿，颁赏有差。
现代文：丙午，北周国主在北齐的太极殿赐宴随从的官员将士，按等级给予赏赐。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, the Northern Zhou Emperor held a banquet at the Taiji Hall in Northern Qi for the officials and soldiers who accompanied him, and rewarded them according to their ranks.

古文：丁未，高纬至鄴，周主降价，以宾礼见之。
现代文：丁未，高纬到邺城，北周国主走下台阶，以对待宾客的礼节接见他。
English: Ding Wei, Gaoyu to Licheng, the North Zhou sovereign walked down the steps to receive him with the courtesy of treating guests.

古文：齐广宁王孝珩至沧州，以五千人会任城王湝于信都，共谋匡复，召募得四万馀人。
现代文：北齐的广宁王高孝珩到沧州，带领五千人在信都和任城王高会合，共同计划复国，征募到四万多人。
English: Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojun of North Qi went to Cangzhou and led five thousand people to meet in Xindu and Rencheng Wang Gao to jointly plan the restoration of the country, recruiting more than forty thousand people.

古文：周主使齐王宪、柱国杨坚击之。
现代文：北周国主派齐王宇文宪、柱国杨坚攻打他们。
English: The ruler of North Zhou sent Qi Wang Yuwen Xian and pillar state Yang Jian to attack them.

古文：令高纬为手书招湝不从。
现代文：叫高纬写亲笔信对高招降，高不服从。
English: Asking a high-ranking official to write a personal letter to a high-ranking official results in a high-ranking official's demotion and high-ranking official's disobedience.

古文：宪军至赵州，湝遣二谍觇之，候骑执以白宪。
现代文：宇文宪的军队到赵州，高派二名探子去侦察，反被北周的侦察骑兵捉住并报告了宇文宪。
English: Uwen Xian's army went to Zhaozhou, Gao sent two scouts to investigate, but they were caught by the reconnaissance cavalry of Beizhou and reported to Uwen Xian.

古文：宪集齐旧将，遍示之，谓曰： 吾所争者大，不在汝曹。
现代文：宇文宪把原先是北齐的将领召集在一起，将捉到的探子向他们示众，并说： 我所争夺的是大目标，不是你们。
English: Yu Wenxian called together the generals who were originally Beiqi, showed them the captured spies, and said: What I am fighting for is the big goal, not you.

古文：今纵汝还，仍充吾使。 
现代文：今天放你们回去，仍旧充当我的使者。 
English: Today I am sending you back again to be my messengers.

古文：乃与湝书曰： 足下谍者为候骑所拘，军中情实，具诸执事。
现代文：给高带去书信，信上说： 您的探子被我们的侦察兵捉到，我方军队中的情况，他们会向您报告。
English: Take a letter to Gao, saying: Your scout has been caught by our scouts, and they will report to you on the situation in our army.

古文：战非上计，无待卜疑；守乃下策，或未相许。
现代文：和我们打仗不是上策，这不用占卜就可以决定；防守是下策，您或许不会同意。
English: Fighting is not the best strategy, it's useless; defending is a bad strategy, because we don't agree.

古文：已勒诸军分道并进，相望非远，凭轼有期。 不俟终日 ，所望知机也！ 
现代文：我已经统率各路军队分道并进，和您相见已经不远，我扶着兵车上的横木到来指日可待。希望您能知道时机，不要拖延时日！ 
English: I have already led all the troops to part ways, and it is not far to meet you. I am holding the crossbar on the troop car and I can wait. I hope you can know the time, don't delay!

古文：宪至信都，湝陈于城南以拒之。
现代文：宇文宪到了信都，高在城南列阵进行抗拒。
English: When Uwen Xian arrived at Xindu, Gao stood in a line south of the city to resist.

古文：湝所署领军尉相愿诈出略陈，遂以众降。
现代文：被高任命的领军尉相愿假装到阵前巡行，便率领军队向宇文宪投降。
English: The leading lieutenant, who had been appointed by the emperor, agreed to pretend to march to the front of the battle, and then led the army to surrender to Uwen Xian.

古文：相愿，湝心腹也，众皆骇惧。
现代文：尉相愿本来是高的心腹，大家为此感到惊恐害怕。
English: The lieutenant-colonel was originally a close confidant of Gao, and everyone was alarmed and afraid.

古文：湝杀相愿妻子。
现代文：高便杀掉尉相愿的妻儿。
English: Gao then killed his wife and son.

古文：明日，复战，宪击破之，俘斩三万人，执湝及广宁王孝珩。
现代文：第二天，又进行战斗，被宇文宪打败，俘虏和杀死的有三万人，高和广宁王高孝珩被捉住。
English: The next day, they fought again, and were defeated by Yu Wenxian. Thirty thousand people were captured and killed, and Gao and Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojuan were captured.

古文：宪谓湝曰： 任城王何苦至此？ 
现代文：宇文宪对高说： 任城王何苦至此！ 
English: Uwen Xian said to Gao, "How hard it is to be the king of the city!

古文：湝曰： 下官神武皇帝之子，兄弟十五人，幸而独存。逢宗社颠覆，今日得死，无愧坟陵。 
现代文：高说： 下官是神武皇帝的儿子，十五个兄弟，只有我侥幸活下来，遇到国家被推翻，死而无愧于祖先。 
English: Gao said, "The junior officer was the son of Emperor Jinwu, and there were fifteen brothers. I was the only one who was lucky enough to survive when the country was overthrown, and my death was worthy of my ancestors.

古文：宪壮之，命归其妻子。
现代文：宇文宪佩服他的雄壮豪迈，命令归还他的妻儿。
English: Uwen Xian admired his magnificent courage and ordered the return of his wife and child.

古文：又亲为孝珩洗疮傅药，礼遇甚厚。
现代文：宇文宪又亲自为高孝珩洗疮涂药，礼遇很厚。
English: Yu Wenxian also personally applied medicine to Gao Xiaozhong's scabies, and was treated with great courtesy.

古文：孝珩叹曰： 自神武皇帝以外，吾诸父兄弟，无一人至四十者，命也。
现代文：高孝珩叹道： 除神武皇帝以外，我的父辈和兄弟，没有一个能活到四十岁的，这是命运注定的。
English: Gao Xiaoxiao sighed, "Except for Emperor Jinwu, none of my fathers and brothers can live to the age of forty. This is fate."

古文：嗣君无独见之明，宰相非柱石之寄，恨不得握兵符，受斧钺，展我心力耳！ 
现代文：继位的国君缺乏独特见解的明察，宰相不能担负国家重任的委托，遗憾的是我不能掌握兵符，授予我兵权，以施展我的用心和能力！ 
English: The heir to the throne lacks insight into unique opinions, the prime minister cannot shoulder the heavy responsibility of the state, and unfortunately I cannot grasp the military code and grant me military power to exert my intentions and abilities!

古文：齐王宪善用兵，多谋略，得将士心。
现代文：齐王宇文宪善于用兵，足智多谋，得到将士的爱戴。
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian was good at using soldiers, resourceful, and was loved by soldiers.

古文：齐人惮其威声，多望风沮溃。
现代文：北齐军队害怕他的威崐名，都望风溃散。
English: The North Qi army was afraid of his intimidating reputation, and they all hoped for the wind to break up.

古文：刍牧不扰，军无私焉。
现代文：北周军队对百姓放牧的牲口不加侵扰，军队遵守纪律。
English: The Beizhou army does not disturb the cattle grazing by the people, and the army abides by discipline.

古文：周主以齐降将封辅相为北朔州总管。
现代文：北周国主任命北齐的降将封辅相为北朔州总管。
English: The ruler of North Zhou appointed Beiqi as the governor of North Shuozhou.

古文：北朔州，齐之重镇，士卒骁勇。
现代文：北朔州是北齐的重镇，士兵强悍勇敢。
English: Beishuozhou is a major town in Beiji, and the soldiers are strong and brave.

古文：前长史赵穆等谋执辅相迎任城王湝于瀛州，不果，乃迎定州刺史范阳王绍义。
现代文：前长史赵穆等人曾预谋捉住封辅相在瀛州迎接任城王高，没有成功，便迎接定州刺史范阳王高绍义。
English: Former prefect Shi Zhao Mu and others had premeditated to capture Feng Fu to meet Ren Chengwang Gao in Ganzhou, but without success, they met Dingzhou assassin Fan Yang Wang Gao Shaoyi.

古文：绍义至马邑，自肆州以北二百八十余城皆应之。
现代文：高绍义到马邑，从肆州以北的二百八十多座城池都起来响应。
English: From Gaoshaoyi to Ma'e, more than 280 cities and towns in the north of Wuzhou have responded.

古文：绍义与灵州刺史袁洪猛引兵南出，欲取并州。
现代文：高绍义和灵州刺史袁洪猛领兵发兵向南，打算夺取并州。
English: After the arrival of Shao Yi, they all surrendered. He and the Lingzhou assassin, Yuan Hong, marched southward at the head of an army, intending to conquer and annex the state.

古文：至新兴，而肆州已为周守，前队二仪同以所部降周。
现代文：到了新兴时，肆州已经被北周军队占领，高绍义的前队中有二名仪同率领部下向北周投降。
English: By the time of emerging, Zhouzhou had already been occupied by the North Zhou army, and Gao Shaoyi's former team included two officers who led their subordinates to surrender to the North Zhou.

古文：周兵击显州，执刺史陆琼，复攻拔诸城。
现代文：北周军队向显州进攻，捉住显州刺史陆琼，又攻克其他城池。
English: The Northern Zhou army attacked Henzhou, captured the Henzhou assassin Lu Qiong, and conquered other cities.

古文：绍义还保北朔州。
现代文：高绍义回师保卫北朔州。
English: Gao Shao's Yihou Division defends Beishuozhou.

古文：周东平公神举将兵逼马邑，绍义战败，北奔突厥，犹有众三千人。
现代文：北周东平公宇文神举领兵逼近马邑，高绍义被打败，向北逃奔突厥，还有三千部众。
English: In the north, Zhou Dongping's general Uwen Shen led an army and approached Ma'e. Gao Shao Yi was defeated and fled north to Turku, along with 3,000 followers.

古文：绍义令曰： 欲还者从其意。 
现代文：高绍义下令说： 想回去的人可以听便。 
English: Gao Shao Yi ordered: Those who want to go back can do so at their own convenience.

古文：于是辞去者大半。
现代文：于是超过半数的人都离去了。
English: As a result, more than half of the people left.

古文：突厥佗钵可汗常谓齐显祖为英雄天子，以绍义重踝，似之，甚见爱重；凡齐人在北者，悉以隶之。
现代文：突厥的佗钵可汗常说文宣帝是英雄天子，因为高绍义的踝关节两侧各有两个骨突，很象文宣帝，所以对他非常喜爱看重；凡是在突厥的北齐人，都由高绍义管理。
English: The Turkic Khans often said that Emperor Wenzhong was a hero and a son of heaven, because Gao Shao Yi had two bony protrusions on each side of his ankle joint, very much like Emperor Wenzhong, so they loved and valued him very much; all the Northern Qi people in Turkey were managed by Gao Shao Yi.

古文：于是齐之行台、州、镇，唯东雍州行台傅伏、营州刺史高宝宁不下，其馀皆入于周。
现代文：于是北齐的行台、州、镇中，只有东雍州行台傅伏、营州刺史高宝宁没有降服，其他地方都并入北周。
English: As a result, among the counties, prefectures, and towns in Northern Qi, only Dongyong County, County of Fu Fu, and Yingzhou County, County of Gao Bao Ning did not surrender. All other places were merged into Northern Zhou.

古文：凡得州五十，郡一百六十二，县三百八十，户三百三万二千五百。
现代文：一共得到五十州，一百六十二郡，三百八十县，三百另三万二千五百户。
English: A total of fifty states, one hundred and sixty-two counties, three hundred and eighty counties, and three million and thirty-two thousand five hundred households.

古文：高宝宁者，齐之疏属，有勇略，久镇和龙，甚得夷、夏之心。
现代文：高宝宁是北齐皇室的远支，勇敢有胆略，长久在和龙镇守，很得夷人和汉人的人心。
English: Gao Bao Ning is a distant branch of the Northern Qi royal family. He is brave and daring, and has been guarding He Longzhen for a long time. He has won the hearts of the barbarians and the Han people.

古文：周主于河阳、幽、青、南兗、豫、徐、北朔、定置总管府，相、并二州各置宫及六府官。
现代文：北周国主在河阳、幽、青、南兖、豫、徐、北朔、定各州设置总管府，相、并二州分别设置宫室和六府官。
English: The ruler of the North Zhou Province set up the headquarters in the provinces of Heyang, Yu, Qing, Nanlu, Yu, Xu, Beishuo and Ding, and set up a palace and six prefectural officials in the provinces of Hebei, Yu, Qing, Nanlu, Xu, Beishuo and Ding.

古文：周师之克晋阳也，齐使开府仪同三司纥奚永安求救于突厥，比至，齐已亡。
现代文：北周军队攻克晋阳时，北齐派开府仪同三司纥奚永安向突厥求救，他刚到突厥，北齐已经灭亡。
English: When the Northern Zhou army conquered Jinyang, the Northern Qi sent Kaifu Yi and the three officers Yongan to the Turks for help. He had just arrived in Turkey, and Northern Qi had already perished.

古文：佗钵可汗处永安于吐谷浑使者之下，永安言于佗钵曰： 今齐国已亡，永安何用馀生！
现代文：佗钵可汗把纥奚永安安排在吐谷浑使者之下，纥奚永安对佗钵可汗说： 现在齐国已经灭亡，我何必留此残生！
English: The khan placed Yongan under the tutelage of the emissary of Tukuhun. Yongan said to the khan: Now that Qi has perished, why should I stay here for the rest of my life!

古文：欲闭气自绝，恐天下谓大齐无死节之臣；乞赐一刀，以显示远近。 
现代文：本准备屏气自尽，只怕天下人说我们大齐朝没有殉节而死的臣子，请求给我一刀，死后可以让远近的人都知道我的心迹。 
English: I was ready to commit suicide with bated breath, but I was afraid that the world would say that we were the courtiers who died without martyrdom in the Great Qi Dynasty, and I asked for a sword, so that after death I could let people near and far know my heart.

古文：佗钵嘉之，赠马七十匹而归之。
现代文：佗钵可汗对他表示赞许，送给七十匹马让他回去。
English: The Khan thanked him and gave him 70 horses to take home.

古文：梁主入朝于鄴。
现代文：后梁国主到邺城朝见北周君主。
English: Later, Liang Guozhong went to Shicheng to see the Northern Zhou monarch.

古文：自秦兼天下，无朝觐之礼，至是始命有司草具其事：致积，致饣气，设九傧、九介，受享于庙，三公、三孤、六卿致食，劳宾，还贽，致享，皆如古礼。
现代文：自从秦始皇兼并天下以后，朝见礼制久已废缺，这时才开始命令有关部门拟订礼节：如致送薪米、致送活羊，设九个宾相、九个传达，在宗庙中设宴款待，三公、三孤、六卿向后梁国主献食，慰劳宾客、还礼、宴享宾客等，都依照古礼。
English: Since Emperor Qin's annexation of the country, the imperial court ceremony system has long been obsolete. It was only then that the relevant departments were ordered to draw up the etiquette: for example, to send rice and live sheep, to set up nine guests and nine messengers, to set up a banquet in the ancestral temple, the three princes, three orphans and six nobles to offer food to Houliang Guozhong, to comfort guests, to return gifts, to entertain guests, etc., all in accordance with ancient etiquette.

古文：周主与梁主宴，酒酣，周主自弹琵琶。
现代文：北周国主设宴款待后梁国主，酒喝到高兴时，北周国主亲自弹琵琶。
English: Northern Zhou hosted a banquet to entertain the Later Liang sovereign, and when he drank to his heart's content, the Northern Zhou sovereign himself played the lute.

古文：梁主起舞，曰： 陛下既亲抚五弦，臣何敢不同百兽！ 
现代文：后梁国主起立跳舞，说： 陛下既然亲自演奏琵琶，臣怎敢不象百兽那样起舞！ 
English: Houliang Guozhong stood up and danced, saying, "Since His Majesty himself plays the lute, how dare the minister not dance like a hundred beasts!"

古文：周主大悦，赐赉甚厚。
现代文：北周国主听了大为高兴，赏赐给他很多东西。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor was very pleased to hear this and rewarded him with many things.

古文：乙卯，周主自鄴西还。
现代文：乙卯，北周国主从邺城西回长安。
English: At the same time, the ruler of North Zhou Province returned to Chang'an from the west of Shicheng.

古文：三月，壬午，周诏： 山东诸军，各举明经干治者二人；若奇才异术，卓尔不群者，不拘此数。 
现代文：三月，壬午，北周下诏： 山东各州的总管，分别推荐二名通晓经术办事能干的人；如果有特殊的才能，超出寻常与众不同的人，可以不受人崐数的限制。 
English: In March, at Ren'ao, Northern Zhou issued an edict: the governor of each prefecture in Shandong should separately recommend two people who are proficient in handling affairs; if there are special talents, people who are out of the ordinary and different, they can not be limited by the number of people.

古文：周主之擒尉相贵也，招齐东雍州刺史傅伏，伏不从。
现代文：北周国主捉拿尉相贵时，曾经招降北齐东雍州刺史傅伏，傅伏不肯。
English: When the ruler of the North Zhou Province wanted to capture a high-ranking lieutenant, he once invited Fu Fu, the governor of the North Qidong Yongzhou, to surrender, but Fu Fu refused.

古文：齐人以伏为行台右仆射。
现代文：北齐任命傅伏为行台右仆射。
English: The Northern Qi appointed Fu Fu as the right-hand man of the line.

古文：周主既克并州，复遣韦孝宽招之，令其子以上大将军、武乡公告身及金、马脑二酒钟赐伏为信。
现代文：北周国主攻下并州以后，又派韦孝宽去招降，叫他的儿子送去上大将军、武乡公等官爵的委任状和用金子、玛瑙制成的酒杯作为凭据。
English: After the Northern Zhou conquered and annexed the state, he also sent Wei Xiaokuan to invite the surrender, and asked his son to send the letter of appointment of the senior general, the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official title of the official

古文：伏不受，谓孝宽曰： 事君有死无贰。
现代文：傅伏不肯接受，对韦孝宽说： 我服事国君除殉死以外没有其他想法。
English: Fu Fu refused to accept and said to Wei Xiaokuan, "I have no other thought than to serve the sovereign and die a martyr."

古文：此儿为臣不能竭忠，为子不能尽孝，人所雠疾，愿速斩之以令天下！ 
现代文：这个孩子作为臣子不能尽忠，作为儿子又不能尽孝，为人人憎恨痛骂，希望你赶快把他杀掉以昭示天下！ 
English: This child cannot be loyal as a vassal, cannot be filial as a son, and is hated and reviled by everyone. I hope you will kill him quickly to show the world!

古文：周主自鄴还，至晋州，遣高阿那肱等百余人临汾水召伏。
现代文：北周国主从邺城返回时，到了晋州，派高阿那肱等一百多人在汾水边召傅伏来。
English: When the Northern Zhou sovereign returned from Shicheng and arrived in Jinzhou, he sent Gao Anaxun and more than a hundred others to summon Fu Fu at the edge of Surabaya.

古文：伏出军，隔水见之，问： 至尊今何在？ 
现代文：傅伏派出军队，隔河见到他们，便问： 天子现在哪里？ 
English: Fu Fu sent out an army, and when he saw them across the river, he asked, "Where is Tianzi now?"

古文：阿那肱曰： 已被擒矣。 
现代文：高阿那肱说： 已经被捉住了。 
English: Gao Ananyuan said: "He has been caught.

古文：伏仰天大哭，帅众入城，于听事前北面哀号，良久，然后降。
现代文：傅伏仰天大哭，率领军队进城，在官署的厅堂前面向北方悲伤痛哭，哭了很久，然后向北周投降。
English: Fu Fuxiang cried loudly, led the army into the city, and wept bitterly in front of the hall of the government office. He cried for a long time, and then surrendered to Bei Zhou.

古文：周主见之曰： 何不早下？ 
现代文：北周国主见到他说： 为什么不及早投诚？ 
English: When the Lord of the North Zhou saw him, he said, "Why didn't you cast your vote earlier?"

古文：伏流涕对曰： 臣三世为齐臣，食齐禄，不能自死，羞见天地！ 
现代文：傅伏流泪回答说： 我家三代是齐国的臣子，吃的是齐国的俸禄，没有殉国，羞见天地！ 
English: Fu Fu replied with tears streaming down his face, "For three generations, my family have been the retainers of the State of Qi. We have eaten the salary of the State of Qi. We have not been martyred. Shame on heaven and earth!"

古文：周主执其手曰： 为臣当如此。 
现代文：北周国主握住他手说： 做臣子的应当这样。 
English: The North Zhou sovereign took him by the hand and said, "This is how a vassal should be."

古文：乃以所食羊肋骨赐伏曰： 骨亲肉疏，所以相付。 
现代文：便把自己食用的羊排骨赏给傅伏，说： 骨亲肉疏，所以把骨头交给你。 
English: So he took out the bone of the lamb chop he was eating and gave it to Fu Fu, saying, "The bone is too close to the meat, so I'll give you the bone."

古文：遂引使宿卫，授上仪同大将军。敕之曰： 若亟与公高官，恐归附者心动。
现代文：便派他充当官廷的值宿禁卫，授给上仪同大将军的官职，说： 如果马上让你做高官，怕归附的人嫉妒。
English: He then sent him to act as a guard on duty at the court, and bestowed on him the official post of grand marshal, saying: "If you immediately make you a high-ranking official, people who are afraid of adhering to you will be jealous.

古文：努力事朕，勿忧富贵。 
现代文：你只要努力侍奉朕，不必担心富贵。 
English: As long as you work hard to serve me, you don't have to worry about being rich.

古文：他日，又问： 前救河阴得何赏？ 
现代文：另一天，又问他： 以前救援河阴时得到什么赏赐？ 
English: On another day, he asked again: What reward did you get for rescuing Heyin before?

古文：对曰： 蒙一转，授特进、永昌郡公。 
现代文：回答道： 蒙皇帝迁调官职一次，授给特进、永昌郡公。 
English: He replied: The Mongolian emperor transferred the official post once and awarded it to Tejin and Yongchang County.

古文：周主谓高纬曰： 朕三年教战，决取河阴。
现代文：北周国主对高纬说： 朕指挥打仗三年，决心攻下河阴。
English: The Northern Zhou sovereign said to Gao Wei: I have commanded the war for three years, and I am determined to capture Hebei.

古文：正为傅伏善守，城不可动，遂敛军而退。
现代文：正由于傅伏善于防守，城不可动，便收拾军队而退走。
English: Precisely because Fu Fu was good at defense, the city could not be moved, so he gathered his army and retreated.

古文：公当时赏功，何其薄也！ 
现代文：您当时对他功劳的赏赐，为什么如此微薄！ 
English: Why was the reward you gave him for his services so meager?

古文：夏，四月，乙巳，周主至长安，置高纬于前，列其王公于后，车舆、旗帜、器物，以次陈之。
现代文：夏季四月，乙巳，北周国主到长安，把高纬安排在前面，把北齐的王公排在后面，车辆、旗帜、器物，依次排列。
English: In the summer of April, the ruler of Northern Zhou arrived in Chang'an. He placed Gaoli in the front, Wang Gong of Northern Qi in the back, and arranged vehicles, flags, and utensils in order.

古文：备大驾，布六军，奏凯乐，献俘于太庙。
现代文：准备好出行的 大驾 所应具备的全部人员仪仗，由公卿奉引，太仆驾车，六军排开队列，高奏凯旋的音乐，到太庙举行献俘的仪式。
English: The chauffeur is ready to go. All the people who should be present perform the ceremony. The nobles lead the procession, the servants drive the car, the six armies line up, the music of the triumphal march is played, and the ceremony of offering the prisoners to the Imperial Temple is held.

古文：观者皆称万岁。
现代文：观看的人都高呼万岁。
English: Onlookers shouted "long live."

古文：戊申，封高纬为温公，齐之诸王三十余人，皆受封爵。
现代文：戊申，封高纬为温公，北齐的三十多个王，都受到封爵。
English: In Wushin, more than thirty kings of the Northern Qi were knighted, with the highest being Wengong.

古文：周主与齐君臣饮酒，令温公起舞。
现代文：北周国主和北齐的君臣一同饮酒，叫温公为大家跳舞。
English: The Northern Zhou sovereign and the Northern Qi monarchs and courtiers drank alcohol together and asked Wen Gong to dance for everyone.

古文：高延宗悲不自持，屡欲仰药，其傅婢禁止之。
现代文：高延宗悲伤到不能克制自己，屡次要服毒自尽，都被周围的婢女劝止。
English: Gao Yanzong was so sad that he could not restrain himself. He repeatedly wanted to take poison and commit suicide, but was dissuaded by the surrounding maids.

古文：周主以李德林为内史上士，自是诏诰格式用山东人物，并以委之。
现代文：北周国主武帝任命李德林为内史上士，此后凡是武帝的诏诰格式和对潼关以东人物的任用，全都委托给他。
English: Emperor Wu, the ruler of Northern Zhou, appointed Li Delin as the Inner Historian, and thereafter, all of Emperor Wu's edicts and appointments of figures east of Shaoguan were entrusted to him.

古文：帝从容谓群臣曰： 我常日唯闻李德林名，复见其为齐朝作诏书移檄，正谓是天上人；岂言今日得其驱使。 
现代文：武帝曾在闲谈时对群臣说： 我以前只听说李德林的名字，又常见到他为齐朝所写的诏书公文，正认为他是天上的人才，怎么敢说今天能为我所用。 
English: Emperor Wu once said to his courtiers in a casual conversation: I had only heard of Li Delin's name before, and often saw the official document of the edict he wrote for the Qi Dynasty. I thought he was a heavenly talent. How dare I say that I can use him today.

古文：神武公纥豆陵毅对曰： 臣闻麒麟凤皇，为王者瑞，可以德感，不可力致。
现代文：神武公纥豆陵毅回答说： 臣听说麒麟凤凰，是王者的祥瑞，可用德行来感化它们，不能用强力得到它们。
English: Shenwu Gong Doudou Ling Yi replied, "Minister, I have heard that the Kirin phoenix is the auspiciousness of kings. You can use virtue to influence them, but you can't get them by force.

古文：麒麟凤皇，得之无用。岂如德林，为瑞且有用哉！ 
现代文：麒麒凤凰，得到了也没有用处，怎么象李德林那样，既是祥瑞而且有用！ 
English: The phoenix, obtained and useless, how can it be both auspicious and useful, like Li Delin!

古文：帝大笑曰： 诚如公言。 
现代文：武帝大笑说： 真是您所说的那样。 
English: Emperor Wu laughed loudly, "It is indeed as you said.

古文：己巳，周主享太庙。
现代文：己巳，北周国主到太庙祭祀。
English: At this time, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty went to the Imperial Temple for a religious service.

古文：五月，丁丑，周以谯王俭为大冢宰。
现代文：五月，丁丑，北周任命谯王宇文俭为大冢宰。
English: In May, Dingwuxi, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Wang Yuwenjian as the grand vizier.

古文：庚辰。以杞公亮为大司徒，郑公达奚震为大宗伯，梁公侯莫陈芮为大司马，应公独孤永业为大司寇，郑公韦孝宽为大司空。
现代文：庚辰，任命杞公宇文亮为大司徒，郑公达奚震为大宗伯，梁公侯莫陈芮为大司马，应公独孤永业为大司寇，郑公韦孝宽为大司空。
English: Geng Chen, appointed Gong Gong Yu Wenliang as the chief disciple, Zheng Gong Dadai Zhen as the grand patriarch, Liang Gong Hou Mo Chenqi as the chief disciple, Ying Gong Duolong Yongye as the chief disciple, and Zheng Gong Wei Xiaokuan as the chief disciple.

古文：己丑，周主祭方丘。
现代文：己丑，北周国主到方丘祭地。
English: The ruler of Northern Zhou went to the Fangqiu Festival Grounds.

古文：诏以 路寝会义、崇信、含仁、云和、思齐诸殿，皆晋公护专政时所为，事穷壮丽，有逾清庙，悉可毁撤。
现代文：诏告： 天子的寝室会议、崇信、含仁、云和、思齐等殿，都是晋公宇文护专政时所兴建的，穷极壮丽的能事，超过宗庙的规模，可以全部拆毁。
English: The edict announced: The Heavenly Son's Bedroom Meeting, Chongxin, Ganren, Yunhe, Siqi and other halls were all built during the dictatorship of Emperor Jingu, and they are extremely magnificent, exceeding the scale of the ancestral temple, and can all be demolished.

古文：雕斫之物，并赐贫民。
现代文：雕饰的物件，可以赐给贫民。
English: Ornaments may be given to the poor.

古文：缮造之宜，务从卑朴。 
现代文：修缮建造的事宜，务必简单朴素。 
English: Repairs and construction must be simple and unpretentious.

古文：戊戌，又诏： 并、鄴诸堂殿壮丽者准此。 
现代文：又诏告： 并、邺的各处壮丽的厅堂宫殿照此办理。 
English: He also decreed: And the magnificent halls and palaces in all parts of the country should be handled in the same way.

古文：臣光曰：周高祖可谓善处胜矣！
现代文：臣司马光曰：周武帝可以称得上善于对待胜利了！
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: Zhou Wudi can be said to be good at handling victory!

古文：他人胜则益奢，高祖胜而愈俭。
现代文：别人得到胜利后就更加奢侈，周武帝胜利后却更加节俭。
English: Others were more extravagant after their victory, but Emperor Zhou was more frugal after his victory.

古文：六月，丁卯，周主东巡。
现代文：六月，丁卯，北周国主到东部巡视。
English: In June, Dingwu, the ruler of Northern Zhou, went on a tour to the east.

古文：秋，七月，丙戌，幸洛州。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙戌，驾临洛州。
English: Autumn, July, spring, arriving in Lozhou.

古文：八月，壬寅，议定权衡度量，颁之于四方。
现代文：八月，壬寅，议定度量衡制度，向四方颁布。
English: In August, Jinyin agreed on the measurement system and promulgated it to the four parties.

古文：初，魏虏西凉之人，没为隶户，齐氏因之，仍供厮役。
现代文：当初，北魏俘虏了西凉人，便没入官府当奴隶户，北齐沿袭北魏的做法，奴隶户仍旧为官府服劳役。
English: At first, when the Northern Wei captured the Xiliang people, they disappeared into the government as slave households. The Northern Qi followed the practice of the Northern Wei, and the slave households still served as laborers for the government.

古文：周主灭齐，欲施宽惠，诏曰： 罪不及嗣，古有定科。
现代文：北周国主灭掉北齐，要对这些人给予宽恕恩惠，下诏说： 犯罪不能株连后代，是古代已有的法律。
English: When the Northern Zhou sovereign eliminated the Northern Qi, he wanted to grant forgiveness and grace to these people, and issued the following edict: Crimes cannot be passed down to future generations. This is a law that has existed since ancient times.

古文：杂役之徒，独异常宪，一从罪配，百代不免，罚既无穷，刑何以措！
现代文：从事杂役的犯人，唯独异于常法，一旦犯罪发配，百代都得不到赦免，惩罚既已无穷无尽，正常的刑法还怎么执行！
English: The criminals engaged in miscellaneous services are only different from the ordinary law. Once the crime is committed, no one will be pardoned for a hundred generations. The punishment is already endless. How can the normal criminal law be enforced?

古文：凡诸杂户，悉放为民。 
现代文：凡属于这类杂户，全都释放为民。 
English: All slaves and servants were to be released as civilians.

古文：自是无复杂户。
现代文：从此以后就没有杂户。
English: Since then, there have been no more miscellaneous households.

古文：甲子，郑州获九尾狐，已死，献其骨。
现代文：甲子，郑州捉到有九尾的狐狸，当时已经死了，于是把骨骼献上。
English: In Zhengzhou, a fox with nine tails was caught, but it was already dead at the time, so the skeleton was donated.

古文：周主曰： 瑞应之来，必彰有德。
现代文：北周国主说： 天降祥瑞，一定是显扬世上有德之人。
English: The Lord of the North Zhou Kingdom said: Heaven-sent Xiang Rui, must be a virtuous person in the world.

古文：若五品时叙，四海和平，乃能致此。
现代文：如果五伦常行，天下和平，才能出现此种祥瑞。
English: If the Five Classics are practiced regularly and the world is at peace, this kind of auspiciousness can only occur.

古文：今无其时，恐非实录。 
现代文：现在没有这样的时势，恐怕不符合实际。 
English: There is no such situation now, and I'm afraid it does not correspond to reality.

古文：命焚之。
现代文：命令把骨骼烧掉。
English: He ordered the bones to be burned.

古文：九月，戊寅，周制： 庶人已上，唯听衣绸、绵绸、丝布、圆绫、纱、绢、绡、葛、布等九种，余悉禁之。
现代文：九月，戊寅，北周下诏： 平民百姓以上的人，可以穿用绸、绵绸、丝布、圆绫、纱、绢、绡、葛、布等九种材料做的衣服，其余的一概禁止。
English: In September, Wu Yin and Bei Zhou issued an edict: People above the rank of ordinary people can wear clothes made of nine kinds of materials, including silk, cotton, silk cloth, round satin, yarn, satin, satin, georgette and cloth, and the rest are prohibited.

古文：朝祭之服，不拘此制。 
现代文：朝祭时的服装，不受这种制度的限制。 
English: The dress code for the morning ceremony is not restricted by this system.

古文：冬，十月，戊申，周主如鄴。
现代文：冬季十月，戊申，北周国主去邺城。
English: In the winter of October, the lord of Northern Zhou went to Lucheng in Wushan.

古文：上闻周人灭齐，欲争徐、兗，诏南兗州刺史、司空吴明彻督诸军伐之，以其世子戎昭、将军惠觉摄行州事。
现代文：陈宣帝听到北周灭亡了齐国，想和北周争夺徐州、兖州，下诏南兖州刺史、司空吴明彻督率军队进行讨伐，任命吴明彻的长子吴戎昭、将军惠觉代理州事。
English: When Chen Xuandi heard that the Northern Zhou Dynasty had destroyed the State of Qi, he wanted to compete with the Northern Zhou Dynasty for the control of Xuzhou and Zhangzhou. He ordered the governor of Southern Zhangzhou, Wu Mingche, to lead the army in a crusade, and appointed Wu Mingche's eldest son, Wu Rongzhao, and General Hui Jue to be in charge of state affairs.

古文：明彻军至吕梁，周徐州总管梁士彦帅众拒战，戊午，明彻击破之。
现代文：吴明彻的军队到了吕梁，北周的徐州总管梁士彦率领军队抵抗，戊午，被吴明彻打败。
English: Wu Mingcher's army arrived in Luliang. Liang Shiyan, the head of Xuzhou in northern Zhou, led the army to resist. At noon, he was defeated by Wu Mingcher.

古文：士彦婴城自守，明彻围之。
现代文：梁士彦据城自守，被吴明彻的军队包围。
English: Liang Shih-yan defended himself in the city and was surrounded by Wu Ming-che's army.

古文：帝锐意以为河南指麾可定。
现代文：陈宣帝一心认为河南很容易平定。
English: Chen Xuandi was of the opinion that Henan could be easily pacified.

古文：中书通事舍人蔡景历谏曰： 师老将骄，不宜过穷远略。 
现代文：中书通事舍人蔡景历规劝说： 军队老迈将领骄傲，不宜穷兵远攻。 
English: Cai Jinglian, a Chinese scholar, advised: The army is proud of its veteran generals, and it is not appropriate to attack from afar.

古文：帝怒，以为沮众，出为豫章内史。
现代文：宣帝大怒，认为是破坏大家的斗志，把蔡景历派出担任豫章内史。
English: Emperor Xuan was furious and thought that it would destroy everyone's fighting spirit, so he sent Cai Jinglian to serve as Yuzhang's internal historian.

古文：未行，有飞章劾景历在省赃污狼籍，坐免官，削爵土。
现代文：他还没有出发，有紧急的奏章弹劾蔡景历在中书省有贪赃行为，声名很坏，因此被免去官职，取消了爵号和封地。
English: He had not yet set out, but there was an urgent petition to impeach Cai Jinglian for corrupt behavior in the Chinese Book Ministry, and his reputation was very bad, so he was removed from office, and his title and fief were canceled.

古文：周改葬德皇帝于冀州，周主服缞，哭于太极殿；百官素服。
现代文：北周将德皇帝宇文肱在冀州改葬，北周国主穿了丧服，在太极殿大哭，百官都穿白色的丧服。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty buried the German Emperor Uwen Zang in Jizhou. The Northern Zhou Emperor wore mourning clothes and cried loudly in the Taiji Hall. All officials wore white mourning clothes.

古文：周人诬温公高纬与宜州刺史穆提婆谋反，并其宗族皆赐死。
现代文：北周有人诬告温公高纬和宜州刺史穆提婆合谋造反，下令对他们以及他们的宗族赐死。
English: Someone in Beizhou falsely accused Wengong Gaowei and Yizhoushi Muti of conspiring to rebel, and ordered that they and their clans be put to death.

古文：众人多自陈无之，高延宗独攘袂泣而不言，以椒塞口而死。
现代文：众人都自已申辩没有这件事，高延宗却独自捋起衣袖哭泣而不说话，用辣椒塞在自己的口里而死。
English: All of them denied the incident, but Gao Yanzong alone rolled up his sleeves, wept silently, stuffed chili into his mouth, and died.

古文：唯纬弟仁英以清狂，仁雅以瘖疾得免，徙于蜀。
现代文：只有高纬的弟弟高仁英由于是白痴，高仁雅由于是哑巴而得到赦免，被徙移到四川。
English: Only Gao Renying, Gao Wei's younger brother, was pardoned because he was an idiot, and Gao Renya was pardoned because he was dumb, and they were both exiled to Sichuan.

古文：其余亲属，不杀者散配西土，皆死于边裔。
现代文：其他亲属，不杀的被分散发配到长安西边的州郡，都死在边境。
English: Other relatives, who were dispersed to counties and prefectures west of Chang'an without being killed, all died at the border.

古文：周主以高湝妻卢氏赐其将斛斯征。
现代文：北周国主把高的妻子卢氏赏给将军斛斯征。
English: The ruler of the North Zhou Province gave Gao's wife, Lu, to the general, Jiesheng.

古文：卢氏蓬首垢面，长斋，不言笑。
现代文：卢氏蓬头垢面，一直吃素，不说不笑。
English: Lu's hair is unkempt and dirty, and he has always been a vegetarian.

古文：征放之，乃为尼。
现代文：斛斯征便放了她，于是做了尼姑。
English: He released her and she became a nun.

古文：齐后、妃贫者，至以卖烛为业。
现代文：北齐皇后、贫穷的妃子，甚至以卖蜡独为业。
English: The Empress of Northern Qi, the poor concubine, and even the wax seller.

古文：十一月，壬申，周立皇子衍为道王，兑为蔡王。
现代文：十一月，壬申，北周立皇子宇文充为道王，宇文兑为蔡王。
English: In November, in Jinshin, the prince of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, Uwenchong, became the king of Tao, and Uwen Dui became the king of Cai.

古文：癸酉，周遣上大将军王轨将兵救徐州。
现代文：癸酉，北周派上大将军王轨带兵援救徐州。
English: At that time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent the great general Wang Liao to lead the troops to rescue Xuzhou.

古文：初，周人败齐师于晋州，乘胜逐北。齐人所弃甲仗，未暇收敛，稽胡乘间窃出，并盗而有之。
现代文：起初，北周在晋州打败北齐军队，乘胜追逐北上，北齐人所丢弃的盔甲兵器，来不及收罗集中；稽胡钻空子偷偷出动，将丢弃的东西全都盗走。
English: At first, Northern Zhou defeated the Northern Qi army in Jinzhou and took advantage of the victory to chase northward. The armor and weapons discarded by the Northern Qi people were too late to be collected; Qihudian secretly set out to steal everything that had been discarded.

古文：仍立刘蠡升之孙没鐸为主，号圣武皇帝，改元石平。
现代文：仍旧立刘蠡升的孙子刘没铎为君主，称圣武皇帝，改年号为石平。
English: Liu Mianzhong, the grandson of Liu Shusheng, was still appointed as the monarch, called Emperor Shengwu, and his era name was changed to Shi Ping.

古文：周人既克关东，将讨稽胡，议欲穷其巢穴。
现代文：北周攻克北齐以后，将讨伐稽胡，商议要直捣他们的巢穴。
English: After the Northern Zhou conquered the Northern Qi, they will fight against the Jianhu and discuss how to directly attack their lair.

古文：齐王宪曰： 步落稽种类既多，又山谷险绝，王师一举，未可尽除。
现代文：齐王宇文宪说： 步落稽的种类很多，又在山谷险峻的地方，只靠朝廷军队的一次行动，不能将他们全部消灭。
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian said: There are many types of faltering, and in steep valleys, only one action by the imperial army can not eliminate them all.

古文：且当剪其魁首，余加慰抚。 
现代文：应当除掉他们的首领，对众人加以慰劳安抚。 
English: It is best to cut off the head and pacify the rest.

古文：周主从之，以宪为行军元帅，督诸军讨之。
现代文：北周国主采纳了他的意见，任命宇文宪为行军元帅，督率军队进行讨伐。
English: The ruler of the Northern Zhou adopted his opinion and appointed Wu Wenxian as a marching marshal to lead the army in the crusade.

古文：至马邑，分道俱进。
现代文：大军抵达马邑后，分路并进。
English: After the large army arrived in Mayi, they split up and marched side by side.

古文：没鐸分遣其党天柱守河东，穆支守河西，据险以拒之。
现代文：刘没铎分派党羽天柱防守西河以东，穆支防守西河以西，据险进行抗拒。
English: Liu Muxun dispatched the Party's Feathered Heavenly Column to defend the east of the West River, and the Mu Branch to defend the west of the West River, and resisted dangerously.

古文：宪命谯王俭击天柱，滕王逌击穆支，并破之，斩首万馀级。
现代文：宇文宪命令谯王宇文俭进攻天柱，滕王宇文进攻穆支，将他们都打败，杀死一万多人。
English: Uwen Xian ordered Xing Wang Uwen Jian to attack Tianzhu, and Teng Wang Uwen to attack Mu Zhi, defeating them both and killing more than ten thousand people.

古文：赵王招击没鐸，擒之，馀众皆降。
现代文：赵王宇文招进攻刘没铎，将他活捉，其余兵众全部投降。
English: Zhao Wang Yuwen attacked Liu Mianzhong, captured him alive, and all the remaining soldiers surrendered.

古文：周诏： 自永熙三年以来，东土之民掠为奴婢，及克江陵之日，良人没为奴婢者，并放为良。 
现代文：北周诏令： 自永熙三年以来，东部的百姓被抢走当奴婢、以及攻克江陵时被没入官府当奴婢的平民百姓，都放归民间。 
English: North Zhou Dynasty decree: Since the third year of Yongxi, the people in the east who were taken away as slaves, as well as the civilians who were absorbed into the government as slaves when Jiangling was conquered, have been released to the people.

古文：又诏： 后宫唯置妃二人，世妇三人，御妻三人，此外皆减之。 
现代文：又诏令： 后宫只设置妃子二人，女官三人，御女三人，除此以外都减掉。 
English: It was also decreed that the harem should only contain two concubines, three maids of honour, and three maids of honour, and that everything else should be reduced.

古文：周主性节俭，常服布袍，寝布被，后宫不过十馀人；每行兵，亲在行陈，步涉山谷，人所不堪；抚将士有恩，而明察果断，用法严峻。由是将士畏威而乐为之死。
现代文：北周国主生性节俭，常常穿布袍，睡觉时盖布被，后宫不过十几人；每逢行军作战，亲自在军队里，徒步在山谷里行走，这是别人所不能忍受的；安抚将士给予恩惠，而且明察果断，用法严峻，因此将士们虽然怕他的威严但乐意为他而死。
English: The ruler of the Northern Zhou Kingdom was frugal by nature. He often wore a cloth robe and covered his bed with a cloth quilt, and his harem consisted of only a dozen people. Whenever he marched to battle, he was in the army and walked on foot in the valley, which others could not bear. He appeased the soldiers and gave them favors, and he was clear-sighted and decisive, and his methods were severe. Therefore, although the soldiers were afraid of his majesty, they were willing to die for him.

古文：己亥晦，日有食之。
现代文：己亥晦，出现日食。
English: At the end of the year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：周初行《刑书要制》：群盗赃一匹，及正、长隐五丁、若地顷以上，皆死。
现代文：北周开始实行《刑书要制》：凡盗窃一匹赃物，以及闾正、里正、族正、保长、党长隐满五个丁口、一百亩地以上的，都处死。
English: North Zhou began to implement the "penalty book system": anyone who steals a horse and stolen goods, as well as five dingkou, more than one hundred mu of land belonging to the general, the village general, the tribal general, the provincial governor, and the party leader, will be executed.

古文：十二月，戊申，新作东宫成，太子徙居之。
现代文：十二月，戊申，陈朝新建的东宫落成，皇太子迁到那里居住。
English: In December, the newly built East Palace of the Chen Dynasty was completed in Wushin, and the crown prince moved there to live.

古文：庚申，周主如并州，移并州军民四万户于关中。
现代文：庚申，北周国主去并州，将并州的四万户军民迁移到关中地区。
English: Goshun, the ruler of Northern Zhou, went to annex the prefecture and moved 40,000 military and civilian households from the annexed prefecture to the Guanzhong area.

古文：戊辰，废并州宫及六府。
现代文：戊辰，废除并州的宫室和六府。
English: Boshin said that the merger of the state palace and the six prefectures around it had been revoked.

古文：高宝宁自黄龙上表劝进于高绍义，绍义遂称皇帝，改元武平，以宝宁为丞相。
现代文：高宝宁从黄龙上表劝高绍义当皇帝，高绍义于是做了皇帝，改年号为武平，任命高宝宁为丞相。
English: Gao Baoning advised Gao Shao Yi to become emperor from the Huanglong table. Gao Shao Yi then became emperor, changed his name to Wuping, and appointed Gao Baoning as chancellor.

古文：突厥佗钵可汗举兵助之。
现代文：突厥佗钵可汗举兵帮助高绍义。
English: The Turkic Khans raised an army to help Gao Shao Yi.

古文：高宗宣皇帝中之下太建十年春，正月，壬午，周主幸鄴；辛卯，幸怀州；癸巳，幸洛州。
现代文：太建十年春季，正月，壬午，北周国主驾临邺城；辛卯，驾临怀州；癸巳，驾临洛州。
English: In the spring of the 10th year of the Tai Jian era, in the first month of the year, at noon, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty drove to Linyi City; Xin Wu, drove to Huai Zhou; Xun Si, drove to Luozhou.

古文：置怀州宫。
现代文：设置怀州的宫室。
English: Set in Waizhou's Imperial Palace.

古文：二月，甲辰，周谯孝王俭卒。
现代文：二月，甲辰，北周谯孝王宇文俭去世。
English: In February, Jia Chen, the leader of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, Wang Yuwenjian passed away.

古文：丁巳，周主还长安。
现代文：丁巳，北周国主回长安。
English: Just then, the head of the Northern Zhou Kingdom returned to Chang'an.

古文：吴明彻围周彭城，环列舟舰于城下，攻之甚急。
现代文：陈朝的吴明彻包围北周的彭城，将战船环绕排列在城下，攻城很急。
English: Wu Mingche of the Chen Dynasty encircled Pengcheng in the northern periphery and lined up warships around the city. The siege of the city was very rapid.

古文：王轨引兵轻行，据淮口，结长围，以铁锁贯车轮数百，沈之清水，以遏陈船归路，军中恟惧。
现代文：北周派王轨领兵轻装前进，占据淮口，结成长长的包围圈，用铁锁连接起几百个车轮，沉在清水河里，用来阻断陈朝船只的归路；军队中动荡不安感到恐惧。
English: Beizhou sent Wang Liao to lead the troops to advance lightly, occupy Huaikou, form a long encircling circle, connect hundreds of wheels with iron locks, and sink in the Clear Water River to block the return route of Chen Dynasty ships; the army was afraid of turbulence.

古文：谯州刺史萧摩诃言于明彻曰： 闻王轨始锁下流，其两端筑城，今尚未立，公若见遣击之，彼必不敢相拒。
现代文：谯州刺史萧摩诃对吴明彻说： 听说王轨刚开始封锁清水河的下游，在河的两头筑城，现在还没有建起来，您如果派我去攻击，对方一定不敢抵抗。
English: "I heard that Wang Liao has just begun to blockade the lower reaches of the Qingshui River and build a city at both ends of the river, but it has not been built yet. If you send me to attack, the other side will not dare to resist.

古文：水路未断，贼势不坚；彼城若立，则吾属必为虏矣。
现代文：水路没有阻断，贼势不会牢固；等到他们的城建成，我们就会成为对方的俘虏。 
English: If the waterway is not blocked, the bandits will not be strong; when their city is built, we will become each other's prisoners.

古文：明彻奋髯曰： 搴旗陷陈，将军事也；长算远略，老夫事也。 
现代文：吴明彻掀起胡子，说： 拔掉敌人的军旗冲锋陷阵，是你将军的事情；长谋远略，是我老夫的事情。 
English: Wu Mingcher raised his mustache and said, "Pulling down the enemy's banner and charging into battle is your general's business; long-term strategy is my husband's business.

古文：摩诃失色而退。
现代文：萧摩诃吓得脸上变色退了出来。
English: Xiao Ma was so shocked that he lost his composure and quit.

古文：一旬之间，水路遂断。
现代文：十天之间，水路终于被阻断。
English: After ten days, the waterway was finally cut off.

古文：周兵益至，诸将议破堰拔军，以舫载马而去。马主裴子烈曰： 若破堰下船，船必倾倒，不如先遣马出。 
现代文：北周军队越到越多，陈朝的将领们商议破坏堵水的土堤将军队撤离，用船只装载马匹退走，马军主将裴子烈说： 如果破了土堤将马匹放下船，船一定会倾翻，不如先将马匹送出去。 
English: The number of Northern Zhou troops increased. The generals of the Chen Dynasty discussed breaking the earth embankment blocking the water to evacuate the troops, and loaded the horses with ships to retreat. The horse army commander Pei Zilei said: If the earth embankment is broken and the horses are put down, the ship will surely capsize. It is better to send the horses out first.

古文：时明彻苦背疾甚笃，萧摩诃复请曰： 今求战不得，进退无路。
现代文：当时吴明彻背上长疮病得很重，萧摩诃再次向他请求说： 现在求战不得，进退无路。
English: At that time, Wu Mingche was very ill with sores on his back. Xiao Maojun once again asked him, "There is no choice but to fight now. There is no way out."

古文：若潜军突围，未足为耻。
现代文：军队如果秘密地突围，也不足为耻。
English: It is nothing to be ashamed of if the army secretly breaks through the encirclement.

古文：愿公帅步卒、乘马舆徐行，摩诃领铁骑数千驱驰前后，必当使公安达京邑。 
现代文：希望您率领步兵、乘马车慢慢地前进，我带领几千名铁骑在前后来往奔驰，崐一定能使您平安地到达京城建康。 
English: I hope that you will lead the infantry and slowly advance by carriage, and I will lead several thousand cavalry to the front and back to the Mercedes, which will surely enable you to safely reach the capital Jiankang.

古文：明彻曰： 弟之此策，乃良图也。
现代文：吴明彻说： 老弟这个计策，是个好办法。
English: Wu Mingcher said, "Brother, this strategy is a good one.

古文：然步军既多，吾为总督，必须身居其后，相帅兼行。
现代文：然而步兵很多，我是总督，必须在队伍后面，率领他们一起行动。
English: But there are a lot of infantry, and I'm the governor, and I have to be at the back of the line, leading them together.

古文：弟马军宜须在前，不可迟缓。 
现代文：老弟的马军应当行动迅速，走在步兵前面不能迟缓。 
English: Your cavalry must advance, and not delay.

古文：摩诃因帅马军夜发。
现代文：萧摩诃因此率领马军在晚上出发。
English: As a result, Xiao Miao led the horse army to set out in the evening.

古文：甲子，明彻决堰，乘水势退军。冀以入淮。
现代文：甲子，吴明彻决断土堤，乘水势撤退军队，希望从这里进入淮河。
English: Ji Zi and Wu Ming Che decided to break the earth embankment and withdraw the army by taking advantage of the water potential, hoping to enter the Huaihe River from here.

古文：至清口，水势渐微，舟舰并碍车轮，不复得过。
现代文：到清口时，水越来越浅，水军船只被沉在清水河中的车轮所阻挡，无法通过。
English: By the time they reached the mouth of the Clear Water River, the water was getting shallower and shallower, and the naval vessels were blocked by the wheels sunk in the Clear Water River and could not pass.

古文：王轨引兵围而蹙之，众溃。
现代文：王轨带领军队将他们包围起来并加以收缩，陈朝军队溃败。
English: Wang Luo led the army to encircle them and shrink them, and the Chen Dynasty army was defeated.

古文：明彻为周人所执，将士三万并器械辎重皆没于周。
现代文：吴明彻被北周捉住，三万将士以及军队的器械物资都被北周吞并。
English: Wu Mingche was captured by Northern Zhou, and 30,000 soldiers and military equipment and materials were all absorbed by Northern Zhou.

古文：萧摩诃以精骑八十居前突围，众骑继之，比旦，达淮南，与将军任忠、周罗独全军得还。
现代文：萧摩诃率领八十名精骑兵在前面突围，其余的骑兵在后面跟随，早晨时，到达淮河南岸，和将军任忠、周罗的军队得以保全回去。
English: Xiao Maqi led eighty elite cavalrymen to break through the encirclement in the front, and the rest of the cavalry followed behind. In the morning, they reached the south bank of the Huai River, and the army of generals Ren Zhong and Zhou Luo was able to return safely.

古文：初，帝谋取彭、汴，以问五兵尚书毛喜，对曰： 淮左新平，边民未辑。
现代文：当初，陈宣帝打算夺取彭州、汴州，询问五兵尚书毛喜的意见，毛喜回答说： 淮左平定不久，边地的百姓还不稳定。
English: At first, Chen Xuandi planned to seize Pengzhou and Zhangzhou, and asked the opinion of the five soldiers Shangshu Mao Xi. Mao Xi replied: It is not long since Huai Zuo was pacified, and the people in the border areas are still unstable.

古文：周氏始吞齐国，难与争锋。
现代文：周国刚吞并齐国，很难和对方争高低。
English: Zhou Guo just annexed Qi Guo, it is difficult to compete with the other side.

古文：且弃舟戢之工，践车骑之地，去长就短，非吴人所便。
现代文：况且放弃乘船作战的擅长，来到平原地区骑马乘车打仗，避长就短，这不是南方人所熟习的。
English: Moreover, they gave up their ability to fight by boat and came to the plains to fight on horseback and by car. This is not something that people in the south are familiar with.

古文：臣愚以为不若安民保境，寝兵结好，斯久长之术也。 
现代文：以臣的愚见不如安抚百姓守护国境，停止用兵和周国结成友好关系，这才是长久之计。 
English: It is better to appease the people and guard the border, stop using troops and form a friendly relationship with Zhou, which is a long-term solution.

古文：及明彻败，帝谓喜曰： 卿言验于今矣。 
现代文：吴明彻被打败以后，宣帝对毛喜说： 您以前的话现在证实了。 
English: After Wu Mingcher was defeated, Emperor Xuan said to Mao Xi: Your previous words have now been confirmed.

古文：即日，召蔡景历，复以为征南咨议参军。
现代文：同一天，召见蔡景历，复官任职为征南咨议参军。
English: On the same day, Cai Jinglian was summoned and reinstated to join the army for the Southern Expedition.

古文：周主封吴明彻为怀德公，位大将军。
现代文：北周国主封吴明彻为怀德公，位于大将军之列。
English: Wu Mingche, the chief vassal of the Northern Zhou Kingdom, is the Lord of Huai De, and is ranked among the great generals.

古文：明彻忧愤而卒。
现代文：吴明彻忧愁愤怒而去世。
English: Wu Mingche died of grief and anger.

古文：乙丑，周以越王盛为大冢宰。
现代文：乙丑，北周任命越王宇文盛为大冢宰。
English: Second, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Yue Wang Uwen Sheng as the grand vizier.

古文：三月，戊辰，周于蒲州置宫，废同州及长春二宫。
现代文：三月，戊辰，北周在蒲州营建宫室，废除同州和长春二宫。
English: In March, the Northern Zhou Dynasty built a palace in Puzhou and abolished the Second Palace of Tongzhou and Changchun.

古文：甲戌，周主初服常冠，以皁纱全幅向后襆发，仍裁为四脚。
现代文：甲戌，北周国主初次戴平日用的帽子，用整幅的黑纱从前向后包扎头发，并裁成四个帽翅。
English: For the first time, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty wore a hat for everyday use. He wrapped his hair from front to back with a full-width black gauze and cut it into four wings.

古文：丙子，命中军大将军、开府仪同三司淳于量为大都督，总水陆诸军事，镇西将军孙瑒督荆、郢诸军，平北将军樊毅都督清口上至荆山缘淮诸军，宁远将军任忠都督寿阳、新蔡、霍州诸军，以备周。
现代文：丙子，陈朝任命中军大将军、开府仪同三司淳于量为大都督，总管水路和陆路的军事，镇西将军孙都督荆州、郢州的军队，平北将军樊毅都督清口上到荆山沿淮河一带的军队，宁远将军任忠都督寿阳、新蔡、霍州的军队，以防备北周的军事行动。
English: Cui Zi, the Chen dynasty appointed the general of the Chinese army, Kaifu Yi and the three divisions of Junyurong as the grand governor, the military commander of waterways and land routes, Zhenxi General Sun as the governor of the army of Jingzhou and Zhangzhou, Pingbei General Zou Yi as the governor of the army of Jingshan along the Huai River, and Ningyuan General Renzhong as the governor of the army of Shouyang, Xincai and Huzhou, in order to prepare for the military operations of North Zhou.

古文：乙酉，大赦。
现代文：乙酉，陈朝大赦全国。
English: The Chen Dynasty granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：壬辰，周改元宣政。
现代文：壬辰，北周改年号为宣政。
English: In Imjin, Northern Zhou changed the year name to Xuan Zheng.

古文：夏，四月，庚申，突厥寇周幽州，杀掠吏民。
现代文：夏季四月，庚申，突厥入侵北周的幽州，杀害抢劫当地的官吏百姓。
English: In the summer of April, the Turks invaded Yuzhou in northern Zhou, killing and robbing local officials and people.

古文：戊午，樊毅遣军渡淮北，对清口筑城。
现代文：戊午，陈朝的樊毅派军队渡过淮河到了北面，对着清口筑城。
English: At noon, Zou Yi of the Chen Dynasty sent troops to cross the Huai River to the north and build a city opposite the mouth of the river.

古文：壬戌，清口城不守。
现代文：壬戌，清口城失守。
English: On the same day, Qingkou City was conquered by the Zhou army.

古文：五月，己丑，周高祖帅诸军伐突厥，遣柱国原公姬愿、东平公神举等将兵五道俱入。
现代文：五月，己丑，北周武帝率领军队征讨突厥，派柱国原公宇文姬愿、东平公宇文神举等领兵分五路并进。
English: In May, the Northern Zhou Emperor led the army to conquer the Turks, and sent Zhu Guo Yuan Gongyu Wenji Wang, Dongping Gongyu Wenjin He to lead the army in five directions.

古文：癸巳，帝不豫，留止云阳宫；丙申，诏停诸军。
现代文：癸巳，北周武帝生病，留在云阳宫；丙申，下诏所有军队停止行动。
English: Soon after, the Northern Zhou Emperor fell ill and stayed at the Yunyang Palace; he ordered all troops to cease operations.

古文：驿召宗师宇文孝伯赴行在所，帝执其手曰： 吾自量必无济理，以后事付君。 
现代文：派驿使到长安召宗师宇文孝伯赶到武帝所在的地方，武帝崐握住他的手说： 我自己估计不能痊愈了，以后的事都托付给您。 
English: He sent an envoy to Chang'an to summon his mentor, Uwen Xiao Bo, and rushed to where Emperor Wu was. Emperor Wu took him by the hand and said, "I don't think I can be cured, I'll leave everything else to you."

古文：是夜，授孝伯司卫上大夫，总宿卫兵。
现代文：这天晚上，授给宇文孝伯司卫上大夫的职位，总管宿卫兵。
English: That evening, Yuwen Xiao was given the position of the senior doctor of the Imperial Guards, the chief of the guards.

古文：又令驰驿入京镇守，以备非常。
现代文：又命令他骑上驿马到京城镇守，防备非常事件。
English: He also ordered him to ride a steed to the capital to guard the city and prepare for an emergency.

古文：六月，丁酉朔，帝疾甚，还长安；是夕殂，年三十六。
现代文：六月，丁酉朔，武帝病情严重，回长安；在当天夜晚去世，年三十六岁。
English: In June, Ding Junshuo, Emperor Wu was seriously ill and returned to Chang'an; he died that night at the age of thirty-six.

古文：戊戌，太子即位。
现代文：戊戌，皇太子宇文即位。
English: Emperor Wu and Crown Prince Uwen ascend the throne.

古文：尊皇后阿史那氏为皇太后。
现代文：尊称皇后阿史那氏为皇太后。
English: She was given the honorary title of Empress Dowager of the Ashina clan.

古文：宣帝始立，即逞奢欲。
现代文：北周宣帝刚即位，便放肆地奢侈纵欲。
English: As soon as the Northern Zhou Emperor Xuan ascended the throne, he indulged in extravagant indulgence.

古文：大行在殡，曾无戚容，扪其杖痕，大骂曰： 死晚矣！ 
现代文：北周武帝还没有殡葬，他毫无悲伤的样子，抚摸以前被棍棒所打留下的伤痕，大骂道： 死得太晚了！ 
English: The Northern Zhouwu Emperor has not yet been buried, he has no sad look, stroking the scars left by being beaten with a club, and cursing: It's too late to die!

古文：阅视高祖宫人，逼为淫欲。
现代文：察看北周宣帝后宫的女子，强迫她们满足自己的淫欲。
English: He inspected the women in the harem of the Northern Zhou Emperor Xuan and forced them to satisfy their sexual desires.

古文：超拜吏部下大夫郑译为开府仪同大将军、内史中大夫，委以朝政。
现代文：越级封吏部下大夫郑译为开府仪同大将军、内史中大夫，把朝政委托给他。
English: Zheng translated the subordinate doctor Zheng, who was a higher-ranking official, into Kaifu Yi Tong Da Gen, Inner History Middle Doctor, and entrusted him with the administration of the imperial court.

古文：己未，葬武皇帝于孝陵，庙号高祖。
现代文：己未，将武皇帝埋葬在孝陵，庙号高祖。
English: However, Emperor Wu was not buried in the Xiaoling Mausoleum, but in the Mausoleum of Gaozu.

古文：既葬，诏内外公除，帝及六宫皆议即吉。
现代文：葬事刚结束，便下诏朝廷内外脱去丧服，让朝臣议论皇帝和皇后、妃嫔换穿吉服。
English: As soon as the funeral was over, the emperor decreed that everyone inside and outside the imperial court should take off their mourning clothes and let the courtiers discuss whether the emperor, empress, and concubines should change into auspicious clothing.

古文：京兆郡丞乐运上疏，以为 葬期既促，事讫即除，太为汲汲。 
现代文：京兆郡丞乐运向周宣帝上疏，以为 葬期已经很匆促，葬事刚完就不穿丧服，太焦急了。 
English: Jingzha Guzheng Rongle Yun to Zhou Xuandi, thought that the funeral period had been very hurried, and did not wear funeral clothes immediately after the funeral, too anxious.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：宣帝不听。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：帝以齐炀王宪属尊望重，忌之。
现代文：北周宣帝因为齐炀王宇文宪位高望重，对他很忌恨。
English: Emperor Xuan of the Northern Zhou Dynasty was very jealous of King Uwen of Qi, because he was held in high esteem.

古文：谓宇文孝伯曰： 公能为朕图齐王，当以其官相授。 
现代文：对宇文孝伯说： 您如果能为朕除掉齐王，就把他的官职授给您。 
English: He said to Uwen Xiao Bo, "If you can get rid of King Qi for me, I will give you his official post."

古文：孝伯叩头曰： 先帝遗诏，不许滥诛骨肉。
现代文：宇文孝伯叩头说： 先帝有遗诏，不许滥杀骨肉至亲。
English: Uwen Xiao Bo's flunky said, "The late emperor had a last will and testament, forbidding the indiscriminate killing of blood relatives.

古文：齐王，陛下为叔父，功高德茂，社稷重臣。陛下若无故害之，臣又顺旨曲从，则臣为不忠之臣，陛下为不孝之子矣。 
现代文：齐王是陛下的叔父，功高德重，是国家的重臣，陛下如果无缘无故地杀害他，那么我就是不忠之臣，陛下就是不孝之子了。 
English: King Qi is Your Majesty's uncle, highly meritorious, and the chief minister of the country. If Your Majesty were to kill him for no reason, then I would be a disloyal minister, and Your Majesty would be an unfilial son.

古文：帝不怿，由是疏之。
现代文：宣帝很不高兴，从此对他疏远。
English: Emperor Xuancheng was very unhappy and distanced himself from him.

古文：乃与开府仪同大将军于智、郑译等密谋之，使智就宅候宪，因告宪有异谋。
现代文：宣帝便和开府仪同大将军于智、郑译等人密谋，派于智到宇文宪的家里去伺探，诬告宇文宪有阴谋。
English: Emperor Xuan then conspired with Kaifu Yi and the generals Yu Zhi and Zheng Qi, and sent Yu Zhi to Uwen Xian's home to investigate and falsely accuse Uwen Xian of plotting.

古文：甲子，帝遣宇文孝伯语宪，欲以宪为太师，宪辞让。
现代文：甲子，宣帝派宇文孝伯传话给宇文宪，想任命他为太师，宇文宪表示推辞。
English: Emperor Xuan sent Uwen Xiao Bo to send a message to Uwen Xian, who wanted to appoint him as Grand Master, but Uwen Xian declined.

古文：又使孝伯召宪，曰： 晚与诸王俱入。 
现代文：又派宇文孝伯召宇文宪，说： 晚上和其他王公一起来。 
English: He also sent Uwen Xiao Bo to summon Uwen Xian, saying, "Come with the other princes in the evening.

古文：既至殿门，宪独被引进。
现代文：他们应召刚到殿门，宇文宪被单独领进去。
English: When he arrived at the palace gate, he was ushered into the palace alone.

古文：帝先伏壮士于别室，至，即执之。
现代文：宣帝预先在别的房子里埋伏了壮士，宇文宪一到，就被捉住。
English: Xuan Di had ambushed the strong man in another house in advance, and as soon as Uwen Xian arrived, he was caught.

古文：宪自辨理，帝使于智证宪，宪目光如炬，与智相质。
现代文：宇文宪为自己辩护说理，宣帝就叫于智和他对证，宇文宪的目光如火，和于智对质。
English: Uwen Xian argued in his own defense, and Emperor Xuan called Yu Zhi to testify against him. Uwen Xian's eyes were on fire as he confronted Yu Zhi.

古文：或谓宪曰： 以王今日事势，何用多言！ 
现代文：有人对宇文宪说： 以你今天事情的趋势，何必多说！ 
English: Someone said to Yu Wenxian: With the trend of today's events, why don't you say more!

古文：宪曰： 死生有命，宁复图存！
现代文：宇文宪说： 死生有命，我难道还想活吗！
English: Uwen Xian said, "Life and death are the same, do I still want to live?"

古文：但老母在堂，恐留兹恨耳！ 
现代文：只是老母亲还在，感到遗憾而已！ 
English: It's just that my elderly mother is still here, and I feel sorry for her!

古文：因掷笏于地。
现代文：因此把朝笏扔在地上。
English: So throw the hajj on the ground.

古文：遂缢之。
现代文：宇文宪被绞死。
English: Uwen Xian was hanged.

古文：帝召宪僚属，使证成宪罪。
现代文：宣帝召来宇文宪部下的官吏，要他们证实宇文宪的罪行。
English: Emperor Xuan summoned officials from Uwen's constitutional department and asked them to confirm Uwen's guilt.

古文：参军勃海李纲，誓之以死，终无桡辞。
现代文：参军勃海人李纲，以死起誓，始终没有乱说。
English: Li Gang, a Bohai man who joined the army, swore by death and never said anything untrue.

古文：有司以露车载宪尸而出，故吏皆散，唯李纲抚棺号恸，躬自瘗之，哭拜而去。
现代文：官吏用没有帷盖的车子载上宇文宪的尸体出了殿门，宇文宪从前的官吏都散走了，只有李纲抚摸着棺木号啕痛哭，亲自将宇文宪埋葬，大哭拜别而去。
English: The officials carried the body of Uwen Xian out of the palace gate in a car without a curtain. The former officials of Uwen Xian dispersed. Only Li Gang stroked the coffin bell and cried bitterly. He personally buried Uwen Xian and bade farewell with tears.

古文：又杀上大将军王兴、上开府仪同大将军独孤熊、开府仪同大将军豆卢绍，皆素与宪亲善者也。
现代文：宣帝又杀掉上大将军王兴、上开府仪同大将军独孤熊、开府仪同大将军豆卢绍，他们都是素来和宇文宪亲近的人。
English: Emperor Xuan also killed the high-ranking general Wang Xing, the high-ranking Kaifu Yi and the high-ranking general Duolong Xiong, and the high-ranking general Kaifu Yi and the high-ranking general Dou Lushao, all of whom had always been close to Yu Wenxian.

古文：帝既诛宪而无名，乃云与兴等谋反，时人谓之 伴死 。
现代文：宣帝既然杀掉宇文宪而没有罪名，便说他是和王兴等人密谋造反，当时人称王兴等人为 伴死 。
English: Since Emperor Xuan killed Wu Wenxian without any crime, he said that he conspired with Wang Xing and others to rebel. At that time, Wang Xing and others were said to have died as accomplices.

古文：以于智为柱国，封齐公，以赏之。
现代文：任命于智为柱国，封齐公，作为对他的奖赏。
English: Yu Zhi was appointed as a pillar state and given the title of Qi Gong as a reward.

古文：闰月，乙亥，周主立妃杨氏为皇后。
现代文：闰月，乙亥，北周国主宣帝宇文立妃子杨氏为皇后。
English: In the leap month, the Year of the Boar, the ruler of Northern Zhou proclaimed Emperor Yuwen and installed his daughter Yang as empress.

古文：辛巳，周以赵王招为太师，陈王纯为太傅。
现代文：辛巳，北周任命赵王宇文招为太师，陈王宇文纯为太傅
English: Soon after, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Zhao Wang Yuwenzhao as the Grand Master and Chen Wang Yuwenjun as the Grand Master

古文：齐范阳王绍义闻周高祖殂，以为得天助。
现代文：北齐范阳王高绍义听说北周高祖已死，以为得到了上天的帮助。
English: When Northern Qi Fanyang Wang Gao Shao Yi heard that Northern Zhou Gao Zu had died, he thought he had received help from heaven.

古文：幽州人卢昌期，起兵据范阳，迎绍义，绍义引突厥兵赴之。
现代文：幽州人卢昌期起兵占领范阳，迎接高绍义，高绍义引来突厥兵去那里。
English: During the Lu Chang period, the people of Yuzhou raised an army to occupy Fanyang to welcome Gao Shao Yi, and Gao Shao Yi attracted Turkish soldiers to go there.

古文：周遣柱国东平公神举将兵讨昌期。
现代文：北周派柱国东平公宇文神举率军讨伐卢昌期。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty sent the pillar state Dongping Gong Uwen Shen to lead the army to fight against Lu Chang.

古文：绍义闻幽州总管出兵在外，欲乘虚袭蓟，神举遣大将军宇文恩将四千人救之，半为绍义所杀。
现代文：高绍义听到幽州总管出兵在外，想乘虚袭击蓟州，宇文神举派大将军宇文恩率领四千人去援救，被高绍义杀死一半。
English: Gao Shaoyi heard that the general manager of Yuzhou had sent troops outside, and wanted to take advantage of the false attack on Zhangzhou. Uwen Shen sent General Uwen En to lead four thousand people to rescue, and Gao Shaoyi killed half of them.

古文：会神举克范阳，擒昌期。绍义闻之，素衣举哀，还入突厥。
现代文：恰好宇文神举攻下范阳，生擒卢昌期，高绍义听到噩耗，穿上白色丧服举行哀悼，退回突厥。
English: It just so happened that Uwen Shen led an army to conquer Fanyang, and when Lu Chang was still alive, Gao Shao Yi heard the bad news, put on white mourning clothes to mourn, and returned to Turkey.

古文：高宝宁帅夷、夏数万骑救范阳，至潞水，闻昌期死，还，据和龙。
现代文：高宝宁率领夷人和汉人的几万骑兵去救范阳，到潞水时，听到卢昌期已死的消息，返回，占据和龙。
English: Gao Baoning led tens of thousands of cavalrymen from the Yi people and the Han people to rescue Fan Yang. When he arrived at Surabaya, he heard the news that Lu Changji had died and returned to occupy He Long.

古文：秋，七月，周主享太庙；丙午，祀圜丘。
现代文：秋季七月，北周国主到太庙祭祀；丙午，到圜丘祭天。
English: In the autumn of July, the North Zhou sovereign went to the Great Temple to offer sacrifices; in the afternoon of the third day, he went to Mengqiu to offer sacrifices.

古文：庚戌，周以小宗伯斛斯征为大宗伯。
现代文：庚戌，北周任命小宗伯斛斯征为大宗伯。
English: Gyeongbokgung, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed the minor Zongbokgung as the major Zongbokgung.

古文：壬戌，以亳州总管杨坚为上柱国、大司马。
现代文：壬戌，任命亳州总管杨坚为上柱国、大司马。
English: In Renmin, Yang Jian, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the top pillar of the country and the chief secretary.

古文：癸亥，周主尊所生母李氏为帝太后。
现代文：癸亥，北周国主对亲生母亲李氏尊称为帝太后。
English: At that time, the ruler of Northern Zhou called his biological mother, Li Shizhong, the Empress Dowager.

古文：八月，丙寅，周主祀西郊；壬申，如同州。
现代文：八月，丙寅，北周国主到西郊祭祀；壬申，去同州。
English: In August, the Northern Zhou sovereigns went to the Western Suburbs to offer sacrifices; the Jinshin sovereigns went to Tongzhou.

古文：以大司徒杞公亮为安州总管，上柱国长孙览为大司徒，杨公王谊为大司空。
现代文：任命大司徒杞公宇文亮为安州总管，上柱国长孙览为大司徒，杨公王谊为大司空。
English: Appointed the Grand Master of the Sages, Gong Yu Wenliang, as the General Manager of Anzhou, the Grand Master of the Elders, Sun Qian, as the Grand Master of the Sages, and Yang Gong Wangyi as the Grand Master of the Empty Tombs.

古文：丙戌，以永昌公椿为大司寇。
现代文：丙戌，任命永昌公宇文椿为大司寇。
English: He also appointed Yongchang Gongyu Wenqin as the grand secretary of the Korean Workers' Party.

古文：九月，乙巳，立方明坛于娄湖。
现代文：九月，乙巳，陈朝在娄湖建立方明坛。
English: In September, Chen Dynasty built the Fangming Altar in Wuhu.

古文：戊申，以扬州刺史始兴王叔陵为王官伯，临盟百官。
现代文：戊申，任命扬州刺史始兴王陈叔陵为王官伯，和朝廷百官立盟效忠皇室。
English: Wushin, Yangzhou appointed Wang Chen Shuling, a member of the Shixing Dynasty, as a royal official, and pledged allegiance to the royal family with 100 officials of the imperial court.

古文：庚戌，周主封其弟元为荆王。
现代文：庚戌，北周国主封弟弟宇文元为荆王。
English: Geng Zheng, the chief vassal of Northern Zhou, and his younger brother, Wu Wenyuan, became the King of Jing.

古文：周主诏： 诸应拜者，皆以三拜成礼。 
现代文：北周国主诏令： 应当对皇帝朝拜的，都以三拜成礼。 
English: The ruler of the North Zhou Dynasty decreed: Those who should pay homage to the emperor should do so with three bows.

古文：甲寅，上幸娄湖誓众。
现代文：甲寅，陈宣帝驾临娄湖对众官盟誓。
English: A Yin, Chen Xuandi drove to Linyi Lake to swear an oath to all officials.

古文：乙卯，分遣大使以盟誓班下四方，上下相警戒。
现代文：乙卯，分派大使将盟誓对全国宣布，使上下互相告诫防备。
English: Second, the assigned ambassador will swear to announce it to the whole country, so that the upper and lower levels will warn each other to be prepared.

古文：冬，十月，癸酉，周主还长安。
现代文：冬季十月，癸酉，北周国主回长安。
English: In the winter of October, the Northern Zhou Dynasty returned to Chang'an.

古文：以大司空王谊为襄州总管。
现代文：任命大司空王谊为襄州总管。
English: Appointed Senior Secretary Kong Wangye as the general manager of Xiangzhou.

古文：戊子，以尚书左仆射陆缮为尚书仆射。
现代文：戊子，陈朝任命尚书左仆射陆缮为尚书仆射。
English: On the day of the birth of the Empress Dowager Cixi, Lu Zuo, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：十一月，突厥寇周边，围酒泉，杀掠吏民。
现代文：十一月，突厥入侵北周边境，包围酒泉，屠杀抢掠当地官吏百姓。
English: In November, the Turks invaded the northern periphery border, surrounded Jiuquan, slaughtered and looted local officials and people.

古文：十二月，甲子，周以毕王贤为大司空。
现代文：十二月，甲子，北周任命毕王宇文贤为大司空。
English: In December, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Bi Wang Yu Wenxian as the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：己丑，周以河阳总管滕王逌为行军元帅，帅众入寇。
现代文：己丑，北周任命河阳总管滕王宇文为行军元帅，率众侵犯陈朝。
English: As a result, Northern Zhou appointed Teng Wang Yuwen, the head of Heyang, as the marshal of the march, and led the crowd to invade the Chen Dynasty.

古文：高宗宣皇帝中之下太建十一年
现代文：太建十一年
English: The 11th year of Tai Jian

古文：春，正月，癸巳，周主受朝于露门，始与群臣服汉、魏衣冠；大赦，改元大成。
现代文：春季正月，癸巳，北周国主在宫室最里面的正门接受百官的朝拜，开始和群臣穿戴汉、魏时代的衣帽；大赦全国，改年号为大成。
English: In the first month of spring, the Northern Zhou Emperor received the worship of hundreds of officials at the main gate in the innermost part of the palace, and began to wear Han and Wei-era clothes and hats with his courtiers; he granted amnesty to the whole country, and changed the year name to Dacheng.

古文：置四辅官：以大冢宰越王盛为大前疑，相州总管蜀公尉迟迥为大右弼，申公李穆为大左辅，大司马随公杨坚为大后承。
现代文：设置四名辅助皇帝的官职；任命大冢宰越王宇文盛为大前疑，相州总管蜀公尉迟迥为大右弼，申公李穆为大左辅，大司马随公杨坚为大后承。
English: Four officials were set up to assist the emperor; Wang Yuwen Sheng, the Grand Secretary of the Yue Emperor, was appointed as the Grand Vice President, Shu Guofeng, the Chief Administrator of Xiangzhou Province, was appointed as the Grand Vice President, Shen Gong Li Mu was appointed as the Grand Vice President, and Yang Jian, the Grand Secretary of the Ma Xing Gong, was appointed as the Grand Vice President.

古文：周主之初立也，以高祖《刑书要制》为太重而除之，又数行赦宥。
现代文：北周国主宣刚即位时，认为高祖时的《刑书要制》量刑太重而废除，又几次施行赦罪。
English: When Emperor Xuan of the Northern Zhou Dynasty ascended the throne, he thought that Gao Zu's "Sentencing System" was too severe and abolished it, and pardoned him several times.

古文：京兆郡丞乐运上疏，以为： 《虞书》所称 眚灾肆赦 ，谓过误为害，当缓赦之。《吕刑》云： 五刑之疑有赦。 谓刑疑从罚，罚疑从免也。
现代文：京兆郡丞乐运向宣帝上疏，以为： 《虞书》中所说的 眚灾肆赦 ，是说因无心的过失而犯罪的，应当宽恕赦免；《吕刑》中说： 五刑之疑有赦 ，是说对叛刑有怀疑可以改为处罚，对处罚有怀疑可以改为免罪。
English: Jingzha Guzheng Le Yun was a disciple of Emperor Xuan, and he thought that: "Forgive and forget" mentioned in "The Book of the State" meant that those who committed crimes due to unintentional mistakes should be forgiven and pardoned; "Forgive and forget" mentioned in "The Punishment of Lv" meant that those who had doubts about the punishment for treason could be punished, and those who had doubts about the punishment could be exonerated.

古文：谨寻经典，未有罪无轻重，溥天大赦之文。
现代文：我认真地查阅了经典，没有发现对罪行不分轻重，普天下一律大赦的记载。
English: I have carefully examined the classics and have found no record of a general amnesty for all crimes, no matter how serious.

古文：大尊岂可数施非常之惠，以肆奸宄之恶乎！ 
现代文：天子怎能几次施行非同寻常的仁慈，使为非作歹的人放肆作恶！ 
English: How many times can the Son of God exercise his extraordinary mercy, so that those who have done evil may continue to do evil!

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：北周宣帝不采纳他的意见。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：既而民轻犯法，又自以奢淫多过失，恶人规谏，欲为威虐，慑服群下。
现代文：不久以后百姓不怕犯法，宣帝自己又因为奢侈有许多过失，痛恨别人的规劝，想用威势和残暴，令下面的人畏惧屈服。
English: Soon after, the common people were not afraid to break the law, and Emperor Xuan himself, because of his extravagance, made many mistakes, hated the persuasion of others, and wanted to use his power and brutality to make the people below fear to give in.

古文：乃更为《刑经圣制》，用法益深，大醮于正武殿，告天而行之。
现代文：于是另行制定《刑经圣制》，用刑更加严厉，在正武殿设坛进行祈祷，祷告上天以后加以实施。
English: As a result, the "Sacred System of the Penal Code" was formulated separately, the punishment was more severe, and a prayer altar was set up in the Zhengwu Hall, and it was implemented after the prayer went up to heaven.

古文：密令左右伺察群臣，小有过失，辄行诛谴。
现代文：秘密地派左右的人窥伺观察群臣，发现犯有小的过失，便任意杀害治罪。
English: He secretly sent people around to spy on and observe his ministers, and if they were found to have committed minor faults, they were arbitrarily killed and punished.

古文：又，居丧才逾年，即恣声乐，鱼龙百戏，常陈殿前，累日继夜，不知休息；多聚美女以实后宫，增置位号，不可详录。游宴沉湎，或旬日不出，群臣请事者，皆因宦者奏之。
现代文：另外，北周宣帝居丧刚过一年，就恣意于音乐歌舞，常常在殿前欣赏鱼龙变化等魔术杂技，连日连夜，不知道休息；又选了许多美女充实后宫，增添了不少名位称号，无法详细记录；游宴酗酒，甚至一连十天不出宫，群臣向他启奏请示，都由太监转奏。
English: In addition, just a year after the death of Emperor Xuan of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he indulged in music and dance at will, often enjoying magic acrobatics such as the change of fish and dragon in front of the palace, day and night, without knowing the rest; he also selected many beautiful women to enrich the harem, added many prestigious titles, and could not be recorded in detail; he drank alcohol at banquets, and even did not leave the palace for ten days in a row, and his courtiers requested him to play music, all of which were played by eunuchs.

古文：于是乐运舆榇诣朝堂，陈帝八失：其一，以为 大尊比来事多独断，不参诸宰辅，与众共之 。
现代文：于是乐运用车拉了棺木到百官议事的朝堂，面陈北周宣帝的八条过失：一，认为 天子近来对大事多独断专行，不和宰相辅臣一同商议。 
English: Therefore, Le used a cart to pull the coffin to the hall of the imperial court, where hundreds of officials were discussing the matter, and faced the eight faults of Emperor Zhou Xuan of the North: First, he thought that the Son of Heaven had recently been acting arbitrarily on major events, and did not consult with the prime ministers and vice-ministers.

古文：其二， 搜美女以实后宫，仪同以上女不许辄嫁，贵贱同怨 。
现代文：二， 搜罗美女充实后宫，仪同以上官员的女儿不准出嫁，无论贵贱都对此怨恨。 
English: Second, the collection of beautiful women enriches the harem, and the daughters of the above officials are not allowed to marry, and both the noble and the low are resentful of this.

古文：其三， 大尊一入后宫，数日不出，所须闻奏，多附宦者 。
现代文：三， 天子一进后宫，几天都不出来，官员们要奏事，必须通过太监。 
English: Third, once the Son of Heaven enters the harem, he will not come out for several days. Officials must pass through eunuchs to report matters.

古文：其四， 下诏宽刑，未及半年，更严前制 。
现代文：四， 下诏放宽刑罚，不到半年，反而比以前的制度更加严厉。 
English: Fourth, the lower edict relaxed the punishment, but in less than half a year, it has become harsher than the previous system.

古文：其五， 高祖斫雕为朴，崩未逾年，而遽穷奢丽 。
现代文：五， 高祖皇帝去绝浮华，崇尚朴实，驾崩还不到一年，而天子就竭力追求奢侈壮丽。 
English: Fifth, Emperor Gaozu eschewed pomp, advocated simplicity, and died less than a year later, while Emperor Tianzi strove to pursue luxury and magnificence.

古文：其六， 徭赋下民，以奉俳优角抵 。
现代文：六， 叫百姓服劳役纳赋税，用来供养耍杂技演滑稽比角力的艺人。 
English: Sixth, the people were forced to work and pay taxes, which were used to support artists who performed acrobatics.

古文：其七， 上书字误者，即治其罪，杜献书之路 。
现代文：七， 向天子献书中有错字，就被治罪，杜绝了献书之路。 
English: Seventh, if there is a misspelled word in the book dedicated to the Son of Heaven, it will be punished and the road to the book will be cut off.

古文：其八， 玄象垂诫，不能咨诹善道，修布德政 。 若不革兹八事，臣见周庙不血食矣。 
现代文：八， 天空的星象出现了告诫的预兆，不能征求询问为善之道，修整实行德政。  如果不革除这八件事，臣将见到周朝的宗庙不会有杀牲取血的祭祀了。 
English: If these eight things are not eliminated, the minister will see that there will be no blood sacrifice in the ancestral temple of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：帝大怒，将杀之。
现代文：北周宣帝勃然大怒，要杀死他。
English: Emperor Xuan of Northern Zhou flew into a rage and wanted to kill him.

古文：朝臣恐惧，莫有救者。
现代文：朝臣们都很恐惧，没有人敢救他。
English: The courtiers were terrified, and no one dared to save him.

古文：内史中大夫洛阳元岩汉曰： 臧洪同死，人犹愿之，况比干乎！
现代文：内史中大夫洛阳元岩叹道： 汉献帝时的陈容愿意和臧洪一起死，使人仰慕，何况比干！
English: Luo Yang Yuanyan, a doctor in the history of internal medicine, sighed: Chen Rong was willing to die with Sui Hong when the Han Dynasty was consecrated, which made people admire him, let alone compare him!

古文：若乐运不免，吾将与之俱毙。 
现代文：如果乐运不免一死，我将和他一起去死。 
English: If Le Ying cannot avoid death, I will die with him.

古文：乃诣阁请见，曰： 乐运不顾其死，欲以求名。
现代文：于是到中求见北周宣帝，说： 乐运不顾死活，是为了求名。
English: So he went to the Middle Kingdom to see Northern Zhou Xuan Di and said: "Luck is not a matter of life and death, it is a matter of seeking fame.

古文：陛下不如劳而遣之，以广圣度。 
现代文：陛下不如对他慰劳而后放他走，才显出陛下度量宏大。 
English: It would be better for His Majesty to console him and then let him go, only then would His Majesty show his magnanimity.

古文：帝颇感悟。
现代文：宣帝稍有点感动省悟。
English: Emperor Xuan was a little moved and paused for reflection.

古文：明日，召运，谓曰： 朕昨夜思卿所奏，实为忠臣。 
现代文：第二天，把乐运召来，对他说： 朕昨天晚上考虑你所奏的话，实在是个忠臣。 
English: The next day, he summoned the musician and said to him, "Considering what you played last night, I am really a loyal subject.

古文：赐御食而罢之。
现代文：赐给他御用的食物但又将他罢免。
English: Gave him royal food but dismissed him.

古文：癸卯，周立皇子阐为鲁王。
现代文：癸卯，北周立皇子宇文阐为鲁王。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty's Prince Uwen became the King of Lu.

古文：甲辰，周主东巡；丙午，以许公宇文善为大宗伯。
现代文：甲辰，北周国主东巡，任命许公宇文善为大宗伯。
English: Jia Chen, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, went on an eastward tour and appointed Xu Gongyu Wenzhen as the grand patriarch.

古文：戊午，周主至洛阳；立鲁王阐为皇太子。
现代文：戊午，北周国主到洛阳；立鲁王宇文阐为皇太子。
English: In the afternoon, the ruler of Northern Zhou went to Luoyang; Lu Wang Yuwen was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：二月，癸亥，上耕藉田。
现代文：二月，癸亥，陈宣帝到藉田举行耕种仪式。
English: In February, Yanhai, Chen Xuandi held a cultivation ceremony at the rented field.

古文：周下诏，以洛阳为东京；发山东诸州兵治洛阳宫，常役四万人。
现代文：北周下诏，以洛阳为东京；征调潼关以东各州的士兵修建洛阳宫，平时服劳役的有四万人。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty decreed that Luoyang would become Tokyo; soldiers from states east of Shaoguan were conscripted to build the Luoyang Palace, and 40,000 people worked there in peacetime.

古文：徒相州六府于洛阳。
现代文：把相州的六府迁到洛阳。
English: Relocate the six prefectures of Suzhou to Luoyang.

古文：周徐州总管王轨，闻郑译用事，自知及祸，谓所亲曰： 吾昔在先朝，实申社稷至计。
现代文：北周的徐州总管王轨，听到郑译当权，自己知道将有灾祸，对亲近的人说： 我从前在先帝时，真实地申述了治国的根本大计。
English: Wang Luo, the governor of Xuzhou in the north of Zhou, heard Zheng Yi's speech in power and knew that there would be a disaster. He said to those close to him: I used to truthfully state the fundamental plan for governing the country during the time of the former emperor.

古文：今日之事，断可知矣。
现代文：今天将要发生的事，断然可以知道。
English: It is easy to judge the consequences of today's events.

古文：此州控带淮南，邻接强寇，欲为身计，易如反掌。
现代文：这个州控制淮南，靠近强敌，如果要替自己打算，可说是易如反掌。
English: This state controls Huainan and is close to the strong enemy. If you want to plan for yourself, it is easy as pie.

古文：但忠义之节，不可亏违，况荷先帝厚恩，岂可以获罪于嗣主，遽忘之邪！
现代文：但是忠义的节操，不敢违背，何况我蒙受先帝的厚恩，怎能因为得罪了当今皇上，就忘掉所受的恩德！
English: But I dare not violate the principle of loyalty, not to mention the great favor I received from the former emperor. How can I forget the grace I received because I offended the current emperor!

古文：正可于此待死，冀千载之后，知吾此心耳！ 
现代文：正可以在这里等死，希望在千年以后，知道我的忠心！ 
English: Right here I can wait for death, hoping that after a thousand years, they will know my loyalty!

古文：周主从容问译曰： 我脚杖痕，谁所为也？ 
现代文：北周宣帝曾经随便问郑译说： 我脚上被杖打的伤痕，是谁干的？ 
English: Emperor Xuan of Northern Zhou once casually asked Zheng: Who did the scars on my feet where I was beaten with a cane?

古文：对曰： 事由乌丸轨、宇文孝伯。 
现代文：答道： 事情的起因是乌丸轨、宇文孝伯。 
English: Answer: The cause of the incident was the Uzumaru track and Uwen Takahiro.

古文：因言轨捋须事。
现代文：因此告诉他王轨在宫中宴会时捋先帝胡子的事。
English: Therefore, he told him that Wang Lu had ruffled the former emperor's beard during a banquet at the palace.

古文：帝使内史杜庆信就州杀轨，元岩不肯署诏。
现代文：北周宣帝派内史杜庆信到徐州将王轨处死，内史中大夫元岩不肯在诏书上签名。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor sent the Inner Historian Du Qingxin to Xuzhou to execute Wang Lu, but the Inner Historian Middle Doctor Yuan Yan refused to sign the edict.

古文：御正中大夫颜之仪切谏，帝不听，岩进继之，脱巾顿颡，三拜三进。
现代文：御正中大夫颜之仪恳切劝阻宣帝，宣帝不听，元岩随后进见宣帝，脱下头巾叩拜，三次叩头三次前进。
English: The imperial middle-ranking doctor Yan Zhi Yi earnestly dissuaded Xuan Di, Xuan Di did not listen, Yuan Yan then went to see Xuan Di, took off his headscarf and bowed, bowed three times and advanced three times.

古文：帝曰： 汝欲党乌丸轨邪？ 
现代文：宣帝说： 你要袒护王轨吗？ 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "Do you want to protect Wang Luo?"

古文：岩曰： 臣非党轨，正恐滥诛失天下之望。 
现代文：元岩说： 臣不是要偏袒王轨，而是担心乱杀会失掉天下人对陛下的期望。 
English: Motoiwa said, "It is not that I want to favor the king's path, but I am worried that indiscriminate killing will lose the expectations of the people of the world for His Majesty.

古文：帝怒，使阉竖搏其面。
现代文：宣帝大怒，叫太监打元岩的耳光。
English: Emperor Xuan was furious and ordered the eunuch to slap Yuan Yan in the face.

古文：轨遂死，岩亦废于家。
现代文：王轨于是被杀死，元岩也被免职回家。
English: Wang Lu was then killed, and Yuan Yan was also dismissed and sent home.

古文：远近知与不知，皆为轨流涕。
现代文：远近各地不论是否知道王轨，都为之流泪。
English: People from far and wide shed tears for Wang Luo, whether they know it or not.

古文：之仪，之推之弟也。
现代文：颜之仪是颜之推的弟弟。
English: Yan Zhi Yi is the younger brother of Yan Zhi Tuo.

古文：周主之为太子也，上柱国尉迟运为宫正，数进谏，不用；又与王轨、宇文孝伯、宇文神举皆为高祖所亲待，太子疑其同毁己。
现代文：当北周宣帝还是皇太子时，上柱国尉迟运担任太子宫正，屡次对皇太子进谏，意见不被采纳；尉迟运和王轨、宇文孝伯、宇文神举都曾受到北周武帝亲切的对待，皇太子怀疑尉迟运和他们一同在武帝跟前诽谤自己。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong of the Northern Zhou Dynasty was still the crown prince, the head of the imperial guard, Lieutenant Liang Yun, served as the prince's palace attendant. He repeatedly insulted the crown prince, and his opinions were not accepted; Lieutenant Liang Yun and Wang Lu, Uwen Xiao Bo, and Uwen Shenzhu were all treated cordially by Emperor Zhou of the Northern Zhou Dynasty. The crown prince suspected that Lieutenant Liang Yun and they were slandering themselves in front of Emperor Wu.

古文：及轨死，运惧，私谓孝伯曰： 吾徒必不免祸，为之奈何？ 
现代文：王轨死后，尉迟运感到恐惧，私下对宇文孝伯说： 我们这些人一定免不了遭祸，怎么办？
English: After Wang Luo's death, he was afraid of bad luck and privately said to Yu Wenxiao: "We people are bound to be plagued by misfortune. What should we do?

古文：孝伯曰： 今堂上有老母，地下有武帝。为臣为子，知欲何之！
现代文：宇文孝伯说： 现在堂上有老母亲，九泉之下有先帝，作为臣子和儿子，怎能知道去哪里！
English: Uwen Xiao Bo said: Now there is an old mother in the hall, and a former emperor under the nine springs. As a courtier and a son, how can I know where to go?

古文：且委质事人，本徇名义；谏而不入，死焉可逃！
现代文：况且作为臣子奉侍君主，本应遵从名义；对君主加劝阻而不被采纳，怎能避免一死！
English: Moreover, as a vassal serving the monarch, he should have obeyed the name; how can a death be avoided if the monarch is dissuaded and not accepted!

古文：足下若为身计，宜且远之。 
现代文：足下如果为自己考虑，最好暂且躲远一点。 
English: If you want to save your own life and that of your family, you should leave the imperial court.

古文：于是运求出为秦州总管。
现代文：于尉迟运请求离开朝廷去做秦州总管。
English: Yu Lijian requested to leave the imperial court to become the governor of Qin.

古文：他日，帝托以齐王宪事让孝伯曰： 公知齐王谋反，何以不言？ 
现代文：另一天，宣帝假借了齐王宇文宪的事情责备宇文孝伯说： 你知道齐王谋反的事，为什么不说？ 
English: On another day, Emperor Xuan accused Uwen Xiao Bo of taking advantage of the rebellion of King Qi, saying, "You know about King Qi's rebellion, why didn't you tell me?

古文：对曰： 臣知齐王忠于社稷，为群小所谮，言必不用，所以不言。
现代文：答道： 臣知道齐王忠于国家，由于被一帮小人造谣中伤，我说话一定不被陛下采纳，所以不说。
English: He replied, "My vassal knows that King Qi is loyal to the country, and since I have been slandered by a gang of villains, my words will definitely not be accepted by His Majesty, so I will not speak."

古文：且先帝付嘱微臣，唯令辅导陛下。
现代文：况且先帝曾嘱咐微臣，只让我辅导陛下。
English: Moreover, the former emperor had ordered his ministers to only allow me to advise His Majesty.

古文：今谏而不从，实负顾托。
现代文：现在规劝而不被采纳，实在辜负了先帝的委托。
English: Now to exhort and not to be accepted is really to fail the mandate of the former emperor.

古文：以此为罪，是所甘心。 
现代文：以此作为罪名，我崐心甘情愿。 
English: I'm willing to take the punishment you're going to give me.

古文：帝大惭，俯首不语，命将出，赐死于家。
现代文：北周宣帝大为惭愧，低头不语，命令放他出去，在家里把他赐死。
English: Northern Zhou Emperor Xuan was very ashamed, bowed his head and did not speak, ordered to let him go out, and put him to death at home.

古文：时宇文神举为并州刺史，帝遣使就州鸩杀之。
现代文：当时宇文神举是并州刺史，北周宣帝派使者去并州赐给毒酒将他害死。
English: At that time, the Yuwen Shengzhu was to annex the state and stab history, and the Northern Zhou Xuan Emperor sent an envoy to annex the state and give him poisoned wine to kill him.

古文：尉迟运至秦州，亦以忧死。
现代文：尉迟运到秦州后，也因忧愁而死。
English: After he was transported to Qinzhou, he also died of grief.

古文：周罢南伐诸军。
现代文：北周停止南征的军事行动。
English: North Zhou halted the military operations of the Southern Expedition.

古文：突厥佗钵可汗请和于周，周主以赵王招女为千金公主，妻之，且命执送高绍义；佗钵不从。
现代文：突厥佗钵可汗向北周求和，北周宣帝将赵王宇文招的女儿封为千金公主，嫁给佗钵可汗为妻，又命令可汗捉住高绍义送回北周，佗钵可汗不服从。
English: The Turkic Khan sued for peace with the Northern Zhou, and the Northern Zhou Emperor proclaimed the daughter of Zhao Wang Yuwenzhu as the Princess of Thousand Gold and married her to the Khan, and ordered the Khan to capture Gao Shaoyi and send him back to the Northern Zhou, but the Khan disobeyed.

古文：辛巳，周宣帝传位于太子阐，大赦，改元大象，自称天元皇帝，所居称 天台 ，冕二十四旒，车服旗鼓皆倍于前王之数。
现代文：辛巳，北周宣帝将皇位传给皇太子宇文阐，大赦全国，改年号为大象，自称天元皇帝，居住的地方称 天台 ，皇冠悬垂二十四条玉串，车服旗鼓比以前的皇帝增加一倍。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xuan of the Northern Zhou Dynasty passed the imperial throne to Crown Prince Yu Wenxuan, granted amnesty to the whole country, changed the year name to Elephant, called himself Emperor Tianyuan, lived in a place called Tiantai, had a crown with 24 beads hanging from it, and doubled the number of chariots, flags, and drums compared to previous emperors.

古文：皇帝称正阳宫，置纳言、御正、诸卫等官，皆准天台。
现代文：皇帝所住的地方称正阳宫，设置纳言、御正、诸卫等官职，都按照天台那样。
English: The place where the emperor lived was called Zhengyang Palace, and the offices of Nagan, Gosheng, and Zhuwei were set up according to the roof.

古文：尊皇太后为天元皇太后。
现代文：尊称皇太后为天元皇太后。
English: The honorary title of Empress Dowager is Tengen Empress Dowager.

古文：天元既传位，骄侈弥甚，务自尊大，无所顾惮，国之仪典，率情变更。每对臣下自称为天、用樽、彝、珪、瓚以饮食。令群臣朝天台者，致斋三日，清身一日。
现代文：天元皇帝传位以后，更加骄纵奢侈，妄自尊大，无所顾忌，国家的典章制度，随意改变，常常对臣子自称为天，饮食时用金、玉制成的食器，命令群臣到天台朝见以前，先素食三天，洁身一天。
English: After Emperor Tianyuan passed on the throne, he became more arrogant and extravagant, arrogant and arrogant, without any scruples, the country's award system changed at will, he often called himself Tian to his courtiers, used gold and jade tableware when eating, and ordered his courtiers to eat vegetarian food for three days and cleanse themselves for one day before going to the morning meeting on the rooftop.

古文：既自比上帝，不欲群臣同己，常自带绶，及冠通天冠，加金附蝉，顾见侍臣弁上有金蝉及王公有绶者，并令去之。
现代文：他自比上天，不准群臣和他同样穿戴，常常穿配有丝带的衣服，戴通天冠，冠上有金制的蝉作为装饰品，看到侍臣的帽子上有金蝉和王公衣服上配有丝带，都叫他们去掉。
English: He compared himself to the heavens and did not allow his courtiers to wear the same clothes as him. He often wore clothes with ribbons and a crown with a golden cicada as an ornament. When he saw the gold cicada on the courtiers' hats and the ribbons on the prince's clothes, he asked them to remove them.

古文：不听人有 天 、 高 、 上 、 大 之称，官名有犯，皆改之。
现代文：不准别人有 天 、 高 、 上 、 大 等字的称呼，官员的姓名中有以上字样，一律改掉。
English: It is not allowed for others to have the words "tian," "gao," "shang" and "da," and the above words in the names of officials must be changed.

古文：改姓高者为 姜 ，九族称高祖者为 长祖 。
现代文：姓高的改为姓 姜 ，九族中称高祖的改称 长祖 。
English: Gao's surname was changed to Jiang, and Gao Zu, known as Gao Zu among the nine ethnic groups, was renamed Chang Zu.

古文：又令天下车皆以浑木为轮。
现代文：又命令天下的车辆用整块木材做车轮。
English: He also ordered the world's vehicles to use whole pieces of wood to make wheels.

古文：禁天下妇人不得施粉黛，自非宫人，皆黄眉墨汝。
现代文：禁止天下的妇女搽粉画眉，以后如果不是宫中的女子，都不准涂脂抹粉画眉毛。
English: It is forbidden for women all over the world to paint their eyebrows with powder. In the future, if they are not women in the palace, they are not allowed to paint their eyebrows with grease and powder.

古文：每召侍臣论议，唯欲兴造变革，未尝言及政事。
现代文：天元皇帝召集侍臣议论，只谈宫室的兴建变革，从不谈论政事。
English: Emperor Tengen called together his courtiers for a discussion, but they only talked about the construction and transformation of the palace, and never about politics.

古文：游戏无常，出入不节，羽仪仗卫，晨出夜还，陪侍之官，皆不堪命。
现代文：随意游戏，出入没有节制，有仪仗队随从，早出晚归，连陪伴侍奉的官员，都无法忍受。
English: Playing games at will, going in and out without restraint, being escorted by an honor guard, leaving early and returning late, and even accompanying officials are all unbearable.

古文：自公卿以下，常被楚挞。
现代文：自公卿以下的官员，常常遭到刑杖的拷打。
English: Officials below the rank of nobility were often beaten with canes.

古文：每捶人，皆以百二十为度，谓之 天杖 ，其后又加至二百四十。
现代文：对人拷打时，以一百二十下为准，称为 天杖 ，以后又增加到二百四十下。
English: When torturing a person, one hundred and twenty strokes were used as the standard, known as the Heavenly Cane, later increased to two hundred and forty strokes.

古文：宫人内职亦如之，后、妃、嫔、御，虽被宠幸，亦多杖背。
现代文：宫女和在宫中任职的女官也都这样，后、妃、嫔、御，虽然受到宠幸，也多被拷打背脊。
English: The palace maids and the female officials who served in the palace were also like this. Although the empress, empress, empress dowager, and empress dowager were favored, they were often beaten on the back.

古文：于是内外恐怖，人不自安，皆求苟免，莫有固志，重足累息，以逮于终。
现代文：于是内外都感到恐怖，人心惶惶，动摇不定，只求苟安幸免，失去了意志，恐惧到叠足而立不敢出气，直到他死去为止。
English: As a result, he was terrified both inside and outside, his heart was in turmoil, he was unsettled, he just wanted to be spared, he lost his will, he was so afraid that he stood on his tiptoes and dared not breathe until he died.

古文：戊子，周以越王盛为太保，尉迟迥为大前疑，代王达为大右弼。
现代文：戊子，北周任命越王宇文盛为太保，尉迟迥为大前疑，代王宇文达为大右弼。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Yu Wensheng, the King of Yue, as Taibao, Ye Xizhen as Dazai, and Wang Wenda as Dazai.

古文：辛卯，徙鄴城《石经》于洛阳。
现代文：辛卯，将邺城的《石经》迁到洛阳。
English: Xinwu moved the "Stone Sutra" from Fucheng to Luoyang.

古文：诏： 河阳、幽、相、豫、亳、青、徐七总管，并受东京六府处分。 
现代文：诏令： 河阳、幽、相、豫、亳、青、徐七州的总管，都受东京六府的管辖。 
English: Imperial edict: The governors of the seven prefectures of Kawayo, Yu, So, Yu, Min, Qing and Xu are all under the jurisdiction of the six prefectures of Tokyo.

古文：三月，庚申，天元还长安，大陈军伍，亲擐甲胄，入自青门，静帝备法驾以从。
现代文：三月，庚申，北周天元皇帝回长安时，大张旗鼓地摆开军队的阵容，自己穿戴了铠甲和头盔，从长安的青门进城，静帝备好皇帝的车驾在后跟随。
English: In March, when the Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan returned to Chang'an, he paraded the army lineup with great fanfare. Wearing armor and helmets, he entered the city from the Qingmen of Chang'an. Emperor Jing prepared the emperor's chariot and followed behind.

古文：夏，四月，壬戌朔，立妃硃氏为天元帝后。
现代文：夏季四月，壬戌朔，天元皇帝立妃子朱氏为天元帝后。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Tengen's daughter, Empress Zhu, was crowned Empress of Tengen.

古文：后，吴人，本出寒微，生静帝，长于天元十余岁，疏贱无宠，以静帝故，特尊之。
现代文：天元帝后，是江南吴人，出身低贱，是静帝的生母，比天元皇帝大十几岁，原先被疏远轻视得不到宠爱，因为生了静帝所以赐给尊号。
English: Emperor Tianyuan's empress, a native of Wuzhen in the south of the Yangtze River, came from a lowly background. She was the birth mother of Emperor Jingdi. She was a teenager older than Emperor Tianyuan. She was originally alienated, despised and unloved. Because she gave birth to Emperor Jingdi, she was given a noble title.

古文：乙巳，周主祠太庙。
现代文：乙巳，北周国主到太庙祭祀。
English: At this time, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty went to the Imperial Temple for a religious service.

古文：壬午，大醮于正武殿。
现代文：壬午，在正武殿举行祷神除灾的祭祀。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third month, a sacrificial rite was held at Shobu-den to pray to the god for disaster relief.

古文：五月，辛亥，以襄国郡为赵国，济南郡为陈国，武当、安富二郡为越国，上党郡为代国，新野郡为滕国，邑各万户；令赵王招、陈王纯、越王盛、代王达、滕王逌并之国。
现代文：五月，以襄国郡为赵国，济南郡为陈国，武当、安富二郡为越国，上党郡为代国，新野郡为滕国，分别食邑一万户；令赵王宇文招、陈王宇文纯、越王宇文盛、代王宇文达、滕王宇文一起去各自的封国。
English: In May, with Xiangguo County as Zhao Province, Jinan County as Chen Province, Wudang and Anfu 2 Counties as Yue Province, Shangdang County as deputy province, and Nino County as Teng Province, respectively, there were 10,000 households in food villages; Zhao Wang Yuwenzhao, Chen Wang Yuwenjun, Yue Wang Yuwensheng, deputy Wang Yuwenda, and Teng Wang Yuwen went to their respective fiefdoms.

古文：随公杨坚私谓大将军汝南公庆曰： 天元实无积德；视其相貌，寿亦不长。
现代文：随公杨坚私下对大将军汝南公宇文庆说： 天元皇帝实在没有积德，看他的相貌，寿命也不长。
English: Subsequent to this, Yang Jian privately said to the great general Renan Gongyu Wenqing: Emperor Tianyuan really had no virtue. Judging by his appearance, his life expectancy was not long.

古文：又，诸籓微弱，各令就国，曾无深根固本之计。
现代文：另外，各个藩王势力都很微弱，叫他们去各自的封国，没有深根固本、不可动摇的长远之计。
English: In addition, the powers of each feudal lord were very weak, and there was no deep-rooted, unshakable long-term plan to tell them to go to their respective feudal states.

古文：羽翮既剪，何能及远哉！ 
现代文：羽毛都被剪掉了，怎么能飞得远呢！ 
English: The feathers have all been cut off, how can it fly so far!

古文：庆，神举之弟也。
现代文：宇文庆是宇文神举的弟弟。
English: Uwen Qing is the younger brother of Uwen Shenhu.

古文：突厥寇周并州。
现代文：突厥侵扰北周的并州。
English: The Turks invaded Northern Zhou and annexed the province.

古文：六月，周发山东诸民修长城。
现代文：六月，北周征调潼关以东各地的百姓修葺北齐所筑的长城。
English: In June, the Great Wall built by Northern Qi was repaired by people from all over the country east of Shouguan.

古文：秋，七月，庚寅，周以杨坚为大前疑，柱国司马消难为大后承。
现代文：秋季七月，庚寅，北周任命杨坚为大前疑，柱国司马消难为大后承。
English: In the autumn of July, Gyeong-in and North Zhou appointed Yang Jian as the prime suspect, and Zhu Guo Sima Qian as the successor.

古文：辛卯，初用大货六铢钱。
现代文：辛卯，陈朝开始使用六铢钱的大钱币。
English: Xinwu, the Chen Dynasty began to use large coins of six yuan.

古文：丙申，周纳司马消难女为正阳宫皇后。
现代文：丙申，北周静帝纳司马消难的女儿为正阳宫皇后。
English: Bishen, the daughter of Northern Zhou Jingdi Nasima Qiandan, is the Empress of Zhengyang Palace.

古文：己酉，周尊天元帝太后李氏为天皇太后，壬子，改天元皇后硃氏为天皇后，立妃元氏为天右皇后，陈氏为天左皇后，凡四后云。
现代文：己酉，北周对天元帝太后李氏尊号为天皇太后。壬子，改天元皇后朱氏为天皇后，立妃子元氏为天右皇后，陈氏为天左皇后，一共有四个后。
English: According to the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Northern

古文：元氏，开府仪同大将军晟之女；陈氏，大将军山提之女也。
现代文：元氏，是开府仪同大将军元晟的女儿；陈氏，是大将军陈山提的女儿。
English: The Yuan clan is the daughter of Kaifu Yi and General Yuan Shao; the Chen clan is the daughter of General Chen Shan Ti.

古文：八月，庚申，天元如同州。
现代文：八月，庚申，天元皇帝去同州。
English: In August, Emperor Gaoshen and Emperor Tianyuan went to Tongzhou.

古文：丁卯，上阅武于大壮观。
现代文：丁卯，陈朝宣帝在大壮观阅兵。
English: Dingwu, Emperor Xuan of the Chen Dynasty marches in a grand military parade.

古文：命都督任忠帅步骑十万陈于玄武湖，都督陈景帅楼舰五百出瓜步江，振旅而还。
现代文：命令都督任忠率领十万步骑兵在玄武湖列阵，都督陈景统率五百艘楼船出瓜步江，整顿部队而返。
English: He ordered the governor Ren Zhong to lead 100,000 cavalrymen to form a line on the Xuanwu Lake, and the governor Chen Jingtong led 500 ships out of the Guabu River to rectify the troops and return.

古文：壬申，周天元还长安。
现代文：壬申，北周天元皇帝回长安。
English: Jinshin, Northern Zhou, Emperor Tianyuan returned to Chang'an.

古文：甲戌，以陈山提、元晟并为上柱国。
现代文：甲戌，任命陈山提、元晟两人为上柱国。
English: Jiuquan, appointed Chen Shanti and Yuan Zang as the two leaders of the pillar country.

古文：戊寅，上还宫。
现代文：戊寅，陈宣帝回宫。
English: Wu Yin, Emperor Chen Xuan returned to the palace.

古文：豫章内史南康王方泰，在郡秩满，纵火延烧邑居，因行暴掠，驱录富人，征求财贿。
现代文：豫章内史南康王陈方泰，在郡里服官任期已满，纵火焚烧城里的房屋，并进行凶暴的抢掠，驱赶逮捕富人，搜括财富强索贿赂。
English: Chen Fangtai, the king of Nankang in Henan, whose term of service in the county had expired, set fire to houses in the city, and carried out violent robberies, drove away and arrested rich people, and collected wealth to extort bribes.

古文：上阅武，方泰当从，启称母疾不行，而微服往民间淫人妻，为州所录。
现代文：宣帝阅兵时，陈方泰应当随从，却启奏说母亲有病不能随同，然而穿了普通衣服到民间奸污别人的妻子，被州官逮捕。
English: During the military parade to proclaim the emperor, Chen Fangtai was supposed to accompany, but he said that his mother was ill and could not accompany. However, he wore ordinary clothes to the people to rape and defile someone else's wife, and was arrested by state officials.

古文：又帅人仗抗拒，伤禁司，为有司所奏。
现代文：又曾领人带着兵器抗拒官府，打伤禁司，被官吏奏报给宣帝。
English: He once led a group of people to resist the government with weapons, injuring a procurator, and was reported to Emperor Xuan by officials.

古文：上大怒，下方泰狱，免官，削爵土，寻而复旧。
现代文：宣帝勃然大怒，将陈方泰投入牢狱，免官，取消他的爵号和封地，不久又都恢复如前。
English: Emperor Xuan was furious, threw Chen Fangtai into prison, dismissed him from his post, cancelled his title and fiefdom, and soon restored everything to its previous state.

古文：壬午，周以上柱国毕王贤为太师，郇公韩业为大左辅。
现代文：壬午，北周任命上柱国毕王宇文贤为太师，郇公韩业为大左辅。
English: In the morning of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Wang Yuwenxian of Shangzhu Province as the Grand Master, and Gong Hanye as the Grand Left Assistant.

古文：九月，乙卯，以酆王贞为大冢宰。
现代文：九月，乙卯，任命王宇文贞为大冢宰。
English: In September, Wang Yuwenzhen was appointed as the grand secretary.

古文：以郧公韦孝宽为行军元帅，帅行军总管杞公亮、郕公梁士彦寇淮南。
现代文：任命郧公宇文孝宽为行军元帅，率领行军总管杞公宇文亮、公梁士彦入侵淮南。
English: He appointed Gongguan Yuwen Xiaokuan as the marshal of the march, and led the general manager of the march, Gongguan Yuwenliang, and Gongliang Shihang to invade Huainan.

古文：仍遣御正杜杲、礼部薛舒来聘。
现代文：仍派御正杜杲、礼部薛舒到陈朝聘问。
English: The Imperial Household Agency still sent Du Qiao and the Ministry of Ceremonies, Xue Shu, to Chen for an interview.

古文：冬，十月，壬戌，周天元幸道会苑，大醮，以高祖配醮。
现代文：冬季十月，壬戌，北周天元皇帝驾临道会苑，举行祷神除灾的祭祀，以周高祖配祀。
English: In the winter of October, the Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan came to the Taoist Garden in Ren'an to hold a ceremony to pray to God for disaster relief, with Zhou Gao Zuo as the officiant.

古文：初复佛像及天尊像，天元与二像俱南面坐，大陈杂戏，令长安士民纵观。
现代文：开始恢复佛像和天尊像，天元皇帝的造像和上述的两像都是面南而坐，布置了大批杂戏，让长安的士民随意观赏。
English: They began to restore the Buddha statue and the statue of Heaven. The statue of Emperor Tianyuan and the above-mentioned two statues all sat facing south. A large number of miscellaneous plays were arranged for the people of Chang'an to watch at will.

古文：甲戌，以尚书仆射陆缮为尚书左仆射。
现代文：甲戌，陈朝任命尚书仆射陆缮为尚书左仆射。
English: Kuching, the Chen Dynasty appointed Shang Shuxu's lackey Lu Zuo as Shang Shuxu's left-hand lackey.

古文：十一月，辛卯，大赦。
现代文：十一月，辛卯，陈朝大赦全国。
English: In November, Xinwu and Chen issued a nationwide amnesty.

古文：周韦孝宽分遣杞公亮自安陆攻黄城，梁士彦攻广陵。
现代文：北周韦孝宽分别派遣杞公宇文亮从安陆进攻黄城，梁士彦进攻广陵。
English: Northern Zhou Wei and Northern Zhou Wei dispatched Gongwu Wenliang from Anlu to attack Huangcheng, and Liang Shihang to attack Guangling.

古文：甲午，士彦至肥口。
现代文：甲午，梁士彦到肥口。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Liang Shihang went to Heikou.

古文：乙未，周天元如温汤。
现代文：乙未，北周天元皇帝去骊山的温泉。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan went to the hot springs in Lushan.

古文：戊戌，周军进围寿阳。
现代文：戊戌，北周军队进攻并包围寿阳。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, Zhou's army entered and besieged Shouyang.

古文：周天元如同州。
现代文：北周天元皇帝去同州。
English: Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan went to Tongzhou.

古文：诏开府仪同三司、南兗州刺史淳于量为上流水军都督，中领军樊毅都督北讨诸军事，左卫将军任忠都督北讨前军事，前丰州刺史皋文奏帅步骑三千趣阳平郡。
现代文：陈宣帝诏令开府仪同三司、南兖州刺史淳于量为上流水军都督，中领军樊毅都督北讨诸军事，左卫将军任忠都督北讨前军事，前丰州刺史皋文奏率领三千步骑兵进取阳平郡。
English: Emperor Chen Xuanli decreed that Kaifu Yi and his three subordinates, Nanluozhou Zhishun and Yu Quan should be the governors of the upper stream water army, the central leader of the army, Zou Yi, the governor of the north, should lead the military, the left guard general should be the governor of the north, should lead the former military, and the former Fengzhou Zhishun and Wenso should lead three thousand cavalry to enter Yangping County.

古文：壬寅，周天元还长安。
现代文：壬寅，北周天元皇帝回长安。
English: Emperor Tianyuan returned to Chang'an in the northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：癸卯，任忠帅步骑七千趣秦郡；丙午，仁威将军鲁广达帅众入淮；是日，樊毅将水军二万自东关入焦湖，武毅将军萧摩诃帅步骑趣历阳。
现代文：癸卯，陈朝的任忠率领七千步骑兵进取秦郡；丙午，仁威将军鲁广达率军进入淮河一带。同一天，樊毅率领二万水军从东关进入焦湖，武毅将军萧摩诃率领步骑兵进取历阳。
English: In the afternoon, Ren Zhong of the Chen Dynasty led seven thousand infantry and cavalry to enter Qin County; in the afternoon, Ren Wei General Lu Guangda led the army into the Huai River area. On the same day, Zou Yi led twenty thousand naval troops from Dongguan into Jiao Lake, and Wu Yi General Xiao Miao led the infantry and cavalry to enter Liyang.

古文：戊申，韦孝宽拔寿阳，杞公亮拔黄城，梁士彦拔广陵；辛亥，又取霍州。
现代文：戊申，北周的的韦孝宽攻克寿阳，杞公宇文亮攻克黄城，梁士彦攻克广陵；辛亥，又攻取霍州。
English: Wu Shen, Wei Xiaokuan of the Northern Zhou conquered Shouyang, Gongyu Wenliang conquered Huangcheng, Liang Shihang conquered Guangling; Xinhai, also conquered Hozhou.

古文：癸丑，以扬州刺史始兴王叔陵为大都督，总水步众军。
现代文：癸丑，陈朝任命扬州刺史始兴王陈叔陵为大都督，总辖水步诸军。
English: At the same time, the Chen Dynasty appointed Yangzhou's King Chen Shuling as the grand governor, with overall jurisdiction over the armies.

古文：丁巳，周铸永通万国钱，一当千，与五行大布并行。
现代文：丁巳，北周铸造永通万国钱，以一当千，和五行大布一并流通。
English: At that time, the Yongtong Banknote was minted in Beizhou, with a face value of 1,000 yuan, and circulated together with the Five Elements Large Cloth.

古文：十二月，戊午，周天元以灾异屡见，舍仗卫，如天兴宫。
现代文：十二月，戊午，北周天元皇帝因为一再出现灾异现象，不用仪仗和护卫，去天兴宫斋戒。
English: In December, at noon, the Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan went to the Tianxing Palace to fast, without ceremonial battle and escort, because of the repeated occurrence of disasters and phenomena.

古文：百官上表，劝复寝膳。
现代文：朝廷百官对他上表，劝他恢复睡觉用膳。
English: Hundreds of officials of the Imperial Court visited him and advised him to resume sleeping and eating.

古文：甲子，还宫，御正武殿，集百官及宫人、外命妇，大列伎乐，初作乞寒胡戏。
现代文：甲子，天元皇帝回宫，在正武殿召集百官、宫人、宫廷外臣以下的母亲、妻子，摆开了许多杂技歌舞，初次演出西域地方的 乞寒 戏。
English: When Emperor Tengen returned to the palace, he summoned hundreds of officials, courtiers, and the mothers and wives of the palace's foreign ministers and below to the Zhengwu Palace. He staged many acrobatic songs and dances, and for the first time performed the begging cold play in the western region.

古文：乙丑，南、北兗、晋三州及盱眙、山阳、阳平、马头、秦、历阳、沛、北谯、南梁等九郡民并自拔还江南。
现代文：乙丑，南兖州、北兖州、晋州以及盱眙、山阳、阳平、马头、秦、历阳、沛、北谯、南梁等九郡的百姓一齐离开当地返回长江以南地区。
English: People from nine counties including Eugu, South Luzhou, North Luzhou and Jinzhou, as well as Min, Sanyang, Yangping, Matoo, Qin, Liyang, Pei, Beilun and Nanliang, all left the area to return to areas south of the Yangtze River.

古文：周又取谯、北徐州。
现代文：北周又得到谯、北徐州。
English: North Zhou also got Shandong and North Xuzhou.

古文：自是江北之地尽没于周。
现代文：此后长江以北的地方都并入北周。
English: After that, all the places north of the Yangtze River were merged into Beizhou.

古文：周天元如洛阳，亲御驿马，日行三百里，四皇后及文武侍卫数百人并乘驲以从。
现代文：北周天元皇帝去洛阳，亲自驾驭驿马，一天走三百里，四位皇后以及文武侍卫几百人乘驿马在后面跟从。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan went to Luoyang, personally driving a steed, walking three hundred miles a day, followed by four queens and hundreds of courtiers.

古文：仍令四后方驾齐驱，或有先后，辄加谴责，人马顿仆，相及于道。
现代文：又命令四位皇后和自己并驾齐驱，走得有先后时，便加以斥责，弄得人困马乏跌倒在地，一路上接连不断出现。
English: He also ordered the four queens to walk alongside him, and when they walked in succession, he rebuked them, causing them to stumble and fall to the ground, and they appeared one after another along the way.

古文：癸酉，遣平北将军沈恪、电威将军裴子烈镇南徐州，开远将军徐道奴镇栅口，前信州刺史杨宝安镇白下。
现代文：癸酉，陈朝派平北将军沈恪、电威将军裴子烈镇南徐州，开远将军徐道奴镇守栅口，前信州刺史杨宝安镇守白下。
English: , sent the Pingbei general Shen Gu, the telegraph general Pei Zili to guard the southern Xuzhou, the Kaiyuan general Xu Daonu to guard the gate, and the former Shinshou general Yang Baoan to guard the Baixia.

古文：戊寅，以中领军樊毅都督荆、郢、巴、武四州水陆诸军事。
现代文：戊寅，任命中领军樊毅都督荆、郢、巴、武四州的水陆军务。
English: Wu Yin, appointed the central leader of the army, Zou Yi, the governor of Jing, Handan, Ba, and Wuxi Provinces, to be in charge of the army and navy affairs.

古文：己卯，周天元还长安。
现代文：已卯，北周天元皇帝回长安。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan returned to Chang'an.

古文：贞毅将军汝南周法尚，与长沙王叔坚不相能。叔坚谮之于上，云其欲反。上执其兄定州刺史法僧，发兵将击法尚。
现代文：陈朝的贞毅将军汝南周法尚，与长沙王陈叔坚不和，陈叔坚在皇帝面前说周法尚的坏话，说他要谋反，陈宣帝逮捕了周法尚的哥哥定州刺史周法僧，发兵准备讨伐周法尚。
English: Zhou Fa Shang, the Zhen Yi general of the Chen Dynasty, was at odds with the king of Changsha, Chen Shujian. Chen Shujian spoke ill of Zhou Fa Shang in front of the emperor, saying that he was going to rebel. Emperor Chen Xuan arrested Zhou Fa Shang's brother, Dingzhou Jishi Zhou Fa Sang, and sent troops to prepare to fight Zhou Fa Shang.

古文：法尚奔周，周天元以为开府仪同大将军、顺州刺史，上遣将军樊猛济江击之。
现代文：周法尚投降北周，北周天元皇帝任命他为仪同大将军、顺州刺史，陈宣帝派将军樊猛渡过长江去攻打他。
English: Zhou Fa Shang surrendered to the Northern Zhou, the Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan appointed him as the general of Iitong and the governor of Shunzhou, and Chen Xuandi sent a general to cross the Yangtze River to attack him.

古文：法尚遣部曲督韩朗诈降于猛，曰： 法尚部兵不愿降北，人皆窃议，欲叛还。
现代文：周法尚派部曲督韩朗向樊猛假投降，说： 周法尚部下的士兵不愿意向北周投降，人们都私下议论，要叛变返回陈国。
English: Zhou Fashang sent his commander Han Lang to surrender to the fierce foe, saying: The soldiers under Zhou Fashang are not willing to surrender to the North Zhou, and people are privately talking about rebelling and returning to Chen Province.

古文：若得军来，自当倒戈。 
现代文：如果能派军队来，就会掉转矛头对周法尚造反。 
English: If they can send troops, they will turn around and rebel against Zhou Fa.

古文：猛以为然，引兵急趋之。
现代文：樊猛认为他的话很对，便率军急攻周法尚。
English: He thought his words were right, so he led his army to attack Zhou Fashang.

古文：法尚阳为畏惧，自保江曲，战而伪走，伏兵邀之。猛仅以身免，没者几八千人。
现代文：周法尚表面装作畏惧，自保江曲，交战后假装退兵，实际上埋伏了士兵向樊猛拦击，樊猛仅仅单身脱逃，损失的军队几乎有八千人。
English: Zhou Fa still pretended to be afraid on the surface, played the self-protection game, and pretended to withdraw after the battle. In fact, he ambushed the soldiers to intercept the ferocity. The ferocity only escaped alone, and the loss of the army was almost eight thousand.

