古文：伯颜见之，惊问曰： 汝为何人子？ 
现代文：康里脱脱，康里国王族，阿沙不花之弟。其父牙牙，康里国王封为云中王。
English: Kangri is a member of the Kangri royal family. He is the younger brother of Asha no Hana. His father, King Kangri, is known as the King of the Clouds.

古文：脱脱以实对，伯颜语之曰： 吾老矣，他日可大用者，未见汝比。 
现代文：康里脱脱体格魁梧，步履庄重，世祖及丞相伯颜都认为是大用之才，命入宿卫军。
English: Kangri was a burly man with a stately gait. He was considered a great talent by both the founder of the dynasty and the prime minister, Bo Yan, and was assigned to the Succession Guard.

古文：大德三年，武宗以皇子抚军北鄙，脱脱从行。
现代文：大德三年，武宗命皇子于北部边疆抚军，脱脱从行。
English: In the third year of the Great Tokugawa Shogunate, Prince Takemune died in the northern borderland of Fushun, and was succeeded by his son.

古文：五年，叛王海都犯边，脱脱从武宗讨之。
现代文：五年，叛王海都侵扰边境，脱脱随武宗征讨，在杭海大败海都。
English: In the fifth year, the rebel king Haidu invaded the border, broke away with the Wusong conquest, and defeated Haidu in the Hangzhou Sea.

古文：师次杭海，进击海都，大破其众，脱脱手斮一士之首，连背胛以献，武宗壮之。
现代文：交战之初，武宗要亲自出战，脱脱拦马谏阻，武宗大怒，挥鞭打脱脱的手，脱脱不退，武宗只得不出战。
English: At the beginning of the war, Buson wanted to go to war in person, get rid of the obstacles and obstacles, Buson was furious, whipped the hands of the escapees, and did not retreat. Buson had no choice but not to fight.

古文：兵之始交也，武宗锐欲出战，脱脱执辔力谏，武宗怒，挥鞭抶其手，不退，乃止。已而武宗与大将朵儿答哈语及之，朵儿答哈曰： 太子在军中，如身有首，如衣有领，脱有不虞，众安所附？脱脱之谏，可谓忠矣。 
现代文：其后，武宗与大将朵儿答哈谈及此事，朵儿答哈说： 太子在军中如身体之首、衣服之领，若有闪失，全军由谁统领？脱脱堪称忠臣。 
English: Afterwards, Emperor Wuzong discussed the matter with General Doer Daha, who said: "In the army, the crown prince is like the head of the body and the collar of the clothes. If there is a slip-up, who will lead the whole army? A loyal subject is the one who gets rid of him."

古文：武宗深然之。
现代文：武宗深以为然。
English: Takemune was deeply convinced.

古文：武宗闻之，默然，进脱脱而言曰： 我捍御边陲，勤劳十年，又次序居长，神器所归，灼然何疑。
现代文：武宗闻知对脱脱说： 我捍卫边疆，勤劳十年，兄弟中我又居长位，理所当然由我承继皇位，今太后信天命之说。
English: Wu Zong Wen Zhi said to Dadu: I have defended the frontier, worked hard for ten years, and I hold a high position among my brothers. It is natural for me to succeed to the throne. Now the Empress Dowager believes in the Mandate of Heaven.

古文：今太后以星命休咎为言，天道茫昧，谁能豫知？设使我即位之后，所设施者上合天心，下副民望，则虽一日之短，亦足垂名万年，何可以阴阳之言而乖祖宗之托哉！此盖近日任事之臣，擅权专杀，恐我他日或治其罪，故为是奸谋动摇大本耳。
现代文：然而天道如何，谁能预知？如果我即位后，一切措施能上合天意，下合民心，虽在位一日则足以垂名万年，何必信阴阳之言而有违祖宗之托付！这一定是近来一些执政大臣，擅权专杀，怕我即位后治他们的罪，故阴谋动摇国家根本。
English: However, what is the way of heaven? Who can predict? If, after I ascend the throne, all measures can meet the will of heaven and the will of the people, although one day of reign is enough to be famous for thousands of years, why believe the words of yin and yang and violate the entrustment of the ancestors! This must be a recent conspiracy of some ruling ministers to shake the country fundamentally by arbitrarily killing, fearing that I will punish their sins after I ascend the throne.

古文：脱脱，汝为我往察事机，疾归报我。 
现代文：脱脱，你去访察事情真象，疾速回来报告。 
English: Get rid of it, go and see what's really going on and report back as soon as possible.

古文：脱脱承命即行。
现代文：脱脱奉命立即起程。
English: The escapees were ordered to leave immediately.

古文：武宗亲率大军由西道进，按灰由中道，床兀儿由东道，各以劲卒一万从。
现代文：武宗亲率大军由西道前进，按灰由中道，床兀儿由东道，各率劲旅一万人。
English: Wu Zong's relatives led the army to advance from the west road, according to the ashes from the middle road, the bedstead from the host, each leading 10,000 people.

古文：脱脱驰至大都，入见太后，道武宗所授旨以闻。太后愕然曰： 修短之说虽出术家，为太子周思远虑乃出我深爱。
现代文：脱脱迅速赶到大都，将武宗的话报告太后，太后惊愕道： 国运长短之说，虽出自阴阳家，为太子想得周全远大也是我深爱太子的本意。
English: Devadatta quickly rushed to Dadu and reported the words of Emperor Wuzong to the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager was surprised and said, "As far as the national fortune is concerned, although I come from the yin and yang family, it is also my intention to deeply love the Crown Prince and to be thoughtful and far-sighted for him."

古文：贪憝已除，宗王大臣议已定，太子不速来何为？ 
现代文：今奸臣已除，关于立皇帝的事宗王大臣已经议定，太子不速来却是为何？ 
English: Now the treacherous vassal has been removed, and the matter of the emperor's enthronement has been agreed upon by the king's ministers, but why did the crown prince not come immediately?

古文：脱脱具致太后、仁宗之语，武宗乃大感悟，释然无疑。
现代文：诸王秃列也表示他们拥戴武宗，决无二心。太后与仁宗希望脱脱劝说武宗不要有疑虑，弥合骨肉嫌隙。
English: The queue of kings and queens also said that they supported Buzong and had no second thoughts. The empress dowager and Ninsong hoped to persuade Buzong not to have doubts and to bridge the gap between flesh and blood.

古文：遂遣阿沙不花还报。
现代文：脱脱答应回去推诚竭忠开释太子武宗。
English: He promised to return if he could free Prince Takemune.

古文：仁宗即日命驾奉迎于上都。武宗正位宸极，尊太后为皇太后，立仁宗为皇太子，三宫协和，脱脱兄弟之力为多。
现代文：后武宗至大都即位，尊太后为皇太后，立仁宗为皇太子，皇帝、太后、太子三宫协和，脱脱尽了很大努力。
English: Emperor Wu Zong ascended to the throne, Empress Dowager Son was crowned empress dowager, Emperor Ren Zong was crown prince, and the emperor, empress dowager, and prince made great efforts to escape.

古文：脱脱之至京师也，武宗尝命其同知枢密院，比还，问曾视事否，脱脱对曰： 今正殿未御，宗亲未见，为扈从之臣搀取名位，诚恐有累圣德，是以未敢祗事。 
现代文：脱脱到了京师以后，武宗已任命他为同知枢密院。后来，武宗问他到职视事否，脱脱说： 今陛下未即位，宗亲未朝贺，我这扈从之臣先取得名位，实是怕有损圣德，故未敢视事。 
English: After he had escaped to Beijing, Emperor Wu appointed him as Tongzhi Privy Councillor. Later, Emperor Wu asked him whether he would accept the post or not, and he said, "Your Majesty has not ascended the throne yet, and my father-in-law has not yet been enthroned, and I, as a subordinate vassal, have not yet received the title, but I am afraid of compromising my sanctity, so I did not dare to accept the post."

古文：武宗嘉叹久之。知枢密院只儿哈忽在潜邸时尝有不逊语，将置于法，脱脱谏曰： 陛下新正位，大信未立而辄行诛戮，知者以为彼自有罪，不知者以为报仇，恐人人自危。
现代文：知枢密院只儿哈忽在武宗即位前曾有过对武宗不敬的话，武宗即位后要将他法办，脱脱劝谏道 ：陛下新登大宝就将他诛杀，知道的人认为是他本有罪，不知道的人会认为是报私仇，恐人人自危。
English: The Privy Council only knew that Haruko had spoken disrespectfully of Emperor Takemune before he ascended the throne. After he ascended the throne, Emperor Takemune wanted to have him tried by a court of law and get rid of the way of persuasion: His Majesty killed him as soon as he ascended the throne. Those who knew him thought he was guilty, those who didn't know him thought it was revenge, and everyone feared for their own safety.

古文：况只儿哈忽习于先朝典故，今固不可少也。 
现代文：况只儿哈忽熟悉先朝的典章制度和掌故，也是今天治国不可少的人才。 
English: In addition, only his son, Haku, was familiar with the previous dynasty's system of awards and patronage, and he is also an indispensable talent for governing the country today.

古文：乃宥之。
现代文：因此开释了只儿哈忽。
English: As a result, only Haruhisa was released.

古文：继海都而王者曰察八儿，素服武宗威名，至是率诸王内附，诏特设宴于大庭。
现代文：继海都之后而为王的是察八儿，此人素来信服武宗威名，武宗登基后率诸王归附，朝廷设宴款待。
English: The next king after Kaito was Chabara, who had always believed in the prestige of Emperor Wuzong. After Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he led the kings to annexation, and the imperial court held a banquet to entertain them.

古文：故事，凡大宴，必命近臣敷宣王度，以为告戒。
现代文：按惯例，凡大宴必命近臣宣布朝廷法度以告诫诸王。
English: According to the usual practice, whenever there is a grand banquet, the courtiers must be ordered to announce the imperial law to admonish the kings.

古文：脱脱荐只儿哈忽，令具其言以进，果称旨。武宗叹曰： 博尔忽、博尔术前朝人杰，脱脱今世人杰也。 即以所进之言授脱脱。
现代文：脱脱荐举只儿哈忽。只儿哈忽把所讲的话先奏与武宗，武宗满意，并称赞脱脱为 今世人杰 ，把只儿哈忽所进呈的话交给脱脱。
English: It was only Haku who recommended Dhotu. It was only Haku who prefaced what he said with Buson, and Buson was satisfied, and praised Dhotu as a modern world leader, and gave the words presented by Haku to Dhotu.

古文：及诸王大臣被宴服就列，脱脱即席陈西北诸藩始终离合之由、去逆效顺之义，辞旨明畅，听者倾服。
现代文：在宴会上，脱脱陈述西北诸藩王时离时合的始末，以及效忠皇室不存贰心的道理，言辞明畅，众皆佩服。
English: At the banquet, he clearly stated the reason why the kings of the northwestern domains were separated from each other, and why loyalty to the imperial family was not a bad thing. His words were clear and everyone admired them.

古文：自同知枢密院事进中书平章政事，拜御史大夫。
现代文：他由同知枢密院事晋升为中书平章政事，拜御史大夫。
English: He was promoted from Tongzhi Privy Councillor to Zhongshu Pingzhang Politician, and then to Bai Goshi Doctor.

古文：迁江南行台御史大夫。
现代文：后调任江南行台御史大夫。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Gangnam Gyotai goshi daibu.

古文：寻召拜录军国重事、中书左丞相。
现代文：不久召回京拜录军国重事、中书左丞相。
English: Soon after, he was recalled to Beijing to attend an important military and national event, and became Chushizu-zojo (Minister of the Left)

古文：脱脱知无不言，言无不行，中外翕然称为贤相。
现代文：脱脱知无不言，言无不行，朝野一致称赞他为贤相。
English: The Emperor and Empress unanimously praised him as a wise man who knows what to say and what not to say.

古文：至大三年，尚书省立，迁右丞相。
现代文：至大三年，朝廷设尚书省，以脱脱为右丞相。
English: In the third year of his reign, the Imperial Court established the Ministry of Literature and Literature, with Doudou as the Minister of the Right.

古文：三宝奴等劝武宗立皇子为皇太子。
现代文：三宝奴等劝武宗立皇子为太子。
English: The Three Noblemen and others urged Emperor Wuzong to make Prince Wu the crown prince.

古文：三宝奴虽不以为然，而莫能夺其议也。
现代文：脱脱有异议，对三宝奴说： 国家大计不可不慎，过去皇弟亲自决定皇上登基大事，于宗社有功，自己为太子，这是已经确定了的。
English: Zhu Deguang disagreed and said to Sanbao: The national plan must not be careless. In the past, the younger brother of the emperor personally decided on the emperor's enthronement, contributed to the patriarchal society, and became the prince himself. This has already been determined.

古文：是时，尚书省赐予无节，迁叙无法，财用日耗，名爵日滥。脱脱进言曰： 爵赏者，帝王所以用人也。
现代文：从此以后兄弟叔侄世世相承，谁敢破坏这一规定！我辈为臣的对于国家法制虽不能有所帮助，但也不可破坏。 当时，尚书省赏赐无节制，官吏的任用升迁无规定，以致国家财政一天天困难，官吏名爵一天天泛滥。脱脱上章批评说： 封爵赐赏，是帝王用人的办法之一。
English: Since then, brothers, uncles, and nephews have been handed down from generation to generation. Who would dare to break this rule? Although our generation of subjects cannot help the state's legal system, we must not destroy it either. At that time, there was no restraint in the awarding of rewards by the Ministry of Education and Culture, and there was no provision for the appointment and promotion of officials. As a result, the state's finances became more and more difficult, and the number of distinguished officials increased day by day. The last chapter criticizes: The awarding of knighthoods is one of the ways the emperor employs people.

古文：今爵及比德，赏及罔功，缓急之际何所赖乎！
现代文：今给那些无德的人进爵，给无功的人奖赏，而对于有德有功的人正需进爵奖赏时又将如何？
English: Now we give knighthoods to those who are not virtuous, and awards to those who are not meritorious, but what will happen when we need to award knighthoods to those who are virtuous and meritorious?

古文：中书所掌，钱粮、工役、选法、刑狱十有二事。
现代文：中书省掌管国家钱粮、工役、官吏人选、刑狱等十二事。
English: The Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy is in charge of the state's money and grain, labor service, the selection of officials, imprisonment and other twelve things.

古文：若从臣言，恪遵旧制，则臣愿与诸贤黾勉从事。不然，用臣何补！ 
现代文：若采纳我的意见，遵行国家法制，则我愿与诸贤共勉，不然，用臣于国事无补！ 
English: If you adopt my opinion and abide by the country's legal system, then I am willing to work with all the sages, otherwise, it is useless to be a vassal in national affairs!

古文：遂遣丞相秃忽鲁等二人往给之，几以激变。
现代文：于是，朝廷下诏，令那些滥进爵受赐的人回各衙门复原职，以堵侥幸之路。
English: As a result, the imperial court issued an edict ordering those who had been awarded the title to return to their respective provinces to resume their duties, in order to block the path of chance.

古文：四年正月，复为中书左丞相。
现代文：脱脱奏请将中台所存赃罚钞五百万缗用以赈济孤寡老疾及贫困百姓。至大四年正月，复任脱脱为中书左丞相。
English: Please use the five million baht in fines from Zhongtai to help the lonely, the elderly, the sick and the poor. In the first month of his fourth year of university, he was reinstated as the Vice-Minister of the Left of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：仁宗即位，眷待弥笃，欲使均逸于外，二月，拜江浙行省左丞相。
现代文：仁宗即位，拜脱脱为江浙行省左丞相。
English: Emperor Renzong ascended to the throne, and Baiduttu became the Minister of the Left for Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provinces.

古文：下车，进父老问民利病，咸谓杭城故有便河通于江浒，堙废已久，若疏凿以通舟楫，物价必平。
现代文：他一到职便向父老访问民间利病。都说，杭城原有一条小河可通于江浒，但久被堵塞，若疏通可行船通航，杭城物价必平。
English: As soon as he arrived at work, he visited his father and grandfather to listen to their folk wisdom. They all said that there used to be a small river in Hangzhou that could flow into the Yangtze River, but it had been blocked for a long time. If it was unblocked and ships could sail through, prices in Hangzhou would be flat.

古文：僚佐或难之，脱脱曰： 吾陛辞之日，密旨许以便宜行事。
现代文：同僚有畏难情绪，脱脱说： 我辞别皇上时，密旨许我有权自行处理行省事务。
English: My colleague was in a daunting mood, and he said, "When I resigned from the emperor, I was given the right to handle provincial affairs on my own.

古文：民以为便，行之可也。 
现代文：疏通河流既然有利于民，那就施行。 
English: Since the dredging of rivers is beneficial to the people, it should be carried out.

古文：俄有旨禁勿兴土功，脱脱曰： 敬天莫先勤民，民蒙其利则灾沴自弭，土功何尤。 
现代文：突然，朝廷传旨，禁兴土木，脱脱说： 敬天莫如先勤民事，民蒙受利益，灾难自消，兴土木之工造福于民有什么不对。 
English: Suddenly, the imperial court issued an order prohibiting the construction of civil engineering, saying: "There is no civil engineering without respect for the heavens, the people will benefit, the disaster will be eliminated, what is wrong with the construction of civil engineering for the benefit of the people."

古文：不一月而成。
现代文：不到一月河道疏通。
English: The dredging of the river was completed in less than a month.

古文：今察汝无他，其复还镇。 脱脱入谢太后曰： 臣虽被先帝知遇，而受太后及今上恩不为不深，岂敢昧所自乎！ 还江浙。未几，迁江西行省左丞相。
现代文：铁木迭儿为丞相，为了巩固其相位，取宠于皇帝，提出立仁宗子英宗为皇太子，将武宗子明宗封为周王，出镇云南。又向仁宗说，脱脱是武宗的旧臣，不可靠。朝廷将脱脱逮捕押回京师，因未查出他有什么过错，仍让他回江浙，不久，调任江西行省左丞相。
English: Tiemu Dier was the prime minister, and in order to consolidate his position and win the favor of the emperor, he proposed that Liren Zongzi Yingzong be crown prince, and that Wu Zongzi Mingzong be crowned King of Zhou, and went to Yunnan. He also said to Ren Zong that Zhuo Zhuo was an old minister of Wu Zong and was unreliable. The imperial court sent Zhuo Zhuo back to Beijing for arrest, and because they could not find out what was wrong with him, they still sent him back to Jiangsu and Zhejiang. Soon, he was transferred to the post of the left prime minister of Jiangxi Province.

古文：英宗嗣位，召拜御史大夫。
现代文：英宗即位，召脱脱回京拜御史大夫。
English: Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, and Yingzong was summoned back to Beijing to pay homage to the Grand Historian.

古文：时帖赤先为大夫，阴忌之，奏改江南行台御史大夫。
现代文：前任御史大夫帖赤暗中忌妒他，奏请改任为江南行台御史大夫。
English: His predecessor, Grand Historian Thé Chak, secretly envied him and requested that he be reassigned as Grand Historian of the Southern Yangtze.

古文：朝廷赐其精舍额曰景贤书院，为设学官。其没也，即其中祠焉。
现代文：还策划把他贬到云南。帖赤因罪伏诛，而脱脱也居家五年不出，于泰定四年去世，年五十六岁。
English: He also plotted to banish him to Yunnan. Chieh Chih was imprisoned for his crimes, but he escaped and did not leave his home for five years. He died in Taiding four years later, at the age of 56.

古文：子九人，其最显者二人：曰铁木儿塔识，曰达识帖睦迩，各有传。
现代文：至正初年，赠推诚全德守义佐运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封和宁王，谥 忠献 。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, it was given to the meritorious soldiers of the Satsuma Rebellion, the Grand Master, the three officials of the Kaifu ceremony, the upper pillar of the country, and the king of Wanning, as a gift of loyalty.

古文：燕铁木儿燕铁木儿，钦察氏，床兀儿第三子，世系见《土土哈传》。
现代文：脱脱曾在宣德别墅请师教导子弟，朝廷因赐名曰 景贤书院 。脱脱死后，在景贤书院立灵位祭祀。燕铁木儿，姓钦察氏，床兀儿第三子，世系见《土土哈传》。
English: Decheng invited a teacher to teach his children at the Xuande Villa, and the imperial court gave him the name Jingxian Academy. After Decheng's death, a spiritual sacrifice was established at the Jingxian Academy. Yan Tiemu Er, surnamed Qincha, the third son of Bedouin Er, his lineage can be seen in "Tu Tu Ha Chuan."

古文：武宗镇朔方，备宿卫十余年，特爱幸之。
现代文：武宗即位前曾镇守北方，燕铁木儿为其近卫军十余年，深受宠爱。
English: Before the enthronement of Emperor Wuzong, Yan Tiemu'er used to guard the north. Yan Tiemu'er served as his bodyguard for more than ten years and was deeply loved.

古文：及即位，拜正奉大夫、同知宣徽院事。
现代文：武宗即位，拜为正奉大夫、同知宣徽院事。
English: Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, and he was appointed to the post of chief physician, and also to the post of abbot of the Xuanhui Monastery.

古文：皇庆元年，袭左卫亲军都指挥使。
现代文：皇庆元年袭任左卫亲军都指挥使。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he assumed the position of the left guard and commanded the troops.

古文：泰定二年，加太仆卿。三年，迁同佥枢密院事。致和元年，进佥书枢密院事。
现代文：泰定三年调任同佥枢密院事。致和元年晋升为佥书枢密院事。
English: In the third year of Taiding's reign, he was transferred to the position of peer of the Privy Council. In the first year of the Heian period, he was promoted to the position of secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：泰定帝崩于上都，丞相倒剌沙专政，宗室诸王脱脱、王禅附之，利于立幼。
现代文：致和元年七月，泰定帝在上都开平驾崩，当时丞相倒剌沙专政，宗室诸王脱脱、王禅立泰定帝子为帝。
English: In July of the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Taiding died peacefully in Shangdu. At that time, the prime minister overthrew the Bisha dictatorship, and the royal families overthrew and enthroned Emperor Taiding.

古文：燕铁木儿时总环卫事，留大都，自以身受武宗宠拔之恩，其子宜纂大位，而一居朔汉，一处南陲，实天之所置，将以启之。
现代文：燕铁木儿在大都总领禁军，闻泰定帝死，乃与公主察吉儿、族党阿剌帖木儿及心腹孛伦赤、剌剌等策划，以武力强行奉武宗次子图帖睦尔为皇帝，任命前湖广行省左丞相别不花为中书左丞相，詹事塔失海涯为平章，前湖广行省右丞速速为中书左丞，前陕西行省参政王不怜吉台为枢密副使，萧忙古仍为通政院使，与中书右丞赵世延、枢密同佥燕铁木儿、通政院使寒食等分别主持政务。
English: When Emperor Taizong died, Yan Tiemu'er led the forbidden army in Dadu. He plotted with Princess Cajiel, the tribal party Ahun Tiemu'er, and the conspirators Yan Lunchong and Zou to forcibly make the second son of Emperor Wu, Tu Tiemu'er, the emperor by force. He appointed the former Minister of the Left of the Guangxing Province of Hubei Province, Beifu Hua, as the Minister of the Left of the Central Government of Hubei Province, Zhan Zhita, who had lost the sea, as the Minister of the Left of the Central Government of Hubei Province, the former Minister of the Right

古文：丙辰，率百官备法驾郊迎。丁巳，文宗至京师，入居大内。己未，上都王禅及太尉不花、丞相塔失帖木儿、平章买闾、御史大夫纽泽等军次榆林。九月庚申，诏燕铁木儿帅师御之，撒敦先驱，至榆林西，乘其未阵薄之，北军大败。
现代文：这时图帖睦尔尚在中兴，燕铁木儿派撒里不花及锁南班去中兴奉迎图帖睦尔于天顺元年八月二十七日还至京师，入居皇宫。图帖睦尔到大都后第三天，即天顺元年八月二十九日，上都王禅及太尉不花、丞相塔失帖木儿、平章买闾、御史大夫纽泽等不服，联军南下，到达榆林。九月初一日，诏令燕铁木儿率师抵御，以撒敦为先驱于榆林大败北军。
English: At this time, Tut was still in Zhongxing, and Yan Tiemu'er sent a messenger to Zhongxing to welcome him to Beijing on August 27th, and he moved into the imperial palace. On the third day after Tut arrived in the capital, that is, on August 29th, the first day of the year of Tianshun, Shangdu Wang Zhen and Taifeng Wufang, the prime minister of the tower lost Timur, Ping Zhang bought the coffin, and the chief historian Nyuzhe were not satisfied, and the allied forces went south and reached Yulin. On the first day of September, the emperor ordered Yan Tiemu'er to lead the division to resist, and

古文：甲子，诏还都。戊辰，辽东平章秃满迭儿以兵犯迁民镇，斩关以入。
现代文：九月初九日，辽东平章秃满迭儿也驱兵由迁民镇入关，进逼大都。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, Liaodong Pingzhang Baldman Dyer also drove the soldiers from the relocated towns into the customs, and forced them into the capital.

古文：遣撒敦往拒，至蓟州东沙流河，累战败之。
现代文：朝廷遣撒敦拒敌于蓟州东之沙流河，但屡战屡败，大都人心惶惶。
English: The imperial court sent Saton to oppose the enemy in the east of Ganzhou, Sharyu River, but he was repeatedly defeated in battle, and most people were panicked.

古文：燕铁木儿以为扰攘之际，不正大名，不足以系天下之志，与诸王大臣伏阙劝进。
现代文：燕铁木儿认为不正大名不足以稳定人心，于是联合诸王臣劝图帖睦儿即刻登皇位，是为文宗，改元天历。
English: Yan Tiemu'er thought that the unjust daimyo was not enough to stabilize the hearts of the people, so he united with the princes to persuade Tut Choe Mu'er to immediately ascend to the throne. It was for Wenzong to change the calendar.

古文：壬申，文宗即位，改元天历，赦天下。癸酉，封燕铁木儿为太平王，以太平路为其食邑。甲戌，加开府仪同三司、上柱国、录军国重事、中书右丞相、监修国史、知枢密院事；赐黄金五百两、白金二千五百两、钞一万锭、金素织段色缯二千匹、海东白鹘一、青鹘二、豹一、平江官地五百顷。
现代文：文宗登位后，于九月十四日，封燕铁木儿为太平王，次日又加开府仪同三司、上柱国、录军国重事、中书右丞相、监修国史、知枢密院事等官职，赐黄金、白银、缎匹、田地。
English: After Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, on September 14th, Emperor Wenzong designated Yan Tiemu as the King of Taiping, and the next day, he also added the official positions of the three departments of the Imperial Household Agency, Shangzhuang Guo, Luo Guo Guo Gui, Minister of Chinese Literature, Supervisor of National History, and Secretary of the Privy Council, and bestowed gold, silver, horses, and fields.

古文：即日诏将兵出蓟州拒秃满迭儿。
现代文：即日诏令他领兵出蓟州抵御入关的秃满迭儿大军。
English: On the same day, the emperor ordered him to lead an army out of Bozhou to resist the army of bald men entering the customs.

古文：乙亥，次三河，而王禅等军已破居庸关，遂进屯三冢。
现代文：十六日，即到三河，这时上都王禅大军已攻破居庸关，进至三冢。
English: On the sixteenth day, that is, to Sanhe, at this time Shangdu Wang Zen's army had broken through Juyongguan and entered Sanxing.

古文：丙子，燕铁木儿蓐食倍道而还。
现代文：十七日，燕铁木儿急忙绕道回师。
English: On the seventeenth day, Yan Tiemu Er hurriedly made a detour to return to his teacher.

古文：丁丑，抵榆河，闻帝出都城，将亲督战，燕铁木儿单骑请见，曰： 陛下出，民心必惊，凡剪寇事一以责臣，愿陛下亟还宫以安黎庶。 
现代文：十八日，军至榆河，闻文宗已出京都，将亲至前线督战，忙单骑进见劝阻皇帝还京，自率大军与王禅之北军在红桥、白浮一带鏖战数日。
English: On the 18th, the army reached the Li River. Wenzong had already left Kyoto, and he would personally go to the front to supervise the battle. He hurriedly rode alone to see and dissuade the emperor from returning to Beijing. His large army and the northern army of Wang Zhen fought for several days in the area of Hongqiao and Baifu.

古文：是日，敌军再战再北，王禅单骑亡命。
现代文：燕铁木儿遣撒敦绕于敌后，部曲八都儿压阵于前，前后夹攻，北军大乱而西遁。燕铁木儿军追至昌平北，斩首数千级，降者万余人。
English: Yan Tiemu sent Satun to encircle the enemy's rear, followed by the eight capital cities in a crushing array in front, and attacked back and forth. The Northern Army was in chaos and fled to the west. Yan Tiemu's army chased to the north of Changping, beheaded thousands of people, and more than 10,000 people fell.

古文：也速答儿、也不伦、撒敦追之，就命也速答儿及佥院彻里帖木儿统卒三万守居庸关，还至昌平南。
现代文：其后，北军屡战屡败，王禅单骑而逃。燕铁木儿命知院也速答儿及佥院彻里帖木儿统领三万军镇守居庸关，自己还军昌平南。
English: After that, the Northern Army was repeatedly defeated in battle, and Wang Zhen fled on horseback. Yan Tiemu'er Mochiin also quickly answered the call and Qiuyuan Cheri Timu'er led 30,000 troops to defend Juyongguan, and returned to Changping South.

古文：俄报古北口不守，上都军掠石槽。
现代文：忽报古北口失守，北军已进至石槽。
English: Suddenly, it was reported that the Old North Gate was lost, and the Northern Army had entered the stone trough.

古文：丙戌，遣撒敦为先驱，燕铁木儿以大军继其后，至石槽。
现代文：九月二十七日，朝廷忙遣撒敦为先驱，燕铁木儿领大军继后，到石槽后乘其不备大败北军。
English: On September 27th, the imperial court hurriedly dispatched Satun as the forerunner, followed by Yan Tiemu'er leading a large army, and after arriving at the stone trough, took advantage of its unpreparedness to defeat the Northern Army.

古文：敌军方炊，掩其不备，直蹂之，大军并进，追击四十里，至牛头山，擒驸马孛罗帖木儿，平章蒙古答失、牙失帖木儿，院使撒儿讨温等，献俘阙下，戮之。各卫将士降者不可胜纪，余兵奔窜。
现代文：擒获驸马孛罗帖木儿、平章蒙古答失、牙失帖木儿、院使撒儿讨温等，各卫将士投降者无数。
English: There were countless surrenders of guardsmen, including those who were captured, such as 馬羅帖木儿, 平章蒙古答失,牙失帖木儿,院使撒儿讨温, and so on.

古文：夜遣撒敦袭之，逐出古北口。
现代文：撒敦追逐余兵出古北口。
English: Satun chased the remaining soldiers out of the old north gate.

古文：丁亥，秃满迭儿及诸王也先帖木儿军陷通州，将袭京师，燕铁木儿急引军还。
现代文：这时，秃满迭儿及诸王也先帖木儿军攻陷通州，逼进京师，燕铁木儿急引军还京。
English: At this time, Bald Man Dier and other kings also led the Timur army to invade Tongzhou, forcing it into the Beijing division, and Yan Tiemu Er hurriedly led the army back to Beijing.

古文：已而撒敦将轻兵要之，弗及而还。
现代文：十月初一，燕铁木儿大军至通州，乘黄昏天暗，大败敌军，敌军狼狈渡潞河逃。
English: On the first day of October, the Yan Tie Mu'er army marched to Tongzhou, took advantage of the dusk and darkness, defeated the enemy army, and the enemy army fled across the Fen River.

古文：乙未，上都诸王忽剌台，指挥阿剌铁木儿、安童入紫荆关，犯良乡，游骑逼南城。
现代文：天明，燕铁木儿军渡河乘胜追击，北军驻守檀子山。过了两天，也先帖木儿、秃满迭儿与阳翟王太平、国王朵罗台、平章塔海等，合军来做殊死战斗，北军大败，尸横遍野，残军连夜逃遁。十月初七，上都诸王忽剌台、指挥阿剌铁木儿、安童等率军入紫荆关，进犯良乡，前锋已至城下。
English: At dawn, Yan Tiemu's army crossed the river in pursuit of victory, and the Northern Army was stationed in Danzhishan. Two days later, first, Timur, Balmandi and the impotent King Taiping, King Dorotai, Pingzhang Tahai, etc. joined forces to fight a desperate battle. The Northern Army was defeated, the corpses were all over the field, and the remnants fled overnight. At the beginning of October 7th, the Shangdu kings Huo Xingtai, commanding the aunts Tiemu and Ando, led the army into the Bauhinia Pass, invaded Liang Township, and the vanguard had reached the city.

古文：燕铁木儿即率诸将兵循北山而西，令脱衔系囊，盛莝豆以饲马，士行且食，晨夜兼程，至于卢沟河。
现代文：燕铁木儿即率诸将兵循北山而西，星夜兼程到达卢沟河。
English: Yan Tiemu Er immediately led the soldiers to follow the north mountain to the west, and reached the Lugou River in the starry night.

古文：忽剌台闻之，望风西走。
现代文：忽剌台闻朝廷军至，望风西逃。
English: Suddenly, he heard the arrival of the imperial army and fled to the west.

古文：是日凯旋，入自肃清门，都人罗拜马首，以谢更生之惠。燕铁木儿曰： 此皆天子威灵，吾何力焉。 入见，帝大悦，赐燕兴圣殿，尽欢而罢。赐太平王黄金印，并降制书及赐玉盘、龙衣、珠衣、宝珠、金腰带等物。
现代文：燕铁木儿班师回朝。文宗大喜，赐宴兴圣殿，君臣尽欢而散，赐燕铁木儿太平王金印，并降制书及赐玉盘、龙衣、珠衣、珠宝、金腰带等物。
English: Emperor Wenzong was overjoyed, gave a banquet to celebrate the prosperity of the holy temple, and the princes and courtiers dispersed in joy. Emperor Wenzong also gave Emperor Yan Tiemuer the gold seal of the King of Taiping, as well as the books, the jade plate, the dragon robe, the pearl robe, the jewelry, and the gold belt.

古文：是日，撒敦遣报秃满迭儿军复入古北口，燕铁木儿遂以师赴之，战于檀州南野，败之。
现代文：同一天，撒敦遣人入京报告军情，秃满迭儿又进入古北口。燕铁木儿派兵前去御敌，在檀州之南会战，大败入侵军。
English: On the same day, Saton sent someone to Beijing to report on the military situation, and Bald Man Deer entered Gubeikou. Yan Tiemu Er sent troops to oppose the enemy and fought in the south of Danzhou, defeating the invading army.

古文：东路蒙古万户哈剌那怀率麾下万人降，余兵东溃，秃满迭儿走还辽东。
现代文：东路蒙古万户哈剌那怀率所部万人投降，其余东溃，秃满迭儿也逃还辽东。
English: On the eastern road, all the Mongolian households surrendered, and the rest were routed, and many fled back to Liaodong.

古文：获忽剌台、阿剌帖木儿、安童、朵罗台、塔海等戮之。先是，齐王月鲁帖木儿、东路蒙古元帅不花帖木儿闻文宗即位，乃起兵趋上都围之。时上都屡败势蹙。
现代文：在此以前，齐王月鲁帖木儿、东路蒙古元帅不花帖木儿闻文宗即位，便起兵围上都，上都屡败。
English: Prior to this, the King of Qi, Yue Lut Timur, and the Mongolian Marshal of the East Road, Fuxa Timur, heard of Wenzong's enthronement, and raised an army to encircle Shangdu. Shangdu was repeatedly defeated.

古文：壬寅，倒剌沙肉袒奉皇帝宝出请死。
现代文：十月十四日倒剌沙捧上皇帝玉玺请死。
English: On October 14th, Lu Bisha held up the emperor's jade scepter and asked for death.

古文：齐王调兵护送至京师。
现代文：齐王派兵把玉玺及倒剌沙护送至京师。
English: King Qi sent soldiers to escort Jade Dragonfly and Plague Dragonfly to Beijing Division.

古文：庚戌，文宗御兴圣殿，受皇帝宝，下倒剌沙于狱。
现代文：十月二十二日，文宗于兴圣殿接受玉玺，把倒剌沙下狱。
English: On October 22nd, Wenzong received the Jade Urn in the Xing Temple and sent Qiaobuxa to prison.

古文：两都平。
现代文：至此，上都与大都均平定无事。
English: So far, both Shangdu and Dadu have been pacified without incident.

古文：丁巳，加燕铁木儿以答剌罕之号，使其世世子孙袭之。
现代文：十月二十九日文宗加燕铁木儿以 答剌罕 的称号，且世代承袭。
English: On October 29th, Wen Zong and Yan Tie Mu'er took the title of "Answering Han," and it has been inherited for generations.

古文：仍赐珠衣二、七宝束带一、白金瓮一、黄金瓶二、海东白鹘一、青鹘三、白鹰一、豹二十。十二月，置龙翊卫，命领其事。先是，至治二年，以钦察卫士多，为千户所者凡三十五，故分置左右二卫，至是又析为龙翊卫。二年，立都督府，以统左、右钦察、龙翊三卫，哈剌鲁东路蒙古二万户府，东路蒙古元帅府，而以燕铁木儿兼统之，寻升为大都督府。燕铁木儿乞解相印还宿卫，帝勉之曰： 卿已为省院，惟未入台，其听后命。 二月，迁御史大夫，依前开府仪同三司、上柱国、录军国重事、太平王。
现代文：燕铁木儿请求辞去大督府之职，只领宿卫禁军，未准。同年二月升任御史大夫。
English: Yan Tiemu'er requested to resign from the post of the governor's office, but was only allowed to lead the imperial guards. In February of the same year, he was promoted to the post of chief historian.

古文：未几，复拜中书右丞相、监修国史、知枢密院事、领都督府龙翊侍卫亲军都指挥使司事，就佩元降虎符，依前开府仪同三司、上柱国、录军国重事、答剌罕、太平王。
现代文：不久，除原职外，又拜中书右丞相、监修国史、知枢密院事、领都督府龙翊侍卫亲军都指挥使司事、答剌罕。在此以前燕铁木儿奉诏护皇玺北至上都，明宗奖励其功，五月，特拜他为开府仪同三司、上柱国、录军国重事、中书右丞相、监修国史、大都督、领龙翊亲军都指挥使事、答剌罕、太平王等官爵。
English: Soon, in addition to his original duties, he was also appointed as the Minister of the Censuses, the Supervisor of the National History, the Censor of the Privy Council, and the Commander-in-Chief of the Governor's Office of the Long March, the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Guards, the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Guards, the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Guards, the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Guards, the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Guards, the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Guards, the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Guards, the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Guards, the Commander-

古文：赐龙庆州之流杯圆池水硙土田。
现代文：六月又加拜太师。从明宗南还大都。
English: In June, they added a deacon. Most of them came from the south of Myeongjong.

古文：又赐平江、松江、江阴芦场、簜山、沙涂、沙田等地。
现代文：八月初一日，文宗以皇太子身分叩见。八月初六日，明宗暴卒，燕铁木儿受皇后命授玉玺于文宗，护送文宗于上都，与诸王大臣再次劝进大位。
English: On the first day of August, Emperor Wenzong visited him as the crown prince. On the sixth day of August, Emperor Wenzong's storm-trooper, Emperor Yan Tiemu'er, was ordered by the empress to bestow the imperial scepter on Emperor Wenzong, escort Emperor Wenzong to Shangdu, and once again persuade Emperor Wenzong to ascend to the throne with the royal ministers.

古文：因言平江、松江圩田五百顷有奇，粮七千七百石，愿增为万石入官，以所得余米赡弟撒敦，诏从之。四年，文宗大渐，遗诏立兄明宗之子。
现代文：于是文宗在上都复登皇位。六月，知枢密院事阔彻伯、脱脱木儿等十人嫉恨燕铁木儿权势之重，欲加谋害，事被察觉，均伏诛。至顺四年，文宗病重，遗诏立其兄明宗之子为帝。
English: As a result, Emperor Wenzong was restored to the throne in Shangdu. In June, ten members of the Privy Council, including Zhi Kuo Che Bo and Dettong Mu'er, became jealous of Emperor Yangtze's power and plotted to assassinate him. When they were discovered, they all fled the country. In the following four years, Emperor Wenzong fell seriously ill and had his brother Emperor Mingzong's son installed as emperor.

古文：已而文宗崩，明宗次子懿璘质班即位，四十三日而崩。
现代文：不久文宗崩，明宗次子懿瞞质班即位，但仅四十三日又亡。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wenzong died, and Emperor Mingzong's second son, Emperor Xizang, ascended to the throne, but died again only 43 days later.

古文：后呼帝曰： 陛下救我！ 
现代文：燕铁木儿与群臣议立文宗子燕贴古思。
English: Yan Tie Mu'er and his group of ministers discussed and decided on the idea of Yan Tie Gu Si, the son of Wen.

古文：帝曰： 汝兄弟为逆，岂能相救邪！ 
现代文：文宗后令立明宗子妥欢帖睦尔，遣使自广西迎归京师以继大统。燕铁木儿内心疑惧，因为明宗之死为他所害，恐被揭发。
English: Later, Emperor Wenzong ordered Li Mingzong's son to make a toast to Mutluer, and sent an envoy from Guangxi to welcome him back to Beijing to succeed the emperor. Yan Tiemu's heart was suspicious, because he was the victim of Mingzong's death, and feared that it would be exposed.

古文：乃迁皇后出宫，寻鸩之于开平民舍，遂簿录唐其势家。
现代文：燕铁木儿自掌握国家军政大权以来，挟天子之威，肆意无忌，娶泰定帝后为夫人，先后娶宗室之女为妾者有四十人，荒淫无度，终以体虚溺血而死。
English: Since taking over the military and political power of the country, Yan Tiemu'er has wielded the power of heaven and earth, marrying the Empress Taiding as his wife, and successively marrying the daughter of his ancestor as his concubine. There are forty of them, and they are wild and debauched. He eventually died of emaciation and drowning.

古文：伯颜伯颜，蔑儿吉氏。
现代文：燕铁木儿死后，妥欢帖睦儿才即皇位，就是顺帝。
English: After the death of Yan Tiemu'er, it was necessary to make the Emperor happy, that is, the Emperor Shun.

古文：曾大父探马哈儿，给事宿卫。
现代文：伯颜，姓蔑儿吉碍氏，曾祖父探马哈儿，任宿卫。
English: Bo Yan, surnamed Zurer Jiyu, great-grandfather Tan Mahal, served as a night watchman.

古文：大父称海，从宪宗伐宋，殁于王事。
现代文：祖父称海，随宪宗伐宋，为国捐躯。
English: My grandfather called himself Hai, followed the Confucianism to the Song Dynasty, and sacrificed his life for the country.

古文：父谨只儿，总宿卫隆福太后宫。
现代文：父谨只儿，在隆福太后宫中总领宿卫。
English: My father was the only son, and he was the head of the guards at the Longfu Palace.

古文：伯颜弘毅深沉，明达果断。
现代文：伯颜抱负远大，沉着果断。
English: Bo Yan is ambitious, calm and decisive.

古文：年十五，奉成宗命侍武宗于藩邸。
现代文：十五岁时奉成宗之命侍奉太子武宗。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was ordered by Shigemune to serve Prince Takemune.

古文：大德三年，从北征海都。
现代文：大德三年，随武宗征海都。
English: In the third year of Dade, he followed Wu Zong to conquer the sea capital.

古文：五年，从至迭怯里古之地，力战，又至哈剌塔之地，累捷，功为诸将先。
现代文：五年又随武宗征迭怯里古及哈剌塔之地，屡战屡捷，其功在其他诸将之上。
English: In the following five years, with the Wusong Conquest, he made repeated conquests in Liguo and Harbin Tower, his achievements surpassing those of other generals.

古文：十年，斡罗思、失班等逃奔察八儿之地，武宗命伯颜追降之。
现代文：十年，斡罗思、失班等逃往察八儿之地，武宗命伯颜追击，斡罗思等降。
English: In the tenth year, Zhuo Luo Si, off-duty, etc. fled to the land of Zhabaer, Wu Zong's life pursued, Zhuo Luo Si, etc. fell.

古文：十一年，武宗大会诸王驸马于和林，锡号曰伯颜拔都儿。
现代文：十一年，武宗大会诸王、驸马于和林，赐伯颜号为 拔都儿 。
English: In the eleventh year, the kings of the Wuzong Assembly, Hema Yu and Lin, gave Bo Yan the name Ba Du'er.

古文：武宗即位，拜吏部尚书，俄改尚服院使，又拜御史中丞。
现代文：武宗即位，拜伯颜吏部尚书，不久改为尚服院使，又拜御史中丞。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he paid homage to Grand Empress Dowager Cixi, and soon changed it to Grand Empress Dowager, and also paid homage to Grand Historian Zhongzheng.

古文：至大二年十一月，拜尚书平章政事，特赐蛟龙虎符，领右卫阿速亲军都指挥使司达鲁花赤。
现代文：至大二年十一月，拜尚书平章政事，特赐蛟龙虎符，领右卫阿速亲军都指挥司达鲁花赤。
English: By November of the second year of his sophomore year, he had been awarded the Order of the Dragon, the Order of the Tiger, and the Order of the Red Star. He led the right guard of the Ahok troops.

古文：三年，加特进。延祐三年，仁宗命为周王常侍府常侍。
现代文：延三年，仁宗任命他为周王常侍府常侍。
English: In the following three years, Emperor Nanzong appointed him as Zhou's personal attendant.

古文：四年，拜江南行台御史中丞。
现代文：四年，拜江南行台御史中丞。
English: In four years, he became the middle-ranking official of the Southern Baijiang.

古文：五年，就升御史大夫。
现代文：五年，升御史大夫。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to Doctor of History.

古文：六年，拜江浙行省平章政事。
现代文：六年，拜江浙行省平章政事。
English: In six years, Baijiang and Zhejiang Province Pingzhang government affairs.

古文：七年，拜陕西行台御史大夫。
现代文：七年，拜陕西行台御史大夫。
English: For seven years, he served as the chief historian of Xingtai, Shaanxi Province.

古文：至治二年，复迁南台御史大夫。
现代文：至治二年，复调任南台御史大夫。
English: Two years later, he was reassigned to the post of Nantai goshi daibu.

古文：泰定二年，迁江西行省平章政事。
现代文：泰定二年，迁调江西行省平章政事。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Jiangxi Province was transferred to Pingzhang Province.

古文：三年，迁河南行省平章政事。
现代文：三年，改任河南行省平章政事。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the Henan Provincial Government of Pingzhang Province.

古文：旧所赐河南田五千顷，以二千顷奉帝师祝釐，八百顷助给宿卫，自取不及其半。
现代文：在河南任职期间，将原赐给他在该省的田五千顷，以二千顷奉献泰定帝做求福之用，以八百顷助宿卫，自留者不到半数。
English: During his tenure in Henan, Yuan gave him five thousand hectares of farmland in the province, two thousand hectares were dedicated to Emperor Taiding as a blessing, and eight hundred hectares were used to help the guards. Less than half of them remained.

古文：又使罗里报燕铁木儿曰： 公尽力京师，河南事我当自效。 
现代文：他为政严谨，对于本省那些奸豪害民之人，必加重惩。致和元年七月，泰定帝崩。八月，丞相燕铁木儿遣明里董阿迎武宗之子怀王从江陵回京即位。
English: He was a strict politician, and those in the province who were traitors and harmed the people would be punished more severely. In July of the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Taiding passed away. In August, Prince Huai Wang, the son of Emperor Mingli and Emperor Donga, returned to Beijing from Gangneung to take the throne.

古文：伯颜别募勇士五千人以迎帝于南，而躬勒兵以俟。
现代文：路过河南时，伯颜尽其所能从财力、物力、人力各方面极力供应，募勇士五千人，拟亲至南郊躬迎圣驾；还遣罗里向燕铁木儿表示： 公尽力于京师，河南方面的事我当效力。 
English: When passing through Henan, Bo Yan did his best to supply as much as possible in terms of financial resources, material resources and manpower, recruited five thousand warriors, and planned to go to the southern suburbs to welcome the saint; he also sent Lori to Yantie Muer to say: I will do my best in Beijing Division, and I should be effective in Henan.

古文：参政脱别台曰： 今蒙古军马与宿卫之士皆在上都，而令探马赤军守诸隘，吾恐此事之不可成也。
现代文：参政脱别台劝他 ：令蒙古军马与宿卫之士皆在上都，已令探马赤军分守各要地，吾恐立怀王为帝之事不可成功。
English: He advised him to join politics and leave Taiwan: Let the Mongolian army horses and guardsmen all be in Shangdu, and let the Red Army horses guard each important place. I am afraid that the matter of establishing King Huai as emperor cannot be successful.

古文：我等图保性命，他何计哉？ 
现代文：我等只图自保性命，何必管其他？ 
English: We're just trying to save our own lives, why should we care about anyone else?

古文：伯颜不从其言。
现代文：伯颜不采纳这种意见。
English: Bo Yan did not accept this opinion.

古文：其夜，脱别台手刃欲杀伯颜为变，伯颜觉，遂拔剑杀之，夺其所部军器，收马千二百骑。
现代文：晚间，脱别台欲杀伯颜，伯颜察觉，拔剑杀死脱别台，夺其所部军器及马一千二百匹。
English: In the evening, the departing table wanted to kill Bo Yan, Bo Yan noticed, drew his sword to kill the departing table, and seized his military equipment and twelve hundred horses.

古文：怀王命撒里不花拜伯颜河南行省左丞相。
现代文：怀王命撒里不花拜伯颜为河南行省左丞相。
English: In accordance with the king's command, Bai Baiyan became the minister of Henan Province.

古文：怀王至河南，伯颜属櫜鞬，擐甲胄，与百官父老导入，咸俯伏称万岁，即上前叩头劝进。
现代文：怀王至河南，伯颜佩带弓箭，身穿甲胄，率文武官员和父老迎接入城，俯身称万岁，叩头劝登皇位。
English: King Huai went to Henan Province, and Lady Bo, wearing a bow and arrow and armor, led officials and elders to welcome him to the city. They bowed down and said "long live the king" and advised him to ascend to the throne.

古文：怀王解金铠、御服、宝刀及海东白鹘、文豹赐伯颜。明日扈从北行。
现代文：怀王解金铠、御服、宝刀等物赐与伯颜。第二日，伯颜扈从怀王北行往京都。
English: On the second day, Hakuin sent gifts of gold brooches, ceremonial robes, and swords to Bo Yan. Bo Yan traveled from the northern part of Hakuin to Kyoto.

古文：九月，怀王即皇帝位，是为文宗，特加伯颜银青荣禄大夫，仍领宿卫。
现代文：九月，怀王即皇帝位，是为文宗，特加伯颜银青荣禄大夫，仍统领宿卫军。
English: In September, when Emperor Huaiwang ascended to the throne, it was Wenzong, who was still the commander-in-chief of the imperial guards.

古文：寻加太尉，赐黄金二百五十两、白金一千两、楮币二十五万缗，进开府仪同三司、录军国重事、御史大夫、中政院使。
现代文：不久，加太尉，赐黄金二百五十两、白金一千两，楮币二十五万缗，进开府仪同三司、录军国重事、御史大夫、中政院使。
English: Soon after, he was given 2502 gold, 1000 white gold and 250,000 ryo, and was promoted to the 3rd Division of the Imperial Household Agency, the 3rd Division of the Ministry of War, the 3rd Division of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, the 3rd Division of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the 3rd Division of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the 3rd Division of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the 3rd Division of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the 3rd Division of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the 3rd Division of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the 3rd Division of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the 3rd Division of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the 3rd Division of the

古文：天历二年正月，拜太保。
现代文：天历二年正月，拜太保。
English: In the first month of the second year of the lunar calendar, Baitai Bao is celebrated.

古文：二月，加授储庆使，加赐虎符，特授忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使。
现代文：二月，加授储庆使，加赐虎符，特授忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使。
English: In February, he was awarded the Zooking Envoy, the Tiger Emblem, and the Special Commendation for Loyalty and Service.

古文：八月，拜中书左丞相。
现代文：不久，明宗即位，文宗居东宫，拜伯颜太子詹事、太保。八月，拜中书左丞相。
English: Soon after, Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, Emperor Wenzong lived in the East Palace, and he paid homage to Crown Prince Po Yan as Zhan Zhi (詹事) and Taibo (太保). In August, Emperor Mingzong paid homage to Emperor Zhongshu as Zuo Zheng (左丞).

古文：明宗崩，文宗嗣位，加储政院使。
现代文：明宗崩，文宗又即位，加伯颜储政院使。
English: Emperor Mingzong passed away, Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, and Emperor Jia Bo Yan sent an envoy to the State Council.

古文：三年正月，拜知枢密院事。
现代文：三年正月，拜知枢密院事。
English: In the first month of the third year, he resigned from the Privy Council.

古文：至顺元年，文宗以伯颜功大，不有异数不足以报称，特命尚世祖阔阔出太子女孙曰卜颜的斤，分赐虎士三百：怯薛丹百、默而吉军百、阿速军百，隶左右宿卫。又赐黄金双龙符，镌文曰 广忠宣义正节振武佐运功臣 ，组以宝带，世为明券。又命凡宴饮视诸宗王礼。
现代文：至顺元年，文宗认为伯颜功大，不格外多加褒赏不足与其贡献相称，于是特命许配世祖阔阔出太子的孙女卜颜的斤给伯颜为妻，分赐虎士三百，即：怯薛丹一百、默而吉军一百、阿速军一百，隶属于左右宿卫；赐黄金双龙符，其文为 广忠宣义正节振武佐运功臣 ，世代相传；命一切宴饮均以诸宗王礼相待。
English: In the first year of Shun, Wenzong thought that Bo Yan's merit was great, and the extra reward was commensurate with his contribution. Therefore, he specially ordered Bo Yan's granddaughter Bu Yan's jin to be given to Bo Yan as his wife, and distributed three hundred tigers, that is, one hundred of Qiu Xuedan, one hundred of Mojiji's army, and one hundred of Asao's army, belonging to the left and right guards; he gave gold double dragon symbols, whose text was "Guangzhong Xuanyi Zhengxing Zhenwu Sanyun Gongshen," which was passed down from generation to generation

古文：二年八月，进封浚宁王，特加授侍正府侍正，追封其先三世为王。又加伯颜昭功宣毅万户、忠翊侍卫都指挥使。
现代文：二年八月，进封浚宁王，特加授侍正府侍正，追封其祖先三世为王，又加伯颜昭功宣毅万户、忠翊侍卫都指挥使。
English: In August of the second year, King Junning was enthroned, and he was given the title of Zhengfu Zhengfu, and the third generation of his ancestors were crowned as kings. He was also given the title of Yan Zhao Gong Xuan Yi Wanhu, and the title of Zhongyuan Zhengfu Commander.

古文：三年，拜太傅，加徽政使。
现代文：三年，拜太傅，加徽政使。
English: In three years, Bai Taifu became the political envoy of Jia Hui.

古文：八月，文宗崩。
现代文：至顺三年八月，文宗崩。
English: In August of the following year, Wenzong passed away.

古文：十月，伯颜奉太皇太后命，立明宗之子懿璘质班，是为宁宗。
现代文：十月，伯颜奉太皇太后命，立明宗之子懿瞞质班，是为宁宗。
English: In October, at the behest of the empress dowager, Bo Yan, the son of the Limei Sect, Zou Xizhe Ban, became the leader of the Ning Sect.

古文：十一月，宁宗崩。
现代文：十一月，宁宗崩。
English: In November, Ning Zong passed away.

古文：四年六月，顺帝至自南服，入践大位，嘉伯颜翊戴之功，拜中书右丞相、上柱国、监修国史。
现代文：至顺四年六月，顺帝即位，嘉奖伯颜拥戴之功，拜中书右丞相、上柱国、监修国史。
English: In June of the 4th year of Shun, Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, commended Bo Yan for his support, and worshiped Zhongshu, the Minister of the Right, Shangzhu, and the supervisor of national history.

古文：元统二年，进太师、奎章阁大学士，领太史院，兼领司天监、威武、阿速诸卫。
现代文：元统元年，进太师、奎章阁大学士，管领太史院，兼领司天监、威武、阿速诸卫。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Jin Taishi, Kuizhangge University scholar, leader of Taishi Academy, and leader of Tianjun, Weiwu, and Ahow Zhuwei.

古文：奏复经筵，加知经筵事。
现代文：伯颜奏请恢复经筵，顺帝允准并加他为知经筵事。
English: Bo Yanseo, please restore the sutra, Shun Di agreed and added him to the sutra anecdote.

古文：三年六月，唐其势及其弟塔剌海私蓄异志，谋危社稷，伯颜奉诏诛之。余党称兵，又亲率师往上都，击破其众。
现代文：十一月，进封秦王，继续统管太禧宗院、中政院、宣政院、隆祥使司、宫相诸内府，总领蒙古、钦察、斡罗思诸卫亲军都指挥使。三年六月，唐其势及其弟塔剌海阴谋篡夺皇位，伯颜奉诏诛杀；余党举兵反叛，伯颜亲率军至上都镇压。
English: In November, Emperor Qin was enthroned, and he continued to preside over the Imperial Family Court, the Central Government Court, the Xuan Government Court, the Longxiang Envoys, and the Imperial Court Courtiers, as well as the Commander-in-Chief of Mongolia, the Commander-in-Chief of Chincha, and the Commander-in-Chief of Luos. In June of the third year, Tang Qizhen and his younger brother, Tabuhai, plotted to usurp the imperial throne, and Baiyan was killed; the rest of the party raised an army to rebel, and Baiyan led the army to suppress the rebellion.

古文：七月，伯颜鸩杀皇后伯牙吾氏，为匿唐其势、塔剌海于后宫。伯颜怒曰： 岂有兄弟谋不轨而姊妹党之者乎！ 
现代文：七月，皇后伯牙吾氏因私藏唐其势、塔剌海于后宫，伯颜怒曰 ：哪有兄弟图谋不轨而姊妹竟保护的！ 迫使皇后服毒自杀。
English: In July, the Empress Bao Yaguo was forced to commit suicide by swallowing poison after she was caught hiding the Tang Dynasty's treasure, the Tower of the Sea, in her harem. Bo Yan angrily said, "How can a brother plot evil and a sister protect him?"

古文：遂鸩之。诏谕天下，用国初故事，赐伯颜以答剌罕之号，俾世袭之。
现代文：顺帝诏谕天下，援国初之例，赐伯颜以 答剌罕 称号，使世袭。
English: Emperor Shun issued an edict to the world, the first example of aiding the country, giving Bo Yan the title of "Answer Han" and making it hereditary.

古文：至元元年，伯颜赞帝率遵旧章，奏寝妨农之务，停海内土木营造四年，息彰德、莱芜冶铁一年，蠲京圻漕户杂徭，减河间、两淮、福建盐额岁十八万五千有奇，赈沙漠贫户及南北饥民至千万计，帝允而行之。
现代文：至元元年，伯颜赞助顺帝遵行本朝传统制度，奏请停止一切有碍于农事的措施，四年之内国内不进行土木营造，暂停彰德、莱芜冶铁一年，免除京城周围千里内漕户杂徭，减少河间、两淮、福建每年盐课十八万五千引，赈济沙漠贫户及南北饥民千千万万。这些都经皇帝批准实行。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bo Yan sponsored Shun Di to comply with the traditional system of this dynasty, and petitioned him to stop all measures that hindered agriculture, not to carry out civil engineering in the country within four years, to suspend the iron and steel production in Changde and Laiwu for one year, to exempt the thousands of households within a thousand miles around the capital city from miscellaneous consumption, to reduce the annual salt consumption in Humen, Liahuai and Fujian by 185,000, and to help the poor households in the desert and the millions of hungry people in the north and south. These were all implemented with the approval of the emperor.

古文：其知经筵日，当进讲，必与讲官敷陈格言，以尽启沃之道。
现代文：给皇帝讲解经史时，伯颜必与讲官一起简明扼要地以治国之道开导皇帝。
English: When explaining the history of the sutras to the emperor, Bo Yan would work with the lecturer to explain the way of governing the country to the emperor in a concise manner.

古文：太皇太后赐第时雍坊，有旨雄丽视诸王邸，伯颜力辞，制度务从损约。
现代文：太皇太后赐他宅第名 时雍坊 ，且规定要同诸王宅第一样华丽壮观。伯颜极力辞谢，要求厉行简约。
English: The empress dowager gave him the house's first name, Shiyongfang, and stipulated that it should be as magnificent as the first of the royal houses. Bo Yan tried his best to say thank you and demanded that the contract be strictly enforced.

古文：四年，求解政柄，三宫交勉留。
现代文：四年，伯颜请解除他的职务，皇帝、太后和皇后三宫极力挽留。
English: Four years later, Bo Yan requested that he be relieved of his duties, but the Emperor, Empress Dowager and Empress Sanmiya tried their best to retain him.

古文：五年十月，诏为大丞相，加号元德上辅，赐七宝玉书龙虎金符，镌刻如前。
现代文：五年十月，诏为大丞相，加号 元德上辅 ，赐七宝玉书龙凤金符。
English: In October of the fifth year, Zhao was promoted to major general, and given the title of senior vice-minister of the Yuan Dynasty. He was also given the Seven Treasures, the Dragon and the Phoenix.

古文：先数日，伯颜面奏请以赐田岁入所积钞一万锭，赈帖列坚、末邻、纳邻三道驿置，及关北十三驿之困乏者。
现代文：数日前，伯颜面向皇帝奏请将所赐田岁入钞一万锭，赈济帖列坚、末邻、纳邻三道驿站及关北十三处驿站中之困乏者。
English: A few days ago, Boyan appealed to the emperor, asking him to give 10,000 baht of the land revenue given to the emperor to help the needy people in Jiaojian, Laijian, Nanjian, Sandao and 13 other stations in Guanbei.

古文：然伯颜自诛唐其势之后，独秉国钧，专权自恣，变乱祖宗成宪，虐害天下，渐有奸谋。
现代文：然而，伯颜自诛唐其势之后，独掌政权，肆意专横，变乱祖宗法规，虐害天下，且逐渐有所奸谋。
English: However, after the rise of Baoyan since the Tang Dynasty, Baoyan has been in sole control of the regime, arbitrarily arbitrary, changing the laws and regulations of the ancestors, abusing the world, and gradually plotting.

古文：帝患之。
现代文：顺帝不胜担忧。
English: Emperor Shun was very worried.

古文：初，伯颜欲以其侄脱脱宿卫，伺帝起居，惧涉物议，乃以枢密知院汪家奴、翰林承旨沙剌班同侍禁近，实属意脱脱。
现代文：最初，伯颜想让其侄儿脱脱进入宿卫军，侍奉顺帝日常生活，但又怕众人议论，于是将其侄与枢密知院汪家奴、翰林承旨沙剌班一同入宫为宿卫，实际上是要掩盖他把脱脱送入宿卫的真正意图。
English: At first, Bo Yan wanted to let his nephew break away and join the palace guards to serve the daily life of Emperor Shun, but he was afraid of public discussion. Therefore, he sent his nephew into the palace as a palace guard together with the Privy Councilor Wang Jiannu and Hanlin Chengzhi Shajian, in fact, to cover up his true intention of sending him into the palace guards.

古文：故脱脱政令日修而卫士拱听约束。
现代文：脱脱大权在握，卫士都听脱脱的约束。
English: The power to break away is in their hands, and the guards are all subject to the constraints of breaking away.

古文：伯颜自领诸卫精兵，以燕者不花为屏蔽，导从之盛，填溢街衢。而帝侧仪卫反落落如晨星。
现代文：伯颜自领诸卫精兵，以燕者不花为护卫，每出行前呼后拥，而皇帝的仪仗卫队反而寥若晨星。
English: Bo Yan himself led the guards of the elite soldiers, with the swallows as escorts, and called for support before each trip, while the emperor's honor guard was like the morning star.

古文：势焰薰灼，天下之人惟知有伯颜而已。
现代文：其气焰咄咄逼人，天下之人只知有伯颜，不知有皇帝。
English: His arrogance is aggressive, and people all over the world only know him as Bo Yan, but not as an emperor.

古文：脱脱深忧之，乘间自陈忘家徇国之意，帝犹未之信。
现代文：脱脱深深担心这样下去的后果，便乘机向皇帝自陈愿忘家殉国的本意。
English: Deeply worried about the consequences of going on like this, he took the opportunity to tell the emperor of his intention to leave home and die for his country.

古文：遣阿鲁、世杰班日以忠义与之往复论难，益知其心无他，遂闻于帝，帝始无疑。
现代文：顺帝还是不信任，遣阿鲁、世杰班每天与脱脱反复谈论忠义之道，从中了解他确实忠贞不贰，这才消除疑虑。
English: Emperor Shun still didn't trust him, so he sent Aru and Shijiban to talk to Zhu De repeatedly every day about the way of loyalty, from which they learned that he was indeed loyal, which eliminated their doubts.

古文：是年，车驾自上都还京，伯颜数以兵巡行红城诸处，归辄在后。
现代文：这年，顺帝自上都还京，伯颜多次带兵巡行红城诸处，回来时走在后面。
English: In this year, Emperor Shun returned to Beijing from Shangdu, and Bo Yan led the troops to parade around the Red City many times. When he returned, he walked behind.

古文：三人谋益坚，伯颜不知，益逞凶虐，构陷郯王彻彻笃，奏赐死，帝未允，辄传旨行刑。
现代文：阿鲁、世杰班及脱脱三人谋杀他的决心更坚。而伯颜不知，更加逞凶肆虐，陷害郯王彻彻辙笃，奏请赐死，未得皇上同意就传旨行刑。
English: Aru, Shigeban, and the three escapees were even more determined to murder him, while Bo Yan, unbeknownst to them, was even more determined to wreak havoc. He set up Shao Wang as a scapegoat, pleaded for his death, and was executed without the emperor's consent.

古文：复奏贬宣让王帖木儿不花、威顺王宽彻普化，辞色愤厉，不待旨而行。
现代文：又奏贬宣让王帖木儿不花、威顺王宽辙普化，声色俱厉，不等皇帝批准就专断自行。
English: He also made derogatory proclamations that Wang Timur should not spend money, and that Wang Wushun should open his country to the rest of the world. He was very angry, and did not wait for the emperor's approval to arbitrarily decide on his own.

古文：帝益忿之。
现代文：顺帝更加愤怒。
English: Emperor Shun became even angrier.

古文：伯颜且日益立威，锻炼诸狱，延及无辜。
现代文：伯颜的淫威日盛，一些无辜的人亦身陷牢狱。
English: Bo Yan's arrogance is on the rise, and some innocent people are in prison.

古文：六年二月，伯颜自领兵卫，请帝出田。
现代文：至元六年二月，伯颜自领宿卫军，请顺帝出宫打猎。
English: In February of the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bo Yan led the imperial guards and invited Emperor Shun to leave the palace to go hunting.

古文：脱脱告帝托疾不往。
现代文：脱脱劝帝托病不去。
English: Get rid of and discourage children with Tourette's syndrome.

古文：伯颜固请太子燕帖古思出次柳林。
现代文：伯颜一再请太子燕帖古思至柳林打猎。
English: Bo Yan repeatedly asked Prince Yan Zhe Gu Si to go hunting in the willow forest.

古文：脱脱欲有所为，遂与世杰班、阿鲁合议，白于帝。
现代文：脱脱打算对伯颜采取行动，遂与世杰班、阿鲁商议把伯颜的阴谋奏告顺帝。
English: Shudu planned to take action against Bo Yan, so he discussed with Shijiban and Aru to report Bo Yan's plot to Emperor Shun.

古文：戊戌，脱脱悉拘门钥，受密旨领军，阿鲁、世杰班侍帝侧传命。
现代文：二月十五日，脱脱掌握所有宫门的钥匙，并受密旨领军，阿鲁、世杰班在顺帝身边传命。
English: On February 15th, with the keys to all the palace gates in his hands, and with a secret order to lead the army, Aru and Shijiban received their orders at the side of Emperor Shun.

古文：是夜，帝御玉德殿，主符檄，发号令，详见《脱脱传》。中夜二鼓，遣太子怯薛月可察儿率三十骑抵太子营，取之入城，夜半见帝。
现代文：是夜二更，遣太子怯薛月可察儿率三十骑接太子入城见顺帝。
English: It was two o'clock in the evening, and the prince was riding into the city to see Emperor Shun at the rate of thirty.

古文：四鼓，命只儿瓦歹奉诏往柳林，出伯颜为河南行省左丞相。
现代文：四更，命只儿瓦歹奉诏往柳林，宣布派他出京为河南行省左丞相。
English: Fourthly, he ordered his son Wawang to go to Liulin and announced that he would send him to Beijing to be the minister of the left for Henan Province.

古文：己亥，伯颜遣人来城下问故。
现代文：十六日，伯颜遣人到城下问为什么要派他出京为河南行省左丞相。
English: On the 16th, Bo Yan sent someone to the outskirts of the city to ask why he should be sent out of Beijing to serve as Henan Province's Minister of the Left.

古文：脱脱倨城门上宣言，有旨黜丞相一人，诸从官无罪，可各还本卫。
现代文：脱脱在城上宣布圣旨，只罢黜丞相一人，随从他的官员无罪，各还本卫。
English: He proclaimed the imperial edict on the castle, only the prime minister was deposed, the officials who followed him were not guilty, and they all returned to their posts.

古文：及立为皇太子，以为中顺大夫、典用太监。
现代文：马札儿台，伯颜之弟，先侍奉武宗，后侍奉太子仁宗，出入都很恭谦谨慎，任职办事，敏捷通达，仁宗颇为欣赏，任他为中顺大夫、典用太监。
English: Mazardai, the younger brother of Bogan, first served Emperor Wuzong and later Prince Renzong. He was very courteous and cautious when entering and leaving the palace. He was quick and efficient in his duties. Renzong was quite appreciative. He appointed him as the doctor of Zhongshun and the eunuch of the imperial court.

古文：寻迁吏部郎中，升侍郎，进兵部尚书，迁利用卿，进度支卿，转同知典瑞院事，升院使，历大都路达鲁花赤，佩虎符，领虎贲亲军都指挥使。
现代文：不久调任吏部郎中，后又升侍郎、兵部尚书，转任利用卿，进升度支卿，又转为同知典瑞院事，升院使、大都路达鲁花赤，佩虎符，领虎贲亲军都指挥使。
English: Soon he was transferred to the middle of the cadre, and later he was promoted to the attendant and the secretary of the military department, transferred to the secretary of utilization, promoted to the vice-secretary of the promotion, and transferred to the secretary of the Swiss Academy of Sciences, the envoy of the promotion, the general of the capital, the commander of the troops, the bearer of the tiger, and the leader of the tiger.

古文：泰定四年，拜陕西行台治书侍御史。
现代文：泰定四年，拜陕西行台治书侍御史。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he went to Shaanxi Province to govern Taiwan.

古文：关陕大饥，赈贷有不及者，尽出私财以周贫民，所活甚众。
现代文：当时关陕大饥，赈贷钱粮不足，马札儿台将自己的私财用来周济贫民。
English: At that time, there was a great famine in Guanshan, and there was a shortage of money and grain. Mazartai used his own private money to help the poor.

古文：转太府卿，又转都功德使，改宣政使。三迁皆仍太府卿，佩元降虎符，领高丽女直汉军万户府达鲁花赤。
现代文：转任太府卿、都功德使、宣政使，虽三度迁调，最后仍为太府卿，佩原所赐虎符，为统领高丽、女真、汉军万户府达鲁花赤。
English: He was transferred to the position of Dafu-kyo, Du Gongde-shi, and Xuan Zheng-shi. Although he was transferred three times, he was still Dafu-kyo in the end. He was given the tiger emblem by Pei Yuan, and was the commander of Goryeo, Jurchen, and the Chinese army, Wanyufu Daruhana.

古文：拜御史大夫，仍领高丽女直汉军，兼右卫阿速亲军都指挥使司达鲁花赤，提调承徽寺。
现代文：拜御史大夫，仍统领高丽、女真、汉军，兼右卫阿速亲军都指挥使司达鲁花赤，提调承徽寺。
English: Dr. Baigongshi still led the Goryeo, Jurchen, and Han armies, and also commanded the right guard Ahok troops. He also commanded the envoy Siddhartha, and raised the tone of Chenghui Temple.

古文：寻迁知枢密院事，兼前职，加提调武备寺事，加金牌，领钦察闯闯帖木儿千户所；又仍以知枢密院事，加镇守海口侍卫亲军屯储都指挥使司达鲁花赤，余如故。
现代文：不久，调任知枢密院事，除仍兼前职外，又加提调武备寺事，加金牌，领钦察之闯闯帖木儿千户所。其后，又仍以知枢密院事加镇守海口侍卫亲军屯储指挥使司达鲁花赤，其他职务仍不变。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the Privy Council, and in addition to still holding his previous position, he was also transferred to the Temple of Martial Arts, added a gold medal, and received a commendation for breaking into thousands of households. Later, he was still assigned to the Privy Council, and the town guard of Haikou, the guard of the pro-army, the commander of the camp, and the commander of the army, and the other positions remained unchanged.

古文：至元三年，议进爵封王，辞以兄伯颜既封秦王，兄弟不宜并王，乃拜太保，分枢密院，往镇北边。
现代文：至元三年，朝廷准备给马札儿台进爵封王。他辞谢，认为其兄伯颜既封秦王，兄弟不宜同时封王。于是拜他为太保、知枢密院，令镇守北边。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court was preparing to knight Mazardai and crown him king. He declined, believing that since his brother Boyan had already been crowned King of Qin, it would be inappropriate for his brother to be crowned king at the same time. Therefore, he was made the guardian of the north side of the town and the privy council.

古文：至镇，边民岁有徭役，悉蠲除之，后为定例。
现代文：到任后，他免除边民每年的徭役，并作为制度固定下来。
English: After taking office, he exempted the border residents from the annual corvee and fixed it as a system.

古文：六年，伯颜既罢黜，召拜太师、中书右丞相。
现代文：六年，贬黜伯颜后，召马札儿台回京，拜太师、中书右丞相。
English: Six years later, after the dethronement of Bo Yan, Ma Zardai was summoned back to Beijing, where he became the Grand Master and the Minister of the Right for Chinese Literature.

古文：奏罢各处船户提举、广东采珠提举二司。
现代文：他奏请裁撤各处船户提举司和广东采珠提举司。
English: He called for the abolition of ship owners' promotion offices and Guangdong pearling promotion offices.

古文：兼领右卫阿速军，又兼领群牧监。
现代文：在相位时，还兼统领右卫阿速军，又兼领群牧监。
English: During the phase, he also led the right guard of the Ahok army, and also led the group overseer.

古文：十二年，特命改封德王，令翰林儒臣制词立碑，仍赐旌忠昭德之额。
现代文：不久，因病辞职。至正元年，任其子脱脱为右丞相，封马札儿台为忠王。至正七年病逝于甘肃，年六十三岁。十二年，特命改封德王，令翰林儒臣为之树碑立传，赐 旌忠昭德 的匾额。
English: Soon after, he resigned due to illness. In the first year of the Taisho era, he appointed his son Rengo as the minister of justice, and named Ma Zardai as the king of loyalty. In the seventh year of the Taisho era, he died in Gansu at the age of sixty-three. In the twelfth year, he was specially appointed to be the king of loyalty, and ordered Hanlin Ruxen to erect a monument to him, and gave him the title of "Chungzhong Zhaode."

古文：长子脱脱，次子也先帖木儿。
现代文：子二人，长曰脱脱，次曰也先帖木儿。
English: They have two children, the eldest of whom is a toddler, and the second is a toddler.

古文：至顺二年，授虎符、忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使。
现代文：脱脱，字大用，自幼与一般儿童不同，年稍长，能挽强弓。
English: Detachment, extensive use of words, different from ordinary children since childhood, slightly older, able to tie a strong bow.

古文：元统二年，同知宣政院事，兼前职。
现代文：十五岁任皇太子怯怜口怯薛官。天历元年任成制提举司达鲁花赤。顺帝元统二年任同知宣政院事，但仍兼前职。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was appointed to the position of Crown Prince Xue. In the first year of the Heian period, he was appointed to the position of Shidaru Hanaka. In the second year of the Shun Dynasty, he was appointed to the position of Tongzhi Xuansei Academy, but he still held the previous position.

古文：五月，迁中政使。六月，迁同知枢密院事。
现代文：同年五月升为中政使，同年六月又升同知枢密院事。
English: In May of the same year, he was promoted to Vice-Minister of State, and in June of the same year, he was promoted to Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：至元元年，唐其势阴谋不轨，事觉伏诛，其党答里及剌剌等称兵外应。脱脱选精锐与之战，尽禽以献。历太禧宗禋院使，拜御史中丞、虎符亲军都指挥使，提调左阿速卫。
现代文：至元元年，唐其势谋反被诛，其党羽答里及剌剌起兵外应，脱脱率精锐军将叛逆者生擒，为朝廷除害，历任太禧宗院使、御史中丞、虎符亲军都指挥使，统领左阿速卫。
English: By the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Tang Dynasty was overthrown because of its power to plot rebellion, and its party was overthrown and its army was overthrown by outsiders. The elite army that escaped from the rebellion captured the rebels alive and eliminated the harm to the imperial court. Successive emissaries of the Grand Empress Dowager, the Grand Historian Zhongzheng, and the Tiger Fuxin Army all commanded the emissaries, with Zuo Ah Wei at the helm.

古文：四年，进御史大夫，仍提调前职，大振纲纪，中外肃然。
现代文：至元四年晋升为御史大夫，仍兼任前职，他大振朝纲，中外肃然。
English: In the 4th year of the 1st century, he was promoted to goshi daifu, still holding his previous position. He greatly improved the morning program, and was admired by people at home and abroad.

古文：扈从上都还，至鸡鸣山之浑河，帝将畋于保安州，马蹶。
现代文：跟随文宗自上都返回，至鸡鸣山之浑河，文宗将在保安州举行围猎，其所乘之马突然惊蹶。
English: Following Wenzong back from Shangdu, to the Hunhe River of Jining Mountain, Wenzong will hold a hunt in the security state, and the horse he is riding suddenly panics.

古文：脱脱谏曰： 古者帝王端居九重之上，日与大臣宿儒讲求治道，至于飞鹰走狗，非其事也。 
现代文：脱脱劝谏道 ：古时帝王端居九重之上，每日与大臣宿儒探求治国安邦之道，至于飞鹰走狗，实非帝王所为之事。 
English: Escape from the path of persuasion: In ancient times, emperors ranked higher than nobles, and daily explored the way of governing the country and securing the nation with ministers. As for the eagle running dogs, it was really not the emperor who did it.

古文：帝纳其言，授金紫光禄大夫，兼绍熙宣抚使。
现代文：文宗听从了他的劝告，授予他金紫光禄大夫，兼绍熙宣抚使。
English: Wenzong heeded his advice and awarded him the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor and the title of Shaoxi Envoy.

古文：是时，其伯父伯颜为中书右丞相，既诛唐其势，益无所忌，擅爵人，赦死罪，任邪佞，杀无辜，诸卫精兵收为己用，府库钱帛听其出纳。帝积不能平。
现代文：唐其势谋反被诛以后，中书右丞相伯颜专权，用奸邪小人，擅自封官授爵，滥杀无辜，诸卫精兵由他指挥，府库钱帛由他使用，皇帝对此忿忿不满，但无对策。
English: After Tang was arrested for plotting a rebellion, the emperor was furious and dissatisfied, but had no solution. He used the evil villain Bo Yan, appointed officials and knighted people without authorization, and killed innocent people indiscriminately. He commanded the guards and used the treasury money.

古文：脱脱虽幼养于伯颜，常忧其败，私请于其父曰： 伯父骄纵已甚，万一天子震怒，则吾族赤矣。
现代文：伯颜是脱脱的伯父，脱脱见伯父如此骄横，十分担心，怕皇上一旦震怒，会株连他们。与父亲商议，父亲也没有主意。
English: Bo Yan was a detached uncle, and seeing his uncle so arrogant, he was very worried, fearing that the emperor would be furious and attack them. When he discussed it with his father, his father had no idea.

古文：曷若于未败图之。 其父以为然，复怀疑久未决。
现代文：这时，皇帝周围都是伯颜的亲党，只有世杰班、阿鲁为心腹，于是脱脱与这两人深交，取得皇帝的信任。
English: At this time, the emperor was surrounded by Bo Yan's relatives, with only Shijiban and Aru as confidants, so he broke away from these two people and gained the emperor's trust.

古文：质之直方，直方曰： 《传》有之， 大义灭亲 。
现代文：皇帝委任他们三人商讨政事。
English: The emperor appointed the three of them to discuss political affairs.

古文：大夫但知忠于国家耳，余复何顾焉。 
现代文：至元五年秋，河南范孟假借名义杀死省臣，这事牵连到廉访使段辅。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Henan Fan Meng killed a provincial minister under a false name, which implicated the unlicensed envoy Duan Fu.

古文：脱脱度不能遏，谋于直方。直方曰： 此祖宗法度，决不可废，盍先为上言之？ 
现代文：伯颜以此为口实，说汉人不能任廉访使，脱脱以其事请教老师吴直方。吴直方说 ：廉访使任用汉人是祖宗定的制度，决不可废，何不先去告诉皇上。 
English: Taking this as an excuse, Bo Yan said that the Han people could not be appointed as unlicensed envoys, and asked his teacher Wu Naofang for help. Wu Naofang said: The system of appointing unlicensed envoys to the Han people was established by the ancestors, and must not be abandoned. Why not tell the emperor first?

古文：脱脱入告于帝，及章上，帝如脱脱言。
现代文：脱脱把这话作为自己的意见上奏皇帝，顺帝接受，拒绝了伯颜废汉人为廉访使的奏章。
English: Zhu De took this as his own opinion to appeal to the emperor, Shun Di accepted, and rejected Bo Yan's appeal to discard Han as a clandestine envoy.

古文：伯颜知出于脱脱，大怒，言于帝曰： 脱脱虽臣之子，其心专佑汉人，必当治之。 
现代文：伯颜知道是脱脱的主意，认为他是偏袒汉人，请皇帝治罪，皇帝说： 此皆朕意，脱脱无罪。 
English: Bo Yan knew that it was Zhu De's idea, and thought that he was favoring the Han people, and asked the emperor to punish the crime. The emperor said: This is all my intention, Zhu De is not guilty.

古文：帝曰： 此皆朕意，非脱脱罪也。 及伯颜擅贬宣让、威顺二王，帝不胜其忿，决意逐之。一日，泣语脱脱，脱脱亦泣下，归与直方谋。直方曰： 此宗社安危所系，不可不密。
现代文：后来伯颜又擅贬宣让、威顺二王，顺帝非常忿恨，决心撤伯颜之职，把这打算告诉了脱脱，脱脱回去向老师吴直方请教，直方说： 此事关系到社稷安危，必须严格保密。 
English: Later, Bo Yan also arbitrarily dethroned the two kings, Xuan Zhan and Wei Shun. Shun Emperor was very angry and determined to remove Bo Yan's post. He told this plan to Zhuodu, and Zhuodu went back to his teacher Wu Naofang for advice. Naofang said: This matter is related to social security and must be strictly confidential.

古文：详见《伯颜传》中。事定，诏以马紥儿台为中书右丞相；脱脱知枢密院事，虎符，忠翊卫亲军都指挥使，提调武备寺、阿速卫千户所，兼绍熙等处军民宣抚都总使、宣忠兀罗思护卫亲军都指挥使司达鲁花赤、昭功万户府都总使。
现代文：第二年二月在脱脱、世杰班及阿鲁等人的谋划下，终于从朝廷中赶走了伯颜，任命马札儿台为中书右丞相，脱脱为知枢密院事，佩虎符，兼忠诩卫亲军都指挥使，统领武备寺、阿速卫千户所，又兼任绍熙等处军民宣抚都总使、宣忠兀罗思护卫亲军都指挥使司达鲁花赤、昭功万户府都总使。
English: In February of the following year, under the planning of Zhu Degu, Shijiban and Aru, he finally drove away Bo Yan from the imperial court, appointed Mazardai as the Minister of the Right of the Central Government, Zhu Degu as the Secretary of the Privy Council, Pei Hu Fu, and Zhong Xuanwei as the commander of the pro-military forces, commanding the Wubi Temple and the Ahowi Thousand Households, and also serving as the general envoy of the army and the people of the army and the people to the capital, the general envoy of the pro-military forces to the capital, the general envoy of the pro-military forces to

古文：十月，马紥儿台移疾辞相位，诏以太师就第。
现代文：同年十月，马扎儿台因病辞去中书右丞相的职务。
English: In October of the same year, Mazartai resigned from the post of Vice-Minister of Education and Culture due to illness.

古文：至正元年，遂命脱脱为中书右丞相、录军国重事，诏天下。脱脱乃悉更伯颜旧政，复科举取士法，复行太庙四时祭，雪郯王彻彻秃之冤，召还宣让、威顺二王，使居旧藩，以阿鲁图正亲王之位，开马禁，减盐额，蠲负逋，又开经筵，遴选儒臣以劝讲，而脱脱实领经筵事。中外翕然称为贤相。二年五月，用参议孛罗帖木儿等言，于都城外开河置闸，放金口水，欲引通州船至丽正门，役丁夫数万，讫无成功。事见《河渠志》。三年，诏修辽、金、宋三史，命脱脱为都总裁官。
现代文：脱脱任丞相后，完全改革伯颜的弊政，恢复科举制度和太庙四时祭祀的礼仪，昭雪郯王彻彻秃之冤，召还宣让、威顺二王，放开马禁，减少政府征收食盐定额，免除人民所欠赋税，挑选儒臣为皇帝讲解经书，脱脱亲自主持其事，天下都称赞他为贤相。二年五月采纳参议孛罗帖木儿等人的建议，在都城外开河设闸，放金口水，计划使通州的船能驶至丽正门，虽征调了数以万计民工，但未成功，详见《河渠志》。至正三年，顺帝命修纂《辽史》、《金史》和《宋史》，以脱脱为都总裁官。
English: After he was relieved of his duties as chancellor, he completely reformed the bad politics of Bo Yan, restored the imperial examination system and the four-hour ritual of the imperial temple, cleared the wrongs of King Xueliang, recalled the two kings Xuan Zheng and Wei Shun, lifted the horse ban, reduced the government's salt quota, exempted the people from taxes, selected a Confucian scholar to be the emperor to explain the scriptures, and got rid of his relatives to handle the matter independently, and the world praised him as a wise man. In May of the second year, he adopted the suggestion of councillor Jiro Timur and others to open the river outside the capital,

古文：脱脱力请俱行，在道则阅骑乘庐帐，食则视其品之精粗。
现代文：脱脱又奏请修纂《至正条格》颁行天下。四年，脱脱主持宣政院事，因多病，上表请辞丞相职，文宗不准。
English: In four years, he presided over the Xuan Zheng Academy of Sciences. Due to his many illnesses, he was asked to resign from the post of minister of education, and he was not allowed to teach literature.

古文：及至其地，马紥儿台安之。
现代文：上表十七次才批准辞职。顺帝封他为郑王，赐河南安丰县为他的私属领地，赏银万两。
English: Emperor Shun made him King Zheng and gave him the private territory of Anfeng County in Henan Province, with a reward of 10,000 taels of silver.

古文：复移西域撒思之地，至河，召还甘州就养。
现代文：脱脱均辞不受。七年，别儿怯不花为右丞相，把脱脱迁居甘肃，又准备移居西域撒思之地，未到就被召还到甘州。
English: For seven years, Be'er Qiu did not spend time as the Minister of the Right, moved the escape to Gansu, and also prepared to move to the west to the land of Sassi, but was called back to Gansu before he arrived.

古文：十一月，马紥儿台薨。帝念脱脱勋劳，召还京师。
现代文：同年十一月，文宗念脱脱昔日的功勋，召回京师。
English: In November of the same year, Wenzong wanted to get rid of his former merits and recalled the Beijing division.

古文：八年，命脱脱为太傅，提调宫傅，综理东宫之事。
现代文：八年任命脱脱为太傅、提调宫傅，管理东宫事务。
English: In 8 years, he was appointed as Taifu and Tidanggu Fu to manage the affairs of the East Palace.

古文：时开端本堂，皇太子学于其中，命脱脱领端本堂事。又提调阿速、钦察二卫、内史府、宣政院、太医院事。
现代文：九年，任命为中书右丞相，同时又主持端本堂的事务，并兼顾阿速、钦察二卫，内史府、宣政院、太医院诸机构事务。
English: In the ninth year, he was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Right for Chinese Literature, and at the same time presided over the affairs of the end of the hall, and also took care of the affairs of Ahau, Qinzha Erwei, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Xuan Zheng Yuan, and Tai Hospital.

古文：十年五月，居母蓟国夫人忧。帝遣近臣喻之，俾出理庶务。
现代文：至正十年五月，脱脱因母亲蓟国夫人去世守丧在家，顺帝遣身边臣僚劝脱脱出来管理政务。
English: In May of the tenth year of the Taisho era, Emperor Shun sent his ministers to persuade him to come out and manage government affairs, as Emperor Shuntoku was at home mourning the death of his mother, Lady Shinkoku.

古文：于是脱脱用乌古孙良桢、龚伯遂、汝中柏、伯帖木儿等为僚属，皆委以腹心之寄，小大之事悉与之谋，事行而群臣不知也。
现代文：脱脱任用乌古孙良桢、龚伯遂、汝中柏、伯帖木儿等为僚属，大小事务都同这些人商议。吏部尚书亻契哲笃建议改行至正交钞，脱脱同意。
English: He appointed Wukusun Liangyao, Zibo Sui, Ruzhongbao, Bo Tiemu'er and others as his subordinates, and consulted with them on all matters, large and small. Shangshu Jiezhe, the director of the Personnel Department, suggested that the bank should change to legal tender banknotes, and he agreed to the change.

古文：于是天子嘉其功，赐世袭答剌罕之号。又敕儒臣欧阳玄制《河平碑》以载其功。
现代文：皇帝命召集枢密院、御史台、翰林院、集贤院的臣僚讨论，大家都唯唯诺诺，只有祭酒吕思诚表示反对，脱脱很不高兴。决定改行至正交钞，但终未能行。这年，黄河决白茅堤，又决金堤，周围数千里内人民均受其害。
English: By order of the emperor, the ministers of the Privy Council, the Imperial Historian's Office, the Hanlin Academy, and the Jixian Academy were convened to discuss the matter. All of them were agreeable. Only the sacrificial wine Lu Sichen expressed opposition, and he was very unhappy to get rid of it. It was decided to change the line to the official banknote, but in the end it could not be done. In this year, the Yellow River broke through the whitewashed dike and the golden dike, and the people within thousands of miles around suffered from it.

古文：仍赐淮安路为其食邑，郡邑长吏听其自用。
现代文：脱脱采用贾鲁的计划来治理，并亲自主持其事，力排众议。
English: Get rid of the use of Jaru's plan to govern, and take matters into their own hands, and strive to exclude public discussion.

古文：已而汝、颍之间妖寇聚众反，以红巾为号，襄、樊、唐、邓皆起而应之。
现代文：奏请朝廷任命贾鲁为工部尚书，总管治河工程，征调大河南北人民十七万，历经八个月，最后决口被堵住了，河水沿故道东流。顺帝大加嘉赏，赐脱脱世袭 答剌罕 的称号，并令儒臣欧阳玄制《河平碑》以载其功。不久，汝、颍之间红巾起义反元。
English: He petitioned the imperial court to appoint Jialu as the secretary of the Ministry of Works, the general manager of the river control project, and conscripted and transferred 170,000 people from the north and south of the great river. After eight months, the final breach was blocked, and the river flowed east along the old road. Emperor Shun gave him a great commendation, gave him the title of escaping the hereditary problem, and ordered the scholar Ouyang Xuan to make the "Heping Monument" to record his achievements. Soon, the Red Scarf Uprising broke out between you and Zou.

古文：十一年，脱脱乃奏以弟御史大夫也先帖木儿为知枢密院事，将诸卫兵十余万讨之。克上蔡。
现代文：至正十一年脱脱奏请以其弟御史大夫也先帖木儿为知枢密院事，领诸卫兵十余万讨伐，攻克上蔡。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taisei era, he asked his younger brother, Goshi Daifu, to lead more than a hundred thousand guards in a crusade to conquer Shang Cai.

古文：既而驻兵沙河，军中夜惊。也先帖木儿尽弃军资器械，北奔汴梁，收散卒，屯朱仙镇。
现代文：元军屯驻沙河，突然士兵惊闹，也先帖木儿慌乱中抛弃军械北奔汴梁，然后收集逃散士卒屯驻朱仙镇。
English: The former army was stationed in Shahe. Suddenly, the soldiers made a commotion. First, Timur abandoned his military equipment in the panic and fled to Beipenqiliang, and then he collected the escaped soldiers and stationed them in Zhuxian Town.

古文：朝廷以也先帖木儿不习兵，诏别将代之。
现代文：朝廷见也先帖木儿不善带兵，另遣将代替。
English: The imperial court also saw that Timur was not good at leading soldiers, and another envoy would replace him.

古文：帝遣中书平章政事普化等即军中命脱脱为太师，依前右丞相，趣还朝，而以枢密院同知秃赤等进师平颍、亳。
现代文：陕西行台监察御史十二人弹劾也先帖木儿丧师辱国。脱脱大怒，把西行台御史大夫朵儿直班调任湖广行省平章政事，御史贬为各府判官，从此再无人敢言。至正十二年，红巾军芝麻李占据徐州，脱脱请求自己率兵镇压。九月元军围攻徐州，红巾军寡不敌众，退走。
English: The impeachment of the twelve inspectors of Shaanxi and Taiwan also led to the death of Timur and the humiliation of the country. Out of great anger, he transferred the westbound inspector of Taiwan, Dr. Dole, to the direct shift of the government of Pingzhang, Huguang Province, and the inspector was demoted to the judge of each prefecture. From then on, no one dared to speak. By the twelfth year, the Red Scarf Army of Zhima Li occupied Xuzhou, and the escape requested the suppression of their own soldiers. In September, the Yuan Army besieged Xuzhou, and the Red Scarf Army was outnumbered and

古文：师还，赐上尊、珠衣、白金、宝鞍。
现代文：皇帝派中书平章政事普化去脱脱军中慰劳，命脱脱仍为右丞相，催他还朝，另命枢密院同知秃赤等进军颍、亳，追剿红巾军。
English: The emperor sent Zhongshu Pingzhang Zhengji Puhua to escape from the consolation of the army. He was still the minister of the right and urged him to return to the imperial court. In addition, he ordered the Privy Council to march into the Red Scarf Army.

古文：皇太子锡燕于私第。
现代文：脱脱还朝后，皇太子赐宴款待他。
English: After he was restored to the throne, the crown prince gave him a banquet and entertained him.

古文：诏改徐州为武安州，而立碑以著其绩。
现代文：皇上命改徐州为武安州，立碑以表彰脱脱的功绩。
English: The emperor ordered to change Xuzhou to Wu'an, and erected a monument to commend the achievements of breaking away.

古文：十三年三月，脱脱用左丞乌古孙良桢、右丞悟良哈台议，屯田京畿，以二人兼大司农卿，而脱脱领大司农事。西至西山，东至迁民镇，南至保定、河间，北至檀、顺州，皆引水利，立法佃种，岁乃大稔。
现代文：至正十三年三月，脱脱采纳左丞乌古孙良桢、右丞悟良哈台的建议，在京畿屯田，以此二人兼任大司农卿，他自己领导大司农的工作，于是西到西山，东到迁民镇，南至保定、河间，北至檀州、顺州，引水灌田，获得丰收。
English: In March of the thirteenth year of the Taisho era, he adopted the suggestion of the left-hand senator, Ugusun Ryosho, and the right-hand senator, Goryo Hatai, and in Gyeonggi Tunden, the two of them concurrently served as the chief secretary of agriculture, and he himself led the work of the chief secretary of agriculture. He then went to the west to Xishan, to the east to Qimen Town, to the south to Baoding and Haenam, to the north to Danzhou and Shunzhou, and to water irrigation fields, and obtained a bumper harvest.

古文：十四年，张士诚据高邮，屡招谕之不降。
现代文：至正十四年，张士诚起兵反元，占据高邮。
English: In the 14th year of the Taisho era, Zhang Shicheng raised an army against Yuan and occupied Gaoyou.

古文：诏脱脱总制诸王诸省军讨之。黜陟予夺一切庶政，悉听便宜行事；省台院部诸司，听选官属从行，禀受节制。
现代文：朝廷命脱脱总领诸王诸省大军征讨，凡官吏之升降予夺，均可自行处置；省、台、院、部各衙门的官员，可任意挑选作为随从，均受他节制。
English: The general leaders of the kings and provinces of the armies of the imperial court are exempted from the command of the imperial court, and all officials can be promoted and demoted at their own discretion; officials of the provinces, Taiwan, the imperial court and the ministry can be arbitrarily selected as followers, and they are all subject to his restraint.

古文：西域、西番皆发兵来助。
现代文：西域、西蕃皆发兵来助。
English: The western region and Xidi all sent troops to help.

古文：旌旗累千里，金鼓震野，出师之盛，未有过之者。
现代文：大军浩浩荡荡，旌旗蔽空，金鼓震地，军威之盛未有超过此次者。
English: The vast army is boisterous, the banner is covered by the sky, the golden drum is the epicenter, and the military power has not exceeded this time.

古文：辛未至乙酉，连战皆捷。
现代文：十一月，元军至高邮，连战皆捷。
English: In November, the Yuan army advanced to Gaoyou, and they were victorious in all their battles.

古文：分遣兵平六合，贼势大蹙。
现代文：又分兵六合，张士诚的势力大为削弱。
English: In addition, Zhang Shicheng's forces were greatly weakened.

古文：俄有诏罪其老师费财，以河南行省左丞相太不花、中书平章政事月阔察儿、知枢密院事雪雪代将其兵，削其官爵，安置淮安。
现代文：忽然诏责脱脱在江南用兵日久，军费消耗太多，以河南行省左丞相太不花、中书平章政事月阔察儿、知枢密院事雪雪代领其兵，削其官爵，令居淮安。
English: All of a sudden, Emperor Taizong ordered Zhu De to use soldiers in the south of the Yangtze River for a long time, and the military expenditure was too much, so he used Henan Province as the capital of the province, Pingzhang as the capital of the province, Guo Zhaer as the capital of the province, Zhixue as the capital of the province, Zhixue as the capital of the province, and He Xuexue as the capital of the province.

古文：会也先帖木儿方移疾家居，监察御史袁赛因不花等承哈麻风旨，上章劾之，三奏乃允；夺御史台印，出都门外听旨，以汪家奴为御史大夫；而脱脱亦有淮安之命。十二月辛亥，诏至军中，参议龚伯遂曰： 将在军，君命有所不受。
现代文：在此之前，脱脱听信汝中柏的谗言，与哈麻不和，哈麻指使监察御史袁赛因不花三次上章弹劾脱脱之弟御史大夫也先帖木儿。皇帝诏令夺也先帖木儿御史台印及脱脱的兵权。十二月二十四日，诏书到达军中，参议龚伯遂抗旨曰 ：将在外，君命有所不受。
English: Prior to this, Decheng listened to the advice of Xinren Zhongbo and did not get along with Hama. Hama instructed the Inspector of Imperial History Yuan Sai to impeach Decheng's brother, Imperial Historian Dr. Timur, because it did not take three chapters to impeach Decheng's brother. The emperor's edict also deprived Timur of the imperial seal and Decheng's military power. On December 24, the edict arrived in the army, and the councillor said: "I will be outside, I will not accept the king's order."

古文：客省副使哈剌答曰： 丞相此行，我辈必死他人之手，今日宁死丞相前。 
现代文：且丞相出师时，系奉密旨。今奉旨进军则可。请暂不要宣布诏书，若一宣布则剿贼之事就此了结。 脱脱道： 抗旨不从，是与天子对抗，有失君臣之义。 
English: In addition, when the prime minister was dispatched, it was by secret order. Now, it is possible to march by order. Please do not announce the imperial edict for the time being, if you announce it, the matter of the thief will be over. Escape route: If you do not follow the order, it is a confrontation with the Son of Heaven, and you will lose the righteousness of the monarchs and ministers.

古文：拔刀刎颈而死。初命脱脱安置淮安，俄有旨移置亦集乃路。
现代文：他接受了朝廷的处置，奉命居于淮安，不久又迁居于亦集乃路。
English: He accepted the disposition of the imperial court, was ordered to live in Huai'an, and soon moved to Tsuchino Road.

古文：十五年三月，台臣犹以谪轻，列疏其兄弟之罪，于是诏流脱脱于云南大理宣慰司镇西路，流也先帖木儿于四川碉门。
现代文：十五年三月，御史台官员们还认为对脱脱贬谪漠北是惩罚太轻，又罗列其兄弟罪状上报。于是朝廷又把脱脱贬到云南大理宣慰司镇西路，把其弟也先帖木儿流放到四川碉门。
English: In March of the fifteenth year, the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office also thought that the punishment for the defection of Qu Mubei was too light, and listed the crimes of his brothers for reporting. Therefore, the imperial court also deported Qu Qu to the west road of Xuanjie Town, Dali, Yunnan, and first deported his younger brother, Timur, to Qimen, Sichuan.

古文：脱脱长子哈剌章，肃州安置；次子三宝奴，兰州安置。
现代文：把脱脱的长子哈剌章遣送到肃州，次子三宝奴遣送到兰州，家产没官。
English: The eldest son, Haruzhang, was sent to Suzhou, and the second son, Sanbao, was sent to Lanzhou. There was no official record of the family property.

古文：家产簿录入官。脱脱行至大理腾冲，知府高惠见脱脱，欲以女事之，许筑室一程外以居，虽有加害者可以无虞。
现代文：脱脱行至大理腾冲，知府高惠欲将女儿嫁给脱脱为妻，并答应在一程之外建房居住，免遭人迫害。脱脱谢绝。
English: After escaping to Dali Tengchong, Gao Hui, the prefectural governor, wanted to marry his daughter to escape as a wife, and promised to build a house to live in one mile away to avoid persecution. Escape declined.

古文：九月，遣官移置阿轻乞之地，高惠以脱脱前不受其女，故首发铁甲军围之。
现代文：九月，又把脱脱迁到阿轻乞地方。高惠因脱脱不受其女为妻，怀怨于心，发铁甲军包围脱脱住地。
English: In September, Gao Hui moved to Aqianqian again. Because Gao Hui did not accept his daughter as his wife, he harbored resentment, and the Iron Armored Army surrounded his place of residence.

古文：十二月己未，哈麻矫诏遣使鸩之，死，年四十二。
现代文：十二月八日，哈麻假传圣旨，遣使令脱脱服毒自尽。
English: On December 8th, he issued an order to rid himself of the poison and commit suicide.

古文：功施社稷而不伐，位极人臣而不骄，轻货财，远声色，好贤礼士，皆出于天性。至于事君之际，始终不失臣节，虽古之有道大臣，何以过之。
现代文：这时脱脱才四十二岁。脱脱体魄雄伟，见识远大。有功于国家而不自夸，职位最高却不骄傲。不好货财声色，而好礼贤下士。在为君效忠时，始终不失做臣之道，虽古之有道大臣，何人能超过他？
English: At this time, Decheng was only forty-two years old. Decheng was physically majestic and far-sighted. He did not boast of his services to the country, but he was not proud of the highest position. He was not rich, but he was a courteous corporal. When he was loyal to you, he always did not lose the way of being a minister, although he was a minister of the old way, who could surpass him?

古文：惟其惑于群小，急复私仇，君子讥焉。
现代文：但为小人所惑，急报私仇，因而遭到有德行人的讥笑。
English: However, he was tricked by a villain and quickly took up a personal vendetta, and was ridiculed by people of virtue as a result.

古文：二十二年，监察御史张冲等上章雪其冤，于是诏复脱脱官爵，并给复其家产。召哈剌章、三宝奴还朝。
现代文：至正二十二年，监察御史张冲等，上书为脱脱雪冤。朝廷恢复了脱脱的官爵，归还没收的家产，召其子哈剌章与三宝奴还朝，分别授予中书平章政事和知枢密院事。
English: By the 22nd year of the Heian period, Zhang Chong, the inspector of imperial history, and others, submitted a petition to get rid of the snow. The imperial court restored the knighthoods who got rid of the snow, returned the confiscated family property, summoned his son Haruzhang and Sanbao to return to the imperial court, and awarded the government affairs and the privy council affairs respectively.

古文：二十六年，监察御史圣奴、也先、撒都失里等复言： 奸邪构害大臣，以致临敌易将，我国家兵机不振从此始，钱粮之耗从此始，盗贼纵横从此始，生民之涂炭从此始。
现代文：二十六年，监察御史圣奴、也先、撒都失里等，再次上书力陈奸邪陷害大臣，以致临阵易帅，使我国家军力不振，盗贼纵横。奏请朝廷对脱脱封王爵，定称号。朝廷都同意，但还未来得及办理，元朝就灭亡了。
English: In the 26th year, the inspector of the imperial history, the saintly slave, and first, the Sadducee, lost his way, and again sent a letter to the old traitor, the evil, and the framed minister, so that the battle was easy, so that the country's military strength was weak, and the thieves were rampant. Reported to the court to remove the title of the prince. The court agreed, but there was still time to deal with it, and the Yuan Dynasty was destroyed.

