古文：◎宗室安平献王孚彭城穆王权高密文献王泰济南惠王遂谯刚王逊
现代文：◎宗室安平献王孚彭城穆王权高密文献王泰济南惠王遂谯刚王逊
English: ◎ Anping's ancestral home offered Wang Fu, Pengcheng, Mu, Wang Quan, high-secret documents, Wang Taiji, Nan Hui, Wang Sui, Wang Gang, and Wang Xun

古文：安平献王孚，字叔达，宣帝次弟也。
现代文：安平献王司马孚字叔达，是宣帝的次弟。
English: Anping Xianwang Sima Fu, also known as Shuda, was the second brother of Emperor Xuan.

古文：初，孚长兄朗字伯达，宣帝字仲达，孚弟馗字季达，恂字显达，进字惠达，通字雅达，敏字幼达，俱知名，故时号为 八达 焉。
现代文：当初，司马孚的长兄司马朗字伯达，宣帝字仲达，司马孚弟司马馗字季达，司马恂字显达，司马进字惠达，司马通字雅达，司马敏字幼达，都有名气，因而当时号称 八达 。
English: At the beginning, Sima Fu's eldest brother Sima Lang's name was Boda, Xuan Di's name was Zhongda, Sima Fu's younger brother Sima Yao's name was Ji Da, Sima Yao's name was Xanda, Sima Jin's name was Huida, Sima Tong's name was Yada, and Sima Min's name was Yuda. All of them were famous, so they were known as Bada at that time.

古文：孚温厚廉让，博涉经史。
现代文：司马孚温和敦厚正直谦让，广泛阅读经典史籍。
English: Sima Fu is mild-mannered, honest and humble, and reads a wide range of classic historical books.

古文：汉末丧乱，与兄弟处危亡之中，箪食瓢饮，而披阅不倦。
现代文：汉朝末年丧亡动乱，与兄弟处于危亡之中，粗茶淡饭，而披阅不知疲倦。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, he was killed in the turmoil, and he and his brother were in danger of death. He ate plain food and read tirelessly.

古文：性通恕，以贞白自立，未尝有怨于人。
现代文：性格开通宽容，以贞洁清白作为立身之本，从没与别人结怨。
English: She is open-minded and tolerant, with chastity and innocence as the foundation of her life, and has never held a grudge against others.

古文：陈留殷武有名于海内，尝罹罪谴，孚往省之，遂与同处分食，谈者称焉。
现代文：陈留人殷武在国内闻名，曾经遭受刑罚，司马孚去探望他，于是就与他同吃同住，谈论的人称道此事。
English: Chen Liu Ren Yinwu is famous in the country. He was once punished. Sima Fu went to visit him, so he ate and lived with him. The people who talked about this praised the matter.

古文：魏陈思王植有俊才，清选官属，以孚为文学掾。
现代文：魏陈思王曹植有超人的才干，精选官属，任命司马孚为文学掾。
English: Wei Chen Si Wang Cao planted a superhuman talent, selected officials and appointed Sima Fu as a literary gong.

古文：植负才陵物，孚每切谏，初不合意，后乃谢之。
现代文：曹植仗着才干凌驾于人，司马孚常常诚恳地劝谏，起初不合曹植的心意，后来才向他认错。
English: Cao Zhi was superior to others by virtue of his talent, and Sima Fu often earnestly advised him. At first, he did not agree with Cao Zhi's intention, but later he admitted his mistake.

古文：迁太子中庶子。
现代文：迁任太子中庶子。
English: He is an illegitimate son of the crown prince.

古文：魏武帝崩，太子号哭过甚，孚谏曰： 大行晏驾，天下恃殿下为命。
现代文：魏武帝去世，太子号哭得太厉害，司马孚劝谏说： 皇帝去世，天下仗着殿下您来发布命令。
English: When Emperor Weiwu died, the crown prince cried so hard that Sima Fu advised him, "Since the emperor has passed away, the world is depending on you to issue an order."

古文：当上为宗庙，下为万国，奈何效匹夫之孝乎！ 
现代文：应当上为宗庙，下为各封国，为什么效仿平民的孝道呢! 
English: It should be the ancestral temple at the top and the fiefdoms at the bottom. Why follow the filial piety of the common people?

古文：太子良久乃止，曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：太子好一会儿才止住哭，说： 你说得对。 
English: The prince could not stop crying for a long time before he said, "You are right.

古文：时群臣初闻帝崩，相聚号哭，无复行列。
现代文：当时群臣刚听说皇帝去世，聚在一起号哭，不再成行列。
English: At that time, the courtiers had just heard that the emperor had died, gathered together and cried, and no longer lined up.

古文：孚厉声于朝曰： 今大行晏驾，天下震动，当早拜嗣君，以镇海内，而但哭邪！ 
现代文：司马孚在朝廷上厉声说： 如今皇帝去世，天下震动，应该及早拜继位的国君，来镇抚海内，祇是哭就行了吗! 
English: Sima Fu snapped at the imperial court: "Now that the emperor has passed away, the whole world is shaken. It is time to pay homage to the heir to the throne, to calm the seas. Is it enough just to cry?"

古文：孚与尚书和洽罢群臣，备禁卫，具丧事，奉太子以即位，是为文帝。
现代文：司马孚与尚书和洽解散群臣，设置禁卫，完成丧事，拥戴太子即位，也就是文帝。
English: Sima Fu and Shang Shu made peace and disbanded the ministers, set up the guards, completed the funeral, and supported the enthronement of the prince, that is, Emperor Wen.

古文：时当选侍中、常侍等官，太子左右旧人颇讽谕主者，便欲就用，不调余人。
现代文：当时正在选侍中、常侍等官，太子身边的旧人不时地暗示主事的人，打算就任用他们自己，不再征调其他人。
English: At that time, officials such as attendants and regular attendants were being selected. From time to time, the old men around the prince hinted at the person in charge, intending to appoint themselves and no longer recruit others.

古文：孚曰： 虽有尧舜，必有稷契。
现代文：司马孚说： 虽然有了尧舜，还一定少不了稷契。
English: Sima Fu said: Although there is a yakitori, there must be a yakitori contract.

古文：今嗣君新立，当进用海内英贤，犹患不得，如何欲因际会自相荐举邪！官失其任，得者亦不足贵。 
现代文：如今新君才即位，应该进用海内英才贤士，尚且还怕得不到，怎能想利用时机来自相推荐举用呢做官不称职，得到官位也不足以令人尊重。 
English: Now that a new prince has ascended to the throne, we should make use of the domestic talents and sages. Even if we are afraid of not being able to get them, how can we take advantage of the opportunity to make use of them? Being an official is not competent, and getting an official position is not enough to be respected.

古文：遂更他选。
现代文：于是另外推选。
English: As a result, another election was held.

古文：转孚为中书郎、给事常侍，宿省内，除黄门侍郎，加骑都尉。
现代文：转授司马孚为中书郎、给事常侍，住宿在官署内，又拜任黄门侍郎，加任骑都尉。
English: Sima Fu was transferred to the position of Chushiro, and became a regular attendant, staying at the government office. He was also appointed to the position of Huangmen attendant, as well as the position of cavalry captain.

古文：时孙权称籓，请送任子，当遣前将军于禁还，久而不至。
现代文：当时孙权对魏自称属国，请求送人质入魏，应当遣送魏的前将军于禁回魏，很久人还不到。
English: At that time, Sun Quan claimed to be a vassal state to Wei, and requested that hostages be sent to Wei, and that Wei's former generals should be sent back to Wei, but no one came for a long time.

古文：天子以问孚，孚曰： 先王设九服之制，诚以要荒难以德怀，不以诸夏礼责也。
现代文：天子向司马孚问此事，司马孚说： 先王设下了九服的制度，是诚心用仁德的胸怀来要求荒远的地域，而不用中原的礼去责求。
English: Tianzi asked Sima Fu about this, and Sima Fu said: The previous king set up the nine-clothes system, and he sincerely used his benevolence to ask for the desolate regions, instead of using the Central Plains to ask.

古文：陛下承绪，远人率贡。
现代文：陛下继承帝位，远方的人服从进贡。
English: His Majesty will succeed to the throne, and people from far away will pay tribute.

古文：权虽未送任子，于禁不至，犹宜以宽待之，畜养士马，以观其变。
现代文：孙权虽没送来人质，于禁也没回来，可还是应该以宽厚对待他们。蓄积兵士马匹，观察事态的变化。
English: Although Sun Quan did not send the hostages and Yu Han did not return, they should still be treated with leniency. Stockpile soldiers and horses and observe changes in the situation.

古文：不可以嫌疑责让，恐伤怀远之义。
现代文：不能因为嫌疑而责怪，那样恐怕会有伤感怀远方人的大义。
English: You can't blame them for being suspicious, because that would be a sentimental view of distant people's righteousness.

古文：自孙策至权，奕世相继，惟强与弱，不在一禁，禁之未至，当有他故耳。 
现代文：从孙策到孙权，累世相继承，力量的强舆弱，不在于一个于禁。于禁没到，应当是有其他缘故。 
English: From Sun Ce to Sun Quan, the succession of generations, the strength of the strong and the weakness of the weak, does not lie in the ban. If the ban did not come, there should be other reasons.

古文：后禁至，果以疾迟留，而任子竟不至。
现代文：后来于禁回到了魏。果然是因为有病而滞留，然而人质始终没送来。
English: Later, Yu Han returned to Wei. Sure enough, he stayed because he was ill, but the hostages were never sent.

古文：大军临江，责其违言，吴遂绝不贡献。
现代文：大军开到江边，责备吴国违背诺言，吴于是断绝关系不再贡献。
English: A large army drove to the riverside and accused Wu of reneging on his promise, so Wu broke off relations and no longer contributed.

古文：后出为河内典农，赐爵关内侯，转清河太守。
现代文：此后出任河内典农，赐爵位为关内侯，转任清河太守。
English: After that, he served as a farmer in Hanoi, was given the title of Lord of Guanai, and was transferred to the governor of Qinghe.

古文：初，魏文帝置度支尚书，专掌军国支计，朝议以征讨未息，动须节量。
现代文：当初，魏文帝设置度支尚书，专门掌管军队国家的支出计划，朝廷的议论认为征战讨伐没有平息，举措必须节约。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wei Wendi set up the General Office of the People's Commissariat of War, which was specifically in charge of the country's military expenditure plan. The discussion in the imperial court was that the war effort had not subsided, and measures had to be economized.

古文：及明帝嗣位，欲用孚，问左右曰： 有兄风不？ 
现代文：等到明帝继承君位，打算任用司马孚，问左右的人说： 有他兄长的风范吗? 
English: When Emperor Ming came to the throne, he planned to appoint Sima Fu, and asked the people around him, "Is he like his brother?"

古文：答云： 似兄。 
现代文：回答说： 像他兄长。 
English: And he said, Like his brother.

古文：天子曰： 吾得司马懿二人，复何忧哉！ 
现代文：天子说： 我得到两个司马懿，还有什么忧虑呢! 
English: The son of heaven said: I have gained two Simas, so what is there to worry about?

古文：转为度支尚书。
现代文：司马孚转任度支尚书。
English: Sima Fu's transfer is still pending.

古文：孚以为擒敌制胜，宜有备预。
现代文：司马孚认为擒敌制胜，应有所准备。
English: Sima Fu believes that it is necessary to be prepared in order to defeat the enemy.

古文：每诸葛亮入寇关中，边兵不能制敌，中军奔赴，辄不及事机，宜预选步骑二万，以为二部，为讨贼之备。
现代文：每次诸葛亮入侵关中，边境的军队不能制止敌人，后方军队奔赴边境，就会赶不上战机，应该事先挑选两万步兵骑兵，分成两部分，作为讨伐敌人的预备队。
English: Every time Zhuge Liang invaded Guanzhong, the border troops could not stop the enemy, and the rear troops rushed to the border and could not catch up with the warplanes. Twenty thousand infantry and cavalry should be selected in advance and divided into two parts as a reserve force to fight the enemy.

古文：又以关中连遭贼寇，谷帛不足，遣冀州农丁五千屯于上邽，秋冬习战阵，春夏修田桑。
现代文：司马孚又认为关中连续遭受敌人进犯，谷物布帛不足，派遣冀州农夫五千人在上郢驻扎，秋天冬天演习战阵，春季夏季治理田地桑园。
English: Sima Fu also believed that Guanzhong was continuously attacked by the enemy, grain cloth was insufficient, and 5,000 farmers from Jizhou were dispatched to be stationed in Shangtao. In autumn and winter, they practiced battle formations, and in spring and summer, they managed fields and mulberry gardens.

古文：由是关中军国有余，待贼有备矣。
现代文：从此关中军队国家有了富余，预防入侵有了准备。
English: From then on, the country had a surplus of troops, and preparations were made to prevent an invasion.

古文：后除尚书右仆射，进爵昌平亭侯，迁尚书令。
现代文：此后拜任尚书右仆射，进封爵位为昌平亭侯，迁任尚书令。
English: After that, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shuling, was given the title of Lord of Changpingting, and was transferred to the post of Shang Shuling.

古文：及大将军曹爽擅权，李胜、何晏、邓飏等乱政，孚不视庶事，但正身远害而已。
现代文：等到大将军曹爽专权，李胜、何晏、邓飏等人搞乱政治，司马孚不过问日常政事，衹是端正自身远离祸害而已。
English: By the time General Cao Shuang gained absolute power, and Li Sheng, He Quan, Deng Yao and others had made a mess of politics, Sima Fu did not care about day-to-day politics, he was just trying to keep himself away from the scourge.

古文：及宣帝诛爽，孚与景帝屯司马门，以功进爵长社县侯，加侍中。
现代文：等到宣帝诛杀曹爽，司马孚与景帝驻扎在司马门，因为有功进封爵位为长社县侯，加任侍中。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong killed Cao Shuang, Sima Fu and Emperor Jing were stationed at Sima Gate. Because of his achievements, he was given the title of Lord of Changsha County and was also appointed as an attendant.

古文：时吴将诸葛恪围新城，以孚进督诸军二十万防御之。
现代文：当时吴将诸葛恪包围新城，任命司马孚督统诸军二十万人防御敌军。
English: At that time, Wu encircled Xincheng with Zhuge Ke, and appointed Sima Fu Duc to lead an army of 200,000 people to defend the enemy.

古文：孚次寿春，遣毌丘俭、文钦等进讨。
现代文：司马孚驻扎在寿春，派遣母丘俭、文钦等人进军讨伐。
English: Sima Fu was stationed in Shouchun and sent his mother, Qiu Jian, Wen Qin and others to march in the crusade.

古文：诸将欲速击之，孚曰： 夫攻者，借人之力以为功，且当诈巧，不可力争也。 
现代文：诸将想快速进击，司马孚说： 进攻这种事，要藉对方的力量取得成功，而且应当狡诈巧妙，不能力争。 
English: The generals wanted to make a quick attack, Sima Fu said: "In such a matter as an attack, it is necessary to succeed through the strength of the other side, and it should be cunning and skillful, not competitive.

古文：故稽留月余乃进军，吴师望风而退。
现代文：故意滞留一个多月才进军，吴国军队望风而逃。
English: Deliberately delaying for more than a month before marching in, the Wu army fled before the wind.

古文：魏明悼后崩，议书铭旌，或欲去姓而书魏，或欲两书，孚以为： 经典正义，皆不应书。
现代文：魏明悼后去世，议论如何书写灵柩前的旗幡，有人打算去掉姓而写魏，有人打算姓与魏都写。司马孚认为： 根据经典正义，都不应写。
English: After Wei Ming passed away, there were discussions on how to write the banner in front of the coffin. Some people wanted to remove the surname and write Wei, while others wanted to write both surnames and Wei. Sima Fu thought: According to classical justice, neither should be written.

古文：凡帝王皆因本国之名以为天下之号，而与往代相别耳，非为择美名以自光也。
现代文：凡是帝王都根据本国的名称来作天下的称号，从而与以往的各代相区别，不是为了选择美名来为自己增光。
English: All emperors distinguished themselves from previous generations by naming the world according to the name of their country, not in order to choose a good name to glorify themselves.

古文：天称皇天，则帝称皇帝，地称后土，则后称皇后。
现代文：天称作皇天，则帝称作皇帝；地称作后土，则后称作皇后。
English: Heaven is called the Emperor Heaven, then the Emperor is called the Emperor; the Earth is called the Back Earth, then the Back is called the Queen.

古文：此乃所以同天地之大号，流无二之尊名，不待称国号以自表，不俟称氏族以自彰。
现代文：造就是与天地的大号相同，流传世间没有第二的尊贵名号，不用称国号来自我表明，不用称氏族来自我炫耀的原因。
English: Zong is the same as the great trumpet of heaven and earth. It is said that there is no second noble name in the world. There is no need to say that the country name is self-explanatory, and there is no need to say that the clan is self-explanatory.

古文：是以《春秋》隐公三年《经》曰 三月庚戌天王崩 ，尊而称天，不曰周王者，所以殊乎列国之君也。 八月庚辰宋公和卒 ，书国称名，所以异乎天王也。
现代文：因此《春秋》隐公三年《经》说 三月庚戌天王崩 ，尊敬而称天，不称周王，是为了与列国的国君相区别。 八月庚辰宋公和卒 ，写国号称人名，是为了与天王相区别。
English: Therefore, in the "Spring and Autumn" of the third year of the Hidden Emperor, the "Ching" said that the March Geng Zi Tianwang collapsed, respected and called Heaven, not Zhou Wang, in order to be distinguished from the kings of other countries, and the August Geng Chen Song Gonghe, wrote the country's reputation as a person, in order to be distinguished from the Heavenly King.

古文：襄公十五年《经》曰 刘夏逆王后于齐 ，不云逆周王后姜氏者，所以异乎列国之夫人也。
现代文：襄公十五年《经》说 刘夏在齐迎接王后，不说迎接周王后姜氏，是为了与列国的夫人相区别。
English: In the 15th year of Prince Xiang's reign, the "Book of Songs" said that Liu Xia was in Qi to greet the queen, not to mention to greet the queen of Zhou, Jiang, in order to be distinguished from the wives of other countries.

古文：至乎列国，则曰 夫人姜氏至自齐 ，又曰 纪伯姬卒 ，书国称姓，此所以异乎天王后也。
现代文：至于列国，则说 夫人姜氏从齐来 ，又说 纪伯姬去世 ，写国名称呼姓氏，为的是区别于天王后。
English: As for the countries, it is said that Mrs. Jiang came from Qi, and it is also said that Ji Boji died, writing the name of the country and calling the surname, in order to distinguish from the Queen.

古文：由此考之，尊称皇帝，赫赫无二，何待魏乎？
现代文：由此考证，尊称皇帝，显赫无二，有什么必要写上魏呢?
English: From this study, what is the need to write Wei in the title of the emperor?

古文：尊称皇后，彰以谥号，何待于姓乎？
现代文：尊称皇后，用谧号加以彰明，有什么必要写上姓呢?
English: Why is it necessary to write the surname when the title of the empress is indicated by a nickname?

古文：议者欲书魏者，此以为天皇之尊，同于往古列国之君也。
现代文：议论者中想写上魏的人，自以为表现了天皇的尊贵，其实却与古代列国的国君等同。
English: Among the commentators, those who wanted to write Wei thought that they were expressing the dignity of the emperor, but in fact they were equivalent to the sovereigns of ancient countries.

古文：或欲书姓者，此以为天皇之后，同于往古之夫人也。
现代文：想写上姓氏的人，自以为表现了这是天皇的后妃，其实却与古代的夫人等同。
English: People who want to write their surnames think that they are expressing the empress of the emperor, but in fact they are equated with the ancient lady.

古文：乖经典之大义，异乎圣人之明制，非所以垂训将来，为万世不易之式者也。 
现代文：违背了经典大义，不同于圣人的明确制度，不能为将来留下成训，不能成为万世不变的法式。 
English: It is contrary to the great principles of the classics, and different from the clear system of saints. It cannot be left for the future, and cannot become the eternal French style.

古文：遂从孚议。
现代文：于是依从了司马孚的议论。
English: So he followed Sima Fu's argument.

古文：迁司空。
现代文：迁任司空。
English: Moved to Jikku.

古文：代王凌太尉。
现代文：代替王浚任太尉。
English: In place of Wang Junren, he was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：及蜀将姜维寇陇右，雍州刺史王经战败，遣孚西镇关中，统诸军事。
现代文：等到蜀国将领姜维入侵陇右，雍州刺史王经打了败仗，派遣司马孚去西部镇守关中，统率诸军。
English: When Jiang Wei, the general of Shu, invaded Shannu, Wang Jing, the governor of Yongzhou, was defeated and sent Sima Fu to the western town of Shuguanzhong to lead the army.

古文：征西将军陈泰与安西将军邓艾进击维，维退。
现代文：征西将军陈泰舆安西将军邓艾进军攻打姜维，姜维退兵。
English: Western Conquest General Chen Taiwu and Western Anxi General Deng Ai marched to attack Jiang Wei, and Jiang Wei withdrew.

古文：孚还京师，转太傅。
现代文：司马孚回京城，转任太傅。
English: Sima Fu returned to Beijing and was transferred to Taifu.

古文：及高贵乡公遭害，百官莫敢奔赴，孚枕尸于股，哭之恸，曰： 杀陛下者臣之罪。 
现代文：等到高贵乡公被害，百官没人敢去表示哀悼，司马孚伏在尸体上，哭得很悲痛，说： 杀害陛下是我的罪过。 
English: When the nobleman was killed, none of the officials dared to offer condolences. Sima Fu prostrated himself on the corpse, wept bitterly, and said, "It was my sin to kill Your Majesty."

古文：奏推主者。
现代文：奏请追究主谋的人。
English: Please prosecute the mastermind.

古文：会太后令以庶人礼葬，孚与群公上表，乞以王礼葬，从之。
现代文：适逢太后下令以庶民之礼下葬，司马孚和群公上表，请求以王礼下葬，依从了他们。
English: When the empress dowager ordered the funeral to be conducted with a commoner's rite, Sima Fu and Qun Gong came forward and requested that the funeral be conducted with a royal rite, which they complied with.

古文：孚性至慎。
现代文：司马孚生性非常谨慎。
English: Sima Fu is very cautious by nature.

古文：宣帝执政，常自退损。
现代文：宣帝执政，司马孚经常退让谦抑。
English: When Emperor Xuan was in power, Sima Fu often gave in to modesty.

古文：后逢废立之际，未尝预谋。
现代文：后来在废置确立国君的那段时间，未曾参与谋划。
English: Later, during the period of the abolition and establishment of the sovereign, he did not participate in the planning.

古文：景文二帝以孚属尊，不敢逼。
现代文：景、文两朝皇帝因为司马孚位尊，不敢逼迫他。
English: The emperors of the two dynasties of Jing and Wen did not dare to persecute Sima Fu because of his high rank.

古文：后进封长乐公。
现代文：后来进封为长乐公。
English: Later, Jinfeng became Changle Gong.

古文：及武帝受禅，陈留王就金墉城，孚拜辞，执王手，流涕歔欷，不能自胜。
现代文：等到武帝接受禅让，陈留王去金墉城，司马孚向他告辞，拉着王的手，流泪叹息，不能控制自己的情感。
English: When Emperor Wu accepted the offer of Zen, and Chen Liu Wang left for Jinshan City, Sima Fu bade him farewell, took the king's hand, shed tears and sighed, unable to control his emotions.

古文：曰： 臣死之日，固大魏之纯臣也。 
现代文：说： 到我死的那天，一定要成为大魏的忠臣。 
English: He said, "Until the day I die, I must be a loyal vassal of the Great Wei Dynasty."

古文：诏曰： 太傅勋德弘茂，朕所瞻仰，以光导弘训，镇静宇内，愿奉以不臣之礼。
现代文：诏书说： 太傅功勋道德宏大茂盛，是我所瞻仰的，用以光大辅导弘大的教诲，镇抚清静天下，愿把不必称臣的礼奉送给他。
English: The imperial edict said: Taifu's meritorious deeds and moral virtues are magnificently flourishing. I look up to him. I will use him to give brilliant guidance and great teachings, and to pacify and calm the world. I would like to give him the courtesy of not having to praise him.

古文：其封为安平王，邑四万户。
现代文：封他为安平王，采邑四万户。
English: He was given the title of Anping King and gained 40,000 households.

古文：进拜太宰、持节、都督中外诸军事。 
现代文：进升为太宰、持节、都督中外诸军事。 
English: He was promoted to Dazai, Jisetsu, and the governor of the capital by various military officers.

古文：有司奏，诸王未之国者，所置官属，权未有备。
现代文：官吏奏报，诸王没有去所封国的，所设置的府衙中的辅吏，暂且还不完备。
English: Officials report, the kings did not go to the fiefdoms, the auxiliary officials in the government offices set up are not yet complete.

古文：帝以孚明德属尊，当宣化树教，为群后作则，遂备置官属焉。
现代文：皇帝因为司马孚有完美的德行尊贵的地位，应当宣扬树立教化，为各王作出榜样，于是为他备置府衙的辅吏。
English: Because Sima Fu was of perfect virtue and noble status, the emperor should propagate and establish education and set an example for all kings, so he prepared an assistant to set up a government post for him.

古文：又以孚内有亲戚，外有交游，惠下之费，而经用不丰，奉绢二千匹。
现代文：又因为司马孚内有亲戚，外有朋友，给下面人好处的花费，用度不富裕，奉送两千匹绢。
English: Also, because Sima Fu had relatives inside and friends outside, he spent money to give benefits to the people below, but he was not rich, so he sent two thousand yakitori.

古文：及元会，诏孚舆车上殿，帝于阼阶迎拜。
现代文：等到元旦皇帝朝见群臣，诏书让司马孚乘坐小车上殿，皇帝在堂前台阶迎拜。
English: On New Year's Day, when the emperor met with his courtiers, the imperial edict ordered Sima Fu to ride in a carriage to the palace, where the emperor greeted him on the front steps of the hall.

古文：既坐，帝亲奉觞上寿，如家人礼。
现代文：坐下以后，皇帝亲自奉上酒杯祝寿，如同家庭中的礼节。
English: After he sat down, the emperor himself offered him a glass of wine to celebrate his birthday, as is the etiquette in families.

古文：帝每拜，孚跪而止之。
现代文：每次皇帝行拜礼，司马孚都要下跪而制止他。
English: Every time the emperor went to pray, Sima Fu would kneel down to stop him.

古文：又给以云母辇、青盖车。
现代文：又给司马孚云母辇、青盖车。
English: He also gave Sima Fu a mica chisel and a chalk wheel.

古文：孚虽见尊宠，不以为荣，常有忧色。
现代文：司马孚虽然被尊宠，但不以此为荣，常有忧愁的神色。
English: Although Sima Fu was respected and favored, he was not proud of it and often had a sad look.

古文：临终，遗令曰： 有魏贞士河内温县司马孚，字叔达，不伊不周，不夷不惠，立身行道，终始若一，当以素棺单椁，敛以时服。 
现代文：临终，遣令说： 魏朝守志不移的人河内温县司马孚，字叔达，不同于伊尹、周公，不同于伯夷、柳下惠，立身行道，始终如一。应当用不上漆的棺和单层的椁，用平时穿的衣服装殓。 
English: At the end of his life, the dispatch said: The person who kept the unwavering will of the Wei Dynasty, Sima Fu of Wen County, Hanoi, with the name Shuda, is different from Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, different from Bo Yi and Liu Xia Hui, standing on the sidewalk, consistent. It is necessary to use a non-lacquered coffin and a single-layer coffin, and decorate it with clothes worn at ordinary times.

古文：泰始八年薨，时年九十三。
现代文：泰始八年去世，时年九十三岁。
English: Taishi died eight years later, at the age of 93.

古文：帝于太极东堂举哀三日。
现代文：皇帝在太捶塞堂举哀三天。
English: The emperor mourned for three days at Taiyuansai Hall.

古文：诏曰： 王勋德超世，尊宠无二，期颐在位，朕之所倚。
现代文：诏书说： 王的功勋道德超越世人，尊贵宠幸没人能比，期望他保养在官位上，作我的依靠。
English: The edict said: "The king's merits and morals surpass those of the world, and no one can match his honor and favor. I expect him to maintain his position and be my support."

古文：庶永百龄，谘仰训导，奄忽殂陨，哀慕感切。
现代文：盼他长命百岁，咨询景仰他的训导，忽然去世，哀伤思慕深切感怀。
English: Hoping that he would live to be a hundred years old, consulting and admiring his teachings, he died suddenly, deeply moved by his sorrowful thoughts.

古文：其以东园温明秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭、绯练百匹、绢布各五百匹、钱百万，谷千斛以供丧事。
现代文：用东园温明秘器、朝服一套、衣一套、绯练百匹、绢布各五百匹、钱一百万、谷一千斛供给丧事。
English: With the Dongyuan warm secret utensils, a set of morning dress, a set of clothes, a hundred pairs of shoes, five hundred pairs of socks, a million of money, and a thousand bags of grain to supply the funeral.

古文：诸所施行，皆依汉东平献王苍故事。 
现代文：各类事情的施行，都按照远曲束平献王型董的先例。 
English: The implementation of all kinds of matters are in accordance with the precedent of the far-curved bundle flat-offering king-type dong.

古文：其家遵孚遣旨，所给器物，一不施用。
现代文：司马孚的家人遵从司马孚的遗言，所给的器物，一概不用。
English: Sima Fu's family members obeyed Sima Fu's last words and did not use any of the items given to them.

古文：帝再临丧，亲拜尽哀。
现代文：皇帝两次去灵堂，亲自拜别竭尽悲哀。
English: The emperor went to the mortuary hall twice to pray in person and not to exhaust his grief.

古文：及葬，又幸都亭，望柩而拜，哀动左右。
现代文：等到下葬，又亲临都亭，向灵柩行拜礼，悲哀感动了左右。
English: When the funeral was over, they went to the Imperial Palace and paid their respects to the casket. Everyone was moved by the sadness.

古文：给銮辂轻车，介士武贲百人，吉凶导从二千余人，前后鼓吹，配飨太庙。
现代文：给銮辂轻车，甲士武贲一百人，吉凶导从两千多人，前后鼓吹，拊祭在太庙。
English: A light car was given to Zou, a hundred warriors and warriors, and more than two thousand people led the auspicious and inauspicious, and preached back and forth. The sacrificial offering was held in the Great Temple.

古文：九子：邕、望、辅、翼、晃、瑰、珪、衡、景。
现代文：旦马孚有九个儿子：司马邕、司马望、司马辅、司马翼、司马晃、司马瓖、司马珪、司马衡、司马景。
English: Dang Mafu had nine sons: Sima Ye, Sima Wang, Sima Fu, Sima Ying, Sima Qiao, Sima Yao, Sima Yao, Sima Heng, and Sima Jing.

古文：邕字子魁。
现代文：司马邕字子魁。
English: Sima Qian is the leader of the group.

古文：初为世子，拜步兵校尉、侍中。
现代文：起初作世子时，官拜步兵校尉、侍中。
English: At first, when he was the heir, he was an infantry captain and a chamberlain.

古文：先孚卒，追赠辅国将军，谥曰贞。
现代文：先于司马孚而死，追赠辅国将军，谧号是贞。
English: He died before Sima Fu and was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Auxiliary State. His posthumous name was Zhen.

古文：邕子崇为世孙，又早夭。
现代文：司马邕的儿子司马崇是世孙，又死得早。
English: Sima Chong, Sima Yao's son, was a great-grandson and died early.

古文：泰始九年，立崇弟平阳亭侯隆为安平王。
现代文：泰始九年，立司马崇的弟弟平阳亭侯司马隆为安平王。
English: In the ninth year of Taishi, Ma Chong's younger brother, Pingyangting Hossimarong, was crowned King of Anping.

古文：立四年，咸宁二年薨，谥曰穆，无子，国绝。
现代文：四年后，在咸宁二年去世，谧号是穆。没有儿子，封国断绝。
English: Four years later, in the second year of Xianning, he passed away. His family name was Mu. He had no son, and his claim to the throne was cut off.

古文：义阳成王望，字子初，出继伯父朗，宽厚有父风。
现代文：义阳成王司马望字子初，过继给伯父司马朗，宽厚有父亲的风范。
English: At the beginning of the reign of King Sima Wang of Yiyang, he was adopted by his uncle Sima Lang. He was generous and had the demeanor of a father.

古文：仕郡上计吏，举孝廉，辟司徒掾，历平阳太守、洛阳典农中郎将。
现代文：任郡中的上计吏，被荐举为孝廉，征为司徒掾，历任平阳太守、洛阳典农中郎将。
English: He served as the county's chief tax collector, and was recommended to be promoted to the position of filial piety, conscripted to serve as a tutor, and successively served as the governor of Pingyang and the vice-governor of Luoyang.

古文：从宣帝讨王凌，以功封永安亭侯。
现代文：跟随宣帝讨伐王波，因有功被封为永安亭侯。
English: He followed Emperor Xuan to fight against Wang Bo, and was awarded the title of Yongan Tinghou for his achievements.

古文：迁护军将军，改封安乐乡侯，加散骑常侍。
现代文：迁任护军将军，改封安乐乡侯，加任散骑常侍。
English: He was transferred to the post of general of the escort, changed his title to Anle Township, and was appointed to the post of straggler.

古文：时魏高贵乡公好才爱士，望与裴秀、王沈、锺会并见亲待，数侍宴筵。
现代文：当时魏高贵乡公好才爱士，司马望和裴秀、王沈、钟会都被亲近对待，多次侍奉宴筵。
English: At that time, Wei Gao Gui Township's public servants were loved by everyone, and Sima Wang, Pei Xiu, Wang Shen and the Bell Association were all treated closely and served banquets for many times.

古文：公性急，秀等居内职，急有召便至。
现代文：公性急，裴秀等人在宫内任职，有紧急召唤马上就到。
English: The public is impatient, Pei Xiu and others are working in the palace, and if there is an emergency call, they will arrive immediately.

古文：以望外官，特给追锋车一乘，武贲五人。
现代文：因为司马望任外职，特地给他一乘追锋车，勇士五人。
English: Because Sima Wang is on secondment, he was specially given a chase car, with five warriors.

古文：时景文相继辅政，未尝朝觐，权归晋室。
现代文：当时景帝、文帝相继辅佐朝政，不曾朝见，权力归于晋室。
English: At that time, Emperor Jing and Emperor Wen successively assisted the imperial government, but they never met with the emperor, and the power belonged to the imperial court.

古文：望虽见宠待，每不自安，由是求出，为征西将军、持节、都督雍凉二州诸军事。
现代文：司马望虽被宠幸，经常内心不安，因此请求出京城，任征西将军、持节、都督雍凉二州诸军事。
English: Although Sima Wang was favored, he was often uneasy, so he asked to leave the capital and was appointed as the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, the military commander of the Western Expeditionary Force, and the military governor of Yongliang and Erzhou.

古文：在任八年，威化明肃。
现代文：在任八年，威严教化显赫整肃。
English: During his eight years in office, the majesty of the teaching has become a prominent rectification.

古文：先是蜀将姜维屡寇关中，及望至，广设方略，维不得为寇，关中赖之。
现代文：以前蜀将姜维屡次入侵关中，等到司马望到任，广泛制定谋略，姜维无法进犯，关中依赖他。
English: In the past, Shu General Jiang Wei repeatedly invaded Guanzhong. When Sima Wang took office, he extensively formulated strategies. Jiang Wei was unable to attack, and Guanzhong relied on him.

古文：进封顺阳侯。
现代文：进封顺阳侯。
English: Jinfeng Shunyang.

古文：征拜卫将军，领中领军，典禁兵。
现代文：征任卫将军，兼中领军，主管禁兵。
English: He was appointed General of the Guards, also the leader of the Central Army, and was in charge of the prohibition of soldiers.

古文：寻加骠骑将军、开府。
现代文：不久加封为骠骑将军、开设府署。
English: He was soon given the title of General of Cavalry and opened a prefectural office.

古文：顷之，代何曾为司徒。
现代文：不久，代替何曾任司徒。
English: Soon after, he replaced He Zeng as the head monk.

古文：武帝受禅，封义阳王，邑万户，给兵二千人。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，封司马望为义阳王，采邑一万户，给兵士两千人。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's surrender, enthroned Ma Wang as the King of Yiyang, seized ten thousand households, and gave two thousand soldiers.

古文：泰始三年，诏曰： 夫尚贤庸勋，尊宗茂亲，所以体国经化，式是百辟也。
现代文：耋始三年，诏书说： 崇尚贤能任用功臣，尊敬宗族昌盛亲属，以此治理国家宣扬教化，做出榜样给百官看。
English: At the beginning of the third year, the imperial edict said, "Uphold the virtue of appointing meritorious officials, and respect the relatives of the ancestral family, in order to govern the country, propagate enlightenment, and set an example for hundreds of officials."

古文：且台司之重，存乎天官，故周建六职，政典为首。
现代文：再说台司的重要，存在于天官，因而周朝建立政、刑、事、治、教、礼六种官职，治国的典章最为重要。
English: Furthermore, the importance of the Taiji is that it exists in the heavenly government, so the Zhou Dynasty established six kinds of government posts: political, criminal, administrative, judicial, educational, and ceremonial. The ceremony of governing the country is the most important.

古文：司徒、中领军，以明德近属，世济其美；祖考创业，翼佐大命，出典方任，入赞朝政，文德既著，武功宣暢。
现代文：司徒、中领军司马望，因德行美好又是皇亲，世人从他的那些美德上受益；祖先创业，辅佐天命，出京主管一方重任，入朝协助朝廷政治，既有显着的文德，又有宣畅的武功。
English: Sitoru, the middle leader of the army, Sima Wang, was a close relative of the emperor due to his virtuous behavior, and the world benefited from his virtues; his ancestors started a business, assisted the Mandate of Heaven, was in charge of a heavy responsibility when he went to Beijing, and assisted the imperial politics when he entered the imperial court.

古文：逮朕嗣位，弼道惟明，宜登上司，兼统军戎，内辅帝室，外隆威重，其进位太尉，中领军如故。
现代文：等到我继承君位，辅弼之道英明，应该登上太尉的官位，兼管军事，对内辅佐皇室，对外隆盛君主的威重。进位为太尉，中领军依旧。
English: By the time I succeed to the throne, the way of promotion is clear. I should be promoted to the rank of first lieutenant, concurrently in charge of the military, supporting the royal family internally, and promoting the dignity of the monarch externally. I will be promoted to first lieutenant, and I will continue to lead the army.

古文：置太尉军司一人，参军事六人，骑司马五人。
现代文：设置太尉军司一人，参军事六人，骑司马五人。
English: There was one captain-general, six enlisted men, and five horsemen.

古文：又增置官骑十人，并前三十，假羽葆鼓吹。 
现代文：又增置官骑十人，加上以前的共三十人，假羽葆鼓吹。 
English: In addition, ten officials and horsemen were added, adding to the previous total of thirty people.

古文：吴将施绩寇江夏，边境骚动。
现代文：吴国将领施绩入侵江夏，边境骚动。
English: The generals of the State of Wu made a successful invasion of Jiangxia, and the border was in turmoil.

古文：以望统中军步骑二万，出屯龙陂，为二方重镇，假节，加大都督诸军事。
现代文：任命司马望统率中军步兵骑兵两万人，出外驻扎在龙陂，形成两方重镇，假节，加任大都督诸军事。
English: He appointed Sima Wangtong to lead 20,000 infantry and cavalry soldiers of the Chinese army, stationed in Longjing, forming the two sides of the town, the holiday, and appointed the military as the grand governor.

古文：会荆州刺史胡烈距绩，破之，望乃班师。
现代文：适逢荆州刺史胡烈抵御施绩，击破敌军，司马望于是收兵回朝。
English: At the right time, Jingzhou stabbed Shi Hulei to resist and defeat the enemy army, and Sima Wang then withdrew his troops back to the North.

古文：俄而吴将丁奉寇芍陂，望又率诸军以赴之，未至而奉退。
现代文：不久吴国将领丁奉入侵芍陂，司马望又率诸军奔赴前线，还没到丁奉就退兵了。
English: Soon after, the Wu general Ding Bong invaded Yunnan, and Sima Wang led the army to the front line. However, he withdrew before reaching Ding Bong.

古文：拜大司马。
现代文：拜为大司马。
English: Pray for the big horse.

古文：孙皓率众向寿春，诏望统中军二万，骑三千，据淮北。
现代文：孙皓率军队向寿春进犯，韶书令司马望统率中军两万人，骑兵三千人，占据淮北。
English: Sun Yat-sen led an army to invade Shouchun, and Zenshu ordered Sima Wangtong to lead an army of twenty thousand people and three thousand cavalry to occupy Huaibei.

古文：皓退，军罢。
现代文：孙皓退兵，晋军作罢。
English: Sun Yat-sen retired from the army, and the work of advancing the army was abandoned.

古文：泰始七年薨，时年六十七，赙赠有加，望性俭吝而好聚敛，身亡之后，金帛盈溢，以此获讥。
现代文：泰始七年去世，时年六十七岁，对丧事的赠送超出常礼。司马望生性俭朴吝啬而且喜好聚敛，死了以后，金帛充溢，因此受到讥刺。
English: Taishi died seven years later, at the age of sixty-seven, and the funeral gifts were beyond the usual etiquette. Sima was frugal and miserly and liked to gather. After his death, his coffers were overflowing with gold, so he was ridiculed.

古文：四子：弈、洪、整、楙。
现代文：有四个儿子：司马弈、司马洪、司马整、司马拼。
English: They have four sons: Sima Yi, Sima Hong, Sima Jie and Sima Pi.

古文：弈至黄门郎，先望卒。
现代文：司马弈官至黄门郎，比司马望先死。
English: From Sima Yi official to Huang Men Lang, he died before Sima Wang.

古文：整亦早亡。
现代文：司马整也死得早。
English: Sima Zheng also died early.

古文：以弈子奇袭爵。
现代文：让司马弈的儿子司马奇承袭爵位。
English: Let Sima Yi's son Sima Qi inherit the title.

古文：奇亦好畜聚，不知纪极，遣三部使到交广商货，为有司所奏，太康九年，诏贬为三纵亭侯。
现代文：司马奇也喜好积蓄聚敛，没有限度，派遣三部使到交广做生意，被有关的官吏举奏，太康九年，韶书下令贬司马奇为三纵亭侯。
English: Simaqi also likes to accumulate and accumulate, there is no limit, dispatched three envoys to Jiaogang to do business, and was praised by relevant officials. In the ninth year of Taikang, the imperial edict ordered Simaqi to be demoted to the three-tiered pavilion.

古文：更以章武王威为望嗣。
现代文：改用章武王司马威作为司马望的继承人。
English: Instead, King Sima Wei of Zhangwu was used as Sima Wang's successor.

古文：后威诛，复立奇为棘阳王以嗣望。
现代文：后来司马威被杀，又立司马奇为棘阳王来继承司马望。
English: Later, Sima Wei was killed, and Sima Qi was set up as the King of Thorny Mountain to succeed Sima Wang.

古文：河间平王洪，字孔业，出继叔父昌武亭侯遗。
现代文：河间平王司马洪字孔业，过继给叔父昌武亭侯司马遣。
English: King Sima Hong, also known as Kongye, was succeeded by his uncle, Prince Sima Yu of Changwuting.

古文：仕魏，历位典农中郎将、原武太守，封襄贲男。
现代文：在魏做官，历任典农中郎将、原武太守，封为襄贲男。
English: He served as an official in the Wei Dynasty, successively serving as a ceremonial agronomist-middle-ranking general and the former military governor, and was given the title of "Xiang Ye's son."

古文：武帝受禅，封河间王。
现代文：武帝受禅让，封他为河间王。
English: Emperor Wu was won over by Zen and made him the king of Kawama.

古文：立十二年，咸宁二年薨。
现代文：十二年后，咸宁二年去世。
English: Twelve years later, Xianning died two years later.

古文：二子：威、混。
现代文：有两个儿子：司马威、司马混。
English: They have two sons: Sima Wei and Sima Gong.

古文：威嗣，徙封章武。
现代文：司马威继承爵位，改封到章武。
English: Sima Wei inherits the title of nobility, and his title is changed to Zhang Wu.

古文：其后威既继义阳王望，更立混为洪嗣。
现代文：后来司马威继承了义阳王司马望，改立司马混作为司马洪的继承人。
English: Later, Sima Wei succeeded Yiyang King Sima Wang, and re-established Sima Jian as Sima Hong's successor.

古文：混历位散常侍，薨。
现代文：司马混历任散骑常侍，去世。
English: Sima Ming, who had been a samurai on horseback, passed away.

古文：及洛阳陷，混诸子皆没于胡。
现代文：等到洛阳陷落，司马混的几个儿子都被胡人俘虏。
English: By the time Luoyang fell, several of Sima Gan's sons had been captured by the Hu people.

古文：而小子滔初嗣新蔡王确，亦与其兄俱没。
现代文：而小儿子司马滔刚继承新蔡王司马确，也和兄长一同被俘。
English: The youngest son, Sima Tao, who had just succeeded the new Cai Wang, Sima Ji, was also captured together with his brother.

古文：后得南还，与新蔡太妃不协。
现代文：后来得以回到南方，与新蔡太妃不和。
English: Later, he was able to return to the south and fell out with the new Empress Dowager Cai.

古文：太兴二年上疏，以兄弟并没在辽东，章武国绝，宜还所生。
现代文：太兴二年上疏，认为兄弟都被掳到辽东，章武的封国被断绝，自己应当回到出生地去。
English: Tai Xing, who was two years older, thought that his brothers had all been taken to Liaodong, that Zhang Wu's fiefdom had been broken off, and that he should return to his birthplace.

古文：太妃讼之，事下太常。
现代文：太妃为此争辩，事情交付给太常。
English: Tohei argued about this, and the matter was referred to Shojo.

古文：太常贺循议： 章武、新蔡俱承一国不绝之统，义不得替其本宗而先后傍亲。
现代文：太常贺循评议说： 章武、新蔡都奉承一个封国不当灭绝的系统，按道义不能抛弃自己的宗族而先做旁支亲属的后人。
English: Commentator Taizang Hexian said: Zhangwu and Xin Cai both flatter a system of unjustified nationalization and extermination. Morally, they cannot abandon their own clan and become the descendants of collateral relatives.

古文：按滔既已被命为人后矣，必须无复兄弟，本国永绝，然后得还所生。
现代文：考察司马滔已经被定为别人的继承人，必须不再另有兄弟，本国永远绝后，这样才能回到出生地。
English: Sima Tao has been designated as someone else's heir, there must be no other brothers, the country will never die, so that he can return to his birthplace.

古文：今兄弟在远，不得言无，道里虽阻，复非绝域。
现代文：如今兄弟在远方，不能说没有，路途虽然阻隔，可也不是极远的地域。
English: Now the brothers are far away, we can't say no. Although the road is blocked, it's not a very far away area.

古文：且鲜卑恭命，信使不绝。
现代文：再说鲜卑恭顺听命，信使不断。
English: In addition, Xianbei obediently obeyed orders, and the messengers kept coming.

古文：自宜诏下辽东，依刘群、卢谌等例，发遣令还，继嗣本封。
现代文：自然应该向辽东下诏书，依照刘群、卢谌等人的先例，迫使他们放还，继嗣原来的封国。
English: Naturally, an imperial edict should be issued to Liaodong, in accordance with the precedent of Liu Qun, Lu Wei and others, to force them to return and inherit the original fief.

古文：谓滔今未得便委离所后也。 
现代文：我认为司马滔现在不便离开他所继嗣的地方。 
English: I think it is not convenient for Sima Tao to leave the place he inherited.

古文：元帝诏曰： 滔虽出养，自有所生母。
现代文：元帝下韶说： 司马滔虽然过继，但自有生母。
English: Emperor Yuan said: Although Sima Tao was adopted, he had his own biological mother.

古文：新蔡太妃相待甚薄，滔执意如此。
现代文：新蔡太妃对待他很薄情，司马滔才坚持这样。
English: The new Tsai Taifi treated him very unkindly, and Sima Toucai insisted on it.

古文：如其不听，终当纷纭，更为不可。
现代文：如果不听他的，将始终有纷争，更加不好。
English: If you don't listen to him, there will always be strife, which is even worse.

古文：今便顺其所执，还袭章武。 
现代文：如今就顺着他的意愿，回去继承章武。 
English: Now, in accordance with his wishes, he will return to inherit the title.

古文：滔历位散骑常侍，薨，子休嗣。
现代文：司马滔历任散骑常侍，去世，儿子司马休继嗣。
English: Sima Tao, who had been a samurai on horseback, died and was succeeded by his son Sima Xiu.

古文：休与彭城王雄俱奔苏峻。
现代文：司马休和彭城王司马雄都投奔了苏峻。
English: Sima Xiu and Pengcheng Wang Sima Xiong both joined Su Jun.

古文：峻平，休已战死。
现代文：苏峻被平定，司马休已经战死。
English: Sushun was pacified, and Sima Xiu died in battle.

古文：弟珍年八岁，以小弗坐。
现代文：弟弟司马珍年方八岁，因为小没获罪。
English: His younger brother Sima Zhen, aged eight, was not found guilty because he was a minor.

古文：咸和六年袭爵，位至大宗正。
现代文：咸和六年承袭爵位，位至大宗正。
English: He succeeded to the peerage six years later and rose to the rank of daizongzheng.

古文：薨，无嗣，河间王钦以子范之继，位至游击将军。
现代文：去世，没有子孙。河间王司马钦让儿子司马范之继嗣，位至游击将军。
English: He died without having any children or grandchildren. King Sima Chin of Kawama made his son Sima Fan his successor and promoted him to the rank of guerrilla general.

古文：薨，子秀嗣。
现代文：去世，儿子司马秀继嗣。
English: He died and was succeeded by his son Sima Xiu.

古文：义熙元年，为桂阳太守。
现代文：义熙元年，任桂阳太守。
English: In the first year of Yixi, he was appointed the governor of Guiyang.

古文：秀妻桓振之妹，振作逆，秀不自安，谋反，伏诛，国除。
现代文：司马秀的妻子是桓振的妹妹，桓振叛逆，司马秀自己不安，谋反，被杀，封国被废除。
English: Sima Xiu's wife was the sister of Kuan Zhen, Kuan Zhen rebelled, Sima Xiu was uneasy, plotted a rebellion, was killed, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：威字景曜，初嗣洪。
现代文：司马威宇景曜，起初继嗣司马洪。
English: Sima Wei Yu Jingyang, originally the successor of Sima Hong.

古文：咸宁三年，徙封章武。
现代文：咸宁三年，改封章武。
English: After three years in Xianning, he was awarded the title of Zhangwu.

古文：太康九年，嗣义阳王望。
现代文：太康九年，继嗣义阳王司马望。
English: In the ninth year of Taikang, the successor of Yiyang King Sima Wang died.

古文：威凶暴无操行，谄附赵王伦。
现代文：司马威凶暴没有好品行，谄媚依附赵王司马伦。
English: Sima Wei is violent, has no good character, and is charmingly attached to Zhao Wang Sima Lun.

古文：元康末，为散骑常侍，伦将篡，使威与黄门郎骆休逼帝夺玺绶，伦以威为中书令。
现代文：元康末年，任散骑常侍。司马伦将篡位，派司马威和黄门郎骆休逼迫皇帝争夺玺绶，司马伦任命司马威为中书令。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Kang, he was appointed as a knight errant. Sima Lun will usurp the throne, send Sima Wei and Huangmen Lang Luo Xiu to force the emperor to compete for the scepter, and Sima Lun appoints Sima Wei as the Chinese scribe.

古文：伦败，惠帝反正，曰： 阿皮捩吾指，夺吾玺绶，不可不杀。 
现代文：司马伦失败，惠帝恢复帝位，说： 阿皮扭转我的手指，夺我的玺绶，不能不杀。 
English: Sima Lun failed, Hui Di restored the imperial throne, saying: Api twisted my fingers, snatched my shackles, and couldn't help but kill.

古文：阿皮，威小字也。于是诛威。
现代文：回座是司屋毖的小名。于是杀了司压盛。
English: Kaiza was a minor name of Shiyazaki, so he killed Shigemori.

古文：随穆王整，兄弈卒，以整为世子。
现代文：随穆王司马整，兄长司马弈去世，以司马整为世子。
English: With the death of King Sima Jie of Mu, his elder brother Sima Yi passed away, leaving Sima Jie as his heir.

古文：历南中郎将，封清泉侯，先父望薨，追赠冠军将军。
现代文：历任南中郎将，封为遣星堡，比父亲司马望先死，追赠为冠军将军。
English: Successive Southern Middle Captains were given the title of Sentry of the Stars, and if they died before their father, Sima Wang, they were posthumously awarded the title of Champion General.

古文：武帝以义阳国一县追封为随县王。
现代文：武帝以义阳国一个县追封他为随县王。
English: Emperor Wu made him the king of a county in Yiyang Province.

古文：子迈嗣。
现代文：儿子星迈继嗣。
English: His son, Hoshimai, became his successor.

古文：太康九年，以义阳之平林益迈为随郡王。
现代文：太康九年，用义阳的平林进升他为随郡王。
English: In the ninth year of Taikang, he used the flat forest of Yiyang to promote himself as the county king.

古文：竟陵王楙，字孔伟，初封乐陵亭侯，起家参相国军事。
现代文：竟陵王司马拼字孔伟，起初封为乐陵亭侯，刚做官时任参相国军事。
English: Kong Wei, the king of Jingling, was originally given the title of Le Ling Ting Hou, and when he first became an official, he served in the military of the State of Sanxiang.

古文：武帝受禅，封东平王，邑三千九十七户。
现代文：武帝接受惮让，封他为束平王，封邑三千零九十七户。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Shuozhen's offer and granted him the title of King of Sokping, with a total of 3,097 fiefs.

古文：入为散骑常侍、尚书。
现代文：入京为散骑常侍、尚书。
English: He entered the capital as a samurai who rode horseback, Shoshu.

古文：楙善谄谀，曲事杨骏。
现代文：司马桥善于阿谀奉承，曲意事奉杨骏。
English: Sima Qiao is good at flattery, the song means to serve Yang Xuan.

古文：及骏诛，依法当死，东安公繇与楙善，故得不坐。
现代文：等到杨骏被诛，依法该判死罪，束安公司马繇与司马拼关系好，因而没获罪。
English: By the time Yang Wei was arrested, he should have been sentenced to death according to the law. The relationship between Ma Wei of Sokan Company and Sima Ping was good, so he was not convicted.

古文：寻迁大鸿胪，加侍中。
现代文：不久迁任大鸿胪，加任侍中。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Da Hongtao, and was also appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：繇欲擅朝政，与汝南王亮不平。
现代文：司马繇想独揽朝政，与汝南王司马亮不和。
English: Sima Ye wanted to monopolize the imperial government, and he was at odds with Sima Liang, the king of Yunnan.

古文：帝托以繇讨骏顾望，免繇、楙等官，遣楙就国。
现代文：司马亮以司马繇讨伐杨骏不坚决为由，免了司马繇、司马拼等人的官职，打发司马榊去所封国。
English: Sima Liang, on the grounds that Sima Yi was not resolute in fighting against Yang Hui, relieved Sima Yi, Sima Pi and others of their official posts and sent Sima Yi to the fief country.

古文：楙殖财货，奢僭逾制。
现代文：司马榊于是经营财货，奢侈超越制度。
English: Sima Yi then engaged in the business of goods and luxury beyond the system.

古文：赵王伦篡位，召还。
现代文：赵王司马伦篡位，召回司马椁。
English: Zhao Wang Sima Lun usurped the throne and recalled Sima Yao.

古文：及义兵起，伦以楙为卫将军、都督诸军事。
现代文：等到义军起兵，司马伦任命司马拼为卫将军、都督诸军事。
English: When the rebels raised an army, Sima Lun appointed Sima Ping as the general of the guards and the military governor.

古文：伦败，楙免官。
现代文：司马伦失败，司马椁被免官。
English: Sima Lun failed, and Sima Ye was removed from office.

古文：齐王冏辅政，繇复为仆射，举楙为平东将军、都督徐州诸军事，镇下邳。
现代文：齐王司马同辅佐朝政，司马繇又任仆射，推举司马柳任平东将军、都督徐州诸军事，镇守下邳。
English: King Qi promoted Sima Liu to be the general of Pingdong, the military governor of Xuzhou, and the town guard.

古文：成都王颖辅政，进楙为卫将军。
现代文：成都王司马颖辅佐朝政，提拔司马拼为卫将军。
English: Chengdu Wang Sima Ying assisted the imperial government and promoted Sima Ping to the rank of Wei general.

古文：会惠帝北征，即以楙为车骑将军，都督如故，使率众赴鄴。
现代文：适逢惠帝向北征讨，就令司马榊为车骑将军，都督职务依旧，派他率军奔赴邺。
English: When Emperor Hui went on a campaign to the north, he made Sima Qian the general of chariots and cavalry, with the same duties as the governor-general, and sent him and his army to Qi.

古文：荡阴之役，东海王越奔于下邳，楙不纳，越乃还国。
现代文：荡阴之战，东海王司马越跑到下邳，司马椁不接纳，司马越于是回到了自己的封国。
English: In the shadow of the war, the East Sea king Sima Yue ran to the lower Ying, Sima Yue did not accept, and Sima Yue then returned to his own fief.

古文：帝既西幸，越总兵谋迎大驾，楙甚惧。
现代文：皇帝巡视西部后，司马越聚集军队准备迎接皇帝，司马椁很是恐惧。
English: After the emperor's inspection tour of the west, Sima Yue gathered troops to prepare to meet the emperor. Sima Yao was very afraid.

古文：长史王修说曰： 东海宗室重望，今将兴义，公宜举徐州以授之，此克让之美也。 
现代文：长史王修献策说： 东海王在宗室中地位重要，如今将要做出义举，公应该把徐州授给他，这是克制谦让的美事。 
English: Changshi Wang Xiu Xian said: Donghai Wang has an important position in the family, and now he is going to make a good deed. The prince should give him Xuzhou, which is a beautiful thing of restraint and modesty.

古文：楙从之，乃自承制都督兗州刺史、车骑将军，表于天子。
现代文：司马梆依从了他，于是自认秉承皇帝旨意都督兖州刺史、车骑将军，上表报告天子。
English: Sima Qian obeyed him, so he confessed that he adhered to the emperor's will as the governor of Zhangzhou, the general of the cavalry, and the son of heaven.

古文：时帝在长安，遣使者刘虔即拜焉。
现代文：当时皇帝在长安，派遣使者刘虔去授职。
English: At that time, the emperor was in Chang'an and sent an envoy, Liu Qian, to confer the post.

古文：楙虑兗州刺史苟晞不避己，乃给虔兵，使称诏诛晞。
现代文：司马拼担心兖州刺史苟晞不避让自己，于是给刘虔兵士，让他以诏书名义诛杀苟晞。
English: Sima Peng was worried that Guozhou would not avoid him, so he gave Liu Qian a soldier and asked him to kill Guozhou in the name of the edict.

古文：晞时已避位，楙在州征求不已，郡县不堪命。
现代文：苟晞当时已经辞去官职，司马椁在州中不断地寻求苟晞，郡县无法忍受他的命令。
English: At that time, Goh Chun had already resigned from his post. Sima Chun was constantly looking for Goh Chun in the state, and the county could not bear his order.

古文：范阳王虓遣晞还兗州，徙楙都督青州诸军事。
现代文：范阳王司马墟派苴迈回到奎业，调司屋登都督直业诸军事。
English: Fan Yang Wang Sima Hui sent Zou Mai back to Kuye, and the tuner, Deng Tudou, sent Zhiyuan to the military.

古文：楙不受命，背山东诸侯，与豫州刺史刘乔相结。
现代文：司显榊不接受命令，背着山东诸侯，与遂业刺史塑匮相勾结。
English: Sihenyi did not accept the order and colluded with Shandong lords behind his back.

古文：虓遣将田徽击楙，破之，楙走还国。
现代文：司马嫉派遣将领田徽攻击司马柳，打败了司马桥，司马拼跑回了自己的封国。
English: Sima Yin dispatched general Tian Hui to attack Sima Liu, defeated Sima Qiao, and Sima Ping ran back to his own fiefdom.

古文：帝还洛阳，楙乃诣阙。
现代文：皇帝回到洛阳，司马桥于是前往宫阙。
English: The emperor returned to Luoyang, and Sima Qiao went to the imperial palace.

古文：及怀帝践阼，改封竟陵王，拜光禄大夫。
现代文：等到怀帝即位，改封司马榊为竟陵王，拜任光禄大夫。
English: When Emperor Huai ascended the throne, he changed the title of Sima Ye to King of the Mausoleum, and took the post of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：越出牧豫州，留世子毗及其党何伦访察宫省。
现代文：司马越出任豫州牧，留下世子司马咝及其同党何伦访察设于宫内的官署。
English: Sima Yue served as the governor of Yuzhou, leaving his heir, Sima Yao, and his party comrade, He Lun, to inspect the government offices set up in the palace.

古文：楙白帝讨越，乃合众袭伦，不克。
现代文：司马柳说服皇帝讨伐司马越，于是纠集众人袭击司马伦，没成功。
English: Sima Liu convinced the emperor to fight against Sima Yue, so he gathered many people to attack Sima Lun, without success.

古文：帝委罪于楙，楙奔窜获免。
现代文：皇帝归罪于司马桥，司马桥逃奔流窜才免于难。
English: The emperor blamed Sima Qiao, but Sima Qiao only escaped the disaster by running away.

古文：越薨，乃出。
现代文：司马越死，司马椁才出来。
English: After Sima Yue's death, Sima Yao came out.

古文：及洛阳倾覆，为乱兵所害。
现代文：等到洛阳倾覆，被乱兵杀害。
English: He waited until Luoyang fell and was killed by rioting soldiers.

古文：太原成王辅，魏末为野王太守。
现代文：太原成王司马辅，魏末任野王太守。
English: Taiyuan Cheng Wang Sima Fu, the late Wei Wang Dai Shou.

古文：武帝受禅，封渤海王，邑五千三百七十九户，泰始二年之国。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，封他为渤海王，封邑五千三百七十九户，泰始二年去封国。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's resignation and made him the king of the Bohai Sea, with 5,379 fiefs. He left the country two years later.

古文：后为卫尉，出为东中郎将，转南中郎将，咸宁三年，徙为太原王，监并州诸军事。
现代文：后来任卫尉，出任东中郎将，转任南中郎将。咸宁三年，迁任太原王，监并州诸军事。
English: Later, he was appointed captain of the guards, served as the East Vice Admiral, and was transferred to the South Vice Admiral. For three years, Hamnin was transferred to the King of Taiyuan, and he supervised the merger of the state into the military.

古文：太康四年入朝，五年薨，追赠镇北将军。
现代文：太康四年入朝，五年去世，追赠镇北将军。
English: Taikang entered the imperial court for four years, died five years later, and was posthumously awarded the title of Zhenbei General.

古文：三年薨，子铄立。
现代文：永平元年，改赠卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the Yongping era, it was changed to the General of the Guards, the Opening Ceremony and the Three Departments.

古文：翼字子世，少历显位，官至武贲中郎将。
现代文：儿子司马弘继嗣，元康年间任散骑常侍，后来改封司马翼字子世，年轻时就出任显赫的官位，官做到武贲中郎将。
English: Sima Hong's son, Sima Hong's successor, served as a knight errant during the reign of Yuan Kang. Later, he was given the title of Sima Yingzhi, and when he was young, he held a prominent official position, and became a military commander.

古文：武帝未受禅而卒，以兄邕之支子承为嗣，封南宫县王。
现代文：没接受禅让时就死了，让兄长司马邕的庶子司马承继嗣，封为南宫县王。
English: When he did not accept Zen's offer, he died, leaving his brother Sima Xuan's illegitimate son Sima Xuan to succeed him as the king of Nangong County.

古文：薨，子祐嗣立，承遂无后。
现代文：死，儿子司马佑继嗣，司马承于是没了后人。
English: After his death, his son Sima You became his successor, and Sima He then had no descendants.

古文：下邳献王晃字子明，魏封武始亭侯，拜黄门侍郎，改封西安男，出为东莞太守。
现代文：下邳献王司马晃字子明，魏朝封他为武始皇堡，官拜黄门侍郎，改封酉童男，出任塞差太守。
English: The lower part of the seal dedicated to King Sima Akira is inscribed with the Chinese character Zi Ming. In the Wei Dynasty, he was given the title of Emperor Wu Shi, and he was given the official title Huangmen Zhi Rong, and he was also given the official title of Xing Tong Nian, and he was appointed as the governor of Xiezha.

古文：武帝受禅，封下邳王，邑五千一百七十六户，泰始二年就国。
现代文：亘瞳接受禅让，封他为工巫王，封邑五千一百七十六户，壶丝二年去所封国。
English: Watahito accepted Zenjo's offer, and was named the King of Witches and Crafts, with 5,176 households in his fiefdom. He was banished to his fief for two years.

古文：晃孝友贞廉，谦虚下士，甚得宗室之称。
现代文：司马晃孝顺友善贞正廉洁，谦虚对贤士恭敬，很是得到宗室的称赞。
English: Sima Akira was filial, good-natured, chaste, upright, modest, and respectful of the sages. He was highly praised by his family.

古文：后为长水校尉、南中郎将。
现代文：后来任长水校尉、南中郎将。
English: Later, he was appointed Chosui lieutenant and Minami churo shogun.

古文：九年，诏曰： 南中郎将、下邳王晃清亮中正，体行明洁，才周政理，有文武策识。
现代文：九年，诏书说： 南中郎将、下邳王亘马晃清廉贞正，办事开明廉洁，才能周遍政理，有文武的策谋见识。
English: In the ninth year, the imperial edict said, "Nan Zhong Lang will lead, and the king of the Lower Han Dynasty, Guomao, will be clean, honest and upright, and his work will be open and honest. Only then will he be able to thoroughly understand politics and have knowledge of military strategy."

古文：其以晃为使持节，都督宁益二州诸军事、安西将军，领益州刺史。 
现代文：任命司马晃为使持节、都督宁益二州诸军事、安西将军，兼益州刺史。 
English: Sima Akira was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the military of the two states of Ningyizhou, the general of Anxi, and the history of Yizhou.

古文：晃以疾不行，更拜尚书，迁右仆射。
现代文：司马晃因有病没出任，改任尚书，迁任右仆射。
English: Sima Akira did not take up his post due to illness, and was reassigned to the post of Shoshu, and transferred to the post of Umekusa.

古文：久之，出为镇东将军、都督青徐二州诸军事。
现代文：很久后，出任镇东将军、都督青徐二州诸军事。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the Zhendong General and the military governor of Qingxu Erzhou.

古文：惠帝即位，入为车骑将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：惠帝即位，入京任车骑将军，加任散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, entered Beijing as the general of chariots and cavalry, and was appointed as the samurai of horseback riding.

古文：将诛杨骏，以晃领护军，屯东掖门，寻守尚书令。
现代文：将要诛杀杨骏，让司马晃领护军，屯守束掖门。不久任尚书令。
English: He was going to kill Yang Hui and let Sima Qiao lead the escorting army to guard the Sokou Gate. Soon, he became Shang Shuling.

古文：迁司空，加侍中，令如故，元康六年薨，追赠太傅。
现代文：迁任司空，加任侍中，尚书令的职务依旧。元康六年去世，追赠为太傅。
English: He was transferred to the position of Siku, and was also appointed to the position of Samurai, but his position as Shosho Rei remained the same. Motokasu died six years later and was posthumously promoted to Taifu.

古文：二子：裒、绰。
现代文：有两个儿子：司马裒、司马绰。
English: They have two sons: Sima Yao and Sima Chaozhou.

古文：裒早卒，绰有笃疾，别封良城县王，以太原王辅第三子韡为嗣。
现代文：司马裒死得早，司马绰有重病，另封为良城县王，让太原王司马辅的第三个儿子韡继嗣。
English: Sima Yu died early, Sima Chuang was seriously ill, and he was also named the king of Liangcheng County, so that the third son of Taiyuan King Sima Yu would be the heir.

古文：官至侍中、尚书，早薨，子韶立。
现代文：官至侍中、尚书，死得早，儿子韶继嗣。
English: The official, the chamberlain, the courtier, died early, and his son became the heir.

古文：太原烈王瑰，字子泉，魏长乐亭侯，改封贵寿乡侯。
现代文：太原烈王司马瓖字子泉，是魏的长乐亭侯，改封贵寿乡侯。
English: Taiyuan Martyr King Sima Zi Zi Quan, is the Changle Pavilion of Wei, and was renamed Guizhou Township.

古文：历振威将军，秘书监，封固始子。
现代文：历任振威将军、秘书监，封为固始子。
English: Successive Zhenwei generals, secretary supervisors, sealed as Gu Xi's son.

古文：武帝受禅，封太原王，邑五千四百九十六户，泰始二年就国。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，被封为太原王，封邑五千四百九十六户，泰始二年去封国。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's offer and was made the King of Taiyuan, with 5,496 fiefs. He left the country two years later.

古文：四年入朝，赐衮冕之服，迁东中郎将。
现代文：四年入朝，赐他衮冕的服装，迁任束中郎将。
English: Four years after his accession to the throne, he was given a crowned robe and transferred to the position of Sokuchuro.

古文：十年薨，诏曰： 瑰乃心忠笃，智器雅亮。
现代文：十年去世，诏书说： 司马瓖心地忠厚，才智高雅鲜明。
English: Ten years after his death, the imperial edict said: Sima Xuan had a loyal heart, and his talent was elegant and bright.

古文：历位文武，有干事之绩。
现代文：历任文官武职，有干事的业绩。
English: Successive civilian-military officials have had the performance of officers.

古文：出临封土，夷夏怀附，镇守许都，思谋可纪。
现代文：出京去自己的封国，各族人感怀依附，镇守许都，策谋可以记载。
English: Going out of Beijing to their own fiefdoms, people of all ethnic groups feel attached, the town guards Xu Du, and the plot can be recorded.

古文：不幸早薨，朕甚悼之。
现代文：不幸早逝，我很是悼念他。
English: He died tragically early, and I'm very sad for him.

古文：今安厝在近，其追赠前将军。 
现代文：如今安葬在不远处，追赠为前将军。 
English: Now he is buried not far away, posthumously as a former general.

古文：子颙立，徙封河间王，别有传。
现代文：儿子司马腮继嗣，迁封为河间王，另有传。
English: His son, Sima Qian's successor, was transferred to the title of King of Kawama, according to another legend.

古文：高阳元王珪，字子璋，少有才望，魏高阳乡侯。
现代文：高阳元王司马珪字子璋，年轻时有才气名望，是魏高阳乡侯。
English: Gaoyang's former king, Sima Yao Zi Yao, had talent and fame when he was young. He was a Wei Gaoyang villager.

古文：历河南令，进封浈阳子，拜给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：历任河南令，进封为浈阳子，官拜给事黄门侍郎。
English: Successive Henan lords were sent to Shifeng as Shiyangzi, and they were given the official title of Huangmen Sifang.

古文：武帝受禅，封高阳王，邑五千五百七十户。
现代文：武帝接受惮让，封他为高阳王，封邑五千五百七十户。
English: Emperor Wu accepted the offer and named him the King of Gaoyang, with 5,570 households in his fiefdom.

古文：历北中郎将、督鄴城守诸军事。
现代文：历任北中郎将、督邺城守诸军事。
English: Successive Kitanakachiro generals, governors, and castle keepers became military officers.

古文：泰始六年入朝，以父孚年高，乞留供养。
现代文：泰始六年入朝，因为父亲司马垩年老，请求留京供养。
English: Six years after Taishi's accession to the throne, because his father Sima Yi was old, he asked Tsuru to stay in Beijing to provide for him.

古文：拜尚书，迁右仆射。
现代文：官拜尚书，迁任右仆射。
English: He was transferred to the post of right-hand man to Sho.

古文：十年薨，诏遣兼大鸿胪持节监护丧事，赠车骑将军、仪同三司。
现代文：十年去世，诏书派遣兼大鸿胪持节监护丧事，追赠车骑将军、仪同三司。
English: Ten years after his death, he was dispatched by imperial edict and became the guardian of the funeral of the Day of the Great Hungarians, and was posthumously awarded the general of the cavalry, and the three divisions of the ceremony.

古文：珪有美誉于世，而帝甚悼惜之。
现代文：司马珪在世上有美誉，而皇帝很是悼念痛惜他。
English: Sima Yi had a good reputation in the world, and the emperor was very sorry for him.

古文：无子，诏以太原王辅子缉袭爵。
现代文：没有儿子，诏书让太原王司马辅的儿子司昼纬承袭爵位。
English: Since he had no son, the imperial edict allowed the son of Taiyuan King Sima Yu, Siyongwei, to inherit the title.

古文：缉立五年，咸宁四年薨，谥曰哀。
现代文：司马缉继嗣五年，咸宁四年去世，谧号是塞。
English: Sima Jia's successor for five years, Xianning died four years ago, and his surname is Xi.

古文：无子，太康二年诏以太原王瑰世子颙子讼为缉后，封真定县侯。
现代文：没有儿子，太康二年诏书让主愿王旦屋基长子司马腮的儿子司马讼做司马缉的继承人，封为真室腿。
English: Having no son, Taikang issued an imperial edict in the second year of his reign, requesting that Sima Sheng, the son of Wang Danyu's eldest son Sima Yao, be made the heir to Sima Hei, and be made the true heir.

古文：常山孝王衡，字子平，魏封德阳乡侯。
现代文：常山孝王司马衡字子平，魏封为德阳乡侯。
English: Changshan Xiaowang Sima Heng Zi Ping, Wei Feng is Deyang Township.

古文：进封汝阳子，为驸马都尉。
现代文：进封汝阳子，任驸马都尉。
English: He was given the title of Ruyangzi, and was appointed as the captain of the cavalry.

古文：武帝受禅，封常山王，邑三千七百九十户。
现代文：武帝接受挥让，封他为常山王，封邑三千七百九十户。
English: Emperor Wu accepted the concession and made him the King of Changshan, with 3,790 households in the fief.

古文：二年薨，无子，以安平世子邕第四子敦为嗣。
现代文：二年去世，没有儿子，让安平献王的长子司马邕的第四个儿子司马殷继嗣。
English: He died two years later without a son, leaving the fourth son of Sima Yan, the eldest son of Anping Xianwang, as his successor.

古文：沛顺王景，字子文，魏乐安亭侯。
现代文：沛顺王司马景字子文，是魏的乐安亭侯。
English: Pei Shun Wang Sima Jing Zi Wen, is Wei's Leanting Hou.

古文：历谏议大夫。
现代文：历任谏议大夫。
English: Successive members of the council are doctors.

古文：武帝受禅，封沛王，邑三千四百户。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，封他为沛王亘，封邑三千四百户。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's resignation and appointed him as Pei Wangwu, with 3,400 households in his fief.

古文：立十一年，咸宁元年薨，子韬立。
现代文：在位十一年，咸宁元年去世，儿子司马韬继嗣。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, Xianning died in the first year of the year, and his son Sima Yi became the successor.

古文：彭城穆王权，字子舆，宣帝弟魏鲁相东武城侯馗之子也。
现代文：彭城穆王司马权字子舆，是宣帝的弟弟魏鲁相东武城侯司马馗的儿子。
English: Pengcheng Mu Wang Sima Quan Zi Zi Ying was the son of Emperor Xuan's younger brother, Wei Lu Xiang Dongwu's vassal, Sima Quan.

古文：初袭封，拜冗从仆射。
现代文：刚承袭封爵时，任冗从仆射。
English: When he just inherited the knighthood, Ren Zhaoju followed his stepson.

古文：武帝受禅，封彭城王，邑二千九百户。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，封他为彭城王，封邑两千九百户。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's resignation and made him the king of Pengcheng, with 2,900 fiefs.

古文：出为北中郎将、都督鄴城守诸军事。
现代文：出任北中郎将、都督邺城守诸军事。
English: He was appointed to the position of Kitanakura-no-chujo (Northern Vice Admiral) and became the military governor of the castle.

古文：泰始中入朝，赐衮冕之服。
现代文：泰始年间入朝，赐他衮冕的服饰。
English: When Emperor Taizhi ascended to the throne, he was given a crown to wear.

古文：咸宁元年薨，子元王植立。
现代文：咸宁元年去世，儿子元王司马植继嗣。
English: Xianning died in the first year of the year, and his son, Wang Sima, became the heir.

古文：历位后将军，寻拜国子祭酒、太仆卿、侍中、尚书。
现代文：历任后将军，不久官拜国子祭酒、太仆卿、侍中、尚书。
English: After successively serving as a general, he soon rose through the ranks to become a courtier, a priest, a servant, a chamberlain, and a scholar.

古文：出为安东将军、都督扬州诸军事，代淮南王允镇寿春，未发。
现代文：出任安束将军、都督扬州诸军事，代替淮南王司马允镇守寿春，没有出发。
English: Yangzhou's generals, including General Anzac and the military governor, replaced Wang Sima Yun of Huainan to guard Shuchun, but did not set out.

古文：或云植助允攻赵王伦，遂以忧薨。
现代文：有人说司马植帮助司马允攻打赵王司马伦，于是忧郁而死。
English: Some people say that Sima Zhi helped Sima Yun to attack Zhao Wang Simaren, and then died of melancholy.

古文：赠车骑将军，增封万五千户。
现代文：追赠车骑将军，增加封邑一万五千户。
English: After the gift, the number of chariot and cavalry generals was increased, and the number of fiefs increased by 15,000.

古文：子康王释立，官至南中郎将、持节、平南将军，分鲁国蕃、薛二县以益其国，心二万三千户。
现代文：儿子康王司马释继嗣，官至南中郎将、持节、平南将军，分出鲁国蕃、薛两个县来扩充他的封国，共两万三千户。
English: Kang Wang's son Sima Shi's successor, officials ranging from the Southern Vice Admiral, Mochizeki, and Pingnan Generals, divided Lu County and Xue County to expand his fiefdom, with a total of 23,000 households.

古文：薨，子雄立，坐奔苏峻伏诛，更以释子纮嗣。
现代文：去世，儿子司马雄继嗣，因投奔苏峻获罪被杀，改用司马释的儿子司马弦继嗣。
English: He died, and his son Sima Xiong Heir, who was killed for the crime of defecting to Su Jun, was replaced by Sima Xie's son Sima Zhen Heir.

古文：纮字伟德，初封堂邑县公。
现代文：司马弦字伟德，起初被封为堂邑县公。
English: Sima Zhen Zi Weide, was initially named the county magistrate of Dongyi County.

古文：建兴末，元帝承制，以纮继高密王据。
现代文：建兴末年，元帝根据皇帝旨意，把司马弦遇继给高密王司马据。
English: At the end of Jianxing, Emperor Yuan, according to the emperor's will, made Sima Zhen succeed to Gaomi Wang Sima Jian.

古文：及帝即位，拜散骑侍郎，迁翊军校尉、前将军。
现代文：等到元帝即位，司马弦官拜散骑侍郎，迁任翊军校尉、前将军。
English: By the time Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne, Sima Zhenguan had been given the title of Sanzhijishi, transferred to the post of Shao Jun's lieutenant, and became a former general.

古文：雄之诛也，纮入继本宗。
现代文：司马雄被诛杀后，司马弦回去继承自己的宗族。
English: After Sima Xiong was killed, Sima Zhen returned to inherit his clan.

古文：拜国子祭酒，加散骑常侍，寻迁大宗正、秘书监。
现代文：官拜国子祭酒，加任散骑常侍，不久迁任大宗正、秘书监。
English: He was appointed to the post of a knight errant, and was soon transferred to the post of Daizongzheng and Secretary Supervisor.

古文：有风疾，性理不恆。
现代文：有疯病，情绪理智不能持久。
English: With insanity, emotional sanity doesn't last.

古文：或欲上疏陈事，历示公卿。
现代文：有时想上疏陈奏事情，展示在公卿之前。
English: Sometimes you want to play things up, show off in front of the nobility.

古文：又杜门让还章印貂蝉，著《杜门赋》以显其志。
现代文：又闭门谦让退还印章冠饰，着《杜门赋》来表达他的志向。
English: He also closed the door and humbly returned the seal crown, expressing his ambition with "Dumen Fu."

古文：由是更拜光禄大夫，领大宗师，常侍如故。
现代文：因此改拜光禄大夫，兼任大宗师，常侍的职位依旧。
English: Therefore, he was changed to Dr. Kōroku, concurrently serving as the grand master, while the position of the regular attendant remained the same.

古文：后疾甚，驰骋无度，或攻劫军寺，或扞伤官属，丑言悖詈，诽谤上下。
现代文：后来病重，放纵无度，有时攻击掠取军寺，有时伤害官属，恶语伤人，诽谤上下。
English: Later, he became seriously ill and indulged in excesses, sometimes attacking and plundering military temples, sometimes injuring officials, using foul language and slandering people.

古文：又乘车突入端门，至太极殿前。
现代文：又乘车冲入端门，直到太极殿前。
English: He also rushed into the terminal gate by car until he arrived in front of the Taiji Hall.

古文：于是御史中丞车灌奏劾，请免纮官，下其国严加防录。
现代文：于是御史中丞车灌上奏弹劾，请求免去司马弦的官职，送他到所封国严加防范约束。
English: As a result, Imperial Historian Chunjong Che instigated an impeachment petition, requesting that Sima Zhen be relieved of his official duties and sent to his fief country for strict prevention and restraint.

古文：成帝诏曰： 王以明德茂亲，居宗师之重，宜敷道养德，静一其操。
现代文：成帝下诏说： 王凭着美德又是有才的亲属，官居宗师的要位，应该广布道义修养德行，使他的操行清静专一。
English: Emperor Cheng issued an edict saying: "The king is a virtuous and talented relative, and holds the important position of the official mentor. He should widely preach morality, cultivate virtue, and make his behavior quiet and single-minded.

古文：而顷游行烦数，冒履风尘。
现代文：而近来屡屡游荡烦劳，冒风履尘。
English: Lately, however, he has been wandering around, tiring himself out, and stirring up trouble.

古文：宜令官属已下，各以职奉卫，不得令王复有此劳。
现代文：应命令府吏以下，各自根据职责侍奉护卫，不能让王再有这类烦劳。
English: Government officials and below should be ordered to serve as guards according to their duties, and the king should not be burdened with this kind of work.

古文：内外职司，各慎其局。
现代文：内外机构，各自慎重对待职掌。
English: domestic and foreign institutions, each with a cautious approach to their duties.

古文：王可解常侍、光禄、宗师，先所给车牛可录取，赐米布床帐以养疾。 
现代文：王可以免去常侍、光禄、宗师，先前所给的车牛可以收回，赐米布床帐用于养病。 
English: The king may exempt the regular attendants, honorifics, and teachers. The oxen previously given may be taken back, and a bed sheet made of rice cloth may be given for the treatment of illness.

古文：咸康八年薨，赠散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：咸康八年去世，追赠散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Xiankang died eight years later, and was posthumously given the title of Zanyi (free-riding) regular attendant, and the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：二子：玄、俊。
现代文：有两个儿子：司马玄、司马俊。
English: They have two sons: Sima Xuan and Sima Jun.

古文：玄嗣立。
现代文：司马玄继嗣。
English: Sima Xuan's heir.

古文：会庚戌制不得藏户，玄匿五户，桓温表玄犯禁，收付廷尉。
现代文：适逢庚戌制不许隐瞒户数，司马玄隐匿五户，桓温上表说司马玄犯禁，收捕他交给廷尉。
English: At the time of the Geng Zi system, it was not allowed to conceal the number of households, Sima Xuan concealed five households, and Kuan Wen publicly said that Sima Xuan had committed a crime, and arrested him and handed him over to the imperial lieutenant.

古文：既而宥之，位至中书侍郎。
现代文：这之后又赦免了他，官做到中书侍郎。
English: After that, he was pardoned, and the official became a chusho-sajiro.

古文：薨，子弘之立，位至散骑常侍。
现代文：去世，儿子司马弘之继嗣，官做到散骑常侍。
English: He died, and his son, Sima Hong's successor, became a samurai.

古文：薨，子邵之立。
现代文：去世，儿子司马邵之继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son Sima Shao.

古文：薨，子崇之立。
现代文：去世，儿子司马崇之继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Sima Chong.

古文：薨，子缉之立。
现代文：去世，儿子司马缉之继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Sima Jishi.

古文：宋受禅，国除。
现代文：宋接受禅让后，封国被取消。
English: Song accepted Zen's concession, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：恭王俊字道度，出嗣高密王略，官至散骑常侍。
现代文：恭王司马俊字道度，过继给高密王司马略，官做到散骑常侍。
English: Gong Wang Sima Jun was given the title of Daodu, and he was succeeded by Gaomi Wang Sima Liao, and he became a knight-errant.

古文：薨，子敬王纯之立，历临川内史、司农少府卿、太宰右长史。
现代文：去世，儿子敬王司马纯之继嗣，历任临川内史、司农少府卿、太宰右长史。
English: He died, and his son, Keio Sima Chun's successor, successively held the posts of Lin Chuanai Shi, Sino-Minor-Governor, and Dazai Ujinaga Shi.

古文：薨，子恢之立。
现代文：去世，儿子司马恢之继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son Sima Kosei.

古文：义熙末，以给事中兼太尉，修谒洛阳园陵。
现代文：义熙末年，以给事中身份兼任太尉，修整拜谒洛阳园陵。
English: In the last years of Yixi's reign, he also served as a lieutenant in the capacity of giving things, and repaired the Beiyuan Luoyang Garden.

古文：宋受禅，国除。
现代文：宋接受惮让后，封国被取消。
English: Song accepted Zen's concession, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：高密文献王泰，字子舒，彭城穆王权之弟，魏阳亭侯，补阳翟令，迁扶风太守。
现代文：高密文献王司马泰字子舒，是彭城穆王司马权的弟弟，任魏阳亭侯，补任阳翟令，迁任扶风太守。
English: Wang Simatai, also known as Zi Shu, is the younger brother of Pengcheng Mu Wang Simatuan. He was appointed as Wei Yang Ting Hou, Yang Xing Ling, and Fu Feng Taishou.

古文：武帝受禅，封陇西王，邑三千二百户，拜游击将军。
现代文：武帝接受挥让，封他为陇西王，封邑三千二百户，官拜游击将军。
English: Emperor Wu accepted the concession and made him the king of Shaanxi, with 3,200 fiefs and the title of guerrilla general.

古文：出为兗州刺史，加鹰扬将军。
现代文：出任兖州刺史，加封鹰扬将军。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and was given the additional title of General Yingyang.

古文：迁使持节、都督宁益二州诸军事、安西将军，领益州刺史，称疾不行。
现代文：迁任使持节、都督宁益二州诸军事、安西将军，兼益州刺史，声称有病没有赴任。
English: On the day of the transfer of the envoy, the military of the two states, the general of Anxi, and the history of Yizhou, claimed that he was ill and did not take up the post.

古文：转安北将军，代兄权督鄴城守事。
现代文：转任安北将军，代替兄长司马权督邺城防守事宜。
English: He was transferred to the post of General Anbei, replacing his brother, Sima Quan Du, in charge of the defense of Lucheng.

古文：安西将军、都督关中事。
现代文：迁任安西将军、都督关中事。
English: He was transferred to the post of General Anxi and the post of the Governor of Guanzhong.

古文：太康初，入为散骑常侍、前将军，领鄴城门校尉，以疾去官。
现代文：太康初年，入朝任散骑常侍、前将军，兼邺城门校尉，因病辞官。
English: In the first year of Taikang's reign, he was appointed as the imperial equerry for horseback riding, a former general, and also the captain of the castle gate, but resigned due to illness.

古文：后代下邳王晃为尚书左仆射。
现代文：后来代替下邳王司马晃任尚书左仆射。
English: Later, he replaced Wang Simaqiao, the lower eunuch, with Ren Shangshu, the left eunuch.

古文：出为镇西将军，领护西戎校尉、假节，代扶风王骏都督关中军事，以疾还京师。
现代文：出任镇西将军，兼任护西戎校尉、假节，代替扶风王司马骏都督关中军事，因病回到京师。
English: He assumed the post of Zhenxi general, concurrently held the posts of Fuxirong school lieutenant and Fuxie, and replaced Fufeng Wang Sima as the military governor of Guanzhong, but returned to Beijing Division due to illness.

古文：永熙初，代石鉴为司空，寻领太子太保。
现代文：永熙初年，代替石鉴任司空，不久兼任太子太保。
English: In the first year of Yongxi, he replaced Shi Jian as Siku, and soon also served as Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：及杨骏诛，泰领骏营，加侍中，给步兵二千五百人，骑五百匹。
现代文：等到杨骏被诛杀，司马泰兼管杨骏的军营，加授侍中，给步兵两千五百人，马五百匹。
English: By the time Yang Hui was killed, Sima Tai was also in charge of Yang Hui's military camp. He was also made an attendant and given 2,500 infantrymen and 500 horses.

古文：泰固辞，乃给千兵百骑。
现代文：司马泰坚决推辞，于是给一千步兵一百匹马。
English: Simatai firmly refused, so he gave a hundred horses to a thousand infantry.

古文：楚王玮之被收，泰严兵将救之，祭酒丁绥谏曰： 公为宰相，不可轻动。
现代文：楚王司马璋被收捕时，司马泰整肃兵马将要去救他，祭酒丁绥劝谏说： 公身为宰相，不能轻率行动。
English: When King Sima Yi of Chu was arrested, Sima Tai's rectifying soldiers and horses would go to rescue him. Ding Yao, the minister of wine, advised him: As the prime minister, you should not act rashly.

古文：且夜中仓卒，宜遣人参审定问。 
现代文：再说夜晚仓猝，应该派人参加审问。 
English: Besides, with the suddenness of the night, someone should be sent to take part in the interrogation.

古文：泰从之。
现代文：司马泰听从了他。
English: Simatai obeyed him.

古文：玮既诛，乃以泰录尚书事，迁太尉，守尚书令，改封高密王，邑万户。
现代文：司马璋被诛杀后，就任命司马泰录尚书事，迁任太尉，试任尚书令，改封为高密王，封邑一万户。
English: After Sima Yi was assassinated, he appointed Sima Tai to record the official records, transferred him to the rank of captain, appointed him as the official record keeper on a trial basis, changed his title to Gao Mi Wang, and fiefed ten thousand households.

古文：元康九年薨，追赠太傅。
现代文：元康九年去世，追赠为太傅。
English: In the ninth year of Yuan Kang's death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu.

古文：泰性廉静，不近声色。
现代文：司马泰品性廉洁清静，不接近音乐女色。
English: Simatai's character is clean and quiet, not close to the music woman.

古文：虽为宰辅，食大国之租，服饰肴膳如布衣寒士。
现代文：虽任宰辅，享有大国的租赋，但服饰饮食如同平民百姓。
English: Although he served as deputy governor and enjoyed the rent of a large country, he dressed and ate like the common people.

古文：任真简率，每朝会，不识者不知其王公也。
现代文：率真自然简易坦率，每次朝会，不认识他的人不知他是王公。
English: Every time there is a royal court meeting, people who do not know him do not know that he is a prince.

古文：事视恭谨，居丧哀戚，谦虚下物，为宗室仪表。
现代文：事奉父母恭敬谨慎，居丧悲哀忧伤，谦虚甘居人下，是宗室的仪表。
English: To serve one's parents respectfully and prudently, to mourn and grieve, to be humble and willing to serve others, are the etiquette of the family.

古文：当时诸王，惟泰及下邳王晃以节制见称。
现代文：当时的诸王，衹有司马泰和下邳王司马晃因为节制自己被称赞。
English: The kings of that time, including Sima Tai and Sima Huan, were praised for their self-restraint.

古文：虽并不能振施，其余莫得比焉。
现代文：虽然都不能救济施舍，但其余方面没人能比。
English: Although they are not able to provide relief and charity, no one can match them in other aspects.

古文：泰四子：越、腾、略、模。
现代文：司马泰有四个儿子：司马越、司马腾、司马略、司马模。
English: Sima Tai had four sons: Sima Yue, Sima Teng, Sima Liao and Sima Miao.

古文：越自有传。
现代文：司马越自己有传。
English: Sima Yue himself has a legend.

古文：腾出后叔父，弟略立。
现代文：司马腾遇继给叔父，弟弟司马略继嗣。
English: Sima Teng Rong was succeeded by his uncle, and his brother Sima Liao became the successor.

古文：孝王略，字元简，孝敬慈顺，小心下士，少有父风。
现代文：孝王司马略字元简，孝敬慈顺，谨慎谦恭地对待贤士，有些他父亲的风范。
English: Xiao Wang Sima slightly simplified characters, filial piety, benevolence and obedience, prudently and humbly treat the sages, some of his father's demeanor.

古文：元康初，愍怀太子在东宫，选大臣子弟有名称者以为宾友，略与华恆等并侍左右。
现代文：元康初年，愍怀太子在太子宫，挑选大臣子弟中有声望的人作为宾客友人，司马略和华恒等人一同侍奉在太子左右。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Kang, when the Crown Prince was in the womb, he chose prominent people among the sons of ministers as guests and friends. Sima Liao and Hua Heng and others served around the crown prince.

古文：历散骑黄门侍郎、散骑骑常侍、秘书监，出为安南将军、持节、都督沔南诸军事，迁安北将军、都督青州诸军事。
现代文：历任散骑黄门侍郎、散骑常侍、秘书监，出任安南将军、持节、都督沔南诸军事，迁任安北将军、都督青州诸军事。
English: Successive ranged horseman Huangmen waiter, ranged horseman Huangmen regular attendant, secretary supervisor, served as General Annan, Mochijie, the military governor of Hunan Province, transferred to General Annbei, the military governor of Qingzhou Province.

古文：略逼青州刺史程牧，牧避之，略自领州。
现代文：司马略威逼青州刺史程牧，程牧避开他，司马略自己兼管青州。
English: Sima Liao forced Qingzhou to stab Cheng Mu, Cheng Mu avoided him, and Sima Liao himself was also in charge of Qingzhou.

古文：永兴初，弦令刘根起兵东莱，诳惑百姓，众以万数，攻略于临淄，略不能距，走保聊城。
现代文：永兴初年，嵫令刘根在东莱起兵，欺骗迷惑百姓，有上万人追随，在临淄攻打司马略，司马略抵御不住，跑到聊城固守。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, Gong ordered Liu Gen to raise an army in Donglai, deceive and confuse the people, with tens of thousands of followers, attack Sima Liao in Linyi, Sima Liao could not resist and ran to Liaocheng to defend himself.

古文：怀帝即位，迁使持节、都督荆州诸军事、征南大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：怀帝即位，迁任使持节、都督荆州诸军事、征南大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Emperor Huai ascended to the throne, and transferred to the position of envoy to hold the festival, the governor of Jingzhou to the military, the general of the Southern Expedition, the ceremony of founding the prefecture and the three departments.

古文：京兆流人王逌与叟人郝洛聚众数千，屯于冠军。
现代文：京兆被流放的人王迪与叟人郝洛聚集几千人，驻扎在冠军。
English: Wang Di, an exiled person from Jingzhao, and Zhao Luo, an exiled person, gathered several thousand people and were stationed in Champion.

古文：略遣参军崔旷率将军皮初、张洛等讨逌，为逌所谲，战败。
现代文：司马略派参军崔旷率将军皮初、张洛等人讨伐王迪，中王迪计，打了败仗。
English: Sima Liao sent the general Pi Chu, Zhang Luo and others to join the army led by Cui Yuan to fight Wang Di, and Wang Di lost the battle.

古文：略更遣左司马曹摅统旷等进逼逌。
现代文：司马略又派左司马曹摅统率崔旷等人进逼王迪。
English: Sima Liang also sent the Left Division's Ma Cao Baotong, led by Cui Kuang and others, to force Wang Di to leave.

古文：将大战，旷在后密自退走，摅军无继，战败，死之。
现代文：将要大战，崔旷在后边悄悄地自己退兵跑了，曹摅的军队没有后援，打了败仗，曹摅死在战场上。
English: On the verge of a major battle, Cui Yu quietly retreated in the rear and ran away. Cao Pi's army had no backup and was defeated. Cao Pi died on the battlefield.

古文：略乃赦旷罪，复遣部将韩松又督旷攻逌，逌降。
现代文：司马略赦免了崔旷的罪过，又派部将韩松再次督统崔旷攻打王迪，王迪投降了。
English: Sima Liao pardoned the sins of Cui Yuan, and sent Han Song to lead Cui Yuan to attack Wang Di again. Wang Di surrendered.

古文：寻进开府，加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久进位开府，加任散骑常侍。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Kofu, and he was also appointed as Sanzhishi no Tsunenobu.

古文：永嘉三年薨，追赠侍中、太尉，子据立。
现代文：永嘉三年去世，追赠侍中、太尉。儿子司马据继嗣。
English: Yongjia died three years later and was posthumously awarded the titles of Chamberlain and Second Lieutenant. His son Sima succeeded him.

古文：薨，无子，以彭城康王子纮为嗣。
现代文：去世，没有儿子，让彭城康王的儿子司马弦继嗣。
English: He died without a son, leaving Pengcheng Kang Wang's son Sima Zhen as his heir.

古文：其后纮归本宗，立纮子俊以奉其祀。
现代文：后来司马弦回到自己的宗族，立司马弦的儿子司马俊继嗣。
English: Later, Sima Zhen returned to his clan and appointed Sima Zhen's son Sima Jun as his successor.

古文：新蔡武哀王腾，字元迈，少拜冗从仆射，封东嬴公，历南阳、魏郡太守，所在称职，征为宗正，迁太常，转持节、宁北将军、都督并州诸军事、并州刺史。
现代文：新蔡武哀王司马腾字元迈，年轻时官拜冗从仆射，封为束嬴公，历任南阳、魏郡太守，在官位上称职。征召为宗正，迁任太常，转任持节、宁北将军、都督并州诸军事、并州刺史。
English: The new Cai Wuye Wang, Sima Teng, the character of Yuanmai, when he was young, he was an official, he was given the title of Sokun Gong, successively served as the governor of Nanyang and Wei County, and was competent in the official position. He was conscripted as Zongzheng, transferred to Taizhong, and transferred to Ji Jie, the general of Ningbei, the governor and the military of the state, and the history of the state.

古文：惠帝讨成都王颖，六军败绩。
现代文：惠帝讨伐成都王司马颖，六军打了败仗。
English: Emperor Hui fought against Wang Sima Ying of Chengdu, and the Six Armies were defeated.

古文：腾与安北将军王浚共杀颖所署幽州刺史和演，率众讨颖。
现代文：司马腾和安北将军王浚一起杀了司马颖手下的幽州刺史和演，率众讨伐司马颖。
English: Sima Teng and Anbei General Wang Jun together killed Sima Ying's subordinates Yuzhou Jishi and En, and led the crowd to fight against Sima Ying.

古文：颖遣北中郎将王斌距战，浚率鲜卑骑击斌，腾为后系，大破之。
现代文：司马颖派北中郎将王斌迎战，王浚率领鲜卑骑兵攻击王斌，司马腾作为后援，大破敌军。
English: Sima Ying sent Bei Zhonglang to confront Wang Bin, Wang Jun led the cavalry to attack Wang Bin, Sima Teng as a backup, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：颖惧，挟帝归洛阳，进腾位安将军。
现代文：司马颖恐惧，挟持皇帝回洛阳，进升司马腾为安北将军。
English: Sima Ying was afraid, took the emperor back to Luoyang, and promoted Sima Teng to general of Anbei.

古文：永嘉初，迁车骑将军，都督鄴城守诸军事，镇鄴。
现代文：永嘉初年，迁任车骑将军、都督邺城守诸军事，镇守邺。
English: In the first year of Yongjia, he was transferred to the post of chariot and cavalry general, the governor of the city, the city guard, the military, and the town guard.

古文：又以迎驾之勋，改封新蔡王。
现代文：又因为迎接皇帝的功勋，改封为新蔡王。
English: In addition, because of the merit of welcoming the emperor, he was renamed the new Cai Wang.

古文：初，腾发并州，次于真定。
现代文：当初，司马腾从并州出发，驻扎在真定。
English: At first, Sima Teng set out from Bianzhou and was stationed in Zhending.

古文：值大雪，平地数尺，营门前方数丈雪融不积，腾怪而掘之，得玉马，高尺许，表献之。
现代文：赶上下大雪，平地雪深几尺，营门前方几丈雪融化不积存，司马腾感到奇怪而挖掘那块地，得到玉马，高一尺左右，上表奉献了玉马。
English: Catching up with the heavy snow, a few feet of snow on the flat ground, and a few feet of snow melting in front of the camp gate, Sima Teng felt strange and dug up the land to get the horse, about a foot high, and dedicated the horse to the table.

古文：其后公师籓与平阳人汲桑等为群盗，起于清河鄃县，众千余人，寇顿丘，以葬成都王颖为辞，载颖主而行，与张泓故将李丰等将攻鄴。
现代文：后来公师藩和平阳人汲桑等人结伙为强盗，在清河郃县起兵，有一千多人追随，攻打顿丘。以安葬成都王司马颖为藉口，用车载着司马颖的牌位，与张泓过去的将领李丰等将攻打邺。
English: Later, a group of bandits from the Gongshi and Hepingyang clans, including Kuisang and others, raised an army in Jixian County, Qinghe, with more than a thousand followers, and attacked Dongqiu. On the pretext of burying Chengdu Wang Sima Ying, they used a car to carry Sima Ying's badge, and attacked Jixian with Zhang Ye's former general Li Feng and others.

古文：腾曰： 孤在并州七年，胡围城不能克。
现代文：司马腾说： 我在差州七年，胡入围城无法取胜。
English: Sima Teng said, "I have been in Cangzhou for seven years, but I could not win Huyancheng.

古文：汲桑小贼，何足忧也。 
现代文：汲桑那个小贼寇，不值得忧虑。 
English: Kuisang, that petty thief, is not worth worrying about.

古文：及丰等至，腾不能守，率轻骑而走，为丰所害。
现代文：等到李丰等人到来，司马腾守不住，率轻骑逃跑，被李丰杀害。
English: When Li Feng and others arrived, Sima Teng could not hold out and fled on horseback. He was killed by Li Feng.

古文：四子：虞、矫、绍、确。
现代文：司马腾有四个儿子：司马虞、司马矫、司马绍、司马确。
English: Sima Teng has four sons: Sima Yu, Sima Jiao, Sima Shao and Sima Ji.

古文：虞有勇力，腾之被害，虞逐丰，丰投水而死。
现代文：司；缠勇敢有力，司马腾被害时，司飓追逐奎丰，李丰跳河而死。
English: When Sima Teng was killed, Sifeng chased after Guifeng, and Li Feng jumped into the river and died.

古文：是日，虞及矫、绍并钜鹿太守崔曼、车骑长史羊恆、从事中郎蔡克等又为丰余党所害，及诸名家流移依鄴者，死亡并尽。
现代文：这天，司马虞及司马矫、司昼绉和堑尘太守崔垦、车骑长史芏垣、从事中郎蔡克等人又被李丰的余党所害，至于那些名家大户漂流迁移依附到邺的，都死光了。
English: On this day, Sima Yu and Sima Jiao, Siarong Zhao and Zoucheng Daju Cui Yao, Chariot Master Shi Yigaki, Middle Manager Cai Ke and others were also victimized by Li Feng's remaining party. As for those famous families drifting and migrating to attach themselves to Zou, they all died.

古文：初，鄴中虽府库虚竭，而腾资用甚饶。
现代文：当初，邺中虽然库存空虚，而司马腾的资财用度很富裕。
English: At first, although the inventory was empty, Sima Teng's financial resources were very rich.

古文：性俭啬，无所振惠，临急，乃赐将士米可数升，帛各丈尺，是以人不为用，遂致于祸。
现代文：司马腾生性节省吝啬，对人不予赈济恩惠，临到事情急迫，才赐给将士大约几升米，帛各一丈零几尺，因而军民不为他出力，于是导致灾祸。
English: Sima Tengs innate frugality was stingy, and he did not grant favors to people. When things were urgent, he only gave soldiers about a few liters of rice and a few feet of rice each. As a result, the military and the people did not work for him, which led to disaster.

古文：及苟晞救鄴，桑还平阳。
现代文：等到苟晞救邺，汲桑退回平阳。
English: After the rescue, Kuisang returned to Pingyang.

古文：于时盛夏，尸烂坏不可复识，腾及三子骸骨不获。
现代文：当时是盛夏，尸体腐烂无法辨识，司马腾及三个儿子的尸骨没有得到。
English: It was midsummer, and the decomposed bodies were unrecognizable. The bones of Sima Teng and his three sons were never found.

古文：庶子确立。
现代文：庶子司马确继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his illegitimate son Sima Ji.

古文：庄王确，字嗣安，历东中郎将、都督豫州诸军事，镇许昌。
现代文：庄王司马确字嗣安，历任东中郎将、都督豫州诸军事，镇守许昌。
English: Zhuang Wang Sima Ji Zi An, successively the East Middle Lord, the military governor of Yuzhou, and the town guard Xu Chang.

古文：永嘉末，为石勒所害。
现代文：永嘉末年，被石勒杀害。
English: At the end of Yongjia's life, he was killed by Shi Le.

古文：无子，初以章武王混子滔奉其祀，其后复以汝南威王祐子弼为确后。
现代文：没有儿子，起初让章武王司马混的儿子司马滔供奉司马确的祭祀，后来又让汝南威王司马枯的儿子司马弼做司马确的后人。
English: He did not have a son, so at first he had Zhangwu's King Sima Ming's son Sima Tao offer a sacrifice to Sima Ji, and later he had Renanwei's King Sima Kui's son Sima Ye become Sima Ji's descendant.

古文：太兴元年薨，无子，又以弼弟邈嗣确，位至侍中。
现代文：太兴元年去世，没有儿子，又让司马弼的弟弟司马邈继承司马确，官位到侍中。
English: Tai Hing died in the first year of the year, without a son, and let Sima Yi's younger brother Sima Yi succeed Sima Ji, and the official rank went to the chamberlain.

古文：薨，子晃立，拜散骑侍郎。
现代文：去世，儿子司马晃继嗣，官拜散骑侍郎。
English: He died, and his son, Sima Akira, became his successor. He was given the official title of Sanki-zamiro.

古文：桓温废武陵王，免晃为庶人，徙衡阳。
现代文：桓温废黜武陵王，罢免司马晃为庶人，迁徙到衡阳。
English: Kuan Wen deposed King Wuling, dismissed Sima Qiao as a commoner, and moved to Hengyang.

古文：孝武帝立晃弟崇继邈后，为奴所害，子惠立。
现代文：孝武帝立司马晃的弟弟司马崇继嗣司马邈，被奴仆害死，儿子司马惠继嗣。
English: Emperor Xiaowu appointed Sima Chong, the younger brother of Sima Akira, as the successor to Sima Ye, who was killed by a slave, and his son Sima Hui became the successor.

古文：宋受禅，国除。
现代文：宋接受禅让，封国被取消。
English: Song accepted Zen's concession, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：南阳王模，字元表，少好学，与元帝及范阳王虓俱有称于宗室。
现代文：南阳王司马模字元表，年少时好学，与元帝及范阳王司马械都在宗室中有名望。
English: Nanyang Wang Sima Moji Font Table, eager to learn when he was young, and Yuan Di and Fan Yang Wang Sima Machinery are both famous in the family.

古文：初封平昌公。
现代文：起初被封为平昌公。
English: At first, he was given the title of PyeongChang Prince.

古文：惠帝末，拜冗从仆射，累迁太子庶子、员外散骑常侍。
现代文：惠帝末年，官拜冗从仆射，逐渐迁任太子庶子、员外散骑常侍。
English: At the end of Emperor Hui's reign, he was appointed to the position of prince's illegitimate son and non-commissioned officer's equerry.

古文：成都王颖奔长安，东海王越以模为北中郎将，镇鄴。
现代文：成都王司马颖跑到长安，东海王越任命司马模为北中郎将，镇守邺。
English: Chengdu Wang Sima Ying ran to Chang'an, and the East Sea Wang Yue appointed Sima Mow to be the North Vice Admiral and the town guard.

古文：永兴初，成都王颖故帐下督公师籓、楼权、郝昌等攻鄴，模左右谋应之。
现代文：永兴初年，成都王司马颖过去的帐下督公师籓、楼权、郝昌等人攻打邺，司马模手下人谋划策应。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, Chengdu Wang Sima Ying was attacked by his former subordinates, such as Gu Zhisheng, Lou Quan and Qichang, and Sima Meng's subordinates planned countermeasures.

古文：广平太守丁邵率众救模，范阳王虓又遣兗州刺史苟晞援之，籓等散走。
现代文：广平太守丁邵率众救司马模，范阳王司马嫉又派奎业刺史苞肿救援他，公应醒等人离散逃跑了。
English: Guangping Taishu Ding Shao led the crowd to rescue Sima Miao, Fan Yang Wang Sima Yin also sent Kui Ye to rescue him, and Gong Ying Xing and others scattered and fled.

古文：迁镇东大将军，镇许昌。
现代文：迁任镇东大将军，镇守许昌。
English: He was transferred to the post of the general of the town of Dongdae and became the town guard of Xuchang.

古文：进爵南阳王。
现代文：进升爵位为南阳王。
English: Nanyang Wang was promoted to the peerage.

古文：永嘉初，转征西大将军、开府、都督秦雍梁益诸军事，代河间王颙镇关中。
现代文：永嘉初年，转任征西大将军、开府、都督秦雍梁益诸军事，代替河间王颙镇守关中。
English: In the first year of Yongjia, he was transferred to be the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, the governor of Kaifu, and the military governor of Qin Yongliangyik, and replaced the guard of Wangye Town in Kawama.

古文：模感丁邵之德，敕国人为邵生立碑。
现代文：司马模感激丁邵的恩德，命令国人为工邵生前立碑。
English: Sima Mo was grateful for Ding Shao's kindness, and ordered the Chinese to erect a monument in front of the worker Shao Sheng.

古文：时关中饥荒，百姓相敢，加以疾疠，盗贼公行。
现代文：当时关中饥荒，百姓人吃人，再加上疾病瘟疫，盗贼公然作恶。
English: At that time, there was famine in Guanzhong, and people were eating each other. In addition, there were diseases and plagues, and thieves were openly committing evil.

古文：模力不能制，乃铸铜人钟鼎为釜器以易谷，议者非之。
现代文：司马模的力量不能控制，于是把铜人钟鼎铸成炊具来换粮食，议论的人否定这种做法。
English: Sima Miao's strength could not be controlled, so he cast the bronze man Zhong Ding into a cooking utensil to exchange for grain. Commentators deny this practice.

古文：东海王越表征模为司空，遣中书监傅祗代之。
现代文：东海王司马越上表征召司马模为司空，派遣中书监傅祗代替司马模。
English: The king of the East China Sea, Sima Yue, summoned Sima Miao to serve as Secretary of the Air Force, and dispatched the Chinese Literature Supervisor Fu Yao to replace Sima Miao.

古文：模谋臣淳于定说模曰： 关中天府之国，霸王之地。
现代文：司马模的谋臣淳于定劝说司马模说： 关中是天府之国，是霸王的地域。
English: Sima Miao's strategist, Jun Yu Ding, persuaded Sima Miao to say: Guanzhong is the country of heaven, the region of the overlord.

古文：今以不能绥抚而还，既于声望有亏，又公兄弟唱起大事，而并在朝廷，若自强则有专权之罪，弱则受制于人，非公之利也。 
现代文：要是因为不能安抚而回朝，已经对声望有损了。再说公的兄弟倡导大事，而两人都在朝廷，如果自身强大则有专权的罪名，软弱则被别人控制，回朝对您不是件有利的事。 
English: If you return to the imperial court because you can't be placated, you've already damaged your reputation. Furthermore, it's not a good thing for you to return to the imperial court when your brother is advocating major issues and both of you are in the imperial court. If you're strong, you'll be accused of being authoritarian, and if you're weak, you'll be controlled by others.

古文：模纳其言，不就徵。
现代文：司马模采纳了他的话，不赴征召。
English: Sima Miao accepted his words and did not go for conscription.

古文：表遣世子保为西中郎将、东羌校尉，镇上邽，秦州刺史裴苞距之。
现代文：上表派遣长子司马保为西中郎将、东羌校尉，镇守上郢，秦州刺史裴苞拒绝司马保。
English: The eldest son, Sima Bao, was sent to the above table as the West Vice Admiral, the East Vice Captain, the Town Marshal of the Upper Yangtze River, and the Qin State Vice Admiral Pei Jun refused Sima Bao.

古文：模使帐下都尉陈安率众攻苞，苞奔安定。
现代文：司马模派帐下都尉陈安率众人攻打裴苞，裴苞跑到安定。
English: Sima Miao sent his lieutenant Chen An to lead the people to attack Pei Yao, and Pei Yao ran to the stable.

古文：太守贾疋以郡迎苞，模遣军司谢班伐疋，疋退卢水。
现代文：太守买疋率领郡人迎接裴苞，司马模派军司谢班伐贾疋，贾疋逃跑到卢水。
English: Empress Dowager Maibao led the county people to welcome Pei Min, Sima Miao sent the military governor Xie Banwa Jia Min, and Jia Min fled to Lushui.

古文：其年，进位太尉、大都督。
现代文：这一年，进升为太尉、大都督。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to the rank of captain and grand governor.

古文：洛京倾覆，模使牙门赵染戍蒲坂，染求冯翊太守不得，怒，率众降于刘聪。
现代文：洛京被颠覆，司马模派牙门赵染守卫蒲坂，趟染向冯翊太守求援而不成，发怒，率众人投降了刘聪。
English: When Luojing was overthrown, Sima Miao sent Zhao Dye, the gatekeeper, to guard Puzhan. When Dye did not succeed in asking for help from Feng Yu, the empress dowager, he became angry and led the people to surrender to Liu Cong.

古文：聪使其子粲及染攻长安，模使淳于定距之，为染所败。
现代文：刘聪派他的儿子刘粲和趟染攻打长安，司马模派淳于定抵御，被趟染打败。
English: Liu Cong sent his sons Liu Xuan and Wazuye to attack Chang'an, while Sima Mu sent his son Jun Yu Ding to resist, but he was defeated by Wazuye.

古文：士众离叛，仓库虚竭，军祭酒韦辅曰： 事急矣，早降可以免。 
现代文：众人背叛逃离，仓库空虚，军祭酒韦辅说： 事情紧急了，早投降可以免难。 
English: People are defecting and fleeing, warehouses are empty, and Wei Wei, a military celebrant, says: "The situation is urgent, and an early surrender is inevitable."

古文：模从之，遂降于染。
现代文：司马模听从了他，于是投降了赵染。
English: Sima Miao obeyed him and surrendered to Zhao Zhen.

古文：染箕踞攘袂数模之罪，送诣粲。
现代文：赵染脚朝前坐着捋起袖子数落司马模的罪名，送到刘粲那裹。
English: Zhao Dyeing, sitting with his feet facing forward and his sleeves rolled up, was sent to Liu Xi'an to be wrapped.

古文：粲杀之，以模妃刘氏赐胡张本为妻。
现代文：刘粲杀了司马模，把司马模的妃子刘氏赐给胡人张本做妻子。
English: Liu Ye killed Sima Miao and gave Sima Miao's concubine Liu to Hu's man Zhang Ben to be his wife.

古文：子保立。
现代文：司马模的儿子司马保继嗣。
English: Sima Bao, the son of Sima Mo, became the successor.

古文：保字景度，少有文义，好述作。
现代文：司马保字景度，年少时有文采，喜好著述写作。
English: Sima Baozhe scenic beauty, when he was young, he was literate and liked to write.

古文：初拜南阳国世子。
现代文：起初被封为南阳国世子。
English: At first, he was named the heir of Nanyang.

古文：模遇害，保在邽上。
现代文：司马模遇害时，司马保在上郢。
English: When Sima Meng was killed, Sima Bao was on the gallows.

古文：其后贾疋死，裴苞又为张轨所杀，保全有秦州之地，自号大司马，承制置百官。
现代文：以后买疋死了，裴苞又被张轨杀了，司马保完全控制了秦州的地域，自己号称大司马，秉承旨意设置百官。
English: After that, Miao Yao died, Pei Yao was killed by Zhang Railing, and Sima Bao completely controlled the Qinzhou region. He called himself the great Sima and set up hundreds of officials in accordance with his will.

古文：陇右氐羌并从之，凉州刺史张寔遣使贡献。
现代文：陇右氐羌都依从了他，凉州刺史张窟派使节贡献。
English: All the princes obeyed him, and the envoys of the Zhang Gu faction in Liangzhou sent their contributions.

古文：及愍帝即位，以保为右丞相，加侍中、都督陕西诸军事。
现代文：等到愍帝即位，任命司马保为右丞相，加任侍中、都督陕西诸军事。
English: When Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, he appointed Sima Bao as the minister of the right, and he also appointed him as a chamberlain and the military governor of Shaanxi.

古文：寻进位相国。
现代文：不久进位为相国。
English: Soon to be promoted to partner country.

古文：模之败也，都尉陈安归于保，保命统精勇千余人以讨羌，宠遇甚厚。
现代文：司马模失败后，都尉陈安投奔了司马保，司马保命令他统率精兵勇士一千余人去讨伐羌，对陈安宠幸待遇优厚。
English: After the failure of Sima Miao, Captain Chen An defected to Sima Bao. Sima Bao ordered him to lead more than a thousand elite soldiers to fight against the Han, and Chen An was favored with generous treatment.

古文：保将张春等疾之，谮安有异志，请除之，保不许。
现代文：司马保的将领张春等人妒忌，诬陷陈安有二心，请求除掉他，司马保不同意。
English: Sima Bao's general Zhang Chun and others were jealous, framed Chen An as being double-minded, and requested that he be eliminated. Sima Bao did not agree.

古文：春等辄伏客以刺安，安被创，驰还陇城，遣使诣保，贡献不绝。
现代文：张春等人就埋伏刺客刺杀陈安，陈安受伤，跑回陇城，派使者到司马保处，朝贡不断。
English: Zhang Chun and others ambushed the assassins and assassinated Chen An. Chen An was injured and ran back to Lucheng. He sent an envoy to the Sima Bao office, and the tributes continued.

古文：愍帝之蒙尘也，保自称晋王。
现代文：愍帝蒙受耻辱后，司马保自称晋王。
English: After the humiliation of Emperor Xuan, Sima Bao proclaimed himself the new king.

古文：时上邽大饥，士众窘困，张春奉保之南安。
现代文：当时上邦饥荒严重，官兵困窘，张春护送司马保去南安。
English: At that time, the famine in Shangpang was severe and the officers and soldiers were in dire straits. Zhang Chun escorted Sima Bao to Nan'an.

古文：陈安自号秦州刺史，称籓于刘曜。
现代文：陈安自己封任秦州刺史，对刘曜自称属地。
English: Chen An appointed himself as the governor of Qin State, and claimed to be a vassal of Liu You.

古文：春复奉保奔桑城，将投于张寔。
现代文：张春又护送司马保奔往桑城，将投奔张富。
English: Zhang Chun also escorted Sima Bao to Kuangcheng, and will rush to Zhang Fu.

古文：寔使兵迎保，实御之也。
现代文：张宫派兵迎接司马保，实际上是防备他。
English: Zhang Gong sent soldiers to meet Sima Bao, but actually to guard against him.

古文：是岁，保病薨，时年二十七。
现代文：这一年，司星堡病死，时年二十七岁。
English: That year, Sternberg fell ill and died at the age of 27.

古文：保体质丰伟，尝自称重八百斤。
现代文：旦屋堡身高体胖，曾自称体重八百斤。
English: Tanya Fort is tall and fat, and once claimed to weigh 800 pounds.

古文：喜睡，痿疾，不能御妇人。
现代文：好睡觉，有阳痿的毛病，不能与女子交合。
English: He sleeps well, suffers from impotence and is unable to have sexual intercourse with women.

古文：无子，张春立宗室司马瞻奉保后。
现代文：没有儿子，张春立宗室司马瞻继嗣。
English: There was no son, but Zhang Chunli's father's wife, Sima Zhan, became his successor.

古文：陈安举兵攻春，春走，瞻降于安，安送诣刘曜，曜杀之。
现代文：陈安起兵攻打张春，张春逃跑，司马瞻投降了陈安，陈安把他送交刘曜，刘曜杀了他。
English: Chen An raised an army to attack Zhang Chun, Zhang Chun fled, Sima Zhan surrendered to Chen An, Chen An sent him to Liu You, Liu You killed him.

古文：安迎保丧，以天子礼葬于上邽，谥曰元。
现代文：陈安迎接司马保的灵柩，按天子的礼节把司马保葬在上郢，谧号是元。
English: Chen An greeted Sima Bao's coffin, and according to the etiquette of the son of heaven, buried Sima Bao in the upper coffin. His posthumous name was Yuan.

古文：范阳康王绥，字子都，彭城王权季弟也，初为谏议大夫。
现代文：范阳康王司马绥字子都，是彭城王司马权的小弟。起初任谏议大夫。
English: Fan Yang Kang Wang Sima Zi Zidu is the younger brother of Pengcheng Wang Sima Quan. At first, he served as a doctor of consultation.

古文：泰始元年受封，在位十五年。
现代文：泰始元年受封，在位十五年。
English: He was enthroned in the first year of the Tai Dynasty and reigned for fifteen years.

古文：咸宁五年薨，子虓立焉。
现代文：咸宁五年去世，儿子司马虓继嗣。
English: Xianning died five years later and was succeeded by his son Sima Yi.

古文：虓字武会，少好学，驰誉，研考经记，清辩，能言论。
现代文：司马虓字武会，年少时好学有名声，研究考订经典，善发言论且清晰明辩。
English: Sima Zang, a member of the Chinese Martial Arts Association, had a reputation for being eager to learn when he was young. He studied classics, was good at speech theory, and was able to argue clearly.

古文：以宗室选拜散骑常侍，累迁尚书。
现代文：因为是宗室亲属，被选任散骑常侍，逐渐迁升为尚书。
English: Because he was a relative of the family, he was chosen to be a samurai and was gradually promoted to Shoshu.

古文：出为安南将军、都督豫州诸军事、持节，镇许昌，进位征南将军。
现代文：出任安南将军、都督豫州诸军事、持节，镇守许昌，进位为征南将军。
English: He served as General Annan, the military governor of Yuzhou, held festivals, and the town guard Xu Chang, and was promoted to the position of General of the Southern Expedition.

古文：河间王颙表立成都王颖为太弟，为王浚所破，挟天子还洛阳。
现代文：河间王司马颙上表立盛都王司艳为太弟，王浚打败，挟持天子回到洛阳。
English: Wang Shiyan, the eldest son of Wang Sima, was crowned as the younger brother of Wang Shiyan, the eldest son of Wang Jian. Wang Shiyan defeated Wang Shiyan and took him back to Luoyang.

古文：虓与东平王楙、镇东将军周馥等上言曰： 自愍怀被害，皇储不建，委重前相，辄失臣节。
现代文：司马虓与东平王司马柳、镇东将军周馥等人向皇帝进言说：自从愍怀太子被害，没有设置皇位继承人，把重任交给前相，就失去了做臣的节操。
English: Sima Qian, Dongping King Sima Liu, Zhendong General Zhou Qian and others made a speech to the emperor, saying: Since the death of Zhou Huai, there has been no heir to the throne, and the important task has been handed over to the former minister, he has lost the discipline of being a minister.

古文：是以前年太宰与臣，永惟社稷之贰，不可久空，所以共启成都王颖，以为国副。
现代文：因此前年太宰与臣下长久地考虑太子的人选，不能长期空缺，所以一同启奏以成都王司马颖作为太子。
English: Therefore, the year before last, the Dazaifu and his vassals considered the candidate for the prince for a long time, and it could not be vacant for a long time. Therefore, Wang Sima Ying from Chengdu was chosen as the prince.

古文：受重之后，而弗克负荷。 小人勿用 ，而以为腹心。
现代文：司马颖接受重任后，而不能挑起重担。 小人不用 ，而当成了心腹。
English: After Sima Ying accepted the heavy responsibility, she could not lift the burden. Instead of being a villain, she became a confidant.

古文：骨肉宜敦，而猜佻荐至，险讠皮宜远，而谗说殄行。
现代文：骨肉间应当敦厚，而猜忌轻薄一再出现。阴险邪僻应当疏远，而谗言蜂起。
English: The flesh and blood should be close-knit, but suspicions and suspicions repeatedly appear. Sinister and perverse should be alienated, and gossip should rise up.

古文：此皆臣等不聪不明，失所宗赖。
现代文：这都是我们不聪明，在尊奉依赖人上失策。
English: It's all because we're not smart, and we've made mistakes in respecting and relying on others.

古文：遂令陛下谬于降授，虽戮臣等，不足以谢天下。
现代文：于是让陛下在授权上出错，就是杀了我们，也不足以向天下谢罪。
English: So letting His Majesty make a mistake in the authorization, that is, killing us, is not enough to apologize to the world.

古文：今大驾还宫，文武空旷，制度荒破，靡有孑遗，臣等虽劣，足匡王室。
现代文：如今皇帝回宫，文武官员空缺，制度荒废破坏，没有残存。臣等虽然低劣，但足以匡辅王室。
English: Today, the emperor has returned to the palace, the positions of civil and military officials are vacant, the system has been devastated and destroyed, and there is nothing left. Although inferior, the vassals are enough to support the royal family.

古文：而道路之言，谓张方与臣等不同。
现代文：外界传说，张方与我们不同。
English: According to the outside world, Zhang Fang is different from us.

古文：既惜所在兴异，又以太宰惇德允元，著于具瞻，每当义节，辄为社稷宗盟之先。
现代文：既惋惜他在任上作乱，又想到太宰的淳厚有德诚信善良，有目共睹，在道义节操面前，就作为国家宗族盟友的榜样。
English: While regretting that he caused turmoil while in office, I also think of Dazai's honesty, virtue, sincerity and kindness, which are obvious to all. In the face of moral rigor, he serves as a role model for the country's clan allies.

古文：张方受其指教，为国效节。
现代文：张方受他的指点教诲，为国家奉献节操。
English: Zhang Fang was instructed by him and devoted himself to the country.

古文：昔年之举，有死无贰。
现代文：往年的举动，宁可死也没有二心。
English: The behavior of previous years, I'd rather die than have second thoughts.

古文：此即太宰之良将，陛下之忠臣。
现代文：造就是太宰的良将，陛下的忠臣。
English: Zou is a good general of Dazai, a loyal vassal of His Majesty.

古文：但以受性强毅，不达变通，遂守前志，已致纷纭。
现代文：衹是因为生性刚强坚定，不能做到随机应变，于是固守先前的志向，以致产生混乱。
English: Because they are naturally strong and firm, they cannot make random contingencies, so they stick to their previous aspirations, resulting in confusion.

古文：然退思惟，既是其不易之节，且虑事翻之后，为天下所罪，故不即西还耳。
现代文：然而退一步考虑，既要肯定他不改易的节操，而且想到他事态变化后，被天下怪罪，因而不立即回到西部。
English: But let us step back for a moment, and be sure of his steadfastness, and remember that he was blamed by the whole world for not immediately returning to the West after the turn of events.

古文：原其本事，实无深责。
现代文：追究事情的本末，实在没有深重的遇责。
English: There is no serious criminal responsibility in pursuing the root of the matter.

古文：臣闻先代明主，未尝不全护功臣，令福流子孙。
现代文：我们听说先代开明的君主，总是成全保护功臣，使福泽流传给子孙。
English: We have heard that the enlightened monarchs of the past always protected meritorious heroes, so that the blessings would be passed down to their children and grandchildren.

古文：自中间以来，陛下功臣初无全者，非独人才皆劣，其于取祸，实由朝廷策之失宜，不相容恕。
现代文：自从中间以来，陛下的功臣开始没有能保全的人，并不是人才都差，他们招致祸患，实在是因为朝廷政策的不当，不能相互包容宽恕。
English: Since the middle of the century, His Majesty's meritorious vassals have begun to have no one who can protect them. It is not that they are all poor in talent, but that they have caused misfortune. It is really because of the improper policies of the imperial court and the inability to tolerate and forgive each other.

古文：以一旦之咎，丧其积年之勋，既违《周礼》议功之典，且使天下之人莫敢复为陛下致节者。
现代文：因为一个早晨的过失，丧失多年的功勋，既违背了《周礼》评议功勋的典章，又使天下人没人敢再为陛下献出节操。
English: Because of one morning's mistake, the loss of many years of merit, not only violated the "Weekly Ritual" comment on the award of merit, but also made no one in the world dare to sacrifice for His Majesty.

古文：臣等此言，岂独为一张方，实为社稷远计，欲令功臣长守富贵。
现代文：我们这些话，难道仅仅为了一个张方，实在是为了国家长远打算，想让功臣长久拥有富贵。
English: These words of ours, are they just for the sake of one Zhang Fang, is it really for the sake of the country's long-term plan, to let the heroes have wealth for a long time.

古文：臣愚以为宜委太宰以关右之任，一方事重，及自州郡已下，选举授任，一皆仰成。
现代文：我们愚笨的想法认为应该把关右的重任交给太宰，一方的重大事情，以及自州郡以下，选举授职，全都仰望他的成功。
English: We foolishly thought that we should give the important task of Guan Zhen to Dazai. On the one hand, the important things, as well as the election and appointment of officials from prefecture to county, all looked up to his success.

古文：若朝之大事，废兴损益，每辄畴谘。
现代文：如果是朝廷中的大事，如废置起用减损增益，就向他咨询。
English: If it is a major event in the imperial court, such as the abolition of the use of loss and gain, consult him.

古文：此则二伯述职，周召分陕之义，陛下复行于今时。
现代文：造就是所谓二伯汇报政务，周公、召公分别治理陕的东西两侧的义理，陛下又在今天实行了。
English: This is the so-called principle of reporting government affairs to two deputies, and governing the eastern and western parts of Shaanxi separately. His Majesty has implemented it again today.

古文：遣方还郡，令群后申志，时定王室。
现代文：发遣张方回郡，让诸王伸张心意，随时安定王室。
English: Zhang Fang was sent back to the county, so that the kings could expand their minds and stabilize the royal family at any time.

古文：所加方官，请悉如旧。
现代文：授予张方的官职，请全部依照先前。
English: Please grant Zhang Fang's official position in accordance with the above.

古文：此则忠臣义士有劝，功臣必全矣。
现代文：这样就使得功臣义士努力，功臣必定能保全。
English: In this way, the hero and heroine will make efforts, and the hero and heroine will surely be able to preserve.

古文：司徒戎，异姓之贤；司空越，公族之望，并忠国爱主，小心翼翼，宜干机事，委以朝政。
现代文：司徒戎，是异姓的贤士；司空司马越，是公族的名人，两人都忠于国家爱戴君主，小心翼翼，适合干机要的国事，交给他们朝政。
English: Both of them were loyal to the country, loved the monarch, were careful, and were suitable for doing important state affairs. They were entrusted with governing the country.

古文：安北将军王浚佐命之胤，率身履道，忠亮清正，远近所推。
现代文：安北将军王浚是佐助天命者的后代，躬行道义，忠诚清廉，被远近的人推崇。
English: Anbei General Wang Jun is a descendant of Sasuke the Man of Destiny. He is moral, loyal and incorruptible, and is respected by people near and far.

古文：如今日之大举，实有定社稷之勋，此是臣等所以叹息归高也。
现代文：像如今这样大的举动，实在是有安定国家的功勋，这是我们叹息崇敬的原因。
English: A move as big as this is a credit to the stability of the country, and it is a reason for us to sigh with admiration.

古文：浚宜特崇重之，以副群望，遂抚幽朔，长为北籓。
现代文：对王浚应该特别推崇重用，来符合大家的期望，顺利地镇抚幽朔，长久地做北部的藩篱。
English: Wang Jun should be especially respected and reused to meet everyone's expectations, successfully pacify Yushaku, and make the northern barrier for a long time.

古文：臣等竭力扞城，籓屏皇家，陛下垂拱，而四海自正。
现代文：我们竭力保卫疆土，捍卫皇室，陛下不用费气力，四海自然平定。
English: We are doing our best to defend our territory and safeguard the imperial family. Your Majesty does not need to make any effort, and the four seas will be naturally pacified.

古文：则四祖之业，必隆于今，日月之晖，昧而复曜。
现代文：那么四代祖先的事业，必定在今日兴盛。日月的光辉，昏暗后又复明。
English: Then the cause of the four generations of ancestors must be flourishing today. The brilliance of the sun and the moon, after dimming, becomes bright again.

古文：乞垂三思，察臣所言。
现代文：恳请陛三思，考察我们的言论。
English: I implore Your Majesty to think twice and examine our words.

古文：又可以臣表西示太宰。 
现代文：又可把我们的上表给西部的太宰看。
English: We can also show our top table to the western Dazaifu.

古文：又表曰： 成都王失道，为奸邪所误，论王之身，不宜深责。
现代文：又上表说： 成都王背离道义，被奸邪耽误，说到王本人，不该过分责备。
English: The above-mentioned table also said: The king of Chengdu deviated from morality and was delayed by treachery. As for the king himself, he should not be blamed excessively.

古文：且先帝遗体，陛下群弟，自元康以来，罪戮相等，实海内所为匈匈，而臣等所以痛心。
现代文：再说先帝的后代，陛下的众兄弟，自从元康以来，惩处杀戮不断，海内实在正是为此而纷乱，而我们这些臣子正是为此而痛心。
English: Furthermore, the descendants of the former emperor, His Majesty's brothers, have been punished and killed incessantly since Yuan Kang. It is precisely for this reason that the country is in turmoil, and it is for this reason that we, the courtiers, are heartbroken.

古文：今废成都，更封一邑，宜其必许。
现代文：假如废掉成都王，改封一个城邑，他应当是赞许的。
English: If the king of Chengdu were to be abolished and a new city named after him, he would approve.

古文：若废黜寻有祸害，既伤陛下矜慈之恩，又令远近恆谓公族无复骨肉之情，此实臣等内省悲惭，无颜于四海也。
现代文：如果废黜不久产生祸害，既伤害了陛下同情仁慈的恩典，又让远近的人总说王族不再有骨肉亲情，这实在是我们内自省察悲伤惭愧，在四海之内没有脸面的事。
English: If the dethronement soon produces a calamity, both hurting His Majesty's compassion and benevolent grace, and letting people far and near always say that the royal family no longer has flesh and blood relatives, this is really a matter of sorrow and shame for us, and there is no face in the four seas.

古文：乞陛下察臣忠款。 
现代文：恳请陛下体察我们的真诚。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to feel our sincerity.

古文：于是虓先率众自许屯于荥阳。
现代文：于是司马城先率众人从许转到荣阳驻扎。
English: As a result, Sima Cheng led everyone from Xu to Rongyang.

古文：会惠帝西迁，虓与从兄平昌公模、长史冯嵩等刑白马臿血而盟，推东海王越为盟主，虓都督河北诸军事、骠骑将军、持节，领豫州刺史。
现代文：适逢惠帝西迁，司马城和堂兄平昌公司马模、长史冯嵩等人杀白马歃血结盟，推举东海王司马越为盟主，司马嫉都督河北诸军事、骠骑将军、持节，兼豫州刺史。
English: At the time of Hui Di's move to the West, Sima Cheng and his cousin, PyeongChang Company's Ma Meng, Chang Shi Feng Song and others made an alliance to kill the white horse, elected the East Sea King Sima Yue as the leader, and Sima Yin as the governor of Hebei Province, military, riding generals, holding festivals, and making history in Yuzhou.

古文：刘乔不受越等节度，乘虚破许。
现代文：刘乔不接受司马越等人节制，乘虚攻破许。
English: Liu Qiao did not accept the restraint of Sima Yue and others, and took advantage of the false attack to break the promise.

古文：虓自拔渡河，王浚表虓领翼州刺史，资以兵马。
现代文：司马城自己移师渡黄河，王浚上表请司马嫉兼冀州刺史，资助他兵马。
English: Sima Cheng himself moved his army to cross the Yellow River, and Wang Jun sent a request to Sima Yin and Jizhou Zhishi to finance his army.

古文：虓入翼州发兵，又南济河，破乔等。
现代文：司马嫉进入冀州调动军队，又向南渡黄河，攻破刘乔等人。
English: Sima Yin entered Jizhou to mobilize the army, and then crossed the Yellow River to the south to defeat Liu Qiao and others.

古文：河间王颙闻乔败，斩张方，传首于越。
现代文：河间王司马腮听说刘乔战败，杀了张方，把首级传送给司马越。
English: When Wang Simayu heard that Liu Qiao had been defeated, he killed Zhang Fang and sent his head to Simayu.

古文：越与虓西迎帝，而颙出奔。
现代文：司马越与司马嫉向西迎接皇帝，而司马颗出逃。
English: Sima Yue and Sima Yin went west to meet the emperor, while Sima Di fled.

古文：于是奉天子还都，拜虓为司徒。
现代文：于是护送天子回都城，拜司马嫉为司徒。
English: Therefore, they escorted Tianzi back to the capital city, and prayed for Sima Yin to become a disciple.

古文：永兴三年暴疾薨，时年三十七。
现代文：永兴三年得暴病去世，时年三十七岁。
English: Yongxing died of a violent illness three years later, at the age of 37.

古文：无子，养模子黎为嗣，黎随模就国，于长安遇害。
现代文：没有儿子，领养司马模的儿子司马黎继嗣。司马黎跟随司马模去自己的封国，在长安遇害。
English: He had no son, so he adopted Sima Li, the son of Sima Miao, as his successor. Sima Li followed Sima Miao to his own fiefdom and was killed in Chang'an.

古文：济南惠王遂，字子伯，宣帝弟魏鸿胪丞恂之子也。
现代文：济南惠王司马遂字子伯，是宣帝的弟弟魏鸿胪丞司马恂的儿子。
English: Jinan Hui Wang Sima Sui Zi Bo was the son of Emperor Xuan's younger brother, Emperor Wei Hongzhi.

古文：仕魏关内侯，进封平昌亭侯，历典军郎将。
现代文：任魏的关内侯，进封为干昌亭侯，历任典军郎将。
English: He served as Kwanai marquis in the Wei Dynasty, and as Ganchangteen marquis in the Jin Dynasty, and successively served as a military commander.

古文：景元二年，转封武城乡侯、督鄴城守诸军事、北中郎将。
现代文：景元二年，转封武城乡侯、督邺城守诸军事、北中郎将。
English: In the second year of the reign of King Jingyuan, he was transferred from a feudal lord to the military commander of Wucheng Township, the governor of Wucheng Castle, and the commander of the Northern Middle Palace Guards.

古文：五等建，封祝阿伯，累迁冠军将军。
现代文：五等爵位建立，封为祝阿伯，逐渐迁任冠军将军。
English: The fifth-class title of nobility was established, and he was given the title of Zhu Abo, and was gradually transferred to the title of Champion General.

古文：武帝受禅，封济南王。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，封他为济南王。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's resignation and made him the king of Jinan.

古文：泰始二年薨。
现代文：泰始二年去世。
English: Taishi died two years later.

古文：二子：耽、缉。
现代文：有两个儿子：司马耽、司马缉。
English: They have two sons: Sima Tan and Sima Ji.

古文：耽嗣立，咸宁三年徙为中山王。
现代文：司马耽继嗣，咸宁三年改封为中山王。
English: Sima Tan's successor, Xianning changed his title to Zhongshan King three years later.

古文：是年薨，无子，缉继。
现代文：这一年去世，没有儿子，司马缉继嗣。
English: He died that year without a son, leaving Sima Jiao as his heir.

古文：成都王颖以缉为建威将军，与石熙等率众距王浚，没于阵，薨。
现代文：盛昼旺司马颖任命司马缉为建威将军，与互飓等人率军众抵御王撞，陷落在战阵中，去世。
English: In the middle of the day, Wang Zima Ying appointed Zima Ji as the general of Jianwei, and led the army to resist Wang Qian with the mutual hurricanes and others. He was trapped in the battle and died.

古文：无子，国除。
现代文：没有儿子，封国被取消。
English: Without a son, the state was abolished.

古文：后遂之曾孙勋字伟长，年十余岁，愍帝末，长安陷，刘曜将令狐泥养为子。
现代文：后来，司马遂的曾孙司马勋字伟长，年纪十多岁，愍帝末期，长安陷落，刘曜的将领令狐泥领养司马勋为儿子。
English: Later, the great-grandson of Sima Sui, Sima Xun Zi Wei Chang, was more than ten years old, at the end of the Qian Dynasty, the fall of Chang'an, and the general of Liu You ordered the fox mud to adopt Sima Xun as his son.

古文：及壮，便弓马，能左右射，咸和六年，自关右还，自列云 是大长秋恂之玄孙，冠军将军济南惠王遂之曾孙，略阳太守瓘之子 ，遂拜谒者仆射，以勇闻。
现代文：等到成年，熟悉射箭骑马，能左右开弓。咸和六年，从关右回来，自称 是大长秋司马恂的玄孙，冠军将军济南惠王司马遂的曾孙，略阳太守司马罐的儿子 ，于是官拜谒者仆射，以勇猛闻名。
English: When he became an adult, he was familiar with archery and horseback riding, and could open the bow to the left and right. Xian He, six years old, returned from Guanzhong, claiming to be the great-great-grandson of the great-grandson of the champion general Jinan Hui Wang Simasui, the great-grandson of the champion general Jinan Hui Wang Simasui, and the son of the great-grandson of the champion general Jinan Hui Wang Simasui, the son of the great-grandson of the champion general Jinan Hui Wang Simasui, and the son of the great-grands

古文：庾翼之镇襄阳，以梁州刺史援桓宣卒，请勋代之。
现代文：庾翼镇守襄阳时，因为梁州刺史桓宣死了，请求让司马勋代替。
English: When Gong Ying Zhen was guarding Xiangyang, he requested Sima Xun to replace him because Liang Zhou assassin Shi Huan Xuan had died.

古文：初屯西城，退守武当。
现代文：起初驻扎在西城，退守武当。
English: At first, he was stationed in the West Town and withdrew to Wudang.

古文：时石季龙死，中国乱，雍州诸豪帅驰告勋。
现代文：当时石季龙死了，中原动乱，雍州的豪族将帅们急速报告司马勋。
English: At that time, Shi Jilong died, the Central Plains were in turmoil, and the local warlords in Yongzhou quickly reported to Sima Xun.

古文：勋率众出骆谷，壁于悬钩，去长安二百里，遣部将刘焕攻长安，又拔贺城。
现代文：司马勋率军队出骆谷，在悬钩安营，离长安二百里，派遣部将刘焕攻长安，又夺取贺城。
English: Sima Xun led the army out of Luogu and set up camp in Hanghu, two hundred miles from Chang'an. He dispatched Liu Huan to attack Chang'an and capture Hecheng.

古文：于是关中皆杀季龙太守令长以应勋。
现代文：于是关中都杀死季龙手下的太守令长来响应司马勋。
English: As a result, all the officials in the Guanzhong killed Ji Long's commander-in-chief in response to Sima Xun.

古文：勋兵少，未能自固，复还梁州。
现代文：司马勋兵少，不能自我稳固，又退回梁州。
English: Sima Xun soldiers are few, unable to stabilize themselves, and returned to Liangzhou.

古文：永和中，张琚据陇东，遣使召勋，勋复入长安。
现代文：永和年间，张琚占据陇束，派使者召见司马勋，司马勋又进入长安。
English: During the Yonghe era, Zhang Ye occupied Shaoshu, sent an envoy to summon Sima Xun, and Sima Xun entered Chang'an.

古文：初，京兆人杜洪以豪族陵琚，琚以勇侠侮洪，洪知勋惮琚兵强，因说勋曰； 不杀张琚，关中非国家有也。 
现代文：当初，京兆人杜洪凭藉自己是豪门凌驾于张琚之上，张琚凭藉勇猛羞辱杜洪，杜洪知道司马勋怕张琚兵强，于是劝司马勋说： 不杀张琚，关中就不会归国家所有。 
English: At first, Du Hong, a man from Beijing and Shanghai, used his status as a wealthy man to dominate Zhang Ye, and Zhang Ye humiliated Du Hong with his bravery. Du Hong knew that Sima Xun was afraid of Zhang Ye's military strength, so he persuaded Sima Xun to say: If you don't kill Zhang Ye, Guanzhong won't be owned by the state.

古文：勋乃伪请琚，于坐杀之。
现代文：司马勋于是假装请张琚，在座上杀了他。
English: Sima Xun then pretended to invite Zhang Ye and killed him on the stage.

古文：琚弟走池阳，合众攻勋，频战不利，请和，归梁州。
现代文：张琚的弟弟跑到池阳，纠合兵力攻打司马勋，屡战不利，求和，回到梁州。
English: Zhang Yao's younger brother ran to Chiyang, gathered forces to attack Sima Xun, was repeatedly defeated, sued for peace, and returned to Liangzhou.

古文：后桓温伐关中，命勋出子午道，而为苻雄所败，退屯于女娲堡。
现代文：后来桓温攻伐关中，命令司马勋出兵子午道，而被苻雄打败；退兵驻扎在女娲堡。
English: Later, when Kuan Wen attacked Guanzhong, he ordered Sima Xun to send soldiers to the north, but was defeated by Shao Xiong; the retreating soldiers were stationed in the women's bunker.

古文：俄迁征虏将军，监关中军事，领西戎校尉，赐爵通吉亭侯。
现代文：不久迁任征虏将军，监关中军事，兼西戎校尉，赐爵为通吉亭侯。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of conscript general, inspector of customs and military, and captain of Xi Rong, and was given the title of Baron Tongjiting.

古文：为政暴酷，至于治中别驾及州之豪右，言语忤意，即于坐枭斩之，或引弓自射。
现代文：从政暴虐残酷，至于管辖下的别驾及州中的豪族，言语不顺他心意的，就在座位上杀掉，或拉弓自己射杀。
English: From the tyranny and cruelty of the government, as for the outcasts under the jurisdiction and the powerful families in the state, if the words do not suit his heart, he will kill them on the seat, or draw a bow and shoot himself.

古文：西土患其凶虐。
现代文：西方地域对他的凶虐忧虑。
English: The West is worried about his brutality.

古文：在州常怀据蜀，有僭伪之意。
现代文：在州中常想占据蜀地，有割据白封王朝的心思。
English: In the state, they often wanted to occupy Shu, and they had the idea of seceding from the Baifeng Dynasty.

古文：桓温闻之，务相绥怀，以其子康为汉中太守。
现代文：桓温听说后，致力于安抚关怀，让他的儿子司马康做汉中太守。
English: After hearing this, Kuan Wen devoted himself to appeasing Caring, and let his son Sima Kang become the Han Dynasty's grand marshal.

古文：勋逆谋巳成，惮益州刺史周抚，未发。
现代文：司马勋叛逆的谋划已经完成，因害怕益州刺史周抚，没有行动。
English: Sima Xun's treasonous plan had been completed, but he did not act for fear that Yizhou would assassinate him.

古文：及抚卒，遂拥众人剑阁。
现代文：等到周抚死了，于是就拥兵进入剑阁。
English: He waited until Zhou Fuzhi was dead, and then he led the soldiers into the Hall of Swords.

古文：梁州别驾雍端、西戎司马隗粹并切谏，勋皆诛之，自号梁益二州牧、成都王。
现代文：梁州别驾雍端、西戎司马隗粹一同恳切劝谏，都被司马勋杀了，自己号称梁益二州牧、成都王。
English: Liang Zhou, the governor of Yongduan, and Xi Rong, the governor of Xi Rong, both earnestly advised him, and were both killed by Sima Xun. He called himself the governor of Liang Zhou and the king of Chengdu.

古文：桓温遣硃序讨勋，勋兵溃，为序所获，及息陇子、长史梁惮、司马金壹等送于温，并斩之，传首京师。
现代文：桓温派朱庄讨伐司马勋，司马勋军队溃败，被塞庄俘获，与儿子垄王、长史塑、司马金童等被押送到担周那裹，都被杀了，传送首级到京师。
English: Kuan Wen sent Zhu Zhuang to fight Sima Xun, Sima Xun's army was defeated and captured by Xizhuang, and he and his son Ren Wang, Chang Shi Pu, Sima Jintong, etc. were escorted to Tan Zhou, all of whom were killed and sent to the Beijing Division.

古文：谯刚王逊，字子悌，宣帝弟魏中郎进之子也。
现代文：谯刚王司马逊字子悌，是宣帝的弟弟魏中郎司马进的儿子。
English: Gongang Wang Si Mazon Zi Zi, was the son of Emperor Xuan's younger brother Wei Zhong Lang Si Ma Jin.

古文：仕魏关内侯，改封城阳亭侯，参镇东军事，拜轻车将军、羽林左监。
现代文：任魏关内侯，改封城阳亭侯，参镇束军事，官拜轻车将军、羽林左监。
English: He served as Wei Guan Nei Hou, changed his title to Chengyang Ting Hou, was a member of the town's military, a general of light vehicles, and the left supervisor of Ulin.

古文：五等建，徙封泾阳男。
现代文：五等爵位建立，改封泾阳男。
English: The fifth-class title of nobility was established, and the title of Shanyangnong was changed.

古文：武帝受禅，封谯王，邑四千四百户。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，封他为谯王，封邑四千四百户。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen Zhen's offer and made him the king of the Xiongnu, with 4,400 fiefs.

古文：泰始二年薨。
现代文：泰始二年去世。
English: Taishi died two years later.

古文：二子：随、承。
现代文：有两个儿子：司马随、司马承。
English: They had two sons: Sima Sui and Sima Cheng.

古文：定王随立。
现代文：定王司马随继嗣。
English: Sadao Sima followed his successor.

古文：薨，子邃立，没于石勒，元帝以承嗣逊。
现代文：去世，儿子司马邃继嗣，死于石勒，元帝让司马承继嗣司马逊。
English: He died, and his son Sima Qian, the successor, died in Shilu, and the Yuan Emperor allowed Sima Qian to succeed Sima Qian.

古文：闵王承字敬才，少笃厚有志行。
现代文：闵王司马承字敬才，年少时忠厚有志气德行。
English: Wang Sima Chengzhi was known as an honorable man. When he was young, he was loyal and had a strong will.

古文：拜奉车都尉、奉朝请，稍迁广威将军、安夷护军，镇安定。
现代文：官拜奉车都尉、奉朝请，逐渐迁任广威将军、安夷护军，镇守安定。
English: He was appointed to the posts of Fengche captain and Fengchong, and was gradually transferred to the posts of Guangwei general, Anyi protector, and town guardian of stability.

古文：从惠帝还洛阳，拜游击将军。
现代文：跟从惠帝回洛阳，官拜游击将军。
English: He followed Hui Di back to Luoyang and paid homage to the guerrilla general.

古文：永嘉中，天下渐乱，间行依征南将军山简，会简卒，进至武昌。
现代文：永嘉年间，天下逐渐混乱，暗地裹依附征南将军山简，适逢山简去世，进入到武昌。
English: During the Yongjia years, the world gradually became chaotic, secretly clinging to the Southern General Shan Jian, coincided with the death of Shan Jian, and entered Wuchang.

古文：元帝初镇扬州，承归建康，补军谘祭酒。
现代文：元帝开始镇守扬州时，司马承回到建康，补任军谘祭酒。
English: When the Yuan Emperor began to garrison Yangzhou, Sima Cheng returned to Jiankang to fill the position of military adviser.

古文：愍帝征为龙骧将军，不行。
现代文：愍帝征召他为龙骧将军，不赴任。
English: Emperor Qian enlisted him as General Longyu, but he did not take up the post.

古文：元帝为晋王，承制更封承为谯王。
现代文：元帝做晋王，根据旨意改封司马承为谯王。
English: Emperor Yuan made him the King of Jin, and according to his will, he changed the title of Sima Cheng to the King of Zhou.

古文：太兴初，拜屯骑校尉，加辅国将军，领左军将军。
现代文：太兴初年，官拜屯骑校尉，加任辅国将军，兼左军将军。
English: In the first year of Taixing, he was promoted to the rank of cavalry captain, and was also appointed as the general of the auxiliary province and the general of the left army.

古文：承居官俭约，家无别室。
现代文：司马承做官节俭，不纳妾。
English: Sima Cheng is frugal as an official and does not take a concubine.

古文：寻加散骑常侍，辅国、左军如故。
现代文：不久加任散骑常侍，辅国、左军职位依旧。
English: He was soon promoted to straggler's aide, and the positions of auxiliary and left wing remained the same.

古文：王敦有无君之心，表疏轻慢。
现代文：王敦有不忠于国君之心，上表奏疏轻慢。
English: Wang Dun is disloyal to the heart of the sovereign, and his performance is slow and careless.

古文：帝夜召承，以敦表示之，曰： 王敦顷年位任足矣，而所求不已，言至于此，将若之何？ 
现代文：皇帝夜晚召来司马承，把王敦的表拿给他看，说： 王敦近年权位足够高了，而他想要的没止境，话说到这样，将对他怎么办呢? 
English: The emperor summoned Sima Cheng in the evening, showed him Wang Dun's watch, and said: Wang Dun's power has been high enough in recent years, and there is no end to what he wants. Having said that, what will happen to him?

古文：承曰： 陛下不早裁之，难将作矣。 
现代文：司马承说： 陛下不早裁决此事，灾难将会发生。 
English: Sima Cheng said: If His Majesty does not rule on this matter soon, a disaster will occur.

古文：帝欲树籓屏，会敦表以宣城内史沈充为湘州，帝谓承曰： 湘州南楚险固，在上流之要，控三州之会，是用武之国也。
现代文：皇帝想树立藩篱屏障，适逢王敦上表请求以宣城内史沈充任湘州刺史，皇帝对司马承说： 湘州南楚险要坚固，在上流的要害位置，控制三州的交会处，是能用兵的封地。
English: The emperor wanted to erect a barrier, and when Wang Dun requested the above table to proclaim the history of the city, the emperor said to Sima Cheng: Hunan Chu Huan should be strong, in the upstream key position, control the junction of the three states, is a fiefdom that can use soldiers.

古文：今以叔父居之，何如？ 
现代文：假如让叔父镇守，怎么样? 
English: What if we let my uncle keep the town?

古文：承曰： 臣幸托末属，身当宿卫，未有驱驰之劳，频受过厚之遇，夙夜自厉，思报天德。
现代文：司马承说： 我有幸托身于亲族，担任着保卫的职务，没有尽力效命的功劳，屡屡受到过于优厚的待遇，早晚勉励自己，想着报答上天的恩德。
English: Sima Cheng said: I have the privilege of entrusting myself to my relatives, serving as a guard, without the merit of doing my best, I have repeatedly received too generous treatment, I encourage myself morning and night, thinking about repaying God's grace.

古文：君之所命，惟力是视，敢有辞焉！
现代文：国君的命令，我衹有尽力，怎敢推辞呢!
English: How dare I refuse the sovereign's order when I have done my best!

古文：然湘州蜀寇之余，人物凋尽，若上凭天威，得之所莅，比及三年，请从戎役。
现代文：然而湘州是蜀国敌人遣留下来的，人物衰败穷尽，如果上凭天威，在官位上有所成就，等到了三年，请求让我从军服役。
English: However, Hunan was left behind by the enemies of Shu. My character was worn out. If I were to rely on the power of heaven, I could achieve something in my official position. After three years, they asked me to serve in the army.

古文：若未及此，虽复灰身，亦无益也。 
现代文：如果没能到那个地步即便是死了，亦没有好处。 
English: If you don't get to that point, even if you die, it's no good.

古文：于是诏曰： 夫王者体天理物，非群才不足济其务。
现代文：于是下韶书说： 身为王应体察天意治理万物，没有众多人才就不能完成大业。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict said: As a king, you should be aware of the will of heaven to govern all things. Without many talents, you cannot complete the great cause.

古文：外建贤哲，以树风声，内睦亲亲，以广籓屏。
现代文：对外起用贤士哲人，来树立风气名声，对内和睦亲属，来扩大藩篱屏障。
English: To the outside world, they use sages and philosophers to establish a culture and reputation, and to the inside world, they use harmonious relatives to expand the barriers.

古文：是以太公封齐，伯禽居鲁，此先王之令典，古今之通义也。
现代文：因此太公被封在齐，伯禽居住到鲁，这是先王的美好制度，是古今通行的道义。
English: For this reason, the grand dukes were sealed in the same way, and the grand dukes lived in Lu. This was the beautiful system of the former king, and it is the morality that has prevailed from ancient times to the present.

古文：我晋开基，列国相望，乃授琅邪武王，镇统东夏；汝南文成，总一淮许；扶风、梁王，迭据关右；爰暨东嬴，作司并州。
现代文：我晋开创基业，各国相望，于是授命琅邪武王，镇守统辖东夏；汝南文成，总管淮许；扶风、梁王，先后据守关右；及至束嬴，在并州设置官府。
English: I Jin initiated the foundation, and all countries looked forward to it, so I gave the order to establish the government offices in the following provinces: Dongxia, under the leadership of the town guard; Ru Nanwencheng, under the leadership of Huai Xu; Fufeng and Liangwang, under the leadership of Guan Yu; and Zuoying, under the leadership of the town guard.

古文：今公族虽寡，不逮曩时，岂得替旧章乎！
现代文：如今公族虽少，不比往昔，难道能废弃旧章程吗!
English: Today, although there are fewer publicans than in the past, can the old regulations really be abolished?

古文：散骑常侍、左将军、谯王承贞素款亮，志存忠恪，便蕃左右，恭肃弥著。
现代文：散骑常侍、左将军、谯王司马承贞洁诚信廉正，心存忠诚恭敬，作为左右的屏障，恭敬更显著。
English: The horseback riding attendants, the left general, and the eunuch king Sima Cheng are chaste, honest, and upright, and are loyal and respectful. As a barrier to the left and right, the respect is more prominent.

古文：今以承监湘州诸军事、南中郎将、湘州刺史。 
现代文：现在任命司马承监湘州诸军事、南中郎将、湘州刺史。 
English: Now, Sima Chengxuan has been appointed as the supervisor of the military of Hunan Province, the general of South China Province, and the historian of Hunan Province.

古文：初，刘隗以王敦威权太盛，终不可制，劝帝出诸心腹，以镇方隅。
现代文：当初，刘隗认为王敦威权太盛，最终难以控制，劝皇帝派出心腹，去镇守地方。
English: At first, Liu Bei thought that Wang Dun's authority was too strong and ultimately difficult to control, and persuaded the emperor to send a confidant to guard the area.

古文：故先以承为湘州，续用隗及戴若思等，并为州牧。
现代文：因而先派司马承就任于湘州，继而任用刘隗及戴若思等人，都做州牧。
English: Therefore, he first sent Sima Cheng to take office in Hunan, and then appointed Liu Wei and Dai Raushi and others to be provincial pastors.

古文：承行达武昌，释戎备见王敦。
现代文：司马承出行到达武昌，不带武装去见王敦。
English: Sima Cheng traveled to Wuchang and went to see Wang Dun without weapons.

古文：敦与之宴，欲观其意，谓承曰： 大王雅素佳士，恐非将帅才也。 
现代文：王敦为他设宴，想观察司马承的用意，对司马承说： 大王虽然是雅素有才之人，但恐怕不是将帅之才。 
English: Wang Dun held a banquet for him and wanted to observe Sima Cheng's intentions. He said to Sima Cheng: Although the great king is an elegant and talented person, I am afraid that he is not a talented general.

古文：承曰： 公未见知耳，铅刀岂不能一割乎！ 
现代文：司马承说： 公不一定知道，铅刀难道就不能一割吗! 
English: Sima Cheng said: The public does not necessarily know, can't the lead knife be one-tenth?

古文：承以敦欲测其情，故发此言。
现代文：司马承因为王敦想测试他的真情，所以这样说。
English: Sima Cheng said this because Wang Dun wanted to test his true feelings.

古文：敦果谓钱凤曰： 彼不知惧而学壮语，此之不武，何能为也。 
现代文：王敦果然对钱凤说： 他不知道害怕还学说豪迈的话，这种不懂武的人，能干什么。 
English: Wang Dun said to Qian Feng, "He doesn't know how to be afraid and still learns to be brave. What can such a person who doesn't know martial arts do?"

古文：听承之镇。
现代文：听任司马承赴任所。
English: He was appointed to the post by Sima Cheng.

古文：时湘土荒残，公私困弊，承躬自俭约，乘苇茭车，而倾心绥抚，甚有能名。
现代文：当时湘土地荒残，公私困乏，司马承亲身节俭，乘坐苇茭车，而倾心安抚，很有好名声。
English: At that time, Hunan's land was desolate and the public and private sectors were impoverished. Sima Cheng personally was frugal, took a tuk-tuk, and devoted himself to pacification. He had a good reputation.

古文：敦恐其为己患，诈称北伐，悉召承境内船乘。
现代文：王敦恐怕他成为自己的祸患，假称北伐，征用司马承境内全部船乘。
English: Wang Dun, fearing that he would become his own scourge, pretended to be the Northern Expedition and requisitioned all the ships in Sima Cheng territory.

古文：承知其奸计，分半与之。
现代文：司马承知道他的奸计，分出一半给他。
English: Sima Cheng knew his trick and gave him half.

古文：敦寻构难，遣参军桓罴说承，以刘隗专宠，今便讨击，请承以为军司，以军期上道。
现代文：王敦不久就开始制造动乱，派参军桓照说服司马承，以刘隗专宠，如今去讨伐为由，让司马承任军司，按军期上路。
English: Wang Dun soon began to create turmoil. He sent Han Zhao to join the army to persuade Sima Cheng, citing Liu Bei's special favor, to go to the crusade now, and let Sima Cheng serve as the military commander and go on the road according to the military period.

古文：承叹曰： 吾其死矣！
现代文：司马承叹息说： 我大概要死了!
English: Sima Cheng sighed and said: I'm probably dead!

古文：地荒人鲜，势孤援绝。
现代文：土地荒芜人烟稀少，势力孤单增援断绝。
English: The land is barren, the people are few and far between, and the forces have been left without reinforcements.

古文：赴君难，忠也；死王事，义也。
现代文：为君赴难，这是忠；为王事而死，这是义。
English: To go into battle for the king is loyalty; to die for the king is righteousness.

古文：惟忠与义，夫复何求！ 
现代文：有了忠和义，还有什么所求呢! 
English: With loyalty and righteousness, what more could you ask for!

古文：便欲唱义，而众心疑惑。
现代文：于是就要倡导义举，然而众人心中疑惑。
English: Therefore, it was necessary to advocate for a charity event, however, doubts arose in people's minds.

古文：承曰： 吾受国恩，义无有贰。 
现代文：司马承说： 我受国家恩典，举义没有二心。 
English: Sima Cheng said: I am blessed by the state, and I have no second thoughts about being righteous.

古文：府长史虞悝慷慨有志节，谓承曰： 王敦居分陕之任，而一旦作逆，天地所不容，人神所痛疾。
现代文：府长史虞悝慷慨有志气节操，对司马承说： 王敦以朝廷官员身份任地方长官，而一旦作乱，天地所不容，入神所痛恨。
English: The prefectural governor, Shi Yuxuan, who was generous and had the spirit of self-restraint, said to Sima Cheng: Wang Dun served as a local governor as an official of the imperial court, but once he made a disturbance, it was unacceptable to heaven and earth and hated by the gods.

古文：大王宗室籓屏，宁可从其伪邪！
现代文：大王是宗室的藩篱屏障，难道可以顺从他的诡诈吗!
English: The Great King is the barrier of the lineage, how can we follow his cunning!

古文：便宜电奋，存亡以之。 
现代文：现在就应该立即发奋，存亡在此一举。 
English: Now is the time to work hard and survive.

古文：于是与悝及弟前丞相掾望、建昌太守长沙王循、衡阳太守淮陵刘翼等共盟誓，囚桓罴，驰檄湘州，指期至巴陵。
现代文：于是舆虞悝以及其弟前丞相掾虞望、建昌太守长沙王循、衡阳太守淮陵刘翼等人共同盟誓，囚禁桓罢，迅速在湘州发檄文，指定日期到达巴陵。
English: As a result, Meng Yuqi and his younger brother, the former prime minister Zou Yuwang, the governor of Jianchang, Changsha Wang Cun, the governor of Hengyang, Huairing Liu Ying, and others jointly vowed to imprison Huan, quickly issued a proclamation in Hunan, and arrived in Baling on the designated date.

古文：零陵太守尹奉首同义谋，出军营阳，于是一州之内，皆同义举。
现代文：零陵太守尹奉首先响应义谋，出兵营阳。于是整个州内，都响应义举。
English: The first to respond to the good deed was the governor of Jilin Province, Yin Bong, who sent troops to Yingyang. As a result, the entire state responded to the good deed.

古文：乃使虞望讨诸不服，斩湘东太守郑澹。
现代文：于是派虞望讨伐不服的人，杀湘东太守郑澹。
English: As a result, he sent the people who did not want to fight, to kill the East Hunan Governor Zheng He.

古文：澹，敦姊夫也。
现代文：郑澹是王敦的姐夫。
English: Zheng Qi is Wang Dun's brother-in-law.

古文：敦遣南蛮校尉魏乂、将军李恆、田嵩等甲卒二万以攻承。
现代文：王敦派遣南蛮校尉魏义、将军李恒、田嵩等兵士两万人攻打司马承。
English: Wang Dun dispatched 20,000 soldiers from Nanban, including Captain Wei Yi, General Li Heng, and Tian Song, to attack Sima Cheng.

古文：承且战且守，待救于尹奉、虞望，而城池不固，人情震恐。
现代文：司马承边战边守，等待尹奉、虞望的救兵，然而城池不坚固，人心十分恐惧。
English: Sima Cheng Rong kept watch on the battlefield, waiting for Yin Bong and Yu Wang to rescue the soldiers. However, the castle was not strong, and the people were very afraid.

古文：或劝承南投陶侃，又云可退据零桂。
现代文：有人劝司马承向南投奔陶侃，又说可以退守零桂。
English: Some people urged Sima Cheng to go to Nantou, and said that he could retreat to Guilin.

古文：承曰： 吾举义众，志在死节，宁偷生苟免，为奔败之将乎！
现代文：司马承说： 我发动举义的人，立志为节操而死，难道能苟且偷生，成为逃奔的将领吗!
English: Sima Cheng said, "If I send forth righteous men who are determined to die for the sake of righteousness, will they be able to remain alive and become fugitive generals?"

古文：事之不济，其令百姓知吾心耳。 
现代文：事情不能成功，希望百姓能了解我的心。 
English: If things don't work out, I hope the people can understand my heart.

古文：初，安南将军甘卓与承书，劝使固守，当以兵出沔口，断敦归路，则湘围自解。
现代文：起初，安南将军甘卓给司马承写信，劝司马承固守，应当用兵出沔，切断王敦的退路，这样对湘的包围就自然瓦解了。
English: At first, Annan's General Gantzro wrote to Sima Cheng, urging Sima Cheng to hold fast, and that troops should be sent out to cut off Wang Dun's escape route. In this way, the siege of Hunan naturally disintegrated.

古文：承答书曰： 季思足下：劳于王事。
现代文：司马承回信说： 季思足下：为王事辛劳。
English: Sima Cheng replied to the letter, saying: Ji Si, get off your feet: work hard for the king.

古文：天纲暂圮，中原丘墟。
现代文：国法暂时毁坏，中原成了废墟。
English: National law was temporarily destroyed, and the Central Plains became a wasteland.

古文：四海义士，方谋克复，中兴江左，草创始尔，岂图恶逆萌自宠臣。
现代文：四海的义士，正在谋划恢复，恢复江左的基业，初步的创建已开始，怎么能想到作恶叛逆在宠臣中萌生。
English: The righteous of the four seas are planning to restore and restore the foundation of Jiangzuo, and the initial creation has begun. How can one think of evil and rebellion sprouting among the favorites?

古文：吾以暗短，托宗皇属。
现代文：我愚昧见识短，托身于皇室宗亲。
English: I was foolish, short-sighted, and put my trust in the imperial family.

古文：仰豫密命，作镇南夏，亲奉中诏，成规在心。
现代文：靠着预先的密令，镇守南夏，亲奉手诏，已确定的规矩记在心中。
English: Relying on advance secret orders, the town guards Nanxia, personally obeying the edict, and keeping the established rules in mind.

古文：伯仁诸贤，扼腕歧路，至止尚浅，凡百茫然。
现代文：伯仁等贤臣，在歧路上令人惋惜，事发短，众人茫然。
English: It is regrettable that wise men such as Boren are on the wrong path. The incident was brief, and everyone is at a loss.

古文：豺狼易惊，遂肆丑毒，闻知骇踊，神气冲越。
现代文：豺狼容易受惊，于是放肆丑行恶毒，听说的人奋起，神气冲天。
English: The jackals are easily frightened, so they are impudent, ugly and vicious, and those who have heard of them rise up and become arrogant.

古文：子来之义，人思自百，不命而至，众过数千。
现代文：民心向着正义，人人想着以一当百，不下命令就来到，人数有几千。
English: The people's hearts are turning towards justice. Everyone is thinking of giving a hundred, and they come without giving orders. There are several thousand of them.

古文：诚足以决一旦之机。摅山海之愤矣。
现代文：确实可以在一时之间决战，发泄山海的愤怒。
English: Indeed, it is possible to fight a decisive battle in an instant and vent the anger of the mountains and seas.

古文：然迫于仓卒，舟楫未备，魏乂、李恆，寻见围逼，是故事与意违，志力未展。
现代文：然而被时间仓猝所迫，舟船没有齐备，魏义、李恒很快就来围逼，因此事与愿违，心意力量没能表现出来。
English: However, forced by the suddenness of time, the boat was not ready, Wei Yi and Li Heng soon came to encircle, so it was contrary to their wishes, and they could not show their strength of mind.

古文：猥辱来使，深同大趣；嘉谋英算，发自深衷。
现代文：承蒙您派来使者，与我意向完全相同；神机妙算，发自内心深处。
English: I am grateful to you for sending me an emissary who has exactly the same intentions as I do; he is a cunning man who speaks from the depths of his heart.

古文：执读周复，欣无以量。足下若能卷甲电赴，犹或有济，若其狐疑，求我枯鱼之肆矣。
现代文：读了一遍又一遍，高兴的心情无法表达，您要是能带着军队火速到来，也许还有帮助；要是再迟疑，那就是要求我这离水的鱼再挣扎啊。
English: Reading it over and over again, I can't express how happy I am. If you can come quickly with an army, it may help; if you hesitate again, it's asking me, a fish out of water, to struggle again.

古文：兵闻拙速，未睹工迟。
现代文：用兵衹听说有人在神速方面笨拙，没见谁在迟缓方面工巧。
English: I have heard that some people are clumsy in terms of speed, but I have not seen anyone who is skillful in terms of slowness.

古文：季思足下，勉之勉之！
现代文：季思足下，努力呀努力!
English: Put your feet up, work hard, work hard!

古文：书不尽意，绝笔而已。 
现代文：书信不能完全表达心意，不过是我的遗书罢了。 
English: A letter cannot fully express one's thoughts, but it is my suicide note.

古文：卓军次者口，闻王师败绩，停师不进，乂等攻战日逼，敦又送所得台中人书疏，令乂射以示承。
现代文：甘卓的军队驻扎在赌口，听说谯王的军队打了败仗，军队停止不前。魏义等人攻战一天紧似一天，王敦又送去他所得到的台省中人们的疏奏，命令魏义射给司马承看。
English: Gancro's army was stationed at the mouth of the Yangtze River, and it was reported that Shao Wang's army had lost the battle, and the army had stopped advancing. Wei Yi and others attacked the battle day after day, and Wang Dun sent him the records of the people in Taiwan Province, and ordered Wei Yi to show them to Sima Cheng.

古文：城内知朝廷不守，莫不怅惋。
现代文：城内的人得知朝廷守不住了，没有不惆怅惋惜的。
English: When the people in the city learned that the imperial court could not hold out, they were not without regret.

古文：刘翼战死，相持百余日，城遂没。
现代文：刘翼战死，相持了一百多天，城于是陷落了。
English: Liu Ying died in the battle and was held for more than a hundred days, after which the city fell.

古文：乂槛送承荆州，刺史王暠承敦旨于道中害之，时年五十九。
现代文：魏义用槛车送司马承去荆州，刺史王虞根据王敦的意思在半路上杀害了他，时年五十九岁。
English: Wei Yi sent Sima Cheng to Jingzhou with a threshold car, and stabbed Wang Yu, who was fifty-nine years old, according to Wang Dun's intention, and killed him on the way.

古文：敦平，诏赠车骑将军。
现代文：王敦被平定，下韶追赠司马承为车骑将军。
English: Wang Dun was subdued and Sima Cheng was posthumously awarded the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry.

古文：子无忌立。
现代文：儿子无忌继嗣。
English: The son is the heir.

古文：烈王无忌字公寿，承之难，以年小获免。
现代文：烈王无忌字公寿，司马承遇难时，他因为年纪小免于难。
English: When Sima Cheng was killed, he was spared because of his young age.

古文：咸和中，拜散骑侍郎，累迁屯骑校尉、中书、黄门侍郎。
现代文：咸和年间，官拜散骑侍郎，逐渐迁任屯骑校尉、中书、黄门侍郎。
English: During the Haman and Heian periods, he was promoted to the position of Sanzhiyajirō, and was gradually transferred to the positions of Tonkiyakifu, Chusho, and Kōmon-jirō.

古文：江州刺史褚裒当之镇，无忌及丹阳尹桓景等饯于版桥。
现代文：江州刺史褚裒要去边镇，无忌及丹杨尹桓景等人在版桥为他饯行。
English: Jiangzhou Zhi Shizhen wants to go to the border town, and Danyang Yinhuangjing and others will go to the bridge for him.

古文：时王暠子丹阳丞耆之在坐，无忌志欲复仇，拔刀将手刃之，裒、景命左右救捍获免。
现代文：当时王虞的儿子丹杨丞耆之在座，无忌有心复仇，拔出刀将要亲手杀耆之，褚裒、桓景命令左右护卫耆之才获免。
English: At that time, Wang Yu's son, Danyang Choejun, was present at the scene, and it was no doubt that Dang Choejun was bent on revenge. He pulled out his sword and was about to kill Dang Choejun with his own hands. It was only after he and Huan Jing ordered the guards on both sides to protect Dang Choejun that Dang Choejun was released.

古文：御史中丞车灌奏无忌欲专杀人，付廷尉科罪。
现代文：御史中丞车灌奏报说无忌想自作主张杀人，交廷尉治罪。
English: The official historian, Chucho Che, was quoted in a newspaper as saying that there was no doubt that he wanted to commit the murder himself, and that he should be punished by a court official.

古文：成帝诏曰： 王敦作乱，闵王遇祸，寻事原情，今王何责。
现代文：成帝下诏书说： 王敦作乱，闵王遇祸，探究事情的原委，今王有什么过错呢?
English: The imperial edict issued by Emperor Cheng said: Wang Dun started the turmoil, the king was in trouble, and the original commission of the matter was investigated. What is the fault of the king now?

古文：然公私宪制，亦巳有断，王当以体国为大，岂可寻绎由来，以乱朝宪。
现代文：然而公私的法律制度，也已经有了决断，王应当以治理国家为重，怎能推求根源，搞乱朝廷法律。
English: However, the public and private legal system has also made a decision that the king should focus on governing the country, how can he seek the root cause and mess up the imperial law.

古文：主者其申明法令，自今已往，有犯必诛。 
现代文：主管的人应申明法令，从今以后，有违犯的必定诛杀。 
English: The person in charge should declare the decree, from now on, violators must be killed.

古文：于是听以赎论。
现代文：于是听任按赎罪论处。
English: Therefore, he was punished according to the theory of atonement.

古文：建元初迁散骑常侍，转御史中丞，出为辅国将军、长沙相，又领江夏相，寻转南郡、河东二郡太守，将军如故。
现代文：建元初年，迁任散骑常侍，转任御史中丞，出京任辅国将军、长沙相，又兼任江夏相，不久转任南郡、河东两郡太守，将军的职位依旧。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, he was transferred to the position of Sanzhijizhang, transferred to the position of Goshi Chujo, went to Beijing to serve as the general of Fu Guo, the minister of Changsha, and also served as the minister of Jiang Xia, and soon transferred to the governor of Nan County and the two counties of Hedong, the position of the general is still the same.

古文：随桓温伐蜀，以勋赐少子愔爵广晋伯，进号前将军，永和六年薨，赠卫将军。
现代文：跟随担担讨伐蜀，因为有功赐给小儿子墨情广置伯的爵位，进封号为前将军。丞勉六年去世，追赠卫将军。
English: He followed the leading role in the campaign against the Mongolian invasion of China, and because of his meritorious service, he gave his youngest son, Mo Xiangguang, the title of nobility, and the title of former general. He died six years later and was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Guards.

古文：二子：恬、愔。
现代文：有两个儿子：司马恬、司马情。
English: They have two sons: Simaju and Simaju.

古文：恬立。
现代文：司马恬继嗣。
English: Sima Yi's successor.

古文：敬王恬，字元愉，少拜散骑侍郎，累迁散骑常侍、黄门郎、御史中丞。
现代文：敬王司马恬字元愉，年轻时官拜散骑侍郎，逐渐升任散骑常侍、黄门郎、御史中丞。
English: He was nicknamed "Yuan Yu" (元愉) in homage to King Sima Qian, and when he was young, he was promoted to the position of "sangai jiangro" (散騎侍郎) and gradually rose to the positions of "sangai jiangro" (散騎常侍), "huangmenro" (黄門郎) and "goshi chujo" (御史中丞).

古文：值海西废，简文帝登阼，未解严，大司马桓温屯中堂，吹警角，恬奏劾温大不敬，请科罪。
现代文：时值海西公被废，简文帝登基，还没有解除戒严，大司马巡在中堂屯聚，吹响警角，司马恬上奏弹劾但周大不敬，请求定他的罪。
English: At the time of Haixi Gong being abolished, Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, and martial law had not yet been lifted. The chief magistrate Ma Jun gathered in the central hall and sounded the warning horn. The chief magistrate played the impeachment, but Zhou was disrespectful and asked to convict him.

古文：温视奏叹曰： 此兒乃敢弹我，真可畏也。 
现代文：担温看着奏章感叹说： 逭年轻人居然敢弹劾我，真可敬畏。 
English: Looking at the record, Tanwen sighed and said: "How dare these young people impeach me, I am truly awestruck.

古文：恬忠正有干局，在朝惮之。
现代文：司马恬忠诚正直有才干，朝廷上的官吏们惧怕他。
English: Sima Yu was loyal, honest and talented. The officials at the imperial court were afraid of him.

古文：迁右卫将军、司雍秦梁四州大中正，拜尚书，转侍中，领左卫将军，补吴国内史，又领太子詹事。
现代文：迁任右卫将军、司雍秦梁四州大中正，拜尚书，转任侍中，兼左卫将军，补任吴国内史，又兼任太子詹事。
English: He was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards, Secretary of the Yong Qin and Liang Dynasties of the Four Provinces, Vice-President of the Shang Dynasty, transferred to the post of Vice-President of the Inner Palace Guards, and General of the Left Division of the Inner Palace Guards. He also served as the Vice-President of the Inner Palace Guards, and the Vice-President of the Inner Palace Guards of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：恬既宗室勋望，有才用，孝武帝时深杖之，以为都督兗、青、冀、幽并扬州之晋陵、徐州之南北郡军事，领镇北将军、兗青二州刺史、假节。
现代文：司马恬在宗室功勋名望极高，有才能，孝武帝时深深依赖他，任命他为都督兖、青、冀、幽和扬州的晋陵、徐州的南北郡军事，兼镇北将军、兖青两州刺史、假节。
English: Sima Qian was highly respected and talented in his family, and Emperor Xiaowu deeply relied on him. He appointed him as the military governor of Jinling, Qing, Hebei, and Yangzhou, and the military governor of Nanbei County in Xuzhou, as well as the general of Zhenbei, and the general of the two states of Qing and Jiaozuo.

古文：太元十五年薨，追赠车骑将军。
现代文：太元十五年去世，追赠车骑将军。
English: Taiyuan died 15 years ago, and was posthumously given a chariot and cavalry general.

古文：四子：尚之、恢之、允之、休之。
现代文：有四个儿子：尚之、恢之、允之、休之。
English: They had four sons: Shang Zhi, Guo Zhi, Yun Zhi and Xue Zhi.

古文：尚之立。
现代文：尚之继嗣。
English: He is the successor of Hisashi Tsune.

古文：忠王尚之，字伯道，初拜秘书郎，迁散骑侍郎。
现代文：忠王尚之字伯道，最初官拜秘书郎，迁任散骑侍郎。
English: Tadanobu Shosho's nickname was Haku-dō, and at first he was a government-paid secretary, but later he was transferred to the position of Sanki-sadaira.

古文：恬镇京口，尚之为振威将军、广陵相，父忧去职。
现代文：司马恬镇守京口，尚之是振威将军、广陵相，父亲去世时离职。
English: Sima Ye Zhen guarded the capital, while Shang Zhi was the general of Zhenwei and the minister of Guangling. He left the post when his father died.

古文：服阕，为骠骑谘议参军。
现代文：服丧完毕，任骠骑谘议参军。
English: After the funeral, he was assigned to the cavalry and advised to join the army.

古文：宗室之内，世有人物。
现代文：在宗室之内，世代有杰出人物。
English: Within the family, there have been outstanding figures for generations.

古文：王国宝之诛也，散骑常侍刘镇之、彭城内史刘涓子，徐州别驾徐放并以同党被收，将加大辟。
现代文：王国宝被诛时，散骑常侍刘镇之、彭城内史刘涓子、徐州别驾徐放一起按同党被收捕，将施以死刑。
English: When Wang Guobao was arrested, Liu Zhenzhi, Pengcheng Inner History Liu Zhenzi, and Xuzhou Beie Xu Fang, who were riding horseback together, were arrested as members of the same party and will be sentenced to death.

古文：尚之言于会稽王道子曰： 刑狱不可广，宜释镇之等。 
现代文：尚之对会稽王道子说： 刑罚不能涉及面太大，应该放了镇之等人。 
English: Shangzhi told Wang Daozi, a member of the commission, that the punishment should not be too extensive, and that the townspeople should be released.

古文：道子以尚之昆季并居列职，每事仗焉，乃从之。
现代文：道子因为尚之兄弟都在朝中任职，每逢有事要依赖他，于是听从了他。
English: Since all of Shang's brothers held positions in the imperial court, Tao Zi had to rely on him whenever there was a problem, so he listened to him.

古文：兗州刺史王恭忌其盛也，与豫州刺史庾楷并称兵，以讨尚之为名，南连荆州刺史殷仲堪、南郡公桓玄等。
现代文：兖州刺史王恭忌妒尚之势力兴盛，与豫州刺史庾楷一同起兵，以讨伐尚之为名，向南串联荆州刺史殷仲堪、南郡公桓玄等人。
English: Envious of Shang's growing power, Zhangzhou's Zhang Shi Wang Gong led an army together with the Henan's Zhang Shi Xuan Kai. In the name of fighting Shang, they marched south in tandem with Jingzhou's Zhang Shi Yin Zhong Kan, Nan County's Gong Huan Xuan and others.

古文：道子命前将军王珣、右将军谢琰讨恭，尚之距楷。
现代文：道子命令前将军王殉、右将军谢琰讨伐王恭，尚之抵御庾楷。
English: Doji ordered the former general Wang Zhidong and the right general Xie Jun to fight Wang Gong, but they were repulsed.

古文：允之与楷子鸿战于当利，鸿败走，斩楷将段方，楷单马奔于桓玄。
现代文：允之与庾楷的儿子庾鸿在当利交战，庾鸿打了败仗逃走，杀了庾楷的将领段方，庾楷一人骑马投奔桓玄。
English: Yun Zhi fought with Zou Kai's son, Zou Hong, in Dangli. Zou Hong was defeated and fled, killing Zou Kai's general, Duan Fang. Zou Kai rode alone to attack Huan Xuan.

古文：道子以尚之为建威将军、豫州刺史、假节，一依楷故事，寻进号前将军；允之为吴国内史；恢之骠骑司马、丹杨尹；休之襄城太守。
现代文：道子任命尚之为建威将军、豫州刺史、假节，完全按庾楷的原职，不久进号前将军；允之任吴国内史；恢之任骠骑司马、丹杨尹；休之任襄城太守。
English: Tao Zi appointed Shang Zi as Jian Wei General, Yu Zhou as Zhishi, and Lu Jie as Mao, completely in accordance with the original position of Shao Kai, and soon became the former general; Yun Zi was appointed as Wu Domestic History; Hui Zi was appointed as Sima, Dan Yang Yin; and Hui Zi was appointed as Xiangcheng Dazhou.

古文：各拥兵马，势倾朝廷。
现代文：各自掌管兵马，势力在朝廷卜超越他人。
English: Each of them controls the soldiers and horses, and their power surpasses others in the imperial court.

古文：后将军元显执政，亦倚以为援。
现代文：后将军元显执政，也倚仗他作为后援。
English: After that, Gen. Motohide came to power, and relied on him for support.

古文：元显宠幸张法顺，每宴会，坐起无别。
现代文：元显宠幸张法顺，每逢宴饮，起坐没有区别。
English: Every time there is a banquet, there is no difference in the seating.

古文：尚之入朝，正色谓元显曰： 张法顺驱走小人，有何才异，而暴被拔擢。
现代文：尚之入朝，脸色严肃地对元显说： 张法顺不过是个跑腿的小人，有什么才能出众的地方，而得到迅速的提拔。
English: When Shangzhi entered the imperial court, he said to Yuan Xuan with a serious face, "Zhang Fashun is just a small person running errands. If he has any outstanding talent, he will be promoted quickly.

古文：当今圣世，不宜如此。 
现代文：在如今这圣明世上，不应该如此。 
English: In today's holy world, this should not be the case.

古文：元显默然。
现代文：元显沉默不语。
English: Motohide was silent.

古文：尚之又曰： 宗室虽多，匡谏者少，王者尚纳刍荛之言，况下官与使君骨肉不远，蒙眷累世，何可坐视得失而不尽言。 
现代文：尚之又说： 宗室人虽多，能匡正劝谏的人少，帝王尚且采纳草野之人的意见，何况我与长官血缘关系不远，几代人受宠，怎么能坐视得失而不把话说透。 
English: Shangzhi also said: Although there are many family members, there are few people who can rectify and advise, and the emperor still adopts the opinions of people from the grasslands. Moreover, I am not far from the blood relationship with the chief, and have been favored for several generations. How can I sit idly by and not understand what is being said?

古文：因叱法顺令下。
现代文：于是呵斥渤晅令他退下。
English: He was shouted down and told to back down.

古文：举坐失色，尚之言笑自若，元显深衔之。
现代文：满座人都很吃惊，尚之谈笑自如，元显深深怀恨。
English: Everyone in the auditorium was very surprised. Shang was able to talk and laugh freely. Yuan Xuan held a deep grudge.

古文：后符下西府，令出勇力二千人。
现代文：后来向西府下符节，命令派出两千勇士。
English: Later, he issued an order to send two thousand warriors to the Western Prefecture.

古文：尚之不与，曰： 西籓滨接荒余，寇虏无常，兵止数千，不足戍卫，无复可分彻者。 
现代文：尚之不给，说： 西藩与荒远地域相连，敌寇出没无常，而兵力仅几千人，不足以守卫，没有能再分派出去的人。 
English: Still, he did not give up, saying: Xi'an is connected to a desolate area, enemy invaders come and go, and the troops are only a few thousand, which is not enough to guard, and there is no one who can be sent out again.

古文：元显尤怒，会欲伐桓玄，故无他。
现代文：元显特别恼怒。适逢要讨伐桓玄，因而没造成祸害。
English: Motohide was particularly angry. It was the right time to fight Kangen, so no harm was done.

古文：及元显称诏西伐，命尚之为前锋，尚之子文仲为宁远将军、宣城内史。
现代文：等到元显以奉诏的名义讨伐西部，命令尚之为前锋，尚之的儿子文仲为宁远将军、宣城内史。
English: It was not until Motohide attacked the west in the name of the Emperor that he ordered Shoko to be the vanguard and Shoko's son, Funchaku, to be the general of Ningyuan and proclaim the history of the city.

古文：桓玄至姑熟，遣冯该等攻历阳，断洞浦，焚尚之舟舰。
现代文：担玄到达姑熟，派冯该等人攻打历阳，切断洞浦，焚烧尚之的船只。
English: When Tang Xuan arrived at Guju, he sent Feng Cai and others to attack Liyang, cut off Dongpu, and burn Shang Zhen's ships.

古文：尚之率步卒九千阵于浦上，先遣武都太守杨秋屯横江。
现代文：尚之率领九千步兵在岸边列阵，先派武都太守杨秋在横江驻守。
English: Shangzhi led nine thousand infantrymen to line up on the shore, and first sent Yang Qiu, the military governor, to garrison Hengjiang.

古文：秋奔于玄军，尚之众溃，逃于涂中十余日。
现代文：杨秋投奔了盘的军队，堂之的军队溃散，逃到途中十多天。
English: Yang Qiu defected to Pan's army, and Danzhi's army broke up, fleeing for more than ten days on the way.

古文：谯国人韩连、丁元等以告玄，玄害之于建康市。
现代文：谯国人韩连、丁元等人向桓玄报告，桓玄杀害了堂之。
English: Han Lian, Ding Yuan and others from Shan reported to Kuan Xuan, and Kuan Xuan killed him.

古文：玄上疏以闵王不宜绝嗣，乃更封尚之从弟康之为谯县王。
现代文：担宝上疏认为因王不应断绝继嗣，于是改封尚之的堂弟康之为谯县王。
English: The treasure bearer Shang Shou thought that the king should not cut off his heir, so he changed the title of Shang Zhi's cousin Kang Zhi to the king of Shixian.

古文：安帝反正，追赠尚之卫将军，以休之长子文思为尚之嗣，袭封谯郡王。
现代文：安童重新掌权，追赠尚之卫将军，让休之的长子文思继嗣尚之，承袭谯郡王的爵位。
English: When Ando regained power, he posthumously bestowed the title of General of the Imperial Guards to Shangzhi, and allowed Shangzhi's eldest son, Wen Si, to succeed him and inherit the title of King of Shishun.

古文：文思性凶暴，每违轨度，多杀弗辜。
现代文：文思性情凶狠暴虐，经常违背法度规矩，滥杀无辜。
English: Wensi's temperament is ferocious and violent. He often violates laws and regulations and indiscriminately kills innocent people.

古文：好田猎，烧人坟墓，数为有司所纠，遂与群小谋逆。
现代文：喜好打猎，烧别人的坟墓，屡次被有关官吏纠察，于是与一些小人谋划叛逆。
English: He liked to hunt, burn other people's graves, and was repeatedly picketed by relevant officials, so he plotted a rebellion with some villains.

古文：刘裕闻之，诛其党与，送文思付父休之，令自训厉。
现代文：刘裕听说了，诛杀了塞墨的同党，把主墨交给他父亲堡之，让他自行管教。
English: Liu Yu heard about it, killed Saimo's party comrade, and gave the master ink to his father, Castle, so that he could discipline himself.

古文：后与休之同怨望称兵，为裕所败而死，国除。
现代文：后来与休之一同因积怨而起兵，被刘裕打败而死，封国被取消。
English: Later, he and Hui jointly raised an army due to resentment and were defeated and killed by Liu Yu, and the state seal was cancelled.

古文：恢之字季明，历官骠骑司马、丹杨尹。
现代文：恢之字季明，历任骠骑司马、丹杨尹。
English: The word "Ji Ming" was restored, and the successors of Zou Jie Sima and Danyang Yin were crowned.

古文：尚之为桓玄所害，徙恢之等于广州，而于道中害之。
现代文：尚之被桓玄所害，把恢之等人迁徙到广州，而在半路上杀害了他。
English: Shang Zhi was victimized by Huan Xuan, who moved Huan Zhi and others to Guangzhou and killed him on the way.

古文：安帝反正，追赠抚军将军。
现代文：安帝重新掌权，追赠他为抚军将军。
English: Emperor An regained power and posthumously promoted him to general of the army.

古文：休之字季预。
现代文：休之字季预。
English: The holiday season is upon us.

古文：少仕清涂，以平王恭、庾楷功，拜龙骧将军、襄城太守，镇历阳。
现代文：少任清要之职，因为平王恭、庾楷的功劳，官拜龙骧将军、襄城太守，镇守历盟。
English: He held a number of important posts, and because of the merits of Ping Wangqong and Zou Kai, he was appointed as the general of Longyu, the governor of Xiangcheng, and the town guard of Limei.

古文：桓玄攻历阳，休之婴城固守。
现代文：桓玄攻打历阳，体之环城固守。
English: Kuan Xuan attacked Liyang, but fortified the city.

古文：及尚之战败，休之以五百人出城力战，不捷，乃还城，携子侄奔于慕容超。
现代文：等到尚主战败，体之用五百人出城奋力交战，没能取胜，于是回城，带着子侄们投奔慕容超。
English: When Lord Shang was defeated, he sent five hundred men out of the city to fight, but they could not win, so he returned to the city and went to Murongchao with his sons and nephews.

古文：闻义军起，复还京师。
现代文：听说义军兴起，又回到京师。
English: Hearing of the rise of the rebel army, he returned to Beijing.

古文：大将军武陵王令曰： 前龙骧将军休之，才干贞审，功业既成。
现代文：大将军武陵王下令说： 前龙骧将军体之，有才干正直精审，功业已成。
English: General Wuling Wang gave the order, saying: "For the former Longyu army corps, with talent, honesty and careful examination, the work has been accomplished.

古文：历阳之战，事在机捷。
现代文：历盐之战，事情在于机智迅捷。
English: In the battle of Lishan, it's all about being quick-witted.

古文：及至势乖力屈，奉身出奔，犹鸠集义徒，崎岖险阻。
现代文：等到势穷力竭，舍身出奔，还纠集正义的人们，踏上崎岖险阻。
English: Wait until the situation is exhausted, give up and run away, but also gather people of justice, step on the rugged obstacles.

古文：既应亲贤之举，宜委分陕之重。
现代文：既然要符合亲近贤人的举措，就应该交给他治理陕土的重任。
English: Since it is necessary to comply with the measures of being close to the sage, he should be given the important task of governing Shaanxi.

古文：可监荆益梁宁秦雍六州军事、领护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史、假节。 
现代文：可以让他监荆益梁宁秦雍六州军事、兼任护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史、假节。 
English: You can let him supervise the Jing Yi Liang Ning Qin Yong Ruzhou military, concurrently serve as a guard Nanban captain, Jingzhou stabbing history, and false festival.

古文：到镇无几，桓振复袭江陵，休之战败，出奔襄阳。
现代文：到任所没多久，桓振又攻袭江陵，休之打了败仗，出奔到襄阳。
English: Not long after he arrived at the post, Kuan Zhen attacked Jiangling again. Hugh fought a losing battle and fled to Yangyang.

古文：宁朔将军张暢之、高平相刘怀肃自沔攻振，走之。
现代文：宁朔将军张畅之、高平相刘怀肃从沔攻打桓振，打跑了他。
English: Zhang Changzhi, the general of Ningshuo, and Liu Huaixu, the minister of Gaoping, attacked Huan Zhen from Shao and beat him away.

古文：休之还镇，御史中丞王桢之奏休之失戍，免官。
现代文：休之回到任所，御史中丞王桢之奏报休之失守，免去官职。
English: Huizhi returned to his post, and Wang Xizhi, the Grand Historian, reported Huizhi's defection and removed him from his official post.

古文：朝廷以豫州刺史魏咏之代之，征休之还京师，拜后将军、会稽内史。
现代文：朝廷以豫州刺史魏咏之代替他，征召休之回京师，官拜后将军、会稽内史。
English: The imperial court replaced him with the governor of Yuzhou, Wei Xizhi, and conscripted the retired back to Beijing division, the general after the official worship, and the internal history of the association.

古文：御史中丞阮歆之奏休之与尚书虞啸父犯禁嬉戏，降号征虏将军，寻复为后将军。
现代文：御史中丞阮歆之奏报休之与尚书虞啸父违犯禁令嬉闸游戏，降封号为征虏将军，不久又恢复为后将军。
English: The Vice-Minister of History, Nguyn Thnh, reported to the emperor that he was resigning from his post, and the emperor's father violated the ban on playing games. He was demoted to the rank of conscript general, and was soon reinstated as post-general.

古文：及卢循作逆，加督渐江东五郡军事，坐公事免。
现代文：等到卢循叛逆，加任督浙江束五郡军事，因为公事获罪被免职。
English: When Lu Xun rebelled, he was appointed as the military governor of Zhejiang Shouwu County, but was removed from his post because he was convicted of a crime in public affairs.

古文：刘毅诛，复以休之都督荆雍梁秦宁益六州军事、平西将军、荆州刺史、假节。
现代文：刘毅被诛，又以休之都督荆雍梁秦宁益六州军事、平西将军、荆州刺史、假节。
English: Liu Yi was executed, and the retired governor Jing Yongliang, Qin Ningyi, the six-state military, the Pingxi general, the Jingzhou stabbing history, and the false festival.

古文：以子文思为乱，上疏谢曰： 文思不能聿修，自贻罪戾，忧惧震惶，惋愧交集。
现代文：因为儿子文思作乱，上疏谢罪说： 文思不能行善，自己留下罪戾，忧虑恐惧震惊惶惑，惋惜惭愧交集。
English: Because his son Wensi made a mess, Shang Zuo Xie Sin said: Wensi can't do good, he left the guilt, worry, fear, shock, confusion, regret and shame.

古文：臣御家无方，威训不振，致使子侄愆法，仰负圣朝。
现代文：我治家无方，威严教训没有振兴，致使子侄违法，辜负圣明的朝廷。
English: I had no way to manage my family, and the lessons of majesty did not invigorate me, causing my son and nephew to break the law and betray the court of Shenming.

古文：悚赧兼怀，胡颜自处，请解所任，归罪阙庭。 
现代文：我恐惧羞愧交加，哪有脸面就这样过下去，请求解除我的职务，带罪回朝。 
English: Filled with fear and shame, I had no choice but to go through with it, ask to be relieved of my duties, and return to the imperial court with my crime.

古文：不许。
现代文：皇上不许。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：后以文思事怨望，遂结雍州刺史鲁宗之，将共诛执政。
现代文：后来因为文思的事怨恨，于是勾结雍州刺史鲁宗之，打算一同诛杀执政的人。
English: Later, because of the resentment of the Wensi affair, he colluded with the Yongzhou assassin, Shiluzong, and planned to kill the people in power together.

古文：时休之次子文宝及兄子文祖并在都，收付廷尉赐死。
现代文：当时休之的次子文宝及哥哥的儿子文祖都在都城，收捕交给廷尉赐死。
English: At that time, the retired emperor's second son, Wenbao, and his brother's son, Wenzu, were both in the capital. They were arrested and handed over to the imperial lieutenant, who sentenced them to death.

古文：刘裕亲自征之，密使遗休之治中韩延之书曰： 文思事意，远近所知。
现代文：刘裕亲自征讨休之，派密使给休之治中韩延之书信说： 文思的事情，远近皆知。
English: Liu Yu personally solicited Ren Zhi, and sent an emissary to give Ren Zhi a letter from Han Yan, saying: The matter of Wen Zi is known far and wide.

古文：去秋遣康之送还司马君者，推至公之极也。
现代文：去年秋天派遣康之送还司马君的事，推究起来是极公正的。
English: The dispatch of Kang Zhi to return Sima Jun last autumn was extremely fair.

古文：而了无愧心，久绝表疏，此是天地所不容。
现代文：而休之全无愧心，很久不向朝廷上表奏疏，这是天地所不容的。
English: However, he was not ashamed, and he did not show disrespect to the imperial court for a long time, which was unacceptable.

古文：吾受命西征，止其父子而已。
现代文：我受命西征，仅针对他父子而已。
English: I was ordered to go to the West, only against his father and son.

古文：彼土侨旧，为之驱逼，一无所问。
现代文：那边的侨居者与本地人，被休之驱赶逼迫，一概不问。
English: The expatriates living there and the local people were expelled and persecuted without any questions being asked.

古文：往年郗僧施、谢劭、任集之等交构积岁，专为刘毅规谋，所以至此。
现代文：往年郗僧施、谢劭、任集之等人多年勾结，专门为刘毅出谋划策，所以有那种结局。
English: In previous years, Zang Zang Shi, Xie Zang, Ren Zhi and others have been colluding for many years, especially for Liu Yi to make suggestions, so there is that kind of ending.

古文：今卿诸人一时逼迫，本无纤衅。
现代文：如今你们这些人受一时的逼迫，本来是毫无罪责的。
English: And now you are being persecuted for a time for which you were not responsible.

古文：吾虚怀期物，自有由来，今在近路，是诸贤济身之日。
现代文：我敞开心扉期待众人，自有原因，如今我们相距不远，是诸位贤人救助自身的子。
English: I open my heart and look forward to everyone, for my own reasons, now we are not far apart, it is for you wise men to save their own children.

古文：若大军相临，交锋接刃，兰艾杂揉，或恐不分。
现代文：如果大军相临，兵刃相交，好人坏人混在一起，或许难于区分。
English: When armies face each other, swords meet swords, good guys and bad guys mix together, it may be difficult to tell the difference.

古文：故白此意，并可示同怀诸人。 
现代文：因而说明这个意思，你也可以向志趣相同的人出示。 
English: Thus illustrating the point, you can also show it to like-minded people.

古文：延之报曰： 闻亲率戎马，远履西畿，阖境士庶，莫不恇骇。
现代文：延之回信说： 听说您亲率兵马，远征西域，整个境内的士人百姓，没有不恐惧的。
English: Yan Zhi replied in a letter: I heard that you personally led the soldiers and horses on an expedition to the western region, and there is no one in the entire territory who is not afraid.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：莫知师出之名故也。
现代文：原因是不知道出兵的名义。
English: The reason is that the name of the troop dispatch is unknown.

古文：辱来疏，始委以谯王前事，良增叹息。
现代文：委屈您来信，开始把原因归于谯王以前的事，更增加了我的叹息。
English: To add insult to injury, your letter began to ascribe the cause to something that happened before Shao Wang, adding to my sighs.

古文：司马平西体国忠贞，款怀待物。
现代文：司马平西治国忠贞，待人诚恳。
English: Sima Pingxi governed the country loyally and treated people sincerely.

古文：以君有匡复之勋，家国蒙赖，推德委诚，每事询仰。
现代文：因为您有匡正恢复国家的功勋，家国依赖，推崇美德奉上诚心，每事咨询仰望。
English: Because you have the merits of rectifying and restoring the country, relying on the motherland, advocating virtue and sincerity, and consulting and looking up to everything.

古文：谯王往以微事见劾，犹自逊位，况以大过，而当默然也！
现代文：谯王过去因为小事被弹劾，他还主动逊位，何况要是因为大错的责任，而会沉默吗!
English: In the past, Shao Wang was impeached for a small matter, and he voluntarily abdicated his throne. What's more, if he was responsible for a big mistake, would he remain silent?

古文：但康之前言，有所不尽，故重使胡道，申白所怀，道未及反，已表奏废之，所不尽者命耳。
现代文：衹是康之以前说的话，有没说到的地方，因而重新派胡道，申述自己的想法。胡道还没回来，休之已经上表奏请废了文思，这是说话没说透的人的命啊。
English: This is what Kang said before, there is something he didn't say, so he reassigned Hu Dao and expressed his thoughts. Hu Dao hasn't come back yet, and he has already been dismissed. This is the life of a person who doesn't speak clearly.

古文：推寄相与，正当如此，有何不可，便及兵戈。
现代文：相互推心置腹，就该这样，有什么办不到的，就一定要动兵戈呢?
English: Pushing each other's hearts and stomachs, that's how it should be, what can't be done, we must go to war?

古文：自义旗以来，方伯谁敢不先相谘畴，而径表天子，可谓欲加之罪，其无辞乎！
现代文：自从举起义旗以来，地方长官谁敢不先互相咨询商议，就直接给天子上表，可以说是欲加之罪，何患无词!
English: Since the flag of righteousness was raised, local governors who dare not consult with each other first, directly report to the heavens, which can be said to be an intentional crime. What a pity!

古文：刘裕足下，海内之人，谁不见足下此心。
现代文：刘裕足下，海内的人谁不知道您的心思。
English: Liu Yu underfoot, the sea of people who do not know your mind.

古文：而复欲诳国士， 天地所不容。 在彼不在此矣。
现代文：而又想欺骗国中的士人， 天地所不容 ，在别处不在这裹。
English: But if you want to deceive the country's scholars, heaven and earth will not allow you to do so.

古文：来言 虚怀期物，自有由来 ；今伐人之君，啖人以利，真可谓 虚怀期物，自有由来 矣！
现代文：来信说 敞开心扉期待众人，自有原因；如今讨伐别人的君，用利害关系引诱人，真可以说是 敞开心扉期待众人，自有原因 啊!
English: The letter said, "Open your heart and look forward to everyone, for your own reasons; now you are fighting other people's lords and tempting people with interests. You can truly say, "Open your heart and look forward to everyone, for your own reasons!"

古文：刘籓死于阊阖之门，诸葛弊于左右之手。
现代文：刘藩死在阎阖之门，诸葛死在左右人的手中。
English: Liu Han died at the Gate of Hell, Zhuge died at the hands of those around him.

古文：甘言诧方伯，袭之以轻兵，遂使席上靡款怀之士，阃外无自信诸侯。
现代文：用甜言蜜语欺骗地方官，用轻便部队袭击他们，于是使席位上没有了诚恳的人士，城门外没有了自信的诸侯。
English: He deceived the local officials with sweet words and attacked them with light troops, so that there were no sincere people on the seats and no self-confident princes outside the gate.

古文：以是为得算，良可耻也。
现代文：把这当作得计，实在是可耻啊。
English: It's a disgrace that this has been allowed to happen.

古文：吾诚鄙劣，尝闻道于君子。
现代文：我确实浅陋，然而曾在君子那裹听说过道。
English: I am indeed shallow, but I have heard about the Tao from a gentleman.

古文：以平西之至德，宁可无授命之臣乎！
现代文：凭着平西的完美德行，难道会没有为他献身的臣吗!
English: With Pingxi's perfect virtue, wouldn't there be a vassal dedicated to him?

古文：假令天长丧乱，九流浑浊，当与臧洪游于地下耳。 
现代文：假如天下长久丧乱，九条河流浑浊，我该和臧洪在地下交往。 
English: If the world is in turmoil for a long time and the nine rivers are muddy, I should communicate with Zhai Hong underground.

古文：裕得书叹息，以示诸佐曰： 事人当应如此！ 
现代文：刘裕得到书信叹息，把信给左右人看，说： 为人做事应当像这样! 
English: Liu Yu sighed when he received the letter and showed it to people around him, saying, "Doing things for others should be like this!

古文：宗之闻裕向荆州，自襄阳就休之共屯江陵。
现代文：宗之听说刘裕出兵荆州，从襄阳到休之那裹共同驻守江陵。
English: Zongzhi heard that Liu Yu sent soldiers to Jingzhou, and they were stationed together in Jiangling from Xiangyang to Xuzhou.

古文：使文思及宗之子轨以兵距裕，战于江津。
现代文：派文思及宗之的儿子司马轨率兵抵御刘裕，在江津交战。
English: Wen Si and Zong Zhi's son Sima Luo led an army to resist Liu Yu and fought in Jiangjin.

古文：休之大败，遂与宗之俱奔于姚兴。
现代文：休之大败，于是和宗之一起投奔姚兴。
English: After Hu's crushing defeat, he and Zong went to work for Yao Xing.

古文：裕平姚泓，休之将奔于魏，未至，道死。
现代文：刘裕平定姚泓，休之将投奔到魏，还没到，死在路上。
English: Liu Yu pinned down Yao Zhen, Huizhi will rush to Wei, has not yet arrived, died on the road.

古文：允之字季度，出后叔父愔，袭爵广晋伯，历位辅国将军、吴国宣城谯梁内史。
现代文：允之字季度，过继给叔父司马情，承袭了广晋伯的爵位，历任辅国将军、吴国宣城谯梁内史。
English: In the fourth year of his reign, he was succeeded by his uncle Sima Jiao, and inherited the title of Guang Jin Bo. Successive generals of Fu Guo, Wu Guoxuan and Cheng Yu Liang are recorded in history.

古文：王恭、庾楷、桓玄等内伐也，会稽王道子命允之兄弟距楷，破之。
现代文：王恭、庾楷、桓玄等人在国内征伐时，会稽王命令允之兄弟抵御楷，被打败。
English: When Wang Gong, Zou Kai, Huan Xuan and others went on a campaign in China, the king of the imperial court ordered Yun's brothers to defend themselves against Kai, and they were defeated.

古文：元兴初，与兄恢之同徙广州，于道被害。
现代文：五垦初年，和兄长一同被迁徙到卢州，在道上被害。
English: In the first year of the Five Year Plan, he and his elder brother were moved to Luzhou, where they were killed on the road.

古文：义军起，追赠太常卿。
现代文：义军兴起，追赠为太常卿。
English: The rebel army arose, and he was posthumously promoted to the position of Taijōkyō.

古文：从弟康之以子文惠袭爵。
现代文：堂弟尘之让儿子文惠继承爵位。
English: His cousin, Chen Zhi, allowed his son, Wen Hui, to inherit the title.

古文：宋受禅，国除。
现代文：宋接受禅让后，封国被取消。
English: Song accepted Zen's concession, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：韩延之，字显宗，南阳赭阳人，魏司徒暨之后也。
现代文：韩延之字显宗，南阳赭阳人，是魏司徒韩暨的后人。
English: Han Yan Zi's character Xian Zong, a native of Nanyang and Shenyang, was a descendant of Han Ji, a Western scholar.

古文：少以分义称。
现代文：年少时以名分义气著称。
English: When he was young, he was known for his sense of duty.

古文：安帝时为建威将军、荆州治中，转平西府录事参军。
现代文：安帝时任建威将军、荆州治中，转任平西府录事参军。
English: At that time, An Di served as General Jian Wei and Jingzhou Zhizhong, and transferred to Pingxi Prefecture to join the army.

古文：以刘裕父名翘字显宗，延之遂字显宗，名兒为翘，以示不臣刘氏。
现代文：因为刘裕的父亲名翘字显宗，延之于是取字显宗，为儿子取名为翘，以此表示不向刘氏臣服。
English: Because Liu Yu's father's name was "Heng Zong," Yan Zhi took the name "Heng Zong" and named his son "Heng Zong" to show that he would not submit to the Liu clan.

古文：与休之俱奔姚兴。
现代文：和休之一起投奔姚兴。
English: He went to work for Yao Xing at the same time.

古文：刘裕入关，又奔于魏。
现代文：刘裕入关，又投奔到魏。
English: Liu Yu entered the pass and went to Wei.

古文：愔字敬王，初封广晋伯。
现代文：司马情字敬王，起初被封为广晋伯。
English: Sima Rongzhi wrote "Dear King" and was initially given the title "Guang Jin Bo."

古文：早卒，无子，兄恬以子允之嗣。
现代文：死得早，没儿子，兄长司马恬让儿子允之继嗣。
English: He died early, without a son, and his elder brother Sima Ye let his son become his heir.

古文：高阳王睦，字子友，谯王逊之弟也。
现代文：高阳王司马睦字子友，是谯王司马逊的弟弟。
English: Gaoyang Wang Sima Mu Zi You is the younger brother of Shao Wang Sima Shu.

古文：魏安平亭侯，历侍御史。
现代文：在魏为安平亭侯，历任侍御史。
English: He was the lord of Anping Pavilion in the Wei Dynasty, and his successors are the history of attendants.

古文：武帝受禅，封中山王，邑五千二百户。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，封他为中山王，封邑五千二百户。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's resignation and made him the King of Zhongshan, with 5,200 fiefs.

古文：睦自表乞依六蓼祀皋陶，鄫杞祀相立庙。
现代文：司马睦自己上表请求依照六蓼祭祀皋陶，郜杞祭祀相建立宗庙。
English: Sima Mu himself requested that the family temple be built in accordance with the six sacrificial rites of the Tao and the Five Sacrifices.

古文：事下太常，依礼典平议。
现代文：事情交给太常，按照礼典评议。
English: The matter was handed over to the superintendent and discussed according to protocol.

古文：博士祭酒刘憙等议： 《礼记·王制》，诸侯五庙，二昭二穆，与太祖而五。
现代文：博士祭酒刘患等人议： 《礼记王制》，诸侯设五庙，二昭二穆，加上太祖庙共五个。
English: Liu Zi and others discuss the doctoral sacrificial wine: "The royal system of etiquette," the princes set up five temples, two Zhao and two Mu, plus the Great Ancestor Temple, a total of five.

古文：是则立始祖之庙，谓嫡统承重，一人得立耳。
现代文：据此立始祖的庙，指的是嫡传系统的继承，一个人可以立。
English: According to this, the temple of the founder refers to the inheritance of the patriarchal system, and one person can establish it.

古文：假令支弟并为诸侯，始封之君不得立庙也。
现代文：假如旁支兄弟都是诸侯，最初被封的国君不能立庙。
English: If the collateral brothers are all lords, the prince who was originally enthroned cannot establish a temple.

古文：今睦非为正统，若立祖庙，中山不得并也。
现代文：如今司马睦不是正统，如果立祖庙，中山不能并列。
English: Today, Sima Mu is not orthodox. If the ancestral temple is built, Zhongshan cannot be ranked alongside it.

古文：后世中山乃得为睦立庙，为后世子孙之始祖耳。 
现代文：后世的中山王才能为司马睦立庙，作为后世子孙的始祖。 
English: Only the future King of Zhongshan can build a temple for Sima Mu, as the ancestor of future generations.

古文：诏曰： 礼文不明，此制度大事，宜令详审，可下礼官博议，乃处当之。 
现代文：诏书说： 礼制条文不明，这是关系到制度的大事，应该详细审定，可交付礼官广泛议论，再处理此事。 
English: The edict said: "The text of the etiquette system is unclear. This is a major matter related to the system. It should be verified in detail and may be submitted to the etiquette officials for extensive discussion before the matter is dealt with."

古文：咸宁三年，睦遣使募徙国内八县受逋逃、私占及变易姓名、诈冒复除者七百余户，冀州刺史杜友奏睦招诱逋亡，不宜君国。
现代文：咸宁三年，司马睦派人招募迁徙国内八县接受逃亡、私自占有及改变姓名、诈冒免除徭役的七百多产，冀州刺史杜友奏报司马睦招纳引诱逃亡的人，不适宜做一国之君。
English: In the third year of Xianning, Sima Mu sent people to recruit and migrate to eight counties in China to accept more than seven hundred products of escape, self-possession and change of name, fraud and exemption from forced labor. Jizhou Sisi Duyuso reported that Sima Mu recruited and enticed people to escape. It is not suitable to be the king of a country.

古文：有司奏，事在赦前，应原。
现代文：有关官吏上奏，说事情发生在大赦前，应原谅。
English: The officials involved have come forward to say that the incident happened before the amnesty and should be forgiven.

古文：诏曰： 中山王所行何乃至此，览奏甚用怃然。
现代文：诏书说： 中山王所做的事怎么到了这个地步，读奏章让人很茫然。
English: The imperial edict said: How did the things done by King Zhongshan come to this point? Reading the edict leaves one at a loss.

古文：广树亲戚，将以上辅王室，下惠百姓也。
现代文：广泛地任用亲戚，将靠他们对上辅助王室，对下施恩惠于百姓。
English: Extensive use of relatives will rely on them to assist the royal family and benefit the people.

古文：岂徒荣崇其身，而使民逾典宪乎！
现代文：难道仅仅为了荣耀崇大自身，而使百姓违背法律吗!
English: Is it only for the sake of glory and self-aggrandizement that the people violate the law?

古文：此事当大论得失，正臧否所在耳。
现代文：逭件事应该深入议论得失，这正是区分好壤的地方。
English: The merits and demerits of this matter should be discussed in depth. This is where the fine line is drawn.

古文：苟不宜君国，何论于赦令之间耶。
现代文：如果不宜做一国之君，为什么用在赦令前后来论断呢?
English: If it is not suitable to be the ruler of a country, why is it used to judge before and after the pardon?

古文：其贬睦为县侯。 
现代文：贬司马睦为县侯。 
English: He demoted his secretary, Ma Mu, to the position of county magistrate.

古文：乃封丹水县侯。
现代文：于是封为丹水县侯。
English: As a result, he was given the title of Lord of Danshui County.

古文：及吴平，太康初诏复爵。
现代文：等到吴国被平定，太康初年下诏恢复爵位。
English: When the state of Wu was pacified, Taikang issued an edict to restore his peerage the following year.

古文：有司奏封江阳王，帝曰： 睦退静思愆，改修其德，今有爵土，不但以赦。
现代文：有关官吏奏请封他为江阳王，皇帝说： 司马睦退身平静地思考过失，重新修养自己的品德，如今有了爵位土地，不仅仅是因为赦免。
English: The relevant officials asked him to be named Jiangyang King, and the emperor said: Sima Mu retired to calmly reflect on his mistakes, re-cultivate his character, and now has a knighthood land, not only because of the pardon.

古文：江阳险远，其以高阳郡封之。 
现代文：江阳地方险要遥远，把高阳郡封给他。 
English: Jiangyang district is too far away, so Gaoyang County should be given to him.

古文：乃封为高阳王。
现代文：于是封为高阳王。
English: As a result, he was given the title of Goyang Wang.

古文：元康元年，为宗正。
现代文：元康元年，任宗正。
English: In the first year of the Genko era, he was appointed to the post of Munemasa.

古文：薨于位，世子蔚早卒，孙毅立。
现代文：死在官位上，长子司马蔚死得早，孙子司马毅继承王位。
English: He died in office, his eldest son Sima Wei died early, and his grandson Sima Yi succeeded to the throne.

古文：拜散骑侍郎，永嘉中没于石勒。
现代文：官拜散骑侍郎，永嘉年间死于石勒。
English: He was a government official and a horseback riding attendant. He died in Shile during the Yongjia era.

古文：隆安元年，诏以谯敬王恬次子恢之子文深继毅后。
现代文：隆安元年，韶书让谯敬王司马恬次子恢之的儿子文深做司马毅的继承人。
English: In the first year of the Longan era, the imperial edict named Wen Sheng, the son of the second son of King Sima Yi, as Sima Yi's successor.

古文：立五年，薨，无嗣，复以高密王纯之子法莲继之。
现代文：在王位五年，去世，没儿子，又以高密王司马纯的儿子法莲继嗣。
English: After five years on the throne, he died without a son, and was succeeded by the son of Gaomi King Sima Chun, Falian.

古文：宋受禅，国除。
现代文：宋接受禅让，封国被取消。
English: Song accepted Zen's concession, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：任城景王陵，字子山，宣帝弟魏司隶从事安城亭侯通之子也。
现代文：任城景王司马陵字子山，是宣帝的弟弟魏司隶从事安城亭侯司马通的儿子。
English: Rencheng Wang Sima Ling Zishan is the son of Emperor Xuan's younger brother Wei Sipu, who was engaged in the construction of the Ancheng Pavilion.

古文：初拜议郎。
现代文：起初官拜议郎。
English: At first, he was a bureaucrat.

古文：泰始元年封北海王，邑四千七百户。
现代文：泰始元年，封为北海王，封邑四千七百户。
English: In the first year of the Tai Dynasty, he was given the title of the North Sea King, with 4,700 households in his fiefdom.

古文：三年，转封任城王，之国。
现代文：三年，转封任城王，去了封国。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the post of city king and went to the feudal state.

古文：咸宁五年薨，子济立。
现代文：咸宁五年去世，儿子司马济继承王位。
English: Xianning died five years later, and his son Sima Zi succeeded to the throne.

古文：拜散骑侍郎、给事中、散骑常侍、辅国将军。
现代文：官拜散骑侍郎、给事中、散骑常侍、辅国将军。
English: The official saluted the horseback riding attendant, and in the middle of the ceremony, the horseback riding attendant, the general of the auxiliary country.

古文：随东海王越在项，为石勒所害，二子俱没。
现代文：跟随束海王司马越在项地，被石勒杀害，两个儿子都死了。
English: He followed King Sima Yue of Sokai to Xiangtang and was killed by Shi Le. His two sons also died.

古文：有二弟：顺、斌。
现代文：有两个弟弟：司马顺、司马斌。
English: He has two younger brothers: Sima Shun and Sima Bin.

古文：顺字子思，初封习阳亭侯。
现代文：司马顺字子思，起初被封为习阳亭侯。
English: Sima Shunzixi was originally named Xiyang Tingzhou.

古文：及武帝受禅，顺叹曰： 事乖唐虞，而假为禅名！ 
现代文：等到武帝接受禅让，司马顺叹息说： 事情舆庐、虞相违背，而藉用禅让的名义! 
English: When Emperor Wu accepted Zen Zhen, Sima Shun sighed and said: Things are contrary to public opinion and the state of affairs, but in the name of Zen Zhen!

古文：遂悲泣。
现代文：于是悲哀哭泣。
English: And they wept bitterly.

古文：由是废黜，徙武威姑臧县。
现代文：因此被废黜，迁徙到武威姑臧县。
English: As a result, he was dethroned and moved to Wuwei, Gushan County.

古文：虽受罪流放，守意不移而卒。
现代文：虽然受罪流放，但坚持自己的看法不改变直到死。
English: Although he was exiled for his crime, he insisted that his views would not change until his death.

古文：西河缪王斌，字子政，魏中郎。
现代文：西河缪王司马斌字子政，是魏的中郎。
English: Xihe Miao Wang Sima Bin Zi Zi Zheng, is Wei Zhong Lang.

古文：武帝受禅，封陈王，邑千七百一十户。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，封他为陈王，封邑一千七百一十户。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's resignation and made him the King of Chen, with 1,710 fiefs.

古文：三年，改封西河。
现代文：三年，改封西河。
English: Three years later, it was renamed West River.

古文：咸宁四年薨，子隐立。
现代文：咸宁四年去世，儿子隐立继承王位。
English: Emperor Xianning died four years later, and his son became the heir to the throne.

古文：薨，子立。
现代文：迁死，儿子继承王位。
English: He died and his son succeeded to the throne.

古文：史臣曰：泰始之初，天下少事，革魏余弊，遵周旧典，并建宗室，以为籓翰。
现代文：史臣日：泰始初年，天下少事，革除魏遣留下来的弊端，遵循且塑的旧典章，一起建立宗室，作为保卫国家的屏障。
English: Historian Sun: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, there were few things in the world. We should eliminate the drawbacks left by the Wei Dynasty, follow and shape the old regulations, and jointly establish the ancestral house as a barrier to protect the country.

古文：诸父同虞虢之尊，兄弟受鲁卫之祉，以为历纪长久，本支百世。
现代文：那些父辈的人与虞堕的尊贵相同，兄弟享有鲁、街的福祉，以为历代长久，正宗旁支百世相传。
English: Those people of the fathers' generation are of the same dignity as those of the fallen state, and the brothers enjoy the well-being of Lu and the city. They believe that it has been passed down from generation to generation for a long time, and it has been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：安平风度宏邈，器宇高雅，内弘道义，外阐忠贞。
现代文：安平风度宏大飘邈，器宇高雅，对内弘扬道义，对外阐发忠贞。
English: Anping's demeanor is grand and elegant, his utensils are elegant, he promotes morality internally, and he is loyal to the outside world.

古文：洎高贵薨殂，则枕尸流恸；陈留就国，则拜辞陨涕。
现代文：到高贵乡公遇害时，则趴在尸体上痛哭；陈留王赴金墉城，则跪拜辞行悲伤落泪。
English: When the noble townsman was killed, he lay down on the corpse and wept bitterly; when Chen Liu Wang went to Jinyu City, he knelt down and shed tears of sorrow.

古文：语曰 疾风彰劲草 ，献王其有焉。
现代文：俗话说 疾风知劲草 ，可以用来形容献王。
English: As the saying goes, 疾風知劲草, can be used to describe the king's offering.

古文：故能位班上列，享年眉寿，清徽至范，为晋宗英，子孙遵业，世笃其庆。
现代文：因而能位居上卿之列，享有高寿，美好至极的典范，是晋宗族的英才，子孙遵循遣业，世代忠实于他的善行。
English: As a result, he was able to rank among the high lords, enjoy a long life, and set an extremely beautiful example. He was the genius of the Jin clan, and his descendants followed his teachings and were loyal to his good deeds for generations.

古文：高密风监清远，简素寡欲，孝以承亲，忠以奉上，方诸枝庶，实谓国桢。
现代文：高密王作风清静超俗，简朴少欲望，用孝心奉承亲人，用忠诚奉承朝廷，比起其他旁支宗亲，实在可以说他是国家的栋梁。
English: Gaomi Wang's style is quiet and refined, simple with few desires, he flattered his relatives with filial piety, and flattered the imperial court with loyalty. Compared to other collateral relatives, it can truly be said that he is the pillar of the country.

古文：新蔡、南阳，俱莅方岳。
现代文：新蔡王、南阳王，都统治一方。
English: The new Cai Wang and Nanyang Wang both rule one side.

古文：值王室多难，中原芜梗，表义甄节，效绩艰危。
现代文：时值王室多难，中原荒芜阻塞，表明义气节操，在艰难危困时建立功绩。
English: It was a difficult time for the royal family, and the Central Plains were barren and blocked, which showed that they were virtuous and disciplined, and built achievements in times of hardship and distress.

古文：于时丑类实繁，凶威日逞，势悬众衅，相继沦亡，悲夫！
现代文：那时恶人实在太多，凶威一天比一天得逞，势力悬殊人力不足，因而相继沦亡，可悲啊!
English: At that time, there were too many evil people, the ferocious became more and more successful day by day, the disparity of forces was too great, and there was a shortage of manpower, so they fell one after another, how sad!

古文：谯闵沈雄壮勇，作镇南服。
现代文：谯闵王勇敢有大略，镇守南方。
English: Shao Wang bravely had a general plan to defend the south of the town.

古文：属奸回肆乱，称兵内侮。
现代文：适逢奸邪放肆作乱，起兵欺侮朝廷。
English: At the right time, the traitors and heretics wantonly caused chaos and raised an army to bully the imperial court.

古文：怀忠愤发，建义湘州，荆沔响应，群才致力。
现代文：谯闵王怀着忠心发奋振作，在湘州举义，荆沔响应，众多人才出力。
English: King Gong, with his loyalty, worked hard and raised his spirits. In Xiangzhou, Jingyao responded, and many talents contributed.

古文：虽元勋不立，而诚节克彰，垂裕后昆，奕世贞烈，岂不休哉！
现代文：虽然没有建头功，但显现了忠诚节操，把功业留给后人，几代人忠贞贤明，难道不可喜吗!
English: Although there is no outstanding achievement, but showed loyalty and discipline, leaving the work to future generations, several generations of loyalty and wisdom, can not be pleased!

古文：勋托末属，禀性凶暴。
现代文：司马勋托身于宗室，禀性凶暴。
English: Sima Xun is devoted to his family and has a violent temper.

古文：仍荷朝寄，推觳梁民，遂弃亲背主，负恩放命。
现代文：仍负荷着朝廷的寄托，被推举到梁岷，于是背弃宗族国君，辜负君恩抛弃命令。
English: He was still burdened with the trust of the imperial court and was promoted to Liang Jie, so he betrayed his ancestor, the sovereign, and disobeyed the order to abandon his position.

古文：凭庸蜀之饶，苞藏不逞；恃江山之固，奸谋日深。
现代文：凭藉庸蜀的富饶，包藏自己的不满；仗着江山的坚固，奸邪的谋划越来越深。
English: With the help of the richness of Yonshu, they hide their dissatisfaction; with the help of the solidity of the country, the evil plot is getting deeper and deeper.

古文：是以搢绅切齿，摅积愤之志；义士思奋，厉忘身之节。
现代文：因此官吏切齿，发泄长期不满的心意；义士发奋，磨砺自己忘身的节操。
English: As a result, officials gnash their teeth, venting their long-term dissatisfaction; the righteous are energized, sharpening their selfless self-control.

古文：天道祸淫，应时荡定。
现代文：上天之道降灾祸于邪恶，适时平定。
English: God's way is to bring calamity to evil, and to subdue it in a timely manner.

古文：昔汲黯犹在，淮南寝谋，周抚若存，凶渠未发，以邪忌正，异代同规。
现代文：过去汲黯还在，淮南王搁置了策谋，周抚要是活着，司马勋也不敢作乱，由于邪恶顾忌正直，不同的朝代同样的道理。
English: In the past, Zhu Xi was still alive. King Huainan shelved the plot. If Zhou Fu was alive, Sima Xun would not dare to make trouble. Due to the evil and scruples of honesty, different dynasties have the same reason.

古文：《诗》云 自贻伊戚 ，其勋之谓矣。
现代文：《诗》说 自己给自己留下悲伤 ，说的就是司马勋啊。
English: "Poetry" says, "Leave your sorrow to yourself," and that is Sima Xun.

古文：习阳凭庆枝叶，守约怀逸，栖情尘外，希踪物表，顾匹夫之独善，贵达节之弘规，言出身播，犹为幸也。
现代文：习阳亭侯因出身宗室而得福，保持俭约心怀隐逸，置情感于尘世之外，仰慕追随超越世事，关心独善其身，看重通达事理合乎节操的准则，一句话说出而扬名，还是应该庆幸。
English: Xi Yangting Hou was blessed by being born in the same family as his parents. He kept a frugal lifestyle, cherished seclusion, put his emotions outside the world, admired those who transcended worldly affairs, cared about self-improvement, and valued the principle of doing things in a rational and disciplined manner. It is still fortunate that he became famous by saying one sentence.

古文：赞曰：安平立节，雅性贞亮。
现代文：赞曰：安平王树立节操，高尚的性格忠贞贤明。
English: Praise says: King Anping established discipline, and his noble character was loyal and wise.

古文：高密含和，宗室之望。
现代文：高密王心怀和睦，是宗室的名人。
English: King Gaomi was a man of peace and harmony, and he was a famous member of his family.

古文：新蔡遇祸，忠全元丧。
现代文：新蔡王遇难，保全了忠诚丧失了性命。
English: The new Cai Wang was killed, and he lost his life while preserving his loyalty.

古文：谯闵徇义，力屈志扬。
现代文：谯闵王为道义而死，力量竭尽志气播扬。
English: Shao Wang died for morality and did his best to spread his spirit.

古文：勋自贻戚，名陨身亡。
现代文：司马勋自找忧戚，名败身亡。
English: Sima Xun took it upon himself to seek out relatives, and died in disgrace.

古文：顺不恤忌，流播遐方。
现代文：司马顺不顾忌，扬名到远方。
English: Sima Shun has no scruples, and his fame has spread far and wide.

