古文：二十二日，南天门。
现代文：从丹霞寺往上走三里，为湘南寺，又走两里，到南天门。
English: From Danxia Temple, walk up three miles to Shonan Temple, and walk another two miles to Nantianmen.

古文：平行东向二里，分路。
现代文：向东平走两里，路岔开。
English: Walk two miles to Dongping and turn off the road.

古文：南一里，飞来船、讲经台。
现代文：往南走一里，到飞来船和讲经台。
English: Walk one mile south to the flying boat and the lectern.

古文：转至旧路，又东下半里，北度脊，西北上三里，上封寺。
现代文：转回到原路，又向东朝下走半里，往北越过山脊，再往西北朝上走三里，到达上封寺。
English: Turn back to the original road, and walk half a mile to the east and down, cross the ridge to the north, and then walk three miles to the northwest and up to reach Shangfeng Temple.

古文：上封东有虎跑泉，西有卓锡泉。
现代文：上封寺东面有虎跑泉，西面有卓锡泉
English: On the east side of the temple, there is a tiger running spring, and on the west side, there is a Zhuoxi spring

古文：二十三日，上封。
现代文：二十三日在上封寺。
English: On the 23rd, I went to the Joho-ji Temple.

古文：二十四日，上封。
现代文：二十四日在上封寺。
English: On the 24th, it was held at the Joho-ji Temple.

古文：二十五日，上封。
现代文：二十五日在上封寺。
English: On the 25th, I went to the Joho-ji Temple.

古文：二十六日，晴。
现代文：二十六日天气晴朗。
English: The weather was fine on the 26th.

古文：呈观音崖，再上祝融会仙桥，由不语崖西下。
现代文：到了观音崖，再次登上祝融会仙桥，从不语崖往西朝下走。
English: After arriving at the Guanyin Cliff, I climbed the Zhuronghui Bridge again, and walked down from the cliff to the west.

古文：八里，分路。
现代文：八里后，路岔开。
English: After eight miles, the road splits.

古文：南茅坪。
现代文：往北走两里，到九龙坪。
English: Walk two miles north to Jiulongping.

古文：北二里，九龙坪，仍转路口。南一里，茅坪。东南由山半行，四里渡乱涧，至大坪分路。
现代文：仍然转回路口，往南走一里，到茅坪。往东南从半山腰中走，四里后渡过纷乱的山涧水，到大坪路岔开。
English: I still turned the roundabout, walked one mile south to Mao Ping, walked southeast from the middle of the mountainside, and four miles later crossed the chaotic mountains and rivers to reach Daping Road.

古文：东南上南天门。西南小路直上四里，为老龙池，有水一池在岭坳，不甚澄清澈，其净室多在岭外。
现代文：从西南面的小路直往上走四里，为老龙池，有一池水在岭坳上，不很清澈。僧人的净室大多在岭外。
English: From the southwestern path, walk straight up for four miles to Lao Longchi. There is a pool of water on the ridge crest, which is not very clear. Most of the monks' purification chambers are outside the ridge.

古文：西南侧刀之西，雷祖之东分路。
现代文：又往西南走，到侧刀峰西面、雷祖峰东面路岔开。
English: Walk to the southwest again, and walk to the west side of Xiangtaofeng and the east side of Lei Zuofeng.

古文：东二里，上侧刀峰。
现代文：往东走两里，登上侧刀峰。
English: Walk east for two miles and climb up the Sidewinder Peak.

古文：平行顶上二里，下山顶，度脊甚狭。
现代文：从侧刀峰顶上平行两里，走下山顶，所越过的山脊很狭窄。
English: From the top of the side cutter peak, it is a two-mile parallel walk down to the top of the mountain. The ridge is very narrow.

古文：行赤帝峰北一里，绕其东，分路。
现代文：从赤帝峰北面走一里，绕到峰东面，路岔开。
English: From the north side of the Red Emperor Peak, walk one mile, go around to the east side of the peak, and the road will be open.

古文：乃南由坳中东行，一里，转出天柱东，遂南下。
现代文：于是往南从山坳中向东行，一里，转出天柱峰东面，便往南朝下走。
English: So I went south from the middle of the mountains to the east, one mile, turned off the east face of Tianzhu Peak, and went south.

古文：五里，过狮子山与大路合，遂由岐路西入福严寺，殿已倾，僧佛鼎谋新之。
现代文：走五里，过了狮子山后与大路交合，于是从岔路往西进入福严寺，住在明道山房。
English: After walking for five miles, after passing Lion Mountain, it intersected with the main road, so it entered Fuyan Temple from the west and lived in Mingdao Mountain House.

古文：宿明道山房。二十七日，早闻雨，餐后行少止。
现代文：二十七日早晨听到雨声，餐后出发时稍微停了些。
English: On the morning of the 27th, we heard the sound of rain. When we set out after dinner, it stopped a little.

古文：由寺西循天柱南一里，又西上二里，越南分之脊，转而北，循天柱西一里，上西来之脊，遂由脊上西南行，于是循华盖之东矣。
现代文：从寺西面顺着天柱峰南边走一里，又往西朝上走两里，越过天柱峰分朝南面的山脊，折往北，顺天柱峰西面走一里，登上从西边延伸过来的山脊，便从山脊上往西南行，从这里起就是顺着华盖峰的东面走了。
English: From the west side of the temple, walk one mile along the south side of Tianzhu Peak, then walk two miles up to the west, cross the ridge on the south side of Tianzhu Peak, turn north, walk one mile along the west side of Tianzhu Peak, climb the ridge extending from the west, then walk southwest from the ridge, and from here walk along the east side of Huagai Peak.

古文：一里，转华盖南，西行三里，循华盖西而北下。
现代文：一里，转到华盖峰南面，往西走三里，顺华盖峰西面往北朝下走。
English: One mile, turn to the south of Huagai Peak, walk west for three miles, and walk down the west side of Huagai Peak to the north.

古文：风雨大至，自是持盖行。
现代文：这时急风骤雨来临，我撑伞而行。
English: At this time, a sudden wind and rain came, and I was walking with an umbrella.

古文：北过一小坪，复上岭，共一里，转而西行岭脊上。
现代文：往北越过一小块山间平地，又上了岭，共走一里，折往西从岭脊上行。
English: I walked north across a small flat area between the mountains, and then up the ridge, a total of one mile. I turned west and walked up the ridge.

古文：连度三脊，或循岭北，或循岭南，共三里而复上岭。
现代文：接连越过三座山脊，或者顺岭北，或者顺岭南，共走三里而又上了岭。
English: They crossed three ridges in succession, either Shunling North or Shunling South, and walked a total of three miles before reaching the ridge.

古文：于是直上二里，是为观音峰矣。
现代文：从那岭直往上走两里，就是观音峰了。
English: From that ridge, walk straight up for two miles and you will reach Guanyin Peak.

古文：由峰北树中行三里，雨始止，而沉霾殊甚。
现代文：从观音峰北面的树林中行三里，雨才停下来，然而天空中阴霆仍十分浓密。
English: It took three miles from the woods north of Guanyin Peak for the rain to stop, but the sky was still very overcast.

古文：又西南下一里，得观音庵，始知路不迷。
现代文：又往西南朝下走一里，见到观音庵，这才知没迷路。
English: I walked another mile down to the southwest and saw the Guanyin Temple. That's when I knew I hadn't lost my way.

古文：又下一里，为罗汉台。
现代文：又朝下走一里，为罗汉台。
English: Another mile downhill, and it's Lohantai.

古文：于是复南上二里，连度二脊，丛木亦尽，峰皆茅矣。
现代文：有条路从北面山坞中过来、它就是从南沟来的路。从罗汉台又往南朝上走两里，接连越过两座山脊，丛密的树木也没有了，山峰间都是些茅草。
English: There is a road coming from the dock in the north, and it is the road from the south ditch. From Lohantai, it is another two miles to the south, over two ridges in succession. The thick trees are gone, and there is only some thatch between the peaks.

古文：既逾高顶，南下一里，得丛木一丘，是为云雾堂。
现代文：随后越过高高的山顶，往南朝下走一里，见到一座丛木生长的小山，这就是云雾堂。
English: Then he crossed the high mountain top and walked one mile down to the south, where he saw a small hill covered with bushes. This was the Cloud Palace.

古文：中有老僧，号东窗，年九十八，犹能与客同拜起。
现代文：云雾堂中有个老僧人，法号叫东窗，年纪九十八岁，还能和客人同样地起身互行打拱作揖的礼仪。
English: There is an old monk in the Hall of Clouds and Mists. His Dharma name is Dongfeng. He is ninety-eight years old, and he can get up and perform the ritual of playing the gong with his guests in the same way.

古文：时雾稍开，又南下一里半，得东来大路，遂转西下，又一里半至涧，渡桥而西，即方广寺。
现代文：这时雾气稍微散开了些，又往南朝下走一里，见到从东面过来的大路，于是折往西下去，又走一里半到达山涧边，越过山涧上的桥到西面，就是方广寺。
English: At this time, the fog dispersed a little, and I walked a mile to the south and saw the main road coming from the east, so I turned west and walked another mile and a half to reach the edge of the ridge, over the bridge on the ridge to the west, that is, Fangguang Temple.

古文：寺正殿崇祯初被灾，三佛俱雨中。盖大岭之南，石廪峰分支四下，大岭之北，云雾顶分支西下，夹而成坞，寺在其中，寺始于梁天监中。水口西去，环锁甚隘，亦胜地也。
现代文：大略大岭的南面，石凛峰分出支脉往西延伸下去，成为莲花等山峰；大岭的北面，云雾堂所在山峰的峰顶分出支脉往西延伸下去，成为泉室、天台等山峰。它们夹峙而形成山坞，方广寺就位于山坞中，山坞的水口往西过去的地方，峰峦回环交锁，很是险要狭窄，也是一处名胜之地。
English: On the south side of the Great Rift Valley, the branching offshoot of Shilin Peak extends westward to become a lotus flower and other peaks; on the north side of the Great Rift Valley, the branching offshoot of the peak of the peak where the Cloud Temple is located extends westward to become a spring room, rooftop and other peaks. They are sandwiched and form a dock. Fangguang Temple is located in the dock, where the mouth of the dock passes to the west. The peak is interlocked with the ring. It is very narrow, and it is also a place of scenic beauty.

古文：宋晦庵、南轩诸迹，没俱于火。
现代文：寺西面有个洗袖池，补衣石则在山涧旁边。
English: On the west side of the temple, there is a pond for washing sleeves, and the stone for mending clothes is next to the hammock.

古文：寺西有洗衲池，补衣石在涧旁。渡水口桥，即北上山，西北登一里半，又平行一里半，得天台寺。
现代文：天台峰西面垂下一条支脉，它环绕而折向南面，若像一条摆动的大尾巴，几乎往东连接着天台峰向南延伸下去的那条支脉。
English: On the west face of Tiantai Peak hangs a branch, which wraps around and folds to the south, like a large swinging tail, connecting the branch that extends southward from Tiantai Peak almost to the east.

古文：寺有僧全撰，名僧也。适他出，其徒中立以芽茶馈。返宿方广庆禅、宁禅房。
现代文：天台峰南面两山间的水流细小，山峡内环绕着一个山坞如同块玉，这山坞位于高山之上，与方广寺所在的那山坞可称为上下两奇。返回方广寺宿在庆禅和宁禅的房中。
English: The water flow between the two mountains on the south side of Tiantai Peak is small, and a dock is like a ball in the canyon. This dock is located on a high mountain, and the dock where Fangguang Temple is located can be called the upper and lower wonders. Returning to Fangguang Temple, stay in the rooms of Qing Zen and Ning Zen.

古文：先是，余欲由南沟趋罗汉台至方广；比登古龙池，乃东上侧刀峰，误出天柱东；及宿福严，适佛鼎师通道取木，遂复辟罗汉台路。
现代文：原先，我想从南沟前往罗汉台再到方广寺；等登上古龙池，却往东上了侧刀峰，错转出天柱峰东面；到宿在福严寺时，正好佛鼎禅师凿通道路取木修殿，便又辟开了到罗汉台的路。
English: Originally, I wanted to go from the South Ditch to Lohantai and then to Fangguang Temple; when I ascended the Guolong Pond, I went east to the Sidewinder Peak and made a wrong turn to the east of the Tianzhu Peak; when I stayed at Fuyuan Temple, it was just the time when the Buddhist Zen master chiseled a road to take wood to repair the hall, and then opened up the road to Lohantai.

古文：余乃得循之西行，且自天柱、华盖、观音、云雾至大坳，皆衡山来脉之脊，得一览无遗，实意中之事也。
现代文：我这才得以顺着那辟开的路往西行，而且从天柱峰、华盖峰、观音峰、云雾堂所在的山峰到大坳，都是衡山来脉的峰脊，得以一览无遗，实在是心中快意的事。
English: It was only then that I was able to follow the open road to the west, and from Tianzhu Peak, Huagai Peak, Guanyin Peak, the peak where Yunwu Hall is located, to Datong, they are all the ridges of Hengshan. Being able to see everything at a glance is really a matter of pleasure in my heart.

古文：由南沟趋罗台亦迂，不若径登天台，然后南岳之胜乃尽。
现代文：从南沟前往罗汉台，道路也绕，不如径直登上天台峰，这样南岳衡山的优美景致便可以览尽。
English: From the South Ditch to the Lohantai, the road is also around, it is better to go straight up to the roof peak, so that the beautiful scenery of Nanyue Hengshan can be fully seen.

古文：二十八日，早起，风雨不收。
现代文：二十八日早晨起来，风雨未停。
English: I woke up on the morning of the 28th, and the wind and rain had not stopped.

古文：宁禅、庆禅二僧固坚持留，余强别之。
现代文：宁禅、庆禅两位僧人坚决挽留我，我强硬地辞别了他们。
English: The two monks, Ningzen and Qingzen, resolutely held me back, and I forcibly parted with them.

古文：庆禅送至补衲台而别。
现代文：庆禅送我到补钠台才与我分别。
English: It was only after Qingzen sent me to the sodium-supplement station that they separated from me.

古文：遂沿涧西行，南北两界，山俱茅秃。
现代文：于是沿山涧往西行，南北两边，山都是光秃秃的，尽生长着些茅草。
English: So we went west along the ridge, and on both sides, north and south, the mountains were bare, with only some thatch growing.

古文：五里，始有石树萦溪，崖影溪声，上下交映。
现代文：走五里，才有石崖树木萦绕在溪畔，崖影溪流，上下交相映照。
English: After walking for five miles, the cliffs and trees linger on the riverbank, the cliff shadows the stream, and the top and bottom are reflected in each other.

古文：又二里，北向登崖，崖下石树愈密，涧在深壑，其中有黑、白、黄三龙潭，两崖峭削，故路折而上，已而平行山半，共三里，过鹅公嘴，得龙潭寺。
现代文：又走两里，溪对岸的前山间，有个山峡自东南面延伸过来，山峡中的水与方广寺来的水汇合而流往西去。我们向北朝山崖上攀登，山崖下面石头树木更加茂密，山涧水处深谷之中，那深谷中有黑、白、黄三个龙潭，因为谷两边崖壁峻峭陡削，所以路折往上走，这样便只是听到水声而已，不能见到龙潭。随后在山半平行三里，过鹅公嘴，到龙潭寺。
English: After another two miles, in the foothills on the opposite bank of the stream, there was a canyon extending from the southeast. The water in the canyon merged with the water from Fangguang Temple and flowed to the west. We climbed up the cliff to the north. The rocks and trees below the cliff were more dense. In the middle of the deep valley at the water's edge, there were three dragon pits: black, white and yellow. Because the cliffs on both sides of the valley were steep and steep, we had to walk up the road, so we only heard the sound of water and could not see the dragon pits. Then, three miles parallel to the mountain,

古文：寺在天台西峰之下，南为双髻峰。
现代文：此寺在天台峰的西峰下，寺南面为双髻峰。
English: This temple is at the foot of the west peak of Tiantai Peak, and the south face of the temple is a double-peaked peak.

古文：盖天台、双髻夹而西来，以成龙潭之流；潭北上即为寺，寺西为狮子峰，尖削特立，天台以西之峰，至此而尽；其南隔溪即双髻西峰，而莲花以西之峰，亦至此而尽；过九龙，犹平行山半，五里，自狮子峰南绕其西，下山又五里，为马迹桥，而衡山西面之山始尽。
现代文：大概天台峰、双髻峰夹峙而往西延伸过来，从而形成了有兰个龙潭在其中的那条水流；龙潭北面山上就是寺，寺西面为狮子峰，尖削陡峭，孤峰耸立，天合峰以西的山峰，到此结束；狮子峰南面溪流对岸就是双髻峰的西峰，莲花峰以西的山峰，也到此结束。过了九龙坪，依然从半山中朝前平行，五里后，从狮子峰南面绕到峰西面，下了山又走五里，为马迹桥，衡山西面的山峦这才结束。
English: Probably, the Tiantai Peak and the Shuangtaiping Peak extended to the west, thus forming the stream with the blue Longtan in it; the north side of the Longtan is the temple on the mountain, the west side of the temple is the Lion Peak, the sharp and steep, the lonely peak stands, the mountain peak west of Tianhe Peak, and ends here; the south side of the Lion Peak across the stream is the west peak of the Shuangtaiping Peak, the mountain peak west of the Lotus Peak, and ends here. After Jiulongping, it is still parallel from the middle of the mountain to the front, after five miles, from the south side of the Lion Peak

古文：自马迹桥南渡一涧，即东南行，四里至田心。
现代文：马迹桥东距龙潭十里，西距湘乡县界四十里，西北距白高三十里，南到衡阳县界孟公坳五里。
English: Maqiu Bridge is ten miles east of Longtan, forty miles west of Xiangxiang County, thirty miles northwest of Baigao, and five miles south of Hengyang County.

古文：又越一小桥，一里，上一低坳，不知其为界头也。
现代文：从马迹桥往南渡过一条山涧，就是从方广寺、九龙坪流往白高去的那条。然后便往东南行，四里到田心。
English: From the horse-drawn bridge to the south, I crossed a ridge, the one that went from Fangguang Temple and Jiulongping Stream to Baigao. Then I went southeast, four miles to Tianxin.

古文：过坳又五里，有水自东北山间悬崖而下，其高数十仞，是为小响水塘，盖亦衡山之余波也。
现代文：又越过一座小桥，走一里，登上一个低矮的山坳，我当时不知道它是往两县分界处。越过山坳又走五里，有条水流从东北面山间悬崖上倾泻下来，高有几丈，这里是小响水塘，大约这水也是衡山水流的余波。
English: I also crossed a small bridge, walked one mile, and climbed a low mountain ridge. I did not know at the time that it was to the border between the two counties. After crossing the ridge and walking five miles, a stream of water poured down from the mountain cliff in the northeast, several meters high. Here is Xiaoxing Reservoir. This water is also the aftermath of Hengshan River.

古文：又二里，有水自北山悬崖而下，是为大响水塘。
现代文：又走两里，有条水流从北面山上悬崖间倾泻下来，这里是大响水塘。
English: After another two miles, a stream of water pours down from between the cliffs on the north face of the mountain. This is the Daxing Reservoir.

古文：前即宁水桥，问水从何处，始知其南由唐夫沙河而下衡州草桥。
现代文：水面的宽处超过前面那崖壁上的，但水分成两级折下山峡间，先看见上面的一级，然后见到下面的那级，所以觉得它不如前面崖壁上的那样飞流直下。
English: The width of the water surface exceeded that on the cliff in front, but the water broke down into two levels between the canyons, first seeing the level above, then seeing the level below, so I felt that it was not as fast as the one on the cliff in front.

古文：盖自马迹南五里孟公坳分衡阳、衡山界处，其水北下者，即由白高下一殒江，南下者，即由沙河下草桥，是孟公坳不特两县分界，而实衡山西来过脉也。
现代文：大响水塘前面就是宁水桥，我向旁人询问桥下的水从何处流来，才知道它是往南从唐夫沙河而流下衡州城草桥。大略从马迹桥南面五里衡阳、衡山两县分界处的孟公坳起，水往北流是从白高流下一琐江，往南流是从沙河流下草桥，因此孟公坳不只是两县的分界，而实际上是衡山往西延伸而来的山脉经过的地方。
English: In front of Daxing Reservoir is Ningshui Bridge. I asked a bystander where the water under the bridge was coming from, only to find out that it was flowing south from the Tangfusha River under the Hengzhou City Grass Bridge. It was roughly from the Menggong Bridge at the border between the two counties of Hengyang and Hengshan, five miles south of the Horse Trail Bridge. The water flowed north from Baigao under the Zorjiang River, and south from the Sand River under the Grass Bridge. Therefore, Menggong Bridge is not just the border between the two counties, but actually the place where the mountains of Hengshan extend to the west.

古文：第其坳甚平，其西来山即不甚高，故不之觉耳。
现代文：只是这山坳很平，衡山往西延伸而来的山岭不很高，所以没有觉察到罢了。
English: However, this ridge is very flat, and Hengshan Mountain, which extends to the west, is not very high, so I did not notice it.

古文：始悟衡山来脉非自南来，乃由此坳东峙双髻，又东为莲花峰后山，又东起为石廪峰，始分南北二支，南为岣嵝ǒǒ白石诸峰，北为云雾、观音以峙天柱。
现代文：我这才悟出衡山的来脉不是从南面来，而是从此坳东面耸起为双髻峰，又往东为莲花峰后面的山，又往东耸起为石凛峰，这才分成南北两支，南支为峋峻、白石等山峰，北支为云雾堂所在的山峰和观音峰，而后耸起为天柱峰。
English: It was only then that I realized that the source of Hengshan did not come from the south, but from the east, it rose as a double peak. To the east, it was the mountain behind Lotus Peak, and to the east, it rose as Shilin Peak. This was divided into north and south branches. The south branch was the peak of Jushun and Baishi, and the north branch was the peak where Yunwu Hall was located and Guanyin Peak, and then it rose as Tianzhu Peak.

古文：使不由西路，必谓岣嵝、白石乃其来脉矣。
现代文：假若不从衡山西面走，必定认为峋峻峰、白石峰就是它的来脉了。
English: If you don't walk from the west side of Hengshan Mountain, you will surely think that the steep peaks and white stone peaks are its origin.

古文：由宁水桥饭而南，五里，过国清亭，逾一小岭，为穆家洞。
现代文：在宁水桥吃了饭后往南走，五里，经过国清亭，然后越过一座小山岭，为穆家洞。
English: After eating at Ningshui Bridge, walk south for five miles, pass Guoqing Pavilion, and then cross a small mountain ridge to Mu Jia Dong.

古文：其洞回环圆整，自东南绕至东北，山亦如之，而东附于衡山之西。
现代文：那洞曲折环绕，圆而齐整，水流从洞的东南面绕到东北面，它就是石凛峰西南山峡中的水流；洞周围的山也是环绕盘曲，往东连接衡山的西面。
English: The cave is twisted around, round and even, and the water flows from the southeast side of the cave to the northeast side. It is the water flow in the southwest mountain gorge of Shilin Peak. The mountains around the cave are also twisted around, connecting the west side of Hengshan Mountain to the east.

古文：径洞二里，复南逾一岭，一里，是为陶朱下洞，其洞甚狭，水直西去。
现代文：过洞走两里，又往南翻越一座山岭，走一里，为陶朱下洞，那洞很狭窄，水从洞中直往西流去。
English: Walk two miles through the cave, and then go south over a mountain ridge. Walk one mile, and you will reach the Tao Zhu lower cave. The cave is very narrow, and water flows from the cave straight to the west.

古文：路又南入峡，二里，复逾一岭，为陶朱中洞，其水亦西去。
现代文：道路又向南进入山峡中，走两里，又翻越一座山岭，为陶朱中洞，洞中的水也往西流去。
English: The road went south into the gorge, walked two miles, and climbed over a mountain ridge. It was the Tao Zhu Middle Cave, and the water in the cave also flowed westward.

古文：又南二里，上一岭，其坳甚隘，为陶朱三洞，其洞较宽于前二洞，而不及穆洞之回环也。
现代文：又往南走两里，登上一座山岭，岭坳很狭窄，那地方为陶朱三洞，此洞较宽于前面的两个洞，但不如穆洞那样曲折环绕。
English: Another two miles to the south, up a mountain ridge, the ridge is very narrow, that place is Tao Zhu three holes, this hole is wider than the previous two holes, but not as tortuous as Mu cave.

古文：二里，又逾一岭，为界江，其水由东南向西北去。
现代文：走两里，又越过一座山岭，为界江，江水从东南向西北流去。
English: After walking for two miles, we crossed another mountain range to reach the Jiejiang River, which flows from the southeast to the northwest.

古文：界江之西为大海岭。
现代文：界江的西面为大海岭。
English: The west side of the Jiejiang River is a large ridge.

古文：溯水南行一里，上一坳，亦甚平，乃衡之脉又西度为大海岭者。
现代文：溯水往南行一里，登上一个山坳，它也很平，是衡山的山脉又往西延伸为大海岭的那个山坳。
English: I followed the water for a mile to the south and climbed a ridge. It was also flat. It was the ridge of Hengshan Mountains, which extended westward to become the Great Sea Ridge.

古文：其坳北之水，即西北下唐夫；其坳南之水，即东南下横口者也。
现代文：山坳北边的水，就是往西北流下唐夫的那条；山坳南边的水，就是往东南流下横口的那条。
English: The water on the north side of the ridge is the one that flows northwest down Tangfu; the water on the south side of the ridge is the one that flows southeast down Hengkou.

古文：逾坳共一里，为傍塘，即随水东南行。
现代文：翻过山坳共走一里，为傍塘，便沿水流往东南行。
English: After crossing the mountains, they walked for a total of one mile, until they came to a pond, where they followed the stream to the southeast.

古文：五里，为黑山，又五里，水口，两山逼凑，水由其内破壁而入，路逾其上。
现代文：走五里，为黑山，又走五里，为水口，两山迫近，水流从中间破壁而入，道路则要翻越水流上面的山崖。
English: Go five miles to get to the Black Mountain, and another five miles to get to the water's mouth. The two mountains are approaching, the water is breaking through the middle of the wall, and the road has to climb over the cliff above the water.

古文：一里，水始出峡，路亦就夷平。
现代文：一里后，水才流出山峡，路也趋平。
English: A mile later, the water flowed out of the gorge and the road was leveled.

古文：又一里，是为横口。
现代文：又走一里，就是横口。
English: Walk another mile and you'll come to a crossroads.

古文：傍塘、山之水南下，岣嵝之水西南来，至此而合。
现代文：傍塘、黑山的水往南流下来，峋峻峰的水从西南流来，到此处便汇合。
English: The water of the pond and the Black Mountain flows down to the south, and the water of the Qushun peak flows from the southwest, and they converge here.

古文：其地北望岣嵝、白石诸峰甚近，南去衡州尚五十里，遂止宿旅店。
现代文：从此地向北眺望，峋缕、白石等众山峰很近，它南距衡州城还有五十里，于是便停下来住宿在旅店中。
English: Looking northward from here, the mountains such as the Jianxin Mountains and the Baishi Mountains are very close. It is still fifty miles south of Hengzhou City, so they stopped and stayed in a hotel.

古文：是日共行六十里。
现代文：这一天共行了六十里。
English: On this day, we traveled a total of sixty miles.

古文：二十九日，早起，雨如注，乃踯躅泥途中。沿溪南行，逾一小岭，是为上梨坪。
现代文：二十九日早晨起来，大雨如注，于是在泥泞的道路中艰难地行走，边往前走边向后滑。沿溪往南行，越过一座小山岭，为上梨坪。
English: On the morning of the 29th, I got up and it was raining heavily, so I struggled to walk in the muddy road, slipping backwards as I walked forward. I went south along the creek, over a small mountain ridge, to Shangliping.

古文：又逾一小岭，五里，是为下梨坪，复与溪遇。
现代文：又越过一座小山岭，走五里，为下梨坪，到这里又与溪流相遇。
English: Then we crossed a small mountain ridge and walked five miles to get to the Lower Li Ping, where we met the stream again.

古文：又循溪东南下，十里，为杨梅滩，有石梁南北跨溪上，溪由梁下东去，路越梁东南行。
现代文：又沿溪往东南朝下走，十里，为杨梅滩，有座石桥南北横架在溪上，溪水从石桥下往东流去，路越过石桥往东南走。
English: I also walked along the stream in a south-easterly direction. Ten miles away, at Yangmei Beach, there was a stone bridge that ran north-south across the stream. The stream water flowed east from under the stone bridge, and the road passed over the stone bridge to the south-east.

古文：五里入排冲，又行排中五里，南逾青山坳，排冲者，冈自谭碧岭东南至青山，分为两支，俱西北转，两冈排闼门，夹成长坞，缭绕为田，路由之入，至青山而坞穷。
现代文：走五里进入排冲，又从排冲走五里，向南翻越青山坳。所谓排冲，是一条山冈从谭碧岭往东南延伸到青山后，分为两支，都折向西北，两座山冈中间如同一扇门，它们相夹而形成长长的山坞，山坞中田畴环绕，路顺山坞进去，到了青山山坞便结束了。
English: The so-called platooning is a mountain ridge that extends from Tan Bi Ling to the southeast to Aoyama. It is divided into two branches, both of which bend to the northwest. The middle of the two mountains is like a door. They are clamped together to form a long dock. The dock is surrounded by fields, the road goes into the dock, and it ends at the Aoyama dock.

古文：乃逾坳而南，陂陀高下，滑泞几不留足，而衣絮沾透，亦疲而不觉其寒。
现代文：于是翻过山坳往南走，山坡高低不平，泥浆滑溜，儿乎不能立足，衣服里层的棉絮虽然湿透了，也因为疲惫而不觉得寒冷。
English: So I walked over the mountains to the south, the slopes were uneven, the mud was slippery, I could hardly stand on my feet, and although the lint on the inner layer of my clothes was wet, I did not feel cold because I was tired.

古文：十里，下望日坳，为黄沙湾，则蒸江自西南沿山而来，路遂随江东南下，又五里为草桥，即衡州府矣。
现代文：走十里，下了望日坳，为黄沙湾，蒸江从西南面沿山而来，道路于是顺江往东南朝下走。又走五里为草桥，就到达衡州府城了。
English: After walking for ten miles, we came to the Wangri estuary, which is the Yellow Sand Bay. The steaming river came from the southwest along the mountain, and the road then went along the river to the southeast. After walking five miles to the grass bridge, we arrived at the capital of Hengzhou.

古文：觅静闻，暮得之绿竹庵天母殿瑞光师处。
现代文：去找寻静闻，傍晚在绿竹庵天母殿瑞光禅师处见到了他。
English: I went to look for him, and in the evening I saw him at the Zen master Rui Guang's place in the Green Bamboo Hermitage.

古文：亟投之，就火炙衣，而衡山古太坪僧融止已在焉。
现代文：赶忙奔到瑞光禅师房中，凑近火烘烤衣服，而衡山古太坪的僧人融止这时已经在瑞光禅师的房中了。
English: He hurried to the Ruiguang Zen master's room and approached the fire to bake clothes, while the monks of Hengshan Ancient Taiping were already in the Ruiguang Zen master's room.

古文：先是，予过古太坪，上古龙池，于山半问路静室，而融止及其师兄应庵双瞽。苦留余。余急辞去，至是已先会静闻，知余踪迹。
现代文：这之前，我经过古太坪，上古龙池，在半山中曾到融止的静室何路，融止和他师兄应庵苦苦挽留我，我急着告辞而去，到现在他已经先见着静闻，所以静闻知道了我的踪迹。
English: Before this, I had passed through Gu Taiping and Shang Gu Longchi, and in the middle of the mountain I had come to the still room of Rong Zhi. Rong Zhi and his elder brother Ying An worked hard to keep me, and I left in a hurry. So far, he had seen Jing Xuan first, so Jing Xuan knew my tracks.

古文：盖融止扶应庵将南返桂林七星岩，故道出于此，而复与之遇，亦一缘也。
现代文：因为融止搀扶着应庵打算南下返回桂林七星岩，所以经过这地方，而我又与他们相遇，也是 次机缘。
English: I passed this place because I was planning to go south to return to Guilin Qixingyan Rock, and I met them again. It was also a second chance.

古文：绿竹庵在衡北门外华严、松萝诸庵之间。
现代文：绿竹庵在衡州城北门外华严、松萝等众庵之间。
English: The Green Bamboo Hermitage is located outside the north gate of Hengzhou City, between the Huayan, Pineapple and other hermitages.

古文：八庵连络，俱幽静明洁，呗呗即梵，佛教徒念经诵之声相闻，乃藩府焚修焚香修道之地。
现代文：八个庵连接着，各庵都幽静明亮而清洁，僧人诵经的声音根互听得到，它们是藩府焚香修道的地方。
English: Eight hermitages are connected. Each hermitage is quiet, bright and clean. The sound of monks chanting can be heard from one to the other. They are places of incense burning.

古文：盖桂王以亲藩乐善，故孜孜于禅教云。
现代文：大概因为桂王以宗室受封者的身份而乐于行善，所以对于佛教中的事极为努九而不怠。
English: It is probably because King Katsura was happy to do good deeds in his capacity as the heir to the throne, so he was extremely diligent about things in Buddhism.

古文：三十日，游城外河街，泞甚。
现代文：三十日游览城外的河街，街道上泥浆很深很烂。
English: On the 30th, we toured the river streets outside the city. The mud on the streets was very deep and rotten.

古文：暮，返宿天母殿。
现代文：傍晚时，返回天母殿住宿。
English: In the evening, return to Tianmu Hall for accommodation.

