古文：掌禹锡，字唐卿，许州郾城人。
现代文：掌禹锡，字唐卿，许州郾城人。
English: He was called "Palm Yu Xi," "Tang Qing" and a native of Xuzhou.

古文：中进士第，为道州司理参军。
现代文：考取进士，任道州司理参军。
English: He passed the entrance examination and joined the army as a prefectural governor.

古文：试身言书判第一，改大理寺丞，累迁尚书屯田员外郎、通判并州。
现代文：参加修身立言书法的考核被评为第一名，改任大理寺丞，积功升任尚书屯田员外郎、并州通判。
English: He was awarded the first place in the assessment of the calligraphy of self-cultivation and self-criticism, and was reappointed as the chancellor of Dali Temple, and was promoted to the vice-chancellor of Shoshu, the vice-chancellor of Tonden, and the state general judge.

古文：擢知庐州，未行，丁度荐为侍御史，上疏请严备西羌。
现代文：后被提升为庐州刺史，还未赴任，丁度又推荐他做了侍御史，他上疏请求严防西羌。
English: Later, he was promoted to be the governor of Zhangzhou, but before he took office, he was recommended to be an attendant governor, and he asked Shangsu to strictly prevent Xidi.

古文：时议举兵，禹锡引周宣薄伐为得，汉武远讨为失；且建画增步卒，省骑兵。
现代文：当时正议论出兵，掌禹锡借引历史说周宣王近讨是正确的，汉武帝远攻匈奴是失策；并献计增加步兵，裁减骑兵。
English: At that time, they were discussing the dispatch of troops, and Pal Yuxi quoted history to say that Zhou Xuan Wang's recent discussion was correct, and Emperor Hanwu's distant attack on the Xiongnu was a blunder; and they planned to increase the number of infantry and reduce the number of cavalry.

古文：旧法，荐举边吏，贪赃皆同坐。
现代文：旧法律规定，推荐边疆守将，如果被推荐者贪赃犯法，推荐者也会连坐治罪。
English: According to the old law, if a border guard is recommended, if the recommended person is corrupt and breaks the law, the recommending person will also be punished.

古文：禹锡奏谓： 使贪使愚，用兵之法也。
现代文：掌禹锡上奏说 ：使用贪心的人还是用愚蠢的人，那是用兵的方法。
English: Pal Yuxi said at the top of his speech, "Whether to use greedy people or stupid people, that is the way to use soldiers."

古文：若举边吏必兼责士节，则莫敢荐矣。
现代文：如果推荐守边官吏还必须负责他的品节，则没人敢推荐了。
English: If the recommending border guard has to be responsible for his or her character, no one will dare to recommend him or her.

古文：材武者孰从而进哉？ 后遂更其法。
现代文：那些有才干本领的人又怎么出来为国效力呢？ 后来朝廷便修改了这一法律。
English: How could those with talent and ability come out to serve the country? Later, the imperial court amended this law.

古文：出提点河东刑狱。
现代文：后调出朝廷，任提点河东刑狱。
English: Later, he was transferred out of the imperial court and sent to Hedong Prison.

古文：杜衍荐，召试，为集贤校理，改直集贤院兼崇文院检讨。
现代文：因杜衍推荐，被召回朝受考核，任集贤校理，改任直集贤院兼崇文院检讨。
English: Due to Duyan's recommendation, he was recalled to the DPRK for examination, appointed as the schoolmaster of Jixian, and was reassigned to Jixian Academy and Chongwen Academy for review.

古文：历三司度支判官、判理欠司、同管勾国子监。
现代文：历任三司度支判官、判理欠司、同管勾国子监。
English: Successive incumbents of the three departments have served as judge, judge-in-charge, and co-supervisor.

古文：历判司农、太常寺。
现代文：又历任判司农、判太常寺。
English: He was also successively appointed as the judge of farmers and the judge of Daijo-ji Temple.

古文：数考试开封国学进士，命题皆奇奥，士子惮之，目为 难题掌公 。
现代文：多次主持开封府国学进士考试，他的命题都离奇古奥，书生们都害怕他，称他叫 难题掌公 。
English: He presided over the Kaifeng prefectural Chinese studies entrance examination many times. His propositions were all out of the ordinary, and the students were afraid of him, calling him "the master of difficult problems."

古文：迁光禄卿，改直秘阁。
现代文：后升职任光禄卿，改做直秘阁。
English: He was later promoted to the post of Kōroku-kyō (光禄卿) and became a direct secretary of the shogunate.

古文：英宗即位，自秘书监迁太子宾客。
现代文：宋英宗即位后，他从秘书监升做太子宾客。
English: After the enthronement of Song Ying Zong, he was promoted from secretary to prince's guest.

古文：御中劾禹锡老病不任事，帝怜其博学多记，令召至中书，示以弹文。
现代文：御史弹劾掌禹锡年老多病不能胜任事情，皇帝怜惜他博学多记，下令召他至中书，拿弹劾的奏文给他看。
English: The emperor took pity on his erudition and ordered to call him to the palace to show him the impeachment report.

古文：禹锡惶怖自请，遂以尚书工部侍郎致仕，卒。
现代文：掌禹锡惶恐不安，自己请求辞职，于是以尚书工部侍郎身份退休，后去世。
English: Panicked and uneasy, he asked to resign, so he retired as a waiter of the Shang Shuxigong Department, and later died.

古文：禹锡矜慎畏法，居家勤俭，至自举几案。
现代文：掌禹锡谨小慎微畏惧法律，平时在家勤俭，甚至自己动手搬几案。
English: Yuxi Palm is cautious and slightly afraid of the law. He is usually frugal at home, and has even handled several cases himself.

古文：尝预修《皇祐方域图志》、《地理新书》，奏对帝前，王洙推其稽考有劳，赐三品服。
现代文：曾参加修撰《皇方域图志》、《地理新书》，在向皇帝汇报时，王洙称赞他在稽查考实方面很有功，他因此被赏赐三品官服。
English: He had participated in the compilation of the "Imperial Map of China" and the "New Book of Geography," and when reporting to the emperor, Wang Qi praised him for his great achievements in the inspection and examination of facts, and he was awarded three official uniforms.

古文：及校正《类篇》、《神农本草》，载药石之名状为《图经》。
现代文：在校正《类篇》、《神农本草》时，他又记载药石的名称形状编著成《图经》。
English: When he was correcting "Classical Texts" and "Shennong Original Herbs," he also recorded the name and shape of the medicinal stone and compiled it into "Diagrams."

古文：喜命术，自推直生日，年庚寅，日乙酉，时壬午，当《易》之《归妹》、《困》、《震》初中末三卦。
现代文：喜欢算命术，自己推算生辰八字，出生年是庚寅，日是乙酉，时辰是壬午，命属《周易》中的《归妹》、《困》、《震》初中末三个卦。
English: She likes fortune-telling, and has calculated her eight-character birth date by herself. The year of birth is 庚寅, the day is乙, the hour is 壬午, and the life belongs to the three gossips at the end of junior high school, "归妹," "困," and "震" in "周易."

古文：以世应飞伏纳五甲行轨析数推之，卦得二十五少分，三卦合七十五年约半，禄秩算数，尽于此矣。
现代文：用世应飞伏纳五甲行轨析数的方法推算，每一卦得二十五年多一点，三卦合计为七十五年半，自己的官职寿命，都在这个数。
English: Using the method of calculating the number of years of service in the world, each gua is a little more than 25 years, and the total of three guas is 75 and a half years. Their official life expectancy is all in this number.

古文：著《郡国手鉴》一卷，《周易集解》十卷。
现代文：著作有《郡国手鉴》一卷，《周易集解》十卷。
English: He is the author of one volume of "County Handbook" and ten volumes of "Zhou Yi Set Solution."

古文：绅与梁适同在两禁，人以为险诐，故语曰： 草头木脚，陷人倒卓。 子颂，别有传。王洙，字原叔，应天宋城人。
现代文：喜藏书，他所记忆的书中内容极为广博，但迂腐散乱不能抓住要点。常乘劣马，衣服污垢不净，言谈举止多可笑，同事下属有时怠慢侮辱他，过街巷时，人们指着他戏论取乐。王洙，字原叔，应天府宋城人。
English: He liked to collect books. The contents of the books he remembered were extremely extensive, but the pedantry and confusion could not grasp the main points. He often rode a bad horse, his clothes were dirty, his speech and behavior were ridiculous, his subordinates sometimes neglected to insult him, and when he passed through the streets, people pointed at him to make fun of him. Wang Yao, Uncle Zhihara, was from Songcheng, Yingtianfu.

古文：少聪悟博学，记问过人。
现代文：少年时聪明博学，学问记忆超过常人。
English: When he was a boy, he was clever and erudite, and his academic memory exceeded that of an ordinary person.

古文：初举进士，与郭稹同保。
现代文：初次考进士时，与郭稹同为一人保荐。
English: When he took the entrance examination for the first time, he and Guo Jun were the only sponsors.

古文：人有告稹冒祖母禫，主司欲脱洙连坐之法，召谓曰： 不保，可易也。 洙曰： 保之，不愿易。 遂与稹俱罢。
现代文：有人控告郭稹谎称已为祖母服完丧，负责保荐的人想将王洙从连坐中解脱出来，召见王洙对他说： 我不再保荐你了，你可以换一个保荐人。 王洙说： 你仍保荐我，我不愿换人。 结果与郭稹都被取消参试资格。
English: Someone accused Guo Yao of falsely claiming that his grandmother had passed away. The person in charge of sponsoring Wang Yao wanted to release him from the joint sitting, and summoned Wang Yao to say to him: I no longer sponsor you, you can change a sponsor. Wang Yao said: You still sponsor me, I do not want to change. As a result, both Guo Yao and Guo Yao were disqualified from participating in the examination.

古文：再举，中甲科，补舒城县尉。
现代文：后再次参加考试，考取进士甲科，补任舒城县尉。
English: After that, he took the examination again, and passed the entrance examination for the Class A Division, and was appointed as the Shucheng County Lieutenant.

古文：坐覆县民钟元杀妻不实免官
现代文：因审查县民钟元杀妻一案有不实的错误被罢免职务。
English: He was removed from his post for making a false error in reviewing the case of the murder of his wife by county resident Zhong Yuan.

古文：后调富川县主簿。
现代文：后调任富川县主簿。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of the chief registrar of Bucheon County.

古文：晏殊留守南京，厚遇之，荐为府学教授。
现代文：晏殊留守南京时，对王洙非常礼遇，推荐他做府学教授。
English: When Gongshu stayed in Nanjing, he was very polite to Wang Yao and recommended him to be a professor of prefectural studies.

古文：召为国子监说书，改直讲。
现代文：后被召到京城任国子监说书，不久改任国子监直讲。
English: After that, he was called to the capital to serve as the provincial overseer of storytelling, and soon he was reassigned as the provincial overseer of straight storytelling.

古文：校《史记》、《汉书》，擢史馆检讨、同知太常礼院，为天章阁侍讲。专读宝训、要言于迩英阁。
现代文：校订《史记》、《汉书》，升任史馆检讨、同知太常礼院，后任天章阁侍讲，专门在迩英阁阅读皇帝的宝训、要言。
English: He revised the "Histories" and "Chinese Classics," was promoted to the review of the History Museum, the same as the Taizhongli Academy, and later served as the assistant lecturer of Tianzhangge, and read the emperor's precious sermons and key words at the Yuyingge.

古文：累迁太常博士、同管勾国子监，预修《崇文总目》成，迁尚书工部员外郎。
现代文：积功升任太常博士、同管勾国子监，参加《崇文总目》修撰，书成后升尚书工部员外郎。
English: For his achievements, he was promoted to the position of Tai Chang Ph.D. and the same position of Guo Guo Zi Guo. He participated in the compilation of "Chongwen Zongme" and was promoted to the member of the calligraphy department after the completion of the book.

古文：修《国朝会要》，加直龙图阁、权同判太常寺。
现代文：修撰《国朝会要》，加级任直龙图阁、权同判太常寺。
English: Compiled the "Important Documents of the Imperial Court," and was promoted to the post of Jialong Tuko, with the same authority as Taiji Temple.

古文：坐赴进奏院赛神与女妓杂坐，为御史劾奏，黜知濠州，徙襄州。
现代文：因犯在赴进奏院赛神会时与妓女混坐在一起的错误，被御史上奏弹劾，降职调出朝廷，做濠州知州，后调任襄州知州。
English: For making the mistake of sitting with prostitutes when he went to the Saishin Society of the Imperial Academy of Music, he was impeached by the Imperial Academy of Music, demoted and transferred out of the imperial court, made the governor of Zhangzhou, and then transferred to the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：会贝卒叛，州郡皆恟々，襄佐史请罢教阅士，不听。
现代文：这时正好贝州士兵叛乱，各州郡也都骚乱不安，襄州佐史请求停止训练检阅士兵，王洙不听。
English: At this time, Beizhou soldiers rebelled, and all prefectures and counties were in turmoil. Xiangzhou Sashi requested to stop training and inspecting soldiers, but Wang Hui did not listen.

古文：又请毋给真兵，洙曰： 此正使人不安也。 命给库兵，教阅如常日，人无敢哗者。
现代文：他又请求不给真兵，王洙说 ：这样反而会使人不安。 于是下令发派守府库的士兵，照常训练检阅，人们便再没有敢哗乱的了。
English: He also asked that the real soldiers not be sent, but Wang Yao said that this would make people uneasy, so he ordered the soldiers guarding the government treasury to be sent to train and inspect as usual, and the people no longer dared to riot.

古文：徙徐州。
现代文：调任徐州知州。
English: He was transferred to Xuzhou Chizhou.

古文：时京东饥，朝廷议塞商胡，赋楗薪，输半而罢塞。
现代文：当时京东饥荒，而朝廷讨论决定禁止经商的胡人，并收柴草充税，但仅送了一半柴草作税时，朝廷又取消禁令。
English: At that time, there was a famine in Jingdong, and the imperial court discussed and decided to ban Hu people from doing business and collect firewood tax. However, when only half of the firewood was sent for tax, the court canceled the ban.

古文：洙命更其余为谷粟，诱愿输者以餔流民，因募其壮者为兵，得千余人，盗贼衰息。
现代文：王洙下令将剩余一半用谷粟来交纳，引导愿意输送粮食的人来饣甫养流民，并招募身体强壮的流民当兵，得到一千多人，盗贼也因此衰败平息。
English: Wang Hui ordered the remaining half to be paid with corn, guided those who were willing to transport grain to help feed the refugees, and recruited strong refugees as soldiers, gaining more than a thousand people. The thieves also declined and subsided.

古文：有司上其最，为京东第一，徙亳州。
现代文：官吏上报他的最佳政绩，被认为是京东第一名，调任亳州知州。
English: The official reported his best political performance, was considered the first in Jingdong, and was transferred to Zhangzhou Chizhou.

古文：复为天章阁侍讲、史馆检讨。
现代文：后又做天章阁侍讲、史馆检讨。
English: Later, he also gave a lecture on Tianzhangge and reviewed the history museum.

古文：帝将祀明堂，宋祁言： 明堂制度久不讲，洙有《礼》学，愿得同具其仪。 诏还洙太常，再迁兵部员外郎，命撰《大飨明堂记》。
现代文：皇帝将要在明堂举行祭祀，宋祁说： 明堂制度很久没人讲，王洙深通《礼》学，希望能与他共同准备祭典的礼仪。 皇帝下诏将王洙调回太常寺，再迁兵部员外郎，命他撰写《大飨明堂记》。
English: The emperor was going to hold a religious service in the Ming Hall, and Song Tao said, "For a long time, no one has talked about the Ming Hall system. Wang Tao is well versed in the study of "Rites," and I hope to work with him to prepare the rituals of the festival. The emperor issued an edict to transfer Wang Tao back to the Taizhong Temple, relocate the military officer Wai Lang, and order him to write the "Diary of the Ming Hall."

古文：除史馆修撰，迁知制诰。
现代文：后受任史馆修撰，升任知制诰。
English: Later, he was appointed as a reviewer for the History Museum, and was promoted to the post of intellectual.

古文：诏诸儒定雅乐，久未决。
现代文：朝廷下令儒家学者制定雅乐，很久没有决定。
English: The imperial court ordered the Confucian scholars to formulate the elegant music, but it was not decided for a long time.

古文：洙与胡瑗更造钟磬，而无形制容受之别。
现代文：王洙与胡瑗新制钟磬，而两人所造的竟在形制容量上都完全相同无异。
English: Wang Qian and Hu Qian made a new bell tower, but what they made was exactly the same in terms of capacity.

古文：皇祐五年，有事于南郊，劝上用新药，既而议者多非之，卒不复用。
现代文：皇五年，朝廷在南郊举行典礼，王洙劝皇上使用新造的乐器，后来很多人都反对，终于没有再用新乐器。
English: In the fifth year of the emperor's reign, the imperial court held a ceremony in the southern suburbs. Wang Xi advised the emperor to use the newly made musical instruments. Later, many people objected, and finally, the new musical instruments were no longer used.

古文：夏竦卒，赐谥文献。
现代文：夏竦去世，赐谥号 文献 。
English: Xia Yao passed away and gave his posthumous name to literature.

古文：洙当草制，封还其目曰： 臣下不当与僖祖同谥。 因言： 前有司谥王溥为文献，章得象为文宪，字虽异而音同，皆当改。 于是太常更谥竦文庄，而溥、得象皆易谥。
现代文：王洙在草拟制文时，将名称封住退还给皇上说： 臣民不应与僖祖皇帝用同样的谥号。 并进一步说： 从前官吏将王溥谥为 文献 ，将章得象谥为 文宪 ，后者字虽异但音相同，两人的谥号都应改正。 于是太常重新给夏竦谥为 文庄 ，而且王溥、章得象都更改谥号。
English: During the drafting of the document, Wang Zhe sealed the name and returned it to the emperor, saying: Subjects should not use the same nickname as the ancestor emperor, and further said: Former officials used Wang Zhe as a document, and the chapter as a written constitution, although the latter word is different but the sound is the same, the nicknames of both should be corrected. Therefore, Xia Zhe was often re-given to Wenzhuang, and both Wang Zhe and the chapter changed their nicknames.

古文：尝使契丹，至靴淀。
现代文：曾出使契丹，到达革华淀。
English: He once sent an envoy to Khitan and arrived in Guevadon.

古文：契丹令刘六符来伴宴，且言耶律防善画，向持礼南朝，写圣容以归，欲持至馆中。
现代文：契丹命刘六符来备宴，且说耶律防善长绘画，从前到宋朝访问时，曾画了皇帝的圣像带回来，要拿着这画到王洙所住馆中来。
English: Khitan ordered Liu Liufu to prepare the banquet, and said that when Ye Luo Fang Zhenchang visited the Song Dynasty in the past, he had painted the emperor's holy image and brought it back, and he wanted to take this painting to Wang Xi's residence.

古文：洙曰： 此非瞻拜之地也。 六符言恐未得其真，欲遣防再往传绘，洙力拒之。
现代文：王洙说 ：这里不是瞻仰拜见皇上圣像的地方。 刘六符又说他怕这张画像没有画出皇帝的真貌，要派遣耶律防再次前往宋朝为皇帝画一张带回，王洙极力拒绝他。
English: Wang Yao said, "This is not the place to visit and worship the emperor's holy image." Liu Liufu also said that he was afraid that this picture did not depict the emperor's true appearance, and that he wanted to send Ye Liubo back to the Song Dynasty to draw a picture for the emperor. Wang Yao strenuously refused him.

古文：尝言天下田税不均，请用郭谘、孙琳千步开方法，颁州县以均其税。
现代文：王洙曾说全国田税不均衡，请朝廷用郭谘、孙琳提出的千步开方法，颁布各州县来平均田税。
English: Wang Hui once said that the national field tax was unbalanced, and asked the imperial court to use the method of 1000 steps proposed by Guo Zhi and Sun Lin to promulgate the average field tax of each state and county.

古文：贵妃张氏薨，治丧皇仪殿，追册温成皇后。
现代文：贵妃张氏去世，在皇仪殿治丧，追册封她为温成皇后。
English: Princess Zhang passed away and was buried in the Imperial Hall of Ceremonies. She was posthumously crowned the Empress of Wencheng.

古文：洙钩摭非礼，阴与内侍石全彬附会时事。
现代文：王洙对皇后丧礼的稽考取舍不符合礼制，暗中与内侍宦官石全彬附会当时的事。
English: Wang Yao's choice of funeral attire for the empress was not in accordance with the etiquette, and he secretly discussed the matter with the eunuch and eunuch Shi Quanbin.

古文：陈执中、刘沆在中书，喜其助己，擢洙为翰林学士。
现代文：陈执中、刘沆在中书省，喜欢他帮助了自己，便提拔他为翰林学士。
English: Chen Xizhong and Liu Wei in the Ministry of Education and Culture liked that he helped himself, so they promoted him to be a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：既而温成即园立庙，且欲用乐，诏礼院议。
现代文：后来在温成皇后的陵园中建立她的庙，而且要用乐队，令礼院议定。
English: Later, it was decided by the Rite House to build a temple for Empress Wencheng in her mausoleum and to use an orchestra.

古文：礼官论未一，洙令礼直官填印纸，上议请用乐，朝廷从其说。
现代文：礼官的议论不统一，王洙便令礼直官们填写官府印发的专用笺，送上议论结果请求用乐队，朝廷听从这一说法。
English: The etiquette officials were not unanimous in their opinions, so Wang Xi ordered the etiquette officials to fill in the special forms issued by the government and send the results of their discussions to request the use of a band. The court obeyed this request.

古文：礼官吴充、鞠直卿移文开封府，治礼直官擅发印纸罪。
现代文：礼官吴充、鞠直卿传送公文给开封府，要求治礼直官擅自发放官方专用笺的罪。
English: The etiquette officers Wu Chong and Mu Zhiqing sent an official document to the Kaifeng government, demanding that the etiquette officers issue official special stamps without authorization.

古文：知府蔡襄释不问，而谏官范镇疏礼院议园陵前后不一，请诘所以。
现代文：知府蔡襄为他开脱不加过问，但谏官范镇又上疏对礼院议论皇后园陵前后不一致的原因进行质问。
English: Governor Cai Xiang absolved him without question, but eunuch Fan Zhen also questioned the reasons for the inconsistency of the discussion of the Empress's garden and tomb in the ceremonial hall.

古文：御史继论之不已，宰相意充等风言者，皆罢斥。
现代文：御史接着也批评议论个不停，宰相怀疑吴充等讽刺议论的对象，将他们全都罢免排斥出朝廷。
English: Subsequently, the Imperial Historian also criticized the incessant discussions. The Prime Minister suspected Wu Chong and other objects of satirical discussions, and dismissed them all from the imperial court.

古文：既而洙以兄子尧臣参知政事，改侍读学士兼侍讲学士。
现代文：后来王洙因为哥哥的儿子王尧臣做了参知政事，被改任侍读学士兼侍讲学士。
English: Later, because his elder brother's son, Wang Xizhen, became the party chief, Wang Xizhen was reappointed as an attendant bachelor and an attendant lecturer.

古文：罢一学士，换二学士且兼讲读，前此未尝有也。
现代文：被罢免去一个学士头衔，却换来两个学士头衔而且是侍讲和侍读学士。这是前所未有的。
English: To be stripped of a bachelor's degree and to be given two bachelor's degrees and to be valedictorian and valedictorian is unprecedented.

古文：是岁，京东、河北秋大稔。
现代文：这一年，京东河北一带秋谷大丰收。
English: This year, the great harvest in Akitani in the Hebei area of Jingdong began.

古文：洙言： 近年边籴，增虚价数倍，虽复稍延日月之期，而终偿以实钱及山泽之物，以致三司财用之蹙。
现代文：王洙上奏说 ：近来边区籴进粮食，增报虚价数倍，虽后来又稍微延缓交送粮食的日期，但最终还是用实钱以及山川湖泽物产来偿还，因而导致政府财用紧蹙。
English: Wang Bing said, "Recently, the border areas have been hoarding grain, and the false prices have been increased several times. Although the date of delivery of grain was later slightly delayed, it was eventually repaid with real money and products from mountains, rivers, lakes, and lakes, which led to the government's tight budget.

古文：请借内藏库禁钱，乘时和籴京东、河北之粟，以供边食，可以坐纾便籴之急。 又言： 近时选谏官、御史，凡执政之臣尝所荐者，皆不与选。
现代文：请求借用内藏库的禁用钱，趁现在这个好时候以平价买进京东、河北地区的粟，用来供给边区，就可以轻易地缓解方便边境的籴买粮食之急。 又说 ：近一时期选任谏官、御史，凡是被执政大臣曾推荐过的，都不能入选。
English: He asked to borrow the forbidden money in the inner storehouse, and take advantage of this good time to buy millet in Jingdong and Hebei regions at a fair price, and use it to supply the border areas, which can easily alleviate the urgent need to buy grain at the border. He also said: In the recent period, elected eunuchs and imperial historians who have been recommended by the ruling minister cannot be selected.

古文：且士之饬身励行，稍为大臣所知，反置而不用，甚可惜也。 及得疾逾月，帝遣使问： 疾少间否，能起侍经席乎？ 时不能起矣。
现代文：而那些能够磨砺自己行为、加强修养的读书士子，稍被大臣赏识，也反被闲置不任用，很可惜。 在他得病一个多月后，皇帝遣使者问候说： 病好了些吗，能起来侍奉经席吗？ 这时他已不能起床了。
English: It is a great pity that those scholars who are able to sharpen their behavior and strengthen their self-cultivation are slightly appreciated by the minister, but are also left idle and not appointed.More than a month after he fell ill, the emperor sent a messenger to say: Are you feeling better, can you get up to serve the seat?

古文：洙泛览传记，至图纬、方技、阴阳、五行、算数、音律、诂训、篆隶之学，无所不通。
现代文：王洙博览群书，甚至对图纬、方技、阴阳、五行、算数、音律、训诂、篆隶等学问，都无所不通。
English: Wang Qian is well-versed in books, and even has a thorough knowledge of the arts of graphs, geometry, yin and yang, the five elements, arithmetic, music theory, xing and yang, and so on.

古文：及卒赐谥曰文，御史吴中复言官不应得谥，乃止。
现代文：到去世，被赐谥号叫 文 ，御史吴中复说王洙的官级不应得谥号，于是停止。
English: When he died, he was given the title of "Wen," and the governor Wu Zhongfu said that Wang Xi's official rank did not deserve the title of "Wen," so he stopped.

古文：预修《集韵》、《祖宗故事》、《三朝经武圣略》、《乡兵制度》，著《易传》十卷、杂文千有余篇。
现代文：参加修撰《集韵》、《祖宗故事》、《三朝经武圣略》、《乡兵制度》，著有《易传》十卷、杂文一千多篇。
English: He participated in the compilation of "Collection of Rhyme," "Ancestor's Story," "Three Dynasties of Wu" and "Hillbilly System," and is the author of ten volumes of "I Chuan" and more than a thousand essays.

古文：子钦臣。
现代文：他的儿子叫王钦臣。
English: His son's name is Wang Qinshun.

