古文：○圣穆皇后柴氏
现代文：周太祖有一个皇后三个皇妃。
English: Zhou Taizu had one empress and three empresses.

古文：太祖一后三妃。圣穆皇后柴氏，邢州尧山人也，与太祖同里，遂以归焉。太祖微时，喜饮博任侠，不拘细行，后常谏止之。
现代文：圣穆皇后柴氏，邢州尧山人，和周太祖是同乡，于是嫁给了他。周太祖未成名时，喜好饮酒赌博，行侠仗义，不拘小节，皇后常常劝阻他。
English: The Queen Chai of Shengmu, a native of Lushan in Zhangzhou, was a fellow villager of Zhou Taizu and married him. When Zhou Taizu was not famous, he liked to drink and gamble, to be chivalrous, and to be petty. The queen often discouraged him.

古文：太祖状貌奇伟，后心知其贵人也，事之甚谨。
现代文：周太袒相貌奇特伟岸，皇后心里知道是一个贵人，事奉他很周到。
English: Zhou Taifeng's appearance was strangely magnificent, and the queen knew in her heart that he was a noble person, and she served him very thoughtfully.

古文：及太祖即位，后已先卒，乃下诏： 故夫人柴氏，追册为皇后，谥曰圣穆。 
现代文：到周太祖登位时，皇后已先死，于是下诏： 已故夫人柴氏，追封为皇后，谧号举穆。 
English: By the time Zhou Taizu ascended the throne, the empress had already died first, so he issued the following edict: The late Mrs. Chai, posthumously crowned as empress, with the posthumous name of Zhu Mu.

古文：淑妃杨氏，镇州真定人也。
现代文：淑妃杨氏，镇州真定人。
English: Shufei Yang, a member of the Zhenzhou Zhending Clan.

古文：父弘裕，真定少尹。
现代文：父亲杨弘裕，任真定少尹。
English: His father was Yang Hongyu, and Ren Zhending was his younger brother.

古文：妃幼以色选入赵王宫，事王熔。
现代文：淑妃小时候因美貌被选进赵王宫中，事奉王镕。
English: As a child, Shu Fei was chosen for her beauty to enter the palace of King Zhao and serve the king.

古文：熔为张文礼所杀，镇州乱，妃亦流寓民间，后嫁里人石光辅。
现代文：王镕被张文礼杀死，镇州大乱，淑妃也流落民间，后来嫁给同乡石光辅。
English: Wang Yao was killed by Zhang Wenli, and the town and county were in turmoil. Shu Fei also became a commoner, and later married fellow villager Shi Guangfu.

古文：居数年，光辅死。太祖柴夫人卒，闻妃有色而贤，遂娶之为继室。
现代文：过了几年，石光辅死去周太祖柴夫人去世后，听说淑妃有美色而又贤惠，于是娶她为继室。
English: A few years later, after the death of Lady Zhou Taizuchai and the death of Shi Guangfu, he heard that Shu Fei was beautiful and virtuous, so he married her as a stepmother.

古文：太祖方事汉高祖于太原，天福中妃卒，遂葬太原之近郊。
现代文：周太祖正在太原事奉汉高祖，天福年问淑妃死去，于是安葬在太原近郊。
English: Zhou Taizu was serving Han Gao Zu in Taiyuan. When she died, she was buried in the suburbs of Taiyuan.

古文：太祖即位，广顺元年九月，追册为淑妃。
现代文：周太祖登位，广顺元年九月，追封为淑妃。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne, Guang Shun in September of the first year, and she was posthumously conferred the title of Shuxi.

古文：拜妃弟廷璋为右飞龙使，廷璋辞曰： 臣父老矣，愿以授之。 
现代文：拜淑妃的弟弟杨廷璋为右飞龙使，杨廷璋推辞说： 我父亲老了，希望将此官授给他。 
English: Yang Tingyao, the younger brother of Bai Shuxi, is the Right Flying Dragon Envoy. Yang Tingyao said, "My father is old, I hope to give him this post."

古文：太祖曰： 吾方思之，岂忘尔父邪！ 
现代文：周太祖说： 我正在考虑逭事，难道会忘记你父亲吗！ 
English: Zhou Taizu said: I'm thinking about an anecdote, will you forget your father!

古文：即召弘裕，弘裕老不能行，乃就其家拜金紫光禄大夫、真定少尹。
现代文：随即召见杨弘裕，杨弘裕年老不能行走，于是在他家拜他为金紫光禄大夫、真定少尹。
English: He immediately summoned Yang Hongyu. Yang Hongyu was too old to walk, so he worshipped him at his home as Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor and Zhen Ding Shao Yin.

古文：太祖崩，葬嵩陵，一后三妃皆当陪葬，而太原未克，世宗诏有司营嵩陵之侧为虚墓以俟。
现代文：周太祖死，安葬在嵩陵。一后三妃都应当陪葬，但太原还没有攻克，周世宗诏令官府在嵩陵旁修建空墓等候。
English: Zhou Taizu died and was buried in Songling. All three empresses were supposed to accompany the burial, but Taiyuan had not yet been conquered, and Zhou Shizong ordered the government to build an empty tomb next to Songling.

古文：显德元年，世宗已败刘旻于高平，遂攻太原，太原闭壁被围，乃迁妃丧而葬之。
现代文：显德元年，周世宗在高平打败刘曼，于是进攻太原，太原关闭壁垒而被包围，于是将淑妃迁葬。
English: In the first year of Xiande, Zhou Shizong defeated Liu Man in Gaoping, and then attacked Taiyuan. Taiyuan closed the barriers and was surrounded, so Shu Fei was moved and buried.

古文：○贵妃张氏
现代文：贵妃张氏镇州真定人。
English: Guifei Zhang Zhenzhou Zhending.

古文：贵妃张氏，镇州真定人也。祖记，成德军节度判官、检校兵部尚书。
现代文：祖父张记，任成德军节度判官、检校兵部尚书。
English: His grandfather, Zhang Ji, was appointed judge of the German military festival and inspector of the military school.

古文：父同芝，事赵王王熔为谘呈官，官至检校工部尚书。
现代文：父亲张同芝，跟随赵王王镕任谘呈官，作官至检校工部尚书。
English: Zhang Tongzhi, Zhao Wang's father, followed Zhao Wang as a consultant and later became an official at the school inspection department.

古文：熔死，镇州乱，庄宗遣幽州符存审以兵讨张文礼，裨将武从谏馆于妃家，见妃尚幼，怜之，而从谏家在太原，遂以妃归，为其子妇。
现代文：王铬死后，镇州大乱，唐庄宗派幽州符存审率兵讨伐张文礼，副将武从谏住在贵妃家，见贵妃还年幼，可怜她，而武从谏家在太原，于是领着贵妃返回，做了他的儿媳妇。
English: After the death of Wang Chrom, there was a big riot in Zhenzhou, and the Tangzhuang sect Yuzhou Fu Cun Zi led the troops to fight against Zhang Wenli. The vice-commander Wu Conglu lived in Guifei's house. Seeing that Guifei was still young, he felt sorry for her. But Wu Conglu's house was in Taiyuan, so he led Guifei back and made her his daughter-in-law.

古文：太祖以兵入京师，汉遣刘铢戮其家，妃与诸子皆死。太祖即位，追册为贵妃。
现代文：过了很久，周太祖在太原事奉汉高祖，杨夫人死去，武氏的儿子也死了，于是娶贵妃为继室。
English: After a long time, Zhou Taizu served Han Gao Zu in Taiyuan, Mrs. Yang died, and Mr. Wu's son also died, so he married Guifei as his second wife.

古文：○德妃董氏太祖子侗信侄守愿奉超逊
现代文：周太祖显贵后，屡次加封至昊国夫人。周太祖率兵进京城，汉派遣刘铢杀戮他的家人，贵妃和子女都被杀。
English: After Zhou Taizu became eminent, he was repeatedly given the title of Hao Guo's wife. Zhou Taizu led an army into Beijing, and Han dispatched Liu Bei to kill his family. The empress and her children were all killed.

古文：德妃董氏，镇州灵寿人也。
现代文：周太祖登位后，追封为贵妃。德妃董氏，镇州灵寿人。
English: After Zhou Taizu ascended the throne, she was posthumously awarded the title of Guifei. Defei Dong, Zhenzhou Ling Shouren.

古文：祖文广，唐深州录事参军。
现代文：祖父董文广，唐深州录事参军。
English: His grandfather, Dong Wenguang, enlisted in the Tang army in Shenzhou.

古文：父光嗣，赵州昭庆尉。
现代文：父亲董光嗣，趟州昭庆县尉。
English: His father, Dong Guangzhi, was a lieutenant of Wanzhou Zhaoqing County.

古文：妃幼颖悟，始能言，闻乐声知其律吕。
现代文：德妃从小颖悟，刚能说话，听到音乐声就能辨别其律吕。
English: Ever since she was a little girl, Takfei has been able to speak, and she can distinguish the rhythm of music when she hears it.

古文：年七岁，镇州乱，其家失之，为潞州牙将所得，置诸褚中以归。
现代文：七岁时，镇州大乱，家里将她丢失，被潞州牙将获得，放在袋中带回。
English: At the age of seven, when Zhenzhou was in turmoil, her family lost her, but she was retrieved by Zhenzhou Fang Que and brought back in a bag.

古文：潞将妻尝生女，辄不育，得妃怜之，养以为子，过于所生。
现代文：这个潞州牙将的妻子曾经生遇一个女儿，便不能再生育，得到德妃后很怜爱，收为养女，爱她胜过亲生女儿。
English: The wife of this Zhangzhou dental officer had once given birth to a daughter, but was unable to have any more children. She was very fond of Princess De, adopted her as an adopted daughter, and loved her more than her own daughter.

古文：居五六年，妃家悲思，其兄瑀求之人间，莫知所在。
现代文：五六年后，德妃家人悲伤地想念她，她的哥哥董踽在民间寻找，没有人知道她在哪里。
English: Five or six years later, Defei's family sadly misses her. Her brother Dong Jun is searching for her among the people. No one knows where she is.

古文：潞将仕于京师，遇瑀，欣然归之，时年十三。
现代文：潞州牙将在京城做官，碰见董璃，欣然将德妃送还给他，当时德妃十三岁。
English: When Zhangzhou Ya, who was going to be an official in Beijing, met Dong Li, he was delighted to give her back to him. At that time, she was thirteen years old.

古文：瑀以嫁里人刘进超，进超亦仕晋为内职。
现代文：董踽把德妃嫁给同乡刘进超，刘进超也在晋做官，在宫内任职。
English: Dong Xuan married Defei to fellow villager Liu Jinchao. Liu Jinchao was also an official in Jin and served in the imperial court.

古文：契丹犯阙，进超殁于虏中，妃嫠居洛阳。
现代文：契丹进攻京城，刘进超死在虏人兵中，德妃寡居洛阳。
English: Khitan attacked Beijing, Liu Jinchao died among the captured soldiers, and Defei was widowed in Luoyang.

古文：汉高祖由太原入京师，太祖从，过洛阳，闻妃有贤行，聘之。
现代文：汉高祖从大原进入京城，周太祖跟随，经过洛阳时，听说德妃贤惠，聘她为妻。
English: When Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty entered the capital from Ohara, followed by Emperor Zhou, and passed through Luoyang, he heard about Empress De and took her as his wife.

古文：太祖建国，中宫虚位，遂册为德妃。
现代文：周太祖建国后，中宫位置空缺，于是册封为德妃。
English: After Zhou Taizu founded the country, the position of the middle palace was vacant, so she was crowned as the Empress of Germany.

古文：广顺三年卒，年三十九。
现代文：广顺三年死，三十九岁。
English: Guangshun died three years later, at the age of 39.

古文：妃兄三人：瑀官至太子右赞善大夫，玄之、自明皆至刺史。
现代文：德妃有三个哥哥：董玛做官到太子右赞善大夫，董玄之、董自明都做到刺史。
English: Princess De has three older brothers: Dong Ma worked as an official until Prince U Zanzan became a doctor, and Dong Xuan Zhi and Dong Ziming both made history.

古文：初，帝举兵于魏，汉以兵围帝第，时张贵妃与诸子青哥、意哥，侄守筠、奉超、定哥，皆被诛。
现代文：当初，皇帝在魏州起兵，汉率兵包围皇帝的住宅，当时张贵妃和几个儿子郭青哥、郭意哥，侄子郭守筠、郭奉超、郭定哥，都被杀死。
English: At that time, Zhang Guifei and several of his sons, Guo Qingge and Guo Yi Ge, and his nephews, Guo Shouyu, Guo Fengchao and Guo Dingge, were all killed.

古文：青哥、意哥，不知其母谁氏。
现代文：郭青哥、郭意哥，不知他们的母亲是谁。
English: Guo Qingge, Guo Yi Ge, I do not know who their mother is.

古文：太祖即位，诏故第二子青哥赠太尉，赐名侗；第三子意哥赠司空，赐名信；皇侄守筠赠左领军卫将军，以筠声近荣，为世宗避，更名守愿；奉超赠左监门卫将军；定哥赠左千年卫将军，赐名逊。
现代文：周太祖登位后，下诏赠已故的第二个儿子郭青哥为太尉，赐名郭侗；第三个儿子郭意哥赠司空，赐名郭信；皇帝的侄子郭守筠赠左领军卫将军，因 筠 字声音接近 荣 字，为周世宗避讳，改名为郭守愿；郭奉超赠左监门卫将军；郭定哥赠左千牛卫将军，赐名郭逊。
English: After Emperor Zhou ascended to the throne, the following imperial edict gave the deceased second son Guo Qingge the title of lieutenant and gave him the name Guo Jun; the third son Guo Yi Ge gave him the title Siku and gave him the name Guo Xin; the emperor's nephew Guo Shoujun gave him the title Zuo Lian Jun Wei Gen. Because the sound of the  character is close to the 榮 character, Zhou Shizong avoided it and changed his name to Guo Shouzhen; Guo Fengchao gave him the title Zuo Menwei Gen.; Guo Dingge gave him the title Zuo Qian Niu Wei Gen. and

古文：世宗显德四年夏四月癸未，诏曰： 礼以缘情，恩以悼往，矧在友于之列，尤钟恻怆之情。
现代文：周世宗显德四年夏四月癸未，下诏说： 讲礼用以顺应人情，加恩用以哀悼死者，何况在兄弟之间，尤其沉浸于悲伤的感情。
English: Zhou Shizong Xiande issued the following edict in the late summer of April in the fourth year of his reign: "Courtesy should be used to accommodate human feelings, and kindness should be used to mourn the dead, especially between brothers, who are especially immersed in sad feelings.

古文：故皇弟赠太保侗、赠司空信，景边初启，大年不登，俾予终鲜，实勤予怀。
现代文：已故的皇弟赠为太保的郭侗、赠为司空的郭信，大连刚刚开始，不能长寿，使我最终失去兄弟，确实让我经常想念。
English: The late emperor's younger brother presented Guo Jian as Tai Bao, and Guo Xin as Sikuo. Dalian was just beginning, and I could not live long, so I finally lost my brother. I really miss him often.

古文：侗可赠太傅，追封郯王；信司徒，杞王。 
现代文：郭侗可以赠为太傅，追封为郯王；郭信可以赠为司徒，追封为杞王。 
English: Guo Jian can be presented as Taifu and posthumously awarded the title of Shao Wang; Guo Xin can be presented as Sitou and posthumously awarded the title of Shao Wang.

古文：又诏曰： 故皇从弟赠左领军卫将军守愿、赠左监门卫将军奉超、赠左千牛卫将军逊等，顷因季世，不享遐龄，每念非辜，难忘有恸。
现代文：又下诏说： 已故的皇堂弟赠为左领军卫将军的郭守愿、赠为左监门卫将军的郭奉超、赠为左干牛卫将军的郭逊等人，当初由于世道衰微，未能享受高龄，每每想到他们无辜夭折，就难以忘怀而悲痛欲绝。
English: The imperial edict also said: Guo Shouwang, who was given the title of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards by the late imperial cousin, Guo Fengchao, who was given the title of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and Guo Xun, who was given the title of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, were originally unable to enjoy old age due to the decline of society. Every time I think of their innocent untimely death, it is hard to forget and grief-stricken.

古文：守愿可赠左卫大将军，奉超右卫大将军，逊右武卫大将军。 
现代文：郭守愿可以赠为左卫大将军，郭奉超可以赠为右卫大将军，郭逊可以赠为右武卫大将军。 
English: Guo Shouyan can be presented as the left guard general, Guo Fengchao can be presented as the right guard general, and Guo Xun can be presented as the right guard general.

