古文：元年春，公及夫人嬴氏至自王城。秦伯纳卫三千人，实纪纲之仆。
现代文：晋文公元年春天，文公和夫人嬴氏从王城前来，秦穆公派卫士三千人护送，都是得力的仆从。
English: In the spring of Jinwen in the year of our Lord, King Wen and his wife, Lady Zou, came from Wangcheng. Qin Mu Gong sent three thousand guards to escort them. They were all powerful servants.

古文：公属百官，赋职任功。
现代文：文公会见百官，授与官职，任用功臣。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture met with hundreds of officials, conferred official positions, and appointed meritorious officials.

古文：弃责薄敛，施舍分寡。救乏振滞，匡困资无。
现代文：废除旧的债务，减免赋税，布施恩惠，舍弃禁令，分财给寡少的人，救济贫困，起用有才德而长期没升迁的人，资助那些没有财产的人。
English: To cancel old debts, to remit taxes, to bestow favors, to waive prohibitions, to distribute wealth to the few, to relieve poverty, to employ the talented who have not been promoted for a long time, and to support those who have no property.

古文：轻关易道，通商宽农。
现代文：减轻关税，修治道路，便利通商，宽免农民的劳役。
English: Tariffs will be reduced, roads will be repaired, commerce will be facilitated, and farmers will be exempted from labor service.

古文：懋穑劝分，省用足财。
现代文：鼓励发展农业，提倡互相帮助，节省费用来使资财充足。
English: Encourage the development of agriculture, promote mutual assistance, and save costs to make resources sufficient.

古文：利器明德，以厚民性。
现代文：利器便民，宣扬德教，以培养百姓的纯朴德性。
English: It is a good tool to facilitate the people and promote moral education, so as to cultivate the pure and simple virtue of the people.

古文：举善援能，官方定物，正名育类。
现代文：推举贤良，任用有才能的人，制定官员规章，依法办事，确立名分，培育美德。
English: promote the virtuous, appoint the talented, formulate official regulations, act in accordance with the law, establish titles, and cultivate virtues.

古文：昭旧族，爱亲戚，明贤良，尊贵宠，赏功劳，事耈老，礼宾旅，友故旧。
现代文：昭显有功勋的旧族，惠爱亲戚，荣耀贤良，尊宠贵臣，奖赏有功劳的人，敬事老人，礼待宾客，亲近旧日友人。
English: It is the duty of the old generation to show appreciation to the meritorious members of the family, to favor the relatives, to honor the virtuous, to respect and cherish the dignitaries, to reward the meritorious, to respect the elderly, to treat the guests with courtesy, and to be close to the old friends.

古文：胥、籍、狐、箕、栾、郤、柏、先、羊舌、董、韩，实掌近官。
现代文：胥、籍、狐、箕、栾、郤、桓、先、羊舌、董、韩等十一族，都担任朝廷近官。
English: Eleven ethnic groups, including the Xiongnu, Qizhi, Xiongnu, Yao, Yao, Huan, Xian, Sheep Tongue, Dong and Han, all served as close officials of the imperial court.

古文：诸姬之良，掌其中官。
现代文：姬姓中贤良的人，担任朝廷内务官。
English: Her maiden name was Zhong Xianliang, and she served as the imperial court's internal affairs officer.

古文：异姓之能，掌其远官。
现代文：异姓中有才能的人，担任边远地方的官。
English: Talented people with different surnames serve as officials in remote areas.

古文：公食贡，大夫食邑，士食田，庶人食力，工商食官，皂隶食职，官宰食加。
现代文：王公享用贡赋，大夫收取采邑的租税，士受禄田，一般平民自食其力，工商之官领受官廪，皂隶按其职务领取口粮，家臣的食用取自大夫的加田。
English: The prince enjoyed the tribute, the doctor collected the tax of the mining town, the soldiers received the field, the general civilians were self-supporting, the officials of industry and commerce received the official salary, the servants received the rations according to their duties, and the food of the vassals was taken from the doctor's field.

古文：政平民阜，财用不匮。
现代文：于是政治清明，民生丰安，财用充足。
English: As a result, politics are clear, people's livelihoods are secure, and financial resources are sufficient.

古文：冬，襄王避昭叔之难，居于郑地汜。使来告难，亦使告于秦。
现代文：冬天，周襄王为躲避昭叔之难，住到郑国的汜地，派人到晋国告急，又派人到秦国求援。
English: In winter, King Zhou Xiang, in order to avoid the difficulties of Uncle Zhao, lived in the plains of Zheng, sent people to Jin to seek help, and sent people to Qin to seek help.

古文：子犯曰： 民亲而未知义也，君盍纳王以教之义。
现代文：子犯说： 百姓亲近君王，但还不知道道义，您何不送周襄王回国，以此来教导百姓懂得道义呢？
English: The son-in-law said, "The people are close to the king, but they still don't know about morality. Why don't you send King Zhou Xiang back to China to teach the people about morality?"

古文：若不纳，秦将纳之，则失周矣，何以求诸侯？
现代文：如果您不送，秦国就会送襄王回国，那就会失去事奉周天子的机会，还凭什么来求得诸侯盟主的地位呢？
English: If you do not send it, Qin will send Xiang Wang back to China, and you will lose the opportunity to serve Zhou Tianzi. What else can you rely on to obtain the status of the lord of the states?

古文：不能修身而又不能宗人，人将焉依？
现代文：如果不能修养品德，又不能尊奉周天子，别人怎么会依附呢？
English: If you can't cultivate moral character and can't worship Zhou Tianzi, how can others be attached to you?

古文：继文之业，定武之功，启土安疆，于此乎在矣，君其务之。 
现代文：继承晋文侯的业绩，建立晋武公的功德，开拓国土，安定疆界，就在于这次了，请您努力做好这件事。 
English: Inheriting the achievements of Jin Wenhou, establishing the merits of Jin Wuchong, opening up the country, and stabilizing the borders, is this time, please do your best to do this.

古文：公说，乃行赂于革中之戎与丽土之狄，以启东道。
现代文：文公听了很高兴，于是就送钱财给革中之戎和丽土之狄，打开东进的道路。
English: Wengong was very pleased to hear this, so he sent money and wealth to Gezhongno-wong and Lido-no-di to open the road to the east.

