古文：汉高祖疾甚，吕后问曰： 萧相国既死，谁令代之？ 
现代文：汉高祖病重，吕后问他说： 萧相国如果去世以后，叫谁去代替他呢？ 
English: Han Gaozu was seriously ill, and Lü Hou asked him: If Xiao Xianguo passed away, who would replace him?

古文：上曰： 曹参可。 
现代文：皇上说： 曹参可以。 
English: Gao Zu said: Cao San can do it.

古文：萧何事惠帝，病，上问曰： 君即百岁后，谁可代君？ 
现代文：萧何辅佐汉惠帝，生了病，皇上问他说： 您如果去世了，谁可以代替您呢？ 
English: When Emperor Xiao He's aide-de-camp Han Hui fell ill, the emperor asked him, "If you die, who will take your place?"

古文：对曰： 知臣莫若主。 
现代文：回答说： 知道臣下的没有谁比得上主上。 
English: And he answered and said, I know that there is none like unto the LORD among the children of men.

古文：帝曰： 曹参何如？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 曹参怎样？ 
English: The emperor said, "How is Cao San?"

古文：曰： 帝得之矣。 
现代文：回答说： 皇帝找到合适的人了。 
English: "The emperor has found the right man," he replied.

古文：曹参相齐，闻何薨，告舍人趣治行，吾且入相。
现代文：曹参正当齐国相国，听说萧何死了，告诉手下人准备行装，我要入朝当宰相了。
English: Cao San was the minister of Qi Guo Guo, when he heard that Xiao He had died, he told his subordinates to prepare to march. I was about to enter the imperial court as the prime minister.

古文：居无何，使者果召参。
现代文：时间不久，使者果然来召曹参进京。
English: Not long after, the person sent by the imperial court actually came to summon Cao San.

古文：赵括自少时学兵法，其父奢不能难，然不谓善，谓其母曰： 赵若必将之，破赵军者必括也。 
现代文：赵括从小就学习兵法，他父亲赵奢也难不倒他，但不认为他学得好，对他母亲说： 赵国如一定让他为将，他必定葬送赵国的大军。 
English: Zhao Kuan learned the art of war from a young age. His father, Zhao Shuang, could hardly defeat him, but he did not think that he had learned well. He said to his mother: If Zhao Guo must make him a general, he must bury the great army of Zhao Guo.

古文：后廉颇与秦相持，秦应候行千金为反间于赵，曰： 秦之所畏，独赵括耳。 
现代文：其后，廉颇和秦国对垒，秦国的应侯范雎，用一千两黄金到赵国行反间计，说： 秦国所怕的人，只有赵括。 
English: After that, Lianpo confronted Qin State, and Qin State's vassal, Fan Qi, used a thousand taels of gold to go to Zhao State to make a counter-offer, saying, "The only person that Qin State fears is Zhao Kuang."

古文：赵王以括代颇将。
现代文：赵王信以为真，使用赵括代替廉颇。
English: Zhao Wangxin thought it was true and used Zhao bracket instead of Renpo.

古文：蔺相如谏，王不听。括母上书言括不可使，王又不听。秦王闻括已为赵将，乃阴使白起代王龁，遂胜赵。
现代文：蔺相如劝阻，赵王不听，赵括的母亲上书赵王，说赵括不能用，赵王又不听，秦王听说赵括当了赵国的大将，于是暗地让白起代替王龁，于是就打败了赵国。
English: Zhao Xiang was dissuaded, Zhao Wang did not listen, Zhao Kuang's mother wrote to Zhao Wang, saying that Zhao Kuang could not be used, Zhao Wang did not listen, Qin Wang heard that Zhao Kuang had become the general of Zhao State, so he secretly let Baiqi replace Wang Kuang, and then defeated Zhao State.

古文：曹参之宜为相，高祖以为可，惠帝以为可，萧何以为可，参自以为可，故汉用之而兴。
现代文：曹参适宜当相国，高祖认为能够胜任，惠帝认为能够胜任，萧何认为能够胜任，萧何认为能够胜任，曹参也认为能够胜任，所以汉朝用了曹参，就兴盛起来。
English: Caoshan is suitable for being a partner country, Gao Zu thought it was competent, Hui Di thought it was competent, Xiao He thought it was competent, Xiao He thought it was competent, Caoshan also thought it was competent, so the Han Dynasty used Caoshan and prospered.

古文：赵括之不宜为将，其父以为不可，母以为不可，大臣以为不可，秦王知之，相应候知之，将白起知之，独赵王以为可，故用之而败。
现代文：赵括不适合当大将，他父亲知道，他母亲知道，大臣知道，秦王知道，秦国相国应侯知道，大将白起知道，只有赵王不知道，所以用了他遭到了失败。哎！
English: Zhao Kui was not fit to be a general. His father knew it, his mother knew it, the minister knew it, the Qin king knew it, the Qin minister knew it, the general knew it, only Zhao Wang didn't know it, so using him was a failure.

古文：呜呼！将相安危所系，可不监哉！
现代文：将和相关系国家安危，能不慎重吗？
English: Can we not be prudent when it comes to the safety and security of related countries?

古文：且秦以白起易王龁，而赵乃以括代廉颇，不待于战，而胜负之形见矣。
现代文：再说秦国用白起代替王龁，赵国用赵括代替廉颇，不等战争开始，胜败的形势，已经分出来了。
English: Furthermore, Qin replaced Wang Qi with Bai Qi, and Zhao replaced Renpo with Zhao Quan. The situation of victory and defeat had already been sorted out before the war began.

