古文：二十四日街鼓未绝，唐君令人至，言早起观天色，见阴云酿雨，风寒袭人，乞再迟一日，候稍霁乃行。
现代文：二十四日街上打更的声音还没停止，唐元鹤君派人前来，说早早起来观察天色，看到阴云正逐渐形成雨，冷风袭人，请我再推迟一天，等稍稍晴开后才出发。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the sound of hammering on the street had not yet stopped. Tang Yuanhe sent a man to me, saying that he got up early to observe the sky, saw the dark clouds gradually forming rain, and the cold wind attacking people, and asked me to postpone it for another day, and wait for it to clear up a little before setting out.

古文：余谢之曰： 行不容迟，虽雨不为阻也， 及起，风雨凄其，令人有黯然魂消意。
现代文：我对来人辞谢道： 启程的日期不能再推迟了，即使下雨也不能被阻挡。 等到起床时，风寒雨凉，不禁令人情绪低落，精神不振。
English: I thanked the people who came and said: The departure date can no longer be delayed, even if it rains, it can't be blocked. When I got up, the wind was cold and the rain was cold, I couldn't help but feel depressed and my spirits were low.

古文：令庖人速作饭，余出别唐大来。
现代文：让厨师赶快做饭，我出门去和唐大来告别。
English: I told the chef to hurry up and cook, and I went out to say goodbye to Tang Da.

古文：时余欲从海口、安宁返省，完省西南隅诸胜，从西北富民观螳螂川下流，而取道武定，以往鸡足，乃以行李之重者，托大来令人另赍往省，而余得轻具西行焉。
现代文：当时我打算经过海口、安宁州返回省城，游完省城西南边的各处名胜，然后从西北出到富民县观看蝗螂川下游，并取道武定府，前往鸡足山。于是把重的行李，托大来让人单另送到省城，我从这里轻装西行。
English: At that time, I planned to return to the provincial capital through Haikou and Anningzhou, and after swimming around the scenic spots in the southwest of the provincial capital, I would go out from the northwest to watch the lower reaches of the Locust River in Fumin County, and take the road to Wudingfu to go to the Chicken's Foot Mountain. Therefore, I put my heavy luggage on the truck and asked someone to take it to the provincial capital, and I would travel west with light luggage.

古文：方抵大来宅，报晋宁公已至下道，亟同大来及黄氏昆玉还道中。
现代文：刚到大来家，有人来报晋宁公唐元鹤已经去到下道，我赶快和大来以及黄氏兄弟一齐返回道中。
English: Just after I arrived home, someone came to inform me that Jin Ning Gong Tang Yuan He had gone to the lower road. I hurriedly returned to the middle road with him and the Huang brothers.

古文：晋宁公复具酌于道，秣马于门。
现代文：晋宁公又在道中备下酒宴，在城门口喂饱马。
English: Jinning Gong also prepared a wine banquet in the middle of the road and fed the horses at the gate.

古文：时天色复朗，遂举大觥，登骑就道。
现代文：这时天色又晴开了，于是举杯告别，骑马上路。
English: At this time, the sky was clear again, so they raised a glass to say goodbye and rode away.

古文：从西门三里，度四通桥。
现代文：从晋宁州西门出去三里，过四通桥。
English: From the west gate of Jinning Prefecture, it is three miles and four bridges.

古文：从大道直西行，半里，上坡，从其西峡转而西南上，一里半，直蹑望鹤岭西坳。
现代文：顺着大路一直往西走，半里，上坡，从晋宁州西边的峡谷中转朝西南上，一里半，直接登上望鹤岭西坳。
English: Walk west along the highway, half a mile, uphill, from the canyon on the west side of Jinning Province, turn to the southwest, one and a half miles, and directly climb the west ridge of Wanghe Mountains.

古文：又西下涉一涧，稍北，即濒滇池之涯。
现代文：又往西下山，越过一道沟涧，稍微往北走，就到了滇池岸边。
English: I went down the mountain to the west, crossed a gully, walked a little north, and arrived at the shore of Tsugaike.

古文：共五里，循南山北麓而西，有石耸起峰头，北向指滇池，有操戈介胄之状，是为石将军，亦石峰之特为巉峭者。
现代文：一共五里，顺着滇池南部山峰北麓往西走，山峰顶上耸着一块巨石，朝北指向滇池，有手持兵器、披甲戴盔的形状，这是石将军，也是特别高险陡峭的石峰。
English: For a total of five miles, I walked westward along the northern foot of the southern peak of Dianchi Lake. On the top of the peak, there was a huge rock, pointing north to Dianchi Lake. It had the shape of a hand-held weapon, armor and helmet. This was the General of Stone, and it was also a particularly dangerous and steep stone peak.

古文：其西有庙北向，是为石鱼庙。
现代文：石将军西边有座朝北的庙，这是石鱼庙。
English: To the west of the Stone General, there is a temple facing north, which is the Stone Fish Temple.

古文：于是又循峡而南，二里，逾平坡南下，有水一塘，直浸南山之足，是为三尖塘。
现代文：石鱼庙西南边又有山朝西面耸起，此峰低于石将军，是石鱼山。又往西走二里，滇池水中有一丛丛的石头露出水面，这就是牛恋石。岸边的乡和村，都用牛恋命名。从牛恋石又顺着峡谷往南走，二里，越过平缓的山坡往南下，有一塘水，一直渗透到南山脚，这是三尖塘。
English: To the southwest of the Stone Fish Temple, there is another mountain rising to the west. This peak is lower than the Stone General, which is the Stone Fish Mountain. Another two miles to the west, there is a cluster of stones exposed to the water of the Dianchi Pond. This is the Cow Love Stone. Towns and villages along the shore are named after the Cow Love Stone. From the Cow Love Stone, walk south along the canyon, two miles, cross the gentle slope to the south, there is a pond of water, which penetrates all the way to the foot of the South Mountain, which is the Three-Pointed Pond.

古文：塘南山峦高列，塘北度脊平衍，脊之北，即滇池牛恋。
现代文：塘南山峦高高耸列，塘北我所越过的山梁平坦宽阔，山梁北面，就是滇池牛恋石。
English: The mountains in the south of Tang are tall and towering, the mountains in the north of Tang are flat and wide, and the northern side of the mountains is the peak of the Yanchi Cattle Stone.

古文：塘水不北泄而东破山腋，始知望鹤之脉自西来，不自南来也。
现代文：塘里的水不往北流，却往东从山侧面穿过，才知道望鹤山的山脉是从西边延伸过来，而不是从南边延伸过来。
English: The water in the pond does not flow to the north, but passes through the side of the mountain to the east. Only then do you know that the mountains of Mount Mogao extend from the west, not from the south.

古文：从塘北西向溯坞入，其坞自西而东，即塘水之上流也。
现代文：从三尖塘北面往西溯流走进山坞，其坞从西往东走向，坞中的水是三尖塘的上游。
English: From the north of the Three Peaks Pond, the westward backwash flows into the dock, and the dock moves from west to east. The water in the dock is the upper reaches of the Three Peaks Pond.

古文：三里，坞西尽处，有三峰排列其南：最高者即南山之再起者也；其中一峰，则自南峰之西绕峡而北，峙为中峰焉；北峰则濒滇池，而东度为石将军、望鹤山之脉矣。
现代文：三里，山坞西部尽头处，有三座山峰排列：南边最高的就是南山又耸起的山峰；中间的一峰，是从南峰西侧绕着峡谷往北延伸，到这里耸立为中峰；北峰则是濒临滇池，往东延伸成为石将军、望鹤山的山脉。
English: At Sanli, at the western end of the dock, there are three peaks lined up: the highest peak on the south side is Nanshan, which rises again; the middle peak extends from the west side of the south peak around the canyon to the north, where it stands as the middle peak; the north peak is on the edge of Dianchi Lake, and extends to the east to become the mountains of Shizhen and Bokhe.

古文：中峰之东，有村落当坞，是为三尖村，晋宁村落止此。
现代文：中峰的东边，有个村落位于山坞中，这是三尖村，晋宁州管辖的村落到此为止。
English: On the east side of the middle peak, there is a village located in the dockyard, this is the three-pointed village, the village under the jurisdiction of Jining Province has ended here.

古文：西沿中峰而上，一里，与南峰对峡之中，复阻水为塘，不能如东塘之大，而地则高矣。
现代文：往西沿着中峰而上，一里，与南峰相对的峡谷中，又拦水形成一个水塘，这个水塘比不上东边的三尖塘大，但地势则比三尖塘高。
English: Westward along the middle peak, one mile, in the canyon opposite the south peak, the water is blocked to form a pond. This pond is not as large as the east side of the Three-Pointed Pond, but the terrain is higher than the Three-Pointed Pond.

古文：又平上而西，一里，逾中峰之脊。
现代文：又平缓地往西而上，一里，翻越中峰山梁。
English: Then, I walked slowly westward for one mile, crossing the mid-peak ridge.

古文：从脊上西南直行，为新兴道；逾脊西北下，即滨池南涯，是为昆阳道；而晋宁、昆阳以是脊为界焉。
现代文：从山梁上一直往西南走，是去新兴州的路；越过山梁往西北下去，是滇池南岸，是去昆阳州的路；因而晋宁州、昆阳州以这道山梁为界。
English: Walking from the ridge all the way to the southwest is the road to Xinxing Prefecture; crossing the ridge and going northwest is the south bank of Dianchi Lake, the road to Kunyang Prefecture; therefore, Jining Province and Kunyang Province are bounded by this ridge.

古文：于是昆阳新旧州治，俱在一望。
现代文：从这里看昆阳州的新旧州治，都能一眼看到。
English: From here, you can see the old and new governance of Kunyang at a glance.

古文：直下半里，沿滇池南山陇半西行，二里余，有村在北崖之下，滇池之水环其前，是曰赤峒里，亦池滨聚落之大者，而田则不能成壑焉。
现代文：直直地下半里，沿着滇池南部山的半山坡往西走，二里多，有一个村子在北边的山崖下，滇池水环绕在村前，这是赤蛔里，也是滇池岸边比较大的村落，但村里的田地则没有沟渠环绕。
English: Half a mile straight down, along the mid-mountain slope of the southern mountain of Dianchi to the west, more than two miles, there is a village under the cliff on the north side, Dianchi water is surrounded in front of the village, this is Akaburi, it is also a relatively large village on the shore of Dianchi, but the fields in the village are not surrounded by ditches.

古文：又西由村后逾岭南上，即西下，三里，有村倚南山北麓。
现代文：又往西从赤桐里后面越岭南上，不一会往西下，三里，有个村子坐落在南山北麓。
English: Further west, from the back of Akatogiri, it crosses the ridge to the south, and after a while, it descends to the west. Three miles later, there is a village located at the northern foot of Nanshan.

古文：盘其嘴而西，于是西峡中开，自南而北，与西界山对夹成坞。
现代文：绕着南山口往西走，于是西峡谷从中分开，从南往北走向，与西部山对夹形成山坞。
English: Walking west around the South Col, the West Canyon separated from the center and moved from south to north, forming a dock with the West Mountain.

古文：其脊南自新兴界分支北下，西一支直走而为新旧州治，而北尽于旧寨村；东一支即赤峒里之后山，滨池而止。
现代文：其脊南端起自新兴州境内往北延伸的分支山脉，往西延伸的一支脉一直到昆阳新、旧州治，再往北延伸到旧寨村结束，往东延伸的一支脉就是赤酮里背靠的山，延伸到滇池岸边为止。
English: The southern end of its ridge starts from the branching mountains extending northward in the territory of the emerging state, a branch extending westward to Kunyang New and Old Zhouzhi, and then northward to the end of the old village, and a branch extending eastward is the mountain behind Chikateli, extending to the shore of Dianchi Lake.

古文：按《隋书》，史万岁为行军总管，自蜻蛉川至渠滥川，破三十余部，当即指此。由东嘴截坞而西，正与新城相对，而大道必折而南，盘东界之嘴以入，三里始西涉坞。
现代文：山脊东部短，西部长，中间开阔平坦的山坞布满良田，一条小河从坞中穿过，也是从南往北流入滇池，是志书中记载的渠滥川。从东部山口横穿山坞往西走，正好和昆阳州新城相对，而走大路必须折向南，绕着东部山口往南进山，三里后才往西穿坞。
English: The eastern ridge is short, the western ridge is long, and the open and flat dock in the middle is covered with good fields. A small river passes through the dock, and also flows from south to north into the Dianchi Lake, which is the canalless river recorded in the book. From the eastern mountain pass, walk across the dock to the west, just opposite the Xincheng in Kunyang Prefecture, and take the main road to the south, walk around the eastern mountain pass to the south into the mountain, and only after three miles walk to the west dock.

古文：径坞三里，又随西界之麓北出，一里半，是为昆阳新城，又北一里半，为昆阳旧城，于是当滇池西南转折处矣。
现代文：取道坞中走三里，又顺着西部山麓往北走出去，一里半，走到昆阳州新城。又往北走一里半，到昆阳州旧城，这里位于滇池西南的转折处。
English: Take the dock walk three miles, and then walk north along the western foot of the mountain, one and a half miles, to the new city of Kunyang Prefecture. Walk another mile and a half north to the old city of Kunyang Prefecture, here is the turning point southwest of Dianchi.

古文：旧城有街衢阛堵而无城郭，新城有楼橹雉堞而无民庐，乃三四年前，旧治经寇，故卜筑新邑，而市舍犹仍旧贯也。
现代文：昆阳州旧城有街道集市却没有城墙，新城有门楼城墙却没有民房，是因为三四年前，旧州治被入侵，所以选择地点建筑新城，而集市、房舍仍在原地。
English: In the old city of Kunyang Prefecture, there is a street market but no city wall, and in the new city, there is a gate tower, but there is no residential building. This is because three or four years ago, the old prefecture was invaded, so they chose a place to build a new city, but the market and buildings are still in the same place.

古文：旧治街自南而北，西倚山坡，东瞰湖涘。
现代文：旧城的街道从南到北，西靠着山坡，东俯瞰滇池。
English: The streets of the old town run from south to north, with the hillside to the west and the view of Dianchi Pond to the east.

古文：至已日西昃日偏西，亟饭于市。
现代文：到达时太阳已经偏西、急忙在街上吃饭。
English: By the time we arrived, the sun had already set, and we hurried to eat in the street.

古文：此州有天酒泉、普照寺，以无奇不及停屐，遂北行。
现代文：昆阳州有天酒泉、普照寺，因为没有奇特之处而顾不上停留，于是往北行。
English: In Kunyang Prefecture, there are Tianjiu Spring and Fusho Temple. Since there is nothing special, I couldn't stay there, so I headed north.

古文：四里，稍上，逾一东突之坳。
现代文：走了四里，逐渐上坡，越过一道向东突出的山坳。
English: Walked four miles, gradually uphill, over a mountain range that juts out to the east.

古文：其山自西界横突而出，东悬滇海中。
现代文：这座山从滇池西部横耸着伸出去，东端悬空在滇池中。
English: The mountain juts out from the western side of Dianchi Lake, with its eastern end hanging over the lake.

古文：路逾其坳中北下，其北滇海复嵌坞西入。
现代文：道路穿越山坳往北伸下去，山北面的滇池海岸线又往西嵌入山坞。
English: The road passes through the mountains and stretches northward, and the coastline of Tsugaike on the north side of the mountain is embedded in the dock to the west.

古文：其突出之峰，远眺若中浮水面，而其西实连缀于西界者也。
现代文：那向东突出的山峰，远远地看像悬空浮在水面上，而山峰西端其实和西部山相连。
English: The mountain peak protruding to the east looks like it is suspended on the water surface from a distance, while the western end of the mountain peak is actually connected to the western mountain.

古文：乃西转涉一坞，共四里，又北向循滇池西崖山麓行。
现代文：于是往西转穿越一道山坞，一共走了四里，又往北顺着滇池西崖的山麓行。
English: So I turned west and went through a dock, walking a total of four miles, and then north along the foot of the West Cliff of Dianchi Lake.

古文：五里，又有小峰傍麓东突，南北皆湖山环抱之，数十家倚峰而居，是为旧寨村。
现代文：五里，又有小山峰傍靠着山麓往东突出去， 山峰南面、北面都是湖山环抱，数十家人靠着小山峰居住，这是旧寨村。
English: Five miles away, there is also a small peak next to the foot of the mountain jutting out to the east. The south and north sides of the peak are surrounded by lakes and mountains. Dozens of families live next to the small peak. This is the old village.

古文：由村北过一坞，其坞始自西而东；坞北有山一派，亦自西而东，直瞰滇海中。
现代文：从旧寨村往北走，经过一道山坞，其坞开始从西往东走向，坞北边有一座山，也是从西往东走向，从这里能直视到滇池正中。
English: Walking north from the old village of Zhai, you will pass a dock, whose dock begins to move from west to east. There is a mountain on the north side of the dock, which also moves from west to east. From here, you can see the middle of Dianchi Lake.

古文：北二里，抵山下。
现代文：往北走二里，抵达山下。
English: Walk two miles north to the foot of the mountain.

古文：直蹑山北上，一里余，从崩崖始转东向山半行。
现代文：直接登山朝北上，一里多，才顺着崩塌的山崖转向东往山腰上走。
English: After climbing directly northward for more than a mile, I followed the collapsed cliff and turned eastward up the mountainside.

古文：又里余，从东岭盘而北，其岭南北东三面，俱悬滇海中，正东与罗藏隔湖相对。
现代文：又走了一里多，顺着东岭往北绕，其岭的南、北、东三面都悬空在滇池中，东面正正地和罗藏山隔着滇池相对。
English: He walked for more than a mile, following the East Ridge to the north. The south, north and east sides of the ridge are suspended in the Dianchi Lake, and the east side is directly opposite the Luo Zang Mountain across the Dianchi Lake.

古文：此地杳僻隔绝，行者为畏途焉。
现代文：这里寂静偏僻，与世隔绝，行人视为畏途。
English: It is a quiet, isolated place, cut off from the rest of the world, where pedestrians are seen as a menace.

古文：岭北又有山一支，从水涯之北，亦自西而东，直瞰滇海中，与此岭南北遥对成峡，滇海驱纳其中，外若环窝，中骈束户，是为海口南岭。
现代文：岭北又有一支脉，顺着滇池岸边往北延伸，也是从西向东走向，从这里可直视滇池正中，租这座山岭南北远远相对，其间形成峡谷，滇池水长驱直入峡谷中，其外滇池像转弯一样，其内对峙的山峰像门一样束住滇池水流，这座山岭是海口南岭。
English: There is another vein in the north of Ling Lake, which extends north along the shore of Dianchi Lake, and also goes from west to east. From here, you can see the middle of Dianchi Lake. This mountain range is far away from north to south, and a canyon is formed between them. The water of Dianchi Lake drives straight into the canyon. The outside of Dianchi Lake is like a turn, and the opposing peaks inside it are like a door to hold the water flow of Dianchi Lake. This mountain range is the South Ridge of Haikou.

古文：北下之处，峻削殊甚，余虑日暮，驱马直下。
现代文：往北下去的地方，非常险峻陡峭，我考虑太阳已落山，驱赶马直接下山。
English: The area to the north was very steep, and I drove the horse straight down the mountain, thinking that the sun had set.

古文：二里，复循坞西入，二里，西逾一坳。
现代文：二里，又顺着山坞往西进去，二里，往西翻越一座山坳。
English: Two miles, and then along the dock to the west, and two miles west over a mountain pass.

古文：山坳西下，山坞环开，中为平畴，滇池之流，出海就峡，中贯成河，是为螳螂川焉。
现代文：顺山坳往西下，环形的山坞很阔，坞中部是平坦的田地，滇池水流出后注入峡谷，到坞中形成纵贯的河流，就叫蝗螂川。
English: Running down the mountain to the west, the ring-shaped dock is very wide, the middle of the dock is a flat field, and the water from the pond flows into the canyon, forming a longitudinal river in the dock. It is called the Locust River.

古文：二里，有村傍坞中南山下，过之。
现代文：二里，有个村庄依傍在坞中南山脚，从村庄经过。
English: Two miles away, there is a village next to the dock at the foot of Zhongnan Mountain, passing by the village.

古文：行平畴间，西北四里，直抵川上。
现代文：在平坦的田地间行走，往西北走四里，直接来到蝗螂川边。
English: Walking between flat fields, four miles to the northwest, directly to the locust river.

古文：有聚落成衢街道，滨川之南，是曰茶埠墩，即所谓海口街也，有公馆正焉，监察御史案临，必躬诣其地，为一省水利所系耳。先是唐晋宁谓余，海口无宿处，可往柴厂莫土官盐肆中宿；盖唐以候代巡，常宿其家也。余问其处尚相去六七里，而日色已暮，且所谓海门龙王庙者，已反在其东二里，又闻阮玉湾言，有石城之胜，亦在斯地，将留访焉，遂不复前，觅逆旅投宿。
现代文：这里有村落、街道，濒临蝗螂川南岸，叫茶埠墩，就是所谓的海口街，海口街上有公馆，监察御史到云南省考查，一定亲自到海口，因为这里关系到一个省的水利情况、在这之前唐元鹤知州对我说，海口没有住处，可以去柴厂莫土官的盐肆中住；原来唐元鹤以访问的名义来巡视，经常住在他家；我询问柴厂距离海口还有六七里，而且太阳已经落山，所说的海门龙王庙，反而在这里以东二里处，又听阮玉湾说过，有石城风景名胜，也在海口，打算住在这里游访，于是不再往前走，寻找旅店投宿。
English: There are villages and streets here, bordering the south bank of the Locust River, called Cha Bu Quan, which is the so-called Haikou Street. There is a mansion on Haikou Street. If you come to Yunnan Province to investigate, you must come to Haikou in person, because this is related to the water conservancy situation of a province. Before this, Tang Yuan He Zhizhou told me that Haikou has no place to live, you can go to the wood factory and live in the salt factory of the local official. Originally, Tang Yuan He came to inspect in the name of visiting, and often lived in his house. I asked the wood factory is still six or seven miles

古文：二十五日令二骑返晋宁。
现代文：二十五日让两匹马返回晋宁州。
English: On the 25th, the two horses were allowed to return to Jining.

古文：余饭而蹑屩ｊｕē草鞋北抵川上，望川北石崖矗空，川流直啮其下。
现代文：我吃过饭就穿上草鞋往北去到蝗螂川边，看到蝗螂川北岸石崖凌空矗立，川流直接冲咬着石崖脚。
English: After eating, I put on my sandals and went north to the locust river. I saw the stone cliff on the north bank of the locust river soaring into the sky, and the river current directly gnawing at the foot of the cliff.

古文：问所谓石城者，土人皆莫之知，惟东指龙王堂在盈盈一水间。
现代文：询问所听到的石城名胜，当地人都不知道。只是往东指着包围在清澈湖水之中的龙王堂。
English: When asked what famous places in Shicheng they had heard about, the locals didn't know. They just pointed east to the Dragon King Hall, surrounded by the clear water of the lake.

古文：乃溯川南岸，东向从之。
现代文：于是沿着蝗螂川南岸，往东朝着河流上游走。
English: So I walked along the south bank of the Locust River, eastward toward the upper reaches of the river.

古文：二里，南岸山亦突而临川，水反舍北而逼南，南岸崩嵌盘沓，而北崖则开绕而受民舍焉，是为海门村。与南崖相隔一水，不半里，中有洲浮其吭间，东向滇海，极吞吐之势；峙其上者，为龙王堂。
现代文：二里，南岸的山也临川突起，河流反而离开北岸而逼近南岸，南岸山像崩塌一样嵌入水中、弯曲重叠，而北岸则山崖绕开来容纳民舍，这就是海门村，和南岸山崖仅相隔一水，距离不到半里，有沙洲浮在这咽喉一样的河道中间，沙洲往东朝向滇池，极尽吞吐滇池的气势；屹立在沙洲上的就是龙王堂。
English: Two miles away, the mountain on the south bank also protrudes from the river, but the river instead leaves the north bank and approaches the south bank. The south bank mountain is embedded in the water like a collapse, bending and overlapping, while the north bank is surrounded by cliffs to accommodate residences. This is Haimen Village. The south bank cliff is separated by only one body of water, less than half a mile away. There is a sandbar floating in the middle of this throat-like river channel. The sandbar moves eastward toward Dianchi Lake, swallowing the power of Dianchi Lake. Standing on the sandbar is Longwang Temple.

古文：时渡舟在村北岸，呼之莫应。
现代文：这时渡船在北岸村里，呼叫渡船而没有人答应。
English: At this time, the ferry was in the north shore village, calling for the ferry and no one answered.

古文：余攀南岸水窟，与水石相为容与，忘其身之所如也。
现代文：我攀爬南岸崖上的水洞，在湖水、山石中怡然自得，忘记了自己是在什么地方。
English: I climbed into the water cave on the cliff on the south shore, and felt so at home in the lake and the rocks that I forgot where I was.

古文：久之，北崖村人以舟至，遂渡登龙王堂。
现代文：很久，北岸海门村的人划船过来，于是乘船过河登龙王堂。
English: For a long time, the people of Haimen Village on the north bank came by boat, so they took a boat across the river to climb the Dragon King Hall.

古文：堂当川流之中，东临海面，时有赛祭祀神者浮舟而至，而中无庙祝；后有重楼，则阮祥吾所构也。
现代文：龙王堂位于蝗螂川流正中，东临海面，这时有还愿的人乘船而到，但龙王堂里却没有管香火的人；后面有重叠的楼房，是阮祥吾建造的。
English: The Dragon King's Hall is located in the middle of the Locust Stream, facing the sea to the east. At that time, there were people who wished to come by boat, but there was no incense burner in the Dragon King's Hall; there were overlapping buildings behind, built by Nguyen Xiangu.

古文：庙中碑颇多，皆化、治以后，抚按相度水利、开濬，疏通海口免于泛滥，以成濒海诸良田者，故巡方者以此为首务云。
现代文：庙里有很多石碑，都是成化、弘治以后立的，巡抚、按察使视察、计划水利工程，疏通海口避免滇池水泛滥，从而形成滇池沿岸众多良田的情况都记在碑上，所以来云南视察的官员都首先到这里来。
English: There are many stone tablets in the temple, all of which were erected after Chenghua and Hongzhi. The inspectors and inspectors inspected and planned water conservancy projects, dredged Haikou to avoid flooding of Dianchi Lake, and thus the situation of many good fields along the coast of Dianchi Lake was recorded on the tablet. Therefore, officials who came to Yunnan to inspect came here first.

古文：出庙渡北岸，居庐颇集。
现代文：从龙王堂出来过河到蝗螂川北岸，这里住家比较集中。
English: From the Dragon King Hall, cross the river to the north bank of the Locust River, where there is a relatively large concentration of homes.

古文：其北向所倚之山有二重。
现代文：其北面背靠的山有两层。
English: The mountain behind it to the north has two levels.

古文：第一重横突而西，多石，而西垂最高，即矗削而濒于川之北岸者；第二重横突而东，多土，而东绕最远，即错出而尽为池之北圩者。
现代文：第一层横列着往西边耸起，山上石头多，而西端最高，就是矗立在蝗螂川北岸的峭壁；第二层横列着往东边耸起，山上泥土多，而东边绕伸出去最远，就是错落耸出而尽头形成滇池北堤的山。
English: The first layer rises horizontally to the west, there are many stones on the mountain, and the highest west end is the cliff standing on the north bank of the Locust River; the second layer rises horizontally to the east, there is a lot of dirt on the mountain, and the farthest east is the mountain that juts out at random and ends up forming the northern embankment of Dianchi Lake.

古文：二重层叠于村后，盖北自观音山盘礴而尽于此。
现代文：两层山重叠在海门村背后，大概北起观音山，气势磅礴地延伸到这里为止。
English: The two-tiered mountains overlap behind Haimen Village, with Guanyin Mountain rising from the north, extending majestically to this point.

古文：村氓俱阮氏庄佃。
现代文：海门村村民都是阮家田庄的佃户。
English: Haimen villagers are all tenants of the Nguyen family's farm.

古文：余向询阮玉湾新置石城之胜，土人莫解，谓阮氏有坟在东岸，误指至此，村人始有言石城在里仁村。
现代文：我先前询问阮玉湾新近构置的石城胜景，当地人谁也不知道，说阮家有坟地在东岸，我被错误地指引到了这里，才有村人说石城在里仁村。
English: I had previously inquired about the newly constructed Shicheng Scenic Spot in Ruan Yu Bay. No one in the local community knew about it. They said that the Ruan family had a graveyard on the east coast. I was mistakenly directed here, and only then did the villagers say that Shicheng was in Liren Village.

古文：其村乃儸儸寨，正与茶埠墩对，从此有小径，向山后峡中西行，三里可至。
现代文：其村是锣锣寨，和茶埠墩正对，从这里有小路去，朝山背后的峡谷中往西行，三里可以到达。
English: Its village is Zhaozhai, which is directly opposite the tea town of Zhaozhou. From here, there is a small road, and it can be reached in three miles by traveling west through the canyon behind the morning mountain.

古文：余乃不东向阮坟，而西觅里仁焉。
现代文：我于是不往东去阮家坟地，而往西走去找里仁村。
English: So instead of going east to the Nguyen family cemetery, I went west to the village of Liren.

古文：即由村后北逾第一重石峰之脊，北向下，路旁多错立之石，北亦开坞，而中无细流。
现代文：就从村后翻过第一层石峰的山梁，朝北往下走，路旁有很多交错耸立的石头，北面也是开阔的山坞，但坞中没有小溪。
English: From the back of the village, you have to climb over the first layer of the stone peak and walk down to the north. There are many interlaced stones on the roadside. The north side is also an open dock, but there is no creek in the dock.

古文：此句意即桃树繁盛，桃花开放之时，武陵人寻觅到的桃花源与之相比太微不足道了矣。
现代文：一里，随着山坞往西转，已经到了蝗螂川北岸矗立的峭壁后面，原来这座山峰的南面紧接蝗螂川水，所以道路从山峰北面走。坞中有成千上万棵桃树，复盖山冈、布满壑谷，想像着这些桃树万紫千红、映红彩霞时的情景，令人嗤笑武陵、天台的桃花不过像一束小火把而已了。
English: One mile later, as the dock turned west, it was already behind the cliff standing on the north bank of the Locust River. Originally, the south side of this peak was adjacent to the water of the Locust River, so the road went from the north side of the peak. There are thousands of peach trees in the dock, covering the mountains and valleys, imagining the scene when these peach trees are purple and red, reflecting the red color of the sky. It makes people laugh that the peach blossoms of Wuling and the rooftop are just like a bunch of small torches.

古文：西一里，过桃林，则西坞大开，始见田畴交塍，溪流霍霍，村落西悬北山之下，知其即为里仁村矣。
现代文：往西走一里，穿过桃林，则西边的山坞十分开阔，才看到耕地田埂交错，溪水哗哗流淌，西边有个村子坐落在北山下，知道这就是里仁村了。
English: Walking one mile to the west, through the peach grove, the west side of the dock is very open, only to see the farmland interlaced with fields, streams flowing, and a village on the west side located under the north mountain, knowing that this is the village of Liren.

古文：盖其坞正南矗立石山，西尽于此，坞濒于川，亦有一村临之，是为海口村，与茶埠墩隔川相对，有渡舟焉。
现代文：原来这座山坞的正南部石山矗立，西部到里仁村为止，山坞濒临蝗螂川之处，也有一个村子紧靠川水，这是海口村，和茶埠墩隔川相对，村里有渡船。
English: Originally, this dockyard stood in the south of Shishan, in the west as far as Liren Village, and where the dockyard bordered the Locust River, there was also a village close to the river water, this was Haikou Village, which was across the river from Chaobu, and the village had a ferry.

古文：其坞之东北逾坡，坞之西北循峡，皆有路，凡六十里而抵省会。
现代文：这座山坞的东北面翻过山坡，西北面顺着峡谷，都有路，一共六十里就到省会了。
English: The northeast side of this dockyard overturns the hillside, the northwest side follows the canyon, there are roads, a total of sixty miles to the provincial capital.

古文：而里仁村当坞中北山下，半里抵村之东，见流泉交道，山崖间树木丛荫，上有神宇，盖龙泉出其下也，东坞以无泉，故皆成旱地；西坞以有泉，故广辟良畴。
现代文：而里仁村位于坞中北山下，走半里来到村子东边，看到泉水从路上流过，山崖间草木丛生、绿树成荫，山上有神庙，大概龙潭水从庙下面流出。东坞没有泉水，所以都是旱地；西坞因为有泉水，所以广泛地开辟良田。
English: However, Liren Village is located at the foot of the mountain in the middle and north of the dock, walk half a mile to the east of the village, see the spring water flowing through the road, the mountains and cliffs are overgrown with green trees, there is a temple on the mountain, and probably the Longtan water flows out from the bottom of the temple. There is no spring water in the east dock, so it is all dry land; because there is spring water in the west dock, good fields are widely developed.

古文：由村西盘山而北，西坞甚深，其坞自北峡而出，直南而抵海口村焉。
现代文：从里仁村西边绕着山往北走，西坞很深，这座山坞从北边的峡谷中伸出来，一直往南伸到海口村。
English: From the west side of Liren Village, walk around the mountain to the north. The west dock is very deep. This dock protrudes from the canyon on the north side and extends all the way south to Haikou Village.

古文：村西所循之山，其上多蹲突之石，下多崆峒之崖，有一窍二门西向而出者。
现代文：从村西绕着走的山上有很多枷同人蹲卧、站立般的石头，山下有很多有洞的石崖，有一个洞两道门都朝西边开出去。
English: On the mountain that goes around the west of the village, there are a lot of standing and crouching stones. At the bottom of the mountain, there are a lot of stone cliffs with holes. There is one hole, and both doors open to the west.

古文：余觉其异，询之土人，石城尚在坞西岭上，其下亦有龙泉，可遵之而上。
现代文：我感到这里很奇特，向当地人询问，知道石城还在山坞西边的岭上，石城下面也有泉水，可以顺着水流而上。
English: I felt it was very special here and asked the locals if they knew that Shicheng was still on the ridge to the west of the dock, and that there was also a spring below Shicheng that you could follow upstream.

古文：共北半里，乃西下截坞而度，有一溪亦自北而南，中乾无流。
现代文：一共往北走了半里，就往西下山横穿山坞，坞中也有一条水沟从北往南伸去，只是沟中干涸无水。
English: After walking a total of half a mile to the north, they went down the mountain to the west and crossed the dock. There was also a ditch in the dock stretching from north to south, but the ditch was dry and there was no water.

古文：涉溪西上，共半里，闻水声虢虢，则龙泉溢西山树根下，潴为小潭，分泻东南去。
现代文：过水沟往西上，一共半里，听到哗哗的流水声，是泉水从西山上树根下涌出，积聚成小水潭，潭里的水往东边、南边分流出去。
English: Crossing the ditch to the west, a total of half a mile, I heard the sound of rushing water. It was spring water gushing out from under the roots of trees on the west mountain, accumulating into a small pool, and the water in the pool was diverted to the east and south.

古文：由潭西上岭，半里，则岭头峰石涌起，有若卓锥者，有若夹门者，有若芝擎而为台，有若云卧而成郭者。
现代文：从水潭西边上岭，半里，就看到岭头石峰石块涌起，有的像锥子尖耸，有的像门户夹道，有的像灵芝擎起而形成石台，有的像云朵卧地而形成墙壁。
English: From the western edge of the pool, half a mile up the ridge, you can see the stone pinnacles of the ridge rise, some like cones, some like portals, some like Ganoderma lucidum and form stone platforms, and some like clouds lying on the ground and form walls.

古文：于是循石之隙，盘坡而上，坠壑而下。
现代文：于是顺着石头之间的缝隙，绕着山坡往上走，坠着壑沟而下。
English: So he followed the gap between the stones, walked up around the hillside, and fell down the gully.

古文：其顶中洼，石皆环成外郭，东面者巑岏森透，西面者穹覆壁立，南向则余之逾脊而下者，北面则有石窟曲折，若离若合间，一石坠空当关，下覆成门，而出入由之，围壑之中，底平而无水，可以结庐，是所谓石城也。
现代文：顶上中部低洼，石头都环绕洼地形成外墙，东面陡峭的石块如同森林，西南面弯形覆盖下来的石壁耸立，南面就是我翻过山梁而下的地方，北面则有曲折的石洞，若离若合之间，一块石头从空中坠下来挡在关口，下面覆盖成门样的空间，而出入都从这里。被石壁围着的洼地之中，底部平坦而没有水，可以盖房子，这就是所说的石城。
English: The top is low-lying in the middle, and the stones all surround the depression to form an outer wall. The steep stones on the east are like a forest, and the curved stone walls covered on the southwest are towering. The south is where I turned over the mountain beam and went down, and the north has meandering stone caves. If there is a gap between them, a stone falls from the sky and blocks the gate. The space below is covered like a door, and all entrances and exits are from here. In the middle of the depression surrounded by stone walls, the bottom is flat and there is no water, you can build a house. This is the so-called stone city.

古文：透北门而出，其石更分枝簇萼、石皆青质黑章花纹，廉利棱削，与他山迥异。
现代文：穿过北面的石门出去，那里的石头更像树木分枝、花尊簇拥，石头都是青色质地黑色纹彩，棱角分明，边缘锋利，和其他山上的石头完全不一样。
English: Go out through the stone gate to the north, where the stones are more like tree branches and flowers. The stones are blue with black patterns, with sharp edges, and are completely different from the other stones on the mountain.

古文：有牧童二人，引余循崖东转，复入一石队中，又得围崖一区，惟东面受客如门，其中有趺座之龛，架板之床，皆天成者。
现代文：有两个牧童，领着我顺山崖往东转，再次走入一列石头队伍之中，又看到石壁包围的一片地区，这片地区只有东面像门一样地容纳客人进出，中间有僧徒打坐的石屋，架好床板的床，都是天然生成的。
English: Two shepherds led me along the mountain cliffs to the east, where I again walked into a line of stones and saw an area surrounded by stone walls. Only the eastern side of this area is like a door for guests to enter and exit. In the middle is a stone house where monks meditate, and a bed with a good mattress, all of which are naturally formed.

古文：出门稍南，回顾门侧，有洞岈然，亟转身披之。
现代文：从石围出去逐渐往南走，回头看石门旁边，有个深远的石洞，急忙转身回来钻洞。
English: Go out from the stone enclosure and gradually walk to the south, look back next to the stone gate, there is a far-reaching stone cave, quickly turn back and drill a hole.

古文：其峒透空而入，复出于围崖之内，始觉由门入，不若由洞入更奇也。
现代文：从石洞中穿进去，出来又是石围之中，才觉得从石门进入石围，不如从石洞进入更奇妙。
English: Entering from the stone cave and coming out in the middle of the stone enclosure, I felt that it was more wonderful to enter the stone enclosure from the stone gate than from the stone cave.

古文：计围崖之后，即由石城中望所谓东面巑岏处矣。
现代文：估计石围的背后，就是石城中往东看去有如同森林般的陡峭石块所在地。
English: It is estimated that behind the stone enclosure is the location of the steep stone blocks that look like a forest to the east in the middle of the stone city.

古文：出洞，仰眺洞上石峰层沓，高耸无比，复有一老儸儸披兽皮前来，引余相与攀跻。
现代文：从石洞中出来，抬头眺望石洞上面，石峰层层叠叠，高耸无比。又有一位老年锣锣披着兽皮走过来，带着我和他一起攀登。
English: Coming out of the cave, I looked up at the top of the cave, where the stone peaks were piled on top of each other, towering immeasurably high. Another old man, wearing animal skins, came over and took me to climb with him.

古文：其上如众台错立，环中洼而峙其东，东眺海门，明镜漾空，西俯洼底，翠瓣可数，而隔崖西峰穹覆之上，攒拥尤高。
现代文：登上去的地方如同众多的高台错落而立，环绕着中洼地而峙立在石城东部。往东眺望海门村，天空像明镜一样光亮，往西俯视洼地底部，青绿色的石块瓣瓣可数，而隔着山崖看西峰如弯隆覆盖显得更高。
English: The place to climb up is like a multitude of high plateaus, surrounding the middle depression and standing in the east of Shicheng. Looking east to Haimen Village, the sky is as bright as a mirror, looking west down to the bottom of the depression, the blue-green stone blocks can be counted, and looking across the cliff to the west peak, such as the camber cover, appears higher.

古文：乃下峰，复度南脊，转造西峰，则穹覆上崖，复有后层分列，其中开峡，东坠危坑而下，其后则土山高拥，负扆于上，耸立之石，或上覆平板，或中剖斜棂。
现代文：于是下峰，又越过南面的山梁，绕到西面的山峰，就看到弯形崖壁之上，还有后层山峰分开耸列，中间是敞开的峡谷。往东坠入陡坑而下，其后则土山高拥，上面背靠屏风般的山峰，耸立的石头，有的顶上覆盖着石板，有的从中剖成倾斜的窗格。
English: So I went down the mountain, crossed the south-facing mountain beam, and circled the west-facing mountain peak. On top of the curved cliff wall, I saw the back-layer peaks standing separately, with an open canyon in the middle. To the east, I fell into a steep pit and descended, followed by high earthen hills, with the screen-like peaks behind them, and towering stones, some covered with stone slabs on top, and some cut into slanted panes in the middle.

古文：崖胁有二小穴如鼻孔，群蜂出入其中，蜜渍淋漓其下，乃崖蜂所巢也。
现代文：石崖侧壁上有两个鼻孔一样的小洞，群峰从洞露出时隐时现，有蜂蜜淋在石洞下面，小洞是崖蜂的蜂巢。
English: There are two small holes like nostrils on the side wall of the cliff, the peaks emerge from the hole from time to time, and honey drips under the cave. The small hole is the beehive of the cliff bee.

古文：两牧童言： 三月前土人以火熏蜂而取蜜，蜂已久去，今乃复成巢矣。 
现代文：两个牧童说： 三个月以前当地人用火烟熏蜂子取蜂蜜，蜂子离开小洞已经很长时间了，到如今才又成为蜂巢。 
English: The two shepherd boys said, "Three months ago, the local people smoked bees to extract honey. The bees have been away from the cave for a long time, and only now have they become a hive again.

古文：童子竞以草塞孔，蜂辄嗡嗡然作铜鼓声。
现代文：两个牧童争着用草去塞小洞，洞里的蜂子就发出像铜鼓一样的嗡嗡声。
English: Two shepherds were struggling to fill a small hole with grass, and the bees in the hole made a buzzing sound like a brass drum.

古文：凭览久之，乃循坠坑之北，东向悬崖而下。
现代文：登高观览了很久，才从陡坑的北面，往东顺着悬崖而下。
English: After climbing for a long time, I descended from the north side of the steep pit, eastward along the cliff.

古文：经东石门之外，犹令人一步一回首也。
现代文：经过石围东面的石门外，其景致仍然让人一步一回首，不忍离去。
English: After passing the stone gate on the east side of the stone perimeter, the scenery still makes people look back step by step, and they can't bear to leave.

古文：先是从里仁村望此山，峰顶耸石一丛，不及晋宁将军峰之伟杰，及抵其处而阖辟曲折，层沓玲珑，幻化莫测，钟秀独异，信乎灵境之不可以外象求也。
现代文：在登临之前从里仁村看这座山，峰顶上耸立着一丛石头，赶不上晋宁州石将军峰的雄伟壮丽，等到达后才知道这里山石闭合曲折，层次丰富，造形玲珑，变化莫测，集秀美于一身而独具奇异，仙境的确不能只凭外表去寻求。
English: Looking at the mountain from the village of Liren before climbing, there is a cluster of stones on the peak, which is not as magnificent as the majestic Shizhen General Peak in Jining Province. It is only after arrival that you know that the mountains and rocks here are closed twists and turns, rich in layers, exquisite shapes, unpredictable changes, beautiful in one and unique and strange, fairyland can not really be sought only by appearance.

古文：盖是峰西倚大山，此其一支东窜，峰顶中坳，石骨内露，不比他山之以表暴见奇者；第其上无飞流涵莹之波，中鲜剪棘梯崖之道，不免为兔狐所窟耳。
现代文：原来这座山峰西靠大山，是大山往东伸出的一支脉，峰顶中部低洼，棱角分明的石头暴露在洼地之内，不像其它山那样因为暴露在外表而显得奇妙；只是山峰上没有飞瀑冲流的晶莹水波，山峰中没有披刑斩棘的攀壁梯道，不免成为野兔狐狸的巢穴。
English: Originally, this peak was located to the west of a large mountain, and was a branch of the large mountain stretching out to the east. The middle of the peak was low-lying, and the angular stones were exposed in the depression. Unlike other mountains, it looked strange because it was exposed to the outside. However, there was no crystal clear water wave of the flying waterfall on the peak, and there was no climbing path of the mountain peak, which would inevitably become the nest of the hare fox.

古文：老儸儸言： 此石隙土最宜茶，茶味迥出他处。
现代文：老锣锣说： 这些石头间隙中的土地最适宜种茶，种出的茶叶味道超出其他地方。
English: Lao Zi said: The land between these stones is most suitable for growing tea, and the taste of the tea leaves is better than anywhere else.

古文：今阢氏已买得之，将造庵结庐，招净侣以开胜壤。
现代文：现在阮氏已经买下这山，准备建造庙宇、建盖房屋，招集净侣来开辟这片美丽的土地。
English: Now, Mr. Nguyen has bought the mountain and is preparing to build a temple, construct houses, and recruit pure couples to open up this beautiful land.

古文：岂君即其人耶？ 余不应去。
现代文：您难道就是招来的人吗？  我没有回答而离开了。
English: Are you the one who invited me? I didn't answer and left.

古文：信乎买山而居，无过此者。
现代文：确实，买山建屋居住，没有一处能够超过这里。
English: Indeed, there is no better place to buy a mountain, build a house and live than here.

古文：下山，仍过坞东，一里，经里仁村。
现代文：下山后，仍然穿过山坞往东走，一里，过里仁村。
English: After descending the mountain, I still walked through the dock to the east, one mile, and passed Liren Village.

古文：东南一里，抵螳螂川之北，西望海口，有渡可往茶埠，而东眺濒川，石崖耸削。
现代文：往东南走一里，来到蝗螂川北岸，向西边海口看去，有渡船，能够去茶埠墩，而向东眺望蝗螂川边，石崖高耸峻峭。
English: Walk one mile southeast to the north bank of the Locust River, look west to the estuary, there is a ferry, you can go to the tea harbor, and look east to the Locust River, the cliff is high and steep.

古文：先从茶埠隔川北望，于巑岏嵌突中，见白垣一方，若有新茅架其上者；今虽崖石掩映，不露其影，而水石交错，高深嵌空，其中当有奇胜，遂东向从之。
现代文：先前从茶埠墩隔着蝗螂川向北看，在高低错落的峭石中，看得见一堵白墙，墙内好像有新茅屋；现在虽然被崖石遮挡，看不见白墙的影子，但河水山石交错，很高的山峰插向空中，其中应当有奇特的美景，于是往东顺着走过去。
English: In the past, when looking north from Chabuye across the Locust River, a white wall could be seen in the craggy rocks, and inside the wall there seemed to be a new cottage. Now, although it is blocked by cliffs, the shadow of the white wall cannot be seen, but the river rocks are interlaced, and high peaks are inserted into the air, which should have a strange beauty, so I walked east.

古文：抵崖下，崖根插水，乱石潆洄，遂攀跻水石间。
现代文：来到山崖下，山脚直插水中，乱石绕在周围，于是从水石中间攀越。
English: Came to the bottom of the cliff, the foot of the mountain straight into the water, the rocks around, so I climbed from the middle of the stones.

古文：沿崖南再东，忽见石上有痕，蹑崖直上，势甚峻，挂石悬崖之迹，俱倒影水中。
现代文：沿着山崖南面再往东，忽然看见石头上有迹印，顺着山崖直直上去，形势十分陡峻，悬挂在山崖上的迹印与山崖的倒影，都映在水中。
English: Further east along the southern face of the cliff, I suddenly saw a footprint on the stone. I went straight up along the cliff. The situation was very steep. The footprint hanging on the cliff and the reflection of the cliff were reflected in the water.

古文：方下见为奇，又忽闻謦咳ｑǐｎｇ咳嗽声落头上，虽仰望不可见，知新茅所建不远矣。
现代文：正为往下看到的景色感到惊奇，又忽然听到咳嗽声从头顶上传下来，虽然抬头仰望看不见人影，却知道距离所建造的新茅屋不远了。
English: He was just marvelling at the view below, when suddenly he heard the sound of coughing coming from overhead, and although he couldn't see anyone when he looked up, he knew that the new thatched cottage he was building was not far away.

古文：再穿下覆之石，则白垣正在其上。
现代文：又穿过向下覆盖的石头，白墙正好在穿过的石头上面。
English: He went through the stone again, which was covered downwards, and the white wall was right on top of the stone he had gone through.

古文：一道者方凿崖填路，迎余人坐茅中。
现代文：一个道士正在凿崖填路，迎接我进茅屋中坐。
English: A Taoist priest is chiselling a path through the cliff to welcome me into the hut.

古文：其茅仅逾方丈，明窗净壁，中无供像，亦无爂具，盖初落成而犹未栖息其间者。
现代文：这间茅屋每边的长不过一丈多一点，窗子明亮，墙壁洁净，屋中没有供奉塑像，也没有烧火做饭的器具，大概是刚刚盖好，人还没有住进来。
English: This hut is only a little more than a foot long on each side, the windows are bright, the walls are clean, there are no statues in the house, and there are no fire cooking utensils. It was probably just built, and people have not yet moved in.

古文：道人吴姓，即西村海口人，向以贾游于外，今归而结净于此，可谓得所托矣。
现代文：道士姓吴，就是西边海口村人，从前在外面经商，现在返回家乡，因而在这里建造洁净的房舍，可以称得上找到托身之处了。
English: The Taoist priest surnamed Wu, a villager from Haikou Village in the west, used to do business outside, but now he has returned to his hometown, so he built a clean house here, which can be said to be a place to hide.

古文：坐茅中，上下左右，皆危崖缀影，而澄川漾碧于前，远峰环翠于外；隔川茶埠，村庐缭绕，烟树堤花，若献影镜中；而川中凫舫贾帆，鱼罾即渡艇，出没波纹间，棹影跃浮岚，橹声摇半壁，恍然如坐画屏之上也。
现代文：坐在茅屋中，上下左右，都是陡峭的石崖和身影相连。清澈的蝗螂川水在前方碧波荡漾，远方翠绿的群山环绕在外围；蝗螂川对岸的茶埠墩村，房舍缭绕，树影烟云，堤坝浪花，仿佛是镜中呈现出的美景；而川中扬着帆的商船像野鸭浮游，张着鱼网的打鱼船在波浪间出没，船只的影子跳跃在飘浮的云雾中，划桨的声音传出半边山，令人觉得仿佛置身在画屏中一样。
English: Sitting in a thatched cottage, there are steep stone cliffs above and below and to the right and left, all of which are connected to the figure. The clear water of the Locust River ripples in the front, and the distant green mountains surround the periphery; on the opposite bank of the Locust River, the houses of the village of Chabu, the shadows of the trees, the smoke clouds, and the waves of the dam, seem to be the beauty of the mirror; and the merchant ships with sails in the river float like wild ducks, the fishing boats with fish nets hang out in the waves, the shadows of the ships jump in the floating clouds, and the sound of the paddles

古文：既下，仍西半里，问渡于海口村。
现代文：下山后，仍然往西走，半里，在海口村上了渡船。
English: After descending the mountain, I still walked westward for half a mile and got on the ferry in Haikou Village.

古文：南度茶埠街，入饭于主家，已过午矣。
现代文：往南渡到茶埠墩街上，在主人家吃饭后，已经过了中午。
English: After traveling south to Cha Bu Quan Street and eating at the owner's house, it was already past noon.

古文：茶埠有舟，随流十里，往柴厂载盐渡滇池。
现代文：茶埠墩有船，顺着蝗螂川行十里，到柴厂运盐渡滇池。
English: There is a boat in the tea village, which travels ten miles along the Locust River to transport salt to the wood factory.

古文：余不能待，遂从村西遵川堤而行。
现代文：我不能等，就从茶埠墩往西沿着蝗螂川的堤坝走。
English: I couldn't wait, so I walked west from Cha Bu Qu to the dam along the Locust River.

古文：其堤自茶埠西达平定，随川南涯而筑之。
现代文：这条堤坝从茶埠墩往西到达平定哨，沿蝗螂川南岸而修筑。
English: This dike was built along the southern bank of the Locust River from Chabuye westward to Pingding Sentinel.

古文：盖川水北依北岸大山而西，其南岸山势层叠，中多小坞，故筑堤障川。
现代文：因为川水北边靠着北岸的大山往西流，而南岸山势层层叠叠，中间有很多小山坞，所以要修筑堤坝堵住川水。
English: Because the north side of the river flows westward against the mountains on the north bank, while the south bank is mountainous, with many small mountain docks in the middle, it is necessary to build a dam to block the river.

古文：堤之南，屡有小水自南峡出，亦随堤下注。
现代文：堤坝的南边，常有小溪从南部的峡谷中流出，溪水也顺着堤坝往下流。
English: On the south side of the dike, there are often small streams flowing out of the southern canyon, and the stream water also flows down the dike.

古文：从堤上西行，川形渐狭，川流渐迅。
现代文：从堤坝上往西走，蝗螂川的河道逐渐狭窄，川流逐渐迅速。
English: Walking westward from the dam, the river channel of the Locust River gradually narrows, and the flow of the river gradually increases.

古文：七里，有村庐倚堤，北下临川，堤间有亭有碑，即所谓柴厂也；按旧碑谓之汉厂，莫土官盐肆在焉。
现代文：走了七里，有个村子紧靠堤坝，往北伸到蝗螂川边，堤坝中间有亭子、有石碑，就是所说的柴厂；按照碑刻旧名叫做汉厂，莫土官的盐铺就在这里。
English: After walking seven miles, there is a village close to the dam, stretching north to the Locust River. In the middle of the dam, there is a pavilion and a stone monument, which is the so-called wood factory. According to the old name inscribed on the monument, it is called Han Factory, and the salt shop of the local government is here.

古文：至此川迅石多，渐不容舟，川渐随山西北转矣，堤随之。
现代文：到这里川流急，石头多，逐渐不能行船，蝗螂川渐渐地随着山往西北转，堤坝跟着河流转。
English: At this point, the river is fast-flowing and full of stones, making it impossible to navigate. The Locust River gradually turns to the northwest along with the mountains, and the dike follows the river.

古文：又西北七里，水北向逼山入峡，路西向度坞登坡。
现代文：又往西北走了七里，河流往北紧靠着山注入峡谷，道路朝西越过山坞上坡。
English: I walked another seven miles to the northwest, the river flowing into the canyon close to the mountain to the north, the road heading west over the dock and uphill.

古文：又二里，数家踞坡上，曰平定哨。
现代文：又走了二里，有几家人住在坡上，名平定哨。
English: After walking another two miles, there were several families living on the slope, and they were called Pingding Sentinel.

古文：时日色尚高，以土人言前途无宿店，遂止。
现代文：这时太阳还高，因当地人说前面途中没有旅店，于是停留在此。
English: At this time the sun was still high, because the locals said that there was no hotel on the way ahead, so they stopped here.

