古文：十年春，王正月。
现代文：昭公十年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: In the spring of Akira's tenth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏，齐栾施来奔。
现代文：夏季，齐国大夫栾施逃到鲁国。
English: In the summer, Qigong doctor Yan Shi fled to Lu.

古文：秋七月，季孙意如、叔弓、仲孙貜帅师伐莒。
现代文：秋季七月，鲁国大夫季孙意如、叔弓、仲孙貜率领军队攻打莒国。
English: In the autumn of July, Ji Sun Yiru, the doctor of the State of Lu, Shugu, and Zhong Sun Rong led the army to attack the State of Lu.

古文：戊子，晋侯彪卒。
现代文：戊子日，晋侯彪去世。
English: On the day of Boshi, Jin Hou Biao passed away.

古文：九月，叔孙婼如晋，葬晋平公。
现代文：九月，叔孙婼去到晋国，安葬晋平公。
English: In September, his uncle Sun Yat-sen went to Jin Province to bury Jin Ping.

古文：十有二月甲子，宋公成卒。
现代文：十二月甲子日，宋平公去世。
English: On December 1, Song Pingguo passed away.

古文：十年春，王正月，有星出于婺女。
现代文：十年春季，周王朝历法的正月，有一颗星出现在婺女宿。
English: In the spring of the 10th year, the first month of the Zhou dynasty calendar, a star appeared in the young woman's inn.

古文：郑裨竈言于子产曰： 七月戊子，晋君将死。
现代文：郑国的裨灶对子产说： 七月初三日，晋国国君将要死去。
English: Zheng's benefactor said to his son: On the third day of the seventh month, the prince of Jin will die.

古文：今兹岁在颛顼之虚，姜氏、任氏实守其地。居其维首，而有妖星焉，告邑姜也。
现代文：现在岁星在玄枵，姜氏、任氏保守着这里的土地，婺女宿正当玄枵的首位，而有了妖星在这里出现，这是预告灾祸将要归于邑姜。
English: Now the year star is in Xuanzang, the Jiang clan and the Ren clan are protecting the land here, the Lady Inn is the first place in Xuanzang, and a monster star appears here, which is a harbinger of the disaster that will be attributed to the city of Jiang.

古文：邑姜，晋之妣也。
现代文：邑姜，是晋侯的先妣。
English: Ojang is the forerunner of Jinhau.

古文：天以七纪，戊子，逢公以登，星斯于是乎出。吾是以讥之。 
现代文：上天用七来记数，七月初三日，是逢公的死日，妖星就在这时候出现了，我是用它占卜而知道的。 
English: Heaven uses seven to count, and the third day of the beginning of July is the day of Feng Gong's death. It was at this time that the evil star appeared, and I knew it by divination.

古文：齐惠栾、高氏皆耆酒，信内多怨，强于陈、鲍氏而恶之。
现代文：齐惠公的后代栾氏、高氏都喜欢喝酒，听信女人的话，所以别人的怨恨很多，势力比陈氏、鲍氏还要大而又讨厌陈氏、鲍氏。
English: Qi Huigong's descendants, the Zou clan and the Gao clan, both like to drink and listen to women, so there is a lot of resentment from others. They are more powerful than the Chen clan and the Bao clan, but they hate the Chen clan and the Bao clan.

古文：夏，有告陈桓子曰： 子旗、子良将攻陈、鲍。 
现代文：夏季，有人告诉陈桓子说： 子良、子旗将要进攻陈氏、鲍氏。 
English: In the summer, someone told Chen Huan Zi: Zira and Ziqi are going to attack the Chen and Bao clans.

古文：亦告鲍氏。
现代文：同时也告诉了鲍氏。
English: At the same time, he also told Mr. Bao.

古文：桓子授甲而如鲍氏，遭子良醉而骋，遂见文子，则亦授甲矣。
现代文：陈桓子把兵器发给部下并且亲自到鲍氏那里，路上遇到子良喝醉了酒而骑马奔驰，就进见鲍文子，鲍文子也已经把兵器发下去了。
English: Chen Huan Zi distributed the weapons to his subordinates and personally went to Bao's place. On the way, he met Ziliang, who was drunk and riding a horse, and went to see Bao Wenzi. Bao Wenzi had also distributed the weapons.

古文：使视二子，则皆将饮酒。
现代文：派人去看子良、子旗两个人，他们都准备喝酒。
English: They sent someone to see two people, Ziliang and Ziqiang, who were getting ready to drink.

古文：桓子曰： 彼虽不信，闻我授甲，则必逐我。
现代文：陈桓子说： 他们将攻打我们的传闻即使不真实，但是他们听说我发下兵器，就一定会追赶我们。
English: Chen Huan Zi said, "Even if the rumor that they will attack us is not true, if they hear that I have sent weapons, they will definitely chase us."

古文：及其饮酒也，先伐诸？ 
现代文：趁着他们在喝酒，抢先攻打他们怎么样？ 
English: Why not take advantage of the fact that they're drinking and attack them first?

古文：陈、鲍方睦，遂伐栾、高氏。
现代文：陈氏、鲍氏正在和睦的时候，就攻打栾氏、高氏。
English: While the Chen and Bao clans were reconciling, they attacked the Min and Gao clans.

古文：子良曰： 先得公，陈、鲍焉往？ 
现代文：子良说： 先得到国君的支持，陈氏、鲍氏往哪里去？ 
English: Ziliang said, "If we get the support of the sovereign first, where will Chen and Bao go?"

古文：遂伐虎门。
现代文：于是就攻打虎门。
English: So they attacked Humen.

古文：晏平仲端委立于虎门之外，四族召之，无所往。
现代文：晏平仲穿着朝服站在虎门外边，四个家族召见他，他都不去。
English: Gong Pingzhong stood outside the gate in his imperial robes. Four families had summoned him, but he would not go.

古文：其徒曰： 助陈、鲍乎？ 
现代文：他的手下人说： 帮助陈氏、鲍氏吗？ 
English: His subordinates said, "Should we help Mr. Chen and Mr. Bao?"

古文：曰： 何善焉？  助栾、高乎？ 
现代文：晏平仲说： 他们有什么好处值得帮助？  帮助栾氏、高氏吗？ 
English: Gong Pingzhong said, "What are the benefits of them that are worth helping? Is it worth helping Gong and Gao?"

古文：曰： 庸愈乎？ 
现代文：晏平仲说： 难道能胜过陈氏、鲍氏？  那么回去吗？ 
English: Zou Pingzhong said, "Can we really beat Chen and Bao? So should we go back?"

古文： 然则归乎？ 曰： 君伐焉归？ 
现代文：晏平仲说： 国君被攻打，回哪里去？ 
English: Zou Pingzhong said: The sovereign has been attacked, where should he go back to?

古文：公召之而后入。
现代文：齐景公召见他，然后进去。
English: Qi Jing Gong called out to him and then went inside.

古文：公卜使王黑以灵姑率，吉。请断三尺焉而用之。
现代文：齐景公为了派王黑用龙旗领兵而占卜，吉利，请求砍去三尺以后再使用。
English: In order to send Wang Hei to lead the troops with the dragon flag, Qi Jing Gong divined and asked to cut off three feet before using it.

古文：五月庚辰，战于稷，栾、高败，又败诸庄。
现代文：五月某日，在稷地作战，栾氏、高氏战败，在庄地又击败他们。
English: On a certain day in May, in the battle of Shunde, the Shao clan and the Gao clan were defeated, and they were defeated again in Zhuangdi.

古文：国人追之，又败诸鹿门。
现代文：国内的人们追赶他们，又在鹿门再次击败他们。
English: People in the country chased after them and defeated them again in Deer Gate.

古文：栾施、高彊来奔。陈、鲍分其室。
现代文：栾施、高彊逃亡到鲁国来，陈氏、鲍氏分了他们的家产。
English: Yan Shi and Gao Yao fled to Lu Province, and the Chen and Bao clans divided their family property.

古文：晏子谓桓子： 必致诸公。
现代文：晏子对陈桓子说： 一定要把获得的栾氏、高氏家产交给国君。
English: Hao Zi said to Chen Huan Zi, "You must hand over the acquired property of the Hao clan and the Gao clan to the sovereign."

古文：让，德之主也，让之谓懿德。
现代文：谦让，是德行的根本，让给别人叫做美德。
English: Modesty is the foundation of virtue, and giving to others is called virtue.

古文：凡有血气，皆有争心，故利不可强，思义为愈。
现代文：凡是有血气的人，都有争夺之心，所以利益不能勉强，想着道义就能胜过别人。
English: All people with blood have a competitive spirit, so they can't force their interests, and they can outperform others by thinking about morality.

古文：义，利之本也，蕰利生孽。
现代文：道义，是利益的根本。积聚利益就会产生妖孽。
English: Morality is the foundation of profit. Accumulation of profit will produce evil.

古文：姑使无蕰乎，可以滋长。 
现代文：姑且使它不要积聚吧！可以让它慢慢地生长。 
English: Let it not accumulate! Let it grow slowly.

古文：桓子尽致诸公，而请老于莒。
现代文：陈桓子把陈氏、鲍氏的家产全都交给齐景公，并请求在莒地告老退休。
English: Chen Huan Zi handed over all of Chen and Bao's family property to Qi Jing Gong and asked him to retire in Shunde.

古文：桓子召子山，私具幄幕器用从者之衣屦，而反棘焉。
现代文：陈桓子召见子山，私下准备了帷幕、器物、从者的衣服鞋子，并把棘地还给了子山。
English: Chen Huan Zi summoned Ziyan, privately prepared the curtain, utensils, clothes and shoes of the follower, and returned the thorny ground to Ziyan.

古文：子商亦如之，而反其邑。子周亦如之，而与之夫于。
现代文：对子商也像这样做，而把封邑也还给了子商，对子周也是这样，而把夫于给了他。
English: He did the same with his son-in-law, and returned the fief to his son-in-law. He did the same with his son-in-law, and gave him his husband.

古文：反子城、子公、公孙捷，而皆益其禄。
现代文：让子城、子公、公孙捷回国，并且都增加了他们的俸禄。
English: Let Zicheng, Zi Gong and Gongsun Jie return to the country, and increase their salaries.

古文：凡公子、公孙之无禄者，私分之邑。
现代文：凡是公子、公孙中没有俸禄的，私下把封邑分给他们。
English: If any of his sons or grandsons did not receive a salary, he would privately allocate fiefs to them.

古文：国之贫约孤寡者，私与之粟。
现代文：对国内贫困孤寡的人，私下给他们粮食。
English: For the poor and lonely people in the country, privately give them food.

古文：曰： 《诗》云， 陈锡载周 ，能施也。
现代文：他说 《诗》说， 把受到的赏赐摆出来赐给别人就创建了周朝 ，这就是能够施舍的缘故。
English: He said that "Poem" said that the Zhou Dynasty was created by giving the rewards received to others, which is the reason for being able to give alms.

古文：桓公是以霸。 
现代文：齐桓公因此而成为霸主。 
English: As a result, Prince Qi Kuan became the overlord.

古文：公与桓子莒之旁邑，辞。
现代文：齐景公把莒地旁边的城邑赐给陈桓子，他辞谢了。
English: Lord Qi Jing gave Chen Huanzi the towns next to Longji, but he declined.

古文：穆孟姬为之请高唐，陈氏始大。
现代文：穆孟姬为他请求高唐，陈氏开始昌大。
English: Mu Mengji asked Gao Tang for him, and the Chen clan began to prosper.

古文：秋七月，平子伐莒取郠，献俘，始用人于亳社。
现代文：秋季，七月，季平子进攻莒国，占领郠地。奉献俘虏，在亳社开始用人祭祀。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ji Ping Zi attacked Shandong Province, occupied Shandong Province, dedicated the captives, and began to employ people to worship in Shandong Province.

古文：臧武仲在齐，闻之曰： 周公其不飨鲁祭乎！
现代文：臧武子在齐国，听到了这件事，说： 周公大约不去享用鲁国的祭祀了吧！
English: Yao Wuzi, who was in Qi, heard about this and said: Zhou Gong probably won't go to enjoy the sacrificial rites in Lu!

古文：周公飨义，鲁无义。
现代文：周公享用合于道义的祭祀，鲁国不符合道义。
English: Zhou Gong enjoyed a ritual that was in line with morality, while Lu Guo did not.

古文：《诗》曰： 德音孔昭，视民不佻。 
现代文：《诗》说： 那德行声誉特别显明，让百姓不要轻佻随便。 
English: "Poetry" said: That virtue and reputation are particularly evident, let the people not be careless.

古文：佻之谓甚矣，而壹用之，将谁福哉！ 
现代文：现在的做法可以说轻佻随便得过分了，而把人同牲畜一样使用，上天将会降福给谁呀！ 
English: The current practice can be said to be excessively frivolous, and to use people as if they were livestock, to whom will heaven bestow blessings!

古文：戊子，晋平公卒。
现代文：七月初三日，晋平公死了。
English: On the third day of the first month of July, Jinping died.

古文：郑伯如晋，及河，晋人辞之。游吉遂如晋。
现代文：郑简公去晋国，到达黄河，晋国人辞谢了，游吉就去到晋国。
English: Zheng Jian Gong went to Jin Province and arrived at the Yellow River. When the Jin people declined to thank him, You Ji went to Jin Province.

古文：九月，叔孙婼、齐国弱、宋华定、卫北宫喜、郑罕虎、许人、曹人、莒人、邾人、薛人、杞人、小邾人如晋，葬平公也。
现代文：九月，叔孙婼、齐国国弱、宋国华定、卫国北宫喜、郑国罕虎、许人、曹人、莒人、邾人、滕人、薛人、杞人、小邾人到晋国去，这是为了安葬晋平公。
English: In September, his uncles Sun Yat, Qi Guo Guo Weak, Song Guo Huading, Wei Guo Bei Gongxi, Zheng Guo Hanhu, Xu Ren, Cao Ren, Yao Ren, Xuan Ren, Teng Ren, Xue Ren, Yao Ren and Xiao Yao Ren went to Jin Province, this was to bury Jinping.

古文：郑子皮将以币行。子产曰： 丧焉用币？用币必百两，百两必千人，千人至将不行。
现代文：郑国的子皮准备带着财礼前去，子产说： 吊丧哪里要用财礼，用财礼一定要一百辆车拉，一定要一千人。一千人到那里，一时不会回来。
English: Zheng Guo's son-in-law was preparing to go with the money gift. The son-in-law said, "Wherever there is a funeral, we must use the money gift. We must use the money gift to pull a hundred carts and a thousand people. If a thousand people go there, they won't come back for a while."

古文：不行，必尽用之。
现代文：不回来，财物一定会用光。
English: If I don't come back, I'll run out of money.

古文：几千人而国不亡？ 
现代文：几千人的礼物出去几次，国家还有不灭亡的？ 
English: How many times does the gift of thousands of people go out, and the country still does not perish?

古文：子皮固请以行。
现代文：子皮坚决请求带着财礼出去。
English: Zi Pei firmly requested to go out with Zai Liang.

古文：既葬，诸侯之大夫欲因见新君。
现代文：安葬完毕，诸侯的大夫想要乘机拜见新国君。
English: After the burial, the prince's doctor wanted to take the opportunity to meet the new sovereign.

古文：叔孙昭子曰： 非礼也。 
现代文：叔孙昭子说： 这是不合于礼的。 
English: My great-uncle Akiko said, "This is not proper.

古文：弗听。
现代文：大家不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：叔向辞之曰： 大夫之事毕矣。而又命孤，孤斩焉在衰绖之中。其以嘉服见，则丧礼未毕。其以丧服见，是重受吊也。
现代文：叔向辞谢他们，说： 大夫们的送葬事情已经完了，又命令我与诸卿相见，我哀痛地处在服丧期间，如果用吉服相见，那么丧礼还没有完毕；如果以丧服相见，这就是再受一次吊唁。
English: My uncle thanked them and said: "The funeral of the doctors is over, and he ordered me to meet with the nobles. I am sadly in the period of mourning. If I meet them in traditional clothes, then the funeral is not over; if I meet them in mourning clothes, it is another condolence.

古文：大夫将若之何？ 
现代文：大夫们准备怎么办？ 
English: What are the doctors going to do?

古文：皆无辞以见。
现代文：大家都没有理由再请求拜见。
English: There's no reason for anyone to ask to see you again.

古文：子皮尽用其币，归谓子羽曰： 非知之实难，将在行之。
现代文：子皮用光了他带去的财礼。回国后，对子羽说： 并不是难于懂得道理，难在实行。
English: After returning to China, he said to Zi Yu, "It is not difficult to understand the principle, but difficult to practice."

古文：夫子知之矣，我则不足。
现代文：他老人家懂得道理，我对道理还懂得不够。
English: He's old enough to know better, I'm not old enough to know better.

古文：《书》曰： 欲败度，纵败礼。 
现代文：《书》说 欲望败坏法度，放纵败坏礼仪 ，这就是说我啊。
English: "The Book" says, "Desire corrupts the law, indulgence corrupts etiquette," which means me.

古文：我之谓矣。夫子知度与礼矣，我实纵欲而不能自克也。 
现代文：他老人家懂得法度和礼仪了，我确实是放纵欲望，又不能自我克制。 
English: He's old enough to know the rules and etiquette. I'm really indulging my desires, but I can't control myself.

古文：昭子至自晋，大夫皆见。
现代文：昭子从晋国归来，大夫们都来进见。
English: When Akiko returned from Jin Province, all the doctors came to see her.

古文：高彊见而退。
现代文：高彊进见以后就退了出去。
English: After Gao Yao's visit, he withdrew.

古文：昭子语诸大夫曰： 为人子，不可不慎也哉！
现代文：昭子对大夫们说： 做一个人的儿子不能不谨慎啊！
English: Akiko said to the doctors: "Being someone's son, you have to be careful!

古文：昔庆封亡，子尾多受邑而稍致诸君，君以为忠而甚宠之。
现代文：过去庆封逃亡，子尾接受城邑之后，又稍稍奉还给国君一部分，国君认为他忠诚，因而很宠信他。
English: In the past, Qingfeng fled, and after Ziwei accepted the township, he returned a small part to the sovereign. The sovereign thought he was loyal, so he was very fond of him.

古文：将死，疾于公宫，辇而归，君亲推之。
现代文：临死以前，在公宫得病，坐上车子回家，国君亲自推着他走。
English: Before his death, he fell ill at the Imperial Palace. He got into a car to go home, and the sovereign himself pushed him along.

古文：其子不能任，是以在此。
现代文：他的儿子不能继承父业，因此在这里。
English: His son couldn't follow in his footsteps, so here he is.

古文：忠为令德，其子弗能任，罪犹及之，难不慎也。
现代文：忠诚是美德，他的儿子不能继承，罪过就会延及到他身上，怎么能不谨慎呢？
English: Loyalty is a virtue, his son can not inherit, the sin will extend to him, how can he not be cautious?

古文：丧夫人之力，弃德旷宗，以及其身，不亦害乎。
现代文：丧失了那个人的功劳，丢掉德行，让宗庙闲空而无人祭祀，而罪过就延及到他身上，不也是祸害吗？
English: Is it not also a calamity to have lost one's merit, to have lost one's virtue, to have left one's ancestral temple empty and without a sacrificial offering, and to have one's sins spread to him?

古文：《诗》曰： 不自我先，不自我后。 其是之谓乎。 
现代文：《诗》说， 忧患的到来不在我前头，也不在我后头 ，说的就是这个吧！ 
English: "Poetry" says, the arrival of sorrow is not in front of me, nor behind me, that's what it says!

古文：冬十二月，宋平公卒。
现代文：冬季，十二月，宋平公死去。
English: In winter, in December, Song Pingguo died.

古文：初，元公恶寺人柳，欲杀之。
现代文：当初，宋元公讨厌寺人柳，想要杀死他。
English: At first, Song Yuan Gong hated the priest Liu and wanted to kill him.

古文：及丧，柳炽炭于位，将至，则去之。
现代文：等到有了丧事，寺人柳在元公坐的地方烧上炭火，元公将要到达，就把炭撤去。
English: When there was a funeral, Yanagi, a member of the temple, would light a charcoal fire in the place where Motoko was sitting. When Motoko was about to arrive, he would remove the charcoal.

古文：比葬，又有宠。
现代文：等到安葬以后，寺人柳又得到了宠信。
English: After the funeral, Terahito Yanagi received another letter.

