古文：黄帝问力黑：唯余一人，兼有天下，滑民将生，年辩用知，不可法组，吾恐或用之以乱天下。
现代文：黄帝问力黑说：我一人广有天下,刁巧的乱民就会出现,那些阿谀谄媚、花言巧辩之徒也会苦心孤诣地运用权谋，实在是难以遏止，我担心人们会群起效尤以乱天下。
English: The Yellow Emperor asked Lihong, saying, "I am the only one in the world, and clever ruffians will appear, and those flatterers and smooth talkers will also painstakingly use power and strategy. It is really difficult to stop them. I am worried that people will flock to follow suit and cause chaos in the world."

古文：请问天下有成法可以正民者？
现代文：请问天下有没有既定的法则来端正民心？
English: Is there any established rule to rectify the people's will?

古文：力黑曰：然。
现代文：力黑回答说：有的。
English: Lihai replied, "Yes.

古文：昔天地既成，正若有名，合若有形。乃以守一名。
现代文：昔日在天地已经形成时，万物都是通过名分来正定其形质并且使形名相符，这种以名正形、使形名相符的原则就称为执守天道。
English: In the past, when heaven and earth were already formed, all things used names to determine their qualities and match their names. This principle of using names to match names is called adhering to the heavenly way.

古文：上淦之天，下施之四海。
现代文：这种大道，上可溢于天而下可延及四海。
English: This kind of avenue can overflow the sky and extend to the four seas.

古文：吾闻天下成法，故曰不多，一言而止。
现代文：据我所知，天下的这种既定法则本不需过多描述，一句话就可以概括了，这便是，寻求事物的名形而总归于 道 。
English: As far as I know, this established principle of the world does not need to be described too much, it can be summarized in one sentence, which is to seek the name of things and always return to the Way.

古文：循名复一，民无乱纪。黄地曰：请问天下猷有一虖？
现代文：这样的话，天下百姓就不会违法乱纪了。黄帝说：请问天下可有 道 吗？
English: In this way, the people of the world will not violate the law and discipline. Huangdi said: Is there any way in the world?

古文：力黑曰：然。
现代文：力黑回答说：有的。
English: Lihai replied, "Yes.

古文：昔者皇天使冯下道一言而止。五帝用之，以朳天地，以揆四海，以坏下民，以正一世之士。
现代文：过去天帝曾派风伯飞下传道，上古的帝王们采用它来辨别规范天地万物，并料理斟酌四海之事，且用它来安抚百姓、端正了一代知识分子。
English: In the past, the Heavenly Emperor had sent Feng Bo to fly down to preach. The ancient emperors used it to distinguish and regulate all things in heaven and earth, and to consider the affairs of the four seas, and used it to appease the people and straighten out a generation of intellectuals.

古文：夫是故谗民皆退，贤人咸起，五邪乃逃，年辩乃止，循名复一，民无乱纪。黄帝曰：一者，一而已乎？
现代文：因此，品行败坏的人统统屏去不用，有德行的人一律被启用，各种淫邪销声匿迹，谄谀巧辩之方才止息。寻求名形而复归于道，人们不再违法犯纪。黄帝问： 道 ，莫非就仅仅是一句话吗？
English: As a result, all those with corrupt morals were eliminated, all those with virtuous behavior were enabled, all kinds of lewdness and wickedness disappeared, and only those with clever arguments ceased. People returned to the Tao after seeking fame, and no longer broke the law. Huang Di asked: "Is the Tao just a word?"

古文：其亦有长乎？
现代文：它还包含有更多的意思吗？
English: Does it contain more meaning?

古文：力黑曰：一者，道其本也，胡为而无长？凡有所失，莫能守一。
现代文：力黑回答说： 循名复一 这一句话就 道 的根本而言的，怎么能没有更多的含义呢？
English: Lihai replied, "In terms of the fundamentals of the Way, how can the phrase "repeat one's name" not have more meaning?

古文：一之解，察于天地；一之理，施于四海。
现代文：诸事所以有失误，就是因为不能执守大道的缘故。 道 的踪迹，可以至于天地； 道 的妙理，可以延及四海。
English: For this cause cometh the fall of all things: because they have not kept the way of the Lord: whose goings forth are from heaven, even unto the ends of the earth; and his goings forth are from the west unto the east.

古文：何以知一之至，远近之稽？夫唯一不失，一以驺化，少以知多。
现代文：然而，怎么知道 道 的高下远近的至极呢？ 道 促使了万物发生变化，由少到多、以一知百。
English: However, how can we know the highs and lows, the near and far extremes of the Tao? The Tao has caused all things to change, from less to more, from one to a hundred.

古文：夫达望四海，困极上下，四向相抱，各以其道。夫百言有本，千言有要，万言有总。
现代文：通观四海，穷极天地，天地四方，无论何事何物都在按照其自身规律存在和运动着；无论是千言还是万语也都有着其根本和总纲。
English: Throughout the four seas, to the ends of the earth, to the four directions of the universe, no matter what things exist and move according to their own laws; whether it is a thousand words or a thousand languages, they all have their fundamental and general outline.

古文：万物之多，皆阅一空。
现代文：但是，万物虽多却都是由 道 所总掌。
English: However, although there are many things, they are all controlled by Tao.

古文：夫非正人也，孰能治此？
现代文：如果不是形正德美的人，谁又能够代表天道去总理天下万物万事呢？
English: If it is not a person of upright virtue and virtue, who can represent the heavenly way to become the prime minister of the world?

古文：罢必正人也，乃能操正以正奇，握一以知多，除民之所害，而持民之所宜。
现代文：必须是这样的圣人，能够秉持正道以矫正邪道，把握大道去处理各种复杂事物，除去有害于人民的东西，而保持适宜于人民的东西。
English: He must be such a sage who can uphold the right path to correct the wrong path, grasp the avenue to deal with all kinds of complex things, remove things that are harmful to the people, and maintain things that are suitable for the people.

古文：抱凡守一，与天地同极，乃可以知天地之祸福。
现代文：执守大道以总理万物，取效天地的法则，这样就可以懂得天地之间祸与福的所在了。
English: Adhere to the road to the prime minister of all things, take advantage of the laws of heaven and earth, so that you can understand where the misfortune and blessing between heaven and earth come from.

