古文：管叔鲜、蔡叔度者，周文王子而武王弟也。
现代文：管叔鲜和蔡叔度，都是周文王的儿子、周武王的弟弟。
English: Guan Shuxiang and Cai Shudu were both sons of King Zhouwen and brothers of King Zhouwu.

古文：武王同母兄弟十人。
现代文：周武王一母同胞的兄弟共有十人。
English: There are a total of ten brothers and sisters of Zhou Wu Wang.

古文：母曰太姒，文王正妃也。
现代文：他们的母亲名叫太姒，是文王的正妻。
English: Their mother's name was Taiko, and she was the lawful wife of King Mun.

古文：其长子曰伯邑考，次曰武王发，次曰管叔鲜，次曰周公旦，次曰蔡叔度，次曰曹叔振铎，次曰成叔武，次曰霍叔处，次曰康叔封，次曰厓季载。
现代文：她的长子是伯邑考，以下依次是武王发、管叔鲜、周公旦、蔡叔度、曹叔振铎、成叔武、霍叔处、康叔封，最小的是冉季载。
English: Her eldest son is Bo Yikau, followed by Wu Wangfa, Guan Shuxian, Zhou Gongdan, Cai Shudu, Cao Shuzhenqi, Cheng Shuwu, Huo Shuxian, Kang Shufu, and the youngest is Ran Ji Zai.

古文：厓季载最少。同母昆弟十人，唯发、旦贤，左右辅文王，故文王舍伯邑考而以发为太子。
现代文：十兄弟中只有武王发和周公旦德重才高，是辅助文王的左膀右臂，所以文王不立伯邑考，而立次子发为太子。
English: Among the ten brothers, only Wuhongfa and Zhou Gongdan were of high moral stature, and they were the right and left arms to assist King Wen. Therefore, King Wen did not set up a peerage, but set up the second son as the prince.

古文：及文王崩而发立，是为武王。
现代文：文王去世后，太子发即位，就是武王。
English: After the death of King Wen, the crown prince ascended to the throne, that is, King Wu.

古文：伯邑考既已前卒矣。
现代文：伯邑考已经在这之前去世了。
English: He had already passed away before that.

古文：武王已克殷纣，平天下，封功臣昆弟。
现代文：武王战胜殷纣王、平定天下以后，大封功臣和兄弟。
English: After King Wu defeated King Yin Xi and pacified the world, Da Feng and his brothers became great heroes.

古文：於是封叔鲜於管，封叔度於蔡：二人相纣子武庚禄父，治殷遗民。
现代文：于是把管地分封给叔鲜，把蔡地分封给叔度；并让二人做纣子武庚禄父的相，一起治理殷族遗民。
English: Therefore, he assigned the fief to Shuxiang and the fief of Cai to Shudu, and let the two of them govern the remnants of the Yin people together.

古文：封叔旦於鲁而相周，为周公。
现代文：把鲁地分封给叔旦，同时让叔旦做周王朝的相，故称周公。
English: Lu Di was assigned to Shudan, while Shudan was made the Zhou Dynasty's consort, so he was called Zhou Gong.

古文：封叔振铎於曹，封叔武於成，封叔处於霍。
现代文：叔振铎封于曹地，叔武封于成地，叔处封于霍地。
English: Uncle Zhen Rong was sealed in Cao Di, Uncle Wu was sealed in Cheng Di, and Uncle Shu was sealed in Hu Di.

古文：康叔封、厓季载皆少，未得封。
现代文：当时康叔和冉季载年龄幼小，因此未能受封。
English: At that time, Uncle Kang and Ran Ji Zai were very young, so they could not receive the title.

古文：武王既崩，成王少，周公旦专王室。
现代文：武王去世后，成王年幼继位，周公旦掌握国家大权。
English: After the death of King Wu, Cheng Wang succeeded to the throne at a young age, and Zhou Gongdan seized state power.

古文：管叔、蔡叔疑周公之为不利於成王，乃挟武庚以作乱。
现代文：管叔和蔡叔怀疑周公的作为不利于成王，于是扶持武庚一起叛乱。
English: Guan Xiu and Cai Xiu suspected that Zhou Gong's actions were not conducive to Cheng Wang, so they supported Wu Geng to rebel together.

古文：周公旦承成王命伐诛武庚，杀管叔，而放蔡叔，迁之，与车十乘，徒七十人从。
现代文：周公旦按成王旨意征伐叛军，诛斩武庚，杀死管叔而流放蔡叔，流放时只给了蔡叔十乘车和刑徒七十人为随从。
English: Zhou Gongdan, in accordance with the will of King Cheng, conquered the rebels, beheaded Wu Geng, killed Uncle Guan and exiled Uncle Cai. When he was exiled, he only gave Uncle Cai ten rides and seventy convicts as followers.

古文：而分殷馀民为二：其一封微子启於宋，以续殷祀；其一封康叔为卫君，是为卫康叔。
现代文：又把南朝遗民分为二部：宋地一部分封给微子启，以延续殷代的祭祀；卫地一部，建立卫国，命康叔做卫国国君，就是卫康叔。
English: He also divided the remnants of the Southern Dynasty into two parts: a part of the Song Dynasty was given to Huiziqi to continue the sacrifices of the Yin Dynasty; a part of the Wei Dynasty, to establish the defense of the country, ordered Uncle Kang to be the prince of the defense of the country, that is, Uncle Kang.

古文：封季载於厓。
现代文：又把冉地分封给季载。
English: He also assigned Ranji to a quarter.

古文：厓季、康叔皆有驯行，於是周公举康叔为周司寇，厓季为周司空，以佐成王治，皆有令名於天下。
现代文：冉季、康叔品行美善，因此周公举荐康叔为周朝的司寇，冉季担任周朝的司空。二人辅佐成王治理国家，美名传于天下。
English: Ran Ji and Kang Shu were good and virtuous, so Zhou recommended Kang Shu to be the governor of the Zhou Dynasty, and Ran Ji served as the governor of the Zhou Dynasty. The two assisted King Cheng to govern the country, and their good name was passed down to the world.

古文：蔡叔度既迁而死。
现代文：蔡叔度流放后去世。
English: Cai Shudu died after being exiled.

古文：其子曰胡，胡乃改行，率德驯善。
现代文：他的儿子名叫胡，胡一改其父旧行，遵循德训，实行善行。
English: His son's name was Hu. Hu changed his father's old way of life, followed the moral teachings, and practiced good deeds.

古文：周公闻之，而举胡以为鲁卿士，鲁国治。
现代文：周公听说后，举荐他做鲁国的卿士，鲁国被治理得很好。
English: After Zhou Gong heard about it, he recommended him to be the noble knight of Lu. Lu was well governed.

古文：于是周公言于成王，复封胡于蔡，以奉蔡叔之祀，是为蔡仲。余五叔皆就国，无为天子吏者。
现代文：周公向成王建议，又把胡封在蔡地，以行蔡叔的岁时祭祀之礼，就是蔡仲，其余五叔各回封国，没有在周朝廷担任官吏。
English: Zhou Gong suggested to Cheng Wang that Hu should be enshrined in Cai Di to perform the sacrificial rite at the age of Cai Shu, that is, Cai Zhong, and the remaining five uncles should be enshrined in the country, and did not serve as officials in the Zhou court.

古文：蔡仲卒，子蔡伯荒立。
现代文：蔡仲去世，他的儿子蔡伯荒继位。
English: Cai Zhong died and was succeeded by his son Cai Bo Aru.

古文：蔡伯荒卒，子宫侯立。
现代文：蔡伯荒去世，他的儿子宫侯继位。
English: Cai Bo Ao died and was succeeded by his son Gong Hou Zeng.

古文：宫侯卒，子厉侯立。
现代文：宫侯去世，他的儿子厉侯继位。
English: The lord of the palace died, and his son Rig Vong succeeded to the throne.

古文：厉侯卒，子武侯立。
现代文：厉侯去世，他的儿子武侯继位。
English: Li Hou died and was succeeded by his son Wu Hou.

古文：武侯之时，周厉王失国，奔彘，共和行政，诸侯多叛周。
现代文：武侯在位的时候，周厉王丢了王位，逃到彘地，周公、召公共同执政，有许多诸侯背叛周室。
English: When Wuhou was on the throne, King Zhou Li lost his throne and fled to Shantian. Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong ruled together, and many lords betrayed the Zhou family.

古文：武侯卒，子夷侯立。
现代文：武侯去世，他的儿子夷侯继位。
English: Wuhou died and was succeeded by his son, Yi Hou.

古文：夷侯十一年，周宣王即位。
现代文：夷侯十一年，周宣王即位。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, King Zhou Xuan ascended the throne.

古文：二十八年，夷侯卒，子厘侯所事立。
现代文：二十八年，夷侯去世，其子釐侯所事继位。
English: In the 28th year, Yi Hou passed away and was succeeded by his son, Yan Hou Xizhi.

古文：厘侯三十九年，周幽王为犬戎所杀，周室卑而东徙。
现代文：厘侯三十九年，周幽王被犬戎杀死，周室衰落东迁。
English: In the thirty-ninth year of Li Hou, Zhou Yu Wang was killed by Injun Rong, and Zhou Mansion declined and moved to the east.

古文：秦始得列为诸侯。
现代文：秦国开始被列为诸侯。
English: Qin began to be classified as a vassal state.

古文：四十八年，厘侯卒，子共侯兴立。
现代文：四十八年，厘侯去世，他的儿子共侯兴继位。
English: In 48 years, Ri Hou died, and his son Tong Hou Xing succeeded to the throne.

古文：共侯二年卒，子戴侯立。
现代文：共侯二年去世，其子戴侯继位。
English: He died two years later and was succeeded by his son Dai Hou.

古文：戴侯十年卒，子宣侯措父立。
现代文：戴侯十年去世，他的儿子宣侯措父继位。
English: Dai Hou died ten years later, and his son, Xuan Hou Cao, succeeded his father.

古文：宣侯二十八年，鲁隐公初立。
现代文：宣侯二十八年，鲁隐公即君位。
English: In the 28th year of the proclamation of the prince, Lu Yinggu ascended to the throne.

古文：三十五年，宣侯卒，子桓侯封人立。
现代文：三十五年，宣侯去世，他的儿子桓侯封人继位。
English: Thirty-five years later, Prince Xuan died, and his son, Prince Huan, succeeded to the throne.

古文：桓侯三年，鲁弑其君隐公。
现代文：桓侯三年，鲁国人杀死了他们的国君鲁隐公。
English: In the third year of his reign, the people of Lu killed their sovereign, Lu Yinggong.

古文：二十年，桓侯卒，弟哀侯献舞立。
现代文：二十年，桓侯去世，他的弟弟哀侯献舞继位。
English: Twenty years later, Han Hou passed away, and his younger brother Wei Hou Xianwu succeeded to the throne.

古文：哀侯十一年，初，哀侯娶陈，息侯亦娶陈。息夫人将归，过蔡，蔡侯不敬。
现代文：哀侯十一年，先前，哀侯从陈国娶的夫人，这一年，息侯也从陈国娶了夫人，息夫人出嫁路过蔡国，哀侯表现极不尊重。
English: In the eleventh year of mourning, previously, mourners married a wife from Chen, this year, mourners also married a wife from Chen, and mourners passed by Cai Guo when his wife got married. Mourners showed great disrespect.

古文：息侯怒，请楚文王： 来伐我，我求救于蔡，蔡必来，楚因击之，可以有功。 
现代文：息侯大怒，请求楚文王： 你带兵来征伐我国，我向蔡国求救，蔡兵必来援救，楚国借机攻打蔡国，必获胜利。 
English: He was very angry and asked King Chu Wen: You bring soldiers to conquer our country, I ask Cai Guo for help, Cai soldiers will come to the rescue, Chu Guo will take the opportunity to attack Cai Guo and will win.

古文：楚文王从之，虏蔡哀侯以归。
现代文：楚文王照计而行，把蔡哀侯俘获带回楚国。
English: King Chu Wen followed the plan and captured Cai Yehou and brought him back to Chu.

古文：哀侯留九岁，死于楚。
现代文：哀侯被扣留在楚国九年，最后死在了楚国。
English: A Hou was detained in Chu for nine years, and finally died in Chu.

古文：凡立二十年卒。蔡人立其子肸，是为缪侯。
现代文：哀侯在位二十年去世，蔡人拥立哀侯的儿子肸为国君，就是缪侯。
English: When Mu Hou died after twenty years on the throne, Cai Ren made Mu Hou's son, Zou, the ruler of the country.

古文：缪侯以其女弟为齐桓公夫人。
现代文：缪侯把妹妹嫁给齐桓公做夫人。
English: Miao Hou married his sister to Prince Qi Huan as his wife.

古文：十八年，齐桓公与蔡女戏船中，夫人荡舟，桓公止之，不止，公怒，归蔡女而不绝也。
现代文：十八年，齐桓公和夫人蔡女乘船游玩，夫人使劲晃船，桓公制止她，她仍然不停止。桓公大怒，把她送回娘家却并不断绝关系。
English: In the 18th year, Prince Qi Huan and his wife, Lady Cai, went on a boat trip. The lady was rocking the boat hard. Prince Huan stopped her, but she still did not stop. Prince Huan was furious and sent her back to her mother's house, but did not break off the relationship.

古文：蔡侯怒，嫁其弟。
现代文：蔡侯也很生气，把其妹嫁了别人。
English: Cai Hou was also angry and married his sister to someone else.

古文：齐桓公怒，伐蔡；蔡溃，遂虏缪侯，南至楚邵陵。
现代文：齐桓公一怒之下讨伐蔡国；蔡国大败，缪侯被俘，齐国向南进军至楚国邵陵。
English: In a fit of rage, Qi Kuan Gong attacked Cai Guo; Cai Guo was soundly defeated, Mu Hou was captured, and Cai Guo marched south to Shao Ling in Chu.

古文：已而诸侯为蔡谢齐，齐侯归蔡侯。
现代文：后来各诸侯替蔡侯向齐桓公道歉，齐桓公才放蔡侯回国。
English: Later, all the lords apologized to King Qi Huan for Cai Hou, and King Qi Huan released Cai Hou to return to the country.

古文：二十九年，缪侯卒，子庄侯甲午立。
现代文：二十九年，缪侯去世，他的儿子庄侯甲午继位。
English: In the 29th year, Mu Hou died, and his son Zhuang Hou Jia Wu succeeded to the throne.

古文：庄侯三年，齐桓公卒。
现代文：庄侯三年，齐桓公去世。
English: In the third year of his reign, Prince Qi Huan passed away.

古文：十四年，晋文公败楚于城濮。
现代文：十四年，晋文公在城濮打败了楚国。
English: In the 14th year, Emperor Jinwen defeated the State of Chu in Chenghuang.

古文：二十年，楚太子商臣弑其父成王代立。
现代文：二十年，楚国的太子商臣杀掉他的父亲成王夺得王位。
English: Twenty years ago, a prince and merchant in the state of Chu killed his father, Cheng Wang, and seized the throne.

古文：二十五年，秦穆公卒。
现代文：二十五年，秦穆公去世。
English: Twenty-five years ago, Qin Mu Gong passed away.

古文：三十三年，楚庄王即位。
现代文：三十三年，楚庄王即位。
English: In 33 years, the king of Chuzhuang ascended the throne.

古文：三十四年，庄侯卒，子文侯申立。
现代文：三十四年，庄侯去世，他的儿子文侯申继立。
English: Thirty-four years later, Zhuang Hou died, and his son Wen Hou Shen succeeded him.

古文：文侯十四年，楚庄王伐陈，杀夏征舒。
现代文：文侯十四年，楚庄王讨伐陈国，杀了夏徵舒。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of King Wen, the king of Chu Zhuang invaded Chen Province and killed Xia Zhoshu.

古文：十五年，楚围郑，郑降楚，楚复之。
现代文：十五年，楚军包围了郑国，郑国国君投降，楚国又释放郑君。
English: Fifteen years ago, the Chu army surrounded Zheng Guo, Zheng Guo Guojun surrendered, and Chu Guo released Zheng Guo.

古文：二十年，文侯卒，子景侯固立。
现代文：二十年，文侯去世，他的儿子景侯固继位。
English: Twenty years later, Wen Hou died, and his son Jing Hou Gu succeeded to the throne.

古文：景侯元年，楚庄王卒。
现代文：景侯元年，楚庄王去世。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jinghong, King Chu Zhuang died.

古文：四十九年，景侯为太子般娶妇于楚，而景侯通焉。太子弑景侯而自立，是为灵侯。
现代文：四十九年，景侯给太子般迎娶楚国的女子，景侯又与儿媳通奸，太子杀死了景侯，自立为君，就是灵侯。
English: In the 49th year, Jing Hou married a woman from the state of Chu like a prince. Jing Hou also committed adultery with his daughter-in-law. The prince killed Jing Hou and established himself as the ruler, that is, Jing Hou.

古文：灵侯二年，楚公子围弑其王郏敖而自立，为灵王。
现代文：灵侯二年，楚国的公子围杀掉国君郏敖自立为楚王，就是楚灵王。
English: In the second year of Lingwu, the princes of the state of Chu surrounded and killed the sovereign and established themselves as the King of Chu, that is, the King of Chu Lingwu.

古文：九年，陈司徒招弑其君哀公。
现代文：九年，陈国的司徒招杀死了他的国君陈哀公。
English: In the ninth year of Chen's reign, King Chen Aigong was assassinated by one of Chen's soldiers.

古文：楚使公子弃疾灭陈而有之。
现代文：楚国派公子弃疾占领陈国，陈国灭亡。
English: Chu sent his nobles to occupy Chen, and Chen perished.

古文：十二年，楚灵王以灵侯弑其父，诱蔡灵侯于申，伏甲饮之，醉而杀之，刑其士卒七十人。
现代文：十二年，楚灵王借口蔡灵侯杀死了自己的父亲，诱骗蔡灵侯到申地，预先埋伏甲兵，用酒宴招待灵侯。
English: In the twelfth year, King Chuling killed his own father on the pretext of Cai Linghou, tricked Cai Linghou to go to Xian, ambushed the armored soldiers in advance, and entertained the holy man with a wine banquet.

古文：令公子弃疾围蔡。
现代文：灵侯醉后被楚人杀死，跟随灵侯的七十名士兵也遭刑受害。
English: After Ling Hou got drunk, he was killed by the Chu people. Seventy soldiers who followed Ling Hou were also tortured.

古文：十一月，灭蔡，使弃疾为蔡公。
现代文：楚灵王又命公子弃疾围住蔡国。十一月，楚国灭掉蔡国，任命弃疾做蔡公。
English: King Chuling also ordered his son to surround Cai Guo. In November, Cai Guo eliminated Cai Guo and appointed Cai Guo as Cai Guo.

古文：楚灭蔡三岁，楚公子弃疾弑其君灵王代立，为平王。
现代文：楚国灭亡蔡国三年后，楚国公子弃疾杀了楚灵王，代其为君，就是平王。
English: Three years after the demise of the State of Chu and the State of Cai, the prince of the State of Chu renounced his illness and killed King Chuling. He was replaced by King Ping.

古文：平王乃求蔡景侯少子庐，立之，是为平侯。
现代文：平王找到蔡景侯的小儿子庐，立为蔡国国君，就是平侯。
English: King Hei found Cai Jing Hou's youngest son, Zou, and established him as Cai Guo Guo Jun, that is, Hei Hou.

古文：是年，楚亦复立陈。
现代文：这一年，楚国也恢复了陈国。
English: In the same year, the State of Chu also restored the State of Chen.

古文：楚平王初立，欲亲诸侯，故复立陈、蔡后。
现代文：楚平王刚即位，打算亲近诸侯，所以让陈、蔡国君的后人继君位。
English: As soon as King Chuping ascended the throne, he planned to be close to the princes, so he let the descendants of Chen and Cai Guojun succeed to the throne.

古文：平侯九年卒，灵侯般之孙东国攻平侯子而自立，是为悼侯。
现代文：平侯在位九年后去世，蔡灵侯的孙子东国打跑平侯的儿子，自立为国君，就是悼侯。
English: Nine years after the death of Pinghou, Cai Linghou's grandson Dongguo beat the son of Pinghou and became the ruler of the country, which is the mourning of Hou.

古文：悼侯父曰隐太子友。
现代文：悼侯的父亲是隐太子友。
English: The mourner's father is a close friend of the crown prince.

古文：隐太子友者，灵侯之太子，平侯立而杀隐太子，故平侯卒而隐太子之子东国攻平侯子而代立，是为悼侯。
现代文：友本是灵侯太子，平侯继位后杀了隐太子友。因此平侯一死，隐太子的儿子东国就攻打平侯的儿子夺取了王位。
English: Tomohon was the prince of Linghau, but Pinghau succeeded to the throne and killed Inzai Tomohon. Therefore, as soon as Pinghau died, Inzai's son Dongguk attacked Pinghau's son and seized the throne.

古文：悼侯三年卒，弟昭侯申立。
现代文：悼侯在位三年去世，他的弟弟昭侯申继位。
English: Miao Hou died three years into his reign, and was succeeded by his younger brother, Zhao Hou Shen.

古文：昭侯十年，朝楚昭王，持美裘二，献其一于昭王而自衣其一。
现代文：昭侯十年时去朝见楚昭王，带着两件漂亮皮衣，一件献给昭王，一件自己穿。
English: When Zhao Hou was ten years old, he went to the court to meet King Chu Zhao, bringing with him two beautiful furs, one dedicated to King Zhao, and one to wear himself.

古文：楚相子常欲之，不与。
现代文：楚国令尹子常想要蔡昭侯那一件，昭侯不给。
English: Chu governor Yin Zi often wanted Cai Zhaohou to do something, but Zhaohou wouldn't give it.

古文：子常谗蔡侯，留之楚三年。
现代文：子常就向楚昭王说昭侯的坏话，把昭侯扣留在楚国达三年之久。
English: His son often spoke ill of Zhao Hou to King Chu Zhao, and detained Zhao Hou in Chu for as long as three years.

古文：蔡侯知之，乃献其裘于子常；子常受之，乃言归蔡侯。
现代文：后来蔡昭侯知其中原因，就把自己那件皮衣献给子常，子常接受皮衣后，才向楚王建议把昭侯放回国。
English: Later, Cai Zhaohou knew the reason, so he gave his fur coat to Zichang. After Zichang accepted the fur coat, he suggested to King Chu that Zhaohou be released back to the country.

古文：蔡侯归而之晋，请与晋伐楚。
现代文：蔡侯回国后赶到晋国，请求晋国帮助蔡国攻楚。
English: After returning to China, Cai Hou rushed to Jin and asked Jin to help Cai attack Chu.

古文：十三年春，与卫灵公会邵陵。
现代文：十三年春，昭侯和卫灵公在邵陵举行会盟。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, Zhao Hou and Wei Ling Gong held an alliance in Shao Ling.

古文：蔡侯私于周苌á弘以求长于卫；卫使史鳅言康叔之功德，乃长卫。
现代文：蔡侯暗中收买了周的大夫苌弘，请求将蔡国在盟会上的位次排在卫国前面。卫则派史陈说卫康叔德高功大，于是卫国排位先于蔡国。
English: Cai Hou secretly bribed Zhou's doctor, Zou Hong, and requested that Cai Guo's rank at the alliance be ranked ahead of Wei Guo's. Wei sent Shi Yan Chen to say that Wei Kang's uncle was highly meritorious, so Wei Guo's rank was ahead of Cai Guo's.

古文：夏，为晋灭沈，楚怒，攻蔡。
现代文：夏季，蔡国按晋国意愿灭掉沈国，楚王大怒，发兵攻打蔡国。
English: In the summer, Cai Guo annihilated Shen Guo according to the wishes of Jin Guo. King Chu was furious and sent troops to attack Cai Guo.

古文：蔡昭侯使其子为质于吴，以共伐楚。
现代文：蔡昭侯派其子去吴国做人质，请吴国发兵共同讨伐楚国。
English: Cai Zhaohou sent his son to be a hostage in the State of Wu and asked the State of Wu to send troops to fight against the State of Chu.

古文：冬，与吴王阖闾遂破楚入郢。
现代文：冬季，蔡侯与吴王阖闾攻破楚国，进入楚都城郢。
English: In the winter, Cai Hou and Wu Wangyi conquered the state of Chu and entered the city of Chu.

古文：蔡怨子常，子常恐，奔郑。
现代文：因蔡侯痛恨子常，子常心中害怕，逃到郑国。
English: Because Cai Hou hated Zizang, Zizang was afraid in his heart and fled to Zheng.

古文：十四年，吴去而楚昭王复国。
现代文：十四年，吴国撤军，楚昭王光复楚国。
English: In the 14th year, the troops of the State of Wu withdrew, and King Chu Zhao recovered the State of Chu.

古文：十六年，楚令尹为其民泣以谋蔡，蔡昭侯惧。
现代文：十六年，楚国的令尹计划攻蔡报仇，在向民众鼓动时泣不成声，蔡昭侯听说后十分恐惧。
English: In the 16th year, Ling Yin of Chu planned to attack Cai for revenge. He cried inconsolably while encouraging the people, and Cai Zhaohong was very afraid after hearing about it.

古文：二十六年，孔子如蔡。
现代文：二十六年，孔子前往蔡国。
English: In the 26th year, Confucius went to Cai Guo.

古文：楚昭王伐蔡，蔡恐，告急于吴。
现代文：楚昭王讨伐蔡国，蔡侯恐慌，向吴国告急。
English: Chu Zhaowang fought against Cai Guo, and Cai Hou panicked and complained to Wu Guo.

古文：吴为蔡远，约迁以自近，易以相救；昭侯私许，不与大夫计。
现代文：吴王认为蔡国都城距吴国太远，要求蔡侯将其国都迁得离吴国近一些，以便于出兵相救；蔡昭侯也不与大夫商量，暗中答应了。
English: The King of Wu thought that the capital city of Cai Guo was too far away from Wu Guo, and asked Cai Hou to move his capital closer to Wu Guo, so that he could send troops to help; Cai Zhaohou did not discuss with the doctor, but secretly agreed.

古文：吴人来救蔡，因迁蔡于州来。
现代文：于是吴国出兵救蔡，并把蔡国都城迁到州来。
English: As a result, the State of Wu sent troops to rescue Cai, and moved the capital city of Cai to Suzhou.

古文：二十八年，昭侯将朝于吴，大夫恐其复迁，乃令贼利杀昭侯；已而诛贼利以解过，而立昭侯子朔，是为成侯。
现代文：二十八年，昭侯要去朝见吴王，蔡国大夫们怕他再次迁都，就指使一个名叫 利 的盗贼杀死昭侯，然后又杀掉利以推诿杀君之罪，于是拥立昭侯之子朔为国君，就是成侯。
English: In the 28th year, Zhaohou wanted to go to the court to see King Wu. The doctors of the State of Cai, fearing that he would move the capital again, ordered a thief named Li to kill Zhaohou, and then killed Li to cover up the crime of killing the prince. So Zhaohou's son Shuo became the prince of the country, that is, Zhenghou.

古文：成侯四年，宋灭曹。
现代文：成侯四年，宋国灭掉曹国。
English: In the fourth year of his reign, Song wiped out Cao.

古文：十年，齐田常弑其君简公。
现代文：十年，齐国的田常杀死了他的国君齐简公。
English: Ten years ago, Tian Chang of Qi killed his sovereign, Qi Jian Gong.

古文：十三年，楚灭陈。
现代文：十三年，楚国灭掉陈国。
English: In the thirteenth year, Chu extinguished Chen.

古文：十九年，成侯卒，子声侯产立。
现代文：十九年，成侯去世，他的儿子声侯产继位。
English: Nineteen years later, Cheng Hou died, and his son Sheng Hou Sang succeeded to the throne.

古文：声侯十五年卒，子元侯立。
现代文：声侯十五年去世，他的儿子元侯继位。
English: When Shouhou died fifteen years later, his son Yuanhou succeeded to the throne.

古文：元侯六年卒，子侯齐立。
现代文：元侯六年去世，他的儿子侯齐继位。
English: Six years after the death of the former lord, his son, Hou Qi, succeeded to the throne.

古文：侯齐四年，楚惠王灭蔡，蔡侯齐亡，蔡遂绝祀。后陈灭三十三年。
现代文：侯齐四年，楚惠王灭掉蔡国，蔡侯齐出逃，蔡国从此祭祀断绝，国家灭亡，比陈国晚灭亡三十三年。
English: In the fourth year of Hou Qi, King Chu Hui destroyed Cai Guo, Cai Hou Qi fled, Cai Guo broke off the sacrificial rites, and the country perished, 33 years later than Chen Guo.

古文：伯邑考，其后不知所封。
现代文：伯邑考的后人不知道被封在了哪里。
English: The descendants of Bo'yuko do not know where it was sealed.

古文：武王发，其后为周，有本纪言。
现代文：武王发的后人是周王，在《本纪》中有记载。
English: The descendant of King Wufa was King Zhou, which is recorded in the "Analects."

古文：管叔鲜作乱诛死，无后。
现代文：管叔鲜叛乱被杀，没有后代。
English: Guan Shuxin was killed in the rebellion and had no descendants.

古文：周公旦，其后为鲁，有世家言。
现代文：周公旦的后人是鲁国君主，在《世家》中有记载。
English: Zhou Gongdan's descendant was the ruler of the State of Lu, which is recorded in "The Family."

古文：蔡叔度，其后为蔡，有世家言。
现代文：蔡叔度的后人是蔡国君主，在《管蔡世家》有记载。
English: Cai Shudu's descendant was the monarch of Cai Guo, which is recorded in the "Management of the Cai Family."

古文：曹叔振铎，有后为曹，有世家言。
现代文：曹叔振铎的后人是曹国君主，在《管蔡世家》中有记载。
English: The descendant of Cao Shu Zhenyu is the monarch of Cao, which is recorded in "The Guan Cai Family."

古文：成叔武，其后世无所见。
现代文：成叔武的后人不知下落。
English: The whereabouts of Cheng Shuwu's descendants are unknown.

古文：霍叔处，其后晋献公时灭霍。
现代文：霍叔处的后人分封于霍地，后被晋献公灭掉。
English: The descendants of Uncle Huo were assigned to Huodi, and were later eliminated by the Jin Xian Gong.

古文：康叔封，其后为卫，有世家言。
现代文：康叔封的后人是卫国君主，在《卫康叔世家》中有记载。
English: The descendants of Kang Shufeng were the monarchs of the Great Patriotic War, as recorded in "Weikang Shufeng's Family."

古文：冉季载，其后世无所见。
现代文：冉季载的后代下落不明。
English: The whereabouts of Ran Qizai's descendants are unknown.

古文：太史公曰：管蔡作乱，无足载者。
现代文：太史公说：管叔、蔡叔造反的事情，没有什么值得记载的。
English: Taishikong said, "There is nothing worth recording about Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai rebelling.

古文：然周武王崩，成王少，天下既疑，赖同母之弟成叔、冉季之属十人为辅拂，是以诸侯卒宗周，故附之世家言。
现代文：但周武王死后，成王年幼，天下的人都怀疑周公，全仗成叔、冉季等同母兄弟十人的辅助，才使天下诸侯共尊周室，所以把他们的事迹附记在《世家》内。
English: However, after the death of King Zhou Wu, when King Cheng was still young, people all over the world doubted Zhou Gong. It was only with the help of Uncle Cheng, Ran Ji and other ten brothers of the same mother that the princes of the world respected the Zhou family, so their deeds were recorded in "The Family."

古文：曹叔振铎者，周武王弟也。武王已克殷纣，封叔振铎于曹。
现代文：曹叔振铎是周武王的弟弟，武王战胜商纣后，就把曹地分封给叔振铎。
English: Cao Shu Zhenyu was the younger brother of King Zhou Wu. After King Wu defeated Shang Yu, he assigned Cao Di to Shu Zhenyu.

古文：叔振铎卒，子太伯脾立。
现代文：叔振铎去世，他的儿子太伯脾继位。
English: Uncle Zhen Rong died, and his son Tai Bo Xian succeeded to the throne.

古文：太伯卒，子仲君平立。
现代文：太伯去世，他的儿子仲君平即位。
English: The great-uncle died and his son, Naka Junpei, ascended to the throne.

古文：仲君平卒，子宫伯侯立。
现代文：仲君平去世，他的儿子宪伯侯继位。
English: Naka Junpei died and was succeeded by his son, Genshaku Maru.

古文：宫伯侯卒，子孝伯云立。
现代文：宪伯侯去世，其子孝伯云继位。
English: Genshaku died, and his son Takahaku succeeded to the throne.

古文：孝伯云卒，子夷伯喜立。
现代文：孝伯云去世，他的儿子夷伯喜继位。
English: Xiao Boyun died and was succeeded by his son, Yiboxi.

古文：夷伯二十三年，周厉王奔于彘。
现代文：夷伯二十三年，周厉王逃往彘地。
English: In the 23rd year of Yibo, King Zhou Li fled to Shantian.

古文：三十年卒，弟幽伯强立。
现代文：夷伯三十年去世，他的弟弟幽伯强继位。
English: Thirty years after the death of Yi Bo, his younger brother Yu Boqiang succeeded to the throne.

古文：幽伯九年，弟苏杀幽伯代立，是为戴伯。
现代文：幽伯九年，他的弟弟苏杀死幽伯，自立为国君，就是戴伯。
English: In the ninth year of You Bo's reign, his younger brother Su killed You Bo and became the ruler of the country, that is, Dai Bo.

古文：戴伯元年，周宣王已立三岁。
现代文：戴伯元年，周宣王已即位三年。
English: In the first year of Dai Bo, Zhou Xuan Wang had been on the throne for three years.

古文：三十年，戴伯卒，子惠伯兕立。
现代文：三十年，戴伯去世，他的儿子惠伯兕继位。
English: Thirty years later, Dai Bo died, and his son Huibao succeeded to the throne.

古文：惠伯二十五年，周幽王为犬戎所杀，因东徙，益卑，诸侯畔之。
现代文：惠伯二十五年，周幽王被犬戎杀死，王室东迁，越发衰微，诸侯纷纷背叛王室。
English: In the 25th year of Huibo, Zhou Yu Wang was killed by Injun Rong, the royal family moved east and became increasingly weak, and the princes betrayed the royal family one after another.

古文：秦始列为诸侯。
现代文：秦国在这一年开始被列为诸侯。
English: Qin began to be listed as a vassal.

古文：三十六年，惠伯卒，子石甫立，其弟武杀之代立，是为缪公。
现代文：三十六年，惠伯去世，他的儿子石甫继位，他的弟弟武杀掉石甫代自立为君，就是缪公。
English: In 36 years, Huibo died, his son Shifu succeeded to the throne, and his brother Wu killed Shifu and became the ruler, that is, Miao Gong.

古文：缪公三年卒，子桓公终生立。
现代文：缪公在位三年去世，他的儿子桓公终生继位。
English: Miao Gong died three years into his reign, and his son Huan Gong succeeded him for the rest of his life.

古文：桓公三十五年，鲁隐公立。
现代文：桓公三十五年，鲁隐公继位为君。
English: In the 35th year of the reign of Emperor Kan, Emperor Ruyin ascended to the throne.

古文：四十五年，鲁弑其君隐公。
现代文：四十五年，鲁人杀死隐公。
English: Forty-five years ago, Lu Ren killed Ying Gong.

古文：四十六年，宋华父督弑其君殇公，及孔父。
现代文：四十六年，宋国的华父督杀死宋殇公和大夫孔父。
English: In the year 46, the Chinese patriarch of Song killed Song Yigong and the doctor Kong Chou.

古文：五十五年，桓公卒，子庄公夕姑立。
现代文：五十五年，曹桓公去世，他的儿子庄公夕姑继位。
English: In 55 A.D., Cao Huan died, and his son Zhuang Xiu Gu succeeded to the throne.

古文：庄公二十三年，齐桓公始霸。
现代文：庄公二十三时，齐桓公开始做诸盟主，称霸天下。
English: At the 23rd hour of Zhuang Gong, Qi Huan Gong began to be the leader of all the allies, claiming to dominate the world.

古文：三十一年，庄公卒，子厘公夷立。
现代文：三十一年，庄公去世，他的儿子厘公夷继立。
English: In the 31st year, Zhuang Gong died, and his son Li Gongyi succeeded him.

古文：厘公九年卒，子昭公班立。
现代文：厘公在位九年去世，他的儿子昭公班继立。
English: Li Gong died nine years into his reign, and his son, Zhaogongban, succeeded him.

古文：昭公六年，齐桓公败蔡，遂至楚召陵。
现代文：昭公六年，齐桓公打败蔡国，于是来到楚国的邵陵。
English: In the sixth year of Zhaogong, Qi Huan Gong defeated Cai Guo, so he came to Shao Ling in Chu.

古文：九年，昭公卒，子共公襄立。
现代文：九年，昭公去世，他的儿子共公襄继立。
English: In the ninth year, Shoko died, and his son Shoko succeeded him.

古文：共公十六年，初，晋公子重耳其亡过曹，曹君无礼，欲观其骈胁。
现代文：共公十六年。起初，晋国的公子重耳在逃亡的时候路过曹国，曹国的国君对待重耳很无礼，想要观看重耳长在一起的肋骨。
English: Sixteen years of Communist rule. At first, the prince of Jin, Jie Er, passed by Cao when he was fleeing. The sovereign of Cao treated Jie Er very rudely and wanted to see the ribs of Jie Er growing together.

古文：厘负羁谏，不听，私善于重耳。
现代文：厘负羁劝谏，曹君没有听从，于是厘负羁私下亲近重耳。
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche advised Cao Jun, but Cao Jun did not listen, so Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche privately approached Cao Jun.

古文：二十一年，晋文公重耳伐曹，虏共公以归，令军毋入厘负羁之宗族闾。
现代文：二十一年，晋文公重耳讨伐曹国，俘虏了曹共公后返回，下令晋军不许进入厘负羁家族居住的地方。
English: In the twenty-first year, the Jin emperor Wengu sent troops to invade Cao, captured Cao Congguo, and ordered the Jin army not to enter the place where Li Shouyu's family lived.

古文：或说晋文公曰： 昔齐桓公会诸侯，复异姓；今君囚曹君，灭同姓，何以令于诸侯？ 
现代文：有人对晋文公说： 从前齐桓公和诸侯举行会盟，恢复了异姓国家；如今您囚禁了曹君，灭亡同姓国家，凭什么向天下的诸侯发号施令呢？ 
English: Someone said to Prince Jinwen: Once upon a time, Prince Qi Huan held an alliance with the princes and restored the country with a different name; now that you have imprisoned Cao Jun and destroyed the country with the same name, on what basis do you issue orders to the princes of the world?

古文：晋乃复归共公。
现代文：晋文公于是将共公释放回国。
English: Jinwen Gong then released Gongong back to the country.

古文：二十五年，晋文公卒。
现代文：二十五年，晋文公去世。
English: Twenty-five years later, Emperor Jinwen passed away.

古文：三十五年，共公卒，子文公寿立。
现代文：三十五年，曹共公去世，他的儿子文公寿继位。
English: Thirty-five years later, Cao Gongguo died, and his son, Wen Gongshou, succeeded him.

古文：文公二十三年卒，子宣公强立。
现代文：文公在位二十三年去世，他的儿子宣公强继位。
English: Wenguang died in the 23rd year of his reign, and was succeeded by his son, Xuanguangqiang.

古文：宣公十七年卒，弟成公负刍立。
现代文：宣公在位十七年去世，他的弟弟成公负刍继位。
English: Xuan Gong died 17 years into his reign and was succeeded by his younger brother Cheng Gong.

古文：成公三年，晋厉公伐曹，虏成公以归，已复释之。
现代文：成公三年，晋厉公讨伐曹国，俘虏成公后返回，不久又释放了他。
English: Three years after his accession to the throne, Jin Liguo led a crusade to conquer Cao Cao's kingdom. The captive returned after his accession to the throne and was soon released.

古文：五年，晋栾书、中行偃使程滑弑其君厉公。
现代文：五年，晋国的栾书、中行偃命令程滑杀了他们的国君厉公。
English: In the fifth year, Jin's imperial edict, Zhongxing's imperial edict, and Cheng's imperial edict killed their sovereign, Liguo.

古文：二十三年，成公卒，子武公胜立。
现代文：二十三年，成公去世，他的儿子武公胜继立。
English: In 233, Chenggong died, and his son Wu Gongsheng succeeded him.

古文：武公二十六年，楚公子弃疾弑其君灵王代立。
现代文：武公二十六年，楚国的公子弃疾杀掉他的国君灵王取代他成为国君。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of the reign of King Wu, the prince of the State of Chu renounced evil and killed his sovereign, King Ling, replacing him as sovereign.

古文：二十七年，武公卒，子平公须立。
现代文：二十七年，武公去世，他的儿子平公须继立。
English: In the 27th year, King Wu passed away, and his son, King Ping, succeeded him.

古文：平公四年卒，子悼公午立。
现代文：平公在位四年去世，他的儿子悼公午继立。
English: Heiko died four years into his reign, and his son Kogo succeeded him.

古文：是岁，宋、卫、陈、郑皆火。
现代文：这一年，宋国、卫国、陈国、郑国都发生了火灾。
English: In this year, there were fires in Song, Wei, Chen and Zheng.

古文：悼公八年，宋景公立。
现代文：悼公八年，宋景公即位。
English: After eight years of mourning, Song Jing Gong ascended to the throne.

古文：九年，悼公朝于宋，宋囚之；曹立其弟野，是为声公。
现代文：九年，曹悼公去宋国朝会，被宋囚禁；曹国大臣拥立悼公之弟野为君，就是声公。
English: In the ninth year, Cao Yigong went to the Song Dynasty Council and was imprisoned by Song; the Minister of Cao supported the younger brother of Cao Yigong, Nino, that is, Shenggong.

古文：悼公死于宋，归葬。
现代文：悼公最终死在宋国，后来归葬于曹。
English: Yigong eventually died in Song and was later buried in Cao.

古文：声公五年，平公弟通弑声公代立，是为隐公。
现代文：声公五年，曹平公之弟通杀声公自立，就是隐公。
English: Five years after the death of Shou Gong, Cao Ping Gong's younger brother killed Shou Gong and became independent.

古文：隐公四年，声公弟露弑隐公代立，是为靖公。
现代文：隐公四年，曹声公之弟露又杀隐公自立，就是靖公。
English: In the fourth year of Ying Gong, Cao Sheng Gong's younger brother Lu also killed Ying Gong and became independent, that is, Ying Gong.

古文：靖公四年卒，子伯阳立。
现代文：靖公四年死，其子伯阳继位。
English: Jing Gong died four years later, and his son Boyang succeeded to the throne.

古文：伯阳三年，国人有梦众君子立于社宫，谋欲亡曹；曹叔振铎止之，请待公孙强，许之。
现代文：伯阳三年，曹国都城里有一人做梦，梦见许多君子站在社宫那里商议灭掉曹国；曹叔振铎制止了他们，让他们等待公孙强，众君子答应了叔振铎的要求。
English: In the third year of Poyang, there was a man in the capital city of Cao who had a dream. He dreamed that many gentlemen were standing in the palace and discussing the destruction of Cao. Cao Zhenyu stopped them and told them to wait for Gongsun Qiang. The gentlemen agreed to Uncle Zhenyu's request.

古文：旦，求之曹，无此人。
现代文：做梦者天亮后找遍了曹国，也没有公孙强这个人。
English: The dreamer searched all over Cao Guo after dawn, but there was no Gongsun Qiang.

古文：梦者戒其子曰： 我亡，尔闻公孙强为政，必去曹，无离曹祸。 
现代文：做梦者就告戒他的儿子： 我死以后，你听说公孙强执掌政事，一定离开曹国，免遭祸事。 
English: The dreamer warned his son: After my death, you have heard that Gongsun Qiang is in charge of the government, so you must leave Cao's country to avoid misfortune.

古文：及伯阳即位，好田弋之事。
现代文：等到伯阳即位后，喜好射猎。
English: After the enthronement of Boyang, he preferred to go shooting.

古文：六年，曹野人公孙强亦好田弋，获白雁而献之，且言田弋之说，因访政事。
现代文：六年，曹国有个农夫公孙强也喜好射猎，猎得白雁献给伯阳，大谈射猎之道，借此商问政事。
English: In the sixth year of Cao's reign, there was a farmer, Gongsun Qiang, who also liked to go shooting. He hunted white geese and presented them to Boyang. They talked a lot about the way of shooting, and used this opportunity to discuss politics.

古文：伯阳大说之，有宠，使为司城以听政。
现代文：伯阳高兴之极，非常宠幸公孙强，命他做司城来处理政务。
English: Boyang was overjoyed. He was so favored by Sun Qiang that he was assigned to be his secretary to handle government affairs.

古文：梦者之子乃亡去。
现代文：做梦者之子听说后，逃离了曹国。
English: After hearing this, the dreamer's son fled Cao.

古文：公孙强言霸说于曹伯。
现代文：公孙强向曹伯陈说称霸诸侯的主张。
English: Gongsun Qiang told Cao Bo Chen that the idea of dominating the princes was wrong.

古文：十四年，曹伯从之，乃背晋干宋。
现代文：十四年，曹伯听从公孙强的主意，背叛晋国，进犯宋国。
English: In the 14th year, Cao Bo followed the idea of Gongsun Qiang, betrayed Jin and invaded Song.

古文：宋景公伐之，晋人不救。
现代文：宋景公攻曹，晋国不救。
English: If Song Jing Gong attacks Cao, Jin will not be saved.

古文：十五年，宋灭曹，执曹伯阳及公孙强以归而杀之。曹遂绝其祀。
现代文：十五年，宋灭掉曹，抓曹伯阳和公孙强回宋杀掉，曹国就灭亡了。
English: Fifteen years later, Song eliminated Cao, captured Cao Boyang, and Gongsun Qiang killed him. Cao's state was destroyed.

古文：太史公曰：余寻曹共公之不用僖负羁，乃乘轩者三百人，知唯德之不建。
现代文：太史公说：我通过探究曹共公不听信贤人釐负羁却宠幸后宫美女三百人高乘轩车的事，得知共公不树德政。
English: Taishigong said, "I learned that Cao Gonggong would not listen to the wise men and women, but he favored the three hundred beautiful women of the harem to ride in his carriage. I learned that Gonggong did not practice virtue politics.

古文：及振铎之梦，岂不欲引曹之祀者哉？
现代文：至于曹叔振铎托梦于人，岂不是想延长曹国命运吗？
English: As for Cao Shu Zhenyu's dream, isn't he just trying to prolong Cao Guo's fate?

古文：如公孙强不修厥政，叔铎之祀忽诸。
现代文：无奈公孙强却不好好治理国家，曹叔振铎的祭祀香烟终于灭绝了。
English: However, Sun Qiang was not good at governing the country, and the sacrificial cigarettes of Cao Shu Zhenyu were finally extinct.

