古文：爰盎字丝。
现代文：袁盎，字丝。
English: Yuan wang, word silk.

古文：其父楚人也，故为群盗，徙安陵。
现代文：他的父亲是楚国人，曾当过盗贼，后迁居安陵。
English: His father, a native of Chu, was once a thief and later moved to Anling.

古文：高后时，盎为吕禄舍人。
现代文：吕后时期，袁盎曾经做过吕禄的家臣。
English: During the reign of Queen Lulu, Yuan Ang was once a vassal of Lulu.

古文：孝文即位，盎兄哙任盎为郎中。
现代文：汉文帝登位，袁盎的哥哥袁啥保举袁盎做了郎中。
English: Emperor Hanwen ascended to the throne, and Yuan Ang's brother Yuan Wei Bao made Yuan Ang his second-in-command.

古文：绛侯为丞相，朝罢趋出，意得甚。
现代文：绛侯周勃担任丞相，退朝后快步走出，意气很自得。
English: Zhou Bo served as chancellor, and after the imperial court ceremony, he hurried out of the imperial court, full of ambition.

古文：上礼之恭，常目送之。
现代文：皇上待他的礼节很恭谨，常常目视送他。
English: The Emperor treated him with great respect, and often saw him off.

古文：盎进曰： 丞相何如人也？ 
现代文：袁盎上前说： 丞相是什么样的人? 
English: Yuan Huan stepped forward and said: What kind of person is the prime minister?

古文：上曰： 社稷臣。 
现代文：皇上说： 国家的重臣。 
English: The emperor said: He is the chief minister of the country.

古文：盎曰： 绛侯所谓功臣，非社稷臣。
现代文：袁盎说： 绛侯是通常所说的功臣，不是国家的重臣。
English: Yuan Ang said: Gong Hou is what is commonly called a meritorious minister, not a senior minister of the state.

古文：社稷臣主在与在，主亡与亡。
现代文：国家的重臣是主在臣在，主亡臣亡。
English: The chief vassal of the country is the master in the vassal, the master's death is the death of the vassal.

古文：方吕后时，诸吕用事，擅相王，刘氏不绝如带。
现代文：在吕后时，诸吕掌权，擅自封王，刘氏天下虽没断绝，但也像带子一样微细无力。
English: At the time of Queen Lyu, the Lyu family was in power and had made themselves king without permission. As a result, the Liu family's reign was barely maintained, like a thin ribbon, and was almost about to be severed.

古文：是时绛侯为太尉，本兵柄，弗能正。
现代文：那时绛侯担任太尉，掌握兵权，不能匡扶挽救。
English: At that time, Yan Hou served as a lieutenant, mastered military power, and could not be saved.

古文：吕后崩，大臣相与共诛诸吕，太尉主兵，适会其成功，所谓功臣，非社稷臣。
现代文：吕后逝世，大臣们一起共同诛减诸吕，太尉掌握军队，恰好使他成功，是通常所说的功臣，不是国家的重臣。
English: After the death of Empress Lyu, the ministers worked together to reduce Zhu Lyu, and the lieutenant took control of the army, which made him successful. He is commonly referred to as a hero, not a state chief minister.

古文：丞相如有骄主色，陛下谦让，臣主失礼，窃为陛下弗取也。 
现代文：丞相假如对主上表现出骄傲的神色，而陛下又谦虚退让，臣下主上都违背了礼节，我认为陛下不应当采取这种态度。 
English: If the prime minister shows a proud look to the Lord, while His Majesty humbly concedes, the vassal Lord has violated the etiquette, and I think His Majesty should not take this attitude.

古文：后朝，上益庄，丞相益畏。
现代文：以后朝会，皇上逐渐庄严起来，丞相逐渐畏惧。
English: Later, at the imperial court meeting, the emperor gradually became more dignified, and the prime minister gradually became more reverent.

古文：已而绛侯望盎曰： 吾与汝兄善，今儿乃毁我！ 
现代文：过后，绛侯责备袁盎说： 我舆你哥哥要好，现在你这小子却在朝廷上毁谤我! 
English: Afterward, Yan Hou reproached Yuan Ang, saying: I thought your brother was good, but now you, this boy, are slandering me in the court!

古文：盎遂不谢。
现代文：袁盎始终不认错。
English: Yuan Ang did not apologize to him.

古文：及绛侯就国，人上书告以为反，征系请室，诸公莫敢为言，唯盎明绛侯无罪。
现代文：等到绛侯被免除丞相回到封国，封国中有人上书告发他谋反，绛侯被捕捆绑入狱，皇族和各位公卿都不敢替他说话，衹有袁盎申辩绛侯没有罪。
English: When Yan Hou was released from the custody of the emperor and returned to his fief, someone in the fief wrote to him accusing him of plotting a rebellion. Yan Hou was arrested, tied up and imprisoned. The royal family and all the nobles did not dare to speak for him. Even Yuan Wanzhen argued that Yan Hou was not guilty.

古文：绛侯得释，盎颇有力。
现代文：绛侯能获得释放，袁盎出了大力。
English: Yan Hou was able to be released, and Yuan Ang showed a lot of strength.

古文：绛侯乃大与盎结交。
现代文：绛侯于是与袁盎深交为知己。
English: Yan Hou then made friends with Yuan Unqin.

古文：淮南厉王朝，杀辟阳侯，居处骄甚。
现代文：淮南王刘长进京朝见，击杀了辟阳侯，举止很骄横。
English: When Liu Chang, the king of Huainan, came to Beijing to meet the imperial court, he killed Biyang Hou. He was also quite arrogant in his dealings with people.

古文：盎谏曰： 诸侯太骄必生患，可適削地。 
现代文：袁盎劝谏皇上说： 诸侯太骄横必然会发生祸乱，可以适当削减他们的封地。 
English: Yuan Ang advised Emperor Zou, saying: If the princes are too arrogant, disasters will inevitably occur, and their fiefs can be appropriately reduced.

古文：上弗许。
现代文：皇上没有采纳他的意见。
English: The Emperor did not accept his opinion.

古文：淮南王益横。
现代文：淮南王更加骄横。
English: King Huainan became even more arrogant.

古文：谋反发觉，上征淮南王，迁之蜀，槛车传送。
现代文：图谋反叛的事被发觉，淮南王被征召，皇上便将他放逐到蜀郡去，用囚车押送。
English: The plot to rebel was discovered, King Huainan was conscripted, and the emperor banished him to Shu County, escorting him in a prison wagon.

古文：盎时为中郎将，谏曰： 陛下素骄之，弗稍禁，以至此，今又暴摧折之。
现代文：袁盎当时担任中郎将，便谏阻说： 您向来骄纵淮南王，不加一点限制，以至达到这种程度。现在却又突然摧折他。
English: Yuan Ang, who was the middle-ranking general at that time, said: You have always been proud of the king of Huainan, without any restrictions, to such an extent. Now, however, you have suddenly crushed him.

古文：淮南王为人刚，有如遇霜露行道死，陛下竟为以天下大弗能容，有杀弟名，奈何？ 
现代文：淮南王为人刚烈，如果在路上遭受风寒死去，您最后会被认为天下之大不能相容，背上杀弟的名声，怎么办? 
English: Huainan Wang is a man of fortitude. If you die of cold and wind on the road, you will eventually be considered incompatible with the world's great, and the reputation of killing your brother will be on your back. What should you do?

古文：上不听，遂行之。
现代文：皂上不听，还是那样办了。
English: I didn't listen, so I did it anyway.

古文：淮南王至雍，病死。闻，上辍食，哭甚哀。
现代文：淮南王到达雍县，病死，消息传来，皇上吃不下饭，哭得很悲伤。
English: Huainan King arrived in Yong County, died of illness, the news came, the emperor could not eat, cried very sad.

古文：盎入，顿首请罪。
现代文：袁盎进入，叩头请罪。
English: Yuan Ang entered and bowed down to plead guilty.

古文：上曰： 以不用公言至此。 
现代文：皇上说： 因为没有采用您的意见，出现了这种情况。 
English: The emperor said, "It is because we did not adopt your opinion that we ended up with this result."

古文：盎曰： 上自宽，此往事，岂可悔哉！
现代文：袁盎说： 皇上自己要想开，这事已经过去了，怎么可以追悔呢!
English: Yuan Ang said, "Emperor, please be relieved, this is already a thing of the past, can you still regret it?"

古文：且陛下有高世行三，此不足以毁名。 
现代文：况且您有三件高出世人的行为，这件事不足以毁坏您的名声。 
English: Besides, you have committed three acts of the highest order, which are not enough to ruin your reputation.

古文：上曰： 吾高世三者何事？ 
现代文：皇上说： 我高于世人的行为是哪三件? 
English: The emperor said, "What are the three things that make me superior to the world?"

古文：盎曰： 陛下居代时，太后尝病，三年，陛下不交睫解衣，汤药非陛下口所尝弗进。
现代文：袁盎说： 您在代国时，太后曾经患病，三年的时间，您不曾合眼，不解衣就寝，药物您不亲口尝就不进奉给太后。
English: Yuan Ang said: When you were representing the country, the empress dowager was ill. For three years, you did not close your eyes, did not undress and go to bed, and did not taste the medicine yourself before serving it to the empress dowager.

古文：夫曾参以布衣犹难之，今陛下亲以王者修之，过曾参远矣。
现代文：曾参作为平民，尚且难做到，现在您作为国王却实行了，在尽孝方面超过曾参很远了。
English: As a commoner, it was difficult to do, but now you have done it as a king, and you are far ahead of Zeng Zheng in terms of filial piety.

古文：诸吕用事，大臣颛制，然陛下从代乘六乘传，驰不测渊，虽贲、育之勇不及陛下。
现代文：诸吕当政，大权臣专行，然而您从代国乘坐六辆驿车驶向祸福难料的京城，即使是孟贲、夏育那样的勇士，也比不上您。
English: Zhu Lü is in power, and only high-ranking officials are allowed to travel. However, you have traveled from your ancestral country to the capital city, which is full of misfortune and fortune, in six armored cars. Even warriors like Meng Xuan and Xia Yu are no match for you.

古文：陛下至代邸，西乡让天子者三，南乡让天子者再。
现代文：您到达代王官邸，向西坐着三次辞让天子位，向南坐着又两次辞让天子位。
English: When you arrive at the official residence of the king, sit to the west and bow three times, and sit to the south and bow two more times.

古文：夫许由一让，陛下五以天下让，过许由四矣。
现代文：许由衹让了一次，而您五次将天下辞让，超过许由四次了。
English: Xu Yuxuan conceded once, while you have conceded the world five times, exceeding Xu Yuxuan four times.

古文：且陛下迁淮南王，欲以苦其志，使改过，有司宿卫不谨，故病死。 
现代文：况且您放逐淮南王，是想要让他的心志受些劳苦，使他改正错误，因为官吏护卫不慎，以致病死。 
English: Moreover, by banishing King Huainan, you want to make his spirit suffer some hardships and make him correct his mistakes, because the officials were careless in escorting him, which led to his death.

古文：于是上乃解，盎繇此名重朝廷。
现代文：皇上这时才得到宽慰，袁盎从此在朝廷声名大振。
English: It was only then that the emperor was relieved. From then on, Yuan Ang became famous in the imperial court.

古文：盎常引大体慷慨。
现代文：袁盎时常讲述大道理，慷慨激昂。
English: Yuan Ang often tells the truth, impassioned.

古文：宦者赵谈以数幸，常害盎，盎患之。
现代文：宦官趟谈因为多次受到皇上宠幸，时常暗害袁盎，袁盎感到忧虑。
English: Because the eunuch had been favored by the emperor many times, he often plotted against Yuan Ang, and Yuan Ang was worried.

古文：盎兄子种为常侍骑，谏盎曰： 君众辱之，后虽恶君，上不复信。 
现代文：袁盎的侄儿袁种担任侍从骑士，手持符节在皇帝左右护卫。袁种劝袁盎说： 您在朝廷上羞辱他，今后再说您的坏话，皇上也就不会相信他了。 
English: Yuan Xiang, the nephew of Yuan Weng, served as an attendant knight, holding a rune and escorting the emperor around. Yuan Xiang advised Yuan Weng to say: You humiliated him at the court, and if you say anything bad about him in the future, the emperor will not believe him.

古文：于是上朝东宫，赵谈骖乘，盎伏车前曰： 臣闻天子所与共六尺舆者，皆天下豪英。今汉虽乏人，陛下独奈何与刀锯之余共载！ 
现代文：汉文帝外出，赵谈陪同乘车，袁盎拜伏在车前说： 我听说陪同天子乘坐六尺高大车厢的，都是国内的英雄豪杰，如今汉朝即使缺少人才，您为什么惟独与形体残毁的人同坐一辆车呢? 
English: When Emperor Wen of Han went out, Zhao talked about accompanying him by car, and Yuan Wengbai prostrated himself in front of the car and said: I heard that those who accompanied Tianzi on the six-foot-tall carriage were all domestic heroes. Nowadays, even if the Han Dynasty lacks talent, why do you only sit in a car with people who are disfigured?

古文：于是上笑，下赵谈。
现代文：皇上于是笑起来，让赵谈下车。
English: The emperor then laughed and told Zhao to get out of the car.

古文：谈泣下车。
现代文：赵谈哭着下了车。
English: Zhao Dan wept and got off the bus.

古文：上从霸陵上，欲西驰下峻阪，盎揽辔。
现代文：汉文帝从霸陵上山，想要从西边纵马奔驰下山坡。
English: Emperor Hanwen went up the mountain from Bailing and wanted to ride down the mountain from the west.

古文：上曰： 将军怯邪？ 
现代文：袁盎挽住了文帝的马缰绳。皇上说： 将军胆怯吗? 
English: The emperor said, "Is the general afraid?"

古文：盎言曰： 臣闻千金之子不垂堂，百金之子不骑衡，圣主不乘危，不侥幸。
现代文：袁盎说： 我听说家有千金的人就坐时不靠近屋檐下，家藏百金之人也不跨在楼台边的栏杆上，明主不去冒险，不侥幸取得成功。
English: Yuan Ang said: I heard that people with a lot of money don't sit near the eaves when they sit, and people with a lot of money don't straddle the railing at the edge of the platform. Obviously, if you don't take risks, you won't be lucky enough to succeed.

古文：今陛下聘六飞，驰不测山，有如马惊车败，陛下纵自轻，奈高庙、太后何？ 
现代文：现在您要放纵驾车的六匹马，奔驰下高山，假如驾马受惊车辆毁坏，您即使看轻自己，怎么对得起高祖和太后呢? 
English: Now you want to indulge in driving six horses, galloping down a high mountain. If the driving horse is frightened and the vehicle is destroyed, even if you despise yourself, how can you be worthy of Gaozu and the empress dowager?

古文：上乃止。
现代文：皇上这才停止。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：上幸上林，皇后、慎夫人从。
现代文：皇上驾临上林苑，皇后和慎夫人随从。
English: The Emperor arrived at Shanglin Court, followed by Empress Dou and Lady Shen.

古文：其在禁中，常同坐。
现代文：她们在宫中，常坐在同一等级的席位上。
English: In the palace, they often sit on the same level of seats.

古文：及坐，郎署长布席，盎引却慎夫人坐。
现代文：等到就座时，郎署长官布置坐席，袁盎把慎夫人的坐席拉退一些。
English: When it was time to take their seats, the chief steward laid out the seating, and Yuan Ang pulled Mrs. Shin's seat back a bit.

古文：慎夫人怒，不肯坐。
现代文：慎夫人生气，不肯坐。
English: Mrs. Shin was angry and refused to sit down.

古文：上亦起，起。
现代文：皇上也生气，起身。
English: The Emperor was also angry and got up.

古文：盎因前说曰： 臣闻尊卑有序则上下和，今陛下既以立后，慎夫人乃妾，妾、主岂可以同坐哉！
现代文：袁盎趁机上前劝说： 我听说尊卑有次序，那么上下便和睦。如今陛下已经确定了皇后，慎夫人衹是妾，妾和主上怎么可以同席坐呢!
English: Yuan Ang took advantage of the opportunity to persuade: "I heard that there is an order of precedence and inferiority, so there will be harmony between the upper and lower ranks. Now that Your Majesty has determined the queen, Lady Shan is a concubine, how can a concubine and the lord sit at the same table!

古文：且陛下幸之，则厚赐之。
现代文：况且您宠爱她，就加重赏赐她好了。
English: Besides, if you love her, you should reward her more.

古文：陛下所以为慎夫人，适所以祸之也。
现代文：陛下用来宠爱慎夫人的办法，恰好成为灾祸。
English: His Majesty's way of pampering Lady Shin turned out to be a disaster.

古文：独不见 人豕 乎？ 
现代文：陛下难道没有听说 人猪，吗? 
English: Hasn't your majesty heard of the man-pig?

古文：于是上乃说，入语慎夫人。
现代文：皇上这才高兴，入内将袁盎的话告诉慎夫人。
English: This made the emperor happy, and he told Yuan Ang's words to Lady Shen.

古文：慎夫人赐盎金五十斤。
现代文：慎夫人赐给袁盎黄金五十斤。
English: Madam Shen gave Yuan Ang 50 catties of gold.

古文：然盎亦以数直谏，不得久居中。
现代文：然而袁盎也因为多次直言劝谏，不能长久地留在朝廷。
English: However, Yuan Ang could not stay in the imperial court for a long time due to his many frank words of persuasion.

古文：调为陇西都尉，仁爱士卒，士卒皆争为死。
现代文：被调任为陇西都尉，他爱护士兵，士兵们都争着替他出死力。
English: He was transferred to be the captain of Shaanxi Province. He loved soldiers, and soldiers were all competing to do their best for him.

古文：迁齐相，徒为吴相。
现代文：他升任齐国丞相，又改任吴国相。
English: He was promoted to Minister of Qi and then Minister of Wu.

古文：辞行，种谓盎曰： 吴王骄日久，国多奸，今丝欲刻治，彼不上书告君，则利剑刺君矣。
现代文：在辞别起程的时候，袁种对袁盎说： 吴王骄横的子很长了，国内奸人多，现在如果要揭发惩办，那些人不是上书控告你，就要用利剑来刺杀你了。
English: At the time of his farewell departure, Yuan Zang said to Yuan Ang: "Wu Wang's arrogant son has been around for a long time, and there are many traitors in the country. Now, if you want to expose and punish them, those people should not write a letter to accuse you, but use a sharp sword to stab you to death."

古文：南方卑湿，丝能日饮，亡何，说王毋反而已。
现代文：南方土地低下潮湿，你每天喝酒，没什么别的，时时劝说吴王不要反叛就是了。
English: In the south, the land is low and damp, you drink alcohol every day, nothing else, it's just a matter of constantly persuading King Wu not to rebel.

古文：如此幸得脱。 
现代文：能这样，就可能侥幸摆脱祸患。 
English: Like that, you might just get away with it.

古文：盎用种之计，吴王厚遇盎。
现代文：袁盎采用袁种的策略，吴王优待他。
English: Yuan Ang adopted Yuan Zhai's strategy, and Wu Wang treated Yuan Ang generously.

古文：盎告归，道逢丞相申屠嘉，下车拜谒，丞相从车上谢。
现代文：袁盎告假回家，在路上遇见丞相申屠嘉，下车行礼拜见，丞相衹从车上向袁盎表示谢意。
English: Yuan Ang went home on leave. On the way, he met Vice-Premier Shen Tu Jia. They got out of the car and said their goodbyes. Vice-Premier Zheng expressed his gratitude to Yuan Ang from the car.

古文：盎还，愧其吏，乃之丞相舍上谒，求见丞相。
现代文：袁盎回到家，面对下属感到羞愧，于是前往丞相住所送上名帖，请求会见丞相。
English: Yuan Ang returned home and felt ashamed in front of his subordinates, so he went to the prime minister's residence to send a postcard, requesting to meet the prime minister.

古文：丞相良久乃见。
现代文：丞相遇了很长时间才接见袁盎。
English: It took a long time for me to meet Yuan Ang.

古文：因跪曰： 愿请间。 
现代文：袁盎便下跪说： 希望单独接见。 
English: Yuan wang then knelt down and said: I hope to meet you alone.

古文：丞相曰： 使君所言公事，之曹与长史掾议之，吾且奏之；则私，吾不受私语。 
现代文：丞相说： 如果您所说的是公事，往官署和长史属官讨论，我将把你的意见上奏，如果是私事，我不接受私人的请托。 
English: The prime minister said: If what you are saying is a public matter, go to the government office and discuss it with Changshi's subordinate, and I will report your opinion. If it is a private matter, I will not accept a private request.

古文：盎即起说曰： 君为相，自度孰与陈平、绛侯？ 
现代文：袁盎就跪着劝说道： 您担任丞相，自己衡量一下，比陈平和绛侯怎么样? 
English: Yuan Wang kneeled down to persuade him and said: You are the prime minister, take a look for yourself, how are you better than Chen Pingping and Yan Hou?

古文：丞相曰： 不如。 
现代文：丞相说： 我比不上。 
English: The prime minister said: I can't compete.

古文：盎曰： 善，君自谓弗如。
现代文：袁盎说： 对，您自认为比不上。
English: Yuan Ang said, "Yes, you think you are no match.

古文：夫陈平、绛侯辅翼高帝，定天下，为将相，而诛诸吕，存刘氏；君乃为材官蹶张，迁为队帅，积功至淮阳守，非有奇计攻城野战之功。
现代文：陈平、绛侯辅佐高帝平定天下，担任将相，铲除诸吕，保存刘氏天下；您不过是个脚踏强弓的武士，升任队长，积累功劳做到淮阳郡守，没有出奇计攻城夺地的战功。
English: Chen Ping, the prince's aide-de-camp of Emperor Gao, pacified the world, served as the commander-in-chief, eradicated Zhu Lv, and preserved the Liu dynasty; you are just a warrior with a strong bow, promoted to captain, and accumulated merits to become the governor of Huaiyang County. There is no extraordinary strategy to attack the city and seize the land.

古文：且陛下从代来，每朝，郎官者上书疏，未尝不止辇受。其言不可用，置之；言可采，未尝不称善。
现代文：况且皇上从代国进京，每次朝会，郎官送上报告、条陈，没有哪一次不停下车来接受他们的意见，意见不能采用就搁下，意见可以接受就采用，没有一次不赞许。
English: Moreover, since the Emperor came to Beijing on behalf of the country, every time there was a meeting of the Imperial Court, his vassals and officials would send reports and reports. There was never a time when he did not get off the train to accept their opinions. If the opinions could not be adopted, they were shelved. If the opinions could be accepted, they were adopted. There was never a time when he did not approve of them.

古文：何也？
现代文：什么原因呢?
English: What is it for?

古文：欲以致天下贤英士大夫，日闻所不闻，以益圣。而君自闭箝天下之口，而日益愚。
现代文：就是想用这种办法招引天下贤能的士人和官吏。皇上每天听到自己不曾听到的事物，明了不曾明了的道理，一天比一天英明，您如今自己封闭天下人的口而一天天愚蠢。
English: The Emperor hears things every day that he has never heard before, understands things that he has never understood before, and becomes wiser every day. Now you are shutting the mouths of the world and becoming more stupid every day.

古文：夫以圣主责愚相，君受祸不久矣。 
现代文：以圣明的君主来责求愚蠢的丞相，您遭受灾祸的子不远了。 
English: The day of your calamity is not far off, when a holy monarch will rebuke a foolish prime minister.

古文：丞相乃再拜曰： 嘉鄙人，乃不知，将军幸教。 
现代文：丞相于是向袁盎拜了两拜。说道： 我是一个粗鄙庸俗的人，就是不聪明，幸亏将军指教。 
English: The prime minister then bowed twice to Yuan Ang and said, "I am a vulgar and vulgar person, that is to say, I am not clever, but fortunately the general is giving me advice."

古文：引与入坐，为上客。
现代文：引袁盎入内室同坐，作为最尊贵的客人。
English: He brought Yuan Huan into the inner room and sat with him as the most honored guest.

古文：盎素不好晁错，错所居坐，盎辄避；盎所居坐，错亦避：两人未尝同堂语。
现代文：袁盎向来不喜欢晁错。晁错停留的地方，袁盎就离开；袁盎在，晁错也离开。两个人未曾在一起说过话。
English: Yuan Ang has always disliked being mistaken. Wherever he stays, Yuan Ang leaves; wherever Yuan Ang stays, he also leaves. The two have never spoken to each other.

古文：及孝景即位，晁错为御史大夫，使吏案盎受吴王财物，抵罪，诏赦以为庶人。
现代文：等到漠景帝登位，晁错担任御史大夫，便派官吏查核袁盎接受吴王财物的事，给予惩罚，皇上下诏免除刑罚，把他降为平民。
English: When Emperor Mu Jing ascended the throne, he was mistakenly appointed as the imperial historian, and officials were sent to investigate Yuan Ang's acceptance of King Wu's property and punish him. The emperor issued an imperial edict exempting him from punishment and reducing him to a commoner.

古文：吴、楚反闻，错谓丞史曰： 爰盎多受吴王金钱，专为蔽匿，言不反。
现代文：吴、楚叛乱的消息传来，晁错对丞史说： 袁盎接受了吴王很多金钱，专门替他掩饰，说他不会反叛。
English: When the news of Wu and Chu's rebellion came, Zou Er told Zheng Shi: Yuan Ang accepted a lot of money from King Wu, specifically to cover up for him and say that he would not rebel.

古文：今果反，欲请治盎，宜知其计谋。 
现代文：现在果真反叛了，想要请求处治袁盎，他必当知道叛乱阴谋。 
English: Now that he has really rebelled, if he wants to ask for Yuan Ang to be punished, he must know about the rebellion plot.

古文：丞史曰： 事未发，治之有绝。
现代文：丞史说： 事情没有暴露，惩办他，可能中断叛乱阴谋。
English: Zheng Shi said: The matter has not yet been exposed, so punish him, and it may interrupt the rebellion plot.

古文：今兵西向，治之何益！
现代文：现在叛军西进，惩办他有什么好处!
English: Now the rebels are marching west, what good will it do to punish him!

古文：且盎不宜有谋。 
现代文：况且袁盎也不应当有什么阴谋。 
English: Moreover, Yuan Ang should not have any conspiracy.

古文：错犹与未决。
现代文：晁错犹豫不决。
English: He hesitates.

古文：人有告盎，盎恐，夜见窦婴，为言吴所以反，愿至前，口对状。
现代文：有人将造事告诉了袁盎，袁盎恐惧，夜晚会见窦婴，对他说明吴王反叛的原因，愿到皇上面前亲口对质。
English: Someone told Yuan Ang about the plot, Yuan Ang was afraid, so he met Dou Ying at night, explained to him the reasons for King Wu's rebellion, and was willing to confront the emperor in person.

古文：婴入言，上乃召盎。盎入见，竟言吴所以反，独急斩错以谢吴，吴可罢。
现代文：窦婴进宫报告皇上，皇上便叫袁盎进宫会见，入见，原原本本地说明了吴王谋反的情况，是因为晁错的缘故，衹有赶快杀掉晁错来向吴王认错，吴军才可停止。
English: Dou Ying entered the palace to report to the emperor, and the emperor then called Yuan Ang to enter the palace to meet with him. In his opinion, the original local explanation of the situation of Wu Wang's rebellion was due to a mistake, and only by quickly killing the mistake to admit the mistake to Wu Wang could the Wu army be stopped.

古文：上拜盎为泰常，窦婴为大将军。
现代文：皇上派袁盎担任太常，宝婴担任大将军。
English: The emperor sent Yuan Ang to serve as the first secretary, and Bao Jiao to serve as the general.

古文：两人素相善。是时，诸陵长安中贤大夫争附两人。车骑随者日数百乘。
现代文：这两人一向友好，到吴王谋反，京师附近诸陵的头面人物和长安城中的贤能官吏都争着依附这两人，跟在他们身后的车子每天都有几百辆。
English: The two men had always been friendly. They went to Wuhang to plot a rebellion. The leading figures in the mausoleums near Beijing and the competent officials in Chang'an were all vying to attach themselves to the two men. There were hundreds of cars following them every day.

古文：及晁错已诛，盎以泰常使吴。
现代文：等到晁错已被诛杀，袁盎以太常的身份出使昱厘。
English: By the time Zou Er had been killed, Yuan Ang, in his usual capacity, had sent Zou Li.

古文：吴王欲使将，不肯。
现代文：呈王想要让塞盎担任将领，墓塞不愿意。
English: Wu Wang wanted to make him a general, but Yuan Ang refused.

古文：欲杀之，使一都尉以五百人围守盎军中。
现代文：吴王想杀掉他，派一个都尉带领五百士兵将袁盎围困在军中。
English: King Wu killed him and sent a captain with five hundred men to surround Yuan Ang and trap him in the army.

古文：初，盎为吴相时，从史盗私盎侍儿。盎知之，弗泄，遇之如故。
现代文：袁盎当初担任吴国丞相时，有个从史曾经跟袁盎的婢女私通，袁盎知道这件事，没有泄露，对待从史仍然和以往一样。
English: When Yuan Ang was the prime minister of Wu Guozhen, there was a confidant who used to have an affair with Yuan Ang's maid. Yuan Ang knew about this and did not reveal it. He still treated the confidant the same as before.

古文：人有告从史， 君知女与侍者通 ，乃亡去。
现代文：有人告诉从史，说 丞相知道你跟婢女私通 ，从史便逃回去了。
English: Someone told Zongshi that the prime minister knew that you were having an affair with your maid, and Zongshi fled back.

古文：盎驱自追之，遂以侍者赐之，复为从史。
现代文：袁盎亲自驾车追赶从史，终于将婢女赐给他，仍旧让他担任从史。
English: Yuan Ang himself drove to catch up with Zongshi, and finally gave him the maid, still letting him serve as Zongshi.

古文：司马夜引盎起，曰： 君可以去矣，吴王期旦日斩君。 盎弗信，曰： 何为者？ 
现代文：等到袁盎出使吴国被围困，从史恰好担任围困袁盎的校尉司马，便将他的全部行装换买了二石浓酒，碰上天气寒冷。士兵饥渴，围困西南角的士兵都醉倒了，司马趁夜晚领袁盎起身，说道： 您可以走了。吴王预期在明天杀您。 袁盎不相信，说道： 您是干什么的? 
English: When Yuan Ang set out to besiege Wu, Sima, who happened to be the lieutenant in charge of the siege of Yuan Ang, exchanged his entire outfit for two kilos of strong liquor and encountered the cold weather. The soldiers were hungry and thirsty, and the soldiers besieging the southwest corner were all drunk. Sima took advantage of the night to get Yuan Ang up and said, "You can go. King Wu expects to kill you tomorrow." Yuan Ang did not believe him and said, "What are you doing?"

古文：司马曰： 臣故为君从史盗侍儿者也。 
现代文：司马说： 我是原先做从史私通婢女的人。 
English: Sima said, "I used to be a servant girl of a courtesan.

古文：盎乃惊，谢曰： 公幸有亲，吾不足累公。 
现代文：袁盎这才惊骇地道谢说： 您幸好有父母，我不可连累你。 
English: Yuan Ang was shocked and thanked him, saying, "You are lucky to have parents. I must not burden you."

古文：司马曰： 君疵去，臣亦且亡，辟吾亲，君何患！ 
现代文：司马说： 您衹管走，我也即将逃走，藏匿我的父母，您忧虑什么! 
English: Sima said: You don't have to go, I'm about to run away and hide my parents, what are you worried about!

古文：乃以刀决帐，道从醉卒直出。
现代文：于是用刀决开军营的帐幕，引导袁盎从醉倒的士兵所把守的路上径直走出。
English: So he used a knife to break open the tent of the military camp and guide Yuan Ang out of the way guarded by drunken soldiers.

古文：司马与分背。盎解节旄怀之，屐步行七十里，明，见梁骑，驰去，遂归报。
现代文：司马与袁盎分路而走，袁盎解下节旄揣在怀裹，步行七十里路，天亮时，碰上了梁国的骑兵，骑马飞奔脱逃，终于回报朝廷。
English: Sima and Yuan Ang went their separate ways. Yuan Ang unpacked the next bundle of straw, wrapped it in his arms, and walked seventy miles. At dawn, he ran into Liang's cavalry, galloped away on horseback, and finally returned to the imperial court.

古文：吴、楚已破，上更以元王子平陆侯礼为楚王，以盎为楚相。
现代文：吴、楚叛军已被打败，皇上改封楚元王的儿子平陆侯刘礼为楚王，袁盎担任楚相。
English: The rebels of Wu and Chu had been defeated, and the emperor changed the title of the son of King Chu Yuan, Ping Lu Hou Liu Li, to King of Chu, and Yuan Ang became the Prime Minister of Chu.

古文：尝上书，不用。
现代文：他曾经上书言事，没被采用。
English: He had applied for the post, but was not accepted.

古文：盎病免家居，与闾里浮湛，相随行斗鸡走狗。
现代文：袁盎托病辞职回家闲居，与乡里人随俗上下，一起斗鸡赛狗。
English: Yuan Angtuo resigned himself to his illness and went home to idle, mingling with the villagers and playing cockfighting and greyhound racing.

古文：雒阳剧孟尝过盎，盎善待之。
现代文：洛阳人剧孟曾拜访袁盎，袁盎热情地款待他。
English: Luoyang people's opera Meng Zeng visited Yuan Ang, Yuan Ang warmly entertained him.

古文：安陵富人有谓盎曰： 吾闻剧孟博徒，将军何自通之？ 
现代文：安陵有个富人对直蠢说： 我听说剧孟是个赌徒，您为什么与他来往? 
English: A rich man in Anling said to Yuan Ang: I heard that Yu Meng is a gambler, why are you associating with him?

古文：盎曰： 剧孟虽博徒，然母死，客送丧车千余乘，此亦有过人者。
现代文：袁盎说： 剧孟虽然是个赌徒，但他的母亲死了，从外地来送葬的车子有一千多辆，造就有超过众人的地方。
English: Yuan Ang said: Although He Meng was a gambler, his mother died, and more than a thousand cars came from out of town to take her to the funeral, which was more than many people could build.

古文：且缓急人所有。
现代文：况且急难的事人人都有。
English: Besides, everyone has things that are dangerous.

古文：夫一旦叩门，不以亲为解，不以在亡为辞，天下所望者，独季心、剧孟。
现代文：一旦人家有急难事来敲门求你，不用父母健在去推脱，不用离家外出去推辞。天下仰望的人，衹有季心、剧孟而已。
English: Once someone has an urgent and difficult matter to knock on your door, you don't need your parents to be alive to escape, you don't need to go out of the house to resign. People who are looked up to by the world only have a seasonal heart and drama.

古文：今公阳从数骑，一旦有缓急，宁足恃乎！ 
现代文：如今您身后经常跟随着几个骑马的战士，一旦有急事，难道可依靠吗? 
English: Nowadays, you are often followed by several horseback warriors. If there is an emergency, can you rely on them?

古文：遂骂富人，弗与通。
现代文：斥责富人之后，不再与他往来。
English: After reprimanding the rich man, she stopped associating with him.

古文：诸公闻之，皆多盎。
现代文：各王公贵官听到这件事，都推崇袁盎。
English: Upon hearing this, all the kings, princes and dignitaries praised Yuan Ang.

古文：盎虽居家，景帝时时使人问筹策。
现代文：袁盎虽然在家闲居，景帝时时派人向他询问计谋策略。
English: Although Yuan Ang was idle at home, Emperor Jing sent people to him from time to time to inquire about strategies.

古文：梁王欲求为嗣，盎进说，其后语塞。
现代文：梁王想谋求成为皇位继承人，袁盎进言劝说，以后不要再有这种议论。
English: Liang Wang wanted to seek to become the heir to the throne, and Yuan Ang Jin advised him not to have such discussions in the future.

古文：梁王以此怨盎，使人刺盎。
现代文：梁王因此怨恨袁盎，曾派人行刺袁盎。
English: As a result, Liang Wang resented Yuan Ang and sent someone to assassinate Yuan Ang.

古文：刺者至关中，问盎，称之皆不容口。
现代文：行刺的人来到关中，询问袁盎的为人，许多有名人物都满口称赞他。
English: The assassin came to Guanzhong to inquire about Yuan Ang. Many famous people praised him.

古文：乃见盎曰： 臣受梁王金刺君，君长者，不忍刺君。
现代文：刺客就会见袁盎说： 我接受梁王的金钱来刺杀您，您是有修养的人，我不忍心杀您。
English: The assassin would meet Yuan Ang and say: I accept the money of Liang Wang to assassinate you, you are a cultivated person, I can't bear to kill you.

古文：然后刺者十余曹，备之！ 
现代文：但以后行刺您的还有十多批，要戒备。 
English: However, there will be more than ten groups of assassins after you, so be on your guard.

古文：盎心不乐，家多怪，乃之棓生所问占。
现代文：袁盎内心不愉快，家裹又多怪事，便到桔先生那裹去占卜问吉凶。
English: Unhappy in his heart, and with many strange things going on at home, Yuan Ang went to Mr. Kuei for fortune-telling.

古文：还，梁刺客后曹果遮刺杀盎安陵郭门外。
现代文：返回时，随后来的梁国刺客果然在安陵城门外面拦住袁盎，将他刺死了。
English: When he returned, the subsequent Liang assassin stopped Yuan Ang outside the Anling gate and stabbed him to death.

古文：晁错，颍川人也。
现代文：晁错是颖川人。
English: The mistake was made by someone from Yingchuan.

古文：学申、商刑名于轵张恢生所，与雒阳宋孟及刘带同师。
现代文：曾经在轵县张恢先生那裹学习过申不害、商鞅的刑名学说，与雒阳人宋孟和刘带同师。
English: He once studied the theories of "not harming others" and "negotiating with others" at the home of Zhang Hui in Handan County. He was a classmate of Song Meng and Liu Zhe, both from Handan.

古文：以文学为太常掌故。
现代文：因为通晓文献典籍，担任了太常掌故。
English: With a thorough knowledge of classics, he has served as a too-frequent pupil.

古文：错为人峭直刻深。
现代文：晁错为人严峻刚直而又苛刻。
English: He is a stern, forthright and demanding person.

古文：孝文时，天下亡治《尚书》者，独闻齐有伏生，故秦博士，治《尚书》，年九十余，老不可征。乃诏太常，使人受之。
现代文：汉文帝时，朝廷没有研究《尚书》的人，衹听说齐国有伏生，原是秦朝的博士，精通《尚书》，已经九十多岁了，年老不能征召，文帝于是下令太常派人前往学习。
English: At the time of Emperor Wen of Han, the imperial court did not have anyone to study the Shangshu. It was said that there was a doctor of the Qin Dynasty, who was well versed in the Shangshu, who was over 90 years old and could not be conscripted. Emperor Wen then ordered to send people to study.

古文：太常遣错受《尚书》伏生所，还，因上书称说。
现代文：太常派遣晁错到伏生那裹学习《尚书》，回来后，趁机上书报告学习情况，称赞解说《尚书》。
English: He often sent his son to study "Shangshu" in Fushun, and when he came back, he took the opportunity to report on the study situation and praised the interpretation of "Shangshu."

古文：诏以为太子舍人，门大夫，迁博士。
现代文：文帝下诏先后任命他担任太子舍人、门大夫，后升为博士。
English: Emperor Wen issued an imperial edict appointing him to the posts of crown prince and gatekeeper, and later he was promoted to doctor.

古文：又上书言： 人主所以尊显功名扬于万世之后者，以知术数也。
现代文：晁错又上书说： 君王所以地位尊贵显赫，功名传播万代之后，是因为懂得运用刑名之术。
English: Zang Er also wrote: The reason why the king has such a distinguished position, and his fame has been passed down for generations, is because he knows how to use the art of chastisement.

古文：故人主知所以临制臣下而治其众，则群臣畏服矣；知所以听言受事，则不欺蔽矣；知所以安利万民，则海内必从矣；知所以忠孝事上，则臣子之行备矣：此四者，臣窃为皇太子急之。
现代文：因此知道怎样控制臣下、治理众人，那么群臣便畏惧顺从了；懂得怎样听取各种言论，那么便不被欺骗蒙蔽了；懂得怎样安定社会，使百姓富裕，那么天下百姓就会服从；懂得怎样对尊长尽忠尽孝，那么臣子的行为就具备了。这四条，臣自以为是皇太子的当务之急。
English: Therefore, if you know how to control your subjects and govern the people, then your subjects will fear and obey you; if you know how to listen to all kinds of speech, then you will not be deceived; if you know how to stabilize society and make the people rich, then the people of the world will obey you; if you know how to be loyal and filial to your elders, then the behavior of your subjects will be ready.

古文：人臣之议或曰皇太子亡以知事为也，臣之愚，诚以为不然。
现代文：人臣的议论有人认为皇太子没有必要知道干什么事，臣虽然愚笨，实在认为并非如此。
English: Some people think that the crown prince does not need to know what to do, but the minister, although stupid, does not think so.

古文：窃观上世之君，不能奉其宗庙而劫杀于其臣者，皆不知术数者也。
现代文：看看上世君王，不能供奉宗庙而被臣子所胁迫杀害的原因，就在于不懂得刑名之术这门学问。
English: If you look at the kings of the past, the reason why they could not offer sacrifices to their ancestral temples and were coerced and killed by their vassals was because they did not understand the art of punishing.

古文：皇太子所读书多矣，而未深知术数者，不问书说也。
现代文：皇太子所读书很多了，所以没有深入掌握刑名之术的原因，在于不深究书中论说的义理。
English: The reason why the crown prince has read a lot of books and has not thoroughly mastered the art of punishing is that he has not thoroughly studied the meaning of the book.

古文：夫多诵而不知其说，所谓劳苦而不为功。
现代文：多读而不知其中论述的道理，造就是劳而无功。
English: If you read a lot and don't know what's in it, you'll get nowhere.

古文：臣窃观皇太子材智高奇，驭射技艺过人绝远，然于术数未有所守者，以陛下为心也。
现代文：臣看到皇太子才智高奇，驾驭、骑射技艺超绝出众，然而对于刑名之学还没有掌握，这与陛下的心思是有关的。
English: The vassal saw that the crown prince was highly intelligent, and his driving, riding and shooting skills were outstanding. However, he had not yet mastered the study of surnames, which was related to His Majesty's thoughts.

古文：窃愿陛下幸择圣人之术可用今世者，以赐皇太子，因时使太子陈明于前。
现代文：臣希望陛下选择一些圣人之术，又可用于今世的，用以赐教皇太子，根据情况让太子陈述出来。
English: The minister hoped that His Majesty would choose some saintly techniques that could also be used in this world to give the pope the crown prince, and let the crown prince present them according to the situation.

古文：唯陛下裁察。 
现代文：望陛下明察、裁决。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will make a clear inspection and ruling.

古文：上善之，于是拜错为太子家令。
现代文：皇上称善，于是拜授晁错为太子家令。
English: The emperor commended him for his kindness, so he was given the title of crown prince.

古文：以其辩得幸太子，太子家号曰 智囊 。
现代文：由于他的善辩才能得宠于太子，在太子家中号称为 智囊 。
English: By virtue of his ability to argue, Zou Er obtained the favor of the prince, and the prince's family called him "the brain."

古文：是时匈奴强，数寇边，上发兵以御之。
现代文：这时匈奴正强大，多次侵边，皇上发兵抵御。
English: At this time, the Huns were strong and repeatedly invaded the border, and the emperor sent troops to resist.

古文：错上言兵事，曰：
现代文：晁错上书论兵事，说：
English: mistakenly read a book on military affairs and said:

古文：臣闻汉兴以来，胡虏数入边地，小入则小利，大入则大利；高后时再入陇西，攻城屠邑，驱略畜产；其后复入陇西，杀吏卒，大寇盗。
现代文：臣听说汉兴以来，胡人多次侵入边地，小规模侵入就获得小利，大规模侵入就有大利；高后时再侵入陇西，攻城抢劫邑镇，驱掠畜产；之后又侵入陇西，杀害官兵，大举抢掠。
English: The minister heard that since Han Xing, the Hu people had repeatedly invaded the borderlands. Small-scale invasions brought small profits, while large-scale invasions brought big profits. At the time of Gao Hou, they invaded Shaanxi again, attacked and robbed towns and villages, and plundered livestock. After that, they invaded Shaanxi again, killed officers and soldiers, and plundered extensively.

古文：窃闻战胜之威，民气百倍；败兵之卒，没世不复。
现代文：臣听说战胜的威力，可使民气百倍；失败的兵卒，至死也不能振奋。
English: The vassal hears that the power of victory can make the people's morale increase a hundredfold; the defeated soldiers cannot be inspired to death.

古文：自高后以来，陇西三困于匈奴矣，民气破伤，亡有胜意。
现代文：从高后以来，陇西三次被匈奴困扰，民气受到摧折伤害，没有取胜的信心。
English: Since high school, Shaanxi has been plagued by the Xiongnu three times, the people's morale has been devastated, and there is no confidence in winning.

古文：今兹陇西之吏，赖社稷之神灵，奉陛下之明诏，和辑士卒，底厉其节，起破伤之民以当乘胜之匈奴，用少击众，杀一王，败其众而大有利。
现代文：今天陇西的官吏，仰仗先祖神灵，奉行陛下明诏，和睦团结士卒，激励他们的气节意志，唤起受伤害的百姓来抵挡正气盛的匈奴，以少击众，杀死匈奴一王，对于击败众多士兵十分有利。
English: Today's officials in Shaanxi rely on the spirits of their ancestors, carry out the edict of His Majesty the Great, unite the soldiers in harmony, encourage their spirit, arouse the injured people to resist the vigorous Xiongnu, and kill the Xiongnu king with a few shots, which is very beneficial to defeat many soldiers.

古文：非陇西之民有勇怯，乃将吏之制巧拙异也。
现代文：不是陇西之民有勇怯之分，而是将吏表现得巧妙、拙笨有不同而已。
English: It is not that the people of Shaanxi are brave, but that the officials are clever and clumsy.

古文：故兵法曰： 有必胜之将，无必胜之心。 
现代文：因此兵法说： 有必胜的将领，没有必胜的百姓。 
English: Therefore the art of war says: There are victorious generals, but no victorious people.

古文：繇此观之，安边境，立功名，在于良将，不可不择也。
现代文：由此看来，安定边境，建立功业，在于良将，不可不加以选择。
English: From this point of view, the stability of the border and the establishment of the cause lie in the good generals, and they must be selected.

古文：臣又闻用兵，临战合刃之急者三：一曰得地形，二曰卒服习，三曰器用利。
现代文：臣又听说用兵，临战交锋最紧急的有三件事：一是占领有利地形，二是士兵服从命令、训练有素，三是兵器精良、使用便利。
English: The minister also heard that when using soldiers, there are three things that are most urgent in a battle: one is to occupy favorable terrain, the second is that soldiers obey orders and are well-trained, and the third is that weapons are sophisticated and easy to use.

古文：兵法曰：丈五之沟，渐车之水，山林积石，经川丘阜，草木所在，此步兵之地也，车骑二不当一。
现代文：兵法说：宽有丈五的沟渠，漫过车的水，山林和垒集的石块，长流之水、大的丘陵，草木生长之地，这是步兵用武之地，车兵骑兵在这裹战斗二不当一。
English: The laws of war say: wide ditches, water flowing over vehicles, mountains, forests and stone blocks of fortifications, long streams of water, large hills, and places where plants and trees grow, this is a place for infantry to fight, and chariots and cavalry should not fight here.

古文：土山丘陵，曼衍相属，平原广野，此车骑之地，步兵十不当一。
现代文：土山丘陵，连绵不断，平原旷野，是车、骑的用武之地，步兵在这裹交战十不当一。
English: The rolling hills and plains of the plains and wilderness are the battlefields of chariots and horsemen, and infantrymen should not engage in battle here.

古文：平陵相远，川谷居间，仰高临下，此弓弩之地也，短兵百不当一。
现代文：高低悬殊，河谷居其中，居高临下，这是弓弩的用武之地，使用短兵器百不当一。
English: There is a great disparity between the high and the low, with the valley in the middle and the high and the low. This is where bows and arrows come into play, and the use of short weapons is completely inappropriate.

古文：两陈相近，平地浅草，可前可后，此长戟之地也，剑楯三不当一。
现代文：两阵相临近，平地短草，可前可后，这是长戟兵器用武之地，使用剑盾三不当一。
English: The two armies are close to each other, the plain is short grass, you can go forward or backward, this is where the Nagatoro weapons come into play, the use of swords and shields is not appropriate.

古文：萑苇竹萧，草木蒙茏，枝叶茂接，此矛鋋之地也，长戟二不当一。
现代文：萑苇竹萧，草木葱龙，枝叶茂密，这是长矛短矛用武之地，使用长戟二不当一。
English: Bamboo and bamboo shoots, plants and trees, thick branches and leaves, this is a place where long and short spears are used. It is not appropriate to use long and short spears.

古文：曲道相伏，险厄相薄，此剑楯之地也，弓弩三不当一。
现代文：道路曲屈，险阻交错，这是剑盾的用武之地，使用弓弩三不当一。
English: The road is tortuous and dangerous obstacles are intertwined. This is where swords and shields come into play. The use of bows and arrows is inappropriate.

古文：士不选练，卒不服习，起居不精，动静不集，趋利弗及，避难不毕，前击后解，与金鼓之指相失，此不习勤卒之过也，百不当十。
现代文：士不经选拔、训练，卒不熟练兵器，起居动作不精，动静不协调、不稳定，争夺利益不能到手，躲避灾难不迅速，前面攻击后面懈怠，与金鼓指挥脱节，这些都是不熟习训练管理部队的过错，这种士兵交战时百不当十。
English: Unselected and untrained soldiers, unskilled weapons, sluggish movements, uncoordinated movement and movement, unstable, unable to win interests, not quick to avoid disasters, slack in front and behind attacks, and out of touch with the conductor of the golden drum, are all the faults of unskilled training management troops. Such soldiers are not suitable for combat.

古文：兵不完利，与空手同；甲不坚密，与袒裼同；弩不可以及远，与短兵同；射不能中，与亡矢同；中不能入，与亡镞同：此将不省兵之祸也，五不当一。
现代文：兵器不锐利，与空手相同；锁甲不坚硬，与袒肉露体相同；弩不能射到远处，与短兵器相同；射箭不中目标，与没有箭相同；中目标而不能入内，与没有箭头相同：这些是将领没有察看检查兵器所造成的灾祸，在这些情况下交战，五不当一。
English: Weapons that are not sharp are the same as empty hands; armor that is not hard is the same as exposed flesh; crossbows that cannot be shot far are the same as short weapons; arrows that do not hit the target are the same as no arrows; and those that hit the target but cannot enter are the same as no arrows: these are the disasters caused by the generals not inspecting and checking the weapons. In these circumstances, it is better not to fight.

古文：故兵法曰： 器械不利，以其卒予敌也；卒不可用，以其将予敌也；将不知兵，以其主矛敌也；君不择将，以其国予敌也。
现代文：因此兵法说：兵器不锐利，就是把士兵交给了敌人；卒不可用，就是把将领交给了敌人；将领不知用兵谋略，就是把国君交给了敌人；国君不懂择将，就是把国家交给了敌人。
English: Therefore, the law of war says: if the weapon is not sharp, it means that the soldier has been handed over to the enemy; if the pawn cannot be used, it means that the general has been handed over to the enemy; if the general does not know how to use military strategy, it means that the sovereign has been handed over to the enemy; if the sovereign does not know how to choose a general, it means that the country has been handed over to the enemy.

古文：四者，兵之至要也。
现代文：这四方面，就是用兵要领。
English: These four aspects are the essentials of the use of force.

古文：臣又闻小大异形，强弱异势，险易异备。
现代文：臣又听说小与大形状是不同的，强与弱力量是不同的，险与易具有不同的防备。
English: The minister also heard that small and large shapes are different, strong and weak forces are different, and dangerous and easy have different defenses.

古文：夫卑身以事强，小国之形也；合小以攻大，敌国之形也；以蛮夷攻蛮夷，中国之形也。
现代文：以低微之身去事奉强者是小国所表现的形态；联合小国攻打大国，是势均力敌之国的形态；以夷攻夷，是中原之国的形态。
English: To serve the strong by humbling oneself is the form of a small country; to attack a big country by uniting with a small country is the form of a country with equal strength; to attack a country by using force is the form of a country in the Central Plains.

古文：今匈奴地形、技艺与中国异。
现代文：如今匈奴地形技艺与中原不同。
English: Today, the Xiongnu terrain technology is different from that of the Central Plains.

古文：上下山阪，出入溪涧，中国之马弗与也；险道倾仄，且驰且射，中国之骑弗与也；风雨罢劳，饥渴不困，中国之人弗与也：此匈奴之长技也。
现代文：上下山坡，出入溪涧，中原的战马不如匈奴的战马；险道倾侧，边奔跑边射箭，中原的骑手不如匈奴骑手；风雨疲劳，饥渴不困乏，中原人不如匈奴人：这些是匈奴的长技。
English: Up and down the mountain slope, in and out of the creek, the horses of the Central Plains are not as good as the horses of the Huns; the dangerous road is sloping, while running, archery, the riders of the Central Plains are not as good as the Huns; wind and rain fatigue, hunger and thirst are not tired, the Central Plains people are not as good as the Huns: these are the long skills of the Huns.

古文：若夫平原易地，轻车突骑，则匈奴之众易挠乱也；劲弩长戟，射疏及远，则匈奴之弓弗能格也；坚甲利刃，长短相杂，游弩往来，什伍俱前，则匈奴之兵弗能当也；材官驺发，矢道同的，则匈奴之革笥木荐弗能支也；下马地斗，剑戟相接，去就相薄，则匈奴之足弗能给也：此中国之长技也。
现代文：若是平原地带，轻车骁骑，匈奴就容易乱了阵；强弩长戟，射的宽阔距离远，匈奴的弓不能比；坚硬镗甲、锐利兵器，长短相配合，游弩往来支应，列队的士兵一齐向前，匈奴士兵就不能抵挡；骑射手射出鶸矢，射同一目标，匈奴的革笥、木荐遮挡不住；下马地上搏斗，剑戟相交，脚步前后移动，匈奴人的脚不能快速相连：这些是中原之长技。
English: If it is a plain area, with light vehicles and horseback riding, the Xiongnu will easily get out of line; if it is strong and long, the shot will be wide and far away, and the Xiongnu's bow will not match; if it is hard armor and sharp weapons, the length and width will match, and the peregrine falcon will support the movement, and the soldiers in the line will advance together, and the Xiongnu soldiers will not be able to resist; if it is a horseback archer, the archer will shoot a crossbow, and the Xiongnu will not be able to cover the same target; if it is a horse

古文：以此观之，匈奴之长技三，中国之长技五。
现代文：由此看来，匈奴之长技有三，中原的长技有五。
English: From this point of view, the Xiongnu has three long skills, and the Central Plains has five long skills.

古文：陛下又兴数十万之众，以诛数万之匈奴，众寡之计，以一击十之术也。
现代文：陛下又发兵数十万之众，用来诛杀数万人的匈奴，计算众寡，就是以一击十之术了。
English: His Majesty also sent hundreds of thousands of troops, which were used to fight and kill tens of thousands of Xiongnu. Counting the number of soldiers is like counting to ten with one blow.

古文：虽然，兵，匈器；战，危事也。
现代文：虽然是这样，兵器还是凶器；战争还是危险的事情。
English: Nevertheless, the weapon is still a murder weapon; war is still a dangerous thing.

古文：以大为小，以强为弱，在俯卬之间耳。
现代文：不懂用兵之道和方法，就会以大为小，由强变弱，这种变化也仅仅在于俯仰之间那样容易。
English: If you don't know the ways and means of using troops, you will go from big to small, from strong to weak, and this change is only as easy as between pitching.

古文：夫以人之死争胜，跌而不振，则悔之亡及也。
现代文：用人的死亡换取胜利，就会失足而不振，悔之不及。
English: If you exchange the death of a person for victory, you will lose your footing and not be able to recover.

古文：帝王之道，出于万全。
现代文：帝王成功之道，立足于万全之策。
English: The emperor's road to success is based on a comprehensive strategy.

古文：今降胡义渠蛮夷之属来归谊者，其众数千，饮食长技与匈奴同，可赐之坚甲絮衣，劲弓利矢，益以边郡之良骑。
现代文：今天来投降的胡人义渠蛮夷等是归义的，部众有几千人，他们的饮食、长技与匈奴相同，可以赐给他们硬镘甲棉衣，强弓利矢，再增加边郡的良骑。
English: The Hu people, Yi Quan, and other barbarians who surrendered today are righteous, and there are several thousand followers. Their diet and long skills are the same as the Xiongnu. They can be given hard armor cotton clothes, strong bows and arrows, and then increase the good riding of the border counties.

古文：令明将能知其习俗和辑其心者，以陛下之明约将之。
现代文：让明将能知他们的习俗，使他们和睦相处，就在于用陛下之明智去节制统帅。
English: It was His Majesty's wisdom in restraining the commander-in-chief that enabled Mingguo to know their customs and make them live in harmony.

古文：即有险阻，以此当之；平地通道，则以轻车材官制之。
现代文：要是有了险阻，用这一办法对付；平地通道，就用轻车骑手去对付。
English: If there is a dangerous obstacle, use this method to deal with it; if there is a flat passage, use a light vehicle rider to deal with it.

古文：两军相为表里，各用其长技，衡加之以众，此万全之术也。
现代文：两军互相配合，协同作战，各用其长技，横向上使用众多士兵，这就是万全之策。
English: The two armies should cooperate with each other and fight together. Each side should make use of its long-term skills and use many soldiers horizontally. This is the best strategy.

古文：传曰： 狂夫之言，而明主择焉。 
现代文：书传上说： 狂夫之言，请明主选择。 
English: According to the legend, the madman said, "Please let the Lord choose."

古文：臣错愚陋，昧死上狂言，唯陛下财择。
现代文：臣晁错愚笨鄙陋，冒犯死罪进上狂言，望陛下裁择。
English: If a vassal makes a mistake, if he is stupid and despicable, if he commits a capital offense, if he goes on a rant, it is up to His Majesty to decide.

古文：文帝嘉之，乃赐错玺书宠答焉，曰： 皇帝问太子家令：上书言兵体三章，闻之。
现代文：文帝十分赞扬晁错的陈述，便赐给他玺书回答，说： 皇帝问太子家令：上书所讲兵事三章，听到了。
English: Emperor Wen highly praised the erroneous statement and gave him a reply in writing, saying: The emperor asked the prince's household: I have heard the three chapters on military affairs that you read in the letter.

古文：书言 狂夫之言，而明主择焉 。今则不然。
现代文：书曰 狂夫之言，而明主择焉，如今不是这样。
English: Books used to be the words of a madman, but that is no longer the case.

古文：言者不狂，而择者不明，国之大患，故在于此。
现代文：言者不狂，而择取的人却不明智，国家的大患，就在于此。
English: The speaker is not mad, but the chooser is not wise. This is the great danger of the country.

古文：使夫不明择于不狂，是以万听而万不当也。 
现代文：要是让不明智去选择不狂，就是听一万条上书也是有一万次对付不了。 
English: If you let the unwise choose not to be crazy, you will not be able to cope with listening to ten thousand petitions ten thousand times.

古文：错复言守边备塞、劝农力本，当世急务二事，曰：
现代文：晁错叉论守边备塞，鼓励农耕，致力本业，当世的二件紧急要务，说：
English: On the twin imperatives of preserving and preparing the borders, encouraging farming, and working hard, he said:

古文：臣闻秦时北攻胡貉，筑塞河上，南攻杨粤，置戍卒焉。
现代文：臣听说秦朝北攻胡、貉，在黄河上修筑工事，南攻杨、粤，安置了戍守士卒。
English: The minister heard that the Qin Dynasty attacked Hu and Yunnan in the north and carried out construction work on the Yellow River, and attacked Yang and Guangdong in the south, and placed soldiers to guard Yunnan.

古文：其起兵而攻胡、粤者，非以卫边地而救民死也，贪戾而欲广大也，故功未立而天下乱。
现代文：他们发兵攻胡、粤的曰的，并非保卫边地、救助死亡，而是贪图扩大，因此功业尚未建立天下就大乱起来。
English: When they sent troops to attack Hu and Yue, it was not to defend the borderlands, or to save lives, but to seek expansion. As a result, the world was thrown into turmoil before the cause was established.

古文：且夫起兵而不知其势，战则为人禽，屯则卒积死。
现代文：要是发兵而不知道所处的形势，交战就会被人擒获，屯守就会让士卒老死在边地。
English: If soldiers are sent out without knowing the situation, they will be captured in battle, and the garrison will let the soldiers die on the outskirts.

古文：夫胡貉之地，积阴之处也，木皮三寸，冰厚六尺，食肉而饮酪，其人密理，鸟兽毳毛，其性能寒。
现代文：胡、貉之地是阴寒之处，草木生长出三寸，而冰冻厚达六尺，食肉饮酪，人们肌肉紧密，鸟兽长着细毛，很能耐寒。
English: The land of the goose and the stork is a cold and gloomy place. The grass and trees grow three inches tall, while the ice is six feet thick. People eat meat and drink cheese. People's muscles are tight. Birds and animals have fine hair and are very cold-resistant.

古文：杨粤之地少阴多阳，其人疏理，鸟兽希毛，其性能暑。
现代文：杨、粤之地少阴多阳，人们的肌肉疏松，乌兽长着稀毛，性能耐暑热。
English: Yang and Guangdong have less yin and more yang, people's muscles are loose, black animals have thin hair, and their heat resistance is better.

古文：秦之戍卒不能其水土，戍者死于边，输者偾于道。
现代文：秦朝的戍卒不能适应边地水土，戍守士卒死在边境，运输的士卒、民工跌死在路上。
English: The soldiers of the Qin Dynasty could not adapt to the water and soil of the frontier, the soldiers guarding the frontier died at the border, and the soldiers and migrant workers transporting goods fell to their deaths on the road.

古文：秦民见行，如往弃市，因以谪发之，名曰 谪戍 。
现代文：秦民上路，如赴刑场，因此政府就强制微发，名曰 谪戍 。
English: If Qin people go on the road, such as to the execution site, the government will force them to issue micro-cards, called.

古文：先发吏有谪及赘婿、贾人，后以尝有市籍者，又后以大父母、父母尝有市籍者，后入闾，取其左。
现代文：先征发有罪被贬官吏及上门女婿、小商贩，然后征发曾经入过商人户籍的，又往后是征发祖父母、父母曾经入过商人户籍的，最后征发居住在间左的所有穷人。
English: The first to be conscripted and dispatched were the guilty officials who had been demoted, their sons-in-laws and small traders, then those who had been registered as merchants, followed by those whose grandparents and parents had been registered as merchants, and finally all the poor people living in the middle.

古文：发之不顺，行者深恐，有背畔之心。
现代文：征发不顺利，上路的服役人深切怨恨，有背叛之心。
English: The requisition and dispatch did not go well, and the servicemen who went on the road were deeply resentful and had a heart of betrayal.

古文：凡民守战至死而不降北者，以计为之也。
现代文：凡是百姓在防守、攻战中宁死而不降敌，就是用计谋实现的。
English: All the people who would rather die than surrender to the enemy in defense and attack are achieved by means of stratagem.

古文：故战胜守固则有拜爵之赏，攻城屠邑则得其财卤以富家室，故能使其众蒙矢石，赴汤火，视死如生。
现代文：因此战胜固守就应有拜爵之赏赐，攻城掠地就要夺取战利品使士兵家室富足，所以能让士众甘愿冒着箭矢和石块，赴汤蹈火，视死如归。
English: Therefore, the victory over the stubborn defense should be rewarded with a baronetcy, and the siege of the city and the capture of the land should be to seize the spoils of war and make the soldiers' families rich, so it can make the soldiers willing to risk the arrows and stones, go through the fire, and see death.

古文：今秦之发卒也，有万死之害，而亡铢两之报，死事之后不得一算之复，天下明知祸烈及已也。
现代文：今天秦朝征发士卒，有万死的灾害，而无铢两之报赏，战死之后不能免除一算钱的赋税，天下人清楚地看到灾祸的火焰已经烧到身边。
English: Today, the Qin Dynasty recruits soldiers, there are disasters that cause thousands of deaths, and the rewards are endless. After death in battle, one cannot be exempted from paying taxes. People all over the world can clearly see that the flames of disaster have burned around them.

古文：陈胜行戍，至于大泽，为天下先倡，天下从之如流水者，秦以威劫而行之之敝也。
现代文：陈胜前往戍边，到了大泽乡，为天下率先倡导起义，天下人从之如流水，就是因为秦朝用暴力强行征发劳役的恶果。
English: Chen Sheng went to Fuxian and arrived at Osawa Township. He took the lead in advocating an uprising for the whole country, and people all over the world followed him like water, because the Qin Dynasty used violence to forcibly conscript labor.

古文：胡人衣食之业不著于地，其势易以扰乱边境。
现代文：胡人衣食之业不固定在土地上，造就自然形成了轻易来扰乱边境的形势。
English: The Hu people's clothing and food industry is not fixed on the land, creating a natural situation where it is easy to disrupt the border.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：怎么证明呢?
English: How do you prove it?

古文：胡人食肉饮酪，衣皮毛，非有城郭田宅之归居，如飞鸟走兽于广野，美草甘水则止，草尽水竭则移。
现代文：胡人食肉饮酪，穿皮衣，没有城市田宅去居住，像飞鸟走兽在旷野，遇到甜美水草便停下来，草尽水竭便移走。
English: The Hu people eat meat, drink cheese, wear leather clothes, and do not live in urban farmhouses. They are like birds and beasts in the wilderness. When they encounter sweet water plants, they stop, and when the grass runs out of water, they move away.

古文：以是观之，往来转徙，时至时去，此胡人之生业，而中国之所以离南亩也。
现代文：由此看来，转移不定，时而到达，时而离去，造就是胡人的生存的职业，而在中原就会造成离开耕地的局面。
English: From this point of view, the transfer is uncertain, sometimes arriving, sometimes leaving, which is the occupation of the Hu people's survival, and in the Central Plains it will cause the situation of leaving the cultivated land.

古文：今使胡人数处转牧行猎于塞下，或当燕、代，或当上郡、北地、陇西，以候备塞之卒，卒少则入。
现代文：如今让胡人在几处转移放牧，在塞边行猎，有时到燕、代，有时到上郡，有时到北地，有时到陇西，以便窥伺防守的戍卒，卒少就侵入。
English: Nowadays, the Hu people are allowed to move grazing in several places and hunt on the edge of the dam, sometimes to Yan, Dai, sometimes to Shang County, sometimes to the north, and sometimes to the west of Shaanxi, in order to spy on the defensive pawns, and invade the pawns.

古文：陛下不救，则边民绝望而有降敌之心；救之，少发则不足，多发，远县才至，则胡又已去。
现代文：陛下不救，边民就绝望而产生降敌之心；去救，派兵少不足以抵抗胡人，多派，路途遥远，刚刚到达，胡人便已经离开。
English: If His Majesty does not help, the border people will despair and have a heart of surrender to the enemy; to save, send fewer troops is not enough to resist the Hu people, more troops, the road is far away, just arrived, the Hu people have left.

古文：聚而不罢，为费甚大；罢之，则胡复入。
现代文：屯聚不退，费用太大，退回来，胡人又来入侵。
English: If they do not retreat, the cost will be too high. If they retreat, the Hu people will invade again.

古文：如此连年，则中国贫苦而民不安矣。
现代文：如此连年，中原就贫苦而百姓不得安宁了。
English: Thus, year after year, the Central Plains are impoverished and the people have no peace.

古文：陛下幸忧边境，遣将吏发卒以治塞，甚大惠也。
现代文：陛下幸好担忧边界，遣将派兵整治边塞，大有好处。
English: Fortunately, His Majesty is concerned about the border, and sending troops to rectify the border is of great benefit.

古文：然令远方之卒守塞，一岁而更，不知胡人之能，不如选常居者，家室田作，且以备之。
现代文：然而让远道而来的士卒守边塞，一年便轮换，不了解胡人的特长，不如选拔常居的士卒，建立家室，耕种田地，就此守边。
English: However, it would be better to select soldiers who had lived in the area for a long time, built a house, and cultivated fields to guard the border, rather than letting soldiers who had come from far away guard the border and rotate every year.

古文：以便为之高城深堑，具蔺石，布渠答，复为一城其内，城间百五十岁。
现代文：为了防守之便，就建造高城深沟。准备垒石，布下铁蒺藜，再造一城于城内，两城之间相距一百五十步。
English: In order to facilitate the defense, they built a high city with a deep ditch. They prepared a foundation stone, laid an anvil, and rebuilt a city within the city. The distance between the two cities was one hundred and fifty paces.

古文：要害之处，通川之道，调立城邑，毋下千家，为中周虎落。先为室屋，具田器，乃募罪人及免徒复作令居之；不足，募以丁奴婢赎罪及输奴婢欲以拜爵者；不足，乃募民之欲往者。皆赐高爵，复其家。
现代文：要害之处，河流经的路口，规划并建立城邑，计算城邑中居民不少于千家，城周围应设置防盗用的竹篾，先造居室，准备好农具，然后招募罪人及免去徒刑处罚一年劳役的人居住下来；不够数，招募用成丁奴婢赎罪的和用奴婢买爵的；再不够，便招募百姓想去的，一律赐给高爵位，免除全家赋役。
English: The key points, the intersections where rivers flow, the planning and establishment of townships, the calculation of the residents in the townships of not less than a thousand, the anti-theft bamboo fences should be set up around the city, the living rooms should be built first, the farm tools should be prepared, and then the criminals and the people who are exempt from imprisonment and one-year labor service should be recruited to live there; if the number is not enough, the slaves and maidservants should be recruited to atone for their sins and the slaves and maidservants should be used to buy a baronetcy; if it is not enough, the people should be recruited to go there,

古文：予冬夏衣，廪食，能自给而止。
现代文：发给冬夏衣服，供给饮食，能自给时停止供应。
English: They are given winter and summer clothes and provided with food and drink, but the supply is cut off when they are able to provide for themselves.

古文：郡县之民得买其爵，以自增至卿。
现代文：郡县百姓可以买爵位，可以买到高级爵位，可同列卿。
English: County and county people can buy a peerage, can buy a senior peerage, can be listed as a lord.

古文：其亡夫若妻者，县官买与之。
现代文：他们有丧失丈夫或妻子的，由官府给买奴、买妻子、买衣服。
English: If they have lost their husband or wife, the government will buy them a slave, a wife, and clothes.

古文：人情非有匹敌，不能久安其处。
现代文：人情上说，非有匹配，不能久居其处。
English: Humanly speaking, unless there is a match, you cannot stay there for a long time.

古文：塞下之民，禄利不厚，不可使久居危难之地。
现代文：塞下之民，利禄不厚，不可让他们永久居住在危难之地。
English: The people living under the blockade do not have a lot of money, so they should not be allowed to live permanently in a dangerous place.

古文：胡人入驱而能止其所驱者，以其半予之，县官为赎其民。
现代文：胡人入侵抢掠，能阻止其抢掠的将被抢的一半财物奖给他，官府出价赎回被抢掳的百姓。
English: Hu people invaded and plundered, and those who could prevent their plunder would be rewarded with half of the stolen property, and the government would offer to redeem the plundered people.

古文：如是，则邑里相救助，赴胡不避死。
现代文：造样，邑里就会互相救助，与胡人去交战就不怕死。
English: As a result, the townspeople will help each other, and they will not be afraid to die if they fight with the Hu people.

古文：非以德上也，欲全亲戚而利其财也。
现代文：所有这些，并不是让皇上立德义的，而是想保护亲戚生命财产。
English: All of this is not for the emperor to decide, but to protect the lives and property of relatives.

古文：此与东方之戍卒不习地势而心畏胡者，功相万也。
现代文：与东方戍卒不熟习地势又心畏胡人的情况相比，功劳要高出万倍。
English: Compared with the situation in which the Eastern cadres were not familiar with the terrain and were afraid of the Hu people, the merit was ten thousand times higher.

古文：以陛下之时，徙民实边，使远方亡屯戍之事，塞下之民父子相保，亡系虏之患，利施后世，名称圣明，其与秦之行怨民，相去远矣。
现代文：陛下这个时候，徙民充实边塞，让远方的百姓没有屯戍负担，边塞的百姓又父子相保，没有被俘虏的后患，好处流传给后世，陛下就是圣明之君，这和秦朝去服役的怨民相比，利害相差太大了。
English: Your Majesty, at this time, the migratory people are enriching the frontier fortress, so that the distant people do not have the burden of settlement. The people of the frontier fortress are protected by father and son, and there is no sequelae of captivity. The benefits are passed on to future generations. Your Majesty is the Prince of the Sacred Light. Compared with the wicked people who went to serve the Qin Dynasty, the difference in interests is too great.

古文：上从其言，募民徙塞下。
现代文：皇上听从了晁错的建议，募民迁徙到边塞去。
English: The emperor followed the erroneous advice and called on the people to migrate to the frontier fortress.

古文：错复言：
现代文：晁错又说：
English: He also said:

古文：陛下幸募民相徒以实塞下，使屯戍之事益省，输将之费益寡，甚大惠也。
现代文：陛下幸好募民迁徙到边塞去，使屯戍之事大大节省，运送物资的费用更加减少，益处显著。
English: Fortunately, His Majesty conscripted people to migrate to the frontier fortress, which greatly reduced the cost of settlement, and the cost of transporting materials was further reduced, with significant benefits.

古文：下吏诚能称厚惠，奉明法，存恤所徙之老弱，善遇其壮士，和辑其心而勿侵刻，使先至者安乐而不思故乡，则贫民相募而劝往矣。
现代文：下面官吏真能称得起厚惠，执行英明办法，关心迁来的老弱，善待壮士，对他们宽柔和睦而不侵害，让先来的安乐而不思念故土，那么贫民便互相招请、勉励。
English: If the officials below can truly be worthy of praise for their generous benefits, implement wise measures, care for the old and weak who have moved here, treat the strong kindly, treat them with gentleness and harmony without encroaching on them, and let those who come first enjoy themselves without thinking about their homeland, then the poor will invite and encourage each other.

古文：臣闻古之徙远方以实广虚也，相其阴阳之和，尝其水泉之味，审其土地之宜，观其草木之饶，然后营邑立城，制里割宅，通田作之道，正阡陌之界，先为筑室，家有一堂二内，门户之闭，置器物焉，民至有所居，作有所用，此民所以轻去故乡而劝之新邑也。
现代文：臣闻古代迁徙到远方去充实空虚之地，要察看阴阳的调和，尝尝水泉之味，查一查土地好坏，观察草木的长势，然后营造城邑，编制里区，划割住宅，开通通向田地的道路，确定田间边界，先造住室，一家有一堂二室，有门窗的开闭，设置家具，百姓来就可以居住，耕作有农具，这就是百姓所以肯轻易离乡而乐意到新邑去的原因。
English: It is said that in ancient times, vassals migrated to distant places to enrich the empty land. It was necessary to observe the harmony of yin and yang, taste the taste of water springs, check the quality of the land, observe the growth of plants and trees, and then build towns, set up villages, divide houses, open roads to the fields, determine the boundaries of the fields, and first build houses. A family has one or two rooms, doors and windows can be opened and closed, furniture can be set up, people can live here, and farming tools are available. This is why people are willing to leave their hometowns easily and are willing to go to new towns.

古文：为置医巫，以救疾病，以修祭祀，男女有昏，生死相恤，坟墓相从，种树畜长，室屋完安，此所以使民乐其处而有长居之心也。
现代文：要给他们准备医生巫师，以便治疗疾病，祭祀祖先、神灵，男婚女嫁，生死相照应，坟墓相跟从，种树养畜，室屋完整安全，这些足以让百姓乐于居其处而有长住久留之心。
English: It is necessary to prepare doctors and sorcerers for them in order to cure diseases, to offer sacrifices to ancestors and gods, to marry men and women, to take care of life and death, to follow graves, to plant trees and raise animals, and to make houses safe and complete. These are enough to make people happy to live there and have the heart to stay for a long time.

古文：臣又闻古之制边县以备敌也，使五家为伍，伍有长；十长一里，里有假士；四里一连，连有假五百；十连一邑，邑有假候：皆择其邑之贤材有护，习地形知民心者，居则习民于射法，出则教民于应敌。
现代文：臣又听说古代设置边地县城是为了防备敌人侵犯的，让五家为一伍，有伍长；十长为一里，里有假士；四里一连，连有假五百；十连一邑，邑有假侯：各长都是邑中贤才又有保护能力，熟习地形和民心，闲居就让百姓练习射箭，外出就教民如何应敌。
English: The minister also heard that the outlying county towns were set up in ancient times in order to prevent the enemy from encroaching. Let five families be a team, with a team leader; ten leaders for one mile, with fake soldiers; four miles a company, with a fake five hundred; ten companies a township, with a fake mayor: each leader is a wise man in the township and has the ability to protect, familiar with the terrain and the people's hearts, let the people practice archery when they are idle, and teach the people how to deal with the enemy when they are out.

古文：故卒伍成于内，则军正定于外。
现代文：因此对内是卒伍编制，对外就是军政制度。
English: Therefore, internally it is the formation of the military cadre, and externally it is the military and political system.

古文：服习以成，勿令迁徙，幼则同游，长则共事。
现代文：训练完成之后，就不许再迁徙，幼年时同游，成年后就共事。
English: After the training is completed, they are not allowed to migrate again. They travel together when they are young and work together when they are adults.

古文：夜战声相知，则足以相救；昼战目相见，则足以相识；欢爱之心，足以相死。
现代文：夜战凭声音认出自己人，便足以互相救护；白天作战眼睛能看到，便足以相认；爱护之心，足以拼死相救。
English: Night fighting by sound to recognize their own people, it is enough to rescue each other; daytime fighting eyes can see, it is enough to recognize each other; love heart, it is enough to desperately save each other.

古文：如此而劝以厚赏，威以重罚，则前死不还踵矣。
现代文：这样，用厚赏劝导，用重罚威慑，那么死亡在前面也不会转回身退逃。
English: In this way, with a heavy reward for persuasion, with a heavy punishment for deterrence, then death will not turn back and flee in front.

古文：所徙之民非壮有材力，但费衣粮，不可用也；虽有材力，不得良吏，犹亡功也。
现代文：所迁徙之民不是健壮有材力的人，衹是消耗衣粮者，不能使用；虽然有勇力，没有良好官吏，和无功是一样的。
English: The migrated people are not strong and able-bodied people. The donkeys consume food and clothing and cannot be used. Although they have courage, they do not have good officials, and they are useless.

古文：陛下绝匈奴不与和亲，臣窃意其冬来南也，壹大治，则终身创矣。
现代文：陛下断绝与匈奴和亲，臣估计今冬胡人会南来，重创胡人一次，便永久受创。
English: His majesty broke off the peace with the Xiongnu, and the vassal estimated that the Hu people would come south this winter, and once the Hu people were severely injured, they would be permanently injured.

古文：欲立威者，始于折胶，来而不能困，使得气去，后未易服也。
现代文：想确立威严，必须从使用弓弩开始，来犯而不能重创，让敌人得胜而去，以后就不易降服了。
English: If you want to establish majesty, you must start with the use of a bow and arrow, attack without hitting hard, let the enemy go away victorious, and then it will not be easy to surrender.

古文：愚臣亡识，唯陛下财察。
现代文：愚臣无识，希望陛下裁察。
English: Foolish and ignorant, I hope His Majesty will take legal action.

古文：后诏有司举贤良文学士，错在选中。
现代文：后来下诏朝廷官员推荐贤良文学之士，晁错在推举之列。
English: Later, imperial officials issued an edict recommending virtuous men of letters, and Shun Er was among those recommended.

古文：上亲策诏之，曰：
现代文：皇上亲自策韶，说：
English: The Emperor himself gave the order, saying:

古文：惟十有五年九月壬子，皇帝曰： 昔者大禹勤求贤士，施及方外，四极之内，舟车所至，人迹所及，靡不闻命，以辅其不逮；近者献其明，远者通厥聪，比善戮力，以翼天子。
现代文：十五年九月壬子曰，皇帝说： 以前大禹广求贤士，扩及到境外，四方边远的尽头以内，舟车所能达到的地方，人迹能去之处，无不听命，以弥补其施政之缺陷；近者献出明亮，远者献出智慧，和善勉力，以助天子。
English: In September of the fifteenth year, according to Ren Zi, the emperor said: "In the past, Dayu Guang asked for sages, extending beyond the borders, within the farthest ends of the four directions, where the boat could reach, where the human traces could go, all obeyed orders to make up for the shortcomings of his governance; the near ones offered brightness, the far ones offered wisdom, and the good ones made efforts to help the son of heaven.

古文：是以大禹能亡失德，夏以长楙。
现代文：所以大禹能不失去德政，夏朝长久盛美。
English: Therefore, Dayu could not lose the German government, and the summer dynasty was prosperous for a long time.

古文：高皇帝亲除大害，去乱从，并建豪英，以为官师，为谏争，辅天子之阙，而翼戴汉宗也。
现代文：高皇帝亲除大害，去祸乱之踪迹，选拔豪杰英才，作为一官之长，极尽力争提出劝谏，弥补天子朝政的缺陷，而拥戴汉家王朝。
English: Emperor Gao personally removed the great harm, went to the trail of disaster, selected heroes and outstanding talents, and, as the head of an official, tried his best to put forward persuasion, make up for the shortcomings of the heavenly son's government, and support the Han Dynasty.

古文：赖天之灵，宗庙之福，方内以安，泽及四夷。
现代文：幸赖上天之灵，宗庙之福，天下安定，延及到四方边界各民族。
English: Relying on the spirit of heaven, the blessing of the ancestral temple, the world is stable, extending to the borders of all ethnic groups.

古文：今朕获执天子之正，以承宗庙之祀，朕既不德，又不敏，明弗能烛，而智不能治，此大夫之所著闻也。
现代文：今朕即天子正位，以继承宗庙的祭祀，朕既没有高德，又不聪敏，明亮度不能照射、洞察，智慧不能使国家大治，这是诸大夫看得见的。
English: Now that I, the Son of Heaven, am enthroned to succeed the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple, I am neither virtuous nor intelligent. Brightness cannot illuminate, insight, and wisdom cannot make the country great. This is what doctors can see.

古文：故诏有司、诸侯王、三公、九卿及主郡吏，各帅其志，以选贤良明于国家之大体，通于人事之终始，及能直言极谏者，各有人数，将以匡朕之不逮。
现代文：因此下诏有司、诸侯王、三公、九卿及郡守，各凭自己的意志，选出贤良优秀人才，深明国家大体，通晓人事的变化，敢于直言极力劝谏的，各有若干人数，将用来辅佐匡正朕的不完备之处。
English: Therefore, it is hereby decreed that there shall be a certain number of officials, princes, three princes, nine nobles, and county governors, each of whom shall, according to his own will, select good and outstanding talents, have a deep understanding of the country as a whole, be familiar with changes in personnel, and dare to speak frankly and strongly to persuade others, who shall be used to assist Kuang Zhen in the incomplete areas.

古文：二三大夫之行当此三道，朕甚嘉之，故登大夫于朝，亲谕朕志。
现代文：有二三名大夫可以论述国体、人事、劝谏三方面的道理，朕十分嘉许，因此让诸大夫登朝，亲自告谕朕的旨意。
English: I greatly appreciate the fact that there are two or three doctors who can discuss the three aspects of the National Games, personnel, and persuasion. Therefore, I let the doctors come to the palace and personally announce my will.

古文：大夫其上三道之要，及永惟朕之不德，吏之不平，政之不宣，民之不宁，四者之阙，悉陈其志，毋有所隐。
现代文：大夫应陈述国体、人事、直谏三道要领，深思朕德之缺乏之处，官吏办事不公正，政事不宣通，百姓不安宁，四者缺漏、错误之处，全部讲出自己的意见，不要隐瞒。
English: The doctor should state the three essentials of the National Sports Festival, personnel, and discipline, and reflect on the lack of morality, the injustice of officials, the lack of publicity of political affairs, and the lack of peace among the people, as well as the omissions and mistakes of all four. Express your own opinions and do not hide them.

古文：上以荐先帝之宗庙，下以兴愚民之休利，著之于篇，朕亲览焉，观大夫所以佐朕，至与不至。
现代文：上可以进献先帝之宗庙，下可以兴办愚民的美好利益，写成篇章，朕要亲自阅览，观察大夫用来辅佐朕的建议，是尽到了责任还是没有把话说完、说透。
English: On the one hand, you can donate to the ancestral temple of the former emperor, and on the other hand, you can promote the good interests of the foolish people, and write a chapter. I want to read it myself, observe the doctor's advice to assist me, and whether I have fulfilled my responsibility or not.

古文：书之，周之密之，重之闭之。兴自朕躬，大夫其正论，毋枉执事。
现代文：写下，周密慎重地封闭起来，由朕亲自拆封，大夫们应正言直论，不要顾忌当权官吏的阻挠。
English: Write it down, carefully seal it up, and I will personally open it. Doctors should be forthright and not be afraid of the obstruction of officials in power.

古文：乌乎，戒之！
现代文：啊，要切戒啊!
English: Ah, let us beware!

古文：二三大夫其帅志毋怠！ 
现代文：被推荐来的二三位大夫应抒发自己的意志，不要怠慢！ 
English: The two or three doctors who have been recommended should express their will, do not neglect it!

古文：错对曰：
现代文：晁错回答说：
English: To which he replied:

古文：平阳侯臣窋、汝阴侯臣灶、颍阴侯臣何、廷尉臣宜昌、陇西太守臣昆邪所选贤良太子家令臣错昧死再拜言：臣窃闻古之贤主莫不求贤以为辅翼，故黄帝得力牧而为五帝先，大禹得咎繇而为三王祖，齐桓得管子而为五伯长。
现代文：平阳侯臣曹亩、汝阴侯臣夏侯宠、颖阴侯臣灌何、廷尉臣宜昌、陇西太守臣公孙昆邪所推荐贤良太子家令臣晁错冒死再拜说：臣听说古代英贤之主无不求贤士来辅佐自己，因此黄帝得力牧而在五帝中名列首位，大禹得咎繇成了三王的鼻祖，齐桓公得管仲成了五霸之长。
English: Pingyang Hossin Cao Mu, Ruyin Hossin Xia Hossin, Yingyin Hossin Guan He, Courtier Hossin Yichang, Shaanxi Taishou Hossin Gongsun Kunzong recommended by the virtuous prince family, ordered his vassals not to make mistakes and risked death, saying: "My vassals have heard that in ancient times, the lord of the sages always asked the sages to assist him. Therefore, the Yellow Emperor gained the first place among the five emperors, the Great Emperor Yu gained the first place among the three emperors, and the Great Emperor Qi Huan gained the first place among the five

古文：今陛下讲于大禹及高皇帝之建豪英也，退托于不明，以求贤良，让之至也。
现代文：今陛下讲到从大禹至高皇帝之选拔豪杰英才，自谦不明，以求贤士辅佐，责备之至。
English: Now that His Majesty has spoken about the selection of outstanding talents from Dayu to Emperor Gao, he is not sure whether to ask for the assistance of sages, which is reprehensible.

古文：臣窃观上世之传，若高皇帝之建功业，陛下之德厚而得贤佐，皆有司之所览，刻于玉版，藏于金匮，历之春秋，纪之后世，为帝者祖宗，与天地相终。
现代文：臣观上世史传，像高皇帝一样建功立业，陛下之大德从而得到贤士辅佐，都是有司看到的，刻在记录功勋的玉版上，藏在金匮之中，经历年月，传至后世，为帝王所宗仰，与天地相终始。
English: According to the history of the past, like Emperor Gao, who made great achievements, His Majesty's great virtue was assisted by sages. All of this was seen by the emperor, engraved on the jade plate that recorded the merits, hidden in the lack of gold, passed through the years, and passed on to future generations. It was revered by the emperor, and was connected to heaven and earth.

古文：今臣窋等乃以臣错充赋，甚不称明诏求贤之意。
现代文：今臣曹宙等把晁错拿来充数，很不合明诏寻求贤良的旨意。
English: It is very unreasonable for the current minister Cao Chou and others to make up for their mistakes and seek the will of the virtuous.

古文：臣错草茅臣，亡识知，昧死上愚对，曰：
现代文：臣晁错草茅之臣，没有见识，冒死献上愚对，说：
English: The follower of the false straw and the false straw, who has no insight, risks his life to present the false straw and says:

古文：诏策曰 明于国家大体 ，愚臣窃以古之五帝明之。
现代文：诏策日： 明于国家大体 ，愚臣自以古代的五帝来说明它。
English: Zhaozhe Day: Ming is more than the country as a whole, and the fools use the five emperors of ancient times to illustrate it.

古文：臣闻五帝神对，其臣莫能及，故自亲事，处于法官之中，明堂之上；动静上配天，下顺地，中得人。
现代文：臣闻五帝神智圣明，那些大臣都不如五帝圣明，因此亲自处理政务，在正殿之中，宣明政教的明堂之上。处事上符合天时，下顺应地利，中得人和。
English: The ministers are not as good as the five emperors, so they personally handle government affairs, in the middle of the main hall, above the main hall of Xuanming Government and Religion. In dealing with affairs, they are in line with the times, the lower is in line with the place, and the middle is in line with the people.

古文：故众生之类亡下覆也，根著之徒亡不载也；烛以光明，亡偏异也；德上及飞鸟，下至水虫草木诸产，皆被其泽。
现代文：因此众生之类无不被覆盖，生长在土地中的万物无不被托载；用光明来照耀，没有偏异；恩德上及飞鸟，下至水虫，草木诸产物，都受到润泽。
English: Therefore, there is no living thing that is not covered, and there is no living thing that grows in the land that is not supported; shining with light, there is no deviation; the upper end and the flying birds, down to the aquatic insects, plants and other products, are all moisturized.

古文：然后阴阳调，四时节，日月光，风雨时，膏露降，五谷熟，袄孽灭，贼气息，民不疾疫，河出图，洛出书，神龙至，凤鸟翔，德泽满天下，灵光施四海。
现代文：然后阴阳调和，四季有节，曰月生光，风雨适时，膏露普降，五谷丰登，妖孽灭绝，毒气息灭，民不生疾病，黄河现出图，洛水现出书，神龙到来，凤凰飞翔，德泽遍布天下，灵光施至四海。
English: Then the yin and yang are harmonized, the four seasons have festivals, the moon is said to give birth to light, the wind and rain are in good time, the dew is falling, the grain is abundant, the witchcraft is extinct, the poisonous air is extinguished, the people do not give birth to diseases, the Yellow River is now a map, the Luo water is now a book, the divine dragon is coming, the phoenix is flying, the virtue is all over the world, and the spiritual light is spread to the four seas.

古文：此谓配天地，治国大体之功也。
现代文：造就是配天应地，治国大体的基本内容。
English: Building is the basic content of governing the country in accordance with the needs of the country.

古文：诏策曰 通于人事终始 ，愚臣窃以古之三王明之。
现代文：诏策曰 通于人事终始 ，愚臣用古代三王来说明。
English: The imperial edict said that it should be consistent from the beginning to the end of the personnel, and the fools used the ancient three kings to illustrate it.

古文：臣闻三王臣主俱贤，故合谋相辅，计安天下，莫不本于人情。
现代文：臣闻三王君臣都贤明，因此合谋相辅助，计谋安定天下，无不从人情出发。
English: The three kings, princes and ministers are all wise, so they help each other to conspire and stabilize the world. They all proceed from human feelings.

古文：人情莫不欲寿，三王生而不伤也；人情莫不欲富，三王厚而不困也；人情莫不欲安，三王扶而不危也；人情莫不欲逸，三王节其力而不尽也。
现代文：人情无不想长寿，三王保护人们的生命而不加以伤害；人情无不想富，三王让人们财富丰厚而不使人穷困；人情无不想安宁，三王维持社会秩序而不去危害人民；人情无不想舒适，三王节省人力而不竭尽民力。
English: Human nature does not want to live long, the three kings protect people's lives without harming them; human nature does not want to be rich, the three kings make people rich without impoverishing them; human nature does not want to be peaceful, the three kings maintain social order without harming the people; human nature does not want to be comfortable, the three kings save manpower without exhausting people's power.

古文：其为法令也，合于人情而后行之；其动众使民也，本于人事然后为之。
现代文：三王制订法令，合于人情然后执行；发动民众兴办事业，从人事出发然后去实行。
English: The three kings formulate laws and ordinances, and then implement them in accordance with the people's conditions; they mobilize the people to do business, and then implement them from the perspective of personnel.

古文：取人以己，内恕及人。
现代文：以己之心为根据来要求别人，把自己的好恶也用到别人身上。
English: Use your own heart as the basis to make demands of others, and apply your own likes and dislikes to others.

古文：情之所恶，不以强人；情之所欲，不以禁民。
现代文：自己心裹讨厌的，不可强加于人；自己心裹想要办的，不要禁止人们去办。
English: What you hate in your heart, do not impose on others; what you want to do, do not forbid others to do.

古文：是以天下乐其政，归其德，望之若父母，从之若流水；百姓和亲，国家安宁，名位不失，施及后世。
现代文：这样的话天下就欢迎政府的政令，佩服政府的恩德，敬仰他们就像父母一样，像流水一样跟从他们；百姓和睦亲爱，国家安宁，名分地位的秩序不混乱，延续到后代。
English: In such a case, the world will welcome the government's decrees, admire the government's benevolence, admire them like their parents, and follow them like running water; the people will be harmonious and dear, the country will be peaceful, and the order of rank and status will not be chaotic, and will continue to future generations.

古文：此明于人情终始之功也。
现代文：这些就是明了人事终始的人事之道。
English: These are the ways of personnel affairs that clarify the personnel end-to-end.

古文：诏策曰 直言极谏 ，愚臣窃以五伯之臣明之。
现代文：诏策曰 直言极谏 ，愚臣认为五霸之臣能明了。
English: The imperial edict said, "Straight talk is the most dangerous thing," and the fools thought that the five overlords could understand them.

古文：臣闻五伯不及其臣，故属之以国，任之以事。
现代文：臣闻五霸不如他们的大臣，因此把国家托付给大臣，把大事交由大臣办理。
English: The five overlords were not as well-informed as their ministers, so they entrusted the country to the minister and let the minister handle important matters.

古文：五伯之佐之为人臣也，察身而不敢诬，奉法令不容私，尽心力不敢矜，遭患难不避死，见贤不居其上，受禄不过其量，不以亡能居尊显之位。
现代文：五霸的辅佐大臣作为人臣，省察己身而不敢逾越诬上，遵守法令不容私情，尽心力而不敢自夸，遭遇灾难不避死亡，见贤人而不抢占在上位，受禄不超过法定的标准，不用无能者居尊显之位。
English: As a vassal of the Five Dynasties, the assistant minister of the Five Dynasties should be self-reflective and not dare to exceed the standards, abide by the laws and regulations and not tolerate selfishness, do his best and not dare to boast, do not avoid death in the event of a disaster, do not occupy the top position when he sees a wise man, do not exceed the statutory standards, and do not use incompetents to occupy the position of honor.

古文：自行若此，可谓方正之士矣。
现代文：自己的行为就是这样，可以说是按规矩办事的臣子。
English: This is how he conducts himself. You could say that he is a courtier who follows the rules.

古文：其立法也，非以苦民伤众而为之机陷也，以之兴利除害，尊主安民而救暴乱也。
现代文：他们制订法律，不是为伤害民众设置陷阱，而是用来兴利除害，尊主安民而免除暴躁。
English: They enact laws, not to set traps for harming the people, but to use them to benefit and eliminate harm, to respect the safety of the people and to avoid irritability.

古文：其行赏也，非虚取民财妄予人也，以劝天下之忠孝而明其功也。
现代文：他们进行奖赏，不是白白收取民财妄自送人的，是用来鼓励天下忠孝而宣扬其功劳的。
English: Their reward is not to take people's money in vain, but to encourage the world's loyalty and to publicize their merits.

古文：故功多者赏厚，功少者赏薄。
现代文：因此功多的人赏厚，功少者赏薄。
English: Therefore, those who have made more merit are rewarded more, and those who have made less merit are rewarded less.

古文：如此，敛民财以顾其功，而民不恨者，知与而安己也。
现代文：如此，收取民财报赏其功劳，百姓之所以不痛恨，是知道付出的是为了自己的安定。
English: Thus, the reason why the people do not resent the fact that they receive money from the people to reward their services is that they know that what they are paying for is their own stability.

古文：其行罚也，非以忿怒妄诛而从暴心也，以禁天下不忠不孝而害国者也。
现代文：他们实行处罚，不是用愤怒妄加诛杀来放纵暴躁之心，而是为了禁绝不忠不孝甚至是危害国家的行为。
English: They impose punishments, not to indulge the hot-tempered heart with anger and wanton killing, but to forbid disloyalty and even acts that endanger the country.

古文：故罪大者罚重，罪小者罚轻。
现代文：因此，罪大的重罚，罪小的轻罚。
English: Therefore, heavy punishment for major crimes and light punishment for minor crimes prevail.

古文：如此，民虽伏罪至死而不怨者，知罪罚之至，自取之也。
现代文：这样，百姓犯了罪至死也不会怨恨，知道招来对犯罪的处罚，是咎由自取。
English: In this way, people who have committed a crime to death will not be resentful, knowing that the punishment for the crime is self-inflicted.

古文：立法若此，可谓平正之吏矣。
现代文：制订法律如果是这样，可以说是公平正直的官吏了。
English: If this is how laws are made, it can be said that officials are fair and honest.

古文：法之逆者，请而更之，不以伤民；主行之暴者，逆而复之，不以伤国。
现代文：法律违背了情理，请求修改，不要用来伤民；君主执行的暴烈，就反过来恢复正确作法，不要用来伤害国家。
English: Laws are contrary to reason. They should be amended and not used to hurt the people. If the monarch is violent, the correct practice should be restored and the country should not be harmed.

古文：救主之失，补主之过，扬主之美，明主之功，使主内亡邪辟之行，外亡骞污之名。
现代文：补救国君的过失，发扬国君的美德，彰明国君的功劳，使国君内无邪僻行为，外无损害污秽的坏名声。
English: Remedy the faults of the sovereign, promote the virtues of the sovereign, highlight the merits of the sovereign, so that the sovereign has no evil deeds inside and no bad reputation outside.

古文：事君若此，可谓直言极谏之士矣。
现代文：侍奉国君到这种地步，可谓直言极力劝谏之士了。
English: To serve the sovereign to such an extent, it can be said that I tried my best to persuade him.

古文：此五伯之所以德匡天下，威正诸侯，功业甚美，名声章明。举天下之贤主，五伯与焉，此身不及其臣而使得直言极谏补其不逮之功也。
现代文：这正是五霸之所以用德政来扶正天下，威势校正诸侯，功业盛美，名声显赫的原因，举出天下贤明君主的话，五霸就是突出的代表，这是自己不如其臣而能用直言极谏弥补不足的办法。
English: This is precisely the reason why the Five Overlords used their moral authority to support the world, their might to correct their vassals, their great achievements, and their illustrious reputation. To quote the words of the wise monarchs of the world, the Five Overlords are outstanding representatives. This is a way to make up for their inadequacy with blunt words.

古文：今陛下人民之众，威武之重，德惠之厚，令行禁止之势，万万于五伯，而赐愚臣策曰 匡朕之不逮 ，愚臣何足以识陛下之高明而奉承之！
现代文：今天陛下统领人民的众多，威武的庄重，德惠的深厚，令行禁止之势，超过五霸万万倍，然而赐给愚臣的诏策说 弥补朕的不足，愚臣怎么还能够认识到陛下的高明而要去奉承!
English: Today, His Majesty commands a large number of people. His majesty is dignified and powerful, his virtue and benevolence are profound, and his orders and actions are prohibited more than five hundred thousand times. However, the imperial edict given to the fools says, "Make up for my shortcomings." How can the fools still recognize His Majesty's wisdom and flatter him?

古文：诏策曰 吏之不平，政之不宣，民之不宁 ，愚臣窃以秦事明之。
现代文：韶策曰 吏之不平，政之不宣，民之不宁 ，愚臣用塞事来说明。
English: Xie Zhe said that the officials are dissatisfied, the government is not announced, the people are restless, and the fools use the blockade to explain.

古文：臣闻秦始并天下之时，其主不及三王，而臣不及其佐，然功力不迟者，何也？
现代文：臣闻塞开始兼并天下时，它的国君不及三王，而大臣也不及三王的辅臣，然而功业的建立并不迟慢，为什么?
English: When the vassal Wencai began to annex the whole country, its sovereign was less than the three kings, and the minister was also less than the three kings' aide-de-camp, but the establishment of the cause was not slow, why?

古文：地形便，山川利，财用足，民利战。
现代文：地形方便，山川有利，财富充足，民善于作战。
English: The terrain is convenient, the mountains and rivers are favorable, the wealth is sufficient, and the people are good at fighting.

古文：其所与并者六国，六国者，臣主皆不肖，谋不辑，民不用，故当此之时，秦最富强。
现代文：它与并存的六国相比，六国臣主都是无能之辈，计谋不统一，民不能任使，因此，这时秦国最富强。
English: Compared with the coexisting Six Kingdoms, the vassals of the Six Kingdoms were all incompetent, the strategies were not unified, and the people could not be left to their own devices. Therefore, Qin was the richest and strongest at this time.

古文：夫国富强而邻国乱者，帝王之资也，故秦能兼六国，立为天子。
现代文：国强而邻国混乱，最具备称帝的条件，所以秦国可以兼并六国，立为天子。
English: The country is strong and the neighboring countries are chaotic, and it has the best conditions to be called an emperor, so Qin can annex six countries and become the son of heaven.

古文：当此之时，三王之功不能进焉。
现代文：当时，三王建立功业的办法不能被采纳。
English: At that time, the method of establishing the merits of the three kings could not be adopted.

古文：及其末涂之衰也，任不肖而信谗贼；宫室过度，耆欲亡极，民力罢尽，赋敛不节；矜奋自贤，群臣恐谀，骄溢纵恣，不顾患祸；妄赏以随喜意，妄诛以快怒心，法令烦憯，刑罚暴酷，轻绝人命，身自射杀；天下寒心，莫安其处。奸邪之吏，乘其乱法，以成其威，狱官主断，生杀自恣。
现代文：到后来衰败之时，任用不肖而听信谗贼；宫室超过限度，奢侈的欲望没有极限，民力疲尽，赋敛没有节制；妄自称贤，群臣因恐惧而争相阿谀，骄横放纵，不顾灾祸临头；妄赏以随个人喜好，妄诛以发泄怒心，法令烦苛残害下民，刑罚酷暴，轻易处决，亲自射杀人命；天下寒心，不能安定居住，奸邪官吏，利用乱法，横施威风，狱官判官，生杀专断。
English: At the time of the later decline, the appointment was unsightly and listened to the thief; the palace exceeded the limit, the desire for luxury had no limit, the people's strength was exhausted, and the restraint had no restraint; arrogantly claiming to be virtuous, the courtiers competed with each other out of fear, arrogantly indulged, and disregarded the impending disaster; arrogantly rewarding with personal preferences, arrogantly venting their anger, the laws were tedious and cruel to the people, the punishments were brutal, the executions were easy, and the lives of the people were shot in person; the world was cold and could not live stably, the officials were evil, the laws were

古文：上下瓦解，各自为制。
现代文：上下瓦解，各自为政。
English: The top and the bottom are disintegrating, each pursuing its own course.

古文：秦始乱之时，吏之所先侵者，贫人贱民也；至其中节，所侵者富人吏家也；及其末涂，所侵者宗室大臣也。
现代文：秦刚开始内乱时，官吏先侵夺的对象是贫人贱民；到中期，所侵害的是富人官吏之家；到了末路时，所侵害的是宗室大臣。
English: At the beginning of the civil war of Qin Gang, the first target of the officials was the poor and untouchable; in the middle, the target was the home of the rich officials; in the end, the target was the family minister.

古文：是故亲疏皆危，外内咸怨，离散逋逃，人有走心。
现代文：因此，亲疏皆危，内外怨恨，离散逃亡，人有叛心。
English: Therefore, estrangement is dangerous, resentment at home and abroad, dispersion and escape, and people are rebellious.

古文：陈胜先倡，天下大溃，绝祀亡世，为异姓福。
现代文：陈胜首倡，天下崩溃，断绝了宗庙祭祀，为异姓占有国家。
English: Chen Sheng was the first to advocate the collapse of the country, cut off the ancestral temple rituals, and occupied the country for different surnames.

古文：此吏不平，政不宣，民不宁之祸也。
现代文：造就是吏不平、政不宣、民不宁之祸。
English: Zou is the scourge of officials' discontent, politics not being made public, and the people being restless.

古文：今陛下配天象地，覆露万民，绝秦之迹，除其乱法；躬亲本事，废去淫末；除苛解娆，宽大爱人；肉刑不用，罪人亡帑；非谤不治，铸钱者除；通关去塞，不孽诸侯；宾礼长老，爱恤少孤；罪人有期，后宫出嫁；尊赐孝悌，农民不租；明诏军师，爱士大夫；求进方正，废退奸邪；除去阴刑，害民者诛；忧劳百姓，列侯就都；亲耕节用，视民不奢。
现代文：今陛下配天之时，象地之利，荫泽万民，除绝亡秦遣迹，废去乱法；亲身提倡本业，杜禁奢侈末业；消除烦扰，宽厚爱人；肉刑不用，犯罪不及妻子；诽谤不治罪。废禁铸钱律；打通关塞，不猜疑诸侯；礼敬长老，抚恤少孤；罪人有期，后宫出嫁；尊敬赏赐孝悌，农民在朝廷足用时免租；明诏军中师长，爱惜士卒和官员；寻求正派官吏，废退奸邪之官；除去宫刑，害民者处死；慰问百姓，列侯回到封国；亲自耕田，节省用费，向百姓昭示不侈。
English: Now, at the time of His Majesty's matchmaking with heaven, the benefit of the earth and the shadow of all peoples will be eliminated, the Qin Dynasty will be eliminated, and the law of chaos will be abolished; He will personally advocate the business, prohibit the luxury of the last business; eliminate the annoyance, the generous lover; do not use corporal punishment, the crime is not as good as the wife; slander will not be punished. Abolish the prohibition of the money law; break through the customs, do not suspect the princes; respect the elders, support the orphans; the sinner has a time limit, the harem is married; respect and reward the filial piety, the

古文：所为天下兴利除害，变法易故，以安海内者，大功数十，皆上世之所难及，陛下行之，道纯德厚，元元之民幸矣。
现代文：为天下兴利除害，变法革旧，安定海内，大功数十项，都是上世所难以办到的，陛下实行了，道德纯厚，是天下百姓之大幸。
English: For the benefit of the world, eliminating harm, changing the law, and stabilizing the country, dozens of great achievements have been made, all of which are difficult to achieve in the past. His Majesty has implemented them, and his morality is pure. This is a great blessing for the people of the world.

古文：诏策曰 永惟朕之不德 ，愚臣不足以当之。
现代文：诏策曰 永远纠正朕的不合德义的言行 ，愚臣不足以当此。
English: The edict said, "Always correct my words and deeds that are not in accordance with virtue. Foolishness is not enough for this."

古文：诏策曰 悉陈其志，毋有所隐 ，愚臣窃以五帝之贤臣明之。
现代文：诏策曰 悉陈其志，毋有所隐 ，愚臣用五帝的贤臣来说明。
English: The Emperor's edict said, "There is no need to conceal one's ambition," and the Fool used the wise men of the Five Emperors to illustrate his point.

古文：臣闻五帝其臣莫能及，则自亲之；三王臣主俱贤，则共忧之；五伯不及其臣，则任使之。
现代文：臣闻五帝之臣不如五帝，五帝便亲自去办；三王臣主皆贤，便臣主共同操心；五霸不及其臣，便任使其臣。
English: When the vassals heard that the vassals of the five emperors were not as good as the five emperors, the five emperors went to do it themselves; the three kings and vassals were all wise, so the vassals worried about it together; if the five overlords did not like their vassals, they appointed their vassals.

古文：此所以神明不遗，而贤圣不废也，故各当其世而立功德焉。
现代文：这便是不弃神明之德，不废圣贤之名，各在当世建立功德。
English: This is not to abandon the virtue of the gods, not to abandon the name of the sages, and to establish merit in the present world.

古文：传曰 往者不可及，来者犹可待，能明其世者谓之天子 ，此之谓也。
现代文：传日 以往的事追不回来，将来的事还可以等待，能明白世事者就是天子 ，说的就是这个意思。
English: According to legend, the past cannot be recovered, the future can wait, and the one who can understand the world is the Son of Heaven, which is what it means.

古文：窃闻战不胜者易其地，民贫穷者变其业。
现代文：我私下听说战不能取胜就改换他的封地，百姓贫穷就改变他的职业。
English: I have heard in private that if a war cannot be won, he changes his fiefdom, and if the people are poor, he changes his profession.

古文：今以陛下神明德厚，资财不下五帝，临制天下，至今十有六年，民不益富，盗贼不衰，边境未安，其所以然，意者陛下未之躬亲，而待群臣也。
现代文：今陛下神明厚德，素质之才不低于五帝，主宰天下，至今十六年，民不增富，盗贼不衰减，边境没有安定，其所以是这样，有人说陛下没有亲身办事，而在等待群臣去办。
English: Now, His Majesty is divine and virtuous, and his qualities are no less than those of the Five Emperors. He dominates the world. So far, for sixteen years, the people have not increased in wealth, the thieves have not diminished, and the borders have not been stable. This is why some people say that His Majesty has not personally done anything, but is waiting for his ministers to do it.

古文：今执事之臣皆天下之选已，然莫能望陛下清光，譬之犹五帝之佐也。
现代文：如今当政大臣都是从天下各地选拔上来的，然而不能望见陛下清明之光，就像五帝的辅佐之臣。
English: Nowadays, the ministers of state are selected from all over the world, but they cannot see the clear light of His Majesty, just like the assistants of the five emperors.

古文：陛下不自躬亲，而待不望清光之臣，臣窃恐神明之遗也。
现代文：陛下不亲自处理，而等待不望清明之光的臣子，臣私自以为神明之德就要被自己遣弃。
English: If your majesty does not personally deal with it, but waits for a vassal who does not hope for the light of clarity, the vassal who thinks he is a god will be rejected.

古文：日损一日，岁亡一岁，日月益暮，盛德不及究于天下，以传万世，愚臣不自度量，窃为陛下惜之。
现代文：曰损失是一日，岁损失了是一岁，曰月更加临近夜暮，盛德不普及到天下，来流传万世，愚臣不自量力，私下为陛下惋惜。
English: He said that the loss was one day, the loss of a year was one year, the moon was closer to the twilight, the greatness of virtue did not spread to the world and spread to all ages, the fools did not do their best, and he privately regretted his majesty.

古文：昧死上狂惑草茅之愚，臣言惟陛下财择。
现代文：冒死上狂惑草茅之愚见，臣言仅供陛下裁择。
English: He risked his life to bewitch the foolishness of grass and thatch, and his words are only for His Majesty to decide.

古文：时，贾谊已死，对策者百余人，唯错为高第，繇是迁中大夫。
现代文：当时置谊已死，对策者百余人，衹有垦壁是最高等级，由是升为中大夫。
English: At that time, 置谊 had already died, and there were more than a hundred countermeasures. 有壁 was the highest grade, and由是上 was promoted to junior doctor.

古文：错又言宜削诸侯事，及法令可更定者，书凡三十篇。
现代文：显壁又说宜削诸侯，还有法令应更改的，写出共三十篇。
English: He also wrote a total of thirty articles, stating that it was appropriate to reduce the number of lords, and that the laws should be changed.

古文：孝文虽不尽听，然奇其材。
现代文：圭立壶虽然不尽采纳，然而惊奇他的才华。
English: Although Gui Lijuan did not fully adopt it, he was surprised by his talent.

古文：当是时，太子善错计策，爰盎诸大功臣多不好错。
现代文：当时，太子称善垦错的计策，塞矗诸大功臣多不喜欢显错。
English: At that time, the crown prince said that it was a good strategy to avoid mistakes, and many great heroes did not like to make mistakes.

古文：景帝即位，以错为内史。
现代文：景帝登位后，用晁错作内史。
English: After Emperor Han Jing succeeded to the throne, he appointed Zou Er as the leader of the Inner History.

古文：错数请间言事，辄听，幸倾九卿，法令多所更定。
现代文：晁错多次请求单独谈论政事，景帝每每听从，宠爱超过了九卿，法令被修改的很多。
English: He repeatedly asked for a separate discussion of political affairs, and Emperor Jing obeyed every time. He was favored by more than nine emperors, and many laws and regulations were amended.

古文：丞相申屠嘉心弗便，力未有以伤。
现代文：丞相申屠嘉心里不满，但又无力加以伤害。
English: Premier Shen Tu Jia was not satisfied in his heart, but he did not have enough strength to destroy him.

古文：内史府居太上庙堧中，门东出，不便，错乃穿门南出，凿庙堧垣。
现代文：内史府建在太上庙围墙裹的空地上，门向东开，进出不方便，晁错便向南边开了两扇门出入，凿开了太上庙的围墙。
English: The Inner History Museum was built in an open space surrounded by the wall of the Taishang Temple. The door opened to the east, making it inconvenient to enter and exit. By mistake, two doors opened to the south, opening the wall of the Taishang Temple.

古文：丞相大怒，欲因此过为奏请诛错。
现代文：丞相申屡台听说后，非常生气，打算藉这个过失撰写奏章请求诛杀晁错。
English: After hearing the news, the chancellor was very angry and planned to use this mistake to write a petition to correct the mistake.

古文：错闻之，即请间为上言之。
现代文：晁错听到这个消息，当夜请求单独进见皇上，原原本本地向皇上说了这件事。
English: Hearing this news by mistake, he asked to see the emperor alone that night. He had originally told the emperor about this.

古文：丞相奏事，因言错擅凿庙垣为门，请下廷尉诛。
现代文：丞相上朝奏事，趁机说了晁错擅自凿开太上庙的墙作门，请求把他交给廷尉处死。
English: The prime minister made a report to the emperor, took the opportunity to say that it was a mistake to open the wall of the temple without permission, and requested that he be handed over to the imperial lieutenant to be executed.

古文：上曰： 此非庙垣，乃堧中垣，不致于法。 
现代文：皇上说： 这不是庙墙，是庙外空地上的围墙，不牵涉到法律。 
English: The emperor said: This is not a temple wall, it is a fence on the open space outside the temple, and it does not involve the law.

古文：丞相谢。罢朝，因怒谓长史曰： 吾当先斩以闻，乃先请，固误。 
现代文：丞相谢罪，退朝后，生气地对长史说： 我应该先杀掉他再报告皇上，却先奏请，反被造小子出卖，因此失误。 
English: Emperor Xie sinned, and after retiring, he angrily said to Chang Shi: I should have killed him first and then reported to the emperor, but I should have asked first, but I was betrayed by the boy, so I made a mistake.

古文：丞相遂发病死。错以此愈贵。
现代文：丞相于是发病死了，晁错因此更加显贵。
English: The prime minister finally fell ill and died, making the mistake all the more conspicuous.

古文：迁为御史大夫，请诸侯之罪过，削其支郡。
现代文：晁错被提升为御史大夫，陈述诸侯的罪过，请求削减他们的土地，收回他们的旁郡。
English: He was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian, and he reported on the sins of the lords, requesting that their lands be reduced and their counties be taken back.

古文：奏上，上令公卿、列侯、宗室杂议，莫敢难，独窦婴争之，繇此与错有隙。
现代文：奏章送上去，皇上命令公卿、列侯和皇族集会讨论，没有谁敢非难，衹有宝婴不同意，从此和晁错了隔阂。
English: The imperial rescript was sent up, and the emperor ordered the nobles, lords, and members of the imperial family to assemble and discuss it. No one dared to criticize it, and no one dared to disagree with it. From then on, there was a gap between them.

古文：错所更令三十章，诸侯讙哗。
现代文：晁错修改的法令有三十章，诸侯哗然，憎恨晁错。
English: There are thirty chapters in the revised edict, and the princes are outraged and hate the mistake.

古文：错父闻之，从颍川来，谓错曰： 上初即位，公为政用事，侵削诸侯，疏人骨肉，口让多怨，公何为也？ 
现代文：晁错的父亲听到这个消息，从颖川赶来，对晁错说： 皇上刚才即位，您执政掌权，侵害削弱诸侯，疏远人家的骨肉，人们都责怪怨恨您，为什么这样作呢? 
English: On hearing the news, Zou Zou's father arrived from Yingchuan and said to Zou Zou: "Your Majesty has just ascended the throne, you have been in power, you have encroached on and weakened the lords, and you have alienated people's flesh and blood. People are blaming and hating you. Why are you doing this?

古文：错曰： 固也。
现代文：晁错说： 当然嘛。
English: I mistakenly said, "Of course."

古文：不如此，天子不尊，宗庙不安。 
现代文：不这样，天子不会尊贵，国家不得安宁。 
English: Otherwise, the Son of Heaven will not be honored, and the country will not have peace.

古文：父曰： 刘氏安矣，而晁氏危，吾去公归矣！ 
现代文：晁错的父亲说： 刘家的天下安宁了，而晁家却危险了，我离开您回去了! 
English: Zou Er's father said: The world of Liu's family is peaceful, but Zou's family is in danger. I left you and went back!

古文：遂饮药死，曰 吾不忍见祸逮身。 
现代文：便服毒药死去，临死时说： 我不忍看到大祸连累自己。 
English: So he took poison and died, saying as he died, "I cannot bear to see the great evil that I have brought upon myself."

古文：后十余日，吴、楚七国俱反，以诛错为名。
现代文：十几天之后，吴、楚七国皆反，以诛晁错为名。
English: A dozen days later, the seven provinces of Wu and Chu all rebelled, taking the name of the mistake.

古文：上与错议出军事，错欲令上自将兵，而身居守。
现代文：皇上与晁错商议出兵事，晁错想让皇上亲自率兵，由他居守后方。
English: The emperor and Zeng Er discussed sending troops, but Zeng Er wanted the emperor to personally lead the troops and guard the rear.

古文：会窦婴言爰盎，诏召入见，上方与错调兵食。
现代文：当时窦婴正推举袁盎，受韶入见，皇上正与晁错筹划军粮。
English: At that time, Dou Ying was in the process of nominating Yuan Wang, and it was understood that the emperor was in the process of planning military rations.

古文：上问盎曰： 君尝为吴相，知吴臣田禄伯为人乎？
现代文：皇上问袁盎说： 你曾担任吴国相，知道吴臣田禄伯的为人吗?
English: The emperor asked Yuan Ang, "You once served as the minister of the State of Wu. Did you know that the minister of the State of Wu was Tian Luo Bo?"

古文：今吴、楚反，于公意何如？ 对曰： 不足忧也，今破矣。 
现代文：今吴、楚反，你怎么看? 回答说： 不足忧，今天就可以打败。 
English: What do you think of Wu and Chu Tuan now? They replied, "Don't worry, we can beat them today."

古文：上曰： 吴王即山铸钱，煮海为盐，诱天下豪桀，白头举事，此其计不百全，岂发乎？
现代文：皇上说： 吴王就山铸钱，煮海为盐，引诱天下豪杰，头裹白巾为号起事，这个计划还没有完善，那能放弃呢?
English: The emperor said, "Wu Wang casts money on the mountain, boils the sea for salt, lures the world's heroes, and wraps his head in a white scarf as a signal to rise up. This plan has not yet been perfected, so can it be abandoned?

古文：何以言其无能为也？ 
现代文：为什么说他不足担忧呀? 
English: Why say he can't make a difference?

古文：盎对曰： 吴铜、盐之利则有之，安得豪桀而诱之！
现代文：袁盎回答说： 吴国铜盐之利是有的，哪裹去找豪杰来引诱!
English: Yuan Ang replied, "Wu has the advantage of copper and salt. How can I find a great man to entice me?

古文：诚令吴得豪桀，亦且辅而为谊，不反矣。
现代文：真是让吴国得到豪杰，也祇是辅政为谊，不会反叛。
English: It is true that Wu has gained a hero, but it is only a political friendship, not a rebellion.

古文：吴所诱，皆亡赖子弟，亡命铸钱奸人，故相诱以乱。 
现代文：吴国所引诱的人，都是一些无赖子弟，亡命铸钱奸人，所以招来后为乱。 
English: The people lured by the State of Wu were all scoundrels and money-launderers, so the result was chaos.

古文：错曰： 盎策之善。 
现代文：晁错说： 袁盎策很好。 
English: He mistakenly said: Yuan Wanzhong's policy is very good.

古文：上问曰： 计安出？ 
现代文：皇上说： 平乱之计怎么订? 
English: The emperor asked: How can we come up with a good countermeasure?

古文：盎对曰： 愿屏左右。 
现代文：袁盎说： 请左右人等退下。 
English: Yuan Ang said, "Please stand back, left and right.

古文：上屏人，独错在。
现代文：左右人退下，晁错一人留下。
English: The emperor asked the people around him to step back, and only Shao Kuo remained.

古文：盎曰： 臣所言，人臣不得知。 
现代文：袁盎说： 臣要说的，人臣不得知。 
English: Yuan Ang said, "What a minister wants to say, a vassal does not know.

古文：乃屏错。
现代文：于是让晁错退下。
English: Then the screen went blank again.

古文：错趋避东箱，甚恨。
现代文：晁错忙避到束厢房，深恨袁盎。
English: He was in a hurry to get to the casket room by mistake, and deeply hated Yuan Ang.

古文：上卒问盎，对曰： 吴、楚相遗书，言高皇帝王子弟各有分地，今贼臣晁错擅適诸侯，削夺之地，以故反名为西共诛错，复故地而罢。
现代文：皇上急问袁盎，回答说： 吴、楚相送来书信，说高帝封子弟为王各有分地，今贼臣晁错擅罚诸侯，削夺他们的土地，所以反名是 西进共诛晁错，恢复原有封地就罢兵。
English: The emperor asked Yuan Ang urgently, and replied: Wu and Chu Sang sent a letter saying that Emperor Gao's vassal sons had their own lands as kings, and now the vassals of the thieves had made the mistake of arbitrarily punishing the lords and robbing their lands. Therefore, the counter-name was the Westward march and the mistake of restoring the original fiefs.

古文：方今计，独有斩错，发使赦吴、楚七国，复其故地，则兵可毋血刃而俱罢。 
现代文：如今的计策，衹有斩晁错，派使者赦吴、楚七国，恢复故地，那么不会流血就可以全都罢兵。 
English: Today's strategy, there is no mistake, send an envoy to pardon Wu, Chu seven countries, restore the homeland, then there will be no bloodshed, you can all go on strike.

古文：于是上默然良久，曰： 顾诚何如，吾不爱一人谢天下。 
现代文：于是皇上默不作声，很久才说： 看看情况如何，我不爱一人以谢天下。 
English: So the Emperor was silent for a long time before he said, "Let's see how things go. I don't love anyone, thank God."

古文：盎曰： 愚计出此，唯上孰计之。 
现代文：袁盎说： 愚计拿出来，衹能是皇上好好合计。 
English: Yuan Ang said, "If you come up with a stupid plan, the emperor can make a good overall plan."

古文：乃拜盎为泰常，密装治行。
现代文：于是任袁盎为太常，秘密打点行装起程。
English: As a result, Ren Yuanang was too common, secretly starting the packing process.

古文：后十余日，丞相青翟、中尉嘉、廷慰欧劾奏错曰： 吴王反逆亡道，欲危宗庙，天下所当共诛。
现代文：十几天后，丞相青翟、中尉嘉、廷尉张欧上奏弹劾晁错说： 吴王反逆无道，想危害宗庙，天下应当共诛之。
English: A dozen days later, the Minister of the Imperial Court, the Minister of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, and the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Court,

古文：今御史大夫错议曰： 兵数百万，独属群臣，不可信，陛下不如自出临兵，使错居守。
现代文：今御史大夫晁错建议说： 兵几百万，单独交给群臣不可靠，陛下不如亲自率兵，让晁错留守。
English: Now, Imperial Historian Kojima suggested, "It is not reliable to leave several million soldiers to the vassals alone. Your Majesty should personally lead the troops and let Kojima stay behind."

古文：徐、僮之旁吴所未下者可以予吴。 
现代文：徐、僮周围未攻占的地方可以给吴。 
English: The unoccupied areas around Xu and Handan can be given to Wu.

古文：错不称陛下德信，欲疏群臣百姓，又欲以城邑予吴，亡臣子礼，大逆无道。
现代文：晁错不称颂陛下德义诚信，想疏远群臣百姓，又想用城邑给吴，没有尽臣子之礼，大逆无道。
English: If you make a mistake and do not praise His Majesty's virtue, righteousness and integrity, if you want to alienate your subjects and people, and if you want to give cities and towns to Wu, if you have not exhausted the courtesy of your subjects, there is no way out.

古文：错当要斩，父母妻子同产无少长皆弃市。
现代文：晁错应当受腰斩刑罚，父母妻子兄弟无论老少都应处死。
English: Whoever commits a crime shall be punished by beheading, and his parents, wife and brothers, whether old or young, shall all be put to death.

古文：臣请论如法。 
现代文：臣请按法论处。 
English: Minister, please deal with it according to the law.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇上批示说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：错殊不知。
现代文：晁错毫无所知。
English: He didn't know anything about it.

古文：乃使中尉召错，绐载行市。错衣朝衣，斩东市。
现代文：便派中尉召晁错，骗上车经过街市，晁错穿着朝服在束市被斩。
English: He then sent a lieutenant to call him by mistake, tricked him into getting into a car and driving through the market, and he was beheaded in Sokuichi for wearing a morning suit by mistake.

古文：错已死，谒者仆射邓公为校尉，击吴、楚为将。
现代文：晁错已死，谒者仆射邓公担任校尉，这时担任将领进攻吴、楚叛军。
English: Zou Er was dead, and Zou's servant, Deng Gong, became the captain of the school. At that time, he served as the general to attack the rebels of Wu and Chu.

古文：还，上书言军事，见上。
现代文：他回京师，上书报告军事情况，进见皇上。
English: He returned to Beijing, reported the military situation in a letter, and went to see the emperor.

古文：上问曰： 道军所来，闻晁错死，吴、楚罢不？ 
现代文：皇上问道： 你从军中来，听到晁错死了，吴、楚退兵没有? 
English: The emperor asked, "You came from the army, and you heard that Yao died by mistake. Didn't Wu and Chu leave the army?"

古文：邓公曰： 吴为反数十岁矣，发怒削地，以诛错为名，其意不在错也。
现代文：邓公说： 吴王谋反已有几十年了，因削减他的封地而发怒，以诛杀晁错为名，他的本意不在晁错呀。
English: Deng Gong said, "Wu Wang has been plotting rebellion for decades. He is angry because of the reduction of his fiefs, and in the name of fighting and killing, his intention is not to fight and kill.

古文：且臣怒天下之士箝口不敢复言矣。 上曰： 何哉？ 
现代文：而且我担心天下的士大夫闭口，不敢进言了厂皇上说： 为什么呢? 
English: And I'm worried that the world's police chiefs are keeping their mouths shut, not daring to speak up to the emperor and say: Why?

古文：邓公曰： 夫晁错患诸侯强大不可制，故请削之，以尊京师，万世之利也。
现代文：邓公说： 晁错忧虑诸侯强大了不能够制服，所以请求削减诸侯的封地，藉以尊崇朝廷，这是万世的好事。
English: Deng Gong said: "It is a good thing for the world to ask for the reduction of the fiefs of the lords in order to respect the imperial court.

古文：计划始行，卒受大戮，内杜忠臣之口，外为诸侯报仇，臣窃为陛下不取也。 
现代文：计划刚开始实行，竟然遭受杀戮，对内来说，堵塞了忠臣的口，对外来说，替诸侯报了仇，我私下认为您这样做是不可取的。 
English: I think it is inadvisable for you to do so, since the plan has just begun to be implemented, and you have been killed. From the inside, you have silenced your loyal vassals, and from the outside, you have avenged the feudal lords.

古文：于是景帝喟然长息，曰： 公言善。吾亦恨之！ 
现代文：这时，景帝长声叹息，说道： 您说的对，我也悔恨这什事。 
English: At this time, Emperor Jing sighed and said: You are right, I also regret this.

古文：乃拜邓公为城阳中尉。
现代文：于是任命邓公担任城阳中尉。
English: As a result, Deng Gong was appointed as the lieutenant of Chengyang.

古文：邓公，成固人也，多奇计。
现代文：邓公是成固人，多有奇特的谋略。
English: Deng Gong is a Chenggu person, with many unexpected tricks.

古文：建元年中，上招贤良，公卿言邓先。邓先时免，起家为九卿。
现代文：建元年问，朝廷招纳贤良，公卿们推举邓公，这时邓公免了职，由平民起用做了九卿。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, the imperial court recruited virtuous people, and the nobles nominated Deng Gong. At this time, Deng Gong was relieved of his duties and was appointed by the commoners as the nine nobles.

古文：一年，复谢病免归。
现代文：一年后，邓公又托病辞职回家。
English: A year later, Deng Gong resigned to take care of his illness and returned home.

古文：其子章，以修黄、老言显诸公间。
现代文：他的儿子塑童因为研究茎壶、王的学说，在朝廷大臣中间很有名望。
English: His son, Plastang, was well-known among the ministers of the imperial court for his research on the stem kettle and the theory of the king.

古文：赞曰：爰盎虽不好学，亦善傅会，仁心为质，引义慷慨。
现代文：赞说：袁盎虽然不好学，却也善于贯通领会，尚有仁爱之心的本质，引述大义时常常激昂慷慨。
English: Zang said: Although Yuan Ang is not good at learning, he is also good at comprehending and understanding, still has the essence of benevolence, and is often impassioned and generous when quoting the Great Righteousness.

古文：遭孝文初立，资适逢世。
现代文：遇到汉文帝即位，正是才智得以逢时。
English: When Emperor Hanwen ascended to the throne, it was precisely talent that was able to rise to the occasion.

古文：时已变易，及吴壹说，果于用辩，身亦不遂。
现代文：时代变化，到景帝时，对吴、楚叛乱的一次建议，用诡计诛杀晁错，而他自己也终于遭到不测。
English: Times have changed, and by the time of Emperor Jing, a suggestion of a rebellion against Wu and Chu was defeated by trickery, and he himself was finally taken by surprise.

古文：晁错锐于为国远虑，而不见身害。
现代文：晁错敏锐于为国深谋远虑，却看不到自身祸害临头。
English: He is keen on forethought for the country, but can't see his own impending disaster.

古文：其父睹之，经于沟渎，亡益救败，不如赵母指括，以全其宗。
现代文：他的父亲看得清楚，却自杀于沟渠，无益于挽救败亡，不如赵母责备赵括，赵括虽败于长平，却保全了赵家不受连坐法杀害。
English: His father could see clearly, but committed suicide in a ditch, which was of no use in saving the defeat. It was better for Zhao's mother to blame Zhao Guan. Although Zhao Guan was defeated by Changping, he saved the Zhao family from being killed by Lian Zi Fa.

古文：悲夫！
现代文：可悲啊!
English: How sad!

古文：错虽不终，世哀其忠。
现代文：晁错虽然不得善终，世人还是哀叹他的忠心。
English: The world still mourns his loyalty, even though his mistake did not have a happy ending.

古文：故论其施行之语著于篇。
现代文：因此收集他实施政事的有关言论，载于传记之中。
English: Therefore, the collection of his speeches related to the implementation of government affairs is contained in the biography.

