古文：定王八年，使刘康公聘于鲁，发币于大夫。
现代文：周定王八年，派刘康公出使鲁国，向鲁国的大夫分送礼物。
English: In the eighth year of King Zhou Ding, Liu Kangong sent an envoy to the State of Lu to distribute gifts to the doctors of the State of Lu.

古文：季文子、孟献子皆俭，叔孙宣子、东门子家皆侈。
现代文：季文子、孟献子都俭朴，而叔孙宣子、东门子家却很奢侈。
English: Ji Wenzi and Meng Xianzi were frugal, while their uncles and grandsons, Xuan Zi and Dongmen Zi, were very extravagant.

古文：归，王问鲁大夫孰贤，对曰： 季、孟其长处鲁乎！叔孙、东门其亡乎！
现代文：回来以后，定王询问鲁国的大夫哪位贤德，刘康公答道： 季孙、仲孙能在鲁国长期保持低位，叔孙、东门可能最后会败亡。
English: After returning, Ding Wang asked Liu Kangong about the virtues of the doctors in Lu. Liu Kangong replied: Ji Sun and Zhong Sun can maintain a low position in Lu for a long time, while Uncle Sun and Dongmen may eventually be defeated.

古文：若家不亡，身必不免。 
现代文：即使家族不亡，本人必不能免祸。 
English: Even if my family doesn't die, I won't be immune.

古文：王曰： 何故？ 
现代文：定王说： 那是什么原因呢？ 
English: Zhou Dingwang asked: What is the reason?

古文：对曰： 臣闻之：为臣必臣，为君必君。
现代文：刘康公答道： 我听说，为臣必须遵行臣道，为君必须恪守君道。
English: Liu Kang replied: I have heard that as a vassal, you must follow the vassal's way, and as a prince, you must follow the prince's way.

古文：宽肃宣惠，君也；敬恪恭俭，臣也。
现代文：宽厚、严整、公正、仁爱，是君道；忠敬、谨慎、谦恭、俭朴，是臣道。
English: Generosity, strictness, justice, and benevolence are the ways of a monarch; loyalty, prudence, modesty, and frugality are the ways of a subject.

古文：宽所以保本也，肃所以济时也，宣所以教施也，惠所以和民也。
现代文：宽厚用以维护基业，严整用以完成政务，公正用以施行教化，仁爱用以团结民众。
English: Generosity is used to maintain the foundation, strictness is used to complete government affairs, fairness is used to carry out enlightenment, and benevolence is used to unite the people.

古文：本有保则必固，时动而济则无败功，教施而宣则遍，惠以和民则阜。
现代文：基业得到维护就必然稳固，按时机而行动而政务完成就没有荒废的事情，教化施行而公正就流布周遍，用仁爱来团结民众就上下富足。
English: If the foundation is maintained, it is bound to be stable; if the government acts in accordance with the time and the affairs are completed, there will be no wastage; if enlightenment is carried out and justice is carried out, it will spread everywhere; if benevolence is used to unite the people, the people will be prosperous.

古文：若本固而功成，施遍而民阜，乃可以长保民矣，其何事不彻？
现代文：如果基业稳固而政务成就，教化周遍而民众富足，才能够长久地保有百姓，还有什么事做不到呢？
English: If the foundation is solid and the government affairs are successful, if the enlightenment is widespread and the people are rich, only then can the people be kept for a long time. What else can't be done?

古文：敬所以承命也，恪所以守业也，恭所以给事也，俭所以足用也。
现代文：忠敬用以承受君命，谨慎用以守护家业，谦恭用以执行公务，俭朴用以丰足财用。
English: Loyalty and reverence are used to bear the king's life, prudence is used to guard the family business, modesty is used to perform official duties, and frugality is used to amass wealth.

古文：以敬承命则不违，以恪守业则不懈，以恭给事则宽于死，以俭足用则远于忧。
现代文：以忠敬来承受君命就不会违抗，以谨慎来守护家业就不会荒怠，以谦恭来执行公务就不会犯法，以俭朴来丰足财用就不会担忧。
English: If one bears the king's command with loyalty and reverence, there will be no defiance; if one guards the family business with prudence, there will be no neglect; if one performs official duties with courtesy, there will be no violation of the law; if one is frugal, there will be no worries about the use of wealth.

古文：若承命不违，守业不懈，宽于死而远于忧，则可以上下无隙矣，其何任不堪？
现代文：如果承受君命不违抗，守护家业不懈怠，不触犯刑法而又远离忧愁，君臣上下就能够没有嫌隙了，还有什么事胜任不了呢？
English: If one does not disobey the emperor's order, does not slack off in guarding the family business, does not violate the criminal law, and keeps away from sorrow, there will be no rift between the emperor and his subjects. What else is beyond one's competence?

古文：上任事而彻，下能堪其任，所以为令闻长世也。
现代文：在上者要施行的政务能办到，在下者能胜任交办的公务，因此国家才能长治久安。
English: Those at the top can carry out the government affairs that need to be carried out, and those at the bottom can be competent in the official duties assigned, so the country can enjoy long-term peace and stability.

古文：今夫二子者俭，其能足用矣，用足则族可以庇。
现代文：现在季孙、仲孙俭朴，他们将财用丰足，因而家族能得到荫护。
English: Now the grandchildren and great-grandchildren are frugal, they will use their wealth abundantly, so the family can be protected.

古文：二子者侈，侈则不恤匮，匮而不恤，忧必及之，若是则必广其身。
现代文：叔孙、东门奢侈，奢侈就不会体恤贫困，贫困者得不到体恤，忧患必然会降临，这样必然会危及自身。
English: Uncles and grandsons, the East Gate luxury, luxury will not sympathize with poverty, the poor do not get sympathy, sorrow will inevitably come, this will inevitably endanger themselves.

古文：且夫人臣而侈，国家弗堪，亡之道也。 
现代文：况且作为人臣而奢侈，国家不堪负担，这是在走向败亡。 
English: Moreover, as a vassal and extravagant, the country is unbearable burden, which is on the road to ruin.

古文：王曰： 几何？ 
现代文：定王问： 他们能维持多久呢？ 
English: Sadao asked: How long can they keep it up?

古文：对曰： 东门之位不若叔孙而泰侈焉，不可以事二君，叔孙之位不若季、孟而亦泰侈焉，不可以事三君。
现代文：刘康公答道： 东门子家的地位不如叔孙宣子但比叔孙宣子奢侈，所以不可能连续两朝享有俸禄；叔孙宣子的地位不如季孙、仲孙，但也比他们奢侈，所以不可能连续三朝享有俸禄。
English: Liu Kanggong replied: The status of the Eastern Gate family is not as high as that of the great-great-grandson, but more extravagant than that of the great-great-grandson, so it is impossible to enjoy the salary for two consecutive dynasties; the status of the great-great-grandson is not as high as that of the great-great-grandson, but it is also more extravagant than them, so it is impossible to enjoy the salary for three consecutive dynasties.

古文：若皆蚤世犹可，若登年以载其毒，必亡。 
现代文：如果他们死得早倒还罢了，假若他们有长久的年寿来多干坏事，一定会败亡。 
English: If only they had died sooner, if only they had lived long enough to do more evil, they would have perished.

古文：十六年，鲁宣公卒。
现代文：周定王十六年，鲁宣公去世。
English: In the 16th year of King Zhou Ding, Lu Xuan Gong passed away.

古文：赴者未及，东门氏来告乱，子家奔齐。
现代文：告丧的使者还没有抵达王都，东门家的人已来报告发生变乱，东门子家逃往齐国。
English: The messenger who announced the death had not yet arrived in the capital, but people from the Dongmen family had already come to report that there had been a disturbance, and the Dongmen family had fled to Qi.

古文：简王十一年，鲁叔孙宣伯亦奔齐，成公未殁二年。
现代文：周简王十一年，叔孙宣子也逃奔齐国，这正好是鲁成公去世的前二年。
English: In the eleventh year of King Zhou Jian, his uncle and grandson, Xuan Zi, also fled to Qi, which was exactly two years before the death of Lu Chenggong.

