古文：文皇帝讳丕，字子桓，武帝太子也。
现代文：魏文帝名丕，字子桓，魏武帝曹操的太子。
English: Emperor Weiwen was the prince of Emperor Cao Cao, also known as Emperor Wei and Emperor Cao Wu.

古文：中平四年冬，生于谯。
现代文：汉灵帝中平四年，在谯县出生。
English: Hanling Emperor Zhongping was born in Lu County in the fourth year of the Heian period.

古文：建安十六年，为五官中郎将、副丞相。
现代文：建安十六年，被封为五官中郎将、副丞相。
English: In 16th year of the Jian'an era, he was appointed as the fifth-ranked middle-ranked general and vice-minister of the imperial court.

古文：二十二年，立为魏太子。太祖崩，嗣位为丞相、魏王。
现代文：建安二十二年，被立为魏国太子，太祖去世后，他继位丞相、魏王。
English: In the 22nd year of Jian'an, he was appointed as the prince of Wei. After the death of his grandfather, he succeeded to the throne as the prime minister and the king of Wei.

古文：尊王后曰王太后。
现代文：尊魏王后为王太后。
English: The Queen of Wei is revered as the Queen Mother.

古文：改建安二十五年为延康元年。
现代文：把建安二十五年改为延康元年。
English: The 25th year of Jianan will be changed to the 1st year of Yan Kang.

古文：元年二月壬戌，以大中大夫贾诩为太尉，御史大夫华歆为相国，大理王朗为御史大夫。
现代文：延康元年二月十六日，魏王封大中大夫贾诩为太尉，御使大夫华歆为相国，大理王朗担任御使大夫。
English: On February 16th, the first year of Yan Kang, Wei Wangfeng University's junior doctor Jia Jun was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, the imperial doctor Hua Jun was promoted to the rank of consort, and the senior doctor Wang Lang was promoted to the rank of imperial doctor.

古文：置散骑常侍、侍郎各四人，其宦人为官者不得过诸署令；为金策著令，藏之石室。
现代文：设立散骑常侍、侍郎各四人，又下令太监担任官职的人数不得超过众署令级别，并把这个诏令刻在金册上，收藏在石室之中。
English: He set up four ranged equerries and four attendants each, and ordered that the number of eunuchs holding official positions should not exceed the level of the orders, and this edict was engraved on a gold book and stored in a stone room.

古文：初，汉熹平五年，黄龙见谯，光禄大夫桥玄问太史令单飏： 此何祥也？ 
现代文：早在汉灵帝熹平五年，黄龙在谯县上空出现，光禄大夫桥玄问太史令单飏说： 这是什么吉兆？ 
English: As early as the fifth year of Emperor Hanling's reign, the Yellow Dragon appeared in the sky over Jixian County. Dr. Guanglu Qiao Xuan asked the Grand Historian to order the single dragonfly to say: What is this good omen?

古文：飏曰： 其国后当有王者兴，不及五十年，亦当复见。天事恒象，此其应也。 
现代文：单飏回答： 这个地方以后必有称王的人出现，不到五十年，黄龙会再次出现，天象经常会反映人事的，这就是天人感应。 
English: Sanzhao replied, "After this place, there will surely be people who praise the king. In less than fifty years, the yellow dragon will appear again. The celestial body will often reflect human affairs. This is the influence of heaven and man.

古文：内黄殷登默而记之。
现代文：内黄殷登默默把这话记下来。
English: Inner Huang Yinden silently jotted down these words.

古文：至四十五年，登尚在。
现代文：四十五年后，殷登依然活着。
English: Forty-five years later, Yin Deng is still alive.

古文：三月，黄龙见谯，登闻之曰： 单飏之言，其验兹乎！ 
现代文：延康元年三月，黄龙又在谯县出现，殷登听到这个消息时说： 单飏的话，现在果然应验了。 
English: In March of the first year of Yan Kang, Huanglong appeared again in Jixian County. When Yin Deng heard this news, he said: "If I had only said it once, now it has come true."

古文：已卯，以前将军夏侯惇为大将军。
现代文：三月九日，魏王任命前将军夏侯惇为大将军。
English: On March 9th, the Wei king appointed the former general Xia Houyi as the great general.

古文：濊貊、扶馀单于、焉耆、于阗王皆各遣使奉献。
现代文：濊貊、扶余族的单于、焉耆、于阗的国王都各派使者进贡。
English: The kings of Shan Yu, Yan Yu, and Yu Yu of the Pu and Fu Yu clans all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月丁巳，饶安县言白雉见。
现代文：四月十二日，饶安县上报说有野鸡出现。
English: On April 12, Rao'an County reported the appearance of pheasants.

古文：庚午，大将军夏侯惇薨。
现代文：二十五日，大将军夏侯惇去世。
English: On the 25th, General Xia Houyi passed away.

古文：五月戊寅，天子命王追尊皇祖太尉曰太王，夫人丁氏曰太王后，封王子叡为武德侯。
现代文：五月三日，汉献帝命令魏王追封皇祖太尉曹嵩为太王，夫人丁氏称太王后，封魏王的儿子曹睿为武德侯。
English: On May 3rd, Emperor Han Xian ordered the Wei king to appoint the emperor's ancestor Cao Song as the great king, his wife Ding as the great queen, and Cao Rui, the son of the Wei king, as the prince of Wude.

古文：是月，冯翊山贼郑甘、王照率众降，皆封列侯。
现代文：在这个月，冯翊地区的山贼郑甘、王照率领部下投降，都被册封为列侯。
English: In this month, the bandits Zheng Gan and Wang Zhao, who led their subordinates to surrender in the Fengyuan area, were both canonized as princes.

古文：酒泉黄华、张掖张进等各执太守以叛。
现代文：酒泉人黄华、张掖人张进等都各自挟持本郡太守反叛。
English: Huang Hua from Jiuquan, Zhang Jin from Zhangye, and so on, are each holding the rebellion of the county's governor hostage.

古文：金城太守苏则讨进，斩之。
现代文：金城太守苏则率兵征讨张进，斩杀了张进。
English: Su Ze, the governor of Jincheng, led an army to recruit Zhang Jin and killed him.

古文：华降。
现代文：黄华投降。
English: Huang Hua surrendered.

古文：六月辛亥，治兵于东郊，庚午，遂南征。
现代文：六月七日，魏王在东郊操练士兵，二十六日，开始南征。
English: On June 7th, the king of Wei drilled soldiers in the eastern suburbs, and on the 26th, he began the southern expedition.

古文：秋七月庚辰，令曰： 轩辕有明台之议，放勋有衢室之问，皆所以广询於下也。
现代文：七月六日，魏王下令说： 黄帝轩辕曾在明台议政，尧帝放勋在道路上修建听取民意的处所，这些都是为了广泛收集民众意见。
English: On July 6th, the Wei king issued an order saying: The Yellow Emperor Xuan Zang once deliberated on politics in Mingdai, and Emperor Gong Fang Xun built a place on the road to listen to the people's opinions. These are all for the purpose of widely collecting the opinions of the people.

古文：百官有司，其务以职尽规谏，将率陈军法，朝士明制度，牧守申政事，缙绅考六艺，吾将兼览焉。 
现代文：朝臣们一定要尽到劝谏的职责；出征将帅要申明军法；朝中大臣要深明治国之道，州牧郡守述说政事，凡是有官职的人都应考核六艺；我会广泛听取大家的意见。 
English: The courtiers must fulfill their duties of persuasion; the dispatched generals and marshals should affirm the military law; the ministers of the dynasty and the Middle Kingdom should deepen the Meiji national way, the state pastures and counties should keep records of political affairs, and all people with official positions should examine the six arts; I will listen to everyone's opinions extensively.

古文：孙权遣使奉献。
现代文：孙权派遣使者前来进献礼物。
English: Sun Quan sent an envoy to bring gifts.

古文：蜀将孟达率众降。
现代文：蜀将孟达率部投降。
English: Shu ordered Mengda to surrender.

古文：武都氐王杨仆率种人内附，居汉阳郡。
现代文：武都氐王杨仆率领族人来归附，让他们居住在汉阳郡。
English: The Wudang Emperor Yang Pu led the tribesmen to be annexed, and let them live in Hanyang County.

古文：甲午，军次於谯，大飨六军及谯父老百姓於邑东。八月，石邑县言凤皇集。
现代文：七月二十日，大军停驻在谯县，魏王在城东备办宴席犒赏六军和谯县的父老乡亲。八月，石邑县上奏说有凤凰聚集。
English: On July 20th, the great army was stationed in Shixian, and the Wei king prepared a banquet in the east of the city to reward the six armies and the parents of Shixian. In August, Shiyi County reported that there was a phoenix gathering.

古文：冬十月癸卯，令曰： 诸将征伐，士卒死亡者或未收敛，吾甚哀之；其告郡国给槥椟殡敛，送致其家，官为设祭。 
现代文：十月一日，魏王下令说： 众将征战讨伐，士卒死亡还有没有收殓的，我倍感哀痛；特此通告各郡国供给小棺材收殓，送到亡者家中，官府为他们祭祀。 
English: On October 1st, the Wei king issued an order: "I am deeply saddened by the fact that many soldiers have gone to war, and there are still soldiers who have not been buried. I hereby notify all counties and states to provide small coffins for burial, to be sent to the homes of the deceased, and for the government to hold a memorial service for them.

古文：丙午，行至曲蠡。
现代文：四月，魏王巡行到曲蠡。
English: In April, the Wei King marched to Quzhou.

古文：汉帝以众望在魏，乃召群公卿士，告祠高庙。
现代文：汉献帝因人心所望在魏，便召集文武百官，在汉高祖庙祭告。
English: Han Xian Di, because the people's hearts longed for Wei, called together hundreds of civil and military officials to make a proclamation at the ancestral temple of the Han Dynasty.

古文：使兼御史大夫张音持节奉玺绶禅位，册曰： 咨尔魏王：昔者帝尧禅位於虞舜，舜亦以命禹，天命不于常，惟归有德。
现代文：派御使大夫张音拿着符节、捧着玉玺把皇位禅让给魏王。在策命书中写道： 咨尔魏王：天命无常，只归有德之人。
English: He sent the imperial envoy Zhang Yin, holding the imperial scepter and the jade scepter, to offer the imperial throne to the Wei king. He wrote in the strategy book: To the Wei king: the fate of heaven is fickle, and it only belongs to those who have virtue.

古文：汉道陵迟，世失其序，降及朕躬，大乱兹昏，群凶肆逆，宇内颠覆。
现代文：汉朝国运衰微，世道处于无序状态，皇位传到我身上，天下大乱，濒于颠覆崩溃。
English: The national fortune of the Han Dynasty was fading, the world was in a disorderly state, the imperial throne was passed on to me, the world was in turmoil, and it was on the verge of collapse.

古文：赖武王神武，拯兹难於四方，惟清区夏，以保绥我宗庙，岂予一人获乂，俾九服实受其赐。
现代文：幸亏魏武王神明英武，拯救危难，使华夏清平，保护我祖宗庙宇平安，全国百姓都得感激武王的厚赐。
English: Fortunately, King Wu of the Wei Dynasty was a man of wisdom and valor, who saved the country from danger, pacified China, and protected the temples of my ancestors. The people of the whole country should be grateful for King Wu's generous gift.

古文：今王钦承前绪，光于乃德，恢文武之大业，昭尔考之弘烈。
现代文：如今您继承先王的事业，弘扬崇高的品德，完备文武大业，发扬光大您父亲的宏伟业绩。
English: Today, you are inheriting your father's cause, promoting lofty morals, completing the great cause of literature and martial arts, and carrying forward your father's magnificent achievements.

古文：皇灵降瑞，人神告徵，诞惟亮采，师锡朕命，佥曰尔度克协于虞舜，用率我唐典，敬逊尔位。
现代文：皇天有灵，辅助我认清我的使命，恭敬地把皇位让给您。您应恭敬地接受大礼，享有万国，以顺承天命。 
English: You should respectfully accept the great gift, enjoy the kingdoms of the world, and obey the heavenly command.

古文：庚午，王升坛即阼，百官陪位。
现代文：于是在繁阳修建祭天的祭坛。二十八日，魏王登上祭坛即位，文武官都在两旁陪拜。
English: On the 28th, the Wei king ascended the altar and ascended to the throne, accompanied by the civil and military officers on both sides.

古文：事讫，降坛，视燎成礼而反。
现代文：禅让之事完成，魏王走下祭坛，参加完燃火祭天地的大礼后返回。
English: After the zen ritual was complete, Wei Wang walked down from the altar and returned after participating in the grand ceremony of the Fire Festival of Heaven and Earth.

古文：改延康为黄初，大赦。
现代文：把年号延康改为黄初，下令大赦天下。
English: He changed the era name from Yankang to Huangchu and ordered a general amnesty.

古文：黄初元年十一月癸酉，以河内之山阳邑万户奉汉帝为山阳公，行汉正朔，以天子之礼郊祭，上书不称臣，京都有事于太庙，致胙；封公之四子为列侯。
现代文：黄初元年十一月一日，尊汉献帝为山阳公，把河内郡山阳邑的一万户封赏给他作为封地，使用汉朝的年号历法，可以用天子的礼仪祭天，上奏不需要自称为臣，朝廷在太庙举行祭祀典礼时，可分享祭品；又封山阳公的四个儿子为列侯。
English: On the first day of November in the first year of the Yellow Emperor, the emperor of the Han Dynasty offered the emperor to be the Sanyang Prince, and awarded him ten thousand households in Sanyang, Hanoi County, as a fief. Using the year calendar of the Han Dynasty, you can use the ceremony of the son of heaven to sacrifice heaven. You do not need to call yourself a vassal. When the imperial court holds a ritual ceremony in the temple, you can share the offerings. In addition, the four sons of Sanyang Prince were made princes.

古文：追尊皇祖太王曰太皇帝，考武王曰武皇帝，尊王太后曰皇太后。
现代文：魏文帝追赠皇祖太王为太皇帝，父武王为武皇帝，尊王太后为皇太后。
English: Emperor Weiwen posthumously presented the emperor's ancestor King Taewon as Emperor Taewon, his father King Wu as Emperor Wu, and Queen Sonwang as Queen Taewon.

古文：赐男子爵人一级，为父后及孝悌力田人二级。
现代文：恩裳每个男子进爵位一级，作为父亲继承人的嫡长子的和孝顺父母，尊敬兄长，努力务农的人个进爵位二级。
English: Every man who is grateful to his father will be promoted to the first level of peerage, and the eldest son who is the heir of his father will be promoted to the second level of peerage, who is filial and obedient to his parents, respects his elder brother, and works hard in agriculture.

古文：以汉诸侯王为崇德侯，列侯为关中侯。
现代文：把汉朝的众位诸侯王封为崇德侯，列侯封为关中侯。
English: He made all the princes of the Han Dynasty into Chongde princes and Guanzhong princes.

古文：以颍阴之繁阳亭为繁昌县。封爵增位各有差。
现代文：把颍阴的繁阳亭改为繁昌县，增封爵位各有不同。
English: The renaming of Shengyin's Shenyang Pavilion to Shengchang County, and the addition of titles and ranks are different.

古文：改相国为司徒，御史大夫为司空，奉常为太常，郎中令为光禄勋，大理为廷尉，大农为大司农。
现代文：把相国改称司徒，御史大夫改称司空，奉常改称太常，郎中令改称光禄勋，大理改称廷尉，大农改称大司农。
English: He changed the names of his relatives to Sito (司徒), Mishi no daibu (御史大夫) to Siku (司空), Bongjon (奉常) to Taejon (太常), Rongzhongling (郎中令) to Guangrokun (光禄勋), Dali (大理) to Tingfu (廷尉) and Dainong (大农) to Daishinong (大司農).

古文：郡国县邑，多所改易。
现代文：各封国与郡县，大多都有改动。
English: Most of the countries and counties have made changes.

古文：更授匈奴南单于呼厨泉魏玺绶，赐青盖车、乘舆、宝剑、玉玦。
现代文：还把原来魏国的玉玺授给匈奴南单于呼厨泉，另赏赐他青盖车、乘舆、宝剑、玉玦等。
English: He also bestowed the jade scepter of the former Wei Kingdom to the Xiongnu Nanshan Yu Hukouquan, and rewarded him with a blue-covered chariot, a horse, a sword, and a jade scepter.

古文：十二月，初营洛阳宫，戊午幸洛阳。
现代文：十二月，开始修建洛阳宫。八月，巡行到洛阳。
English: In December, the construction of Luoyang Palace began. In August, the parade went to Luoyang.

古文：是岁，长水校尉戴陵谏不宜数行弋猎，帝大怒；陵减死罪一等。
现代文：这年，长水校尉戴陵劝谏说不应该经常外出狩猎，文帝大怒；戴陵被判死罪但刑罚降低一等。
English: This year, Emperor Wen was furious when the Changshui lieutenant Dai Ling advised him not to go out hunting so often. Dai Ling was sentenced to death, but the punishment was reduced by one grade.

古文：二年春正月，郊祀天地、明堂。
现代文：黄初二年正月，文帝到郊外祭祀天地和祖先。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Yellow Emperor, Emperor Wen went to the suburbs to worship heaven and earth and ancestors.

古文：甲戌，校猎至原陵，遣使者以太牢祠汉世祖。
现代文：三日，外出涉猎到了原陵地区，派使者备牛、羊、猪三牲之礼祭祀汉世祖光武帝刘秀。
English: On the third day, he went hunting to the original tomb area and sent an emissary to prepare cattle, sheep, and pigs for the ritual sacrifice of Han Dynasty Emperor Guangwu Liu Xiu.

古文：乙亥，朝日于东郊。
现代文：四月，在东郊举行祭祀太阳。
English: In April, a sun-worshipping ceremony was held in the eastern suburbs.

古文：初令郡国口满十万者，岁察孝廉一人；其有秀异，无拘户口。
现代文：又诏令凡是人口满十万的郡县，每年要推举孝廉一人；其中有卓越出众的人，不必拘泥于人数限制。
English: He also decreed that in counties with a population of over 100,000, one filial piety person should be elected every year; among them are outstanding people, who do not have to adhere to the number limit.

古文：辛巳，分三公户邑，封子弟各一人为列侯。
现代文：十日，分配三公的封地户邑，让三公的后代各选一人封为列侯。
English: On the tenth day, the fiefdoms of the three dukes were distributed, and the descendants of the three dukes were each allowed to choose one person to be made a vassal.

古文：壬午，复颍川郡一年田租。
现代文：十一日，免除颍川郡一年的田租赋税。
English: On the 11th day of the month, a year's worth of rice rent tax was exempted in Luochuan County.

古文：改许县为许昌县。
现代文：把许县改称为许昌县。
English: Rename Xu County as Xu Chang County.

古文：以魏郡东部为阳平郡，西部为广平郡。
现代文：把的东部称为阳平郡，西部称为广平郡。
English: The eastern part is called Yangping County, and the western part is called Guangping County.

古文：诏曰： 昔仲尼资大圣之才，怀帝王之器，当衰周之末，无受命之运，在鲁、卫之朝，教化乎洙、泗之上，凄凄焉，遑遑焉，欲屈己以存道，贬身以救世。
现代文：魏文帝颁布诏令： 从前孔子怀有圣人的才能、帝王的气局，却身处周朝的衰末时期，没有接受天命的运数，只得在鲁卫两国的洙水和泗水地区教化引导百姓，忙碌不安，四处奔波，想要委屈自己来保存贤君明主的思想，贬低自己来拯救百姓。
English: Emperor Weiwen issued a decree: Once upon a time, Confucius had the talent of a saint and the temperament of an emperor, but he was in the waning period of the Zhou Dynasty. He did not accept the operation number of the heavenly destiny. He had to enlighten and guide the people in the Surabaya and Surabaya regions of the Luwei two countries. He was busy and anxious, rushing around, wanting to wrong himself to preserve the thought of the wise king and master, and belittle himself to save the people.

古文：于时王公终莫能用之，乃退考五代之礼，脩素王之事，因鲁史而制春秋，就太师而正雅颂，俾千载之后，莫不宗其文以述作，仰其圣以成谋，咨！
现代文：但当时天子诸侯都最终没有重用他，他只能隐居，专注考证黄帝、唐、虞、夏、殷五个朝代的礼仪制度，撰写远古帝王的纪事，并根据鲁史著写《春秋》，参照太师的音乐来订正《雅》、《颂》之音，千百年的流传之后，没有人不把他的著作视为经典，瞻仰他的品德来规范言行，啊！
English: But at that time, the heavenly sons and princes did not reuse him in the end. He could only live in seclusion, focus on the examination of the etiquette system of the five dynasties of the Yellow Emperor, Tang, Yu, Xia and Yin, write the chronicles of ancient emperors, and write "Spring and Autumn" according to the works of Lu Shi, and revise the sound of "Ya" and "Ode" with reference to the music of the grandmaster. After thousands of years of circulation, no one does not regard his works as classics, admire his character to standardize words and deeds, ah!

古文：可谓命世之大圣，亿载之师表者也。
现代文：他可以称得上是治世的良才，万世的师表啊！
English: He can be said to be the reigning genius, the master watchmaker of all time!

古文：遭天下大乱，百祀堕坏，旧居之庙，毁而不脩，褒成之后，绝而莫继，阙里不闻讲颂之声，四时不睹蒸尝之位，斯岂所谓崇礼报功，盛德百世必祀者哉！
现代文：如今天下大乱，礼仪祭祀的仪式都荒废松弛，昔日的庙宇，有所损毁却也没有修缮，对孔氏家族的封爵也没有延续了，他的故乡阙里再也听不到讲礼颂诗的声音，一年四季看不到祭拜的情形，这难道是那些要崇尚礼制、奖励功业、品德要流传百世的帝王们要祭祀的人的样子吗？
English: If today there is a great turmoil, the rituals of ritual sacrifice are all wasted and slack, the temples of the past have been damaged and destroyed but have not been repaired, the knighthood of the Kong family has not been continued, the voice of eulogy and hymn can no longer be heard in his hometown, and the situation of worship can not be seen all year round, is this the appearance of those who want to worship the etiquette, reward the merits, and the moral of the emperors to be passed down for a hundred years?

古文：其以议郎孔羡为宗圣侯，邑百户，奉孔子祀。
现代文：所以现在封议郎孔羡为宗圣侯，封邑百户，侍奉孔子的祀庙。 
English: It is with great honor that we specially confer the title of "King of Confucianism" to the holy prince of Zong, who has a hundred-year-old cuisine and worships King of Confucianism.

古文：令鲁郡脩起旧庙，置百户吏卒以守卫之，又於其外广为室屋以居学者。 
现代文：诏令让鲁郡重新修缮旧时的庙宇，设立一百户官兵守卫庙宇，又在外围建造许多房屋来汇集志学人仕子们。
English: The imperial edict ordered Lu County to renovate the old temple, set up a hundred officers and soldiers to guard the temple, and build many houses in the outskirts to bring together the scholars.

古文：三月，加辽东太守公孙恭为车骑将军。
现代文：三月，文帝加封辽东太守公孙恭为车骑将军。
English: In March, Emperor Wen conferred the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry to Liaodong Governor Sun Qiong.

古文：初复五铢钱。
现代文：恢复使用五铢钱。
English: Resumption of the use of five-baht coins.

古文：夏四月，以车骑将军曹仁为大将军。
现代文：四月，封车骑将军曹仁为大将军。
English: In April, Cao Ren, the commander of the cavalry, was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：五月，郑甘复叛，遣曹仁讨斩之。
现代文：五月，郑甘再次反叛，文帝派曹仁前往征讨并诛杀了郑甘。
English: In May, Zheng Gan rebelled again, and Emperor Wen sent Cao Ren to conquer and kill Zheng Gan.

古文：六月庚子，初祀五岳四渎，咸秩群祀。
现代文：六月一日，前往祭祀五岳名山，百官都有秩序地参加祭礼。
English: On June 1st, they went to the Five Famous Mountains for the ritual, and all the officials participated in the ritual in an orderly manner.

古文：丁卯，夫人甄氏卒。
现代文：二十八日，文帝夫人甄氏去世。
English: On the 28th, Wen Di's wife, Zhen, passed away.

古文：戊辰晦，日有食之，有司奏免太尉，诏曰： 灾异之作，以谴元首，而归过股肱，岂禹、汤罪己之义乎？
现代文：二十九日，出现了日蚀，相关官员上奏免去太尉之职，文帝下诏说： 天象有异，是在谴责帝王，现在却把罪过归在大臣身上，这难道是大禹、商汤归罪于自己的道义吗？
English: On the 29th, there was a solar eclipse, the relevant officials made a report to dismiss the captain, and Emperor Wen issued an edict saying: The celestial appearance is different, it is to condemn the emperor, but now it is to blame the minister. Is it that Dayu and Shangtang are to blame for their own morality?

古文：其令百官各虔厥职，后有天地之眚，勿复劾三公。 
现代文：特令文武百官要恪尽职守，尽职尽责，以后再有自然灾害，不要再弹劾三公。 
English: He ordered the civil and military officials to fulfill their duties and responsibilities. If there is a natural disaster in the future, they should not impeach the three princes.

古文：秋八月，孙权遣使奉章，并遣于禁等还。
现代文：八月，孙权派使节送来奏章，并送回于禁等人。
English: In August, Sun Quan's envoys sent the music chapter and sent it back to Yu Han and others.

古文：丁巳，使太常邢贞持节拜权为大将军，封吴王，加九锡。
现代文：十九日，文帝派太常邢贞拿着符节去江东任命孙权为大将军，封为吴王，赏赐九锡。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Wen sent Taizhong Qizhen to the east of the Yangtze River with the festival to appoint Sun Quan as the great general, crown him as the king of Wu, and reward Jiuxi.

古文：冬十月，授杨彪光禄大夫。
现代文：十月，封杨彪为光禄大夫。
English: In October, Yang Biao was awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：以谷贵，罢五铢钱。
现代文：因为谷物价贵，停止使用五铢钱。
English: Because of the high price of grain, the use of five-baht coins was discontinued.

古文：己卯，以大将军曹仁为大司马。
现代文：十二日，改任大将军曹仁为大司马。
English: On the 12th, the general Cao Ren was appointed as the chief secretary.

古文：十二月，行东巡。
现代文：十二月，巡视东方。
English: In December, he toured the East.

古文：是岁筑陵云台。
现代文：这一年修筑陵云台。
English: This was the year of the construction of Lingyuntai.

古文：三年春正月丙寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：黄初三年正月初一，出现了日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the Yellow Emperor, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：庚午，行幸许昌宫。
现代文：五日，文帝车驾到了许昌宫。
English: On the fifth day, Emperor Wen's carriage drove to the Xu Chang Palace.

古文：诏曰： 今之计、孝，古之贡士也；十室之邑，必有忠信，若限年然后取士，是吕尚、周晋不显於前世也。
现代文：发布诏令： 现在考评官吏、推荐孝廉，就是以前呢推选人才的做法；但就算只有十户人的小邑，一定会有忠信的贤人，如果限制年龄来选取官员，那么吕尚、周晋就不会在前代显达。
English: Issued a decree: Now, evaluating officials and recommending filial piety is the same as the practice of selecting talents in the past; but even if there are only ten households in a small town, there will certainly be loyal sages. If the age limit is used to select officials, then Lushang and Zhou Jin will not be prominent in the previous generation.

古文：其令郡国所选，勿拘老幼；儒通经术，吏达文法，到皆试用。
现代文：特令各郡国所推举的人才，不要拘泥于年龄大小。应不分老幼；只要儒生通晓经学，吏人明白文章结构章法，都可以考试选用。
English: It is hereby ordered that the talents nominated by each county and state should not be limited by age. There should be no distinction between the old and the young; as long as Confucians are familiar with the scriptures, and officials understand the structure of the article, they can be used in the examination.

古文：有司纠故不以实者。 
现代文：官府追究那些虚假的作法。 
English: The government is investigating those false practices.

古文：二月，鄯善、龟兹、于阗王各遣使奉献，诏曰： 西戎即叙，氐、羌来王，诗、书美之。
现代文：二月，鄯善、龟兹、于阗国王派遣使者进献礼物，文帝下诏说： 从前西戎各国臣服，氐族、羌族来朝朝拜，《诗》、《书》中都称颂此事。
English: In February, the kings of Shenshan, Kuez, and Yu'an sent envoys to present gifts, and Emperor Wen issued an edict saying: In the past, all countries in Xijun were subject, and the Yi and Yao people came to worship in the morning. This was praised in the poem and the book.

古文：顷者西域外夷并款塞内附，其遣使者抚劳之。 
现代文：不久西域各族都来叩开边塞大门前来归顺，特此派使者去安抚慰劳。 
English: Soon, all the tribes in the western region came to break open the gate of the frontier fortress to surrender, and an envoy was sent to appease and comfort them.

古文：是后西域遂通，置戊己校尉。
现代文：从此以后西域的交流通道便打开了，设置戊己校尉。
English: Since then, the communication channel in the western region has been opened, and Lieutenant Wu has been set up.

古文：三月乙丑，立齐公叡为平原王，帝弟鄢陵公彰等十一人皆为王。
现代文：三月初一，立齐公曹睿为平原王，文帝之弟鄢陵公曹彰等十一人都封为王。
English: On the first day of March, Prince Qi Cao Rui was crowned King of the Plain, and Emperor Wen's younger brother Prince Gu Ling Cao Chang and eleven others were also crowned kings.

古文：初制封王之庶子为乡公，嗣王之庶子为亭侯，公之庶子为亭伯。
现代文：并规定所封诸王的庶子称乡公，嗣王的庶子称亭侯，公的庶子称亭伯。
English: It was also stipulated that the illegitimate children of the kings who were enthroned were to be called "Sokong," the illegitimate children of the succeeding king were to be called "Tinghou," and the illegitimate children of the prince were to be called "Tingbo."

古文：甲戌，立皇子霖为河东王。
现代文：十日，封皇子曹霖为河东王。
English: On the 10th, Cao Lin, the crown prince, became the king of Hedong.

古文：甲午，行幸襄邑。
现代文：三十日，文帝巡行到襄邑。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Wen marched to Xiangyi.

古文：夏四月戊申，立鄄城侯植为鄄城王。
现代文：四月十四日，封甄城侯曹植为甄城王。
English: On April 14, Cao Zhi, the lord of Zhencheng, was crowned the King of Zhencheng.

古文：癸亥，行还许昌宫。
现代文：二十九日，文帝巡行回到许昌宫。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Wen returned to the Xu Chang Palace.

古文：五月，以荆、扬、江表八郡为荆州，孙权领牧故也；荆州江北诸郡为郢州。
现代文：五月，把荆、扬以及长江以南的八郡合并为荆州，孙权像以前一样担任荆州牧。荆州江北各郡归属郢州。
English: In May, the counties of Jing, Yang and eight counties south of the Yangtze River were merged into Jing Province, and Sun Quan served as the governor of Jing Province as before. The counties north of the Jing Province River belong to Ganzhou.

古文：闰月，孙权破刘备于夷陵。
现代文：这年闰月，孙权在夷陵大破刘备。
English: In the leap month of this year, Sun Quan defeated Liu Bei in Yiling.

古文：初，帝闻备兵东下，与权交战，树栅连营七百馀里，谓群臣曰： 备不晓兵，岂有七百里营可以拒敌者乎！ 苞原隰险阻而为军者为敌所禽 ，此兵忌也。
现代文：当初，文帝听说刘备大军东下，与孙权交战，围栅栏连接营寨七百多里，对群臣说： 刘备不通晓军事，哪里有用七百里的营寨来抵抗敌军的呢？ 在草木丛生、地势高旷或低洼潮湿的地方安营扎寨，必然被敌方所击败 ，这是用兵的大忌。
English: At first, Emperor Wen heard that Liu Bei's large army was marching eastward to fight against Sun Quan, and the fence connected the camp by more than seven hundred miles. He said to his courtiers: Liu Bei is not familiar with military affairs, where is the use of a camp of seven hundred miles to resist the enemy? If you set up camp in a place with thick vegetation, high terrain or low-lying wetlands, you will inevitably be defeated by the enemy, which is a big taboo for soldiers.

古文：孙权上事今至矣。 
现代文：孙权的胜利的奏章马上就要到了。 
English: Sun Quan's triumphant march is about to begin.

古文：后七日，破备书到。
现代文：七天后，孙权打败刘备的奏书果然到了。
English: Seven days later, Sun Quan's report on defeating Liu Bei finally arrived.

古文：秋七月，冀州大蝗，民饥，使尚书杜畿持节开仓廪以振之。
现代文：七月，冀州发生大蝗灾，百姓饥饿无谷可食，文帝派尚书杜畿拿着符节到各地开仓放粮来赈济饥民。
English: In July, a large locust plague occurred in Jizhou, and the people were starving and had no grain to eat. Emperor Wen sent Shangshu Dugi to open storehouses and distribute grain to feed the hungry.

古文：八月，蜀大将黄权率众降。
现代文：八月，蜀国大将黄权率部投降。
English: In August, General Huang Quan of Shu surrendered.

古文：九月甲午，诏曰： 夫妇人与政，乱之本也。
现代文：九月三日，文帝下诏说： 妇人参议政事，是动乱的本源。
English: On September 3rd, Emperor Wen issued an edict saying: Women's participation in political affairs is the source of turmoil.

古文：自今以后，群臣不得奏事太后，后族之家不得当辅政之任，又不得横受茅土之爵；以此诏传后世，若有背违，天下共诛之。 
现代文：从现在开始，群臣有事不得向太后上奏，外戚不能在朝中担任重将权臣，也不能无功而被封王封侯；把这条法令传给后世，如果有人违背了，天下都能诛杀他。 
English: From now on, the courtiers are not allowed to report to the empress dowager, the maternal relatives are not allowed to serve as senior generals and ministers in the court, and they are not allowed to be crowned kings and princes without merit. Pass this decree to future generations, and if someone violates it, the whole world will be able to kill him.

古文：庚子，立皇后郭氏。
现代文：九日，立郭氏为皇后。
English: On the 9th, Liguo became empress.

古文：赐天下男子爵人二级；鳏寡笃癃及贫不能自存者赐谷。
现代文：赏赐全国男子都进爵二级；鳏夫、寡妇、残疾、年迈和贫苦难以生存的人，国家赐给粮食。
English: All the country's men were awarded second-class knighthoods; widowers, widows, the disabled, the elderly and those who were too poor to survive were given food by the state.

古文：冬十月甲子，表首阳山东为寿陵，作终制曰： 礼，国君即位为椑，存不忘亡也。
现代文：这年十月三日，选定首阳山东侧作为生前预筑的陵墓，发布关于丧葬的规定： 按礼制，国君登基以后，就应该制做内棺，表示活着的时候不忘记死亡。
English: On October 3 of that year, the eastern side of Shouyang Mountain was selected as the mausoleum pre-built during his lifetime, and the regulations on funeral were issued: According to the etiquette, after the sovereign ascends the throne, an inner coffin should be made, indicating that he should not forget death when he is alive.

古文：昔尧葬谷林，通树之，禹葬会稽，农不易亩，故葬於山林，则合乎山林。
现代文：从前尧葬在谷林，茂密的树木包围起来，禹葬在会稽，农夫不改变耕种的地方，所以葬在山林中，就应该与山林相融。
English: In the past, people were buried in valleys and forests, surrounded by thick trees, and people were buried in communes, where farmers did not change their farming methods. Therefore, burial in the mountains and forests should be in harmony with the mountains and forests.

古文：封树之制，非上古也，吾无取焉。
现代文：堆土为坟，植树为饰，不是先人葬礼的追求，我不会用这样的做法。
English: Piles of dirt for graves, planting trees for decoration, is not the pursuit of the ancestors of funerals, I will not use such a practice.

古文：寿陵因山为体，无为封树，无立寝殿，造园邑，通神道。
现代文：预筑的坟墓应该顺着山势与之成为一体，不要修建陵寝，建造园囿，修设神道。
English: Prefabricated tombs should follow the contours of the mountain and become one with it. Do not build a mausoleum, a garden, or a Shinto shrine.

古文：夫葬也者，藏也，欲人之不得见也。
现代文：安葬，就是藏，想要让人找不到。
English: To bury is to hide, to make it impossible to find.

古文：骨无痛痒之知，冢非栖神之宅，礼不墓祭，欲存亡之不黩也，为棺椁足以朽骨，衣衾足以朽肉而已。
现代文：骨头是没有痛或痒的区别的，坟冢也不是我的思想安居的地方，按礼不需要祭祀扫墓，是希望生人和死者不要太亲近，是因为修建棺椁就容易让骨头腐朽，衣服被衾会让肉体瓦解罢了。
English: There is no difference between the bones without pain or itching, and the grave is not a place where my thoughts can safely reside. According to the ritual, there is no need to sacrifice and sweep the grave. It is hoped that the living and the dead should not be too close, because building a coffin is easy to let the bones rot, and clothes and bedding will let the body disintegrate.

古文：故吾营此丘墟不食之地，欲使易代之后不知其处。
现代文：所以我选择在这不长庄稼的地方修建陵寝，是为了不让后人知道我埋葬的地方。
English: That's why I chose to build a mausoleum in this place where there are no crops, so that future generations would not know where I was buried.

古文：无施苇炭，无藏金银铜铁，一以瓦器，合古涂车、刍灵之义。
现代文：不要放防腐的灰炭，也不要把金、银、铜、铁等作为陪葬品，全部用陶器，这样才合乎古代殉葬用涂彩的泥车、茅草扎成的人马的规定。
English: Do not put antiseptic ash and charcoal, and do not take gold, silver, copper, iron, etc. as funerary objects, all with pottery, so as to meet the requirements of ancient funerals with painted mud carts, and horses and men made of thatch.

古文：棺但漆际会三过，饭含无以珠玉，无施珠襦玉匣，诸愚俗所为也。
现代文：棺木只须刷三遍漆，口中所含的不需要珠玉珍宝，也不用穿着珍珠做的服装，也不用放在玉制的匣子中，因为这些都是愚昧庸俗的人做的事。
English: The coffin only needs to be painted three times, and the contents of the mouth do not need to be precious stones, nor do they need to be dressed in clothing made of pearls, nor do they need to be placed in a box made of jewels, because these are all things that ignorant and vulgar people do.

古文：季孙以玙璠敛，孔子历级而救之，譬之暴骸中原。
现代文：季孙用美玉丧殓，孔子跨上台阶劝阻他，把这种做法比喻成是把骸骨暴露在天日下。
English: When Ji Sun used gems to die, Confucius stepped up to dissuade him, likening the practice to exposing a skeleton to the sun.

古文：宋公厚葬，君子谓华元、乐莒不臣，以为弃君於恶。
现代文：宋公被厚葬，有识之士都说华元、乐莒没有做到臣子的职责，认为他们把君主置于不义之地。
English: Song Gong was given a lavish funeral, and people with insight all said that Hua Yuan and Le Yao did not fulfill their duties as courtiers, believing that they placed the monarch in an unfair position.

古文：汉文帝之不发，霸陵无求也；光武之掘，原陵封树也。
现代文：汉文帝墓保存完好，是因为霸陵中没有什么让人贪图的东西；光武帝的陵墓被发掘，是因为原陵造墓种树的缘故。
English: Emperor Hanwen's tomb is well preserved because there is nothing to covet in the tomb; Emperor Guangwu's tomb was excavated because the original tomb was planted with trees.

古文：霸陵之完，功在释之；原陵之掘，罪在明帝。
现代文：霸陵能完整保全，是张释之的功劳；原陵被损毁，是明帝的罪过。
English: It is the merit of Zhang Xizhi that the tomb of the tyrant can be completely preserved; it is the fault of Emperor Ming that the original tomb was damaged and destroyed.

古文：是释之忠以利君，明帝爱以害亲也。
现代文：张释之为君主着想的忠心让霸陵得以保存，明帝因为偏爱亲人却反而带来损害的结果。
English: Zhang Xie explained that it was the loyalty of the monarch that allowed the tyrannical tomb to be preserved, but the Ming Emperor's preference for relatives caused damage.

古文：忠臣孝子，宜思仲尼、丘明、释之之言，鉴华元、乐莒、明帝之戒，存於所以安君定亲，使魂灵万载无危，斯则贤圣之忠孝矣。
现代文：大凡忠臣孝子，都该想想孔仲尼、左丘明、释之的话，以华元、乐莒、明帝为前车之鉴，心中常常存着使君主亲人安定、魂灵长久不受危害的想法，这就是贤圣之人的忠和孝了。
English: All great loyal subjects and filial sons should think about the words of Kong Zhong Ni, Zuo Qiu Ming, and Xie Zhi, and take Hua Yuan, Le Yao, and Ming Di as a precedent. In their hearts, they often have the idea of stabilizing the relatives of the monarch and protecting their souls from harm for a long time. This is the loyalty and filial piety of a wise and holy man.

古文：自古及今，未有不亡之国，亦无不掘之墓也。
现代文：从以前到现在，没有过不会灭亡的诸侯国，也没有过不被挖掘的陵墓。
English: From the past to the present, there has never been a vassal state that would not perish, nor a mausoleum that would not be excavated.

古文：丧乱以来，汉氏诸陵无不发掘，至乃烧取玉匣金缕，骸骨并尽，是焚如之刑，岂不重痛哉！
现代文：天下战乱以来，汉代的陵墓没有不被人挖掘的，一旦被发掘，墓中的贵重珠宝都被掳走，甚至死者遗骸都被损毁，就像是把人烧死的酷刑，难道不是让死者再次经受一次痛苦吗！
English: Since the world war, there is no mausoleum in the Han Dynasty that has not been excavated. Once excavated, the precious jewels in the tomb have been taken away, and even the remains of the dead have been damaged. It is like the torture of burning people to death. Isn't it just to make the dead suffer again!

古文：祸由乎厚葬封树。 桑、霍为我戒 ，不亦明乎？
现代文：祸害的根源就在于厚葬和造陵种树。 前人都知道把桑弘羊和霍光的事件引以为戒 ，这难道还不够明白吗？
English: The root of the scourge lies in the mass burial and the construction of tombs and the planting of trees. The ancients all knew to take the events of Mulberry Sheep and Huo Guang as a warning, is this not clear enough?

古文：其皇后及贵人以下，不随王之国者，有终没皆葬涧西，前又以表其处矣。
现代文：皇后及贵人以下的嫔妃，凡是不和君主埋在一起的，死后都葬在涧西，先前已经说明具体地方了。
English: Empresses and concubines of nobles and below, who are not buried with the monarch, are buried in Shaanxi after death. The specific place has been explained in advance.

古文：盖舜葬苍梧，二妃不从，延陵葬子，远在嬴、博，魂而有灵，无不之也，一涧之间，不足为远。
现代文：当年尧舜去世的时候，娥皇女英二妃是没有跟从的，所以我的后妃也不必陪我殉葬。延陵先生安葬他的儿子，葬在嬴、博那么远的地方，如果真的有魂灵，没有什么到不了的地方，我的后妃和我只有一涧的阻隔，更谈不上远了。
English: Mr. Yanling buried his son in a place as far away as Zou and Bo. If there really is a soul, there is no place it cannot reach. My empress and I are only a stone's throw away, let alone far away.

古文：若违今诏，妄有所变改造施，吾为戮尸地下，戮而重戮，死而重死。
现代文：我现在的诏令，如果有人违背或者妄加改变执行的，我在地下就会受到戮刑，反反复复，我会多次经受死亡的痛苦。
English: My current edict, if someone violates or changes it, I will be punished underground, repeatedly, and I will suffer the pain of death many times.

古文：臣子为蔑死君父，不忠不孝，使死者有知，将不福汝。
现代文：为臣者轻视已死去的君王、父亲，那才是不忠不孝，假设死者地下有知，将不会保佑你们。
English: It is disloyalty to despise a dead king and father. If the dead knew, they would not protect you.

古文：其以此诏藏之宗庙，副在尚书、秘书、三府。 
现代文：这份诏书，要妥善地保存在宗庙，另外抄录三份副本放在尚书、秘书、三府之中。 
English: This imperial edict should be properly preserved in the ancestral temple, and three copies should be copied and placed in the Shojo, the secretary, and the three prefectures.

古文：是月，孙权复叛。
现代文：这个月，孙权再次叛乱。
English: This month, Sun Quan rebelled again.

古文：复郢州为荆州。
现代文：重新称郢州为荆州。
English: Renamed Luzhou as Jingzhou.

古文：帝自许昌南征，诸军兵并进，权临江拒守。
现代文：文帝从许昌出发率兵南征，几路兵马并进，孙权依靠长江天险抵抗。
English: Emperor Wen started the Southern Expedition with troops from Xu Chang, and soldiers and horses marched in several directions. Sun Quan relied on the Yangtze River to resist.

古文：十一月辛丑，行幸宛。
现代文：十一月十一日，驾临宛地。
English: On November 11th, they arrived at their destination.

古文：庚申晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，发生日蚀。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：是岁，穿灵芝池。
现代文：这一年，开通灵芝池。
English: In the same year, Lingzhi Pond was opened.

古文：四年春正月，诏曰： 丧乱以来，兵革未戢，天下之人，互相残杀。
现代文：黄初四年正月，文帝发布诏令说： 自从祸乱以来，战争没有停息，天下之人，自相残杀。
English: In the first month of the 4th year of the Yellow Emperor, Emperor Wen issued a decree saying: Since the calamity, the war has not stopped, and people all over the world have been killing each other.

古文：今海内初定，敢有私复雠者皆族之。 
现代文：现在天下刚刚平定，有胆敢私下复仇的灭其九族。 
English: Now that the world has just been pacified, those who dare to take revenge in private will be exterminated.

古文：筑南巡台于宛。
现代文：在宛城修筑南巡台。
English: Construct the South Patrol Platform in Wancheng.

古文：三月丙申，行自宛还洛阳宫。
现代文：三月八日，从宛城回到洛阳宫。
English: On March 8, he returned to Luoyang Palace from Wancheng.

古文：癸卯，月犯心中央大星。
现代文：十五日，月亮冲杀心宿中央大星。
English: On the fifteenth day, the moon rushed to kill the central star.

古文：丁未，大司马曹仁薨。
现代文：十九日，大司马曹仁去世。
English: On the 19th, Chief Secretary Ma Cao Ren passed away.

古文：是月大疫。
现代文：这个月发生了大瘟疫。
English: This month there was a great plague of locusts.

古文：夏五月，有鹈鹕鸟集灵芝池，诏曰： 此诗人所谓污泽也。
现代文：五月，成群鹈鹕鸟聚集在灵芝池，文帝下诏说： 这就是诗人所说的污泽呀！
English: In May, flocks of ostriches gathered at Lingzhi Pond, and Emperor Wen decreed: "This is what the poet called filth!

古文：曹诗 刺恭公远君子而近小人 ，今岂有贤智之士处於下位乎？
现代文：《诗经·曹风》中说 刺恭公远君子而近小人 ，难道现在有有识之士却处于底层的人吗？
English: In the "Book of Poetry, Cao Feng," it is said that Zhi Gonggong is far from a gentleman and close to a villain. Are there now people with insight who are at the bottom?

古文：否则斯鸟何为而至？
现代文：否则这些鸟为何都来了？
English: Why else would all these birds be here?

古文：其博举天下俊德茂才、独行君子，以答曹人之刺。 
现代文：特令各级官府广泛举荐天下有良好品德，丰富学识的优秀人才，来防止出现曹人所讽刺之事。 
English: The government at all levels has been ordered to widely recommend outstanding talents with good moral character and rich knowledge to prevent the occurrence of irony.

古文：六月甲戌，任城王彰薨於京都。甲申，太尉贾诩薨。
现代文：六月十七日，任城王曹彰在京都逝世，太尉贾诩逝世。
English: On June 17th, the king of Rencheng, Cao Zhang, passed away in Kyoto, and the second lieutenant Jia Jun passed away.

古文：太白昼见。
现代文：太白星白天出现。
English: Too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：是月大雨，伊、洛溢流，杀人民，坏庐宅。
现代文：这个月大雨连绵，伊水、洛水洪水泛滥，淹死平民、毁坏房屋。
English: This month, continuous heavy rain caused flooding in Yishui and Luoshui, drowning civilians and destroying houses.

古文：秋八月丁卯，以廷尉锺繇为太尉。
现代文：八月十一日，任命廷尉钟繇为太尉。
English: On August 11th, the courtier Zhong Qi was appointed as the first lieutenant.

古文：辛未，校猎于荥阳，遂东巡。
现代文：十五日，在荥阳打猎，顺势东巡。
English: On the 15th, he went hunting in Fenyang and then went on an eastward inspection tour.

古文：论征孙权功，诸将已下进爵增户各有差。
现代文：评判征讨孙权的功劳，众将以下都加官进爵，增加封邑，各有差等。
English: Judging the merits of Sun Quan, the following generals were promoted to higher ranks, increased their fiefdoms, and so on.

古文：九月甲辰，行幸许昌宫。
现代文：九月十九日，驾临许昌宫。
English: On September 19th, they arrived at Xu Chang Palace.

古文：五年春正月，初令谋反大逆乃得相告，其馀皆勿听治；敢妄相告，以其罪罪之。
现代文：黄初五年正月，诏命天下只有谋反和大逆的罪行才能揭发上告，其他罪名都不要断狱治事。有敢诬陷别人的人，就用他诬陷别人的罪行来惩治他。
English: In the first month of the 5th year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, it was decreed that only crimes of conspiracy and high treason could be reported to the emperor, and no one should be released from prison for any other crimes. Those who dared to frame others would be punished for the crime of framing others.

古文：三月，行自许昌还洛阳宫。夏四月，立太学，制五经课试之法，置春秋谷梁博士。
现代文：三月，文帝从许昌巡行回到洛阳宫，四月，设立太学，制定五经课试的考试办法，设置《春秋谷梁》博士。
English: In March, Emperor Wen returned to the Luoyang Palace from the Xu Chang parade, and in April, he set up the Taixue, formulated the examination methods for the Five Classics examination, and set up the "Spring and Autumn Valley Liang" doctor.

古文：五月，有司以公卿朝朔望日，因奏疑事，听断大政，论辨得失。
现代文：五月，相关官员因为群臣在初一、十五两天朝拜，趁机奏报疑难之事，文帝听取众人意见，制定方针大策，与众臣评品利弊得失。
English: In May, the relevant officials took advantage of the opportunity to report any suspicious or difficult matters, since the courtiers came to pay homage on the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the second month. Emperor Wen listened to everyone's opinions, formulated policies and measures, and evaluated the pros and cons with all the courtiers.

古文：秋七月，行东巡，幸许昌宫。
现代文：七月，文帝出发东巡，驾临许昌宫。
English: In July, Emperor Wen embarked on an eastern tour and arrived at Xu Chang Palace.

古文：八月，为水军，亲御龙舟，循蔡、颍，浮淮，幸寿春。
现代文：八月，设立水军，文帝亲自驾驶龙舟，顺着蔡、颍二州，直到淮河，巡行到寿春。
English: In August, the navy was established, and Emperor Wen personally piloted the dragon boat along the two states of Cai and Qian to the Huaihe River, and paraded to Shouchun.

古文：扬州界将吏士民，犯五岁刑已下，皆原除之。
现代文：扬州地区将官百姓，被判五年以下徒刑的罪犯，全部被赦免。
English: Yangzhou region generals and civilians, criminals sentenced to less than five years in prison, were all pardoned.

古文：九月，遂至广陵，赦青、徐二州，改易诸将守。
现代文：九月，到达广陵，大赦青、徐二州，调换二州的将领和郡守。
English: In September, he arrived at Guangling, pardoned Qing and Xu Erzhou, and transferred the generals and county governors of Erzhou.

古文：冬十月乙卯，太白昼见。
现代文：十月六日，太白星在白天出现。
English: On October 6th, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：行还许昌宫。
现代文：回到许昌宫。
English: Back to Xu Chang Palace.

古文：十一月庚寅，以冀州饥，遣使者开仓廪振之。
现代文：十一月十一日，因为冀州发生饥荒，文帝派使者开仓放粮，赈济百姓。
English: On November 11th, due to the famine in Jizhou, Emperor Wen sent an envoy to open storehouses and distribute grain to help the people.

古文：戊申晦，日有食之。
现代文：二十九日，出现了日蚀。
English: On the 29th, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：十二月，诏曰： 先王制礼，所以昭孝事祖，大则郊社，其次宗庙，三辰五行，名山大川，非此族也，不在祀典。
现代文：十二月，文帝发布诏令说： 先王制定祭祀的礼规，是为了表明对祖先的孝顺，重大的事就到郊社去祭祀，其次到宗庙中去祭祀，天上的日月星辰，地上的万物、名山大川，都不属于这几类，不在祭祀的仪典之中。
English: In December, Emperor Wen issued a royal edict, saying: The previous king established the ritual rules of sacrifice in order to show filial piety to the ancestors. The important things were to go to the suburb to sacrifice, and then to the ancestral temple to sacrifice. The sun, moon and stars in the sky, all things on earth, and famous mountains and rivers do not belong to these categories and are not in the ritual of sacrifice.

古文：叔世衰乱，崇信巫史，至乃宫殿之内，户牖之间，无不沃酹，甚矣其惑也。
现代文：末世衰微战乱，推崇迷信巫史，以至于宫殿之内，门窗之间，没有不置酒祭祀的，这种迷惑已经非常严重了。
English: With the decline and fall of the last days, people's superstitious belief in witchcraft and fortune-telling has increased, so much so that within the imperial palace and between the doors and windows of the common people, they all drink wine and offer sacrifices to ghosts and gods. People are so deeply confused.

古文：自今，其敢设非祀之祭，巫祝之言，皆以执左道论，著于令典。 
现代文：从现在开始，要是有人敢举行不在仪典里的祭祀，散播巫祝的言论，都按旁门左道论处，将这一诏令写在令典上。 
English: From now on, if anyone dares to hold a ritual that is not part of the ceremony, or to spread the word of witchcraft, they will be dealt with according to the rules, and this edict will be written on the edict.

古文：是岁穿天渊池。
现代文：这一年挖通了天渊池。
English: This year, the Tianyuan Pond was excavated.

古文：六年春二月，遣使者循行许昌以东尽沛郡，问民所疾苦，贫者振贷之。
现代文：黄初六年二月，文帝派遣使者顺着许昌往东巡视直到沛郡，察访民间百姓的疾苦，贫穷的人就赈济或借贷。
English: In February of the sixth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen dispatched an envoy to follow Xu Chang to the east to inspect Pei County, to visit the sufferings of the common people, and the poor to give or lend money.

古文：三月，行幸召陵，通讨虏渠。
现代文：三月，文帝驾临召陵，修通讨虏渠。
English: In March, Emperor Wen drove to the mausoleum to repair the canal.

古文：乙巳，还许昌宫。
现代文：二十八日，回到许昌宫。
English: On the 28th, he returned to Xu Chang Palace.

古文：并州刺史梁习讨鲜卑轲比能，大破之。
现代文：并州刺史梁习率军讨伐鲜卑人轲比能，获得胜利。
English: And Zhoushi Liang Xi led the army to fight against Xianbei and Bi Neng, and won victory.

古文：辛未，帝为舟师东征。
现代文：闰月二十四日，文帝亲自率领水师东征。
English: On the 24th day of the leap month, Emperor Wen personally led the sailors to the east.

古文：五月戊申，幸谯。
现代文：五月二日到达谯县。
English: On May 2nd, they arrived in Jixian.

古文：壬戌，荧惑入太微。
现代文：十六日，火星进入太微星分野。
English: On the 16th, Mars entered the faint star field.

古文：六月，利成郡兵蔡方等以郡反，杀太守徐质。
现代文：六月，利成郡兵丁蔡方等人在地方聚众叛乱，杀死太守徐质。
English: In June, the soldiers of Licheng County, Ding Caifang and others, rallied the local people to rebel and killed the governor Xu Jian.

古文：遣屯骑校尉任福、步兵校尉段昭与青州刺史讨平之；其见胁略及亡命者，皆赦其罪。
现代文：文帝派遣屯骑校尉任福、步兵校尉段昭与青州刺史讨伐并平定了他；其中被胁迫反叛和逃亡的人，都赦免了他们的罪行。
English: Emperor Wen dispatched the cavalry captain Renfu and the infantry captain Duan Zhao to fight against and subdue Qingzhou Zhishi; among them, those who were forced to rebel and escape were pardoned for their crimes.

古文：秋七月，立皇子鉴为东武阳王。
现代文：七月，封皇子曹鉴为东武阳王。
English: In July, the crown prince Cao Jian became the King of Eastern Wuyang.

古文：八月，帝遂以舟师自谯循涡入淮，从陆道幸徐。
现代文：八月，文帝率领水军从谯地沿着涡水进入淮河，又从陆路巡行到徐州。
English: In August, Emperor Wen led the naval forces from Handan to enter the Huaihe River along the swirling waters, and then marched overland to Xuzhou.

古文：九月，筑东巡台。
现代文：九月，修建东巡台。
English: In September, the East Patrol Platform was built.

古文：冬十月，行幸广陵故城，临江观兵，戎卒十馀万，旌旗数百里。
现代文：十月，驾临广陵故城，到江边检阅军队，士兵十多万人，旌旗数百里。
English: In October, he arrived at the ancient city of Guangling and went to the river to review the army, with more than 100,000 soldiers and hundreds of miles of flags.

古文：是岁大寒，水道冰，舟不得入江，乃引还。
现代文：这年天气寒冷，水路都封冻了，舟船不能入江，文帝只好返回广陵。
English: This year the weather was cold, the waterways were frozen, and boats could not enter the river, so Emperor Wen had to return to Guangling.

古文：十一月，东武阳王鉴薨。
现代文：十一月，东武阳王曹鉴逝世。
English: In November, Dongwuyang King Cao Jian passed away.

古文：十二月，行自谯过梁，遣使以太牢祀故汉太尉桥玄。
现代文：十二月，从谯县回还路过梁地，派使者用太牢之礼祭祀已故的汉朝太尉桥玄。
English: In December, after returning from Min County and passing through Liangdi, an envoy was sent to use the ceremony of Taiji to sacrifice the late Han Dynasty Taiyi Qiao Xuan.

古文：七年春正月，将幸许昌，许昌城南门无故自崩，帝心恶之，遂不入。
现代文：黄初七年正月，文帝将要巡视许昌的时候，许昌城南门无故崩塌，文帝很不高兴，就没有前往许昌。
English: In the first month of the 7th year of the Yellow Emperor, when Emperor Wen was going to inspect Xu Chang, the south gate of Xu Chang collapsed for no reason. Emperor Wen was very unhappy and did not go to Xu Chang.

古文：壬子，行还洛阳宫。
现代文：十日，车驾返回洛阳宫。
English: On the 10th, the car drove back to Luoyang Palace.

古文：三月，筑九华台。
现代文：三月，修筑九华台。
English: In March, the construction of Jiuhuatai began.

古文：夏五月丙辰，帝疾笃，召中军大将军曹真、镇军大将军陈群、征东大将军曹休、抚军大将军司马宣王，并受遗诏辅嗣主。
现代文：五月十六日，文帝病重，宣召中军大将军曹真、镇军大将军陈群、征东大将军曹休、抚军大将军司马宣王，一同接受遗诏辅助继位的皇上。
English: On May 16th, Emperor Wen was seriously ill and called for Cao Zhen, the general of the Central Army, Chen Qun, the general of the Zhen Army, Cao Xiu, the general of the Eastern Expeditionary Army, and Sima Xuan Wang, the general of the Eastern Expeditionary Army, to jointly accept the imperial edict to assist the emperor in his succession.

古文：遣后宫淑媛、昭仪已下归其家。
现代文：把后宫中淑媛、昭仪以下的嫔妃各自遣送回家。
English: Send all the concubines in the harem, from Shukhime and Shoui on down, home.

古文：丁巳，帝崩于嘉福殿，时年四十。
现代文：十七日，文帝在嘉福殿驾崩，年四十岁。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Wen passed away at the age of 40 at the Jiafu Hall.

古文：六月戊寅，葬首阳陵。
现代文：六月九日，在首阳陵安葬。
English: On June 9, he was buried in Shouyang Mausoleum.

古文：自殡及葬，皆以终制从事。
现代文：从发丧到下葬，都按他生前的文告举行。
English: From the time of the funeral to the burial, everything was carried out in accordance with his last will and testament.

古文：初，帝好文学，以著述为务，自所勒成垂百篇。
现代文：当初，文帝爱好文学，把写作当做一种事业，自己创作的文章将近一百篇。
English: At first, Emperor Wen loved literature and treated writing as a career, writing nearly a hundred articles himself.

古文：又使诸儒撰集经传，随类相从，凡千馀篇，号曰皇览。
现代文：又下令让儒生们收集注释各类经典，按照内容分门别类排序，总共一千多篇，称为《皇览》。
English: He also ordered the Confucian scholars to collect and annotate all kinds of classics, sorting them into categories according to content, a total of more than one thousand, called "Imperial Review."

古文：评曰：文帝天资文藻，下笔成章，博闻强识，才艺兼该；若加之旷大之度，励以公平之诚，迈志存道，克广德心，则古之贤主，何远之有哉！
现代文：评曰：文帝天资聪颖，文采不凡，下笔即成文，博闻强记，才艺双全；如果再具备博大的气度，勉励自己修养公平的德行，怀着远大的志向，追求圣贤的道义，推行先王的善意德政，那么距离古代的贤明君主，有什么遥远的呢！
English: The review said: Emperor Wen was gifted and intelligent, his literary skills were extraordinary, he could write a book with the stroke of a pen, his knowledge and memory were strong, and his talent was complete; if he had a broad-minded spirit, encouraged himself to cultivate the virtue of fairness, had lofty aspirations, pursued the morality of the sages, and promoted the goodwill and good governance of the forefathers, then what was so far away from the wise monarch of ancient times!

