古文：王艮，字敬止，吉水人。
现代文：王艮，字敬止，吉水人。
English: Wang Yao, the character of respect, the people of Jishui.

古文：建文二年进士。
现代文：建文二年成为进士。
English: Jianwen 2nd year, junior high school graduate.

古文：对策第一。
现代文：廷试对策名列第一。
English: Court trial countermeasures ranked first.

古文：貌寝，易以胡靖，即胡广也。艮次之，又次李贯。
现代文：因他相貌丑陋，而改为胡靖第一，胡靖即胡广，王艮第二，李贯第三。
English: Because of his ugly appearance, it was changed to Hu Jing first, Hu Jing that is, Hu Guang, Wang Qian second, Li Jun third.

古文：三人皆同里，并授修撰，如洪武中故事，设文史馆居之。
现代文：三人都是同乡，一同被授为修撰，朝廷并按照洪武年中成例，设文史馆让他们居住。
English: The three were all from the same village, and they were all awarded the right to write, and the imperial court set up a literature and history museum for them to live in, following the example of Hongwu.

古文：预修《太祖实录》及《类要》、《时政记》诸书。
现代文：王艮参与编修《太祖实录》及《类要》、《时政记》等书。
English: Wang Qi participated in the compilation of "Grandfather's Record" and "Classification," "Political History" and other books.

古文：一时大著作皆综理之。
现代文：由此许多重要著作均由他来负责整理。
English: As a result, he was responsible for the arrangement of many important works.

古文：数上书言时务。
现代文：此外王艮还多次上书谈论时务。
English: In addition, Wang Wei has also written several times to discuss current affairs.

古文：燕兵薄京城，艮与妻子诀曰： 食人之禄者，死人之事。
现代文：燕兵逼近京城，王艮与妻子诀别时说 ：食人之禄，为人而死，我不能再活下去了。 
English: As the Yan soldiers approached the capital, Wang Yao said goodbye to his wife, "I can no longer live as a cannibal and die as a human being."

古文：吾不可复生矣。 解缙、吴溥与艮、靖比舍居。
现代文：解缙、吴溥与王艮、胡靖相邻而居。
English: Xie Qian and Wu Qian lived next to Wang Qian and Hu Jing.

古文：城陷前一夕，皆集溥舍。
现代文：京城失陷前一晚，他们都聚集在吴溥屋内。
English: On the night before the fall of the capital, they all gathered in Wu Ye's house.

古文：缙陈说大义，靖亦奋激慷慨，艮独流涕不言。
现代文：解缙陈说大义，胡靖也奋激慷慨，唯独王艮流泪不语。
English: Zhaojuan Chen spoke the great truth, Hu Jing also worked hard to inspire generosity, but Wang Yao shed tears and did not speak.

古文：三人去，溥子与弼尚幼，叹曰： 胡叔能死，是大佳事。 
现代文：三人离去后，吴溥之子吴与弼年纪尚幼，他叹道： 胡叔叔能死节，是大好事。 
English: After the three of them left, Wu Yao's son, Wu Yao, who was still very young, sighed: It's a great thing that Uncle Hu can die.

古文：溥曰： 不然，独王叔死耳。 
现代文：吴溥却说： 不对，只有王叔叔会死。 
English: But Wu Gan said, "No, only Uncle Wang will die."

古文：语未毕，隔墙闻靖呼： 外喧甚，谨视豚。 
现代文：语音未落，只听胡靖隔墙在喊： 外面吵闹得很，要小心看着小猪。 
English: Before the voice was over, I could only hear Hu Jing shouting from the other side of the wall: There's a lot of noise outside, be careful watching the piglets.

古文：溥顾与弼曰： 一豚尚不能舍，肯舍生乎？ 
现代文：吴溥回头对吴与弼说道 ：一只猪都舍不得，怎么舍得去死呢？ 
English: Wu Yao turned back to Wu He and said, "A pig can't be spared, how can you be willing to die?"

古文：须臾艮舍哭，饮鸩死矣。
现代文：片刻之后，王艮在屋内哭泣，然后喝毒酒而死。
English: Moments later, Wang Yao was crying inside the house before drinking poisoned wine and dying.

古文：缙驰谒，成祖甚喜。
现代文：解缙则驱马前去拜谒，成祖十分高兴。
English: Xie Yao drove his horse forward to pay homage to Yao. Cheng Zu was very happy.

古文：明日荐靖，召至，叩头谢。
现代文：第二天，解缙推荐胡靖，胡靖应诏而至，叩头谢恩。
English: The next day, Xie Ye recommended Hu Jing, Hu Jing came in response to the edict, and bowed his head in thanks.

古文：贯亦迎附。
现代文：李贯也迎附成祖。
English: Li Gang also welcomed Cheng Zu.

古文：后成祖出建文时群臣封事千余通，令缙等编阅。
现代文：后来成祖拿出建文帝时分封群臣之事千余件，命解缙等编阅。
English: Later, Cheng Zu took out more than a thousand pieces of the matter of the enclosure of the vassals at the time of Emperor Jianwen, and ordered them to be read.

古文：事涉兵农、钱谷者留之，诸言语干犯及他，一切皆焚毁。
现代文：涉及兵、农、钱、谷之事的留下，而言语冒犯者及其他一切都加以焚毁。
English: Soldiers, farmers, money, grain, and anything else that offends them will be burned.

古文：因从容问贯、缙等曰： 尔等宜皆有之。 
现代文：成祖趁机从容问李贯、解缙等说： 你们应该都曾为此受封过吧？ 
English: Cheng Zu took the opportunity to calmly ask Li Gang, Xie Yao and others, saying, "You must have been knighted for this, right?

古文：众未对，贯独顿首曰： 臣实未尝有也。 
现代文：众人未答，只有李贯叩首说道： 臣确实未曾有过。 
English: The crowd didn't answer, only Li Gang tapped his head and said, "I've never had it before."

古文：成祖曰： 尔以无为美耶？
现代文：成祖说 ：你认为没有就是好吗？
English: Chengzu said, "Do you think it's good to have nothing?"

古文：食其禄，任其事，当国家危急，官近侍独无一言可乎？
现代文：拿其食禄，担负其事，当国家危急之时，作为近臣却毫无建议可以吗？
English: Is it okay to take the credit, shoulder the responsibility, and, when the country is in a critical situation, act as a close vassal without any advice?

古文：泰尝游学宫，狂人挤之，溺池中几死，弗校。
现代文：朕特别讨厌那些引诱建文帝破坏祖法，扰乱国政的人。 后来李贯升为中允，被牵连获罪，死于狱中。临死时叹道： 我愧对王敬止啊！ 
English: I especially hate those who seduced Emperor Jianwen to destroy the Ancestral Law and disrupt national politics. Later, Li Jianlian was promoted to Zhongyong, was implicated and convicted, and died in prison. When dying, he lamented: I am ashamed to respect the king!

古文：人服其量。周是修，名德，以字行，泰和人。
现代文：周是修，名德，以字行世，泰和人。
English: Zhou was a scholar, a man of great virtue, a man of letters, and a man of peace.

古文：洪武末，举明经，为霍邱训导。
现代文：洪武末年，他考中明经，任为霍丘训导。
English: In the last years of Hongwu's life, he was appointed as the tutor of Huoqiu.

古文：太祖问家居何为。对曰： 教人子弟，教弟力田。 
现代文：太祖问他在家做什么事，周是修回答： 教人子弟，孝弟力田。 
English: The great-grandfather asked him what he was doing at home, and Zhou Zexu replied: "Teaching others, and being a filial son."

古文：太祖喜，擢周府奉祀正。
现代文：太祖听后很高兴，将他提拔为周府奉祀正。
English: The great-grandfather was very pleased to hear this, and promoted him to the position of Zhoufu Bonshi Zheng.

古文：逾年，从王北征至黑山，还迁纪善。
现代文：一年之后，周是修跟随周王北征至黑山，回来后升为纪善。
English: A year later, Zhou Zexu followed Zhou Wang Beizheng to Montenegro, and after returning, he was promoted to Ji Sheng.

古文：建文元年，有告王不法者，官属皆下吏。
现代文：建文元年，有人告发周王违法，属官都被交付司法官吏审判治罪。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, someone accused Zhou Wang of breaking the law, and his subordinates were all handed over to judicial officials for trial and punishment.

古文：是修以尝谏王得免，改衡府纪善。
现代文：周是修因曾经劝谏过周王而得以幸免，改任衡府纪善。
English: Zhou Zexu was spared because he had once persuaded the king of Zhou, and he was changed to Hengfu Jizan.

古文：衡王，惠帝母弟，未之藩。
现代文：衡王，惠帝的亲弟弟，没有前往藩地。
English: Heng Wang, Hui Di's younger brother, did not go to the domain.

古文：是修留京师，预翰林纂修，好荐士，陈说国家大计。
现代文：周是修留在京城，参与翰林纂修，喜欢推荐贤人、陈述国家大事。
English: Zhou Zexu stayed in Beijing to participate in the compilation of Hanlin, and liked to recommend sages and present national events.

古文：燕兵渡淮，与萧用道上书指斥用事者。
现代文：燕兵渡过淮河时，周是修与萧用道上书斥责朝廷当权者。
English: When the Yan soldiers crossed the Huai River, Zhou Zexu and Xiao Shou used a petition to reprimand those in power in the imperial court.

古文：用事者怒，共挫折之，是修屹不为动。
现代文：当权者大怒，一起来对付他，周是修不为所动。
English: The authorities were furious and came together to deal with him, but Zhou was unmoved.

古文：京城失守，留书别友人江仲隆、解缙、胡靖、萧用道、杨士奇，付以后事。具衣冠，为赞系衣带间。
现代文：京城失守，周是修留下书信告别友人江仲隆、解缙、胡靖、萧用道、杨士奇等，交托后事，然后穿戴整齐，将赞文系于衣带之间。
English: The capital was lost, and Zhou Zexu left a letter to say goodbye to his friends Jiang Zhonglong, Jie Zheng, Hu Jing, Xiao Yingdao, Yang Shichi, and so on, entrusting it to posterity, and then dressed neatly, tying the praise between the belts.

古文：入应天府学，拜先师毕，自经于尊经阁，年四十九。
现代文：前往应天府学，拜别先师，然后在尊经阁自缢而死，终年四十九岁。
English: He went to Yingtianfu to study, paid homage to his teacher, and then hanged himself at the Temple of Heaven, at the age of 49.

古文：燕王即帝位，陈瑛言是修不顺天命，请追戮。
现代文：燕王即帝位后，陈瑛说周是修不顺天命，请求追戮他。
English: After Yan Wang ascended the throne, Chen Ying said that Zhou was unable to fulfill his destiny and asked to kill him.

古文：帝曰： 彼食其禄，自尽其心，勿问。 
现代文：成祖却说 ：他拿其俸禄，自尽其心，不必追究。 
English: However, Cheng Zu said: He took his salary and did his best, there is no need to investigate.

古文：是修外和内刚，志操卓荦。非其义，一介不苟得也。
现代文：周是修外和内刚，志向和操守非同常人，不合大义，决不苟合。
English: Zhou was a man of extraordinary cultivation and inner fortitude. His aspiration and conduct were not those of an ordinary person. He did not conform to the great principles, and he would never have sexual relations.

古文：尝曰： 忠臣不计得失，故言无不直；烈女不虑死生，故行无不果。 
现代文：他说 ：忠臣不计个人得失，因而所言无不正直；烈女不顾自己生死，因而所为无不果敢。 
English: He said: "A loyal subject does not care about his personal gains and losses, so his words are not dishonest; a brave woman does not care about her own life and death, so she does not hesitate to do anything."

古文：尝辑古今忠节事为《观感录》。
现代文：并将古今忠节之事编辑成《观感录》。
English: And edited the events of the ancient and modern Loyalty Festival into "Viewing Record."

古文：其学自经史百家，阴阳医卜，靡不通究。为文援笔立就而雅赡条达。
现代文：他对经史百家，阴阳医卜，无不精通，而且下笔成章，言辞高雅，条达通畅。
English: He is well versed in the history of hundreds of schools, yin and yang, medicine and divination, and his writing is complete, his words are elegant, and his style is smooth.

古文：初与士奇、缙、靖及金幼孜、黄淮、胡俨约同死。
现代文：当初他与杨士奇、解缙、胡靖及金幼孜、黄淮、胡俨相约一起去死。
English: At first, he made an appointment to die together with Yang Shiqui, Ge Ying, Hu Jing, Jin Yuzi, Huang Huai, and Hu Yao.

古文：临难，惟是修竟行其志云。
现代文：临难时，最终只有周是修完成了他的志向。
English: In the face of adversity, in the end, only Zhou Zexu was able to fulfill his ambition.

古文：程本立，字原道，崇德人。
现代文：程本立，字原道，崇德人。
English: Cheng Benli, Aza Yuan Road, Chongde people.

古文：先儒颐之后。
现代文：先儒程颐之后。
English: After the first Confucianism, Cheng Zong.

古文：父德刚，负才气不仕。
现代文：父亲程德刚，富于才气，却不为官。
English: His father, Cheng Degang, was talented, but did not become an official.

古文：元将路成兵过皂林，暴掠。
现代文：元将路成率兵经过皂林，军队施暴抢掠。
English: The former general Lu Cheng led his soldiers through the saponification forest, and the army carried out violent looting.

古文：德刚为陈利害。
现代文：程德刚前去陈述利弊。
English: Cheng De just went to present the pros and cons.

古文：成悦，戢其部众。俗奏，官之，辞去。
现代文：路成十分高兴，禁止其部众抢掠，并要上奏让程德刚担任官职，程德刚推辞离去。
English: Lu Cheng was very happy, forbade his subordinates to loot, and wanted to appeal to Cheng Degang to hold an official post. Cheng Degang refused and left.

古文：本立少有大志，读书不事章句。
现代文：程本立年少有大志，读书从不拘泥于章句。
English: Cheng Benli rarely has big aspirations, and never sticks to chapters and sentences when reading.

古文：洪武中，旌孝子，太祖尝谓之曰： 学者争务科举，以穷经为名而无实学。
现代文：洪武年中，表彰孝子，太祖曾对他说 ：读书人争相参加科举，以研究经书为名，而无实学之实。
English: In the middle of the Hongwu era, when he was commending a filial son, the great-grandfather once said to him: Readers compete to participate in the imperial examinations, in the name of studying the scriptures, but there is no real learning.

古文：子质近厚，当志圣贤之学。 
现代文：你生性厚道，应当有志于圣贤之学。 
English: If you have a good nature, you should be interested in the study of the sages.

古文：本立益自力。
现代文：程本立更加发奋学习。
English: Cheng Hongli is more eager to study.

古文：闻金华朱克修得朱熹之传于许谦，往从之游。
现代文：他听说金华朱克修从许谦那里获得朱熹之真传，便前去跟随许谦游学。
English: He heard that Jinhua Zhu Kexiu obtained the true story of Zhu Xi from Xu Qian, so he went to study with Xu Qian.

古文：举明经、秀才。除秦府引礼舍人，赐楮币、鞍马。
现代文：他考中明经、秀才，被授为秦府引礼舍人，并被赐给纸币、鞍马。
English: He was awarded the title of Qin prefectural gift-giver, and was given paper money and a pommel horse.

古文：母忧去官，服除，补周府礼官，从王之开封。
现代文：因遭母丧辞官，服丧完后，补任周府礼官，跟随周王前往开封。
English: Due to his mother's death, he resigned from his post. After the funeral, he was appointed as the ceremonial officer of the Zhou government and followed King Zhou to Kaifeng.

古文：二十年春进长史。从王入觐。
现代文：二十年，程本立升为长史，随周王入朝觐见。
English: Twenty years later, Cheng Ben stood up for a long history, and followed Zhou Wang into the imperial court.

古文：坐累，谪云南马龙他郎甸长官司吏目。留家大梁，携一仆之任。
现代文：被牵连获罪，贬为云南马龙他郎甸长官司吏目，他将家人留在大梁，仅携一仆人上任。
English: He was implicated and convicted, and demoted to the position of Yunnan Malontar Langdian Chief Official. He left his family in Dalian and took office with only one servant.

古文：土酋施可伐煽百夷为乱，本立单骑入其巢，谕以祸福，诸酋咸附。
现代文：土酋施可伐煽动百夷叛乱，程本立独自骑马入其巢穴，晓谕祸福，诸酋因而全部归附。
English: Tsuchihime Shikawara incited the rebellion of the Baiyi, and Cheng Benli rode alone into his lair to speak of good and evil, and all the chieftains thus joined him.

古文：未几，复变。
现代文：不久，再次反叛。
English: Soon, they rebelled again.

古文：西平侯沐英、布政使张紞知本立贤，属行县典兵事，且抚且御。自楚雄、姚安抵大理、永昌鹤庆、丽江。山行野宿，往来绥辑凡九年，民夷安业。
现代文：西平侯沐英、布政使张知道程本立贤能，命他代掌本县军事，且抚且御，从楚雄、姚安直到大理、永昌、鹤庆、丽江，翻山越岭，餐风露宿，往来安抚共九年，各族百姓得以安居乐业。
English: Xiping marquis Mu Ying and Bu Zheng envoy Zhang knew that Cheng Benli was capable, ordered him to take charge of the county's military on his behalf, and guided and guided him, from Chuxiong and Yao'an to Dali, Yongchang, Heqing and Lijiang, over the mountains and over the ridge, the dining style was sleeping rough, and the visits were pacified for a total of nine years, and the people of all ethnic groups were able to live and work in peace.

古文：三十一年奏计京师。
现代文：三十一年，程本立上奏考核京官。
English: In the 31st year of his reign, Cheng Ben stood up for the post of Beijing official.

古文：学士董伦、府尹向宝交荐之。
现代文：学士董伦、府尹向宝一起举荐他。
English: Dong Lun, a bachelor, and Fu Yin recommended him to Xiang Bao.

古文：征入翰林，预修《太祖实录》，迁右佥都御史。
现代文：程本立被征入翰林，参加编修《太祖实录》，又升为右佥都御史。
English: Cheng Benli was conscripted into the Hanlin, participated in the editing of the "Grandfather's Record," and was promoted to the right Shidu Imperial Historian.

古文：俸入外，不通馈遗。
现代文：他除了俸禄之外，从不与人互通馈赠。
English: Apart from his salary, he never exchanged gifts with anyone.

古文：建文三年坐失陪祀，贬官，仍留纂修。
现代文：建文三年，因陪祀过失而被贬官，但仍留任纂修。
English: In the third year of the Jianwen era, he was demoted for the fault of accompanying the worship, but he still remained in the position of compiler.

古文：《实录》成，出为江西副使。
现代文：《太祖实录》完成后，程本立出任江西副使。
English: After the completion of "The True Record of the Great Ancestors," Cheng Benli served as deputy envoy to Jiangxi.

古文：未行，燕兵入，自缢死。
现代文：还未出发，燕兵已入京城，便自缢而死。
English: Before they set off, Yan Bing had already entered the capital, and he hanged himself.

古文：黄观，字伯澜，一字尚宾，贵池人。
现代文：黄观，字伯澜，又字尚宾，贵池人。
English: Huang Guan, also known as Bo Lan, also known as Shang Bin, was from Guizhou.

古文：父赘许，从许姓。
现代文：父亲入赘许家，转随许姓。
English: His father joined the Xu family and changed his surname to Xu.

古文：受学于元待制黄冔。
现代文：黄观就学于元朝待制黄。
English: Huang Guan studied in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：冔死节，观益自励。
现代文：黄死节，黄观更加自励。
English: On the Day of the Yellow Death, Huang Guan encouraged himself even more.

古文：洪武中，贡入太学。
现代文：洪武年间，黄观被推荐入太学。
English: During the Hongwu era, Huang Guan was recommended to enter the University of Taiwan.

古文：绘父母墓为图，赡拜辄泪下。
现代文：他将父母之墓绘成图，每次瞻拜总是泪流不止。
English: He drew a picture of his parents' grave, and every time he visited it, he was in tears.

古文：二十四年，会试、廷试皆第一。
现代文：二十四年，黄观在会试、廷试中都名列第一。
English: In twenty-four years, Huang Guan ranked first in both the board exam and the court exam.

古文：累官礼部右侍郎，乃奏复姓。
现代文：累升为礼部右侍郎，于是上奏恢复原姓。
English: He was successively promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, after which he reverted to his original surname.

古文：建文初，更官制，左、右侍中次尚书。改观右侍中，与方孝孺等并亲用。
现代文：建文初年，更改官制，左、右侍中居尚书之下，黄观改任右侍中，与方孝孺等一起被重用。
English: In the first year of the Jianwen era, the official system was changed, and the left and right attendants were placed under Shangshu, and Huang Guan was changed to the right attendant, and was reused together with Fang Xiaojun and others.

古文：燕王举兵，观草制，讽其散军归藩，敕身谢罪，辞极诋斥。
现代文：燕王举兵后，黄观起草皇上命令劝告他遣散军队返回藩地，然后自绑谢罪，言辞十分严厉。
English: After Yan Wang raised an army, Huang Guan drafted an imperial order to advise him to disband the army and return to the domain, and then he committed the crime of self-bondage. His words were very harsh.

古文：四年奉诏募兵上游，且督诸郡兵赴援。
现代文：建文四年，黄观奉诏前往上游募兵，并且督率诸郡军队赴援。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwen, Huang Guan went to the upstream to recruit soldiers, and led the county army to help.

古文：至安庆，燕王已渡江入京师，下令暴左班文职奸臣罪状，观名在第六。
现代文：到达安庆时，燕王已经渡江进入京城，下令揭露左班文职奸臣罪状，黄观名列第六。
English: When he arrived in Anqing, Yan Wang had already crossed the river into the capital and ordered to expose the crimes of the left-wing civil servants and traitors. Huang Guan ranked sixth.

古文：既而索国宝，不知所在，或言： 已付观出收兵矣！ 
现代文：不久搜寻国宝，不知所在，有人说已交给黄观去募兵了。
English: Soon they were searching for the national treasure, but they didn't know where it was. Some people said that it had been given to Huang Guan to recruit soldiers.

古文：命有司追捕，收其妻翁氏并二女给象奴。
现代文：成祖下令，命官府追捕黄观，逮捕其妻翁氏及二个女儿交给象奴。
English: Cheng Zu issued an order, ordering the government to hunt down Huang Guan, arrest his wife Weng and his two daughters, and hand them over to Xiang Rong.

古文：奴索钗钏市酒肴，翁氏悉与之持去，急携二女及家属十人，投淮清桥下死。
现代文：象奴索取钗镯去买酒菜，翁氏便让其全部拿去，然后迅速带领二个女儿及家属十人，跳下淮清桥而死。
English: When the elephant demanded the donkey to buy wine and vegetables, Mr. Weng let the donkey take everything, and then quickly led his two daughters and ten family members to jump off Huaiqing Bridge and die.

古文：观闻金川门不守，叹曰： 吾妻有志节，必死。 
现代文：黄观获悉金川门失守，叹道： 我妻守节操，必死无疑。 
English: Huang Guan was informed that the Jinchuan Gate had been lost, and he sighed: My wife will no doubt die defending the Constitution.

古文：招魂，葬之江上。
现代文：于是招魂葬于江上。
English: As a result, his soul was entombed in the river.

古文：命舟至罗刹矶，朝服东向拜，投湍急处死。
现代文：然后下令将船开到罗刹矶，黄观身穿朝服向东拜别，在江水湍急处投江而死。
English: He then ordered the ship to be sailed to Luosha Qiao, where Huang Guan, dressed in imperial robes, bowed to the east and died after falling into the river at a critical point.

古文：观弟覯，先匿其幼子，逃他处。
现代文：黄观之弟黄觏，先将其幼子藏起来，然后自己逃往他处。
English: Huang Guan's younger brother, Huang Qi, first hid his young son and then fled to another place.

古文：或云覯妻毕氏孀居母家，遗腹生子，故黄氏有后于贵池。
现代文：有人说黄觏之妻毕氏孀居母家，生下遗腹子，因而黄氏在贵池才有后代。
English: Some people say that Huang Yao's wife, Bi Shi, lived alone in her mother's house and gave birth to a stillborn child, so Huang Shi only had descendants in Guiqi.

古文：初，观妻投水时，呕血石上，成小影，阴雨则见，相传为大士像。僧舁至庵中。翁氏见梦曰； 我黄状元妻也。 
现代文：当初，黄观之妻投水时，曾吐血在一块石头上，形成小影，阴雨时可见，相传为大士像，僧人将此石抬至庵中，翁氏托梦说： 我是黄状元之妻。 
English: At first, when Huang Guan's wife threw water, she spat blood on a stone, forming a small shadow, visible when it was cloudy or rainy. It was said to be a great image. The monk carried the stone to the hermitage, and Weng said, "I am Huang Guan Yuan's wife."

古文：比明，沃以水，影愈明，有愁惨状。
现代文：等到天明，在石头上浇水，影子更加清晰，显出愁惨的样子。
English: Wait until dawn, watering the stone, the shadow is more clear, showing a sad look.

古文：后移至观祠，名翁夫人血影石。
现代文：后来被移至黄观祠，称作翁夫人血影石。
English: Later, it was moved to Huangguancun, known as the Weng Lady Blood Shadow Stone.

古文：今尚存。
现代文：现在尚存。
English: It still exists.

