古文：高琼范廷召葛霸
现代文：高琼，家族世代为燕州人。
English: Gao Qiong's family has been living in Yanzhou for generations.

古文：高琼，家世燕人。
现代文：祖父高霸，父亲高乾。
English: His grandfather was Gao Ba and his father was Gao Qian.

古文：祖霸，父乾。五代时，李景据江南，潜结契丹，岁遣单使往复。
现代文：五代时，李景割据江南，暗中勾结契丹，每年派遣一使者单独往返。
English: In the fifth generation, Li Jing cut off the south of the Yangtze River, secretly colluded with the Khitan, and sent an envoy back and forth alone every year.

古文：霸将契丹之命，以乾从行使景。
现代文：高霸奉契丹之命，带着高乾随同出使李景。
English: At the behest of Khitan, Gaoba dispatched Li Jing with Gao Qian.

古文：方至江左，谍间北使与中夏构隙，以纾疆场之难，遂杀霸，居乾濠州，声言为汴人所杀。
现代文：当到达江左时，间谍侦查到有北方使者与中国为敌，将兴起战争，于是杀了高霸，而将高乾留居濠州，声称高霸是被开封人所杀。
English: When he reached the left bank of the Yangtze River, the spy detected that there was an envoy from the north who was hostile to China and would start a war, so he killed Gao Ba, but kept Gao Qian in Zhangzhou, claiming that Gao Ba was killed by Kaifeng people.

古文：乾在濠州生三子，以江左蹙弱，寻挈族归中朝，给田亳州之蒙城，因土著焉。
现代文：高乾在濠州生了三个儿子。因为江左地方贫穷困苦，不久他带着全族归降朝廷，朝廷将亳州蒙城的一块田地赐给他，因此便成为当地土著。
English: Gao Qian gave birth to three sons in Ganzhou. Due to the poverty and hardship in Jiangzao, he and his whole family soon surrendered to the imperial court. The court gave him a piece of land in Mengcheng, Ganzhou, so he became a local native.

古文：琼少勇鸷无赖，为盗，事败，将磔于市，暑雨创溃，伺守者稍怠，即掣钉而遁。
现代文：高琼少时凶猛无赖，沦为强盗，事情败露后，将在午门斩头。时值夏雨滂沱，看守稍有松懈，他便掣断锁钉逃遁。
English: When Gao Qiong was young, he was a ferocious ruffian and fell into banditry. After the affair was exposed, he was beheaded at the noon gate. It was a summer rain, and the guards were a little slack, so he broke the lock and escaped.

古文：事王审琦，太宗尹京邑，知其材勇，召置帐下。
现代文：后跟随王审琦，宋太宗任京兆尹时，得知他勇猛有将才，便召来安置在帐下做贴身侍卫。
English: Later, when he followed Wang Xianqian and Song Taizong to the post of Beijing Zhaoyun, he learned that he was a brave and talented general, so he was called to be placed under the account to be a close bodyguard.

古文：太宗尝侍宴禁中，甚醉，及退，太祖送至苑门。
现代文：太宗曾陪侍宋太祖皇帝在宫中宴饮，大醉，至退席时，宋太祖送到苑门。
English: Emperor Taizong once accompanied Emperor Song Taizu to a banquet in the palace. He was very drunk. When he left the banquet, Emperor Song Taizu sent him to the garden gate.

古文：时琼与戴兴、王超、李斌、桑赞从，琼左手执靮，右手执镫，太宗乃能乘马。
现代文：当时高琼与戴兴、王超、李斌、桑赞都随从太宗，高琼左手抓住马革勺，右手执马镫，太宗才能乘马。
English: At that time, Gao Qiong, Dai Xing, Wang Chao, Li Bin, and San Zan all followed Taizong. Gao Qiong grasped the horse leather scoop with his left hand, and held the stirrup with his right hand. Only Taizong could ride a horse.

古文：太祖顾琼等壮之，因赐以控鹤官衣带及器帛，且勖令尽心焉。
现代文：太祖见了高琼等，颇赏识他们的壮猛，因此赐给他控鹤官的衣带及器物布帛，且勉励他尽心侍奉太宗。
English: The great-grandfather saw Gao Qiong and others, appreciated their prowess, so he gave him the crane controller's belt and cloth utensils, and encouraged him to serve the emperor wholeheartedly.

古文：太宗即位，擢御龙直指挥使。
现代文：太宗即位，升为御龙直指挥使。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne and was promoted to the post of Goryongzhi commander.

古文：从征太原，命押弓弩两班，合围攻城。
现代文：随太宗征讨太原时，太宗命他带领两班弓箭手，合围攻城。
English: When he went with Taizong to conquer Taiyuan, Taizong ordered him to lead two groups of archers to besiege the city.

古文：及讨幽蓟，属车驾倍道还，留琼与军中鼓吹殿后，六班扈从不及，惟琼首率所部见行在，太宗大悦，慰劳之。
现代文：讨幽蓟时，太宗令车队人马打道还京，留高琼与军中吹鼓手殿后，当时六班扈从都没跟上，只有高琼最先率所部跟上，太宗很高兴，特别慰劳他。
English: When discussing the retreat, Taizong ordered the motorcade to return to Beijing, leaving Gao Qiong behind with the military trumpeters. At that time, the six teams never caught up, only Gao Qiong led the first team to catch up. Taizong was very happy and especially consoled him.

古文：太平兴国四年，迁天武都指挥使、领西州刺史。
现代文：太平兴国四年，升天武都指挥使、领西州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of Taiping's rejuvenation of the country, he ascended to the heavens as the military commander of the capital and made history as the ruler of the Western Province.

古文：明年，改为神卫右厢都指挥使、领本州团练使。
现代文：第二年，改任神卫右厢都指挥使，兼任本州团练使。
English: In the second year, he was reassigned to the post of Shenwei right compartment commander and concurrently served as the Honshu regimental training officer.

古文：车驾巡师大名，命琼与日骑右厢都指挥使朱守节分为京城内巡检。
现代文：皇帝乘车巡阅大名的军队，命高琼与日骑右厢都指挥使朱守节都任京城内巡检。
English: The emperor toured the daimyo's army by car, and ordered Gao Qiong and Nichijie to command the right compartment, and Zhu Shoujie to inspect the capital.

古文：坐事，出为许州马步军都指挥使。
现代文：因犯错误，降级出任许州马步军都指挥使。
English: Due to a mistake, he was relegated to the post of commander of the Huzhou Horse Infantry Army.

古文：会有龙骑亡命卒数十人，因知州臧丙出郊，谋劫其导从以叛。
现代文：当时许州的数十个亡命骑兵，在知州臧丙出游城郊时，阴谋威逼劫迫导从举行叛乱。
English: At that time, dozens of exiled cavalrymen from Huzhou, when traveling in the suburbs of Zhiping, Chizhou, plotted and threatened to hold a rebellion.

古文：琼闻即白丙，趣还城，因自率从卒数十人，挟弓矢单骑追捕，至榆林村，及之。
现代文：高琼获悉此情后即告诉臧丙，劝他还城，并亲自率领随从将士数十人，带着弓箭单骑追捕叛兵，至榆林村，才追上他们。
English: After Gao Qiong learned of this situation, he immediately told Zou Bin, advised him to return to the city, and personally led dozens of soldiers with him, chasing the rebels with bows and arrows, until he caught up with them in Yulin Village.

古文：贼入村后舍，登墙以拒。
现代文：叛贼进入村后民舍，登在墙头抗拒。
English: The ruffians entered a private house behind the village and climbed on the wall to resist.

古文：贼首青脚狼者注弩将射琼，琼引弓一发毙之，遂悉擒送于州。
现代文：外号青脚狼的叛贼首领正搭弩将射高琼，琼射了一箭便将他击毙，于是将他们全部捕送到许州城。
English: The traitor leader, nicknamed the Blue-footed Wolf, was accosting and about to shoot Gao Qiong. Qiong shot him with an arrow and killed him, so he took them all to Xuzhou City.

古文：丙上其事。
现代文：臧丙上奏此事。
English: The matter has been reported to the police.

古文：会将北伐，召归。授马步军都军头、领蓟州刺史、楼船战棹都指挥使，步船千艘赴雄州。
现代文：正好朝廷将要北伐，便召高琼回京，授任马步军都军头，兼任蓟州刺史、楼船战棹都指挥使，率船千艘赶赴雄州。
English: Just as the Northern Expedition was about to be launched by the imperial court, Gao Qiong was summoned back to Beijing and appointed as the commander of the horse cavalry and infantry troops, as well as the commander of the Zhangzhou expedition and the warship expedition, and he led a thousand ships to Xiongzhou.

古文：又城易州。
现代文：后又建筑易州城。
English: Later, he also built Yizhou City.

古文：师还，为天武右厢都指挥使、领本州团练使。
现代文：班师回京后，任天武右厢都指挥使，兼任本州团练使。
English: After the class teacher returned to Beijing, he was appointed as the commander of the right compartment of Tianwu, and also served as the Honshu group training envoy.

古文：端拱初，迁左厢，改领富州团练使。
现代文：端拱初年，升任左厢都指挥使，改兼富州团练使。
English: In the first year of the end of the arch, he was promoted to the left compartment commander, and changed to the Fuzhou regimental training envoy.

古文：是秋，出为单州防御使，改贝州部署。
现代文：这年秋季，出任单州防御使，后改贝州部署。
English: In the autumn of that year, he was appointed as a single-state defense envoy, and later he was deployed to Bechuanaland.

古文：其出守也，与范廷召、王超、孔守正并命焉。
现代文：当初出任地方官时，高琼与范廷召、王超、孔守正等一同受命调出京师。
English: When Gao Qiong was initially appointed as a local official, he, Fan Tingzhao, Wang Chao, Kong Shuzheng and others were ordered to transfer out of Beijing.

古文：数月，廷召等皆复补兵职，琼颇悒悒。
现代文：数月后，范廷召等都复任军职，高琼悒悒不乐。
English: A few months later, Fan Tingxiao and others were reinstated to their military posts, and Gao Qiong was not happy.

古文：时王承衍镇贝丘，公主每入禁中，颇知上于琼厚，承衍每宽慰之。
现代文：当时王承衍镇守贝丘，公主常常入宫，颇知皇上对高琼很厚爱，王承衍因此每每宽慰他。
English: At that time, Wang Chengyan was in charge of Beiqiu, and the princess often came to the palace. It was well known that the emperor was very fond of Gao Qiong, so Wang Chengyan always comforted him.

古文：二年，召还。
现代文：端拱二年，召还京师。
English: In the second year of the end of the arch, the Beijing division was recalled.

古文：故事，廉察以上入朝，始有茶药之赐，至是特赐琼焉。
现代文：先例，廉察以上的官吏入朝，才有茶药赏赐，到这一次却特例赏赐高琼。
English: Previously, officials above the rank of inspector general were only rewarded with tea and medicine when they entered the imperial court. However, this time, a special award was given to Gao Qiong.

古文：三月，迁朔、易帅臣，制授琼侍卫步军都指挥使、领归义军节度，廷召辈始加观察使，不得与琼比。
现代文：三月后，升朔、易二州帅臣，诏授高琼任侍卫步军都指挥使，领归义军节度，而范廷召等辈才开始加授观察使，不能跟高琼相比。
English: After March, Gao Qiong, who was awarded the title of "the handsome minister of the two states" and Gao Qiong, who was awarded the title of "the bodyguard of the infantry," commanded the troops and led them back to the rebel army. However, it was not until the generation of Fan Ting Zhao that they began to be awarded the title of "the observer," which could not be compared with Gao Qiong.

古文：出为并州马步军都部署，时潘美亦在太原，旧制，节度使领军职者居上，琼以美旧臣，表请居其下，从之。
现代文：后又出任并州马步军都部署。当时潘美也在太原，旧制规定，节度使兼任军职者位居上，而高琼却因为潘美是老臣，特上表请让自己位居其下，被允许。
English: At that time, Pan Mei was also deployed in Taiyuan. According to the old system, the schedule allowed those who served as military officials to be ranked higher, but Gao Qiong was allowed because Pan Mei was a senior minister.

古文：戍兵有以廪食陈腐哗言者，琼知之，一日，出巡诸营，士卒方聚食，因取其饭自啖之，谓众曰： 今边鄙无警，尔等坐饱甘丰，宜知幸也。 众言遂息。
现代文：当时守兵中有人因为仓廪粮米陈腐而谣言惑众，高琼知道后，一日出巡各营，士兵正在聚餐，他因此取饭自吃，并对众人说： 今边线无警，你们坐在这里饱食酒肉，应该知福。 
English: At that time, some soldiers in the garrison spread rumors to mislead the public because the grain and rice stored in silos were stale. After Gao Qiong knew this, he went on a one-day tour of the battalions. The soldiers were having a meal, so he took his own food and said to the people: There are no policemen on the borderline now. You are sitting here, feasting on meat and wine. You should know that you are blessed.

古文：改镇州都部署。
现代文：众人的议论于是息灭。改任镇州都部署。
English: As a result, everyone's discussion died down. The appointment of town and state governors was postponed.

古文：至道中，就改保大军节度，典军如故。
现代文：至道年间，就地改任保大军节度，仍旧带兵。
English: In the years leading up to the parade, he was reassigned to guard the grand military parade, but he still led the troops.

古文：真宗即位，加彰信军节度，充太宗山陵部署，复为并代都部署。
现代文：宋真宗即位，高琼加官彰信军节度，充太宗山陵部署，后又复任并代都部署。
English: Song Zhenzong ascended to the throne, Gao Qiong was promoted to the post of commander of the Zhangxin Army and deployed to the mountains, and later he was reinstated and deployed to the capital.

古文：咸平中，契丹犯塞，其母车帐至狼山大夏。
现代文：咸平时，契丹进犯边塞，契丹王母的车帐到达狼山大夏。
English: In the Heian period, the Khitan invaded the border fortress, and the carriage of the Queen Mother of the Khitan reached the summer of the Wolf Mountain.

古文：上亲巡河朔，遣杨允恭驰往，召琼率所部出土门，与石保吉会镇、定。
现代文：皇上亲自巡视河朔，派杨允恭驰往边关，令高琼率所部出土门，与石保吉在镇、定二州会合。
English: The emperor personally inspected Heshaku, sent Yang Yun Gong to drive to the border, ordered Gao Qiong to lead the headquarters out of the earthen gate, and met with Shi Baoji in the town and Ding Erzhou.

古文：既而傅潜以逗留得罪，即召琼代之。
现代文：后来傅潜因犯逗留不前的罪，便令高琼代替他。
English: Later, Fu Qian was accused of procrastination and Gao Qiong was appointed to replace him.

古文：兵罢，复还本任。
现代文：撤兵后，复还本职。
English: After the withdrawal, he resumed his duties.

古文：转运使言其政绩，诏褒之。
现代文：转运使上报高琼的功绩，皇帝下诏褒奖。
English: Gao Qiong's exploits were reported to the emperor, and the emperor issued a commendation.

古文：咸平三年，代还，以手创不任持笏，诏执梃入谒，授殿前都指挥使。
现代文：咸平三年，轮换还京，因手伤不能持笏，特诏许执木棒入见，并授任殿前都指挥使。
English: Xianping three years, the rotation back to Beijing, due to hand injury can not hold the shovel, special permission to hold the wooden stick, and awarded the palace before the commanding officer.

古文：先是，范廷召、桑赞所将边兵临敌退衄，言者请罪之。
现代文：先前，范廷召、桑赞所带边防士兵临敌后退，谏官请求将他们治罪。
English: Previously, the border soldiers led by Fan Ting and Sanzan retreated in the face of the enemy, and the eunuch requested that they be punished.

古文：以问琼，琼对曰： 兵违将令，于法当诛。
现代文：皇帝以此事征求高琼，琼答道： 兵违将令，依法当杀。
English: The emperor asked Gao Qiong about this. Qiong replied, "If a soldier disobeys a general's order, he should be killed according to the law."

古文：然陛下去岁已释其罪，今复行之，又方屯诸路，非时代易，臣恐众心疑惧。 乃止。
现代文：但陛下去年已免了他们的罪，今天怎能又去治罪呢？而且又正要派兵屯守各路，在这种时候改变原来的决定，臣恐怕人心会疑惑畏惧。 于是作罢。
English: But His Majesty had already pardoned them last year, so how could He punish them again today? Moreover, He was about to send soldiers to guard all roads. At such a time, changing the original decision, I was afraid that the people would be confused and afraid. So I stopped.

古文：景德中，车驾北巡。
现代文：景德年间，皇帝乘车北巡。
English: During the reign of King Jingde, the emperor toured the north by car.

古文：时前军已与敌接战，上欲亲临营垒，或劝南还，琼曰： 敌师已老，陛下宜亲往，以督其成。 上悦，即日进幸澶渊。
现代文：当时前军已与敌人接战，皇帝要亲临战阵，有人劝皇上南回，高琼则说： 敌军已疲惫，陛下应亲往前线，以督勉将士，杀敌成功。 皇上很高兴，当天亲临澶渊。
English: At that time, the front army had already engaged the enemy, and the emperor wanted to be present at the battle. Some people advised the emperor to return to the south, but Gao Qiong said: The enemy army is exhausted, his majesty should go to the front line in person, exhort the soldiers with supervision, and kill the enemy successfully. The emperor was very happy to be present at the abyss that day.

古文：明年，以罢兵，料简兵卒诸班直十年者出补军校，年老者退为本班剩员。
现代文：第二年，因为停战，精简兵卒，凡守边十年以上的出补军校之职，年老的退为本班剩员。
English: In the second year, because of the armistice, the soldiers were streamlined, and those who had been guarding the border for more than ten years were assigned to supplement the military school, and the old ones retired as the remaining members of this class.

古文：琼进曰： 此非激劝之道，宿卫岂不劳乎？ 自是八年者皆得叙补焉。
现代文：高琼上奏说 ：此非激励将士之道，宿卫边疆，岂不劳苦吗？ 从此，凡戍边八年的也可补军校了。
English: Gao Qiong said in his speech, "Isn't this the way to inspire soldiers, to defend the frontier, and not to toil? From now on, every eight-year-old can also supplement the military school."

古文：马军都校葛霸权步军司，会以疾在告，令琼兼领二司。
现代文：马军都校葛霸代理步军司，当时正因病告退，皇上令高琼兼领此二司。
English: Ge Ba, the acting acting military commander of the Ma Jundu School, was retiring due to illness at the time, and Emperor Gao Qiong concurrently led the two divisions.

古文：琼从容上言曰： 臣衰老，傥又有犬马之疾，则须一将总此二职。
现代文：高琼从容地对皇上说： 臣已衰老，倘又有犬马之疾，则又必须一将来总领此二职。
English: Gao Qiong calmly said to the emperor: The vassal has aged, if there is a disease of the dog and horse, then he must lead this second post in the future.

古文：臣事先朝时，侍卫都虞候以上常至十员，职位相亚，易于迁改，且使军伍熟其名望，边藩缓急，亦可选用。 上深然之。
现代文：臣在前一朝任职时，朝中侍卫都虞候以上常多至十员，职位相当，容易改任，而且使军队熟悉他们的名望，到时若边关有急，也可以选用。 皇上深以为然。
English: When a vassal served in the previous dynasty, there were often as many as ten members of the Imperial Household and the Imperial Guard, and the positions were comparable, it was easy to change positions, and the troops were familiar with their reputation, and they could also be used if there was an emergency at the border.

古文：未几，以久疾求解兵柄，授检校太尉、忠武军节度。
现代文：不久，以久病在身请求解除兵权，于是改任检校太尉、忠武军节度。
English: Soon after, he requested to be relieved of his military powers due to a long-term illness, and was then reassigned to the post of inspector of schools and commander of loyal troops.

古文：三年冬，疾甚，上欲亲临问之，宰相不可，乃止。
现代文：景德三年冬，高琼病危，皇上想要亲临慰问，因宰相劝阻，才止。
English: In the winter of the third year of King Jingde's reign, Gao Qiong was critically ill. The emperor wanted to come and offer his condolences in person, but was dissuaded by the prime minister.

古文：卒，年七十二，赠侍中。
现代文：去世时，年七十二岁。赠侍中。
English: He was 72 years old at the time of his death.

古文：琼不识字，晓达军政，然颇自任，罕与副将参议。
现代文：高琼不识字，他精通军政，但颇为独裁，很少与副将商议。
English: Gao Qiong is illiterate. He is well versed in military and political affairs, but he is quite dictatorial and rarely consults with his vice-commanders.

古文：善训诸子：继勋、继宣、继忠、继密、继和、继隆、继元。
现代文：善于教养儿子。他的儿子有：继勋、继宣、继忠、继密、继和、继隆、继元。
English: He was good at educating his sons. His sons were: Jixun, Jixuan, Jizhong, Jimei, Jiahe, Jilong and Jiyuan.

古文：继勋、继宣最知名。
现代文：其中，继勋、继宣最知名。
English: Among them, Jixun and Jixuan are the most famous.

