古文：傅好礼，字伯恭，固安人。
现代文：傅好礼，字伯恭，固安人。
English: Fu Haoli, Zi Boqiong, Guanren.

古文：万历二年进士。知泾县，治最，入为御史。
现代文：万历二年进士，任泾县知县，考核政绩为上等，进入京师为御史。
English: In the second year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to the rank of scholar, and was appointed to the post of county magistrate of Jixian County. His political performance was assessed as superior, and he entered the Beijing division as the imperial historian.

古文：尝陈时政，请节游宴，停内操，罢外戚世封，止山陵行幸，又上崇实、杜渐诸疏。语皆剀直。
现代文：曾陈明时政，请减少游玩、宴请，停止宫中操练士兵，停止外戚世代分封的制度，停止巡幸山陵，又奏提倡务实，防微杜渐等疏，言词恳切、直爽。
English: Please reduce the number of visits and banquets, stop the practice of training soldiers in the palace, stop the system of assigning titles to generations of relatives, stop the inspection of mountains and tombs, and play a role in advocating pragmatism, prevent micro-management, etc. The words are earnest and straightforward.

古文：巡按浙江。
现代文：巡按浙江。
English: The patrol presses Zhejiang.

古文：岁大侵，条上荒政。
现代文：那一年发生大灾害，分列度过荒年的对策呈给朝廷。
English: In that year, a major disaster occurred, and the countermeasures to overcome the disaster year were presented to the Imperial Court.

古文：行部湖州，用便宜发漕折银万两，易粟振饥民。改按山东。
现代文：行至湖州，利用便利发放漕折银万两，买米赈济饥民，改为巡按山东。
English: They went to Huzhou to take advantage of the convenient distribution of 100,000 taels of silver to buy rice to feed the hungry, and changed it to patrol Shandong.

古文：泰安州同知张寿朋当贬秩，文选郎谢廷寀用为永平推官，谓州同知六品，而推官七品也。
现代文：泰安州同知张寿朋应当降职，文选郎谢廷肕起用为永平推官，说州同知为六品，而推官是七品。
English: Zhang Shoupeng, a Tai'an County Tongzhi, should be demoted, and Xie Tingyu, a literary critic, should be appointed as Yongping's nominator. He said that the county Tongzhi is six products, and the nominator is seven products.

古文：好礼驰疏劾其非制，廷寀坐停俸，寿朋改调。
现代文：傅好礼上疏弹劾他误用制度，谢廷肕被停发俸禄，张寿朋改为调到他处。
English: Fu Haorai impeached him for misuse of the system, Xie Tingyao was suspended from salary, and Zhang Shoupeng was transferred to another post.

古文：好礼寻谢病归。
现代文：傅好礼不久因疾归家。
English: Fu Haoli soon returned home due to illness.

古文：召进光禄少卿，改太常。
现代文：后来起用为光禄少卿，改为太常。
English: Later, he was appointed as Koroku Shokei and changed his title to Taizen.

古文：时税使四出，海内骚然。
现代文：当时矿税使到处出动，天下不安定。
English: At that time, the mining tax was everywhere, and the world was unstable.

古文：二十六年冬，奸民张礼等伪为官吏，群小百十人分据近京要地，税民间杂物，弗予，捶至死。
现代文：万历二十六年冬天，奸民张礼等伪装为官吏，一百多人分别把守京城附近的要地，对民间杂物都收税，倘若不给，就将人打死。
English: In the winter of the twenty-sixth year of Wanli, more than a hundred people, including the villain Zhang Li, disguised as officials, separately guarded important places near the capital, collecting taxes on folk miscellaneous goods. If they did not pay, they would beat people to death.

古文：好礼极论其害，因言： 自朝鲜用兵，畿民富者贫，贫者死，思乱已久，奈何又虐征。
现代文：傅好礼极力论证矿税使的害处，说： 自从用兵朝鲜，京畿老百姓富的变穷，穷的死掉，老百姓想起来反抗的心思早有了，为什么要残酷地征收呢？
English: Fu Haoli tried his best to prove the harm caused by the mining tax, saying: Since the Korean War, the people of Gyeonggi have become poorer and poorer, and the poor have died. The people have long had the idea of resistance. Why should they be cruelly levied?

古文：国家纵贫，亦不当头会箕敛，括细民续命之脂膏；况奸徒所得千万，输朝廷者什一耳，陛下何利为之。 
现代文：国家纵使贫困，也不能横征暴敛，搜刮百姓延长生命的钱财，更何况奸臣所得到的有成千上万，而输送到朝廷的仅十分之一，陛下有什么利呢？ 
English: Even if the country is poor, it cannot extort money and resources to prolong people's lives. What's more, the treacherous vassals have received thousands of dollars, while only one-tenth has been sent to the imperial court. What is the benefit to His Majesty?

古文：奏入，四日未报，复具疏请。
现代文：奏疏上后，四天没有得到答复，他又上疏请求。
English: When he did not receive a reply in four days, he made another request.

古文：帝大怒，传旨镌三级，出之外。
现代文：皇上大怒，传旨将他降职三级，贬出京城。
English: Enraged, the emperor decreed that he be demoted three ranks and banished from the capital.

古文：大理卿吴定疏救。帝益怒，谪好礼大同广昌典史，定镌三级，调边方。
现代文：大理卿吴定上疏救他，皇帝更加不高兴，将傅好礼贬为大同广昌典史，吴定降三级，调往边境地区。
English: The Emperor was even more displeased, and reduced Fu Haoli to a historical figure of Datong and Guangchang. Wu Ding was demoted three levels and transferred to the border region.

古文：言官复交章论救，斥定为民。
现代文：言官又连上奏章为吴定辩解，皇上将吴定降为平民。
English: The magistrate also issued a proclamation in defense of Wu Ding, and the emperor reduced Wu Ding to a commoner.

古文：既而帝思好礼言，下其疏，命厂卫严缉，逮礼等二十八人诏狱，其害乃除。
现代文：不久，皇上想起傅好礼的话，将其奏疏放下，命东厂、锦衣卫严加缉捕，逮捕张礼等二十八人下狱，他们的祸害才得以除掉。
English: Not long after, the emperor remembered Fu Haoli's words and put down his complaint. He ordered the East Factory, Jin Rongwei to be severely arrested, and arrested Zhang Li. Twenty-eight people were sent to prison, and their scourge was eliminated.

古文：好礼之官，未几，请急归。
现代文：傅好礼上任不久，就请求赶快回乡。
English: Soon after Fu Haoli took office, he asked to return to his hometown as soon as possible.

古文：家居十五年卒。
现代文：在家居住了十五年后死了。
English: She died after living in the house for 15 years.

古文：天启中，赠太常卿。
现代文：天启中，赠为太常卿。
English: In the Apocalypse, he was given the title of Tai Changqing.

