古文：浊漳水出上党长子县西发鸠山，漳水出鹿谷山，与发鸠连麓而在南。《淮南子》谓之发苞山，故异名互见也。
现代文：浊漳水发源于上党郡长子县西面的发鸿山，漳水发源于鹿谷山，鹿谷山与发鸡山山麓相连而位置在南，《淮南子》称为发苞山，所以在诸书中常见互用异名。
English: Ershui originated from the Fanghong Mountain in the west of Changzi County, Shangdang County, and Ershui originated from Lugu Mountain. Lugu Mountain is connected to the foot of Fangqishan Mountain and is located in the south. Huainanzi is called Fangqishan, so it is common to use different names in books.

古文：左则阳泉水注之，右则伞盖水入焉。
现代文：左边有阳泉水注入，右边有缴盖水流进来。
English: On the left side, there is a sun spring water injection, and on the right side, there is a covered water flow.

古文：三源同出一山，但以南北为别耳。
现代文：这三个源头都出自同一座山，只不过南北方向不同罢了。
English: These three sources all come from the same mountain, but in a different north-south direction.

古文：东过其县南，又东，尧水自西山东北流，径尧庙北，又东径长子县故城南。周史辛甲所封邑也。
现代文：往东流过县南，又往东，尧水从西山往东北流经尧庙北面，又往东流经长子县老城南面，这里是周时史官辛甲所封的食邑。
English: It flows eastward through the southern part of the county, and then eastward again. Surabaya's water flows from the western mountains to the northeast through the northern side of the Ancestral Temple, and then eastward through the southern side of the old town of the eldest son county. This is the food village sealed by the Zhou Dynasty historian Xin Jia.

古文：《春秋》襄公十八年，晋人执卫行人石买于长子，即是县也。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公十八年前，晋人在长子俘虏了卫国的行人石买，就是此县。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Eighteen years ago, the eldest son of Emperor Xiangzong of the Jin Dynasty captured the pedestrians in the defense of the country. It was in this county.

古文：秦置上党郡，治此。
现代文：秦时设置上党郡，治所就在这里。
English: In the Qin Dynasty, Shangdang County was established, and the government office is located here.

古文：其水东北流入漳水。
现代文：水往东北流，注入漳水。
English: The water flows to the northeast, injecting brackish water.

古文：漳水东会于梁水，梁水出南梁山，北流径长子县故城南。
现代文：漳水往东流，汇合于梁水。梁水发源于南梁山，往北流经长子县老城南面。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward and merges with Liangshui. Liangshui originates from South Liangshan and flows northward through the southern part of the old city of Changzi County.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：梁惠成王十二年，郑取屯留、尚子、涅。尚子，即长子之异名也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：梁惠成王十二年前，郑国夺取了屯留、尚子、涅―尚子就是长子的异名。
English: The "Chronicle of Bamboo" says: Twelve years before Liang Huicheng became king, Zheng conquered Tunlu, Shangzi, and Nie - Shangzi was the eldest son's different name.

古文：梁水又北入漳水。
现代文：梁水又往北注入漳水。
English: The Liangshui River also flows north into the Bohai River.

古文：屈从县东北流，陶水南出陶乡，北流径长子城东，西转径其城北，东注于漳水。
现代文：转弯从县城往东北流，陶水发源于南面的陶乡，往北流经长子城的东面，向西转弯流经城北，东流注入漳水。
English: The curve flows from the county seat to the northeast, and the ceramic water originates in the south of Tao Township, flows northward through the east of the eldest son, flows westward through the north of the city, and the east stream is injected into the water.

古文：又东过壶关县北，又东北过屯留县南，漳水东径屯留县南，又屈径其城东，东北流，有绛水注之。
现代文：又往东流过壶关县北边，又往东北流过屯留县南边，漳水往东流经屯留县南面，又转弯流过城东，往东北流，有绛水注入。
English: It also flowed eastward through the north of Juguan County, and northeastward through the south of Tunliu County, and the floodwater flowed eastward through the south of Tunliu County, and then turned and flowed through the east of the city, and flowed to the northeast, with the floodwater being injected.

古文：故许慎曰：水出发鸠山入漳，从水，东声也。漳水又东北径壶关县故城西，又屈径其城北。
现代文：绛水发源于西方谷远县东面的发鸡之谷，称为滥水；往东流经屯留县老城南面，就是旧时的留吁国，是潞氏的属国。
English: The Surabaya water originates from the valley of the Rooster in the east of the West Valley, called Surabaya; it flows eastward through the south of the old town of Tunliu County, which was the old Luchu country and was a vassal state of the Xiong family.

古文：故黎国也，有黎亭，县有壶口关，故曰壶关矣。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公十八年把余吾封给景丹的儿子景尚，立为侯国。
English: "Spring and Autumn": In the 18th year of Emperor Xiang, Emperor Xiang gave Yuwufeng to Jingdan's son, Jing Shang, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：吕后元年，立孝惠后宫子武为侯国。
现代文：陈水又往东流经屯留县老城北面。《竹书纪年》：梁惠成王元年把这里封给孝惠帝后宫所生的儿子刘武，立为侯国。
English: Chen Shui also flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Tunliu County. "The Bamboo Annals": In the first year of King Liang Huicheng, Liu Wu, the son of Emperor Xiao Hui's harem, was given this place as a fief.

古文：汉有壶关三老公乘兴上书讼卫太子，即色人也。
现代文：汉时有壶关三老公乘兴上书控告卫太子，他就是本县人。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a man named Juguan San who wrote a complaint against Emperor Wei. He was from this county.

古文：县在屯留东，不得先壶关而后屯留也。
现代文：壶关县在屯留东边，不可能先流经壶关然后才到屯留。
English: Juguan County is to the east of Tunlu. It is impossible to flow through Juguan first and then go to Tunlu.

古文：漳水历鹿台山与铜鞮水合，水出铜鞮县西北石瞪山，东流与专池水合，水出八特山，东北流入铜鞮水。
现代文：漳水流过鹿台山与铜鞋水汇合。铜鞋水发源于铜鞍县西北的石陇山，东流与专池水汇合。专池水发源于八特山，往东北流，注入铜赣水。
English: The brackish water flows through Mt. Lutaishan and merges with the brackish water. The brackish water originates from Mt. Shikotsu in the northwest of Tongan County, and the eastern stream merges with the water of the special pond. The water of the special pond originates from Mt. Hatto, flows to the northeast, and is injected with the brackish water.

古文：铜鞮水又东南合女谏水，水西北出好松山，东南流，北则苇池水与公主水合而右往之；南则榆交水与皇后水合而左入焉。乱流东南，注于铜鞮水。
现代文：铜鞍水又往东南流，与女谏水汇合。女谏水发源于西北的好松山，往东南流，北边有苇池水与公主水合流往西注入，南边有榆交水与皇后水合流往东汇进来，往东南乱流，注入铜鞋水。
English: The Tongxuan water flows to the southeast and merges with the Meixuan water. The Meixuan water originates from the northwest of the Good Pine Mountain and flows to the southeast. In the north, the water from the Dianchi Lake and the water from the Princess Water merge and flow to the west. In the south, the water from the Dianchi Lake and the water from the Queen Water merge and flow to the east. Turbulent water flows to the southeast and injects the copper shoe water.

古文：铜鞮水又东径李憙墓，墓前有碑，碑石破碎，故李氏以太和元年立之。
现代文：铜赣水又往东流经李息墓，墓前有碑，是太和元年李氏所立，现在已经破碎了。
English: The brackish water also flows eastward through the Li Xi tomb. There is a monument in front of the tomb, which was erected by the Li clan in the first year of the Taiwa era. It is now broken.

古文：其水又东径故城北，城在山阜之上，下临岫壑，东、西、北三面，阻袤二里，世谓之断梁城，即故县之上虒亭也，铜鞮水又东径铜鞮县故城北，城在水南山中，晋大夫羊舌赤铜鞮伯华之邑也。
现代文：水又往东流经老城北面；城在山冈上面，底下临着深谷；东、西、北三面都有深涧隔断，宽广约二里，世人称为断梁城，就是旧县的上旎亭。铜鞋水又往东流经铜鞋县老城北面，城在南岸山中，是晋时大夫羊舌赤―号铜鞍伯华的食邑。
English: The water also flows eastward through the north side of the old city; the city is on top of a hill, with a deep valley below; the east, west and north sides are deeply cut off, about two miles wide. The world is known as the broken beam city, which is the Shangyu Pavilion of the old county. The copper shoe water also flows eastward through the north side of the old city of the copper shoe county, and the city is in the South Bank Mountains. It is the food town of the Jin Dynasty doctor sheep's tongue red - number copper saddle Bo Hua.

古文：汉高祖破韩王信于此县。
现代文：汉高祖就在这里打败韩王信。
English: It was here that Henkel's founder defeated Han Wangxin.

古文：铜鞮水又东南流径顷城西，即县之下虒聚也。
现代文：铜鞋水又往东南流过顷城西面，就是铜赣县的下瘾聚。
English: The water of the Copper Shoe also flows to the southeast across the west side of the city, which is the downstream of Tonglu County.

古文：《地理志》曰：县有土虒亭，下虒聚者也。
现代文：《地理志》说：铜鞍县有上瘾亭、下旎聚。
English: "Geography" said: There are addiction kiosks and gatherings in the lower part of Tongxuan County.

古文：铜鞮水又南径胡邑西，又东屈径其城南，又东径襄垣县，入于漳。
现代文：铜墟水又往南流经胡邑西面，又向东转，流过城南，又往东流经襄垣县，注入漳水。
English: The water of Tongxu also flows southward through the west side of Hui, turns eastward, flows through the south of the city, and flows eastward through Xiangyuan County, injecting the water.

古文：漳水又东北流径襄垣县故城南，王莽之上党亭。
现代文：漳水又往东北流经襄垣县老城南面，就是王莽的上党亭。
English: Surabaya also flows to the northeast through the south of the old city of Xiangyuan County, which is Wang Mang's Shangdang Pavilion.

古文：潞县北，县，故赤翟潞子国也。
现代文：潞县北边，潞县就是从前赤翟的潞子国。
English: In the north of Handan County, Handan County is the former Handan Province of Red Handan.

古文：余案《燕书》，王猛与慕容评相遇于潞川也。评障锢山泉，鬻水与军，入绢匹，水二石，无他大川，可以为浸，所有巨浪长湍，惟漳水耳。
现代文：潞子国的尽相丰舒很有才能，但没有德行，晋国伯宗列举了他的五条罪状，派荀林父去灭了潞子国。闻胭说：潞县有潞水，是冀州的大河流，就是漳水。我按《燕书》，王猛与慕容评在潞川相遇，慕容评堵截了山泉，卖水给军队，交上一匹绢就给二担水。这里没有别的大川可以灌溉，所有的长川大河，就只有漳水一条了。
English: Wang Meng and Murong Huan met at the Lijiang River, according to "The Book of the Swallow." Murong Huan blocked the mountain spring, sold water to the army, and handed over a donkey to give two loads of water. There is no other big river here that can be irrigated, and all the big rivers of the Yangtze River are only Lijiang Water.

古文：故世人亦谓浊漳为潞水矣。
现代文：所以世人也把浊漳称为潞水。
English: That's why the world also calls the reed a reed.

古文：县北对故台壁，漳水径其南。
现代文：潞县北边与旧时的台壁相望。漳水流经壁南。
English: The northern side of Handan County faces the old retaining wall. The Handan River flows south of the wall.

古文：本潞子所立也，世名之为台壁。
现代文：此壁原是潞子所建，世人称为台壁。
English: This wall was originally built by mules, and is known to the world as the Table Wall.

古文：慕容垂伐慕容永于长子，军次潞川，永率精兵拒战，阻河自固，垂阵台壁，一战破之，即是处也。
现代文：慕容垂在长子攻打慕容永，部队驻扎在潞水，慕容永率领精兵抵抗，凭河坚守，慕容垂在台壁摆好阵势，一仗就把慕容永打垮了，就是在这地方。
English: Murongtang attacked Murongyong at the eldest son, the troops were stationed in Surabaya, Murongyong led the elite soldiers to resist and held on to the river, Murongtang set up a position on the platform wall, and defeated Murongyong in one battle, that is where.

古文：漳水于是左合黄须水口，水出台壁西张讳岩下。
现代文：漳水左岸在这里于黄须口汇合黄须水。黄须水发源于台壁西边张讳岩下。
English: Here, the left bank of the Surabaya River meets the Huangshu River at the mouth of the Huangshu River. The Huangshu River originates under the Zhangye Rock on the west side of the platform wall.

古文：世传岩赤则土罹兵害，故恶其变化无常，恒以石粉污之令白，是以俗目之为张讳岩。
现代文：世上相传岩石发红，就会遭到战祸，人们讨厌这岩石的变化无常，都用石粉把它涂成白色，所以民间把它叫张讳岩。
English: It is said that if a rock turns red, it will be the cause of a war. People hate the fickleness of this rock and use stone powder to paint it white, so people call it Zhangyaku Rock.

古文：其水南流，径台壁西，又南入于漳。
现代文：水往南流经台壁西面，又南流注入漳水。
English: The water flows southward through the west face of the platform wall, and the south flow injects brackish water.

古文：漳水又东北历望夫山，山之南有石人仁于山上，状有怀于云表，因以名焉。
现代文：漳水又往东北流过望夫山，山南有石人伫立在山上，姿态像是在盼望着云天外的远人，因而取名。
English: Surabaya also flows to the northeast past Mount Mofu. In Shannan, a stone man stands on the mountain, looking as if he is looking forward to meeting someone far away, hence his name.

古文：有涅水西出覆甑山，而东流与西汤溪水合，水出涅县西山汤谷，五泉俱会。谓之五会之泉，交东南流，谓之西汤水，又东南流注涅水。
现代文：有涅水发源于西边的覆颤山，东流与西汤溪水汇合。西汤溪水发源于涅县西山的汤谷，五条泉水汇合在一起，叫五会之泉；又往东南流，称为西汤水，又往东南流，注入涅水。
English: The water of the West Tang River originates from the Tang Valley of the West Mountain in Ne County. Five springs come together and are called the Five Associations Spring. It flows to the southeast and is called the West Tang River, and it flows to the southeast and is infused with water from the Ne River.

古文：涅水又东径涅县故城南，县氏涅水也。
现代文：涅水又往东流经涅县老城南面，东流与白鸡水汇合。
English: The Nie River flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Nie County, and the eastward flow merges with the Baijiu River.

古文：东与白鸡水合，水出县之西山，东径其县北，东南流入涅水。
现代文：涅县就是以涅水命名的。白鸡水发源于涅县的西山，往东流经县北，往东南流入涅水。
English: Ne County is named after Ne Shui. Baiji Shui originates from the West Mountain of Ne County, flows eastward through the north of the county, and flows into Ne Shui in the southeast.

古文：涅水又东南，武乡水会焉，水源出武山西南，径武乡县故城西，而南得清谷口。
现代文：涅水又往东南流，武乡水汇入。武乡水源出武山，往西南流经武乡县老城西面，然后往南流到清谷口汇合清谷水。
English: Wuxiang's water source flows out of Wushan, flows southwest through the west side of the old town of Wuxiang County, and then flows south to the mouth of the Qingya River, where it meets the Qingya Water.

古文：水源出东北长山清谷，西南与鞸鞛、白壁二水合，南入武乡水，又南得黄水口，黄水三源，同注一壑，东南流与隐室水合，水源西北出隐室山，东南注黄水。
现代文：清谷水发源于东北方长山的清谷，往西南流与桦赔水和白璧水汇合，南流注入武乡水；又南流有黄水口。黄水有三个源头，同流注入一条深涧，往东南流，与隐室水汇合。隐室水源出西北方的隐室山，往东南注入黄水。
English: The Qinggu water originates from the Qinggu in the northeastern Nagayama, and flows to the southwest, where it merges with the Gongpo water and Bai Bi water. The southern stream injects the Wuxiang water; and the southern stream has a yellow water outlet. The yellow water has three sources, the same stream injects a deep stream, flows to the southeast, and merges with the hidden room water. The hidden room water source comes from the hidden room mountain in the northwest, and injects the yellow water to the southeast.

古文：又东入武乡水。武乡水又东南注于涅水。涅水又东南流，注于樟水。
现代文：黄水又往东注入武乡水；武乡水又往东南注入涅水；涅水又往东南流，注入漳水。
English: The yellow water then flows eastward into the Wuxiang water; the Wuxiang water then flows southeastward into the Nian water; and the Nian water then flows southeastward into the Ershui water.

古文：漳水又东径磻阳城北，仓谷水入焉。
现代文：漳水又往东流经播阳城北面，仓谷水注入。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the northern side of Boyang City, and Canggu water is injected.

古文：水出林虑县之仓谷溪，东北径鲁班门西。
现代文：仓谷水发源于林虑县的仓谷溪，往东北流经鲁班门西面。
English: The Canggu Water originates from Canggu Creek in Linxian County and flows northeast through the west side of Lubanmen.

古文：双阙昂藏，石壁霞举，左右结石修防，崇基仍存。
现代文：这里两侧的山崖状如门户，石壁凌云高举，左右两岸用石块修筑成堤防，高高的基址至今还在。
English: The cliffs on both sides here are like portals, the stone walls soaring high above the clouds, the embankments on the left and right sides built with stones to form a dike, and the high foundation is still there.

古文：北径偏桥东，即林虑之娇岭抱犊固也。
现代文：漳水往北流经偏桥东面，这就是林虑的娇岭抱犊固。
English: Surabaya water flows northward through the east side of the bridge, which is the Jiaoling of Linxian.

古文：石隥西陛，陟踵修上五里余，隥崿路中断四五丈，中以木为偏桥，劣得通行，亦言故有偏桥之名矣。
现代文：循着石级向西往高处攀登，约五里余，到了崖边路就断了，中间一段约有四五丈，用木料架成偏桥，勉强可以通行，所以听说这里地名也叫偏桥。
English: Following the stone steps to the west, I climbed to a high place, about five miles, and when I reached the edge of the cliff, the road broke. The middle section is about four or five meters high, with a wooden bridge, barely passable, so I heard that the place name here is also called the bridge.

古文：自上犹须攀萝们葛，方乃自津，山顶，即庾衮眩坠处也。
现代文：从这里上山，还要攀藤援葛，才能到达山顶，这就是庚衰眩晕坠崖的地方。
English: From here, you have to climb up the mountain and climb the rattan to reach the top of the mountain, which is the place where the decline and fall of vertigo cliff.

古文：仓谷溪水又北合白木溪。溪水出壶关县东白木川，东径百晦城北，盖同仇池百顷之称矣。
现代文：仓谷溪水又北流，与白木溪汇合，溪水发源于壶关县东边的白木川，往东流经百亩城北面，这也和仇池百顷之类名称一样。
English: Canggu Stream also flows north, merging with Shiraki Stream. The stream originates from the Shiraki River on the east side of Kuguan County, and flows eastward through the north side of the hundred mu city, which is also the same as the names such as the hundred hectares of Qiuchi.

古文：又东径林虑县之石门谷，又注于仓溪水。
现代文：又往东流经林虑县的石门谷，又注入仓溪水。
English: It also flows eastward through the Shimen Valley in Linqian County, and injects water into the Cangxi River.

古文：仓溪水又北径磻阳城东而北流，注于漳水。
现代文：仓溪水又往北流经潘阳城东面，往北流注入漳水。
English: The water of Cangxi Creek flows northward through the east of Panyang City, and then flows northward into the Ershui River.

古文：漳水又东径葛公亭北而东注矣。
现代文：漳水又往东流经葛公亭北面，往东流去。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the north side of Ge Gongting and flows eastward.

古文：又东过武安县，漳水于县东，清漳水自涉县东南来注之，世谓决入之所为交漳口也。
现代文：又往东流过武安县，漳水在武安县东面，汇合了从涉县往东南流来的清漳水。世人把汇流处称为交漳口。
English: It also flows eastward through Wu'an County, and the clear water of the Yanshui River is in the east of Wu'an County, merging with the clear water of the Yanshui River flowing from the southeast of Wanzhou County. The world calls the confluence the junction.

古文：又东出山，过邺县西，漳水又东径三户峡为三户津。
现代文：又往东出山，流过邺县西面，漳水又往东流经三户峡，称为三户津。
English: It also flows eastward out of the mountains, passing through the west side of Handan County. Handan Water also flows eastward through Sandu Gorge, known as Sandu Tsuen.

古文：张晏曰：三户，地名也，在梁期西南。
现代文：张晏说：三户是地名，在梁期西南。
English: Zhang Ye said: Sanfu is a place name, in the southwest of Liang period.

古文：孟康曰：津，峡名也，在邺西四十里。
现代文：孟康说：三户津是一条山峡名，在邺县以西四十里。
English: Meng Kang said: Sannootsu is the name of a mountain gorge, forty miles west of Handan County.

古文：又东，汗水注之，水出武安县山，东南流径汗城北。
现代文：又东流，汗水注入。汗水发源于武安县山，往东南流经汗城北面。
English: It also flows eastward, injecting sweat. The sweat originates in the mountains of Wu'an County and flows southeast through the north of Khancheng.

古文：昔项羽与蒲将军英布济自三户，破章邯于是水。
现代文：从前项羽与蒲将军、英布从三户渡水，就在这条水上打败了章邯。
English: In the past, Xiang Yu and Pu Zhen and Ying Bu crossed the water from Sanyu and defeated Zhang Ye on this water.

古文：汗水东注于漳水。
现代文：汗水往东注入漳水。
English: Sweat pours eastward into the brackish water.

古文：漳水又东径武城南，世谓之梁期城。梁期在邺北，俗亦渭之两期城，皆为非也。
现代文：漳水又往东流经武城南面，世人称为梁期城；梁期在邺城北面，民间又称为两期城，都是不正确的。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the south of Wucheng, and the world is called Liangzhi City; Liangzhi is in the north of Wucheng, and the people are also called the two-phase city, which is not correct.

古文：司马彪《郡国志》曰：邺县有武城，武城即期城矣。
现代文：司马彪《郡国志》说：邺县有武城，武城就是期城。
English: Sima Biao's "County History" said: There is Wucheng in Handan County, and Wucheng is the period city.

古文：漳水又东北径西门豹祠前。
现代文：漳水又往东北流经西门豹祠前面，祠的东边有石碑，隐约可以看出凸起的字迹。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast through the front of the West Gate Leopard Shrine. There is a stone monument on the east side of the shrine, and the raised writing can be faintly seen.

古文：祠东侧有碑，隐起为字，祠堂东头石柱勒铭曰：赵建武中所修也。魏文帝《述征赋》曰：羡西门之嘉迹，忽遥睇其灵字。
现代文：祠堂东端的石柱上刻有这些字样：赵建武年间所建。魏文帝《述征赋》说：景慕西门豹感人的事迹，忽然远远望见他的祠庙。
English: The stone pillar at the east end of the ancestral hall is inscribed with these words: "Built by Zhao Jianwu." Wei Wendi's "Record of the Conscription" said: "Jing Mu Xi Menpiao's touching deeds, suddenly his ancestral temple can be seen far away.

古文：漳水右与枝水合。其水上承漳水于邯会西，而东别与邯水合，水发源邯山东北，径邯会县故城西，北注枝水，故曰邯会也。
现代文：漳水右岸与支流汇合，支流上流在邯会西边承接漳水，向东分支与邯水汇合。邯水发源于邯山东北，流经邯会县老城西面，北流注入这条支流，所以称为邯会。
English: The right bank of the Surabaya River merges with a tributary, and the upstream tributary joins the Surabaya River on the west side of the community, and branches off to the east to merge with the Surabaya River. The Surabaya River originates in the northeast of Lushan, flows through the west side of the old city of Lushan County, and the north stream flows into this tributary, so it is called the Surabaya Community.

古文：城之西北有三台，皆因城为之基，巍然崇举，其高若山，建安十五年魏武所起，平坦略尽。《春秋古地》云：葵丘，地名，今邺西三台是也。
现代文：张晏说：从漳水分出的支流，从西南流与邯山之水汇合，现在城旁还有沟渠留着。汉武帝元朔二年才开始封在这里，所以称魏。汉高帝十二年魏武帝所筑，现在已差不多削平了。《春秋古地》说：葵丘是地名，现在邺城西面的三座台，就是葵丘的所在地。
English: Zhang Qian said: the tributary flowing from the Qian water, from the southwest flow and the water of the Qian Mountain converge, and now there are still ditches left next to the city. Emperor Hanwu only began to seal here in the second year of the Yuan Shuo, so it is called Wei. Emperor Wudi built in the twelfth year of the Han Dynasty, and now it has almost been leveled. "Ancient Spring and Autumn" said: Kwai Qiu is a place name, and now the three platforms on the west side of Qiancheng are the location of Kwai Qiu.

古文：谓台已平，或更有见，意所未详、中曰铜雀台，高十丈，有屋百一间，台成，命诸子登之，并使为赋。
现代文：现在台已削平，但当时也许另有所见，不很清楚。中间的叫铜雀台，高十丈，有房屋一百零一间。台建成后，魏武帝叫他的儿子们去登台，还要他们作赋。
English: Now the stage has been leveled, but at that time there may have been another view, it is not very clear. The middle one is called the Bronze Sparrow Stage, which is ten meters high and has one hundred and one houses. After the stage was built, Emperor Wei Wu called his sons to go on stage and asked them to make a performance.

古文：陈思王下笔成章，美捷当时。
现代文：陈思王落笔成篇，文词的优美，才思的敏捷，当时无人可与他相比。
English: At that time, no one could be compared to Chen Si Wang when he finished writing a book. His writing was beautiful and his wit was quick.

古文：亦魏武望奉常王叔治之处也，昔严才与其属攻掖门，修闻变，车马未至，便将宫属步至宫门，太祖在铜雀台望见之曰：彼来者必王叔治也。
现代文：铜雀台也是魏武帝望见奉常王叔治的地方。从前严才和他的部属攻打宫殿边门，王修听到发生事变，没等到车马到来，就带领部属步行赶到宫门。太祖在铜雀台上远远看到了，说道：那赶来的人一定是王叔治了。
English: The Copper Sparrow Terrace is also the place where Emperor Wei Wu could see Wang Shuji. Once upon a time, Yan Cai and his subordinates attacked the side gate of the palace. Wang Xiu heard that an incident had occurred, and did not wait for the car and horse to arrive, he led his subordinates on foot to the palace gate. Taizu saw it from afar on the Copper Sparrow Terrace and said: The person who arrived must be Wang Shuji.

古文：相国钟繇曰：旧京城有变，九卿各居其府，卿何来也？
现代文：相国钟舔说：过去京城里发生事变，九卿都留守在他们的官署，你为什么赶来啊？
English: His partner, Zhong Li, said, "In the past, there was an incident in the capital, and the nine nobles all stayed at their government offices. Why did you come?"

古文：修曰：食其禄，焉避其难，居府虽旧，非赴难之义。
现代文：王修说：吃人家的傣禄，人家有危难时，怎能躲着呢？留守官署虽说是老规矩，但却没有蹈汤赴火，尽救人急难的本分。
English: Wang Xiu said, "If you take someone's hard-earned money, how can you hide when someone is in danger? Although it is an old rule, the left-behind government office did not rush into the fire to do its duty of rescuing people in an emergency.

古文：时人以为美谈矣。
现代文：当时人们把这件事传为美谈。
English: At the time, people made a big deal about it.

古文：石虎更增二丈，立一屋，连栋接榱，弥覆其上，盘回隔之，名曰命子窟。
现代文：石虎又把台加高了二丈，台上建了一座房屋，栋椽相连，把高台顶上全都盖住，在周围分隔开来，叫命子窟。
English: Shihu also raised the platform by two storeys. A house was built on the platform, with the rafters connected, and the top of the platform was completely covered and separated from the surrounding area. It was called the cave of life.

古文：又于屋上起五层搂，高十五丈，去地二十七丈，又作铜雀于楼巅，舒翼若飞。
现代文：又在屋上建五层楼，高十五丈，离地二十七丈；又在楼顶做了一只铜雀，张开翅膀，像在飞翔似的。
English: He also built a five-storey building on the roof, fifteen stories high and twenty-seven stories above the ground. He also made a copper sparrow on the roof, and opened its wings as if it were flying.

古文：南则金虎台，高八丈，有屋百九间。
现代文：南边是金虎台，高八丈，有屋一百零九间。
English: To the south is Jinhu Terrace, eight stories high, with 109 rooms.

古文：北曰冰井台，亦高八丈，有屋百四十五间，上有冰室，室有数井，井深十五丈，藏冰及石墨焉。
现代文：北边有冰井台，也高八丈，有屋一百四十五间，上面有冰室，室中有几口井，每口深十五丈，井中贮存冰和石墨。
English: On the north side there is an ice well platform, also eight stories high, with one hundred and forty-five houses, with an ice room above, and several wells in the room, each 15 stories deep, in which ice and graphite are stored.

古文：石墨可书，又然之难尽，亦谓之石炭。
现代文：石墨可以写字，点着了火也不易烧尽，也叫石炭。
English: Graphite can be used to write, and it is not easy to burn out when lit. It is also called coal.

古文：又有粟窖及盐窖，以备不虞。
现代文：还有藏谷和藏盐的地窖，以防意外。
English: There is also a hidden valley and a salt cellar in case of accidents.

古文：今窖上犹有石铭存焉。
现代文：现在地窖上还留有石刻铭文。
English: There is still a stone inscription on the cellar.

古文：左思《魏都赋》曰三台列峙而峥嵘者也。
现代文：左思《魏都赋》说：三座高台罗列，高高地耸峙着。
English: Zuo Si's "Weidufu" said: Three high platforms are lined up, standing tall.

古文：城有七门，南曰凤阳门，中曰中阳门，次曰广阳门，东曰建春门，北曰广德门，次曰厩门，西曰金明门，一曰白门。
现代文：邺城有七座城门：南边叫凤阳门，中央叫中阳门，近边的叫广阳门，东边叫建春门，北边叫广德门，近边的叫底门，西边的叫金明门，又叫白门。
English: Lucheng has seven gates: the south gate is called Fengyang Gate, the central gate is called Zhongyang Gate, the nearby gate is called Guangyang Gate, the east gate is called Jianchun Gate, the north gate is called Guangde Gate, the nearby gate is called Bottom Gate, and the west gate is called Jinming Gate, also known as White Gate.

古文：凤阳门三台洞开，高三十五丈，石氏作层观架其上，置铜凤，头高一丈六尺。
现代文：凤阳门上有三座台，城门大开，高三十五丈。石虎在上面建起层楼，楼顶上安放了一只铜凤，头高一丈六尺。
English: There are three platforms on the Fengyang Gate. The gate is wide open and thirty-five feet high. Shihu has built a storey on top of it, and a bronze phoenix with a head six feet high has been placed on the roof.

古文：东城上，石氏立东明观，观上加金博山，谓之骼天。
现代文：他又在东城上建了东明观，观上装了一座金博山为饰，称为锵天。
English: He also built the Dongmingyuan on the east side of the city, which was adorned with a Jinbo Mountain, known as the Jingtian.

古文：北城上有齐斗楼，超出群榭，孤高特立。
现代文：北城上有齐斗楼，高出周围的亭榭之上，显得分外突出。
English: In the north of the city, there is the Qi Dou Building, which rises above the surrounding pavilions and stands out.

古文：其城东西七里，南北五里，饰表以砖，百步一楼，凡诸宫殿，门台、隅雉，皆加观榭。
现代文：城东西七里，南北五里，用砖装饰表面，每百步有一座城楼。城内所有的宫殿、门台、边墙上面都加建观榭。
English: The city is seven miles from east to west and five miles from north to south. The surface is decorated with bricks, and there is a city tower every hundred paces. All the palaces, gateways, and side walls in the city have been added.

古文：层甍反宇，飞檐拂云，图以丹青，色以轻素。当其全盛之时，去邺六七十里，远望苕亭，巍若仙居。
现代文：层沓的屋栋，反仰的檐瓦，飞檐高接青云，描画上彩色和淡白色，在全盛时期，离邺城六七十里外，远远就可望见楼台高耸，就像仙宫一样。
English: The multilayered houses, the tiled roofs that lean back, the soaring eaves that touch the blue sky, are depicted in color and pale white. In the heyday, sixty or seventy miles away from Lucheng, the towers could be seen towering in the distance, just like the Celestial Palace.

古文：魏因汉祚，复都洛阳，以谯为先人本国，许昌为汉之所居，长安为西京之遗迹，邺为王业之本基，故号五都也。
现代文：魏承袭汉朝政权，也建都在洛阳，因为憔是祖先的本国，许昌是汉朝所居，长安是西京遗迹，邺是建立王朝大业的基地，所以合称五都。
English: Wei inherited the power of the Han Dynasty, and also built in Luoyang, because Yu is the ancestor's home country, Xu Chang is the residence of the Han Dynasty, Chang'an is the relic of Xijing, and Yu is the base for the establishment of the dynasty's great cause, so they are collectively known as the five capitals.

古文：今相州刺史及魏郡治。
现代文：现在邺城是相州刺史及魏郡的治所。
English: Now, Fucheng is the administrative center of Xiangzhou Zhishi and Wei County.

古文：漳水自西门豹祠北径赵阅马台西，基高五丈，列观其上，石虎每讲武于其下，升观以望之，虎自台上放鸣镝之矢，以为车骑出入之节矣。
现代文：漳水从西门豹祠往北流经后赵阅马台西面。台基高五丈，上面建了望楼，石虎每次在台下讲武，总要登楼眺望，他从台上放响箭，作为兵将出入的信号。
English: Surabaya water flows north from the West Gate Panther's Shrine and passes through the west side of the Back Zhao Yamatai. The platform is five stories high, with a watchtower built on top. Every time Shihu gives a military speech, he always climbs up to the building to look around. He shoots arrows from the platform as a signal for soldiers to enter and leave.

古文：漳水又北径祭陌西。
现代文：漳水又往北流经祭陌西面。
English: Surabaya's waters also flow northward to the west of the festival site.

古文：战国之世，俗巫为河伯取妇，祭于此陌。
现代文：战国时民间的巫婆为河伯娶新娘，都是在这条陌上祭祀的。
English: During the Warring States period, folk witches married brides for Hebe, all of which were sacrificed on this strange mountain.

古文：魏文侯时，西门豹为邺令，约诸三老曰：为河伯娶妇，幸来告知，吾欲送女。
现代文：魏文侯时，西门豹当邺令，和三老相约说：为河伯娶新娘时，请来通知我，我也来送送那位姑娘。
English: At the time of Wei Wen Hou, Simon the Leopard was acting as the magistrate, and he made an agreement with the three elders, saying: "When you marry a bride for Hebe, please come to inform me, and I will also come to see the girl off."

古文：皆曰：诺。
现代文：三老都说好的。
English: The three elders all agreed.

古文：至时，三老、廷掾，赋敛百姓，取钱百万，巫觋行里中，有好女者，祝当为河伯妇，以钱三万聘女，沐浴脂粉如嫁状。
现代文：到了那时候，三老、廷椽向百姓征税，征得百万钱。男巫女巫在乡里各处巡行，看到有漂亮的姑娘，说是应当给河伯做新娘，就用了三万钱给她娘家做聘金，为她沐浴、涂脂抹粉，有如出嫁的样子。
English: At that time, the Three Elders and Tingyu collected a million dollars in taxes from the people. The witches and wizards paraded all over the countryside. When they saw a beautiful girl, they said that she should be Hebe's bride, so they used thirty thousand dollars to hire her mother's family, and they bathed her, put on grease and powder, and made her look like she was getting married.

古文：豹往会之，三老、巫、掾与民咸集赴观。
现代文：西门豹去赴会，三老、巫婆、廷椽和民众人山人海，赶去看热闹。
English: Ximen leopard went to the meeting, the three old men, the witch, the eunuch and the masses of people rushed to see the lively scene.

古文：巫妪年七十，从十女弟子。
现代文：巫婆七十岁了，跟她的女弟子十人。
English: The witch is seventy years old, with ten of her female disciples.

古文：豹呼妇视之，以为非妙，令巫妪入报河伯，投巫于河中。
现代文：西门豹叫了新娘来看，说不够好，叫巫婆去报告河伯，就把她投到河中。
English: Simeon the leopard called the bride to see, and said it was not good enough, and told the witch to report Hebe, and then threw her into the river.

古文：有顷曰：何久也，又令三弟子及三老入白，并投于河。
现代文：等了一会儿，他说：为什么这么久还不回来？又叫三个弟子及三老去秉告，也都投入河中。
English: After waiting for a while, he said, "Why haven't you come back for such a long time?" He also told the three disciples and the three elders to report to him, and they also threw themselves into the river.

古文：豹磬折曰：三老不来，奈何？
现代文：西门豹恭恭敬敬地弯着腰说：三老还不回来，怎么办呢全想再叫廷椽豪长前去。
English: The West Gate leopard respectfully bent down and said: "The three old men have not come back yet, what should we do? We all want to tell Ting Tong Hao to go ahead."

古文：复欲使廷掾、豪长趣之，皆叩头流血，乞不为河伯取妇。
现代文：他们都叩头求饶，直叩得头破血流，说不再给河伯娶新娘了。
English: They all bowed their heads and begged for mercy, beating their heads until they bled, saying that they would no longer give Hebe a bride.

古文：即此地也。又东过列入县南，漳水又东，右径斥丘县北，即裴县故城南。王莽更名之曰即是也。
现代文：又往东流过列人县南边，漳水又东流，右边流经斥丘县北面，即裴县老城南面―王莽改即裴为即是。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Lehman County, and eastward through Surabaya. On the right, it flows through the northern part of Kuku County, that is, the southern part of the old city of Pei County - Wang Mangka is Pei.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：列入县西南六十里有即裴城，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：列人县西南六十里，有即裴城，是个旧县城。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: sixty miles southwest of Lehman County, there is Baicheng, an old county seat.

古文：漳水又东北径列入县故城南，王莽更名之为列治也。
现代文：漳水又往东北流经列人县旧城南面，王莽改名为列治。
English: The Surabaya River flows to the northeast through the southern part of the old city of Liren County, and Wang Mang was renamed Liji.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰；梁惠成王八年，惠成王伐邯郸取列入者也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：梁惠成王八年前，惠成王攻打邯郸，夺取了列人。
English: "The Bamboo Annals" says: Eight years before Liang Huicheng Wang, Huicheng Wang attacked and captured Liang.

古文：于县右合白渠故渎，白渠水出魏郡武安县钦口山，东南流径邯郸县南，又东与拘涧水合。
现代文：漳水在县右汇合了白渠旧水道。白渠水发源于魏郡武安县钦口山，往东南流经邯郸县南，又东流与拘涧水汇合。
English: The White Canal originates from Qinqou Mountain, Wu'an County, Wei County. It flows southeast through the south of Handan County, and the east stream merges with the Zhenglong Water.

古文：水导源武始东山白渠，北俗犹谓是水为拘河也。
现代文：拘涧水发源于武始县东山的白渠，北方民间仍把这条水称为拘河。
English: The water of Zhenglu originates from the white canal of Dongshan in Wuxi County. People in the north still call this water the Zhenglu River.

古文：拘涧水又东，又有牛首水入焉，水出邯郸县西堵山，东流分为二水，洪湍双逝，澄映两川。
现代文：拘涧水又东流，又有牛首水注入。牛首水发源于邯郸县西边的堵山，东流分为两条，急湍奔腾流过，两条澄澈的溪流照影如镜。
English: The Niu Shou Water originates from the blocked mountains in the west of Handan County. The east stream is divided into two, with the rapids rushing past and the two clear streams forming a mirror image.

古文：汉景帝时，七国悖逆，命曲周侯郦寄攻赵，围邯郸，相捍七月，引牛首拘水灌城，城坏，王自杀，其水东入邯郸城，径温明殿南。
现代文：汉景帝时，七国叛乱，命令曲周侯哪寄去打赵国，包围了邯郸，相持七月，引了牛首水和拘水去淹城，城被冲坏，赵王也自杀了。水往东流入邯郸城，流经温明殿南面。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Jing, the Seven Kingdoms rebelled, ordered Qu Zhou to send troops to fight Zhao, encircled Yunnan, held out for seven months, brought oxhead water and tributary water to flood the city, the city was destroyed, and King Zhao also committed suicide. The water flowed eastward into Yunnan and flowed south of the Wenming Palace.

古文：汉世祖擒王郎、幸邯郸昼卧处也。
现代文：汉世祖俘获王郎，巡视邯郸时，曾在殿中午睡过。
English: When Han Shizao captured Wang Lang and inspected the palace, he once took a nap in the middle of the hall.

古文：其水又东径丛台南。六国时，赵王之台也。
现代文：水又往东流经丛台南面，丛台是六国时期赵王的台。
English: The water also flows eastward through the south side of the terrace, which was King Zhao's terrace during the Six Kingdoms period.

古文：《郡国志》曰：邯郸有丛台。
现代文：《郡国志》说：邯郸有丛台。
English: "County National History" said: "There is no need for a platform."

古文：故刘劭《赵都赋》曰：结云阁于南宇，立丛台于少阳者也。
现代文：所以刘肋《赵都赋》说：在南边造起云阁，在少阳山建立丛台。现在遗址上还有些老墙留下来。
English: Therefore, Liu Li said in "Zhao Du Fu," "Build a cloud pavilion on the south side and build a cluster platform on Shaoyang Mountain." Now there are still some old walls left on the site.

古文：今遗基旧墉尚在。其水又东历邯郸阜，张晏所谓邯山在东城下者也。
现代文：水又往东流经邯郸阜，就是张晏所说的东边城下的邯山，单，是尽头的意思；城郭从邑，所以偏旁加邑。
English: The water also flows eastward through Shufu, which is the Shaoshan under the east side of the city that Zhang Jun said. "Single" means the end; the castle is from the town, so the side is from the town.

古文：曰单，尽也，城郭从邑，故加邑，邯郸之名，盖指此以立称矣。
现代文：邯郸这地名，大概就是依据此山命名的，是旧时赵郡的治所。
English: This place name, probably named after this mountain, was the old seat of Zhao County.

古文：故赵郡治也，《长沙耆旧传》称，桓楷为赵郡太守，尝有遗囊粟于路者，行人挂囊粟于树，莫敢取之，即于是处也。
现代文：《长沙眷旧传》说：桓楷当赵郡太守时，有人在路上丢了一袋米，过往行人把这袋米挂在树上，没有人敢拿，说的就是这地方。
English: "Changsha Relatives" said: When Huan Kuang was the governor of Zhao County, someone lost a bag of rice on the road. Passers-by hung this bag of rice on a tree, and no one dared to take it. It was this place.

古文：其水又东流出城，又合成一川也。又东，澄而为渚，渚水东南流，注拘涧水，又东入白渠，又东，故渎出焉。
现代文：水又东流出城，重新汇合成一条；又东流，形成一片澄澈的水湾，水往东南流，注入拘涧水；又东流，注入白渠；又东流，分出一条旧渠。
English: The water also flows out of the city to the east, and re-merges into one; it also flows to the east, forming a clear water bay, and the water flows to the southeast, injecting the water of Zhengyi; it also flows to the east, injecting the white canal; it also flows to the east, separating an old canal.

古文：一水东为泽渚，曲梁县之鸡泽也。
现代文：一条往东流，积成沼泽，就是曲梁县的鸡泽。
English: One stream flows eastward, accumulating into a swamp, which is the chicken lake in Qu Liang County.

古文：《国语》所谓鸡丘矣。
现代文：《国语》有所谓鸡丘就是这地方。
English: "Kokugo" has a so-called chicken hill is this place.

古文：东北通澄湖，白渠故渎南出所在，枝分右出，即邯沟也。历邯沟县故城东，盖因沟以氏县也。
现代文：东北与澄湖相通。白渠旧道往南分出，所到之处分出许多支渠，向右边分出的就是邯沟，流过邯沟县旧城东边，县名就是因沟名而来的。
English: The northeast is connected to Lake Chenghu. The old Baiqiu Road branches off to the south, and many branch canals branch off wherever it goes. The one that branches off to the right is the Gonggou, which flows through the east of the old city of Gonggou County. The name of the county comes from the name of the ditch.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：即裴城，西北二十里有邯沟城，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：即裴城西北二十里有邯沟城，是个旧县城。
English: "Geography and Customs" said: that is, there are 20 cities in the northwest of Baicheng, and it is an old county seat.

古文：又东径肥乡县故城北。
现代文：又往东流经肥乡县旧城北面。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Feixiang County.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：梁惠成王八年，伐邯郸取肥者也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：梁惠成王八年前，攻打邯郸，夺取了肥。
English: The "Chronicle of Bamboo" says: Eight years ago, King Liang Huicheng attacked and captured the cormorant.

古文：《晋书地道记》曰：太康中，立以隶广平也。
现代文：《晋书•地道记》说：太康年间设置肥乡县，属广平郡。
English: "Jinshu•Jinduo Ji" said: Feixiang County was set up during the Taikang period, and it belongs to Guangping County.

古文：渠道交径，互相缠魔，与白渠同归，径列人右会漳津，今无水。
现代文：渠道纵横交错，相互纠缠在一起，与白渠流到同一处，经过列人县，在右边汇合漳水，今天已枯涸无水了。
English: The channels are criss-crossed, entangled with each other, flowing to the same place as the white canal, passing through Lehen County, and merging with Surabaya on the right. Today, it has dried up and there is no water.

古文：《地理志》曰：白渠东至列人入漳是也。
现代文：《地理志》说：白渠东流到列人县，注入漳水。
English: "Geography" said: the Baiqiu River flows eastward to Liren County, and it is injected with Surabaya water.

古文：又东北过斥漳县南，应劭曰：其国斥卤，故曰斥漳。
现代文：又往东北流过斥漳县南面。应肋说：那个地区是盐碱地，所以叫斥漳。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the southern part of Guanqian County. Ying Li said: That area is saline, so it is called Guanqian.

古文：汉献帝建安十八年，魏太祖凿渠，引漳水东入清洹以通河漕，名曰利漕渠。
现代文：汉献帝建安十八年魏太祖开了一条渠道，引漳水往东流入清水、沮水，以便通航运粮，名为利嘈渠。
English: In the 18th year of the reign of Emperor Jian'an, Emperor Han Xian, Emperor Wei Taizu opened a channel to divert salty water to the east to flow into clear water and stagnant water, so as to allow the passage of shipping grain. It was called Lijiao Canal.

古文：漳津故渎水断，旧溪东北出，涓流濗注而已。
现代文：漳水旧河道断流后，旧溪通往东北，只是一缕细水，在涓涓地流渗罢了。
English: After the outflow of the old river in Surabaya was cut off, the old stream led to the northeast. It was just a wisp of thin water seeping through the ground in Surabaya.

古文：《尚书》所谓覃怀底绩，至于衡漳者也。
现代文：《尚书》说，覃怀一带直到衡漳，治水也已卓有成效。
English: "Shangshu" said that water control has also been very effective in the area from Zhuhai to Hengshui.

古文：孔安国曰：衡，横也，言漳水横流也。
现代文：孔安国说：衡是横的意思，就是说漳水横流。
English: Kong An Guo said, "Heng" means "horizontal," which means that the water flows sideways.

古文：又东北径平恩县故城西。
现代文：又往东北流经平恩县旧城西面。
English: It also flows northeast through the west side of the old city in Ping'an County.

古文：应劭曰：县，故馆陶之别乡，汉宣帝地节三年置，以封后父许伯为侯国，王莽更曰延平也。
现代文：应劭说：平恩县原来是馆陶县的一个乡，汉宣帝地节三年设置，把这地方封给皇后的父亲许伯，立为侯国。王莽改名为延平。
English: Ying Yao said: Ping'en County was originally a township in Guantao County. It was set up in the third year of the Han Emperor's reign, and this place was given to the queen's father, Xu Bo, and established as a principality. Wang Mang changed his name to Yanping.

古文：又东北过曲周县东，又东北过巨鹿县东，衡漳故渎东北径南曲县故城西。
现代文：又往东北流过曲周县东面，又往东北流过巨鹿县东面，衡漳旧水道往东北流过南曲县旧城西面。
English: It also flowed to the northeast through the east of Quzhou County, and to the northeast through the east of Jugu County. Hengyao Old Waterway flowed to the northeast through the west of Nanqu County Old Town.

古文：《地理志》，广平有南曲县。
现代文：按《地理志》，广平有南曲县。
English: According to "Geography," Guangping has Nanqu County.

古文：应劭曰：平恩县北四十里有南曲亭，故县也。
现代文：应肋说：平恩县以北四十里有南曲亭，是个旧县址。
English: Ying Li said: There is Nanqu Ting in the forty north of Ping'an County, which is an old county site.

古文：又径曲周县故城东。
现代文：又流经曲周县旧城东面。
English: It also flows through the eastern side of the old city of Quzhou County.

古文：《地理志》曰：汉武帝建元四年置，王莽更名直周。
现代文：《地理志》说：曲周县，汉武帝建元四年置，王莽时改名为直周。
English: "Geography" said: Quzhou County, Han Emperor Jianyuan four years, Wang Mang changed his name to Zhizhou.

古文：余按《史记》，大将军郦商以高祖六年封曲周县为侯国，又考《汉书》同。是知曲周旧县，非始孝武。
现代文：我按《史记卜大将军哪商，在高祖六年封于曲周县，立为侯国；考《汉书》记载也相同，因而知道曲周这个旧县，不是始于孝武帝。
English: According to the "Historical Records of General Bu, which merchant, in the sixth year of Emperor Gaozu, was assigned to Quzhou County and established as a vassal state; the examination of the "Chinese Book" records the same, so I know that Quzhou, this old county, did not begin with Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：啸父冀州人，在县市补履数十年，人奇其不老，求其术而不能得也。
现代文：啸父是冀州人，在县城市场上补鞋补了数十年，人们都奇怪他不会老，想求他传授秘术却求不到。
English: Xiao's father is from Jizhou. He has been mending shoes in the county market for decades. People are surprised that he will not grow old. They want to ask him to teach the secret art, but they can't.

古文：衡漳又北径巨桥邸阁西，旧有大梁横水，故有巨桥之称。
现代文：衡漳又往北流经巨桥仓储西面。旧时有一座大桥横架于水上，所以有巨桥之名。
English: Hengye also flows north through the west side of the huge bridge warehouse. In the old days, there was a large bridge across the water, hence the name of the huge bridge.

古文：昔武王伐纣，发巨桥之粟，以赈殷之饥民。
现代文：从前武王讨伐封王，开出巨桥仓，把粮食发给殷商的饥民。
English: Once upon a time, King Wu fought against the feudal king, opened a huge bridge warehouse, and distributed grain to the hungry merchants.

古文：服虔曰：巨桥，仓名。
现代文：服虔说：巨桥是粮仓名。
English: Fuxian said: Giant Bridge is the name of the granary.

古文：许慎曰：巨鹿水之大桥也。
现代文：许慎说：巨桥是巨鹿水上的大桥。
English: Xu Shen said: The giant bridge is a bridge over the water of the giant deer.

古文：今临侧水湄，左右方一二里中，状若丘墟，盖遗囤故窖处也。
现代文：现在靠近水边处，左右一二里方圆内，还有些像土丘似的隆起处，就是从前粮仓地窖留下的遗迹。
English: Now, close to the water's edge, within a radius of a mile or two, there are some mound-like bumps, which are the remains of the former granary cellar.

古文：衡水又北径巨鹿县故城东。
现代文：衡水又往北流经巨鹿县旧城东面。
English: Hengshui also flows northward through the east of the old city of Jugu County.

古文：应劭曰：鹿者，林之大者也。
现代文：应韵说：鹿就是大树林。
English: According to the rhyme, the deer is the forest.

古文：《尚书》曰：尧将禅舜，纳之大麓之野，烈风雷雨不迷，致之以昭华之玉。
现代文：《尚书》说：尧将把帝位让给舜的时候，在大麓之野迎接他，当时有暴风雷雨，但舜却不迷失方向，于是拿昭华之玉赠给他，县也因此取名了。
English: "Shangshu" said: "When Yao was about to give up the imperial throne to Yao, he met him in the field at the foot of the mountain. At that time, there was a storm and thunderstorm, but Yao did not lose his way, so he gave him the Jade of Zhao Hua, and the county was named for this reason.

古文：而县取目焉，路温舒，县之东里人，父为里监门，使温舒牧羊泽中，取蒲牒用写书，即此泽也。
现代文：路温舒，巨鹿县东里人，父亲在乡里当监门小吏，叫他到泽地去放羊，采了曹蒲叶写字，就是这片泽地。
English: Lu Wenshu, a resident of Dongli, Jugu County, whose father worked as a gatekeeper in the village, told him to go to the lake to herd sheep. He picked up a cattail leaf to write, and this is the lake.

古文：又东屈北径信都县故城西，信都郡治也，汉高帝六年置。景帝中二年，为广川惠王越国，王莽更为新博，县曰新博亭，光武自蓟至信都是也，明帝水平十五年，更名乐成，安帝延光中，改曰安平。城内有汉冀州从事安平赵征碑，又有魏冀州刺史陈留丁绍碑，青龙三年立。
现代文：汉高帝六年。景帝中元二年是广川惠王刘越的封国，王莽改为新博，县叫新博亭。光武帝从蓟到信都，就是这地方。明帝永平十五年改为安平。城内有汉冀州从事安平赵征碑，又有魏冀州刺史陈留丁绍碑，是青龙三年所立。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Han Gao. In the second year of Emperor Jing, Guangchuan Hui King Liu Yue was enthroned. Wang Mang was changed to Xinbo, and the county was called Xinbo Ting. Emperor Guangwu went from Shantou to Xindu, which is this place. Emperor Yongping changed it to Anping in the fifteenth year of Emperor Ming. In the city, Han Jizhou was engaged in the Anping Zhao Monument, and Wei Jizhou engraved the Chen Liu Ding Shao Monument, which was erected in the third year of Qinglong.

古文：城南有献文帝《南巡碑》。
现代文：城南有《献文帝南巡碑》。
English: In the south of the city, there is the "Southern Monument to Emperor Xianwen."

古文：其水侧城北注，又北径安阳城东，又北径武阳城东。
现代文：水沿城边往北流注，又往北流经安阳城东面，文往北流经武阳城东面。
English: The water flows northward along the edge of the city, flows northward through the east of Anyang City, and flows northward through the east of Wuyang City.

古文：《十三州志》曰：抉柳县东北有武阳城，故县也。
现代文：《十三州志》说：扶柳县东北有武阳城，是个旧县城。
English: "The History of the Thirteen States" said: Buyang City is located in the northeast of Fuliu County. It is an old county seat.

古文：又北为博广池，池多名蟹佳虾，岁贡王朝，以充膳府。
现代文：又北流，就是博广池，池中多产虾蟹，以鲜美驰名，每年进贡朝廷，以充实府库的食品。
English: Also flowing north is the Bogangchi Pond, which is famous for its shrimp and crabs, which are abundant in the pond. Every year, a tribute is paid to the imperial court to replenish the food in the government treasury.

古文：又北径下博县故城东，而北流注于衡水也。
现代文：又往北流经下博县老城东面，然后北流注入衡水。
English: It also flows northward to the east of the old town of Shimo-bo County, and then flows northward into Hengshui.

古文：又东北过扶柳县北，又东北过信都县西。
现代文：又往东北流过扶柳县北面，又往东北流过信都县西面，
English: and flowed northeastward through the northern part of Fuliu County, and northeastward through the western part of Xindu County,

古文：扶柳县故城在信都城西，衡水径其西。
现代文：扶柳县旧城在信都城西面，衡水从城西流过。
English: The old town of Fuliu County is in the west of the capital city, Hengshui flows from the west of the city.

古文：县有扶泽，泽中多柳，故曰扶柳也。
现代文：县里有个扶泽，泽中多生柳树，所以叫扶柳县。
English: There is a Buze in the county, and there are many willows in the middle of the willow, so it is called Buze County.

古文：衡水又北径昌城县故城西。
现代文：衡水又往北流经昌城县旧城西面。
English: Hengshui also flows northward through the west side of the old city of Changcheng County.

古文：《地理志》，信都有昌城县。
现代文：《地理志》：信都有昌城县。
English: "Geography": All letters are from Changcheng County.

古文：汉武帝以封城阳顷王子刘差为侯国。
现代文：汉武帝把这地方封给城阳顷王的儿子刘差，立为侯国。
English: Emperor Hanwu gave this place to Liu Zha, the son of King Chengyangha, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：阚駰曰：昌城本名阜城矣。
现代文：阐驱说：昌城本叫阜城。
English: The commentator said, "Changcheng is originally called Fucheng.

古文：应劭曰：堂阳县北三十里有昌城，故县也。
现代文：应肋说：堂阳县北三十里有昌城，是个旧县城。
English: Ying Li said: There is Changcheng in the north 30 of Doyang County, which is an old county seat.

古文：世祖之下堂阳，昌城人刘植率宗亲子弟据邑以奉世祖是也。
现代文：世祖攻下堂阳，昌城人刘植率领宗族子弟据守城邑拥戴世祖。
English: The ancestor conquered Doyang, and Liu Zhi, a Changcheng citizen, led the children of the clan to defend the city and supported the ancestor.

古文：又东径耿乡南，世祖封前将军耿纯为侯国，世谓之宜安城。
现代文：又流经西梁县老城东面。《地理风俗记》说：扶柳县西北五十里有西梁城，是个旧县城；而世人却以为叫五梁城，大概是因为字形近似而造成的错误。
English: It also flows to the east of the old town of Xiliang County. "Geography and Customs" said: There is Xiliang City in the northwest fifty of Fuliu County, which is an old county seat; but the world thought it was called Wuliang City, probably because of the error caused by the similarity of the glyphs.

古文：又东径宋子县故城北，又谓之宋子河。汉高帝八年，封许瘛为侯国，王莽更名宜子。
现代文：衡漳又往东北流经桃县旧城北面。汉高祖十二年把宋子封给许虑，立为侯国，王莽改名为宜子。
English: Hengye also flows to the northeast through the north of the old city of Taoxian. In the twelfth year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gaozu gave Song Zifeng to Xu Xian and established it as a vassal state. Wang Mang changed his name to Yizi.

古文：昔高渐离击筑佣工，自此入秦。
现代文：从前高渐离善于击筑，为人当仆役，就是从这里进入秦国的。
English: In the past, Gao Yanyuan was good at construction and served as a servant. It was from here that he entered Qin.

古文：又东径敬武县故城北。
现代文：水又往东流经敬武县旧城北面。
English: The water also flowed eastward through the northern part of the old city of Jingwu County.

古文：按《地理志》，巨鹿之属县也。
现代文：按《地理志》敬武是巨鹿郡的属县。
English: According to "Geography," Jingwu is a county belonging to Jugu County.

古文：汉元帝封女敬武公主为汤沐邑。
现代文：汉元帝把这地方封给他女儿敬武公主，作为汤沐邑。
English: Emperor Han Yuan assigned this place to his daughter, Princess Jingwu, as Tangmuyi.

古文：阚駰《十三州记》曰：杨氏县北四十里有敬武亭，故县也。
现代文：阔驹《十三州记》说：杨氏县北四十里有敬武亭，是个旧县城。
English: Kuo Zheng's "History of the Thirteen Provinces" said: There is a Jingwu Pavilion in the north forty of Yang County, which is an old county seat.

古文：今其城实中，小邑耳，故俗名之曰敬武垒，即古邑也。
现代文：现在此城还很坚固，只是个小城，所以俗名叫敬武垒，是个古城邑。
English: Now this city is still very strong, just a small city, so it is commonly known as Jingwuye, an ancient city.

古文：白渠水又东，谓之斯洨水。
现代文：白渠水又东流，叫斯浚水。
English: White canal water also flows to the east, called Si dredge water.

古文：《地理志》曰：大白渠东南至下曲阳入斯洨者也。东分为二水，枝津右出焉，东南流，谓之百尺沟，又东南径和城北。
现代文：《地理志》说：大白渠往东南流，到了下曲阳县注入斯校水；东流分为两条，支流从右边伸出，往东南流，称为百尺沟；又往东南流过和城北面。
English: "Geography" said: the Great White Canal flows to the southeast, and the water of Shicheng is injected into the lower Quyang County; the east flow is divided into two, the tributary flows from the right, and the southeast flow is called the hundred foot ditch; and it flows to the southeast and the north of the city.

古文：世谓之初丘城，非也。
现代文：世人称为初丘城，其实不对。
English: The world calls it Hatsuoka Castle, but that's not true.

古文：汉高帝十一年，封郎中公孙昔为侯国。
现代文：汉高帝十一年前，把这里封给郎中公孙昔，立为侯国。
English: Eleven years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to his son-in-law Sun Qian and established it as a vassal state.

古文：又东南径贳城西，汉高帝六年，封吕博为侯国。
现代文：又往东南流过贯城西面。汉高帝六年前，把这里封给吕博，立为侯国。
English: It also flows southeast through the west side of the city. Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to Lubei and established it as a principality.

古文：百尺沟东南散流，径历乡东而南入泜湖，东注衡水也。
现代文：百尺沟往东南散流，经过历乡东面，往南流进低湖，东流注入衡水。
English: The Hundred Foot Ditch flows to the southeast, passing east of Lixiang, flowing south into the low lake, and east into Hengshui.

古文：斯洨水自枝津东径贳城北，又东积而为陂，谓之阳縻渊。
现代文：斯佼水从支流分出处往东流经贯城北面，又东流，积储为阪塘，称为阳糜渊。
English: Shiqiao water flows from the source of the tributary to the east through the north side of the city, and flows eastward, accumulating as a pond, called Yangpuyuan.

古文：又东径肥累县之故城南，又东径陈台南，台甚宽广，今上阳台屯居之。
现代文：渊水左边接纳了白渠支流，俗称低水。低水在草城县乌子堰承接白渠，又往东流经肥累县老城南面，又往东流经陈台南面。这座台很宽广又往东流经新丰城北面。
English: The tributary of the White Canal, commonly known as the Low Water, is on the left side of the Deep Water. The Low Water joins the White Canal at Wuzi Weir in Caocheng County, and flows eastward through the south of the old city in Hulun County, and eastward through the south of Chen Tai. This platform is very wide and flows eastward through the north of Xinfeng City.

古文：又东径新丰城北。按《地理志》云：巨鹿有新市县，侯国也。王莽更之曰乐市，而无新丰之目，所未详矣。
现代文：按《地理志》说：巨鹿有新市县，是个侯国，王莽改名为乐市，但却没有新丰这地名，那就不清楚了。
English: According to the "Geography" said: the giant deer has a new city and county, is a principality, Wang Mang changed its name to Le City, but without Xinfeng this place name, then it is not clear.

古文：其水又东径昔阳城南。世谓之曰直阳城，非也，本鼓聚矣。
现代文：水文往东流经昔阳城南面，世人称为直阳城，这不对，这里本来是鼓聚。
English: The hydrological current flows eastward through the south of the former Yangcheng, known to the world as the Naoyangcheng. This is not correct. Originally, this was a place where drums gathered.

古文：《春秋左传》昭公十五年，晋荀吴帅师伐鲜虞，围鼓三月，鼓人请降，穆子曰：犹有食色，不许。
现代文：《春秋左传》：昭公十五年前，晋国荀吴领兵攻打鲜虞，把鼓城围困了三个月，鼓人请求投降。穆子说：城里人看起来还吃得饱。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Fifteen years ago, Shogun Zhaogong of the State of Jin led his army to attack the State of Wu and besieged the city of Drum for three months. The drummer pleaded for surrender. Mu Zi said, "The people in the city still seem to have enough to eat."

古文：军吏曰：获城而弗取，勤民而顿兵，何以事君？
现代文：他不肯答应。军吏说：这城分明就可以到手了，你却不去拿，反而苦了军民，损了兵器，怎么能为君主效劳呢？
English: He would not agree. The military officer said, "This city is clearly within your grasp, but instead of taking it, you have made the soldiers and civilians suffer and damaged the weapons. How can you serve the sovereign?"

古文：穆子曰：获一邑而教民怠，将焉用邑也。
现代文：穆子道：虽攻取了一座城，却教百姓懈怠，怎么去治理它呢？
English: Mu Zi said: Although we have conquered a city, we have taught the people to slack off. How can we govern it?

古文：贾怠无卒，弃旧不祥，鼓人能事其君，我亦能事吾君，率义不爽，好恶不愆，城可获也。
现代文：城虽拿到但换来的却是懈怠，这不会有好结果；抛弃老传统也是不祥的。鼓人能够为他们的君主效劳，我们也能够为我们的君主效劳。按正义行事不出差错；赏善罚恶没有失误，才能真正取得这座城。
English: It will not end well; it is not good to give up old traditions. Drummers can serve their monarchs, and we can serve our monarchs. There is no mistake in doing justice; there is no mistake in rewarding good and punishing evil, in order to truly obtain this city.

古文：有死义而无二心，不亦可乎？
现代文：能为大义而献身，这难道还不好吗？
English: Isn't it good to be able to give your life for a great cause?

古文：鼓人告食竭力尽，而后取之。克鼓而返，不戮一人，以鼓子鸢鞮归，既献而返之。
现代文：鼓人宣称粮食告罄并且精疲力竭了，于是才来取城，晋军攻下后得胜而回，没有杀一个人，只俘虏了鼓子莺鞍而归，把他上献后又放他回去。
English: The drummer declared that he had run out of food and was exhausted, so he came to take the city. After the Jin army was defeated, he returned in triumph. He did not kill anyone, he only captured the drummer and his saddle and returned. He was presented and then released.

古文：鼓子又叛，荀吴略东阳，使师伪，负甲息于门外，袭而灭之。以鼓子鸢鞮归，使涉佗守之者也。
现代文：鼓子又反叛了，荀吴打下东阳，把兵士化装成买粮的人，背穿恺甲在城门外歇息，发起突击，灭了鼓国，俘获鼓子莺鞍而归，派涉佗去驻守。
English: Drums rebelled again. Zou Wu attacked Dongyang, disguised his soldiers as grain buyers, put armor on their backs and rested outside the city gate, launched a surprise attack, destroyed Drums' country, captured Drums' saddle and returned, and sent Zhan to guard.

古文：《十三州志》曰：今其城，昔阳亭是矣。
现代文：《十三州志》说：鼓城就是现在的昔阳亭。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" says: Gucheng is the present-day Xiyangting.

古文：京相璠曰：白狄之别也。
现代文：京相潘说：鼓人是白狄的一个分支。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: "Drummers are a branch of the Baidi tribe.

古文：下曲阳有鼓聚，故鼓子国也。
现代文：下曲阳有鼓聚，就是旧时的鼓子国。
English: In the lower part of the song, there is a drum gathering, which is the old drum country.

古文：白渠枝水又东径下曲阳城北，又径安乡县故城南。《地理志》曰：侯国也。又东径贳县，入斯洨水。
现代文：白渠支流又往东流过下曲阳城北面，又流过安乡县老城南面―《地理志》说：这是个侯国―又往东流经贯县，注入斯佼水。
English: The Baiquan tributary also flows eastward through the northern side of the lower Quyang City, and flows through the southern side of the old city of Anxiang County - "Geography" said: This is a vassal state - and flows eastward through the county, injecting excellent water.

古文：斯洨水又东径西梁城南，又东北径乐信县故城南。
现代文：斯佼水又往东流经西梁城南面，又往东北流经乐信县老城南面。
English: The water also flows eastward through the southern side of Xiliang City, and flows northeastward through the southern side of the old city of Lexin County.

古文：《地理志》，巨鹿属县，侯国也。
现代文：《地理志》：这是巨鹿郡属县，是个侯国。
English: "Geography": This is a subordinate county of Jugu County, which is a principality.

古文：又东入衡水。
现代文：又东流注入衡水，衡水又北流，就到袁谭渡。
English: The east stream also flows into Hengshui, and Hengshui and the north stream flow into Yuan Tandu.

古文：衡水又北为袁谭渡，盖谭自邺往还所由，故济得厥名。
现代文：袁谭从邺往来都要经过这里，渡口也就因而得名了。
English: Yuan Tan passed through here on his way to and from Handan, which is how the ferry got its name.

古文：又东北过下博县之西，衡水又北径邬县故城东。
现代文：又往东北流过下博县西边，衡水又往北流经邹县老城东面。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the west side of Shimo-Bo County, and Hengshui flows to the north through the east side of the old city of Handan County.

古文：《竹书纪年》，梁惠成王三十年，秦封卫鞅于邬，改名曰商。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：梁惠成王三十年前，秦把卫秧封于邹，改名为商，就是这地方。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Thirty years before the reign of Liang Huicheng, the Qin Dynasty sealed Wei Xuan in Yunnan and renamed it Shang. This is the place.

古文：又右径下博县故城西，王莽改曰闰博。
现代文：所以王莽把它改名秦聚。《地理风俗记》说：县北有邹阜，邹县大概就是依此阜命名的。王莽改名为闰博。
English: Therefore, Wang Mang changed its name to Qinju. "Geography and Customs" said: There is a Fufu in the north of the county, and Fufu County is probably named after this Fufu. Wang Mang changed its name to Yue Bo.

古文：应劭曰：太山有博，故此加下。
现代文：应肋说：太山有博，所以这里，叫下博。
English: Ying Li said: "There is bo in Taishan, so here, it is called lower bo.

古文：汉光武自滹沱南出，至此失道，不知所以。遇白衣老父曰：信都为长安守，去此八十里。
现代文：汉武帝从溥沱河南行，到这里迷了路，不知道该往哪里走，碰到一位白衣老人，说：现在信都是为汉而守城的，离这里有八十里。
English: Emperor Wudi of Han traveled from the south of the Wei River. He lost his way here and did not know where to go. He met an old man in a white robe who said, "Nowadays, everyone believes in defending the city for Han. It's eighty miles from here."

古文：世祖赴之，任光开门纳焉，汉氏中兴始基之矣。
现代文：世祖就到信都去，任光开了城门迎接他，汉室中兴的基业才自此奠定。
English: The founder went to Xindu, Ren Guang opened the city gate to welcome him, and the foundation of Hanzhong ZTE was laid from then on.

古文：寻求老父不得，议者以为神。
现代文：以后去寻求这位老人，却找不到了，人们谈论这件事，以为他是神仙。
English: Later, when I went to look for the old man, I couldn't find him, and people talked about it, thinking he was a god.

古文：衡漳又东北历下博城西，逶迆东北注，谓之九。西径乐乡县故城南，王莽更之曰乐丘也。
现代文：衡漳又往东北流经下博城西面，弯弯曲曲地往东北奔流，称为九睁；西流经过乐乡县老城南面，王莽改名为乐丘。
English: Hengye also flows to the northeast through the west side of Shimo Bo City, and meanders to the northeast, known as Jiucheng; the west stream passes south of the old city of Lexiang County, and Wang Mang is renamed Leqiu.

古文：又东，引葭水注之。
现代文：又东流，引霞水注入。
English: It also flows to the east and is fed by the Xia water.

古文：又东北过阜城县北，又东北至昌亭，与滹沱河会。
现代文：又往东北流过阜城县北边，又往东北到昌亭，与淖沱河汇合。
English: It then flows northeast through the northern part of Fucheng County, and then northeast to Changting, where it merges with the Li River.

古文：《经》叙阜城于下博之下，昌亭之上。考地非比，于事为同。
现代文：《水经》把阜城放在下博的下流，昌亭的上流来叙述，可是查考地址的位置，次序虽不对，但的确又事出有因。
English: "Water Sutra" describes Fucheng in the downstream of lower Bo and the upstream of Changting, but the location and order of the address are not correct, but there is indeed a reason.

古文：勃海阜城又在东昌之东，故知非也。
现代文：勃海郡的阜城又在东昌的东边，所以知道并非这地方。
English: Fucheng in Bohai County is also on the east side of Dongchang, so I knew it wasn't this place.

古文：漳水又东北径武邑郡南，魏所置也。
现代文：漳水又往东北流经武邑郡南面，那是魏时所置。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the northeast through the southern part of Wuyi County, which was established during the Wei Dynasty.

古文：又东径武强县北，又东北径武隧县故城南。
现代文：又往东流经武强县北面，又往东北流经武隧县老城南面。
English: It also flows eastward to the north of Wuqiang County and northeastward to the south of the old city of Wucheng County.

古文：按《史记》秦破赵将扈辄于武隧，斩首十万，即于此处也。
现代文：按《史记》，秦军在武隧打败赵国将军启辄，杀了十万人，就在这个地方。
English: According to the "Histories," the Qin army defeated the Zhao general Qixi in the Wudong Tunnel and killed one hundred thousand people, right here.

古文：王莽更名桓隧矣。
现代文：王莽改名为桓隧。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Kan Tun.

古文：白马河注之，水上承滹沱，东径乐乡县北，饶阳县南，又东南径武邑郡北，而东入衡水，谓之交津口。
现代文：白马河在这里注入漳水。白马河上流承接淖沱河，往东流经乐乡县北面、饶阳县南面，又往东南流经武邑郡北面，往东注入衡水，汇流处称为交津口。
English: The upper stream of the Baima River flows eastward through the northern part of Lexiang County and the southern part of Raoyang County, and flows southeastward through the northern part of Wuyi County and eastward into Hengshui, and the confluence is called the junction of the rivers.

古文：衡漳又东径武邑县故城北，王莽之顺桓也。
现代文：衡漳又往东流经武邑县老城北面，就是王莽的顺桓。
English: Hengye also flows eastward through the north of the old city of Wuyi County, which is Wang Mang's Shunhuan.

古文：晋武帝封子于县以为王国，后分武邑、武隧、观津为武邑郡，治此。
现代文：晋武帝把他的儿子封在该县，立为王国。后来把武邑、武隧、观津都划归武邑郡，治所就设在这里。
English: Emperor Jinwu made his son a vassal of the county and made it a kingdom. Later, Wuyi, Wuchong and Guanzhong were all assigned to Wuyi County, and the provincial capital was located here.

古文：衡漳又东北，右合张平口，故沟上承武强渊，渊之西南，侧永有武强县故治，故渊得其名焉。
现代文：衡漳又往东北流，右边汇合了张平口旧沟，上流承接武强渊，武强渊西南，水边留有旧时武强县的治所，渊就因而得名。
English: Hengye also flows to the northeast, and the old ditch of Zhang Pingkou is joined on the right. The upstream is connected to the Wuqiangyuan, the southwest of the Wuqiangyuan, and the water's edge is left with the former administrative center of Wuqiang County, hence the name of the valley.

古文：《东观汉记》曰：光武拜王梁为大司空，以为侯国。
现代文：《东观汉记》说：光武帝派王梁当大司空，把武强立为侯国封给他。
English: "Dongguan Han Ji" said: Emperor Guangwu sent Wang Liang to be the grand secretary of the sky, and appointed Wu Qiang as the lord of the country.

古文：耆宿云：邑人有行于途者，见一小蛇，疑其有灵，持而养之，名曰担生。
现代文：据老人们说：县里有个人走路时看见一条小蛇，心里觉得似乎有点灵异，于是就把它带回家饲养，取名担生。
English: According to the old people, there was a man in the county who saw a small snake when he was walking. He thought it was a bit strange, so he took it home to raise it and named it "Tang Sheng."

古文：长而吞噬人，里中患之，遂捕系狱，担生负而奔，邑沦为湖，县长及吏咸为鱼矣。
现代文：蛇长大后竟把人吃了，邻里中人都很发愁，就把养蛇者抓起来关进监牢。担生背着他逃走，县城沉陷成为湖泊，县长和官吏也都变成鱼鳖。
English: After the snake grew up, it actually ate a man. The neighbors were very worried, so they arrested the snake breeder and put him in prison. The porter ran away with him, the county seat sank into a lake, and the county governor and officials were turned into fish bait.

古文：今县治东北半里许落水。
现代文：现在县城东北大约半里的地方都没在水中。
English: Now, about half a mile northeast of the county seat, there are no whales in the water.

古文：渊水又东南结而为湖，又谓之郎君渊。
现代文：渊水往东南流，积聚成湖泊，又叫郎君渊。
English: The abyssal water flows to the southeast and accumulates into lakes, also known as the Langjunyuan.

古文：耆宿又言：县沦之日，其子东奔，又陷于此，故渊得郎君之目矣。
现代文：老人们又说：县城沉陷那天，那人的儿子向东奔逃，也在这里沉陷，所以这个深潭就叫郎君渊了。
English: The old people also said: On the day that the county seat sank, the man's son fled to the east and also sank here, so this deep pool is called the Langjunyuan.

古文：渊水北通，谓之石虎口，又东北为张平泽。
现代文：渊水通问北面，水口叫石虎口；又往东北流，就是张平泽。
English: The deep water flows to the north, and the water outlet is called Shihogou; it also flows to the northeast, that is, Zhang Pingshe.

古文：泽水所泛，北决堤口，谓之张刀沟，北注衡漳，谓之张平口，亦曰张平沟。
现代文：泽水泛滥，在北面冲垮堤口流出，叫张刀沟。往北注入衡漳，汇流处叫张平口，沟水也叫张平沟。
English: When the floodwater overflows and flows out of the dike on the north side, it is called Zhangtaogou. When it flows into Hengyao to the north, the confluence is called Zhangpingou, and the ditch water is also called Zhangpingou.

古文：水溢则南注，水耗则辍流。
现代文：泽水涨溢时就南流，水枯时就断流。
English: When the lake overflows, it flows to the south, and when it dries up, it stops flowing.

古文：衡漳又径东昌县故城北，《经》所谓昌亭也。王莽之田昌也，俗名之曰东相，盖相、昌声韵合，故致兹误矣。
现代文：衡漳又流经东昌县老城北面，这就是《水经》里说的昌亭，也就是王莽的田昌，俗名叫东相，这是因为相、昌两字音韵相合，因而致误。
English: Hengye also flows through the northern part of the old town of Dongchang County. This is the Changting mentioned in the "Water Sutra," that is, Wang Mang's Tianchang, commonly known as Dongsang. This is because the two characters of "sang" and "chang" are phonologically the same, resulting in an error.

古文：西有昌城，故目是城为东昌矣。
现代文：西边有昌城，所以称此城为东昌。
English: There is Changcheng in the west, so this city is called Dongchang.

古文：衡漳又东北，左会滹沱故渎，谓之合口。
现代文：衡漳又往东北流，在左边汇合了淖沱河的旧水道，汇流处叫合口。
English: Hengye also flows to the northeast, merging with the old waterway of the Wei River on the left. The confluence is called the confluence.

古文：衡漳又东北，分为二川，当其水泆处，名之曰李聪涣。
现代文：衡漳又往东北流，分为两条，水流溢出处，叫李聪涣。
English: Hengyao also flows to the northeast, divided into two, and the place where the water overflows is called Li Congyao.

古文：又东北至乐成陵县北别出，衡漳于县无别出之渎，出县北者，乃滹沱别水，分滹沱故渎之所缠络也。
现代文：又往东北流到乐成郡陵县北面，分支流出，在陵县，衡漳并没有分支流出的水，往县北分出的，是滤沱的支水，是从淖沱旧河道分出的。
English: It also flows to the northeast to the north of Ling County, Lecheng County, and branches out. In Ling County, Hengye has no branching out of water. The water that branches out to the north of the county is a tributary of the Yangtze River, and is separated from the old Yangtze River.

古文：衡漳又东，分为二水，左出为向氏口，渎水自此决入也。
现代文：衡漳又东流分为两支：向左边分出处是向氏口，渠水就从此口引入。
English: Hengchun and the east stream are divided into two branches: the branch to the left originates from Xiangshi mouth, and the canal water is introduced from this mouth.

古文：衡漳又东，径弓高县故城北。
现代文：衡漳又往东流经弓高县老城北面。
English: Hengye also flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Yugang County.

古文：汉文帝二年，别为国。
现代文：汉文帝把这里封给韩王信的儿子韩馈当，立为侯国，也就是王莽的乐成亭。
English: Emperor Hanwen gave this place to Han Jiedang, the son of Han Wangxin, and established it as a principality, that is, Wang Mang's Lecheng Pavilion.

古文：应劭曰：在两河之间也。
现代文：衡漳水又往东北流，右边汇合了柏梁搓。
English: Hengxuan water flows to the northeast, and the right side merges with Bai Liangyu.

古文：景帝九年，封子德为河间王，是为献王。
现代文：这条水上流承接李聪涣，往东北流叫柏梁搓；往东流经蒲领县老城南面。汉武帝元朔三年封他的儿子刘德为河间王，就是献王。
English: This upstream stream succeeds the Li Conglu, and flows to the northeast and is called the Bai Lianglu; it flows to the east and passes south of the old city of Putuo County. In the third year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Wu designated his son Liu De as the King of Hebei, that is, the King of Consecration.

古文：王莽更名，郡曰朔定，县曰陆信。
现代文：王莽改名，郡称朔定，县叫陆信。
English: Wang Mang changed his name, the county was called Shuo Ding, and the county was called Lu Xin.

古文：褚先生曰：汉宣帝地节三年，封大将军霍光兄子山为侯国也。
现代文：褚先生说：汉宣帝地节三年前，把这里封给大将军霍光哥哥的儿子霍山，立为侯国。
English: Mr. Zou said: Three years before the Han Xuan Emperor Land Festival, it was assigned to the son of General Huo Guang's brother, Huoshan, and established as a principality.

古文：封子开于此，桓帝追尊祖父孝王开为孝穆王，以其邑奉山陵，故加陵曰乐成陵也。
现代文：章帝把他儿子刘开封在这里；桓帝追封他的祖父孝王刘开，加孝穆王的尊号，划出该县作为祭扫陵墓之用，所以把陵称为乐成陵。
English: Emperor Zhang sealed his son Liu Kai here; Emperor Kuan sealed his grandfather Xiaowang Liu Kai and added the honorific title of Xiaomu Wang, and designated the county as the use of the mausoleum, so the mausoleum was called Le Cheng Mausoleum.

古文：今城中有故池，方八十步，旧引衡水北入城注池。
现代文：现在城中还有一口古池，方圆八十步，从前引了衡水北流入城，注入池中。
English: Now there is an ancient pond in the city, with a circumference of eighty paces. In the past, Hengshui water was brought north into the city and poured into the pond.

古文：池北对层台，基隍荒芜，示存古意也。
现代文：池北面对一座高台，台基和沟堑都已荒芜了，只是留着表示保存古迹的意思罢了。
English: The north side of the pond faces a high plateau. The base of the plateau and the ravine have been abandoned, but the intention to preserve the monument has been kept.

古文：又东北过成平县南。
现代文：又往东北流过成平县南边。
English: It also flows northeast through the southern part of Chengping County.

古文：衡漳又东径建成县故城南。
现代文：衡漳又往东流经建成县旧城南边。
English: Hengye also flows eastward through the southern part of Jiancheng County's old city.

古文：按《地理志》，故属勃海郡。
现代文：按《地理志》该县旧属勃海郡。
English: According to "Geography," the county was formerly part of Bohai County.

古文：成平县故城在北，汉武帝元朔三年，封河间献王子刘礼为侯国，王莽之泽亭也。
现代文：褚先生说：汉昭帝元凤三年把成平封给河间献王的儿子刘礼，立为侯国，也就是王莽的泽亭。
English: Mr. Zou said, "Three years ago, Emperor Han Zhao and Emperor Yuanfeng appointed Liu Li, the son of Cheng Pingfu, who had offered the crown to King He, as the lord of the land, that is, Wang Mang's Ze Ting.

古文：城南北相直。
现代文：老城南北相直对。
English: The north and south of the old city are directly opposite each other.

古文：衡漳又东右会杨津沟水，水自陂东径阜城南。
现代文：衡漳又东流，右边汇合了杨津沟水。沟水从破塘往东流经阜城南面。
English: Hengye also flows to the east, and on the right is the confluence of the Yangjin Ditch Water. The ditch water flows from the broken pond to the east through the south of Fucheng.

古文：《地理志》，勃海有阜城县，王莽更名吾城者，非《经》所谓阜城也。
现代文：《地理志》说：勃海有阜城县。王莽改名为吾城的那个阜城，并不是《水经》中所说的阜城。
English: "Geography" said: "There is Fucheng County in the Bohai Sea. The Fucheng that Wang Mang changed its name to our city is not the Fucheng mentioned in the "Water Sutra."

古文：建武十五年，世祖更封大司马王梁为侯国。
现代文：建武十五年，世祖把这里改封给大司马王梁，立为侯国。
English: In the fifteenth year of Jianwu, the ancestor changed the name of this place to Daishi Ma Wangliang and established it as a vassal state.

古文：杨津沟水又东北径建成县，左入衡水，谓之杨津口。
现代文：杨津沟水又往东北流，经过建成县向左边注入衡水，汇流处叫杨津口。
English: The water of Yangjin ditch flows to the northeast, and through Jiancheng County, Hengshui is injected to the left. The confluence is called Yangjin mouth.

古文：衡漳又东，左会滹沱别河故渎，又东北入清河，谓之合口，又径南皮县之北皮亭，而东北径浮阳县西，东北注也。
现代文：衡漳又东流，左边汇合溥沱河的旧河道，又往东北流入清河，汇流处叫合口。又流经南皮县的北皮亭，然后往东北经浮阳县西面，往东流去。
English: Hengye also flows eastward, merging with the old river course of the Minhe River on the left, and flowing into the Qinghe River to the northeast, the confluence is called the confluence. It also flows through the Beipi Pavilion in Nanpi County, and then to the northeast through the west of Fuyang County, and flows eastward.

古文：又东北过章武县西，又东北过平舒县南，东入海。
现代文：又往东北流过章武县西边，又往东北流过平舒县南边，东流人海。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the west of Zhangwu County, and to the northeast through the south of Pingshu County, and to the east is a sea of people.

古文：清漳径章武县故城西，故邑也。
现代文：清漳流经章武县旧城西面，就是旧时的秽邑。
English: The Qing Dynasty stream flows through the west side of the old city of Zhangwu County, which is the old Zushi Town.

古文：枝渎出焉，谓之水。
现代文：在这里分出支流，叫秽水。
English: A tributary flows out of here, called the Dirty Water Canal.

古文：东北径参户亭，分为二渎。
现代文：往东北流经参户亭，分成两条。
English: To the northeast, it flows through Sanju-tei and splits into two streams.

古文：应劭曰：平舒县西南五十里有参户亭，故县也。
现代文：应劭说：平舒县西南五十里有参户亭，是个旧县城。
English: Ying Yao said: There are more than 50 sanhu pavilions in the southwest of Pingshu County, which is an old county seat.

古文：世谓之平虏城。
现代文：世人称为平虏城。
English: The world knows it as Pingru City.

古文：枝水又东注，谓之蔡伏沟。又东积而为淀。
现代文：支流又往东流奔，叫蔡伏沟，又东流积储成为湖淀。
English: The tributary also flows eastward, called Cai Fuguo, and the eastward flow accumulates and becomes Lake Yodo.

古文：一水径亭北，又径东平舒县故城南。
现代文：一条流经亭北，又流经东平舒县旧城南面。
English: One flows through the north of Ting, and also flows through the south of the old city of Dongping Shuxian.

古文：代郡有平舒城，故加东。
现代文：代郡有平舒城，所以这里叫东平舒。
English: There is Pingshu Town in Dayi County, so it is called Dongpingshu.

古文：《地理志》，勃海之属县也。
现代文：按《地理志》，这是勃海郡的属县。
English: According to "Geography," this is the largest county in Bohai County.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：章武郡治，故世以为章武故城，非也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：这是章武郡的治所。所以世人以为这就是章武县的旧城，但实际并不是。
English: "Wei Shui Ji" said: This is the seat of Zhangwu County. So the world thought that this was the old city of Zhangwu County, but it was not.

古文：又东北分为二水，一右出为淀，一水北注滹沱，谓之口。
现代文：又往东北流，分成两条水：一条向右边流出成为湖淀，一条往北注入淖沱河，汇流处称为秽口。
English: It also flows to the northeast and divides into two streams: one flows out to the right to become Lake Yodo, one flows north into the Min River, and the confluence is called the Narrow Mouth.

古文：清漳乱流而东注于海。
现代文：清漳水往东乱流，注入大海。
English: The clear brackish water flows eastwards in a turbulent current and pours into the sea.

古文：清漳水出上党沾县西北少山大要谷，南过县西，又从县南屈，《淮南子》曰：清漳出谒戾山。
现代文：清漳水发源于上党郡沾县西北的少山大要谷，往南流过县西，又从县南转弯，《淮南子》说：清漳水发源于渴决山。
English: The water of the Qinglong River originates from the valley of Shaoshan Mountain in the northwest of Shangdang County, flows south through the west of the county, and turns from the south of the county. "Huai Nanzi" said: The water of the Qinglong River originates from the Qixie Mountain.

古文：高诱云：山在沾县。
现代文：高诱说：山在沾县。
English: Gao Yu said: The mountain is in Zangxian County.

古文：今清漳出沾县故城东北，俗谓之沾山。
现代文：现在清漳水发源于沾县旧城东北面，俗称沾山。
English: Nowadays, the source of the Qinglong Water originates in the northeast of the old city of Zangxian County, commonly known as Zangshan.

古文：后汉分沾县为乐平郡，治沾县。
现代文：后汉把沾县划给乐平郡，郡治在沾县。
English: Later Han Dynasty assigned Zan County to Leping County, and the county government was based in Zan County.

古文：水出乐平郡沾县界。
现代文：清漳水就发源于乐平郡的沾县境内。
English: The clear brackish water originates from the territory of Zan County in Leping County.

古文：故《晋太康地记》曰：乐平县旧名沾县。
现代文：所以《晋太康地记》说：乐平县，旧名沾县。
English: Therefore, "Jin Tai Kang Di Ji" said: Leping County, the old name Zang County.

古文：汉之故县矣。
现代文：是汉时的旧县。
English: It is an old county of the Han Dynasty.

古文：其山亦曰鹿谷山，水出大要谷，南流径沾县故城东，不历其西也。
现代文：那座山也叫鹿谷山，水从大要谷流出，往南流经沾县旧城东面，并不流经西面。
English: That mountain is also called Lugu Mountain. The water flows out of the valley and flows southward through the eastern part of the old city of Jin County, but does not flow through the west.

古文：汉高帝八年，封冯解散为侯国。
现代文：又往南流经昔阳城。《左传》：昭公十二年把这里封给冯解散，立为侯国。
English: It also flows south through Xiyang City. "Left Biography": In the 12th year of Zhaogong, Feng dissolved the fief here and established it as a principality.

古文：其水左台北水，北水又东南入于清漳。
现代文：南水在左边汇合北水，北水又往东南流入清漳水。
English: The South Water joins the North Water on the left, and the North Water flows southeast into the Clear Water.

古文：清漳又东南与轑水相得。
现代文：清漳水又往东南流与镣水相合流。
English: The south-eastern stream of the clear brackish water merges with the brackish water.

古文：轑水出轑阳县西北轑山，南流径轑阳县故城西南，东流至粟城，注于清漳也。
现代文：镣水发源于燎阳县西北的撩山，往南流经镣阳县老城西南面，东流到粟城，注入清漳水。
English: Surabaya water originates from Mount Surabaya in the northwest of Surabaya County, flows southward through the southwest of the old city of Surabaya County, and flows eastward to Maocheng, injecting clear Surabaya water.

