古文：夫设官分职，高卑联事。
现代文：朝廷设官各司其职，各级官吏共同治理国家大事。
English: The officials appointed by the imperial court shall each perform their duties, and officials at all levels shall jointly manage national affairs.

古文：天子垂珠以听，诸侯鸣玉以朝。
现代文：天子戴着皇冠受理政事，诸侯穿朝服觐见君主。
English: The heavenly son wears a crown to accept government affairs, and princes wear court dress to meet the monarch.

古文：敷奏以言，明试以功。
现代文：群臣上奏各种政见，帝王便据以查核其功绩。
English: Various political opinions were voiced by the courtiers, and the emperor used them to check their achievements.

古文：故尧咨四岳，舜命八元，固辞再让之请，俞往钦哉之授，并陈辞帝庭，匪假书翰。
现代文：相传古代帝尧曾向诸侯之长提出询问，帝舜曾任命八个贤人；于是臣下有再三辞让的请求，帝王用信任和肯定的话授以重任：这些都是在朝廷上口头的对答，并未通过纸笔写成书面文件。
English: According to legend, the ancient emperors once asked the heads of the princes, and the emperors appointed eight sages; the subjects then repeatedly asked for concessions, and the emperors gave them important tasks with trust and affirmation: these were verbal responses at the court, and were not written down by pen and paper.

古文：然则敷奏以言，则章表之义也；明试以功，即授爵之典也。
现代文：可是，用言辞向帝王陈述，就具有进奏章表的意义了；帝王对臣下功绩的查核，也就是一种授予爵位的仪式了。
English: However, using words to make a statement to the emperor has the meaning of a prelude; the emperor's examination of the merits of his vassals is also a ceremony for awarding a knighthood.

古文：至太甲既立，伊尹书诫，思庸归亳，又作书以赞。
现代文：到商代的太甲立位，大臣伊挚曾写《伊训》来训诫太甲；及至太甲改过而思念常道，从被流放的地方回到毫都，伊挚又作《太甲》三篇来赞美他。
English: At the time of the establishment of Taiga in the Shang Dynasty, the minister Yi Jing once wrote "I Ching" to admonish Taiga; and when Taiga reformed and thought about the normal way and returned from the place where he was exiled, Yi Jing also wrote "Taiga" three times to praise him.

古文：文翰献替，事斯见矣。
现代文：用书面文辞来扬善弃恶，就从此开始了。
English: The use of written words to promote good and reject evil began here.

古文：周监二代，文理弥盛。
现代文：周王朝继承借鉴夏、商两代的制度，礼仪更为隆重。
English: The Zhou Dynasty inherited the system of the two generations of Xia and Shang, and the etiquette was more solemn.

古文：再拜稽首，对扬休命，承文受册，敢当丕显。虽言笔未分，而陈谢可见。
现代文：臣下对帝王常称：再三叩头、报答美命、敬受册封、敢当重任等，这些虽是口讲笔写兼用，但陈辞谢恩之义是明显的。
English: Subjects often said to the emperor: repeatedly kowtow, repay the good life, respectfully receive the title, dare to take on heavy responsibilities, etc. Although these are both spoken and written, the meaning of Chen Jie's gratitude is obvious.

古文：降及七国，未变古式，言事于王，皆称上书。
现代文：到了战国时期，仍用商周格式，对帝王呈文，都叫 上书 。
English: In the Warring States period, the Shang Zhou format was still used, and the submission of documents to the emperor was called Shang Shu.

古文：秦初定制，改书曰奏。
现代文：秦朝初期订立了制度，才改 书 为 奏 。
English: The system was established at the beginning of the Qin Dynasty, and only then was it changed to calligraphy.

古文：汉定礼仪，则有四品∶一曰章，二曰奏，三曰表，四曰议。章以谢恩，奏以按劾，表以陈请，议以执异。
现代文：汉朝时期制定礼仪，便把对帝王的上书分为四种：第一种叫 章 ，第二种叫 奏 ，第三种叫 表 ，第四种叫 议 。 章 用于谢恩， 奏 用于揭发检举， 表 用于陈述请求， 议 用于提出不同的议论。
English: When the etiquette was established during the Han Dynasty, the letters to the emperor were divided into four types: the first was called "Chapter," the second was called "Record," the third was called "Table," and the fourth was called "Suggestion." "Chapter" was used to express gratitude, "Table" was used to make a complaint, "Table" was used to make a request, and "Suggestion" was used to raise different arguments.

古文：章者，明也。
现代文：所谓 章 ，就是明。
English: The so-called chapter is the Ming.

古文：《诗》云 为章于天 ，谓文明也。
现代文：《诗经》中说，银河 为章于天 ，意为文采明显。
English: In the "Song of Songs," it is said that the Milky Way is a chapter in the sky, meaning that the poetry is obvious.

古文：其在文物，赤白曰章。
现代文：对于有文采的事物来说，红白交错就是 章 。
English: For literary things, the interlacing of red and white is 章.

古文：表者，标也。
现代文：所谓 表 ，就是表明。
English: The so-called table is an indication.

古文：《礼》有《表记》，谓德见于仪。
现代文：《礼记》中的《表记》，就是君子的品德外现于仪表的意思。
English: In "The Book of Etiquette," "honor" means that a gentleman's character is reflected in his appearance.

古文：其在器式，揆景曰表。章表之目，盖取诸此也。
现代文：对于用作标志之物来说，测量日影的器具就叫 表 。 章 、 表 的名称，就取之于这种意义。
English: In the case of a thing used as a sign, the instrument for measuring the shadow of the sun is called a table, and the name of the chapter, Table, is taken in this sense.

古文：按《七略》、《艺文》，谣咏必录；章表奏议，经国之枢机，然阙而不纂者，乃各有故事，布在职司也。
现代文：在刘歆的《七略》和班固的《汉书·艺文志》中，各地歌谣也有闻必录；章、表、奏、议等治理国事的重要文件，其所以没有编录进去，是由于奏议的掌管各别而编纂者分工不同的原因。
English: In Liu Wei's "Seven Abridgements" and Ban Gu's "Chinese Book, History of Art and Literature," songs from all over the country are also required to be recorded; important documents for governing state affairs, such as chapters, tables, reports, and resolutions, were not included in the compilation, due to the different division of labor among the compilers due to the different management of the report.

古文：前汉表谢，遗篇寡存。
现代文：前汉时期的章表，留传下来的很少。
English: There are very few extant chapter lists from the period of the former Han Dynasty.

古文：及后汉察举，必试章奏。
现代文：到后汉时期，选拔官吏必须考试章表。
English: By the time of the Later Han Dynasty, officials had to pass an examination.

古文：左雄表议，台阁为式；胡广章奏，天下第一：并当时之杰笔也。
现代文：左雄的奏议，成了尚书台的典范；胡广的章奏，被安帝称为 天下第一 ：这都是当时杰出的作品。
English: Zuo Xiong's recital became the model for Shang Shudai; Hu Guang's capella recital was called the best in the world by Emperor An: these were all outstanding works at the time.

古文：观伯始谒陵之章，足见其典文之美焉。
现代文：读胡广 谒陵 的章奏，可见其典范之作确是写得很美的。
English: Reading the chapter on Hu Guang's tomb, it can be seen that his exemplary work is indeed beautifully written.

古文：昔晋文受册，三辞从命，是以汉末让表，以三为断。
现代文：从前晋文公受周襄王册封时，曾三次辞让然后接受册命，所以汉代末年的让表，也以推让三次为限。
English: In the past, when Jinwen Gong was canonized by King Zhou Xiang, he had resigned three times and then accepted the canonization order, so the concession table at the end of the Han Dynasty was limited to three times.

古文：曹公称 为表不必三让 ，又 勿得浮华 。
现代文：曹操曾说： 写让表不需要三次，又不应文辞浮华。 
English: Cao Cao once said: It is not necessary to write the concession form three times, and it should not be pompous.

古文：所以魏初表章，指事造实，求其靡丽，则未足美矣。
现代文：因此，魏初的章表，大都就事论事，按实而书；按照华丽的要求来看，这时的作品是不够美的。
English: Therefore, most of the chapter tables at the beginning of the Wei Dynasty were based on facts and based on reality; according to the requirements of gorgeous, the works at this time were not beautiful enough.

古文：至如文举之《荐祢衡》，气扬采飞；孔明之辞后主，志尽文畅；虽华实异旨，并表之英也。
现代文：至于孔融的《荐祢衡表》，写得意气高昂，文采飞扬；诸葛亮的《出师表》，情理透彻，文辞流畅：它们虽然在华丽与质朴上各不相同，但都是优秀的表文。
English: As for Kong Rong's "Recommend Your Weighing Table," the writing is high-spirited and the writing is flying; Zhu Ge Liang's "Teacher's Table," the sense is thorough and the wording is smooth: although they are different in terms of splendor and simplicity, they are all excellent essays.

古文：琳禹章表，有誉当时；孔璋称健，则其标也。
现代文：此外，陈琳和阮瑀的章表，在当时很有名气；陈琳之作，曹丕认为特别矫健，就是建安文人中较突出的了。
English: In addition, the chapter tables of Chen Lin and Ruan Hui were very famous at that time; Chen Lin's work, which Cao Hui considered to be particularly vigorous, was the most prominent among Jianan literati.

古文：陈思之表，独冠群才。
现代文：曹植的表文，更是独冠群雄。
English: Cao Zhi's prose is the best in the world.

古文：观其体赡而律调，辞清而志显，应物制巧，随变生趣，执辔有馀，故能缓急应节矣。
现代文：他的作品体制宏富而音律协调，文辞清明而情志显著，随物成巧，变化多趣；如驾千里之马，轻重缓急掌握得恰到好处。
English: The structure of his works is rich and the music is well-coordinated, the words are clear and the sentiments are prominent, they are easy to follow and changeable; like driving a thousand-mile horse, the priorities are mastered to perfection.

古文：逮晋初笔札，则张华为俊。
现代文：到晋初作者的章表，就以张华较为优秀。
English: As far as the author's chapter list at the beginning of the Jin Dynasty is concerned, Zhang Hua's chapter list is superior.

古文：其三让公封，理周辞要，引义比事，必得其偶，世珍《鹪鹩》，莫顾章表。
现代文：他三度辞让被封为壮武郡公的表文，道理周详而文辞简要，引申意义，排比事类，都用对偶；一般都珍视张华的《鹪鹩赋》，而没有注意到他的章表。
English: He three times declined to be appointed as Zhuangwu County magistrate. His prose is detailed and concise, and uses duals for extension, comparison, and so on. Generally, people cherish Zhang Hua's "Endowment," but do not pay attention to his chapter list.

古文：及羊公之辞开府，有誉于前谈；庾公之《让中书》，信美于往载。序志联类，有文雅焉。
现代文：又如西晋羊祜的《让开府表》，前代论述已有所称誉；东晋庾亮的《让中书监表》，确较已往章表写得美好：他们表达情志，联系事理，都颇为文雅。
English: Another example is the "Let's Go to the Capital Table" of the Western Jin Dynasty, which has been praised by the previous generation; the "Let's Go to the Central China Book Supervision Table" of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, has indeed been written more beautifully than the previous chapter table. Their expression of feelings and relationship are quite elegant.

古文：刘琨《劝进》，张骏《自序》，文致耿介，并陈事之美表也。
现代文：此外，西晋末年刘琨的《劝进表》、张骏的《请讨石虎李期表》，写得光明正大，都是陈事美好的佳作。
English: In addition, at the end of the Western Jin Dynasty, Liu Zhen's "Persuasion Table" and Zhang Zhen's "Request for Stone Tiger and Li Period Table" were written in a straightforward manner, and were both excellent works.

古文：原夫章表之为用也，所以对扬王庭，昭明心曲。
现代文：章表原本的用处，是为了宣扬天子的美德，彰显内心的情意。
English: The original purpose of the table of contents was to proclaim the virtues of the Son of God and to reveal the heart's feelings.

古文：既其身文，且亦国华。
现代文：既能够表明自身的文采，又能够表明国家的华貌。
English: It can not only show its own literary style, but also show the splendor of the country.

古文：章以造阙，风矩应明，表以致策，骨采宜耀：循名课实，以文为本者也。
现代文：章是用来朝见君主的，风格规矩意思明确；表是用来陈述策略的，文采有骨且能够显扬：依据章表名彰显其实质，是以章表的文采为根本的。
English: The chapter is used to meet the monarch, the style, rules and meaning are clear; the table is used to state the strategy, the writing is solid and can be shown off: according to the chapter name, it shows its essence, and the writing of the chapter is fundamental.

古文：是以章式炳贲，志在典谟；使要而非略，明而不浅。表体多包，情伪屡迁。必雅义以扇其风，清文以驰其丽。
现代文：由此章的体制要彰显光耀，志趣在于法典，使其扼要而不简略，明确而不浅显；表的体裁包含很多，真情假意屡屡变化，一定要用雅义来宣扬其风格，以清晰的文笔来彰显其华丽。
English: The system of this chapter should highlight the brilliance, the ambition lies in the code, so that it is concise but not abbreviated, clear but not obvious; the genre of the table contains a lot, the truth and falsehood change frequently, we must use elegance to promote its style, and use clear writing to highlight its gorgeousness.

古文：然恳恻者辞为心使，浮侈者情为文屈，必使繁约得正，华实相胜，唇吻不滞，则中律矣。
现代文：可是真切的章表大都被内心所驱使，浮华奢侈的章表大都被华丽所掩盖。一切要繁简得当，华丽质朴相宜，音韵得体，这就是最合适的音律了。
English: However, most of the authentic chapters are driven by the heart, and most of the flashy and extravagant chapters are covered by the gorgeous. Everything should be properly simplified, the gorgeous should be simple, and the rhyme should be decent. This is the most appropriate rhythm.

古文：子贡云 心以制之，言以结之 ，盖一辞意也。
现代文：子贡说 用内心来制定言辞，用言辞来说明心意 ，要统一言辞和意境。
English: Zigong said, "Use your heart to formulate words, use words to clarify your mind, and unify words and mood."

古文：荀卿以为 观人美辞，丽于黼黻文章 ，亦可以喻于斯乎？
现代文：荀子认为 看人用善意的言辞，比华丽的文章要好 ，这是要言辞和意境一致的意思。总结：
English: Zouzi believes that it is better to see people use kind words than gorgeous articles, which means that the words and the mood should be consistent.

古文：赞曰∶敷表降阙，献替黼扆。
现代文：陈述章表于宫阙，是为了向帝王劝善规过。
English: The statement was made at the palace gate in order to persuade the emperor to change his ways.

古文：言必贞明，义则弘伟。
现代文：因此，言辞必须正确明白，意义应该宏大深远。
English: Therefore, the words must be correctly understood, and the meaning should be grand and far-reaching.

古文：肃恭节文，条理首尾。
现代文：要严肃恭敬地处理得体，使从头到尾条理清晰。
English: It should be handled seriously, respectfully, and properly, so that it is clear from beginning to end.

古文：君子秉文，辞令有斐。
现代文：卓越的人物写作章表，一定是文辞优美而富有文采。
English: An excellent character writing chapter list must be beautifully written and full of poetry.

