古文：粤若稽古，圣人之在天地间也，为众生之先。
现代文：先让我们来考察一下历史吧。古代那些存于世间的大智大勇的圣者，都是芸芸众生的先导。
English: First, let's take a look at history. In ancient times, those wise and courageous saints who existed in the world were the forerunners of all beings.

古文：观阴阳之开阖以命物，知存亡之门户，筹策万类之终始，达人心之理，见变化之眹焉，而守司其门户。
现代文：他们通过观察阴阳两类现象的变化来对事物作出判断，并进一步了解事物生存和死亡的途径。计算和预测事物的发生过程，通晓人们思想变化的关键，发现世上事物、人事的发展征兆，从而把握事物发展变化的关键。
English: They judge things by observing the changes of yin and yang phenomena, and further understand the ways of survival and death of things. They calculate and predict the occurrence process of things, understand the key to people's ideological changes, discover the signs of development of things and people in the world, and thus grasp the key to the development and change of things.

古文：故圣人之在天下也，自古及今，其道一也。
现代文：所以，圣人在社会上立身处世，从古到今，其遵循的规律都是一样的。
English: Therefore, from ancient times to the present, sages have followed the same rules in their social lives.

古文：变化无穷，各有所归。或阴或阳，或柔或刚，或开或闭，或弛或张。
现代文：事物的变化是无穷无尽的，然而都各有自己的归宿；或归于阴，或归于阳；或以柔为特征，或以刚为特征；或以开放为主导，或以闭藏为主导；或松弛不固，或紧张难入。
English: The changes of things are endless, but they all have their own destination; either to the yin or to the yang; or to the soft or to the hard; or to the open or to the closed; or to the loose or to the tight.

古文：是故圣人一守司其门户，审察其所先后，度权量能，校其伎巧短长。
现代文：所以圣人把握事物的关键，审察事物的前因后果、轻重缓急。权衡对方的思维能力和实践能力，比较其技巧优劣长短，然后借物举事。
English: Therefore, sages grasp the key to things, examine the causes, consequences and priorities of things, weigh the other party's thinking ability and practical ability, compare their skills, and then borrow things.

古文：夫贤不肖、智愚、勇怯有差，乃可捭，乃可阖；乃可进，乃可退；乃可贱，乃可贵，无为以牧之。
现代文：世人中有贤良与不肖者，有识之士与愚黯之辈，有勇敢者和怯懦者；有仁人君子及苟且小人总之，人们的品行和素质是千差万别的。
English: There are good and bad people in the world, wise and foolish people, brave and cowardly people; there are kind and gentle people and rude people. In short, people's behaviors and qualities are very different.

古文：审定有无与其实虚，随其嗜欲以见其志意，微排其所言而捭反之，以求其实，贵得其指；阖而捭之，以求其利。
现代文：所以，针对不同的人品素质，要采取不同的态度与措施。对某些人可以开导，对某些人可以压抑；对某些人可以擢用，对某些人可以黜退；可以让某些人富贵，可以使某些人贫贱。
English: Therefore, different attitudes and measures should be adopted for different human qualities. Some people can be enlightened, some people can be suppressed; some people can be promoted, some people can be discouraged; some people can be made rich, and some people can be made poor.

古文：或开而示之，或阖而闭之。
现代文：总归一句话，要顺应人们的自然品性去分别对待他们。
English: In a word, it is necessary to conform to people's natural character to treat them separately.

古文：开而示之者，同其情也；阖而闭之者，异其诚也。可与不可，审明其计谋，以原其同异。
现代文：要起用一个人，首先要审定其品质如何，摸清其真假虚实，顺从其嗜欲愿望，发掘其志向意图，并要暗中排察他的言语，或启导他，或适当地贬抑、质疑他，以探知其真情实意，以明了其性格主流。
English: In order to employ a person, it is first necessary to verify his quality, find out his true and false, obey his desire, discover his aspiration and intention, and secretly examine his words, or enlighten him, or appropriately demean and question him, in order to detect his true feelings and clarify his personality mainstream.

古文：离合有守，先从其志。即欲捭之贵周，即欲阖之贵密。
现代文：对人使用捭阖之术，或开启引导他，估量出他的情志；或压抑控制他，摸准他的诚心。
English: For a person, it is necessary to use the art of seduction, or to open and guide him, and gauge his sentiments; or to suppress and control him, and gauge his sincerity.

古文：周密之贵微，而与道相追。捭之者，料其情也；阖之者，结其诚也。皆见其权衡轻重，乃为之度数，圣人因而为之虑。其不中权衡度数，圣人因而自为之虑。
现代文：此外，还要知道他的谋略措施，圣人因之作出测度与分析，若其谋略措施得当，与我们距离较小，合乎我们的准则，我们就可以据此帮他完善谋略措施；若其谋略措施失当，与我们距离较大，不合我们的准则，我们只好舍弃不用，自己另谋良策。
English: In addition, it is necessary to know his strategic measures, so that the sage can make measurements and analysis. If his strategic measures are appropriate, less distant from us, and meet our standards, we can help him improve the strategic measures accordingly; if his strategic measures are inappropriate, more distant from us, and do not meet our standards, we have no choice but to abandon the use and find another good solution ourselves.

古文：故捭者，或捭而出之，或捭而内之；阖者，或阖而取之，或阖而去之。
现代文：因此，对人使用捭阖之术时，或开导他帮他引出决策，或启发他吐露决策以便纳为己用；或抑制他以便于我们顺利起用，或拒斥他弃而不用。
English: Therefore, when we use the art of persuasion with a person, we either enlighten him to help him make a decision, or inspire him to reveal the decision so that we can use it for ourselves; or restrain him so that we can use it successfully, or reject him and not use it.

古文：捭阖者，天地之道。
现代文：捭阖之术，以阴阳之道为主旨。
English: The art of Kitesurfing is based on the principle of Yin and Yang.

古文：捭阖者，以变动阴阳，四时开闭，以化万物。
现代文：捭阖，就是变动阴阳，用开闭之法构成四季轮回，使万物化生、万事兴亡交替。
English: , that is, changing yin and yang, using the method of opening and closing to form a four-season cycle, so that all things become life, and all things rise and fall alternately.

古文：纵横、反出、反覆、反忤，必由此矣。
现代文：纵和横，返和出，反和覆，反与忤，皆为阴阳之道的具体表现，都可用阴阳变动来区别、说明它们。
English: Vertical and horizontal, back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, are all concrete manifestations of the way of yin and yang, and can be distinguished and explained by yin and yang changes.

古文：捭阖者，道之大化。
现代文：而使用捭阖之术使事物转化，正是阴阳之道的关键所在。
English: And the key to the yin and yang is to use the art of magic to transform things.

古文：说之变也，必豫审其变化，吉凶大命系焉。
现代文：游说过程中的每一变化，都出自捭阖之术，所以要预先审知捭阖之术的阴阳变化法则，这是游说能否成功、游说目的能否达到的关键所在。
English: Every change in the lobbying process comes from the art of persuasion, so it is necessary to know in advance the law of yin and yang changes in the art of persuasion. This is the key to whether lobbying can be successful and whether the purpose of lobbying can be achieved.

古文：口者，心之门户也；心者，神之主也。
现代文：口，是表达内心思想的门户；而心灵，是人的精神世界的主宰。
English: The mouth is the gateway for expressing one's inner thoughts, while the mind is the master of one's spiritual world.

古文：志意、喜欲、思虑、智谋，此皆由门户出入，故关之以捭阖，制之以出入。
现代文：人的志向与意愿，喜好与欲求，思念和焦虑，智慧和谋略，都是由口这个门户出入从而表露出来的。所以，应该用捭阖之术来把守自己的口，用开闭之法来调控自己的言谈。
English: People's aspirations and will, preferences and desires, thoughts and anxieties, wisdom and strategy, are all revealed by the entrance and exit of the mouth. Therefore, it is necessary to use the technique of shackling to guard one's mouth, and the method of opening and closing to regulate one's speech.

古文：捭之者，开也，言也，阳也；阖之者，闭也，默也，阴也。
现代文：使用捭术，就是让对方开口，让对方说话，这就是阳之道；使用阖术，就是让对方闭口，让对方沉默，这就是阴之道。
English: The way of yin and yang is to let the other person speak and let the other person speak, and the way of yin and yang is to let the other person shut up and let the other person be silent.

古文：阴阳其和，终始其义。
现代文：懂得了阴阳之道的协调交替使用，就能够懂得 终 和 始 的意义了。
English: If you understand the coordinated use of yin and yang, you will be able to understand the meaning of the end and the beginning.

古文：故言长生、安乐、富贵、尊荣、显名、爱好、财利、得意、喜欲为阳，曰始。故言死亡、忧患、贫贱、苦辱、弃损、亡利、失意、有害、刑戮、诛罚为阴，曰终。
现代文：所以，我们把长生、安乐、富贵、尊荣、显名、爱好、财利、得意、喜欲等归为阳类事物，称作人生向往；把死亡、忧患、贫贱、苦辱、弃损、亡利、失意、有害、刑戮、诛罚等归为阴类事物，称作人生忌讳。
English: Therefore, we classify longevity, well-being, wealth, honor, fame, hobbies, financial gain, pride, and desire as masculine things and call them life yearnings; we classify death, sorrow, poverty, humiliation, loss, loss, disappointment, harmfulness, torture, and punishment as feminine things and call them life taboos.

古文：诸言法阳之类者，皆曰始，言善以始其事；诸言法阴之类者，皆曰终，言恶以终其谋。
现代文：凡是那些遵循、效仿、涉及上述阳类事物的说辞，可以叫作 人生向往型语言 ，也就是说可以用这类美好的语言去说动对方进行某事；凡是那些遵循、效仿、涉及上述阴类事物的说辞，可以叫作 人生忌讳型语言 ，也就是说可以用这类令人厌恶的语言去威胁、警醒对方中止某种计谋。
English: All those words that follow, imitate, and involve the above-mentioned masculine things can be called life aspiration language, that is, you can use this kind of beautiful language to persuade the other party to do something; all those words that follow, imitate, and involve the above-mentioned feminine things can be called life taboo language, that is, you can use this kind of disgusting language to threaten, alert the other party to stop a certain scheme.

古文：捭阖之道，以阴阳试之。
现代文：游说中运用捭阖之术时，先用阴言和阳言去试探对方。
English: When using the art of persuasion in lobbying, first use negative and positive words to test the other party.

古文：故与阳言者依崇高，与阴言者依卑小。以下求小，以高求大。
现代文：由此，与喜欢阳言的人论谈时，以使用涉及上述阳类事物的崇高语言为主；与喜欢阴言的人论谈时，以使用涉及上述阴类事物的卑下语言为主。
English: As a result, when discussing with people who like yang language, they mainly use lofty language involving the above-mentioned yang things; when discussing with people who like yin language, they mainly use lowly language involving the above-mentioned yin things.

古文：由此言之，无所不出，无所不入，无所不可。
现代文：这样，我们就可以用卑下的阴言去打动小人，用崇高的阳言去说服君子。
English: In this way, we can use the lowly words to impress the villain, and the lofty words to convince the gentleman.

古文：可以说人，可以说家，可以说国，可以说天下。
现代文：照此而论，用捭阖之术去游说，就没有探测不出来的真情，就没有不听从我们决策的人，就没有不能说服的对象。
English: On this basis, there is no truth that cannot be detected, no one who does not listen to our decision-making, and no object that cannot be persuaded.

古文：为小无内，为大无外。益损、去就、倍反，皆以阴阳御其事。
现代文：用捭阖之术去游说，可以说动每个普通民众，可以说动每个有封地的大夫，可以说动每个诸侯国的国王，甚至可以说动天下的君主。
English: Using the art of persuasion to lobby can be said to move every ordinary citizen, can be said to move every doctor with a fiefdom, can be said to move the king of every principality, and can even be said to move the monarchs of the world.

古文：阳动而行，阴止而藏；阳动而出，阴隐而入，阳还终阴，阴极反阳。
现代文：若要成就小事，可以小到极限，没有更小的了；若要成就大事，可以大到极限，没有更大的了。
English: If you want to achieve small things, you can be as small as possible, there is nothing smaller; if you want to achieve big things, you can be as big as possible, there is nothing bigger.

古文：以阳动者，德相生也；以阴静者，形相成也。
现代文：所有的裨益或损害、离去与接近、背叛和复归，都是阴阳之道的行为表现，可用阴阳之道加以掌控和驾驭。
English: All benefits or harms, departures and approaches, betrayals and returns, are behavioral manifestations of the yin and yang way, and can be controlled and driven by the yin and yang way.

古文：以阳求阴，苞以德也；以阴结阳，施以力也；阴阳相求，由捭阖也。
现代文：阳以动为特征，故主要表现为进取；阴以静止为特征，故主要表现为闭藏。阳动必然显现出来，阴止必然潜藏进去。
English: Yang is characterized by movement, so it is mainly manifested as advancement; Yin is characterized by stillness, so it is mainly manifested as hiding. Yang movement is bound to appear, and Yin stillness is bound to be hidden.

古文：此天地阴阳之道，而说人之法也，为万事之先，是谓圆方之门户。
现代文：阳发展到极致就成为阴，阴超过了极限就变为阳。用阳去拨动事物，是为了让它按照自身规律发展；用阴去安定事物，是为了让它巩固自己的形态。
English: When yang develops to the extreme, it becomes yin, and when yin exceeds its limit, it becomes yang. To use yang to move things is to let it develop according to its own laws; to use yin to stabilize things is to let it consolidate its form.

