古文：易水出涿郡故安县阎乡西山，易水出西山宽中谷，东径五大夫城南。
现代文：易水发源于泳郡故安县阎乡的西山，易水发源于西山宽中谷，往东流经五大夫城南边。
English: Yi Shui originates from the west mountain of Yan Township, Yuan County, Yong County. Yi Shui originates from the wide middle valley of the west mountain and flows eastward through the south side of Wudaofu City.

古文：并避时乱，隐居此山，故其旧居，世以为五大夫城，即此。《岳赞》云：五王在中，庞葛连续者也。
现代文：从前北平侯王谭，不肯顺从王莽政权，他的儿子王兴生了五个儿子，也都跟他出来避乱，隐居这座山中。世人就把他们的旧居称为五大夫城。潘岳《赞》说：五王在城中，裙带相连，是个大族。
English: Once upon a time, Beiping marquis Tan refused to submit to Wang Mang's regime. His son Wang Xing gave birth to five sons, who also came out with him to escape the turmoil and lived in seclusion in this mountain. The world called their former residence the Five Kings' City. Pan Yue's "Zan" said: The five kings are in the city, their cronies are connected, and they are a large clan.

古文：易水又东，左与子庄溪水合，水北出子庄关，南流径五公城西，屈径其城南。
现代文：易水又东流，左边与子庄溪水汇合。子庄溪水发源于北方的子庄关，往南流经五公城西，拐弯流经城南。
English: The Yishui also flows eastward, merging with the Zizhuang Creek on the left. The Zizhuang Creek water originates from the northern Zizhuang Pass, flows south through the west of Wukong City, and flows through the south of the city.

古文：五公，即王兴之五子也。
现代文：五公，就是王兴的五个儿子。
English: The five princes are the five sons of Wang Xing.

古文：光武即帝位，封为五侯：元才北平侯，益才安憙侯，显才蒲阴侯，仲才新市侯，秀才为唐侯。
现代文：光武帝即位后，封他们为五侯：元才为北平侯，益才为安息侯，显才为蒲阴侯，仲才为新市侯，季才为唐侯―这就是所谓中山五王。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Guangwu, they were given the titles of five princes: Yuan Cai was the prince of Peiping, Yi Cai was the prince of Pan, Xian Cai was the prince of Buyin, Zhong Cai was the prince of Xin City, and Ji Cai was the prince of Tang - these are the so-called Five Kings of Zhongshan.

古文：所谓中山五王也，俗又以五公名居矣。二城并广一里许，俱在冈阜之上，上斜而下方。其水东南入于易水。
现代文：民间又称他们的居地为五公城。五大夫城和五公城方圆都有一里左右，都坐落在小山岗上，上方倾斜，下端方正，溪水往东南注入易水。
English: People also call their place of residence Wukongcheng. Both Wukongcheng and Wufucheng have a radius of about one mile and are located on a small hill. The top is sloping, the bottom is square, and the stream water flows into fresh water to the southeast.

古文：易水又东，右会女思谷水，水出西南女思涧，东北流注于易，谓之三会口。
现代文：易水又东流，右边与女思谷水汇合。女思谷水发源于西南的女思涧，往东北流，注入易水，汇流处称为三会口。
English: The Yishui River flows to the east, and merges with the Niusi Valley Water on the right. The Niusi Valley Water originates from the Niusi Valley in the southwest, flows to the northeast, and is infused with the Yishui River. The confluence is called the Three Junctions.

古文：易水又东届关门城西南，即燕之长城门也。
现代文：易水又往东拐弯流到关门城西南一一就是昔日燕国的长城门，与樊石山水汇合。
English: The easy-flowing water flows eastward to the southwest of the closed city - the Great Wall Gate of the former Yan country - and merges with the rock landscape.

古文：与樊石山水合，水源西出广昌县之樊石山，东流径覆釜山下，东流注于易水。
现代文：樊石山水发源于西方广昌县的樊石山，往东流经覆釜山下，东流注入易水。
English: The Dongseok Mountain Water originates from the Dongseok Mountain in western Gwangchang County, flows eastward through the lower part of Busan, and the eastward flow injects fresh water.

古文：易水又东历燕之长城，又东径渐离城南，盖太子丹馆高渐离处也。
现代文：易水又往东流经燕长城，又往东流经渐离城南，这是燕太子丹设馆安顿高渐离的地方。
English: The Yishui also flows eastward through the Yan Great Wall, and eastward through the south of the city, which is the place where Prince Yan Dan set up a museum.

古文：易水又东径武阳城南，盖易自宽中历武夫关东出，是兼武水之称。故燕之下都，擅武阳之名。
现代文：易水又往东流经武阳城南。因为易水从宽中经武夫关东流而出，于是就兼有武水之称，所以燕国下都也就得了武阳之名了。
English: The Yishui also flows eastward through the south of Wuyang City. Because the Yishui flows from the middle of Guangzhong through the east of Wufu Kanto, it is also known as the Wusui, so the lower part of Yan Province also got the name of Wuyang.

古文：左得濡水枝津故渎。
现代文：易水左边与濡水支流旧－道汇合。
English: The confluence of the old road on the left side of the fresh water and the wet water tributary.

古文：武阳大城东南小城，即故安县之故城也，汉文帝封丞相申屠嘉为侯国。
现代文：武阳大城东南的小城，就是故安县的旧城，汉文帝把该县封给垂相申屠嘉，立为侯国。
English: The small city southeast of the big city of Wuyang is the old city of the old An County. Emperor Han Wenzong gave the county to Dangxiang Shen Tu Jia and established it as a principality.

古文：城东西二里，南北一里半。
现代文：旧城东西二里，南北一里半。
English: The old city is two miles from east to west and one and a half miles from north to south.

古文：高诱云：易水径故安城南城外东流。
现代文：高诱说：易水经故安城南城外往东流。
English: Gao Yu said: The changing water flowed eastward outside the southern part of the former Ancheng.

古文：即斯水也。
现代文：指的就是这支水。
English: It is this water that is referred to.

古文：诱是涿人，事经明证。
现代文：高诱是琢郡人，他的记载是经过明确的查证的。
English: Gao Yu is a native of Taku County, and his records have been clearly verified.

古文：今水被城东南隅，世又谓易水为故安河。
现代文：今天水漫到城的东南角，世人又称易水为故安河。
English: Today, the water has spread to the southeast corner of the city, and the world also calls the easy water the Old Ann River.

古文：武阳，盖燕昭王之所城也，东西二十里，南北十七里。
现代文：武阳城是燕昭王所筑，东西二十里，南北十七里。
English: Wuyang City was built by Yan Zhao Wang. It is 20 miles from east to west and 17 miles from north to south.

古文：故傅逮《述游赋》曰：出北蓟，历良乡，登金台，观武阳，两城辽廓，旧迹冥芒。
现代文：因而傅逮《述游赋》说：出了北蓟，经过良乡，登上金台，眺望武阳，两座城空旷辽阔，旧遗迹渺渺茫茫。
English: Therefore, Fu Fang said in "Recounting the Travels": Out of Beilun, through Liangxiang, onto Jintai, overlooking Wuyang, the two cities are vast, and the old relics are dim.

古文：盖谓是处也。
现代文：赋中写的就是这地方。
English: This is the place written about in Fu.

古文：易水东流而出于范阳。
现代文：易水往东流出范阳。
English: The fresh water flows out of Fanyang to the east.

古文：东过范阳县南，又东过容城县南，易水径范阳县故城南。秦末，张耳、陈余为陈胜略地，燕、赵命蒯通说之，范阳先下是也。
现代文：往东流过范阳县南边，又往东流过容城县南边，易水流经范阳县旧城南边，秦朝末年，张耳、陈余替陈胜攻占燕、赵的土地，派蒯通去游说，首先攻下范阳。
English: It flowed eastward through the south of Fanyang County, and eastward through the south of Rongcheng County, and the easy water flowed through the south of the old city of Fanyang County. At the end of the Qin Dynasty, Zhang Er and Chen Yu occupied the land of Yan and Zhao for Chen Sheng, and sent Yu Tong to lobby, and first conquered Fanyang.

古文：汉景帝中二年，封匈奴降王代为侯国，王莽之顺阴也。
现代文：汉景帝中元二年前，把范阳封给降于汉的匈奴王代，立为侯国，就是王莽时的顺阴。
English: Two years before the middle of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Han Jing gave Fanyang to the Xiongnu Dynasty, which had fallen to the Han Dynasty, and established it as a vassal state. This was Wang Mang's Shunyin.

古文：昔慕容垂之为范阳也，戍之即斯。
现代文：从前慕容垂逃奔到范阳，设兵驻守，就是这地方。
English: Once upon a time, Murong Du fled to Fanyang and stationed soldiers there. This is the place.

古文：意欲图还上京，阻于行旅，造次不获，遂中。
现代文：他本来打算到上京去，因行军途中受阻，仓促间未能如愿。
English: He had originally planned to go to Kyoto, but was prevented from marching and was unable to do so in a hurry.

古文：易水又东与濡水合，水出故安县西北穷独山南谷，东流与源泉水合，水发北溪，东南流注濡水。
现代文：易水又东流，与濡水汇合。濡水发源于故安县西北穷独山的南谷，东流与源泉水汇合，源泉水发源于北溪，往东南流注入濡水。
English: The fresh water also flows eastward and merges with the wet water. The wet water originates from the south valley of the northwest poor mountain of Guo'an County, the east stream merges with the source water, the source water originates from the North Stream, and the southeast stream injects the wet water.

古文：濡水又东南径樊于期馆西，是其授首于荆轲处也。
现代文：濡水又往东南流经樊砖期馆西边，就是樊砖期自刻，把头交给荆柯的地方。
English: The wet water flowed south-east through the west side of the Museum of the Han Dynasty, which is the place where the Han Dynasty carved itself and handed the head to Jing Ke.

古文：濡水又东南流径荆轲馆北，昔燕丹纳田生之言，尊轲上卿，馆之于此。
现代文：濡水又往东南流经荆柯馆北边，昔日燕丹采纳田生的建议，尊封荆柯为上卿，在此处修建馆舍安置他。
English: The wet water also flows southeast through the north side of the Jing Ke Hall. In the past, Yandan adopted Tian Sheng's suggestion to honor Jing Ke as a nobleman and build a hall to house him.

古文：二馆之城，涧曲泉清，山高林茂，风烟披薄，触可栖情，方外之士，尚凭依旧居，取畅林木。
现代文：两座馆舍所在的小城，溪涧曲折，泉水澄清，山高林茂，烟雾缭绕，眺望这景色，真令人心旷神怡；出家的僧道，还栖身于旧地，在山林清静的生活中自得其乐。
English: The small town where the two buildings are located, the meandering streams, the clear spring water, the mountains and forests, the smog, the view of this scenery is really refreshing; the ordained monks still live in the old land and enjoy themselves in the quiet life of the mountains and forests.

古文：濡水又东径武阳城西北，旧堨濡水，枝流南入城径柏冢西，冢垣城侧，即水塘也。
现代文：濡水又往东流经武阳城西北。从前曾拦河筑坝，引出支流往南流入城中，流经柏家西边。墓园的围墙在城旁，有个水塘。
English: The wet water also flows eastward through the northwest of Wuyang City. In the past, the river was dammed to build a dam, and the tributary flowed south into the city and flowed through the west side of the Bai family. The cemetery wall is next to the city, and there is a pond.

古文：四周茔域深广，有若城焉。
现代文：四周是森严庞大的墓地，有如城邑。
English: It is surrounded by a huge, densely wooded graveyard, resembling a town.

古文：其水侧有数陵，坟高壮，望若青丘，询之古老，访之史籍，并无文证，以私情求之，当是燕都之前故坟也，或言燕之坟茔，斯不然矣。其水之故渎南出，屈而东转，又分为二渎。
现代文：濡水旧道往南流出，转向东边分为两条。
English: The old wet-water channel flows out to the south, turns to the east and divides into two.

古文：一水径故安城西，侧城南注易水，夹塘崇峻，邃岸高深。左右百步，有二钓台，参差交峙，迢递相望，更为佳观矣。
现代文：一条流经故安城西，傍着城墙往南流入易水。两边堤高岸深，左右相隔百步，有两座钓台参差对峙，遥遥相望，风景更为秀丽。
English: A stream flows through the west of the former Ancheng, along the city wall to the south and flows into the Yishui River. Both sides of the embankment are high and deep, separated by a hundred paces from left to right, with two jagged fishing platforms facing each other, far away from each other, and the scenery is more beautiful.

古文：其一水东出注金台陂，陂东西六七里，南北五里。侧陂西北有钓台高丈余，方可四十步，陂北十余步有金台，台上东西八十许步，南北如减。
现代文：另一条往东流，注入金台阪，这片破塘东西六七里，南北五里；阪塘西北有钓台，高一丈余，方圆大约四十步，阪塘北岸十余步有个金台，台上东西八十多步，南北稍狭。
English: Another stream flows to the east and flows into Jintaihan, this piece of broken pond is sixty-seven miles from east to west and five miles from north to south; there is a fishing platform in the northwest of Jintang, which is more than one story high and about forty paces in circumference, and there is a gold platform more than ten paces from the north shore of Jintang. There are more than eighty paces from east to west on the platform, and it is slightly narrow from north to south.

古文：北有小金台，台北有兰马台，并悉高数丈，秀峙相对，翼台左右，水流径通，长庑广字，周旋被浦，栋堵咸沦，柱础尚存，是其基构可得而寻访。
现代文：北边有个小金台，台北又有个兰马台，都有几丈高，相对并峙，十分秀丽。台左右两边水流相通，有长庞阔檐，盘回曲折地披覆在水岸上。屋宇墙壁都已倒塌了，但柱础还在，所以建筑的基址和结构还可以看得出来。
English: There is a small gold platform on the north side, and a lantern platform in Taipei, both of which are several meters high, relatively juxtaposed, and very beautiful. The water flows on both sides of the platform, and there are long and wide channels, and the coils are covered with twists and turns on the waterfront. The walls of the building have collapsed, but the pillars are still there, so the foundation and structure of the building can still be seen.

古文：诸耆旧咸言，昭王札宾，广延方士，至于郭隗、乐毅之徒，邹衍、剧辛之俦，宦游历说之民，自远而届者多矣。
现代文：访问老人，都说昭王以礼厚待宾客，广泛招聘四方人才，如郭魄、乐毅、邹衍、剧辛之流，还有那些求官觅职，游说于诸侯之间的人们，都纷纷远道而来。
English: Interviewing the elderly, they all said that King Zhao treated guests with courtesy, extensively recruited talents from the four directions, such as Guo Peng, Le Yi, Xuan Yan, and Yan Xin, as well as those who sought positions and lobbied among the princes, all came from afar.

古文：不欲令诸侯之客，伺隙燕邦，故修连下都馆之南垂，言燕昭创之于前，子丹踵之于后，故雕墙败馆，尚传镌刻之石，虽无经记可凭，察其古迹，似符宿传矣。
现代文：但昭王为防备诸侯的门客到燕国来刺探虚实，所以又修建了下都，把他们安顿在南部边境的馆舍里。老人们还说，昭王开创于前，他的儿子丹又续建于后，所以雕墙破馆之间，还留有镌刻过的残石，虽然没有经籍记载可相印证，但细察这里的古迹，似乎与历来相传的说法颇相符合。
English: However, in order to prevent the courtiers of the princes from coming to Yan Province to investigate the truth, King Zhao also built a lower capital and settled them in a pavilion on the southern border. The old people also said that King Zhao founded it before, and his son Dan continued to build it after, so between the carved wall and the broken pavilion, there are still engraved remnants of stone. Although there is no written record to corroborate this, a closer look at the monuments here seems to be quite consistent with the traditional story.

古文：濡水自堰又东径紫池堡西，屈而北流，又有浑塘沟水注之，水出遒县西白马山南溪中，东南流入濡水。
现代文：濡水从堰坝又往东流经紫池堡以西，转向北流，又有浑塘沟水注入。浑塘沟水发源于遒县西边白马山的南溪，往东南流注入濡水。
English: The wet water flows from the dam to the east through the west of Zi Chicheng and turns to the north, and the muddy ditch water is injected. The muddy ditch water originates from the Nanxi River in Baima Mountain on the west side of Handan County, and the southeastern stream is injected with wet water.

古文：濡水又东至塞口，古累石堰水处也。
现代文：濡水又往东流到塞口，是古时修筑石堰拦水的地方。
English: The wet water then flows eastwards to the dam, where a stone weir was built in ancient times to hold back the water.

古文：濡水旧枝分南入城东大陂，陂方四里，今无水。
现代文：濡水旧分支南流，注入城东大阪。破塘方圆四里，现在已经无水了。
English: The old branch of the south stream of wet water was injected into the city of East Osaka. The pond is four miles in circumference, and now there is no water.

古文：陂内有泉，渊而不流，际池北侧，俗谓圣女泉。
现代文：破塘内有泉水，水深不流，紧邻着水池的北边，俗称圣女泉。
English: There is a spring in the broken pond, the water is deep but does not flow, immediately adjacent to the north side of the pond, commonly known as the Sainte-Geneviève spring.

古文：濡水又东得白杨水口，水出道县西山白杨岭下，东南流入濡水，时人谓之虎眼泉也。
现代文：濡水又东流，在水口接纳了白杨水。白杨水发源于遒县西山的白杨岭下，往东南流入濡水，时人称为虎眼泉。
English: The wet water also flowed to the east, and poplar water was received at the water outlet. Poplar water originated from under the poplar ridge in the west mountain of Handan County, and flowed into the wet water to the southeast. At that time, it was called the Tiger's Eye Spring.

古文：濡水东合檀水，水出遒县西北檀山西南，南流与石泉水会，水出石泉固东南隅，水广二十许步，深三丈。
现代文：濡水东流，与檀水汇合。檀水发源于遒县西北、檀山西南，南流与石泉水汇合。石泉水发源于石泉固东南角，水宽二十来步，深三丈。
English: East stream of wet water merges with sandal water. Sandal water originates in the northwest of Handan County and the southwest of Danshan. South stream merges with stone spring water. Stone spring water originates in the southeastern corner of Shiquan Gu. The water is 20 meters wide and 3 meters deep.

古文：固在众山之内，平川之中，四周绝涧阻水，八丈有余。
现代文：石泉固坐落在群山深处的平川之间，四周有山涧阻隔，涧岸高八丈有余，底部岩石高五丈，岩上又有一层红土，高四丈，陡峭直上，有如墙壁。
English: Shiquangu is located between the Hirakawa River, deep in the mountains. It is surrounded by mountains and ridges. The bank of the river is more than eight meters high, the rock at the bottom is five meters high, and there is a layer of red soil on the rock. It is four meters high and steep straight up, like a wall.

古文：石高五丈，石上赤土，又高一匹，壁立直上，广四十五步，水之不周者，路不容轨，仅通人马，谓之石泉固。
现代文：涧宽四十五步。水不流到的地方，路极狭窄，容不下一辆车子，只有单人独马可以通过，地名叫石泉固。
English: It is forty-five paces wide. Where the water does not flow, the road is extremely narrow and cannot accommodate a car. Only a single person and a horse can pass. The place is called Shiquan Gu.

古文：固上宿有白杨寺，是白杨山神也。
现代文：石泉固上古来就有一座白杨寺，寺庙里供奉的是白杨山神。
English: Since ancient times, there has been a poplar temple in Shiquan Gu. The temple is dedicated to the Poplar Mountain God.

古文：寺侧林木交荫，丛柯隐景，沙门释法澄建刹于其上，更为思玄之胜处也。
现代文：寺旁林木茂密，枝柯交错，连片的绿荫把阳光都遮住了。僧人法澄在上面修建了一座佛寺，就更成为修道的胜地了。
English: The forest next to the temple is thick with trees, branches and shrubs are intertwined, and the continuous green shade blocks out the sun. The monk Fachem built a Buddhist temple on top of it, making it even more of a place of pilgrimage.

古文：其水南流注于檀水，故俗有并沟之称焉。
现代文：水往南流，注入檀水，所以民间有并沟之称。
English: The water flows to the south, injecting sandalwood water, so it is popularly known as the parallel ditch.

古文：其水又东南流，历故安县北而南注濡水。濡水又东南流，于容城县西北大利亭东南合易水而注巨马水也。
现代文：水又往东南流经故安县北边，往南注入濡水；濡水又往东南流，在容城县西北、大利亭东南与易水汇合，注入巨马水。
English: The water flowed to the southeast through the northern part of Goyang County, and the wet water was injected to the south; the wet water flowed to the southeast again, and merged with the easy water in the northwest of Rongcheng County and the southeast of Dali Ting, and the giant horse water was injected.

古文：故《地理志》曰：故安县阎乡，易水所出，至范阳入濡水。
现代文：所以《地理志》说：故安县的阎乡，易水就发源在这里，到范阳注入濡水。
English: Therefore, "Geography" said: In Yan Township of Yuan'an County, fresh water originated here, and wet water was injected into Fanyang.

古文：阚駰亦言是矣，又曰濡水合渠。
现代文：阐胭也是这么说；又说：濡水与渠水汇合。
English: This is also said in the commentary; it is also said that "wet water and canal water converge."

古文：许慎曰：濡水入涞。
现代文：许慎说：濡水注入沫水。
English: Xu Shen said: wet water is injected into the foam.

古文：涞、渠二号，即巨马之异名。
现代文：沫水、渠水这两个称呼都是巨马水的别名。
English: Both of these names, "foam water" and "drain water," are aliases for "giant horse water."

古文：然二易俱出一乡，同入濡水，南濡。
现代文：但两条易水都发源于一乡，一同注入濡水。
English: However, both rivers originate from the same village and are fed with wet water.

古文：北易至涿郡范阳县会北濡，又并乱流入涞，是则易水与诸水互摄通称，东径容城县故城北，浑涛东注，至勃海平舒县与易水合。
现代文：北易水流到琢郡范阳县与北濡水汇合，又一起乱流注入沫水，于是北易水与诸水就都可相互通称了。北易水往东流经容城县老城北边，波涛滚滚地往东流，到勃海郡平舒县与南易水汇合。
English: The Beiyi Water flows to the north of Fanyang County, Taku County, and merges with the Beiyu Water, and together with the turbulent flow, it injects the foam water, so the Beiyi Water and all the waters can be called each other. The Beiyi Water flows eastward through the north of the old city of Rongcheng County, and the waves roll eastward to Pingshu County, Bohai County, where it merges with the Nan Yi Water.

古文：阚駰曰：涿郡西界代之易水。
现代文：阐驰说：琢郡西部与代郡以易水为分界。
English: Yanqi said: The western part of Taku County and Dai County are separated by the Yishui River.

古文：而是水出代郡广昌县东南郎山东北燕王仙台东。
现代文：这条易水是南易水，发源于代郡广昌县东南、郎山东北的燕王仙台东边。
English: This Yishui is Nan Yishui, originating in the southeast of Guangchang County, Dayi County, and the east of Yanwang Sendai in the northeast of Langshan.

古文：台有三峰，甚为崇峻，腾云冠峰，高霞翼岭，岫壑冲深，含烟罩雾，耆旧言：燕昭王求仙处。
现代文：仙台有三座山峰，十分高峻，峰顶上飘着云霞，深谷中笼着烟雾，老人们说这是燕昭王求仙的地方。
English: Sendai has three mountains, very high, with clouds on the peak and smoke in the valley. Old people say that this is the place where Yan Zhao Wang sought immortality.

古文：其东谓之石虎冈，范晔《汉书》云：中山简王焉之窆也。
现代文：仙台的东面称石虎冈。范哗《后汉书》说：这里是中山简王焉墓穴的所在地，葬物非常丰厚，采了琢郡的山石来修筑坟墓。
English: The eastern side of Sendai is called Shikugoka. Fan Gua of "Hou Han Shu" said: This is the location of the tomb of Zhongshan Jian Wangyan. The funeral goods are very rich, and the mountains and rocks of Taku County were used to build the tomb.

古文：厚其葬，采涿郡山石，以树坟茔，陵隧碑兽，并出此山，有所遗二石虎，后人因以名冈。
现代文：墓道上的墓碑和石兽都是用山上的岩石雕成的，还留下两只石虎，因此后人就称为石虎冈。
English: The tombstones and stone animals on the cemetery path were carved from the rock on the mountain, and two stone tigers were also left behind, so later generations were called Stone Tiger Hill.

古文：山之东麓，即泉源所导也，《经》所谓阎乡西山。
现代文：山的东麓，就是泉源所出处，《水经》称为阎乡西山。
English: The eastern foot of the mountain is the source of the spring, which is called Yanxiang Xishan in the "Water Sutra."

古文：其水东流，有毖水南会，浑波同注，俗谓之为雹河。
现代文：水往东流，有毖水往南汇入，二水混合同流，俗称雹河。
English: The water flows to the east, some salty water flows to the south, and the two waters mix and flow together. It is commonly known as the Li River.

古文：司马彪《郡国志》曰，雹水出故安县。
现代文：司马彪《郡国志》说：雹水发源于故安县。
English: Sima Biao, "County National History," said: Surabaya originated in ancient An County.

古文：易水又东径孔山北，山下有钟乳穴，穴出佳乳，采者篝火寻沙，入穴里许，渡一水，潜流通注，其深可涉，于中众穴奇分，令出入者疑迷不知所趣，每于疑路，必有历记，返者乃寻孔以自达矣。上又有大孔，豁达洞开，故以孔山为名也。
现代文：世祖命令耿况去攻打故安西山的贼兵吴耐氢，沿雹水而上十余营，全都击溃，指的就是这条水。易水又往东流经孔山北麓，山下有钟乳溶洞，洞中出产很美的石钟乳。采石钟乳的人打着灯笼去寻觅，入洞约一里，渡过一条潜流的地下河，不太深，人可涉水过去。洞中又奇妙地分出许多石洞，使得出入的人迷失方向，不知该往哪里走；因此在容易迷路的地方，人们一定会留下标记，回来时才能找到出洞的通道。洞顶又有大孔，朝天敞开，所以叫孔山。
English: The founder of the world ordered Geng Fu to attack Wu Nai Hydrogen, the thief-soldier of the former Anxi Mountain, and routed more than ten battalions along the Surabaya River, referring to this water. The fresh water also flowed eastward through the northern foot of Kongshan Mountain. There is a bell-melting cave under the mountain, and the cave produces very beautiful stone bell-mills. The people who quarried the stone bell-mills searched with lanterns. They went into the cave for about one mile and crossed an underground river that was not too deep, so people could wade through it. Many stone caves were strangely separated in the cave,

古文：其水又东径西故安城南，即阎乡城也。
现代文：易水又往东流经西故安城南，就是阎乡城；流过送荆隆北边。
English: The Yishui also flows eastward through the south of Xi Xuancheng, that is, Yanxiangcheng; it flows through the north side of Zhaozhonglong.

古文：历送荆陉北，耆旧云：燕丹饯荆轲于此，因而名焉，世代已远，非所详也。
现代文：老人们说：燕丹就在这里为荆柯饯行，因而得名，但世代久远，也不大弄得清楚了。
English: The old people said: Yandan is here for Jing Ke Xing, hence the name, but generations have passed, and it is not very clear.

古文：遗名旧传，不容不诠，庶广后人传闻之听。
现代文：不过对从前留下的地名和传闻，也不得不作此说明，以便让后人扩大见闻。
English: However, for the place names and rumors left behind in the past, it is also necessary to make this explanation in order to let future generations expand their knowledge.

古文：易水又东流屈径长城西，又东流南径武隧县南，新城县北。
现代文：易水又东流，转弯绕经长城西边，又东流，往南流经武隧一县以南、新城县以北。
English: The Yishui also flows eastward, turning around the west side of the Great Wall, and flows eastward again, flowing southward south of Wuchong County and north of Xincheng County.

古文：《史记》曰：赵将李牧伐燕，取武隧方城是也。
现代文：《史记》说：赵国大将李牧攻打燕国，占领了武隧、方城，就指这两座城。
English: "History" said: Zhao's general Li Mu attacked Yan's country and occupied Wuchang and Fangcheng, referring to these two cities.

古文：俗又谓是水为武隧津，津北对长城门，谓之汾门。
现代文：民间又把这条水叫武隧津。水北朝着长城门，称为汾门。
English: The people also call this water the Wuchongjin. The water north of the Great Wall Gate is called the Yamen.

古文：《史记。赵世家》云：孝成王十九年，赵与燕易土，以龙兑，汾门与燕，燕以葛城，武阳与赵。
现代文：《史记•赵世家》说：孝成王十九年前，赵国与燕国交换土地，把龙兑、汾门给燕，燕则把葛城、武阳给赵。
English: "History of the Zhao Family" says: Nineteen years before the reign of King Xiaocheng, Zhao State and Yan State exchanged land, giving Longdui and Qimen to Yan, while Yan gave Gecheng and Wuyang to Zhao.

古文：即此也。亦曰汾水门，又谓之梁门矣。
现代文：汾门也叫汾水门，又称梁门。
English: The gate is also known as the Water Gate and the Beam Gate.

古文：易水东分为梁门陂，易水又东，梁门陂水注之，水上承易水于梁门，东入长城，东北入陂。
现代文：易水往东分支流出，积成梁门破；易水又东流，梁门破水注入。这条水上口在梁门承接易水，往东流入长城，往东北流注入破中。
English: The fresh water flows out of the eastern branch and accumulates in the Liangmen breach; the fresh water also flows to the east, and the Liangmen breach water is injected. This water outlet receives the fresh water at the Liangmen, flows into the Great Wall to the east, and injects it into the breach in the northeast.

古文：陂水北接范阳陂，陂在范阳城西十里，方十五里，俗亦谓之为盐台陂。
现代文：破水在北方承接范阳破，这片破塘在范阳城西十里，方圆十五里，民间又称为盐台破。
English: In the north, the breakwater succeeds the Fanyang breakwater. This piece of broken pond is ten miles west of Fanyang City, with a circumference of fifteen miles. It is also known as the Yantai breakwater.

古文：陂水南通梁门淀，方三里，淀水东南流，出长城注易，谓之范水，易水自下，有范水通目。
现代文：阪水南通梁门淀，梁门淀方圆三里。淀水往东南流，出了长城，注入易水，称为范水。易水从这里起，下流通称为范水。
English: The Hanshui South Stream flows through Liangmen Yodo, and Liangmen Yodo has a circumference of three miles. Yodo water flows to the southeast, out of the Great Wall, and is injected with fresh water, which is called Fan water. Fresh water from here onward is called Fan water.

古文：又东径范阳县故城南，即应劭所谓范水之阳也。
现代文：又往东流经范阳县老城南边，就是应肋所说的范水之阳。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern side of the old city of Fanyang County, which is what Yingli called the sun of Fanyang.

古文：易水又东径樊舆县故城北。
现代文：易水又往东流经樊舆县老城北边。
English: The Yishui River flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Niu County.

古文：汉武帝元朔五年，封中山靖王子刘条为侯国，王莽更名握符矣。
现代文：汉武帝元朔五年前，把樊舆封给中山靖王的儿子刘条，立为侯国。王莽改名为握符。
English: Five years ago, Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo gave the imperial seal to Liu Jie, the son of King Zhongshan Jing, and established him as a vassal state. Wang Mang changed his name to Hanzhu.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：北新城县东二十里有樊舆亭，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：北新城县以东二十里有樊舆亭，是个旧县。
English: "Geography and Customs" said: "There are more than 20 pagodas in the east of Beixincheng County, which is an old county."

古文：易水又东径容城县故城南，汉高帝六年，封赵将夜于深泽，景帝中三年，以封匈奴降王唯徐卢于容城，皆为侯国，王莽更名深泽也。
现代文：易水又往东流经容城县老城南。汉高帝六年前，封赵将夜于深泽；景帝中元三年前，把降于汉的匈奴王唯徐卢封于容城，都是侯国。王莽改名为深泽。
English: The Yishui River also flows eastward through the southern part of Laocheng, Rongcheng County. Six years before the Han Emperor Gao, Zhao Zhaozhou was enthroned in Fuzhou; three years before the middle of the reign of Emperor Jing, the Hun King Xu Lu was enthroned in Rongcheng. Both were vassal states. Wang Mang changed his name to Fuzhou.

古文：易水又东，埿水注之，水上承二陂于容城县东南，谓之大埿淀、小埿淀。
现代文：易水又往东流，堡水注入。坚水上流，在容城县东南承接两个破塘，称为大坚淀和小坚淀。
English: The hard water flows upstream, connecting two broken ponds in the southeast of Rongcheng County, known as the Big Jianyong and the Small Jianyong.

古文：其水南流注易水，谓之埿洞口，水侧有浑埿城，易水径其南，东合滱水。
现代文：水往南流，注入易水，汇流处叫坚洞口。水边有浑堡城，易水流经城南，往东与流水汇合。
English: The water flows southward, injecting fresh water, and the confluence is called Jiandongkou. There is Hunburg City on the water's edge, and the fresh water flows through the south of the city and merges with the flowing water to the east.

古文：故桑钦曰：易水出北新城西北，东入滱，自下滱，易互受通称矣。
现代文：所以桑饮说：易水发源于北新城西北，东流注入流水。从此以下，流水与易水都可通称了。
English: Therefore, the mulberry drink said: the fresh water originates from the northwest of Beixincheng, and the east stream is injected into the running water. From now on, the running water and the fresh water can be commonly known.

古文：易水又东径易京南。
现代文：易水又往东流经易京以南。
English: The Yishui also flows eastward through the south of Yijing.

古文：汉末，公孙瓒害刘虞于蓟下，时童谣云：燕南垂，赵北际，惟有此中可避世。
现代文：汉朝末年，公孙攒在蓟下杀害了刘虞。当时童谣说：燕的南疆，赵的北地，唯有这里可避乱世。
English: In the last years of the Han Dynasty, Gongsun Gan killed Liu Yu at the instigation of Gongsun Gan. At that time, the nursery rhyme said: Yan's southern region, Zhao's northern region, only here can escape the turbulent world.

古文：瓒以易地当之，故自蓟徙临易水，谓之易京城，在易城西四五里。
现代文：公孙攒以为这地方就是易水一带，所以从蓟迁到易水边，把他所驻的城称为易京城，在易城以西四五里。
English: Gwangsun thought that this place was the area around Yishui, so he moved from Handan to the edge of Yishui and called the city where he was stationed Yijing, four or five miles west of Yicheng.

古文：赵建武四年，石虎自辽西南达易京，以京障至固，令二万人废坏之。
现代文：后赵建武四年，石虎从辽西南下，到了易京，看到易京城墙极其坚固，就派了二万人把它破坏了。
English: Four years after Zhao Jianwu, Shihu came down from southwest Liaoning to Yijing. Seeing that the city wall of Yijing was extremely strong, he sent twenty thousand people to destroy it.

古文：今者，城壁夷平，其楼基尚存，犹高一匹，余基上有井，世名易京楼，即瓒所保也。
现代文：现在城墙已经毁为平地，但城楼基址还在，高度还有四丈多。废址上有一口井，世人称这座城楼为易京楼，城就是公孙攒所据守的易京城。
English: Now the city wall has been destroyed into flat land, but the foundation of the city tower is still there, still more than four stories high. There is a well on the waste site, the world calls this city tower the Yijing Tower, and the city is the Yijing City defended by Gongsun.

古文：故瓒《与子书》云：袁氏之攻，状若鬼神，冲梯舞于楼上，鼓角鸣于地中。
现代文：所以公孙攒给他儿子的信中说：袁氏攻城时，就像鬼神一样，冲梯在城楼上乱舞，鼓角在地上齐鸣，说的就是这里的城楼。
English: Therefore, Gongsun Zuo said in a letter to his son: When the Yuan Dynasty attacked the city, like ghosts and gods, the rushing ladders danced wildly on the castle tower, and the drums sounded in unison on the ground. This is the castle tower.

古文：即此楼也。
现代文：易水又往东流经易县老城南。
English: The Yishui also flows eastward through the old south of Yixian County.

古文：易水又东径易县故城南，昔燕文公徙易，即此城也。阚駰称太子丹遣荆轲刺秦王，与宾客知谋者，祖道于易水上。
现代文：从前燕文公迁到易县，就是这座城。阐胭说：太子丹派荆柯去刺秦王，与知道这一密谋的宾客在易水上给他饯行。
English: It was this city that Yan Wenkong moved to in Yi County in the past. Yan Yan said: Prince Dan sent Jing Ke to assassinate King Qin, and the guests who knew about this conspiracy gave him a ride on the Yi River.

古文：《燕丹子》称，荆轲入秦，太子与知谋者，皆素衣冠送之于易水之上，荆轲起为寿，歌曰：风萧萧兮易水寒，壮士一去兮不复还。
现代文：《燕丹子》说：荆柯动身到秦国去时，太子和知道密谋的人都穿了白衣，戴了白帽，在易水上给他送行。荆柯起身向他敬酒，唱道：风萧萧兮易水寒，壮士一去兮不复还！
English: "Yan Danzi" said: When Jing Ke set out for Qin, the prince and those who knew about the conspiracy wore white clothes and white hats to see him off on the water. Jing Ke got up and toasted him, singing: The wind is cold, the water is cold, the strong man is gone, and he will not return!

古文：高渐离击筑，宋如意和之，为壮声，士发皆冲冠；为哀声，士皆流涕。
现代文：高渐离击筑，宋如意伴唱，唱到悲壮时，人们激动得头发直竖，把帽子都顶了起来；唱到凄哀时，人们都不禁涕泪纷纷。
English: Gao gradually left the building, Song Ruyi accompanied the singing, when singing to the tragic, people were so excited that their hair stood straight up and their hats were raised; when singing to the sad, people couldn't help but shed tears.

古文：疑于此也。
现代文：这次壮行处可能就是在这里。
English: This send-off might just be it.

古文：余按遗传旧迹，多在武阳，似不饯此也。
现代文：我按古时留一下的遗迹认为，壮行处大多是在武阳，似乎不会在这里。
English: According to the relics left by the ancients, I believe that most of the emissaries are in Wuyang, but it does not seem to be here.

古文：汉景帝中三年，封匈奴降王仆为侯国也。
现代文：汉景帝中元三年前，把易县封给降于汉的匈奴王仆继，立为侯国。
English: Three years before the middle of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Han Jing gave the fief of Yi County to the Xiongnu King Puji, who had been reduced to Han, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：又东过安次县南，易水径县南，鄚县故城北，东至文安县与滹沱合。
现代文：又往东流过安次县南边，易水流经安次县南边、郭县旧城北边，往东流到文安县，与淳沱河汇合。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Anji County. The Yishui River flows through the southern part of Anji County and the northern part of the old city of Guo County, flows eastward to Wen'an County, and merges with the Chunyu River.

古文：正谓此水也。是以班固、阚駰之徒，咸以斯水谓之南易。
现代文：《史记》载，苏秦说：燕长城以北，易水以南，指的就是这条水。所以班固、阐驯等人都把这条水叫南易水。
English: According to "Histories," Su Qin Rong said: "North of the Yan Great Wall, south of Yishui, refers to this water. Therefore, Ban Gu, Ying Jie and others call this water Nan Yishui.

古文：又东过泉州县南，东入于海。
现代文：又往东流过泉州县南边，往东注人大海。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Quanzhou County and flows eastward into the sea.

古文：《经》书水之所历，沿次注海也。
现代文：《水经》记载易水依次所经地方，一路流去，注入大海。
English: "Water Sutra" records that the fresh water flows to the places it passes in turn, and flows all the way to the sea.

古文：滱水出代郡灵丘县高氏山，即沤夷之水也，出县西北高氏山。
现代文：滱水发源于代郡灵丘县高氏山，滱水就是沤夷之水，发源于灵丘县西北的高氏山。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Gaoshan Mountain in Lingqiu County, Dayi County. Surabaya's water is the water of the Yi people and originates from Gaoshan Mountain in the northwest of Lingqiu County.

古文：《山海经》曰：高氏之山，滱水出焉，东流注于河者也。
现代文：《山海经》说：高氏之山，流水发源在这里，东流注入河水。
English: "Shanhai Jing" said: Gao's mountain, the source of flowing water is here, and the east stream is injected into the river.

古文：其水东南流，山上有石铭，题言冀州北界，故世谓之石铭陉也。
现代文：滱水往东南流，山上有摩崖石刻，题着冀州北界四字，因此人们称这里为石铭隆。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast, and there are rock carvings on the cliff on the mountain, inscribed with the four characters of the northern boundary of Jizhou, so people call it Shi Minglong.

古文：其水又南径候塘，川名也。
现代文：沱水又往南流经侯塘，这是个川原名；又往东流，与温泉水汇合。
English: Surabaya water flows southward through Houtang, which is the original name of the river; it also flows eastward, merging with hot spring water.

古文：又东合温泉水，水出西北暄谷，其水温热若汤，能愈百疾，故世谓之温泉焉。
现代文：温泉水发源于西北的暄谷，源头的水温热如汤，入水沐浴，能治愈百病，因此人们称为温泉。
English: The hot spring water originates from Shibuya in the northwest. The water temperature at the source is as hot as soup. Bathing in the water can cure all kinds of diseases, so people call it a hot spring.

古文：东南流径兴豆亭北，亭在南原上，敧倾而不正，故世以敧城目之。
现代文：温泉水往东南流经兴豆亭北面。兴豆亭在南原上，亭身倾斜不正，因此世人把它称为敲城。
English: The hot spring water flows to the southeast through the northern side of Xingdouting. Xingdouting is on the southern plain, and the pavilion is tilted irregularly, so the world calls it Knock City.

古文：水自原东南注于滱。
现代文：水从南原往东南流，注入流水。
English: Water flows from the southern plains to the southeast, injecting running water.

古文：滱水又东，莎泉水注之，水导源莎泉南流，水侧有莎泉亭，东南入于滱水。
现代文：施水又东流，莎泉水注入。这条水发源于莎泉，往南流，水旁有莎泉亭；往东南流注入浓水。
English: This water originates from the Xaquan Spring and flows southwards, with the Xaquan Pavilion next to the water; the south-eastern stream is filled with thick water.

古文：滱水又东径灵丘县故城南。应劭曰：赵武灵王葬其东南二十里，故县氏之。
现代文：流水又往东流经灵丘县旧城南，应肋说：赵武灵王葬在旧城东南二十里，所以取名灵丘县。
English: The water flowed eastward through the south of the old city of Lingqiu County, and it was said: Zhao Wuling Wang was buried twenty miles southeast of the old city, so it was named Lingqiu County.

古文：县，古属代，汉灵帝光和元年，中山相臧昊上请别属也。
现代文：灵丘县古时属于代郡，汉灵帝光和元年，中山相藏昊上奏朝廷，请求把该县划归别郡。
English: In ancient times, Lingqiu County belonged to Dai County. In the first year of Emperor Guangwu's reign, Zhongshan Sanzang Hao petitioned the imperial court to transfer the county to another county.

古文：瓒注《地理志》曰：灵丘之号，在武灵王之前矣。
现代文：薛攒注《地理志》说：灵丘县名称在赵武灵王前就有了。
English: Xue Nanju of "Geography" said: Lingqiu County was named before King Zhao Wuling.

古文：又按司马迁《史记》，赵敬侯九年，败齐于灵丘，则名不因武灵王事，如瓒《注》。
现代文：又据司马迁《史记》：赵敬侯九年前，在灵丘打败了齐军。这样看来，灵丘这地名并不是由赵武灵王而来的。
English: According to Sima Qian's "History": Zhao Jinghou defeated the Qi army in Lingqiu nine years ago. It seems that the name of Lingqiu did not come from King Zhao Wuling.

古文：流水自县南流入峡，谓之隘门，设隘于峡，以讥禁行旅。
现代文：这与薛攒《注》所说一致。流水从灵丘县往南流入山峡，峡口称为隘门，那里设了关隘，用来稽查过往行人。
English: This is consistent with what Xue Nan "Note" said. Flowing water from Lingqiu County flows south into the gorge. The gorge is called the narrow gate, where a barrier is set up to inspect passing pedestrians.

古文：历南山，高峰隐天，深溪埒谷，其水沿涧西转，径御射台南，台在北阜上，台南有御射石碑，南则秀嶂分霄，层崖刺天，积石之峻，壁立直上， 车驾沿溯，每出是所游艺焉。
现代文：滱水流经南山，这里高峰遮天，深溪沿着峡谷流下。沱水沿着山涧向西转，流经御射台南边。台在北面的山岗上，台南有一块御射石碑。水南奇峰高入云霄，层崖峭壁，直刺蓝天。山石险峻，壁立直上。皇上的车驾常沿河来来往往，到这里游乐和习射。
English: Surabaya water flows through Nanshan, where the peak blocks the sky, and the deep stream flows down the canyon. Surabaya water turns west along the ridge and flows through the south side of the shooting platform. The platform is on the hill to the north, and there is a shooting stone monument in Tainan. Surabaya's strange peak soars into the clouds, cliffs and cliffs, and pierces the blue sky. The rock is precipitous, and the wall stands straight up. The emperor's car often comes and goes along the river, and he comes here to play and practice shooting.

古文：滱水西流，又南转东屈径北海王详之石碣南，御射碑石柱北而南流也。
现代文：滱水往西流，又向南转，往东弯，流经北海王详石竭南、御射碑石柱北，然后往南流去。
English: The Surabaya water flows westward, turns southward, and curves eastward, flowing through the southern part of the North Sea King Jiao Stone and the northern part of the Ocheibi Stone Column, and then flows southward.

古文：东南过广昌县南，滱水东径嘉牙川，有一水南来注之，水出恒山北麓，稚川三合，径嘉牙亭东而北流，注于滱水。
现代文：往东南流过广昌县南边，滱水往东流经嘉牙川，有一条水从南边流来注入。这条水发源于恒山北麓，由三条小水流汇合而成，流经嘉牙亭东，然后转向北流，注入滱水。
English: It flows to the southeast through the south of Guangchang County, and the Surabaya water flows to the east through the Jiaga River, and a stream of water is injected from the south. This water originates from the northern foot of Hengshan Mountain, is formed by the confluence of three small streams, flows through the east of Jiaga Ting, and then turns to the north stream and injects Surabaya water.

古文：水之北山，行即广昌县界。
现代文：滱水北岸从山路过去，就是广昌县界。
English: The northern shore of Surabaya, past the mountain road, is the border of Guangchang County.

古文：滱水又东径倒马关，关山险隘，最为深峭，势均诗人高冈之病良马，傅险之困行轩，故关受其名焉。
现代文：滱水又往东流经倒马关，关口极深极远。诗人咏叹高冈崔巍，使良马疲惫不堪；傅岩峻险，使行车受阻不前；这里的山势也与此相仿，因而就有倒马关之名了。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the inverted horse pass, the pass is very deep and far away. The poet laments Gao Gang Cui Yao, which makes the good horse tired; Fuyan precipitous, which makes the driving blocked; the mountain here is also similar to this, so there is the name of the inverted horse pass.

古文：关水出西南长溪下，东北历关注滱。
现代文：关水发源于西南的长溪下，往东北流经此关，注入滱水。
English: The Guan River originates in the southwest under the Changxi River, flows through the Guan River to the northeast, and is fed by the Bohai River.

古文：滱水南，山上起御坐于松园，建祗洹于东圃。东北二面，岫嶂高深，霞峰隐日，水望澄明。
现代文：滱水南边山上的松园里，建有帝王的御座，在东圃造了一所佛寺；东北两面，高峰深谷连绵不绝，高入云霞的山峰，荫天蔽日，山间流积的水潭清澈见底，深渊也藏不住鱼鳖。
English: In the pine grove on the mountain south of Surabaya, the emperor's throne was built, and a Buddhist temple was built in the east garden; in the northeast, the peaks and valleys are continuous, the peaks are high into the clouds, the shadow of the sky covers the sun, the ponds flowing between the mountains are clear to the bottom, and the abyss cannot hide the fish bait.

古文：渊无潜甲，行李所径，鲜不徘徊忘返矣。又东南过中山上曲阳县北，恒水从西来注之。
现代文：行旅途经此处，无不留连忘返。又往东南流过中山郡上曲阳县北边，恒水从西方流来注人。
English: The journey passes through here, leaving no stone unturned. It also flows southeast through the north of Shangquyang County, Zhongshan County, and Hengshui flows from the west to inject people.

古文：其水东北流，注于滱水。
现代文：两岭溪水往东北流，注入滱水。
English: The water of the two ridge streams flows to the northeast and is injected into the Bohai River.

古文：又东，左合悬水，水出山原岫盘谷，轻湍浚下，分石飞悬，一匹有余，直灌山际，白波奋流，自成潭渚。
现代文：浓水又往东流，在左边与悬水汇合。悬水发源于山原帕盘谷，轻流急下，在悬崖间飞泻成一挂瀑布，高四丈余，水从山边直灌下来，白浪汹涌，积成深潭。
English: The heavy water flows eastward again, and merges with the suspended water on the left. The suspended water originates in the mountain plain of the Papan Valley, and the light current rushes down, flying down between the cliffs into a waterfall, which is more than four meters high, the water is poured straight down from the mountainside, the white waves are turbulent, and it accumulates into a deep pool.

古文：其水东南流，扬湍注于滱。
现代文：悬水往东南流，扬起急流，注入滱水。
English: Suspended water flows to the southeast, raising rapids and injecting turbid water.

古文：滱水又东流历鸿山，世谓是处为鸿头，疑即《晋书地道记》所谓鸿上关者也。
现代文：滱水又往东流经鸿山，世人把这里称为鸿头，可能就是《晋书•地道记》所说的鸿上关。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through Hongshan, and the world calls this place Hongtou, which may be the Hongshan Pass mentioned in the "Jinshu•Jindou Ji."

古文：关尉治北平而画塞于望都东北，去北平不远，兼县土所极也。
现代文：关尉的治所在北平，却把疆界划到望都东北，距北平不远，县境辖地也到这里为止了。
English: Guanfei's jurisdiction is located in Beiping, but the boundary is drawn to the northeast of Wangdu, not far from Beiping, and the county's jurisdiction ends here.

古文：滱水于是，左纳鸿上水，水出西北近溪，东南流注于滱水也。
现代文：滱水在此从左边接纳了鸿上水，这条水发源于西北近溪，往东南流注入滱水。
English: Here, Surabaya Water receives Honjo Water from the left. This water originates from the northwest near the creek and flows into Surabaya Water from the southeast.

古文：又东过唐县南。
现代文：又往东流过唐县南边，
English: and flowed eastward through the southern part of Tang County,

古文：滱水又东径左人城南。
现代文：滱水又往东流经左人城南。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the south of Zuoren.

古文：应劭曰：左人城在唐县西北四十里。
现代文：应肋说：左人城在唐县西北四十里。
English: Ying Li said: Zuorencheng is forty miles northwest of Tang County.

古文：城内有小山，在城西侧而锐上，若委粟焉，疑即《地道记》所云望都县有委粟关也。
现代文：县里有雹水，也有人称为唐水。唐水发源于中山城以西偏北处，城内有一座小山，坐落在城西侧，山形尖削耸立，有如一堆积粟。《地道记》所说的望都县有委粟关，可能就指这里。
English: In the county, there is Surabaya water, also known as Tang water. Tang water originates from the north-west of Zhongshan City. There is a hill in the city, located on the west side of the city. The mountain shape is pointed and stands like a pile of poppies. The "Historical Record" says that there is a committee for poppy cultivation in Wangdu County, which may refer to this place.

古文：俗以山在邑中，故亦谓之中山城；以城中有唐水，因复谓之为广唐城也。
现代文：因为山在城中，所以民间又称此城为中山城，又因城中有唐水，所以又称城为广唐城。
English: Because the mountain is in the city, the people also call this city Zhongshan City, and because there is Tang water in the city, the city is also called Guang Tang City.

古文：《中山记》以为中人城，又以为鼓聚，殊为乖谬矣。
现代文：《中山记》称为中人城，又称鼓聚，这实在是极大的错误。
English: "Zhongshan Ji" is called Zhongren City, also known as Drum Gathering, which is really a great mistake.

古文：言城中有山，故曰中山也，中山郡治。
现代文：又说城中有山，所以称为中山，是中山郡的治所。
English: It is also said that there is a mountain in the city, so it is called Zhongshan. It is the seat of Zhongshan County.

古文：京相璠曰：今中山望都东二十里有故中人城。
现代文：京相潘说：今天中山望都以东二十里有旧中人城。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: Today, there is the old Zhongren Town 20 kilometers east of Zhongshan Bodu.

古文：望都城东有一城名尧姑城，本无中人之传，璠或以为中人，所未详也。
现代文：望都城东有一座城叫尧姑城。本来没有流传过中人城之名，京相潘却以为叫中人城，不知到底有何依据。
English: To the east of the capital city, there is a city called Shugu City. Originally, the name Zhongren City had not been spread, but Beijing Xiangpan thought it was called Zhongren City. I don't know what the basis is.

古文：《中山记》所言中人者，城东去望都故城十余里，二十里则减，但苦其不东，观夫异说，咸为爽矣。
现代文：《中山记》所说的中人城，城东距望都旧城十余里，二十里则不到，但却不在望都以东。纵观各种木同说法，都有错误的地方。
English: Zhongren Town, mentioned in "Zhongshan Ji," is more than ten miles east of the old town of Wangdu, and less than twenty miles, but it is not east of Wangdu. Looking at all kinds of similar sayings, there are mistakes.

古文：今此城于卢奴城北如西六十里。城之西北，泉源所导，西径郎山北，郎、唐音读近，实兼唐水之传。
现代文：今天这座城在卢奴城北偏西六十里，城的西北是源头所出处，往西流经郎山以北，郎、唐读音相近，雹水兼有唐水之称，实际上就是由此而来的。
English: Today, the city is located sixty miles north-west of Lunu City. The source is in the northwest of the city. It flows westward to the north of Langshan. The pronunciation of Lang and Tang is similar. The water is also known as Tang water, which is actually where it comes from.

古文：西流历左人亭注滱水。
现代文：唐水往西流经左人亭，注入滱水。
English: The Tang water flows westward through the Zuoren Pavilion and is infused with the Sui water.

古文：滱水又东，左会一水，水出中山城北郎阜下，亦谓之唐水也。
现代文：滱水又往东流，在左边汇合了一条水，这条水发源于中山城北边的郎阜下，也称唐水。
English: The Surabaya water flows eastward again, and on the left a stream of water comes together. This water originates from Langfushia on the north side of Zhongshan City, and is also known as the Tang water.

古文：然于城非在西，俗又名之为雹水，又兼二名焉。
现代文：但此水并不在城的西边，民间也称雹水，这条水又兼有两个名称了，往西南流，注入滱水。
English: However, this water is not on the west side of the city. The people also call it Surabaya water. This water also has two names. It flows to the southwest and is infused with Surabaya water.

古文：西南流入滱，并所未详，盖传疑耳。
现代文：这些情况都不大清楚，无非录以存疑罢了。
English: None of this is very clear, and it is doubtful that this is the case.

古文：滱水又东，恒水从西来注之。自下滱水兼纳恒川之通称焉。
现代文：滱水又往东流，恒水从西方流来注入，从这里开始到下游，沱水又兼有恒川的通称了。
English: Surabaya's water flows eastward, and Hengshui's water flows in from the west. From here it begins to flow downstream, and Surabaya also has the common name of Hengchuan.

古文：即《禹贡》所谓恒、卫既从也。
现代文：《禹贡》所说的恒水、卫水都已疏导入海，这里的恒水就指这条水。
English: The Hengshui and Weishui mentioned in "Yugong" have been channeled into the sea, and the Hengshui here refers to this water.

古文：滱水又东，右苞马溺水，水出上曲阳城东北马溺山，东北流径伏亭。
现代文：滱水又往东流，在右边接纳了马溺水。马溺水发源于上曲阳城东北的马溺山，往东北流经伏亭。
English: Surabaya also flows eastwards, receiving Ma Dongdang on the right. Ma Dongdang originates from Ma Dongdang Mountain in the north-east of Shangquyang City, and flows north-east through Futing.

古文：《晋书地道记》曰：望都县有马溺关。
现代文：《晋书•地道记》说：望都县有个马溺关。
English: "Jinshu•Jindo Ji" said: There is a horse-drowning pass in Bodu County.

古文：又东南流，胡泉水注之，水首受胡泉，径上曲阳县南，又东径平乐亭北，左会长星川，东南径卢奴城南，又东北，川渠之左有张氏墓，冢有汉土谷太守议郎张平仲碑，光和中立。川渠又东北合滱水，水有穷通，不常津注。
现代文：《中山记》说：八渡、马溺，都是山弯里的险要之处，两个关口地势相接，说不定此城就是当年关尉的治所。但异名的由来却不清楚。马溺水又往东流注入滚水。惋水又往东流经中人亭南，《春秋左传》：昭公十三年立为王国，王莽改名为常山。北魏皇始二年立。长星川又往东北流，与沱水汇合，此渠有时无水，有时通水，不是长流不断的。
English: "Zhongshan Ji" said: Hadu and Ma Dong are both dangerous places in the mountain bend. The two checkpoints are contiguous, and it may be that this city was the governor's office that year. However, the origin of the different name is unclear. Ma Dong also flows eastward into the rolling water. The rushing water also flows eastward through the south of Zhongren Ting. "Chunqiu Zuo Chuan": Zhaogong was established as a kingdom in 133, and Wang Mang was renamed Changshan. It was established in the second year of the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Changxing River also flows to the northeast, merging with the rushing water.

古文：又东过安憙县南，县，故安险也。
现代文：又往东流过安憙县南边，安息县过去叫安险县。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Anhui County, which used to be called Anjiang County.

古文：其地临险，有井涂之难，汉武帝元朔五年，封中山靖王子刘应为侯国，王莽更名宁险，汉章帝改曰安憙，《中山记》曰：县在唐水之曲，山高岸险，故曰安险；邑丰民安，改曰安憙。
现代文：这里地势险恶，有如井隆、三涂那样的险道。汉武帝元朔五年前，把这地方封给中山靖王的儿子刘应，立为侯国；王莽改名为宁险，汉章帝又改为安息。《中山记》说：县在唐水的水湾上，山高岸险，因而称为安险；以后城富民安，改为安息。
English: The terrain here is treacherous, with dangerous roads such as Jinglong and Sanpu. Five years ago, Emperor Hanwu granted this place to Liu Ying, the son of King Zhongshan Jing, and established it as a vassal state; Wang Mang changed his name to Ningyuan, and Emperor Hanzhang changed it to Ren'an. "Zhongshan Ji" said: The county is on the bay of Tangshui, with mountainous and coastal risks, so it is called Ren'an. Later, it was renamed Chengfu Min'an and then Ren'an.

古文：秦氏建元中，唐水泛涨，高岸崩颓，城角之下有大积木，交横如梁住焉。
现代文：前秦建元年间，唐水泛涨，高岸崩塌，城角下有成堆的大木材，纵横交错，有如梁柱。
English: During the pre-Qin Jianyuan period, the Tang water surged, the high bank collapsed, and there were piles of large timber under the city corner, criss-crossing, like beams and columns.

古文：后燕之初，此木尚在，未知所从。
现代文：后燕初年，这些木材还在，但不知是哪里来的。
English: In the first year of Houyan, this wood was still there, but I don't know where it came from.

古文：余考记稽疑，盖城地当初，山水渀荡，漂沦巨栰，阜积于斯，沙息壤加，渐以成地，板筑既兴，物固能久耳。
现代文：我查阅过从前的记载，想弄清这个间题，大概当初这里发过山洪，漂下大木筏，堆在这地方，后来沙土淤积，变成了陆地，又兴工筑起城来。因为木材埋在地下，所以能经久不腐。
English: I have looked into the records of the past to find out the answer to this question. Presumably, there was a flash flood here at the beginning, large logs floated down and piled up in this place. Later, the sand was silted up, turned into land, and the city was built. Because the wood is buried under the ground, it can last without rotting.

古文：滱水又东径乡城北，旧卢奴之乡也。
现代文：滱水又往东流经乡城北边，这里从前是卢奴县的一个乡。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward through the north side of the township, which was once a township in Lunu County.

古文：《中山记》曰：卢奴有三乡，斯其一焉，后隶安吝。
现代文：《中山记》说：卢奴县有三个乡，这是其中之一，后来又改属安息县。
English: "Zhongshan Ji" said: Lulu County has three townships, this is one of them, and later it was transferred to Shibuya County.

古文：城郭南有汉明帝时孝子王立碑。
现代文：外城南有汉明帝时孝子王立的墓碑。
English: To the south of the outer city, there is the tombstone of the dutiful son of Emperor Han Ming.

古文：又东过安国县北，滱水历县东分为二水，一水枝分，东南流径解渎亭南。
现代文：又往东流过安国县北边，滱水流经安国县东边，分为两条。一条支流往东南流经解读亭南边。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Anguo County, and the Surabaya River flows through the eastern part of Anguo County and is divided into two. A tributary flows southeastward through the south side of the interpretation pavilion.

古文：汉顺帝阳嘉元年，封河间孝王子淑于解渎亭为侯国，孙宏，即灵帝也。
现代文：汉顺帝阳嘉元年，把河间孝王的儿子刘淑封于解读亭，立为侯国。他的孙子刘宏就是后来的灵帝。
English: In the first year of Emperor Han Shun's reign, Liu Shufu, the son of Emperor Xiaowang of the Middle Kingdom, was enthroned in the Reading Pavilion and established as a vassal state. His grandson, Liu Hong, later became Emperor Ling.

古文：又东南径任丘城南，又东南径安郭亭南。
现代文：这条支流又往东南流经任丘城南边，又往东南流经安郭亭南边。
English: This tributary also flows southeast through the south side of Renqiu City, and then flows southeast through the south side of Anguoting.

古文：汉武帝元朔五年，封中山靖王子刘传富为侯国。
现代文：汉武帝元朔五年前，把这地方封给中山靖王的儿子刘传富，立为侯国。
English: Five years ago, Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo granted this place to Liu Chuanfu, the son of King Zhongshan, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：其水又东南流，入于滹沱。
现代文：又往东南流，最后注入淖沱河。
English: It flows southeast again, and finally flows into the Min River.

古文：滱水又东北流径解渎亭北而东北注。
现代文：滱水又往东北流经解读亭北边，然后往东北流去。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast through the north side of the interpretation pavilion, and then flows to the northeast.

古文：又东过博陵县南，滱水东北径蠡吾县故城南。《地理风俗记》曰：县，故饶阳之下乡者也，自河问分属博陵。
现代文：又往东流过博陵县南边，滱水往东北流经氢吾县旧城南边，《地理风俗记》说：氢吾县是过去饶阳的下乡，从河间郡分出，属博陵郡。
English: It also flowed eastward through the south of Boling County, and the Surabaya water flowed northeastward through the south of the old city of Hyogo County. "Geography and Customs" said: Hyogo County was the countryside of Raoyang in the past. It was separated from Kawama County and belongs to Boling County.

古文：汉安帝元初七年，封河间王开子翼为都乡侯，顺帝永建五年，更为侯国也。
现代文：汉安帝元初七年，封河间王刘开的儿子刘翼为都乡侯，顺帝永建五年，改为侯国。
English: In the first seven years of the Han Dynasty, Liu Ying, the son of Liu Kai, the King of Hohenzollern, was made the vassal of the capital, and in the fifth year of Shun Emperor Yongjian, it was changed to the vassal state.

古文：汉末，罢还安平，晋太始年复为郡，今谓是城为野城。
现代文：滱水又往东北流经博陵县旧城南边，就是古时的陆成。
English: Surabaya water flows northeast through the southern side of the old city of Boling County, which is the ancient Lu Cheng.

古文：滱水又东北径侯世县故城南，又东北径陵阳亭东，又北，左会博水，水出望都县，东南流径其县故城南，王莽更名曰顺调矣。
现代文：汉武帝元朔二年始年间重又设郡。现在称此城为野城。滱水又往东北流经侯世县旧城南边，又往东北流经陵阳亭东边，又往北流，左边与博水汇合。博水发源于望都县，往东南流经旧城南边，王莽改名为顺调。
English: At the beginning of the second year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, the county was established again. Now this city is called Yucheng. Surabaya also flows to the northeast through the south of the old city of Hosi County, to the northeast through the east of Lingyangting, to the north, and to the left of the confluence with Boshui. Boshui originated in Bodu County and flowed to the southeast through the south of the old city. Wang Mang changed its name to Shunjun.

古文：又东南，潜入地下。博水又东南循渎，重源涌发。东南径三梁亭南，疑即古勺梁也。
现代文：博水又往东南流，潜入地下；接着又往东南沿着水道重新冒出，往东南流经三梁亭南边，这地方可能就是古时的勺梁。
English: Bo water flowed to the southeast and went underground; then it flowed to the southeast along the waterway and re-emerged, flowing to the southeast to the south of San Liang Ting, this place may be the ancient spoon beam.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：燕人伐赵，围浊鹿，赵武灵王及代人救浊鹿，败燕师于勺梁者也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：燕军进攻赵国，把浊鹿围困起来，赵武灵王和代人去援救浊鹿，在勺梁击败燕军。
English: "The Annals of the Bamboo Annals" says: Yan's army attacked Zhao and besieged Mule Deer. King Zhao Wuling and his deputies went to rescue Mule Deer and defeated Yan's army at Shao Liang.

古文：今广昌东岭之东有山，俗名之曰浊鹿逻。城地不远，土势相邻，以此推之，或近是矣，所未详也。
现代文：现在广昌东岭以东有一座山，俗称浊鹿逻，离浊鹿城不远，地势相邻，推想起来也许就是当年的勺梁，不知对否。
English: Now, there is a mountain to the east of Dongling in Guangzhou, commonly known as Elk Luo. It is not far from Elk City, and the terrain is adjacent. It may be the spoon beam of that year. I don't know if it is true or not.

古文：博水又东南径谷粱亭南，又东径阳城县，散为泽渚。
现代文：博水又往东南流经毁梁亭南，又往东流经阳城县，散溢为湖泽，湖水上涨时，方圆数里，不但盛产香蒲和竹笋，而且菱角和莲藕也特别多。
English: Bo water also flows to the southeast through Ruiliangting South, and flows to the east through Yangcheng County, spreading into lakes. When the lake water rises, there are not only abundant cattails and bamboo shoots, but also a large number of rhododendrons and lotus buds.

古文：诸水潴涨，方广数里，匪直蒲笋是丰，实亦偏饶菱藕，至若娈婉丱童，及弱年崽子，或单舟采菱，或叠舸折芰，长歌阳春，爱深绿水，掇抬者不言疲，谣咏者自流响，于时行旅过瞩，亦有慰于羁望矣。世谓之为阳城淀也。
现代文：那些扎着双角的可爱儿童和年少哥儿，有的独自划着小舟采菱，有的几只船一起折菱，他们向着这三月阳春而欢唱，深深地爱着这悠悠碧水，采菱的人们不感到疲倦，歌唱的人们吐出悠扬的清音，那时路过此处的行人，对着此情此景，他乡羁旅的心情，也会得到慰藉了。人们称此湖为阳城淀。
English: Those adorable children and younger brothers with their horns in a knot, some of them paddling a small boat to collect rhombuses on their own, some of them with several boats to collect rhombuses together, they sing joyfully to this March sun and spring, and deeply love this soft water. The people who collect rhombuses do not feel tired, and the people who sing spit out melodious clear sounds. At that time, pedestrians passing by here will also be comforted by this situation, this scene, and the mood of traveling to another country. People call this lake Yangcheng Yodo.

古文：阳城县故城近在西北，故陂得其名焉。
现代文：阳城县旧城就在附近的西北方，湖也因而得名了。
English: The old town of Yangcheng County is nearby in the northwest, and the lake got its name from this.

古文：《郡国志》曰：蒲阴县有阳城者也。
现代文：《郡国志》说：蒲阴县有阳城。
English: "County National History" said: There is a Yangcheng in Puyin County.

古文：今城在县东南三十里。
现代文：而现在阳城在县城东南三十里。
English: Now Yangcheng is 30 miles southeast of the county seat.

古文：张晏曰：濡水于城北曲而西流，是受此名，故县亦因水名而氏曲逆矣。《春秋左传》哀公四年，齐国夏伐晋，取曲逆是也。
现代文：湖水又潜入地下沿水道而流，转到清梁亭西北，重又涌出地面。博水又往东流经白堤亭南边，又往东流经广望县旧城北边。汉武帝元朔二年夏，齐国攻打晋国，夺取了曲逆，就是这地方。
English: The lake water also flowed underground along the aqueduct, turned to the northwest of Qingliangting, and again gushed out of the ground. Bo water also flowed eastward through the south of Baidai Ting, and eastward through the north of the old city of Guangwang County. In the summer of the second year of Emperor Hanwu, Qi Province attacked Jin Province and captured Quqiao. This is the place.

古文：汉高帝击韩王信，自代过曲逆，上其城，望室字甚多，曰：壮哉！
现代文：汉高帝去打韩王信，从代出发途经曲逆，登上城头，望见城内房屋很多，说道：好大的城啊！
English: Emperor Han Gao went to fight Han Wangxin, and after a tortuous journey, he climbed to the top of the city, saw many houses in the city, and said: What a big city!

古文：吾行天下，惟洛阳与是耳。
现代文：我走遍天下，所见大城只有洛阳和这里了。
English: I've been all over the world, and the only big cities I've seen are Luoyang and here.

古文：诏以封陈平为曲逆侯。
现代文：于是下诏封陈平为曲逆侯。
English: As a result, Chen Ping was placed under house arrest.

古文：王莽更名顺平。
现代文：王莽改名为顺平。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Shunping.

古文：濡水又东与苏水合，水出县西南近山，东北流径尧姑亭南，又东径其县入濡。
现代文：濡水又往东流与苏水汇合。苏水发源于县城西南近处山中，往东北流经尧姑亭南边，又往东流经该县，注入濡水。
English: The fresh water flows eastward to meet the brackish water. The brackish water originates in the mountains near the southwest of the county seat, flows northeast through the south side of Shugu Ting, and flows eastward through the county, injecting fresh water.

古文：濡水又东，得蒲水口，水出西北蒲阳山，西南流，积水成渊，东西百步，南北百余步，深而不测。
现代文：濡水又往东流，到藏水口接纳了蒲水。蒲水发源于西北方的蒲阳山，往西南流，积成深潭，水潭东西一百步，南北百余步，深不可测。
English: The wet water flowed to the east, and the puff of water was received at the mouth of the reservoir. The puff of water originated from Mount Puyang in the northwest and flowed to the southwest, accumulating into a deep pool. The pool was a hundred paces from east to west and a hundred paces from north to south, and was unfathomable.

古文：蒲水又东南流，水侧有古神祠，世谓之为百祠。亦曰蒲上祠，所未详也。
现代文：蒲水又往东南流，水旁有个古神祠，人们称为百祠，也叫蒲上祠，这也不大清楚。
English: The Po River flows to the southeast, and there is an ancient shrine next to the water. People call it the Hundred-Ancestral Shrine, or the Po-Shang-Ancestral Shrine, but it's not entirely clear.

古文：又南径阳安亭东。
现代文：蒲水又往南流经阳安亭东边。
English: The river also flows southwards past the eastern side of Yang'an Pavilion.

古文：《晋书地道记》曰：蒲阴县有阳安关，盖阳安关都尉治。世俗名斯川为阳安扩。
现代文：《晋书•地道记》说：蒲阴县有阳安关，是阳安关都尉的治所，民间称这一带的平川为阳安扩。
English: "Jinshu•Jindo Ji" said: There is Yang'an Pass in Puyin County, which is the capital of Yang'an Pass. People call the Pingchuan River in this area as Yang'an Expansion.

古文：蒲水又东南历扩，径阳安关下，名关皋为唐头坂。
现代文：蒲水又往东南流经阳安扩，经阳安关下，把关前的高地叫唐头坂。
English: The Po River flows to the southeast through Yang'an, and passes under Yang'an Pass. The highland in front of the pass is called Tangtoushan.

古文：出关北流，又东流径夏屋故城，实中险绝。
现代文：蒲水出关往北流，又往东流经夏屋旧城，城很坚固，极其险要。
English: The water from the dam flows to the north and then to the east, passing through Xiaya Old Town. The city is very strong and extremely precarious.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：魏殷臣、赵公孙裒伐燕，还取夏屋，城曲逆者也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：魏国殷臣、赵国公孙哀讨伐燕国，回来时夺取了夏屋，修筑了曲逆城。
English: The "Chronicle of the Bamboo Cutter" says: Yinchen of Wei and Gongsun of Zhao fought bitterly to conquer Yan, and when they came back, they seized the summer house and built a castle.

古文：其城东侧，因阿仍墉筑一城，世谓之寡妇城，贾复从光武追铜马、五幡于北平所作也。
现代文：旧城东侧，利用曲折的地势和城墙又筑了一座城，世人称为寡妇城。贾复在北平随从光武帝追击铜马、五蟠二军时筑了此城。
English: On the east side of the old city, taking advantage of the tortuous terrain and city walls, another city was built, known to the world as the Widow's City. Jia Fu built this city in Beiping when he followed Emperor Guangwu to pursue the Bronze Horse and Five Armies.

古文：世俗音转，故有是名矣。
现代文：世俗音讹，因而把贾复城说成寡妇城了。
English: Jia Fuzhong is said to be a city of widows.

古文：其水又东南流径蒲阴县故城北，《地理志》曰：城在蒲水之阴。
现代文：蒲水又往东南流经蒲阴县旧城北边，《地理志》说：城在蒲水之南。
English: The Pudong also flows southeast through the north of the old city of Pudong County. "Geography" said: the city is south of Pudong.

古文：汉章帝章和二年，行巡北岳，以曲逆名不善，因山水之名，改曰蒲阴焉。
现代文：汉章帝章和二年巡视北岳，以为曲逆这地名不好，于是就因水改名为蒲阴。
English: In the second year of Emperor Hanzhang's reign, he inspected Beidake and thought that the name of the place was not good, so he changed it to Puyin because of the water.

古文：水右合鱼水，水出北平县西南鱼山，山石若巨鱼，水发其下，故世俗以物色名川。
现代文：蒲水在右边与鱼水汇合。鱼水发源于北平县西南的鱼山，山上有巨石，形状像大鱼，水源从石下流出，因而民间就按物象来命名。
English: On the right is the confluence of the Puddle Water and the Fish Water. The Fish Water originates from the Fish Mountain in the southwest of Peiping County. There are huge stones on the mountain, shaped like big fish, and the water source flows out from under the stone, so people named it after the object.

古文：又东流注于蒲水，又东入濡。
现代文：鱼水又往东流，注入蒲水，蒲水又往东注入濡水。
English: The fish water then flows eastwards, where it is injected into the water table, and the water table then injects the wet water eastwards.

古文：故《地理志》曰：蒲水、苏水，并从县东入濡水。
现代文：因此《地理志》说：蒲水、苏水都从县东注入濡水。
English: For this reason, "Geography" says: Both potash and soda water are infused with wet water from the eastern part of the county.

古文：石文云：皇帝以太延元年十二月，车驾东巡，径五回之险邃，览崇岸之竦峙，乃停驾路侧，援弓而射之，飞矢逾于岩山，刊石用赞元功。
现代文：濡水又往东北流经乐城南，又往东注入博水，自此以下，博水也兼称濡水了。《春秋》：昭公七年十二月，车驾东巡，途经险峻的五回岭，看到崖岸巍然耸峙，于是停车路旁，弯弓搭箭向山崖射去，那箭高高地飞过山岩顶上，因而刻石称颂这一伟大事迹。
English: The wet water also flowed to the northeast through the south of Lecheng, and then to the east into Bo water. Since then, Bo water has also been called wet water. "Spring and Autumn": In December of the 7th year of Zhaogong, driving eastbound, passing through the precipitous Wuheiling, he saw the cliff shore towering, so by the parking road, the bow and arrow shot toward the cliff. The arrow flew high over the top of the mountain rock, so the carved stone praised this great event.

古文：夹碑并有层台二所，即御射处也。
现代文：三碑之间夹着两座层台，就是当年皇上射箭的地方。
English: Sandwiched between the three monuments are two tiered platforms, which is where the emperor used to shoot arrows.

古文：碑阴皆列树碑官名。
现代文：石碑背面都刻着立碑者的官名。
English: The official name of the person who erected the monument is engraved on the back of the stone monument.

古文：徐水东北屈径郎山，又屈径其山南，众岑竞举，若竖鸟翅，立石崭岩，亦如剑秒，极地险之崇峭。
现代文：徐水往东北转弯流经郎山，又转弯流经山南。无数尖尖的山峰竞相高耸，就像鸟儿竖着翅膀，直立的蠕岩仿佛出鞘的剑端，地势真是险峻高峭极了。
English: The slow-moving water flows in a north-easterly curve through Langshan, and in another curve through Shannan. Countless sharp peaks soar in competition, like birds with their wings upraised. Upright peridotite is like the tip of a sword emerging from its scabbard. The terrain is truly precipitous and extremely high.

古文：汉武之世，戾太子以巫蛊出奔，其子远遁斯山，故世有郎山之名。
现代文：汉武帝时代，决太子因以巫术害人之罪逃跑，他的儿子远逃到这座山中，因此得了郎山之名。
English: In the era of Emperor Hanwu, Prince Xuan fled for the crime of harming people with witchcraft, and his son fled far away to this mountain, so he got the name of Langshan.

古文：山南有《郎山君碑》，事具其文。
现代文：山南有郎山君碑，碑文记载了这件事。
English: There is a monument to Lang Shanjun in Shannan. The inscription records this event.

古文：徐水又径郎山君中子触锋将军庙南，庙前有碑，晋惠帝永康元年八月十四日壬寅；发诏锡君父子，法祠其碑。
现代文：徐水又流经郎山君次子触锋将军庙南，庙前有块石碑，晋惠帝永康元年八月十四日壬寅，下诏赐郎山君父子建祠，建了这块碑。
English: The slow-moving water also flowed through the south of the temple of the second son of Langshan, the general Tang Feng. There is a stone monument in front of the temple. On August 14, the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongkang, the emperor Jin Hui gave Langshan and his son permission to build a shrine and built this monument.

古文：刘曜光初七年，前顿丘太守郎宣，北平太守阳平邑振等，共修旧碑，刻石树颂焉。
现代文：刘暇光初七年，原顿丘太守郎宣、北平太守阳平、邑振等人，共同整修旧碑，刻石作颂。
English: In the first seven years of Liu Baiguang's reign, the original Dongqiu governor Lang Xuan, Beiping governor Yangping, Ouzhen and others jointly renovated the old monument and carved stones to make a tribute.

古文：徐水又径北平县，县界有汉熹平四年幽、冀二州以戊子诏书，遣冀州从事王球，幽州从事张昭，郡县分境，立石标界，具揭石文矣。
现代文：徐水又流经北平县，县界有界碑，是汉息平四年所立。幽、冀二州遵照戊子日颁发的诏书，派了冀州从事王球、幽州从事张昭，去解决郡县分境的争端，于是立碑标界，将此事刻子碑上。
English: Xu Shui also flows through Beiping County, and there is a boundary monument on the county boundary, which was erected by Han Xiping in the fourth year of the Han Dynasty. In accordance with the edict issued on Wu Zi Day, the two states of Jizhou and Hebei sent Jizhou to engage in Wang Qiu, and Yuzhou to engage in Zhang Zhao, to resolve the dispute of the county boundary, so they erected a monument to mark the boundary and engraved the matter on the monument.

古文：徐水又东南流历石门中，世俗谓之龙门也。
现代文：徐水又往东南流经石门中，民间称为龙日。
English: The slow-moving water flows south-east through Shimenzhong, which is popularly known as Longri.

古文：其山上合下开，开处高六丈，飞水历其间，南出乘崖，倾涧泄注，七丈有余，渀荡之音，奇为壮猛，触石成井，水深不测，素波自激，涛襄四陆，瞰之者惊神，临之者骇魄矣。
现代文：这座山上合下开，开口处高六丈，水流从石门间飞速地南流而出，循着山崖下泻七丈余，注入山涧，狂涛冲击之声雄豪威猛，在岩石间冲蚀成潭，深不可测，激起一片白浪，涌上了四岸。身临高岸俯视底下，不禁会胆战心惊，栗然生畏。
English: The top of this mountain closes and opens, the opening is six feet high, the water flows rapidly south from between the stone gates, following the cliff and sinking seven feet, injecting into the mountains, the sound of the storm surge is majestic and powerful, eroding into a pool between the rocks, unfathomable, stirring up a white wave, surging to the four banks. Being on the high bank looking down, I can't help but be afraid and tremble.

古文：东南出山径其城中，有故碑，是太白君碑，郎山君之元子也。
现代文：水往东南流出山间，流经城中，有一座古碑叫伏白君碑―太白君是郎山君的长子。
English: The water flows out of the mountains to the southeast and flows through the city. There is an ancient monument called Fubai Junbei - Tai Bai Jun is the eldest son of Lang Shan Jun.

古文：其水又东流，汉光武追铜马、五幡于北平破之于顺水北，乘胜追北，为其所败，短兵相接，光武自投崖下，遇突骑王丰，于是授马退保范阳。
现代文：水又往东流，汉光武帝在北平追击铜马军和五蟠军，就在顺水以北打败了他们，于是乘胜追击，却反而被他们打败。两军短兵相接，光武帝慌忙跳到崖下，幸好碰到冲出敌阵的王丰，把马让给他骑，退回范阳坚守。
English: The water flowed eastward again. Emperor Guangwu of Han pursued the Bronze Horse Army and the Five Armies Army in Beiping, and defeated them just north of Shunhui. He then pursued them with victory, but was defeated by them instead. The two armies were close together, and Emperor Guangwu jumped under the cliff in a hurry. Fortunately, he met Wang Feng, who had rushed out of the enemy lines. He gave him the horse to ride, and returned to Fanyang to stand firm.

古文：顺水，盖徐州之别名也。
现代文：顺水就是徐州的别名。
English: Shunshui is another name for Xuzhou.

古文：徐水又东径蒲城北，又东径清苑城。
现代文：徐水又往东流经蒲城以北，又往东流经清苑城，又往东南与卢水汇合。
English: The Xushui also flows eastward to the north of Puteng, eastward to Qingyuancheng, and southeast to the confluence with the Luzhui.

古文：又东南与卢水合，水出蒲城西，俗谓之泉头水也。《地理志》曰北平县有卢水，即是水也。东径其城，又东南，左入徐水。
现代文：卢水发源于蒲城以西，俗称泉头水。《地理志》说：北平县有卢水，就是这条水。卢水往东流经城中，又往东南流，向左注入徐水。
English: The Lu River originates in the west of Putian, commonly known as the Quan Tou River. "Geography" said: Beiping County has the Lu River, which is this water. The Lu River flows eastward through the city, and flows southeastward, injecting the Xushui River to the left.

古文：《地理志》曰：东至高阳入博，今不能也。
现代文：《地理志》说：往东流到高阳注入博水，现在水却流不到高阳了。
English: "Geography" said: flowing eastward to Gaoyang to inject Bohai water, but now the water does not flow to Gaoyang.

古文：徐水又东，左合曹水，水出西北朔宁县曹河泽，东南流，左合岐山之水，水出岐山，东径邢安城北，又东南入曹河。
现代文：徐水又往东流，左边与曹水汇合。曹水发源于西北方宁朔县的曹河泽，往东南流，左边与岐山之水汇合。岐山之水发源于岐山，往东流经邢安城北边，又往东南流入曹河。
English: Xushui also flows eastward, and merges with Caoshui on the left. Caoshui originates from Caoheze in Ningshuo County in the northwest, flows southeastward, and merges with the water of Qishan on the left. The water of Qishan originates from Qishan, flows eastward through the north side of Fu'an City, and flows into Caohe to the southeast.

古文：曹水又东南径北新城县故城南，王莽之朔平县也。
现代文：曹水又往东南流经北新城县老城南，就是王莽的朔平县。
English: Caoshui also flows southeast through the old south of Beixincheng County, which is Wang Mang's Shuoping County.

古文：曹水又东人于徐水。
现代文：曹水又往东注入徐水。
English: Caoshui also injected Xushui to the east.

古文：徐水又东南径故城北，俗谓之祭隅城，所未详也。
现代文：徐水又往东南流经老城北边，俗称祭隅城，也不知城名是怎样来的。
English: The slow-moving water then flows southeast through the northern part of the old city, commonly known as the Festival Corner City. It is not known how the city got its name.

古文：徐水又东注博水。
现代文：徐水又往东注入博水。
English: Xushui also injected Boshui to the east.

古文：《地理志》曰：徐水出北平，东至高阳入于博，又东入滱、《地理志》曰：博水自望都，东至高阳入于滱是也。
现代文：《地理志》说：徐水发源于北平，往东流到高阳，注入博水；又往东流，注入惋水。《地理志》说：博水从望都往东流，到高阳注入滱水。
English: "Geography" said: Xushui originates from Beiping, flows eastward to Gaoyang, and injects Boshui; it also flows eastward and injects Surabaya. "Geography" said: Boshui flows eastward from Wangdu and injects Surabaya into Gaoyang.

古文：又东北入于易。
现代文：又往东北注人易水。
English: Water is also being pumped to the northeast.

古文：滱水又东北径依城北，世谓之依城河。
现代文：滱水又往东北流经依城北边，世人称为依城河。
English: The Surabaya River flows to the northeast through the northern side of Yicheng, and is known to the world as the Yicheng River.

古文：《地说》无依城之名，即古葛城也。
现代文：《地说》中没有依城的地名，其实就是古代的葛城。
English: In "Say," there is no reference to the place name of the city, but it is actually the ancient city of Ge.

古文：《郡国志》曰：高阳有葛城，燕以与赵者也。
现代文：《郡国志》说：高阳有葛城，燕把此城让给赵国。
English: "County History" said: Gaoyang has Gecheng, Yan gave this city to Zhao.

古文：滱水又东北径阿陵县故城东，王莽之阿陆也。
现代文：滱水又往东北流经阿陵县老城东边，就是王莽的阿陆。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast through the eastern side of the old city of Aling County, which is Wang Mang's Alu.

古文：建武二年，更封左将军任光为侯国。
现代文：建武二年，改封给左将军任光，立为侯国。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, it was changed to the left general Renguang and established as a principality.

古文：滱水东北至长城注于易水者也。
现代文：滱水往东北流，到长城注入易水。
English: The brackish water flows to the northeast, injecting fresh water into the Great Wall.

