古文：孙子曰：夫用兵之法，全国为上，破国次之，全军为上，破军次之；全旅为上，破旅次之；全卒为上，破卒次之；全伍为上，破伍次之。
现代文：孙子说：大凡用兵的原则，使敌举国不战而降是上策，经过交战击破敌国使之降服就次一等；使敌国全军不战而降是上策，武力击破而取胜就次一等；使敌人全旅不战而降是上策，击破敌旅而取胜就次一等；使敌全卒不战而降是上策，击破敌卒使之降服就次一等；使敌全伍不战而降是上策，击破敌伍而取胜就次一等。
English: Sun Tzu said: "According to the general principle of the use of force, the best strategy is to make the enemy surrender without a fight, and the second best strategy is to defeat the enemy country and make it surrender after a battle; the best strategy is to make the enemy's entire army surrender without a fight, and the second best strategy is to defeat it by force; the best strategy is to make the enemy's entire army surrender without a fight, and the second best strategy is to defeat the enemy's entire army; the best strategy is to make the enemy's entire army surrender without a fight, and the second best strategy is to defeat the enemy's entire army; the best strategy is to

古文：是故百战百胜，非善之善者也；不战而屈人之兵，善之善者也。
现代文：因此，百战百胜，不算是最好的用兵策略，只有在攻城之前，先让敌人的军事能力严重短缺，根本无力抵抗，才算是高明中最高明的。
English: Therefore, a hundred victories in a hundred battles is not the best strategy for the use of troops. Only if the enemy's military capability is seriously deficient and it is unable to resist at all before attacking the city can it be considered the best of the best.

古文：故上兵伐谋，其次伐交，其次伐兵，其下攻城。
现代文：所以上等的用兵策略是以谋略胜敌，其次是以外交手段胜敌，再其次是出动军队交兵胜敌，最下等的是攻城。
English: Therefore, the highest level of military strategy is to win the enemy by strategy, the second is to win the enemy by diplomatic means, the second is to send troops to fight the enemy, and the lowest is to attack the city.

古文：攻城之法为不得已。
现代文：攻城是在不得已的情况下才采取的策略。
English: The siege was a last-resort strategy.

古文：修橹轒辒，具器械，三月而后成，距堙，又三月而后已。
现代文：为了攻城，修造蔽橹、轒辒，准备各种攻城器械，需要花费三个月时间；堆积攻城的土山，又需要三个月的时间。
English: In order to lay siege to the city, it takes three months to build the palisades and mounds, and to prepare all kinds of siege equipment; and it takes another three months to pile up the earth and mountains to attack the city.

古文：将不胜其忿而蚁附之，杀士卒三分之一而城不拔者，此攻之灾也。
现代文：这时，将帅们已经非常焦躁忿怒，驱赶着士兵像蚂蚁一样去爬梯攻城，士卒伤亡三分之一而城还不能攻下，这便是攻城带来的灾害啊！
English: At this time, the generals were already very anxious and angry, driving the soldiers like ants to climb ladders to attack the city. One-third of the soldiers were killed and wounded, but the city could not be captured. This was the disaster brought about by the siege!

古文：故善用兵者，屈人之兵而非战也，拔人之城而非攻也，毁人之国而非久也，必以全争于天下。
现代文：所以，善于用兵的人，使敌军屈服而不依靠交战；攻占敌城不用依附强攻；消灭敌国而不依靠和敌人打持久战。
English: Therefore, a person who is good at using soldiers can make the enemy army succumb without relying on combat; capture the enemy city without relying on a strong attack; destroy the enemy country without relying on a protracted war with the enemy.

古文：故兵不顿而利可全，此谋攻之法也。
现代文：比敌人兵力少时就撤退，比敌人兵力弱就避免正面于敌交战。
English: If you are outnumbered, retreat. If you are outgunned, avoid engaging the enemy head-on.

古文：故用兵之法，十则围之，五则攻之，倍则分之，敌则能战之，少则能逃之，不若则能避之。故小敌之坚，大敌之擒也。
现代文：兵力弱小如果顽固硬拼，就势必会被强大的敌人俘获。
English: If a small force stubbornly fights, it is bound to be captured by a powerful enemy.

古文：夫将者，国之辅也。
现代文：将帅，是国君的辅佐。
English: A general is an aide to the sovereign.

古文：辅周，则国必强；辅隙，则国必弱。
现代文：如果辅佐得周密，国家就强盛；辅佐有疏漏，国家就一定衰弱。
English: If the assistance is thorough, the country will be strong; if the assistance is incomplete, the country will be weak.

古文：故君之所以患于军者三：不知军之不可以进而谓之进，不知军之不可以退而谓之退，是谓 縻军 ；不知三军之事，而同三军之政者，则军士惑矣；不知三军之权，而同三军之任，则军士疑矣。
现代文：君主对军事行动造成危害的情况有三个方面：不懂得军队不能前进而命令他们前进，不懂得军队不能后退而命令他们后退，这叫束缚军队；不懂军中事务却干涉军中行政管理，就会使军中将士产生迷惑；不懂军中权谋之变而去干涉军队的指挥，就会使军中将士产生疑虑。
English: There are three aspects of the situation in which the monarch causes harm to military operations: if he does not understand that the army cannot advance, he will order them to advance; if he does not understand that the army cannot retreat, he will order them to retreat, which is called binding the army; if he does not understand the affairs of the army, but interferes in the administrative management of the army, he will cause confusion to the lieutenant generals; if he does not understand the change of power in the army and interferes in the command of the army, he will cause doubts to the lieutenant generals.

古文：三军既惑且疑，则诸侯之难至矣，是谓 乱军引胜 。
现代文：如果三军将士既迷惑又疑虑，那么，诸侯乘机起而攻之的灾难就到来了。这就叫自乱其军而丧失了胜利。
English: If the soldiers of the three armies are both confused and doubtful, then the calamity of the lords seizing the opportunity to attack will come. This will cause the victory to be lost by self-disturbing their army.

古文：故知胜有五：知可以战与不可以战者胜，识众寡之用者胜，上下同欲者胜，以虞待不虞者胜，将能而君不御者胜。
现代文：所以，预知胜利的情况有五种：懂得什么条件下可以打或者不打的，能够胜利；懂得众与寡的灵活运用的，能够胜利；全军上下一心，同仇敌忾的，能够胜利；以有准备之师击无准备之敌的，能够胜利；将领富于才能而国君又不从中干预牵制的，能够胜利。
English: Therefore, there are five kinds of conditions for predicting victory: those who know under what conditions they can fight or not fight can win; those who know how to flexibly use the majority and minority can win; those who are united as an army and fight with the same enemy can win; those who fight the unprepared enemy with a prepared division can win; generals who are rich in talent and the sovereign does not interfere and restrain them can win.

古文：此五者，知胜之道也。
现代文：这五种就是预知胜利的方法。
English: These five are the ways to predict victory.

古文：故曰：知彼知己者，百战不殆；不知彼而知己，一胜一负，不知彼，不知己，每战必殆。
现代文：所以说：对敌人的情况和自己的情况都有透彻的了解，作战就不会失败；不了解敌人但了解自己的情况，胜负的机率各一半；既不了解敌人又不了解自己的，每战必败。
English: Therefore, it is said: if one has a thorough understanding of the enemy's situation and one's own situation, the battle will not fail; if one does not understand the enemy but understands one's own situation, the probability of winning or losing is half; if one does not understand the enemy and does not understand one's own situation, every battle will be defeated.

