古文：太阳所谓肿腰脽痛者，正月太阳寅，寅，太阳也。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经有所谓腰部和臀部肿胀、疼痛的症状，是因为农历正月，地支为寅，太阳。
English: The so-called swollen and painful symptoms of the lower back and buttocks are due to the lunar new year, the branch of the earth is the crane, the sun.

古文：正月阳气出在上而阴气盛，阳未得自次也，故肿腰脽痛也。
现代文：正月里虽然阳气开始生发，但阴寒之气还很旺盛，当阳气没有按照正常的次序逐渐旺盛，因此就会出现腰部和臀部肿胀、疼痛。
English: In the first month, although the yang qi begins to grow, the cold qi is still very strong. When the yang qi does not gradually grow in accordance with the normal order, swelling and pain in the waist and buttocks will occur.

古文：病偏虚为跛者，正月阳气冻解，地气而出也。所谓偏虚者，冬寒颇有不足者，故偏虚为跛也。
现代文：有的病人因为阳气偏虚就发为跛足，这是因为虽然正月的阳气促使冰冻消解，地气随着阳气开始从地下冒出来，由于寒冬的寒气还很旺盛，阳气颇感不足，若阳气偏虚于足太阳经一侧，则发生跛足的症状。
English: Some patients suffer from lameness due to a deficiency of yang. This is because although the yang of the first month promotes the dissolution of ice, the ground gas begins to emerge from the ground with the yang. Since the cold of the cold winter is still very strong, the yang is quite insufficient. If the yang is weak on the side of the foot with the sun, the symptoms of lameness occur.

古文：所谓强上引背者，阳气大上而争，故强上也。
现代文：所谓颈项强急而牵引背部的，是因为阳气剧烈的上升而争引，影响于足太阳经脉，所以发生颈项强急。
English: The so-called strong neck and traction of the back is due to the strong rise of the yang and the struggle, affecting the foot solar meridians, so there is a strong neck.

古文：所谓耳鸣者，阳气万物盛上而跃，故耳鸣也。
现代文：所谓出现耳鸣症状的，是因为阳气过盛，好像万物向上盛长而活跃，盛阳循经上逆，故出现耳鸣。
English: The so-called tinnitus symptoms occur because the yang qi is too strong, as if everything is upward and active, and the yang qi follows the opposite direction, so tinnitus occurs.

古文：所谓甚则狂巅疾者，阳尽在上而阴气从下，下虚上实，故狂巅疾也。
现代文：所谓阳邪亢盛发生狂病、癫痫的，是因为阳气尽在上部，阴气却在下面，下虚而上实，所以发生狂病和癫痫病。
English: The so-called "impotence" and "mania" and "epilepsy" occur because the yang qi is in the upper part, but the yin qi is in the lower part. The lower part is imaginary, but the upper part is real. This is why mania and epilepsy occur.

古文：所谓浮为聋者，皆在气也。
现代文：所谓逆气上浮而致耳聋的，是因为气分失调过于上浮。
English: The so-called counter-surging deafness is caused by the imbalance of qi that is too buoyant.

古文：所谓入中为瘖者，阳盛已衰，故为瘖也。
现代文：所谓阳气进入体内而致不能言语的，是因为进入体内的阳气太盛反而转为衰竭造成的，所以不能言语。
English: The so-called yang that enters the body and cannot speak is because the yang that enters the body is too strong but turns into exhaustion, so it cannot speak.

古文：内夺而厥，则为瘖俳，此肾虚也。少阴不至者，厥也。
现代文：此时如果房事不节内夺肾精，精气耗散而厥逆，就会罹患 瘖俳 ，这是因为肾气亏虚，少阴的精气不能到达四肢而发生厥逆，舌体僵硬而不能言语。
English: At this time, if the kidney essence is deprived in the house, the essence is dissipated, and the retrograde occurs, the patient will suffer from haemoptysis. This is because the kidney essence is deficient, the essence of the minor yin cannot reach the limbs and the retrograde occurs, and the tongue is stiff and cannot speak.

古文：少阳所谓心胁痛者，言少阳盛也。
现代文：足少阳胆经有所谓心胁痛的症状，是因为农历九月，地支为戌，少阳。
English: The symptoms of so-called heartburn are due to the fact that in September of the lunar calendar, the branch of the earth is the yang and the yang is small.

古文：盛者，心之所表也。
现代文：少阳经脉散络于心包，为心之表。
English: Shao Yang meridians are scattered in the pericardium, which is the table of the heart.

古文：九月阳气尽而阴气盛，故心胁痛也。
现代文：九月阳气将尽，阴气方盛，邪气循经而病，所以心胁部发生疼痛。
English: In September, the yang qi will be exhausted, the yin qi will be abundant, and the evil qi will follow the meridian and cause illness. Therefore, pain will occur in the coronary heart.

古文：所谓不可反侧者，阴气藏物也，物藏则不动，故不可反侧也。
现代文：所谓不能侧身转动，是因为九月阴气盛，万物皆潜藏而不动，少阳经气应之，所以不能转侧。
English: The so-called inability to turn sideways is due to the fact that September is overcast, everything is latent and does not move, and the sun passes through the atmosphere, so it is impossible to turn sideways.

古文：所谓甚则跃者，九月万物尽衰，草木毕落而堕，则气去阳而之阴，气盛而阳之下长，故谓跃。
现代文：所谓甚则跳跃，是因为九月万物衰败，草木尽落而坠地，人身的阳气应该由表入里而阴气旺盛，如果阳气仍然旺盛向下，就会发生跳跃不止的症状。
English: The so-called jump is because everything decays in September, plants and trees fall to the ground, and the yang of the human body should be from the outside to the inside, while the yin is strong. If the yang is still strong downwards, the symptoms of jumping will occur.

古文：阳明所谓洒洒振寒者，阳明者午也，五月盛阳之阴也，阳盛而阴气加之，故洒洒振寒也。
现代文：足阳明胃经有所谓寒冷颤栗的症状，是因为农历五月，地支为午，阳明。五月是阳极而生的时候，人体也是一样，阴气加于盛阳之上，故令人寒冷颤栗。
English: The symptoms of so-called cold shivering are due to the lunar calendar in May, when the earth is in the afternoon and the sun is shining. When May is born from the anode, the human body is the same, and the gloom is added to the full sun, so it is cold and shivering.

古文：所谓胫肿而股不收者，是五月盛阳之阴也，阳者衰于五月，而一阴气上，与阳始争，故胫肿而股不收也。
现代文：所谓小腿浮肿而大腿弛缓不收，是因为五月阳盛极而阴生，阳气始衰于五月，而初生的阴气要向上与阳气相争，致使阳明经脉不和，故发生小腿浮肿而大腿弛缓不收的症状。
English: The so-called calf swelling and thigh relaxation is due to the fact that in May, the yang is at its peak and the yin is in decline. The yang begins to decline in May, and the nascent yin has to compete with the yang, resulting in a discord between the yang and yin meridians. Therefore, the symptoms of calf swelling and thigh relaxation occur.

古文：所谓上喘而为水者，阴气下而复上，上则邪客于脏腑间，故为水也。
现代文：所谓因水肿而致喘息的，是由于土不制水，阴气自下而上，居于脏腑之间，水气不化，故为水肿之病。
English: The so-called wheezing caused by edema is due to the fact that the earth does not hold water, and the yin gas rises from the bottom up, living between the internal organs, and the water vapor does not dissolve, so it is a disease of edema.

古文：所谓胷痛少气者，水气在脏腑也；水者阴炁也，阴炁在中，故胷痛少炁也。
现代文：所谓胸部疼痛呼吸少气的，也是由于水气停留于脏腑之间，水液属于阴气，停留于脏腑之间，上逆于心肺，所以出现胸痛少气的症状。
English: The so-called chest pain and shortness of breath is also due to the fact that water vapor stays between the viscera, and the fluid is yin gas, staying between the viscera and upstream of the heart and lungs, so the symptoms of chest pain and shortness of breath appear.

古文：所谓甚则厥，恶人与火，闻木音则惕然而惊者，阳气与阴气相薄，水火相恶，故惕然而惊也。
现代文：所谓病甚则厥逆，厌恶见人与火光，听到木击的声音则惊惕不已，这是由于阳气与阴气相争，水火不相协调，所以发生惊惕一类的症状。
English: The so-called disease is very rebellious, loathing to see people and fire, and hearing the sound of wood being struck, it is alarmed. This is because yang and yin are in conflict, and water and fire are not coordinated, so symptoms such as alarm occur.

古文：所谓欲独闭户牖而处者，阴阳相薄也，阳尽而阴盛，故欲独闭户牖而居。
现代文：所谓想关闭门窗而独居的症状，是由于阴气与阳气相争，阳尽而阴盛，所以发生想关闭门窗而独居的症状。
English: The so-called symptom of wanting to close the doors and windows while living alone is due to the yin and yang competing, the yang being exhausted and the yang being full, so the symptom of wanting to close the doors and windows while living alone occurs.

古文：所谓病至则欲乘高而歌，弃衣而走者，阴阳复争而外并于阳，故使之弃衣而走也。
现代文：所谓病至而想要登高而歌、弃衣而走的，这是由于阴气与阳气相争而外并于阳经，热盛于上，所以病人喜欢登高而歌；热盛于外，所以弃衣而走。
English: The so-called patients who are so ill that they want to climb high and sing, throw away their clothes and leave, this is because the yin and yang are in conflict, and the yang is out and the heat is on, so the patients like to climb high and sing; the heat is out, so they throw away their clothes and leave.

古文：所谓客孙脉则头痛、鼻鼽、腹肿者，阳明并于上，上者则其孙络太阴也，故头痛、鼻鼽、腹肿也。
现代文：所谓客于孙脉则发生头痛、鼻塞和腹部胀肿的，是由于阳明胃经与太阴脾经之气并行于皮肤肌腠之间，迫于阳明的孙络和太阴的经脉。迫于阳明之孙络，就出现头痛、鼻塞的症状；迫于太阴脾经，就出现腹部肿胀的症状。
English: The so-called guest in the sun vein has a headache, nasal congestion and abdominal swelling, because the yangming gastric meridian and the yin-yang spleen meridian are parallel to the skin muscle folds, and are constrained by the yangming sun network and the yin-yang meridian. When constrained by the yangming sun network, the symptoms of headache and nasal congestion appear; when constrained by the yin-yang spleen meridian, the symptoms of abdominal swelling appear.

古文：太阴所谓病胀者，太阴子也，十一月万物气皆藏于中，故曰病胀。
现代文：足太阴脾经有所谓病腹胀的症状，是因为农历十一月，地支为子，太阴，为阴中至阴。
English: The foot is too yin and the spleen is too yang, and the so-called symptoms of bloating are due to the lunar month of November, when the earth's axis is too yin and the moon is between yin and yang.

古文：所谓上走心为噫者，阴盛而上走于阳明，阳明络属心，故曰上走心为噫也。
现代文：此时阴气最盛，万物皆闭藏于中，人气亦然，阴邪循经入腹，所以发生腹胀的症状。所谓上走于心而为嗳气的，是因为阴盛邪，阴邪循脾经上走于阳明胃经，足阳明之正上通于心，心主嗳气，所以说上走于心就会发生嗳气。
English: At this time, yin qi is at its peak, everything is hidden in the middle, and so is popularity. Yin and evil go through the meridian and enter the abdomen, so the symptoms of bloating occur. The so-called going up in the heart and being a miasma is because of yin and evil, yin and evil go through the spleen meridian and go to the yang and bright stomach meridian, the feet and bright sun are directly connected to the heart, and the heart is the main miasma, so going up in the heart will cause miasma.

古文：所谓食则呕者，物盛满而上溢，故呕也。
现代文：所谓食入则呕吐的，是因为脾病，食物不能运化，胃中盛满而上溢，所以发生呕吐的症状。
English: The so-called eating and vomiting is due to spleen disease, food can not be transported, the stomach is full and overflowing, so the symptoms of vomiting occur.

古文：所谓得后与气则快然如衰者，十二月阴气下衰而阳气且出，故曰得后与气则快然如衰也。
现代文：所谓得到大便和矢气就觉得爽快而病减的，是因为十二月阴气盛极而下衰，阳气初生，人体也是一样，腹中阴邪得以下行，所以腹胀嗳气的病人得到大便或矢气后，就觉得爽快，就象病减轻了似的。
English: The so-called "feeling refreshed and feeling less sick after getting stool and yakitori" is due to the fact that yin qi is at its peak in December and then declines, yang qi is newly born, and the human body is the same. The yin qi in the abdomen has to descend, so patients with abdominal distension and hernia feel refreshed after getting stool or yakitori, as if the disease has been alleviated.

古文：少阴所谓腰痛者，少阴者，肾也，十月万物阳气皆伤，故腰痛也。
现代文：足少阴肾经有所谓腰痛的症状，是因为农历七月，地支为申，少阴。阴气初生，万物肃杀，阳气被抑制，腰为肾之府，故出现腰痛的症状。
English: The so-called symptoms of low back pain are due to the fact that in the seventh month of the lunar calendar, the earth's axis is in the yin and the earth's axis is in the yang. Yin is born, all things are killed, yang is suppressed, and the waist is the home of the kidneys, so the symptoms of low back pain appear.

古文：所谓呕欬上气喘者，阴气在下，阳气在上，诸阳气浮，无所依从，故呕欬上气喘也。
现代文：所谓呕吐、咳嗽、上气喘息的，是因为阴气盛于下，阳气浮越于上而无所依附，少阴脉从肾上贯肝膈入肺中，故出现呕吐、咳嗽、上气喘息的症状。
English: The so-called vomiting, coughing, and wheezing are due to the fact that the yin qi prevails below, the yang qi floats above without attachment, and the minor yin vein penetrates from the kidney to the liver into the lungs, so the symptoms of vomiting, coughing, and wheezing appear.

古文：所谓色色不能久立久坐，起则目䀮䀮无所见者，万物阴阳不定未有主也，秋气始至，微霜始下，而方杀万物，阴阳内夺，故目䀮䀮无所见也。
现代文：所谓身体衰弱不能久立久坐，久坐起则眼花缭乱视物不清的，是因为七月秋气始至，微霜始降，阴阳交替尚无定局，万物因受肃杀之气而衰退，人体阴阳之气争夺，故不能久立，久坐乍起则两目视物不清。
English: The so-called weakness of the body cannot stand for a long time and sit for a long time, and when sitting for a long time, the eyes are dazzled and the vision is unclear, because in July, the autumn air begins to arrive, the frost begins to fall, the alternation of yin and yang is still uncertain, all things decline due to the killing air, and the human body's yin and yang gas competition, so it cannot stand for a long time, and when sitting for a long time, the eyes are unclear.

古文：所谓少气善怒者，阳气不治，阳气不治，则阳气不得出，肝气当治而未得，故善怒，善怒者，名曰煎厥。
现代文：所谓少气善怒的，是因为秋天阳气下降，失去调摄作用，使少阳经阳气不得外出，阳气郁滞在内，肝气郁结不得疏泄，不能约束其所管，故容易发怒，善怒则气逆而厥，叫做 煎厥 。
English: The so-called "less qi and good anger" is because of the fall of the yang qi and the loss of the regulating effect, so that the "less yang" cannot go out through the yang qi, the yang qi is depressed, the liver qi is depressed and cannot be discharged, and it cannot be controlled, so it is easy to get angry, and the good anger is the opposite of the qi, called "suspended anger."

古文：所谓恐如人将捕之者，秋气万物未有毕去，阴气少，阳气入，阴阳相薄，故恐也。
现代文：所谓恐惧不安好像被人捉捕一样，是因为秋天阴气始生，万物尚未尽衰，人体应之，阴气少，阳气入，阴阳交争，循经入肾，故恐惧如人将捕之。
English: The so-called fear and anxiety seem to be caught by someone, because autumn is the beginning of yin and qi, everything is not yet exhausted, the human body responds to it, yin and qi are less, yang and qi enter, yin and yang are in conflict, and go through the kidneys, so fear will be caught by someone.

古文：所谓恶闻食臭者，胃无气，故恶闻食臭也。
现代文：所谓厌恶闻到食物气味的，是因为肾火不足，不能温养化源，致使胃气虚弱，消化功能已失故不欲进食而厌恶闻到食物的气味。
English: The so-called aversion to the smell of food is due to the lack of kidney fire, the inability to maintain the temperature of the source, resulting in a weak stomach, the digestive function has been lost, and the aversion to the smell of food.

古文：所谓面黑如地色者，秋气内夺，故变于色也。
现代文：所谓面色发黑如地色的，是因为秋天肃杀之气耗散内脏精华，精气内夺而肾虚，故面色发黑。
English: The so-called darkening of the complexion like the color of the ground is due to the fact that autumn's suffocating air dissipates the essence of the internal organs, the essence is taken away and the kidneys are weak, so the complexion turns black.

古文：所谓欬则有血者，阳脉伤也，阳气未盛于上而脉满，满则欬，故血见于鼻也。
现代文：所谓咳嗽则出血的，是上焦阳脉损伤，阳气未盛于上，血液充斥于脉管，上部脉满则肺气不利，故咳嗽，络脉伤则血见于鼻。
English: The so-called cough is bleeding, it is caused by the injury of the supraglottic yang vein, the yang is not on the top, the blood is filled with the vas deferens, the upper pulse is full and the lung is unfavorable, so the cough, the injury of the vas deferens is the blood seen in the nose.

古文：厥阴所谓㿗疝，妇人少腹肿者，厥阴者辰也，三月阳中之阴，邪在中，故曰㿗疝少腹肿也。
现代文：足厥阴肝经有所谓 㿗疝 以及妇女少腹肿的症状，是因为农历三月，地支为辰，厥阴。三月阳气方长，阴气尚存，阴邪积聚于中，循厥阴肝经发病，故发生阴囊肿大疼痛及妇女少腹肿的症状。
English: The reason why there are so-called  and symptoms of minor abdominal swelling in women during the foot, jue, yin and liver transplants is because the lunar month of March, when the earth's axis is the hour, is jue, yin. In March, the yang qi is square long, the yin qi is still present, and the yin evil is accumulated in the middle. When the foot, jue, yin and liver transplants occur, the symptoms of enlarged scrotum and minor abdominal swelling in women occur.

古文：所谓腰脊痛不可以俛仰者，三月一振，荣华万物，一俛而不仰也。
现代文：所谓腰脊痛不能俯仰的，是因为三月阳气振发，万物荣华繁茂，然尚有余寒，人体应之，故出现腰脊疼痛而不能俯仰的症状。
English: The so-called lumbar spine pain that cannot be tilted is due to the March yang vibration, everything is prosperous and flourishing, but there is still cold, the human body responds to it, so there is pain in the lumbar spine and cannot be tilted.

古文：所谓㿗癃疝膺胀者，曰阴亦盛而脉胀不通，故曰㿗癃疝也。
现代文：所谓 㿗癃疝 、皮肤肿胀的，也是因为阴邪旺盛，以致厥阴脉胀闭不通，故发生前阴肿痛、小便不利以及肤胀等病。
English: The so-called pressure sores and swollen skin are also caused by the strong yin and yang so that the jue and yang veins are not able to open and close, resulting in anterior yang and yang pain, unfavorable urination, and skin swelling.

古文：所谓甚则嗌干热中者，阴阳相薄而热，故嗌干也。
现代文：所谓病甚则咽干热中的，是因为三月阴阳相争而阳气胜，阳胜产生内热，热邪循厥阴肝经上逆入喉，故出现咽喉干燥的症状。
English: In the so-called disease of very dry throat fever, it is because in March yin and yang compete with each other and yang wins, yang wins and produces internal heat, and the heat goes through the kidney and the liver and back into the throat, so the symptoms of dry throat appear.

