古文：人之初，性本善。
现代文：人刚刚出生时，禀性本身都是善良的。
English: When a person is just born, the temperament itself is kind.

古文：性相近，习相远。苟不教，性乃迁。
现代文：天性也都相差不多，只是后天所处的环境不同和所受教育不同，彼此的习性才形成了巨大的差别。
English: Their natures are all similar, it's just that the environment they are in and the education they have received are different, which is why their habits are so different from each other.

古文：教之道，贵以专。
现代文：如果从小不好好教育，善良的本性就会遭到破坏。
English: If you don't get a good education from an early age, your good nature will be destroyed.

古文：昔孟母，择邻处。
现代文：为了使人不变坏，最重要的方法就是要专心致志地去教育孩子。
English: The most important way to keep oneself from going bad is to devote oneself to educating children.

古文：子不学，断机杼。窦燕山，有义方。
现代文：五代时，燕山人窦禹钧教育儿子很有方法。
English: In the fifth generation, the Yanshan people Dou Ufan educated his son in a very methodical way.

古文：教五子，名俱扬。
现代文：他教育的五个儿子都很有成就，同时科举成名。
English: The five sons he educated are all very accomplished, and they are all famous for their achievements in science education.

古文：养不教，父之过。
现代文：仅仅是供养儿女吃穿，而不好好教育，是父亲的过错。
English: It is the father's fault for merely providing for his children and not properly educating them.

古文：教不严，师之惰。
现代文：只是教育，但不严格要求，就是做老师的懒惰了。
English: It's just education, but without strict requirements, it's lazy to be a teacher.

古文：子不学，非所宜。
现代文：小孩子不肯好好学习，是很不应该的。
English: It is very wrong for a child to refuse to study well.

古文：幼不学，老何为。
现代文：如果一个人小时候不好好学习，那么到老的时候能有什么作为呢？
English: If a person is not good at learning when he is young, what can he do when he is old?

古文：玉不琢，不成器。人不学，不知义。
现代文：玉不打磨雕刻，就不会成为精美的器物；人如果不学习，就不会懂礼仪，不能成才。
English: If jade is not polished and carved, it will not become a fine utensil; if people do not study, they will not understand etiquette and cannot become talented.

古文：为人子，方少时。亲师友，习礼仪。
现代文：做儿女的，从小时候就要亲近老师和朋友，以便从他们那里学习到许多为人处事的礼节和知识。
English: Children need to be close to their teachers and friends from a young age, so that they can learn a lot of manners and knowledge from them.

古文：香九龄，能温席。孝于亲，所当执。融四岁，能让梨，悌于长，宜先知。
现代文：一个人首先要学的是孝敬父母和友爱兄弟的道理，接下来是学习看到和听到的知识。并且要知道基本的算术，认识文字，阅读文学。
English: A person must first learn the principles of filial piety, respect for parents and brotherly love. Next, he must learn to see and hear. He must also know basic arithmetic, recognize words and read literature.

古文：首孝悌，次见闻。知某数，识某文。一而十，十而百。百而千，千而万。
现代文：我国采用十进位算术方法：一到十是基本的数字，然后十个十是一百，十个一百是一千，十个一千是一万一直变化下去。
English: China uses the decimal arithmetic method: one to ten is the basic number, then ten ten is one hundred, ten hundred is one thousand, ten thousand is ten thousand, and so on.

古文：三才者，天地人。
现代文：还什么是 三才 ？ 三才 指的是天、地、人三个方面。
English: What else is Sanzai? Sanzai refers to the three aspects of heaven, earth and man.

古文：三光者，日月星。
现代文：什么是 三光 ？三光就是太阳、月亮、星星。
English: What are the three lights? The three lights are the sun, the moon and the stars.

古文：三纲者，君臣义。父子亲，夫妇顺。曰春夏，曰秋冬。
现代文：什么是 三纲 ？ 三纲 是人与人之间关系应该遵守的三个行为准则，就是君王与臣子的言行要合乎义理，父母子女之间相亲相爱，夫妻之间和顺相处。春、夏、秋、冬叫做四季。
English: What are the Three Norms? The Three Norms are the three codes of conduct that should be observed in the relationship between people, that is, the words and deeds of the monarch and his subjects should be reasonable, the parents and children should love each other, and the husband and wife should get along well. Spring, summer, autumn and winter are called the four seasons.

古文：此四时，运不穷。
现代文：季节不断变化，春去夏来，秋去冬来，如此循环往复，永不停止。
English: The seasons are constantly changing, spring to summer, autumn to winter, and so on, never stopping.

古文：曰南北，曰西东。此四方，应乎中。
现代文：东、南、西、北，叫做 四方 ，这是指各个方向的位置。
English: East, south, west and north are called four directions, which refers to the position of each direction.

古文：曰水火，木金土。
现代文：这四个方位，必须有个中央位置对应，才能把各个方位定出来。
English: These four directions must have a corresponding central position in order to determine the various directions.

古文：此五行，本乎数。十干者，甲至癸。
现代文：太阳运行的轨道叫 黄道 ，在地球中央有一条假想的与地轴垂直的大圆圈，这就是赤道。
English: The orbit of the sun is called the ecliptic, and in the center of the earth there is an imaginary large circle perpendicular to the earth's axis, which is the equator.

古文：十二支，子至亥。曰黄道，日所躔。曰赤道，当中权。赤道下，温暖极。
现代文：在赤道地区，温度最高，气候特别炎热，从赤道向南北两个方向，气温逐渐变低。
English: In the equatorial region, the temperature is the highest, the climate is particularly hot, and from the equator to the north and south, the temperature gradually becomes lower.

古文：我中华，在东北。
现代文：中国是地处地球的东北边。
English: China is located in the northeastern corner of the globe.

古文：寒燠均，霜露改。右高原，左大海。
现代文：中国气候冷暖匀称而有霜露。右边是高原，左边是大海。
English: China's climate is cold and warm, with frost and dew. On the right is the plateau, on the left is the sea.

古文：曰江河，曰淮济。此四渎，水之纪。
现代文：中国直接流入大海的有长江、黄河、淮河和济水，这四条大河是中国河流的代表。
English: The Yangtze River, the Yellow River, the Huai River and the Jishui River flow directly into the sea in China. These four major rivers are representative of China's rivers.

古文：曰岱华，嵩恒衡。此五岳，山之名。
现代文：中国的五大名山，称为 五岳 ，就是东岳泰山、西岳华山、中岳嵩山、南岳衡山、北岳恒山，这五座山是中国大山的代表。
English: China's five famous mountains, known as the Five Mountains, are Dongyue Taishan, Xiyue Huashan, Zhongyue Songshan, Nanyue Hengshan, and Beidue Hengshan. These five mountains are representative of China's great mountains.

古文：古九州，今改制，称行省，三十五。
现代文：中国汉时以辖九州统管全国，现为省，总共三十五个。
English: When the Han Dynasty ruled China, Kyushu was in charge of the whole country. Now it is a province, with a total of 35 provinces.

古文：曰士农，曰工商。此四民，国之良。
现代文：知识分子、农民、工人和商人，是国家不可缺少的栋梁，称为四民，这是社会重要的组成部分。
English: Intellectuals, farmers, workers and businessmen are the indispensable pillars of the country, known as the four people, which is an important part of society.

古文：曰仁义，礼智信。此五常，不容紊。地所生，有草木。
现代文：如果所有的人都能以仁、义、礼、智、信这五种不变的法则作为处事做人的标准，社会就会永葆祥和，所以每个人都应遵守，不可怠慢疏忽。
English: If all people can take the five unchanging laws of benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith as the standard for doing things and being human, society will be forever peaceful, so everyone should abide by them and should not neglect them.

古文：此植物，遍水陆。有虫鱼，有鸟兽。
现代文：除了人类，在地球上还有花草树木，这些属于植物，在陆地上和水里到处都有。
English: In addition to humans, there are plants and trees on the earth, which belong to plants and are found everywhere on land and in water.

古文：此动物，能飞走。稻粱菽，麦黍稷。
现代文：虫、鱼、鸟、兽属于动物，这些动物有的能在天空中飞，有的能在陆地上走，有的能在水里游。
English: Insects, fish, birds, and beasts are animals. Some of these animals can fly in the sky, some can walk on land, and some can swim in water.

古文：此六谷，人所食。马牛羊，鸡犬豕。
现代文：人类生活中的主食有的来自植物，像稻子、小麦、豆类、玉米和高粱，这些是日常生活的重要食品。
English: Some of the staple foods in human life come from plants, such as rice, wheat, beans, corn and sorghum, which are important foods in daily life.

古文：此六畜，人所饲。
现代文：在动物中有马、牛、羊、鸡、狗和猪，这叫六畜。
English: Among the animals, there are horses, cows, sheep, chickens, dogs and pigs, which are called the six animals.

古文：曰喜怒，曰哀惧。
现代文：这些动物和六谷一样本来都是野生的。
English: These animals, like those in Rokkoku, were originally wild.

古文：爱恶欲，七情俱。
现代文：后来被人们渐渐驯化后，才成为人类日常生活的必需品。
English: Later, after being gradually domesticated by people, it became a necessity of human daily life.

古文：青赤黄，及黑白。此五色，目所识。
现代文：高兴叫做喜，生气叫做怒，伤心叫做哀，害怕叫做惧，心里喜欢叫爱，讨厌叫恶，内心很贪恋叫做欲，合起来叫七情。
English: Pleasure is called joy, anger is called wrath, sadness is called grief, fear is called fear, liking in the heart is called love, hating is called evil, being very greedy in the heart is called lust, and together they are called the seven loves.

古文：酸苦甘，及辛咸。此五味，口所含。膻焦香，及腥朽。
现代文：鼻子可以闻出东西的气味，气味主要有五种，即羊膻味、烧焦味、香味、鱼腥味和腐朽味。
English: The nose can smell the smell of things, and there are five main smells, namely, mutton taste, burnt taste, fragrance, fishy taste and rotten taste.

古文：此五臭，鼻所嗅。匏土革，木石金。丝与竹，乃八音。
现代文：中国古代人把制造乐器的材料，分为八种，即匏瓜、黏土、皮革、木块、石头、金属、丝线与竹子，称为 八音 。
English: Ancient Chinese people divided the materials for making musical instruments into eight types, namely, gourd, clay, leather, wood, stone, metal, silk thread and bamboo, known as eight tones.

古文：曰平上，曰去入。
现代文：中国古代把说话声音的声调分为平、上、去、入四种。
English: In ancient China, the tone of the speaking voice was divided into four types: flat, up, down and in.

古文：此四声，宜调协。
现代文：四声的运用必须和谐，听起来才能使人舒畅。
English: The use of the four tones must be harmonious in order to sound pleasant.

古文：高曾祖，父而身。身而子，子而孙。
现代文：由高祖父生曾祖父，曾祖父生祖父，祖父生父亲，父亲生自己本身，自己生儿子，儿子再生孙子。
English: From great-great-grandfather to great-grandfather, great-grandfather to grandfather, grandfather to father, father to himself, himself to son, son to grandson.

古文：自子孙，至玄曾。
现代文：由自己的儿子、孙子再接下去，就是曾孙和玄孙。
English: They are followed by their sons, grandchildren, great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren.

古文：乃九族，人之伦。父子恩，夫妇从。兄则友，弟则恭。长幼序，友与朋。君则敬，臣则忠。此十义，人所同。当师叙，勿违背。
现代文：前面提到的十义：父慈、子孝、夫和、妻顺、兄友、弟恭、朋信、友义、君敬、臣忠，这是人人都应遵守的，千万不能违背。
English: The ten principles mentioned above: fatherly kindness, filial piety, husbandly love, obedience to one's wife, brotherly friendship, brotherly respect, good faith, friendliness, respect for one's superiors, and loyalty to one's subjects, should be observed by everyone and must never be violated.

古文：斩齐衰，大小功。至缌麻，五服终。
现代文：斩衰、齐衰、大功、小功和缌麻，这是中国古代亲族中不同的人死去时穿的五种孝服。
English: The five kinds of filial piety worn by different members of ancient Chinese families at the time of their death are: Zhenzhen, Qi Zhen, Da Gong, Xiao Gong and Nianma.

古文：礼乐射，御书数。古六艺，今不具。
现代文：礼法、音乐、射箭、驾车、书法和算数是古代读书人必须学习的六种技艺，这六种技艺到现已经没有人能同时具备了。
English: Etiquette, music, archery, driving, calligraphy and arithmetic are the six skills that ancient readers must learn, and these six skills have not been possessed by anyone at the same time.

古文：惟书学，人共遵。
现代文：在六艺中，只有书法现今社会还是每个人都推崇的。
English: Among the six arts, only calligraphy is still respected by everyone in today's society.

古文：既识字，讲说文。有古文，大小篆。隶草继，不可乱。
现代文：中国的文字发展经历了古文、大篆、小篆、隶书、草书，这一定要认清楚，不可搞混乱了。
English: The development of Chinese characters has gone through ancient Chinese characters, capital Chinese characters, small Chinese characters, cursive Chinese characters, and cursive Chinese characters. This must be clearly recognized and must not be confused.

古文：若广学，惧其繁。但略说，能知原。
现代文：假如想广泛地学习知识，实在是不容易的事，也无从下手，但如能做大体研究，还是能了解到许多基本的道理。
English: If you want to learn a wide range of knowledge, it's really not easy and you can't get started, but if you can do general research, you can still learn a lot of basic principles.

古文：凡训蒙，须讲究。详训诂，明句读。
现代文：凡是教导刚入学的儿童的老师，必须把每个字都讲清楚，每句话都要解释明白，并且使学童读书时懂得断句。
English: Any teacher who teaches children who have just entered school must make every word clear, explain every sentence clearly, and make students understand sentences when reading.

古文：为学者，必有初。小学终，至四书。
现代文：作为一个学者，求学的初期打好基础，把小学知识学透了，才可以读 四书 。
English: As a scholar, you should lay a good foundation at the beginning of your studies, and you should have learned the primary school knowledge thoroughly before you can read the four books.

古文：论语者，二十篇。
现代文：《论语》这本书共有二十篇。
English: There are a total of twenty chapters in the book "Analects."

古文：群弟子，记善言。
现代文：是孔子的弟子们，以及弟子的弟子们，记载有关孔子言论的一部书。
English: It is the disciples of Confucius, and the disciples of his disciples, who have written a book about the sayings of Confucius.

古文：孟子者，七篇止。
现代文：《孟子》这本书是孟轲所作，共分七篇。
English: The book "Mencius" was written by Mencius and is divided into seven parts.

古文：讲道德，说仁义。
现代文：内容也是有关品行修养、发扬道德仁义等优良德行的言论。
English: The content is also about the cultivation of moral conduct, the promotion of morality, benevolence and other fine virtues.

古文：作中庸，乃孔伋。中不偏，庸不易。
现代文：作《中庸》这本书的是孔伋， 中 是不偏的意思， 庸 是不变的意思。
English: The book "Zhongyong" was written by Kong Qian. "Zhong" means "unbiased" and "Yong" means "unchanged."

古文：作大学，乃曾子。自修齐，至平治。
现代文：作《大学》这本书的是曾参，他提出了 修身齐家治国平天下 的主张。
English: The book "University" was written by Zeng Zan, who proposed the idea of "self-cultivation and family-oriented governance for a peaceful world."

古文：孝经通，四书熟。如六经，始可读。
现代文：把四书读熟了，孝经的道理弄明白了，才可以去读六经这样深奥的书。
English: Only when you have read the Four Books well and understood the truth of the Filial Piety Sutra can you read such a profound book as the Six Classics.

古文：诗书易，礼春秋。号六经，当讲求。
现代文：《诗》、《书》、《易》、《礼》、《春秋》，再加上《乐》称六经，这是中国古代儒家的重要经典，应当仔细阅读。
English: "Poetry," "Book," "Ease," "Rite," "Spring and Autumn" and "Music" are called the Six Classics, which are important classics of ancient Chinese Confucianism and should be read carefully.

古文：有连山，有归藏。有周易，三易详。有典谟，有训诰。
现代文：《连山》、《归藏》、《周易》，是我国古代的三部书，这三部书合称 三易 ， 三易 是用 卦 的形式来说明宇宙间万事万物循环变化的道理的书籍。
English: "Lianshan," "Gathering" and "Zhou Yi" are three ancient Chinese books. These three books are collectively known as the "Three Yi" (三易). The "Three Yi" (三易) is a book that uses the form of a riddle to explain the cycle of change of all things in the universe.

古文：有誓命，书之奥。
现代文：《书经》的内容分六个部分：一典，是立国的基本原则；二谟，即治国计划；三训，即大臣的态度；四诰，即国君的通告；五誓，起兵文告；六命，国君的命令。
English: The contents of the "Book of Songs" are divided into six parts: one, the basic principles of the founding of the country; two, the plan for governing the country; three, the attitude of the minister; four, the announcement of the sovereign; five, the oath, the declaration of war; six, the order of the sovereign.

古文：我周公，作周礼。著六官，存治体。
现代文：周公著作了《周礼》，其中记载着当时六宫的官制以及国家的组成情况。
English: Zhou Gong wrote "Zhou Li," which recorded the official system of the Six Palaces and the composition of the country at that time.

古文：大小戴，注礼记。述圣言，礼乐备。
现代文：戴德和戴圣整理并且注释《礼记》，传述和阐扬了圣贤的著作，这使后代人知道了前代的典章制度和有关礼乐的情形。
English: Daide and Dai Sheng compiled and annotated the "Rites and Rituals" and narrated and expounded the writings of the sages, which enabled future generations to know the previous generation's ceremonial system and the situation related to ritual music.

古文：曰国风，曰雅颂。号四诗，当讽咏。诗既亡，春秋作。
现代文：《国风》、《大雅》、《小雅》、《颂》，合称为四诗，它是一种内容丰富、感情深切的诗歌，值得去朗诵。
English: "National Style," "Grand Elegance," "Small Elegance" and "Ode," collectively known as the Four Poems, is a rich, emotional poem that is worth reciting.

古文：寓褒贬，别善恶。三传者，有公羊。有左氏，有谷梁。经既明，方读子。
现代文：由于周朝的衰落，诗经也就跟着被冷落了，所以孔子就作《春秋》，在这本书中隐含着对现实政治的褒贬以及对各国善恶行为的分辨。三传就是羊高所著的《公羊传》，左丘明所著的《左传》和谷梁赤所著的《谷梁传》，这些是解释《春秋》的书。
English: As a result of the decline of the Zhou Dynasty, the Book of Poetry was also left out in the cold, so Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn." In this book, praise and criticism of real politics and the distinction between good and evil behavior of various countries are implied. The three biographies are "The Biography of the Ram" written by Yang Gao, "The Biography of the Left" written by Zuo Quming and "The Biography of Gu Liang" written by Gu Liangqi. These are the books that explain "Spring and Autumn."

古文：撮其要，记其事。
现代文：经传都读熟了然后读子书。
English: When you are familiar with all the sutras, you can read the children's books.

古文：五子者，有荀扬。文中子，及老庄。
现代文：子书繁杂，必须选择比较重要的来读，并且要记住每件事的本末因果。五子是指荀子、扬子、文中子、老子和庄子。
English: There are a lot of children's books, so you have to choose the most important ones to read, and remember the cause and effect of everything. Wuzi refers to Zizi, Yangzi, Wenzhongzi, Laozi and Zhuangzi.

古文：经子通，读诸史。
现代文：他们所写的书，便称为子书。
English: The books they write are called children's books.

古文：考世系，知终始。自羲农，至黄帝。
现代文：经书和子书读熟了以后，再读史书、读史时必须要考究各朝各代的世系，明白他们盛衰的原因，才能从历史中记取教训。
English: After the sutras and children's books have been read well, then read the history books, and when reading history, it is necessary to study the lineage of each dynasty and generation, understand the reasons for their rise and fall, in order to learn lessons from history.

古文：号三皇，居上世。唐有虞，号二帝。相揖逊，称盛世。
现代文：自伏羲氏、神农氏到黄帝，这三位上古时代的帝王都能勤政爱民、非常伟大，因此后人尊称他们为 三皇 。
English: The three emperors of the most ancient times, including the Zifu Shi clan, the Shennong clan and the Yellow Emperor, were able to govern diligently and love the people, and were very great. Therefore, later generations called them the Three Emperors.

古文：夏有禹，商有汤。周文武，称三王。
现代文：这几个德才兼备的君王被后人称为三王。
English: These emperors, who were both virtuous and talented, were later known as the Three Kings.

古文：夏传子，家天下。
现代文：禹把帝位传给自己的儿子，从此天下就成为一个家族所有的了。
English: Yu passed the imperial throne to his son, and from then on the world became a family possession.

古文：四百载，迁夏社。汤伐夏，国号商，六百载，至纣亡。
现代文：经过四百多年，夏被汤灭掉，从而结束了它的统治。汤朝征讨夏朝，定国号为商，过了六百多年，直到纣的灭亡。
English: After more than four hundred years, Xia was eliminated by Tang, thus ending its rule. Tang Dynasty conquered Xia Dynasty, and established the country as a merchant, after more than six hundred years, until the demise of Yao.

古文：周武王，始诛纣。八百载，最长久。
现代文：周武王起兵灭掉商朝，杀死纣王，建立周朝，周朝的历史最长，前后延续了八百多年。
English: King Zhou Wu raised an army to wipe out the Shang Dynasty, killed the Shao King, and established the Zhou Dynasty. The Zhou Dynasty has the longest history, lasting for more than 800 years.

古文：周辙东，王纲坠。
现代文：自从周平王东迁国都后，对诸侯的控制力就越来越弱了。
English: Since Zhou Ping Wang moved the capital to the east, the control of the princes has become weaker and weaker.

古文：逞干戈，尚游说。
现代文：诸侯国之间时常发生战争，而游说之士也开始大行其道。
English: Wars often broke out between the feudal states, and lobbyists began to make their mark.

古文：始春秋，终战国。
现代文：东周分为两个阶段，一是春秋时期，一是战国时期。
English: Eastern Zhou is divided into two phases, one is the Spring and Autumn Period, and the other is the Warring States Period.

古文：五霸强，七雄出。嬴秦氏，始兼并。
现代文：春秋时的齐桓公、宋襄公、晋文公、秦穆公和楚庄王号称五霸。战国的七雄分别为齐楚燕韩赵魏秦。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Qi Huan, Song Xiang, Jin Wen, Qin Mu and Chu Zhuang were known as the Five Heroes. The Seven Heroes of the Warring States Period were Qi Chu Yan Han Zhao Wei Qin.

古文：传二世，楚汉争。高祖兴，汉业建。
现代文：战国末年，秦国的势力日渐强大，把其他诸侯国都灭掉了，建立了统一的秦朝。
English: At the end of the Warring States period, the power of the Qin State grew stronger and stronger, eliminating all other vassal states and establishing the unified Qin Dynasty.

古文：至孝平，王莽篡。光武兴，为东汉。
现代文：秦传到二世胡亥，天下又开始大乱，最后，形成楚汉相争的局面。
English: Qin passed to the second Hu Hai, the world began to be in turmoil again, and finally, a situation of competition between Chu and Han was formed.

古文：四百年，终于献。
现代文：汉高祖打败了项羽，建立汉朝。
English: Han Gaozu defeated Xiang Yu and established the Han Dynasty.

古文：魏蜀吴，争汉鼎。
现代文：汉朝的帝位传了两百多年，到了孝平帝时，就被王莽篡夺了。
English: The imperial throne of the Han Dynasty was passed down for more than two hundred years. When it came to Emperor Xiaoping, it was usurped by Wang Mang.

古文：号三国，迄两晋。
现代文：王莽篡权。
English: Wang Mang usurped power.

古文：宋齐继，梁陈承。为南朝，都金陵。
现代文：改国号为新，天下大乱，刘秀推翻更始帝，恢复国号为汉，史称东汉光武帝，汉朝延续四百年，到汉献帝的时候灭亡。
English: The name of the country was changed to New Han, and the world was in turmoil. Liu Xiu overthrew Emperor Kangxi and restored the name of the country to Han. Historically, he was known as Eastern Han Emperor Guangwu. The Han Dynasty lasted for four hundred years, and died out when the Han Emperor was crowned.

古文：北元魏，分东西。
现代文：东汉末年，魏国、蜀国、吴国争夺天下，形成三国相争的局面。
English: At the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, the states of Wei, Shu, and Wu competed for the world, creating a situation of three countries competing with each other.

古文：宇文周，与高齐。迨至隋，一土宇。
现代文：后来魏灭了蜀国和吴国，但被司马炎篡夺了帝位，建立了晋朝，晋又分为东晋和西晋两个时期。
English: Later, Wei destroyed the states of Shu and Wu, but Sima Yan usurped the imperial throne and established the Jin Dynasty, which was divided into two periods, the Eastern Jin and the Western Jin.

古文：不再传，失统绪。唐高祖，起义师。
现代文：晋朝王室南迁以后，不久就衰亡了，继之而起的是南北朝时期。
English: After the royal family of the Jin Dynasty moved south, it soon declined and died, followed by the Northern and Southern Dynasties.

古文：除隋乱，创国基。
现代文：南朝包括宋齐梁陈，国都建在金陵。
English: The Southern Dynasty included Song Qiliang Chen, and the national capital was built in Jinling.

古文：二十传，三百载。
现代文：北朝则指的是元魏。
English: The Northern Dynasty refers to the Yuan and Wei dynasties.

古文：梁灭之，国乃改。梁唐晋，及汉周。
现代文：元魏后来也分裂成东魏和西魏，西魏被宇文觉篡了位，建立了北周；东魏被高洋篡了位，建立了北齐。
English: Later, the Yuan Wei also split into the Eastern Wei and the Western Wei. The Western Wei was usurped by Yu Wen Jie and established the Northern Zhou; the Eastern Wei was usurped by Gao Yang and established the Northern Qi.

古文：称五代，皆有由。
现代文：杨坚重新统一了中国，建立了隋朝，历史上称为隋文帝。
English: Yang Jian reunified China and established the Sui Dynasty, historically known as the Sui Emperor.

古文：炎宋兴，受周禅。十八传，南北混。辽与金，皆称帝。元灭金，绝宋世。
现代文：北方的辽人、金人和蒙古人都建立了国家，自称皇帝，最后蒙古人灭了金朝和宋朝，建立了元朝，重又统一了中国。
English: The Liao, Jin and Mongols in the north all established states and claimed to be emperors. Finally, the Mongols destroyed the Jin and Song dynasties, established the Yuan dynasty and reunified China.

古文：舆图广，超前代。
现代文：元朝的疆域很广大，所统治的领土，超过了以前的每一个朝代。
English: The territory of the Yuan Dynasty was very vast, and the territory it ruled exceeded that of every previous dynasty.

古文：九十年，国祚废。
现代文：然而它只维持了短短九十年，就被农民起义推翻了。
English: However, it only lasted a short ninety years before it was overthrown by a peasant uprising.

古文：太祖兴，国大明。号洪武，都金陵。
现代文：元朝末年，明太祖朱元璋起义，最后推翻元朝统治，统一全国，建立大明，年号洪武，定都在金陵。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhu Yuanzhang, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, led an uprising, finally overthrew the Yuan Dynasty, unified the whole country, and established Daming. The year of Hongwu is always in Jinling.

古文：迨成祖，迁燕京。
现代文：到明成祖即位后，把国都由金陵迁到北方的燕京。
English: After Emperor Ming Cheng Zu ascended the throne, he moved the capital from Jinling to Yanjing in the north.

古文：十六世，至崇祯。
现代文：明朝共传了十六个皇帝，直到崇祯皇帝为止，明朝就灭亡了。
English: The Ming Dynasty had a total of sixteen emperors, until Emperor Chongzhen, when the Ming Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：权阉肆，寇如林。李闯出，神器焚。
现代文：明朝末年，宦官专权，天下大乱，老百姓纷纷起义，以闯王李自成为首的起义军攻破北京，迫使崇祯皇帝自杀，明朝最后灭亡。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, the eunuchs had absolute power, the country was in turmoil, and the common people revolted one after another. The rebel army led by Wang Li Zi defeated Beijing and forced Emperor Chongzhen to commit suicide. The Ming Dynasty finally perished.

古文：清世祖，膺景命。靖四方，克大定。由康雍，历乾嘉，民安富，治绩夸。
现代文：清军入关后，清世祖顺治皇帝在北京登上帝座，平定了各地的混乱局面，使得老百姓可以重新安定地生活。
English: After the Qing army entered the pass, Emperor Shunzhi, the founding father of the Qing Dynasty, ascended to the throne in Beijing, which calmed the chaotic situation in various regions and enabled the common people to live a stable life again.

古文：道咸间，变乱起，始英法，扰都鄙。
现代文：顺治皇帝以后，分别是康熙、雍正、乾隆和嘉庆四位皇帝，在此期间，天下太平，人民生活比较安定，国家也比较强盛。
English: After Emperor Shunzhi, there were four emperors, namely Kangxi, Yongzheng, Qianlong and Jiaqing. During this period, the world was peaceful, people's lives were relatively stable, and the country was relatively strong.

古文：同光后，宣统弱，传九帝，满清殁。革命兴，废帝制，立宪法，建民国。
现代文：孙中山领导的辛亥革命，推翻了清朝政府的统治，废除了帝制，建立了宪法，成立了中华民国政府，孙中山任临时大总统。
English: The Xinhai Revolution, led by Sun Yat-sen, overthrew the rule of the Qing government, abolished the imperial system, established a constitution, and established the government of the Republic of China. Sun Yat-sen served as interim president.

古文：古今史，全在兹。
现代文：三皇五帝到建立民国的古今历史，全都列在此处了。
English: From the three emperors and five emperors to the establishment of the Republic of China, all the ancient and modern history is listed here.

古文：载治乱，知兴衰。史虽繁，读有次。
现代文：通过对历史的学习，可以了解各朝各代的治乱兴衰，领悟到许多有益的东西。
English: Through the study of history, we can understand the rise and fall of various dynasties and generations, and understand many useful things.

古文：史记一，汉书二。后汉三，国志四。
现代文：中国的历史书虽然纷繁、复杂，但在读的时候应该有次序：先读《史记》，然后读《汉书》。
English: Although China's history books are numerous and complex, there should be an order when reading them: read "Histories" first, and then read "Chinese Books."

古文：兼证经，参通鉴。读史者，考实录。
现代文：第三读《后汉书》，第四读《三国志》，读的同时，还要参照经书，参考《资治通鉴》，这样就可以更好地了解历史的治乱兴衰了。
English: The third reading of "Post-Han Dynasty," the fourth reading of "History of the Three Kingdoms," and at the same time reading, you should also refer to the scriptures, refer to the "Capitalism General Reference," so that you can better understand the rise and fall of history.

古文：通古今，若亲目。口而诵，心而惟。
现代文：读历史的人应该更进一步地去翻阅历史资料，了解古往今来事情的前因后果，就好像是自己亲眼所见一样。
English: People who read history should go further to read historical materials and understand the antecedents and consequences of things from ancient times to the present, as if they were seeing with their own eyes.

古文：朝于斯，夕于斯。
现代文：读书学习，要有恒心，要一边读，一边用心去思考。
English: In reading and studying, one must have perseverance, one must read while thinking with one's heart.

古文：昔仲尼，师项橐。古圣贤，尚勤学。赵中令，读鲁论。
现代文：只有早早晚晚都把心思用到学习上，才能真正学好。
English: Only if you apply your mind to study early in the morning and late at night, can you really study well.

古文：彼既仕，学且勤。披蒲编，削竹简。
现代文：从前孔老夫子听说鲁国有一位七岁神童项橐，虽然只有七岁，孔子依然向他学习。像孔子这样的圣贤，尚不忘勤学。
English: Once upon a time, Confucius heard that there was a seven-year-old child prodigy in the State of Lu, although he was only seven years old, Confucius still learned from him. A sage like Confucius has not forgotten to study hard.

古文：彼无书，且知勉。头悬梁，锥刺股。彼不教，自勤苦。
现代文：宋朝的赵普，已官至中书令了，天天还手不释卷地阅读论语，不因为自己已经当了高官，而忘记勤奋读书。
English: Zhao Pu of the Song Dynasty, who had reached the rank of middle-ranking official, read the Analects of Confucius every day. It was not because he had become a high-ranking official that he forgot to study diligently.

古文：如囊萤，如映雪。
现代文：西汉时路温舒把文字抄在蒲草上阅读。
English: In the Western Han Dynasty, it was common for people to read and write on papyrus.

古文：家虽贫，学不辍。
现代文：公孙弘将春秋刻在竹子削成的竹片上。
English: Gongsunhong engraved the spring and autumn seasons on a piece of bamboo.

古文：如负薪，如挂角。
现代文：两人都很穷，买不起书，但还不忘勤奋读书。
English: Both of them are very poor and cannot afford to buy books, but they do not forget to study hard.

古文：身虽劳，犹苦卓。
现代文：东汉的孙敬读书时把自己的头发拴在屋梁上，以免打瞌睡。
English: In the Eastern Han Dynasty, Sun Jing tied his hair to the roof beam to avoid falling asleep while reading.

古文：苏老泉，二十七。始发奋，读书籍。
现代文：战国时苏秦读书每到疲倦时就用锥子刺大腿，他们不用别人督促而自觉勤奋苦读。
English: During the Warring States period, whenever Su Qin was tired of reading, he would prick his thigh with a cone. They did not need to be urged by others, but studied diligently.

古文：彼既老，犹悔迟。
现代文：就像晋朝人车胤，把萤火虫放在纱袋里当照明读书。
English: It's like the Jin dynasty people used to put fireflies in a gauze bag as a light for reading.

古文：尔小生，宜早思。若梁灏，八十二。对大廷，魁多士。
现代文：梁灏这么大年纪，尚能获得成功，不能不使大家感到惊异，钦佩他的好学不倦。
English: At such an old age, Liang Hui is still able to achieve success, which cannot but make everyone feel surprised and admire his tireless eagerness to learn.

古文：彼既成，众称异。尔小生，宜立志。
现代文：而我们应该趁着年轻的时候，立定志向，努力用功就一定前途无量。
English: But we should take advantage of our youth, set our sights high, and work hard so that our future will be limitless.

古文：莹八岁，能咏诗。
现代文：北齐一个叫祖莹的人，八岁就能吟诗。
English: In Northern Qi, a person named Zu Ying was able to recite poetry at the age of eight.

古文：泌七岁，能赋棋。
现代文：唐朝有个叫李泌的人，七岁时就能以下棋为题而作出诗赋。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Li Xiu who, at the age of seven, was able to compose a poem on the subject of chess.

古文：彼颖悟，人称奇。尔幼学，当效之。
现代文：他们两人的聪明和才智，在当时很受人们的赞赏和称奇，你们现在刚刚开始学习，应该效法他们，努力用功读书。
English: Both of them were admired and admired for their intelligence and wit at the time. Now that you are just starting to study, you should follow their example and study hard.

古文：蔡文姬，能辨琴。谢道韫，能咏吟。
现代文：东汉末年的蔡文姬能分辨琴声好坏，晋朝的才女谢道韫则能出口成诗。
English: Cai Wenji, who lived at the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, could distinguish between good and bad sounds on the harp, while Xie Daojun, a talented woman of the Jin Dynasty, was able to write poetry.

古文：彼女子，且聪敏。尔男子，当自警。
现代文：女流之辈尚且聪颖，敏而好学；男儿更应严于律己，努力修学，时时警惕。
English: Women are more intelligent, sensitive and eager to learn; men should be more self-disciplined, study hard and be vigilant at all times.

古文：唐刘晏，方七岁。举神童，作正字。
现代文：唐玄宗时，有个叫刘晏的孩子，才七岁，就被推举为神童，并且做了负责刊正文字的官。
English: In the time of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, a seven-year-old boy named Liu Xuan was elected as a prodigy and became the official in charge of publishing the orthography.

古文：彼虽幼，身已仕。有为者，亦若是。
现代文：刘晏虽然年纪小，但却已经做官，担当国家给他的重任，要想成为一个有用的人，只要勤奋好学，也可以和刘晏一样名扬后世。
English: Although Liu Wei is young, he has already been an official, taking on the important tasks given to him by the state. If you want to become a useful person, as long as you are diligent and eager to learn, you can be as famous as Liu Wei in the future.

古文：犬守夜，鸡司晨。苟不学，曷为人。
现代文：狗会守夜看家护院，鸡会每天天刚亮时报晓，人如果不学习，有什么资格称为人呢。
English: Dogs will keep watch at night to look after the nursing home, chickens will wake up at dawn every day. If people do not study, what qualifications do they have to be called people?

古文：蚕吐丝，蜂酿蜜。
现代文：蚕吐丝以供我们做衣料，蜜蜂酿制蜂蜜，供人们食用。
English: Silkworms produce silk for our clothing, and bees produce honey for human consumption.

古文：人不学，不如物。幼而学，壮而行。
现代文：人要是不懂得学习，以自己的知识、技能来实现自己的价值，连动物都不如。
English: If people do not know how to learn and use their knowledge and skills to realize their own value, they are not even as good as animals.

古文：上致君，下泽民。扬名声，显父母。
现代文：人在幼年时要好好学习知识，到壮年后能够学以致用，上替国家效力，下为人民谋福利。
English: People should study knowledge well when they are young, and be able to apply what they have learned when they are mature. They should serve the country first and benefit the people second.

古文：光于前，裕于后。人遗子，金满赢。
现代文：如果你为人民做出应有的贡献，人民就会赞扬你，而父母也可以得到荣耀，给祖先增添了光彩，也给下代留下了好的榜样。
English: If you make your due contribution to the people, the people will praise you, and your parents can also be honored, adding luster to your ancestors and leaving a good example for the next generation.

古文：我教子，唯一经。勤有功，戏无益。
现代文：勤奋上进的人都会有好的收获，而只顾贪玩，浪费了大好时光是一定要后悔的。
English: Those who are diligent and progressive will have a good harvest, but those who are greedy and waste a good time must regret it.

古文：戒之哉，宜勉力。
现代文：要时刻提醒自己，勉励自己好好学习。
English: You should always remind yourself and encourage yourself to study hard.

