古文：王镇之，字伯重，琅邪临沂人，征士弘之兄也。曾祖暠，晋骠骑将军。
现代文：王镇之字伯重，琅笽临沂人，是隐士王弘之的哥哥，曾祖王訥，是晋代的骠骑将军。
English: Wang Zhen's character Bo Chong, 临人, is the brother of the hermit Wang Hongzhi, the great-grandfather Wang Qian, was the cavalry general of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖耆之，中书郎。父随之，上虞令。
现代文：祖父王耆之是中书郎，父亲王随之，是上虞县令。
English: His grandfather, Wang Xizhi, was a middle school teacher, and his father, Wang Xizhi, was a Shangyu County magistrate.

古文：镇之初为琅邪王卫军行参军，出补剡、上虞令，并有能名。
现代文：王镇之开始当琅笽王卫军行参军，出外补任剡县和上虞县令，在任上都有能干的名声。
English: At the beginning of Wang Zhen, when the Shao Wang Wei Army marched to join the army, he went abroad to fill the posts of Shao County and Shangyu County, and had a reputation for ability in his post.

古文：内史谢輶请为山阴令，复有殊绩。
现代文：内史谢车酋请王镇之当山阴县令，他再一次作出了特别的成绩。
English: Wang Zhen was invited by the Chief of the Inner History Xie Che to be the county magistrate of Shanyin County, and he once again made a special achievement.

古文：迁卫军参军，本国郎中令，加宁朔将军。
现代文：升官卫军参军，本国郎中令，加号宁朔将军。
English: He was promoted to the Guards and joined the army, and became the vice-commander of his country, with the additional title of General Ningshuo.

古文：桓玄辅晋，以为大将军录事参军。
现代文：桓玄辅佐晋朝，用他当大将军录事参军。
English: Emperor Jin's aide, Kuan Xuan, used him as a general to enlist in the army.

古文：时三吴饥荒，遣镇之衔命赈恤，而会稽内史王愉不奉符旨，镇之依事纠奏。
现代文：当时三吴发生饥荒，派遣王镇之带着朝廷命令赈济灾民，但是会稽内史王愉不接受圣旨，王镇之按法律弹劾了他。
English: At that time, a famine occurred in Sanwu, and Wang Zhenzhi was sent to bring the imperial order to help the victims. However, the internal auditor Wang Yu did not accept the edict, and Wang Zhenzhi impeached him according to the law.

古文：愉子绥，玄之外甥，当时贵盛，镇之为所排抑，以母老求补安成太守。
现代文：王愉的儿子王绥，是桓玄的外甥，当时是非常显赫的人物。王镇之便遭到他的排挤。
English: Wang Yu's son Wang Yao, a nephew of Huan Xuan, was a very prominent figure at that time. Wang Zhenzhi was then ousted by him.

古文：及玄败，玄将苻宏寇乱郡境，镇之拒战弥年，子弟五人，并临阵见杀。
现代文：王镇之因为母亲年老便以此作为借口请求补任安成太守，到了桓玄失败时，桓玄的部将苻宏侵略本郡边境，王镇之抵抗了一年多，兄弟子侄五人都在战斗中牺牲。
English: Because of his mother's old age, Wang Zhenzhi used this as an excuse to request the replacement of Ancheng's governor. When Huan Xuan failed, Huan Xuan's subordinate general Zou Hong invaded the county's border. Wang Zhenzhi resisted for more than a year, and all five of his brothers, sons, and nephews died in the battle.

古文：母忧去职，在官清洁，妻子无以自给，乃弃家致丧还上虞旧基。
现代文：母亲去世他就离职，因为在做官时清廉正直，他的妻子儿女无法得到完全的物质供应。
English: After his mother's death, he left his job because he had been honest and upright when he was an official, and his wife and children were unable to obtain a complete material supply.

古文：毕，为子标之求安复令，随子之官。
现代文：于是丢下家庭带着母亲灵柩回到上虞祖先坟墓，安葬完毕，为儿子王标之请求任安彳复县令，随同儿子到任上做官。
English: So he left his family and took his mother's coffin back to the ancestral tomb of Shangyu. After the burial, he was appointed to the post of county magistrate at the request of his son Wang Bing, and accompanied his son to the post to work as an official.

古文：服阕，为征西道规司马、南平太守。
现代文：三年守孝期满，当征西将军刘道规的司马，南平太守。
English: At the end of the three-year period of filial piety, when the Western Conquest General Liu Daoyi's Sima, Nanping Taishu.

古文：徐道覆逼江陵，加镇之建威将军，统檀道济、到彦之等讨道覆，以不经将帅，固辞，不见听。
现代文：徐道覆进逼江陵。朝廷增加王镇之建威将军的官号，统率檀道济、到彦之等人讨伐徐道覆，王镇之因为未搞过军事，坚决辞让，但没被允许。
English: The imperial court increased the official title of Wang Zhenjun to General Jianwei, and led Dang Daoji, Zhu Yanzhi and others to fight against Xu Daohui. Wang Zhenjun, because he had never engaged in military affairs, resolutely resigned, but was not allowed.

古文：既而前军失利，白衣领职，寻复本官。
现代文：既而他的先锋将军打败了。王镇之以大兵身份兼任官职，不久又恢复官职。
English: Even though his vanguard general was defeated, Wang Zhen served concurrently as an officer as a soldier, and soon resumed his official duties.

古文：以讨道覆功，封华容县五等男，征廷尉。
现代文：因为讨伐徐道覆的功劳，封爵华容县五等男、被征为廷尉。
English: Because of the merit of fighting against Xu Daohui, the fifth-ranked man of Huarong County was knighted and enlisted as a courtier.

古文：晋穆帝何皇后山陵，领将作大匠。
现代文：晋穆帝何皇后在建陵墓时，王镇之任将作大匠，又进官御史中丞。
English: When Emperor Jinmu was building the mausoleum for Empress He, Wang Zhenren was assigned to be the master carpenter and was promoted to the position of imperial historian.

古文：迁御史中丞，秉正不挠，百僚惮之。出为使持节、都督交广二州诸军事、建威将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：因为刚正不阿，朝中百官都怕他。接着王镇之出外当使持节，都督交广二州诸军事，建威将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: Because he was not upright, all the officials in the court were afraid of him. Then, when Wang Zhen went abroad to hold a festival, the governor of the capital handed him over to the military in Guangzhou, General Jian Wei, General Ping Yue, and Guangzhou stabbed history.

古文：高祖谓人曰： 王镇之少著清绩，必将继美吴隐之。
现代文：高祖对人说： 王镇之青年便建立清廉名誉，他必定会成为吴隐之之后最好的官吏。
English: Gao Zu said to the people: Wang Zhen's youth has established a reputation for integrity, and he will surely become the best official after Wu Yingzhi.

古文：岭南之弊，非此不康也。 
现代文：岭南的弊病必定会一洗干净。 
English: Lingnan's ills will surely be washed away.

古文：在镇不受俸禄，萧然无所营。
现代文：在任上不接受俸禄，离开广州时，和初至广州时几乎一样干净。
English: He did not accept a salary while in office, and left Guangzhou almost as clean as when he first arrived.

古文：去官之日，不异始至。高祖初建相国府，以为谘议参军，领录事。善于吏职，严而不残。迁宋台祠部尚书。
现代文：高祖刚开始建立相国府，用他当谘议参军，兼领录尚书事。王镇之在行政上特别能干，虽然严厉，但不残酷，又升官宋国宫廷的祠部尚书。
English: Gao Zu had just begun to establish the Imperial Household Agency, and he used him as a consultant to join the army, and also as a recorder. Wang Zhenzhi was particularly capable in administration, and although he was strict, he was not cruel. He was also promoted to the office of the Shrine Department of the Song Dynasty.

古文：高祖践阼，镇之以脚患自陈，出为辅国将军、琅邪太守，迁宣训卫尉，领本州大中正。
现代文：高祖刘裕即位做皇帝，王镇之以脚病名义申请辞职，刘裕让他出外当辅国将军、琅笽太守，又升官宣训卫尉，并任本州大中正。
English: Liu Yu, the great-grandfather, ascended to the throne as emperor. Wang Zhen applied for resignation in the name of a foot ailment. Liu Yu sent him abroad to serve as vice-governor of the country, governor of Yunnan Province, and he was promoted to the position of Xuanxiu Guards lieutenant, and he also served as the vice-president of Honshu University.

古文：永初三年，卒官，时年六十六。
现代文：永初三年，在任上逝世，时年六十六岁。
English: In the third year of his reign, he died in office at the age of 66.

古文：弟弘之，在《隐逸传》。
现代文：他弟弟王弘之的事迹在《隐逸传》之中。
English: The story of his younger brother, Wang Hongzhi, is told in "Hidden History."

古文：杜慧度，交趾朱鹴人也。
现代文：杜慧度，交趾朱鹴人。祖籍京兆。
English: Du Huidu, a cousin of Zhu Xi, was born in Beijing.

古文：本属京兆。曾祖元，为宁浦太守，遂居交趾。
现代文：他曾祖父杜元，当宁浦太守，于是迁居交阝止。
English: He was the grandfather of Du Yuan, when he was the governor of Ningpu, so he moved to Jiaxing.

古文：父瑗，字道言，仕州府为日南、九德、交趾太守。
现代文：他父亲杜瑗字道言。在州府做官做到日南、九德、交阝止太守。
English: His father, Du Xuan, was a great orator. As an official in the prefectural government, he achieved the positions of Nichinan, Jiude, Jiaotong and Dazhu.

古文：初，九真太守李逊父子勇壮有权力，威制交土，闻刺史腾遁之当至，分遣二子断遏水陆津要。
现代文：当初九真太守李逊父子勇敢健壮有权力，威风盖过交州。李逊听说刺史滕遁之要到，便分派他的两个儿子截断水陆要路。
English: At that time, Jiuzhen Taishou Li Xun and his son were brave, strong and powerful, and they dominated Jiaozhou. When Li Xun heard that Sheng Sheng was about to arrive, he sent his two sons to cut off the water and land routes.

古文：瑗收众斩逊，州境获宁。
现代文：杜瑗收集人马杀掉李逊，交州得以安宁。
English: Cuckoo gathers men and horses to kill Li Xun, and Jiaozhou is at peace.

古文：除龙骧将军。
现代文：被任命为龙骧将军。
English: He was appointed as the general of Longjing.

古文：遁之在州十余年，与林邑累相攻伐。
现代文：滕遁之在交州十余年，和林邑国之间多次互相攻击。
English: Teng Yanzhi has been in Jiaozhou for more than ten years, and Lin Yizhi and Teng Yanzhi have repeatedly attacked each other.

古文：遁之将北还，林邑王范胡达攻破日南、九德、九真三郡，遂围州城。
现代文：滕遁之将回到北方，林邑王范胡达攻克日南、九德、九真三郡，于是围攻州城，当时滕遁之已走远了。
English: Teng Yizhi will return to the north, Lin Yu Wang Fan Huda conquered Nichinan, Jiude, Jiuzhen three counties, and then besieged the state capital, when Teng Yizhi had gone far away.

古文：时遁之去已远，瑗与第三子玄之悉力固守，多设权策，累战，大破之。追讨于九真、日南。连捷，故胡达走还林邑。
现代文：杜瑗和他的第三个儿子杜玄之竭尽全力防守、设谋划策，经多次交战，大败敌人，接着又追讨到九真、日南，连战皆捷，所以范胡达逃回林邑。
English: Du Yu and his third son, Du Xianzhi, tried their best to defend, plan and strategize. After many battles, they defeated the enemy, and then pursued the enemy to Jiuzhen and Nichinan. They were successful in consecutive battles, so Fan Huda fled back to Linyi.

古文：乃以瑗为龙骧将军、交州刺史。
现代文：朝廷于是用杜瑗为龙骧将军、交州刺史。
English: The imperial court then used the cuckoo as the dragon dragon general, and the state of jiaozhou as the history.

古文：义旗进号冠军将军。卢循窃据广州，遣使通好，瑗斩之。
现代文：他的部属进号为冠军将军，卢循反叛占据广州，派使者交结他，杜瑗将来人斩首。
English: His subordinate Jin was named the champion general, Lu Xun occupied Guangzhou in rebellion, sent an envoy to confront him, and Du Xuan beheaded him.

古文：义熙六年，年八十四，卒，追赠右将军，本官如故。
现代文：义熙六年，杜瑗八十四岁去世，追认为右将军，其他官职照旧。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Yixi, Du Xuan passed away at the age of 84, and was posthumously regarded as the right general. Other official positions remained unchanged.

古文：慧度，瑗第五子也。初为州主簿，流民督护，迁九真太守。
现代文：杜慧度，是杜瑗的第五个儿子，开始当州的主簿，流民督护，接着升官九真太守。
English: Du Huidu, the fifth son of Du Xuan, began as the state's chief accountant, the guardian of the exiles, and then was promoted to the position of Jiu Zhen Taozhu.

古文：瑗卒，府州纲佐以交土接寇，不宜旷职，共推慧度行州府事，辞不就。
现代文：杜瑗去世，府州官吏们认为交州与外国相邻，应天天都有刺史，共同推举杜慧度代管交州府中事务，杜慧度坚决辞让不接受。
English: After Du Xuan's death, the prefectural officials believed that Jiaozhou was adjacent to a foreign country and should have a bitter history every day. They jointly nominated Du Huidu to be in charge of the affairs of Jiaozhou Fuzhong. Du Huidu resolutely refused to accept the offer.

古文：七年，除使持节、督交州诸军事、广武将军、交州刺史。
现代文：七年朝廷命他当使持节，督交州诸军事，广武将军、交州刺史。
English: In the seventh year, the imperial court ordered him to hold the festival, and he became the military governor of Jiaozhou, the general of Guangwu, and the historian of Jiaozhou.

古文：诏书未至，其年春，卢循袭破合浦，径向交州。
现代文：诏书还未抵达，当年春天，卢循袭占合浦郡，直接向交州进发。
English: The imperial edict had not yet arrived, so in the spring of that year, Lu Xun raided Zhanhaipo County and headed straight for Jiaozhou.

古文：慧度乃率文武六千人距循于石碕，交战，禽循长史孙建之。循虽败，余党犹有三千人，皆习练兵事。
现代文：慧度于是率领文武将士六千多人在石石奇抗拒卢循的军队。经过交战，活捉卢循长史孙建之，卢循虽然失败，其残余还有三千多人，而且都是久经战斗的老兵。
English: Huidu then led more than six thousand literati warriors in Shishiqi to resist Lu Xun's army. After the battle, he captured Lu Xun's eldest son Sun Jianzhi alive. Although Lu Xun failed, there are still more than three thousand remnants, and they are all battle-tested veterans.

古文：李子逊李弈、李脱等奔窜石碕，盘结俚、獠，各有部曲。
现代文：李逊的儿子李弈、李脱等人逃到石石奇盘踞在狸獠中间，各有自己的部众。
English: Li Xun's sons, Li Yin and Li De, and others fled to Shishiqichibanyu in the midst of the foxes, each with their own followers.

古文：循知弈等与杜氏有怨，遣使招之，弈等引诸俚帅众五六千人，受循节度。
现代文：卢循了解到李弈等人和杜氏有世仇，便派人召引他。李弈等人带着各个狸族头人和部众五六千人，接受卢循指挥。
English: Lu Xun learned that Li Yi and others had a feud with the Du clan, so he sent someone to summon him. Li Yi and others brought the heads of the various Tuxi tribes and 56,000 followers to accept Lu Xun's command.

古文：六月庚子，循晨造南津，命三军入城乃食。
现代文：六月庚子，卢循早晨便抵达南津，叫三军攻进城后才吃饭。
English: In June, Geng Zi and Lu Xun arrived in Nanzin in the morning and ordered the three armies to attack the city before eating.

古文：慧度悉出宗族私财，以充劝赏。
现代文：杜慧度把宗族的私有财产拿出来作为赏赐部众的物质。
English: Du Huidu took the private property of the clan as the material to reward his followers.

古文：弟交趾太守慧期、九真太守章民并督率水步军，慧度自登高舰，合战，放火箭雉尾炬，步军夹两岸射之。循众舰俱然，一时散溃，循中箭赴水死。
现代文：慧度的弟弟交阝止杜慧期，九真太守杜章明都统率水步兵，杜慧度亲自攀上高船，与卢循的部队交战。在火箭的尾巴上点火射向敌人，步兵则在两岸猛烈射击敌人，卢循的舰船都燃烧起来，卢军倾刻之间大败而逃，卢循被箭射中掉入水中淹死。
English: Huidu's younger brother Jiaojing stopped Du Huizhou, the 9th emperor's eunuch Du Zhangming led the water infantry, and Du Huizhou himself climbed onto the tall ship and fought with Lu Cun's troops. He ignited the tail of the rocket and fired at the enemy, and the infantrymen fired fiercely at the enemy on both sides of the river. Lu Cun's ships all caught fire, and the Lu army fled in defeat. Lu Cun was shot by an arrow and fell into the water and drowned.

古文：斩循及父嘏，并循二子，亲属录事参军阮静、中兵参军罗农夫、李脱等，传首京邑。
现代文：杜军将卢循和他的父亲卢嘏，以及卢的二个儿子，卢的亲属录事参军阮静，中兵参军罗农夫、李脱等人斩首。
English: Du's troops beheaded Lu Xun and his father Lu Yao, as well as Lu's two sons, Lu's relative Nguyn Quc, Lu's middle-ranking soldier Luo Nongfu, and Lu's middle-ranking soldier Li Tuo.

古文：封慧度龙编县侯，食邑千户。
现代文：他们的脑袋被送到京城。杜慧度被封龙编县侯，享受一千户租税待遇。
English: Their heads were sent to the capital. Du Huidu was named the county magistrate of Longyan County and enjoyed the tax treatment of a thousand households.

古文：高祖践阼，进号辅国将军。
现代文：高祖刘裕登位做皇帝，杜慧度进号辅国将军。
English: The great ancestor Liu Yu ascended to the throne as emperor, and Du Huidou was promoted to vice-governor.

古文：其年，率文武万人南讨林邑，所杀过半，前后被抄略，悉得还本。
现代文：当年，杜慧度率领文武将士一万多人南征林邑国，杀死了林邑国的大半士兵，而宋军前前后后被林邑国掠走的人财却都归还了。
English: That year, Du Huidu led more than ten thousand literati warriors to invade Linyi Province, killing most of the soldiers of Linyi Province, while the Song Army returned all the plundered people and wealth of Linyi Province.

古文：林邑乞降，输生口、大象、金银、古贝等，乃释之。遣长史江悠奉表献捷。
现代文：林邑国王请求投降，并且输送牲口、大象、金银、古贝等，于是饶了林邑国，杜慧度派长史江悠上表贡献胜利成果。
English: The King of Linyi requested to surrender, and sent livestock, elephants, gold and silver, Gubei and so on, thus sparing the country of Linyi. Du Huidu sent Chang Shi Jiang Yu to the table to contribute to the victory.

古文：慧度布衣蔬食，俭约质素，能弹琴，颇好《庄》、《老》。
现代文：杜慧度穿布衣，吃素菜，俭约朴素，会弹琴，很喜欢读《老子》、《庄子》。
English: Du Huidu wears cloth clothes, eats vegetarian food, is frugal and simple, can play the piano, and likes to read "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi."

古文：禁断淫祀，崇修学校。岁荒民饥，则以私禄赈给。
现代文：在州内严禁多余的庙宇，广修学校，荒年之际人民没饭吃，便用个人的俸禄赈济人民。
English: In the state, superfluous temples and extensive schools are strictly prohibited. When the people have no food during the lean years, they will use their personal salaries to help the people.

古文：为政纤密，有如治家，由是威惠沾洽，奸盗不起，乃至城门不夜闭，道不拾遗。
现代文：在管理上很严密，好像治家一样，因此他的恩惠威望人人感知，奸人盗贼也停息，以至城门夜晚不用关闭，人们不捡路人的东西。
English: In terms of management, it is very strict, as if it were a family, so his grace and prestige are felt by everyone, and the traitors and thieves have stopped, so that the city gate does not have to be closed at night, and people do not pick up the things of passers-by.

古文：少帝景平元年，卒，时年五十，追赠左将军。
现代文：少帝景平元年去世，享年五十，死后被追赠为左将军。
English: The young Emperor Jingping died in the first year of the year, at the age of fifty. After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Left.

古文：以慧度长子员外散骑侍郎弘文为振威将军、刺史。
现代文：朝廷用杜慧度的长子员外散骑侍郎杜弘文当振威将军、刺史。
English: The imperial court used Du Huidi's eldest son, Du Hongwen, to be the general of Zhenwei and the sashimi.

古文：初，高祖北征关、洛，慧度板弘文为鹰扬将军，流民督护，配兵三千，北系大军。
现代文：当初高祖北征关中、洛阳一带，杜慧度任命弘文为鹰扬将军、流民督护，给他配兵三千，到北方作为大军的后援。
English: At that time, when Gao Zu was in the middle of the Northern Expedition in Luoyang, Du Huidu appointed Guangwen as the general of Yingyang and the overseer of the exiles, and assigned him three thousand soldiers to go to the north as the back-up of the great army.

古文：行至广州，关、洛已平，乃归。
现代文：杜弘文走到广州时，关洛地区已被平定。
English: When Du Hongwen went to Guangzhou, the Guanluo area had already been pacified.

古文：统府板弘文行九真太守。
现代文：州府又署杜弘文代理九真太守。
English: The prefectural government also dispatched Du Hongwen to act as the deputy governor of Jiuzhen.

古文：及继父为刺史，亦以宽和得众，袭爵龙编侯。
现代文：到了继承他父亲当刺史，也因为宽厚温和得百姓欢心，继承他父亲爵位龙编侯。
English: When it came to inheriting his father's title of prince, he also won the people's favor because of his generosity and gentleness, inheriting his father's title of prince.

古文：太祖元嘉四年，以廷尉王徽为交州刺史，弘文就征。会得重疾，牵以就路，亲旧见其患笃，劝表待病愈。
现代文：太祖元嘉四年朝廷用廷尉王徽当交州刺史，杜弘文响应朝廷的征调，恰遇得了重病，要人牵扶才得上路，亲戚旧属看到他病情严重，劝他上表病好后再说。
English: In the four years of the great ancestor Yuan Jia, the imperial court used the imperial lieutenant Wang Hui as the secretary of the imperial court, and Du Hongwen responded to the imperial court's solicitation. He just happened to be seriously ill and needed someone to help him get on the road. His relatives saw that he was seriously ill and advised him to wait until he was better.

古文：弘文曰： 吾世荷皇恩，杖节三世，常欲投躯帝庭，以报所荷。况亲被征命，而可宴然者乎！
现代文：杜弘文说： 我家世世代代蒙受朝廷大恩，三代执掌交州，常常想在朝廷卖命，以报答皇上的大恩，况且我亲自被征调，而能安然不动吗？
English: Du Hongwen said: My family has enjoyed the great favor of the imperial court for generations. Three generations have been in charge of Jiaozhou. I often want to work hard at the imperial court to repay the emperor's great favor. Moreover, I myself have been conscripted, but can I safely move?

古文：如其颠沛，此乃命也。 
现代文：如果中途坎坷不顺，这也是命中注定的。 
English: If things get bumpy along the way, that's just fate.

古文：弘文母既年老，见弘文舆疾就路，不忍分别，相与俱行。到广州，遂卒。
现代文：杜弘文的母亲年岁很老，看到杜弘文带病上路，不忍心与儿子分别，和儿子一起上路到了广州，杜弘文便逝世了。
English: Du Hongwen's mother was very old. When she saw Du Hongwen on the road with an illness, she couldn't bear to part with her son. She went on the road with her son to Guangzhou, and Du Hongwen passed away.

古文：临死，遣弟弘猷诣京，朝廷甚哀之。
现代文：临死前，派他的弟弟杜弘猷到京城上贡，朝廷对他的去世表示沉痛哀悼。
English: Before his death, he sent his younger brother, Du Hongtao, to pay tribute to the capital, and the imperial court expressed its deep condolences for his death.

古文：徐豁，字万同，东莞姑幕人也，中散大夫广兄子。
现代文：徐豁字万同，东莞姑幕人，是中散大夫徐广的哥哥的儿子。
English: Xu Huan Zi Wan Tong, Dongguan aunt of the shogun, is the son of the elder brother of Zhongshan doctor Xu Guang.

古文：父邈，晋太子左卫率。
现代文：父亲徐邈，是晋朝的太子左卫率。
English: His father, Xu Xi, was Prince Zuo Wei of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：豁晋安帝隆安末为太学博士。
现代文：徐豁在晋安帝隆安末，当太学博士，桓玄辅佐晋朝时，当中外都督。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Yongan in Jin and An, when he was a Doctor of Theology and Vice-Councilor of Emperor Jin, Xu Huan was the prefectural governor of both China and foreign countries.

古文：桓玄辅政，为中外都督，豁议： 致敬唯内外武官，太宰、司徒，并非军职，则琅邪王不应加敬。 
现代文：徐豁提议： 表示敬礼只能是内外的武官，太宰、司徒，并非军队职务。则对于琅笽王不应加以敬礼。 
English: Xu Huan proposed: The salute can only be shown by military attachés at home and abroad, Dazai and Sito, not military positions. Then, the salute should not be given to the king of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：玄讽中丞免豁官。
现代文：桓玄暗示中丞免除徐豁的官职。
English: Kuan Xuan hinted that the middle-ranking officer should relieve Xu Huan of his post.

古文：玄败，以为秘书郎，尚书仓部郎，右军何无忌功曹，仍为镇南参军；又祠部，永世令，建武司马，中军参军，尚书左丞。
现代文：桓玄败亡后，朝廷用徐豁任秘书郎，尚书仓部郎，右军将军何无忌功曹，同时当镇南参军，又当祠部郎，永世令、建武司马、中军参军，尚书左丞。
English: After the defeat and death of Huan Xuan, the imperial court appointed Xu Huan as secretary, Shang Shukuraburo, general of the right army, at the same time, he joined the army in the south of the town, and he was also the minister of the shrine, Yongshirong, Jianwu Sima, and the Chinese army, and Shang Shukuraburo.

古文：永初初，为徐羡之镇军司马，尚书左丞，山阴令。
现代文：永初初年，徐豁当徐羡之镇军司马，尚书左丞，山阴令。
English: In the first year of Yongchu, Xu Huan served as the town's military secretary, Shang Shuzhu Zuorong, and Shan Yin Rong.

古文：历二丞三邑，精练明理，为一世所推。
现代文：徐豁做过二次中丞三次县令。每次都把管理工作做得条理清晰。为时人所推崇。
English: Xu Huan served as the second middle-ranking general and the third county magistrate. Each time, he made the management work orderly and clear. He was highly respected by the people at that time.

古文：元嘉初，为始兴太守。
现代文：元嘉初年，当始兴太守。
English: In the first year of Yuan Jia, Dang Shi Xing became the governor.

古文：三年，遣大使巡行四方，并使郡县各言损益。
现代文：三年朝廷派大使巡察四方，叫各个郡县官员陈述自己的政绩，徐豁因此上表陈述三条建议：
English: Three years later, the imperial court sent an ambassador to inspect the four directions and asked each county official to report on his political achievements. Xu Huan therefore presented three proposals in the above table:

古文：豁因此表陈三事，其一曰： 郡大田，武吏年满十六，便课米六十斛，十五以下至十三，皆课米三十斛，一户内随丁多少，悉皆输米。
现代文： 第一：本郡大田，年满十六的武官租借，应收租税六十斛大米，十五到十三岁的，都收租税三十斛大米，一家之内根据人口多少，都要上交租税。
English: First: In Daejeon, this county, military attachés aged 16 or older are required to lease 60 bags of rice, and those aged 15 to 13 are required to lease 30 bags of rice. Depending on the population within a family, they must pay tax.

古文：且十三岁兒，未堪田作，或是单迥，无相兼通，年及应输，便自逃逸，既遏接蛮、俚，去就益易。
现代文：况且十三岁的小儿，还不能种田地，或者是单身一人，无法平摊，年龄到了应交租税的时候，便逃到远方，既然与蛮、俚少数民族接近，逃往回来更加容易。
English: Moreover, thirteen-year-old children are not yet able to cultivate fields, or they are single and cannot be shared equally. When they are old enough to pay taxes, they flee to far away places. Since they are close to the barbarian and Han ethnic minorities, it is easier to escape and return.

古文：或乃断截支体，产子不养，户口岁减，实此之由。
现代文：百姓有的被截断手脚，有的生了孩子又养不活，户口每年都有减少，实在是应该追究这其中的原因。
English: Some people have had their hands and feet amputated, some have given birth to children they cannot feed, and the number of household registrations has decreased every year. It is really necessary to investigate the reasons for this.

古文：谓宜更量课限，使得存立。今若减其米课，虽有交损，考之将来，理有深益。 
现代文：我认为应该重新制订租税制度，让百姓得以成家立业，虽然减少了他们的租税，对政府有些损失，但对于将来却有非常大的好处。 
English: I believe that the tax system should be reformed so that people can start a family and start a business. Although reducing their taxes has some losses for the government, it has great benefits for the future.

古文：其二曰： 郡领银民三百余户，凿坑采砂，皆二三丈。功役既苦，不顾崩压，一岁之中，每有死者。官司检切，犹致逋违，老少相随，永绝农业；千有余口，皆资他食，岂唯一夫不耕，或受其饥而已。所以岁有不稔，便致甚困。
现代文：第二，本郡有交银税的百姓三百多家，他们挖坑开矿，每个坑都二三丈，很费功夫，不顾土矿塌方，一年之中，总有被打死的人，官家检查，往往导致逃跑，老少相随，永远离开了农业，一千多口人，都仰仗他人而吃饭，哪里仅仅是一个农民不耕田，必有人受到饥饿的威胁而已，所以年岁不丰收，便遭到困穷。
English: Second, there are more than three hundred people in this county who pay the silver tax. They dig pits and open mines, each pit is two or three feet high, and they work very hard. Despite the landslide of the earth and mine, there are always people who are killed in a year. Official inspections often lead to escape. The old and the young follow each other and have left agriculture forever. More than a thousand people rely on others to eat. Where there is only one farmer who does not farm, someone will be threatened by hunger. Therefore, if there is not a good harvest every year, they will be impoverished.

古文：寻台邸用米，不异于银，谓宜准银课米，即事为便。 
现代文：考虑宫城用米，与用银子没有差别，我认为按银价征收大米，于事更方便。
English: Considering that the rice used in Miyagi is no different from the rice used for silver, I think it is more convenient to levy rice according to the silver price.

古文：其三曰： 中宿县俚民课银，一子丁输南称半两。
现代文： 第三，中宿县俚人交银税，一子一口人丁输银税只相当于半两。
English: Thirdly, in Zhongshuku County, a single person pays the highest amount of silver tax, while a single person with one child pays only half the amount of silver tax.

古文：寻此县自不出银，又俚民皆巢居鸟语，不闲货易之宜，每至买银，为损已甚。
现代文：考虑到这县不出银矿，加上俚民都住在洞中，说话像鸟语一般，不熟悉交易的方法，每到买银子的时候，损失又很大。
English: Considering that there are no silver mines in this county, and that the people of Xing live in caves, speak like birds, and are not familiar with the methods of trading, every time they buy silver, they lose a lot.

古文：又称两受入，易生奸巧，山俚愚怯，不辨自申，官所课甚轻，民以所输为剧。今若听计丁课米，公私兼利。 
现代文：另外称两而收，容易导致奸伪狡诈山民。山民愚蠢而胆怯，无法申明，公家所收的税很轻，俚民却认为很重，如今如果允许按丁收米税，于公私都有好处。 
English: It is also said that two taxes are collected at the same time, which can easily lead to treachery and cunning of the mountain people. The mountain people are stupid and timid, and cannot affirm that the tax collected by the public is very light, but the people think it is very heavy. Nowadays, if the rice tax is allowed to be collected according to Ding, it will be good for both public and private.

古文：在郡著绩，太祖嘉之。下诏曰： 始兴太守豁，洁己退食，恪居在官，政事修理，惠泽沾被。
现代文：在郡上作出了显著成绩，太祖非常称赞他，下了一道诏书说： 始兴太守徐豁，廉洁奉公，勤劳公务，政绩卓著，恩惠在民。
English: He made remarkable achievements in the county. The great-grandfather highly praised him and issued an imperial edict saying: Shixing Daju Xu Huan, incorruptible public servant, diligent in official duties, outstanding in political achievements, favored by the people.

古文：近岭南荒弊，郡境尤甚，拯恤有方，济厥饥馑，虽古之良守，蔑以尚焉。
现代文：近来岭南饥荒，始兴郡内尤其严重，徐豁治理有方，赈济饥民，即使古代的好太守，也赶不上。
English: Recently, the famine in Lingnan, especially in Shixing County, has been particularly serious. Xu Huan has managed the famine well and provided relief to the starving people. Even the good Taizhou in ancient times could not keep up with the situation.

古文：宜蒙褒贲，以旌清绩，可赐绢二百匹，谷千斛。 
现代文：应该蒙受褒赏，以表彰他卓越的成绩，可以赏给他绢布二百匹，一千斛谷。 
English: He should be rewarded in recognition of his outstanding achievements. He should be given two hundred horses and one thousand donkeys.

古文：五年，以为持节、督广交二州诸军事、宁还将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。未拜，卒，时年五十一。
现代文：五年朝廷用徐豁当持节，督广交二州诸军事、宁远将军，平越中郎将、广州刺史，还未拜官便去世了。当年五十一岁。
English: In the fifth year, the imperial court used Xu Huan to hold a festival. He was the governor of Guangzhou, the military of the two states, the general of Ningyuan, the general of Pingyue, and the historian of Guangzhou. He died before he became an official. He was fifty-one years old.

古文：太祖又下诏曰： 豁廉清勤恪，著称所司，故擢授南服，申其才志。不幸丧殒，朕甚悼之。可赐钱十万，布百匹，以营葬事。 
现代文：太祖文帝又下诏说： 徐豁清廉奉公，在任官上作出了成绩。所以选拔他当广州刺史，让他实现自己的志向，不幸早死，我非常哀悼他，可以给他赐钱十万，布一百匹，以经营安葬大事。 
English: The great-grandfather Emperor Wen also issued an edict saying: Xu Huanqinglian served the public well and made achievements in his post. Therefore, he was selected to be the chief historian of Guangzhou, let him realize his ambition, unfortunately died early, I mourn him very much, I can give him one hundred thousand yuan and one hundred pieces of cloth to manage the funeral.

