古文：寇俊字祖俊，上谷昌平人也。
现代文：寇俊字祖俊，是上谷昌平人。
English: Kou Jun, also known as Zu Jun, is a descendant of Kamitani Shohei.

古文：祖赞，魏南雍州刺史。
现代文：祖父寇赞，魏南雍州刺史。
English: Grandfather Kouzan, Wei Nan Yongzhou stabbing history.

古文：父臻，安远将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：父亲寇臻，安远将军、郢州刺史。
English: His father, Kou Zhen, was a general in the Anyuan army and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：隽性宽雅，幼有识量，好学强记。
现代文：寇俊性情宽厚文雅，从小懂事有气量，喜欢学习记忆力好。
English: Kou Jun's disposition is generous and elegant. He has been knowledgeable and energetic since childhood. He likes to learn and has a good memory.

古文：兄祖训、祖礼及隽，并有志行。
现代文：兄长寇祖训、寇祖礼和寇俊，都有志行。
English: His elder brothers, Kou Zu Xun, Kou Zu Li and Kou Jun, all volunteered.

古文：闺门雍睦，白首同居。
现代文：整个家庭都友好和睦，祖孙同居。
English: The whole family is friendly and harmonious, and the grandparents and grandchildren live together.

古文：父亡虽久，而犹于平生所处堂宇，备设帷帐几杖，以时节列拜，垂涕陈荐，若宗庙焉。
现代文：其父去世虽然时间很久，但是还是在他平生所居住的房屋内，设置布帷帐帘几杖等物，按时节依次祭拜，流着泪陈献牺牲，如同祭祀宗庙。
English: Although it has been a long time since his father passed away, he still sets up cloth curtains, a few canes and other things in the house where he used to live, and worships according to the seasons, offering sacrifices with tears, as if he were worshiping the ancestral temple.

古文：吉凶之事，必先启告，远行往返，亦如之。
现代文：好事坏事，肯定要先加以禀报，离家远行往返，也都要禀报。
English: Good things and bad things must first be reported, and if you travel far away from home, you must also report it.

古文：性又廉恕，不以财利为心。
现代文：性情又廉洁宽厚，不谋求财利。
English: He is honest by nature and is not motivated by wealth or self-interest.

古文：家人曾卖物与人，而剩得绢五匹。
现代文：家人曾经责物给他人，获利五匹绢。
English: A family member once lent money to others and made a profit of five horses.

古文：隽于后知之,乃曰： 恶木之阴，不可暂息；盗泉之水，无容误饮。
现代文：寇俊后来知道了，说道： 不好的树木下的阴凉，暂时休息也不行；盗泉的水，不能随便喝。
English: Afterward, Kou Jun knew, and said: The shade under the bad trees is not good for a temporary rest, and the water from the stolen spring cannot be drunk casually.

古文：得财失行，吾所不取。 遂访主还之。
现代文：获得钱财却丧失德行，我是不愿意这样做的。 于是寻找到买主归还给他。
English: I didn't want to make money and lose my virtue, so I found the buyer and returned it to him.

古文：其雅志如此。
现代文：寇俊平时的意愿就是如此。
English: This is what Ko Jun usually wants to do.

古文：以选为魏孝文帝挽郎，除奉朝请。
现代文：以选为魏孝文帝挽郎，任命为奉朝请。
English: He was chosen to be the groom of Emperor Wei Xiaowen and was appointed to serve the Emperor.

古文：大乘贼起，燕齐扰乱，隽参护军事东讨，以功授员外散骑侍郎，迁尚书左民郎中。
现代文：大乘贼反叛，燕赵动乱不安，寇俊参与监督军事束讨，以功而授予员外散骑侍郎，升迁尚书左民郎中。
English: The Mahayana Thieves rebelled, Yan Zhao was disturbed and uneasy, Kou Jun participated in the supervision of military bundles, and was awarded the title of non-commissioned officer for meritorious service, and was promoted to Shangshu Zuo Minro Junior High School.

古文：以母忧不拜。
现代文：因为居母丧而没有赴任。
English: He did not take up his post due to the death of his mother.

古文：正光三年，拜轻将军，迁扬烈将军、司空府功曹参军，转主簿。
现代文：正光三年，授予轻车将军，调任扬烈将军、司空府功曹参军，转任主簿。
English: Three years later, Zhengguang was awarded the title of General of Light Vehicles, transferred to the post of General Yang Rong, and Sikuofu Gong Cao joined the army, and was transferred to the post of chief accountant.

古文：时灵太后临朝，减食禄官十分之一，造永宁佛寺，令隽典之。
现代文：当时灵太后摄政，减去十分之一享受俸禄的官吏，建造永宁佛寺，令寇俊掌管此事。
English: At that time, the regent of the Empress Dowager Ling, minus one-tenth of the officials who enjoyed a salary, built Yongning Buddhist Temple, leaving Kou Jun in charge of the matter.

古文：资费巨万，主吏不能欺隐。
现代文：建造费用极多，掌管的官吏却不能欺瞒。
English: The construction of the temple cost a huge amount of money, but officials of all ranks did not dare to commit acts of corruption.

古文：寺成，又极壮丽。
现代文：寺庙建成后，十分壮丽。
English: After the completion of the temple, it was extremely spectacular and magnificent.

古文：灵太后嘉之，除左军将军。
现代文：灵太后给予嘉奖，授予左军将军。
English: Empress Dowager Ling praised him and appointed him as the general of the Left Army.

古文：孝昌中，朝议以国用不足，乃置盐池都将，秩比上郡。
现代文：孝昌年问，朝廷商议认为国用不足，于是设置盐池都将，官位与上郡相等。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, the imperial court deliberated and decided that due to insufficient state expenditure, the official in charge of the salt pond would receive the same salary as the county officials.

古文：前后居职者，多有侵隐。
现代文：先后任此职务者，多有侵占隐没。
English: Those who have held this position successively have mostly occupied and disappeared.

古文：乃以隽为之。
现代文：于是任命寇俊任此职。
English: As a result, Kou Jun was appointed to this position.

古文：加龙骧将军，仍主簿。
现代文：加龙骧将军，依然任主簿。
English: General Garong Yao, still acting as chief accountant.

古文：永安初，华州民史底与司徒杨椿讼田。
现代文：永安初年，华州百姓史底与司徒杨椿争田产而打官司。
English: In the first year of Yong'an, the Huazhou People's History Department and the scholar Yang Tsubaki fought for land and filed a lawsuit.

古文：长史以下，以椿势贵，皆言椿直，欲以田给椿。
现代文：长史官员以下，以杨椿为权贵，因此都说杨椿有理，要将田地给杨椿。
English: Changshi officials and below, regard Yang Cam as powerful, so they all say that Yang Cam has reason to give the fields to Yang Cam.

古文：隽曰： 史底穷民，杨公横夺其地。
现代文：寇俊说： 史底是穷困百姓，杨公强行夺其土地。
English: Kou Jun said: The bottom of history is the poor people, Yang Gong forcibly seized their land.

古文：若欲损不足以给有余，见使雷同，未敢闻命。 遂以地还史底。
现代文：如果要损不足而给有余，大家都如此认为，我不敢听命。 于足将地还给史底。
English: If you want to give more than you take away, which is what everyone thinks, then I won't take orders.

古文：孝庄帝后知之，嘉隽守正不挠，即拜司马，赐帛百匹。
现代文：孝庄帝后来知道丁这件事，嘉奖寇俊守正不挠，马上委任为司马，赐给一百匹帛。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang later learned of Ding's deed, praised Kou Junshou's perseverance, and immediately appointed him as the steward of horses and gave him a hundred mules.

古文：其附椿者，咸谴责焉。
现代文：那些替杨椿说话的，都受到了谴责。
English: Those who spoke for Mr. Yang were denounced.

古文：二年，出为左将军、州刺史。
现代文：二年，出京城任左将军、梁州刺史。
English: Two years later, he went to Beijing to serve as General of the Left, and became the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：民俗荒犷，多为盗贼。
现代文：当地风俗野蛮，很多人成为盗贼。
English: Local customs are barbaric, and many people become thieves.

古文：隽乃令郡县立庠序，劝其耕桑，敦以礼让，数年之中，风俗顿革。
现代文：寇俊下令郡县建立学校，劝导百姓从事农业生产，勉励礼让，数年之中，民情风俗得以全面改革。
English: Koujun ordered counties to establish schools, persuade people to engage in agricultural production, and encourage courtesy. In a few years, folk customs were comprehensively reformed.

古文：梁遣其将曹琰之镇魏兴，继日版筑。
现代文：梁朝派遣将领曹琰之镇守魏兴，天天构筑工事。
English: The Liang Dynasty dispatched the general Cao Yu to guard Wei Xing, and the construction work was carried out every day.

古文：琰之屡扰疆埸，边人患之。
现代文：曹琰之经常派遣军队侵扰边境，边境之人都很担心。
English: Cao Bingzhi often sends troops to invade the border, and people on the border are very worried.

古文：隽遣长史杜休道率兵攻克其城，并擒琰之。
现代文：寇俊派遣长史杜休道率兵攻克魏兴城，活捉曹琰之。
English: Kuo Jun dispatched Long Shi Du Xiu Dao and his soldiers to attack Wei Xing City and capture Cao Yu alive.

古文：琰之即梁大将军景宗之季弟也。
现代文：曹琰之是梁朝大将曹景宗最小的弟弟。
English: Cao Xizhi was the youngest brother of Liang Dynasty General Cao Jingzong.

古文：于是梁人惮焉。
现代文：从此梁朝人都害怕了。
English: From then on, everyone in the Liang Dynasty was afraid.

古文：属魏室多故，州又僻远，梁人知无外援，遂遣大兵顿魏兴，志图攻取。
现代文：适逢魏朝发生了很多事件，梁州又处在僻远之处，梁朝知道梁州没有外援，于是派遣大军驻扎在魏兴，目的是攻取梁州。
English: A lot of events happened at the same time as the Wei Dynasty, and Liangzhou was in a remote place. The Liang Dynasty knew that Liangzhou had no foreign aid, so it sent a large army to be stationed in Weixing with the aim of conquering Liangzhou.

古文：隽抚励将士，人思效命。
现代文：寇俊安抚激励将士，大家都愿舍命报效。
English: Kuo Jun pacified and inspired the soldiers, and everyone was willing to give their lives to repay the favor.

古文：梁人知其得众心也，弗之敢逼。
现代文：梁人得知其受到众人忠心拥戴，不敢来攻。
English: Liang people heard that he was very popular, so they did not dare to approach Liangzhou.

古文：隽在州清苦，不治产业。
现代文：寇俊任州刺史俭朴清苦，不置办产业。
English: Kou Jun was appointed by the state to be thrifty, simple and clean, and not to run industries.

古文：秩满，其子等并徒步而还。
现代文：任职期满离任时，其儿子等人都是步行回去。
English: When he left office at the end of his term, his son and others all walked back.

古文：吏人送隽，留连于道，久之乃得出界。
现代文：州吏和百姓送行，一路上留恋不舍，经历多时才出了州境。
English: The state officials and the people saw them off, and they were nostalgic along the way. It took them a long time to get out of the state.

古文：大统二年，东魏授隽洛州刺史，隽因此乃谋归阙。
现代文：大统二年，柬魏委任寇俊为洛州刺史，寇俊因此密谋来归。
English: In the second year of the Great Reunification, Cambodia and Wei appointed Ko Jun to be a historian of Luozhou. As a result, Ko Jun plotted to return.

古文：五年，将家及亲属四百余口入关，拜秘书监。
现代文：五年，率领全家和亲属共四百余人入关，授任秘书监。
English: In five years, he led his entire family and relatives, a total of more than four hundred people, into the customs and was awarded the title of secretary supervisor.

古文：时军国草创，坟典散逸，隽始选置令史，抄集经籍，四部群书，稍得周备。
现代文：当时统军治国各种事务都开始兴办，经史典籍散逸，寇俊选置令史，抄写收集经典书籍，四部群书逐渐得以完备。
English: At that time, all kinds of affairs concerning the unified army and the governance of the country began to be carried out. After the historical classics were dispersed, Guo Jun selected and placed the history, copied and collected classic books, and the four books were gradually completed.

古文：加镇东将军，封西安县男，邑二百户。
现代文：加镇东将军，封西安县男，食邑二百户。
English: Ga Zhen Dongzhen, Fong Xi'an County, Meng, Shueyi 200 households.

古文：十七年，除车骑大将军、仪同三司，加散骑常侍。
现代文：十七年，任命为靼骑大将军、仪同三司，加散骑常侍。
English: In the seventeenth year of his reign, he was appointed the Tatar cavalry general, the three chiefs of the ceremonial cavalry, and the sundry cavalry attendants.

古文：隽以年老乞骸骨，太祖弗许。
现代文：寇俊因为年老请求辞职，太祖没有同意。
English: The great-grandfather did not agree to Kou Jun's request to resign due to old age.

古文：遂称疾笃，不复朝觐。
现代文：于是自称疾病严重，不再入朝。
English: As a result, he claimed that he was seriously ill and would no longer enter the Imperial Palace.

古文：魏恭帝三年，赐姓若口引氏。
现代文：魏恭帝三年，赐姓若口引氏。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was given the surname of Wakaguchihi.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵为子，增邑五百户。
现代文：孝置查登基，进爵位为子爵，食邑增加五百户。
English: Xiao Jiezha was enthroned as emperor, he was raised to the rank of viscount, and the number of food villages increased by 500 households.

古文：武成元年，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，增邑并前二千户。
现代文：亘递元年，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，增封食邑合前所封共二千户。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to the general of the imperial cavalry, and was given the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, as well as the title of Zengfei Shuyue, bringing the total number of his former fiefs to 2,000.

古文：隽年齿虽迈，而志识未衰，教授子孙，必先礼典。
现代文：寇俊虽然年迈，但是志向和见识未衰减，教授子孙，必先教礼法。
English: Although Ko Jun is old, his aspiration and insight have not diminished. To teach his children and grandchildren, he must first teach etiquette.

古文：世宗尚儒重道，特钦赏之，数加恩锡，思与相见。
现代文：世宗尊儒重道，特别钦赏寇俊，多次加以嘉奖恩赏，想与其相见。
English: The Sejong respected Confucianism, especially admired Kou Jun, repeatedly rewarded him, and wanted to meet him.

古文：隽不得已，乃入朝。
现代文：寇俊无从推却，只好入朝晋见。
English: There was no way for Kou Jun to refuse, so he had no choice but to enter the court of Emperor Jin.

古文：世宗与同席而坐，因顾访洛阳故事。
现代文：世宗与他同席而坐，乘便请教洛阳旧事。
English: Sejong sat at the same table with him and took the opportunity to ask Luoyang about the past.

古文：隽身长八尺，须鬓皓然，容止端详，音韵清朗。
现代文：寇俊身高八尺，胡须鬓角雪白，容貌举止端庄安详，说话声音洪亮。
English: Kou Jun is eight feet tall, his beard is snow-white, his appearance and demeanor are dignified and serene, and his voice is booming.

古文：帝与之谈论，不觉屡为前膝。
现代文：帝与他交谈，不自觉地多次往前移动。
English: The emperor conversed with him and unconsciously moved forward several times.

古文：及隽辞还，帝亲执其手曰： 公年德俱尊，朕所钦尚，乞言之事，所望于公。宜数相见，以慰虚想。 以御舆令于帝前乘出。
现代文：当寇俊告辞时，帝亲自握住他的手说： 公年龄和德望都很高，朕为之钦尚，所谈之事，寄希望于公最好能够多见面，以慰抚我悬念之心。 安排皇帝的坐驾令在帝面前乘坐驰出。
English: When Kou Jun was bidding farewell, the emperor personally grasped his hand and said: The prince is very old and respected, I admire him, and I hope to see him more often to comfort my suspenseful heart.

古文：顾谓左右曰： 如此之事，唯积善者可以致之。
现代文：帝望着左右的人说： 这样的事，衹有积善的人可以得到。
English: The emperor looked at the people on either side of him and said, "Such a thing can only be achieved by those who have a lot of good qualities.

古文：何止见重于今，亦将传之万古。 时人咸以为荣。
现代文：不仅仅是见重当世，而且也会传之万古。 当时人都认为是一大荣耀。
English: It was not only a great honor at the time, but also one that would be passed down through the ages.

古文：保定三年卒，时年八十。
现代文：保定三年去世，终年八十岁。
English: Baoding died three years later, at the age of 80.

古文：高祖叹惜之，赠本官，加冀定瀛三州诸军事、冀州刺史，谥曰元。
现代文：高祖叹惜他的去世，获赠本官，加冀定瀛三州诸军事、冀州刺史，谧号称为五。
English: Gao Zu lamented his death and was given his own post, plus the military of the three states of Jizhou and the history of Jizhou, and his nickname was Five.

古文：隽笃于仁义，期功之有孤者，衣食丰约，俱与之同。
现代文：寇俊笃守仁义，五服之内宗亲中的孤儿，衣食好坏，与之相共。
English: Kou Jun is a staunch defender of benevolence and righteousness. He is an orphan living with his parents in Wufu. He shares their food and clothing.

古文：少为司徒崔光所知，光命其子励与隽结友。
现代文：年少时为司徒崔光赏识，崔光令儿子崔励与寇俊结为朋友。
English: When he was young, he admired Cui Guang, and Cui Guang made his son Cui Li and Kou Jun friends.

古文：隽每造光，常清言移日。
现代文：寇俊每次拜访崔光，经常都是交谈整天。
English: Every time Kou Jun visits Cui Guang, they often talk all day.

古文：小宗伯卢辩以隽业行俱崇，待以师友之礼。
现代文：小宗伯卢辩以寇俊功业和操行都很好，待以老师和友人的礼仪。
English: Xiao Zongbailu argued that Kou Jun's work and conduct were very good, and treated him with the etiquette of a teacher and a friend.

古文：每有闲暇，辄诣隽燕语弥日。
现代文：每当有了空闲的时候，就拜访寇俊亲切交谈整天。
English: Whenever he has free time, he visits Kou Jun and they talk all day long.

古文：恒谓人曰： 不见西安君，烦忧不遣。 其为通人所敬重如此。
现代文：经常对人说： 见不到西安君，心中的烦恼无法驱除。 寇俊得到学识渊博通达人士的敬重都如此例。
English: He often said to people: "If you can't see Xi'an Jun, you can't drive away the troubles in your heart." This is how Kou Jun won the respect of learned and knowledgeable people.

古文：子奉，位至仪同三司、大将军、顺阳郡守、洵州刺史、昌国县公。
现代文：寇俊子寇奉，官爵至仪同三司、大将军、顺阳郡守、洵州刺史、昌国县公。
English: Kou Junzi and Kou Bong were given the titles of three generals, the governor of Shunyang County, the governor of Zhangzhou, and the governor of Changguo County.

古文：奉弟颙，少好学，最知名。
现代文：寇奉弟弟寇颐，从小喜好学习，最有名气。
English: Kou Bong's younger brother, Kou Ye, has been fond of studying since childhood, and is the most famous.

古文：居丧哀毁。
现代文：居丧过分哀伤以致身体受损伤。
English: The mourners were so sad that their bodies were injured.

古文：历官仪同大将军，掌朝、布宪、典祀下大夫，小纳言，濩泽郡公。
现代文：官职历任仪同大将军，掌朝、布宪、典祀下大夫，小纳言，爵位濩泽郡公。
English: His official position was General of the same rank, Shucho, Buken, Shitai Shitafu, Konagon, and Heze-gun no Kimi.

古文：韩褒字弘业，其先颍川颍阳人也。
现代文：韩褒字弘业，原籍是颖川颖阳人。
English: Han Bao Zi Hongye, originally from Yingchuan Yingyang.

古文：徙居昌黎。
现代文：徙居昌黎。
English: Moved to Changli.

古文：祖瑰，魏镇西将军、平凉郡守，安定郡公。
现代文：他祖父韩瓖，任魏镇西将军、平凉郡守，爵位安定郡公。
English: His grandfather, Han Zheng, was the general of Wei Zhen Xi, the governor of Pingliang County, and the lord of the stable county.

古文：父演，征虏将军、中散大夫、恒州刺史。
现代文：他父亲韩演，任征虏将军、中散大夫、恒州刺史。
English: His father, Han Yan, was a conscript general, a doctor in Zhongshan, and a historian in Hengzhou.

古文：褒少有志尚,好学而不守章句。
现代文：韩褒从小便有志向，喜欢学习却不拘泥于章句。
English: Han Bo has had an ambition since he was a child. He likes to study, but he is not a stickler for rules.

古文：其师怪而问之。
现代文：他的老师觉得奇怪而问他。
English: His teacher thought it was strange and asked him.

古文：对曰： 文字之间，常奉训诱。
现代文：回答说： 文字之间，常常受到教诲诱导。
English: Answered: Between the letters, often induced by the teachings.

古文：至于商较异同，请从所好。 师因此大奇之。及长，涉猎经史，深沉有远略。
现代文：但是争论比较异同，请老师任凭我自己的喜好。 老师因此非常看重他成人后，学习经史典籍，深沉有远略。
English: But the debate is more similar and dissimilar, so I asked the teacher to let me have my own preferences. Therefore, the teacher attaches great importance to him studying the classics of history after he becomes an adult, and he is profound and far-sighted.

古文：魏建明中，起家奉朝请。
现代文：魏建明年间，开始担任的官职为奉朝请。
English: Wei Jian next year, began to hold the official position of minister to the emperor.

古文：加强弩将军，迁太中大夫。
现代文：加封强弩将军，调任太中大夫。
English: He was given the additional title of General Qiangqian and transferred to the position of Vice Admiral.

古文：属魏室丧乱，褒避地于夏州。
现代文：适逢魏室丧乱，韩褒至夏州避难。
English: At the time of the Wei dynasty's downfall, Han Bo fled to Xiazhou.

古文：时太祖为刺史，素闻其名，待以客礼。
现代文：这时太祖任当地刺史，向来听闻其名，待之以客礼。
English: At this time, the great-great-grandfather served as a local historian, always heard his name, and was treated with courtesy.

古文：及贺拔岳为侯莫陈悦所害，诸将遣使迎太祖。
现代文：贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害，各将领派使者迎接太祖。
English: He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, and the generals sent envoys to meet the great ancestor.

古文：太祖问以去留之计。
现代文：太祖向他询问如何确定去留。
English: The great-grandfather asked him how to make sure to stay.

古文：褒曰： 方今王室凌迟，海内鼎沸。
现代文：韩褒说： 现在王室衰落，天下混乱。
English: Han Bo said: Now the royal family is in decline and the world is in chaos.

古文：使君天资英武，恩结士心。
现代文：使君你天资英武，用恩惠团结了将士人心。
English: May your talent and bravery unite the hearts of the generals with grace.

古文：贺拔公奄及于难，物情危骇。
现代文：贺拔公突然遇难，人心惶恐惊骇。
English: The sudden death of He Bago shocked the nation.

古文：寇洛自知庸懦，委身而托使君。
现代文：寇洛自知庸下懦弱，委身而寄托于使君。
English: Kolo, knowing that he was weak under the yoke of mediocrity, committed himself to the envoy.

古文：若总兵权，据有关中之地，此天授也，何疑乎！
现代文：如果控制兵权，占据关中之地，这是上天所授，还疑虑什么!
English: If controlling the military power and occupying the central position is given by heaven, what is there to worry about!

古文：且侯莫陈悦乱常速祸，乃不乘胜进取平凉，反自遁逃，屯营洛水。
现代文：而且侯莫陈悦作乱而迅速自取其祸，他不是乘胜进取平凉，反而自行逃跑，将军队带至洛水扎营。
English: Moreover, Hou Mo Chen Yue made a mess and quickly brought his own misfortune. Instead of taking advantage of the victory to achieve calm, he ran away on his own and brought the army to Luoshui to camp.

古文：斯乃井中蛙耳，使君往必擒之。
现代文：眼光见识如同井底之蛙，使君前往必定可以擒获。
English: Insight is like a frog at the bottom of a well. If you go looking for it, you're sure to find it.

古文：不世之勋，在斯一举。
现代文：非凡的功勋，就在此一举。
English: This is an extraordinary achievement.

古文：时者，难得而易失，诚愿使君图之。 太祖纳焉。
现代文：时机难以得到却容易失去，诚心希望使君认真考虑。 太祖接受了此建议。
English: Time is hard to get but easy to lose, and I sincerely hope that you will seriously consider it.

古文：太祖为丞相，引褒为录事参军，赐姓侯吕陵氏。
现代文：太祖任丞相，荐举韩褒为录事参军，赐姓侯吕陵氏。
English: The great-grandfather was appointed chancellor, recommended Han Bo to join the army, and was given the surname of Hou Luling.

古文：大统初，迁行台左丞，赐爵三水县伯。
现代文：大统初年，升迁行台左丞，赐予三水县伯。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was promoted to Gangdai Zuojo and given the title of Sanshui County magistrate.

古文：寻转丞相府属，加中军将军、银青光禄大夫。二年，梁人北寇商洛，东魏复侵樊邓，于是以褒为镇南将军、丞相府从事中郎，出镇淅郦。
现代文：不久转任丞相府属，加中军将军、银青光禄大夫二年，梁朝军队往北侵犯商洛地区，东魏又攻打樊邓，于是任命韩褒为镇南将军、丞相府从事中郎，出镇淅郦。
English: He was soon transferred to the chancellor's office, and became the general of the Chinese army and the doctor of Yin Qing Guanglu. In two years, the Liang Dynasty army invaded the Shangluo area to the north, and the Eastern Wei Dynasty attacked Shandong. Therefore, Han Bo was appointed as the general of Zhenan, the chancellor's office was engaged in the middle, and he left the town.

古文：居二年，征拜丞相府司马，进爵为侯。
现代文：过了二年，征回朝廷任为丞相府司马，进爵为侯。
English: Two years later, he was called back to the Imperial Court and appointed to the post of chancellor's steward, and was raised to the peerage.

古文：出为北雍州刺史，加卫大将军。
现代文：出京为北雍州刺史，加卫大将军。
English: He went to Beijing to write the history of North Yongzhou and became a general of the Imperial Guards.

古文：州带北山，多有盗贼。
现代文：该州北面为山区，有不少盗贼。
English: The area north of Yongzhou is mountainous, and there are many thieves in the mountains.

古文：褒密访之，并豪右所为也，而阳不之知,厚加礼遇。
现代文：韩褒秘密侦访，都是豪族所为，于是假装不知道，对他们十分客气礼貌。
English: Han Bo's secret reconnaissance was all done by the powerful clans, so he pretended not to know and was very polite to them.

古文：谓之曰： 刺史起自书生，安知督盗，所赖卿等共分其忧耳。 乃悉诏桀黠少年素为乡里患者，署为主帅，分其地界。
现代文：对他们说： 我这位刺史是一介书生，怎么会知道如何剿除盗贼，只好依赖你们大家共同与我分忧。 于是将所有为患于乡里的凶狠狡黠的年轻人召集起来，任为主帅，分管各地界。
English: He said to them, "I, a scholar, do not know how to drive out thieves, so I have to rely on all of you to share my worries with me." So he gathered together all the young men who suffered from ferocious cunning in the countryside and put them in charge of the various regions.

古文：有盗发而不获者，以故纵论。
现代文：假如发生盗贼之事而没有擒获，当事人便处以故意放纵之罪。
English: If a theft occurs and the thief is not caught, the offender will be punished with the crime of willful indulgence.

古文：于是诸被署者，莫不惶惧。
现代文：于是被署为主帅的各人，没有谁不惶恐害怕。
English: As a result, no one who was appointed as the head coach was not scared.

古文：皆首伏曰： 前盗发者，并某等为之。 所有徒侣，皆列其姓名。
现代文：这些人叩头承认： 以前那些盗贼之事，都是我们做的。 所有同伙，都列出姓名。
English: The men genuflect and admit: We did all the thieving in the old days, and all our partners are listed by name.

古文：或亡命隐匿者，亦悉言其所在。
现代文：有些逃亡隐匿的，也全告知其所在之处。
English: Some of those who fled and hid have also been informed of their whereabouts.

古文：褒乃取盗名簿藏之。
现代文：韩褒将盗贼名单收藏好。
English: Han Bo collected the list of thieves.

古文：因大牓州门曰： 自知行盗者，可急来首，即除其罪。
现代文：随后在州门上张贴巨大榜文： 认识到自己所犯盗贼之事的，迅速前来自首，可以免罪。
English: Then they posted a huge notice on the state gate: "If you recognize the theft you have committed and quickly turn yourself in, you can be exonerated."

古文：尽今月不首者，显戮其身，籍没妻子，以赏前首者。 旬日之间，诸盗咸悉首尽。
现代文：在本月之内不自首的，公开行刑，陈尸于众，妻子儿女没入官府为奴，用以奖赏先自首的人。 旬日之间，全部盗贼都自首完毕。
English: If they do not surrender within this month, they will be publicly executed, their bodies exposed to the public, and their wives and children will be enslaved in government offices as a reward for those who surrender first.

古文：褒取名簿勘之，一无差异。
现代文：韩褒对照名单，没有一点差异。
English: Hanbao checklist, there is not a bit of difference.

古文：并原其罪，许以自新。
现代文：全部都免去其罪，让其自新。
English: He was completely exonerated and rehabilitated.

古文：由是群盗屏息。
现代文：从此盗贼绝迹。
English: Since then, thieves have become extinct.

古文：入为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：调入朝廷为给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the imperial court and appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：九年，迁侍中。
现代文：九年，调任侍中。
English: Nine years later, he was transferred to the position of Samurai Junior High School.

古文：十二年，除都督、西凉州刺史。
现代文：十二年，授予都督、西凉州刺史。
English: In the 12th year, he was awarded the title of the governor of Xiliangzhou.

古文：羌胡之俗，轻贫弱，尚豪富。
现代文：羌胡民族风俗，轻视贫困弱小者，推崇豪富之家。
English: beards, despise the poor and the weak, and worship the powerful and the rich.

古文：豪富之家，侵渔小民，同于仆隶。
现代文：豪富之家，欺凌剥夺小民，将之视为奴仆。
English: The home of the super-rich, bullying and depriving the little people, treating them as slaves.

古文：故贫者日削，豪者益富。
现代文：所以贫困者越来越穷，富豪者越来越富。
English: So the poor get poorer and the rich get richer.

古文：褒乃悉募贫人，以充兵士，优复其家，蠲免徭赋。
现代文：韩褒于是招募穷人，充任战士，优待其家庭，免除徭役赋税。
English: Han Bo recruited poor people together, made them soldiers, gave preferential treatment to their families, and exempted them from paying taxes.

古文：又调富人财物以振给之。
现代文：又调富人财物救济贫困者。
English: He also distributed the goods of the rich to the poor.

古文：每西域商货至，又先尽贫者市之。
现代文：每当西域的货物和商人来到，先让贫困者进行交易。
English: Whenever the goods and merchants of the Western Regions came, the poor were allowed to trade first.

古文：于是贫富渐均，户口殷实。
现代文：于是贫富逐渐均衡，户口增加很多。
English: As a result, the gap between the rich and the poor narrowed, and every household became richer.

古文：十六年，加大都督、凉州诸军事。
现代文：十六年，加大都督、凉州诸军事。
English: In the 16th year, he became the governor of the capital and the military commander of Liangzhou.

古文：魏废帝元年，转会州刺史。
现代文：魏废帝元年，转任会州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of Hezhou Shishi.

古文：二年，进位车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：二年，晋升车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry and Third Division of Ceremonial Troops.

古文：寻加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为公。
现代文：不久加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为公。
English: Soon after, Gao Jun, the general of cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three officials were knighted.

古文：武成三年，征拜御伯中大夫。
现代文：武成三年，征入朝廷为御伯中大夫。
English: In the third year of Emperor Wucheng's reign, he was conscripted into the imperial court as an imperial junior doctor.

古文：保定二年，转司会。
现代文：惺宣二年，转任司会。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the board of directors.

古文：三年，出为汾州刺史。
现代文：三年，出京城为汾州刺史。
English: Three years later, he went to Beijing to write a history of Zhangzhou.

古文：州界北接太原，当千里径。
现代文：该  面与太原相连接，正对千里径。
English: This side is connected to Taiyuan and is directly opposite the thousand-mile path.

古文：先是齐寇数入，民废耕桑，前后刺史，莫能防扞。
现代文：以前查寇经常入侵，造成百姓农业荒废，前后刺史，都无法防御。
English: In the past, the Chaco often invaded, causing the people's agriculture to be abandoned, and they were unable to defend themselves.

古文：褒至，适会寇来，褒乃不下属县。
现代文：韩褒来到后，正遇寇至，韩褒于是不下所属各县。
English: After Han Bo's arrival, he was attacked by robbers. Han Bo's belong to all counties.

古文：人既不及设备，以故多被抄掠。
现代文：各地人由于没有来得及防备，所以很多人遭到抢掠。
English: Because people in various regions did not have time to prepare, many people were robbed.

古文：齐人喜相谓曰： 汾州不觉吾至，先未集兵。
现代文：齐人高兴而相互说： 汾州不知道我们前来，事先没有调集军队。
English: Everyone was happy and said to each other, "Changzhou didn't know we were coming and didn't mobilize the army in advance.

古文：今者之还，必莫能追蹑我矣。 由是益懈，不为营垒。
现代文：现在我们回去，肯定是无法追击我们。 因此放松警惕，不设立营垒。
English: Now that we're going back, they certainly can't chase us, so they're letting their guard down and not setting up camp.

古文：褒已先勒精锐，伏北山中，分据险阻，邀其归路。
现代文：韩褒预先准备好精锐将士，埋伏在北山中，分兵占据险要，邀截其回归之路。
English: Han Bo had concentrated his elite troops in advance, and they lay in ambush in the northern mountains, separately occupying the critical points and blocking the return route of the Qi soldiers.

古文：乘其众怠，纵伏击之，尽获其众。
现代文：乘其松懈，伏兵进攻，全部加以擒获。
English: While waiting for the Qi soldiers to pass by, he took advantage of their laxness and unpreparedness to attack the ambushed soldiers, and captured all the Qi soldiers.

古文：故事，获生口者，并囚送京师。
现代文：以前的惯例，擒获的俘虏，都囚送京城。
English: The previous practice was to send all captured prisoners to the capital.

古文：褒因是奏曰： 所获贼众，不足为多。
现代文：韩褒为此而上奏说： 擒获的贼众数量不多。
English: For this reason, Han Bo said: The number of thieves caught is not large.

古文：请一切放还，以德报怨。 
现代文：俘获后再加以侮辱，衹会增加他们的忿恨。
English: A plea to put them all back, to repay the grudge with grace.

古文：有诏许焉。
现代文：请求全都放回。以德报怨。 诏书同意。
English: The imperial edict was carried out.

古文：自此抄兵颇息。
现代文：从此以后来犯的军队越来越少。
English: Since then, fewer and fewer troops have been convicted of desertion.

古文：四年，迁河洮封三州诸军事、河州总管。
现代文：四年，升迁迥逃封三州诸军事、河州总管。
English: In four years, he was promoted to the military of the three states and the general manager of Hezhou.

古文：天和三年，转凤州刺史。
现代文：玉和三年，调任凰塑刺史。
English: In the third year of Tamakawa, he was transferred to the position of the director of the Phoenix Sculpture Museum.

古文：寻以年老请致仕，诏许之。
现代文：不久因为年老而申请离职，诏书同意。
English: Not long after, he applied to leave his post because of old age, and the imperial edict agreed.

古文：五年，拜少保。
现代文：五年，委任为少保。
English: Five years later, he was appointed as a junior security guard.

古文：褒历事三帝，以忠厚见知。
现代文：整壶先后在三位皇帝手下任职，以忠厚而被赏识。
English: Han Bo was the emperor of three dynasties and was known for his loyalty to the emperor.

古文：高祖深相敬重，常以师道处之。
现代文：直担对他很尊敬和器重，常常以老师之礼相待。
English: The direct supervisor respects him very much and holds him in high esteem, often treating him with the courtesy of a teacher.

古文：每入朝见，必有诏令坐，然后始与论政事。
现代文：每当朝见，都诏令赐给座位，然后开始讨论政事。
English: Every time there is a meeting in the morning, a seat is given by imperial decree, and then the discussion of political affairs begins.

古文：七年，卒。
现代文：七年，去世。
English: He died seven years later.

古文：赠泾岐燕三州刺史。
现代文：获赠泾岐燕三州刺史。
English: He was presented with the Iki Yan Sanshu Sashimi.

古文：谥曰贞。
现代文：谧号称为贞。
English: Her posthumous name was Zeng.

古文：子继伯嗣。
现代文：其子韩继伯继嗣。
English: His son, Han Ji Bo, became his successor.

古文：赵肃字庆雍，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：赵肃字庆雍，是河南洛阳人。
English: Zhao Su Zi Qing Yong is from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：世居河西。
现代文：世代在河西居住。
English: They have lived in Hexi for generations.

古文：及沮渠氏灭，曾祖武始归于魏，赐爵金城侯。
现代文：当沮渠氏被减时，他曾祖父赵武才归附于魏，被赐予金城侯爵位。
English: When the Deshu clan was reduced, his great-grandfather Zhao Wucai was attached to Wei and was given the title of Marquis of Jincheng.

古文：祖兴，中书博士。
现代文：他祖父趟兴，为中书博士。
English: His grandfather, Wuching, was a doctor of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：父申侯，举秀才，后军府主簿。
现代文：他父亲赵申侯，举秀才，任后军府主簿。
English: His father, Zhao Shenhou, promoted talents and became the chief accountant of the military government.

古文：肃早有操行，知名于时。
现代文：赵肃的操守品行早就很突出，在当时很有名气。
English: Zhao Su's ethical conduct has long been outstanding, and he was very famous at that time.

古文：魏正光五年，郦元为河南尹，辟肃为主簿。
现代文：魏正光五年，郦元为河南尹，荐举他为主簿。
English: In the fifth year of Wei Zhengguang, the founder was Henan Yin, recommending him as the main book.

古文：孝昌中，起家殿中侍御史，加威烈将军、奉朝请、员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：孝昌年间，开始担任的官职为殿中侍御史，加威烈将军、奉朝请、员外散骑侍郎。
English: During the reign of Takamasa, he began to hold the official positions of palace attendant, General Gawere, courtier to the emperor, and horseback riding attendant outside the palace.

古文：寻除直后，转直寝。
现代文：不久委任为直后，调任直寝。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of immediate past and transferred to the post of immediate past.

古文：永安初，授廷尉平，二年，转监。
现代文：永安初年，授任廷尉平，二年，转任廷尉监。
English: In the first year of Yongan, he was awarded the title of Imperial Lieutenant, and in the second year, he was transferred to the position of Imperial Lieutenant Inspector.

古文：后以母忧去职，起为廷尉正。
现代文：其后因居母丧去职，起任为廷尉正。
English: After that, he lost his position due to the death of his mother, and was appointed as a court lieutenant.

古文：以疾免。
现代文：由于生病免职。
English: He was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：久之，授征虏将军、中散大夫，迁左将军、太中大夫。
现代文：遇了一段时间，授予征虏将军、中散大夫，调任左将军、太中大夫。
English: After a period of time, he was awarded the title of Conscript General, Dr. Nakasanzan, and transferred to the position of Left General, Dr. Taichung.

古文：东魏天平初，除新安郡守。
现代文：束魏天平初年，委任为新安郡守。
English: In the first year of Wei and Tianping, he was appointed as the governor of Xin'an County.

古文：秩满，还洛。
现代文：任期满后，回到洛肠。
English: After completing his term of office, he returned to Locsin.

古文：大统三年，独孤信东讨，肃率宗人为乡导。
现代文：大统三年，独孤信率军柬讨，趟肃率领宗族做其向导。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, Du Guoxin led the military and people to discuss, and Wu Su led the clan to be its guide.

古文：授司州治中，转别驾。
现代文：授予司州治中，转任别驾。
English: He was awarded the title of Vice-governor of Shizuoka Prefecture, and transferred to the position of vice-governor.

古文：监督粮储，军用不匮。
现代文：监督粮食储备，保证了军队供应。
English: Supervised grain reserves and ensured the supply of the army.

古文：太祖闻之，谓人曰： 赵肃可谓洛阳主人也。 
现代文：太祖听说后，对人说： 赵肃可以称作洛阳主人。 
English: After hearing this, the great-grandfather said to the people: Zhao Su can be called the master of Luoyang.

古文：七年，加镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫、都督，仍别驾。
现代文：七年，加镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫、都督，依然为别驾。
English: In seven years, General Kazhenan, Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, and the governor of the capital, are still the stars.

古文：领所部义徒，据守大坞。
现代文：率领所部义徒，据守大坞。
English: He led the righteous people of Shobu and guarded the dockyard.

古文：又兼行台左丞，东道慰劳。
现代文：又授予兼行台左丞，东道慰劳。
English: He was also awarded the concurrent title of Tai Zuo Cho, host and consoler.

古文：九年，行华山郡事。
现代文：九年，兼摄华山郡守职务。
English: For nine years, he also served as the governor of Huashan County.

古文：十三年，除廷尉少卿。
现代文：十三年，委任为廷尉少卿。
English: Thirteen years later, he was appointed to the position of Imperial Lieutenant, Junior Lord.

古文：明年元日，当行朝礼，非有封爵者，不得预焉。
现代文：第二年元日，将举行朝礼，没有封爵者，不能参加。
English: On New Year's Day of the second year, a morning ceremony will be held. Those who have not been knighted will not be able to attend.

古文：肃时未有茅土。
现代文：赵肃当时未封爵位。
English: At that time, Zhao Su did not have a peerage.

古文：左仆射长孙俭白太祖请之。
现代文：左仆射长孙俭禀报太祖为之请求。
English: His left-hand servant, Sagi Cho Sun Jian, reported the request to the great-grandfather.

古文：太祖乃召肃谓曰： 岁初行礼，岂得使卿不预，然何为不早言也？ 于是令肃自选封名。
现代文：太祖于是召见赵肃说： 年初行礼，卿怎么能不参预呢，但为什么不早说呢? 于是令赵肃自己选封号。
English: The great-grandfather then summoned Zhao Su and said, "At the beginning of the year, how can you not attend the pre-ceremony, but why not say it earlier?" So he asked Zhao Su to choose a seal number.

古文：肃曰： 河清乃太平之应，窃所愿也。 于是封清河县子，邑三百户。
现代文：趟肃说： 河清是天下太平的兆应，愿以此为名号。 于是封为清河县子，食邑三百户。
English: Wai Su said: "Kaw Ching is a sign of world peace, and I would like to use it as a name." So he was given the title of the son of Qinghe County, with three hundred households in the food village.

古文：十六年，除廷尉卿，加征东将军。
现代文：十六年，授予廷尉卿，加征束将军。
English: Sixteen years later, he was awarded the title of Lord Privy Seal and promoted to General of Conscription.

古文：肃久在理官，执心平允。
现代文：赵肃长期担任司法官，执法公正。
English: Zhao Su has served as a judicial officer for a long time, and his law enforcement is fair.

古文：凡所处断，咸得其情。
现代文：凡是判决处理之事，都合情合理。
English: In all matters to be adjudicated, the circumstances shall be reasonable.

古文：廉慎自居，不营产业。
现代文：奉行廉洁谨慎，不经营产业。
English: Pursue integrity and prudence, and do not run businesses.

古文：时人以此称之。
现代文：当时人因此而称赞他。
English: He was lauded for it at the time.

古文：十七年，进位车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，赐姓乙弗氏。
现代文：十七年，晋升车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，赐姓乙弗氏。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was promoted to chariot and cavalry general, ceremonial third secretary, and horseback riding attendant, and was given the surname Yifu.

古文：先是，太祖命肃撰定法律。
现代文：先前，左担令趟盛修定法律。
English: Previously, the left-leaning party was in favor of amending the law.

古文：肃积思累年，遂感心疾。去职，卒于家。
现代文：趟蛊花费多年时间认真钻研，因此患上重病。去职，在家去世。
English: After spending many years studying diligently, he fell seriously ill. He left his job and died at home.

古文：子正礼，齐王宪府属、大都督、新安郡守。
现代文：其子趟正礼，任查王宇文宪府属、大都督、新安郡守。
English: His son, Watan Zhengli, appointed Chao Wang Yuwen as a prefectural official, grand governor, and governor of Xin'an County.

古文：时有高平徐招少好法律。
现代文：当时有位高平人徐招从小喜好法律。
English: At that time, there was a high-ranking person, Xu Zhaozhou, who liked the law from childhood.

古文：发言措笔，常欲辨析秋毫。历职内外，有当官之誉。
现代文：说话写文章，经常要非常细微地加以辨析。担任过内外各种宫职，都获得称职声誉。
English: When speaking and writing, it is often necessary to be very subtle. He has served in various palace posts both at home and abroad, and has gained a competent reputation.

古文：从魏孝武入关，为给事黄门侍郎、尚书右丞。
现代文：随从魏孝武帝入关，任给事黄门侍郎、尚书右丞。
English: Accompanied by Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he entered the imperial palace and was appointed Huangmen Zhi Rong and Shangshu Yu Rong.

古文：时朝廷播迁，典章有阙，至于台阁轨仪，多招所参定。
现代文：当时朝廷有难迁徙，典章制度不完善，以及台阁各朝廷机构的必要制度规定，很多是徐招参酌商定的。
English: At that time, it was difficult for the imperial court to move, the legal system was not perfect, and many of the necessary institutional provisions of the cabinet and various imperial institutions were agreed upon by Xu Zhaojun.

古文：论者称之。
现代文：谈论者均加以称赞。
English: It has been praised by commentators.

古文：寻迁侍中、度支尚书。
现代文：不久升迁侍中、度支尚书。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Samurai Junior High School, and was given the title of Doshi Shosho.

古文：大统初，卒。
现代文：大统初年，去世。
English: He died in the first year of unification.

古文：张轨字符轨，济北临邑人也。
现代文：张轨字元轨，是济北临邑人。
English: Zhang Rail, also known as Yuan Rail, is a native of Linyi, north of Jibei.

古文：父崇，高平令。
现代文：他父亲张崇，任高平县令。
English: His father, Zhang Chong, was the county magistrate of Gaoping.

古文：轨少好学，志识开朗。
现代文：张轨年轻时喜好学习，志向见识开阔明晰。
English: Zhang Rail has loved reading since childhood and has a broad knowledge.

古文：初在洛阳，家贫，与乐安孙树仁为莫逆之友，每易衣而出。
现代文：最初在洛阳，家境贫困，与乐安孙树仁为特别要好的朋友，经常换衣服而出。
English: At first in Luoyang, his family was poor, and he and Le'an Sun Shuren were particularly good friends, often changing their clothes.

古文：以此见称。
现代文：这事为人称赞。
English: This is to be commended.

古文：永安中，随尔朱荣击元颢，除讨寇将军、奉朝请。
现代文：永安年间，随从尔朱荣攻打元颢，授予讨寇将军、奉朝请。
English: During the Yongan period, he followed Er Zhu Rong to attack the Yuan Dynasty, and was awarded the title of general of the anti-pirate campaign, and was invited to the imperial court.

古文：轨常谓所亲曰： 秦雍之间，必有王者。 尔朱氏败后，遂杖策入关。
现代文：张轨常对亲近的人说： 在秦雍地区，肯定会出王者。 尔朱氏失败后，于是策马入关。
English: Zhang Liao often said to people close to him: In the Qin and Yong regions, the king will surely come out. After the failure of the Lzhu clan, the horse entered the customs.

古文：贺拔岳以轨为记室参军，典机务。
现代文：贺拔岳任命张轨为记室参军，掌管机要事务。
English: He Batyue appointed Zhang Liao as a recorder to join the army and take charge of important affairs.

古文：寻转仓曹，加镇远将军。
现代文：不久转任仓曹，加镇远将军。
English: He was soon transferred to Cang Cao and then to General Ga Zhenyuan.

古文：时谷籴涌贵，或有请贷官仓者。
现代文：当时粮价昂贵，有人想从官府粮仓贷粮。
English: At that time, grain prices were high, and some people wanted to borrow grain from government granaries.

古文：轨曰： 以私害公，非吾宿志。
现代文：张轨说： 因私利而损公益，我从来没有如此念头。
English: Zhang Rail said: I have never had such an idea of sacrificing public interest for private gain.

古文：济人之难，讵得相违。 乃卖所服衣物，籴粟以赈其乏。
现代文：救济有难者，怎么可以不管。 于是卖掉自己的衣服物品，买粮食而救其难。
English: So they sold their clothes and other belongings to buy food and save themselves the trouble.

古文：及岳被害，太祖以轨为都督，从征侯莫陈悦。
现代文：贺拔岳被害之后，太祖任用张轨为都督，从征侯莫陈悦。
English: After the destruction of Mt. He Batur, the great ancestor appointed Zhang Rail as the governor of the capital, and promoted Mo Chen Yue to the position of solicitor-general.

古文：悦平，使于洛阳。
现代文：讨平侯莫陈悦，出使洛阳。
English: Mo Chen Yue was sent to Luoyang to settle the dispute.

古文：见领军斛斯椿，椿曰： 高欢逆谋，已传行路。
现代文：见领军斛斯椿，斛斯椿说： 高欢叛逆密谋，路人皆知。
English: Seeing the leader of the army, Zou Shizhuan, Zou Shizhuan said: High joy, treason and conspiracy, all passers-by know about it.

古文：人情西望，以日为年。
现代文：大家都西望关中，度日如年。
English: Everyone is looking westward toward Guanzhong, living day to day as if it were a year.

古文：未知宇文何如贺拔也？ 轨曰： 宇文公文足经国，武可定乱。
现代文：不知道宇文泰与贺拔岳相比较如何呢? 张轨说： 宇文公文可以治理国家，武可以平定祸乱。
English: I don't know how Uwen Tai compares to Mt. Hebatake. Zhang Liao said: Uwen Kumon can govern the country, and martial arts can quell the calamity.

古文：至于高识远度，非愚管所测。 椿曰： 诚如卿言，真可恃也。 太祖为行台，授轨郎中。魏孝武西迁，除中书舍人，封寿张县子，邑三百户，加左将军、济州大中正，兼著作佐郎，修起居注。
现代文：至于高识远度，就不是我所能够测定的了。 斛斯椿说： 真如您所说的，那就可仰仗他了。 太祖担任行台，任命张轨为郎中魏孝武帝西迁，授予张轨中书舍人，封寿张县子，食邑三百户，加左将军、济州大中正，兼著作佐郎，修起居注。
English: As for the high degree of knowledge and foresight, it is not something I can measure. Zou Shizhong said, "If it is as you say, then you can rely on him." The great-grandfather served as a guidebook, appointed Zhang Rail as a disciple of Emperor Wei Xiaowu's westward migration, awarded Zhang Rail with the title of a scholar, granted him the title of a son of Zhang County, three hundred households in food villages, plus General Zuo, the president of Jeju University, and also the title of Saro, and built a residence for him.

古文：迁给事黄门侍郎，兼吏部郎中。
现代文：调任给事黄门侍郎，兼任吏部郎中。
English: He was transferred to the post of Huangmen waiter and concurrently held the post of vice-minister.

古文：六年，出为河北郡守。
现代文：六年，出京城担任河北郡守。
English: Six years later, he went to Beijing to serve as Hebei County Governor.

古文：在郡三年，声绩甚着。
现代文：在郡守职务上三年，名声政绩很出色。
English: During his three years on the post of county governor, his reputation and achievements were outstanding.

古文：临人治术，有循吏之美。
现代文：管理民众治理政务，有奉法循理的官吏的美称。
English: They manage the affairs of the people and the government, and are known as law-abiding officials.

古文：大统间，宰人者多推尚之。
现代文：大统年间，各地长官对他都加以推崇。
English: During the years of the Great Reunification, governors from all over the country respected him.

古文：入为丞相府从事中郎，行武功郡事。
现代文：调入朝廷担任丞相府从事中郎，兼摄武功郡守职务。
English: Entered the capital and was appointed to the chancellor's office, where he worked as a middle-ranking official and was in charge of military affairs.

古文：章武公导出镇州，以轨为长史。
现代文：章武公宇文导出京镇守秦州，委任张轨为长史。
English: Zhang Wukong and Uwen led out the Beijing town guard Qinzhou, and appointed Zhang Rail as the long history.

古文：加抚军将军、大都督、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：加抚军将军、大都督、通直散骑常侍。
English: The general of the reinforcement army, the grand governor, and the regular attendants on horseback.

古文：魏废帝元年，进车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：魏废帝元年，晋升车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of ceremony, and the attendant of horseback riding.

古文：二年，赐姓宇文氏，行南秦州事。
现代文：二年，赐姓宇文氏，兼摄南秦州政务。
English: Two years later, he was given the surname Uwen and became the acting governor of South Qin Province.

古文：魏恭帝二年，征拜度支尚书，复除陇右府长史。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，征拜度支尚书，又授予陇右府长史。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Guanzhong, Duozhi Shangshu was enlisted, and he was also awarded the title of prefectural governor.

古文：卒于位，时年五十五。
现代文：在其职位上去世，终年五十五岁。
English: He died in office at the age of 55.

古文：谥曰质。
现代文：谧号称为质。
English: 号 is called quality.

古文：轨性清素，临终之日，家无余财，唯有素书数百卷。
现代文：张轨性情清雅朴素，临终时，家中没有其他财产，仅有数百卷书籍。
English: Zhang Lu's disposition was elegant and simple. At the time of his death, there were no other possessions in his home, only hundreds of volumes of books.

古文：子肃，世宗初，为宣纳上士，转中外府记室参军、中山公训侍读。
现代文：张轨子张肃，世宗初年，任宣纳上士，转任中外府记室参军、中山公宇文训侍读。
English: Zhang Su, Zhang Ruizi's son, in the first year of the reign of King Sejong, was appointed as a heraldic staff sergeant, transferred to the Central and Western Prefectural Records Office to join the army, and attended the reading of Zhongshan Gongwu's sermon.

古文：早有才名，性颇轻猾，时人比之魏讽。
现代文：很早便有才气名声，性情很轻浮狡猾，当时人认为与魏讽相类似。
English: Very early on, he had a reputation for talent and a very frivolous and cunning temperament, which was thought to be similar to that of Wei Wei.

古文：卒以罪考竟终。
现代文：最终因犯罪拷问而死。
English: He eventually died as a result of criminal torture.

古文：李彦字彦士，梁郡下邑人也。
现代文：李彦字彦士，是梁郡下邑人。
English: Li Yan (李彦) is a native of Liang County, Shimo-eup.

古文：祖先之，魏淮南郡守。
现代文：他祖父李先之，任魏淮南郡守。
English: His grandfather, Li Xianzhi, was the governor of Weihuainan County.

古文：父静，南青州刺史。
现代文：他父亲李静，为南青州刺史。
English: Her father, Li Jing, was the official historian of South Qingzhou.

古文：彦少有节操，好学慕古，为乡闾之所敬惮。
现代文：李彦青少年时便有志节操守，喜欢学习钦慕古人，为家乡人敬重和折服。
English: When Li Yan was a teenager, he had a strong sense of ethics, liked to study and admire the ancients, and respected and dressed up for his hometown people.

古文：孝昌中，解褐奉朝请，加轻车将军。
现代文：孝昌年间，开始担任的官职为奉朝请，加轻车将军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, he began to hold the post of general of light vehicles.

古文：从魏孝武入关，兼著作佐郎，修起居注。加宁朔将军，进号冠军将军、中散大夫，迁平东将军、太中大夫。
现代文：随从魏孝武帝入关，兼著作佐郎，撰修起居注加宁朔将军，进号冠军将军、中散大夫，迁为平东将军、太中大夫。
English: With Emperor Wei Xiaowu's entry into the customs, he also wrote "Saro" and "Chuan Ningshuo," and was transferred to "Pingdong" and "Taichung."

古文：大统初，除通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：大统初年，任为通直散骑侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed as Tsuchizuchika Sanzhijirō.

古文：三年，拜安东将军、银青光禄大夫、太保转太傅长史、仪曹郎中、左民郎中。
现代文：三年，任为安束将军、银青光禄大夫、太保转太傅长史、仪曹郎中、左民郎中。
English: In three years, he was appointed as General Anzaku, Silver Seiko Roku no daibu, Taibo to Taifu Choshi, Moreso Soro junior high school, and Samiroro junior high school.

古文：十二年，省三十六曹为十二部，改授民部郎中，封平阳县子，邑三百户。
现代文：十二年，裁减三十六曹改为十二部，改授民部郎中，封平阳县子，食邑三百产。
English: In 2012, the reduction of thirty-six Cao was changed to twelve, and he was re-awarded as a junior minister of the Ministry of People's Affairs, a son of Pingyang County, and a son of 300 food villages.

古文：十五年，进号中军将军，兼尚书左丞，领选部。
现代文：十五年，进号中车将军，兼任尚书左丞，领选部。
English: In the 15th year, he was promoted to the rank of middle carriage general, concurrently serving as Shang Shuzhanzheng, leading the selection department.

古文：大军东讨，加持节、大都督、通直散骑常侍，掌留台事。
现代文：大军束讨，加持节、大都督、通直散骑常侍，掌管留台事务。
English: The great army council, the blessing festival, the great governor, and the attendants who rode on horseback, were in charge of the affairs of remaining on the platform.

古文：魏废帝初，拜尚书右丞，转左丞。
现代文：魏废帝初年，任为尚书右丞，转任为左丞。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as Shangshu Yu Rong, and later as Zu Rong.

古文：彦在尚书十有五载，属军国草创，庶务殷繁，留心省阅，未尝懈怠。
现代文：争产在尚书任职十五年，当时政权初创，各种事务相当繁杂，他认真审视，未曾懈怠。
English: During his 15-year tenure at Shangshu, when the regime was in its infancy, various affairs were quite complicated. He carefully examined them and never slacked off.

古文：断决如流，略无疑滞。
现代文：处理事务果断快速，没有什么犹豫拖拉。
English: Deal with things decisively and quickly, without delay.

古文：台阁莫不叹其公勤，服其明察。
现代文：台阁机构官员都对其公正勤恳赞叹，钦佩他能洞察政事。
English: There is no one among his cabinet colleagues who does not praise his fairness and diligence, and admire his wisdom.

古文：迁给事黄门侍郎，仍左丞。
现代文：迁任给事黄门侍郎，依然任尚书左丞。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Huangmen waiter, and later he still held the post of Shangshu Zuo.

古文：寻进车骑大将军、仪同三司，赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：不久晋升车骑大将军、仪同三司，赐姓字文氏。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was given the surname Wen.

古文：出为鄜州刺史。
现代文：出京城担任鄘州刺史。
English: The departure from Kyoto is a milestone in the history of the prefecture.

古文：彦以东夏未平，固辞州任，诏许之。
现代文：李彦以束部没有平复，决心推辞州刺史职任，诏令同意。
English: Li Yan said that Sokube had not been defeated, and he was determined to resign from the post of state historian, and the imperial edict agreed.

古文：拜兵部尚书，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，仍兼著作。
现代文：授予兵部尚书，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，依然兼任著作郎。
English: He was awarded the title of Hyobusho (Minister of War) and promoted to General of Cavalry, Kaifu Yi and Sanji, and he still serves as Shosho-ro.

古文：六官建，改授军司马，进爵为伯。
现代文：建立六官时，改授军司马，进爵为伯爵。
English: Since the Eastern Xia had not yet been pacified, Li Yan resigned from the post of scribe, which was approved by the imperial edict. He was promoted to the post of military secretary, the post of cavalry general, and the post of secretary of the Kaifu ceremony. He also served as a scribe.

古文：彦性谦恭，有礼节。
现代文：李彦性情谦逊恭敬，注重礼节。
English: Li Yan is humble, respectful and pays attention to etiquette.

古文：虽居显要，于亲党之间，恂恂如也。
现代文：虽然宫位显要，但是在亲族家人之中，态度恭恭敬敬。
English: Although the status of the palace is important, among relatives and family members, the attitude is respectful.

古文：轻财重义，好施爱士。
现代文：轻财重义，救济他人招引人才。
English: Money is more important than justice. Relief for others is the best way to attract talent.

古文：时论以此称之。然素多疾而勤于莅职，虽沉顿枕席，犹理务不辍，遂至于卒。时年四十六。
现代文：当时人为此而加以称赞但是他一直多病而又任职勤奋，就是躺在床上，还是不停地处理政务，因此而去世。终年四十六岁。
English: He was lauded for it at the time, but he died, aged 46, having been a sickly and diligent public servant, whether lying in bed or tirelessly attending to government business.

古文：谥曰敬。
现代文：谧号称为敬。
English: His nickname is Zeng.

古文：彦临终遗诫其子等曰： 昔人以窾木为椟，葛虆为缄，下不乱泉，上不泄臭。此实吾平生之志也。
现代文：李彦临终遗言告诫儿子们： 以前的人用窍木做匣子，用葛蘗封好，对下不会影响泉水，对卜不会泄出臭气这实在是我一生的意愿。
English: Li Yan's last words on his deathbed were to admonish his sons: "In the past, people used to make boxes out of oak wood and seal them with kudzu, so that the bottom would not affect the spring water, and the top would not emit foul odors. This was truly my life's intention.

古文：朝廷嘉焉，不夺其志。
现代文：李彦儿子李升明嗣位。
English: Li Yan's son Li Shengming succeeded him.

古文：子升明嗣。少历显职。
现代文：李升明年轻时便历任显要官职。
English: When he was young, Li Shengming held a number of high-ranking positions.

古文：大象末，太府中大夫、仪同大将军。郭彦，太原阳曲人也。
现代文：大象末年，为太府中大夫、仪同大将军郭彦，是太原阳曲人。
English: At the end of the elephant's life, it was Guo Yan, the Grand Prefectural Junior Doctor and General of Ceremonies, who was the leader of the Taiyuan Yang Quan.

古文：其先从宦关右，遂居冯翊。
现代文：其先人在关右做官，便在冯翊定居。
English: His ancestors worked as officials in Guan Yu and then settled in Fenghuang.

古文：父胤，郡功曹、灵武令。
现代文：他父亲郭胤，任郡功曹、灵武令。
English: His father, Guo Tan, was a county meritorious service officer and a military commander.

古文：彦少知名，太祖临雍州，辟为西曹书佐。
现代文：郭彦年轻时已知名，太祖到雍州，征召他为西曹书佐。
English: When Guo Yan was young, he was already well-known. His great-grandfather went to Yongzhou to recruit him as a senior aide.

古文：寻除开府仪同主簿，转司空记室、太尉府属，迁虞部郎中。
现代文：不久授予开府仪同主簿，转任司空记室、太尉府属，调任虞部郎中。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Kaifu giri, the same as the master, and was transferred to the office of the secretary for space records, the office of the captain, and the office of the assistant to the governor.

古文：大统十二年，初选当州首望，统领乡兵，除帅都督、持节、平东将军。
现代文：大统十二年，选为本州的首望，统领乡兵，授予帅都督、持节、平柬将军。
English: In the twelfth year of unification, he was selected as the leader of the state, the leader of the townspeople, and was awarded the title of "commander-in-chief," "commander-in-chief," and "general of the Khmer Rouge."

古文：以居郎官著称，封龙门县子，邑三百户，进大都督，迁车骑大将军、仪同三司、司农卿。
现代文：因为任郎官著称，封龙门县子，食邑三百户，升大都督，迁车骑大将军、仪同三司、司农卿。
English: Because he was famous for being a vassal, he was given the fief of Longmen County, 300 households of food villages, promoted to the grand governor, the general of moving vehicles and cavalry, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the secretary of agriculture.

古文：是时，岷州羌酋傍乞铁匆与郑五丑等寇扰西服。
现代文：当时，岷州羌族首领傍乞铁忽与郑五丑等侵扰西部地区。
English: At that time, the leaders of the Yao people in Zhangzhou, such as Bei Bei Tiehwu and Zheng Wuqiu, invaded the western region.

古文：彦从大将军宇文贵讨平之。
现代文：郭彦随从大将军宇文贵征讨平定。
English: Guo Yan followed the general Yu Wengui to subdue the rebellion.

古文：魏恭帝元年，除兵部尚书。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，授任兵部尚书。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Gong, he was awarded the title of Hyobu Shangshu.

古文：仍以本兵从柱国于谨南伐江陵。
现代文：于是以所部军队随从柱国于谨南伐江陵。
English: As a result, the Shobu army followed the pillar country to the south of Gangneung.

古文：进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，增邑五百户，进爵为伯。
现代文：晋升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，食邑增加五百户，进爵为伯。
English: He was promoted to the general of the cavalry, and became the keeper of the imperial residences and the three departments. He increased the number of households by 500, and was raised to the peerage.

古文：六官建，拜民部中大夫。
现代文：建立六官时，委任为民部中大夫。
English: When the six positions were established, he was appointed as the junior doctor of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：孝闵帝践祚，出为澧州刺史。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，出京城担任澧州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne and left Beijing to serve as the prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：蛮左生梗，未遵朝宪。
现代文：蛮人闹事，不遵守朝廷法令。
English: Barbarians make trouble and do not comply with the imperial decree.

古文：至于赋税，违命者多。
现代文：至于赋税，很多都抗缴。
English: As for taxes, many have been withheld.

古文：聚散无恒，不营农业。
现代文：聚散没有规律，不进行农业生产。
English: Aggregation and dispersion are not regular, and agricultural production is not carried out.

古文：彦劝以耕稼，禁共游猎，民皆务本，家有余粮。
现代文：郭彦劝导他们从事农业，禁止结伙游猎，百姓都参加农业生产，家中有余粮。
English: Guo Yan advised them to engage in agriculture, forbade hunting in groups, the people all participated in agricultural production, and there was surplus grain at home.

古文：亡命之徒，咸从赋役。
现代文：亡命之徒，也都交赋税服劳役。
English: The exiles also had to pay taxes and perform forced labor.

古文：先是以澧州粮储乏少，每令荆州递送。
现代文：原来因为澧州储备粮食过少，经常令荆州运送。
English: Originally, because the grain reserves in Zhangzhou were too small, the cranes were often transported to Jingzhou.

古文：自彦莅职，仓庾充实，无复转输之劳。
现代文：自从郭彦担任该职，仓库充实，不必再转运粮食。
English: Since Guo Yan assumed the post, the warehouse has been enriched, and it is no longer necessary to transship grain.

古文：齐南安城主冯显密遣使归降，其众未之知也。
现代文：齐南安城主冯显秘密遣使者来归降，但部众不知道。
English: Feng Xian, the lord of the city of Qinan'an, secretly sent an envoy to surrender, but his subordinates did not know about it.

古文：柱国宇文贵令彦率兵应接。
现代文：柱国宇文贵令郭彦率军去接应。
English: Columnist Umengui ordered Guo Yan to lead an army to meet them.

古文：齐人先令显率所部送粮南下，彦惧其众不从命，乃于路邀之。
现代文：齐人先令冯显率领所部军队运粮南下，郭彦担心冯显部下不听从号令，便在中途拦截。
English: Qi people ordered Feng Xian to lead the army of the headquarters to transport grain to the south. Guo Yan was worried that Feng Xian's subordinates would not obey the order, so he intercepted them halfway.

古文：显因得自拔。
现代文：冯显因此而得救。
English: As a result, Feng Xian was saved.

古文：其众果拒战，彦纵兵奋击，并虏获之。
现代文：其部下果然拒战，郭彦指挥军队攻击，全都将之擒获。
English: His subordinates refused to fight, and Guo Yan commanded the army to attack, and all of them were captured.

古文：以南安无备，即引军掩袭。
现代文：考虑到南安没有防备，因而率部突袭。
English: Considering that Nan'an was unprepared, the headquarters made a surprise attack.

古文：显外兵参军邹绍既为彦所获，因请为乡导。
现代文：冯显外兵参军邹绍已为郭彦所俘获，申请做向导。
English: Feng Xian, a foreign soldier who joined the army in Shengshao, has been captured by Guo Yan and has applied to be a guide.

古文：彦遂夜至城下，令绍诈称显归。
现代文：郭彦军队晚上到了城下，令邹绍假装说冯显回来。
English: Guo Yan's army arrived at the outskirts of the city in the evening, and ordered Gong Shao to pretend to be Feng Xian and come back.

古文：门者开门待之，彦引兵而入，遂有其城。
现代文：守门者打开门，郭彦率军而入，因而占有该城。
English: The gatekeeper opened the gate, and Guo Yan led the army to enter, thus occupying the city.

古文：俘获三千余人。
现代文：俘虏三千多人。
English: more than three thousand prisoners.

古文：晋公护嘉之，进爵怀德县公，邑一千户。
现代文：晋公字文护给予嘉奖，进爵为怀德县公，食邑千户。
English: Awarded the prize of Jin Gong, the title of Wen Guo. He was given the title of Duke of Huai De County, and became the ruler of a thousand households.

古文：以南安悬远，寻令班师。
现代文：因为南安太远，不久令其班师。
English: Because Nan'an is too far away, his classmates soon left.

古文：及秩满还朝，民吏号泣送彦二百余里。
现代文：当任满回朝时，百姓僚吏哭哭啼啼送郭彦走了二百多里。
English: When he returned to the imperial court after his term of office was over, the people's court officials sent Guo Yan away with tears and shouts, more than two hundred miles away.

古文：寻为东道大使，观省风俗。
现代文：不久为束道大使，视察民情风俗。
English: He soon became the ambassador of Sokudo, inspecting folk customs.

古文：除蒲州总管府长史，入为工部中大夫。
现代文：委任为蒲州总管府长史，调入朝廷为工部中大夫。
English: He was appointed as the governor-general of Puzhou and transferred to the imperial court as a junior doctor in the engineering department.

古文：保定四年，护东讨。
现代文：保定四年，宇文护东讨。
English: In the fourth year of Baoding, the discussion on Umun's protection of the East came to an end.

古文：彦从尉迟迥攻洛阳。
现代文：郭彦随从尉迟迥攻打洛阳。
English: Guo Yan went to attack Luoyang with his subordinates.

古文：迥复令彦与权景宣南出汝颍。
现代文：尉迟迥又令郭彦与权景宣南出汝颖。
English: After a long delay, Guo Yan and Quan Jing Xuan were forced to retreat.

古文：及军次豫州，彦请攻之。
现代文：军队行至豫州，郭彦建议攻城。
English: The army marched to Yuzhou, and Guo Yan proposed to attack the city.

古文：景宣以城守既严，卒难攻取，将欲南辕，更图经略。
现代文：权景宣认为城守已很严密，终难攻取，想要往南进军，以求发展。
English: Guan Jing proclaimed that the castle was already well defended and difficult to capture, and he wanted to march south in order to develop it.

古文：彦以奉命出师，须与大军相接。
现代文：郭彦认为奉命出师，必须与大军相接应。
English: Guo Yan thought that he had been ordered to go out as an instructor, and he had to go out with a large army.

古文：若向江畔立功，更非朝廷本意。
现代文：如果南下江畔求取战功，不是朝廷的本意。
English: It is not the intention of the imperial court to go south of the river to seek war achievements.

古文：固执不从，兼画攻取之计。
现代文：郭彦坚决不同意，另外计划攻取谋略。
English: Guo Yan resolutely disagreed, and made another plan.

古文：会其刺史王士良妻弟董远秀密遣送款，景宣乃从。
现代文：正好豫州刺史王士良妻弟董远秀秘密遣使投诚，权景宣也就同意了。
English: Wang Shiliang's wife and brother-in-law, Dong Yuanxiu, secretly sent an envoy to Yancheng, and Quan Jingxuan agreed.

古文：于是引军围之，士良遂出降。
现代文：于是指挥军队包围州城，王士良因而出城投降。
English: So he ordered the army to encircle the state capital, and Wang Shiliang left the city and surrendered.

古文：仍以彦镇豫州，增邑六百户。
现代文：便以郭彦镇守豫州，食邑增加六百户。
English: He then used Guo Yan Town to defend Yuzhou, increasing the number of food villages by 600.

古文：寻以洛阳班师，亦弃而不守。
现代文：不久由于洛阳的军队班师回朝，所以放弃了豫州。
English: Soon, because Luoyang's army division returned to the North, it abandoned Yuzhou.

古文：属纯州刺史樊舍卒，其地既东接陈境，俗兼蛮左，初丧州将，境内骚然。
现代文：适逢纯州刺史樊舍去世，而纯州束面与陈朝相接，州内有不少蛮族，刺史去世，州中不太安定。
English: It coincided with the death of Zhi Shi of Zhengzhou, and Zhengzhou Sokmen was adjacent to the Chen Dynasty. There were many barbarians in the state. Zhi Shi died, and the state was not very stable.

古文：朝议以彦威信着于东南，便令镇抚。
现代文：朝廷认为郭彦在东南地区有威信，所以令其前往镇抚。
English: The imperial court believed that Guo Yan had prestige in the southeastern region, so he was ordered to go to Zhenfu.

古文：彦至，吏人畏而爱之。
现代文：郭彦到后，僚吏百姓对他既敬畏而又爱戴。
English: After Guo Yan arrived, his colleagues and the people were both in awe of him and loved him.

古文：天和元年，除益州总管府长史，转陇右总管府长史。
现代文：天和元年，委任益州总管府长史，转任陇右总管府长史。
English: In 1902, he was appointed as the Chief Administrator of Yizhou Province, and then he was transferred to the position of the Chief Administrator of Shandong Province.

古文：四年，卒于位。
现代文：四年，在此职位上去世。
English: Four years later, he died in this position.

古文：赠小司空、宜鄜丹三州刺史。
现代文：获赠小司空、宜鄘丹三州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of "Kosikku" and "Ikidan Sanshu Sashimi."

古文：裴文举字道裕，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：裴文举字道裕，是河东闻喜人。
English: Pei's citation of the word "Doyu" is a reference to Hedong Wenshi.

古文：祖秀业，魏中散大夫、天水郡守，赠平州刺史。
现代文：他祖父裴秀业，任魏中散大夫、天水郡守，获赠平州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Pei Xiuye, was a doctor of Wei Zhongshan and the governor of Tianshui County, and was awarded the title of the history of Pingzhou.

古文：父邃，性方严，为州里所推挹。
现代文：他父亲裴邃，性情方正严肃，家乡人都很敬重他。
English: His father, Pei Jun, was a serious person, and his hometown people respected him very much.

古文：解褐散骑常侍、奉车都尉，累迁谏议大夫、司空从事中郎。
现代文：裴邃开始担任官职为散骑常侍、奉车都尉，不断升迁而任谏议大夫、司空从事中郎。
English: Pei Yao began to hold the official positions of horseback riding attendant and carriage captain, and was constantly promoted to the position of chief adviser, while Siku was engaged in the role of middle manager.

古文：大统三年，东魏来寇，邃乃纠合乡人，分据险要以自固。
现代文：大统三年，东魏入侵，裴邃集合乡亲，在各处险要地方防守自固。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, when the Eastern Wei Dynasty invaded, Pei Yao gathered his fellow townsmen and defended himself everywhere.

古文：时东魏以正平为东雍州，遣其将司马恭镇之。
现代文：当时束魏以正平设为束雍州，派遣将领司马恭镇守。
English: At that time, Sok Wei set Zhengping as Sok Yongzhou and dispatched the general Sima Qiong to guard the town.

古文：每遣间人，扇动百姓。
现代文：司马恭经常派遣间谍，煽动百姓。
English: Sima Qiong often sent spies to instigate the people.

古文：邃密遣都督韩僧明入城，喻其将士，即有五百余人，许为内应。
现代文：裴邃秘密派遣都督韩僧明进入城内，晓谕司马恭部下将士，便有五百多人答应做内应。
English: Baekhyun secretly sent the governor Han Sang-Ming into the city and told Sima Qiong's subordinates, and more than five hundred of them agreed to do so.

古文：期日未至，恭知之，乃弃城夜走。
现代文：约定时间未到，司马恭知道此事，于是弃城连夜逃走。
English: The agreed time did not arrive, Sima Qiong knew about this, so he abandoned the city and fled overnight.

古文：因是东雍遂内属。
现代文：柬雍州得以归属朝廷。
English: Cambodia's Yongzhou was able to belong to the imperial court.

古文：及李弼略地东境，邃为之乡导，多所降下。
现代文：李弼要侵占东部土地，裴邃为他做向导，不少地方归降。
English: Li Gan wanted to occupy the eastern lands, Pei Gan acted as his guide, and many places surrendered.

古文：太祖嘉之，特赏衣物，封澄城县子，邑三百户，进安东将军、银青光禄大夫，加散骑常侍、太尉府司马，除正平郡守。
现代文：太祖嘉奖，特意赏赐衣物，封澄城县子，食邑三百户，进安束将军、银青光禄大夫，加散骑常侍、太尉府司马，委任为正平郡守。
English: The great-grandfather's award, specially rewarding clothing, sealed off 300 households in Chengcheng County, including 300 households in food villages, Jin Anzuk General, Yin Qingguanglu Doctor, plus Sanzhiyi Regular Attendant, and Taifu Sima, and appointed him as Zhengping County Governor.

古文：寻卒官。
现代文：不久在职位上去世。
English: He died in office shortly afterwards.

古文：赠仪同三司、定州刺史。
现代文：获赠仪同三司、定州刺史。
English: He received the same award as Sanji and Dingzhou Sashimi.

古文：文举少忠谨，涉猎经史。
现代文：裴文举从小忠实谨慎，学习经史典籍。
English: From a young age, Pei Wenju was a faithful and prudent student of the classics.

古文：大统十年，起家奉朝请，迁丞相府墨曹参军。
现代文：大统十年，开始担任官职为奉朝请，迁任丞相府墨曹参军。
English: In the 10th year of the Great Reunification, he began to serve as a government official at the request of the government, and was transferred to the Prime Minister's Office to join the army.

古文：时太祖诸子年幼，盛简宾友。
现代文：当时太祖各位儿子年幼，广泛挑选宾友。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather's sons were young, and they had a wide selection of friends.

古文：文举以选与诸公子游，雅相钦敬，未尝戏狎。
现代文：裴文举被选中而与诸公子相处，对之钦佩敬重，未曾嬉戏。
English: He died in office more than a year later, and the barbarians remembered him fondly and built a temple for him on the banks of the Li River. Pei Wencu, a man of many words, and Hedong Wencu, a man of many virtues. Wencu was loyal and prudent from an early age.

古文：迁威烈将军、著作郎、中外府参军事。
现代文：迁任威烈将军、著作郎、中外府参军事。
English: He was transferred to the post of General Wei Rong, a writer, and participated in military affairs in and out of the prefecture.

古文：魏恭帝二年，赐姓贺兰氏。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，赐姓贺兰氏。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wei Gong, he was given the surname Helan.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，袭爵澄城县子。
现代文：孝闵帝登基。承嗣澄城县子爵位。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne. He succeeded to the viscountcy of Chengcheng County.

古文：齐公宪初开幕府，以文举为司录。
现代文：齐公宇文宪刚建立幕府时，委任裴文举为司录。
English: He was also transferred to be a writer and joined the army in Chugai-fu. Just after the establishment of the bakufu, Qi Gong Uwen Xian was appointed as a scribe.

古文：世宗初，累迁帅都督、宁远将军、大都督。
现代文：世宗初年，多次升迁为帅都督、宁远将军、大都督。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was promoted several times to the position of the handsome governor, the general of Ningyuan, and the great governor.

古文：及宪出镇剑南，复以文举为益州总管府中郎。
现代文：宇文宪镇守剑南，又委任裴文举为益州总管府中郎。
English: He also appointed Pei Wenju as the vice-governor of Yizhou.

古文：武成二年，就加使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：武成二年，以此加使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the second year of Wucheng, he was assigned to hold the festival, the general of the chariot and cavalry, and the three departments of the ceremony.

古文：蜀土沃饶，商贩百倍。
现代文：蜀地富饶，经商贩卖利润百倍。
English: Shunde is rich and bountiful, and the profit from trading is a hundred times higher.

古文：或有劝文举以利者，文举答之曰： 利之为贵，莫若安身。
现代文：有人劝裴文举以此获利，裴文举回答说： 财利虽然珍贵，但是不如洁身自好。
English: Some people advised Pei Wenju to make a profit in this way. Pei Wenju replied: Although financial gain is precious, it is not as good as being clean.

古文：身安则道隆，非货之谓。
现代文：身安则道隆，不能以货相比。
English: Personal safety is important, but cannot be compared to goods.

古文：是以不为，非恶财也。 宪矜其贫窭，每欲资给之。
现代文：不想为求利去做，并不是讨厌钱财。 宇文宪怜悯他贫困，多次给予资助。
English: Not wanting to do something for the sake of profit is not the same as hating money. Uwen Hsien took pity on his poverty and provided him with financial support many times.

古文：文举恒自谦逊，辞多受少。
现代文：苤塞垩常常谦逊，大多推辞衹接受少量资助。
English: Defaulters are often humble, and most refuse to accept small amounts of funding.

古文：保定三年，迁绛州刺史。
现代文：保定三年，调任绛州刺史。
English: After three years in Baoding, he was transferred to Bozhou.

古文：邃之往正平也，以廉约自守，每行春省俗，单车而已。
现代文：裴邃前往正平上任，坚持奉守廉洁节约，每当春出巡考察民俗，也就是一辆车而已。
English: Pei Jun went to Zhengping to take office, insisted on adhering to the principles of honesty and economy, and inspected folk customs every spring, that is, only one car.

古文：及文举临州，一遵其法。
现代文：到裴文举至州任职，还是遵循其法。
English: As far as the appointment of Pei Wen to the state post is concerned, it still follows its law.

古文：百姓美而化之。
现代文：百姓称赞而得到教化。
English: The people applauded and were enlightened.

古文：总管韦孝宽特相钦重，每与谈论，不觉膝前于席。
现代文：总管韦孝宽对他特别敬重，每当与他一起交谈，往往不自觉地向前移动。
English: General Manager Wei Xiaokuan holds him in high esteem and often unconsciously moves forward when talking to him.

古文：天和初，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：天和初年，晋升骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Tianhe, he was promoted to the general of the cavalry and the three departments of the prefectural government.

古文：寻为孝宽柱国府司马。
现代文：不久任韦孝宽柱国府司马。
English: Soon after, Wei Xiaoqiang became the secretary of the State Council.

古文：六年，入为司宪中大夫，进爵为公，增邑通前一千户。
现代文：六年，调入朝廷为司宪中大夫，进爵为公，增加食邑合前所封总计一千户。
English: In six years, he was transferred to the imperial court as a constitutional mid-level doctor, knighted as a public official, and the total number of households that had been sealed before the merger increased by one thousand.

古文：俄转军司马。
现代文：一很快转任军司马。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of military secretary.

古文：建德二年，又增邑七百户。
现代文：建德二年，又增加食邑七百户。
English: In the second year of Jiande, another 700 households were added.

古文：文举少丧父，其兄又在山东，唯与弟玑幼相训养，友爱甚笃。
现代文：裴文举少年丧父，兄长又在山东，惟有与弟弟裴玑幼年共同生活学习，感情很深。
English: Pei Wenqiu lost his father at a young age, and his elder brother was also in Shandong. However, he and his younger brother Pei Jun lived and studied together since they were very young, and their feelings are very deep.

古文：玑又早亡，文举抚视遗孤，逾于己子。
现代文：裴玑很早去世，裴文举抚养他的子女，比自己的子女还要好。
English: Pei Rong died very early, and Pei Wenjie raised his children better than his own children.

古文：时人以此称之。
现代文：当时人因此加以称赞。
English: He was lauded for it at the time.

古文：初，文举叔父季和为曲沃令，卒于闻喜川，而叔母韦氏卒于正平县。
现代文：当初，文举叔父裴季和担任曲沃县令，在闻喜川去世，而叔母韦氏在正平县去世。
English: At first, Wenju's uncle Pei Jihe, who served as the magistrate of Quwo County, died in Wensi River, while his aunt Wei died in Zhengping County.

古文：属东西分隔，韦氏坟垄在齐境。
现代文：当时东西分隔，韦氏的坟墓在齐境内。
English: At that time, east and west were separated, and Wei's grave was in Qi territory.

古文：及文举在本州，每加赏募。
现代文：裴文举任职本州，多次悬赏募求。
English: Pei Wenjie served in Honshu, and the reward was offered and solicited many times.

古文：齐人感其孝义，潜相要结，以韦氏柩西归，竟得合葬。
现代文：齐人受其孝义的感动，秘密合伙，将韦氏灵柩送归，终得以与叔父合葬。
English: Moved by his filial piety, Qi people secretly cooperated to return Wei's casket, and finally they were able to be buried together with their uncle.

古文：六年，除南青州刺史。
现代文：六年，委任为南青州刺史。
English: Six years later, he was appointed as the first president of South Qingzhou.

古文：宣政元年，卒于位。
现代文：宣政元年，在其职位上去世。
English: He died in office in the first year of the proclamation of the Republic.

古文：子冑嗣。
现代文：其子裴胄嗣位。
English: His son Baekhyun succeeded him.

古文：官至大都督，早卒。
现代文：官至大都督，早逝。
English: He was a high-ranking official and a great governor, but died young.

古文：时有高宾者，历官内外，亦以干用见称。
现代文：当时有一位名为高宾的，担任内外各种官职，也是以才干能力见称。
English: At that time, there was a man named Gao Bin, who held various official positions at home and abroad, and was also known for his ability.

古文：宾，渤海修人也。
现代文：高宾，是渤海修人。
English: The guest of honour was Bohai Xiu Ren.

古文：其先因官北边，遂没于辽左。
现代文：其祖上因为在北边任职，所以留居辽左。
English: His ancestors stayed in Liao Zuo because they worked in the north.

古文：祖暠，以魏太和初，自辽东归魏。
现代文：他祖父高嵩，在魏太和初年，自辽东归附魏朝。
English: His grandfather Gao Song, in the first year of the Wei Dynasty, was annexed to the Wei Dynasty from Liaodong.

古文：官至安定郡守、卫尉卿。
现代文：官至安定郡守、卫尉卿。
English: He rose to the rank of stable county governor and lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：父季安，抚军将军、兖州刺史。
现代文：他父亲高季安，任抚军将军、兖州刺史。
English: His father, Gao Ji'an, was a general in the Fuzhou army and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：宾少聪颖，有文武干用。
现代文：高宾年轻时便聪明机敏，具备文武才能。
English: When Gaobin was young, he was smart and quick-witted, with talent in literature and martial arts.

古文：仕东魏，历官至龙骧将军、谏议大夫、立义都督。
现代文：在东魏任职，一直做到龙骧将军、谏议大夫、立义都督。
English: He served in the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and has been a general of Longyu, a doctor of consultation, and a governor of Liyi.

古文：同列有忌其能者，谮之于齐神武。
现代文：同事中有人妒忌他的才能，向齐神武说他的坏话。
English: Some of his colleagues were jealous of his talent and spoke ill of him to Qi Shenwu.

古文：宾惧及于难，大统六年，乃弃家属，间行归阙。
现代文：高宾担心会有灾难，大统六年，不带家属，潜行归附朝廷。
English: Gao Bin was worried that there would be a disaster. After six years of unification, he sneaked back to the imperial court without his family.

古文：太祖嘉之，授安东将军、银青光禄大夫。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他，授予安东将军、银青光禄大夫。
English: His great-grandfather praised him and awarded him the titles of General Anton and Silver Qingguanglu Doctor.

古文：稍迁通直散骑常侍、抚军将军、大都督。
现代文：后来迁任通直散骑常侍、抚军将军、大都督。
English: Later, he was transferred to the posts of Tsuchida Sanzhishi no Tsuneishi, Fushun Shogun, and Grand Governor.

古文：世宗初，除咸阳郡守。
现代文：世宗初年，任命为咸阳郡守。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed governor of Xianyang County.

古文：政存简惠，甚得民和。
现代文：处理政务简要而施予恩惠，很得民心。
English: He is popular for handling government affairs concisely and dispensing favors.

古文：世宗闻其能，赐田园于郡境。
现代文：世宗得知他的政绩，赐给他郡内田园。
English: When Sejong learned of his achievements, he gave him the best farmland in the county.

古文：宾既羁旅归国，亲属在齐，常虑见疑，无以取信。
现代文：高宾寄居异乡归附朝廷后，亲属仍在齐国，经常担忧受怀疑，无从取得信任。
English: After Gao Bin went to live in a foreign country and became attached to the imperial court, his relatives were still in Qi, often worried and suspected, and unable to gain trust.

古文：乃于所赐田内，多莳竹木，盛构堂宇，并凿池沼以环之，有终焉之志。
现代文：于是在所赐给的田内，多种竹木，建造许多房屋，周围建以池沼，有心在此终老。
English: Therefore, in the field given to him, many kinds of bamboo and wood, many houses were built, and a pond was built around it. He had the intention to live here forever.

古文：朝廷以此知无贰焉。
现代文：朝廷因此知道他没有反叛之意。
English: The court therefore knew that he had no intention of rebelling.

古文：加使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，赐姓独孤氏。武成元年，除御正下大夫，兼小载师，出为益州总管府长史。
现代文：加使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，赐姓独孤氏武成元年，任职御正下大夫，兼任小载师，出京城担任益州总管府长史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu Cheng, he was given the surname of Doko, and served as the imperial chief physician, concurrently as a page, and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：保定初，征拜计部中大夫，治中外府从事中郎，赐爵武阳县伯。
现代文：保定初年，征召为计部中大夫，治中外府从事中郎，赐封武阳县伯。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was conscripted as a junior doctor of the accounting department, engaged in the administration of foreign provinces, and awarded the title of Wuyang County.

古文：宾敏于从政，果敢决断，案牍虽繁，绰有余裕。
现代文：高宾善于处理政务，果敢决断，文案虽然繁多，却从容处理绰有余暇。
English: Gao Bin is good at handling government affairs, decisive, and although there are many copywriters, he has plenty of leisure time to deal with them.

古文：转太府中大夫、齐公宪府长史。
现代文：转任太府中大夫、齐公宇文宪府长史。
English: He was transferred to the position of Taifu Junior Doctor and Qi Gongwu Wenxianfu Changshi.

古文：天和二年，除鄀州诸军事、鄀州刺史，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，治襄州总管府司录。
现代文：天和二年，担任都州诸军事、都州刺史，晋升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，治襄州总管府司录。
English: In 1902, he served as the Military Commander of the Capital Region and the Military Historian of the Capital Region, and was promoted to the General of the Cavalry, the Secretary of the Three Departments of the General Administration of the Capital Region, and the Secretary of the General Administration of the Capital Region.

古文：六年，卒于州。
现代文：六年，在州职位上去世。
English: He died in office six years later.

古文：时年六十八。
现代文：终年六十八岁。
English: He was sixty-eight years old.

古文：子颎，为隋文帝佐命。
现代文：其子高颓，是辅佐隋文帝创业的功臣。
English: His son Gao Wei is a meritorious person who assisted the Sui Emperor Wen to start a business.

古文：开皇中，赠宾礼部尚书、武阳公。
现代文：开皇年间，追赠高宾礼部尚书、武阳公。
English: During the emperor's reign, the high-ranking guests' etiquette book, Shang Shu, and Wu Yang Gong were posthumously presented.

古文：谥曰简。
现代文：谧号称为简。
English: Her nickname is Jane.

古文：又有安定燎允，本姓牛氏，亦有器干，知名于时。
现代文：又有一位安定人家允，本姓牛，也有才干，知名于时。
English: There was also a stable person, Jiayong, whose real surname was Niu, who was also talented and well-known at the time.

古文：历官侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、工部尚书、临泾县公，赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：历任侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、工部尚书、临泾县公，赐姓宇文氏。
English: Successive officials, such as the Vice-Chamberlain, the General of the Horse, the Keifu Rites and Ceremonies, the Third Secretary, the Minister of Works, and the Linyi County Governor, were given the surname Uwen.

古文：失其事，故不为传。
现代文：因为他的事已失传，所以不立传。
English: Because his story has been lost, it will not be published.

古文：允子弘，博学洽闻。
现代文：亲允儿子奈弘，博学多闻。
English: Jinjo's son, Nahiro, is well-read and well-spoken.

古文：宣政中，内史下大夫、仪同大将军。
现代文：宣政年间，任内史下大夫、仪同大将军。
English: During the years of the proclamation of the Constitution, he was appointed as a doctor of history and a general of ceremony.

古文：大象末，复姓牛氏。
现代文：大象末年，恢复姓牛。
English: At the end of his life, he changed his surname back to Niu.

古文：史臣曰：寇隽委质两朝，以儒素见重。
现代文：史臣曰：寇俊任职于两朝，以儒素而见重。
English: Shichen said: "Kojun served in two dynasties, and was distinguished by his Confucianism.

古文：韩褒奉事三帝，以忠厚知名。
现代文：韩裹任职于三位皇帝朝中，以忠厚而知名。
English: Han Wai served under three emperors and was known for his loyalty.

古文：赵肃平允当官。
现代文：赵肃做官公正称职。
English: Zhao Su is a fair and competent official.

古文：张轨循良播美。
现代文：张轨奉公守法而被传颂美名。
English: Zhang Rail is a law-abiding person and has been praised for his good reputation.

古文：李彦誉流省合。
现代文：李彦在朝廷机构名声很好。
English: Li Yan had a good reputation in the imperial court.

古文：郭彦信着蛮陬。
现代文：郭彦在蛮族人中获得信誉。
English: Guo Yan gained credibility among the barbarians.

古文：历官外内，并当时之选也。
现代文：都在朝廷内外任职，都是当时选出的人才。
English: All of them served inside and outside the Imperial Court, and all of them were talented people who were elected at that time.

古文：文举之在绛州，世载清德。
现代文：裴文举在绛州任职，当世称赞高洁美德。
English: Pei Wenqiu served in Zhangzhou and praised Gao Jie's virtues.

古文：辞多受少，有廉让之风焉。
现代文：辞多受少，具有清廉谦让之风。
English: He speaks more than he listens, and has a clean and humble demeanor.

