古文：◎穆宗
现代文：穆宗
English: Mu Zong

古文：穆宗契天隆道渊懿宽仁显文光武纯德弘孝庄皇帝，讳载垕，世宗第三子也。
现代文：穆宗契天隆道渊懿宽仁显文光武纯德弘孝庄皇帝朱载垕，明世宗第三子。
English: Emperor Zhu Zhaozhong, the third son of Emperor Mingzong, was a Mu Zongchi, a Tianlong, a Duyun, a Quanren, a Wen Guang, a Wu Chun, a De Hong, and a Xiaozhuang.

古文：母杜康妃。
现代文：其母为杜康妃。
English: His mother was Du Kangfei.

古文：嘉靖十八年二月封裕王，与庄敬太子、景恭王同日受册。
现代文：嘉靖十八年二月封为裕王，与庄敬太子、景恭王同一天受册封。
English: In February of the 18th year of Jiajing, he was given the title of Yu Wang. He was conferred the title on the same day as Prince Zhuang Jing and King Jing Gong.

古文：已而庄敬薨，世宗以王长且贤，继序已定，而中外危疑，屡有言者，乃令景王之国。
现代文：不久，庄敬太子死去，世宗因裕王年长并且有才能，被定为皇位的继承人，然而，朝中内外猜忌怀疑，经常有人谈论此事，世宗于是命令裕王前往封国。
English: Soon after, Prince Zhuang Jing died, and Shizong was designated as the heir to the throne due to King Yu's age and talent. However, there were suspicions inside and outside the court, and people often talked about the matter. Shizong then ordered King Yu to go to Hokkoku.

古文：四十五年十二月庚子，世宗崩。
现代文：嘉靖四十五年十二月十四日，明世宗死。
English: Jiajing died on December 14th, 45 years ago.

古文：壬子，即皇帝位。
现代文：二十六日，朱载篨即皇帝位。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Zhu Zaiqi became emperor.

古文：以明年为隆庆元年，大赦天下。
现代文：以第二年为隆庆元年，大加赦免。
English: With the second year being the first year of the Longqing, he was greatly pardoned.

古文：先朝政令不便者，皆以遗诏改之。
现代文：不适合本朝的前朝政令均因遗诏改变。
English: The decrees of the former imperial court that were not suitable for the current imperial court were all changed as a result of the will.

古文：召用建言得罪诸臣，死者恤录。
现代文：下诏任用因提建议而得罪的诸位大臣，已死去的加以抚恤记功。
English: The following decree appoints all ministers who have offended by making suggestions, and those who have died will be given a pension to commemorate their achievements.

古文：方士悉付法司治罪。罢一切斋醮工作及例外采买。
现代文：方士全部交给法官治罪，停止一切斋戒工作及额外采办买卖。
English: The officials were all handed over to the judge to be punished, and all fasting work and extra purchases and sales were stopped.

古文：免明年天下田赋之半，及嘉靖四十三年以前逋赋。
现代文：减免明年天下田赋的一半，以及直到嘉靖四十三年以前欠交赋税。
English: Half of the next year's land tax will be reduced and exempted, as well as the tax arrears up to the 43rd year of Jiajing.

古文：释户部主事海瑞于狱。
现代文：户部主事海瑞释放出狱。
English: The head of the household department, Hai Rui, was released from prison.

古文：是年，土鲁番入贡。
现代文：这年，土鲁番来朝进贡。
English: In this year, Turuban was the first to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：隆庆元年春正月丙寅，罢睿宗明堂配享。
现代文：隆庆元年正月十日，停止睿宗明堂附祭。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the first year of Longqing, the festival attached to Ruizongming Hall was stopped.

古文：戊辰，复郑王厚烷爵。
现代文：十二日，恢复郑王朱厚烷爵位。
English: On the 12th, the title of Zheng Wang Zhu Houxuan was restored.

古文：丁丑，追尊母康妃为孝恪皇太后。
现代文：二十一日，追尊其母康妃为孝恪皇太后。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, she became the empress dowager of Takaoka in honor of her mother, Kofui.

古文：二月戊子，祭大社大稷。
现代文：二月二日，祭大社大稷。
English: On February 2nd, the grand ceremony of the festival was held.

古文：乙未，册妃陈氏为皇后。吏部侍郎陈以勤为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，礼部侍郎张居正为吏部左侍郎兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：九日，册立陈妃为皇后，吏部侍郎陈以勤为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，礼部侍郎张居正为吏部左侍郎兼东阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On the 9th, Chen Fei was appointed as the empress, Chen Yiquan, the attendant of the personnel department, was appointed as the honorable member of the ceremonial department and the academician of Wenyu Academy, and Zhang Jizheng, the attendant of the ceremonial department, was appointed as the left attendant of the personnel department and the academician of Donggak University, to participate in the military affairs.

古文：三月壬申，葬肃皇帝于永陵。
现代文：三月十七日，安葬肃皇帝于永陵。
English: On March 17th, Emperor Anzu was buried in Yongling.

古文：乙酉，土蛮犯辽阳，指挥王承德战殁。
现代文：三十日，土蛮侵犯辽阳，指挥王承德战死。
English: On the 30th, the barbarians invaded Liaoyang, and the commander Wang Chengde died in battle.

古文：夏四月丙戌朔，享太庙。
现代文：四月一日，祭奉太庙。
English: On April 1st, the temple was dedicated.

古文：丙午，禁属国毋献珍禽异兽。
现代文：二十一日，禁止属国进献珍禽异兽。
English: On the 21st, the country banned the donation of rare birds and animals.

古文：丁未，御经筵。
现代文：二十二日，去讲席听讲经论史。
English: On the 22nd, I went to the lecture hall to listen to a lecture on the history of scripture.

古文：五月己未，黄河决口工成。
现代文：五月五日，黄河决口筑好完工。
English: On May 5, the construction of the mouth of the Yellow River was completed.

古文：辛酉，祀地于北郊。
现代文：七日，去北郊祭地。
English: On the seventh day, go to the northern suburb festival.

古文：丁丑，高拱罢。
现代文：二十三日，高拱停职。
English: On the 23rd, Gao Gong was suspended.

古文：六月戊戌，以霪雨修省，素服避殿，御皇极门视事。
现代文：六月十五日，因久雨而修身反省，穿素服避开正殿，到皇极门处理政事。
English: On the 15th of June, because of the long rain, he felt remorse and dressed in plain clothes to avoid the main hall and went to the imperial gate to deal with political affairs.

古文：是月，新河复决。
现代文：这一月，新修成的黄河堤决口。
English: This month, the newly built Yellow River dike broke through.

古文：秋七月辛巳，招抚山东、河南被灾流民，复五年。
现代文：七月二十八日，招抚山东、河南受灾流民，免除五年徭役。
English: On July 28th, the disaster-affected and displaced people in Shandong and Henan were exempted from five years of forced labor.

古文：八月癸未朔，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：八月初一日，隆重祭奠先师孔子。
English: On the first day of August, a grand ceremony was held to pay tribute to Confucius.

古文：九月乙卯，俺答寇大同，诏严战守。
现代文：九月四日，俺答侵犯大同，下诏严格战事守备。
English: On September 4, I announced that we would invade Datong and that we would maintain a strict defense posture.

古文：癸亥，俺答陷石州，杀知州王亮采，掠交城、文水。
现代文：十二日，俺答攻陷石州，杀石州知州王亮采，夺取交城、文水。
English: On the twelfth day, we agreed to capture Shishu, kill Shishu Chizhou Wang Liangcai, and seize Jiecheng and Wenshui.

古文：壬申，土蛮犯蓟镇，掠昌黎、卢龙，至于滦河。
现代文：二十一日，土蛮侵犯蓟镇，掳掠昌黎、卢龙，直到滦河。
English: On the twenty-first day, the barbarians invaded Lushan Town, captured Changli and Lulong, and went as far as Luhe.

古文：诏宣大总督侍郎王之诰还驻怀来，巡抚都御史曹亨驻兵通州。
现代文：命令宣府、大同总督侍郎王之诰回驻怀来，巡抚都御史曹亨驻兵通州。
English: He ordered Xuanfu and the governor of Datong, Wang Zhixuan, to return to Huai, and the governor of the capital, Cao Heng, to stay in Heitongzhou.

古文：甲戌，郭朴致仕。
现代文：二十三日，郭朴辞官退职。
English: On the 23rd, Guo Pak resigned and retired.

古文：免襄阳、郧阳被灾秋粮。
现代文：减免襄阳、郧阳受灾秋粮。
English: Relief for affected autumn crops in Xiangyang and Fenyang.

古文：乙亥，总兵官李世忠援永平，与敌战于抚宁，京师戒严。
现代文：二十四日，总兵官李世忠救援永平，与俺答激战于抚宁，京师戒严。
English: On the 24th, Commander-in-Chief Li Shizhong came to the rescue of Yongping and fought a fierce battle with me in Fuxing. The capital was placed under martial law.

古文：冬十月丙戌，寇退，京师解严。
现代文：十月五日，俺答退兵，京师解严。
English: On October 5, I agreed to withdraw from the army, and the Beijing division lifted the restrictions.

古文：甲辰，谕群臣议边防事宜。
现代文：二十三日，告诉群臣商议边防事宜。
English: On the 23rd, he told his ministers to discuss border defense issues.

古文：宁夏总兵官雷龙出塞邀击河套部，败之。
现代文：宁夏总兵官雷龙出塞拦击河套诸部，大败河套各部。
English: Lei Long, the general officer of Ningxia, went out to block the various departments of Hetao, and defeated all the departments of Hetao.

古文：十一月癸亥，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十一月十二日，在南郊祭天。
English: On November 12th, the Southern Suburbs will hold a festival.

古文：是年，广东贼大起。琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，广东盗贼大起，琉球入朝进贡。
English: At that time, the Guangdong thieves were on the rise, and the Ryukyus paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：二年春正月己卯，给事中石星疏陈六事，杖阙下，斥为民。
现代文：隆庆二年正月九日，给事中石星陈奏六件大事，被杖于宫前阶下，贬为平民。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Longqing, six major events were given to Shi Xing Chen, who was caned under the front steps of the palace and reduced to a commoner.

古文：二月丁酉，寇犯柴沟堡，守备韩尚忠战死。
现代文：二月十七日，俺答侵犯柴沟堡，守将韩尚忠战死。
English: On February 17th, we invaded Chai Gou Fortress, and the guard Han Shangzhong was killed.

古文：己亥，耕耤田。
现代文：十九日，耕种謖田。
English: On the 19th, the ploughing of the alfalfa field began.

古文：丁未，如天寿山，谒长陵、永陵。
现代文：二十七日，到天寿山去，拜谒长陵、永陵。
English: On the 27th, he went to Tianshou Mountain to visit the Changling Mausoleum and Yongling Mausoleum.

古文：庚戌，还宫，免所过田租有差。
现代文：三十日回宫，减免所过地方田租各有差别。
English: On the thirtieth day back to the palace, the reduction and exemption of local land rent varies.

古文：三月辛酉，立皇子翊钧为皇太子，诏赦天下。
现代文：三月十一日，立皇子朱翊钧为皇太子，下诏赦免天下。
English: On March 11, Prince Zhu Xi was enthroned as crown prince, and the imperial edict of amnesty was issued.

古文：乙丑，广西总兵官俞大猷讨广东贼。
现代文：十五日，广西总兵官俞大猷征讨广东盗贼。
English: On the 15th, the Guangxi general military officer, Xing Daxuan, led a campaign against the Guangdong thieves.

古文：戊辰，赐罗万化等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赏赐罗万化等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On the 18th, Luo Wanhua and other new recruits were awarded with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：丙子，幸南海子。
现代文：二十六日，巡幸南海子。
English: On the 26th, they went on a sightseeing tour of Nanhaizi.

古文：戊寅，京师地震，命百官修省。
现代文：二十八日，京师发生地震，命百官修身反省。
English: On the 28th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, and hundreds of officials were forced to reflect on their lives.

古文：夏六月庚辰，遣使两畿录囚。己丑，广东贼曾一本寇广州，杀知县刘师颜。
现代文：广东贼曾一本侵犯广州，杀知县刘师颜。
English: A bandit from Guangdong once invaded Guangzhou and killed Liu Shiyan from Zhixian County.

古文：秋七月己酉，贼入廉州。
现代文：七月二日，盗贼进入廉州。
English: On July 2, the thieves entered Lianzhou.

古文：丙寅，徐阶致仕。
现代文：十九日，徐阶辞官退职。
English: On the 19th, Xu Ji resigned and retired.

古文：冬十月戊寅，免南畿被灾秋粮，振淮、徐饥。
现代文：十月三日，减免南畿受灾秋粮，赈救淮、徐州饥荒。
English: On October 3, the autumn grain in Nanki, which was affected by the disaster, was reduced and exempted, and the famine in Huaihe and Xuzhou was relieved.

古文：己亥，废辽王宪节为庶人。
现代文：二十四日，废辽王朱宪火节为庶人。
English: On the 24th, the deposed Liao king, Zhu Xian, became a commoner.

古文：甲辰，免畿内、河南被灾秋粮，十一月壬子，宣府总兵官马芳袭俺答于长水海子，又败之鞍子山。
现代文：二十九日，免畿内、河南受灾秋粮。十一月七日，宣府总兵官马芳在长水海子袭击俺答，又在鞍子山打败俺答。
English: On the 29th, autumn crops in Kinai and Henan were spared from the disaster. On November 7, Ma Fang, the chief military officer of the General Staff of the Korean People's Army, attacked Ipoh in Haizi, Changshui, and defeated Ipoh in Kruzishan.

古文：辛酉，免江西被灾税粮，戊辰，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十六日，减免江西受灾税粮。二十三日，在南郊祭天。
English: On the 16th, the relief of the disaster-affected tax grain in Jiangxi Province was announced, and on the 23rd, the Southern Suburbs Festival was held.

古文：己巳，命广东、福建督抚将领会剿曾一本。
现代文：二十四日，命令广东、福建督抚将领一起征剿曾一本。
English: On the 24th, he ordered the governors-general of Guangdong and Fujian to jointly collect one yuan.

古文：十二月庚寅，世宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：十二月十六日，世宗神牌附祭于太庙。
English: On December 16th, the Sejong Shinpai Festival was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：丁酉，限勋戚庄田。
现代文：二十三日，规定并限制勋戚庄田数目。
English: On the 23rd, it stipulated and limited the number of shodato for relatives of the war dead.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球入朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月壬子，大同总兵官赵岢败俺答于弘赐堡。
现代文：隆庆三年正月八日，大同总兵官赵岢在弘赐堡打败俺答。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the third year of Longqing, the Datong general officer Zhao Wei defeated me in Hongji Fort.

古文：二月庚辰，免陕西被灾秋粮。
现代文：二月六日，免陕西受灾秋粮。
English: On February 6, Shaanxi was exempted from the affected autumn grain.

古文：三月戊辰，曾一本陷碣石卫，裨将周云翔杀参将耿宗元叛，附于贼。
现代文：三月二十四日，曾一本攻陷碣石卫，副将周云翔杀参将耿宗元反叛，依附于曾一本。
English: On March 24th, Zeng Bin attacked and captured Jinshiwei. Vice Admiral Zhou Yunxiang killed General Geng Zongyuan, who had rebelled and attached himself to Zeng Bin.

古文：夏四月己丑，总兵官雷龙出塞袭河套部，败之。
现代文：四月十六日，总兵官雷龙出塞袭击河套诸部并打败河套各部。
English: On April 16th, Lei Long, the commander-in-chief of the military, went out to attack the various departments of Hetao and defeated them.

古文：五月庚戌，总兵官郭成等破贼于平山，周云翔伏诛。
现代文：五月七日，总兵官郭成等在平山打败曾一本，周云翔被杀。
English: On May 7, the commander-in-chief Guo Cheng and others defeated Zeng Bin in Hirayama, and Zhou Yunxiang was killed.

古文：甲寅，御史詹仰庇请罢靡费，斥为民。
现代文：十一日，御史詹仰庇请求停止奢侈费用，被驱除为民。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Mishi Zhan Yangpi requested that the extravagant expenses be stopped and was expelled from the country.

古文：秋七月壬午，河决沛县。
现代文：七月十一日，沛县黄河决堤。
English: On July 11, the Yellow River in Pei County burst its banks.

古文：乙酉，诏天下有司实修积谷备荒之政。
现代文：十四日，下诏天下官吏整治积蓄粮食以备荒年之政事。
English: On the 14th, officials across the country issued an order to rectify and accumulate grain to prepare for the political affairs of the barren year.

古文：壬辰，遣使振沿河被灾州县。
现代文：二十一日，派使者沿黄河赈济受灾州县。
English: On the 21st, an envoy was sent along the Yellow River to help the affected counties.

古文：八月癸丑，广东贼平，曾一本伏诛。
现代文：八月十二日，广东贼被平定，曾一本伏诛。
English: On August 12th, the Guangdong bandits were subdued.

古文：壬戌，礼部尚书赵贞吉兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十一日，礼部尚书赵贞吉兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhao Zhengyi, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Wenyu Pavilion University, participated in important affairs.

古文：丁卯，振南畿、浙江、山东水灾。
现代文：二十六日，赈救南畿、浙江、山东水灾。
English: On the 26th, the flood disaster in Nanki, Zhejiang and Shandong was successfully rescued.

古文：九月丙子，俺答犯大同，掠山阴、应州、怀仁、浑源。
现代文：九月六日，俺答侵犯大同，掳掠山阴、应州、怀仁、浑源。
English: On September 6, I invaded Datong and plundered Shanyin, Yingzhou, Huairen, and Hunyuan.

古文：辛卯，大阅。
现代文：二十一日，大肆检阅。
English: On the twenty-first day, it was extensively inspected.

古文：冬十一月甲戌，祀天于南郊。庚辰，京师地震有声，敕修省。
现代文：十一月五日，在南郊祭天。十一日，京师地震发出声响，命令修身反省。
English: On the 5th of November, the Southern Suburbs held a festival. On the 11th, the Beijing Earthquake made a sound, commanding people to self-reflect.

古文：十二月己亥，命厂卫密访部院政事。
现代文：十二月一日，命令厂卫秘密探访部院政事。
English: On December 1st, he ordered the plant guards to secretly visit the political affairs department of the academy.

古文：庚申，召高拱复入阁。
现代文：二十二日，召高拱再次入阁。
English: On the 22nd, Gao Gong was once again invited to join the cabinet.

古文：乙丑，尚宝寺丞郑履淳以言事廷杖下狱。
现代文：二十七日，尚宝寺丞郑履淳因谈论政事被廷杖下狱。
English: On the 27th, Zheng Lixun, the chief priest of Shangbao Temple, was sent to prison by the imperial scepter for talking about politics.

古文：是冬，免两畿、山东、浙江、河南、湖广税粮。
现代文：当年冬天，免两畿、山东、浙江、河南、湖广税粮。
English: In the winter of that year, tax grain was exempted from the two Kis, Shandong, Zhejiang, Henan and Hunan provinces.

古文：是年，陕西贼起。
现代文：这年，陕西盗贼大起。
English: This year, thieves in Shaanxi are on the rise.

古文：琉球、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：琉球、土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu, Turuban entered the court and paid tribute.

古文：四年春正月己巳朔，日有食之，免朝贺。辛未，避殿修省。
现代文：隆庆四年正月一日，有日食，免朝贺。初三日，避开正殿修身反省。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Longqing, there is a solar eclipse, so no morning greetings. On the third day of the first month, avoid the main hall for self-reflection.

古文：是月，倭入广海卫城。
现代文：本月，倭寇入侵广海卫城。
English: This month, wokou invaded Guanghai Acropolis.

古文：二月乙丑，分设三大营文武提督六人。
现代文：二月二十七日，分设三大营文、武提督六人。
English: On February 27th, three major battalions and six military governors were established.

古文：夏四月戊戌，京师地震。
现代文：四月一日，京师发生地震。
English: On April 1, an earthquake occurred in the capital city of Kyoto.

古文：丙午，俺答寇大同、宣府，官兵拒却之。
现代文：九日，俺答侵犯大同、宣府，官兵击退俺答。
English: On the 9th, we invaded Datong and Xuanfu, and the officers and soldiers repulsed us.

古文：是月，陕西贼寇四川。
现代文：这月，陕西盗贼侵犯四川。
English: This month, thieves from Shaanxi invaded Sichuan.

古文：五月癸酉，给事中李己谏买金宝，廷杖下狱。
现代文：五月六日，给事中李己进谏买金银宝物，遭廷杖下狱。
English: On May 6, during the incident, Li Jizhong bought gold and silver treasures and was jailed by the court.

古文：秋七月己巳，禁章奏浮冗。
现代文：七月三日，禁止奏章空洞冗长。
English: On July 3rd, the ban on lengthy and empty chants was lifted.

古文：命抚、按官严禁有司酷刑。
现代文：命令抚、按官员严禁官吏施行酷刑。
English: It is strictly forbidden for officials to order or order officials to torture.

古文：戊子，陈以勤致仕。
现代文：二十二日，陈以勤辞官退职。
English: On the 22nd, Chen resigned from his post.

古文：乙未，免四川被灾税粮。
现代文：二十九日，减免四川受灾税粮。
English: On the 29th, the reduction and exemption of Sichuan disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：八月庚戌，宣、大告警，敕边备。
现代文：八月十五日，宣府、大同报警，命令防备边境。
English: On August 15, Xuanfu and Datong alerted the police and ordered to guard the border.

古文：九月癸酉，陕西水灾，蠲振有差。
现代文：九月八日，陕西发生水灾，减免税粮及赈恤各有不同。
English: On September 8th, a flood occurred in Shaanxi Province, and the reduction of tax-free grain and subsistence allowance varied.

古文：甲戌，河决邳州。
现代文：九日，邳州黄河决堤。
English: On the 9th, the Yellow River in Zhangzhou burst its banks.

古文：壬午，免北畿、湖广被灾税粮。
现代文：十七日，减免北畿、湖广受灾后应交税粮。
English: On the 17th, tax-deductible grain was reduced and exempted in Beigui and Hukang after the disaster.

古文：癸未，寇犯大同，副总兵钱栋战死。
现代文：十八日，俺答又侵掠大同，副总兵钱栋战死。
English: On the 18th, we invaded and plundered Datong again, and the deputy commander Qian Dong was killed.

古文：戊子，犯锦州，总兵官王治道等战死。
现代文：二十三日，侵犯锦州，总兵官王治道等战死。
English: On the 23rd, they invaded Jinzhou, and the commander-in-chief Wang Zhidou and others died in battle.

古文：甲午，罢京营文武提督，置总督协理大臣。
现代文：二十九日，罢免京师营兵文武提督，设置总督协理大臣。
English: On the 29th, the admiral of the Beijing Divisional Battalion of the Chinese People's Liberation Army was dismissed, and the vice-minister of the governor was set up.

古文：冬十月癸卯，俺答孙把汉那吉来降。
现代文：十月九日，俺答孙子把汉那吉前来投降。
English: On October 9th, I asked my grandson to bring Hanaji to surrender.

古文：丁未，以把汉那吉为指挥使。
现代文：十三日，以把汉那吉为指挥使。
English: On the thirteenth day, Hanakichi was appointed as the commanding officer.

古文：壬戌，考察给事中、御史。
现代文：二十八日，考察给事中、御史官。
English: On the 28th, the investigation was handed over to the court historian.

古文：十一月丁丑，俺答乞封。
现代文：十一月十三日，俺答乞求加封。
English: On November 13th, I begged for an extension.

古文：己卯，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十五日，在南郊祭天。
English: On the 15th, the Southern Suburbs held a festival.

古文：乙酉，赵贞吉罢。
现代文：二十一日，赵贞吉停职。
English: On the 21st, Zhao Zhengyi was suspended.

古文：己丑，礼部尚书殷士儋兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十五日，礼部尚书殷士儋兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 25th, the Vice President of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies Shangshu Yin and the Vice President of the University of Wenyu participated in important affairs.

古文：十二月丁酉，俺答执叛人赵全等九人来献，诏遣把汉那吉归，厚赐之。
现代文：十二月四日，俺答捉拿叛乱首领赵全等九人进献于朝，下诏遣返把汉那吉，丰厚赏赐给他。
English: On December 4, I ordered the capture of nine people, including the rebel leader Zhao Quan, and presented them to the DPRK. I also ordered the repatriation of Hanaji and gave him a rich reward.

古文：乙卯，受俘，磔赵全等于市。
现代文：二十二日，受俘，赵全等分尸弃市。
English: On the 22nd, after being captured, Zhao Quan and the others abandoned the city.

古文：五年春二月甲午，廷臣及朝觐官谒皇太子于文华左门。己未，封皇子翊镠为潞王。
现代文：隆庆五年二月二日，群臣及朝觐官在文华殿左门谒见皇太子。二十七日，封皇子朱翊为潞王。
English: On February 2nd of the 5th year of Longqing, a group of courtiers and court eunuchs came to see the crown prince at the left gate of the Wenhua Hall. On the 27th, the crown prince Zhu Xi was crowned king.

古文：三月己卯，赐张元忭等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐张元忭等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On March 18th, Zhang Yuanjun and other new members were awarded with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：己丑，封俺答为顺义王。
现代文：二十八日，封俺答为顺义王。
English: On the 28th, I was crowned Shunyi King.

古文：夏四月甲午，河复决邳州。
现代文：四月三日，邳州黄河再次决口。
English: On April 3rd, the Yellow River in Zhangzhou once again burst its banks.

古文：五月壬戌，古田僮贼平。
现代文：五月一日，古田僮贼被平定。
English: On May 1, the Gutian bandits were finally subdued.

古文：戊寅，李春芳致仕。
现代文：十七日，李春芳辞官退职。
English: On the 17th, Li Chunfang resigned and retired.

古文：六月辛卯，京师地震者三，敕修省。
现代文：六月一日京师三次发生地震，命令修身反省。
English: On June 1st, an earthquake occurred three times in the capital, and the order was given to self-reflect.

古文：甲辰，授河套部长吉能为都督同知。
现代文：十四日，授予河套部部长吉能为都督同知。
English: On the 14th, the Minister of the Hetao Department, Yoshitaka Yoshitaka, was awarded the title of governor.

古文：甲寅，顺义王俺答贡马，告庙受贺。
现代文：二十四日，顺义王俺答进贡马匹，告诉宗庙接受庆贺。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Shunyi Wang I agreed to enter the tribute horses and told the ancestral temple to accept the celebration.

古文：丙辰，俺答执赵全余党十三人来献。
现代文：二十六日，俺答捉拿赵全余党十三人进献给朝廷。
English: On the 26th, I ordered to capture the remaining 13 members of Zhao Quan's party and present them to the imperial court.

古文：秋八月癸卯，许河套部互市。
现代文：八月十四日，允许河套诸部互市买卖。
English: On August 14th, it was allowed to buy and sell river sets from various provinces.

古文：九月癸未，三镇贡市成。
现代文：九月二十四日，修成三镇贡市。
English: On September 24th, the three towns of Gongshi were built.

古文：冬十月己亥，河南、山东大水，申饬河防。
现代文：十月十日，河南、山东涨大水，重申整治黄河堤防。
English: On October 10, Henan Province and Shandong Province experienced high water levels and reiterated the need to rectify the Yellow River dike.

古文：十一月己巳，殷士儋致仕。
现代文：十一月十一日，殷士儋辞官退职。
English: On November 11, Yin Shizhen resigned from his post.

古文：是年，琉球、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球、土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu and Truk were the first to pay tribute to the Emperor.

古文：六年春正月辛未，筑徐州至宿迁堤三百七十里。
现代文：隆庆六年正月十四日，修筑徐州至宿迁堤防三百七十里。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the sixth year of Longqing, the construction of the Xuzhou-Shukou embankment was completed.

古文：二月丙申，倭寇广东，陷神电卫，大掠。
现代文：二月九日，倭寇侵犯广东，攻陷神屯卫，大肆抢劫。
English: On February 9, the Japanese invaders invaded Guangdong, captured Shentunwei and plundered it.

古文：山寇复起。
现代文：山寇又趁机兴起。
English: The yamko took advantage of the opportunity to rise again.

古文：闰月丁卯，御皇极殿门，疾作，遽还宫。
现代文：闰二月十一日，穆宗到皇极门，疾病发作，便匆匆回到宫中。
English: On the eleventh day of the second month, Mu Zong arrived at the imperial gate, fell ill, and hurried back to the palace.

古文：乙亥，倭寇高、雷，官军击败之。
现代文：十九日，倭寇侵犯高、雷等州，被官军击败。
English: On the 19th, the wokou invaded Gao, Lei and other prefectures and were defeated by the government army.

古文：夏四月戊辰，礼部尚书高仪兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：四月十三日，礼部尚书高仪兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On April 13th, the Vice-Chancellor of the Ministry of Rites, Literature and Culture and the Associate Professor of Bunyukaku University came to participate in important business.

古文：五月壬辰，免广东用兵诸郡逋赋。
现代文：五月八日，减免广东用兵各郡欠交赋税。
English: On May 8th, the tax arrears of Guangdong soldiers were reduced and exempted.

古文：己酉，大渐，召大学士高拱、张居正、高仪受顾命。
现代文：二十五日，病危，召大学士高拱、张居正、高仪接受遗命。
English: On the 25th, when he was critically ill, he summoned scholars Gao Gong, Zhang Jizheng, and Gao Yi to accept his death.

古文：庚戌，崩于乾清宫，年三十有六。
现代文：二十六日穆宗死于乾清宫，享年三十六岁。
English: On the 26th, Mu Zong died in the Qianqing Palace at the age of 36.

古文：七月丙戌，上尊谥，庙号穆宗，葬昭陵。
现代文：七月三日，上尊谥，庙号穆宗，葬于昭陵。
English: On July 3rd, Shangzong Zong, temple name Mu Zong, was buried in Zhaoling.

