古文：达奚长儒
现代文：○达奚长儒
English: ○ Daren Nagarjuna

古文：达奚长儒，字富仁，代人也。
现代文：达奚长儒，字富仁，代地人。
English: Daguo Changru Zi Furen, the successor.

古文：祖俟，魏定州刺史。
现代文：祖父达奚俟，西魏定州刺史。
English: Zhu Dazhao was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：父庆，骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：父亲达奚庆，骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: His father, Dazhongqing, was once the commander of the cavalry and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：长儒少怀节操，胆烈过人。
现代文：长儒小时即有节操，胆略过人。
English: When he was a young man, he had a strong sense of morality and courage.

古文：十五袭爵乐安公。
现代文：十五岁，袭爵为乐安公。
English: At the age of fifteen, he succeeded to the title of Lord Le An.

古文：魏大统中，起家奉车都尉。
现代文：西魏大统中，开始为官，当奉车都尉。
English: In the Western Wei Dazhong, he began to serve as an official, when he was a lieutenant of Fengche.

古文：周太祖引为亲信，以质直恭勤，授大都督。
现代文：周太祖把他作为亲信，因他直质恭勤，授为子都督。
English: Zhou Taizu treated him as a close confidant, and because of his straightforwardness and diligence, he gave him the title of governor-general.

古文：数有战功，假辅国将军，累迁使持节、抚军将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：多有战功，代理辅国将军，累次升迁，到任使持节、抚军将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: He had many war exploits, acting as the general of the auxiliary province, and was repeatedly promoted. He was appointed as the envoy of Ji Jie, the general of the army, and the general of the cavalry.

古文：平蜀之役，恆为先锋，攻城野战，所当必破之。
现代文：在平定西蜀的战争中，他总当先锋，攻城野战，所向必破。
English: In the war to pacify West Shuxu, he was always the vanguard, attacking the city and the field, and breaking through in all directions.

古文：除车骑大将军、仪同三司，增邑三百户。
现代文：升任车骑大将军、仪同三司，增加食邑三百户。
English: He was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, and the number of restaurants increased by 300.

古文：天和中，除渭南郡守，迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：周武帝天和年间，授他为渭南郡守，升任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhouwu, he was appointed as the governor of Yinan County, promoted to the general of the cavalry, and promoted to the highest rank of the three divisions.

古文：从武帝平齐，迁上开府，进爵成安郡公，邑千二百户，别封一子县公。
现代文：随周武帝平定北齐，升任上开府仪同三司，晋爵为成安郡公，食邑一千二百户。另封他一个儿子为县公。
English: With Emperor Zhou Wu, he subdued the Northern Qi and was promoted to Shang Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and was promoted to the county seat of Cheng'an County, with 1,200 households. In addition, one of his sons was appointed as the county seat.

古文：宣政元年，除左前军勇猛中大夫。
现代文：宣政元年，任左前军勇猛中大夫。
English: In the first year of the promulgation of the Constitution, he was appointed as a courageous junior doctor of the Left Front Army.

古文：后与乌丸轨围陈将吴明彻于吕梁，陈遣骁将刘景率劲勇七千来为声援，轨令长儒逆拒之。
现代文：后与乌丸车丸包围陈国将领吴明彻于吕梁，陈国派骁将刘景率劲旅七千来增援。乌丸车丸命令达奚长儒迎战援军。
English: After that, Wu Mingche, the general of Chen Guo, encircled Luliang with the Wu Maru Che Maru, and Chen Guo sent Liu Jingzhu's strong brigade of seven thousand to reinforce. Wu Maru Che Maru ordered Dazhong Changru to meet the reinforcements.

古文：长儒于是取车轮数百，系以大石，沉之清水，连毂相次，以待景军。
现代文：长儒于是用几百车轮，系上大石头，沉到清水里去，让车轮连着车轮，以等待刘景的授军。
English: Chang Ru then used hundreds of wheels, tied them to large stones, sank into the clear water, and let the wheels connect to the wheels to wait for Liu Jing to send troops.

古文：景至，船舰碍轮不得进，长儒乃纵奇兵，水陆俱发，大破之，俘数千人。
现代文：刘景到了，船舰被车轮所阻，不能前进。长儒于是用奇兵，水陆俱发，大破刘景，俘虏几千人。
English: When Liu Jing arrived, the ship was blocked by the wheels and could not move forward. Chang Rong then used extraordinary soldiers to attack both land and water, defeating Liu Jing and capturing several thousand prisoners.

古文：及获吴明彻，以功进位大将军。
现代文：俘虏吴明彻后，长儒因战功升任大将军。
English: After the capture of Wu Mingche, Chang Ru was promoted to general for his war service.

古文：寻授行军总管，北巡沙塞，卒与虏遇，接战，大破之。
现代文：继而授他为行军总管，让他北巡沙漠，猝然与胡人相遇，交战，大破胡人。
English: Subsequently, he was appointed as the general manager of the march, let him tour the desert in the north, suddenly met and fought with the Hu people, and defeated the Hu people.

古文：高祖作相，王谦举兵于蜀，沙氐上柱国杨永安扇动利、兴、武、文、沙、龙等六州以应谦，诏长儒击破之。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相，王谦举兵反叛于蜀，沙氐人上柱国杨永安，煽动利州、兴州、武州、文州、沙州、龙州等六州兵马，以响应王谦。有诏让达奚长儒打败叛军。
English: Sui Gaozu was the minister of Northern Zhou, Wang Qian raised an army to rebel against Shu, and Yang Yong'an, the Shangzhu of Shaanxi, incited the soldiers and horses of six states, including Lizhou, Xingzhou, Wuzhou, Wenzhou, Shazhou, and Longzhou, to respond to Wang Qian. There was an edict to let Dagu Changru defeat the rebels.

古文：谦二子自京师亡归其父，长儒并捕斩之。
现代文：王谦的两个儿子，从京师逃出来，想逃到他们的父亲那里去，长儒全抓来杀了。
English: Wang Qian's two sons, who had escaped from the capital and wanted to go to their father, were caught and killed by the elder Zhuquan.

古文：高祖受禅，进位上大将军，封蕲春郡公，邑二千五百户。
现代文：隋高祖受禅登基，长儒升任上大将军，封为蕲春郡公，食邑二千五百户。
English: Sui Gao Zu was enthroned by Emperor Zhen, Chang Ru was promoted to the rank of senior general, and was appointed the governor of Hunchun County, with 2,500 households in the county.

古文：开皇二年，突厥沙钵略可汗并弟叶护及潘那可汗众十馀万，寇掠而南，诏以长儒为行军总管，率众二千击之。
现代文：开皇二年，突厥的沙钵略可汗和他弟弟叶护以及潘那可汗，率领十几万人马，向南方进犯抢掠。有诏以达奚长儒为行军总管，率部二千人打击他们。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, the Turkic Shah Salih Khan, his brother Ye Zor and Panah Khan, led more than a hundred thousand men and horses to attack and plunder the south. There was an edict that Daju Changru was the general manager of the march, and he led two thousand people to fight them.

古文：遇于周，众寡不敌，军中大惧，长儒慷慨，神色愈烈。
现代文：双方相遇于周，寡不敌众，长儒部下很恐惧。长儒慷慨激昂，神色更壮烈。
English: The two sides met in Zhou, outnumbered, Chang Ru's subordinates were very afraid. Chang Ru was impassioned and looked even more magnificent.

古文：为虏所冲突，散而复聚，且战且行，转斗三日，五兵咸尽，士卒以拳殴之，手皆见骨，杀伤万计，虏气稍夺，于是解去。
现代文：他们被胡人所冲击，打散了，又聚集起来，且战且走，转战了三天，兵器全部用光了，士兵就用拳头殴打胡人，以至手上的骨头都打出来了，杀伤数以万计的敌人。突厥人士气略降，于是解围离去。
English: They were attacked by the Hu people, dispersed, gathered again, and fought and fought for three days. The weapons were all used up. The soldiers beat the Hu people with their fists until the bones in their hands were knocked out, killing tens of thousands of enemies. The Turks were a little discouraged, so they lifted the siege and left.

古文：长儒身被五创，通中者二；其战士死伤者十八九。
现代文：长儒身受五处创伤，其中被杀穿的地方有两处。他的战士，十之八九战死战伤。
English: Nagarjuna suffered five wounds, two of them where he was killed. Ninety-nine out of ten of his soldiers were killed or wounded.

古文：突厥本欲大掠秦、陇，既逢长儒，兵皆力战，虏意大沮，明日，于战处焚尸恸哭而去。
现代文：突厥人本想大肆抢掠秦州、陇右一带，既遭遇长儒，长儒的士兵全都力战，突厥士气大丧。次日，突厥在交战处焚烧尸体，大哭而离去。
English: The Turkic soldiers had originally planned to plunder and pillage the two states of Qin and Qin. However, when they encountered the counterattacks of the Dalai Lama, the soldiers fought with all their might. The Turkic soldiers suffered many deaths and injuries and were very depressed. The next day, they cleaned up the battlefield, burned the dead bodies, and went away crying.

古文：高祖下诏曰： 突厥猖狂，辄犯边塞，犬羊之众，弥亘山原。
现代文：高祖下诏书说： 突厥人猖狂，动不动就侵犯边塞，像犬羊那样多，弥漫了整个山岭原野。
English: Gaozong's edict said: "The Turks are running amok, invading border posts at every turn. They are as numerous as dogs and sheep, and have spread throughout the mountains and plains.

古文：而长儒受任北鄙，式遏寇贼，所部之内，少将百倍，以昼通宵，四面抗敌，凡十有四战，所向必摧。
现代文：但达奚长儒受任于北边边塞，遏制胡人，他所率领的人马很少，差不多只是突厥人的百分之一。他日以继夜，四面抗敌，共打了十四仗，所向必克。
English: However, Daguan Changru was assigned to the northern border fortress to contain the Hu people. He led a small number of men and horses, almost only one percent of the Turks. He resisted the enemy day and night, on all sides, and fought a total of fourteen battles. He was determined to defeat the enemy.

古文：凶徒就戮，过半不反，锋刃之馀，亡魂窜迹。
现代文：凶人被杀的超过了一半，这些人再也回不去了。暂未被杀的，丢了魄魂似地逃走了。
English: More than half of the murderers were killed, and these people will never be able to return. Those who were not killed for the time being fled like lost souls.

古文：自非英威奋发，奉国情深，抚御有方，士卒用命，岂能以少破众，若斯之伟？
现代文：如非长儒英勇奋发，对国家有很深的感情，士卒又服从命令，怎能以少破众，像这样伟大？
English: How could such greatness have been achieved with so few, if not for the heroic efforts of Chang Rong, who had deep feelings for the country, and the soldiers who obeyed his orders?

古文：言念勋庸，宜隆名器，可上柱国，馀勋回授一子。
现代文：说到长儒的功勋，应该授他高官厚禄，可授他上柱国，另授他一子为官。
English: When it comes to the merits of Changru, he should be awarded a high-ranking official honor, he can be awarded a pillar country, and he should be awarded a son as an official.

古文：其战亡将士，皆赠官三转，子孙袭之。 
现代文：其战亡的将士，都追赠官阶三级，让他们的子孙承袭。 
English: The rest of the fallen soldiers are posthumously awarded official positions, which can be transferred to three generations and inherited by their children and grandchildren.

古文：其年，授宁州刺史，寻转鄜州刺史，母忧去职。
现代文：这年，长儒任宁州刺史，继而转任鹿阝州刺史，因母丧离职。
English: In the same year, Chang Ru was appointed as the chief historian of Ningzhou, and then he was appointed as the chief historian of Luye, but he left the post due to his mother's death.

古文：长儒性至孝，水浆不入口五日，毁悴过礼，殆将灭性，天子嘉叹。
现代文：长儒生性很孝顺，他水米不沾达到五天，哀毁太过，身体将要垮了。天子叹赏不已。
English: Datong Chang Rong's nature is very filial. After his mother's funeral, he didn't drink water for five days, mourned his mother, went beyond the limits of etiquette, and almost died.

古文：起为夏州总管三州六镇都将事，匈奴惮之，不敢窥塞。
现代文：丧满后，长儒任夏州总管三州六镇都将事，匈奴怕他，不敢窥探边塞。
English: After the end of the war, Chang Ru was appointed as the governor of the three states and six towns in Xia Prefecture. The Xiongnu were afraid of him and did not dare to spy on the border.

古文：以病免。
现代文：因病免职。
English: Removed from duty due to illness.

古文：又除襄州总管，在职二年，转兰州总管。
现代文：后又任襄州总管，在职二年后，转任兰州总管。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general manager of Xiangzhou, and after two years in office, he was transferred to the general manager of Lanzhou.

古文：高祖遣凉州总管独孤罗、原州总管元褒、灵州总管贺若谊等发卒备胡，皆受长儒节度。
现代文：高祖派凉州总管独孤罗、原州总管元褒、灵州总管贺若谊等人发兵，防备胡人，他们都归达奚长儒指挥。
English: Gao Zu sent Liangzhou Governor Duku Luo, Yuanzhou Governor Yuan Bo, Lingzhou Governor He Ruo and others to send troops to guard against the Hu people, and they all returned to the command of Da Zhaochang Ru.

古文：长儒率众出祁连山北，西至蒲类海，无虏而还。
现代文：长儒率部到了祁连山北部，西到蒲类海，无敌而回。
English: Dajuan Changru led a large army out of the north of the Qilian Mountains, westward to the Pudong Sea, but did not see the Huns, so the group returned.

古文：复转荆州总管三十六州诸军事，高祖谓之曰： 江陵要害，国之南门，今以委公，联无虑也。 
现代文：长儒又转任荆州总管三十六州诸军事。高祖对他说： 江陵是要害，是国家的南大门。如今交给你，我不用担心了。 
English: Gao Zu said to him: "Gangneung is a very important place, it is the southern gate of the country. Now that I have handed it over to you, I don't have to worry about it.

古文：岁馀，卒官。谥曰威。
现代文：过了一年多，在官任上去世。谥号叫 威 。
English: More than a year later, he died in office. His nickname was Wei.

古文：子暠，大业时，官至太仆少卿。
现代文：他儿子达奚詗，在大业中，官至太仆少卿。
English: His son, Daju, rose through the ranks to become a servant of the emperor.

古文：○贺娄子干
现代文：○贺娄子干
English: ○Hobakitori with dried bonito

古文：贺娄子干，字万寿，本代人也。
现代文：贺娄子干字万寿，本是代地人。
English: He Zizi's name means longevity, and he was originally from the local area.

古文：随魏氏南迁，世居关右。
现代文：随西魏南迁，世代居住关右。
English: With the migration of the Western Wei Dynasty to the south, the generation of residence is on the right.

古文：祖道成，魏侍中、太子太傅。
现代文：祖父贺娄道成，任西魏侍中、太子太傅。
English: His grandfather, He Xuan Daocheng, served as a West Wei chamberlain and the crown prince's steward.

古文：父景贤，右卫大将军。
现代文：父亲贺娄景贤，任右卫大将军。
English: His father, He Bingjingxian, was appointed as the General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：子干少以骁武知名。
现代文：子干小时以骁勇出名。
English: Zi Gan was once famous for his bravery.

古文：周武帝时，释褐司水上士，称为强济。
现代文：周武帝时，他开始作官，任司水上士，被称为强干有才。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Wu, he began to work as an official, serving as a chief petty officer, and was known as a strong and talented man.

古文：累迁小司水，以勤劳，封思安县子，俄授使持节、仪同大将军。
现代文：累次升迁，到任小司水。因他勤劳，封为思安县子爵。不久授他使持节、仪同大将军。
English: He was repeatedly promoted and appointed to the post of Junior Secretary of Water Resources. Because of his hard work, he was named Viscount of Si'an County. Soon he was awarded the title of Envoy and General of Ceremonies.

古文：大象初，领军器监，寻除秦州刺史，进爵为伯。
现代文：大象初年，兼任军器监，继而授为秦州刺史，晋爵位为伯爵。
English: In the first year of the elephant, he also served as the inspector of military equipment, and was subsequently awarded the title of Qin State Historian, and the title of count.

古文：及尉迥作乱，子干与宇文司录从韦孝宽讨之。
现代文：到尉迟迥造反作乱时，贺娄子干与宇文司录随从韦孝宽讨伐叛军。
English: When Wei's subordinates rebelled and started a riot, He Yanzi Gan and Uwen Siroku followed Wei Xiaokang to fight the rebels.

古文：遇贼围怀州，子干与宇文述等击破之。
现代文：遇上贼人包围了怀州，子干与宇文述等人打败了叛军。
English: When the bandits surrounded Waizhou, Zikang and Yu Wenshu defeated the rebels.

古文：高祖大悦，手书曰： 逆贼尉迥，敢遣蚁众，作寇怀州。
现代文：高祖很高兴，亲自写信说： 叛贼尉迟迥，胆敢派遣叛军，作乱于怀州。
English: Gaozu was very pleased and wrote a letter saying, "The traitor's lieutenant hesitated and dared to send a rebel army to make trouble in Waizhou.

古文：公受命诛讨，应机荡涤，闻以嗟赞，不易可言。
现代文：你受命诛讨，应运荡涤反贼，我听此喜讯，赞赏不已，欣喜之情，不可言喻。
English: You were ordered to fight, and you fought against the bandits. When I heard this good news, I couldn't stop appreciating it. I couldn't express how happy I was.

古文：丈夫富贵之秋，正在今日，善建功名，以副朝望也。 
现代文：大丈夫富贵的日子，正在今天。望你善建功名，以不辜负朝廷的希望。 
English: Today is the day when you can become rich and powerful. I hope you can build a good reputation and live up to the hopes of the imperial court.

古文：其后每战先登，及破鄴城，与崔弘度逐迥至楼上。
现代文：子干此后每次作战，必先登城。到打破邺城时，与崔弘度追赶尉迟迥到楼上。
English: After that, every time Zi Gan fought, he had to go to the city first. When he broke through the city, he and Cui Hongdu chased the lieutenant to the upper floor.

古文：进位上开府，封武川县公，邑三千户，以思安县伯别封子皎。
现代文：子干升任上开府，封为武川县公，食邑三千户。另以思安县伯爵的爵位，封他的儿子贺娄皎。
English: His son Gan was promoted to the post of the head of the provincial government, and was given the title of the governor of Bukawa County, with 3,000 households. In addition, his son He Xuan was given the title of the count of Sian County.

古文：开皇元年，进爵巨鹿郡公。
现代文：开皇元年，子干晋爵位为巨鹿郡公。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Zogan Jin was given the title of Duke of Koga County.

古文：其年，吐谷浑寇凉州，子干以行军总管从上柱国元谐击之，功最优，诏褒美。
现代文：这年，吐谷浑进犯凉州，子干以行军总管身份随上柱国元谐打击吐谷浑，子干功劳最大，皇上下诏书褒奖。
English: In that year, Tugu Hun invaded Liangzhou, and his son, as the commander-in-chief of the march, fought against Tugu Hun in harmony with the emperor. Tugu Hun received the highest commendation in the imperial edict.

古文：高祖虑边塞未安，即令子干镇凉川。
现代文：高祖担心边塞不安，就令子干镇守凉州。
English: Gaozu was worried about the insecurity of the border fortress, so he ordered his son to defend Liangzhou.

古文：明年，突厥寇兰川，子干率众拒之，至可洛峐山，与贼相遇。
现代文：次年，突厥进犯兰州，子干率部抵抗，到了可洛赅山，与突厥军相遇。
English: The following year, the Turks invaded Lanzhou, and Zi Gan led the resistance, and met the Turkish army at Mount Koro.

古文：贼众甚盛，子干阻川为营，贼军不得水数日，人马甚敝，纵击，大破之。
现代文：贼人很多，子干守河流以为军营，突厥军几天喝不到水，人马很疲惫，子干纵兵进击，大破突厥军。
English: There were a lot of thieves and robbers. The Zi Gang guarded the river as if it were a military camp. The Turkish army could not drink water for several days. The men and horses were very tired. The Zi Gang assaulted and defeated the Turkish army.

古文：于是册授子干为上大将军曰： 於戏！
现代文：朝廷于是策授子干为上大将军，说： 啊呀呀！
English: The imperial court then promoted the son of a strategist to the rank of grand general, saying, "Wow!

古文：敬听朕命。
现代文：你听我的命令。
English: You follow my orders.

古文：唯尔器量闲明，志情强果，任经武将，勤绩有闻。
现代文：只有你才能贤明，意志坚毅果敢，你当武将，功绩我有所耳闻。
English: Only you can be wise, strong-willed and courageous. I have heard of your exploits as a warlord.

古文：往岁凶丑未宁，屡惊疆埸，拓土静乱，殊有厥劳。
现代文：往年那些凶丑不安宁，屡屡惊动疆场。你开拓疆土，平定乱军，功劳很大。
English: In previous years, those villains disturbed the peace and repeatedly shocked the battlefield. You have done a great service in opening up the territory and pacifying the rebels.

古文：是用崇兹赏典，加此车服，往钦哉！
现代文：因此根据奖赏典册，增加你的车服，提高你的官阶。
English: Therefore, according to the reward manual, increase your car clothes and raise your rank.

古文：祗承荣册，可不慎欤！ 
现代文：去执行我的命令吧，你恭敬地接受这光荣的典册，能不谨慎谦虚吗？ 
English: Carry out my orders. You will respectfully accept this glorious manual. Can you not be prudent and modest?

古文：征授营新都副监，寻拜工部尚书。
现代文：调他当营建新都的副监，不久授他为工部尚书。
English: He was assigned to be the deputy superintendent of the construction of the new capital, and was soon promoted to the position of the head of the engineering department.

古文：其年，突厥复犯塞，以行军总管从窦荣定击之。
现代文：这年，突厥人又进犯边塞，他以行军总管身份，随窦荣定反击他们。
English: This year, the Turks invaded the border fortress again, and he counterattacked them with Dou Rongding as the commander-in-chief of the march.

古文：子干别路破贼，斩首千馀级，高祖嘉之，遣通事舍人曹威赍优诏劳勉之。
现代文：子干从另一条路打败突厥军，斩首一千多级。高祖嘉奖他，派通事舍人曹威送去诏书，慰劳、勉励他。
English: Zogan defeated the Turkic army from a different path, beheading more than a thousand. Gao Zu commended him and sent Cao Wei, a man who spared no effort, to send him an imperial edict to comfort and encourage him.

古文：子干请入朝，诏令驰驿奉见。
现代文：子干请求入朝，有诏让他沿驿道来见。
English: Zigang requested to go to the imperial court, and an imperial edict told him to come to the imperial court along the Yangtze River.

古文：吐谷浑复寇边，西方多被其害，命子干讨之。
现代文：这时吐谷浑又进犯边疆，西方多遭其害。皇上命子干去讨伐。
English: At this time, Tugu Hun invaded the frontier again, and the West suffered more from it. Emperor Meishi went to fight.

古文：驰驿至河西，发五州兵，入掠其国，杀男女万馀口，二旬而还。
现代文：子干沿驿道到了黄河以北，调发了五个州的兵卒，到吐谷浑国去抢掠，杀了他们的男女一万多人，二十天后回还。
English: Zi Gan went north of the Yellow River along the Silk Road, dispatched soldiers from five states to loot Tuyun and Hun states, killed more than 10,000 of their men and women, and returned twenty days later.

古文：高祖以陇西频被寇掠，甚患之。
现代文：高祖因陇西频频被侵犯抢掠，很担扰。
English: Gao Zu is very worried because of the frequent violations and robberies in Shaanxi.

古文：彼俗不设村坞，敕子干勒民为堡，营田积谷，以备不虞。
现代文：那里的风俗不设村子，高祖命令子干率领百姓筑城堡，修田地，积扌赞粮食，以防备不测。
English: The custom there is not to set up a village. Gao Zu ordered his son Gan to lead the people to build a castle, cultivate fields, and stockpile grain to be prepared for any eventuality.

古文：子干上书曰： 比者凶寇侵扰，荡灭之期，匪朝伊夕。伏愿圣虑，勿以为怀。
现代文：子干上书说： 这里凶寇侵扰，我荡灭他们的日子，不是早晨就是晚上，请圣上不要担扰。
English: His son-in-law wrote: "Here intruders intrude, I destroy their days, either in the morning or in the evening, please do not disturb the saint."

古文：今臣在此，观机而作，不得准诏行事。
现代文：现在我在这里，需要见机行事，不能完全按诏书办事。
English: Now that I'm here, I need to act opportunistically, and I can't do everything according to the edict.

古文：且陇西、河右，土旷民稀，边境未宁，不可广为田种。
现代文：而且陇右、河北，地广人少，边境未安宁，不可能广泛地种田。
English: Moreover, there are few people on the vast land of Shiyu and Hebei, and the border is not peaceful, so it is impossible to widely cultivate fields.

古文：比见屯田之所，获少费多，虚役人功，卒逢践暴。
现代文：我看屯田的地方，收获少而花费多，白花人力，最后还是被入侵者糟塌。
English: I see the place of Tonden, where the harvest is small but the cost is high, and the manpower is wasted, and finally it is ruined by invaders.

古文：屯田疏远者，请皆废省。
现代文：屯田诸事，请都废除。
English: Please abolish all things related to the military garrison.

古文：但陇右之民以畜牧为事，若更屯聚，弥不获安。
现代文：但陇右百姓以放牧为生，如再聚居，他们会更加不安。
English: But the people on the right live from grazing. If they live together again, they will be even more uneasy.

古文：只可严谨斥候，岂容集人聚畜。
现代文：只能严密侦探，岂容他们聚集人马？
English: Only strict detectives, will they be allowed to gather people?

古文：请要路之所，加其防守。
现代文：请让我在重要路口，加强防备。
English: Please let me be on high alert at major intersections.

古文：但使镇戍连接，烽候相望，民虽散居，必谓无虑。 
现代文：只要镇守之所相连接，烽火能够相望，百姓虽然散居，也没什么可担心的。 
English: As long as the townships are connected, the bonfires can be seen from each other, and the people are scattered, there is nothing to worry about.

古文：高祖从之。
现代文：高祖听了他的。
English: Gaozu listened to him.

古文：俄而虏寇岷、洮二州，子干勒兵赴之，贼闻而遁去。
现代文：不久，胡人侵犯岷州、洮州二州，子干统兵赶去，贼人闻讯逃走。
English: Soon after, the Hu people invaded Zhangzhou and the two states of Zhangzhou. The Zi Gan led the soldiers to drive away, and the thieves heard the news and fled.

古文：高祖以子干晓习边事，授榆关总管十镇诸军事。
现代文：高祖因子干通晓边疆的事情，授他榆关总管十镇诸军事。
English: Gaozhu factor knew about the frontier affairs, and gave him the post of general manager of ten towns and military.

古文：岁馀，拜云州刺史，甚为虏所惮。
现代文：过了一年多，授他云州刺史，很为胡人惧怕。
English: After more than a year, he was awarded the title of "Yunzhou Sashihong" and was very afraid of the Hu people.

古文：后数年，突厥雍虞闾遣使请降，并献羊马。
现代文：几年后，突厥的雍闾派人来请求投降，并献羊马。
English: A few years later, the Turkic Yongle sent people to ask for surrender and offered sheep and horses.

古文：诏以子干为行军总管，出西北道应接之。
现代文：有诏以子干为行军总管，出西北道接应他。
English: An imperial edict named Zikang as the general manager of the march, and he went to the northwest to meet him.

古文：还拜云州总管，以突厥所献马百匹、羊千口以赐之，乃下书曰： 自公守北门，风尘不警。
现代文：回来后，授子干为云州总管，把突厥人所贡献的马百匹、羊千只赐给他，于是下诏书说： 自从你把守北大门，那里风尘不惊。
English: After his return, he made his son-in-law the governor-general of Yunnan, and gave him a hundred horses and a thousand sheep donated by the Turks. He then issued an edict saying, "Since you have guarded the northern gate, there has been no wind or dust.

古文：突厥所献，还以赐公。 
现代文：突厥所贡献的羊马，还是赐给你。 
English: The sheep and horses contributed by the Turks will still be given to you.

古文：母忧去职。
现代文：因母丧离职。
English: Resigned after his mother's death.

古文：朝廷以榆关重镇，非子干不可，寻起视事。
现代文：朝廷因榆关是重镇，非子干镇守不可，不久就要他出来管事。
English: Because Shaoguan was an important town, the imperial court had no choice but to send a son to guard the town, and soon he would be put in charge.

古文：十四年，以病卒官，时年六十。
现代文：开皇十四年，子干因病在任上去世，时年六十岁。
English: In the fourteenth year of the emperor's reign, Zigan died of illness while in office, at the age of sixty.

古文：高祖伤惜者久之，赙缣千匹，米麦千斛，赠怀、魏等四州刺史，谥曰怀。
现代文：高祖伤心叹惜很久，赐他缣采千匹，米麦千斛，追赠他为怀州、魏州等四州刺史。谥号叫 怀 。
English: Gao Zu grieved and lamented for a long time. He gave him a thousand cranes, a thousand stalks of rice and a thousand stalks of barley, and posthumously bestowed on him the title of the four states including Waizhou and Weizhou. His posthumous name was Huai.

古文：子善柱嗣，官至黔安太守。
现代文：他儿子贺娄善柱继承爵禄，官至黔安太守。
English: His son, He Zhaozhu, inherited the title and rose to the position of the governor of Jian'an.

古文：子干兄诠，亦有才器，位至银青光禄大夫、鄯纯深三州刺史、北地太守、东安郡公。○史万岁
现代文：○史万岁
English: Long live history

古文：史万岁，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：史万岁是京兆杜陵人。
English: Shi Wanling is a member of the Beijing Zhaotong Mausoleum.

古文：父静，周沧州刺史。
现代文：他的父亲史静，是北周沧州刺史。
English: His father, Shi Jing, was the governor of Northern Zhou Cangzhou.

古文：万岁少英武，善骑射，骁捷若飞。
现代文：万岁年轻时英俊威武，擅长骑马射箭，勇猛凶悍，敏捷如飞。
English: Long live the young, handsome and powerful, good at riding and archery, brave and fierce, agile as a fly.

古文：好读兵书，兼精占候。
现代文：喜读兵书，并精通占卜。
English: He enjoys reading military books and is good at divination.

古文：年十五，值周、齐战于芒山，万岁时从父入军，旗鼓正相望，万岁令左右趣治装急去。俄而周师大败，其父由是奇之。
现代文：十五岁那年，正值北周、北齐在芒山作战，万岁当时从父随军，两军正旗鼓相望，万岁命令身边的士兵迅速脱下战衣化装走脱，不一会儿，周军大败，他的父亲因此对他的才能十分惊奇。
English: When he was 15 years old, the Northern Zhou and Northern Qi armies were fighting in Mangshan. At that time, he followed his father's army. The two armies were facing each other. He ordered the soldiers around him to quickly take off their uniforms and disguise themselves. Soon, the Zhou army was defeated. His father was therefore very surprised by his talent.

古文：武帝时，释褐侍伯上士。
现代文：武帝年间，他由平民百姓提升为侍伯上士。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, he was promoted from a commoner to a staff sergeant.

古文：及平齐之役，其父战没，万岁以忠臣子拜开府仪同三司，袭爵太平县公。
现代文：在平定北齐的战役中，他的父亲战死沙场，万岁因是忠臣的儿子，晋升为开府仪同三司，继承太平县公的爵位。
English: In the campaign to pacify North Qi, his father died in the battlefield. He was promoted to the third division of the Kaifu ceremony because he was the son of a loyal subject, and inherited the title of Taiping County.

古文：尉迥之乱也，万岁从梁士彦击之。
现代文：尉迟迥叛乱，万岁跟随梁士彦去平叛。
English: Long live those who follow Liang Shih-yan to suppress the rebellion.

古文：军次冯翊，见群雁飞来，万岁谓士彦曰： 请射行中第三者。 
现代文：军队驻扎在冯翊。一天，看见大雁飞来，万岁对士彦说： 请允许我射下那一行中的第三只雁。 
English: The army was stationed in Fengye. One day, when he saw a goose flying, he said to Shihang, "Please allow me to shoot the third goose in that line."

古文：既射之，应弦而落，三军莫不悦服。
现代文：随即拉弓搭箭，第三只雁应声而落，全军没有不心悦诚服的。
English: The bow and arrows were immediately drawn, and the third goose fell in response to the call. The whole army did not hesitate to obey.

古文：及与迥军相遇，每战先登。
现代文：等到与尉迟迥军相遇时，每次他都是身先士卒。
English: He was always the first to go when he met the enemy's army.

古文：鄴城之阵，官军稍却，万岁谓左右曰： 事急矣，吾当破之。 
现代文：在邺城作战中，官军渐渐败退，万岁对身边的士兵说： 事情紧急了，我们应当攻破敌阵。 
English: During the Battle of Pengcheng, the government army was gradually defeated and retreated. Hooray said to the soldiers around him: Things are urgent, we should break through the enemy line.

古文：于是驰马奋击，杀数十人，众亦齐力，官军乃振。
现代文：于是跃马上前，拼命厮杀，一口气斩杀了几十个敌人，大家也齐心合力，官军的士气于是振作起来。
English: So they leapt forward at once, fought desperately, and killed dozens of enemies in one go. Everyone also worked together, and the morale of the government army was thus boosted.

古文：及迥平，以功拜上大将军。
现代文：剿灭尉迟迥后，万岁因有功提升为上大将军。
English: He was promoted to the rank of senior general for meritorious service.

古文：尔硃勋以谋反伏诛，万岁颇相关涉，坐除名，配敦煌为戍卒。
现代文：尔朱责力因谋反被处死，万岁与这件事很有牵连，因此被罢官削职，流放到敦煌当戍边的兵卒。
English: Er Zhu Baili was put to death for plotting rebellion. He was very much involved in this matter, so he was dismissed from his post and exiled to Dunhuang to be a foot soldier.

古文：其戍主甚骁武，每单骑深入突厥中，掠取羊马，辄大克获。
现代文：那守边头目彪悍威武，常常单独一人骑马深入突厥部落中，掠夺羊马，总是有大收获。
English: The leader of the garrison was very powerful and often rode alone deep into the Turkic tribes, plundering sheep and horses, always with a great harvest.

古文：突厥无众寡莫之敢当。
现代文：突厥无论多少人，没有敢抵挡他的。
English: No matter how many Turks there were, they did not dare to oppose him.

古文：其人深自矜负，数骂辱万岁。
现代文：那头目骄横自负，多次辱骂万岁。
English: Long live the arrogant, conceited, and repeatedly abusive leader.

古文：万岁患之，自言亦有武用。
现代文：万岁对此很忧虑，自称也有英武之才。
English: Hooray is worried about this, and claims to have a talent for martial arts.

古文：戍主试令驰射而工，戍主笑曰： 小人定可。 
现代文：守边头目试探性地命令他飞马射箭，果然射技精湛，头目笑着说： 你定然不错。 
English: The captain of the guard tentatively ordered him to shoot arrows at the Pegasus, and as expected, his shooting skill was superb. The captain smiled and said, "You're definitely good.

古文：万岁请弓马，复掠突厥中，大得六畜而归。
现代文：万岁请求骑马带弓，再入突厥中掠夺羊马，很快抢获大批牲畜回营了。
English: Long live the request to ride a horse with a bow, re-enter the Turks to plunder sheep and horses, and soon return to the camp with a large number of livestock.

古文：戍主始善之，每与同行，辄入突厥数百里，名詟北夷。
现代文：小头目开始对他友好，经常一起同行，常入突厥地域几百里，声威传遍北夷。
English: The small leader began to be friendly to him, and they often traveled together. They often traveled hundreds of miles into the Turkic region, and their fame spread throughout the Beiyi.

古文：窦荣定之击突厥也，万岁诣辕门请自效。
现代文：窦荣定奉命攻击突厥，万岁到军中请求为他效力。
English: Dou Rongding was ordered to attack the Turks, and he went to the army to ask them to serve him.

古文：荣定数闻其名，见而大悦。
现代文：荣定多次听到他的名声，相见后很高兴。
English: Rongding had heard of his reputation many times and was delighted to meet him.

古文：因遣人谓突厥曰： 士卒何罪过，令杀之，但当各遣一壮士决胜负耳。 
现代文：于是派人对突厥说： 士兵有什么罪过，何必让他们互相残杀呢？只在两军中各选一位勇士决斗比个胜负吧！ 
English: Then they sent to the Turks, saying: What is the fault of the soldiers, and why should they be allowed to kill one another? Only choose one warrior from each of the two armies to fight a duel, and see who wins.

古文：突厥许诺，因遣一骑挑战。
现代文：突厥头领答应了，因此派了一名骠骑挑战。
English: The Turk leader agreed, so he sent a rider to challenge him.

古文：荣定遣万岁出应之，万岁驰斩其首而还。
现代文：荣定派万岁应战，万岁冲过去，砍下突厥勇士的头颅得胜而回。
English: Long live the Rongding faction, long live the Rongding faction, long live the Rongding faction, long live the Rongding faction, long live the Rongding faction.

古文：突厥大惊，不敢复战，遂引军而去。
现代文：突厥十分惊恐不敢再战，于是率领全军撤退了。
English: The Turks were so frightened that they dared not fight again, so they led the whole army to retreat.

古文：由是拜上仪同，领车骑将军。
现代文：因这次功劳，万岁又晋升为上仪同，兼任车骑将军。
English: Due to this achievement, he was promoted to Shang Yi Tong and concurrently served as a cavalry general.

古文：平陈之役，又以功加上开府。
现代文：平定陈国战役中，万岁又因战功升为上开府。
English: In the campaign to pacify Chen Guo, he was promoted to Shangkaifu for his war service.

古文：及高智慧等作乱江南，以行军总管从杨素击之。
现代文：高智慧等在江南叛乱，史万岁以行军总管身份跟随杨素剿灭叛军。
English: Gao Zhizhong and others rebelled in the south of the Yangtze River, and Shi Wanling followed Yang Su to crush the rebels as the commander-in-chief.

古文：万岁率众二千，自东阳别道而进，逾岭越海，攻陷溪洞不可胜数。
现代文：万岁率领二千士兵，从东阳与大军分路前进，爬山涉水，攻陷溪洞不计其数。
English: Long live the leader of two thousand soldiers, advancing from Dongyang with a large army, climbing mountains, wading through water, and capturing countless caves.

古文：前后七百馀战，转斗千馀里，寂无声问者十旬，远近皆以万岁为没。
现代文：前后七百多次战斗，转战一千多里，与大军失去联系有一百来天，远近的人都以为万岁战死了。
English: More than seven hundred battles back and forth, more than a thousand miles of fighting, and a hundred days of losing contact with the great army, people near and far thought that they had died in the war.

古文：万岁以水陆阻绝，信使不通，乃置书竹筒中，浮之于水。汲者得之，以言于素。
现代文：万岁见水陆交通阻隔，音信不通，于是将书信放在竹筒中，浮在水上，漂到了下游，打水的人得到了竹筒，将情况报告给了杨素。
English: When he saw that land and water traffic was blocked and there was no communication, he put the letter in a bamboo tube, floated on the water, and drifted downstream. The water carrier got the bamboo tube and reported the situation to Yang Su.

古文：素大悦，上其事。
现代文：杨素十分高兴，向皇上陈奏了此事。
English: Yang Su was very happy and reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：高祖嗟叹，赐其家钱十万，还拜左领军将军。
现代文：高祖得知后十分称赞，赏赐万岁家十万钱，万岁回朝后，提升他做了左领军将军。
English: After learning of this, Gaozu praised him highly and rewarded him 100,000 yuan and promoted him to general of the left leading army after his return to the imperial court.

古文：先是，南宁夷爨来降，拜昆州刺史，既而复叛。
现代文：从前，南宁夷人爨玩来投降，让他做了昆州刺史，不久他又背叛朝廷。
English: Once upon a time, the Nanning barbarians capitulated, making him the history of Queensland, and he soon betrayed the imperial court.

古文：遂以万岁为行军总管，率众击之。
现代文：于是委派万岁任行军总管率兵讨伐。
English: As a result, the general manager of the march was appointed to lead the crusade.

古文：入自蜻蛉川，经弄冻，次小勃弄、大勃弄，至于南中。
现代文：从蜻蛉川进军，经过弄冻，穿过小勃弄，大勃弄，到达南中。
English: Marching from the Li River, after freezing, passing through the small and large pits, reaching the middle of the south.

古文：贼前后屯据要害，万岁皆击破之。
现代文：叛军前后驻扎要道，万岁一一攻破了。
English: The rebels were stationed along the main road, and they broke through one by one.

古文：行数百里，见诸葛亮纪功碑，铭其背曰： 万岁之后，胜我者过此。 
现代文：深入几百里后，看见诸葛亮记功碑，碑文背面写着： 万岁以后，超过我的就过此界。 
English: After several hundred miles, he saw Zhuge Liang's memorial plaque. On the back of the monument was written: "Long live the future, those who surpass me will pass through this world."

古文：万岁令左右倒其碑而进。
现代文：万岁命令左右推倒石碑继续前进。
English: Long live the order to knock down the stone tablets left and right and continue to advance.

古文：渡西二河，入渠滥川，行千馀里，破其三十馀部，虏获男女二万馀口。
现代文：渡过西二河，进入渠滥川，行军一千多里，击破三十多部落，俘虏男女二万多人。
English: They crossed the West Second River and entered the Driftless River, marched more than a thousand miles, defeated more than thirty tribes, and captured more than twenty thousand men and women.

古文：诸夷大惧，遣使请降，献明珠径寸。
现代文：夷人十分震惊，派人请求投降，献上的明珠大到一寸。
English: The barbarians were so shocked that they sent someone to ask for surrender, and the pearl they offered was one inch in size.

古文：于是勒石颂美隋德。万岁遣使驰奏，请将入朝，诏许之。
现代文：万岁于是刻石碑称颂隋朝功德，并派使者飞报皇上，要求押带爨玩回朝，皇上下诏同意。
English: Therefore, he carved a stone monument to praise the merits of the Sui Dynasty, and sent an envoy to report to the emperor, asking him to escort them back to the empire. The emperor agreed.

古文：爨玩阴有二心，不欲诣阙，因赂万岁以金宝，万岁于是舍玩而还。
现代文：爨玩暗怀二心，不愿入朝，因此用金银财宝贿赂万岁，万岁受贿于是放走了他，自己就带兵返回了。
English: He secretly harbored doubts and did not want to enter the imperial court, so he used gold, silver and treasure to bribe Long live the bribe, Long live the bribe, so he let him go and returned with his soldiers.

古文：蜀王时在益州，知其受赂，遣使将索之。万岁闻而悉以所得金宝沉之于江，索无所获。
现代文：蜀王当时在益州，知道他接受了赂贿，派使者想索取财宝，万岁得知后将全部金银珠宝沉到江底，蜀王一无所获。
English: At that time, King Shu was in Yizhou. Knowing that he had accepted bribes, he sent an envoy to claim the treasure. After learning this, he sank all the gold, silver and jewelry to the bottom of the river. King Shu gained nothing.

古文：以功进位柱国。
现代文：万岁因平爨玩立功提升为柱国。
English: Long live the promotion to pillar country for making meritorious contributions to Pingyao.

古文：万岁曰： 臣留爨玩者，恐其州有变，留以镇抚。
现代文：晋王杨广虚怀敬重他，并用朋友的礼节待他。皇上知道他被晋王看好，就派万岁监管晋王府的军中事务。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, held him in high esteem and treated him with the courtesy of a friend. The emperor knew that he was favored by the king of Jin, and sent him to supervise the military affairs of the king of Jin.

古文：臣还至泸水，诏书方到，由是不将入朝，实不受赂。 
现代文：第二年，爨玩又反叛朝廷，蜀王乘机上告万岁，说他昔日受贿放贼，致使边防又生战火，并说万岁毫无大臣节操。
English: In the second year, Shu Wang rebelled against the imperial court. He took the opportunity to declare "long live," saying that in the past he had taken bribes and released thieves, which caused the border guards to fight again. He also said, "long live no ministerial discipline."

古文：上以万岁心有欺隐，大怒曰： 朕以卿为好人，何乃官高禄重，翻为国贼也？ 
现代文：皇上命令追究这件事，事情都被验证，按罪应判死刑。皇上大发脾气说： 我原以为你是个良臣，怎么如今官职大俸禄重，反而变成国贼了呢？ 
English: The Emperor gave the order to investigate the matter, and all the facts were verified, and the crime was punishable by death. The Emperor lost his temper and said, "I thought you were a good minister, so how is it that you have a high-paying official position, but have become a traitor?"

古文：顾有司曰： 明日将斩之。 
现代文：回头对有司说： 明天就杀掉他。 
English: He turned back to Yuji and said, "Kill him tomorrow."

古文：万岁惧而服罪，顿首请命。
现代文：万岁害怕处死而认罪，叩头请求饶命。
English: Long live the fear of execution, the confession of guilt, the groveling plea for a reprieve.

古文：左仆射高颎、左卫大将军元旻等进曰： 史万岁雄略过人，每行兵用师之处，未尝不身先士卒，尤善抚御，将士乐为致力，虽古名将未能过也。 
现代文：左仆射高赹、左卫大将军元等替万岁求情： 史万岁才略非同一般，每次率军作战，身先士卒，又善于抚恤将士，大家乐意为他效力，即使是古代名将也难超过他。 
English: Zuo minion Gao Wei, Zuo Wei general Yuan and others interceded for him: Shi Wanli is a bit different from the ordinary. He leads the army in battle every time, he is the first, and he is good at supporting the soldiers. Everyone is willing to serve him. Even the ancient famous generals can hardly surpass him.

古文：上意少解，于是除名为民。
现代文：皇上怒气稍消，免了万岁的死罪，将他罢官为民。
English: The emperor's anger subsided a little, he was spared the death penalty for life, and he was dismissed from office and became a commoner.

古文：岁馀，复官爵。
现代文：一年后又恢复了官职。
English: He was reinstated a year later.

古文：寻拜河州刺史，复领行军总管以备胡。
现代文：不久任河州刺史，又任行军总管去防守胡人入侵。
English: He was soon appointed as the chief historian of Hezhou and the chief marshal to defend against the invasion of the Hu people.

古文：开皇末，突厥达头可汗犯塞，上令晋王广及杨素出灵武道，汉王谅与万岁出马邑道。
现代文：开皇末年，突厥的达头可汗侵犯边境，皇上令晋王和杨素从灵武出发，汉王杨谅和万岁从马邑进军。
English: At the end of the first emperor's reign, the Turkic Tatou Khan invaded the border. The emperor ordered Jin Wang and Yang Su to set out from Lingwu, and Han Wang Yang Jun and Wan Hei to march from Ma'e.

古文：万岁率柱国张定和、大将军李药王、杨义臣等出塞，至大斤山，与虏相遇。
现代文：万岁率领柱国张定和、大将军李药王、杨义臣越过边界，到达大斤山，与胡兵相遇。
English: Long live Zhang Dinghe, the leader of the pillar country, the general Li Yue Wang, and Yang Yichen crossed the border, reached Dajin Mountain, and met the Hu soldiers.

古文：达头遣使问曰： 隋将为谁？ 
现代文：达头可汗派使者侦问： 隋军主帅是谁？ 
English: The Great Khan sent an envoy to inquire: Who was the commander of the Sui army?

古文：候骑报： 史万岁也。 
现代文：使者回报道： 是史万岁。 
English: Sui Army waiting to ride reported: Long live Shi!

古文：突厥复问曰： 得非敦煌戍卒乎？ 
现代文：突厥人又问： 莫不是敦煌守卒史万岁？ 
English: The Turks also asked: Isn't it Dunhuang that guards the Long Live History?

古文：候骑曰： 是也。 
现代文：使者答： 是他。 
English: The messenger answered, "It is he."

古文：达头闻之，惧而引去。
现代文：达头听说是万岁带兵，害怕得率军撤离了战场。
English: Tatsuo heard that it was good luck to lead soldiers, but he was afraid and withdrew his army from the battlefield.

古文：万岁驰追百馀里乃及，击大破之，斩数千级，逐北入碛数百里，虏遁逃而还。
现代文：万岁率兵追赶一百多里才赶上了他们，击败了突厥，斩杀了几千人，驱逐敌军到沙漠里几百里，敌人四处逃窜。
English: He chased them for more than a hundred miles before he caught up with them, defeated the Turks, killed several thousand people, drove the enemy army hundreds of miles into the desert, and the enemy fled in all directions.

古文：杨素害其功，因谮万岁云： 突厥本降，初不为寇，来于塞上畜牧耳。 
现代文：杨素害怕万岁功大对自己不利，于是谗害万岁说： 突厥已经投降了，况且他们本来不是侵略，只是放牧而已。 
English: Yang Su was afraid that his great achievement would be to his detriment, so he said: "The Turks have surrendered, and besides, they were not invading, they were just grazing.

古文：遂寝其功。
现代文：因此隐瞒了他的功劳。
English: So he hid his work.

古文：万岁数抗表陈状，上未之悟。
现代文：万岁几次上书陈述情况，但皇上还是没了解到真实情况。
English: Long live Shi, who several times presented his merits on the table, but Emperor Wen still did not wake up.

古文：会上从仁寿宫初还京师，废皇太子，穷东宫党与。
现代文：这时，皇上从仁寿宫刚回京都，废掉了皇太子，穷究东宫党羽。
English: At this time, the emperor had just returned to Kyoto from the Palace of Renshū, and he had abolished the position of crown prince and was scrutinizing the Eastern Court party.

古文：上问万岁所在，万岁实在朝堂，杨素见上方怒，因曰： 万岁谒东宫矣。 
现代文：皇上问万岁在什么地方，万岁实际在朝中，杨素见皇上正怒气冲冲，于是趁机说： 万岁拜访东宫去了。 
English: The emperor asked him where he was, but he was actually in the middle of the court. Yang Su saw that the emperor was furious, so he took the opportunity to say: "I went to visit the East Palace."

古文：以激怒上。
现代文：用以激怒皇上。
English: This was done to infuriate Emperor Wen.

古文：上谓为信然，令召万岁，时所将士卒在朝称冤者数百人，万岁谓之曰： 吾今日为汝极言于上，事当决矣。 
现代文：皇上相信了杨素的话，命令召来万岁。当时万岁所带领的将士在朝喊冤枉的有几百人，万岁对他们说： 我今天把你们的功劳极力地陈述给皇上，事情会解决好的。 
English: The emperor believed Yang Su's words and ordered him to summon Wang Ran. At that time, there were hundreds of soldiers led by Wang Ran who shouted to the emperor that they had been wronged. Wang Ran said to them, "Today, I will do my best to present your merits to the emperor, and things will be resolved well."

古文：既见上，言将士有功，为朝廷所抑，词气愤厉，忤于上。
现代文：就去拜见皇上，陈述将士有功，却被朝廷压抑，他的语气激昂愤慨，对皇上也不顺从。
English: He went to see the Emperor and told him that the soldiers had performed well, but had been suppressed by the court. His tone was very indignant, and he did not obey the Emperor.

古文：若竭诚立节，心无虚罔者，乃为良将，至如万岁，怀诈要功，便是国贼，朝宪难亏，不可再舍。 死之日，天下士庶闻者，识与不识，莫不冤惜。
现代文：皇上激怒了，命令左右当场摔死了他。万岁死后皇上后悔不及，但为了尊严，还是下诏列出许多罪名。死的那一天全国上下得知消息的，认识或不认识万岁的，没有一个不惋惜的。
English: The emperor was enraged and ordered that he be thrown to his death on the spot. After his death, the emperor could not regret it enough, but for the sake of dignity, he issued an edict listing many crimes. On the day of his death, everyone in the country learned the news, and no one who knew or did not know him did not regret it.

古文：万岁为将，不治营伍，令士卒各随所安，无警夜之备，虏亦不敢犯。
现代文：万岁为将领，不严治军队，让士兵自由随便，夜晚也没有人警备，敌人却不敢偷袭。
English: Long live the general, who does not strictly govern the army, but allows soldiers to do as they please. At night, no one is on guard, but the enemy does not dare to make a surprise attack.

古文：临阵对敌，应变无方，号为良将。
现代文：面对敌军，随机应变，没有一定的方略，称为良将。
English: In the face of the enemy, random contingency, without a certain strategy, is called a good general.

