古文：房张李房琯，字次律，河南河南人。
现代文：房琯的字叫次律，是河南府河南县人。
English: Fang Yao's character is called Zi Lu. He is from Henan County, Henan Province.

古文：父融，武后时，以正谏大夫同凤阁鸾台平章事；神龙元年，贬死高州。
现代文：父亲是房融，武则天时，以正谏大夫任同凤阁鸾台平章事；神龙元年，被贬死在高州。
English: His father was Fang Rong, and Wu Zetian was appointed as the doctor of Zheng Qi and Tong Feng Ke; in the first year of Shenlong, he was killed in Gaozhou.

古文：琯少好学，风度沈整，以廕补弘文生。
现代文：房琯年少时好学，风格沉稳整饬，因父亲的地位成为弘文馆生员。
English: When he was young, Fang Yao was eager to learn, his style was calm and orderly, and he became a member of the Hongwen Library due to his father's status.

古文：与吕向偕隐陆浑山，十年不谐际人事。
现代文：后和吕向一起隐居在陆浑山，十年不与人交往。
English: Afterward, he and Lv Xiang lived in seclusion together in Lukhun Mountain and did not interact with people for ten years.

古文：开元中，作《封禅书》，说宰相张说，说奇之，奏为校书郎。
现代文：开元年间，写了《封禅书》，去游说宰相张说，张说对他感到惊奇，任命他为校书郎。
English: During the first year of the year, he wrote "Feng Zenshu" and went to lobby the Prime Minister Zhang He. Zhang He said that he was surprised and appointed him as the school scribe.

古文：举任县令科，授卢氏令。
现代文：他又考中了任县令科，被任命为卢氏县县令。
English: He also passed the examination of county magistrate and was appointed as the county magistrate of Luzhi County.

古文：拜监察御史，坐讯狱非是，贬睦州司户参军。
现代文：后被封为监察御史，因审案不对获罪，被贬为睦州司户参军。
English: After that, he was appointed as an inspector of imperial history, and because he was not found guilty in the trial, he was demoted to the position of Munchu governor and joined the army.

古文：复为县，所至上德化，兴长利，以治最显。
现代文：后又任县令，所到之处提倡道德教化，兴办能长期受益的事，政绩最为突出。
English: Later, he served as a county magistrate, where he promoted moral education and set up long-term benefits, with the most outstanding political achievements.

古文：天宝五载，试给事中，封漳南县男。
现代文：天宝五年，任给事中，封漳南县男爵。
English: Five years after Tianbao, he was appointed to the post of middle-ranking official, and was given the title of Baron of Minan County.

古文：时玄宗有逸志，数巡幸，广温泉为华清宫，环宫所置百司区署。
现代文：当时唐玄宗有玩乐的愿望，多次出游，把温泉宫扩大为华清宫，围绕该宫设置百官部门。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang had a desire to have fun, traveled many times, expanded the Hot Spring Palace into the Huaqing Palace, and set up a hundred official departments around the palace.

古文：以琯资机算，诏总经度骊山，疏岩剔薮，为天子游观。
现代文：因为房琯善于设计安排，有诏令总管规划骊山，凿岩挖池建皇帝出游的行宫。
English: Because Fangyao was good at designing and arranging, there was an imperial edict ordering the general manager to plan Lushan, hew rock, dig ponds, and build the emperor's traveling palace.

古文：未毕，坐善李适之、韦坚，斥为宜春太守。
现代文：没完工，因与李适之、韦坚交好牵连治罪，贬为宜春郡太守。
English: He did not complete it, and because of his friendship with Li Shizhi and Wei Jian, he was implicated in crimes and demoted to the position of Yichun County Governor.

古文：历琅邪、鄴、扶风三郡，频迁宪部侍郎。
现代文：历任琅笽、邺、扶风三郡太守，多次提升任宪部侍郎。
English: He was successively appointed as the governor of the three counties of Zou, Zou and Fufeng, and was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Constitutional Affairs Department several times.

古文：十五载，帝狩蜀，琯驰至普安上谒，帝喜甚，即拜文部尚书、同中书门下平章事，从至成都，赐一子官。
现代文：天宝十五年，唐玄宗逃到蜀地，房琯骑马跑到普安拜见，皇帝很高兴，随从到了成都，又赐他一个儿子为官。
English: In the fifteenth year of Tianbao, Tang Xuan Zong fled to Shu, and Fang Yao rode to Pu'an to meet him. The emperor was very pleased, followed him to Chengdu, and gave him a son as an official.

古文：俄与韦见素、崔涣奉册灵武，见肃宗，具言上皇所以传付意，因道当时利病，箝索虏情，辞吐华畅，帝为改容。
现代文：不久和韦见素、崔涣送册封诏令到了灵武，拜见了唐肃宗，详细说明了太上皇让位的意愿，顺便谈到眼前有利和不利的情况，抑制叛军的方法和叛军的情况，言谈典雅流畅，皇帝脸上露出钦佩的神色。
English: Soon after, he went to Lingwu with Wei Jingsu and Cui Jue to deliver the imperial rescript. He met with Tang Su Zong and explained in detail the will of the Emperor to abdicate. By the way, he talked about the current favorable and unfavorable situation, the method of suppressing the rebels and the situation of the rebels. The speech was elegant and fluent, and the emperor's face showed admiration.

古文：琯既有重名。帝倾意待之，机务一二与琯参决，诸将相莫敢望。
现代文：房琯已有很高的威望，皇帝又一心信任他，重要事务一一和房琯讨论决定，其他将相没人能比。
English: Fang Yao already had a high reputation, and the emperor trusted him wholeheartedly. Important matters were discussed and decided one by one with Fang Yao, and no other magistrate could match him.

古文：于是，第五琦言财利幸，为江淮租庸使。
现代文：这时，第五琦因上奏谈赋税军费受到重用，担任了江淮租庸使。
English: At this time, the Fifth Empress, due to the heavy use of tax and military expenditure talks, served as the envoy of Jianghuai and Renyong.

古文：琯谏曰： 往杨国忠聚敛，产怨天下。陛下即位，人未见德，今又宠琦，是一国忠死，一国忠生，无以示远方。 
现代文：房琯劝谏道 ：过去杨国忠搜刮盘剥，使天下人怨恨；皇上登基人们没见德政，现又宠信第五琦，这是一个杨国忠死了，另一个杨国忠又产生了，不能让全国人民安心。 
English: Fang Ye advised: In the past, Yang Guozhong scraped and scraped, making the world resentful; the emperor's enthroned people did not see German politics, and now they are fond of the fifth generation. This is a Yang Guozhong died, another Yang Guozhong was born, and it can not let the people of the whole country feel at ease.

古文：帝曰： 六军之命方急，无财则散。
现代文：皇帝说 ：我正紧急调集军队，没有钱财就不行。
English: The emperor said, "I am urgently raising an army, but I can't do it without money."

古文：卿恶琦可也，何所取财？ 
现代文：您可以讨厌第五琦，但哪里去弄钱财呢？ 
English: You can hate the fifth column, but where are you going to get the money?

古文：琯不得对。
现代文：房琯无话可答。
English: Fang Yao had nothing to say.

古文：北海太守贺兰进明自河南至，诏摄御史大夫、岭南节度使，入谢，帝曰： 朕语琯除正大夫，何为摄邪？ 
现代文：北海太守贺兰进明从河南来了，有诏任命为代理御史大夫、岭南节度使，他进殿谢恩，皇帝说： 我叫房琯任命为正职大夫，怎么成了代理呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager of the North Sea, Helan Jinming, came from Henan Province. He was appointed as the Acting Imperial Historian and the Lingnan Festival Delegate by imperial edict. He entered the palace with thanks. The emperor said, "I asked Fang Zheng to be appointed as the official doctor. How did he become the acting doctor?"

古文：进明衔之，因曰： 陛下知晋乱乎？
现代文：贺兰进明恨房琯，就说： 皇上知道晋朝失败的原因吗？
English: He Lanjin clearly hated Fang Yao and said: Does the emperor know the reason for the failure of the Jin Dynasty?

古文：惟以尚虚名，任王衍为宰相，基祖浮华，不事天下事，故至于败。
现代文：就因为重视虚假的名望，任命王衍为宰相，崇尚浮华，不管天下大事，因此走向了灭亡。
English: It was because he valued false reputation, appointed Wang Yan as prime minister, and advocated pomp and circumstance, regardless of world events, that he went to ruin.

古文：方唐中兴，当用实才，而琯性疏阔，大言无当，非宰相器。
现代文：现大唐中兴，应任用实干家，但房琯生性虚浮，好说大话，不是宰相的材料。
English: The current leader of the Great Tang Dynasty, Zhongxing, should appoint a doer, but Fang Xuan is vain and boastful, and is not prime minister material.

古文：陛下待之厚，然孰肯为陛下用乎？ 帝曰： 何哉？ 
现代文：皇上虽宠信他，但他肯被皇上任用吗？ 皇帝说 ：此话怎讲？ 
English: Although the Emperor had great confidence in him, would he be willing to be appointed by the Emperor? The Emperor said, "How can I say this?

古文：对曰： 陛下顷为皇太子，太子出曰抚军，入曰监国，而琯为圣皇建遣诸王为都统节度，乃谓陛下为元子而付以朔方、河东、河北空虚之地，永王、丰王乃统四节度。
现代文：他回答说 ：皇上先前是太子，太子领兵出征叫抚军，进京坐镇叫监国，但房琯给太上皇建议派众王任都统节度，称皇上是太子却分给朔方、河东、河北人口稀少的地方，永王、丰王却统辖四位节度使。
English: He replied, "The emperor was previously the prince. The prince led the army to call for reinforcements, and went to Beijing to sit in the town and supervise the country. However, Fusang suggested to the emperor that he should send kings to be the governor of the capital. He said that the emperor was the prince, but he was assigned to the sparsely populated areas of Shuofang, Hedong and Hebei, while Yongwang and Fengwang were in charge of the four governors.

古文：此于圣皇似忠，于陛下非忠也。
现代文：这对于太上皇好像是忠心，对皇上却不是忠心。
English: This seems to be loyalty to the Empress Dowager, but it is not loyalty to the Emperor.

古文：琯意诸子一得天下，身不失恩，又多树私党，以副戎权，推此而言，岂肯尽诚于陛下乎？ 
现代文：房琯的用意是众王不论哪一个得天下，自己都能保往恩宠，他又多安排自己的党羽，来掌握军队，从这看来，他哪里肯为皇上尽忠呢？ 
English: Fusang's intention was that no matter which one of the kings won the world, he would be able to keep the favor, and he arranged more of his own party to control the army. From this point of view, how could he be loyal to the emperor?

古文：帝入其语，始恶琯。
现代文：皇帝听信了他的话，开始讨厌房琯了。
English: The emperor took him at his word and began to hate Fusang.

古文：以进明为御史大夫、河南节度使。
现代文：任命贺兰进明为御史大夫、河南节度使。
English: Appointed Helan Jinming as the chief historian and Henan Festival envoy.

古文：会琯请自将平贼，帝犹倚以成功，乃诏琯持节招讨西京、防御蒲潼两关兵马节度等使，得自择参佐。
现代文：碰上房琯请求自己率兵讨平叛贼，皇帝还想依靠他完成这一大业，就下诏命房琯持符节任招讨长安，防御蒲、潼两关兵马节度使，能自己选择幕僚和将领。
English: Faced with the request of Fang Xuan to lead his own troops to defeat the traitors, the emperor also wanted to rely on him to complete this great undertaking, so he issued an edict ordering Fang Xuan to hold the code and be responsible for recruiting Chang'an, defending Po and Handan from the two armies, and being able to choose his own staff and generals.

古文：乃以兵部尚书王思礼、御史中丞邓景山为副，户部侍郎李揖为行军司马，中丞宋若思、起居郎知制诰贾至、右司郎中魏少游为判官，给事中刘秩为参谋。
现代文：他就任命兵部尚书王思礼，御史中丞邓景山为副手，户部侍郎李揖为行军司马，中丞宋若思，起居郎知制诰贾至，右司郎中魏少游为判官，给事中刘秩为参谋。
English: He appointed Hyobu Shoshu Wang Sirei, Goshi Chujo Deng Jingshan as his deputy, Hubei waiter Li Yuanzhong as the marching steward, Chujo Song Ruosi, Kijiro Jia Zhi, Right sergeant Zhong Wei Shoyu as the judge, and Liu Ritchi as the staff officer.

古文：琯分三军趋京师：杨希文将南军，自宜寿入；刘悊将中军，自武功入；李光进将北军，自奉天入。
现代文：房琯把军队分成三支进攻长安：杨希文率南军，从宜寿进攻；刘折心率中军，从武功进攻；李光进率北军，从奉天进攻。
English: Fang Xuan divided the army into three groups to attack Chang'an: Yang Xiwen led the Southern Army and attacked from Yishou; Liu Weixin led the Central Army and attacked from Wugong; Li Guang led the Northern Army and attacked from Mingtian.

古文：琯身中军先锋。
现代文：房琯自领中军任先锋。
English: Fusang led the Chinese army as the vanguard.

古文：十月庚子，次便桥。
现代文：十月庚子日，驻扎在便桥。
English: In October, on the day of Emperor Genshi, he was stationed in Benshiao.

古文：辛丑，中军、北军遇贼陈涛斜，战不利。琯欲持重有所伺，中人邢延恩促战，故败，士死麻苇。
现代文：辛丑日，中军、北军在陈涛遭遇叛军，作战不胜，房琯想防守等待时机，宦官邢延恩催促出战，因此战败，兵将战死者像砍倒的麻杆芦苇一样。
English: On the fateful day, the Chinese army and the Northern army encountered the rebels in Chen Tao. They were defeated in battle. Fong Yao wanted to defend and wait for the right time. The eunuch Yao Yan'en urged them to go to war. As a result, they were defeated. The soldiers treated the war dead like reeds cut down with a pole.

古文：癸卯，率南军复战，遂大败，希文、悊皆降贼。
现代文：癸卯日，房琯率南军再战，被打得大败，杨希文，刘折心都投降了叛贼。
English: On the same day, Fang Ye led the Southern Army to fight again and was defeated. Yang Xiwen and Liu Xiwen surrendered to the traitors.

古文：初，琯用春秋时战法，以车二千乘缭营，骑步夹之。
现代文：战前，房琯采用春秋时代的作战方法，用兵车两千辆围绕着军营，骑、步兵布置在兵车两边。
English: Before the war, Fanglong adopted the combat methods of the Spring and Autumn Period, with two thousand chariots surrounding the military camp, and cavalry and infantry were arranged on both sides of the chariots.

古文：既战，贼乘风噪，牛悉髀栗，贼投刍而火之，人畜焚烧，杀卒四万，血丹野，残众才数千，不能军。
现代文：接战后，叛军顺风呐喊，拉兵车的牛都吓得战抖，叛军又扔草用火烧兵车，兵将和马牛被烧死了不少，总共被杀死了四万士兵，血把大地都染红了。残兵只有几千人，不能组成作战部队了。
English: After the engagement, the rebels shouted that the wind was favorable, and the oxen pulling the chariots trembled with fear. The rebels also threw grass and burned the chariots. Many soldiers and horses and oxen were burned to death. A total of forty thousand soldiers were killed, and the blood stained the earth red. There were only a few thousand soldiers left, and they could not form a fighting force.

古文：琯还走行在，见帝，肉袒请罪，帝宥之，使裒夷散，复图进取。
现代文：房琯逃回了皇帝驻地，拜见皇帝，脱光上身请求处罚，皇帝饶恕了他，叫他招集受伤和打散了的士兵，再计划进攻。
English: Fusang fled back to the emperor's residence, met the emperor, stripped to the waist and asked for punishment. The emperor forgave him and told him to gather the wounded and scattered soldiers and then plan the attack.

古文：琯雅自负，以天下为己任，然用兵本非所长。
现代文：房琯很自负，将平治天下作为自己的责任，但作战本来就不是他擅长的。
English: Fusang was very conceited and took it as his responsibility to pacify the world, but he was not good at fighting.

古文：其佐李揖、刘秩等皆儒生，未尝更军旅，琯每诧曰： 彼曳落河虽多，能当我刘秩乎？ 
现代文：他的助手李揖、刘秩等人都是书生，没有经历过战阵，房琯常常夸耀说 ：叛军壮士虽然多，能抵挡我的刘秩吗？ 
English: His assistants Li Qian, Liu Chizhi, and others were all students, and had never experienced a battle. Fang Qian often boasted, "Although there are many rebels, can they resist my Liu Chizhi?"

古文：帝虽恨琯丧师，而眷任未衰。
现代文：皇帝虽然对房琯损失了军队感到遗憾，但宠爱信任没有减少。
English: Although the emperor regretted the loss of troops to the Fang clan, his favor and trust did not diminish.

古文：崔圆自蜀来，最后见帝，琯谓帝不见省，易之。
现代文：崔圆从蜀地来，在大臣中最后拜见皇帝，房琯认为皇帝不召见他，是看不起他。
English: Cui Yuan came from Shu, and was the last of the ministers to meet the emperor. Fang Yu thought that the emperor did not invite him to meet him, and looked down on him.

古文：圆以金畀李辅国，不淹日被宠，遂怨琯。
现代文：崔圆将金钱送给李辅国，没几天就受到宠信，于是怨恨房琯。
English: Cui Yuan gave the money to Li Yuxuo, and after a few days, he was favored, so he resented Fang Yao.

古文：琯数称疾不入。
现代文：房琯常称病不上朝。
English: Atrial fibrillation is often referred to as morning sickness.

古文：会御史大夫颜真卿劾奏谏议大夫李何忌不孝，琯素善何忌，不欲以恶名锢之，托被酒入朝，贬西平郡司马。
现代文：遇到御史大夫颜真卿弹劾谏议大夫李何忌不行孝，房琯一向与李何忌要好，不想让坏名声加在他身上，假托他酒后上朝，贬官任西平郡司马。
English: Faced with the impeachment of Yan Zhenqing, the imperial historian, for not showing filial piety to Li He Boi, the doctor who had proposed the impeachment, Fang Zheng had always been on good terms with Li He Boi. He did not want to have a bad reputation attached to him, so he went to the imperial court under the pretense that he was drunk, and was demoted to the position of Xiping County Magistrate.

古文：琴工董廷兰出入琯所，琯昵之。
现代文：琴师董廷兰进出房琯官邸，房琯对他很亲近。
English: Pianist Dong Tinglan went in and out of Fang Ye's official residence. Fang Ye was very close to him.

古文：廷兰藉琯势，数招赇谢，为有司劾治，琯诉于帝，帝因震怒，叱遣之，琯惶恐就第。
现代文：董廷兰依仗房琯的权势，多次招揽贿赂，被有关部门弹劾治罪，房琯对皇帝诉说，皇帝为之大怒，呵斥打发他出来，房琯惶恐不安地回到官邸。
English: Dong Tinglan, relying on the power of Fang Ye, solicited bribes many times and was impeached and punished by the relevant departments. Fang Ye told the emperor that the emperor was very angry and sent him out. Fang Ye returned to the official residence with trepidation.

古文：罢为太子少师。
现代文：后贬任太子少师。
English: He was later demoted to the position of junior teacher to the crown prince.

古文：从帝还都，封清河郡公。
现代文：他跟随皇帝回到京城后，被封为清河郡公。
English: After he followed the emperor back to Beijing, he was given the title of Qinghe County Grand Duke.

古文：琯之废，朝臣多言琯谋包文武，可复用，虽琯亦自谓当柄任，为天子立功。
现代文：房琯罢相后，朝中臣子多认为房琯文武兼备，可以再次任用。房琯也自认为将复出，给皇帝建功。
English: After Fusang retired, most of the courtiers in the imperial court believed that Fusang was well-versed in both literature and military affairs and could be reappointed. Fusang also believed that he would return and make contributions to the emperor.

古文：善琯者暴其言于朝。
现代文：和房琯要好的大臣在朝中公开宣扬他的主张。
English: The minister, who was friendly with Fang Xuan, openly propagated his views in the DPRK and China.

古文：琯方日引刘秩、严武与宴语，移病自如。
现代文：房琯当时每天邀请刘秩、严武等人宴饮会谈，称病不上朝时也这样。
English: At that time, Fusang invited Liu Chizhi, Yanwu and others for banquet talks every day, saying that it was the same when he was not in the morning.

古文：帝以琯虚言浮诞，内鞅鞅，挟党背公，非大臣体。
现代文：皇帝认为房琯好说大话虚浮怪诞，心怀不满，结党营私，不合大臣规范。
English: The emperor thought that Fang Yao was fond of boasting, being vain and grotesque, harboring discontent, and forming a faction, which was not up to the standards of a minister.

古文：乾元元年，出琯为邠州刺史，逐秩、武等，因下诏陈其比周状，喻敕中外。
现代文：乾元元年，将房琯贬出京城任琯州刺史，把刘秩、严武等人也贬出了京城，并下诏书述说他们勾结的情况，通报朝中和外地。
English: In the first year of Qianyuan, he banished Fang Zheng from Beijing and appointed him as the governor of Zhangzhou. He also banished Liu Ritchi, Yan Wu and others from Beijing. He also issued an imperial edict to describe the situation of their collusion and to inform both North Korea and the outside world.

古文：始，邠以武将领刺史，故纲目废弛，即治府为营，吏攘民居相淆欢。
现代文：以前，州用武将任刺史，因此法纪废弃松弛，将官府作为兵营，官吏侵占百姓的房屋互相混杂争吵。
English: In the past, state-appointed military generals made history. As a result, laws and regulations were abandoned and relaxed, government offices were used as military camps, and government officials invaded and occupied people's houses.

古文：琯至，一切革之，人以便安，政声流闻。
现代文：房琯去了，所有问题都解决了。人民得以安居乐业，政绩到处流传。
English: The House of Peers has gone, all problems have been solved, the people can live and work in peace, and the achievements of the government have been spread everywhere.

古文：召拜太子宾客，迁礼部尚书，为晋、汉二州刺史。
现代文：后召他回到京城任刑部尚书，在路上他生病去世了，赠官为太尉。
English: After that, he was called back to Beijing to serve as the chief of the Criminal Investigation Department. On the way, he fell ill and died. He was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：善待士，性简重，论议有体。
现代文：房琯有远大报负，喜欢谈论老子、佛教教义，喜欢客人，善于空谈，但不能解决问题。
English: He likes to talk about Laozi and Buddhist teachings, likes guests, and is good at idle talk, but he can't solve problems.

古文：在位虽浅，而天下之人推为旧德云。李泌，字长源，魏八柱国弼六世孙，徙居京兆。七岁知为文。
现代文：当时国家多难，急着计划进攻，皇帝用对官吏的要求约束臣子，但房琯任宰相时，很想从容镇定地辅佐治理，加上对部下了解不够，招致失败，所以功业名声受损。李泌字长源，是西魏八柱国徒何弼的第六代孙，后迁居京兆，七岁时就能写文章。
English: At that time, the country was in a difficult situation, and there was a rush to plan an attack. The emperor used the requirements for officials to restrain his vassals. However, when Fang Xuan was appointed prime minister, he very much wanted to calmly and steadily assist in governance. In addition, he did not know enough about his subordinates, which led to failure, so his reputation was damaged. Li Xuzi Zi Changyuan, the sixth generation grandson of He Xuan, the Eight Pillars of the West Wei Dynasty, later moved to Jingzhao, and was able to write articles at the age of seven.

古文：玄宗开元十六年，悉召能言佛、道、孔子者，相答难禁中。
现代文：玄宗开元十六年，朝廷广召天下能讲论佛教、道教、孔子学说的人同到宫里辩论。
English: In the 16th year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, the imperial court invited people from all over the world who could discuss Buddhism, Taoism, and Confucianism to the palace for debate.

古文：有员俶者，九岁升坐，词辩注射，坐人皆屈。
现代文：有个名叫员亻叔的，九岁登上讲坛，辩论出言流畅尖锐，在座的人全都折服。
English: A nine-year-old named Jianzhong, who took the podium, delivered a fluent and incisive speech in the debate, which everyone present was impressed by.

古文：帝异之，曰： 半千孙，固当然。 
现代文：玄宗惊异地说 ：他是员半千的孙子，本该如此。 
English: Surprised, Xuanzong said, "He is the grandson of half a thousand members, which is as it should be.

古文：因问： 童子岂有类若者？ 
现代文：接着问道： 在少年中还有像你这样的人吗？ 
English: Then he asked, "Is there anyone like you among the boys?"

古文：俶跪奏： 臣舅子李泌。 
现代文：员亻叔跪奏道： 臣舅舅之子李泌就是一个。 
English: Uncle Zhen kneels down and sings: Uncle Zhen's son, Li Xiu, is one.

古文：帝即驰召之。
现代文：玄宗立即派人召见李泌。
English: Xuanzong immediately sent someone to summon Li Xiu.

古文：泌既至，帝方与燕国公张说观弈，因使说试其能。
现代文：李泌来到宫中，玄宗正同燕国公张说观棋，便叫张说试一试他的才能。
English: When Li Xiu came to the palace, Xuanzong was playing chess with Zhang Guozhong, and asked him to try his skill.

古文：说请赋 方圆动静 ，泌逡巡曰： 愿闻其略。 
现代文：张说请李泌以 方圆动静 为题做赋，李泌迟疑了一会儿说： 我想知道大致的要求。 
English: Zhang said that he would like Li Jie to give a lecture on the subject of the dynamics of a square circle. Li Jie hesitated for a moment and said: I would like to know the general requirements.

古文：说因曰： 方若棋局，圆若棋子，动若棋生，静若棋死。 
现代文：张说便说 ：方，好比棋盘；圆，好比棋子；动，好比活棋；静，好比死棋。 
English: Zhang said: "Square, like a chessboard; round, like a chess piece; moving, like a living chess piece; still, like a dead chess piece."

古文：泌即答曰： 方若行义，圆若用智，动若骋材，静若得意。 
现代文：李泌听了立即回答道： 方如行仁义，圆如用智慧，动如施展才能，静如心领神会。 
English: Upon hearing this, Li Xiu immediately replied, "The square is like practicing benevolence and righteousness, the circle is like using wisdom, the movement is like exerting talent, and the stillness is like the mind grasping the divine."

古文：说因贺帝得奇童。
现代文：张说祝贺玄宗得到了奇童。
English: Zhang said, "Congratulations to Xuanzong for winning the role of Wonder Child.

古文：帝大悦曰： 是子精神，要大于身。 
现代文：玄宗极高兴地说： 这孩子的神采气质，大大超过了他的身份。 
English: Xuanzong said with great pleasure, "This child's spirited temperament far exceeds his status.

古文：赐束帛，敕其家曰： 善视养之。 
现代文：赏赐他五匹锦缎，并对他的家人下旨 ：好好对待培养这个孩子。 
English: He rewarded him with five koi carp and told his family to take good care of the child.

古文：张九龄尤所奖爱，常引至卧内。
现代文：张九龄特别赞赏喜爱他，经常带他到自己卧室。
English: Zhang Jiuling especially appreciates and likes him, and often takes him to her bedroom.

古文：九龄与严挺之、萧诚善，挺之恶诚佞，劝九龄谢绝之。
现代文：张九龄与严挺之、萧诚很要好，严挺之厌恶萧诚的巧言阿谀，劝张九龄不要与他来往。
English: Zhang Jiuling and Yan Ting, Xiao Cheng is very good, Yan Ting loathes Xiao Cheng's wise words, and advises Zhang Jiuling not to associate with him.

古文：九龄忽独念曰： 严太苦劲，然萧软美可喜。 
现代文：张九龄偶尔自言自语道 ：严挺之过于急躁刚直，萧诚却柔顺温和讨人喜欢。 
English: Zhang Jiuling occasionally said to himself: Yan Ting is too impatient and upright, but Xiao Cheng is gentle and pleasant.

古文：方命左右召萧，泌在旁，帅尔曰： 公起布衣，以直道至宰相，而喜软美者乎？ 
现代文：正要派人去请萧诚，李泌在一旁不加思索地说： 明公出身于平民，靠耿直正派为官至宰相，却喜欢柔顺献媚的人？ 
English: Just as he was about to send someone to invite Xiao Cheng, Li Xiu casually said: "Ming Gong was born from a commoner, was promoted to prime minister by Geng Zhizhong, but likes someone who is submissive and flattering?

古文：九龄惊，改容谢之，因呼 小友 。
现代文：张九龄听后一惊，马上改容向李泌认错并称李泌为 小友 。
English: Zhang Jiuling was surprised after hearing this, and immediately changed his appearance to admit his mistake to Li Xuan and called Li Xuan his little friend.

古文：及长，博学，善治《易》，常游嵩、华、终南间，慕神仙不死术。
现代文：李泌长大后，才学广博，对《易经》研究尤为精湛；经常漫游于嵩山、华山、终南山之间，思慕神仙的长生之术。
English: After Li Jie grew up, he learned a lot, and his study of the "I Ching" was particularly exquisite; he often roamed between Songshan, Huashan, and Zhunan Mountain, pondering the immortals' longevity.

古文：天宝中，诣阙献《复明堂九鼎议》，帝忆其早惠，召讲《老子》，有法，得待诏翰林，仍供奉东宫，皇太子遇之厚。
现代文：天宝年间，他到皇宫献《复明堂九鼎议》，玄宗皇帝想起他少年时就聪慧，便召他讲《老子》，他说得头头是道，得以待诏翰林院，又任东宫供奉，皇太子对待他特别好。
English: During the Tenpo era, he went to the Imperial Palace to present "Fu Ming Tang Jiuding Zheng," and Emperor Xuanzong thought of his wisdom when he was a boy, and invited him to speak about "Lao Zi." He spoke the truth, and was able to attend Hanlin Academy and serve in the East Palace. The crown prince treated him particularly well.

古文：尝赋诗讥诮杨国忠、安禄山等，国忠疾之，诏斥置蕲春郡。
现代文：李泌曾经写赋讥笑讽刺杨国忠、安禄山等人，杨国忠憎恨他，下令将他贬到蕲春郡。
English: Li Xiu once wrote a mocking satire of Yang Guozhong, An Lushan and others. Yang Guozhong hated him and ordered him to be banished to Hunchun County.

古文：肃宗即位灵武，物色求访，会泌亦自至。
现代文：肃宗在灵武即位，物色求访贤士，李泌不请自至。
English: Su Zong ascends the throne in Lingwu, searches for a sage to visit, but Li Xiu does not invite him.

古文：已谒见，陈天下所以成败事，帝悦，欲授以官，固辞，愿以客从。
现代文：拜见肃宗后，他向肃宗陈述了治理天下所以有成有败的道理。肃宗听了很高兴，想给他官做，李泌坚决推辞，只愿以宾客身份相随。
English: After paying a visit to Su Zong, he explained to Su Zong the reason why there is success and failure in governing the world. Su Zong was very happy to hear this and wanted to give him an official post, but Li Xiu firmly declined and was only willing to accompany him as a guest.

古文：入议国事，出陪舆辇，众指曰： 著黄者圣人，著白者山人。 
现代文：他入宫参议国事，外出随车伴驾，人们指指点点说： 穿黄衣服的是皇帝，穿白衣服的是隐士。 
English: He entered the palace to advise on state affairs, and when he went out, he was accompanied by a chauffeur. People pointed at him and said, "The emperor wears yellow clothes, and the hermit wears white clothes."

古文：帝闻，因赐金紫，拜元帅广平王行军司马。
现代文：肃宗听到后，便赏赐他金印章紫绶，委任他为元帅、广平王李忄叔的行军司马。
English: When Su Zong heard this, he awarded him the Gold Seal and Purple Ribbon, and appointed him as a marshal, the marching steed of Guangping King Lixun.

古文：帝尝曰 卿侍上皇，中为朕师，今下判广平行军，朕父子资卿道义 云。
现代文：肃宗曾对他说： 您曾经侍奉过上皇，又是我的老师，今屈就广平王行军司马，我父子都借助了您的辅佐。 
English: Su Zong once said to him: "You once served the last emperor, and you were my teacher. Now you are Guangping Wang Xing's army commander. Both my father and son have benefited from your assistance.

古文：始，军中谋帅，皆属建宁王，泌密白帝曰： 建宁王诚贤，然广平冢嗣，有君人量，岂使为吴太伯乎？ 
现代文：起初，在军队商议元帅一职时，很多人看中了建宁王，李泌密奏肃宗： 建宁王确实很贤良，但广平王是您的嫡长子，具有国君的器度，难道让他成为逃亡的吴太伯吗？ 
English: At first, when the army was discussing the post of marshal, many people took a fancy to King Jianning, Li Xiumi said to Su Zong: King Jianning is indeed very virtuous, but King Guangping is your eldest son and has the stature of a sovereign. Would you let him become the fugitive Wu Tai Bo?

古文：帝曰： 广平为太子，何假元帅？ 
现代文：肃宗说 ：广平王是太子，何必再让他当元帅呢？ 
English: Su Zong said: Guangping Wang is a prince, why should he be a marshal?

古文：泌曰： 使元帅有功，陛下不以为储副，得耶？
现代文：李泌说： 如果元帅有功，皇上不让元帅当太子，能行吗？
English: Li Zuo said, "If the marshal is meritorious, can the emperor not allow the marshal to become the crown prince?

古文：太子从曰抚军，守曰监国，今元帅乃抚军也。 
现代文：太子到军队去就是抚军，留在京城就是监国，如今的元帅就是抚军啊！ 
English: When the prince goes to the army, he is leading the army, when he stays in the capital, he is supervising the country, and now the marshal is leading the army!

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：初，帝在东宫，李林甫数构谮，势危甚，及即位，怨之，欲掘冢焚骨。
现代文：当初，肃宗为太子时，李林甫不断说他的坏话，地位十分危险；到他即位后，他非常怨恨李林甫，打算掘墓焚尸以泄恨。
English: At first, when Su Zong was crown prince, Li Linfu constantly spoke ill of him, and his position was very dangerous; after he ascended the throne, he was very resentful of Li Linfu and planned to dig up the grave and burn the corpse to vent his hatred.

古文：泌以天子而念宿嫌，示天下不广，使胁从之徒得释言于贼。帝不悦，曰： 往事卿忘之乎？ 
现代文：李泌认为身为天子而念念不忘旧怨，等于向天下显示自己的气量狭窄，使叛贼能进一步威胁胁从的人。肃宗很不高兴地说 ：已往的事你难道忘了吗？ 
English: Li Xiu thought that being a son of heaven and not forgetting old grudges was tantamount to showing the world his narrow-mindedness, so that traitors could further threaten those who obeyed. Su Zong was very unhappy and said: Have you forgotten the past?

古文：对曰： 臣念不在此。上皇有天下五十年，一旦失意，南方气候恶，且春秋高，闻陛下录故怨，将内惭不怿，万有一感疾，是陛下以天下之广不能安亲也。 
现代文：李泌回答说： 臣所考虑的不是这些，上皇在位五十年，突然失志，加以南方气候恶劣，年岁已高，听到陛下心怀旧怨，内心惭愧不悦，万一病倒，这就是陛下有广大的天地却使双亲不得安身了。 
English: Li Xiu replied, "This is not what the vassal was thinking about. The last emperor reigned for fifty years, and suddenly lost his will, the weather in the south was bad, and he was already old. Hearing that his majesty was nostalgic, his heart was ashamed and displeased, and in case he fell ill, this meant that his majesty had a vast world, but his parents were unable to settle down.

古文：帝感悟，抱泌颈以泣曰： 朕不及此。 
现代文：肃宗感悟，抱着李泌的脖子哭着说： 我没有想到这一点。 
English: Su Zong, deeply moved, hugged Li Xiu's neck and cried, "I didn't think of that.

古文：因从容问破贼期，对曰； 贼掠金帛子女，悉送范阳，有苟得心，渠能定中国邪？
现代文：皇帝偶然询问打败安禄山的时间。李泌说： 贼兵抢掠了金银织锦、男女百姓，全送到了范阳，仅有苟合之人贪得之心，他能统治中国吗？
English: The emperor happened to inquire about the time of the defeat of Anlu Mountain. Li Xiu said: The robber soldiers robbed the gold and silver brocade, men and women, and sent them all to Fanyang. Only the fornicator is greedy. Can he rule China?

古文：华人为之用者，独周挚、高尚等数人，馀皆胁制偷合，至天下大计，非所知也。
现代文：为他效力的汉族人只有周挚、高尚等几个人，其他人都是被威逼胁迫的苟合之人，至于治国平天下的大计，什么都不懂。
English: There are only a few conscientious and honorable Han people who work for him. The others are all people who have been coerced by intimidation and coercion. As for the overall plan of governing the country and the world, they do not understand anything.

古文：不出二年，无寇矣，陛下无欲速。
现代文：要不了两年就无力暴乱了，陛下不要操之过急。
English: It will take less than two years to quell the rebellion. Your Majesty, don't be too hasty.

古文：夫王者之师，当务万全，图久安，使无后害。
现代文：朝廷的军队，要谋求万全之策，以期长治久安，行动不留后患。
English: The army of the imperial court should seek all-round measures with a view to long-term peace and stability, and leave no trace behind.

古文：今诏李光弼守太原，出井陉，郭子仪取冯翊，入河东，则史思明、张忠志不敢离范阳、常山，安守忠、田乾真不敢离长安，是以三地禁其四将也。
现代文：当前可诏令：李光弼守太原，出井陉；郭子仪收复冯翊，进入河东，那么史思明、张忠志就不敢离开范阳、常山；安守忠和田乾真则不敢离开长安；这样就用三个地方拴住他四员大将。
English: At present, it can be decreed: Li Guangya will stay in Taiyuan and go to Jingyao; Guo Ziyi will recover Fengyao and go to Hedong, then Shi Siming and Zhang Zhongzhi will not dare to leave Fanyang and Changshan; Anshu Zhongwada Qianzhen will not dare to leave Chang'an; thus, he will use three places to capture his four generals.

古文：随禄山者，独阿史那承庆耳。
现代文：跟随安禄山的只剩下阿史那承庆一人而已。
English: Following Anlu Mountain, there is only one person left, Ashina Chengqing.

古文：使子仪毋取华，令贼得通关中，则北守范阳，西救长安，奔命数千里，其精卒劲骑，不逾年而弊。
现代文：叫郭子仪不要攻取华县，让贼寇打通关中，这样他北守范阳，西救长安，就会在数千里地之间疲于奔命，他的精兵劲骑，不要一年就会拖垮。
English: Tell Guo Ziyi not to capture Huaxian, and let the thieves and robbers break through the customs. In this way, he will guard Fanyang in the north and save Chang'an in the west. He will be exhausted from running for his life between thousands of miles. If his elite soldiers ride hard, they will be dragged down in less than a year.

古文：我常以逸待劳，来避其锋，去翦其疲，以所征之兵会抚风，与太原、朔方军互击之。
现代文：我方始终以逸待劳，敌来避其锋芒，敌去趁其疲惫而歼灭；用征调的兵集中在扶风，同太原、朔方军配合攻击敌人。
English: Our side has always taken advantage of the enemy's fatigue to annihilate the enemy. We concentrated the conscripted soldiers on the wind, and cooperated with the Taiyuan and Shuo armies to attack the enemy.

古文：徐命建宁王为范阳节度大使，北并塞与光弼相掎角，以取范阳。贼失巢窟，当死河南诸将手。 
现代文：然后再任命建宁王为范阳节度大使，北边靠近边塞与李光弼形成掎角之势，以攻取范阳，贼寇一旦失去巢穴，必然会死在河南诸将的手中。 
English: Then, he appointed King Jianning as the ambassador of the Fanyang Festival. In the north, close to the border fortress, he and Li Guangyao formed an angle to capture Fanyang. Once the bandits lost their nest, they would inevitably die in the hands of Henan generals.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：肃宗认为李泌的意见很对。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：会西方兵大集，帝欲速得长安，曰： 今战必胜，攻必取，何暇千里先事范阳乎？ 
现代文：适逢西域的各军云集，肃宗急欲收回长安，说 ：今战必胜，攻必取，哪有空闲到千里之外先取范阳呢？ 
English: When all the armies in the western region gathered, Sozong was anxious to take back Chang'an, saying, "This battle must be won, the attack must be won. Who has the leisure to go thousands of miles away to take Fanyang first?"

古文：泌曰： 必得两京，则贼再强，我再困。且我所恃者，碛西突骑、西北诸戎耳。
现代文：李泌说 ：如果得到东西两京，叛贼将再次强盛，我方将再次受困；况且我们所倚仗的不过是大漠西边的骑兵、各西北少数民族的兵力罢了。
English: Li Xiu said, "If we get the two capitals of East and West, the traitors will become strong again, and we will be trapped again; moreover, what we rely on is nothing more than the cavalry on the west side of the desert and the troops of the ethnic minorities in the northwest.

古文：若先取京师，期必在春，关东早热，马且病，士皆思归，不可以战。
现代文：假若先去攻打京城，时间必在春季，关东热得早，马容易生病，士兵都想回家，不宜打仗。
English: If we were to attack the capital first, it would have to be in the spring. The Kanto region is hot early, horses get sick easily, and soldiers want to go home. It's not a good time to fight.

古文：贼得休士养徒，必复来南。
现代文：叛军将士得以休养生息，必定再次南侵。
English: The rebel soldiers were able to rest and recuperate, and they will certainly invade the south again.

古文：此危道也。 
现代文：这是危险的战略。 
English: This is a dangerous strategy.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：肃宗听不进去。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：二京平，帝奉迎上皇，自请归东宫以遂子道。
现代文：两京收复后，肃宗奉迎太上皇玄宗回京，自己情愿仍回东宫当太子以尽人子之道。
English: After the recovery of the two capitals, Su Zong returned to Beijing to welcome the Emperor Xuanzong, and he would like to return to the East Palace to be the crown prince in order to fulfill the way of a human being.

古文：泌曰： 上皇不来矣。人臣尚七十而传，况欲劳上皇以天下事乎。 
现代文：李泌说： 太上皇不会来了，做人臣的到了七十岁还要传位，难道还让太上皇去为天下事操劳吗？ 
English: Li Xiu said, "The Emperor will not come. When a minister reaches the age of seventy, he still has to pass on the throne. Should the Emperor be allowed to work for the world?

古文：帝曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：肃宗说 ：那怎么办呢？ 
English: Suson said, "Then what should we do?"

古文：泌乃为群臣通奏，具言天子思恋晨昏，请促还以就孝养。
现代文：李泌就代群臣报捷，详述肃宗想早晚向太上皇省视问安，请太上皇速速回京，好让皇上以尽孝养之道。
English: Li Xiu reported the success to his vassals, detailing that Su Zong wanted to visit the Empress Dowager sooner or later, and asked the Empress Dowager to return to Beijing as soon as possible, so that the Emperor could do his best to maintain filial piety.

古文：上皇得初奏，答曰： 当与我剑南一道自奉，不复东矣。 
现代文：太上皇得到第一个奏章回答说 ：就将剑南一道给我养活自己，我不再东返了。 
English: When Emperor Taizong received the first musical score, he replied, "Give me Jian Nan and I will support myself. I will not return to the East."

古文：帝甚忧。
现代文：肃宗十分忧虑。
English: Su Zong was very worried.

古文：及再奏至，喜曰： 吾方得为天子父！ 
现代文：等到二次奏章到达，玄宗高兴地说 ：我将成为当今天子的父亲！ 
English: When the second movement arrived, Hyunjong happily said, "I'm going to be the father of today's son!"

古文：遂下诰戒行。
现代文：于是便下令准备起程。
English: He then gave the order to prepare for departure.

古文：崔圆、李辅国以泌亲信，疾之。泌畏祸，愿隐衡山。
现代文：崔圆、李辅国因为李泌受肃宗的亲近，非常忌恨，李泌怕带来祸殃，情愿到衡山隐居。
English: Cui Yuan and Li Yu, because of Li Xiu's closeness to Su Zong, were very jealous. Li Xiu was afraid of bringing disaster and preferred to live in seclusion in Hengshan.

古文：有诏给三品禄，赐隐士服，为治室庐。
现代文：于是朝廷下诏赏他三品俸禄，送他一套隐士服，并且为他修盖了庐舍。
English: As a result, the imperial court rewarded him with three salaries, gave him a set of hermit clothes, and built a hermitage for him.

古文：泌尝取松樛枝以隐背，名曰 养和 ，后得如龙形者，因以献帝，四方争效之。
现代文：李泌常常将背靠在弯曲的松枝下，称这种松枝为 靠背 ，后来得到一根状如龙形的松枝 靠背 ，献给肃宗，于是四方相争效仿。
English: Li Xiu often leaned his back under a curved pine branch, calling this pine branch a backrest. Later, he got a dragon-shaped pine branch backrest, dedicated to Su Zong, so the four sides competed to follow suit.

古文：代宗立，召至，舍蓬莱殿书阁。
现代文：代宗即位，召李泌回宫，安排他住在蓬莱殿书阁。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, summoned Li Xiu back to the palace, and arranged for him to live in the Penglai Palace Bookstore.

古文：初，泌无妻，不食肉，帝乃赐光福里第，强诏食肉，为娶朔方故留后李甥，昏日，敕北军供帐。
现代文：起初，李泌没有妻室，也不吃肉，代宗赐给他在光福里的一所宅第，下诏强迫他吃肉，并为他娶了朔方郡已故的留后李日韦的外甥女做妻子。
English: At first, Li Xiu didn't have a wife and didn't eat meat. The emperor gave him a mansion in Guangfu, ordered him to eat meat, and married him to the niece of Li Rongwei, the late ruler of Shuofang County.

古文：元载恶不附己，因江西观察使魏少游请僚佐，载称泌才，以试秘书少监充判官。
现代文：结婚的那天，还下令北军陈设帷帐以供欢宴。元载憎恶李泌不依附自己，趁江西观察使魏少游求派助手，称赞李泌有才能，让他以试秘书少监充当判官。
English: On the day of the wedding, he also ordered the Northern Army to set up the curtains for the banquet. Yuan Zang detested Li Xiu for not adhering to himself, and took advantage of the observation of Jiangxi to ask Wei Shao You to send an assistant, praised Li Xiu for his talent, and let him act as a judge as a probationary secretary and junior inspector.

古文：载诛，帝召还。
现代文：元载被杀后，代宗将李泌又召回朝廷。
English: After Yuan Zang was killed, the acting emperor recalled Li Xiu back to the imperial court.

古文：复为常衮所忌，出为楚州刺史，辞不行，帝亦留之。
现代文：后来李泌又被常衮忌恨，将他调出朝廷任楚州刺史，李泌坚辞不去，代宗也挽留他。
English: Later, Li Xiu was also hated by Chang Xi, and he was transferred out of the imperial court to serve as the Chuzhou chief historian. Li Xiu firmly refused to go, and the daizong also retained him.

古文：会澧州缺，衮盛言南方凋瘵，请辍泌治之，乃授澧、朗、峡团练使，徙杭州刺史，皆有风绩。
现代文：适逢澧州官员空缺，常衮极言南方民生凋敝，请皇帝割爱派李泌去治理，于是委派李泌为澧、朗、峡三州团练使，后调任杭州刺史，各任都有德风政绩。
English: When there was a vacancy for an official in Zhangzhou, he often said that the people's livelihood in the south was withering away. He asked the emperor to send Li Xiu to govern, so Li Xiu was appointed as the training envoy for the three states of Zhai, Lang and Xiao, and then transferred to Hangzhou to make history. All of them had moral and political achievements.

古文：德宗在奉天，召赴行在，授左散骑常侍。
现代文：德宗在奉天时，将李泌召到行宫，授官左散骑常侍。
English: When Emperor Dezong was enthroned, he summoned Li Xiu to the imperial palace and gave him the title of Zuo Sanzhi Changzhi.

古文：时李怀光叛，岁又蝗旱，议者欲赦怀光。
现代文：当时李怀光叛变，这年又遭蝗灾、干旱，议政者希望德宗赦免李怀光。
English: At that time, Li Huaiguang rebelled, and this year he suffered from locust plagues and drought. The deliberators hoped that Emperor Dezong would pardon Li Huaiguang.

古文：帝博问群臣，泌破一桐叶附使以进，曰： 陛下与怀光，君臣之分不可复合，如此叶矣。 
现代文：德宗广问群臣，李泌撕破一片桐树叶交付使者进呈德宗，并陈奏道： 皇上与李怀光君臣的名份不能再复合，就似这片树叶一样。 
English: Emperor Dezong asked his ministers, and Li Xiu tore a piece of paulownia leaf and handed it to the envoy to present to Emperor Dezong, and Chen Zhao said: The names of the emperor and Li Huai Guang, the prince and the minister, can no longer be combined, just like this leaf.

古文：由是不赦。
现代文：因此德宗不赦李怀光。
English: Therefore, the German sect does not forgive Li Huaiguang.

古文：始，硃泚乱，帝约吐蕃赴援，赂以安西、北庭。
现代文：原先，朱氵此作乱，德宗约请吐蕃出兵支援，答应送给他们安西、北庭两个地方。
English: Originally, Zhu Xi was the instigator of the rebellion, and De Zong asked Tubo to send troops to support him, promising to give them two places, Anxi and Beiting.

古文：既而浑瑊与贼战咸阳，泚大败，吐蕃以师追北不甚力，因大掠武功而归。
现代文：后来浑蠨与朱氵此战于咸阳，朱氵此大败，吐蕃的军队追击败兵不很卖力，反而趁势在武功大肆抢掠而归。
English: Later, Hun Rong and Zhu Xi fought this battle in Xianyang, Zhu Xi suffered this great defeat, and the army of Tubo did not try very hard to chase and defeat the soldiers, but instead took advantage of the situation to plunder the martial arts.

古文：京师平，来请如约。
现代文：京师平定后，吐蕃来京要德宗履行原来的协约。
English: After the subjugation of the Beijing division, Tubo came to Beijing to demand that Dezong fulfill the original agreement.

古文：帝业许，欲遂与之。
现代文：德宗已经许诺，打算按约把安西、北庭让给他们。
English: Dezong has already promised that he intends to cede Anxi and Beibei to them as agreed.

古文：泌曰： 安西、北庭，控制西域五十七国及十姓突厥，皆悍兵处，以分吐蕃势，使不得并兵东侵。
现代文：李泌说： 安西、北庭控制着西域五十七国以及突厥的十姓部落，都是出精兵的地方，可牵制分散了吐蕃的势力，使他不能够合兵东侵。
English: Li Xiu said: Anxi and Beiting controlled the fifty-seven countries in the western region as well as the ten tribes of the Turks. They were the places where the elite soldiers were dispatched. They could contain the scattered power of the Tubo, so that he could not join the eastward invasion.

古文：今与其地，则关中危矣。且吐蕃向持两端不战，又掠我武功，乃贼也，奈何与之？ 
现代文：如果将这两个地方给他们，关中就危险了，况且吐蕃当时犹犹豫豫不肯参战，又掠夺了我们的武功城，简直是盗寇，为什么要将此二地送给他？ 
English: If these two places were given to them, Guanzhong would be in danger. Moreover, at that time, Tubo hesitated to join the war and plundered our Wugong City. He was a thief. Why should these two places be given to him?

古文：遂止。
现代文：德宗这才作罢。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：贞元元年，拜陕虢观察使。
现代文：贞元元年，李泌任陕虢观察使。
English: In the first year of Zhengyuan, Li Xiu was appointed as the observation envoy of Shaanxi Province.

古文：泌始凿山开车道至三门，以便饟漕。
现代文：他开始凿山开辟车道直至三门，以利运输粮食。
English: He began to cut the mountain to open a lane up to Sanmen to facilitate the transportation of grain.

古文：以劳，进检校礼部尚书。
现代文：因有功劳晋升检校礼部尚书。
English: For meritorious service, he was promoted to inspector of the school etiquette department.

古文：淮西兵防秋屯鄜州，已而四千人亡归，或曰吴少诚密招之。
现代文：淮西的军队为防御异族秋季来犯屯驻在虢州，不久有四千人逃回，有人说是被吴少诚秘密招回来的。
English: Huaxi's army was stationed in Ganzhou to defend against foreign invaders in the autumn, and soon four thousand people fled back. Some said that they were secretly recruited back by Wu Shaocheng.

古文：既入境，泌邀险悉击杀之。
现代文：这些逃兵一入境，李泌就在半路上拦截迅疾将他们全部消灭了。
English: As soon as these deserters entered the country, Li Xiu intercepted them on the way and wiped them all out.

古文：三年，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，累封鄴县侯。
现代文：贞元三年，他被授任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，加封邺县侯。
English: In the third year of the Zhengyuan era, he was awarded the title of Zhongshu Jirong, the same as Zhongshu Men Shimohei Zhangji, and the title of Zhen County Marquis.

古文：初，张延赏减天下吏员，人情愁怨，至流离死道路者。
现代文：当初，张延赏裁减全国的吏员，人心愁怨，致使有流离失所死于路旁者。
English: At first, Zhang Yanbo was praised for reducing the number of officials across the country, and people were upset, resulting in some people being displaced and dying on the side of the road.

古文：泌请复之，帝未从，因问： 今户口减承平时几何？ 
现代文：李泌奏请恢复旧制，德宗不肯，并问道 ：现在户口与天下太平时减少了多少？ 
English: Li Xiu Song asked to restore the old system, Dezong refused, and asked: How much has the hukou decreased now compared to the time of world peace?

古文：曰： 三之二。 
现代文：李泌回答说 ：三分之二。 
English: Li Xiu replied: "Two-thirds."

古文：帝曰： 人既雕耗，员何可复？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：人口既然减少了这么多，旧制怎能恢复呢？ 
English: The emperor said: Since the population has decreased so much, how can the old system be restored?

古文：泌曰： 不然。户口虽耗，而事多承平十倍。
现代文：李泌说 ：不是这样，人口虽然减少了，但公事却多于太平时期的十倍。
English: Li Xiu said: This is not the case. Although the population has decreased, there are ten times more public affairs than during the Taiping era.

古文：陛下欲省州县则可，而吏员不可减。
现代文：陛下想要裁减州县当然可以，但吏员不能减少。
English: If His Majesty wants to reduce the number of prefectures and counties, it is certainly possible, but the number of officials cannot be reduced.

古文：今州或参军署券，县佐史判案。
现代文：如今有的州府是参军在签署文件，有的县是佐史在判案。
English: Today, some prefectures are signing documents to join the military, and some counties are judging cases.

古文：所谓省官者，去其冗员，非常员也。 
现代文：所谓裁减官员，是裁去那些多余的人员，决不是那些必要的正常编制。 
English: The so-called reduction of officials is to cut those superfluous personnel, but by no means those necessary normal staffing.

古文：帝曰： 若何为冗员？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：哪些人算是多余的官员呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "Who are the superfluous officials?"

古文：对曰： 州参军无职事及兼、试额内官者。
现代文：李泌回答说 ：各州的参军中没有具体职务以及兼、试名目内的官。
English: Li Jie replied: There are no specific positions and officials in the probationary list for joining the army in each state.

古文：兼、试，自至德以来有之，比正员三之一，可悉罢。 
现代文：兼、试官员，自至德年间以来才有，将近正式官员的三分之一，他们可全部免掉。 
English: Only since the 1950s have part-time and probationary officials accounted for nearly one-third of full-time officials, and they can all be exempted.

古文：帝乃许复吏员，而罢冗官。
现代文：皇帝这才允许吏员复职，并罢免了那些冗官。
English: Only then did the emperor allow the officials to resume their duties and dismissed those redundant officials.

古文：泌又条奏： 中朝官常侍、宾客十员，其六员可罢；左右赞善三十员，其二十员可罢。
现代文：李泌又分条陈奏： 朝中的常侍、宾客有十个官员，其中六个可以取消；左右赞善有三十个，其中二十个可以取消。
English: Li Jie also played a piece of music: There are ten officials, six of which can be canceled, who are the regular attendants and guests of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China; there are thirty left and right Zanzan, of which twenty can be canceled.

古文：如旧制，诸王未出閤，官属皆不除。
现代文：按照旧制，诸王在没有出宫任职之前，都不委任属吏。
English: According to the old system, kings did not appoint subordinate officials until they left the palace.

古文：而所收科奉，乃多于减员矣。 
现代文：节省下来的官俸，就大大超过减少吏员的收入了。 
English: The savings in government salaries will greatly exceed the reduction in the income of officials.

古文：帝悦。
现代文：德宗很高兴。
English: Desong is very happy.

古文：是时，州刺史月奉至千缗，方镇所取无艺，而京官禄寡薄，自方镇入八座，至谓罢权。
现代文：当时，一个州刺史每月薪俸高达千缗，节度使收入没有限度，但在京官员的薪俸却很低。节度使被调到京城来做官，竟被称作失权。
English: At that time, the monthly salary of a prefectural magistrate was as high as one thousand monme, but the salary of an official in Beijing was very low. Because of this, he was transferred to Beijing to work as an official, which was actually called a loss of power.

古文：薛邕由左丞贬歙州刺史，家人恨降之晚。
现代文：薛邕由尚书左丞贬为歙州刺史，家中人只遗憾贬得太晚了。
English: Xue Yao was demoted from Shangshu Zuojo to Zhangzhou Zushi, and his family only regretted that the demotion came too late.

古文：崔祐甫任吏部员外，求为洪州别驾。
现代文：崔甫在京城任吏部员外，请求外放到洪州当别驾。
English: In addition to serving as an official in Beijing, Cui Fu requested to be sent to Hongzhou as a special guest.

古文：使府宾佐有所忤者，荐为郎官。
现代文：节度使府中的宾客辅佐如果不听话，就推荐他们到京城去做郎官。
English: If the assistant of the guest in the palace is disobedient, he will recommend them to go to the capital to be a vassal.

古文：其当迁台阁者，皆以不赴取罪去。
现代文：那些应该升迁任重臣的，都因不赴任被治罪免职。
English: Those who should have been promoted to the post of senior minister were all punished and dismissed for not going to the post.

古文：泌以为外太重，内太轻，乃请随官闲剧，普增其奉，时以为宜。
现代文：李泌认为外官俸禄过厚，在京的官员的俸禄太少，便请求按照官职的闲忙普遍增加薪俸，人们称合适。
English: Li Xiu thought that the salary of foreign officials was too high, and that the salary of officials in Beijing was too low, so he asked for a general increase in salary in accordance with the idleness of the official position. People said it was appropriate.

古文：而窦参多沮乱其事，不能悉如所请。
现代文：然而窦参却多次干扰他的事，不能全部按照李泌所奏请的实行。
English: However, Dou Zhan interfered with him many times, and he could not implement all of Li Xiu's requests.

古文：泌又白罢拾遗、补阙，帝虽不从，然因是不除谏官，唯用韩皋、归登。
现代文：李泌又奏请皇帝撤销拾遗、补阙的官职，皇帝虽然没有应允，但从此再也不任命谏官，只任用韩皋、归登两个谏官。
English: Li Xiu also petitioned the emperor to revoke the official post of collecting relics and supplementing records. Although the emperor did not agree, he would never appoint eunuchs again, only appointing two eunuchs, Han Zheng and Guideng.

古文：泌因收其公廨钱，令二人寓食中书舍人署。
现代文：李泌收回他们的办公费，让他们两人就在中书舍人署搭伙。
English: Li Xuan recovered their office expenses and let the two of them work together at the China Scholarship and Scholarship Agency.

古文：凡三年，始以韦绶、梁肃为左右补阙。
现代文：过了三年，才让韦绶、梁肃两人担任左右补阙。
English: It took three years before Wei Wei and Liang Su were allowed to serve as left and right fill-ins.

古文：太子妃萧母，郜国公主也，坐蛊媚，幽禁中，帝怒，责太子，太子不知所对。
现代文：太子妃子萧氏的母亲，是郜国公主，因犯有勾引罪，被囚禁宫中。皇帝十分生气，便斥责太子，太子不知该如何对答。
English: Prince Consort Xiao's mother, Princess Rong of Shandong Province, was imprisoned in the palace for the crime of seduction. The emperor was very angry and rebuked the prince. The prince did not know how to respond.

古文：泌入，帝数称舒王贤，泌揣帝有废立意，因曰： 陛下有一子而疑之，乃欲立弟之子，臣不敢以古事争。
现代文：李泌入宫后，皇帝多次称赞舒王贤德，李泌揣摩到皇帝有废黜太子另立舒王之意，便说： 陛下只有一个儿子，还不相信他，却想立弟弟的儿子，臣不敢拿古代的事例来争辩。
English: After Li Jie entered the palace, the emperor repeatedly praised the virtue of Shu Wang. Li Jie guessed that the emperor had the intention of dethroning the crown prince and establishing another Shu Wang, and said: Your Majesty has only one son, and you still don't believe him, but you want to establish your brother's son. The minister didn't dare to argue with the ancient case.

古文：且十宅诸叔，陛下奉之若何？ 
现代文：况且十宅诸叔，陛下让哪一家的侄子当太子呢？ 
English: Besides, which of the ten families' nephews did Your Majesty choose to be crown prince?

古文：帝赫然曰： 卿何知舒王非朕子？ 
现代文：皇帝发怒道 ：你怎么知道舒王不是我的儿子呢？ 
English: The emperor angrily said, "How do you know that King Shu is not my son?"

古文：对曰： 陛下昔为臣言之。陛下有嫡子以为疑，弟之子敢自信于陛下乎？ 
现代文：李泌答道： 陛下过去曾说过，陛下有亲生的儿子却怀疑他，弟弟的儿子怎能相信陛下呢？ 
English: Li Seul replied, "Your Majesty has said in the past that Your Majesty has a biological son but doubts him. How can a younger brother's son trust Your Majesty?"

古文：帝曰： 卿违朕意，不顾家族邪？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 你违抗我的意愿，难道不顾及家族吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Do you disobey my wishes and disregard your family?

古文：对曰： 臣衰老，位宰相，以谏而诛，分也。使太子废，它日陛下悔曰 我惟一子杀之，泌不吾谏，吾亦杀尔子 ，则臣绝祀矣。
现代文：李泌回答说 ：臣已经衰老，身为宰相，因为直言劝告而被诛，也是应该的；假若太子被废，他日陛下后悔了就会说 ：我仅有一个儿子被杀了，李泌却不向我进谏，我也要杀你的儿子。 这么一来，臣就绝后了。
English: Li Xiu replied, "My father-in-law has grown old, and as the prime minister, he was banished for his outspoken advice, and rightly so; if the crown prince were to be deposed, his majesty would one day regret it and say, 'I only had one son killed, but Li Xiu did not banish me, so I am going to kill your son as well.' In that case, my father-in-law would be no more."

古文：虽有兄弟子，非所歆也。 
现代文：纵然有兄弟的儿子，但并不是能祭祀我的。 
English: Even though I have a brother's son, he is not able to sacrifice to me.

古文：即噫呜流涕。因称： 昔太宗诏： 太子不道，籓王窥伺者，两废之。 
现代文：说罢痛哭流涕，接着又说： 昔日太宗曾下诏： 太子不好，同时又有藩王窥伺太子位的，两者都废掉。 
English: He said, weeping bitterly, and continued, "Long ago, Emperor Taizong issued an edict: Prince is not good, and at the same time, there was a feudal lord who coveted the position of prince, and both were abolished.

古文：陛下疑东宫而称舒王贤，得无窥伺乎？
现代文：陛下不相信东宫太子而称道舒王贤德，难道舒王就没有窥伺之嫌吗？
English: Your Majesty does not believe the Crown Prince of the Eastern Palace, but praises the virtue of King Shu. Is it true that King Shu does not like to be spied on?

古文：若太子得罪，请亦废之而立皇孙，千秋万岁后，天下犹陛下子孙有也。
现代文：假若太子有罪，就把太子废掉而立皇孙，这样千秋万代之后，天下仍归陛下子孙所有。
English: If the crown prince is guilty, the crown prince will be abolished and the imperial grandson will be established. In this way, after thousands of generations, the world will still belong to His Majesty's descendants.

古文：且郜国为其女妒忌，而蛊惑东宫，岂可以妻母累太子乎？ 
现代文：况且是郜国公主为妒忌她的女儿，而去扰乱东宫，怎能因为妻子母亲的罪过连累太子呢？ 
English: Moreover, how could the Crown Princess of Shikoku, who was jealous of her daughter, go and disturb the East Palace? How could she implicate the Crown Prince for the sins of his wife's mother?

古文：执争数十，意益坚，帝寤，太子乃得安。
现代文：争执了很多次，李泌的意见愈来愈坚决，皇帝方醒悟过来，太子才得以平安无事。
English: They argued many times, Li Xuan's opinion became more and more resolute, the emperor came to his senses, and the prince was safe.

古文：初，兴元后国用大屈，封物皆三损二。
现代文：当初，兴元年以后，国库空虚，封赏物品大都减少了三分之二。
English: At first, after the first year of the Heian period, the state treasury was empty, and the reward items were mostly reduced by two-thirds.

古文：旧制，堂封岁三千六百缣，后才千二百。
现代文：按老规矩封赏宰相每年三千六百匹，后来仅有一千二百匹。
English: According to the old rules, the prime minister was awarded 3,600 horses per year, but later only 1,200 horses.

古文：至是，帝使还旧封。
现代文：这时皇帝决定恢复旧制的宰相封赏。
English: At this time, the emperor decided to restore the old system of rewarding the prime minister.

古文：于是李晟、马燧、浑瑊各食实封，悉让送泌，泌不纳。
现代文：李晟、马燧、浑蠨等人都享受收缴赋税的封户，便将赏予的缣全部给李泌，李泌不接受。
English: Li Zhe, Ma Zhe, Hun Zhe and other people all enjoy the tax collection, and they will give all the rewards to Li Zhe, but Li Zhe will not accept them.

古文：时方镇私献于帝，岁凡五十万缗，其后稍损至三十万，帝以用度乏问泌，泌请： 天下供钱岁百万给宫中，劝不受私献。
现代文：这时各地方镇私向皇帝进贡，每年都有五十万缗，后来慢慢减到三十万，皇帝因费用匮乏垂问李泌，李泌奏道 ：天下每年用百万钱供给宫中，皇上不要接受私人的奉献。
English: At this time, each local town privately paid tribute to the emperor, with an annual amount of half a million baht, later slowly reduced to three hundred thousand. The emperor asked Li Xue for lack of expenses. Li Xue replied: The world supplies the palace with millions of money every year, the emperor should not accept private donations.

古文：凡诏旨须索，即代两税，则方镇可以行法，天下纾矣。 
现代文：凡是下诏必须索派的，就代两税，这样各方镇就可依法行事，国家用度就宽裕了。 
English: Whenever an imperial edict has to be issued, two taxes will be paid, so that all towns can act in accordance with the law, and the state's expenses will be more than enough.

古文：帝尝从容言： 卢杞清介敢言，然少学，不能广朕以古道，人皆指其奸而朕不觉也。 
现代文：德宗曾随口说道 ：卢杞清正敢于说话，然而学识浅薄，不能增长我的历史知识，人们都说他为人奸诈，但是我却没有感觉到。 
English: Desong once said casually: Lu Yongqing dares to speak, but his knowledge is shallow and cannot increase my knowledge of history. People say he is treacherous, but I didn't feel it.

古文：对曰： 陛下能觉杞之恶，安致建中祸邪？
现代文：李泌回答说 ：陛下如果能早日觉察到卢杞的奸诈险恶，怎能导致建中年间的灾祸呢？
English: Li Xiu replied, "If Your Majesty could have detected Lu Xun's treachery and evil at an early stage, how could it have led to the calamity of the Jianzhong period?"

古文：李揆和蕃，颜真卿使希烈，其害旧德多矣。
现代文：派李揆去和番，让颜真卿出使李希烈，他坑害有德望的故老的事太多了。
English: There are too many things that he has done to harm the venerable Li Xuan. He sent Li Xuan to fight the war and sent Yan Zhenqing to dispatch Li Xili.

古文：又杨炎罪不至死，杞挤陷之而相关播。
现代文：又如杨炎虽然有罪但并没有构成死罪，卢杞排挤陷害他却任命关播为相。
English: For example, although Yang Yan was guilty, it did not constitute a capital crime. However, Lu Yueh appointed Guan Baoxing as his prime minister.

古文：怀光立功，逼使其叛。
现代文：李怀光立了功，却逼得他叛变。
English: Li Huaiguang made great achievements, but he was forced to defect.

古文：此欺天也。 
现代文：这都是欺君之罪啊。 
English: All of this is the sin of cheating the king.

古文：帝曰： 卿言诚有之。
现代文：德宗说 ：你说的都是事实。
English: Dezong said, "Everything you said is true.

古文：然杨炎视朕如三尺童子，有所论奏，可则退，不许则辞官，非特杞恶之也。
现代文：但杨炎把我看成了三尺童子，他有什么议论奏章，我准了他就退下，不答应他就辞官不干，不仅仅是卢杞讨厌他啊。
English: But Yang Yan saw me as a three-foot-tall boy. If he had anything to say about the score, I would give him permission to withdraw, and if he did not agree, he would resign. It was not just Lu Wei who hated him.

古文：且建中乱，卿亦知桑道茂语乎？
现代文：而且建中之乱，你知道桑道茂说过的话吧？
English: And the Jianzhong Rebellion, do you know what Sando Mao said?

古文：乃命当然。 
现代文：这是命该如此啊！ 
English: It's meant to be!

古文：对曰： 夫命者，已然之言。
现代文：李泌回答道 ：所谓命，是已经如此的一种托辞。
English: Li Jing replied, "The so-called life is already a kind of excuse.

古文：主相造命，不当言命。
现代文：君王的使命就是造就命运，就不应该再谈什么命了。
English: The king's mission is to create destiny, so there should be no more talk about what kind of life.

古文：言命，则不复赏善罚恶矣。
现代文：如果讲命，就不再用去赏善罚恶了。
English: If you give orders, you no longer have to reward good and punish evil.

古文：桀曰： 我生不有命自天。 
现代文：夏桀曾说 ：我的降生不是由天命决定的吗？ 
English: Xia Yao once said: Wasn't my birth determined by the fate of heaven?

古文：武王数纣曰： 谓己有天命。 
现代文：武王指责纣说 ：自认有天命。 
English: King Wu accused Gong and said, "He thinks he has a divine destiny."

古文：君而言命，则桀、纣矣。 
现代文：当君王的人去大谈特谈命，就成了夏桀、商纣了。 
English: When the king's men go to talk about life, it becomes a charade, a farce.

古文：帝曰： 朕请不复言命。 
现代文：皇帝说： 我再也不说命了。 
English: The emperor said, "I will not give my word any more."

古文：俄加集贤殿、崇文馆大学士，修国史。
现代文：立即加封李泌为集贤殿、崇文馆大学士，修治国史。
English: Li Xiu was immediately awarded the title of Shixian, and became a scholar of the Chongwen Academy, studying the history of the country.

古文：泌建言：学士加大，始中宗时，及张说为之，固辞，乃以学士知院事。
现代文：李泌建议：学士头衔上再冠一个 大 字，是从中宗开始的，到了张说任此职时，坚决谢辞，仅以学士衔主持翰林院事务。
English: Li Zuo suggested that the title of bachelor should be crowned with another big character, which was started from Zhongzong. When Zhang said that he would take up this post, he firmly resigned and presided over the affairs of Hanlin Academy with only a bachelor's degree.

古文：至崔圆复为大学士，亦引泌为让而止。
现代文：到了崔圆又被封大学士，他引用李泌辞让这个称号才没封。
English: When it came to Cui Yuan, he was also awarded the title of university professor, but he didn't get this title because he quoted Li's secret speech.

古文：帝以 前世上巳、九日，皆大宴集，而寒食多与上巳同时，欲以三月名节，自我为古，若何而可？ 
现代文：皇帝问李泌 ：以前上巳、重阳节日，都大设酒宴集会，但寒食节往往与上巳同时，朕想在二月份命名一个节日，从我这里开始，怎么样才好呢？ 
English: The emperor asked Li Xiu: In the past, both the Shang Si and the Chongyang festivals had large wine banquet gatherings, but the cold food festival was often held at the same time as the Shang Si. I would like to name a festival in February. How about starting with me?

古文：泌请： 废正月晦，以二月朔为中和节，因赐大臣戚里尺，谓之裁度。
现代文：李泌说： 取消正月最后一日的那个节日，以二月初一为中和节。赐给大臣及帝王外戚们一把尺子，称它为 裁度 。
English: Li Xiu said: Cancel the festival on the last day of the first month, and make the first day of February the Mid-Autumn Festival. Give a ruler to the ministers and the emperor's maternal relatives, and call it "discretion."

古文：民间以青囊盛百谷瓜果种相问遗，号为献生子。里闾酿宜春酒，以祭勾芒神，祈丰年。
现代文：民间就以黑色布袋盛装百谷瓜果种子互相赠送，称为献生子；各家各户酿制宜春酒，用来祭祀勾芒神，祈求丰年。
English: People give each other black cloth bags filled with seeds of the melon and fruit of the melon and fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the melon and fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the melon and fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the melon and fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the melon and fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the melon and fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the melon and fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the melon and fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the melon and fruit of the fruit of the fruit of the melon.

古文：百官进农书，以示务本。 
现代文：百官进献农书，以表示务农为本。 
English: Hundreds of officials donated agricultural books, with the theme of agriculture.

古文：帝悦，乃著令，与上巳、九日为三令节，中外皆赐缗钱燕会。
现代文：皇帝大喜，于是便下令，将中和节与上巳、重阳并列为三令节，宫内宫外，都赏赐缗钱举行宴会。
English: The emperor was overjoyed, so he ordered that the Mid-Autumn Festival be listed alongside the Spring Festival and the Mid-Autumn Festival as the Three Festivals, and both inside and outside the palace were awarded money to hold a banquet.

古文：四年八月，月蚀东壁，泌曰： 东壁，图书府，大臣当有忧者。
现代文：贞元四年八月，在东壁星官天区发生月蚀，李泌说： 东壁象征图书府的所在地，大臣中可能会有人丧命。
English: In August of the 4th year of the Zhengyuan era, a lunar eclipse occurred in the East Wall Star Official Heaven Area, Li Xiu said: The East Wall symbolizes the location of the library, and some ministers may be killed.

古文：吾以宰相兼学士，当之矣。
现代文：我是当朝的宰相兼学士，该轮到我了。
English: I was the prime minister of the day and a bachelor. It's my turn.

古文：昔燕国公张说由是以亡，又可免乎？ 
现代文：以前燕国公张说就是由于这种天象而死的，我怎能避免呢？ 
English: In the past, Yan Guo Gongzhang said that it was because of this kind of celestial elephant that he died. How can I avoid it?

古文：明年果卒，年六十八，赠太子太傅。
现代文：第二年果然去世了，享年六十八岁，死后追赠为太子太傅。
English: He died the following year, at the age of sixty-eight, and was posthumously given the title of crown prince.

古文：泌出入中禁，事四君，数为权幸所疾，常以智免。
现代文：李泌一直担任宫廷内外要职，侍奉过四代君王，屡屡为权贵所忌恨，常常靠他的才智过人而幸免。
English: Li Xiu has always held important positions both inside and outside the court. He has served four generations of emperors. He has often been hated by the powerful, and has often been spared by his superior intellect.

古文：好纵横大言，时时谠议，能寤移人主。
现代文：李泌喜欢高谈阔论，常有公正议论，能让人主醒悟而改变主张。
English: Li Jie likes to talk a lot, often has a fair discussion, can make people wake up and change their views.

古文：然常持黄老鬼神说，故为人所讥切。
现代文：然而他常常持黄老鬼神之说，以致被人们非议。
English: However, he was often criticized for holding onto the idea of "yellow old ghosts and gods."

古文：初，肃宗重阴阳巫祝，擢王玙执政，大抵兴造工役，辄牵禁忌俗说。
现代文：当初肃宗迷信阴阳巫祝，选拔王执政，凡是兴建施工，动辄拘泥于禁忌俗说。
English: At the beginning, Su Zong believed in the superstition of yin and yang, witchcraft and fortune-telling, selected kings to govern, and always adhered to the taboo of popular sayings when building and constructing.

古文：而黎干以左道位京兆尹，尝使禁工骈珠刺绣为乘舆服，举焚之以为禳禬。
现代文：黎干靠旁门左道当上了京兆尹后，曾叫禁工用并列的珍珠刺绣缝制皇帝服装，又用火烧掉来除病祛灾和求福。
English: After Li Gang became the successor of Emperor Jing Zhaoyun, he ordered the imperial laborers to embroider the emperor's clothes with parallel rows of pearls, and burn them with fire to cure diseases and seek blessings.

古文：德宗素不为然，及嗣位，罢内道场，除巫祝。
现代文：德宗对此一贯不以为然，他登基以后，立即撤掉了宫内的道场，赶走了巫祝。
English: Emperor Dezong always disagreed with this. After he ascended the throne, he immediately removed the dojo in the palace and drove away the sorcerers.

古文：代宗将葬，帝号送承天门，而辒车行不中道，问其故，有司曰： 陛下本命在午，故避之。 
现代文：代宗将要安葬时，德宗嚎啕大哭地到承天门送行，而灵车却不按正道行驶。问是何缘故，官吏说： 陛下出生在午时，所以要避开走中间到达丧葬地点。 
English: When Emperor Daizong was about to be buried, Emperor Dezong went to the Gate of Heaven in tears to see him off, but the hearse did not follow the right path. Asked why, the official said: His Majesty was born at noon, so avoid walking in the middle to reach the funeral site.

古文：帝泣曰： 安有枉灵驾以谋身利？ 
现代文：皇帝哭泣说 ：哪能委屈先王的灵驾来考虑自身的利益呢？ 
English: The emperor wept and said, "How can one wrong the spirit of the former king and consider one's own interests?"

古文：命直午而行。
现代文：便下令灵车在路中间向前走。
English: He ordered the hearse to move forward in the middle of the road.

古文：又宣政廊坏，太卜言： 孟冬魁冈，不可营缮。 
现代文：后来宣政殿的走廊倒塌，太卜说 ：十月犯魁冈，不可营造修缮。 
English: Later, the corridor of the Palace of the Grand Council of State collapsed, and the Empress Dowager said, "It's October, so we can't make repairs."

古文：帝曰： 《春秋》 启塞从时 ，何魁冈为？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：《春秋》一书上有 启塞从时 这句话，管他什么魁冈呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "In the book Spring and Autumn, there is a quote from the time of Qi Jie, what does he care about Qui-Gon?

古文：亟诏葺之。
现代文：立即下诏动工修建。
English: Start construction immediately.

古文：及桑道茂城奉天事验，始尚时日拘忌，因进用泌，泌亦自有所建明。
现代文：到了桑道茂修筑奉天城的事应验，才开始重视时日的禁忌，因此进一步重用了李泌，李泌也出了不少主意。
English: It was not until the fulfillment of the matter of Sando Mao's construction of Feng Tiancheng that he began to pay attention to the taboos of the day, so he further reused Li Xuan, and Li Xuan also came up with a lot of ideas.

古文：独柳玭称，两京复，泌谋居多，其功乃大于鲁连、范蠡云。
现代文：惟独柳王比称道李泌，说他在收复两京上计谋最多，他的功绩大大超过古代的鲁仲连和范蠡。
English: However, Liu Wangbi praised Li Xiu, saying that he had the most strategies in recovering the two capitals, and his achievements greatly exceeded those of Lu Zhonglian and Fan Ye in ancient times.

