古文：杂器用独孤彦姚康成马举吉州渔者
现代文：杂器用独孤彦姚康成马举吉州渔者
English: Yao Kangcheng, a self-made man with miscellaneous tools, leads the fishermen from Jizhou on horseback

古文：凶器上梁氏曹惠窦不疑
现代文：凶器上梁氏曹惠窦不疑
English: The murder weapon of the Liang clan, Cao Hui Dou, is beyond doubt

古文：杂器用
现代文：杂器用
English: For miscellaneous equipment

古文：独孤彦
现代文：独孤彦
English: Dokko hiko

古文：建中末，有独孤彦者，尝客于淮泗间。
现代文：唐德宗建中末年，独孤彦在泗水和淮河间客居。
English: At the end of Tang Dezongjian's middle school years, Du Guohan lived as a guest between Surabaya and Huaihe.

古文：会天大风，舟不得进，因泊于岸。
现代文：遇到大风，船无法行驶，停泊在岸边。
English: Encountering high winds, the ship was unable to sail and anchored on the shore.

古文：一夕步月登陆，至一佛寺中，寺僧悉赴里民会去，彦步绕于庭。
现代文：一天夜晚，他跨着皎洁的月光登上岸，来到一座佛寺。寺院里的和尚都去赴村民的集会去了，独孤彦漫步于庭院。
English: One night, he stepped ashore in the bright moonlight and arrived at a Buddhist temple. The monks in the temple had all gone to the villagers' meeting, and only Orihiko was strolling in the courtyard.

古文：俄有二丈夫来。一人身甚长，衣黑衣，称姓甲，名侵讦，第五。
现代文：不一会有两个男子走来，一个人身材很长，穿黑衣，自称姓甲名侵讦，排行第五。
English: Every now and then, two men would walk up. One of them was very tall, dressed in black, and called himself A. He was the fifth in line.

古文：一人身广而短，衣青衣，称姓曾，名元。
现代文：一个人身材粗矮，穿绿色衣裳，自称姓曾名曾元。
English: He was a short, stocky man, dressed in green, who gave his name as Zeng Meng Zeng Yuan.

古文：与彦揖而语，其吐论玄微，出于人表。
现代文：两个人同独孤彦互相施礼，交谈起来。两个人出语不凡，言谈论述深奥玄妙。
English: The two men bowed to each other and began to converse with each other. The two men uttered extraordinary words and talked about the profound and mysterious.

古文：彦素耽奇奥，常与方外士议语，且有年矣。
现代文：独孤彦平素善于清谈，多年来经常和一些清高不俗的人物高谈阔论，对于玄学和佛学深有造诣。
English: Dokuko Hikobira is good at plain talk. Over the years, he has often talked at length with some high-profile figures. He is well-versed in metaphysics and Buddhism.

古文：至于玄门释氏，靡不穷其指归。乃遇二人，则自以为不能加也，窃奇之，且将师焉。
现代文：如今遇到了这两个人，心中非常惊奇，感到自己远远不如他们，打算拜他们为老师。
English: Now I've met these two people, I'm very surprised, I feel far inferior to them, and I plan to worship them as teachers.

古文：因再拜请曰：某好奇者，今日幸遇先生，愿为门弟子，其可乎？
现代文：于是重新施礼说：我喜好奇奥，有幸遇到两位先生，想要作你们的弟子，可以吗？
English: So he bowed again and said, "I'm curious, I've been lucky enough to meet two teachers, and I'd like to be your disciple, is that okay?"

古文：二人谢曰：何敢？
现代文：两个人辞谢说：不敢。
English: Two people declined and said, "I don't dare."

古文：彦因征其所自。
现代文：独孤彦又询问他们从何处来。
English: Dokko also asked them where they came from.

古文：黑衣者曰：吾之先，本卢氏，吾少以刚劲闻。
现代文：黑衣人说：我的祖先原本姓卢。我年少时，以刚毅强劲而闻名。
English: The man in black said, "My ancestor's family name was originally Lu. When I was young, I was known for being strong and courageous.

古文：大凡物有滞而不通者，必侵犯以讦悟之。时皆谓我为 侵讦 ，因名之。
现代文：大概任何事物如果滞塞不通畅时，必须要用侵犯刺激的方法使他醒悟，人们都叫我 侵讦 ，所以便以侵讦作为自己的名字。
English: If there is a blockage in the flow of anything, it is necessary to use the method of violating the stimulus to wake it up. People call me "encroachment," so I use "encroachment" as my name.

古文：其后适野，遇仇家击断，遂易姓甲氏，且逃其患。
现代文：后来到郊外，遇到敌人把我击断，就改为姓甲，以逃避祸患。
English: Later, when I went to the suburbs and encountered the enemy to defeat me, I changed my surname to A to escape the scourge.

古文：又吾素精药术，尝侍忝医之职。
现代文：我还精于医药知识，曾经当过一个不称职的医官。
English: I am also well versed in medical knowledge, having been an incompetent medical officer.

古文：非不能精熟，而升降上下，即假手于人。
现代文：不是不能精通医术，而是升降上下，都要求助于别人。
English: It's not that they can't be proficient in medicine, but they ask for help from everyone.

古文：后以年老力衰，上欲以我为折腰吏，吾固辞免，退居田间。
现代文：再后来年老体衰，皇上想叫我作一个小官，我坚持辞掉，退居山林。
English: Later, when I was old and weak, the emperor wanted to make me a minor official, but I insisted on resigning and retiring to the mountains.

古文：吾有舅氏，常为同僚。其行止起居，未尝不俱。然我自摈弃，常思吾舅。
现代文：我舅舅曾经同在一个官署任职，他的行为品德都很好，然而我却离开了他，我如今还常常思念舅舅。
English: My uncle used to work with me in a government office. He was a man of good conduct and morals, but I left him. I still think about him often.

古文：直以用舍殊，致分不见矣。
现代文：只是因为愿做官还是愿归隐，志向不同，所以不能相见。
English: It's just that they can't see each other because they have different aspirations, whether they want to be an official or retire.

古文：今夕君子问我，我得以语平生事，幸何甚哉！
现代文：今天晚上，您询问我，使我有机会把平生的事都讲出来，感到非常高兴。
English: I am delighted that your inquiry this evening has given me the opportunity to tell you all about my life.

古文：语罢，曾元曰：吾之先，陶唐氏之后也。
现代文：曾元说：我的祖先是唐陶氏的后代，担任陶君的官职。
English: Zeng Yuan said: My ancestor was a descendant of the Tang Dao clan and held the official post of Tao Jun.

古文：唯陶唐之官，受姓于姚曾者，与子孙以字为氏，故为曾氏焉，我其后也。吾早从莱侯，居推署之职，职当要热。
现代文：因为是从姚曾那里接受的姓氏，所以让子孙用曾字为姓，所以就姓曾了。我早先跟随莱侯，担任推署，职位显赫重要。
English: Because it was the surname I received from Yao Zeng, I let my children and grandchildren use the Zeng character as their surname, so my surname became Zeng. I had earlier followed Lai Hou and served as an envoy, a position of great importance.

古文：素以褊躁，又当负气以凌上，由是遭下流沸腾之谤，因而解去。盖吾忠烈之罪。
现代文：我平素气量狭小，性情急躁，又好赌气违背上级的意途，由此遭受下流小人乱哄哄的诽谤，因此被免除官职，这都是我正直忠烈的罪过。
English: I am narrow-minded, quick-tempered, and a gambler who goes against the wishes of my superiors. As a result, I have been slandered by scurrilous villains. Therefore, I have been relieved of my official duties. These are all my honest and loyal sins.

古文：我自弃置，处尘土之间，且有年矣。
现代文：我从此被抛弃放置。处在尘土中间，已经很多年了。
English: I have been abandoned and left in the dust for many years.

古文：甘同瓦砾。岂敢他望乎？
现代文：我甘愿像瓦石一样，哪敢有其他的奢望呢？
English: I would like to be like a stone, how can I have any other hope?

古文：然日昔与吾父遭事。吾父性坚正，虽鼎镬不避其危。
现代文：然而过去我和父亲遭受祸事，我父亲性情坚强正直，即使鼎镬在前也不避危险。
English: However, in the past, my father and I have suffered misfortunes. My father has a strong and honest temperament, and he will not avoid danger even if he is in great danger.

古文：赒人之急，要赴汤蹈火，人亦以此重之。
现代文：为解除别人的急难，甘愿赴汤蹈火。人们也因此而器重他。
English: He is willing to go through thick and thin in order to help others out of their predicament. People respect him for this.

古文：今拘于旧职，窘若囚系。
现代文：现在他拘守原职，窘困得像监狱里的囚犯一样。
English: Now he's stuck in his job, as miserable as a prison inmate.

古文：余以父弃掷之故，不近于父，迨今亦数岁。
现代文：因为被父亲抛弃的缘故，我不亲近父亲已经有好几年了。
English: I haven't been close to my father for years because he abandoned me.

古文：足下有问，又安敢默乎？
现代文：你询问我，我又怎样敢沉默不语呢！
English: How dare I be silent when you interrogate me!

古文：语未卒，寺僧俱归。
现代文：话没说完，寺院里的和尚都回来了。
English: Before the words were out, all the monks in the temple had returned.

古文：二人见之，若有所惧，即驰去，数十步已亡见矣。
现代文：那两个人看见他们，似乎很害怕，立即跑着离去，只跑了十几步远就看不见了。
English: When the two men saw them, they seemed to be very scared and immediately ran away. After only a dozen steps, they were out of sight.

古文：彦讯僧，僧曰：吾居此寺且久，未尝见焉，惧为怪耳。
现代文：独孤彦向和尚询问那两个人的来历，一个和尚说：我居住在这里很多年了，从未见过这俩人，恐怕是妖怪吧。
English: Dokukohiko asked a monk about the origin of the two people. One monk said, "I have lived here for many years and have never seen these two people. I'm afraid they are monsters."

古文：彦奇其才，且异之，因祈其名氏。久而悟曰：所闻曾元者，岂非 甑 乎？夫文，以 瓦附 曾 ，是 甑 字也。
现代文：独孤彦赞叹那两个人的学识，也感到有些怪异。他思索那两个人的姓名，许久才明白。他说：曾元，难道不是甑吗？ 瓦 字加个 曾 字是 甑 字。
English: Duk Guohan admired the knowledge of the two people and also felt a little strange. He thought about the names of the two people for a long time before he understood. He said: Zengyuan, isn't it? Adding the tile character Zengyuan is.

古文：以 截 附 全 ，是 铁 字也。
现代文：名叫元，大概是用瓦字中的一划，放到瓦字上面，它的意义就在这儿了。
English: The name "Yuan" is probably a stroke from the tile character, placed on top of the tile character, and its meaning is here.

古文：总而辩焉，得非甑及铁杵耶！
现代文：甲侵讦，难道不是铁杵吗，午木是 杵 字，姓甲是取自东方甲乙木，排行第五，也是 午 字的谐音。
English: A encroaches on Xuan, isn't it iron Xuan? The Chinese character for noon is, and the surname A is taken from the Oriental character甲乙木, ranking fifth, and is also a homophone of 午.

古文：明日，即命穷其迹，果于朽坏中，得一杵而铁者。
现代文：而金截， 截 附 金 字旁，是铁字。综合起来分析，不正是甑和铁杵吗！
English: However, next to the words "金截" and "截 附金" is the word "铁." Taken together, isn't that exactly "" and "铁"?

古文：又一甑自中分，盖用之余者。彦大异之，尽符其解也。
现代文：第二天，他叫人寻找那两个人的踪迹，果然在腐朽的倒墙中，找到一个铁杵和一个中间裂开一条缝的甑，都是被人用过废弃的。完全符合其推论，使独孤彦大为惊异。
English: The next day, he asked someone to look for traces of the two people, and sure enough, in the decaying fallen wall, they found a shovel and a spade with a slit in the middle, both of which had been used and discarded by someone.

古文：姚康成
现代文：姚康成
English: Yao Kangcheng

古文：太原掌书记姚康成，奉使之汧陇。
现代文：太原掌书记官姚康成，奉命到汧陇。
English: Yao Kangcheng, the chief secretary of Taiyuan, was ordered to go to the capital.

古文：会节使交代，八蕃使回，邮馆填咽。遂假邢君牙旧宅，设中室，以为休息之所。
现代文：正赶上节使替换，出使少数民族地区的使臣返回，所以驿站的客馆拥挤，姚康成便借邢君牙的旧宅，布置安排一些生活用具，作为休息的地方。
English: It was just in time for the replacement of the envoys, and the envoys from ethnic minority areas were returning, so the guest house of the station was crowded. Yao Kangcheng borrowed the old house of Zou Junya and arranged some daily necessities as a place to rest.

古文：其宅久空废，庭木森然。
现代文：那个房子空废很久了，庭院中树木森森。
English: The house had been vacant for a long time, and the yard was overgrown with trees.

古文：康成昼为公宴所牵，夜则醉归，及明复出，未尝暂歇于此。
现代文：姚康成白天忙于应酬赴宴，晚上喝醉了才回来，到天明又出去，未曾在这里好好休息。
English: During the day, Yao Kangcheng was busy with entertaining and going to banquets. He came back drunk in the evening, and went out again at dawn. He never had a good rest here.

古文：一夜，自军城归早，其属有博戏之会，故得不醉焉。
现代文：一天晚上，他回来得早一点，他部下赌博聚会去了，所以他没有喝醉。
English: One night he came back early and his men had gone to a gambling party, so he wasn't drunk.

古文：而坐堂中，因命茶，又复召客，客无至者。乃命馆人取酒，遍赐仆使，以慰其道路之勤。
现代文：他坐在厅上叫人上茶，想找个朋友来也没找到，就叫驿站的侍从拿来酒，赏赐给每一个仆人，对他们一路上的辛勤侍奉表示慰劳。
English: He sat in the hall and called for tea. He was looking for a friend, but when he couldn't find one, he asked the waiter at the station to bring him some wine. He gave it to each of his servants as a token of his appreciation for their hard work.

古文：既而皆醉，康成就寝。
现代文：不一会大家都醉了，姚康成也躺下休息。
English: Soon everyone was drunk, and Yao Kangcheng lay down to rest.

古文：二更后，月色如练，因披衣而起，出于宅门，独步移时，方归入院。
现代文：二更以后，月色像洁白的绢。他穿衣服起来，走出宅院的大门，独自散步多时才返回宅院。
English: Two moons later, the moon was as white as snow. He got dressed, walked out of the gate of the mansion, and took a long walk alone before returning to the mansion.

古文：遥见一人，入一廊房内，寻闻数人饮乐之声。
现代文：这时他远远看见院子里有一个人进入一间空房子里，不久又听到几个人喝酒说笑的声音。
English: In the distance, he saw a man in the courtyard enter an empty house, and soon heard the sounds of several people drinking and laughing.

古文：康成乃蹑履而听之，聆其言语吟啸，即非仆夫也。
现代文：姚康成轻轻地走过去倾听，听到有人吟诗，知道不会是仆人。
English: Yao Kangcheng gently walked over to listen, heard someone chanting, and knew it couldn't be a servant.

古文：因坐于门侧，且窥伺之。仍闻曰：诸公知近日时人所作，皆务一时巧丽。
现代文：于是他坐到门房，偷偷地观看这些人，听到其中一人说：各位知道近来当代文人的作品，都是追求辞藻的华丽。
English: So he sat in the gatehouse and secretly watched these people, and heard one of them say: "You all know that the works of recent contemporary writers are all in pursuit of rhetorical splendor.

古文：其于托情喻己。体物赋怀，皆失之矣。
现代文：在寄托情感，表达见解，描写事物和抒发志向上都明显不足。
English: There is a distinct lack of emphasis on emotions, expressing opinions, describing things and expressing aspirations.

古文：皆曰善。乃见一人，细长而甚黑，吟曰：昔人炎炎徒自知，今无烽灶欲何为。
现代文：又说：现在我们三个人可以各自赋诗一首，以增加酒兴。几个人都表示赞成。这时姚康成看见一个人，身材细长而面色黝黑，吟诵说：昔人炎炎徒自知，今无烽灶欲何为。
English: He also said, "Now the three of us can each compose a poem to increase the enjoyment of drinking." Several people agreed. At this time, Yao Kangcheng saw a person, slender and dark-skinned, chanting: "The old-timers know what they want to do now."

古文：可怜国柄全无用，曾见人人下第时。
现代文：可怜国柄全无用，曾见人人下第时。
English: Pity the useless national character, which has seen everyone fail.

古文：又见一人，亦长细而黄，面多疮孔，而吟曰：当时得意气填心，一曲君前值万金。
现代文：又见一个人，身材细长而面色微黄，上面还有很多疮孔，吟诵道：当时得意气填心，一曲君前值万金。
English: I also saw a person, with a slender body and a yellowish complexion, with many sores on it, chanting: At that time, I was full of pride, and one song was worth a million dollars.

古文：今日不如庭下竹，风来犹得学龙吟。
现代文：今日不如庭下竹，风来犹得学龙吟。
English: Today is not as good as the bamboo under the courtyard, the wind has come to Judah to learn dragon singing.

古文：又一人肥短，鬓发垂散，而吟曰：头焦鬓秃但心存，力尽尘埃不复论。
现代文：最后一个人肥胖粗矮，鬓发垂散，他吟诵说：头焦鬓秃但心存，力尽尘埃不复论。
English: The last man was fat, short and stout, with long hair hanging loose. He chanted, "My head is scorched and bald, but my heart is with you. I'll do my best and never give up."

古文：莫笑今来同腐草，曾经终日扫朱门。
现代文：莫笑今来同腐草，曾经终日扫朱门。
English: Mo Xiao now comes from the same rotten grass, he used to sweep the door all day.

古文：康成不觉失声，大赞其美。因推门求之，则皆失矣。
现代文：姚康成不觉失声叫了一声好，对他们的诗表示赞美，然后推开门进去找他们，但是这些人都不见了。
English: Unconsciously, Yao Kangcheng shouted a greeting, praised their poems, and then pushed open the door to look for them, but they were all gone.

古文：俟晓，召舒吏询之，曰：近并无此色人。
现代文：等到天亮，姚康找来驿站的官员询问那几个人的来历。官员回答：近来没有这样的人。
English: At dawn, Yao Kang asked the official of the station to inquire about the origin of those people. The official replied that there was no such person recently.

古文：康心疑其必魅精也，遂寻其处。
现代文：姚康成怀疑他们是鬼魅，于是便寻找他们的踪迹。
English: Suspecting that they were ghosts, Yao Kangcheng searched for their tracks.

古文：方见有铁铫子一柄，破笛一管，一秃黍穰帚而已。
现代文：看见有一柄烧水烫酒用的铫子，一管破笛子，一把秃头扫帚。
English: He saw a pair of tongs used to boil water and heat wine, a broken flute, and a bald broom.

古文：康成不欲伤之，遂各埋于他处。
现代文：姚康成不想伤害他们，就叫人将他们分别埋了。
English: Yao Kangcheng didn't want to hurt them, so he had them buried separately.

古文：马举
现代文：马举
English: Ma Hui

古文：马举镇淮南日，有人携一棋局献之，皆饰以珠玉。
现代文：马举镇守淮南的时候，有一个人携带一个镶嵌着珍珠宝玉石的棋盘献给他。
English: When Ma held the town of Huainan, there was a person who carried a chessboard inlaid with pearl gemstones to dedicate to him.

古文：举与钱千万而纳焉。
现代文：马举给了那人很多钱把棋盘收下了。
English: Ma gave the man a lot of money and took the board.

古文：数日，忽失其所在。
现代文：过了几天，棋盘忽然不见了。
English: A few days later, the board suddenly disappeared.

古文：举命求之，未得。
现代文：马举叫人寻找，但没有找到。
English: A search was launched, but nothing was found.

古文：而忽有一叟，策杖诣门，请见举。
现代文：一天忽然有一个拄着拐杖的老头来到门前求见马举。
English: One day, an old man on crutches suddenly came to the door asking to see the horse.

古文：多言兵法，举遥坐以问之。
现代文：老头谈论的大多是兵法，马举坐在离他很远的位置询问他。
English: The old man mostly talked about military tactics, and Ma Huo sat far away from him and questioned him.

古文：叟曰：方今正用兵之时也，公何不求兵机战术，而将御寇仇。
现代文：老头说：当今正是用兵的时候，你为什么不研究战略战术呢？你要防御敌寇的入侵。
English: The old man said: Today is the time to use soldiers, why don't you study strategy and tactics? You have to defend against the invasion of the enemy.

古文：若不如是，又何作镇之为也？
现代文：若不这样，你镇守此地又有什么作为呢？
English: If not, what are you doing to defend this place?

古文：公曰：仆且治疲民，未暇于兵机战法也。幸先生辱顾，其何以教之？
现代文：马举说：我忙于治理疲弱的百姓，没有时间研究兵法战策，幸亏先生屈尊赶来，你有什么指教呢？
English: Maju said, "I am busy with governing the weak people, and have no time to study military tactics. Fortunately, sir deigned to come. Do you have any advice?"

古文：老叟曰：夫兵法不可废也，废则乱生，乱生则民疲，而治则非所闻。
现代文：老头说：用兵的法度和策略不可松懈和废止，荒废了就会产生混乱，混乱会导致人民贫困疲惫，那时候再去治理就困难了。
English: The old man said: the rules and strategies for the use of force must not be relaxed or abolished. If they are abandoned, chaos will ensue. Chaos will lead to the people's poverty and exhaustion. At that time, it will be difficult to govern.

古文：曷若先以法而治兵，兵治而后将校精，将校精而后士卒勇。
现代文：何不先来治兵呢？治兵以后将校精干，将校精干以后士兵勇敢。
English: Why not take care of the soldiers first? After taking care of the soldiers, the officers will be capable, and after the officers are capable, the soldiers will be brave.

古文：且夫将校者，在乎识虚盈，明向背，冒矢石，触锋刃也。
现代文：作为将校，重要的在于能够识别虚实，明辩人心的向背，敢于冒险冲锋，拼杀格斗。
English: As an officer, the important thing is to be able to recognize the truth and falsehood, to be able to argue back and forth, to dare to take risks, and to fight.

古文：士卒者，在乎赴汤蹈火，出死入生，不旋踵而一焉。
现代文：而士兵呢，要不怕赴汤蹈火，出生入死，不临阵逃跑。
English: A soldier, on the other hand, is not afraid to go through thick and thin, from birth to death, and to run away from battle.

古文：今公既为列藩连帅，当有为帅之才，不可旷职也。
现代文：现在您既然位列藩镇，身为主帅，就应具备帅才而不可失职。
English: Now that you are ranked as a han town and you are the head coach, you should have talent and not be derelict in your duties.

古文：举曰：敢问为帅之事何如？
现代文：马举说：那么主帅应当干些什么呢？
English: Ma said: So what should a manager do?

古文：叟曰：夫为帅也，必先取胜地，次对于敌军。
现代文：老头说：做主帅的，一定要首先夺取有利地势，其次是对付敌军。
English: The old man said, "If you want to be a manager, you must first seize a favorable situation, and then deal with the enemy.

古文：用一卒，必思之于生死。见一路，必察之于出入。
现代文：使用一名士兵，一定先考虑他的生死；遇见道路一定要先想好进退。
English: If you use a soldier, you must first consider his life and death; if you meet a road, you must first think about how to advance and retreat.

古文：至于冲关入劫，虽军中之余事，亦不可忘也。
现代文：说到破关打阵，以及军中的其事情，也都不可忽视。
English: When it comes to breaking the deadlock, as well as its affairs in the army, it can not be ignored.

古文：仍有全小而舍大，急杀而屡逃。
现代文：还有为了保全一小部分，反而损失大部，急躁杀敌反而屡次失败的情况。
English: There are also cases in which, in order to preserve a small part, a large part is lost, and in the haste to kill the enemy, there are repeated failures.

古文：据其险地，张其疑兵。
现代文：占据险要的地势，布置疑惑敌人的兵力。
English: Occupy the critical terrain, placing doubt on the enemy's strength.

古文：妙在急攻，不可持疑也。
现代文：妙在急速进攻，不可疑心过重或犹豫寡断。
English: The secret is to attack quickly, without hesitation or hesitation.

古文：其或迟速未决，险易相悬，前进不能，差须求活。
现代文：强弱险易相差悬殊无法前进时，要寻求退路，保存力量。
English: When the gap between the strong and the weak is so great that it is impossible to move forward, it is necessary to seek a way out and preserve strength.

古文：屡胜必败，慎在欺敌。若深测此术，则为帅之道毕矣。
现代文：骄兵必败，不可轻敌，如果深刻地领会掌握这些原则，便是具备了作主帅的知识。
English: If you deeply understand and master these principles, you will have the knowledge to be a manager.

古文：举惊异之，谓叟曰：先生何许人？
现代文：马举非常惊奇，问老头说：先生是哪里人？
English: The horse was very surprised and asked the old man, "Where is your master from?"

古文：何学之深耶？
现代文：为什么有这么高深的学问呢？
English: Why is there such a high level of knowledge?

古文：叟曰：余南山木强之人也。自幼好奇尚异，人人多以为有韬玉含珠之誉。
现代文：老头说：我是南山的倔强人，自幼就喜欢标新立异，人们都认为我胸怀韬略，口含珠宝。
English: The old man said, "I am a strong-willed person from Nanshan. Since I was a child, I have been fond of innovating. People think I am conceited and have jewels in my mouth.

古文：屡经战争，故尽识兵家之事。
现代文：因为我屡经战事，所以熟悉用兵之法。
English: Because I have experienced war many times, I am familiar with the use of force.

古文：但乾坤之内，物无不衰。况假合之体，殊不坚牢，岂得更久耶？
现代文：但是天地之间，事物没有不衰败的，况且乌合之众，很不牢固，怎么能长久呢？
English: But between heaven and earth, there are no things that do not decay, and moreover, the rabble is very unstable, how can it last?

古文：聊得晤言，一述兵家之要耳，幸明公稍留意焉。
现代文：我们见面所说的，都是用兵打仗的要点，希望能够引起您一点注意。
English: What we talked about when we met are the main points of using soldiers to fight a war. I hope I can get your attention.

古文：因遽辞，公坚留，延于客馆。
现代文：说完就要告辞，马举坚决挽留，把他请到馆驿休息。
English: When he had finished, he had to say his farewells, but Ma Hui resolutely held him back and invited him to the pavilion to rest.

古文：至夜，令左右召之，见室内唯一棋局耳，乃是所失之者。
现代文：到了晚上，马举叫左右的人去请老头，只看见室内有一个棋盘，就是丢失的那个。
English: In the evening, the horse called out to the people around to invite the old man, only to see that there was a chessboard in the room, which was the lost one.

古文：公知其精怪，遂令左右以古镜照之，棋局忽跃起，坠地而碎，似不能变化。
现代文：马举知道它是精怪，就命令左右的人用古镜照它。棋盘忽然跳起来，落到地上摔碎了，好象不能变化了。
English: Knowing that it was rare, Ma Hui ordered the people around him to look at it with an antique mirror. The chessboard suddenly jumped up, fell to the ground and broke, as if it could not be changed.

古文：公甚惊异，乃令尽焚之。
现代文：马举很惊异，命令人把棋盘碎块烧光。
English: The mahjong master was surprised and ordered the pieces of the board to be burned.

古文：吉州渔者
现代文：吉州渔者
English: Fisherman from Chizhou

古文：吉州龙兴观有巨钟，上有文曰：晋元康年铸。
现代文：吉州龙兴观有一口巨大的古钟，钟上铸有一行字：晋元康年铸造。
English: There is a huge ancient bell in Longxingguan, Jizhou, with a line of characters on the bell: "Forged in the reign of Emperor Jingu."

古文：钟顶有一窍，古老相传，则天时，钟声震长安。遂有诏凿之，其窍是也。
现代文：大钟顶上有一个洞，相传是武则天的时候，钟声震动长安，于是武则天命令凿坏它，大概就是这个洞了。
English: There is a hole at the top of the big clock. According to legend, when Wu Zetian was at the top, the bell shook Chang'an, so Wu Zetian ordered it to be broken. This is probably the hole.

古文：天祐年中，忽一夜失钟所在，至旦如故。
现代文：天祐年的一天晚上，大钟突然丢失，第二天早晨又回到原处。
English: One evening in the year of heaven, the big clock was suddenly lost, and the next morning it returned to its original place.

古文：见蒲牢有血痕并焄草，焄草者，江南水草也，叶如薤，随水浅深而生。观前大江，数夜，居人闻江水风浪之声。至旦，有渔者，见江心有一红旗，水上流下。渔者棹小舟往接取之，则见金鳞光，波涛汹涌，渔者急回。始知蒲牢斗伤江龙
现代文：居住在龙兴观前长江边上的人们，有几天夜里都听到江水风浪的巨大响声。一天早晨，有一个渔人看见江心有一杆红旗，从上游飘下来，打鱼的人划着小船去取红旗，看见浪涛汹涌的水中鳞片闪着金光，打鱼的人急忙掉船回来。这才知道是神兽蒲牢咬伤了江龙。
English: One morning, a fisherman saw a red flag in the middle of the river, floating down from upstream. The fisherman rowed a small boat to get the red flag, saw the scales in the turbulent water glistening with gold, and the fisherman hurriedly got off the boat and came back. Only then did he know that it was the divine beast that had bitten the dragon.

古文：凶器上
现代文：凶器上
English: On the murder weapon

古文：梁氏
现代文：梁氏
English: Mr. Leung

古文：后魏洛阳阜财里，有开善寺，京兆人韦英宅也。
现代文：后魏洛阳阜财里，有座开善寺，原来是京城人韦英的住宅。
English: In the post-Wei Luoyang Fuchai, there is a Kaizen Temple, which was originally the residence of Wei Ying, a resident of Beijing.

古文：英早卒，其妻梁，不治丧而嫁，更纳河内向子集为夫。
现代文：韦英很早就死了，他的妻子梁氏没有办理丧事就改嫁了，接纳黄河西的向子集为丈夫。
English: Wei Ying died a long time ago, and his wife, Liang, remarried without a funeral, and accepted Xiang Zixi from the west of the Yellow River as her husband.

古文：乘马，将数人，至于庭前，呼曰：阿梁，卿忘我也。
现代文：虽说她已改嫁，但仍然居住在韦英的房宅里。韦英得知梁氏改嫁，在一天白天，带领几个人，骑着马赶回来。韦英到院门外高喊：阿梁，你忘了我啦！
English: Although she had remarried, she still lived in Wei Ying's house. Wei Ying learned that Mr. Liang had remarried, and one day during the day, he led several people and rode back. Wei Ying shouted outside the courtyard door: Aliang, you have forgotten me!

古文：子集惊怖，张弓射之，应箭而倒，即变为桃人。
现代文：向子集惊慌害怕，拉开弓用箭射韦英。韦英中箭倒地，变成了桃木人。
English: Panicked and afraid, Xiangzi pulled out his bow and shot Wei Ying with an arrow. Wei Ying fell to the ground in the middle of the arrow and turned into a peach tree.

古文：所骑之马，亦化为茅马。
现代文：骑的马变成了茅草马。
English: The horse he was riding turned out to be a thatch horse.

古文：从者数人，尽为蒲人。
现代文：跟随的几个人也都是蒲草扎的。
English: Several of the people following him were also wearing a headdress.

古文：梁氏惶惧，舍宅为寺。
现代文：梁氏害怕，舍弃房宅捐作寺院。
English: Afraid, Mr. Liang gave up his house and donated it to a temple.

古文：曹惠
现代文：曹惠
English: Cao Hui

古文：武德初，有曹惠为江州参军。
现代文：唐高祖武德初年，曹惠任江州参军。
English: In the first year of Tang Gao Zuwude, Cao Hui joined the army in Jiangzhou.

古文：官舍有佛堂，堂中有二木偶人，长尺余，雕饰甚巧妙，丹青剥落。
现代文：官府有一座佛堂，堂里两个木偶人，一尺多长，雕刻装饰巧妙精致，但丹青涂色已经剥落。
English: There is a Buddhist temple in the government office. There are two puppet figures in the hall, more than a foot long, the carving decoration is ingenious and exquisite, but the livid paint has peeled off.

古文：惠因持归与稚儿。
现代文：曹惠就拿回家给小孩玩。
English: Cao Hui took it home to play with her children.

古文：后稚儿方食饼，木偶引手请之。
现代文：后来小孩吃饼，木偶也伸手要饼。
English: Later, the child eats the cake and the puppet reaches out for the cake.

古文：儿惊报惠，惠笑曰：取木偶来。
现代文：小孩惊讶地告诉曹惠，曹惠笑着说：拿木偶来。
English: The child told Cao Hui in surprise. Cao Hui smiled and said, "Bring the puppet."

古文：即言曰：轻素自有名，何呼木偶？
现代文：木偶立即说：轻素我自有名字，为什么叫我木偶？
English: The puppet immediately said: I have my own name, why do you call me a puppet?

古文：于是转盼驰走，无异于人。
现代文：并且转动着眼睛奔跑，和人没有什么两样。
English: And they run with their eyes rolling, just like humans.

古文：惠问曰：汝何时物，颇能作怪？
现代文：曹惠问她说：你是什么时代的妖物？很能作怪！
English: Cao Hui asked her: "What era are you from? You are very good at playing tricks!"

古文：轻素与轻红曰：是宣城太守谢家俑偶。
现代文：木偶轻素和轻红说：是宣城太守谢朓陪葬的木俑。
English: The puppets, Light So and Light Red, said, "It is the wooden coffin of Xuancheng's governor, Xie Jun, who was buried with him."

古文：当时天下工巧，皆不及沈隐侯家老苍头孝忠也。轻素、轻红，即孝忠所造。
现代文：当时天下的能工巧匠都比不上沈隐侯沈约家的老仆人孝忠，轻素、轻红就是孝忠制造的。
English: At that time, all the skilled craftsmen in the world were no match for the old servant of the Shen Yojia family, Xiaozhong. Xiaozhong was made by Xiaozhong.

古文：隐侯哀宣城无常，葬日故有此赠。
现代文：沈隐侯哀伤谢朓早逝，所以埋葬谢朓时就放入木偶侍女。
English: Shen Ying Hou was saddened by Xie Yao's early death, so when he buried Xie Yao, he put in a puppet maid.

古文：时素圹中，方持汤与乐夫人濯足，闻外有持兵称敕声。
现代文：一天轻素在墓中，正拿热水给乐夫人洗脚，忽然听到外面有拿着武器的人呼唤命令的声音。
English: One day in the tomb, he was taking hot water to wash Madame Le's feet, when he suddenly heard the voice of a man with a weapon shouting orders outside.

古文：夫人畏惧，跣足化为白蝼。
现代文：乐夫人害怕。光着脚变成了白髅骷。
English: Mrs. Le was scared. Her bare feet turned white.

古文：少顷，二贼执炬至，尽掠财物。
现代文：过了一会有两个盗贼拿着火把进来，把墓中财物盗走。
English: After a while, two thieves with torches came in and stole the goods from the grave.

古文：谢郎持舒瑟瑟环，亦为贼敲颐脱之。
现代文：谢朓戴的项圈，也被盗贼敲碎脸颊拿走。
English: The collar worn by Xie Rong was also taken away by the thieves, who smashed his cheek.

古文：贼人照见轻红等曰： 二明器不恶，可与小儿为戏具。
现代文：盗贼用火把照着轻素和轻红说： 这两个东西不坏，可以给小孩玩。于是拿了出去。
English: The thief shined a torch on the light blue and light red and said, "These two things are not bad, they can be played with by children." So he took them out.

古文：遂持出，时天平二年也。
现代文：当时是东魏孝敬天平二年。
English: At that time, it was the second year of the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：自尔流落数家。陈末，麦铁杖犹子将至此。
现代文：流落了几家以后，到陈朝末年，麦铁杖的侄子又把我们带到这里。
English: After several families had been displaced, at the end of the Chen dynasty, Mu Tiexue's nephew brought us here again.

古文：惠又问曰：曾闻谢宣城婚王敬则女，尔何遽云乐夫人？
现代文：曹惠又问：听说谢朓娶的是王敬则的女儿，你为什么说是乐夫人呢？
English: Cao Hui also asked: I heard that Xie Jun married the daughter of Wang Jingzhe, why do you say that she is Lady Le?

古文：轻素曰：王氏乃生前之妻，乐氏乃冥婚耳。
现代文：轻素说：王氏是生前的妻子，乐氏是阴间的婚配。
English: Lightly said: Wang is the wife of life, Le is the marriage partner of the underworld.

古文：王氏本屠酤种，性粗率多力，至冥中，犹与宣城不睦。
现代文：王氏本是屠户家的后代，性情直率粗鲁，到了阴曹地府，还和谢朓不和。
English: Originally a descendant of a family of butchers, the Wang clan was blunt and rude. When they arrived at Yin Cao Di Fu, they had a falling out with Xie Yao.

古文：伺宣城严颜，则磔石拄关，以为威胁。
现代文：她对待谢太守态度恶劣，用拿石头砸门的方法来威胁他。
English: She treated Xie Taizhong with a bad attitude and threatened him by smashing the door with a rock.

古文：宣城自密启于天帝，许逐之，二女一男，悉随母归矣。
现代文：谢朓秘密地报告了天帝，天帝允许驱逐她，两个女孩和一个男孩都随母亲回娘家了。
English: Xie Yao secretly reported to Heavenly Father, Heavenly Father allowed her to be expelled, and the two girls and one boy all returned to their mother's home with their mother.

古文：遂再娶乐彦辅第八女，美姿质，善书，好弹琴，尤与殷东阳仲文、谢荆州晦夫人相得，日恣追寻。
现代文：于是又娶了乐彦辅的第八个女儿。乐夫人姿质美丽，善书法，喜好弹琴，尤其是和东阳太守殷仲文、荆州刺史谢晦的夫人相处很好，谢朓和乐夫人每天形影不离。
English: So he married the eighth daughter of Le Yanfu. Mrs. Le is beautiful, good at calligraphy, and likes to play the piano. In particular, she gets along well with the wives of Dongyang Grand Empress Dowager Yin Zhongwen and Jingzhou Empress Dowager Xie Yu. Xie Yu and Mrs. Le are inseparable every day.

古文：宣城常云：我才方古词人，唯不及东阿耳。
现代文：谢朓常说：我的才华同古词人相比，只是不如曹植。
English: Xie Yao often said: "Compared to ancient poets, my talent is just not as good as Cao Zhi."

古文：其余文士，皆吾机中之肉，可以宰割矣。
现代文：其他的文人，都是我案子上的肉，可以任意宰割。
English: Other writers are the meat on my case and can be slaughtered at will.

古文：见为南曹典铨郎，与潘黄门同列，乘肥衣轻，贵于生前百倍。
现代文：现在谢朓任南曹典铨郎，与潘黄门的府第一样，骑骏马，穿皮衣，比生前富贵百倍。
English: Now, Xie Yu is the Nanzao Noritaka, riding a fine horse and wearing a fur coat, just like the ruler of Panhuangmen. He is a hundred times richer than he was before he died.

古文：然十月一朝晋宋齐梁，可以为劳，近闻亦已停矣。
现代文：十个月朝拜一次晋宋齐梁，他可以效劳，听说近来已经停止了。
English: Jin Song Qi Liang once paid homage to the emperor for ten months. He could be of service, but I heard that he had recently stopped doing so.

古文：惠又问曰：汝二人灵异若此，吾欲舍汝如何？
现代文：曹惠又说：你二人如此灵异，我想放了你们怎么样？
English: Cao Hui also said, "You two are so brilliant, how about if I let you go?"

古文：即皆言曰：以轻素等变化，虽无不可，君意如不放，终不能逃。
现代文：轻素和轻红立即回答：虽然凭着我们的变化，这没有什么做不到的。但是如果您的意思不想放，我们终究无法逃脱。
English: Light and light red immediately replied: Although with our changes, there is nothing that can't be done. But if you don't want to let go, we can't escape after all.

古文：庐山山神，欲取轻素为舞姬久矣，今此奉辞，便当受彼荣富。
现代文：庐山山神早就想要我们俩去作舞妓，如今可以领命告辞了。
English: Hatakeyama-sanshin has long wanted the two of us to become maiko, and now we can take our leave.

古文：然君能终恩，请命画工，便赐粉黛。
现代文：我们应当给予你荣华富贵，如果您能最终成全我们，就请您找画工重新给我们画妆。
English: We should give you glory and wealth. If you can finally perfect us, please find an artist to redo our makeup.

古文：惠即令工人为图之，使摛锦绣。
现代文：曹惠立刻命令画工为她俩涂漆，使她们的面容服饰焕然一新。
English: Cao Hui immediately ordered the painter to paint the two of them to make their faces and clothes look brand new.

古文：轻素笑曰：此度非论舞伎，亦当彼夫人。
现代文：轻素笑着说：这回不是谈论舞女的时候了，应当是庐山山神的夫人。
English: Lightly smiling, she said, "This is not the time to talk about a dancer, it should be the wife of the god of Lushan Mountain."

古文：无以奉酬，请以微言留别。
现代文：用什么来报答您呢？
English: What do you get in return?

古文：百代之中。但以他人会者，无不为忠臣，居大位矣。
现代文：请让我们说几句隐语作为临别赠言： 百代之中，但以他人会者，无不为忠臣，居大位矣。
English: Please let us say a few cryptic words as a parting gift: Among the hundreds of generations, but with other participants, all are loyal subjects, ranking high.

古文：鸡角入骨，紫鹤吃黄鼠。申不害。五通泉室。为六代吉昌。
现代文：鸡角入骨，紫鹤吃黄鼠，申不害，五通泉室，为六代吉昌。
English: Chicken horns into bones, purple cranes eat weasels, Shin is not harmful, Wotong spring room, for the sixth generation of Jichang.

古文：后有人祷庐山神，女巫言神君新纳二妾，要翠钗花簪，汝宜求之，当降大福。
现代文：后来有人祭祀庐山神时，女巫说山神新娶两个小妾，要翠钗花簪，你应该为他找来，山神会降福给你。
English: Later, when someone was offering a sacrifice to the mountain god, the witch said that the mountain god had just married two concubines, and that he wanted jade and jade flowers. You should find them for him, and the mountain god would give you a blessing.

古文：祷者求而焚之，遂如愿焉。
现代文：祈祷的人找到后送去焚烧了，果然如愿以偿。
English: The praying man was found and sent to be burned, and his wish came true.

古文：惠亦不能知其微言，访之时贤，皆不悟。
现代文：曹惠不能理解轻素隐语的意思，求教于有学问的人，都解释不了。
English: Cao Hui couldn't understand the meaning of the light-hearted cryptic, and couldn't explain it to the learned people.

古文：或云，中书令岑文本识其三句，亦不为人说。
现代文：有人说，中书令岑文本理解其中三句话，但不为别人解说。
English: Some people said that they understood three sentences in the text of the Chinese edict, but did not explain them to others.

古文：窦不疑
现代文：窦不疑
English: Dou Doubtless

古文：武德功臣孙窦不疑，为中郎将，告老归家。家在太原，宅于北郭阳曲县。
现代文：唐高祖武德功臣的孙子窦不疑任中郎将，他告老还乡回到太原，他家的住宅在北城阳曲县。
English: Dou, the grandson of Tang Gao, the founder of martial arts and a meritorious subject, undoubtedly served as a middle-ranking general. He returned to Taiyuan at an old age, and his family's residence was in Beicheng Yangqu County.

古文：不疑为人勇，有胆力，少而任侠。
现代文：窦不疑胆大勇敢，少年时就很侠义。
English: Dou is undoubtedly bold and brave, and he was very chivalrous when he was a boy.

古文：常结伴十数人，斗鸡走狗，樗蒲一掷数万，皆以意气相期。
现代文：经常聚集十多个人斗鸡斗狗，赌博时一掷几万，全凭义气相互交往。
English: They often gather more than ten people to fight cocks and dogs, throw tens of thousands at a time when gambling, and interact with each other entirely on the basis of righteousness.

古文：而太原城东北数里，常有道鬼，身长二丈。每阴雨昏黑后，多出。
现代文：太原城东北几里远的地方，道上经常闹鬼，鬼的身高两丈，经常在阴雨天昏黑的夜晚出现。
English: A few miles to the northeast of Taiyuan City, there are often ghosts on the road. The ghosts are tall and often appear in the dark on cloudy and rainy nights.

古文：人见之，或怖而死。
现代文：许多人都看见过这个鬼，有的人还被吓死了。
English: Many people have seen this ghost, and some have been scared to death.

古文：诸少年言曰：能往射道鬼者，与钱五千。
现代文：少年们都说：能够前去射死路上鬼的人，给赏钱五千贯。
English: The boys all said: Anyone who can go and shoot dead a ghost on the road will be rewarded with five thousand kan.

古文：余人无言，唯不疑请行。
现代文：人们听了都不说话，只有窦不疑要去。
English: People don't say anything when they hear it, but Dou is sure to go.

古文：迨昏而往。众曰：此人出城便潜藏，而夜绐我以射，其可信乎？
现代文：黄昏时窦不疑出发，大家说：他要是出城后就暗中藏起来，而后欺骗我们说已用箭射了，难道我们就相信吗？
English: At dusk Dou set out without hesitation. Everyone said: "If he went out of the city and hid himself secretly, and then deceived us by saying that he had been shot with an arrow, would we believe him?

古文：盍密随之？
现代文：我们何不秘密地跟在他的后面？
English: Why don't we secretly follow him?

古文：不疑既至魅所，鬼正出行。
现代文：窦不疑到了鬼魅出现的地方，鬼刚出来。
English: Dou no doubt got to the place where the ghost appeared, and the ghost just came out.

古文：不疑逐而射之，鬼被箭走。
现代文：窦不疑冲上去用箭射鬼，鬼中箭逃跑。
English: Dou no doubt rushed up to shoot the ghost with an arrow, and the ghost ran away with the arrow.

古文：不疑追之，凡中三矢，鬼自投于岸下，不疑乃还。
现代文：窦不疑继续追赶，一共射中三箭。鬼自己跳到河岸下，窦不疑返回。
English: Dou no doubt continued to pursue, shooting a total of three arrows. The ghost itself jumped under the riverbank, and Dou no doubt returned.

古文：诸人笑而迎之，谓不疑曰：吾恐子潜而绐我，故密随子，乃知子胆力若此。
现代文：少年们笑着迎接他，对他说：我们怕你藏起来欺骗我们，所以偷偷跟踪你，这才知道你胆量竟这么大。
English: The boys greeted him with a smile and said to him: "We were afraid that you would hide and deceive us, so we followed you secretly. That's how we knew you were so courageous."

古文：因授之财，不疑尽以饮焉。
现代文：于是把钱给了他，他全都用来喝酒了。
English: So I gave him the money and he spent it all on drink.

古文：明日，往寻所射岸下，得一方相，身则编荆也，其傍仍得三矢，自是道鬼遂亡，不疑亦从此以雄勇闻。
现代文：第二天，人们到河岸下寻找，找到一个驱疫避邪的神像，是用荆条编成的，它的旁边果然又找到三支箭。从这以后，道路上的鬼就消失了，窦不疑也从此以雄猛勇敢而闻名。
English: The next day, people searched under the riverbank and found a statue of the god of pestilence and evil prevention, made of reeds, and three arrows were found next to it. Since then, the ghosts on the road have disappeared, and Dou has undoubtedly been famous for his bravery.

古文：及归老，七十余矣，而意气不衰。
现代文：等到他告老还乡的时候已经七十多岁了，但是他的胆气不衰。
English: By the time he returned home, he was over seventy years old, but his courage never wavered.

古文：天宝二年冬十月，不疑往阳曲，从人饮，饮酣欲返，主苦留之。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝二年冬十月，窦不疑去阳曲同别人饮酒，喝醉了想回家，主人苦苦挽留。
English: In the winter of October of the second year of Tang Xuan Zong Tianbao, Dou no doubt went to Yangqu to drink with others, got drunk and wanted to go home, but his master struggled to hold him back.

古文：不疑尽令从者皆留，己独乘马，昏后归太原。
现代文：窦不疑命令从人都留下，自己独自骑马在黄昏后返回太原。
English: Dou no doubt ordered everyone to stay behind and rode back to Taiyuan alone after dusk.

古文：阳曲去州三舍，不疑驰还。其间则沙场也，狐狸鬼火丛聚，更无居人。
现代文：阳曲距太原州城九十里，窦不疑经过的道路是古战场，狐狸，鬼火聚集，没有人居住。
English: Yangqu is ninety miles away from the city of Taiyuan, Dou undoubtedly passed through the road is an ancient battlefield, foxes, ghost fires gather, no one lives.

古文：其夜，忽见道左右皆为店肆，连延不绝。
现代文：那天夜里窦不疑忽然看见道两旁都是店铺，连绵不断。
English: That night Dou suddenly saw that there were shops on both sides of the road, one after the other.

古文：时月满云薄，不疑怪之。
现代文：当时月明云薄，窦不疑觉得很奇怪。
English: At that time, the moon was not very bright, and Dou undoubtedly felt very strange.

古文：俄而店肆转众，有诸男女，或歌或舞，饮酒作乐，或结伴踏蹄。
现代文：不一会店铺变得更多，有很多男女在唱歌跳舞，饮酒作乐，还有人结伴按节奏踏脚。
English: Soon there were more shops, and many men and women were singing, dancing, drinking, and stomping their feet in unison.

古文：有童子百余人，围不疑马，踏蹄且歌，马不得行。
现代文：有小孩一百多人，包围了窦不疑的马，边跳边唱，马不能前进。
English: There are more than a hundred children, surrounded by horses that are not in doubt, jumping and singing, the horse can not move forward.

古文：道有树，不疑折其柯，长且大，以击。
现代文：窦不疑折断路旁树上的粗枝，用来击打包围他的人，这些人逃跑了。
English: Dou no doubt snapped a rough branch from a roadside tree to hit his captors, who fled.

古文：歌者走，而不疑得前。又至逆旅，复见二百余人，身长且大，衣服甚盛，来绕不疑，踏蹄歌焉。
现代文：窦不疑又往前走，再到一个旅店，又看见二百多人，身材又高又大，衣服很华丽，前来围绕窦不疑跳舞唱歌。
English: Dou Undoubtedly walked forward again, then to an inn, and saw more than two hundred people, tall and big, with gorgeous clothes, coming to dance and sing around Dou Undoubtedly.

古文：不疑大怒，又以树柯击之，长人皆失。
现代文：窦不疑大怒，又用树枝击打他们，高大的人消失了。
English: Dou was furious and hit them with a branch. The tall man disappeared.

古文：不疑恐，以所见非常，乃下道驰。
现代文：这时窦不疑开始感到有些害怕，认为看到的不是普通的人，想到村庄投宿。
English: At this time, Dou undoubtedly began to feel a little scared, thinking that what he saw was not an ordinary person, and thought of staying in the village.

古文：将投村野，忽得一处百余家，屋宇甚盛。
现代文：遇到一个一百多户人家的村庄，房屋建造得很好。
English: When I came across a village with more than a hundred families, the houses were well built.

古文：不疑叩门求宿，皆无人应，虽甚叫击，人犹不出。
现代文：窦不疑敲门投宿，全都没有人回应，他使劲敲打，仍然没有人出来。
English: Dou no doubt knocked on the door of the lodging, but no one responded. He knocked hard, but still no one came out.

古文：村中有庙，不疑入之，系马于柱，据阶而坐。
现代文：村中有座庙，窦不疑把马拴到柱子上，坐到台阶上。
English: There is a temple in the village, and Dou undoubtedly tied his horse to the pillar and sat on the steps.

古文：时朗月，夜未半，有妇人素服靓妆，突门而入，直向不疑再拜。
现代文：这时月光明亮，快到半夜时，有个女人穿着淡雅的服装，擦着脂粉破门而入，走过来给窦不疑行礼。
English: At this time, the moon was bright and bright, and it was almost midnight when a woman wearing a light dress, rubbed with talcum powder, broke through the door and came to Dou without hesitation.

古文：问之，妇人曰：吾见夫婿独居，故此相偶。
现代文：窦不疑问她是谁，她说：我知道我的丈夫独居，所以前来相伴。
English: Dou has no doubt who she is, she said: I know my husband lives alone, so I came to accompany him.

古文：不疑曰：孰为夫婿？
现代文：窦不疑说：谁是你的丈夫？
English: Dou said without hesitation, "Who is your husband?"

古文：妇人曰：公即其人也。不疑知是魅，击之，妇人乃去。
现代文：女人说：就是你啊！窦不疑知道她是鬼，上前打她，她才离开。
English: The woman said, "That's you! Dou knew without a doubt that she was a ghost, and he hit her before she left.

古文：厅房内有床，不疑息焉。
现代文：厅房内有床，窦不疑到床上休息。
English: There is a bed in the hall, and Dou has no doubt gone to bed to rest.

古文：忽梁间有物，坠于其腹，大如盆盎。
现代文：忽然房梁上有个怪物，坠到他的肚子上，大小像个盆。
English: Suddenly, there was a monster on the beam of the house, falling onto his stomach, the size of a basin.

古文：不疑殴之，则为犬音。
现代文：窦不疑打它，竟发出狗的叫声。
English: Dou no doubt hit it, but it let out a dog's howl.

古文：自投床下，化为火人，长二尺余，光明照耀，入于壁中，因尔不见。
现代文：窦不疑将它扔到床下，怪物变了一个火人，长二尺多，光辉照耀，进入墙壁中看不见了。
English: Dou no doubt threw it under the bed, and the monster turned into a Burning Man, more than two feet long, shining brightly, invisible through the walls.

古文：不疑又出户，乘马而去，遂得入林木中憩止，天晓不能去。
现代文：窦不疑走出门，骑马离开，终于找到一处树林进去休息，天亮以后已不能走路。
English: Dou undoubtedly walked out the door, rode away, and finally found a place in the woods to rest. After dawn, he could no longer walk.

古文：会其家求而得之，已愚且丧魂矣。
现代文：正好这时家里人来了，他已经失魂落魄的了。
English: Just then, his family arrived. He had lost his mind.

古文：舁之还，犹说其所见。乃病月余年。
现代文：回家后他讲述了见到的事，病了一个多月就死了。
English: After returning home, he recounted what he had seen and died after being ill for more than a month.

