古文：文王将田，史编布卜曰： 田于渭阳，将大得焉。
现代文：周文王姬昌准备外出打猎，太史编占卜以后说： 您这次到渭河北岸打猎，会有很大的收获。
English: Zhou Wen Wang Jichang was preparing to go out hunting. After divination, the great historian said: This time you go hunting on the north bank of the Wei River, you will have a great harvest.

古文：非龙、非螭，非虎、非罴，兆得公侯。
现代文：所获得的不是龙，不是螭，不是虎，也不是罴，而是要得到一位公侯之才。
English: What was won was not a dragon, not a dragonfly, not a tiger, not a dragonfly, but the talent of a prince.

古文：天遣汝师，以之佐昌，施及三王。 文王曰： 兆致是乎？ 
现代文：他是上天赐给您的老师，辅佐您成就功业，并将施恩加惠于您的子孙后代。 文王问： 占卜的结果真的这么好吗？ 
English: He is a teacher given to you by Heaven to assist you in accomplishing your work, and will extend his grace to your future generations.Wen Wang asked: Is the result of divination really so good?

古文：史编曰： 编之太祖史畴，为禹占，得皋陶兆比于此。 
现代文：史编回答说： 我的远祖太史畴曾经为禹占卜，也得到过这种卜兆。
English: The historian replied, "My great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-

古文：文王乃斋三日，乘田车，驾田马，田于渭阳，卒见太公，坐茅以渔。
现代文：今天的征兆和那次很相似。 文王于是斋戒三天，然后乘着猎车，驾着猎马，到渭水北岸打猎。在狩猎的时候，终于见到了正坐在长满茅草的河岸边钓鱼的姜太公。
English: Today's signs are very similar to that time. So King Wen fasted for three days, and then rode a hunting carriage and a hunting horse to the north shore of Surabaya to hunt. While hunting, he finally saw Jiang Taigong sitting on the bank of the river full of thatch and fishing.

古文：文王劳而问之曰： 子乐渔耶？ 
现代文：文王上前慰劳并询问： 先生喜欢钓鱼吗？ 
English: King Wen came forward to console him and asked: Does your teacher like fishing?

古文：太公曰： 臣闻君子乐得其志，小人乐得其事。
现代文：太公回答说： 我听说君子乐于实现自己的志向抱负，平凡人乐于做好自己愿意做的事情。
English: The father-in-law replied, "I have heard that a gentleman is happy to realize his aspirations, and an ordinary person is happy to do what he wants to do.

古文：今吾渔甚有似也，殆非乐之也。 文王曰： 何谓其有似也？ 
现代文：现在我钓鱼，跟这个道理很相似，并不是真正喜欢钓鱼这件事情。 文王问： 这两者之间有什么相似的地方呢？ 
English: Now that I am fishing, it is very similar to this, I don't really like fishing.Wen Wang asked: What are the similarities between the two?

古文：太公曰： 钓有三权；禄等以权，死等以权，官等以权。
现代文：太公回答说： 钓鱼比如人事，有三种权术。用厚禄收买人才，如同用诱饵钓鱼；用重金招揽勇士，让其慷慨赴死，也如同用诱饵钓鱼；用官职招揽人才，让其为自己效忠，也如同用诱饵钓鱼。
English: The grand duke replied, "There are three kinds of power in fishing, such as in personnel affairs. Using a large amount of money to bribe a talented person is like fishing with bait; using a large amount of money to invite a brave person to die generously is like fishing with bait; and using an official position to invite a talented person to be loyal to oneself is like fishing with bait.

古文：夫钓以求得也，其情深，可以观大矣。 
现代文：凡是垂钓，最终目的都是为了有所收获，这里面的道理十分深奥，我们可以从这里面悟出治理国家的道理。 
English: In all fishing, the ultimate goal is to gain something. The reason behind this is very profound, and from this we can understand the reason for governing the country.

古文：文王曰： 愿闻其情。 
现代文：文王说： 我愿意听听这里面深奥的道理。 
English: Wen Wang said: I am willing to listen to the profound reason behind this.

古文：太公曰： 源深而水流，水流而鱼生之，情也。根深而木长，木长而实生之，情也。
现代文：太公回答说： 水的源流深，水流就不息，水流不息，鱼类就能够生长，这是自然的道理；树的根扎得深，枝叶就很繁茂，枝叶茂盛才能硕果累累。
English: The great-grandfather replied, "The source of the water is deep, and the water will not stop flowing, and the water will not stop flowing, and the fish can grow, which is a natural reason; the roots of the tree are deep, the branches and leaves are very luxuriant, and the branches and leaves are luxuriant in order to be fruitful.

古文：君子情同而亲合，亲合而事生之，情也。
现代文：这也是自然的道理；君子情投意合，就能够互相合作，互相合作事业就能成功，这也是自然的道理。
English: This is also a natural reason; gentlemen can cooperate with each other when they like each other, and they can succeed in the cause of mutual cooperation. This is also a natural reason.

古文：言语应对者，情之饰也；言至情者，事之极也。
现代文：言语应对，通常是用来表达真实的情感，如果能说出真情实话，才是最好的事情。
English: Verbal responses are usually used to express true emotions, and it's best if you can tell the truth.

古文：今臣言至情不讳，君其恶之乎？ 
现代文：现在我说的都是真情实话，毫无隐讳，您听了不会生气吧？ 
English: Now I'm telling you the whole truth, I'm not hiding anything. You won't be angry, will you?

古文：文王曰： 惟仁人能受正谏，不恶至情，何为其然！ 
现代文：文王说： 只有具备仁德品质的人才能接受直率的规谏，不会厌恶真情实话。我怎么会反感呢？ 
English: King Wen said, "Only a person with the quality of benevolence can accept straightforward rules and regulations, and will not abhor the truth. How can I be disgusted?

古文：太公曰： 缗微饵明，小鱼食之；缗调饵香，中鱼食之；缗隆饵丰，大鱼食之。
现代文：太公说： 钓丝非常细小，鱼饵则清晰可见，小鱼就会上钩；钓丝适中，鱼饵味香，中等大小的鱼就会上钩；钓丝粗长，鱼饵丰盛，大鱼就会上钩。
English: Taigong said: The fishing line is very small, the bait is clearly visible, and small fish will be hooked; the fishing line is moderate, the bait is fragrant, and medium-sized fish will be hooked; the fishing line is coarse, the bait is rich, and large fish will be hooked.

古文：夫鱼食其饵，乃牵于缗；人食其禄，乃服于君。
现代文：鱼要贪吃香饵，就会被钓丝牵住；人得到了国家的俸禄，就会服从君主任使。
English: If a fish wants to eat champagne, it will be caught by a fishing line; if a person gets a state salary, he will obey the leader.

古文：故以饵取鱼，鱼可杀；以禄取人，人可竭；以家取国，国可拔；以国取天下，天下可毕。
现代文：所以用香饵钓鱼，就可以捕获鱼；用爵禄网罗人才，人才就能尽为所用；以家庭为基础取国家，就能将这个国家攻克；以国家为基础夺取天下，就能够征服天下。可叹啊！
English: Therefore, if you use a champagne flute to fish, you can catch fish; if you use a peerage to snare talent, talent can be put to good use; if you take a country on the basis of family, you can conquer this country; if you seize the world on the basis of a country, you can conquer the world. What a pity!

古文：呜呼！曼曼绵绵，其聚必散；嘿嘿昧昧，其光必远。微哉！
现代文：土地广大，国祚绵长，但是如果不得人心，它所积聚起来的东西，最终必将烟消云散；默默无闻，不动声色地暗中准备，它的光芒必将普照四方。微妙啊！
English: The land is vast, the country is long, but if it is not popular, the things it has accumulated will eventually disappear into thin air; unknown, quietly prepared in secret, its light will surely shine everywhere. Delicate!

古文：圣人之德，诱乎独见。
现代文：圣人的德化，就在于独到且潜移默化地争取人心。
English: The virtue of a saint is to win the hearts of the people in a unique and subtle way.

古文：乐哉！
现代文：高兴啊！
English: Rejoice!

古文：圣人之虑，各归其次，而树敛焉。 
现代文：圣人之虑，就是使天下的人各得其所，人心能够凝聚。 
English: The saint's concern is to enable everyone in the world to find their place, and to unite people's hearts.

古文：文王曰： 树敛若何而天下归之？ 
现代文：文王问道： 该制定什么办法才能凝聚人心让天下归顺呢？ 
English: King Wen asked: What measures should be formulated in order to unite the hearts of the people and make the world submit?

古文：太公曰： 天下非一人之天下，乃天下之天下也。
现代文：太公回答说： 天下不是一个人的天下，是天下所有人所共有的。
English: The father-in-law replied: "The world is not a man's world, it is shared by all people in the world.

古文：同天下之利者，则得天下；擅天下之利者，则失天下。
现代文：能同天下所有人共同分享天下利益的，就可以取得天下；独占天下利益的，就会失去天下。
English: If you can share the world's benefits with everyone, you can gain the world; if you monopolize the world's benefits, you will lose the world.

古文：天有时，地有财，能与人共之者，仁也。
现代文：天有四时，地有财富，能和天下人共享利益，就是仁爱。
English: Heaven has four seasons, the earth has wealth, and to be able to share one's interests with people around the world is benevolence.

古文：仁之所在，天下归之。
现代文：仁爱所在的地方，天下人就会归附。
English: Where there is benevolence and love, the whole world will follow.

古文：免人之死，解人之难，救人之患，济人之急者，德也。
现代文：能够免除人们的死亡，解决人们的苦难，消除人们的祸患，解救人们的危急，就是恩德。
English: Ende is able to save people from death, solve people's suffering, eliminate people's disasters, and rescue people from crisis.

古文：德之所在，天下归之。
现代文：恩德所在的地方，天下人就会归附。
English: Where Ende is, the whole world will follow.

古文：与人同忧、同乐、同好、同恶者，义也；义之所在，天下赴之。
现代文：和人们同忧同乐，同好同恶的，就是道义。道义所在，天下之人就会争相归附。
English: To share the same joys and sorrows with others, and the same likes and dislikes, is morality. Where there is morality, everyone in the world will strive to adhere to it.

古文：凡人恶死而乐生，好德而归利，能生利者，道也。
现代文：人们无不厌恶死亡而乐于生存，欢迎恩德而追求利益，能为天下人谋求利益的，就是王道。
English: People all abhor death but are happy to survive, welcome benevolence but pursue profit. The one who can seek profit for the world is the royal road.

古文：道之所在，天下归之。 
现代文：王道所在，天下之人就会归附。 
English: Where the royal road is, the people of the world will follow.

古文：文王再拜曰： 允哉，敢不受天之诏命乎！ 
现代文：文王再次拜谢后说： 先生讲得太好了。我怎敢不接受上天的旨意！ 
English: After thanking him again, King Wen said, "The teacher spoke very well. How dare I not accept God's will!"

古文：乃载与俱归，立为师。
现代文：于是，就把姜太公请上狩猎乘坐的车子，一起回到国都，并拜他为师。
English: As a result, he invited Jiang Taigong to go on a hunting trip in his car, returned to the capital together, and worshiped him as a teacher.

