古文：读破句
现代文：读破句
English: Reading a broken sentence

古文：庸师惯读破句，又念白字。
现代文：有个不高明的教书先生常常断错句子，还经常念白字。
English: There was an incompetent teacher who often cut wrong sentences and often read white letters.

古文：一日训徒，教《大学序》，念云： 大学之，书古之，大学所以教人之。 
现代文：有一天他教训徒弟，讲授《大学·序》，他念道： 大学之，书古之，大学所以教人之。 
English: One day he was giving a lesson to his apprentice, lecturing on "College Preface," and he read: "College, ancient books, that's why universities teach people.

古文：主人知觉，怒而逐之。
现代文：主人听出了错误，非常生气，把他赶了出去。
English: When the owner heard about the mistake, he was very angry and kicked him out.

古文：复被一荫官延请入幕，官不识律令，每事询之馆师。
现代文：后来这个教书先生又被一个官员请去做幕僚，这个官员不懂律法，每件事情都要问这位先生。
English: Later, this professor was asked to be an aide-de-camp by an official who did not know the law and had to ask the professor about everything.

古文：一日，巡捕拿一盗钟者至，官问： 何以治之？ 
现代文：一天，巡抚抓到一个偷钟的人，官员就问： 如何处置他？ 
English: One day, the inspector caught a clock thief, and the official asked, "What should we do with him?"

古文：师曰： 夫子之道忠，怒而巳矣。 
现代文：这位先生说： 夫子之道忠，怒而已矣。 
English: The teacher said, "Fu Zi's way is loyal, it's just anger."

古文：官遂释放。
现代文：官员于是释放了盗钟的人。
English: Officials then released the man who stole the bell.

古文：又一日，获一盗席者至，官又问，师曰： 朝闻道夕，死可以。 
现代文：又有一天，抓到了一个偷席子的人，官员又问那先生处置的方法，他就说： 朝闻道夕，死可以。 
English: Another day, they caught a person who was stealing mats, and the officials asked the gentleman what they should do with him. He said, "You can die if you are caught stealing mats."

古文：官即将盗席者立毙杖下。
现代文：官员立即将盗席的人打死了。
English: Officials immediately shot the seat stealer dead.

古文：适冥王私行，察访得实，即命鬼判拿来，痛骂曰： 什么都不懂的畜生！
现代文：正赶上冥王私访，知道了事情的实情，就命小鬼把教书先生抓来痛骂道： 什么都不懂的畜生！
English: Just in time for Hades' private visit, when he learned the truth of the matter, he ordered the imp to capture the teacher and scolded him: You don't understand anything, beast!

古文：你骗人馆谷，误人子弟，其罪不小，谪往轮回去变猪狗。 
现代文：你骗人钱财，误人子弟，罪过不小，罚你转世去变猪狗。 
English: If you cheat people out of money and children, you will be punished by being reincarnated as a pig or dog.

古文：师再三哀告曰： 作猪狗固不敢辞，但猪要判生南方，狗乞做一母狗。 
现代文：教书先生再三哀求道： 做猪狗不敢推辞，只要求猪要判生南方，做狗乞求做一母狗。 
English: The teacher repeatedly begged: "Don't refuse to be a pig dog, just ask the pig to give birth to Nanfang, and be a dog and beg to be a female dog."

古文：王问何故，答曰： 《曲礼》云：临财母苟得，临难母苟免。 
现代文：冥王问为什么，他回答说： 《曲礼》云：临财母狗得，临难母狗免。 
English: Hades asked why, and he replied: "In the Song of Songs, it is said that a female dog that is close to wealth is acceptable, but a female dog that is close to hardship is not.

古文：两企慕
现代文：两企慕
English: Two companies in love

古文：山东人慕南方大桥，不辞远道来看。
现代文：有个山东人羡慕南方大桥，不辞劳苦长途跋涉地到苏州去看。
English: A man from Shandong envied the Nanfang Bridge and went to great lengths to travel to Suzhou to see it.

古文：中途遇一苏州人，亦闻山东萝卜最大，前往观之。
现代文：途中遇到一个苏州人，这个苏州人也因为听说山东的萝卜最大，所以正前往山东去看。
English: On the way, I met a Suzhou native, who was also heading to Shandong to see the cows because he had heard that the radishes in Shandong were the biggest.

古文：两人各诉企慕之意。
现代文：两人各自述说了羡慕之意。
English: Each of them described their admiration for the other.

古文：苏人曰： 既如此，弟只消备述与兄听，何必远道跋涉？ 
现代文：苏州人说： 既然如此，我就把南方大桥详细地讲述给你听，何必要长途跋涉。 
English: The man from Suzhou said, "In that case, I will tell you about the Nanfang Bridge in detail. There is no need to travel a long distance."

古文：因言： 去年六月初三，一人从桥上失足堕河，至今年六月初三，还未曾到水，你说高也不高？ 
现代文：于是就介绍道： 去年六月初三有人从桥上掉了下去，到今年六月初三还没落入水中，你想这桥高不高？ 
English: Then he introduced: On the third day of June last year, someone fell from the bridge, and by the third day of June this year, they had not fallen into the water. Do you think this bridge is too high?

古文：山东人曰： 多承指教。足下要看敝处萝卜，也不消去得。明年此时，自然长过你们苏州来了。 
现代文：山东人说： 承蒙指教，山东的萝卜你也不需要去看了，明年的这个时候，自然会长到你们那边去了。 
English: Shandong people said: Thanks to your advice, you don't need to look at the radishes in Shandong. This time next year, they will naturally grow to your side.

古文：未冠
现代文：未冠
English: Uncrowned

古文：童生有老而未冠者，试官问之，以 孤寒无网 对。
现代文：有个童生年纪已很大了，但没戴帽子，考官问他为什么不戴帽子，老童生回答说： 因为孤寒无网。 
English: There was a very old child who did not wear a hat. The examiner asked him why he did not wear a hat. The old child replied, "Because I am cold and lonely."

古文：官曰： 只你嘴上胡须剃下来，亦勾结网矣。 
现代文：考官说： 将你嘴上的胡须剃下来，就够结网了。 
English: The examiner said, "Shave the mustache off your mouth and you're good to go."

古文：对曰： 童生也想要如此，只是新冠是桩喜事，不好戴得白网巾。 
现代文：童声回答说： 我也想要这样，只是戴新帽子是桩喜事，不好戴一顶白网巾。 
English: The boy replied, "I want to do that too, but it's a lot of fun to wear a new hat. It's not as fun to wear a white scarf."

古文：见皇帝
现代文：见皇帝
English: To see the Emperor

古文：一人从京师回，自夸曾见皇帝。
现代文：有个人从京城回来，自我吹嘘说曾经见到了皇帝。
English: A man came back from the capital boasting that he had seen the emperor.

古文：或问： 皇帝门景如何？ 
现代文：有人问： 皇帝住所前是什么样？ 
English: Someone asked: What does the emperor's residence look like?

古文：答曰： 四柱牌坊，金书 皇帝世家 。
现代文：那人回答说： 四柱牌坊，上写金字 皇帝世家 。
English: The man replied, "A four-pillared archway, with the words "Imperial Family" written in gold on it.

古文：大门内匾，金书 天子第 。
现代文：大门内匾，金书 天子第 。
English: Inside the main gate, the Golden Book of the Heavenly Child is displayed.

古文：两边对联是：日月光天德，山河壮帝居。 
现代文：两边对联是： 日月光天德，山河壮帝居。  
English: The couplet on both sides is: Sun, moon and stars are virtuous, and mountains and rivers are the abode of the mighty emperor.

古文：又问： 皇帝如何装束？ 
现代文：问话的人又问： 皇帝穿些什么？ 
English: The questioner then asked: What does the emperor wear?

古文：曰： 头带玉纱帽，身穿金海青。 
现代文：那人回答说： 头戴玉纱帽，身穿金海青。 
English: The man replied, "He is wearing a jade cap and a blue and gold cloak.

古文：问者曰： 明明说谎，穿了金子打的海青，如何拜揖？ 
现代文：问话的人说： 你显然是说谎，穿了金子做的长袍，怎么拜揖？ 
English: The questioner said: You are clearly lying, wearing a robe made of gold, how can you prostrate?

古文：其人曰： 呸！你真是个冒失鬼，皇帝肯与哪个作揖的。 
现代文：那人回答说： 你真是个糊涂虫，皇帝肯和谁作揖。 借称呼
English: The man replied, "You really are a muddle-headed worm, with whom the emperor would have no quarrel.

古文：借称呼一家父子僮仆，专说大话，每每以朝廷名色称呼。
现代文：有户人家父子与僮仆专说大话，事事都用朝廷用语相称呼。
English: There was a family in which the father and the son talked a lot with their servants, and everything was referred to in the language of the court.

古文：一日友人来望，父出外，遇其长子，曰： 父王驾出了。 
现代文：一天朋友到家，正巧主人外出，遇到长子，长子说： 父王驾出了。 
English: One day, a friend arrived home, and just as the host was leaving, he met the eldest son. The eldest son said, "Father Wang is driving out."

古文：问及令堂。次子又云： 娘娘在后花园饮宴。 
现代文：客人问到家母，次子又说： 娘娘在后花园饮宴。 
English: When the guests asked about my mother, the second son said, "My daughter is having a banquet in the back garden.

古文：友见说话僭分，含怒而去。
现代文：朋友见他们说话超越身份，含怒离开。
English: Friends see them talking above their station and leave in anger.

古文：途遇其父，乃述其子之言告之。父曰： 是谁说的？ 
现代文：路上遇到主人，朋友叙述其子所说的话，主人问道： 是谁说的？ 
English: Encountering the owner on the road, the friend recounted what his son had said, and the owner asked: Who said it?

古文：仆在后云： 这是太子与庶子说的。 
现代文：仆人在后边接话道： 这是太子与庶子说的。 
English: The servant took up the conversation from behind and said, "This is what the prince and the illegitimate son said.

古文：其友愈恼，扭仆便打。
现代文：朋友一听更加恼怒，扭住仆人便打。
English: Hearing this, the friend became even more enraged. He grabbed the servant and started to beat him.

古文：其父忙劝曰： 卿家弗恼，看寡人面上。 
现代文：主人急忙劝道： 卿家勿恼，看在寡人面上。 
English: The host hurriedly advised, "Don't worry, sir, you're not the only one.

古文：看镜
现代文：看镜
English: Looking in the mirror

古文：有出外生理者，妻要捎买梳子，嘱其带回。
现代文：有个人出外经商，其妻让他买把梳子回来。
English: A man went abroad on business and his wife asked him to buy a comb to bring back home.

古文：夫问其状，妻指新月示之。
现代文：丈夫问梳子是什么形状，妻子指着月牙说： 和月亮形状一样。 
English: When the husband asked what shape the comb was, the wife pointed to the crescent and said, "It's the same shape as the moon."

古文：夫货毕，忽忆妻语，因看月轮正满，遂依样买了镜子一面带归。
现代文：丈夫卖完货物，突然想起妻子的话，便抬头看月亮，当时月亮正圆，于是按照月亮的样子买了一面镜子带回来。
English: After selling the goods, the husband suddenly remembered his wife's words and looked up at the moon. At that time, the moon was full, so he bought a mirror according to the appearance of the moon and brought it back.

古文：妻照之骂曰： 梳子不买，如何反娶一妾回来？ 
现代文：妻子拿起镜子一看大骂道： 梳子不买，为何反倒娶了一个小老婆？ 
English: His wife picked up the mirror and scolded him, "If you don't buy a comb, why did you marry a little wife?"

古文：两下争闹，母闻之往劝，忽见镜，照云： 我儿有心费钱，如何讨恁个年老婆儿？ 
现代文：夫妻争吵不休，母亲过来劝解，突然见到镜子，照后说： 我儿有心花钱讨小老婆，为何讨个老太婆？ 
English: A husband and wife were arguing incessantly. The mother came over to reason with them. Suddenly, she saw a mirror. After looking at it, she said: My son is willing to spend money to woo a little wife, why woo an old woman?

古文：互相埋怨。
现代文：三人互相埋怨告到官府。
English: The three complained to each other and went to the government.

古文：遂至讦讼。官差往拘之，差见镜，慌云： 才得出牌，如何就出添差来捉违限？ 
现代文：当官的派衙役去捉拿到案，衙役见到镜子，惊慌说： 才出来去捉人，为何又派人来捉我？ 
English: The official sent an enforcer to catch and get the case, the enforcer saw the mirror, panicked and said: I just came out to catch people, why did you send someone to catch me?

古文：及审，置镜于案。官照见大怒云： 夫妻不和事，何必央请乡官来讲分！ 
现代文：等到审案时，衙役把镜子放在案桌上，当官的照见大怒说： 夫妻不和之事，何必请地方官来说情。 
English: While waiting for the case to be heard, the bailiff placed a mirror on the case table, and the official, seeing this, said angrily, "In a case of discord between husband and wife, why do you need to ask a local official to intercede?

古文：高才
现代文：高才
English: High talent

古文：一官偶有书义未解，问吏曰： 此处有高才否？ 
现代文：有个官员偶然不明书中语义，向差役问道： 这里有高才吗？ 
English: An official who happened to be confused about the meaning of the book asked the guard: "Are there any high-level talents here?"

古文：吏误以为裁缝姓高也，应曰： 有。 
现代文：差役误认为裁缝姓高，便回答说： 有。 
English: Mistaking the tailor's last name for Gao, the guard replied, "Yes.

古文：即唤进。官问曰： 贫而无谄，如何？ 
现代文：随即差役领来了裁缝，官员问道： 贫而无谄，怎么解？ 
English: The officer then brought the tailor to the official, who asked: "How can you be poor and healthy?

古文：答曰： 裙而无裥，折起来。 
现代文：裁缝回答说： 裙无裥，折起来。 
English: The tailor replied, "The dress is seamless, fold it up."

古文：又问： 富而无骄，如何？ 
现代文：又问： 富而不骄，怎么解？ 
English: He also asked: How to be rich without being arrogant?

古文：答曰： 裤若无腰，做上去。 
现代文：回答说： 裤若无腰，做上去。 
English: He replied: If the trousers have no waist, make them higher.

古文：官怒喝曰： 咄！ 
现代文：官人听了十分恼怒，喝斥道： 咄！ 
English: Hearing this, the officials were very angry and shouted, "Wow!

古文：裁缝曰： 极是容易，小人有熨斗。取来烫烫。 
现代文：裁缝说： 极是容易，若是皱了，小人有烫斗取来烫烫。 
English: The tailor said, "It's very easy. If it's wrinkled, the little people can take it off and iron it."

古文：不识货
现代文：不识货
English: Not knowing the goods

古文：有徽人开典而不识货者，一人以单皮鼓一面来当。喝云： 皮锣一面，当银五分。 
现代文：有个安徽人开当铺，但不识货。有个人拿一面单皮鼓来当，老板喝道： 皮锣一面，当银五分。 
English: There was a man in Anhui who opened a pawnshop, but he didn't know anything about goods. A man pawned a single-skin drum, and the owner said, "A single skin drum is worth five silver coins."

古文：有以笙来当者，云： 斑竹酒壶一把，当银三分。 
现代文：又有一个拿笙来当，老板喊道： 斑竹酒壶一把，当银三分。 
English: The boss called out, "One piece of variegated bamboo wine jug is worth three pieces of silver.

古文：有当笛者，云： 丝缉火筒一根，当银二分。 
现代文：有个人拿笛子来当，老板喊： 丝缉火筒一根，当银二分。 
English: A man took a flute as a dice, and the boss shouted, "One silk tinderbox, two silver coins."

古文：后有持了事帕来当者，喝云： 虎狸斑汗巾一条。当银二分。 
现代文：后来一个人拿了一条合房用的手巾来当，老板喊道： 虎狸斑汗巾一条，当银二分。 
English: Later, a person took a hand towel used to close the room as a pawn, and the boss shouted: "One tiger beetle spot sweat towel is worth two silver coins."

古文：小郎曰： 这物要他何用？ 
现代文：小伙计说： 这东西要他干什么？ 
English: The lad said: What does this thing want with him?

古文：答云： 若不赎。留他抹抹嘴也好。 
现代文：老板回答道： 如不赎回，留下它抹抹嘴也好。 
English: The boss replied, "If you don't redeem it, you can keep it and wipe your mouth with it."

古文：外太公
现代文：外太公
English: Great-grandfather

古文：有教小儿以 大 字者。次日写 太 字问之。儿仍曰： 大字。 
现代文：老师教学生认字，先教 大 字，第二天写一个 太 字相问，学生仍念 大 字。
English: A teacher teaches a student to read and write. First, he teaches the capital letter. The next day, he asks the student to write a question about a word. The student still reads the capital letter.

古文：因教之曰： 中多一点，乃太公的太字也。 
现代文：接着老师教学生说： 大字里边多一点，是太公的 太 字。 
English: Next, the teacher instructed the students, saying, "The large characters have a little more on the inside, which is too formal.

古文：明日写 犬 字问之，儿曰： 太公的太字。 
现代文：又过了一天，老师写 犬 字相问，学生说： 太公的 太 字。 
English: A day later, the teacher asked the students to write the dog's name, and the students said: Taigong's name.

古文：师曰： 今番点在外，如何还是太字？ 
现代文：老师说： 现在点在外，怎么还是 太 字？ 
English: The teacher said, "Now the dots are out, why is the word "too" still there?"

古文：儿即应曰： 这样说，便是外太公了。 
现代文：学生接口说： 这样说，便是外太公了。 
English: The student interface said: In this way, it is grandpa.

古文：床榻
现代文：床榻
English: Bunk beds

古文：有卖床榻者，一日夫出，命妇守店。
现代文：有户人家卖床、榻。有一天，丈夫外出，让妻子看守店铺。
English: There is a family that sells beds and mattresses. One day, the husband went out and asked his wife to look after the shop.

古文：一人来买床，价少，银水又低，争执良久，勉强售之。
现代文：一人来买床，出价很少，讨价很久，店妇勉强卖给了他。
English: A man came to buy a bed. The bids were few and the bargaining was long. The saleswoman reluctantly sold it to him.

古文：次日，复来买榻。
现代文：第二天，那人又来买榻。
English: The next day, the man came again to buy a bed.

古文：妇曰： 这人不知好歹，昨日床上讨尽我的便宜，今日榻上又想要讨我的便宜了。 
现代文：店妇说： 这人实在不知好歹，昨天在床上讨尽我的便宜，今日在榻上又想讨我的便宜了！ 
English: The shop assistant said, "This man is really up to no good. Yesterday he was trying to take advantage of me in bed, and today he's trying to take advantage of me on the bed!"

古文：房事
现代文：房事
English: Housekeeping

古文：一丈母命婿以房典银，既成交而房价未足，因作书促之云： 家岳母房事悬望至紧，刻不容缓，早晚望公垂慈一处，以济其急。
现代文：有位岳母让女婿用房子典银，已经成交，但钱未给足，于是岳母写信一封催促说： 岳母我房事盼望极紧，刻不容缓，从早到晚盼你到我这里来，以解其急，深表感谢！ 
English: A mother-in-law asked her son-in-law to use the house as collateral, and the transaction was concluded, but the money was not enough, so the mother-in-law wrote a letter of urging saying: Mother-in-law, I am very anxious about my house, I must not delay, from morning to night I hope you will come to me to solve my urgency, I am deeply grateful!

古文：至感至感！ 卖粪
现代文：卖粪
English: Selling excrement

古文：一家有粪一窖，招人货卖，索钱一千，买者还五百。主人怒曰： 有如此贱粪，难道是狗撒的？ 
现代文：有户人家有一窖粪，准备出卖，要价一千。一个农夫还价五百，主人大怒，说： 有这样的贱粪吗？难道是狗屙的？ 
English: A family had a cow dung, ready to sell, asking for a thousand. A farmer countered with five hundred, the owner was furious, saying: Is there such cheap dung? Is it made by dogs?

古文：乡人曰： 又不曾吃了你的，何须这等发急。 
现代文：农夫说： 又不曾吃了你的，何必这样着急。 
English: The farmer said, "I haven't eaten any of yours, why are you in such a hurry?"

古文：出丑
现代文：出丑
English: Making a fool of himself

古文：有屠牛者，过宰猪者之家。
现代文：宰牛人经过一宰猪人家，问主人在家吗？
English: A man slaughtering a cow passes by the house of a man slaughtering a pig and asks if the owner is home.

古文：其子欲讳 宰猪 二字，回云： 家尊出亥去了。 
现代文：其儿子想要避讳宰猪二字，便回答说： 父亲杀猪去了。 
English: His son, trying to avoid the word "pig slaughter," replied: "My father went to kill a pig."

古文：屠牛者归，对子述之，称赞不已。
现代文：宰牛人回到家里，对儿子讲述宰猪人儿子所说的话，称赞不已。
English: When the ox-slayer came home, he told his son what the pig-slayer's son had said and praised him.

古文：子亦领悟。次日屠猪者至，其子亦回云： 家父往外出丑去了。 
现代文：儿子领悟，第二天宰猪人来了，其儿子也回答说： 家父往外出丑去了。 
English: The son understood, and the next day the swineherd came, and his son also answered: "My father went out to be ugly."

古文：问： 几时归？ 
现代文：宰猪人问： 什么时候回来？ 
English: The pig slaughterer asked: When will you be back?

古文：答曰： 出尽丑自然回来了。 
现代文：儿子回答说： 出尽丑自然就回来了。 
English: His son replied: "He came back as ugly as he could be.

古文：整嫂裙
现代文：整嫂裙
English: The whole dress

古文：一嫂前行，而裙夹于臀缝内者，叔从后拽整之。
现代文：嫂子走在前面，裙子夹在屁股沟里，小叔子从后把裙子拽出来。
English: My sister-in-law walked in front, her skirt caught in the ditch, and my little brother-in-law pulled the skirt out from behind.

古文：嫂顾见，疑其调戏，遂大怒。
现代文：嫂子回头一看，以为是小叔子调戏她，十分恼怒。
English: When her sister-in-law looked back, she thought it was her younger brother-in-law who was teasing her. She was very angry.

古文：叔躬身曰： 嫂嫂请息怒，待愚叔依旧与你塞进去，你再夹紧何如？ 
现代文：小叔子躬身说： 嫂嫂请息怒，待我仍旧给你塞进去，你再夹紧怎么样。 
English: The little uncle bowed down and said, "Sister-in-law, please calm down. I'll still stuff it in for you. How about clamping it again?

古文：戏嫂臂
现代文：戏嫂臂
English: The playwright's arm

古文：兄患病献神，嫂收祭物，叔将嫂臂暗捏一把。
现代文：哥哥患病打算祭神，嫂子拾掇祭物。小叔子将嫂子的胳膊偷偷地捏了一把。
English: When his brother fell ill, he planned to make an offering to the gods. His sister-in-law picked up the sacrificial offering. His younger brother-in-law secretly squeezed his sister-in-law's arm.

古文：嫂怒云： 看你肥肉吃得几块！ 
现代文：嫂子恼怒说： 看你能吃几块肥肉！ 
English: My sister-in-law said angrily: See how many pieces of fat you can eat!

古文：兄在床上听见，叫声： 兄弟没正经，你嫂要留来结识人头的，大家省口出客罢。 
现代文：哥哥在床上听见，叫道： 兄弟太没正事，你嫂子要留下招待客人的，家里人省点吃吧！ 
English: My brother heard it in bed and called out: My brother is too idle, your sister-in-law wants to keep the guests, the family should save some food!

古文：利市
现代文：利市
English: Li City

古文：一人元旦出门云： 头一日必得利市方妙。 
现代文：有个人元旦出门说： 头一天出门必得吉利才好。 
English: A person who went out on New Year's Day said: It's better to be lucky on the first day.

古文：遂于桌上写一 吉 字。
现代文：于是在桌上写一个 吉 字。
English: So I wrote a Chinese character on the table.

古文：不意连走数家，求一茶不得。
现代文：不想连走数家，连一杯茶水都没喝到。
English: I don't even want to go to several houses, I haven't even had a cup of tea.

古文：将 吉 字倒看良久。曰： 原来写了 口干 字，自然没得吃了。 
现代文：那人回到家里将 吉 字倒看了一会说： 原来写了 口干 二字，自然没有吃的。 
English: When the man returned home, he looked at the characters upside down and said, "I originally wrote the word "mouth dry," but of course I didn't eat it.

古文：再顺看曰： 吾论来，竟该有十一家替我润口。 
现代文：接着又顺着看说： 论理，应该有 十一 家替我润口。 
English: Then he looked down and said: Logically, there should be eleven moisturizers for me.

古文：官话
现代文：官话
English: Chinese (official)

古文：有兄弟经商，学得一二官话。
现代文：有兄弟俩外出经商，学得一两句官话。
English: Two brothers went out to do business and learned a sentence or two of the official language.

古文：将到家，兄往隔河出恭，命弟先往见其父。父曰： 汝兄何在？ 弟曰： 撒屎。 
现代文：归来快到家时，哥哥到河南岸大便，让弟弟先回去见父亲。父亲说： 你哥在哪里？ 弟说： 撒屎。 
English: When he was about to return home, his elder brother defecated on the south bank of the river and asked his younger brother to go back to see their father first. The father said, "Where is your brother?" The younger brother said, "Shit."

古文：父惊曰： 在何处杀死的？ 
现代文：父亲十分惊恐，说： 在哪里杀死的？ 
English: The father was very alarmed and said, "Where did they kill him?"

古文：答曰： 河南。 
现代文：弟弟回答说： 河南。 
English: The younger brother replied: Henan Province.

古文：父方悲恸而兄已至，父遂骂其次子， 何得妄言如是？ 曰： 我自打官话耳。 
现代文：父亲悲痛大哭，正在这时哥哥回来了，父亲于是大骂小儿子： 为何说如此假话？ 小儿子说： 我说的是官话。 
English: The father wept with grief. Just then, his brother returned, and the father scolded his younger son: Why did you tell such a lie? The younger son said: I spoke Mandarin.

古文：父曰： 这样官话，只好吓你亲爷罢了。 
现代文：父亲说： 这样的官话，只能吓你亲爹罢了。 
English: The father said: Such official language can only scare your own father.

古文：掌嘴
现代文：掌嘴
English: Clap your hands

古文：一乡人进城，偶与人竞，被打耳光子数下，赴县叫喊。官问： 何事？ 
现代文：有个农夫进城，偶然与他人比赛，被人打了数个耳光子。农夫跑到县衙叫喊，县官问： 什么事？ 
English: A farmer came to the city, accidentally competed with others, and was slapped several times. The farmer ran to the county and shouted. The county official asked: What happened?

古文：曰： 小人被人打了许多乳广。 
现代文：农夫说： 我被人打了许多乳广。 
English: The farmer said: "I was beaten up a lot.

古文：官不信。连问，只以乳广对。
现代文：县官不明白，连问数句，农夫只用 乳广 回答。
English: The prefectural official did not understand, and asked several questions, but the farmer only answered with milk.

古文：官大怒。呼皂隶掌嘴。
现代文：县官大怒，呼差役打其嘴巴。
English: The county official flew into a rage, and the dispatcher punched him in the mouth.

古文：方被掌，乡人遂以指示官，正是这个样子。
现代文：刚被打，农夫急忙用手示意说： 正是这个样子。 
English: Having just been beaten, the farmer quickly gestured with his hand and said: "That's exactly what it looks like.

古文：乳广
现代文：乳广
English: Milk breadth

古文：一乡人涉讼，官受其贿，临审复掌嘴数下。
现代文：有个农夫被牵连进官司，当官的接受了他的贿赂，到了审案时，又打了他数下嘴巴。
English: A farmer was implicated in a lawsuit, the official accepted his bribe, and when the case came to trial, he punched him several times in the mouth.

古文：乡人不忿，作官话曰： 老爷，你要人觜我就人觜。要铜圆就铜圆，要尾就尾，为何临了来又歹我的乳广？ 
现代文：农夫不愤，学作官话说： 老爷，你要人觜我就给你人觜；要铜圆就给你铜圆；要尾就给你尾，为什么要审案时又打我的乳广？ 
English: The farmer was not angry, and the learned magistrate said: My lord, if you want a man's bridle, I will give you a man's bridle; if you want a copper coin, I will give you a copper coin; if you want a tail, I will give you a tail. Why did you hit my nipple when trying the case?

古文：初上路
现代文：初上路
English: First time on the road

古文：一人初上路，才骑牲口踏镫，掉落一鞋。
现代文：有个人初上路，才骑上牲口踏上镫，就掉落了一只鞋。
English: A man was just starting out on the road when he rode an animal and stepped on a donkey, and one of his shoes fell off.

古文：其人因作官话大声曰： 啊呀。掌鞭的，我的鞋。 
现代文：那人用京城里的话大声喊道： 啊呀掌鞭的，我的鞋！ 
English: The man shouted loudly in the language of the capital: Ah, my shoes!

古文：赶鞭的以为唤他做爷，答云： 爷不敢。 
现代文：掌鞭人以为唤他做爷，答道： 爷不敢当。 
English: The man in charge of the whip thought he was calling him to be a grandfather, and replied: "I wouldn't dare.

古文：其人愈发急，大呼曰： 我的鞋！
现代文：那人更加着急，大喊道： 我的鞋！
English: The man became even more anxious and shouted: "My shoes!

古文：我的鞋！ 
现代文：我的鞋！ 
English: My shoes are wet!

古文：掌鞭的不会其意，亦连声回应曰： 爷，小的怎么敢？ 
现代文：掌鞭人未领会其意，也连声回答说： 爷，小的怎么敢做？ 
English: The person in charge of the whip did not understand his meaning, and replied in unison: My lord, how dare the little one do that?

古文：其人只得仍作乡语怒骂曰： 搠杀那娘，我一只鞋子脱掉了！ 
现代文：那人只得仍然用家乡话怒骂道： 日他娘，我一只鞋子掉了。 
English: The man still had to use his native language to scold her, saying: "One day, my daughter, one of my shoes fell off.

古文：闹一闹
现代文：闹一闹
English: It's a mess.

古文：一杭人妇，催轿往西湖游玩，贪恋湖上风景，不觉归迟。
现代文：有个杭州妇女，催促抬轿的到西湖去游玩。由于贪恋风景，不觉归来晚了，将要天黑。
English: A woman in Hangzhou urged a sedan driver to go to the West Lake for a trip. Due to her love of the scenery, she returned late and it was getting dark.

古文：时已将暮，怕关城门，心中着急。乃对轿夫言曰： 轿夫阿哥，天色晚了，我多把银钱打发，你与我尽力闹一闹，早行进到里头去。不但是我好，连你们也落得自在快活些。 
现代文：妇女怕关城门，心里着急，就对轿夫说道： 轿夫阿哥，天色晚了，我多给你们银钱，你们给我尽力闹一闹，也好早些进到里头去，不但是我好，连你们也落得自己快活些。 
English: The women were afraid to close the gate, and in their haste they said to the coachman: "Brother coachman, it's getting late, I'll give you more money. If you give me as much trouble as you can, you'd better get inside sooner. Not only will I be happier, but you'll be happier too."

古文：摸一把
现代文：摸一把
English: Give it a touch

古文：妇人门首买菜，问： 几个钱一把？ 
现代文：有个妇女在门口买菜，问卖菜的： 几个钱一把？ 
English: A woman was buying vegetables at the door and asked the vendor: How much is a handful of money?

古文：卖者说： 实价三个钱两把。 
现代文：卖主说： 实在说三个钱两把。 
English: The seller said, "Actually, it's two for the price of three."

古文：妇还两个钱三把。
现代文：妇女还价两个钱三把。
English: The woman countered with two coins and three handfuls.

古文：卖者云： 不指望我来摸娘娘一把，娘娘倒想要摸我一把，讨我这样便宜。 
现代文：卖主说： 我不曾指望摸娘娘一把，没想到娘娘倒想要摸我一把，讨我的便宜。 
English: The seller said: "I didn't expect to touch my daughter, I didn't expect my daughter to want to touch me and take advantage of me.

古文：苏空头
现代文：苏空头
English: Su Koutou

古文：一人初往苏州。或教之曰： 吴人惯扯空头，若去买货，他讨二两，只好还一两。
现代文：一个人初次要去苏州，有人告诫他说： 苏州人一贯好说谎，如果去买东西，他要价二两，只能还价一两。
English: A man was going to Suzhou for the first time, and someone warned him: "Suzhou people are always good at lying. If you go to buy something, he wants to charge two yuan, but you can only charge one yuan.

古文：就是与人讲话，他说两句，也只好听一句。 
现代文：就是与人说话，他说两句，也只能听一句。 
English: Even if you talk to someone and they say two sentences, you can only listen to one.

古文：其人至苏，先以买货之法，行之果验。
现代文：那人到了苏州，先用上法买东西，果然行之有效。
English: When the man arrived in Suzhou, he first used the method to buy something, and it worked.

古文：后遇一人。
现代文：后来遇到一人问其姓什么？
English: Later, I met a man who asked me what my surname was.

古文：问其姓，答曰： 姓陆。 
现代文：回答说： 姓陆。 
English: He replied: My surname is Lu.

古文：其人曰： 定是三老官了。 
现代文：那人说： 定是姓三的老官了。 
English: The man said, "It must be an old official with the surname San."

古文：又问： 住房几间？ 
现代文：又问： 住房几间。 
English: Another question: How many rooms are there?

古文：曰： 五间。 
现代文：回答说： 五间。 
English: And he said, Five.

古文：其人曰： 原来是两间一披。 又问： 宅上还有何人？ 
现代文：那人说： 原来是两间半。 又问： 家里还有什么人？ 
English: The man said, "It used to be two and a half rooms," and asked, "Who else is in the house?"

古文：曰： 只房下一个。 
现代文：回答说： 只有一个老婆。 
English: He answered, "I have only one wife."

古文：其人背曰： 原还是与人合的。 
现代文：那人暗自说： 原来还是与人合用的。 
English: The man said to himself, "It still works with people."

古文：连偷骂
现代文：连偷骂
English: Even cursing secretly

古文：吴人有灌园者，被邻居窃去疏果，乃大骂曰： 入娘贼，春天偷了我婶，夏天又来偷我妹子，到冬来还要偷我个老婆。 
现代文：吴地有个菜农，被邻居偷去蔬菜，于是大骂道： 入娘贼，春天偷了我的婶，夏天又来偷我妹子，到了冬天还要偷我的老婆。 
English: There was a vegetable farmer in Wu who was caught stealing vegetables by his neighbor, so he cursed loudly: "You are a thief, you stole my aunt in the spring, you stole my sister in the summer, and you will steal my wife in the winter."

古文：晾马桶
现代文：晾马桶
English: Hanging out the toilet

古文：苏州人家晒两马桶在外，瞽者不知，误撒小解。
现代文：有户苏州人家在外边晾了两只马桶，一个瞎子不晓得，误撒小便。
English: A family in Suzhou hung two toilets outside, and a blind man accidentally spilled his urine.

古文：其姑喝骂，嫂忙问曰： 这娘贼个脓血，滴来你个里面，还是撒来我个里头。 
现代文：小姑子大吵大骂，嫂子急忙问道： 这个老娘贼，是撒在你的里面，还是撒在我的里面？ 
English: The little sister-in-law quarreled and cursed, and the sister-in-law hurriedly asked: Is this old lady thief sprinkled inside you, or inside me?

古文：姑回云： 我搭你两边都有点个。 
现代文：小姑子回答道： 我和你的两边都有点。 
English: The little sister-in-law replied, "I have a little bit of both sides with you.

古文：鸟出来
现代文：鸟出来
English: The birds are out

古文：一家养子瞒人，邻翁问其妇曰： 娘子恭喜。添了令郎。 
现代文：有户人家生了儿子，对外隐瞒，邻家老头向那家妇女问道： 娘子，恭喜你生了儿子。 
English: The old man of a neighboring family asked the woman: "Daughter, congratulations on the birth of your son.

古文：妇曰： 并无此事，要便是你鸟出来的。 
现代文：妇女说： 并无此事，要是养了儿子便是你鸟出来的。 
English: The woman said, "That's not true. If you have a son, it's your fault.

古文：轧棉花
现代文：轧棉花
English: Cotton gin

古文：姑嫂二人地上轧棉花。
现代文：姑嫂二人在地上轧棉花。
English: My sister-in-law and my sister-in-law were rolling cotton on the ground.

古文：嫂问： 姑轧得几何？ 姑曰： 尽力轧得两腿酸麻，轧个绒勿出。 
现代文：嫂子问小姑子轧了多少，小姑子回答说： 用尽力气轧得两腿发麻，连个绒也没轧出来。 
English: The sister-in-law asked the little sister-in-law how many yarns she had rolled, and the little sister-in-law replied, "I tried my best to roll the yarn until my legs were numb, but I couldn't even roll a single yarn."

古文：庆生
现代文：庆生
English: Birthday celebrations

古文：松江有妪诞辰，子侄辈商所以庆生者。一曰： 叫伙戏子与渠汤汤，好弗热闹。 
现代文：松江地区有个老太太过生日，晚辈们商量庆祝生日的方法，一个说： 让演戏的给她唱唱戏，是再热闹不过了。 
English: An old lady in the Songjiang region was celebrating her birthday. The younger generation were discussing how to celebrate her birthday. One said, "Let the actor sing a song for her. It would be the most hilarious."

古文：一曰： 个非阿娘所好，弗如寻几个和尚，与渠笃笃倒好。 
现代文：另一个说： 那不是老太太所喜欢的，不如找几个和尚，给她笃笃倒好。 
English: Another said, "That's not what the old lady likes, let's find some monks to give her a good beating."

古文：贺寿
现代文：贺寿
English: He Shou

古文：贺友寿者，其友先期躲生，锁门而出。
现代文：甲到乙家为其祝寿，乙提前躲避，锁门外出了。
English: A went to B's house to wish him a happy birthday, but B avoided him in advance and locked the door.

古文：一日路上遇见，此人惯作歇后语，因对友曰： 前兄寿日，弟拉了许多丧门吊，替你生灾作贺。谁料你家入地无门，竟披枷带锁了。 
现代文：一天，两人路上相见，甲擅长作歇后语，于是对乙说： 前些日子你过生日，我拉了许多丧门吊替你生灾作贺，谁料你家入地无门，竟然披枷戴锁了。 
English: One day, two people met on the road. A was good at making an afterword, so he said to B: A few days ago you had a birthday, I pulled a lot of dead doors to congratulate you on your birth and death. Who would have thought that there was no door to your home, but you were shackled and chained.

古文：寿气
现代文：寿气
English: Shou qi

古文：一老翁寿诞，亲友醵分，设宴公祝。正行令，各人要带说 寿 字。
现代文：有个老头过生日，亲友凑钱设宴为其祝贺，宴席中行酒令，每人行酒令都要带 寿 字。
English: An old man was celebrating his birthday. His relatives and friends pooled their money to hold a banquet to congratulate him. During the banquet, a toast was made, and each person had to bring the word "happy birthday" when making the toast.

古文：而壶中酒忽竭，主人大怒。
现代文：壶中酒突然干了，主人大怒。
English: The owner was furious when the wine in the jug suddenly dried up.

古文：客曰： 为何动寿气？ 
现代文：客人说： 为何动寿气？ 
English: Guest says: Why does the air of longevity linger?

古文：一客云： 欠检点，该罚。 
现代文：另一个客人说： 欠检点，该罚。 
English: Another guest said: "There's a penalty for missing the checkpoint.

古文：少顷，又一人唱寿曲。傍一人曰： 合差了寿板。 
现代文：不一会，又一人唱寿曲，旁边一人说： 合差了寿板。 
English: After a while, another person sang a birthday song, and a person next to him said: "The birthday is over.

古文：合席皆曰： 一发该罚。 
现代文：客人们都说： 更加该罚。 
English: The guests all said: That's even more of a punishment.

古文：不知令
现代文：不知令
English: Unknown order

古文：饮酒行令，座客有茫然者。
现代文：众人饮酒行令，其中有个人茫然不知所措。
English: People were ordering drinks, and one of them was at a loss.

古文：一友戏曰： 不知令，无以为君子也。 
现代文：一位朋友开玩笑说： 不晓得行令，不能算是君子。 
English: A friend joked: "If you don't know how to give orders, you can't be a gentleman."

古文：其人诘曰： 不知命，为何改作令字？ 
现代文：那人反问道： 不知命中的 命 字为何改作 令 字？ 
English: The man asked: Why did you change the word "命" from "命" to "令"?

古文：答曰： 《中庸》注云： 命犹令也。  
现代文：朋友回答说： 《中庸》注说： 命犹如令。  
English: The friend replied: "The Middle Way says: Life is like a command.

古文：十恶不赦
现代文：十恶不赦
English: The Ten Deadly Sins

古文：乡人汇缘进学，与父兄叔伯暑天同走，惟新生撑伞。
现代文：同村的人聚在一起去学校，和父兄叔伯在大热天一同走路，只有新生打着雨伞。
English: People from the same village gathered to go to school, walking with their parents and uncles on a hot day, only the new students carried umbrellas.

古文：人问何故，答曰： 入学不晒。 
现代文：有人见此问是什么缘故，回答说： 新生入学不晒。 
English: Someone saw this and asked what the reason was, and replied: "Freshmen don't go to school in the sun.

古文：馄饨
现代文：馄饨
English: 

古文：苏州人有卖馄饨者。夫偶出，令其妻守店，姿色甚美。
现代文：苏州有卖馄饨的，丈夫碰巧外出，让妻子看守店铺，妻子的姿色十分秀美。
English: There is a shop in Suzhou that sells cocoons. The husband happened to be out, so he asked his wife to look after the shop. The wife's appearance is very beautiful.

古文：一人来买馄饨，因贪看想慕出神，叫曰： 娘子。我要买饨。 
现代文：一个人来买馄饨，由于贪看想慕出神，喊道： 娘子我要买饨。 
English: A man came to buy a donkey, and being greedy and desirous to be rich, he cried out, "My daughter, I want to buy a donkey."

古文：妇应曰： 你为何脱落子馄？ 
现代文：妇人应声道： 你为何丢掉了你的馄了？ 
English: The woman answered, "Why have you lost your donkey?"

古文：卖糖
现代文：卖糖
English: Selling sugar

古文：一糖担歇在人家门首敲锣，妇喝曰： 快请出去，只管在此汤手甚么？
现代文：有个挑糖担的人在一户人家门口敲锣叫卖，该家妇女喊道： 快请离开，只管待在这里嚷什么？
English: A sugar-picker was knocking on the door of a house to sell it. The woman shouted: "Please leave, just stay here and shout what?"

古文：汤手出个小的儿来，又要害我淘气。 
现代文：嚷出个小儿来，又要害我淘气。 食蔗
English: He called me a brat and tried to make me naughty again.

古文：食蔗一家请客，摆列水果，家主母取甘蔗食之，连声叫淡。
现代文：有户人家请客，陈列了许多水果，主妇拿起甘蔗吃，连声说味淡。
English: A family invited guests and displayed a lot of fruit. The housewife picked up a sugar cane and ate it, saying it was bland.

古文：厨司曰： 娘娘想是梢了。 
现代文：厨师说： 娘娘想是梢了。 
English: The chef said, "I think my daughter is a cow."

古文：秤人
现代文：秤人
English: The Scales

古文：天赦日秤人，婆先将媳上秤。婆云： 娘子，你放在大花星上正好。 
现代文：天赦日秤人，婆婆先秤儿媳，婆婆说： 娘子，你放在大花星上正好。 
English: For heaven's sake, scales man, the mother-in-law first weighed the daughter-in-law, the mother-in-law said: Daughter, you put it on the big flower star just right.

古文：次秤婆，媳云： 看婆婆不出，到梢了。 
现代文：之后秤婆婆，儿媳说： 看婆婆不出，到梢了。 
English: After the weighing of the mother-in-law, the daughter-in-law said: Look, the mother-in-law is not coming out, she is at the end.

古文：蚬子
现代文：蚬子
English: Dice

古文：两人相遇，各问所生子女几何。一曰： 五女。 
现代文：两人相遇，互相询问对方生了几个子女。甲说： 生了五个女儿。 
English: Two people meet and ask each other how many children the other has. Person A says: I have five daughters.

古文：一曰： 一子。 
现代文：乙说： 生了一个儿子。 
English: The second said, "I have given birth to a son."

古文：生女者曰： 一子是险子。 
现代文：甲说： 生了一个儿子是险子。 
English: A said: Having a son is risky.

古文：生子者怒曰： 我是蚬子，强如你养了许多肉蚌。 
现代文：乙大怒说： 我是蚬子，强似你养了许多肉蚌。 
English: Big B angrily said, "I'm a louse, it's more like you've raised a lot of flesh lice."

古文：绵在凳上
现代文：绵在凳上
English: curled up on a stool

古文：一女买绵子，正在讲价，卖者欲出小恭，踌蹰不决。
现代文：一女子买绵子，正在讲价，货主想要出去小便，踌躇不决。
English: A woman is buying a loofah and negotiating the price. The owner of the goods is hesitating because he wants to go out to urinate.

古文：女云： 你放在此，难道我偷了不成？ 
现代文：女子说： 你放在这里，难道我会偷去吗？ 
English: The woman said, "If you leave it here, will I steal it?"

古文：其人曰： 既如此，大娘绵在凳上，待我撒出来了。 
现代文：货主说： 既然如此，大娘绵在凳上，等我撒出来吧。 
English: The owner of the goods said: "In that case, my granddaughter is curled up on the bench, wait until I scatter her.

古文：撒屁秤
现代文：撒屁秤
English: Farting scale

古文：一人问邻妇借秤，妇回云： 我家这管撒屁秤，是用不得的。 
现代文：有个人向邻妇借秤，妇女回答说： 我家这杆撒屁秤，是用不得的。 
English: A man asked his neighbor for a scale. The woman replied, "This is a useless scale.

古文：其人曰： 娘子，你在前另有不撒屁的，求借我用一用。 
现代文：那人说： 娘子，你在前面另有不撒屁的，求你借我用一用。 
English: The man said, "Daughter, you have someone else ahead of you who doesn't give a rat's ass. Please let me help you."

古文：日饼
现代文：日饼
English: Rice cakes

古文：中秋出卖月饼。招牌上错写日饼。
现代文：有个人中秋节出卖月饼，招牌上错写成 日饼 。
English: A person was selling mooncakes on the Mid-Autumn Festival. The signboard misspelled them as "day cakes."

古文：一人指曰： 月字写成白字了。 
现代文：一个人指出： 月字写成白字了。 
English: One person pointed out: "The word for the month is written in white."

古文：其人曰： 我倒信你骗，白字还有一撇哩。 
现代文：卖月饼的人说： 我难道会相信你的欺骗吗？ 白 字还有一撇哩。 
English: The man selling mooncakes said, "Am I to believe your deception?

古文：禁溺
现代文：禁溺
English: Prohibition of intoxication

古文：墙脚下恐人撒尿，画一乌龟于壁上，且批其后曰： 撒尿者即是此物。 
现代文：有户人家怕人在墙脚下撒尿，在墙壁上画了一只乌龟，并在后面写了一行字： 撒尿者即是此物。 
English: One family, afraid of people urinating at the foot of the wall, drew a turtle on the wall and wrote a line behind it: "The urinator is this thing."

古文：一人不知就里，仍去屙溺。
现代文：有个人不晓得，仍去那里撒尿。
English: Someone, I don't know who, still goes there to piss.

古文：其人骂曰： 瞎了眼睛，也不看看。 
现代文：主人骂道： 瞎了眼睛，也不看看。 
English: The owner scolded: "You're blind, you can't even see."

古文：撒尿者曰： 不知老爷在此。 
现代文：撒尿的人说： 不晓得老爷你在这里。 
English: The urinator says: I didn't know you were here.

古文：墙龟
现代文：墙龟
English: Wall turtle

古文：墙上画一乌龟，专禁人屙溺，一人竟撒。
现代文：主人在自家墙上画一乌龟，目的是禁止他人屙屎撒尿，有个人竟然照样在此撒尿。
English: The owner painted a turtle on the wall of his house in order to prohibit others from defecating and urinating, but someone still peed there.

古文：主家喝曰： 你看！ 
现代文：主人呵斥道： 你看！ 
English: The owner shouted: "Look!

古文：其人云： 原来乌龟在此看我撒尿。 
现代文：那人回答说： 原来乌龟在此看我撒尿。 
English: The man replied, "Well, the turtle is here to watch me pee."

古文：说大话
现代文：说大话
English: Talking big

古文：主人谓仆曰： 汝出外，须说几句大话，装我体面。 
现代文：主人对仆人说： 你出外须说几句大话，替我装出一些体面。 
English: The master said to his servant, "When you go out, be sure to make a good impression on me.

古文：仆领之。
现代文：仆人答应了。
English: The servant agreed.

古文：值有言 三清殿大 者，仆曰： 只与我家租房一般。 
现代文：正赶上有人说 三清殿大 的，仆人说： 只跟我家的房子一样大。 
English: Just as someone was about to say how big the Sanqing Palace was, the servant said, "It's only as big as my house."

古文：有言 龙衣船大 者，曰： 只与我家帐船一般。 
现代文：有人说 龙衣船大 的，仆人说： 只跟我家的小船一样大。 
English: Some said it was as big as a dragon boat, but the servant said, "It's only as big as my family's small boat."

古文：有言 牯牛腹大 者，曰： 只与我家主人肚皮一般。 
现代文：有人说 牯牛肚子大 的，仆人说： 只和我家主人肚皮一样大。 
English: When someone said, "A yakitori has a big belly," the servant said, "It's only as big as my master's belly."

古文：挣大口
现代文：挣大口
English: Earning big bucks

古文：两人好为大言，一人说： 敝乡有一大人，头顶天脚踏地。 
现代文：有两个人好说大话，甲说： 我们那有个很大的人，头顶天脚踏地。 
English: There are two people who like to talk big. A said: We have a big man with his head in the sky and his feet on the ground.

古文：一人曰： 敝乡有一人更大，上嘴唇触天，下嘴唇着地。 
现代文：乙说： 我们那有个人长得更大，上嘴唇触天，下嘴唇着地。 
English: B: One of us is taller than the other. His upper lip touches the sky, and his lower lip touches the ground.

古文：其人问曰： 他身子藏哪里？ 
现代文：甲问道： 他的身子藏在哪里？ 
English: A asked: Where is his body hidden?

古文：答曰： 我只见他挣得一张大口。 
现代文：乙回答说： 我只看见他长了一张大嘴。 
English: B replied: I only saw him grow a big mouth.

古文：天话
现代文：天话
English: A fairy tale

古文：一人说： 昨日某处，天上跌下一个人来，长十丈，大二丈。 
现代文：一个人说： 昨天从天上掉下一个人来，高十丈，宽二丈。 
English: A man said, "Yesterday, a man fell from the sky. He was ten feet tall and two feet wide.

古文：或问之曰： 亦能说话否？ 
现代文：有人问他说： 也能说话吗？ 
English: And they asked him, saying, "Is he able to speak?"

古文：答曰： 也讲几句。 
现代文：回答说： 也讲几句话。 
English: And he answered, I will also speak a few words unto thee.

古文：曰： 讲甚么话？ 
现代文：又问： 讲什么话？ 
English: And he said, What shall I speak?

古文：曰： 讲天话。 
现代文：回答说： 讲天话。 
English: And he answered, Speak thou the words of God.

古文：谎鼓
现代文：谎鼓
English: The Lying Drum

古文：一说谎者曰： 敝处某寺中有一鼓，大几十围，声闻百里。 
现代文：有个说谎的对人说： 我们那某某寺庙里有一鼓，几十人才能围过来，声闻百里。 
English: A lying interlocutor said: There is a drum in our so-and-so temple, and only a few dozen people can surround it and hear it from a hundred miles away.

古文：傍又一人曰： 敝地有一牛，头在江南，尾在江北，足重有万余斤。岂不是奇事？ 
现代文：旁边又一个人说： 我们那有一头牛，头在江南，尾在江北，脚重一万多斤，难道不是稀奇之事？ 
English: Next to him, another person said: Isn't it a strange thing that we have a cow with its head in the south of the river and its tail in the north of the river, and its feet weigh more than ten thousand kilos?

古文：众人不信。
现代文：众人不相信。
English: People don't believe it.

古文：其人曰： 若没有这头大牛，如何得这张大皮，幔得这面大鼓？ 
现代文：那人说： 如果没有这样大的牛，就不会得到那样大的牛皮，那么用什么去蒙那张大鼓。 
English: The man said, "If there were no such big cow, we wouldn't get such a big cowhide, so how are we going to cover the big drum?"

古文：大浴盆
现代文：大浴盆
English: Large bath basin

古文：好说谎者对人曰： 敝处某寺有一脚盆，可使千万人同浴。 
现代文：有个好说谎的对人说： 我们那某某寺院有个大浴盆，可供几千人一同洗浴。 
English: A good liar once said to someone: Our so-and-so temple has a large tub that can accommodate several thousand people bathing together.

古文：闻者不信。
现代文：听者不相信。
English: The audience didn't believe it.

古文：傍一人曰： 此是常事，何足为奇？
现代文：旁边一人说： 此是常事，何足为奇。
English: A bystander said: "This is a regular occurrence, what a surprise."

古文：敝地一新闻。说来才觉诧异。 
现代文：我们那有一新闻说起来才觉得诧异。 
English: We were surprised when we heard the news.

古文：人问： 何事？ 
现代文：人们问： 什么新闻？ 
English: People ask: what news?

古文：曰： 某寺有一竹林，不及三年，遂长有几百万丈。
现代文：那人说： 某某寺院有一竹林，不到三年的时间，就长到几百万丈。
English: The man said, "A certain temple has a bamboo forest. In less than three years, it has grown to millions of meters.

古文：如今顶着天长不上去，又从天上长下来。
现代文：如今顶着天长不上去，又从天上长下来。
English: Now, it can't grow up against the sky, but it can grow down from the sky.

古文：岂不是奇事？ 
现代文：难道不是奇事？ 
English: Isn't that a miracle?

古文：众人皆谓诳言。
现代文：众人都认为他的话是欺骗之言。
English: Everyone thought his words were a lie.

古文：其人曰： 若没有这等长竹，叫他把甚么篾子，箍他那只大脚盆？ 
现代文：那人说： 如果没有那样的长竹，叫他用什么竹篾子去箍他那只大浴盆？ 
English: The man said: If there is no such long bamboo, what kind of bamboo rake should he use to clean his large bathtub?

古文：误听
现代文：误听
English: Misheard

古文：一人过桥，贴边而走。
现代文：有个人过桥，贴边而走。
English: There was a man crossing the bridge, walking close to the edge.

古文：旁人谓曰： 看仔细，不要踏了空。 
现代文：旁边一人对那人说： 看仔细，不要踏了空。 
English: A bystander said to the man: "Look carefully, don't step in the air."

古文：其人误听说他偷了葱，因而大怒，争辩不已，复转诉一人。
现代文：那人误听为说他偷了葱，因而大怒，争吵不休，二人转述另一人。
English: The man misheard him as saying that he had stolen the onions, and he flew into a rage, quarreled endlessly, and the two recounted the other person.

古文：其人曰： 你们又来好笑，你我素不相识，怎么冤我盗了钟？ 
现代文：其人说： 你们实在好笑，我和你们素不相识，为何冤枉我盗了钟？ 
English: The man said: "You are really funny. I don't know you. Why did you accuse me of stealing the bell?

古文：互相撕打。三人扭结到官。
现代文：三人互相撕打，扭打到官府。
English: The three of them tore at each other and scuffled all the way to the government office.

古文：官问三人情事，拍案怒曰： 朝廷设立衙门，叫我南面坐，尔等反叫我朝了东！ 
现代文：当官的听了三人扭打的缘由，拍案咆哮道： 朝廷设立衙门，叫我南面坐，你们反说我朝了东。 
English: When the official heard the reason for the three men's scuffle, he roared, "The imperial court set up a gate and told me to sit in the south, but you say I went to the east.

古文：掣签就打。
现代文：随即操起竹板就打。
English: He immediately picked up the bamboo board and started playing.

古文：官民争闹。惊动后堂。
现代文：官民争辩吵闹，惊动后堂。
English: Officials and citizens argue noisily, startling the back hall.

古文：适奶奶在屏后窃听。闻之柳眉倒竖，抢出堂来，拍案吵闹曰： 我不曾干下歹事。为何通同众百姓要我嫁老公！ 
现代文：正好官妇人在屏幕后边窃听，听后柳眉倒竖，闯出堂来，拍案吵闹道： 我不曾做了坏事，为什么通城百姓要我嫁老公！ 
English: Just then, the official's wife was eavesdropping behind the screen. After listening, she raised her eyebrows and stormed out of the courtroom, shouting loudly: I have never done anything bad, why do the people of Tongcheng want me to marry my husband!

古文：招弗得
现代文：招弗得
English: Zhaofu District

古文：松江人无子，一友问： 尊嫂曾养否？ 
现代文：有个松江人没有儿子，一个朋友问： 尊嫂曾经养过吗？ 
English: A friend of a Matsue resident who did not have a son asked: Did your wife ever have a son?

古文：其人答曰： 房下养是常常养呢，只是孽深招勿得。 
现代文：松江人回答说： 我老婆养是常常养的，只是孽深招不得。 
English: The man from Matsue replied, "My wife often feeds me, but I am too sinful to invite her.

