古文：薛尊师王老黑叟刘无名
现代文：薛尊师王老黑叟刘无名
English: Xue Zun Shi Wang Laohai Yao Liu Nameless

古文：薛尊师
现代文：薛尊师
English: by Master Xue

古文：薛尊师者，家世荣显。则天末，兄弟数人。皆至二千石。
现代文：薛尊师，家世荣耀显贵，武则天末年，他们兄弟几人，俸禄都达到两千石。
English: Xue Zongshi, family glory, Wu Zetian, several of their brothers, their salaries all reached two thousand koku.

古文：身为阳翟令。
现代文：他本身做阳翟县令。
English: He himself became the county magistrate of Yangpu County.

古文：而数年间，兄弟沦丧都尽，遂精心归道，弃官入山，妻儿悉弃。
现代文：但几年之间，他的兄弟们，死的死，亡的亡，都没了。于是他决心皈依道教。放弃官职进入深山，连妻子儿女都抛弃了。
English: But within a few years, his brothers, dead, dead, dead, were all gone. So he decided to convert to Taoism. He gave up his official position and went deep into the mountains, abandoning his wife and children.

古文：召同志者，唯有邑小胥唐臣愿从之。
现代文：招集志趣相同的人，只有县里的低级小官吏唐臣，愿意跟随他。
English: Only Tang Chen, a low-ranking minor official in the county, is willing to follow him.

古文：杖策负囊，往嵩山口。
现代文：他们手持拐杖背着行囊，向嵩山山口走去。
English: Holding crutches and carrying backpacks, they walked toward the Songshan Pass.

古文：忽遇一人。自山而出。
现代文：路上忽然遇见一个人，从山里面出来。
English: On the way, I suddenly met a man coming out of the mountains.

古文：自云求道之人，姓陈。云如近有仙境。
现代文：这人自己说是求道的，姓陈，并说他知道附近有仙境。
English: The man, surnamed Chen, described himself as a seeker and said he knew there was a fairyland nearby.

古文：薛遂求问其路。
现代文：薛尊师就求问去仙境的道路。
English: Master Xue asked for the way to the fairyland.

古文：陈曰： 吾有小事诣都，约三日而回。回当奉导。君且於此相待。 
现代文：姓陈的人说： 我有小事到都城去，大约三天就回来了，回来后给你们作向导，你们暂且在这里等候。 
English: The man surnamed Chen said: I have a small matter to go to the capital, and I will return in about three days. After returning, I will guide you, and you will wait here for the time being.

古文：薛与唐子止於路口。
现代文：薛尊师和唐臣就停在路口。
English: Mr. Xue and Mr. Tang stopped at the intersection.

古文：陈至期而至。
现代文：姓陈的人到约定的日子就回来了。
English: The man surnamed Chen came back on the appointed day.

古文：陈曰： 但止於此，吾当入山求之。知所诣，即来相报。 
现代文：说： 你们先停在这里，我先进山寻找那个地方，知道了前往的地方，立刻回来相告。 
English: He said, "You stop here first. I'll go to the top of the mountain and look for that place. Once I know where I'm going, I'll come back and let you know."

古文：期以五日，既而过期，十日不至。
现代文：当时约定以五天为期限，可已经过了期限，十天还没来。
English: At that time, it was agreed that the deadline would be five days, but the deadline has already passed and ten days have not yet come.

古文：薛曰： 陈生岂相绐乎？
现代文：薛尊师说： 陈生难道是欺骗我们吗？
English: Master Xue said, "Is Chen Sheng really deceiving us?

古文：吾当自往。 
现代文：我应当自己去。 
English: I should go myself.

古文：遂缘磴入谷三四十里。忽於路侧见一死人，虎食其半，乃陈山人也。
现代文：于是沿着石头台阶进入山谷，大约走了有三四十里，忽然在路旁看见一个死人，已经被虎吃了一半，这个人正是陈山人。
English: So he followed the stone steps into the valley, walked about thirty or forty miles, and suddenly saw a dead man on the side of the road, who had been half eaten by a tiger. This man was a native of the Chen Mountains.

古文：唐子谓尊师曰： 本入山为求长生，今反为虎狼之餐。
现代文：唐臣对薛尊师说： 本来入山是为了寻求长生不死的，现在反倒成为虎狼之食了。
English: Tang Chen said to Xue Zunshi: Originally, I went into the mountains to seek immortality, but now I have become food for tigers and wolves.

古文：陈山人尚如此，我独何人？
现代文：陈山人尚且如此，我们算什么人呢？
English: Even though Chen Shan people are like this, who are we?

古文：不如归人世以终天年耳。 
现代文：不如回到人世间而终天年罢了。 
English: It would be better to return to the human world and live happily ever after.

古文：尊师曰： 吾闻嵩岳本灵仙之地，岂为此害？
现代文：薛尊师说： 我听说嵩山本是神灵仙人居住的地方，怎么会受这种伤害。
English: Master Xue said, "I heard that Mount Song was originally a place where gods and immortals lived, so how could it be damaged like this?

古文：盖陈山人所以激吾志也。汝归，吾当终至。必也不幸而死，终无恨焉。 
现代文：大概是陈山人用这个激励我们的意志，你回去吧，我一定要坚持到底，倘若也是不幸而死，那死也不遗憾了。 
English: It was probably Chen Shanren who inspired us with this will, you go back, I must persevere to the end, if it is unfortunate to die, that death is not regrettable.

古文：言讫直往，唐亦决意从之。
现代文：说完一直往前走去。唐臣也决定跟他去。
English: After saying this, he walked straight ahead. Tang Chen also decided to go with him.

古文：夜即宿於石岩之下，昼则缘磴而行。
现代文：夜晚就宿在石壁下面，白天沿着石磴向上。
English: At night, they sleep under the stone wall, and during the day, they climb up along the ledge.

古文：数日，忽见一岩下，长松数百株，中有道士六人，如修药之状。
现代文：过了几天，忽然看见一面岩石下面，长了几百株松树，松林中有六个道士，象炼制药材的样子。
English: A few days later, I suddenly saw hundreds of pine trees growing under a rock. There were six Taoist monks in the pine forest, looking like refined pharmaceutical materials.

古文：薛遂顶礼求诸。
现代文：薛尊师就叩拜请求各位道士。
English: Venerable Master Xue asked all the Taoists to bow down.

古文：道士曰： 吾虽至此，自服药耳。亦无术可以授君。 
现代文：道士说： 我们虽然到了这里，不过自己服药罢了，也没有什么道术可以传授给你们。 
English: The Taoist said: Although we have come here, we have only taken medicine ourselves, and there is no Taoism that can be taught to you.

古文：俄睹一禅室中，有一老僧。
现代文：一会儿，看见一个禅室中有一个年老和尚。
English: After a while, I saw an old monk in a Zen room.

古文：又礼拜求问。
现代文：薛尊师又向和尚叩拜求教。
English: Master Xue bowed to the monk and asked for advice.

古文：僧亦无言。
现代文：和尚也不说话。
English: The monk did not speak either.

古文：忽於僧床下见藤蔓缘壁出户。僧指蔓视。
现代文：忽然在和尚床下出现一藤蔓沿着墙壁出了门，和尚指着藤蔓让他们看，薛尊师于是寻找藤蔓的去向出了门。
English: Suddenly, a vine appeared under the monk's bed and ran along the wall out of the door. The monk pointed to the vine and asked them to look at it. Xue then went out of the door to find out where the vine had gone.

古文：薛遂寻蔓出，具蔓傍岩壁不绝，经两日犹未尽，忽至流泉。石室中有道士数人，围棋饮酒，其陈山人亦在。
现代文：看见藤蔓靠着石壁连绵不断，经过两天还没到尽头。忽然遇到一个流泉，旁边有一石室，石室中有几个道士，一边下棋一边饮酒。那个陈山人也在。
English: I saw vines growing continuously against the stone wall, and after two days they still hadn't come to an end. Suddenly, I came across a flowing spring, with a stone room next to it. In the stone room, there were several Taoists, playing chess and drinking alcohol. The man from the Chen Mountains was also there.

古文：笑谓薛曰： 何忽而至？
现代文：他笑着对薛尊师说： 为什么忽然到这里来。
English: He smiled and said to Master Xue, "Why did you suddenly come here?"

古文：子之志可教也。 
现代文：你的志向坚定可以教育。 
English: Your determination can be taught.

古文：遂指授道要。
现代文：于是向薛尊师传授道术要领。
English: So he taught the essentials of Taoism to Master Xue.

古文：亦见俗人於此伐薪采药不绝。
现代文：薛尊师也看见俗人在这里砍柴采药，络绎不绝。
English: Venerable Master Xue also saw lay people cutting firewood and collecting medicines here.

古文：问其所，云 终南山紫阁峰下，去长安城七十里。 
现代文：问他们这是什么地方，他们说： 这是终南山紫阁峰下，距离长安城七十里。 
English: Ask them where it is, and they say: It's at the foot of Zigu Peak on the southernmost mountain, seventy miles from Chang'an City.

古文：尊师道成后入京，居于昊天观，玄风益振。
现代文：薛尊师学成道术之后进入京师，居住在昊天观。从此京师道教更加振兴了。
English: After Master Xue became a Taoist, he entered the Beijing School and lived in Haotian. Since then, the Beijing School of Taoism has been further revitalized.

古文：时唐玄宗皇帝奉道，数召入内礼谒。
现代文：当时唐玄宗皇帝信奉道教，几次召薛尊师入内宫礼谒。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty was a believer in Taoism, and he invited Xue Zunshi to enter the inner palace several times.

古文：开元末，时已百余岁，忽告门人曰： 天帝召我为八威观主。 
现代文：开元末年，薛尊师当时已经一百多岁了。忽然告诉弟子说： 天帝召我去做八威观主。 
English: At the end of the first year of the 21st century, Master Xue, who was more than a hundred years old at the time, suddenly told his disciple, "The Heavenly Emperor has called me to be the Eight-Powered Observer."

古文：无病而坐亡，颜色不变。
现代文：无病端坐死去，脸色不变。
English: He died sitting up without any ailment, his face unchanged.

古文：遂于本院中造塔，不塞塔户。每至夜，辄召弟子唐君，告以修行之术。
现代文：就在本院给他建造一墓塔，不砌死塔门，每到夜里，就召见他的弟子唐臣，告诉他修行的道术。
English: In this temple, a tomb tower was built for him, but no mortuary gate. Every night, he would call his disciple, Tang Chen, to tell him the techniques of the practice.

古文：后以俗人礼谒烦杂，遂敕塞其塔户。
现代文：后来因为俗人礼谒的太多，十分烦乱，就敕命关闭了他的塔门。
English: Later, he closed the gate of his pagoda with all his might, because he was disturbed by too many people's eulogies.

古文：唐君后亦为国师焉。
现代文：唐臣后来也成为国师了。
English: Tang Chen later became the national teacher.

古文：王老
现代文：王老
English: Wang Lao

古文：有王老者，常于西京卖药，累世见之。
现代文：有个叫王老的人，常在西京卖药，几个世代的人都见到过他。
English: There is a man called Wang Lao, who often sells medicine in West Beijing. People of several generations have seen him.

古文：李司仓者，家在胜业里，知是术士，心恒敬异，待之有加。
现代文：有个叫李司仓的人，家住在胜业里。他知道王老是个术士，心里一直非常敬重他，招待他更加周到。
English: There was a man named Li Sicang, who lived in Shengye. He knew that Wang Lao was a sorcerer, and he had always held him in high esteem, so his invitation was even more thoughtful.

古文：故王老往来依止李氏，且十余载。
现代文：所以王老来来往往就住在李家，将近十多年。
English: So Wang Laolai often stayed at Li's home for nearly ten years.

古文：李后求随入山，王亦相招。
现代文：李司仓后来请求随他入山学道，王老也欣然相召。
English: Later, Li Sicang asked Wang Lao to follow him into the mountain school, and Wang Lao gladly accepted.

古文：遂仆御数人，骑马俱去。
现代文：于是李司仓带了几个仆人，骑马一起跟去了。
English: So Li Sicang took a few servants with him and rode off together.

古文：可行百余里，峰峦高峭，攀藤缘树，直上数里，非人迹所至。
现代文：大约走了一百多里，便无路可走，只是峰峦叠嶂，高峭入云。他们攀藤爬树，一直上了几里，都不是人的踪迹所能到的地方。
English: After walking for more than a hundred miles, there was no way to go, only peaks and ridges, high into the clouds. They climbed vines and trees for several miles, all of which were out of reach of human footprints.

古文：王云： 与子偕行，犹恐不达神仙之境；非仆御所至，悉宜遣之。 
现代文：王老说： 和你一块走，恐怕还不能到达神仙住的地方，就更不是仆人所能到的了。
English: Wang Lao said, "If I go with you, I'm afraid I won't be able to reach the place where the immortals live, let alone the servants.

古文：李如其言，与王至峰顶。
现代文：应该全遣散他们，李司仓依照他的话做了，遣散了跟随的仆人，和王老一起到了峰顶。
English: They should all be dismissed. Li Sichang did as he said, dismissed the servants who followed him, and reached the peak together with Wang Lao.

古文：田畴平坦，药畦石泉，佳景差次。
现代文：峰顶地势平坦，有药畦和泉水，景色美好。
English: The top of the peak is flat, there are medicinal springs and springs, and the scenery is beautiful.

古文：须臾，又至林口，道士数人，来问王老，知邀嘉宾，故复相候。
现代文：不一会儿，又来到一树林边，有几个道士来问候王老。知道你邀请嘉宾，所以在此相候。
English: A short while later, we came to the edge of a forest, where several Taoists came to greet Wang Lao. They knew that you had invited guests, so they waited for each other here.

古文：李随至其居，茅屋竹亭，潇洒可望。
现代文：李司仓跟随王老到他的住处，那里是茅屋竹亭，潇洒可望。
English: Li Sicang followed Wang Lao to his place of residence, which was a thatched bamboo pavilion.

古文：中有学生数十人，见李各来问其亲戚，或不言。
现代文：里面有学生几十人，看见李司仓，各自来问他们的亲戚，有的什么也不说。
English: There were dozens of students inside, and when they saw Li Sicang, they all came to ask their relatives, and some didn't say anything.

古文：或惆怅者云： 先生不在，今宜少留。
现代文：有一个有些伤感的人说： 因为先生不在，现在还要停留一些时候，在这等待。
English: One sad-looking person said, "Because my teacher is not here, I have to stay here for a while and wait."

古文：具厨饭蔬菜，不异人间也。 
现代文：这里准备着一般的饭菜，和人间没有什么不同。 
English: Ordinary meals are prepared here, no different from those on earth.

古文：为李设食。
现代文：给李司仓设置的饮食。
English: The meal set up for Li Sicang.

古文：经数日，有五色云霞覆地，有三白鹤随云而下。于是书生各出，如迎候状。
现代文：经过几天，有五色云霞遮盖大地，有三只白鹤随云而下，於是书生各自出来，象迎候宾客的样子。
English: After a few days, five-colored clouds covered the earth, and three white cranes descended with the clouds, so the students came out separately, as if they were welcoming guests.

古文：有顷云： 先生至。 
现代文：过了一会儿，有人说： 先生到了。 
English: After a while, someone said: "The teacher has arrived."

古文：见一老人，须发鹤素，从云际来。
现代文：李司仓看见一位老人，须发雪白，从云彩的边缘处走来。
English: Li Sicang saw an old man with snow-white hair coming from the edge of the cloud.

古文：王老携李迎拜道左。
现代文：王老携带李司仓在道路左侧迎拜。
English: Wang Lao carried Li Shicang to bow to him on the left side of the road.

古文：先生问王老： 何以将他人来此！
现代文：先生问王老，为什么带别人来这里。
English: The teacher asked Wang Lao why he brought others here.

古文：诸生拜谒讫，各就房。李亦入一室。
现代文：众书生叩拜完毕，各自回房，李司仓也进了一室。
English: After all the students had finished their prostrations, they all went back to their rooms. Li Sicang also went into a room.

古文：时颇炎热，李出寻泉，将欲洗浴。
现代文：当时天气很炎热，李司仓出来寻找泉水，想用泉水洗澡。
English: At that time, the weather was very hot. Li Sicang went out to look for spring water and wanted to take a bath with spring water.

古文：行百余步，至一石泉，见白鹤数十，从岩岭下，来至石上，罗到成行。
现代文：走了一百多步，来到一个石泉，看见几十只白鹤从石峰上飞下来，来到石上，排列成行。
English: Walked more than a hundred steps, came to a stone spring, saw dozens of white cranes flying down from the stone peak, came to the stone, lined up in rows.

古文：俄而奏乐，音响清亮，非人间所有。
现代文：一会儿，开始奏乐，乐声清脆响亮，是人间所没有的。
English: A moment later, the music begins. The music is crisp and loud, like nothing else on earth.

古文：李卑伏听其妙音。
现代文：李司仓低下身去伏在地上听那奥妙的声音。
English: Li Sicang bent down to the ground to listen to the mysterious sound.

古文：乐毕飞去。
现代文：白鹤奏完乐都飞走了。
English: After the white cranes finished playing, they all flew away.

古文：李还说其事。
现代文：李司仓返回来说那件事。
English: Li Sicang returned to report the incident.

古文：先生问得无犯仙官否？ 答云： 不敢。 
现代文：先生问他有没有触犯仙官，李司仓回答说： 学生不敢。 
English: The teacher asked him if he had offended the eunuch, and Li Sicang replied, "Students don't dare.

古文：先生谓李公曰： 君有官禄，未合住此；待仕官毕，方可来耳。 
现代文：先生对李公说： 你命里有官禄，不应当住在这里。等到仕宦生涯结束了，才可以来。 
English: The teacher said to Li Gong, "You are destined to have an official position, you should not live here. You can only come here when your service life is over."

古文：因命王老送李出，曰： 山中要牛两头，君可送至藤下。 
现代文：说完，就命令王老送李司仓出来。王老对李司仓说： 山中要两头牛，你可以送到藤下。 
English: After saying this, he ordered Wang Lao to send Li Sicang out. Wang Lao said to Li Sicang: If you want two cows in the mountains, you can send them to Fujishita.

古文：李买牛送讫，遂无复见路耳。
现代文：李司仓买了牛送去，就再也不见他走过的路了。
English: Li Sicang bought a cow and sent it, and he never saw the road he walked on again.

古文：黑叟
现代文：黑叟
English: Black locusts

古文：唐宝应中，越州观察使皇甫政妻陆氏，有姿容而无子息。
现代文：唐代宗宝应年间，越州观察使皇甫政的妻子陆氏，容貌很美丽，但没有儿子。
English: During the Zongbao era of the Tang Dynasty, Lu, the wife of Emperor Fuzheng, was observed in Yuezhou. She was very beautiful, but had no son.

古文：州有寺名宝林，中有魔母神堂，越中士女求男女者，必报验焉。
现代文：越州里有一座寺院，名叫宝林寺，寺院里有魔母神堂。越州城中的男男女女，凡是来许愿祈求儿女的，必定是回报应验。
English: There is a temple in Yuezhou, called Baolin Temple, and there is a hall of the Mother of God in the temple. All the men and women in Yuezhou city who come to make a wish and pray for children will surely be rewarded.

古文：政暇日，率妻孥入寺，至魔母堂，捻香祝曰： 祈一男，请以俸钱百万贯缔构堂宇。 
现代文：皇甫政在空闲的日子，领着妻子进入宝林寺，到魔母神堂，捻香祝祷说： 向魔母祈求一个男孩，果然如愿，请神灵允许我用俸禄钱一百万贯建造堂宇。 
English: On his free day, Emperor Fuzheng led his wife into the Baolin Temple and went to the Demon Mother Shrine, where he twisted incense and said: "I prayed to the Demon Mother for a boy, and my wish came true. I asked the gods to allow me to use one million rupees of my salary to build the temple."

古文：陆氏又曰： 傥遂所愿，亦以脂粉钱百万，别绘神仙。 
现代文：陆氏接着又说： 倘若遂了我们的心愿，我也用脂粉一百万贯，另画神仙的像。 
English: Mr. Lu went on to say, "If our wish comes true, I will also use a million gallons of greasepaint to paint another image of a fairy godmother.

古文：既而寺中游，薄暮方还。
现代文：接着皇甫政夫妇在寺院四处游览，到了傍晚才回家。
English: The Imperial couple then toured around the temple, returning home in the late afternoon.

古文：两月余，妻孕，果生男。
现代文：过了两个多月，皇甫政的妻子怀孕了，后来果然生了一个男孩。
English: After more than two months, Emperor Hou Zheng's wife became pregnant and later gave birth to a boy.

古文：政大喜，构堂三间，穷极华丽。
现代文：皇甫政大喜，建造了三间堂宇，极其富丽堂皇。
English: The Emperor was overjoyed and built three magnificent palaces.

古文：陆氏于寺门外筑钱百万，募画工。
现代文：他的妻子陆氏在寺院门外堆了一百万贯钱，招募画工。
English: His wife, Ms. Lu, piled up a million yuan outside the temple gate to recruit painters.

古文：自汴、滑、徐、泗、杨、润、潭、洪及天下画者，日有至焉。
现代文：从汴、滑、徐、泗、杨、润、潭、洪等地和全国各地的画工，天天有来到的。
English: Painters from various places such as Handan, Nanning, Xu, Handan, Yang, Run, Tan and Hong and from all over the country come here every day.

古文：但以其偿过多，皆不敢措手。
现代文：只是因为它的赏钱太多，都不敢着手。
English: It's just that they don't dare to do it because the reward is too much.

古文：忽一人不说姓名，称剑南来，且言善画，泊寺中月余。
现代文：忽然有一个人不说姓名，自己说是从剑南来的，并说善于绘画。要接手绘神仙像一事。
English: Suddenly, one person, who did not give his name, said that he was from southern Jian and that he was good at painting. He wanted to take over the painting of the immortal statue.

古文：一日视其堂壁，数点头。
现代文：他在寺院里停留了一个多月，一天，他看着那堂宇的墙壁，不住的点头。
English: He stayed in the temple for more than a month. One day, he looked at the walls of the hall and kept nodding.

古文：主事僧曰： 何不速成其事耶？ 
现代文：主事的和尚说： 你为什么不快点完成那件画像的事情呢？ 
English: The monk in charge said, "Why don't you hurry up and finish that painting thing?"

古文：其人笑曰： 请备灯油，将夜缉其事。 
现代文：那人笑着对主事的和尚说： 请你给我准备灯油，我将要在夜里聚集精力完成那件事情。 
English: The man smiled and said to the monk in charge, "Please prepare the lamp oil for me. I will gather my energy in the night to complete the task."

古文：僧从其言。
现代文：主事的和尚依从了他，按他的话做了。
English: The monk in charge obeyed him and did as he said.

古文：至平明，灿烂光明，俨然一壁。
现代文：到天亮的时候，光明灿烂，整整齐齐画满了一墙壁。
English: By dawn, the light is brilliant, neatly painted all over a wall.

古文：画人已不见矣。
现代文：但是绘画的人已经不见了。
English: But the painter has disappeared.

古文：政大设斋，富商来集。
现代文：皇甫政大设斋祭，很多富商都聚集到这里来。
English: Many wealthy merchants gathered here for the Emperor's Feast of Fasting.

古文：政又择日，率军吏州民，大陈伎乐。
现代文：皇甫政又选择了吉日，率领军吏州民，大排歌舞、宴筵。
English: The Emperor also chose a good day to lead the military officials and the people of the state in a grand procession of song and dance and feasting.

古文：至午时，有一人形容丑黑，身长八尺，荷笠莎衣，荷锄而至。阍者拒之，政令召入。
现代文：到中午时，有一个容貌黑丑的人，身高八尺，背着斗笠，穿着蓑衣，扛着锄头而来，看守大门的人拒绝他进门，但是皇甫政却让人招唤他进来。
English: At noon, an ugly, dark-skinned man, eight feet tall, wearing a battle hat, a long robe, and carrying a hoe, came to the gate. The gatekeeper refused to let him in, but the emperor had someone invite him in.

古文：直上魔母堂，举手锄以斸其面。壁乃颓。
现代文：那人进入寺院后，直接上了魔母堂，举起手中的锄头来斫那神像的脸面，墙壁都倒塌了。
English: After the man entered the temple, he went straight to the Hall of the Mother of God, raised the hoe in his hand to hit the face of the statue, and the walls collapsed.

古文：百万之众，鼎沸惊闹，左右武士欲擒杀之，叟无怖色。政问之曰： 尔颠癎耶。 
现代文：大家惊骇叫喊。周围担任护卫的武士，想要把他抓住杀了他，但是那黑丑的老头儿毫无惧色。皇甫政问他说： 你是疯颠吗？ 老头儿说： 不是。 
English: Everyone screamed in horror. The samurai guards around him wanted to catch him and kill him, but the ugly old man had no fear. Emperor Hossho asked him, "Are you crazy?" The old man said, "No."

古文：叟曰： 无。 尔善画耶？ 
现代文：皇甫政又问： 你是善于绘画吗？ 
English: The Emperor asked again, "Are you good at painting?"

古文：叟曰： 无。 
现代文：老头儿又说： 不是。 
English: The old man said, "No."

古文：曰： 缘何事而斸此也？ 
现代文：皇甫政说： 那你为什么来斫这画像呢？ 
English: The Emperor said, "Then why did you take this picture?"

古文：叟曰： 恨画工之罔上也。
现代文：老头儿回答说： 可恨画工蒙蔽上官。
English: The old man replied, "It's a shame that an artist can blind a superior officer.

古文：夫人与上官舍二百万，图写神仙，今比生人，尚不逮矣。 
现代文：夫人和上官施舍二百万贯钱，描画神仙。可是现在画的和真人相比，根本比不了呢。 
English: His wife and his superiors gave him two million rupees as alms, and he painted immortals. However, compared to real people, what he paints now is no better.

古文：政怒而叱之。
现代文：皇甫政大怒并呵斥他。
English: The Emperor was furious and rebuked him.

古文：叟抚掌笑曰： 如其不信，田舍老妻，足为验耳。 
现代文：老头儿拍掌大笑说： 如果你不信，我在乡间的老妻，足够验证的了。 
English: The old man clapped his hands and laughed, "If you don't believe me, my old wife in the countryside is proof enough.

古文：政问曰： 尔妻何在。 
现代文：皇甫政问他说： 你的妻子在什么地方？ 
English: The Emperor asked him, "Where is your wife?"

古文：叟曰： 住处过湖南三二里。 
现代文：老头儿说： 住处在过湖南二、三里的地方。 
English: The old man said, "I live two or three miles beyond Hunan Province.

古文：政令十人随叟召之。
现代文：皇甫政派十个人跟着老头儿去招呼老头儿的妻子。
English: The Emperor sent ten men to follow the old man to greet his wife.

古文：叟自苇庵间，引一女子，年十五六，薄傅粉黛，服不甚奢，艳态媚人，光华动众。
现代文：老头儿从苇庵里引出一个女子，年纪有十五六岁的样子，脸上略微化了点妆，衣着也不奢华，却艳态媚人，光华动众。
English: The old man led a woman out of the hermitage. She looked to be fifteen or sixteen years old, her face was slightly made up, her clothes were not luxurious, but she was attractive and glamorous.

古文：顷刻之间，到宝林寺。
现代文：不一会儿工夫，到了宝林寺。
English: After a while, I arrived at Baolin Temple.

古文：百万之众，引颈骇观，皆言所画神母，果不及耳。
现代文：众人都伸长脖子吃惊地观看，都说所画的神母像，果然是不如她。
English: All the people craned their necks in amazement, saying that the image of the Mother of God they had drawn was indeed not like her.

古文：引至阶前，陆氏为之失色。
现代文：把她领到台阶前，陆氏见她美丽异常也大惊失色。
English: When he led her to the front of the steps, Mr. Lu was shocked to see her extraordinary beauty.

古文：政曰： 尔一贱夫，乃蓄此妇，当进于天子。 
现代文：皇甫政对老头儿说： 你是一个地位卑微的人，却蓄养了这样一个美丽妇人，实在是不该的，应当把她进献给天子。 
English: Emperor Fuzheng said to the old man: You are a low-ranking person, but you have raised such a beautiful woman. It is really not right. You should give her to the Son of Heaven.

古文：叟曰： 待归与田舍亲诀别也。 
现代文：老头儿说： 等我们回去和乡亲告别一下再走吧。 
English: The old man said, "Let's wait until we go back and say goodbye to the villagers before we leave."

古文：政遣卒五十，侍女十人，同诣其家。
现代文：皇甫政应允了，派士卒五十人、侍女十人，一起到他们家。
English: The Emperor agreed and sent fifty servants and ten maidservants to their home.

古文：至江欲渡，叟独在小游艇中，卫卒、侍女、叟妻同一大船，将过江，不觉叟妻于急流之处，忽然飞入游艇中。
现代文：到了江边要过江，老头儿单独在小游艇中，卫卒侍女和老头的妻子同乘一大船。将要过江，不知不觉中老头的妻子在急流处忽然飞入游艇中。
English: When he got to the river to cross it, the old man was alone in a small yacht, and the stewardess and the old man's wife were on a big boat. When they were about to cross the river, the old man's wife suddenly flew into the yacht in the rapids.

古文：人皆惶怖，疾棹趋之。夫妻已出，携手而行。
现代文：人们都惊惶恐怖起来，急忙划船去追赶他们，他们夫妻二人已经走出游艇，上岸并肩携手而行了。
English: Panicked and frightened, people scrambled to catch up with them, and the couple got out of the yacht and walked hand-in-hand to shore.

古文：又追之，二人俱化为白鹤，冲天而去。
现代文：又追他们，二人都化为白鹤，冲上天空远飞而去。
English: He chased after them, and both of them turned into white cranes, soaring into the sky and flying away.

古文：刘无名
现代文：刘无名
English: Liu Muzhong

古文：刘无名，成都人也。
现代文：刘无名，是成都人。
English: Liu, who has no name, is from Chengdu.

古文：本蜀先主之后，居于蜀焉。
现代文：原本三国时期西蜀先主刘备的后代，居住在四川。
English: Originally, the descendants of Liu Bei, the ancestor of Western Shu during the Three Kingdoms period, lived in Sichuan.

古文：生而聪悟。
现代文：他生来就聪明颖悟。
English: He was born brilliant.

古文：八九岁，道士过其家，见而叹曰： 此儿若学道，当长生神仙矣。 
现代文：八九岁的时候，道士经过他的家，看见他就感叹地说： 这个小孩如果学道术，能成为长生神仙了。 
English: When he was eighty-nine years old, a Taoist priest passed by his home, saw him, and said with regret: "If this child studies Taoism, he can become an immortal god."

古文：自是好道探玄，不乐名利。
现代文：从这以后刘无名喜好道术，研究玄理，不喜欢名利。
English: Since then, Liu Mumei has been fond of Daoism, studying metaphysics, and dislikes fame and fortune.

古文：弱冠，阅道经，学咽气朝拜，存真内修之术。常以庚申日守三尸，存神默咒，服黄精、白术，志希延生。
现代文：二十岁左右的时候，阅读道经，学习咽气朝拜、存真内修之术，常以庚申日守三尸神，保存精神默念咒语，吃黄精白术，志向是希望延长生命。
English: When I was around twenty years old, I read Taoist sutras, learned how to choke the breath and worship the dragon, practiced the inner cultivation technique of concentration, often kept the three dead gods in the morning and evening, preserved the spirit and silently recited spells, and ate the yellow essence. My aspiration was to prolong my life.

古文：或见古方，言草木之药，但愈疾微效，见火辄为灰烬，自不能固，岂有延年之力哉。
现代文：有时看见古代药方上说的草木之类的药，只是治愈疾病有微效，遇见火就成灰烬。自己都不能稳固，怎么能有延年益寿的力量呢？
English: Sometimes we see herbs and other medicines mentioned in ancient prescriptions, but they only have a slight effect on curing diseases. If they meet fire, they will turn into ashes. They are not stable, so how can they have the power to prolong life?

古文：乃涉历山川，访师求道。
现代文：于是跋山涉水，游历名山大川，访师求道。
English: As a result, he waded through mountains and rivers, traveled famous mountains and rivers, and visited teachers to ask for directions.

古文：数年入雾中山，尝遇人教其服饵雄黄，三十余年。
现代文：几年后进入雾中山，曾经遇到一个人，叫他吃雄黄，达三十多年。
English: A few years later, when he entered the misty mountains, he once met a man who told him to eat horse chestnuts for more than thirty years.

古文：一旦有二人，赤巾朱服，径诣其室。
现代文：一天有两个包红头巾穿红衣服的人，直闯进他的住室。
English: One day, two men wearing red clothes and red bandanas burst into his room.

古文：刘问其何人也？
现代文：刘无名问他们是什么人？
English: Liu asked anonymously, "Who are they?"

古文：何以及此？
现代文：为什么到他这来？
English: Why did he come here?

古文：对曰： 我泰山直符，追摄子耳。不知子以何术，顶有黄光。至三日矣，冥期迫促，而无计近子，将恐阴符遣责，以稽延获罪，故见形相问耳。 
现代文：那两个人回答说： 我们是泰山直符，追赶勾取你，但不知你用的什么法术，头顶上有黄光，我们到这里三天了，阴曹地府的期限紧迫，然而没有办法靠近你，又害怕阴府怪罪谴责，因为停留延误期限要获罪，所以现出身形向你询问。 
English: The two men replied, "We are the direct messengers of Mount Tai, we are chasing you, but we don't know what spell you are using, there is a yellow light above our heads, we have been here for three days, the devil's deadline is tight, but we can't get close to you, and we are afraid of the devil's blame and condemnation, because the delay period is to be punished, so we are here to ask you.

古文：刘曰： 余无他术，但冥心至道，不视声利，静处幽山，志希度世而已。 
现代文：刘无名说： 我没有别的法术，只是深入地静心至道，不追求名声利禄，安静地置身深山，志向是希望度世罢了。 
English: Liu Muzhong said, "I don't have any other magic, I just meditate deeply on the Tao. I don't pursue fame or fortune, I stay quietly in the mountains. My ambition is to live out my days."

古文：二使曰： 子之黄光，照灼于顶，迢高数丈，得非雄黄之功？
现代文：二位使者说： 你的黄光，照耀在头顶上，高过几丈，恐怕是雄黄的功用吧？
English: The two emissaries said, "Your yellow light, shining above your head, is several stories high. I'm afraid it's a male function, isn't it?

古文：然吾闻一阴一阳之谓道，一金一石之谓丹，子但服其石，未饵其金，但得其阳，未知其阴，将何以超生死之难，期升腾之道乎？
现代文：然而我听说一阴一阳谓之道，一金一石叫做丹。你只服那石，不吃那金，只能得到阳，却不了解阴，又凭什么超脱生死的难关，期望升天飞腾的道术呢？
English: However, I have heard that one yin and one yang is called the Tao, and one gold and one stone is called Dan. If you only wear the stone and don't eat the gold, you can only get the yang, but don't understand the yin, and how can you overcome the difficulties of life and death and expect to soar into the sky?

古文：其次广施阴功，救人济物，柔和雅静，无欲无为，至孝至忠，内修密行，功满三千，然后黑籍落名，青华定箓。
现代文：其次，要广泛地布施阴功，挽救人，接济人，温和，雅静，没有情欲和贪心，尽孝尽忠，内心秘密修行，功德满了三千，然后才能从黑籍中落去名字，定在青华名册中。
English: Secondly, it is necessary to widely spread yin gong, save people, help people, be gentle, elegant and quiet, have no lust and greed, be filial and loyal, practice secretly in the heart, and complete three thousand merits, and then the name can be removed from the black book and placed in the youth roster.

古文：制御神鬼，驱驾云龙，而上补仙官，永除地简。
现代文：能控制神鬼，驾驭云龙，补进天上仙官的行列，从阴曹地府的名册中永远除去名字。
English: Able to control gods and demons, harness dragons and clouds, replenish the ranks of celestial magicians, and permanently remove names from the roster of the Evil Empire.

古文：九祖超炼，七玄生天。
现代文：九祖超炼，七玄生天。
English: Nine ancestors are super-refined, and seven ancestors are born.

古文：如此则不为冥官所追捕耳。
现代文：象这样就不会被冥官追捕了。
English: That way, you won't be hunted by the Necromancer.

古文：今子虽三尸已去，而积功未著，大限既尽，将及死期，岂可苟免也？ 
现代文：现在你虽然三尸已去，但积功不显著，寿数已经没有了，将要到死期，怎么可以苟且求免呢？ 
English: Now, although the three corpses are gone, your accumulated merits are not significant, your life expectancy is gone, and you are about to die. How can you ask for forgiveness?

古文：刘闻其语，心魂丧越，忧迫震惧，不知所为。
现代文：刘无名听了他的话，丧魂落魄，震惊恐惧，不知所措。
English: Liu Muxun listened to his words, lost his soul, shocked and frightened, and at a loss.

古文：二使徐谓之曰： 岷峨青城，神仙之府，可以求诣真师，访寻道要。
现代文：二位使者慢慢对他说： 岷山、峨眉山、青城山，都是神仙的洞府，可以到那里去寻找真师，访寻道术要领。
English: The two emissaries slowly said to him, "Mount Lushan, Mount Emei, and Mount Qingcheng are all sacred caves. You can go there to find a true teacher and learn the essentials of Taoism.

古文：我闻铅汞朱髓，可致冲天，此非高真上仙，莫得修炼之旨。
现代文：我听说铅汞朱髓，可以冲天。不是高真上仙，不能得到修炼的真义。
English: I've heard that lead, mercury and vermilion quartz can reach the sky. It's not high-truth immortality, and you can't get the true meaning of cultivation.

古文：我为子求姓名同，年寿尽者，以代于子。
现代文：我给你寻找和你姓名相同、寿数已尽的人，用他来代替你。
English: I'll find someone with the same name as you, who has reached the end of his life, and replace you with him.

古文：子勉而勤修，无至中怠也。 
现代文：你要努办勤奋修行，不要中途懈怠呀。 
English: You should work hard and practice diligently. Don't slack off in the middle.

古文：刘致谢二使。二使乃隐。
现代文：刘无名拜谢了二位使者，二位使者就隐去了身形不见了。
English: Liu Nameless thanked the two emissaries, and the two emissaries disappeared.

古文：刘如其言，入峨眉岷山，登陟峭险，探求洞穴，历年不遇。
现代文：刘无名按照他们的话，进入峨眉山、岷山，登攀险崖峭壁，探索寻找洞穴，经历几年也没遇到。
English: According to their words, Liu Muzhong entered Mount Emei and Mount Lushan, climbed dangerous cliffs and cliffs, explored and searched for caves, and did not encounter them for several years.

古文：复入青城山，北崖之下得一洞。
现代文：又进入青城山，在北崖的下面找到一个洞。
English: He entered Qingcheng Mountain again and found a hole at the bottom of the north cliff.

古文：行数里，忽觉平博，殆非人世。遇神仙居其间，云青城真人。
现代文：进去后，走了几里，忽然发觉平坦宽阔，大概不是人世，遇到神仙居住在那里，说是青城真人。
English: After entering, walked a few miles, suddenly found a flat and wide, probably not a human world, met the immortal living there, said to be Qingcheng real people.

古文：刘祈叩不已，具述所值鬼使追摄之由，愿示道要，以拯拔沉沦，赐度生死之苦。
现代文：刘无名祈求叩拜不已，全部述说了被鬼使追摄的原由，希望青城真人指示道术要领，用它拯救灵魂，拔出沉沦，赐给超过生死之苦的办法。
English: Liu, nameless, prayed and worshipped endlessly. He told everyone the reason why he was chased by the ghost. He hoped that Qingcheng Zhenren would instruct the essentials of Taoism, use it to save souls, pull out the downfall, and give a way to overcome the suffering of life and death.

古文：即能乾汞成银，丸而服之，可以祛疾。
现代文：再运用火二年，六百个整天，再经过四季，重履长至。
English: Two more years of using fire, six hundred full days, four more seasons, and so on.

古文：三年之外，服者延年益算，发白反黑。
现代文：开始是十月离开它的胞胎，已经成为初品，马上能干汞成银，做成丸吃它，可以除去疾病。三年以外，吃的人可以延年益寿，白发可以变黑。
English: It began in October, when it left its offspring, which has become the first product. It can immediately turn mercury into silver, and eating it as a whole can eliminate diseases. After three years, people who eat it can live longer and longer, and white hair can turn black.

古文：三年之后，服之刀圭。游散名山，周游四海。
现代文：三年之后，吃一刀圭，游览名山，云游四海。
English: Three years later, eat a knife and fork, visit famous mountains, travel around the world.

古文：初品，地仙服之半剂，变化万端，坐在立亡，驾驭飞龙，白日升天。
现代文：初品，地仙吃它半剂，变化万端，坐着在立起就没了，驾驭飞龙，白天飞升。
English: The first product, the earth fairy eats half of it, it changes a lot, sitting and standing are gone, driving the flying dragon, flying up during the day.

古文：大都此药，经十六节，已为中品。便能使人长生。
现代文：大都这种药，经过十六个季节，已经成为中品，就能使人长生。
English: Most of this medicine, after sixteen seasons, has become a Chinese product, which can make people live longer.

古文：药成之日，五金八石，黄芽诸物，与君臣二药，不相杂乱矣。
现代文：药成的日子，五金八石，黄芽诸物，和君臣二药，不相互混杂。
English: In the days when the medicine was made, the five metals and eight stones, the yellow buds and other things, and the monarchs and ministers were the two medicines, and they were not mixed with each other.

古文：千日功毕，名上品还丹。
现代文：一千天功毕，名字就叫上品还丹。
English: After a thousand days of hard work, the name is called Shangpin Haodan.

古文：谨而藏之，勿示非人，世有其人，视彼形气，功行合道，依法传之。
现代文：要谨慎保存它，不要给人看。人世上，如果有那样的人，看他形状气质和功德行为都合乎道，就按照方法传给他。
English: If there is such a person in the world, if you see that his form, temperament, and meritorious deeds are in accordance with the Way, then you should pass it on to him according to the method.

古文：刘授丹诀，还于雾中山，筑室修炼，三年乃成。
现代文：刘无名接受炼丹诀窍，回到雾中山，筑室修炼，三年就成功了。
English: Liu accepted the alchemist's know-how anonymously, returned to the misty mountain, built a room for cultivation, and succeeded in three years.

古文：开成二年，犹驻于蜀，自述无名传，以示后人。
现代文：开成二年，刘无名还住在四川，自己陈述无名传，用来给后人看。
English: Two years after the opening of the museum, Liu Nameless was still living in Sichuan, and he himself narrated the Nameless Legend for posterity to read.

古文：入青城去。不知所终。
现代文：后来进入青城山，不知道他的终了。
English: Later, he entered Qingcheng Mountain, not knowing his fate.

