古文：◎礼七
现代文：礼七
English: Verse 7

古文：登极仪大朝仪常朝仪皇太子亲王朝仪诸王来朝仪诸司朝觐仪中宫受朝仪朝贺东宫仪大宴仪上尊号徽号仪
现代文：登极仪大朝仪常朝仪皇太子亲王朝仪诸王来朝仪诸司朝觐仪中宫受朝仪朝贺东宫仪大宴仪上尊号徽号仪
English: Accession to the Throne Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony, Crown Prince Ceremony, Imperial Family Ceremony, Imperial Visit Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony, Grand Imperial Court Ceremony

古文：二曰嘉礼。
现代文：第二是嘉礼。
English: The second is the greeting.

古文：行于朝廷者，曰朝会，曰宴飨，曰上尊号、徽号，曰册命，曰经筵，曰表笺。
现代文：在朝廷行礼，叫朝会，叫宴飨，叫上尊号、上徽号，叫册命，叫经筵，叫表笺。
English: In the imperial court, the salute is called the imperial meeting, the banquet is called the banquet, the honorific title and the badge are called the honorific title, the book is called the book, the book is called the book, and the watch is called the watch.

古文：行于辟雍者，曰视学。
现代文：在学校行礼，叫视学。
English: If you salute at school, you'll be told to look away.

古文：自天子达于庶人者，曰冠，曰婚。
现代文：白天子到平民都举行，叫冠，叫婚。
English: During the day, everything is open to the public, from crowns to weddings.

古文：行于天下者，曰巡狩，曰诏赦，曰乡饮酒。
现代文：皇上颁行于天下，叫巡狩，叫诏赦，叫乡饮酒。
English: The emperor's edict is carried out throughout the country, and it is called the inspection and hunting, the imperial pardon, and the township drinking.

古文：举其大者书之。
现代文：列举重要的记录下来。
English: Make a list of important things to write down.

古文：仪之同者，则各附于其类云。
现代文：相同的礼仪，就各自附在同类。
English: The same etiquette applies to each attached to the same species.

古文：登极仪
现代文：登极仪
English: The instrument for ascending to the pole

古文：汉高帝即位氾水之阳，其时绵蕞之礼未备。
现代文：汉高帝在泛水北面即位，当时朝仪典韦没有制订。
English: Emperor Han Gao ascended the throne on the north side of the floodplain. At that time, the imperial etiquette was not established.

古文：魏、晋以降，多以受禅改号。
现代文：魏、晋以下，多因受禅改号。
English: Below Wei and Jin, most of them changed their names because they were influenced by Zen.

古文：元世祖履尊既久，一统后，但举朝贺。
现代文：元世祖登上尊位已久，统一天下后，只举行朝贺。
English: It has been a long time since the founding fathers ascended the throne. After unification, only morning greetings were held.

古文：明兴，太祖以吴元年十二月将即位，命左相国李善长等具仪。
现代文：明朝兴起，太祖在昊元年十二月将即位，命令左相国李善长等人准备礼仪。
English: With the rise of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Taizu was about to ascend the throne in December of the first year of the Hao Dynasty, and he ordered the left consort, Li Shanzhong, and others to prepare for the ceremony.

古文：善长率礼官奏。
现代文：李善长率礼官奏报。
English: Li Zhengrong led the etiquette officials to deliver the report.

古文：即位日，先告祀天地。
现代文：即位那天，先告祭天地。
English: On the day of enthronement, the heavens and the earth were first sacrificed.

古文：礼成，即帝位于南郊。
现代文：礼仪结东，太祖在南郊即帝位。
English: The etiquette is in the east, the great-grandfather is in the southern suburbs, that is, the imperial throne.

古文：丞相率百官以下及都民耆老，拜贺舞蹈，呼万岁者三。
现代文：丞相率领百官以下及京城百姓、有德望的老年人，行舞蹈礼拜贺，连呼三次万岁。
English: The prime minister led hundreds of officials and the people of the capital, as well as the elderly people of virtue, in a dance of worship and congratulations, shouting three times in unison, "Long live!"

古文：具卤簿导从，诣太庙，上追尊四世册宝，告祀社稷。
现代文：准备仪仗队在前引导，在后跟从。到太庙，给四代先人追加尊号上呈册书、实玺，祭告土地神与谷神。
English: Prepare a guard of honor to lead in front and follow behind. Go to the Imperial Temple and present the four generations of ancestors with additional honorifics in the form of a record book and a real seal, and worship the land god and the valley god.

古文：还，具衮冕，御奉天殿，百官上表贺。
现代文：返回，穿戴好衮冕服，驾临奉天殿，百官上上表祝贺。
English: Returned, put on the coronation robes, arrived at the Temple of Heaven, and congratulated by hundreds of officials.

古文：先期，侍仪司设表案于丹墀内道之西北，设丞相以下拜位于内道东西，每等异位，重行北面。
现代文：在举行仪节之前，侍仪司在宫殿丹陛内道的西北设置表案，在内道的东西设置丞相以下的拜位。每个等次不同位，重行，面向北。
English: Prior to holding the ceremony, the Master of Ceremonies set up the table in the northwest of the inner road of the palace, and set up the prostration below the prime minister in the east of the inner road. Each order is different, repeated, facing north.

古文：捧表、展表、宣表官位于表案西，东向。纠仪御史二人于表案南，东西向。
现代文：在表案西是捧表官、展表官、读表官的位置，面向东。纠仪御史二人在表案南，东西向。
English: On the west side of the table is the position of the watch-holder, the watch-exhibitor and the watch-reader, facing east. The two correctors are on the south side of the table, facing east and west.

古文：宿卫镇抚二人于东西陛下，护卫百户二十四人于其南，稍后。
现代文：宿卫镇抚二人在东西台阶下面，护卫百户二十四人在他们南边，稍后。
English: The two guards are at the bottom of the east and west steps, and the 24 guards of the hundred households are on their south side, a little later.

古文：知班二人，于文武官拜位北，东西向。
现代文：知班二人，在文武官员拜祭的位子以北，东西向。
English: There are two people in the leading group, to the north of the place where the civil and military officials worship, facing east and west.

古文：通赞、赞礼二人于知班北，通赞西，赞礼东。
现代文：通赞、赞礼二人在知班的北面，通赞在西，赞礼在东。
English: Tongzan and Zhanlei are located in the north of Zhiban, Tongzan in the west, and Zhanli in the east.

古文：引文武班四人于文武官拜位北，稍后，东西向。
现代文：引文武班四人在文武官员拜祭的位子以北，稍后，东西向。
English: The four members of the citation martial arts team are marching north from the place where the martial arts officials worship, and later, east and west.

古文：引殿前班二人于引文武班南。
现代文：引殿前班二人在引文武班的南面。
English: Two people from the class in front of the hall are on the south side of the citation class.

古文：举表案二人于引文武班北。
现代文：举表案二人在引文武班的北面。
English: The two people who filed the complaint are on the north side of the citation class.

古文：举殿上表案二人于西陛下，东向。
现代文：举殿上表案二人在西面台阶下，面向东。
English: The two people who presented the motion to raise the palace are at the bottom of the west steps, facing east.

古文：丹陛上设殿前班指挥司官三人，东向。
现代文：宫殿台阶上设殿前班指挥司官三人，面向东。
English: On the steps of the palace, there is a row of three front-of-house officers, facing east.

古文：宣徽院官三人，西向。
现代文：宣徽院官三人，面向西。
English: Three abbots of Xuan Hui facing west.

古文：仪鸾司官于殿中门之左右，护卫千户八人于殿东西门，俱东西向。
现代文：仪鸾司官在殿中门的左右，护卫千户八人在殿东西门，都东西向。
English: The etiquette officers are on the left and right of the middle gate of the hall, and the guards of the eight thousand households are at the east and west gates of the hall, all facing east and west.

古文：鸣鞭四人于殿前班之南，北向。
现代文：鸣鞭四人在殿前班的南面，面向北。
English: Four men with whips are marching on the south side of the forecourt, facing north.

古文：将军六人于殿门左右，天武将军四人于陛上四隅，俱东西向。
现代文：将军六人在殿门左右，天武将军四人在宫殿台阶的四角，都东西相向。
English: The six generals are around the palace gate, and the four generals are at the four corners of the palace steps, facing east and west.

古文：殿上，尚宝司设宝案于正中，侍仪司设表案于宝案南。
现代文：殿上，尚宝司在正中设宝案，侍仪司在宝案南设表案。
English: In the main hall, the Master of Ceremonies sets the treasure case in the middle, and the Master of Ceremonies sets the table case in the south of the treasure case.

古文：文武侍从两班于殿上东西，文起居注、给事中、殿中侍御史、尚宝卿，武悬刀指挥，东西向。
现代文：文武侍从两班在殿上的东面和西面，文起居注、给事中、殿中侍御史、尚宝唧，武悬指挥，东西相向。
English: The civil and military attendants were stationed in two groups on the east and west sides of the hall. The civil and military attendants were stationed in the east, the civil and military attendants were stationed in the west, the civil and military attendants were stationed in the middle, the civil and military attendants were stationed in the middle, the civil and military attendants were stationed in the middle, the civil and military attendants were stationed in the middle, and the military attendants were stationed in the middle.

古文：受表官于文侍从班南，西向。
现代文：受表官在文侍从班以南，面向西。
English: The receiver of the watch is in the south of the clerk, facing west.

古文：内赞二人于受表官之南，卷帘将军二人帘前，俱东西向。
现代文：内赞二人在受表官的南面，卷帘将军二人在帘前，都东西相向。
English: The two Nezans are on the south side of the receiver, and the two curtain generals are in front of the curtain, facing east and west.

古文：是日，拱卫司陈卤簿，列甲士于午门外，列旗仗，设五辂于奉天门外，侍仪舍人二，举表案入。
现代文：这一天，拱卫司陈设扈从仪仗队，在午门外陈列甲士，排列旗仗，在奉天门外设五辖车。侍仪舍人两名，举着表案进入。
English: On this day, the Arch Guard Department set up a table with a crossbow from the guard of honor, displayed knights outside the noon gate, arranged a flag, and set up a five-tiered carriage outside the Fengtian Gate. Two attendants left the ceremony and entered with a watch case.

古文：鼓初严，百官朝服立午门外。
现代文：初更擎鼓，百官穿朝服站在午门外。
English: On the first day of the new year, hundreds of officials wearing imperial robes stood outside the noon gate.

古文：通赞、赞礼、宿卫官、诸侍卫及尚宝卿侍从官入。
现代文：通赞、赞礼、宿卫官、众侍卫以及尚宝卿侍从官进入。
English: The courier, the celebrant, the guards, the attendants, and the attendants of Shang Baoqing entered.

古文：鼓三严，丞相以下入。
现代文：三更击鼓后，丞相以下进入。
English: After three more drumbeats, the prime minister and his entourage enter.

古文：皇帝衮冕升御座，大乐鼓吹振作。
现代文：皇帝穿衮冕服登上御座，大乐、鼓吹开始演奏。
English: The emperor, dressed in his coronation robes, ascended the throne, and the music and preaching began to play.

古文：乐止，将军卷帘，尚宝卿置宝于案。
现代文：乐止，将军卷起帘子，尚宝卿将宝印放到案上。
English: The music stopped, the general rolled up the curtain, and Shang Baoqing put the treasure seal on the case.

古文：拱卫司鸣鞭，引班导百官入丹墀拜位。
现代文：拱卫司挥鞭使人肃静，引班引导百官到丹陛上的礼拜位。
English: The arch-guard waved a whip to keep the people quiet, and led the procession to guide the hundreds of officials to the place of worship of Emperor Dan.

古文：初行乐作，至位乐止。
现代文：初行乐开始演奏，至位乐止。
English: The first march begins and the music stops.

古文：知班赞班，赞礼赞拜。
现代文：知班赞唱班次，赞礼赞唱跪拜。
English: Know the class, praise the class, praise the class, kneel.

古文：乐作，四拜，兴。
现代文：奏乐，四拜，起身。
English: Play music, bow four times, get up.

古文：乐止。
现代文：音乐停止。
English: The music stops.

古文：捧表以下官由殿西门入。
现代文：捧表以下官员从殿西门进入。
English: The following officials entered from the west gate of the main hall, holding a table.

古文：内赞赞进表。
现代文：内赞官赞唱进表。
English: The vice-chancellor's eulogy was well received.

古文：捧表官跪捧。
现代文：捧表官跪着捧表献上。
English: The official holding the watch knelt down and presented the watch.

古文：受表官搢笏，跪受，置于案。
现代文：受表官插上笏板，跪着接表，放到案上。
English: The official receiving the watch inserts the cutting board, kneels to connect the watch, and places it on the case.

古文：出笏，兴，退立，东向。
现代文：拿出笏板，起身，退步站立，面向东。
English: Take out the cutting board, stand up, step back and stand facing east.

古文：内赞赞宣表。
现代文：内赞赞唱宣读表文。
English: The text of the proclamation was read aloud to applause.

古文：宣表官前，搢笏，跪，展表官搢笏，同跪。
现代文：宣表官上前，插笏板，跪下，展表官插笏板，也跪下。
English: The meter reader comes forward, inserts the dowel, kneels down, the meter reader inserts the dowel, also kneels down.

古文：宣讫，展表官出笏，以表复于案，俱退。
现代文：宣读完表，展表官拿出笏板，将表又放在案上，都退下。
English: After reading out the watch, the watch officer took out the cutting board, put the watch back on the case, and retreated.

古文：宣表官俯伏兴。
现代文：宣表官俯身伏地，起身。
English: The meter reader stooped to the ground and stood up.

古文：俱出殿西门，复位。
现代文：都出殿西门，回到原来的位子上。
English: They all left the West Gate of the Imperial Palace and returned to their original seats.

古文：赞礼赞拜。
现代文：赞礼官赞唱下拜。
English: The eulogist sings a hymn of adoration.

古文：乐作，四拜，乐止。
现代文：奏乐，拜四拜，音乐停止。
English: Play music, bow four times, music stops.

古文：搢笏，鞠躬三，舞蹈。
现代文：插上笏板，鞠躬三次，行舞蹈礼朝拜皇帝。
English: They plugged in the seesaw, bowed three times, and performed a dance to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：拱手加额，呼万岁者三。
现代文：拱手放在额上，连呼三次万岁。
English: Place your hand on your forehead and chant hooray three times in a row.

古文：出笏，俯伏兴。
现代文：拿出笏板，俯身伏地，起身。
English: Take out the cutting board, bend over, get up.

古文：乐作，四拜，贺毕。
现代文：奏乐，拜四拜，贺礼完成。
English: The music is playing, the bells are ringing, and the ceremony is complete.

古文：遂遣官册拜皇后，册立皇太子，以即位诏告天下。
现代文：于是派遣官员册拜皇后，册立皇太子，以即位诏书告示天下。
English: As a result, officials were dispatched to pay homage to the empress, crown the crown prince, and announce his enthronement to the world with an imperial edict.

古文：成祖即位仓猝，其议不详。
现代文：成祖即位仓促，他即位的礼仪不能详知。
English: Chengzu's enthronement was hasty, and the etiquette of his enthronement cannot be known in detail.

古文：仁宗即位，先期，司设监陈御座于奉天门，钦天监设定时鼓，尚宝司设宝案，教坊司设中和韶乐，设而不作。
现代文：仁宗即位，至期之前，司设监在奉天门陈放御座，钦天监设定时鼓，尚宝司设宝案，教坊司设中和韶乐，设了却不演奏。
English: When Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, before the due date, the Grand Treasurer set up the throne at the Gate of Heaven, the Grand Treasurer set up the time drum, the Grand Treasurer set up the treasure case, and the Preceptor set up the Chinese and Korean music, but they did not play.

古文：是日早，遣官告天地宗社，皇帝具孝服告几筵。
现代文：这天早上，派官员祭告天地宗庙社稷，皇帝穿孝服祭告灵座。
English: On this morning, officials were sent to announce the heaven and earth, the family, the temple and the shrine, and the emperor wore filial piety to announce the funeral.

古文：至时，鸣钟鼓，设卤簿。
现代文：到时，呜响钟鼓，设扈从仪仗队。
English: At that time, the bells and drums will ring, and the guard of honor will march.

古文：皇帝衮冕，御奉天门。
现代文：皇帝穿衮冕服，驾临奉天门。
English: The emperor, wearing a crown, arrives at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：百官朝服，入午门。
现代文：百官穿朝服，进入午门。
English: Hundreds of officials, dressed in imperial robes, enter the noon gate.

古文：鸿胪寺导执事官行礼，请升御座。
现代文：鸿胪寺导引执事官行礼，请登上御座。
English: Honjo-ji Temple guide deacon salute, please climb onto the throne.

古文：皇帝由中门出。升座，鸣鞭。
现代文：皇帝从中门出，升座，挥呜礼鞭使人肃静。
English: The emperor came out of the middle door, ascended the throne, and waved a whip to calm the people.

古文：百官上表，行礼，颁诏，俱如仪。
现代文：百官上表，行礼，颁布诏书，都按礼仪。
English: It is a matter of etiquette for all officials to stand at attention, bow, and issue an imperial edict.

古文：宣宗以后，储宫嗣立者并同。
现代文：宣宗以后，太子继承君位相同。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan Zong, the crown prince will inherit the same throne.

古文：正德十六年，世宗入承大统。
现代文：正德十六年，世宗入京继承帝位。
English: In the 16th year of Zhengde, Shizong entered Beijing to succeed to the imperial throne.

古文：先期造行殿于宣武门外，南向。
现代文：至期以前在宣武门外造行殿，向南。
English: Before his death, he built a hall of worship outside the Xuanwu Gate and went south.

古文：设帷幄御座，备翼善冠服及卤簿大驾以候。
现代文：设帷幄御座，准备翼善冠服以及扈从俄仗大驾等侯。
English: Set up the curtains and the throne, prepare the winged crown, and wait for the great ride from the Russian war.

古文：至期，百官郊迎。
现代文：到了日期，百官在郊外迎接。
English: When the date arrived, hundreds of officials met them in the suburbs.

古文：驾入行殿，行四拜礼。
现代文：皇帝车驾进入行殿，行四拜礼。
English: The emperor drove into the hall and paid homage four times.

古文：明日，由大明门入。
现代文：第二天，从大明门进入。
English: The next day, enter through the main gate.

古文：省诏草，改年号，素服诣大行几筵谒告。
现代文：省察草拟的诏书，改年号，穿素服到刚刚死去的皇帝灵座告祭。
English: The imperial edict was revised, the year was changed, and the emperor who had just died was dressed in plain clothes.

古文：毕，设香案奉天殿丹陛上。
现代文：结东以后，在奉天殿丹陛上设香案。
English: After the conclusion of the ceremony, incense was offered to His Majesty the Emperor Dan in the Bongten Hall.

古文：皇帝衮冕，行告天地礼。
现代文：皇帝穿着衮冕，举行告祭天地的礼仪。
English: The emperor, wearing a crown, held a ceremony to make offerings to heaven and earth.

古文：诣奉先殿、奉慈殿谒告，仍诣大行几筵、慈寿皇太后、庄肃皇后前各行礼，遂御华盖殿。
现代文：到奉先殿、奉慈殿拜谒告祭，接着到刚刚死去的皇帝灵座、慈寿皇太后、庄肃皇后前分别行礼，于是到华盖殿。
English: They went to the Bongsen-den and the Bongji-den to hold memorial services, and then to the Emperor's Sepulcher, the Empress Dowager Cixu, and the Empress Shoshu, who had just died, to pay their respects, and then to the Huagai-den.

古文：百官朝服入。
现代文：百官穿着朝服进入。
English: The dignitaries entered in their royal robes.

古文：传旨免贺，五拜三稽首。
现代文：皇帝传旨免除祝贺，五拜三叩头。
English: The emperor's order exempted congratulations, and five bowed three times.

古文：鸿胪寺官请升殿，帝由中门出御奉天殿。
现代文：鸿胪寺官请求升殿，皇帝从中门出来到奉天殿。
English: The officials of Hongye Temple requested to be elevated to the main hall, and the emperor came out from the middle gate to the main hall.

古文：鸣鞭，赞拜，颁诏，如制。
现代文：挥鞭肃静，赞唱拜礼，颁布诏令，按制度办理。
English: Waving the whip, chanting prayers, promulgating the edict, and proceeding according to the system.

古文：大朝仪
现代文：大朝仪
English: The Great Morning Glory

古文：汉正会礼，夜漏未尽七刻，钟鸣受贺。
现代文：汉代的正月初一朝会礼，离夜漏尽前七刻，鸣钟接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the Han Dynasty, there was a morning ceremony. Seven hours before the night was over, the bell was rung to receive morning greetings.

古文：公卿以下执贽来庭，二千石以上升殿，称万岁，然后宴飨。
现代文：公卿以下拿着礼物来到朝廷，二千石以上升殿，口称万岁，然后设宴席招待。
English: The court nobles came to the imperial court with gifts, more than two thousand stones were raised to the palace, they said "long live," and then a banquet was set up to invite everyone.

古文：晋《咸宁注》，有晨贺昼会之分。
现代文：晋《咸宁注》，有早晨庆贺、白天朝会的分别。
English: According to "Xianning Note," there are morning celebrations and morning meetings during the day.

古文：唐制，正旦、冬至、五月朔、千秋节，咸受朝贺。
现代文：唐朝制度，正月初一、冬至、五月朔日、皇帝诞辰，都要接受朝贺。
English: According to the Tang Dynasty system, the first day of the first month, the winter solstice, the first day of May, and the emperor's birthday are all subject to morning greetings.

古文：宋因之。
现代文：宋代沿袭唐制。
English: The Song Dynasty followed the Tang Dynasty.

古文：明太祖洪武元年九月，定正旦朝会仪，与登极略相仿。
现代文：明太祖洪武元年九月，制定正月初一的朝会礼仪，与皇帝即位大致相仿。
English: In September of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Hongwu, the great-great-grandfather of the Ming Dynasty, established the etiquette of the Imperial Court on the first day of the first month of the year, which is roughly similar to the emperor's enthronement.

古文：其后屡诏更定，立为中制。
现代文：这以后屡次下诏更改修定，立为适当的典章制度。
English: After that, the edict was amended and revised many times, and it was established as an appropriate award system.

古文：凡正旦冬至，先日，尚宝司设御座于奉天殿，及宝案于御座东，香案于丹陛南。
现代文：凡是正月初一、冬至，早一天，尚宝司在奉天殿设御座，宝案设置在御座东面，香案设置在宫殿丹陛南面。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the winter solstice, and one day earlier, the Grand Treasurer sets up the throne in the Bongten Hall, the treasure case is set up on the east side of the throne, and the incense case is set up on the south side of the palace.

古文：教坊司设中和韶乐于殿内东西，北向。
现代文：教坊司在殿内东西设中和韶乐，面向北。
English: The teacher's office is located in the middle of the hall, facing north.

古文：翌明，锦衣卫陈卤簿、仪仗于丹陛及丹墀，设明扇于殿内，列车辂于丹墀。鸣鞭四人，左右北向。
现代文：次日天明，锦衣卫在丹陛以及丹墀上陈列扈从仪仗队、仪仗，在殿内设明扇，在丹墀上陈列车辖。呜鞭四人，分列左右面向北。
English: The next day, at dawn, the brocade-wearing guards displayed their swords and shields from the honor guard and honor guard at the foot of Emperor Dan and the Dan Tower. A fan was set up in the hall, and a train was set up on the Dan Tower. There were four of them, lined up left and right, facing north.

古文：教坊司陈大乐于丹陛东西，北向，仪礼司设同文、玉帛两案于丹陛东。
现代文：教坊司在丹陛东西陈放大乐，面向北。仪礼司设同文案、玉帛案于丹陛东。
English: The Department of Education is located on the east and west sides of His Majesty, facing north. The Department of Ceremonies is located on the east side of His Majesty, facing south.

古文：金吾卫设护卫官于殿内及丹陛，陈甲士于丹墀至午门外，锦衣卫设将军于丹陛至奉天门外，陈旗帜于奉天门外，俱东西列。
现代文：金吾卫在殿内及丹陛上设护卫官，在丹墀至午门外陈列甲士，锦衣卫在丹陛到奉天门外设将军，在奉天门外陈列旗帜，都东西陈列。
English: King Wuwei set up escort officers in the hall and on His Majesty Emperor Dan, and displayed armored soldiers from Danzhao to the noon gate, while King Yinwei set up generals outside the Gate of Heaven and displayed flags outside the Gate of Heaven on His Majesty Emperor Dan, and they were displayed from east to west.

古文：典牧所陈仗马犀象于文、武楼南，东西向。
现代文：典牧所在文武楼南陈列仗马、犀象，东西相向。
English: War horses and rhinoceros elephants are on display in the south of Wenwu Building, facing east and west.

古文：司晨郎报时位于内道东，近北。
现代文：司晨郎的报时位在内道东，靠近北面。
English: Sichenro's time-reporting place is in the east of Inner Road, close to the north.

古文：纠仪御史二，位于丹墀北，内赞二，位于殿内，外赞二，位于丹墀北，传制、宣表等官位于殿内，俱东西向。
现代文：两名纠仪御史，位于丹墀北面，两名内赞官，位于殿内，两名外赞官，位于丹墀北面，传制、宣表等官位于殿内，都东西相向。
English: Two rectifying officers are located on the north side of the hall, two vice-chancellors are located inside the hall, two foreign vice-chancellors are located on the north side of the hall, and officials such as the transmission system and the proclamation table are located inside the hall, all facing east to west.

古文：鼓初严，百官朝服，班午门外。
现代文：刚擎初更鼓，百官穿着朝服，依次在午门外列班。
English: At the beginning of the day, Gangjing changed the drum, and hundreds of officials, wearing imperial robes, lined up outside the afternoon gate.

古文：次严，由左、右掖门入，诣丹墀东西，北向立。
现代文：击二更鼓百官由左右掖门进入，到丹墀东西，向北站着。
English: At the stroke of two more drums, hundreds of officials entered from the left and right gates, to the east and west of Danzhou, and stood to the north.

古文：三严，执事官诣华盖殿，帝具衮冕升座，钟声止。
现代文：击三更鼓，执事官员到华盖殿，皇帝穿衮冕服升座，钟声停止。
English: Three more drums are struck, the deacon officials go to the Huagai Hall, the emperor wears a crown and ascends to the throne, and the bells stop.

古文：仪礼司奏执事官行礼，赞五拜，毕，奏请升殿。
现代文：仪礼司奏唱执事官行礼，赞唱拜五拜，结东，奏唱请升殿。
English: The master of ceremonies sang the deacon's salute, the chanting of the five prostrations, the setting of the east, and the chanting of the ascension.

古文：驾兴，中和乐作。
现代文：皇帝起身，奏中和乐。
English: The emperor rose to his feet and played the choral melody.

古文：尚宝司捧宝前行，导驾官前导，扇开帘卷，宝置于案，乐止。
现代文：尚宝司捧宝印在前面走，导驾官在前面引导，打开扇，卷起帘，宝印放置在案上，音乐停止。
English: Shang Bao Shi walked in front holding the treasure seal, the guide officer guided in front, opened the fan, rolled up the curtain, the treasure seal was placed on the case, and the music stopped.

古文：鸣鞭报时，对赞唱排班，班齐。
现代文：挥鞭肃静报告时辰，对赞宣唱排列班次，班次整齐。
English: Waving the whip to quietly report the time, singing praises to arrange the shifts, and the shifts are neat.

古文：赞礼唱鞠躬，大乐作。
现代文：赞礼宣唱鞠躬，大乐奏响。
English: Singing praises, bowing, and grand music played.

古文：赞四拜，兴，乐上。
现代文：赞唱拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Sing praise, bow four times, get up, the music stops.

古文：典仪唱进表，乐作。
现代文：典仪官宣唱进表，奏乐。
English: The master of ceremonies led the chant, and the music began.

古文：给事中二人，诣同文案前，导引序班举案由东门入，置殿中，乐止。
现代文：两名给事中，到同文案前，引导序班举案从东门进入，放置到殿中，音乐停止。
English: In the middle of the two presenters, before the same text, the leader of the order class entered from the east gate, placed it in the hall, and the music stopped.

古文：内赞唱宣表目。
现代文：内赞官唱宣表目。
English: The vice-chancellors sing the proclamation.

古文：宣表目官跪，宣讫，俯伏，兴。
现代文：宣表目官跪下，宣唱完毕，俯身伏地，起身。
English: The announcer kneeled down, finished singing, bowed to the ground, and stood up.

古文：唱宣表，展表官取表，宣表官至帘前，外赞唱，众官皆跪。
现代文：宣唱宣读表文，展表官取表，宣表官到帘前，外赞官宣唱，众官都下跪。
English: The pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement of the pronouncement.

古文：宣表讫，内外皆唱，俯伏，兴。
现代文：宣表完毕，内赞官、外赞官都宣唱，俯身伏地，起身。
English: After the proclamation, the Vice-Chancellor and the Foreign Vice-Chancellor both sang, bowed to the ground, and stood up.

古文：序班举表案于殿东，外赞唱众官皆跪。
现代文：序班举表案到殿东，外赞官宣唱，众官都下跪。
English: The order of precedence goes to the east of the hall, the foreign secretary sings, and all the officials kneel.

古文：代致词官跪丹陛中，致词云： 具官臣某，兹遇正旦，三阳开泰，万物咸新。 
现代文：代致词官跪在丹陛中央，致词说： 具官臣某人，现在正遇正月初一日，三阳开泰，万物更新。 
English: The deputy speech writer knelt in the center of His Majesty the Emperor and delivered a speech, saying: If you are an official or a minister, you are now facing the first day of the first month of the year, when Sanyang is open and everything is renewed.

古文：冬至则云： 律应黄种，日当长至。 
现代文：冬至则说： 节律应合黄钟，时日正当冬至。 
English: The winter solstice says: The rhythm should be in accordance with the yellow bell, and the time should be the winter solstice.

古文： 恭惟皇帝陛下，膺乾纳祜，奉天永昌。 
现代文： 恭敬地希望皇帝陛下，承受天命接纳祥福，奉行天命永远昌盛。 
English: I respectfully hope that His Majesty the Emperor will accept the good fortune of the destiny and pursue the destiny of prosperity forever.

古文：贺毕，外赞唱，众官皆俯伏，兴。
现代文：祝贺完毕，外赞官宣唱，众官都俯身伏地，起身。
English: When the congratulations were over, the Foreign Minister began to sing, and all the officials bowed to the ground and stood up.

古文：乐作，四拜，兴。
现代文：奏乐，拜四拜，起身。
English: Play music, bow four times, get up.

古文：乐止。
现代文：音乐停止。
English: The music stops.

古文：传制官跪奏传制，由东门出，至丹陛，东向立，称有制。
现代文：传制官跪着奏请传达制命，从柬门出，到丹陛，向东站立，声称有制命。
English: When the herald kneels to play the bugle, please convey the command. Go out of the Cambodian Gate to His Majesty the Emperor and stand to the east, proclaiming that you have the command.

古文：赞礼唱，跪，宣制。
现代文：赞礼官宣唱，跪下，宣读制命。
English: The eulogist chants, kneels, and reads the precepts.

古文：正旦则云： 履端之庆，与卿等同之。 
现代文：正月初一则说： 正月初一的福庆，与你们共同分享。 
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, it said: The first day of the first month of the year is the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month.

古文：冬至则云： 履长之庆，与卿等同之。 
现代文：冬至则说： 冬至的福庆，与你们共同分享。 
English: For the winter solstice, he said, "I would like to share with you the story of the winter solstice.

古文：万寿圣节则致词曰： 具官臣某，钦遇皇帝陛下圣诞之辰，谨率文武官僚敬祝万岁寿。 
现代文：皇帝生日就致词说： 具官臣某人，正遇上皇帝陛下的生日，谨率领文武官员敬祝万寿无疆。 
English: On the emperor's birthday, he made a speech, saying: If you are a government official or a minister, and it is the emperor's birthday, I would like to lead the civil and military officials to wish you longevity without borders.

古文：不传制。
现代文：不传达制命。
English: Failure to communicate is fatal.

古文：赞礼唱俯伏，兴。
现代文：赞礼官宣唱俯伏，起身。
English: The eulogist intoned, "Bow down, rise up."

古文：乐止。
现代文：音乐停止。
English: The music stops.

古文：赞搢笏，鞠躬三，舞蹈。
现代文：赞唱插笏板，三鞠躬，行舞蹈礼。
English: Sing praises to the cutting board, bow three times, and perform a dance.

古文：赞跪唱山呼，百官拱手加额曰 万岁 ；唱山呼，曰 万岁 ；唱再山呼，曰 万万岁 。
现代文：赞跪唱叩头高呼万岁，百官拱手放到额头上说 万岁 ；宣唱山呼，说 万岁 ；宣唱再次山呼，说 万万岁 。
English: Kneel in praise, sing, bow down, and chant, "Long live!"; the officials put their hands on their foreheads and say, "Long live!"; they chant, "Long live!"; they chant again, "Long live!"

古文：凡呼万岁，乐工军校齐声应之。
现代文：凡是高呼万岁时，乐工、军校官都齐声呼喊响应。
English: Whenever there is a shout of "hurrah!," musicians and military school officials all shout in unison in response.

古文：赞出笏，俯伏，兴，乐作。
现代文：赞唱抽出笏板，俯身伏地，起身，奏乐。
English: Sing praise, pull out the seesaw, bend over, get up, play music.

古文：赞四拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：赞拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Praise four bows, get up and sing, the music stops.

古文：仪礼司奏礼毕，中和乐作。
现代文：仪礼司上奏礼仪结东，奏中和乐挥鞭肃静，皇帝起身。
English: The etiquette officer played the etiquette at the top, and the music was played in the middle. The whip was waved quietly, and the emperor rose.

古文：鸣鞭，驾兴。尚宝官捧宝，导驾官前导，至华盖殿，乐止。
现代文：尚宝官捧宝印，导驾官在前面引导，到华盖殿，音乐停止。
English: The Grand Treasurer holds the seal, the conductor leads in front, to the Huagai Hall, the music stops.

古文：百官以次出。
现代文：百官依次出来。
English: Hundreds of officials withdrew in turn.

古文：洪武三十年，更定同文、玉帛案俱进安殿中，宣表讫，举置于宝案之南。
现代文：洪武三十年，修改制定同文案、玉帛案都安放在殿中，宣读完表文，举着放在宝案的南面。
English: In the 30th year of Hongwu's reign, the amended and enacted draft of the same text and the draft of the Jade Rooster were placed in the hall. After reading out the document, it was held up and placed on the south side of the treasure case.

古文：嘉靖十六年，更定蕃国贡方物案入于丹陛中道左右，设定时鼓于文楼上，大乐陈奉天门内东西，北向。
现代文：嘉靖十六年，修改制定蕃王国进贡土产的桌案放在丹陛中道左右，在文楼上设置定时鼓，大乐陈放在奉天门内的东西面，向北。
English: In the 16th year of Jiajing, the table plan for revising and formulating the tribute of local products in the Kingdom of Zhai was placed around the middle of Danzhong Road, the time drums were set up on the building, and the big music was placed on the east and west sides of the Fengtian Gate, facing north.

古文：他仪亦略有增损。
现代文：其它礼仪略有增碱。
English: Other etiquette is slightly more basic.

古文：立春日进春，都城府县举春案由东阶升，跪置于丹陛中道，俯伏，兴。
现代文：立春日举行进春礼，京城府县举着春案从东阶升登，跪着放置在丹陛中道，俯身伏地，起身。
English: On the first day of spring, the Spring Festival ceremony was held. The capital prefecture ascended from the east steps, kneeling in the middle of the road, bowed to the ground and stood up.

古文：赞拜，乐作。
现代文：赞唱跪拜，奏乐。
English: The hymns, the prayers, the music.

古文：四拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Bow four times, stand up, and the music stops.

古文：文武官北向立，致词官诣中道之东，跪奏云： 新春吉辰，礼当庆贺。 
现代文：文武官员向北站立，致词官到中道的东面，跪着上奏说： 新春吉祥时辰，按礼应当庆贺。 
English: The civil and military officials stood up to the north, and kneeled on the east side of the middle road, saying: The New Year is an auspicious time and should be celebrated according to etiquette.

古文：赞拜，乐作。
现代文：赞唱跪拜，奏乐。
English: The hymns, the prayers, the music.

古文：五拜三叩头，兴，乐止。
现代文：五拜二叩头，起身，音乐停止。
English: Bow twice, stand up, music stops.

古文：仪礼司奏礼毕。
现代文：仪礼司上奏礼仪结东。
English: The etiquette officer plays the etiquette koto.

古文：正统十一年，正旦立春，礼部议顺天府官进春后，百官即诣班行贺正旦礼。
现代文：正统十一年，正月初一立春，礼部提议顺天府官举行进春礼之后，百官就到班列举行庆贺正月初一的礼仪。
English: In the 11th year of the orthodox calendar, the first day of the first month of the year marked the beginning of spring. The Ministry of Ceremonies proposed that the prefectural officials hold the Spring Festival Rite on the first day of the first month of the year. After that, the officials went to the parade to celebrate the first day of the first month of the year.

古文：旧制，冬至日行贺礼。
现代文：旧有制度，冬至日举行贺礼。
English: Under the previous system, the winter solstice was celebrated as a day of congratulation.

古文：嘉靖九年，分祀二郊，以冬至大报，是日行庆成礼。
现代文：嘉靖九年，在两郊分别祭祀，因冬至遍祭天神，这一日举行庆成礼。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, there were separate sacrifices in the two suburbs, and because of the winter solstice, the gods were worshipped everywhere, and the celebration was held on this day.

古文：次日，帝诣内殿，行节祭礼。
现代文：第二日，皇帝到内殿，举行节祭礼。
English: On the second day, the emperor went to the inner hall to hold a festival.

古文：又诣母后前行贺礼讫，始御奉天殿受贺。
现代文：又到母后前举行贺礼完毕，纔到奉天殿接受众官朝贺。
English: After the congratulatory ceremony was held in front of the empress dowager, the empress dowager went to the Bonten Hall to receive the morning greetings from all officials.

古文：常朝仪
现代文：常朝仪
English: Jochogi

古文：古礼，天子有外朝、内朝、燕朝。
现代文：古代礼制，天子有外朝、内朝、燕朝。
English: According to the ancient etiquette system, the sons of heaven are the Outer Dynasty, the Inner Dynasty, and the Yan Dynasty.

古文：汉宣帝五日一朝。
现代文：汉宣帝五日一上朝。
English: Emperor Han Xuan died on the morning of the fifth day.

古文：唐制，天子日御紫宸殿见群臣曰常参，朔望御宣政殿见群臣曰入阁。
现代文：唐代制度，天子每天到紫宸殿接见群臣叫做常参，朔日、望日到宣政殿接见群臣叫做入阁。
English: According to the Tang Dynasty system, the emperor's daily visits to the Hall of the Purple Pheasant to receive the courtiers were called "frequent visits," and his visits to the Hall of the Proclamation to receive the courtiers on New Year's Eve and New Year's Day were called "entering the cabinet."

古文：宋则侍从官日朝垂拱谓之常参，百司五日一朝紫宸为六参，在京朝官朔望朝紫宸为朔参、望参。
现代文：宋代则是侍从官每天在垂拱殿朝见叫做常参，各个部门五天在紫宸殿朝见一次叫做六参，在京的朝官朔日、望日在紫宸殿朝见叫做朔参、望参。
English: In the Song Dynasty, the attendants of officials were called "Chōsans" when they met in the morning at the Hanging Arch every day, "Rōsans" when they met in the morning for five days at the Purple Pagoda for various departments, and "Rokusans" when they met once a day for five days at the Purple Pagoda, and "Saku-sans" and "Mōsans" when they met in the morning at the Purple Pagoda for officials in Kyoto and Mōsans in Kyoto.

古文：明洪武三年定制，朔望日，帝皮弁服御奉天殿，百官朝服于丹墀东西，再拜。
现代文：明洪武三年确立制度，朔日、望日，皇帝穿皮弁服到奉天殿，百官穿朝服在丹墀东西，行再拜礼。
English: In the third year of Hongwu in the Ming Dynasty, a system was established. On the New Year's Day and the Day of the Dead, the emperor would wear a long robe and go to the Temple of Heaven, while hundreds of officials would wear the imperial robe and go to Danluo and other places for worship.

古文：班首诣前，同百官鞠躬，称 圣躬万福 。
现代文：班首上前，同百官一起鞠躬，称 圣体万福 。
English: The head of the class came forward, bowed together with the centurion, and said the Blessed Sacrament.

古文：复位，皆再拜，分班对立。
现代文：返回原位，都行再拜礼，分班列对着站立。
English: Returning to their original positions, all line up to pray again, and stand in separate lines facing each other.

古文：省府台部官有奏，由西阶升殿。
现代文：省府台部官有事上奏，从西阶上殿。
English: The prefectural and ministerial officials had to make a report, and they went up to the hall from the west steps.

古文：奏毕降阶，百官出。
现代文：奏完后走下台阶，百官出宫。
English: After the performance, the officials walked down the steps and left the palace.

古文：十七年，罢朔望起居礼。
现代文：十七年，罢除朔日、望日起居礼。
English: In the seventeenth year, the New Year's Day and the Day of Hope were abolished.

古文：常朝官一拜三叩头，乐止，复班。谢恩见辞官序立奉天门外，北向。
现代文：后来更改修定，朔日、望日到奉天殿，常朝官依次站立丹墀上，东西相向，谢恩的官员和当朝辞职的官员依次站在奉天门外，面向北。
English: Later, the amendment was amended, and the New Year's Day and the Day of the Sun were moved to the Fengtian Hall, and the officials of the Joseon Dynasty stood on the ridge in turn, facing east and west, and the officials of Shane and the officials who resigned from the Joseon Dynasty stood outside the Fengtian Gate in turn, facing north.

古文：升座作乐。
现代文：皇帝升座，奏乐。
English: The emperor rose to his seat and the music began.

古文：常朝官一拜三叩头，乐止，复班。
现代文：常朝官拜一拜三叩头，音乐停止，恢复班位。
English: The officials bowed once, twice, three times, the music stopped, and the classes resumed.

古文：谢恩见辞官于奉天门外，五拜三叩头毕，驾兴。
现代文：谢恩的官员和当朝辞职的官员在奉天门外，拜五拜三叩头完毕，皇帝起身。
English: Shane's officials and the officials who resigned that morning were outside the Gate of Heaven. After bowing five times and three times, the emperor stood up.

古文：又凡早朝，御华盖殿，文武官于鹿顶外东西立，鸣鞭，以次行礼讫。
现代文：又，凡是早朝，驾临华盖殿，文武官员在东西房与南北房连接转角的地方东西站立，挥鞭肃静，依次行完礼。
English: In addition, when arriving at Huagai Hall in the early morning, civil and military officials stand in the east-west corner where the east-west room connects with the north-south room, wave the whip quietly, and complete the salute in turn.

古文：四品以上官入侍殿内，五品以下仍前北向立。
现代文：四品以上官员入殿侍从，五品以下仍如以前向北站立。
English: Officials with four or more court ranks enter the hall as attendants, while those with five or fewer court ranks remain standing to the north as before.

古文：有事奏者出班，奏毕，鸣鞭以次出。
现代文：有事奏报的人走出班列，奏完，挥鞭肃静，依次出去。
English: Those who have something to report go out of the line, finish reporting, wave the whip quietly, and go out in turn.

古文：如御奉天殿，先于华盖殿行礼。
现代文：如果到奉天殿，先在华盖殿行礼。
English: If you go to the Bokuten-den, first bow at the Hagaiden.

古文：奏事毕，五品以下诣丹墀，北向立，五品以上及翰林院、给事中、御史于中左、中右门候鸣鞭，诣殿内序立，朝退出。
现代文：奏完事，五品以下到丹墀，向北站立，五品以上以及翰林院、给事中、御史在中左门、中右门等候，挥鞭肃静，到殿内依次站立，退朝出来。
English: After the recitation, those below the fifth grade went to Danzhao and stood facing north, while those above the fifth grade, as well as Hanlinin, those in attendance, and the historian waited at the center left and center right doors, waved their whips in silence, went inside the hall and stood in turn, and then left for the palace.

古文：凡百官于御前侍坐，有官奏事，必起立，奏毕复坐。
现代文：凡是百官在皇帝面前侍坐，有官奏事，必须起立，奏完又坐下。
English: All the officials who sit in the presence of the emperor must stand up when there is a speech to be delivered, and then sit down again when the speech is over.

古文：后皇帝行丹墀，常北面，不南向，左右周旋不背北。
现代文：跟从皇帝到丹墀，常向北面，不向南，左右行礼不背朝北面。
English: When following the emperor to Dandong, always face north, not south, and do not bow with your back to the north.

古文：皇帝升奉天门及丹陛，随从官不得径由中道并王道。
现代文：皇帝登奉天门以及丹陛，随从官不能直接走中道与王道。
English: The emperor ascended to Heaven's Gate and His Majesty the Emperor of Tang, and the attendants could not go directly between the middle way and the royal way.

古文：二十四年，定侍班官：东则六部都察院堂上官、十三道掌印御史、通政司、大理寺、太常寺、太仆寺、应天府、翰林院、春坊、光禄寺、钦天监、尚宝司、太医院、五军断事及京县官，西则五军都督、锦衣卫指挥、各卫掌印指挥、给事中、中书舍人。
现代文：洪武二十四年，规定侍班官：柬面是六部都察院堂上官、十三道掌印御史、通政司、大理寺、太常寺、太仆寺、应天府、翰林院、春坊、光禄寺、钦天监、尚宝司、太医院、五军断事官以及京县官，西面是五军都督、锦衣卫指挥、各卫掌印指挥、给事中、中书舍人。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Hongwu, it was stipulated that the attendants were: on the west side were the five military governors, the commander of Jin Yi Wei, the commanders of the guards, the commanders of the guards, and the attendants of the five military governors, the commander of Jin Yi Wei, and the commanders of the guards, and the attendants of the five military governors, and the attendants of the five military governors, and the attendants of the five military governors.

古文：又令礼部置百官朝牌，大书品级，列丹墀左右木栅上，依序立。
现代文：又命令礼部设置百官的朝牌，用大字写上官品级别，列在丹墀左右木栅栏上，百官依照牌序站立。
English: He also ordered the ceremonial department to set up the morning cards of the officials, write the official rank in large letters, and line them up on the wooden fence on the left and right of the den, with the officials standing in the order of the cards.

古文：二十六年，令凡入殿必履鞋。
现代文：洪武二十六年，命令凡是进殿必须穿鞋。
English: In the 26th year of Hongwu's reign, it was ordered that anyone entering the palace must wear shoes.

古文：永乐初，令内阁官侍朝立金台东，锦衣卫在西，后移御道，东西对立。
现代文：永乐初年，命令内阁官员在金台东面侍立等待上朝，锦衣卫立在西面，后来移到御道，东西对立。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the cabinet officials were ordered to wait for the Shang Dynasty on the east side of Jintai, and on the west side of Jinlingwei. Later, they moved to the Imperial Road, and the east and west stood opposite each other.

古文：四年谕六部及近侍官曰： 早朝多四方所奏事。
现代文：永乐四年，训谕六部以及近侍官员说： 早朝多是四方所奏之事。
English: In the fourth year of Yongle, the six parts of the precepts and the officials of the close attendants said: In the early morning, it was mostly a matter of the four directions.

古文：午后事简，君臣之间得从容陈论。
现代文：午后事情少，君臣之间能不慌不忙地讨论。
English: In the afternoon, there are fewer things to do, and the monarchs and ministers can discuss things unhurriedly.

古文：自今有事当商榷者，皆于晚朝。 
现代文：从现在起，有事需要商量的，都在晚朝提出。 
English: From now on, anything that needs to be discussed will be brought up in the late morning.

古文：四年，谕行在礼部曰： 北京冬气严凝，群臣早朝奏事，立久不胜。
现代文：七年，训谕北京行在礼部说： 北京冬天天气严寒，群臣早朝奏事，长时间站着经受不住。
English: In the seventh year, the precepts of the Beijing trip said in the Ministry of Ceremonies: Beijing winter weather is very cold, the courtiers report early in the morning, and they can't stand for a long time.

古文：今后朝毕，于右顺门内便殿奏事。 
现代文：从今以后，朝拜完毕，在右顺门内便殿奏事。 
English: From now on, after the morning worship is over, there will be a service in the hallway on the right.

古文：景泰初，定午朝仪。
现代文：景泰初年，制定午朝的礼仪。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, the morning etiquette was established.

古文：凡午朝，御左顺门，设宝案。
现代文：凡是午朝，皇帝到左顺门，设宾案。
English: Every morning at noon, the emperor would go to Zuo Shun Gate to make a guest list.

古文：执事奏事官候于左掖门外。
现代文：执事奏事官在左掖门外等候。
English: The clerk waited outside the left antechamber.

古文：驾出，以次入。
现代文：皇帝出来，百官依次进入。
English: The emperor came out, and the hundred officials entered in turn.

古文：内阁、五府、六部奏事官，六科侍班官，案西序立；侍班御史二，序班二，将军四，案南面北立；鸣赞一，案东，西向立；锦衣卫、鸿胪寺东向立；管将军官、侍卫官立于将军西。
现代文：内阁、五府、六部奏事官，六科侍班官，依次在宝案西面站立；两名侍班御史，两名序班，四名将军，在宝案南面向北站立；一名呜赞官，在宝案东，向西站立；锦衣卫、鸿胪寺向东站立；管将军官、侍卫官站在将军的西面。
English: The cabinet, the five prefectures, the six sections of the record officer, and the six sciences attendant officers stood in turn on the west side of the treasure case; two attendant historians, two order classes, and four generals stood on the south side of the treasure case facing north; a vouzan officer stood on the east side of the treasure case facing west; Jin Yi Wei and Honglu Temple stood on the east side of the treasure case; the officer in charge of the general and the attendant officers stood on the west side of the general.

古文：府部奏事毕，撤案，各官退。
现代文：府部奏事完毕，撤除宝案，各官退下。
English: The prefectural and ministerial report was completed, the removal of the treasure case was completed, and all officials withdrew.

古文：有密事，赴御前奏。
现代文：有密事，到皇帝面前呈奏。
English: If you have a secret, present it to the emperor.

古文：嘉靖九年，令常朝官礼毕，内阁官由东陛、锦衣卫官由西陛升，立于宝座东西。
现代文：嘉靖九年，命令常朝官礼弃结东后，内阁官员从东阶、锦衣卫官从西阶升殿，站在宝座的东西两边。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Emperor, after ordering the officials of the imperial court to abandon the ceremonial tie and move to the east, the cabinet officials ascended from the east steps and the brocade guards from the west steps, standing on the east and west sides of the throne.

古文：有钦差官及外国人领敕，坊局官一人奉敕立内阁后，稍上，候领敕官辞，奉敕官承旨由左陛下，循御道授之。
现代文：如有钦差官以及外国人领受敕令，坊局官一名捧着敕令站在内阁后面，稍微上前一点，等着领敕官辞行，奉敕官领旨从左阶退下，沿着御道把敕令交给他。
English: If there is a courtier or a foreigner to receive the imperial edict, a magistrate will stand behind the cabinet holding the imperial edict, slightly forward, waiting for the eunuch to resign, and with the eunuch's permission, step down from the left step and hand the imperial edict to him along the imperial road.

古文：隆庆六年，诏以三六九日视朝。
现代文：隆庆六年，皇帝下诏在三、六、九日上朝。
English: In the sixth year of the Longqing, the emperor issued an edict to march to the capital on the 3rd, 6th and 9th.

古文：万历三年，令常朝日记注起居官四人，列于东班给事中上，稍前，以便观听。
现代文：万历三年，命令常朝日记注起居官四人，站立在东班给事中之上，稍微向前，以方便枧听。
English: After a lapse of three years, the four resident officers were ordered to write in their morning diaries, and to stand in the middle of the East Ward, slightly forward to make it easier to hear.

古文：午朝，则列于御座西，稍南。
现代文：午朝，就列于御座的西面，稍微向南。
English: In the afternoon, they are lined up on the west side of the throne, slightly to the south.

古文：凡入朝次第，洪武二十四年，令朝参将军先入，近侍次之，公、侯、驸马、伯又次之，五府、六部又次之，应天府及在京杂职官员又次之。
现代文：凡是入朝的顺序，洪武二十四年，命令朝参将军先进入，近侍其次，公、侯、驸马、伯又其次，五府、六部又在其次，应天府以及在京杂职官员又在其次。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Hongwu, he ordered the general staff of the imperial court to enter the court first, followed by the aides-de-camp, the court officials, courtiers, equerries, and courtiers, then the five prefectures and six provinces, followed by the Celestial Capital and the miscellaneous officials in Beijing.

古文：成化十四年令进士照办事衙门次第，立见任官后。
现代文：成化十四年，命令进士按照办事衙门的次第，立于现任官员的后面。
English: In the 14th year of Chenghua, the order was given to the new officials to stand behind the current officials according to the order of the door.

古文：皇太子亲王朝仪
现代文：皇太子亲王朝仪
English: Crown Prince pro-dynastic rite

古文：前史多不载。
现代文：以前的史书多不记载这一礼仪。
English: Most of the previous history books did not record this etiquette.

古文：明洪武元年十月定制，凡正旦等大朝，皇帝御奉天殿，先设皇太子、亲王次于文楼，设拜位并拜褥于丹陛上正中。
现代文：明洪武元年十月规定制度，凡是正月初一等大型朝会，皇帝到奉天殿，先在文楼设皇太子、亲王位次，在丹陛上正中设拜位与跪拜垫褥。
English: In October of the first year of the reign of Emperor Ming Hongwu, a system was established that whenever there was a large-scale imperial court meeting such as the first day of the first month of the first month, the emperor would go to the Bonten Hall and first set up the crown prince and prince's throne in the study hall, and then set up a prostration and kneeling mat in the middle of His Majesty the Emperor.

古文：皇帝升座，殿前执事班起居讫。
现代文：皇帝升座，殿前执事班起居结东。
English: The emperor ascended to the throne, and the deacon class in front of the palace moved to the east.

古文：引进引皇太子及亲王由奉天东门入，百官齐入。
现代文：引进官引领皇太子以及亲王从奉天东门进入，百官一齐进入。
English: The introduction officer led the crown prince and the prince to enter from the east gate of Fengtian, and hundreds of officials entered together.

古文：乐作，皇太子、亲王升自东阶，至丹陛拜位，乐止。
现代文：奏乐，皇太子、亲王从东阶升登，到台阶的拜位上，音乐停止。
English: After the music, the crown prince and the prince ascended from the east steps to the place of worship on the steps, and the music stopped.

古文：赞四拜，乐作，兴，乐止。
现代文：赞唱拜四拜，音乐奏响，起身，音乐停止。
English: Sing praise, bow four times, play music, get up, the music stops.

古文：引进导由殿东门入，乐作。
现代文：引进官引导从殿东门进入，奏乐。
English: The ushering officer led us in through the east gate of the hall, and the music began.

古文：内赞引至御座前位，乐止。
现代文：内赞官导引到御座前位，音乐停止。
English: The music stopped as he was led to the front of the throne.

古文：唱跪，皇太子跪称贺云： 长子某，兹遇履端之节 ，冬至则云 履长 ， 谨率诸弟某等，钦诣父皇陛下称贺 。
现代文：宣唱跪下，皇太子跪下称贺说， 长子某，正遇上正月初一的节日 ，冬至就说： 冬至 ， 谨率领众弟某等人，恭敬地来向父皇陛下称贺 。
English: Kneel down for the chanting, the crown prince kneeled down to offer congratulations and said, the eldest son, who is celebrating the first day of the first month, the winter solstice, said: Winter solstice, I would like to lead all the brothers and others to respectfully congratulate His Majesty the Father.

古文：传制如前，赞俯伏，兴。
现代文：像前文所说的一样传达制命的礼仪，赞唱俯伏，起身。
English: As mentioned in the previous paragraph, convey the etiquette of life, sing praise, bow down, and stand up.

古文：皇太子、诸王由东门出，乐作。
现代文：皇太子、众王从东门出，奏乐。
English: The crown prince and the kings came out of the east gate to play music.

古文：引进引复丹陛位，乐止。
现代文：引进官引导回到丹陛拜位上，音乐停止。
English: The usher leads us back to His Majesty's throne, and the music stops.

古文：赞四拜，乐作，兴，乐止。
现代文：赞唱拜四拜，奏乐，起身，音乐停止。
English: Sing praise, bow four times, play music, get up, the music stops.

古文：降自东阶，乐作。
现代文：从东阶下来，奏乐。
English: Come down from the east steps and play music.

古文：至文楼，乐止。
现代文：到文楼，音乐停止。
English: Arriving at Wenlou, the music stopped.

古文：百官随入贺。
现代文：百官随后进入祝贺。
English: The dignitaries then joined in the congratulations.

古文：其朝皇后则于坤宁宫，略如朝皇帝仪。
现代文：朝见皇后，就在坤宁宫，大略如同朝见皇帝的礼仪。
English: Seeing the empress in the morning, right in the Kunning Palace, is roughly the same as seeing the emperor in the morning.

古文：二十六年，改定朝贺于乾清宫。
现代文：洪武二十六年，改定在干清宫朝贺。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Hongwu, it was decided to hold morning greetings at the Ganqing Palace.

古文：其日，皇帝、皇后升座，侍从导引如仪，引礼引皇太子及妃、亲王及妃诣上位前，赞礼赞四拜，兴。
现代文：这一天，皇帝、皇后登上座位，侍从按礼仪导引，引礼官导引皇太子以及妃、亲王以及王妃到皇上位前，赞礼官赞唱拜四拜，起身。
English: On this day, the emperor and empress ascended to their seats, the attendants guided them according to the etiquette, the usher led the crown prince and princess, the prince and princess to the front of the imperial table, and the eulogist sang four bows and stood up.

古文：赞礼引皇太子诣前，赞跪，引礼赞太了妃、诸王及妃皆跪。
现代文：赞礼官导引皇太子上前，赞唱跪拜，引礼官赞唱太子妃、众王以及王妃都跪拜。
English: The eulogist led the crown prince forward, sang and bowed, and the eulogist sang and bowed to the princess, kings and queens.

古文：皇太子致词，同前，不传制。
现代文：皇太子致词，如同前边所记，不传达制命。
English: The crown prince's speech, as noted earlier, did not convey a command.

古文：赞礼赞皇太子俯伏，兴，引礼赞诸王俯伏，兴，太子妃、诸王妃皆兴。
现代文：赞礼官赞唱皇太子俯伏，起身，引礼官赞唱众王俯伏，起身，太子妃、众王妃都起身。
English: The eulogists sang the praises of the crown prince bowing and rising, the ushers sang the praises of the kings bowing and rising, and the princesses and queens all rose.

古文：赞礼引皇太子复位。
现代文：赞礼官导引皇太子回到原位。
English: The eulogist led the crown prince back to his original seat.

古文：赞拜，皇太子以下皆四拜。
现代文：赞唱礼拜，皇太子以下都拜四拜。
English: During the chanting service, everyone from the crown prince on down bowed four times.

古文：礼毕，引礼引至皇后前，其前后赞拜，皆如朝皇帝仪。
现代文：礼仪结东，引礼官引导到皇后面前，前后的赞拜，都如同朝见皇帝的礼仪。
English: The etiquette of the eulogy, the introduction of the eulogist to the queen, and the praise before and after, are all like the etiquette of the emperor's court.

古文：致词称 母后殿下 。
现代文：致词称 母后殿下 。
English: The speech was given by Her Royal Highness the Queen Mother.

古文：礼毕，出。
现代文：礼仪结东，退出。
English: After the salute, come out.

古文：七年更定，不致贺辞，止行八拜礼。
现代文：七年更改修定，不致贺辞，只行八拜礼。
English: After seven years of revision, there will be no congratulatory speech, and only eight prayers will be performed.

古文：朝贺皇太后礼皆同。
现代文：朝贺皇太后礼，也相同。
English: Asaga, the empress dowager, did the same.

古文：诸王来朝仪
现代文：诸王来朝仪
English: The kings come to the imperial ceremony

古文：古者，六年五服一朝。
现代文：古代，六年五服来京朝拜一次。
English: In ancient times, people came to Beijing to pay homage once every five years.

古文：汉法有四见仪。
现代文：汉代礼法有四见的礼仪。
English: There are four types of etiquette in Han Dynasty etiquette.

古文：魏制，藩王不得入觐。
现代文：曹魏制度，藩王不能入京朝见皇帝。
English: Under the Cao Wei system, the king of a domain could not enter Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：晋泰始中，令王公以下入朝者，四方各为二番。
现代文：晋泰始年间，命令王公以下入京朝拜的，四方各为两次。
English: During the first year of the reign of Emperor Jintai, it was ordered that the prince and his entourage enter the capital to pay homage twice in each direction.

古文：唐以后，亲藩多不就国。
现代文：唐以后，亲藩多不到藩王封国去。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, fewer pro-Han lords than Han kings went to fiefdoms.

古文：明代仿古封建，亲王之藩不常入朝，朝则赐赉甚厚。
现代文：明代仿照古代封邦建国的办法，亲王到藩国不经常入京朝拜，朝见就赏赐很丰厚。
English: In the Ming Dynasty, emulating the method of founding a feudal state in ancient times, princes did not often go to Beijing to pay homage to the emperor when they visited their feudal lord's country, and they were rewarded handsomely when they did.

古文：明初，凡来朝，先期陈御座于奉天殿，如常仪。
现代文：明朝初年，凡是诸王来京朝拜，事先在奉天殿陈设御座，如同平常礼仪。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, when the kings came to Beijing to worship, they set up the throne in front of the Temple of Heaven, as was the usual etiquette.

古文：诸王次于奉天门外东耳房。
现代文：众王住在奉天门外的柬耳房。
English: The kings lived in the Kamdeor House outside the Gate of Heaven.

古文：鼓三严，百官入就侍立位。
现代文：三更击鼓以后，百官进入到侍立位。
English: After three more drumbeats, the centurion moved into the steward's seat.

古文：引礼导王具衮冕，由东门入，升东陛，就位。
现代文：引礼官引导王穿衮冕服，从柬门进入，从柬台阶升登，到御座上去。
English: The usher leads the king, dressed in his coronation robes, through the Cambodian gate and up the Cambodian steps to the throne.

古文：王府从官就丹墀位。
现代文：王府的从官到丹墀的拜位上。
English: Officials from the royal court came to pay homage to Dangun.

古文：赞拜，乐作，王与从官皆四拜。
现代文：赞唱拜礼，奏乐，王与从官都拜四拜。
English: The chanting of prayers, the playing of music, the king and his attendants all bowing four times.

古文：兴，乐止。
现代文：起身，音乐停止。
English: Get up, the music stops.

古文：王从殿东门入，乐作。
现代文：王从殿东门进入，奏乐。
English: The king enters through the east gate of the hall, and the music begins.

古文：内赞导至御前，乐止。
现代文：内赞官引导到御座前，音乐停止。
English: The music stopped as the Vice-Chamberlain led them to the throne.

古文：王跪，王府官皆跪。
现代文：王跪下，王府的从官都跪下。
English: The king knelt down, and all the officials of the royal court knelt down.

古文：王致辞曰： 第几子某王某，兹遇某时入觐，钦诣父皇陛下朝拜。 
现代文：王致辞说： 第几子某王某，正遇某时入京朝觐，恭敬地到父皇陛下面前朝拜。 
English: The king said in his speech: The first son, a certain king, was on his way to the imperial court at a certain time, and he respectfully bowed before his father, His Majesty the Emperor.

古文：赞俯伏，兴。
现代文：赞唱俯伏，起身。
English: Sing praise, fall down, get up.

古文：王由东门出。
现代文：王从柬门出。
English: Wang came out of the Cambodian gate.

古文：乐作，复拜位，乐止。
现代文：奏乐，返回拜位，音乐停止。
English: music, return to worship, and the music stops.

古文：赞拜，王兴。
现代文：赞唱行拜礼，王起身。
English: After the hymn, the king rose to his feet.

古文：从官皆四拜，兴。
现代文：随从官都拜四拜，起身。
English: The officials all bowed and got up.

古文：乐作，驾兴，王及各官以次出。
现代文：奏乐，皇上起身，王及各位官员依次退出。
English: After the music was played, the emperor stood up, and the king and all the officials left in turn.

古文：洪武二十六年定，凡诸王大朝，行八拜礼。
现代文：洪武二十六年规定，凡是诸王来京大朝会，行八拜礼。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Hongwu, it was stipulated that all kings should come to the imperial court of Beijing University and perform eight prayers.

古文：常朝，一拜。
现代文：常朝，行一拜礼。
English: Always in the morning, perform a prayer.

古文：凡伯叔兄见天子，在朝行君臣礼，便殿行家人礼。
现代文：凡是伯叔兄拜见天子，在朝堂上行君臣礼，在便殿行家人礼。
English: It is customary for great-uncles and great-aunts to pay homage to the Son of Heaven, to perform the monarch-servant salute in the morning hall, and to perform the family salute in the toilet hall.

古文：伯叔兄西向坐，受天子四拜。
现代文：伯叔兄面向西坐，受天子四拜。
English: Uncle Bo sat facing west, bowing to the heavens.

古文：天子居中南面坐，以尚亲亲之义，存君臣之礼。
现代文：天子居中面向南坐，以尊崇规亲的义理，保存君臣的礼节。
English: The heavenly son sits in the middle, facing south, and preserves the etiquette of princes and ministers by honoring the principle of righteousness.

古文：凡外戚朝见，皇后父母见帝行君臣礼，后见父母行家人礼。
现代文：凡是外戚朝见，皇后父母见皇帝行君臣礼，皇后见父母行家人礼。
English: In general, when the maternal relatives see the emperor, the queen's parents see the emperor and perform the monarch-servant ceremony, and when the queen sees her parents, they perform the family ceremony.

古文：皇太子见皇后父母，皇后父母西向立，皇太子东向行四拜礼，皇后父母立受两拜，答两拜。
现代文：皇太子见皇后父母，皇后父母向西站立，皇太子向东行四拜礼，皇后父母站着受两拜，答两拜。
English: The Crown Prince met the Queen's parents, the Queen's parents stood to the west, the Crown Prince went to the east for four prostrations, the Queen's parents stood to receive two prostrations and to answer two prostrations.

古文：诸司朝觐仪
现代文：诸司朝觐仪
English: Departments of the Imperial Household Agency

古文：明制，天下官三年一入朝。
现代文：明朝制度，天下官吏三年入京朝拜一次。
English: Under the Ming Dynasty system, government officials from all over the world came to Beijing to pay homage to the emperor once every three years.

古文：自十二月十六日始，鸿胪寺以次引见。
现代文：从十二月十六日开始，鸿胪寺依次引见。
English: From December 16th, Hongye Temple will be introduced one after another.

古文：二十五日后，每日方面官随常朝官入奉天门行礼，府州县官及诸司首领官吏、土官吏俱午门外行礼。
现代文：二十五日以后，每天地方军政长官跟随常朝官进入奉天门行礼，府州县官以及各部门首领官吏、土官吏都在午门外行礼。
English: After the 25th, every day, the local military and political chiefs followed the imperial officials into the Fengtian Gate to perform the salute, and the prefectural and county officials as well as the heads of various departments and local officials all performed the salute outside the gate.

古文：正旦大朝以后，方面官于奉天殿前序立，知府以下，奉天门金水桥南序立，如常朝仪。
现代文：正月初一大型朝会以后，地方军政长官在奉天殿前依次站立，知府以下，在奉天门金水桥南依次站立，如同常朝礼仪。
English: After a large imperial court meeting at the beginning of the first month of the year, the local military and political leaders stood in turn in front of the Bonten Hall, and those below the prefectural government stood in turn in front of the Bonten Gate, south of the Jinshui Bridge, as is the usual morning etiquette.

古文：天顺三年，令凡方面官入朝，递降京官一等。
现代文：天顺三年，命令凡是地方军政长官入朝，依次享受比同等京官降一等的待遇。
English: In the third year of Tenshun, it was ordered that all local military and political officials entering the DPRK would enjoy one-grade lower treatment than the equivalent Beijing officials.

古文：万历五年，令凡朝觐，南京府尹、行太仆寺苑马寺卿、布按二司，俱于十二月十六日朝见，外班行礼。
现代文：万历五年，命令凡是朝见天子，南京府尹、行太仆寺苑马寺卿、布政按察二司，都在十二月十六日朝见，外班行礼。
English: In the fifth year of the Wanli calendar, it was ordered that all should see the Son of Heaven in the morning, and that Yin of Nanjing Prefecture, Gong of Daju Temple, Yuan of Ma Temple, and Bu Zheng of the Second Division should all see the Son of God in the morning on December 16th, and perform the salute outside the office.

古文：由右掖门至御前，鸿胪寺官以次引见。
现代文：由右掖门到御前，鸿胪寺官依次引见。
English: From the right side of the gate to the front of the palace, the officials of Hongye Temple were introduced one by one.

古文：其盐运司及知府以下官吏，浙江、江西十七日，山东、山西十八日，河南、陕西十九日，湖广、南直隶二十日，福建、四川二十一日，广东、广西二十二日，云南、贵州二十三日，北直隶二十四日，各外班行礼，至御前引见。
现代文：盐运司以及知府以下官吏，浙江、江西在十七日，山东、山西在十八日，河南、陕西在十九日，塑庭、南直隶在二十日，福建、四川在二十一日，广塞、尘西在二十二日，云南、贵州在二十三日，北直隶在二十四日，各外班行礼，到御前引见。
English: On the 17th, officials from Zhejiang and Jiangxi provinces, on the 18th, from Shandong and Shanxi provinces, on the 19th, from Henan and Shaanxi provinces, on the 20th, from Putian and Nanzhili provinces, on the 21st, from Fujian and Sichuan provinces, on the 22nd, from Guangxi and Jianxi provinces, on the 23rd, from Yunnan and Guizhou provinces, and on the 24th, from Nanzhili province, came to pay their respects to the emperor.

古文：免朝则止，仍候御朝日引见。
现代文：不上朝时就停止，仍等到皇帝朝见日引见。
English: If he did not go to the imperial court, he would stop and wait until the emperor came to see him.

古文：正旦朝贺，俱入殿前行礼。
现代文：正月初一朝贺，都进殿前行礼。
English: On the morning of the first day of the first month, everyone enters the hall and salutes.

古文：凡朝觐官见辞谢恩，具公服，正旦具朝服，不著朱履。
现代文：凡是朝见官员朝见告辞谢恩，都穿公服，正月初一穿朝服，不穿红鞋。
English: All officials who visit the Imperial Household Agency for a morning greeting wear official uniforms. On the first day of the first month, they wear imperial uniforms and do not wear red shoes.

古文：常朝俱锦绣。
现代文：平常朝见穿锦绣。
English: I usually wear brocade in the morning.

古文：中宫受朝仪
现代文：中宫受朝仪
English: The Imperial Consort's coronation ceremony

古文：惟唐《开元礼》有朝皇太后及皇后受群臣贺，皇后会外命妇诸仪。
现代文：只有唐《开元礼》有皇太后及皇后接受群臣朝贺、皇后会见外臣命妇等礼仪。
English: Only Tang's "Celebration of the First Year of the Year" has the Empress Dowager and the Empress receiving morning greetings from the retainers, and the Empress meeting the wife of a foreign minister.

古文：明制无皇后受群臣贺仪，而皇妃以下，正旦、冬至朝贺仪，则自洪武元年九月诏定。
现代文：明朝制度无皇后接受群臣朝贺的仪礼，而皇妃以下，正月初一、冬至朝贺的礼仪，则从洪武元年九月下诏制定。
English: Under the Ming Dynasty system, there was no empress to receive the morning greetings from the courtiers. However, for empresses and below, the morning greetings on the first day of the first month and the winter solstice were established by imperial edict in September of the first year of Hongwu.

古文：凡中宫朝贺，内使监设皇后宝座于坤宁宫。
现代文：凡是中宫皇后接受朝贺，宫内太监在坤宁宫设皇后宝座。丹陛仪仗，由太监执持。
English: Whenever the Empress of the Middle Court receives morning greetings, the palace eunuch sets up the empress throne in Kunning Palace. The eunuch presides over His Majesty's ceremonial parade.

古文：丹陛仪仗，内使执之，殿上仪仗，女使执之。
现代文：殿上仪仗，由宫女执持。在宫门外陈设女乐。
English: A ceremonial battle in the palace, presided over by a lady-in-waiting. Women's music on display outside the palace gates.

古文：陈女乐于宫门外。设皇贵妃幄次于宫门外之西，近北；设公主幄次于宫门外之东，稍南；设外命妇幄次于门外之南，东西向。
现代文：在宫门外以西设皇贵妃帏帐，靠近北面；在宫门外以柬设公主帏帐，稍靠南；在门外以南，设外臣命妇帏帐，东西相向。
English: Outside the palace gate to the west, the imperial concubine's box is set up, close to the north; outside the palace gate to the west, the princess's box is set up, slightly to the south; outside the gate to the south, the foreign minister's wife's box is set up, facing east to west.

古文：皇后服祎衣出閤，仗动，乐作。
现代文：皇后穷祭服出阁门，仪仗启行，奏乐。
English: The empress dressed in poor ceremonial clothes came out of the pavilion, the ceremonial march began, and music was played.

古文：升座，乐止。
现代文：登上后座，音乐停止。
English: Take your seats, the music has stopped.

古文：司宾导外命妇由东门入内道，东西班侍立，讫。
现代文：司宾引导命妇从东门进入内道，东西列班侍立，完毕。
English: The officiant led the lady-in-waiting from the east gate into the inner path, and the attendants stood in rows from east to west. That was it.

古文：导皇贵妃、众妃由东门入，至陛上拜位。
现代文：引导皇贵妃、众妃从东门进入，到台阶上行礼位置。
English: Guide the empress dowager and all the empresses to enter from the east gate and go to the position of saluting on the steps.

古文：赞拜，乐作，四拜兴，乐止。
现代文：引导官宣唱行礼，奏乐，拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Sing a hymn, play a tune, pray four times, get up, the music stops.

古文：导由殿东门入，乐作。
现代文：引导从殿东门进入，奏乐。
English: The guide enters from the east gate of the hall, and the music begins.

古文：内赞接引至殿上拜位，乐止。
现代文：内赞官迎接引导到殿上行礼位置，音乐停止。
English: The chancellor welcomed the guide to a position of saluting in the hall, and the music stopped.

古文：赞跪，妃皆跪。
现代文：赞唱跪下，妃子都跪下。
English: Kneel down in praise, kneel down all ye concubines.

古文：皇贵妃致祠曰， 妾某氏等，遇兹履端之节 ，冬至则云 履长 ， 恭诣皇后殿下称贺 。致词毕，皆俯伏，兴，乐作，复位，乐止。
现代文：皇贵妃致词说： 妾某氏等人，遇到正月初一的节日 ，冬至就说 冬至 ， 恭拜皇后殿下称贺 致词完毕，都俯伏，起身，奏乐。回到原位，音乐停止。
English: Empress Dowager Guifei said in her speech, "When a certain person's concubine and others encounter the festival on the first day of the first month of the year, the winter solstice is said to be the winter solstice. After the congratulatory speech, they all bowed down, stood up, and played music. When they returned to their original positions, the music stopped.

古文：赞拜，乐作，四拜兴，乐止。
现代文：赞唱礼拜，奏乐，拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Sing a hymn, play a tune, pray four times, get up, the music stops.

古文：降自东阶出。
现代文：自柬阶下来出宫。
English: From the Cambodian steps down to the palace.

古文：司宾导公主由东门入，至陛下拜位，以次立，行礼如皇妃仪。
现代文：司宾引导公主从东门进入，到台阶上行礼的位置，依次站立，如皇妃礼仪一样行礼。
English: The officiant led the princess from the east gate, to the place of the salute on the steps, standing in turn, like the etiquette of the empress.

古文：司宾导外命妇入殿前中道拜位。赞拜如仪。
现代文：司宾引导命妇进入殿前中道行礼位置，按礼仪赞唱行拜礼。
English: The officiant led the lady-in-waiting into the middle prayer position in front of the hall, and they chanted the prayer according to the etiquette.

古文：班首由西陛升，入殿西门，乐作。
现代文：班首从西阶上，进入殿西门，奏乐。
English: The head of the class enters the west gate of the hall from the west steps and plays music.

古文：内赞接引至殿上拜位，班首及诸命妇皆跪。
现代文：内赞官迎接引导到殿上行拜礼位置，班首以及聚命妇都跪下。
English: The vice-chancellor welcomes the guide to the place of worship in the hall, and the head of the class and the hostess kneel down.

古文：班首致词曰： 某国夫人妾某氏等称贺。 
现代文：班首致词说： 某国夫人妾某氏等人称贺。 
English: The head of the class said in his speech: The wife of a certain country, the concubine of a certain clan and others congratulated.

古文：贺毕，出复位。
现代文：庆贺完毕，出来回到原位置。
English: After the celebration is over, come out and return to the original position.

古文：司言跪承旨，由殿中门出，立露台之东，南向，称有旨。
现代文：司言官跪下接受懿旨，从殿中门出来，站在露台的东面，面向南，称有懿旨。
English: The spokesman knelt down to receive the imperial edict, came out of the middle door of the hall, stood on the east side of the terrace, facing south, and said that he had the imperial edict.

古文：命妇皆跪，司言宣旨曰： 履端之庆，与夫人等共之。 
现代文：命妇都跪下，司言官宣读懿旨说： 正月初一福庆，与夫人等共同分享。 
English: The wives all kneeled down, and the chief spokesman read out the edict, saying: "On the first day of the first month, share the good fortune with your wife and others.

古文：赞兴。
现代文：赞唱起身。
English: He rose to his feet in praise.

古文：司言奏宣旨毕。
现代文：司言上奏宣读懿旨完毕。
English: The Sikyong has finished reading out the imperial edict.

古文：皇后兴，乐作。
现代文：皇后起身，奏乐。
English: The Queen rose to her feet and the music began.

古文：入内閤门，乐止。
现代文：进入内殿门，音乐停止。
English: Entering the inner gate, the music stops.

古文：诸命妇出。
现代文：案受封命妇出来。
English: The case was sealed and she was ordered to come forward.

古文：太皇太后、皇太后朝贺仪同。
现代文：太皇太后、皇太后的朝贺礼仪相同。
English: The morning greeting etiquette for the Grand Duchess and the Grand Duchess is the same.

古文：洪武二十六年，重定中宫朝贺仪：先日，女官设御座香案。
现代文：洪武二十六年，复位中官朝贺礼仪。前一天，女官设御座香案。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Hongwu, the morning greeting ceremony of the vice-regent was restored. The day before, the lady-in-waiting set up an incense burner.

古文：至日内官设仪仗、陈女乐于丹陛东西，北向，设笺案于殿东门。
现代文：到了这天，太监在丹陛东西设置仪仗，陈设女乐，面向北，在殿东门设笺案。
English: On this day, the eunuch set up a ceremonial battle in the east and west of the Emperor Dan, set up female music, facing north, and set up a gong case at the east gate of the hall.

古文：命妇至宫门，司宾引入就拜位，女官具服侍班。
现代文：命妇到了宫门，司宾官引导进入行拜礼的位置，女官穿礼服随班侍立。
English: When the lady-in-waiting arrived at the palace gate, the steward led her into the place of worship, and the lady-in-waiting, wearing a ceremonial dress, stood by.

古文：尚宫、尚仪等官诣内奉迎，皇后具服出，作乐，赞拜如前仪。
现代文：尚宫、尚仪等官到里面迎接，皇后穿礼服出来，奏乐，如同前边的仪礼赞唱行拜礼。
English: Shang Gong, Shang Yi and other officials went inside to welcome, the queen came out wearing a dress and played music, just like the front of the ceremony.

古文：女官举笺案由殿东门入，乐作。
现代文：女官举着笺案从殿柬门进入，奏乐。
English: The lady-in-waiting enters from the hall's entrance gate, holding a scepter, and begins to play music.

古文：至殿中，乐止。
现代文：到殿中，音乐停止。
English: Once inside the hall, the music stops.

古文：赞跪，命妇皆跪。
现代文：赞唱跪下，命妇都跪下。
English: Kneel for the anthem, kneel for life.

古文：赞宣笺目，女官宣讫，赞展笺，宣笺女官诣案前，展宣讫，举案于殿东。
现代文：赞唱宣读笺目，女官宣读完毕，赞唱展开笺，宣读笺的女官到案前，展笺宣读完毕，举案放在殿东。
English: After the chanting is read aloud, the court lady finishes reading, the chanting begins, before the court lady arrives, the chanting is finished, and the case is placed in the east of the hall.

古文：命妇皆兴，司宾引班首由东阶升入殿东门，乐作。
现代文：命妇都起身，司宾引导班首徒东阶升入殿东门，奏乐。
English: The ladies-in-waiting all stood up, and the chief priest led the head of the class, the east steps, into the east gate of the hall, and played music.

古文：内赞引至殿中，乐止。
现代文：内赞官引导到殿中，音乐停止。
English: The chancellor was led into the hall and the music stopped.

古文：赞跪，班首及诸命妇皆跪。
现代文：赞唱跪下，班首及众命妇都跪下。
English: Kneel down for the anthem. The squad leader and all the women kneel down.

古文：班首致词讫，皆兴，由西门出。
现代文：班首致词完毕，都起身，从西门出来。
English: After the head of the class finished his speech, everyone got up and left the West Gate.

古文：赞拜及司言宣旨，皆如仪，礼毕。
现代文：宣唱行拜礼以及司言官宣读圣旨，都按礼仪行事，礼毕。
English: The chanting of the liturgy and the reading of the decree by the moderator are performed according to the liturgy.

古文：千秋节致词云： 兹遇千秋令节，敬诣皇后殿下称贺。 
现代文：皇后生日致词说： 正遇上皇后生日，恭敬地拜见皇后殿下称贺。 
English: The Queen's Birthday Message said: "It is the Queen's birthday, so I would like to pay my respects to Her Royal Highness and congratulate her.

古文：不传旨。
现代文：不传旨。
English: The message is not getting through.

古文：凡朔望命妇朝参，是日设御座于宫中，陈仪仗女乐。
现代文：凡是朔日、望日命妇上朝参拜，这一天，在宫中设御座，陈设仪仗、女乐。
English: On the first day of the new year and on the day of the new moon, it is the custom for women to go up to the palace to pay homage. On this day, the throne is set up in the palace and ceremonial dances and women's music are performed.

古文：皇后升座，引礼女官引命妇入班，文东武西，各以夫品。
现代文：皇后升座，引礼女官引导命妇入班列，文官柬面武官西面，各自按照丈夫的品级排列。
English: The empress ascends to the throne, the maids of honor lead the ladies-in-waiting into the procession, and the civil servants and military attachés face west, each arranged according to their husband's rank.

古文：赞拜，乐作，四拜。
现代文：赞唱行拜礼，奏乐，拜四拜。
English: Sing hymns, pray, play music, pray four times.

古文：礼毕，出。
现代文：行礼完毕，出来。
English: After the salute, come out.

古文：阴雨、大寒暑则免。
现代文：阴雨、大寒、大暑就免去。
English: Rain, cold and heat will be avoided.

古文：后命妇朝贺，俱于仁智殿。
现代文：后来命妇朝贺，都在仁智殿。
English: Later, my wife's morning greetings all ended up at Nenshi-dono.

古文：朝东宫妃，仪如朝中宫，不传令。
现代文：朝见东宫妃，礼仪如同朝见中宫皇后，不传达命令。
English: The etiquette of meeting the Eastern Empress in the morning is the same as that of meeting the Empress of the Middle Court in the morning. No orders are conveyed.

古文：朝贺东宫仪
现代文：朝贺东宫仪
English: Asaga Donggungi

古文：汉以前无闻。
现代文：汉代以前没有听说。
English: It was unheard of before the Han Dynasty.

古文：隋文帝时，冬至百官朝太子，张乐受贺。
现代文：隋文帝时，冬至日，百官朝见太子，陈设音乐接受朝贺。
English: In the time of the Sui Emperor Wen, on the winter solstice, hundreds of officials came to see the crown prince, and music was set up to receive morning greetings.

古文：唐制，宫臣参贺皇太子，皆舞蹈。
现代文：唐朝制度，太子属官参见朝贺皇太子，都要行舞蹈礼。
English: According to the Tang Dynasty system, the crown prince's subordinate officials, such as Crown Prince Asaga, must perform a dance ceremony.

古文：开元始罢其礼。
现代文：开元时纔罢用此礼。
English: At the beginning of the new year, this ceremony is used.

古文：故事，百官诣皇太子止称名，惟宫臣称臣。
现代文：按照旧例，百官拜见皇太子只称名，祇有太子属官称臣。
English: According to the old practice, when hundreds of officials visit the crown prince, they only call him by his first name. Only the prince's subordinate officials call him a vassal.

古文：明洪武十四年，给事中郑相同请如古制，诏下群臣议。
现代文：明洪武十四年，给事中郑相同请求按照古代礼制行礼，下诏交群臣讨论。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu in the Ming Dynasty, the same request was made by Zheng to perform the salute according to the ancient etiquette system, and the following edict was submitted to the ministers for discussion.

古文：编修吴沈等议曰： 东宫国之大本，所以继圣体而承天位也。
现代文：编修昊沈等人议论说： 东宫太子，是国家的重要根本，是延续圣体继承帝位的人。
English: Editor Xiu Haoshen and others commented: The crown prince of the Eastern Palace is an important foundation of the country, and is the person who continues to inherit the imperial throne.

古文：臣子尊敬之礼，不得有二。
现代文：臣子尊敬的礼节，不能不遵从。
English: It is impossible not to follow the respectful etiquette of a courtier.

古文：请凡启事东宫者，称臣如故。 
现代文：请求凡是向东宫启奏事情，仍如以前称臣。 
English: Requests for matters to be referred to the East Palace remained the same as before.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：凡朝东宫，前期，典玺官设皇太子座于文华殿，锦衣卫设仪仗于殿外，教坊司陈大乐于文华门内东西，北向，府军卫列甲士旗帜于门外，锦衣卫设将军十二人于殿中门外及文华门外，东西向，仪礼司官设笺案于殿东门外，设百官拜位于殿下东西，设传令宣笺等官位于殿内东西。是日，百官诣文华门外。
现代文：凡是朝见东宫，此前，典玺官在文华殿设皇太子座，锦衣卫在殿外设仪仗，教坊司在文华门内东西陈设大乐，面向北，府军卫在门外陈列甲土旗帜，锦衣卫在殿中门外及文华门外设将军十：二人，东西相向，仪礼司官在殿柬门外设笺案，在殿下东西设百官行礼位，在殿内东西面设传令宣笺等官位。这一天，百官到文华门外。
English: Whenever the East Palace is seen in the morning, previously, the court eunuch set up the crown prince's seat in the Palace of Literature, the brocade guard set up a ceremonial battle outside the palace, the teacher's office set up a grand music in the east and west of the Palace of Literature, facing north, the palace guard displayed a red and white flag outside the door, the brocade guard set up a general ten: two people, east and west, outside the door of the Palace of Literature, the ceremonial officer set up a ceremonial case outside the door of the palace, set up a hundred official ranks in the east and west of the palace, and set up official ranks such

古文：导引官启外备，皇太子具冕服出，乐作。
现代文：导引官开启警卫宫禁，皇人子穿冕服出来，奏乐。
English: The usher opens the guard gate, and the prince comes out wearing a crown and playing music.

古文：升座，乐止。
现代文：升座，音乐停止。
English: Take your seats, the music has stopped.

古文：百官入赞拜，乐作。
现代文：百官进入，赞唱行拜礼，奏乐。
English: Hundreds of officials enter, sing hymns, perform prayers, and play music.

古文：四拜兴，乐止。
现代文：拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Bow four times, stand up, and the music stops.

古文：丞相升自西阶，至殿内拜位，俱跪。
现代文：丞相从西阶升登，到殿内行拜礼的位置，都跪下。
English: The chancellor ascended from the west steps to the place of worship in the hall and knelt down.

古文：丞相致词曰： 某等兹遇三阳开泰，万物维新。
现代文：丞相致词说： 某等正遇三阳开泰，万物维新。
English: The prime minister said in his speech: Some people are experiencing the three suns and the four winds, and everything is being renewed.

古文：敬惟皇太子殿下，茂膺景福。 
现代文：敬祝皇太子殿下，美好地享受洪福。 
English: I wish His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince a happy and prosperous life.

古文：毕，俯伏，兴，复位。
现代文：结柬，俯伏，起身，恢复原位。
English: Kneel, bend over, stand up, return to your original position.

古文：舍人举笺案入殿中，其捧笺、展笺、宣笺、传令，略与皇后同。
现代文：舍人举着笺案进入殿中，捧笺、展笺、宣笺、传令，大致与朝见皇后礼相同。
English: The officiant enters the hall with a copy of the imperial edict, holds the imperial edict, displays the imperial edict, proclaims the imperial edict, and delivers the imperial edict, which is roughly the same as the morning audience with the empress.

古文：令曰： 履兹三阳，愿同嘉庆。 
现代文：皇太子下令说： 遇到春天，愿同你们共同享受福庆。 
English: The crown prince gave an order, saying, "When spring comes, I would like to enjoy Fuqing with you."

古文：余俱如仪。
现代文：其余的都按礼仪行事。
English: The rest followed protocol.

古文：冬至致词，则易 律应黄钟，日当长至 。
现代文：冬至致词，则改变为 节律应合黄钟，日期正当冬至 。
English: The winter solstice speech was changed to "the rhythm should match the yellow clock, and the date should match the winter solstice."

古文：传令则易 履长之节。 
现代文：传达命令则变为 冬至的节令 。
English: The transmission order is changed to the winter solstice.

古文：千秋节致词则云 兹遇皇太子殿下寿诞之辰，谨率文武群官，敬祝千岁寿。 
现代文：皇太子生日致词则说： 正遇皇太子殿下的生日，谨率领文武群官，敬祝皇太子长寿。 
English: In his birthday speech, the Crown Prince said: "It is the birthday of His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince, and I would like to extend my best wishes for a long life to His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince.

古文：不传令。
现代文：不传令。
English: Don't bark orders.

古文：凡朔望，百官朝退，诣文华殿门外，东西立。
现代文：凡是朔日、望日，百官退朝，到文华殿门外，东西相向站立。
English: Every New Year's Day and the day of the Emperor's birthday, hundreds of officials leave the palace and stand outside the gate of the Palace of Literature, facing east and west.

古文：皇太子升殿，乐作。
现代文：皇太子升殿，奏乐。
English: The crown prince ascends the throne, and the music begins.

古文：百官行一拜礼。
现代文：百官行一拜礼。
English: A hundred officials go to a church service.

古文：其谢恩见辞官亦行礼。
现代文：那些谢恩官员以及当朝辞官官员也行礼。
English: Those Shane officials, as well as the officials of the current chancellor, also salute.

古文：洪武元年十二月，帝以东宫师傅皆勋旧大臣，当待以殊礼，命议三师朝贺东宫仪。
现代文：洪武元年十二月，皇帝认为东宫的师和傅都是有功的元老大臣，应当以特殊礼仪对待，命令讨论太师、太傅、太保朝贺东宫的礼仪。
English: In December of the first year of Hongwu, the emperor thought that the East Palace's master and tutor were meritorious veteran ministers and should be treated with special etiquette, and ordered to discuss the etiquette of the East Palace's master, tutor, and tutor.

古文：礼官议曰： 唐制，群臣朝贺东宫，行四拜礼，皇太子答后二拜。
现代文：礼官议论说： 唐朝制度，群臣朝贺东宫，行四拜礼，皇太子答礼后拜二拜。
English: The etiquette official commented, "The Tang Dynasty system is outdated. The courtiers of the East Asaga Palace bow four times, and the crown prince bows twice after answering the bow.

古文：三公朝贺，前后俱答拜。
现代文：三公朝贺，前后都答拜。
English: Three morning greetings, bowing before and after.

古文：近代答拜之礼不行，而三师之礼不可不重。
现代文：近代答拜的礼仪不施行，而太师、太傅、太保的礼仪不能不隆重。
English: The etiquette of modern worship is not carried out, but the etiquette of Taishi, Taifu, and Taibo cannot but be grand.

古文：今拟凡大朝贺，设皇太子座于大本堂，设答拜褥位于堂中，设三师、宾客、谕德拜位于堂前。
现代文：现在拟定凡是大型朝贺，在大本堂设皇太子座，在堂中设答拜褥位，在堂前设太师、太傅、太保、宾客、谕德行拜礼的位置。
English: Now we are planning the usual large-scale morning greetings, setting up the crown prince's throne in the large main hall, a place of worship in the hall, and a place for the priest, priest, priestess, guests, and oracle to worship in front of the hall.

古文：皇太子常服升座，三师、宾客常服入就位，北向立。
现代文：皇太子穿平常衣服登上座位，太师、太傅、太保、宾客穿常服到拜位，向北站立。
English: The crown prince climbed onto the seat in his regular clothes, while the grand master, grand maester, grand chamberlain, and guests wore their regular clothes to pay their respects, standing to the north.

古文：皇太子起立，南向。
现代文：皇太子起立，面向南。
English: The crown prince stood up, facing south.

古文：赞四拜，皇太子答后二拜。 
现代文：赞唱拜四拜，皇太子答礼后拜二拜。
English: The chanting was followed by four bows, and the crown prince's reply was followed by two bows.

古文：六年，诏百官朝见太子，朝服去蔽膝及佩。
现代文：洪武六年，诏令百官朝见太子，朝服去掉蔽膝及佩玉。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, the emperor ordered all officials to meet with the crown prince in the morning, and the court dress was stripped of the knee cap and the topknot.

古文：二十九年，诏廷臣议亲王见东宫仪。
现代文：二十九年，诏令朝廷大臣讨论亲王拜见柬宫太的礼仪。
English: In 1929, the Minister of the Imperial Court was ordered to discuss the etiquette of the prince's visit to the Cambodian Empress.

古文：礼官议，诸王来见，设皇太子位于正殿中，设诸王拜位于殿门外及殿内，设王府官拜位于庭中道上之东西，设百官侍立位于庭中，东西向。
现代文：礼官讨论，众王前来拜见，在正殿中设皇太子位，设众王行礼位子于殿门外以及殿内，在庭中道上的东西面设王府官行拜礼的位置，在庭中设百官侍立的位置，东西相向。
English: The etiquette officials discussed, the kings came to pay their respects, the crown prince's throne was set up in the main hall, the kings' places of worship were set up outside the gate of the hall and inside the hall, the royal officials' places of worship were set up on the east and west sides of the middle path of the court, and the positions of the hundreds of officials were set up in the court, facing east and west.

古文：至日，列甲士，陈仪仗，设乐如常。
现代文：到了礼拜这天，陈列甲士、仪仗，按常礼设音乐。
English: When it came to the day of worship, there was a parade of warriors, a ceremonial battle, and music was played according to the usual ritual.

古文：诸王诣东宫门外幄次，皇太子常服出，乐作。
现代文：诸王到东宫太子门外的帷帐，皇太子穿平常衣服出来，奏乐。
English: The kings went to the curtain outside the prince's door of the East Palace, and the crown prince came out wearing ordinary clothes and played music.

古文：升座，乐止。
现代文：升座，音乐停止。
English: Take your seats, the music has stopped.

古文：引礼导诸王入就殿门外位。
现代文：引礼官引导诸王进入殿门外的拜位。
English: The usher leads the kings into the prostration outside the gate of the hall.

古文：初行，乐作，就位，乐止。
现代文：初次行礼，奏乐，就位，音乐停止。
English: Initial salute, march to music, take your places, music stops.

古文：导诣殿东门入，乐作。
现代文：引导由殿柬门进入，奏乐。
English: The guide enters through the main gate, and the music begins.

古文：内赞引至位，北向立，乐止。
现代文：内赞官引导到位置上，向北站立，音乐停止。
English: The usher leads them into position, they stand facing north, and the music stops.

古文：赞跪，王与王府官皆跪，致词曰： 兹遇某节，恭诣皇太子殿下。 
现代文：赞唱跪下，王与王府官都跪卜，致词说： 正遇上某节，恭敬地拜见皇太子殿下。 
English: Kneeling down in praise, the king and the royal officials all knelt down and gave a speech, saying: It is a certain festival, respectfully visit His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince.

古文：致词毕，王与王府官皆俯伏，兴，乐作。
现代文：致词完毕。王与王府官员都俯伏，起身，奏乐。
English: After the speech, the king and the officials of the royal court prostrated themselves, stood up, and played music.

古文：复位，乐止。
现代文：返回原位，音乐停此。
English: Return to your original position, the music stops here.

古文：赞拜，乐作，王与王府官皆四拜。
现代文：赞唱行拜礼，奏乐，王与王府官都拜四拜。
English: Prayers were sung, music was played, and the king and his officials bowed four times.

古文：兴，乐止。
现代文：起身，音乐停止。
English: Get up, the music stops.

古文：礼毕，王及各官以次出。
现代文：行完礼，王及各官员依次退出。
English: After the salute, Wang and the officials left in turn.

古文：王至后殿，叙家人礼。
现代文：王到后殿，叙家人礼。
English: The king arrives at the inner court and pays homage to his family.

古文：东宫及王皆常服，王由文华殿东门入，至后殿。
现代文：皇太子以及王都穿常服，王从文华殿东门进入，到后殿。
English: The crown prince and the king both wore their regular clothes. The king entered from the east gate of the Palace of Literature and moved to the rear hall.

古文：王西向，东宫南向。
现代文：王向西，皇太子向南。
English: The king faces west, the crown prince faces south.

古文：相见礼毕，叙坐，东宫正中，南面，诸王列于东西。
现代文：相见礼结东，按尊卑等次就座，皇太子在正中，面向南，诸王列于东西两侧。
English: The crown prince is in the middle, facing south, and the kings line up on the east and west sides.

古文：嘉靖二十八年，礼部奏，故事，皇太子受朝贺，设座文华殿中，今易黄瓦，似应避尊。
现代文：嘉靖二十八年，礼部上奏，按照旧例，皇太子接受朝贺，在文华殿中设座，现在换为黄瓦，似乎应该避尊。
English: In the 28th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the ceremony began. According to the old practice, the crown prince received the morning greetings and set up a seat in the Wenhua Hall. Now it is replaced by yellow tiles, it seems that he should avoid the honor.

古文：帝曰： 东宫受贺，位当设文华门之左，南向。
现代文：皇帝说： 东宫太子接受朝贺，位子应当设在文华门左边，面向南。
English: The emperor said, "The crown prince of the East Palace receives morning greetings. The seat should be located on the left side of the Wenhua Gate, facing south.

古文：然侍卫未备，已之。 
现代文：然而侍卫没有配备，停止算了。 
English: However, the bodyguards were not equipped, so it was time to stop.

古文：隆庆二年册皇太子，诏于文华殿门东间设座受贺。
现代文：隆庆二年，册立皇太子，下诏在文华殿门柬间，设座位接受朝贺。
English: In the second year of the Longqing, the crown prince was enthroned, and it was decreed that a seat would be set up between the doors of the Wenhua Hall to receive morning greetings.

古文：大宴仪
现代文：大宴仪
English: The grand banquet begins

古文：汉大朝会，群臣上殿称万岁，举觞。
现代文：汉代大型朝会，群臣上殿称万岁，举觞祝贺。
English: Large-scale imperial court gatherings in the Han Dynasty, the courtiers went to the palace to say "long live" and "congratulations."

古文：百官受赐宴飨，大作乐。
现代文：百官受赐宴飨，大奏乐。
English: Hundreds of officials were given banquets, accompanied by grand music.

古文：唐大飨登歌，或于殿庭设九部伎。
现代文：唐代大宴，乐师升堂奏歌，或在殿庭设九部乐伎。
English: Tang Dynasty grand banquet, musicians ascending to the hall to play songs, or nine pieces of music in the hall.

古文：宋以春秋仲月及千秋节，大宴群臣，设山楼排场，穷极奢丽。
现代文：宋朝在春秋雨季的第二个月及太子生日。大宴群臣，搭建楼与戏台，奢侈无比。
English: The Song Dynasty was in the second month of the spring and autumn rainy season and the prince's birthday. The grand banquet of the ministers, the construction of the building and the stage, the extravagance was incomparable.

古文：明制，有大宴、中宴、常宴、小宴。
现代文：明朝制度，有大宴、中宴、常宴、小宴。
English: Under the Ming Dynasty system, there were grand banquets, middle banquets, regular banquets, and small banquets.

古文：洪武元年，大宴群臣于奉天殿，三品以上升殿，余列于丹墀，遂定正旦、冬至圣节宴谨身殿礼。
现代文：洪武元年，在奉天殿大宴群臣，三品以上官员升上殿堂，其余的排列在丹墀，于是决定正月初一、冬至、皇帝生日在谨身殿举行宴会。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, at the grand banquet of the Bongtian Hall, the ministers, officials with three or more prizes were promoted to the hall of fame, and the rest were arranged in Danzhao. Therefore, it was decided to hold a banquet on the first day of the first month, the winter solstice, and the emperor's birthday in the Jishimen Hall.

古文：二十六年，重定大宴礼，陈于奉天殿。
现代文：二十六年，重新制定大宴礼仪，在奉天殿陈设。
English: In the 26th year, the grand banquet etiquette was reformulated and displayed in the Bongten Hall.

古文：永乐元年，以郊祀礼成，大宴。
现代文：永乐元年，因郊祀礼完成，举行大宴会。
English: In the first year of Yongle, a grand banquet was held after the suburb ritual was completed.

古文：十九年，以北京郊社、宗庙及宫殿成，大宴。
现代文：十九年，因北京郊社、宗庙以及宫殿建成，举行大宴会。
English: In 1919, a grand banquet was held to celebrate the completion of the Beijing suburb shrine, ancestral temple and palace.

古文：宣德、正统间，朝官不与者，给赐节钱。
现代文：宣德、正统年问，朝官没有参加宴飨的，赐给节日钱。
English: In accordance with the proclamation of virtue and orthodoxy, if the imperial officials did not attend the banquet, they would be given money for the festival.

古文：凡立春、元宵、四月八日、端午、重阳、腊八日，永乐间，俱于奉天门赐百官宴，用乐。
现代文：凡是立春、元宵、四月初八日、端午、重阳、腊月初八日，永乐年间，都在奉天门赐百官宴飨，奏乐。
English: At the beginning of spring, the Lantern Festival, the 8th day of the 4th lunar month, the Dragon Boat Festival, the Double Ninth Day of the 7th lunar month, and the 8th day of the 8th lunar month, all of which are in the Yongle Year, the Gate of Heaven will give the 100 officials a banquet and play music.

古文：其后皆宴于午门外，不用乐。
现代文：这以后都在午门外举行宴会，不用音乐。
English: Since then, banquets have been held outside the main gate, without music.

古文：立春日赐春饼，元宵日团子，四月八日不落荚，端午日凉糕粽，重阳日糕，腊八日面，俱设午门外，以官品序坐。
现代文：立春日赏赐春饼，元宵赐团子，四月八日赐不落荚，嘉靖年问，改赐不落荚为麦饼。端午日赐凉糕粽，重阳日赐糕，腊月初八日赐面，都设在午门外，按照官吏的品级高低排列座次。
English: On the first day of spring, spring cakes are given out, on the Lantern Festival, dumplings are given out, on the 8th day of April, dumplings are given out, on the Jiajing New Year, dumplings are given out as wheat cakes. On the Dragon Boat Festival, cold cakes are given out, on the Mid-Autumn Festival, cakes are given out, and on the 8th day of the Lunar New Year, noodles are given out. They are all located outside the Mid-Autumn Festival Gate, and the seats are arranged according to the rank of officials.

古文：宣德五年冬，久未雪，十二月大雪，帝示群臣《喜雪》诗，复赐赏雪宴。
现代文：宣德五年冬，很久没有下雪，十二月下大雪。皇帝给群臣看《喜雪》诗，又赐给赏雪宴席。
English: In the winter of the fifth year of Xuande, there was no snow for a long time, and heavy snow fell in December. The emperor showed the "Joy of Snow" poem to the courtiers, and gave them a banquet to enjoy the snow.

古文：群臣进和章，帝择其寓警戒者录之，而为之序。
现代文：群臣进献和诗，皇帝选择寓有警戒意义的诗记录下东，而为诗写序。
English: The courtiers presented poems and poems, the emperor chose to record the poems with cautionary significance, and wrote a preface for the poem.

古文：皇太后圣诞，正统四年赐宴午门。
现代文：皇太后生日，正统四年在午门赐宴。
English: On the birthday of the empress dowager, a banquet is traditionally held at the noon gate.

古文：东宫千秋节，永乐间，赐府部堂上、春坊、科道、近侍锦衣卫及天下进笺官，宴于文华殿。
现代文：东宫太子生日，永乐年问，赏赐府部堂上官、春坊、科道、近侍锦衣卫以及天下进笺官，在文华殿设宴。
English: To celebrate the birthday of the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court, a banquet was held at the Palace of Literature to reward the superiors of the prefectural ministries, the chunbo, the science and technology ministries, the close attendants of the imperial court, and the eunuchs who were promoted to the highest ranks.

古文：宣德以后，俱宴午门外。
现代文：宣德以后，都在午门外设宴。
English: After Xuan De, they all held a banquet outside the noon gate.

古文：凡祀圜丘、方泽、祈谷、朝日夕月、耕耤、经筵日讲、东宫讲读，皆赐饭。
现代文：凡是祭祀圜丘、祭祀地祇、祈谷、祭朝日夕月、皇帝亲耕劝农、御前讲席日讲、东宫讲读，都赏赐饭食。
English: Meals will be provided for all of the following: the ritual of the sacred mound, the ritual of the sacred place, the ritual of the sacred valley, the ritual of the morning sun, the evening moon, the emperor's encouragement of farmers, the lecture in front of the emperor, and the lecture in the East Palace.

古文：亲蚕，赐内外命妇饭。
现代文：皇后进行亲自养蚕之事，赏赐内外命妇饭食。
English: The empress personally raised silkworms and rewarded the inner and outer life with food.

古文：纂修校勘书籍，开馆暨书成，皆赐宴。
现代文：编纂校勘书籍，开馆以及书成，都要赐宴。
English: The compilation of books, the opening of libraries, and the completion of books all require a banquet.

古文：阁臣九年考满，赐宴于礼部，九卿侍宴。
现代文：内阁大臣九年任满，在礼部赐宴，九卿侍宴。
English: When a cabinet minister has completed his nine-year term, he is given a banquet by the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the nine nobles attend.

古文：新进士赐宴曰恩荣。
现代文：赐给新科进士的宴席叫恩荣。
English: The banquet given to new scientists is called En Rong.

古文：凡大飨，尚宝司设御座于奉天殿，锦衣卫设黄麾于殿外之东西，金吾等卫设护卫官二十四人于殿东西。
现代文：凡是大型宴飨，尚宝司在奉天殿设御座，锦衣卫在殿外东西两边设黄麾，金吾等卫在殿的东西两边设护卫官二十四人。
English: For large-scale banquets, Shang Bao Si set up a throne in the Feng Tian Hall, Jin Yi Wei set up a yellow urn on both sides of the hall, and King Wu and other guards set up twenty-four guards on both sides of the hall.

古文：教坊司设九奏乐歌于殿内，设大乐于殿外，立三舞杂队于殿下。
现代文：教坊司在殿内设九奏乐歌，在殿外设大乐，在殿下立三舞杂队。
English: The headmaster set up a nine-song orchestra in the hall, a grand orchestra outside the hall, and a three-dance troupe in the hall.

古文：光禄寺设酒亭于御座下西，膳亭于御座下东，珍羞醯醢亭于酒膳亭之东西。
现代文：光禄寺在御座下西面设酒亭，在御座下的柬面设膳亭，在酒膳亭的东西两面设珍馑酰醢亭。
English: Koroku-ji Temple has a sake pavilion on the west side below the throne, a table pavilion on the north side below the throne, and a rare ginger ale pavilion on the east and west sides of the wine and table pavilion.

古文：设御筵于御座东西，设皇太子座于御座东，西向，诸王以次南，东西相向。
现代文：在御座东西面设御筵，在御座东面设皇太子座位，面向西，诸王依次在南面，东西相对。
English: On the east and west sides of the throne, there is a throne, and on the east side of the throne, there is a seat for the crown prince, facing west, and the kings are in the south, facing east and west.

古文：群臣四品以上位于殿内，五品以下位于东西庑，司壶、尚酒、尚食各供事。
现代文：群臣中四品以上位于殿内，五品以下位于东西糜，司壶、尚酒、尚食等官员各承担具体事务。
English: Among the group of courtiers, those with four or more honours are located in the hall, and those with five or less honours are located in the east and west pavilions. Officials such as the chief cupbearer, the minister of wine, and the minister of food each undertake specific affairs.

古文：至期，仪礼司请升座。
现代文：到了大型宴飨日期，仪礼司请求升登座位。
English: When it came to the date of the grand banquet, the etiquette officer requested a seat upgrade.

古文：驾兴，大乐作。
现代文：皇帝起身，大乐奏响。
English: The emperor stood up, and the grand music began to play.

古文：升座，乐止。
现代文：登座，音乐停止。
English: Take your seats, the music has stopped.

古文：鸣鞭，皇太子亲王上殿。
现代文：挥鞭肃静，皇太子、亲王上殿。
English: With a wave of the whip, the crown prince and the prince go up to the palace.

古文：文武官四品以上由东西门入，立殿中，五品以下立丹墀，赞拜如仪。
现代文：文武官四品以上从东西门进入，站立殿中，五品以上站立在丹墀，按礼仪赞唱行拜礼。
English: Civil and military officers with four or more court ranks enter from the east and west gates, stand in the middle of the hall, and those with five or more ranks stand in the dungeon, chanting and performing prayers according to etiquette.

古文：光禄寺进御筵，大乐作。
现代文：光禄寺进献御筵，奏大乐。
English: Koroku-ji Temple dedicates a gong, and grand music is played.

古文：至御前，乐止。
现代文：到皇帝前，音乐停止。
English: When the emperor arrived, the music stopped.

古文：内官进花。
现代文：太监进献花。
English: Eunuchs come to offer flowers.

古文：光禄寺开爵注酒，诣御前，进第一爵。
现代文：光禄寺开爵注酒，到皇帝身前，进献第一爵。
English: He poured wine at the opening ceremony of the Kōroku-ji Temple and presented the first prize to the emperor.

古文：教坊司奏《炎精之曲》。
现代文：教坊司奏《炎精之曲》。
English: The teacher plays "The Song of the Fire Sprite."

古文：乐作，内外官皆跪，教坊司跪奏进酒。
现代文：奏乐，内外官都跪下，教坊司跪着上奏献酒。
English: When the music was played, the officials inside and outside the palace knelt down, and the priest knelt down and offered wine.

古文：饮毕，乐止。
现代文：饮完酒，音乐停止。
English: After drinking, the music stops.

古文：众官俯伏，兴，赞拜如仪。
现代文：众官俯伏，起身，按礼仪赞唱行拜礼。
English: The officials prostrated themselves, stood up, and performed the ritual chanting.

古文：各就位坐，序班诣群臣散花。
现代文：各自就位坐下，序班到群臣处散花。
English: Sit down in your respective places, and go in order to scatter flowers among the courtiers.

古文：第二爵奏《皇风之曲》。
现代文：进献第二爵时音乐演奏《皇风之曲》。
English: A musical performance of "The Emperor's Wind" accompanied the presentation of the second earldom.

古文：乐作，光禄寺酌酒御前，序班酌群臣酒。
现代文：奏乐，光禄寺到皇帝身前斟酒，序班斟给群臣酒。
English: After the music was played, members of the Koroku-ji Temple came to the emperor to pour wine in front of him, and the procession poured wine for the courtiers.

古文：皇帝举酒，群臣亦举酒，乐止。
现代文：皇帝举酒，群臣也举酒，音乐停止。
English: The emperor raised his glass, the ministers also raised their glasses, and the music stopped.

古文：进汤，鼓吹响节前导，至殿外，鼓吹止。
现代文：进献汤，鼓吹乐响，节制在前引导者，到殿外，停止鼓吹乐。
English: When the soup is served and the music is playing, if the leader is restrained, go outside the hall and stop the music.

古文：殿上乐作，群臣起立，光禄寺官进汤，群臣复坐。
现代文：殿上奏乐，群臣起立，光禄寺官进汤，群臣又坐下。
English: The music is played in the hall, the courtiers stand up, the officials of the Guanglu Temple enter the soup, and the courtiers sit down again.

古文：序班供群臣汤。
现代文：序班供给群臣汤。
English: The orderly class served soup to the retinue.

古文：皇帝举箸，群臣亦举箸，赞馔成，乐止。
现代文：皇帝举起筷子，群臣也举筷子，赞唱饭食已成，音乐停正。
English: The emperor held up his chopsticks, the courtiers also held up their chopsticks, sang the meal was ready, and the music stopped.

古文：武舞入，奏《平定天下之舞》。
现代文：跳武舞的人进入，乐奏《平定天下之舞》。
English: The martial dancers enter, and "Dance to Pacify the World" is played.

古文：第三爵奏《眷皇明之曲》。
现代文：第三爵奏《眷皇明之曲》。
English: The Third Duke plays "Song of the Imperial Family."

古文：乐作，进酒如初。乐止，奏《抚安四夷之舞》。
现代文：奏乐，像前面那样进酒。音乐停止，演奏《抚安四夷之舞》。
English: The music plays, and the chorus drinks as before. The music stops, and the "Dance of the Four Emperors of Fu'an" is performed.

古文：第四爵奏《天道传之曲》，进酒、进汤如初，奏《车书会同之舞》。
现代文：第四爵奏《天道传之曲》，进酒、进汤如前，奏《车书会同之舞》。
English: The 4th Duke played "Song of Heaven," drank wine and soup as before, and played "Dance of the Car Club."

古文：第五爵奏《振皇纲之曲》，进酒如初，奏《百戏承应舞》。
现代文：第五爵奏《振皇纲之曲》，进酒如前，奏《百戏承应舞》。
English: The 5th Duke played "The Emperor's Anthem," drank wine as before, and played "One Hundred Dances."

古文：第六爵奏《金陵之曲》，进酒、进汤如初，奏《八蛮献宝舞》。
现代文：第六爵奏《金陵之曲》，进酒、进汤如前，奏《八蛮献宝舞》。
English: The 6th Duke played "Song of the Golden Mausoleum," drank wine and soup as before, and played "Dance of the Eight Barbarians."

古文：第七爵奏《长杨之曲》，进酒如初，奏《采莲队子舞》。
现代文：第七爵奏《长杨之曲》，进酒如前，奏《采莲队子舞》。
English: The 7th Duke played the "Song of the Long Yang," drank wine as before, and played the "Lotus Picking Dance."

古文：第八爵奏《芳醴之曲》，进酒、进汤如初，奏《鱼跃于渊舞》。
现代文：第八爵奏《芳醴之曲》，进酒、进汤如前，奏《鱼跃于渊舞》。
English: The eighth earl played "The Song of the Kite," drank wine and ate soup as before, and played "Fish Leaping in the Deep."

古文：第九爵奏《驾六龙之曲》，进酒如初。
现代文：第九爵奏《驾六龙之曲》，进酒如前。
English: The 9th Duke played "The Song of the Six Dragons" and drank as before.

古文：光禄寺收御爵，序班收群臣盏。
现代文：光禄寺收起御爵，序班收起群臣的杯盏。
English: At Koroku-ji Temple, the vassals' cups and goblets were collected, and the cup and goblet of the courtiers were collected in order.

古文：进汤，进大膳，大乐作，群臣起立，进讫复坐，序班供群臣饭食。
现代文：进汤，进大膳，奏大乐，群臣起立。进完又坐下，序班供给群臣饭食。
English: After the soup, the meal, and the grand music, the courtiers stood up. After the meal, they sat down again, and the orderly class served the meal to the courtiers.

古文：讫，赞膳成，乐止。
现代文：完毕，赞唱膳食完，音乐停止。
English: The meal is over, the hymn is sung, the music stops.

古文：撤膳，奏《百花队舞》。
现代文：撤除膳食，奏《百花队舞》。
English: Remove the meal and play "Dance of the Hundred Flowers."

古文：赞撤案，光禄寺撤御案，序班撤群臣案。
现代文：赞唱撤案，光禄寺撤掉御案，序班撤掉群臣案。
English: The Zanzang Withdrawal Proposal, the Guanglu Temple Withdrawal Proposal, and the Group of Subordinates Withdrawal Proposal.

古文：赞宴成，群臣皆出席，北向立。
现代文：赞唱宴飨结东，群臣都出席，向北站立。
English: The singing banquet was held in the east, and all the ministers were present, standing to the north.

古文：赞拜如仪，群臣分东西立。
现代文：按礼仪赞唱行拜礼，群臣分东西站立。
English: According to the etiquette, the worshippers sang hymns and stood in groups.

古文：仪礼司奏礼毕，驾兴，乐止，以次出。
现代文：仪礼司上奏宴礼结东，皇上起身，音乐停止，依次出来。
English: When the master of ceremonies concluded the banquet, the emperor stood up, the music stopped, and the singers came out one by one.

古文：其中宴礼如前，但进七爵。
现代文：中宴礼像前面所述一样，但只敬献七爵。
English: The middle banquet was held as described above, but only for the seven barons.

古文：常宴如中宴，但一拜三叩头，进酒或三或五而止。
现代文：常宴如同中宴，只是拜一拜三叩头，敬献酒或三次或五次就结东。
English: A regular banquet is like a midday meal, except that you have to bow once, twice, three times, and offer wine, or you have to bow three times or five times.

古文：凡宴命妇，坤宁宫设仪仗、女乐。
现代文：上尊号徽号仪凡是宴飨命妇，在坤宁宫设仪仗、女乐。
English: Shangzonggo Huiguo Yi is usually a banquet for women, with ceremonial battles and women's music at Kunning Palace.

古文：皇后常服升座，皇妃、皇太子妃、王妃、公主亦常服随出閤，入就位，大小命妇各立于座位后。
现代文：皇后穿常服登座，皇妃、皇太子妃、王妃、公主也穿常服随从出阁，入宫到各自的位置。大小命妇各自站在座位后。
English: The Empress, dressed in her regular clothes, took her seat, and the Empress Dowager, Crown Princess, Empress Dowager, and Princess, also dressed in their regular clothes, followed her out of the pavilion and into the palace to their respective positions.

古文：丞相夫人率诸命妇举御食案。
现代文：丞相夫人率领众命妇举御食案。
English: The prime minister's wife led the crowd in raising the issue of the meal.

古文：丞相夫人捧寿花，二品外命妇各举食案于皇妃、皇太子妃、王妃、公主前。
现代文：丞相夫人捧寿花，二品官的外命妇各自举着食案，到皇妃、皇太子妃、王妃、公主的面前。
English: The prime minister's wife held a bunch of lilies of the valley, and the foreign wives of the second-ranked officials each held up a meal plan, in front of the empress, the crown princess, the queen and the princess.

古文：大小命妇各就座位，奉御执事人分进寿花于殿内及东西庑。
现代文：大小命妇各自到座位上，奉御执事人分别在殿内以及东西廉进献寿花。
English: The wives of the deceased, both large and small, went to their seats, and the deacons presented flowers to the deceased in the hall and in the east and west respectively.

古文：酒七行，上食五次，酌酒、进汤、乐作止，并如仪。
现代文：行献七次酒，上食五次，斟酒、进汤、奏乐止乐，都按礼仪进行。
English: The offering of wine seven times, the serving of food five times, the pouring of wine, the serving of soup, and the playing of music are all performed according to etiquette.

古文：上尊号徽号仪子无爵父之道。
现代文：儿子没有给父亲授爵位的道理。
English: The reason why the son did not give his father a knighthood.

古文：汉高帝感家令之言而尊太公，荀悦非之。
现代文：汉高帝被家令官的话感动，而尊崇太公，苟悦非议此事。
English: Emperor Han Gao was moved by the words of the family official, but respected the grand duke and was not happy about the matter.

古文：晋哀帝欲尊崇皇太妃，江以为宜告显宗之庙，明事不在己。
现代文：晋哀帝想尊崇皇太妃，江膨认为应该告祭显宗庙，表明事情不在于自己。
English: Emperor Jinlai wanted to honor the Empress Dowager, and Jiang Huan thought that he should offer a sacrifice to the Xian Family Temple to show that the matter did not lie with him.

古文：宋、元志俱载皇太后上尊号仪，而不行告庙，非礼也。
现代文：宋、元史志都记载皇太后上尊号的礼仪，而不告祭太庙，与礼仪不合。
English: The Song Dynasty and Yuan Dynasty histories both record the etiquette of honoring the empress dowager's name, but they do not mention the temple, which is inconsistent with the etiquette.

古文：明制，天子登极，奉母后或母妃为皇太后，则上尊号。
现代文：明朝制度，天子登帝位，奉母后或母妃为皇太后，就上尊号。
English: In the Ming Dynasty system, when the emperor ascended to the throne, and the empress dowager or empress dowager became the empress dowager, she was given the title of Shangxun.

古文：其后或以庆典推崇皇太后，则加二字或四字为徽号。
现代文：这以后有因庆典推崇皇太后，就加上二字或者四字作为徽号。
English: After that, some people added two or four words to the emblem to honor the empress dowager because of the celebration.

古文：世宗时，上两宫皇太后，增至八字。
现代文：世宗的时候，上两宫皇太后尊号，增加八个字。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, eight characters were added to the honorific title of the empress dowager of the two palaces.

古文：上徽号致词，而上尊号则止进宝册。
现代文：上徽号致词，而上尊号就只是进献宝玺与册害。
English: The upper crest signifies a speech, while the upper honorific sign only indicates the presentation of treasures and the registration of deeds.

古文：上尊号，自宣宗登极尊皇太后始。
现代文：上尊号，从宣帝即位尊崇皇太后开始。
English: The title of nobility began with Emperor Xuanzong and Empress Dowager Zongxiong.

古文：先期遣官祭告天地宗社，帝亲告太宗皇帝、大行皇帝几筵。
现代文：上尊号前先派官员祭告天地宗庙社稷，皇帝亲自祭告太宗皇帝、刚去世的皇帝灵座。
English: In front of the Shangzong, officials were sent to announce the heaven and earth, the dynasty, the temple and the shrine, and the emperor himself announced the Emperor Taizong and the recently deceased Emperor Lingzhao.

古文：是日，鸣钟鼓，百官朝服。
现代文：这天，呜钟鼓，百官穿朝服。
English: On this day, hundreds of officials wear court dress.

古文：奉天门设册宝彩舆香亭。
现代文：在奉天门设册宝彩舆香亭。
English: A treasure and incense pavilion will be set up at the Fengtian Gate.

古文：中和韶乐及大乐，设而不作。
现代文：中和韶乐及大乐，设置了却不演奏。
English: Middle and high music and big music, set up but not played.

古文：内官设皇太后宝座，陈仪仗于宫中。
现代文：太监设皇太后宝座，在宫中陈设仪仗。
English: The eunuch set up a throne for the empress dowager, and a ceremonial sword was set up in the palace.

古文：设册宝案于宝座前，设皇帝拜位于丹陛正中，亲王拜位于丹墀内。
现代文：在宝座前设册宝案，在丹陛正中设皇帝礼拜的位置，亲王的礼拜位置在丹墀内。
English: In front of the throne, the treasure case is set up, in the middle of the throne, the emperor's worship position is set up, and the prince's worship position is in the center of the throne.

古文：女乐设而不作。
现代文：女乐设置而不演奏。
English: Women's music is set up but not played.

古文：皇帝冕服御奉天门。
现代文：皇帝穿冕服到奉天门。
English: The emperor wore a crown and rode to the Gate of Heaven.

古文：奉册宝官以册宝置舆中，内侍举舆，皇帝随舆降阶升辂。
现代文：奉册宝官将册书宝玺放在舆中，内侍举舆，皇帝随舆下台阶登上辖车。
English: The official holding the scroll placed the scroll in the middle of the chariot, the attendants held the scroll up, and the emperor followed the scroll down the steps to board the chariot.

古文：百官于金水桥南，北向立，舆至皆跪，过兴。
现代文：百官在金水桥南，向北站立，舆到了都跪下，舆过了纔起身。
English: A hundred officials stood in the south of Jinshui Bridge, facing north. When they arrived, they knelt down, and when they left, they stood up.

古文：随至思善门外桥南，北向立。
现代文：百官跟随到思善门外桥的南面，向北站立。
English: Hundreds of officials followed to the south side of the bridge outside Shishan Gate and stood facing north.

古文：皇帝至思善门内降辂。
现代文：皇帝到思善门内下辖车。
English: The emperor arrived at Shishan Gate in a chariot.

古文：皇太后升座。
现代文：皇太后升登座位。
English: The Empress Dowager ascends to her seat.

古文：舆至丹陛。
现代文：舆到丹陛。
English: My heart goes out to His Majesty the Emperor.

古文：皇帝由左门入，至陛右，北向立。
现代文：皇帝从左门进入，到丹陛右边，向北站立。
English: The emperor entered through the left door and stood to the right of Emperor Dan, facing north.

古文：亲王冕服各就位。
现代文：亲王穿冕服各就位。
English: The princes, dressed in their regalia, take their places.

古文：奏四拜，皇帝及王以下皆四拜。
现代文：上奏拜四拜，皇帝以及诸王以下都拜四拜。
English: There are four bows at the beginning of the performance, and the emperor and all the kings bow four times.

古文：奉册宝官以册宝由殿中门入，立于左。
现代文：奉册宝官拿着册书与宝玺从殿中门进入，站在左边。
English: The treasurer, holding the record book and the treasure bowl, entered from the middle gate of the hall and stood on the left.

古文：皇帝由殿左门入，至拜位跪，亲王百官皆跪。
现代文：皇帝从殿左门进入，到行礼位子跪下，亲王百官都跪下。
English: The emperor entered from the left door of the hall, kneeled down to the place of salute, and all the princes and officials knelt down.

古文：奏搢圭，奏进册。
现代文：奏唱插圭，奏唱进册。
English: Sing the chorus, sing the chorus.

古文：奉册官以册跪进，皇帝受册献讫，执事官跪受，置案左。
现代文：奉册官拿着册书跪着进献，皇帝接受册书献册完毕。执事官跪着接受，放在案的左边。
English: The registrar kneels with the register and presents it to the emperor. The emperor accepts the register and presents it to the emperor. The deacon kneels and accepts it and places it on the left side of the case.

古文：奏进宝，奉宝官以宝跪进。
现代文：奏唱进献宝玺，奉宝官拿着实玺跪着进献。
English: The music is played and sung into the offering bowl, and the offering officer kneels down with the real bowl in his hand.

古文：皇帝受宝，献讫，执事官跪受，置案右。
现代文：皇帝接受宝玺，进献完毕，执事官跪着接受，放在案右。
English: The emperor receives the treasure and presents it. The deacon kneels to receive it and places it on the right side of the case.

古文：奏出圭，奏宣册，执事官跪宣读。
现代文：奏唱抽出圭，奏唱宣读册书，执事官跪着宣读。
English: The choir sang, the book was read aloud, and the deacon read it on his knees.

古文：皇帝俯伏，兴，由左门出，至拜位。
现代文：皇帝俯伏，起身，从左门出，到行拜礼的位置。
English: The emperor prostrated himself, stood up, and went out of the left door to the place of worship.

古文：奏四拜，传唱百官同四拜。
现代文：奏唱拜四拜，传唱百官同样拜四拜。
English: Singers bow four times, and singers bow four times.

古文：礼毕，驾兴。
现代文：典礼完毕，皇帝起身。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor stood up.

古文：是日，皇帝奉皇太后谒奉先殿及几筵，行谒谢礼。
现代文：这一天，皇帝奉皇太后拜谒奉先殿以及灵座，举行谒谢礼。
English: On this day, the emperor paid homage to the empress dowager by visiting the front hall and the shrine, and held a thanksgiving ceremony.

古文：礼毕，皇太后还宫，服燕居冠服，升座。皇帝率皇后、皇妃、亲王、公主及六尚等女官行庆贺礼。
现代文：行礼完毕，皇太后回宫，穿燕居冠服，登上座位皇帝率皇后、皇妃、亲王、公主以及六尚等女官，行庆贺礼。
English: After the ceremony, the empress dowager returned to the palace, put on the Yanju crown dress, and ascended to the seat. The emperor led the empress, the empress dowager, the prince, the princess, and the six court ladies to celebrate the ceremony.

古文：翌日，外命妇四品以上行进表笺礼。
现代文：第二天，外命妇四品以上，行进献表笺礼。
English: The next day, the foreign emissaries with more than four articles marched to present the table and salute.

古文：宣德以后，仪同。
现代文：宣德以后，礼仪相同。
English: After Xuan De, the etiquette is the same.

古文：正统初，尊太皇太后仪同。
现代文：正统初年，尊崇太皇太后礼仪相同。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the etiquette of revering the empress dowager was the same.

古文：天顺八年二月，增命妇致词云： 某夫人妾某氏等，恭惟皇太后陛下尊居慈极，永膺福寿。 
现代文：天顺八年二月，增加命妇致词道： 某夫人妾某氏等，恭敬地希望皇太后陛下尊居后位，永远享受福寿。 
English: In February of the 8th year of Tenshun, the additional designated lady made a speech: A certain lady, the concubine of a certain person, etc., respectfully hope that Her Majesty the Empress Dowager will take a back seat and enjoy a happy life forever.

古文：弘治十八年，上两宫尊号，改皇太后致词云： 尊居慈闱，茂隆福寿。 
现代文：弘治十八年，上两宫尊号，改皇太后致词说： 尊居后位，享受盛大的福寿。 
English: In the 18th year of the Hongzhi era, she was given the title of "Imperial Princess" and became the empress dowager. In her speech, she said: "Respectfully stay behind and enjoy a grand and prosperous life."

古文：嘉靖元年二月上尊号，以四宫行礼过劳，分为二日。
现代文：嘉靖元年二月上尊号，因四宫行礼遇于劳累，分为二曰。
English: In February of the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the name of the emperor was changed to honor the four palaces, which was divided into two days.

古文：又以武宗服制未满，庄肃皇后免朝贺，命妇贺三宫，亦分日。
现代文：又因武宗服丧期未满，庄肃皇后免去朝贺，命妇朝贺三宫，也分日进行。
English: Also, due to the fact that the period of mourning for Emperor Wuzong had not yet expired, Empress Shoshu was exempted from the morning greeting, and the morning greeting of the three palaces was also carried out on a daily basis.

古文：上徽号，自天顺二年正月奉皇太后始。
现代文：上徽号，从天顺二年正月奉皇太后开始。
English: The upper emblem, from the first month of the second year of Tianshun to the empress dowager.

古文：致词云： 嗣皇帝臣，伏惟皇太后陛下，功德兼隆，显崇徽号，永膺福寿，率土同欢。 
现代文：致词说： 嗣位皇帝臣，恭敬地想到皇太后陛下，功业与德行兼高，显扬尊崇徽号，永远享受福寿，天下同欢。 
English: The speech said: Emperor's Heir Minister, I respectfully think of Her Majesty the Empress Dowager, who has high achievements and virtues, shows respect and reverence for the emblem, and always enjoys a good life, and the whole world is happy.

古文：命妇进表庆贺致词云： 某夫人妾某氏等，恭惟皇太后陛下德同坤厚，允协徽称，寿福无疆，舆情欢戴。 
现代文：命妇进表庆贺致词说： 某夫人妾某氏等，恭敬地想皇太后陛下恩德如同大地一样深厚，确实符合徽号称呼，寿福无疆，民情欢呼拥戴。 
English: In her congratulatory speech, the designated lady said: "A certain lady, a certain concubine, and so on, respectfully think that the empress dowager's grace is as deep as the earth, truly in line with the name of the emblem, life is boundless, and people's feelings are cheered and supported.

古文：馀如常仪。
现代文：其余的如同平常仪礼。
English: The rest is business as usual.

古文：后上徽号及加上徽号，仿此。
现代文：后来上徽号及加上徽号，仿照此礼。
English: Later, the crest and the crest were added to imitate this salute.

古文：成化二十三年，礼部具仪上，未及皇太子妃礼，特命增之。
现代文：成化二十三年，礼部制定礼仪上奏，没有涉及皇太子妃的礼仪，特别命令增添。
English: In the 23rd year of Chenghua, the etiquette department formulated the etiquette recital, which did not involve the etiquette of the crown princess, and a special order was added.

