古文：论者多谓儒生不及彼文吏，见文吏利便，而儒生陆落，则诋訾儒生以为浅短，称誉文吏谓之深长。
现代文：评论的人很多都认为儒生赶不上文吏，因为看见文吏处境顺利而儒生不得志，就诋毁儒生认为他们才智低下，称赞文吏认为他们才智高超。
English: Many commentators believed that Confucians could not catch up with the high-ranking officials, because when they saw that the civil servants were doing well and the Confucians were discouraged, they denigrated the Confucians as being of low intelligence and praised the civil servants as being of high intelligence.

古文：是不知儒生，亦不知文吏也。
现代文：这是不了解儒生，也不了解文吏。
English: This is because they do not understand Confucianism, nor do they understand the literati.

古文：儒生、文吏皆有材智，非文吏材高而儒生智下也，文吏更事，儒生不习也。
现代文：其实，儒生和文吏都有才智，并不是文吏才智高超而儒生才智低下，只是文吏经历的事情多，而儒生没有做过罢了。
English: In fact, both Confucianism students and literati have talents. It is not that the literati have superior talents and the Confucianism students have inferior talents. It is just that the literati have experienced many things, while the Confucianism students have not.

古文：谓文吏更事，儒生不习，可也；谓文吏深长，儒生浅短，知妄矣。
现代文：认为文吏经历的事情多，儒生没有做过，是可以的；认为文吏才智高超，儒生才智低下，就荒谬了。
English: It is possible to think that the literati have experienced more things than the Confucians have not done; it is absurd to think that the literati are highly intelligent and the Confucians are less intelligent.

古文：世俗共短儒生，儒生之徒，亦自相少。
现代文：社会上一般人都诋毁儒生，儒生们也自己互相瞧不起。
English: In society, the general public denigrates Confucianism, and Confucianists themselves look down on each other.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：并好仕学宦，用吏为绳表也。
现代文：因为他们都想做官并学习当官的本领，而且以文吏作为标准。
English: Because they all want to be officials and learn the skills of officials, and civil servants are the standard.

古文：儒生有阙，俗共短之；文吏有过，俗不敢訾。
现代文：儒生一有缺点，一般人就一起诋毁他们；文吏有过错，一般人都不敢去诋毁。
English: As soon as a Confucian scholar has a shortcoming, the general public denigrates them together; when a civil servant makes a mistake, the general public does not dare to denigrate them.

古文：归非於儒生，付是於文吏也。
现代文：把错的东西归罪给儒生，把对的东西归给文吏。
English: Blame the wrong things on the Confucians and the right things on the literati.

古文：夫儒生材非下於文吏，又非所习之业非所当为也，然世俗共短之者，见将不好用也。
现代文：其实，儒生的才能不比文吏低下，也不是他们学习的本事没有用处，而社会上一般人都诋毁他们，是因为看见地方长官不喜欢任用他们的缘故。
English: In fact, the talent of Confucians is not lower than that of civil servants, nor is their ability to learn useless, and the general public denigrates them because they see that local governors do not like to appoint them.

古文：将之不好用之者，事多己不能理，须文吏以领之也。
现代文：地方长官不喜欢任用他们，是因为很多事情自己不能亲自处理，需要文吏来主持办理。
English: Local governors do not like to appoint them, because they cannot handle many things themselves, and need civil servants to preside over them.

古文：夫论善谋材，施用累能，期於有益。
现代文：于是衡量和选择人材，区别他们能力大小，希望对办事有好处。
English: As a result, they measure and select human resources, distinguish their ability size, and hope that it will be good for business.

古文：文吏理烦，身役於职，职判功立，将尊其能。
现代文：文吏善于处理烦杂事务尽力于自己职务，做好本职工作建立功绩，所以地方长官爱重他们的能力。
English: Civil servants are good at dealing with tedious affairs, and they try their best to perform their duties, do a good job of their own work and establish merit, so local governors value their ability.

古文：儒生栗栗，不能当剧；将有烦疑，不能效力，力无益於时，则官不及其身也。
现代文：儒生事事小心翼翼战战兢兢，不能担当繁杂的工作，地方长官有烦难疑问，不能效力。他们的能力对于处理时事没有用处，那么当官就轮不到他们身上。
English: Confucians are cautious and wary of everything, and cannot take on complex work. Local governors have troubles and doubts, and cannot be effective. Their ability is not useful for dealing with current affairs, so it is not their turn to be in charge.

古文：将以官课材，材以官为验，是故世俗常高文吏，贱下儒生。
现代文：地方长官用做官的标准来考核人的才能，人的才能大小又以当官作证明，所以社会上一般人常常看重文吏，看不起儒生。
English: Local governors use the standard of being an official to assess a person's talent, and the size of a person's talent is also proved by being an official. Therefore, in society, ordinary people often value civil servants and look down on Confucians.

古文：儒生之下，文吏之高，本由不能之将。
现代文：儒生被轻视，文吏被重视，根源在于无能的地方长官。
English: Confucianism is despised, and clericalism is valued. The root of this lies in the incompetence of local officials.

古文：世俗之论，缘将好恶。
现代文：可见社会上一般人的评论，都顺着地方长官的喜欢与厌恶。
English: It can be seen that the comments of ordinary people in society are in line with the likes and dislikes of local governors.

古文：今世之将，材高知深，通达众凡，举纲持领，事无不定。其置文吏也，备数满员，足以辅己志。
现代文：像当今的将才，才智高深，地位显贵，起着纲领作用，事情没有不由他们作决定的，他们设置文吏，是为了填满名额，足以辅助自己实现志向。
English: Like today's generals, who are highly intelligent, hold high positions, and play a programmatic role, things are not decided by them. They set up clerks in order to fill vacancies, enough to help them achieve their ambitions.

古文：志在修德，务在立化，则夫文吏瓦石，儒生珠玉也。
现代文：如果他们的志向在于修养道德，致力于提倡教化，那么文吏就会被看成瓦石，儒生就会被看成珠玉。
English: If their aspiration is to cultivate morality and promote enlightenment, then the literati will be regarded as bricks and mortar, and the Confucians will be regarded as jewels.

古文：夫文吏能破坚理烦，不能守身，身，则亦不能辅将。
现代文：文吏能解决困难问题，处理烦杂事务，却不能保持住自身的节操，那么也就不能辅助地方长官。
English: If the clerks can solve difficult problems and deal with complicated matters, but cannot maintain their own discipline, then they cannot assist the local governors.

古文：儒生不习於职，长於匡救，将相倾侧，谏难不惧。
现代文：儒生没有学习过文职工作，却善长于纠正过失，地方长官为非作歹，冒危险规劝也不惧怕。
English: Confucianism students have not studied clerical work, but they are good at correcting mistakes. Local governors are not afraid to take the risk of persuasion.

古文：案世间能建蹇蹇之节，成三谏之议，令将检身自敕，不敢邪曲者，率多儒生。
现代文：考察社会上能树立忠心耿耿节操的，实现三谏之义的，使地方长官检点自身，约束自己，不敢不正直的，大多是儒生。
English: The majority of those who can establish loyalty and discipline in society, who can realize the three noble truths, and who can make local governors check themselves, restrain themselves, and dare not be dishonest, are Confucians.

古文：阿意苟取容幸，将欲放失，低嘿不言者，率多文吏。
现代文：而迎合地方长官意志，不择手段讨喜欢和争宠幸的，地方长官想放纵，低头沉默不说话的，大多是文吏。
English: But those who pander to the will of local governors, who try by all means to please and compete for favors, those whom local governors want to indulge, and those who bow their heads in silence, are mostly civil servants.

古文：文吏以事胜，以忠负；儒生以节优，以职劣。
现代文：文吏以处理事务占优势，在忠诚正直方面欠缺；儒生以保持节操占优势，在处理文职事务方面欠缺。
English: Civil servants are superior in dealing with affairs, but lacking in loyalty and honesty; Confucianism is superior in maintaining discipline, but lacking in dealing with civil affairs.

古文：二者长短，各有所宜。世之将相，各有所取。
现代文：二者都有长处与短处，各有合适的工作，当今的地方官吏，对二者都各有所取的。
English: Both have their strengths and weaknesses, each has a suitable job, and today's local officials have something to say about both.

古文：取儒生者，必轨德立化者也；取文吏者，必优事理乱者也。
现代文：选取儒生的人，一定是讲究道德和提倡教化者；选取文吏的人，一定是注重事务和重视处理烦杂工作者。
English: Those who choose Confucianism students must be moralists and advocates of enlightenment; those who choose clerks must be those who pay attention to affairs and those who pay attention to dealing with troublesome workers.

古文：材不自能则须助，须助则待劲。
现代文：自己才能不够则需要帮助，需要帮助就要依靠有能力的人。
English: If one's own ability is not enough, one needs help. If one needs help, one should rely on capable people.

古文：官之立佐，为力不足也；吏之取能，为材不及也。
现代文：官吏设置辅佐，是因为能力不足；选取有能力的属吏，是因为自己才能不够。
English: Officials set up assistants because of their lack of ability; they choose capable subordinate officials because of their own lack of ability.

古文：日之照幽，不须灯烛；贲、育当敌，不待辅佐。
现代文：太阳照耀黑暗，不需要灯烛；孟贲、夏育御敌，不靠辅佐。
English: The sun shines on the darkness, and no candle is needed; Meng Xuan and Xia Yu fight the enemy, and do not rely on assistance.

古文：使将相知力，若日之照幽，贲、育之难敌，则文吏之能无所用也。
现代文：假使地方长官的能力，都像太阳照耀黑暗，孟贲和夏育那样难于抵挡，那么文吏的才能就没有用处了。
English: If the ability of local governors is as difficult to resist as the sun shines through the darkness, like Meng Xuan and Xia Yu, then the talent of civil servants is useless.

古文：病作而医用，祸起而巫使。
现代文：病发作而医生就有人请，灾祸来了巫就人有用。
English: When sickness comes, a doctor is called for; when disaster strikes, a witch comes to the rescue.

古文：如自能案方和药，入室求祟，则医不售而巫不进矣。
现代文：如果自己能开方配药，会入室捉神弄鬼，那么医生就没有人请，巫没有人用。
English: If you can prescribe your own medicine and enter a room to play with ghosts, then no one will invite a doctor, and no one will use a witch.

古文：桥梁之设也，足不能越沟也；车马之用也，走不能追远也。
现代文：桥梁的架设，是因为人的脚不能跨越河沟；车马的使用，是因为人跑不能跑得很远。
English: Bridges are built because human feet cannot cross a river ditch; horses and carts are used because people cannot run very far.

古文：足能越沟，走能追远，则桥梁不设、车马不用矣。
现代文：要是人的脚能跨越河沟，人跑能跑得很远，那么桥梁就不用架设，车马也不要使用。
English: If a man's foot can cross a river ditch, and if a man can run very far, then there is no need to build bridges, and there is no need to use horses and carts.

古文：天地事物，人所重敬，皆力劣知极，须仰以给足者也。
现代文：天地间的事物，人尊重崇敬的原因，都是因为能力低下智慧不够，需要依仰它来充足。
English: The things of heaven and earth, the reasons for people's respect and reverence, are all because of low ability and insufficient wisdom, and need to rely on it to be sufficient.

古文：今世之将相，不责己之不能，而贱儒生之不习；不原文吏之所得得用，而尊其材，谓之善吏。
现代文：像当今的地方长官，不责备自己没有才能，却轻视儒生不学习文职；不追究文吏得到重用的原因，而尊重他们的才能，认为他们是好官吏。
English: Like today's local governors, they do not blame themselves for their lack of talent, but despise Confucianism for not learning the clerical position; they do not investigate the reasons why clerks are reused, but respect their talents and think they are good officials.

古文：非文吏，忧不除；非文吏，患不救。
现代文：于是就认为，不是文吏，忧虑不能排除；不是文吏，忧患不能解救。
English: Therefore, it is believed that if one is not a clerk, worries cannot be eliminated; if one is not a clerk, sorrows cannot be relieved.

古文：是以选举取常故，案吏取无害。
现代文：所以选举时常要老办事的人，考核官吏常取按章办事没有差错的人。
English: Therefore, the election often requires people who have been doing their jobs, and the appraisal officials often require people who have done their jobs according to the regulations and have no mistakes.

古文：儒生无阀阅，所能不能任剧，故陋於选举，佚於朝庭。
现代文：儒生没有处理时事的功绩和经历，所具备的能力不能胜任繁杂的事务，所以在选举时处于下等，在朝廷上失去地位。
English: Confucianism did not have the merit and experience to deal with current affairs, and the ability to deal with complex affairs was not competent. Therefore, it was in the lower ranks at the time of the election and lost its position in the imperial court.

古文：聪慧捷疾者，随时变化，学知吏事，则踵文吏之後，未得良善之名。
现代文：儒生中脑子聪明行动敏捷的人，随着当时情况变化，学会作官的一套，就追随文吏的后面，从未得过好名声。
English: The quick-witted and quick-moving Confucian scholars, who learned to be bureaucrats as the situation changed, followed the bureaucrats and never gained a good reputation.

古文：守古循志，案礼修义，辄为将相所不任，文吏所毗戏。
现代文：而遵守先王之道，坚持自己志向，遵守讲求礼义的，往往地方长官不信任，被文吏鄙视、戏弄。
English: On the other hand, those who abide by the ways of the former king, adhere to their own aspirations, and abide by etiquette are often distrusted by local governors and despised and teased by civil servants.

古文：不见任则执欲息退，见毗戏则意不得。临职不劝，察事不精，遂为不能，斥落不习。
现代文：由于不被重用就执意要退职，被鄙视、戏弄就感到不得意，因而办事不勤勉，观察事情不精细，从而被认为没有能力，被数落不会办事。
English: Because they are not reused, they are determined to retire, and they are despised and teased, they feel discouraged, so they are not diligent in doing things, and they do not observe things finely, so they are considered to be incapable, and they will not do things when they are counted down.

古文：有俗材而无雅度者，学知吏事，乱於文吏，观将所知，适时所急，转志易务，昼夜学问，无所羞耻，期於成能名文而已。
现代文：儒生中只有一般才能没有高尚抱负的，学会了作官的一套，与文吏混在一起，窥测地方长官的喜好，迎合当时的急需，转变志向改变作为，日夜兼程又学又问，不感到羞耻，只是希望成为一个擅长文书出名的人罢了。
English: Among Confucianism students, only those with average ability and no lofty aspirations have learned the bureaucratic way, mingling with civil servants, spying on the preferences of local governors, catering to the urgent needs of the time, changing their aspirations and changing their actions, learning and asking questions day and night, not feeling ashamed, just hoping to become a person who is good at writing and famous.

古文：其高志妙操之人，耻降意损崇，以称媚取进，深疾才能之儒，入文吏之科，坚守高志，不肯下学。
现代文：而那些有高尚志向美好节操的人，耻于降低自己高尚志向，损害自己崇高品德，去献媚求官，因而深恨那些 有俗材而无雅度 的儒生。等到他们进入文吏行列，仍然坚持自己高尚的志向，不肯就学文吏一套。
English: On the other hand, those who have lofty aspirations and good morals are ashamed of lowering their lofty aspirations and compromising their lofty morals to curry favor with officials, so they deeply hate those Confucian students who are vulgar and have no elegance. When they enter the ranks of clerks, they still insist on their lofty aspirations and refuse to study clerks.

古文：亦时或精暗不及，意疏不密，临事不识；对向谬误；拜起不便，进退失度；秦记言事，蒙士解过，援引古义；割切将欲，直言一指，触讳犯忌；封蒙约缚，简绳检署，事不如法，文辞卓诡，辟刺离实，曲不应义。
现代文：也许因为在处理问题上，熟练程度不够，考虑粗疏不周密，遇事不知道怎么办；在官场上对答有错误，跪拜不熟练，进退违背礼节；在朝廷上，上本陈述己见议论大事，像迂腐的读书人辩解过失，引证典故；在地方上，切断了长官的欲望，直言一针见血，触犯了讳忌；在办事上，封固和捆扎公文，给简牍系带帖签落名，或封泥用印，这些事上没有按照规章制度；在言谈上，说话高谈阔论，乖僻脱离实际，迂腐不符合道理。
English: Perhaps because in dealing with problems, the degree of proficiency is insufficient, the consideration is rough and not thorough, and I do not know what to do in case of trouble; in the official field, the answer is wrong, the kneeling is not skillful, and the advance and retreat is against etiquette; in the imperial court, the above statement has seen and discussed major events, like a pedantic reader justifying mistakes and quoting allusions; in the localities, it cut off the desires of the superiors, spoke bluntly, and broke the taboo; in the affairs, the sealing and binding of official documents, the signing of the name on the letterhead, or the sealing with mud

古文：故世俗轻之，文吏薄之，将相贱之。
现代文：所以社会上一般人轻视他们，文吏鄙薄他们，地方长官看不起他们。
English: That is why ordinary people in society despise them, civil servants despise them, and local governors look down on them.

古文：是以世俗学问者，不肯竟经明学，深知古今，急欲成一家章句，义理略具，同学史书，读律讽令，治作奏，习对向，滑习跪拜，家成室就，召署辄能。
现代文：所以社会上一般做学问的人，不肯完全弄通经学，在深刻了解古今上下功夫，都急于想成为一家章句学派。只要初懂文义道理，同时就讲究学习令史的必读书籍，熟读背诵法令，习作公文，学习答对，熟习跪拜礼节，在家练习好，以备一旦召去供职就能胜任。
English: Therefore, the general scholars in society are not willing to fully understand the study of scripture, and are eager to become a school of chapter and verse. As long as they first understand the meaning of the text, they also pay attention to studying the must-read books of history, mastering the recitation of laws and regulations, studying official documents, learning to answer correctly, mastering the kneeling ceremony, and practicing at home, so that they can be competent once they are called to serve.

古文：徇今不顾古，趋仇不存志，竞进不案礼，废经不念学。
现代文：为了顺应当今风气不顾先王之道，急于成交就放弃高尚志向，抢着上爬不顾礼义，废弃经书不想学习。
English: In order to conform to today's culture, they do not care about the previous king's way, give up noble aspirations in a hurry to make a deal, rush to climb up regardless of etiquette, and do not want to study.

古文：是以古经废而不修，旧学暗而不明，儒者寂於空室，文吏哗於朝堂。材能之士，随世驱驰；节操之人，守隘屏窜。
现代文：因此古经被废弃没人学习，经学暗淡无光，儒生冷冷清清地呆在家里，文吏则在朝堂上高声喧哗得意洋洋。 有俗材而无雅度 的读书人，就跟随世俗奔走效劳；而有高尚节操的儒生，就处于偏僻狭小的地方，被排斥与疏远。
English: As a result, the ancient scriptures were abandoned and no one studied them, the study of the scriptures was dull and lackluster, the Confucians stayed at home coldly and coldly, and the clerics were loud and proud in the morning hall. The readers who had vulgarity but no elegance followed the world and went to work; and the Confucians who had high principles were in a remote and narrow place, excluded and alienated.

古文：驱驰日以巧，屏窜日以拙。
现代文：奔走效劳的人一天比一天显得灵巧，被排斥疏远的人则一天比一天显得笨拙。
English: Those who rush to serve become more and more dexterous every day, while those who are excluded and alienated become more and more clumsy.

古文：非材顿知不及也，希见阙为，不狎习也。
现代文：不是他们能力差，智慧不够，而是见得少，干得少，不熟习的缘故。
English: It is not that they have poor ability and insufficient wisdom, but because they have seen little, done little, and are not familiar with it.

古文：盖足未尝行，尧、禹问曲折；目未尝见，孔、墨问形象。
现代文：要是自己的脚未曾走过的地方，即使是尧和禹也要问问道路的情况；要是自己眼睛未曾见过的东西，即使是孔子和墨子也要问问它们的形状。
English: If it is a place that their feet have never walked, even Yu and Yu will ask about the condition of the road; if it is something that their eyes have never seen, even Confucius and Mozi will ask about their shape.

古文：齐部世刺绣，恆女无不能；襄邑俗织锦，钝妇无不巧。
现代文：齐郡的人世世代代刺绣，普通妇女没有不会的；襄邑一般人都会织锦，就是迟钝的妇女也没有不手巧的。
English: People in Qi County have been embroidering for generations, and there is no ordinary woman who cannot do it; ordinary people in Xiangyuan can weave brocade, and even dull women are not unskilled.

古文：见之，日为之，手狎也。
现代文：天天看，天天做，手就熟练了。
English: See it every day, do it every day, and your hands will become skilled.

古文：使材士未尝见，巧女未尝为，异事诡手，暂为卒睹，显露易为者，犹愦愦焉。
现代文：假使 有俗材而无雅度 的读书人未曾见过，手巧的妇女未曾做过，生事生手，就是偶尔干一下，匆忙瞟一眼，即使是明摆着的问题，很容易干的事，也会糊里糊涂看不清，干不了。
English: If you have never seen a reader with vulgarity and no elegance, if you have never done a clever woman, if you have never done anything, if you have never done anything, if you have only done it occasionally, if you have only glanced at it in a hurry, even if it is a clear problem, something that is easy to do, you will be confused and unable to do it.

古文：方今论事，不谓希更，而曰材不敏；不曰未尝为，而曰知不达。失其实也。
现代文：当今评论事情，不说经历少，而说才干不敏捷；不说未曾做过，而说智慧不够，这不符合实际情况。
English: When commenting on things today, instead of saying that experience is lacking, they say that talent is not agile; instead of saying that they have never done it, they say that wisdom is not enough, which is not in line with the actual situation.

古文：儒生材无不能敏，业无不能达，志不为。
现代文：儒生的才干没有不敏捷的，职业没有干不了的，只是他们有高尚的志向不肯去做。
English: The talents of Confucians are not lacking in agility, and there is no occupation that they cannot do, but they have a noble aspiration and are unwilling to do it.

古文：今俗见不习，谓之不能，睹不为，谓之不达。
现代文：现在社会上一般人看见不愿习文书，就说他们不会；看见他们不肯去做吏事，就说他们干不了。
English: In today's society, when ordinary people don't want to learn a language, they say they can't; when they don't want to be a bureaucrat, they say they can't.

古文：科用累能，故文吏在前，儒生在後。是从朝庭谓之也。
现代文：是因为要分别和比较能力的大小，所以文吏排在前，儒生排在后，这是从朝廷的角度说的。
English: It is because it is necessary to separate and compare the size of the ability, so the clerics are in the front, and the Confucians are in the back, which is said from the perspective of the imperial court.

古文：如从儒堂订之，则儒生在上，文吏在下矣。
现代文：如果从通晓儒家经书的角度来评定儒生与文吏，那么儒生在上，文吏在下。
English: If one evaluates Confucian scholars and literati from the perspective of understanding Confucian scriptures, then Confucian scholars are at the top and literati are at the bottom.

古文：从农论田，田夫胜；从商讲贾，贾人贤；今从朝庭谓之文吏。
现代文：从务农的角度来评论种田，农夫最高明；从经商的角度来讲做买卖，坐商最能干；如今从朝廷的角度来论人才，所以说文吏最高明。
English: From the perspective of farming, the farmer is the most capable; from the perspective of doing business, the merchant is the most capable; from the perspective of the court, the clerk is the most capable.

古文：朝庭之人也，幼为干吏，以朝庭为田亩，以刀笔为耒耜，以文书为农业，犹家人子弟，生长宅中，其知曲折，愈於宾客也。
现代文：朝廷里的人，年纪小的时候做干吏，以朝廷为田地，用刀笔作耒耜，把公文当农桑，就像人家的子弟，生长在宅院中，他们知道宅院内房屋，通道的情况，胜过宾客。
English: People in the imperial court, when they are young, work as officials, use the imperial court as a field, use knives and pens as ploughshares, and treat official documents as agricultural mulberry, just like other people's children, growing up in the courtyard. They know the situation of the houses and passageways in the courtyard better than guests.

古文：宾客暂至，虽孔、墨之材，不能分别。
现代文：宾客刚来，即使是孔子和墨子的才智，也不能辨别。
English: When the guests have just arrived, even the wisdom of Confucius and Mozi cannot be distinguished.

古文：儒生犹宾客，文吏犹子弟也。
现代文：儒生像宾客，文吏像子弟。
English: Confucians are like guests, and literati are like children.

古文：以子弟论之，则文吏晓於儒生，儒生暗於文吏。
现代文：用子弟熟悉宅院作比喻来评论文吏和儒生，那么文吏在掌握文书上比儒生熟悉，而儒生比文吏生疏。
English: To use the analogy of children being familiar with the house to comment on the literati and the Confucians, then the literati are more familiar than the Confucians in mastering the scriptures, while the Confucians are less familiar than the literati.

古文：今世之将相，知子弟以文吏为慧，不能知文吏以狎为能；知宾客以暂为固，不知儒生以希为拙：惑蔽暗昧，不知类也。
现代文：像当今的地方长官，知道子弟因为在宅院里时间长熟悉情况才聪明起来，却不知道文吏是因为文书熟练才能干的；知道宾客因为刚来不了解情况，却不知道儒生是因为接触文书和法令少才拙笨的。这里糊涂不明，不会类推的缘故。
English: Like today's local governors, they know that their children are smart because they have been familiar with the situation for a long time in the courtyard, but they don't know that civil servants can do it because they are skilled in writing; they know that guests don't understand the situation because they have just arrived, but they don't know that Confucianism is clumsy because they have little contact with documents and laws.

古文：一县佐史之材，任郡掾史。一郡修行之能，堪州从事。
现代文：县里一个佐史的才能，能胜任郡里的掾史；郡里一个循行的才能，能胜任州里的从事。
English: A talent for history in the county can be competent for the history of the county; a talent for practice in the county can be competent for the practice in the state.

古文：然而郡不召佐史，州不取修行者，巧习无害，文少德高也。
现代文：然而郡里不招用佐史，州里不起用循行，这是因为处理文书非常熟练就会按法令办事没有差错，而他们虽然道德高尚，但很少处理公文的缘故。
English: However, the county does not employ a clerk, and the state does not employ a clerk, because clerks are very skilled in handling documents and will act according to the law without error, and although they have high morals, they rarely handle official documents.

古文：五曹自有条品，簿书自有故事，勤力玩弄，成为巧吏，安足多矣？
现代文：五曹办事自有章程，公文书写自有旧例，只要勤勉练习，就能成为高明的文吏，这怎么能受到称赞呢？
English: The five commissioners work according to their own regulations, and write official documents according to their own old practices. As long as you practice diligently, you can become a clever clerk. How can this be praised?

古文：贤明之将，程吏取才，不求习论高，存志不顾文也。
现代文：贤能高明的地方长官，衡量官吏是选择才智，不寻求是否熟习文书来评论其高低，因为他们看重志向，轻视文才。
English: As for the local magistrates who are capable and clever, the officials are measured by their intelligence, not by whether they are familiar with the documents to judge their level, because they attach importance to ambition and despise literary talent.

古文：称良吏曰忠，忠之所以为效，非簿书也。
现代文：称赞好的官吏就说他忠心耿耿，忠心耿耿所起的作用，不是在处理公文上。
English: If you praise a good official, he will say that he is loyal, and the role of loyalty is not in the handling of official documents.

古文：夫事可学而知，礼可习而善，忠节公行不可立也。
现代文：事情可以通过学习达到了解，礼节可以经过练习做到完善，忠贞的节操和公正的操行不是容易树立的。
English: Things can be solved through learning, etiquette can be perfected through practice, and loyalty and fair play are not easy to establish.

古文：文吏、儒生皆有所志，然而儒生务忠良，文吏趋理事。
现代文：文吏和儒生都有志向，然而儒生追求忠贞善良，而文吏追求能办好事情。
English: Both literati and Confucianism students have aspirations, but Confucianism students pursue loyalty and kindness, while literati pursue being able to do things well.

古文：苟有忠良之业，疏拙於事，无损於高。
现代文：如果有忠良的表现，即使办事生疏、笨拙，对他们高尚的志向没有什么损害。
English: If there is a display of loyalty, even if the work is unfamiliar and clumsy, there is no harm to their noble aspirations.

古文：论者以儒生不晓簿书，置之於下第。
现代文：评论的人认为儒生不会公文，把他们排在一下等。
English: The commentator thought that Confucianism could not write official documents, and ranked them one after another.

古文：法令比例，吏断决也。
现代文：由于法令和比例是文吏断案的依据。
English: Because the decree and the ratio are the basis for the clerk to decide the case.

古文：文吏治事，必问法家。
现代文：文吏处理事情，一定要请教精通法令的人。
English: When civil servants deal with things, they must consult people who are familiar with laws and regulations.

古文：县官事务，莫大法令。
现代文：天子的事务，没有比法令更重要的。
English: There is nothing more important for the Son of God than the law.

古文：必以吏职程高，是则法令之家宜最为上。
现代文：因此肯定要以能否精通法令，善于按法令办事来衡量人的才能的高低，这样精通法令的人应该最受重视。有人说： 确实是这样。
English: Therefore, it is definitely necessary to measure the level of human talent by whether it is proficient in laws and regulations and good at acting in accordance with laws and regulations. People who are proficient in laws and regulations should be given the most attention. Some people say: This is indeed the case.

古文：或曰： 固然，法令，汉家之经，吏议决焉。
现代文：法令是汉朝的经典，文吏的议论取决于它。
English: The edict is a classic of the Han Dynasty, and the discussion of the clerks depends on it.

古文：事定於法，诚为明矣。 
现代文：事情以法令来判定，确实是很明白的。 
English: It is indeed clear that the matter is to be decided by law.

古文：曰：夫《五经》亦汉家之所立，儒生善政，大义皆出其中。
现代文：我说：五经是汉朝所立，儒生完美的政治主张和大道理，都出自五经当中。
English: I said: The Five Classics were established by the Han Dynasty, and the perfect political proposition and great principle of Confucianism all come from the Five Classics.

古文：董仲舒表《春秋》之义，稽合於律，无乖异者。
现代文：董仲舒阐术《春秋》的道理，跟今天的法律是符合的，没有什么违反和不同。
English: The principle of "Spring and Autumn" expounded by Dong Zhongshu is consistent with today's laws, and there is no violation or difference.

古文：然则《春秋》，汉之经，孔子制作，垂遗於汉。
现代文：然而《春秋》，汉朝的经典之一，是孔子写的，留传到汉代。
English: However, "Spring and Autumn," one of the classics of the Han Dynasty, was written by Confucius and passed down to the Han Dynasty.

古文：论者徒尊法家，不高《春秋》，是暗蔽也。
现代文：评论的人只尊重精通法令的人，不抬高《春秋》，这是愚昧不明的表现。
English: The reviewers only respect those who are proficient in laws and regulations, and do not elevate "Spring and Autumn," which is a manifestation of ignorance.

古文：《春秋》、《五经》义相关穿，既是《春秋》，不大《五经》，是不通也。
现代文：《春秋》和五经，道理是互相贯穿的，既然赞赏《春秋》，又不推崇五经，这是不懂类推的道理。
English: The principles of "Spring and Autumn" and the Five Classics run through each other. Since people appreciate "Spring and Autumn" but do not respect the Five Classics, they do not understand the principle of analogy.

古文：《五经》以道为务，事不如道，道行事立，无道不成。
现代文：五经就是阐述原则的。具体事情不如原则重要，原则被执行了，事情就办成了，没有原则，事情就办不成。
English: The Five Classics expound principles. Specific matters are not as important as principles. If principles are implemented, matters will be accomplished. Without principles, matters will not be accomplished.

古文：然则儒生所学者，道也；文吏所学者，事也。
现代文：然而儒生学的东西，正是原则；文吏学的东西，是处理具体事情。
English: However, the essence of Confucianism is the principle; the essence of literati studies is to deal with specific matters.

古文：假使材同，当以道学。如比於文吏，洗泥者以水，燔腥生者用火。水火，道也，用之者，事也，事末於道。
现代文：假使才能相同，应当以学习原则的儒生为高，如比对于文吏，就像用水洗污泥，用火烧去腥味一样，水与火，是原则，运用它的人，是处理具体事情的，处理具体事情对于原则只是细枝末节。
English: If the talents are the same, it should be the Confucianism of learning principles that is higher. For example, for the clerks, it is like washing the sludge with water and burning the smell with fire. Water and fire are principles, and the people who use it are dealing with specific things. Dealing with specific things is just a detail for principles.

古文：儒生治本，文吏理末，道本与事末比，定尊卑之高下，可得程矣。
现代文：儒生能治理根本，文吏只是处理细枝末节，属根本的原则与属细枝末节的具体事情相比，要判定其尊卑高下，就可以衡量出来了。
English: Confucianism can govern the fundamentals, while the clerics only deal with the minutiae. Compared with the fundamental principles and the details, it is possible to judge their superiority and inferiority.

古文：尧以俊德，致黎民雍。
现代文：尧以美德使百姓和睦。
English: Using virtue to bring harmony to the people.

古文：孔子曰： 孝悌之至，通於神明。 
现代文：孔子说： 孝顺父母，尊重兄长到极点，就能与上天相通。 
English: Confucius said: If you are filial to your parents and respect your elder brother to the utmost, you will be able to communicate with heaven.

古文：张释之曰： 秦任刀笔小吏，陵迟至於二世，天下土崩。 
现代文：张释之说： 秦朝那些做 刀笔小吏 的，使秦每况愈下直到二世，秦朝灭亡。 
English: Zhang Xizhi said: Those petty officials of the Qin Dynasty who made swords and pens made the Qin Dynasty worse and worse until the second generation, when the Qin Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：张汤、赵禹，汉之惠吏，太吏公《序累》置於酷部而致土崩，孰与通於神明令人填膺也？
现代文：张汤和赵禹是汉朝精明强干的官吏，司马迁作《史记》，把他们列在《史记·酷吏列传》中，认为他们导致了西汉的灭亡。他们与 孝悌之至，通于神明 的人相比，谁令人义愤填膺呢？
English: Zhang Tang and Zhao Yu were shrewd and hard-working officials of the Han Dynasty. Sima Qian wrote "Histories" and listed them in "Histories of Cruel Officials," believing that they led to the demise of Western Han Dynasty. Compared to those who are filial and knowledgeable about the gods, who are the most indignant?

古文：将相知经学至道，而不尊经学之生，彼见经学之生，能不及治事之吏也。
现代文：地方长官虽懂得经学是最高的道理，但不尊重学习经学的儒生，因为他们看见读经书的儒生的能力赶不上能处理具体事务的文吏。
English: Although local governors understand that studying scripture is the highest principle, they do not respect Confucian scholars who study scripture, because they see that the ability of Confucian scholars to read scripture is not as good as that of civil servants who can handle specific affairs.

古文：牛刀可以割鸡，鸡刀难以屠牛。
现代文：宰牛的刀可以杀鸡，杀鸡的刀难以宰牛。
English: The knife for slaughtering a cow can kill a chicken, but the knife for killing a chicken is difficult for slaughtering a cow.

古文：刺绣之师能缝帷裳。
现代文：刺绣的师父能缝帐幕和衣裳，缝补破衣服的工匠不能纺织锦缎。
English: The embroiderer can make tents and clothes, but the mender of a garment cannot weave a tapestry.

古文：纳缕之工不能织锦；儒生能为文吏之事，文吏不能立儒生之学。文吏之能，诚劣不及，儒生之不习，实优而不为。
现代文：儒生能做文吏的职事，文吏不能树立儒生的学问，文吏的才能，确实低劣不及儒生，而儒生不学习文书，确实是高尚不肯去做。
English: Confucians can do clerical work, but clerics cannot establish Confucian learning. The talent of clerics is indeed inferior to that of Confucians, and if Confucians do not study literature, it is indeed noble that they do not want to do it.

古文：禹决江河，不秉锸；周公筑雒，不把筑杖。
现代文：禹疏通江河，不拿锸，周公旦筑雒邑，不握筑杖。
English: Yu Zhaotong channels rivers, but does not hold a scepter; Zhou Gongdan builds cities, but does not hold a scepter.

古文：夫笔墨簿书，锸筑杖之类也，而欲合志大道者躬亲为之，是使将军战而大匠斫也。
现代文：其实，笔墨公文是锸筑杖之类工具，而想要使有志于大道的人亲自去作文吏的具体事务，这是叫大将军亲自去冲锋陷阵，要高级工匠亲自去砍木头啊。
English: In fact, the pen, ink and official documents are tools such as ploughshares and canes, but if you want people who are interested in the road to personally go to the specific affairs of the composition officers, this is to ask the general to personally go to the front, and to ask the senior craftsmen to personally chop wood.

古文：说一经之生，治一曹之事，旬月能之。典一曹之吏，学一经之业，一岁不能立也。
现代文：能够解释一种经书的儒生，去处理一曹的事务，十来天个把月就会了；掌管一曹事务的文吏，去学一种经书，一年也不能学成。
English: A Confucian scholar who can explain a scripture will be able to handle the affairs of an emperor in about ten days; a clerk who is in charge of the affairs of an emperor will not be able to learn a scripture in a year.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：吏事易知，而经学难见也。
现代文：因为文吏的事情容易懂得，而经学却难得弄懂。
English: Because the things of the clerks are easy to understand, but the things of the scribes are hard to understand.

古文：儒生擿经，穷竟圣意；文吏摇笔，考迹民事。
现代文：儒生不但要弄懂经书，而且要弄通圣人的意思，文吏只需动笔，考察下老百姓的事。
English: Confucians not only need to understand the scriptures, but also the meaning of the saints. The clerics only need to write and investigate the people's affairs.

古文：夫能知大圣之意，晓细民之情，孰者为难？
现代文：能够懂得大圣人的意思。跟只懂得百姓的事情，哪个困难呢？
English: What is the difficulty in being able to understand the meaning of a great sage, as opposed to only being able to understand ordinary people?

古文：以立难之材，含怀章句十万以上，行有余力。
现代文：能够弄通艰难经学的人才，掌握了经书章节字句的解释十万字以上，还有余力做其他事情。
English: Those who can make it through the difficult study of the Bible, have mastered the interpretation of the words of the chapters of the Bible more than 100,000 words, and still have room to do other things.

古文：博学览古今，计胸中之颖，出溢十万。
现代文：至于学识渊博，通览古今的人，衡量他们心中的智慧，远远超出能解说十万章句的人。
English: As for those who are well-versed in knowledge, who can survey people from ancient times to the present and gauge the wisdom in their hearts, they are far superior to those who can explain a hundred thousand chapters.

古文：文吏所知，不过辨解簿书。
现代文：文吏懂得的，不过是辨解公文。
English: What a clerk understands is nothing more than the interpretation of official documents.

古文：富累千金，孰与赀直百十也？
现代文：具有千金的人比起只有价值百十个钱的人，哪个富呢？
English: Who is richer, he who has a thousand pieces of gold, or he who has a hundred pieces of silver?

古文：京禀知丘，孰与委聚如坻也？
现代文：粮食堆得像小山，与粮食积聚像小坻，哪个高呢？
English: Grain piles up like a hill, and grain accumulates like a small reed, which is higher?

古文：世名材为名器，器大者盈物多。
现代文：世上把有名声的人才当作名贵的宝器，宝器大装的东西就多。
English: The world regards famous talents as precious treasures, and there are a lot of things that are full of treasures.

古文：然则儒生所怀，可谓多矣。
现代文：然而儒生所装的东西，可以说是多得很。
English: However, it can be said that there are a lot of things that Confucianism contains.

古文：蓬生麻间，不扶自直；白纱入缁，不染自黑。
现代文：飞蓬长在麻中间，不扶自然会直；白纱放进黑染缸，不染自然会黑。
English: The flying fan grows in the middle of the hemp, and will naturally straighten without support; the white yarn is put into the black dyeing tank, and will naturally darken without dyeing.

古文：此言所习善恶，变易质性也。儒生之性，非能皆善也，被服圣教，日夜讽咏，得圣人之操矣。
现代文：这话是说学习的好坏，会改变人的本性，儒生的本性，不是就都好的，受圣人孔孟之道的深刻影响，白天晚上地诵读，才得到了圣人的操行。
English: This is to say that whether learning is good or bad, it will change people's nature, and the nature of Confucianism is not all good. Deeply influenced by the path of the sage Kong Meng, he recited it day and night, and only then did he gain the saint's practice.

古文：文吏幼则笔墨，手习而行，无篇章之诵，不闻仁义之语。
现代文：文吏从小就练习写字，只要手练习并且成行，没有文章诵读，也听不到仁义的话。
English: Civil servants have been practicing writing since childhood. As long as they practice by hand and walk, there is no article to recite, nor can they hear the words of benevolence.

古文：长大成吏，舞文巧法，徇私为己，勉赴权利；考事则受赂，临民则采渔，处右则弄权，幸上则卖将；一旦在位，鲜冠利剑。
现代文：长大做了文吏，舞文弄法，顺着私心为自己，使劲追求个人的权力和利益，审理案件就接受贿赂，治理百姓就搜刮掠夺，处在重要职位时就滥用权柄，得皇上宠幸就出卖地方长官。
English: He grew up to be a clerk, played tricks, pursued personal power and interests according to his selfishness, accepted bribes when trying cases, plundered when governing the people, abused power when he was in important positions, and betrayed local governors when he was favored by the emperor.

古文：一岁典职，田宅并兼。
现代文：一旦做官，头戴华丽帽子，身佩锋利宝剑；掌权一年，老百姓的田地房屋一齐兼并。
English: Once an official, wearing a magnificent hat, wearing a sharp sword; one year in power, the fields and houses of the common people were all annexed.

古文：性非皆恶，所习为者，违圣教也。
现代文：他们本性并非都坏，是所学所作违背了孔孟之道。
English: Their nature is not all bad, it is what they have learned and done that goes against Confucius and Mencius.

古文：故习善儒路，归化慕义，志操则励变从高明。
现代文：所以在儒门学习好的东西，趋于接受仰慕正义，其志向和节操就会由于自己努力变得很高尚，高明的地方长官看到这一点，就会重用儒生。
English: Therefore, those who learn good things in Confucianism tend to accept and admire justice, and their aspirations and self-discipline will become noble through their own efforts. When high-level local officials see this, they will reuse Confucianism.

古文：明将见文，显用儒生：东海相宗叔犀，犀广召幽隐，春秋会飨，设置三科，以第补吏。一府员吏，儒生什九。
现代文：东海国的相宗叔庠，广泛招致隐士，春秋会飨，设置三等，按名次先后授官，全府的官吏，儒生占十分之九。
English: In the East China Sea country, the Confucian uncle system was widely used to invite hermits, and the Spring and Autumn Meetings were held. Third-class officials were appointed in order of precedence, and Confucian scholars accounted for nine-tenths of the officials in the whole province.

古文：陈留太守陈子瑀，开广儒路，列曹掾史，皆能教授。簿书之吏，什置一二。
现代文：陈留太守陈子瑀，广开儒生门路，选入各曹的掾史，都能讲授儒家经书；处理公文的文吏，占十分之一二。
English: Chen Liu, the dean of Chen Zixuan, opened the door to Confucianism, and every Cao Zixi was able to teach Confucian scriptures; the number of clerks who handled official documents accounted for two-tenths.

古文：两将知道事之理，晓多少之量，故世称褒其名，书记纪累其行也。
现代文：这两位地方长官都懂得道和事之间的道理，通晓他们之间数量的多少，所以世人颂扬他们的名声，书籍记载他们的事迹。
English: Both of these local governors understood the principle of the relationship between Tao and matter, and understood the number between them, so the world extolled their fame, and books recorded their deeds.

