古文：夫林战之道：昼广旌旗，夜多金鼓，利用短兵，巧在设伏，或攻于前，或发于后。丛战之道：利用剑楯，将欲图之，先度其路，十里一场，五里一应，偃戢旌旗，特严金鼓，令贼无措手足。
现代文：军队在森林中作战的方法是：在白天以旌旗作主要的指挥工具，在夜间用铜钲、擂鼓指挥，以短兵为主，可以巧妙地设置埋伏，有时进攻敌人的正面，有时进攻敌人的背面，有时采用前后夹击的战术，在草丛中作战的方法是：利用刀、剑、盾牌等短型武器，在与敌人交锋之前，事先调查好敌人的进军路线，在敌人的必经之路埋下哨兵，十里一大哨，五里一小哨，把所有的旗帜收藏好，把铜钲、鼓包掩好，当敌人过来时，出其不意，打敌人一个措手不及。
English: The army's method of fighting in the forest is as follows: during the day, the battle flag is used as the main command tool; during the night, the brass kite and gong drum are used for command; the short soldiers are mainly used, which can skillfully set up ambushes, sometimes attacking the enemy's front, sometimes attacking the enemy's back, and sometimes using the tactic of pinching back and forth. The method of fighting in the bushes is as follows: using short weapons such as swords, swords, and shields, before engaging the enemy, investigate the enemy's advance route in advance, and bury sentries on the enemy's route, ten-mile

古文：谷战之道：巧于设伏，利以勇斗，轻足之士凌其高，必死之士殿其后，列强弩而冲之，持短兵而继之，彼不得前，我不得往。
现代文：在两山之间的谷地作战，可采用的方法是：利用埋伏，勇猛出击，让身手狡捷的士兵站在高处，让不怕牺牲的士兵切断敌人后路，用弓弩向敌人射击，接着使用短兵继续进攻，使敌人瞻前顾后，没有反击的机会。
English: To fight in the valley between two mountains, the methods that can be used are: using ambush, making a bold attack, letting the skillful soldiers stand on a high place, letting the soldiers who are not afraid of sacrifice cut off the enemy's back way, shooting at the enemy with a bow and arrow, and then using short soldiers to continue the attack, so that the enemy looks forward and backward, and there is no chance of counterattack.

古文：水战之道：利在舟楫，练习士卒以乘之，多张旗帜以惑之，严弓弩以中之，持短兵以捍之，设坚栅以卫之，顺其流而击之。
现代文：在水上作战的方法是：利用船只作战，训练士兵掌握各种水上技巧以攻击敌人，可以在船上多插旗帜以迷惑敌人，要用弓、弩猛烈地向敌发射，也可用短兵与敌人在近处交手，还要在水上埋设栅栏防止敌人入侵，这一切都要顺水的流向进行。
English: The methods of fighting on the water are: using ships to fight, training soldiers to master various water skills to attack the enemy, planting more flags on the ship to confuse the enemy, using bows and harpoons to fire fiercely at the enemy, using short soldiers to fight the enemy in the vicinity, and laying fences on the water to prevent the enemy from invading, all of which should be carried out along the water flow.

古文：夜战之道：利在机密，或潜师以冲之以出其不意，或多火鼓以乱其耳目，驰而攻之，可以胜矣。
现代文：在夜战作战，以安静、隐密为主，可以秘密地派部队偷袭敌人，也可以用火把、战鼓扰乱视听，用最快的速度攻击敌人，以取得胜利。
English: In the night battle, the battle is mainly quiet and stealthy. You can secretly send troops to sneak attack the enemy. You can also use torches and war drums to disturb the audio-visual, and attack the enemy at the fastest speed to achieve victory.

