古文：石黄石马肝石石鼓采石青石石文石连理太白精古铁铧走石石桥
现代文：石黄石马肝石石鼓采石青石石文石连理太白精古铁铧走石石桥
English: stone yellow stone horse liver stone drum stone quarry stone blue stone stone stone stone bridge stone bridge

古文：石磨釜濑石鱼坠石立石孤石网石卵石卧石僧化陨石目岩
现代文：石磨釜濑石鱼坠石立石孤石网石卵石卧石僧化陨石目岩
English: stone millstonestone fishfalling stonestanding stoneisolated stonenetstone pebblelying stonemonastic meteorite rock

古文：石驼石柱石响石女藏珠石化石松化自然石热石犬吠石
现代文：石驼石柱石响石女藏珠石化石松化自然石热石犬吠石
English: stone camel stone pillar stone rattling stone woman's treasure pearl stone fossil loosened natural stone hot stone dog barking stone

古文：瓮形石三石人石金蚕
现代文：瓮形石三石人石金蚕
English: Dragonfly-shaped stone, three-stone man, stone, golden silkworm

古文：坡沙飞坡鸣沙
现代文：坡沙飞坡鸣沙
English: As the sand flies, so does the sand rise

古文：石
现代文：石
English: Stone

古文：黄石
现代文：黄石
English: Huangshi

古文：帝尧时，有五星自天而陨。
现代文：帝尧时代，有五颗星从天上坠落下来。
English: In the imperial era, five stars fell from the sky.

古文：一是土之精，坠于谷城山下。
现代文：其中有一颗是土星的精气，坠落在谷城山的山脚下。
English: One of them was the essence of Saturn, which fell at the foot of Mt.

古文：其精化为圯桥老人，以兵书授张子房。
现代文：它的精气变化成圯桥老人，他把一部兵书授给张子房，并且说： 读了这部书能给帝王掌管军队。
English: He gave Zhang Zifang a military book and said, "Reading this book can give the emperor control over the army."

古文：云： 读此当为帝王师，后求我于谷城山下，黄石是也。 子房佐汉功成，求于谷城山下，果得黄石焉。
现代文：以后要找我就到谷城山的山脚，那里的黄石就是我。 张子房辅助汉王完成功业之后，到谷城山的山脚寻找圯桥老人，果然在那里得到了黄石。
English: In the future, if you want to find me, go to the foot of the Valley City Mountain, where the Yellow Stone is me. After Zhang Zifang assisted Han Wang to complete his successful career, he went to the foot of the Valley City Mountain to look for the old man of Qiaoqiao, and he got the Yellow Stone there.

古文：子房隐于商山，从四皓学道。
现代文：后来张子房隐居在商山，跟随时称商山四皓的东园公、用里先生、绮里季、夏黄公学习道术。
English: Later, Zhang Zifang lived in seclusion in Shangshan and studied Daoism with Dongyuan Gong, Yoli Sensei, Gong Liji, and Xia Huang Gong, who were known as the Shangshan Four Immortals.

古文：其家葬其衣冠黄石焉。
现代文：张子房死后，他的家人把他的服装和黄石埋葬了。
English: After Zhang Zifang died, his family buried his clothes and yellow stone.

古文：古者常见墓上黄气高数十丈。
现代文：古代的人常常看见他的坟墓上有几十丈高的黄色雾气。
English: The ancients often saw a yellow mist several tens of meters high over his grave.

古文：后赤眉所发，不见其尸，黄石亦失，其气自绝。
现代文：后来，他的坟墓被赤眉军挖掘，没有看见他的尸体，黄石也失掉了，那种黄色的雾气自然的断绝了。
English: Later, his grave was excavated by the Red Eyebrows, and his body was not seen. The Yellow Stone was also lost, and the yellow mist naturally broke off.

古文：马肝石
现代文：马肝石
English: Horse liver stone

古文：元鼎五年，郅支国贡马肝石百斤。
现代文：西汉元鼎五年，郅支国进贡马肝石一百斤。
English: In the fifth year of the Western Han Dynasty's Yuan Dynasty, the State of Fujian paid a tribute of one hundred catties of horse liver stone.

古文：长以水银养，内于玉函中，金泥封其上。
现代文：马肝石长时间用水银保养，放在玉石做的匣子中，它的上面用金泥封严。
English: The stone was preserved with mercury for a long time, placed in a box made of jade, and its top was sealed with gold mud.

古文：其国人长四尺，唯饵马肝石。
现代文：郅支国的人身长四尺，只吃马肝石。
English: The people of Luo Province are four feet tall and only eat horse liver.

古文：此石半青半白，如今之马肝。
现代文：这种石半黑半白，像现在的马肝。
English: This stone is half-black and half-white, like modern horse liver.

古文：舂碎之，以和九转丹，吞之一丸，弥年不饥渴。
现代文：捣碎它，用它和成九转丹，吃下一丸，长年不饥不饿。
English: Mash it up, use it to make nine round dan, eat a whole one, and you won't be hungry for a long time.

古文：以之拭发，白者皆黑。
现代文：用它擦拭头发，白的都变成黑的。
English: Wipe your hair with it and the white will turn black.

古文：帝尝坐群臣于甘泉殿，有发白者，以此拭之，应手皆黑。
现代文：皇帝曾经和群臣在甘泉殿上坐，其中有头发白的人，用它擦拭头发，手过之处都变成黑的了。
English: The emperor once sat with his courtiers in the Ganquan Palace, and one of them, who had white hair, used it to wipe his hair, and it turned black everywhere he touched it.

古文：是时公卿语曰： 不用作方伯，唯愿拭马肝石。 
现代文：当时王公大臣有一句谚语说： 不用做一方的长官，只愿意擦拭马肝石。 
English: At that time, the prince minister had a saying: "I don't have to be the leader of one side, I'm just willing to wipe the stones."

古文：此石酷烈。不杂丹砂，唯可近发。
现代文：这种石头药性猛烈，不能与丹砂混合，只可以接近头发。
English: This stone has strong medicinal properties and cannot be mixed with red sand. It can only be used close to the hair.

古文：石鼓
现代文：石鼓
English: Stone Drums

古文：吴郡临江半岸崩，出一石鼓，槌之无声。
现代文：吴郡临江的堤岸有一半崩塌，出现一面石鼓。用木槌敲打它没有声音。
English: Half of the embankment of the Linjiang River in Wuxi County collapsed, and a stone drum appeared. There was no sound when it was beaten with a mallet.

古文：武帝以问张华，华曰： 可取蜀中桐材，刻为鱼形，扣之则鸣矣。 
现代文：武帝因而询问张华。张华说： 可以取来蜀中的桐木，雕刻成鱼的形状，敲打它就会响了。 
English: Emperor Wu therefore asked Zhang Hua. Zhang Hua said: You can take the paulownia wood from Shu, carve it into the shape of a fish, and when you strike it, it will ring.

古文：于是如其言，果声闻数里。采石
现代文：于是按照张华说的做了，果然在几里之外都可以听到石鼓的声音。采石
English: So he did as Zhang Hua said, and sure enough, the sound of the stone drum could be heard several miles away.

古文：石季龙立河桥于云昌津，采石为中济。
现代文：石季龙在云昌渡口建一座河桥。采石作为河口渡头之用。
English: Shi Jilong is building a river bridge at the Yunchang ferry port. Quarrying stone is used as a bridgehead for river crossings.

古文：石无大小，下辄随流，用工五百余万，不成。
现代文：石头无论是大是小，扔下去就随水流走。用工五百多万，没有成功。
English: No matter how big or small the stone is, if you throw it down, it will go with the flow of the water. It took more than five million workers, but it was not successful.

古文：季龙遣使致祭，沉璧于河。俄而所沉璧流于渚上。
现代文：石季龙派遣使者到那里祭祀，把璧投入河中，不一会儿投入水中的璧漂流到河中的水洲上。
English: Shi Jilong sent an emissary to make a sacrifice there. He threw the gem into the river, and after a while, the gem that had been thrown into the water drifted onto a shoal in the river.

古文：地震，水波腾上津所。楼殿倾坏，压死者百余人。
现代文：大地震动，河水的波涛上下翻腾涌上渡口，渡口上面的楼台殿阁倾倒毁坏，被压死的有一百多人。
English: The earth shook violently, and the waves of the river surged up and over the ferry. The palace above the ferry was destroyed, and more than a hundred people were crushed to death.

古文：青石
现代文：青石
English: Aoishi

古文：其略曰，高皇海宇字李九王八千太平天子李世王千年太子治书燕山人士国主尚任谔奖文通千古大王五王七王十王凤手才子武文贞观昌大圣四方上下万古忠孝为喜，勅礼部郎中柳逞，驰驿检覆，并同所奏。
现代文：唐朝显庆四年，有一个打鱼的人在大江中用网打上来一块青石，长四尺，宽九寸。它的颜色光亮柔润，和各种石都不同。把青石悬挂起来敲打它，发出的响声清脆悠扬，走路的人听到它，没有不停住脚步的。都督滕王上奏章运送京师，收进瑞府。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xianqing of the Tang Dynasty, a fisherman in the Yangtze River fished up a piece of bluestone with a net. It was four feet long and nine inches wide. Its color was bright and soft, and it was different from all other kinds of stones. He hung the bluestone up and struck it. The sound it made was crisp and melodious, and people who were walking did not stop walking when they heard it.

古文：石连理
现代文：石文翻译缺失石连理
English: Lack of stone text translation leads to confusion

古文：永昌年中，台州司马孟诜奏： 临海水下冯义，得石连理树三株，皆白石。 
现代文：唐朝永昌年间，台州司马孟诜上奏表章： 临海郡水下冯义，得到三株石连理树，都是白色的石头。 
English: During the Yongchang period of the Tang Dynasty, Taizhou Sima Mengyao won the medal: Linhai County Underwater Fengyi, and obtained three stone trees, all of which were white stones.

古文：太白精
现代文：太白精
English: Taibai Jing

古文：金星之精，坠于中南圭峰之西，因号为太白山，其精化为白石，状如玉美，时有紫气覆之。
现代文：金星的精气，坠落在中南圭峰的西侧，于是称名为太白山。它的精气变化成白石，样子象玉一样美，经常有紫色的雾气覆盖着它。
English: The essence of Venus fell on the west side of Zhongnan Guifeng, so it was called Taibai Mountain. Its essence turned into a white stone, looking as beautiful as a jade, often covered with purple mist.

古文：天宝中，玄宗立玄元庙于长安大宁里临淄旧邸，欲塑玄元像。
现代文：唐天宝年间，唐玄宗在长安大宁里临淄旧邸建立玄元庙，想雕塑玄元的像。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tianbao, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty built the Xuanyuan Temple at his former residence in Linyi, Chang'an, with the intention of sculpting a statue of Xuanyuan.

古文：梦神人曰： 太白北谷中有玉石，可取而琢之，紫气见处是也。 
现代文：唐玄宗梦见神人对他说： 太白山北面的山谷中有玉石，可以取回来雕塑成玄元像，出现紫色雾气的地方就是有玉石之处。
English: Tang Xuan Zong had a dream in which a man of God said to him, "In the valley to the north of Mount Tai Bai, there is a piece of jade. You can take it back and sculpt it into an image of Xuan Yuan. The place where the purple mist appears is where there is jade.

古文：翌日，令使入谷求之。
现代文：第二天，玄宗派使者进山谷寻找。
English: The next day, Xuanzong sent an emissary into the valley to search.

古文：山下人云： 旬日来，尝有紫气，连日不散。 
现代文：山下的人说： 近十天来，常有紫色雾气出现，连日不散。 
English: People at the foot of the mountain said: For nearly ten days, a purple mist has often appeared, and it has not dispersed for days.

古文：果于其下掘获玉石，琢为玄元像，高二丈许，又为二真人二侍童，及李林甫、陈希烈之形，高六尺以来。古铁铧
现代文：果然在紫色雾气的下面挖掘到了玉石，雕琢成玄元像，高两丈左右。又做了两个得道之人和两个侍童，以及李林甫、陈希烈的形象，高六尺。古铁铧
English: Sure enough, beneath the purple haze, they excavated a piece of jade, and carved a portrait of Xuanyuan, about two meters tall. They also made two disciples and two attendants, as well as the image of Li Linfu and Chen Xili, six feet tall.

古文：天宝中，玄宗以三门河道险厄，漕转艰阻，乃令旁北山，凿石为月河，以避湍急，名曰天宝河。
现代文：天宝年间，唐玄宗因三门河道险要阻塞，漕运受阻，于是命令依傍北山，开凿山石弯为月芽形河道，而避开湍急水流，名字叫天宝河。
English: During the Tenpo era, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, because the Sanmen River was in danger of being blocked, and rowing was impeded, ordered the construction of a crescent-shaped river along the side of the North Mountain, avoiding the rapids, and named it the Tenpo River.

古文：岁省运夫五十余万，又无覆溺淹滞之患，天下称之。
现代文：每年可以节省运输民工五十多万，又没有船翻沉没滞留不通的忧虑，天下的人都称赞这件事。
English: Every year, it can save more than half a million in the transportation of migrant workers, and there is no worry about the ship capsizing and sinking, stranded and unable to pass. People all over the world praise this thing.

古文：其河东西径直，长五里余，阔四五丈，深二丈三丈至五六丈，皆凿坚石。
现代文：那条河东西笔直，长五里多，宽四、五丈。深二、三丈到五、六丈，都是开凿坚硬的岩石。
English: The river is straight from east to west, with a length of more than five miles, a width of four to five meters, and a depth of two to three meters to five to six meters, all of which are hard rock.

古文：匠人于坚石之下，得古铁铧，长三尺余，上有 平陆 两字，皆篆文也。玄宗异之，藏于内库。
现代文：匠人在坚硬的岩石下面，得到了一个古代的铁铧。长三尺多，上面有 平陆 两个字，都是篆文，唐玄宗觉得它很奇特，收藏在皇宫的库房里。
English: Under the hard rock, the craftsman obtained an ancient spade. It was more than three feet long and had the words 平陆 (flat land) on it, both of which were written in Chinese characters. Tang Xuan Zong thought it was very special and stored it in the treasury of the imperial palace.

古文：遂命改河北县为平陆县，旌其事也。走石
现代文：于是命令改河北县为平陆县，以表彰得到古铁铧那件事。走石
English: As a result, the order was issued to change Hebei County to Pinglu County in recognition of the fact that the ancient iron anvil was obtained.

古文：宝历元年乙巳岁，资州资阳县清弓村山，有大石，可三间屋大，从此山下。
现代文：唐宝历元年乙巳年，资州资阳县清弓村的山上，有一块巨大的石头，大约有三间屋子那样大。
English: In the 1st year of the 2nd month of the 1st year of the 2nd month in the 1st year of the 2nd month in the 1st year of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14

古文：忽然吼踊，下山越涧，却上坡，可百步。
现代文：巨石从这座山上滚下来，忽然吼叫跳跃，下山过涧，还能上坡，大约有一百步。
English: The boulder rolls down the mountain, suddenly roars and leaps, descends down the mountain, and can also go uphill, about a hundred steps.

古文：其石走时，有锄禾人见之。各手执锄，赶至止所，其石高二丈。
现代文：那巨石跑动的时候，有几个铲地的人看见了它，他们各自手拿锄头，赶到巨石停止的地方。那巨石高有两丈。
English: As the boulder moved, several shovelers saw it and, each with a shovel in hand, raced to where the boulder stopped. The boulder was two stories high.

古文：石桥
现代文：石桥
English: Stone bridge

古文：赵州石桥甚工，磨垅密致，如削焉。
现代文：赵州石桥非常精巧，石头之间的接缝非常均匀细致，象用刀削的样子。
English: Zhaozhou stone bridge is very delicate, the joints between the stones are very uniform and meticulous, like the appearance of cutting with a knife.

古文：望之如初月出云，长虹饮涧。
现代文：从远处看它，石桥就象月初出云的弯月，汲饮涧水的长虹。
English: Seen from a distance, the stone bridge is like the crescent moon rising from the clouds at the beginning of the month, a rainbow that draws water.

古文：上有勾栏，皆石也，勾栏并为石狮子。
现代文：石桥上面有栏杆，都是石头的。栏杆上并列着雕刻的石狮子。
English: There are railings on the stone bridge, all of them made of stone, and carved stone lions are lined up on the railings.

古文：龙朔年中。高丽谍者盗二狮子去，后复募匠修之，莫能相类者。
现代文：唐龙朔年间，高丽国国侦探消息的人盗走了两个石狮子。后来又招工匠修建石狮子，却不能与原来的相似。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, two stone lions were stolen by an informant of the Goryeo Detective Agency. Later, craftsmen were hired to build stone lions, but they could not be similar to the original ones.

古文：至天后大足年，默啜破赵定州，贼欲南过。
现代文：到了武则天皇后称帝的大足年间，高丽国默啜攻克赵州定州，贼人想过桥南进。
English: During the reign of Empress Wu Zetian, the Goryeo Empire silently invaded the Korean state of Zhaozhou-Dingzhou, and the bandits tried to cross the bridge to the south.

古文：至石桥，马跪地不进，但见一青龙卧桥上，奋迅而怒，贼乃遁去。
现代文：到了石桥，马跪在地上不往前走，只见一条青龙趴伏在桥上，看见贼人，精神振奋，行动迅速，并且愤怒以待，贼人于是悄悄地逃走了。
English: When they arrived at the stone bridge, Ma knelt on the ground and did not move forward, only to see a blue dragon lying on the bridge. When he saw the thief, his spirit was uplifted, he acted quickly, and he was furious. The thief then quietly fled.

古文：石磨
现代文：石磨
English: Stone mills

古文：吴兴故彰县东三十里，有梅溪山。山根直竖一石，可高百余丈，至青而团，如两间屋大。
现代文：吴兴故彰县东面三十里处，有一座梅溪山，山脚下笔直地竖立着一根石柱，大约高有一百多丈，完全是黑色而且呈圆形，有两间屋子大。
English: Thirty miles to the east of Wu Xing's former Zhang County, there is a Meixi Mountain. At the foot of the mountain, a stone pillar stands upright. It is more than a hundred meters high, completely black and round, and the size of two houses.

古文：四面斗绝，仰之于云外，无登陟之理。
现代文：周围都是陡峭的绝壁，仰面看好象高出云外，没有攀登的可能。
English: There are steep cliffs all around, and the back looks as if it is high above the clouds, with no possibility of climbing.

古文：其上复有盘石，正员如车盖，恒转如磨，声若风雨，土人号为石磨。
现代文：它的上面又有一块盘石，呈正圆形，象车盖一样，象磨一样不停转动，发出的声音象风雨声。当地人把它叫作石磨。
English: On top of it, there is a round stone, shaped like a car cover, which constantly turns like a mill, emitting a sound like the sound of wind and rain. Locals call it a stone mill.

古文：转駃则年丰，迟则岁俭。
现代文：石磨转得快，这一年就丰收；石磨转得慢，这一年就欠收。
English: If the stone mill turns quickly, there will be a good harvest this year; if the stone mill turns slowly, there will be a poor harvest this year.

古文：欲知岁之丰俭，以石磨候之，无差焉。
现代文：想要知道年岁的丰欠，用石磨来观测，是没有差错的。
English: If you want to know the deficiency of the year, there is no mistake in using a stone mill to observe.

古文：釜濑
现代文：釜濑
English: Kamakura

古文：夷道县有釜濑，其石大者如釜，小者如斗，形色乱真，唯实中耳。
现代文：夷道县有釜濑，那石大的像锅那样大，小的像斗那样大，形状和颜色和真的一样，只是中间是实的罢了。
English: There is a kettle in Yidu County. The big one is as big as a pot, and the small one is as big as a bucket. The shape and color are the same as the real one, but the middle is real.

古文：石鱼
现代文：石鱼
English: Stonefish

古文：衡阳相乡县，有石鱼山，山石黑，色理若生雌黄。
现代文：衡阳相乡县，有一座石鱼山，山的石头是黑色的，颜色和纹理像雌黄石。
English: In Hengyang Xiangxiang County, there is a stone fish mountain. The stone of the mountain is black, and the color and texture are like oolite.

古文：开发一重，辄有鱼形，鳞鳍首尾，有若画焉，长数寸，烧之作鱼腥。
现代文：开采发掘一层之后，就出现了鱼的形状，鳞鳍头尾，就像画上的一样，长有几寸，用火烧它便出来鱼的腥味。
English: After mining and excavating one layer, the shape of a fish appeared, scaly head and tail, just like the picture, a few inches long, and when it was burned with fire, the smell of fish came out.

古文：坠石
现代文：坠石
English: Falling rocks

古文：伊阙县令李师晦，有兄弟任江南官，与一僧往还。
现代文：伊阙县令李师晦，有个兄弟在江南做官，同一个和尚有来往。
English: There is a brother who is an official in the south of the Yangtze River, and he has dealings with the same monk.

古文：尝入山采药，暴风雨，避于桤树。
现代文：曾经进山采药，遇到暴风雨，在桤树下避雨。
English: He once went into the mountains to collect medicine, encountered a storm, and sheltered from the rain under a banyan tree.

古文：须臾大震，有物瞥然坠地，倏而晴朗。
现代文：不一会儿，风雨大震，有一物忽然落地，很快天晴日朗。
English: Not long after, there was a strong wind and rain, and an object suddenly fell to the ground. Soon, the weather cleared up.

古文：僧就视，乃一石，形如乐器，可以悬击。
现代文：和尚靠近落物去看，是一块石头，形状象乐器，可以悬挂起来击打。
English: The monk moved closer to the fallen object and saw that it was a stone, shaped like a musical instrument, that could be hung up and struck.

古文：其上平齐如削，中有窍，其下渐阔而员，状若垂囊。
现代文：它的上面平滑整齐象刀削的一样，中间有孔，它的下面逐渐变宽变圆，形状象下垂的口袋。
English: Its upper surface is as smooth and neat as if it had been sharpened with a knife, with a hole in the middle. Its underside gradually widens and becomes rounded, shaped like a sagging pocket.

古文：长二尺，厚三分，左小缺。
现代文：石头长二尺，厚三分，左边有一小的缺口。
English: The stone is two feet long and three points thick, with a small gap on the left side.

古文：色理如碎锦，光泽可鉴，叩之有声。
现代文：颜色和纹理象细碎的锦缎，光泽可以照人，敲打它有响声。
English: The color and texture are like finely chopped brocade, the luster can shine, and there is a sound when it is beaten.

古文：僧意其异物，置于樵中归。
现代文：和尚猜想它是奇特的东西，放在木柴中带回寺院，放入柜中并埋在禅床下面。
English: The monk thought it was something strange and brought it back to the temple in firewood, put it in a cabinet and buried it under the Zen bed.

古文：柜而埋于禅床下，为其徒所见，往往有知者。
现代文：被他的徒弟看见，传了出去，往往有知道的人。
English: Seen by his apprentice, passed on, often to those in the know.

古文：李生恳求一见，僧确然无言。
现代文：李生恳求见一见坠石，和尚坚持不说。
English: Li Sheng pleaded to see the rockfall at first sight, but the monk insisted not to say anything.

古文：忽一日，僧召李生，既至，执手曰： 贫道已力衰弱，无常将至。
现代文：忽然有一天，和尚呼唤李生来，不久李生到了，和尚握住李生的手说： 贫道已经精疲力竭，勾摄生魂的使者无常就要到了。
English: Suddenly, one day, the monk called Li Sheng to come. Soon Li Sheng arrived. The monk held Li Sheng's hand and said, "The path of poverty has been exhausted. The messenger of impermanence, who brings life to the soul, is about to arrive."

古文：君前所求物，聊用为别。 
现代文：你以前所求见的东西，姑且用作分别的纪念。 
English: What you asked to see before, let it serve as a separate memento.

古文：乃尽去侍者。引李生入卧内，撤榻掘地，捧匣受之而卒。
现代文：于是，让服侍他的人全退出去，带领李生进入他的卧房内，撤掉床铺，挖开地面，手棒木匣给予李生后死了。
English: As a result, he asked all of his attendants to withdraw, led Li Sheng into his bedroom, removed the bed, dug up the ground, and gave Li Sheng a wooden box. Li Sheng died.

古文：立石
现代文：立石
English: Tateishi district

古文：莱子国海上有石人，长一丈五尺，大十围。
现代文：莱子国的海上有一个石人，高一丈五尺，有十围那样粗大。
English: In the sea of Lai Zi's country, there is a stone man, five feet high, and as thick as ten circumferences.

古文：昔始皇遣此石人追劳山，不得，遂立。
现代文：过去秦始皇帝派这个石人追赶劳山，没有追到，就立在这里了。
English: In the past, Emperor Qin Shihuang sent this stone man to chase after Mount Lao. When he didn't catch him, he ended up standing here.

古文：孤石
现代文：孤石
English: Lone Stone

古文：筑阳县水中，有孤石挺出。
现代文：筑阳县潭水中，有一孤石挺立出水面。
English: In Tanchui, Chikuyang County, there is a lone rock sticking out of the water.

古文：其下澄潭，时有见此石根，如竹根，色黄。
现代文：它的下面潭水澄清。时常有人看见这孤石的根，象竹子的根，黄色。
English: The pool of water beneath it is clear. The roots of this solitary rock are often seen, like the roots of bamboo, yellow.

古文：见者多凶，俗号承受石。
现代文：看见过石根的人，多半都不吉祥。人们都称它承受石。
English: People who have seen the stone root are mostly not auspicious. People say that it bears stones.

古文：网石
现代文：网石
English: Net stone

古文：于季有为和州刺史时，临江有一寺，寺前鱼钓所聚。
现代文：于季有做和州刺史的时候，靠近江边有一座寺庙，寺庙前是钓鱼人聚集的地方。
English: There was a temple near the river when Yu Ji was engaged in the history of fishing in the prefecture. In front of the temple was a gathering place for fishermen.

古文：有渔子，下网，举之觉重，坏网，视之乃一石，如拳。
现代文：有一个打鱼的人，向江中下网，起网时觉得很重，网破了，往网里一看，是一块石头，大小象拳头。
English: A fisherman cast his net into the middle of the river. When he lifted the net, he felt it was very heavy. The net broke, and when he looked inside the net, he saw a stone the size of a fist.

古文：因乞寺僧，置于佛殿中。
现代文：于是乞求寺庙里的和僧，把这块石头放置在佛殿当中。
English: So he begged the monk in the temple to place the stone in the middle of the Buddhist hall.

古文：石遂长不已，经年重四十斤。
现代文：石头就不停地长，过了一年，重达四十斤。
English: The stone continued to grow, and after a year, it weighed forty pounds.

古文：张司封员外入蜀时，亲睹其事。
现代文：张司封员外郎入蜀的时候，亲眼看到了那件事。
English: When Zhang Sifeng's second-in-command came to Shou, he saw it with his own eyes.

古文：卵石
现代文：卵石
English: Pebbles

古文：常侍崔元亮，在洛中，尝闲步涉岸，得一石子，大如鸡卵，黑润可爱。
现代文：常侍崔元亮，在洛中的时候，曾空闲散步来到河岸，捡得到一个石子，大小象鸡蛋一样，黑色，光润可爱。
English: The regular attendant, Cui Yuanliang, once took a leisurely walk to the riverbank when he was in the middle of the city and picked up a stone, the size of an egg, black, shiny and lovely.

古文：玩之，行一里，划然而破，有鸟大如巧妇，飞去。
现代文：崔元亮不时玩弄它，走了一里路，石子突然破裂分开，内有小鸟，大小象巧妇鸟一样，腾空飞走了。
English: Cui Yuanliang played with it from time to time. After walking for a mile, the pebble suddenly broke apart, and a small bird, the size of a ladybird, flew away.

古文：卧石
现代文：卧石
English: Crouching Stone

古文：荆州永丰县东乡里，有卧石一，长九尺六寸，其形似人，而举体青黄隐起，状若雕刻。
现代文：荆州永丰县的东乡里，有卧石一块，长九尺六寸，它的形状象人，但全身青色和黄色，微微突起，像雕刻的一样。
English: In the Dongxiang Township of Yongfeng County, Jingzhou, there is a nine-foot-six-inch-long recumbent stone. It is shaped like a person, but its whole body is blue and yellow, and it protrudes slightly, like a sculpture.

古文：境若旱，使祭而举之，小雨小举之，大雨大举之。
现代文：境内如果干旱，让人祭祀并举起它，要小雨小举它，要大雨大举它。
English: If there is drought in the territory, let people make sacrifices and lift it up. If there is light rain, lift it up a little. If there is heavy rain, lift it up a lot.

古文：相传此石忽见如此，本长九尺，今加六寸矣。僧化
现代文：相传这块卧石忽然出现的时候是这样，本来长只有九尺，现在增加了六寸。僧化
English: According to legend, this is what happened when the stone suddenly appeared. Originally, it was only nine feet long, but now it is six inches longer.

古文：天台僧，乾符中，自台山之东临海县界，得洞穴。
现代文：有一个天台山和尚，在乾符年间，从天台山东面的临海县境内，找得一个洞穴。
English: There is a Tiantai Mountain monk who, during the dry years, found a cave in Linhai County, east of Tiantai Mountain.

古文：同志僧相将寻之。
现代文：与他志向相同的一个和尚将与他互相协助探明洞穴。
English: A like-minded monk will help him explore the cave.

古文：初一二十里，径路低狭，率多泥涂。
现代文：开始的一、二十里，山洞低矮，小路狭窄，一般多是泥泞的路。
English: For the first one to twenty miles, the caves are low, the paths are narrow, and the roads are generally muddy.

古文：自外稍平阔，渐有山，山十许里。
现代文：从这往外稍平坦开阔，并逐渐有山。
English: From here it flattens out a bit and gradually becomes mountainous.

古文：见市肆居人，与世无异。
现代文：过山十余里，出现了市场、作坊和居民，和人世间没有什么不同。
English: More than ten miles across the mountains, markets, workshops and residents appeared, no different from the human world.

古文：此僧素习咽气，不觉饥渴。
现代文：天台山和尚一向练咽气之功，不觉得饥饿干渴，而与他同行的和尚饥饿得很，到市场、作坊去乞食。
English: The monk of Tiantai Mountain had always practiced the skill of swallowing his breath, so he did not feel hungry or thirsty, but the monk who accompanied him was very hungry and went to the market and workshops to beg.

古文：其同行之僧饥甚，诣食市肆乞食，人或谓曰： 若能忍饥渴，速还无苦。或餐啖此地之食，必难出矣。 
现代文：人们有的对他说： 如果你能忍住饥渴，快返回去，没有痛苦。如果吃了此地的食物，必然难出去呀。 
English: Some people said to him: "If you can resist hunger and thirst, go back soon, there is no pain. If you eat the food here, it will be difficult to go out."

古文：饥甚，固求食焉。
现代文：和尚饥饿厉害，坚持乞求食物。
English: The monk was very hungry and kept begging for food.

古文：食毕，相与行十余里，路渐隘小，得一穴而出。餐物之僧，立化为石矣。
现代文：吃完后，共同走了十余里，道路逐渐狭小，找到一个洞穴走出来，吃食物的和尚，立刻化作石头了。
English: After eating, they walked more than ten miles together. The road gradually narrowed. They found a cave and came out. The monk who ate the food was immediately turned into stone.

古文：天台僧出山逢人，问其所管，已在牟平海滨矣。
现代文：天台山和尚走出山遇见人，问他们这里归哪管辖，已经在牟平县的海边了。
English: When the Tiantai Mountain monk met people coming out of the mountain and asked them what jurisdiction they belonged to, they were already on the coast of Muping County.

古文：陨石
现代文：陨石
English: meteorite

古文：唐天复十年庚午夏，洪州陨石于越王山下昭仙观前，有声如雷，光彩五色，阔十丈。
现代文：唐天复十年即庚午年的一个夏天，洪州有块石头陨落在越王山下的昭仙观前。有声音如雷，发出五色光彩，光环有十丈。
English: One summer in the tenth year of Tang Tianfu, that is, in the year of Geng Wu, a stone fell in Hongzhou in front of Zhaoxian under Yuewang Mountain. There was a sound like thunder, emitting five-colored brilliance, and the aura was tenfold.

古文：袁吉江洪四州之界，皆见光闻声。
现代文：袁州、吉州、江州、洪州这四个州的界内，人们都看见了光听见了响声。
English: Within the boundaries of the four states of Yuanzhou, Jizhou, Jiangzhou and Hongzhou, people have seen the lights and heard the sounds.

古文：观前五色烟雾，经月而散。
现代文：昭仙观前的五色烟雾，一个月才散去。
English: The five-colored smoke in front of the Zhaoxian Temple took a month to dissipate.

古文：有石长七八尺，围三丈余，清碧如玉，堕于地上。
现代文：有块大石长七八尺，周围三丈多，清碧如玉，落在地上。
English: There was a large stone, seven or eight feet long, surrounded by three more, clear and blue as a jade, which fell to the ground.

古文：节度使刘威命舁入昭仙观内，设斋祈谢。
现代文：节度使刘威命人抬入昭仙观内，设置供品祈祷拜谢。
English: The solemnity of the occasion made Liu Wei order people to be carried into the Zhaoxian Temple and set up offerings to pray and give thanks.

古文：七日之内，石稍小，长三尺；又斋数日，石长尺余；今只有七八寸，留在观内。
现代文：七天之内，石稍见小，长三尺；又供祈了几天，石只一尺多长；现在只有七八寸长，仍留在昭仙观内。
English: Within seven days, the stone was slightly smaller and three feet long; after a few more days of prayer, the stone was just over a foot long; now it is only seven or eight inches long and still remains in Zhaoxian.

古文：目岩
现代文：目岩
English: Eye of the Rock

古文：平乐县有山，林石岩间，有目如人眼，极大，瞳子白黑分明，名曰目岩。
现代文：平乐县有座山，山林的岩石中间，有孔象人的眼睛，特别大，内眼珠黑白分明，名叫目岩。
English: There is a mountain in Pingle County. In the middle of the rocks of the mountain forest, there is a hole with a particularly large human-like eye, and the inner eye is black and white. It is called the eye rock.

古文：石驼
现代文：石驼
English: Stone camel

古文：于阗国北五日行，又有山，山上石骆驼溺水，滴下，以金银等器承之，皆漏。人掌亦漏，唯瓠取不漏。
现代文：从于阗国向北走五天，又有一山，山上有头石骆驼尿水。水滴到山下，用金银等器具接水，水都漏；人用手掌接水也漏，只有用葫芦做的器具接水才不漏。
English: After five days of walking northward from Yunnan Province, there was another mountain. On the mountain, there was a camel urinating water. Water dripped to the bottom of the mountain, and people used gold and silver utensils to collect water, but the water leaked. People also used their palms to collect water, but only utensils made of gourds could collect water without leaking.

古文：或执之，令人身臭，皮毛改。
现代文：如果用手端它，人身上就发臭，皮毛都变了样子。
English: If you touch it with your hands, your body will stink and your fur will look different.

古文：石柱
现代文：石柱
English: Stone pillar

古文：劫比他国，中天竺之属国也。
现代文：劫比他国，隶属于中天竺国。
English: than other countries, belonging to the Middle Kingdom.

古文：有石柱，高七十尺，绀色有光。
现代文：国内有根石柱，高七十尺，颜色深青带红有光泽。
English: There is a stone pillar in China, seventy feet high, the color is deep blue with red luster.

古文：或观其身，随其罪福，悉见影中见之。
现代文：如果站在它的面前，你的吉凶祸福，就可以全从影子中看见了。
English: If you stand in front of it, your good luck, bad luck, and misfortune can all be seen from the shadow.

古文：石响
现代文：石响
English: Stone ringing

古文：南岳岣嵝峰，有响石，呼唤则应，如人共语，而不可解也。
现代文：南岳岣嵝峰，有一响石，呼唤它就答应，就象人与人说话一样，不明白怎么回事。
English: There is a ringing stone on the peak of Nanyue Mountain. If you call it, it will answer, just as if you were talking to someone. You don't understand what is going on.

古文：南州南河县东南三十里，丹溪之曲，有响石，高三丈五尺，阔二丈，状如卧兽。
现代文：南州南河县东南三十里，丹溪的转弯处，有块响石，高三丈五尺，宽二丈，形状象卧兽。
English: Thirty miles southeast of Nanhe County, Nanzhou, at the turn of Dan Creek, there is a rock, three feet high and five feet wide, shaped like a crouching beast.

古文：人呼之应，笑亦应之，块然独处，亦号曰独石也。石女
现代文：人呼唤它它就答应，人笑它也笑。它孤独地躺在那里，所以也称作独石。石女
English: People call it and it answers, people laugh at it and it laughs back. It lies there alone, which is why it is also called the monolith.

古文：桂阳有贞女峡，传云，秦世数女，取螺于此，遇雨，一女化为石人。
现代文：桂阳有个贞女峡，传说，秦朝时有几个女人，在峡中采螺，遇到了雨，一个女人化做石人。
English: Guiyang has a Virgin Gorge. According to legend, during the Qin Dynasty, several women were collecting snails in the gorge when they encountered rain. One of the women turned into a stone man.

古文：今石人形高七尺，状似女子。
现代文：现在石人身高七尺，体形象女人。
English: Now she is seven feet tall and has the body shape of a woman.

古文：藏珠石
现代文：藏珠石
English: Zangzhu Stone

古文：江州南五十里，有店名七里店，在沱江之南。
现代文：江州南五十里，有个村店名叫七里店，在沱江的南面。
English: Fifty miles south of Jiangzhou, there is a village store called Shili Store, in the south of the Li River.

古文：小山下有十余枚，如流星往来。或聚或散。
现代文：它那里有座小山丘，下面有十多个石子，象流星一样往来穿梭，时聚时散。
English: There is a small hill there, under which there are more than ten pebbles, which come and go like meteors, sometimes gathering, sometimes scattering.

古文：石上常有光景。
现代文：石上经常有光影。
English: There are often lights and shadows on the stone.

古文：相传云，珠藏于此，乃无价宝也。
现代文：人们都传说，有宝珠藏在这里，是无价宝。
English: People say that there is a treasure hidden here that is priceless.

古文：或有见者，密认其处，寻求不得。
现代文：有见到藏珠石的人，虽然暗中记住了藏珠石所在的地方，但却找不到宝珠。
English: Some people who have seen the gemstone have secretly remembered where the gemstone is, but they can't find the pearl.

古文：化石
现代文：化石
English: Fossils

古文：会稽进士李晀，偶拾得小石，青黑平正，温滑可玩，用为书镇焉。
现代文：会稽进士李晀，偶然拣到一颗小石子，颜色青黑形状平正，温暖滑润可以玩赏，李晀用它作书写用的镇纸。
English: Li Yao, a member of the Audit Commission, happened to pick up a small stone. The color is blue-black, the shape is flat, and the warmth and smoothness can be enjoyed. Li Yao used it as a paperweight for writing.

古文：偶有蛇集其上，驱之不去，视以化为石。
现代文：偶然间有条蛇盘在石上，赶它也不走，仔细一看蛇已化成了石头。
English: By chance, there was a snake coiled up on a rock. When he tried to chase it, it wouldn't go away. Upon closer inspection, the snake had turned into a rock.

古文：求它虫试之，随亦化焉。
现代文：找来别的小虫试验一下，跟着也化成了石头。
English: He got some other worms to try it, and they turned to stone too.

古文：壳落坚重，与石无异。
现代文：壳落坚硬有重量，与石头没什么不同。
English: The shell is hard and heavy, not unlike stone.

古文：松化
现代文：松化
English: Loosening

古文：婺州永康县山亭中，有枯松树，因断之，误堕水中。化为石。
现代文：婺州永康县的山亭中，有一棵枯干的松树，由于树干折断，使树堕入水中，化成了石头。
English: In a pavilion in Yongkang County, Zhangzhou, there is a dead pine tree. Because the trunk broke, the tree fell into the water and turned into stone.

古文：取未化者，试于水中，随亦化焉。
现代文：拿没化的树枝，在水中试验，随着也化成了石头。
English: Immersed twigs were tested in water and turned to stone.

古文：其所化者，枝干及皮，与松无异，且坚劲。
现代文：化成石头的松树，树枝树干和树皮，和松树一样，而且坚韧苍劲。
English: Pine trees turned into stone, branches, trunks and bark, like pine trees, and tough.

古文：有未化者数段，相兼留之，以旌异物。
现代文：有没化成石的几段树，人们互相保留起来，以表明它是奇异之物。
English: There are several sections of the tree that have not been petrified, and people keep them to themselves to show that it is something special.

古文：自然石
现代文：自然石
English: Natural stone

古文：洪州建昌县界田中，有自然石碑石人及石龟，散在地中，莫知其数。
现代文：洪州建昌县境内的农田中，有自然形成的石碑、石人和石龟，分散在田地中，不知道有多少。
English: In the farmland of Jianchang County, Hongzhou, there are naturally formed stone monuments, stone people and stone turtles, scattered in the fields, I don't know how many.

古文：皆如镌琢之状，而无文字。
现代文：都像被雕琢过的样子，只是没有文字。
English: It's all like it's been sculpted, but there's no writing.

古文：石人多倒卧者，时有立者。
现代文：石人大多数都倒在地里，偶尔也有站立着的。
English: Most of the stone figures are lying on the ground, with the occasional one standing up.

古文：又云，侧近有石井，深而无水。
现代文：另外，田地旁不远处有口石井，井很深但没有水。
English: In addition, there is an open stone well not far from the field, the well is very deep but there is no water.

古文：有好事者，持火入其中，旁有横道，莫知远近，道侧亦皆是石人焉。
现代文：有好事的人，手拿着火进入井中，井壁旁边有横道，不知道多远多近。道两旁也都是石人。
English: People who have good luck go into the well with a fire in their hands. There is a crosswalk next to the well wall, I don't know how far or how close it is. There are also stone people on both sides of the road.

古文：热石
现代文：热石
English: Hot stones

古文：新北市是景云观旧基，有一巨石，大如柱础。
现代文：新北市是景云观的旧址。那里有一个巨石，大小象柱子下面的石墩。
English: New Taipei City is the former site of Jingyun Scenic Area, where there is a huge rock, the size of which is like a stalagmite under a pillar.

古文：人或坐之蹋之，逡巡如火烧。应心烦热，因便成疾，往往致死。
现代文：有人坐在上面或踩在上面，就象被火烧了一样迅速退下来，弄得人心烦躁而发热，于是便生成疾病，往往使人致死。
English: Anyone who sits on it or steps on it quickly falls back as if he had been burned, causing irritation and fever, which leads to illness and often death.

古文：或云，若聚火烧此石吼，即瞿塘山吼而水沸。
现代文：有的人说，要是聚火烧得这个石墩吼叫，瞿塘山也立即吼叫而且水也开始沸腾。
English: Some people said that if a fire broke out and made this stalagmite roar, the Qutang Mountain would immediately roar and the water would begin to boil.

古文：古老相传耳。
现代文：这只是古老的时候人们的互相传说罢了。
English: It's just an old folk's tale.

古文：又蜀州晋原县山亭中，有二大石，各径二尺已来，出地七八寸。
现代文：另外，蜀州晋原县的山亭中，有两块大石，每块的直径都在二尺以内，露出地面七八寸。
English: In addition, there are two large stones in the pavilion in Jinyuan County, Shuzhou, each with a diameter of less than two feet, exposing seven or eight inches of ground.

古文：人或坐之，心痛往往不救。
现代文：人坐在石上，心痛往往不能救治。
English: People sit on the stone, the heartache often can't be cured.

古文：又是落星石，东边者，坐即灵者；西边者，与诸石无异。
现代文：也是两块陨石。东边那块石头，是坐上就灵验的石头，西边那块，和别的石头没有不同。
English: It is also two meteorites. The stone on the east side is a stone that is easy to sit on, and the one on the west side is no different from other stones.

古文：色并带青白也。
现代文：两块石头都带有青白的颜色。
English: Both stones have a bluish-white color.

古文：犬吠石
现代文：犬吠石
English: Dog barking stone

古文：婺源县有大黄石，自山坠于溪侧，莹彻可爱，群犬见而竞吠之。
现代文：婺源县有块黄色的大石头，从山上坠落在山间的溪水旁，晶莹透彻很是可爱。一群狗见了就全都朝着石头叫。
English: There is a big yellow stone in Luyuan County. It fell from the mountain and landed next to a mountain stream. It is crystal clear and lovely. When a group of dogs saw it, they all barked at the stone.

古文：数日，村人不堪其喧，乃相与推致水中。
现代文：一连叫了几天，村里的人忍受不了狗叫的喧闹声，就一起将黄石推到溪水中。
English: After barking for several days in a row, the people in the village could not stand the noise of the dogs barking, so they pushed Huangshi into the stream together.

古文：犬又俯水而吠愈急，取而碎之。
现代文：狗又冲着水叫而且叫声愈来愈急，村里的人又将大黄石从水中取出砸碎，狗便不叫了。
English: The dog barked at the water again, and the barking got louder and louder. The villagers took the large yellow stone out of the water and smashed it, and the dog stopped barking.

古文：瓮形石
现代文：瓮形石
English: Zircon stones

古文：潘祚为鄱阳县令，后连带古城，其中隙荒数十亩。
现代文：潘祚是鄱阳县的县令，以后又带管了古城，古城的荒地有好几十亩。
English: Pan Ye is the county magistrate of Fenyang County, and later he took charge of the ancient city. The wasteland of the ancient city has dozens of mu.

古文：祚尝与家人望月于此，见城下草中有光，高数丈。
现代文：潘祚曾经和家里人在古城望月，见城下草丛中有光亮，光芒高好几丈。
English: Pan Yao and his family once looked up at the moon in the ancient city. They saw a bright light in the bushes below the city. The light was several meters high.

古文：其间荆棘蒙密，不可夜行，即取弓射其处，以志之。
现代文：发光的地方荆棘茂密，夜间不能行走，他就立即拿过弓箭射向发光的地方，用箭作为记号。
English: The glowing place was thick with thorns, and he could not walk at night, so he immediately took a bow and arrow and shot it at the glowing place, using the arrow as a mark.

古文：明日掘其地，得一瓮，大腹小口，青石塞之。
现代文：第二天挖掘发光的地方，挖到一只陶瓮，大肚小口，里面装满了青色的石头。
English: The next day, digging in the glowing place, he dug up a pottery eel with a large belly and a small mouth, which was filled with blue stone.

古文：祚命舁归其家，发其口，不可开。令击碎之，乃一石，如瓮之形，若冰冻之凝结者。
现代文：潘祚命人抬回家中，想打开瓮口，但打不开，就令人将陶瓮打碎，里面是一块石头，和瓮的形状一样，就像水冻成冰而凝结成的。
English: Pan ordered the potter to take it home. He wanted to open the jar, but when he couldn't, he had the potter break the jar. Inside was a stone, the same shape as the jar, like water frozen into ice.

古文：复碎而弃之，卒无所得。
现代文：又把这石头砸碎扔掉。最终什么也没有得到。
English: He smashed the stone again and threw it away. In the end, he got nothing.

古文：三石
现代文：三石
English: Three stones

古文：处州石人山，在泥水口，近有三石，形甚似人。
现代文：处州有座石人山，在泥水河的入江口，山上相近有三石，形状非常象人。
English: There is a stone man mountain in Wenzhou. At the mouth of the muddy river, there are three stones on the mountain, which are very similar in shape to a man.

古文：居中者为君，左曰夫人，右曰女郎。
现代文：在中间的是君，左边的叫夫人，右边的叫女郎。
English: In the middle is you, on the left is your wife, and on the right is your girlfriend.

古文：人石
现代文：人石
English: The Human Stone

古文：昔有夫妻二人，将儿入山猎，其父落崖，妻子将下救之，并变为三石，因以为人石。
现代文：过去有夫妻二人，带领儿子进山打猎。父亲不幸从山崖上掉了下去，他妻子和儿子到崖下要救他，三人一起变成了三块石头，因此叫作人石。
English: In the past, there were two couples who led their sons into the mountains to hunt. Unfortunately, the father fell down from the cliff, his wife and son went to the cliff to save him, and the three of them turned into three stones, hence the name "human stone."

古文：金蚕
现代文：金蚕
English: The Golden Silkworm

古文：右千牛兵曹王文秉，丹阳人，世善刻石，其祖尝为浙西廉使裴璩采碑。
现代文：右千牛兵曹王文秉，丹阳人。
English: Right is Thousand Cattle soldier Cao Wang Wenbing, from Danyang.

古文：于积石之下，得一自然圆石，如球形，式如砻斫，乃重叠如壳相包。
现代文：他家世代善于刻石。他的祖父曾经为浙西廉使裴璩开采碑石，在堆积的石块中，得到一块自然形成的圆形石头，形状象皮球，象是人工削磨的样子。外面重叠好象包着一层壳。
English: His family has been good at carving stone for generations. His grandfather used to mine monument stone for Zhejiang Xilian. Among the accumulated stones, he obtained a naturally formed round stone, shaped like a leather ball, as if it was artificially ground. The outside overlaps as if wrapped in a layer of shell.

古文：斫之至尽，其大如拳。
现代文：把外壳都削掉，剩下的象拳头那样大。
English: Shave off the shell and the rest is as big as your fist.

古文：复破之，中有一蚕，如蛴螬，蠕蠕能动。
现代文：再把它打破，里面有一条蚕，象金龟子的幼虫，能蠕动。
English: Then break it, there is a silkworm inside, like the larva of the beetle, can creep.

古文：人不能识，因弃之。
现代文：人们都不认识它是什么，于是把它扔掉了。
English: People didn't know what it was, so they threw it away.

古文：数年，浙西乱，王出奔至下蜀，与乡人夜会，语及青蚨还钱事。佐中或云，人欲求富，莫如得石中金蚕畜之。则宝货自致矣。
现代文：几年之后，浙西发生动乱，王文秉出逃到下蜀。有一天和家乡的人夜晚聚会，说到借钱还钱的事时，陪伴他的人中有人说： 人要寻求富贵，不如得到石中的金蚕畜养着，财宝金钱就会自然来到。
English: A few years later, there was turmoil in western Zhejiang, and Wang Wenbing fled to Shimo-Shu. One day, he was meeting with people from his hometown in the evening. When it came to borrowing money and paying it back, one of the people accompanying him said: "If you want to seek wealth, it is better to get the golden silkworms in the stone and raise them. Treasure and money will come naturally."

古文：问其形状，则石中蛴螬也。
现代文：王文秉问过金蚕的形状后，才知道那就是石头中的金龟子的幼虫。
English: After Wang Wenbing asked about the shape of the silkworm, he knew that it was the larva of the golden beetle in the stone.

古文：坡沙
现代文：坡沙
English: Po Sa

古文：飞坡
现代文：飞坡
English: Flying downhill

古文：永昌年，太州敷水店南西坡，白日飞四五里，直塞赤水。
现代文：唐永昌年间，太州敷水店南的西坡，白天飞出去四五里路，一直堵落到赤水河中。
English: During the Tang and Yongchang dynasties, during the day, four or five miles of the west slope of the south of the Taizhou pavement shop flew out, and it was blocked all the way to the Chashui River.

古文：坡上桑畦麦垄，依然仍旧。
现代文：坡上的桑田麦地，依然还是原来的样子。
English: The mulberry field on the slope is still in its original state.

古文：鸣沙
现代文：鸣沙
English: Mingsha

古文：灵州鸣沙县有沙，人马践之，辄鈖然有声。
现代文：灵州鸣沙县有个地方的沙子，人或马踏上，就发出金属般的响声。
English: There is a place in Mingsha County, Lingzhou, where sand, when stepped on by a person or a horse, emits a metallic sound.

古文：持至他处，信宿之后，无复有声。
现代文：把这里的沙子拿到别的地方，随便在哪里放一夜之后，再踏便不再有声。
English: Take the sand from here to somewhere else, put it anywhere overnight, and then there is no sound.

