古文：○杨师厚
现代文：杨师厚，颖州斤沟人。
English: Yang Shihou, a resident of Jinsha, Yingzhou.

古文：杨师厚，颍州斤沟人也。少事河阳李罕之，罕之降晋，选其麾下劲卒百人献于晋王，师厚在籍中。
现代文：年轻时跟随河阳人李罕之，李罕之向晋投降时，挑选他的部下强健兵士一百人献给晋王，杨师厚名列其中。
English: When he was young, he followed Li Hanzhi, a native of Heyang. When Li Hanzhi surrendered to Jin, he selected one hundred of his strong soldiers to be dedicated to the Jin king. Yang Shihou was among them.

古文：师厚在晋，无所知名，后以罪奔于梁，太祖以为宣武军押衙、曹州刺史。
现代文：杨师厚在晋时，没有什么名气，后来因为犯罪逃奔到梁，梁太祖任命他为宣武里押衙、曹州刺史。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, Yang Shihou had little fame. Later, he fled to Liang because of a crime. Liang Taizu appointed him as the deputy of Xuanwu and the governor of Caozhou.

古文：梁攻王师范，师厚战临朐，擒其偏将八十余人，取棣州，以功拜齐州刺史。
现代文：梁进攻王师范，杨师厚在临朐作战，擒获梁的副将八十多人，攻克棣州，因功拜为齐州刺史。
English: Liang attacked Wang Shifan, Yang Shihou fought in Linyi, captured Liang's vice-general and more than eighty people, conquered Zhangzhou, and made history in Qizhou for his service.

古文：太祖攻赵匡凝于襄阳，遣师厚为先锋。
现代文：梁太祖在襄阳进攻趟匡凝，派杨师厚担任先锋。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Congee in Yangyang and sent Yang Shihou as the vanguard.

古文：师厚取谷城西童山木为浮桥，渡汉水，击匡凝，败之，匡凝弃城走。
现代文：杨师厚砍伐谷城西童山的树木做成浮桥，渡过汉水，攻击趟匡凝，打败了他，赵匡凝弃城逃跑。
English: Yang Shihou cut down the trees of West Tongshan in Gucheng to make a floating bridge, crossed the Han River, attacked and defeated Zhao Kuangcheng, and Zhao Kuangcheng abandoned the city and fled.

古文：师厚进攻荆南，又走匡凝弟匡明，功为多，拜山南东道节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：杨师厚进攻剂南，又驱逐赵匡凝的弟弟趟匡明，功劳最大，拜为山南束道节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: Yang Shihou's attack on Nan, and the expulsion of Zhao Kuangning's younger brother, Wai Kuangming, were the greatest achievements. He was worshipped as Shannan Shu Dao's festival envoy, and the book gate of the same school was leveled.

古文：刘知俊叛，攻陷长安，刘掞、牛存节等攻之，久不克。
现代文：刘知俊反叛，攻陷长安，刘郡、牛存节等人进攻他，很久不能攻克。
English: Liu Zhijun rebelled and captured Chang'an. Liu County, Niu Cunjie and others attacked him and could not be defeated for a long time.

古文：师厚以奇兵出，旁南山入其西门，降其守者，遂克之。
现代文：杨师厚率奇兵出击，沿南山进入长安西门，降服守门的军队，于是攻克长安。
English: Yang Shihou led his extraordinary soldiers to attack, entered the West Gate of Chang'an along the Nanshan Mountain, surrendered to the army guarding the gate, and then conquered Chang'an.

古文：晋周德威攻晋州以应知俊，师厚败之于蒙坑，以功迁保义军节度使，徙镇宣义。
现代文：晋周德威进攻晋州来接应刘知俊，杨师厚在蒙坑打败他，因功升任保义里节度使，调任镇守宣义军。
English: Jin Zhou Dewei attacked Jinzhou to meet Liu Zhijun, Yang Shihou defeated him in Mengkeng, and was promoted to the post of the Bailiff of Baoyili and transferred to the post of the town guard of Xuanyi Army.

古文：是时，梁兵攻赵久无功，太祖病卧洛阳，少间，乃自将北击赵。
现代文：适时，梁军进攻赵很久没有进展，梁太祖在洛阳因病卧床，病情稍稍好转，就亲自率兵向北进攻赵。
English: At the right time, Liang's attack on Zhao did not progress for a long time. Liang Taizu was bedridden in Luoyang due to illness. When his condition improved slightly, he personally led his troops north to attack Zhao.

古文：师厚从太祖至洹水，夜行迷失道，明旦，次魏县，闻敌将至，梁兵溃乱不可止，久之无敌，乃定。
现代文：杨师厚跟随梁太祖到达洹水，夜晚行军迷路，第二天早晨，到达魏县，听说敌军快到，梁军溃散混乱不可收拾，过了很久没有敌军到来，纔平定下来。
English: Yang Shihou followed Liang Taizu to Surabaya. He lost his way during the night march. The next morning, he arrived at Wei County. He heard that the enemy army was about to arrive. Liang's army was in chaos and could not be put down. After a long time, no enemy army arrived, and the situation was stabilized.

古文：已而太祖疾作，乃还。
现代文：不久梁太祖发病，于是返回。
English: Soon after, Liang Taizu fell ill and returned home.

古文：明年少间，而晋军攻燕，燕王刘守光求援于梁，太祖为之击赵以牵晋，屯于龙花，遣师厚攻枣强，三月不能下。
现代文：第二年梁太祖的病稍微好转，造时晋军进攻燕，燕王刘守光向梁请求救援，梁太祖用进攻趟的行动来牵制晋人，屯驻在龙花，派遣杨师厚进攻枣强，三个月都没能攻克。
English: In the second year, Liang Taizu's illness improved slightly. When the Jin army attacked Yan, Yan King Liu Shouguang asked Liang for help. Liang Taizu used offensive operations to contain the Jin people, stationed in Longhua, and sent Yang Shihou to attack Zaoqiang, but failed to conquer it for three months.

古文：太祖怒，自往督兵战，乃破，屠之，进围蓚县。
现代文：梁太祖发怒，亲自前往敦促士兵作战，纔攻破枣强，屠城之后，进兵围攻蓓县。
English: Liang Taizu became angry and personally went to urge the soldiers to fight,  attacked Zaoqiang, and after slaughtering the city, the soldiers entered and besieged Shixian.

古文：晋史建瑭以轻兵夜击梁军，梁军大扰，太祖与师厚皆弃辎重南走。
现代文：晋史建瑭率领轻兵夜袭梁军，梁军大乱，梁太祖和杨师厚都丢弃辎重南逃。
English: Jin Shi Jian Kun led light soldiers to attack Liang's army at night. Liang's army was in chaos, and Liang Taizu and Yang Shih Hou both abandoned their posts and fled south.

古文：太祖还东都，师厚留屯魏州。
现代文：梁太祖返回柬都，杨师厚留下驻扎魏州。
English: Liang Taizu returned to the capital of Cambodia, while Yang Shihou remained stationed in Weizhou.

古文：明年，太祖遇弑，友珪自立，师厚乘间杀魏牙将潘晏、臧延范等，逐出节度使罗周翰，友珪因以师厚为天雄军节度使。
现代文：第二年，梁太祖被杀，朱友珪擅自登位，杨师厚乘机杀掉魏州牙将潘晏、臧延范等人，驱逐节度使罗周翰，朱友珪于是任命杨师厚为天雄军节度使。
English: In the second year, Liang Taizu was killed, Zhu Youyou ascended to the throne without authorization, Yang Shihou took the opportunity to kill the Wei Zhou general Pan Xuan, Zou Yanfan and others, and expelled the festival commander Luo Zhouhan. Zhu Youyou then appointed Yang Shihou as the festival commander of the Tianxiong Army.

古文：自太祖与晋战河北，师厚常为招讨使，悉领梁之劲兵。
现代文：自从梁太祖和晋在河北开战以来，杨师厚常任招讨使，统率梁的全部精兵。
English: Since the war between Liang Taizu and Jin in Hebei, Yang Shihou has been a permanent envoy, leading all of Liang's elite soldiers.

古文：太祖崩，师厚遂逐其帅，而稍矜倨难制。
现代文：梁太祖死后，杨师厚就排斥旧有将帅，慢慢有些矜持傲慢，难以管制。
English: After the death of Liang Taizu, Yang Shihou ostracized the old generals, and gradually became somewhat arrogant and difficult to control.

古文：时魏恃牙兵，其帅得以倔强。
现代文：当时魏仗恃牙兵，统帅因此桀惊不驯。
English: At that time, the Wei troops were toothless soldiers, so the commander was shocked and disobedient.

古文：罗绍威时，牙兵尽死，魏势孤，始为梁所制。
现代文：罗绍威时，牙兵都被杀死，魏势力孤单，纔被梁控制。
English: In the time of Roshowei, the Fang soldiers were all killed, the Wei forces were alone, and the Yao were controlled by the Liang.

古文：师厚已得志，乃复置银枪效范军。
现代文：杨师厚志满意得，于是又重新设立银效节军。
English: Yang Shih Hou Zhi was satisfied, so he re-established the Silver Effect Festival Army.

古文：友珪阴欲图之，召师厚入计事。
现代文：朱友珪暗中想算计他，叫杨师厚进宫商量事情。
English: Zhu Youyao secretly wanted to trick him and asked Yang Shihou to go to the palace to discuss the matter.

古文：其吏田温等劝师厚勿行，师厚曰： 吾二十年不负硃家，今若不行，则见疑而生事，然吾知上为人，虽往，无如我何也。 
现代文：杨师厚的幕僚田温等人劝他不要去，杨师厚说： 我二十年没有对不起朱家的地方，现在如果不去，就会被怀疑而惹事生非，但我知道皇上的为人，即使去，也不会把我怎么样。 
English: Yang Shihou's staff member, Tian Wen, and others advised him not to go. Yang Shihou said, "For twenty years, I have never disrespected the Zhu family. Now, if I don't go, I will be suspected and cause trouble. But I know the emperor's character. Even if I go, he won't treat me badly."

古文：乃以劲兵二万朝京师，留其兵城外，以十余人自从，入见友珪，友珪益恐惧，赐与巨万而还。
现代文：于是率强兵二万人往京城朝见，把军队留在京城外，带十多人跟着自己，进官朗见朱友珪，朱友珪更加恐惧，赏赐钱财上万让他返回。
English: As a result, he led 20,000 strong soldiers to the capital to see the morning, left the army outside the capital, brought more than ten people to follow him, and entered the office to see Zhu Youyao. Zhu Youyao was even more afraid, and rewarded him with tens of thousands of money to let him return.

古文：已而末帝谋讨友珪，问于赵岩，岩曰： 此事成败，在招讨杨公尔。
现代文：不久梁末帝谋划讨伐朱友珪，向赵岩询问计谋，赵岩说： 这件事的成败，关键在于招讨使杨公。
English: Soon after, Emperor Liang planned to attack Zhu Youyao and asked Zhao Yan about the plan. Zhao Yan said: The key to the success or failure of this matter lies in recruiting Yang Gong.

古文：得其一言谕禁军，吾事立办。 
现代文：能让他说句话告诉禁军，我们的事立即就能成功。 
English: If we can get him to say a few words to the Forbidden Army, we will succeed immediately.

古文：末帝乃遣马慎交阴见师厚，布腹心。
现代文：梁末帝于是派遣马慎交秘密会见杨师厚，推心置腹地向杨师厚说明他们的打算。
English: Emperor Liang sent Ma Sheng to secretly meet with Yang Shihou and explain their plans to him.

古文：师厚犹豫未决，谓其下曰： 方郢王弑逆时，吾不能即讨。
现代文：杨师厚犹豫不决，对他的部下说： 当郢王杀父叛逆时，我没能立即讨伐他。
English: Yang Shihou hesitated and said to his subordinates, "When King Yao killed his father and rebelled, I couldn't fight him right away.

古文：今君臣之分已定，无故改图，人谓我何？ 
现代文：如今君臣的名分已经确定，无缘无故改弦易辙，人们会怎样说我呢？ 
English: Now that the title of monarch and minister has been determined, what will people say about me if I change my mind for no reason?

古文：其下或曰： 友珪弑父与君，乃天下之恶，均王仗大义以诛贼，其事易成。
现代文：有的部下说： 朱友珪杀死父亲和君主，是天下的恶人，均王依仗大义诛讨乱贼，这件事容易成功。
English: Some of his subordinates said: Zhu Youya killed his father and the monarch, he is an evil person in the world. King Jun relied on the great righteousness to fight against the ruffians, this matter is easy to succeed.

古文：彼若一朝破贼，公将何以自处？ 
现代文：他如果有一天攻破乱贼，你将怎样安身呢？ 
English: If one day he breaks through the ruffians, how will you settle down?

古文：师厚大悟，乃遣其将王舜贤至洛阳，见袁象先计事，使硃汉宾以兵屯滑州为应。
现代文：杨师厚恍然大悟，于是派遣他的将领王舜贤到洛阳，会见袁象先商量有关事宜，派朱汉宾率兵屯驻滑州作为接应。
English: Yang Shihou had a sudden epiphany, so he sent his general Wang Qianxian to Luoyang to meet with Yuan Xiangxian to discuss the relevant matters, and sent Zhu Hanbin to lead the troops stationed in Nanzhou as a response.

古文：末帝卒与象先杀友珪。
现代文：梁末帝终于和袁象先杀掉了朱友珪。
English: Emperor Liang finally and Yuan Xiang first killed Zhu Youyao.

古文：末帝即位，封师厚鄴王，诏书不名，事无巨细皆以谘之，然心益忌而畏之。
现代文：梁末帝登位，封杨师厚为邺王，韶书不称他的名字，事情无论大小都要跟杨师厚商量，但梁末帝心里更加戒备害怕他。
English: When Emperor Liang Moku ascended the throne, he named Yang Shihou as the King of Qi. The imperial edict did not mention his name. No matter how big or small the matter was, it had to be discussed with Yang Shihou. However, Emperor Liang Moku was more wary and afraid of him.

古文：已而师厚疡发卒，末帝为之受贺于宫中。
现代文：不久杨师厚溃疡发作死去，梁末帝为此在宫中接受庆贺。
English: Soon after, Yang Shihou died of an ulcer, for which Emperor Liang received congratulations in the palace.

古文：由是始分相、魏为两镇。
现代文：从此纔分相、魏为两个镇。
English: Since then, Wei has been divided into two towns.

古文：魏军乱，以魏博降晋，梁失河北自此始。
现代文：魏军叛乱，献魏博之地向晋投降，梁失去河北从这时开始。
English: The Wei army rebelled, Wei Bo's land surrendered to Jin, and Liang lost Hebei from this time on.

古文：○王景仁王景仁，庐州合淝人也。
现代文：壬量仁，庐州合淝人。
English: Minsheng Ren, a native of Bozhou.

古文：初名茂章，少从杨行密起淮南。
现代文：原名茂章，年轻时跟随杨行密在淮南起兵。
English: Originally named Maozhang, he followed Yang Xingmi to join the army in Huainan when he was young.

古文：景仁为将骁勇刚悍，质略无威仪，临敌务以身先士卒，行密壮之。
现代文：王景仁作将领骁勇刚烈而骠悍，诚实简朴没有威严的仪表，面对敌人必定身先士卒，杨行密视他为壮士。
English: Wang Jingren as a general is brave and tough, honest and simple without a majestic appearance, facing the enemy must be the forerunner, Yang Xingmi regards him as a strong man.

古文：梁太祖遣子友宁攻王师范于青州，师范乞兵于行密，行密遣景仁以步骑七千救师范。
现代文：梁太祖派侄子朱友宁在青州进攻王师范，王师范向杨行密请求援兵，杨行密派遣王景仁率领步兵、骑兵七千人援救王师范。
English: Liang Taizu sent his nephew Zhu Youning to attack Wang Shifan in Qingzhou. Wang Shifan asked Yang Xingmi for reinforcements. Yang Xingmi sent Wang Jingren to rescue Wang Shifan, leading 7,000 infantry and cavalry.

古文：师范以兵背城为两栅，友宁夜击其一栅，栅中告急，趣景仁出战，景仁按兵不动。
现代文：王师范提兵背城构成两个栅寨，朱友宁趁夜攻击其中一寨，寨中告急，催促王景仁出战，王景仁按兵不动。
English: Wang Shifan's withdrawal of troops behind the city formed two stockades. Zhu Youning took advantage of the night to attack one of the stockades. The middle of the stockade was in a hurry, urging Wang Jingren to go to war. Wang Jingren did not move.

古文：友宁已破一栅，连战不已。
现代文：朱友宁攻破一个栅寨后，连续作战不停。
English: After breaking through a stockade, Zhu Youning fought continuously.

古文：迟明，景仁度友宁兵已困，乃出战，大败之，遂斩友宁，以其首报行密。
现代文：快天亮时，王景仁估计朱友宁的军队已经困乏，于是出战，大败敌军，于是斩杀朱友宁，拿着他的头报告杨行密。
English: When it was almost dawn, Wang Jingren estimated that Zhu Youning's army was exhausted, so he went to war and defeated the enemy army. He then killed Zhu Youning and took his head to report to Yang Xingmi.

古文：是时，梁太祖方攻郓州，闻子友宁死，以兵二十万倍道而至，景仁闭垒示怯，伺梁兵怠，毁栅而出，驱驰疾战，战酣退坐，召诸将饮酒，已而复战。
现代文：这时，梁太祖正进攻郫州，得知儿子朱友宁被杀死，率领二十万军队兼程赶来，王景仁关闭营垒假装胆怯，等到梁军松懈的时候，破寨而出，飞驰疾战，酣战后退出小坐，叫来众将领一起饮酒，之后再次出战。
English: At this time, Liang Taizu was attacking Zhangzhou. When he learned that his son Zhu Youning had been killed, he led two hundred thousand troops to come all the way. Wang Jingren closed the camp and pretended to be timid. When Liang's army was slack, he broke out of the camp and raced to fight. After the battle, he withdrew from the small seat, called all the generals to drink together, and then went to war again.

古文：太祖登高望见之，得青州降人，问： 饮酒者为谁？ 
现代文：梁太祖登上高处望见后，叫来一个青州降兵，问他： 饮洒的人是谁？ 
English: After Liang Taizu ascended to a high place, he called a Qingzhou soldier to come down and asked him: Who is the person who is sprinkling water?

古文：曰： 王茂章也。 
现代文：回答说： 是王茂章。 
English: He answered, "It is Wang Maozhang."

古文：太祖叹曰： 使吾得此人为将，天下不足平也！ 
现代文：梁太祖叹息说： 如果我得到这个人作将领，天下也不难平定了！ 
English: Liang Taizu sighed and said, "If I get this man as a general, it will not be difficult to pacify the world!"

古文：梁兵又败。
现代文：梁军又被打败了。
English: Liang's army was defeated again.

古文：景仁军还，梁兵急追之，景仁度不可走，遣裨将李虔裕以众一旅设覆于山下以待之，留军不行，解鞍而寝。虔裕疾呼曰： 追兵至矣，宜速走，虔裕以死遏之！ 
现代文：王景仁的军队撤回时，梁兵急迫不放，王景仁估计不能脱身，派遣副将李虔裕率领一队士兵在山下埋伏，等待敌军，让军队停下不走，解去马鞍开始睡觉，李虔裕大声疾呼道： 追兵到了，赶快跑吧，我李虔裕冒死阻挡他们！ 
English: When Wang Jingren's army retreated, Liang soldiers were in a hurry and did not let go, Wang Jingren estimated that he could not escape, sent Vice Admiral Li Qianyu to lead a group of soldiers to ambush under the mountain, waiting for the enemy army, let the army stop and not go, untied the saddle and began to sleep, Li Qianyu shouted: The pursuers have arrived, hurry up and run, I, Li Qianyu, will risk my life to stop them!

古文：景仁曰： 吾亦战于此也。 
现代文：王景仁说： 我也准备在这里打仗。 
English: Wang Jingren said, "I am also ready to fight here."

古文：虔裕三请，景仁乃行，而虔裕卒战死，梁兵以故不能及，而景仁全军以归。
现代文：李虔裕再三请求，王景仁纔起行，李虔裕最终战死，梁军因此不能追上王景仁，王景仁得以保全部队返回。
English: After repeated requests from Li Qianyu, Wang Jingren started to march. Li Qianyu eventually died in the battle. As a result, Liang's army was unable to catch up with Wang Jingren, and Wang Jingren was able to return with his entire army intact.

古文：景仁事行密，为润州团练使。
现代文：王景仁跟随杨行密，任润州团练使。
English: Wang Jingren followed Yang Xingmi and was appointed as the Rongzhou regimental training officer.

古文：行密死，子渥自宣州入立，以景仁代守宣州。
现代文：杨行密死后，儿子杨渥从宣州赶来继位，让王景仁代他守宣州。
English: After the death of Yang Xingmi, his son Yang Wo came from Xuanzhou to succeed him, and let Wang Jingren guard Xuanzhou on his behalf.

古文：渥已立，反求宣州故物，景仁惜不与，渥怒，以兵攻之。
现代文：杨渥继位后，返回索求宣州原有物品，王景仁吝惜不给，杨渥发怒，派兵进攻王景仁。
English: After Yang Wo succeeded to the throne, he returned to claim the original articles from Xuanzhou. Wang Jingren grudgingly refused to give them to him. Yang Wo became angry and sent troops to attack Wang Jingren.

古文：景仁奔于钱镠，镠表景仁领宣州节度使。
现代文：王景仁投奔钱铿，钱铿表奏王景仁领宣州节度使。
English: Wang Jingren went to Qian Ye, and Qian Ye played the role of Wang Jingren's envoy to the Xuanzhou Festival.

古文：梁太祖素识景仁，乃遣人召之，景仁间道归梁，仍以为宁国军节度使，加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：梁太祖早就认识王景仁，于是派人叫他来，王景仁从小路投奔梁，仍任命他为宁国军节度使，加授同中书门下平章事头衔。
English: Liang's great-grandfather had known Wang Jingren for a long time, so he sent someone to summon him. Wang Jingren ran to Liang from a side road, but still appointed him as the Ningguo Army's festival envoy, and awarded him the title of Tongzhong Shumen Xia Pingzhangji.

古文：久之，未有以用，使参宰相班，奉朝请而已。
现代文：过了很久，没有用他之处，让他和宰相一起，上朝请安罢了。
English: After a long time, there was no use for him, so he and the Prime Minister went to the Imperial Court to ask for peace.

古文：开平四年，以景仁为北面招讨使，将韩勍、李思安等兵伐赵；行至魏州，司天监言： 太阴亏，不利行师。 
现代文：开平四年，任命王景仁为北面招讨使，率领韩勃、李思安等人的军队讨伐赵，行进到魏州时，司天监说： 月亮亏缺，不利于出兵。 
English: In the fourth year of the Heian period, Wang Jingren was appointed as the envoy to the north, and led the army of Han Bo, Li Sian and others to fight against Zhao. When they marched to Weizhou, Siyuan said: The moon is short, which is not conducive to sending troops.

古文：太祖亟召景仁等还，已而复遣之。
现代文：梁太祖急忙命令王景仁等人返回，不久又派他们出征。
English: Liang Taizu hastily ordered Wang Jingren and others to return, and soon sent them out again.

古文：景仁已去，太祖思术者言，驰使者止景仁于魏以待。
现代文：王景仁离去后，梁太祖想到占星人的话，派使臣飞驰前去，令王景仁在魏州停下待命。
English: After Wang Jingren left, Liang Taizu thought of the astrologer's words and sent an envoy to rush forward to make Wang Jingren wait in Weizhou.

古文：景仁已过邢、洺，使者及之，景仁不奉诏，进营于柏乡。
现代文：王景仁已经过了邢、沼二州，使臣追上他，王景仁不听诏命，前进到柏乡驻扎。
English: Wang Jingren had already passed Shantou and Nanzhou, and the envoys caught up with him. Wang Jingren did not listen to the imperial edict and marched to Baoxiang for stationing.

古文：乾化元年正月庚寅，日有食之，崇政使敬翔白太祖曰： 兵可忧矣！ 
现代文：干化元年正月庚寅，发生日食，崇政使敬翔对梁太祖说： 战事令人担忧了！ 
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Heung-in, a solar eclipse occurred, and the high political envoy Jing Xiang said to Liang Taizu: The war is worrying!

古文：太祖为之旰食。
现代文：梁太祖为此忧虑，很晚纔吃饭。
English: Liang Taizu was worried about this and had dinner very late.

古文：是日，景仁及晋人战，大败于柏乡，景仁归诉于太祖，太祖曰： 吾亦知之，盖韩勍、李思安轻汝为客，不从节度尔。 
现代文：这天，王景仁和晋人作战，在柏乡大败，王景仁回来向梁太祖诉苦，梁太祖说： 我也明白，恐怕是韩勃、李思安轻视你是客人，不听从你指挥罢了。 
English: On this day, Wang Jingren fought with the Jin people and suffered a great defeat in Baoxiang. Wang Jingren came back to complain to Liang Taizu. Liang Taizu said: I also understand that I am afraid that Han Bo and Li Sian despise you as a guest and do not obey your command.

古文：乃罢景仁就第，后数月，悉复其官爵。
现代文：于是罢免王景仁回家，几个月后，恢复丁他的所有官爵。
English: So he dismissed Wang Jingren and sent him home. A few months later, he restored all of Ding's titles.

古文：末帝立，以景仁为淮南招讨使，攻庐、寿，军过独山，山有杨行密祠，景仁再拜号泣而去。
现代文：梁末帝登位，任命王景仁为淮南招讨使，进攻庐、寿二州，军队经过独山，山上有杨行密的祠庙，王景仁拜了两拜悲号哭泣而离去。
English: Emperor Liang Mucu ascended to the throne and appointed Wang Jingren as the envoy of Huainan Province, attacking Shou and Shou two states. The army passed through the mountains, and there was an ancestral temple of Yang Xingmi on the mountain. Wang Jingren prayed for two days and wept and left.

古文：战于霍山，梁兵败走，景仁殿而力战，以故梁兵不甚败。
现代文：在霍山作战，梁军败逃，王景仁断后，奋力作战，因此梁军没有大败。
English: In the battle of Huoshan, Liang's army was defeated and fled. After Wang Jingren died, Liang's army fought hard, so Liang's army did not suffer a major defeat.

古文：景仁归京师，病疽卒，赠太尉。
现代文：王景仁回到京城后，因患疽病而死，赠官太尉。
English: After Wang Jingren returned to Beijing, he died of gangrene and was given the rank of lieutenant.

古文：○贺瑰贺瑰，字光远，濮州人也。
现代文：贺瓖字光速，濮州人。
English: Hebei word speed of light, Zhangzhou people.

古文：事郓州硃宣为都指挥使。
现代文：跟随郫州朱宣任都指挥使。
English: He followed Zhangzhou Zhu Xuanren as the commanding envoy.

古文：梁太祖攻硃瑾于兗州，宣遣瑰与何怀宝、柳存等以兵万人救兗州，瑰趋待宾馆，欲绝梁饷道。
现代文：梁太祖在充州进攻朱瑾，朱宣派贺瓖和何怀宝、柳存等人率兵一万人救援充州，贺瓖赶赴待宾馆，打算断绝梁军的军饷供应线。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Zhu Xi in Chenzhou. Zhu Xuan sent He Xuan, He Huai Bao, Liu Cun and others with 10,000 soldiers to rescue Chenzhou. He Xuan rushed to the hotel, intending to cut off Liang's supply line of military supplies.

古文：梁太祖略地至中都，得降卒，言瑰等兵趋待宾馆矣！
现代文：梁太祖征战到中都，遇到投降的士兵，说贺瓖等人的军队奔赴待宾馆了！
English: Liang Taizu went to the capital to fight, and when he met soldiers who had surrendered, he said that the army of He Xuan and others had rushed to wait for the hotel!

古文：以六壬占之，得 斩关 ，以为吉，乃选精兵夜疾驰百里，期先至待宾以逆瑰，而夜黑，兵失道，旦至钜野东，遇瑰兵，击之，瑰等大败。
现代文：用六壬占卜，得到 靳关 ，认为吉祥，于是挑选精兵夜晚飞驰百里，希望先赶到待宾馆迎战贺瓖，但天太黑，士兵迷路，早晨到达巨野束面时，和贺瓖的军队相遇，发起攻击，贺瓖等人大败。
English: Using the Six Immortals divination, he obtained Shiguan, which he considered auspicious, so he selected elite soldiers and raced hundreds of miles at night, hoping to reach the hotel first to meet He Xuan, but it was too dark, the soldiers lost their way, and when they arrived at the Giant Field in the morning, they met He Xuan's army and launched an attack, and He Xuan and others were defeated.

古文：瑰走，梁兵急追之，瑰顾路穷，登冢上大呼曰： 我贺瑰也，可勿杀我！ 
现代文：贺瓖逃走，梁兵紧追不放，贺瓖看到无路可逃，登上山坡大叫道： 我是贺瓖，不要杀我！ 
English: He Rong fled, Liang soldiers chased him, He Rong saw there was no way to escape, climbed the hillside and shouted: I am He Rong, don't kill me!

古文：太祖驰骑取之，并取怀宝等数十人，降其卒三千余人。
现代文：梁太祖驱马将贺瓖抓来，同时捉到何怀宝等数十人，降服他们的士兵三千多人。
English: Liang Taizu drove a horse to capture He Qi, and at the same time caught dozens of people such as He Huai Bao, and subdued more than three thousand of their soldiers.

古文：是日，大风扬沙蔽天，太祖曰： 天怒我杀人少邪？ 
现代文：这天，大风吹起沙尘遮天蔽日，梁太祖说： 老天愤怒我杀人太少嚼？ 
English: On this day, when a strong wind blew up sand and dust to cover the sky, Liang Taizu said: "God is angry with me for killing too few people?

古文：即尽杀降卒三千人，而系瑰及怀宝等至兗城下以招瑾，瑾不纳，因斩怀宝等十余人，而独留瑰。
现代文：于是杀死投降的全部士兵三千人，然后捆着贺瓖和何怀宝等人到充城下招降朱瑾，朱瑾不让他们进城，于是斩杀何怀宝等十多人，只留下贺瓖。
English: He then killed all three thousand soldiers who had surrendered, and then he tied up He Ying and He Huai Bao and others and went to Mincheng to invite Zhu Xi to surrender. Zhu Xi would not let them enter the city, so he killed more than ten people, including He Huai Bao, leaving only He Ying.

古文：瑰感太祖不杀，誓以身自效。
现代文：贺瓖感激梁太祖不杀之恩，发誓用生命为梁太祖效力。
English: He Ying thanked Liang Taizu for not killing him, and vowed to serve Liang Taizu with his life.

古文：从太祖平青州，以为曹州刺史。
现代文：跟随梁太祖平定青州，任命为曹州刺史。
English: He followed Liang Taizu in pacifying Qingzhou, and was appointed as the chief historian of Caozhou.

古文：太祖即位，累迁相州刺史。
现代文：梁太祖登位，历次升迁至相州刺史。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, and his successive promotions to Sangju were recorded in history.

古文：末帝时，迁左龙虎统军，宣义军节度使。
现代文：梁末帝时，升任左龙虎统军，宣义军节度使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Liang Mucu, he was promoted to the United Front of the Left Dragon and the Tiger, and became an envoy of the Revolutionary Army.

古文：贞明元年，魏兵乱，贺德伦降晋，晋王入魏州。
现代文：贞明元年，魏兵叛乱，贺德伦向晋投降，晋王进入魏州。
English: In the first year of the Zhenming Dynasty, Wei soldiers rebelled, Hedren surrendered to Jin, and Jin entered Wei.

古文：刘掞败于故元城，走黎阳，贝、卫、洺、磁诸州皆入于晋。
现代文：刘郭在旧元城被打败，逃到黎阳，贝、卫、沼、磁各州都归属晋。
English: Liu Guo was defeated in the old Yuancheng and fled to Liyang. Bei, Wei, Numa and Magong all belonged to Jin.

古文：晋军取杨刘，末帝乃以瑰为招讨使，与谢彦章等屯于行台。
现代文：晋军攻取杨刘，梁末帝于是任命贺瓖为招讨使，和谢彦章等人屯驻在行台。
English: The Jin army captured Yang Liu, and Emperor Liang appointed He Qian as the envoy, and Xie Yanzhang and others were stationed in Xingtai.

古文：晋军迫瑰十里而栅，相持百余日。
现代文：晋军逼近贺瓖，仅距十里地筑栅扎寨，双方对峙一百多天。
English: The Jin army approached Hezhen, only ten miles away, built a fence and encampment, and the two sides faced off for more than a hundred days.

古文：瑰与彦章有隙，伏甲杀之，庄宗喜曰： 将帅不和，梁亡无日矣！ 
现代文：贺瓖和谢彦章有矛盾，伏兵杀掉他，晋庄宗高兴地说： 将帅不和，梁就快灭亡了！ 
English: He Shao and Xie Yan Zhang had a conflict, the ambush killed him, and Jin Zhuozong said happily: If the generals do not get along, Liang will soon perish!

古文：乃令军中归其老疾于鄴，以轻兵袭濮州。
现代文：于是命令军队把老弱病残的人送回邺，率领轻兵袭击濮州。
English: Therefore, he ordered the army to send the old, weak and sick people back to Ganzhou, and led the light soldiers to attack Ganzhou.

古文：瑰自行台蹑之，战于胡柳陂，晋人辎重在阵西，瑰军将薄之，晋军乱，斩其将周德威，尽取其辎重。
现代文：贺瓖从行台追踪他们，在胡柳陂发生战斗，晋人的辎重在战阵西面，贺瓖的军队快要逼近时，晋军大乱，梁军斩杀晋军将领周德威，全部夺取晋军的辎重。
English: He Xuan followed them from Xingtai, and a battle took place in Huliangye. The Jin's main force was in the west of the battle line. When He Xuan's army was about to approach, the Jin army was in chaos. Liang's army killed the Jin general Zhou Dewei and captured all of the Jin's main force.

古文：军已胜，阵无石山，日暮，晋兵仰攻之，瑰军下山击晋军，瑰大败，晋遂取濮州，城德胜，夹河为栅。
现代文：梁军胜利后，在无石山布阵，天黑时，晋军从山下进攻他们，贺瓖的军队下山出击晋军，贺瓖大败，晋于是夺取濮州，筑德胜城，在黄河两岸修筑棚寨。
English: After the victory of Liang's army, the Jin army attacked them from the bottom of the mountain when it was dark. He Bing's army went down the mountain to attack the Jin army, and He Bing was defeated. Jin then seized Zhangzhou, built De Sheng City, and built shanties on both sides of the Yellow River.

古文：瑰以舟兵攻南栅，不能得，还军行台，以疾卒，年六十二，赠侍中。
现代文：贺瓖派水兵进攻南面栅寨，没有成功，回师行台，因病而死，时年六十二岁，赠官侍中。
English: He Yao sent sailors to attack Nanmen Zhaozhai, but without success. He returned to Shigangdai and died of illness at the age of sixty-two. He was awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：有子光图。
现代文：有一个儿子甽贺光图。
English: He has a son, He Guangtu.

古文：○王檀王檀，字众美，京兆人也。
现代文：王檀字众美，京兆人。
English: Wang Dan Zi is very beautiful, and he is from Beijing.

古文：少事梁太祖为小校，尚让攻梁，战尉氏门，檀勇出诸将，太祖奇之，迁踏白副指挥使。
现代文：年轻时跟随梁太祖作小校，尚让进攻梁，在尉氏门作战，王檀勇猛超遇众将领，梁太祖觉得他很不寻常，升任踏白副指挥使。
English: When he was young, he followed Liang Taizu as a cadet. He was allowed to attack Liang and fought at the gate of the general. Wang Dang bravely overcame the generals. Liang Taizu thought he was very unusual and promoted him to deputy commander of Taibai.

古文：从硃珍募兵东方，战数有功。
现代文：跟随朱珍往东方招募士兵，多次立下战功。
English: He followed Zhu Zhen to the East to recruit soldiers, and made war exploits many times.

古文：梁与蔡兵战板桥，李重裔马踣，为蔡兵所擒，檀驰取之，并获其将一人。
现代文：梁和蔡州兵在板桥作战，李重裔的战马跌倒，被蔡州兵擒获，王檀驰马夺回，同时擒获蔡州将领一人。
English: Liang and Caizhou soldiers fought in Panqiao, Li Chongxiong's horse fell and was captured by Caizhou soldiers, Wang Dan's horse was recaptured, and one Caizhou general was captured.

古文：从太祖破魏内黄，迁冲山都虞候。
现代文：跟随梁太祖攻破魏内黄，升任衡山都虞候。
English: He followed Liang Taizu in defeating Wei Neihuang and was promoted to Hengshan Duyu.

古文：复从硃珍攻徐州，檀获其将一人。
现代文：又随朱珍进攻徐州，王檀擒获将领一人。
English: With Zhu Zhen's attack on Xuzhou, Wang Danzhang gained one general.

古文：梁兵攻王师范，檀以一军破其密州，拜密州刺史。
现代文：梁兵进攻王师范，王檀率领一支军队攻破密州，拜焉密州刺史。
English: Liang soldiers attacked Wang Shifan, Wang Dan led an army to break through Mizhou, and worshiped the history of Mizhou.

古文：太祖即位，迁保义军节度使，潞州东北面招讨使。
现代文：梁太祖登位，升任保义军节度使，潞州束北面招讨使。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, and was promoted to be the envoy of the Guoying People's Liberation Army and the envoy of the north side of Bozhou.

古文：王景仁败于柏乡，晋兵围邢州，太祖大惧，欲自将救之，檀止太祖，请自拒敌，力战，卒全邢州，以功加同中书门下平章事，进封琅琊郡王。
现代文：王景仁在柏乡被打败，晋军围攻邢州，梁太祖十分恐惧，打算亲自率兵救援邢州，王檀劝阻梁太祖，请求让自己去抗敌，奋力作战，终于保全了邢州，因功加授同中书门下平章事，进封为琅琊郡王。
English: Wang Jingren was defeated in Baoxiang, the Jin army besieged Luzhou, Liang Taizu was very afraid and planned to personally lead the troops to rescue Luzhou. Wang Dan dissuaded Liang Taizu, asked him to resist the enemy, fought hard, and finally preserved Luzhou. Due to his efforts, he was awarded the title of King of Luzhou.

古文：友珪立，徙镇宣化。
现代文：朱友珪登位，调任镇守宣化军。
English: Zhu Youjun ascended to the throne and was transferred to the town guard of the Xuanhua Army.

古文：贞明元年又徙匡国。
现代文：贞明元年又调任匡国军。
English: In the first year of the Zhenming Dynasty, he was transferred to the Kuangguo Army.

古文：是时，庄宗取魏博，檀以谓晋兵悉在河北，乃以奇兵西出阴地袭太原，不克而还。
现代文：这时，唐庄宗攻取魏博，王檀认为晋军全部在河北，于是率领奇兵西出阴地袭击太原，役能攻克而返回。
English: At this time, Tang Zhuangzong captured Weibo. Wang Dan thought that the Jin army was all in Hebei, so he led the strange soldiers to attack Taiyuan from the west, and returned after defeating the enemy.

古文：徙镇天平，檀尝招纳亡盗居帐下，帐下兵乱，入杀檀，年五十八，赠太师，谥曰忠毅。
现代文：调任镇守天平军，王檀曾经招收逃亡的盗贼作部下，他们发动兵变，入室杀死王檀，王檀当时五十八岁，赠官太师，溢号忠毅。
English: Transferred to the town guard of the Tianping Army, Wang Dan once recruited fugitive thieves as subordinates, they launched a mutiny, entered the house and killed Wang Dan. Wang Dan was fifty-eight years old at the time, awarded the title of Grand Master, and was extremely loyal.

古文：○马嗣勋马嗣勋，濠州钟离人也，少事州为客将，为人材武有辩。
现代文：马嗣勋，濠州锺离人，年轻时在州中作客将，为人文武双全、能言善辩。
English: Ma Shih-hun, a native of Luzhou, was a guest in Luzhou when he was young. He was both a man of letters and a man of words.

古文：梁太祖攻濠州，刺史张遂遣嗣勋持牌印降梁。
现代文：梁太祖进攻濠州，刺史张遂派遣马嗣勋手持牌印向梁投降。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Zhangzhou, and Zhang Shishi sent Ma Shihun to surrender to Liang, holding a signboard.

古文：杨行密攻遂，遂又使嗣勋乞兵于太祖。
现代文：杨行密进攻张遂，张遂又派马嗣勋向梁太祖请求援兵。
English: Yang Xingmi attacked Zhang Sui, and Zhang Sui sent Ma Shuxun to request reinforcements from Liang Taizu.

古文：梁兵未至，濠州已没，嗣勋无所归，乃留事梁，太祖以为宣武军元从押衙。
现代文：梁兵还没到，濠州已经覆没，马嗣勋无处可去，于是留下来在梁做事，梁太祖任命他为宣武军元从押衙。
English: Liang soldiers had not yet arrived, Luzhou had already disappeared, Ma Shixun had nowhere to go, so he stayed to work in Liang. Liang Taizu appointed him as the commander of the Xuanwu army.

古文：太祖西攻凤翔，行至华州，遣嗣勋入说韩建，建即时出降。
现代文：梁太祖向西进攻凤翔，行进到华州时，派马嗣勋入城游说韩建，韩建立即出城投降。
English: When Liang Taizu attacked Fengxiang to the west and marched to Huazhou, he sent Ma Shihun into the city to lobby Han Jian, and Han Jian immediately left the city to surrender.

古文：天祐二年，罗绍威将诛牙军，乞兵于梁，梁女嫁魏，适死，太祖乃遣嗣勋以长直千人为彩舆入魏，致兵器于舆中，声言助葬。
现代文：天佑二年，罗绍威准备诛杀牙军，向梁请求援兵，梁的公主嫁给了魏，刚刚死去，梁太祖于是派遣马嗣勋率领长直一千人造成彩车进入魏，把兵器放在彩车中，声称协助葬事。
English: In the second year of Heaven's blessing, Roshauwei was preparing to kill the Fang army and asked Liang for reinforcements. Liang's princess had married Wei and had just died. Liang Taizu then sent Ma Shihun to lead a thousand people to cause a float to enter Wei, put weapons in the float, and claimed to assist in the funeral.

古文：嗣勋馆铜台，夜与魏新乡镇兵攻石柱门，入迎绍威家属，卫之。
现代文：马嗣勋住在铜台，夜晚和魏镇守新乡的军队进攻石柱门，入城接出罗绍威的家属，严加保护。
English: Ma Shih-hun lived in Tongtai. At night, the troops of Wei Zhen guarding Xinxiang attacked Shizhu Gate. They entered the city to pick up the family members of Roshowe and protected them strictly.

古文：乃益取魏甲兵攻牙军，牙军不知兵所从来，莫能为备，杀其八千余人，迟明皆尽。
现代文：于是又夺取魏出武器进攻牙军，牙军不知敌兵从何而来，没有人能够防备，杀死牙军八千多人，天快亮时牙军全都被杀。
English: So Wei took out his weapons and attacked the Yaga army. The Yaga army did not know where the enemy soldiers came from, and no one was able to defend themselves. They killed more than eight thousand of the Yaga army. By dawn, all of the Yaga army had been killed.

古文：嗣勋中重疮卒。
现代文：马嗣勋受重伤而死。
English: Ma Shih-hun was seriously injured and died.

古文：太祖即位，赠太保。
现代文：梁太祖登位，赠官太保。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne and bestowed the title of Grand Marshal.

古文：○王虔裕
现代文：王虔裕，琅琊临沂人。
English: Wang Qianyu, the star of the film.

古文：王虔裕，琅琊临沂人也。
现代文：为人矫健勇猛，擅长骑马射箭，靠打猎谋生。
English: They are strong and brave, good at horseback riding and archery, and make a living by hunting.

古文：为人健勇善骑射，以弋猎为生。少从诸葛爽起青、棣间，其后爽为汝州防御使，率兵北击沙陀，还入长安攻黄巢。爽兵败降巢，巢以爽为河阳节度使。
现代文：年轻时跟随诸葛爽在青、棣二州间起兵，后来诸葛爽任汝州防御使，率兵向北攻击沙陀，返回时进入长安进攻黄巢，诸葛爽的军队被打败向黄巢投降，黄巢任命诸葛爽为河阳节度使。
English: When he was young, he followed Zhuge Shuang to raise an army between the two states of Qing and Qin. Later, Zhuge Shuang was appointed as the defense envoy of Ruzhou and led the army to the north to attack Shatou. When he returned, he entered Chang'an to attack Huang Chao. Zhuge Shuang's army was defeated and surrendered to Huang Chao. Huang Chao appointed Zhuge Shuang as the Kheyang Festival envoy.

古文：中和三年，孙儒陷河阳，虔裕随爽奔于梁。
现代文：中和三年，孙儒攻陷河阳，王虔裕跟随诸葛爽投奔到梁。
English: In the middle and third years, Sun Ru conquered Heyang, and Wang Qianyu followed Zhuge Shuang to Liang.

古文：是时，太祖新就镇，黄巢、秦宗权等兵方盛，太祖数为所窘，而梁未有佗将，乃以虔裕将骑兵，常为先锋击巢陈、蔡间，拔其数栅。巢走，梁兵蹑之，战于万胜戍，贼败而东，虔裕功为多，乃表虔裕义州刺史。
现代文：这时，梁太祖刚刚镇守汴州，黄巢、秦宗权等人正是兵力强盛，梁太祖与他们作战中多次陷入困境，但梁没有别的将领，于是让王虔裕统率骑兵，曾经作为先锋在陈、蔡二州间攻击黄巢，铲除黄巢的几个栅寨，黄巢逃跑，梁军追击，在万胜戍作战，黄巢军被打败向东逃跑，王虔裕的功劳最大，于是表奏王虔裕为义州刺史。
English: At this time, Liang Taizu had just taken over the defense of Luzhou. Huang Chao, Qin Zongquan, and others had a strong military force. Liang Taizu got into trouble many times in battle with them, but Liang had no other generals. Therefore, he ordered Wang Qianyu to lead the cavalry. As a pioneer, he attacked Huang Chao between Chen and Cai, and eliminated several of Huang Chao's fortresses. Huang Chao fled, and Liang's army pursued him. They fought in Wansheng. Huang Chao's army was defeated and fled to the east. Wang Qianyu's contribution was the greatest, so

古文：黄巢已去，秦宗权攻许、郑，与梁为敌境，大小百余战，虔裕常有功。
现代文：黄巢逃离后，秦宗权进攻许、郑二州，和梁作为敌对双方交界，大小战斗一百多次，王虔裕常有战功。
English: After fleeing Huang Chao, Qin Zongquan attacked Xu, Zheng Erzhou, and Liang as enemies at the border. There were more than a hundred battles between the two sides, and Wang Qianyu often had military achievements.

古文：秦贤攻汴南境，太祖遣虔裕拒贤于尉氏，战败，失一裨将，太祖怒，拘虔裕于军中。
现代文：秦宗贤进攻汴州南部地区，梁太祖派王虔裕在尉氏抵抗秦宗贤，王虔裕战败，损失一名副将，梁太祖发怒，把王虔裕拘禁在军队中。
English: Qin Zongxian attacked the southern region of Ganzhou. Liang Taizu sent Wang Qianyu as a lieutenant to resist Qin Zongxian. Wang Qianyu was defeated and lost a vice-general. Liang Taizu was angry and detained Wang Qianyu in the army.

古文：邢州孟迁降梁，为晋人所围，太祖遣虔裕以精兵百人疾驰，夜破晋围，入邢州，迟明，立梁旗帜于城上，晋人以为救兵至，乃退。
现代文：邢州孟迁向梁投降，被晋人围困，梁太祖派王虔裕率精兵一百人飞驰救援，趁夜冲破晋的包围，进入邢州，天快亮时，在城上树起梁的旗帜，晋人以为救兵到了，于是撤退。
English: Bozhou Mengqian surrendered to Liang and was besieged by the Jin. Liang's great-grandfather sent Wang Qianyu and a hundred elite soldiers to the rescue, taking advantage of the night to break through the encirclement of Jin and enter Bozhou. When it was almost dawn, Liang's flag was raised on the city. The Jin thought that the rescue had arrived, so they retreated.

古文：已而晋兵复来，迁执虔裕降于晋，见杀。
现代文：不久晋兵又卷土重来，孟迁拘捕王虔裕向晋投降，王虔裕被杀。
English: The Jin soldiers soon returned, and Meng Qian arrested Wang Qianyu, who surrendered to the Jin. Wang Qianyu was killed.

古文：○谢彦章
现代文：谢彦章，许州人。
English: Xie Yanzhang, a native of Xuzhou.

古文：谢彦章，许州人也。幼事葛从周，从周怜其敏惠，养以为子，授之兵法，从周以千钱置大盘中，为行阵偏伍之状，示以出入进退之节，彦章尽得之。
现代文：小时候跟随葛从周，葛从周欣赏他的机敏聪明，把他作为儿子抚养，向他傅授兵法，葛从周把一千贯钱放在大盘子中，摆成各种战阵，向他展示军队出入进退的法度，谢彦章全都掌握了。
English: When he was a child, he followed Ge Cong Zhou. Ge Cong Zhou appreciated his cleverness, raised him as his son, and taught him military tactics. Ge Cong Zhou put a thousand crowns of money in a large plate, arranged them into various battle lines, and showed him the rules for the entry and exit of troops. Xie Yanzhang mastered them all.

古文：及壮，事梁太祖为骑将。
现代文：到长大成人后，跟随梁太祖做骑将。
English: After he became an adult, he followed Liang Taizu as a cavalry general.

古文：是时，贺瑰善用步卒，而彦章与孟审澄、侯温裕皆善将骑兵，审澄、温裕所将不过三千，彦章多而益办。
现代文：这时，贺瓖擅长使用步兵，而谢彦章和孟审澄、侯温裕都擅长统率骑兵，孟审澄、侯温裕率领的骑兵不过三干人，谢彦章的骑兵多而且统领得更好。
English: At this time, He Xuan was good at using infantry, while Xie Yanzhang, Meng Xianzhen and Hou Wenyu were all good at leading cavalry. The cavalry led by Meng Xianzhen and Hou Wenyu was only three strong, while Xie Yanzhang had more cavalry and led it better.

古文：彦章事末帝，累迁匡国军节度使。
现代文：谢彦章跟随梁末帝，历次升迁至匡国军节度使。
English: Xie Yanzhang followed Emperor Liangmu and was repeatedly promoted to the commander of the Kuangguo Army.

古文：贞明四年，晋攻河北，贺瑰为北面招讨使，彦章为排阵使，屯于行台。
现代文：贞明四年，晋进攻河北，贺瓖任北面招讨使，谢彦章任排阵使，屯驻在行台。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenming, Jin attacked Hebei, He Ying served as the north side recruiting envoy, Xie Yan Zhang served as the platoon envoy, stationed in Xingtai.

古文：彦章为将，好礼儒士，虽居军中，尝儒服，或临敌御众，肃然有将帅之威，左右驰骤，疾若风雨。
现代文：谢彦章作将领，喜欢礼待儒生，虽然在军队中，常穿儒生衣服，一旦面对敌人统领士兵，举止威严，有将帅的仪容，左右奔驰，如风雨般迅猛。
English: As a general, Xie Yanzhang likes to treat Confucian students with courtesy, although in the army, he often wears Confucian clothes. Once he faces the enemy and leads the soldiers, he behaves majestically, has the appearance of a general, and runs around like the wind and rain.

古文：晋人望其行阵齐整，相谓曰： 谢彦章必在此也！ 
现代文：晋人望见他军阵整齐，相互说道： 谢彦章一定在这里！ 
English: When the Jin people saw his army arrayed neatly, they said to each other: Xie Yanzhang must be here!

古文：其名重敌中如此。
现代文：他的威名在敌军中就是这样有分量。
English: His reputation thus carried weight with the enemy.

古文：瑰心忌之。彦章与瑰行视郊外，瑰指一地语彦章曰： 此地冈阜隆起，其中坦然，营栅之地也。 
现代文：贺瓖心里产生猜忌，当谢彦章和贺瓖在郊外巡视时，贺瓖指着一个地方对谢彦章说： 这个地方山冈隆起，中问却很平坦，是筑栅安营的好地方。 
English: When Xie Yanzhang and He Yanzhang were on a tour of the suburbs, He Yanzhang pointed to a place and said to Xie Yanzhang, "This place is uplifted by mountains and hills, but it is very flat in the middle. It is a good place to build a fence and camp."

古文：已而晋兵栅之，瑰疑彦章阴以告晋，益恶之。
现代文：不久晋军在这里筑栅，贺瓖疑心是谢彦章暗中告诉了晋人，更加讨厌他。
English: Soon the Jin army was building a fence here, and He Ying suspected that Xie Yan Zhang had secretly told the Jin people, and hated him even more.

古文：彦章故与马步都虞候硃珪有隙，瑰欲速战，彦章请持重以老敌，珪乃诬彦章以为将反。
现代文：谢彦章原来和马步都虞候朱珪有矛盾，贺瓖想速战速决，谢彦章请求稳重行事拖垮敌军，朱珪于是诬告谢彦章，认为他将要反叛。
English: Originally, Xie Yanzhang had a conflict with Ma Bu Du Yu and Zhu Xi. He Yanzhang wanted a quick battle and a quick decision. Xie Yanzhang asked for steady action to defeat the enemy army. Zhu Xi then falsely accused Xie Yanzhang, thinking that he would rebel.

古文：瑰旦享士，使珪伏甲杀之，审澄、温裕皆见害。
现代文：贺瓖早上宴飨兵士，派朱珪埋伏士兵杀死谢彦章，孟审澄、侯温裕都被害。
English: In the morning, He Zheng feasted on the soldiers and sent Zhu Xi to ambush the soldiers to kill Xie Yan Zhang. Meng Xuizheng and Hou Wenyu were both killed.

