古文：凡与敌战，士卒前进而不敢退后，是畏我而不畏敌也；若敢退而不敢进者，是畏敌而不畏我也。
现代文：大凡对敌作战，士卒之所以奋勇前进而不敢后退的，是由于畏惧将帅的威严而不畏惧敌人的缘故；如果敢于后退而不敢前进的，那是由于畏惧敌人而不畏惧将帅的缘故。
English: In a great battle against the enemy, the reason why the soldiers courageously advance and do not dare to retreat is because they are afraid of the commander's majesty and are not afraid of the enemy; if they dare to retreat and do not dare to advance, it is because they are afraid of the enemy and are not afraid of the commander.

古文：将使士卒赴汤蹈火而不违者，是威严使然也。
现代文：将帅命令士卒赴场蹈火而不敢违抗的，是由于威严的军纪促使他们这样做的。
English: If a general orders his men to march into the field and fire, and they do not dare to disobey, it is because of the strict discipline of the army that forces them to do so.

古文：法曰： 威克厥爱，允济。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 威严的军纪克服了单纯的怜爱，作战就会取得成功。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: When the military discipline of majesty overcomes the love of mercy, the battle will be a success.

古文：春秋，齐景公时，晋伐阿、鄄，而燕侵河上，齐师败绩。晏婴乃荐田穰苴，曰： 穰苴虽田氏庶孽，然其人文能附众、武能威敌，愿君试之。 
现代文：齐景公一直很忧虑这件事情。大臣晏婴为此而向景公推荐田穰苴，说： 穰苴虽然是田氏门中偏房所生，可是此人论文韬能使众人归服，论武略可以使敌人畏惧。希望君王可以试着任用他。 
English: Lord Qi Jing had always been worried about this matter. For this reason, Minister Zou Ying recommended Tian Yao to Lord Jing, saying, "Although Zou was born to a member of the middle echelon of the Tian clan, this man can make everyone submit, and his military strategy can make enemies afraid. I hope the king can try to appoint him."

古文：景公乃召穰苴，与语兵事，大悦之，以为将军，将兵捍燕、晋之师。
现代文：景公于是召见田穰苴，同他谈论用兵之事，非常高兴，就任命他为将军率兵抗击燕、晋入侵军。
English: King Jing then summoned Tian Xuan to discuss the matter of using soldiers with him. He was very pleased and appointed him as a general to lead the troops to fight against the invading Yan and Jin armies.

古文：穰苴曰： 臣素卑贱，君擢之闾伍之中，加之大夫之上，士卒未附，百姓不亲，人微权轻，愿得君之宠臣、国之所尊，以监军，乃可。 
现代文：穰苴受任后，对景公说： 我本人一向地位低下，君王突然把我从平民中提拔起来，加官于大夫之上，士兵不会服从，百姓不会亲近。人的地位低微就没有权威可言，因此，请求派一个为君王所宠信、全国所尊崇的人来作监军，才可以统军作战。 
English: After being appointed, Zou said to King Jing: I myself have always been low in status. The king suddenly promoted me from the commoners and made me higher than the doctor. The soldiers would not obey, and the people would not get close to me. There is no authority to speak of when one's status is low. Therefore, I request that a person who is favored by the king and respected throughout the country be sent to supervise the army, so that the army can be unified and fight.

古文：于是景公许之，使庄贾往。
现代文：于是，景公答应了他的请求，派宠臣庄贾为监军。
English: As a result, Jing Gong agreed to his request and sent his favorite vassal Zhuang Jia to supervise the troops.

古文：穰苴既辞，与庄贾约： 旦日日中会于军门。 
现代文：田穰苴辞别了齐景公，与庄贾约定说： 明天中午于军营门会齐。 
English: Tian Xuan said goodbye to Qi Jing Gong, and agreed with Zhuang Jia: Tomorrow at noon, they will meet at the military camp gate.

古文：穰苴先驰至军中，立表下漏待贾。
现代文：第二天，穰苴先赶到军营，设置了测日影的标竿和计时间的漏壶，以等待庄贾的到来。
English: The next day, Zou arrived at the military camp ahead of Zhuang Jia, and set up a sunshade measuring rod and a time measuring jug to wait for Zhuang Jia's arrival.

古文：贾素骄贵，以为将己之军而己为监，不甚急，亲戚左右送之，留饮，日中而贾不至。
现代文：庄贾向以显贵而骄横，这次又认为穰苴所率士卒是他自己的军队，而他自己又是君王委派的监军，故对如约赴军之事不很着急在意。亲戚朋友为他送行，留他宴饮，到了中午时分他还没有到达军营。
English: Zhuang Jiaxiang was proud of being a dignitary, and this time he thought that the soldiers led by the commander were his own army, and he himself was the supervisor of the army appointed by the king, so he was not very anxious about going to the army as promised. Relatives and friends saw him off, kept him feasting, and by noon he had not yet arrived at the military camp.

古文：穰苴则仆表决漏，入，行军勒兵，申明约束。
现代文：田穰苴便放倒测影标竿，撤掉计时漏壶，然后进入军营，检阅队伍，指挥士兵，宣布军纪。
English: He knocked down the wooden watch, broke the leaking pot, entered the military camp, inspected the camp, rectified the army, and announced various rules and orders.

古文：既定，夕时，贾乃至。
现代文：部署完毕，待到傍晚时分，庄贾才来到军营。
English: After the deployment was completed, Zhuang Jia did not come to the military camp until the evening.

古文：穰苴曰： 何为后期？ 
现代文：田穰苴质问庄贾说： 为什么过了约定时间才到？ 
English: Tian Qi questioned Zhuang Jia and said: Why did you arrive after the agreed time?

古文：贾对曰： 不佞，大夫亲戚送之，故留。 
现代文：庄贾满不在乎地回答道： 不才受大臣和亲戚们盛情饯行，故留饮有所耽搁。 
English: Zhuang Jia Man replied indifferently, "It's not just because the minister and his relatives are lavish with their hospitality that there's a delay in serving drinks.

古文：穰苴曰： 将受命之日则忘其家，临阵约束则忘其亲，援枹鼓之急则忘其身。
现代文：穰苴厉声指斥说： 身为将帅，接受命令的那一天，就应忘掉自己的家庭；亲临战阵指挥部队，就应忘掉自己的父母；擂鼓进击的紧急时刻，就应忘掉自己的生命。
English: "As a general, the day you receive an order, you should forget your family; when you lead troops in battle, you should forget your parents; when the war drums are beating, you should forget your life," he said.

古文：今敌国深侵，邦内骚动，士卒暴露于境，君寝不安席，食不甘味，百姓之命皆悬于君，何谓相送乎？ 
现代文：如今，敌人侵入我国内地，国内人心动荡，士卒们日晒夜露于边境之上，君王为此睡不安稳，吃不香甜，百姓的性命都系在你的手里，还说什么送行呢？ 
English: Today, the enemy has invaded our homeland, the hearts of our people are in turmoil, the soldiers are exposed to the sun and night on the border, the monarchs sleep uneasily because of this, the food is not delicious, the lives of the people are in your hands, what else to say about the send-off?

古文：召军正问曰： 军法，期而后至者云何？ 
现代文：说罢，就把军法官叫来，问道： 军法上对于约期而迟到的人，规定该怎样处置？ 
English: Having said that, he called in the military judge and asked: What does military law say should be done with a person who is late for an appointment?

古文：对曰： 当斩。 
现代文：军法官回答说： 应当处斩。 
English: The military judge replied: "He should be beheaded."

古文：贾惧，使人驰报景公，请救。
现代文：庄贾这时才感到害怕起来，并立即派人飞马报告齐景公，请求解救。
English: It was only then that Zhuang Jia felt afraid, and immediately sent Fei Ma to report to Qi Jing Gong and request rescue.

古文：既往，未及返，于是遂斩庄贾以徇三军。
现代文：庄贾派出的人尚未返回时，田穰苴已按军法将庄贾斩首示众了。
English: When the person sent by Zhuang Jia had not yet returned, Tian Yu had already beheaded Zhuang Jia in accordance with military law.

古文：三军皆震栗。
现代文：全军将士都震惊战栗不已。
English: The entire army was shocked and trembling.

古文：久之，景公遣使持节赦贾，使驰入军中，穰苴曰： 将在军，君命有所不受。 
现代文：过了好久，齐景公所派使者手持符节乘车来救庄贾，径直冲入军营。田穰苴对使者说： 将领在军中执行军务，君王的命令有的可以不接受。 
English: After a long time, the Qiqing Public Security Bureau sent an emissary to rescue Zhuang Jia by car with a rune in hand and rushed straight into the military camp. Tian Qi said to the emissary: Generals carry out military affairs in the army, and some of the king's orders can not be accepted.

古文：问军正曰： 军中不驰，今使者驰云何？ 
现代文：他又问军法官，说： 军营中不准车马驰入，如今使者这样干，军法规定该怎样办？ 
English: He also asked the military judge, saying: "Cars and horses are not allowed to enter the military camp. Now the envoy is doing this. What should be done according to the military law?

古文：对曰： 当斩。 
现代文：军法官回答说： 应当处斩。 
English: The military judge replied: "He should be beheaded."

古文：使者大惧。
现代文：使者一听大为恐惧。
English: The messenger was terrified.

古文：穰苴曰： 君之使不可杀之。 
现代文：但田穰苴却说： 君王的使者是不可以杀掉的。 
English: Zou said: The emissary of the sovereign cannot be beheaded.

古文：乃杀其仆、车之左驸、马之左骖，以徇三军。
现代文：于是，就斩了使者的仆人、砍断车子左边的车辕、杀了左边驾车的马匹，并向全军示众。
English: So they beheaded the messenger's servant, cut off the cart on the left side of the cart, and killed the horses that were driving on the left side of the cart.

古文：遣使者还报，然后行。
现代文：田穰苴让使者还报齐景公，然后又继续布置军务。
English: Tian Qi asked the envoy to report to Qi Jing, and then continued to arrange military affairs.

古文：士卒次舍、井灶、饮食、问疾、医药，身自拊循之。
现代文：对于部队的行军宿营、掘井埋灶、士卒伙食、看病吃药等事宜，田穰苴都亲自过问和布置。
English: For matters such as the troops' marching camps, digging wells and burying stoves, feeding the soldiers, seeing the sick and taking medicine, Tian Yu personally inquired and arranged.

古文：悉取将军之资粮，以享士卒，身与士卒平分粮食。
现代文：他还把自己那份官俸粮饷全部拿出来，供士卒们享用，自己同士卒一样平分粮食，特别是照顾到那些体弱有病的士卒。
English: He also took out all of his share of the government-paid rations for the officers and men to enjoy, and he divided the grain equally among the officers and men, especially taking care of those who were weak and sick.

古文：最比其羸弱者，三日而后勒兵。病者皆求行，争奋出为之赴战。
现代文：三天之后率军出发，生病的士卒都请求跟随部队一同出征，大家奋勇争先地为报答将军的关怀而去战斗。
English: Three days later, he led the army to set out, and the sick soldiers all asked to follow the troops to go to war together. Everyone fought bravely to repay the general's care and go to battle.

古文：晋师闻之，为罢去；燕师闻之，渡河而解。
现代文：晋军听到这个消息后，便撤兵而去；燕国听到这个消息后，也渡过黄河向北撤走，齐国的危急得以解除。
English: After hearing this news, the Jin army withdrew; after hearing this news, Yan also crossed the Yellow River and withdrew to the north, and the crisis in Qi was resolved.

古文：于是，穰苴乃率众追击之，遂取所亡邦内故境，率兵而归。
现代文：田穰苴挥军追击，收复了国土，率军凯旋而归。
English: Tian Xuan led the army in pursuit, regained the land, and led the army to a triumphant return.

