古文：温造，字简舆，河内人。
现代文：温造字简舆，河内人。
English: He is a native of Hanoi.

古文：祖景倩，南郑令。
现代文：祖父温景倩，南郑县令。
English: His grandfather, Wen Jingyao, was the governor of Nan Zheng County.

古文：父辅国，太常丞。
现代文：父温辅国，太常丞。
English: His father, Wen Shuo Guo, was the Grand Chancellor.

古文：造幼嗜学，不喜试吏，自负节概，少所降志，隐居王屋，以渔钓逍遥为事。
现代文：温造幼小好学，不喜应试做官，以节操气度自负，少小立下志向，愿隐居王屋山，以渔钓逍遥为生。
English: Warm-hearted, eager to learn at a young age, not willing to try to become an official, self-assured with self-restraint, aspiring to stand up at a young age, willing to live in seclusion on Wangyashan and make a living by fishing.

古文：寿州刺史张建封闻风致书币招延，造欣然谓所亲曰： 此可人也。 
现代文：寿州刺史张建封闻其名致书信钱财聘请他，温造欣然对家人说： 这是位了不起的人。 
English: When Zhang Jianfeng, the governor of Shoushu, heard of his name and sent a letter asking for money to hire him, Wenzo gladly said to his family: This is a great man.

古文：徙家从之。
现代文：于是举家迁至寿州跟从张建封。
English: As a result, the whole family moved to Shoushu to follow Zhang Jianfeng.

古文：建封动静咨询，而不敢縻以职任。
现代文：张建封凡事皆请教他，但不敢以职任束缚他。
English: Zhang Jianfeng asked him for advice in everything, but he did not dare to bind him with his position.

古文：及建封授节彭门，造归下邳，有高天下之心。
现代文：及至张建封授节彭门，温造回到下邳，有超脱尘世之心。
English: As far as Zhang Jianfeng's conferment of the festival Pengmen, Wen Zou returned to the lower jaw, with a transcendent heart.

古文：建封恐一旦失造，乃以兄女妻之。
现代文：张建封担心有一天会失去温造，便将兄长之女嫁给温造为妻。
English: Zhang Jianfeng feared that one day he would lose Unzo, so he married his brother's daughter to Unzo as his wife.

古文：时李希烈方悖，侵寇籓邻，屡陷郡邑。
现代文：此时李方烈正逆反，侵犯相邻州郡，屡次攻陷郡邑。
English: At this time, Li Fanglie was on the contrary, invading neighboring counties and repeatedly capturing counties.

古文：天下城镇恃兵者，从而动摇，多逐主帅，自立留后，邀求节钺。
现代文：天下各城镇掌握兵权者，随之心猿意马，大多驱逐了主帅，自任留后，要挟朝廷赐给节旄斧钺。
English: Those who held military power in towns all over the world followed their hearts and minds, and most of them expelled the commander-in-chief. After staying in office, they threatened the court to give the commander-in-chief the axe.

古文：德宗患之，以范阳刘济方输忠款，但未能尽达朝廷倚赖之意；与密诏建封选特达识略之士往喻之。
现代文：德宗因此忧惧，恰值范阳刘济表示竭诚效忠，但未能最后表明足以让朝廷依靠的意思，于是密诏张建封挑选才识谋略卓异之人前往沟通。
English: De Zong was worried about this. Just as Fan Yang Liu Ji expressed his wholehearted loyalty, but failed to finally show enough meaning for the imperial court to rely on, he secretly ordered Zhang Jianfeng to select a person with a brilliant strategy to communicate.

古文：建封乃强署造节度参谋，使于幽州。
现代文：张建封强行委任温造为节度参谋，派他出使幽州。
English: Zhang Jianfeng forcibly appointed Unzo as the chief of staff and sent him to Yuzhou.

古文：造与语未讫，济俯伏流涕曰： 济僻在遐裔，不知天子神圣，大臣忠荩。
现代文：温造同刘济谈话语犹未了，刘济俯伏流涕道： 济偏处远郡，不知天子神圣，大臣忠荩。
English: Wen Zong's conversation with Liu Jie was still in progress, and Liu Jie prostrated and said, "Jie is far away from the county, I don't know if he is divine, but the minister is loyal."

古文：愿得率先诸侯，效以死节。 
现代文：甘愿在诸将领之先，以死报效朝廷。 
English: He was willing to go ahead of the generals and serve the imperial court to the death.

古文：造还，建封以其名上闻。
现代文：温造回来，张建封将他的名字呈报朝廷。
English: When Wen Zong returned, Zhang Jianfeng reported his name to the imperial court.

古文：德宗爱其才，召至京师，谓之曰： 卿谁家子？
现代文：德宗爱其才，召至京师，对他说： 卿为谁家子弟？
English: Dezong loved his talent, summoned him to Beijing, and said to him: "Sir, who are your children?

古文：年复几何？ 
现代文：多大年龄？ 
English: How old are they?

古文：造对曰： 臣五代祖大雅，外五代祖李勣。
现代文：温造答道： 臣五代祖温大雅，外五代祖李责力。
English: Wen Zou replied: The five-generation ancestor Wen Daya, and the five-generation ancestor Li Youli.

古文：臣犬马之年三十有二。 
现代文：臣犬马之年三十又二。 
English: His vassal Inuma is thirty-two years old.

古文：德宗奇之，欲用为谏官，以语泄事寝。
现代文：德宗认为是个奇才，欲用为谏官，因言语间泄露意图而未成。
English: Dezong thought he was a wizard and wanted to use him as a eunuch, but his words betrayed his intentions and he did not succeed.

古文：长庆元年，授京兆府司录参军。
现代文：长庆元年，授京兆府司录参军。
English: In the first year of the Changqing era, he was awarded the title of Jingzhao Prefecture Secretary and joined the army.

古文：奉使河朔称旨，迁殿中侍御史。
现代文：奉使河朔传达圣旨，调任殿中侍御史。
English: He was sent by the emperor to convey the imperial edict, and was assigned to serve the emperor in the palace.

古文：既而幽州刘总请以所部九州听朝旨。穆宗选可使者，或荐造。帝召而谓之曰： 朕以刘总输忠，虽书诏便蕃，未尽朕之深意。
现代文：不久幽州刘总请以所辖之九州听候朝旨，穆宗欲挑选一个恰当的使者，有人推荐温造，皇上召见对他说道： 朕因刘总表达忠诚，虽然降诏外蕃也相宜，但不能充分表达朕之深意。
English: Soon, Emperor Yuzhou asked Liu Zong to wait for the imperial edict with the Kyushu under his jurisdiction. Mu Zong wanted to choose an appropriate messenger. Someone recommended Wen Zong. The emperor summoned him and said to him, "I express my loyalty because of Liu Zong. Although it is appropriate to issue an imperial edict, it cannot fully express my deep intention.

古文：以卿素能办事，为朕此行。 
现代文：因卿素来善于办事，替朕走一趟吧。 
English: Yingying has always been good at doing things, so take a trip for me.

古文：造对曰： 臣府县走吏，初受宪职，望轻事重，恐辱国命，无能谕旨。 
现代文：温造答道： 臣不过是府县跑腿小吏，初任要职，名望轻微差事重大，恐怕有辱国命，无能力传达旨意。 
English: Wen Zou replied, "A minister is nothing more than a prefectural errand boy. He is appointed to an important post for the first time, his reputation is insignificant, and his duties are important. I am afraid that he will disgrace the national destiny and will not be able to convey the will.

古文：帝曰： 我在东宫时，闻刘总请觐；及我即位，比年上书不绝，及约以行期，即喑默不报。
现代文：皇上说： 我在东宫时，听说刘总请求入觐，等到我即位，连年上书不断，及至约定入觐行期，却缄默不予答复。
English: The emperor said, "When I was in the East Palace, I heard that Liu Zong had requested to be enthroned. When I ascended the throne, I wrote letters to him year after year, and when it was time for him to be enthroned, he remained silent and did not reply.

古文：卿识机知变，往喻我怀，无多让也。 
现代文：卿善于见机应变，前去说明我之胸怀，不要多加辞让了。 
English: Sir is good at seizing the opportunity, go ahead and explain my mind, don't add more words.

古文：乃拜起居舍人，赐绯鱼袋，充太原、镇州、幽州宣谕使。
现代文：于是拜温造为起居舍人，赐绯衣银鱼袋，充任太原、镇州、幽州宣谕使。
English: Therefore, Bai Wen created him as a resident, gave him a silver fish bag, and appointed him as an envoy to Taiyuan, Zhenzhou, and Yuzhou.

古文：造初至范阳，刘总具櫜鞬郊迎；乃宣圣旨，示以祸福。
现代文：温造刚到范阳，刘总携弓带箭在郊外迎接，温造便宣布圣旨，讲明祸福得失。
English: As soon as Wen Zong arrived in Fanyang, Liu Zong took a bow and arrows to meet him in the suburbs. Wen Zong then declared his holy will, explaining the benefits and drawbacks.

古文：总俯伏流汗，若兵加于颈矣。
现代文：刘总俯伏流汗，仿佛兵刃加于脖颈之上一般。
English: Liu prostrated and sweated profusely, as if a soldier's blade had been applied to his neck.

古文：及造使还，总遂移家入觐，朝廷遂以张弘靖代之。
现代文：及至温造出使还朝，刘总便迁徙全家入觐，朝廷让张弘靖代理刘总之职。
English: When Emperor Wen made the envoy to return to China, Emperor Liu moved the whole family into the palace, and the imperial court asked Zhang Hongjing to act as the representative of Emperor Liu.

古文：及硃克融逐弘靖，镇州杀田弘正，朝廷用兵，乃先令造衔命河东、魏博、泽潞、横海、深冀、易定等道，喻以军期，事皆称旨。
现代文：及至朱克融驱逐张弘靖，镇州杀了田弘正，朝廷发兵征讨，于是先令温造携带诏命出使河东、魏博、泽潞、横海、深冀、易定等道，指定出兵期限，事情办得皆合皇上意旨。
English: When Zhu Ke Rong expelled Zhang Hongjing, Zhenzhou killed Tian Hong Zheng, and the imperial court sent troops to investigate, then Wen Zong, a shill, came with the imperial edict to send troops to the provinces of Hedong, Weibo, Zeyu, Henghai, Shenji, and Yiding, with a specified time limit, and everything was done in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：俄而坐与谏议大夫李景俭史馆饮酒，景俭醉谒丞相，出造为朗州刺史。
现代文：过了不久，一次与谏议大夫李景俭在史馆坐着饮酒，李景俭借醉谒见丞相，命温造出任朗州刺史。
English: Not long after, he once sat drinking with Li Jingjian, the doctor of the imperial edict, in the history museum. Li Jingjian borrowed a drunken eunuch to see the prime minister, and the eunuch served as a historian of Lanzhou.

古文：在任开后乡渠九十七里，溉田二千顷，郡人获利，乃名为右史渠。
现代文：在任期间开通后乡渠九十七里，灌溉农田二千顷，郡人得利，便取名为右史渠。
English: During his time in office, he opened the 97-mile Hougang Canal, irrigated 2,000 hectares of farmland, and the people of the county benefited, so it was named the Right Historical Canal.

古文：居四年，召拜侍御史，请复置弹事硃衣、豸冠于外廊，大臣阻而不行。
现代文：四年后，被召还拜侍御史，在外廊奏请重新赐给弹劾时所用朱衣、豸冠，因大臣阻止而未成。
English: Four years later, he was summoned to pay homage to the Imperial Household Agency's history by reciting in the outer gallery a request for the return of the vermilion robe and crown of thorns used at the time of his impeachment, but he was prevented from doing so by the minister.

古文：李祐自夏州入拜金吾，违制进马一百五十匹。
现代文：李佑自夏州入朝拜金吾，违制进奉马一百五十匹。
English: Li You from Xiazhou went to the imperial court to worship Kingu, and 150 horses were given to him in violation of regulations.

古文：造正衙弹奏，祐股战汗流。
现代文：温造在正衙宣政殿启奏弹劾，李佑两腿战栗汗流浃背。
English: Wen Zi opened the impeachment in the Zhengqi Xuanzheng Hall, and Li You's legs trembled and sweated.

古文：祐私谓人曰： 吾夜逾蔡州城擒吴元济，未尝心动，今日胆落于温御史。吁，可畏哉！ 
现代文：李佑私下对人说： 我黑夜翻越蔡州城擒吴元济，未曾心跳，今日被温御史吓破了胆。哎，可畏呀！ 
English: In private, Li You said to people: "I climbed Wu Yuanji, the castle tower of Caizhou, in the dark of night. I never had a heartbeat, but today I was scared out of my wits by Emperor Wen. Oh, how scary!

古文：迁左司郎中，再知杂事。
现代文：温造调任左司郎中，并知杂事。
English: Unzo was transferred to the middle of the left sergeant, and knew miscellaneous things.

古文：寻拜御史中丞。
现代文：不久拜御史中丞。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of goshi chujo.

古文：太和二年十一月，宫中昭德寺火。
现代文：大和二年十一月，宫中昭德寺失火。
English: In November of the 2nd year of the Yamato era, the Shōtoku-ji Temple in the Imperial Palace caught fire.

古文：寺在宣政殿东隔垣，火势将及，宰臣、两省、京兆尹、中尉、枢密，皆环立于日华门外，令神策兵士救之，晡后稍息。
现代文：寺在宣政殿东隔着墙垣，火势将延及宫殿，宰臣、两省、京兆尹、中尉、枢密，皆环立日华门外，令神策军士扑救，黄昏以后火势逐渐熄灭。
English: The temple is east of the palace, separated by a wall, and the fire will spread to the palace. The vice-minister, the two provinces, Jing Zhaoyun, the lieutenant, and the privy councillor all stand in a circle outside the Nichihua Gate. They are saved by the sergeant, and the fire is gradually extinguished after dusk.

古文：是日，唯台官不到。造奏曰： 昨宫中遗火，缘台有系囚，恐缘为奸，追集人吏堤防，所以至朝堂在后，臣请自罚三十直。
现代文：当天，惟有御史台官员未到，温造启奏道： 昨日宫中失火，只因台署有在押囚犯，耽心伺机作乱，紧急集合人吏加以戒备，所以至朝堂在众官之后，臣请自罚三十直。
English: On the same day, only the officials of the Imperial Historical Records Office did not arrive, and Wen Ziqi said: Yesterday, there was a fire in the palace, but because the Taiwan Affairs Office had prisoners in custody, they were worried about creating a disturbance, and urgently gathered personnel to be on the alert. Therefore, after the officials arrived at the morning hall, the minister asked for a thirty-day self-punishment.

古文：其两巡使崔蠡、姚合火灭方到，请别议责罚。 
现代文：其他两名巡使崔蠡、姚合火灭方到，请另议责罚。 
English: The other two rangers, Cui Wei and Yao He, came to extinguish the fire. Please discuss the punishment.

古文：敕曰： 事出非常，台有囚系，官曹警备，亦为周虑，即合待罪朝堂，候取进止。
现代文：皇上敕令说： 事出非常，台署有羁押囚犯，部署官吏警戒，亦属考虑周到，则应待罪于朝堂，听候处分。
English: The Emperor's edict said, "If the matter is so serious that the Taiwan Affairs Office has prisoners in custody and officials have been alerted, which is also considered, the offender should be detained in the Imperial Palace to await punishment."

古文：量罚自许，事涉乖仪。
现代文：酌情处罚是自己的请求，而且事情涉及违背礼仪。
English: The discretionary punishment is self-imposed, and the matter involves a breach of etiquette.

古文：温造、姚合、崔蠡各罚一月俸料。 
现代文：温造、姚合、崔蠡各罚一月俸禄及料钱。 
English: Unzo, Yaohe and Cui Hao were each fined one month's salary and fees.

古文：造性刚褊，人或激触，不顾贵势，以气凌藉。
现代文：温造秉性刚直，若有人激怒或触犯他，便不顾对方权势，必以气势相加。
English: If someone irritates or offends him, he will not care about the other party's power.

古文：尝遇左补阙李虞于街，怒其不避，捕祗承人决脊十下。左拾遗舒元褒等上疏论之曰： 国朝故事，供奉官街中，除宰相外，无所回避。
现代文：曾在大街上遇左补阙李虞仲，恼怒他不避让，拘捕李虞仲属下衙役处以脊杖十下，左拾遗舒元褒等上疏论奏道： 国朝旧例，供奉官在街上，除宰相外，无所回避。
English: He once met Li Yuzhong, a subordinate of Li Yuzhong, on the street. He was so angry that he did not avoid giving way. He arrested Li Yuzhong's subordinate with ten strokes of the cane. He was praised and praised. He said: In the old days of the country and the dynasty, there was no way to avoid the offering officer in the street, except for the prime minister.

古文：温造蔑朝廷典礼，凌陛下侍臣，恣行胸臆，曾无畏忌。
现代文：温造蔑视朝廷礼制，凌辱陛下侍臣，一意恣行，毫无畏忌。
English: He disdained the court etiquette, insulted his majesty's attendants, and acted arbitrarily without any fear.

古文：凡事有小而关分理者，不可失也。
现代文：凡事情虽小但涉及原则的，不可丧失原则。
English: In all matters, however small, involving principles, principles must not be lost.

古文：分理一失，乱由之生。
现代文：原则一失，变乱便由此产生。
English: Once the principle is lost, chaos will ensue.

古文：遗、补官秩虽卑，陛下侍臣也；中丞虽高，法吏也。
现代文：拾遗、补阙品位虽卑，是陛下的侍臣啊；中丞官阶虽高，是执法的官员。
English: Although they are low-ranking officials, they are His Majesty's attendants; although they are high-ranking officials, they are law enforcement officials.

古文：侍臣见凌，是不广敬；法吏坏法，何以持绳？
现代文：侍臣被凌辱，表明他不能敬守礼法；执法官吏毁坏礼法，又怎能掌握法律准绳？
English: If a courtier is insulted, it shows that he cannot respect the etiquette; if a magistrate destroys the etiquette, how can he grasp the legal standard?

古文：前时中书舍人李虞仲与造相逢，造乃曳去引马。
现代文：日前中书舍人李虞仲与温造相遇，温造便抓了李虞仲的导从。
English: A few days ago, Li Yuzhong, a Chinese scholar, met with Wen Zou, who caught Li Yuzhong's guide.

古文：知制诰崔咸与造相逢，造又捉其从人。
现代文：知制诰崔咸与温造相遇，温造又捉其随从。
English: Zang Cui Xian met with Wen Zou, and Wen Zou captured his entourage.

古文：当时缘不上闻，所以暴犯益甚。
现代文：只因当时不奏告圣上，所以温造以暴力侵犯他官的行为越发厉害。
English: It was only because he did not report to the emperor at that time that Wen Zhe's violent behavior against other officials became more severe.

古文：臣闻元和、长庆中，中丞行李不过半坊，今乃远至两坊，谓之 笼街喝道 。
现代文：臣闻元和、长庆年间，中丞导从队列不能超过半坊，现在却长达两坊，称作 笼街喝道 。
English: During the reigns of Wenyuan and Changqing, middle school students could not drink more than half a cup from the queue, but now it is up to two cups, known as the cage street.

古文：但以崇高自大，不思僭拟之嫌。
现代文：只顾显露自己位高势大，不考虑有越轨之嫌疑。
English: They only care about showing that they are high-ranking and powerful, and do not consider the suspicion of going off the rails.

古文：若不纠绳，实亏彝典。 
现代文：若不纠正，确实有损国朝典章。 
English: If it is not corrected, it will indeed undermine the Constitution of the DPRK.

古文：敕曰： 宪官之职，在指佞触邪，不在行李自大；侍臣之职，在献可替否，不在道路相高。
现代文：皇上降敕道： 御史之职责，在指斥佞人抨击邪恶，不在以导从仪仗抬高自己；侍臣之职责，在出谋划策，不在于在道路上比高低。
English: Emperor Qianlong said: The duty of emperors is to rebuke and criticize the evil, not to elevate themselves by leading the war of honor; the duty of courtiers is to make plans, not to compare high and low on the road.

古文：并列通班，合知名分，如闻喧竞，亦已再三，既招人言，甚损朝体。
现代文：同列朝班，应知名分，如果听到喧闹争吵一一一何况已经再三发生，既招人议论，又很损害朝廷体统。
English: If you listen to the noisy quarrels, which have repeatedly occurred, it is not only controversial, but also very damaging to the dignity of the imperial court.

古文：其台官与供奉官同道，听先后而行，道途即祗揖而过，其参从人则各随本官之后，少相辟避，勿言冲突。
现代文：台官与供奉官同道，应听其自然先后而行，道途相遇即礼貌相揖而过，那些随从人员则各随本官之后，相互稍许侧行避让，不可冲突。
English: The Taiwan official and the offering official are on the same path, and should listen to their natural successions. When they meet on the road, they will politely pass each other. Those who follow the official will follow each other, slightly side-by-side to avoid conflict.

古文：又闻近日已来，应合导从官，事力多者，街衢之中，行李太过。
现代文：又听说近日以来，聚合导从官，以暴力生事的情况多有发生，街衢之中，行列太长。
English: I also heard that in recent days, there have been many cases of violence caused by officials of the aggregation guide, and the queue is too long in the street.

古文：自今后，传呼前后，不得过三百步。 
现代文：从今后，前后传呼，不许超过三百步。 
English: From now on, no more than three hundred paces back and forth.

古文：然造之举奏，无所吐茹。
现代文：但皇上对温造的举奏，依然尽皆听纳。
English: However, the Emperor's warm gesture was still well received.

古文：朝廷有丧不以礼、配不以类者，悉劾之。
现代文：朝廷官员中有丧葬不循礼法、婚配不相称者，皆进行弹劾。
English: The imperial court officials whose funerals did not follow the etiquette and whose marriages were not suitable were all impeached.

古文：获伪官王果等九十余人，杖杀南曹吏李賨等六人，刑于都市。
现代文：捕获伪官王果等九十余人杖刑处决，南曹吏李宾等六人在京城街市上行刑处死。
English: More than ninety people, including Wang Guo, the captured pseudo-official, were executed by caning, and six people, including Li Bin, the Nanzhao official, were executed on the streets of Beijing.

古文：迁尚书右丞，加大中大夫，封祁县开国子，赐金紫。
现代文：升尚书右丞，加授大中大夫，封祁县开国子，赐紫服金鱼袋。
English: He was promoted to Shang Shuyujo, conferred the title of senior middle school doctor, and given the title of the founder of the county, and was given a purple goldfish bag.

古文：四年，兴元军乱，杀节度使李绛。文宗以造气豪嫉恶，乃授检校右散骑常侍、兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：大和四年，兴元军叛乱，杀节度使李绛，文宗因温造气度豪放嫉恶如仇，便授以检校右散骑常侍、兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: In the 4th year of the Yamato era, the rebellion of the Xingyuan army, the killing of the festival made Li Xi, and Wenzong, because of his warm temperament, was jealous and evil, he was awarded the inspection of the right horseback riding attendant, Xingyuan Yin, and the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：造辞赴镇，以兴元兆乱之状奏之，文宗尽悟其根本，许以便宜从事。
现代文：温造辞朝赴镇，将兴元最初叛乱的情况奏报朝廷，文宗完全了解事变的根由，允许温造因利乘便，见机行事。
English: Wen Zuoji went to the town and reported the situation of Xingyuan's initial rebellion to the imperial court. Wenzong fully understood the root cause of the incident and allowed Wen Zuoji to take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：帝虑用兵劳费，造奏曰： 臣计诸道征蛮之兵已回，俟臣行程至褒县，望赐臣密诏，使受约束。
现代文：皇上担心朝廷用兵负担很重，温造奏道： 臣估计诸道征伐蛮方之兵已返回，待臣行至褒县，望赐臣密诏，使诸道之兵受臣调遣。
English: The emperor was worried about the heavy burden of the imperial court's use of soldiers, and Wen Zhao recited: The vassal estimated that the soldiers of the conquest of barbarians in all directions had returned, and waited for the vassal to go to Baoxian. He hoped to give the vassal a secret edict so that the soldiers of all directions would be dispatched by the vassal.

古文：比臣及兴元，诸军相续而至，臣用此足矣。 
现代文：及至臣到达兴元，诸军相继而至，臣使用这些军队便足够了。 
English: When the vassal arrived in Xingyuan, the armies came one after another, and it was enough for the vassal to use these armies.

古文：乃授造手诏四通。神策行营将董重质、河中都将温德彝、郃阳都将刘士和等，咸令禀造之命。
现代文：于是皇上授温造手谕四道，命令神策行营将领董重质、河中都将温德彝、合阝阳都将刘士和等，皆须听从温造指挥。
English: Therefore, the emperor gave four decrees to Wenzuo, ordering the god to plan and lead the general of the camp, Dong Chongqing, the general of the river, Wen Dejun, and the general of the city, Liu Shihhe, all of whom must obey the command of Wenzuo.

古文：造行至褒城，会兴元都将卫志忠征蛮回，谒见。造即留以自卫，密与志忠谋。又召亚将张丕、李少直各谕其旨。
现代文：温造行至褒城，遇兴元都将卫志忠征蛮返回，前来谒见，温造即留下做自己的护卫，秘密与卫志忠策划，又召副将张丕、李少直分别宣谕圣旨。
English: Unzo went to Baocheng, and when Xingyuan came, they all came back to see him, leaving Unzo to be his bodyguard, secretly plotting with Wei Zhizhong, and calling vice-commanders Zhang Xuan and Li Shaoshi to proclaim the holy will separately.

古文：暨发褒城，以八百人为衙队，五百人为前军，入府分守诸门。
现代文：及至兵发褒城，以八百人为卫队，五百人为前军，进入兴元府衙分守诸门。
English: As far as the Hapoeng Fortress, with eight hundred soldiers as guards and five hundred as vanguard, they entered Xingyuanfu and guarded all the gates.

古文：造下车置宴，所司供帐于事。造曰： 此隘狭，不足以飨士卒，移之牙门。 
现代文：温造下车即置办宴席，主管官员在厅堂设置帷帐，温造说： 此处狭隘，不足以宴飨士卒，移到衙门去吧。 
English: Unzo got out of the car to prepare a banquet, and the responsible officials set up curtains in the hall. Unzo said: This place is narrow and not enough for a banquet, let's move to the main gate.

古文：坐定，将卒罗拜，志忠兵周环之。造曰： 吾欲问新军去住之意。
现代文：坐定之后，兴元将士罗列而拜，卫志忠的军队环布在周围，温造说： 我欲询问新军去留之打算。
English: After sitting down, Xingyuan's generals lined up and bowed, Wei Zhizhong's army surrounded them, and Wen Zhao said: I want to inquire about the intention of the new army to stay.

古文：可悉前，旧军无得错杂。 
现代文：可都往前来，旧军不得混杂其间。 
English: But they all came forward, and the old troops were not allowed to mingle with them.

古文：劳问既毕，传言令坐，有未至者，因令舁酒巡行。
现代文：慰问完毕，传话命兴元兵坐下，有未上前的，温造便令人抬着酒巡行。
English: After the condolences, a message was sent ordering the Xingyuan soldiers to sit down. If they did not come forward, Wenzuo ordered them to parade with wine.

古文：及酒匝，未至者皆至，牙兵围之亦合。
现代文：及至酒行一周，未上前者都上前了，卫兵的包围随即合拢。
English: After a week of drinking, those who had not been drinking came forward, and the encirclement of the guards was immediately closed.

古文：坐卒未悟，席上有先觉者，挥令起，造传言叱之，因帖息不敢动。
现代文：坐在地上的兴元兵士尚未省悟，酒席上有先察觉的，挥手令坐卒起身，温造传令呵叱，因而坐卒服帖而不敢动。
English: The Xingyuan soldiers sitting on the ground had not yet come to their senses. Someone at the banquet noticed it first, waved his hand and ordered the attendant to stand up. The attendant did not dare to move.

古文：即召坐卒，诘以杀绛之状。
现代文：温造便召唤坐卒，诘问杀害李绛的情节。
English: Wen Zong then summoned his attendants and questioned them about the circumstances of Li Xuan's murder.

古文：志忠、张丕夹阶立，拔剑呼曰 杀 。
现代文：卫志忠、张丕夹阶而立，拔剑呼喊 杀 。
English: Wei Zhizhong and Zhang Qian stood side by side, drew their swords and shouted, "Kill!"

古文：围兵齐奋，其贼首教练使丘铸等并官健千人，皆斩首于地，血流四注。
现代文：四周包围的兵士一齐冲上，兴元贼兵首领教练使丘铸等连同兵士千人，皆斩首于地，血流四注。
English: The soldiers encircled all around rushed up together, and the leader of the Xingyuan bandits, the coach, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, the leader of the bandits, and so on.

古文：监军杨叔元在座，遽起求哀，拥造靴以请命；遣兵卫出之，以俟朝旨。
现代文：监军杨叔元在座，慌忙起身哀求，抱着温造的靴子请求饶命，温造派卫兵将他拖出去，等候朝廷发落。
English: Yang Shuyuan, the military overseer, was present. He got up in a hurry and begged for his life, clutching the boots of Wen Zong. Wen Zong sent guards to drag him out and waited for the imperial court to arrive.

古文：敕旨配流康州。
现代文：敕旨杨叔元流放康州。
English: Yang Shuyuan was exiled to Kangzhou.

古文：其亲刃绛者斩一百断，号令者斩三断，余并斩首。
现代文：那些亲手诛杀李绛的，碎尸百段，发号司令者斩尸三段，其余一律斩首。
English: Those who killed Li Yan with their own hands will have their bodies chopped into a hundred pieces, while the commander who gave the order will have their bodies chopped into three pieces, and the rest will all be beheaded.

古文：内一百首祭李绛，三十首祭王景延、赵存约等，并投尸于江。
现代文：用其中一百个首级祭李绛，三十个首级祭王景延、赵存约等，并抛尸江中。
English: One hundred of them were used for the head-sacrifice of Li Xi, and thirty for the head-sacrifice of Wang Jingyan, Zhao Cunyu, and so on, and the bodies were thrown into the river.

古文：以功就加检校礼部尚书。
现代文：温造因功随即加授检校礼部尚书。
English: Because of his merits, Wen Zou was immediately awarded the title of inspector of school etiquette.

古文：五年四月，入为兵部侍郎，以耳疾求退。
现代文：大和五年四月，入朝任兵部侍郎，因耳疾请求退职。
English: In April of the 5th year of the Yamato era, he entered the Imperial Court as an attendant of the military department, and requested to retire due to an ear disease.

古文：七月，检校户部尚书、东都留守，判东都尚书省事、东畿汝防御使。
现代文：七月，任检校户部尚书、东都留守，判东都尚书省事、东畿汝防御使。
English: In July, he was appointed as a school inspector, but left his residence in Shanshu and Dongdu, and was sentenced to Shanshu in Dongdu, and to be a defense envoy in Dongguiru.

古文：造至洛中。九月，制改授河阳怀节度观察等使。
现代文：温造至洛中，九月，诏令改授河阳怀节度观察等使。
English: Wen Zong went to Luochu, and in September, he was awarded the title of Heyang Huai Festival Observation and Other Envoys.

古文：造以河内膏腴，民户凋瘵，奏开浚怀州古秦渠枋口堰；役工四万，溉济源、河内、温、武陟四县田五千余顷。
现代文：温造因河内土地肥沃，而民生凋敝，奏请开浚怀州古秦渠枋口堰，使用工役四万人，灌溉济源、河内、温、武陟四县田地五千余顷。
English: Due to the fact that Hanoi's land is fertile and people's livelihoods are withering, Wenzao requested the opening of the dredging of the Huai Zhou Ancient Qin Canal Hukou Weir, using 40,000 laborers to irrigate more than 5,000 hectares of fields in Jiyuan, Hanoi, Wen and Wuxi counties.

古文：七年十一月，入为御史大夫。
现代文：大和七年十一月，入朝任御史大夫。
English: In November of the 7th year of the Yamato era, he entered the imperial court as goshi daibu.

古文：造初赴镇汉中，遇大雨，平地水深尺余，乃祷鸡翁山祈晴，俄而疾风驱云，即时开齐。
现代文：温造当初赴兴元府时，遇大雨，平地水深尺余，便祭祷鸡翁山祈求天晴，一会儿疾风驱散阴霾，即刻云开雨霁。
English: When Anzuo initially went to Xingyuanfu, in the event of heavy rain, the water depth on the flat ground was more than a foot deep, so he prayed to Qiongshan to pray for a sunny day. A short while later, a gale dispersed the gloom, and the rain immediately began to fall.

古文：文宗尝闻其事，会造入对言之，乃诏封鸡翁山为侯。
现代文：文宗曾听说此事，待温造入朝应对时言及，于是降诏封为鸡翁山侯。
English: Wenzong had heard about this and mentioned it when he was waiting for Wen Zong to respond to the DPRK, so the imperial seal was lowered to Ji Weng Shan Hou.

古文：九年五月，转礼部尚书。
现代文：大和九年五月，调任礼部尚书。
English: In May of the ninth year of the Yamato era, he was transferred to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：其年六月病卒，时年七十，赠右仆射。
现代文：那年六月病逝，时年七十，追赠右仆射。
English: He died of illness in June of that year, at the age of seventy, and was posthumously awarded the Right-Handed Shooter.

古文：有文集八十卷。
现代文：有文集八十卷。
English: There are eighty volumes in the anthology.

古文：造于晚年积聚财货，一无散施，时颇讥之。
现代文：温造晚年积聚财货，一点也不散布施舍，当时人们颇讥笑他。
English: In his later years, when he was amassing wealth and not at all distributing alms, people laughed at him.

古文：子璋嗣。
现代文：其子温璋承袭官位。
English: His son, Ong Yeon, succeeded to the post.

古文：璋以廕入仕，累佐使府，历三郡刺史。
现代文：温璋以荫庇入仕，屡次在使府任幕僚，做过三郡刺史。
English: Atsushi entered the service with a shadow, repeatedly served as a staff officer in the legation, and did three county histories.

古文：咸通末，为徐泗节度使，徐州牙卒曰银刀军，颇骄横。
现代文：咸通末，任徐泗节度使。徐州衙兵号称银刀军，很是骄横。
English: At the end of Hamdang Road, he was appointed as the envoy of Xu Bing. Xuzhou Xingbing, known as the Silver Sword Army, was very arrogant.

古文：璋至，诛其恶者五百余人，自是军中畏法。
现代文：温璋到任后，诛杀其中凶恶者五百余人，从此军中畏惧法律。
English: After Wen Rong took office, he killed more than five hundred of them, and from then on, the army feared the law.

古文：入为京兆尹，持法太深，豪右一皆屏迹。
现代文：入京师为京兆尹，执法极严，豪强一时销声敛迹。
English: Jing Zhaoyun was the architect of Beijing's entry into the capital, and he enforced the law very strictly.

古文：会同昌公主薨，懿宗怒，杀医官，其家属宗枝下狱者三百人。
现代文：正值同昌公主薨，懿宗发怒，诛杀医官，其家属宗族下狱者三百人。
English: At the time of Princess Tongchang's death, Emperor Taizong became enraged and killed a medical officer. Three hundred members of his family and clan were imprisoned.

古文：璋上疏切谏，以为刑法太深。帝怒，贬璋振州司马。
现代文：温璋上疏极力谏奏，认为刑法处置太过分，皇上大怒，贬温璋为振州司马。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was furious and denounced Wenxuan as Zhenzhou Sima.

古文：制出，璋叹曰： 生不逢时，死何足惜？ 
现代文：诏令发出，温璋叹息道： 生不逢时，死何足惜！ 
English: The edict was issued, and Wen Qi sighed: Life is too short, death is too short!

古文：是夜自缢而卒。
现代文：当天夜晚自缢身死。
English: He committed suicide that night.

