古文：维正月，既生魄，王访于周公曰： 呜呼，朕闻维时兆厥工，非不显，朕实不明。
现代文：在正月十五那天，成王询问周公，说： 啊呀!我听说只有正直才兆示他的官职。并非此话不明显，而我实在是不明白，以此来问伯父。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month, Cheng Wang asked Zhou Gong, saying: Ah! I heard that only honesty indicates his official position. It is not that this is not obvious, but I really do not understand, so I ask my uncle.

古文：维士非不务，而不得助，大则骄，小则慑，慑谋不极。
现代文：并非我不访求士人，而是得不到他们的帮助。官大的就骄纵，官小的就畏惧，心存畏惧智谋就不能完全展示。
English: It's not that I don't visit scholars, it's that I don't get their help. Officials at the highest levels are arrogant, officials at the lowest levels are fearful, and when you're fearful, you can't fully demonstrate your wisdom.

古文：予重位与轻服。非其得福厚用遗。
现代文：我提高他们的爵位又减少他们的职事，并非要共享清福、厚赠爵禄。
English: I have raised their ranks and reduced their duties, not to share the good fortune and generous knighthood.

古文：庸止生隙，庸行信贰，众辑群政，不辑自匿。
现代文：想以此防止产生嫌隙，以此让诚实的副职行事。只有众人和睦，群体才能治理；不和睦自有奸慝。
English: This is intended to prevent the creation of rifts and to allow honest deputies to act. A group can be governed only if everyone is in harmony; discord brings its own traitors.

古文：呜呼，予夙勤之，无或告余。
现代文：啊呀，我早就想为之努力，而没有人告诉我。
English: Gee, I've been meaning to work on it for a long time, and no one told me.

古文：非不念，念不知。 
现代文：并非不常加思虑，而是思虑了还不明白。 周公说： 啊!
English: It wasn't that he didn't often give it much thought, but that he thought about it and still didn't understand.Zhou Gong said: Ah!

古文：周公曰： 于敢称乃武考之言曰：微言入心，夙喻动众，大乃不骄，行惠于小，小乃不慑。
现代文：让我用你父亲武王的话说： 微妙之言入人心，做出榜样打动众人，大官就不骄纵；施惠给小官，小官就不畏惧。
English: Let me use the words of your father, King Wu, to say: If you speak delicately and move the hearts of the people, if you set an example and move the people, the high-ranking officials will not be arrogant; if you give favors to minor officials, the minor officials will not be afraid.

古文：连官集乘，同忧若一，谋有不行，予惟重告尔。
现代文：团结官员与民众，大家想的都一样，计谋还有不成的? 
English: Solidarity officials and the public, everyone thinks the same way, can the plan still succeed?

古文：庸厉以饵士，权先申之，明约必遣之。其位不尊，其谋不阳。
现代文：我再告诉，你用优厚待遇引诱士人，权力给他要先加申明，赏罚一定告诉他，地位不尊，他的计谋就不显露。
English: I'll tell you again, if you use generous treatment to lure a scholar, you must first affirm his authority, reward and punish him, and tell him that if his position is not respected, his stratagem will not be revealed.

古文：无不畏敬，材在四方。
现代文：我们不敬重人才，人才就散于四方。
English: If we don't respect talent, talent will be scattered to the four winds.

古文：无擅于人，塞匿勿行，惠戚咸服，孝悌乃明，明立威耻乱。
现代文：对人不要专断，阻塞奸慝，不让他公行，恩惠与抚恤同时并行，孝悌之道才能显明。
English: Don't be arbitrary with people, obstruct the traitor, don't let him do public duties, and concurrently grant favors and pensions. Only then will the way of filial piety be revealed.

古文：使众之道，抚之以惠，内姓无感，外姓无谪。人知其罪，上之明审教幼，乃勤贫贱，制设九备，乃无乱谋。
现代文：公开树立权威、羞辱乱臣、役使众人的方法，是用恩惠抚慰他们，使同姓的无怨恨，让异姓没有责怪，下民知道他的罪过，上官知道要明审，教育幼辈要用心，贫贱要有节制，再设立九备，就没有被打乱的计谋。
English: The method of publicly establishing authority, humiliating chaotic ministers, and serving the masses is to appease them with grace, so that the same surname is free from resentment, so that the different surnames are not blamed, the subordinates know his sins, the superior officers know to judge clearly, educate the younger generation to be careful, the poor and humble to be temperate, and then set up nine reserves, there is no disrupted strategy.

古文：九备：一忠正不荒，美好乃不作恶，四□说声色忧乐盈匿，五硕信伤辩曰费，六出观好怪，内乃淫巧，七谋躁，内乃荒异，八好威，民众日逃，九富宠极足，是大极内，心其离。
现代文：九备是：一，忠正口口，口口口口；二，口口口口，口口口口；三，不沉湎美酒、玩物，就不会作恶；四，喜好音乐美女，享乐必生奸慝；五，说大话有害论辩，叫做耗费口口；六，外出观光，喜好怪异，朝内就会出现淫技奇巧；七，思虑不周，谋事急躁，内臣就会荒乱偏激；八，违背道德，好耍威风，民众就会日益逃避；九，富贵与宠信过分，内臣就会背离。
English: The nine preparations are as follows: First, be loyal and honest; second, be honest and honest; third, do not indulge in fine wine and playthings, and you will not commit evil; fourth, like music and beautiful women, enjoyment will inevitably lead to treachery; fifth, talk big and harmful arguments, which is called consuming the mouth; sixth, go sightseeing and like strange things, and there will be erotic tricks in the court; seventh, be thoughtless and hasty in planning, and the vassal will be wild and extreme; eighth, violate morality and play with dignity, and the people will increasingly escape; ninth, be rich and over-trusted, and the vassal will

古文：九备既明，我贵保之，应协以动，远尔同功。
现代文：九备已明白，我们要珍惜保守它。顺应和谐地办事，不分远近都同心协力，想的一样，目标一致。
English: Jiubei has understood that we must cherish and preserve it. We should act in accordance with harmony, work together with one heart and mind, think alike, and have the same goal.

古文：谋和适用，复以观之，上明任意，援贡有备。
现代文：反过来加以审察，只要崇尚仁义，援助与贡赋就会具备。
English: On the other hand, as long as benevolence and righteousness are upheld, assistance and tribute will be available.

古文：聚财多□，以援成功，克禁淫谋，众匿乃雍。
现代文：招揽人才，增加力量，以帮助他成事。能够禁绝邪恶的计谋，众多的奸慝就不会发生。
English: Recruit talent and increase strength to help him accomplish things. If you can prevent evil schemes, many treacherous acts will not occur.

古文：顺得以动，人以立行。
现代文：顺应道德去感动人，以此树立自己的品行。
English: Comply with morality to move people, in order to establish their own moral conduct.

古文：辑佐之道，上必尽其志，然后得其谋。
现代文：辑求辅佐的办法，主上一定要尽其心志，然后才能得到他的智谋。
English: In the process of seeking help, the master must do his best, and then he can get his wisdom.

古文：无转其信，虽危不动，贞信以昭，其乃得人。
现代文：不要转变对臣下的信任，即使危险臣下也不会动摇。坚定而诚心地招引，就能得到所求的人才。
English: Do not change your trust in your vassals. Even dangerous vassals will not waver. If you invite them firmly and sincerely, you will get the talent you are looking for.

古文：上危而转，下乃不亲。 
现代文：主上遇到危险而动摇，臣下就不会亲近他。 
English: If the lord is shaken by danger, his vassals will not approach him.

古文：王拜曰： 允哉，允哉，敬行天道。 
现代文：成王拜手行礼道： 真好，真好!我将认真执行这天大的道理。 
English: Cheng Wang bowed his head and said, "It's great, it's great! I will earnestly implement this great principle."

