古文：殷孝祖、刘勔
现代文：殷孝祖，陈郡长平人。
English: Yin Xiaozu, Chen County Governor Pingren.

古文：殷孝祖，陈郡长平人也。
现代文：他的曾祖父殷羡是晋朝的光禄勋。
English: His great-grandfather Yin Zhen was awarded the Order of the Star of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：曾祖羡，晋光禄勋。
现代文：他的祖父和父亲都没有做大官。
English: Neither his grandfather nor his father was a high-ranking official.

古文：父祖并不达。孝祖少诞节，好酒色，有气干。
现代文：殷孝祖小时不规矩，喜欢喝酒搞女人，但也有气魄才干。
English: Yin Xiaozu is a little unruly, likes to drink and get involved with women, but he also has the courage and talent.

古文：太祖元嘉末，为奉朝请，员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：文帝元嘉末年，殷孝祖当奉朝请和员外散骑侍郎。
English: In the last years of Emperor Wen Yuanjia, Emperor Yin Xiaozhuang invited a number of non-official attendants to attend the imperial court.

古文：世祖以其有武用，除奋武将军、济北太守。入为积射将军。
现代文：世祖因为他有军事才能，便用他当奋武将军，济北太守，接着又到中央当积射将军。
English: Because he had military talent, the founder of the nation used him as the general of the army, the governor of Jibei Province, and then he went to the central government as the general of the army.

古文：大明初，索虏寇青州，上遣孝祖北援，受刺史颜师伯节度，累与虏战，频大破之，事在师伯传。
现代文：大明初年，北魏人侵略青州，孝武帝派殷孝祖北上增援，接受青州刺史颜师伯的指挥，多次和敌人交锋，常常大败敌人，此事可参见《颜师伯传》。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Northern Wei people invaded Qingzhou. Emperor Xiaowu sent Yin Xiaozu to the north for reinforcement. He accepted the command of Yan Shibao from Qingzhou, fought with the enemy many times, and often defeated the enemy. This matter can be found in the "Biography of Yan Shibao."

古文：还授太子旅贲中郎将，加龙骧将军。
现代文：凯旋后被授予太子旅贲中郎将，另加龙骧将军。
English: After his triumphant return, he was awarded the title of Prince's Brigadier General, as well as the title of General of the Long March.

古文：竟陵王诞据广陵为逆，孝祖隶沈庆之攻诞，又有战功，迁西阳王子尚抚军、宁朔将军、南济阴太守。
现代文：竟陵王刘诞占据广陵造反，殷孝祖在沈庆之的指挥下进攻刘诞，又有战功，便荣升西阳王刘子尚的抚军，宁朔将军、南济阴太守。
English: In fact, the tomb king Liu Xizang occupied Guangling and rebelled, and Yin Xiaozhu attacked Liu Xizang under the command of Shen Qingzhi. He also made great achievements in the war, and was promoted to the army of the Western Yang King Liu Zishang, the general of Ningshuo, and the governor of Nanjiyin.

古文：出为盱眙太守，将军如故。
现代文：又出外当盱眙太守，将军还是照旧。
English: He went out again to serve as Shun Taishu, but the generals were still at the top.

古文：还为虎贲中郎将，仍除宁朔将军、阳平东平二郡太守。又迁济南、南郡，将军如故。
现代文：又回到京城当虎贲中郎将军，仍兼任宁朔将军，阳平东平二郡太守，又转官济南、南郡太守，将军还是照旧。
English: He returned to Beijing as General Tigress Zhongro, still concurrently serving as General of Ningshuo, Yangping Dongping Second County Governor, and transferred to Jinan and South County Governor, the general is still the same.

古文：前废帝景和元年，以本号督兗州诸军事、兗州刺史。
现代文：前废帝景和元年，殷孝祖以宁朔将军都督兖州诸军事、兖州刺史。
English: In the year of the former Emperor Jing and the first year of the year, Yin Xiaozu led the military and the history of Zhangzhou as the general of Ningshuo and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：太宗初即位，四方反叛，孝祖外甥司徒参军颍川葛僧韶建议衔命征孝祖入朝，上遣之。
现代文：明帝刚即位，藩镇同时反叛中央，孝祖的外甥司徒参军颍川葛僧韶，提议自己带朝廷命令征调孝祖到朝廷，明帝便派遣僧韶去。
English: Soon after Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, the towns of the domain rebelled against the central government at the same time. Xiaozu's nephew, Sittu, joined the army of Quechuan Ge, and proposed that he take the imperial order to recruit and transfer Xiaozu to the imperial court. Emperor Ming then dispatched Xiaozu.

古文：时徐州刺史薛安都遣薛索兒等屯据津径，僧韶间行得至，说孝祖曰： 景和凶狂，开辟未有，朝野危极，假命漏刻。
现代文：当时徐州刺史薛安都派薛索儿等人占据河流渡口，僧韶从小路抵达兖州，游说殷孝祖说： 景和帝狠毒疯狂，自古以来从未有过，朝廷和民间都感到危险万分，人们性命几乎保不住。
English: At that time, the Xuzhou prince Xue Andu sent Xue Sol and others to occupy the river ferry, and the monks arrived in Zhangzhou from the small road, and lobbied Yin Xiaozu to say: Jing and the emperor are vicious and crazy, which has never happened since ancient times. Both the court and the people feel very dangerous, and people's lives can hardly be saved.

古文：主上圣德天挺，神武在躬，曾不浃辰，夷凶翦暴，更造天地，未足为言。
现代文：当今皇上天生贤德，神武超人，在不到一个时辰的时间里，便消灭了这昏君，重新缔造天地，这也不用多说。
English: It is needless to say that the present emperor, a man of innate virtue, a divine warrior and superman, in less than an hour's time, eliminated this dim prince and re-created heaven and earth.

古文：国乱朝危，宜立长生，公卿百辟，人无异议，泰平之隆，非旦则夕。
现代文：国家危急，应该立成年的人做国君。公卿大臣们都没有反对意见，和平之时指日可待。
English: The country is in a critical situation, and an adult should be installed as the sovereign. The nobles and ministers have no objections, and peace is just around the corner.

古文：而群小相煽，构造无端，贪利幼弱，竞怀希望。
现代文：但是一些小人相互煽动，制造邪恶的阴谋，贪图立小孩做皇帝从中谋利，怀着不可告人的目的。
English: But some villains instigate each other, create evil conspiracies, covet to establish a child as an emperor to profit from it, with ulterior motives.

古文：使天道助逆，群凶事申，则主幼时艰，权柄不一，兵难互起，岂有自容之地。
现代文：假使老天保佑坏人，小人们的打算得逞，那么一定会导致国君年幼无知社会混乱，小人掌权，战争政变不断发生，人们怎么会有容身之地？
English: If God blesses the bad guys and the villains succeed in their plans, it will surely lead to chaos in the young and ignorant society, villains in power, and constant military coups. How can people find a place to live?

古文：舅少有立功之志，长以气节成名，若便能控济、河义勇，还奉朝廷，非唯匡主静乱，乃可以垂名竹帛。 
现代文：舅父大人自小便有建功立业的大志，成年后又因英勇慷慨著名。如果您能控制河济一带的勇士，回来拥护朝廷，不仅仅会拯救朝廷消除祸乱，而且会名垂史册，流芳百世。 
English: Your uncle had the ambition to build a great career since he was a child, and he was famous for his bravery and generosity after he became an adult. If you can control the warriors around Heji and come back to support the imperial court, you will not only save the imperial court and eliminate the scourge, but you will also be famous in the history books and be loved for centuries.

古文：孝祖具问朝廷消息，僧韶随方酬譬，并陈兵甲精强，主上欲委以前驱之任。
现代文：殷孝祖又详细地探听朝廷消息，僧韶则反复地回答晓喻，并且说朝廷兵马强壮，武器锋利，皇上希望委托他当平叛先锋的重托。
English: Yin Xiaozhu inquired in detail about the news of the imperial court, and the monk Zhuang repeatedly answered Xiaoyu, and said that the imperial soldiers and horses were strong and the weapons were sharp, and the emperor hoped to entrust him with the important task of being the vanguard of the counter-rebellion.

古文：孝祖即日弃妻子，率文武二千人随僧韶还都。
现代文：殷孝祖便当天离开妻子儿女，率领文武人员二千人随僧韶回到京城。
English: On the same day, Yin Xiaozu left his wife and children and returned to the capital with 2,000 civil and military personnel.

古文：时普天同逆，朝廷唯保丹阳一郡，而永世县寻又反叛。义兴贼垂至延陵，内外忧危，咸欲奔散。
现代文：当时全国同时反叛，朝廷只占丹阳一郡，而其中的永世县不久又叛变，义兴的叛军快到延陵时，朝中人心非常忧虑害怕，都想逃跑。
English: At that time, the whole country rebelled at the same time. The imperial court only occupied one county in Danyang, and Yongse County, one of them, soon rebelled again. When the rebels from Yixing were about to reach Yanling, the people in the central government were very worried and afraid, and all wanted to escape.

古文：孝祖忽至，众力不少，并伧楚壮士，人情于是大安。
现代文：殷孝祖忽然来了，有不少人马，而且都是南方的壮士，这才人心安定。
English: Yin Xiaozu suddenly came, there were many people and horses, and they were all strong men from the south, which made the hearts of the people stable.

古文：进孝祖号冠军，假节、督前锋诸军事，遣向虎槛，拒对南贼。
现代文：朝廷给他加官冠军将军，假节、都督前锋诸军事，派他到虎槛，抵挡南方叛军。
English: The imperial court promoted him to champion general, false festival, vanguard of the military, and sent him to the Tiger's Threshold to resist the southern rebels.

古文：御仗先有诸葛亮筒袖铠帽，二十五石弩射之不能入，上悉以赐孝祖。
现代文：武器库中先有些诸葛亮时留下的竹制筒装的铠甲式帽子，这种帽子即使二十五号的石箭也射不进，明帝把它们都赐给殷孝祖。
English: In the arsenal, there were some bamboo tube-shaped armor-piercing hats left by Zhuge Liang. This kind of hat could not be shot even with the 25th stone arrow, and Emperor Ming gave them all to Yin Xiaozhu.

古文：孝祖负其诚节，凌轹诸将，台军有父子兄弟在南者，孝祖并欲推治。由是人情乖离，莫乐为用。
现代文：殷孝祖为他的忠诚勇毅自豪无比，对将领们颐指气使，中央军队中有些人的父子兄弟在南方叛军中，殷孝祖都想搞清楚，于是人心愤怒，没有谁想为他出力。
English: Yin Xiaozhu was extremely proud of his loyalty and courage, and he gave orders to the generals. Some of the fathers and sons of the Central Army were in the southern rebel army. Yin Xiaozhu wanted to find out, so people were angry, and no one wanted to work for him.

古文：进使持节、都督兗州青冀幽四州诸军事、抚军将军，刺史如故。
现代文：此时朝廷升他使持节、都督兖州青冀幽四州诸军事、抚军将军的官，刺史还照旧。
English: At this time, the imperial court promoted him to the post of commander-in-chief, and he became the military governor of Bozhou, Qinghai, Hebei and Shizhou Provinces, and the commander of the general staff of the army.

古文：时贼据赭圻，孝祖将进攻之，与大统王玄谟别，悲不自胜，众并骇怪。
现代文：当时叛军占据赭圻，殷孝祖将进攻那里。他先和大帅王玄谟告别时，曾经非常悲痛，众人无不惊异。
English: At that time, the rebels occupied Handan, where Yin Xiaozhu would attack. When he first said goodbye to the commander Wang Xuanmu, he was very sad, and everyone was surprised.

古文：泰始二年三月三日，与贼合战，常以鼓盖自随，军中人相谓曰： 殷统军可谓死将矣。今与贼交锋，而以羽仪自标显，若善射者十士攒射，欲不毙，得乎？ 
现代文：泰始二年三月三日，殷军和敌人交战，孝祖一直用战鼓将军徽号跟在身边，先前将士们便议论说： 殷统军可以说是必死的将军，今日与敌人交战，竟用官位仪盖显示自己，如果敌人有十人一齐向他射去，想不死，能吗？ 
English: On March 3 of the second year of Taizhi, the Yin army and the enemy engaged in battle. Xiao Zu had been using the war drum and the general's badge to follow him around. Previously, the generals discussed: The Yin army can be said to be a mortal general. Today, when fighting with the enemy, he actually used the official rank to show himself. If the enemy has ten people shooting at him at the same time, can he not die?

古文：是日，于阵为矢所中死，时年五十二。
现代文：当天，在战斗中被敌人射死，时年五十二岁。
English: On the same day, he was shot dead by the enemy in battle, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：追赠散骑常侍、征北将军，持节、都督如故。
现代文：他死后被追认为散骑常侍、征北行参军，持节、都督照旧。
English: After his death, he was posthumously recognized as a samurai who rode horseback, joined the army in the Northern Expedition, and continued to hold festivals and be the governor of the capital.

古文：封秭归县侯，食邑千户。
现代文：追封秭归县侯，享有一千户租税。
English: The posthumous titles reverted to the county magistrates, who enjoyed a tax exemption of one thousand households.

古文：四年，追改封建安县，谥曰忠侯。
现代文：泰始四年，又改追封他为建安县侯，谥号为忠侯。
English: In the first four years of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was given the title of Jian'an County Marquis, and his posthumous name was Zhong Marquis.

古文：孝祖子悉为薛安都所杀，以从兄子慧达继封。
现代文：殷孝祖的儿子都被薛安都杀死，朝廷用他的堂兄的儿子慧达继承。
English: The sons of Yin Xiaozhu were all killed by Xue An, and the imperial court used his cousin's son Huida to succeed.

古文：齐受禅，国除。
现代文：齐国建国，殷慧达的封爵被取消。
English: The State of Qi was established, and the title of nobility was abolished.

