古文：元微之、白乐天，在唐元和、长庆间齐名。
现代文：元微之、白乐天，在唐代元和、长庆年间以工诗齐名，他们吟咏天宝年间时事的诗作，《连昌宫词》、《长恨歌》都脍炙人口。
English: Yuan Weizhi and Bai Letian were both famous for their poetry during the Yuan and Changqing dynasties of the Tang Dynasty. Their poems on current events during the Tianbao era, "Lianchang Palace Lyrics" and "Song of Longing" are both popular.

古文：其赋咏开宝时事，《连昌宫词》、《长恨歌》皆脍炙人口，使读之者情性荡摇，如身生其时，亲见其事，殆未易以优劣论也。然《长恨歌》不过述明皇追怆贵妃始末，无他激扬，不若《连昌词》有监戒规讽之意，如云： 姚崇、宋璟作相公，劝谏上皇言语切。长官清贫太守好，拣选皆言由相至。开元之末姚、宋死，朝廷渐渐由妃子。
现代文：使读它的人思绪激荡，好象身在其时，亲眼见到了当时的事清，大抵不容易评论其优劣，可是，《长恨歌》的内容不过是记述唐明皇追悼杨贵妃事件的来龙去脉，没有其他的激浊扬清的文字，不如《连昌宫词》戒讽双劝的精神，比如其词说： 姚崇、宋璟作相公，劝谏上皇言语亲切，长官消贫太守好，拣选皆言由相至，开元之末姚、宋死，朝廷渐渐由妃子。
English: It is usually not easy to comment on its merits and demerits, but the content of "Everlasting Regret" is nothing more than a description of the ins and outs of the Tang Emperor's commemoration of Yang Guifei. There is no other stirring and clear text than the spirit of the "Lianchang Palace Speech" to rebuke and persuade. For example, its words say: Yao Chong and Song Xi are the father-in-law, the father-in-law's words are kind, the chief is too good at eliminating poverty, and the choice is made by the father-in-law. At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, Yao and Song died, and

古文：禄山宫里养作儿，虢国门前闹如市。
现代文：禄山宫里养作儿，虢国门前闹如市。
English: In the palace of Lushan, children are reared, and the front of the gate of the country is bustling like a city.

古文：弄权宰相不记名，依稀忆得杨与李。
现代文：弄权宰相不记名，依稀忆得杨与李。
English: The power-hungry prime minister kept his name a secret, but he vaguely remembered Yang and Li.

古文：庙谟颠倒四海摇，五十年来作疮惾。 
现代文：庙谟颠倒四海摇，五十年来作疮惾。 
English: The temple has gone through ups and downs over the past 50 years.

古文：其末章及官军讨淮西，乞 庙谟休用兵 之语，盖元和十一、二年间所作，殊得风人之旨。非《长恨》比云。
现代文：它的末节谈到了官军讨淮西的事，有 庙谟休用兵 之语，大概作于元和十一、二年间，甚得当时人针贬时弊的旨趣，不是《长恨歌》所能比的。
English: Its last stanza talks about the government army's campaign against Huaxi, and there is the story of the temple's suspension of military service. It was probably written in the 11th or 12th years of the Yuan Dynasty, and it was very interesting at the time, not comparable to "Song of Long Sorrow."

