古文：丙辰岁，余同浔阳叔翁，于正月二十六日，至微之休宁。
现代文：丙辰年，我同得阳的叔翁，于正月二十六日，一起到徽州府休宁县。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the year, I went to Xiuning County, Huizhou Province with my uncle from Deyang.

古文：出西门。
现代文：走出县城西门。
English: Go out of the west gate of the county seat.

古文：其溪自祁门县来，经白岳，循县而南，至梅口，会郡溪入浙。
现代文：那条溪水从祁门县流来，经过白岳山，顺着县城向南流，到梅口后汇合郡溪水流入浙溪水。
English: The stream water flows from Qimen County, passes through Mount Baiyue, flows southward along the county seat, and flows into Meikou, where it joins the county stream water and flows into the Zhejiang stream water.

古文：循溪而上，二十里，至南渡。
现代文：沿着溪流而上行，走二十里路，到达南渡。
English: Follow the stream upstream for twenty miles to Nandu.

古文：过桥，依山麓十里，至岩下已暮。
现代文：经过一座桥，依顺山麓走十里路，到达岩下睁已是傍晚。
English: After crossing a bridge and walking ten miles along the foot of the mountain, it was already evening when we reached the foot of the rock.

古文：登山五里，借庙中灯，冒雪蹑冰，二里，过天门，里许，入榔梅庵。
现代文：登山走五里路，借用庙里的灯笼，冒着漫天雪花，踩着一路冰棱，走二里路，经过天门，再走一里左右，就进入榔梅庵中。
English: Climb the five-mile path, borrow a lantern from the temple, brave the snow, step on the ice, walk two miles, pass the Heavenly Gate, walk another mile or so, and enter the Jimei Hermitage.

古文：路经天门、珠帘之胜，俱不暇辨，但闻树间冰响铮铮。
现代文：路途中经过天门、珠帘两地胜景，都没有闲暇去辨另俪赏，仅止听到树林中冰棱坠落时铮铮的响声。
English: On the way, we passed through the scenic spots of Heaven's Gate and Pearl Curtain. We had no time to enjoy the scenery. We only heard the sound of crickets in the woods when the ice edge fell.

古文：入庵后，大霰作，浔阳与奴子俱后。
现代文：走过榔梅庵后，一场大冰雹从天而降，而得阳叔翁与奴仆憧子都还在后面。
English: After passing through Jimei-an, a large hailstorm fell from the sky, but Dedyang Shouwen and his servant Longzi were still behind.

古文：余独卧山房，夜听水声屋溜，竟不能寐。
现代文：我一个人独自躺在山房中的床上，一整夜都听到屋檐的滴水声，竟然不能入睡。
English: I was lying alone on a bed in a mountain hut, and all night long I heard the sound of water dripping from the eaves, and I couldn't fall asleep.

古文：二十七日起视满山冰花玉树，迷漫一色。
现代文：二十七日早晨起床后，但见满山都是冰花玉树，天地迷漫着一色的银白。
English: After getting up in the morning of the 27th day, however, I saw that the whole mountain was covered with icicles and jade trees, and the sky and earth were covered with a uniform silver-white haze.

古文：坐楼中，适浔阳并奴至，乃登太素宫。
现代文：坐在楼中，恰好涛阳叔翁并奴仆都到了，于是一同登上太素宫。
English: Sitting in the middle of the building, it just so happened that Uncle Tao Yang and his servants had arrived, so they boarded the Tai Su Palace together.

古文：宫北向，玄帝像乃百鸟衔泥所成，色黧黑。
现代文：太素宫北向，传说玄帝的塑像乃是百鸟衔来泥土所塑成，脸色黛黑。
English: To the north of Taisugu Palace, legend has it that the statue of Emperor Xuanzong was made from the mud of hundreds of birds, with a dark complexion.

古文：像成于宋，殿新于嘉靖三十七年，庭中碑文，世庙御制也。
现代文：塑像完成于宋代，大殿于嘉靖三十七年新建而成，庭院中的碑文，是明世宗皇帝亲自下令制作的。
English: The statue was completed in the Song Dynasty, and the main hall was newly built in the 37th year of Jiajing. The inscription in the courtyard was personally ordered by Emperor Ming Shizong.

古文：左右为王灵官、赵元帅殿，俱雄丽。
现代文：左右两边是祀祭王灵官、赵公元帅的殿堂，都很雄伟壮丽。
English: On the right and left sides is the hall of worship for the sacrificial king and general Zhao, both of which are majestic and magnificent.

古文：背倚玉屏即齐云岩，前临香炉峰。
现代文：太素宫背倚玉屏似的齐云岩，前临香炉峰。
English: The back of Taisugu Palace leans against the jade screen-like Qi Yunyan, and the front of it faces the Incense Hearth Peak.

古文：峰突起数十丈，如覆钟，未游台、宕者或奇之。
现代文：香炉峰耸起有数十丈高，像只倒覆的钟，没有游览过天台山、雁宕山的人有的对它感到很神奇。
English: Incense Burner Peak rises dozens of meters high, like an inverted clock. Some people who have not visited Tiantai Mountain and Yantang Mountain feel very magical about it.

古文：出庙左，至舍身崖，转而上为紫玉屏，再西为紫霄崖，俱危耸杰起。
现代文：从庙的左面出来，到了舍身崖，楚转而上，就是紫玉屏，再西边是紫霄崖，都高耸而特别突起。
English: From the left side of the temple, to the cliff, Chu turned up, that is, Ziyu Yuping, and then the west side is Ziyu Xiao Jia, all towering and protruding.

古文：再西为三姑峰、五老峰，文昌阁据其前。
现代文：再往西是三姑峰、五老峰，文昌阁则据立其前。
English: Further to the west are the Sangu Peak and the Wulao Peak, and the Wenchang Pavilion stands in front of them.

古文：五老比肩，不甚峭削，颇似笔架。
现代文：五老峰像五位老人并肩而立，不怎么陡峭，倒很像一个笔架。
English: The Five Old Peaks look like five old men standing side by side. They are not very steep, but rather resemble a pen holder.

古文：返榔梅，循夜来路，下天梯。
现代文：返回榔梅庵，顺着夜里走的来路，走下天梯。
English: Returning to Jimei-an, I walked down the staircase, following the same path I had taken during the night.

古文：则石崖三面为围，上覆下嵌，绝似行廊。
现代文：但见三面被石崖所包围，上有石崖覆盖，下面则镶嵌于石崖中间，非常像走廊。
English: However, it is surrounded by cliffs on three sides. The upper part is covered with cliffs, while the lower part is embedded in the middle of the cliffs, very much like a corridor.

古文：循崖而行，泉飞落其外，为珠帘水。
现代文：沿着石崖前行，泉水飞落于石崖外面，就是珠帘水胜景。
English: Walking along the cliff, the spring water falls outside the cliff, which is the pearl curtain water scenic spot.

古文：嵌之深处，为罗汉洞，外开内伏，深且十五里，东南通南渡。
现代文：嵌在石崖深处的，是罗汉洞，洞外开阔而洞内低矮，纵深却有十五里，东南方向可通南渡。
English: Embedded in the depths of the cliff is the Rohan Cave. The cave is open on the outside and low on the inside, but has a depth of fifteen miles. It is possible to pass to the south-east.

古文：崖尽处为天门。
现代文：石崖穷尽处就是天门。
English: At the end of the cliff is the Heaven's Gate.

古文：崖石中空，人出入其间，高爽飞突，正如阊阖。
现代文：崖石中间是空洞，人在洞中出入，感到高阔气爽而飞檐突兀，正像传说中的天门。
English: There is a hollow in the middle of the cliff, and people go in and out of the cave, feeling lofty and exhilarated, just like the Heaven's Gate in the legend.

古文：门外乔楠中峙，蟠青丛翠。
现代文：天门外，高大的楠树当中峙立，青松蟠曲，绿树丛丛。
English: Outside the Heavenly Gate, tall camphor trees stand in the middle, green pines sway, and green trees clump.

古文：门内石崖一带，珠帘飞洒，奇为第一。
现代文：天门内的石崖一带，珠帘水飞洒而下，为第一奇景。
English: In the area of the stone cliff inside the Heavenly Gate, the pearl curtain of water flying down is the first wonder.

古文：返宿庵中，访五井、桥崖之胜，羽士即道士汪伯化，约明晨同行。
现代文：返回榔梅庵歇宿，寻问五井、桥崖的胜景情况，道士汪伯化邀约我明天早晨与他同行。
English: Returning to my lodging at Jimei-an, I inquired about the wonderful scenery of Goi and the bridge cliff. Taoist Wang Bo-hwa invited me to accompany him tomorrow morning.

古文：二十八日梦中闻人言大雪，促奴起视，弥山漫谷矣。
现代文：二十八日睡梦中听见有人说下大雪，催促奴仆起床查看，白雪已满山遍谷了。
English: On the twenty-eighth day, in his sleep, he heard someone say that it was snowing heavily. He urged his servant to get up and check. Snow had covered the mountains and valleys.

古文：余强卧。
现代文：我勉强卧床。
English: I'm barely out of bed.

古文：已刻，同伯化蹑屐ì木头鞋二里，复抵文昌阁。
现代文：上午巳刻时分，同汪伯化穿好鞋上路，走二里路，又抵达文昌阁。
English: At three o'clock in the morning, he and Wang Bohua put on their shoes, walked two miles, and arrived at Wenchang Pavilion.

古文：览地天一色，虽阻游五井，更益奇观。
现代文：看天地间茫茫一片白色，虽然五井胜景的游览被阻，但这更加增添了奇景之观。
English: Looking at the vast expanse of white between heaven and earth, although the sightseeing of Goi was blocked, this further added to the wonder of the landscape.

古文：二十九日奴子报： 云开，日色浮林端矣。 
现代文：二十九日奴仆报告说： 云已散开，太阳光已浮现在树林梢端了。 
English: On the 29th, the servant reported: "The clouds have dispersed, and the sun has appeared at the edge of the forest.

古文：急披衣起，青天一色，半月来所未睹，然寒威殊甚。
现代文：我急忙披好衣服起床，只见蓝天一色，是半个月以来所没有见到过的好天气，然而寒威还非常的厉害。
English: I hurriedly put on my clothes and got up. All I could see was the blue sky. It was the best weather I had seen in half a month, but the cold was still very severe.

古文：方促伯化共饭。
现代文：于是催促汪伯化一同用饭。
English: So he urged Wang Bo to have dinner with him.

古文：饭已，大雪复至，飞积盈尺。
现代文：吃完饭，大雪又重新下起来，飞雪积起来超过一尺厚。
English: After the meal, the heavy snow fell again, and the snow piled up more than a foot thick.

古文：偶步楼前，则香炉峰正峙其前。
现代文：偶尔走到楼前，只见香炉峰正正的峙立于前方。
English: Occasionally, when I walked to the front of the building, I saw the incense burner standing upright in front of me.

古文：楼后出一羽士曰程振华者，为余谈九井、桥岩、傅岩诸胜。
现代文：楼后走出一位叫程振华的道士，为我讲述九井、桥岩、傅岩各处胜景的情况。
English: A Taoist named Cheng Zhenhua came out from behind the building to tell me about the beauty spots in Jiujiang, Qiaojing and Fuyan.

古文：三十日雪甚，兼雾浓，咫尺不辨。
现代文：三十日雪下得更犬，兼有浓雾弥漫，使人咫尺之间不能辨别方向。
English: On the 30th, it snowed more heavily, and there was also a thick fog, making it impossible to distinguish the direction between people.

古文：伯化携酒至舍身崖，饮睇边饮边看元阁。
现代文：汪伯化带着酒至舍身崖，在娣元阁里共饮赏雪。
English: Wang Bohua took the wine to the cliff, and they drank and enjoyed the snow together at the Yuyuan Pavilion.

古文：阁在崖侧，冰柱垂垂，大者竟丈。
现代文：娣元阁在山崖侧面，冰柱一根根从崖上下垂，长的竟然有一丈。
English: Shigenkaku is on the side of a cliff. Icicles are hanging from the cliff one by one, and some of them are quite long.

古文：峰峦灭影，近若香炉峰，亦不能见。
现代文：峰峦的影像都已消失于雪雾之中，像香炉峰矫距离很近的，人也不能看见它的影像。
English: The images of the peak have all disappeared in the snow and fog. Like the incense burner peak, which is very close, people can't see its image.

古文：二月初一日东方一缕云开，已而大朗。
现代文：二月初一日东方一缕云彩散开，接着天空大大晴朗起来。
English: On the first day of February, a wisp of cloud dispersed in the east, followed by a very clear sky.

古文：浔阳以足裂留庵中。
现代文：得阳叔翁因为脚被冻裂，无法行走而留歇于榔梅庵中。
English: Due to frostbite on his feet, Deyang Shu Weng was unable to walk and had to rest in the Jimei Hermitage.

古文：余急同伯化蹑西天门而下。
现代文：我急着同汪伯化顺着西天门而下行。
English: I hurried down the West Heaven's Gate with Wang Bohua.

古文：十里，过双溪街，山势已开。
现代文：走了十里路，经过双溪街，山势已显得开阔。
English: After walking ten miles and passing through Shuangxi Street, the mountains have become more open.

古文：五里，山复渐合，溪环石映，倍有佳趣。
现代文：又走五里路，山势重又渐渐的合拢，溪水环绕，山石倒映溪水中，使愉快的游兴倍增。
English: Another five-mile walk, the mountains are heavy and gradually close, the streams are surrounded, and the mountains and rocks are reflected in the streams, doubling the pleasure of swimming.

古文：三里，由溪口循小路入，越一山。二里，至石桥岩。
现代文：走完三里路，由山溪口顺着小路进去，翻越过一座山，经过二里路，到达石桥岩。
English: After walking the three-mile path, follow the path from the mouth of the mountain stream, climb over a mountain, pass the two-mile path, and reach the stone bridge rock.

古文：桥侧外岩，高亘如白岳之紫霄。
现代文：石桥岩侧面的外岩，高峻绵延有如白岳山的紫霄岩。
English: The outer rock on the side of the stone bridge rock is as high and continuous as the purple mountain rock of Mount Shiratake.

古文：岩下俱因岩为殿。
现代文：外岩下，都是利用岩石作为殿堂。
English: Under the outer rock, they all use the rock as a hall of fame.

古文：山石皆紫，独有一青石龙蜿蜒于内，头垂空尺余，水下滴，曰龙涎泉，颇如雁宕龙鼻水。
现代文：山岩的颜色都是紫的，唯独只有一条蜿蜒的青色石龙在里面，龙头垂突有一尺多高，水从龙口往下滴淌，叫作龙涎泉，很像雁宕山的龙鼻水。
English: The mountain rocks are all purple in color, except for a meandering blue stone dragon inside. The faucet is more than a foot high, and water drips down from the dragon's mouth. It is called Longjing Spring, much like the dragon's snot in the Wild Goose Mountains.

古文：岩之右，一山横跨而中空，即石桥也。
现代文：外岩的右面，一座山横跨而过，山的中间是空的，这就是石桥了。
English: To the right of the outer rock, a mountain stretches across, the middle of the mountain is empty, this is the stone bridge.

古文：飞虹垂蝀为虹，下空恰如半月。
现代文：石桥似彩虹飞架，下面空的地方恰好像半月。
English: The stone bridge looks like a rainbow flyover, and the empty space below looks like a half moon.

古文：坐其下，隔山一岫特起，拱对其上，众峰环侍，较胜齐云天门。
现代文：坐在石桥下面，隔山还有一山突耸起来，拱对石桥之上，四周有很多山峰环围，景致比齐云山天门更美。
English: Sitting under the stone bridge, there is still a mountain protruding from the mountain, arching over the stone bridge, surrounded by many peaks, the scenery is more beautiful than the Qiyun Mountain Gate.

古文：即天台石梁，止一石架两山间；此以一山高架，而中空其半，更灵幻矣！
现代文：就是天台山的石梁，也只是一巨石架在两山之间；而这里以一座山高架两边，中间一半是空的，更是灵巧奇幻了！
English: Even the stone beam of Tiantai Mountain is just a huge stone frame between two mountains; and here, with a mountain elevated on both sides, and the middle half is empty, it is even more ingenious and fantastic!

古文：穿桥而入，里许，为内岩。
现代文：穿过石桥，走了一里多路，就是内岩。
English: After crossing the stone bridge, we walked more than a mile to the Inner Rock.

古文：上有飞泉飘洒，中有僧斋，颇胜。
现代文：内岩上有飞泉飘洒，中间还有僧人供给斋饭，真是在佳境之中。
English: On the inner rock, there are flying springs and crabs, and in the middle, there is a monk who is offering a meal. It is truly in the best of times.

古文：还饭于外岩。
现代文：返回外岩吃饭。
English: Return to the outer rock for dinner.

古文：觅导循崖左下。
现代文：寻觅到一位向导，得以顺着山崖的左边下山。
English: He found a guide and was able to make his way down the left side of the cliff.

古文：灌莽中两山夹涧，路棘雪迷，行甚艰。
现代文：灌木草莽中的两座山之间夹有一条溪涧，道路难走，加上漫天大雪迷漫，行走非常艰难。
English: There is a creek between the two mountains in the middle of the scrub grass, the road is difficult to walk, and with the heavy snow, walking is very difficult.

古文：导者劝余趋傅岩，不必向观音岩。
现代文：向导劝我去傅岩，不必去观音岩。
English: The guide advised me to go to Fu Rock, not to go to Guanyin Rock.

古文：余恐不能兼棋盘、龙井之胜，不许。
现代文：我担心不能兼顾游览棋盘、龙井的胜景，没有应允。
English: I was worried that I wouldn't be able to visit both the chessboard and the magnificent scenery of Longjing, but they didn't agree.

古文：行二里，得涧一泓，深碧无底，亦 龙井 也。
现代文：走了二里路，看到溪涧中有一潭深水，碧绿得像是深而无底，也像是 龙井 了。
English: After walking two miles, I saw a pool of deep water in the creek. It was so green that it seemed to be deep and bottomless. It also looked like a dragon well.

古文：又三里，崖绝涧穷，悬瀑忽自山坳挂下数丈，亦此中奇境。
现代文：又走三里路，山崖和山涧都已穷尽了，高悬的瀑布忽然从山坳间飞挂下来数丈，也是此中奇异的胜境。
English: After walking another three miles, the mountain cliffs and ridges have been exhausted, and high-hanging waterfalls suddenly fly down from between the ridges, which is also a strange victory in this.

古文：转而上跻ì登，行山脊二里，则棋盘石高峙山巅，形如擎菌，大且数围。
现代文：差转而往上攀登，在山脊口行走二里路，就见棋盘石高高的峙立于山顶，形状像往上托起的一朵菌，大有好几围。
English: After a while, I turned to climb up, and after walking two miles at the ridge, I saw the chessboard stone standing tall on the top of the mountain, shaped like a fungus held up, with several sizes.

古文：登之，积雪如玉。
现代文：登上棋盘石，上面覆盖的积雪就像洁白的玉。
English: Climbing onto the checkerboard stone, the snow covering it is like a pure white marble.

古文：回望傅岩，屼嵲云际。
现代文：回头看傅岩，高耸于云际。
English: Looking back at Fuyan, towering above the clouds.

古文：由彼抵棋盘亦近，悔不从导者。
现代文：由傅岩到棋盘石距离也很近，后悔没有听从向导的话。
English: The distance from Fuyan Rock to Checkerboard Rock was also very close, and I regretted not listening to the guide.

古文：石旁有文珠庵，竹石清映。
现代文：棋盘石旁有座文殊庵，庵中的翠竹碧绿、山石清秀，相互辉映。
English: Beside the checkerboard stone, there is a Manjuan hermitage. The emerald green of the bamboo in the hermitage and the clear beauty of the mountains and rocks are reflected in each other.

古文：转东而南，二里，越岭二重，山半得观音岩。
现代文：转向东再朝南走二里路，翻越两座山岭，在山腰处见到观音岩。
English: Turn to the east and then head south for two miles, climb over two mountains, and see the Guanyin Rock on the mountainside.

古文：禅院清整，然无奇景，尤悔觌面失傅岩也。
现代文：观音岩禅院清净整洁，然而并没有什么奇异的景观。
English: The Guanyin Rock Zen Temple is clean and tidy, but there is nothing unusual about the landscape.

古文：仍越岭东下深坑，石涧四合，时有深潭，大为渊，小如臼，皆云 龙井 ，不能别其孰为 五 ，孰为 九 。
现代文：特别后悔的是已看到傅岩却失去了游览傅岩的良机。仍旧翻越山岭朝东方走下深坑，石涧四周有山崖围合，不时有深水潭，大的是渊，小的有如柞臼，都说是 龙井 ，不能分别出哪处是 五龙井 ，哪一处是 九龙井 。
English: What I particularly regret is that I have seen Fuyan but lost the good opportunity to visit Fuyan. I still climbed over the mountains to the east and walked down the deep pit. There are cliffs surrounding the stalagmites, and there are deep pools from time to time. The big one is the abyss, and the small one is like a millstone. They are all said to be Longjing. I can't tell which is Wulongjing and which is Jiulongjing.

古文：凡三里，石岩中石脉隐隐，导者指其一为青龙，一为白龙，余笑颔之。
现代文：往前总共又走了三里路，石岩中石脉隐隐约约，向导指其中之一处说是 青龙 ，指另一处说是 白龙 ，我微笑着点头。
English: In total, I walked another three miles ahead. The stone veins in the rock were faintly visible. The guide pointed to one of them and said that it was a blue dragon, and pointed to another and said that it was a white dragon. I smiled and nodded.

古文：又乱崖间望见一石嵌空，有水下注，外有横石跨之，颇似天台石梁。
现代文：又在乱崖中间看见一块石头嵌在崖壁，悬垂空中，有水往下流注，外面有横石跨越，很像天台山的石梁。
English: In the middle of the cliff, he also saw a stone embedded in the cliff wall, hanging in the air, with water flowing down, and cross-stones on the outside, much like the stone beams of Tiantai Mountain.

古文：伯化以天且晚，请速循涧觅大龙井。
现代文：道士汪伯化因为天色近晚，请求我迅速顺着山涧寻觅大龙井。
English: Because it was getting late, the Taoist Wang Bohua asked me to quickly go along the ridge of the mountain to look for the Great Dragon Well.

古文：忽遇僧自黄山来，云： 出此即大溪，行将何观？ 
现代文：忽然遇到从黄山归来的一位和尚，说： 走出这里就是大溪，还要去观赏什么景致？ 
English: Suddenly, he met a monk who had just returned from the Yellow Mountain. He said, "If you walk out of here, you will come to a large stream. What more do you want to see?

古文：遂返。
现代文：于是返回。
English: So he returned.

古文：里余，从别径向漆树园。
现代文：走过一里多路，从其他小路向漆树园前进。
English: Walked more than a mile, from other small roads to the lacquer tree garden.

古文：行巉石乱流间，返照映深木，一往幽丽。
现代文：在嘎石乱流间奔走，夕阳反照着深邃的树林，非常幽静而瑰丽。
English: Running between the quartzite turbulence, the sunset reflected the deep woods, very quiet and magnificent.

古文：三里，跻其巅，余以为高埒齐云，及望之，则文昌阁犹巍然也。
现代文：走完三里路，攀登上漆树园的山顶，我原以为其山高峻可与齐云山相等，等到仔细一看，则文昌阁还算是很巍峨的。
English: After walking three miles and climbing to the top of the lacquer tree garden, I thought that its height could be equal to that of Qiyun Mountain, but when I took a closer look, Wenchang Pavilion was still very tall.

古文：五老峰正对阁而起，五老之东为独耸寨，循其坳而出，曰西天门，五老之西为展旗峰，由其下而渡，曰芙蓉桥。
现代文：五老峰正对着文昌阁耸起，它的东面是独耸寨，顺着独耸寨的山坳出来，称为西天门；五老峰的西面是展旗峰，由展旗峰下渡过溪水，叫芙蓉桥。
English: Wulao Peak rises directly in front of Wenchang Pavilion. To the east of it is Duosheng Village. It is called the West Heaven Gate as it emerges from the mountains along Duosheng Village. To the west of Wulao Peak is Zhanqi Peak. It is called Hibiscus Bridge as it crosses the stream under Zhanqi Peak.

古文：余向出西天门，今自芙蓉桥入也。
现代文：我过去从西天门出来，现在从芙蓉桥进入。
English: I used to come out from the West Heaven Gate, but now I enter from the Hibiscus Bridge.

古文：余望三姑之旁，犹殢ì滞留日色，遂先登，则落照正在五老间。
现代文：我看见三姑岩的旁边，还滞留着夕阳的光辉，于是先登而上，见那西下的夕阳正在五老峰之间冉冉下坠。
English: I saw the glow of the setting sun still lingering next to the Sangu Rock, so I climbed up first and saw the setting sun was falling between the five old peaks.

古文：归庵，已晚餐矣。
现代文：回归榔梅庵时，已经是吃晚餐的时候了。
English: By the time we return to Jimei-an, it's time for dinner.

古文：相与追述所历，始知大龙井正在大溪口，足趾已及，而为僧所阻，亦数也！
现代文：相互追述这一天的经历，才知道大龙井正在大溪口，足趾都已经触及到了，却为和尚所阻止而不能游览，这也是天数了！
English: They recounted the day's experience to each other, only to find out that the Great Dragon Well is at the mouth of the large stream, their toes have already touched it, but they are prevented from visiting it by the monk. This is also the number of days!

