古文：君臣易位谓之逆，贤不肖并立谓之乱，动静不时谓之逆，生杀不当谓之暴。
现代文：君主大臣改变了相互正常的位次就称为逆，贤与不贤的人职爵贵贱无别就称为乱，违反了服役务农的时节规律就称之为逆，滥行生杀赏罚之权就叫暴戾。
English: If the minister of the sovereign changed the normal rank of each other, it was called a reverse; if there was no difference between the virtuous and the wicked, it was called a disorder; if there was a violation of the seasonal rules of service in agriculture, it was called a reverse; if there was a right to reward and punish for indiscriminate killing, it was called a tyranny.

古文：逆则失本，乱则失职，逆则失天，暴则失人。失本则损，失职则侵，失天则饥，失人则疾。
现代文：违反了君臣的正常位次就使国家失去了生存的根本，混乱了贤与不贤人的贵贱位序就会使之各自迷失本身的身份职守，动静违逆时令，就会失去上天的保佑，君主暴戾就会失去民心。
English: Violating the normal order of monarchs and ministers will cause the country to lose the foundation of its existence. Confusing the order of nobility and lowliness of the wise and the unwise will cause them to lose their own identity and duties. Acting against the times will cause them to lose the blessing of heaven. The tyranny of the monarch will cause them to lose the hearts of the people.

古文：周迁动作，天为之稽。天道不远，入与处，出与反。君臣当位谓之静，贤不肖当位谓之正，动静参于天地谓之文，诛禁时当谓之武。
现代文：国家失去根本就会受以重创，贤与不贤的人迷失了各自身份职守就会发生僭越侵权之事，失去天佑则会有饥馑凶荒，失去民心就会遭到天下的憎恨。进退动静，都必须以天道作为法则。天道不远，人事的一切举措都应与之协调。君臣各安其位就叫位次整肃，贤与不贤的人各安其位就叫贵贱正定，耕战参合于天时地利就称作 文 ，伐乱止暴合于天道就称作 武 。
English: If a country loses its foundation, it will be dealt a heavy blow. If both virtuous and unvirtuous people lose their respective duties, there will be excesses and infringements. If it loses God's blessing, there will be famine and savagery. If it loses the people's heart, it will be hated by the world. Both advance and retreat must be governed by Heaven's way. Heaven's way is not far away, and all measures of personnel should be coordinated with it. Monarchs and ministers who each secure their own position are called rectification, and those who are virtuous and unvirtuous who each secure their own position are called noble and lowly, and those who

古文：静则安，正则治，文则明，武则强。
现代文：君臣位次整肃则上下安定，贤与不贤的人位次正定则万事都可得到治理，有文德则政令清明，讲武德则国家强大。
English: The rectification of the ranks of officials and subordinates means stability up and down, the ranking of virtuous and non-virtuous people means that everything can be governed, the government decree is clear if there is morality, and the country is strong if there is military virtue.

古文：安则得本，治则得人，明则得天，强则威行。
现代文：上下安定则国家就有了存在的保证，万事治理会更好地招揽人才，政令清明会得到天助，国家强大则威慑天下。
English: If the country is stable from top to bottom, its existence is guaranteed. If everything is well-governed, it will be better able to attract talent. If the government's decrees are clear, it will receive help from heaven. If the country is strong, it will deter the world.

古文：参于天地，合于民心。文武并立，命之曰上同。
现代文：参合于天地，顺应于民心，文德武德并举，君主就会得到人民的普遍拥戴。
English: The monarch will be universally supported by the people if he or she is in harmony with heaven and earth, conforms to the people's will, and upholds both literature and martial arts.

古文：审知四度，可以定天下，可安一国。
现代文：深刻体会上述四项准则，大可平定天下，小可安治一国。
English: With a deep understanding of the above four principles, a big country can pacify the world, and a small country can govern a country safely.

古文：顺治其内，逆用于外，功成而伤。
现代文：在内政的治理上能够执道循理而在军事外交上却诛禁不当，则治国之功仍有所损。
English: In the governance of domestic affairs, it is possible to follow the path of reasonableness, but in military diplomacy, it is inappropriate, and the achievement of governing the country is still impaired.

古文：逆治其内，顺用于外，功成而亡。
现代文：如在内政的治理上反义逆理，而只是在军事外交上诛禁得当，那么征伐之功也会失去。
English: If one acts against justice and reason in the governance of domestic affairs, but only restrains it properly in military diplomacy, then the achievement of conquest will also be lost.

古文：内外皆逆，是谓重殃，身危为戮，国危破亡。
现代文：倘若内政外交的处理上都违背天道人理，这就是最大的祸殃，君主将身陷危难，还有被杀的危险，并且最终导致国家灭亡。
English: If the handling of domestic and foreign affairs is contrary to the principles of heaven and man, this is the greatest calamity, the monarch will be in danger, there is also the danger of being killed, and ultimately lead to the demise of the country.

古文：内外皆顺，功成而不废，后不逢殃。
现代文：如果内政外交皆顺应天道人理，则内绩武功都不会失去，而且亦无后患。名不副实，这是不宜取的，顺天道，这是动的特征。
English: If the internal affairs and foreign affairs all conform to the heavenly way and human reason, then the internal achievements and military exploits will not be lost, and there will be no sequelae. It is not worthy of the name, it is not appropriate, it is in accordance with the heavenly way, this is the characteristic of the movement.

古文：声华实寡者，庸也。
现代文：中人理，这是静的特质。
English: In human nature, this is a static trait.

古文：顺者，动也。正者，事之根也。
现代文：执守天地之道，遵循人事之理，必须从最基本的事情做起，并沿这条路去安排内政和外交。
English: To adhere to the way of heaven and earth and follow the principle of personnel, we must start from the most basic things and follow this road to arrange domestic affairs and diplomacy.

古文：执道循理，必从本始，顺为经纪。
现代文：在征伐有罪之国时，必须符合天道。
English: When conquering a guilty country, it must be in accordance with the heavenly law.

古文：禁伐当罪，必中天理。
现代文：背盟弃义则进退窘困，征伐行动不合于天意则必受损伤。
English: Those who abandon the alliance will be in trouble, and those whose conquering actions are not in accordance with the will of Heaven will be harmed.

古文：背约则窘，达刑则伤。背逆合当，为若有事，虽无成功，亦无天殃。
现代文：顺于天理、合于天当，则战争一旦发生，即使不能取得战功，也不会有什么灾祸。
English: According to the laws of heaven, once a war occurs, even if you can't win the war, there will be no disaster.

古文：毋止生以死，毋御死以生，毋为虚声。
现代文：不要从死亡的角度去阻止新生，不要从永生的角度去阻止死亡，也不要虚张声势徒有虚名。
English: Don't try to stop the new birth from the perspective of death, don't try to stop death from the perspective of eternal life, and don't bluff.

古文：声溢于实，是谓灭名。
现代文：名声超过实际其结果反而是无名。
English: Fame outweighs reality, and the result is obscurity.

古文：极阳以杀，极阴以生，是谓逆阴阳之命。
现代文：在阳气极盛时，反有阴气孕育着，在阴气极盛时，却有阳气萌生着，这种现象，便称作变异的阴阳规律。
English: When the yang is at its peak, on the other hand, the yin is pregnant, and when the yin is at its peak, the yang is budding. This phenomenon is called the yin-yang law of variation.

古文：极阳杀于外，极阴生于内。已逆阴阳，又逆其位，大则国亡，小则身受其殃。
现代文：阳气萌生于内，已经出现变异的阴阳定律，又不能及时摆正具体对策位置，那么大则国家败亡，小则殃及自身。
English: If the yang arises from within, and the law of yin and yang has already mutated, and the specific countermeasures cannot be put in place in time, then the country will be defeated in the large scale, and it will be self-inflicted in the small scale.

古文：故因阳伐死，因阴建生。当者有数，极而反，盛而衰：天地之道也，人之理也。
现代文：因此在阳极阴生时，要果断地讨伐开始走向衰落之阳，而在阴极阳生时，要及时扶植新生之阳。天当有定数，这就是至极时就开始走向反面，盛极时就开始走向衰落；这不仅是天地自然的规律，也是人类社会的规律。
English: Therefore, when the anode is negative, it is necessary to resolutely fight against it and begin to move towards the declining sun, and when the cathode is positive, it is necessary to timely support the newly born sun. The sky should have a fixed number, that is, when it is at its maximum, it will begin to move to the opposite side, and when it is at its peak, it will begin to decline; this is not only the law of nature of heaven and earth, but also the law of human society.

古文：逆顺同道而异理，审知逆顺，是谓道纪。
现代文：逆、顺两种阴阳定律都同样是天道决定的，但人类相应的对策却不同。详细说明逆、顺两种定律，这就是在总体上把握了道的准则。
English: The two laws of yin and yang, the reverse and the forward, are equally determined by the heavenly way, but the corresponding countermeasures of human beings are different.Detailed explanation of the two laws, the reverse and the forward, is to grasp the principle of the way as a whole.

古文：以强下弱，何国不克；以贵下贱，何人不得；以贤下不肖，何事不治。
现代文：强盛的向弱小的表示谦卑，那么有什么国家不能战胜呢？高贵的向卑贱的表示虚心谦卑，那么什么人不能归附呢？贤人向不贤的人表示虚心谦卑，那么国家又有什么事情不能治理呢？
English: The powerful show humility to the weak, so what country can't be conquered? The noble show meekness and humility to the lowly, so what person can't be attached? The wise show meekness and humility to the unwise, so what things can't the country manage?

古文：规之内曰圆，矩之内曰方，悬之下曰正，水之上曰平；尺寸之度曰大小短长，权衡之称曰轻重不爽，斗石之量曰少多有数，绳墨之立曰曲直有度。八度者，用之稽也。
现代文：规用来画圆，矩用来画方，悬用以测端正，水用以测水平。用尺寸度量小大短长，用权衡称量轻重，用斗石量多少，用绳准来测度曲直。以上八种度量标准是人们日常生活中实际应用的准则。
English: The gauge is used to draw a circle, the moment is used to draw a square, the suspension is used to measure the right angle, and the water is used to measure the level. The size is used to measure the length, the weight is used to weigh the weight, the stone is used to measure the size, and the rope is used to measure the curvature. The above eight kinds of measurement standards are the practical application standards in people's daily lives.

古文：日月星辰之期，四时之度，动静之立，外内之处，天之稽也。
现代文：日月星辰都遵循着固定的运行周期，四时更迭都有一定的次序，自然界的消息盈虚进退出入自有一定的守则，事物的适度与非适度自有分际，这些都是天道自有的法则。
English: The sun, the moon and the stars all follow a fixed cycle of operation, the four-hour change has a certain order, the news of the natural world has a certain code of its own, the moderation and non-moderation of things have their own distinction, these are the laws of heaven.

古文：高下不蔽其形，美恶不匿其情，地之稽也。
现代文：地势高下各有定位，不至隐蔽不明。土地肥瘠不同，不至隐匿不清，这些都是地道所含的法则。
English: The height of the terrain has its own positioning, so it is not hidden and unclear. The land fertility is different, so it is not hidden and unclear. These are the rules contained in the tunnel.

古文：君臣不失其位，士不失其处，任能毋过其所长，去私而立公，人之稽也。美恶有名，逆顺有形，情伪有实，王公执之以为天下正。
现代文：国君臣子都各居其位，士人也得其所哉，擢用贤能量才授官，治理百姓秉公办事，这是人道所应守的法则，是非善恶各有名分，背于道理或合于道理自有客观情形作依据，真实虚假自有事实来判定，君主只要掌握上述准则，就可以成为天下的楷模。
English: Monarchs and their subjects all occupy their respective positions, and the nobles also receive their due, and they use their wisdom and energy to promote and appoint officials, and to govern the people and act impartially. This is the rule that humanity should abide by. There are specific points for good and evil, and there are objective circumstances that are contrary to reason or reasonable, and there are facts that are true and false to judge. As long as the monarch has mastered the above criteria, he can become a model for the world.

古文：因天时，伐天悔，谓之武。
现代文：顺应天道，诛伐必然要灭亡的国家，这叫 武 。
English: In accordance with Heaven's way, the country that will inevitably perish is called Wu.

古文：武刃而以文随其后，则有成功矣，用二文一武者王。
现代文：在武功杀伐之后继之以文德安抚，这样就会有成功，而使用二分文德一分武功就可以称王天下。
English: If one succeeds in killing with martial arts and then pacifies with literature and virtue, then one will be successful, and if one succeeds in using two parts literature and virtue and one part martial arts, then one will be king of the world.

古文：其主道，离人理，处狂惑之位处而不悟，身必有戮。
现代文：像那种弃天道、背离人理、处于悖逆之位而尚不省悟的君主，必有杀身之祸。
English: Like that kind of monarch who abandons the heavenly way, deviates from human reason, and is in a rebellious position and has not yet come to his senses, there must be the calamity of killing himself.

古文：柔弱者无罪而几，不及而趯，是谓柔弱。
现代文：守雌节者虽无忧患却能居安思危，祸患未至却能随时警惕，这便是雌节的含义。
English: The meaning of the female festival is that those who keep the female festival can live in peace and think about danger even though they have no worries, and they can be alert at any time before the evil comes.

古文：刚正而强者临罪而不究。
现代文：而恃雄节者却正相反，祸患已经临头还丝毫意识不到。
English: On the other hand, those who celebrate the male festival are just the opposite. They are completely unaware of the impending disaster.

古文：名功相抱，是故长久。
现代文：名声与功绩相符，所以才能长存久安。
English: Fame and merit go together, that's why they last.

古文：名功不相抱，名进实退，是谓失道，其卒必有身咎。
现代文：名声与功绩不相符，名声超过实际，这就弃失了天道，最终必有祸患。
English: Fame and merit do not match, fame exceeds reality, this is the abandonment of the heavenly way, and ultimately there must be a disaster.

古文：黄金珠玉藏积，怨之本也。
现代文：厚积黄金珠玉而不分他人，这是惹怨的祸根。
English: The accumulation of gold and jewels, regardless of others, is the root cause of resentment.

古文：女乐玩好燔材，乱之基也。
现代文：盛置女乐珍玩而蛊惑其心，这是生乱的开始。
English: This is the beginning of the turmoil.

古文：守怨之本，养乱之基，虽有圣人，不能为谋。
现代文：保守惹怨的祸根，培养生乱的苗头，即便有圣人在他的国家，也仍然难以为这样的君主出谋划策了。
English: Even if there is a saint in his country, it is still difficult for such a monarch to come up with a plan.

