古文：梁焘王岩叟郑雍孙永
现代文：梁焘字况之，郓州须城人。
English: In the case of Liang Kun, Zhangzhou must be a city.

古文：梁焘，字况之，郓州须城人。父蒨，兵部员外郎、直史馆。
现代文：父亲梁蒨，兵部员外郎、直史馆。
English: His father was Liang Jun, his brother was a member of the military, and he was a member of the History Museum.

古文：焘以蒨任，为太庙斋郎。
现代文：梁焘因梁在任，为太庙斋郎。
English: Because Liang was in office, Liang Xuan was appointed as the chief priest of the Great Temple.

古文：举进士中第，编校秘阁书籍，迁集贤校理、通判明州，检详枢密五房文字。
现代文：考中进士中等等次，编校秘阁书籍，升集贤校理、通判明州，检详枢密五房文字。
English: The examination of the middle school entrance examination, etc., the compilation of secret books, the collection of scholars, the establishment of the state, and the examination of the confidential five-room text.

古文：元丰时久旱，上书论时政曰：
现代文：元丰年间久旱，梁焘上书议论时政说：
English: During the Yuan and Feng dynasties, there was a long drought, and Liang Qi wrote a book discussing the current political situation, saying:

古文：陛下日者闵雨，靖惟政事之阙，惕然自责。
现代文： 陛下往日怜念下雨，为了安定政事的过失，惧戒自省。
English: In the past, His Majesty longed for rain, and for the sake of political stability, refrained from making mistakes and self-examination.

古文：丁卯发诏，癸酉而雨，是上天顾听陛下之德言，而喜其有及民之意也。
现代文：丁卯日发下诏书，癸酉日下雨，这是上天眷念陛下的德言，而喜其有利于百姓的意思。
English: Dingwu issued an edict on the third day, and it rained on the third day. This is the meaning of Heaven remembering His Majesty's wise words and favoring the people.

古文：当四方仰雨十月之久，民刻于新法，嗷嗷如焦，而京师尤甚，闤阓细民，罔不失职，智愚相视，日有大变之忧。
现代文：正当全国各地祈求下雨有十个月之久，百姓被新法所刻剥，像火烧般哀鸣，而京城尤其严重，街市小民，没有不疏于职责的，聪明的、愚蠢的互相对望，好像天有大灾变的忧虑。
English: At a time when people all over the country have been praying for rain for ten months, the people have been torn to shreds by the new law and are wailing like they are on fire, and the capital is particularly serious. The small people in the streets, who are not negligent in their duties, and the clever and the stupid are looking at each other, as if they are worried about a great disaster.

古文：陛下既惠以诏旨，又施之行事，讲除刻文，蠲损缗钱等，一日之间，欢声四起。
现代文：陛下才下诏书示以恩惠，又着手实行，计及废除刻薄的条文，免除减损钱数，一天之间，欢呼声四起。
English: It was only after His Majesty issued an imperial edict to show his favor, and proceeded to implement it, taking into account the abolition of the harsh provisions and the exemption of the deduction of money, that there were cheers all over the day.

古文：距诞节三日而膏泽降，是天以雨寿陛下之万年，感圣心于大寤，有以还其仁政也。
现代文：距离陛下生日三天而滋润土壤的雨水降下，这是上天以雨水来祝陛下享寿万年，为圣心大觉大悟而感动，有用来归还仁政的意思。
English: Three days before His Majesty's birthday, the rainwater that moistens the soil began to fall. This is God's way of using rainwater to wish His Majesty a long and happy life. It was moved by His Sacred Heart's great enlightenment and had the meaning of being used to return benevolence.

古文：然法令乖戾，为毒于民者，所变才能万一。
现代文： 然而法令不合，对百姓有害的，所改变的只有万分之一。
English: However, only one in ten thousand of the laws that are inconsistent and harmful to the people have been changed.

古文：人心之不解，故天意亦未释，而雨不再施。
现代文：因为人心的不理解，所以天意也没有解开，而不再降雨。
English: Because of the lack of understanding of the people, the providence has not been resolved, and it will no longer rain.

古文：陛下亦以此为戒，而夙夜虑之乎？
现代文：陛下也因此为戒，而日夜担心它吗？
English: Is that why your majesty is afraid of it, and worries about it day and night?

古文：今陛下之所知者，市易事耳。
现代文：现在陛下所知道的，只是市易法这件事而已。
English: All that His Majesty knows now is the matter of the Exchange Act.

古文：法之为害，岂特此耶？
现代文：法令的危害，难道只是此吗？
English: Is this all the harm caused by the ordinance?

古文：曰青苗钱也，助役钱也，方田也，保甲也，淤田也。
现代文：青苗钱、助役钱、方田、保甲、淤田都是。
English: The young seedlings money, the assistant money, the square field, the protective armor, and the silted field are all the same.

古文：兼是数者，而天下之民被其害。
现代文：兼有这几事，而天下百姓遭受它的危害。
English: All of these things are happening, and the people of the world are being harmed by it.

古文：青苗之钱未一及偿，而责以免役；免役之钱未暇入，而重以淤田；淤田方下，而复有方田；方田未息，而迫以保甲。
现代文：青苗钱没有来得及偿还，而责以免役；免役钱没有来得及交纳，而重以淤田；淤田刚刚下达，而又有方田；方田没有平息，而迫以保甲。
English: The young seedlings did not have time to repay the money, but they were forced to avoid service; the free money did not have time to pay, but they were repaid with silt fields; the silt fields had just been issued, but there were square fields; the square fields did not subside, but they were forced to keep the armor.

古文：是徒扰百姓，使不得少休于圣泽。
现代文：这是白白地骚扰百姓，使他们不得在皇帝的恩泽下稍加休息。
English: This is a gratuitous harassment of the people, so that they are not allowed to rest a little under the emperor's grace.

古文：其为害之实，虽一有言之者，必以下主吏，主吏妄报以无是，则从而信之，恬不复问，而反坐言者。
现代文：其为害百姓的实际情况，即使一旦有人说出，必定以之传达给主管官吏，主管官吏以没有这回事妄报，就听从而且相信他，安然不再过问，而且反而治罪说话的人。
English: Even if the actual situation of his harm to the people, once someone says it, it must be conveyed to the competent officials. The competent officials listen and believe him, saying that there is no such thing, and they will no longer ask, but instead punish the speaker.

古文：虽间遣使循行，而苟且宠禄，巧为妄诞，成就其事，至请遍行其法，上下相隐，习以成风。
现代文：虽然间或派使者巡行，但苟且于宠爱俸禄，巧为妄语荒诞，成就其事，至于请求全部实行这些法令，上下互相隐瞒，习以成风。
English: Although envoys were sent from time to time, they only cared about their salaries, and made up absurdities to achieve their goals. As for the request to fully implement these laws, it was common practice for the higher and lower levels to conceal them from each other.

古文：臣谓天下之患，不患祸乱之不可去，患朋党蔽蒙之俗成，使上不得闻所当闻，故政日以敝，而祸乱卒至也。
现代文： 我认为天下的祸患，不担心祸乱不能除去，却担心朋党蒙蔽的习俗形成，使上下不能闻见所应闻见的事，因此政治日益败坏，而祸乱终于到来。
English: In my opinion, the scourge of the world is not the fear that the scourge cannot be eliminated, but the fear of the formation of a custom that is blinded by cronyism, so that people cannot hear what they should hear, so that politics is getting worse and worse, and the scourge has finally arrived.

古文：陛下可不深思其故乎？
现代文：陛下能不深思它的原因吗？ 
English: Would your majesty care to speculate as to the cause?

古文：疏入，不报。
现代文：奏疏入内，朝廷不为醒悟。
English: There has been no response since the complaint was filed.

古文：内侍王中正将兵出疆，干赏不以法。
现代文：内侍王中正率领军队出边疆，不按法制求取赏赐。
English: Inner palace attendant Wang Zhongzheng is leading the army out of the frontier and is not seeking rewards according to the legal system.

古文：焘争之不得，请外，出知宣州。
现代文：梁焘争辩不能，请求外任，出知宣州。
English: Unable to argue, Liang Zheng asked to be reassigned and sent to Xuanzhou.

古文：入辞，神宗曰： 枢臣云卿不肯安职，何也？ 对曰： 臣居官五年，非敢不安职，恐不胜任使，故去耳。 神宗曰： 王中正功赏文书，何为独不可？ 曰： 中正罔冒侥觊，臣不敢屈法以负陛下。 未几，提点京西刑狱，哲宗立，召为工部郎中，迁太常少卿、右谏议大夫。
现代文：入朝辞谢，神宗说 ：宰辅大臣说你不肯安于职守，为什么呢？ 梁焘应对说： 我居官五年，不是敢不安于职守，只是担心不能胜任使命，因此离开罢了。 神宗说： 王中正功赏文书，你为什么独独认为不可以？ 回答说 ：王中正欺罔假冒侥幸希图，我不敢委曲法制以辜负陛下。 不久，梁焘为京西提点刑狱。哲宗即位，召用为工部郎中，升太常少卿、右谏议大夫。
English: When thanking him for entering the imperial court, Shenzong said, "The Vice-Minister said that you refused to be satisfied with your duties, why?" Liang Zheng replied, "I have been in office for five years. I did not dare to be uneasy about my duties, but I was worried that I could not fulfill my mission, so I just left." Shenzong said, "Wang Zhongzheng is honoring the clerks, why do you think that it is not possible to be unique?" He replied, "Wang Zhongzheng is bullying, pretending to be lucky, and I dare not bend the law to disappoint your majesty." Soon, Liang Zheng

古文：有请宣仁后御文德殿服衮冕受册者，焘率同列谏，引薛奎谏章献明肃皇后不当以王服见太庙事，宣仁后欣纳。
现代文：有人请宣仁太后临幸文德殿穿礼服礼帽接受册封，梁焘率领同事进谏，引用薛奎劝谏章献明肃皇后不应穿帝王服装见太庙事，宣仁太后欣然采纳。
English: Some people asked the Empress Dowager of Xuanren, Lin Xuanwende, to wear a ceremonial dress and a ceremonial hat to receive the official seal. Liang Jie led his colleagues into the coffin, citing Xue Kui's advice that the empress should not wear imperial clothing to see the temple. The Empress Dowager of Xuanren gladly accepted.

古文：又论市易已废，乞蠲中下户逋负；又乞欠青苗下户，不得令保人备偿。
现代文：梁焘又论市易法已废除，请求免除中户下户的欠债；又请求欠青苗钱的下户所欠钱款，不得令担保的人全部偿还。
English: Liang Wei also said that the Municipal Exchange Law had been abolished, and requested that the debts of the middle and lower households be exempted. He also requested that the money owed by the lower households that owed money to the young seedlings should not be fully repaid by the guarantor.

古文：文彦博议遣刘奉世使夏国，御史张舜民论其不当遣，降通判虢州。
现代文：文彦博建议派刘奉世出使夏国，御史张舜民论不应派人出使，降为虢州通判。
English: Wen Yanbo suggested that Liu Bongshi should be sent as an envoy to Xia Province, and that Zhang Ye Min should not be sent as an envoy, and that it should be reduced to Bozhou Tongzhan.

古文：焘言： 御史持纪纲之官，得以犯颜正论，况臣下过失，安得畏忌不言哉？
现代文：梁焘说： 御史是坚持法制的官员，能够犯颜正论，何况臣下有过失，怎能害怕忌讳而不直言进谏呢？
English: Liang Zhe said: Gu Shi is an official who adheres to the legal system and can be honest, not to mention that his subordinates have made mistakes. How can he be afraid of taboo and not speak out?

古文：今御史敢言大臣者，天下之公议；大臣不快御史者，一夫之私心。
现代文：现在御史敢于说大臣的，这是天下的公议；大臣不满意御史的，这是一人的私心。
English: Now, if you dare to say that you are a minister, this is the public opinion of the world; if the minister is not satisfied with you, this is a person's selfishness.

古文：罪天下敢言之公议，便一夫不快之私心，非公朝盛事也。 时同论者傅尧俞、王岩叟、朱光庭、王觌、孙升、韩川，凡七人，悉召至都堂，敕谕以 事当权其轻重，故不惜一新进御史，以慰老臣。 焘又言： 若论年龄爵禄，则老臣为重；若论法度纲纪，则老臣为轻。
现代文：怪罪天下敢于说话的公议，便宜一人不快乐的私心，这不是公正朝代盛事。 当时同时议论的傅尧俞、王岩叟、朱光庭、王觌、孙升、韩川，共七人，都被召到尚书省都堂，以 事情应权衡轻重，因此不惜一个刚进用的御史，来安慰老臣 敕谕他们。梁焘又说 ：如果论年龄爵位俸禄，那么老臣为重；如果论法度法制，那么老臣为轻。
English: It is not a fair dynastic event to blame the public opinion of the world for daring to speak, and the selfishness of one person for being unhappy. At that time, seven people who were discussing at the same time, Fu Xi, Wang Yanzhang, Zhu Guangting, Wang Hui, Sun Sheng, and Han Chuan, were all called to the Shangshu Provincial Capital Hall to weigh the weight of the matter, so they did not hesitate to use a newly-appointed historian to comfort the old minister to lecture them. Liang Hui also said: If it is about age, rank and salary, then the old minister is heavy; if it is about law and legal system, then

古文：御史者，天子之法官也，不可以大臣鞅鞅而斥去。
现代文：御史，是天子的法官，不能因为大臣郁郁不乐而贬斥去职。
English: As a magistrate who is the son of heaven, he cannot be dismissed from his post because the minister is depressed.

古文：愿还舜民，以正国体。 章十上，不听。
现代文：希望召回张舜民，以端正国体。 奏章十次上呈，没有被采纳。
English: It was hoped that Zhang Ximin would be recalled to straighten out the national team. The report was submitted ten times, but was not adopted.

古文：焘又面责给事中张问不能驳还舜民制命，以为失职。
现代文：梁焘又当面责斥给事中张问不能驳还贬降张舜民的制命，认为是失职。
English: Liang Jun also reprimanded Zhang Qiao in person and belittled Zhang Ximin's command, which was considered a dereliction of duty.

古文：坐诟同列，出为集贤殿修撰、知潞州，辞不拜，曰： 臣本论张舜民不当罢，如以为非，即应用此受斥。
现代文：由于诟骂同事，梁焘出任集贤殿修撰、知潞州，辞谢不受君命，说 ：我本来论张舜民不应罢免，如果认为不对，就应该因此受贬斥。
English: As a result of abusing his colleagues, Liang Wei, who served as a member of Jixian, Shuxian and Zhishang, refused to accept the king's order to resign, saying: I originally argued that Zhang Ximin should not be dismissed, and if I thought it was wrong, I should be reprimanded for it.

古文：今乃得以微罪冒美职，守剧郡，如此则朝廷命令，不能明辨曲直，以好恶示天下矣。 不报。
现代文：现在只得以微小的罪过冒充好的官职，守重郡，这样则朝廷命令，不能明辨曲直是非，以好恶告示天下了。 
English: Now it is only possible to feign a good official position with a minor crime, to keep a heavy county, so the court order, unable to distinguish between right and wrong, announces the world with likes and dislikes.

古文：至潞，值岁饥，不待命发常平粟振民。
现代文：没有得到答复。到潞州，正值饥年，没有等待命令分发常平粟赈济百姓。
English: There was no reply. When I arrived in Zhangzhou, it was the year of famine, and I did not wait for the order to distribute common poppy seeds to help the people.

古文：流人闻之，来者不绝，焘处之有条，人不告病。
现代文：流亡在外的人听说此事，来者不绝，梁焘处理此事有条理，人们不再报告困乏。
English: Exiles heard about this and came in droves. Liang Ye dealt with the matter in an orderly manner, and people no longer reported being exhausted.

古文：明年，以左谏议大夫召。
现代文：第二年，梁焘被召为左谏议大夫。
English: In the second year, Liang Jun was called to be the doctor of the left lower jaw.

古文：甫就道，民攀辕不得行，逾太行，抵河内乃已。
现代文：刚刚上路，百姓攀住车辕，车不能行走，越过太行山，抵达河内才平息。
English: Just on the road, the people clung to the car, the car could not walk, crossed the Taihang Mountains, and only calmed down when they reached Hanoi.

古文：既对，上书言： 帝富于春秋，未专宸断；太皇保佑圣主，制政帘帷，奸人易为欺蔽。
现代文：不久应对，上书说： 皇帝年壮，没有专权独断。太皇太后保佑圣明的君主，垂帘听政，奸恶的人易于欺骗蒙蔽。
English: Shortly after the reply, the letter said: The emperor is young and strong, and has no arbitrary power. The empress dowager blesses the sacred monarch, obeys the government, and treacherous people are easily deceived.

古文：愿正纲纪，明法度，采用忠言，讲求仁术。 两宫嘉纳焉。
现代文：希望端正法制，申明法度，采用忠言，讲求仁政之术。 
English: It is hoped to rectify the legal system, affirm the rule of law, adopt loyal advice, and talk about the art of benevolent government.

古文：前宰相蔡确作诗怨谤，焘与刘安世交攻之。
现代文：哲宗、太皇太后表示嘉许采纳。前宰相蔡确作诗怨恨毁谤，梁焘与刘安世交相攻击他。
English: Zhezong and the Grand Empress Dowager expressed their appreciation for the adoption. Former Prime Minister Cai Zhengyi wrote a poem of resentment and slander, and Liang Xuan and Liu An attacked him.

古文：焘又言： 方今忠于确者，多于忠朝廷之士；敢为奸言者，多于敢正论之人。
现代文：梁焘说 ：现在忠心于蔡确的人，多于忠心朝廷的士人；敢于为奸言的人，多于敢于正论的人。
English: Liang Qi said, "Nowadays, there are more people who are loyal to Cai Jizhen than those who are loyal to the imperial court; there are more people who dare to speak falsely than those who dare to speak the truth."

古文：以此见确之气焰凶赫，根株牵连，贼化害政，为患滋大。 确卒窜新州。
现代文：由此可见蔡确的气焰汹汹显赫，盘根错节，贼人化变危害政治，为患越来越大。 蔡确终于被贬窜新州。
English: From this, it can be seen that Cai Zhengyi's arrogance is formidable and conspicuous, his roots are intertwined, and his transformation into a thief endangers politics, and his troubles are getting bigger and bigger. Cai Zhengyi was finally demoted to Xinzhou.

古文：焘进御史中丞。
现代文：梁焘升任御史中丞。
English: Liang Jian was promoted to the position of goshi chujo.

古文：邓润甫除吏部尚书，焘论润甫柔佞不立，巧为进取。
现代文：邓润甫被任命为吏部尚书，梁焘论邓润甫怯懦邪佞没有建树，巧为提升。
English: Deng Runfu was appointed as the secretary of the cadre department, and Liang Qi said that Deng Runfu was cowardly and evil, and did not build a tree, and was cleverly promoted.

古文：不听。
现代文：没有得到采纳。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：改权户部尚书，不拜，以龙图阁直学士知郑州。
现代文：改任权户部尚书，不受命，以龙图阁直学士的身份任郑州知州。
English: He was appointed to Zhengzhou Zhizhou with the status of Longtu Ge's direct bachelor.

古文：旬日，入权礼部尚书，为翰林学士。
现代文：十天后，入朝任权礼部尚书，为翰林学士。
English: Ten days later, he was appointed to the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies of the Joseon Dynasty, and became a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：元祐七年，拜尚书右丞，转左丞。
现代文：元七年，被授任尚书右丞，转任左丞。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Shangshu Yujo and transferred to the title of Zojo.

古文：蔡京帅蜀，焘曰： 元丰侍从，可用者多；惟京轻险贪愎，不可用。 又与同列议夏国地界，不能合，遂丐去。
现代文：蔡京为蜀州帅臣，梁焘说： 元丰时的侍从，可以任用的很多，只有蔡京轻薄险恶贪心固执，不能任用。 又与同事议论夏国边界，意见不能协调，于是乞求去职。
English: Cai Jing is a handsome retainer of Shuzhou, Liang Qi said: There are many attendants who can be appointed in Yuanfeng's time, but Cai Jing is frivolous, sinister, greedy and stubborn, and cannot be appointed. He also discussed the border of Xia with his colleagues, and the opinions could not be coordinated, so he begged to leave the post.

古文：哲宗遣近臣问所以去意，且令密访人才。
现代文：哲宗派亲信大臣询问他之所以去职的意思，而且令他密访人才。
English: Zhe sent a close confidant minister to inquire about the reason for his departure, and ordered him to secretly visit the talent.

古文：焘曰： 信任不笃，言不见听，而询问人才，非臣所敢当也。 使者再至，乃言： 人才可大任者，陛下自知之。
现代文：梁焘说 ：对我信任不笃深，说话又不被采纳，而向我询问人才进用之事，不是我所敢承担的。 使者又到，就说： 可以大加任用的人才，陛下自己知道。
English: Liang Juan said, "It is not my duty to be asked about the promotion of talented people when my trust in you is not deep and my words are not accepted. When the envoy came again, he said, "Your Majesty knows the talents that can be promoted."

古文：但须识别邪正，公天下之善恶，图任旧人中坚正纯厚有人望者，不牵左右好恶之言以移圣意，天下幸甚。 
现代文：但必须识别邪佞正直，公开天下的善恶，图谋任用旧臣中坚正纯厚、有声望的人，不被左右好恶之言所牵连以动摇圣意，则天下非常幸运。 
English: However, it is necessary to recognize the wicked and honest, disclose the good and evil of the world, and try to appoint the most upright, pure and reputable person among the former ministers, and the world is very lucky not to be affected by the words of likes and dislikes to shake the sacred will.

古文：以疾，罢为资政殿学士、同醴泉观使。
现代文：因病被罢为资政殿学士、同醴泉观使。
English: Due to illness, he was demoted to the position of a scholar of the House of Councillors, and a peer of Quanquan.

古文：故事，非宰相不除使，遂置同使以宠之。
现代文：按照旧有的成例，不是宰相不能任命为使，于是设置同使以示宠爱。
English: According to the old precedent, the prime minister cannot appoint an envoy, so he set up a co-envoy to show his favor.

古文：力辞，改知颍昌府。
现代文：梁焘极力辞谢，改知颍昌府。
English: Liang Jie tried his best to say thank you, and changed the address to Beichangfu.

古文：既出京师，哲宗遣中贵谕以复用之旨。
现代文：不久出京城，哲宗派有权势的宦官以复加任用的旨意晓谕他。
English: Soon after he left the capital, the powerful eunuchs of the Zhe sect told him of their intention to reappoint him.

古文：绍圣元年，知郓州。
现代文：绍圣元年，梁焘任郓州知州。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, Liang Yu was appointed as the leader of Bozhou and Chizhou.

古文：朋党论起，哲宗曰： 梁焘每起中正之论，其开陈排击，尽出公议，朕皆记之。 以故最后责，竟以司马光党黜知鄂州。
现代文：朋党之论兴起，哲宗说： 梁焘常常起中正之论，其开列陈述排斥攻击，都是出于公议，朕都记下了。 因故最后被责斥，竟以司马光党羽的罪名贬退知鄂州。
English: On the rise of the theory of party cronyism, Zhezong said: "Liang Yu'er often takes up the theory of the center-right, and his list of statements and rejection of attacks are all based on public opinion, I have recorded them all. For some reason, he was finally rebuked, and he was accused of being a party follower of Sima Guang.

古文：三年，再贬少府监。分司南京。
现代文：绍圣三年，再贬为少府监，分掌南京。
English: Shaosheng three years, and then downgraded to Junior Prefectural Supervisor, in charge of Nanjing.

古文：明年，三贬雷州别驾，化州安置。
现代文：第二年，三贬雷州别驾，在化州居住。
English: In the second year, the three of them left Leizhou and went to live in Huazhou.

古文：三年卒，年六十四。
现代文：当年去世，终年六十四岁。
English: He died that year, aged 64.

古文：徙其子于昭州。
现代文：把他的儿子迁移于昭州居住。
English: He moved his son to live in Zhaozhou.

古文：徽宗立，始得归。
现代文：徽宗即位，才得以返归。
English: It was only after the enthronement of Huizong that they were able to return.

古文：焘自立朝，一以引援人物为意。
现代文：梁焘自从在朝廷，一心以引荐援用人物为意。
English: Ever since he was in the imperial court, Liang Kun has been intent on introducing and citing figures.

古文：在鄂作《荐士录》，具载姓名。
现代文：在鄂州作《荐士录》，开列记载姓名。
English: In Ezhou, the "Recommendation List" was made, listing the recorded names.

古文：客或见其书，曰： 公所植桃李，乘时而发，但不向人开耳。 焘笑曰： 焘出入侍从，至位执政，八年之间所荐，用之不尽，负愧多矣。 其好贤乐善如此。
现代文：客人偶然见到此书，说： 您所培植的桃李，乘时而发，只是不向人开花罢了。 梁焘笑着说： 我出入侍从皇帝，位至执政大臣，八年之间所荐举的，用之不尽，负愧很多了。 梁焘好贤乐善如此。
English: A guest happened to see this book and said, "The peach and plum trees you have cultivated take time to bloom, but they don't bloom for people." Liang Yao said with a smile, "In the eight years since I entered and left the service of the emperor and rose to the position of minister in power, the things I have recommended are inexhaustible, and I am truly humbled. Liang Yao is so virtuous, so happy, and so good.

古文：王岩叟，字彦霖，大名清平人。
现代文：王岩叟字彦霖，大名清平人。
English: Wang Iwatsuki Aza Yanlin, Daimyo (feudal lord) Qingping.

古文：幼时，语未正已知文字。
现代文：小时候，说话还不平正就已经识字。
English: When I was a child, I was able to read and write even before I could speak properly.

古文：仁宗患词赋致经术不明，初置明经科，岩叟年十八，乡举、省试、廷对皆第一。
现代文：仁宗担心词赋导致经术不明，开始设置明经科，岩叟十几岁时，乡举、省试、廷对都是第一名。
English: Ninsong was worried that the word endowment would lead to unclear sutras, so he began to set up a clear sutra department. When Iwatsuki was a teenager, he won first place in the township election, the provincial examination, and the imperial examination.

古文：调栾城簿、泾州推官，甫两月，闻弟丧，弃官归养。
现代文：调任栾城主簿、泾州推官，刚二个月，听说弟弟死去，弃官归养。
English: Just two months after he was transferred to the post of the main bookkeeper of Zhangcheng and the governor of Zhangzhou, he heard that his younger brother had died, and he resigned his post and returned to his family.

古文：熙宁中，韩琦留守北京，以为贤，辟管勾国子监，又辟管勾安抚司机宜文字，监晋州折博、炼盐务。
现代文：熙宁年中，韩琦留守北京，认为王岩叟贤能，征召为管勾国子监，又征召为管勾安抚司机宜文字，监晋州折博、炼盐务。
English: In the middle of the Ninth Five-Year Plan, Han Zheng stayed in Beijing and thought that Wang Yansheng was a good man. He was conscripted to supervise the recruitment of sons and daughters of the state, and he was also conscripted to supervise the pacification of the driver Yigong, supervise the Jinzhou mining and salt refining.

古文：韩绛代琦，复欲留用。
现代文：韩绛代理韩琦，又打算留用他。
English: Han Mi, acting for Han Mi, also plans to keep him on.

古文：岩叟谢曰： 岩叟，魏公之客，不愿出他门也。 士君子称之。
现代文：王岩叟辞谢说： 岩叟是魏公的门客，不愿意出于他人的门下。 士人君子称赞他。
English: Wang Yanzhong said: Iwanzhong is a disciple of Wei Gong, and does not want to be under the tutelage of others. The scholar and gentleman praised him.

古文：后知定州安喜县，有法吏罢居乡里，导人为讼，岩叟捕挞于市，众皆竦然。
现代文：后来任定州安喜县令，有大理寺官吏免官退居乡里，引导他人诉讼，王岩叟把他捉拿鞭挞于街市，众人都肃敬。
English: Later, the Anxi County Government of Dingzhou was appointed, and the officials of Dali Temple were dismissed and retired to the countryside to guide others in litigation. Wang Yanyan caught him and whipped him in the street market, and everyone was reverent.

古文：定守吕公著叹曰： 此古良吏也。 有诏近臣举御史，举者意属岩叟而未及识，或谓可一往见。
现代文：定州太守吕公著感叹说 ：这是古代的良吏。 有诏令亲信大臣荐举御史，荐举的人意属王岩叟但不认识，有人认为王岩叟可以前去见一见荐举者。
English: Lyu Gong, the governor of Dingzhou, lamented in his book, "This is a good official from ancient times. There was a decree that the minister's close confidant should recommend the person to present the history. The person who recommended the history belonged to Wang Iwatsuki, but he did not know him. Some people thought that Wang Iwatsuki could go and see the person who recommended the history.

古文：岩叟笑曰： 是所谓呈身御史也。 卒不见。
现代文：王岩叟笑着说 ：这是所谓现身御史。 终于没有相见。
English: Wang Yanzhang smiled and said, "This is the so-called history of appearing in person.

古文：哲宗即位，用刘挚荐，为监察御史。
现代文：哲宗即皇帝位，因韩琦推荐，王岩叟为监察御史。
English: Tetsuzong became the emperor, and Wang Yanzhong was appointed as the inspector of imperial history on the recommendation of Han Zheng.

古文：时六察尚未言事，岩叟入台之明日，即上书论社稷安危之计，在从谏用贤，不可以小利失民心。
现代文：当时六察司还没有言事，王岩叟到御史台的第二天，就上书论社稷安危的大计，在于听取谏言任用贤能，不能因为小利失去民心。
English: At that time, the six inspectors had not yet spoken, and the next day after Wang Yanyu arrived at the Imperial History Museum, he published a book on the company's safety and security plan, which was to listen to advice and appoint talent, and not to lose the people's hearts because of small profits.

古文：遂言役钱敛法太重，民力不胜，愿复差法如嘉祐时。
现代文：于是论说役钱聚敛之法太重，民力不能负担，希望恢复像嘉时的差役法。
English: Therefore, it is said that the method of collecting money for officials is too heavy and cannot be borne by the people. It is hoped that the method of collecting money for officials, like that of Jiacheng, will be restored.

古文：又言河北榷盐法尚行，民受其弊，贫者不复食。
现代文：又说河北榷盐法刚实行，百姓遭受其害，贫困的人不再吃盐。
English: It is also said that the salt-mining law in Hebei Province has just been implemented, the people have suffered from it, and the poor people no longer eat salt.

古文：录大名刻石《仁宗诏书》以进，又以河北天下根本，自祖宗以来，推此为惠。愿复其旧。
现代文：抄录大名刻石《仁宗诏书》以进献皇帝，认为河北是天下根本，从祖宗以来，推此为惠，希望恢复原样。
English: He copied the famous engraved stone "Ninsong's Imperial Rescript" and presented it to the emperor, believing that Hebei is the foundation of the world. Since his ancestors, he has benefited from this and hopes to restore the original.

古文：江西盐害民，诏遣使者往视。
现代文：江西盐法危害百姓，下诏派使者前去视察。
English: The Jiangxi Salt Law endangers the people, and the emperor sent an envoy to inspect it.

古文：岩叟曰： 一方病矣，必待使还而后改为，恐有不及被德泽而死者。
现代文：王岩叟说： 一方困乏了，必定等待使者回来然后改正，恐怕有人来不及蒙受陛下的恩泽而死去。
English: Wang Yanzhang said: On the other hand, if one is tired, he must wait for the messenger to return and then correct himself. I am afraid that some people will die before they can receive His Majesty's grace.

古文：愿亟罢之。 又极陈时事，以为 不绝害本，百姓无由乐生；不屏群邪，太平终是难致。 时下诏求民疾苦，四方争以其情赴诉，所司惮于省录，颇成壅滞。
现代文：希望赶快免除。 又极力陈指时事，认为 不清绝危害的本源，百姓没有理由快活起来；不摒弃众多邪佞，太平之世终是难以达到 。当时下诏询问百姓疾苦，全国各地争相把其情况前往投诉，所在的官府害怕检查记录，多蒙蔽阻滞不上报。
English: He also tried his best to point to current affairs, saying that if the source of harm is not eliminated, the people have no reason to be happy; if many evils are not abandoned, it is difficult to achieve a peaceful world. At that time, it was decided to inquire about the suffering of the people, and people from all over the country rushed to complain about their situation. The local government was afraid to check the records, and it was more difficult to report.

古文：岩叟言： 不问则已，言则必行之。
现代文：王岩叟说： 不过问就算了，说了话就一定要实行。
English: Wang Yanzhong said: However, it doesn't matter if you ask, what you say must be implemented.

古文：不然，天下之人必谓陛下以空言说之，后有诏令，孰肯取信？ 李定不持所生母仇氏服，岩叟论其不孝，定遂分司。
现代文：不然的话，天下人必定认为陛下用空言说教，以后有诏令，谁肯相信呢？ 李定不为亲生母亲仇氏服丧守孝，王岩叟论其不孝，李定于是任分司官。
English: Otherwise, people around the world must have thought that His Majesty was preaching with empty words. Afterward, there was a royal edict, who would believe it? Li Ding did not show filial piety for his biological mother, Wang Yanyu said that it was not filial piety, and Li Ding was appointed as a sub-officer.

古文：宰相蔡确为裕陵复土使，还朝，以定策自居。
现代文：宰相蔡确为裕陵复土使，回到朝廷，以主谋尊立天子自居。
English: Prime Minister Cai Zhengyi returned to the imperial court as the envoy for the restoration of Yuling, claiming to be the mastermind and the son of heaven.

古文：岩叟曰： 陛下之立，以子继父，百王不易之道。
现代文：王岩叟说 ：陛下被立为皇帝，以儿子的身份继承父亲，这是百王不易之道理。
English: Wang Yanzhong said: His Majesty was made emperor, and he succeeded his father as a son. This is a difficult reason for a hundred kings.

古文：且太皇太后先定于中，而确敢贪天自伐。
现代文：又太皇太后首先决定于禁中，而蔡确敢贪图天功自夸功绩。
English: The empress dowager was the first to decide to go to the forbidden Middle Kingdom, and Cai Jizhen dared to covet divine merits and boast of his achievements.

古文：章惇谗贼狼戾，罔上蔽明，不忠之罪，盖与确等。
现代文：章是谗言贼子，凶狠暴戾，欺骗皇上蒙蔽明察，不忠的罪行，大概与蔡确等同。
English: Zhang is the thief of slander, fierce and violent, deceiving the emperor, blinding his eyes, the crime of disloyalty, probably the same as Cai Ju.

古文：近帘前争役法，词气不逊，无事上之礼。
现代文：接近帘前争论役法，言辞不恭，没有事奉皇帝的礼节。
English: Close to the curtain, the argumentative method, the rhetoric is not respectful, and the etiquette of the emperor is not served.

古文：今圣政不出房闼，岂宜容此大奸犹在廊庙！ 于是二人相继退斥。
现代文：现在圣政不出房门，怎能容忍这样的大奸臣还在朝廷！ 于是蔡、章二人相继被退斥。
English: Now that the sacred government does not come out of the house, how can such a great treacherous vassal still be tolerated in the imperial court! Therefore, Cai and Zhang were dismissed one after another.

古文：迁左司谏兼权给事中。
现代文：升左司谏兼权给事中。
English: The left ascending priest also gave power to the middle.

古文：时并命执政，其间有不协时望者，岩叟即缴录黄，上疏谏。
现代文：当时一同任命执政大臣，他们当中有与时望不相协调的人，王岩叟立即交纳录黄，上疏进谏。
English: At that time, the ruling ministers were appointed together, and among them were people who were not in harmony with the times. Wang Yanyu immediately submitted to Luo Huang, and Shang Xuzhong was promoted.

古文：既而命不由门下省以出，岩叟请对，言之益切。
现代文：不久诏命不从门下省发出，王岩叟请求应对，言辞更加恳切。
English: Soon after, Wang Yanzhong requested that the imperial edict not be issued from his subordinate province, and Wang Yanzhong responded with more earnest words.

古文：退就阁上疏曰： 臣为谏官既当言，承乏给事又当驳，非臣好为高论，喜忤大臣，恐命令斜出，尤损纪纲。 疏凡八上，命竟寝。
现代文：退出后就在侧门上疏说： 我为谏官既然应该讲话，暂由自己充任给事中又应该封驳，不是我喜欢说大话，喜欢忤逆大臣，只是担心命令所出不正，尤其损害法制。 奏疏共八次进呈，此命终于停止。
English: After quitting, he wrote on the side door: "Since I am a eunuch, I should speak, and since I am temporarily acting as a minister, I should also refute. It's not that I like to talk big, like a rebellious minister, but I'm worried about the injustice of the order, especially the damage to the rule of law. I submitted my resignation a total of eight times, and this life finally stopped.

古文：又言： 三省胥吏，月飨厚奉，岁累优秩。
现代文：又说： 三省胥吏，每月享受丰厚的俸禄，每年屡次优给俸禄。
English: He also said: the officials of the three provinces enjoy a rich monthly salary, and the salary is increased many times every year.

古文：而朝廷每举一事，辄计功论赏，不知平日禄赐，将焉用之？
现代文：但朝廷每举办一事，就计功论赏，不知平时的俸禄，打算如何使用？
English: However, every time the imperial court held an event, it would reward the winners according to their merits. I don't know how they plan to use their usual salary.

古文：姑息相承，流弊已极。
现代文：姑息相承，相沿而成的弊端已非常严重。
English: The drawbacks of tolerating and following each other have become very serious.

古文：望饬励大臣，事为之制。 即诏裁抑侥幸，定为十七条。
现代文：希望告诫勉励大臣，奉行成为制度。 马上诏令裁减抑制侥幸，定为十七条。
English: It is hoped that exhorting and exhorting the minister will become a system, and it will be immediately decreed to reduce and suppress the fluke and set it as Article 17.

古文：迁侍御史。
现代文：升任侍御史。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain.

古文：两省正言久阙，岩叟上疏曰： 国朝仿近古之制，谏臣才至六员，方之先王，已为至少。
现代文：两省正言空缺很久，王岩叟上疏说 ：国朝仿照近代古代的制度，谏官才到六员，比之先王，已经是最少了。
English: The two provinces have been vacant for a long time, and Wang Yanzhong said: The dynasty is modeled on the system of modern and ancient times. There are only six eunuchs, compared to the previous king, which is the least.

古文：今复虚而不除，臣所未谕。
现代文：现在又虚位而不任官，这是我所不明白的。
English: What I don't understand is that he is now taking up an empty post.

古文：岂以为治道已清，而无事于言邪？
现代文：难道认为治道已清，而无事可言吗？
English: Do they think that the path to justice has been cleared and there is nothing more to be said?

古文：人材难称，不若虚其位邪？
现代文：人才难以相称，虚其官位吗？
English: Is it difficult to match talent, and is one's official position illusory?

古文：二者皆非臣所望于今日也。
现代文：这二者，都不是我对今天的希望。
English: Neither of those are my hopes for today.

古文：愿趣补其阙，多进正人以壮本朝；正人进，则小人自消矣。 
现代文：希望赶快补其空缺，多进用正直的人以壮大本朝；正直的人进用，那么小人就自动消失了。 
English: It is hoped that the vacancy will be filled as soon as possible, and more honest people will be used to strengthen this government; if honest people are used, then villains will automatically disappear.

古文：诸路水灾，朝廷行振贷，户部限以灾伤过七分、民户降四等始许之。
现代文：各路发生水灾，朝廷实行赈济，户部规定以灾伤超过七分、民户降四个户等的，才允许赈济。
English: Floods occurred on all roads, the imperial court implemented relief, and the household department stipulated that if the disaster and injury exceeded seven points, and the private households were reduced to four households, then relief was allowed.

古文：岩叟言： 中户以上，盖亦艰食。
现代文：王岩叟说： 中户以上，大概也吃饭艰难。
English: Wang Yanzhong said: If you are middle-class or above, it is probably difficult to eat.

古文：乞毋问分数、等级，皆得贷，庶几王泽无间，以召至和矣。 坐张舜民事，改起居舍人，不拜，以直集贤院知齐州。
现代文：请不要问灾伤的分数、民户的等级，都得赈济，也许可以使王泽无间，以致至和了。 因张舜民事件的牵连，改任起居舍人，没有到任，以直贤院的身份知齐州。
English: Please do not ask about the score of the disaster and injury, the level of the private households, they all received relief, and it may be possible to make Wangze unharmed, so that it was peaceful. Due to the implication of the Zhang Yimin incident, he was reappointed as a resident, but he did not arrive at the office, and he knew Qi Prefecture as a Jiu Xian Academy.

古文：请河北所言盐法，行之京东。
现代文：请求河北所说的盐法，在东京实行。
English: Ask for the salt law, as it is called in Hebei, to be implemented in Tokyo.

古文：明年，复以起居舍人召。
现代文：第二年，又以起居舍人召用。
English: The following year, he was called up again as a live-in caregiver.

古文：尝侍迩英讲，进读《宝训》，至节费，岩叟曰： 凡言节用，非偶节一事便能有济。
现代文：曾侍讲迩英殿，进读宝训，至节省费用处，王岩叟说： 凡是说节用，不是偶然节用一事，便能有成。
English: Wang Yanzhong, who once served as an attendant to the speaker of the Yu Ying Palace, read the treasure sermon and went to the cost-saving department, said: "Anything that is said to be economical is not a matter of casual use, it can be successful.

古文：当每事以节俭为意，则积久累日，国用自饶。 读仁宗知人事，岩叟曰： 人主常欲虚心平意，无所偏系，观事以理，则事之是非，人之邪正，自然可见。 
现代文：应每事以节俭为意，那么积久累日，国家用度自然丰饶。 读仁宗知人之事，王岩叟说： 人主常常想虚心平意，无所偏颇，以理观察事情，那么事情的正确错误，人的邪佞正直，自然可见。 
English: Wang Yanyu, who was a disciple of the Jurchen Sect, said: People often want to be open-minded and unbiased, and observe things rationally, then the rightness and wrongness of things, and the wickedness and honesty of people, can be seen naturally.

古文：司马康讲《洪范》，至 乂用三德 ，哲宗曰： 止此三德，为更有德。 盖哲宗自临御，渊默不言，岩叟喜闻之，因欲风谏，退而上疏曰： 三德者，人君之大本，得之则治，失之则乱，不可须臾去者也。
现代文：司马光讲解《洪范》，到 治理国家使用三德 处，哲宗说： 只此三德，为更有德。 原来哲宗自从登上皇帝位，沉默不语，王岩叟高兴地听到此事，因而打算讽谏，退出后上疏说： 三德，是人君的大本，得之则治，失之则乱，不能有片刻离开它。
English: When Sima Guang explained "Hong Fan" and went to the section on the use of the three virtues in governing the country, Zhezong said, "This is the only way to use the three virtues, to be more virtuous." Originally, Zhezong had been silent since he ascended to the throne. Wang Yanyu was pleased to hear this, so he intended to make fun of him. After he withdrew, he said, "The three virtues are the foundation of a human being. What is gained is the rule, what is lost is chaos. You cannot leave it for a moment."

古文：臣请别而言之。
现代文：我请求另外言之。
English: I beg to differ.

古文：夫明是非于朝廷之上，判忠邪于多士之间，不以顺己而忘其恶，不以逆己而遗其善，私求不徇于所爱，公议不迁于所憎。竭诚尽节者，任之当勿二；罔上盗宠者，弃之当勿疑。
现代文：在朝廷上明辨是非，在众多的士人之间判别忠良邪佞，不因归顺自己而忘掉他的缺点，不因背逆自己而遗漏他的优点，私下求取不曲从于所喜爱，公议不迁怒于所憎恨，竭诚尽节的人，用之应不疑；欺骗君上盗取宠爱的人，弃之应不疑。
English: In the imperial court, it is necessary to distinguish right from wrong, to distinguish between the loyal, the good, and the vicious among the numerous scholars, not to forget one's shortcomings by submitting to oneself, not to omit one's merits by betraying oneself, to secretly seek and obey the one you like, to publicly discuss and not give in to the anger of the one you hate, and to wholeheartedly use the one you should not doubt; to deceive the prince and steal the one you like, and to abandon the one you should not doubt.

古文：惜纪纲，谨法度，重典刑，戒姑息，此人主之正直也。
现代文：顾惜法制，谨慎法度，重视常刑，劝戒姑息，这是人主公正不偏邪。
English: To cherish the legal system, to be prudent in the application of the law, to attach importance to long-term punishment, and to dissuade and tolerate, this is the principle of fairness and impartiality.

古文：远声色之好，绝盘游之乐，勇于救天下之弊，果于断天下之疑，邪说不能移，非道不能说，此人主之刚德也。
现代文：疏远声色的爱好，断绝游乐的享乐，勇敢地挽救天下的弊病，果断地决断天下的疑难，不为邪佞之说所动摇，不为不符合道德之言所游说，这是人主的刚德。
English: It is man's moral fortitude to distance himself from the love of sound and color, to cut off the enjoyment of pleasure, to bravely save the world from ills, to decisively solve the world's problems, not to be shaken by evil talk, not to be lobbied by immoral words.

古文：居万乘之尊而不骄，享四海之富而不溢，聪明有余而处之若不足，俊杰并用而求之如不及，虚心以访道，屈己以从谏，惧若临渊，怯若履薄，此人主之柔德也。
现代文：居万乘之尊而不骄，享有四海之富而不过度，聪明有余而处之好像不足，贤能豪杰并用而求之好像不及，虚心咨询治国之道，委屈自己听从进谏，像面临深渊般恐惧，像脚履薄冰般怯弱，这是人主的柔德。
English: It is the Lord's way to be modest, to consult with modesty on the way of governing the country, to submit oneself to injustice, to fear as if facing an abyss, and to be timid as if treading on thin ice.

古文：三者足以尽天下之要，在陛下力行何如耳。 岩叟因侍讲，奏曰： 陛下退朝无事，不知何以消日？ 哲宗曰： 看文字。
现代文：这三者足以尽天下之要务，在乎陛下如何努力去做罢了。 王岩叟因为哲宗侍讲，奏言说： 陛下退朝后无事，不知怎样消磨时日？ 哲宗说 ：看书。 
English: These three are enough to fulfill the important tasks of the world, no matter how hard His Majesty tries to do it. Wang Yanyan, because of Tetsuzo's speech, said in his speech: His Majesty has nothing to do after retiring, I don't know how to kill time? Tetsuzo said: read a book.

古文：对曰： 陛下以读书为乐，天下幸甚。
现代文：王岩叟应对说 ：陛下以读书为业，天下非常幸运。
English: Wang Yanzhang said: Your Majesty is very lucky to be able to study.

古文：圣贤之学，非造次可成，须在积累。
现代文：圣贤之学，不是轻率可以成就的，必须在于积累。
English: The study of the sages is not something that can be accomplished in a haphazard manner. It must be accumulated.

古文：积累之要，在专与勤。
现代文：积累的要点，在于专心和勤奋。
English: The key to accumulation lies in concentration and diligence.

古文：屏绝它好，始可谓之专；久而不倦，始可谓之勤。
现代文：摒斥断绝其他爱好，才可以叫作专；久而不倦，才可以叫作勤。
English: Only by rejecting and cutting off other hobbies can one be called a specialist; only by working tirelessly for a long time can one be called diligent.

古文：愿陛下特留圣意。 哲宗然之。
现代文：希望陛下特别留意圣贤的心意。 哲宗表示同意。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will pay special attention to the thoughts of the sages.

古文：岩叟馆伴辽贺正旦使耶律宽，宽求观《元会仪》，岩叟曰： 此非外国所宜知。 止录《笏记》与之，宽不敢求。
现代文：王岩叟在旅馆陪伴辽国贺正旦使耶律宽，耶律宽请求观看《元会仪》，王岩叟说 ：这不是外国所应知道的。 只是抄录《笏记》给他，耶律宽不敢再行请求。
English: Wang Yanyan accompanied Liao He Zhengdan to the hotel to ask Yelukang to watch "The Rite of the Yuan Dynasty." Wang Yanyan said, "This is not something that a foreign country should know about. I just gave him a copy of "The Diary of a Conqueror." Yelukang did not dare to make another request.

古文：进权吏部侍郎、天章阁待制、枢密都承旨。
现代文：升任权吏部侍郎、天章阁待制、枢密都承旨。
English: He was promoted to the position of the attendant of the department of authorized officials, and received the Order of the Sacred Treasure and the Order of the Privy Seal.

古文：湖北诸蛮互出扰边，无有宁岁，岩叟请专以疆事委荆南唐义问。
现代文：湖北诸蛮互相出动扰乱边地，没有一年安宁，王岩叟请求专门将边疆事务委任给荆南唐义问。
English: The barbarians of Hubei all went out to disturb the border areas, and there was no peace for a year. Wang Yanyan requested that the border affairs be specially delegated to Jingnan Tang Yiwu.

古文：遂自草檄文，喻义问以朝廷方敦尚恩信，勿为侥幸功赏之意，后遂安辑。
现代文：于是亲自起草檄文，把朝廷正厚尚恩信，不要做希望意外的功劳奖赏的事的意思，晓谕唐义问，后来于是安定和睦。
English: Therefore, he personally drafted an imperial edict, instructing Tang Yiqi that the imperial court should be honest and trustworthy, and should not do the thing of hoping for an unexpected reward, and later there was stability and harmony.

古文：初，夏人遣使入贡，及为境上之议，故为此去彼来，牵致劳苦，每违期日。
现代文：开始，西夏人派使臣入贡，等到为边境谈判，故为此去彼来，牵累至于辛苦，每每违背约定的日期。
English: At first, the Xixia people sent envoys to pay tribute, and waited for the border negotiations, so they went to him for this purpose, involving as much as hard work, each time violating the agreed date.

古文：岩叟请预戒边臣，夏违期，一不至则勿复应，自后不复敢违。
现代文：王岩叟请求预先告诫边疆大臣，西夏违背日期，一旦不到就不要再回答，从此以后西夏不敢违时。
English: Wang Yanzhong requested that the Minister of the Frontier be warned in advance that Xi Xia would not violate the time limit, and that once the time limit was reached, he would not answer any more. From then on, Xi Xia would not dare to violate the time limit.

古文：质孤、胜如二堡，汉赵充国留屯之所，自元祐讲和，在兰州界内，夏以为形胜膏腴之地，力争之。
现代文：质孤、胜如二堡，是汉代赵充国留守驻扎的地方，自从元时讲和，在兰州界内，西夏认为这是地势优越并且肥沃的地方，极力争抢。
English: Quality alone, better than two castles, is the place where Zhao Chongguo stayed and stationed in the Han Dynasty. Since the Yuan Dynasty declared peace, within the boundaries of Lanzhou, Western Xia believed that this was a superior and fertile place, and tried their best to compete.

古文：二堡若失，则兰州、熙河遂危。
现代文：二堡如果失去，那么兰州、熙河就危险。
English: If the Second Fort is lost, then Lanzhou and Heihe will be in danger.

古文：延帅欲以二堡与夏，苏辙主其议。
现代文：延州主帅打算把二堡给与西夏，苏辙主张这种意见。
English: The head coach of Yanzhou intends to give the second castle to Xixia, and Su ruts advocate this opinion.

古文：及熙河、延安二捷同报，辙奏曰： 近边奏稍频，西人意在得二堡。
现代文：等到熙河、延安二地捷报一同传来，苏辙上奏说 ：近来边地奏书稍稍频繁，西夏人意在得到二堡。
English: When the Heihe and Yan'an reports came in together, Su Ruz said, "Recently, the reports have been a little more frequent, and the Xixia people want to get the two castles."

古文：今盛夏犹如此，入秋可虞，不若早定议。 意在与之也。
现代文：现在盛夏还这样，到秋天令人担心，不如早早决定。 意思是给与西夏。
English: Now the midsummer is still like this, it is worrying to fall, it is better to decide early.

古文：岩叟曰： 形势之地，岂可轻弃，不知既与，还不更求否？ 太皇太后曰： 然。 议遂止。
现代文：王岩叟说 ：在地形上有高下平险之势的地方，岂可轻易放弃，不知既然给与了西夏，西夏会不会再有其他要求？ 太皇太后说 ：对。 以二堡给西夏之议于是停止。
English: Wang Yanzhong said, "In a place where the terrain has the potential for ups and downs, can we easily give up? I don't know, since the Western Xia was given, will the Western Xia have any other demands?" The Great Empress Dowager said, "Yes." The proposal to give the Western Xia two castles was then stopped.

古文：夏人数万侵定西之东、通远之北，坏七厓匙堡，掠居人，转侵泾原及河外鄜、府州，众遂至十万。
现代文：几万西夏人侵犯定西东部、通远北部，破坏七堡，掠夺当地居民，转而侵犯泾原以及黄河以外的州、府州，人于是多到十万。
English: Tens of thousands of Xixia people invaded the eastern part of Dingxi and the far north, destroyed the seven castles, plundered the local residents, and invaded the Plains and the states and prefectures beyond the Yellow River. The number of people increased to 100,000.

古文：熙帅范育侦伺夏右厢种落大抵趣河外，三疏请乘此进堡砦，筑龛谷、胜如、相照、定西而东径陇诺城。
现代文：熙州主帅范育侦察探听到西夏右厢种落大都趋向黄河以外，三次上疏请求乘机进攻堡砦，修筑龛谷、胜如、相照、定西而向东直达陇诺城。
English: Heizhou coach Fan Yu's reconnaissance probe heard that most of the Western Xia right-side villages were moving away from the Yellow River, and three times the Shang Shu requested to take the opportunity to attack the fort, build Shibuya, Shengru, Liaoyang, and Dingxi, and go east to Zeno City.

古文：朝议未一，或欲以七巉经毁之地，皆以与夏。
现代文：朝廷意见不一致，有人认为七是常常毁坏的地方，不如都给与西夏。
English: The imperial court disagreed, and some people thought that seven was a place that was often destroyed, so it would be better to give it all to Xixia.

古文：岩叟力言不可与，彼计得行，后患未已。
现代文：王岩叟极力争辩不能给与西夏，如果他们的这一计谋得以实行，后患无穷。
English: Wang Yanzhang tried his best to argue that he couldn't give Xi Xia anything, and if they were able to carry out this trick, the consequences would be endless.

古文：因请遣官谕熙帅，即以户部员外郎穆衍行视，筑定远以据要害。
现代文：因而请求派官员去晓谕熙州主帅，马上以户部员外郎穆衍出行巡视，修筑定远城以占据要害。
English: Therefore, he requested that an official be sent to inform the coach of Xizhou, and immediately sent a member of the household department, Wai Lang Mu Yan, to make a tour and build a distant city to occupy the key.

古文：其调兵赀费，一从便宜，不必中覆。
现代文：其征调兵员资金费用，一律听任方便行事，不必中书省回覆。
English: The fund expenses for conscripted and transferred soldiers shall be at the discretion of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and there is no need for the Ministry to reply.

古文：定远遂城，皆岩叟之力。
现代文：定远顺利筑城，都是王岩叟的作用。
English: The successful construction of the city of Dingyuan was all the work of Wang Yanzhang.

古文：拜中书舍人。
现代文：授任中书舍人。
English: He was appointed as a member of the Board of Education.

古文：滕甫帅太原，为走马承受所撼，徙颍昌。
现代文：滕甫为太原统帅，被走马承受用言语打动朝廷，移任颍昌。
English: Teng Fu was the commander-in-chief of Taiyuan, and he was transferred to Juchang after he had impressed the imperial court with his words.

古文：岩叟封还词头，言： 进退帅臣，理宜重慎。
现代文：王岩叟封还词头，说： 进用贬退帅臣，理应慎重。
English: Wang Yanqufeng also prefaced his speech, saying: It is prudent to be cautious when using the derogatory term "handsome minister."

古文：今以小臣一言易之，使后人畏惮不自保，此风浸长，非委任安边之福。 乃止。
现代文：现在因小官的一句话改易帅臣，使后继之人畏惧不能自保，这种风气逐渐助长，这不是委任安边的福运。 
English: Now, because of a word from a minor official, he is changed into a handsome minister, so that his successors are afraid and cannot protect themselves. This kind of culture is gradually growing. This is not the good fortune of appointing Anbian.

古文：复为枢密都承旨、权知开封府。
现代文：于是停止变换太原帅臣。再任枢密都承旨、权知开封府。
English: As a result, the transformation of Taiyuan's handsome vassals was stopped. He was reappointed as the Privy Councilor, and the Kofu government was established.

古文：旧以推、判官二人分左右厅，共治一事，多为异同，或累日不竟，吏疲于咨禀。
现代文：过去以推官、判官二人分掌左右厅，共同治理一事，多为异同，或者多日不加穷究，官吏疲于咨询禀陈。
English: In the past, the matter of co-governance of the left and right offices with two supervisors and judges was mostly the same, or it was not investigated for many days, and officials were tired of consulting.

古文：岩叟创立逐官分治之法，自是署为令。
现代文：王岩叟创立逐官分治的办法，以此署为法令。
English: Wang Yanzhong created the method of government by officials, which was promulgated as a law.

古文：都城群偷所聚，谓之 大房 ，每区容数十百人，渊薮诡僻，不可胜究。
现代文：都城是众多小偷所聚居的地方，叫作 大房 ，每区容纳几十上百人，他们所聚集的处所怪异偏僻，不可胜究。
English: Miyakonojo is a place where many thieves live together. It is called "Daifusa" (大房), and each ward can accommodate dozens or hundreds of people. The place where they gather is strange and remote, and cannot be beat.

古文：岩叟令掩捕撤毁，随轻重决之，根株一空。
现代文：王岩叟命令乘其不备而逮捕撤毁，按其罪行轻重断决，连根拔掉一空。
English: Wang Yanzhang ordered to take advantage of his inadequacy and arrest and demolish, according to the seriousness of his crime, and uproot him.

古文：供备库使曹续以产贸万缗，市侩逾年负其半，续尽力不可取。
现代文：供备库使曹续以资产交易一万缗钱，奸商过了一年还拖欠一半，曹续尽力不能取得。
English: The reserve fund made Cao Rui trade 10,000 baht in assets, and the profiteer still owed half a year later. Cao Rui tried his best but couldn't get it.

古文：一日启户，则所负皆在焉。
现代文：一天，打开仓库门，则所欠的钱都在这里。
English: One day, you open the door of the warehouse, and the money you owe is all here.

古文：惊扣其故，侩曰： 王公今日知府矣。 初，曹氏之隶韩绚与同隶讼，事连其主，就逮之。
现代文：王岩叟惊异地叫问其缘故，奸商说： 是因为王公现在任知府了。 开始，曹氏的奴仆韩绚和另外一个奴仆发生诉讼，事情牵连到他们的主人，主人当场被逮捕。
English: Wang Yanzhang exclaimed in surprise and asked the reason for this, and the profiteer said, "It's because Wang Gong is now the governor." At first, Cao's servant Han Huan and another servant were involved in a lawsuit, and the matter involved their master, who was arrested on the spot.

古文：曹氏者，慈圣后之族也。
现代文：曹氏，是慈圣皇后的族人。
English: The Cao clan is a descendant of Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：岩叟言： 部曲相讼，不当论其主。今不惟长告讦之风，且伤孝治。
现代文：王岩叟说： 奴仆相互诉讼，不应论罪他们的主人，现在不但助长告发别人的阴私的风气，而且有伤孝治。
English: Wang Yanzhong said: "Servants should not sue their masters in lawsuits. This not only promotes the culture of slandering others, but also undermines filial piety.

古文：慈圣仙游未远，一旦因厮役之过，使其子孙对吏，殆圣情有所不忍。 诏窜绚而绝其狱。
现代文：慈圣皇后去世不久，一旦因为奴仆的过错，使她的子孙与官吏敌对，大概圣情有所不忍心。 诏令贬窜韩绚而且结束他的狱案。
English: Not long after the death of Empress Dowager Cixi, once the fault of a servant caused her children and grandchildren to be hostile to officials, probably the Holy Spirit could not bear it. The edict decried Han Hua and ended his prison case.

古文：岩叟常谓： 天下积欠多名，催免不一，公私费扰，乞随等第多寡为催法。 朝廷乃定五年十科之令。
现代文：王岩叟常常认为 ：天下积欠名目繁多，催纳免纳不一致，公私费用混乱，请随等第立定多少作为催法。 朝廷就决定五年十科的法令。
English: Wang Yanzhong often thought: there are many names of arrears in the world, there are inconsistencies in delaying payment and exempting payment, and there is confusion between public and private expenses, please set the number of points as a prompting law.

古文：元祐六年，拜枢密直学士、签书院事。
现代文：元六年，授任枢密直学士、签书院事。
English: In 1861, he was awarded the title of Privy Direct Bachelor and Signed Academician.

古文：入谢，太皇太后曰： 知卿才望，不次超用。 岩叟又再拜谢，进曰： 太后听政以来，纳谏从善，务合人心，所以朝廷清明，天下安静。
现代文：入朝辞谢，太皇太后说： 知道你的才能声望，所以不按常例越级任用。 王岩叟又再次拜谢，进言说： 太后听政以来，纳谏从善，务必合乎人心，所以朝廷清明，天下安定清静。
English: After thanking the Empress Dowager for entering the imperial court, Wang Yanyu said, "I know that your talent and reputation are high, so I will not appoint you to a higher rank than usual." Wang Yanyu thanked her again and said, "Since the Empress Dowager has been listening to the government, she has been good at listening to the people, and she must meet the people's hearts. Therefore, the imperial court is clear, and the country is stable and quiet.

古文：愿信之勿疑，守之勿失。 复少进而西，奏哲宗曰： 陛下今日圣学，当深辨邪正。
现代文：希望信之不疑，守之不失。 又稍稍上前而向西，上奏哲宗说： 陛下今天圣学，应深加辨别邪佞正直。
English: Hope believes without doubting and keeps without losing, and a little further ahead, to the west, Tetsuzo Joso said: Your Majesty, today's sacred doctrine should be to deeply distinguish between the wicked and the righteous.

古文：正人在朝，则朝廷安，邪人一进，便有不安之象。
现代文：正直的人在朝廷，那么朝廷安定，邪佞的人一旦进用，便有不安定的迹象。
English: If honest people are in the court, then the court will be stable. If dishonest people are in the court, then there will be signs of instability.

古文：非谓一夫能然，盖其类应之者众，上下蔽蒙，不觉养成祸胎尔。 又进曰： 或闻有以君子小人参用之说告陛下者，不知果有之否？
现代文：不是说一个人能这样，原因是其同类呼应的人很多，上下蒙蔽，不知不觉养成祸根而已。 又进言说 ：偶然听说有人以君子小人掺杂任用之说报告陛下的，不知果然有这样的事没有？
English: It's not that one person can do this, the reason is that there are many people of the same kind, who are blinded from top to bottom, and unknowingly develop into the root of evil. He also said: I happened to hear that someone reported to His Majesty by saying that the appointment was mixed with a gentleman and a villain, I don't know if there really is such a thing?

古文：此乃深误陛下也。
现代文：这是严重地贻误陛下。
English: This is a grave misjudgment, Your Majesty.

古文：自古君子小人，无参用之理。
现代文：自古以来君子小人，没有掺杂任用的道理。
English: Since ancient times, there has been no reason for the appointment of a gentleman villain.

古文：圣人但云： 君子在内，小人在外则泰，小人在内、君子在外则否。 小人既进，君子必引类而去。
现代文：圣人只说 ：君子在内、小人在外则安定，小人在内、君子在外则混乱。 小人既然进用，君子必定引类而离去。
English: The sage only said: The gentleman inside and the rascal outside are stable; the rascal inside and the gentleman outside are chaotic; since the rascal is advancing, the gentleman must lead by example and leave.

古文：若君子与小人竞进，则危亡之基也。
现代文：如果君子小人竞相进用，则是危亡的基础。
English: If nobles and villains compete to advance, it is the basis for the danger of death.

古文：此际不可不察。 两宫深然之。
现代文：在此任用之时不可以不加明察。 太皇太后、哲宗认为很对。
English: Tetsuzo, the grand empress dowager, thought it was right that the appointment should not go unnoticed.

古文：上清储详宫成，太皇太后谓辅臣曰： 此与皇帝皆出阁中物营之，以成先帝之志。 岩叟曰： 陛下不烦公，不劳民，真盛德事。
现代文：上清储祥宫建成，太皇太后对辅佐大臣说： 此宫全是皇帝出宫中物资营造，以成全先帝的遗志。 王岩叟说： 陛下不烦公府，不劳动百姓，真是盛德之事。
English: After the construction of the Shangqing Custodian Palace was completed, the Empress Dowager said to the Vice-Minister: This palace was entirely built with materials from the emperor's palace to fulfill the last wishes of the former emperor. Wang Yanzhong said: Your Majesty does not bother the government, does not work the people, it is really a virtuous thing.

古文：然愿自今以土木为戒。 又以宫成将戒肆赦，岩叟曰： 昔天禧中，祥源成，治平中，醴泉成，皆未尝赦。
现代文：但希望从今以后以兴造土木为戒。 又以宫建成将要大肆赦免，王岩叟说： 过去天禧年中，祥源宫建成，治平年中，醴泉宫建成，都从没有赦免。
English: However, it is hoped that from now on, the construction of civil engineering will be a warning, and the construction of the palace will be greatly pardoned, Wang Yanyu said: In the past Jubilee Year, the Xiangyuan Palace was built, and in the year of peace, the Xuanquan Palace was built, and there was never a pardon.

古文：古人有垂死谏君无赦者，此可见赦无益於圣治也。 
现代文：古人有临死前劝谏君主不要赦免的，这可见赦免对圣治没有好处。 
English: The ancients, on their deathbeds, advised their sovereigns not to grant pardons, which shows that pardons are of no benefit to the rule of law.

古文：哲宗方选后，太皇太后曰： 今得狄谘女，年命以便，然为是庶出过房，事须评议。 岩叟进曰： 按《礼经·问名篇》，女家答曰： 臣女，夫妇所生。
现代文：哲宗正在选择皇后，太皇太后说： 现在得狄谘的女儿，年庚好像适宜，但因为是庶出过房，事情必须评议。 王岩叟进言说 ：按《礼经？问名篇》，女家回答说 ：我女儿，是我夫妇所生。 
English: Tetsuzong was choosing an empress, and the great empress dowager said, "The daughter of Dizi seems to be suitable at this time, but since she was born out of wedlock, the matter must be discussed." Wang Yanyan said, "According to the "Rite of Spring," the woman replied, "My daughter was born to my husband and my wife.

古文：及外氏官讳，不识今者狄氏将何辞以进？ 议遂寝。
现代文：涉及到外氏官讳，不知现在狄氏打算以什么借口进献？ 
English: When it comes to the taboo of foreign officials, I don't know what excuse Mr. Di is going to use now.

古文：哲宗选后既定，太皇太后曰： 帝得贤后，有内助功，不是小事。 岩叟对曰： 内助虽后事，其正家须在皇帝。
现代文：此议于是停止。哲宗选择皇后已定，太皇太后说： 皇帝得贤惠的皇后，有内助的功用，不是小事。 王岩叟应对说： 内助虽然是皇后的事，但正其家必须在于皇帝。
English: Tetsuzo's choice of empress had already been decided, and the great empress dowager said, "It is no small matter for the empress, who has been favored by the emperor, to have the function of a domestic helper." Wang Yanyu replied, "Although domestic help is a matter for the empress, her true home must be with the emperor."

古文：圣人言： 正家而得天下 。
现代文：圣人说 ：正家而天下定。 
English: The sage said, "The family is the most important, and the country is the most important."

古文：当慎之于始。 太皇太后以是语哲宗者再。
现代文：应在开始就慎重。 太皇太后把这话多次告诉哲宗。
English: You should be careful at the beginning, the Empress Dowager told Tetsuzo many times.

古文：岩叟退取历代后事可为法者，类为《中宫懿范》上之。
现代文：王岩叟回去后选取历代皇后事可以作为效法的，类编为《中宫懿范》进献。
English: After Wang Yanzhang returned, he selected the empresses of past generations as an example to follow, and compiled the "Imperial Household Law" as a gift.

古文：宰相刘挚、右丞苏辙以人言求避位，岩叟曰： 元祐之初，排斥奸邪，缉熙圣治，挚与辙之功居多。
现代文：宰相刘挚、右丞苏辙因人言请求辞官，王岩叟说： 元初年，排斥奸恶邪佞，光大圣治，刘挚与苏辙的功劳居多。
English: Wang Yanzhang said: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Cui and Su Rute, the Prime Minister Liu Cui and the Minister of Justice Su Rute, were promoted to the post because of people's request.

古文：原深察谗毁之意，重惜腹心之人，无轻其去就。 两宫然之。
现代文：希望深察谗言毁谤的用意，重惜腹心大臣，不要轻视他们的去留。 
English: It is hoped that the intention of slandering and defaming will be deeply observed, and the minister's confidants will be cherished, and their departure and stay will not be taken lightly.

古文：后挚竟为御史郑雍所击，岩叟连上疏论救。
现代文：太皇太后、哲宗表示同意。后来刘挚终于被御史郑雍所攻击，王岩叟接连上疏议论救助。
English: The empress dowager, Zhezong, agreed. Later, Liu Zhengyi was finally attacked by the imperial historian Zheng Yong, and Wang Yanyu successively discussed the rescue.

古文：挚去位，御史遂指为党，罢为端明殿学士、知郑州。
现代文：刘挚离开相位，御史就指责王岩叟为朋党，罢为端明殿学士、知郑州。
English: When Liu Zhi left the scene, the imperial historian accused Wang Yanzhong of being a friend of the party and a scholar of Duanming Palace who knew Zhengzhou.

古文：言者犹未厌，太皇太后曰： 岩叟有大功，今日之命，出不获已耳。 
现代文：言事的人还不满足，太皇太后说： 王岩叟有大功劳，今天的诏命，是出于无奈罢了。 
English: The speaker was still not satisfied, and the Grand Empress Dowager said: Wang Yansheng has great merit, today's imperial edict is just out of helplessness.

古文：明年，徙河阳，数月卒，年五十一。
现代文：第二年，王岩叟移任河阳，几个月后去世，终年五十一岁。
English: The following year, Wang Yanyu was transferred to Heyang, where he died a few months later, at the age of 51.

古文：赠左正议大夫。
现代文：赠左正议大夫。
English: Presented to Dr. Zhao Zhengli.

古文：绍圣初，追贬雷州别驾。
现代文：绍圣初年，追贬雷州别驾。
English: In the first year of Shaoshan, don't chase after Leizhou.

古文：司马光以其进谏无隐，称之曰： 吾寒心栗齿，忧在不测，公处之自如，至于再三，或累十数章，必行其言而后已。 为文语省理该，深得制诰体。
现代文：司马光认为他进谏没有隐瞒，称赞他说： 我寒心战栗，担心有不测之祸，王公处之自如，至于再三，有时接连十几次上奏章，一定要实行他的话而后已。 王岩叟写文章语言简省事理该博，深得制诰的体制。
English: Sima Guang believed that he did not hide his entrance into the world, and praised him saying: I shuddered coldly, fearing an unforeseen calamity, Wang Gong was at ease, as for repeatedly, sometimes more than a dozen times in a row, he must implement his words. Wang Yanyu wrote an article on the language, simplified the matter, and deepened the system of controlling the world.

古文：有《易》、《诗》、《春秋传》行于世。
现代文：著有《易》、《诗》、《春秋传》流行于世。
English: He is the author of "Yi," "Poetry" and "Spring and Autumn Biography," which are popular in the world.

