古文：赵元楷阎知微郑愔薛稷李峤李义府侯思止卢藏用赵履温张岌吉顼
现代文：赵元楷阎知微郑愔薛稷李峤李义府侯思止卢藏用赵履温张岌吉顼
English: Zhao Yuankai, Yan Zhiwei, Zheng Qi, Xue Qi, Li Qi, Li Yifu, Hou Si, Shizhu Lu, Zang Zang, Zhao Li Wen, Zhang Dujiu

古文：宗楚客崔融崔湜用番将张说程伯献杨国忠太真妃李林甫
现代文：宗楚客崔融崔湜用番将张说程伯献杨国忠太真妃李林甫
English: Zong Chu's guest, Cui Rong and Cui Yao, present Zhang Saying Cheng Bo to Yang Guozhong's concubine Li Linfu

古文：赵元楷
现代文：赵元楷
English: Zhao Yuankai

古文：赵元楷为交河道行军大总管，时候君集为元帅。
现代文：赵元楷任交河道行军大总管时，候君集在交河道任元帅。
English: When Zhao Yuankai was in charge of marching troops along the Jiaohe River, Huo Junji was appointed marshal of the Jiaohe River.

古文：君集马病颡疮，元楷以指沾其脓而嗅之，以谀君集。
现代文：一次，侯君集的坐骑头上生疮，赵元楷用手指沾着马额头上的脓疮放在鼻子上嗅，来讨好侯君集。
English: On one occasion, Hou Junji's horse developed sores on its head, and Zhao Yuankai smelled the sores on the horse's forehead with his finger to please Hou Junji.

古文：为御史所劾，左迁刺史。
现代文：被御史弹劾，贬为刺史。
English: Impeached by history, relegated to history.

古文：阎知微
现代文：阎知微
English: Yan Zhiwei

古文：唐春官尚书阎知微和默啜，司宾丞田归道为之副焉。
现代文：唐朝武则天执政期间，礼部尚书阎知微奉旨出使突厥默啜部请求和亲，同去的有司宾丞田归道为副使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian of the Tang Dynasty, the Minister of Ceremonies, Shangshu Yan Zhiwei, sent an envoy to the Turkish Ministry of Silence to request a reconciliation, accompanied by the Vice-Minister, Siping Jotian.

古文：至牙帐下，知微舞蹈，宛转抱默啜靴鼻而嗅之。
现代文：阎知微进入默啜单于居住的帐幕里，立即舞蹈着，左右抱着默啜单于脚上穿的皮靴用鼻子嗅着，藉以讨好。
English: Yan Zhiwei entered the tent where Misuzu lived alone, and immediately danced, holding Misuzu's leather boots with his nose to please him.

古文：田归道独长揖不拜。
现代文：田归道却只长揖一躬而不下拜。
English: Tian Hui Dao, however, only bowed and did not bow down.

古文：默啜大怒，倒悬之，经一宿。
现代文：默啜单于大怒，将田归道头冲下悬吊起来。
English: In a fit of rage, he hurled Tian Gui Dao under and hung him up.

古文：明日将杀之，元珍谏：大国和亲使，杀之不祥。
现代文：吊了一宿，第二天早晨默啜单于欲杀田归道，阿波达干元珍劝谏说：大国派遣来的和亲使节，杀了他会招至不祥的。
English: After hanging up for a night, the next morning, he silently said that he wanted to kill Tian and return to Taoism, and Aboda Gan Yuanzhen advised him to say: If you kill the envoy sent by a big country, it will be ominous.

古文：乃得释。
现代文：才得以获释。
English: He was eventually released.

古文：后与知微争于殿庭，言默啜必不和，知微坚执以为和。
现代文：出使归来后，阎知微就突厥单于默啜能否和亲的问题，和田归道在殿庭争执起来。田归道说默啜不会和亲的，阎知微坚持说会和亲。
English: After the emissary returned, Yan Zhiwei and Wada Guido got into an argument in the palace courtyard over the question of whether or not the Turks could be reconciled through silence alone. Tian Guido said that silence would not be reconcilable, but Yan Zhiwei insisted that it would.

古文：默啜果反，陷赵定。
现代文：后来，默啜果然反叛，出兵攻陷了赵、定二州。
English: Later, he actually rebelled and sent troops to invade Zhao and Dingzhou.

古文：天后乃诛知微九族，拜归道夏官侍郎。
现代文：武则天于是诛杀了阎知微的九族，同时提升田归道为夏官侍郎。
English: Wu Zetian then killed the nine clans of Yan Zhiwei, and at the same time promoted Tian Gui Dao to the position of Xia official's attendant.

古文：郑愔
现代文：郑愔
English: Zheng Wei

古文：唐吏部侍郎郑愔初托附来俊臣。
现代文：唐朝吏部侍郎郑愔，最初依附御史中丞来俊臣。
English: Zheng Yao, the attendant of the Tang Dynasty's cadre department, initially attached himself to Gu Shizhong Rong Rong to become a good minister.

古文：俊臣诛，即附张易之。
现代文：来俊臣被处死后，他立即依附张易之兄弟。
English: After Lai Junchen was executed, he immediately attached himself to Zhang Yi's brother.

古文：易之被戮，即附韦庶人，后附谯王。
现代文：张氏兄弟被诛杀后，郑愔又依附韦庶人，后又依附谯王。
English: After the Zhang brothers were killed, Zheng He attached himself to Wei Shizhen, and later to Shao Wang.

古文：竟被诛。
现代文：最后，终于也被诛杀。
English: In the end, he was also beaten to death.

古文：薛稷
现代文：薛稷
English: Xue Ying

古文：唐太子少保薛稷、雍州长史李晋、中书令崔湜、萧至忠、岑羲等，皆外饰忠鲠，内藏谄媚。
现代文：唐睿宗李旦在位期间，太平公主因废除武氏、韦氏有功，权倾朝野。太子少保薛稷、雍州长史李晋、中书令崔湜、萧至忠、岑羲等人，都外表装作忠诚耿直，内心却隐藏着奸诈谄媚。
English: During the reign of Tang Ruizong Li Dan, Princess Taiping gained power by abolishing the Wu and Wei dynasties. Princes Xiaobo Xue Qi, Yong Guo Shi Li Jin, and the Chinese scribes Cui Wei, Xiao Zhizhong, and Zou all pretended to be loyal and upright on the outside, but they were deceitful and flattering on the inside.

古文：胁肩屏气，而舐痔折肢，阿附太平公主。并腾迁云路，咸自以为得志，泰山之安也。
现代文：他们耸着肩膀装成恭敬畏屈的样子，不敢大声出气以示驯顺，实际上却哈腰舐腚地依附于太平公主，并通过这种途径飞黄腾达、官居高位。他们自得意满，自以为安如泰山。
English: They shrugged their shoulders and pretended to be respectful and submissive, not daring to raise their voices to show their submissiveness, but in fact they clung to Princess Taiping with all their might, and through this means they rose to fame and held high positions. They were self-satisfied and thought they were safe as Mount Tai.

古文：七月三日，家破身戮。何异鸋鴃栖于苇苕，大风忽起，巢折卵坏。
现代文：谁料到延和元年七月三日这天，随着太平公主被玄宗皇帝处死，这些谄媚弄臣也身遭杀戮家破人亡。这种下场，跟鸱鸋鴃息在芦苇之上，忽然刮起大风，遭至巢折卵破有什么不同？
English: Who would have guessed that on July 3rd of the first year of the Yanhe era, along with the execution of the Taiping Princess by Emperor Xuanzong, these flattering jesters would also be killed by the slayers. What is the difference between this fate and that of a hen sitting on a reed when a strong wind suddenly blows and the nest is broken?

古文：后之君子，可不鉴哉！
现代文：后世的正人君子们，怎么可以不从中汲取教训呢！
English: Honest gentlemen of the future, how can you not learn from this?

古文：李峤
现代文：李峤
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐李峤少负才华，代传儒学。
现代文：唐朝人李峤，少年时就负有才华。
English: Li Xi, a Tang Dynasty native, was a talented actor from a young age.

古文：累官成均祭酒吏部尚书，三知政事，封郑国公。
现代文：他承继家传儒学，连续升迁，最终官至成均祭酒吏部尚书、三知政事，封为郑国公。
English: He inherited Confucianism, which was passed down in his family, and was promoted successively. He eventually rose through the ranks to the position of the chief priest of the Chengyun Festival, the head of the wine department, and the third-ranking official in the government, and was given the title of Zheng Guogong.

古文：长寿三年，则天征天下铜五十余万斤，铁一百三十余万斤，钱二万七千贯。
现代文：武则天长寿三年，则天后从全国各地征集铜五十多万斤，铁一百三十多万斤，钱二万七千贯。
English: Wu Zetian lived for three years, and Zetian collected more than half a million catties of copper, more than 1.3 million catties of iron, and 27,000 catties of money from all over the country.

古文：于定鼎门内，铸八棱铜柱，高九十尺，径一丈二尺。
现代文：在定鼎门内，铸一八棱铜柱，柱高九十尺，经阔一丈二尺。
English: Inside the Dingding Gate, an eighteen-pronged copper column was cast, with a height of ninety feet and a width of one and two feet.

古文：题曰大周万国述德天枢。张革命之功，贬皇家之德。
现代文：在铜柱上面题大周万国述德天枢八个大字，用以宣扬武氏周朝改革的政绩，贬斥李唐王朝的功德。
English: On the bronze pillar, there are eight large characters inscribed with the theme "Zhou Banguo Shu De Tian Zuo," which are used to promote the achievements of the Wu Dynasty's Zhou Dynasty reform and denounce the merits of the Li Tang Dynasty.

古文：天枢下置铁山，铜龙负戴，狮子麒麟围绕。
现代文：天枢下面铸造一座铁山，下面铸有一条铜龙负载，四周布有狮子、麒麟等围绕着铁山。
English: An iron mountain is cast below the heavenly core, and a bronze dragon is cast below, surrounded by lions, unicorns and so on.

古文：上有云盖，盖上施盘龙，以托火珠。
现代文：铁山上面铸有一只云盖；盖上置放盘龙；盘龙托举着一只巨大的火珠。
English: Above the iron mountain, a cloud cover is cast; a dragon is placed on the cover; the dragon holds a huge ball of fire.

古文：珠高一丈，围三丈，金彩荧煌，光侔日月。
现代文：火珠高一丈，周围三丈。流金溢彩，金碧辉煌。
English: The fireball is a meter high, and the surrounding area is three meters high.

古文：武三思为其文，朝士献诗者，不可胜纪。
现代文：它发出的光亮可和日、月相比。武三思为天枢写文颂扬。朝中的官员争相献诗纪颂的人，不可胜数。
English: The brightness emitted by it can be compared to that of the sun and the moon. Wu San Si wrote a poem to praise the heavenly center. There are countless officials in the imperial court who compete to present poems and poems.

古文：唯峤诗冠绝当时。
现代文：其中，唯有李峤的献诗，冠压群臣，位居榜首。
English: Among them, only Li Xi's dedication poem, the crown pressure group of ministers, ranked first.

古文：诗曰：辙迹光西嶬，勋庸纪北燕。
现代文：李峤的诗是这样的：辙迹光西嶬，勋庸纪北燕。
English: Li Yao's poem is as follows: The path of light is Xidi, the path of honor is Yongji, and the path of honor is Beiyan.

古文：何如万国会，讽德九门前。
现代文：何如万国会，讽德九门前。
English: It's as if the world's nations have gathered in front of the Nine Gates of Hell.

古文：灼灼临黄道，迢迢入紫烟。
现代文：灼灼临黄道，迢迢入紫烟。
English: Shining close to the ecliptic, bursting into violet smoke.

古文：仙盘正下露，高柱欲承天。
现代文：仙盘正下露，高柱欲承天。
English: The dewdrops are falling from the celestial bowl, and the tall pillar wants to inherit the heavens.

古文：山类丛云起，珠疑大火悬。
现代文：山类丛云起，珠疑大火悬。
English: The mountain-like clouds are rising, and the fire is suspected to be imminent.

古文：声流尘作劫，业固海成田。
现代文：声流尘作劫，业固海成田。
English: The sound and dust of the current wreaks havoc, and Narita is surrounded by the sea.

古文：圣泽倾尧酒，薰风入舜絃。
现代文：圣泽倾尧酒，董风入舜絃。
English: Shengze poured the wine, and Dongfeng poured the wine.

古文：忻逢下生日，还偶上皇年。
现代文：忻逢下生日，还偶上皇年。
English: It's my birthday next month, and it also happens to be the Year of the Emperor.

古文：后宪司发峤附会韦庶人，左授滁州别驾。
现代文：后来，御史发现李峤依附韦皇后，将他贬降为滁州别驾。
English: Later, the imperial historian found that Li Qiye was attached to the Empress of Wei and relegated him to the second highest rank in Zhangzhou.

古文：后至开元中，诏毁天枢，发卒镕烁，弥月不尽。
现代文：到开元年间，唐玄宗下诏命人拆毁天枢，派去工匠役夫将它推倒镕化，经过一个月也没有镕化完。
English: In the year of the first century, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering the destruction of the Temple of Heaven, and sent craftsmen to tear it down and turn it into a tomb. After one month, the tomb was still not completely destroyed.

古文：洛阳尉李休烈乃赋诗以咏曰：天门街东倒天枢，火急先须卸火珠。
现代文：洛阳尉李休烈赋诗一首讽咏。他的诗是这样的：天门街东倒天枢，火急先须卸火珠。
English: Luoyang lieutenant Li Xulei composed a satirical poem. His poem is as follows: Tianmen Street is east of the heavenly center, and the first thing to do in a fire is to remove the fire bead.

古文：既合一条丝线挽，何劳两县索人推。
现代文：既合一条丝线挽，何劳两县索人推。
English: Once a silk thread is tied, how hard it is to get people from two counties.

古文：先有谣云：一条丝线挽天枢。
现代文：在武则天当年铸造天枢时，世上就有歌谣说：用一条丝线就可以牵引往天枢铜柱。
English: When Emperor Wuzetian was casting the heavenly core, there was a ballad in the world that said, "With a piece of silk thread, you can pull the bronze pillar to the heavenly core."

古文：言其不久也，故休诗及之。
现代文：是说天枢铜柱只用一条丝线牵引着，是不会立得长久的。因此，李诗中用了这一典故。
English: It is said that the heavenly bronze pillar is only pulled by a silk thread and will not stand for a long time. Therefore, this allusion is used in the poem.

古文：庶士莫不讽诵。
现代文：天枢铜柱被拆毁后，人心大快，朝野莫不写文赋诗讽诵。
English: After the bronze pillar of the heavenly center was demolished, people's hearts were quickened, and Asano could not help but write poems and recite them.

古文：天枢之北，韦庶人继造一台，先此毁拆。
现代文：天枢的北侧，有韦皇后建造的一座纪功台，在天枢之前就被拆毁了。
English: On the north side of the heavenly center, a Ji Gong Tower built by Empress Youwei was demolished before the heavenly center.

古文：李义府
现代文：李义府
English: Li Yifu

古文：唐李义府状貌温恭，与人语，必嬉怡微笑，而褊忌阴贼。
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，瀛州饶阳人李义府以对策被选中，官任门下省典仪，高宗时因赞立武则天为皇后，升任中书令，封河间郡公。李义府表面看貌似温顺谦恭，跟人说话，一定是和颜悦色、面带微笑。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, Li Yifu, a native of Raoyang in Bozhou, was selected as a countermeasure, and was appointed as the provincial ceremonial official. At the time of Emperor Gao, she was appointed as the empress for praising Wu Zetian, promoted to the position of the middle secretary, and appointed as the governor of Huama County. On the surface, Li Yifu looks meek and modest, and when he speaks to people, he must be amiable and smiling.

古文：既处权要，欲人附己，微忤意者辄加倾陷。
现代文：然而内心褊狭疑忌、阴险张。待到他位居要职后，想方设法让人依附投靠他，稍微触犯了他就打击陷害你。
English: However, in his heart, he is narrow-minded, suspicious, and insidious. After he is in an important position, he will try his best to make people rely on him, and if you slightly offend him, he will attack and frame you.

古文：故时人言义府笑中有刀。
现代文：因此，当时人都说他笑里藏刀。
English: Therefore, at that time, people said that he was hiding a knife in his smile.

古文：杨行颖表言义府罪状，制令刘祥道对推其事。
现代文：杨行颖上表朝廷陈述李义府的种种罪状，制令刘祥道对他进行审问对质，事实具在。
English: Yang Xingying presented various charges against Li Yifu to the imperial court and ordered Liu Xiangdao to interrogate and confront him. The facts are there.

古文：李勣监焉，按有实。
现代文：李勣重新核查，证据确凿。
English: Re-checked by Li Wei, the evidence is conclusive.

古文：长流西州。
现代文：于是，将他流放发配到西州。
English: As a result, he was exiled to Saizhou.

古文：或作刘祥道破铜山之大贼，李义府露布。
现代文：还有人说：刘祥道攻破铜鼓山上贼寇的山寨，李义府泄露了机密。
English: Another said: "Liu Xiangdao broke through the thieves' village on Tonggu Mountain, and Li Yifu leaked the secret."

古文：称混奴婢而乱放，各识家而竞入。
现代文：贼人冒充奴婢、仆夫被他随便放走，各自逃回自己家中躲藏起来。
English: The thieves, posing as male and female slaves and servants, were let go by him at will, and each fled back to his own home to hide.

古文：侯思止
现代文：侯思止
English: Hou Sizhong

古文：唐侯思止贫穷，不能理生业，乃依事恒州参军高元礼。
现代文：唐朝人侯思止家境贫困，不能维持生活，于是投奔依附恒州参军高元礼。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, people were unable to maintain their livelihoods due to the poverty of their families, so they followed the Gao Yuanli to join the army in Hengzhou.

古文：而无赖诡谲，无以逾也。
现代文：但是，这个人行为无赖，心地阴险诡诈，没有人能赶得上他。
English: But this man is a scoundrel, and his heart is deceitful above all things, and who can stand before him?

古文：时恒州刺史裴贞杖一判司。
现代文：当时，恒州刺史裴贞杖罚一名判司。
English: At that time, one judge was punished with the Hengzhou stabbing stick.

古文：则天将不利王室，罗织之徒已兴矣。
现代文：这位判司怀恨在心。这时候，武则天已经露出了除灭王室篡夺政权的野心，广为搜罗党羽。
English: The judge held a grudge. At this time, Wu Zetian had already revealed his ambition to eliminate the royal family and usurp power, and he was widely recruiting followers.

古文：判司谓思止曰：今诸王多被诛戮，何不告之？思止因请状，遂告舒王及裴贞谋反。
现代文：这位判司对侯思止说：现在诸位王子多数都被武则天杀害，你何不趁此机会告发舒王与裴贞谋反呢？
English: The judge said to Hou Sizhi, "Now that most of the princes have been killed by Wu Zetian, why don't you take this opportunity to denounce Shu Wang for plotting against Peizhen?"

古文：诏按问，并族诛，授思止游击将军。
现代文：侯思止听信了这位判司的话，果然奏上状纸，诬告舒王与裴贞图谋造反。
English: Hou Sidi listened to the words of the judge, and indeed filed a complaint, falsely accusing Shu Wang and Peizhen of plotting a rebellion.

古文：元礼惧而思媚之，引与同坐，呼为侯大曰：国家用人不次，若言侯大不识字，可奏云： 獬豸亦不识字，而能触邪。
现代文：朝廷下令追查，舒王与裴贞全家都被处死，并授任侯思止游击将军。高元礼惧怕侯思止，进而向侯献媚，将侯按同辈看待，跟自己同起同坐。并且，称呼侯思止为侯大，为他出谋划策说：眼下朝廷用人不按资历、能力，如果说侯大不识字，你可以上奏朝廷说： 獬豸还不识字呢，但是却能用它的独角辨别忠奸、善恶。 
English: The imperial court ordered the investigation, the whole family of Shu Wang and Peizhen were executed, and Gao Yuanli was appointed as the guerrilla general of Hou Sizhi. Gao Yuanli was afraid of Hou Sizhi, and then flattered Hou, regarded Hou as a peer, and sat with him. Moreover, he called Hou Sizhi as Hou Da, and made suggestions for him, saying: At present, the imperial court does not employ people according to seniority and ability. If you say that Hou Da is illiterate, you can report to the imperial court and say: He is still illiterate, but he can use his one-horn to distinguish between loyal and traitor, good and

古文：则天果曰：欲与汝御史，人云汝不能识字。
现代文：则天皇后果然召见侯思止，问他：想任你为御史，人们说你不认识字。
English: The emperor then summoned Hou Sizhi and asked him: "I want to appoint you as my historian, but people say you don't know the alphabet.

古文：思止以獬豸对，则天大悦，即授焉。
现代文：侯思止用獬豸可辨别善恶回答武则天。
English: Hou Xizhi answered Wu Zetian that he could distinguish between good and evil with a pair of scissors.

古文：元礼复教曰：圣上知侯大无宅，倘以没官宅见借，可拜谢而不受。
现代文：武则天果然非常高兴，立即授任他为御史。高元礼又教给侯思止说：则天皇后知道你没有居住的宅第，假若将没收的官宅暂时借给你住用。你可以拜谢而不接受。
English: Wu Zetian was very pleased indeed, and immediately appointed him as imperial historian. Gao Yuanli also taught Hou Sizhi to say: "Then the Empress knows that you do not live in the house, if the confiscated official residence is temporarily lent to you for living. You can thank and not accept.

古文：圣上必问所由，可奏云： 诸反逆人宅，恶其名，不愿坐其内。
现代文：则天皇后一定要问你缘由，你就说： 这些反叛您的逆贼的宅第，我非常厌恶它们的名声，不愿意住在那里。
English: Then the Empress must ask you the reason, and you must say: These houses of the traitors who rebelled against you, I detest their reputation and do not want to live there.

古文：果如言，则天复大喜，恩赏甚优。
现代文：后来，果然象高元礼预料的那样，侯思止如果是跟武则天说了。武则天听了后又特别高兴，对侯思止的恩宠与赏赐特别优厚。
English: Later, as expected by Gao Yuanli, Hou Sizi told Wu Zetian about it. Wu Zetian was particularly pleased after listening, and the grace and reward for Hou Sizi were particularly generous.

古文：卢藏用
现代文：卢藏用
English: Cows for Luzon

古文：卢藏用征拜左拾遗，千吏部侍郎中书舍人。历黄门侍郎，兼昭文馆学士，转尚书右丞。
现代文：卢藏用被征召授任左拾遗，升任吏部侍郎中书舍人，历任黄门郎，兼昭文馆学士，后转任尚书右丞相。
English: Lu Zangye was conscripted and assigned to Zuo Zui, promoted to the position of the secretary of the personnel department, the junior secretary, the successive Huangmenro, and the scholar of the Shou Library, and then transferred to the position of the minister of the right.

古文：与陈伯玉、赵贞固友善。
现代文：卢藏用，与陈伯玉、赵贞固是亲密的朋友。
English: Lu Zangye is a close friend of Chen Boyu and Zhao Zhenggu.

古文：隐居之日，颇以贞白自炫，往来于少室、终南二山，时人称为假隐。
现代文：他在被征召前过着隐居的生活时，特别以自己正直清廉自诩，经常行走于少室、终南二山，当时人称他为假隐士。
English: When he was living a secluded life before being conscripted, he especially prided himself on his honesty and integrity, often walking in the Shoshitsu and ending up in the South Ershan. At that time, people called him a fake hermit.

古文：自登朝，奢靡淫纵，本服鲜丽。
现代文：自从被征召入朝为官后，生活非常奢华铺张、淫逸骄纵。
English: Ever since he was drafted into the imperial court and became an official, his life has been full of luxury, ostentation, lewdness and arrogance.

古文：趑趄诡侫，专事权贵。时议乃表其丑行。
现代文：使用特别豪华鲜丽的车马服饰，而且专横暴虐、诡诈奸佞，专门阿谀事奉权贵，卖身授靠。当时的舆论，都上表章揭露卢藏用的种种丑恶劣行。
English: Using particularly luxurious and beautiful chariot and horse costumes, but also tyrannical, cruel, deceitful and treacherous, especially to serve the powerful, to sell themselves. At that time, the public opinion exposed all kinds of ugly deeds used by Lu Zang.

古文：以阿附太平公主，流陇州。
现代文：终于因为他投靠依附太平公主，而被流放发配到陇州。
English: In the end, he was exiled to Quzhou for his allegiance to Princess Taiping.

古文：赵履温
现代文：赵履温
English: Zhao Ruiwen

古文：唐赵履温为司农卿，谄事安乐公主。
现代文：唐中宗李显在位期间，赵履温官任司农卿，用阿谀奉承的手段投靠安乐公主。
English: During the reign of Li Xian of the Tang Dynasty, Zhao Luyuan was appointed as the Secretary of Agriculture, and used flattery to win the favor of Princess Anle.

古文：气势回山海，呼吸变霜雪。
现代文：他骄横的气势可以回山填海，他哈口气就可以变成霜雪。
English: His arrogance can go back to the mountains and reclaim the sea, and his arrogance can turn into frost and snow.

古文：客谓张文成曰：赵司农何如人？
现代文：有人问张文成：司农卿赵履温为人怎么样？
English: Someone asked Zhang Wencheng: How is the person of the Secretary of Agriculture Zhao Luwen?

古文：曰：猖獗小人。
现代文：张文成说：那是个得势便猖狂的无耻小人。
English: Zhang Wensheng said: "He was a shameless villain who gained power and went on a rampage.

古文：心佞而险，行僻而骄。
现代文：心地奸佞而阴险，行为乖僻而骄横。
English: Sinister and treacherous at heart, devious and arrogant in behaviour.

古文：折支势族，舐痔权门。
现代文：而且弯腰俯首依附有势力的皇族，舐腚溜须投靠权贵豪门。
English: Moreover, they bowed down to the powerful imperial family and had to rely on the rich and powerful.

古文：诌于事上，傲于接下。
现代文：攻谄事上，极尽献媚取宠之心；傲慢对下，穷竭侮辱作践之法。
English: In the matter of attack, the utmost flattery to win favor; arrogance to the next, exhausting insult to practice the law.

古文：猛若虣虎，贪如饿狼。
现代文：狂暴如食人猛虎，贪婪似饥饿凶狼。
English: As fierce as a man-eating tiger, as greedy as a hungry wolf.

古文：性爱食人，终为人所食。
现代文：但是他生性爱吃人，终将被人所吃。
English: But he loves to eat people and will eventually be eaten by people.

古文：为公主夺百姓田园，造定昆池，言定天子昆明池也。用库钱百万亿。
现代文：赵履温为安乐公主抢夺百姓田园修造定昆池，耗费掉国家府库中上百万亿钱。
English: Zhao Liwen robbed the people's pastoral land to build a dongguan pond for Princess Anle, and spent hundreds of billions of yuan from the state treasury.

古文：斜褰紫衫，为公主背挽金犊车。
现代文：所谓定昆池，是取必定超过天子的昆明池之意啊！
English: The so-called Ding Kunchi, is to take the meaning of Kunming pond, which must exceed the heavenly son!

古文：险诐皆此类。诛逆韦之际，上御承天门。履温诈喜，舞蹈称万岁。上令斩之，刀剑乱下，与男同戮。人割一脔，骨肉俱尽。
现代文：不一会儿，赵履温的骨肉就被人割尽。
English: Within a short time, Zhao Luyuan's bones and flesh were cut up.

古文：张岌
现代文：张岌
English: Zhang Rui

古文：唐天后时，张岌谄事薛师。
现代文：唐朝武则天执政期间，张岌谄媚事奉薛师。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian of the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Rui served Xue Shi.

古文：掌擎黄幙随薛师后，于马旁伏地承薛师马镫。
现代文：张岌手里擎着黄头巾，跟随在薛师的身后。在马旁边俯伏在地为上马凳，让薛师踏着他的脊背上马。
English: Zhang, holding a yellow turban in his hand, walked behind Xue Shifu. He prostrated himself on the ground next to the horse as a stool, allowing Xue Shifu to mount the horse on his back.

古文：侍御史郭霸尝来俊臣粪秽，宋之问捧张易之溺器。
现代文：当时，还有侍御史郭霸为酷吏来俊臣嗜粪，宋之问为武则天的宠臣张易之亲自端尿罐。
English: At that time, there was also an attendant, Shi Guoba, who was a cruel official who came to collect excrement from the young minister, and Song Zhiwen, who was Wu Zetian's favorite minister, Zhang Yi, who personally carried the urine can.

古文：并偷媚取容，实名教之罪人也。
现代文：这些人，用这种巧黠谄媚的方法取悦这些权贵。实在是儒教的罪人啊！
English: These people, using such a clever and charming method to please these dignitaries, are really Confucian sinners!

古文：吉顼
现代文：吉顼
English: Jilin Province

古文：天后时，太常博士吉顼，父哲，易州刺史，以贓坐死。
现代文：武则天时代，太常博士吉顼在京城天津桥南，拦阻内史魏王承嗣，跪拜在地上口称：罪臣万死！
English: In the era of Wu Zetian, the great scholar Ji Zhe marched to the south of Tianjin Bridge in Beijing to stop the inheritor of the Inner Shi Wei King, kneeled on the ground and said: Sinful vassals must die!

古文：顼于天津桥南，要内史魏王承嗣，拜伏称死罪。承嗣问之，曰：有二妹堪事大王。
现代文：承嗣问她们为什么不说话？二人回答说：我们的父亲触犯了国法，心里很是为他老人家担心，又没有什么人可以依赖。
English: The heir asked them why they didn't speak up, and they replied, "Our father violated the law of the country, we are very worried about him, and there is no one we can rely on."

古文：承嗣若之，即以犊车载入。
现代文：原来，吉顼的父亲吉哲官任易州刺史，因为贪赃枉法而获死罪。
English: It turned out that Ji Zhe's father, Ji Zhe, an official in charge of the history of Yizhou, was sentenced to death for corruption.

古文：三日不语，承嗣问其故，对曰：父犯国法，忧之，无复聊赖。承嗣既幸免其父极刑。
现代文：于是，吉顼想出这个献妹救父的无耻办法。后来，魏王承嗣果然为吉顼的父亲请求免去了死罪。
English: Therefore, Ji Yao thought of this shameless way of sacrificing his sister to save his father. Later, Wei Wang Shou He was indeed exempted from the death penalty for Ji Yao's father's request.

古文：进顼笼马监，俄迁中丞吏部侍郎。
现代文：并且推荐吉顼任笼马监，不久又升任中丞吏部侍郎。
English: Moreover, he recommended Yoshitaka to be appointed Keima no kami (superintendent of horses), and soon he was promoted to the position of chujo (middle-ranking officer) and chamberlain.

古文：不以才升，二妹请求耳。
现代文：吉顼不是凭借才干任职升迁的，而是靠他的两个妹妹为他请求的官职啊。
English: Ji Yeon didn't rise through the ranks by virtue of his talent, but by virtue of the positions his two younger sisters requested for him.

古文：宗楚客
现代文：宗楚客
English: Dzongchuk

古文：唐天后内史宗楚客性谄佞。
现代文：唐朝武则天时代，内史宗楚客为人谄媚奸佞。
English: In the era of Wu Zetian of the Tang Dynasty, Naishi Zongchu was a charming and treacherous person.

古文：时薛师有嫪毒之宠，遂为作传二卷。论薛师之圣，从天而降，不知何代人也。
现代文：当时，武则天宠幸嬖爱的弄臣薛师，实际是武则天豢养的一个面首宗楚客为了讨好武则天，为薛师撰写了传二卷，论说薛师是超凡的圣人，从天上突然降到世上来的，不知道是什么时代的人啊！
English: At that time, Wu Zetian's favorite and beloved jester Xue Shi, who was actually one of Wu Zetian's favored disciples, wrote a two-volume biography of Xue Shi in order to please Wu Zetian, arguing that Xue Shi was an extraordinary saint who suddenly descended to the world from the sky. I don't know what era he was from!

古文：释迦重出，观音再生。
现代文：又说薛师是释迦牟尼重生，观世音大士再世。
English: It is also said that Master Xue is the reincarnation of Sakyamuni and the reincarnation of Master Guanyin.

古文：期年之间，位至内史。
现代文：由于他谄媚逢迎得法，一年之内，升官为内史。
English: Due to his affinity for the law, within a year, he was promoted to the position of internal historian.

古文：崔融
现代文：崔融
English: Choe Ryong

古文：唐天后梁王武三思为张易之作传。
现代文：唐朝武则天执政期间，梁王武三思为武则天的弄臣太子少卿张易之作传。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuzetian of the Tang Dynasty, Liang Wang Wusanshi was a follower of Emperor Wuzetian's jester Prince Shaoqing Zhang Yi.

古文：云是王子晋后身，于缑氏山立祠。
现代文：说张易之是周灵王的太子晋转世，并在缑氏山为王子晋建造祠堂。
English: It is said that Zhang Yizhi is the reincarnation of Prince Jin of King Zhou Ling, and he built a shrine for Prince Jin in Shushi Mountain.

古文：词人才子佞者为诗以咏之，舍人崔融为最。
现代文：一时间，词人才子与谄谀奸姣的人，争相撰诗赞咏。舍人崔融表演得最为积极、充分。
English: For a while, the poet's son and the traitor's son were competing to write and praise the poem. The traitor, Cui Rong, performed most actively and fully.

古文：后易之赤族，佞者并流岭南。
现代文：后来，张易之全家被诛杀。当年附炎张易之的人，也被发配到岭南。
English: Later, Zhang Yi's entire family was killed in a fight. Zhang Yi's accomplice was also sent to Lingnan.

古文：崔湜
现代文：崔湜
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：唐崔挹子湜，桓敬惧武三思谗间，引湜为耳目。
现代文：唐朝武则天执政期间，崔挹的儿子崔湜得宠于一时。起初，桓敬因惧怕武三思进谗言陷害他，收纳崔湜为自己的耳目，让他秘密通报武三思的情况。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian of the Tang Dynasty, Cui Jian's son Cui Jian was favored for a while. At first, Huan Jing was afraid of Cui Jian's insinuations and set him up, taking Cui Jian as his eyes and ears and letting him secretly report the situation of Cui Jian.

古文：湜乃反以桓敬等计潜告三思，寻为中书令。
现代文：崔湜表面答应了，暗地里却将桓敬等人商量的计策报告给武三思。不长时间，他就被武则天提升为中书令。
English: On the surface, Cui Gan agreed, but secretly he reported the strategy discussed by Huan Jing and others to Wu Sansi. Not long after, he was promoted by Wu Zetian to the position of Zhongshirong.

古文：湜又说三思，尽杀五王，绝其归望。
现代文：崔湜又建议武三思，将李氏五王全都诛杀除掉，以免除他人恢复李氏王朝的希望。
English: Cui Yao also advised Wu Sanxi to eliminate all the five kings of the Li Dynasty, in order to spare others the hope of restoring the Li Dynasty.

古文：先是湜为兵部侍郎，挹为礼部侍郎。
现代文：起初，崔湜任兵部侍郎，他的父亲崔挹任礼部侍郎。
English: At first, Cui Jun served as a military attendant, and his father Cui Jun served as a ceremonial attendant.

古文：父子同为南省副贰，有唐以来，未之有也。
现代文：父子同时官任尚书省的副职，是自有唐朝以来，未曾有过的事情啊！
English: A father and son both holding the vice-chairmanship of the Ministry of Education and Culture at the same time is something that has not happened since the Tang Dynasty!

古文：上官昭容屡出外，湜谄附之。
现代文：当时，宫内女官上官昭容很有权势，崔湜于是谄媚依附于她。
English: At that time, the lady-in-waiting of the imperial court, the superior officer Zhaorong, was very powerful, so Cui Yao attached himself to her.

古文：玄宗诛萧至忠后，所司奏宫人元氏款称，与湜曾密谋进鸩。
现代文：唐玄宗处死萧至忠后，负责审理此案的官员上奏玄宗说：宫中女使元氏供认，崔湜曾经一同谋划在进献给您的赤箭粉食中下鸩想毒死您。
English: After Xiao Zhizhong was executed by Tang Xuan Zong, the official in charge of the case reported to Xuan Zong: "The palace servant Yuan confessed that Cui Yao had plotted with him to poison you in the Red Arrow Powdered Food that was presented to you.

古文：乃赐湜死，年四十。
现代文：于是，玄宗皇帝下令处死崔湜，这年他才四十岁。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanzong ordered the execution of Cui Yao, who was only forty years old at the time.

古文：初湜与张说有隙，说为中书令，议者以为说构陷之。
现代文：初时，崔湜与张说有矛盾。张说官任中书宰相，人们还认为是张说陷害崔湜呢。
English: At the beginning, there was a conflict between Choe Son and Chang Son. Chang Son was the official vice-premier, and people thought that Chang Son had framed Choe Son.

古文：湜美容仪，早有才名。
现代文：崔湜容仪俊美，很早就以有才华而闻名。
English: Choi Min-yong is handsome and has long been known for his talent.

古文：弟液、涤及从兄涖，并有文翰，列居清要。
现代文：崔湜的弟弟崔液、崔涤，及堂兄崔涖，都能赋诗撰文，而列居显要的官位。
English: Cui Yao's younger brothers Cui Rui and Cui Yao, as well as his cousin Cui Yao, were all able to compose poems and hold prominent official positions.

古文：每私宴之际，自比王谢之家。
现代文：每次家宴谈起来，都以南北朝时的南齐学问家与诗人王俭、谢自比。
English: At every family banquet, the scholars of Nanqi during the Northern and Southern Dynasties were compared with the poets Wang Jian and Xie Yao.

古文：谓人曰：吾之门地及出身历官，未尝不为第一。
现代文：对人说：我们家的门地以及出身历任的官职，未曾不都是位居天下第一的。
English: To say to people: Our family's lineage, as well as the official positions we have held, have always been the best in the world.

古文：丈夫当先据要路以制人，岂能默默受制于人！
现代文：大丈夫生活在世上，应当抢先占据重要位置用以制人，怎么能默默无闻地被人制呢！
English: To live well in the world, one should occupy an important position ahead of time to control others. How can one be controlled by others in obscurity?

古文：故进取不已，而不以令终。
现代文：因此，他们崔氏兄弟从未有停止谋取高官显位的时候，而不顾及保持美善的名誉。
English: As a result, the Choe brothers have never stopped seeking high-ranking positions, regardless of maintaining a good reputation.

古文：又湜谄事张易之与韦庶人。
现代文：崔湜还曾谄媚依附张易之与韦皇后。
English: Cui Yao had also been obsequiously attached to Zhang Yizhi and Empress Wei.

古文：及韦诛，复附太平。有冯子都、董偃之宠。
现代文：待到韦皇后与安乐公主合谋毒死亲夫中宗李显、阴谋篡权事发被处死后，崔湜又依附太平公主，并跟太平公主有冯子都、董偃等弄臣的爱昧关系。
English: After Empress Wei and Princess Anle were executed for conspiring to poison her husband, Chuzong Li Xian, and conspiring to usurp power, Cui Yao attached herself to Princess Taiping, and had an amorous relationship with Feng Zidu, Dong Yao and other jesters.

古文：妻美，并二女并进储闱，得为中书侍郎平章事。
现代文：崔湜的妻子非常美丽漂亮。他将自己的妻子和二个女儿，一同进献给太子宫中，由此而得以官任中书侍郎行使宰相的权力。
English: Cui Jun's wife was very beautiful, and he dedicated his wife and two daughters to the prince's uterus, thereby being able to exercise the power of the prime minister as a secretary.

古文：有榜之曰：托庸才于主第，进艳妇于春宫。
现代文：有人张贴出榜文说崔湜：本是个庸才却身居宰相要职，原来是将自己美貌的夫人进献给东宫的缘故啊！
English: Someone posted a list saying that Cui Wei: He was a mediocre talent, but he held the important post of prime minister. It turned out that it was because he dedicated his beautiful wife to the East Palace!

古文：用番将
现代文：用番将
English: The next in line

古文：唐玄宗初即位，用郭元振、薛讷；又八年而用张嘉贞、张说；五年而杜暹进；又三年萧嵩进；又十二年而李适之进。
现代文：唐玄宗刚刚继承皇位时，重用郭元振、薛纳。过了八年而起用张嘉贞、张说等老臣。即位第五年时，起用杜暹；又过了三年起用萧嵩；又过了十二年起用李适之。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty had just succeeded to the throne, Guo Yuan Zhen and Xue Na were used. Eight years later, Zhang Jiazhen and Zhang Said were used. In the fifth year of his reign, Du Siam was used; three years later, Xiao Song was used; and twelve years later, Li Shizhi was used.

古文：咸以大将直登三事。
现代文：都是起用大将、重臣，直接执掌三公大权。
English: All of them appointed generals and senior vassals to directly hold the three great powers.

古文：李林甫既惩适之之患，遂易旧制。请以番人为将，欲固其权。
现代文：到了李林甫为宰相时，他鉴戒李适之的教训，于是改易旧制，请求玄宗皇帝起用胡人为大将，从而达到巩固他的宰相的权力的目的。
English: When Li Linfu became the prime minister, he learned the lesson from Li Shizhi, so he changed to the old system and asked Emperor Xuanzong to appoint Hu as the general, thus achieving the goal of consolidating the power of his prime minister.

古文：尝奏于上曰：以陛下雄才，兼国家富强。
现代文：李林甫曾经上奏玄宗皇帝说：以皇上的雄才大略，加上国家的昌盛富强。
English: Li Linfu once quoted Emperor Xuanzong as saying, "Take the emperor's great talent as an outline, and add the country's prosperity and strength.

古文：而诸番未灭者，由文吏为将，怯懦不胜武事。
现代文：现在那些个胡人还不时地骚扰边境，如果任用文职官员为统兵的大将，他们怯懦不胜任征战杀伐之事。
English: Now those Hu people still harass the border from time to time. If civilian officials are appointed as generals of the general staff, they are cowardly and incompetent in the matter of recruiting and killing.

古文：阶下必欲灭四夷，威海内，莫若武臣，武臣莫若番将。
现代文：皇上想要灭除四方胡人夷族的进犯，施天朝国威于海内，不如起用武臣为将掌握兵权。武臣中汉将不如番将勇猛。
English: If the emperor wanted to eliminate the attacks of the Hu people and the barbarians in the four directions and establish the authority of the imperial court in the sea, it would be better to appoint a warrior to hold the military power. A warrior among warriors would not be as brave as a general.

古文：番将生而气雄，少养马上，长求阵敌，此天性然也。
现代文：番将生来就气势雄壮，自幼就在马上过活，长年打仗对阵。这是他们的天性啊！
English: Generals are born powerful and strong, live on horses since childhood, and fight against each other for many years. This is their nature!

古文：若陛下感而将之，使其必死，则夷狄不足图也。
现代文：接着，玄宗皇帝又起用骁勇善战的突骑施酋长哥舒部的后裔哥舒翰，因战功封他为西平郡王。
English: Next, Emperor Xuanzong also appointed Go Shuhan, a descendant of the brave and warlike Tokujishi chieftain Go Shube, and made him the king of Xiping County for his war exploits.

古文：上大悦。首用安禄山，安禄山有功；用哥舒翰有勇；用安思顺能军；用高仙芝善战。禄山卒为戎首，林甫之罪也。
现代文：又起用会治军的突厥族人安思顺，和能征善战的高句丽族人高仙芝。安禄山最终成为众夷酋之首，酿成范阳兵变，两京被毁，其罪责都是身居宰相重位的李林甫起用番将的谋略造成的啊！
English: The Turkic tribesman An Sishun, who would lead the army, and the Koguryo tribesman Gao Xianzhi, who could wage a good war, were also used. An Lushan eventually became the head of all the emperors, leading to the Fanyang mutiny and the destruction of the two capitals. Their guilt was caused by the strategy of Li Linfu, who held the important position of the prime minister, to use the general.

古文：张说
现代文：张说
English: Zhang said.

古文：唐燕国公张说，幸佞人也。
现代文：唐玄宗在位期间，曾位居宰相的燕国公张说，是个奸佞媚上的人。
English: During the reign of Tang Xuan Zong, Yan Guo Gong Zhang, who was once the prime minister, said that he was a deceitful and charming person.

古文：前为并州刺史，谄事特进王毛仲。
现代文：张说前期为并州刺史时，谄媚侍奉有特殊地位的散官王毛仲。
English: Zhang said that in the early period of the annexation of the state, Wang Maozhong, a sanshan with a special status, was a charming servant.

古文：饷致金宝，不可胜数。
现代文：送给王毛仲金银财宝，不计其数。
English: Countless gold, silver and treasures were given to Wang Mao Zhong.

古文：后毛仲巡边，会说于天雄军大宴。
现代文：后来，王毛仲巡视边境，跟张说一块儿聚宴于天雄军。
English: Later, Wang Maozhong inspected the border and had a banquet with Zhang Xuan in Tianxiong's army.

古文：酒酣，恩敕忽降：授兵部尚书同中书门下三品。
现代文：酒喝到高潮时，忽然朝廷特使送来玄宗皇帝的敕书：授予张说为兵部尚书同中书门下三品。
English: When the drinking reached its climax, suddenly a special envoy from the imperial court brought Emperor Xuanzong's imperial edict: Zhang was awarded the following three prizes: the first prize for military literature and the second prize for Chinese literature.

古文：说拜谢讫，便把毛仲手起舞，嗅其靴鼻。
现代文：张说拜谢完后，便把着王毛仲的手跳起舞来，并边舞边嗅王毛仲的靴鼻。
English: After Zhang said thanks, he danced with Wang Maozhong's hand and sniffed Wang Maozhong's shoe nose while dancing.

古文：程伯献
现代文：程伯献
English: Cheng Bo Xian

古文：唐将军高力士特承玄宗恩宠。遭父丧，左金吾大将军程伯献、少府监冯绍正二人，直就其丧前，被发而哭，甚于己亲。
现代文：高力士父亲去世时，左金吾大将军程伯献少府监冯绍正二人，一直来到灵堂前，披散着头发，大声痛哭。其悲痛哀伤之状，胜过自己的亲爹死了。
English: When Goryeo's father passed away, the Left Kingu General Cheng Boqian and the Young Prefect Feng Shao Zheng both came to the front of the funeral hall, wore their hair loose and cried loudly. Their grief and sadness surpassed that of their own father's death.

古文：朝野闻之，不胜其笑。
现代文：朝野听说这件事情后，都觉得特别可笑。
English: When Asano heard about this, he thought it was particularly ridiculous.

古文：杨国忠
现代文：杨国忠
English: Yang Guozhong

古文：玄宗谓侍臣曰：我欲行一事，自古帝王未有也。
现代文：唐玄宗对侍臣说：我准备做一件事情，是自古以来的帝王从未有人做过的。
English: Tang Xuan Zong said to his attendant: I am going to do something that no emperor has ever done since ancient times.

古文：盖欲传位于肃宗。
现代文：就是我想把皇位传给李亨。
English: That is, I want to pass the throne to Li Heng.

古文：及制出，国忠大惧，言语失次。
现代文：待册封李亨为太子的命令下达后，宰相杨国忠异常恐惧，说话都语无伦次。
English: After the order for Li Heng to be registered as the crown prince was issued, Prime Minister Yang Guozhong was extremely afraid and spoke incoherently.

古文：归语杨氏姐妹曰：娘子，我辈何用更作活计？
现代文：下朝后，立即找到杨氏姐妹说：妹子，我们怎么才能想出一条活路来？
English: After the morning, he immediately found Ms. Yang's sisters and said: Sister, how can we come up with a way to live?

古文：皇太子若监国，我与姊妹等即死矣。
现代文：若皇太子继位，我与诸位姊妹立即就会被处死的啊。
English: If the crown prince succeeds to the throne, I and all my sisters will be executed immediately.

古文：相聚而哭。
现代文：说完，相互抱头大哭。
English: After that, they hugged each other and cried.

古文：虢国入谋于贵妃。
现代文：虢国夫人进宫找杨贵妃谋划。
English: Lady Zeng Guo went to the palace to find Yang Guifei to plan.

古文：妃衔土以请，其事遂止。
现代文：杨贵妃口中衔土，用这种以死相请求的办法请求玄宗皇帝，册封李亨为皇太子的事情才作罢。
English: Yang Guifei put words in her mouth, using this method of deathbed request to ask Emperor Xuanzong to stop the matter of crowning Li Heng as crown prince.

古文：哥舒翰在潼关，或劝请诛国忠，以悦众心，舒翰不听。
现代文：哥舒翰率兵镇守潼关。有人劝他请求玄宗皇帝处死杨国忠，以使天下人心大快。哥舒翰没有听取这种意见。
English: Goshukhan led the soldiers to guard Shoguan. Some people advised him to ask Emperor Xuanzong to execute Yang Guozhong, so that the hearts of the world would be quickened. Goshukhan did not listen to this opinion.

古文：禄山发范阳，每日于帐前叹曰：杨国忠头，来何太迟也！
现代文：待安禄山兵变范阳进逼两京，哥舒翰每天坐在军帐中叹息地说：杨国忠的人头，为什么斩下得太迟啦！
English: While waiting for the Anlu Mountain soldiers' mutiny of Fan Yang to enter the two capitals, Brother Shu Han sat in the military accounts every day and said with a sigh: Yang Guozhong's head, why is it too late to cut it off!

古文：国忠妻裴柔，蜀之大娼也。
现代文：杨国忠的妻子裴柔，是蜀中的有名的歌舞娼人。
English: Yang Guozhong's wife Peirou is a famous song and dance prostitute in Shuzhong.

古文：国忠又为剑南节度。
现代文：杨国忠后来又兼任剑南节度使。
English: Later, Yang Guozhong also served as the Jiannan Festival envoy.

古文：劝玄宗入蜀，授其所亲官，布蜀汉。
现代文：在安禄山叛军逼近京城长安时。杨国忠劝玄宗皇帝避难入蜀。他将他的亲信，都安插在蜀中。
English: When the rebels from Anlu Mountain approached the capital Chang'an, Yang Guozhong advised Emperor Xuanzong to take refuge in Shu. He placed his close associates in Shu.

古文：太真妃
现代文：太真妃
English: Princess Taizhen

古文：太真妃尝因妒忌，有语侵上。
现代文：杨贵妃一次因为妒忌，口出不逊冲撞了玄宗皇帝。
English: Once, because of jealousy, Yang Guifei was so outspoken that she offended Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：上怒甚。令高力士以辎车载送还其家。
现代文：玄宗大怒，命令高力士用一般的饰有帷盖的车，将她送还娘家杨府。
English: Xuanzong was furious and ordered Gao Lixi to take her back to his daughter's home, Yangfu, in an ordinary car decorated with curtains.

古文：妃悔恨号泣，抽刀剪发，授力士曰：珠玉珍异，皆上所赐，不足充献。
现代文：杨贵妃异常悔恨，抽取剪刀剪下一缕头上的青丝，交付给高力士说：珠宝玉翠，都是皇上赐赏给我的，不足以用它们进献给皇上。
English: Yang Guifei was extremely remorseful. She took out a pair of scissors and snipped off a strand of hair on her head. She handed it to Colossus and said, "All the jade and emerald jewels were given to me by the emperor. It is not enough to use them to offer them to the emperor."

古文：唯发父母所生，可达妾意。
现代文：唯有这缕头发是父母给予我的，可以用它来表达我对皇上的一片真情。
English: Only this strand of hair was given to me by my parents, and I can use it to express my true feelings for the Emperor.

古文：望为申妾万一慕恋之诚。
现代文：望高公公向皇上转达我的万分之一的仰慕依恋的诚心。
English: Wang Gao Gonggu conveyed to the emperor my one-ten-thousandth admiration and attachment.

古文：上得发，挥涕潣然。遽命力士召之归。
现代文：玄宗皇帝得见杨贵妃的这缕头发后，立时流下眼泪，可怜起这位被废黜回娘家的爱妃来。马上命令高力士将贵妃召回宫中。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong saw this strand of Yang Guifei's hair, he immediately shed tears and felt sorry for this beloved princess who had been deposed and returned to her mother's family. He immediately ordered Gao Lixi to recall Guifei to the palace.

古文：李林甫
现代文：李林甫
English: Li Linfu

古文：玄宗在东都，宫中有怪。
现代文：唐玄宗在东都洛阳，宫中闹鬼怪。
English: Tang Xuan Zong in the eastern capital Luoyang, haunted by ghosts in the palace.

古文：明日，召宰相，欲西幸。
现代文：第二天，玄宗召集宰相们上朝议事，说自己想回驾西京长安。
English: The next day, Xuanzong called together the prime ministers for a meeting, saying that he wanted to return to the western capital Chang'an.

古文：裴稷山、张曲江谏曰：百姓场圃未毕，请候冬间。
现代文：宰相裴稷山、张曲江劝阻说：老百姓现在正忙于收割打场，请皇上等候到冬闲时再回驾西京吧。
English: Prime Minister Pei Shaoshan and Zhang Qujiang dissuaded him, saying, "The common people are now busy harvesting the crops, so please wait until the winter is over before returning to West Beijing."

古文：是时，李林甫初拜相。
现代文：当时，李林甫刚刚升任宰相。
English: At that time, Li Linfu had just been promoted to prime minister.

古文：窃知上意，及罢退，佯为蹇步。上问：何故脚疾。
现代文：他心中暗暗体察到玄宗欲回驾长安的原因，待到退朝时，他假装脚瘸留在后面。玄宗皇帝问：脚怎么瘸了？李林甫回答说：我的脚没有病，不瘸。
English: In his heart, he secretly sensed the reason why Emperor Xuanzong wanted to return to Chang'an. When he left the palace, he pretended that the shackles were left behind. Emperor Xuanzong asked: "How did your feet become lame?" Li Linfu replied: "My feet are not ill, they are not lame."

古文：对曰：臣非病足，愿独奏事。
现代文：我是想单独向皇上谈谈我对回驾西京的看法。
English: I wanted to talk to the Emperor alone about my thoughts on returning to West Kyoto.

古文：乃言二京陛下东西宫也。
现代文：于是李林甫对玄宗皇帝说：洛阳、长安二京，乃是皇上的东宫与西宫。
English: Therefore, Li Linfu said to Emperor Xuanzong: Luoyang and Chang'an are the East Palace and the West Palace of the emperor.

古文：将欲驾幸，何用择时？
现代文：皇帝要上哪宫，难道还用选择日子吗？
English: Does the emperor have to choose which palace to go to, or does he have to choose the day?

古文：设有妨于刈获，独免过路赋税。
现代文：如果会妨碍百姓们收割、打场。单独免去他们的过路赋税就可以了吗。
English: If it will hinder the people from harvesting and playing, is it enough to exempt them from the toll tax alone?

古文：臣请宣示有司，即日西幸。
现代文：我请求皇上允许我指示有关部门，说皇上马上就回驾西京，您看如何？
English: I ask the emperor to allow me to instruct the relevant departments, saying that the emperor will return to West Beijing immediately. What do you think?

古文：上大悦。
现代文：玄宗皇帝非常高兴。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy.

古文：自此驾幸长安，不复东矣。
现代文：就在这一天回驾长安，再也没有上东都洛阳来。
English: On this day, I drove back to Chang'an and never went to the eastern capital Luoyang again.

古文：旬日，耀卿、九龄俱罢，而牛仙客进。
现代文：过了十多天，裴耀卿、张九龄都被免除宰相职务，玄宗皇上提升朔方节度使牛仙客为工部尚书同中书门下三品领朔方节度使。
English: After more than ten days, Pei Yaoqing and Zhang Jiuling were both relieved of their duties as prime minister, and Emperor Xuanzong promoted Shuo Fang Jiedu to make Niu Xianke the third grade leader of Shuo Fang Jiedu under the supervision of Shang Shu and Zhong Shu.

古文：又李林甫居相位一十九年，诛锄海内人望。
现代文：又李林甫居相位十九年。
English: In addition, Li Linfu has been in power for nineteen years.

古文：自储君以下，无不累息。
现代文：在这十九年中，凡是才干、名望、功业高于他的人，以及皇上看重的人，他都百般设计除掉。
English: During these nineteen years, he tried in every possible way to get rid of all those who were superior to him in talent, fame, and achievements, as well as those who were important to the emperor.

古文：初开元后，姚宋等一二老臣，多献可替否，以争天下大体。
现代文：因此，自皇太子以下，没有不感到恐惧的，连大气都不敢出。玄宗皇帝刚刚即位时的开元初年，所用的姚崇、宗璟等一些老臣，多数人都向皇上推荐日后能替代自己为相的人。
English: Therefore, from the crown prince down, there is no one who does not feel fear, and even the atmosphere does not dare to come out. In the first year of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, when Emperor Xuanzong had just ascended the throne, most of the old ministers such as Yao Chong and Zong Yao, who were used, recommended to the emperor people who could replace themselves as the emperor in the future.

古文：天下既理，上心亦泰。
现代文：用以谋得国家太平，百姓康乐。他们知道，国家治理好了，皇上的心也就安了。
English: They knew that if the country was well governed, the emperor's heart would be at ease.

古文：张九龄上所拔，颇以后进少之。
现代文：宰相张九龄是玄宗皇帝亲自选拔重用的人。
English: Prime Minister Zhang Juering was personally selected by Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：九龄尤謇谔，数犯上，上怒而逐之。
现代文：但是他为人正直，多次直言冲撞玄宗皇帝。玄宗一怒之下，罢免了他的宰相，贬降为荆州长史。
English: However, he was an honest man and repeatedly confronted Emperor Xuanzong. Xuanzong was so angry that he dismissed his prime minister and demoted him to Governor of Jing Province.

古文：上雄才豁达，任人不疑。
现代文：玄宗皇帝雄才大略，为人豁达，用人不疑。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was a man of great talent, open-minded, and had no hesitation in employing people.

古文：晚得林甫，养成君欲，未尝有逆耳之言，上爱之。
现代文：在晚年得到李林甫这样的一位谄媚的宰相，从来不说玄宗皇帝不爱听的话，这才养成了皇上听不得逆耳忠言的习惯。
English: In his later years, he got such a charming prime minister as Li Linfu, who never said anything that Emperor Xuanzong did not like to hear. This led to the Emperor's habit of not listening to contrary advice.

古文：遂深居高枕，以富贵自乐。
现代文：玄宗皇帝宠爱倚重李林甫。自从李林甫为宰相后，玄宗皇帝就深居在宫帷中，贪恋声色，恣意享乐。
English: Emperor Xuanzong favored and relied heavily on Li Linfu. Ever since Li Linfu became the prime minister, Emperor Xuanzong lived deep within the palace walls, indulging in sex and pleasure at will.

古文：大臣以下，罕得对见，事无大小，责成林甫。
现代文：大臣以下的人，很少有机会见到玄宗皇帝，更谈不上跟皇上讲对国家大事了。不论大事、小事，都一律责成宰相李林甫去办理。
English: People below the rank of minister rarely had the opportunity to meet Emperor Xuanzong, let alone talk to the emperor about national affairs. No matter how big or small, Prime Minister Li Linfu was always assigned to handle everything.

古文：林甫虽不文，而明练吏事，慎守纲纪，衣冠非常调，无进用之门。
现代文：李林甫虽然不通晓词赋文章，然而对官场上的事情却精明干练，恪守原有的纲常法纪，就是你再有奇才异学的官员士人，也没有破格提拔任用的门路，一切都按常轨办事。
English: Although Li Linfu did not understand the words and articles, he was shrewd and skillful in dealing with things in the official field, and adhered to the original rules and regulations. Even if you are an unusually talented official and scholar, there is no way to be promoted and appointed. Everything is done according to the usual procedure.

古文：而阴贼忍杀，未尝以爱憎见于容色。
现代文：李林甫为人阴毒残忍，随意迫害人。从未有表露过喜爱谁与憎恨谁。
English: Li Linfu was a vicious and cruel man who persecuted people at will. He never showed who he loved and who he hated.

古文：上左右者虽饔人厮养，无不略之，故动静辄知。
现代文：玄宗皇帝左右的人，就连为皇上掌管烹饪的小吏，和做粗活的仆役，他没有不笼络收买的。因此，皇上的一举一动，他马上都知晓。
English: The people around Emperor Xuanzong, even the minor officials in charge of cooking for the emperor, and the servants who did menial work, he did not have to bribe. Therefore, he knew the emperor's every move immediately.

古文：李适之初入相，疏而不密，林甫卖之。
现代文：李适之刚任宰相时，行事疏乎而不慎密，被李森甫设下圈套出卖了。
English: When Li Shizhi was newly appointed as prime minister, he acted carelessly and carelessly, and was betrayed by Li Senfu's trap.

古文：乃曰：华山之下有金矿焉，采之可以富国。
现代文：一次，李森甫对李适之说：华山下面有金矿，开采了可以给国家增加财富。
English: On one occasion, Li Senfu said to Li Shizhi, "There is a gold mine under Huashan Mountain. If it is mined, it can add wealth to the country."

古文：上未知之耳。
现代文：但是皇上并不知道啊。
English: But the Emperor didn't know.

古文：适之善其言，他日，从容以奏，上悦。
现代文：李适之相信了他的话，日后，将此事上奏玄宗皇帝。
English: Li Shizhi believed his words and later reported the matter to Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：顾问林甫，林甫曰：臣知之久矣。
现代文：玄宗皇帝非常高兴，征询李林甫。李林甫说：我很久以前就知道华山底下有金矿。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very pleased and consulted Li Linfu. Li Linfu said, "I knew a long time ago that there were gold mines at the bottom of Huashan Mountain.

古文：华山陛下本命也，王气所在，不可发之。
现代文：但是华山是皇上的本命啊。王气所在，不可以开采金矿。
English: But Huashan is the emperor's destiny. Where the king's spirit is, it is not possible to mine gold.

古文：故臣不敢言。上遂薄适之。
现代文：因此，我不敢向皇上提起这件事情。
English: Therefore, I dare not mention this matter to the Emperor.

古文：因曰：自今奏事，先与林甫议之，无轻脱。
现代文：玄宗皇帝从此特别轻视李适之，对他说：从今以后，凡是向我奏请的事，事先跟林甫商议一下，不要太轻佻随便了。
English: Emperor Xuanzong especially despised Li Shizhi from then on, and said to him, "From now on, if you have any request to make to me, please discuss it with Lin Fu in advance, and don't be too careless.

古文：自是适之束手矣。
现代文：从此，李适之的手脚被束缚住了，再也不能单独向玄宗皇帝奏事。
English: From then on, Li Shizhi's hands and feet were tied, and he could no longer report to Emperor Xuanzong alone.

古文：非其所引进，皆以罪诛。威震海内，谏官但持禄养资，无敢论事。
现代文：李林甫在任宰相期间，凡是不是经他引荐的人，都想方设法查找你的错处，将你排挤出去，或者罗织罪名将你杀掉。由此，他的声威震动海内。所有的谏官都老老实实地拿着俸禄维持生计，谁也不敢纳谏议论朝政。
English: During Li Linfu's tenure as prime minister, all those who were not recommended by him tried their best to find out what was wrong with you, to push you out, or to fabricate charges to kill you. As a result, his prestige shook the sea. All eunuchs honestly took their salaries to make a living, and no one dared to discuss court politics.

古文：独补缺杜中犹再上疏。
现代文：补缺杜中犹不信邪，再次上疏玄宗皇上。
English: To make up for the lack of Duzhong Yu's distrust of evil, Emperor Xuanzong once again ascended the throne.

古文：翌日，被黜为下邽令。
现代文：第二天，就被贬黜为下邽令。
English: The next day, it was downgraded to an executive order.

古文：林甫召诸谏官谓曰：今明主在上，群臣将顺之不暇，何用多言。
现代文：李林甫召集诸位谏官说：现今，上有圣明的皇帝，我们当臣子的，按照皇上的正确旨意办事还来不及呢，何用你们多嘴多舌。
English: Li Linfu called all the eunuchs together and said, "Nowadays, since the emperor has ascended to the throne, it is too late for us to act according to the emperor's correct will. Why do you talk so much?"

古文：君不见立仗马乎？
现代文：你们没有看到御苑内那些供仪仗使役的马吗？
English: Have you not seen the horses in the royal park that are used for ceremonial purposes?

古文：终日无声，而食三品料；及其一鸣，即黜去。
现代文：整天老老实实没有一点响动的，可以吃到三品的草料，只要哪匹马稍一鸣叫、不听使役，立即赶出去。
English: Horses that do not make any noise all day long can eat three kinds of grass. If any horse makes any noise and does not listen to the attendants, it will be driven out immediately.

古文：虽欲再鸣，其可得乎。
现代文：从今后，你们谁再随意向皇上奏疏，他的下场就象那匹鸣叫不听使役的马一样。
English: From now on, if any of you play tricks on the Emperor again, his fate will be the same as the horse that did not listen to the servants.

古文：由是谏诤之路绝失。
现代文：从此，向玄宗皇上纳谏提意见的道路则被堵死了。
English: From then on, the way to present opinions to Emperor Xuanzong was blocked.

古文：晚年多冤仇，惧其报复。
现代文：李林甫到了晚年时，结下了许多的冤仇。他非常惧怕有仇人报复。
English: In his later years, Li Linfu had a lot of vendettas. He was very afraid of enemies taking revenge on him.

古文：出广车仆，金吾静街，前驱百步之外。
现代文：因此，每次出行都广置车舆仆夫，派许多宫中卫士将前边百步之内的人群驱散，在两旁警卫。
English: Therefore, each trip is accompanied by a large number of cars and servants, and many palace guards are sent to disperse the crowd within a hundred paces in front, with guards on both sides.

古文：居则以砖垒屋，以板幙墙。家人警卫，如御大敌。
现代文：他居住的府第都用砖砌屋，用木板做围墙，派出许多家将仆夫日夜警卫，如临大敌。
English: The prefectural capital where he lives has brick buildings and wooden board fences, and many families have sent their servants to stand guard day and night, as if they were facing a great enemy.

古文：其自防也如此。
现代文：他就这样的设防保护自己。从前。
English: That's how he protected himself in the past.

古文：故事，宰臣骑从，三五人而已。
现代文：历任宰相出行过街，不过有三五个侍从随行而已。
English: Successive prime ministers have traveled through the city, but only accompanied by three or five attendants.

古文：士庶不避于路。
现代文：士人百姓也无需在道两旁躲避。
English: There is also no need for people to take cover on both sides of the road.

古文：至是骑从百余人，为左右翼，公卿以下趋避，自林甫始也。
现代文：而设置骑从上百人在左右护卫，让公卿以下的人都得躲藏退避，是从李林甫开始的啊！
English: And setting hundreds of people on horseback to escort him from left to right, so that everyone below the nobility had to hide and retreat, was started by Li Linfu!

