古文：或谓韩王曰： 秦王欲出事于梁，而欲攻绛、安邑，韩计将安出矣？
现代文：有人对韩王说： 秦王想要征讨魏国，并且想攻打绛、安邑等城，韩国打算采取什么对策？
English: Someone said to King Han: King Qin wants to conquer Wei, and wants to attack cities such as Handan and Anyi, what countermeasures does South Korea plan to take?

古文：秦之欲伐韩，以东窥周室，甚唯寐忘之。
现代文：秦国想攻打韩国，主要是为了图谋周王室，这是他梦寐以求的。
English: Qin wanted to invade Korea, mainly to plot against the Zhou royal family, which was his dream.

古文：今韩不察，因欲与秦，必为山东大祸矣。
现代文：如今韩国不明察事实，就贸然想要和秦国结为盟国，必然给崤山以东各诸侯带来灾祸。
English: Nowadays, South Korea, without checking the facts, wants to form an alliance with Qin, which will inevitably bring disaster to the provinces east of Lushan.

古文：秦之欲攻梁也，欲得梁以临韩，恐梁之不听也，故欲病之以固交也。
现代文：秦攻打魏国，主要是为了经由魏国军临韩国，惟恐魏国不听号令，所以才决定给魏国以沉重的打击，借以巩固秦、魏之间的关系。
English: Qin attacked Wei, mainly in order to invade Korea through Wei's army, but fearing that Wei would not listen to the signal, it was decided to give Wei a heavy blow in order to consolidate the relationship between Qin and Wei.

古文：王不察，因欲中立，梁必怒于韩之不与己，必折为秦用，韩必举矣。愿王熟虑之也。
现代文：可是君王没有明察事实真相，竟然想要保持中立，魏国必然愤恨韩国不和自己联盟，它在不得已的情况下会顺从秦国驱使，到那时韩国必然会灭亡，希望大王慎重考虑啊！
English: However, the king did not clearly observe the facts and wanted to remain neutral. Wei would inevitably resent Korea for not forming an alliance with itself. It would, under extreme circumstances, follow Qin's lead. At that time, Korea would inevitably perish. I hope the king will carefully consider this.

古文：不如急发重使之赵、梁，约复为兄弟，使山东皆以锐师戍韩、梁之西边，非为此也，山东无以救亡，此万世之计也。
现代文：所以君王不如派人前往赵、魏，和赵、魏两国结为同舟共济的兄弟，使崤山以东各诸侯派精兵镇守韩、魏的西边；假如不采取这种紧急措施，那山东诸侯将无法救亡图存，这是万代不朽的君国大计。
English: Therefore, it would be better for the king to send someone to Zhao, Wei, and the two countries of Zhao and Wei as brothers in the same boat, so that the princes in the east of Lushan would send elite soldiers to guard the west of Han and Wei; if such emergency measures were not taken, the princes in the east of Shanshan would not be able to survive, which is the immortal kingdom plan for all generations.

古文：秦之欲并天下而王之也，不与古同。
现代文：秦国妄想吞并天下诸侯，进而以天子的姿态君临中国，其气概和古时迥然不同。
English: Qin's ambition to annex the world's principalities, and then to rule China as the Son of Heaven, was very different from that of the ancients.

古文：事之虽如子之事父，犹将亡之也。
现代文：侍奉秦国虽然像儿子侍奉父亲一样，但是父亲最后还是把儿子消灭掉。
English: Although serving Qin was like a son serving his father, the father eventually eliminated his son.

古文：行虽如伯夷，犹将亡之也。行虽如桀、纣，犹将亡之也。
现代文：行为虽然像手足兄弟的伯夷让位叔齐，但是最后两兄弟却都是饿死在首阳山下；言行虽然像夏桀王和殷纣王，但是仍然被商汤王和周武王灭亡。
English: Although his behavior was like that of his brothers, Bo Yi, he lost his place to his uncle Qi, but the last two brothers died of starvation under Shouyang Mountain; although his words and deeds were like those of King Xia Yao and King Yin Yao, he was still killed by King Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu.

古文：虽善事之，无益也。不可以为存，适足以自令亟亡也。
现代文：所以说，无论怎样事秦都是没有任何作用的，不但不能靠事秦来维护国运，反而会因此而加速国家的灭亡。
English: Therefore, no matter how Qin affairs are, they have no effect. Not only can Qin affairs not be relied on to maintain the national movement, but it will accelerate the country's demise.

古文：然则山东非能从亲，合而相坚如一者，必皆王矣。 
现代文：换句话说，崤山以东的各国诸侯如果不结成合纵联盟，使各国诸侯团结一致，最后一定会被秦国所灭。 
English: In other words, if the lords of the countries east of Lushan did not form a vertical alliance and make the lords of the countries united, they would eventually be destroyed by Qin.

