古文：自书契之作，先民可得而闻者，经传所称，唐、虞以上，帝王有号谥。
现代文：自从文字被发明以来，能够了解的上古人物，就是经传中所提到的。唐、虞之前，帝王有谥号，但辅佐他们的大臣却没有记载。
English: Since the invention of writing, the only ancient figures that can be understood are those mentioned in the scriptures. Before Tang and Yu, emperors had surnames, but there is no record of the ministers who assisted them.

古文：辅佐不可得而称矣，而诸子颇言之，虽不考虖孔氏，然犹著在篇籍，归乎显善昭恶，劝戒后人，故博采焉。
现代文：但是诸子却多次提到他们，虽然诸子不考察孔子之书，但仍将这些大臣记载在书中，是出于彰显善行，揭发恶行，劝导警戒后世人的目的。
English: But the sons mentioned them many times. Although the sons did not examine the book of Confucius, they still recorded these ministers in the book, for the purpose of highlighting good deeds, exposing evil deeds, and persuading and warning future generations.

古文：孔子曰： 若圣与仁，则吾岂敢？ 
现代文：所以我广泛地采纳这些资料。孔子说： 若圣与仁，则吾岂敢。 
English: Confucius said, "If I were holy and benevolent, I would not dare to do this."

古文：又曰： 何事于仁，必也圣乎！ 
现代文：又说： 何事于人，必也圣乎。 
English: And he said, Whatsoever is born of man is unclean.

古文： 未知，焉得仁？ 
现代文： 为知，焉得仁。 
English: To know is not to know.

古文：又曰： 中人以上，可以语上也。  唯上智与下愚不移。 
现代文： 生而知之者，上也；学而知之者，次也；困而不学，民斯为下矣。 又说： 中人以上可以语上，唯上智与下愚不移。 
English: Those who are born with knowledge are also superior; those who learn and know are also inferior; those who are poor and do not learn are inferior.

古文：传曰：譬如尧、舜，禹、稷、卨与之为善则行，鮌、讠雚兜欲与为恶则诛。
现代文：经义中这样解释：比如尧、舜、禹、稷、契，和他们做善事则能够仕途通畅，鮌、讙兜想要和他们作恶就被诛杀。
English: In the meaning of economy, it is explained as follows: for example, if you do good deeds with the angels, you can have a smooth career, but if you want to do evil with them, you will be killed.

古文：可与为善，不可与为恶，是谓上智。
现代文：能够和他们做善事而不能和他们作恶事，这就叫上智。
English: To be able to do good with them, and not to be able to do evil with them, is called wisdom.

古文：桀、纣，龙逢、比干欲与之为善则诛，于莘、崇侯与之为恶则行。
现代文：夏桀、商纣，关龙逢和王子比干想要和他们做善事就被诛杀，于莘、崇侯和他们做恶事就能够仕途通畅。
English: Xia Yao, Shang Yao, Guan Longfeng and Prince Bi Gan wanted to do good deeds with them and were beaten to death, while Yu Yao, Chong Hou and others who did evil deeds with them could have a smooth career.

古文：可与为恶，不可与为善，是谓下愚。
现代文：能够和他们为恶而不能和他们为善，这叫下愚。
English: To be able to do evil with them, but not to be able to do good with them, is called lower stupidity.

古文：齐桓公，管仲相之则霸，竖貂辅之则乱。可与为善，可与为恶，是谓中人。
现代文：齐桓公，管仲辅佐他则成为霸主，竖貂辅佐他则国家大乱，能和他为善，也能和他做恶，这叫中人。
English: Qi Huan Gong, Guan Zhong Fu Zuo, he became the overlord, and Zhisheng Fu Zuo, he became the national chaos. You can do good with him, but you can also do evil with him. This is called the middle man.

古文：因兹以列九等之序，究极经传，继世相次，总备古今之略要云。
现代文：我根据这个来排列九等次序，穷极经传，世代相继，依次排序，总体将古今的概要整理完备。
English: According to this, I arranged the nine-level order, passing down from generation to generation, sequentially sorted, and the overall overview of the past and present was completed.

古文：表略
现代文：表格此处省略。
English: Abbreviations

