古文：简文皇帝讳昱，字道万，元帝之少子也。
现代文：简文皇帝名昱，字道万，是元帝的小儿子。
English: Emperor Jianwen was the youngest son of Emperor Yuan.

古文：幼而岐嶷，为元帝所爱。
现代文：他幼年时就很聪明，得到元帝的钟爱。
English: He was very clever when he was young and was loved by the Yuan Emperor.

古文：郭璞见而谓人曰： 兴晋祚者，必此人也。 
现代文：郭璞见到他，对人说： 振兴晋室的，一定是这个人。 
English: When Guo Wei saw him, he said, "This man must be the one to revitalize the Jin family."

古文：及长，清虚寡欲，尤善玄言。
现代文：司马昱长大后，清虚寡欲，尤其擅长谈玄。
English: After Sima Ye grew up, he became more modest and less greedy. He was especially good at talking about the occult.

古文：永昌元年，元帝诏曰： 先公武王、先考恭王君临琅邪。
现代文：永昌元年，元帝下诏说： 先公武王、先考恭王统治琅邪。
English: In the first year of Yongchang, Emperor Yuan issued an edict saying, "First, King Gongwu and then King Gaoqiong will rule over the evil."

古文：继世相承，国嗣未立，蒸尝靡主，朕常悼心。
现代文：父子世代相承，现在嗣位的人还没有立祭祀没有主持，朕常常为此伤心。
English: It has been handed down from father to son for generations. The current heir to the throne has not yet established a sacrificial rite or presided over it. I often feel sad about this.

古文：子昱仁明有智度，可以虔奉宗庙，以慰罔极之恩。
现代文：儿子司马昱仁厚贤明，有智谋气度，可以恭敬地侍奉祖宗，用以慰藉祖宗无尽的恩德。
English: His son, Sima Qianren, was generous and wise, with wisdom and tact. He could respectfully serve his ancestors, and use this to console them for their endless kindness.

古文：其封昱为琅邪王，食会稽、宣城如旧。 
现代文：封司马昱为琅邪王，食邑依然是会稽、宣城。 
English: The feudal magistrate Ma Jun is the king of evil, and the food town is still the city of audit and proclamation.

古文：咸和元年，所生郑夫人薨。
现代文：咸和元年，司马昱的生母郑夫人去世。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Sima Ye's birth mother, Mrs. Zheng, passed away.

古文：帝时年七岁，号慕泣血，固请服重。
现代文：简文帝当时年仅七岁，哭祭生母都哭出了血，坚决请求穿重丧孝服。
English: Emperor Jianwen was only seven years old at the time, and his birth mother cried blood and insisted that he wear mourning clothes.

古文：成帝哀而许之，故徙封会稽王，拜散骑常侍。
现代文：成帝可怜他，答应了他的请求，因而改封为会稽王，援散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Cheng took pity on him and agreed to his request. As a result, he was given the title of the King's Court Clerk and the title of the Prince's Equerry.

古文：九年，迁右将军，加侍中。
现代文：九年，升右将军，加授侍中。
English: In the ninth year, he was promoted to General of the Right and awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：咸康六年，进抚军将军，领秘书监。
现代文：咸康六年，进升抚军将军，兼领秘书监。
English: In the sixth year of Xiankang, he was promoted to the general of the Fuzhou army and concurrently held the post of secretary supervisor.

古文：建元元年夏五月癸丑，康帝诏曰： 太常职奉天地，兼掌宗庙，其为任也，可谓重矣。
现代文：建元元年夏五月癸丑，康帝下诏说： 太常觉得敬奉天地，兼管宗庙，它的职责可以说很大。
English: In the summer and May of the first year of Jianyuan, Emperor Kang issued an edict saying, "I often feel that it is a great responsibility to serve heaven and earth and manage the ancestral temple.

古文：是以古今选建，未尝不妙简时望，兼之儒雅。
现代文：所以古往今来挑选作用，都选择有声望，兼为博学的儒士。
English: Therefore, from ancient times to the present, the role of selection has been to select the most prestigious and erudite Confucianists.

古文：会稽王叔履尚清虚，志道无倦，优游上列，讽议朝肆。其领太常本官如故。 
现代文：会稽王崇尚清虚，孜孜不倦立志求道，在高官要位上从容不迫，讽议朝野，就让会稽王兼领太常，原有的官职不变。 
English: The Auditor-General advocates purity, tirelessly aspires to be a Taoist, takes things easy in high-ranking positions, and makes sarcastic remarks about the court. Therefore, the Auditor-General is allowed to serve concurrently, and the original official position remains unchanged.

古文：永和元年，崇德太后临朝，进位抚军大将军、录尚书六条事。
现代文：永和元年，崇德太后临朝，司马昱进升为抚军大将军、录尚书六条事。
English: In the first year of the Yonghe era, when the Empress Dowager Zongde ascended to the throne and Sima Junjin was promoted to the general of the army, six events were recorded.

古文：二年，骠骑何充卒，崇德太后诏帝专总万机。
现代文：二年，骠骑何充死了，崇德太后下诏帝让简文帝专权处理国家事务。
English: Two years later, after the death of Emperor He, Empress Dowager Zongde gave Emperor Jianwen the exclusive right to handle state affairs.

古文：八年，进位司徒，固让不拜。
现代文：八年，进升司徒，司马昱坚决推辞不受。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to the position of Sifu, and Sima Yi resolutely refused to accept the promotion.

古文：穆帝始冠，帝稽首归政，不许。
现代文：穆帝开始行冠礼时，简文帝要求归还国政，穆帝不答应。
English: When Mu Di began to perform the coronation, Emperor Jianwen demanded the return of state affairs, but Mu Di did not agree.

古文：废帝即位，以琅邪王绝嗣，复徙封琅邪，而封王子昌明为会稽王。
现代文：废帝即位后，因为琅邪王没有继承人，又改封简文帝为琅邪王，封他的儿子司马明为会为会稽王。
English: After the deposed emperor ascended the throne, because there was no heir to the evil king, he changed the title of Emperor Jianwen to the evil king, and his son Sima Ming to the king of the meeting.

古文：帝固让，故虽封琅邪而不去会稽之号。
现代文：简文帝极力推辞，所以虽封琅邪王却不除去会稽王的封号。
English: Emperor Jianwen strenuously refused, so although he sealed the evil king, he did not remove the seal of the king.

古文：太和元年，进位丞相、录尚书事，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，剑履上殿，给羽葆鼓吹班剑六十人，又固让。
现代文：太和元年，进升丞相、录尚书事，入朝时不需趋步上前，参拜时不必称名，可以佩剑穿鞋上殿，供给他六十名羽葆鼓吹班剑仪仗队，简文帝又极力推让。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, he was promoted to chancellor and recorded in the records. When he entered the imperial court, he did not have to step forward, and he did not have to give his name when he went to worship. He could wear a sword and shoes to go up to the palace, and he was provided with a ceremonial guard of sixty egrets, and Emperor Jianwen tried his best to give in.

古文：及废帝废，皇太后诏曰： 丞相、录尚书、会稽王体自中宗，明德劭令，英秀玄虚，神栖事外。
现代文：到了废帝被废黜后，皇太后下诏说： 丞相、录尚书、会稽王是中宗之后，德性美好，高尚后美崇尚清虚，神妙表现在处事之外。
English: After the dethronement of the former emperor, the empress dowager issued an edict saying, "The chancellor, the recorder of the records, and the king of the reviewers are after the Middle Sect. Their virtue is beautiful, their beauty is pure and virtuous after they are noble, and their divinity is manifested outside of their work.

古文：以具瞻允塞，故阿衡三世。
现代文：以辅佐重臣的地位，所以辅导三代帝王主持国政。
English: With the status of assistant and senior minister, he advised three generations of emperors to preside over state affairs.

古文：道化宣流，人望攸归，为日已久。
现代文：道德教化流布，众望所归，日子已经很久了。
English: It has been a long time since moral education has been popular and popular.

古文：宜从天人之心，以统皇极。
现代文：应该顺从天意民心，来即帝位。
English: He should obey the will of heaven and the will of the people, and take the throne immediately.

古文：主者明依旧典，以时施行。 于是大司马桓温率百官进太极前殿，具乘舆法驾，奉迎帝于会稽邸，于朝堂变服，著平巾帻单衣，东向拜受玺绶。
现代文：主管的人明确依从当时典章，按时施行 于是大司马桓温率百官进入太极前殿，准备好皇帝乘车，到会稽王的官邸去迎接简文帝，在朝堂上改换服装，穿戴着平巾帻和单衣，向东方下拜接受玺绶。
English: The person in charge clearly complied with the regulations of the time and implemented them on time. Therefore, the chief secretary Ma Huanwen led hundreds of officials into the front hall of the Taiji Temple, prepared the emperor to take a car, went to the official residence of the King of Auditors to meet Emperor Jianwen, changed clothes in the morning hall, wore a flat scarf and a single dress, and bowed to the East to receive the imperial scepter.

古文：咸安元年冬十一月己酉，即皇帝位。
现代文：咸安元年冬十一月己酉，司马昱即皇帝位。
English: In November of the first year of the Heian era, Sima Yi became emperor.

古文：桓温出次中堂，令兵屯卫。乙卯，温奏废太宰、武陵王晞及子总。
现代文：桓温出宫驻留在中堂，命令军队驻守，乙卯，温奏上奏皇帝请求废黜太宰、武陵王司马晞和他的儿子司马总。
English: Kan-Wen left the palace and stayed in the nave, ordering the army to be stationed there. In response, Emperor Wen requested the dethronement of the Dazai, Wuling King Sima Yu and his son Sima Chong.

古文：诏魏郡太守毛安之帅所领宿卫殿内，改元为咸安。
现代文：皇帝诏令魏郡太守毛安之帅领他的军队在殿内值宿警卫，改元为咸安。
English: The emperor ordered the Wei County Governor Mao An to lead his troops as guards on duty in the palace, and the name was changed to Xi'an.

古文：庚戌，使兼太尉周颐告于太庙。辛亥，桓温遣弟秘逼新蔡王晃诣西堂，自列与太宰、武陵王晞等谋反。帝对之流涕，温皆收付廷尉。
现代文：辛亥日，桓温派弟弟桓秘逼迫新蔡王司马晃到西堂去，逼他说和太宰、武陵王司马晞等人谋反。皇帝对着司马晃流着眼泪，桓温把司马晃等人抓起来交付廷尉发落。
English: On the day of Xinhai, Kuanwen sent his younger brother Kuanpi to force the new Cai King Sima Qiao to go to the West Hall, forcing him to conspire with the Dazaifu, Wuling King Sima Qiao and others. The emperor shed tears over Sima Qiao, and Kuanwen arrested Sima Qiao and others and sent them to the palace.

古文：癸丑，杀东海二子及其母。
现代文：癸丑日，杀了东海王的两个儿子和他们的母亲。
English: On April Fool's Day, he killed the East Sea King's two sons and their mother.

古文：初，帝以冲虚简贵，历宰三世，温素所敬惮。
现代文：当初，皇帝淡泊清虚简傲高贵，历任三朝宰相，桓温平素敬仰害怕他。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Tanpo was simple and noble, and successive prime ministers of the three dynasties, Kuan Wenping admired and feared him.

古文：及初即位，温乃撰辞欲自陈述，帝引见，对之悲泣，温惧不能言。
现代文：到了皇帝接见了桓温，对着他悲伤地哭泣，桓温怕得说不出话。
English: When the emperor came to meet him, Kuan-Wen wept with sorrow. Kuan-Wen was too scared to speak.

古文：至是，有司承其旨，奏诛武陵王晞，帝不许。
现代文：到了这个时候，一些官吏秉承桓温的旨意，上奏请求诛杀武陵王司马晞，皇帝不答应。
English: At this time, some officials, adhering to the will of Kuan Wen, made a request to assassinate Wuling King Sima Qian, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：温固执至于再三，帝手诏报曰： 若晋祚灵长，公便宜奉行前诏。
现代文：桓温再三地坚持，皇帝亲自下诏书回答说： 如果晋室国长久，明公就应该奉行前诏。
English: Kan-Wen insisted again and again, and the emperor replied in his own imperial edict: If the Jin Dynasty lasts long, the Ming Dynasty should follow the former imperial edict.

古文：如其大运去矣，请避贤路。 
现代文：如果晋室大运已去，那么请让我给圣贤的人让路。 
English: If Jinmu Dayun has gone, then please let me give way to the sages.

古文：温览之，流汗变色，不复敢言。
现代文：桓温看了，吓得一身冷汗，脸色也变了，便不复再说。
English: When Kanen saw it, he was so scared that he broke out in a cold sweat. His face changed, and he stopped talking.

古文：乙卯，废晞及其三子，徙于新安。
现代文：乙卯日，废黜司马晞和他的三个儿子，流放到新安。
English: On the second day of the month, Sima Yu and his three sons were deposed and exiled to Xin'an.

古文：丙辰，放新葵王晁于衡阳。
现代文：丙辰日，把新蔡王司马晁流放到衡阳。
English: On the tenth day of the ninth month, the new Cai Wang Sima Yi was exiled to Hengyang.

古文：戊午，诏曰： 王室多故，穆哀早世，皇胤夙迁，神器无主。
现代文：戊午日，下诏说： 王室多难，穆帝、哀帝过早离开人世，皇统早有变更，帝位没有主人。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, the following edict was issued: The royal family is facing many difficulties. Emperor Mu and Empress Ai have passed away prematurely. There have been changes in the imperial line, and the throne has no owner.

古文：东海王以母弟近属，入纂大统，嗣位经年，昏暗乱常，人伦亏丧，大祸将及，则我祖宗之灵靡知所托。
现代文：东海王是皇帝母弟这样亲近的亲属，入朝继承大统，继掌这位多年，昏暗远道，扰乱朝纲，人伦败坏，大祸将要降临，我祖宗的神灵不知寄托何处。
English: Donghae Wang is such a close relative of the emperor's mother and brother. He entered the imperial court to inherit the supreme leadership. Following his footsteps for many years, he has traveled a long and dark road. He has disrupted the imperial system, corrupted human morals, and a great disaster is about to come. I don't know where to place the spirits of my ancestors.

古文：皇太后深惧皇基，时定大计。
现代文：皇太后深为皇室基业担忧，及时定下大计。
English: The Empress Dowager was deeply worried about the foundation of the imperial family, and made a plan in time.

古文：大司马因顺天人，协同神略，亲帅群后，恭承明命。
现代文：大司马遵循天人意志，协同神明大略，亲自率领王公们，恭敬地承受圣明之命。
English: Daisima followed the will of heaven and earth, coordinated with the gods, personally led the princes, and respectfully accepted the holy order.

古文：云雾既除，皇极载清，乃顾朕躬，仰承弘绪。
现代文：云雾既已扫除，皇室得以清明，就顾念于朕，继承弘大功业。
English: Now that the clouds have been cleared and the imperial family has become clear, they will think of me and carry on my great work.

古文：虽伊尹之宁殷朝，博陆之安汉室，无以尚也。
现代文：即使是伊尹安定殷朝，博陆安定汉室，也无法超过。
English: Even if it is the Yin Dynasty, the Bolu Dynasty and the Han Dynasty, it cannot be surpassed.

古文：朕以寡德，猥居元首，实惧眇然，不克负荷，战战兢兢，罔知攸济。
现代文：朕以寡薄德行，暂居皇位，实在担心眼光狭隘，不能担负起重任，战战兢兢，不知如何成功。
English: I came to the throne with a weak moral character, and I am really worried that my vision is narrow and I cannot shoulder the heavy responsibilities. I am trembling and I don't know how to succeed.

古文：思与兆庶更始，其大赦天下，大酺五日，增文武位二等，孝顺忠贞鳏寡孤独米人五斛。 
现代文：思念和千万百姓更新天下，朕决定大赦天下，百姓大宴五天，文武官员品秩增加二等，赏赐孝顺忠贞的人和老弱病残，没有人养的，每人五斛大米。 
English: Thinking of the tens of millions of people and renewing the world, I decided to grant a general amnesty to the world, a five-day people's banquet, a second-class increase in the rank of civil and military officials, and reward the filial piety and loyalty of the people and the old, the weak and the sick, and those who have no one to raise, five stalks of rice per person.

古文：己未，赐温军三万人，人布一匹，米一斛。
现代文：己未日，赏赐桓温三万军人，每人一匹布，米一斛。
English: On the day before yesterday, he rewarded thirty thousand soldiers of Kuan-Wen with one horse of cloth and one bushel of rice each.

古文：庚申，加大司马桓温为丞相，不受。
现代文：庚申日，加授大司马桓温为丞相，桓温不接受。
English: On Goshun's day, Ma Kuan-Wen, the senior vice-minister of education, was promoted to chancellor, but Kuan-Wen did not accept.

古文：辛酉，温旋自白石，因镇姑孰。
现代文：辛酉日，桓温从白石回来，镇守姑孰。
English: On the day of Hsinchu, Kan-Wen returned from Shiroishi and became the town guard of Gushan.

古文：以冠军将军毛武生都督荆州之沔中、扬州之义城诸军事。
现代文：任命冠军将军毛武生都督荆州的沔中、扬州的义城诸军事。
English: Mao Wusheng, the champion general, was appointed as the military governor of Yanzhong in Jingzhou and Yicheng in Yangzhou.

古文：十二月戊子，诏以京都有经年之储，权停一年之运。
现代文：十二月戊子，皇帝下诏书，因为京都的物资储备很多，权且停止一年的运送。
English: In December, the emperor issued an edict, saying that since Kyoto had a lot of material reserves, he had the right to stop transportation for a year.

古文：庚寅，废东海王奕为海西公，食邑四千户。
现代文：庚寅日，废黜东海王司马奕为海西公，食邑为四千户。
English: On the day of Geng Yin, the dethroned East Sea King Sima Yi became the West Sea King, and the food villages numbered four thousand.

古文：辛卯，初荐酃渌酒于太庙。
现代文：辛卯日，第一次在太庙进献渌酒。
English: On the day of Xinwu, for the first time in the temple, the offering of wine was made.

古文：二年春正月辛丑，百济、林邑王各遣使贡方物。
现代文：二年春正月辛丑，百济、林邑王各自派使者来进贡地方土特产。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, Baekje and Lin'yi sent envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：二月，苻坚伐慕容桓于辽东，灭之。
现代文：二月，苻坚到辽东攻打慕容桓，消灭了幕容桓。
English: In February, Zou Jian went to Liaodong to attack Mu Ronghuan and eliminated him.

古文：三月丁酉，诏曰： 朕居阿衡三世，不能济彼时雍，乃至海西失德，殆倾皇祚。赖祖宗灵祗之德，皇太后淑体应期，籓辅忠贤，百官戮力，用能荡气务于昊苍，耀晨辉于宇宙。
现代文：三月丁酉，下诏说： 朕处在宰相的位置上经历了三朝，不能够使时世太平，而海西公更新丧失了德行，差一点倾覆了皇室江山，仰赖着祖宗神灵的恩德，皇太后美德顺应天运，辅弼的忠贤百官全力，因而能够在苍天扫尽荡气，在宇宙照耀着朝阳的光辉。
English: In March, Ding Xuan issued the following edict: "I, as the prime minister, have experienced three dynasties, and I am unable to make the world peaceful. However, Emperor Haishi has lost his virtue, and almost overturned the imperial family, relying on the benevolence of the ancestral gods, the virtue of the empress dowager conforming to the fate of heaven, and the efforts of the loyal sages and officials assisting him. As a result, I am able to sweep the sky and shine the morning sun in the universe.

古文：遂以眇身，托于王公之上，思赖群贤，以弼其阙。
现代文：于是托残躯在王公之上，思念着依赖贤臣们，用以矫正朕的过失。
English: So I put the remains of my body on top of the prince, thinking of relying on the wise men to correct my mistakes.

古文：夫敦本息末，抑绝华竞，使清浊异流，能否殊贯，官无秕政，士无谤讟，不有惩劝，则德礼焉施？
现代文：振本自末，遏制浮华豪奢，使得清渴分开，胜任的和不胜任的有别，官吏没有不好的政事，士人没有非议，如果没有责罚和资历，那么道德礼仪怎么施行？
English: To separate the rich from the poor, to curb extravagance and luxury, to separate the thirsty from the thirsty, to distinguish the competent from the incompetent, to ensure that officials do not have bad political affairs, and that judges do not have criticism, if there is no punishment and seniority, then how can moral etiquette be enforced?

古文：且强寇未殄，劳役未息，自非军国戎祀之耍，其华饰烦费之用皆省之。
现代文：而且，强大的敌人还没有消灭，劳役还没有停息，除非是军事国政战争祭祀这些要务，那些华美的修饰、繁杂的费用都减省掉。
English: Moreover, the powerful enemy has not yet been eliminated, and the labor service has not yet stopped. Unless it is a military, national, or political war, these important tasks, those gorgeous decorations, and complex costs have been reduced.

古文：夫肥遁穷谷之贤，滑泥扬波之士，虽抗志玄霄，潜默幽岫，贪屈高尚之道，以隆协赞之美，孰与自足山水，栖迟丘壑，徇匹夫之洁，而忘兼济之大邪？
现代文：隐退于幽谷里的贤才，随俗沉浮的士人，即使坚持天一样高的志节，隐居于幽深的山谷，想要以高尚的道义，以振兴协同的美誉，哪里比得上自满于山水之间，隐遁在深山幽谷，遵循着匹夫的高洁，却忘记了兼济天下的大义呢？
English: The wise man who retreats into the valley, the scholar who follows the world, even if he adheres to the same high aspirations as the sky, lives in seclusion in a deep valley, wants to use high morals to revitalize the reputation of cooperation, what is comparable to the complacency between the mountains and rivers, secluded in the deep mountains and valleys, following the nobleness of the horse, but forgetting the great justice of the world?

古文：古人不借贤于曩代，朕所以虚想于今日。
现代文：古人不习藉前代贤人，朕因而也对今日怀有虚想。
English: The ancients did not take advantage of the sages of the previous generation, so I also harbor illusions about today.

古文：内外百官，各勤所司，使善无不达，恶无不闻，令诗人元素餐之刺，而吾获虚心之求焉。 
现代文：内外百官，各自勤勉地务政，使得善事无不传布，恶事无不上报，让诗人没有素餐那样的讽刺，我也得到虚心访求之名。 
English: Hundreds of officials at home and abroad, each of them diligently engaged in political affairs, so that good things are spread and bad things are reported, so that poets do not have the irony of a vegetarian meal, and I also get the name of a humble visit.

古文：癸丑，诏曰： 吾承祖宗洪基，而昧于政道，惧不能允厘天工，克隆先业，夕惕惟忧，若涉泉冰。
现代文：癸丑日，下诏说： 我继承祖宗的大基业，但是不善于治理国政，害怕不能治理好上天所赋予的事业，振兴祖先的基业，整天担忧，就好像涉过河水一样。
English: On April Fool's Day, he said: I have inherited the great heritage of my ancestors, but I am not good at governing the country. I am afraid of not being able to govern the cause given by God well, revitalize the heritage of my ancestors, and worry all day. It is like wading through river water.

古文：赖宰辅忠德，道济伊望，群后竭诚，协契断金，内外尽匡翼之规，文武致匪躬之节，冀因斯道，终克弘济。每念干戈未戢，公私疲悴，籓镇有疆理之务，征戍怀东山之勤，或白首戎阵，忠劳未叙，或行役弥久，担石靡储，何尝不昧旦晨兴，夜分忘寝。
现代文：全靠辅政大臣们竭尽忠诚，同心合力，内外的大臣们竭尽全力谋划来辅佐，文武百官表现出了不顾自我的节操，希望能长此以往，最终能够普救天下，每当我想到战争还没有停息，国家和人民都疲劳困苦，藩镇有守卫边境的要务，戍守的战士怀有《东山》诗所描述的忧虑，他们有的是在沙场上战斗到老，忠贞劳苦还没有得到奖赏，有的是长久服役，家里却连粮食储备都没有，何尝不是天还没有亮就起床，半夜还顾不上睡觉。
English: It all depends on the loyal and concerted efforts of the vice-ministers. The ministers at home and abroad have made every effort to plan for assistance. The military and civilian officials have shown selfless self-restraint, hoping to go on like this and eventually save the world. Whenever I think of the war has not stopped, the country and the people are tired and poor, the provinces and towns have the important task of guarding the border, and the soldiers guarding the border have the worries described in the poem "East Mountain," some of them have fought on the battlefield until old age, loyalty and hard work have not been rewarded, some have served for a long time, but there are not even grain reserves

古文：虽未能抚而巡之，且欲达其此心。
现代文：我虽然不能够亲自去抚慰和巡视他们，但是我也希望把我的心情传达给他们知道。
English: Although I am unable to comfort and visit them in person, I hope to convey my feelings to them.

古文：可遣大使诣大司马，并问方伯，逮于边戍，宣诏大飨，求其所安。
现代文：派遣大使去慰问大司马，并慰问地方长官，到边戍去，宣读诏书，犒劳战士，使他们安心。
English: Send an ambassador to commiserate with the grand steward, and also to commiserate with the local governor, go to the border town, read out the edict, reward the soldiers, and make them feel at ease.

古文：又筹量赐给，悉令周普。 乙卯，诏曰： 往事故之后，百度未充，群僚常俸，并皆寡约，盖随时之义也。
现代文：又按规定赏赐，让他们的全都能知道 乙卯日，下诏说： 在先前的变故之后，各种物品都不充足，官员们平素的俸禄都很菲薄，这是随时而定的做法。
English: On the second day of the month, the following edict was issued: After the previous incident, all kinds of goods are not sufficient, and the ordinary salaries of officials are very meager. This is a practice that can be determined at any time.

古文：然退食在朝，而禄不代耕，非经通之制。
现代文：但是在朝中减省膳食，俸禄不能代替劳作，这不是通常的制度。
English: However, this is not the usual system, as the Emperor and Empress cut back on meals, and the stipend cannot replace labor.

古文：今资储渐丰，可筹量增俸。 
现代文：现在购物储备日渐非足，可适当增加俸禄。 
English: Now that purchasing reserves are increasingly insufficient, salaries can be appropriately increased.

古文：驺虞见豫章。
现代文：豫章出现怪兽。
English: A monster appears in Yuzhang.

古文：夏四月，徙海西公于吴县西柴里。
现代文：夏四月，把海西公调到吴县西柴里。
English: In the summer of April, Hai Xi Gong was transferred to West Chai Li, Wuxian County.

古文：追贬庾后曰夫人。
现代文：追贬庾后说夫人。
English: After a scathing rebuke, he said, "Madam."

古文：六月，遣使拜百济王余句为镇东将军，领乐浪太守。
现代文：六月，派使者去授拜百济王余句为镇东将军，兼领乐浪太守。
English: In June, an envoy was sent to present Baekje King Yu Quan with the title of Zhendong General, concurrently holding the title of Lelangu Taishu.

古文：戊子，前护军将军庚希举兵反，自海陵入京口，晋陵太守卞眈奔于曲阿。
现代文：戊子日，前护军将军庚希领兵谋反，从海陵进入京口，晋陵太守卞眈逃到曲阿。
English: On Bosi Day, the former garrison general, Geng Xi, led the troops to plot a rebellion and entered Kyoguchi from Hailing. Jinling's grand marshal, Guan Yu, fled to Qu'ao.

古文：秋七月壬辰，桓温遣东海内史周少孙讨希，擒之，斩于建康市。
现代文：秋七月壬辰，桓温派东海内史周少孙讨庚希，擒获了他，在建康闹市把他杀了。
English: In the autumn and July of the Ninth Century, Guan Wen sent Zhou Shosun, a scholar of East China Sea history, to investigate Geng Xi, captured him, and killed him in Jiankang downtown.

古文：己未，立会稽王昌明为皇太子，皇子道子为琅邪王，领会稽内史。
现代文：己未日，立会稽王司马昌明为皇太子，皇子司马道子为琅邪王，兼领会稽内史。
English: Just a few days ago, the Standing Audit King, Sima Changming, became the crown prince, and the prince, Sima Daozi, became the evil king, and also learned the internal history of the audit.

古文：是日，帝崩于东堂，时年五十三。
现代文：当天，皇帝在东堂去世，享年五十三岁。
English: On the same day, the emperor died in the East Hall at the age of fifty-three.

古文：葬高平陵，庙号太宗。
现代文：安葬在高平陵，庙号太宗。
English: He was buried in Gaoping Mausoleum. His temple name was Taizong.

古文：遗诏以桓温辅政，依诸葛亮、王导故事。
现代文：遗诏让桓温辅弼国政，依照诸葛亮、王导故事。
English: According to Zhuge Liang's and Wang Du's stories, the emperor's last words were to let Kanwen assist him in governing the country.

古文：帝少有风仪，善容止，留心典籍，不以居处为意，凝尘满席，湛如也。
现代文：简文帝年轻时有风仪，形貌举止都很好，留心典籍，不把居住环境放在心上，坐席上积满了尘土，他依然高兴。
English: When he was young, Emperor Jianwen had etiquette, his appearance and manners were very good, he paid attention to classics, he did not care about the living environment, the seat was covered with dust, and he was still happy.

古文：尝与桓温及武陵王晞同载游版桥，温遽令鸣鼓吹角，车驰卒奔，欲观其所为。
现代文：曾经和桓温以及武陵王司马晞同车游览版桥，桓温突然命令擂起鼓，吹号角，车马突然间飞速奔驰，想看看他们二人的表现。
English: Once, he and Kuan Wen and Wuling Wang Simak took the same car to visit the Fengtai Bridge. Kuan Wen suddenly ordered to beat the drum and blow the horn, and the car suddenly sped away, wanting to see how the two of them performed.

古文：晞大恐，求下车，而帝安然无惧色，温由此惮服。
现代文：司马晞非常惊恐，请求下车，但是简文帝神色镇定，一点儿也不惊慌，恒温因此敬畏他。
English: Sima Yu was very frightened and asked to get off the bus, but Emperor Jianwen looked calm and did not panic at all, so the thermostat was in awe of him.

古文：温既仗文武之任，屡建大功，加以废立，威振内外。
现代文：桓温倚仗他的文武官职，多次立大功，又加上废旧帝立新帝，威震朝廷内外。
English: Kuan-Wen relied on his civil and military officer position, repeatedly made great achievements, and together with the abolition of the old emperor and the establishment of a new emperor, he was a powerful force inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：帝虽处尊位，拱默守道而已，常惧废黜。
现代文：简文帝虽然处在帝位，但只能垂拱无为、持守常道而已，常常害怕被废黜。
English: Although Emperor Jianwen was on the throne, he could only do nothing and stick to the usual path. He was often afraid of being dethroned.

古文：先是，荧惑入太微，寻而海西废。
现代文：先前，灾惑星进入太微，不久海西公就被废黜。
English: Previously, when the doomed planet entered the too-small phase, Haishigong was soon dethroned.

古文：及帝登阼，荧惑又入太微，帝甚恶焉。
现代文：到了简文化帝登上帝位时，灾惑星又入太微，简文帝非常憎恶此事。
English: When Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, the disaster planet was too weak again, and Emperor Jianwen hated this very much.

古文：时中书郎郗超在直，帝乃引入，谓曰： 命之修短，本所不计，故当无复近日事邪！ 
现代文：当时中书郎郗超当值，皇帝就把他叫进去，对他说 生命的长短，固然是不加考虑的，所以不应再有前些日子的废立的事情了吧！ 
English: At that time, Zhongshulang was extremely valuable, and the emperor called him in and said to him, "The length of life, of course, is not taken into consideration, so there should be no more scrapping of the previous days!"

古文：超曰： 大司马臣温方内固社稷，外恢经略，非常之事，臣以百口保之。 
现代文：郗超说： 大司马桓温正在内部巩固江山，对外筹划非常之事，臣下用全家来担保。 
English: Zou Chao said: Daishi Ma Huanwen is consolidating the country internally, planning for the outside world, and his vassals are using the whole family to guarantee it.

古文：及超请急省其父，帝谓之曰： 致意尊公，家国之事，遂至于此！
现代文：到了郗超请求急速探视父亲，皇帝对他说： 请转达我对令尊的问候，国家的事情，竟然到了这个地步！
English: When Gong Chao asked for a quick visit to his father, the emperor said to him: "Please convey my greetings to your father, the state of affairs has come to this!

古文：由吾不能以道匡卫，愧叹之深，言何能喻。 
现代文：因为我不能用正道来匡正社稷，羞愧之深，语言怎么能表达得出。 
English: Because I can't use the right way to rectify society, the depth of shame, how can language express it.

古文：因咏庾阐诗云 志士痛朝危，忠臣哀主辱 ，遂泣下沾襟。
现代文：于是咏咏庾阐的诗歌道 志士为朝廷的危急而痛心，忠臣为君主受辱而悲哀 ，最后凄然泪下沾湿了衣襟。
English: As a result, the poet Dao Zhishi was heartbroken by the crisis of the imperial court, the loyal subject was saddened by the humiliation of the monarch, and finally his collar was wet with tears.

古文：帝虽神识恬暢，而无济世大略，故谢安称为惠帝之流，清谈差胜耳。
现代文：简文帝虽然风识通达，但是没有救世的远大谋略，所以谢安称他为惠帝之流，只是清谈略强一些而已。
English: Although Emperor Jianwen was well-informed, he did not have a grand strategy to save the world. Therefore, Xie An called him a follower of Emperor Hui, but he was slightly better at plain speaking.

古文：沙门支道林尝言 会岙有远体而无远神 。
现代文：和尚支道林曾经说 会稽王有高远的外表却没有高远的神 。
English: A monk named Shidolin once said that the King of Censors had a lofty appearance but no lofty god.

古文：谢灵运迹其行事，亦以为赧献之辈云。
现代文：谢灵运追述他的行事，也认为他是周赧王周献王那样的人物。
English: Xie Lingyun recounted his actions, and also believed that he was a person like King Zhou of Zhou Dynasty.

古文：孝武皇帝讳曜，字昌明，简文帝第三子也。
现代文：孝武皇帝名曜，字昌明，是简文帝司马昱的第三个儿子。
English: Emperor Xiaowu Menyou, also known as Changming, was the third son of Emperor Sima Jianwen.

古文：兴宁三年七月甲申，初封会稽王。
现代文：兴宁三年六月十二日，始封为会稽王。
English: On June 12 of the third year of Xingning, he was appointed as the king of the association.

古文：咸安二年秋七月己未，立为皇太子。
现代文：咸安二年秋七月二十八，立为皇太子。
English: On July 28, the second year of the fall of Haman, he became crown prince.

古文：是日，简文帝崩，太子即皇帝位。
现代文：这一天，简文帝驾崩，太子即皇帝位。
English: On this day, Emperor Jianwen passed away, and the crown prince became emperor.

古文：诏曰： 朕以不造，奄丁闵凶，号天扣地。靡知所诉。
现代文：下诏书说： 朕以不幸，忽逢丧事，呼天抢地，不知所诉。
English: The next imperial edict said: I take misfortune, sudden death, calling heaven and earth, I do not know what to complain about.

古文：藐然幼冲，眇若缀旒，深惟社稷之重，大惧不克负荷。
现代文：年龄幼弱，国势垂危，深深感到社稷之重，忧虑不能担当重任。
English: At a tender age, with the national situation in peril, and deeply aware of the weight of social responsibility, anxiety cannot play an important role.

古文：仰凭祖宗之灵，积德之祀。先帝淳风玄化，遗咏在民。
现代文：仰赖祖宗显灵，积德享祀，先帝风俗敦厚古朴，圣明的道德教化，流传在民间。
English: Relying on the ancestors to reveal the spirit, the accumulated virtues to enjoy the worship, the customs of the former emperors to be thick and quaint, and the moral enlightenment of the saints to be spread among the people.

古文：宰辅英贤，勋隆德盛。
现代文：宰辅英明贤德，勋高德重。
English: Zaifu is wise and virtuous, and is highly decorated.

古文：顾命之托，实赖匡训。
现代文：接受遗命，实赖众人匡正训导。
English: He accepted his last will and relied on everyone to correct his teachings.

古文：群后率职，百僚勤政。
现代文：公卿克尽职守，百官勤于政事。
English: The Kugyong Ke is dedicated to his duties, and hundreds of officials are diligent in politics.

古文：冀孤弱之躬有寄，皇极之基不坠。
现代文：希望弱小之君有所寄托，祖先的基业不被坠毁。
English: I hope that you, the weak and small, have something to fall back on, and that the legacy of your ancestors will not be destroyed.

古文：先恩遗惠，播于四海，思弘余润，以康黎庶。
现代文：先祖遗留的恩惠，传播到四海，我想弘扬其余润，使黎民康宁。
English: The bounty left behind by our ancestors has spread to the four seas. I want to carry forward the remaining bounty and make the people of Liangning prosperous.

古文：其大赦天下，与民更始。 
现代文：将大赦天下，与民除旧布新。 
English: He will grant a general amnesty to the whole country, and do away with the old and bring in the new.

古文：九月甲寅，追尊皇妣会稽王妃曰顺皇后。
现代文：九月二十四日，追赠皇母会稽王妃为顺皇后。
English: On September 24th, the Imperial Mother's Association posthumously conferred the title of Empress Dowager on Empress Shun.

古文：冬十月丁卯，葬简文皇帝于高平陵。
现代文：十月初八，将简文皇帝安葬在高平陵。
English: On October 8th, Emperor Jianwen was buried in Gaoping Mausoleum.

古文：十一月甲午，妖贼卢悚晨人殿庭，游击将军毛安之等讨擒之。
现代文：十一月初五，妖贼卢悚清晨进入朝廷宫殿，游击将军毛安之等人捉住了他。
English: On the 5th day of the 11th month, the thief Lu Cui entered the imperial palace in the early morning, and the guerrilla general Mao Anzhi and others captured him.

古文：是岁，三吴大旱，人多饿死，诏所在振给。
现代文：这一年，三吴大旱，许多人饿死，下诏大旱地区赈灾救给。
English: In this year, many people died of starvation due to the drought in Sanwu, and disaster relief and relief in drought-stricken areas were carried out.

古文：苻坚陷仇池，执秦州刺史杨世。
现代文：苻坚攻陷仇池，捉住了秦州刺史杨世。
English: Zou Jian attacked and captured Qianchi, and caught Yang Shiro, the Qin State assassin.

古文：宁康元年春正月己丑朔，改元。
现代文：宁康元年正月初一，改用新年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Ningkang, the new year number was used.

古文：二月，大司马桓温来朝。
现代文：二月，大司马桓温前来朝拜。
English: In February, Daishi Ma Kan-Wen came to pay homage.

古文：三月癸丑，诏除丹阳竹格等四桁税。
现代文：三月二十六日，下诏免除丹阳、竹格等四座桥梁的税收。
English: On March 26th, the following edict exempted four bridges including Danyang and Zhuge from taxation.

古文：夏五月，旱。
现代文：五月，天旱。
English: In May, there was a drought.

古文：秋七月己亥，使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、丞相、录尚书、大司马、扬州牧、平北将军、徐兗二州刺史、南郡公桓温薨。
现代文：七月十四，使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、丞相、录尚书、大司马、扬州牧、平北将军、徐州兖州刺史、南郡公桓温死。
English: On the 14th of July, the military, chancellors, and governors-general of foreign countries, chancellors-general, consuls-general, grand stewards, Yangzhou pastors, Pingbei generals, Xuzhou officials, and Nangun officials all died.

古文：庚戌，进右将军桓豁为征西将军。
现代文：二十五日，晋升右将军桓豁为征西将军。
English: On the 25th, Right General Kan Haku was promoted to General of the Western Expedition.

古文：以江州刺史桓冲为中军将军、都督扬豫江三州诸军事、扬州刺史，镇姑孰。
现代文：以州刺史桓冲为中军将军、都督扬州、豫州、江州诸军事、扬州刺史，镇守姑孰。
English: The general of the Chinese army, the military governor of Yangzhou, Yuzhou, and Jiangzhou, the military governor of Yangzhou, and the town guard of Guzheng.

古文：八月壬子，崇德太后临朝摄政。
现代文：八月二十七日，崇德太后临朝摄理朝政。
English: On August 27th, Empress Dowager Zongde became the regent of the Lin Dynasty.

古文：九月，苻坚将杨安寇成都。
现代文：九月，符坚的将领杨安侵犯成都。
English: In September, Fu Jian's general Yang An invaded Chengdu.

古文：丙申，以尚书仆射王彪之为尚书令，吏部尚书谢安为尚书仆射，吴国内史刁彝为北中郎将、徐兗二州刺史，镇广陵。
现代文：十二日，以尚书仆射王彪之为尚书令，吏部尚书谢安为尚书仆射，吴国内史刁彝为北中郎将、徐州兖州刺史，镇守广陵。
English: On the 12th, Wang Biao, Shang Shuxu's valet, was named Shang Shuling, Xie'an, Shang Shuling's valet, was named Shang Shuling's valet, Wu Jiaozhong's Shijie was named Bei Zhong Lang Zheng, and Xuzhou's Shizhou's Shizhi was named Zhenguang Ling.

古文：复置光禄勋、大司农、少府官。
现代文：重新设置光禄勋、大司农、少府官。
English: The ranks of the Order of the Star, the Grand Secretary of Agriculture, and the Junior Government Official were re-established.

古文：冬十月，西平公张天锡贡方物。
现代文：十月，西平公张天锡进贡地方物产。
English: In October, Xiping Gong Zhang Tianxi paid tribute to local products.

古文：十一月，苻坚将杨安陷梓潼及梁、益二州，刺史周仲孙帅骑五千南遁。
现代文：十一月，苻坚的将领杨安攻陷梓潼以及梁州、益州，刺史周仲孙带领五千骑兵向南逃跑。
English: In November, Yan Jian's general Yang An captured Zizhi, Liangzhou and Yizhou, and Zhou Zhongsun led five thousand cavalry to flee south.

古文：二年春正月癸未朔，大赦。
现代文：宁康二年正月初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Ningkang, there was a general amnesty.

古文：追封谥故会稽世子郁为临川献王。
现代文：追封从前的会稽王的大儿子司马郁谥号为临川献王。
English: Sima Yuxuan, the eldest son of the ex-king of Hefei, became the king of Linchuan.

古文：己酉，北中郎将、徐兗二州刺史刁彝卒。
现代文：二十七日，北中郎将、徐州、兖州刺史刁彝死。
English: On the 27th, the generals of the Northern Middle Kingdom, Xuzhou and Zhangzhou died.

古文：二月癸丑，以丹阳尹王坦之为北中郎将、徐兗二州刺史。
现代文：二月初一，以丹阳府尹王坦之为北中郎将、徐兖二州刺史。
English: On the first day of February, with Yin Wangtan of Danyang Prefecture as the North Middle Lord, Xu Xi of the two states stabbed history.

古文：丁巳，有星孛于女虚。
现代文：初五，有彗星在女虚星座出现。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, a comet appeared in the constellation of Virgo.

古文：三月丙戌，彗星见于氐。
现代文：三月初五，彗星在氐座出现。
English: On the 5th of March, a comet appeared in the constellation of Cancer.

古文：夏四月壬戌，皇太后诏曰： 顷玄象忒愆，上天表异，仰观斯变，震惧于怀。
现代文：四月十一，皇太后下诏说： 近来天象错乱，上天呈现变异，仰观这种变化，内心震惊忧惧。
English: On April 11th, the Empress Dowager issued an edict saying, "Recently, the celestial phenomena have been chaotic, and the heavens have been showing changes. Looking up at these changes, my heart is shocked and worried.

古文：夫因变致休，自古之道，朕敢不克意复心，以思厥中？
现代文：能因异招来休美，是自古之道，朕岂敢不留意尽心，以考虑适中的措施？
English: To be able to withdraw from the United States due to unusual circumstances has been the way since ancient times. How dare I not pay attention to my heart and consider moderate measures?

古文：又三吴奥壤，股肱望郡，而水旱并臻，百姓失业，夙夜惟忧，不能忘怀，宜时拯恤，救其雕困。
现代文：另外三吴是心腹之地，如同股肱般的重要郡邑，可是水旱之灾并至，百姓失业，我日夜忧虑，不能忘怀，应该及时拯救抚恤，拯救他们的凋敝贫困。
English: In addition, Sanwu is the land of my heart, an important county seat like a stock market, but floods and droughts have also come, the people are unemployed, I am worried day and night, I can't forget, we should save their pensions in time, save their withering poverty.

古文：三吴义兴、晋陵及会稽遭水之县尤甚者，全除一年租布，其次听除半年，受振贷者即以赐之。 
现代文：三吴的义兴、晋陵以及会稽等遭遇水灾特别厉害的县，完全免除一年的租税，其他的县允许免除半年的租税，受到赈济借贷的便赏赐给他们。 
English: The counties of Yixing, Jinling and Huizhou in Sanwu that suffered particularly severe floods were completely exempted from taxes for one year. Other counties were allowed to be exempted from taxes for half a year, and those who received loans and loans were rewarded.

古文：五月，蜀人张育自号蜀王，帅众围成都，遣使称籓。
现代文：五月，蜀地人张育自称蜀王，率徒众围攻成都，派使自称藩屏之臣。
English: In May, Zhang Yu, a man from Shu, claimed to be the king of Shu, led his followers to besiege Chengdu, and sent an envoy claiming to be a retainer of the Ping clan.

古文：秋七月，凉州地震，山崩。
现代文：七月，凉州地震，山崩塌。
English: In July, the Liangzhou earthquake, the mountain collapsed.

古文：苻坚将邓羌攻张育，灭之。
现代文：苻坚的将领邓羌进攻张育，将他消灭。
English: The warlord Deng Xuan attacked Zhang Yu and eliminated him.

古文：八月，以长秋将建，权停婚姻。
现代文：八月，因要立皇后，权且停止民间婚嫁。
English: In August, due to the establishment of the empress, the right to stop civil marriage came into effect.

古文：九月丁丑，有星孛于天市。
现代文：九月二十九日，有彗星侵入天市座。
English: In September, Ding Yuxi, the evil star, appeared in the sky.

古文：冬十一月己酉，天门蜑贼攻郡，太守王匪死之，征西将军桓豁遣师讨平之。
现代文：十一月初二，天门的譙贼进攻郡邑，太守王匪战死，征西将军桓豁派军队讨伐平定了他。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the Heaven's Gate bandits attacked the county. The eunuch Wang Gang died in the battle, and the Western Conquest General Huan Hui sent troops to fight and subdue him.

古文：长城人钱步射、钱弘等作乱，吴兴太守硃序讨平之。
现代文：长城人钱步射、钱弘等人作乱，吴兴太守朱序将他们讨伐平定。
English: The Great Wall people Qian Buxia, Qian Hong and others made a disturbance, and Wu Xingtao Zhu Xuan subdued them.

古文：癸酉，镇远将军桓石虔破苻坚将姚苌于垫江。
现代文：二十六日，镇远将军右虔在垫江打败苻坚的将领姚苌。
English: On the 26th, General Zhenyuan Yuqian defeated the warlord Yao Qi in Jiajiang.

古文：三年春正月辛亥，大赦。
现代文：宁康三年正月初五，大赦天下。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the third year of Ningkang, the general amnesty will begin.

古文：夏五月丙午，北中郎将、徐兗二州刺史、蓝田侯王坦之卒。
现代文：五月初二，北中郎将、徐兖二州刺史、蓝田侯王坦之死。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, the deaths of General Kitanakura, Ershu Shishi, and Lantian Hou Wangtan were recorded.

古文：甲寅，以中军将军、扬州刺史桓冲为镇北将军、徐州刺史，镇丹徒，尚书仆射谢安领扬州刺史。
现代文：初十，以中军将军、扬州刺史桓冲为镇北将军、徐州刺史，镇守丹徒，尚书仆射谢安领任扬州刺史。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the general of the Chinese army, Yangzhou Shishi Huanchong, was appointed as the general of Zhenbei, Xuzhou Shishi, Zhengu Dantu, and Shang Shubei Sha Xie'an as the leader of Yangzhou Shishi.

古文：秋八月癸巳，立皇后王氏，大赦，加文武位一等。
现代文：八月二十日，立王氏为皇后，大赦天下，文武众官增位一等。
English: On August 20th, the Wang clan was established as the empress, the world was amnestied, and the civil and military officials were promoted to the first class.

古文：九月，帝讲《孝经》。
现代文：九月，天子讲说《孝经》。
English: In September, Heavenly Son spoke about the "Filial Piety Sutra."

古文：冬十月癸酉朔，日有蚀之。十二月癸未，神兽门灾。
现代文：十月初一，有日蚀。十二月十二，神兽门遭火灾。
English: On the first day of October, there was a solar eclipse. On December 12th, fire broke out at the Gate of Divine Beasts.

古文：甲申，皇太后诏曰： 顷日蚀告变，水旱不适，虽克己思救，未尽其方。
现代文：十三日，皇太子下诏说： 近日有日蚀变异，水旱不适，虽然竭力用心补救，但方法不全。
English: On the 13th, the crown prince issued an edict saying, "Recently, there has been a solar eclipse variation, water and drought discomfort, although we have tried our best to remedy it, the method is incomplete.

古文：其赐百姓穷者米，人五斛。 
现代文：现赐给贫穷的百姓每人五斛大米。 
English: Now the poor people are being given five bushels of rice each.

古文：癸巳，帝释奠于中堂，祠孔子，以颜回配。
现代文：二十二日，天子亲自在中堂祭祀孔子，以颜回陪祀。
English: On the 22nd, the heavenly son himself came to offer a sacrifice to Confucius in the middle hall, accompanied by Yan.

古文：太元元年春正月壬寅朔，帝加元服，见于太庙。
现代文：太元元年正月初一，天子加冠冕，在太庙谒见。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first century, the heavenly son was crowned and crowned in the Great Temple.

古文：皇太后归政。
现代文：皇太后交还国政。
English: The Empress Dowager returned to national politics.

古文：甲辰，大赦，改元。
现代文：初三，大赦天下，改变年号。
English: On the third day of the new year, there will be a general amnesty, and the year will be changed.

古文：丙午，帝始临朝。
现代文：初五，天子临朝听政。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Rinzai came to listen to politics.

古文：以征西将军桓豁为征西大将军，领军将军郗愔为镇军大将军，中军将军桓冲为车骑将军，加尚书仆射谢安中书监、录尚书事。
现代文：以征西大将军桓豁为征西大将军，领军将军郗忄音为镇军大将军，中军将军桓冲为车骑将军，加封尚书仆射谢安为中书监、录尚书事。
English: General Kan Haku of the Western Expeditionary Army was appointed as the Western Expeditionary Army's general, the leader of the Western Expeditionary Army, Shion, was appointed as the general of the town army, the general of the Chinese army, Kanchō, was appointed as the general of the cavalry, and the enfeoffed senior clerk, Shiean, was appointed as the senior clerk of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：甲子，谒建平等四陵。
现代文：二十三日，天子谒拜建平等四座皇帝陵。
English: On the 23rd, four imperial mausoleums were built.

古文：夏五月癸丑，地震。
现代文：五月十四，地震。
English: May 14th, earthquake.

古文：甲寅，诏曰： 顷者上天垂监，谴告屡彰，朕有惧焉，震惕于心。
现代文：十五，下诏说： 近来上天显示征兆，谴责告戒之灾多次显现，朕内心忧惧，震惊。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the following edict was issued: "Recently, signs have appeared in the heavens, condemning and warning disasters have appeared many times, and my heart is worried and shocked.

古文：思所以议狱缓死，赦过宥罪，庶因大变，与之更始。 
现代文：考虑到重议诉讼，宽缓死刑，赦免罪过，或许因此大有改变，会有新的开始。 
English: Considering the reconsideration of the lawsuit, the reprieve of the death penalty, and the pardon of the crime, perhaps there will be a big change and a new beginning.

古文：于是大赦，增文武位各一等。
现代文：于是大赦天下，文武百官各增爵位一等。
English: As a result, there was a general amnesty across the country, and a hundred civil and military officials each received a first-class knighthood.

古文：六月，封河间王钦子范之为章武王。
现代文：六月，封河间王司马钦的儿子司马范之为章武王。
English: In June, the son of King Sima Qin, Sima Fanxing, was named King Zhangwu.

古文：秋七月，苻坚将苟苌陷凉州，虏刺史张天锡，尽有其地。
现代文：七月，苻坚的将领苟苌攻陷凉州，俘虏了刺史张天锡，将凉州全部占领。
English: In July, Gan Jian's general, Guo Gan, invaded Liangzhou, captured Zhang Tianxi, and occupied all of Liangzhou.

古文：乙巳，除度田收租之制，公王以下口税米三斛，蠲在役之身。
现代文：初七，废除度量田亩收租的制度，王公以下每人交三斛税米，在役人员除外。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the system of collecting rents by measuring fields and mu was abolished, and everyone under Wang Gong had to pay three mu of tax rice, except for active personnel.

古文：冬十月，移准北流人于淮南。
现代文：十月，把淮北的流动人口迁移到淮南。
English: In October, the floating population of Huaibei was relocated to Huainan.

古文：十一月己巳朔，日有蚀之。诏太官撤膳。
现代文：十一月初一，有日蚀，下诏太官减省御膳。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, there was a solar eclipse, and the emperor decreed that the Imperial Diet would be reduced.

古文：十二月，苻坚使其将苻洛攻代，执代王涉翼犍。
现代文：十二月，苻坚派他的将领苻洛进攻代地，捉住了代王涉翼犍。
English: In December, Zou Jian sent his general Zhao Luo to attack the viceregal territory and captured the viceregal king, Wanzhong Yao.

古文：二年春正月，继绝世，绍功臣。
现代文：太元二年正月，恢复已灭绝的宗祀，承续已断绝的后代，使功臣的后代继承祖业。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Taiyuan era, the extinct religious rites were restored, the descendants of the dead were continued, and the descendants of the heroes inherited the ancestral inheritance.

古文：三月，以兗州刺史硃序为南中郎将、梁州刺史、监沔中诸军，镇襄阳。
现代文：三月，以兖州刺史朱序为南中郎将、梁州刺史、监沔中诸军，镇守襄阳。
English: In March, with Zhangzhou Zhishi Zhuxu as the South Vice Admiral, Liangzhou Zhishi, and Jianye Middle Army, the town guard of Xiangyang was formed.

古文：闰月壬午，地震。
现代文：闰三月十九，地震。
English: Earthquake on March 19th.

古文：甲申，暴风，折木发屋。
现代文：二十一日，刮暴风，刮断树木掀翻房屋。
English: On the 21st, a storm blew in, tearing down trees and overturning houses.

古文：夏四月己酉，雨雹。
现代文：四月十六日，下冰雹。
English: On the 16th of April, it started to hail.

古文：五月丁丑，地震。
现代文：五月十四日，地震。
English: May ding ugly, earthquake.

古文：六月己巳，暴风，扬沙石。
现代文：六月某日，刮暴风，沙石飞扬。
English: One day in June, a storm was blowing and the sand and rocks were flying.

古文：林邑贡方物。
现代文：林邑进贡地方物产。
English: Lin'eup's tribute to local products.

古文：秋七月乙卯，老人星见。
现代文：七月某日，老人星出现。
English: One day in July, the elderly star appeared.

古文：八月壬辰，四骑将军桓冲来朝。
现代文：八月初一，车骑将军桓冲前来朝见。
English: On the first day of August, the cavalry general Kanchong came to see him in the morning.

古文：丁未，以尚书仆射谢安为司徒。
现代文：十六日，以尚书仆射谢安为司徒。
English: On the 16th, Shang Shubu shot Xie An as an apprentice.

古文：丙辰，使持节、都督荆梁宁益交广六州诸军事、荆州刺史、征西大将军桓豁卒。
现代文：二十五日，使持节，都督荆、梁、宁、益、交、广六州诸军事，荆州刺史，征西大将军桓豁死。
English: On the 25th day of the Chinese New Year, the governors of Jing, Liang, Ning, Yixing, Jiaotong, and Guangzhou, and the military commanders of the six prefectures of Jing, Liang, Ning, Yixing, Jiaotong, and Guangzhou, and the general of the Western Expedition, Huan Hui, died.

古文：冬十月辛丑，以车骑将军桓冲都督荆江梁益宁交广七州诸军事、领护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史，尚书王蕴为徐州刺史、督江南晋陵诸军，征西司马谢玄为兗州刺史、广陵相、监江北诸军。
现代文：十月十一日，以车骑将军桓冲都督荆、江、梁、益、宁、交、广七州诸军事、领护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史，尚书王蕴为徐州刺史，督江南晋陵诸军，征西司马谢玄为兖州刺史、广陵相，监江北诸军。
English: On October 11, General Huanchong, riding on a chariot, became the military governor of Jing, Jiang, Liang, Yi, Ning, Jiaotong, and the seven military provinces of Guangxi, the captain of the Southern Barbarians, and the historian of Jing Province; Shang Shu Wang Yun became the historian of Xuzhou, the governor of Jinling in the south of Jiangsu Province; and the Western Division of the Conquest, Ma Xie Xuan, became the historian of Zhangzhou, the minister of Guangling, and the warden of the northern armies of Jiangsu Province.

古文：壬寅。散骑常侍、左光禄大夫、尚书令王彪之卒。
现代文：十二日，散骑常侍、左光禄大夫、尚书令王彪之死。
English: On the twelfth day, Wang Biao's death was announced by his horseback riding attendant, doctor Zuo Guanglu, and his secretary.

古文：十二月庚寅，以尚书王劭为尚书仆射。
现代文：十二月初一，以尚书王劭为尚书仆射。
English: On the first day of December, it was announced that Shangshu Wangjun would be promoted to Shangshu Minion.

古文：三年春二月乙巳，作新宫，帝移居会稽王邸。
现代文：太元三年二月十七日，开始建造新宫，天子移居会稽王府邸。
English: On February 17th of the 3rd year of the Taiyuan era, the construction of the new palace began. It was the residence of the Emperor's son's emigration committee.

古文：三月乙丑，雷雨，暴风，发屋折木。
现代文：三月初七，下雷阵雨，刮暴风，折断树木，毁坏房屋。
English: On the seventh day of the third month, thunderstorms and windstorms broke out, snapping trees and destroying houses.

古文：夏五月庚午，陈留王曹恢薨。
现代文：五月十三日，陈留王曹恢死。
English: On May 13, Chen Liu Wang Cao died.

古文：六月，大水。
现代文：六月，发大水。
English: In June, there is a lot of rain.

古文：秋七月辛巳，帝入新宫。
现代文：七月二十五日，天子移居新建宫殿。
English: On July 25th, the emperor moved into the newly built palace.

古文：乙酉，老人星见南方。
现代文：二十九日，老人星在南方出现。
English: On the 29th, the old man star appeared in the south.

古文：四年春正月辛酉，大赦，郡县遭水旱者减租税。
现代文：太元四年正月初八，大赦天下，遭遇水旱之灾的郡县减免租税。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Taiyuan era, there was a general amnesty. Counties and counties that suffered from floods and droughts received tax relief.

古文：丙子，谒建平等七陵。
现代文：二十三日，天子祭拜建平等七座皇帝陵。
English: On the 23rd, seven imperial mausoleums were built in Tianzi Festival.

古文：二月戊午，苻坚使其子丕攻陷襄阳，执南中郎将硃序。
现代文：二月，苻坚派他的儿子苻丕攻陷襄阳，捉住了南中郎将朱序。
English: In February, Zou Jian sent his son Zou to invade Xiangyang and captured the Southern Middle Lord Zhu Xiu.

古文：又陷顺阳。
现代文：又攻陷顺阳。
English: They also invaded Shunyang.

古文：三月，大疫。
现代文：三月，流行大疾疫。
English: In March, a major epidemic broke out.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 狡寇纵逸，籓守倾没，疆埸之虞，事兼平日。
现代文：初十，下诏说： 狡猾的敌寇骄纵淫逸，守臣倾覆，疆场之忧患，超过平时。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the next imperial edict said: The cunning enemy bandits are arrogant, corrupt and depraved, the guardians are overthrown, and the sorrow of the battlefield is greater than usual.

古文：其内外众官，各悉心戮力，以康庶事。
现代文：内外各种官员，各自戮力同心，使众事康宁。
English: All kinds of officials at home and abroad have made concerted efforts to make everything better.

古文：又年谷不登，百姓多匮。
现代文：又加上五谷不丰收，百姓多匮乏。
English: In addition, the grain harvest is not abundant, and many people are in need.

古文：其诏御所供，事从俭约，九亲供给，众官廪俸，权可减半。
现代文：诏令所供御用品，皆从俭约，九亲供给之物，众官的俸禄，权且减省一半。
English: According to the imperial edict, the provision of royal articles was to be made on the basis of frugality, with the provisions of the nine relatives, the salaries of the officials, and the power of the emperor being reduced by half.

古文：凡诸役费，自非军国事要，皆宜停省，以周时务。 
现代文：其他各种劳役费用，除非军国要事，都应停止或减省，以周济当前大事。 
English: All other labor and service expenses, except for important military affairs, should be stopped or reduced in order to facilitate current affairs.

古文：癸未，使右将军毛武生帅师伐蜀。
现代文：四月初一，派右将军毛武生率军队讨伐蜀地。
English: On the first day of April, Mao Tse-tung, a right-wing general, led an army to attack Shu.

古文：夏四月，苻坚将韦钟陷魏兴，太守吉挹死之。
现代文：本月苻坚的将领韦钟攻陷魏兴，太守吉挹战死。
English: This month, Wei Zhong, the general of Jianjian, attacked and captured Wei Xing, and the governor of Jiaxing died in the battle.

古文：五月，苻坚将句难、彭超陷盱眙、高密内史毛璪之为贼所执。
现代文：五月，苻坚的将领俱难、彭超攻陷盱眙，高密内史毛之被贼兵活捉。
English: In May, Yan Jian's generals were in trouble, Peng Chao was captured, and Gao Mi Nei Shi Mao was captured alive by bandits.

古文：六月，大旱。
现代文：六月，天大旱。
English: In June, there was a severe drought.

古文：戊子，征虏将军谢玄及超、难战于君川，大破之。
现代文：初七，征虏将军谢玄与彭超、俱难在君川作战，大破敌军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the conscript generals Xie Xuan and Peng Chao fought in Kimchuan, defeating the enemy army.

古文：秋八月丁亥，以左将军王蕴为尚书仆射。
现代文：八月初七，以左将军王蕴为尚书仆射。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the left general Wang Yun was chosen as the successor.

古文：乙未，暴风，扬沙石。
现代文：十五日，刮暴风，飞沙走石。
English: On the fifteenth day, a storm blew, and the sand flew away.

古文：九月，盗杀安太守傅湛。
现代文：九月，强盗杀死了建安太守傅湛。
English: In September, robbers killed Jian'an governor Fu Zhan.

古文：冬十二月己酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：闰十二月初一，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of leap December, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：五年春正月乙巳，谒崇平陵。
现代文：太元五年正月二十八日，天子拜祭崇平陵。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the fifth year of the Taiyuan era, the Son of Heaven worship festival was held at the Chongping Mausoleum.

古文：夏四月，大旱。
现代文：四月，天大旱。
English: In April, there was a severe drought.

古文：癸酉，大赦五岁刑以下。
现代文：二十七日，赦免五年以下徒刑的人。
English: On the 27th, people who have been sentenced to less than five years in prison will be pardoned.

古文：五月，大水。
现代文：五月，发大水。
English: In May, there was a big flood.

古文：以司徒谢安为卫将军、仪同三司。
现代文：以司徒谢安为卫将军、仪同三司。
English: With Shitou Xie'an as the guard general, the ceremony begins with the three divisions.

古文：六月甲寅，震含章殿四柱，并杀内侍二人。
现代文：六月初九，含章殿四根大柱被雷震毁，震死两名内侍。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, the four pillars of the Hall of the Imperial Regalia were destroyed by a thunderstorm, killing two chamberlains.

古文：甲子，以比岁荒俭，大赦，自太元三年以前逋租宿债皆蠲除之，其鳏寡穷独孤老不能自存者，人赐米五斛。
现代文：十九日，因连年饥荒，大赦天下，太元三年以前的陈旧租债都一并免除，那些鳏寡孤独年老不能养活自己的人，每人赐五斛大米。
English: On the 19th, due to the consecutive years of famine, the world was pardoned, the old rent debts before the third year of the first century were all forgiven, and those who were widowed, lonely and old and could not support themselves were each given five stalks of rice.

古文：丁卯，以骠骑将军、琅邪王道子为司徒。
现代文：二十二日，以骠骑将军、琅王牙王司马道子为司徒。
English: On the twenty-second day, he took the cavalry general, the king of the king of the king of the king, Sima Daozi, as his apprentice.

古文：秋九月癸未，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：九月初十，皇后王氏死。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month, Empress Wang died.

古文：冬十月，九真太守李逊据交州反。
现代文：十月，九真太守李逊占据交州造。
English: In October, Jiuzhen Grand Empress Dowager Li Xun occupied Jiaozhou.

古文：十一月乙酉，葬定皇后于隆平陵。
现代文：十一月十三日，将定皇后安葬在隆平陵。
English: On November 13th, Empress Ding will be buried in Longping Mausoleum.

古文：六年春正月，帝初奉佛法，立精舍于殿内，引诸沙门以居之。
现代文：太元六年正月，天子开始信奉佛教，在殿内设立佛教精舍，引荐佛教僧侣居住。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the Taiyuan era, the emperor began to believe in Buddhism, set up a Buddhist hermitage in the hall, and recommended Buddhist monks to live there.

古文：丁酉，以尚书谢石为尚书仆射。
现代文：二十六日，任尚书谢石为尚书仆射。
English: On the 26th, Ren Shangshu Xie Shi was appointed as Shangshu's valet.

古文：初置督运御史官。
现代文：开始设置督运御史官。
English: The establishment of the Office of the Superintendent of Military History began.

古文：夏六月庚子朔，日有蚀之。扬、荆、江三州大水。
现代文：六月初一日，有日蚀。扬州、荆州、江州发大水。
English: On the first day of June, there was a solar eclipse. Yangzhou, Jingzhou and Jiangzhou were flooded.

古文：己巳，改制度，减烦费，损吏士员七百人。
现代文：三十日，修改制度，减省费用，裁减吏士官员七百人。
English: On the 30th, the system was revised, costs were reduced, and 700 officials were laid off.

古文：秋七月丙子，赦五岁刑已下。
现代文：七月初七，赦免五年以下徒刑的人。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month of July, people sentenced to less than five years of imprisonment will be pardoned.

古文：甲午，交址太守杜瑗斩李逊，交州平。
现代文：二十五日，交阝止太守杜王爰杀死李逊，交州平定。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Du Wangyao, the governor of Jiaozhou, killed Li Xun, and Jiaozhou was pacified.

古文：大饥。
现代文：天下大饥。
English: There was a great famine.

古文：冬十一月己亥，以镇军大将军郗愔为司空。
现代文：十一月初八，以镇军大将军郗忄音为司空。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, the town's military commander, Yuin, was appointed as the deputy commander.

古文：会稽人檀元之反，自号安东将军，镇军参军谢蔼之讨平之。
现代文：会稽人檀元之谋反，自称安东将军，镇军将军谢蔼征讨平定叛乱。
English: The comptroller of the guild, Dang Yuan, plotted a rebellion, calling himself General Anton, and the general of the town army, Xie An, was enlisted to quell the rebellion.

古文：十二月甲辰，苻坚遣其襄阳太守阎震寇竟陵，襄阳太守桓石虔讨擒之。
现代文：十二月初八，苻坚派他的襄阳太守阎振攻竟陵，襄阳太守桓石虔征讨活捉阎振。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of December, Yu Jian sent his Yangyang daimyō Yan Zhen to attack the Mausoleum, and Yangyang daimyō Huan Shih led a pious expedition to capture Yan Zhen alive.

古文：七年春三月，林邑范熊遣使献方物。
现代文：太元七年三月，林邑范熊派使进献地方物产。
English: In March of the seventh year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Lin Yip Fan Xiong sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：秋八月癸卯，大赦。
现代文：八月十一日，大赦天下。
English: On August 11th, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：九月，东夷五国遣使来贡方物。
现代文：九月，东夷五国派使者前来进贡地方物产。
English: In September, envoys from the five Eastern Yi countries came to pay tribute to local products.

古文：苻坚将都贵焚烧沔北田谷，略襄阳百姓而去。
现代文：苻坚的将领都贵焚烧沔北的稻谷，掳掠襄阳的百姓而去。
English: The generals of Jianjian burned the rice of Jianbei and plundered the people of Xiangyang.

古文：冬十月丙子，雷。
现代文：十月十五日，天空雷鸣。
English: On October 15th, the sky thundered.

古文：八年春二月癸未，黄雾四塞。
现代文：太元八年二月二十四日，黄色大雾弥漫。
English: On the 24th day of February in the year of the dragon, the yellow fog was thick.

古文：三月，始兴、南康、庐陵大水，平地五丈。
现代文：三月，始兴、南康、庐陵发大水，平地深五丈。
English: In March, large floods occurred in Shixing, Nankang and Fuling, with a depth of five meters on flat ground.

古文：丁巳，大赦。
现代文：二十八日，大赦天下。
English: On the 28th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：夏五月，辅国将军杨亮伐蜀，拔五城，擒苻坚将魏光。
现代文：五月，辅国将军杨亮讨伐蜀地，攻下五城，活捉了苻坚的将领魏光。
English: In May, Yang Liang, the general of the Auxiliary State, fought against Shu, captured five cities, and captured Wei Guang, the general of Jianjian, alive.

古文：秋七月，鹰扬将军郭洽及苻坚将张崇战于武当，大败之。
现代文：七月，鹰扬将军郭洽与苻坚的将领张崇在武当作战，大败敌军。
English: In July, Eagle Yang's general Guo Cai and Shijian's general Zhang Chong fought in Wudang and defeated the enemy.

古文：八月，苻坚帅众渡淮，遣征讨都督谢石、冠军将军谢玄、辅国将军谢琰、西中郎将桓伊等距之。
现代文：八月，苻坚率领众兵渡过淮河，朝廷派征讨都督谢石、冠军将军谢玄、辅国将军谢琰、西中郎将桓伊等进行抵抗。
English: In August, Yu Jian led the troops across the Huai River, and the imperial court sent envoys to summon the governor Xie Shi, the champion general Xie Xuan, the auxiliary general Xie Jun, and the West Middle Lord Huan Yi to resist.

古文：九月，诏司徒、琅邪王道子录尚书六条事。
现代文：九月，下诏让司徒、琅王牙王司马道子录尚书六条事。
English: In September, he issued the following edict, ordering six things to be recorded in the record books of King Sima Daozi.

古文：冬十月，苻坚弟融陷寿春。
现代文：十月，苻坚的弟弟苻融攻陷寿春。
English: In October, Zou Jian's younger brother Zou Rong captured Shuchun.

古文：乙亥，诸将及苻坚战于肥水，大破之，俘斩数万计，获坚舆辇及云母车。
现代文：二十日，诸将与苻坚在淝水交战，大破敌军，俘虏斩首几万人，俘获了苻坚的车辇与云母车。
English: On the 20th, they fought with Yu Jian in Surabaya, defeated the enemy army, beheaded tens of thousands of captives, and captured Yu Jian's cart and mica cart.

古文：十一月庚申，诏卫将军谢安劳旋师于金城。
现代文：十一月某日，诏卫将军谢安在金城慰劳凯旋的军队。
English: On a certain day in November, General Xie An of the Imperial Guard was in Jincheng to console the returning troops.

古文：壬子，立陈留王世子灵诞为陈留王。
现代文：二十七日，立陈留王的大儿子曹灵诞为陈留王。
English: On the 27th, Cao Ling, the eldest son of Chen Liu Wang, was born as Chen Liu Wang.

古文：十二月庚午，以寇难初平，大赦。
现代文：十二月十五日，因敌寇刚刚平定，大赦天下。
English: On December 15th, because the enemy invasion had just been quelled, there was a general amnesty.

古文：以中军将军谢石为尚书令。
现代文：以中军将军谢石为尚书令。
English: With the Chinese general Xie Shi as the author.

古文：开酒禁。
现代文：撤销禁酒令。
English: Revocation of the ban on alcohol.

古文：始增百姓税米，口五石。
现代文：并开始增收百姓的税米，每人五石。
English: And they began to collect more tax rice from the people, five koku per person.

古文：前句町王翟辽背苻坚，举兵于河南，慕容垂自鄴与辽合，遂攻坚子晖于洛阳。
现代文：从前句町王翟辽背叛苻坚，在河南举兵，慕容垂从邺地与翟辽会合，于是在洛阳进攻苻坚的儿子苻晖。
English: From the previous sentence, the king of the town, Qilian Liao, betrayed Qian Jian and raised an army in Henan. Murong Du, from Qian, joined Qian Liao and attacked Qian Jian's son, Zou, in Luoyang.

古文：仇池公杨世奔还陇右，遣使称籓。
现代文：仇池公杨世逃回陇右，派使称臣。
English: His enemy, Yang Shih, fled back to Shiyu and sent envoys to claim him as a vassal.

古文：九年春正月庚子，封武陵王孙宝为临川王。
现代文：太元九年正月十六日，封武陵王的孙子司马宝为临川王。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 9th year of the Taiyuan era, Sima Bao, the grandson of King Fongwuling, became the King of Linchuan.

古文：戊午，立新宁王晞子遵为新宁王。
现代文：二月初四，立新宁王司马的儿子司马遵为新宁王。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Sima Zun, the son of King Sima of Shining, was proclaimed King of Shining.

古文：辛亥，谒建平等四陵。
现代文：正月二十七日，天子谒拜建平等四陵。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the year, the four mausoleums dedicated to the four sons of heaven were built.

古文：龙骧将军刘牢之克谯城。
现代文：龙骧将军刘牢之攻克谯城。
English: Longjing General Liu Diao's conquest of Handan City.

古文：车骑将军桓冲部将郭宝伐新城、魏兴、上庸三郡，降之。
现代文：车骑将军、刺史桓冲的部将郭宝进攻新城、魏兴、上庸三郡，招降了他们。
English: General Cavalry and Cavalry General Guo Bao attacked the three counties of Xincheng, Wei Xing and Shangyong, and invited them to surrender.

古文：二月辛巳，使持节、都督荆江梁宁益交广七州诸军事、车骑将军、荆州刺史桓冲卒。
现代文：二月二十七日，使持节，都督荆、江、梁、宁、益、交、广七州诸军事，车骑将军，荆州刺史桓冲死。
English: On the 27th day of February, on the occasion of the Spring Festival, the governors of Jing, Jiang, Liang, Ning, Yixing, Jiaotong, and the seven military provinces of Guangxi, the general of cavalry and cavalry, and the governor of Jing Province, Zhishihuan rushed to their deaths.

古文：慕容垂自洛阳与翟辽攻苻坚子丕于鄴。
现代文：慕容垂从洛阳与翟辽合攻苻坚邺地的儿子苻丕。
English: Murong is the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son.

古文：三月，以卫将军谢安为太保。
现代文：三月，以卫将军谢安为太保。
English: In March, Wei general Xie An was appointed as Taibao.

古文：苻坚北地长史慕容泓、平阳太守慕容冲并起兵背坚。
现代文：苻坚北地长史慕容泓、平阳太守慕容冲都起兵背叛苻坚。
English: The governor of the northern part of Shujian, Shi Murongjun, and the governor of Pingyang, Murongchong, both raised armies to betray Shujian.

古文：夏四月己卯，增置太学生百人。
现代文：四月二十六，增置一百名太学生。
English: On April 26th, an additional one hundred students were enrolled.

古文：封张天锡为西平公。
现代文：封张天锡为西平公。
English: Zhang Tianxi was given the title of Xiping.

古文：使竟陵太守赵统伐襄阳，克之。
现代文：派竟陵太守赵统进攻襄阳，攻克了。
English: Zhao Tong, the governor of the imperial mausoleum, attacked and conquered Xiangyang.

古文：苻坚将姚苌背坚，起兵于北地，自立为王，国号秦。
现代文：苻坚的将领姚苌背离苻坚，在北边起兵，自立为王，国号为秦。
English: Yu Jian's general, Yao Yu, turned his back on Yu Jian and raised an army in the north, establishing himself as king and taking the name Qin.

古文：六月癸丑朔，崇德皇太后褚氏崩。
现代文：六月初一，崇德皇太后褚氏病死。
English: On the first day of June, Empress Dowager Zongde died of illness.

古文：慕容泓为其叔父冲所杀，冲自称皇太弟。
现代文：慕容泓被他的叔父慕容冲杀死，慕容冲自称为皇太弟。
English: Murong Hui was killed by his uncle Murong Chong, who claimed to be the crown prince's younger brother.

古文：秋七月戊戌，遣兼司空、高密王纯之修谒洛阳五陵。
现代文：七月十七日，派兼司空、高密王司马纯之修缮祭拜洛阳等五陵。
English: On July 17th, five mausoleums, including Bai Luoyang, were sent to the renovation festival of Gaomi Wang Simachun.

古文：己酉，葬康献皇后于崇平陵。
现代文：二十八日，将康献皇后葬在崇平陵。
English: On the 28th, Empress Kangxian was buried in the Chongping Mausoleum.

古文：百济遣使来贡方物。
现代文：百济派使者前来进贡地方物产。
English: Baekje sent an envoy to collect tribute from local products.

古文：苻坚及慕容冲战于郑西，坚师败绩。
现代文：苻坚与慕容冲在郑西交战，苻坚的军队失败。
English: Gong Jian and Murong Chong fought in Zhengxi, and Gong Jian's army was defeated.

古文：八月戊寅，司空郗愔薨。
现代文：八月二十七日，司空郗忄音死。
English: On August 27th, Sikuo Shiong died.

古文：九月辛卯，前锋都督谢玄攻苻坚将兗州刺史张崇于鄄城，克之。
现代文：九月十一日，前锋都督谢玄在鄄城进攻苻坚的将领兖州刺史张崇，战胜了他。
English: On September 11th, the forward governor Xie Xuan attacked Zhang Chong, the general of Bozhou, and defeated him.

古文：甲午，加太保谢安大都督扬、江、荆、司、豫、徐、兗、青、冀、幽、并、梁、益、雍、凉十五州诸军事。
现代文：十四日，加封太保谢安大都督扬、江、荆、司、豫、徐、兖、青、冀、幽、并、梁、益、雍、凉十五州诸军事。
English: On the 14th, Zhangfang Taibo Xie'an Dadu, Yang, Jiang, Jing, Si, Yu, Xu, Yao, Qing, Hebei, Yu, Bian, Liang, Yi, Yong, and Liang of the 15 states led the military.

古文：冬十月辛亥朔，日有蚀之。丁巳，河间王昙之薨。
现代文：十月初一，有日蚀。初七，河间王司马昙之死。
English: On the first day of October, there was a solar eclipse. On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the death of Kawama Wang Simaso occurred.

古文：乙丑，以玄象乖度，大赦。
现代文：十五日，因天象违度，大赦天下。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the emperor pardoned the whole country for the offense committed by the celestial beings.

古文：庚午，立前新蔡王晃弟崇为新蔡王。
现代文：二十日，立从前新蔡王司马晃的弟弟司马崇为新蔡王。
English: On the 20th, Sima Chong, the younger brother of the former new Cai Wang Sima Akira, was appointed as the new Cai Wang.

古文：苻坚青州刺史苻朗帅众来降。
现代文：苻坚的青州刺史苻朗率领徒众来降。
English: The strong-willed Qingzhou statesman Shih Lang led the disciples to descend.

古文：十二月，苻坚将吕光称制于河右，自号酒泉公。
现代文：十二月，苻坚的将领吕光在河右代行皇帝职权，自号酒泉公。
English: In December, Luguang, the general of Jiaojian, assumed the powers of the emperor on behalf of He You and called himself Jiuquan.

古文：慕容冲僭即皇帝位于阿房。
现代文：慕容冲在阿房僭位当皇帝。
English: Murongchong became emperor at Afang.

古文：十年春正月甲午，谒诸陵。
现代文：太元十年正月十六日，天子拜祭诸陵。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the 10th year of the Taiyuan era, the heavenly son worshiped the mausoleums.

古文：二月，立国学。
现代文：二月，建立国家学校。
English: In February, the National School was established.

古文：蜀郡太守任权斩苻坚益州刺史李平，益州平。
现代文：蜀郡太守任权把苻坚的益州刺史李平斩首，益州平定。
English: Shu County Taizhu Renquan beheaded Yi Jian's Yizhou assassin, Li Ping, and Yizhou was pacified.

古文：三月，荥阳人郑燮以郡来降。
现代文：三月，荥阳人郑燮率领该郡投降。
English: In March, Zheng Qi, a native of Shenyang, led the county to surrender.

古文：苻坚国乱，使使奉表请迎。
现代文：苻坚国内动乱，派使臣奉表请求接应。
English: In response to the strong domestic turmoil, he sent an envoy to respond to the request.

古文：龙骧将军刘牢之及慕容垂战于黎阳，王师败绩。
现代文：龙骧将军刘牢之与慕容垂在黎阳作战，朝廷的军队大败。
English: Longjing general Liu Dolezhi fought against Murongdiao in Liyang, and the imperial army was defeated.

古文：夏四月丙辰，刘牢之与沛郡太守周次及垂战于五桥泽，王师又败绩。
现代文：四月初九，刘牢之与沛郡太守周次跟慕容垂在五桥泽作战，朝廷的军队又大败。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month, Liu Diao Zhi and Zhou Zhi, the governor of Pei County, fought with Murong Du in Wuhiao Ze, and the imperial army was defeated again.

古文：壬戌，太保谢安帅众救苻坚。
现代文：十五日，太保谢安率领众兵救援苻坚。
English: On the 15th, Tai Po Xie An led the soldiers to rescue Yu Jian.

古文：五月，大水。
现代文：五月，发大水。
English: In May, there was a big flood.

古文：苻坚留太子宏守长安，奔于五将山。
现代文：苻坚留太子苻宏守卫长安，自己逃奔到五将山。
English: Zou Jian stayed with Prince Zou Hong to guard Chang'an, while he himself fled to Mount Wuzhong.

古文：六月，宏来降，慕容冲入长安。
现代文：六月，苻宏来投降，慕容冲进入长安。
English: In June, Yan Hong surrendered and Murong Chong entered Chang'an.

古文：秋七月，苻丕自枋头西走，龙骧将军檀玄追之，为丕所败。
现代文：七月，苻丕从枋头向西逃走，龙骧将军檀玄追赶他，被苻丕打败。
English: In July, Gong fled westward from Shantou. Longjing General Dang Xuan chased him and was defeated by Gong.

古文：旱，饥。
现代文：大旱，闹饥荒。
English: Drought, famine.

古文：丁巳，老人星见。
现代文：十二日，老人星出现。
English: On the 12th, the elderly star appeared.

古文：八月甲午，大赦。
现代文：八月十九日，大赦天下。
English: On August 19th, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：丁酉，使持节、侍中、中书监、大都督十五州诸军事、卫将军、太保谢安薨。
现代文：二十二日，使持节、侍中、中书监、大都督十五州诸军事、卫将军、太保谢安死。
English: On the 22nd, Ji Ji Jie, a chamberlain, a middle school librarian, a grand military governor of fifteen states, a general of the imperial guard, and a court official Xie An died.

古文：庚子，以琅邪王道子为都督中外诸军事。
现代文：二十五日，以琅王牙王司马道子为都督中外诸军事。
English: On the twenty-fifth day of the month, Sima Daozi, the king of Zhai, was appointed as the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces.

古文：是月，姚苌杀苻坚而僭即皇帝位。
现代文：这个月，姚苌杀苻坚，僭位当皇帝。
English: This month, Yao Jian killed Jian Jian and became emperor.

古文：九月，吕光据姑臧，自称凉州刺史。
现代文：九月，吕光占据姑臧，自称为凉州刺史。
English: In September, Luguang occupied Guzheng and claimed to be the founder of Liangzhou.

古文：苻丕僭即皇帝位于晋阳。
现代文：苻丕在晋阳僭位为皇帝。
English: He became emperor at the enthronement in Jinyang.

古文：冬十月丁亥，论淮肥之功，追封谢安庐陵郡公，封谢石南康公，谢玄康乐公，谢琰望蔡公，桓伊永修公，自余封拜各有差。
现代文：十月十三日，论定淮河肥水战役的战功，追封谢安为庐陵郡公，封谢石为南康公，谢玄为康乐公，谢琰为望蔡公，桓伊为永修公，其余的人封赏拜爵各有差等。
English: On October 13th, the war exploits of the Battle of Huaihe Fertile Water were determined, and Xie An was posthumously awarded the title of Fuling County Governor, Xie Shi was awarded the title of Nankang Governor, Xie Xuan was awarded the title of Kangle Governor, Xie Jun was awarded the title of Wang Cai Governor, Huan Yi was awarded the title of Yong Xiu Governor, and the rest of the people were awarded the title of Baron.

古文：是岁，乞伏国仁自称大单于、秦河二州牧。
现代文：这一年，乞伏国仁自称为大单于、秦、河二州牧。
English: In the same year, Kuibuku Kunihito declared himself to be the leader of Dasan Yu, Qin, and He Erzhou Maki.

古文：十一年春正月辛未，慕容垂僭即皇帝位于中山。
现代文：太元十一年正月二十八日，慕容垂在中山僭位为皇帝。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the 11th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Murong Du ascended the throne as emperor in Zhongshan.

古文：壬午，翟辽袭黎阳，执太守滕恬之。
现代文：二月十日，翟辽袭击黎阳，捉住了太守滕恬之。
English: On February 10th, Gongliao attacked Liyang and captured the governor Teng Yanzhong.

古文：乙酉。谒诸陵。
现代文：十三日，天子拜谒诸陵。
English: On the thirteenth day, the Son of Heaven went to visit the tombs.

古文：慕容冲将许木末杀慕容冲于长安。三月，大赦。
现代文：慕容垂的将领许木末在长安杀死慕容冲。三月，大赦天下。
English: Murongtai's general Xu Mimu killed Murongchong in Chang'an. In March, he was pardoned.

古文：太山太守张愿以郡叛，降于翟辽。
现代文：太山太守张愿带该郡反叛，向翟辽投降。
English: Zhang, the governor of Taishan, was willing to rebel with the county and surrender to Gongliao.

古文：夏四月，以百济王世子余晖为使持节、都督、镇东将军、百济王。
现代文：四月，任百济王的大儿子余辉为使持节、都督、镇东将军、百济王。
English: In April, Yu Hui, the eldest son of King Baekje, was appointed as envoy, governor, general of Zhendong and King of Baekje.

古文：代王拓拔圭始改称魏。
现代文：代王拓拔王圭开始改称魏国。
English: The king of Tuoba, Wang Gui, began to change the name to Wei.

古文：癸巳，以尚书仆射陆纳为尚书左仆射，谯王恬为尚书右仆射。
现代文：二十二日，以尚书仆射陆纳为尚书左仆射，谯王司马恬为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 22nd, Lu Na, Shang Shuxu's servant, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant, and Wang Sima Yu as Shang Shuxu's right-hand servant.

古文：六月己卯，地震。
现代文：六月九日，地震。
English: June 9th, earthquake.

古文：庚寅，以前辅国将军杨亮为西戎校尉、雍州刺史，镇卫山陵。
现代文：二十日，任命前辅国将军杨亮为西戎校尉、雍州刺史，镇守护卫皇帝陵。
English: On the 20th, Yang Liang, the former general of the Auxiliary State, was appointed as the Xi Rong lieutenant, the Yongzhou chief historian, and the town guardian of Emperor Wei's tomb.

古文：秋八月庚午，封孔靖之为奉圣亭侯，奉宣尼祀。
现代文：八月初一，封孔靖之为奉圣亭侯，供奉宣尼祀。
English: On the first day of August, Kong Jingsong was enshrined as a saint and worshipped as a nun.

古文：丁亥，安平王邃之薨。
现代文：十八日，安平王司马邃之死。
English: On the 18th, the death of Anping King Sima Yi occurred.

古文：翟辽寇谯，龙骧将军硃序击走之。
现代文：翟辽侵犯谯，龙骧将军朱序赶跑了他。
English: Zhao Liao invaded Yunnan, and General Zhu Xuan of Longyan drove him away.

古文：冬十月，慕容垂破苻丕于河东，丕走东垣，扬威将军冯该击斩之，传首京都。
现代文：十月，慕容垂在河东攻破苻丕，苻丕逃到东垣，扬威将军冯该攻击并将他斩首，把首级传到京都。
English: In October, Murongtang broke through Shao in Hedong, Shao fled to Donggaki, Yangwei attacked and beheaded General Feng Gai, and sent his head to Kyoto.

古文：甲申，海西公奕薨。
现代文：十六日，海西公司马奕死。
English: On the 16th, Haixi Company's Ma Yi passed away.

古文：十一月，苻丕将苻登僭即皇帝位于陇东。
现代文：十一月，苻丕的将领苻登在陇东僭位当皇帝。
English: In November, the general of the Han Dynasty ascended to the throne of the Eastern Han Dynasty as emperor.

古文：十二年春正月乙巳，以豫州刺史硃序为青、兗二州刺史，镇淮阴。
现代文：太元十二年正月初八，以豫州刺史朱序为青州、兖州刺史，镇守淮阴。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 12th year of the Taiyuan era, the town guards of Huaiyin, the town guards of Qingzhou and Zhangzhou, took the lead in writing the history of Henzhou.

古文：丁未，大赦。
现代文：三月十一日，大赦天下。
English: On March 11th, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：壬子，暴风，发屋折木。
现代文：十六日，刮暴风，毁坏房屋，吹折树木。
English: On the 16th, a storm blew in, destroying houses and blowing down trees.

古文：戊午，慕容垂寇河东，济北太守温详奔彭城。
现代文：二十二日，慕容垂侵犯河东，济北大守温详逃到彭城。
English: On the 22nd, Murongtang invaded the eastern part of the province, and the governor of the northern part of the province, Wen Ji, fled to Pengcheng.

古文：翟辽遣子钊寇陈、颍，硃序击走之。
现代文：翟辽派儿子翟钊侵犯陈、颍，朱序将他打跑了。
English: Gong Liao sent his son Zou to encroach on Chen and Zou, and Zhu Xuan beat him up.

古文：夏四月戊辰，尊夫人李氏为皇太妃。
现代文：四月三日，天子把夫人李氏尊为皇太妃。
English: On April 3rd, Emperor Tianzi elevated his wife Li Shizhong to the rank of crown princess.

古文：己丑，雨雹。
现代文：二十四日，下冰雹。
English: On the 24th, hail fell.

古文：高平人翟暢执太守徐含远，以郡降于翟辽。
现代文：高平人翟畅捉住太守徐含远，率该郡向翟辽投降。
English: The Gaoping people successfully captured the Tai Shou, Xu Han Yuan, and led the county to surrender to the Liao.

古文：六月癸卯，束帛聘处士戴逵、袭玄之。
现代文：五月初八日，以束帛礼往聘处士戴逵、龚玄之。
English: On the 8th day of the 5th month of the year, Daisuke Daisuke and Shigenobu Shibata were appointed to the positions of clerk and assistant clerk respectively.

古文：秋八月辛巳，立皇子德宗为皇太子，大赦，增文武位二等，大酺五日，赐百官布帛各有差。
现代文：八月十八日，立皇子德宗为皇太子，大赦天下，文武臣增位一等，大宴享五日，赐给百官多少不等的布帛。
English: On August 18th, Emperor Taizong elevated Prince Dezong to crown prince, granted a general amnesty to the whole country, promoted Wenwu to the first grade, held a grand banquet for five days, and gave cloth bags of various sizes to hundreds of officials.

古文：九月戊午，复新宁王遵为武陵王，立梁王逢子和为梁王。
现代文：九月二十五日，又任新宁王司马遵为武陵王，立梁王司马王逢的儿子司马和为梁王。
English: On September 25th, Shining King Sima Zun was appointed King of Wuling, and Liang King Sima Wangfeng's son Sima He was appointed King of Liang.

古文：冬十一月，松滋太守王遐之讨翟辽于洛口，败之。
现代文：十一月，松滋太守王遐之在洛口讨伐翟辽，将翟辽击败。
English: In November, Wang Xizhi, the governor of Songzhi Province, led a crusade against Yan Liao in Lokou, defeating him.

古文：十三年夏四月戊午，以青兗二州刺史硃序为持节、都督雍梁沔中九郡诸军事、雍州刺史，谯王恬之为镇北将军、青兗二州刺史。
现代文：太元十三年四月二十九日，任青州、兖州刺史朱序为持节、都督雍、梁、沔中九郡诸军事，雍州刺史、谯王司马恬之为镇北将军、青、兖二州刺史。
English: On April 29th of the 13th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the military governor of Qingzhou and Zhangzhou, the military governor of nine counties in Yong, Liang and Zhangzhou, the military governor of Yongzhou, the general of Zhenbei, the king of Zhangzhou, and the military governor of Qingzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：夏六月，旱。
现代文：六月，大旱。
English: In June, there was a drought.

古文：乞伏国仁死，弟乾归嗣伪位，僭号河南王。
现代文：乞伏国仁死，其弟乾归继承伪位，僭号为河南王。
English: Begged Guo Ren to die, and his younger brother Qian Gui succeeded to the pseudo-throne, and was nicknamed the King of Henan.

古文：秋七月，翟辽将翟发寇洛阳，河南太守郭给距破之。
现代文：九月，翟辽的将领翟发侵犯襄阳，河南太守郭给拒敌并大破敌军。
English: In September, the generals of Liao invaded Xiangyang, and Henan Taishu Guo refused the enemy and defeated the enemy army.

古文：冬十二月戊子，涛水入石头，毁大桁，杀人。
现代文：十二月初三，波涛进入石头城，毁坏大浮桥，淹死人。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the waves entered Stone Town, destroying the large pontoon bridge and drowning people.

古文：乙未，大风，昼晦，延贤堂灾。
现代文：初十，刮大风，白天昏暗，延贤堂遭受火灾。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it was blowing a gale, the day was dark, and Yan Xiantang suffered a fire.

古文：丙申，螽斯则百堂、客馆、骠骑库皆灾。
现代文：十一日，螽斯则百堂、客馆、骠骑武库都遭火灾。
English: On the 11th day of the month, hundreds of churches, guesthouses, and cavalry arsenals in Gansu Province were all set on fire.

古文：己亥，加尚书令谢石卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十四日，加封尚书令谢石为卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 14th, Shangshu ordered Xie Shi to be awarded the title of Wei general, Kaifu ceremony and the three divisions.

古文：庚子，尚书令、卫将军、开府仪同三司谢石薨。
现代文：十五日，尚书令、卫将军、开府仪同三司谢石死。
English: On the fifteenth day, Shang Shuling, Wei Zheng, Kaifu Yi and San Shi Xie Shi died.

古文：十四年春正月癸亥，诏淮南所获俘虏付诸作部者一皆散遣，男女自相配匹，赐百日廪，其沿线为军赏者悉赎出之，以襄阳、淮南饶沃地各立一县以居之。
现代文：太元十四年正月初八，诏令淮南所获交付制作兵器部门的俘虏一律遣散，男女各自相配，赐给他们百日的粮食。那些沦为军人奖赏的人全部赎出来，在襄阳、淮南的肥沃土地各立一县让他们居住。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the 14th year of the Taiyuan era, the emperor ordered that all the prisoners of Huainan who had been handed over to the weapons production department should be discharged, and the men and women should be matched, and they were given 100 days of grain. Those who were reduced to military awards were all redeemed, and they were allowed to live in one county each in the fertile lands of Yangyang and Huainan.

古文：彭城妖贼刘黎僭称皇帝于皇丘，龙骧将军刘宰之讨平之。
现代文：彭城贼将刘黎在皇丘僭位称皇帝，龙骧将军刘牢之将他平定。
English: The Pengcheng bandits proclaimed Liu Li to be emperor at Wangqiu, and the Longjing general Liu Dangzhi subdued him.

古文：二月，扶南献方物。
现代文：二月，扶南献上地方物产。
English: In February, Funan presented local products.

古文：吕光僭号三河王。
现代文：吕光僭号为三河王。
English: Luguang's posthumous name is the King of the Three Rivers.

古文：夏四月甲辰，彭城王弘之薨。
现代文：四月二十日，彭城王司马弘之死。
English: On April 20, Wang Simahong of Pengcheng died.

古文：翟辽寇荥阳，执太守张卓。
现代文：翟辽侵犯荥阳，捉住了太守张卓。
English: Gongliao invaded Shenyang and captured the governor Zhang Zhuo.

古文：六月壬寅，使持节、都督荆益宁三州诸军事、荆州刺史桓石虔卒。
现代文：六月十九日，使持节、都督荆、益、宁三州诸军事、荆州刺史桓石虔死。
English: On June 19th, the military of the three states of Jing, Yixing and Ning, the military governor of Jing, and the military governor of Jing, died.

古文：秋七月甲寅，宣阳门四柱灾。
现代文：七月初三，宣阳门的四根大柱失火。
English: On the third day of July, the four pillars of Xuanyang Gate caught fire.

古文：八月，姚苌袭破苻登，获其伪后毛氏。
现代文：八月，姚苌偷袭击败苻登，俘虏了他的伪后毛氏。
English: In August, Yao Jun secretly attacked and defeated Xu Deng, and captured his pseudo-posterior Mao Shi.

古文：丁亥，汝南王羲薨。
现代文：初五，汝南王司马义死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, King Sima Yi died.

古文：九月庚午，以尚书左仆射陆纳为尚书令。
现代文：九月十九，任尚书左仆射陆纳为尚书令。
English: On September 19th, Shangshu's right-hand man, Lu Na, was appointed as Shangshu's second-in-command.

古文：冬十二月乙巳，雨，木冰。
现代文：十二月二十五日，下雨，树木结冰。
English: On December 25th, it rained and the trees froze.

古文：十五年春正月乙亥，镇北将军、谯王恬之薨。
现代文：太元十五年正月二十六日，镇北将军、谯王司马恬之死。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the 15th year of the Taiyuan era, the death of the Zhenbei general, Shao Wang Sima Yi.

古文：龙骧将军刘牢之及翟辽、张愿战于太山，王师败绩。
现代文：龙骧将军刘牢之与翟辽、张愿在太山交战，朝廷的军队失败。
English: The imperial court's army was defeated in the battle between Longyu's general Liu Diaozhi and Gong Liao and Zhang Zhen in Taishan.

古文：征虏将军硃序破慕容永于太行。
现代文：征虏将军朱序在太行攻破慕容永。
English: The conscript general Zhu Xuan defeated Murong Yong in Taihang.

古文：二月辛己，以中书令王恭为都督青兗幽并冀五州诸军事、前将军、青兗二州刺史。
现代文：二月初二，以中书令王恭为都督青、兖、幽、并、冀五州诸军事、前将军、青兖二州刺史。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：三月己酉朔，地震。
现代文：三月初一，地震。
English: On the first day of March, an earthquake.

古文：戊辰，大赦。
现代文：二十日，大赦天下。
English: On the 20th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：秋七月丁巳，有星孛于北河。
现代文：七月十一日，有彗星在北河星旁出现。
English: On July 11, a comet appeared next to the North Star.

古文：八月，永嘉人李耽举兵反，太守刘怀之讨平之。
现代文：八月，永嘉人李耽率兵反叛，太守刘怀之将他平定。
English: In August, the Yongjia man Li Tan led his soldiers in a rebellion, and the governor Liu Huaiyi subdued him.

古文：己丑，京师地震。
现代文：十三日，京城地震。
English: On the 13th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：有星孛于北斗，犯紫微。
现代文：有彗星在北斗星上出现，冲犯紫微星座。
English: A comet appeared on the Big Dipper, colliding with the constellation of Virgo.

古文：沔中诸郡及兗州大水。
现代文：沔中各郡以及兖州发大水。
English: Large amounts of water have been released in counties in Central Luzon and Luzon.

古文：龙骧将军硃序攻翟辽于滑台，大败之，张愿来降。
现代文：龙骧将军朱序在滑台进攻翟辽，翟辽大败，张愿前来投降。
English: Longjing's general Zhu Xuan led an attack on Liao on the plateau. Liao was defeated, and Zhang Xian came to surrender.

古文：九月丁未，以吴郡太守王珣为尚书仆射。
现代文：九月初一，以吴郡太守王王旬为尚书仆射。
English: On the first day of September, Wang Wanzhun, the governor of Wuxi County, was appointed as Shang Shufu.

古文：冬十二月己未，地震。
现代文：十二月十五日，地震。
English: December 15th, earthquake.

古文：十六年春正月庚申，改筑太庙。
现代文：太元十六年某月，改建太庙。
English: In a certain month of the 16th year of the Taigen era, the Taimiao was rebuilt.

古文：夏六月，慕容永寇河南，太守杨佺期击破之。己未，章武王范之薨。
现代文：六月，慕容永侵犯河南，太守杨亻全期打败敌军，十八日，章武王司马范之死。
English: In June, Murong Yong invaded Henan. Yang Jie, the eunuch governor, defeated the enemy army in its entirety. On the 18th, Zhangwu Wang Sima Fan died.

古文：秋九月癸未，以尚书右仆射王珣为尚书左仆射，以太子詹事谢琰为尚书右仆射。
现代文：九月十四日，以尚书右仆射王王旬为尚书左仆射，以太子詹事谢琰为尚书右仆射。
English: On September 14th, Wang Shun, the right-hand man of Shangshu, became the left-hand man of Shangshu, and Janzhi Xiejun, the son of Ether, became the right-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：新庙成。
现代文：新太庙建成。
English: The new Great Temple was completed.

古文：冬十一月，姚苌败苻登于安定。
现代文：十一月，姚苌在安定击败苻登。
English: In November, Yao Wei defeated Zou Deng in the stable.

古文：十七年春正月己巳朔，大赦，除逋租宿债。
现代文：太元十七年正月初一，大赦天下，免除往年的陈租旧债。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventeenth year of the Taiyuan, the world was amnestied, and the old debts of previous years were exempted.

古文：夏四月，齐国内史蒋喆杀乐安太守辟闾浚，据青州反，北平原太守辟闾浑讨平之。
现代文：四月，齐国内史蒋哲杀死乐安太守辟闾氵睿，占据青州造，北平原太守辟闾浑讨伐平定叛乱。
English: In April, in the history of Qi, Jiang Zhe killed Le An Taishou Di Zha Rui, occupied Qingzhou Zou, and the Northern Plains Taishou Di Xun fought and quelled the rebellion.

古文：五月丁卯朔，日有蚀之。六月癸卯，京师地震。
现代文：五月初一，有日蚀。六月初八，京城发生地震。
English: On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse. On the eighth day of June, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：甲寅，涛水入石头，毁大桁。
现代文：十九日，洪水进入石头城，毁坏浮桥。
English: On the 19th, the flood entered Stone Town and destroyed the floating bridge.

古文：永嘉郡潮水涌起，近海四县人多死者。
现代文：永嘉郡的潮水涌起，靠近海边的四县死了很多人。
English: The tide surged in Yongjia County, and many people died in four counties near the coast.

古文：乙卯，大风，折木。
现代文：二十日，刮大风，吹折树木。
English: On the 20th, a strong wind blew, snapping trees.

古文：戊午，梁王薨。
现代文：二十三日，梁王司马和死。
English: On the 23rd, Liang Wang Sima passed away.

古文：慕容垂袭翟钊于黎阳，败之，钊奔于慕容永。
现代文：慕容垂在黎阳袭击翟钊，将翟钊打败，翟钊逃奔慕容永。
English: Murongdiao attacked Zou in Liyang, defeated Zou, and fled to Murongyong.

古文：秋七月丁丑，太白昼见。
现代文：七月十二日，太白星白天出现。
English: On July 12th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：八月，新作东宫。
现代文：八月，新建东宫。
English: In August, the new East Palace was completed.

古文：冬十月丁酉，太白昼见。
现代文：十月初四，太白星白天出现。
English: On the fourth day of October, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：辛亥，都督荆益宁三州诸军事、荆州刺史王忱卒。
现代文：十八日，都督荆、益、宁三州诸军事、荆州刺史王忱死。
English: On the 18th, Wang Zhen, the military commander of the three states of Jing, Yixing and Ning and the governor of Jing Province, died.

古文：十一月癸酉，以黄门郎殷仲堪为都督荆益梁三州诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：十一月初十，任黄门郎殷仲堪为都督荆、益、梁三州诸军事、荆州刺史。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, Huangmen Lang Yin Zhong was appointed as the military governor of the three states of Jing, Yixing and Liang, and the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：庚寅，徙封琅邪王道子为会稽王，封皇子德文为琅邪王。
现代文：二十七日，改封琅王牙王司马道子为会稽王，封皇子司马德文为琅王牙王。
English: On the 27th, Sima Daozi, the prince of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king.

古文：十二月己未，地震。
现代文：十二月二十七日，发生地震。
English: It's December and there's been an earthquake.

古文：是岁，自秋不雨，至于冬。
现代文：这一年，从秋天起不下雨，一直到冬天。
English: This year, it didn't rain from autumn until winter.

古文：十八年春正月癸亥朔，地震。
现代文：太元十八年正月初一，发生地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighteenth year, an earthquake occurred.

古文：二月乙未，地又震。
现代文：二月初四，又发生地震。
English: On the 4th of February, another earthquake occurred.

古文：三月，翟钊寇河南。
现代文：三月，翟钊侵犯河南。
English: In March, it invaded Henan Province.

古文：夏六月己亥，始兴、南康、庐陵大水，深五丈。
现代文：六月初九，始兴、南康、庐陵发大水，水深五丈。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, large floods occurred in Shixing, Nankang and Fuling, with water depths of up to five meters.

古文：秋七月，旱。
现代文：七月，大旱。
English: In July, there was a drought.

古文：闰月，妖贼司马徽聚党于马头山，刘牢之遣部将讨平之。
现代文：闰七月，贼人司马徽在马头山聚集党羽徒众，刘牢之派部将把他平定。
English: In leap July, the thief Sima Hui gathered party followers in Mount Ma Tou, and Liu Diao's faction would take him down.

古文：九月丙戌，龙骧将军杨佺期击氐帅杨佛嵩于潼谷，败之。
现代文：八月二十八日，龙骧将军杨佺期在潼谷进攻氐帅杨佛嵩，将他打败。
English: On August 28th, the Long March general Yang Xizhong attacked the commander Yang Fusong in Shibuya, defeating him.

古文：冬十月，姚苌死，子兴嗣伪位。
现代文：十二月，姚苌死，其子姚兴继承伪位。
English: In December, Yao Xuan died, and his son Yao Xing succeeded to the pseudo throne.

古文：十九年夏六月壬子，追尊会稽王太妃郑氏为简文宣太后。
现代文：太元十九年六月，追尊会稽王太妃郑氏为简文宣太后。
English: In June of the 19th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Princess Zheng, the Queen Mother of the Sui Dynasty, became Empress Dowager Jianwen Xuan.

古文：秋七月，荆、徐二州大水，伤秋稼，遣使振恤之。
现代文：七月，荆、徐二州发大水，毁坏秋天的庄稼，朝廷派使臣赈济抚恤。
English: In July, large amounts of water were released in Jing and Xu Erzhou, destroying the autumn crops. The imperial court sent envoys to provide relief.

古文：八月己巳，尊皇太妃李氏为皇太后，宫曰崇训。
现代文：八月十六日，尊皇太妃李氏为皇太后，把她住的宫叫崇训宫。
English: On August 16th, the revered Empress Dowager Yi became the empress dowager, and the palace where she lived was called the Chongxun Palace.

古文：慕容垂击慕容永于长子，斩之。
现代文：慕容垂在长子进攻慕容永，将他斩首。
English: Murongtang attacked Murongyong with his eldest son and beheaded him.

古文：冬十月，慕容垂遣其子恶奴寇廪丘，东平太守韦简及垂将尹国战于平陆，简死之。
现代文：十月，慕容垂派他的儿子恶奴侵犯廪丘，东平太守韦简与慕容垂的将领尹国在平陆交战，韦简战死。
English: In October, Murongtli sent his son, the villainous slave, to encroach on Shaoqiu. Dongping's eunuch Wei Jian fought with Murongtli's general Yin Guo on flat land. Wei Jian was killed in the battle.

古文：是岁，苻登为姚兴所杀，登太子崇奔于湟中，僭称皇帝。
现代文：这一年，苻登为姚兴所杀，苻登的太子苻崇逃到湟中，僭位称皇帝。
English: In the same year, Yao Xing killed the prince of Xingtang, and the prince of Xingtang, Yao Chong, fled to Yuzhong. He was called the emperor.

古文：二十年春二月，作宣太后庙。
现代文：太元二十年二月，建造宣太后庙。
English: In February of the 20th year of the Taiyuan era, the temple of the Empress Dowager Xuan was built.

古文：甲寅，散骑常侍、光禄大夫、开府仪同三司、尚书令陆纳卒。
现代文：初四，散骑常侍、光禄大夫、开府仪同三司、尚书令陆纳死。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the school year, Lu Na was ordered to be killed by Sanzhi, Guanglu, Kaifu, and Shang Shuling.

古文：二十一年春正月，造清暑殿。
现代文：三月初一，有日蚀。六月，荆、徐二州发大水。
English: On the first day of March, there was a solar eclipse. In June, Jing and Xu Erzhou were flooded.

古文：三月，慕容垂攻平城，拔之。
现代文：十一月，魏王拓拔王圭在黍谷进攻慕容垂的儿子慕容宝，将他打败。
English: In November, Wei King Tuoba Wang Gui attacked Murong Bao, the son of Murong Dui, in Shibuya and defeated him.

古文：夏四月，新作永安宫。
现代文：太元二十一年正月，建清暑殿。三月，慕容垂攻下平城。四月，新建永安宫。
English: In the first month of the twenty-first century, the Qing Summer Palace was built. In March, Murongtang conquered Pingcheng. In April, the Yongan Palace was newly built.

古文：丁亥，雨雹。
现代文：十四日，下冰雹。
English: On the 14th, hail fell.

古文：慕容垂死，子宝嗣伪位。
现代文：慕容垂死，他的儿子慕容宝继嗣伪位。
English: Murong was dying, and his son Murong Bao succeeded to the pseudo-throne.

古文：五月甲子，以望蔡公谢琰为尚书左仆射。
现代文：五月十五日，任望蔡公谢琰为尚书左仆射。
English: On May 15, Renwang Cai Gong Xiejun was appointed as Shangshu's second-in-command.

古文：大水。
现代文：发大水。
English: It's a big mess.

古文：六月，吕光僭即天王位。
现代文：六月，吕光僭位当天子。
English: In June, Lu Guang was enthroned as the emperor.

古文：秋九月庚申，帝崩于清暑殿，时年三十五。
现代文：九月二十日，天子死于清暑殿，享年三十五岁。
English: On September 20th, Tianzi passed away at the age of thirty-five.

古文：葬隆平陵。
现代文：安葬在隆平陵。
English: He was buried in Yongping Mausoleum.

古文：帝幼称聪悟。
现代文：孝武帝年幼时以聪明颖悟著称。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu was young, he was known for his cleverness and insight.

古文：简文之崩也，时年十岁，至晡不临，左右进谏，答曰： 哀至则哭，何常之有？ 
现代文：简文帝死时，他才十岁，到傍晚不临丧，左右进谏，他回答说： 到悲伤时就哭，有什么常规？ 
English: When Emperor Jianwen died, he was only ten years old. He did not mourn until the evening, and he was sad all the time. He replied: When you are sad, you cry. What is the rule?

古文：谢安尝叹以为精理不减先帝。
现代文：谢安曾经感叹孝武帝的精于事理不减于先帝。
English: Xie An once lamented that Emperor Xiaowu was no less adept at reasoning than the previous emperor.

古文：既威权己出，雅有人主之量。既而溺于酒色，殆为长夜之饮。
现代文：权威建立以后，有人君的雅量，不久沉溺于酒色，几乎是长夜饮酒。
English: After the establishment of authority, some people's elegance, soon indulged in alcohol, almost a long night of drinking.

古文：末年长星见，帝心甚恶之，于华林园举酒祝之曰： 长星，劝汝一杯酒，自古何有万岁天子邪！ 
现代文：到末年彗星出现，天子内心十分厌恶，在华林园举酒祷告说： 彗星，劝你一杯酒，自古以来哪里有活一万岁的天子呢？ 
English: When the comet appeared at the end of the year, the heavenly son was very disgusted. He held up a cup of wine in the Hualing Garden and prayed, "Comet, I advise you to drink a cup of wine. Since ancient times, where has the heavenly son lived for ten thousand years?

古文：太白连年昼见，地震水旱为变者相属。
现代文：太白星连年白日出现，地震和水旱之灾接连不断。
English: Too-white stars appear in the daytime year after year, and earthquakes, floods, and droughts continue.

古文：醒日既少，而傍无正人，竟不能改焉。
现代文：酒醒之日甚少。而身旁又没有正直之人，最终不能改变。
English: There are very few sober days, and there are no honest people around, which ultimately cannot be changed.

古文：时张贵人有宠，年几三十，帝戏之曰： 汝以年当废矣。 
现代文：当时张贵人得宠，年近三十，天子戏弄她说： 你按年龄应该废弃了。 
English: At that time, Zhang Guiren was favored, nearly thirty years old. Tianzi teased her and said, "According to your age, you should be discarded."

古文：贵人潜怒，向夕，帝醉，遂暴崩。
现代文：张贵人暗地里发怒，到了晚上，天子喝醉，于是暴死。
English: Zhang Guiren was secretly angry. In the evening, Tianzi got drunk and died violently.

古文：时道子昏惑，元显专权，竟不推其罪人。
现代文：当时司马道子昏庸糊涂，司马元显专权，竟然不追究罪人。
English: At that time, Sima Daozi was confused, Sima Yuanxian had absolute power, and he did not pursue the guilty.

古文：初，简文帝见谶云： 晋祚尽昌明。 
现代文：当初，简文帝见到预言吉凶的文字上说： 晋朝的国运在昌明手中衰竭。 
English: At first, Emperor Jianwen saw the prophecy of the auspicious and inauspicious words saying: The Jin Dynasty's national fortune was exhausted in the hands of Changming.

古文：及帝之在孕也，李太后梦神人谓之曰： 汝生男，以 昌明 为字。 
现代文：等到孝武帝还是胎儿时，李太后梦见神人对她说： 你生男孩，以 昌明 为字。 
English: When Emperor Xiaowu was still a fetus, Empress Dowager Li had a dream in which a divine being said to her, "You will give birth to a boy. His name is Changming."

古文：及产，东方始明，因以为名焉。
现代文：等到他出生，东方刚亮，于是取 昌明 为字。
English: When he was born, the east was just bright, so he took "Changming" as a character.

古文：简文帝后悟，乃流涕。
现代文：简文帝后来明白了，便痛哭流泪。
English: Later, Emperor Jianwen understood and wept bitterly.

古文：及为清暑殿，有识者以为 清暑 反为 楚 声，哀楚之征也。
现代文：等到建清暑殿，有见识的人认为 清暑 的反切是 楚 字之音，意思是凄楚悲哀的征兆。
English: By the time the Qingxiao Hall was built, people with insight believed that the opposite of Qingxiao was the sound of Chu, meaning a sign of great sorrow.

古文：俄而帝崩，晋祚自此倾矣。
现代文：不久天子死，晋朝的福祚国运从此倾颓了。
English: Soon after, Tianzi died, and the prosperity of the Jin Dynasty came to an end.

古文：史臣曰：前史称 不有废也，吾何以兴 ，若乃天挺惟神，光膺嗣位，迈油云而骧首，济沈川而能跃。
现代文：史臣曰：从前的史书称 没有废黜，君王怎么会兴起 ，至若像神一样天姿卓越，光耀地继承帝位，跨越浓云而昂首阔步，渡过大河而能腾跃。
English: The historian said, "The ancient history books said, 'Without dethronement, how can a king arise, if he is as brilliant as a god, inherits the imperial throne brilliantly, strides across thick clouds with his head held high, and can leap across great rivers?'

古文：少康一旅之众，所以阐帝图；成汤七十之基，所以兴王业；静河海于既泄，补穹圆于已紊；事异于斯，则弗由也。
现代文：少康仅有一旅军队，以此得了夏国王之位；成汤祇有七十之地，却振兴了帝王的大业；在河海溃泄以后能够治理好，在天象混乱以后能够补救；事情与此不同，那么原由也不同。
English: Shao Kang only had one brigade of troops, which is how he became the king of Xia; Cheng Tang only had seventy provinces, but he revitalized the emperor's great cause; he could govern well after the river and sea broke out, and he could remedy after the chaos of the heavenly beings; things are different from this, so the reasons are also different.

古文：简皇以虚白之姿，在屯如之会，政由桓氏，祭则寡人。
现代文：简文帝以他清虚无为的资质，处在艰难的时世，政令由桓氏发出，本族之人无权势。
English: Emperor Jianwen, with his ability to do nothing, is in a difficult time, the government orders are issued by the Huan clan, and the people of this clan have no power.

古文：太宗晏驾，宁康纂业，天诱其衷，奸臣自陨。
现代文：太宗去世以后，宁康继承大业，上天感动其忠情，奸臣自行灭亡。
English: After the death of Taizong, Ningkang inherited the great cause, heaven moved his loyalty, and the traitor died of his own accord.

古文：于时西逾剑岫而跨灵山，北振长河而临清洛；荆吴战旅，啸叱成云；名贤间出，旧德斯在：谢安可以镇雅俗，彪之足以正纪纲，桓冲之夙夜王家，谢玄之善断军事。
现代文：于是西边超越剑岫而跨过灵山，北边渡过黄河而到达清澈的洛水；荆吴的战士，叱咤成云；有名的贤臣迭出，有德望的故老还在。谢安可以领导风雅之士与流俗之人，王彪之可以整治纲纪，桓冲的整日辛劳，谢玄的善于处理军事。
English: As a result, the west side surpassed Jianye and crossed the Lingshan, and the north side crossed the Yellow River to reach the clear Luoshui; the soldiers of Jingwu became a cloud; the famous sages came out, and the respected elders are still there. Xie An can lead the elegant and the vulgar, Wang Biao can rectify the discipline, the all-day toil of the rush, and Xie Xuan is good at handling the military.

古文：于时上天乃眷，强氐自泯。
现代文：当时上天眷顾，强悍的氐人泯减。
English: At that time, heaven took care of it, and the strong warrior was reduced.

古文：五尺童子，振袂临江，思所以挂旆天山，封泥函谷；而条纲弗垂，威思罕树，道子荒乎朝政，国宝汇以小人，拜授之荣，初非天旨，鬻刑之货，自走权门，毒赋年滋，愁民岁广。
现代文：五尺童子，挥袖到了长江，想要以此让旗帜飘扬到天山，在函谷据守雄关；但是法度纲纪没有流传，威严恩德少有建树，司马道子荒于朝政，国宝会集小人，拜授官爵的荣耀原本并不是天意，以刑狱腐败而得到的货财，进入权贵的家门，苛捐杂税一年年增加，困苦的百姓一年比一年多。
English: A five-feet-tall boy, waving his sleeves to the Yangtze River, wanted to use this to let the flag fly to Tianshan, and in Hakodate to defend the pass; but the laws and regulations did not spread, the majesty and virtue were rare, Sima Daozi was poor in the imperial government, the national treasure would gather villains, and the glory of awarding official knighthoods was not originally God's will, the goods and wealth obtained by prison corruption entered the homes of the powerful, the harsh taxes and surcharges increased year by year, and the poor people increased year by year.

古文：是以闻人、许荣驰书诣阙，烈宗知其抗直，而恶闻逆耳，肆一醉于崇朝，飞千觞于长夜。
现代文：所以闻人、许荣上书皇帝，烈宗知道他们坦率耿直，但是厌恶听到逆耳忠言，在上午尽情地喝得大醉，在夜晚频频举杯。
English: Therefore, Wenzong and Xu Rong wrote to the emperor, and the emperors knew that they were frank and honest, but they were disgusted to hear the insincere advice, and they drank heavily in the morning and frequently raised their glasses in the evening.

古文：虽复 昌明 表梦，安听神言？
现代文：虽然有 昌明 显梦，哪裹能听到神明的话语?
English: Although there are lucid dreams, where can one hear the words of the gods?

古文：而金行颓弛，抑亦人事，语曰 大国之政未陵夷，小邦之乱已倾覆 也。
现代文：可见晋王朝的衰败，也是人为，常言道 大国的政事还没有衰落，小国的祸乱已把国家搞垮 。
English: It can be seen that the decline of the Jin Dynasty was also man-made. As the saying goes, the political affairs of a large country have not yet declined, but the scourge of a small country has brought down the country.

古文：属苻坚百六之秋，弃肥水之众，帝号为 武 ，不亦优哉！
现代文：适逢苻坚正处在厄运降临的时刻，抛弃肥水战败的人马，帝号谧为 武 ，不也是很滑稽的吗!
English: Isn't it funny that at the right time, when Yu Jian was in the moment of doom, he abandoned the men and horses that had been defeated in the battle, and took the imperial title of Wu!

古文：赞曰：君若缀旒，道非交泰。
现代文：赞曰：国君就像冠冕之旒，时运并不总是亨通。
English: Zang Zai said: The sovereign is like the sceptre of the crown, and fortune does not always succeed.

古文：简皇凝寂，不贻伊害。
现代文：简皇帝清静无为，没有留下什么灾祸。
English: Emperor Jian remained quiet and inactive, leaving no disasters behind.

古文：孝武登朝，奸雄自消。
现代文：孝武帝登上皇位，奸雄自然消失。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, and the malefactor naturally disappeared.

古文：燕之击路，郑叔分镳。
现代文：燕之路途争道，郑叔分道扬镳。
English: Yan's path and Zheng's path conflicted, and they went their separate ways.

古文：倡临帝席，酒劝天妖。
现代文：倡人来到了皇帝的筵席上，美酒由那些美女劝进。
English: The champion came to the emperor's banquet, and the wine was persuaded by the beautiful women.

古文：金风不竞，人事先凋。
现代文：秋风不振，人事首先衰败。
English: The autumn wind is weak, and personnel is the first to decline.

