古文：李景让李敏求李君马举郑延济李生
现代文：李景让李敏求李君马举郑延济李生
English: Li Jing asked Li Min to ask Li Junma to raise Zheng Yan to help Li Sheng

古文：李景让
现代文：李景让
English: Li Jingzhan

古文：唐宣宗将命相，必采中外人情合为相者三两人姓名，捻之致案上，以碗覆之。宰相阙，必添香虔祝，探丸以命草麻，上切于命。
现代文：唐宣宗将要任命宰相之前，必须把朝廷内外普遍认为可以胜任宰相的二三个人的姓名写在纸上团成团，放到书案上，用碗盖上，再点燃香虔诚地祈祷，然后伸手从碗下抓阄决定宰相的名字，以便顺应天命。
English: Before Tang Xuan Zong was to appoint a prime minister, he had to write the names of two or three people who were generally considered to be capable of being a prime minister, both inside and outside the court, in groups on paper, put them on a book, cover them with a bowl, then light incense and pray devoutly, and then reach out from under the bowl and grab a gourd to decide the name of the prime minister, in order to comply with the fate.

古文：故李孝公景让，竟探名不著，有以见其命也。
现代文：已故的孝公李景让竟没有被抓中，有此可见他的命运怎么样了。
English: The late Li Jingzang, a filial son, was not caught at all, which shows how his fate turned out.

古文：李敏求
现代文：李敏求
English: Li Minqiu

古文：李敏求应进士举，凡十有余上，不得第。
现代文：李敏求参加科举考试一共有十多次了，始终没有被录取。
English: Li Min has applied to participate in the entrance examination for a total of more than ten times, but has never been admitted.

古文：海内无家，终鲜兄弟姻属。
现代文：他无家可归，又没有兄弟可以投靠，已经快要到要饭吃的境地，几乎不想活下去了。
English: Homeless and without a brother to turn to, he was close to starvation and barely wanted to live.

古文：栖栖丐食，殆无生意。大和初，长安旅舍中，因暮夜，愁惋而坐。忽觉形魂相离，其身飘飘，如云气而游。渐涉丘墟，荒野之外，山川草木，无异人间。但不知是何处。
现代文：大和初年的一天夜晚，他一个人坐在旅店的床上发愁，忽然感觉到灵魂和身体分离，全身轻飘飘的，像云气一样飘荡，渐渐来到荒郊野外，看见山川草木和人间的一个样，只是不知道在什么地方。
English: One night in the first year of the Yamato era, he was sitting alone on the bed of the inn, worried. Suddenly, he felt his soul and body separate. His whole body was light and floating, floating like a cloud. Gradually, he came to the wild countryside and saw mountains, rivers, plants and trees similar to those in the human world, but he didn't know where.

古文：良久，望见一城壁，即趋就之，复见人物甚众，呵呼往来，车马繁闹。
现代文：过了很久，前面出现一座城镇，便走了进去，看见街道上人来人往，车水马龙，人声嘈杂。
English: After a long time, a town appeared in front of him, and he went inside and saw people coming and going in the streets, the traffic was heavy, and the voices were noisy.

古文：俄有白衣人走来，拜敏求。
现代文：忽然有一个身穿白衣服的人走过来给李敏求行了一个礼。
English: Suddenly, a person dressed in white came over and bowed to Li Min.

古文：敏求曰： 尔非我旧佣保耶？ 
现代文：李敏求问： 你莫非是我以前的仆人吗？ 
English: Li Min asked: Aren't you my former servant?

古文：其人曰： 小人即二郎十年前所使张岸也。是时随从二郎泾州岸，不幸身先犬马耳。 
现代文：那个人说： 小人就是二郎您十年前所雇用的张岸，那时我跟随您去泾州河边，不幸淹死了。 
English: The man said: "The villain is Jiro Zhang, whom you hired ten years ago. At that time, I followed you to the Zhangzhou River and unfortunately drowned.

古文：又问曰： 尔何所事？ 
现代文：李敏又问： 你现在干什么呢？ 
English: Li Min also asked: What are you doing now?

古文：岸对曰： 自到此来，便事柳十八郎，甚蒙驱使。
现代文：张岸回答： 自从来到这里，我就跟随柳十八郎了，一直为他效力。
English: Zhang Guan replied: Since I came here, I have been following Liu Shihachiro and have been working for him.

古文：柳十八郎今见在太山府君判官，非常贵盛。每日判决繁多，造次不可得见。
现代文：柳十八郎现在当太山府君判官，非常尊贵显赫，每天审理判决十分繁忙，轻易见不着他。
English: Liu Shihachiro is now a judge of the Taishan prefectural government. He is very honorable and distinguished. He is very busy hearing verdicts every day, so it is not easy to see him.

古文：二郎岂不共柳十八郎是往今事须见他？ 
现代文：您和柳十八郎不是往日的交情，今天的事必须见他，我先进去通报。 
English: You and Liu Shihachiro are not friends from the past. I have to see him today, so I'll go first to inform him.

古文：岸请先入启白。须臾，张岸复出，引敏求入大衙门。
现代文：一会儿，张岸走了出来，带领李敏求走进官署大门。
English: After a while, Zhang Guan came out and led Li Minqiu into the gate of the government office.

古文：正北有大厅屋，丹楹粉壁，壮丽穷极。又过西庑下一横门，门外多是著黄衫惨绿衫人。又见著绯紫端简而侦立者；披白衫露髻而倚墙者；有被枷锁，牵制于人而俟命者；有抱持文案，窥觑门中而将入者。如丛约数百人。
现代文：李敏求看见院子正北有座大厅，红柱子白粉墙，极为壮丽，又见西面一排房子有一扇门，门外有许多穿黄衣服和绿衣服的人；还有一些人穿着紫红色的衣服，手里拿着申诉状纸站着；还有一些人穿着白衣没戴头巾和帽子，倚着墙站着；还有一些人戴着木枷和锁链，被人牵着等候提审；还有人怀抱着公文案卷窥视门里准备进去，一共大约有几百人。
English: Li Minqiu saw a hall just to the north of the courtyard, with red pillars and white powder walls, extremely magnificent. He also saw a row of houses to the west with a door. Outside the door, there were many people wearing yellow and green clothes; there were also some people wearing purple and red clothes, standing with appeal papers in their hands; there were also some people wearing white clothes without headscarves and hats, standing leaning against the wall; there were also some people wearing wooden shackles and chains, being led by people waiting for arraignment; there were also people holding official documents in their arms, peering into the door and preparing to enter, a total of about several hundred people.

古文：敏求将入门，张岸挥手于其众曰： 官客来。 
现代文：李敏求就要进去，张岸挥手对其他人说： 有客人来了！ 
English: When Li Minqiu was about to enter, Zhang Guan waved his hand to the others and said, "A guest has come!"

古文：其人一时俯首开路。
现代文：马上走过来一个人低着头为他们带路。
English: Immediately, a man came over and led the way for them with his head down.

古文：俄然谒者揖敏求入见，著紫衣官人具公服，立于阶下。敏求趋拜讫，仰视之，即故柳澥秀才也。
现代文：不一会儿有一个人走过来向李敏求作揖，请他进去。李敏求看到一个身穿紫衣服的官员站在台阶下，李敏求上前行完礼，抬头一看，却是已故的秀才柳澥。
English: Soon after, a man approached Li Min and asked him to come in. Li Min saw an official dressed in purple standing at the bottom of the steps. Li Min stepped forward and bowed. When he looked up, it was the late great scholar Liu Ye.

古文：澥熟顾敏求，大惊，未合与足下相见。
现代文：柳澥仔细一看是李敏求，不由得大吃一惊，说： 不应该在这里和您见面。 
English: When Liu Ye took a closer look, he was surprised to see that it was Li Minqiu. He said, "I shouldn't have met you here.

古文：乃揖登席，绸缪叙话，不异平生。
现代文：立刻请他进屋里坐下，亲热地同他谈论往事。柳澥说： 阴间和阳世不是一条路，今天你来这里，真是意料之外的事。
English: She immediately invited him into the house to sit down and had a heart-to-heart talk with him about the past. Liu Yao said, "The underworld and the world of the sun are not one and the same. You coming here today is really unexpected.

古文：澥曰。幽显殊途，今日吾人此来，大是非意事，莫有所由妄相追摄否？仆幸居此处，当为吾人理之。 
现代文：是不是有人错误地把他摄来了？幸好我在这里，必然替你作出安排。 李敏求说： 我到这里，并没有人传呼。 
English: Did someone take a picture of him by mistake? Fortunately, I am here, and I will certainly make arrangements for you. Li Minqiu said: When I got here, there was no one calling out.

古文：敏求曰： 所以至此者，非有人呼也。 
现代文：柳澥沉吟一会说： 这必然是你命该到此，但是应该快点回去。 
English: "It's definitely your destiny to come here, but you should hurry up and go back," Liu Yao said.

古文：然宜速返。 敏求曰： 受生苦穷薄，故人当要路，不能相发挥乎？ 
现代文：李敏求说： 我贫困潦倒，你在这里执掌大权，不能帮助我改变一下命运吗？ 
English: Li Minqiu said: I am impoverished and downtrodden, you are in charge here, can't you help me change my fate?

古文：澥曰： 假使公在世间作官职，岂可将他公事，从其私欲乎？苟有此图，谪罚无容逃逭矣。
现代文：柳澥说： 假如你在阳间当官，难道可以假公济私吗？如果有这样的企图，被处罚贬官是不能逃避的。
English: Liu Wei said: "If you are an official in the public eye, is it possible to be dishonest? If there is such an attempt, it is impossible to escape being punished and demoted.

古文：然要知禄命，乍可施力。 
现代文：但是你如果想要知道自己的命运，我倒可以帮忙。 
English: But if you want to know your fate, I can help.

古文：因命左右一黄衫吏曰： 引二郎至曹司，略示三数年行止之事。 
现代文：于是命令旁边一个穿黄衣服的官员说： 带领李二郎去曹司，简单给他看一下三年的情况。 
English: Then an official wearing yellow next to the order said, "Take Li Jiro to Cao Si and show him the situation of the past three years.

古文：敏求即随吏却出。过大厅东，别入一院。
现代文：李敏求跟随穿黄衣服的官员走出去，经过大厅东面，进入另一个院子里。
English: Li Minkui followed the yellow-clad officials out, past the east side of the hall and into another courtyard.

古文：院有四合大屋，约六七间，窗户尽启，满屋唯是大书架，置黄白纸书簿，各题签榜，行列不知纪极。
现代文：院子四面都有房子，约六七间，窗户全都开着，满屋都是大书架，放满黄纸或白纸的书和帐簿，上面都有标签，也不知道一共有多少册。
English: On all four sides of the courtyard there are houses, about six or seven, the windows are all open, the house is full of large bookshelves, full of yellow or white paper books and account books, all with labels on them, and I don't know how many books there are in total.

古文：其吏止于一架，抽出一卷文，以手叶却数十纸，即反卷十余行，命敏求读之。
现代文：穿黄衣服的官员走到一个书架前，抽出一册帐簿，翻到一面，反折过去，只漏出十几行字让李敏求看。
English: The yellow-clad official walked over to a bookshelf, pulled out an account book, flipped it to one side and flipped it over, leaving only a dozen or so lines for Li Min to read.

古文：其文曰： 李敏求至大和二年罢举。其年五月，得钱二百四十贯。
现代文：上面写的是： 李敏求到大和二年，不再参加科举考试，这一年的五月，得到二百四十贯钱。 
English: It read: Li Min asked to be promoted to the second year of college and no longer take the entrance examination. In May of this year, he received 240 yuan.

古文：侧注朱字，其钱以伊宰卖庄钱充。
现代文：旁边还注着红字，内容是： 这笔钱从伊宰卖庄院所得钱中支付。
English: Next to it, there was also a scarlet letter, which read: This money will be paid from the money received from the sale of the Izai Manor.

古文：又至三年得官，食禄张平子。 
现代文：又过三年得官，任职的地点是张平子。 
English: After another three years, he was appointed to the post, which was held by Zhang Pingzi.

古文：读至此，吏复掩之。
现代文：看到这里，穿黄衣服的官员将帐簿合上。
English: Here, yellow-clad officials close the books.

古文：敏求恳请见其余，吏固不许，即被引出。
现代文：李敏求恳求把其余的部分看完，穿黄衣服的官员不同意，将他领出来。
English: Li Min begged and pleaded with him to finish reading the rest of the section, but the official in yellow did not agree and led him out.

古文：又过一门，门扇斜开，敏求倾首窥之，见四合大屋，屋内尽有床榻，上各有铜印数百颗，杂以赤斑蛇，大小数百余。
现代文：他们经过一个大门，门扇半开，李敏求伸头往里看，见也是四面大房子，屋子里都有床，上面有铜印数百颗，并且夹杂着长着红色斑点的蛇，大大小小有几百条，再没有别的东西。
English: They passed through a gate, the door was ajar, and Li Min looked inside to see a large house on all four sides. There were beds in the house, with hundreds of copper seals on them, and snakes with red spots mixed in. There were hundreds of them, large and small, and nothing else.

古文：更无他物。敏求问吏： 用此何为？ 
现代文：李敏求问穿黄衣服的官员： 这些东西是干什么用的？ 
English: Li Min asked the officials dressed in yellow: What is the use of these things?

古文：吏笑而不答。
现代文：穿黄衣服的官员笑着没说话。
English: The yellow-clad official smiled and did not speak.

古文：遂却至柳判官处。柳谓敏求曰： 非故人莫能至此，更欲奉留，恐误足下归计。 
现代文：回到柳判官那里，柳澥对李敏求说： 不是好朋友我不能让你看到这些，我真想留你多呆一会儿，又怕耽误了你回去的大事。 
English: Returning to Judge Liu, Liu Yao said to Li Minqiu: "I'm not a good friend, I can't let you see this. I really want to keep you for a while longer, and I'm afraid I've delayed your return.

古文：握手叙别。又谓敏求曰： 此间甚难得扬州毡帽子，他日请致一枚。 
现代文：同他握手告别，又对他说： 这里很难得到扬州的毡帽，回去后请你送给我一顶。 
English: He shook hands with him and said, "It's hard to get a Yangzhou skullcap here. Please give me one when you go back."

古文：即顾谓张岸：可将一两个了事手力，兼所乘鞍马，送二郎归。不得妄引经过，恐动他生人。 
现代文：然后对张岸说： 你带一两个人，骑马送李二郎回去，不许随便乱走乱看，以免惊动他不认识的人。 
English: Then he said to Zhang Guan, "Take one or two people with you and send Li Jiro back on horseback. Don't walk around and look around, so as not to alarm people he doesn't know.

古文：敏求出至府署外，即乘所借马。马疾如风，二人引头，张岸控辔，须臾到一处，天地漆黑。张岸曰： 二郎珍重。 
现代文：李敏求走出官署的大门，骑上借来的马，马快如风，两个人在前，张岸指引方向，一会儿跑到一个地方，天地一片漆黑，张岸说： 二郎保重。 
English: Li Minqiu walked out of the gate of the government office, rode a borrowed horse, the horse was as fast as the wind, two people were in front, Zhang Guan guided the direction, and soon ran to a place, the world was pitch black, Zhang Guan said: Jiro, take care.

古文：似被推落大坑中，郎如梦觉。
现代文：李敏求觉得似乎被推落到大坑里面，随即便醒了。
English: Li Minqiu felt as if he had been pushed into a big pit, and then he woke up.

古文：于时向曙，身乃在昨宵愁坐之所。
现代文：过一会儿天亮了，自己仍然在昨天晚上坐着发愁的旅店里。
English: Moments later, it's dawn and I'm still in the same hotel where I sat worrying last night.

古文：敏求从此遂不复有举心。
现代文：李敏求从此不再有考取功名的想法。
English: From now on, Li Minqiu no longer has the idea of trying to win glory.

古文：后数月，穷饥益不堪。敏求数年前，半被伊慎诸子求为妹婿，时方以修进为己任，不然纳之。
现代文：几个月以后，贫穷饥饿处境更加困难，几年前，伊慎的几个儿子曾经请求李敏求作他们的妹夫。当时他考取功名的心切，所以没有同意。
English: A few months later, poverty and hunger became even more difficult. A few years ago, some of Yishan's sons had asked Li Min to be their brother-in-law. At that time, he was anxious to gain fame, so he did not agree.

古文：至是有人复语敏求，敏求即欣然欲之。不旬，遂成姻娶。
现代文：这时又有人对他提出这件事，李敏求很痛快地答应了，不出十几天就结婚了。
English: At this time, someone brought up the matter to him again, and Li Minqiu happily agreed, and they got married within ten days.

古文：伊氏有五女，其四皆已适人，敏求妻其小者。
现代文：伊家有五个女儿，四个早已嫁人，李敏求的妻子是最小的一个。
English: The Yi family has five daughters, four of whom are already married. Li Minqiu's wife is the youngest.

古文：其兄宰，方货城南一庄，得钱一千贯，悉将分给五妹为资装。
现代文：她的哥哥伊宰刚刚把城南的一个宅院卖了，得了一千贯钱，全都分给了五个妹妹。
English: Her brother Izai had just sold a house in the south of the city and made a thousand kroner, all of which he shared with his five younger sisters.

古文：敏求既成婚，即时领二百千。
现代文：李敏求已经结婚，便领了二百贯。
English: Li Minqiu was married and received 200 yuan.

古文：其姊四人曰： 某娘最小，李郎又贫，盍各率十千以助焉。 
现代文：四个姐姐说： 妹妹最小，李郎又穷，我们每人再拿十贯资助你们。 
English: The four sisters said, "My sister is the youngest, and Li Lang is poor. Let's each of us take another ten yuan to help you."

古文：由是敏求获钱二百四十贯无差矣。
现代文：于是李敏求正好得到了二百四十贯钱。
English: As a result, Li Minqiu got exactly 240 yuan.

古文：敏求先有别色身名，久不得调。其年，乃用此钱参选。
现代文：李敏求原来有低级官员的职务，长时间得不到升迁，这一年，就用这笔钱来参加上司选拔。
English: Li Minqiu originally had a low-level official position and could not be promoted for a long time. This year, he used this money to participate in the boss selection.

古文：三年春，授邓州向城尉。
现代文：第二年春天，被任命为邓州向城县尉。
English: In the spring of the following year, he was appointed as a lieutenant of Dengzhou Xiangcheng County.

古文：任官数月，间步县城外，坏垣蓁莽之中，见一古碑，文字磨灭不可识。
现代文：到任几个月后的一天，他没事到县城外游玩，在一片残垣废墟和荆棘丛生的地方，发现了一座古代的石碑，文字磨损得看不清了。
English: One day, a few months after he took office, he took a leisurely trip to the outskirts of the county seat. In a field of rubble and thorns, he found an ancient stone tablet, the writing worn out and no longer legible.

古文：敏求偶令涤去苔藓，细辨其题篆，云： 晋张衡碑。 因悟食禄张平子，何其昭昭欤？
现代文：李敏求叫人把上面的青苔除掉，仔细辨认，看出上面刻的篆字是： 晋张衡碑 ，因此明白了， 任职的地方是张平子 这句话是多么准确啊！
English: Li Min asked someone to remove the moss from the top, identify it carefully, and see that the inscription on it is: Jin Zhang Hengbei, so I understand, the place of office is Zhang Pingzi How accurate this sentence is!

古文：又一说：李敏求暴卒，见二黄衣人追去。至大府署，求窥之，见马植在内，披一短褐，于地铺坐吃饭，四隅尽是文书架。
现代文：还有一种说法是，李敏求突然死了，被两个穿黄衣服的人摄去，来到一座很大的官署，他悄悄往里面一看，马植在里面，穿着一件短衣服，坐在地上吃饭，屋子周围全是书架。
English: Another theory is that Li Minqiu died suddenly, was photographed by two people in yellow clothes, came to a large government office, he quietly looked inside, planted a horse inside, wore a short dress, sat on the ground to eat, and the room was surrounded by bookshelves.

古文：马公早登科名，与敏求情善。
现代文：马植早就考中进士，同李敏求的关系很好。
English: Ma Zhi was admitted to the junior high school entrance examination early, and his relationship with Li Minqiu is very good.

古文：遽入曰： 公安得在此？ 
现代文：李敏求突然进去说： 你怎么在这里？ 
English: Li Minqiu suddenly entered and said, "Why are you here?"

古文：马公惊甚，且不欲与之相见，回面向壁。
现代文：马植非常惊讶，不愿和他相认，回过头面向墙壁。
English: Ma Zhi was very surprised and did not want to identify with him. He turned his head and faced the wall.

古文：敏求曰： 必无事。 
现代文：李敏求说： 没什么事。 
English: Li Minqiu said, "It's nothing.

古文：乃坐从容。
现代文：于是马植才坐得自然了。
English: So Ma Zhi just sat there naturally.

古文：敏求曰： 此主何事？ 
现代文：李敏求问： 你这里是管什么事的？ 
English: Li Minqiu asked: What business do you have here?

古文：曰： 人所得钱物，遂岁支足。 
现代文：马植说： 人们应得的钱物，按年支付。 
English: Ma Zhe said: The money and goods that people deserve are paid on an annual basis.

古文：敏求曰： 今既得见，乃是天意，切要知一年所得如何。 
现代文：李敏求说： 今天既然见面了，就是天意，我要知道一年收入多少钱？ 
English: Li Minqiu said, "Since we are meeting today, it is God's will. I want to know how much my annual income is."

古文：马公乃为检一大叶子簿，黄纸签标，书曰， 卢弘宣年支二千贯。 开数幅，至敏求，以朱书曰， 年支三百贯，以伊宰卖宅钱充。 
现代文：马植便找到一大本帐簿，黄色的纸张，贴有标签，打开一看上面写着： 卢弘宣每年两千贯 翻过几张到李敏求，上面用朱笔写着： 年三百贯，以伊宰卖宅院的钱支付 。
English: Ma Zhi then found a large ledger, yellow paper with a label, opened it and saw that it said: Lu Hongxuan two thousand yuan a year, turned over a few sheets to Li Minqiu, and wrote on it with a red pen: three hundred yuan a year, paid with the money from the sale of houses in Izai.

古文：敏求曰： 某乙之钱簿已多矣，幸逢君子，窃欲侥求。 
现代文：李敏求说： 刚才那个人的钱够多的了，幸好碰到你，也给我添一点。 
English: Li Minqiu said, "That person's money was enough just now. Fortunately, I met you and you gave me a little more.

古文：马公曰： 三二十千即可，多即不得。 
现代文：马植说： 二三十千还可以，再多了就办不到了。 
English: Ma Zhe said: "Twenty or thirty thousand is OK, but any more than that will not do.

古文：以笔注之曰： 更三十千，以某甲等四人钱充。 
现代文：于是便用笔注： 加三十千，以某某四个人的钱支付。 
English: So he wrote: "Add thirty thousand, to be paid with the money of four people."

古文：复见老姥年六十余，乃敏求姨氏之乳母，家在江淮。
现代文：李敏求又碰到一个六十多岁的老太太，正是李敏求姨妈家的奶妈，家住在汇淮。
English: Li Minqiu also met a sixty-plus-year-old old lady, who was the wet nurse of Li Minqiu's aunt, who lived in Huahuai.

古文：见敏求喜曰： 某亦得回，知郎君与判官故旧，必为李奶看年支。 
现代文：她看见李敏求高兴地说： 我也要回去了，知道你和判官是好朋友，必须替李奶我看一看一年的收入。 
English: When she saw Li Min, she said happily, "I want to go back too. I know that you and the judge are good friends. I have to look at my annual income for Li Yong."

古文：敏求婴儿时，为李乳养，不得已却入，具言于马公。
现代文：李敏求小时候，是吃她的奶的，没有办法又走进屋，把情况讲给马植。
English: When Li Minqiu was a child, he used to drink her milk. There was no way he could go back into the house and tell Ma Zhi about the situation.

古文：令左右曰： 速检来。 
现代文：马植命令左右的人说： 快找来。 
English: Ma Zhi ordered the people around him to say: Quickly find it.

古文：大贴文书曰： 阿李年支七百。 
现代文：管理大帐簿的文书说： 李奶每年七百贯。 
English: The document on the management of large account books says: Li Yong earns seven hundred yuan a year.

古文：敏求趋出，见老奶告知，嗟怨垂泪。
现代文：李敏求立即出去，告诉了李奶，李奶流泪叹息。
English: Li Minqiu immediately went out and told Li Rong, and Li Rong shed tears and sighed.

古文：使者促李公去，行数十里，却至壕城，见一坑深黑，使者自后推之，遂觉。妻子家人，围绕啼注，云卒已两日。
现代文：这时差人催促李敏求回去，走了几十里地，来到城外的壕沟边上，坑里一片漆黑，差人在后面往前一推，李敏求醒了，他看见妻子和家里的人正围着他哭，说他已经死了两天了。
English: At this time, the policeman urged Li Min to beg to go back. He walked dozens of miles and came to the edge of the trench outside the city. The pit was pitch black. The policeman pushed forward from behind. Li Min begged to wake up. He saw his wife and family members crying around him, saying that he had been dead for two days.

古文：少顷方言，乃索纸笔细纪。
现代文：过了一会儿，李敏求才能说话，便叫人拿来纸和笔将梦中的情节详细记录下来。
English: After a while, Li Min begged to be able to speak, so he asked someone to bring paper and pen to record the details of the dream.

古文：与乡里三人，皆以敏求情厚者，同赠钱三十千，一如簿中之数。
现代文：李敏求就是伊慎的女婿，大舅哥伊宰是个军使，卖伊家的一处宅院得了二百千钱。到了年底，李敏求应得的三十千钱还没有着落。
English: Li Minqiu was Ishen's son-in-law, and his older brother Izai was a military envoy. The sale of a house belonging to the Yi family brought in 200,000 yuan. By the end of the year, Li Minqiu had yet to receive the 30,000 yuan he was due.

古文：卢弘宣在城，有人知者，为卢公话之，卢公计其俸禄，并知留后使所得钱，毕二千贯无余。李奶已流落，不在姨母之家，乞食于路。七百之数，故当箕敛，方可致焉。
现代文：偶然在街上碰到了一个老人等候任职，见了面非常高兴，共同去酒楼吃饭。一同来的另外三个人，都是李敏求在乡里时的朋友，他们一共凑了三十千钱送给李敏求，同帐簿上所写的数完全一样。卢弘宣也住在城里，有人将李敏求做梦的事告诉他。卢弘宣计算自己已经收入的钱，便知道到年底还能得多少钱，总共正好不会超过两千贯。李奶已经流落街头，不在李敏求的姨妈家里，在街上乞讨，七百贯的收入，也要一点一点地积攒，才能达到。
English: By chance, he met an old man on the street who was waiting for a job. He was very happy to meet him, and they went to a restaurant to eat together. The other three people who came with him were all friends of Li Minqiu when he was in the countryside. They collected a total of thirty thousand yuan to give to Li Minqiu, and the number written in the account book was exactly the same. Lu Hongxuan also lived in the city, and someone told him about Li Minqiu's dream. Lu Hongxuan calculated the money he had already earned and knew how much money he could still earn by the end of the year, a total of just under two thousand yuan. Li

古文：李君
现代文：李君
English: Li Jun

古文：行至昭应，曰： 某隐居，饮西岳，甚荷郎君相厚之意。
现代文：江陵副使李君当初自洛阳赴京城考取进士，走到华阴在旅店里碰到一个穿白衣服的人。李君围坐在炉子旁边喝茶，交谈得非常融洽。
English: Li Jun, the deputy envoy of Gangneung, originally went from Luoyang to Beijing to take the entrance examination. When he went to Huayin, he met a man dressed in white in the hotel. Li Jun sat around the stove and drank tea, and the conversation was very harmonious.

古文：有故，明旦先径往城中，不得奉陪也。
现代文：他们一路同行到了昭应，白衣人说： 我隐居在西岳华山，非常感谢你对我的情意。因为有事，我明天要到城里去，不能奉陪你了。
English: They went all the way to Zhaoying, and the man in white said: "I live in seclusion on Xiyue Huashan, and I am very grateful for your kindness to me. Because of something, I have to go to the city tomorrow, and I cannot accompany you.

古文：莫要知向后事否？ 
现代文：你想知道自己今后的命运吗？ 
English: Do you want to know your future destiny?

古文：君再拜恳请，乃命纸笔，于月下凡书三封。次第缄题之。  甚急则开之。 
现代文：李君作揖表示感谢和恳求。于是白衣人拿过纸笔，在月光下写了三封书信，并一一封好，然后在每一封信皮上写上： 在非常困难和危急的时候才可以打开。 写完告辞走了。
English: Li Junzhu expressed his thanks and entreaties. So the man in white took a pen and paper, wrote three letters in the moonlight, and wrote one by one, and then wrote on each letter skin: It can only be opened in very difficult and critical times. After writing his farewell, he left.

古文：乃去。五六举下第。
现代文：李君连续参加五六次科举考试都未被录取想要回家没有钱，想要住下去找不到立足之处，不得不自言自语道： 神仙哥哥的信可以打开了。 
English: Li Jun has taken five or six consecutive entrance examinations but has not been admitted. He wants to go home but has no money. He wants to live but cannot find a foothold. He had to say to himself, "I can open Shen Xian's brother's letter."

古文：遂沐浴，清旦焚香启之，曰： 某年月日，以困迫无资用，开一封。可青龙寺门前坐。 
现代文：于是沐浴更衣，在早晨点燃香，然后将第一封信拆开。信上写的是： 某年某月某日，遇到困难没有钱用，拆开第一封信，然后可以到青龙寺门前静坐等候。 
English: So he bathed and changed his clothes, lit incense in the morning, and then opened the first letter. The letter said: On a certain day of a certain month of a certain year, if you encounter difficulties and have no money, open the first letter, and then you can sit and wait in front of the gate of Qinglong Temple.

古文：见讫遂往。到已晚矣。望至昏时，不敢归。心自笑曰： 此处坐，可得钱乎？ 
现代文：李君看完信后立即赶往青龙寺，在庙门口一直坐到黄昏也不敢离开，心中暗自发笑说： 就在这儿坐着，能得到钱吗？ 
English: After reading the letter, Li Jun immediately rushed to the Qinglong Temple. He sat at the entrance of the temple until dusk and did not dare to leave. He secretly laughed and said: Just sitting here, can I get money?

古文：少顷，寺主僧领行者至，将闭门。见李君曰： 何人？ 
现代文：一会儿，庙里的方丈领着行者来关门，看见李君问： 什么人？ 
English: After a while, the abbot of the temple led the practitioners to close the door. He saw Li Jun and asked: Who are you?

古文：曰： 某驴弱居远，前去不得，将寄宿于此。 
现代文：李君说： 我的驴很瘦弱，居住的地方又远，无法走了，想在这里过夜。 
English: Li Jun said: My donkey is very thin and weak, the place where I live is far away, I can't walk, I want to spend the night here.

古文：僧曰： 门外风寒不可，且向院中。 
现代文：方丈说： 门外风大寒冷，请到院里来吧。 
English: The abbot said, "It's very cold and windy outside, please come to the courtyard.

古文：遂邀入，牵驴随之。
现代文：李君牵着驴跟着方丈走了进去。
English: Li Jun led the donkey and followed the abbot inside.

古文：具馔烹茶。
现代文：方丈请李君坐下喝茶，夜深了。
English: The abbot asked Li Jun to sit down and drink tea. It was late at night.

古文：夜艾，熟视李君，低头不语者良久。乃曰： 郎君何姓？ 曰： 姓李。 
现代文：方丈反复观察李君，又低头沉思很久，突然问道： 您姓什么？ 李君回答： 姓李。 
English: The abbot repeatedly observed Li Jun, bowed his head and pondered for a long time, and suddenly asked: What is your surname? Li Jun replied: Surname Li.

古文：僧惊曰： 松滋李长官识否？ 
现代文：方丈惊讶地又问： 松滋李大人你认识吗？ 
English: Surprised, the abbot asked, "Do you know Songzhi Li?"

古文：李君起颦蹙曰： 某先人也。 
现代文：李君站起来悲伤地说： 那是我的去世的父亲。 
English: Li Jun stood up and said sadly: That is my deceased father.

古文：僧垂泣曰： 某久故旧，适觉郎君酷似长官。然奉求已多日矣，今乃遇。 
现代文：方丈流着泪说： 他是我的老朋友，我刚才看你长得很像李大人，我找你已经很长时间了，今天恰巧碰到你。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, the abbot said, "He is an old friend of mine. Just now, I saw that you look very much like Mr. Li. I have been looking for you for a long time, and I just happened to run into you today.

古文：李君涕流被面。
现代文：李君泪流满面。
English: Li Jun burst into tears.

古文：因曰： 郎君甚贫，长官比将钱物到求官。
现代文：方丈又说： 你现在十分贫穷，李大人那时拿钱到这里谋求官职，后来出了事，将两千贯钱寄存在我这里，从那以后，我感到负担很重。
English: The abbot also said, "You are now very poor. At that time, Master Li took money and came here to seek a government post. Later, something happened, and he deposited two thousand kroner with me. Since then, I have felt a heavy burden.

古文：至此狼狈。有钱二千贯，寄在某处。
现代文：今天能够将钱交付给你，老僧这一生再没有什么值得牵挂的事了。明天你只要写个收条留下，就可以将钱取走。 
English: If I can deliver the money to you today, the old monk will have nothing to worry about for the rest of his life. Tomorrow, you just need to write a receipt and leave it, and you can take the money away.

古文：自是以来，如有重负。
现代文：李君悲喜交加，第二天早晨带着钱回去了。
English: The next morning, sad and happy, Li Jun went back with the money.

古文：今得郎君分付，老僧此生无事矣。
现代文：回去后他买了住宅住了下来，成了一个富户。
English: When he returned, he bought a house, lived there, and became a wealthy man.

古文：又三数年不第，尘土困悴，欲罢去，思曰： 乃一生之事，仙兄第二缄可以发也。 
现代文：从这以后，他又考了三年，仍然没有被录取，感到疲劳绝望，不想再考下去了。这时他想：考取功名是一个人一辈子的大事，神仙哥哥的第二封信也可以打开了。
English: After that, he took the entrance examination for another three years, but was still not admitted. He felt tired and desperate, and did not want to take the entrance examination any longer. At that time, he thought: "Taking the entrance examination for a meritorious deed is a major event in one's life. The second letter from Brother Shen Xian can also be opened."

古文：又沐浴，清旦启之，曰：某年月日，以将罢举，可开第二封， 可西市鞦辔行头坐。 
现代文：于是他又沐浴，在清晨把信拆开，上面写着： 某年某月某日，想不再参加科举考试，可以拆开第二封。可以去西市场马鞍具行旁边的酒楼。 
English: So he took another bath and opened the letter in the morning. It read: On a certain day of a certain month of a certain year, if you no longer want to take the imperial examinations, you can open a second letter. You can go to the restaurant next to the saddle shop in the West Market.

古文：见讫复往。至即登楼饮酒。
现代文：看完后，他立即赶到西市，登上酒楼喝酒。
English: After watching it, he immediately rushed to Xicheng and went to a restaurant to drink.

古文：闻其下有人言，交他郎君平明即到此，无钱，即道，元是不要钱及第。
现代文：听到楼下有人说： 叫他明天早晨就来，没有钱不行。 又一人说道： 原先考取进士是不要钱的。 
English: I heard someone downstairs say, "Tell him to come in the morning, he can't do it without money," and another person said, "Taking the entrance exam doesn't require money."

古文：李君惊而问之，客曰： 侍郎郎君有切故，要钱一千贯，致及第。
现代文：李君惊奇地问对面的人： 这是怎么回事？ 对面那人说： 侍郎的公子做了笔买卖，给他一千贯钱，保证你考中进士。
English: Li Jun asked the person across from him in surprise: What's going on? The person across from him said: The waiter's son made a deal, giving him a thousand kroner to guarantee you a place in the middle school.

古文：昨有共某期不至者，今欲去耳。 李君问曰： 此事虚实？ 
现代文：昨天有个到约定时间来取钱的，今天要将他的名字勾去。 李君问： 这件事是真的还是假的？ 
English: Yesterday, there was a crow that arrived at the appointed time to withdraw money, and today I want to remove his name.Li Jun asked: Is this matter true or false?

古文：客曰： 郎君见在楼上房内。 
现代文：那人说： 侍郎的公子就在楼上房间内。 
English: The man said, "The waiter's son is in the room upstairs.

古文：李君曰： 某是举人，亦有钱，郎君可一谒否？ 
现代文：李君说： 我是举子，也有钱，能让我见一见公子吗？ 
English: Li Jun said, "I am the eldest son, and I have money. Can you let me see my son?

古文：曰： 实如此，何故不可。 
现代文：那人说： 真是这样的，有什么不可以。 
English: The man said, "That's right, there's nothing I can do.

古文：乃却上，果见之，话言饮酒。
现代文：于是带着他见到了侍郎的公子。
English: So I took him to see the waiter's son.

古文：曰： 侍郎郎君也。
现代文：见面后他们坐下来一起喝酒。李君问： 你是侍郎的公子吗？ 
English: After meeting, they sat down to drink together. Li Jun asked: Are you the waiter's son-in-law?

古文：云，主司是亲叔父。
现代文：公子说： 主考官是我的亲叔父。 
English: He said, "The chief examiner is my own uncle."

古文：乃面定约束。
现代文：于是他们当面说定，做了这笔交易。
English: So they decided face-to-face and made the deal.

古文：明年果及第。
现代文：第二年，李君果然考中进士。
English: In the second year, Li Jun successfully passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：后官至殿中江陵副使，患心痛，少顷数绝，危迫颇甚。
现代文：做官一直做到江陵副使。一天，他突然心口痛，一会儿工夫就昏迷好几次，病情非常危险。
English: One day, he suddenly had a heart attack, and soon fell into a coma several times. His condition was very dangerous.

古文：谓妻曰： 仙师第三封可以开矣。 
现代文：他对妻子说： 神仙师傅的第三封信可以拆开了。 
English: He said to his wife, "The third letter from the Immortal Master can be opened."

古文：妻遂灌洗，开视之云： 某年月日，江陵副使忽患心痛，可处置家事。 
现代文：妻子立即洗澡洁身，然后将第三封信拆开。见上面写的是： 某年某月某日，江陵副使患心痛病，可以交待遗嘱，处理后事了。 
English: His wife immediately took a shower to clean herself, and then opened the third letter to find the following written on it: On a certain day of a certain month in a certain year, the vice-envoy of Jiangling suffered from a heart disease, and was able to submit his will and deal with the aftermath.

古文：更两日卒。
现代文：两天后李君死了。
English: Two days later, Li Jun died.

古文：马举
现代文：马举
English: Ma Hui

古文：淮南节度使马举讨庞勋，为诸道行营都虞侯。
现代文：淮南节度使马举讨伐庞勋，被朝廷封为诸道行营都虞侯。
English: The Huainan Festival made Ma hold a crusade against Pang Xun, and he was crowned by the imperial court as the "camping capital of all roads."

古文：遇大阵，有将在皂旗下，望之不入贼，使二骑斩之，骑回云： 大郎君也。 
现代文：一天遇到一场大仗，有一名将官立马在对面的旗帜下面，看到他一直不向前攻入贼兵的队伍里，马举命令两员骑马的将官去杀了他。
English: One day, when there was a big battle, one of the generals immediately rode under the opposite banner. Seeing that he had not advanced into the ranks of the bandits, he ordered two generals on horseback to kill him.

古文：举曰： 但斩其慢将，岂顾吾子。 
现代文：那员将官去了后又返了回来，对马举说： 那是大公子呀！ 马举说： 只是叫你们斩杀慢将，不管他是不是我的儿子。 
English: After the officer had gone, he came back and said to Ma Hui, "That's the grand duke!" Ma Hui said, "I just want you to kill the arrogant general, whether he is my son or not."

古文：再遣斩之，传首阵上，不移时而败贼。
现代文：又派两人返回去，杀了进军不力的军官，然后将头颅在阵前传示，不多时就将贼兵打败了。
English: He also sent two men back, killed the officer who was not strong enough to march, and then showed his head at the front of the battle, and soon defeated the robbers.

古文：后大军小衄，举落马，坠桥下而死。
现代文：后来大军遇到了小的挫折，马举落马掉到桥下摔死了。
English: Later, the large army encountered a small setback, the horse fell under the bridge and died.

古文：夜深复苏，见百余人至，云： 马仆射在此。 
现代文：半夜时苏醒过来，看见来了一百多人，其中一个人说： 马仆射在这里。 
English: When he woke up in the middle of the night, he saw that more than a hundred people had come, and one of them said: "Ma仆射 hier."

古文：一人云： 仆射左胁一骨折。 
现代文：又一人说： 仆射左胁下断了一根肋骨。 
English: Another said: "He broke one of his ribs.

古文：又一人云： 速换之。 
现代文：另一人说： 快换了。 
English: Another said: "It's about to change."

古文：又曰： 无以换之。 
现代文：回答说： 没有可以替换的。 
English: He replied: There is no substitute.

古文：又令取柳木换，遂换之。
现代文：那人命令取柳树枝换上。
English: The man ordered a willow branch to be substituted.

古文：须臾便晓，所损乃痊，并无所苦。
现代文：于是这些人给他换上柳枝肋骨。一会儿天亮了，马举的伤已经痊愈了，并且丝毫不感到疼痛。
English: So they replaced his ribs with willow branches, and by dawn, the horse's wound had healed and he felt no pain at all.

古文：及镇扬州，检校左仆射。
现代文：等到他镇守扬州时，被朝廷任命为检校左仆射。
English: When he was garrisoned in Yangzhou, he was appointed by the imperial court as a school inspector.

古文：郑延济
现代文：郑延济
English: Zheng Yanji

古文：宰相堂饭，常人多不敢食。
现代文：宰相的工作餐，一般人都不敢跟着吃。
English: Ordinary people would not dare to eat the prime minister's working meal.

古文：郑延昌在相位，一日，本厅欲食次，其弟延济来，遂与之同食。
现代文：郑延昌当宰相时，一天在办公的地点刚要吃中午饭，他的弟弟郑延济来了，于是便跟着他一块吃饭。
English: When Zheng Yanchang was the prime minister, one day he was about to have lunch at his office when his younger brother Zheng Yanji came and joined him for dinner.

古文：延济手秉饧饦，餐及数口，碗自手中坠地。遂中风痹，一夕而卒。
现代文：郑延济手拿着汤饼没吃几口，手中的碗突然掉到地上，得了中风病，不过一天就死了。
English: Zheng Yanji was holding a soup cake in his hand and hadn't taken a few bites when the bowl in his hand suddenly fell to the ground. He had a stroke, but died the next day.

古文：李生
现代文：李生
English: Li Sheng

古文：契贞先生李义范，住北邙山玄元观。
现代文：道士李义范的道号叫契贞，住在北邙山的玄云观。
English: The Taoist priest Li Yifan's Taoist name is Keizhen. He lives in Xuanyun, Beilun Mountain.

古文：咸通末，已数年矣，每入洛城徽安门内，必改服歇辔焉。
现代文：咸通末年，已经有许多年了，每次进入洛阳城的徽安门内，都必须下马更衣。
English: It has been many years since the end of Hamdang, and every time you enter the Hui'an Gate of Luoyang City, you have to dismount and change clothes.

古文：有李生者，不知何许人，年貌可五十余，与先生叙宗从之礼，揖诣其所居。
现代文：有个叫李生的，不知道原来是什么地方的人，年龄大约在五十多岁，与李义范交谈认定了堂兄弟的关系，请李义范到他的家里。
English: There was a man named Li Seng, who didn't know where he was originally from, who was about fifty years old. After talking with Li Yifan, he confirmed the relationship of cousins and invited Li Yifan to his home.

古文：有学童十数辈，生有一女一男。
现代文：他那里有十多个年幼的学生，李生自己有一男一女两个孩子，所住的房子非常简陋，吃了上顿没下顿。
English: He has more than a dozen young students there, and Li Sheng himself has a man, a woman and two children. The house he lives in is very simple, and there is nothing to eat.

古文：其居甚贫窭，日不暇给。自此先生往来，多止其学中，异常款狎。
现代文：从此李义范经常来作客，大多数到他开的学堂里，关系处得非常融洽。
English: From then on, Li Yifan often came as a guest, most of them to the school he opened, and the relationship was very harmonious.

古文：忽一夕，诣邙山，与先生为别。拥炉夜话，问其将何适也？
现代文：忽然有一天，李生来到邙山，与李义范告别，夜里坐在炉子旁边说话，李义范问李生要去什么地方？
English: Suddenly, one day, Li Sheng came to Lushan to bid farewell to Li Yifan. At night, they sat next to the stove and talked. Li Yifan asked Li Sheng where he was going.

古文：今月限既毕，不可久住。
现代文：李生说： 我这次告别是离开人间，并不是出远门。
English: Li Sheng said: My farewell this time is to leave the world, not to go far away.

古文：后三日死矣。五日，妻男葬某于此山之下，所阙者顾送终之人。比少一千钱，托道只贷之，故此相嘱，兼告别矣。 因曰： 人世用水，不过日用三五升，过此必有减福折算，切宜慎之。
现代文：我为阴曹地府做事，负责管理供应城里每户人家每天所用的水，这个月任期就满了，不能久住人间，三天后就会死了。 又说： 人间的水，一天使用不应超过三五升，超过了必然减福折寿，一定要注意。 
English: I work for the evil government, responsible for managing the supply of water used daily by every household in the city, and this month's term is over, I can't live on earth for long, I'll die in three days. He also said: Human water should not exceed three to five liters a day, exceeding the inevitable reduction of happiness and longevity, we must pay attention.

古文：问其身后生计，生曰： 妻聘执丧役夫姓王，某男后当为僧。
现代文：李义范又问他死以后，家里的生活怎么办？李生说： 妻子再嫁的人家是执丧役夫姓王，儿子长大以后当和尚。
English: Li Yifan also asked him what life at home would be like after his death. Li Sheng said: The family of a wife who remarries is the family of a deceased husband surnamed Wang, and his son will become a monk when he grows up.

古文：然其僧在江南，二年外方至，名行成。
现代文：然而他的师傅在江南，两年后才能来到这里，名字叫行成。
English: However, his master is in the south of the Yangtze River, and it will be two years before he can come here. His name is Gangcheng.

古文：未至间，且寄食观中也。 先生使令入道可乎？
现代文：行成没来的这段时间，寄居在观里。 李义范说： 便叫他学道可以吗？ 
English: During the period when he did not come, he lived as a sojourner in Guanli. Li Yifan said: Is it okay to ask him to learn the Tao?

古文：生曰： 伊是僧材，不可为道。非人力所能遣。此并阴骘品定。
现代文：李生说： 他是当和尚的材料，这不是人力所能决定的，是阴间安排的。 
English: Li Sheng said: He is the material to be a monk. This is not something that can be decided by man, it is arranged by the underworld.

古文：言讫，及晓告去。 
现代文：第二天早上，李生告辞走了。
English: The next morning, Li Sheng resigned and left.

古文：自是累阻寒雪，不入洛城。
现代文：从这天起，李义范被风雪所阻挡，五天没有去洛阳城。
English: From that day on, Li Yifan was blocked by the wind and snow and did not go to Luoyang City for five days.

古文：且五日矣，初霁，李生之妻与数辈诣先生，云： 李生谢世，今早葬于山下，欠一千钱，云尝托先生助之，故来取耳。仍将男寄先生院。 
现代文：雪后天刚放晴，李生的妻子和几个学生来找李义范说： 李生死了，今天早晨葬在山下。他生前欠了一千文钱，说是曾经拜托先生帮助偿还，所以前来取钱，然后将儿子寄养在观里。 
English: The day after the snow just cleared, Li Sheng's wife and several students came to Li Yifan and said: Li Sheng died and was buried under the mountain this morning. He owed a thousand yuan when he was alive, and said that he had asked Mr. to help him pay it back, so they came to get the money and then fostered their son in Guanli.

古文：后江南僧行成果至，宿于先生室，因以李生之男委之，行成欣然携去。云： 既承有约，当教以事业，度之为僧。 
现代文：后来江南的和尚行成果然来了，同李义范住在一起，李义范便将李生的儿子托付给他，行成很高兴地同意了，说： 既然他父亲生前就找过我，我一定教他学习经文佛法，剃度他为和尚。 
English: Later, a monk from the south of the Yangtze River came to live with Li Yifan. Li Yifan entrusted Li Sheng's son to him, and Xingcheng happily agreed, saying, "Since his father sought me out before he died, I will definitely teach him to study Buddhist scriptures and make him a monk."

古文：二岁余，行成复至，已为僧矣。诵法华经甚精熟焉。
现代文：二年以后，行成又来了，李生的儿子已经成为一名和尚，诵法华经非常精通熟练。
English: Two years later, Xingcheng came again. Li Sheng's son had become a monk and was very proficient in reciting the Lotus Sutra.

古文：初先生以道经授之，经年不能记一纸。
现代文：当初李义范教他道家经文时，一年也记不住一页。
English: At first, when Li Yifan taught him Taoist scriptures, he couldn't remember a single page for a year.

古文：人之定分，信有之焉。
现代文：相信人是有命运即定数的。
English: Believing that one's destiny is fixed.

