古文：安国之道，道任地始，地得其任则功成，地不得其任则劳而无功。
现代文：译文建立国家的途径从利用地理条件开始，地理条件能够获得利用就能成功，地理条件不能获得利用就会劳而无功。
English: The way to build a country begins with the use of geographical conditions. If the geographical conditions can be used, it will be successful. If the geographical conditions cannot be used, it will be useless.

古文：人亦如此，备不先具者无以安主，吏卒民多心不一者，皆在其将长，诸行赏罚及有治者，必出于王公。
现代文：人也是这样，不预先作好准备就无法安定国主，官吏、士兵和百姓不能同心同德，责任在于将领和官长；所有的赏赐和处罚，都应以王公的名义来确定。
English: It is the same with people. Without advance preparation, it is impossible to stabilize the sovereign. Officials, soldiers and people cannot be of the same mind. The responsibility lies with the generals and officials. All rewards and punishments should be determined in the name of the king.

古文：数使人行劳赐守边城关塞、备蛮夷之劳苦者，举其守卒之财用有余、不足，地形之当守边者，其器备常多者。
现代文：必须多次派遣使臣慰劳赏赐镇守边城、边关和边塞防备蛮夷而又劳苦的将士，并报告哪些镇守将帅的军费是有余还是不足，哪些地形应该派兵据守以及武器装备经常保持充足的将帅。
English: It is necessary to repeatedly send envoys to comfort and reward the hard-working soldiers who guard the border towns, border gates and border fortresses against barbarians, and report which town guard generals have more or less military expenditure, which terrain should be sent to defend, and which generals always maintain sufficient weapons and equipment.

古文：边县邑视其树木恶则少用，田不辟，少食，无大屋草盖，少用桑。
现代文：对于边境地区的州县城市，根据那里树木生长不好就要少用木材，土地没有开垦就要节约粮食，没有大屋和草屋的地方就要少砍桑树。
English: For the state and county cities in the border areas, according to where the trees do not grow well, it is necessary to use less wood, the land is not reclaimed, it is necessary to save grain, and where there are no large houses and grass huts, it is necessary to cut less mulberry trees.

古文：多财，民好食。
现代文：经济富裕，老百姓讲究吃喝。
English: The economy is prosperous, and the people are particular about what they eat and drink.

古文：为内牒，内行栈，置器备其上，城上吏、卒、养，皆为舍道内，各当其隔部。养什二人，为符者曰养吏一人，辨护诸门。门者及有守禁者皆无令无事者得稽留止其旁，不从令者戮。
现代文：城内要构筑矮墙和行栈，城墙上要装置武器装备，守城的头目、士兵、炊事人员都要在城内各自的所属营区驻扎每十个人一个炊事员，掌管符信凭证的养吏一人，监察守护各城门，不允许无公事的人在守门人以及担任警察任务的人旁边逗留，不听从命令的人可以杀掉。
English: In the city, a low wall and a post should be built, weapons and equipment should be installed on the city wall, the head of the city guard, soldiers, and cooks should be stationed in their respective camps in the city, one cook for every ten people, one keeper in charge of letters and certificates, monitoring and guarding each gate, not allowing people who are not on duty to stay next to the gatekeepers and those who are on police duty, and those who do not follow orders can be killed.

古文：敌人但至，千丈之城，必郭迎之，主人利。不尽千丈者勿迎也，视敌之居曲众少而应之，此守城之大体也。
现代文：每当敌人攻来，城邑在千丈以上的大城，一定要在城市郊区迎战敌人，守城一方才有利；城邑不够千丈的中小城市，不要出城迎敌，但要根据敌人的多少灵活应战，这些都是防守城池的大体原则。
English: Whenever the enemy attacks a large city with more than a thousand towns, it is necessary to meet the enemy on the outskirts of the city, so that the defending side will have an advantage; small and medium-sized cities with less than a thousand towns should not go out to meet the enemy, but should flexibly respond to the enemy according to the number of enemies. These are the general principles of defending the city.

古文：其不在此中者，皆心术与人事参之。
现代文：以上没有提到的，就根据心术智谋和人事策划参照处理。
English: If it is not mentioned above, it will be handled with reference to mental skill and personnel planning.

古文：凡守城者以亟伤敌为上，其延日持久以待救之至，不明于守者也，不能此，乃能守城。
现代文：所有守城的一方都应以迅速歼灭敌人为上策，如果拖延持久，等到敌人的援兵到来，这是不懂得守城的方法。能懂得这些道理才能守城。
English: The best policy of all defenders of the city should be to destroy the enemy quickly. If the delay is long, and the enemy's reinforcements arrive, this is a way of not knowing how to defend the city. If you can understand these principles, you can defend the city.

古文：守城之法，敌去邑百里以上，城将如今尽召五官及百长，以富人重室之亲，舍之官府，谨令信人守卫之，谨密为故。
现代文：守城的方法还有：敌人在离城百里之外的时候，守城将领就要把所有的官吏、小军官以及富人、贵戚的亲眷全部集中起来住到官府，谨慎地派可靠的部下保卫他们，越谨慎机密越好。
English: There is another way to defend the city: when the enemy is a hundred miles away from the city, the general guarding the city must gather all the officials, petty officers and relatives of the rich and noble to live in the government office, and carefully send reliable subordinates to protect them. The more careful and confidential, the better.

古文：及傅城，守城将营无下三百人。四面四门之将，必选择之有功劳之臣及死事之后重者，从卒各百人。
现代文：等到敌人开始爬城墙强攻的时候，守城将领所在的兵营不得少于五百人，东西南北四个城门的将领一定要选择立过军功，以及为君王和国事效过死力而获得荣誉和官职的人担任，每人带兵一百人。
English: When the enemy begins to climb the city wall and attack, the garrison commander must have no less than five hundred soldiers. The generals of the four gates of the city, east, west, north and south, must choose those who have served in the military, and those who have received honors and official positions for the king and national affairs, each with one hundred soldiers.

古文：门将并守他门，他门之上，必夹为高楼，使善射者居焉。女郭、冯垣一人。一人守之，使重室子。
现代文：每一方城门的将领如果兼守其他城门，就必须在另一城门上建立起高楼，派善于射箭的士卒守在那里，城上矮墙、冯垣一个一个排列起士兵守护着。让贵家子弟来守。
English: If the generals of each side of the gate also guard the other gates, they must first build a tall building on the other gate, send soldiers who are good at archery to guard there, and guard the low walls and Fengqi on the castle one by one. Let the children of your family guard.

古文：五十步一击。因城中里为八部，部一吏，吏各从四人，以行冲术及里中。
现代文：每五十步建置一个贮藏兵器的 隔 ，按照城中街巷分为八部，每部设置一个头目，每个头目带领四人，在城中要道和街巷中巡逻。
English: Every fifty paces, a storage area for weapons will be built, divided into eight sections according to the streets and lanes in the city. Each section will have a leader, and each leader will lead four people to patrol the main roads and streets in the city.

古文：里中父老小不举守之事及会计者，分里以为四部，部一长，以苛往来不以时行、行而不他异者，以得其奸。
现代文：街巷中老年人、少年人等没有参与守城的人和管理财物出入的人，按街巷分为四部，每部设一首领，让他们盘查来往行人中那些不按规定时间来往或有异常举动的人，以便及时发现和捉拿奸细。
English: The elderly, young people, and others in the streets and alleys who are not involved in the defense of the city and the management of people entering and leaving the property are divided into four parts according to the streets and alleys, and a leader is set up in each part, so that they can investigate the pedestrians who do not go according to the specified time or those who behave abnormally, so as to find and catch the spies in time.

古文：吏从卒四人以上有分者，大将必与为信符；大将使人行守操信符，信不合及号不相应者，伯长以上辄止之，以闻大将。
现代文：带士兵四人以上的头目去执行守城任务，大将一定要给予信符作为凭证；大将派人巡查守卫情况之时，拿有大将给的信符，对信符不合及口号不相应的人，伯和长以上官吏就一律把这种人扣押起来，并报告大将。
English: If the commander of more than four soldiers is to carry out the task of guarding the city, the general must give him a letter of credence as a proof; when the general sends someone to inspect the guarding situation, if there is a letter of credence given by the general, if the letter of credence does not match and the slogan does not match, the officials above the rank of major and above will all detain such people and report to the general.

古文：当止不止及从吏卒纵之，皆斩。
现代文：应当扣押而不扣押，以及头目或士兵把人放跑了的，一律斩首。
English: Those who should have been detained but were not, and the ringleaders or soldiers who let them go, should all be beheaded.

古文：诸有罪自死罪以上，皆遝父母、妻子同产。
现代文：凡是触犯刑律犯有死罪以上的人，他们的父母、妻子儿女和兄弟都要抓起来。
English: Anyone who breaks the law and commits a crime punishable by death or worse will have their parents, wives, children and brothers arrested.

古文：诸男女有守于城上者，什六弩、四兵。丁女子、老少，人一矛。
现代文：在城上防守的男子，每十人中，六人拿弓箭，其余四人拿其他兵器；参加防卫的女子、老人和少年每人执一矛。
English: Of every ten men who defended the city, six carried bows and arrows, and the remaining four carried other weapons; the women, old men, and boys who took part in the defense each held a spear.

古文：卒有惊事，中军疾击鼓者三，城上道路、里中巷街，皆无得行，行者斩。女子到大军，令行者男子行左，女子行右，无并行。
现代文：突然间有紧急事情，中军赶快击鼓三次，城上道路、城内街巷都要禁止通行，擅自通行的人要杀掉，女子参与大军行动时，男子走左边，女子走右边，不许并排一起行走。
English: Suddenly there is an emergency, the Chinese army quickly beats the drum three times, the roads on the city and the streets and alleys within the city are prohibited from passing, and those who pass without permission are to be killed. When women participate in large-scale military operations, men go to the left, women go to the right, and they are not allowed to walk side by side.

古文：皆就其守，不从令者斩。
现代文：所有军民都要坚守各自的岗位，不听从命令的要杀掉。
English: All soldiers and civilians must stick to their posts, and those who disobey orders must be killed.

古文：离守者三日而一徇，而所以备奸也。
现代文：对擅自离开防守岗位的要三天查询一次，以防止作弊。
English: For those who leave the defensive post without permission, they should be investigated once every three days to prevent cheating.

古文：里正与皆守宿里门，吏行其部，至里门，正与开门内吏，与行父老之守及穷巷幽间无人之处。
现代文：街坊里正和居民中的年长的人都要守护各街巷进出口，部吏巡行到他的划分的地方，到进出口，里正开门接待部吏，陪同巡查各居民父老所守的岗位和小巷中偏僻无人的地方。
English: Neighborhood residents and the elderly among the residents should guard the entrances and exits of all streets and alleys, and the officials should patrol to the places designated by him. At the entrances and exits, the neighborhoods should open the doors to receive the officials, and accompany the inspection of the posts guarded by the parents and elders of the residents and the remote and deserted places in the alleys.

古文：奸民之所谋为外心，罪车裂。
现代文：生有外心、图谋通敌的奸民，处以车裂刑法杀掉。
English: Treacherous people who have ulterior motives and conspire to collaborate with the enemy will be killed under the criminal law of car-splitting.

古文：正与父老及吏主部者，不得，皆斩；得之，除，又赏之黄金，人二镒。
现代文：街坊里正和负责守护街巷的居民以及负责这一地方的部吏，没有预先发觉和抓获图谋通敌的人，一律处以死刑，如果能及时发现和抓获，免罪之外，每人还得到赏金四十八两。
English: The residents of the neighborhood and those in charge of guarding the streets, as well as the officials in charge of this place, who did not discover and capture the conspirators in advance, were all sentenced to death. If they could be discovered and captured in time, they were exonerated, and each person also received a bounty of 48 taels.

古文：大将使使人行守，长夜五循行，短夜三循行。
现代文：大将派亲信巡查每一个防守区域，夜长时每晚巡查五次，夜短时每晚巡查三次。
English: The general sent his cronies to inspect every defensive area, inspecting five times a night during the night, and three times a night during the night.

古文：四面之吏亦皆自行其守，如大将之行，不从令者斩。
现代文：防守四方的将领都要像大将一样巡查各自的区域，不执行命令的斩首。
English: The generals of the four defensive sides should inspect their respective areas like generals, and behead those who do not carry out orders.

古文：诸灶必为屏，火突高出屋四尺。慎无敢失火，失火者斩其端，失火以为事者车裂。伍人不得，斩；得之，除。救火者无敢喧哗，及离守绝巷救火者斩。
现代文：所有炉灶一定要砌上防火的屏围，烟囱要比屋顶高出四尺，小心慎重不要失火，第一次失火的人要杀掉，故意失火捣乱的人，用车裂的刑法处死，邻居不举报或不抓住纵火的人也要杀掉；如果能抓住就免于处罚。救火的人
English: All stoves must be covered with fireproof screens, chimneys must be four feet higher than the roof, be careful not to misfire, kill the person who misfires for the first time, kill the person who deliberately misfires and disturbs others, use the criminal law of car-breaking to kill, kill the person who does not report or catch the arson; if you can catch it, you will be exempt from punishment.

古文：其正及父老有守此巷中部吏，皆得救之，部吏亟令人谒之大将，大将使信人将左右救之，部吏失不言者斩。
现代文：不许大声喊叫，如果故意大声喊叫以及擅自离开防守岗位去街巷救火的人，也要杀掉。失火地区的里正和居民，以及防守这一地方的部吏都要救火，部吏迅速派人报告大将，大将派遣亲信率领部下去救火。部吏隐瞒不向大将报告，也要杀掉。
English: Do not shout loudly. If you deliberately shout loudly and leave the defensive post to fight the fire in the streets without authorization, you will also be killed. The villagers and residents in the fire area, as well as the officials defending this place, must fight the fire. The officials quickly send someone to report to the general. The general sends his relatives to lead the department to fight the fire. If the officials hide and do not report to the general, they will also be killed.

古文：诸女子有死罪及坐失火皆无有所失，逮其以火为乱事者如法。
现代文：女子犯有死罪，因失火犯罪但并没有损害别人，以纵火捣乱罪论处。
English: The woman was found guilty of the capital crime of starting a fire without harming others, and was sentenced for the crime of arson.

古文：围城之重禁，敌人卒而至，严令吏命无敢喧嚣、三最、进行、相视坐泣、流涕若视、举手相探、相指、相呼、相麾、相踵、相投、相击、相靡以身及衣、讼驳言语。
现代文：城邑被敌人围困，最重的禁令是：敌人突然来到，要严厉禁止官吏和百姓大声喊叫，不准三人以上聚集一堆，或两人以上一起奔跑、相视哭泣、对面流泪、打手势探问、互相指手划脚、互相呼唤、你拉我扯、互相斗殴撕打、互相争辩，以及擅自察看敌人动静，否则一律处以死刑。
English: Towns and cities are besieged by the enemy. The most serious prohibition is: the enemy comes suddenly. Officials and people are strictly forbidden to shout loudly, more than three people are not allowed to gather in a pile, or more than two people are not allowed to run together, look at each other and cry, shed tears on the opposite side, make gestures and inquire, point fingers at each other, call each other, pull each other, fight and tear each other, argue with each other, and watch the enemy's movements without permission. Otherwise, they will all be sentenced to death.

古文：及非令也而视敌动移者，斩。
现代文：同在一起的人不能及时制止和报告，斩首；能及时报告和制止的，免罪。
English: Those who are together and cannot stop and report in time will be beheaded; those who can report and stop in time will be exonerated.

古文：伍人不得，斩；得之，除。伍人逾城归敌，伍人不得，斩；与伯归敌，队吏斩；与吏归敌，队将斩。
现代文：同伴中有人翻越城墙投敌，同伴没有及时抓住，斩首；伯长叛变投敌，队吏要斩首；队吏叛变投敌，队将要斩首。
English: One of his companions climbed over the city wall and joined the enemy, but his companion did not catch him in time and beheaded him; the captain of the guard mutinied and joined the enemy, and the officers of the guard were to be beheaded; the officers of the guard mutinied and joined the enemy, and the officers of the guard were to be beheaded.

古文：归敌者父母、妻子同产，皆车裂。
现代文：叛变投敌的人，他的父母、妻子、儿女、兄弟都要处以车裂死刑。
English: If anyone rebels and joins the enemy, his father, mother, wife, children, and brothers are to be put to death by the sword.

古文：先觉之，除。
现代文：如果事先发觉而未投敌的，免罪。
English: If it is discovered in advance and they do not join the enemy, they will be exonerated.

古文：当术需敌。离地，斩。伍人不得，斩；得之，除。
现代文：因害怕敌人而临阵脱逃的，斩首；同在一起的人不能发现制止的，斩首；能及时发现和制止的，免罪。
English: Those who fled in fear of the enemy will be beheaded; those who were together and could not find a way to stop the attack will be beheaded; those who were able to find and stop the attack in time will be exonerated.

古文：其疾斗却敌于术，敌下终不能复上，疾斗者队二人，赐上奉。
现代文：迅速战斗击溃了敌人，并使敌人败退后不能再次组织进攻的队伍，每队选出二名勇猛杀敌的士兵，给予最高的奖赏。
English: The team that defeats the enemy in a quick battle and cannot organize an attack again after the enemy retreats, each team selects two soldiers who bravely kill the enemy and gives the highest reward.

古文：而胜围，城周里以上，封城将三十里地为关内侯，辅将如令赐上卿，丞及吏比于丞者，赐爵五大夫，官吏、豪杰与计坚守者，十人及城上吏比五官者，皆赐公乘。
现代文：而打败敌人，冲破敌人围城的队伍，使敌人离开城邑一里以上，封守城将为关内侯，赏赐土地三十里；副将按规定赐给上卿的官职，丞、吏以及原来官职相当于丞的人赐给五大夫的官爵，其他官吏、豪杰参与谋划坚守城邑的、士人和城上那些原来官职相当于五官的，都赐给公乘官位。
English: In order to defeat the enemy, break through the enemy's siege line, and make the enemy leave the city more than one mile, the castle will be guarded by Guan Nei Hou and awarded 30 miles of land; the vice-commander will be given to the official position of Shangqing according to the regulations, the jo, officials and people with the original official position equivalent to jo will be given to the five great men's official rank, and other officials and heroes who participate in the plan to firmly defend the city, the nobles and those on the city with the original official position equivalent to the five officials will be given to the official rank.

古文：男子有守者爵，人二级，女子赐钱五千，男女老小先分守者，人赐钱千，复之三岁，无有所与，不租税。
现代文：参与守城的男子赐给爵位，每人升二级，女子赏钱五千，其余不分男女老少参与防守的，不赐予官爵每人赏钱一千，免除三年赋税。
English: The men who participated in the defense of the city were given a knighthood, and each was promoted to the second level, the women were awarded five thousand, and the rest, regardless of men, women, and children participating in the defense, were not awarded a thousand each, and were exempted from three years of taxation.

古文：此所以劝吏民坚守胜围也。
现代文：这些都是用以鼓励官吏和百姓坚守城池，打败敌人解除围困的措施。
English: These are all measures to encourage officials and citizens to hold fast to the castle, defeat the enemy and lift the siege.

古文：吏卒侍大门中者，曹无过二人。勇敢为前行，伍坐，令各知其左右前后。
现代文：守卫守城主将官署大门的头目和士兵，每班岗不要多于两人，卫兵中勇敢的在前行，根据队、伍排列，让他们知道各自的左右前后是谁。
English: The leader and soldiers of the gate guarding the gate of the mayor's office should not be more than two people in each shift. The brave guards should go ahead and be arranged according to the team and the troop, so that they know who they are.

古文：擅离署，戮。
现代文：擅自离开官署的人，杀掉。
English: Anyone who leaves the office without permission will be killed.

古文：门尉昼三阅之，莫，鼓击门闭一阅，守时令人参之，上逋者名。
现代文：门尉每天白天点名三次，晚上击鼓关门后再点名一次，守将随时派人检查巡察，记上擅自离开岗位人的姓名。
English: The doorkeepers call out names three times a day during the day, and once more in the evening after the drumming closes the door. The guard will send someone to check and inspect at any time, and write down the names of those who leave the post without permission.

古文：铺食皆于署，不得外食。
现代文：早晚两餐都在官署吃饭，不许在外面吃饭。
English: Both morning and evening meals are eaten at the government office, and eating outside is not allowed.

古文：守必谨微察视谒者、执盾、中涓及妇人侍前者志意、颜色、使令、言语之请。
现代文：守将一定要谨慎、细致地暗中观察侍从中的谒者、执盾、中涓以及料理日常生活的妇人等人的思想、心理、脸色、动作和言语的情况。
English: The guard must carefully and meticulously observe the thoughts, psychology, facial expressions, movements, and speech of the attendants, such as the eunuch, the shield-bearer, the eunuch, and the woman who cooks daily life.

古文：及上饮食，必令人尝，皆非请也，击而请故。
现代文：每次端上饮食，一定要先叫人尝一尝再吃。
English: Every time you serve food, you must first ask people to taste it before eating it.

古文：守有所不说谒者、执盾、中涓及妇人侍前者，守曰断之、冲之若缚之，不如令及后缚者，皆断。
现代文：若有异常情况，就立即抓起来予以盘问。守城主将对身边侍从中的谒者、执盾、中涓及料理日常生活的妇人有不满意的，就可下令杀掉，殴打或者捆绑他们，其他侍从不执行命令的或行动迟缓的，都要给予处罚。
English: If there are any unusual circumstances, they will be immediately arrested and interrogated. If the lord of the castle is not satisfied with the attendants around him, such as the bearer of the shield, the middle crossbow and the woman who cooks daily life, he can order them to be killed, beaten or tied up. Other attendants who do not carry out orders or who are slow to act will be punished.

古文：必时素诫之。
现代文：这些务必时时告诫他们。
English: They must be constantly reminded of this.

古文：诸门下朝夕立若坐，各令以年少长相次，旦夕就位，先佑有功有能，其余皆以次立。
现代文：所有官署门前负责早晚警卫的人员，有的站有的坐，分别以年龄大小为次序，早晚值勤时，有功劳和能耐的，居先站上位或坐上座，其余则按次序站坐。
English: The personnel responsible for the morning and evening guards in front of all government offices, some standing and some sitting, respectively, in order of age. When on duty in the morning and evening, those with merit and ability should stand or sit in the first place, and the rest should stand and sit in order.

古文：五日，官各上喜戏、居处不庄、好侵侮人者一。
现代文：官长每隔五天，将那些嬉戏不庄重，喜欢侵犯欺侮别人的卫兵的情况分别予以上报。
English: Every five days, officials will separately report the status of those guards who play undignified, like to encroach and bully others.

古文：诸人士外使者来，必令有以执。
现代文：所有人士、外来使者入城，一定要拿出凭证。
English: All persons and foreign envoys entering the city must produce a certificate.

古文：将出而还若行县，必使信人先戒舍，室乃出迎，门守，乃入舍。
现代文：将领外出归来和巡行回来，一定要先派人告知其家属，家属才出来迎接，再向守城主将报告后才返回自家。
English: When generals go out and return, and when they return from a parade, they must first send someone to inform their family members, and then the family members will come out to welcome them, and then they will return to their home after reporting to the lord of the castle.

古文：为人下者常司上之，随而行，松上不随下。
现代文：作为下级要经常体察上级，上级须去哪儿，都要跟随一起去。
English: As a subordinate, you should always observe your superiors. Wherever your superiors need to go, you should follow them.

古文：必须□□随。
现代文：下级须跟从上级，上级却不必跟从下级。
English: The inferior must follow the superior, but the superior does not have to follow the inferior.

古文：客卒守主人，及以为守卫，主人亦守客卒。
现代文：外来士卒为主人防守及为主人担任守卫，主人也要防备外来士卒。
English: Foreign soldiers defend the master and guard the master, and the master must also guard the foreign soldiers.

古文：城中戍卒，其邑或以下寇，谨备之，数录其署，同邑者弗令共所守。
现代文：担负城中防卫任务的外来兵卒，假如他们原来所在城邑已被敌人攻陷，尤其要戎备他们，要反复核查他们的名册，不要让同属一个城的人共同防守一处地方。
English: Foreign soldiers who are responsible for the defense of the city, if their original cities have been captured by the enemy, should be especially equipped, their rosters should be repeatedly checked, and people who belong to the same city should not be allowed to jointly defend a place.

古文：若城上者，衣服，他不如令者。宿鼓在守大门中。
现代文：城上掌查台阶的守卫军吏要严格检查凭证，凭证相合才能进入，并慰劳之；凭证不合者，就将其扣留，并报知守城主将。晚上时，大鼓设置在主将的大门之内。
English: The military officers guarding the steps of the castle should strictly check the credentials. If the credentials match, they can enter and comfort them; if the credentials do not match, they will be detained and reported to the commander of the castle. In the evening, the big drum is set up inside the commander's gate.

古文：莫令骑若使者操节闭城者，皆以执毚。
现代文：在黄昏时，派出骑兵和使者拿着命符去传令关闭城门，使者必须手执令牌。
English: At dusk, send out horsemen and messengers with tokens to close the gates. The messengers must hold the tokens.

古文：昏鼓，鼓十，诸门亭皆闭之。行者断，必击问行故，乃行其罪。
现代文：黄昏时刻以鼓为号令，击鼓十下，所有城门路亭一律关闭，不让通行，对要通行者要先抓起来问明要通行的原因后再按罪行事。
English: At dusk, the drum is used as a signal, the drum beats ten times, all city gates and road pavilions are closed, and no traffic is allowed. For those who want to pass, they must first be arrested and asked why they want to pass, and then according to the crime.

古文：晨见，掌文鼓，纵行者，诸城门吏各入请籥，开门已，辄复上籥。
现代文：早晨时，打响大鼓放行，所有管城门的官吏自官署拿出钥匙，开完门后再交还钥匙。
English: In the morning, a big drum was played to let everyone go. All officials in charge of the city gate took out the key from the government office, opened the door and then handed back the key.

古文：有符节不用此令。
现代文：有特别符节凭信的人不在此禁之列。
English: People who have special certificates are not included in this ban.

古文：寇至，楼鼓五，有周鼓，杂小鼓乃应之。
现代文：敌人前来进攻，城楼上击鼓五次，又向四周击鼓，有小鼓应和，表示各营队已响应城鼓。
English: When the enemy came to attack, they beat the drums five times on the castle tower, and they beat the drums all around, and there were small drums to match, indicating that each battalion had responded to the castle drums.

古文：小鼓五后众军，断。
现代文：小鼓响了五下之后才集合的，斩首。
English: After five beats of the snare drum, they gathered for the finale, "Beheading."

古文：命必足畏，赏必足利，令必行，令出辄人随，省其可行、不行。
现代文：有令必行，同时，号令一发出，立即派人随着省察号令可行与否。
English: Some orders must be carried out. At the same time, as soon as the order is issued, immediately send someone to check whether the order is feasible or not.

古文：号，夕有号，失号，断。
现代文：口号要注意，夜晚有联络的口号，口号不合的，处斩。
English: Slogans should pay attention to, the night has a slogan of contact, slogans do not match, beheading.

古文：为守备程而署之曰某程，置署街街衢阶若门，令往来者皆视而放。
现代文：制定戒严章程题上标题就称 某某章程 ，在街道，大路台阶和城门上张帖公布，使往来行人都能看到从而照章行事。
English: The enactment of martial law regulations, with the title of "so-and-so regulations," was posted on streets, boulevard steps and city gates, so that pedestrians could see and act according to regulations.

古文：诸吏卒民有谋杀伤其将长者，与谋反同罪，有能捕告，赐黄金二十斤，谨罪。
现代文：所有那些谋杀和伤害自己上级的官兵和百姓，一律按谋反罪处置；若能捉拿到谋杀长官之人者，赏金二十斤，并可免除处罚。
English: All those officers, soldiers and civilians who murder and injure their superiors will be dealt with according to the crime of conspiracy; if they can catch the person who murdered the superior, they will receive a reward of twenty pounds and may be exempted from punishment.

古文：非其分职而擅取之，若非其所当治而擅治为之，断。
现代文：越出职权范围擅自乱拿乱取，和滥用职权办非法之事的，砍头。
English: Those who go beyond the scope of their duties, take things arbitrarily, and abuse their powers to do illegal things, will be beheaded.

古文：诸吏卒民非其部界而擅入他部界，辄收以属都司空若侯，侯以闻守，不收而擅纵之，断。
现代文：一切擅自闯入其它区域的官吏、士兵和百姓，都要由所在的都司空和侯将其拘留，由侯报告守将；不将其拘留而擅自放人的，杀头。
English: All officials, soldiers and common people who intrude into other regions without authorization shall be detained by the prefectural governor and the county where they are located, and reported to the commander by the county; if they release people without authorization without detaining them, they shall be beheaded.

古文：能捕得谋反、卖城、逾城敌者一人。以令为除死罪二人，城旦四人。
现代文：能捉拿一个谋反、出卖本城军政机密或越墙投敌的人，给予特权凭证，将来可以赦免两次死罪或判城旦罪四次。
English: If they can catch a person who plots rebellion, betrays the city's military and political secrets, or crosses the wall to join the enemy, they will be given a privilege certificate, and in the future they can be pardoned twice for the death penalty or sentenced to death four times.

古文：反城事父母去者，去者之父母妻子。
现代文：翻越城墙抛弃父母离开的，该人的父母、妻子、儿女
English: If a man leave his father or his mother, and go over the wall, his father, and his mother, and his wife, and his children,

古文：悉举民室材木、瓦若蔺石数，署长短小大。
现代文：全数查报百姓家的木材、砖瓦、石头等物的数目，登记其长短和大小。
English: The total number of timber, bricks, stones and other objects in people's homes should be reported, and their length and size should be recorded.

古文：当举不举，吏有罪。
现代文：应查报而没有查报的，官吏问罪。
English: If the report should be investigated but is not investigated, the official shall be convicted.

古文：诸卒民居城上者各葆其左右，左右有罪而不智也，其次伍有罪。
现代文：所有居住在城里的官吏、士兵和百姓，要同他们的邻居结成联保联防，邻居犯罪而不知也有罪。
English: All officials, soldiers and people living in the city should form a joint security and joint defense with their neighbors. Neighbors are guilty of crimes without knowing it.

古文：若能身捕罪人若告之吏，皆构之。
现代文：如能亲自捉拿住犯罪人或将其报告给官府，都予以奖赏。
English: If they can catch the criminals themselves or report them to the authorities, they will be rewarded.

古文：若非伍而先知他伍之罪，皆倍其构赏。
现代文：不是联保联防内部的却了解到该联保组的犯罪活动而报告给有关官吏，都加倍给予奖赏。
English: Non-UNPROFOR personnel who learned about the criminal activities of the UNPROFOR unit and reported it to the relevant officials were rewarded twice as much.

古文：城外令任，城内守任。
现代文： 令 负责城外守卫任务，守城主将担任城内的防守职责。
English: He will be responsible for guarding the outside of the city, while the lord of the castle will be in charge of the defense inside the city.

古文：令、丞、尉亡得入当，满十人以上，令、丞、尉夺爵各二级；百人以上，令、丞、尉免，以卒戍。
现代文：令、丞、尉等官，其部下有人逃跑，如果抓回俘虏的人数与逃兵数相当，那么功罪可以两消；逃兵数超过所俘敌兵数十个的，令、丞、尉各减爵位两级；逃兵数超过所俘敌兵数一百的，令、丞、尉就须被撤职罢官，充作兵士，担负防守。
English: If the number of prisoners recaptured is equal to the number of deserters, then the merits and demerits can be eliminated. If the number of deserters exceeds the number of captured enemy soldiers by dozens, the commander, the second-in-command, and the second-in-command will each be reduced by two ranks; if the number of deserters exceeds the number of captured enemy soldiers by one hundred, the commander, the second-in-command, and the second-in-command will have to be removed from their posts and dismissed, and will serve as soldiers and take on the defense.

古文：诸取当者，必取寇虏听之。
现代文：抓来抵挡罪过的一定要是从敌军抓来的俘虏才算数。
English: Those arrested for resisting arrest must be prisoners captured from the enemy.

古文：募民欲财物粟米以贸易凡器者，卒以贾予。
现代文：征募百姓的财物和粟米的，如百姓想交换种种器具，可按平价予以交换。
English: If the people want to exchange all kinds of equipment, they can exchange it at a fair price.

古文：邑人知识、昆弟有罪，虽不在县中而欲为赎，若以粟米、钱金、布帛、他财物免出者，令许之。传言者十步一人，稽留言及乏传者，断。
现代文：城里居民的朋友或相识、兄弟有罪的，即便他们不在本城内但想用粟米物财赎罪出去的，法令都许可。上下传话的人员如此安排：每隔十步派一人，滞留或失职没传达到话的，要杀头。
English: The friends, acquaintances, and brothers of the townspeople who were guilty, even if they were not in the town but wanted to go out to atone for their sins with their corn and property, were permitted by the law. The people who sent messages up and down arranged it this way: one person was sent every ten paces, and anyone who stayed behind or failed in his duty and did not deliver the message was to be beheaded.

古文：诸可以便事者，亟以疏传言守。
现代文：凡是可以便利办的事情应赶紧用书面向守城主将报告。
English: Anything that can be done easily should be reported in writing to the lord of the castle.

古文：吏卒民欲言事者，亟为传言请之吏，稽留不言诸者，断。
现代文：官吏、兵士和百姓有要向上进言的，紧急通过传言人报知，官吏滞流或不代为传达的，要问杀罪。
English: If officials, soldiers and common people have something to say to the higher-ups, they should report it urgently through a messenger. If officials are slow to communicate or do not do so on their behalf, they should be charged with murder.

古文：县各上其县中豪杰若谋士、居大夫重厚，口数多少。
现代文：各县的豪杰、谋士、在家居住的大夫官员及人品忠厚的百姓人数，各县都要统计上报。
English: The number of heroes, counselors, doctors and officials living at home and people with loyal character in each county should be reported by each county.

古文：官府城下吏、卒、民家前后左右相传保火。
现代文：官府、城下官吏、士兵和百姓都要参加左邻右舍的火灾联防。
English: Government offices, local officials, soldiers and ordinary people should all participate in the fire joint defense of the left and right neighbors.

古文：火发自燔，燔曼延燔人，断。
现代文：失火烧了自家或漫延到了别人的家，都要判罪。
English: If a fire breaks out in your own home or spreads to someone else's, you will be found guilty.

古文：诸以众强凌弱少及人妇女，以喧哗者，皆断。诸以众强凌弱少及人妇女，以喧哗者，皆断。
现代文：凡是仗势以强凌弱和妇女的，喧哗打闹的，或擅自跑上城墙以及不按规定着装的，都一律交官府定罪惩罚。
English: Anyone who uses force to bully the weak and women, who is noisy and quarrelsome, or who runs up the city wall without permission and does not dress according to regulations, will all be convicted and punished by the government.

古文：诸城门若亭，谨侯视往来行者符。
现代文：在各个城门和路亭，都要严格检查往来行人的凭证。
English: Passports of pedestrians are to be strictly checked at all city gates and kiosks.

古文：符传疑若无符，皆诣县廷言，请问其所使；其有符传者，善舍官府。其有知识、兄弟欲见之，为召，勿令里巷中。
现代文：凭证有问题和没有凭证的，要送到县廷，查问他们系谁派来。往来人中有凭证的妥善安排其住在官府，他们想要会见兄弟朋友，就替他们传呼召来，不能让他们自己进入城中街巷。
English: If there is a problem with the credentials and there is no credential, they should be sent to the county court to inquire who sent them. If there is a credential among the visitors, they should properly arrange to live in the government office. If they want to meet their brothers and friends, they should summon them for them, and they should not let them enter the streets of the city by themselves.

古文：三老、守闾令厉缮夫为荅。若他以事者、微者，不得入里中。
现代文：如果他们想见城中三老、守闾等有身份的人，可以让三老、守闾先委托家中仆役代替应召来官舍相见。其他有事的人及职位低下者都不得擅自进入街巷之中。
English: If they want to meet the senior officials such as the three elders and the mayor, they can ask the elders and the mayor to entrust their servants to come to the official residence to meet them. Other people who are in trouble and those who have a lower position are not allowed to enter the streets without permission.

古文：三老不得入家人。
现代文：三老不能进入一般民众家里。
English: They cannot enter the homes of the general public for three years.

古文：传令里中有以羽，羽者三所差，家人各令其官中，失令若稽留令者，断。
现代文：须向街巷传令就用羽书，羽
English: If you have to send a message to the streets, use feathers, feathers

古文：家有守者治食。
现代文：书收在三老家中。
English: The books were collected at the home of three elderly people.

古文：吏、卒、民无符节而擅入里巷、官府，吏、三老、守闾者失苛止。
现代文：向一般民众传令就直接传到他们家去，失职没有传送或延迟命令的，要砍头。三老家中有看家的备办吃的。对于官吏、兵士和百姓擅自进入里巷和官府而没有凭证的，如有关官吏、三老以及守门者没有及时盘问和制止，都要定罪。
English: For ordinary people, the order will be sent directly to their homes. Those who fail to send or delay the order will have their heads cut off. In the Three Elders' home, there is a caretaker to prepare food. For officials, soldiers and ordinary people who enter the alleys and government offices without documents, if the relevant officials, the Three Elders and the gatekeepers do not interrogate and stop them in time, they will be convicted.

古文：皆断。诸盗守器械、财物及相盗者，直一钱以上，皆断。
现代文：所有偷盗守城器械、财物以及私人财物的，价值在一钱以上就要判罪。
English: All thefts of city defense equipment, property, and personal property valued at more than one dollar are punishable.

古文：吏、卒、民各自大书于杰，著之其署同，守案其署，擅入者，断。
现代文：官员、兵士和百姓要将自己姓名写在帖上并张贴在各自办事的墙头上，守城主将视察时如发现有擅自进入别人办事处时，要问罪。
English: Officials, soldiers and common people should write their names on a post and post it on the wall of their respective offices. The city's guardian will investigate and if found to have entered someone else's office without permission, they will be charged with a crime.

古文：城上日壹废席蓐，令相错发。
现代文：城上每天都换发垫铺，垫铺规定可以彼此互相交换使用。
English: The cushions are changed every day in the castle, and the cushions can be used interchangeably.

古文：有匿不言人所挟藏在禁中者，断。
现代文：若有知道他人私藏禁品却隐瞒不报者，也要判罪。
English: If someone knows that another person is in possession of contraband but conceals it and does not report it, they should also be convicted.

古文：吏、卒民死者，辄召其人，与次司空葬之，勿令得坐泣。
现代文：若官员、兵士和百姓战死了，要赶紧召来死者家属，同司空一道将死者埋葬，不得久坐哭泣。
English: If officials, soldiers and civilians died in the war, they should quickly call the families of the deceased and bury the dead together with Siku. They should not sit and cry for a long time.

古文：伤甚者令归治病家善养，予医给药，赐酒日二升、肉二斤，令吏数行闾，视病有瘳，辄造事上。
现代文：受伤很重的让回家疗养，妥善照料，供医送药，每天赏其两升酒，两斤肉，并经常派官员前往探慰，如病情好转，就赶紧归队效力。
English: Those who were seriously injured were allowed to go home to recuperate, receive proper care, and were provided with medicine by doctors. They were rewarded with two liters of wine and two pounds of meat every day, and officials were often sent to comfort them. If their condition improved, they would return to the team as soon as possible.

古文：诈为自贼伤以辟事者，族之。
现代文：假若是自己故意致伤欺骗官府以求逃避战斗的，罪连三族。
English: If you intentionally cause injury to deceive the authorities in order to escape the battle, you will be guilty of three crimes.

古文：事已，守使吏身行死伤家，临户而悲哀之。
现代文：战死者埋葬以后，守城主将要派官员亲自到死者家中，表示悲伤和哀悼。
English: After the war dead are buried, the lord of the castle will send officials to the deceased's home in person to express sorrow and condolences.

古文：寇去事已，塞祷。守以令益邑中豪杰力斗诸有功者，必身行死伤者家以吊哀之，身见死事之后。
现代文：当敌人退走，战争结束后，全城举行赛神仪式，守城主将下令奖赏城中豪杰拼死战斗的所有有功之人，论功行赏，并亲自到死伤者家中慰问家人，哀悼死者，接见为守城而牺牲的遗属。
English: When the enemy retreats and the war is over, the whole city will hold a ceremony to celebrate the god of death. The lord of the castle will order to reward all the heroes in the city who fought to the death. He will personally go to the homes of the dead and wounded to console their families, mourn the dead, and meet the survivors who sacrificed themselves to defend the city.

古文：城围罢，主亟发使者往劳，举有功及死伤者数使爵禄，守身尊宠，明白贵之，令其怨结于敌。
现代文：城邑解围之后，守城主将应迅速派使者前往一线慰劳将士，守城主将本人要以身示范，敬重和爱护他们，使人人懂得尊重他们，从而使其对敌人结下仇恨。
English: After the siege of the city is lifted, the lord of the city should quickly send an emissary to the front-line comfort soldiers. The lord of the city should personally demonstrate, respect and cherish them, so that everyone knows how to respect them, thus making them hate the enemy.

古文：城上卒若吏各保其左右。
现代文：城上兵士和官吏也组成联保联防。
English: The soldiers and officials in the city also formed a joint security and defense.

古文：若欲以城为外谋者，父母、妻子、同产皆断。
现代文：有人在城内替敌人出谋划策，其父母、妻子、儿女、兄弟都要杀头。
English: If anyone in the city consults for the enemy, his father and mother, his wife and children, and his brothers shall be put to death.

古文：左右知不捕告，皆与同罪。
现代文：左临右舍知情不捉不报者，同犯罪人一样判罪。
English: A person who knowingly fails to catch or report a crime shall be convicted in the same manner as the criminal.

古文：城下里中家人皆相葆，若城上之数。
现代文：在城内的街巷居民也都要如此，奖惩一如城上。
English: The same applies to the residents of the streets and lanes in the city. Rewards and punishments are the same as in the city.

古文：有能捕告之者，封之以千家之邑；若非其左右及他伍捕告者，封之二千家之邑。
现代文：能够捉拿罪犯并向上报告的人，封给他一千家的食邑，如果举报捉拿之人不属罪犯联保联防组的，就封给他二千家的食邑。
English: A person who is able to catch a criminal and report it to the higher-ups will be awarded a thousand food villages. If the person who reported the capture is not a member of the criminal joint security and defense group, he will be awarded two thousand food villages.

古文：闻城鼓声而伍后上署者，断。人自大书版，著之其署隔，守必自谋其先后，非其署而妄入之者，断。离署左右，共入他署，左右不捕，挟私书，行请谒及为行书者，释守事而治私家事，卒民相盗家室、婴儿，皆断，无赦；人举而藉之。
现代文：守城的禁令：官吏、兵士和百姓仿效制作敌人的服饰的和军门旗帜的，杀；不服从军令的，杀；擅发号令的，杀；延误军令的，杀；靠着战戟悬身下城，上城下城不与众人配合的，杀；不是响应号令而胡叫乱喊的，杀；放走罪犯遗失公物的，杀；长他人威风灭我志气的，杀；擅离职守，聚众瞎谈的，杀；听到城墙鼓声却在应鼓击过五次之后才赶往办事地点的，杀；每个人都要将自己的姓名写在板上，挂在各自的办事处墙头，守城主将必须亲自验查他们所到先后，对不在某办事点却擅自进入的，杀；带领手下人离开自己的办事处进入别人的办事处，而该处办事人员不予捉拿；挟拿私人书信，替人请托成私的；弃城防事去干私事的；偷取他人妻子婴儿的，统统杀头，不予赦免。被偷取的妻子经人举报按法籍没。
English: Prohibitions for the defense of the city: Officials, soldiers and common people who imitate the enemy's clothing and military flags should be killed; those who disobey military orders should be killed; those who issue orders without authorization should be killed; those who delay military orders should be killed; those who hang themselves from battlements should be killed; those who go up and down the city without cooperating with the people should be killed; those who scream and shout without responding to orders should be killed; those who release criminals who have lost property should be killed; those who encourage others to destroy my morale should be killed; those who leave the office without permission should be killed; those who talk nonsense should be killed; those who

古文：无符节而横行军中者，断。客在城下，因数易其署而无易其养。誉敌：少以为众，乱以为治，敌攻拙以为巧者，断。客、主人无得相与言及相藉，客射以书，无得誉，外示内以善，无得应，不从令者，皆断。禁无得举矢书若以书射寇，犯令者父母、妻子皆断，身枭城上。
现代文：没有凭证却在军中乱窜的，杀；故意美化敌人：敌人兵将少而说成多，军纪混乱却说整肃，敌人进攻办法愚蠢却说巧妙的，杀；主人不得与陌生人交谈并借东西给他；敌人用箭射来书信，不得去捡拿；敌人向城内故示伪善，不得有人表示响应，不从禁令的，杀；禁令规定不得捡拿敌人射来的信物，城内也不得将书信射给敌人，触犯这条禁令的，父母，妻儿都要杀头，尸体还要挂城示众。
English: If there is no certificate, but there is disorder in the army, kill; if there is intentional glorification of the enemy: if the enemy soldiers are few, it is said to be many; if there is confusion in military discipline, it is said to be rectified; if the enemy's attack method is stupid, it is said to be clever, kill; if the master is not allowed to talk to strangers and lend him things; if the enemy shoots letters with arrows, it is not allowed to pick them up; if the enemy shows hypocrisy to the city, no one is allowed to respond; if there is no ban, kill; if there is a ban, it is not allowed to pick up

古文：有能捕告之者，赏之黄金二十斤。
现代文：抓获并报告有人向敌人射信或捡取敌人信物情况的人，赏金二十斤。
English: A bounty of 20 jin will be paid to anyone who is captured and reports that someone is shooting letters at the enemy or picking up enemy artifacts.

古文：非时而行者，唯守及操太守之节而使者。
现代文：只有守城主将和他发给了凭证干公差的人，才能在禁止通行的时间行走。
English: Only the lord of the castle and those on official duty who have been issued with a certificate by him can walk during the prohibited time.

古文：守入临城，必谨问父老、吏大夫、请有怨仇雠不相解者，召其人，明白为之解之。守必自异其人而藉之，孤之，有以私怨害城若吏事者，父母、妻子皆断。
现代文：守城主将守城，务必谨慎查询城中父老、官吏和大夫，以及互相有仇怨并无法消除的人，召见他们双方，讲明道理和利害，消除前嫌，一致对外；守城主将同时定要将他们的名字专门记下，不让其居住在一起或安排在一起共事。如果因私仇私怨而妨碍守城公务的，父母、妻子和儿女统统杀掉。
English: The lord of the city will guard the city. He must carefully investigate the fathers and grandfathers, officials and doctors in the city, as well as those who have mutual grudges and cannot be eliminated, summon them both, clarify the reason and interests, eliminate the previous suspicions, and be consistent with the outside world; the lord of the city will also make sure to record their names specifically, and not allow them to live together or arrange to work together. If they interfere with the duties of the city due to personal grudges, the parents, wife and children will all be killed.

古文：其以城为外谋者，三族。
现代文：那些身在城内却为城外敌军出谋划策的，灭三族。
English: Those who are inside the city but make plans for the enemy outside the city will be exterminated.

古文：有能得若捕告者，以其所守邑小大封之，守还授印，尊宠官之，令吏大夫及卒民皆明知之。豪杰之外多交诸侯者，常请之，令上通知之，善属之，所居之吏上数选具之，令无得擅出入，连质之。
现代文：对于那些事先发觉或捉拿罪人上报的，赏封他同该城邑一样大小的城邑，守城主将还要授他官印，给他尊宠的官职，并广喻人知，要经常召请那些与诸侯有广泛结交的豪杰之士，使上级官吏都认识他们，妥善存恤他们，所在地方官要经常安排宴请他们，叫他们不得擅自出入并取他们作为人质。
English: For those who discover or capture criminals in advance and report them, they will be rewarded with a seal of a city the same size as the city, and the lord of the city will also give him an official seal, give him a respected official post, and widely known. They should always invite those heroes who have extensive contacts with the lords, so that the higher-level officials know them and treat them well. The local officials should always arrange a banquet for them, so that they cannot enter and leave without permission and take them as hostages.

古文：术乡长者、父老、豪杰之亲戚父母、妻子，必尊宠之，若贫人食不能自给食者，上食之。
现代文：乡镇中的长老、父老、豪杰之士的亲戚、妻儿一定要给予尊重和爱护。假若他们属贫苦人，难以维持生活，官长要给予吃的。
English: Elders, fathers, relatives, wives and children of heroes in towns and villages must be respected and cared for. If they are poor and have difficulty making a living, officials should give them food.

古文：及勇士父母、亲戚、妻子，皆时酒肉，必敬之，舍之必近太守。
现代文：对于那些勇士的父母、亲戚、妻子、儿女，要经常赐给酒肉，敬重他们，将他们的住宿安排在靠近守城主将官署的地方。
English: As for the parents, relatives, wives, and children of those warriors, they should always be given meat and drink, respect them, and arrange their accommodation in a place close to the office of the commander of the castle.

古文：守楼临质宫而善周，必密涂楼，令下无见上，上见下，下无知上有人无人。
现代文：守城主将的官署楼居高临下对着人质居住的房舍，要周密防卫，楼务必密密地涂上泥，使得署楼上看得清署楼下，而署楼下却看不见楼上，不知道楼上是否有人。
English: The office building of the castle's commander-in-chief should be built high and facing the building where the hostages live. It should be carefully defended. The building must be covered with mud so that the office building can clearly see the office downstairs, but the office downstairs cannot see the upstairs and does not know if there are people upstairs.

古文：守之所亲，举吏贞廉、忠信、无害、可任事者，其饮食酒肉勿禁，钱金、布帛、财物各自守之，慎勿相盗。
现代文：守城主将身边的人：选用在主将身边工作的官员一定要正派廉洁，忠诚可靠，正直无私，并且有能力承担事务的人。不要限制他们的饮食酒肉，金钱、布匹等财物各自保管，谨防盗窃。
English: People around the lord of the castle: The officials who work around the lord of the castle must be decent, honest, reliable, honest and selfless, and have the ability to undertake affairs. Do not restrict their food and drink, keep money, cloth and other property separately, and beware of theft.

古文：葆宫之墙必三重，墙之垣，守者皆累瓦釜墙上。
现代文：葆宫的围墙一定要修三道，在围墙的外垣上守卫应堆上破瓦烂锅之类的东西。
English: The enclosure wall of the Summer Palace must be repaired in three ways. On the outer wall of the enclosure, guards should pile up things such as broken pots and pans.

古文：门有吏，主者门里，筦闭，必须太守之节。
现代文：城门设主管官员，负责城门和里巷的门，开锁和上锁都必须有守城主将所给的凭证。
English: The officials in charge of the city gate, responsible for the city gate and the alley door, must have the certificate given by the lord of the castle to open and lock the lock.

古文：葆卫必取戍卒有重厚者。请择吏之忠信者、无害可任事者。
现代文：葆宫的守卫一定要选拔忠厚的卫兵担当，官吏也须挑选忠诚可靠、公正而又力能胜任的人。
English: The guards of the Summer Palace must select loyal guards, and the officials must also select loyal, reliable, fair and competent people.

古文：令将卫，自筑十尺之垣，周还墙，门、闺者非令卫司马门。
现代文：象令、将一级的官长要自行护卫，在官署和住处四周要环绕十尺高的围墙，守上大门和闺门，卫兵要一并守卫司马门。
English: It was ordered that the first-level officials should be escorted by themselves, and a ten-foot-high wall should be surrounded around the government office and residence, guarding the main door and the boudoir door, and the guards should guard the Sima door together.

古文：望气者舍必近太守，巫舍必近公社，必敬神之。
现代文：供占望吉凶的巫师卜师居住的地方务必要靠近守城主将的住所，巫师所住一定要靠近神社，必须将神灵当神灵敬重。
English: The dwelling place of the fortuneteller must be close to the residence of the lord of the castle, the dwelling place of the sorcerer must be close to the shrine, and the gods must be respected as gods.

古文：巫祝史与望气者必以善言告民，以请上报守，守独知其请而已。
现代文：他们务必将吉利的话告诉全城百姓，把占得的实际情形报告给守城主将，让守城主将一人知道就够了。
English: They must be sure to tell the people of the whole city about the auspicious words, and report the actual situation of the possession to the captain of the castle. It is enough for the captain of the castle to know.

古文：无与望气妄为不善言惊恐民，断弗赦。
现代文：如若巫师和卜师胡编不吉利的话使百姓惊恐不安，就杀无赦。
English: If sorcerers and fortune-tellers make up unlucky words to frighten the people, they will be killed without mercy.

古文：度食不足，食民各自占家五种石升数，为期，其在莼害，吏与杂訾。
现代文：估计到粮食不足，就让百姓自己估算能缴纳用作军粮的五谷数量，规定缴纳日期，登簿记帐、官吏偿付相当价格的钱物。
English: If it is estimated that there is a shortage of grain, let the people themselves estimate the amount of grain that can be used as military grain, set the payment date, record the account in the book, and pay the officials a considerable amount of money.

古文：期尽匿不占，占不悉，令吏卒■得，皆断。
现代文：若过了期限还隐藏不缴。或者还未全部交清，就派官员和兵士暗中搜求，如果搜出隐粮不缴者，给予判罪。
English: If they fail to pay after the deadline, or if they have not paid in full, officials and soldiers will be sent to secretly search for them, and if they find those who do not pay, they will be convicted.

古文：有能捕告，赐什三。
现代文：有能知情举报的，官府赏给所藏粮食的十分之三。
English: The government awards three-tenths of the stored grain to those who are able to provide informed reports.

古文：收粟米、布帛、钱金，出内畜产，皆为平直其贾，与主券人书之。事已，皆各以其贾倍偿之。
现代文：征收好的粟米、布帛、金钱、牲畜，都要公正估价，给主人开具征收证明，写清征收的数量和价值，战事完结后，一律按原价值双倍偿付。
English: All the grain, cloth, money, and livestock that have been collected should be fairly valued, and the owner should be issued with a certificate of collection, and the amount and value of the collection should be clearly written. After the end of the war, all of them should be paid double the original value.

古文：又用其贾贵贱、多少赐爵，欲为吏者许之，其不欲为吏而欲以受赐赏爵禄，若赎出亲戚、所知罪人者，以令许之。其受构赏者令葆宫见，以与其亲。
现代文：想作官的，还可根据应征财物当时的价格和数量赐给官做；不愿做官的人，依法还可准允其接受爵位，或赎出犯罪的亲戚，朋友。那些接受赏赐的人，让他们进葆宫接受接见，表示亲信爱护，能偿付征收品的财物再度捐献帮助官长的，就加倍赐予爵禄。
English: Those who want to become officials can also be given the official title according to the current price and quantity of the requisitioned property; those who do not want to become officials can also be allowed to accept a knighthood according to law, or redeem relatives and friends who have committed crimes. Those who accept rewards, let them go to the Imperial Palace for an interview, express their love and affection, and donate the property that can pay the requisitioned goods again to help the officials, and double the reward is given.

古文：欲以复佐上者，皆倍其爵赏，某县某里某子家食口二人，积粟六百石，某里某子家食口十人，积粟百石。
现代文：缴纳单的格式如下：某县某里某人家里人口两个，存积粟米六百担；或某里某人人口十个，积存粟米百担。
English: The format of the payment form is as follows: if the population of a person's family in a certain county and a certain village is two, the storage of poppy seeds is 600 cwt; or if the population of a person's family in a certain village is ten, the storage of poppy seeds is 100 cwt.

古文：出粟米有期日，过期不出者王公有之，有能得若告之，赏之什三。
现代文：缴纳粟米财物有确定的日期，过期不纳的没收为王公所有。有知隐藏不交实情上报给官府的，将查出隐粮的十分之三赏给他。
English: There is a fixed date for the payment of the corn. If the payment is not made by the due date, it will be confiscated and become the property of the prince. If someone knows how to hide and does not report the truth to the government, he will be rewarded with three-tenths of the hidden grain.

古文：慎无令民知吾粟米多少。
现代文：要小心谨慎，不可让百姓弄清我军存积多少粮食。
English: We must be careful not to let the people find out how much grain our army has stored.

古文：守入城，先以侯为始，得辄宫养之，勿令知吾守卫之备。
现代文：守城主将一入城，就要开始挑选侦探。物色到充当侦探之人就把他接到宫里养起来，但万不可让他了解我方守卫的设施装备。
English: As soon as the lord of the castle enters the city, he will begin to select detectives. When he finds someone to act as a detective, he will be brought to the palace and raised, but he must not be allowed to know the facilities and equipment of our guards.

古文：侯者为异宫，父母妻子皆同其宫，赐衣食酒肉，信吏善待之。
现代文：侦探要互相隔离居住，他们的父母、妻儿同他们本人住在一块，赐给衣服、食物、酒肉，派人好好招待他们。
English: The detectives were to live in isolation from one another, their parents, wives and children living with them. They were to be given clothes, food, wine and meat, and they were to be well entertained.

古文：侯来若复，就间。
现代文：侦探回来交差，要接受问询。
English: The detective came back cross-examined.

古文：守宫三难，外环隅为之楼，内环为楼，楼入葆宫丈五尺为复道。
现代文：守城主将的住房有三层，在外围墙的四角筑楼，内围墙也建楼，楼与葆宫相接一丈五尺修成上下复道。
English: The castle keeper's house has three floors, with a building at the four corners of the outer wall, and a building on the inner wall. The building is connected to the Summer Palace by a five-meter-high road.

古文：葆不得有室，三日一发席蓐，略视之，布茅宫中，厚三尺以上。
现代文：葆宫不砌内室。每隔三天发放一次垫席垫草，大略检查一下，把茅草铺在宫中，厚三尺以上。
English: The Imperial Palace does not have a masonry inner chamber. Every three days, a cushion of cushion grass is distributed. Check it roughly, and spread the thatch in the palace, more than three feet thick.

古文：发侯，必使乡邑忠信、善重士，有亲戚、妻子，厚奉资之。必重发侯，为养其亲若妻子，为异舍，无与员同所，给食之酒肉。遣他侯，奉资之如前侯，反，相参审信，厚赐之，侯三发三信，重赐之，不欲受赐而欲为吏者，许之二百石之吏。守珮授之印。
现代文：派遣别处的侦探，所给予的钱物须与前一个侦探相同。侦探回来后，对前后二人提供的情报参照核实，如果确实可信，要优厚地奖赐他们。如果三次派出侦察，所获情报无出入，都确实可信，就加重奖赏他。不愿受赏而愿做官的，给予二百石的官阶，守城主将授给官印。
English: If a detective is sent to another place, he must be given the same amount of money and goods as the previous detective. After the detective returns, he should verify the information provided by the two people before and after with reference. If it is indeed credible, he should be rewarded generously. If the reconnaissance is sent out three times and the information obtained is consistent and credible, he will be rewarded more. If he does not want to be rewarded and wants to be an official, he will be given an official rank of 200 koku, and the castle keeper will be awarded the official seal.

古文：其不欲为吏而欲受构赏，禄皆如前。
现代文：不愿做官而愿受赏的，爵禄同前一样。
English: If you don't want to be an official, but would like to be rewarded, you'll get the same salary as before.

古文：有能入深至主国者，问之审信，赏之倍他侯。其不欲受赏而欲为吏者，许之三百石之吏者。
现代文：能够有能力深入敌人国都去探察情报的，如果确系确实可信，对于该侦探的赏赐要加倍，若他不愿受赏而愿做官，赐三百石的官阶。
English: The reward for the detective who is able to go deep into the enemy's country to investigate intelligence, if it is indeed credible, should be doubled, and if he does not want to be rewarded and wants to be an official, he should be given an official rank of 300 koku.

古文：扞士受赏赐者，守必身自致之其亲之其亲之所，见其见守之任。
现代文：对于那些保卫城池功劳卓著的勇士，守城主将一定要亲自将赏赐品送往勇士父母住的地方，叫他们亲睹主将对他的恩宠。
English: For those warriors who have distinguished themselves in the defense of the castle, the lord of the castle will be sure to personally send the reward to the place where the parents of the warriors live, so that they can witness the grace of the lord to him.

古文：其次复以佐上者，其构赏、爵禄、罪人倍之。
现代文：对那些把赏赐再度捐献给国家辅助长官的，所给奖赏、爵禄或赎出罪人的数量分别加倍。
English: For those who redistribute their bounty to state auxiliaries, double the amount of bounty, knighthood or ransom respectively.

古文：出候无过十里，居高便所树表，表三人守之，比至城者三表，与城上烽燧相望，昼则举烽，夜则举火。
现代文：要派出警戒兵，但不要超出十里之外，在地势较高而又方便的地方树立标志，派三人看守。从最远的地方到城邑共树立三处标志，同城上烽火遥遥相望。白天就烧烟，晚上就点火。
English: It is necessary to send out guards, but not more than ten miles away, to set up a sign in a higher and more convenient place, and send three guards. From the farthest place to the town, a total of three signs are set up, far away from the bonfires on the city. Smoke is burned during the day, and fires are lit at night.

古文：闻寇所从来，审知寇形必攻，论小城不自守通者，尽葆其老弱、粟米、畜产遣卒候者无过五十人，客至堞，去之，慎无厌建。
现代文：弄清了敌人来的方向和时间后，周密分析敌我形势可战与否，若考虑到城小难以守住交通要道，就要将老人小孩、粟米、牲畜等全部护送进城。一次派出警戒兵不要超过五十人。当敌兵攻到外城短墙地段时，警戒兵就马上撤入城中，不要滞留城外。
English: After ascertaining the direction and time of the enemy's arrival, carefully analyze whether the situation of the enemy can be fought or not. If it is considered that the city is small and it is difficult to keep the traffic routes, it is necessary to escort all the old people, children, corn, livestock, etc. into the city. Do not send more than fifty guards at a time. When the enemy soldiers attack the short-walled area outside the city, the guards will immediately withdraw into the city and do not stay outside the city.

古文：候者曹无过三百人，日暮出之，为微职。
现代文：警戒兵总数不必超过三百人，天黑时派他们出城，戴上军徽标记。
English: The total number of guards should not exceed three hundred, and they should be sent out of the city at dusk, wearing military insignia.

古文：空队、要塞之人所往来者，令可口迹者无下里三人，平而迹；各立其表，城上应之。
现代文：要派人到行人经常路过的道路和重要关塞去察看路上所留下的踪迹，每人都树立向城上报点情况的标志，而城上对他们会作出相应的反应。
English: People should be sent to the roads and important checkpoints frequented by pedestrians to inspect the tracks left on the road, and everyone should set up signs to report the situation to the city, and the city will respond to them accordingly.

古文：候出越陈表，遮坐郭门之外内，立其表，令卒之半居门内，令其少多无可知也。
现代文：出城侦察的警戒兵用标记向城内报告情况，城内的警戒兵坐守在郭门内外，也树立联络标记，命令兵士一半在郭门内，一半在郭门外，使敌人无法知晓人数多少。
English: The sentinels sent out to reconnoiter the city reported the situation to the city with signs. The sentinels inside the city sat guarding inside and outside the gate. They also set up contact signs and ordered the soldiers to be half inside the gate and half outside the gate, so that the enemy could not know how many people there were.

古文：即有惊，见寇越陈去，城上以麾指之，迹坐击正期，以战备从麾所指。
现代文：一旦有紧急军情，见敌兵越过田表，城上就以旗号指挥警戒兵，击鼓，整旗，预备战斗，一切都按城上指挥行事。
English: As soon as there is a military emergency and enemy soldiers are seen crossing the fields, the city will use the banner to command the guards, beat the drums, straighten the flag, and prepare for battle. Everything will be done according to the command of the city.

古文：望见寇，举一垂；入竟，举二垂；狎郭，举三垂；入郭，举四垂；狎城；举五垂。
现代文：看得见敌军，就点一堆烽烟；敌军进入我方境界，就点两堆烽烟；当敌军接近外城时就点三堆烽烟；一旦敌军进入外城内，就点燃四堆烽烟；敌军接近大城墙凡点五堆烽烟。
English: When enemy troops are in sight, light one stack of incense; when enemy troops enter our territory, light two stacks of incense; when enemy troops approach the outer city, light three stacks of incense; once enemy troops enter the outer city, light four stacks of incense; when enemy troops approach the great wall, light five stacks of incense.

古文：夜以火，皆如此。
现代文：夜晚时就点烽火，报告敌情的烽火数目与烽烟相同。
English: Bonfires are lit at night, and the number of bonfires and smoke signals are the same.

古文：去郭百步，墙垣、树木小大尽伐除之。
现代文：在离外城一百步之内，所有墙和树木，不分高低大小全部拆除或砍掉。
English: Within a hundred paces of the outer city, all walls and trees, large and small, were dismantled or cut down.

古文：外空井尽窒之，无令可得汲也。
现代文：城外的井也要全部填塞，使敌人无法打水。
English: The wells outside the city were also to be completely blocked, so that the enemy could not draw water.

古文：外空窒尽发之，木尽伐之。
现代文：城外的空屋子全部拆毁，树木尽伐。
English: All the empty houses outside the city were demolished, and all the trees were cut down.

古文：诸可以攻城者尽内城中，令其人各有以记之，事以，各以其记取之。
现代文：一切可以用作攻城的东西都运进城内，令人登记在册。战事结束后，再按所记数目各自领取。
English: Everything that could be used for attacking the city was brought into the city and registered. After the battle was over, each of them received the amount that had been registered.

古文：事为之券，书其枚数。
现代文：官员要给他们发收条，写清件数。
English: Officials should give them a receipt and write down the number of cases.

古文：当遂材木不能尽内，即烧之，无令客得而用之。
现代文：那些不能全部运进城的当路木材，就就地烧掉，不致落入敌军之手供其使用。
English: Those timbers that could not be transported all the way into the city were burned on the spot, so as not to fall into the hands of the enemy for their use.

古文：人自大书版，著之其署忠。
现代文：每个人都要将自己的姓名写好，贴在办事处所。
English: Everyone should write their name and post it at the office.

古文：有司出其所治，则从淫之法，其罪射。务色谩正，淫嚣不静，当路尼众舍事后就，逾时不宁，其罪射。
现代文：官员公布处罚条规：凡纵淫欲的，用箭射穿他的耳朵；蛮骄无理欺凌正派人，吵吵闹闹不休不止，在道路上有意阻碍过往行人，分派工作拖拖拉拉，不按时就班，又不请假，也用箭射穿他的耳朵。
English: Officials announced the rules of punishment: anyone who indulges in lust, shoot him through the ear with an arrow; arrogant and unreasonable bullying of decent people, noisy and noisy, deliberately obstructing pedestrians on the road, delaying the assignment of work, not working on time, and not taking a vacation, also shoot him through the ear with an arrow.

古文：喧嚣骇众，其罪杀。
现代文：狂呼乱叫惊忧百姓，那是死罪。
English: It is a capital crime to shout wildly in order to frighten people.

古文：非上不谏，次主凶言，其罪杀。
现代文：不向上官进谏却背后非议，任意发表不利言论，论罪该杀。
English: If you don't go to the officials but criticize them behind their backs, arbitrarily make unfavorable remarks, and discuss the crime, you should be killed.

古文：无敢有乐器、弊骐军中，有则其罪射。非有司之令，无敢有车驰、人趋，有则其罪射。
现代文：同。 室 应作 堂 。同。 初 应作 勿 。 食 应作 验 。 节 应作 即 。 请 应作 诘 。 楼 前疑脱一 为 字。 请 应作 诸 。 杼 应作 抒 ； 利 应作 罚 。
English: Ditto. 室 should be 堂. Ditto. 初 should be 乱. 食 should be 驗. 節 should be 即. 请 should be. 楼前疑脱一为字. 请 should be 诸.  should be 抒; 利 should be 罚.

