古文：陈丞相平者，阳武户牖乡人也。
现代文：陈丞相陈平，阳武县户牖乡人。
English: Chen Chengxiang Chen Ping, a villager from Dousheng Township, Yangwu County

古文：少时家贫，好读书，有田三十亩，独与兄伯居。
现代文：陈平少年时期家中贫穷，但是他非常喜欢读书，家里有田地三十亩，他同哥哥陈伯住在一起。
English: Chen Ping's family was poor when he was young, but he loved to read. The family had 30 mu of farmland, and he lived with his brother Chen Bo.

古文：伯常耕田，纵平使游学。
现代文：哥哥陈伯平常在家种地，听任陈平出外求学。
English: His older brother Chen Bo usually farmed at home and let Chen Ping go out to study.

古文：平为人长美色。
现代文：陈平长得身材高大，相貌堂堂。
English: Chen Ping is tall and handsome.

古文：人或谓陈平曰： 贫何食而肥若是？ 
现代文：有人对陈平说： 家里贫穷吃什么而长得如此肥胖呢？ 
English: Someone said to Chen Ping: What do the poor eat at home to become so fat?

古文：其嫂嫉平之不视家生产，曰： 亦食糠覈耳。有叔如此，不如无有。 
现代文：陈平的嫂子恼恨陈平不看顾家庭，不从事劳动生产，说： 也不过吃糠咽菜罢了，有这样的小叔子，还不如没有。 
English: Chen Ping's sister-in-law was angry that Chen Ping did not take care of the family and did not engage in labor production, saying: "He only eats stewed vegetables. Having such a little brother-in-law is better than nothing."

古文：伯闻之，逐其妇而弃之。
现代文：陈伯听到这些话，休弃了她的妻子并将她赶出家门。
English: Hearing these words, Chen Bo abandoned her wife and drove her out of the house.

古文：及平长，可娶妻，富人莫肯与者，贫者平亦耻之。
现代文：等到陈平长大成人该娶媳妇了，富有的人家没有谁肯把女儿嫁给他，娶穷人家的媳妇陈平又感到羞耻。
English: When Chen Ping became an adult, it was time to marry his daughter-in-law. No one from a rich family would marry his daughter to him, and Chen Ping felt ashamed to marry a daughter-in-law from a poor family.

古文：久之，户牖富人有张负，张负女孙五嫁而夫辄死，人莫敢娶。
现代文：过了好长时间，户牖有个叫张负的富人，他的孙女嫁了五次人，每任丈夫都死了，没有人再敢娶她。
English: After a long time had passed, there was a rich man named Zhang Neng in Hubei. His granddaughter had married five times, and each husband had died. No one dared to marry her again.

古文：平欲得之。
现代文：陈平却想娶她。
English: But Chen Ping wanted to marry her.

古文：邑中有丧，平贫，侍丧，以先往後罢为助。
现代文：乡镇中有人办丧事，陈平因为家贫，就去帮忙料理丧事，靠着早去晚归多得些报酬以贴补家用。
English: There are people in the township who are in charge of funerals. Chen Ping, because of his family's poverty, went to help cook the funeral. By going early and returning late, he could get more remuneration to supplement his household.

古文：张负既见之丧所，独视伟平，平亦以故後去。
现代文：张负在丧家见到他，相中了这个高大魁梧的陈平；陈平也因为这个缘故，很晚才离开丧家。
English: Zhang Rui saw him at the funeral home, and the tall and burly Chen Ping caught his eye; Chen Ping also left the funeral home very late because of this.

古文：负随平至其家，家乃负郭穷巷，以弊席为门，然门外多有长者车辙。
现代文：一次，张负跟着陈平来到他家中，陈家就在靠近外城城墙的偏僻小巷子里，拿一领破席就当门了，但门外却有很多贵人留下的车轮印迹。
English: On one occasion, Zhang Nai followed Chen Ping to his home. The Chen family was in a remote alley near the outer city wall, and took a broken seat as a door, but outside the door there were many wheel marks left by nobles.

古文：张负归，谓其子仲曰： 吾欲以女孙予陈平。 
现代文：张负回家后，对他的儿子张仲说： 我打算把孙女嫁给陈平。 
English: After Zhang Nong returned home, he said to his son Zhang Zhong: I plan to marry my granddaughter to Chen Ping.

古文：张仲曰： 平贫不事事，一县中尽笑其所为，独柰何予女乎？ 
现代文：张仲说： 陈平又穷又不从事生产劳动，全县的人都耻笑他的所作所为，您为什么翩翩把孙女嫁给他呢？ 
English: Zhang Zhong said, "Chen Ping is poor and does not engage in productive labor. People all over the county are ashamed of what he has done. Why did you marry your granddaughter to him?

古文：负曰： 人固有好美如陈平而长贫贱者乎？ 
现代文：张负说： 像张平这样仪表堂堂的人哪里会长久贫寒卑贱呢？ 
English: Zhang Rui said, "How can a handsome person like Zhang Ping remain poor and humble for so long?

古文：卒与女。
现代文：最后将孙女嫁给了陈平。
English: Finally, he married his granddaughter to Chen Ping.

古文：为平贫，乃假贷币以聘，予酒肉之资以内妇。
现代文：因为陈平穷，张家就借钱给他行聘，还给他置办酒宴的钱来娶亲。
English: Because Chen Ping was poor, the Zhang family lent him money to hire a maid, and also gave him money to hold a banquet to get married.

古文：负诫其孙曰： 毋以贫故，事人不谨。
现代文：张负告诫他的孙女说： 不要因为陈家穷的缘故，侍奉人家就不恭谨。
English: Zhang Zui warned his granddaughter: "Don't be disrespectful when serving others because the Chen family is poor.

古文：事兄伯如事父，事嫂如母。 
现代文：侍奉兄长陈伯要像侍奉父亲一样，侍奉嫂嫂要像侍奉母亲一样。 
English: Serve the elder brother Chen Bo as you would serve your father, and serve your sister-in-law as you would serve your mother.

古文：平既娶张氏女，赍用益饶，游道日广。
现代文：陈平娶了张家女子以后，资财日益宽裕，交游也越来越广。
English: After Chen Ping married a woman from the Zhang family, his wealth became more and more abundant, and his friendships became more and more extensive.

古文：里中社，平为宰，分肉食甚均。
现代文：陈平所居的库上里祭祀土地神，陈平做主持割肉的人，他把祭肉分配得很均匀。
English: The land deity is worshipped in the upper part of the storehouse where Chen Ping lives. Chen Ping is the person who presides over the meat cutting, and he distributes the sacrificial meat very evenly.

古文：父老曰： 善，陈孺子之为宰！ 
现代文：父老乡亲们说： 好，陈家孩子真会做分割祭肉的人！ 
English: My father's fellow villagers said: Well, the children of the Chen family really know how to divide the sacrificial meat!

古文：平曰： 嗟乎，使平得宰天下，亦如是肉矣！ 
现代文：陈平说： 唉，假使让我治理天下，我也会像这次分肉一样！ 
English: Chen Ping said, "Alas, if I were to rule the world, I would be just like this piece of meat!

古文：陈涉起而王陈，使周市略定魏地，立魏咎为魏王，与秦军相攻於临济。
现代文：陈胜起兵后在陈县称王，派周市平定了魏国地区，立魏咎为魏王，与秦军在临济交战。
English: After Chen Sheng raised an army and proclaimed himself king in Chen County, he sent Zhou Shi to pacify the Wei region, established Wei Wei as the king of Wei, and fought with the Qin Army in Linji.

古文：陈平固已前谢其兄伯，从少年往事魏王咎於临济。
现代文：在此之前陈平本已辞别他的哥哥陈伯，随一些年轻人去临济到魏王咎手下做事。
English: Prior to this, Chen Ping had already said goodbye to his brother Chen Bo and followed some young men to Linji to work under the Wei Wang Wei.

古文：魏王以为太仆。
现代文：魏王任命他为太仆。
English: The king of Wei appointed him as his eunuch.

古文：说魏王不听，人或谗之，陈平亡去。
现代文：陈平向魏王进言，魏王不听，有的人又说他的坏话，陈平只好逃离而去。
English: Chen Ping spoke to Wei Wang, but Wei Wang did not listen, and some people said bad things about him. Chen Ping had no choice but to flee.

古文：久之，项羽略地至河上，陈平往归之，从入破秦，赐平爵卿。
现代文：过了很久，项羽攻占土地到黄河边上，陈平前往投奔项羽，跟随项羽入关攻破秦国，项羽赐给他卿一级的爵位。
English: After a long time, Xiang Yu conquered the land to the edge of the Yellow River, Chen Ping went to Xiang Yu, followed Xiang Yu into the pass to conquer Qin, and Xiang Yu gave him a first-class knighthood.

古文：项羽之东王彭城也，汉王还定三秦而东，殷王反楚。
现代文：项羽东归，在彭城称王，汉王回军平定三秦向东进军，殷王反叛楚国。
English: Xiang Yu returned to the east and proclaimed himself king in Pengcheng, Han Wang returned to the army to quell the eastward march of Sanqin, and Yin Wang rebelled against Chu.

古文：项羽乃以平为信武君，将魏王咎客在楚者以往，击降殷王而还。
现代文：项羽于是封陈平为信武君，让他率领魏王咎留在楚国的部下前往，击败并降服了殷王而凯旋。
English: Xiang Yu then appointed Chen Ping as the prince of Xinwu, and had him lead Wei Wang Wei's subordinates who remained in Chu to defeat and subjugate Yin Wang and return in triumph.

古文：项王使项悍拜平为都尉，赐金二十溢。
现代文：项王派项悍任命陈平为尉，赏给他黄金二十镒。
English: Xiang Wang sent Xiang Han to appoint Chen Ping as a lieutenant and awarded him 20 ounces of gold.

古文：居无何，汉王攻下殷。
现代文：没过多久，汉王又攻下殷地。
English: It didn't take long for the Han Dynasty to conquer the country again.

古文：项王怒，将诛定殷者将吏。
现代文：项王大怒，准备杀掉前次平定殷地的将领吏。
English: Qiao Wang was furious and prepared to kill the generals and officials who had previously subdued Yan.

古文：陈平惧诛，乃封其金与印，使使归项王，而平身间行杖剑亡。
现代文：陈平害怕被杀，便封好项王赏给他的黄金和官印，派人送还项王，自己一人拿着带着剑从小路逃走了。
English: Chen Ping was afraid of being killed, so he sealed the gold and official seal given to him by Xiang Wang, sent someone to return Xiang Wang, and escaped from the path with a sword.

古文：渡河，船人见其美丈夫独行，疑其亡将，要中当有金玉宝器，目之，欲杀平。
现代文：陈平横渡黄河，船夫见他一个美男子单身独行，怀疑他是逃亡的将领，腰中定当藏有金玉宝器，就盯着陈平，打算杀掉他。
English: Chen Ping crossed the Yellow River. The boatman saw him, a single American man, walking alone. He suspected him of being a fugitive general with gold and jewels hidden in his waist. He stared at Chen Ping and planned to kill him.

古文：平恐，乃解衣裸而佐刺船。
现代文：陈平很害怕，就解开衣服，赤裸着上身帮船夫撑船。
English: Chen Ping was very scared, so he undid his clothes and helped the boatman paddle the boat bare-chested.

古文：船人知其无有，乃止。
现代文：船夫看他一无所有，才没有下手。
English: The boatman saw that he had nothing, so he didn't start.

古文：平遂至修武降汉，因魏无知求见汉王，汉王召入。
现代文：陈平于是到修武归降汉军，通过魏无知求见汉王，汉王召他进去。
English: Chen Ping then went to Xiuwu to surrender to the Han army, and through Wei ignorance asked to see the Han king. The Han king called him in.

古文：是时万石君奋为汉王中涓，受平谒，入见平。
现代文：此时万石君石奋做汉王的中涓，接过陈平的名贴，引陈平进见汉王。
English: At this time, Wanshi Junshi worked hard to become the middle eunuch of Han Wang, took over Chen Ping's nameplate, and led Chen Ping to see Han Wang.

古文：平等七人俱进，赐食。
现代文：陈平等七个人都进去了，汉王赐给他们饮食。
English: All seven of the Chen equals went in, and the Han king gave them food and drink.

古文：王曰： 罢，就舍矣。 
现代文：汉王说： 吃完后，到客舍去休息吧。 
English: Han Wang said: After eating, let's go to the guest house to rest.

古文：平曰： 臣为事来，所言不可以过今日。 
现代文：陈平说： 我有要事前来，所说的话不能拖过今日。 
English: Chen Ping said: I have to come in advance, what I have said cannot be delayed beyond today.

古文：於是汉王与语而说之，问曰： 子之居楚何官？ 曰： 为都尉。 
现代文：于是汉王就跟他交谈，并且很喜欢他。汉王问： 你在楚军时担任什么官职？ 陈平说： 做都尉。 
English: So Han Wang talked to him and liked him very much. Han Wang asked: What official position did you hold when you were in the Chu army? Chen Ping said: To be a captain.

古文：是日乃拜平为都尉，使为参乘，典护军。
现代文：汉王当天就任命陈平为都尉，让他做参乘，主管护军一职的工作。
English: Han Wang appointed Chen Ping as a captain on the same day, and let him do the work of the escort.

古文：诸将尽讙，曰： 大王一日得楚之亡卒，未知其高下，而即与同载，反使监护军长者！ 
现代文：众将都喧哗起来，说： 大王日前刚得到楚国的一个逃兵，还不知道他本领的高低，就跟他同乘一辆车子，并且反让他监督我们这些老将！ 
English: The generals were all in an uproar, saying, "The great king just received a deserter from Chu a few days ago, and he doesn't know how skilled he is, so he's riding in a car with him, and he's letting him supervise us veterans!"

古文：汉王闻之，愈益幸平。
现代文：汉王听到这些议论，更加宠幸陈平。
English: When the Han king heard these arguments, he favored Chen Ping even more.

古文：遂与东伐项王。
现代文：汉王于是带着陈平往东讨伐项王。
English: The Han king then took Chen Ping to the east to fight against King Xiang.

古文：至彭城，为楚所败。
现代文：到了彭城，被楚军打败。
English: They arrived at Pengcheng and were defeated by the Chu army.

古文：引而还，收散兵至荥阳，以平为亚将，属於韩王信，军广武。
现代文：汉王领兵返回，一路上收集散兵到达荥阳，任命陈平为副将，隶属于韩王信，驻扎在广武。
English: Han Wang led the troops back, collected scattered soldiers along the way to arrive in Fenyang, appointed Chen Ping as vice-general, subordinated to Han Wangxin, stationed in Guangwu.

古文：绛侯、灌婴等咸谗陈平曰： 平虽美丈夫，如冠玉耳，其中未必有也。
现代文：周勃、灌婴等都进谗言诋毁陈平说： 陈平虽然是个美男子，只不过像帽子上用于装饰的美玉罢了，他的内里未必有雄才大罗。
English: Zhou Bo, Gan Ying and others have all slandered Chen Ping, saying: Although Chen Ping is a handsome man, he is just like a bead used for decoration on a hat. He may not have a great talent inside.

古文：臣闻平居家时，盗其嫂；事魏不容，亡归楚；归楚不中，又亡归汉。
现代文：我们听说陈平在家时，曾和嫂嫂私通；在魏王那里做事不能容身，便逃亡出来归附楚王；归附楚王后又不相合，就又逃来归降汉王。
English: We heard that when Chen Ping was at home, he had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law; when he couldn't bear to work for the Wei king, he fled and joined the Chu king; when he couldn't join the Chu queen, he fled again and joined the Han king.

古文：今日大王尊官之，令护军。
现代文：现在大王如此器重他，使他做高官，任命他为护军来监督军队。
English: Now the great king has so valued him that he has made him a high-ranking official and appointed him as a bodyguard to supervise the army.

古文：臣闻平受诸将金，金多者得善处，金少者得恶处。
现代文：我们听说陈平接受了将领们的钱财，钱给得多的就得到好处，钱给得少的就遭遇坏的处境。
English: We heard that Chen Ping accepted money from the generals. If he gave more money, he would get benefits, but if he gave less money, he would be in a bad situation.

古文：平，反覆乱臣也，原王察之。 
现代文：陈平是一个反复无常的作乱奸臣，希望大王明察。 
English: Chen Ping is a capricious, mischievous and treacherous vassal. I hope the king will see through him.

古文：汉王疑之，召让魏无知。
现代文：汉王怀疑起陈平来，召来魏无知责问他。
English: The king of Han suspected Chen Ping and summoned Wei Jiao to interrogate him.

古文：无知曰： 臣所言者，能也；陛下所问者，行也。
现代文：魏无知说： 我所说的是才能，陛下所问的是品行。
English: Wei Wuzhong said: What I am talking about is talent, what Your Majesty is asking about is character.

古文：今有尾生、孝己之行而无益处於胜负之数，陛下何暇用之乎？
现代文：现在如果有人有尾生、孝已那样的品行，但无益于战争的胜负，陛下何必重用这些人呢？
English: Now, if there are people who have the same moral character as Osho and Takahashi, but are not beneficial to the victory or defeat of the war, why does His Majesty need to reuse these people?

古文：楚汉相距，臣进奇谋之士，顾其计诚足以利国家不耳。
现代文：楚汉对峙，我推荐善出奇谋的人，只关心他的计谋是否确实能够有利国家罢了。
English: In the Chu-Han confrontation, I recommend a person who is good at conjuring up schemes, only concerned about whether his schemes can really benefit the country.

古文：且盗嫂受金又何足疑乎？ 
现代文：至于私通嫂嫂、接受钱财，又有什么值得怀疑的呢？ 
English: As for adultery and accepting money, what is there to question?

古文：汉王召让平曰： 先生事魏不中，遂事楚而去，今又从吾游，信者固多心乎？ 
现代文：汉王召来陈平责问道： 先生在魏王那里做事不相合，便去楚王那里做事而又半道离开。如今又来跟从我，讲信用的人原来是这样三心二意吗？ 
English: The king of Han summoned Chen Ping and asked him: "My master's work with the king of Wei didn't match, so he went to work with the king of Chu and left halfway. Now he's following me again. Are people who talk about trust really so half-hearted?"

古文：平曰： 臣事魏王，魏王不能用臣说，故去事项王。
现代文：陈平说： 我在魏王那里做事，魏王不能采用我的建议，所以我离开他到项王那里做事。
English: Chen Ping said, "I worked for Wei Wang. Wei Wang could not accept my suggestion, so I left him to work for Xiang Wang."

古文：项王不能信人，其所任爱，非诸项即妻之昆弟，虽有奇士不能用，平乃去楚。
现代文：项王不能够信任人，他所信任、宠爱的，不是那些项氏宗族就是妻家的兄弟，即使有奇才也不能重用，我因此离开楚王。
English: King He could not trust anyone. He trusted and favored not only those of the He clan, but also the brothers of his wife's family. Even if he had a great talent, he could not use it, so I left King Chu.

古文：闻汉王之能用人，故归大王。
现代文：我听说汉王能够用人，所以来归附大王。
English: I heard that Han Wang could employ people, so I came to join the Great King.

古文：臣裸身来，不受金无以为资。
现代文：我独自一人前来，不接受钱财便没有办事的费用。
English: I come alone, I don't accept money, so there is no cost of doing business.

古文：诚臣计画有可采者，大王用之；使无可用者，金具在，请封输官，得请骸骨。 
现代文：如果我的计谋确有值得采纳的，希望大王采用；假若没有值得采用的，钱财都还在，请允许我封好送回官府，并请求大王同意我辞官。 
English: If my plan is really worth adopting, I hope the king will adopt it; if it is not worth adopting, the money is still there, please allow me to seal it and send it back to the government, and ask the king to agree to my resignation.

古文：汉王乃谢，厚赐，拜为护军中尉，尽护诸将。
现代文：汉王于是向陈平道歉，并丰厚地赏赐了他，任命他为护军中尉，监督全体将领。
English: The Han king then apologized to Chen Ping and rewarded him generously, appointing him as a lieutenant of the escort to supervise all generals.

古文：诸将乃不敢复言。
现代文：将官们便也不敢再说什么。
English: The generals did not dare to say anything.

古文：其後，楚急攻，绝汉甬道，围汉王於荥阳城。
现代文：后来楚军加紧进攻，切断了汉军运送粮草的甬道，把汉王围困在荥阳城。
English: Later, the Chu army stepped up the attack, cut off the Han army's supply route of grain and grass, and besieged the Han king in Fenyang City.

古文：久之，汉王患之，请割荥阳以西以和。
现代文：过了好一段时间，汉王为这种困境而忧虑，请求割让荥阳以西的地区来讲和。
English: After a long period of time, the Han king was worried about this predicament and asked for the cession of the region west of Shenyang.

古文：项王不听。
现代文：项王不同意。
English: The king did not agree.

古文：汉王谓陈平曰： 天下纷纷，何时定乎？ 
现代文：汉王对陈平说： 天下如此纷乱，什么时候才能安定下来呢？ 
English: Han Wang said to Chen Ping: The world is so chaotic, when will it settle down?

古文：陈平曰： 项王为人，恭敬爱人，士之廉节好礼者多归之。
现代文：陈平说： 项王为人谦恭有礼，对人爱护，具有清廉节操、好礼的士人大多归附他。
English: Chen Ping said: Xiao Wang is a humble and courteous person, he loves and cares for others, and most of the scholars with integrity, self-discipline and good manners belong to him.

古文：至於行功爵邑，重之，士亦以此不附。
现代文：颗到了论功行赏、授爵封邑时，却又吝啬这些爵邑，士人因此不再真心归附他。
English: When the time came to reward him for his meritorious deeds and bestow him with a peerage and fiefdom, he was stingy with these peerages. As a result, the nobles no longer sincerely adhered to him.

古文：今大王慢而少礼，士廉节者不来；然大王能饶人以爵邑，士之顽钝嗜利无耻者亦多归汉。
现代文：如今大王傲慢又缺乏礼仪，具有清廉节操的士人不来归附；但是大王能够舍得给人爵位、食邑，那些圆滑没有骨气、好利无耻之徒又多归附汉王。
English: Nowadays, the great king is arrogant and lacks etiquette, and scholars with integrity and self-discipline do not come to join him; however, the great king can afford to give people titles and food, and those smooth, spineless, greedy and shameless people mostly join the Han king.

古文：诚各去其两短，袭其两长，天下指麾则定矣。
现代文：如果你们各自谁能摒弃双方的短处，采取双方的长处，那么只要招一招手，天下就能安定下来了。
English: If each of you can discard the shortcomings of both sides and take the strengths of both sides, then with just a wave of the hand, the world can settle down.

古文：然大王恣侮人，不能得廉节之士。
现代文：但是大王爱随意侮辱人，不能罗致到具有清廉节操的士人。
English: However, the great king likes to insult people at will, and cannot attract a scholar with integrity.

古文：顾楚有可乱者，彼项王骨鲠之臣亚父、锺离眛、龙且、周殷之属，不过数人耳。
现代文：不过楚军方面也有可以扰乱的地方，项王那里刚直的臣子像亚父范增、钟离眛、龙且、周殷之辈，不过几个人罢了。
English: However, there were also areas in the Chu army that could be disrupted. There were only a few upright courtiers like Fan Zeng, Zhong Yixuan, Long Qi, and Zhou Yin.

古文：大王诚能出捐数万斤金，行反间，间其君臣，以疑其心，项王为人意忌信谗，必内相诛。
现代文：大王如果能舍得拿出几万斤黄金，施行反间的计谋，离间楚国君臣关系，让他们彼此猜疑，项王为人猜忌多疑，容易听信谗言，他们内部一定会互相残杀。
English: If the great king can be willing to come up with tens of thousands of pounds of gold, carry out counter-plots, divide the relationship between the princes and the subjects of Chu, make them suspicious of each other, and the king is suspicious and suspicious, easy to listen to, they will kill each other inside.

古文：汉因举兵而攻之，破楚必矣。 
现代文：汉军可趁机发兵攻打他们，必会打败楚军。 
English: The Han army can take the opportunity to send troops to attack them, and will surely defeat the Chu army.

古文：汉王以为然，乃出黄金四万斤，与陈平，恣所为，不问其出入。
现代文：汉王认为陈平说得对，于是拿出黄金四万斤给陈平，听凭他使用，不过问他的支出情况。
English: Han Wang thought that Chen Ping was right, so he took out forty thousand catties of gold and gave it to Chen Ping to use as he saw fit, but asked him about his expenditure.

古文：陈平既多以金纵反间於楚军，宣言诸将锺离眛等为项王将，功多矣，然而终不得裂地而王，欲与汉为一，以灭项氏而分王其地。
现代文：陈平用了很多黄金在楚军中进行离间活动，在众将中扬言钟离眛等人作为项王的将领，功劳很多，但始终不能划地封王，他们打算跟汉王联合起来，消灭项王，瓜分楚国的土地，各自为王。
English: Chen Ping used a lot of gold to carry out divisive activities in the Chu army. Among the generals, he threatened that Zhong Liwei and others, as the generals of King Xiang, had done a lot of merit, but they could not seal the king. They planned to unite with the Han king, eliminate King Xiang, and divide the land of Chu, each of them being the king.

古文：项羽果意不信锺离眜等。
现代文：项羽果然猜疑起来，不再信任钟离昧等人。
English: Xiang Yu became suspicious and no longer trusted Zhong Liangmai and the others.

古文：项王既疑之，使使至汉。
现代文：项王已经怀疑上钟离昧等人以后，派遣使者到汉军那里打探。
English: After suspecting that Shang Zhong had deserted, he sent an envoy to the Chinese army to investigate.

古文：汉王为太牢具，举进。
现代文：汉王备下丰盛的酒宴，命人端进。
English: Han Wang prepared a sumptuous banquet and ordered people to come.

古文：见楚使，即详惊曰： 吾以为亚父使，乃项王使！ 
现代文：见到楚王的使者，汉王就佯装吃惊地说： 我还以为是亚父的使者，原来竟是楚王的使者！ 
English: Seeing King Chu's messenger, Han Wang feigned surprise and said, "I thought it was my father's messenger, but it turned out to be King Chu's messenger!"

古文：复持去，更以恶草具进楚使。
现代文：又让人把酒肴端走，换上粗劣的饭菜端给楚王的使者。
English: He also had people take away the wine dishes and replace them with inferior dishes for King Chu's emissaries.

古文：楚使归，具以报项王。
现代文：楚王使者回去以后，把这些情况禀告给项王。
English: After King Chu's emissary returned, he reported these circumstances to King Xiang.

古文：项王果大疑亚父。
现代文：项王果然大大地怀疑起亚父。
English: Xiao Wang was indeed very suspicious of his father.

古文：亚父欲急攻下荥阳城，项王不信，不肯听。
现代文：范增想急速攻下荥阳城，项王不信任他，不肯听从。
English: Fan Zeng wanted to quickly capture Shenyang City, but Xiang Wang didn't trust him and wouldn't listen.

古文：亚父闻项王疑之，乃怒曰： 天下事大定矣，君王自为之！
现代文：范增闻知项王在怀疑自己，就生气地说： 天下的大事基本定局了，君王自己干吧！
English: When Fan Zeng heard that Wang Zhixiang was doubting himself, he said angrily: The major events of the world are basically a foregone conclusion, let the king do it himself!

古文：原请骸骨归！ 
现代文：我请求辞职告老还乡！ 
English: I ask you to resign and return to your hometown!

古文：归未至彭城，疽发背而死。
现代文：他回乡还没有到达彭城，就因背上毒疮发作而死。
English: He had not yet reached Pengcheng when he returned to his hometown, when he died of a poisonous ulcer on his back.

古文：陈平乃夜出女子二千人荥阳城东门，楚因击之，陈平乃与汉王从城西门夜出去。
现代文：陈平于是夜里让两千名妇女出荥阳城东门，楚军便发动攻击，陈平就与汉王从荥阳西门出城逃离。
English: Chen Ping then sent two thousand women out of the east gate of Shenyang City at night, the Chu army launched an attack, and Chen Ping and Han Wang fled from the west gate of Shenyang City.

古文：遂入关，收散兵复东。
现代文：汉王随即进入关中，收集败散的士兵再次东进。
English: Han Wang then entered Guanzhong, collected the scattered soldiers and marched east again.

古文：其明年，淮阴侯破齐，自立为齐王，使使言之汉王。
现代文：第二年，淮阴侯韩信打败了齐国，自立为齐王，派使者把这件事禀报给汉王。
English: In the second year, Huaiyin Prince Han Xin defeated Qi and established himself as the king of Qi. He sent an envoy to report this to the king of Han.

古文：汉王大怒而骂，陈平蹑汉王。
现代文：汉王大怒，斥骂韩信。
English: Han Wang was furious and scolded Han Xin.

古文：汉王亦悟，乃厚遇齐使，使张子房卒立信为齐王。
现代文：陈平暗暗地踩汉王的脚，汉王也有所悟，于是优厚地款待齐王使者，并派张子房立即封韩信为为齐王。
English: Chen Ping secretly stepped on the feet of the Han king, and the Han king also had an epiphany, so he generously entertained the envoy of the Qi king, and sent Zhang Zifang to immediately seal the Han letter as the Qi king.

古文：封平以户牖乡。
现代文：汉王把户牖乡封给陈平。
English: The Han king gave the fief of Hubei Township to Chen Ping.

古文：用其奇计策，卒灭楚。
现代文：汉王采用陈平的奇计妙策，最终灭掉了楚国。
English: The Han king used Chen Ping's ingenious strategy to finally eliminate the state of Chu.

古文：常以护军中尉从定燕王臧荼。
现代文：陈平曾经以护军中尉的身份跟随汉王平定了燕王臧荼的叛乱。
English: Chen Ping, as a lieutenant of the escorting army, once followed Han Wang to quell the rebellion of Yan Wangtao.

古文：汉六年，人有上书告楚王韩信反。
现代文：汉六年，有人上书告发楚王韩信意图谋反。
English: In the sixth year of the Han Dynasty, someone sent a letter accusing King Han of Chu of plotting a rebellion.

古文：高帝问诸将，诸将曰： 亟发兵阬竖子耳。 
现代文：高帝问询将领们，将领们说： 赶紧发兵活埋这小子。 
English: Gao Di asked the generals, and the generals said, "Hurry up and send soldiers to bury this boy alive."

古文：高帝默然。
现代文：高帝默默不语。
English: Gao Di said nothing.

古文：问陈平，平固辞谢，曰： 诸将云何？ 
现代文：高帝问陈平，陈平一再推辞，反问道： 各位将领都说了什么？ 
English: Gao Di asked Chen Ping, Chen Ping repeatedly declined and asked: What did the generals say?

古文：上具告之。
现代文：皇上把各位将领的话都告诉了陈平。
English: The emperor told Chen Ping everything the generals had said.

古文：陈平曰： 人之上书言信反，有知之者乎？ 曰： 未有。 
现代文：陈平问： 那人上书告发韩信谋反的事情，还有其他人知道吗？ 皇上说： 没有。 
English: Chen Ping asked: Did anyone else know about the person who wrote to denounce Han Xin's rebellion? The emperor said: No.

古文：曰： 信知之乎？ 曰： 不知。 
现代文：陈平问： 韩信本人知道这情况吗？ 皇上说： 不知道。 
English: Chen Ping asked: Does Han Xin himself know about this situation? The emperor said: I don't know.

古文：陈平曰： 陛下精兵孰与楚？ 
现代文：陈平说： 陛下的精锐部队跟楚国比哪个强？ 
English: Chen Ping said: Which is stronger, His Majesty's elite troops or the Chu nation?

古文：上曰： 不能过。 
现代文：皇上说： 比不上他们。 
English: The emperor said, "We are no match for them."

古文：平曰： 陛下将用兵有能过韩信者乎？ 
现代文：陈平问： 陛下的将领中用兵有能超过韩信的吗？ 
English: Chen Ping asked: Can any of your majesty's generals use more soldiers than Han Xin?

古文：上曰： 莫及也。 
现代文：皇上说： 没有比得上他的。 
English: The emperor said, "There is nothing comparable to him."

古文：平曰： 今兵不如楚精，而将不能及，而举兵攻之，是趣之战也，窃为陛下危之。 
现代文：陈平说： 如今陛下的军队不如楚国精锐，将领的才干又赶不上韩信，如果发兵攻打他，就是在促使他同我们作战，我私下里为陛下的安危而担忧。 
English: Chen Ping said, "Today, your majesty's army is not as elite as that of Chu, and the talent of the generals is not as good as that of Han Xin. If you send troops to attack him, you are prompting him to fight with us. I am privately worried about your majesty's safety.

古文：上曰： 为之柰何？ 
现代文：皇上说： 那该怎么办呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "What should we do?

古文：平曰： 古者天子巡狩，会诸侯。
现代文：陈平说： 古时天子巡察各地，会见诸侯。
English: Chen Ping said: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven inspected various regions and met with princes.

古文：南方有云梦，陛下弟出伪游云梦，会诸侯於陈。
现代文：南方有个云梦泽，陛下可以假装出游云梦，在陈县会见诸侯。
English: There is a dream in the south, His Majesty can pretend to travel and meet princes in Chen County.

古文：陈，楚之西界，信闻天子以好出游，其势必无事而郊迎谒。
现代文：陈县在楚国的西部边界，韩信听到天子怀着善意出游，必定认为平安无事，因而到郊外迎接拜见陛下。
English: Han Xin from Chen County, on the western border of the State of Chu, must have thought that all was well when he heard that the Son of Heaven was traveling with good intentions, so he went to the suburbs to meet His Majesty.

古文：谒，而陛下因禽之，此特一力士之事耳。 
现代文：在他来拜见时，陛下趁机将他拿下，这只不过是一个力士就能办到的事。 
English: When he came to see him, His Majesty took the opportunity to wrestle him to the ground, which is something only a wrestler can do.

古文：高帝以为然，乃发使告诸侯会陈， 吾将南游云梦 。
现代文：高帝觉得他的计策很好，于是派出使者告知各诸侯到陈县会面，说 我即将向南巡游云梦 。
English: Emperor Gao felt that his strategy was good, so he sent an envoy to inform all the princes to meet in Chen County, saying, "I am about to cruise south to Yunmeng."

古文：上因随以行。
现代文：皇上便随即出发。
English: The Emperor set off immediately.

古文：行未至陈，楚王信果郊迎道中。
现代文：此行尚未到达陈县，楚王韩信果然在郊外的路上迎接。
English: This trip has not yet reached Chen County, and King Han Xin of Chu has indeed greeted them on the road outside the city.

古文：高帝豫具武士，见信至，即执缚之，载後车。
现代文：高帝预先准备好武士，见韩信来了，立即将他拿下捆绑起来，装在副车中。
English: Gao Di prepared the samurai in advance, saw Han Xin coming, immediately took him down, tied him up, and loaded him into the second car.

古文：信呼曰： 天下已定，我固当烹！ 
现代文：韩信喊道： 如今天下已经平定，我本来该当烹杀了！ 
English: Han Xin shouted: If the situation has been settled today, I should have been killed!

古文：高帝顾谓信曰： 若毋声！
现代文：高帝回过头对韩信说： 你别出声喊叫了！
English: Gao Di turned back to Han Xin and said, "Don't shout!

古文：而反，明矣！ 
现代文：你谋反的事已经很清楚了！ 
English: Your plot to rebel has been exposed!

古文：武士反接之。
现代文：武士把韩信两手反绑在后。
English: The samurai tied Han Xin's hands behind his back.

古文：遂会诸侯于陈，尽定楚地。
现代文：高帝于是在陈县会见了诸侯，全部平定了楚地。
English: Emperor Gao then met with the princes in Chen County and pacified all of Chu.

古文：还至雒阳，赦信以为淮阴侯，而与功臣剖符定封。
现代文：高帝回到洛阳，赦免了韩信，降封他为淮阴侯，又与有功之臣剖符确定封赏。
English: Emperor Gao returned to Luoyang, pardoned Han Xin, demoted him to Huaiyin, and confirmed the reward with the certificate of meritorious minister.

古文：於是与平剖符，世世勿绝，为户牖侯。
现代文：当时与陈平剖符，要陈家世代相传永不断绝，封为户牖侯。
English: At that time, it was decided that the Chen family should be passed down from generation to generation, and he was given the title of "household vassal."

古文：平辞曰： 此非臣之功也。 
现代文：陈平辞谢说： 这不是我的功劳。 
English: Chen Ping said, "This is not my achievement.

古文：上曰： 吾用先生谋计，战胜剋敌，非功而何？ 
现代文：皇上说： 我采用了先生的计谋，克敌制胜，不是你的功劳又是什么呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "I adopted my master's stratagem and defeated the enemy, but what is your merit?

古文：平曰： 非魏无知臣安得进？ 
现代文：陈平说： 不是魏无知，我又怎么能入朝为官呢？ 
English: Chen Ping said: If Wei was not ignorant, how could I enter the imperial court and become an official?

古文：上曰； 若子可谓不背本矣。 
现代文：皇上说： 像先生您这样可以说是不忘本了。 
English: The emperor said, "Like you, sir, I can say that I have not forgotten my book.

古文：乃复赏魏无知。
现代文：于是又赏赐了魏无知。
English: So he rewarded Wei with ignorance.

古文：其明年，以护军中尉从攻反者韩王信於代。
现代文：第二年，陈平以护军中尉的身份跟从高帝在代地攻打谋反的韩王信。
English: In the following year, Chen Ping followed Han Wangxin, who had fought and plotted against Emperor Gao on behalf of Emperor Gao, as a lieutenant of the escorting army.

古文：卒至平城，为匈奴所围，七日不得食。
现代文：汉军匆忙行军到了平城，被匈奴围困，七天吃不上饭。
English: The Han army hastily marched to Pingcheng, where they were besieged by the Huns and were unable to eat for seven days.

古文：高帝用陈平奇计，使单于阏氏，围以得开。
现代文：高帝采用了陈平的妙计，派人到单于的阏氏那里去疏通，才得以解围。
English: Emperor Gao adopted Chen Ping's ingenious plan and sent someone to the Shan clan in Shan to clear the way, only to be able to break the siege.

古文：高帝既出，其计礻必，世莫得闻。
现代文：高帝脱身以后，陈平所献之计一直被严格保密，世间没有人知道其中内情。
English: After Gao Di escaped, Chen Ping's plan has been kept strictly confidential, and no one in the world knows the inside story.

古文：高帝南过曲逆，上其城，望见其屋室甚大，曰： 壮哉县！
现代文：高帝南归经过曲逆，登上城楼，望见县城的房屋很大，说道： 这个县好壮观！
English: Gao Di Nangui went through the zigzag, climbed the tower, saw the large houses of the county seat, and said: This county is so spectacular!

古文：吾行天下，独见洛阳与是耳。 
现代文：我行遍天下，只见到洛阳和这个县是这样。 
English: I've traveled all over the world, but I've only seen Luoyang and this county like this.

古文：顾问御史曰： 曲逆户口几何？ 
现代文：回头问御史说： 曲逆的户口有多少？ 
English: Go back and ask your history: How many accounts are there that are the opposite of yours?

古文：对曰： 始秦时三万馀户，间者兵数起，多亡匿，今见五千户。 
现代文：御史回答说： 当初秦朝时有三万多，中间连年战乱，很多人逃亡藏匿，如今现存五千。 
English: Gu Shi replied: At the beginning of the Qin Dynasty, there were more than thirty thousand, in the middle of which there were years of war, many people fled and hid, and now there are five thousand.

古文：於是乃诏御史，更以陈平为曲逆侯，尽食之，除前所食户牖。
现代文：当时高帝便命令御史，改封陈平为曲逆侯，尽享全县各户的赋税收入，取消之前所封的户牖乡的食邑。
English: At that time, Emperor Gao ordered the emperor to change the fief of Chenping to a feudal town, enjoy the tax revenue of all households in the county, and cancel the previously fenced food town of Fuxiang.

古文：其後常以护军中尉从攻陈豨及黥布。
现代文：此后陈平曾以护军中尉的身份跟从高帝征讨陈豨和黥布。
English: After that, Chen Ping, as a lieutenant of the escorting army, followed Gao Di to recruit Chen Zhen and Zibo.

古文：凡六出奇计，辄益邑，凡六益封。
现代文：他一共出过六次奇计，每次献计都增加了封邑，一共增封了六次。
English: He came up with a total of six miraculous plans, each of which increased the fiefs, and a total of six additional seals were added.

古文：奇计或颇祕，世莫能闻也。
现代文：奇计有的颇为隐秘，世间无人知晓。
English: Some of the schemes are so secret that no one knows about them.

古文：高帝从破布军还，病创，徐行至长安。
现代文：高帝随击败黥市的军队回来，因受创伤而患病，缓缓地行至长安。
English: Gao Di returned after defeating the troops of Handan City. He was traumatized and fell ill, and slowly traveled to Chang'an.

古文：燕王卢绾反，上使樊哙以相国将兵攻之。
现代文：燕王卢绾反叛，皇上派樊哙以相国的身份率兵征讨他。
English: Yan Wang, Lu Xun, rebelled, and the emperor sent Xun to lead the troops to recruit him as a compatriot.

古文：既行，人有短恶哙者。
现代文：启程后，有人说樊哙的坏话。
English: After the departure, some people said bad things about Zou.

古文：高帝怒曰： 哙见吾病，乃冀我死也。 
现代文：高帝发怒说： 樊哙见我病了，便盼望我死。 
English: Gao Di said angrily, "You saw that I was ill and hoped that I would die.

古文：用陈平谋而召绛侯周勃受诏床下，曰： 陈平亟驰传载勃代哙将，平至军中即斩哙头！ 
现代文：便采用陈平的计谋，召绛侯周勃在病榻前受命，说道： 陈平速驾站车马载着周勃代替樊哙领兵，陈平到了军中立即斩下樊哙的头！ 
English: He then used Chen Ping's stratagem to summon Zhou Bo to receive his orders before his sickbed, saying: Chen Ping quickly drove a carriage and horse to carry Zhou Bo to replace Zhou Bo as leader of the army. When Chen Ping arrived at the army, he immediately cut off Zhou Bo's head!

古文：二人既受诏，驰传未至军，行计之曰： 樊哙，帝之故人也，功多，且又乃吕后弟吕嬃之夫，有亲且贵，帝以忿怒故，欲斩之，则恐後悔。
现代文：二人接受了诏命，驾驿站车马急行，还没有到达军中，边走边商议说： 樊哙是高帝的老朋友了，功劳很多，而且又是吕后妹妹吕嬃的丈夫，与高帝有亲戚关系并且显贵，高帝因为一时愤怒的缘故想杀他，只怕将来会后悔。
English: The two of them accepted the imperial edict and drove the carriage and horse express from Gao's station. They had not yet reached the middle of the army, and as they walked, they discussed: Zou is an old friend of Gao Di, he has a lot of merits, and he is also the husband of Lv Ying, the sister of Queen Lv, he is related to Gao Di and is a prominent person. Gao Di wanted to kill him because of his momentary anger, but he was afraid that he would regret it in the future.

古文：宁囚而致上，上自诛之。 
现代文：我们宁可把他囚禁起来交与皇上，由皇上自己处决他。 
English: We would rather have him imprisoned and handed over to the emperor, who would execute him himself.

古文：未至军，为坛，以节召樊哙。
现代文：他们没有到军营中，便堆土筑坛，用符节召来樊哙。
English: They did not go to the camp, but they piled up earth and built an altar, and called for the donkey with cymbals.

古文：哙受诏，即反接载槛车，传诣长安，而令绛侯勃代将，将兵定燕反县。
现代文：樊哙接受诏令，立即被反绑起来装上囚车，由驿站送往长安，使命绛侯勃替樊哙为将，率兵闰定燕地反叛的各县。
English: He accepted the imperial edict and was immediately tied up and loaded onto a prison wagon. He was sent to Chang'an from the railway station. His mission was to lead the troops to the rebellious counties of Yan'an.

古文：平行闻高帝崩，平恐吕太后及吕嬃谗怒，乃驰传先去。
现代文：陈平在返回时得知高帝驾崩的消息，他恐怕吕嬃进谗言、吕后听信谗言发怒，便急驾驿站车马先行。
English: When Chen Ping learned of the news of Emperor Gao's death on his return, he was afraid that Lv Yingjin would be angry and Lv Hou would be angry, so he quickly drove the stagecoach ahead.

古文：逢使者诏平与灌婴屯於荥阳。
现代文：路上遇到使者诏令陈平和灌婴驻守荥阳。
English: Encountering an envoy on the road, he ordered Chen Heping and Guan Yu to stay in Fenyang.

古文：平受诏，立复驰至宫，哭甚哀，因奏事丧前。
现代文：陈平接受诏命，马上又驱车赶到宫廷，哭得非常哀痛，趁机在高帝灵堂内向吕后禀奏处理樊哙一事的经过。
English: Chen Ping accepted the imperial order and immediately drove to the court, weeping bitterly. He took the opportunity to report to Emperor Gao in the Great Hall of the People on how the matter had been handled.

古文：吕太后哀之，曰： 君劳，出休矣。 
现代文：吕太后哀怜陈平，说道： 您辛苦了，出去好好休息吧。 
English: Empress Dowager Lv pitied Chen Ping and said: You have worked hard, go out and have a good rest.

古文：平畏谗之就，因固请得宿卫中。
现代文：陈平害怕谗言加于自身，于是坚决请求留宿宫中，担任警卫。
English: Chen Ping was afraid of being reprimanded, so he firmly requested to stay in the palace and serve as a guard.

古文：太后乃以为郎中令，曰： 傅教孝惠。 
现代文：吕太后于是任命他做郎中令，说道： 请好好辅佐教导孝惠皇帝。 
English: Empress Dowager Lv then appointed him as her second-in-command, saying, "Please assist and teach Emperor Xiao Hui well."

古文：是後吕嬃谗乃不得行。
现代文：此后吕嬃的谗言才不起作用。
English: It was only after that that Lv Ying's reproach had no effect.

古文：樊哙至，则赦复爵邑。
现代文：樊哙被押到长安，便被赦免并恢复了原来的爵位和封邑。
English: He was sent to Chang'an, pardoned and restored to his former title and fief.

古文：孝惠帝六年，相国曹参卒，以安国侯王陵为右丞相，陈平为左丞相。
现代文：孝惠帝六年，相国曹参去世，任命安国侯王陵为右丞相，陈平为左丞相。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Hui, his father-in-law Cao San passed away, and An Guokou Wang Ling was appointed as the Minister of the Right, and Chen Ping as the Minister of the Left.

古文：王陵者，故沛人，始为县豪，高祖微时，兄事陵。
现代文：王陵，原为沛县人，当初是县里的豪绅，起初高祖地位卑微的时候，像对待兄长那样侍奉王陵。
English: Wang Ling, originally from Peixian County, was originally a wealthy gentleman in the county. At the beginning, when Gao Zu's status was humble, he served Wang Ling like he treated his elder brother.

古文：陵少文，任气，好直言。
现代文：王陵缺乏文才，爱意气用事，喜欢直言。
English: Wang Ling lacks literary talent, loves to do things, and likes to be outspoken.

古文：及高祖起沛，入至咸阳，陵亦自聚党数千人，居南阳，不肯从沛公。
现代文：到了高祖在沛县起兵，进入关中抵达咸阳时，王陵也自己聚集党羽几千人，驻在南阳，不肯跟从沛公。
English: When Gaozu raised an army in Pei County and entered Guanzhong and arrived in Xianyang, Wang Ling also gathered several thousand party members and stationed them in Nanyang, refusing to follow Pei Gong.

古文：及汉王之还攻项籍，陵乃以兵属汉。
现代文：等到汉王回军进攻项籍时，王陵才率兵归属汉王。
English: It was not until the Han king's army returned to attack the country that the royal tomb and its soldiers belonged to the Han king.

古文：项羽取陵母置军中，陵使至，则东乡坐陵母，欲以招陵。
现代文：项羽抓了王陵的母亲，安置在军营中，王陵的使者到来时，项羽就让王陵的母亲朝东坐着，想以此招降王陵。
English: Xiang Yu arrested Wang Ling's mother and placed her in a military camp. When Wang Ling's envoy arrived, Xiang Yu made Wang Ling's mother sit facing east, hoping to lure Wang Ling to surrender.

古文：陵母既私送使者，泣曰： 为老妾语陵，谨事汉王。
现代文：王陵的母亲私下送走使者时说哭着说： 请替我告诉王陵，要小心地侍奉汉王。
English: When Wang Ling's mother sent the messenger away privately, she cried and said, "Please tell Wang Ling for me that I must be careful to serve the Han King."

古文：汉王，长者也，无以老妾故，持二心。
现代文：汉王是个宽厚的长者，不要因为我的缘故而怀有二心。
English: Han Wang is a generous elder, so don't have second thoughts because of me.

古文：妾以死送使者。 
现代文：我以一死来给你送行吧。 
English: I'll see you off with a death.

古文：遂伏剑而死。
现代文：说罢即拔剑自刎而死。
English: With that, Rick killed himself with a sword.

古文：项王怒，烹陵母。
现代文：项王发怒，烹煮了她的尸体。
English: Angered, he boiled her corpse.

古文：陵卒从汉王定天下。
现代文：王陵终于跟从汉王平定天下。
English: Wang Ling finally followed Han Wang to pacify the world.

古文：以善雍齿，雍齿，高帝之仇，而陵本无意从高帝，以故晚封，为安国侯。
现代文：王陵跟雍齿关系不错，雍齿是高帝的仇人，王陵又原本无意跟从高帝，因此他受封较晚，被封为安国侯。
English: Wang Ling had a good relationship with Yong Zi. Yong Zi was an enemy of Emperor Gao, and Wang Ling originally had no intention of following Emperor Gao. As a result, he received his title late and was named the Prince of An.

古文：安国侯既为右丞相，二岁，孝惠帝崩。
现代文：安国侯做了右丞相，两年后，孝惠帝去世。
English: An Guoju became the Minister of the Right, and two years later, Emperor Xiao Hui died.

古文：高后欲立诸吕为王，问王陵，王陵曰： 不可。 
现代文：吕太后想立吕氏宗族的人为王，便以此询问王陵，王陵说： 不行。 
English: Empress Dowager Lyu wanted to make someone from the Lyu clan the king, so she asked the royal mausoleum about it. The royal mausoleum said, "No."

古文：问陈平，陈平曰： 可。 
现代文：又问陈平，陈平说： 可以。 
English: He asked Chen Ping again, and Chen Ping said, "Yes."

古文：吕太后怒，乃详迁陵为帝太傅，实不用陵。
现代文：吕太后发怒，于是假意提升王陵为皇帝的太傅，实际上不重用王陵。
English: Empress Dowager Lv was angry, so she pretended to elevate the royal mausoleum as the emperor's tomb, but in fact did not reuse the royal mausoleum.

古文：陵怒，谢疾免，杜门竟不朝请，七年而卒。
现代文：王陵发怒，称病辞职。闭门不出，始终不朝见皇帝，七年后去世。
English: Wang Ling became angry and resigned, saying he was ill. He did not go out behind closed doors and never met the emperor. He died seven years later.

古文：陵之免丞相，吕太后乃徙平为右丞相，以辟阳侯审食其为左丞相。
现代文：王陵被免除丞相职务后，吕太后就调任陈平为右丞相，任命辟阳侯审食为左丞相。
English: After Wang Ling was removed from the post of chancellor, Empress Dowager Lü transferred Chen Ping to the post of chancellor of the right and appointed Biyang Hou Xunshu as chancellor of the left.

古文：左丞相不治，常给事於中。
现代文：左丞相不设办公的处所，常在宫中处理政务。
English: There is no office for the Minister of the Left, and he often deals with government affairs in the palace.

古文：食其亦沛人。
现代文：审食也是沛县人。
English: The judge is also from Peixian County.

古文：汉王之败彭城西，楚取太上皇、吕后为质，食其以舍人侍吕后。
现代文：汉王在彭城以西被击败时，楚军抓走汉王的父亲和吕后作为人质，食其以家臣的身份侍奉吕后。
English: When King Han was defeated west of Pengcheng, the Chu army took King Han's father and Empress Lv hostage and forced him to serve Empress Lv as a vassal.

古文：其後从破项籍为侯，幸於吕太后。
现代文：他后来跟随汉军打败项羽被封为侯，受到吕太后的宠幸。
English: He later followed the Chinese army to defeat Xiang Yu and was given the title of marquis, and was favored by Empress Dowager Lv.

古文：及为相，居中，百官皆因决事。
现代文：等到他做了左丞相，住在宫中，百官都得通过他来决断国家大事。
English: When he became the Minister of the Left and lived in the palace, all the officials had to use him to make decisions on national affairs.

古文：吕嬃常以前陈平为高帝谋执樊哙，数谗曰： 陈平为相非治事，日饮醇酒，戏妇女。 
现代文：吕嬃常因从前陈平为高帝出谋划策捉拿樊哙，多次进谗言说： 陈平当丞相不理政务，每天饮美酒，玩弄妇女。 
English: Because Chen Ping had once made a plan for Emperor Gao to capture Cao Cao, Lv Ying often said repeatedly: Chen Ping did not handle government affairs when he was prime minister, drank fine wine every day, and flirted with women.

古文：陈平闻，日益甚。
现代文：陈平听到后，饮酒作乐日益加剧。
English: After hearing this, Chen Ping's drinking got worse and worse.

古文：吕太后闻之，私独喜。
现代文：吕太后闻知此事，暗自高兴。
English: When Empress Dowager Lv heard about this, she was secretly delighted.

古文：面质吕嬃於陈平曰： 鄙语曰 兒妇人口不可用 ，顾君与我何如耳。
现代文：她当着吕嬃的面对陈平说： 俗语说 小孩和妇女的话不可信 ，就看你对我怎么样了。
English: She confronted Chen Ping in front of Lv Yao and said, "As the saying goes, the words of children and women cannot be trusted, it depends on how you feel about me."

古文：无畏吕嬃之谗也。 
现代文：不要怕吕嬃说你的坏话。 
English: Don't be afraid of Lyu Hao saying bad things about you.

古文：吕太后立诸吕为王，陈平伪听之。
现代文：吕太后立吕氏宗族的人为王，陈平假装顺从这件事。
English: Empress Dowager Lv set up a man from the Lv clan as king, and Chen Ping pretended to obey this.

古文：及吕太后崩，平与太尉勃合谋，卒诛诸吕，立孝文皇帝，陈平本谋也。
现代文：等到吕太后去世，陈平跟太尉周勃合谋，最后将吕氏宗族诛杀殆尽，拥立孝文皇帝即位，此事陈平是主要策划者。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Lv, Chen Ping conspired with Lieutenant Zhou Bo, and finally wiped out the Lv clan and enthroned Emperor Xiaowen. Chen Ping was the main planner of this event.

古文：审食其免相。
现代文：审食其被免去左丞相一职。
English: As a result, he was removed from his post as the Minister of the Left.

古文：孝文帝立，以为太尉勃亲以兵诛吕氏，功多；陈平欲让勃尊位，乃谢病。
现代文：孝文帝即位后，认为太尉周勃亲自率兵诛灭吕氏宗族，功劳多；陈平想把右丞相的尊位让给周勃，于是托病引退。
English: After Emperor Xiaowen ascended to the throne, he thought that Lieutenant Zhou Bo personally led the soldiers to exterminate the Lv clan, which was a lot of merit; Chen Ping wanted to give Zhou Bo the dignity of the Minister of the Right, so he retired due to illness.

古文：孝文帝初立，怪平病，问之。
现代文：孝文帝刚刚即位，觉得陈平病得奇怪，就去询问他。
English: Emperor Xiaowen had just ascended to the throne and thought Chen Ping's illness was strange, so he went to inquire about him.

古文：平曰： 高祖时，勃功不如臣平。
现代文：陈平说： 高祖时期，周勃的功劳不如我陈平。
English: Chen Ping said: During the Gaozu period, Zhou Bo's merit was not as good as my Chen Ping.

古文：及诛诸吕，臣功亦不如勃。
现代文：到诛灭吕氏宗族时，我的功劳也就不如周勃了。
English: When it came to annihilating the Lu clan, my contribution was not as good as Zhou Bo's.

古文：原以右丞相让勃。 
现代文：我愿把右丞相的职位让给周勃。 
English: I am willing to concede the position of the Minister of the Right to Zhou Bo.

古文：於是孝文帝乃以绛侯勃为右丞相，位次第一；平徙为左丞相，位次第二。
现代文：于是孝文帝就任命绛侯周勃为右丞相，位次名列第一；陈平调职为左丞相，位次名列第二。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowen appointed Gonghou Zhou Bo as Minister of the Right, ranking first; Chen Ping was transferred to Minister of the Left, ranking second.

古文：赐平金千斤，益封三千户。
现代文：赏赐陈平黄金千金，加封食邑三千户。
English: Chen Ping was rewarded with thousands of gold coins, and 3,000 households in food villages were sealed.

古文：居顷之，孝文皇帝既益明习国家事，朝而问右丞相勃曰： 天下一岁决狱几何？ 
现代文：过了一段时间，孝文皇帝已经渐渐明了熟悉国家大事，在一次接受群臣朝见时问右丞相周勃说： 全国一年中判决的案件有多少？ 
English: After a period of time, Emperor Xiaowen had gradually become familiar with national events. During a meeting with a group of courtiers, he asked the Minister of Justice Zhou Bo: How many cases are decided in the country in a year?

古文：勃谢曰： 不知。 
现代文：周勃谢罪说： 不知道。 
English: Zhou Bo Xie said: I don't know.

古文：问： 天下一岁钱穀出入几何？ 
现代文：孝文皇帝又问： 全国一年中钱粮的开支收入有多少？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen also asked: How much of the nation's annual income comes from grain expenditure?

古文：勃又谢不知，汗出沾背，愧不能对。
现代文：周勃又谢罪说不知道，急得汗流浃背，惭愧自己不能回答。
English: Zhou Bo and Xie Sin said that they did not know, they were so anxious that they were sweating, and they were ashamed that they could not answer.

古文：於是上亦问左丞相平。
现代文：于是皇上又问左丞相陈平。
English: So the emperor asked the Minister of the Left, Chen Ping, again.

古文：平曰： 有主者。 
现代文：陈平说： 有主管人负责。 
English: Chen Ping said: There is a supervisor in charge.

古文：上曰： 主者谓谁？ 
现代文：皇上说： 主管的人又是谁？ 
English: The emperor said: Who is the person in charge?

古文：平曰： 陛下即问决狱，责廷尉；问钱穀，责治粟内史。 
现代文：陈平说： 陛下若问判决案件的情况，可询问廷尉；问钱粮收支的情况，可询问治粟内史。 
English: Chen Ping said, "If Your Majesty wants to know about the status of a case that has been adjudicated, you can ask a court lieutenant; if you want to know about the status of the income and expenditure of money and grain, you can ask about the internal history of the control of millet.

古文：上曰： 苟各有主者，而君所主者何事也？ 
现代文：皇上说： 如果各自有主管的人，那么您所主管的又是什么呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "If each of you has a person in charge, then what is it that you are in charge of?

古文：平谢曰： 主臣！
现代文：陈平谢罪说： 为臣诚惶诚恐！
English: Chen Ping Xie Sin said: I am very scared!

古文：陛下不知其驽下，使待罪宰相。
现代文：陛下不知我才智低劣，使我勉强担任宰相的职位。
English: Your Majesty does not know that I am of inferior intelligence, so I reluctantly took the post of prime minister.

古文：宰相者，上佐天子理阴阳，顺四时，下育万物之宜，外镇抚四夷诸侯，内亲附百姓，使卿大夫各得任其职焉。 
现代文：宰相一职，对上辅佐天子调理阴阳，顺应四时，对下养育万物适时生长，对外镇抚四夷和诸侯，对内爱护团结百姓，使公卿大夫各自能够胜任他们的职责。 
English: The prime minister's duty is to adjust yin and yang for the upper assistant and heavenly son, to comply with the four o'clock, to nurture all things to grow at the right time for the lower, to appease the four barbarians and the princes for the outside, to love and protect and unite the people for the inside, so that the court nobles and doctors can each be competent in their duties.

古文：孝文帝乃称善。
现代文：孝文帝听了后称赞他回答得好。
English: After listening, Emperor Xiaowen praised him for his good answer.

古文：右丞相大惭，出而让陈平曰： 君独不素教我对！ 
现代文：右丞相周勃大为惭愧，退朝后埋怨陈平说： 您怎么不在平时教我对答这些话！ 
English: Minister of the Right Zhou Boda was ashamed and complained to Chen Ping after he retired from the imperial court, saying: "Why didn't you teach me these words in peacetime!

古文：陈平笑曰： 君居其位，不知其任邪？
现代文：陈平笑着说： 您身居相位，难道不知道自己的职责吗？
English: Chen Ping said with a smile, "You are in a position of authority, don't you know your duties?

古文：且陛下即问长安中盗贼数，君欲彊对邪？ 
现代文：陛下如若问起长安城中盗贼的数目，您也要勉强凑数来对答吗？ 
English: Your Majesty, if I were to ask you about the number of thieves in Chang'an City, would you be able to answer with a rough count?

古文：於是绛侯自知其能不如平远矣。
现代文：这时绛侯周勃自知自己的才能比陈平差远了。
English: At this time, Zhou Bo knew that his talent was far inferior to Chen Ping.

古文：居顷之，绛侯谢病请免相，陈平专为一丞相。
现代文：过了一会时间绛侯周勃托病请求免去右丞相的职务，陈平独自担任整个丞相的职务。
English: After a while, Zhou Boto requested to be relieved of his duties as the right-hand minister, and Chen Ping took on the entire duties of the minister alone.

古文：孝文帝二年，丞相陈平卒，谥为献侯。
现代文：孝文帝二年，丞相陈平去世，谥号为献侯。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, the chancellor Chen Ping died, and his posthumous name was given as 献侯.

古文：子共侯买代侯。
现代文：他的儿子恭侯陈买接替侯位。
English: His son, Gong Hou Chen Mai, succeeds him.

古文：二年卒，子简侯恢代侯。
现代文：陈买在位两年遍去世，他的儿子简侯陈恢接替侯位。
English: Chen Bai died two years into his reign and was succeeded by his son, Jian Hou Chen Wei.

古文：二十三年卒，子何代侯。
现代文：陈恢在位二十三年去世，他的儿子陈何接替侯位。
English: Chen Hui died in the 23rd year of his reign, and his son Chen He succeeded to the throne.

古文：二十三年，何坐略人妻，弃市，国除。
现代文：陈何在位二十三年时，犯了抢占他人妻子的罪，被处以死刑，封国被废除。
English: When Chen He was on the throne for 23 years, he committed the crime of taking another man's wife. He was sentenced to death, and the state seal was abolished.

古文：始陈平曰： 我多阴谋，是道家之所禁。
现代文：当初陈平曾经说过： 我经常使用诡秘的计谋，这是道家所禁忌的。
English: At the beginning, Chen Ping once said: I often use secret stratagems, which is taboo in Taoism.

古文：吾世即废，亦已矣，终不能复起，以吾多阴祸也。 
现代文：我的后代如果被废黜，也就止住了，最终不会再度兴起，这是因为我暗中积下了很多祸因。 
English: If my descendants are dethroned, they will also stop, and eventually they will not rise again, because I have secretly accumulated a lot of evils.

古文：然其後曾孙陈掌以卫氏亲贵戚，原得续封陈氏，然终不得。
现代文：此后陈平的曾孙陈掌靠着是卫家亲戚的关系，希望能够接续陈家原来的封号，但终究未能实现。
English: After that, Chen Ping's great-grandson Chen Palm, relying on the relationship of being a relative of the Wei family, hoped to be able to continue the original seal of the Chen family, but ultimately failed to achieve it.

古文：太史公曰：陈丞相平少时，本好黄帝、老子之术。
现代文：太史公说：陈丞相陈平年轻的时候，原本喜欢黄帝、老子的学说。
English: Taishikong said, "When Chen Yongzheng and Chen Pingrou were young, they originally liked the teachings of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi.

古文：方其割肉俎上之时，其意固已远矣。
现代文：当他在砧板上分割祭肉的时候，他的志向本来已经很远大了。
English: When he was cutting up the sacrificial meat on the cutting board, his ambitions were already very high.

古文：倾侧扰攘楚魏之间，卒归高帝。
现代文：他徘徊于楚魏之间，最终归附高帝。
English: He wandered between Chu and Wei, and was eventually attached to Gao Di.

古文：常出奇计，救纷纠之难，振国家之患。
现代文：他常常想出奇谋妙计，解救纷繁的危难，消除国家的祸患。
English: He often came up with ingenious plans to relieve the manifold perils and eliminate the scourge of the country.

古文：及吕后时，事多故矣，然平竟自脱，定宗庙，以荣名终，称贤相，岂不善始善终哉！
现代文：到了吕后执政时期，诸事多有变故，但陈平还是能够自免于祸患，并安定汉室，保持荣耀的名望终身，被称为贤相，这难道不是善始善终吗！
English: During the reign of Empress Lv, many things changed, but Chen Ping was still able to free himself from disaster, stabilize the Han dynasty, maintain a glorious reputation for life, and be called a sage. Isn't this a good beginning and a good ending?

古文：非知谋孰能当此者乎？
现代文：假若没有才智和谋略，谁能做到这一步呢？
English: Without talent and strategy, who would have made it this far?

