古文：淳于髡曰： 先名实者，为人也；后名实者，自为也。
现代文：淳于髡说： 首先注重名位实质的，是为了治理人民；不注重名位实质，是为了自己。
English: Jun Yuxuan said: First of all, those who pay attention to the essence of the title are for the purpose of governing the people; those who do not pay attention to the essence of the title are for themselves.

古文：夫子在三卿之中，名实未加于上下而去之，仁者固如此乎？ 
现代文：先生你身居三卿之中，从上辅君王到下济万民的名誉功业都还无所建树就要离开齐国，仁者原来是这样的吗？ 
English: Sir, you are one of the three nobles, and you have not built any reputation or achievement from the top to the bottom, so you have to leave Qi. Is this what a benevolent person is like?

古文：孟子曰： 居下位，不以贤事不肖者，伯夷也；五就汤，五就桀者，伊尹也；不恶污君，不辞小官者，柳下惠也。
现代文：孟子说： 身居下位，不以贤能侍奉不成器的人，是伯夷这类人。五次投到商汤门下，又五次投到夏桀门下，是伊尹这类人。不厌恶昏庸的君主，不推辞小官之位，是柳下惠这类人。
English: Mencius said: Those who are in the lower ranks and do not serve the incompetent by virtue of their ability are people like Bo Yi. Those who have been cast five times under Shang Tang and five times under Xia Yao are people like Yi Yin. Those who do not abhor the mediocre monarch and do not refuse the position of minor officials are people like Liu Xia Hui.

古文：三子者不同道，其趋一也。
现代文：这三个人人生道路不同，但目标是一样的。
English: These three people have different life paths, but the goal is the same.

古文：一者何也？
现代文：这一样的目标是什么呢？
English: What is the goal of all this?

古文：曰：仁也。
现代文：应该说就是仁。
English: It should be said that it is Jin.

古文：君子亦仁而已矣，何必同？ 
现代文：君子只要趋于仁就行了，何必要相同呢？ 
English: It is enough for a gentleman to be benevolent, why does he have to be the same?

古文：曰： 鲁缪公之时，公仪子为政，子柳、子思为臣，鲁之削也滋甚。
现代文：淳于髡说： 鲁缪公的时候，公仪子主持国家政务，子柳、子思做大臣。可是鲁国日渐削弱很严重。
English: Jun Yuxuan said, "During the time of Lord Rumi, Gong Yizi presided over state affairs, and Ziliu and Zisi served as ministers. However, the state of Lu was seriously weakened day by day.

古文：若是乎贤者之无益于国也！ 
现代文：像这样的情况贤能者对于国家没有什么益处。 
English: In a situation like this, a virtuous person is of little use to the country.

古文：曰： 虞不用百里奚而亡，秦穆公用之而霸。
现代文：孟子说： 虞国当年不用百里奚就灭亡，秦穆公重用百里奚成就霸业。
English: Mencius said, "Yu Guo did not use the hundred-li yang to perish that year, but Qin Mu Gong used the hundred-li yang to achieve hegemony.

古文：不用贤则亡，削何可得与？ 
现代文：不用贤能就灭亡，就是想日渐削弱也能得到吗？ 
English: Is it possible to perish without virtue, or to grow weaker and weaker?

古文：曰： 昔者王豹处于淇，而河西善讴；绵驹处于高唐，而齐右善歌；华周、杞梁之妻善哭其夫，而变国俗。
现代文：淳于髡说： 从前王豹住在淇水附近，河西的人因而都善于唱歌。绵驹住在高唐，齐国的西部的人因而都善于唱歌。华周、杞梁的妻子因为善于哀哭她们的丈夫，因而改变了国家的习俗。
English: Chun Yuxuan said: Once upon a time, Wang Bao lived near Qishui, so the people in the west of the river were all good at singing. Mian Ye lived in Gaotang, so the people in the west of Qi were all good at singing. The wives of Huazhou and Qiliang changed the customs of the country because they were good at mourning their husbands.

古文：有诸内必形诸外。
现代文：内在有什么内容，外在就会表现出来。
English: What is inside will show on the outside.

古文：为其事而无其功者，髡未尝睹之也。
现代文：行为于某件事情而没有功效，我还没有见过。
English: I've never seen an action in anything that didn't have an effect.

古文：是故无贤者也，有则髡必识之。 
现代文：所以说齐国没有贤能的人，如果有，我必然会认识。 
English: Therefore, it is said that there are no virtuous people in Qi. If there were, I would certainly know them.

古文：曰： 孔子为鲁司寇，不用，从而祭，燔肉不至，不税冕而行。
现代文：孟子说： 孔子做了鲁国的司寇，不被重用，跟随国君去祭祀，祭祀的肉也没有得到，于是不脱帽子就离开了。
English: Mencius said, "Confucius became the steward of the State of Lu, but he was not reused. He followed the sovereign to a sacrifice, but he did not get the sacrificial meat, so he left without taking off his hat.

古文：不知者以为为肉也。其知者以为为无礼也。
现代文：不知者以为孔子是为了一块祭祀的肉，知道内情的人则认为这祭祀不符合社会行为规范。
English: Those who do not know think that Confucius was a sacrificial piece of meat, while those who know the inside story think that this sacrifice does not conform to the norms of social behavior.

古文：乃孔子则欲以微罪行，不欲为苟去。
现代文：而孔子本人想以承担轻微的罪而离开，不愿意随便离去。
English: But Confucius himself wanted to leave for a minor offense and did not want to leave casually.

古文：君子之所为，众人固不识也。 
现代文：君子的所作所为，本来一般人就很难认识到。 
English: The actions of a gentleman are inherently difficult for the average person to recognize.

