古文：刻意尚行，离世异俗，高论怨诽，为亢而已矣。此山谷之士，非世之人，枯槁赴渊者之所好也。
现代文：磨砺心志崇尚修养，脱离世俗与众不同，谈吐不凡，抱怨怀才不遇而讥评世事无道，只是清高罢了；这样做的是隐居山谷的隐士，是愤世嫉俗的人，正是那些洁身自好、宁可以身殉志的人所一心追求的。
English: To cultivate one's mind, to be different from the world, to speak unusual words, to complain that one's talents are not appreciated, and to ridicule the world's affairs, is nothing but being lofty; it is done by hermits who live in secluded valleys, by cynics, and it is pursued by those who are self-righteous and would rather die than live.

古文：语仁义忠信，恭俭推让，为修而已矣。此平世之士，教诲之人，游居学者之所好也。
现代文：宣扬仁爱、道义、忠贞、信实和恭敬、节俭、辞让、谦逊，算是注重修身罢了；这样做乃是意欲平定治理天下的人，是对人施以教化的人，正是那些游说各国而后退居讲学的人所一心追求的。
English: To preach love, virtue, fidelity, faithfulness, and reverence, frugality, forbearance, and modesty, is but to practise self-denial; and this is the whole aim of those who would subdue and govern the world, of those who would civilize, and of those who would lobby the nations, and retire to lectures.

古文：语大功，立大名，礼君臣，正上下，为治而已矣。此朝廷之士，尊主强国之人，致功并兼者之所好也。
现代文：宣扬大功，树立大名，用礼仪来划分君臣的秩序，并以此端正和维护上下各别的地位，算是投身治理天下罢了；这样做乃是身居朝廷的人，尊崇国君强大国家的人，正是那些醉心于建立功业开拓疆土的人所一心追求的。
English: To proclaim great exploits, to establish a great name, to use etiquette to divide the order of lords and subjects, and thus to rectify and maintain the status of the upper and lower, is to devote oneself to governing the world; this is done by those who live in the court, those who respect the sovereign and the powerful country, and those who are passionate about building a career and exploring the territory.

古文：就薮泽，处闲旷，钓鱼闲处，无为而已矣。此江海之士，避世之人，闲暇者之所好也。
现代文：走向山林湖泽，处身闲暇旷达，垂钩钓鱼来消遣时光，算是无为自在罢了；这样做乃是闲游江湖的人，是逃避世事的人，正是那些闲暇无事的人所一心追求的。
English: To go to the mountains and forests and lakes, where there is plenty of leisure, and to spend one's time hooking and fishing, is nothing but idleness; to do so is to be an idler, to escape from the world, and it is precisely what those who have leisure and nothing to do pursue.

古文：吹呴呼吸，吐故纳新，熊经鸟申，为寿而已矣。此道引之士，养形之人，彭祖寿考者之所好也。
现代文：嘘唏呼吸，吐却胸中浊气吸纳清新空气，像黑熊攀缘引体、像鸟儿展翅飞翔，算是善于延年益寿罢了；这样做乃是舒活经络气血的人，善于养身的人，正是像彭祖那样寿延长久的人所一心追求的。
English: To breathe falsely, to exhale while sucking fresh air into one's chest, to climb like a black bear to attract a mate, to fly like a bird to spread one's wings, is merely to be good at prolonging one's life; to do so is to be a person who is good at invigorating the meridians and qi, a person who is good at taking care of one's body, which is exactly what people like Peng Zu, who have a long life, are pursuing.

古文：若夫不刻意而高，无仁义而修，无功名而治，无江海而闲，不道引而寿，无不忘也，无不有也。
现代文：若不需磨砺心志而自然高洁，不需倡导仁义而自然修身，不需追求功名而天下自然得到治理，不需避居江湖而心境自然闲暇，不需舒活经络气血而自然寿延长久，没有什么不忘于身外，而又没有什么不据于自身。
English: If you don't need to sharpen your mind but are naturally refined, if you don't need to advocate benevolence and righteousness but are naturally self-cultivated, if you don't need to pursue fame but are naturally governed by the world, if you don't need to avoid the world but are naturally leisurely, if you don't need to activate your meridians and qi and blood but are naturally long-lived, if you don't forget anything outside of yourself but don't forget anything inside of yourself.

古文：淡然无极而众美从之。
现代文：宁寂淡然而且心智从不滞留一方，而世上一切美好的东西都汇聚在他的周围。
English: Calm and serene, his mind never wanders, and all the good things of the world gather around him.

古文：此天地之道，圣人之德也。
现代文：这才是像天地一样的永恒之道，这才是圣人无为的无尚之德。
English: This is the eternal way, just like heaven and earth. This is the noble virtue of a saint who does nothing.

古文：故曰：夫恬淡寂漠，虚无无为，此天地之平而道德之质也。
现代文：所以说，恬淡、寂漠、虚空、无为，这是天地赖以均衡的基准，而且是道德修养的最高境界。
English: Therefore, indifference, apathy, emptiness, inaction, this is the benchmark for the balance of heaven and earth, and it is the highest realm of moral cultivation.

古文：故曰：圣人休，休焉则平易矣。
现代文：所以说，圣人总是停留在这一境域里，停留在这一境域也就平坦而无难了。
English: Therefore, sages always stay in this realm, and staying in this realm is smooth and easy.

古文：平易则恬淡矣。平易恬淡，则忧患不能入，邪气不能袭，故其德全而神不亏。
现代文：安稳恬淡，那么忧患不能进入内心，邪气不能侵袭机体，因而他们的德行完整而内心世界不受亏损。
English: If they are stable and serene, then sorrow cannot enter their hearts, and evil spirits cannot invade their bodies. Therefore, their virtue is complete and their inner world is not impaired.

古文：故曰：圣人之生也天行，其死也物化。静而与阴同德，动而与阳同波。
现代文：所以说，圣人生于世间顺应自然而运行，他们死离人世又像万物一样变化而去；平静时跟阴气一样宁寂，运动时又跟阳气一道波动。
English: Therefore, saints are born into the world and run in accordance with nature. When they die, they leave the world and change like everything else. When they are calm, they are as peaceful as yin, and when they are in motion, they fluctuate with yang.

古文：不为福先，不为祸始。感而后应，迫而后动，不得已而后起。
现代文：不做幸福的先导，也不为祸患的起始，外有所感而后内有所应，有所逼迫而后有所行动，不得已而后兴起。
English: It is neither the harbinger of happiness nor the beginning of disaster. It is felt externally and then acted upon internally. It is persecuted and then acted upon. It arises as a last resort.

古文：去知与故，循天之理。
现代文：抛却智巧与事故，遵循自然的常规。
English: Abandon cleverness and accidents, and follow the rules of nature.

古文：故无天灾，无物累，无人非，无鬼责。
现代文：因而没有自然的灾害，没有外物的牵累，没有旁人的非议，没有鬼神的责难。
English: As a result, there are no natural disasters, no external influences, no criticism from others, and no condemnation from ghosts and gods.

古文：其生若浮，其死若休。
现代文：他们生于世间犹如在水面飘浮，他们死离人世就像疲劳后的休息。
English: They are born into the world as if floating on the surface of the water, and they die away from the world like a rest after fatigue.

古文：不思虑，不豫谋。
现代文：他们不思考，也不谋划。
English: They don't think, they don't plan.

古文：光矣而不耀，信矣而不期。
现代文：光亮但不刺眼，信实却不期求。
English: Bright but not dazzling, faithful but not expectant.

古文：其寝不梦，其觉无忧。其神纯粹，其魂不罢。
现代文：他们睡觉不做梦，他们醒来无忧患，他们心神纯净精粹，他们魂灵从不疲惫。
English: They sleep without dreams, they wake without worries, their minds are pure, their spirits never weary.

古文：虚无恬淡，乃合天德。
现代文：虚空而且恬淡，方才合乎自然的真性。
English: It is only when it is empty and insipid that it corresponds to the true nature of nature.

古文：故曰：悲乐者，德之邪也；喜怒者，道之过也；好恶者，德之失也。
现代文：所以说，悲哀和欢乐乃是背离德行的邪妄，喜悦和愤怒乃是违反大道的罪过，喜好和憎恶乃是忘却真性的过失。
English: Therefore sorrow and joy are vices contrary to virtue; joy and anger are vices contrary to virtue; liking and hating are vices contrary to truth.

古文：故心不忧乐，德之至也；一而不变，静之至也；无所于忤，虚之至也；不与物交，淡之至也；无所于逆，粹之至也。
现代文：因此内心不忧不乐，是德行的最高境界；持守专一而没有变化，是寂静的最高境界；不与任何外物相抵触，是虚豁的最高境界；不跟外物交往，是恬淡的最高境界；不与任何事物相违逆，是精粹的最高境界。
English: Therefore, the highest realm of virtue is to have neither sorrow nor joy in one's heart; the highest realm of stillness is to maintain one's identity without change; the highest realm of emptiness is not to conflict with anything external; the highest realm of lightness is not to interact with anything external; and the highest realm of essence is not to contradict anything.

古文：故曰：形劳而不休则弊，精用而不已则劳，劳则竭。
现代文：所以说，形体劳累而不休息那么就会疲乏不堪，精力使用过度而不止歇那么就会元气劳损，元气劳损就会精力枯竭。
English: Therefore, if the body is overworked without rest, it will be exhausted, and if the energy is used excessively without rest, the energy will be exhausted, and the energy will be exhausted.

古文：水之性，不杂则清，莫动则平；郁闭而不流，亦不能清；天德之象也。
现代文：水的本性，不混杂就会清澈，不搅动就会平静，闭塞不流动也就不会纯清，这是自然本质的现象。
English: The nature of water is that if it is not mixed, it will be clear, if it is not agitated, it will be calm, and if it is blocked and does not flow, it will not be pure. This is a phenomenon of the nature.

古文：故曰：纯粹而不杂，静一而不变，淡而无为，动而以天行，此养神之道也。
现代文：所以说，纯粹不混杂，宁静纯一不变不动。按自然规律来行动，这就是颐养心神的道理了。
English: Therefore, it is the principle of cultivating the mind and spirit to act according to the laws of nature, with pure non-mixing, pure and unchanging tranquility.

古文：夫有干越之剑者，柙而藏之，不敢用也，宝之至也。
现代文：拥有吴越宝剑的人，把剑放在匣里藏起来，舍不得用，珍贵极了。
English: People who own the Wu Yue Sword put the sword in a box and hide it. They can't bear to use it. It's extremely precious.

古文：精神四达并流，无所不极，上际于天，下蟠于地，化育万物，不可为象，其名为同帝。
现代文：精神四处横流，没有不到的地方，上会合天，下遍及地，化育万物，不可捉摸，它的名字等同天地。
English: The spirit flows everywhere, there is no place it cannot reach, it reaches up to the heavens and down to the earth, it gives birth to all things, it is unfathomable, and its name is the same as heaven and earth.

古文：纯素之道，唯神是守。
现代文：维持纯朴的方式，唯有守护精神。
English: The only way to maintain the simplicity is to keep the spirit alive.

古文：守而勿失，与神为一。
现代文：守护不致丧失，就能和神明合为一体。
English: If you do not lose your guardianship, you can become one with the gods.

古文：一之精通，合于天伦。
现代文：精通了合一，也就符合了自然法则。
English: When you master oneness, you conform to the laws of nature.

古文：野语有之曰： 众人重利，廉士重名，贤士尚志，圣人贵精。 
现代文：民间有句俗语： 普通的人看重利益，廉洁之士看重名声，贤明之士崇尚意志，圣人推崇精神。 
English: There is a folk saying: Ordinary people value profit, honest people value reputation, wise people value will, and saints value spirit.

古文：故素也者，谓其无所与杂也；纯也者，谓其不亏其神也。能体纯素，谓之真人。
现代文：所以朴素呢，是指它没有任何掺杂；纯粹呢，是指没有亏损。能够表现纯粹朴素，就是真人。
English: Therefore, plainness means that it does not have any adulteration; purity means that there is no loss. To be able to express pure simplicity is to be a real person.

