古文：主位
现代文：主位
English: Primary position

古文：安徐而静，柔节先定，虚心平意以待须。
现代文：安定沉着而保持静默，和柔克制而率先保持镇定，虚心平意地准备着和等待着。
English: Steady and calm while remaining silent, gentle and restrained while taking the lead in remaining calm, humbly and calmly preparing and waiting.

古文：主明
现代文：主明
English: Zhe Ming

古文：目贵明，耳贵聪，心贵智。
现代文：目贵在明，耳贵在聪，心贵在智。
English: The eyes are precious, the ears are precious, the heart is precious.

古文：以天下之目视则无不见也，以天下之耳听则无不闻也，以天下之心虑则无不知也。
现代文：利用天下人的眼睛看，没有看不到的事物；利用天下人的耳朵听，没有听不到的消息；利用天下人的心思考虑，就没有理解不了的问题。
English: Using the eyes of the world to see, there is nothing that cannot be seen; using the ears of the world to listen, there is no news that cannot be heard; using the minds of the world to consider, there is no problem that cannot be understood.

古文：辐凑并进，则明不塞矣。
现代文：集中大家的力量共同行事，聪明就不会被蒙蔽了。
English: Concentrate everyone's strength to act together, and cleverness will not be blinded.

古文：主听
现代文：主听
English: Main auditorium

古文：听之术，曰：勿望而距，勿望而许。
现代文：听取情况的方法是：不要一下子就拒绝，也不要一下子就肯定。
English: The way to listen to the situation is: don't reject it at once, and don't affirm it at once.

古文：许之则失守，距之则闭塞。
现代文：肯定则可能失误，拒绝则可能闭塞。
English: Affirmation may be a mistake, and denial may be a blockage.

古文：高山，仰之不可极也；深渊，度之不可测也。
现代文：要象高山一样，仰视看不到顶；象深渊一样，计量摸不到底。
English: Let us be like the mountain, which cannot be seen from above, and like the deep, which cannot be measured from below.

古文：神明之德，正静其极也。
现代文：象神明的德性一样，端正、冷静到极点。
English: Like the virtue of a god, he is upright and calm to the extreme.

古文：主赏
现代文：主赏
English: Main award:

古文：用赏者贵诚，用刑者贵必。
现代文：行赏贵在信实。处刑贵在坚决。
English: Reward with sincerity. Punish with firmness.

古文：刑赏信必于耳目之所见，则其所不见，莫不暗化矣。诚，畅乎天地，通于神明，见奸伪也？
现代文：刑赏信实坚决，对于亲身耳闻目见的人兑现了，那么，没有亲身见到的，也无不潜移默化了。 信实 这一点，有着畅行天地、通于神明的力量，何况对于奸邪的人们呢？
English: Punishing and rewarding faithfulness resolutely has been realized for those who have personally heard and seen, so those who have not personally seen it have also gradually become subtle.Faithfulness This has the power to travel heaven and earth and communicate with the gods, let alone for those who commit evil.

古文：主问
现代文：主问
English: The question is:

古文：一曰天之，二曰地之，三曰人之，四上下，左右前后，荧惑其处安在？
现代文：一是天上的，二是地上的，三是人间的。四方上下，左有前后。不清楚之处都在哪里呢？
English: The first is in heaven, the second on earth, and the third in the human world. The four directions are up and down, and there is a back and forth on the left. Where are all the unclear places?

古文：主因
现代文：主因
English: The main reason

古文：心不为九窍，九窍治；君不为五官，五官治。
现代文：心不包办九窍的事，九窍会治理得好；君主不包办大臣的事，大臣会治理得好。
English: If the heart does not arrange the affairs of the nine departments, the nine departments will govern well; if the monarch does not arrange the affairs of the ministers, the ministers will govern well.

古文：为善者，君予之赏；为非者，君予之罚。
现代文：做好了的，君主给予赏赐；犯错误的，君主给予刑罚。
English: If it is done well, the monarch gives a reward; if it is done wrong, the monarch gives a punishment.

古文：君因其所以来，因而予之，则不劳矣。
现代文：君主只需利用人们提供的成果，因而给予赏罚就不至政务烦劳了。
English: The monarch only needs to make use of the achievements provided by the people, so giving rewards and punishments will not be a burden on the government.

古文：圣人因之，故能掌之。
现代文：圣人就是能做到 因势利导 ，所以就能管理。
English: The sage is able to do this because he is guided by snobbery, so he can manage.

古文：因之修理，故能长久。
现代文：因势利导能够合理，所以国运长久。
English: Because snobbery guide can be reasonable, so the national transport long.

古文：主周
现代文：主周
English: The main week

古文：人主不可不周。人主不周则群臣下乱。
现代文：人君不可不注意保密，不保密则群臣在下面会发生混乱。
English: One must not be careless about keeping secrets, otherwise, there will be chaos among the ministers below.

古文：寂乎其无端也。外内不通，安知所怨？
现代文：静默地不露出任何倾向，使内外不串通消息，人们怎么能产生不满呢？
English: How can people be dissatisfied if they quietly do not show any inclination and do not collude with the outside world?

古文：关闬不开，善否无原。
现代文：传话的门户不开，好坏的传闻也就没有发源地了。
English: The portal for passing on rumours does not open, and good and bad rumours have no place of origin.

古文：主参
现代文：主参
English: Main participants:

古文：一曰长目，二曰飞耳，三曰树明。
现代文：第一是看得远，第二是听得远，第三是做到明察。
English: The first is to see far, the second is to hear far, and the third is to see clearly.

古文：明知千里之外，隐微之中，曰动奸。
现代文：明察到了解千里之外和隐微之中的情况，便可以洞察奸恶。
English: If you can clearly perceive the situation that is thousands of miles away and hidden, you can have insight into evil.

古文：奸动则变更矣。
现代文：奸恶被洞察，变乱就被阻止了。
English: Wickedness is discerned, and rebellion is prevented.

古文：督名
现代文：督名
English: Governor's Name

古文：修名而督实，按实而定名。
现代文：依照名称考察实际，根据实际确定名称。
English: According to the name, we will examine the actual situation and determine the name according to the actual situation.

古文：名实相生，反相为情。
现代文：名、实互相促进，反过来又互为说明。
English: The name and the reality promote each other and, in turn, illustrate each other.

古文：名实当则治，不当则乱。
现代文：名实相当则治，不相当则乱。
English: Fairness in name and reality is the rule, and unfairness is disorder.

古文：名生于实，实生于德，德生于理，理生于智，智生于当。
现代文：名产生于实，实产生于德，德产生于理，理产生于智，智则产生于 当 。
English: Name comes from reality, reality comes from virtue, virtue comes from reason, reason comes from wisdom, and wisdom comes from when.

