古文：起昭阳大荒落，尽阏逢敦牂，凡二年。二世皇帝下二年冬，十月，泗川监平将兵围沛公于丰，沛公出与战，破之，令雍齿守丰。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。秦二世皇帝二年冬季，十月，秦王朝名叫平的泗川郡监，率军将刘邦包围在丰地，刘邦出兵应战，打败了秦军，即命雍齿守卫丰地。
English: From the beginning to the end, a total of two years. Emperor Qin II in the winter of the second year, in October, the Qin dynasty named Ping, the superintendent of Fenchuan County, led the army to encircle Liu Bang in Fengdi, Liu Bang sent troops to fight, defeated the Qin army, and was immediately ordered to guard Fengdi.

古文：十一月，沛公引兵之薛。泗川守壮兵败于薛，走至戚，沛公左司马得杀之。
现代文：十一月，刘邦领兵去攻薛地，泗川郡守名叫壮的，在薛地吃了败仗后，逃到戚地。刘邦的左司马曹无伤将他捉住杀掉了。
English: In November, Liu Bang led an army to attack Xue Di. The governor of Luochuan County, named Zhuang, was defeated in Xue Di and fled to a relative's land. Liu Bang's left-hand man, Ma Cao, caught and killed him without injury.

古文：周章出关，止屯曹阳，二月馀，章邯追败之。
现代文：楚国将领周文率军退出函谷关，到曹阳亭后驻扎下来，过了两个多月，秦将章邯领兵追击打败了楚军。
English: Zhou Wen, the general of the State of Chu, led the army to withdraw from the Hanyang Pass, and after arriving at Caoyang Pavilion, he was stationed there. After more than two months, Qin general Zhang Ye led the army to chase and defeat the Chu army.

古文：复走渑池，十馀日，章邯击，大破之。
现代文：周文又逃跑到渑池，十余日后，章邯发起攻击，大败周文。
English: Zhou Wen again fled to Dianchi. More than ten days later, Zhang Ye launched an attack and defeated Zhou Wen.

古文：周文自刎，军遂不战。
现代文：周文自杀，楚军于是不再作战。
English: Zhou Wen committed suicide, and the Chu army no longer fought.

古文：吴叔围荥阳，李由为三川守，守荥阳，叔弗能下。
现代文：吴广率军围攻荥阳，秦朝李由为三川郡守，固守荥阳，吴广不能攻下。
English: Wu Guang led the army to besiege Fenyang, the Qin Dynasty Li Yu was the governor of Sanchuan County, adhered to Fenyang, Wu Guang could not be captured.

古文：楚将军田臧等相与谋曰： 周章军已破矣，秦兵旦暮至。
现代文：楚将军田臧等便相互商议说： 周文的军队已被击败了，秦兵很快就会到来。
English: Chu's general Tian Qi and others then discussed among themselves and said: Zhou Wen's army has been defeated, and Qin soldiers will soon arrive.

古文：我围荥阳城弗能下，秦兵至，必大败，不如少遗兵守荥阳，悉精兵迎秦军。
现代文：我们围攻荥阳城不下，秦军一到，必将大败我军，不如留一小部分兵力围守荥阳，而调动全部精兵迎击秦军。
English: We cannot besiege the city of Poyang. Once the Qin army arrives, it will surely defeat our army. It is better to leave a small number of troops to besiege Poyang and mobilize all the elite soldiers to meet the Qin army.

古文：今假王骄，不知兵权，不足与计事，恐败。 
现代文：但现在代理楚王的吴广自高自大，不懂得灵活用兵，不值得与他谋划对策，否则恐怕会坏事。 
English: But now, Wu Guang, the acting king of Chu, is arrogant and does not know how to flexibly use soldiers. It is not worth planning countermeasures with him, otherwise, I am afraid, bad things will happen.

古文：因相与矫王令以诛吴叔，献其首于陈王。
现代文：因此就一起假传楚王陈胜的命令杀掉了吴广，又将吴广的头颅献给陈胜。
English: Therefore, a fake order from King Chen killed Uncle Wu and dedicated his head to King Chen.

古文：陈王使使赐田臧楚令尹印，使为上将。
现代文：陈胜派使者把楚令尹的官印赐给田臧，并任命他为上将军。
English: Emperor Chen sent an envoy to bestow upon Tian Xizhu the imperial seal of command, and appointed him as a senior general.

古文：田臧乃使诸将李归等守荥阳，自以精兵西迎秦军于敖仓，与战。田臧死，军破。
现代文：田臧于是令李归等将领继续围攻荥阳，自己亲率精兵向西至敖仓迎击秦军，与秦兵交锋中，田臧战死，楚军大败。
English: Therefore, Tian Xuan ordered Li Gui and other generals to continue the siege of Fenyang. He led his own elite soldiers to the west to Yingcang to meet the Qin army. During the confrontation with the Qin soldiers, Tian Xuan died in battle, and the Chu army was defeated.

古文：章邯进兵击李归等荥阳下，破之，李归等死。
现代文：章邯进军荥阳城下攻打李归等，击败了楚军，李归等将领战死。
English: Zhang Jun marched to the city of Shenyang and attacked Li Gui and others, defeating them. Li Gui and others were killed in the battle.

古文：阳城人邓说将兵居郯，章邯别将击破之。
现代文：楚将阳城人邓说领兵屯居在郯地，章邯的另一路部将击败了邓的军队。
English: Chu said that Yangcheng's leader, Deng, resided in Handan. Zhangye's other generals defeated Deng's army.

古文：铚人伍逢将兵居许，章邯击破之。
现代文：地人伍逢率军驻扎在许地，章邯又发兵将伍逢打败。
English: The local troops led by Wu Feng were stationed in Xu, and Zhang Ye sent troops to defeat Wu Feng.

古文：两军皆散，走陈，陈王诛邓说。
现代文：邓、伍两军都溃散而逃奔到陈地，陈胜为此杀了邓说。
English: Both Deng and Wu's armies broke up and fled to Chen's territory. Chen Sheng killed Deng for this, he said.

古文：二世数诮让李斯： 居三公位，如何令盗如此！ 
现代文：二世多次谴责李斯： 身居三公高位，如何使盗贼猖狂到这种地步！ 
English: The second generation has repeatedly condemned Li Si: How can a thief be allowed to run amok to such an extent while holding a high position in the Three Kingdoms!

古文：李斯恐惧，重爵禄，不知所出，乃阿二世意，以书对曰： 夫贤主者，必能行督责之术者也。
现代文：李斯颇为恐惧，但他又很看重贪恋官爵利禄，不知怎么办才好，便迎合二世的心意，上书应答说： 贤明的君主，必定是能对臣下施行考察罪过处以刑罚的统治术的人。
English: Li Sipo was quite frightened, but he also attached great importance to the covetousness of the official Li Lu. He did not know what to do, so he pandered to the second emperor's will and wrote a reply saying: A wise monarch must be a person who can exercise the ruling technique of investigating crimes and punishing his subjects.

古文：故申子曰 有天下而不恣睢，命之曰以天下为桎梏 者，无他焉，不能督责，而顾以其身劳于天下之民，若尧、禹然，故谓之桎梏也。
现代文：所以申不害说： 拥有天下却不肆情放纵，称之为 把天下当作自己的桎梏 的原因，并不是别的，就在于不能对臣下明察罪过施行惩处，反而以自身之力为天下平民百姓操劳，即如唐尧、大禹那样，故此称之为 桎梏 。
English: Therefore, it is not a bad thing for Shen to say: The reason why he owns the world but does not wantonly indulge in it, and calls it taking the world as his yoke, is nothing else but the fact that he cannot punish the crimes of his vassals, but instead works for the common people of the world with his own strength, that is, like Tang Xuan and Dayu, so he calls it yoke.

古文：夫不能修申、韩之明术，行督责之道，专以天下自适也；而徒务苦形劳神，以身徇百姓，则是黔首之役，非畜天下者也，何足贵哉！
现代文：不能研习申不害、韩非的高明法术，实行察罪责罚的手段，一心将天下作为使自己快乐的资本，反而偏要劳身苦心地去为百姓效命，似此就成为平民百姓的奴仆，不能算是统治天下的君王了。这有什么值得崇尚的啊！
English: Unable to study the skillful spells of Shin, Han, and Fei, implement the means of investigation, punishment, and punishment, and single-mindedly regard the world as the capital to make himself happy, he would rather work hard to serve the people. As such, he would become the slave of the common people, and could not be regarded as the ruler of the world. What is worthy of admiration?

古文：故明主能行督责之术以独断于上，则权不在臣下，然后能灭仁义之涂，绝谏说之辩，荦然行恣睢之心，而莫之敢逆。
现代文：所以贤明的君主能施行察罪责罚之术，在上独断专行，这样权力就不会旁落至下属臣僚手中，然后才能阻断实施仁义的道路，杜绝规劝者的论辩，独自称心如意地为崐所欲为，谁也不敢抵触反抗。
English: That is why a wise ruler can exercise the art of punishing and punishing crimes, and make arbitrary decisions, so that power will not fall into the hands of subordinate ministers, and then he can block the path of implementing benevolence and righteousness, put an end to the arguments of persuaders, and do whatever he wants, and no one will dare to resist.

古文：如此，群臣、百姓救过不给，何变之敢图！ 
现代文：如此，群臣、百姓想补救自己的过失还来不及呢，哪里还敢去图谋什么变故！ 
English: In this way, it is too late for the ministers and the people to remedy their mistakes. How dare they try to change things!

古文：二世说，于是行督责益严，税民深者为明吏，杀人众者为忠臣，刑者相半于道，而死人日成积于市，秦民益骇惧思乱。
现代文：二世十分高兴，便更加严厉地实行察罪惩处，以向百姓征收重税的人为有才干的官吏，以杀人多的官员为忠臣，结果使路上的行人有一半是受过刑罚的罪犯，死人的尸体天天成堆地积陈在街市中，秦朝的百姓因此愈加惊骇恐惧，思念着发生动乱。
English: The second generation was very happy, so they carried out the investigation and punishment of crimes more severely. They regarded those who levied heavy taxes on the people as talented officials, and those officials who killed more people as loyal subjects. As a result, half of the pedestrians on the road were criminals who had been punished. The bodies of the dead were piled up in the streets and markets every day. As a result, the people of the Qin Dynasty were more shocked and frightened, and thought about the occurrence of turmoil.

古文：赵李良已定常山，还报赵王。
现代文：赵国的将领李良已平定了常山，回报赵王武臣。
English: Li Liang, the general of Zhao, has leveled the Changshan Mountains and returned Zhao Wangwu to the emperor.

古文：赵王复使良略太原。
现代文：赵王又派他去夺取太原。
English: King Zhao also sent him to conquer Taiyuan.

古文：至石邑，秦兵塞井陉，未能前。
现代文：李良领兵抵达石邑时，秦军布防在井陉口，赵军无法继续前进。
English: When Li Liang's troops arrived at Shiyi, the Qin troops had already sealed off the well and were unable to advance.

古文：秦将诈为二世书以招良。
现代文：秦将伪造二世的书信，用以招降李良。
English: Qin will forge Nisei's letter and use it to recruit Li Liang.

古文：良得书未信，还之邯郸，益请兵。
现代文：李良接书后没有相信，率军返回邯郸，请求增援兵力。
English: After receiving the letter, Li Liang did not believe it and led his army back to Shao, requesting reinforcements.

古文：未至，道逢赵王姊出饮，从百馀骑，良望见，以为王，伏谒道旁。
现代文：还没有到达邯郸，在途中遇见赵王的姐姐外出饮宴归来。李良望见，以为是赵王来了，连忙在道旁伏地拜谒。
English: Before arriving in Handan, Li Liang met Zhao Wang's sister on her way back from a banquet. Li Liang saw her and thought it was Zhao Wang who had arrived, so he hurriedly prostrated himself in front of Handan on the roadside.

古文：王姊醉，不知其将，使骑谢李良。
现代文：赵王的姐姐酩酊大醉，不知道他是将官，仅命随行骑兵向他致意。
English: Zhao Wang's sister was very drunk and did not know that he was a general. He was greeted by the accompanying cavalry.

古文：李良素贵，起，惭其从官。
现代文：李良向来尊贵，起身后，回看他的随从官员，自觉羞惭极了。
English: Li Liang has always been dignified. He stood up from the ground and felt very ashamed in front of the deployment.

古文：从官有一人曰： 天下畔秦，能者先立。
现代文：随员中有一人说道： 天下反叛秦朝，有能耐的人先立为王。
English: One of the attendants said: The whole world is rebelling against the Qin Dynasty, and those who have the ability are the first to become kings.

古文：且赵王素出将军下，今女儿乃不为将军下车，请追杀之！ 
现代文：况且赵王的地位一向比您低，如今一个女流之辈就不肯为您下车还礼，所以请追杀她！ 
English: Moreover, Zhao Wang's status has always been lower than yours, and now a woman of her generation is not willing to get out of the car for you, so please chase her!

古文：李良已得秦书，固欲反赵，未决，因此怒，遣人追杀王姊，因将其兵袭邯郸。
现代文：李良已得到过二世的书信，原本就想反叛赵国，只是还未最终作出决断。于是便借着一时的愤怒，派人追上去杀掉了赵王的姐姐，并趁势率军袭击邯郸。
English: Li Liang had already received a letter from the second king of Zhao, and he originally wanted to rebel against Zhao, but he had not yet made a final decision. So, in a moment of anger, he sent someone to chase and kill Zhao Wang's sister, and took advantage of the situation to lead an army to attack Yao.

古文：邯郸不知，竟杀赵王、邵骚。
现代文：邯郸的守兵完全没有察觉，致使李良最终杀掉了赵王和左丞相邵骚。
English: Zhai's guards were completely unaware of this, leading Li Liang to eventually kill Zhao Wang and General Secretary Shao Shao.

古文：赵人多为张耳、陈馀耳目者，以故二人独得脱。
现代文：赵国人中有许多是张耳、陈馀的耳目，及时通报消息，二人因此得以独自脱逃。
English: Many people in Zhao were open-eared and keen-eyed, and reported the news in time, so the two were able to escape on their own.

古文：陈人秦嘉、符离人硃鸡石等起兵，围东海守于郯。
现代文：陈人秦嘉、符离人朱鸡石等聚众起兵，将东海郡守围困在郯地。
English: Chen person Qin Jia, Fu Liang person Zhu Jishi and others gathered a large number of soldiers and besieged the Donghai county guard in Xuanchi.

古文：陈王闻之，使武平君畔为将军，监郯下军。
现代文：陈胜闻讯，即派名叫畔的武平君任将军，督率围郯城的各路军队。
English: When Chen Sheng heard the news, he dispatched General Bu Pingjun, also known as Hen, to supervise and lead the various armies besieging the city.

古文：秦嘉不受命，自立为大司马，恶属武平君，告军吏曰： 武平君年少，不知兵事，勿听！ 
现代文：秦嘉不接受此命令，自立为大司马，并由于厌恶隶属于武平君而告诉他的军吏说： 武平君年少，不懂用兵之事，不要听他的！ 
English: Qin Jia did not accept this order and set himself up as grand steward, and because of his aversion to being subordinate to Wu Pingjun, he told his military officials: Wu Pingjun is young, he does not understand the use of soldiers, do not listen to him!

古文：因矫以王命杀武平君畔。
现代文：随即假传陈胜的命令，杀了武平君畔。
English: He then killed Wu Pingran on the orders of the pretended King Chen.

古文：二世益遣长史司马欣、董翳佐章邯击盗。
现代文：二世增派长史司马欣、董翳辅助章邯攻打盗贼。
English: The second-generation leader, Shi Simasin, and the second-generation leader, Dong Ye, assisted Zhang Ye in fighting the thieves.

古文：章邯已破伍逢，击陈柱国房君，杀之。
现代文：章邯已击败伍逢，并攻击在陈地的楚上柱国房君蔡赐，杀掉了他。
English: Zhang Ye had defeated Wu Feng and attacked the Chu Shangzhu, Guofangjun Cai Jie in Chen Di, killing him.

古文：又进击陈西张贺军。
现代文：接着又进击陈地西侧张贺的军队。
English: Next, they attacked Zhang He's army on the west side of Chen Di.

古文：陈王出监战。
现代文：陈胜亲自上阵督战。
English: Chen Sheng personally oversaw the battle.

古文：张贺死。
现代文：张贺还是战死了。
English: Zhang He still died in the battle.

古文：腊月，陈王之汝阴，还，至下城父，其御庄贾杀陈王以降。
现代文：腊月，陈胜前往汝阴，返归时到达下城父，他的车夫庄贾将他刺杀，投降了秦军。
English: In Lazyue, Chen Sheng went to Ruyin, and when he returned, he arrived at Xiacheng. His driver Zhuang Jia stabbed him to death and surrendered to the Qin army.

古文：初，陈涉既为王，其故人皆往依之。
现代文：当初，陈胜既已作了楚王，他过去的朋友们纷纷前往投靠。
English: At the beginning, Chen Sheng had already become the king of Chu, and his former friends went there to take refuge.

古文：妻之父亦往焉，陈王以众宾待之，长揖不拜。
现代文：陈胜妻子的父亲也去了，但陈胜对他却以普通宾客相待，只是拱手高举行见面礼，并不下拜。
English: Chen Sheng's wife's father also went, but Chen Sheng treated him as an ordinary guest, only holding a welcoming ceremony without bowing down.

古文：妻之父怒曰： 怙乱僭号，而傲长者，不能久矣！ 不辞而去。
现代文：陈胜的岳父因此生气地说： 依仗着叛乱，超越本分自封帝王的称号，且对长辈傲慢无礼，不能长久！ 即不辞而走。
English: Therefore, Chen Sheng's father-in-law angrily said, "If you rely on rebellion, exceed your duty to claim the title of emperor, and are arrogant and rude to your elders, you can't last long!

古文：陈王跪谢，遂不为顾。
现代文：陈胜急忙跪下道歉，老人终究不予理会。
English: Chen Sheng hurriedly knelt down to apologize, but the old man ignored him.

古文：客出入愈益发舒，言陈王故情。
现代文：陈胜的一位客人进进出出愈益放纵，谈论陈胜的往事。
English: The guest became more and more unruly as he wandered in and out of the palace, often talking to people about old times.

古文：或说陈王曰： 客愚无知，颛妄言，轻威。 
现代文：于是有人就劝陈胜道： 客人愚昧无知，专门胡说八道，有损您的威严。 
English: As a result, someone advised Chen Sheng: Your guest is ignorant and full of nonsense, which undermines your dignity.

古文：陈王斩之。
现代文：陈胜便把这位客人杀了。
English: Chen Wang then killed the guest.

古文：诸故人皆自引去，由是无亲陈王者。
现代文：如此，陈胜昔日的朋友都自动离去，从此再也没有亲近他的人了。
English: As a result, all of Chen Sheng's former friends left of their own accord, and he has never been close to anyone since.

古文：陈王以硃防为中正，胡武为司过，主司群臣。
现代文：陈胜又任命朱防为中正，胡武为司过，专管督察群臣的过失。
English: Chen Sheng also appointed Zhu Bao as Zhongzheng and Hu Wu as Sifu, in charge of inspecting the faults of the ministers.

古文：诸将徇地至，令之不是，辄系而罪之。
现代文：众将领攻城掠地到达目的地，凡有不听从陈胜命令的，即被抓起来治罪。
English: The generals stormed the city and reached their destination. Anyone who disobeyed Chen Sheng's orders was arrested and punished.

古文：以苛察为忠，其所不善者，弗下吏，辄自治之。
现代文：以苛刻纠察同僚的过失为忠诚之举，对于所不喜欢的人，不送交司法官员审理，即擅自进行处置。
English: Taking it as an act of loyalty to harshly picket the faults of their colleagues, they arbitrarily deal with people they don't like without sending them to judicial officials for trial.

古文：诸将以其故不亲附，此其所以败也。
现代文：众将领因此都不再亲近依附于陈胜。这是陈胜所以失败的原因。
English: For these reasons, the generals were no longer close to him and attached to him. This is why King Chen failed.

古文：陈王故涓人将军吕臣为苍头军，起新阳，攻陈，下之，杀庄贾，复以陈为楚。葬陈王于砀，谥曰隐王。
现代文：过去在陈胜左右担任洒扫的近侍、将军吕臣建立了一支青巾裹头的苍头军，在新阳起兵，进攻陈地，克复后杀了庄贾，重又以陈地为楚都，将陈胜葬在砀县，谥号为 隐王 。
English: In the past, around Chen Sheng, his close attendant, General Lv Chen, who served as a sprinkling sweep, established a Cangdu army with a blue scarf wrapped around its head. He raised an army in Xinyang and attacked Chen Di. After the victory, he killed Zhuang Jia. He again made Chen Di the capital of Chu and buried Chen Sheng in Min County. His posthumous name was "Hidden King."

古文：初，陈王令铚人宋留将兵定南阳，入武关。
现代文：起初，陈胜命人宋留率军平定南阳，进入武关。
English: At first, Chen Sheng ordered Song Rui to lead an army to pacify Nanyang and enter Wuguan.

古文：留已徇南阳，闻陈王死，南阳复为秦，宋留以军降，二世车裂留以徇。
现代文：宋留已攻下南阳，听到陈胜死亡的消息后，南阳重又被秦军占领，宋留领兵投降，二世将他车裂示众。
English: Song Liu had already conquered Nanyang. After hearing the news of Chen Sheng's death, Nanyang was again occupied by the Qin army. Song Liu led the soldiers to surrender, and the second emperor showed his chariot to the public.

古文：魏周市将兵略地丰、沛，使人招雍齿。
现代文：魏国周率军夺取丰、沛，派人招降雍齿。
English: Wei Zhou led the army to seize Feng and Pei, and sent people to recruit and surrender Yongjia.

古文：雍齿雅不欲属沛公，即以丰降魏。
现代文：雍齿平素就不愿意归属刘邦，于是即举丰邑降魏。
English: Yongjian Pingxin did not want to belong to Liu Bang, so he immediately raised Fengyi to Wei.

古文：沛公攻之，不克。
现代文：刘邦攻丰邑，没能克复。
English: Liu Bang attacked Fengyi, but failed to recover.

古文：赵张耳、陈馀收其散兵，得数万人，击李良。
现代文：赵国张耳、陈馀收集逃散的士卒，得数万人，随即攻打李良。
English: Zhang Er and Chen Yu of Zhao gathered tens of thousands of fleeing soldiers and immediately attacked Li Liang.

古文：良败，走归章邯。
现代文：李良兵败而逃，归降了章邯。
English: Li Liang fled in defeat and surrendered to Zhang Ye.

古文：客有说耳、馀曰： 两君羁旅，而欲附赵，难可独立。
现代文：宾客中有人劝说张耳、陈馀道： 二位作客他乡是外地人，要想使赵国人归附，是很难独立获得成功的。
English: Some of the guests tried to persuade Zhang Er and Chen Yu: "The two guests are from out of town. If you want to win over the people of Zhao, it is very difficult to succeed independently.

古文：立赵后，辅以谊，可就功。 
现代文：若拥立故赵国国君的后裔，并以仁义辅助他，便可以成就功业。 
English: If you support the descendants of the late Zhao Guo Guojun and assist him with benevolence and righteousness, you can achieve merit.

古文：乃求得赵歇。
现代文：二人于是寻求到了赵歇。
English: The two then sought out Zhao Xie.

古文：春，正月，耳、馀立歇为赵王，居信都。
现代文：春季，正月，张耳、陈馀立赵歇为赵王，驻居信都。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Zhang Er and Chen Yu established Zhao Xie as Zhao Wang and resided in Xindu.

古文：东阳宁君、秦嘉闻陈王军败，乃立景驹为楚王，引兵之方与，欲击秦军定陶下；使公孙庆使齐，欲与之并力俱进。
现代文：东阳人宁君和秦嘉闻听陈胜兵败，便拥立景驹为楚王，领兵前往方与，打算在定陶攻击秦军，即遣公孙庆出使齐国，想要与齐合力共同进军攻秦。
English: When the Dongyang people Ningjun and Qin Jia heard about the defeat of Chen Sheng's army, they supported the establishment of Jingyi as the king of Chu, led the army to the direction and planned to attack the Qin army in Dingtao, that is, sent the envoy Sun Qing to Qi, and wanted to join forces with Qi to march together to attack Qin.

古文：齐王曰： 陈王战败，不知其死生，楚安得不请而立王！ 
现代文：齐王说： 陈胜战败，至今生死不明，楚国怎么能不请示齐国便自行立王呀！ 
English: King Qi said, "Chen Sheng was defeated and his life and death are still unknown. How can the State of Chu set up a king without asking the State of Qi?"

古文：公孙庆曰： 齐不请楚而立王，楚何故请齐而立王！
现代文：公孙庆道： 齐国不请示楚国即立王，楚国为什么要请示齐国后才立王呢！
English: Gongsun Qing said, "Qi did not ask Chu to set up a king. Why should Chu ask Qi to set up a king?

古文：且楚首事，当令于天下。 
现代文：况且楚国首先起事，理当号令天下。 
English: What's more, Chu was the first to revolt against the Qin Dynasty, so he should be the leader of the world.

古文：田儋杀公孙庆。
现代文：齐王田儋于是就将公孙庆杀了。
English: As a result, Tian Li killed Gong Sun Qing.

古文：秦左、右校复攻陈，下之。吕将军走，徼兵复聚，与番盗黥布相遇，攻击秦左、右校，破之青波，复以陈为楚。
现代文：秦朝的左、右校尉率军再次攻陷陈，吕臣兵败逃跑，收集散兵重新聚合后，与番阳县的盗贼黥布相遇，合兵攻打秦朝的左、右校尉，在青波击败秦军，重又以陈为楚都。
English: The left and right lieutenants of the Qin Dynasty led the army to attack and capture Chen again. Lv Chen was defeated and fled. After collecting the scattered soldiers and regrouping, he met with the thief Zibo of Panyang County. Together they attacked the left and right lieutenants of the Qin Dynasty, defeated the Qin Army in Qingbo, and again took Chen as the capital.

古文：黥布者，六人也，姓英氏，坐法黥，以刑徒论输骊山。
现代文：黥布是六地人，姓英，因犯法被判处黥刑，以刑徒定罪后被送往骊山做苦工。
English: Zibo is a resident of Liujia, surnamed Ying. He was sentenced to flogging for a crime, and was sent to Lushan to do hard labor after being convicted as a convict.

古文：骊山之徒数十万人，布皆与其徒长豪杰交通，乃率其曹耦，亡之江中为群盗。
现代文：当时赴骊山服劳役的犯人有数十万，黥布与其中的头目和强横有势力的人都有交往，于是即率领他的一伙人逃亡至长江一带，聚结为盗匪。
English: At that time, there were hundreds of thousands of prisoners who went to Lushan for labor service. Zou Bu had dealings with the ringleaders and powerful people among them, so he led his group of people to flee to the Yangtze River area and gathered as robbers.

古文：番阳令吴芮，甚得江湖间心，号曰番君。
现代文：番阳县令吴芮，很受江湖中百姓的爱戴，被称号为 番君 。
English: Wu Gan, the governor of Panyang County, is very loved by the people in the country. He was given the title of "Bangjun."

古文：布往见之，其众已数千人。
现代文：黥布便前往求见，这时黥布的部众已达数千人。
English: Zeng Bu then went to see him, by which time Zeng Bu's followers had reached several thousand.

古文：番君乃以女妻之，使将其兵击秦。
现代文：番君即将自己的女儿嫁给黥布，命他率领部众攻击秦军。
English: The governor, who was about to marry his daughter to Zibo, ordered him to lead the troops to attack the Qin army.

古文：楚王景驹在留，沛公往从之。
现代文：楚王景驹驻居留地，刘邦前往归附。
English: Chu Wang Jingyao stayed in the settlement, and Liu Bang went to join him.

古文：张良亦聚少年百馀人，欲往从景驹，道遇沛公，遂属焉。沛公拜良为厩将。
现代文：张良也聚集青年一百余人，打算去投奔景驹，途中遇到刘邦，就归属了他，刘邦授给张良掌厩将之职。
English: Zhang Liang also gathered more than a hundred young people, intending to go to Jingtao. On the way, he met Liu Bang, who assigned him to him. Liu Bang awarded Zhang Liang the post of stablesman.

古文：良数以太公兵法说沛公，沛公善之，常用其策。
现代文：张良多次用《太公兵法》的道理向刘邦献策，刘邦很赏识他，常常采用他的计策。
English: Zhang Liang repeatedly gave advice to Pei Gong according to the "Tai Gong Hei Law." Pei Gong appreciated him very much and often used his strategies.

古文：良为他人言，皆不省。
现代文：张良向其他人讲述《太公兵法》，那些人都不能领悟。
English: Zhang Liang told others about the "Law of Tai Kung Hei," but no one could understand it.

古文：良曰： 沛公殆天授！ 
现代文：张良因此说道： 沛公大概是天赋之才吧！ 
English: Zhang Liang therefore said: Pei Gong is probably a natural talent!

古文：故遂从不去。
现代文：于是便留下来不再他往。
English: So they followed him and did not leave him.

古文：沛公与良俱见景驹，欲请兵以攻丰。
现代文：刘邦与张良一同去进见景驹，想请求增拨兵力，以反攻丰邑。
English: Liu Bang and Zhang Liang went to Jingyao together to ask for more troops to counterattack Fengyi.

古文：时章邯司马尸二将兵北定楚地，屠相，至砀。
现代文：这时秦将章邯的向北占领楚的土地，洗劫屠戮相后，抵达砀。
English: At this time, Qin sent Zhang Ye to the north to occupy Chu's land, and after looting and slaughtering, he arrived in Qi.

古文：东阳宁君、沛公引兵西，战萧西，不利，还，收兵聚留。
现代文：东阳人宁君、刘邦随即领兵西进，在萧县的西面与秦军交锋，但因出战失利而退回，收拢兵力聚集在留。
English: Ningjun and Liu Bang, who were from Dongyang, immediately led their troops westward and clashed with the Qin army on the west side of Xiao County. However, they retreated after losing the battle and gathered their forces to stay.

古文：二月，攻砀，三日，拔之。收砀兵得六千人，与故合九千人。
现代文：二月，刘邦等攻打砀，历时三日，攻克了该城，收编了砀的降兵，得六千人，与以前的兵力汇合一处，达九千人。
English: In February, Liu Bang and others attacked Handan, which lasted for three days, conquered the city, collected Handan's troops, gained six thousand, and merged with the previous troops, reaching nine thousand.

古文：三月，攻下邑，拔之。还击丰，不下。
现代文：三月，刘邦等又率军攻打下邑，克复后，回击丰，却仍然未能攻下。
English: In March, Liu Bang and others led the army to attack the next town, and after the recovery, they returned to attack Feng, but still failed to capture it.

古文：广陵人召平为陈王徇广陵，未下。
现代文：广陵人召平为陈胜攻夺广陵，但没能攻陷。
English: Guangling people summoned Ping to conquer Guangling for Chen Sheng, but failed to conquer.

古文：闻陈王败走，章邯且至，乃渡江，矫陈王令，拜项梁为楚上柱国，曰： 江东已定，急引兵西击秦！ 
现代文：这时他闻悉陈胜兵败逃亡，章邯的军队就要来到，便渡过长江，假传陈胜的命令，授给项梁楚上柱国的官职，说： 长江以东已经平定，应火速率军向西攻打秦军！ 
English: At this time, he learned that Chen Sheng had been defeated and fled, and that Zhang Ye's army was about to arrive, so he crossed the Yangtze River and falsely transmitted Chen Sheng's order to give Xiang Liang Chu the official post of the pillar country, saying: The east of the Yangtze River has been pacified, and the rapid-fire army should attack the Qin army in the west!

古文：梁乃以八千人渡江而西。
现代文：项梁于是就领八千人渡过长江往西进发。
English: Therefore, Cao Liang led eight thousand people to cross the West River.

古文：闻陈婴已下东阳，使使欲与连和俱西。
现代文：听到陈婴已经攻克了东阳的消息，项梁即派出使者，想要与陈婴联合起来共同西进。
English: When he heard that Chen Ying had captured Dongyang, he sent an envoy to join Chen Ying and go west.

古文：陈婴者，故东阳令史，居县中，素信谨，称为长者。
现代文：陈婴这个人，是过去东阳县的令史，居住在县城中，为人一向诚信谨慎，被称作长者。
English: Chen Ying this person, originally Dongyang Lingshi, has always been honest and prudent in the county, and people call him a loyal elder.

古文：东阳少年杀其令，相聚得二万人，欲立婴为王。
现代文：东阳县的年轻人杀掉了县令，相聚得两万人，欲拥立陈婴为王。
English: The young men of Dongyang County killed the county magistrate, and twenty thousand people gathered to support Chen Yu as king.

古文：婴母谓婴曰： 自我为汝家妇，未尝闻汝先世之有贵者。
现代文：陈婴的母亲因此对陈婴说： 自从我作了你们家的媳妇以来，还不曾听说你的祖先中有过地位显赫的人。
English: Chen Zi's mother therefore said to Chen Zi: "Since I have been your daughter-in-law, I have never heard of anyone of your ancestors having a prominent position.

古文：今暴得大名，不祥；不如有所属。
现代文：而今突然获得大名声，不是什么好兆头。
English: Now all of a sudden they're getting a lot of publicity, which is not a good sign.

古文：事成，犹得封侯；事败，易以亡，非世所指名也。 
现代文：不如依附归属于他人，这样，事情成功了，仍然得以封侯，事情失败了，也容易逃亡，因为不是世上被指名道姓的人物。 
English: It is better to belong to others, so that if things succeed, you can still be imprisoned, and if things fail, it is easy to escape, because you are not a named person in the world.

古文：婴乃不敢为王，谓其军吏曰： 项氏世世将家，有名于楚，今欲举大事，将非其人不可。
现代文：陈婴于是不敢称王，对他的军官们说： 项姓世世代代为将门，在楚国享有盛名，如今想要办大事，将帅就非这种人不可。
English: Chen Ying then did not dare to call himself a king, and said to his officers: Qian surnamed has been a general for generations, and enjoys a high reputation in the State of Chu. Now, if you want to do big things, a general must be this kind of person.

古文：我倚名族，亡秦必矣！ 
现代文：我们依靠名家望族，灭亡秦朝便是必定的了！ 
English: We rely on famous families and noble families. The downfall of the Qin Dynasty is inevitable!

古文：其众从之，乃以兵属梁。
现代文：他的部下听从了他的话，即让部队归项梁统帅。
English: His subordinates obeyed his words, that is, let the troops return to the commander Xiang Liang.

古文：英布既破秦军，引兵而东；闻项梁西渡淮，布与蒲将军皆以其兵属焉。
现代文：英布已经击败了秦军，便领兵东进。听说项梁要西渡淮河，黥布和蒲将军就都将他们的部队归属于项梁指挥了。
English: Ying Bu had already defeated the Qin army and led his troops eastward. Hearing that Xiang Liang wanted to cross the Huai River to the west, Generals Zeng Bu and Pu assigned their troops to Xiang Liang's command.

古文：项梁众凡六七万人，军下邳。
现代文：项梁这时的部众共达六七万人，驻扎在下邳。
English: At that time, there were a total of sixty to seventy thousand troops stationed in the lower moat.

古文：景驹、秦嘉军彭城东，欲以距梁。
现代文：楚王景驹、将领秦嘉驻军彭城东面，想要抵抗项梁。
English: King Chu Jingyao and General Qin Jia, who were stationed in the east of Pengcheng, wanted to resist Xiang Liang.

古文：梁谓军吏曰： 陈王先首事，战不利，未闻所在。
现代文：项梁对军官们说： 陈胜首先起事，作战不利，不知去向。
English: Cao Liang said to the officers: Chen Sheng is the first to start the war, the war is unfavorable, I don't know where to go.

古文：今秦嘉倍陈王而立景驹，逆无道！ 
现代文：现在秦嘉背叛楚王陈胜而拥立景驹，实属大逆不道！ 
English: Now Qin Jia betrays King Chen Sheng of Chu and embraces King Jingjun, which is really a great treason!

古文：乃进兵击秦嘉，秦嘉军败走。
现代文：便进军攻打秦嘉，秦嘉的军队大败而逃。
English: He then marched to attack Qin Jia. Qin Jia's army was soundly defeated and fled.

古文：追之，至胡陵，嘉还战。一日，嘉死，军降；景驹走死梁地。
现代文：项梁领兵追击到胡陵，秦嘉回师对战了一天，秦嘉战死，他的军队即归降了。景驹逃跑，死在了梁地。
English: Xiang Liang led the pursuit to Huling. Qin Jia Hui's division fought for one day. Qin Jia was killed in the battle, and his army surrendered. Jing Yi fled and died in Liangdi.

古文：梁已并秦嘉军，军胡陵，将引军而西。
现代文：项梁已经兼并了秦嘉的军队，就驻扎在胡陵，将要率军西进。
English: Cao Liang had already annexed the army of Qin Jia, stationed in Huling, and was about to lead the army westward.

古文：章邯军至栗，项梁使别将硃鸡石、馀樊君与战。
现代文：章邯的军队这时抵达栗，项梁便命另统一军的将领朱鸡石、馀樊君与章军交战。
English: Zhang Ye's army arrived in Li County, and Xiang Liang's faction fought Zhu Jishi and Yu Xiqun.

古文：馀樊君死，硃鸡石军败，亡走胡陵。
现代文：馀樊君战死，朱鸡石的队伍吃了败仗，逃奔胡陵。
English: Yujun died in the battle, and Zhu Jishi's army was defeated and fled to Huling.

古文：梁乃引兵入薛，诛硃鸡石。
现代文：项梁于是率军进入薛，杀了朱鸡石。
English: Therefore, Cao Liang led the army into Xue and killed Zhu Jishi.

古文：沛公从骑百馀往见梁，梁与沛公卒五千人，五大夫将十人。
现代文：刘邦率百余名随从去拜见项梁。项梁给刘邦增拨了士兵五千名，五大夫级的军官十名。
English: Liu Bang led more than a hundred of his followers to visit Xiang Liang. Xiang Liang gave Liu Bang an additional five thousand soldiers and ten high-ranking officers.

古文：沛公还，引兵攻丰，拔之。
现代文：刘邦回去后，又领兵进攻丰邑，攻陷了该城。
English: After Pei Gong returned to the original place, he led the troops to attack Feng and recovered Feng County.

古文：雍齿奔魏。
现代文：雍齿投奔魏国。
English: Yong Zi fled to Wei.

古文：项梁使项羽别攻襄城，襄城坚守不下；已拔，皆坑之，还报。
现代文：项梁派项羽从另一路攻打襄城，襄城坚守，一时攻不下。待到攻陷后，项羽即将守城军民全部活埋掉，然后回报项梁。
English: Xiang Liang sent Xiang Yu to attack Xiangcheng from the other side. Xiangcheng held out and could not be attacked for a while. After the attack, Xiang Yu was about to bury all the soldiers and civilians alive, and then return to Xiang Liang.

古文：梁闻陈王定死，召诸别将会薛计事，沛公亦往焉。
现代文：项梁听说陈胜确实死了，便将各部将领召集到薛议事，刘邦也前往参加。
English: When Cao Liang heard that Chen Sheng was indeed dead, he summoned the generals of various ministries to Xue for deliberation, and Liu Bang also went to participate.

古文：居鄛人范增，年七十，素居家，好奇计，往说项梁曰： 陈胜败，固当。
现代文：居人范增，年已七十，一向住在家中，好出奇计，前去劝说项梁道： 陈胜的失败是本来就应当的。
English: Resident Fan Zeng, who is 70 years old and has always lived at home, was eager to come up with a plan to persuade Xiang Liang: Chen Sheng's defeat was inevitable.

古文：夫秦灭六国，楚最无罪。
现代文：秦朝灭亡六国，楚国最没有罪过。
English: Qin destroyed six countries, and Chu had the fewest mistakes.

古文：自怀王入秦不反，楚人怜之至今。
现代文：且自从怀王到秦国后一去不返，楚国人怀念他直至今日。
English: And ever since King Huai came to Qin and never returned, the people of Chu miss him to this day.

古文：故楚南公曰： 楚虽三户，亡秦必楚。 
现代文：因此楚南公说： 楚国即便是只剩下三户人家，灭亡秦国的也必定是楚国。 
English: Therefore, Chu Nankong said, "Even if there are only three families left in the State of Chu, it must be the State of Chu that will be the downfall of the State of Qin."

古文：今陈胜首事，不立楚后而自立，其势不长。
现代文：如今陈胜首先起事反秦，不拥立楚王的后裔而自立为王，他的势力不能长久。
English: Nowadays, Chen Sheng is the first to rise up against Qin. He does not support the descendants of King Chu and becomes king on his own. His power cannot last long.

古文：今君起江东，楚蜂起之将皆争附君者，以君世世楚将，为能复立楚之后也。 
现代文：现在您在江东起兵，楚地蜂拥而起的将领都争相归附您，正是因为您家世世代代是楚国的将领，故而能够重新拥立楚王后代的缘故啊！ 
English: The reason why you are now raising an army in Jiangsu and the generals flocking to follow you in Chu is because your family has been generals of Chu for generations and can re-establish the descendants of King Chu.

古文：于是项梁然其言，乃求得楚怀王孙心于民间，为人牧羊。夏，六月，立以为楚怀王，从民望也。
现代文：项梁当时认为他说的很对，就从民间寻找到楚怀王的孙子芈心，芈心这时正在为人家放羊；到夏季，六月，项梁即拥立他为楚怀王，以顺从百姓的愿望。
English: At that time, Xiang Liang thought that what he said was very right, so he searched for the grandson of King Chu Huai from the people. At that time, Xiang Xin was herding sheep for his family; in the summer, in June, Xiang Liang made him King Chu Huai, in order to comply with the wishes of the people.

古文：陈婴为上柱国，封五县，与怀王都盱眙。
现代文：陈婴任楚国的上柱国，赐封五县，跟随怀王建都盱眙。
English: Chen Ying served as the pillar state of Chu, granted five counties, and followed King Huai in building the capital.

古文：项梁自号为武信君。
现代文：项梁则自号为武信君。
English: Xiang Liang calls himself Wu Xinjun.

古文：张良说项梁曰： 君已立楚后，而韩诸公子横阳君成最贤，可立为王，益树党。 
现代文：张良劝说项梁道： 您已经拥立了楚王的后代，韩国的各位公子中，横阳君韩成最为贤能，可以立为王，以增树党羽。 
English: Zhang Liang persuaded Xiang Liang: You have already supported the descendants of King Chu. Among all the noblemen in South Korea, Hengyangjun Hancheng is the most capable and can be made king to increase the party's power.

古文：项梁使良求韩成，立以为韩王，以良为司徒，与韩王将千馀人西略韩地，得数城，秦辄复取之；往来为游兵颍川。
现代文：项梁于是便派张良找到韩成，立他为韩王。由张良任韩国的司徒，随韩王率一千余人向西攻取过去韩国的领地，夺得数城，但秦军随即又夺了回去。
English: Therefore, Cao Liang sent Zhang Liang to find Han Cheng and set him up as the king of Korea. Zhang Liang was appointed as the governor of Korea, followed by Han Wang and more than a thousand people to the west to conquer the territory of Korea in the past and captured several cities, but the Qin Army immediately took it back.

古文：章邯已破陈王，乃进兵击魏王于临济。魏王使周市出，请救于齐、楚。
现代文：如此韩军便在颍川一带来回游动。章邯已经打败了陈胜，即进兵临济攻打魏王。魏王派周出临济城，向齐、楚两国求援。
English: In this way, the Korean army caused a backlash in the Lijiang River. Zhang Ye had already defeated Chen Sheng, that is, he marched into Linji to attack Wei Wang. Wei Wang sent Zhou out of Linji City to seek help from Qi and Chu.

古文：齐王儋及楚将项它皆将兵随市救魏。
现代文：齐王田儋和楚将项它都率军随周去援救魏国。
English: Qi Wang Tian Xuan and Chu Zheng He both led their armies to follow Zhou to rescue Wei.

古文：章邯夜衔枚击，大破齐、楚军于临济下，杀齐王及周市。
现代文：章邯便在夜间命士兵口中衔枚进行突袭，在临济城下大败齐、楚的军队，杀了齐王和周。
English: Zhang Ye then conducted a surprise attack in the middle of the night, defeating Qi and Chu's army at the foot of Linji Castle, killing Qi Wang and Zhou.

古文：魏王咎为其民约降，约定，自烧杀。
现代文：魏王咎为他的百姓而订约投降，降约确定后，即自焚而亡。
English: The king of Wei signed a treaty of surrender for his people, and after the surrender was confirmed, he died by self-immolation.

古文：其弟豹亡走楚，楚怀王予魏豹数千人，复徇魏地。
现代文：魏咎的弟弟魏豹逃奔楚国，楚怀王给了魏豹数千人，重新夺取魏国的领地。
English: Wei Gui's younger brother Wei Pan fled to the State of Chu. King Chu Huai gave Wei Pan thousands of people to recapture the territory of Wei.

古文：齐田荣收其兄儋馀兵，东走东阿，章邯追围之。
现代文：齐国田荣收集他的党兄田儋的余部，向东撤退到东阿。章邯随后追击包围了田荣的军队。
English: Tian Rong of Qi gathered the remnants of his party brother Tian Xuan and retreated east to Dong'a. Zhang Xuan then pursued Tian Rong's encircled army.

古文：齐人闻齐王儋死，乃立故齐王建之弟假为王，田角为相，角弟间为将，以距诸侯。
现代文：齐国人这时听说田儋已死，便拥立已故齐王田建的弟弟田假为齐王，田角任相国，田角的弟弟田间为将军，以对抗诸侯国。
English: When the people of Qi heard that Tian Yao had died, they supported the late Qi king Tian Jian's younger brother Tian Gui as the king of Qi, Tian Jiao as the minister of state, and Tian Jiao's younger brother Tian Mei as the general to fight against the vassal states.

古文：秋，七月，大霖雨。
现代文：秋季，七月，大雨连绵不止。
English: In autumn, in July, there is continuous heavy rain.

古文：武信君引兵攻亢父，闻田荣之急，乃引兵击破章邯军东阿下，章邯走而西。
现代文：武信君项梁率军攻打亢父，闻悉田荣危急，就领兵到东阿城下击败了章邯的军队。
English: Wu Xinjun Xiang Liang led the army to attack his father, and when he heard that Tian Rong was in danger, he led the army to Donga Castle and defeated Zhang Ye's army.

古文：田荣引兵东归齐。
现代文：章邯向西逃跑。田荣于是率军往东返回齐国。
English: Zhang Ye fled to the west, and Tian Rong led his army to the east to return to Qi.

古文：武信君独追北，使项羽、沛公别攻城阳，屠之。
现代文：项梁独自引兵追击败逃的秦军，派项羽、刘邦从另一路攻打城阳，屠灭了全城。
English: Xiang Liang single-handedly led an army to chase and defeat the fleeing Qin army, and sent Xiang Yu and Liu Bang to attack Chengyang from another direction, slaughtering the entire city.

古文：楚军军濮阳东，复与章邯战，又破之。
现代文：楚军驻扎在濮阳东面，重又与章邯的军队交战，再次打败了秦军。
English: The Chu army was stationed in the east of Fenyang, and again fought with the army of Zhang Ye, again defeating the Qin army.

古文：章邯复振，守濮阳，环水。
现代文：章邯重新振作起来，坚守濮阳，挖沟引水环城自固。
English: Zhangye reinvigorated the drums, guarding Shenyang, digging trenches to draw water and self-strengthening.

古文：沛公、项羽去，攻定陶。
现代文：项梁、刘邦因此撤兵，去攻打定陶。
English: As a result, Xiang Liang and Liu Bang withdrew their troops and attacked Dingtao.

古文：八月，田荣击逐齐王假，假亡走楚，田角亡走赵。田间前救赵，因留不敢归。
现代文：八月，田荣追击齐王田假，田假逃奔到楚国。田间在此之间到赵国请求救兵，因此留在那里不敢回国。
English: In August, Tian Rong chased down the king of Qi, Tian Gui, and Tian Gui fled to Chu. In the meantime, Tian Mi went to Zhao to ask for help, so he did not dare to return home.

古文：田荣乃立儋子市为齐王，荣相之，田横为将，平齐地。
现代文：田荣便立田儋的儿子田为齐王，田荣自任齐相，田横为将军，平定齐国的领地。
English: Tian Rong then made Tian Xuan's son, Tian, the king of Qi, Tian Rong appointed himself the Qi minister, and Tian Yang the general, and conquered the territory of Qi.

古文：章邯兵益盛，项梁数使使告齐、赵发兵共击章邯。
现代文：这时章邯的兵力增大，项梁几次派使者去通告齐国和赵国出兵共同攻打章邯。
English: At this time, Zhang Ye's military strength increased, and Xiang Liang sent envoys several times to announce that Qi and Zhao would send troops to jointly attack Zhang Ye.

古文：田荣曰： 楚杀田假，赵杀角、间，乃出兵。 
现代文：田荣说： 如果楚国杀掉田假，赵国杀了田角、田间，我就出兵。 
English: Tian Rong said, "If Chu kills off Tian Fu, and Zhao kills off Tian Kok and Tian Ma, I will send troops."

古文：楚、赵不许。田荣怒，终不肯出兵。
现代文：楚、赵两国不答应，田荣于是大怒，始终不肯出兵。
English: Chu and Zhao did not agree, so Tian Rong was furious and refused to send troops.

古文：郎中令赵高恃恩专恣，以私怨诛杀人众多，恐大臣入朝奏事言之，乃说二世曰： 天子之所以贵者，但以闻声，群臣莫得见其面故也。
现代文：秦朝郎中令赵高仰仗着受皇帝恩宠而专权横行，因报他的私怨杀害了很多人，因此恐怕大臣们到朝廷奏报政务时揭发他，就劝二世说： 天子之所以尊贵，不过是因为群臣只能听到他的声音，而不能见到他的容颜罢了。
English: Zhao Gao Rong, the second-in-command of the Qin Dynasty, who was favored by the emperor, exercised arbitrary power and killed many people for reporting his private grudges. Therefore, I am afraid that the ministers would expose him when reporting on government affairs to the court, so I advised the second generation to say: The reason why the Son of Heaven is noble is simply because the ministers can only hear his voice, but cannot see his face.

古文：且陛下富于春秋，未必尽通诸事。今坐朝廷，谴举有不当者，则见短于大臣，非所以示神明于天下也。
现代文：况且陛下还很年轻，未必对件件事情都熟悉，现在坐在朝廷上听群臣奏报政务，若有赏罚不当之处，就会把自己的短处暴露给大臣们，似此便不能向天下人显示圣明了。
English: Moreover, His Majesty is still very young and may not be familiar with everything. Now, he is sitting in the Imperial Court listening to his ministers report on government affairs. If there is anything improper in the rewards and punishments, he will expose his shortcomings to the ministers. In this way, he will not be able to show his wisdom to the world.

古文：陛下不如深拱禁中，与臣及侍中习法者待事，事来有以揆之。
现代文：所以陛下不如拱手深居宫禁之中，与我和熟习法令规章的侍中们在一起等待事务奏报，大臣们将事务报上来才研究处理。
English: Therefore, it would be better for His Majesty to stay under house arrest and wait for the report of affairs with me and the attendants who are familiar with the laws and regulations. The ministers will study and deal with the report of affairs.

古文：如此，则大臣不敢奏疑事，天下称圣主矣。 
现代文：这样，大臣们就不敢奏报是非难辨的事情，天下便都称道您为圣明的君主了。 
English: In this way, ministers do not dare to report things that are difficult to distinguish between right and wrong, and the whole world will praise you as the monarch of the holy light.

古文：二世用其计，乃不坐朝廷见大臣，常居禁中。赵高侍中用事，事皆决于赵高。
现代文：二世采纳了赵高的这一建议，不再坐朝接见大臣，常常住在深宫之中，赵高侍奉左右，独掌大权，一切事情都由他来决定。
English: Zhao Gao's suggestion was adopted by the second generation, and he no longer sat in the court to receive ministers, but often lived in the deep palace. Zhao Gao served on the right and left, wielded great power, and everything was decided by him.

古文：高闻李斯以为言，乃见丞相曰： 关东群盗多，今上急，益发繇，治阿房宫，聚狗马无用之物。
现代文：赵高听说李斯对此不满而有非议，便去会见丞相李斯说： 关东地区的盗贼纷纷起来闹事，现在皇上却加紧增征夫役去修建阿房宫，并搜集狗马一类无用的玩物。
English: Zhao Gao heard that Li Si was dissatisfied with this and had a complaint, so he went to meet with Premier Li Si and said: Thieves in the Kanto region have risen up to make trouble, but now the emperor is stepping up the recruitment of men to build the Afang Palace and collect useless toys such as dogs and horses.

古文：臣欲谏，为位贱，此真君侯之事。君何不谏？ 
现代文：我想进行规劝，但因地位卑贱不敢言。这可实在是您的事情啊，您为什么不去劝谏呢？ 
English: I want to persuade him, but I dare not because of my lowly position. This is really your business. Why don't you go and persuade him?

古文：李斯曰： 固也，吾欲言之久矣。
现代文：李斯道： 本来是该如此啊，我早就想说了。
English: "It's true, I've been wanting to talk for a long time," Lees said.

古文：今时上不坐朝廷，常居深宫。吾所言者，不可传也。欲见，无闲。 
现代文：但如今皇上不坐朝接见大臣听取奏报，经常住在深宫中，我所要说的话，不能传达进去，而想要觐见，又没有机会。 
English: But now the Emperor does not sit in the morning to receive ministers and listen to reports, and often lives in the deep palace. What I have to say cannot be conveyed, and if I want to see him, there is no opportunity.

古文：赵高曰： 君诚能谏，请为君侯上闲，语君。 
现代文：赵高说： 倘若您真的要进行规劝，就请让我在皇上得空的时候通知您。 
English: Zhao Gao said, "If you really want to persuade, please let me inform you when the emperor is free.

古文：于是赵高待二世方燕乐，妇女居前，使人告丞相： 上方闲，可奏事。 丞相至宫门上谒。
现代文：于是赵高等到二世正在欢宴享乐、美女站满面前时，派人通告李斯： 皇上正有空闲，可以进宫奏报事情。 李斯即到宫门求见。
English: So Zhao Gaoli sent a messenger to Li Si when the Emperor was enjoying a banquet and the beautiful women were standing in front of him, to inform him that the Emperor was free and could come to the palace to report the matter. Li Si went to the palace gate to see him.

古文：如此者三。
现代文：如此接连三次。
English: This happened three times in a row.

古文：二世怒曰： 吾常多闲日，丞相不来；吾方燕私，丞相辄来请事！
现代文：二世大怒道： 我常常有空闲的日子，丞相不来。我正在闲居休息，丞相就来请示奏报！
English: "I often have days off, but the prime minister doesn't come. I'm just relaxing, and the prime minister comes to ask for the report!" said the 2nd generation angrily.

古文：丞相岂少我哉，且固我哉？ 
现代文：丞相这岂不是轻视我年幼看不起我吗？ 
English: Don't you despise my youth and look down on me, Prime Minister?

古文：赵高因曰： 夫沙丘之谋，丞相与焉。
现代文：赵高便趁机说道： 沙丘伪造遗诏逼扶苏自杀的密谋，丞相参与了。
English: Zhao Gao then took the opportunity to say: Sand Dunes forged the will to force Fuxu to commit suicide, and the prime minister participated.

古文：今陛下已立为帝，而丞贵不益，此其意亦望裂地而王矣。
现代文：现在陛下已立为皇帝，而丞相的地位却没有提高，他的意思也是想要割地称王了。
English: Now that his majesty has become emperor, and the position of the prime minister has not improved, he also wants to become king.

古文：且陛下不问臣，臣不敢言。丞相长男李由为三川守，楚盗陈胜等皆丞相傍县之子，以故楚盗公行，过三川城，守不肯击。
现代文：而且陛下若不问我，我还不敢说，丞相的长子李由任三川郡守，楚地盗贼陈胜等都是丞相邻县的人，因此这些盗贼敢于公然横行，以致经过三川城的时候，李由只是据城防守不肯出击。
English: Moreover, if His Majesty did not ask me, I would not dare to say that the eldest son of the prime minister, Li Yu, was the governor of Mikawa County, and the Chu thieves, Chen Sheng, were all from neighboring counties. Therefore, these thieves dared to openly run amok, so that when passing through Mikawa City, Li Yu only defended the city and refused to attack.

古文：高闻其文书相往来，未得其审，故未敢以闻。
现代文：我听说他们还相互有文书往来，因尚未了解确实，所以没敢奏报给陛下。
English: I had heard that there had been correspondence between them, but I hadn't investigated it, so I didn't dare report it to His Majesty.

古文：且丞相居外，权重于陛下。 
现代文：况且丞相在外面，权势比陛下大。 
English: Moreover, the chancellor is outside and has more power than His Majesty.

古文：二世以为然，欲案丞相，恐其不审，乃先使人按验三川守与盗通状。
现代文：二世认为赵高说得有理，便想查办丞相，但又怕事实不确，于是就先派人去审核三川郡守与盗贼相勾结的情况。
English: The second generation thought that Zhao Gao was right, so they wanted to investigate the prime minister, but they were afraid that the facts were not accurate, so they first sent someone to check the collusion between the governor of Mikawa County and the thieves.

古文：李斯闻之，因上书言赵高之短曰： 高擅利擅害，与陛下无异。
现代文：李斯听说了这件事，即上奏书揭发赵高的短处说： 赵高专擅赏罚大权，他的权力跟陛下没有什么区别了。
English: Li Si heard about this matter, that is, Zhao Gao's shortcomings were exposed in the report, and said: Zhao Gao has the power to reward and punish, and his power is no different from that of His Majesty.

古文：昔田常相齐简公，窃其恩威，下得百姓，上得群臣，卒弑齐简公而取齐国，此天下所明知也。
现代文：从前田常当齐国国君简公的相国，窃取了齐简公的恩德威势，下得百姓拥戴，上获群臣支持，终于杀掉了简公，夺取了齐国，这是天下周知的吏事啊。
English: Maeda often served as the consort of Qigong ruler Jian Gong, and stole Jian Gong's nobility and power, won the people's support, and won the support of the courtiers, and finally killed Jian Gong and seized Qigong, which is a well-known official matter.

古文：今高有邪佚之志，危反之行，私家之富，若田氏之于齐矣，而又贪欲无厌，求利不止，列势次主，其欲无穷，劫陛下之威信，其志若韩玘为韩安相也。
现代文：如今赵高有邪恶放纵的心意，阴险反叛的行为，他私家的富足，与田氏在齐国一样，而又贪得无厌，追求利禄不止，地位权势仅次于君主，欲望无穷，窃取陛下的威信，他的野心就犹如韩当韩国国君韩安的相时那样了。
English: Today, Zhao Gao has an evil and indulgent mind, insidious and rebellious behavior, his private wealth is the same as that of the Tian clan in Qi, but he is insatiable, he pursues lucrative profits, his status and power are second only to the monarch, his desires are endless, and he steals the prestige of His Majesty. His ambition is like that of Han when he was the king of South Korea, Han An.

古文：陛下不图，臣恐其必为变也。 
现代文：陛下不设法对付，我怕他是必定会作乱的。 
English: If His Majesty doesn't do something about it, I'm afraid he's bound to make trouble.

古文：二世曰： 何哉！
现代文：二世说： 这是什么话！
English: The second said, "What is this saying?

古文：夫高，故宦人也，然不为安肆志，不以危易心，洁行修善，自使至此，以忠得进，以信守位，朕实贤之。
现代文：赵高本来就是个宦官，但他却从不因处境安逸而放肆地胡作非为，不因处境危急而改变忠心，他行为廉洁向善，靠自己的努力才得到今天的地位。他因忠诚而得到进用，因守信义而保持职位，朕确实认为他贤能。
English: Zhao Gao was originally a eunuch, but he never indulged in wanton misconduct due to his comfortable situation, nor did he change his loyalty due to a critical situation. He acted with integrity and kindness, and only got to where he is today through his own efforts. He was promoted because of his loyalty, and kept his position because of his faithfulness. I really think he is capable.

古文：而君疑之，何也？
现代文：但您却怀疑他，这是为什么呢？
English: But you doubt him. Why is that?

古文：且朕非属赵君，当谁任哉！
现代文：而且朕不依靠赵高，又当任用谁呀！
English: And I don't rely on Zhao Gao, who should I appoint?

古文：且赵君为人，精廉强力，下知人情，上能适朕，君其勿疑！ 
现代文：何况赵高的为人，精明廉洁、强干有力，对下能了解人情民心，对上则能适合朕的心意，就请您不要猜疑了罢！ 
English: What's more, Zhao Gao is a shrewd, incorruptible, strong and powerful person. He can understand the human feelings and the people's hearts of his subordinates, and can suit my heart and mind of his superiors. Please don't be suspicious!

古文：二世雅爱信高，恐李斯杀之，乃私告赵高。
现代文：二世非常喜爱赵高，唯恐李斯把他杀掉，便暗中将李斯的话告诉了赵高。
English: The second generation was very fond of Zhao Gao. To prevent Li Si from killing him, he secretly told Zhao Gao what Li Si had said.

古文：高曰： 丞相所患者独高，高已死，丞相即欲为田常所为。 
现代文：赵高说： 丞相所担心的只是我一个人，我死了，丞相就要干田常所干的那些事了。 
English: Zhao Gao said, "I am the only one that the prime minister is worried about. After my death, the prime minister can do what Tian Chang did."

古文：是时，盗贼益多，而关中卒发东击盗者无已。右丞相冯去疾、左丞相李斯、将军冯劫进谏曰： 关东群盗并起，秦发兵追击，所杀亡甚众，然犹不止。
现代文：此时，盗贼日益增多，而秦朝廷不停地征发关中士兵去东方攻打盗贼，右丞相冯去疾、左丞相李斯、将军冯劫便为此提出规劝说： 关东群盗同时起事，秦朝发兵进剿，所诛杀的非常多，但仍然不能止息。
English: At this time, the number of thieves was increasing day by day, and the Qin Dynasty was constantly conscripting and sending soldiers from Guanzhong to the East to fight the thieves. The Minister of the Right, Feng Deji, the Minister of the Left, Li Si, and General Feng Rong proposed persuasion for this: The Guandong bandits revolted at the same time, and the Qin Dynasty sent soldiers to the Guanzhong. They killed a lot of people, but they still could not stop.

古文：盗多，皆以戍、漕、转、作事苦，税赋大也。
现代文：盗贼之所以多，都是由于兵役、水陆运输和建筑等事劳苦不堪，赋税太重的缘故啊。
English: The reason why there are so many thieves is due to the fact that military service, land and water transport, and construction are hard work, and taxes are too heavy.

古文：请且止阿房宫作者，减省四边戍、转。 
现代文：恳请暂时让修建阿房宫的役夫们停工，减少四方戌守边防的兵役、运输等徭役。 
English: I implore you to temporarily suspend the construction of the Afang Palace and reduce the military service, transportation and other services of the four parties guarding the border.

古文：二世曰： 凡所为贵有天下者，得肆意极欲，主重明法，下不敢为非，以制御海内矣。
现代文：二世说： 大凡所以能尊贵至拥有天下的原因，就在于能够为所欲为、极尽享乐，君主重在修明法制，臣下便不敢为非作歹，凭此即可驾驭天下了。
English: The second generation said: The reason why the great can be honored to own the world is that they can do whatever they want and enjoy themselves to the fullest. The monarch focuses on clarifying the legal system, and his subjects do not dare to do anything wrong. With this, they can control the world.

古文：夫虞、夏之主，贵为天子，亲处穷苦之实以徇百姓，尚何于法！
现代文：虞、夏的君主，虽然高贵为天子，却亲自处于穷苦的实境，以为百姓献身，这还有什么可效法的呢？
English: The emperors of Yu and Xia, although noble as the sons of heaven, were themselves in a real situation of poverty and devoted themselves to the people. What else can be imitated?

古文：且先帝起诸侯，兼天下，天下已定，外攘四夷以安边境，作宫室以章得意，而君观先帝功业有绪。
现代文：况且先帝由诸侯起家，兼并了天下。天下已经平定，就对外排除四方蛮族以安定边境，对内兴修宫室以表达得意的心情，而你们是看到了先帝业绩的开创的。
English: Moreover, the first emperor started from the feudal lords and annexed the whole country. The whole country has been pacified. He eliminated the barbarians from four directions to stabilize the border, and expressed his satisfaction with the construction of the imperial palace, and you have seen the pioneering performance of the first emperor.

古文：今朕即位，二年之间，群盗并起，君不能禁，又欲罢先帝之所为，是上无以报先帝，次不为朕尽忠力，何以在位！ 
现代文：如今朕即位，两年的时间里，盗贼便蜂拥而起，你们不能加以禁止，又想要废弃先帝创立的事业，这即是上不能报答先帝，下不能为朕尽忠效力，如此你们凭什么占据着自己的官位呢？ 
English: Now that I am enthroned, in two years' time, thieves will swarm. You can't ban them, and you want to abandon the cause created by the former emperor. This means that you can't repay the former emperor, and you can't be loyal to me. So why do you occupy your official position?

古文：下去疾、斯、劫吏，案责他罪。
现代文：于是就将冯去疾、李斯、冯劫交给司法官吏，审讯责罚他们的其他罪过。
English: Put Feng Deji, Li Si, and Feng Rong under the custody of prison officers, and investigate and prosecute them for various other crimes.

古文：去疾、劫自杀，独李斯就狱。
现代文：冯去疾、冯劫自杀了，只有李斯被下至狱中。
English: Feng Dexia and Feng Gao committed suicide. Only Li Si was sent to prison.

古文：二世以属赵高治之，责斯与子由谋反状，皆收捕宗族、宾客。
现代文：二世即交给赵高处理，查究李斯与儿子李由进行谋反的情况，将他们的家族、宾客全都逮捕了。
English: The second generation immediately handed it over to Zhao Gao to deal with, investigated the situation of Li Si and his son Li Yu plotting a rebellion, and arrested all their family members and guests.

古文：赵高治斯，榜掠千馀，不胜痛，自诬服。
现代文：赵高惩治李斯，笞打他一千余板，李斯不堪忍受苦痛，含冤认罪。
English: Zhao Gao punished Li Si and tortured him more than a thousand times. Li Si could not bear the painful torture and confessed wrongfully.

古文：斯所以不死者，自负其辩，有功，实无反心，欲上书自陈，幸二世寤而赦之。
现代文：李斯之所以不自杀，是因为他自恃能言善辩，有功劳，实无反叛之心，而想要上书作自我辩解，希望二世能幡然醒悟，将他赦免。
English: The reason why Rees did not commit suicide was because he believed himself to be eloquent, meritorious, and not really rebellious, and he wanted to write a book to justify himself, hoping that Nisei would suddenly wake up and pardon him.

古文：乃从狱中上书曰： 臣为丞相治民，三十馀年矣。
现代文：于是就从狱中上奏书说： 我任丞相治理百姓，已经三十多年了。
English: So he wrote a letter from prison, saying: I have been appointed chancellor to govern the people for more than thirty years.

古文：逮秦地之狭隘，不过千里，兵数十万。
现代文：曾赶上当初秦国疆土狭小，方圆不过千里，士兵仅数十万的时代。
English: It had caught up with the era when the territory of Qin was small and narrow, with a radius of only thousands of miles and only hundreds of thousands of soldiers.

古文：臣尽薄材，阴行谋臣，资之金玉，使游说诸侯；阴修甲兵，饬政教，官斗士，尊功臣；故终以胁韩，弱魏，破燕、赵，夷齐、楚，卒兼六国，虏其王，立秦为天子。
现代文：我竭尽自己微薄的才能，暗地里派遣谋臣，供给他们金玉珍宝，让他们去游说诸侯，同时暗中整顿武装，整治政令、教化崐，擢升敢战善斗的将士，尊崇有功之臣。故而终于能以此胁迫韩国，削弱魏国，击破燕国、赵国，铲平齐国、楚国，最终兼并六国，俘获了它们的国君，拥立秦王为天子。
English: I did my best with my meager talents to secretly send advisers, provide them with precious stones and gold, and let them lobby the lords. At the same time, I secretly rectified the armed forces, rectified the government orders, educated the cadres, promoted the soldiers who dared to fight well, and honored the meritorious vassals. Therefore, I was finally able to use this to coerce South Korea, weaken Wei, break through Yan, Zhao, and level Qi and Chu. Finally, I annexed six countries, captured their kings, and established King Qin as the Son of Heaven.

古文：又北逐胡、貉，南定北越，以见秦之强。
现代文：接着又在北方驱逐胡人、貉人，在南方戡定百越部族，以显扬秦王朝的强大。
English: Next, he expelled the Hu people and the Qiang people in the north, and settled hundreds of Yue tribes in the south to show the power of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：更克画，平斗斛、度量，文章布之天下，以树秦之名。
现代文：并改革文字，统一度量衡和制度，颁布于天下，以树立秦王朝的威名。
English: He also reformed the written language, unified the system of weights and measures, and promulgated it to the world in order to establish the prestige of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：此皆臣之罪也，臣当死久矣！
现代文：这些都是我的罪状啊，早就应当被处死了！
English: These are my crimes, I should have been executed long ago!

古文：上幸尽其能力，乃得至今。
现代文：只是由于皇上希望我竭尽所能，才得以活到今日。
English: It is only because the Emperor wanted me to do my best that I am able to live to this day.

古文：愿陛下察之！ 
现代文：故望陛下明察！ 
English: Your Majesty, please see clearly!

古文：书上，赵高使吏弃去不奏，曰： 囚安得上书！ 
现代文：奏书呈上后，赵高却命狱吏丢弃而不予上报，并且说道： 囚犯怎么能上书！ 
English: After the report was submitted, Zhao Gao asked the prison officer to throw it aside and not report it, saying: "How can a prisoner submit a report!

古文：赵高使其客十馀辈诈为御史、谒者、侍中，更往覆讯斯，斯更以其实对，辄使人复榜之。
现代文：赵高派他的门客十多人假充御史、谒者、侍中，轮番审讯李斯，李斯则翻供以实情对答，于是赵高就让人再行拷打他。
English: Zhao Gao sent more than a dozen of his clients to pretend to be the imperial historian, the eunuch, and the chamberlain to interrogate Li Si in turn. Li Si turned over the confession and answered with the truth, so Zhao Gao had someone torture him again.

古文：后二世使人验斯，斯以为如前，终不更言。辞服，奏当上。
现代文：后来二世派人去验证李斯的供词，李斯以为还与以前一样，便终究不敢更改口供，在供词上承认了自己的罪状。
English: Later, the court sent someone to verify Li Si's confession. Li Si thought it was still the same as before, so he finally dared not change his confession and admitted his guilt in the confession.

古文：二世喜曰： 微赵君，几为丞相所卖！ 
现代文：判决书呈上去后，二世高兴地说： 如果没有赵君，我几乎就被丞相出卖了！ 
English: After the verdict was announced, the second son said happily: "If it weren't for Zhao Jun, I would have almost been betrayed by the prime minister!"

古文：及二世所使案三川守由者至，则楚兵已击杀之。
现代文：待二世派出去调查三川郡守李由的人抵达三川时，楚军已经杀死了李由。
English: By the time the person sent by the second emperor to investigate Li You, the governor of Mikawa County, arrived in Mikawa, the Chu army had already killed Li You.

古文：使者来，会职责相下吏，高皆妄为反辞以相傅会，遂具斯五刑，论腰斩咸阳市。
现代文：使者回来，正逢李斯被交给司法官吏审问治罪，赵高即捏造了李由谋反的罪证，与李斯的罪状合在一起，于是叛处李斯五刑，在咸阳街市上腰斩。
English: When the envoy returned, Li Si was handed over to judicial officials to be interrogated and punished. Zhao Gao fabricated the evidence of Li Yu's crime of plotting rebellion and combined it with Li Si's crime, so Li Si was sentenced to five years in prison for treason and was beheaded on Xianyang Street.

古文：斯出狱，与其中子俱执。顾谓其中子曰： 吾欲与若复牵黄犬，俱出上蔡东门逐狡兔，岂可得乎！ 
现代文：李斯走出监狱时，与他的次子一同被押解，李斯便回头对次子说： 我真想和你重牵黄狗，共同出上蔡东门去追逐狡兔，但哪里还能办得到哇！ 
English: When Li Si walked out of the prison, he was escorted out together with his second son. Li Si turned back to his second son and said, "I really want to take the yellow dog back with you and go out to the Cai Dongmen together to chase the cunning rabbit, but where else can I do it? Wow!

古文：遂父子相哭，而夷三族。
现代文：于是父子二人相对痛哭。李斯三族的人也都被诛杀了。
English: As a result, father and son cried bitterly to each other, and people from all three ethnic groups were executed.

古文：二世乃以赵高为丞相，事无大小皆决焉。
现代文：二世便任命赵高为丞相，事无巨细，全由赵高决定。
English: The second emperor then appointed Zhao Gao as chancellor, and everything, no matter how big or small, was decided by Zhao Gao.

古文：项梁已破章邯于东阿，引兵西，北至定陶，再破秦军。
现代文：武信君项梁已在东阿击败了章邯的军队，就领兵西进，等到达定陶时，再度打垮秦军。
English: Wu Xinjun Xiang Liang had already defeated Zhang Ye's army in Dong'a, so he led the army westward, and when he reached Dingtao, he once again defeated the Qin army.

古文：项羽、沛公又与秦军战于雍丘，大破之，斩李由。
现代文：项羽、刘邦又在雍丘与秦军交战，大败秦军，斩杀了三川郡守李由。
English: Xiang Yu and Liu Bang also fought with the Qin army in Yongqiu, defeated the Qin army, and killed Li Yu, the governor of Mikawa County.

古文：项梁益轻秦，有骄色。
现代文：项梁于是更加轻视秦军，显露出骄傲的神色。
English: After the rebel army won several victories in a row, Xiang Liang nurtured the idea of despising the Qin army, and pride overflowed.

古文：宋义谏曰： 战胜而将骄卒惰者，败。
现代文：宋义便规劝道： 打了胜仗后，如若将领骄傲、士兵怠惰，必定会失败。
English: Song Yi then advised: After winning the war, if the generals are proud and the soldiers are lazy, they will surely fail.

古文：今卒少惰矣，秦兵日益，臣为君畏之。 
现代文：现在士兵已有些怠惰了，而秦兵却在一天天地增多，我替您担心啊！ 
English: Now the soldiers are slacking a little, and the Qin soldiers are increasing day by day. I'm worried about you.

古文：项梁弗听。
现代文：但项梁不听从劝告，竟又派宋义出使齐国。
English: Xiang Liang did not listen to the advice.

古文：馀乃使宋义使于齐，道遇齐使者高陵君显，曰： 公将见武信君乎？ 
现代文：宋义在途中遇到齐国的使者高陵君显，问他道： 您将要去会见武信君吗？ 
English: On the way, Song Yi met Gao Ling Junxian, the envoy of Qi, and asked him: Are you going to meet Wu Xinjun?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：显回答说： 是啊。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：曰： 臣论武信君军必败。
现代文：宋义道： 我论定武信君必会失败。
English: Song Yi said: I conclude that the army of Wuxin must have failed.

古文：公徐行即免死，疾行则及祸。 
现代文：您慢点去当可免遭一死，快步赶去就将遭受祸殃。 
English: If you walk slowly, you can avoid death, but if you walk fast, you will suffer.

古文：二世悉起兵益章邯击楚军，大破之定陶，项梁死。
现代文：这时二世调动全部军队增援章邯攻打楚军，在定陶大败楚军，项梁战死。
English: At this time, the Second Emperor mobilized the entire army to reinforce Zhangye to attack the Chu army, and defeated the Chu army in Dingtao. Xiang Liang died in the battle.

古文：时连雨，自七月至九月。
现代文：时值连阴雨，自七月到九月雨落不止。
English: The weather is cloudy and rainy all the time, and it rains incessantly from July to September.

古文：项羽、沛公攻外黄未下，去，攻陈留。闻武信君死，士卒恐，乃与将军吕臣引兵而东，徙怀王自盱眙都彭城。
现代文：项羽、刘邦攻打外黄，未能攻下，便撤军，转攻陈留，闻听项梁已死，楚兵惊恐，项羽、刘邦就和将军吕臣一起率军东撤，并把怀王芈心从盱眙迁出，建都彭城。
English: Xiang Yu and Liu Bang attacked Waihuang, but failed to capture it, so they withdrew and attacked Chenliu. Upon hearing that Xiang Liang had died, the Chu soldiers panicked. Xiang Yu and Liu Bang led the army eastward together with General Lv Chen, and moved the capital of Pengcheng.

古文：吕臣军彭城东，项羽军彭城西，沛公军砀。
现代文：吕臣驻军彭城东面，项羽驻扎在彭城西面，刘邦则屯驻砀地。
English: Lv Chen was stationed in the east of Pengcheng, Xiang Yu was stationed in the west of Pengcheng, and Pei Gong was stationed in Zhuo.

古文：魏豹下魏二十馀城，楚怀王立豹为魏王。
现代文：魏豹率军攻克了故魏国的二十多个城市，楚怀王即封立魏豹为魏王。
English: The Wei panther led the army to conquer more than twenty cities in the former state of Wei. King Chu Huai made the Wei panther the king of Wei.

古文：后九月，楚怀王并吕臣、项羽军，自将之；以沛公为砀郡长，封武安侯，将砀郡兵；封项羽为长安侯，号为鲁公；吕臣为司徒，其父吕青为令尹。
现代文：闰九月，楚怀王合并吕臣、项羽二人的军队，由自己统率，任命刘邦为砀郡长，封为武安侯，统领砀郡兵马；封项羽为长安侯，号称鲁公；任命吕臣为司徒，他的父亲吕青为令尹。
English: In leap September, King Chu Hui merged the two armies of Lv Chen and Xiang Yu, led by himself, and appointed Liu Bang to be the governor of Jie County, named Wu An Hou, and commanded the soldiers and horses of Jie County; named Xiang Yu to be the governor of Chang'an, known as Lu Gong; appointed Lv Chen to be Stu, and his father Lv Qing to be Ling Yin.

古文：章邯已破项梁，以为楚地兵不足忧，乃渡河，北击赵，大破之。引兵至邯郸，皆徙其民河内，夷其城郭。
现代文：章邯已经击垮了项梁的部队，便认为楚地的兵事不值得忧虑，就渡过黄河，向北攻打赵，大败赵军，而后率军抵达邯郸，将城中百姓全部迁徙到河内，铲平了邯郸的城郭。
English: Zhang Qian had already defeated Xiang Liang's troops, so he thought that Chu's military affairs were not worth worrying about, so he crossed the Yellow River, attacked Zhao to the north, defeated Zhao's army, and then led the army to arrive in Handan, migrated all the people in the city to Hanoi, and leveled Handan's castle.

古文：张耳与赵王歇走入巨鹿城，王离围之。
现代文：张耳与赵王歇逃入钜鹿城，秦将王离领兵将钜鹿团团围住。
English: Zhang Er and Zhao Wang Xie fled into the Elk City, and the Qin general Wang Li led the troops to surround the Elk.

古文：陈馀北收常山兵，得数万人，军巨鹿北。章邯军巨鹿南棘原。
现代文：陈馀向北收集常山的兵士，获得几万人，驻扎在钜鹿北面，章邯驻军钜鹿南面的棘原。
English: Chen Yu went north to gather soldiers from Changshan, gained tens of thousands, and stationed them in the north of Elk, while Zhang Ye's garrison was stationed in the south of Elk.

古文：赵数请救于楚。
现代文：赵于是几次向楚请求救援。
English: Zhao then asked Chu several times for help.

古文：高陵君显在楚，见楚王曰： 宋义论武信君之军必败，居数日，军果败。
现代文：这时齐国的使者高陵君显正在楚，就进见楚怀王说： 宋义推论武信君的军队必败，过了不几天，项军果然失败。
English: At this time, Gao Lingjun, the emissary of the State of Qi, was in Chu, and he went to see King Chu Huai and said: Song Yi deduced that the army of Emperor Wuxin would be defeated. A few days later, the Xiang army was defeated.

古文：兵未战而先见败征，此可谓知兵矣。 
现代文：军队尚未开战就预见到了败亡的征兆，这可以说是颇懂得兵法了！ 
English: The army has not yet gone to war, but has foreseen the signs of defeat, which can be said to be quite understanding of the art of war!

古文：王召宋义与计事而大说之，因置以为上将军。项羽为次将，范增为末将，以救赵。
现代文：楚怀王即召宋义前来商议事情，十分喜欢他，因此便任命他为上将军，项羽为次将，范增为末将，领兵去援救赵国。
English: King Chuhai immediately summoned Song Yi to come and discuss the matter. He liked him very much, so he appointed him as the senior general, Xiang Yu as the second general, and Fan Zeng as the last general to lead the troops to rescue Zhao.

古文：诸别将皆属宋义，号为 卿子冠军 。
现代文：各路部队的将领也都归宋义统领，号称他为 卿子冠军 。
English: The generals of all the troops were also under the command of Song Yi, who was known as the champion of the nobles.

古文：初，楚怀王与诸将约： 先入定关中者王之。 
现代文：当初，楚怀王与各路将领约定： 谁先攻入关中，谁就在关中称王。 
English: At the beginning, King Chu Huai made an agreement with the generals: whoever broke into the pass first would become king of the pass.

古文：当是时，秦兵强，常乘胜逐北，诸将莫利先入关。独项羽怨秦之杀项梁，奋势愿与沛公西入关。
现代文：这时候，秦军还很强大，经常乘胜追击逃敌，故楚将中没有一个人认为先入关是有利的，唯独项羽怨恨秦军杀了项梁，激愤不已，愿同刘邦一起西进入关。
English: At this time, the Qin army was still very powerful and often used victory to pursue the fleeing enemy. Therefore, none of the Chu generals thought that it was advantageous to enter the pass first. However, Xiang Yu resented the Qin army for killing Xiang Liang and was furious. He was willing to enter the pass together with Liu Bang.

古文：怀王诸老将皆曰： 项羽为人，慓悍猾贼，尝攻襄城，襄城无遗类，皆坑之，诸所过无不残灭。
现代文：楚怀王手下的老将们都说： 项羽这个人，迅捷勇猛、狡诈凶残，曾经在攻破襄城时，将城中军民一个不留地统统活埋了。凡是他经过之处，无不遭到残杀毁灭。
English: The veterans under the command of King Chu Huai all said: This Xiang Yu, swift and brave, cunning and ferocious, once buried all the soldiers and civilians in the city alive when he attacked Xiangcheng. Wherever he passed, he was killed and destroyed.

古文：且楚数进取，前陈王、项梁皆败，不如更遣长者，扶义而西，告谕秦父兄。
现代文：况且楚军几次进攻，在前的陈胜、项梁都失败了，因此不如改派敦厚老成的长者，以仁义为号召，率军向西进发，对秦国的父老兄弟们讲明道理。
English: Moreover, the Chu army attacked several times, and the previous Chen Sheng and Xiang Liang failed. Therefore, it is better to reassign the elders who are thick and old, take benevolence and righteousness as a call, lead the army to the west, and explain the truth to the fathers and brothers of Qin.

古文：秦父兄苦其主久矣，今诚得长者往，无侵暴，宜可下。
现代文：而秦国父老兄弟为他们君主的暴政所苦累已经很久了，如若现在真能有位宽厚的长者前往，不施侵夺暴虐，关中应当是可以攻下的了。
English: But Qin's ancestors and brothers have been suffering from the tyranny of their monarch for a long time. If a generous elder can really go there now, without committing aggression and tyranny, Guanzhong should be able to be conquered.

古文：项羽不可遣，独沛公素宽大长者，可遣。 
现代文：项羽不可派遣，只有刘邦向来宽宏大量，有长者气度，可以派遣。 
English: Xiao Yu cannot be dispatched, only Liu Bang, who has always been magnanimous and has the dignity of an elder, can be dispatched.

古文：怀王乃不许项羽，而遣沛公西略地，收陈王、项梁散卒以伐秦。
现代文：楚怀王于是没有答应项羽的请求，而派刘邦西进夺取土地，收容陈胜、项梁的散兵游勇，以攻击秦军。
English: Therefore, King Chuhuai did not agree to Xiang Yu's request, but sent Liu Bangxi to conquer the land and receive Chen Sheng and Xiang Liang's scattered soldiers Yu Yong to attack the Qin army.

古文：沛公道砀，至阳城与杠里，攻秦壁，破其二军。
现代文：刘邦率军取道砀，到达阳城、杠里，攻打秦军营垒，击败了秦军的两支部队。
English: Liu Bang led the army to take Daojun, reached Yangcheng and Liuli, attacked the Qin camp, and defeated the two Qin forces.

古文：二世皇帝下三年
现代文：二世皇帝下三年
English: Three years after the death of the second emperor

古文：冬，十月，齐将田都畔田荣，助楚救赵。
现代文：冬季，十月，齐将田都背叛相国田荣的指令，领兵协助楚援救赵。
English: In the winter, in October, they all betrayed Tian Rong's order and led soldiers to help Chu rescue Zhao.

古文：沛公攻破东郡尉于成武。宋义行至安阳，留四十六日不进。
现代文：刘邦在成武打败了东郡郡尉。宋义带领军队到达安阳，停留了四十六天不进兵。
English: Liu Bang defeated the Dong County lieutenant in Chengwu. Song Yi led the army to Anyang and stayed there for 46 days without entering the army.

古文：项羽曰： 秦围赵急，宜疾引兵渡河；楚击其外，赵应其内，破秦军必矣。 
现代文：项羽说： 秦军围困赵军形势紧急，应火速领兵渡黄河，如此由楚军在外攻击，赵军在内接应，打败秦军就是一定的了！ 
English: Xiang Yu said: The Qin army is besieging the Zhao army, the situation is urgent, it is urgent to lead the soldiers across the Yellow River, so the Chu army will attack outside, the Zhao army will respond inside, and it is certain to defeat the Qin army!

古文：宋义曰： 不然。
现代文：宋义道： 不对。
English: Song Yi said, "That's not right."

古文：夫搏牛之虻，不可以破虮虱。
现代文：要拍打叮咬牛身的大虻虫，而不可以消灭牛毛中的小虮虱。
English: It is necessary to beat the large mites that bite the cow's body, but it is not possible to eliminate the small mites in the cow's hair.

古文：今秦攻赵，战胜则兵疲，我承其敝；不胜，则我引兵鼓行而西，必举秦矣。
现代文：现在秦军攻赵，打胜了，军队就会疲惫，我们即可乘秦军疲惫之机发起进攻；打不胜，我们就率军擂鼓西进，这样便必定能够攻克秦了。
English: Now the Qin army is attacking Zhao. If they win, the army will be exhausted, and we can use the opportunity of the Qin army's exhaustion to launch an attack. If they do not win, we will lead the army westward, so we will definitely be able to conquer Qin.

古文：故不如先斗秦、赵。
现代文：所以不如先让秦、赵两军相斗。
English: Therefore, it is better to let the Qin and Zhao armies fight each other first.

古文：夫被坚执锐，义不如公；坐运筹策，公不如义。 
现代文：身披铠甲、手持锐利的武器冲锋陷阵，我不如您；但运筹帷幄、制定策略，您却不如我。 
English: I am not as good as you at charging into battle clad in armor and armed with sharp weapons, but you are not as good as me at planning and strategizing.

古文：因下令军中曰： 有猛如虎，狠如羊，贪如狼，强不可使者，皆斩之！ 
现代文：因此在军中下达命令说崐： 凡是猛如虎，狠如羊，贪如狼，倔强不服从指挥的人，一律处斩！ 
English: Therefore, an order was issued in the army saying, "Anyone who is ferocious like a tiger, fierce like a sheep, greedy like a wolf, stubborn and disobeys orders will be executed!"

古文：乃遣其子宋襄相齐，身送之至无盐，饮酒高会。
现代文：宋义随后派他的儿子宋襄去齐为相，并亲自把他送到无盐县，大摆宴席招待宾客。
English: Song Yi also sent his son Song Xiang to assist Qi Guo, personally sending him to the salt-free, wine-serving, and banquet guests.

古文：天寒，大雨，士卒冻饥。
现代文：当时天气寒冷，大雨不停，士兵饥寒交迫。
English: At that time, the weather was cold, it rained incessantly, and the soldiers were hungry and cold.

古文：项羽曰： 将戮力而攻秦，久留不行。
现代文：项羽便道： 本当合力攻秦，却长久地滞留不前。
English: Xiang Yu said: I originally planned to attack Qin together, but I couldn't advance for a long time.

古文：今岁饥民贫，士卒食半菽，军无见粮，乃饮酒高会；不引兵渡河，因赵食，与赵并力攻秦，乃曰 承其敝 。
现代文：而今年成荒歉，百姓贫困，士兵吃的是蔬菜拌杂豆子，军中没有存粮，竟还要设酒宴盛会宾客，不领兵渡黄河，取用赵地的粮食作军粮，与赵军合力击秦，却说什么 乘秦军疲惫之机发动进攻 。
English: However, this year is a disaster, the people are poor, the soldiers eat vegetables mixed with beans, the army has no stored grain, but they still want to set up a wine banquet for guests, do not lead soldiers to cross the Yellow River, use grain from Zhao to make military grain, and work with the Zhao army to attack Qin, but say that they will take advantage of the Qin army's tiredness to launch an attack.

古文：夫以秦之强，攻新造之赵，其势必举。
现代文：以秦的强盛攻打新建立的赵，势必战胜。
English: Attacking the newly established Zhao with the strength of Qin, it is bound to win.

古文：赵举秦强，何敝之承！
现代文：赵被攻占，秦军便将更加强大，哪里还会有疲惫的机会可乘！
English: Zhao was occupied and the Qin army was more powerful, so what other opportunities could be taken advantage of?

古文：且国兵新破，王坐不安席，扫境内而专属于将军，国家安危，在此一举。
现代文：况且我军新近刚刚吃了败仗，楚王坐立不安，集中起全国的兵力交付给将军，国家安危，在此一举。
English: Moreover, our army had just recently suffered a defeat, King Chu was restless and concentrated the country's forces and handed them over to the general. The country's safety was at stake.

古文：今不恤士卒而徇其私，非社稷之臣也！ 
现代文：现在不体恤士兵，而去屈从于一己私利，不是以国家为重的忠臣啊！ 
English: Now, instead of sympathizing with the soldiers, he has succumbed to his own selfish interests. He is not a loyal subject who cares about the country!

古文：十一月，项羽晨朝将军宋义，即其帐中斩宋义头。
现代文：十一月，项羽早晨去进见上将军宋义时，就在营帐中斩了宋义的头。
English: In November, when Xiang Yu went to see General Song Yi in the morning, he cut off Song Yi's head in the camp.

古文：出令军中曰： 宋义与齐谋反楚，楚王阴令籍诛之！ 
现代文：出帐后即向军中发布号令说： 宋义与齐合谋反楚，楚王密令我杀了他！ 
English: After the account was issued, he issued an order to the army saying: Song Yi and Qi conspired against Chu, and King Chu secretly ordered me to kill him!

古文：当是时，诸将皆慑服，莫敢枝梧，皆曰： 首立楚者，将军家也，今将军诛乱。 
现代文：这时，众将领都因畏惧而屈服，无人敢于抗拒，一致说： 首先拥立楚王的是将军您家中的人，如今又是您诛除了乱臣贼子。 
English: At this time, all the generals were cowed into submission, and no one dared to resist, and they all said in unison: First, it was the generals in your family who supported King Chu, and now it is you who have expelled the ruffian thief.

古文：乃相与共立羽为假上将军。
现代文：于是就共同推立项羽为代理上将军。
English: The generals jointly promoted Xiang Yu to acting general.

古文：使人追宋义子，及之齐，杀之。
现代文：项羽即派人去追赶宋义的儿子宋襄，追至齐将他杀了。
English: He sent someone to chase after Song Yi's son, caught up with him in Qi Province, and killed him.

古文：使桓楚报命于怀王。怀王因使羽为上将军。
现代文：并遣桓楚向怀王报告情况，怀王便让项羽担任了上将军。
English: He also sent Kanchu to report the situation to King Huai, who then made Xiang Yu the commander-in-chief.

古文：十二月，沛公引兵至栗，遇刚武侯，夺其军四千馀人，并之；与魏将皇欣、武满军合攻秦军，破之。
现代文：十二月，刘邦率军到达栗县时，遇上刚武侯，夺过他手中的部队四千多人，与自己的队伍合并起来，同魏将皇欣、武满的军队联合攻打秦军，击败了对手。
English: In December, when Liu Bang led his army to reach Li County, he encountered the prince of Gangwu, took over more than 4,000 troops from him, merged with his own team, and jointly attacked the Qin Army with Wei, the army of Emperor Xin and Wuman, and defeated the opponent.

古文：故齐王建孙安下济北，从项羽救赵。
现代文：故齐国国君田建的孙子田安攻下济水以北的地区，跟随项羽援救赵。
English: Tian An, the grandson of the late King Tian Jian of Qi, conquered the area north of Jishui and followed Xiang Yu to rescue Zhao.

古文：章邯筑甬道属河，饷王离。
现代文：章邯修筑甬道连接黄河，为王离供应军粮。
English: Zhang Ye built a causeway to connect to the Yellow River to supply grain to Wang Liang.

古文：王离兵食多，急攻巨鹿。
现代文：王离军中粮食充足，即加紧攻打钜鹿。
English: Wang Liang's army had enough food, so they stepped up their attack on the elk.

古文：巨鹿城中食尽、兵少，张耳数使人召前陈馀。
现代文：钜鹿城内粮尽兵少，张耳便几次派人去叫陈馀前来营救。
English: When the food supply in Mule Town was exhausted and the soldiers were few, Zhang Er sent people several times to call Chen Yu to come to the rescue.

古文：陈馀度兵少，不敌秦，不敢前。
现代文：陈馀估计自己兵力不足，打不过秦军，故不敢到钜鹿来。
English: Chen Yu estimated that he was short of troops and could not beat the Qin army, so he did not dare to come to Menglu.

古文：数月，张耳大怒，怨陈馀，使张黡、陈泽往让陈馀曰： 始吾与公为刎颈交，今王与耳旦暮且死，而公拥兵数万，不肯相救，安在其相为死！
现代文：如此过了几个月，张耳勃然大怒，埋怨陈馀，派遣张、陈泽前去责备陈馀说： 当初我和你结为生死之交，而今赵王和我很快就要死了，你拥兵数万，却不肯出手救援，赴难同死的精神在哪里啊！
English: They held each other for several months, no rescuers were to be seen, Zhang Er was furious and held a grudge against Chen Yu. He sent Zhang Ye and Chen Ze to reproach Chen Yu, saying: At first, I forged a life-and-death friendship with you, but now King Zhao and I could die at any moment, and you have tens of thousands of soldiers and are not willing to save each other. Where is that life-and-death friendship?

古文：苟必信，胡不赴秦军俱死，且有十一二相全。 
现代文：如果真守信用，何不攻击秦军而与我们一同战死，似此还有十分之一二能打败秦军保全性命的希望。 
English: If you truly keep your word, why not attack the Qin army and die with us? Then there is still a one in two chance that you can defeat the Qin army and save your life.

古文：陈馀曰： 吾度前终不能救赵，徒尽亡军。
现代文：陈馀道： 我揣测自己前去终究不能救赵，只会白白地使全军覆没。
English: Chen Yu said: I consider that even if I advance towards the advancing army, in the end I will not only fail to save Zhao, but I will also destroy the entire army in vain.

古文：且馀所以不俱死，欲为赵王、张君报秦。
现代文：何况我之所以不和张耳同归于尽，是想为赵王、张耳向秦军报仇啊。
English: Moreover, I do not want to die together, thinking that I will have to take revenge for King Zhao and Zhang Jun to Qin in the future.

古文：今必俱死，如以肉委饿虎，何益！ 
现代文：现在一定要共同赴死，就如同把肉送给饿虎，有什么好处呢！ 
English: Now we must die together, just like giving meat to a hungry tiger, what good is that!

古文：张黡、陈泽要以俱死，乃使黡、泽将五千人先尝秦军，至，皆没。
现代文：但张、陈泽要挟陈馀一同去死，陈馀于是便派张、陈泽率五千人先去试试秦军的力量，结果是到了那里就全军覆没了。
English: However, Zhang and Chen Ze threatened Chen Yu to die together, so Chen Yu sent Zhang and Chen Ze with five thousand men to test the strength of the Qin army first. As a result, when they got there, the entire army was wiped out.

古文：当是时，齐师、燕师皆来救赵，张敖亦北收代兵，得万馀人，来，皆壁馀旁，未敢击秦。
现代文：当时，齐军、燕军都来救赵，张敖也到北面收集代地的士兵，得到一万多人，但是来后却都在陈馀军队的旁边安营所扎寨，不敢进攻秦军。
English: At that time, both the Qi army and the Yan army came to rescue Zhao Rong, and Zhang Ye also went to the north to collect soldiers on behalf of the Qin army, gaining more than ten thousand people. However, after they came, they all camped next to Chen Yu's army and did not dare to attack the Qin army.

古文：项羽已杀卿子冠军，威震楚国，乃遣当阳君、薄将军将卒二万渡河救巨鹿。
现代文：项羽已经杀了 卿子冠军 宋义，威震楚国，就派当阳君黥布和蒲将军领兵两万渡黄河援救钜鹿。
English: Xiang Yu had already killed Song Yi, the champion of the nobles, and the state of Chu was shaken, so he sent Dangyang Jun, Zibo and Pu generals to lead twenty thousand soldiers across the Yellow River to rescue Mule Deer.

古文：战少利，绝章邯甬道，王离军乏食。
现代文：战事稍稍有利，即截断章邯所修的甬道，使王离的军队粮食短缺。
English: The war was slightly favorable, that is, the railway built by Zhang Ye was cut off, causing a shortage of grain for Wang Ye's army.

古文：陈馀复请兵。
现代文：陈馀于是又请求增援兵力。
English: Chen Yu then requested reinforcements.

古文：项羽乃悉引兵渡河，皆沈船，破釜、甑，烧庐舍，持三日粮，以示士卒必死，无一还心。
现代文：项羽便率全军渡过黄河，都凿沉船只，砸毁锅、甑，烧掉营舍，携带三天的口粮，以此表示军队将决一死战，毫无退还之意。
English: Xiang Yu then led the entire army across the Yellow River, sinking ships, smashing pots and pans, burning camps, and carrying three days of rations to show that the army would fight to the death, with no intention of returning.

古文：于是至则围王离，与秦军遇，九战，大破之，章邯引兵却。
现代文：因此楚军一到钜鹿就包围了王离，与秦军接战，经九次交锋，大败秦军。章邯领兵退却。
English: Therefore, the Chu army encircled Wang Li as soon as they arrived in Menglu, and engaged the Qin army. After nine battles, they defeated the Qin army. Zhang Ye led the troops to retreat.

古文：诸侯兵乃敢进击秦军，遂杀苏角，虏王离；涉间不降，自烧杀。
现代文：各国的援兵这时才敢出击秦军。即杀了苏角，俘获了王离。涉不肯报降，自焚而死。
English: It was only then that reinforcements from various countries dared to attack the Qin army. They killed Su Jiao and captured Wang Li. Watanabe refused to surrender and died by self-immolation.

古文：当是时，楚兵冠诸侯军。救巨鹿者十馀壁，莫敢纵兵。
现代文：此时，楚军的雄威压倒了诸侯军；援救钜鹿的诸侯国的军队有营垒十多座，却都不敢发兵出击。
English: At this time, the might of the Chu army overwhelmed the vassal army; the army of the vassal state to rescue Mule deer had more than ten camps, but they did not dare to send troops to attack.

古文：及楚击秦，诸侯将皆从壁上观。
现代文：待到楚军攻打秦军的时候，诸侯军的将领都在营垒上观战。
English: When the Chu army attacked the Qin army, the generals of the princes' army were watching the battle on the camp.

古文：楚战士无不一当十，呼声动天地，诸侯军无不人人惴恐。
现代文：见楚军士兵无不以一当十，喊杀声惊天动地，诸侯军人人都惊恐不已。
English: Seeing that the soldiers of the Chu army were outnumbered ten to one, the shouts of murder were earth-shattering, and the soldiers of the provinces were terrified.

古文：于是已破秦军，项羽召见诸侯将。
现代文：这样打败了秦军后，项羽便召见诸侯军将领。
English: After defeating the Qin army in this way, Xiang Yu summoned the generals of the warlords.

古文：诸侯将入辕门，无不膝行而前，莫敢仰视。
现代文：这些将领们进入辕门时，没有一个不是跪着前行的，谁也不敢仰视。
English: When these generals entered the main gate, none of them advanced without kneeling, and no one dared to look up.

古文：项羽由是始为诸侯上将军。诸侯皆属焉。
现代文：项羽从此始成为诸侯军的上将军，各路诸侯都归他统帅了。
English: From this time onward, Xiang Yu became the general of the vassal army, and all the vassals were under his command.

古文：于是赵王歇及张耳乃得出巨鹿城谢诸侯。
现代文：此时赵王赵歇、张耳才得以出钜鹿城拜谢各国将领。
English: At this time, Zhao Wang, Zhao Xie and Zhang Er were able to come out of Elk City to thank the generals of various countries.

古文：张耳与陈馀相见，责让陈馀以不肯救赵；及问张黡、陈泽所在，疑陈馀杀之，数以问馀。
现代文：张耳与陈馀相见，责备陈馀不肯营救赵王。待问及张、陈泽的下落时，张耳怀疑是陈馀将他两人杀了，即几次追问陈馀。
English: When Zhang Er met Chen Yu, he reproached Chen Yu for refusing to rescue King Zhao. When asked about the whereabouts of Zhang and Chen Ze, Zhang Er suspected that Chen Yu had killed the two of them, that is, he questioned Chen Yu several times.

古文：馀怒曰： 不意君之望臣深也！
现代文：陈馀发怒道： 想不到你对我的责怨如此之深啊！
English: Chen Yu said angrily, "I didn't expect you to hate me so much!"

古文：岂以臣为重去将印哉？ 
现代文：难道你以为我就舍不得放弃这将军的官印吗？ 
English: Did you really think that I would be reluctant to give up this army's official seal?

古文：乃脱解印绶，推予张耳，张耳亦愕不受。
现代文：于是解下印信绶带，推给张耳。张耳也是愕然不肯接受。
English: So he undid the stamped letter ribbon and gave it to Zhang Er. Zhang Er was also appalled and refused to accept it.

古文：陈馀起如厕。客有说张耳曰： 臣闻 天与不取，反受其咎。 
现代文：陈馀起身去上厕所，宾客中有人劝说张耳道： 我听说： 上天的赐与如不接受，反会招致祸殃。 
English: Chen Yu got up to go to the toilet. Someone from the guests persuaded Zhang Er, saying, "I heard that if you don't accept God's gift, it will bring disaster.

古文：今陈将军与君印，君不受，反天不祥，急取之！ 
现代文：现在陈将军给您印信，您不接受，如此违反天意，很不吉祥。还是赶快取过来吧！ 
English: Now General Chen has printed a letter for you, but you do not accept it. This is against the will of heaven and is very unlucky. You should get it as soon as possible.

古文：张耳乃佩其印，收其麾下。
现代文：张耳便佩带上陈馀的官印，接收了他的军队。
English: Zhang Er put on Chen Yu's great seal and received his subordinates.

古文：而陈馀还，亦望张耳不让，遂趋出，独与麾下所善数百人之河上泽中渔猎。
现代文：而等陈馀回来时，也颇怨恨张耳的不辞让，就急步走出，只偕同他手下的亲信几百人到黄河岸边的水泽中捕鱼猎兽去了。
English: But when Chen Yu returned, he was also quite resentful of Zhang Er's refusal to concede, and he left in a hurry, only to go fishing and hunting with a few hundred of his cronies in Mizawa on the shore of the Yellow River.

古文：赵王歇还信都。
现代文：赵王赵歇返回信都。
English: Zhao Wang Zhao Xie returned to Xindu.

古文：春，二月，沛公北击昌邑，遇彭越，彭越以其兵从沛公。
现代文：春季，二月，刘邦向北攻打昌邑，遇到彭越，彭越即带领他的部队跟随了刘邦。
English: In the spring, in February, Liu Bang went north to attack Changyi and encountered Peng Yue. Peng Yue immediately led his troops to follow Liu Bang.

古文：越，昌邑人，常渔巨野泽中，为群盗。
现代文：彭越是昌邑人，经常在钜野湖沼中捕鱼，与人结伙为强盗。
English: Peng Yue is a native of Changyi. He often fishes in the Shenye Lake and is a bandit.

古文：陈胜、项梁之起，泽间少年相聚百馀人，往从彭越曰： 请仲为长。 
现代文：陈胜、项梁起事抗秦时，水泽中的青年一百多人聚合起来，前去追随彭越，说道： 请您出任首领。 
English: When Chen Sheng and Xiang Liang rose up to resist the Qin, more than a hundred young people in Mizusawa gathered together and went to follow Peng Yue, saying: Please be the leader.

古文：越谢曰： 臣不愿也。 
现代文：彭越推辞说： 我不愿意啊。 
English: Peng Yue said, "I don't want to."

古文：少年强请，乃许，与期旦日日出会，后期者斩。
现代文：青年们竭力请求，彭越才答应了，并与他们约定次日清晨太阳出来时集合，迟到的即斩首。
English: The young people pleaded with all their might, but Peng Yue only agreed, and agreed with them to meet the next morning when the sun came out. If they were late, they would be beheaded.

古文：旦日日出，十馀人后，后者至日中。
现代文：第二天日出后，有十多个人晚到，最迟的直至中午才来。
English: After sunrise the next day, more than a dozen people arrived late, not arriving until noon at the latest.

古文：于是越谢曰： 臣老，诸君强以为长。
现代文：彭越于是抱歉地说： 我已经老了，你们执意要推举我为头领。
English: So Peng Yue apologetically said: I am old, you forced me to be the leader.

古文：今期而多后，不可尽诛，诛最后者一人。 
现代文：如今到了约定时间而许多人迟到，不能够都杀掉，那么就将最后到达的一个人斩首吧。 
English: Today, when the appointed time came, many people did not arrive. We cannot kill them all. We must kill the last one to arrive.

古文：令校长斩之。
现代文：即命校长杀那个人。
English: Order the captain to kill him.

古文：皆笑曰： 何至于是！
现代文：大家都笑道： 哪至于这样啊！
English: Everyone laughed and said, "What about this!"

古文：请后不敢。 
现代文：以后再不敢如此就是了。 
English: Don't dare to disobey orders in the future.

古文：于是越引一人斩之，设坛祭，令徒属，徒属皆大惊，莫敢仰视。
现代文：彭越这时拉出那人杀了，设立土坛以人头祭祀，号令所属部下。部属们都惊恐万状，无人敢抬头望他。
English: At this time, Peng Yue pulled out the man and killed him, set up an earthen altar for human head sacrifice, and ordered his subordinates. The subordinates were all terrified, and no one dared to look up at him.

古文：乃略地，收诸侯散卒，得千馀人，遂助沛公攻昌邑。
现代文：彭越随后便领兵攻夺土地，收集诸侯军中的散兵游勇，得到一千余人，即协助刘邦攻打昌邑。
English: Peng Yue then led the troops to conquer the land, collected the scattered soldiers from the vassal army, and got more than a thousand people to assist Liu Bang in attacking Changyi.

古文：昌邑未下，沛公引兵西过高阳。
现代文：昌邑城没有攻下，刘邦率军西进经过高阳。
English: Changyi City was not captured, and Liu Bang led the army westward through Gaoyang.

古文：高阳人郦食其，家贫落魄，为里监门，沛公麾下骑士适食其里中人，食其见，谓曰： 诸侯将过高阳者数十人，吾问其将皆握龊，好苛礼，自用，不能听大度之言。
现代文：高阳人郦食其，家境贫寒，落魄飘零，做了个看管里门的小吏。刘邦部下中一名骑兵正好是郦食其的同乡，郦食其见到他时，对他说： 诸侯军将领路过高阳的有几十人，我打听得这些将领都器量狭小，好拘泥于繁文缛礼，自以为是，听不进气度豁达、抱负恢宏的言论。
English: A cavalryman under Liu Bang happened to be a fellow villager of Gaoyang. When Gaoyang saw him, he said to him: There are dozens of generals leading the way through Gaoyang. I inquired about these generals and found that they are narrow-minded, stuck to formalities, self-righteous, and unable to listen to open-minded and ambitious speech.

古文：吾闻沛公慢而易人，多大略，此真吾所愿从游，莫为我先。
现代文：我还听说刘邦为人傲慢而看不起人，富于远见卓识，这真是我所愿意结交的人啊，可惜没有人为我引荐。
English: I also heard that Liu Bang was arrogant and looked down on people, and was full of foresight and insight. This is really a person I would like to make friends with, but unfortunately no one recommended him to me.

古文：若见沛公，谓曰： 臣里中有郦生，六十馀，长八尺，人皆谓之狂生。
现代文：你如果见到刘邦，就告诉他说： 我的乡里中有个郦生，六十多岁了，身高八尺，人们都称他为狂生。
English: If you see Liu Bang, tell him: There is a twin in my hometown. He is over sixty years old and eight feet tall. People call him the crazy twin.

古文：生自谓 我非狂生 。  
现代文：但他自己却说：我不是狂生。  
English: But he himself said: I'm not crazy.

古文：骑士曰： 沛公不好儒，诸客冠儒冠来者，沛公辄解其冠，溲溺其中，与人言，常大骂，未可以儒生说也。 
现代文：这名骑兵道： 沛公不喜欢儒生，每当宾客中有戴着儒生帽子来的，沛公总是脱下他的帽子，在里面撒尿。与人谈话的时候，也常常破口大骂。所以你不可以儒生的身分前去游说他。 
English: The cavalryman said, "Pei Gong doesn't like Confucianism. Whenever there is a guest wearing a Confucian hat, Pei Gong always takes off his hat and urinates in it. When talking to people, he often curses loudly. Therefore, you can't lobby him as a Confucian.

古文：郦生曰： 第言之。 
现代文：郦食其说： 你只管把这些话告诉他吧。 
English: He said, "Just tell him these words."

古文：骑士从容言，如郦生所诫者。
现代文：骑兵便将郦食其所嘱托的话从容地转达给了刘邦。
English: The cavalry then calmly conveyed to Liu Bang the words entrusted to him by the eunuch.

古文：沛公至高阳传舍，使人召郦生。
现代文：刘邦到了高阳的旅舍，派人召郦食其来见。
English: Later, Pei Gong came to Gaoyang, stayed in a hostel, and sent someone to summon Yan Yan to come and see him.

古文：郦生至，入谒。
现代文：郦食其一到，即进见。
English: As soon as the food arrives, it's ready.

古文：沛公方倨床使两女子洗足，而见郦生。
现代文：这时刘邦正叉开两腿坐在床上，让两个女子给他洗脚，如此便接见郦食其。
English: At this time, Liu Bang was sitting on the bed with his legs apart, letting the two women wash his feet, and this is how he was seen eating them.

古文：郦生入，则长揖不拜，曰： 足下欲助秦攻诸侯乎？且欲率诸侯破秦也？ 
现代文：郦其食进来，只是拱手高举行相见礼而不跪拜，说道： 您是想要协助秦朝攻打诸侯国呢，还是想要率领各路诸侯击败秦朝呢？ 
English: The eunuch went in, just made a long bow without bowing down, and said: Do you want to help Qin attack the princes, or do you want to lead the princes to destroy Qin?

古文：沛公骂曰： 竖儒！
现代文：刘邦骂道： 没见识的儒生！
English: Pei Gong scolded: You are a Confucian!

古文：天下同苦秦久矣，故诸侯相率而攻秦，何谓助秦攻诸侯乎！ 
现代文：天下的人共同受秦朝暴政苦累已经很久了，所以各国相继起兵攻秦，怎么说是帮助秦朝攻打诸侯呀！ 
English: The people of the world have been suffering from the tyranny of the Qin Dynasty for a long time, so all countries have successively raised troops to attack Qin, how can it be said to help the Qin Dynasty attack the princes!

古文：郦生曰： 必聚徒合义兵诛无道秦，不宜倨见长者！ 
现代文：郦食其说： 您若确是要聚集群众、会合正义的军队去讨伐暴虐无道的秦王朝，就不该如此傲慢无礼地接见年长的人！ 
English: He said: "If you really want to gather the masses and assemble a righteous army to fight the tyrannical Qin Dynasty, you should not be so arrogant and disrespectful to the elderly!"

古文：于是沛公辍洗，起，摄衣，延郦生上坐，谢之。
现代文：刘邦于是停止洗脚，起身整理好衣服，请郦食其在尊客席上就坐，向他道歉。
English: Liu Bang then stopped washing his feet, got up and tidied up his clothes. He asked the eunuch to sit in the distinguished guest seat and apologized to him.

古文：郦生因言六国从横时。
现代文：郦食其便谈起了六国合纵连横的史事。
English: He then talked about the history of the Six-Nation Alliance.

古文：沛公喜，赐郦生食，问曰： 计将安出？ 
现代文：刘邦很高兴，赏饭给郦食其吃，并问道： 计策将如何制定啊？ 
English: Liu Bang was very happy, and asked: How will the strategy be formulated?

古文：郦生曰： 足下起纠合之众，收散乱之兵，不满万人；欲以径入强秦，此所谓探虎口者也。
现代文：郦食其说： 您从一群乌合之众中起事，收拢了一些散兵游勇，部众还不足一万人，就想靠此径直去攻打强大的秦朝，这即叫作用手去掏虎口哇！
English: He said, "You rose up from a group of ragtag people, gathered a few scattered soldiers and less than ten thousand people, and you want to use this to directly attack the powerful Qin Dynasty. This is called the role of the hand to poke the tiger. Wow!

古文：夫陈留，天下之冲，四通五达之郊也，今其城中又多积粟。臣善其令，请得使之令下足下。即不听，足下引兵攻之，臣为内应。 
现代文：陈留是天下的要冲，四通八达的枢纽地区，现在该城中又贮存有许多粮食，而我恰与陈留县令交情不错，请您让我出使陈留，劝他向您投降；假如他不听从劝告，您就领兵攻城，我作内应。 
English: Chenliu is the world's most important and well-connected hub, and now there is also a lot of grain stored in the city. I happen to have a good relationship with the Chenliu County magistrate. Please let me send Chenliu to persuade him to surrender to you. If he does not listen to my advice, you will lead an army to attack the city, and I will respond.

古文：于是遣郦生行，沛公引兵随之，遂下陈留。号郦食其为广野君。
现代文：刘邦于是派郦食其出发，自己率军跟随，随即降服了陈留，便号封郦食其为广野君。
English: Liu Bang then dispatched his troops to follow him, and he himself led the army to follow him. He immediately surrendered Chen Rui, and then sent his troops to Hirono.

古文：郦生言其弟商。
现代文：郦食其对他的弟弟郦商说了这些事。
English: He said these things to his brother, the merchant.

古文：时商聚少年得四千人，来属沛公，沛公以为将，将陈留兵以从，郦生常为说客，使诸侯。
现代文：当时郦商就召集青年，得四千人，前来归属刘邦，刘邦任用郦商为将军，命他率领陈留的部队相随。郦食其则常常作为说客，出使各诸侯国。
English: At that time, the merchants gathered 4,000 young men and came to belong to Liu Bang. Liu Bang appointed the merchants as generals and ordered them to lead the remaining troops. The merchants often acted as lobbyists and sent them to various states.

古文：三月，沛公攻开封，未拔。西与秦将杨熊会战白马，又战曲遇东，大破之。
现代文：三月，刘邦攻打开封，没能攻下；便西进，在白马与秦将杨熊会战，又在曲遇东面打了一仗，大败秦军。
English: In March, Liu Bang attacked and opened the seal, but failed to capture it; he then advanced westward, fought with Qin general Yang Xiong in Baima, and fought a battle in the east of Qu, defeating the Qin army.

古文：杨熊走之荥阳，二世使使者斩之以徇。
现代文：杨熊逃到荥阳，二世派使者去将他斩首示众。
English: Yang Xiong fled to Shenyang, and the Second Emperor sent an envoy to have him beheaded in public.

古文：夏，四月，沛公南攻颍川，屠之。
现代文：夏季，四月，刘邦向南进攻颍川，屠戮了一番。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Bang went to the south to attack Luchuan and slaughtered a number of people.

古文：因张良，遂略韩地。
现代文：因得到张良的辅助，攻取了故韩国的领地。
English: With Zhang Liang's assistance, they conquered the territory of the former South Korea.

古文：时赵别将司马卬方欲渡河入关。沛公乃北攻平阴，绝河津南，战洛阳东。
现代文：这时赵军所属部将司马正要渡黄河进入函谷关，刘邦于是崐就向北进攻平阴，切断黄河渡口南部地区，在洛阳东面与秦军交锋。
English: At this time, General Sima of the Zhao Army was about to cross the Yellow River into the Hanyu Pass. Liu Bang then attacked Pingyin to the north, cutting off the southern region of the Yellow River crossing, and clashed with the Qin Army in the east of Luoyang.

古文：军不利，南出轘辕。张良引兵从沛公。沛公令韩王成留守阳翟，与良俱南。
现代文：但因作战不利，向南撤出辕关，张良领兵跟随刘邦；刘邦即命韩王韩成留守阳翟，自己与张良一起南下。
English: However, due to unfavorable combat conditions, he withdrew from Shaoguan to the south, and Zhang Liang led the troops to follow Liu Bang; Liu Bang immediately ordered Han Wang Han Cheng to stay in Yangtze, and he went south with Zhang Liang.

古文：六月，与南阳守齮战犨东，破之，略南阳郡；南阳守走保城，守宛。
现代文：六月，刘邦率军在县东面与南阳郡守吕交战，击败了秦军，夺取了南阳郡。南阳郡守败逃，回保城池，固守郡的治所宛城。
English: In June, Liu Bang led the army in the east of the county to fight against Nanyang County's garrison of Lv, defeated the Qin Army, and captured Nanyang County. Nanyang County's garrison was defeated and fled, returning to Baochengchi and holding fast to the county's seat of government, Wancheng.

古文：沛公引兵过宛，西。
现代文：刘邦领兵绕过宛城西进。
English: Liu Bang led the troops to bypass Wancheng and advance westward.

古文：张良谏曰： 沛公虽欲急入关，秦兵尚众，距险。今不下宛，宛从后击，强秦在前，此危道也。 
现代文：张良劝他道： 您虽然想要尽快入关，但是目前秦军尚兵多势众，且又可据险顽抗，倘若现在不攻下宛城，一旦宛城守敌从背后夹击，前面又有强大的秦军阻挡，将是很危险的！ 
English: Zhang Liang advised him: Although you want to enter the pass as soon as possible, but at present, the Qin army still has a large number of soldiers, and can resist dangerously. If you do not attack Wancheng now, once the Wancheng defenders attack from behind, and the front is blocked by a strong Qin army, it will be very dangerous!

古文：于是沛公乃夜引军从他道还，偃旗帜，迟明，围宛城三匝。
现代文：刘邦于是连夜率军抄小道返回，放倒旗帜，在天没亮时，将宛城重重围住。
English: Pei Gong took a detour to attack Wancheng in the evening, but the attack was repulsed. By dawn, Wancheng was surrounded on three levels.

古文：南阳守欲自刭，共舍人陈恢曰： 死未晚也。 
现代文：南阳郡守见状想自杀，他的舍人陈恢说： 想要寻死还早了点儿吧。 
English: Nanyang County's witness wanted to commit suicide, but his guardian Chen Wei said, "It's too early to seek death."

古文：乃逾城见沛公曰： 臣闻足下约先入咸阳者王之。
现代文：就翻越城墙去见刘邦说： 我听说您曾受楚怀王之约，先攻入咸阳的即在关中称王。
English: He climbed over the city wall to meet Liu Bang and said, "I heard that you once received a promise from King Chu Huai that whoever entered Xianyang first would be crowned king in Guanzhong.

古文：今足下留守宛，宛郡县连城数十，其吏民自以为降必死，故皆坚守乘城。
现代文：如今您滞留在这里攻打宛城，而宛城很大，连城数十座，城内军民自认为投降也是必死无疑，故都登城坚守。
English: Now you are staying here to attack Wancheng, and Wancheng is very large, with dozens of towns. The soldiers and civilians in the city believe that surrender is certain death, so they all go to the city to hold on.

古文：今足下尽日上攻，士死伤者必多。引兵去宛，宛必随足下后。
现代文：现在您整日停留在这里攻城，士兵死伤的必定很多，如若您率军撤离宛城，宛城的守军又肯定要尾随追击。
English: Now that you are staying here all day to attack the city, there must be a lot of soldiers killed and wounded. For example, if you evacuate Wancheng with your army, the defenders of Wancheng will definitely follow and chase you.

古文：足下前则失咸阳之约，后有强宛之患。
现代文：这样一来，您在前则耽误了先入咸阳者称王的约定，在后则有遭到强大的宛城守军夹击的忧患。
English: As a result, in the past, you delayed the agreement that the first to enter Xianyang would be crowned king, and in the future, you were worried about being attacked by the powerful Wancheng defenders.

古文：为足下计，莫若约降，封其守；因使止守，引其甲卒与之西。
现代文：我为您着想，还不如订约招降，加封南阳郡守，仍让他留守郡中，而率领他的军队一道西进。
English: I think for your sake, it would be better to sign a contract to invite and abdicate, add the Nanyang County Governor, still let him stay in the county, and lead his army to the west.

古文：诸城未下者，闻声争开门而待足下，足下通行无所累。 
现代文：这样，那些没有投降的城邑，闻讯就会争先恐后地打开城门等候您的到来，届时您就可以通行无阻了。 刘邦说： 好！ 
English: In this way, those cities that have not surrendered will scramble to open their gates and wait for your arrival, at which time you will be able to pass unhindered.Liu Bang said: Good!

古文：沛公曰： 善！ 秋，七月，南阳守齮降，封为殷侯，封陈恢千户。
现代文：秋季，七月，南阳郡守吕举城投降，刘邦封他为殷侯；并封给陈恢享用一千户的赋税收入。
English: In the autumn, in July, Nanyang County Governor Lvjucheng surrendered, and Liu Bang appointed him as Yinhou; and appointed Chen Wei to enjoy the tax revenue of one thousand households.

古文：引兵西，无不下者。
现代文：于是刘邦率军西进，所过城邑没有不降服的。
English: There is no way to lead the troops westward without surrendering.

古文：至丹水，高武侯鳃、襄侯王陵降。
现代文：待到达丹水时，高武侯戚鳃、襄侯王陵也归降了。
English: The soldiers went to Danshui, and the tombs of Qin Gaowu Houyi and Xiang Houwang were surrendered.

古文：还攻胡阳，遇番君别将梅鋗，与偕攻析、郦，皆降。
现代文：刘邦又回攻胡阳，遇见番君属下的将领梅，便与他一同攻打析和郦，二地都投降了。
English: He returned to his division to attack Huyang, but when he met Banjun, he did not want to attack Meizhou, and together with him, attacked Fuxian and Jixian, and both of them surrendered.

古文：所过亡得卤掠，秦民皆喜。
现代文：刘邦命令军队所过之处不得掳掠，秦地的百姓都非常喜悦。
English: Liu Bang ordered that the army should not plunder the places they passed, and the people of Qin were very pleased.

古文：王离军既没，章邯军棘原，项羽军漳南，相持未战。
现代文：王离的军队已经覆没，章邯的军队驻扎在棘原，项羽的军队则屯驻漳水的南面，两军对垒相持，尚未交战。
English: Wang Li's army has been wiped out, Zhang Qian's army is stationed in Spine Plains, and Xiang Yu's army is stationed in the south of Surabaya. The two armies are facing each other and have not yet engaged in battle.

古文：秦军数却，二世使人让章邯。
现代文：秦军几次后撤，二世为此派人去责问章邯。
English: The Qin army retreated several times, and Qin II sent people to interrogate Zhang Ye.

古文：章邯恐，使长史欣请事。
现代文：章邯颇为恐惧，遣长史司马欣前去请示事务。
English: Zhang Ye was afraid, and sent his commander Shi Simaxin to ask for instructions.

古文：至咸阳，留司马门三日，赵高不见，有不信之心。
现代文：司马欣抵达咸阳后，在皇宫的外门司马门逗留了三天，赵高也不予接见，表示出不信任的意思。
English: When he arrived in Xianyang, he waited outside the door for three days. Zhao Gao did not receive him, and he did not trust him.

古文：长史欣恐，还走其军，不敢出故道。
现代文：长史司马欣惊恐，奔回他的军中，不敢再走原路。
English: Scared, Chief Secretary Sima Xin ran back to his army, not daring to go back to his old ways.

古文：赵高果使人追之，不及。
现代文：赵高果然派人来追赶他，但是没追上。
English: Zhao Gao did indeed send someone to chase him, but they did not catch him.

古文：欣至军，报曰： 赵高用事于中，下无可为者。
现代文：司马欣回到章邯军中，报告说： 赵高在朝中专权，下面的人没有能有所作为的。
English: Sima Xin returned to Zhang Ye's army and reported: Zhao Gao has absolute power in the DPRK, and the people below him have not been able to make a difference.

古文：今战能胜，高必疾妒吾功，不能胜，不免于死。
现代文：现在作战如果能够获胜，赵高必定会嫉妒我们的功劳；不能取胜，便免不了一死。
English: If we can win the battle now, Zhao Gao will surely be jealous of our achievements; if we can't win, we can't avoid death.

古文：愿将军孰计之！ 
现代文：希望您对此仔细斟酌！ 
English: I hope you will consider this carefully!

古文：陈馀亦遗章邯书曰： 白起为秦将，南征鄢郢，北坑马服，攻城略地，不可胜计，而竟赐死。
现代文：陈馀也写信给章邯说： 白起是秦国的大将，他率军南征楚国的都城鄢郢，北战活埋马服君赵括大军的降兵，攻城夺地，不可胜数，却终于被赐死。
English: Chen Yu also wrote a letter to Zhang Ye, saying: Bai Qi was the general of Qin. He led the army to conquer the capital of Chu in the south, buried Ma Fu Jun Zhao alive in the north, led the army to retreat, attacked the city and seized the land. There are countless numbers, but he was finally put to death.

古文：蒙恬为秦将，北逐戎人，开榆中地数千里，竟斩阳周。
现代文：蒙恬是秦国的大将，他北逐匈奴，开拓榆中之地几千里，最后在阳周被斩杀。
English: Mengye was a Qin general who chased the Xiongnu northward, opening up thousands of miles of territory in the Yunnan Province, and was eventually killed in Yangzhou.

古文：何者？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：功多，秦不能尽封，因以法诛之。
现代文：是因为功绩太多，秦国不能全部给以封赏，就趁机按法诛杀了他们。
English: There was too much merit, so Qin couldn't award the title according to merit, so he used the country's laws to kill them.

古文：今将军为秦将三岁矣，所亡失以十万数，而诸侯并起滋益多。
现代文：如今您任秦将已经三年了，所伤亡损失的兵力也以十万计，而诸侯国仍蜂拥而起，越来越多。
English: Now the general has been the general of Qin for three years, the loss of the soldiers is one hundred thousand, and the armies of the princes are increasing at the same time.

古文：彼赵高素谀日久，今事急，亦恐二世诛之，故欲以法诛将军以塞责，使人更代将军以脱其祸。
现代文：那赵高一向阿谀奉承，时日已久，现在情势紧急，他也害怕被二世杀掉，所以就想用秦法杀您，借此搪塞罪责；派人替代您，借此逃脱他的灾祸。
English: That Zhao Gao has been holding a grudge for a long time, the current situation is critical, and he is afraid that the second generation will kill him, so he intends to use the national law to kill the general, so as to shirk responsibility and not send someone abroad to replace the general, so as to get rid of the disaster.

古文：夫将军居外久，多内郤，有功亦诛，无功亦诛。
现代文：您领兵驻在外的时间颇久，朝廷内多有仇怨，有功也要被杀，无功也要被杀。
English: You have been stationed abroad for quite a long time, and there are many grudges within the imperial court. Those who have served will be killed, and those who have not served will be killed.

古文：且天之亡秦，无愚智皆知之。
现代文：况且上天要灭亡秦朝，这是无论愚蠢还是聪慧的人都知道的事情。
English: Moreover, whether it is a stupid person or a smart person, everyone knows that the sky is about to die.

古文：今将军内不能直谏，外为亡国将，孤特独立而欲常存，岂不哀哉！
现代文：而今您在内不能直言规劝，在外又将成亡国的将军，茕茕孑立，却想要长久地生存，难道不是很可悲吗！
English: Nowadays, generals can't speak their minds, and it's sad to be the general of a country that is on the verge of extinction, all alone and wanting to hide for a long time!

古文：将军何不还兵与诸侯为从，约共攻秦，分王其地，南面称孤！
现代文：您何不就倒戈与各诸侯军联合，约定共同攻秦，瓜分秦朝的土地而称王，面向南称孤道寡呀！
English: Why don't you rebel and unite with the armies of all the princes, agree to jointly attack Qin, carve up the land of the Qin Dynasty and call yourself a king, and face south and call yourself an orphan!

古文：此孰与身伏鈇质、妻子为戮乎？ 
现代文：这与身伏斧砧遭斩杀，妻子儿女被杀戮相比，哪一个结局更好啊？ 
English: This is compared to the beheading of a crippled axe-wielding man and the killing of his wife and children. Which outcome is better?

古文：章邯狐疑，阴使候始成使项羽，欲约。
现代文：章邯狐疑不决，暗地里派遣名叫始成的侦察官出使项羽军中，想要签订和约。
English: Zhang Ye hesitated, and secretly sent the military commander Zhucheng to Xiang Yu's camp to sign a peace treaty.

古文：约未成，项羽使蒲将日夜引兵度三户，军漳南，与秦军战，再破之。
现代文：和约未达成，项羽派蒲将军领兵昼夜兼行地渡过漳水三户渡口，驻扎在漳水南面，与秦军交锋，再次打败了他们。
English: The peace treaty was not reached, and Xiang Yu sent General Pu to lead the troops to cross the three ferry ports of Surabaya day and night, stationed in the south of Surabaya, clashed with the Qin Army, and defeated them again.

古文：项羽悉引兵击秦军汙水上，大破之。
现代文：项羽随后又统领全军在污水边进攻秦军，大败敌兵。
English: Xiang Yu led all the non-commissioned officers to attack the Qin army on the sewage, and defeated the Qin army.

古文：章邯使人见项羽，欲约。
现代文：章邯于是派人求见项羽，想订立和约。
English: Zhang Ye sent someone to see Xiang Yu, intending to conclude a peace treaty.

古文：项羽召军吏谋曰： 粮少，欲听其约。 军吏皆曰： 善。 
现代文：项羽即召集军官们商议说： 现在军中粮食短缺，我想就答应他们议和的要求。 军官们都说： 可以。 
English: Xiang Yu immediately called the officers together for discussion and said, "Now that there is a shortage of grain in the army, I would like to agree to their request to negotiate a peace."

古文：项羽乃与期洹水殷虚上。
现代文：项羽便与章邯约定在洹水南面的殷墟上会晤。
English: Xiang Yu and Zhang Ye agreed to meet at the Yin Market on the south side of Surabaya.

古文：已盟，章邯见项羽而流涕，为言赵高。
现代文：订立盟约后，章邯进见项羽，流着泪向他诉说赵高的所作所为。
English: They have already concluded a covenant. When Zhang Ye saw Xiang Yu, he shed tears and told Xiang Yu about Zhao Gao's various actions.

古文：项羽乃立章邯为雍王，置楚军中，使长史欣为上将军，将秦军为前行。
现代文：项羽就立章邯为雍王，将他安顿在楚军中，并命长史司马欣任上将军，率领秦军为先头部队。
English: Xiang Yu appointed Zhang Ye as the king of Yong, placed him in the Chu army, and appointed the commander Shi Sima Xin as the general, leading the Qin army as the vanguard.

古文：瑕丘申阳下河南，引兵从项羽。
现代文：瑕丘人申阳去到河南，领兵追随项羽。
English: Shenyang, a native of Koecheok, went to Henan and led an army to follow Xiang Yu.

古文：初，中丞相赵高欲专秦权，恐群臣不听，乃先设验，持鹿献于二世曰： 马也。 
现代文：当初，中丞相赵高想独操秦朝大权，但又担心群臣不服，于是便先进行试验，牵来一只鹿献给二世说： 这是马啊。 
English: At first, Chujo Minister Zhao Gao wanted to control the power of the Qin Dynasty alone, but he was worried that the courtiers would not be satisfied, so he first carried out an experiment, brought a deer to the second generation and said: This is a horse.

古文：二世笑曰： 丞相误邪，谓鹿为马！ 
现代文：二世笑道： 你错了吧？怎么把鹿叫作马？ 
English: The second laughed, "You're wrong, aren't you? How can you call a deer a horse?

古文：问左右，左右或默，或言马以阿顺赵高，或言鹿者。
现代文：即询问侍立左右的大臣们，群臣有的沉默不语，有的说是马以迎合赵高，有的则说是鹿。
English: That is to say, he asked the ministers around him, and some of the ministers were silent, some said it was a horse to cater to Zhao Gao, and some said it was a deer.

古文：高因阴中诸言鹿者以法。
现代文：于是，赵高暗中借秦法陷害了那些明说是鹿的人。
English: As a result, Zhao Gao secretly used the Qin method to frame those who were clearly deer.

古文：后群臣皆畏高，莫敢言其过。
现代文：此后群臣都畏惧赵高，没有人敢谈他的过错。
English: After that, all the courtiers were afraid of Zhao Gao, and no one dared to talk about his fault.

古文：高前数言 关东盗无能为也 ，及项羽虏王离等，而章邯等军数败，上书请益助。
现代文：赵高以前曾多次说 关东的盗贼成不了大事 ，待到项羽俘获王离等人,而章邯等人的军队也多次被打败，赵高才上书请求增兵援助。
English: Zhao Gao had said many times before that the thieves in Guandong could not achieve great things. It was not until Xiang Yu captured Wang Li and others, and the army of Zhang Ye and others was defeated many times, that Zhao Gao wrote to request additional troops for assistance.

古文：自关以东，大抵尽畔秦吏，应诸侯，诸侯咸率其众西乡。
现代文：这时自函谷关以东，大体上全都背叛秦朝官吏，响应诸侯；诸侯也都各自统率部众向西进攻。
English: At this time, from east of the Hakodate Pass, the officials of the Qin Dynasty were generally all betrayed and responded to the lords; the lords also led the troops to attack the west.

古文：八月，沛公将数万人攻武关，屠之。
现代文：八月，刘邦率几万人攻打武关，屠灭了全城。
English: In August, Liu Bang led tens of thousands of people to attack Wuguan and slaughtered the entire city.

古文：高恐二世怒，诛及其身，乃谢病，不朝见。
现代文：赵高恐怕二世为此发怒，招致杀身之祸，就托病不出，不再朝见二世。
English: Zhao Gao feared that Nisei would be angry about this and kill himself, so he feigned illness and stopped seeing Nisei.

古文：二世梦白虎啮其左骖马，杀之，心不乐，怪问占梦。
现代文：二世梦见一只白虎咬他的左骖马，并把马咬死，但因此心中闷闷不乐，颇觉奇怪，便询问占梦的人。
English: Nisei dreamed that a white tiger bit his left steed and killed the horse, but because of this, he felt depressed and strange, so he asked the person who interpreted the dream.

古文：卜曰： 泾水为祟。 
现代文：占梦人卜测说： 是泾水神在作祟。 
English: The diviners of dreams say: The god of water, the god of running water, is casting a spell.

古文：二世乃斋于望夷宫，欲祠泾水，沈四白马。
现代文：二世于是就在望夷宫实行斋戒，想祭祀泾水神，将四匹白马沉入河中。
English: As a result, the second generation fasted at the Mogi Palace and wanted to offer a sacrifice to the god of water, sinking four white horses into the river.

古文：使使责让高以盗贼事。
现代文：并为盗贼的事派人去责问赵高。
English: sent an envoy to accuse Zhao Gao of the theft.

古文：高惧，乃阴与其婿咸阳令阎乐及弟赵成谋曰： 上不听谏。今事急，欲归祸于吾。
现代文：赵高愈加害怕，即暗中与他的女婿咸阳县令阎乐、他的弟弟赵成商议说： 皇上不听规劝，而今情势紧急，便想加祸于我。
English: Zhao Gao became more and more afraid, so he secretly discussed with his son-in-law, Ling Yanle of Xianyang County, and his brother, Zhao Cheng, saying: "The emperor does not listen to advice, and now the situation is urgent, he wants to do me harm.

古文：吾欲易置上，更立子婴。
现代文：我打算更换天子，改立二世哥哥的儿子子婴为皇帝。
English: I intend to replace the heavenly son and install the second brother's son, the infant, as emperor.

古文：子婴仁俭，百姓皆载其言。 
现代文：子婴为人仁爱俭朴，百姓们都尊重他说的话。 
English: The nobleman, the infant, and the benevolent man love thrift, and the people listen to his words.

古文：乃使郎中令为内应，诈为有大贼，令乐召吏发兵追，劫乐母置高舍。
现代文：随即命郎中令作为内应，诈称有大盗，令阎乐调兵遣将去追捕，同时劫持阎乐的母亲安置到赵高府中。
English: He then immediately ordered his second-in-command to act as a confidential informant, falsely claiming that there was a big thief, ordering Yan Le to send troops to chase the thief, and at the same time kidnapping Yan Le's mother and placing her in Zhao Gaofu Middle School.

古文：遣乐将吏卒千馀人至望夷宫殿门，缚卫令仆射，曰： 贼入此，何不止？ 
现代文：又派阎乐率领官兵一千多人来到望夷宫殿门前，将卫令仆射捆绑起来，说： 大盗进里面去了，为什么不进行阻拦？ 
English: He also sent Yan Le to lead more than a thousand officers and soldiers to come to the front of the palace of Wangyi, tied up the guards, and said: The thief has entered, why not stop him?

古文：卫令曰： 周庐设卒甚谨，安得贼敢入宫！ 
现代文：卫令道： 宫墙周围设置卫后，防守非常严密，怎么会有盗贼敢溜入宫中啊！ 
English: Guarding Road: Guards are set up around the palace wall, the defense is very tight, how could thieves dare to sneak into the palace!

古文：乐遂斩卫令，直将吏入，行射郎、宦者。
现代文：阎乐就斩杀了卫令，带兵径直闯进宫去，边走边射杀郎官和宦官。
English: Yan Le killed the guards and led the soldiers straight into the palace, shooting the eunuchs and eunuchs as he went.

古文：郎、宦者大惊，或走，或格。格者辄死，死者数十人。
现代文：郎官、宦官惊恐万状，有的逃跑，有的抵抗，而反抗者即被杀死，这样死了几十人。
English: The vassals and eunuchs were terrified. Some fled, some resisted, and those who resisted were killed. In this way, dozens of people died.

古文：郎中令与乐俱入，射上幄坐帏。
现代文：郎中令和阎乐于是一同入内，箭射二世的蓬帐、帷帐。
English: The second-in-command and Yan Le entered Nisei's residence together and shot arrows at the curtain where Nisei was sitting.

古文：二世怒，召左右，左右皆惶扰不斗。
现代文：二世怒不可遏，召唤侍候左右的卫士，但近侍卫士都慌乱不堪，不上前格斗。
English: The second generation was furious and called the attendants on the right and left. The attendants on the right and left were all panicked and disturbed, and did not go forward to fight.

古文：旁有宦者一人侍，不敢去。
现代文：二世身旁只有一名宦官服侍着，不敢离去。
English: Next to the second generation, there is only one eunuch who serves and does not dare to leave.

古文：二世入内，谓曰： 公何不早告我，乃至于此！ 
现代文：二世入内对这个宦官说： 你为什么不早告诉我呀，竞至于到了这个地步！ 
English: The second-generation princess said to the eunuch, "Why didn't you tell me sooner? It's come to this!

古文：宦者曰： 臣不敢言，故得全。使臣早言，皆已诛，安得至今！ 
现代文：宦官道： 我不敢说，所以才能保全性命；倘若我早说了，已经被杀掉了，哪里还能活到今日！ 
English: The eunuch said, "I dare not say it, so I can save my life. If I had said it earlier, I would have been killed, but I can still live to this day!"

古文：阎乐前即二世，数曰： 足下骄恣，诛杀无道，天下共畔足下。
现代文：阎乐这时走到二世面前，数落他说： 您骄横放纵，滥杀无辜，天下人都背叛了您，您还是自己打算一下吧！ 
English: At this time, Yan Le walked up to the Second Emperor and told him: "You are arrogant and indulgent, killing innocents indiscriminately. The whole world has betrayed you. You should think about it yourself!

古文：足下其自为计！ 二世曰： 丞相可得见否？ 
现代文：二世说： 我可以见到丞相吗？ 阎乐道： 不行！ 
English: The second generation said, "Can I see the prime minister?" Yan Le said, "No!

古文：乐曰： 不可！ 二世曰： 吾愿得一郡为王。 弗许。
现代文：二世说： 我希望得到一个郡来称王。 阎乐不准许。
English: The second generation said, "I hope to get a county to be crowned king.

古文：又曰： 愿为万户侯。 
现代文：二世又道： 我愿意作万户侯。 
English: The second generation also said: I am willing to be a millionaire.

古文：弗许。
现代文：阎乐仍不答应。
English: Yan Le still did not agree.

古文：曰： 愿与妻子为黔首，比诸公子。 
现代文：二世于是说： 那么我甘愿与妻子儿女去作平民百姓，像各位公子的结局那样。 
English: The second then said: Then I am willing to become a commoner with my wife and children, like the outcome of the noblemen.

古文：阎乐曰： 臣受命于丞相，为天下诛足下。足下虽多言，臣不敢报！ 
现代文：阎乐道： 我奉丞相的命令，为天下百姓诛杀您，您再多说，我也不敢禀告！ 
English: Yan Le said, "I obeyed the order of the prime minister and killed you for the sake of the people of the world. If you say more, I won't dare to denounce you!"

古文：麾其兵进。
现代文：随即指挥他的兵士上前。
English: Yan Le ordered his soldiers to advance and attack.

古文：二世自杀。
现代文：二世就自杀了。
English: The second generation committed suicide.

古文：阎乐归报赵高。赵高乃悉召诸大臣、公子，告以诛二世之状，曰： 秦故王国，始皇君天下，故称帝。
现代文：阎乐回报赵高，赵高便召集全体大臣、公子，告诉他们诛杀二世的经过情形，并说道： 秦从前本是个王国，始皇帝统治了天下，因此称帝。
English: Yan Le replied to Zhao Gao. Zhao Gao then gathered all the ministers and nobles and told them the story of the assassination of the second emperor, and said: Qin was once a kingdom, and the first emperor ruled the world, so he was called the emperor.

古文：今六国复自立，秦地益小，乃以空名为帝，不可。
现代文：现在六国重又各自独立，秦朝的地盘越来越小，仍然以一个空名称帝，不可如此。
English: Now that the six countries have all established their own political power, and the area of Qin is shrinking day by day, it is unacceptable that they still call him emperor and use his name in vain.

古文：宜为王如故，便。 
现代文：应还像过去那样称王才合适。 
English: It is more appropriate to praise the king as in the past.

古文：乃立子婴为秦王。以黔首葬二世社南宜春苑中。
现代文：便立子婴为秦王，并用平民百姓的礼仪把二世葬在了杜县南面的宜春苑中。
English: Therefore, the infant was named King Qin, and the second son was buried in the Yichun Garden in the south of Du County with the etiquette of the common people.

古文：九月，赵高令子婴斋戒，当庙见，受玉玺。
现代文：九月，赵高让子婴斋戒，到宗庙参拜祖先，接受国君的印玺。
English: In September, Zhao Gao asked his infant son to fast, visit his ancestors at the ancestral temple, and accept the seal of the sovereign.

古文：斋五日。子婴与其子二人谋曰： 丞相高杀二世望夷宫，恐群臣诛之，乃佯以义立我。
现代文：斋戒五天后，子婴与他的两个儿子商量说： 丞相赵高在望夷宫杀了二世皇帝，害怕群臣将他杀掉，才假装依据礼义拥立我为王。
English: After five days of fasting, the infant consulted with his two sons and said, "The prime minister, Zhao Gao, killed the second emperor in the palace of Wangyi. He was afraid that his ministers would kill him, so he pretended to make me king out of courtesy.

古文：我闻赵高乃与楚约，灭秦宗室而分王关中。
现代文：我听说赵高曾经与楚军约定，消灭秦朝的宗室之后，在关中分别称王。
English: I heard that Zhao Gao once agreed with the Chu army that after the destruction of the Qin dynasty's imperial family, he would be crowned separately in Guanzhong.

古文：今使我斋、见庙，此欲因庙中杀我。
现代文：如今他让我斋戒，赴宗庙参拜，这是想乘朝见宗庙之机杀了我啊。
English: Now he wants me to fast and go to the ancestral temple to worship. He wants to use the opportunity of seeing the ancestral temple in the morning to kill me.

古文：我称病不行，丞相必自来，来则杀之。 
现代文：我若托病不去，丞相必定会亲自前来请我，他来了就杀掉他。 
English: I said that I would not go if I was ill, and that the prime minister must come to me in person, and that I would kill him when he came.

古文：高使人请子婴数辈，子婴不行。
现代文：赵高派了几批人去请子婴，子婴就是不动身。
English: Zhao Gao sent several groups of people to invite the baby, but the baby did not move.

古文：高果自往，曰： 宗庙重事，王奈何不行？ 
现代文：赵高果然亲自前往，说道： 参拜宗庙是重大的事情，大王您为何不去啊？ 
English: Zhao Gao went there in person and said, "Visiting the ancestral temple is a very important thing. Why don't you go?

古文：子婴遂刺杀高于斋宫，三族高家以徇。
现代文：子婴即在斋宫刺杀了赵高，并诛杀赵高家三族的人以示众。
English: The child stabbed Zhao Gao to death in the Temple of Heaven, and killed three members of Zhao Gao's family as a demonstration.

古文：遣将兵距峣关，沛公欲击之。张良曰： 秦兵尚强，未可轻。
现代文：子婴调兵遣将到关增援，刘邦就想去攻打关的秦军。张良说： 秦军还挺强大的，不可轻视。
English: Liu Bang wanted to go and attack the Qin army in Guan after the child soldiers were sent to Guan for reinforcement. Zhang Liang said: The Qin army is still quite powerful and should not be despised.

古文：愿先遣人益张旗帜于山上为疑兵，使郦食其、陆贾往说秦将，啖以利。 
现代文：希望您先派人上山去多多张挂旗帜，作为疑兵，再命崐郦食其、陆贾前往游说秦朝的将领，对他们加以利诱。 
English: I hope that you will first send people up the mountain to hang more flags, as suspected soldiers, and then eat them alive, and Lu Jia will go to lobby the generals of the Qin Dynasty to entice them.

古文：秦将果欲连和，沛公欲许之。
现代文：秦将果然想与刘邦的军队联合。
English: Qin Zheng really wanted to make peace with Pei Gong, and Pei Gong was going to agree.

古文：张良曰： 此独其将欲叛，恐其士卒不从；不如因其懈怠击之。 
现代文：刘邦打算准许他们联合的请求。张良道： 这还只是那些将领想要反叛秦朝，恐怕他们的士兵还不会服从。不如就乘着秦军麻痹大意时攻击他们。 
English: Liu Bang is going to grant their request to unite. Zhang Liang said: It's just those generals who want to rebel against the Qin Dynasty, I'm afraid their soldiers won't obey. It's better to attack them when the Qin Army is paralyzed.

古文：沛公引兵绕峣关，逾蒉山，击秦军，大破之蓝田南。
现代文：刘邦于是便领兵绕过关，越过蒉山，袭击秦军，在蓝田的南面大败秦军。
English: Liu Bang then led the troops to bypass the pass, crossed Lushan, attacked the Qin army, and defeated the Qin army in the south of Lantian.

古文：遂至蓝田，又战其北，秦兵大败。
现代文：随后抵达蓝田，又在蓝田北面与秦军交战，秦军土崩瓦解。
English: Subsequently, they arrived in Lantian and fought with the Qin army in the north of Lantian. The Qin army collapsed.

