古文：杨国忠，本名钊，蒲州永乐人也。
现代文：杨国忠本名钊，蒲州永乐人。
English: Yang Guozhong's real name is Zou, and he is from Yongle, Puzhou.

古文：父珣，以国忠贵，赠兵部尚书。
现代文：父亲名王旬，凭借国忠的显达，被追封为兵部尚书。
English: His father, Myo Wangjun, was posthumously awarded the title of Hyobu Shoshu by virtue of his loyalty to the country.

古文：则天朝幸臣张易之，即国忠之舅也。
现代文：则天朝中的宠臣张易之，即是国忠的舅舅。
English: Zhang Yizhi, a favorite of the imperial court, was Guozhong's uncle.

古文：国忠无学术拘检，能饮酒，蒱博无行，为宗党所鄙。
现代文：国忠无学术，行为放荡，能饮酒，爱好艹捕，品行不端，为同宗族人所鄙视。
English: Guozhong has no academic qualifications, indulges in debauchery, can drink alcohol, enjoys hunting and trapping, behaves inappropriately, and is despised by his fellow clansmen.

古文：乃发愤从军，事蜀帅，以屯优当迁，益州长史张宽恶其为人，因事笞之，竟以屯优授新都尉。
现代文：于是发愤从军，在蜀帅手下奉事，因驻防出色应当提升，益州长史张宽为人凶恶，因故鞭打他，竟因驻防出色授予新都尉之官。
English: As a result, he angrily joined the army, served under Shu Shu, and should have been promoted due to his outstanding performance in garrison defense. Moreover, the governor Shih Zhang Kuan was a vicious man, and whipped him for some reason, and he was awarded the rank of new captain due to his outstanding performance in garrison defense.

古文：稍迁金吾卫兵曹参军。
现代文：慢慢迁为金吾卫兵曹参军。
English: He slowly moved to join the army as Kingu Guard Cao.

古文：太真妃，即国忠从祖妹也。
现代文：太真妃，即是国忠从祖妹。
English: Taizhenfei, that is, Guozhong Zonglian.

古文：天宝初，太真有宠，剑南节度使章仇兼琼引国忠为宾佐，既而擢授监察御史。
现代文：天宝初，太真得宠，剑南节度使章仇兼琼推荐国忠为宾佐，不久又升为监察御史。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, Taizhen was favored, and Jian'nan Festival envoy Zhang Qianqiong recommended Guozhong as a guest, and soon he was promoted to inspector.

古文：去就轻率，骤履清贵，朝士指目嗤之。
现代文：到任后行为轻率，又因骤然之间登临显位，朝廷众士都对他嗤之以鼻。
English: After taking office, he behaved imprudently, and because of his sudden rise to prominence, many members of the imperial court sneered at him.

古文：时李林甫将不利于皇太子，掎摭阴事以倾之。
现代文：此时李林甫对皇太子不利，谋划计策准备废除他。
English: At this time, Li Linfu was unfavorable to the crown prince and plotted to abolish him.

古文：侍御史杨慎矜承望风旨，诬太子妃兄韦坚与皇甫惟明私谒太子，以国忠怙宠敢言，援之为党，以按其事。
现代文：侍御史杨慎矜奉望风旨，诬陷太子妃兄弟韦坚与皇甫惟明私自谒见太子，由于国忠依仗受宠敢说话，杨慎矜援引他为同党，来评判此事。
English: Attendant Shi Yang Shennong, following the trend, framed the prince's brothers, Wei Jian and Wang Fubei, who openly and privately visited the prince. Since Guozhong was favored and dared to speak, Yang Shennong cited him as a member of the same party to judge the matter.

古文：京兆府法曹吉温舞文巧诋，为国忠爪牙之用，因深竟坚狱，坚及太子良娣杜氏、亲属柳勣、杜昆吾等，痛绳其罪，以树威权。
现代文：京兆府法曹吉温舞弄文墨也予诋毁，充当国忠的爪牙，由于事端严重追究坚入狱，坚及太子良娣杜氏、亲属柳责力杜昆吾等人，全部被绳之以法，以树立威风权势。
English: The legal officer of Jingzhao Prefecture, Jiwen Danzo, was also slandered, acting as a minion of Guozhong. Due to the serious investigation of the incident, Jian was jailed, and Jian, Prince Liang, Du Kunwu and other relatives were all brought to justice in order to establish authority and power.

古文：于京城别置推院，自是连岁大狱，追捕挤陷，诛夷者数百家，皆国忠发之。
现代文：在京城另外设置推院，从此连岁大案，追捕挤陷、被杀的人有数百家，全部是国忠干的。
English: In addition, a courthouse was set up in the capital, and since then, there have been major cases year after year, with hundreds of people being hunted down, trapped and killed, all of which were committed by Guozhong.

古文：林甫方深阻保位，国忠凡所奏劾，涉疑似于太子者，林甫虽不明言以指导之，皆林甫所使，国忠乘而为邪，得以肆意。
现代文：林甫为了牢固其地位，凡国忠上奏揭发，涉及到与太子有关的人，林甫虽不明说指示他，但都是林甫所指使，国忠趁机作恶，肆意放纵。
English: In order to consolidate his position, Lin Fu ordered Guotong to report and expose anyone who was related to the prince. Although it is unclear whether Lin Fu ordered him to do so, Guotong took the opportunity to commit evil and indulge in wanton indulgence.

古文：上春秋高，意有所爱恶，国忠探知其情，动契所欲。
现代文：皇上年岁已高，他的爱恶之意，国忠都能从中探知真情，行为符合其意。
English: The emperor was already very old, and Kunitada was able to detect the true feelings of his love and hate, and his actions were in line with his intentions.

古文：骤迁检校度支员外郎，兼侍御史，监水陆运及司农、出纳钱物、内中市买、召募剑南健兒等使。
现代文：逐渐迁升为检校度支员外郎，兼侍御史，管理水陆运输及司农、发放钱物、宫中采购、召募剑南健儿等事务。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of school inspector's second-in-command, concurrently serving as imperial historian, managing land and water transportation and agriculture, issuing money and goods, imperial procurement, and recruiting Kenan Kenki and other affairs.

古文：以称职迁度支郎中，不期年，兼领十五馀使，转给事中、兼御史中丞，专判度支事。
现代文：由于称职迁为度支郎中，不过一年，兼领十五余使，转给事中、兼御史中丞，专职判度支事。
English: Due to the transfer of duties, he was transferred to Dojiro Junior High School, but one year later, he received more than fifteen envoys, and was transferred to Jizhong and Goshi Junior High School, and was a full-time judge of the Doji branch.

古文：是岁，贵妃姊虢国、韩国、秦国三夫人同日拜命，兄銛拜鸿胪卿。
现代文：这年，贵妃姊虢国、韩国、秦国三位夫人同日拜命，兄铭拜为鸿胪卿。
English: In the same year, the three wives of Guifei's sister, the empresses of Yunnan, South Korea and Qin, all died on the same day, and her brother was revered as Hongyuqing.

古文：八载，玄宗召公卿百僚观左藏库，喜其货币山积，面赐国忠金紫，兼权太府卿事。
现代文：八年，玄宗召见朝廷百官观看左藏库，里面货币如山，玄宗很高兴，面赐国忠金紫，兼管太府卿事务。
English: In the eighth year, Xuanzong summoned hundreds of officials from the imperial court to watch the left bank, where there was a mountain of money. Xuanzong was very happy, and he was given the title of "Kokuchu Zhongjin Zi" and was also in charge of the affairs of the Taifuqing.

古文：国忠既专钱谷之任，出入禁中，日加亲幸。
现代文：国忠已专职管理钱财，出入禁中，越来越受宠爱。
English: Guozhong has become a full-time manager of money and wealth. He has been banned from entering and leaving the country, and is becoming more and more popular.

古文：初，杨慎矜希林甫旨，引王鉷为御史中丞，同构大狱，以倾东宫。
现代文：初，杨慎矜根据林甫之意任王鉷为御史中丞，共同制造了一场冤狱，使太子蒙冤。
English: In the beginning, Yang Shengkun appointed Wang Qian as the vice-president of the imperial history in accordance with Lin Fu's intention, and together they created an unjust prison, causing the crown prince to suffer injustice.

古文：既帝意不回，慎矜稍避事防患，因与鉷有隙。
现代文：不久皇上颇有悔意，慎矜便渐渐疏远王鉷等以保全自己，因而和鉷有隔阂。
English: Soon, the emperor felt remorse, and Shennong gradually distanced himself from Wang Qian and others to protect himself, and thus had a rift with Qianlong.

古文：鉷乃附国忠，奏诬慎矜，诛其昆仲，由是权倾内外，公卿惕息。
现代文：鉷于是依附国忠，上奏诬陷慎矜，诛灭其家族，因为权势在宫内外很大，朝廷公卿无不屏息担心。
English: Therefore, he attached himself to Guozhong, played the role of a false accuser, and annihilated his family. Because his power was so great both inside and outside the palace, the court nobles were all worried.

古文：吉温为国忠陈移夺执政之策，国忠用其谋，寻兼兵部侍郎。
现代文：吉温为国忠取得大权谋划，国忠利用他的谋略，不久兼兵部侍郎。
English: Jiwen planned for Kunitada to gain power, and Kunitada took advantage of his strategy and soon became the attendant of the military department.

古文：京兆尹萧炅、御史中丞宋浑皆林甫所亲善，国忠皆诬奏谴逐，林甫不能救。
现代文：京兆尹萧炅、御史中丞宋浑都是林甫的亲信，国忠一一上奏诬陷使他们被谪贬赶走，林甫不能挽救。
English: Emperor Jingzhao, Yin Xiaoqi, and Grand Historian Zhongzheng, Song Hun, were all close friends of Lin Fu. Guozhong made false accusations one after another, and they were driven away by ridicule. Lin Fu could not save them.

古文：王鉷为御史大夫，兼京兆尹，恩宠侔于国忠，而位望居其右。
现代文：王鉷为御史大夫，兼任京兆尹，受到的恩宠与国忠等同，地位可望居其右。
English: Wang Xi was the imperial historian and concurrently held the post of Jing Zhaoyun. He received the same favor as Guozhong, and his position was expected to be on the right.

古文：国忠忌其与己分权，会邢縡事泄，乃陷鉷兄弟诛之，因代鉷为御史大夫，权京兆尹，赐名国忠。
现代文：国忠顾忌王鉷与自己平分权势，恰巧邢纟宰的事情暴露，于是陷害王鉷兄弟并杀了他们，趁此取代鉷任御史大夫，暂代京兆尹，赐名国忠。
English: Guozhong Guozhong feared that Wang Xi would share power equally with him, so he framed Wang Xi's brothers and killed them. He took advantage of this to replace Guozhong Guozhong as Goshi Daifu, temporarily replacing Jing Zhaoyun, and gave his name to Guozhong.

古文：乃穷竟邢縡狱，令引林甫交私鉷、銲与阿布思事状，而陈希烈、哥舒翰附会国忠，证成其状，上由是疏薄林甫。
现代文：于是追究邢纟宰的官司，命令招供林甫私下与王鉷、王钅旱及阿布思交往的情形，陈希烈、哥舒翰附会国忠，作证有其情形，皇上因此疏远薄待李林甫。
English: Therefore, he investigated the court case of Guzai, and ordered that the circumstances of Lin Fu's private communication with Wang Xuan, Wang Shanzhao and Abu Si should be reported. Chen Xilei and Goshukhan attached to Guozhong testified to the circumstances. Therefore, the emperor alienated and treated Li Lin Fu poorly.

古文：南蛮质子閤罗凤亡归不获，帝怒甚，欲讨之。
现代文：南蛮人质阁罗凤逃跑了没有抓获到，皇上甚是恼怒，准备攻打南蛮。
English: Luo Feng, the hostage of Nanban, ran away and was not caught. The emperor was very angry and prepared to attack Nanban.

古文：国忠荐阆州人鲜于仲通为益州长史，令率精兵八万讨南蛮，与罗凤战于泸南，全军陷没。国忠掩其败状，仍叙其战功，仍令仲通上表请国忠兼领益部。
现代文：国忠推荐阆州人鲜于仲通担任益州史，命令他率领八万精兵攻打南蛮，与罗凤在泸南交战，全军覆没，国忠遮掩失败的事实，仍然陈述仲通的战功，又令仲通上表请国忠兼管益部。
English: Guozhong recommended Guozhou people to Zhongtong as Yizhou history, ordered him to lead 80,000 elite soldiers to attack Nanban, and fight with Luo Feng in southern Fujian, the whole army was destroyed, Guozhong covered up the fact of failure, still stated Zhongtong's war exploits, and ordered Zhongtong to invite Guozhong and control the profit department.

古文：十载，国忠权知蜀郡都督府长史，充剑南节度副大使，知节度事，仍荐仲通代己为京兆尹。
现代文：天宝十年，国忠暂且主管蜀郡都督府长史，充当剑南节度副大使，主管节度事，仍然推荐仲通代替自己为京兆尹。
English: In the tenth year of Tianbao, Guozhong was temporarily in charge of the history of the governor of Shu County and served as the deputy ambassador of the Jianan Festival, in charge of the festival, and still recommended Zhongtong to replace himself as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：国忠又使司马李宓率师七万再讨南蛮。
现代文：国忠又派司马李宓率领军队七万再次攻打南蛮。
English: Guozhong also sent Sima Lijun to lead an army of 70,000 to attack Nanban again.

古文：宓渡泸水，为蛮所诱，至和城，不战而败，李宓死于阵。
现代文：李宓渡过泸水，被南蛮所引诱，到和城，不战而败，李宓死在战场。
English: Li Yu crossed the Surabaya River, was lured by Nanban, and went to Hecheng, but was defeated without a fight. Li Yu died on the battlefield.

古文：国忠又隐其败，以捷书上闻。
现代文：国忠又隐瞒失败的真情，上奏告捷书。
English: Guozhong also concealed the truth of his defeat and reported his victory.

古文：自仲通、李宓再举讨蛮之军，其征发皆中国利兵，然于土风不便，沮洳之所陷，瘴疫之所伤，馈饷之所乏，物故者十八九。
现代文：从仲通、李宓二次发动攻打南蛮的军队看，征发的都是国中的利兵，然而水土风俗不熟悉，陷入低湿地带，被瘴疫所伤害，缺乏馈饷，察原因十有八九是如此。
English: Judging from the army that Zhongtong and Li Xi launched to attack Nanban for the second time, the conscripts were the best soldiers in the country. However, they were not familiar with the customs of the soil and water, fell into the low wetland, were harmed by the cholera epidemic, and lacked nourishment. The reasons are nine out of ten.

古文：凡举二十万众，弃之死地，只轮不还，人衔冤毒，无敢言者。
现代文：所发动的二十万众，弃之死地，只轮不还，人衔冤毒，没有敢说什么的。
English: The two hundred thousand people who had been mobilized had been abandoned to their deaths, and no one dared to say anything.

古文：国忠寻兼山南西道采访使。
现代文：国忠不久兼任山南西道采访使。
English: Soon, Guozhong also served as an envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：十一载，南蛮侵蜀，蜀人请国忠赴镇，林甫亦奏遣之。
现代文：天宝十一年，南蛮入侵蜀，蜀人请国忠去平定，李林甫也上奏请求派遣去平定蜀。
English: In the eleventh year of Tianbao, the Southern Barbarians invaded Shu. The Shu people asked Guozhong to go and pacify Shu. Li Linfu also petitioned to be sent to pacify Shu.

古文：将辞，雨泣恳陈必为林甫所排，帝怜之，不数月召还。会林甫卒，遂代为右相，兼吏部尚书、集贤殿大学士、太清太微宫使、判度支、剑南节度、山南西道采访、两京出纳租庸铸钱等使并如故。
现代文：准备离开时，国忠如泣如诉地恳切陈述自己一定会被李林甫所排挤，皇上怜爱他，几个月不到就下令召还，恰巧林甫死，国忠就代替林甫任右相，兼任吏部尚书、集贤殿大学士、太清太微宫使、判度支、剑南节度、山南西道采访、两京出纳租庸铸钱等使一起如旧。
English: When he was preparing to leave, Guozhong stated earnestly with tears in his eyes that he would definitely be pushed out by Li Linfu. The emperor pitied him and ordered him to return within a few months. Just as Linfu died, Guozhong replaced Linfu as the minister of the right, and also served as the secretary of Shangshu, the scholar of Jixian Palace University, the palace envoy of Taiching Taibai, the judge of Shih, the judge of Jianan, the interviewer of Shannan West Road, the cashier of the two capitals, and the mint of money, and so on.

古文：国忠本性疏躁，强力有口辩，既以便佞得宰相，剖决机务，居之不疑。立朝之际，或攘袂扼腕，自公卿已下，皆颐指气使，无不詟惮。
现代文：国忠本性疏忽急躁，强力有口辩，不久因能说会道得到宰相位置，分析决断机务，从不优柔寡断，上朝理事时，挽袖扼腕，对公卿以下官员，都颐指气使，官吏都畏惧他。
English: Guozhong's nature was careless and impetuous, he was a forceful debater, he soon got the position of prime minister because he could speak the language, he analyzed the decision-making mechanism, he was never indecisive, when he became a director of the court, he kept his hands in his sleeves, he always gave orders to officials below the nobility, and officials were afraid of him.

古文：故事，宰相居台辅之地，以元功盛德居之，不务威权，出入骑从简易。
现代文：过去，宰相身居台辅是由于高功盛德的缘故，不讲究威风权势，出入随从简易。
English: In the past, the chancellor's residence in Taifu was due to high merit and virtue. He did not pay attention to authority and power, and it was easy for him to go in and out.

古文：自林甫承恩顾年深，每出车骑满街，节将、侍郎有所关白，皆趋走辟易，有同案吏。
现代文：自从林甫承蒙恩宠多年，每次出宫时车骑庞大，节将、侍郎向林甫有所请示，都快步小跑以辟易，如案吏匆忙。
English: Since Lin Fucheng had been favored by the emperor for many years, every time he went out of the palace, the carriage was huge, and the commander of the festival and the attendant asked Lin Fuchen for instructions. They all trotted at a fast pace to avoid him, as if they were in a hurry.

古文：旧例，宰相午后六刻始出归第，林甫奏太平无事，以巳时还第，机务填委，皆决于私家。
现代文：旧历，宰相午后六刻开始出宫返家，林甫上奏太平无事，于巳时到家，繁杂的机务要事，都在家处理。
English: According to the old calendar, the prime minister began to leave the palace at 6 o'clock in the afternoon and returned home. Lin Fu went to the palace without incident, and arrived home at noon. All complicated and important matters were handled at home.

古文：主书吴珣持籍就左相陈希烈之第，希烈引籍署名，都无可否。
现代文：主书吴王旬持文站在左相陈希烈身边，希烈取文署名，都没有意见。
English: The main writer, Wu Wangjun, stood next to the leftist Chen Xilei, holding the document. Chen Xilei took the document and signed it, and there was no objection.

古文：国忠代之，亦如前政。
现代文：国忠代替他，也如同前任。
English: He was replaced by Kunitada, who did the same as his predecessor.

古文：国忠自侍御史以至宰相，凡领四十馀使，又专判度支、吏部三铨，事务鞅掌，但署一字，犹不能尽，皆责成胥吏，贿赂公行。
现代文：国忠从侍御史直到宰相，大约掌管四十多种职，又兼任度支、吏部三司的官吏选拔，由于事务繁重，只签一个字，还不能完成，都责成胥吏去完成，贿赂公开进行。
English: Guozhong, who was in charge of more than forty positions from the general secretary to the prime minister, was also in charge of the selection of officials for the three departments of the provincial branch and the personnel department. Due to the heavy workload, he only signed one word, which could not be completed. He ordered the officials to complete it, and the bribery was carried out openly.

古文：国忠既以宰臣典选，奏请铨日便定留放，不用长名。
现代文：国忠已作为宰臣主管选拔官员，上奏选拔日期便决定完毕，不再增加拟名的时间。
English: Guozhong has been appointed as the official in charge of the selection of vice-ministers, and the date of the announcement of the selection has been decided. There is no need to increase the time for naming.

古文：先天已前，诸司官知政事，午后归本司决事，兵部尚书、侍郎亦分铨注拟。
现代文：先天以前，各司官主持政事，午后归本司处理事物，兵部尚书、侍郎也分别选拔、提名。
English: Before the day before yesterday, each secretary presided over government affairs and returned to his department in the afternoon to deal with matters. The secretary of the military department and the chamberlain were also selected and nominated separately.

古文：开元已后，宰臣数少，始崇其任，不归本司。
现代文：开元以后，宰相的人数减少，宰相权力开始扩大，不归属本司。
English: After the founding of the People's Republic of China, the number of chancellors decreased, and the powers of chancellors began to expand, and they no longer belonged to this department.

古文：故事，吏部三铨，三注三唱，自春及夏，才终其事。国忠使胥吏于私第暗定官员，集百僚于尚书省对注唱，一日令毕，以夸神速，资格差谬，无复伦序。
现代文：按旧例，吏部三次选拔官吏，三次记名三次唱名，从春季到夏季，才完成这件事，国忠招引胥吏在自己住宅私自选定官员，召集百僚在尚书省当面唱名记名，一天就选定完毕，自夸办事神速，标准差异很大，秩序不再重新理顺。
English: According to the old practice, the cadre department selected officials three times, recorded their names three times, and sang their names three times. It took from the spring to the summer to complete this matter. Guozhong recruited cadres to privately select officials in their own homes, convened hundreds of officials to sing their names and record their names in person in Shangshu Province, and completed the selection in one day. He boasted that the work was done quickly, the standards were very different, and the order would not be re-adjusted.

古文：明年注拟，又于私第大集选人，令诸女弟垂帘观之，笑语之声，朗闻于外。
现代文：第二年记名，又在私宅召集大批候选人，叫他各位妹妹垂帘观看，笑语之声，在外面都听得清楚。
English: In the second year, he wrote down the names of the candidates and gathered a large number of candidates in his private home. He asked his sisters to watch from behind a curtain. The sound of laughter could be heard clearly outside.

古文：故事，注官讫，过门下侍中、给事中。
现代文：过去，登记官名完毕，给门下侍中、给事中审核。
English: In the past, when the name of the registrar was completed, it was reviewed by the door attendant and the clerk.

古文：国忠注官时，呼左相陈希烈于座隅，给事中在列，曰： 既对注拟，过门下了矣。 
现代文：国忠登记官名时，招呼左相陈希烈在他座边，给事中也在其中，说： 已经登记唱名，经过审核了。 
English: When Guozhong registered the names of officials, he called for the leftist minister Chen Xilei to be at his side, who was also present at the event, and said: "The name-calling has been registered and approved.

古文：吏部侍郎韦见素、张倚皆衣紫，是日与本曹郎官同咨事，趋走于屏树之间。
现代文：吏部侍郎韦见素、张倚都身穿紫色衣服，这天与本曹郎官共同商议事务，在屏树之间快步穿走，不久退下。
English: Wei Mingsu and Zhang Jie, attendants of the cadre department, were both dressed in purple clothes. On this day, they jointly discussed matters with the officials, walked briskly between the screen trees, and soon retreated.

古文：既退，国忠谓诸妹曰： 两员紫袍主事何如人？ 
现代文：国忠对他的各位妹妹说： 这两个穿紫衣袍服的是何等人？ 
English: Guozhong said to his sisters, "Who are these two people in purple robes?"

古文：相对大噱。
现代文：相对大笑。
English: Relatively loud laughter.

古文：其所昵京兆尹鲜于仲通、中书舍人窦华、侍御史郑昂讽选人于省门立碑，以颂国忠铨综之能。
现代文：其心腹京兆尹鲜于仲通、中书舍人窦华、侍御史郑昂暗示选上的人在省门立碑，以歌颂国忠选拔众才的能力。
English: His confidant, Jing Zhaoyun, who was born in Zhongtong, the Chinese scholar Dou Hua, and his attendant, Shi Zhengang, suggested that the person chosen should erect a monument at the provincial gate to praise the ability of Guozhong to select talents.

古文：贵妃姊虢国夫人，国忠与之私，于宣义里构连甲第，土木被绨绣，栋宇之盛，两都莫比，昼会夜集，无复礼度。
现代文：贵妃姊虢国夫人，国忠与她私通，在宣义里修筑官邸，土木披织绣，建筑之宏盛，两都都不能与之相比，两人形影不离，没有礼度。
English: Guizhong and Guozhong had sexual intercourse with Guifei's sister, Guozhong, and built an official residence in Xuanyi. The civil engineering, weaving and embroidery, and the grandeur of the building are incomparable. The two are inseparable, and there is no courtesy.

古文：有时与虢国并辔入朝，挥鞭走马，以为谐谑，衢路观之，无不骇叹。
现代文：有时国忠与虢国夫人并辔入朝，挥鞭策马，彼此谐谑，路人观之，无不惊骇叹息。
English: Sometimes, Guozhong and Lady Zhi Guo entered the imperial court at the same time, waving whips and riding horses, joking with each other, and the passers-by looked at them and sighed in amazement.

古文：玄宗每年冬十月幸华清宫，常经冬还宫。
现代文：玄宗每年冬十月幸驾华清宫，常常经过冬天再还宫。
English: Every winter and October, Emperor Xuanzong visited the Huaqing Palace, and often returned to the palace after the winter.

古文：国忠山第在宫东门之南，与虢国相对，韩国、秦国甍栋相接，天子幸其第，必过五家，赏赐宴乐。
现代文：国忠山邸在宫东门的南部，与虢国夫人相对，韩国夫人、秦国夫人的官邸彼此相接，天子幸驾这里，必访问五家，赏赐宴乐。
English: The residence of Guozhongshan is in the south of the east gate of the palace, opposite the Lady of the Three Kingdoms, and the official residences of the Lady of Korea and the Lady of Qin are adjacent to each other. If you are lucky enough to visit here, you must visit five houses and enjoy the banquet.

古文：每扈从骊山，五家合队，国忠以剑南幢节引于前，出有饯路，还有软脚，远近饷遗，珍玩狗马，阉侍歌兒，相望于道。
现代文：每次驾扈到骊山，五家合队，国忠以剑南仪仗旗在前引路，出去设酒宴饯行，回来则舒适侍候，远近敬献贡物，珍玩狗马，太监歌妓，夹道迎送。
English: Every time they drove to Lushan, the five families joined forces, Guozhong led the way with the Jiannan ceremonial banner, went out to set up a wine banquet, and came back to serve comfortably, pay tribute from far and near, play with dogs and horses, eunuchs and prostitutes, and welcome them.

古文：进封卫国公，食实封三百户，俄拜司空。
现代文：加封卫国公，又实封三百户，不久又迁司空。
English: In addition, three hundred households were sealed in addition to the seal of the Prince of Defense, and they were soon evacuated.

古文：时安禄山恩宠特深，总握兵柄，国忠知其跋扈，终不出其下，将图之，屡于上前言其悖逆之状，上不之信。
现代文：这时安禄山颇受宠幸，总握兵权，国忠知道他骄横，始终不在其下，准备图谋他，多次在皇上面前说他悖逆之处，皇上不相信。
English: At this time, An Lushan was quite favored, always holding military power. Guotong knew that he was arrogant, always not under him, prepared to plot against him, and repeatedly said in front of the emperor that he was rebellious, but the emperor did not believe him.

古文：是时，禄山已专制河北，聚幽、并劲骑，阴图逆节，动未有名，伺上千秋万岁之后，方图叛换。
现代文：此时禄山已控制河北，汇聚幽、并的精锐骑兵，阴谋反叛，行动还没有借口，伺机等待皇上千秋万岁之后，才图谋叛乱。
English: At this time, Lushan had already controlled Hebei, and the elite cavalry of Yu and Bian had gathered to plot a rebellion. There was no excuse for the action, and they waited for the emperor to die before plotting a rebellion.

古文：及见国忠用事，虑不利于己，禄山遥领内外闲厩使，遂以兵部侍郎吉温知留后，兼御史中丞、京畿采访使，内伺朝廷动静。
现代文：等到看见国忠把握政事、担心不利于自己，禄山在外统领闲厩使，于是让兵部侍郎吉温知留后，兼任御史中丞、京畿采访史，伺探朝廷动静。
English: When he saw that Guozhong was in control of political affairs and was worried that he would not be able to benefit himself, Lukyan sent an envoy to the foreign ruler, so he let Jiwen Zhiruo, the attendant of the military department, concurrently serve as the Vice-Minister of History and the Interviewer of the History of Gyeonggi Province to inquire about the movement of the imperial court.

古文：国忠使门客蹇昂、何盈求禄山阴事，围捕其宅，得李超、安岱等，使侍御史郑昂缢杀于御史台。
现代文：国忠派门客蹇昂、何盈探寻禄山阴谋，围捕了其住宅，抓获了李超、安岱等人，将侍御史郑昂吊死在御史台。
English: Guozhong sent his disciples, Yao'ang and He Ying, to investigate the Lushan Conspiracy, rounded up their residences, captured Li Chao, An Qi and others, and hanged Zheng'ang, the attendant, to death on the throne.

古文：又奏贬吉温于合浦，以激怒禄山，幸其摇动，内以取信于上，上竟不之悟。
现代文：又上奏将吉温贬谪到合浦，以激怒禄山，希望其地位有所摇动，又在朝廷内取信于皇上，但皇上竟不领悟。
English: He also played up the idea of banishing Jiwen to Hepu in order to infuriate Luoshan, hoping that his position would be shaken, and to gain the emperor's trust within the imperial court, but the emperor did not understand.

古文：由是禄山惶惧，遂举兵以诛国忠为名。
现代文：因此禄山惊恐畏惧，于是以杀国忠为名举兵。
English: Therefore, Lokusan was frightened and afraid, so he raised an army in the name of killing Kunitada.

古文：玄宗闻河朔变起，欲以皇太子监国，自欲亲征，谋于国忠。
现代文：玄宗听说河朔叛乱，想让皇太子主管国事，自己亲自出征，以谋划国忠。
English: When Xuanzong heard about the rebellion in Hechuo, he wanted to put the crown prince in charge of state affairs and go to war himself in order to gain the allegiance of the country.

古文：国忠大惧，归谓姊妹曰： 我等死在旦夕。今东宫监国，当与娘子等并命矣。 
现代文：国忠极为害怕，回来时对姊妹说： 我将死于旦夕，现在东宫主管国事，应当与娘子等人归命了。 
English: Guozhong was extremely afraid, and when he came back, he said to his sister: "I will die soon. Now the East Palace is in charge of state affairs, and I and my daughter and others should surrender."

古文：姊妹哭诉于贵妃，贵妃衔土请命，其事乃止。及哥舒翰守潼关，诸将以函关距京师三百里，利在守险，不利出攻。
现代文：姊妹向贵妃哭诉，贵妃含土请命，此事于是了结，到哥舒翰驻守潼关，诸将认为函谷关距京师三百里，地势有利驻守，不利外出攻击。
English: The sister cried out to Guifei, and Guifei pleaded for her life, and the matter was settled. She was stationed at Goshuhan to guard Shiguan. The generals thought that Hanyu Guan was three hundred miles away from Beijing, and the terrain was favorable for guarding and unfavorable for going out to attack.

古文：国忠以翰持兵未决，虑反图己，欲其速战，自中督促之。
现代文：国忠认为翰拥兵不战，是图谋自蓟，要他赶快战斗，遣使督责他。
English: Guozhong thought that Han's refusal to fight was an attempt to commit suicide, and ordered him to fight as soon as possible. He also sent an envoy to supervise and reprimand him.

古文：翰不获已出关，及接战桃林，王师奔败，哥舒受擒，败国丧师，皆国忠之误惑也。
现代文：翰迫不得已出关，在桃林作战，王师大败，哥舒翰被擒，既败国又损失军队，都是因国忠的错误所造成。
English: Han was forced to leave the customs, fought in Taolin, Wang Shilong was defeated, and his brother Shu Han was captured. Both the defeat of the country and the loss of the army were caused by the mistakes of Guozhong.

古文：自禄山兵起，国忠以身领剑南节制，乃布置腹心于梁、益间，以图自全之计。
现代文：自从禄山起兵，国忠以身居剑南节制，于是布置心腹在梁、益之间，以图保全自己之计。
English: Since Lushan raised an army, Guozhong had been living in the temperance of Jiannan, so he arranged his inner circle between Liang and Yi in order to preserve his own plan.

古文：六月九日，潼关不守。
现代文：六月九日，潼关失守。
English: On June 9, Shaoguan was lost.

古文：十二日凌晨，上率龙武将军陈玄礼、左相韦见素、京兆尹魏方进，国忠与贵妃及亲属，拥上出延秋门，诸王妃主从之不及，虑贼奄至，令内侍曹大仙击鼓于春明门外，又焚刍藁之积，烟火烛天。
现代文：十二日凌晨，皇上率领龙武将军陈玄礼、左相韦见素、京兆尹魏方进、国忠与贵妃及亲属，簇拥皇上出延秋门，各王妃主跟随不及，担心贼军即将赶到，令内侍曹大仙在春明门外击鼓，又焚烧堆积的稻草，烟火冲天。
English: In the early morning of the 12th, the emperor led Longwu General Chen Xuanli, Zuo Wei Mingsu, Jing Zhao Yin Wei Fangjin, Guozhong and Guifei and relatives, and gathered around the emperor to go out of the Yan Qiu Gate. The princesses could not follow, fearing that the thief army was about to arrive, so the inner servant Cao Da Xian beat the drum outside the Spring Gate, and burned the accumulated straw, and the fireworks soared into the sky.

古文：既渡渭，即令断便桥。
现代文：已渡过渭水，即命令拆断便桥。
English: After passing through Surabaya, the order was given to dismantle the bridge.

古文：辰时，至咸阳望贤驿，官吏骇窜，无复贵贱，坐宫门大树下。
现代文：辰时，到咸阳望贤驿，官吏都恐惧躲藏，不分贵贱，坐在宫门大树下。
English: At that time, when they went to Xianyang to look for the wise and virtuous, the officials were afraid to hide, no matter how high or low, sitting under the big tree at the palace gate.

古文：亭午，上犹未食，有老父献麦，帝令具饭，始得食。
现代文：正午，皇上还没有吃东西，有老父献上麦子，皇上令做饭，才吃上饭。
English: At noon, the emperor had not eaten anything yet. His father offered wheat, and the emperor ordered to cook before eating.

古文：翌日，至马嵬，军士饥而愤怒，龙武将军陈玄礼惧乱，先谓军士曰： 今天下崩离，万乘震荡，岂不由杨国忠割剥氓庶，朝野怨咨，以至此耶？
现代文：第二天到马嵬，军士因饥饿愤怒，龙武将军陈玄礼害怕叛乱，先对军士说： 现在天下崩难，万乘震荡，都不是因为杨国忠残虐百姓，朝野怨恨才至于此吗？
English: The next day, when they arrived in Ma'an, the sergeant was angry because of hunger, and the Longwu general Chen Xuanli was afraid of rebellion. He first said to the sergeant: "Nowadays, the world is in a state of collapse and turmoil, and it is not because Yang Guozhong brutalized the people. Is it because of the resentment between the government and the people?

古文：若不诛之以谢天下，何以塞四海之怨愤！ 
现代文：若不杀掉他以谢天下，又怎么能遏止四海的怨愤？ 
English: If you don't kill him to thank the world, how can you stop the resentment of the four seas?

古文：众曰： 念之久矣。
现代文：众士说： 早就这样想了。
English: Everyone said, "I've thought about it for a long time."

古文：事行，身死固所愿也。 
现代文：事成，虽死也心甘。 
English: It's done, I'm happy even if I die.

古文：会吐蕃和好使在驿门遮国忠诉事，军士呼曰： 杨国忠与蕃人谋叛。 
现代文：此时吐蕃和好使在驿门与杨国忠正在议事，军士大声喊： 杨国忠与蕃人叛乱。 
English: At this time, the conciliator of Tujian and Yang Guozhong were in the middle of a discussion. The sergeant shouted loudly: "Yang Guozhong is rebelling against the Xiongnu."

古文：诸军乃围驿擒国忠，斩首以徇。
现代文：各军于是包围驿站抓获国忠，斩首示众。
English: As a result, the various armies surrounded the station and captured Kunitada, beheading him in public.

古文：是日，贵妃既缢，韩国、虢国二夫人亦为乱兵所杀。御史大夫魏方进死，左相韦见素伤。
现代文：这天，贵妃已自缢，韩国、虢国二夫人也被乱军所杀，御史大夫魏方进死，左相韦见素伤。
English: On this day, Guifei had already committed suicide, South Korea and the second lady of the Republic of China were also killed by the rebels, the chief historian Wei Fangjin died, and Zuo Wei was injured.

古文：良久兵解，陈玄礼等见上谢罪曰： 国忠挠败国经，构兴祸乱，使黎元涂炭，乘舆播越，此而不诛，患难未已。
现代文：许久以后兵乱结束，陈玄礼等人拜见皇上谢罪说： 国忠扰败国经，构成祸乱，使百姓涂炭，乘车流失，此人不杀，患难无穷。
English: After the end of the war, Chen Xuanli and others paid a visit to the emperor Xie Sin and said: Guozhong disturbs and defeats Guojing, which constitutes a calamity, causing the people to burn coal and lose their cars. If this person is not killed, the troubles will be endless.

古文：臣等为社稷大计，请矫制之罪。 
现代文：臣等人为社稷大计，请矫制之罪。 
English: It is a crime of coercion for vassals and others to devise grand plans for the society.

古文：帝曰： 朕识之不明，任寄失所。
现代文：皇帝说： 我认他不明，任寄失所。
English: The emperor said, "I don't know who he is, I've lost track of him."

古文：近亦觉悟，审其诈佞，意欲到蜀，肆诸市朝。
现代文：近来也觉悟，明白其诈佞，竟欲到蜀，肆诸市朝。
English: Recently, he also realized that he had been deceived, and he wanted to go to Shu.

古文：今神明启卿，谐朕夙志，将畴爵赏，何至言焉。 
现代文：今神明启发我，合我夙志，将奖赏你们，为什么说这些。 
English: Now the gods inspire me, and according to my will, will reward you. Why do you say these things?

古文：是时，禄山虽据河洛，其兵锋东止于梁、宋，南不过许、邓。
现代文：这时，禄山虽据河洛，其先头部队在东止于梁，在南不超过许、郑。
English: At this time, although Lushan was as far as Helo, its leading troops stopped at Liang in the east, and did not exceed Xu and Zheng in the south.

古文：李光弼、郭子仪统河朔劲卒，连收恆、定，若崤、函固守，兵不妄动，则逆之势，不讨自弊。
现代文：李光弼、郭子仪统领河朔大军，连接收回恒、定，如果崤、函固守，不轻易出兵，则叛军之势，不战自灭。
English: Li Guangyao and Guo Ziyi led the great army of Hexuo, connecting and withdrawing Heng and Ding. If Zhang and Huan held fast and did not easily send troops, the rebels would be defeated without a fight.

古文：及哥舒翰出师，凡不数日，乘舆迁幸，朝廷陷没，百僚系颈，妃主被戮，兵满天下，毒流四海，皆国忠之召祸也。
现代文：等到哥舒翰出师，不过几天，皇室迁徙，朝廷陷没，百官系颈，妃主被杀，兵满天下，毒流四海，都是国忠召致的祸害。
English: Wait until Goshukhan becomes a disciple, but in a few days, the imperial family will migrate, the imperial court will fall, hundreds of officials will be killed, the empress will be killed, the army will be all over the world, and the poison will flow everywhere, all of which are the scourge of the patriots.

古文：国忠子：暄、昢、晓、晞。
现代文：国忠的儿子：暄、日出、晓？
English: Kunitada's son: Sunrise, sunrise, sunrise?

古文：暄为太常卿兼户部侍郎，尚延和郡主；昢为鸿胪卿，尚万春公主。
现代文：暄为太常卿兼户部侍郎，娶延和郡主为妻；日出为鸿胪卿，娶万春公主为妻。
English: Shun was Daijo-kyo (Grand Councilor of State) and concierge of the household, and married Nobu and the princess as his wife; Hinode was Honjo-kyo, and married Princess Banshun.

古文：兄弟各立第于亲仁里，穷极奢侈。
现代文：兄弟各人在亲仁里修筑房屋穷极奢侈。
English: Each of the brothers built houses for their relatives and lived in extreme luxury.

古文：国忠娶蜀倡裴氏女曰裴柔，国忠既死，柔与虢国夫人皆自刭死。
现代文：国忠娶蜀倡女裴氏的女儿裴柔为妻，国忠已死，柔与虢国夫人皆自刎身亡。
English: Guozhong married Pei Rong, the daughter of Shu Zhan's daughter Pei, as his wife. Guozhong is dead, and both Rong Rong and Zhan Rong have committed suicide.

古文：暄死于马嵬；昢陷贼被杀；晓走汉中郡，汉中王瑀榜杀之；晞走至陈仓，为追兵所杀。
现代文：暄死于马嵬；日出被叛军所杀；晓到汉中郡，被汉中王王禹张榜所杀；走到陈仓，被追兵所杀。
English: He died in Ma'an; he was killed by the rebels at sunrise; when he reached Hanzhong County, he was killed by the king of Hanzhong, Wang Yu Zhangbang; when he reached Chencang, he was killed by the pursuing soldiers.

古文：国忠之党翰林学士张渐窦华、中书舍人宋昱、吏部郎中郑昂等，凭国忠之势，招来赂遗，车马盈门，财货山积；及国忠败，皆坐诛灭，其斫丧王室，俱一时之沴气焉。
现代文：国忠之党翰林学士张渐、宝华、中书舍人宋昱、吏部郎中郑昂等人，凭借国忠势力，收取贿赂，车马盈门，财货如山，等到国忠败倒，都被诛灭，其削丧王室，全都是一时的恶灾之气。
English: The party of Guozhong, such as the scholar Zhang Qian, the scholar Baohua, the scholar Song Xi, and the bureaucrat Zheng Ang, relied on the power of Guozhong to receive bribes, cars and horses, and mountains of goods. When Guozhong was defeated, they were all annihilated, and their loss of the royal family was all a temporary disaster.

古文：张暐，汝州襄城人也。
现代文：张暐，汝州襄城人。
English: Zhang Jun, a resident of Xiangcheng, Ruzhou.

古文：祖德政，武德中郓州刺史。
现代文：祖父名德政，武德年中为郓州刺史。
English: His grandfather's name was Dezheng, and his middle name was Wu De.

古文：暐，景龙初为铜鞮令，家本豪富，好宾客，以弋猎自娱。
现代文：暐在景龙初年为铜革是令，家境豪富，喜爱结交宾客，以射猎自娱。
English: In the first year of Jinglong, Zou was a copper general. He came from a wealthy family and liked to make friends with guests and amuse himself with shooting.

古文：会临淄王为潞州别驾，暐潜识英姿，倾身事之，日奉游处。
现代文：适逢临淄王为潞州的别驾，暐暗记其英姿，全身心供奉，每天侍奉游玩。
English: When the king of Linyi came to visit Ganzhou, Zou secretly remembered his heroic appearance, devoted himself to worship, and served and played every day.

古文：及乐人赵元礼自山东来，有女美丽，善歌舞，王幸之，止于暐第，生废太子瑛。
现代文：直到乐人赵元礼从山东来，带有美丽的女子，善于歌舞，帝王宠爱她，居住在暐的宅第。生废太子瑛。
English: Until the musician Zhao Yuanli came from Shandong, with a beautiful woman, good at singing and dancing, the emperor loved her, living in the residence of the emperor.

古文：唐隆元年六月，王清内难，升为皇太子，召暐拜宫门大夫，每与诸王、姜皎、崔涤、李令问、王守一、薛伯阳在太子左右以接欢。
现代文：唐隆元年六月，王清内乱，升为皇太子，晋升为宫门大夫，常常与诸王、姜皎、崔涤、李令问、王守一、薛伯阳在太子左右博求欢颜。
English: In June of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Qing was caught up in a civil war. He was promoted to crown prince and court physician. He often courted favor with the princes, Jiang Chen, Cui Da, Li Lingtao, Wang Shouyi, and Xue Boyang.

古文：其年，擢拜左台侍御史，数月迁左御史台中丞。
现代文：这年，张暐被提升为左台侍御史，数月后升为御史台中丞。
English: In the same year, Zhang Ye was promoted to the position of Left Division Attendant, and a few months later he was promoted to the position of Junior Secretary.

古文：先天元年，太子即位，帝居武德殿。
现代文：先天元年，太子即位，居住在武德殿。
English: In the year before yesterday, the crown prince ascended to the throne and lived in Wude Hall.

古文：太平公主有异谋，广树朋党，暐与仆射刘幽求请先为备。
现代文：太平公主欲意图谋，广树朋党，张暐与仆射刘幽求恳请皇上早做防备。
English: Princess Taiping wanted to plot, Guangshu and his friends, Zhang Ye and his servant Liu Yu implored the emperor to take precautions.

古文：太平闻之，白于睿宗，乃流暐于岭南峰州，幽求谪于岭外。
现代文：太平公主听说后，到睿宗面前陈叙，于是将张暐流放到岭南峰州，将刘幽求贬谪到岭外。
English: After hearing this, Princess Taiping went to Ruizong to make a report. She then exiled Zhang Ye to the southern peak of the Lingnan Mountains and banished Liu Youcui to the outskirts of the Lingnan Mountains.

古文：及太平之败，幽求追拜尚书左仆射、兼侍中；暐为大理卿，封邓国公，实封三百户，逾月又加权兼雍州长史。
现代文：直到太平公主阴谋败露后，刘幽求被追拜为尚书左仆射、兼侍中；张暐为大理卿，被封为郑国公，实封三百户，一个月后又加封兼雍州长史。
English: Until after the defeat of the Taiping Princess's plot, Liu Youkui was worshipped as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man and servant, and also as an attendant; Zhang Ye was Daliqing, was named Zheng Guogong, was sealed to three hundred households, and a month later was also sealed and named Yong Guozhen Shi.

古文：其年十二月，改元开元，以雍州为京兆府，长史为尹。
现代文：这年十二月，改元为开元，以雍州为京兆府，长史为尹。
English: In December of that year, the era was changed to Kaiyuan, with Yongzhou as Jingzhao Prefecture and Changshi as Yin.

古文：暐首迁京兆尹，入侍宴私，出主都政，以为荣宠之极。
现代文：张暐是第一个迁往京兆的官员，在朝廷内常常出席高官的私宴，出外每每主持国家政事，倍受皇上恩宠。
English: Zhang Ye was the first official to move to Beijing. He often attended the private banquets of high-ranking officials in the imperial court, presided over state affairs whenever he went abroad, and was greatly favored by the emperor.

古文：暐亦有应务才干，迁太子詹事，判尚书左右丞，再除左羽林大将军，三为左金吾大将军，又为殿中监、太仆卿。
现代文：张暐也有应付事务的才干，不久升迁为太子詹事，又升为尚书左右丞，再拜为左羽林大将军，多次为左金吾大将军，又为殿中监、太仆卿。
English: Zhang Ye also had the ability to deal with affairs, and was soon promoted to Prince Zhan Zhi, and then to Shang Shu Zuo Rong, and then to General Zuo Yulin, and many times to General Zuo Kingu, and also to the palace overseer and eunuch.

古文：二十年，以暐年高，加特进。
现代文：二十年，由于张暐年事已高，赠特进之职。
English: Twenty years later, due to Zhang Ye's advanced age, he was given the post of special promotion.

古文：子履冰、季良、弟晤皆居清列。
现代文：张暐的儿子履冰、季良，弟弟张晤都排此行列。
English: Zhang Yao's sons, Li Bing and Qi Liang, and his younger brother, Zhang Xi, are all in this line.

古文：天宝初，暐还乡拜扫，特赐锦袍缯彩，御赐诗以宠异之，乘传来往，敕郡县供拟。
现代文：天宝初年，张暐还乡拜扫，皇上特赐予锦袍缯彩，还赐以诗以示特别恩宠，传令的车马往来穿梭，命令各郡县供奉准备。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, Zhang Ye returned to his hometown to pay homage, and the emperor specially bestowed the brocade decoration on him, and also gave him a poem to show his special grace. The herald's car and horse shuttled back and forth, and ordered all counties to prepare for the dedication.

古文：暐鬓发华皓，在舆中，子弟车马连接数里，衣冠荣之。
现代文：张暐鬓发华皓，坐在车中，其儿子弟弟的车马首尾相连长达数里，衣冠华丽。
English: Zhang Qian sat in the car, her son's and brother's cars lined up end-to-end for several miles, wearing gorgeous clothes.

古文：中使中路追赐药物。
现代文：中使在路途中不断追赐药物。
English: On the way, the midwife kept giving him more and more medicine.

古文：至襄城月馀，诏还京。
现代文：到达襄城一个多月，皇帝下诏书还京。
English: More than a month after arriving in Xiangcheng, the emperor returned to Beijing with an imperial edict.

古文：五载薨，年九十馀，赠开府仪同三司。
现代文：五年死去，享年九十多岁，赠授开府仪同三司。
English: He died five years later, at the age of over ninety, and was presented with the ceremony of opening the government and the three offices.

古文：其后，履冰为金吾将军，季良殿中监，俱列启戟，时人美之。
现代文：其后，张暐的儿子履冰为金吾将军，季良为殿中监，都官居高位，受到人们赞扬。
English: After that, Zhang Ye's son Lu Bing became Kingo General, and Qi Liang became the palace middle supervisor, both of whom held high positions and were highly praised by the people.

古文：暐寿考。善保终始。
现代文：张暐年高命寿，始终善保品性。
English: Zhang Xuan has a long life expectancy and has always maintained a good character.

