古文：衡阳献王昌南康愍王昙朗子方泰方庆
现代文：衡阳献王陈昌，字敬业，是高祖的第六个儿子。
English: Hengyang Xian Wang Chen Chang, known as Jingye, is the sixth son of Gao Zu.

古文：衡阳献王昌，字敬业，高祖第六子也。梁太清末，高祖南征李贲，命昌与宣后随沈恪还吴兴。
现代文：梁朝太清末年，高祖南征李贲，命令陈昌与宣后随沈恪回还吴兴。
English: In the last years of the Liang Dynasty, Emperor Taizong ordered Chen Chang and Xuan to follow Shen Ke back to Wu Xing.

古文：及高祖东讨侯景，昌与宣后、世祖并为景所囚。
现代文：到高祖向东讨伐侯景，陈吕与宣后、世祖同被侯景囚禁。
English: At the time of Gaozu's eastward campaign against Houjing, Chen Lu, Xuanhou and Shizu were imprisoned by Houjing.

古文：景平，拜长城国世子、吴兴太守，时年十六。
现代文：侯景被平定，陈昌被封为长城国世子、吴兴太守，其时十六岁。
English: Hou Jing was subdued and Chen Chang was crowned as the Great Wall's heir and Wu Xing as the governor general, when he was 16 years old.

古文：昌容貌伟丽，神情秀朗，雅性聪辩，明习政事。
现代文：陈昌容貌魁伟英俊，神情秀朗，性格文雅，聪明善辩，明于政事。
English: Chen Chang's appearance is majestic and handsome, his demeanor is handsome, his personality is gentle, he is clever and eloquent, and he is good at politics.

古文：高祖遣陈郡谢哲、济阳蔡景历辅昌为郡，又遣吴郡杜之伟授昌以经书。昌读书一览便诵，明于义理，剖析如流。
现代文：高祖派陈郡谢哲、济阳蔡景历辅助陈昌治郡，又派吴郡杜之伟教授陈昌经书陈昌读书一遍便能背诵，义理明晓，剖析清晰如流。
English: Gao Zu sent Chen County's Xie Zhe and Jiyang County's Cai Jing Liao to assist Chen Changzhi County, and also sent Wu County's Du Zhiwei to teach Chen Chang's sutras. Chen Chang can recite the sutras after reading them once, the principles are clear, and the analysis is as clear as a stream.

古文：寻与高宗俱往荆州，梁元帝除员外散骑常侍。
现代文：不久陈吕与高宗同往荆州，梁元帝封他为员外散骑常侍。
English: Soon, Chen Lu and Gao Zong went to Jingzhou together, and Emperor Liang Yuan appointed him as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：荆州陷，又与高宗俱迁关右，西魏以高祖故，甚礼之。
现代文：荆州陷落，陈昌又同高宗一起迁到关右，西魏因为高祖的缘故，对他们很有礼节。
English: After the fall of Jingzhou, Chen Chang and Gaozong moved to Guanzhong. The Western Wei Dynasty was very polite to them because of Gaozong.

古文：高祖即位，频遣使请高宗及昌，周人许之而未遣，及高祖崩，乃遣之。
现代文：高祖登位，多次派人请高宗和陈吕，北周人答应了却没派遣，到高祖崩，才派遣他们。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne and repeatedly sent people to invite Gao Zong and Chen Lyu. The Northern Zhou people agreed but did not send them, and only sent them when Gao Zu passed away.

古文：是时王琳梗于中流，昌未得还，居于安陆。
现代文：此时王继在渡程中间作梗，速旦不得还，住在宝堕。
English: At this time, Wang Jie got stuck in the middle of the journey and had to return quickly. He lived in Baopiao.

古文：王琳平后，天嘉元年二月，昌发自安陆，由鲁山济江，而巴陵王萧沇等率百僚上表曰：臣闻宗子维城，隆周之懋轨，封建籓屏，有汉之弘规，是以卜世斯永，式资邢、卫，鼎命灵长，实赖河、楚。
现代文：平定王琳后，天嘉元年二月，陈昌从安陆出发，由鱼山渡红，其时巴陵王麓逸等率领百宫上表奏道：臣等听说，王子连城守卫，这是隆周的大轨，封王侯建藩国，这是有汉的宏规，由此占卜预测传国世数的长久，实际要靠邢、街之国，国运皇灵的长久，实在要依赖河、楚之地。
English: After settling Wang Lin, in February of the first year of Tian Jia, Chen Chang set out from Anlu and traveled from Yu Shan to Hong Kong. At that time, Baling Wang Luh Yat and others led the hundred palaces on the table and said, "Ministers and others have heard that princes are guarding the city, this is the long track of Long Zhou, and this is the grand plan of the Han Dynasty, and thus divination predicts the longevity of the country. In fact, it is necessary to rely on the country of the city, the country of the city, and the longevity of the national spirit. It is really necessary to rely on the river and the land of Chu.

古文：伏惟陛下神猷光大，圣德钦明，道高日月，德侔造化。
现代文：陛下您神道光大，圣德钦明，道如月高，德与造化同。
English: Your majesty, your Shintoism shines brightly, your sacred virtue shines brightly, your virtue is as high as the moon, and your virtue is the same as that of creation.

古文：往者王业惟始，天步方艰，参奉权谟，匡合义烈，威略外举，神武内定，故以再康禹迹，大庇生民者矣。
现代文：往昔王业刚开始，天子举步正艰难，您参与奉行权力谋划，匡合天下义烈之士，外举以威略，内定以神武，此乃大禹之迹的再度广大，是大大庇护百姓的功绩。
English: In the past, the king's career was just beginning, and it was difficult for the son of heaven to move forward. You participated in the pursuit of power planning, and supported the world's valiant men and women. It was a bold move, and it was determined to be divine. This is a great achievement of the great Yu, and it is a great achievement to protect the people.

古文：及圣武升遐，王师远次，皇嗣夐隔，继业靡归，宗祧危殆，缀旒非喻。
现代文：到圣武去世，朝廷军队远出，皇子远隔，继业者没归，社稷宗室发生危机，大权旁落不言而喻。
English: By the time of Saint Wu's death, the imperial army was far away, the prince was far away, the successor had not returned, and there was a crisis in Shifu's family, and it was self-evident that power was falling by the wayside.

古文：既而传车言反，公卿定策，纂我洪基，光昭景运，民心有奉，园寝克宁，后来其苏，复在兹日，物情天意，皎然可求。
现代文：不久驿车传言回返，由公卿定策，继承皇基，光昭大运，民心一致举奉您，使帝王之庙能安宁，后来之人复苏，又在此日，物情天意，便分明可求。
English: Soon, the rumor of the carriage returning, the nobles deciding on the succession of the imperial foundation, the glory and great fortune, and the people's unanimous devotion to you, so that the emperor's temple can be peaceful, and later people can be revived, and on this day, the will of heaven, it is clear that it can be asked.

古文：王琳逆命，逋诛岁久，今者连结犬羊，乘流纵衅，舟旗野阵，绵江蔽陆，兵疲民弊，杼轴用空，中外骚然，蕃篱罔固。
现代文：王琳背逆天命，逃脱诛杀年久，如今他连结犬羊之辈，乘河流之利纵行横暴，船旗布成野阵，绵延江岸，蔽满陆地，而士兵疲累，百姓困乏，军实空虚，内外骚动，阵营藩篱不牢固。
English: Wang Lin defied the fate of heaven and escaped the massacre for a long time. Now he is linked to the generation of dogs and sheep, taking advantage of the rivers to carry out violence. The flags of the ships are spread out, stretching the riverbank and covering the land, while the soldiers are tired, the people are poor, the army is empty, there is internal and external turmoil, and the camp is not solid.

古文：乃旰食当朝，凭流授律，苍兕既驰，长蛇自翦，廓清四表，澄涤八纮，雄图遐举，仁声远畅，德化所覃，风行草偃，故以功深于微禹，道大于惟尧，岂直社稷用宁，斯乃黔黎是赖。
现代文：于是您勤政事于当朝，涉流而授军律，苍兕之军出发，长蛇自然剪除，四方廓清，八方乎定，雄图远举，仁声远播，德化所至，如风吹草伏，故而陛下您的功比禹大，您的道胜过尧，岂止社稷大业靠您得以安定，而且黎民百姓也靠您得以生存。
English: As a result, you have been diligent in the administration of the dynasty, waded into the stream and received the military law, the heron army set out, the long snake was naturally cut off, the four directions were clear, the eight directions were fixed, the heroic plan was far-reaching, the benevolent voice was far-reaching, and the virtuous place was like the wind blowing grass. Therefore, Your Majesty, your achievement is greater than that of Yu, your way is better than that of Yao, and not only the great cause of the society is stable by you, but also the people of Li are able to survive by you.

古文：第六皇弟昌，近以妙年出质，提契寇手，偏隔关徼，旋踵末由。
现代文：第六皇弟陈昌，近来以少壮之年出为人质，为敌寇所掌握，地处偏远而又重隔关山，回返无由。
English: The sixth emperor's younger brother, Chen Chang, has recently been taken hostage at a young age and is in the hands of the enemy. He is located in a remote and isolated mountain, and there is no reason for him to return.

古文：陛下天伦之爱既深，克让之怀常切。
现代文：陛下既有深厚的天伦之爱，又常具深切的克让胸怀。
English: His Majesty not only has a deep sense of family love, but also often has a deep sense of forgiveness.

古文：伏以大德无私，至公有在，岂得徇匹夫之恒情，忘王业之大计。
现代文：臣等以为大德必定无私，定有大公之心，岂能因循匹夫常情，而忘了王业大计。
English: The courtiers thought that the great virtue must be selfless and must have a grand duke's heart, but they could not forget the king's business plan due to their selfishness.

古文：宪章故实，式遵典礼，钦若姬、汉，建树贤戚。
现代文：应该遵照前代章法，效遵朝廷典礼，像周代、漠代那样，分封贤能皇戚。
English: It is necessary to follow the previous generation of laws and regulations, effectively follow the imperial court ceremony, and, like the Zhou Dynasty and the Desert Dynasty, award titles to the virtuous imperial relatives.

古文：湘中地维形胜，控带川阜，捍城之寄，匪亲勿居，宜启服衡、疑，兼崇徽饰。
现代文：翅史地处形胜，控制河山地，是保卫城池可寄之地，不是亲属不宜居此，应赐封堑、墅地区，并尊崇徽号服饰。
English: The historical place of Yingtan is in the place of victory, controlling the rivers and mountains, and is the best place to defend the city. It is not suitable for relatives to live here, and they should be given fiefs and villas, and respect the clothing of the emblem.

古文：臣等参议，以昌为使持节、散骑常侍、都督湘州诸军事、骠骑将军、湘州牧，封衡阳郡王，邑五千户，加给皁轮三望车，后部鼓吹一部，班剑二十人。
现代文：臣等参议，宜任命速旦为使持节、散骑常侍、都督湘州诸军事、骠骑将军、湘州牧，并封他为衡阳塑迗，邑五千户，加给皂轮三望车，后部鼓吹一部，班剑二十人。
English: Ministers and other councillors, it is appropriate to appoint Haydan as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the governor of Hunan Province, the military, the cavalry general, and the Hunan herdsman, and appoint him as the Hengyang sculpture, five thousand households, add to the soap wheel three watch cars, the rear part of the propaganda, and twenty swordsmen.

古文：启可奉行。
现代文：启奏可奉行。
English: Opening music may be performed.

古文：诏曰 可 。
现代文：皇帝下诏 可以 。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving the request.

古文：三月入境，诏令主书舍人缘道迎接。
现代文：三月建旦入境，韶令主书舍人沿道迎接。
English: In March, Jiandan entered the country, and the chief scribe was invited to meet him along the road.

古文：丙子，济江，于中流船坏，以溺薨。
现代文：丙子日，渡江，到中流时船坏，速旦溺水而薨。
English: On the day of the third son, crossing the river, the boat broke down when it reached the middle of the stream, and he drowned immediately.

古文：四月庚寅，丧柩至京师，上亲出临哭。
现代文：四月庚寅日，棺材运到京城，皇帝亲自出宫吊丧哭泣。
English: In April, the coffin was transported to the capital, and the emperor went out of the palace to mourn and weep.

古文：乃下诏曰： 夫宠章所以嘉德，礼数所以崇亲，乃历代之通规，固前王之令典。
现代文：于是下韶书道： 光宠之章所以要嘉奖德行，礼仪之数所以要尊崇亲属，造乃是历代的通行规矩，一直是的代材王的法令典章。
English: Therefore, the following calligraphy was made: the chapter of light favor is to reward virtue, and the number of etiquette is to respect relatives, which is the common practice of all ages and has always been the legal code of the king.

古文：新除使持节、散骑常侍、都督湘州诸军事、骠骑将军、湘州牧衡阳王昌，明哲在躬，珪璋早秀，孝敬内湛，聪睿外宣。
现代文：新封使持节、散骑常侍、都督湘州诸军事、骠骑将军、湘州牧衡阳王陈吕，明哲为身，如玉早秀，内具孝敬之心，外显聪敏睿智。
English: The new envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the military governor of Hunan Province, the cavalry general, the king of Hunan Province, Chen Lu, is a philosopher, such as Yuyao Xiu, with a heart of filial piety on the inside, and a clever and wise appearance.

古文：梁季艰虞，宗社颠坠，西京沦覆，陷身关陇。
现代文：梁末艰难之时，宗室社稷倾颠，西京沦陷，他身陷关、陇之地。
English: At the end of his life, when things were tough, his family's business was in a tailspin, and when the Western Capital fell, he found himself in a precarious situation.

古文：及鼎业初基，外蕃逆命，聘问斯阻，音介莫通，睠彼机桥，将邻乌白。
现代文：到皇业初步奠基时，外族番邦违逆天命，聘问之路中断，音讯中介不通，看那征兆，恐怕事态难以改变。
English: At the time of the initial laying of the foundation stone of the imperial industry, the foreign tributaries violated the heavenly destiny, the way of soliciting questions was interrupted, and the information intermediary was not connected. Looking at that sign, I am afraid that the state of affairs is difficult to change.

古文：今者群公戮力，多难廓清，轻传入郛，无劳假道。周朝敦其继好，骖驾归来，欣此朝闻，庶欢昏定。报施徒语，曾莫辅仁，人之云亡，殄悴斯在，奄焉薨殒，倍增伤悼。津门之恸空在，恒岫之切不追，静言念之，心焉如割。
现代文：现在由于各位共同努力，多难已平定，驿车可轻易进入外城，不必再假旁道北周朝廷诚意继续修好，让陈昌驾车归来，早晨很高兴听说此消息，众人到黄昏仍为此欣悦、却小料酬报之言成为空话，小曾有辅仁之麦，人已故，困穷尚在，突然薨损，倍增人伤悼之情滓门亭发丧的悲恸空在，恒岫山切肤之痛不。丁追念，静默思之，心如刀割。
English: Now, thanks to the joint efforts of all of you, many difficulties have been smoothed out, and the carriage can easily enter the outer city. It is no longer necessary to fake the sincerity of the Northern Zhou court to continue to repair the road, and let Chen Chang drive back. In the morning, I was very happy to hear this news. People were still happy about this in the evening, but the words of small rewards became empty words. There was wheat for reinforcement, people died, poverty was still there, sudden loss, doubling the feelings of human mourning. The sadness of the funeral of Qimen Pavilion was empty, and the pain of Hengdu Mountain was excruciating.

古文：宜隆懋典，以协徽猷。可赠侍中、假黄钺、都督中外诸军事、太宰、扬州牧。给东园温明秘器，九旒銮辂，黄屋左纛，武贲班剑百人，辒辌车，前后部羽葆鼓吹。葬送之仪，一依汉东平宪王、齐豫章文献王故事。仍遣大司空持节迎护丧事，大鸿胪副其羽卫，殡送所须，随由备办。 
现代文：应隆重举行人典，以协善道町赠封侍中、假黄铁、都督，呻诸军事、太宰、扬州牧赐给束园温明秘器，九旒銮韬，黄厍纛，武贲班剑白人，辊鲸车，前后部羽葆鼓吹，葬送的礼仪，一律依照汉束乎宪卉豫章文鞑王的老规矩仍然派遣人司空持节迎护丧由，大鸿胪羽卫为副，殡送所需物品，随用全部办齐。 
English: The funeral ceremony should be held grandly, with the town of Xie Son Dao bestowing the title of middle attendant, the fake yellow iron, and the governor, and the military, Dazai, and Yangzhou Moku giving the Sakuyuan warm secret utensils, nine swords, yellow swords, martial swords, white swords, beaked whale car, and the front and rear feathered trumpets, and the funeral etiquette should be carried out in accordance with the old rules of the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the

古文：谥曰献。无子，世祖以第七皇子伯信为嗣。
现代文：缢号为献、陈昌无广，世祖命第厂伯信为继承入。
English: His posthumous name is 献, Chen Chang Muxuang, and his ancestor's name is Bo Xin.

古文：南康愍王昙朗，高祖母弟忠壮王休先之子也。
现代文：南康愍王昙朗，高祖同母弟忠壮王休先的儿子。
English: He was the son of King Nankangyeong and his maternal half-brother, King Taungsoo, who was also the son of King Kyusen.

古文：休先少倜傥有大志，梁简文之在东宫，深被知遇。
现代文：休先少年豪爽人方，有大志，梁简文在东宫时，他深被赏识。
English: Hui Xian is a young man with a strong spirit and great ambition. When Liang Jianwen was in the East Palace, he was deeply appreciated.

古文：太清中既纳侯景，有事北方，乃使休先召募得千馀人，授文德主帅，顷之卒。
现代文：太清年中，接纳侯景后，在北方有军事行动，便派休先招募千余人，授以文德主帅之职，不久休先去世。
English: In the mid-Qing Dynasty, after accepting Hou Jing, when there was a military operation in the north, he sent Rui Xian to recruit more than a thousand people and awarded him the post of Wende coach. Rui Xian died soon after.

古文：高祖之有天下也，每称休先曰： 此弟若存，河、洛不足定也。 
现代文：高祖据有天卜时，每称道休先说： 此弟如尚在，河洛之地不足以平定。 
English: According to Gao Zu, when he had a vision, he first said to each of the Dao brothers: "If this brother is still alive, the land of Helo is not enough to be pacified.

古文：梁敬帝即位，追赠侍中、使持节、骠骑将军、南徐州刺史，封武康县公，邑一千户。
现代文：梁敬帝登位，追赠休先为侍中、使持节、骠骑将军、南徐州刺史，封为武康县公，食邑一千户。
English: Emperor Liang Jian ascended to the throne, posthumously retired as a chamberlain, envoy, cavalry general, and governor of South Xuzhou, and was appointed as the governor of Wukan County, with a thousand households.

古文：高祖受禅，追赠侍中、车骑大将军、司徒，封南康郡王，邑二千户，谥曰忠壮。
现代文：高祖受惮，迫赠侍中、车骑大将军、司徒，封为南尘郡王，食邑二干户，谧号为忠壮。
English: Gao Zu was shunned, forced to give up his titles of chamberlain, general of cavalry and cavalry, and tutor. He was crowned the king of Nanchen County, had two households in Shuei, and his posthumous name was Zhong Zhuang.

古文：昙朗少孤，尤为高祖所爱，宠逾诸子。
现代文：昙翅少年时成为孤儿，特别为高祖所喜爱，宠爱超过自己的几个儿子。
English: He became an orphan when he was a boy, and was especially loved by Gao Zu, who doted on several of his sons more than himself.

古文：有胆力，善绥御。侯景平后，起家为著作佐郎。
现代文：昙朗有胆力，善于安抚控制平定侯景后，昙朗初任著作佐郎。
English: Hao Lang had guts and was good at pacifying and controlling Hou Jing, after which Hao Lang became the first to write Saro.

古文：高祖北济江，围广陵，宿预人东方光据乡建义，乃遣昙朗与杜僧明自淮入泗应赴之。
现代文：高祖北渡江，包围广陵，宿预人东方光据乡树立义旗。于是高祖派昙朗与杜僧明从淮水进入泅水响应奔赴。
English: Gao Zu crossed the Yangtze River to the north, encircled Guangling, and set up a banner of righteousness in the township of Dongfangguang. Therefore, Gao Zu sent Yulang and Du Sengming from Huai Shui into Surabaya to respond.

古文：齐援大至，昙朗与僧明筑垒抗御。寻奉命班师，以宿预义军三万家济江。
现代文：北齐援兵大批来到，昙朗与僧明筑起堡垒抵抗不久奉命率军返回，以宿预义军三万家渡江。
English: A large number of North Qi reinforcements arrived, and Gong Lang and the monk Ming built a fortress to resist. Soon after, they were ordered to return with the army, and they prepared a lodging for the 30,000-strong army to cross the river.

古文：高祖诛王僧辩，留昙朗镇京口，知留府事。
现代文：高祖杀王僧辩，留昙朗镇守京口，知留府事。
English: Gao Zu killed Wang Sofen, and he stayed in Qilang Town to guard Jingkou, and Chiryu Prefecture.

古文：绍泰元年，除中书侍郎，监南徐州。
现代文：绍泰元年，封昙朗中书侍郎，监南徐州。
English: In the first year of the Shao Tai Dynasty, he was the secretary of the middle school of the Fongyulang School and the inspector of the Southern Xuzhou School.

古文：二年，徐嗣徽、任约引齐寇攻逼京邑，寻而请和，求高祖子侄为质。
现代文：绍泰二年，徐嗣徽、任约引北齐军攻逼京城，不久请和，齐军要求以高祖的子侄作为人质。
English: In the second year of the Shao Tai Dynasty, Xu Zhihui and Ren Youli led the North Qi army to attack and besiege Beijing, and soon made peace. The Qi army demanded Gao Zu's nephew as a hostage.

古文：时四方州郡并多未宾，京都虚弱，粮运不断，在朝文武咸愿与齐和亲，高祖难之，而重违众议，乃言于朝曰： 孤谬辅王室，而使蛮夷猾夏，不能戡殄，何所逃责。
现代文：此时四方州郡多未宾服，京城又虚弱，为使粮运不断，在朝文武百官都愿与齐讲和，高祖很为难，但难于违背众议，于是只好对朝廷百官说： 我错辅王室，而使蛮夷之邦欺凌华夏，我不能平定消灭他们，无处逃脱罪责。
English: At this time, most of the counties in Shifang Prefecture did not have guests, and the capital city was weak. In order to keep the grain transports going, all the officials were willing to make peace with the imperial court. Gao Zu was very difficult, but it was difficult to go against public opinion. Therefore, he had to say to the imperial officials: I mistakenly assisted the royal family, and let the barbarian country bully China. I cannot pacify and destroy them, and there is nowhere to escape the guilt.

古文：今在位诸贤，且欲息肩偃武，与齐和好，以静边疆，若违众议，必谓孤惜子侄，今决遣昙朗，弃之寇庭。
现代文：今在位诸位贤臣，且希望平息兵戈，与齐和好，以安定边疆，如我违背大家的意愿，你们必定说我是怜惜自己的子侄，现我决意派昙朗，弃他于敌军庭之中。
English: If I go against everyone's wishes, you must say that I have pity on my nephew, and now I am determined to send Gong Lang and abandon him in the enemy's court.

古文：且齐人无信，窥窬不已，谓我浸弱，必当背盟。
现代文：但齐人不讲信誉，曾伺隙而骚乱不止，认为我军软弱，必将背弃盟约。
English: However, the Qi did not care about their reputation, and continued to riot when they saw an opportunity, believing that our army was weak and would inevitably renege on the treaty.

古文：齐寇若来，诸君须为孤力斗也。 
现代文：假如齐军攻来，诸位务必为我奋力而战。 
English: If the Qi army invades, you must fight hard for me.

古文：高祖虑昙朗惮行，或奔窜东道，乃自率步骑往京口迎之，以昙朗还京师，仍使为质于齐。
现代文：高祖担心昙朗害怕此行，或会逃奔东道，于是亲自率领骑兵到京迎接他，到昙朗回到京城，仍然派人将他送到齐军作为人质。
English: Gaozu was worried that Hulang was afraid of this trip, or that he would run away from his host, so he personally led the cavalry to meet him in Beijing. When he returned to Beijing from Hulang, he still sent someone to take him to the Qi army as a hostage.

古文：齐果背约，复遣萧轨等随嗣徽渡江，高祖与战，大破之，虏萧轨、东方老等。
现代文：齐军果然背弃盟约，又派萧轨等人随嗣徽渡红，直担同他们交战，大败了他们，俘虏了萧轨、东方老等人。
English: The Qi army did indeed renege on the treaty, and sent Xiao Trai and others to follow Hui Duhong, and directly fought with them, defeated them, and captured Xiao Trai, Dongfanglao and others.

古文：齐人请割地并入马牛以赎之，高祖不许。
现代文：变人请求割让土地并送马、牛以赎人，高祖不答应。
English: The changelings requested to cede the land and send horses and cattle as ransom, but Gaozu did not agree.

古文：及轨等诛，齐人亦害昙朗于晋阳，时年二十八。
现代文：到萧轨等人被处死，齐人也将昙朗害死在晋阳，当时昙朗二十八岁。
English: To Xiao Lu and others were executed, Qi people also killed Hao Lang in Jinyang, when Hao Lang was twenty-eight years old.

古文：是时既与齐绝，弗之知也。
现代文：此时已与齐断绝，高祖并不知道此事。
English: At this time, he had already severed ties with Qi, and Gaozu did not know about this.

古文：高祖践祚，犹以昙朗袭封南康郡王，奉忠壮王祀，礼秩一同皇子。
现代文：高祖登位，仍以昙朗袭封为南康郡王，奉忠壮王祀，礼秩一律同皇子。
English: When Gao Zu ascended the throne, he was still crowned as the king of Nankang County with the title of Gonglang, and was worshipped as the king of loyalty and vigor, with the same ceremonial rank as the prince.

古文：天嘉二年，齐人结好，方始知之。
现代文：天嘉二年，齐人重新结好，方知道昙朗已死。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, Qi people were reunited, and it was known that Hao Lang had died.

古文：世祖诏曰： 夫追远慎终，抑闻前诰。
现代文：世祖下诏说： 追念前人依礼尽哀，抑或听闻于前代诰词。
English: The ancestor said in his imperial edict: To mourn one's predecessors, one should follow the etiquette of mourning, or listen to the eulogy of the previous generation.

古文：南康王昙朗，明哲懋亲，蕃维是属，入质北齐，用纾时难。
现代文：南康王昙朗，明哲大亲，维属蕃邦，为人质入于北齐，以此解了一时之难。
English: Nankang Wang Yulang, Mingzhe's great-grandfather, who was from Wei's Shan State, entered Northern Qi as a hostage, thus solving a temporary difficulty.

古文：皇运兆兴，未获旋反，永言跂予，日夜不忘。
现代文：皇运兆兴，他却未获回返，长言企望，令人日夜不忘。
English: The emperor's fortune was auspicious, but he was not allowed to return, and his long-awaited return was unforgettable.

古文：齐使始至，凶问奄及，追怀痛悼，兼倍常情，宜隆宠数，以光恒序。
现代文：王坛使者始来，凶问听到，令人追怀痛悼，倍增常情，实应隆重礼数，以光大恒常之序。
English: From the beginning of the king's envoys to the altar, the fierce questions were heard, causing people to mourn and mourn, doubling the common feelings, and really should be a grand number of ceremonies, with a constant order of great light.

古文：可赠侍中、安东将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史，谥曰愍。 
现代文：可追赠侍中、安束将军、开府仪同三司、南途州刺史，谧号为壁。 
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior High School, General Anzaku, Kaifu-gi and Sanji, and Nan-tushu-sushi, and his posthumous name was Muro.

古文：乃遣兼郎中令随聘使江德藻、刘师知迎昙朗丧柩，以三年春至都。
现代文：于是派兼郎中令随聘使丝堕蓬、刘魉翅迎接昙塑灵柩，在玉台三年春到京城。
English: As a result, he sent his son-in-law, Kenro Chujun, along with the envoys Shidaopeng and Liu Shanying to welcome the urn-shaped coffin, which arrived in the capital in the spring of the third year in the Gyokudai era.

古文：初，昙朗未质于齐，生子方泰、方庆。
现代文：当初，昙朗没作人质去齐前，生有方泰、方庆两子。
English: At the beginning, before Hao Lang went to Qi as a hostage, he had two sons, Fang Tai and Fang Qing.

古文：及将适齐，以二妾自随，在北又生两子：方华、方旷，亦同得还。
现代文：到将去齐，带二妾随从，在北方又生了两子方华、方旷，他们也同时得以回还。
English: When he was about to go to Qi, he took two concubines with him. In the north, he had two sons, Fanghua and Fangya. They were also able to return at the same time.

古文：方泰少粗犷，与诸恶少年群聚，游逸无度，世祖以南康王故，特宽贳之。
现代文：方泰少年粗犷，常与一些恶少群聚，游荡无度，世祖因南康王的缘故，特别宽容他。
English: Fang Tai was a rough-and-tumble young man, who often gathered in groups with some villains and roamed around without restraint. The ancestor was particularly tolerant of him for the sake of King Nankang.

古文：天嘉元年，诏曰： 南康王昙朗，出隔齐庭，反身莫测，国庙方修，奠飨须主，可以长男方泰为南康世子，嗣南康王。 
现代文：天嘉元年，世祖下诏说： 南康王昙朗，出而被隔在北齐，回返之日不测，国庙刚修，奠祭须有主持，可以让昙朗长子方泰为南康世子，继承南康王。 
English: In the first year of Tianjia, the ancestor issued an edict saying: Nankang Wang Huanlang left and was separated in North Qi, the date of return is unpredictable, the national temple has just been rebuilt, and the ceremony must be presided over, so that Huanlang's eldest son Fang Tai can be Nankang's heir and inherit Nankang.

古文：后闻昙朗薨，于是袭爵南康嗣王。
现代文：后听说昙朗薨，于是方泰袭爵为南康嗣王。
English: Later, it was heard that he had been crowned as the King of Southern Kangxi Province, so Fang Tai inherited the title.

古文：寻为仁威将军、丹阳尹，置佐史。
现代文：不久为仁威将军、丹阳尹，置佐史。
English: He was soon followed by General Ren Wei, Danyang Yin, and Okisa Shi.

古文：太建四年，迁使持节、都督广、衡、交、越、成、定、明、新、合、罗、德、宜、黄、利、安、建、石、崖十九州诸军事、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：太建四年，改任使持节，都督广、衡、交、越、成、定、明、新、合、罗、德、宜、黄、利、安、建、石、崖十八州诸军事，平越中郎将，广州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of Ta Jian, he was reassigned to the Jizhi Festival, and became the military governor of 18 provinces, including Guang, Heng, Jia, Yue, Cheng, Ding, Ming, Xin, He, Luo, De, Yi, Huang, Li, An, Jian, Shih, and Yap. He was also the vice-commander of Ping Yue and the historian of Guangzhou.

古文：为政残暴，为有司所奏，免官。
现代文：方泰为政残暴，被有司所奏，罢免官职。
English: For political brutality, Fang Tai was dismissed from his official post by Yu Si.

古文：寻起为仁威将军，置佐史。
现代文：不久又起用为仁威将军，置佐史。
English: Soon after, Okisashi was promoted to General of the Imperial Japanese Army.

古文：六年，授持节、都督豫章郡诸军事、豫章内史。
现代文：太建六年，授持节、都督豫章郡诸军事、豫章内史。
English: Six years after the founding of Taijian, the conferring festival, the military of Yuzhang County and the internal history of Yuzhang County were held.

古文：在郡不修民事，秩满之际，屡放部曲为劫，又纵火延烧邑居，因行暴掠，驱录富人，征求财贿。
现代文：在郡期间，方泰不管民事，任满之际，屡次放纵军队打家劫舍，又纵火焚烧房屋，强行暴掠，驱赶搜捕富人，征取财富贿赂。
English: During his time in the county, Fang Tai did not care about civil affairs. At the end of his term of office, he repeatedly indulged the army in robbing houses, setting fire to houses, forcibly looting, driving away and searching rich people, and collecting wealth for bribes.

古文：代至，又淹留不还。
现代文：更替时间到，又滞留不还。
English: When it's time to change, they don't come back.

古文：至都，诏以为宗正卿，将军、佐史如故。
现代文：回到京都，被诏封为宗正卿，将军、佐史仍如旧。
English: Returning to Kyoto, he was given the posthumous title of Munemasa-kyo (宗正卿), but the position of shogun and sashi remained the same.

古文：未拜，为御史中丞宗元饶所劾，免官，以王还第。
现代文：还未曾拜官，即被御史中丞宗元饶所弹劾，免去官职，以王的身份回还府第。
English: He was impeached by the Imperial Historian Chujo Zongyuan Rao, removed from office, and returned to the palace as king.

古文：十一年，起为宁远将军，直殿省。
现代文：太建十一年，方泰起为宁远将军，直殿省。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taijian era, Fang Tai became the general of Ningyuan, Zhitang Province.

古文：寻加散骑常侍，量置佐史。
现代文：不久加封散骑常侍，量置佐史。
English: He was soon joined by a mounted samurai, Sasafumi.

古文：其年八月，高宗幸大壮观，因大阅武，命都督任忠领步骑十万，陈于玄武湖，都督陈景领楼舰五百，出于瓜步江，高宗登玄武门观，宴群臣以观之。
现代文：遣年八月，高宗驾临大壮观，要大阅兵，命都督任忠率领步兵骑兵十万人，列阵于玄武湖，命都督陈景率领楼舰五百，出于瓜步江，高宗登上玄武门观看，并宴请群臣一同观看。
English: In August of the following year, Emperor Gaozong arrived in a grand and spectacular manner. He wanted to have a grand military parade. He ordered the governor Ren Zhong to lead 100,000 infantry and cavalry to line up at the Xuanwu Lake, the governor Chen Jing to lead 500 warships, and from the Guabu River, Emperor Gaozong boarded the Xuanwu Gate to watch, and invited the courtiers to watch together.

古文：因幸乐游苑，设丝竹会。
现代文：同时驾临乐游苑，设丝竹音乐会。
English: At the same time, he drove to Le Youyuan and held a silk and bamboo concert.

古文：仍重幸大壮观，集众军振旅而还。
现代文：又重临大壮观，召集众军重振军旅而回还。
English: Once again, the Great Spectacular returned, gathering the troops to reinvigorate the military brigade and return.

古文：是时方泰当从，启称所生母疾，不行，因与亡命杨钟期等二十人，微服往民间，淫人妻，为州所录。
现代文：此时方泰应该随从，但他启奏称母亲有疾病，不出行，而与亡命之徒杨钟期等二十人，穿民服到民间去，奸淫人妻，被州府所捕。
English: At this time, Fang Tai should follow, but he said that his mother had an illness and would not go out, and twenty people, including the outlaw Yang Zhongji, wore civilian clothes and went to the folk, raped the wife, and were arrested by the state government.

古文：又率人仗抗拒，伤禁司，为有司所奏。
现代文：又率人抗拒，打伤禁司官，被有司奏告。
English: He also led a group of people to resist, injuring a police officer, and was reported to the police.

古文：上大怒，下方泰狱。
现代文：高宗大怒，将方泰下狱。
English: Gao Zong was furious and sent Fang Tai to prison.

古文：方泰初但承行淫，不承拒格禁司，上曰不承则上刑，方泰乃投列承引。
现代文：方泰起初衹承认行淫，不承认抗拒殴打禁司官，高宗说不承认就施行测刑，方泰便投入上奏行列招认。
English: At first, Fang Tai  admitted to engaging in sexual intercourse, but did not admit to resisting the beating of the detention officer. Gao Zong said that if he did not admit, he would carry out the sentencing, and Fang Tai then went into the process of confessing.

古文：于是兼御史中丞徐君敷奏曰： 臣闻王者之心，匪漏网而私物，至治之本，无屈法而申慈。
现代文：于是兼御史中丞徐君敷上奏说： 臣听说，王者的心，不会因为要将物私有而致使其漏网，治国的根本，不会为申明自己有慈心而使法律委屈。
English: So Xu Junzhi, who was also the imperial historian, made a report, saying: "The minister heard that the king's heart will not leak out because he wants to keep things private. The foundation of governing the country is not to violate the law in order to affirm that he has a compassionate heart.

古文：谨案南康王陈方泰宗属虽远，幸托葭莩，刺举莫成，共治罕绩。
现代文：我以为南康王陈方泰宗属关系虽远，还有幸托为亲戚，侦枧揭发不成，可共治帝王之绩。
English: I thought that although the Nankang King Chen Fangtai's lineage was far away, there was also the privilege of being a relative, so that the investigation could not be revealed, and the emperor's achievements could be jointly managed.

古文：圣上弘以悔往，许其录用，宫闱寄切，宿卫是尸。
现代文：圣上您宽宏他忏悔过往，允许他录用，那么后妃之宫将要寄予切切之心，宫中警卫恐怕会变空。
English: If Your Holiness is so magnanimous as to forgive his past and allow him to be hired, then the palace of the Empress will be filled with longing hearts, and the palace guards will probably become empty.

古文：岂有金门旦启，玉舆晓跸，百司驰骛，千队腾骧，惮此翼从之劳，亡兴晨昏之请？
现代文：哪有宫门早晨开启，皇家玉车拂晓出行而禁止行人，百官驰行，千队人马并进，陈方泰却害怕翼从的劳苦，妄称侍奉母疾而请假?
English: Where is the palace gate opened in the morning, the royal jade chariot traveling at dawn and prohibiting pedestrians, hundreds of officials traveling, thousands of people marching side by side, but Chen Fangtai is afraid of the toil of his followers, pretending to serve his mother's illness and taking time off?

古文：翻以危冠淇上，袨服桑中，臣子之諐，莫斯为大，宜从霜简，允置秋官。
现代文：反而戴高冠于淇水之上，穿盛服于桑中之地，臣子的过失，莫此为大，宜听从御史弹劾的奏章，允许置于刑部。
English: On the contrary, to wear a high crown on top of the water, to wear a ceremonial robe in the middle of the mulberry, the fault of the courtier is not so great, it is appropriate to listen to the impeachment of the imperial history, and allow it to be placed in the criminal department.

古文：臣等参议，请依见事，解方泰所居官，下宗正削爵土。
现代文：臣等以为，请依照事实，解除方泰所任官职，下交宗正，削掉爵土。
English: The vassals and others thought that, in accordance with the facts, Fang Tai should be relieved of his official position, handed over to Zong Zheng, and the peerage should be cut off.

古文：谨以白简奏闻。 
现代文：臣谨以御史弹劾奏章上奏。 
English: I would like to begin with the impeachment movement.

古文：上可其奏。
现代文：高宗同意他的上奏。
English: The emperor approved his music.

古文：寻复本官爵。
现代文：不久又恢复方泰原官爵。
English: He was soon restored to his former title of Fang Taiyuan.

古文：祯明初，迁侍中，将军如故。
现代文：祯明初年，方泰改任侍中，将军照旧。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Fang Tai was reappointed as a chamberlain, and the generals remained as before.

古文：三年，隋师济江，方泰与忠武将军南豫州刺史樊猛、左卫将军蒋元逊领水军于白下，往来断遏江路。
现代文：祯明三年，隋军渡江，方泰与忠武将军南豫州刺史樊猛、左卫将军蒋元逊率领水军于白下，往来断阻江路。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, the Sui army crossed the Yangtze River. Fang Tai and the loyal general Nan Yuzhou stabbed the fierce, and the left guard general Jiang Yuanxun led the navy under Bai, blocking the river road.

古文：隋遣行军元帅、长史高颎领船舰溯流当之，猛及元逊并降，方泰所部将士离散，乃弃船走。
现代文：隋派行军元帅、长史高预率领船舰逆流阻挡，樊猛与蒋元逊都投降了，方泰手下将士纷纷离散，于是弃船而逃。
English: The Sui Dynasty sent the marching marshal, Chang Shigao Yu, to lead the ship against the current. Both the fierce and Jiang Yuanxun surrendered, and the soldiers under the command of Fang Tai dispersed one after another, so they abandoned the ship and fled.

古文：及台城陷，与后主俱入关。
现代文：到台城陷落，方泰与后主一同入关。
English: When Taicheng fell, Fang Tai and his heir entered the pass together.

古文：隋大业中为掖令。
现代文：隋大业年中，方泰为掖县令。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, Fang Tai became the county magistrate.

古文：方庆少清警，涉猎书传。
现代文：方庆少年时清纯机警，涉猎书传。
English: When he was a young boy, Fang Qing was a pure policeman, involved in book hunting.

古文：及长，有干略。
现代文：到年长时，有才干谋略。
English: When you get older, you have the ability to strategize.

古文：天嘉中，封临汝县侯。
现代文：天嘉年中，被封为临汝县侯。
English: In the middle of the year of heaven and earth, he was crowned the lord of Linwu County.

古文：寻为给事中、太子洗马，权兼宗正卿，直殿省。
现代文：不久为给事中、太子洗马，权兼宗正卿，直殿省。
English: Soon after, he was given the title of Prince Saima, and was appointed to the post of Minister of the Imperial Household Ministry.

古文：太建九年，出为轻车将军、假节、都督定州诸军事、定州刺史。
现代文：太建九年，出为轻车将军、假节、都督定州诸军事、定州刺史。
English: In the ninth year of the Tai Jian era, he was appointed as the general of light vehicles, the false festival, the military governor of Dingzhou, and the historian of Dingzhou.

古文：秩满，又为散骑常侍，兼宗正卿。
现代文：任期满，又为散骑常侍，兼宗正卿。
English: At the end of his term of office, he also became a knight-errant and a regular attendant, concurrently holding the title of Zongzheng.

古文：至德二年，进号智武将军、武州刺史。
现代文：至德二年，进号智武将军、武州刺史。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, he was promoted to General Zhiwu and became the ruler of Wuzhou.

古文：初，广州刺史马靖久居岭表，大得人心，士马强盛，朝廷疑之。
现代文：当初，广州刺史马靖久居岭表，大得人心，兵马强盛，朝廷怀疑他。
English: At first, the imperial court was suspicious of Ma Jingjujuling, a famous and powerful military commander from Guangzhou.

古文：至是以方庆为仁威将军、广州刺史，以兵袭靖。
现代文：到此时，以方庆为仁威将军、广州刺史，派兵袭击马靖。
English: At this time, with Fang Qing as General Ren Wei, Guangzhou stabbed history and sent troops to attack Ma Jing.

古文：靖诛，进号宣毅将军。
现代文：马靖被杀，方庆进号宣毅将军。
English: Ma Jing was killed and Fang Qingjin became General Xuan Yi.

古文：方庆性清谨，甚得民和。
现代文：方庆性格清静谨慎，很得民心。
English: Fang Qing's personality is calm and cautious, and he is very popular.

古文：四年，进号云麾将军。
现代文：至德四年，进号云麾将军。
English: In the fourth year of his reign, he was given the title of General Yun Qi.

古文：祯明三年，隋师济江东衡州刺史王勇遣高州刺史戴智烈将五百骑迎方庆，欲令承制总督征讨诸军事。
现代文：祯明三年，隋军渡江，束衡州刺史王勇派高州刺史戴智烈率五百骑兵迎接方庆，欲让他承制总督征讨诸军事。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, the Sui army crossed the Yangtze River, and Wang Yong, the governor of Sokheng, sent the governor of Gaozhou, Dai Zhirong, with 500 cavalry to meet Fang Qing, and wanted him to undertake the governor's conscription into the military.

古文：是时隋行军总管韦洸帅兵度岭，宣隋文帝敕云： 若岭南平定，留勇与豊州刺史郑万顷且依旧职。 
现代文：此时隋行军总管韦洸统率兵马过岭，宣读隋文帝谕令道： 如岭南平定，留王勇与丰州刺史郑万顷仍任旧职。 
English: At this time, Wei Wei, the general manager of the Sui marching army, led the soldiers and horses across the ridge, and read out the Sui Wen imperial decree: If Lingnan is pacified, Ruo Wangyong and Fengzhou Zhi Zheng Wanhe will still hold their old positions.

古文：方庆闻之，恐勇卖己，乃不从，率兵以拒智烈。
现代文：方庆听说，恐怕王勇出卖自己，便不从，率兵抗拒戴智烈。
English: When Fang Qing heard that Wang Yong was afraid to betray himself, he disobeyed and led his soldiers to resist Dai Zhili.

古文：智烈与战，败之，斩方庆于广州，虏其妻子。
现代文：戴堑烈与友庆交战，打败了他，斩友庆于卢业，并俘虏了方庆的妻子。
English: Dai Bingli fought with Youqing, defeated him, beheaded Youqing in Lüye, and captured Fangqing's wife.

古文：王勇，太建中为晋陵太守，在职有能名。
现代文：王勇，太建年中为晋陵太守，在职时有能干之名。
English: Wang Yong, who was the governor of Jinling in the middle of the Jianming era, was known for his ability.

古文：方庆之袭马靖也，朝廷以勇为超武将军、东衡州刺史，领始兴内史，以为方庆声势。
现代文：方庆袭击马靖时，朝廷任命王勇为超武将军、束衡州刺史，领始兴内史，以壮方庆声势。
English: When Fang Qing attacked Ma Jing, the imperial court appointed Wang Yong as the super-martial general, the shackle of Hengzhou, the leader of the beginning of the internal history, and the strong Fang Qing.

古文：靖诛，以功封龙阳县子。
现代文：马靖被杀，王勇因功封龙阳县子。
English: Ma Jing was killed, and Wang Yong was awarded the county seat of Longyang County.

古文：及隋军临江，诏授勇使持节、光胜将军、总督衡、广、交、桂、武等二十四州诸军事、平越中郎将，仍入援。
现代文：到隋军临江，下诏授王勇使持节、光胜将军、总督衡广交桂武等二十四州诸军事、平越中郎将，并入京救援。
English: When the Sui army arrived at Linjiang, Wang Yong sent Jisheng, General Guang Sheng, Governor Heng Guangjia, General Guiwu, and other military leaders from 24 states, as well as General Ping Yue, to Beijing for rescue.

古文：会京城陷、勇因移檄管内，征兵据守，使其同产弟邓暠将兵五千，顿于岭上。
现代文：到京城失陷，王勇便移书管内，征兵据守，使他同产弟邓嵩率兵五千，安顿于岭上。
English: After the fall of the capital, Wang Yong moved to the Shushan area and conscripted soldiers to defend it. He and his brother Deng Song led 5,000 soldiers and settled on the ridge.

古文：又遣使迎方庆，欲假以为名，而自执兵要。
现代文：又派人迎接方庆，想假此为名，自己执掌兵权。
English: He also sent someone to meet Fang Qing, hoping to assume military power in his own name.

古文：及方庆败绩，虏其妻子，收其赀产，分赏将帅。
现代文：到方庆败北，俘虏他的妻子，没收他的资产，分别赏给了将帅们。
English: He went to the north to celebrate his victory, captured his wife, confiscated his assets, and separately rewarded the generals.

古文：又令其将王仲宣、曾孝武迎西衡州刺史衡阳王伯信，伯信惧，奔于清远郡，孝武追杀之。
现代文：又命令手下将领王仲宣、曾孝武迎接西衡州刺史衡阳王侦篮，值信恐惧，逃奔到遣，被曾孝武追杀了。
English: He also ordered his generals, Wang Zhongxuan and Zeng Xiaowu, to meet the West Hengzhou assassin, Hengyang Wang Jianqin, but they were too afraid to do so and fled to the capital, where they were chased down and killed by Zeng Xiaowu.

古文：是时韦洸兵已上岭，豊州刺史郑万顷据州不受勇召，而高梁女子洗氏举兵以应隋军，攻陷傍郡，勇计无所出，乃以其众降。
现代文：此时，童逃兵已上岭，丰业刺史郑万顷占据州地不接受王垩召请，而直銮女子巡举兵响应堕军，攻陷了旁郡，王勇无计可施，祇好率兵投降。
English: At this time, the child deserters had gone up to the ridge, Zheng Wanhao occupied the state and did not accept Wang Yao's invitation, and the women's patrol soldiers responded to the fallen army and captured Bin County. Wang Yong had no choice but to lead the soldiers to surrender.

古文：行至荆州，道病卒，隋赠大将军、宋州刺史，归仁县公。
现代文：行往荆州，半路上患病而亡，隋追赠他大将军、宋州刺史，归仁县公。
English: He went to Jingzhou, but fell ill and died on the way. The Sui Dynasty posthumously rewarded him with the title of general, the title of Songzhou chief historian, and the title of Guiren County governor.

古文：郑万顷，荥阳人，梁司州刺史绍叔之族子也。
现代文：郑万顷，苤屋人，凿旦业刺史叁眯的同族兄弟之子。
English: Zheng Wanhao, a resident of Handan, was the son of a brother of the same family as Zhi Shi.

古文：父旻，梁末入魏。
现代文：父亲鄞曼，梁代末年入北魏。
English: His father, Qimen, entered the Northern Wei Dynasty at the end of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：万顷通达有材干，周武帝时为司城大夫，出为温州刺史。
现代文：郑万顷通达而有才干，北周武帝时为司城大夫，出为温蛆刺史。
English: Zheng Wanha was an accomplished and talented man. When he was the Northern Zhouwu Emperor, he was a doctor in Shicheng, and later became a historian.

古文：至德中，与司马消难来奔。
现代文：至垄年中，与司马消难同来投奔。
English: By the middle of the year, he joined Sima Qianlu.

古文：寻拜散骑常侍、昭武将军、豊州刺史。
现代文：不久被封为散骑常侍、昭武将军、丰州刺史。
English: He was soon given the titles of straggler, general of the Shōmu army, and Toyoshu sashimi.

古文：在州甚有惠政，吏民表请立碑，诏许焉。
现代文：在州内很有惠政，官民均奏请为他立碑，皇帝下韶允许。
English: In the state, there is a lot of favorable policies. The government and the people are requested to erect a monument for him, and the emperor has given permission.

古文：初，万顷之在周，深被隋文帝知遇，及隋文践祚，常思还北。
现代文：当初，郑万顷在周，深受鹰塞壹赏识，到鹰塞童登位，他常想回还北方。
English: At the beginning, Zheng Wanha was in Zhou, deeply appreciated by Yingze I. When Yingze Tong ascended to the throne, he often wanted to return to the north.

古文：及王勇之杀方庆，万顷乃率州兵拒勇，遣使由间道降于隋军。
现代文：王勇杀方庆时，郑万顷便率州兵抗拒王勇，派人从小道投降隋军。
English: When Wang Yong killed Fang Qing, Zheng Wanhao led the National Guard to resist Wang Yong and sent people to surrender to the Sui Army from the trail.

古文：拜上仪同，寻卒。
现代文：他被封为上仪同，不久便亡故。
English: He was awarded the title of Shang Yi Tong and died soon after.

古文：史臣曰：献、愍二王，联华霄汉，或壤子之昵，或犹子之宠，而机桥为阻，骖驾无由，有隔于休辰，终之以早世。
现代文：史臣曰：献王、愍王两人，联系着朝廷，或有爱子的亲近，或有兄弟之子的宠爱，但事态变化机会受阻，无缘驾驭皇室车马，有隔于喜庆之，最终早逝。
English: Shichen said: the two of them, Xianwang and Xuanwang, were in contact with the imperial court, or had the closeness of a beloved son, or the favor of a brother's son, but the opportunity for changes in the state of affairs was blocked, they had no chance to drive the royal chariot and horse, they were separated from the celebration, and eventually died early.

古文：悲夫！
现代文：可悲啊!
English: How sad!

