古文：凡与敌战，可密候邻国君臣交接有隙，乃遣谍者以间之。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，应当密切注视和利用敌国君臣关系中的矛盾，适时派遣间谍去离间他们。
English: When fighting against the enemy, it is necessary to pay close attention to and take advantage of the contradictions in the relations between the enemy country's monarchs and subjects, and dispatch spies at the right time to separate them.

古文：彼若猜贰，我以精兵乘之，必得所欲。
现代文：倘若敌国君臣之间相互猜疑，我方便乘隙以精锐部队进攻它，这样一定能够打败敌人。
English: If there is mutual suspicion between the princes and ministers of the enemy country, I will take advantage of the gap to attack it with elite troops, so that I can defeat the enemy.

古文：法曰： 亲而离之。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 对内部亲密团结的敌人，要用离间计去破坏他们。 
English: As it is said in the art of war: To the enemy of internal closeness and unity, we must use the strategy of separation to destroy them.

古文：战国，周赧王三十一年，燕上将乐毅并将秦、魏、韩、赵之师伐齐，破之，泯王出奔于莒。
现代文：战国时期，在周赧王三十一年，燕国大将乐毅率领燕军及秦、魏、韩、赵等多国军队进攻齐国，攻破齐都临淄，齐湣王被迫逃往莒城。
English: During the Warring States period, in the 31st year of King Zhou Enlai, General Le Yi of Yan led the Yan army and the Qin, Wei, Han, Zhao and other multinational armies to attack Qi, break through the city of Linyi, and the King of Qi was forced to flee to Licheng.

古文：燕军闻齐王在莒，合兵攻之。
现代文：燕军获悉齐泯王在莒城后，立即调集兵力合围莒城。
English: After Yan's army learned that King Qizong was in Handan, they immediately mobilized troops to surround Handan.

古文：楚将淖齿将兵救齐。
现代文：这个时候楚国将领淖齿率军援救齐国，因此而被齐湣王任为国相。
English: At this time, the general of Chu led the army to rescue Qi, so he was appointed as the minister of state by the king of Qi.

古文：因为齐相，欲与燕将分齐地，乃执王数其罪而诛之。
现代文：淖齿打算与燕将乐毅共分齐国土地，于是抓住齐湣王在历数其罪状后将他杀掉。
English: Hao Zhen planned to share the land of Qi with Yan Zhe Le Yi, so he caught Qi Zhe Wang and killed him after counting his crimes.

古文：复坚守莒城、即墨以拒燕兵，数月不下。
现代文：但齐国将士仍然坚守莒城和即墨，抵抗燕军，致使燕军数月都未能攻下。
English: However, the soldiers of Qi still held fast to Lucheng and Zhimo and resisted Yan's army, so that Yan's army could not be captured for several months.

古文：乐毅并围之，即墨大夫战死，城中推田单为将军。
现代文：燕将乐毅只好率军继续围城。这时由于即墨守城将领战死，该城军民共同推举田单为将军。
English: Yan general Le Yi had no choice but to continue the siege of the city with his army. At this time, due to the death of the general leading the defense of the city, the army and people of the city jointly elected Tian Shan as the general.

古文：顷之，昭王薨，惠王立，为太子时与毅有隙。
现代文：不久，燕昭王病死，其子惠王即位，他在作太子时曾与乐毅发生过矛盾。
English: Soon after, Yan Zhao Wang died of illness, and his son Hui Wang ascended to the throne. When he was crown prince, he had a conflict with Le Yi.

古文：田单闻之，乃纵反间曰：乐毅与燕新王有隙，畏诛，欲连兵王齐，齐人未附，故且缓攻即墨以待其事。
现代文：田单了解到这一情况后，就派人到燕国施以离间之计，扬言说： 乐毅因与燕国新王有矛盾，害怕被惠王杀头而想联合各国军队称王于齐国，只是齐国人心尚未归附，所以他便暂缓进攻即墨以等待齐人归顺。
English: After Tian Shan learned of this situation, he sent someone to Yan Guo to sow discord, threatening: "Because of the conflict with the new king of Yan Guo, Le Yi was afraid of being killed by Hui Wang and wanted to unite the armies of all countries to call himself the king of Qi Guo. However, the hearts of the people of Qi Guo had not yet been won over, so he suspended the attack immediately to wait for the Qi people to surrender.

古文：齐人唯恐他将之来，即墨残矣。 
现代文：现在，齐国人唯一担心的，是怕燕国派遣其他将领来代替乐毅，那时即墨将会变成一座残破城邑了。 
English: Now, the only thing the people of Qi are worried about is the fear that Yan will send other generals to replace Le Yi, and then Mo will become a ruined city.

古文：燕王以为然，乃使骑劫代毅。
现代文：燕惠王听到这个谣言后竟信以为真，于是便派遣骑劫取代了乐毅。
English: After hearing this rumor, Yan Hui Wang actually believed it to be true, so he sent a rider to replace Le Yi.

古文：毅遂奔赵，燕将士由是不和。
现代文：乐毅无奈便逃往赵国，燕国将士从此产生不和。
English: Le Yi had no choice but to flee to Zhao Province, and the warlords of Yan Province have been at odds ever since.

古文：单乃诈以卒为神师而祀之，列火牛阵，大破燕军；复齐七十余城，迎襄王自莒入临淄。
现代文：其后，田单找来一个士卒诈称是神师出世佐助他作战，并采用 火牛阵法 ，大败燕军，收复齐国失地七十多座城邑，又去莒城迎接齐襄王回到都城临淄。
English: After that, Tian Shan found a soldier to help him fight, falsely claiming that he was a priest, and used the fire bull array method to defeat the Yan army, recover more than seventy cities and towns lost in Qi, and went to Lucheng to welcome the Qixiang King back to the capital Linyi.

