古文：韩邦奇，字汝节，朝邑人。
现代文：韩邦奇，字汝节，陕西朝邑人。
English: Han Bangqi, a native of Chaoyang, Shaanxi Province.

古文：父绍宗，福建副使。
现代文：父亲韩绍宗曾做过福建副使。
English: His father, Han Shaozong, was once vice-envoy to Fujian.

古文：邦奇登正德三年进士，除吏部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：邦奇考中正德三年榜进士，初任吏部主事，后升为员外郎。
English: He was promoted to the highest rank in the third year of the Zhengde Junior High School Examination, and became the head of the personnel department for the first time. Later, he was promoted to the position of a member of the outer circle.

古文：六年冬，京师地震，上疏陈时政阙失。
现代文：正德六年冬天，京师发生地震，邦奇上书指出当时政治生活中的不足和过失，不合武宗的心意，武宗未予理睬。
English: In the winter of Zhengde's sixth year, an earthquake occurred in Beijing. Bunch sent a letter to the emperor pointing out the shortcomings and mistakes in political life at that time, which was not in accordance with the wishes of Emperor Wuzong. Emperor Wuzong ignored the letter.

古文：忤旨，不报。会给事中孙祯等劾臣僚不职者，并及邦奇。
现代文：后来恰好给事中孙祯等上书弹劾大臣和幕僚中不称职的人，一并提到了邦奇。
English: Later, he happened to write to Sun Yat-sen and others to impeach incompetent ministers and staff members, and mentioned Bunch.

古文：吏部已议留，帝竟以前疏故，黜为平阳通判。
现代文：在吏部已决定继续留用的情况下，武宗竟因为以前那篇奏疏，把他贬为平阳通判。
English: Under the circumstances that the cadre department had decided to continue to retain him, Wu Zong actually relegated him to the position of general judge because of the previous report.

古文：迁浙江佥事，辖杭、严二府。
现代文：后来升为浙江佥事，管辖杭、严二府的事务。
English: Later, it was upgraded to Zhejiang Anji, governing the affairs of Hangzhou and Yan'an.

古文：宸濠令内竖假饭僧，聚千人于杭州天竺寺，邦奇立散遣之。
现代文：宸濠派遣宦官假扮作游脚僧，在杭州天竺寺聚集了一千人左右，邦奇立即就疏散了他们。
English: He sent eunuchs to pose as wandering monks and gathered about a thousand people in Hangzhou's Temple of Heaven, but Bunch immediately evacuated them.

古文：其仪宾托进贡假道衢州，邦奇诘之曰： 入贡当沿江下，奚自假道？
现代文：宸濠的女婿托名进贡要借路过衢州，邦奇质问说： 到北京上贡应当沿江而下，为什么要从此处借路？
English: Gong's son-in-law wanted to pay tribute to Gong by passing through Ganzhou. Bangqi questioned: The tribute should go down along the river to Beijing, why take the road from here?

古文：归语王，韩佥事不可诳也。 
现代文：你回去告诉宁王，我韩佥事是不好蒙骗的。 
English: You should go back and tell Ning Wang that it's not good to deceive me.

古文：时中官在浙者凡四人，王堂为镇守，晁进督织造，崔泬主市舶，张玉管营造。
现代文：当时宦官在浙江的共四个人，王堂当镇守，晁进管织造，崔王缶管市舶，张玉管建筑。
English: At that time, there were a total of four eunuchs in Zhejiang. Wang Tang was the town guard, Zou Jin Guo Weaving, Cui Wang Can Guo Shi Luo, Zhang Yu Guo Building.

古文：爪牙四出，民不聊生。
现代文：他们的爪牙四处活动，弄得民不聊生。
English: Their minions are on the move, making life miserable for the people.

古文：邦奇疏请禁止，又数裁抑堂。
现代文：邦奇上书请对他们加以禁止，还几次压制了王堂。
English: Punch petitioned to have them banned, and several times suppressed the King's Court.

古文：邦奇闵中官采富阳茶鱼为民害，作歌哀之。
现代文：邦奇同情宦官指派在富阳采茶、打鱼的百姓，写了一首诗歌表示感伤。
English: Bunch sympathized with the eunuchs assigned to pick tea and fish in Fuyang, and wrote a poem to express his sentiments.

古文：堂遂奏邦奇沮格上供，作歌怨谤。
现代文：王堂于是上书说邦奇阻挠给皇上的供给，写诗歌埋怨、诽谤。
English: The king's court then wrote a letter saying that Banchi was obstructing supplies to the emperor, writing poems complaining and slandering.

古文：帝怒，逮至京，下诏狱。
现代文：武宗恼了，把邦奇逮到北京，关进了诏狱。
English: Angered, Wu Zong arrested Banqi in Beijing and put him in the Imperial Prison.

古文：廷臣论救，皆不听，斥为民。
现代文：朝中大臣上书挽救，武宗都不听，最后邦奇被罢官为民。
English: The chancellor of the dynasty sent a letter to save him, but the emperor did not listen. Finally, Bunch was dismissed from his post and became a commoner.

古文：嘉靖初，起山东参议。乞休去。
现代文：嘉靖初年，起任山东参议，他请假回乡去了。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, after taking up the post of Shandong councillor, he took a leave of absence and went back to his hometown.

古文：起山东副使，迁大理丞，进少卿，以右佥都御史巡抚宣府。
现代文：不久因为别人推荐，又以参议之职到山西做官，他又请假回去了。后来又起任山东副使，升为大理丞、少卿，然后以右佥都御史的名义巡抚宣府。
English: Soon after, he was recommended by others to go to Shanxi as a councillor, and he took a leave of absence to go back. Later, he was appointed deputy envoy to Shandong, promoted to the rank of grand secretary and junior secretary, and then to the governor of Xuanfu in the name of the governor of the capital.

古文：入佐院事，进右副都御史，巡抚辽东。
现代文：而后入朝助理按察院的事务，升任右副都御史，巡抚辽东。
English: After that, he entered the court as an assistant in charge of the affairs of the court of inspection, and was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, and the governor of Liaodong.

古文：时辽阳兵变，侍郎黄宗明言邦奇素有威望，请假以便宜，速往定乱。
现代文：当时辽阳发生兵变，侍郎黄宗明说邦奇一向很有声望，请给他见机行事的权力，让他迅速前往平定事变。
English: At that time, there was a mutiny in Liaoyang, and the steward, Huang Zongming, said that Bunch had always been very prestigious, please give him the power to act at the right time, and let him quickly go to quell the incident.

古文：帝方事姑息，不从，命与山西巡抚任洛换官。
现代文：世宗当时一味采取姑息政策，没有听宗明的意见，而是让邦奇与山西巡抚任洛做了对调。
English: At that time, Shizong blindly adopted a policy of appeasement, did not listen to Zongming's opinion, but let Bunch and Shanxi Governor Renluo make a match.

古文：至山西，为政严肃，有司供具悉不纳，间日出俸米易肉一斤。
现代文：邦奇到山西后，把政治风气搞得很严肃，官府给他提供的用品他一样不要，自己家里每隔一天用自己的禄米换一斤肉吃。
English: After Bunch arrived in Shanxi, he took the political atmosphere very seriously. He did not want the supplies provided to him by the government. Every other day, he would exchange his rice for a kilo of meat at home.

古文：居四年，引疾归。
现代文：他在山西当了四年巡抚，然后告病回乡了。
English: He served as the governor of Shanxi Province for four years, and then returned to his hometown due to illness.

古文：中外交荐，以故官起督河道。
现代文：由于朝廷内外不断有人推荐，他又以右副都御史的名义出来主管河道事务。
English: As he was constantly recommended by people both inside and outside the imperial court, he was appointed to be in charge of river affairs in the name of the right vice-governor of the capital.

古文：迁刑部右侍郎，改吏部。拜南京右都御史，进兵部尚书，参赞机务。
现代文：后来升任刑部右侍郎，又改当吏部左侍郎，而后担任南京右都御史，提升兵部尚书，开始参与朝廷的军政大事。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and then he was changed to the Left Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and then he served as the Imperial Historian of the Nanjing U.S. Capital, promoted to the Secretary of the Military Department, and began to participate in the military and political events of the Imperial Court.

古文：致仕归。
现代文：最后退休回家了。
English: Finally retired and went home.

古文：三十四年，陕西地大震，邦奇陨焉。
现代文：嘉靖三十四年，陕西发生大地震，邦奇在地震中丧了生。
English: In the 34th year of Jiajing, a major earthquake occurred in Shaanxi, and Bunch lost his life in the earthquake.

古文：赠太子少保，谥恭简。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为太子少保，谥恭简。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed him with the title of prince's minor protector, 恭简.

古文：邦奇性嗜学。自诸经、子、史及天文、地理、乐律、术数、兵法之书，无不通究。著述甚富。
现代文：邦奇天性好学，从经、史、诸子之学到天文、地理、乐律、术数、兵法，各种书籍无不深入进行钻研，生平著述很多。
English: Bunchi was naturally studious. He studied everything from the classics, history, astronomy, geography, musical rhythms, the art of arithmetic, and the art of war. He delved deeply into all kinds of books and wrote many biographies.

古文：所撰《志乐》，尤为世所称。
现代文：他所撰写的《志名》，尤其受人称道。
English: His book "Zhi Ming" (志名) is especially praised.

古文：弟邦靖，字汝度。
现代文：他的弟弟邦靖，字汝度。
English: His younger brother, Bong Ching, goes by the name Rude.

古文：年十四举于乡。与邦奇同登进士，授工部主事。
现代文：十四岁就乡试中举，后来和邦奇一起考中进士，担任工部主事。
English: At the age of fourteen, he took the junior high school entrance examination in his hometown. Later, he and Bunch took the junior high school entrance examination together and served as the head of the engineering department.

古文：榷木浙江，额不充，被劾，以守官廉得免。
现代文：一次到浙江购买木料，回来后数额不足，被人弹劾，最后因为他做官清廉才免于追究责任。
English: Once he went to Zhejiang to buy wood, but when he came back, the amount was insufficient and he was impeached. In the end, he was exempted from accountability because he was a clean official.

古文：进员外郎。乾清宫灾，指斥时政甚切。武宗大怒，下之诏狱。
现代文：以后他升任员外郎，碰上乾清宫发生灾祸，他很尖锐地上书批评当时政治状况，武宗大为恼火，把他关进了诏狱。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of courtier, and when a disaster occurred at the Qianqing Palace, he sharply criticized the political situation at that time in a letter. Bu Zong was very angry and put him in the imperial prison.

古文：给事中李铎等以为言，乃夺职为民。
现代文：给事中李铎等为他说了话，才罢官为民。
English: It was only after Li Qiye and others intervened on his behalf that he resigned from his post and became a citizen.

古文：世宗即位，起山西左参议，分守大同。
现代文：世宗即位后，他起任山西左参议，负责防守大同。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he took up the post of Shanxi Left Counselor and was responsible for the defense of Datong.

古文：岁饥，人相食，奏请发帑，不许。
现代文：有一年发生饥荒，出现人吃人的现象，邦靖上书请打开国库赈灾，世宗不同意。
English: One year, there was a famine and people were eating each other. Bong Ching sent a letter asking for the treasury to be opened to help with the famine, but Sejong did not agree.

古文：复抗疏千余言，不报。
现代文：他又抗言上书，写了一千多字，世宗根本不予理睬。
English: He also wrote a letter of protest, writing more than a thousand words, which was completely ignored by Sejong.

古文：乞归，不待命辄行。军民遮道泣留。
现代文：他于是上书请假回乡，不等朝廷批复就起了程，大同军民拦路哭泣着挽留他。
English: He then wrote a letter requesting leave to return to his hometown, and did not wait for the imperial court's approval to start his journey. Datong soldiers and civilians blocked the road and wept to hold him back.

古文：抵家病卒，年三十六。
现代文：他回到家中病死，终年三十六岁。
English: He came home sick and died at the age of 36.

古文：未几，邦奇亦以参议莅大同。父老因邦靖故，前迎，皆泣下。邦奇亦泣。
现代文：不久以后，邦奇也来大同当山西参议，当地的父老乡亲因为邦靖的缘故前往迎接他，都掉下了眼泪，邦奇也哭了。
English: Not long after, Bunch also came to Datong to serve as a senator of Shanxi Province. Local fathers and fellow countrymen went to meet him because of Bunch. They all shed tears, and Bunch also cried.

古文：邦奇尝庐居，病岁余不能起。
现代文：邦奇曾经住在草庐中，病了一年多不能起来。
English: Bunch once lived in a haystack and was unable to get out of bed for more than a year.

古文：邦靖药必分尝，食饮皆手进。
现代文：邦靖送药一定亲自尝过才送，并亲自给他喂水喂饭。
English: He must have personally tasted the medicine before sending it, and personally gave him water and food.

古文：后邦靖病亟，邦奇日夜持弟泣，不解衣者三月。
现代文：后来邦靖病危时，邦奇日夜抱着弟弟哭泣，三个月都没有脱下衣服睡觉。
English: Later, when Bong Jing was critically ill, Bong Qi held his brother and cried day and night, and did not take off his clothes to sleep for three months.

古文：及殁，衰绖蔬食，终丧弗懈。
现代文：等弟弟死后，他穿丧服，吃素食，在整个丧期里都坚持不懈。
English: After his brother's death, he wore mourning clothes, ate vegetarian food, and persevered throughout the mourning period.

古文：乡人为立 孝弟碑 。
现代文：所以家乡的人们为他们立了一块孝悌碑。
English: So the people in their hometown erected a monument of filial piety for them.

