古文：凡兵，有以道胜，有以威胜，有以力胜。
现代文：战争有用道胜的，有用威胜的，有用力胜的。
English: War is useful to win, to win, to win.

古文：讲武料敌，使敌之气失而师散，虽形全而不为之用，此道胜也。
现代文：讲求军事准备，判明敌人虚实，设法促使敌人士气沮丧而内部分化，虽然军队的组织形式完整但却不能用来作战，这就是以道胜。
English: Insist on military preparation, find out the enemy's true and false, try to make the enemy's morale depressed and internal division, although the army's organizational form is complete, but it cannot be used for combat, this is the way to win.

古文：审法制，明赏罚，便器用，使民有必战之心，此威胜也。
现代文：审定法制，严明赏罚，改善武器装备，使人人都有必战的决心，这就是以威胜。
English: Validate the legal system, strictly reward and punish, improve weapons and equipment, and make everyone have the determination to fight. This is to win by force.

古文：破军杀将，乘闉发机，溃众夺地，成功乃返，此力胜也。
现代文：击破敌军，斩杀敌将，使用各种攻城器械强攻敌人城邑，粉碎敌人防御，占领敌国土地，功成之后，班师回国，这就是以力胜。
English: Defeating the enemy army, killing the enemy general, using all kinds of siege equipment to attack the enemy cities and towns, smashing the enemy defenses, occupying the enemy's land, and returning to the country after success, this is a victory by force.

古文：王侯如此，以三胜者毕矣。
现代文：战争决策者明白这些，就能完全掌握三种胜利方式的具体运用了。
English: If war policy-makers understand this, they will be able to fully grasp the specific application of the three methods of victory.

古文：夫将所以战者，民也；民之所以战者，气也。
现代文：将所赖以作战的是军队，军队所赖以作战的是士气。
English: What the army will fight on is the army, and what the army will fight on is morale.

古文：气实则斗，气夺则走。
现代文：士气旺盛就勇于战斗，士气沮丧就会溃败。
English: If morale is high, one will have the courage to fight; if morale is low, one will be defeated.

古文：刑未加，兵未接，而所以夺敌者五：一曰庙胜之论，二曰受命之论，三曰逾垠之论，四曰深沟高垒之论，五曰举陈加刑之论。
现代文：在军队还未行动，双方还未接触时就能够压倒敌人的条件有五个方面，一是朝廷的决策英明，二是将冲的选拔得人，三是进入敌境的迅速突然，四是本国防务的坚强充实，五是列阵决战的指挥正确。
English: When the army has not yet taken action and the two sides have not yet made contact, there are five aspects of the conditions for being able to overwhelm the enemy. One is the wisdom of the imperial court's decision-making, the second is the selection of the person who will rush, the third is the rapid and sudden entry into the enemy territory, the fourth is the strong and substantial national defense, and the fifth is the correct command of the decisive battle.

古文：此五者，先料敌而后动，是以击虚夺之也。
现代文：这五个方面都要先分析敌情，而后行动，用以实击虚的办法去压倒敌人。
English: These five aspects must first analyze the enemy situation, and then act, using the method of actual attack to overwhelm the enemy.

古文：善用兵者，能夺人而不夺于人。
现代文：善于用兵的人，能压倒敌人。而不为敌人所压倒。
English: He who is skillful in the use of arms overcomes his enemy, but he is not overcome by him.

古文：夺者，心之机也。
现代文：压倒敌人，在于将帅的机智。
English: Overwhelming the enemy lies in the wit of the general.

古文：令者，一众心也。众不审则数变，数变则令虽出众不信矣。
现代文：号令是用来统一军队行动的，对军队情况不了解，号令就会经常变更，经常变更的号令，纵然下达了，大家也都不会相信。
English: The order is used to unify the actions of the army. If you do not understand the situation of the army, the order will change frequently. If the order changes frequently, even if it is issued, everyone will not believe it.

古文：故令之法，小过无更，小疑无申。
现代文：因此，下达号令的原则是，有小的缺点不必变更，有点不明确也不须重申。
English: Therefore, the principle of issuing an order is that there are small shortcomings that do not need to be changed, a little unclear and do not need to be reiterated.

古文：故上无疑令，则众不二听；动无疑事，则众不二志。
现代文：所以，上级没有可疑的命令，大众也就不会无所适从；行动没有犹豫不定的事情，大众就不会三心二意。
English: Therefore, if there are no suspicious orders from superiors, the public will not be at a loss; if there is no hesitation in action, the public will not be half-hearted.

古文：未有不信其心，而能得其力者；未有不得其力，而能致其死战者也。
现代文：从来就没有不取得大众衷心信任，而能得到他们自愿效力的，也没有不取得大众自愿效力，而能使他们拚命作战的。
English: There has never been anyone who could gain the voluntary cooperation of the masses without winning their heartfelt trust, and there has never been anyone who could make them fight hard without gaining the voluntary cooperation of the masses.

古文：故国必有礼亲爱之义，则可以饥易饱；国必有孝慈廉耻之俗，则可以死易生。
现代文：一个国家必须有崇礼守信相亲相爱的风气，民众才能忍饥耐饿克服困难。国家必须有孝顺慈爱廉洁知耻的习俗，民众才能不惜牺牲去捍卫国家。
English: A country must have a culture of reverence, trustworthiness, and love for each other, so that the people can endure hunger and overcome difficulties. The country must have the customs of filial piety, love, integrity, and shame, so that the people can defend the country at any cost.

古文：古者率民，必先礼信而后爵禄，先廉耻而后刑罚，先亲爱而后律其身。
现代文：古代君王治理民众，必须先以礼信感化他们，然后用爵禄鼓励他们；先以廉耻教育他们；然后用刑罚督促他们；先用仁爱抚慰他们，然后用法律约束他们。
English: The ancient monarchs, to govern the people, must first inspire them with courtesy, then encourage them with peerage; first educate them with shame; then urge them with punishment; first soothe them with love, and then restrain them with law.

古文：故战者必本乎率身以励众士，如心之使四也。
现代文：将帅指挥作战，必须用自己的表率行为来激励部队，这样才能象头脑指挥四肢一样的灵活自如。
English: When a general commands a battle, he must use his own exemplary behavior to motivate the troops, so that he can be as flexible as the head commands the limbs.

古文：志不励，则士不死节；士不死节，则众不战。
现代文：战斗意志不加激励，士兵就不会为国家效死，士兵不为国家效死，部队就没有作战能力。
English: If the will to fight is not stimulated, soldiers will not die for the country, and if soldiers do not die for the country, the troops will not have the ability to fight.

古文：励士之道，民之生不可不厚也；爵列之等，死丧之，民之所营，不可不显也。
现代文：激励士气的方法，就是使民众都过富裕的生活。官职的等级，死丧的抚恤，是民众所追求的，应该有明确的规定。
English: The way to stimulate morale is to make the people live a prosperous life. The rank of official posts and death benefits are what the people are pursuing, and there should be clear regulations.

古文：必因民所生而制之，因民所而显之，田禄之实，饮食之，乡里相劝，死相救，兵役相从，此民之所励也。
现代文：必须根据民众的生活需要制定保障措施，根据民众的功绩给予表彰奖励，使他们在田地体禄方面得到实惠，起居饮食方面得到照顾，邻里互相鼓励，死生互相帮助，战时携手应征入伍，这就是激励民众的办法。
English: It is necessary to formulate safeguard measures according to the people's living needs, give commendations and rewards according to the people's merits, so that they can benefit in terms of physical fitness in the field, be taken care of in terms of living and eating, encourage each other in the neighborhood, help each other in life and death, and enlist in the army together in wartime. This is the way to motivate the people.

古文：使什伍如亲戚，卒伯如朋友，止如堵墙，动如风雨，车不结辙，士不旋踵，此本战之道也。
现代文：使同什同伍的人，象亲戚那样互相关心，上下级关系象朋友那样亲密无间，军队驻止下来就象铜墙铁壁一样的坚固，行动起来就象急风暴雨一样的迅猛，战车一往直前，士兵绝不后退，这就是战胜敌人的根本原则。
English: The fundamental principle of defeating the enemy is to make comrades care for each other like relatives, subordinates as close as friends, the army as solid as a bronze wall when it stops, and as swift as a sudden storm when it starts to move, the chariots go straight ahead, and the soldiers never retreat.

古文：地所以养民也，城所以守地也，战所以守城也。
现代文：土地是用来养活民众的，城塞是用来保卫土地的，战斗是用来防守城塞的。
English: The land is used to feed the people, the citadel is used to defend the land, and the battle is used to defend the citadel.

古文：故务耕者民不饥，务守者地不危，务战者城不围。
现代文：所以，注重农业生产的，民众就不会受饥荒，注重边疆守备的，领土就不会被侵犯，注重机动作战的，城市就不会被围困。
English: Therefore, if you pay attention to agricultural production, the people will not suffer from famine; if you pay attention to border defense, the territory will not be invaded; if you pay attention to mobile warfare, the city will not be besieged.

古文：三者，先王之本务。本务，兵最急。
现代文：这且件事是古代君王立国的根本问题，而其中军事问题又最为紧要。
English: Moreover, this matter is the fundamental issue of the founding of the ancient kings, and the military issue is the most important one.

古文：故先王专于兵，有五焉：委积不多则士不行，赏禄不厚则民不劝，武士不选则众不强，备用不便则力不壮，刑赏不中则众不畏。
现代文：所以古代君王特别注意军事方面的五个问题：粮食储备不充分，军队就难以行动；奖赏待遇不优厚，民众就得不到鼓励；武士不经严格挑选，部队就不会坚强；武器装备不充实，战斗力就不会强大；赏罚不公正，民众就不会畏服。
English: Therefore, ancient emperors paid special attention to five military issues: if grain reserves were insufficient, it would be difficult for the army to act; if rewards and benefits were not generous, the people would not be encouraged; if warriors were not strictly selected, the troops would not be strong; if weapons and equipment were not sufficient, the combat effectiveness would not be strong; if rewards and punishments were not fair, the people would not be intimidated.

古文：务此五者，静能守其所，动能成其所欲。
现代文：能够注意到这五个方面的问题，防守时就能守必固，行动时就能战必胜。
English: If you can pay attention to these five aspects, you will be able to defend when defending, and you will be able to win when acting.

古文：夫以居攻出，则居欲重，阵欲坚，发欲毕，欲齐。
现代文：要由防御转入进攻，防御就要稳定，阵地就要坚固，发起进攻要使用全部力量，战斗行动要协调一致。
English: In order to switch from defense to offense, the defense must be stable, the position must be firm, the attack must be launched with full force, and the combat operations must be coordinated.

古文：王国富民，霸国富士，仅存之国富大夫，亡国富仓府，谓上满下漏，患无所救。
现代文：实行王道的国家，注意增加人民的收入；实行霸道的国家，注意增加武士的待遇；没落的国家，只图增加中上层贵族们的财富；濒于灭亡的国家，只图增加君王自己的库存财物。所以说，只满足上层而忽略下层，其祸患是无法挽救的。
English: A country that practices the royal way pays attention to increasing the income of the people; a country that practices the domineering way pays attention to increasing the treatment of the samurai; a country in decline only tries to increase the wealth of the middle and upper class aristocrats; a country on the verge of extinction only tries to increase the monarch's own inventory. Therefore, the evil of only satisfying the upper class and ignoring the lower class is unsalvageable.

古文：故曰：举贤任能，不时日而事利；明法审令，不卜筮而事吉；贵功养劳，不祷祠而得福。
现代文：常言说，选用贤能，不须选择吉日良辰，也会顺利。法令明确，不必占卜吉凶，结果也会圆满。尊重功劳，不必祈祷也会得福。
English: It is often said that the selection of talents does not require the selection of auspicious days and good times, and will be successful. The law is clear, and it is not necessary to divine the auspicious and evil, and the result will be satisfactory. Respect for merit, and it is not necessary to pray to be blessed.

古文：又曰：天时不如地利，地利不如人和。
现代文：又说，天时有利不如地形有利，地形有利不如人心和睦。
English: It is also said that the favorable weather is not as good as the favorable terrain, and the favorable terrain is not as good as the harmony of the people.

古文：圣人所贵，人事而已。
现代文：圣人所重视的，只在人的作为罢了。
English: The sage regards only the actions of men.

古文：夫勤劳之师，将先己。
现代文：勤劳的军队，将帅与士卒同甘苦，不先顾自己。
English: An industrious army is one in which the general and the soldiers go through the ups and downs together, without thinking of themselves first.

古文：暑不张盖，寒不重衣，险必下步，军井成而后饮，军食熟而后饭，军垒成而后舍，劳佚必以身同之。
现代文：天热不张伞，寒冷不加衣，路险必然下马步行，部队的井挖好了自己才饮水，部队的饭煮熟了自已才进餐，部队的营垒筑成了自己才休息，将帅必须与士兵同劳佚，共甘苦。
English: In hot weather, they don't open umbrellas, in cold weather, they don't add clothes, in case of danger on the road, they have to dismount and walk. They only drink water when the well of the troops is dug, they only eat when the meal of the troops is cooked, and they only rest when the camp of the troops is built. The general must work hard with the soldiers and share the hardships.

古文：如此，师虽久而不老不弊。
现代文：这样，部队虽然长期作战，也能保持旺盛的士气而不致衰竭疲弊。
English: In this way, although the troops have been fighting for a long time, they can maintain a strong morale without exhaustion.

