古文：兴宗二十年春正月辛亥朔，宋遣梁适、张从一、富弼、赵日宣来贺。
现代文：重熙十年春正月初一，宋派梁适、张从一、富弼、赵日宣前来祝贺正旦。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 10th year of Chongxi, Song sent Liang Shih, Zhang Congyi, Fuxuan and Zhao Rixuan to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：甲子，复遣吴育、冯戴来贺永寿节。
现代文：十四日，又派吴育、冯戴前来祝贺永寿节。
English: On the 14th, Wu Yu and Feng Dai were also sent to congratulate the longevity festival.

古文：二月庚辰朔，诏蒲卢毛朵部归曷苏馆户之没入者使复业。
现代文：二月初一，诏令让那些从蒲卢毛朵部送还曷苏馆的民户中被籍没的人恢复旧业。
English: On the first day of February, a decree was issued to allow those who had been expelled from the private households that were sent back to the Gansu Pavilion from the Bulu Mao Duo Department to resume their old businesses.

古文：甲申，北枢密院言，南、北二王府及诸部节度侍卫祗候郎君，皆出族帐，既免与民戍边，其祗候事，请亦得以部曲代行。
现代文：初五，北枢密院称：南、北二王府及诸部节度侍卫祗候郎君，均出身于族帐，既已免除他们与寻常百姓一样戍守边境的义务，其祗候事务，请求也能够让部曲代替。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the North Privy Council announced that the attendants of the two royal residences in the north and south, as well as the attendants of the festivals of various ministries, were all born in the family, and since they were exempted from the obligation to guard the border like ordinary people, their requests could also be replaced by a piece of music.

古文：诏从其请。
现代文：皇上下诏允准其请求。
English: The Emperor's edict granted his request.

古文：夏四月，诏罢修鸭渌江浮梁及汉兵屯戍之役。
现代文：夏四月，下诏停修鸭绿江浮桥及停止汉兵屯守戍边之役。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor ordered the suspension of the construction of the Yalu River floating bridge and the suspension of the Han soldiers stationed in the vicinity of the Yalu River.

古文：又以东京留守萧撒八言，驰东京击鞠之禁。
现代文：又听从东京留守萧撒八的建议，废止在东京禁止击鞠之禁令。
English: He also followed the advice of Tokyo resident, Shosabachi, and repealed the ban on shakuchiku in Tokyo.

古文：六月戊寅朔，以萧宁、耶律坦、崔禹称、马世良、耶律仁先、刘六符充贺宋生辰使副；耶律庶成、赵成、耶律烈、张旦充来岁贺宋正旦使副。
现代文：六月初一，任命萧宁、耶律坦、崔禹称、马世良、耶律仁先、刘六符为贺宋生辰正副使者；耶律庶成、赵成、耶律烈、张旦充任来年贺宋正旦正副使者。
English: On the first day of June, Xiao Ning, Yerutang, Cui Yuyao, Ma Shiliang, Yerut Rensi and Liu Liufu were appointed as the deputy envoys of He Song Shengtian; Yerut Shicheng, Zhao Cheng, Yerut Lv and Zhang Dan were appointed as the deputy envoys of He Song Shengtian next year.

古文：秋七月壬戌，诏诸职官私取官物者，以正盗论。
现代文：秋七月十五日，下诏诸命官如私自取用官家财物者，按盗窃罪论处。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of autumn, the following edict was issued, ordering officials to punish anyone who used official property without permission as a thief.

古文：诸敢以先朝已断事相告言者，罪之。
现代文：如有人敢于为先朝已决断之事翻案，要被定罪判刑。
English: If anyone dares to overturn a case that has already been decided by the previous government, they will be convicted and sentenced.

古文：诸帐郎君等于禁地射鹿，决三百，不征偿；小将军决二百以下；及百姓犯者，罪同郎君论。
现代文：诸帐郎君等在禁地射鹿，鞭打三百，不再索取赔偿，小将军责打三百以下；如果百姓犯禁，也同郎君一样论处。
English: If the peasants violate the ban, they will be dealt with in the same way as the vassals.

古文：八月丙戌，以医者邓延贞治详稳萧留宁疾验，赠其父母官以奖之。
现代文：八月初九，因医者邓延贞治疗详稳萧留宁的病很有效验，赐给他的父母官职以示奖赏。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, the doctor Deng Yanzhen gave his parents official positions as a reward for their effective treatment of Zheng Xiaoluning's illness.

古文：九月辛亥，朝皇太后。
现代文：九月初五，皇上朝见皇太后。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：国舅留宁薨。
现代文：国舅留宁逝世。
English: Kunitomo Ruining passed away.

古文：庚申，皇太后射获熊，上进酒为寿。
现代文：十四日，皇太后猎得一头熊，皇上进酒为皇太后祝寿。
English: On the 14th, the empress dowager hunted down a bear, and the emperor drank wine to celebrate her birthday.

古文：癸亥，上猎马孟山，草木蒙密，恐猎者误射伤人，命耶律迪姑各书姓名于矢以志之。
现代文：十七日，皇上出猎于马盂山，因草木茂盛，恐出猎者误伤行人，耶律迪姑命手下均在箭上刻上自己姓名作为标识。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor went hunting in the Malang Mountains. Due to the lush vegetation, the hunters were afraid of accidentally injuring pedestrians. Yerudit ordered her men to inscribe their names on the arrows as a logo.

古文：丙寅，夏国献宋俘。
现代文：二十日，夏国献上宋俘。
English: On the 20th, Xia Guo presented the Song POWs.

古文：以石硬砦太保郭三避虎不射，免官。
现代文：硬砦太保郭三因见到老虎躲避而不射，被免官。
English: Taibo Guosan, a hard fort, was dismissed from his post for not shooting a tiger when he saw it running away.

古文：冬十月丙戌，诏东京留守萧孝忠察官吏有廉干清强者，具以名闻。
现代文：冬十月初十，诏令东京留守萧孝忠考察手下官吏，将清廉干练者名单悉数奏上。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the winter, Xiao Xiaotong was ordered to stay in Tokyo to inspect the officials under him, and the list of those who were capable of being clean and honest was recorded in full.

古文：庚寅，以女直太师台押为曷苏馆都大王。
现代文：十七日，任命女真太师台押为曷苏馆都大王。
English: On the 17th, Lady Zhen was appointed as the Grand Empress of Gansu.

古文：辛卯，以皇子胡卢斡里生，北宰相、驸马撒八宁迎上至其第宴饮，上命卫士与汉人角为乐。
现代文：十五日，因皇子胡卢斡里出生，北宰相、驸马撒八宁将皇上迎至府第宴饮，皇上命令卫士与汉人为角抵戏以助兴。
English: On the fifteenth day, due to the birth of Prince Hulusi, the Emperor was welcomed to the palace for a banquet by the Northern Vice-Minister, the Empress Dowager Masahakunin. The Emperor ordered the guards to fight with the Han people to promote the entertainment.

古文：壬辰，复饮皇太后殿，以皇子生，肆赦。
现代文：十六日，又在皇太后殿中饮宴，因皇子出生，赦免罪犯。
English: On the 16th, a banquet was held in the palace of the empress dowager, and criminals were pardoned due to the birth of the prince.

古文：夕，复引公主、驸马及内族大臣入寝殿剧饮。
现代文：晚上，又带领公主、驸马及内族大臣到寝殿痛饮。
English: In the evening, he also led the princess, the horse and the Minister of the Interior to the bedchamber for a drink.

古文：甲午，幸中京。
现代文：十八日，临幸中京。
English: On the 18th, Linxing Zhongjing.

古文：庚子，以驸马都尉萧忽列为国舅详稳。
现代文：二十四日，任命驸马都尉萧忽列为国舅详稳。
English: On the twenty-fourth day of the month, Xiao Hu, the captain of the horse, was appointed as the uncle of the country.

古文：十一月丙辰，回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：十一月初十，回鹘派使者前来进贡。
English: On the tenth day of the eleventh month, the Uighurs sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十二月丙子朔，宋遣刘沆、王整来贺应圣节。
现代文：十二月初一，宋派刘沆、王整前来祝贺应圣节。
English: On the first day of December, Song Dynasty emperors Liu Bei and Wang Ching came to congratulate the festival.

古文：乙未，置挞术不姑酋长。
现代文：二十日，在挞术不姑部设置酋长。
English: On the 20th, a chief was set up in the Zouwu District.

古文：以胡挞剌为平章事。
现代文：任命胡挞剌为平章事。
English: The appointment of Hu Rong is a matter of record.

古文：上闻宋设关河，治壕堑，恐为边患，与南、北枢密吴国王萧孝穆、赵国王萧贯宁谋取宋旧割关南十县地，遂遣萧英、刘六符使宋。
现代文：皇上听说宋国设置关河，修治壕沟，恐怕成为边境患害，于是与南、北枢密吴国王萧孝穆、赵国王萧贯宁谋划夺取宋先前允诺割让的关南十县地域，并派萧英、刘六符出使宋国。
English: The emperor heard that Song set up the Guan River and repaired the ditch, and feared that it would become a border disaster, so he plotted with King Xiao Xiaomu of Wu and King Xiao Janning of Zhao to seize the ten counties of Guan that Song had previously promised to cede, and sent Xiao Ying and Liu Liufu as envoys to Song.

古文：庚寅，宋遣张沔、侯宗亮、薛申、侍其浚、施昌言、潘永照来贺永寿节及来岁正旦。
现代文：十五日，宋派张沔、侯宗亮、薛申、侍其浚、施昌言、潘永照前来贺永寿节及来年正旦。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Song faction members Zhang Qian, Hou Zongliang, Xue Shen, Zhi Qijun, Shi Changyan, and Pan Yongzhao came to celebrate the He Yongshu Festival and the next year's Lunar New Year.

古文：以宣政殿学士杨佶为吏部尚书、判顺义军节度使事。
现代文：皇上任命宣政殿学士杨佶为吏部尚书，判顺义军节度使事。
English: The emperor appointed Yang Jie, a scholar of the Xuan Zheng Palace, as the secretary of the personnel department, and decided to send the army to the festival.

古文：丁酉，议伐宋，诏谕诸道。
现代文：二十二日，商议伐宋之事，下诏晓谕诸道。
English: On the 22nd, they discussed the matter of the Song Dynasty and issued the following edict.

古文：十一年春正月戊申，奉迎皇太后于内殿。
现代文：十一年春正月初三，皇上在内殿奉迎皇太后。
English: On the third day of the first month of the eleventh year of the Spring, the Emperor greeted the Empress Dowager in the inner hall.

古文：庚戌，遣南院宣徽使萧特末、翰林学士刘六符使宋，取晋阳及瓦桥以南十县地；且问兴师伐夏及沿边疏浚水泽、增益兵戍之故。
现代文：初五，派南院宣徽使萧特末、翰林学士刘六符出使宋国，索取晋阳及瓦桥以南十县之地；并责问宋兴师讨伐夏国及在沿边地区疏浚水道、增加兵将戍守的原故。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he sent Xiaotemai and Liu Liufu, both scholars of Hanlin, as envoys of the Southern Academy of the State Council, to Song Province to claim Jinyang and the land of ten counties south of the tile bridge; and asked Song Xing to fight against Xia Province and dredge waterways in the border areas and increase the number of soldiers to defend the country.

古文：二月壬寅，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：二月二十八日，皇上到鸳鸯泊。
English: On February 28, the emperor arrived in Oshidomari.

古文：夏四月甲戌朔，颁南征赏罚令。
现代文：夏四月初一，颁布南征赏罚令。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, the Southern Levy Reward and Punishment Order was promulgated.

古文：六月乙亥，宋遣富弼、张茂实奉书来聘，以书答之。
现代文：六月初四，宋派富弼、张茂实带国书来访，皇上以书答之。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, Emperor Song sent Fuxi and Zhang Maosi to pay a visit with the imperial rescript. Emperor Song replied with the imperial rescript.

古文：壬午，御含凉殿，放进士王寔等六十四人。
现代文：十一日，御临含凉殿，录进士王萛等六十四人进士及第。
English: On the 11th day of the month, 64 people, including Wang Xi, were inducted into the hall of fame.

古文：禁毡、银鬻入宋。
现代文：禁止卖毡、银给宋国。
English: It was forbidden to sell gold and silver to Song.

古文：秋七月壬寅朔，诏盗易官马者减死论。外路官勤瘁正直者，考满代；不治事者即易之。
现代文：秋七月初一，诏令对于偷盗、买卖官马者，免以死罪论处，外路官员如勤恪于政事、公正无私者任满一届以后才由新官接任；不能治理政事者立即撤换。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the imperial edict exempted from the death penalty those who stole, bought and sold official horses. Foreign officials who were diligent in politics, fair and selfless would be succeeded by a new official after the expiration of one term; those who could not manage politics would be immediately replaced.

古文：八月丙申，宋复遣富弼、张茂实奉书来聘，乞增岁币银绢，以书答之。九月壬寅，遣北院枢密副使耶律仁先、汉人行宫副部署刘六符使宋约和。
现代文：八月二十五日，派北院枢密副使耶律仁先、汉人行宫副部署刘六符出使宋国与宋言和。
English: On August 25, Ye Lu Rensen, the vice-envoy of the Privy Council of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, and Liu Liufu, the vice-delegate of the Han People's Court, were dispatched to make peace between Song and Song.

古文：是时，富弼为上言，大意谓辽与宋和，坐获岁币，则利在国家，臣下无与；与宋交兵，则利在臣下，害在国家。
现代文：此前，富弼对皇上说过一番话，大意是说辽与宋言和，坐得岁币，则利在国家，臣下得不到什么好处；如辽与宋交兵，则臣下获利，害在国家。
English: Previously, Fuxi had said something to the emperor, to the effect that if Liao and Song made peace, it would benefit the country and the vassals would not receive any benefits; if Liao and Song made war, the vassals would benefit and the country would be harmed.

古文：上感其言，和好始定。
现代文：皇上感触于他的言论，这才下了与宋交好的决心。
English: The emperor was touched by his words, and only then did he make up his mind to make friends with Song.

古文：闰月癸未，耶律仁先遣人报，宋岁增银、绢十万两、匹，文书称贡，送至白沟；帝喜，宴群臣于昭庆殿。
现代文：闰九月十三日，耶律仁先派人前来奏告，宋国每年增送银十万两、绢十万匹给辽，文书称 贡 ，钱物由宋送至白沟；皇上大喜，在昭庆殿宴饮群臣。
English: On the 13th day of the 9th month of the leap year, Jeru-Ren first sent a person to report that the Song state sent 100,000 taels of silver and 100,000 horses to Liao every year, which was called "tribute" in the document. The money and goods were sent from Song to Baigou. The emperor was overjoyed and held a banquet for a group of ministers at the Zhaoqing Palace.

古文：是日，振恤三父族之贫者。
现代文：同日，赈济抚恤三父族中的贫户。
English: On the same day, the poor households of the three paternal families were given subsidies.

古文：辛卯，仁先、刘六符还，进宋国誓书。
现代文：二十一日，仁先、刘六符等回国，递交宋国盟誓之书。
English: On the twenty-first day, Rensen, Liu Liufu and others returned to China and submitted the oath of the Song Dynasty.

古文：冬十一月丁亥，群臣加上尊号曰聪文圣武英略神功睿哲仁孝皇帝，册皇后萧氏曰贞懿宣慈崇圣皇后。
现代文：冬十一月十八日，群臣给皇上加上尊号为聪文圣武英略神功睿哲仁孝皇帝，册封皇后萧氏为贞懿宣慈崇圣皇后。
English: On the 18th day of the 11th month of the winter, the courtiers gave the emperor the honorific title of "Congwen Shenwuyingliu Shengongrui Tseringxiao Emperor" and the empress Xiao the title of "Zhenyao Xuancizong Shengxiao Empress."

古文：太赦。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：梁王洪基进封燕国王。
现代文：梁王洪基被进封为燕国王。
English: Liang Wang Hongji was enthroned as the King of Yan.

古文：十二月癸卯，朝皇太后。
现代文：十二月初四，皇上朝见皇太后。
English: On the fourth day of the twelfth month, the Imperial Court went to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：甲辰，封皇太弟重元子涅鲁古为安定郡王。
现代文：初五，封皇太弟重元之子涅鲁古为安定郡王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Nehru, the son of the crown prince's younger brother Chogen, became the king of the county of Anzai.

古文：己酉，以宣献皇后忌日，上与皇太后素服，饭僧于延寿、悯忠、三学三寺。
现代文：初十，因是宣献皇后忌日，皇上与皇太后身着素服，在延寿、悯忠、三学三寺斋僧。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, because it was the day to commemorate the death of the empress, the emperor and the empress dowager wore plain clothes and went to the temples of Enju, Mitentada, Sangaku and Sanji.

古文：辛亥，诏蠲预备伐宋诸部租税一年。
现代文：十二日，下诏蠲免为伐宋做了预先准备的诸部租税一年。
English: On the 12th, the next imperial edict exempted the various ministries from taxes for one year, which had been prepared in advance for the Song Dynasty.

古文：壬子，以吐浑、党项多鬻马夏国，诏谨边防。
现代文：十三日，因吐浑、党项都给夏国很多马匹，诏令加强边防守备。
English: On the thirteenth day, because of the Tu Hun and the party, many horses were given to Xia Guo, and the edict was issued to strengthen the border defense.

古文：己未，宋遣贺正旦及永寿节使居邸，帝微服往观。
现代文：二十日，宋派来祝贺正旦及永寿节的使者居住在客舍，皇上微服前往观察。
English: On the 20th, the emissaries sent by Song to congratulate Zhengdan and the Everlasting Life Festival lived in the guest house, and the emperor's entourage went to observe.

古文：丁卯，禁丧葬杀牛马及藏珍宝。
现代文：二十八日，禁止丧葬时屠杀牛马及陪葬珍宝。
English: On the 28th, the slaughter of cattle and horses and the accompanying burial of treasures were prohibited during funerals.

古文：十二年春正月辛未，遣同知析津府事耶律敌烈、枢密院都承旨王惟吉谕夏国与宋和。
现代文：十二年春正月初二，皇上派同知析津府事耶律敌烈、枢密院都承旨王惟吉前去晓谕夏国与宋讲和。
English: On the second day of the first month of the 12th year of the Spring, the emperor sent Wang Weiyi, together with Zhixing, the governor of the Tientsin prefecture, the Ye Li, and the Privy Council, to tell Xia and Song to make peace.

古文：壬申，以吴国王萧孝穆为南院枢密使，北府宰相萧孝忠北院枢密使，封楚王，韩国王萧惠北府宰相、同知元帅府事，韩八南院大王，耶律侯哂东京留守，北院枢密副使耶律仁先同知东京留守事，北面林牙萧革北院枢密副使。
现代文：初三，任命吴国王萧孝穆为南院枢密使，北府宰相萧孝忠为北院枢密使、封楚王，以韩国王萧惠为北府宰相、同知元帅府事，韩八为南院大王，耶律侯哂为东京留守，北院枢密副使耶律仁先为同知东京留守事，北面林牙萧革为北院枢密副使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, King of Wu, Xiao Xiaomu, was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, the prime minister of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Xiao Xiaozhong, was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, and the king of Fuchu, the prime minister of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Xiao Hui, the king of Korea, was appointed as the prime minister of the Northern Yuan Dynasty and the marshal of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Han Baha was appointed as the great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Yelu Houyi was appointed as the ambassador to Tokyo, the deputy envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Yelu

古文：甲戌，如武清寨苇淀。
现代文：初五，皇上到武清寨苇淀。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor went to Wuchingzhai, Shandong Province.

古文：二月壬寅，禁关南汉民弓矢。
现代文：二月初四，禁止关南汉人拥有弓箭。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, the Han people of Guannan were prohibited from owning bows and arrows.

古文：己酉，夏国以加上尊号，遣使来贺。
现代文：十一日，夏国派使者前来祝贺辽群臣加皇上封号。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xia Guo sent an envoy to congratulate Liao Qun's vassals on receiving the imperial seal.

古文：甲寅，耶律敌烈等使夏国还，奏元昊罢兵，即遣使报宋。
现代文：十六日，耶律敌烈等出使夏国归来，奏称元昊已停止用兵，皇上立即派使者将这一消息告知宋国。
English: On the 16th day of the month, the envoys sent by the Ye Li and other hostile forces to Xia Guo returned and reported that Yuan Hao had stopped using soldiers. The emperor immediately sent an envoy to inform Song Guo of this news.

古文：三月辛卯，幸南京。
现代文：三月二十四日，皇上临幸南京。
English: On March 24, the emperor visited Nanjing.

古文：壬辰，高丽国以加上尊号，遣使来贺。
现代文：二十五日，高丽国因辽群臣加皇上尊号，派使者前来祝贺。
English: On the 25th, the State of Korea sent an envoy to congratulate Liao for adding the title of His Majesty the Emperor to his title.

古文：夏四月己亥，置回跋部详稳、都监。
现代文：四月初三，在回跋部设置详稳、都监。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, a detailed, stable and metropolitan supervisor was set up in the Huibao section.

古文：庚子，夏国遣使进马、驼。
现代文：初三，夏国派使者进献马匹、骆驼。
English: On the third day of the first month, Xia Guo sent an envoy to present horses and camels.

古文：五月辛卯，斡鲁、蒲卢毛朵部二使来贡失期，宥而遣还。
现代文：五月二十五日，蒲卢毛朵部使者朝贡误期，皇上宽宥其罪过并将他们遣还。
English: On May 25th, the emissaries of the Bulu Maodot were late in paying the imperial tribute. The emperor forgave their sins and sent them back.

古文：乙未，诏复定礼制。
现代文：二十九日，诏令再次制定礼制。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict once again established the etiquette.

古文：是月，幸山西。
现代文：同月，临幸山西。
English: In the same month, Linxing, Shanxi Province.

古文：六月丙午，诏世选宰相、节度使族属及身为节度使之家，许葬用银器；仍禁杀牲以祭。
现代文：六月十一日，诏令世代任宰相、节度使之人的同族亲属以及现任节度使的家属，准许陪葬品使用银器；又禁止宰杀牲畜用于祭祀。
English: On June 11th, the imperial edict permitted the use of silverware for funerary objects, and prohibited the slaughter of livestock for sacrificial purposes.

古文：庚戌，诏汉人宫分户绝，恒产以亲族继之。
现代文：十五日，下诏汉人宫分户如果绝嗣，其产业由其亲族继承。
English: On the 15th, it was decreed that if a branch household of the Han People's Palace died out, its property would be inherited by its relatives.

古文：辛亥，阻卜大王屯秃古斯弟太尉撒葛里来朝。
现代文：十六日，阻卜大王屯秃古斯之弟太尉撒葛里前来朝见。
English: On the 16th, Lieutenant Sagri, the younger brother of the Great King of Domb, Tunzorgus, came to see the emperor.

古文：丙辰，回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：二十一日，回鹘派使者前来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Uighurs sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲子，以南院枢密使吴国王萧孝穆为北院枢密使，徙封齐国王。
现代文：二十一日，任命南院枢密使吴国王萧孝穆为北院枢密使，改封齐国王。
English: On the 21st, Xiao Xiaomu, the envoy of the Southern Yuan to King Wu, was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan, and his title was changed to King Qi.

古文：秋七月丙寅朔，北院枢密使萧孝忠薨，特释系囚。
现代文：秋七月初一，北院枢密使萧孝忠逝世，特赦在押囚犯。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, Xiao Xiaozhong, the Privy Councilor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, died, and prisoners were pardoned.

古文：庚寅，夏国遣使上表，请伐宋，不从。
现代文：二十五日，夏国派使者上表请求讨伐宋国，没有得到允许。
English: On the 25th, Xia sent an envoy to the table to request a crusade against Song, but did not receive permission.

古文：八月丙申，谒庆陵。
现代文：八月初二，皇上拜谒庆陵。
English: On the second day of the first month of August, the emperor paid a visit to the Yongqing Mausoleum.

古文：辛丑，燕国王洪基加尚书令，知北南院枢密使事，进封燕赵国王。
现代文：初七，燕国王耶律洪基加封为尚书令，知北南院枢密使事，进封为燕赵国王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Yan King Yeruhongji was given the title of Shang Shuling (尚書令) and the title of Yan Zhao King (燕赵王).

古文：戊午，以前西北路招讨使萧塔烈葛为右夷离毕。
现代文：二十四日，任命前西北路招讨使萧塔烈葛为右夷离毕。
English: On the 24th, the appointment of the former Northwest Road Recruitment led to the departure of Xiao Tarai Ge as a rightist.

古文：庚申，于越耶律洪古薨。
现代文：二十六日，于越耶律洪古逝世。
English: On the 26th, he passed away in Yueyang.

古文：甲子，阻卜来贡。
现代文：三十日，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the 30th, Dabo came to pay tribute.

古文：九月壬申，朝皇太后，谒望仙殿。
现代文：九月初八，皇上朝见皇太后，拜谒望仙殿。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager and paid homage to her.

古文：壬午，谒怀陵。
现代文：十八日，拜谒怀陵。
English: On the 18th, they paid their respects at the imperial mausoleum.

古文：冬十月丁酉，驻跸中会川。
现代文：冬十月初三，皇上歇驾于中会川。
English: On the third day of the tenth month of winter, the emperor passed away in Chukai-gawa River.

古文：己亥，北院枢密使萧孝穆薨，追赠大丞相、晋国王。
现代文：初五，北院枢密使萧孝穆逝世，追赠为大丞相、晋国王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Xiao Xiaomu, the North Privy Council envoy, died and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Minister and Jin King.

古文：庚子，诏诸路上重囚，遣官详谳。
现代文：初六，诏令诸路将重罪囚犯送上，由朝廷派官详审定罪。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered all roads to send felony prisoners, and the imperial court sent officials to examine and convict them in detail.

古文：辛亥，参知政事韩绍芳为广德军节度使，三司使刘六符长宁军节度使。
现代文：十七日，任命参知政事韩绍芳为广德军节度使，三司使刘六符为长宁军节度使。
English: On the 17th, Han Shaofang, a political advisor to the prefectural governor, was appointed as the Guangde Army's envoy to the festival, and Liu Liufu, an envoy from the Third Division, was appointed as the Changning Army's envoy to the festival.

古文：壬子，以夏人侵党项，遣延昌宫使高家奴让之。
现代文：十八日，因夏人侵略党项，派延昌宫使高家奴前去责备夏国。
English: On the 18th, because of the invasion of the party by the Xia people, Yanchang Palace sent Gao Jia Nong to go and reproach Xia Guo.

古文：甲子，北府宰相萧惠为北院枢密使，豳王遂哥为惕隐，惕隐敌鲁古封漆水郡王、西北路招讨使，枢密副使萧阿剌同知北院宣徽事。
现代文：三十日，任命北府宰相萧惠为北院枢密使，豳王遂哥为惕隐，惕隐敌鲁古封漆水郡王、西北路招讨使，枢密副使萧阿剌为同知北院宣徽事。
English: On the 30th, Xiao Hui, the prime minister of Beifu, was appointed as the envoy of the North Prefectural People's Government to proclaim the emblem of the North Prefectural People's Government, and Wang Suigo was appointed as the envoy of the North Prefectural People's Government to proclaim the emblem of the North Prefectural People's Government to proclaim the emblem of the North Prefectural People's Government to proclaim the emblem of the North Prefectural People's Government.

古文：出飞龙厩马，分赐群臣。
现代文：取出飞龙厩马分赐给群臣。
English: He took out the horses from the flying dragon stable and gave them to his ministers.

古文：十一月丁丑，追封楚王萧孝忠为楚国王。
现代文：十一月十三日，追封楚王萧孝忠为楚国王。
English: On November 13, Xiao Xiaotong was crowned King of Chu.

古文：丁亥，以上京岁俭，复其民租税。
现代文：二十三日，因上京谷物欠收，免除其辖下百姓租税。
English: On the 23rd, due to the lack of grain harvest in Shangjing, the people under his jurisdiction were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：癸巳，朝皇太后。
现代文：二十九日，皇上朝见皇太后。
English: On the 29th, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：十二月戊申，改政事省为中书省。
现代文：十二月十五日，将政事省改为中书省。
English: On December 15, the Ministry of Political Affairs was renamed the Ministry of Literature.

古文：十三年春正月甲子朔，朝皇太后。
现代文：十三年春正月初一，皇上朝见皇太后。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of the Spring, the Emperor went to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：戊辰，如混同江。
现代文：初五，到混同江。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, I arrived at the Mudongjiang River.

古文：辛未，猎兀鲁馆冈。
现代文：初八，出猎于兀鲁馆冈。
English: At the age of eight, he went hunting in Jilu Pavilion Hill.

古文：二月庚戌，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：二月十七日，到鱼儿泊。
English: On February 17th, we stayed at the Fish Inn.

古文：丙辰，以参知政事杜防为南府宰相。
现代文：二十三日，任命参知政事杜防为南府宰相。
English: On the 23rd, Du Bo, a political advisor to the governor, was appointed as the prime minister of Nanfu.

古文：三月丁亥，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：三月二十五日，高丽派使者前来朝贡。
English: On March 25, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：以宣政殿学士杨佶参知政事。是月，置契丹警巡院。
现代文：任命宣政殿学士杨佶为参知政事，同月，设置契丹警巡院。
English: Yang Hui, a scholar of the Xuan Zheng Palace, was appointed as a political advisor. In the same month, the Qidan Police Patrol Hospital was set up.

古文：夏四月己酉，遣东京留守耶律侯哂、知黄龙府事耶律欧里斯将兵攻蒲卢毛朵部。
现代文：夏四月十八日，派东京留守耶律侯哂、知黄龙府事耶律欧里斯率兵攻伐蒲卢毛朵部。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of the summer, he sent Yelu Houyi, who was stationed in Tokyo, and Yelu Oulis, who was stationed in Zhifang Longfu, to lead an army to attack the Bulu Maoodu Department.

古文：甲寅，南院大王耶律高十奏党项等部叛附夏国。
现代文：二十三日，南院大王耶律高十奏报党项等部叛变，归附夏国。
English: On the 23rd, the grand king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Yerut Gaozhong, reported that the party and other departments had mutinied and attached themselves to Xia.

古文：丙辰，西南面招讨都监罗汉奴、详稳斡鲁母等奏，山西部族节度使屈烈以五部叛入西夏，乞南、北府兵援送实威塞州户。
现代文：二十五日，西南面招讨都监罗汉奴、详稳斡鲁母等奏称山西部族节度使屈烈率五部部众叛逃入西夏，请求南、北府兵协助送民户到威塞州居住。
English: On the 25th, the southwestern side invited the governor of the capital, Luo Hannu, the detailed and stable mediator, Lu Mu, and others to report that the festival of the Shanxi tribe caused the Qu and the five tribes to defect to the West Xia, and requested the soldiers from the south and the north to assist in sending the households to live in Wuxi.

古文：诏富者遣行，余留屯田天德军。
现代文：诏令将富户遣送至威塞州，其余留下来屯田于天德军。
English: The imperial decree deported the rich to Wessex, leaving the rest of the German army in Tonden.

古文：五月壬戌朔，罗汉奴奏所发部兵与党项战不利，招讨使萧普达、四捷军详稳张佛奴殁于阵。
现代文：五月初一，罗汉奴奏报征发的部兵与党项军交战失利，招讨使萧普达、四捷军详稳张佛奴战死。
English: On the first day of May, Luo Hannuo reported that the soldiers recruited by the newspaper had lost the battle with the party army, and Xiaopuda and the four-star general Zhang Funa were killed in battle.

古文：李元昊来援叛党。
现代文：李元昊前来援助叛党。
English: Li Yuanhao came to the aid of the rebels.

古文：戊辰，诏征诸道兵会西南边以讨元昊。
现代文：初十，皇上诏令征发诸道兵马会师于西南边境以征讨李元昊。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an imperial edict to conscript soldiers and horses from all provinces to gather at the southwestern border to capture Li Yuanhao.

古文：六月甲午，阻卜酋长乌八遣其子执元昊所遣求援使窊邑改来，乞以兵助战，从之。
现代文：六月初四，阻卜酋长乌八派其子押送元昊派往阻卜的求援使者纞邑改至辽，并请求派兵为辽助战，得到允许。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1

古文：驻跸永安山。
现代文：皇上歇驾于永安山。
English: The emperor is resting on Mount Yongan.

古文：以将伐夏，遣延昌宫使耶律高家奴告宋。
现代文：因即将讨伐夏国，派延昌宫使耶律高家奴将消息告知宋国。
English: Because of the impending attack on Xia, Yanchang Palace sent Ye Lu Gao Jia Nong to inform Song.

古文：丙申，诏前南院大王耶律谷欲、翰林都林牙耶律庶成等编集国朝上世以来事迹。
现代文：初六，下诏令前南院大王耶律谷欲、翰林都林牙耶律庶成等汇总编辑国朝上世以来事迹。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1

古文：丙午，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：十六日，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 25th, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁未，录囚。
现代文：十七日，皇上察看犯人口供。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor inspected the prisoners and made a confession.

古文：秋七月辛酉，香河县民李宜儿以左道惑众，伏诛。
现代文：秋七月初二，香河县民李宜儿用左道邪术迷惑百姓，被诛杀。
English: On the second day of the first month of autumn in July, Li Yier, a resident of Xianghe County, was beaten to death after using left-hand magic to confuse the people.

古文：庚午，行再生礼。
现代文：十一日，皇上举行再生礼。
English: On the eleventh day, the emperor held a rebirth ceremony.

古文：庚辰，夏国遣使来朝。
现代文：二十一日，夏国派使者前来朝见。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xia Guo sent an envoy to the emperor.

古文：八月乙未，以夏使对不以情，羁之。
现代文：八月初六，因夏国使者回答问题不依实情，扣押之。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the envoy from Xia was detained for not answering the question truthfully.

古文：丁巳，夏国复遣使来，询以事宜，又不以实对，笞之。
现代文：二十八日，夏国又派使者前来，皇上询问他们有关情况，又拒不以实情相告，因而给以鞭笞。
English: On the 28th, Xia Guo sent another envoy, and the emperor asked them about the situation, but they refused to tell him the truth, so he whipped them.

古文：九月戊辰，宋以亲征夏国，遣余靖致赆礼。
现代文：九月初十，宋因皇上将亲征夏国，派余靖送来送行的礼金。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month of the year, Emperor Song Ying personally led an expedition to conquer Xia, and sent Yu Jing to send him a gift.

古文：壬申，会大军于九十九泉，以皇太弟重元、北院枢密使韩国王萧惠将先锋兵西征。
现代文：十四日，大军会于九十九泉，皇上命皇太弟重元、北院枢密使韩国王萧惠率领先锋部队西征。
English: On the 14th, the great army gathered in Jiu Jiuquan, and the emperor ordered the crown prince's younger brother Chung Won and the North Privy Councilor of Korea Wang Xiao Hui to lead the front line troops to the West.

古文：冬十月庚寅，祭天地。
现代文：冬十月初二，祭祀天地。
English: In winter, on the second day of the first month of October, there is a ritual for heaven and earth.

古文：丙申，获党项侦人，射鬼箭。
现代文：初八，俘获党项间谍，以鬼箭射杀之。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he captured a party spy and shot him with a ghost arrow.

古文：丁酉，李元昊上表谢罪。
现代文：初九，李元昊上表谢罪。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Li Yuanhao made a confession.

古文：己亥，元昊遣使来奏，欲收叛党以献，从之。
现代文：十一日，元昊派使者奏告他想收擒叛党进献给皇上，皇上答应了他的请求。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yuan Hao sent an envoy to report that he wanted to take back the rebel party and present it to the emperor. The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：辛亥，元昊遣使来进方物，诏北院枢密副使萧革迓之。
现代文：二十三日，元昊派使者前来进贡土产，诏令北院枢密使萧革去迎接使者。
English: On the 23rd, Yuan Hao sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local production, and ordered the Northern Court's envoy Xiao Ge to meet the envoy.

古文：壬子，军于河曲。
现代文：二十四日，驻军于河曲。
English: On the 24th, the troops stationed in Hequ were withdrawn.

古文：革言元昊亲率党项三部来，诏革诘其纳叛背盟，元昊伏罪，赐酒。许以自新，遣之。
现代文：萧革报称元昊亲自带领党项三部前来，皇上诏令萧革责问元昊招纳叛降之徒、背弃盟誓的罪过，元昊伏罪，皇上赐酒，容许他改过自新，将他放回夏国。
English: Xiao Ge Daily said that Yuan Hao personally led the three departments of the party to come, and the emperor ordered Xiao Ge to interrogate Yuan Hao on the crimes of recruiting traitors and reneging on the oath, and Yuan Hao was convicted, and the emperor gave him wine, allowed him to reform, and sent him back to Xia.

古文：召群臣议，皆以大军既集，宜加讨伐。
现代文：待到召集群臣商议时，群臣均以为大军既已集结，应该对元昊加以讨伐。
English: When it came time to convene the ministers for deliberation, the ministers all thought that since a large army had already been assembled, they should make a crusade against Yuan Hao.

古文：癸丑，督数路兵掩袭，杀数千人，驸马都尉萧胡睹为夏人所执。
现代文：二十五日，皇上督率数路兵马袭击夏国，杀死数千人，驸马都尉萧胡睹被夏人俘虏。
English: On the 25th, the imperial governor led several armies and horses to attack Xia Province, killing thousands of people. The horse captain Xiao Hujian was captured by the Xia people.

古文：丁巳，元昊遣使以先被执者来归，诏所留夏使亦还其国。
现代文：二十九日，元昊派使者送还以前被扣押者，皇上也诏令将被扣押的夏国使者送还。
English: On the 29th, Yuan Hao sent an envoy to Rong to return the previously detained person, and the emperor also issued a decree to return the detained Xia envoy.

古文：十一月辛酉，赐有功将校有差。
现代文：十一月初四，皇上赏赐有功将土财物各若干。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month, the emperor rewarded the meritorious with a certain amount of land and property.

古文：甲子，班师。
现代文：初七，班师。
English: 7th year of junior high school, class teacher.

古文：丁卯，改云州为西京。
现代文：初十，改云州为西京。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Yunnan was changed to West Beijing.

古文：辛巳，朝皇太后。
现代文：二十四日，朝见皇太后。
English: On the 24th, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：十二月己丑，幸西京。
现代文：十二月初二，皇上临幸西京。
English: On the second day of the twelfth month, the emperor went to visit Saikyo.

古文：戊戌，以北院枢密副使耶律敌烈为右夷离毕。
现代文：十一日，任命北院枢密副使耶律敌烈为右夷离毕。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the appointment of the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Yerut Huanling, as the Right Emigrant was completed.

古文：己亥，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：十二日，高丽派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 12th, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：戊申，萧胡睹自夏来归。
现代文：二十一日，萧胡睹从夏回国。
English: On the 21st, Xiao Huzhen returned to China from the summer.

古文：十四年春正月庚申，以侍中萧虚烈为南院统军使，封辽西郡王。
现代文：十四年春正月初三，任命侍中萧虚烈为南院统军使，封为西辽郡王。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the 14th year of the Heian period, Xiao Huirei, a chamberlain, was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Academy for the unification of the armed forces, and was named the king of Xilio County.

古文：庚午，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：十三日，到鸳鸯泊。
English: On the 13th, to Oshidomari.

古文：壬午，以金吾卫大将军敌鲁古为乙室大王。
现代文：二十五日，任命金吾卫大将军敌鲁古为乙室大王。
English: On the 25th, he appointed Kim Woo Wee's general, Chuluk, as the second-in-command.

古文：甲申，夏国遣使进鹘。
现代文：二十七日，夏国派使者献鹘。
English: On the 27th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to present the scepter.

古文：以常侍斡古得战殁，命其子习罗为帅。
现代文：因常侍斡古得战死，任命其子习罗为帅。
English: Due to the fact that his chief aide Gu died in battle, he appointed his son Xi Luo as commander.

古文：二月庚子，朝皇太后。
现代文：二月十三日，皇上朝见皇太后。
English: On February 13, the Imperial Court met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：驻跸撒剌泺。
现代文：歇驾于撒剌泊。
English: Resting in Sarnath.

古文：三月己卯，宋以伐夏师还，遣使来贺。
现代文：三月二十三日，宋国因辽伐夏班师，派使者前来祝贺。
English: On March 23, Song sent an envoy to congratulate Liao for defeating Xia Ban's division.

古文：四月辛亥，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：四月二十五日，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On April 25, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：闰五月癸丑，清暑永安山。
现代文：闰五月二十八日，皇上避暑于永安山。
English: On the 28th day of leap May, the emperor went to spend the summer in Yongan Mountain.

古文：六月丁卯，谒庆陵。
现代文：六月十三日，拜谒庆陵。
English: On June 13th, he paid homage to the Qing Mausoleum.

古文：己卯，阻卜大王屯秃古斯率诸酋长来朝。
现代文：二十五日，阻卜大王屯秃古斯率领诸部酋长前来朝见。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the great king of Dabo, Tunzongus, led all the chiefs to come to see the emperor.

古文：庚辰，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：二十六日，夏国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 26th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：辛巳，以西南面招讨使萧普达战殁，赠同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，因西南面招讨使萧普达战死，追赠他为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, Xiaopuda was killed in the battle due to the southwestern side's incitement, and he was posthumously awarded the title of a scholar of the same school.

古文：秋七月戊申，驻跸中会川。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，皇上歇驾于中会川。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the emperor went to rest at Chukaigawa.

古文：冬十月甲子，望祀木叶山。
现代文：冬十月十二日，遥祭木叶山。
English: On October 12th in winter, the remote festival is held in Mujiyama.

古文：十一月壬午朔，回鹘阿萨兰遣使来贡。甲辰，以同知北院宣徽事萧阿剌为北府宰相。
现代文：十一月初一，回鹘阿萨兰派使者前来进贡，二十三日，任命同知北院宣徽事萧阿剌为北府宰相。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Emperor Ashurbanipal sent an envoy to pay tribute, and on the 23rd, he appointed Xiao Aqian, who was familiar with the proclamation of the emblem of the Northern Yuan, as the prime minister of the Northern Yuan.

古文：十二月癸丑，观汉军习炮射击刺。
现代文：十二月初二，观看汉军演练炮击和格斗。
English: On the second day of December, watch the Chinese army practice shelling and fighting.

古文：癸亥，决滞狱。
现代文：十二日，审理积压案件。
English: On the 12th, the backlog of cases was cleared.

古文：十五年春正月乙酉，如混同江。
现代文：十五年春正月初四，皇上到混同江。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the fifteenth year of the Spring, the emperor went to the Mudong River.

古文：禁契丹以奴婢鬻与汉人。
现代文：禁止契丹人将奴婢卖给汉人。
English: The Khitan were forbidden to sell male and female slaves to the Chinese.

古文：二月乙卯，如长春河。
现代文：二月初四，到长春河。
English: On the fourth day of the second month, to Changchun River.

古文：丙寅，蒲卢毛朵界曷懒河户来附，诏抚之。
现代文：十五日，蒲卢毛朵界内曷懒河民户前来归附，诏令官吏安抚他们。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the residents of the Lazy River in the territory of Bulu Maodu came to attach themselves, and the officials were ordered to appease them.

古文：三月甲申，朝皇太后。
现代文：三月初四，朝见皇太后。
English: On the fourth day of the third month, the emperor met the empress dowager.

古文：乙酉，以应圣节，减死罪，释徒以下。
现代文：初五，因为是应圣节，犯死罪者减刑，徒罪以下均释放。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, because it was a holy day, those who committed capital crimes had their sentences reduced and were released from prison.

古文：辛卯，朝皇太后。
现代文：十一日，朝见皇太后。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he met the Empress Dowager in the morning.

古文：丁酉，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：十七日，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 17th, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：诏诸道岁具狱讼以闻。
现代文：诏令诸道每年都要奏报处理案件情况。
English: The edict requires all provinces to report the status of their handling of cases every year.

古文：夏四月辛亥朔，禁五京吏民击鞠。
现代文：夏四月初一，禁止五京吏民击鞠。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, officials and citizens in Beijing were prohibited from playing the game.

古文：戊午，罢遥辇帐戍军。
现代文：初八，撤回遥辇帐戍军。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the troops of the Far Eastern Expeditionary Force were withdrawn.

古文：壬戌，以北女直详稳萧高六为奚六部大王。
现代文：十二日，任命北女真详稳萧高六为奚六部大王。
English: On the 12th, he appointed Bei Niang Zhengyo Steady Xiao Gaoliu as the king of the Six Divisions.

古文：甲子，清暑永安山。
现代文：十四日，避暑于永安山。
English: On the 14th, they spent the summer in Yong'an Mountain.

古文：甲戌，蒲卢毛朵曷懒河百八十户来附。
现代文：二十四日，蒲卢毛朵曷懒河一百八十户居民前来归附。
English: On the 24th, 180 residents of Bulu Mao Duo Lazy River came to join.

古文：六月癸丑，以西京留守耶律马六为汉人行宫都部署，参知政事杨佶出为武定军节度使。
现代文：六月初四，任命西京留守耶律马六为汉人行宫都部署，参知政事杨佶被出贬为武定军节度使。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, Yerushalmi, who stayed in West Beijing, was appointed as the Han people's marching palace commander, and Yang Jie, the political advisor to the governor, was demoted to the festival envoy of the Wuding Army.

古文：戊辰，御清凉殿，放进士王棠等六十八人。
现代文：十九日，御临清凉殿，录取进士王棠等六十八人及第。
English: On the 19th, sixty-eight students, including Wang Tang, were admitted to the Imperial Palace.

古文：甲戌，西北路招讨使耶律敌鲁古坐赃免官。
现代文：二十五日，西北路招讨使耶律敌鲁古因受贿被免官。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the Northwest Road solicited the removal of Yeludong Rugu from his post for accepting bribes.

古文：秋七月乙酉，豳王遂哥薨。
现代文：秋七月初七，豳王遂哥逝世。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 8th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9

古文：戊子，观获。
现代文：初十，皇上观看收获庄稼。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor watched the harvest of crops.

古文：乙未，以北院宣徽使旅坟为左夷离毕，前南府宰相耶律喜孙东北路详稳。
现代文：十七日，任命北院宣徽使旅坟为左夷离毕，前南府宰相耶律喜孙为东北路详稳。
English: On the 17th, the proclamation of the emblem of the Northern Court was appointed to make the traveler's grave left for the Zuoying, and the former South Prefecture Prime Minister Yerutxisun was appointed to the Northeast Road.

古文：丙申，籍诸路军。
现代文：十八日，登记诸路军队名册。
English: On the 18th, the registration of Zhu Road army roster was completed.

古文：丁酉，如秋山。
现代文：十九日，皇上到秋山。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor went to Akiyama.

古文：辛丑，禁扈从践民田。
现代文：二十三日，禁止扈从践踏民田。
English: On the 23rd, badgers were banned from trampling on people's fields.

古文：丁未，以女直部长遮母率众来附，加太师。
现代文：二十九日，因女真部酋长遮母率领部众前来降附，加封他太师官号。
English: On the 29th, due to the fact that the female chief of the Ministry of Truth, Zhaimo, led the people of the Ministry to come and annex it, he was given the title of Grand Master.

古文：八月癸丑，高丽王钦薨，遣使来告。
现代文：八月初六，高丽王王钦逝世，高丽派使者前来禀报。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the King of Goryeo, Wang Chin, passed away. Goryeo sent an envoy to report the news.

古文：九月甲辰，禁以罝网捕狐兔。
现代文：九月二十七日，禁止设置网罗捕猎狐狸兔子。
English: On September 27th, it was forbidden to set traps to hunt foxes and rabbits.

古文：冬十月己酉，驻跸中会川。
现代文：冬十月初三，皇上歇驾于中会川。
English: On the third day of the tenth month of winter, the emperor passed away in Chukai-gawa River.

古文：十一月丁亥，以南院枢密使萧孝友为北府宰相，契丹行宫都部署耶律仁先南院大王，北府宰相萧革同知北院枢密使事，知夷离毕事耶律信先汉人行宫都部署，左夷离毕旅坟惕隐，汉人行宫都部署耶律敌烈左夷离毕。
现代文：十一月十一日，任命南院枢密使萧孝友为北府宰相，契丹行宫都部署耶律仁先为南院大王，北府宰相萧革为同知北院枢密使事，知夷离毕事耶律信先为汉人行宫都部署，左夷离毕旅坟为惕隐，汉人行宫都部署耶律敌烈为左夷离毕。
English: On November 11, Xiao Xiaoyou, the envoy of the privy council of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, was appointed as the prime minister of the Northern Yuan Dynasty. The Khitan imperial court was deployed to the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and the Northern Yuan Dynasty was deployed to the Northern Yuan Dynasty. Xiao Ge, the prime minister of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, was deployed as the envoy of the privy council of the Northern Yuan Dynasty. The Chinese imperial court was deployed to the Southern Yuan Dynasty. The Chinese imperial court was deployed to the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：己亥，渤海部以契丹户例通括军马。
现代文：二十三日，在渤海部按照契丹编户旧例全面检括军马。
English: On the 23rd, a comprehensive inspection of military horses was carried out in the Bohai region in accordance with the old practice of Khitan households.

古文：乙巳，振南京贫民。
现代文：二十九日，赈济南京贫民。
English: On the 29th, the poor people of Nanjing, Shijiazhuang, came out.

古文：十二月壬申，曲赦徒以下罪。
现代文：十二月二十七日，特赦徒刑以下犯人。
English: On December 27th, an amnesty was granted to prisoners who had served less than their sentence.

古文：是日为圣宗在时生辰。
现代文：同日为圣宗诞辰日。
English: The same day is the birthday of the Holy Sect.

