古文：虞庆则，京兆栎阳人也，本姓鱼。
现代文：虞庆则，京兆栎阳人，原来姓鱼。
English: Yu Qing Ze, originally surnamed Yu, is from Jingzhaoyang, Beijing.

古文：其先仕赫连氏，遂家灵武，世为北边豪杰。
现代文：其先祖仕于夏赫连氏，就在灵武安下了家，世代都是北部边境的豪门大族。
English: His ancestors served the Shakhrian clan and settled down in Lingwu'an. For generations, they have been a powerful clan on the northern border.

古文：父祥，周灵武太守。
现代文：父祥，周朝时任灵武太守。
English: His father, Xiang, was appointed Lingwu governor-general during the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：庆则幼雄毅，性俶傥，身长八尺，有胆智，善鲜卑语，身被重铠，带两鞬，左右驰射，本州豪侠皆敬惮之。
现代文：虞庆则自幼雄武刚毅，风流倜傥，身高八尺，有勇有谋，擅长说鲜卑语，身穿沉重的铠甲，佩带两个箭囊，左右开弓，驰驱奔腾，本州的豪侠对他又敬又怕。
English: Yu Qing has been a strong and courageous man since he was a child. He is graceful, eight feet tall, courageous and resourceful. He is good at speaking Basque. He wears heavy armor, carries two quiver bags, bows left and right, and gallops. The local heroes respect and fear him.

古文：初以射猎为事，中更折节读书，常慕傅介子、班仲升之为人。
现代文：当初以打猎为生，中间又改变志向，弃武习文，刻苦读书，一直敬慕傅介子、班仲升这样的立功异域的人物。
English: At first, he made a living from hunting, but in the middle of his life he changed his aspirations, abandoning martial arts and studying hard. He has always admired Fu Kaizi and Ban Zhongsheng, who have made outstanding contributions to the world.

古文：仕周，为中外府外兵参军事，袭爵沁源县公。
现代文：出仕周朝，任中外府兵参军事，袭封沁源县公的爵位。
English: He served in the Zhou Dynasty, served as a soldier in the Middle and Foreign Provinces, and succeeded to the title of Duke of Shiyuan County.

古文：越王盛讨平稽胡，将班师，内史下大夫高颎与盛谋，须文武干略者镇遏之，表请庆则，于是拜石州总管。
现代文：越王宇文盛平定稽胡之地，将要班师回朝的时候，内史下大夫高赹和宇文盛商议，必须留下一个文武全才的人镇守，上表请用虞庆则，于是升任虞庆则为石州总管。
English: When the king of Yue, Yu Wensheng, conquered the land of Jianhu and wanted to return to the imperial court with a group of teachers, Gao Yao, a doctor of internal history, and Yu Wensheng discussed that it was necessary to leave behind a person who was well versed in literature and military arts to guard the town. The above table was requested by Yu Qingzhe, and Yu Qingzhe was promoted to the position of general manager of Shizhou.

古文：甚有威惠，稽胡慕义归者八千余户。
现代文：虞庆则非常有威势恩惠，稽胡之人仰慕虞庆则有义气而归顺的，多达八千余户。
English: Yu Qing is very dignified and benevolent, and those who admire Yu Qing are loyal and obedient, up to more than eight thousand households.

古文：开皇元年，历位内史监、吏部尚书、京兆尹，封彭城郡公，营新都总监。
现代文：开皇元年，历任内史监、吏部尚书、京兆尹，封爵彭城郡公，营新都总监。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was successively appointed as the supervisor of internal history, the head of the personnel department, and the governor of Pengcheng County, and the director of Yingxintu.

古文：二年，突厥入寇，庆则为元帅讨之。
现代文：二年，突厥人侵犯边境，虞庆则奉命挂帅征讨突厥。
English: Two years later, the Turks invaded the border, and Yu Qing was ordered to lead a campaign against the Turks.

古文：部分失所，士卒多寒冻，堕指者千余人。
现代文：部分军队失去了营地，士卒多受寒冷冻伤，冻掉手指脚趾的有一千多人。
English: Part of the army lost their camp, many soldiers suffered from cold and frostbite, and more than a thousand people froze their fingers and toes.

古文：偏将达奚长儒率骑兵二千人别道邀贼，为虏所围，庆则按营不救。
现代文：偏将达奚长儒率两千多名骑兵开辟另一条战线与敌作战，被敌兵包围，虞庆则按兵不动，不出兵救援。
English: More than two thousand cavalrymen led by Dagu Changru opened up another front to fight the enemy and were surrounded by enemy soldiers, while Yu Qing did not move and did not come to the rescue.

古文：由是长儒孤军独战，死者十八九。
现代文：长儒因此孤军奋战，战死者十有八九。
English: As a result, Changru fought alone, and nine out of ten died in battle.

古文：上弗之责也。
现代文：皇上并没有责怪他。
English: The Emperor did not blame him.

古文：寻迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：很快，升任尚书右仆射。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Shangshu Rongsha.

古文：后突厥主摄图将内附，请一重臣充使，诏庆则往。
现代文：后来，突厥人的首领摄图准备归附隋朝，请求派一重要大臣充当使者，赴突厥商议，诏令虞庆则赴突厥。
English: Later, the leader of the Turks, Zhengtu, was preparing to join the Sui Dynasty, and requested that an important minister be sent to Turkey to act as an envoy, and that Yu Qing should go to Turkey.

古文：摄图恃强，庆则责以往事，摄图不服。
现代文：摄图自恃强大，虞庆则则以以往之事责备摄图，摄图很不服气。
English: Shoto boasted that he was powerful, but Yu Qing blamed Shoto for the past, and Shoto was not convinced.

古文：其介长孙晟又说谕之，摄图及弟叶护皆拜受诏，因称臣朝贡，请永为籓附。
现代文：充当双方谈判联络人的长孙晟又劝说他们，摄图和其弟叶护才都拜服，接受朝廷诏书，于是自称臣子，向隋朝进奉贡品，请求永远做隋朝的属国。
English: The eldest grandson, who acted as a liaison between the two sides in the negotiations, persuaded them that both the emperor and his brother Ye Yucai bowed down and accepted the imperial edict, so he called himself a vassal, paid tribute to the Sui Dynasty, and asked to be a vassal state of the Sui Dynasty forever.

古文：初，庆则出使，帝敕曰： 我欲存立突厥，彼送公马，但取五三疋。 
现代文：当初，虞庆则出使突厥时，文帝敕令他说 ：我想保留突厥这个部落，如果和谈成功，他们送给你马匹，只接受三五匹，有那个意思就行了。 
English: At first, when Yu Qing was dispatched to the Turks, Emperor Wen ordered him to say: "I want to keep the Turks as a tribe. If the peace talks are successful, they will give you horses. I will only accept three or five horses, if that is what you have in mind."

古文：摄图见庆则，赠马千疋，又以女妻之。
现代文：摄图见到虞庆则，赠给他骏马一千匹，并把女儿嫁给虞庆则为妻。
English: He met Yu Qingzhe, presented him with a thousand horses, and married his daughter to Yu Qingzhe.

古文：帝以庆则功高，皆无所问。
现代文：文帝因虞庆则出使功高，这些事连问就不曾过问。
English: Emperor Wen, due to Yu Qing's great contribution, did not even inquire about these matters.

古文：授上柱国，封鲁国公，食任城县千户，以彭城公回授第二子义。
现代文：授虞庆则上柱国之职，封为鲁国公，食禄任城县千户，把彭城郡公之爵转授给虞庆则的第二子虞义。
English: Yu Qingzhe was awarded the post of Shangzhu Guo, the title of Lu Guo Guo Guo, the food allowance of Chengxian Qianhu, and the title of Pengcheng Guo Guo was transferred to Yu Qingzhe's second son Yu Yi.

古文：平陈后，帝幸晋王第，置酒会群臣。
现代文：平定陈国之后，文帝临幸晋王杨广府第，摆设宴席，大会群臣。
English: After subduing Chen Guo, Emperor Wen went to the residence of King Yang Guangfu, where a banquet was set up and a large number of ministers gathered.

古文：高颎等奉觞上寿。
现代文：高赹等人举杯为文帝祝寿。
English: Gao Jun and others raise a glass to celebrate Emperor Wen's birthday.

古文：帝曰： 高颎平江南，虞庆则平突厥，可谓茂功矣。 
现代文：文帝说： 高赹平定江南，虞庆则平定突厥，可以说是功勋卓著了。 
English: Emperor Wen said: Gao Gan pacified the southern part of the Yangtze River, while Yu Qing pacified the Turkic region, which can be said to be an outstanding achievement.

古文：杨素曰： 皆由至尊威德所被。 
现代文：杨素说 ：这都是皇上天威宏德普照的结果。 
English: Yang Su said, "This is all the result of the Emperor's supreme power.

古文：庆则曰： 杨素前出兵武牢、硖石，若非至尊威德，亦无克理。 
现代文：虞庆则说： 杨素以前出兵武牢、硖石两地，若不是靠着皇上的天威宏德，也决无战胜的道理。 
English: Yu Qing said: Yang Su had previously sent troops to Wudang and Shanshi, and if it were not for the emperor's heavenly power and virtue, there would be no way to win.

古文：遂互相长短。
现代文：于是就互相说长道短，攻忤不止。
English: As a result, they argued with each other about the long and the short of it, and there was no end to the attacks.

古文：御史欲弹之，帝曰： 今日计功为乐，并不须劾。 
现代文：御史欲弹劾他们，帝说 ：今日论功行赏，共为宴乐，不必弹劾。 
English: History wanted to impeach them, and the emperor said, "Today's discussion on the rewards for meritorious deeds is all part of the fun, and there is no need for impeachment."

古文：帝观群臣宴射，庆则进曰： 臣蒙赉酒，令尽乐，御史在侧，恐醉被弹。 
现代文：文帝观看文武百官饮宴作乐，虞庆则进言道： 臣承蒙皇上赐酒，令畅饮尽欢，御史在一旁，臣恐怕喝醉酒后被弹劾。 
English: Emperor Wen watched the drinking banquet of hundreds of officials of the Manchu and Wu Dynasties and was amused. Yu Qing then said, "The Emperor has given wine to his vassals, which has made them drink happily. The Emperor is standing by. I am afraid that the vassals will get drunk and be impeached."

古文：帝赐御史酒，遣之出。
现代文：文帝赐给御史酒，让御史出外自饮，以免众人忌惮。
English: Emperor Wen gave Goshi sake, and let him drink it when he went out, so that no one would be afraid of him.

古文：庆则奉觞上寿，极欢。
现代文：虞庆则捧着酒杯为文帝祝寿，特别欢快。
English: Yu Qing is holding a glass of wine to celebrate the birthday of Emperor Wen, and is particularly happy.

古文：帝谓诸公曰： 饮此酒，愿我与公等子孙常如今日，世守富贵。 
现代文：文帝对众人说： 大家都饮下这杯酒，希望我与诸公的子子孙孙，能经常像今天这样，世世代代永享富贵。 
English: Emperor Wen said to the crowd: "Everyone drink this cup of wine, and I hope that I and the sons and grandsons of the princes can always enjoy wealth and dignity like today, for generations to come.

古文：九年，转为右卫大将军，寻改为右武候大将军。
现代文：开皇九年，虞庆则转任右卫大将军，不久又改任右武侯大将军。
English: In the ninth year of the emperor's reign, Yu Qing was transferred to the General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, and soon he was transferred to the General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard.

古文：十七年，岭南人李世贤据州反，议欲讨之。
现代文：开皇十七年，岭南人李世贤占据州县，扯旗造反，朝廷商议起兵征讨。
English: In the seventeenth year of the emperor's reign, Li Shixian, a native of Lingnan, occupied the prefecture and county, raised a flag and rebelled, and the imperial court deliberated on raising an army for conscription.

古文：诸将二三请行，皆不许。
现代文：有几个将官请求率兵征讨，文帝都没有答应。
English: Several generals asked Emperor Wen to lead the conscription, but he did not agree.

古文：帝顾谓庆则曰： 位居宰相，爵为上公，国家有贼，遂无行意，何也？ 
现代文：文帝回头对虞庆则说： 公位居宰相，爵位为上公，如今国家出现了叛贼，公竟然没有领兵前去征讨的意思，为什么呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen turned back to Yu Qingzai and said, "The official position is that of prime minister, and the title of nobility is that of grand duke. Now there is a traitor in the country, and the duke has no intention of leading troops to fight. Why?

古文：庆则拜谢恐惧，帝乃遣焉。
现代文：虞庆则听到文帝这样问，心中害怕，拜谢请行。文帝于是就命虞庆则领兵征讨。
English: Upon hearing Emperor Wen's question, Yu Qingzhe was afraid and asked to be excused. Emperor Wen then ordered Yu Qingzhe to be conscripted.

古文：为桂州道行军总管，以妇弟赵什柱为随府长史。
现代文：虞庆则任桂州道行军总管，以妻弟赵什柱为随府长史。
English: Yu Qing served as the general manager of the march of the Guizhou Road, with his wife's brother Zhao Shizhu as the governor.

古文：什柱与庆则爱妾通，恐事彰，乃宣言： 庆则不欲此行。 
现代文：赵什柱和虞庆则的爱妾私通，害怕事情暴露，就散布谣言说 ：虞庆则这一次根本就不想去。 
English: Zhao Shizhu and Yu Qingzhe had a love affair with a concubine, and fearing that the affair would be exposed, they spread a rumor that Yu Qingzhe did not want to go at all this time.

古文：帝闻之。
现代文：文帝听到了这种谣言。
English: Emperor Wen heard this rumor.

古文：先是，朝臣出征，帝皆宴别，礼赐遣之。
现代文：当初，朝中大臣领兵出征，文帝皆设宴送别，赏赐礼物。
English: At first, the ministers of the two Koreas led the troops out, and Emperor Wen held a farewell banquet and gave gifts.

古文：庆则南讨辞帝，帝色不悦，庆则由是怏怏不得志。
现代文：虞庆则领兵南征，向文帝辞行，文帝面有不悦之色，虞庆则因此而怏怏不乐。
English: Yu Qing then led the troops to march south and resigned to Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen was displeased, and Yu Qing was unhappy as a result.

古文：暨平世贤还，归桂镇，观眺山川形势，曰： 此诚险固，加以足粮。
现代文：平定李世贤后，还归桂镇，远眺山川形势，说： 此处确实险要坚固，粮食又十分充足。
English: After subduing Li Shixian, he returned to Guizhen, surveyed the situation of the mountains and rivers from afar, and said: This place is indeed almost solid, and the grain is quite sufficient.

古文：若守得其人，攻不可拔。 
现代文：若有合适的人把守，是不可能攻下来的。 
English: If you have the right people guarding you, it's impossible to attack.

古文：遂使什柱驰诣京奏事，观帝颜色。什柱至京，因告庆则谋反。
现代文：派遣什柱飞驰京师，奏闻平贼之事，观察一下文帝喜怒，什柱到了京师，借机诬告虞庆则阴谋造反。
English: Some of them were sent to the capital to report the story of the petty thief, and observe the joy and anger of Emperor Wen. When some of them arrived in the capital, they took the opportunity to falsely accuse Yu Qingzhe of plotting to rebel.

古文：帝按验之，于是伏诛。
现代文：文帝派人审查核实，虞庆则于是被诛杀。
English: Emperor Wen sent someone to inspect and verify, and Yu Qing was then beaten to death.

古文：拜什柱为大将军。
现代文：升任赵什柱为大将军。
English: Zhao Shizhu was promoted to general.

古文：庆则子孝仁，幼豪侠任气，拜仪同，领晋王亲信。
现代文：虞庆则的儿子虞孝仁，自幼豪爽侠义，慷慨任气，官拜仪同，是晋王杨广的亲信。
English: Yu Xiaojin, the son of Yu Qingzhe, was a chivalrous and generous person from a young age. He was a close confidant of the Jin king Yang Guang.

古文：坐父事除名。
现代文：因受父亲谋反事牵连被免官。
English: He was removed from his post because he was implicated in a treason plot by his father.

古文：炀帝嗣位，以籓邸之旧，授候卫长史，兼领金谷监，监禁苑。
现代文：隋炀帝继位，虞孝仁因是炀帝的老部下，授任候卫长史之职，兼任金谷监，主管禁苑。
English: Emperor Sui and Emperor Pu succeeded to the throne, and because Yu Xiaojin was an old subordinate of Emperor Pu, he was appointed to the post of chief guard, concurrently serving as the inspector of the Golden Valley and the head of the Forbidden Garden.

古文：有巧思，颇称旨。
现代文：构思巧妙，颇得炀帝的欢心。
English: Cleverly conceived, it was quite popular with Emperor Xuan.

古文：大业九年，伐辽，迁都水丞，充使监运，颇有功。
现代文：大业九年，征伐辽东，虞孝仁改任都水丞，以朝廷使者的身份监运，多有功劳。
English: In the ninth year of the great undertaking, the conquest of Liaodong, Yu Xiaojin was reassigned to Dousuijo, supervising transportation as a messenger of the imperial court, with many merits.

古文：然性奢华，以骆驼负函盛水养鱼而自给。
现代文：然而，生性奢侈浮华，用骆驼驮负装满水的容器，养鱼自供食用。
English: However, he was born into a life of luxury, filling water containers with camel dung and raising fish for his own consumption.

古文：后或告其为不轨，遂见诛。
现代文：后来，有人告他图谋不轨，于是被诛杀。
English: He was later beaten to death after being accused of plotting a coup.

古文：元胄，河南洛阳人，魏昭成帝之六代孙也。
现代文：元胄，河南洛阳人，魏昭成帝第六代孙。
English: Yuan Shao, a native of Luoyang, Henan Province, was the sixth-generation grandson of Emperor Wei Zhaocheng.

古文：祖顺，魏濮阳王。
现代文：祖父元顺，魏时封濮阳王。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Shun, was the Wei Dynasty's Fengyang King.

古文：父雄，武陵王。
现代文：父元雄，授爵武陵王。
English: His father, Motoyo, was knighted by King Muryo.

古文：胄少英果，多武艺，美须眉，有不可犯之色。
现代文：元胄少年时英勇果断，精通多种武艺，容貌英俊，颇有威严，凛然不可侵犯。
English: When he was a boy, Yuan Xuan was heroic and decisive, proficient in many martial arts, handsome, quite dignified, and inviolable.

古文：周齐王宪见而壮之，引致左右，数从征伐。官至大将军。
现代文：周齐王宇文宪见元胄威武健壮，就把他招至身边。元胄多次随从齐王征伐，官至大将军。
English: Zhou Qi Wang Yuwen Xian saw that Yuan Shao was strong and powerful, so he invited him to his side. Yuan Shao accompanied the conquest of King Qi many times, and he was a great general.

古文：隋文帝初被召入，将受顾托，先呼胄，次命陶澄，并委以腹心，恆宿卧内。
现代文：隋文帝初被召入宫中，在将要受命托孤之际，先召元胄入府，接着又命陶澄入府，都被用作心腹，经常夜宿隋文帝卧房内，保护隋文帝。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was first summoned to the palace, and when he was about to be ordered to leave the palace, he first summoned Yuan Xuan to enter the palace, and then ordered Tao Cheng to enter the palace. They were both used as confidants, often staying in the bedroom of Sui Emperor Wen at night to protect Sui Emperor Wen.

古文：及为丞相，每典军在禁中，又引弟威俱入侍卫。
现代文：到隋文帝任丞相的时候，元胄一直掌管禁军，又引荐弟弟元威一起入宫侍卫。
English: By the time Sui Emperor Wen was appointed chancellor, Yuan Shao had been in charge of the imperial army, and he also introduced his brother Yuan Wei to join the palace guards.

古文：周赵王招谋害帝，帝不之知，乃将酒肴诣其宅。
现代文：周赵王宇文招阴谋杀害隋文帝，隋文帝不知道这件事，竟然带着美酒菜肴到赵王府与赵王宴饮。
English: Zhou Zhao Wang Yuwen plotted the murder of the Sui Emperor Wen. The Sui Emperor Wen did not know about this, and even brought fine wine and dishes to the Zhao King's palace to have a banquet with the Zhao King.

古文：赵王引帝入寝室，左右不得从，唯杨弘与胄兄弟坐于户侧。
现代文：赵王领着文帝入寝室，手下的人不能跟着进去，只有杨弘与元胄兄弟坐在门口旁边守护。
English: Zhao Wang led Emperor Wen into the bedroom. His subordinates were not allowed to follow him in. Only Yang Hong and the Yuanzhang brothers sat next to the door to keep watch.

古文：赵王令其二子进瓜，因将刺帝。
现代文：赵王命令他的两个儿子献瓜，借机刺杀文帝。
English: King Zhao ordered his two sons to offer melons to take advantage of the opportunity to assassinate Emperor Wen.

古文：及酒酣，赵王欲生变，以佩刀子剌瓜，连啖帝，将为不利。
现代文：酒喝到兴起处，赵王想从中生事，用佩带的刀子切开瓜，接连让文帝吃，准备相机行剌。
English: After drinking the wine to the point of intoxication, Zhao Wang wanted to make trouble out of it. He cut the melon with the knife he was wearing, let Emperor Wen eat it one after another, and prepared the camera.

古文：胄进曰： 相府有事，不可久留。 
现代文：元胄进去道： 丞相府有事，不可久留。 
English: Entering the Yuan Dynasty: There is something going on at the prime minister's office, so I can't stay long.

古文：赵王呵之曰： 我与丞相言，汝何为者！ 
现代文：赵王斥责他道： 我和丞相叙话，你要干什么！ 
English: Zhao Wang rebuked him, saying: I'm recounting a conversation with the prime minister, what are you going to do!

古文：叱之使却。
现代文：叱令元胄退下。
English: He reprimanded Geng Yao to step down.

古文：胄瞋目愤气，扣刀入卫。
现代文：元胄怒目圆睁，非常气愤，按刀入内护卫。
English: Motohiro's eyes were wide with anger, he was very angry, and he pressed his knife into the guard.

古文：赵王问其姓名，胄以实对。
现代文：赵王问他的姓名，元胄如实回答。
English: Zhao Wang asked his name, and Yuan Qi answered truthfully.

古文：赵王曰： 汝非昔事齐王者乎？
现代文：赵王说： 你不是昔日侍奉齐王的那个人吗？
English: King Zhao said, "Aren't you the one who used to serve King Qi?"

古文：诚壮士也！ 
现代文：真是一位壮士！ 
English: What a hero!

古文：因赐之酒，曰： 吾岂有不善之意邪？
现代文：于是就赐给元胄酒，说： 我岂能会有恶意？
English: So he gave the wine to Yuan Shao and said, "Can I have any ill will?

古文：卿何猜警如是！ 
现代文：你为何这样猜疑警觉！ 
English: Why are you so suspicious and alert!

古文：赵王伪吐，将入后閤，胄恐其为变，扶令上座，如此者再三。
现代文：赵王假装呕吐，想要进入后阁房，元胄恐怕他要生变故，扶赵王上座。这种情况出现了多次。
English: Zhao Wang pretended to vomit and wanted to enter the back attic. Yuan Qi was afraid that he would change his mind and helped Zhao Wang onto the throne. This situation occurred several times.

古文：赵王称喉干，命胄就厨取饮，胄不动。
现代文：赵王假称喉咙干喝，命元胄到厨房去取水，元胄不动。
English: Zhao Wang pretended that his throat was dry to drink. The life source went to the kitchen to fetch water, but the life source did not move.

古文：会滕王逌后至，帝降阶迎之，胄耳语劝帝速去。
现代文：碰巧滕王宇文荄后到，文帝出门迎接，元胄附在文帝耳边，劝文帝迅速离去。
English: As it happened, Teng Wang Yu arrived after Emperor Wen, and Emperor Wen went out to meet him. Yuan Zheng put his ear to Emperor Wen's ear and urged Emperor Wen to leave quickly.

古文：帝犹不悟，曰： 彼无兵马，复何能为？ 
现代文：文帝还不明白，问 ：他没有兵马又能干些什么呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen still did not understand, and asked: What can he do without soldiers and horses?

古文：胄曰： 兵马悉他家物，一先下手，大事便去。
现代文：元胄说 ：兵马都是他家的东西，一旦先下手，大事就不好了。
English: Motohiro said, "The soldiers and horses are all his family's property. Once he starts, things will not go well."

古文：胄不辞死，死何益邪？ 
现代文：我不害怕死，可死了有什么用呢？ 
English: I'm not afraid to die, but what's the use?

古文：复入坐。
现代文：又入内坐下。
English: Go back inside and sit down.

古文：胄闻屋后有被甲声，遽请曰： 相府事殷，公何得如此？ 
现代文：元胄听到屋后有穿戴盔甲的声音，急忙请求道： 相府的事情很急，公怎么能够这样呢？ 
English: Hearing the sound of armor-wearing behind the house, Yuan Zang hurriedly pleaded, "Things at the imperial palace are very urgent, how can the emperor do this?

古文：因扶帝下床，趣而去。
现代文：于是就扶文帝下床，急忙离去。
English: So Emperor Fuwen got out of bed and left in a hurry.

古文：赵王将追帝，胄以身蔽户，王不得出。
现代文：赵王准备追杀文帝，元胄用身体挡住门口，赵王出门不得。
English: Zhao Wang is preparing to kill Emperor Wen. Yuan Shao blocks the door with his body. Zhao Wang is not allowed to leave the house.

古文：帝及门，胄自后而至。
现代文：文帝回到相府门口时，元胄也从后面赶到了。
English: When Emperor Wen returned to the gate of the imperial palace, Yuan Shao also arrived from behind.

古文：赵王恨不时发，弹指出血。
现代文：赵王悔恨当时没有发难，弹指弹出血来。
English: Zhao Wang regretted that he didn't get into trouble at the time, and his finger started bleeding.

古文：及诛赵王，赏赐不可胜计。
现代文：等到赵王被诛杀，文帝赏赐给元胄的物品不计其数。
English: By the time King Zhao was killed, Emperor Wen had given Yuan Shao countless gifts.

古文：帝受禅，封武陵郡公，拜左卫将军。寻迁右卫大将军。
现代文：文帝受禅即位，封元胄为武陵郡公，任左卫将军，很快又升任右卫大将军。
English: Emperor Wen accepted Zen's enthronement, and Fong Yuanjun became the governor of Wuling County, serving as the General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, and was soon promoted to the General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard.

古文：帝从容曰： 保护朕躬，成此基业，元胄功也。 
现代文：文帝曾很平静地说： 保护朕体，成就这份基业，都是元胄的功劳。 
English: Emperor Wen once said very calmly: The protection of our body and the achievement of this foundation are all the merits of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：历豫、亳、淅三州刺史。
现代文：元胄历任豫州、亳州、淅州三州刺史。
English: Yuan Shao served as the governor of the three prefectures of Yuzhou, Ganzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：时突厥屡为边患，朝廷以胄素有威名，拜灵州总管，北夷甚惮焉。
现代文：这时，突厥人屡屡侵犯边境，朝廷认为元胄平日很有威名，任命元胄为灵州总管，北部的夷族非常害怕他。
English: At this time, the Turks repeatedly violated the border. The imperial court thought that Yuan Shao was very prestigious and appointed Yuan Shao as the governor of Lingzhou. The northern barbarians were very afraid of him.

古文：徵为右卫大将军，亲顾益隆。
现代文：应征入朝，任右卫大将军，深得文帝宠信。
English: He was conscripted into the imperial army and appointed to the post of General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard. He was deeply trusted by Emperor Wen.

古文：尝正月十五日，帝与近臣登高，时胄下直，驰诏召之。
现代文：有一年正月十五日，文帝与亲近的大臣登高游览，当时元胄值班已毕，已经回府，文帝快速传递诏书，召元胄陪驾。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Wen and his close ministers went on a tour of Gao. At that time, Emperor Yuan had already returned to the capital after his tour of duty was over. Emperor Wen quickly delivered the imperial edict and summoned Emperor Yuan to accompany him.

古文：及见，谓曰： 公与外人登高，未若就朕也。 
现代文：见到元胄后，文帝对他说： 公与外人登高，不如到朕身边来，与朕一起登高。 
English: After seeing Yuan Shao, Emperor Wen said to him, "It is better for a commoner and a foreigner to climb to the top, so come to me and climb with me.

古文：赐宴极欢。
现代文：亲赐宴席，极尽欢乐。
English: A banquet given by one's relatives is a time of great joy.

古文：晋王广每致礼焉。
现代文：晋王杨广常常送礼物给他。
English: The Jin king Yang Guang often gave him gifts.

古文：房陵王之废也，胄预其谋。
现代文：房陵王杨勇的太子之位被废，元胄参与了谋划。
English: The position of crown prince of King Yang Yong of Fangling was abolished, and Yuan Shao took part in the planning.

古文：帝正穷东宫事，左卫大将军元旻苦谏，杨素乃谮之。
现代文：文帝正在追究东宫太子的事情时，左卫大将军元苦苦劝谏，杨素却谗毁元。
English: When Emperor Wen was investigating the affairs of the Crown Prince of the Eastern Palace, General Zuo Wei tried hard to persuade Yuan, but Yang Su tried to destroy Yuan.

古文：帝大怒，执旻于仗。
现代文：文帝大怒，在仪卫中把元抓了起来。
English: Emperor Wen was furious and arrested Yuan in the ceremonial guard.

古文：胄时当下直，不去，因奏曰： 臣向不下直者，为防元旻耳。 
现代文：元胄当时已经下班，却没有离开，就上奏说： 臣往日不下班，就是为了防备元。 
English: At that time, Geng Yao had already left work, but he did not leave, so he reported: In the past, the minister did not leave work in order to protect Geng Yao.

古文：复以此言激怒帝，帝遂诛旻。
现代文：元胄又用这些话激怒文帝，文帝于是诛杀元。
English: Yuan Shao also used these words to infuriate Emperor Wen, who then killed Yuan Shao.

古文：蜀王秀之得罪，胄坐与交通，除名。炀帝即位，不得调。
现代文：蜀王杨秀获罪，元胄因与之有交往而受到连累，除去名籍，炀帝即位，元胄仍不得调用。
English: Yang Xiu, the king of Shu, was found guilty, and Yuan Shao was implicated because of his association with him. Yuan Shao was stripped of his title and enthroned as emperor, but Yuan Shao could still not be recalled.

古文：时慈州刺史上官政坐事徙岭南，将军丘和亦以罪废。
现代文：这时，慈州刺史上官政因事受牵连，徙于岭南，将军丘和也因罪被废黜。
English: At this time, the government of Cizhou Province was involved in an incident in history and moved to Lingnan. General Qiu He was also deposed for his crime.

古文：胄与和有旧，因数从之游，酒酣，谓和曰： 上官政诚壮士也，今徙岭表，得无大事乎？ 
现代文：元胄与丘和是旧交，因此多次和丘和一起游乐，酒酣耳热之时，元胄对丘和说 ：上官政真是一位壮士，如今徙居岭南，该不会举大事吧？ 
English: Yuan Xuan and Okawa were old friends, so they often went on outings with Okawa. When the wine was hot, Yuan Xuan said to Okawa, "The Shangguan government is really a strong man, and now I'm living in the south of Lingnan, shouldn't I do something big?"

古文：因自拊腹曰： 若是公者，不徒然矣！ 
现代文：于是，自己抚摸着肚子说 如果是你的话，就不会白白地被贬到那里去了！ 
English: So I stroked my stomach and said, "If it were you, you wouldn't have been relegated there for nothing!"

古文：和明日奏之，胄竟坐死。
现代文：丘和次日将元胄的话奏知炀帝，元胄竟然坐罪受死。
English: Yau and the next day played the words of Yuan Shikai to Emperor Zhisheng, and Yuan Shikai was actually sentenced to death.

古文：于是徵政为骁骑将军。拜和代州刺史。
现代文：炀帝于是征上官政入朝为骁骑将军，升任丘和为代州刺史。
English: Emperor Xizong then enlisted in the government and entered the court as the general of the imperial cavalry. He was promoted to the position of yakitori chef and served as the governor of Daizhou.

古文：达奚长儒，字富仁，代人也。
现代文：达奚长儒字富仁，代人。
English: Daguo Changru Zi Furen, the successor.

古文：祖俟，魏定州刺史。
现代文：祖达奚俟，魏时任定州刺史。
English: Zhu Dazhao was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：父庆，骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：父达奚庆，曾任骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: His father, Dazhongqing, was once the commander of the cavalry and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：长儒少怀节操，胆烈过人。
现代文：达奚长儒少年时就有气节德行，胆气勇烈过人。
English: When he was a young man, he had a strong sense of morality and courage.

古文：十五，袭爵乐安公。
现代文：十五岁那年，袭父爵为安乐公。
English: At the age of fifteen, he followed in his father's footsteps and became a lay preacher.

古文：为周文帝引为亲信，以质直恭朴，授子都督。
现代文：被周文帝用为心腹亲信，因诚实耿直，恭谦朴素，授其子为都督之职。
English: He was used by Emperor Zhou as a confidant, and because of his honesty, modesty and simplicity, his son was given the post of governor-general.

古文：数有战功。
现代文：战功卓著。
English: His war service was outstanding.

古文：天和中，除渭南郡守，位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：周武帝天和年间，升任渭南郡太守，官居骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhouwu, he was promoted to the governor-general of Yinan County, and served as the commander-in-chief of the imperial cavalry, the keeper of the imperial residences, and the third secretary.

古文：从武帝平齐，迁上开府，进爵成安郡公，别封一子县公。
现代文：跟随周武帝平定齐国，晋升为上开府，晋爵位为成安郡公，另封其一子为县公。
English: He followed Emperor Zhou Wu in pacifying Qi and was promoted to Shangkaifu. He was also promoted to the peerage of Cheng'an County, and one of his sons was given the title of county magistrate.

古文：宣政元年，除左将军勇猛中大夫。
现代文：周武帝宣政元年，任左将军勇猛中大夫。
English: In the first year of Zhouwu Emperor's proclamation of political power, he served as a left general and a courageous junior doctor.

古文：后与乌丸轨围陈将吴明彻于吕梁，陈援军至，轨令长儒拒之。
现代文：后来，与乌丸轨一起把陈国将领吴明彻围困在吕梁，陈国援军赶至增援，乌丸轨令达奚长儒领兵阻击。
English: Later, together with Wu Maru Rail, Wu Ming Che, the general of Chen, was besieged in Luliang, Chen's reinforcements arrived to reinforce, and Wu Maru Rail ordered the leader of Daguang Changru to resist.

古文：长儒取车轮数百，系以大石，沉之清水，连毂相次以待之。
现代文：达奚长儒令士兵把数百只车轮，系上大石块，沉到清水河中，然后将战车依次摆开，迎击陈国援军。
English: Daguang Changru ordered the soldiers to tie up hundreds of wheels with large stones and sink them into the Qingshui River. Then the chariots were set out one after another to meet Chen Guo's reinforcements.

古文：船舰碍轮不得进，长儒纵奇兵大破之，获吴明彻，以功进位大将军。
现代文：陈国援军的船只被沉在水中的车轮阻住不能前进，达奚长儒突出奇兵大败陈国军队，生俘吴明彻，因军功晋升为大将军。
English: The ships of Chen Guo's reinforcements were blocked by the wheels sunk in the water and could not advance. Daguang Changru, an outstanding soldier, defeated Chen Guo's army. Wu Mingcher, a prisoner of war, was promoted to general for his military service.

古文：寻授行军总管，北巡沙塞，卒与虏遇，大破之。
现代文：很快授任行军总管之职，巡视北方边疆沙漠要塞，突然与敌军相遭遇，大破敌军。
English: He was soon given the post of commander-in-chief of the marching troops, inspected the desert fortresses of the northern frontier, and suddenly encountered the enemy troops, and defeated the enemy troops.

古文：文帝作相，王谦举兵于蜀，沙氐杨永安扇动利、兴、武、文、沙、龙等穴州以应谦，诏长儒击破之。
现代文：隋文帝任丞相，王谦在蜀地起兵叛乱，沙氏杨永安煽动利州、兴州、武州、文州、沙州、龙州等六州响应王谦，朝廷诏令达奚长儒率兵征讨，大败王谦。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was appointed as chancellor, Wang Qian started a mutiny in Shu, Yang Yong'an of the Shashi instigated six states such as Lizhou, Xingzhou, Wuzhou, Wenzhou, Shazhou, and Longzhou to respond to Wang Qian, and the imperial court ordered Dajiang Changru to lead the army to recruit soldiers, which greatly defeated Wang Qian.

古文：谦二子自京师逃归其父，长儒并捕斩之。
现代文：王谦的两个儿子从京城逃归西蜀，协助其父，亦被达奚长儒捕获斩首。
English: Wang Qian's two sons fled from Beijing to Xishu to help their father, but were also captured and beheaded by Dagu Changru.

古文：文帝受禅，进位上大将军，封蕲郡公。
现代文：文帝受禅即位，达奚长儒晋升为上大将军。封爵蕲郡公。
English: Emperor Wen was enthroned by the Zen Emperor, and Dajian Changru was promoted to General. He was given the title of Duke of Shishun.

古文：开皇二年，突厥沙钵略可汗并弟叶护及籓那可汗寇掠而南，诏以长儒为行军总管击之。
现代文：开皇二年，突厥首领沙钵略可汗和弟弟叶护以及藩那可汗一起，率兵向南方侵犯，文帝诏令达奚长儒为行军总管，赴北方边境打击突厥兵。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, the Turkic leader Shah Weli-ul-Khan, together with his brother Ye-woo and Han-na-khan, led an army to invade the south, and Emperor Wen ordered Dagu Chang-ju to be the general manager of the army and go to the northern border to fight the Turkic soldiers.

古文：遇于周槃，众寡不敌，军中大惧，长儒慷慨，神色愈烈。
现代文：与突厥兵在周这个地方遭遇，寡不敌众，士卒都很恐惧，达奚长儒慷慨激昂，神色更为壮烈。
English: Encountered with the Turkic soldiers in Zhou this place, outnumbered, the soldiers were very afraid, Dadu Changru was impassioned, and his look was even more magnificent.

古文：为虏所冲突，散而复聚，且战且行，转斗三日，五兵咸尽，士卒以拳殴之，手皆骨见，杀伤万计，虏气稍夺，于是解去。
现代文：达奚长儒所部受到突厥军队的冲击，冲散后又重新聚集，边打边走，转战三日，各种兵器全部用尽，士兵就用一双拳头与敌人拼搏。双手被敌人兵器击伤，骨头都暴露出来。杀伤敌人以万数计，敌军的士气受到震慑，于是就撤军返回。
English: The Turkish army attacked the headquarters of the Daguang Confucius Institute, which was dispersed and then re-assembled. The fighting went on for three days. All kinds of weapons were exhausted, and the soldiers fought the enemy with a pair of fists. Their hands were injured by enemy weapons, and their bones were exposed. The number of enemy killed and wounded was counted in the tens of thousands. The morale of the enemy army was shocked, so they withdrew and returned.

古文：长儒身被五疮，通中者二，其战士死者十八九。
现代文：达奚长儒身上五处受伤，其中有两枪是从中间穿透，士兵亦十有八九战死。
English: Daguo Changru was wounded in five places on his body, two of which were shot through the middle. Eight or nine soldiers died in the battle.

古文：突厥本欲大掠秦、陇，既逢长儒，兵皆力战，虏意大沮，明日，于战处焚尸恸哭而去。
现代文：突厥兵本来是想到秦、陇二州大肆掳掠一番，遇到达奚长儒的阻击，士卒皆拼死力战，突厥兵死伤甚多，十分沮丧。次日，打扫战场，焚烧死尸，恸哭而去。
English: The Turkic soldiers had originally planned to plunder and pillage the two states of Qin and Qin. However, when they encountered the counterattacks of the Dalai Lama, the soldiers fought with all their might. The Turkic soldiers suffered many deaths and injuries and were very depressed. The next day, they cleaned up the battlefield, burned the dead bodies, and went away crying.

古文：文帝下诏褒美，授上柱国，余勋回授一子。
现代文：文帝颁诏嘉奖参战将士，授达奚长儒上柱国之职。其余的功勋转授给达奚长儒的一个儿子。
English: Emperor Wenzong awarded the prize to the soldiers who participated in the war and conferred the post of the pillar country to Dajin Changru. The remaining merits were transferred to one of Dajin Changru's sons.

古文：其战亡将士，皆赠官三转，子孙袭之。
现代文：其余阵亡将士，都追赠官位，可转授三代，由子孙承袭。
English: The rest of the fallen soldiers are posthumously awarded official positions, which can be transferred to three generations and inherited by their children and grandchildren.

古文：历宁、鄜二州刺史，母忧去职。
现代文：达奚长儒历任宁州、州二州刺史，为母亲守丧而离职。
English: Daguang Changru has served as the governor of Ningzhou and two other prefectures. He left the post to attend his mother's funeral.

古文：长儒性至孝，水浆不入口五日，毁悴过礼，殆将灭性，天子嘉叹。
现代文：达奚长儒性情十分孝顺，母丧之后，五天滴水未进，哀毁憔悴，超过礼法限定，差一点死了。
English: Datong Chang Rong's nature is very filial. After his mother's funeral, he didn't drink water for five days, mourned his mother, went beyond the limits of etiquette, and almost died.

古文：起为夏州总管，匈奴惮之，不敢窥塞。
现代文：文帝闻知，赞叹不已。守丧期满，重新起用为夏州总管。匈奴人忌惮达奚长儒，不敢骚扰滋事，惊动边塞。
English: Emperor Wen heard about it and was full of admiration. After the mourning period, he was reappointed as the general manager of Xiazhou. The Huns were afraid of him and did not dare to disturb the border.

古文：以病免。
现代文：因病免职。
English: Removed from duty due to illness.

古文：又除襄州总管，转兰州。
现代文：病愈后，又任襄州总管，转任兰州。
English: After he recovered from the illness, he was appointed as the general manager of Xiangzhou and transferred to Lanzhou.

古文：文帝遣凉州总管独孤罗、原州总管元褒、灵州总管贺若谊等发卒备胡，皆受长儒节度。
现代文：文帝命令凉州总管独孤罗、原州总管元褒、灵州总管贺若谊等发兵防备胡人南侵，三人都听从达奚长儒的节制调度。
English: Emperor Wen ordered the governors of Liangzhou, Duwu Luo, Yuanzhou, Zhuangbo, and Lingzhou to send troops to prevent the Hu people from invading the south. All three obeyed the restrained dispatching of Daguang Changru.

古文：长儒率众出祁连山北，西至蒲类海，无虏而还。
现代文：达奚长儒率领大军出祁连山北，西行至蒲类海，没有见到胡虏，于是班师而还。
English: Dajuan Changru led a large army out of the north of the Qilian Mountains, westward to the Pudong Sea, but did not see the Huns, so the group returned.

古文：转荆州总管，帝谓曰： 江陵国之南门，今以委卿，朕无虑也。 
现代文：转任荆州总管，文帝对达奚长儒说 ：江陵是我大隋的南大门，如今把它交给你，朕就没有什么顾虑了。 
English: When he was transferred to be the governor of Jingzhou, Emperor Wen said to Daguang Changru: "Gangneung is the southern gate of my great Sui Dynasty. Now that I have given it to you, I have no worries."

古文：卒于官。
现代文：死于官任。
English: He died in office.

