古文：李恂字叔英，安定临泾人也。
现代文：◆李恂传，李恂字叔英，安定临泾人。
English: ◆ Li Yuchuan, Li Yanzi Zi Xiuying, and Anning Linyi.

古文：少习《韩诗》，教授诸生常数百人。
现代文：少学《韩诗》，教授诸生常数百人。
English: "Hangul Poetry" is little studied and is often taught by hundreds of people.

古文：太守颍川李鸿请署功曹，未及到，而州辟为从事。
现代文：太守颍川李鸿请署李恂为功曹，没有到职，而州里召他做从事。
English: Li Hong, the governor of Beichuan, asked Li Yao to be a meritorious officer, but he did not arrive at the post, and the state called him to do the work.

古文：会鸿卒，恂不应州命，而送鸿丧还乡里。
现代文：恰逢李鸿死去，李恂不应州之命，而送李鸿之丧回故里。
English: Coinciding with Li Hong's death, Li Gan disobeyed the state's order and sent Li Hong back to his hometown.

古文：既葬，留起冢坟，持丧三年。
现代文：已经葬了，留起冢坟，持丧三年。
English: He was buried, his grave marked with a wreath, and he was mourned for three years.

古文：辟司徒桓虞府。
现代文：后来李恂被召入司徒桓虞府。
English: Later, Li Yao was summoned to the Jiuquan District Court.

古文：后拜侍御史，持节使幽州，宣布恩泽，慰抚北狄，所过皆图写山川、屯田、聚落百余卷，悉封奏上，肃宗嘉之。拜兗州刺史。
现代文：后又升为侍御史，持节出使幽州，宣布皇上的恩泽，慰抚北狄，所过之处都描写山川图，以及屯田、聚落等情况，共百余卷，全部封奏上，肃宗嘉奖他，拜他做兖州刺史。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian. He was dispatched to Yuzhou to announce the emperor's favor and comfort the Northern Di, and described the mountains and rivers, as well as the settlements and settlements, in more than a hundred volumes. Su Zong praised him and worshiped him as the history of Yuzhou.

古文：以清约率下，常席羊皮，服布被。
现代文：他以清约做表率，常以羊皮为席，盖布被。
English: He set an example by keeping his appointments clean. He often used sheepskin as a seat and covered it with a quilt.

古文：迁张掖太守，有威重名。
现代文：升为张掖太守，有威重之名。
English: He was promoted to the position of Zhangye governor-general, which was a prestigious title.

古文：时大将军窦宪将兵屯武威，天下州郡远近莫不修礼遗，恂奉公不阿，为宪所奏免。
现代文：当时大将军窦宪率领兵士驻扎在武威，天下州郡无论远近没有不修礼馈送财物，李恂奉公不阿，被窦宪所奏而免职。
English: At that time, the general Dou Xian led the soldiers stationed in Wuwei, and Tianxia County, no matter how far or near, did not have the courtesy to feed the property. Li Xuan did not serve the public, but was dismissed by Dou Xian.

古文：后复征拜谒者，使持节领西域副校尉。
现代文：后来又征召做谒者，使持节领西域校尉。
English: Later, he was also conscripted to be a cadet, and became a lieutenant of the Western Region.

古文：西域殷富，多珍宝，诸国侍子及督使贾胡数遗恂奴婢、宛马、金银、香罽之属，一无所受。
现代文：西域殷实富足，多珍宝，诸国侍子及督使和胡之商贾数次送给李恂以奴婢、宛马、金银、香轭之类的东西，李恂一样也不接受。
English: The Western Regions were rich and plentiful, with many precious treasures. Several times, the attendants and envoys of various countries and the merchants of Hu Jia gave Li Qiye things such as slaves, horses, gold, silver, and champagne. Li Qiye did not accept them.

古文：北匈奴数断西域车师、伊吾，陇沙以西使命不得通，恂设购赏，遂斩虏帅，悬首军门。
现代文：北匈奴数次截断西域车师、伊吾，陇沙以西地区使命不得通，李恂设购赏，于是斩了虏帅，悬首在军门。
English: The Northern Xiongnu several times cut off the western region drivers, Igu, and the mission west of Bisha could not be passed. Li Yu set up a reward, so he beheaded the commander and hung his head at the military gate.

古文：自是道路夷清，威恩并行。
现代文：从此道路清平，恩威并行。
English: Since then, the road has been smooth and Enwei has been running in parallel.

古文：迁武威太守。
现代文：后来迁武威太守。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Wuwei Taishu.

古文：后坐事免，步归乡里，潜居山泽，结草为庐，独与诸生织席自给。
现代文：因事免职，步行回乡里，隐居山泽之间，结草为茅屋，独自与诸生织席以自给。
English: Dismissed from his job, he walked back to the countryside, living in seclusion between the mountains and lakes, weaving grass to make huts, and weaving mats with all living things to provide for himself.

古文：会西羌反畔，恂到田舍，为所执获。
现代文：碰上西羌反叛，李恂到田舍，被羌人抓住。
English: Encountering the Xidi rebels, Li Yao went to the farmhouse and was caught by the Xidi people.

古文：羌素闻其名，放遣之。
现代文：羌人素闻恂之名，放遣他。
English: When he heard the name, he dismissed him.

古文：恂因诣洛阳谢。
现代文：恂就到洛阳谢恩。
English: So I went to Luoyang to thank him.

古文：时岁荒，司空张敏、司徒鲁恭等各遣子馈粮，悉无所受。
现代文：当时年岁饥荒，司空张敏、司徒鲁恭等各派儿子送粮食给恂，恂全部不受。
English: At that time, there was a year-long famine, and the sons of Siku Zhangmin, Siku Lukong and others sent grain to the cormorants, but the cormorants did not accept any of it.

古文：徙居新安关下，拾橡实以自资。
现代文：迁居新安关下，拾橡实饱肚子。
English: Moved to Xin'an Guan, picked acorns and had a full stomach.

古文：年九十六卒。
现代文：年九十六岁而死。
English: He died at the age of 96.

古文：陈禅字纪山，巴郡安汉人也。
现代文：◆陈禅传，陈禅字纪山，巴郡安汉人。
English: ◆ Chen Zenzhuan, Chen Zenzhi Jishan, Ba Guoran Han people.

古文：仕郡功曹，举善黜恶，为邦内所畏。
现代文：做郡里的功曹，举善罚恶，被邦内人所怕。
English: To be the hero of the county, to do good and punish evil, to be feared by the people of the state.

古文：察孝廉，州辟治中从事。
现代文：察孝廉，州里辟他做治中从事。
English: Zha Xiaolian, the state has appointed him to be engaged in mid-term governance.

古文：时刺史为人所上受纳臧赂，禅当传考，无它所赍，但持丧敛之具而已。
现代文：当时刺史被人检举受纳赃赂，陈禅应当逮捕考查，没有什么财物，只是一些丧殓之具罢了。
English: At that time, Zhishi was accused of accepting bribes, Chen Zhen should be arrested for investigation, there is no property, just some funerary tools.

古文：及至，笞掠无算，五毒毕加，禅神意自若，辞对无变，事遂散释。
现代文：到了后，笞掠无算，五毒全部用上，禅神意自如，口供不变，案情便散释了。
English: After arriving, there was nothing to be gained by stealing, all five poisons were used, Zen God was at ease, the confession was unchanged, and the case was dismissed.

古文：车骑将军邓骘闻其名而辟焉，举茂才。
现代文：车骑将军邓骘听到他的名声而召他，举为茂才。
English: When the cavalry general Deng Wei heard of his fame, he summoned him and promoted him to the rank of Maozai.

古文：时汉中蛮夷反畔，以禅为汉中太守。
现代文：当时汉中蛮夷反叛，以陈禅为汉中太守。
English: At that time, the barbarians rebelled in the Han Dynasty, with Chen Zhen as the supreme leader of the Han Dynasty.

古文：夷贼素闻其声，即时降服。
现代文：夷贼素来听到他的名声，立即降服。
English: Thieves have always heard of his reputation and immediately capitulated.

古文：迁左冯翊，入拜谏议大夫。
现代文：陈禅升为左冯翊，入朝拜为谏议大夫。
English: Chen Zensheng became Zuo Fengyao, and entered the imperial court as the chief doctor of the imperial court.

古文：永宁元年，西南夷掸国王献乐及幻人，能吐火，自支解，易牛马头。
现代文：永宁元年，西南夷掸国王献乐及幻人，能够吐火，自己肢解身体，为牛马换头。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, the king of the Southwest Yixuan offered music and phantom people, who could spit fire, dismember their own bodies, and change their heads for cattle and horses.

古文：明年元会，作之于庭，安帝与群臣共观，大奇之。
现代文：第二年元会，在庭中表演，安帝与群臣共同观赏，很觉奇怪。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a performance in the courtyard, and Emperor An and his courtiers watched it together. It was very strange.

古文：禅独离席举手大言曰： 昔齐、鲁为夹谷之会，齐作侏儒之乐，仲尼诛之。
现代文：陈禅独自离席举手大声说 ：从前齐鲁两国为夹谷之会，齐国作侏儒之乐，孔子摄相事，认为有侮诸侯，于是斩了侏儒。
English: Chen Zen left the table on his own, raised his hand and said loudly: "Once upon a time, the two countries of Qi and Lu were a meeting of the valley, Qi made the music of the dwarf, Confucius photographed the scene, and thought that there was contempt for the princes, so he beheaded the dwarf."

古文：又曰： 放郑声，远佞人。 
现代文：又说： 放郑声，远佞人。 
English: He also said, "Make a solemn voice and shout it far and wide."

古文：帝王之庭，不宜设夷狄之技。 
现代文：帝王之庭，不宜设夷狄之技。 
English: In the emperor's court, it is not appropriate to display the skills of the Empress Dowager.

古文：尚书陈忠劾奏禅曰： 古者合欢之乐舞于堂，四夷之乐陈于门，故《诗》云 以《雅》以《南》，《韎》、《任》、《朱离》 。
现代文：尚书陈忠劾奏陈禅道 ：古时合欢之乐舞于堂，四夷之乐陈于门，所以《诗经》说 ：以雅以南，韦末任朱离。 
English: Shangshu Chen Zhong impeached and played Chen Zen way: the music of the ancient time dance in the hall, the music of the four emperors in the door, so the "Song of Songs" said: to the south of Ya, Wei Muzhen Zhu Li.

古文：今掸国越流沙，逾县度，万里贡献，非郑、卫之声，佞人之比，而禅廷讪朝政，请劾禅下狱。 
现代文：今掸国经过流沙河，越过县度山，万里前来贡献，不是郑卫之声，佞人可比，可陈禅在朝廷讥讪朝政，请劾陈禅下狱。 
English: Now the country has passed through the Lingsha River, crossed the County Du Mountain, and come thousands of miles to contribute. It is not the voice of Zheng Wei, but Chen Zen's mockery of the imperial government in the imperial court. Chen Zen should be impeached and sent to prison.

古文：有诏勿收，左转为玄菟候城障尉，诏 敢不之官，上妻子从者名 。
现代文：有诏书，不许收捕，降职为玄菟侯城障尉，诏书说： 胆敢不去上任，把妻子从者的名姓报上来。 
English: There was an edict saying that he was not allowed to arrest anyone, and he was demoted to the position of Xuanwu Houcheng's guard lieutenant. The edict said: "If you dare not take up the post, report your wife's name to the authorities."

古文：禅既行，朝廷多讼之。
现代文：陈禅已经出发，朝廷多控告他。
English: Chen Zhen had already set off, and the imperial court brought more charges against him.

古文：会北匈奴入辽东，追拜禅辽东太守。
现代文：碰上北匈奴进犯辽东，追拜陈禅为了辽东太守。
English: When the Northern Xiongnu invaded Liaodong, they pursued Chen Zen to become the governor of Liaodong.

古文：胡惮其威强，退还数百里。
现代文：胡人怕他威强，退回去数百里。
English: The Hu people feared his power and retreated hundreds of miles.

古文：禅不加兵，但使吏卒往晓慰之，单于随使还郡。
现代文：陈禅不加兵追赶，只派吏卒前去晓喻慰劳他们，单于随使者回到郡里。
English: Chen Zhen did not pursue them with additional troops. He only sent officials to Xiaoyu to console them, and then returned to the county with the envoy.

古文：禅于学行礼，为说道义以感化之。
现代文：陈禅于学行礼，讲说道义以感化他们。
English: Chen Zhen studied and performed rituals, and gave lectures on righteousness to inspire them.

古文：单于怀服，遗以胡中珍货而去。
现代文：单于心服，送一些胡地珍宝而去。
English: Just because I liked it, I gave away some of the treasures of the Hudi region.

古文：及邓骘诛废，禅以故吏免。
现代文：后来邓骘被杀，陈禅因为是邓之故吏而免官。
English: Later, Deng Xuan was killed, and Chen Zhen was dismissed from his post because he was Deng's former official.

古文：复为车骑将军阎显长史。
现代文：又做了车骑将军阎显的长史。
English: He also made the long history of the chariot and cavalry general Yan Xian.

古文：顺帝即位，迁司隶校尉。
现代文：顺帝即位，升为司隶校尉。
English: Emperor Shun ascended to the throne and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：明年，卒于官。
现代文：第二年，死于官府。
English: He died in office the following year.

古文：子澄，有清名，官至汉中太守。
现代文：儿子陈澄，有清名，官做到汉中太守。
English: His son, Chen Cheng, had a distinguished name and rose through the ranks to become the de facto ruler of the Han Dynasty.

古文：庞参字仲达，河南缑氏人也。
现代文：◆庞参传，庞参字仲达，河南缑氏人。
English: ◆Pang San Chuan, Pang San Zi Zhong Da, a member of the Min family from Henan Province.

古文：初仕郡，未知名，河南尹庞奋见而奇之，举为孝廉，拜左校令。
现代文：开始在那里做官，不知名，河南尹庞奋看见了认为很奇特，举为孝廉，拜为左校令。
English: When he started working there as an official, unknown, Henan Yin Pangfen saw it and thought it was very strange. He was praised as a filial son and worshipped as a left-wing schoolmaster.

古文：坐法输作若卢。
现代文：犯了法关进了若卢狱。
English: He broke the law and was sent to the Wolu Prison.

古文：永初元年，凉州先零种羌反畔，遣车骑将军邓骘讨之。
现代文：永初元年，凉州先零钟羌人反叛，朝廷派车骑将军邓骘讨伐他们。
English: In the first year of the Yongchu era, the people of Liangzhou rebelled at ten o'clock in the morning, and the imperial court sent the chariot and cavalry general Deng Qi to fight them.

古文：参于徒中使其子俊上书曰：方今西州流民扰动，而征发不绝，水潦不休，地力不复。
现代文：庞参在流放中使他的儿子庞俊上书道 ：当今西州流民扰动，而征兵不绝，水潦不止，地力不恢复。
English: During his exile, Pang Zhan made his son Pang Jun take up calligraphy: Today, the displaced people of Xizhou are disturbed, but the conscription is incessant, the floods continue, and the strength of the land does not recover.

古文：重之以大军，疲之以远戍，农功消于转运，资财竭于征发。
现代文：加上大军出动，远戍很疲劳，农功忙于转运，资财尽于征发。
English: In addition to the large number of troops dispatched, Yuancheng was very tired, Nonggong was busy with transportation, and resources were exhausted in collecting and sending.

古文：田畴不得垦辞，禾稼不得收入，搏手困穷，无望来秋。
现代文：田亩不能开垦，庄稼不得收割，两手无计，来秋没有希望。
English: The land cannot be cultivated, the crops cannot be harvested, there is no way out, and there is no hope for the autumn.

古文：百姓力屈，不复堪命。
现代文：百姓力竭，不堪承受。
English: The people are exhausted and cannot bear it.

古文：臣愚以为万里运粮，远就羌戎，不若总兵养众，以待其疲。
现代文：臣愚认为万里运粮，远就羌戎，不如总兵养众，等到人家疲劳。
English: The courtiers thought that transporting grain thousands of miles away would not be as effective as raising an army to feed the people when they were tired.

古文：车骑将军骘宜且振旅，留征西校尉任尚使督凉州士民，转居三辅。
现代文：车骑将军邓骘应该带兵出征，留下征西校尉任尚让他督凉州士民，转居在三辅。
English: The cavalry general Deng Wei should lead the troops to go to war, and leave the western-conquering lieutenant to supervise the soldiers and civilians in Liangzhou and move to Sanfu.

古文：休徭役以助其时，止烦赋以益其财，令男得耕种，女得织纴，然后畜精锐，乘懈沮，出其不意，攻其不备，则边人之仇报，奔北之耻雪矣。
现代文：让徭役休息以助其时，停止繁赋以增其财，使男的能够耕种，女的能够织布，然后养精蓄锐，乘懈狙击，出其不意，攻其不备，那么边民的仇能报，奔北之耻可雪了。 
English: Let the eunuchs rest to help the time, stop breeding to increase their wealth, so that the man can cultivate, the woman can weave, and then refresh and sharpen, take the time to snipe, surprise, attack the unprepared, then the border people's hatred can be reported, and the shame of running north can snow.

古文：书奏，会御史中丞樊准上疏荐参曰：臣闻鸷鸟累百，不如一鹗。
现代文：书奏上去，碰上御史中丞樊准上疏荐庞参道 ：臣听说鸷鸟上百只，不如一只鹗。
English: After the calligraphy performance, he came across Mishi Chujo, a junior high school student, who recommended Pang Sando, a junior high school student: The minister heard that there are hundreds of ostriches, but they are not as good as a dragonfly.

古文：昔孝文皇帝悟冯唐之言，而赦魏尚之罪，使为边守，匈奴不敢南向。
现代文：从前孝文皇帝领悟了冯唐的话，而赦了魏尚之罪，使他做了边守，匈奴不敢向南一步。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Xiaowen understood Feng Tang's words, and forgave Wei Shang's sin, making him a border guard. The Xiongnu did not dare to take a step south.

古文：夫以一臣之身，折方面之难者，选用得也。
现代文：用一个臣子之身，解一方之难，选用得人哩。
English: Using a vassal to solve one side's difficulties is a wise choice.

古文：臣伏见故左校令河南庞参，勇谋不测，卓尔奇伟，高才武略，有魏尚之风。
现代文：臣看见故左校令庞参，有勇有谋，与众不同，高才武略，有魏尚的风度。
English: The minister saw that the late left-wing schoolmaster, Pang San, was courageous and resourceful, different from others, highly talented and tactful, and had the demeanor of Wei Shang.

古文：前坐微法，输作经时。
现代文：前因犯了微法，输作很长时间。
English: Due to the previous violation of the micro-law, the production took a long time.

古文：今羌戎为患，大军西屯，臣以为如参之人，宜在行伍。
现代文：现在羌戎为患，大军西屯，臣认为像庞参这种人，应在行伍之列。
English: Now that the situation in the Warring States was critical, with a large army massing in the west, the courtier thought that a man like Pang San should be in the ranks.

古文：惟明诏采前世之举，观魏尚之功，免赦参刑，以为军锋，必有成效，宣助国威。
现代文：希望明诏采前世的举措，观魏尚之功劳，免赦庞参之刑，用作军锋，必有成效，宣助国威。 
English: It is hoped that the measures taken in the previous life, the merits of Guan Wei Shang, the pardon of Pang Sang, and the use of military fronts will be effective and promote national prestige.

古文：邓太后纳其言，即擢参于徒中，召拜竭者，使西督三辅诸军屯，而征邓骘还。
现代文：邓太后采纳了他的话，立即从德徒中提拔庞参，拜为谒者，使他向西督三辅诸军屯，而召邓骘回来。
English: Empress Dowager Deng accepted his words, and immediately promoted Pang San from the virtuous ones to be the worshiper of the god, and sent him to the Western Governor to assist the troops, and called Deng Yao back.

古文：四年，羌寇转盛，兵费日广，且连年不登，谷石万余。
现代文：四年，羌寇又卷土重来，兵费日广，且连年收成不好，谷每石需五万余钱。
English: In four years, the raiders came back, the military expenses became more and more extensive, and the harvest was not good for several years. Each stone in the valley required more than fifty thousand yuan.

古文：参奏记于邓骘曰：比年羌寇特困陇右，供徭赋役为损日滋，官负人责数十亿万。
现代文：庞参报告邓骘道 ：连年羌寇特别困扰陇右，供徭赋役开支甚大，官府负债达数十亿万。
English: Pangshan report Deng Bingdao: For years, robber bandits have particularly plagued the right bank of the Yangtze River. Expenditures for their maintenance and service have been very large, and government debts have reached tens of billions of yuan.

古文：今复募发百姓，调取谷帛，衒卖什物，以应吏求。
现代文：现在再向百姓，调取谷帛，卖什物，以应官吏之需求。
English: Now, they are collecting grain and selling goods to the people to meet the needs of government officials.

古文：外伤羌虏，内困征赋。
现代文：外伤羌虏，内困征赋。
English: Traumatic injuries, internal difficulties, conscription.

古文：遂乃千里转粮，远给武都西郡。
现代文：于是千里运粮，远给武都西郡。
English: As a result, grain was transported thousands of miles, as far away as West Wudu County.

古文：涂路倾阻，难劳百端，疾行则抄暴为害，迟进则谷食稍损，运粮散于旷野，牛马死于山泽。
现代文：道路险阻，困难太多，走得快就钞暴为害，走得慢就粮食受损，运粮散于旷野，牛马死在山泽。
English: The roads are dangerous and there are too many difficulties. If you walk fast, you will be harmed by banknotes. If you walk slowly, your grain will be damaged. The grain is scattered in the wilderness. Cattle and horses die in the mountains.

古文：县官不足，辄贷于民。
现代文：县官不足，常向百姓借贷。
English: There are not enough county officials, so they often borrow money from the people.

古文：民已穷矣，将从谁求？
现代文：百姓已经穷困了，将向谁去索取？
English: The people are already impoverished. Who will they turn to for help?

古文：名救金城，而实困三辅。
现代文：名义上救金城，实际上困了三辅。
English: In the name of saving Jincheng, in fact, the three auxiliaries were trapped.

古文：三辅既困，还复为金城之祸矣。
现代文：三辅已经贫困，反转来又成为金城之祸了。
English: Sanfu has been impoverished, and in turn has become the scourge of Jincheng.

古文：参前数言宜弃西域，乃为西州士大夫所笑。
现代文：参以前数次说过，应放弃西域，却被西州士大夫所笑。
English: I have said several times before that we should give up the western region, but I was laughed at by the governor of Xizhou.

古文：今苟贪不毛之地，营恤不使之民，暴军伊吾之野，以虑三族之外，果破凉州，祸乱至今。
现代文：现在如果贪恋不毛之地，忧恤无用的百姓，让军队在伊吾之野受苦，替三族之外担心，如果破了凉州，祸乱至今不止。
English: Now, if you are greedy for barren land, pity the useless people, let the army suffer in the Igo field, and worry about the three ethnic groups, if you destroy Liangzhou, the calamity will not stop until now.

古文：夫拓境不宁，无益于强；多田不耕，何救饥敝！
现代文：开拓之边境不得安宁，对国家之强大毫无益处；有许多田地不去耕种，怎能救得饥荒！
English: Open frontiers do not bring peace, and are of no benefit to the strength of the state; there are many fields that are not cultivated, and how can famine be avoided!

古文：故善为国者，务怀其内，不求外利；务富其民，不贪广土。
现代文：所以会治国者，一定着眼国内，不求外利；让百姓富足，不贪广土。
English: Therefore, those who will govern the country must focus on the country, not seek foreign interests; let the people be rich, do not covet the vast land.

古文：三辅山原旷远，民庶稀疏，故县丘城，可居者多。
现代文：三辅山原旷远，民众稀少，故县空城，可住人之地方甚多。
English: Sanshu is a remote mountainous area with a sparse population. There are many places where people can live in the former county town.

古文：今宜徙边郡不能自存者，入居诸陵，田戍故县。
现代文：今应将边郡不能自存的，迁入诸陵，田戍故县。
English: It is time to relocate Bian County, which cannot survive on its own, to Zhuling, Tianyao's former county.

古文：孤城绝郡，以权徙之；转运远费，聚而近之；徭役烦数，休而息之。
现代文：孤城绝郡，强迫迁去；转运远费，聚而近之；徭役太多，休而息之。
English: Solitary city, no county, forced to move; long-distance transportation costs, gather and close; too much labor, rest and breathe.

古文：此善之善者也。
现代文：这是好中之好计策哩。 
English: It's the best of a bad bunch.

古文：骘及公卿以国用不足，欲从参议，众多不同，乃止。
现代文：邓骘及公卿们因国用不足，想听从庞参的建议，众多人不赞同，才停止了。
English: Due to the shortage of state funds, Deng Xiao and the nobles wanted to follow the advice of Pang San, but many people did not agree, so they stopped.

古文：拜参为汉阳太守。
现代文：后来拜庞参为汉阳太守。
English: Later, Bai Pangshan became the governor of Hanyang.

古文：郡人任棠者，有奇节，隐居教授。
现代文：郡人任棠有奇节，隐居教授学徒。
English: County resident Ren Tang has a strange festival and becomes a reclusive professor's apprentice.

古文：参到，先候之，棠不与言，但以薤一大本，水一盂，置户屏前，自抱孙兒伏于户下。
现代文：庞参到任，先去拜访他。任棠不和他说话，只把薤一大本、水一盂放在户屏之前，自己抱着孙子伏在户下。
English: When Pang San arrived, he went to visit him first. Ren Tong didn't speak to him, he just put a big pot of stew and a bucket of water in front of the screen, and he held his grandson under the house.

古文：主簿白以为倨。
现代文：主簿报告，认为任棠倨傲。
English: The ledger report said that Ren Tong was arrogant.

古文：参思其微意良久，曰： 棠是欲晓太守也。水者，欲吾清也。
现代文：庞参想了一下他的用意，过了好久便说： 任棠是想告诉太守：水，是想我清白哩。
English: Pang thought about his intention for a moment, and after a long time, he said, "Rentang wanted to tell the governor: water, because he wanted me to be innocent."

古文：拔大本薤者，欲吾击强宗也。
现代文：拔一大本薤，想我打击强宗哩。
English: Pulling out a big book of tricks, I want to fight against strong government.

古文：抱兒当户，欲吾开门恤孤也。 
现代文：抱儿当户，想我开门怜惜孤儿哩。 
English: If I had a child, I would open the door and pity the orphan.

古文：于是叹息而还。
现代文：于是叹息而回。
English: So I sighed and went back.

古文：参在职，果能抑强助弱，以惠政得民。
现代文：庞参在职时，果然能抑强助弱，用惠政赢得民心。
English: When Pang San was in office, he was indeed able to suppress the strong and help the weak, and win the hearts of the people with favorable policies.

古文：元初元年，迁护羌校尉，畔羌怀其恩信。
现代文：元初元年，升为护羌校尉，叛羌怀念他的恩信。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the captain of the guard, and he missed his letter of gratitude.

古文：明年，烧当羌种号多等皆降，始复得还都令居，通河西路。
现代文：第二年，烧当羌种号多等都投降，才又得到还都令居，通河西之路。
English: In the second year, most of the burners surrendered, and only then did they get the road to the west of the river.

古文：时，先零羌豪僭号北地，诏参将降羌及湟中义从胡七千人，与行征西将军司马钧期会北地击之。
现代文：这时先零羌豪强在北地僭号，朝廷诏参率领降羌及湟中起义的胡兵七千人，与行征西将军司马钧约期会合于北地攻打他们。
English: At this time, Emperor Gaozong led seven thousand Hu soldiers, who had revolted against Emperor Gaozong and Empress Dowager Cixi, to attack them in the north, meeting with the Western Expeditionary Force commander Sima Wei.

古文：参于道为羌所败。
现代文：庞参在路上被羌人打败。
English: On the way, Pang San was defeated by the eunuchs.

古文：既已失期，乃称病引兵还，坐以诈疾征下狱。
现代文：已经失了期，于是称病带兵回来，犯了诈疾罪召而下狱。
English: He had already missed the deadline, so he claimed to be sick and brought soldiers back. He committed the crime of fraudulent illness and was sent to prison.

古文：校书郎中马融上书请之曰：伏见西戎反畔，寇抄五州，陛下愍百姓之伤痍，哀黎元之失业，单竭府库以奉军师。
现代文：校书郎中马融上书请求道 ：西戎反叛，寇抄五州，陛下同情百姓之疾苦，哀百姓之失业，用尽府库之财物以养军队。
English: Zhongma Rong, a school teacher, wrote a petition saying: Xi Rong rebelled and plundered five provinces. His Majesty sympathized with the hardships of the people, lamented the unemployment of the people, and exhausted the treasury to support the army.

古文：昔周宣猃狁侵镐及方，孝文匈奴亦略上郡，而宣王立中兴之功，文帝建太宗之号。
现代文：从前周宣王时，猃狁侵略镐和方，孝文帝时，匈奴也入侵上郡，而宣王立了中兴之功，文帝建太宗之号。
English: Once upon a time, when Zhou Xuan Wang was king, the Mongols invaded the Han and Chinese, and when Emperor Xiaowen was emperor, the Xiongnu also invaded Shang County. However, Emperor Xuan Wang established the Zhongxing system, and Emperor Wen established the Taizong system.

古文：非惟两主有明睿之姿，抑亦扞城有虓虎之助，是以南仲赫赫，列在《周诗》，亚夫赳赳，载于汉策。
现代文：不只是两个皇帝有明睿又的天资，也因为有虎将捍卫城池的帮助，所以 南仲赫赫 ，列在《周诗》 ，亚夫纠纠 ，载在汉策。
English: Not only did the two emperors have wisdom and talent, but also because of the help of the tigers to defend the city, Nan Zhonghehe, listed in "Zhou Shi," Yafu Correction, listed in Hanze.

古文：窃见前护羌校尉庞参，文武昭备，智略弘远，既有义勇果毅之节，兼以博雅深谋之姿。
现代文：前护羌校尉庞参，文武全才，智略远大，既有义勇果毅的气节，兼有博雅深谋的天资。
English: Pang San, a former lieutenant of the National Guard, was a man of many talents in literature and martial arts. He was a man of great wisdom, courage and determination, as well as a man of profound wisdom.

古文：又度辽将军粱，前统西域，勤苦数年，还留三辅，攻效克立，间在北边，单于降服。
现代文：又度辽将军梁忄堇，前时统领西域，勤苦数年，回来留在三辅，能立功效，闲在北边，单于降服。
English: Liao's general Liang Kun, who once ruled the western region, worked hard for several years, came back to stay in Sanfu, could establish efficacy, idle in the north, single in surrender.

古文：今皆幽囚，陷于法网。
现代文：现在都关起来，陷于法网。
English: Now they're all locked up, caught in the net.

古文：昔荀林父败绩于邲晋侯使复其位；孟明视丧师于崤，秦伯不替其官。
现代文：从前荀林父在必阝打了败仗，晋侯恢复了他的职位；孟明视在崤丧师，秦伯不废他的官。
English: Once upon a time, Yulin's father was defeated in Bifeng, and Jinhou restored his position; Meng Mingxi was in mourning, and Qin Bo did not give up his post.

古文：故晋景并赤狄之土，秦穆遂霸西戎。
现代文：所以晋景并赤狄的土地，秦穆公于是称霸西戎。
English: Therefore, Jinjing and Chedi's land, Qin Mu Gong then dominated Xi Rong.

古文：宜远览二君，使参、得在宽宥之科，诚有益于折冲，毘佐于圣化。
现代文：应该远看两君，使庞参、梁忄堇得到宽宥，的确对折冲有好处，对圣化有帮助。 
English: It is necessary to look at the two princes from afar, so that Pang Zhen and Liang Zhen can be pardoned, which is indeed beneficial to the conversion and helpful to sanctification.

古文：书奏，赦参等。
现代文：书奏上，梁忄堇、庞参得到赦免。
English: On the calligraphy, Liang Jun and Pang San were pardoned.

古文：后以参为辽东太守。
现代文：后来用庞参为辽东太守。
English: Later, he used Pang San as the governor of Liaodong.

古文：永建元年，迁度辽将军。
现代文：永建元年，升为度辽将军。
English: In the first year of the Yongjian era, he was promoted to General Du Liao.

古文：四年，入为大鸿胪。
现代文：四年，进朝廷做了大鸿胪。
English: Four years later, he entered the imperial court and became a great success.

古文：尚书仆射虞诩荐参有宰相器能，以为太尉，录尚书事。
现代文：尚书仆射虞诩荐参说他有宰相的器量和才干，顺帝时用他为太尉，录尚书事。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant Sho Yu's recommendation said that he had the ability and talent of the prime minister. When Shun was emperor, he used him as a captain to record Shang Shuxu's affairs.

古文：是时三公之中，参名忠直，数为左右所陷毁，以所举用忤帝旨，司隶承风案之。
现代文：这时三公之中，庞参名声忠直，多次被左右所陷害与毁谤，认为所举用的人有违帝旨，司隶承风案之。
English: At this time, among the three princes, Pang San, who had a reputation of being loyal and upright, was repeatedly framed and slandered by the left and right, who thought that the person he used was against the emperor's order, and that he was following the trend.

古文：时当会茂才孝廉，参以被奏，称疾不得会。
现代文：这时当会茂才孝廉，庞因被奏，称疾不得会。
English: At this time, the chairman of the meeting, Shigezai Takahashi, said that he could not attend the meeting due to illness.

古文：上计掾广汉段恭因会上疏曰： 伏见道路行人，农夫织妇，皆曰 太尉庞参，竭忠尽节，徒以直道不能曲心，孤立郡邪之间，自处中伤之地 。
现代文：上计掾广汉段恭因会上疏道 ：臣看到道路行人，农夫织妇，都说 太尉庞参，谒忠尽节，徒因直道不能做违心之事，孤立在群邪之中，自处被中伤之地。 
English: The above-mentioned  Guanghan Duan Qiong said at the meeting: The minister saw pedestrians on the road, farmers and weavers, and said that the captain Pang San,  loyal to the end, could not do anything against his heart because of the straight road, isolated in the evil crowd, and was slandered from everywhere.

古文：臣犹冀在陛下之世，当蒙安全，而复以谗佞伤毁忠正，此天地之大禁，人主之至诫。
现代文：臣还希望在陛下之世，当蒙安全，而又因谗佞之人伤毁忠正之士，这是天地之大禁，人主之至诚。
English: The minister also hopes that in His Majesty's lifetime, when he is safe, he will be able to destroy the loyal and righteous because of the wicked. This is the great prohibition of heaven and earth, and the sincerity of the Lord.

古文：昔白起赐死，诸侯酌酒相贺；季子来归，鲁人喜其纾难。
现代文：从前白起赐死，诸侯酌酒相贺；季子回来，鲁人喜其纾缓国难。
English: Once upon a time, death was given to Baiqi, and the princes congratulated each other by drinking wine; when Ji Zi returned, the Lu people were glad that he had eased the national difficulties.

古文：夫国以贤化，君以忠安。
现代文：国因贤臣而化君因忠臣而安。
English: The country is safe because of its wise men, and the king is safe because of his loyal men.

古文：今天下咸欣陛下有此忠贤，愿卒宠任，以安社稷。 
现代文：今天下都高兴陛下有这种忠贤之臣，愿卒宠任，以安天下。 
English: Today, we are all happy that His Majesty has such a loyal and virtuous vassal, who is willing to do his best to keep the world safe.

古文：书奏，诏即遣小黄门视参疾，太医致羊、酒。
现代文：书奏上，朝廷就派小黄门视庞参的病，派太医送羊酒。
English: On the occasion of the calligraphy performance, the imperial court sent Xiao Huangmen to see the illness of Pang San, and sent the chief physician to deliver sheep wine.

古文：后参夫人疾前妻子，投于井而杀之。
现代文：后来庞参恨前妻之子，把他投在井里杀掉。
English: Later, Pang San hated his ex-wife's son and killed him by throwing him into a well.

古文：参素与洛阳令祝良不平，良闻之，率吏卒入太尉府案实其事，乃上参罪，遂因灾异策免。
现代文：庞参素来与洛阳令祝良不平，祝良听说这事，带领吏卒进入太尉府查实其事，于是上报庞参之罪，便因灾异策免。
English: Pang San had always been at odds with Zhu Liang, the governor of Luoyang. When Zhu Liang heard about this, he led the officials into the captain's residence to investigate the matter, and then reported Pang San's crime. He was pardoned because of the disaster.

古文：有司以良不先闻奏，辄折辱宰相，坐系诏狱。
现代文：有司认为祝良不先报告，就侮辱宰相，关进了牢狱。
English: Yushi thought that Zhu Liang insulted the prime minister without reporting first, and he was put in prison.

古文：良能得百姓心，洛阳吏人守阙请代其罪者，日有数千万人，诏乃原刑。
现代文：祝良能得百姓之心，洛阳吏人守在宫阙请求代受罪的，每天有几千万人，诏书便免刑。
English: Zhu Liang was able to win the hearts of the people. Every day, tens of millions of people in Luoyang would request the magistrate to take the blame on their behalf, and the edict would exempt them from punishment.

古文：阳嘉四年，复以参为太尉。
现代文：阳嘉四年，又用庞参为太尉。
English: In the fourth year of Yang Jia, he also used Pang San as a second lieutenant.

古文：永和元年，以久病罢，卒于家。
现代文：永和元年，因久病罢官，死在家中。
English: In the first year of the Edo period, he was dismissed from his post due to a long illness and died at home.

古文：陈龟字叔珍，上党泫氏人也。
现代文：◆陈龟传，陈龟字叔珍，上党泫氏人。
English: ◆ Chen Kame Chuan, Chen Kame Zi Shuzhen, a member of the Shang Dang Yi clan.

古文：家世边将，便习弓马，雄于北州。
现代文：家世是边将，从小便习弓马，称雄于北州。
English: He was born as a linebacker, learned to play the horse and bow from an early age, and rose to prominence in Beizhou.

古文：龟少有志气。
现代文：陈龟年少即有志气。
English: Chen Zhe is young and has ambition.

古文：永建中，举孝廉，五迁五原太守。
现代文：永建年间，举为孝廉，五次升迁，做了五原太守。
English: During the Yongjian era, he was raised to the rank of filial piety, promoted five times, and became the five original governors.

古文：永和五年，拜使匈奴中郎将。
现代文：永和五年，拜为出使匈奴的中郎将。
English: In the 5th year of the Yonghe era, Baizhong served as the middle general of the Xiongnu.

古文：时南匈奴左部反乱，龟以单于不能制下，外顺内畔，促令自杀，坐征下狱免。
现代文：当时南匈奴左部反乱，龟认为单于不能制服下面，外面恭顺，内心反叛，促使他自杀，犯罪召令下狱，免予执行。
English: At that time, the Southern Xiongnu rebelled from the left, and the tortoise thought that the tortoise could not be subdued because he was submissive on the outside and rebellious on the inside, prompting him to commit suicide. He was sentenced to prison for the crime and was exempted from execution.

古文：后再迁，拜京兆尹。
现代文：以后两次升迁，拜为京兆尹。
English: The next two times he was promoted, he was called Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：时三辅强豪之族，多侵枉小民。
现代文：这时三辅强豪之族，多次侵枉百姓。
English: At this time, the three powerful clans repeatedly abused the people.

古文：龟到，厉威严，悉平理其怨屈者，郡内大悦。
现代文：陈龟到任，厉行威严，全部审理那些受怨屈的人，郡内百姓非常高兴。
English: When Chen Kuei took office, he was very dignified and tried all those who suffered grievances. The people in the county were very happy.

古文：会羌胡寇边，杀长吏，驱略百姓，桓帝以龟世谙边俗，拜为度辽将军。
现代文：碰上羌胡进犯边境，杀了长吏，驱赶掠夺百姓。桓帝认为陈龟世代熟悉边疆风俗，拜他为度辽将军。
English: Encountering Yan Hu, he invaded the border, killed the officials, drove away and plundered the people. Emperor Kuan believed that Chen Jie's generation was familiar with the frontier customs, and worshipped him as General Du Liao.

古文：龟临行，上疏曰：臣龟蒙恩累世，驰聘边垂，虽展鹰犬之用，顿毙胡虏之庭，魂骸不返，荐享狐狸，犹无以塞厚责，答万分也。
现代文：陈龟临行之时，上疏道 ：臣龟代蒙受皇恩，驰骋在边陲，虽然展尽鹰犬的作用，死在胡虏之庭，魂骸不回汉室，用狐狸作祭品，还不能塞厚责，报答君恩万分之一。
English: When Chen Zhe was about to leave, he went to the upper ditch: the vassal tortoise received the royal favor and galloped on the edge of the ditch. Although he played the role of the eagle and the dog, he died in the garden of the hooligans, the soul did not return to the Chinese room, and the fox was used as a sacrifice. He could not fulfill his heavy responsibility and repay the king's favor one hundred thousandth.

古文：臣至顽驽，器无铅刀一割之用，过受国恩，荣秩兼优，生年死日，永惧不报。
现代文：臣极顽驽，没有铅刀一割之用，过受国恩，荣誉官阶均受优等，生之年，死之日，永怕不能报效。
English: Vassals are extremely tenacious, there is no use of a plumb-knife, they are over-rewarded by the state, honorary ranks are all superior, and they will never be able to repay the favor in their lifetime or on the day of death.

古文：臣闻三辰不轨，擢士为相；蛮夷不恭，拔卒为将。
现代文：臣听说三辰不轨，提拔士人为相；蛮夷不恭，选拔士卒为将。
English: The vassal heard that Sanchen was not on the right track, and the promotion of the scholar was a fait accompli; the barbarian was not respectful, and the selection of the scholar was a mistake.

古文：臣无文武之才，而忝鹰扬之任，上惭圣明，下惧素餐，虽殁躯体，无所云补。
现代文：臣没有文武之才，而辱尽鹰扬之任，上愧圣明，下怕素餐，虽尽力而死，也无补益。
English: The vassal has no talent for literature and military arts, but the humiliation of fulfilling the duty of eagle promotion, the top is ashamed of the sacred, the bottom is afraid of vegetarian meals, although he tries his best to die, there is no benefit.

古文：今西州边鄙，土地，鞍马为居，射猎为业，男寡耕稼之利，女乏机杼之饶，守塞候望，悬命锋镝，闻急长驱，去不图反。
现代文：今西州边鄙，土地瘠薄，百姓习于鞍马，以射猎为业，男的不会种田，女的不会织布，守塞候望，悬命于锋镝之上，听到紧急号令而长驱，去后即不想回来。
English: I'm on the edge of the western state, the land is thin, the people are used to riding horses and shooting for hunting, the man can't farm, the woman can't weave, waiting for the block, hanging over the battlements, hearing the emergency call and driving for a long time, I don't want to come back after I go.

古文：自顷年以来，匈奴数攻营郡，残杀长吏，侮略良细。
现代文：近年以来，匈奴数次攻击营部，残杀官吏，侮掠百姓。
English: In recent years, the Xiongnu have attacked the camp several times, killing officials and abusing and plundering the people.

古文：战夫身膏沙漠，居人首系马鞍。
现代文：战士身死沙漠，居民头悬马鞍。
English: The soldier died in the desert, the inhabitant hangs his saddle over his head.

古文：或举国掩户，尽种灰灭，孤兒寡妇，号哭空城，野无青草，室如悬罄。
现代文：有的全国掩埋尸首，尽种灰飞烟灭，孤儿寡妇，号哭空城，野无青草，室如悬磬。
English: Some buried corpses all over the country, all kinds of ashes flew out, orphans and widows cried, the city was empty, there was no grass, and the room was like a hanging coffin.

古文：虽含生气，实同枯朽。
现代文：即使还有性命，实在如同枯木朽株。
English: Even if there is life, it is really like a dead tree.

古文：往岁并州水雨，灾螟互生，稼穑荒耗，租更空阙。
现代文：往年并州雨水过多，灾螟为害，庄稼荒耗，租赋空缺。
English: In previous years, there was too much rain in the state, which led to disasters, crop wastage, and rent vacancies.

古文：老者虑不终年，少壮惧于困厄。
现代文：年老的担心活不到老，少壮的害怕困厄。
English: The old worry they won't live to be old, the young fear hardship.

古文：陛下以百姓为子，品庶以陛下为父，焉可不日昊劳神，垂抚循之恩哉！
现代文：陛下以百姓为子，庶民以陛下为父，怎可不日昃劳神，垂抚循的恩惠呢！
English: Your Majesty regards the common people as his children, and the common people regard Your Majesty as their father. How can you not thank God every day for His grace?

古文：唐尧亲舍其子以禅虞舜者，是欲民遭圣君，不令遇恶主也。
现代文：唐尧帝舍其子把帝位让给虞舜，是想百姓遇到圣君，不叫他们碰上暴君哩。
English: Emperor Tang Xuan did not want his son to give up the throne to Emperor Yu, because he wanted the people to meet a saint, not a tyrant.

古文：故古公杖策，其民五倍；文王西伯，天下归之。
现代文：所以古公父迁到岐山，百姓趋附的比从前增加五倍；文王西伯行仁政，天下百姓归附他。
English: Therefore, when the ancient fathers moved to Qishan, the people's attachment to him increased five times more than before; King Wen Xi Bo carried out benevolent politics, and the people all over the world attached to him.

古文：岂复舆金辇宝，以为民惠乎！
现代文：难道要舆金辇宝，给百姓施恩惠么！
English: Do they really want to spend public money and give favors to the people?

古文：近孝文皇帝感一女子之言，除肉刑之法，体德行仁，为汉贤主。
现代文：近来孝文皇帝被缇萦一女子的话所感动。废除肉刑之法，体德行仁，成为汉代的贤君。
English: Recently, Emperor Xiaowen was moved by the words of a woman named Yan. He abolished the law of corporal punishment and became a virtuous ruler of the Han Dynasty.

古文：陛下继中兴之统，承光武之业，临朝听政，而未留圣意。
现代文：陛下继承中兴的传统，承光武帝的基业，临朝听政，而未留圣意。
English: His majesty inherits the tradition of ZTE, inherits the inheritance of Emperor Guangwu, and listens to politics in the imperial court, but does not keep the sacred intention.

古文：且牧守不良，或出中官，惧逆上旨，取过目前。
现代文：且牧守不良，或出中官，害怕违背旨意，取过目前。
English: And if the shepherd is not good, or if he is a middle-ranking official, he is afraid of violating the will and takes the present.

古文：呼嗟之声，招致灾害，胡虏凶悍，因衰缘隙。
现代文：呼嗟之声，招来灾害，胡虏凶悍，趁衰乘隙。
English: The voice of the roar of the wolf invites disasters, the wolf is fierce, and takes advantage of the gap.

古文：而令仓库单于豺狼之口，功业无铢两之效，皆由将帅不忠，聚奸所致。
现代文：而使金库尽于豺狼之口，功业没有铢两的效果，都是由于将帅不忠，聚奸所致。
English: But the fact that the treasury is in the jaws of the jackal, and the work has no double effect, is all due to the disloyalty of the generals and the gangsters.

古文：前凉州刺史祝良，初除到州，多所纠罚，太守令长，贬黜将半，政未逾时，功效卓然。
现代文：前凉州刺史祝良，初到州郡，多所纠罚，太守令长，贬黜将近半数，政未过时，功效显著。
English: Former Liangzhou assassin Zhu Liang, first arrived in Zhoushu County, a number of corrective punishments, the commander-in-chief, nearly half of the demerits, the policy is not out of date, the effect is significant.

古文：实应赏异，以劝功能，改任牧守，去斥奸残。
现代文：实应受到赏赐，以劝勉有功之人，改任牧守，去斥奸残之徒。
English: In fact, he should be rewarded in order to encourage those who have meritorious deeds to be appointed as shepherds and to persecute the remnants.

古文：又宜更选匈奴乌桓护羌中郎将校尉，简练文武，授之法令，除并、凉二州今年租更，宽赦罪隶，扫除更始。
现代文：又应更选匈奴、乌桓护羌中郎将校尉，简练文武，授之法令，除并凉二州今年租更，宽赦罪隶，扫除更始。
English: In addition, it is necessary to select the Xiongnu, the Wuhuan, the guard, the middle-ranking officer, the lieutenant, the concise literature and martial arts, and the decree, except the annexation of the two states this year, the pardon of the crime, and the elimination of the beginning.

古文：则善吏知奉公之祐，恶者觉营私之祸，胡马可不窥长城，塞下无候望之患矣。
现代文：那么善吏知道奉公之，恶者懂得营私的祸，胡马可不窥长城，塞下没有候望之患了。 
English: Then the good officials will know how to serve the public, the evil ones will know how to exploit the private sector, Humma will not see the Great Wall, and there will be no long-awaited troubles.

古文：帝觉悟，乃更选幽、并刺史，自营郡太守都尉以下，多所革易，下诏 为陈将军除并、凉一年租赋，以赐吏民 。
现代文：帝觉悟了，于是更选幽州、并州刺史，自营郡太守都尉以下，多所革除更易，下诏 为陈将军减除并、凉二州一年的租赋，以赐给官吏百姓。 
English: The emperor became aware of this, so he chose Yuzhou and made it a prefectural capital, and made it a county capital, and made it a prefectural capital, and made it a county capital, and made it a county capital, and made it a county capital, and made it a county capital, and made it a prefectural capital, and made it a county capital.

古文：龟既到职，州郡重足震栗，鲜卑不敢近塞，省息经用，岁以亿计。
现代文：陈龟到职之后，州郡重足害怕，鲜卑不敢走近边塞，省息经费开支，每年以亿计。
English: After Chen Zhe took office, the state and county were very afraid, and they did not dare to go near the border. The cost of interest-saving funds was hundreds of millions of yuan every year.

古文：大将军梁冀与龟素有隙，谮其沮毁国威，挑取功誉，不为胡虏所畏。
现代文：大将军梁冀与陈龟素有嫌隙，向君主谮言说陈龟沮毁国威，独取功誉，不被胡虏所畏。
English: General Liang Jie and Chen Kuei always had a grudge against each other. He told the monarch that Chen Kuei had destroyed the national prestige, took credit for himself, and was not feared by the Khuriks.

古文：坐征还，遂乞骸骨归田里。
现代文：陈龟被召回，于是请求退职回到家乡。
English: Chen Zhe was recalled, so he asked to retire and return to his hometown.

古文：复征为尚书。
现代文：后来又拜为尚书。
English: Later, he became a Buddhist monk.

古文：冀暴虐日甚，龟上疏言其罪状，请诛之。
现代文：梁冀暴虐日甚一日，陈龟上疏言其罪状，请求诛杀之。
English: As Liang Jie's brutality increased day by day, Chen Jie neglected to mention his crime and requested that he be killed.

古文：帝不省。
现代文：皇帝不觉悟。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：自知必为冀所害，不食七日而死。
现代文：陈龟自知必被梁冀所害，七天绝食而死。
English: Chen Zhe knew that he would be harmed by Liang Jie, and he died after seven days of hunger strike.

古文：西域胡夷，并、凉民庶，咸为举哀，吊祭其墓。
现代文：西域胡夷，并州、凉州百姓，都替他举哀，吊祭他的坟墓。
English: The Western Hui, as well as the people of Suzhou and Liangzhou, all mourned for him and made offerings at his grave.

古文：桥玄字公祖，梁国睢阳人也。
现代文：◆桥玄传，桥玄字公祖，梁国睢阳人。
English: ◆Bridge Xuanzuan, Bridge Xuanzang, Liang Guoyang people.

古文：七世祖仁，从同郡戴德学，著《礼记章句》四十九篇，号曰 桥君学 。
现代文：七世祖桥仁，从同郡戴德学习，著《礼记章句》四十九篇，号称 桥君学 。
English: The seventh generation ancestor, Qiao Ren, studied in the same county, Dade, and wrote 49 chapters of "The Book of Rites," which is known as "Qiao Jun's Learning."

古文：成帝时为大鸿胪。
现代文：成帝时做了大鸿胪。
English: He made a big splash when he became emperor.

古文：祖父基，广陵太守。
现代文：祖父桥基，做过广陵太守。
English: His grandfather, Qiao Ji, was the governor of Guangling.

古文：父肃，东莱太守。
现代文：父亲严肃，做过东莱太守。
English: His father was a stern man who had been the governor of Donglai Province.

古文：玄少为县功曹。
现代文：桥玄年轻时做过县功曹。
English: When he was young, Qiao Xuan was a county meritorious scholar.

古文：时豫州刺史周景行部到梁国，玄谒景，因伏地言陈相羊昌罪恶，乞为部陈从事，穷案其奸。
现代文：当时豫州刺史周景行部到梁国，桥玄谒见周景，于是伏地讲陈相羊昌的罪恶，请求做领陈从事，深入检查其罪行。
English: At that time, Zhou Jingxing, the secretary of the Henan Provincial Party Committee, went to Liang Province, and Qiao Xuanzang met Zhou Jingxing. Therefore, he told Voldemort about Chen Xiangyangchang's crimes, and asked him to lead Chen Xiangyong and thoroughly investigate his crimes.

古文：景壮玄意，署而遣之。
现代文：周景认为桥玄很有胆量，就写上他的名字并派遣他。
English: Zhou Jing thought that Qiao Xuan was very brave, so he wrote down his name and sent him.

古文：玄到，悉收昌宾客，具考臧罪。
现代文：桥玄到达后，全部逮捕羊昌的宾客，具体考问臧罪。
English: After the arrival of Qiao Xuan, all the guests of Yangchang were arrested and specifically interrogated.

古文：昌素为大将军梁冀所厚，冀为驰檄救之。
现代文：羊昌素来和大将军梁冀交情很深，梁冀替他快马草檄救援。
English: Yang Chang has always had a deep friendship with General Liang Jie. Liang Jie quickly came to his rescue.

古文：景承旨召玄，玄还檄不发，案之益急。
现代文：周景奉了旨意召玄，桥玄还檄不发，追查更急。
English: Zhou Jing summoned Xuan by his will, but Xuan still did not leave, and the investigation was even more urgent.

古文：昌坐槛车征，玄由是著名。
现代文：羊昌坐槛车应召，桥玄从此著了名。
English: Yangchang was summoned to the threshold car, and Qiao Xuan became famous from then on.

古文：举孝廉，补洛阳左尉。
现代文：桥玄被举为孝廉，补洛阳左尉。
English: Qiao Xuan was promoted to Xiaolian, and became Luoyang's left lieutenant.

古文：时梁不疑为河南尹，玄以公事当诣府受对，耻为所辱，弃官还乡里。
现代文：这时梁不疑做了河南尹，桥玄因公事当诣府对，不想受这番耻辱，弃官回到乡里。
English: At this time, Liang undoubtedly did Henan Yin, and Qiao Xuan, who was in charge of the government due to business, did not want to suffer this disgrace and resigned to return to the village.

古文：后四迁为齐相，坐事为城旦。
现代文：后来四次升迁做了齐相，因事犯了罪罚为城旦。
English: Later, he was promoted four times, and was punished for committing a crime.

古文：刑竟，征，再迁上谷太守，又为汉阳太守。
现代文：刑期已完，被征召，再升为上谷太守，又做了汉阳太守。
English: After his prison term was over, he was conscripted and promoted to the position of Kamitani Taishu, and later became Hanyang Taishu.

古文：时上令皇甫祯有臧罪，玄收考髡笞，死于冀市，一境皆震。
现代文：这时上圭阝令皇甫祯有臧罪，桥玄逮捕并用髡笞等刑罚，死在冀县之市上，一境都被震动。
English: At this time, Shang Guizhen ordered the Emperor Fuwen to be guilty of high treason, arrested Qiao Xuan and punished him with the death penalty. He died in the city of Jixian County, and the whole country was shaken.

古文：郡人上姜岐，守道隐居，名闻西州。
现代文：郡人上圭阝姜岐，守道隐居，名声传遍西州。
English: County people Shangguizhang Jiangqi, guard the road seclusion, fame spread throughout the West.

古文：玄召以为吏，称疾不就。
现代文：桥玄召他为吏，他称病不肯出来。
English: Hashimoto summoned him as an official, but he claimed to be ill and refused to come out.

古文：玄怒，敕督邮尹益逼致之，曰： 岐若不至，趣嫁其母。 
现代文：桥玄发怒，勒令督邮尹益强迫他，并说 ：姜岐如果不来，促嫁他的母亲。 
English: Xiaoxuan got angry and ordered the postmaster Yin Yi to force him, saying: "If Jiang Qi doesn't come, marry his mother."

古文：益固争不能得，遽晓譬岐。
现代文：尹益坚决争取不能得到，连忙开导姜岐。
English: Yin Yi resolutely strived to get what he couldn't get, and quickly enlightened Jiang Qi.

古文：岐坚卧不起。
现代文：岐坚卧不起床。
English: Qi Jian lay down and did not get up.

古文：郡内士大夫亦竞往谏，玄乃止。
现代文：郡内士大夫也争往劝阻，桥玄才停止行动。
English: The sheriff of the county also tried to dissuade him, but it was only after this that he stopped his actions.

古文：时颇以为讥。
现代文：当时人颇有些讥讽。
English: There was quite a bit of sarcasm at the time.

古文：后谢病免，复公车征为司徒长史，拜将作大匠。
现代文：后来谢病免职，又被用公车召为司徒长史，拜为将作大匠。
English: Later, Xie was relieved of his duties due to illness, and he was summoned by public bus to serve as the chief secretary of the Communist Party of China. He was praised as a great craftsman.

古文：桓帝末，鲜卑、南匈奴及高句骊嗣子伯固并畔，为寇抄，四府举玄为度辽将军，假黄钺。
现代文：桓帝末年，鲜卑、南匈奴及高勾骊嗣子伯固一起反叛，成为寇抄，四府举桥玄做度辽将军，假黄钺。
English: In the last years of Emperor Kuan, Xianbei, Southern Xiongnu, and the heir of Gao Xuan, Baogu, rebelled together and became a corsair, and the four prefectures raised Qiao Xuan to be the general of Du Liao, a false Huang Qi.

古文：玄至镇，休兵养士，然后督诸将守讨击胡虏及伯固等，皆破散退走。
现代文：桥玄到镇，休兵养士，然后督诸将守讨击胡虏及伯固等，都打败四散退走。
English: Qiao Xuan went to the town, rested and nursed the soldiers, and then the commanders of the garrisons discussed and defeated Huru and Bo Gu, and they all dispersed and retreated.

古文：在职三年，边境安静。
现代文：在职三年，边境安静。
English: After three years in office, the border is quiet.

古文：灵帝初，征入为河南尹，转少府、大鸿胪。
现代文：灵帝初年，召入做河南令尹，转少府，做大鸿胪。
English: In the first year of Lingdi, he was summoned to Henan Lingyin, transferred to Shaofu, and became a great man.

古文：建宁三年，迁司空，转司徒。
现代文：建宁三年，升为司空，转为司徒。
English: Three years later, Jianning was promoted to Sifu, and then to Sifu.

古文：素与南阳太守陈球有隙，及在公位，而荐球为廷尉。
现代文：桥玄素来与南阳太守陈球有隙，等到自己在三公之位，便推荐陈球做廷尉。
English: Qiao Xuan had always been at odds with the Nanyang Grand Prince Chen Qiu, and when he found himself in the position of the three princes, he recommended Chen Qiu to be a courtier.

古文：玄以国家方弱，自度力无所用，乃称疾上疏，引众灾以自劾。
现代文：桥玄认为国家正弱，自己度量力无所用，于是称病上疏，引众灾以自责。
English: Qiao Xuan believed that the country was weak and that his own ability to measure was useless, so he blamed himself for the misfortune.

古文：遂策罢。
现代文：于是策罢。
English: So let's do it.

古文：岁余，拜尚书令。
现代文：年余后，拜为尚书令。
English: Years later, he was ordained as a priest.

古文：时太中大夫盖升与帝有旧恩，前为南阳太守，臧数亿以上。
现代文：当时太中大夫盖升与帝有旧恩，前做南阳太守，赃获数亿以上。
English: At that time, Tai Zhong Dafu Gai Sheng had an old friendship with the emperor, and he was the former Nanyang Dazhu, and he gained more than hundreds of millions.

古文：玄奏免升禁锢，没入财贿。
现代文：桥玄奏请免去盖升之职并将他关起来，没收其财贿。
English: Mr. Qiao Xuanxiao, please remove Mr. Gui Sheng from his post and lock him up and confiscate his bribe money.

古文：帝不从，而迁升侍中。
现代文：皇帝不同意，而提拔盖升做侍中。
English: The emperor did not agree, and promoted Gaizong to be a chamberlain.

古文：玄托病免，拜光禄大夫。
现代文：桥玄托病免职，拜为光禄大夫。
English: Xiao Xuantuo was relieved of his duties due to illness, and became known as Dr. Guanglu.

古文：光和元年，迁太尉。
现代文：光和元年，升为太尉。
English: In 1902, he was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：数月，复以疾罢，拜太中大夫，就医里舍。
现代文：数月后，又因病罢官，拜为太中大夫，就医里舍。
English: A few months later, he was removed from his post again due to illness. He was given the title of Taizhong Doctor and went to see a doctor.

古文：玄少子十岁，独游门次，卒有三人持杖劫执之，入舍登楼，就玄求货，玄不与。
现代文：桥玄的小儿子年十岁，独游门次，卒有三人持杖劫持他，入舍登楼，向桥玄索取财物，桥玄不给。
English: Xiao Xuan's youngest son was ten years old, and he wandered alone from door to door. Suddenly, three people with canes abducted him, entered the house, and demanded property from Xiao Xuan. Xiao Xuan would not give it to them.

古文：有顷，司隶校尉阳球率河南尹、洛阳令围守玄家。
现代文：不久，司隶校尉陈球率领河南尹、洛阳令围守桥玄之家。
English: Not long after, the commander of the regiment, Lieutenant Chen Kuo, led by Henan Yin and Luo Yang, surrounded Qiao Xuan's home.

古文：球等恐并杀其子，未欲迫之。
现代文：球等怕连他儿子一起杀掉，不想迫他。
English: He did not want to force his son, fearing that he would kill him as well.

古文：玄目呼曰： 奸人无状，玄岂以一子之命而纵国贼乎！ 
现代文：桥玄瞪着眼睛喊叫道： 奸人没有王法，我岂因一个儿子的性命而放掉国贼吗！ 
English: Qiao Xuan stared with his eyes and shouted, "There is no royal law for traitors. Should I release a traitor for the sake of one son's life?"

古文：促令兵进。
现代文：促令兵进。
English: Order the troops to march in.

古文：于是攻之，玄子亦死。
现代文：于是攻打起来，桥玄的儿子也死了。
English: As a result, fighting broke out, and Hashiharu's son also died.

古文：玄乃诣阙谢罪，乞下天下： 凡有劫质，皆并杀之，不得赎以财宝，开张奸路。 
现代文：桥玄于是到朝廷谢罪，请求下令天下 ：凡有抢劫人质，都一并杀掉，不得用财宝赎罪，开张奸路。 
English: Therefore, Hashiharu went to the Imperial Court to apologize, and requested that an order be issued to the world: Anyone who robs a hostage must be killed at the same time, and they must not use treasure to atone for their sins and open a treacherous path.

古文：诏书下其章。初自安帝以后，法禁稍，京师劫质，不避豪贵，自是遂绝。
现代文：诏书写下这项奏章，起初从安帝以后，法禁稍有松弛，京师抢劫人质，不避豪贵之家，从此就再没有了。
English: The imperial edict wrote down this piece of music. At first, after Emperor An, there was a slight relaxation in the prohibition of the law, the Beijing division robbed hostages, and did not avoid the homes of the rich and famous. Since then, there has been no more.

古文：玄以光和六年卒，时年七十五。
现代文：桥玄在光和六年死去，时年七十五岁。
English: Hashiharu died at the age of seventy-five, six years later.

古文：玄性刚急无大体，然谦俭下士，子弟亲宗无在大官者。
现代文：桥玄的个性刚急不顾大体，然而谦恭俭约、礼贤下士，他的子弟亲宗没有做大官的。
English: The personality of Qiao Xuan is impatient regardless of the general situation, however, he is a humble, frugal and courteous corporal. His younger brother Qizong did not become a high-ranking official.

古文：及卒，家无居业，丧无所殡，当时称之。
现代文：等他死后，家中没有什么产业，丧事没有殡殓，当时人称赞他。
English: When he died, his family had no property, and there was no funeral, but people praised him at the time.

古文：初，曹操微时，人莫知者。尝往候玄，玄见而异焉。谓曰： 今天下将乱，安生民者其在君乎！ 
现代文：起初，曹操微贱之时，没有人知道，曾经到桥玄那里问候，桥玄见了觉得有些奇异，对他说： 现在天下将乱，安定百姓的人大概要靠你吧！ 
English: At first, when Cao Cao was a lowly man, no one knew that he had once sent greetings to Qiao Xuan. Qiao Xuan thought it was a bit strange when he saw him, and said to him: Now the world will be in turmoil, and those who want to keep the people stable should probably rely on you!

古文：操常感其知己。
现代文：曹操常感激他是知己。
English: Cao Cao was always grateful to have him as a confidant.

古文：及后经过玄墓，辄凄怆致祭。
现代文：后来经过桥玄之墓，就很悲伤地祭奠。
English: Later, after passing by the grave of Hashiharu, I went to pay my respects with great sadness.

古文：自为其文曰： 故太尉桥公，懿德高轨，泛爱博容。
现代文：自己写一篇祭文道： 故太尉桥公，美德高尚，泛爱博容。
English: Write a ritual poem yourself: The late Taifeng Qiaogong was a man of noble virtue and broad-mindedness.

古文：国念明训，士思令谟。
现代文：国念明训，士思令谟。
English: The country recites the clear teaching, and the scholar thinks about it.

古文：幽灵潜翳，哉缅矣！
现代文：幽灵仍在，美哉远隔。
English: The ghost is still, the beauty is far away.

古文：操以幼年，逮升堂室，特以顽质，见纳君子。
现代文：操在幼年，到君堂室，特因顽质，被君赏识。
English: When she was a child, she was brought to a nunnery, where she was appreciated for her doggedness.

古文：增荣益观，皆由奖助，犹仲尼称不如颜渊，李生厚叹贾复。
现代文：增加荣耀，都由奖励，等于孔子说自己不如颜渊，李生厚叹贾复。
English: Increasing glory, all by reward, is equal to Confucius saying that he is not as good as Yan Yuan, Li Sheng Hou sighing Jia Fu.

古文：士死知己，怀此无忘。
现代文：士为知己而死，怀此永不忘记。
English: A man dies for his friend, he never forgets it.

古文：又承从容约誓之言： 徂没之后，路有经由，不以斗酒只鸡过相沃酹，车过三步，腹痛勿怨。 
现代文：又承从容约誓的话 ：我死以后，你路过时，不用斗酒只鸡祭奠，车过三步之后，肚痛不怨。 
English: I also obeyed the words of the promise: After my death, when you pass by, you don't have to fight with alcohol, only chicken sacrifice, and after three steps of the car, you won't complain of stomachache.

古文：虽临时戏笑之言，非至亲之笃好，胡肯为此辞哉？
现代文：虽是临时戏笑之话，不是至亲笃好，怎肯说这话呢？
English: Although it is a temporary joke, it is not a close relative, how can I say this?

古文：怀旧惟顾，念之凄怆。
现代文：怀念旧情，心中难过。
English: Nostalgic for the old days, feeling sad.

古文：奉命东征，屯次乡里，北望贵土，乃心陵墓。
现代文：奉命东征，屯军乡里，北望贵土，心向陵墓。
English: He was ordered to go to the East, to the Tuncun Township, to look to the north for valuable land, and to his heart for the mausoleum.

古文：裁致薄奠，公其享之！ 
现代文：裁致薄奠，公其享之！ 
English: Make a small tribute, share it with the public!

古文：玄子羽，官至任城相。
现代文：桥玄之子桥羽，官做到任城相。
English: Hashiba, the son of Hashigen, was appointed as the city's magistrate.

