古文：董仲舒申《春秋》之雩，设土龙以招雨，其意以云龙相致。
现代文：董仲舒发挥了《春秋》上关于雩祭的道理，用设置土龙的办法招致下雨，他的意思是云和龙是同类之物可以互相招致。
English: Dong Zhongshu played on the principle of the burnt offering in "Spring and Autumn" and used the method of setting up a mud dragon to attract rain. He meant that clouds and dragons are the same kind of thing and can attract each other.

古文：《易》曰： 云从龙，风从虎。 
现代文：《周易》上说： 云气随龙而起，强风随虎而生。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: The cloud comes from the dragon, the wind from the tiger.

古文：以类求之，故设土龙。阴阳从类，云雨自至。
现代文：根据同类相招的道理，所以就设置土龙，由于阴气、阳气构成的万物是以类相感召的，所以和龙同类的云雨就自然来到了。
English: According to the principle of similarity, the earth dragon was set up. Since all things composed of yin and yang are inspired by similarity, the cloud and rain of the same kind as the dragon naturally came.

古文：儒者或问曰：夫《易》言 云从龙 者，谓真龙也，岂谓土哉？
现代文：儒者中有人发问说，《周易》上讲 云从龙 ，是说的真正的龙，哪里是说的土龙呢？
English: Among the Confucians, someone asked, "Zhou Yi says that clouds come from dragons, which is the real dragon, where is the clay dragon?

古文：楚叶公好龙，墙壁盘盂皆画龙。
现代文：楚国叶公喜好龙，墙壁上盘盂上到处都画有龙。
English: Chu Guo Ye Gong likes dragons, and there are dragons painted everywhere on the walls.

古文：必以象类为若真，是则叶公之国常有雨也。
现代文：一定要把相类似的东西当作和真实的东西一样，那么叶公所在的楚国就经常有雨了。
English: You must treat similar things as if they were real, otherwise it would rain a lot in Chu, where Ye Gong is from.

古文：《易》又曰 风从虎 ，谓虎啸而谷风至也。
现代文：《周易》上又说 风从虎 ，讲虎一呼啸而山谷中的风就吹来。
English: "Zhou Yi" also said that the wind comes from the tiger, that the tiger whistles and the wind blows in the valley.

古文：风之与虎，亦同气类。
现代文：风和虎，也同属于一类。
English: The wind and the tiger also belong to the same category.

古文：设为土虎，置之谷中，风能至乎？
现代文：假设做一个土虎，放它在山谷之中，风能够吹来吗？
English: Suppose you make a local tiger, put it in a valley, can the wind blow?

古文：夫土虎不能而致风，土龙安能而致雨？
现代文：如果土虎不能够产生风，土龙怎么能够产生雨呢？
English: If the tiger cannot produce wind, how can the dragon produce rain?

古文：古者畜龙，乘车驾龙，故有豢龙氏、御龙氏。
现代文：古代畜养龙，乘车时驾驭龙，所以有豢龙氏和御龙氏。
English: In ancient times, dragons were raised as livestock, and dragons were ridden when riding in a car, which is why there are the Jialong clan and the Goryong clan.

古文：夏后之庭，二龙常在，季年夏衰，二龙低伏。
现代文：夏代的朝廷上，两条龙经常在那里，夏朝末世衰败，两条龙就潜伏起来。
English: In the court of the Xia Dynasty, the two dragons were always there. When the Xia Dynasty was in decline at the end of the century, the two dragons lurked.

古文：真龙在地，犹无云雨，况伪象乎？
现代文：真正的龙在地上，尚且没有云雨产生，何况是与龙相似的假龙呢？
English: The real dragon is on the earth, yet there is no cloud or rain. How much more so is the false dragon, which is similar to the dragon?

古文：礼，画雷樽象雷之形，雷樽不闻能致雷，土龙安能而动雨？
现代文：按照礼制，画雷樽就刻画得有云雷之形，没有听说雷樽能够引来雷，土龙怎么能够引动下雨呢？
English: According to the etiquette, the thunder barrel is drawn in the shape of a thunder cloud. If you haven't heard that the thunder barrel can attract thunder, how can the dragon attract rain?

古文：顿牟掇芥，磁石引针，皆以其真是，不假他类。
现代文：玳瑁壳经摩擦能吸引细小的东西，磁石能够吸引铁针，都因为它们是真实的东西，不能借用别的相类似的东西。
English: A clamshell can attract small things by friction, a magnet can attract iron needles, all because they are real things and cannot borrow other similar things.

古文：他类肖似，不能掇取者，何也？
现代文：别的东西即使很相似，也不能够吸引这些东西，这是什么原因呢？
English: Why is it that other things, even if they are very similar, cannot attract these things?

古文：气性异殊，不能相感动也。
现代文：因为构成它们的气的性质不相同，也就不能互相感动。
English: Because the nature of the qi that constitutes them is different, they cannot move each other.

古文：刘子骏掌雩祭，典土龙事，桓君山亦难以顿牟、磁石不能真是，何能掇针取芥，子骏穷无以应。
现代文：刘子骏掌管雩祭，主持设置土龙的事情，桓君山也曾用玳瑁、磁石不是真的怎么能吸针取芥来责难过刘子骏，刘子骏理屈词穷，无法回答。
English: Liu Zixuan was in charge of the skull-and-crossbones festival and presided over the setting up of the clay dragon. Huan Junshan also used the skull and crossbones and magnets to reproach Liu Zixuan. Liu Zixuan was poor in logic and could not answer.

古文：子骏，汉朝智襄，笔墨渊海，穷无以应者，是事非议误，不得道理实也。
现代文：刘子骏是汉朝足智多谋的人物，学识渊博，理屈词穷无法回答的原因，是由于桓君山用这种事例来加以指责是错误的，而自己却不懂得其中的真实道理。
English: The reason why Liu Zixuan, a resourceful person of the Han Dynasty, is so knowledgeable and can't answer in a logical way is because Huan Junshan is wrong to use this example to make accusations, but he doesn't understand the true reason.

古文：曰：夫以非真难，是也；不以象类说，非也。
现代文：我说：用土龙不是真的作为理由提出责难，这是对的；但不用相类似的东西可以相互招致的说法来解释，这是错误的。
English: I said: It is right to blame it on the ground that the dragon is not real, but it is wrong to explain it by saying that similar things can cause each other.

古文：夫东风至，酒湛溢。
现代文：春风吹来了，酒满出来了。
English: The spring breeze is blowing and the wine is flowing.

古文：鲸鱼死，彗星出。天道自然，非人事也。
现代文：鲸鱼死了，彗星出现了，按照天道这些都是极其自然的事情，并不是人为的。
English: The whale died, the comet appeared, according to the laws of nature, these are extremely natural things, not man-made.

古文：事与彼云龙相从，同一实也。
现代文：这些事情跟那种云和龙相互感召是同一个道理。
English: These things are the same as the clouds and dragons calling to each other.

古文：日，火也；月，水也。
现代文：太阳，属于火；月亮，属于水。
English: The sun belongs to fire; the moon to water.

古文：水火感动，常以真气。
现代文：水火经常以真气相互感动。
English: Water and fire often touch each other with sincerity.

古文：今伎道之家，铸阳燧取飞火於日，作方诸取水於月，非自然也，而天然之也。
现代文：现在的方士，炼铸阳燧从太阳那里取火，制作方诸从月亮那里取露水，都不是自然而然生成的东西，是人为的结果。
English: The present-day sorcerers, the smiths who extract fire from the sun, and the makers who extract dew from the moon, are not things that have arisen spontaneously, but are the result of human beings.

古文：土龙亦非真，何为不能感天？
现代文：土龙也不是真的，为何不能感动天而得雨呢？
English: The soil dragon is not real. Why can't you move the sky and get rain?

古文：一也。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第一条理由。
English: So he gave it a thumbs down.

古文：阳燧取火於天，五月丙午日中之时，消炼五石，铸以为器，乃能得火。
现代文：用阳燧从天上取火，五月丙午那天太阳正中的时候，熔炼五种矿石，用它们铸造成铜镜，才能够取得火。
English: Fire was obtained from the sky with the help of the cormorant. On the afternoon of May 3rd, when the sun was at its zenith, fire was obtained by smelting five kinds of ore and using them to cast a bronze mirror.

古文：今妄取刀剑偃月之钩，摩以向日，亦能感天。
现代文：现在随便拿刀剑月牙形的弯曲部分，摩擦以后用它对着太阳，也能和天相感应而取得火。
English: Now take the curved crescent-shaped part of the sword at random. After rubbing, use it against the sun, and you can also get fire by sensing the celestial phase.

古文：夫土龙既不得比於阳燧，当与刀剑偃月钩为比。
现代文：土龙即使不能和阳燧相比，却可与刀剑的月牙形弯钩相比。
English: Even if the soil dragon cannot be compared with the impotent, it can be compared with the crescent-shaped hook of the sword.

古文：二也。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第二条理由。
English: That's two.

古文：齐孟常君夜出秦关，关未开，客为鸡鸣而真鸡鸣和之。
现代文：齐国的孟尝君连夜想逃出秦国的函谷关，关门未开，食客学鸡叫而真的鸡应和起来。
English: Meng Yajun of Qi wanted to escape from Hantuguan of Qin all night long, but the gate was not opened. Diners learned to make chicken calls, but the real chicken should make peace.

古文：夫鸡可以奸声感，则雨亦可以伪象致。
现代文：鸡可以由伪装的叫声所感应，那么雨也可以由相类似于龙的东西所引来。
English: A chicken can be induced by a disguised crow, then rain can be induced by something that looks like a dragon.

古文：三也。李子长为政，欲知囚情，以梧桐为人，象囚之形。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第三条理由。李子长治理政事，想要了解囚犯的情况，用梧桐木做成假人，像囚犯的形象。
English: This is the third reason for the clay dragon's ability to cause rain. When Li Zichang was in charge of political affairs and wanted to know about the situation of prisoners, he made a dummy out of sycamore wood to look like a prisoner.

古文：凿地为坎，以卢为椁，卧木囚其中。
现代文：在地上挖一个坑，用芦苇做成棺椁，把木做的囚犯躺卧在里面。
English: They dug a hole in the ground, made a coffin out of reeds, and laid the wooden prisoner inside.

古文：囚罪正，则木囚不动，囚冤侵夺，木囚动出。
现代文：囚犯罪有应得，那么木囚犯就不动，囚犯冤枉受害，木囚就移动而出。
English: If the prisoner's crime is deserving, then the wooden prisoner does not move, if the prisoner is unjustly victimized, then the wooden prisoner moves out.

古文：不知囚之精神着木人乎？
现代文：不知是囚犯的精神附着在木头人身上了呢？
English: Was the spirit of the prisoner somehow attached to the wooden man?

古文：将精神之气动木囚也？
现代文：还是囚犯的精神之气感动了木头人呢？
English: Or was it the spirit of the prisoners that moved the woodcutter?

古文：夫精神感动木囚，何为独不应从土龙？
现代文：如果囚犯的精神能感动木囚，云雨为什么偏偏不能受土龙的感应而到来呢？
English: If the spirit of the prisoner can move the wooden prisoner, why can't the clouds and rain be inspired by the clay dragon?

古文：四也。舜以圣德，入大麓之野，虎狼不犯，虫蛇不害。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第四条理由。舜凭借他的圣德进入大山脚下的旷野中，虎狼不伤害他，虫蛇不伤害。
English: This is the fourth reason why the soil dragon can cause rain. The earthworm enters the wilderness at the foot of the mountain by virtue of his holiness. The tiger wolf does not hurt him, and the snake does not hurt him.

古文：禹铸金鼎象百物，以入山林，亦辟凶殃。
现代文：禹铸了带有百物图像的大铜鼎，把鼎带入山林，也避开了灾祸之物。
English: Yu cast a large bronze tripod with images of hundreds of objects, brought the tripod into the mountain forest, and also avoided the disaster.

古文：论者以为非实，然而上古久远，周鼎之神，不可无也。
现代文：解说这件事的人认为不真实。然而上古时代时间是很久远了，关于周鼎神奇的事，不能说没有。
English: The person who explained this matter thought it was not true. However, the time in ancient times was very long ago, and it cannot be said that there is nothing magical about Zhou Ding.

古文：夫金与土，同五行也，使作土龙者如禹之德，则亦将有云雨之验。
现代文：金与土同在五行之中，假使堆制土龙的人也有像禹那样的道德，那么也将有招致云雨的效验。
English: Gold and soil are in the same five elements, and if the person who made the clay dragon also has the same morality as Yu, then it will also have the effect of attracting clouds and rain.

古文：五也。顿牟掇芥，磁石、钩象之石非顿牟也，皆能掇芥，土龙亦非真，当与磁石、钩象为类。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第五条理由。玳瑁壳能吸引细小之物，磁石、象牙不是玳瑁壳，都能够吸引细小之物。土龙也不是真的龙，应当与磁石、象牙为同类而能够招致云雨。
English: This is the fifth reason why the soil dragon can cause rain. The earthenware shell can attract small things, and the magnet and ivory are not earthenware shells, but can attract small things. The soil dragon is not a real dragon, it should be the same kind as the magnet and ivory and can cause clouds and rain.

古文：六也。楚叶公好龙，墙壁盂樽皆画龙象，真龙闻而下之。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第六条理由。楚国叶公喜好龙，墙壁上盂樽上都画有龙像，真正的龙听说了就下到叶公那里。
English: This is the sixth reason why soil dragons can cause rain. Ye Gong of Chu likes dragons, and there are dragon statues painted on the walls and on the barrels. When he hears of a real dragon, he goes to Ye Gong.

古文：夫龙与云雨同气，故能感动，以类相从。
现代文：龙与云雨的气性相同，所以能相互感动，因为是同类而相互应从。
English: The temperament of the dragon and the cloud and rain is the same, so they can move each other, because they are of the same kind and follow each other.

古文：叶公以为画致真龙，今独何以不能致云雨？
现代文：叶公因为画龙而招来了真的龙，现在设土龙为什么偏偏不能招致云雨呢？
English: Because he drew a dragon, Ye Gong invited a real dragon. Now, why can't he invite clouds and rain with a clay dragon?

古文：七也。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第七条理由。
English: This is seven.

古文：神灵示人以象，不以实，故寝卧梦悟见事之象。
现代文：神祇向人们显示的是虚象而不是实体，所以睡觉时在梦中见到的都是事物的虚象。
English: The gods appear to people as phantoms, not as real things, so when they sleep they see phantoms of things in their dreams.

古文：将吉，吉象来；将凶，凶象至。
现代文：如果是吉，吉象就出现；如果是凶，凶象就出现。
English: If it is auspicious, the auspicious elephant will appear; if it is unlucky, the unlucky elephant will appear.

古文：神灵之气，云雨之类，神灵以象见实，土龙何独不能以伪致真？
现代文：神灵所具有的气，与云雨同属一类。神灵通过虚象预示将要出现的真实事情，为什么土龙偏偏不能以假的招致真的呢？
English: The qi possessed by the gods belongs to the same category as clouds and rain. The gods foreshadow the true events that will occur through illusions, so why can't the earth dragon bring about the real through the false?

古文：也。神灵以象见实，土龙何独不能以伪致真也？
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第八条理由。上古时代有两个叫神荼、郁垒的人，兄弟二人具有捉拿恶鬼的本领。
English: This is the eighth reason why the mud dragon can cause rain. In ancient times, there were two people called Shen Yao and Yu Yao. The two brothers had the ability to capture evil spirits.

古文：上古之人，有神荼、郁垒者，昆弟二人，性能执鬼，居东海度朔山上，立桃树下，简阅百鬼。鬼无道理，妄为人祸，荼与郁垒缚以卢索，执以食虎。
现代文：他们居住在东海度朔山上，站立在桃树之下查看天下的恶鬼。鬼不讲什么道理，胡乱给人造成灾祸，荼与郁垒用芦索捆住他们，抓他们去喂虎。
English: They live on Mount Doushuo in the East China Sea, and stand under the peach trees to watch the evil spirits of the world. The ghosts do not talk about any reason, and cause disasters to people in a chaotic manner. The dragonflies and damselflies tie them with reeds and catch them to feed the tigers.

古文：故今县官斩桃为人，立之户侧；画虎之形，著之门阑。
现代文：所以当今天子砍桃树作成木头人，让桃人站立在门旁，画上虎的形象，把它附在门框上。
English: So when he chopped down the peach tree to make a wooden man, he had the peach man stand next to the door, painted the image of a tiger, and attached it to the door frame.

古文：夫桃人，非荼、郁垒也；画虎，非食鬼之虎也，刻画效象，冀以御凶。
现代文：桃人并不是荼和郁垒，画的虎也不是吃鬼的那只虎，刻桃人，画老虎，以模仿它们的形状，希望用它们来抵御凶祸。
English: The peach man is not the skull and crossbones, and the tiger is not the tiger that eats ghosts. The peach man is carved and the tiger is painted to imitate their shape, hoping to use them to fend off evil.

古文：今土龙亦非致雨之龙，独信桃人画虎，不知土龙。
现代文：如今土龙也不是招致雨的真龙，只相信桃人和画虎能御凶，却不知道土龙能招致云雨。
English: Nowadays, the mud dragon is not a real dragon that causes rain. People only believe that the peach man and the painted tiger can ward off evil, but they don't know that the mud dragon can cause clouds and rain.

古文：九也。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第九条理由。
English: That's nine.

古文：此尚因缘昔书，不见实验。
现代文：这些还只是沿袭古书上的说法，没有见到过实际效验。
English: These are just claims from ancient books, and no actual tests have been carried out.

古文：鲁般、墨子刻木为鸢，蜚之三日而不集，为之巧也。
现代文：鲁般、墨子用木头雕刻成老鹰，飞了三天能不降落，是因为做得很巧妙。
English: Lu Han and Mo Zi carved an eagle out of wood. It flew for three days without landing because it was done very skillfully.

古文：使作土龙者若鲁般、墨子，则亦将有木鸢蜚不集之类。
现代文：假使堆制土龙的人像鲁般、墨子那样，那么也将会有木鹰高飞不落之类的事情。
English: If people who make clay dragons are like Lu Pan and Mo Zi, then there will also be things like wooden eagles flying high and not falling.

古文：夫蜚鸢之气，云雨之气也。
现代文：飞鹰的气，也同云雨之气。
English: As the eagle flies, so do clouds and rain.

古文：气而蜚木鸢，何独不能从土龙？
现代文：气能使木鹰飞起来，为什么偏偏不能与土龙相应从呢？
English: The wind can make the wood eagle fly, so why can't it do the same with the soil dragon?

古文：十也。夫云雨之气也，知於蜚鸢之气，未可以言。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第十条理由。假如形成云雨的气比使木鸢飞翔的气聪明，因而不能用来说明问题。
English: This is the tenth reason why the soil dragon can cause rain. If the air ratio that forms clouds and rain is too high to make the raft fly, it cannot be used to explain the problem.

古文：钓者以木为鱼，丹漆其身，近之水流而击之，起水动作，鱼以为真，并来聚会。
现代文：钓鱼的人用木头雕刻成鱼，用红漆漆在鱼身上。把木鱼迎水飘浮而击水，水被激起，木鱼浮动。游鱼以为它是真鱼，一齐游来聚会。
English: Fishermen carve wooden fishes into fishes and paint them with red paint. The wooden fish floats against the water and hits the water. The water is stirred up and the wooden fish floats. The swimming fishes think it is a real fish and swim together to gather.

古文：夫丹木，非真鱼也，鱼含血而有知，犹为象至。
现代文：红漆的木鱼不是真的鱼，鱼是活物应当有知觉，尚且被木鱼的形象所引来。
English: The red-painted wooden fish is not a real fish, the fish is a living creature that should be sentient, and it is also attracted by the image of the wooden fish.

古文：云雨之知，不能过鱼。见土龙之象，何能疑之？
现代文：云雨的知觉，不能超过鱼，见到土龙的形象，怎么能够怀疑它呢？
English: The perception of clouds and rain cannot exceed that of a fish. If you see the image of a mud dragon, how can you doubt it?

古文：十一也。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第十一条理由。
English: This is the eleventh reason why soil dragons can cause rain.

古文：此尚鱼也，知不如人。
现代文：这还只是鱼类，它的知觉不如人。
English: It's just a fish, it's not as sentient as a human.

古文：匈奴敬畏郅都之威，刻木象都之状，交弓射之，莫能一中。不知都之精神在形象邪？
现代文：匈奴内心害怕郅都的威风，刻一个木头人像郅都的形状，用乱箭射木像，没有一箭射中，不知是郅都的精神附着在木像上了呢？
English: The Xiongnu was afraid of the prestige of Xindu. He carved a wooden man in the shape of Xindu, and shot arrows at the wooden statue. None of the arrows hit the statue. Was it the spirit of Xindu that was attached to the wooden statue?

古文：亡将匈奴敬鬼精神在木也？
现代文：还是匈奴害怕的心理附着在木像上了呢？
English: Or is the fear of the Huns attached to the wooden statue?

古文：如都之精神在形象，天龙之神亦在土龙。
现代文：如果郅都的精神附于木像上，天龙的精神也会附在土龙上。
English: If the spirit of Xindu is attached to the wooden statue, the spirit of Tianlong will also be attached to the clay dragon.

古文：如匈奴精在於木人，则雩祭者之精亦在土龙。
现代文：如果匈奴害怕的心理附在木像上，那么雩祭者的精神也就可以附在土龙上。
English: If the fear of the Xiongnu is attached to the wooden statue, then the spirit of the sacrificial animal can also be attached to the clay dragon.

古文：十二也。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第十二条理由。
English: This is the twelfth reason why soil dragons can cause rain.

古文：金翁叔，休屠王之太子也，与父俱来降汉，父道死，与母俱来，拜为骑者尉。
现代文：金翁叔是休屠王的太子，他与父亲一同来归降汉朝。父亲在路上死了，他与母亲一同来，汉朝拜他为骑都尉。
English: Uncle Jin Weng was the prince of King Xiu Tu. He came with his father to surrender to the Han Dynasty. His father died on the way. He came with his mother. The Han Dynasty worshipped him as a cavalry captain.

古文：母死，武帝图其母於甘泉殿上，署曰 休屠王焉提 。
现代文：他母亲死后，汉武帝画他母亲的像放在甘泉殿上，像上题字 休屠王焉提 。
English: After his mother's death, Emperor Hanwu painted a portrait of his mother and placed it on the Ganquan Hall, with the inscription "Hui Tuo Wang Yan Ti" above the portrait.

古文：翁叔从上上甘泉，拜谒起立，向之泣涕沾襟，久乃去。
现代文：金翁叔跟随皇帝上甘泉殿，拜见他母亲的画像后站立在像前，向画像哭泣眼泪沾湿了衣襟，哭了很久才离开。
English: Uncle Jin Weng followed the emperor to the Ganquan Palace. After seeing the portrait of his mother, he stood in front of the portrait, weeping at the portrait. His tears soaked his shirt collar, and he cried for a long time before leaving.

古文：夫图画，非母之实身也，因见形象，涕泣辄下，思亲气感，不待实然也。
现代文：图画上的像，不是他母亲的真实身体，由于见到母亲的形象，眼泪就流下来了，被思念母亲情绪所激动，就用不着他母亲真的出现。
English: The image on the picture is not his mother's real body, because seeing his mother's image, tears flowed down, and he was moved by the emotion of missing his mother, so his mother did not have to really appear.

古文：夫土龙犹甘泉之图画也，云雨见之，何为不动？
现代文：土龙好比是甘泉殿上的画像，云雨见到它，为什么不感动呢？
English: The soil dragon is like the image on the Ganquan Hall. When Yunru saw it, why wasn't he moved?

古文：十三也。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第十三条理由。
English: This is the thirteenth reason why soil dragons can cause rain.

古文：此尚夷狄也。
现代文：这还只是夷狄之类。
English: It's just a bunch of bullshit.

古文：有若似孔子，孔子死，弟子思慕，共坐有若孔子之座。
现代文：有若的像貌酷似孔子，孔子死后，弟子们思慕他，共同推有若坐在孔子的座位上。
English: After the death of Confucius, his disciples yearned for him, and together they pushed him to sit in Confucius' seat.

古文：弟子知有若非孔子也，犹共坐而尊事之。
现代文：弟子们知道有若并不是孔子，还要共同推他坐孔子位而尊敬地侍奉他。
English: Disciples know that if there is no Confucius, they should jointly promote him to the position of Confucius and respectfully serve him.

古文：云雨之知，使若诸弟子之知，虽知土龙非真，然犹感动，思类而至。
现代文：云雨的智慧，假使和孔子的弟子们的智慧一样，即使知道土龙不是真龙，然而仍要被感动，因思慕同类而到来。
English: If the wisdom of Yunyu is the same as the wisdom of the disciples of Confucius, even if they know that the soil dragon is not a real dragon, they will still be moved and come because they yearn for the same kind.

古文：十四也。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第十四条理由。
English: This is the fourteenth reason why soil dragons can cause rain.

古文：有若，孔子弟子疑其体象，则谓相似。
现代文：有若，孔子的弟子们把他的形体、容貌和孔子相比较，就说是很相似。
English: If Confucius' disciples compare his shape and appearance with Confucius, they say that they are very similar.

古文：孝武皇帝幸李夫人，夫人死，思见其形。
现代文：孝武皇帝宠爱李夫人，李夫人死后，他很想见到她的形体。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was very fond of Mrs. Li. After Mrs. Li's death, he wanted to see her corpse.

古文：道士以术为李夫人，夫人步入殿门，武帝望见，知其非也，然犹感动，喜乐近之。
现代文：道士以法术变出了一个李夫人，李夫人走入殿门，武帝望见她，知道她不是真实的李夫人，然而还是很激动，高兴地想亲近她。
English: The Taoist conjured up a Mrs. Li with magic. Mrs. Li walked into the gate of the temple. Emperor Wu saw her and knew that she was not the real Mrs. Li. However, he was still very excited and gladly wanted to get close to her.

古文：使云雨之气，如武帝之心，虽知土龙非真，然犹爱好感起而来。
现代文：假使云雨之气像武帝的心一样，即使知道土龙不是真龙，仍然会因爱好土龙感应兴起而到来。
English: If the wind of clouds and rain is like the heart of Emperor Wu, even if you know that the soil dragon is not a real dragon, it will still come because of the rise of the soil dragon.

古文：十五也。
现代文：这是土龙能致雨的第十五条理由。
English: This is the fifteenth reason why soil dragons can cause rain.

古文：既效验有十五，又亦有义四焉。
现代文：已经列举了十五个例证，还可以举出四条理由。
English: Fifteen examples have been given, and four reasons can be given.

古文：立春东耕，为土象人，男女各二人，秉耒把锄；或立土牛。未必能耕也。
现代文：立春举行耕田仪式，用土堆成人像，男女各二人，手中拿着耒和锄；或者堆塑土牛，象人、土牛未必能够耕地。
English: At the beginning of spring, a ceremony is held to cultivate the fields. Statues of two men and two women are made from mounds of earth, holding a plough and a harrow in their hands. Alternatively, earthenware oxen are made from the mounds of earth. Both the elephant and the earthenware ox may not be able to cultivate the land.

古文：顺气应时，示率下也。
现代文：顺应节气时令，表示给老百姓做个榜样。
English: Adhering to the solar terms and seasons means setting an example for the people.

古文：今设土龙，虽知不能致雨，亦当夏时以类应变，与立土人土牛同义。
现代文：现在设置土龙，即使知道不能招致云雨，也应当在夏季的时候，用与真龙类似的土龙来应付旱灾出现，这与堆塑土人、土牛是同一个道理。
English: If a clay dragon is set up now, even if it is known that it cannot cause clouds and rain, it should be used in the summer to cope with droughts with a clay dragon similar to the real dragon. This is the same reason as stacking clay people and clay oxen.

古文：也。
现代文：这是第一条理由。
English: This is the first reason.

古文：礼，宗庙之主，以木为之，长尺二寸，以象先祖。
现代文：按照礼制，宗庙里的神主牌位，用木板做成，长一尺二寸，用来象征先祖。
English: According to the etiquette, the god card in the ancestral temple is made of wood and is one foot two inches long, used to symbolize the ancestors.

古文：孝子入庙，主心事之，虽知木主非亲，亦当尽敬。
现代文：孝子进入宗庙，一心一意地侍奉它，即使知道木牌位不是祖宗，也应当尽力孝敬，表示出虔诚侍奉的意思。
English: Filial sons and daughters enter the ancestral temple and serve it wholeheartedly. Even if they know that the wooden plaque is not the ancestor, they should do their best to show filial piety and the meaning of pious service.

古文：有所主事，土龙与木主同。虽知非真，示当感动，立意於象。
现代文：土龙与木牌位相同，即使知道不是真龙，也应当受到感动，对土龙表示自己的心愿。
English: Even if you know that it is not a real dragon, you should be moved and express your wishes to the clay dragon.

古文：二也。
现代文：这是第二条理由。
English: That's two.

古文：涂车、刍灵，圣人知其无用，示象生存，不敢无也。
现代文：涂车、刍灵这类东西，圣人知道它们没有什么作用，为了表示祖先像还活着一样，不敢缺少这些东西。
English: In order to show that their ancestors were still alive, the sages did not dare to do without things like lacquered chariots and eunuchs, as they knew that they were of no use.

古文：夫设土龙，知其不能动雨也，示若涂车、刍灵而有致。
现代文：设置土龙，明知道它是不能招致云雨的，但就像用涂车、刍灵殉葬一样，是为了表示尽心而已。
English: Setting up a clay dragon, knowing full well that it cannot cause clouds and rain, but just like using a painted car and burying a dead body, is just to show dedication.

古文：三也。
现代文：这是第三条理由。
English: That's three.

古文：天子射熊，诸侯射麋，卿大夫射虎豹，士射鹿豕，示服猛也。
现代文：天子射熊头箭靶，诸侯射麋头箭靶，卿大夫射虎头豹头箭靶，士人射鹿头猪头箭靶，以表示征服凶猛的东西。
English: The son of heaven shoots a bear's head arrow target, the princes shoot a rooster's head arrow target, the noble doctor shoots a tiger's head leopard's head arrow target, and the scholar shoots a deer's head pig's head arrow target to represent the conquest of fierce things.

古文：名布为侯，示射无道诸侯也。
现代文：把画着熊、麋、虎、豹、鹿、猪的布靶子取名为 侯 ，是表示要射杀暴虐的诸侯之意。
English: The cloth targets painted with bears, baboons, tigers, leopards, deer, and pigs were called "Hou," which means to shoot the tyrannical princes.

古文：夫画布为熊麋之象，名布为侯，礼贵意象，示义取名也。
现代文：画熊、麋等物的头像在布靶上，把布靶取名为 侯 ，说明礼是注重具有深刻含意的形象，为了显示寓意而取名的。
English: Draw the head of a bear, dragonfly and other things on a cloth target, and name the cloth target "Hou," indicating that the ritual is to pay attention to the image with deep meaning, and name it in order to show the moral.

古文：土龙亦夫熊麋、布侯之类。
现代文：土龙也就同画上熊麋的布侯一样。
English: The soil dragon is also the same as the cloth lord with the bear on it.

古文：四也。
现代文：这是第四条理由。
English: Four, too.

古文：夫以象类有十五验，以礼示意有四义。
现代文：以形象相似有十五个例证，以礼制表示含义有四条理由。
English: There are fifteen examples of image resemblance, and four reasons for the use of etiquette to express meaning.

古文：仲舒览见深鸿，立事不妄，设土龙之象，果有状也。
现代文：董仲舒阅历深见识广，不会是随便确定某事的，设置土龙的形状，确实有他的根据。
English: Dong Zhongshu is well-read and well-informed. He will not arbitrarily determine something, and the setting of the shape of the clay dragon really has his basis.

古文：龙暂出水，云雨乃至。
现代文：龙突然跃出水面，云雨才会到来。
English: When the dragon suddenly leaps out of the water, clouds and rain will come.

古文：古者畜龙、御龙，常存，无云雨。
现代文：古时候饲养龙、驾御龙，龙经常存在，就没有云雨了。
English: In ancient times, dragons were bred and driven, and dragons often existed, so there was no cloud and rain.

古文：犹旧交相阔远，卒然相见，欢欣歌笑，或至悲泣涕，偃伏少久，则示行各恍忽矣。《易》曰： 云从龙。 非言龙从云也。
现代文：就像老朋友分别久了，突然遇见，心情愉快欢歌谈笑，甚至激动得流泪，相处的时间稍久一点，也就各自淡漠了，《周易》上说 云从龙 ，没有说 龙从云 。
English: Just like old friends who have been separated for a long time, suddenly meet, are in a happy mood, sing and talk, and even cry with excitement. If they spend a little more time together, they will become indifferent to each other. "Zhou Yi" said "cloud from dragon," but did not say "dragon from cloud."

古文：云樽刻雷云之象，龙安肯来？
现代文：雷樽上刻画雷云的图象，龙怎么肯下来呢？
English: The image of a thundercloud is engraved on the thunder barrel. How can the dragon come down?

古文：夫如是，传之者何可解，则桓君山之难可说也，则刘子骏不能对，劣也，劣则董仲舒之龙说不终也。
现代文：如果是这样，提出疑问的人还有什么可说的呢？那么桓君山提出的责难也可以解答了，而刘子骏不能回答，是因为他才学低劣的缘故，刘子骏的才学低劣，使董仲舒设土龙求雨的理论得不到透彻的解释。
English: If this is the case, what else can the questioner say? Then the accusation raised by Huan Junshan can also be answered, and Liu Zixuan cannot answer because he is inferior in learning. Liu Zixuan's learning is inferior, so that Dong Zhongshu's theory of setting a dragon to ask for rain cannot be thoroughly explained.

古文：《论衡》终之。故曰 乱龙 。
现代文：《论衡》透彻地解释它，所以称作《乱龙篇》。
English: "On Balance" explains it thoroughly, so it is called "Crazy Dragon."

古文：者，终也。
现代文：乱，就是进行透彻的解释。
English: Chaos is a thorough explanation.

