古文：子张问入官于孔子。
现代文：子张向孔子询问做官的事。
English: Zi Zhang asked Confucius about being an official.

古文：孔子曰： 安身取誉为难。 
现代文：孔子说： 做到官位稳固又能有好的名声很难。 
English: Confucius said: It is difficult to achieve a stable official position and a good reputation.

古文：子张曰： 为之如何？ 
现代文：子张说： 那该怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhang Zi said, "Then what should we do?"

古文：孔子曰： 己有善勿专，教不能勿怠，已过勿发，失言勿椅，不善勿遂，行事勿留。
现代文：孔子说： 自己有长处不要独自拥有，教别人学习不要懈怠，已出现的过错不要再次发生，说错了话不要为之辩护，不好的事不要继续做下去，正在做的事不要拖延。
English: Confucius said: Do not own your own strengths, do not slack off in teaching others to learn, do not repeat mistakes that have occurred, do not defend wrong words, do not continue to do bad things, and do not delay what you are doing.

古文：君子入官，自此六者，则身安誉至而政从矣。
现代文：君子做官能做到这六点，就可以使地位稳固声誉好，从而政事也会顺利。
English: If a gentleman can do these six points, he can make his position stable and his reputation good, so that political affairs will be smooth.

古文：且夫忿数者，官狱所由生也；拒谏者，虑之所以塞也；慢易者，礼之所以失也；怠惰者，时之所以后也；奢侈者，财之所以不足也；专独者，事之所以不成也。
现代文： 况且，怨恨多了，牢狱之灾就会发生；拒绝劝谏，思虑就会受到阻塞；行为不庄重谨慎，就会失礼；做事松懈懒惰，就会丧失时机；办事奢侈，财物就不充足；专断独权，事情就办不成。
English: Moreover, if there is a lot of resentment, the disaster of prison will occur; if you refuse to persuade, your thoughts will be blocked; if your behavior is not dignified and prudent, you will be rude; if you are lax and lazy in doing things, you will lose the opportunity; if you are extravagant in doing things, your wealth will not be sufficient; if you are arbitrary, you will not be able to get things done.

古文：君子入官，除此六者，则身安誉至而政从矣。
现代文：君子做官，去掉这六种毛病，就可以使地位稳固声誉好，从而政事也会顺利。
English: When a gentleman becomes an official, if he eliminates these six kinds of defects, he can make his position stable and his reputation good, so that political affairs will be smooth.

古文：故君子南面临官大域之中而公治之，精智而略行之，合是忠信，考是大伦，存是美恶，进是利而除是害，无求其报焉，而民之情可得也。
现代文： 因此君子一旦做了官，治理广大的区域，就要以公心来治理，精心地思考而简要地推行，再加上以上所讲的六点忠信品德，考虑哪些是伦理道德的最高准则，把好事和坏事合并考察，推广有利的，除去有害的，不追求别人的回报，这样就可以得到民情了。
English: Therefore, once a gentleman becomes an official and governs a vast area, he must govern with a fair mind, think carefully and implement it briefly, add the above-mentioned six points of loyalty and morality, consider which are the highest standards of ethics and morality, combine good things and bad things, promote the beneficial, remove the harmful, and do not pursue the return of others, so that you can get the people's sentiment.

古文：夫临之无抗民之恶，胜之无犯民之言，量之无佼民之辞，养之无扰于其时，爱之无宽于刑法。
现代文：治理民众没有逆天虐民的恶行，自己有理也不说冒犯民众的话，处理政事没有欺骗百姓的狡诈之辞，为了百姓安居乐业劳役不要违背农时，爱护百姓不能比刑法更宽。
English: In governing the people, there should be no evil acts against heaven and the people, no words that offend the people should be said when there is reason to do so, and there should be no cunning words that deceive the people in handling political affairs. For the sake of the people's peaceful living, work and labor, do not violate the agricultural time, and love and care for the people cannot be broader than the criminal law.

古文：若此，则身安誉至而民得也。
现代文：如果能做到这样，就可以使地位稳固声誉好，从而政事也会顺利。
English: If you can do this, you can make your position stable and your reputation good, so that the government will be smooth.

古文：君子以临官，所见则迩，故明不可蔽也；所求于迩，故不劳而得也；所以治者约，故不用众而誉立；凡法象在内，故法不远而源泉不竭。是以天下积而本不寡，短长得其量，人志治而不乱政，德贯乎心，藏乎志，刑乎色，发乎声。若此，而身安誉至，民咸自治矣。
现代文：先从近处寻找自己需要的东西，这样不用费很大力气就可以得到。治理国家抓住了主要问题，不用兴师动众就可以获得好名声。凡内心存在准则、榜样，那么准则、榜样离自己不远，就如同源泉不会枯竭一样，因此天下人才汇聚而不会缺乏。根据才能的不同都得到任用，人才各得其用，政治就不会混乱。良好的德行贯穿于内心，藏在心志之中，显露在表情上，发表于言谈上，这样，官位就会稳固，好名声随之而至，民众自然就会得到治理。
English: First, look for what you need from nearby, so that you can get it without much effort. Governance of the country grasps the main issues, and you can get a good reputation without having to motivate the masses. If there are guidelines and examples in your heart, then the guidelines and examples are not far from you, just as the source will not be depleted, so the world's talents will converge and there will be no shortage. According to the differences in talents, they are all appointed, the talents are used in their own way, and the politics will not be confused. Good virtues run through the heart, hidden in the aspirations, revealed in the expression, and published in the speech, so that the official position

古文：是故临官不治则乱，乱生则争之者至，争之至，又于乱。
现代文： 由此看来，身居官位不善于治理就会发生混乱，混乱发生竞争的人就会出现。竞争的局面发生，政治会更加混乱。
English: From this perspective, if those who hold official positions are not good at governance, chaos will occur, and if chaos occurs, people who compete will emerge. If a competitive situation occurs, politics will be even more chaotic.

古文：明君必宽佑以容其民，慈爱优柔之，而民自得矣。
现代文：英明的君主必须宽容地对待百姓，用慈爱之心去安抚他们，自然就会得到民众的拥护。
English: A wise monarch must treat the people with tolerance, appease them with a loving heart, and will naturally receive the support of the people.

古文：行者、政之始也；说者、情之导也。
现代文：身体力行，是执好政的前提；让百姓高兴，他们的情绪就可以得到疏导。
English: Physical practice is a prerequisite for good governance; let the people be happy, and their emotions can be channeled.

古文：善政行易，则民不怨；言调说和，则民不变；法在身，则民象之；明在己，则民显之。
现代文：良好的政治措施易于执行而民众也不会有怨言，言论说法符合民心，民众就不会有二心。自己以身作则遵守法律，民众就会以你为榜样；自己正大光明，民众则会颂扬你。
English: Good political measures are easy to implement and the people will not have complaints. Speeches and statements are in line with the people's hearts, and the people will not have second thoughts. If you follow the law by example, the people will follow your example; if you are righteous, the people will praise you.

古文：若乃供己而不节，则财利之生者微矣；贪以不得，则善政必简矣；苟以乱之，则善言必不听也；详以纳之，则规谏日至。
现代文：如果自己贪图享受而不节俭，那么生产财富的人就不努力生产了；贪图财物又胡乱花费，那么好的政治措施也简约不用了。假如政治出现了混乱，那么好的意见必然听不进去；如果仔细审慎地采纳别人的建议，那么天天都会有人进谏。
English: If you are greedy for enjoyment and not frugal, then those who produce wealth will not work hard to produce; if you are greedy for wealth and spend recklessly, then good political measures are simply unnecessary. If there is chaos in politics, then good opinions will inevitably not be heard; if you carefully and prudently adopt other people's suggestions, then there will be people getting into trouble every day.

古文：言之善者，在所日闻；行之善者，在所能为。
现代文：能说出美好的语言，在于每天能听取别人的意见；能有美好的行为，在于能亲身去做。
English: To be able to speak good words is to be able to listen to the opinions of others every day; to be able to have good behavior is to be able to do it yourself.

古文：故君上者、民之仪也；有司执政者，民之表也；迩臣便僻者，群仆之伦也。
现代文：所以说统治民众的君王，是民众的榜样；各级政府的官员，是民众的表率；君王身边的侍御大臣，是臣仆们的样板。
English: Therefore, the king who rules over the people is a role model for the people; government officials at all levels are role models for the people; the ministers who serve the king are role models for his servants.

古文：故仪不正，则民失；表不端，则百姓乱；迩臣便僻，则群臣污矣。
现代文：所以说榜样不正，百姓就失去了方向；表率不正，百姓就会混乱；侍御大臣不正，群臣就会变坏。
English: Therefore, if the example is not right, the people will lose their direction; if the example is not right, the people will be confused; if the attendant minister is not right, the ministers will become bad.

古文：是以人主不可不敬乎三伦。
现代文：因此治国的君主不可不谨慎地遵守各种伦理道德。
English: Therefore, the reigning monarch must not carelessly abide by all kinds of ethics.

古文：君子修身反道，察里言而服之，则身安誉至，终始在焉。
现代文： 君子遵循道来修身，仔细辨别哪些是正确的道理来行事，地位就可巩固，名望也随之而至，终生受用无穷。
English: A gentleman follows the Tao to cultivate his body, and carefully discerns which are the correct principles to act on. The position can be consolidated, and fame will follow, and it will be used endlessly throughout his life.

古文：故夫女子必自择丝麻，良工必自择完材，贤君必自择左右。
现代文：所以女子织布一定要亲自挑选丝麻，优秀的工匠一定要亲自挑选材料，贤明的君主一定要亲自挑选身边的大臣。
English: Therefore, women weavers must personally select the silk and flax, excellent craftsmen must personally select the materials, and wise monarchs must personally select the ministers around them.

古文：劳于取人，佚于治事，君子欲誉，则必谨其左右。
现代文：选拔人才辛苦一些，治理政事时就轻松一些。君子要想得到美誉，也要谨慎选择交往的人。
English: It is more difficult to select talents, but it is easier to govern affairs. If a gentleman wants to get a good reputation, he should also carefully choose the people he interacts with.

古文：为上者、譬如缘木焉，务高而畏下兹甚。
现代文：在上位的人，就好像爬树一样，爬得越高越害怕掉下来。
English: People at the top, just like climbing a tree, become more afraid of falling the higher they climb.

古文：六马之乖离，必于四达之交衢；万民之叛道，必于君上之失政。
现代文：拉车的六匹马分散乱跑，一定是在四通八达的交叉路口；百姓造反，必定是因为君王政治措施的错误。
English: The six horses of the cart must have been scattered at the crossroads; the people must have revolted because of the error of the king's political measures.

古文：上者尊严而危，民者卑贱而神。
现代文：在上者虽然尊严却是有危险的，民众虽然卑贱却是有神力的。
English: In the above, although the dignity is dangerous, the people, although lowly, are powerful.

古文：爱之则存，恶之则亡。
现代文：民众热爱你，你就能存在；民众厌恶你，你就要灭亡。
English: If the people love you, you will live; if the people hate you, you will die.

古文：长民者必明此之要。
现代文：治理民众的人必须要明了这个道理的重要。
English: Those who govern the people must understand the importance of this principle.

古文：故南面临官，贵而不骄，富而能供，有本而能图末，修事而能建业，久居而不滞，情近而畅乎远，察一物而贯乎多，治一物而万物不能乱者，以身本者也。
现代文：因此在上为官，地位虽然高贵也不要骄横，富有了也要谨慎恭敬，有了根本还要考虑细枝末节，做好了事还要建功立业，有了长时间的安定局面仍然要不停地努力，近处的感情沟通了还要畅达到远方，观察一件事物要能联想多种事物。治理一件事而万事都能不乱，是因为能够以身作则的缘故。
English: Therefore, as a high-ranking official, although the position is noble, you should not be arrogant. If you are rich, you should be cautious and respectful. If you have a foundation, you should also consider the details. If you have done a good job, you should also make contributions. If you have a stable situation for a long time, you should still work hard. If you have a close emotional communication, you should also be able to reach the distance smoothly. If you observe one thing, you should be able to associate it with many things. If you can manage one thing and everything is not chaotic, it is because you can lead by example.

古文：君子莅民，不可以不知民之性而达诸民之情。
现代文： 君子统治民众，不可不了解民众的性情，进而了解民众的感情。
English: For a gentleman to rule the people, he must understand the temperament of the people, and then understand the feelings of the people.

古文：既知其性，又习其情，然后民乃从命矣。
现代文：既已知道了民性，而又熟悉了民情，然后民众才能服从你的管理。
English: Once you know the people's nature and are familiar with the people's conditions, then the people can obey your management.

古文：故世举则民亲之，政均则民无怨。
现代文：因此国家安定民众就会爱戴国君，政策公平合理民众就无怨言。
English: Therefore, if the country is stable, the people will love the king, and if the policies are fair and reasonable, the people will have no complaints.

古文：故君子莅民，不临以高，不导以远，不责民之所不为，不强民之所不能。
现代文：所以君子治国，不能只是高高在上，不能做远不可及的事情，不责备民众做不愿做的事，不强求民众做不能完成的事。
English: Therefore, a gentleman cannot govern the country only by being superior, cannot do things that are beyond his reach, does not blame the people for doing things they do not want to do, and does not force the people to do things that cannot be done.

古文：以明王之功，不因其情，则民严而不迎；笃之以累年之业，不因其力，则民引而不从。
现代文：为了扩大贤明君主那样的功业，不顾民情，那么民众表面恭敬实际上却不愿意迎合。为了增加已有的业绩，不顾民力，那么民众就会逃避不服从。
English: In order to expand the work of a wise monarch, regardless of the people's feelings, then the people are outwardly respectful, but in fact they are not willing to meet. In order to increase the existing performance, regardless of the people's power, then the people will escape disobedience.

古文：若责民所不为，强民所不能，则民疾；疾则僻矣。
现代文：如果强迫民众做他们不愿做的事，强迫他们做不能完成的事，民众就会痛恨，痛恨就会作出不当的事。
English: If you force the people to do what they don't want to do, force them to do what they can't accomplish, the people will hate it, hate it and do something improper.

古文：古者圣主冕而前旒，所以蔽明也；紘紞充耳，所以揜聪也。
现代文：古代的圣明君主戴着前面悬垂着玉的帽子，是用来遮蔽亮光的；垂于冠冕两边悬填的带子挡住耳朵，是用来遮蔽听觉的。
English: The ancient holy emperors wore a hat with a bead dangling in front, which was used to cover the bright light; the hanging bands on both sides of the crown blocked the ears and were used to cover the hearing.

古文：水至清即无鱼，人至察则无徒。
现代文：水太清就没有鱼，人太过明察就没有追随者了。
English: If the water is too clear, there will be no fish. If people are too observant, there will be no followers.

古文：枉而直之，使自得之；优而柔之，使自求之；揆而度之，使自索之。
现代文：百姓做错了事需要改正，要使百姓自己有所认识；宽厚柔和地对待百姓，让他们自己去发现错误；度量百姓的情况来教育他们，让他们自己明白对错。
English: What the people have done wrong needs to be corrected, so that the people themselves have some understanding; treat the people with generosity and gentleness, let them find the mistakes themselves; measure the people's situation to educate them, let them understand right and wrong.

古文：民有小过，必求其善，以赦其过；民有大罪，必原其故，以仁辅化。如有死罪，其使之生，则善也。
现代文：百姓犯了小罪，一定要找出他们的长处，赦免他们的过错；百姓犯了大罪，一定要找出犯罪的原因，用仁爱的思想教育他们，使他们改过从善；如果犯了死罪，惩治后使他们得到新生，那就更好了。
English: If the people have committed minor crimes, we must find out their strengths and pardon their faults; if the people have committed major crimes, we must find out the reasons for the crimes, educate them with the thought of benevolence, and make them reform and do good; if they have committed capital crimes, it would be better to punish them and make them have a new life.

古文：是以上下亲而不离；道化流而不蕴。
现代文：这样君臣百姓上下亲和而不离心离德，治理国家的措施就能够推行而不阻塞。
English: In this way, the ruler, the subjects, and the people can be close to each other without being separated from the center, and the measures for governing the country can be implemented without obstruction.

古文：故德者、政之始也。
现代文：所以说执政者的道德，是政治好坏的前提。
English: Therefore, the morality of those in power is a prerequisite for good or bad politics.

古文：政不和，则民不从其教矣；不从教，则民不习；不习，则不可得而使也。
现代文： 政令不切合实际，民众就不会服从教导；不服从教导，民众就不习惯遵守法令法规；不习惯遵守法令法规，就不能很好地役使和统治他们了。
English: If the decrees are impractical, the people will not obey the teachings; if they do not obey the teachings, the people are not used to abiding by the laws and regulations; if they are not used to abiding by the laws and regulations, they cannot be well served and governed.

古文：君子欲言之见信也，莫善乎先虚其内；欲政之速行也，莫善乎以身先之；欲民之速服也，莫善乎以道御之。
现代文：君子要想使自己的话被别人相信，最好的办法是虚心听取意见；要想政治措施迅速推行，最好的办法是身体力行；要想使民众迅速服从，最好的办法是以正确之道来治理国家。
English: If a gentleman wants his words to be believed by others, the best way is to listen to opinions with an open mind; if he wants political measures to be implemented quickly, the best way is to do it himself; if he wants the people to obey quickly, the best way is to govern the country in the right way.

古文：故虽服必强，自非忠信，则无可以取亲于百姓者矣；内外不相应，则无可以取信于庶民者矣。
现代文：不以正确之道治理，民众即使服从也是勉强的。不依靠忠信，就不可能取得百姓的亲近和信任。朝廷和民众不能相互了解沟通，就不能取信于平民百姓。
English: If the government does not govern in the right way, the people will be reluctant to obey. Without relying on loyalty, it is impossible to gain the closeness and trust of the people. If the imperial court and the people cannot understand and communicate with each other, they cannot gain the trust of the common people.

古文：此治民之至道矣，入官之大统矣。 
现代文：这是治理民众的最重要的原则，也是入仕做官者最重要的纲领。 
English: This is the most important principle for governing the people, and it is also the most important program for those who enter government.

古文：子张既闻孔子斯言，遂退而记之。
现代文：子张听了孔子这番话，就回去记录下来。
English: After hearing these words from Confucius, Zizhang went back and wrote them down.

