古文：邾隐公既即位，将冠，使大夫因孟懿子问礼于孔子。
现代文：邾隐公即位后，将要举行冠礼，派大夫通过孟懿子向孔子询问举行冠礼的有关礼仪。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Qianyin, the coronation ceremony was to be held. A doctor was sent to ask Confucius about the etiquette of the coronation ceremony through Mencius.

古文：子曰： 其礼如世子之冠，冠于阼者，以着代也。
现代文：孔子说： 这个礼仪应该和世子的冠礼是一样的。世子加冠时要站在大堂前东面的台阶上，以表示他要代父成为家长。
English: Confucius said: This etiquette should be the same as the crowning of the heir. When crowning the heir, he should stand on the steps in front of the lobby to the east, to indicate that he wants to become a parent in place of his father.

古文：醮于客位，加其有成。
现代文：然后站在客位向位卑者敬酒。
English: Then, standing in the guest seats, they toasted to the underdog.

古文：三加弥尊，导喻其志。
现代文：每戴一次冠敬一次酒，表示加礼于有成的人。
English: Every time a crown is worn, a bottle of wine is toasted, which is a mark of respect to those who have achieved success.

古文：冠而字之，敬其名也。
现代文：三次加冠，一次比一次尊贵，教导他要有志向。
English: Three times crowned, once more honored, teach him to have ambition.

古文：虽天子之元子，犹士也，其礼无变。
现代文：加冠以后，人们用字来称呼他，这是尊重他的名。即使是天子的长子，与一般平民百姓也没有什么两样，他们的冠礼仪式是相同的。
English: After the crowning, people use words to call him, which is to respect his name. Even the eldest son of the son of heaven is no different from the general public, and their crowning ceremony is the same.

古文：天下无生而贵者，故也行冠事必于祖庙，以裸享之礼以将之，以金石之乐节之，所以自卑而尊先祖，示不敢擅。 
现代文：天下没有生下来就高贵的，故而冠礼一定要在祖庙里举行，用裸享的礼节来进行，用钟磬之乐加以节制，这样可以使加冠者感到自己的卑微而更加尊敬自己的祖先，以表示自己不敢擅越祖先的礼制。 
English: The world is not born noble, so the crowning ceremony must be held in the ancestral temple, with the etiquette of naked enjoyment, and with the music of the gong to be controlled, so that the crowned person can feel humble and respect their ancestors more, to show that they dare not exceed the etiquette of their ancestors.

古文：懿子曰： 天子未冠即位，长亦冠也。 
现代文：懿子说： 天子因年幼未举行冠礼便登上王位，长大以后还要举行冠礼吗？ 
English: The cripple said, "Since the Son of Heaven ascended to the throne at a young age without a coronation ceremony, will he still have to hold a coronation ceremony when he grows up?"

古文：孔子曰： 古者王世子虽幼，其即位则尊为人君，人君治成人之事者，何冠之有。 
现代文：孔子说： 古代君王的世子年纪虽幼，一旦即位，则被尊为人君。人君做的是成人所做的事，哪里还要举行冠礼呢！ 
English: Confucius said: Although the sons of ancient kings were young, once they ascended the throne, they were respected as princes. Princes do what adults do, where else would coronations be held?

古文：懿子曰： 然则诸侯之冠，异天子与？ 
现代文：懿子说： 那么诸侯的冠礼和天子有什么不同呢？ 
English: The lame man said, "Then what is the difference between the crowning of princes and the heavenly son?"

古文：孔子曰： 君薨而世子主丧，是亦冠也已，人君无所殊也。 
现代文：孔子说： 天子去世，世子为他主持丧事，这说明他已经是成人了。诸侯也是人君，与天子没什么不同。 
English: Confucius said, "When the heavenly son dies, the earthly son presides over his funeral, which shows that he is already an adult. Princes are also human beings, no different from the heavenly son.

古文：懿子曰： 今邾君之冠，非礼也。 
现代文：懿子说： 现今邾隐公都举行冠礼，不符合礼制吧？ 
English: Zou Zi said: Nowadays, all the emperors and empresses hold coronation ceremonies. Isn't that in line with the etiquette?

古文：孔子曰： 诸侯之有冠礼也，夏之末造也，有自来矣，今无讥焉。
现代文：孔子说： 诸侯有冠礼，是从夏朝末年开始的。这是有来源的，现在没有必要讥讽它。
English: Confucius said: Princes have coronations, which began at the end of the Xia Dynasty. This has a source, and there is no need to ridicule it now.

古文：天子冠者，武王崩，成王年十有三而嗣立，周公居冢宰，摄政以治天下，明年夏六月，既葬，冠成王而朝于祖，以见诸侯，亦有君也。周公命祝雍作颂曰： 祝王达而未幼。 
现代文：天子举行冠礼，始于周成王。武王驾崩，成王十三岁便继承了王位，周公担任冢宰，辅助成王治理天下。第二年夏六月，安葬了武王，为成王举行冠礼并朝拜先祖，接见诸侯，也表示有了国君。周公命令祝雍作辞，说： 祝贺我王一切顺利并快快长大。 
English: The coronation of the heavenly son began with King Zhou Cheng. King Wu passed away, and King Cheng inherited the throne at the age of thirteen. Zhou Gong served as regent and assisted King Cheng in governing the world. In June of the following summer, King Wu was buried, and a coronation was held for King Cheng and he paid homage to his ancestors, met with princes, and also said that he had become the king of the country. King Zhou ordered that Yong should make a speech, saying: "Congratulations to my king for everything going well and for growing up quickly."

古文：祝雍辞曰： 使王近于民，远于年，啬于时，惠于财，亲贤而任能。 
现代文：祝雍祝辞说： 祝愿我主深得民心，长命百岁，使民有时，国富民丰，亲贤而任能。 
English: Zhu Yong said in his congratulatory speech, "I wish my lord to win the hearts of the people, live a long life of one hundred years, make the people prosperous, the country rich, and the people wise and competent.

古文：其颂曰： 令月吉日，王始加元服，去王幼志，服衮职，钦若昊命，六合是式，率尔祖考，永永无极。 
现代文：祝雍又作辞说： 良辰吉日，王举行冠礼。
English: In his congratulatory speech, Yong also said, "On this auspicious day, the king will hold a coronation ceremony.

古文：此周公之制也。 
现代文：去掉稚气，穿上龙袍。
English: Get rid of childishness and put on a dragon robe.

古文：懿子曰： 诸侯之冠，其所以为宾主，何也？ 
现代文：敬顺天命，效法天地四方。祖宗先人，保佑国运永昌。 
English: Adhere to the heavenly destiny, follow the laws of heaven and earth in all directions. Ancestors, bless the national prosperity forever.

古文：孔子曰： 公冠则以卿为宾，无介公自为主，迎宾揖升自阼，立于席北，其醴也则如士，飨之以三献之礼，既醴，降自阼阶。
现代文：这是周公制定的礼制。 
English: This is the etiquette established by Zhou Gong.

古文：诸侯非公而自为主者，其所以异，皆降自西阶，玄端与皮弁，异朝服素毕，公冠四，加玄冕祭，其酬币于宾，则束帛乘马，王太子庶子之冠拟焉，皆天子自为三，其礼与士无变，飨食宾也，皆同。 懿子曰： 始冠必加缁布之冠，何也？ 
现代文：穿着黑色衣服，戴着白鹿皮的冠，和平时所穿的素色朝服和护膝不同。公要四次加冠，头戴玄冠，身穿祭服，在宾位上酬赠宾客，宾客则送束帛和乘马。王太子、庶子的冠礼也仿效诸侯的冠礼，都是天子亲自主持，礼仪与士冠礼一样。用酒食款待宾客，都是相同的。 懿子又问： 第一次加冠必须戴绷布冠，这是为什么呢？ 
English: He was dressed in black, wearing a white deerskin crown, which was different from the plain-colored imperial robes and knee pads worn in peacetime. He had to be crowned four times, wearing a brown crown on his head, wearing a ceremonial robe, and rewarding guests at the guest table, while the guests sent bundles of straw and rode horses. The crowning of the crown prince and the son-in-law also imitated the crowning of the princes, both of which were held by the prince himself, and the etiquette was the same as that of the crowning ceremony. The guests were entertained with wine and food, both of which were the same

古文：孔子曰： 示不忘古，太古冠布斋则缁之，其纟委也吾未之闻，今则冠而币之，可也。 
现代文：孔子说： 这是表示不忘古代的礼制，最早时是麻布做的冠，行斋戒礼时才戴绷布冠，至于帽子有下垂的带子，我没有听说过。现今举行冠礼连瑙布冠也不用了。 
English: Confucius said, "This is to show that the ancient etiquette should not be forgotten. In the earliest days, the crown was made of linen, and only the banded cloth crown was worn during the fasting ceremony. As for the hat with a drooping band, I have not heard of it. Nowadays, there is no need to wear a nawab cloth crown during the coronation ceremony.

古文：懿子曰： 三王之冠，其异何也？ 
现代文：懿子又问： 古代三王的帽子，有什么不同呢？ 
English: The cripple asked again: What is the difference between the ancient Three Kings' hats?

古文：孔子曰： 周弁，殷哻，夏收，一也。
现代文：孔子说： 周代叫牟，殷代叫哻，夏代叫收，作为冠都是一样的。
English: Confucius said: The Zhou Dynasty called it "Mou," the Yin Dynasty called it "Jing," and the Xia Dynasty called it "Chuan." As crowns, they are all the same.

古文：三王共皮弁，素纟委委貌，周道也；章甫⑦，殷道也；毋追⑧，夏后氏之道也。 
现代文：三王的帽子都是皮和素色缨饰。委貌，是周代的帽子；章甫，是殷代的帽子；毋追，是夏后氏的帽子。 
English: The hats of the three kings are all leather and plain-colored satin ornaments. Zhenfu is the hat of the Zhou dynasty; Zhangfu is the hat of the Yin dynasty; and Nepoizhou is the hat of the Xiaguo clan.

