古文：道武皇帝十男。
现代文：道武皇帝有十个儿子。
English: Emperor Daowu had ten sons.

古文：宣穆刘皇后生明元皇帝，贺夫人生清河王绍，大王夫人生阳平王熙，王夫人生河南王曜。
现代文：宣穆刘皇后生明元皇帝，贺夫人生清河王元绍，大王夫人生阳平王元熙，王夫人生河南王元曜。
English: The Empress Xuan Mu Liu gave birth to Emperor Mingyuan, the Lady He gave birth to Qinghe Wangyuan Shao, the Lady Daowang gave birth to Yangping Wangyuan Xi, and the Lady Wang gave birth to Henan Wangyuan Yu.

古文：河间王脩、长乐王处文二王母氏阙。
现代文：河间王元脩、长乐王元处文二王的母亲记载缺略。
English: The records of the mothers of Kawama Wang Yuanjun and Changle Wang Yuanjun are incomplete.

古文：段夫人生广平王连、京兆王黎。
现代文：段夫人生广平王元连、京兆王元黎。
English: Ms. Duan's life is the story of Guangping Wang Yuanlian and Keizhao Wang Yuanli.

古文：皇子浑及聪母氏并阙，皆早薨，无后。
现代文：皇子元浑和元聪的母亲都记载缺略，都死得很早，没有后代。
English: The mothers of the princes, Motohun and Mototsugu, are not well documented, both died very early and had no descendants.

古文：清河王绍，天兴六年封。
现代文：清河王元绍，天兴六年封。
English: Qinghe Wang Yuan Shao, Tianxing six years later.

古文：凶佷俭悖，不遵教训。
现代文：他凶恶残忍阴险狂悖，不遵守教导。
English: He is vicious, cruel, insidious, rebellious, and disobeys instructions.

古文：好轻游里巷，劫剥行人，斫射犬豕，以为戏乐。
现代文：喜好轻浮地游逛街巷，劫掠行人，砍杀射击猪狗，作为戏耍玩乐。
English: Likes to roam the streets frivolously, mugging pedestrians, slashing and shooting pigs and dogs for fun.

古文：太祖尝怒之，倒悬井中，垂死乃出。
现代文：太祖曾经对他发怒，把他倒悬在井中，将要死时才放出来。
English: The great-grandfather was so angry with him that he hung him upside down in a well and only let him out when he was about to die.

古文：太宗常以义方责之，遂与不协，恆惧其为变。
现代文：太宗常用做人的正道要求他，于是同太宗不和谐，太宗总畏惧他造成变乱。
English: Taizong often asked him to live a righteous life, which caused disharmony between him and Taizong. Taizong was always afraid of him causing turmoil.

古文：而绍母夫人贺氏有谴，太祖幽之于宫，将杀之。
现代文：这时元绍的母亲夫人贺氏遭到谴责，太祖将她囚禁在宫中，就要杀掉她。
English: At this time, the wife of Yuan Shao's mother, He, was condemned, and Emperor Taizu imprisoned her in the palace and was about to kill her.

古文：会日暮，未决。
现代文：遇到天黑，没有决定。
English: As it was getting dark, there was nothing to do.

古文：贺氏密告绍曰： 汝将何以救吾？ 
现代文：贺氏密告元绍说： 你将如何救我? 
English: He tipped off Yuan Shao, saying: "How will you save me?

古文：绍乃夜与帐下及宦者数人，逾宫犯禁。
现代文：元绍于是在夜晚和部下以及宦官几个人，翻越宫廷冒犯禁中。
English: Therefore, Yuan Shao crossed the palace at night with his subordinates and several eunuchs to violate the ban.

古文：左右侍御呼曰： 贼至！ 
现代文：左右侍奉皇帝的人叫喊说： 贼寇来了! 
English: People around the emperor shouted, "The bandits are coming!"

古文：太祖惊起，求弓刀不获，遂暴崩。
现代文：太祖惊醒起身，寻找弓箭佩刀找不到，于是突然逝世。
English: The great-grandfather woke up, looked for his bow and arrow, couldn't find his sword, and died suddenly.

古文：明日，宫门至日中不开，绍称诏召百僚于西宫端门前北面而立，绍从门扇间谓群臣曰： 我有父，亦有兄，公卿欲从谁也？ 
现代文：第二天，宫门到中午不打开，元绍假称韶书召唤百官到西宫端门前脸朝北而站立，元绍从门缝间对群臣说： 我有父亲，也有哥哥，公卿想跟从谁呢? 
English: The next day, the palace gate was not opened until noon. Yuan Shao stood facing north in front of the gate at the west end of the palace, pretending that he was summoning hundreds of officials. From between the cracks of the gate, Yuan Shao said to the courtiers: I have a father and a brother. Whom does the nobleman want to follow?

古文：王公已下皆惊愕失色，莫有对者。
现代文：王公以下都大惊失色，没有回答的人。
English: Wang Gong and the others were shocked, and those who didn't answer were removed.

古文：良久，南平公长孙嵩曰： 从王。 
现代文：很久以后，南平公长孙嵩说： 跟从大王。 
English: After a long time, Sun Song, the Prince of Nanping, and others said: Support the great king.

古文：群臣乃知宫车晏驾，而不审登遐之状。唯阴平公元烈哭泣而去。
现代文：群臣这才知道皇先帝逝世，而不确知逝世的情状，惟独阴平公元烈哭泣后离去。
English: It was only then that the courtiers learned that the former emperor had died, but they did not know for sure the circumstances of his death, except that he left after weeping bitterly.

古文：于是朝野凶凶，人怀异志。
现代文：这时朝野骚动不安，人们各怀不同的心思。
English: As a result, the government and the people panicked, each harboring a different opinion.

古文：肥如侯贺护举烽于安阳城北，故贺兰部人皆往赴之，其余旧部亦率子弟招集族人，往往相聚。
现代文：肥如侯贺护在安阳城的北面举起烽火反抗，所以贺兰部的人都前往奔赴，其余旧部也率领子弟招集同族的人，处处聚集。
English: Hiyuruko Heguru raised a bonfire to protest in the north of Anyang City, so the people of the Heguran Department rushed there, and the rest of the old department also led their children to gather people of the same race and gathered everywhere.

古文：绍闻人情不安，乃出布帛班赐王公以下，上者数百匹，下者十匹。
现代文：元绍听说人心不安，就拿出布帛分发赏赐王公以下，上者几百匹，下者十匹。
English: When Yuan Shao heard that people's hearts were uneasy, he took out cloth bags and distributed rewards to the princes and below, a few hundred camels to those above, and ten camels to those below.

古文：先是，太宗在外，闻变乃还，潜于山中。使人夜告北新侯安同，众皆响应。
现代文：在这以前，太宗在外，闻知变乱就返回，潜伏在山中，派人在夜晚告诉北新侯安同。众人都响应。
English: Prior to this, Taizong had been away, but when he heard about the turmoil, he returned, lurked in the mountains, and sent someone to tell Beixin Hou An Tong at night. Everyone responded.

古文：太宗至城西，卫士执送绍。
现代文：太宗到达城西，卫士将元绍拘捕押送给太宗。
English: Taizong arrived in the west of the city, and the guards arrested Yuan Shao and escorted him to Taizong.

古文：于是赐绍母子死，诛帐下阉官、宫人为内应者十数人，其先犯乘舆者，群臣于城南都街生脔割而食之。
现代文：太宗于是赐令元绍母子自杀，诛杀他的手下宦官、做内应的宫女十多人，先冒犯皇帝的人，群臣在城南的都街活生生地切割而吃了他们。
English: Emperor Taizong then ordered the mother and son of Yuan Shao to commit suicide, killing his eunuchs and more than a dozen concubines who acted as concubines. Those who offended the emperor first were cut alive and eaten by the courtiers in the capital city in the south of the city.

古文：绍时年十六。
现代文：元绍时年十六岁。
English: Shao was 16 years old at the time.

古文：绍母即献明皇后妹也，美而丽。
现代文：元绍的母亲是献明皇后的妹妹，娇美而华丽。
English: Yuan Shao's mother was the younger sister of Empress Xianming. She was beautiful and gorgeous.

古文：初太祖如贺兰部，见而悦之，告献明后，请纳焉。后曰： 不可，此过美不善，且已有夫。 
现代文：当初太祖到贺兰部，见到后喜欢她，告诉了献明后，请求娶过来，皇后说： 不可以，此人太美不善良，而且已有丈夫。 
English: At that time, the great-grandfather went to Helanbu, liked her after seeing her, told her about Xianming, and asked her to marry him. The queen said, "No, this man is too beautiful and not kind, and he already has a husband."

古文：太祖密令人杀其夫而纳之，生绍，终致大逆焉。
现代文：太祖秘密派人杀死她的丈夫而后娶她，生下元绍，终于招致谋反的事情。
English: The great-grandfather secretly sent someone to kill her husband and then married her, gave birth to Yuan Shao, and finally caused a rebellion.

古文：阳平王熙，天兴六年封。
现代文：阳平王元熙，天兴六年封。
English: Yangping Wang Yuanxi, Tianxing six years.

古文：聪达有雅操，为宗属所钦重。
现代文：聪明通达有德操，为宗室亲属所钦佩敬重。
English: Clever, accomplished and virtuous, they are admired and respected by their family members.

古文：太宗治兵于东部，诏熙督十二军校阅，甚得军仪，太宗嘉之，赏赐隆厚。
现代文：太宗在东部练兵，诏令元熙统领十二军接受检阅，很有军威，太宗赞美他，赏赐丰厚。
English: Emperor Taizong trained soldiers in the east, and ordered Yuan Xi to lead the 12th army to accept the review, which was very prestigious. Emperor Taizong praised him and rewarded him generously.

古文：后讨西部越勤，有功。
现代文：后来讨伐西部越勤，有功劳。
English: Later, he fought against the Western Yueqin, which was a great achievement.

古文：泰常六年薨，时年二十三。
现代文：台常六年逝世，时年二十三岁。
English: Taichang died six years later, at the age of 23.

古文：太宗哀恸不已，赐温明秘器，礼物备焉。熙有七子。
现代文：太宗悲伤不止，赐给棺材，礼品充足。元熙有七个儿子。
English: Taizong's grief did not stop, a coffin was given to him, and gifts were plentiful. Yuanxi had seven sons.

古文：长子他，袭爵。
现代文：长子元他，继承爵位。
English: The eldest son inherits the title.

古文：身长八尺，美姿貌，性谨厚，武艺过人。
现代文：身高八尺，身材面貌美好，性格谨慎忠厚，武艺超过常人。
English: He is eight feet tall, has a beautiful face, a cautious and loyal personality, and his martial arts skills exceed those of an ordinary person.

古文：从世祖讨山胡白龙于西河，屠其城，别破余党，斩首数千级。
现代文：跟随世祖在酉回讨伐山塑旦垄，屠减城池，另外打败残余的党羽，斩首几千级。
English: Following his ancestor, he went back and forth, cutting down mountains and ridges, destroying castles, defeating the remnants of the party, and beheading thousands.

古文：改封临淮王，拜镇东将军。
现代文：改封为临淮王，任命为镇束将军。
English: His title was changed to Lin Huai Wang and he was appointed as the general of Zhenzhuang.

古文：寻改封淮南王，除使持节、都督豫洛河南诸军事、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司，镇虎牢。
现代文：不久改封为淮南王，授任使持节、都督逸渔回南诸军事、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司，镇守虎牢。
English: He was soon renamed King of Huainan, and was given the posts of envoy to Jizhou, military governor of Yiyu back to the south, general of Zhenan, three departments of Kaifu and Jidong, and town guard of Houguang.

古文：威名甚著。
现代文：威名十分显著。
English: The prestige is very significant.

古文：后与武昌王提率并州诸军讨吐京叛胡曹仆浑于河西，平之。
现代文：后来和武昌王五提率领差蛆各军在董回以西讨伐丝直叛变的翅人萱仆运，平定了他们。
English: Later, together with Wuchang Wang Wutai, he led the armies of Shajing in the west of Dongbei to fight against the mutineers, the Wingmen and the Servants, and pacified them.

古文：拜使持节、前锋大将军、都督诸军事，北讨蠕蠕，破之，运军储于比干城。
现代文：被任命为使持节、前锋大将军、都督诸军事，向北讨伐蠕蠕，攻陷那裹，运军粮到比于城。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of the military, the vanguard general, the governor of the capital, and the northward crusade, the capture of Nawab, and the transportation of military grain to Biu City.

古文：刘义隆遣将寇边，他从征于悬瓠，破之。
现代文：刘越派遣将领侵犯边境，亘地随从征伐到悬瓠，攻陷那裹。
English: Liu Yue sent generals to encroach on the border, and they followed the expedition to the Hanging Mountains and captured that area.

古文：拜使持节、都督雍秦二州诸军事、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史，镇长安。
现代文：被任命为使持节、都督雍秦二州诸军事、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史，镇守长安。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the governor of Yongqin, the two states of the military, the general of Zhenxi, the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, the history of Yongzhou and the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：绥抚秦土，得民夷之心。时义隆寇南鄙，以他威信素著，复为虎牢镇都大将。
现代文：安抚三秦地区，得到民众夷人的欢心这时刘义隆侵犯南部边境，因元他威信早着，世祖又任命他为虎牢镇都大将。
English: At this time, Liu Yilong invaded the southern border to pacify the Sanqin region and gain the favor of the people. Because of his early prestige, the founder appointed him as the general of the town of Tigris.

古文：高宗时，转使持节、都督凉州诸军事、镇西大将军、仪同如故。
现代文：高宗时，改任使持节、都督凉州诸军事、镇西大将军，仪同三司照旧。
English: At the time of Gao Zong, he was reappointed as the envoy of Jizhi Festival, the military governor of Liangzhou, the general of Zhenxi Province, and the three divisions of Yi Tong remained as before.

古文：高祖初，入为中都大官，拜侍中，转征西大将军，迁司徒。
现代文：高祖初年，入京为中都大官，任命为侍中，改任征西大将军，升司徒。
English: In the first year of Gaozu, he entered Beijing as a senior official of the capital, was appointed as a chamberlain, was reassigned as a general of the Western Expeditionary Force, and was promoted to an apprentice.

古文：赐安车几杖，入朝不趋。
现代文：赐予乘坐的小车和几杖，入朝不碎步急行。
English: He was given a carriage to ride in and a few canes, and rode the morning express without breaking stride.

古文：太和十二年薨，年七十三。
现代文：太和十二年逝世，时年七十三岁。
English: She died in 1912, at the age of 73.

古文：时高祖有事宗庙，始荐，闻薨，为之废祭。
现代文：这时高祖到宗庙祭祀，开始献祭品，听说元他逝世，为之停止祭祀。
English: At this time, Gao Zu went to the ancestral temple to offer sacrifices and began to offer sacrifices. When he heard that Yuan had passed away, he stopped the sacrifice.

古文：舆驾亲临，哀恸，诏有司监护丧事，礼赗有加。
现代文：皇帝亲自临丧，哀伤悲恸，韶令有关官员监察料理丧事，礼仪和财物赐予丰厚。
English: The emperor himself attended the funeral, grieved and mourned, ordered the relevant officials to supervise the funeral, and gave rich gifts of etiquette and property.

古文：追赠平东大将军、定州牧，司徒如故。
现代文：追赠为平束大将军、定州牧，司徒照旧。
English: The posthumous awards went to General Hiratsuka, Denzhou Maki, and Sito, as before.

古文：谥曰靖王。
现代文：谧号为靖王。
English: His posthumous name was Yasoo.

古文：他三子。
现代文：元他有三个儿子。
English: He had three sons.

古文：世子吐万，早卒，赠冠军、并州刺史、晋阳顺侯。
现代文：世子吐万，死得很早，追赠为冠军将军、并州刺史、晋阳顺侯。
English: His heir, Tuvang, died very early and was posthumously awarded the title of champion general, as well as the titles of prefectural governor and mayor of Jinyang.

古文：子显，袭祖爵。
现代文：儿子元显，继承祖父爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Xian, succeeded to his grandfather's title.

古文：薨，谥曰亻喜王。
现代文：逝世，谧号为僖王。
English: After his death, his nickname was Shao Wang.

古文：子世遵，袭。
现代文：儿子世遵，继承爵位。
English: His son, Shizun, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：世宗时，拜前军将军、行幽州事、兼西中郎将，又行青州事。
现代文：世宗时，被任命为前军将军、行幽州事、兼西中郎将，又代行青州事务。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed as the general of the former army, the governor of Seongju Province, the vice-governor of Seongju Province, and the acting governor of Seongju Province.

古文：寻迁骁骑将军。
现代文：不久改任骁骑将军。
English: He was soon promoted to general of cavalry.

古文：出为征虏将军、幽州刺史。
现代文：外任为征虏将军、幽州刺史。
English: Externally appointed as a conscript general, Yuzhou stabbed history.

古文：世遵性清和，推诚化导，百姓乐之。
现代文：世遵性格清静和睦，以诚心教化引导，百姓喜爱他。
English: Shizhong had a quiet and peaceful personality, and guided the people with sincerity and enlightenment. The people loved him.

古文：肃宗时，以本将军为荆州刺史。
现代文：肃宗时，以本号将军担任荆州刺史。
English: During Su Zong's reign, this general served as Jingzhou's magistrate.

古文：寻加前将军。
现代文：不久加授前将军。
English: He was soon promoted to former general.

古文：初在汉阳，复有声迹，后颇行货贿，散费边储，由是声望有损。
现代文：起初在汉水以北，又有名声，后来贪于收受财货贿赂，浪费边境储备，因此声望有所损伤。
English: At first, in the north of Hanshui, he had a good reputation. Later, he was greedy in accepting bribes and squandering border reserves, so his reputation was damaged.

古文：沔南蛮首及襄阳民望入密信引世遵，请以襄阳内附。
现代文：沔水以南蛮人首领和襄阳有声望的人秘密送信招引世遵，请求献出襄阳归附。
English: The leader of the barbarians south of Surabaya and a reputable person in Xiangyang secretly sent a letter to invite Shizun and request the surrender of Xiangyang.

古文：世遵表求赴应，朝议从之，诏加世遵持节、都督荆州及沔南诸军事、平南将军，加散骑常侍，余如故。
现代文：世遵上奏疏请求赶去接应，朝廷商议听从了他的意见，下诏加授世遵为持节、都督荆州及沔南诸军事、平南将军，加授散骑常侍，其余职务照旧。
English: Shizun hurried to respond to the request of Shoshu, and the imperial court deliberated and listened to his opinion. The following edict added Shizun as the holder of the festival, the military governor of Jingzhou and southern Fujian, the general of Pingnan, and the cavalryman, and the rest of the duties as before.

古文：遣洛州刺史伊瓫生，冠军将军、鲁阳太守崔模为别将，率步骑二万受世遵节度。
现代文：派遣洛州刺史伊瓮生，冠军将军、鲁阳太守崔模为别将，率领步兵骑兵二万人接受世遵的调度。
English: He dispatched Luozhou's Shishi Yixing, a champion general, and Luyang's eunuch Cui Mo as his second-in-command, leading 20,000 infantry and cavalry to accept Shizun's dispatch.

古文：军至汉水，模等皆疑不渡。
现代文：军队到达漠水，崔模等人都有怀疑而不渡河。
English: When the army arrived at the marsh, Cui Mo and others were suspicious and did not cross the river.

古文：世遵怒，临之以兵，模乃济。
现代文：世遵发怒，以兵士相逼，崔搀才渡河。
English: When Shizun became angry, he used soldiers to force her, and only then did Choi Min cross the river.

古文：而内应者谋泄，为萧衍雍州刺史所杀，筑门以自固。
现代文：而内应的人谋划泄露，被萧衍的雍州刺史杀死，修筑城门加固自己的守备。
English: However, the person who was supposed to be in charge of the plan leaked out and was killed by Xiao Yan's Yongzhou assassin. He built a gate to strengthen his defenses.

古文：模焚襄阳邑郭，烧杀数万口。
现代文：崔模焚烧襄阳城郭，烧死几万人。
English: Cui Miao burned the castle of Xiangyang, killing tens of thousands of people.

古文：会是夜大风雨雪，模等班师，士卒冻死十二三。
现代文：遇上这天夜晚刮大风下大雪，崔模等人撤军，士兵冻死的有十之二三。
English: On this night, with a strong wind blowing and heavy snow, Cui Mo and others withdrew, and two-thirds of the soldiers froze to death.

古文：世遵及瓫生、模并坐免官。
现代文：世遵和瓮生、崔模都获罪免官。
English: Shizun He and Choe Mo were both convicted and removed from office.

古文：后除散骑常侍、平北将军、定州刺史，百姓安之。
现代文：后来授任散骑常侍、平北将军、定州刺史，百姓安定。
English: Later, he was given the positions of straggler, general of the North Pyongan Province, governor of the North Pyongan Province, governor of the North Pyongan Province, governor of the North Pyongan Province, and governor of the North Pyongan Province.

古文：孝昌元年，薨于州。
现代文：孝昌元年，在州中逝世。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, he died in the middle of the state.

古文：赠散骑常侍、征西将军、雍州刺史，谥曰康王。
现代文：追赠为散骑常侍、征西将军、雍州刺史，谧号为康王。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of strolling equerry, general of the Western Expedition, and Yongzhou historian, and his nickname was Kang Wang.

古文：子敬先，袭。
现代文：儿子敬先，继承爵位。
English: A son is first in line to inherit a peerage.

古文：历谏议大夫、散骑常侍，领主衣都统。
现代文：历任谏议大夫、散骑常侍，兼领主衣都统。
English: Successive members of the imperial court have been doctors of deliberation, horseback riding attendants, and lords of the court.

古文：元颢入洛，庄帝北巡。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳，庄帝向北巡视。
English: Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, Zhuang Di went on a tour to the north.

古文：敬先与叔父均等于河梁起义，为颢所害。
现代文：敬先和叔父元均等人在河梁仗义起兵，被元颢杀害。
English: Keixian and his uncle Yuan Rongren led a military uprising in Hebei Province and were killed by the Yuan Shao.

古文：追赠侍中、车骑大将军、太尉公、定州刺史。
现代文：追赠他为侍中、车骑大将军、太尉公、定州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior Officer, General of Chariot and Cavalry, Second Lieutenant, and Sashimi of Dingzhou.

古文：子宣洪，袭。
现代文：儿子宣洪，继承爵位。
English: His son, Xuan Hong, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：历谏议大夫、光禄少卿。
现代文：历任谏议大夫、光禄少卿。
English: Successive 议大夫 and 光禄少卿.

古文：武定中，与元瑾谋反，诛，国除。
现代文：武定年间，和元瑾图谋反叛，被杀，封国削除。
English: During the Wuding era, He and Yuan Shao plotted a rebellion, were killed, and their fiefs were abolished.

古文：世遵弟均，字世平。
现代文：世遵的弟弟元均，字世平。
English: Shizun's younger brother, Yuanjun, known as Shidaira.

古文：累迁通直常侍、征虏将军。
现代文：屡经升迁至通直常侍、征虏将军。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to Tsunenaga no Tsuneishi and Conscript General.

古文：以河梁立义之功，封安康县开国伯，食邑五百户，除散骑常侍、平东将军。
现代文：以河梁起义兵的功劳，封安康县开国伯，食邑五百户，授任散骑常侍、平束将军。
English: With the merits of the Hailiang Uprising soldiers, he was awarded the title of Founding Count of Ankang County, 500 households of food villages, and was awarded the title of straggler, and General of Hirakawa.

古文：卒，赠使持节、征东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：去世，追赠使持节、征束将军、青州刺史。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Envoy, General of the Conscription, and Grand Historian of Qingzhou.

古文：出帝时，复赠骠骑大将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史。
现代文：出帝时，又追赠骠骑大将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史。
English: When he became emperor, he also posthumously bestowed the titles of Grand General of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Three Departments of the Imperial Household, and Grand Historian of Jizhou.

古文：均六子。
现代文：元均有六个儿子。
English: They had six sons.

古文：长子忻之，性粗武，幼有气力。
现代文：长子忻之，性格粗暴爱习武，幼小时有力气。
English: The eldest son, Hao Zhi, had a rough personality and loved martial arts. He was very energetic when he was young.

古文：释褐定州平北府中兵参军，稍迁尚书右中兵郎。
现代文：最初担任定州平北府中兵参军，渐升至尚书右中兵郎。
English: He initially joined the army as a middle-ranking soldier from Dingzhou Pingbei Prefecture, and gradually rose to the rank of Shangshu right middle-ranking soldier.

古文：以河渚起义之勋，赐爵东阿侯。
现代文：以河梁仗义起兵的功勋，赐爵位为束阿侯。
English: He was given a peerage as Sokcho for his meritorious deed of raising an army in the name of righteousness.

古文：初，孝庄之图尔朱荣、元天穆也，忻之密启：临事之日，乞得侍立，手斩二人。
现代文：当初，孝庄帝图谋尔朱荣、元天穆时，忻之秘密上报，到行事的时候，乞求在旁侍奉站立，亲手杀死二人。
English: At first, when Emperor Xiaozhuang was plotting with Zhu Rong and Yuan Tianmu, he secretly reported it to them. When it was time for the ceremony, he begged the attendant to stand by and killed the two with his own hands.

古文：及荣之死，百僚入贺，忻之独蒙劳问。
现代文：到水朱荣死时，百官进去道贺，忻之独受慰劳。
English: At the time of Zhu Rong's death, hundreds of officials went to congratulate him, and only Zou Zhe was consoled.

古文：庄帝崩于晋阳，忻之内惧。
现代文：庄帝在晋阳逝世，忻之心中畏惧。
English: Emperor Zhuang died in Jinyang, and his heart was filled with fear.

古文：及齐献武王起义河北，忻之奔赴。
现代文：等齐献武王在黄河仗义起兵时，忻之前去投奔。
English: When the king of Qi Xianwu raised an army to fight for justice in the Yellow River War, he ran away before the battle.

古文：后废帝时，除散骑常侍、大丞相右长史。
现代文：后废帝时，授任散骑常侍、大丞相右长史。
English: Later, when the emperor was deposed, he was given the posts of straggler, equerry, and grand secretary to the Emperor.

古文：出帝初，袭先封安康县开国伯，除抚军将军、北徐州刺史。
现代文：生童初年，继承父亲封爵宣尘昼开国伯，授任抚军将军、司匕徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of his childhood, he inherited his father's title of Xuancheng, and was awarded the titles of General of the General Staff of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army and Secretary of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：便道之州，属樊子鹄据瑕丘反，遂于中途遇害。
现代文：从小路到州中，遇到樊王鹄占据壁返反叛，于是在中途遇难。
English: From the small road to the middle of the state, he encountered the rebel of the wall occupied by the king of the dragonfly, so he was killed in the middle of the way.

古文：以死王事，追赠使持节、都督定殷二州诸军事、骠骑大将军、司空公、定州刺史，谥曰文贞。
现代文：因是为国事而死，追赠为使持节、都督定殷二州诸军事、骠骑大将军、司空公、定州刺史，谧号为塞贞。
English: Because he died for national affairs, the posthumous gifts are the Envoys' Day, the appointment of the governor of two states to the military, the appointment of the cavalry general, the appointment of the governor of two states to the military, the appointment of the governor of two states to the military, and the appointment of the governor of two states to the military.

古文：忻之弟庆鸾，武定末，司徒谘议参军。
现代文：匠之的弟弟庆鸾，武定末年，担任司徒谘议参军。
English: Takumi's younger brother, Keiichi, in the last years of Wuding's life, served as a tutor to advise him to join the army.

古文：庆鸾弟庆哲，终于司农少卿，赠中军将军、济州刺史。
现代文：庆蚕的弟弟庆蜇，任司农少卿时去世，追赠为中军将军、济州刺史。
English: Qing Zhu, the younger brother of Qing Silkworm, died when he was the Secretary of Agriculture, and was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Chinese Army and the History of Jeju.

古文：均弟禹，容貌魁伟。
现代文：元均的弟弟元禹，身材魁伟。
English: Motoyu, the younger brother of Motokuni, is a towering figure.

古文：起家司空参军，转符玺郎、太常丞、镇远将军、东海太守带峒峿戍主。
现代文：最初担任司空参军，改任符玺郎、太常丞、镇远将军、束海太守兼峒岖戍主。
English: At first, he served as the second-in-command of the air force, but later he was appointed as the second-in-command of the army, the third-in-command of the army, the third-in-command of the army, the fourth-in-command of the army, the fourth-in-command of the army, the fifth-in-command of the army, the fifth-in-command of the army, the sixth-in-command of the army, the eighth-in-command of the army, the eighth-in-command of the army, the eighth-in-command of the army, the eighth-

古文：禹颇好内学，每云晋地有福，孝昌末遂诣尔朱荣。
现代文：元禹很喜好谶纬之学，常说晋地有福气，孝昌末年就前往东朱荣那裹。
English: Yuan Yu was very fond of the study of Confucianism, and often said that Jin had good fortune. In his later years, Xiaochang went to East Zhu Rongna.

古文：建义元年，与荣同入洛。
现代文：建义元年，和尔朱荣一同入洛阳。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he entered Luoyang together with Er Zhu Rong.

古文：除中军将军、金紫光禄大夫，封鄄城县开国伯，邑五百户，为并州东面大都督，镇乐平。
现代文：授任中军将军、金紫光禄大夫，封为鄄城县开国伯，食邑五百户，担任并州东画大都督，镇守乐平。
English: He was awarded the title of General of the Chinese Army and the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor. He was given the title of the Founding Father of Lucheng County, with 500 households in his hometown, and served as the Grand Governor of Shandong Province and the Town Marshal of Leping.

古文：荣死之后，为土民王恶氈起义杀之。
现代文：余朱荣死后，被仗义起兵的当地民众王恶毡杀死。
English: After the death of Yu Zhu Rong, he was killed by the local people Wang Yuxuan, who fought in the uprising.

古文：后赠征西将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：后来追赠征西将军、雍州刺史。
English: Later, he posthumously bestowed the title of General of the Western Expedition to Yongzhou.

古文：子长渊，袭。
现代文：儿子长渊，继承爵位。
English: His son, Nagafuchi, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：武定中，南青州长史。
现代文：武定年间，担任南青州长史。
English: During the Wuding era, he served as the governor of the Southern Qing Dynasty.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：禹弟菩萨，给事中。
现代文：元禹的弟弟菩萨，担任给事中。
English: Motoyu's younger brother, Bodhisattva, is now in charge.

古文：卒，赠济南太守。
现代文：去世，追赠济南太守。
English: He died and was posthumously awarded the title of Jinan Governor-General.

古文：吐万弟钟葵，早卒。
现代文：吐万的弟弟钟葵，去世很早。
English: His younger brother, Zhong Aoi, died at an early age.

古文：长子法寿，侍御中散，累迁中散大夫。
现代文：长子法寿，担任侍御中散，屡经升迁至中散大夫。
English: The eldest son, Faju, served as the chamberlain of Chusan, and was repeatedly promoted to the position of Chusan doctor.

古文：出除龙骧将军、安州刺史。
现代文：外十任龙骧将军、安州刺史。
English: There are ten generals of Longjing outside, and Anzhou stabbing history.

古文：法寿先令所亲微服入境，观察风俗，下车便大行赏罚，于是境内肃然。
现代文：法寿先命所亲近的人穿平民服装进入境内，观察风尚习俗，到任后就大行赏赐处罚，于是境内安宁。
English: People who are close to the Faju Ancestral Shrine wear civilian clothes to enter the territory, observe the fashion and customs, and reward and punish after taking office, so there is peace in the territory.

古文：更满还朝，吏人诣阙诉乞，肃宗嘉之，诏复州任。
现代文：任期满后回朝，官吏民众到朝廷乞求他留任，肃宗赞美他，下诏恢复刺史职位。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, he returned to the imperial court. Officials and people went to the imperial court to beg him to stay in office. Emperor Sozong praised him, and issued an edict to restore his position as chief historian.

古文：后徵为太中大夫，加左将军。
现代文：后来征召为太中大夫，加授左将军。
English: Later, he was conscripted as a Grand Vice-Marshal and promoted to General of the Left.

古文：迁平东将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：改任平东将军、光禄大夫。
English: He was reassigned to the posts of General Pingdong and Doctor Guanglu.

古文：建义初，于河阴遇害，赠车骑将军、相州刺史。
现代文：建义初年，在河阴遇害，追赠车骑将军、相州刺史。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was killed in Heyin. He was posthumously awarded the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry, and the title of the History of Songzhou.

古文：子庆始，大司农丞。
现代文：儿子庆始，担任大司农丞。
English: His son, Keisho, served as Daisho-nojo.

古文：与父同时见害。
现代文：和父亲同时被害。
English: He was killed at the same time as his father.

古文：赠前将军、广州刺史。
现代文：追赠前将军、广州刺史。
English: Ex-general posthumously awarded the Guangzhou Medal of Honor.

古文：庆始弟庆遵，武定末，瀛州骑府司马。
现代文：庆始的弟弟庆遵，武定末年，担任瀛州骑府司马。
English: Keizhi's younger brother, Keizun, who was in his late twenties at the time of Wuding's death, served as the steward of the Bozhou Cavalry.

古文：庆遵弟庆智，美容貌，有几案才。
现代文：庆遵的弟弟庆智，容貌美好，有处理公文的才能。
English: Qing Zun's younger brother, Qing Zhi, is handsome and has a talent for handling official documents.

古文：著作佐郎、司徒中兵参军。
现代文：担任著作佐郎、司徒中兵参军。
English: He served as Shoseki-saro and Shito-chūhei before joining the army.

古文：卒于太尉主簿。
现代文：任太尉主簿时去世。
English: He died while serving as captain.

古文：法寿弟法僧，自太尉行参军稍转通直郎，宁远将军，司徒、司马掾，龙骧将军，益州刺史。
现代文：法寿的弟弟法僧，从太尉行参军逐渐改任通直郎，宁远将军，司徒、司马掾，龙骧将军，益州刺史。
English: Hossu's younger brother, Hosso, joined the army as a captain and was gradually appointed as Tsunenairo, General Ningyuan, Sitoru, Sima Ye, General Longye, and Ikshu Shishi.

古文：素无治干，加以贪虐，杀戮自任，威怒无恆。
现代文：他一向没有行政才干，加上贪婪暴虐，随意杀戮，喜怒无常。
English: He has always lacked administrative ability, coupled with greed, violence, random killings, and mood swings.

古文：王贾诸姓，州内人士，法僧皆召为卒伍，无所假纵。
现代文：王贾各姓，是州内世家大族，法僧都招为兵士，没有丝毫宽宥。
English: Wang Jia's family name, is a large family in the state, and the monks are recruited as soldiers, without the slightest forgiveness.

古文：于是合境皆反，招引外寇。
现代文：于是全境都反叛，招引外面的贼寇。
English: As a result, the entire region rebelled, attracting outside thieves.

古文：萧衍遣将张齐率众攻逼，城门昼闭，行旅不通。
现代文：萧衍派遣将领张齐率领军队攻打围困，城门白天关闭，行人不能通行。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched the general Zhang Qi to lead the army to attack the siege. The city gate was closed during the day, and pedestrians could not pass through.

古文：法僧上表曰： 臣忝守遐方，变生虑表，贼众侜张，所在强盛。
现代文：法僧上奏疏说： 臣下愧守远方，变乱产生在意料之外，贼寇欺诳，各处强盛。
English: The Dharma priest So So said: "Vassals are ashamed to keep a distance, turmoil arises unexpectedly, thieves and robbers bully, and everywhere there is prosperity.

古文：统内城戍悉已陷没，近州之民亦皆扰叛。
现代文：辖区内城池据点都已沦陷，附近几州的民众也都扰乱叛变。
English: The strongholds within the jurisdiction have all fallen, and the people of several nearby states have also disrupted the mutiny.

古文：唯独州治仅存而已，亡灭之期，非旦则夕。
现代文：惟独州治仅存，灭亡的时间，近在旦夕。
English: However, only the prefectural government remains, and the time of its demise is imminent.

古文：臣自思忖，必是死人，但恐不得谢罪阙庭，既忝宗枝，累辱不浅。
现代文：臣下自己寻思，必定会是死人，衹恐怕不能向朝廷谢罪，有愧于宗室旁系亲属，受牵累羞辱不浅。
English: If a vassal thinks for himself, he will surely be a dead man. He will not be able to apologize to the imperial court. He will be ashamed of his collateral relatives, and he will suffer a lot of humiliation.

古文：若死为鬼，永旷天颜，九泉之下，实深重恨。
现代文：如死去成为鬼，永远不见皇上，九泉之下，实有深重的遗憾。
English: If you die and become a ghost, you will never see the emperor. Under all circumstances, there is a deep regret.

古文：今募使间行，偷路奔告，若台军速至，犹希全保。
现代文：现在募集使者从小道奔走，搜寻道路奔走报告，如果朝廷军队急速赶到，还有望保全。
English: Now envoys are being recruited to run from the path, search for road running reports, and if the imperial army arrives quickly, it is expected to be preserved.

古文：哭送使者，不知所言。 
现代文：哭着送别使者，不知说了些什么。 
English: I don't know what he said as he sent the messenger away crying.

古文：肃宗诏曰： 比敕傅竖眼倍道兼行，而犹未达，可更遣尚书郎堪干者一人驰驿催遣，庶令拔彼倒悬，救兹危急。 
现代文：肃宗下诏说： 近来命令傅竖眼日夜不停地赶路，却还没有到达，可另外派遣一名干练的尚书郎乘驿马催促上道，希望能解救这危急的困境，拯救这场危难。 
English: Su Zong issued an edict saying, "Recently, I have ordered Fu Zhixian to keep speeding along the road day and night, but he has not arrived yet. In addition, I can send an able Shang Shulang to hurry along the road on a donkey, hoping to relieve this critical predicament and save this crisis."

古文：竖眼频破张齐，于是获全。
现代文：傅竖眼接连打败张齐，法僧于是得以保全。
English: Fu Zhizhen successively defeated Zhang Qi, and the Dharma monk was thus saved.

古文：徵拜光禄大夫，出为平东将军、兗州刺史，转安东将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：征召任命为光禄大夫，外任为平束将军、兖州刺史，改任安东将军、徐州刺史。
English: He was conscripted and appointed as the Guanglu doctor, and was appointed as the general of Pingzhu and the chief historian of Zhangzhou. He was also appointed as the general of Andong and the chief historian of Xuzhou.

古文：孝昌元年，法僧杀行台高谅，反于彭城，自称尊号，号年天启。
现代文：孝昌元年，法僧杀死行台高谅，在彭城反叛，自称皇帝，年号为天启。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, the legal monk killed Xingtai Gaofeng and rebelled in Pengcheng, claiming to be the emperor. The year was called Tianqi.

古文：大军致讨，法僧携诸子，拥掠城内及文武，南奔萧衍。
现代文：朝廷大军征讨，法僧携带儿子，劫掠城内民众和文武官员，向南投奔萧衍。
English: The imperial army was called out, and the monks, carrying their sons, plundered the city's people and civil and military officials, and headed south.

古文：钟葵弟笃，字阿成。
现代文：钟葵的弟弟元笃，字阿成。
English: Zhong Ao's younger brother, Yuan Tu, goes by the name Acheng.

古文：太子右率、北中郎将、抚冥镇将、光禄卿。
现代文：担任太子右率、北中郎将、抚冥镇将、光禄卿。
English: He served as the Prince's right-hand man, the Northern Middle Steward, the Fude Town Steward, and the Glorious Lord.

古文：出除平北将军、幽州刺史。
现代文：出京任平北将军、幽州刺史。
English: He went to Beijing as the general of Pingbei and became the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：卒，谥曰贞。
现代文：去世，谧号为贞。
English: She died and her nickname was Zhen.

古文：长子浩，字洪达。
现代文：长子元浩，字洪达。
English: The eldest son, Motohiro, is called Hongda.

古文：太尉长史。
现代文：担任太尉长史。
English: He served as a captain for a long time.

古文：他弟浑，继叔父广平王连。
现代文：元他的弟弟元浑，过继给叔父广平王元连。
English: His younger brother, Yuan Hun, was succeeded by his uncle, Guangping Wang Yuanlian.

古文：浑弟比陵，太延五年为司空，赐爵牁公。
现代文：元浑的弟弟比陵，太延五年担任司空，赐爵位为样柯公。
English: Motohun's younger brother Hiring, Taien served as Siku for five years, and was given a peerage as a model Ke Gong.

古文：除安远将军、怀荒镇大将。
现代文：授任安远将军、怀荒镇大将。
English: He was awarded the titles of General Anyuan and General Huairaozhen.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子天琚，袭。
现代文：儿子天琚，继承爵位。
English: His son, Tensho, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：高祖时征虏将军、青州刺史。
现代文：高祖时担任征虏将军、壹业刺史。
English: At the time of Gaozu, he served as a conscript general and made history.

古文：从驾南征，拜后将军，寻降公为侯，除西中郎将。
现代文：跟随皇帝向南征伐，任命为后将军，不久降公爵为侯爵，授任西中郎将。
English: He followed the emperor to the south and was appointed as a rear admiral. Soon, he was demoted from duke to marquis and given the position of West Middle Steward.

古文：世祖时，征虏将军、夏州刺史。
现代文：世祖时，担任征虏将军、夏州刺史。
English: At the time of the founder, he served as a conscript general, Xia Zhou Shishi.

古文：卒，赠本将军、济州刺史。
现代文：去世，追赠本号将军、济州刺史。
English: Passed away, bequeathed this number to the general, Jeju Sashimi.

古文：子延伯袭。
现代文：儿子延伯继承爵位。
English: His son, Yanbo, succeeded to the title.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：河南王曜，天兴六年封。
现代文：河南王五跃，丢星六年封。
English: Henan Wang Wue Yue, star six years.

古文：五岁，尝射雀于太祖前，中之，太祖惊叹焉。
现代文：五岁时，曾经在左担面前射麻雀，射中了，左担惊奇赞叹。
English: When he was five years old, he once shot a sparrow in front of his left shoulder. When he hit it, his left shoulder was amazed.

古文：及长，武艺绝人，与阳平王熙等并督诸军讲武，众咸服其勇。
现代文：等到成人，武艺超过常人，和阳平王元熙等人都统领各军练兵，众人都佩服他的勇敢。
English: When he became an adult, his martial arts skills surpassed those of ordinary people, and he and Yangping Wang Yuanxi led the troops in training. Everyone admired his bravery.

古文：泰常七年薨，时年二十二。
现代文：泰常七年逝世，时年二十二岁。
English: Tai Chang died seven years later, at the age of 22.

古文：有七子。
现代文：有七个儿子。
English: They had seven sons.

古文：长子提，骁烈有父风。
现代文：长子元提，骁勇有父亲的风采。
English: As the eldest son of Yuan Ti, He Yong has his father's style.

古文：世祖时，袭爵，改封颍川王。
现代文：世祖时。继承爵位，改封为颖川王。
English: When he was the founder, he inherited the title of nobility and changed his name to King Yingchuan.

古文：迎昭仪于塞北，时年十六，有夙成之量，殊域敬焉。
现代文：到边塞北迎接昭仪，时年十六岁，有早熟的气量，境外的人敬重他。
English: He was sixteen years old when he went to the northern border of Saipan to meet Zhaoyi. He had a precocious temperament, and people outside the country respected him.

古文：后改封武昌。
现代文：后来改封为武昌王。
English: Later, his title was changed to King Wuchang.

古文：拜使持节、镇东大将军、平原镇都大将。
现代文：被任命为使持节、镇束大将军、平原镇都大将。
English: He was appointed as the general of Ji Ji Festival, the general of Zhenzuka Town, and the general of Pingyuan Town.

古文：在任十年，大著威名。
现代文：在任十年，大显威名。
English: During his ten years in office, he rose to great prominence.

古文：后与淮南王他讨平吐京叛胡，迁使持节、车骑大将军、统万镇都大将，赐马百匹，羊千口，甚见宠待。
现代文：后来和淮南王元他讨伐平定吐京叛变的胡人，改任使持节、车骑大将军、统万镇都大将，赐给马一百匹，羊一千只，十分受宠信厚待。
English: Later, together with King Yuan of Huainan, he fought against the rebellious Hu people in Tujing, and was appointed as the envoy to hold the festival, the general of chariots and cavalry, and the general of all towns. He was given a hundred horses and a thousand sheep, and was very favored and treated well.

古文：太安元年薨，年四十七，谥曰成王。
现代文：太安元年逝世，时年四十七岁，谧号为成王。
English: He died in the first year of the Taian era, at the age of forty-seven. His posthumous name was Chengwang.

古文：长子平原，袭爵。
现代文：长子平原，继承爵位。
English: The eldest son, Hirahara, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：忠果有智略。
现代文：忠诚果敢有智慧谋略。
English: Loyalty, courage and wisdom are the key to success.

古文：显祖时，蠕蠕犯塞，从驾击之，平原战功居多。
现代文：显祖时，蠕蠕侵犯边境，平原跟随皇帝攻打，战功很多。
English: In the time of Emperor Xianzu, Cree invaded the border, the plains followed the emperor to attack, and there were many war exploits.

古文：拜假节、都督齐兗二州诸军事、镇南将军、齐州刺史。善于怀抚，边民归附者千有余家。
现代文：被任命为假节、都督齐兖二州诸军事、镇南将军、齐州刺史，善于怀柔安抚，归附的边境民众有一千多家。
English: He was appointed as the False Festival, the military governor of the two states of Qizhou, the general of Zhenan, and the historian of Qizhou. He was good at pacifying, and there were more than a thousand border people attached to him.

古文：高祖时，妖贼司马小君，自称晋后，聚党三千余人，屯聚平陵，号年圣君。
现代文：高祖时，妖贼司马小君，自称为晋国后裔，聚集党羽三千多人，驻扎在平陵，年号为圣君。
English: At the time of Gaozu, the thief Sima Xiaojun, who claimed to be a descendant of Jin, gathered more than three thousand followers and was stationed in Pingling. His era name was Shijun.

古文：攻破郡县，杀害长吏。
现代文：他们攻下郡县，杀害长官。
English: They took over the county, killing the chief.

古文：平原身自讨击，杀七人，擒小君，送京师斩之。
现代文：平原亲自讨伐，杀死七人，擒获小君，押送到京城斩首。
English: He personally led a crusade, killed seven people, captured a minor, and sent him to the capital to be beheaded.

古文：又有妖人刘举，自称天子，扇惑百姓。
现代文：又有妖贼刘举，自称为天子，煽动蛊惑百姓。
English: There is also the demon thief Liu Jiu, who calls himself the Son of Heaven and instigates and deceives the people.

古文：复讨斩之。
现代文：平原又讨伐斩杀刘举。
English: The plains also fought against and killed Liu Ji.

古文：时岁谷不登，齐民饥馑，平原以私米三千余斛为粥，以全民命。
现代文：这时粮食不丰收，民众饥饿，平原拿出私人的米三千余斛煮稀粥，来保全民众的性命。
English: At this time, the grain harvest was not abundant, the people were hungry, and the plain took out more than three thousand tons of private rice and boiled porridge to save the lives of the people.

古文：北州戍卒一千余人，还者皆给路粮。
现代文：北方州郡的兵士一千多人，返回的都给予途中的粮食。
English: More than a thousand soldiers from Beifang County were given food on the way back.

古文：百姓咸称讠永之。
现代文：百姓都称赞歌颂他。
English: The people sang his praises.

古文：州民韩凝之等千余人，诣阙颂之，高祖览而嘉叹。
现代文：州中民众韩凝之等一千多人，前往朝廷颂扬他，高祖看过后加以赞美感叹。
English: More than a thousand people, including Han Rongzhi from the middle of the state, went to the imperial court to praise him, and Gaozhu praised and lamented after seeing it.

古文：及还京师，每岁率诸军屯于漠南，以备蠕蠕。
现代文：等到回京城，每年率各军驻守在沙漠南面，来防备蠕蠕。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he stationed his army in the south of the desert every year to guard against creep.

古文：迁都督雍秦梁益四州诸军事、征南大将军、开府、雍州刺史，镇长安。
现代文：改任都督雍秦梁益四州诸军事、征南大将军、开府、雍州刺史，镇守长安。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Yongqin, Liang Yi, the military commander of the four states, the general of the Southern Expedition, the governor of Kaifu, the governor of Yongzhou, and the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：太和十一年薨。赠以本官，加羽葆、鼓吹，谥曰简王。
现代文：太和十一年逝世，赠给原来官职，加授仪仗、鼓吹，谧号为简王。
English: When his mother-in-law died eleven years later, he was given his former official position, and was also given the title of ceremonial warrior and propagandist. His posthumous name was Jane Wang.

古文：有五子，长子和为沙门，舍其子显，以爵让其次弟鉴。
现代文：有五个儿子。长子元和做僧人，抛下他的儿子元显，把爵位让给次弟元鉴。
English: He had five sons. The eldest son, Yuan He, was a monk, but he left his son, Yuan Xian, and gave up his title to his second brother, Yuan Jian.

古文：鉴固辞。诏许鉴身终之后，令显袭爵，鉴乃受之。鉴，字绍达。
现代文：元鉴坚决推辞，皇帝下韶准许元鉴逝世后，使元显继承爵位，元鉴才接受。元鉴，字绍达。
English: Yuan Jian resolutely refused, and the emperor issued an edict allowing Yuan Jian to inherit the title after Yuan Jian's death. Only Yuan Jian accepted. Yuan Jian, the word Sauda.

古文：少有父风，颇览书传。
现代文：年轻时有父亲的风采，涉猎书籍多。
English: When he was young, he had his father's demeanor and read a lot of books.

古文：沉重少言，宽和好士。
现代文：沉稳持重少言语，宽厚和顺喜爱士人。
English: Calm and steady, few words, generous and kind, loved by scholars.

古文：拜通直散骑常侍，寻加冠军将军，守河南尹。
现代文：被任命为通直散骑常侍，不久加授冠军将军，代理河南尹。
English: He was appointed as a regular attendant of Tsuchida Sanzhi, and was soon awarded the title of champion general, acting as the crown of Henan Yin.

古文：车驾南伐，以鉴为平南将军，除左卫将军，出为征虏将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：皇帝向南征讨，任命元鉴为平南将军，返回后，授任左卫将军，出任为征虏将军、齐州刺史。
English: The emperor went to the south to fight, and appointed Yuan Jian as the general of Pingnan. After returning, he was appointed the general of Zuwei, and served as the conscript general and the governor of Qizhou.

古文：时革变之始，百度惟新，鉴上遵高祖之旨，下采齐之旧风，轨制粲然，皆合规矩。
现代文：当时处于变革的开端，事事革新，元鉴上遵高祖的旨意，下面吸取齐地的旧风俗，体制明白，都合乎规矩。
English: At that time, it was at the beginning of change, everything was innovative, the original text was in accordance with the will of the ancestors, and the old customs were absorbed from below, the system was clear, and it was in accordance with the rules.

古文：高祖览其所上，嗟美者久之，顾谓侍臣曰： 诸州刺史皆能如此，变风易俗，更有何难？ 
现代文：高祖阅览他的奏书，赞叹了很长时间，回头对侍奉的臣属说： 各州刺史如果都能这样，移风易俗，还有什么困难呢? 
English: Gaozhu read his record book, admired it for a long time, and turned back to his servants and said: If all the states can make history like this, changing customs, what are the difficulties?

古文：下诏褒美，班之天下，一如鉴所上。
现代文：下诏称赞，颁布到天下，全如元鉴所上奏。
English: The following edict was praised and promulgated to the whole world, just as the Yuan Dynasty did.

古文：齐人爱讠永，咸曰耳目更新。
现代文：齐地人喜爱歌咏，都说是耳目一新。
English: Qidi people love songs, and they all say that it is refreshing.

古文：高祖崩后，和罢沙门归俗，弃其妻子，纳一寡妇曹氏为妻。
现代文：高祖逝世后，元和不再做僧人而还俗，抛弃妻子儿女，娶一个寡妇曹氏为妻。
English: After the death of Gaozu, Yuanhe renounced his monastic life and became a layman, abandoning his wife and children and marrying a widow named Cao.

古文：曹氏年齿已长，携男女五人随鉴至历城，干乱政事。
现代文：曹氏年岁已大，带儿女五人跟随元鉴到历城，干扰政事。
English: Mr. Cao, now elderly, took his five children to Licheng to follow the Yuan Xuan, interfering in political affairs.

古文：和与曹及五子七处受纳，鉴皆顺其意，言无不从。
现代文：元和和曹氏以及五个儿女七处受贿，元鉴都顺从他们的意思，言语没有不听从的。
English: Yuanhe, Cao and their five children, a total of seven people, accepted bribes. Yuanhe also obeyed their wishes, and did not disobey what they said.

古文：于是狱以贿成，取受狼籍，齐人苦之。鉴治名大损。
现代文：于是案件以贿赂而成，收受众多，齐地人为之痛苦，元鉴治理的名声大受损伤。
English: As a result, the case was made with bribes, many were received, the people of Qi suffered, and the reputation of the management of the Yuan Jian was greatly damaged.

古文：世宗初，以本将军转徐州刺史。
现代文：世宗初年，以本号将军改任徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou Province with this title.

古文：属徐兗大水，民多饥馑，鉴表加赈恤，民赖以济。
现代文：遇到徐州兖州发生大水灾，民众多遭饥荒，元鉴上奏疏加以赈济抚恤，民众依赖这得以活命。
English: When a major flood occurred in Xuzhou and Ganzhou, and the people suffered from famine, the Yuan Jiang recorded it as a relief and subsistence allowance, and the people relied on it to survive.

古文：先是，京兆王愉为徐州，王既年少，长史卢渊宽以驭下，郡县多不奉法。
现代文：在这以前，京兆王元愉担任徐州刺史，王的年纪小，长史卢渊宽松地统御下属，郡县多不奉行法度。
English: Prior to this, King Zhao Wang Yuan Yu served as the governor of Xuzhou, the king was young, the governor Lu Yuan was loosely subordinate to the governor, and most counties did not follow the law.

古文：鉴表曰： 梁郡太守程灵虬，唯酒是耽，贪财为事，虐政残民，寇盗并起；黩音悖响，盈于道路，部境呼嗟，佥焉怨酷。
现代文：元鉴上奏疏说： 梁郡太守程灵虬，衹沉溺于饮酒作乐，以贪图财货为职事，放纵政务残害民众，盗贼一起产生，污浊悖乱的声名，充积于道路，境内呼喊嗟叹，全是怨恨惨痛。
English: According to the transcript of the original book: Liang County Governor Cheng Lingyao,  indulged in drinking and making music, coveted wealth as his job, indulged in government affairs and harmed the people, thieves were born together, the reputation of filth and rebellion accumulated on the road, the territory cried and lamented, all of which was bitter resentment.

古文：梁郡密迩伪畿，丑声易布，非直有点清风，臣恐取嗤荒远。
现代文：梁郡靠近伪国都，丑恶的声名容易传布，不仅有染清廉的风尚，臣下恐怕为荒远地带的人取笑。
English: Liang County is close to the pseudo-national capital, and the ugly reputation is easily spread. Not only does it have a clean and pure style, but the vassals are afraid to make fun of the people in the desolate area.

古文：请免所居官，以明刑宪。 
现代文：请求免去程灵虬的官职，来严明刑律法度。 
English: Request to remove Cheng Lingyao from his official position, to clarify the severity of the punishment.

古文：诏免灵虬郡，徵还京师。于是徐境肃然。
现代文：诏令免除灵虬郡守职位，征召他回京城，于是徐州境内安宁。
English: The imperial edict exempted Lingya from the position of county governor and called him back to Beijing, so there was peace in Xuzhou.

古文：萧衍角城戍主柴庆宗，以城内附。鉴遣淮阳太守吴秦生率兵千余赴之。衍淮阴援军已来断路，秦生屡战破之，乘胜而进，遂克角城。
现代文：萧衍的角城戍守头领柴庆宗，献城池归附，元鉴派遣淮阳太守吴秦生率领兵士一千多人赶去接应萧衍的淮阴援军已经前来截断路线，秦生屡次打败他们，乘胜前进，于是攻克角城。
English: Chai Qingzong, the leader of Xiao Yan's Jiaocheng garrison, donated the castle to the emperor, and Yuan Jian sent Wu Qinsheng, the governor of Huaiyang, to meet Xiao Yan's Huaiyin reinforcements, who had come to cut off the route. Qinsheng repeatedly defeated them and advanced with the victory, and then conquered Jiaocheng.

古文：世宗诏鉴曰： 知摧角城，威谋展称，良以欣然。
现代文：世宗诏令元鉴说： 知道摧灭角城，威风谋略得以施展，实在为之欣喜。
English: Shizong Zhaozong's imperial edict Yuan Jian said: Knowing that the destruction of Jiaocheng, the grand strategy can be carried out, I am really pleased with it.

古文：此城襟带淮浒，川路冲要，自昔经算，未能克之，蚁固积纪，每成边害。
现代文：这座城有淮水环绕，处于水路要道，从前谋划，没有攻克，蝼蚁固守多年，时常成为边境的祸害。
English: The city is surrounded by the Huai River and is located on a major waterway. It was planned in the past, but never conquered. The ants have persisted for many years, often becoming a scourge on the border.

古文：将军渊规潜运，妙略克宣，辟境克城，功著不日，据要扼喉，津径势阻，可谓勋高三捷，朕甚嘉焉。
现代文：将军周密部署行动，奇妙的策略得以实现，开拓疆域攻克城池，不久便功劳显著，占据要道扼住敌寇咽喉，可以说是功勋高于三次捷报，我十分赞美。
English: The general's actions were well-planned, his wonderful strategy was realized, he explored the territory and conquered the city, and soon his achievements were remarkable. He occupied the important road and choked the enemy's throat. It can be said that his achievements are higher than the three times of success. I highly praise him.

古文：守御诸宜，善以量度，矜慰之使，寻当别遣。 
现代文：各种防守事宜，可善加思量，慰劳的使者，不久将另外派遣。 
English: The emissaries of consolation will soon be dispatched separately for various matters of defense.

古文：年四十二薨。赠卫大将军、齐州刺史，王如故，谥曰悼王。
现代文：四十二岁时逝世，追赠卫大将军、齐州刺史，王爵照旧，谧号为悼王。
English: He died at the age of forty-two, and was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Imperial Guard, Prince of Qizhou, and as before, the title of Prince. His nickname was "Mourning King."

古文：长子伯宗，员外郎；次仲渊，兰陵太守。
现代文：长子继，担任员外郎；第二个儿子住周，担任芦壁太守。
English: The eldest son, Ji, served as the second-in-command; the second son, Zhou, served as the governor.

古文：并早卒。
现代文：都去世很早。
English: Both died early.

古文：仲渊弟季伟，武定中，太尉中兵参军。
现代文：使遄的弟弟奎伟，亘迈年间，担任太尉中兵参军。
English: His younger brother, Kui Wei, served as a lieutenant in the army for many years.

古文：和，字善意。
现代文：元和，字善意。
English: "Yuanhe" means "goodwill."

古文：鉴薨之后，与鉴子伯宗竞求承袭。
现代文：元鉴逝世以后，和元鉴的儿子伯宗竞相乞求继承爵位。
English: After the death of Yuancheng, he and Yuancheng's son, Bozong, competed to inherit the title.

古文：尚书令肇奏： 和太和中出为沙门，让爵于鉴。
现代文：尚书令高肇上奏： 元和在太和年间出家为僧人，让爵位给元鉴。
English: Shang Shuling Gao Zhao read aloud: Yuan He became a monk during the Taihe era, and gave his peerage to Yuan Jian.

古文：鉴后以和子显年在弱冠，宜承基绪，求逊王爵以归正胤。
现代文：元鉴后来囚元和的儿子元显已成年，应继承家业，请求让出王爵归还给正嫡。
English: Later, Yuan Kuan's son, Yuan Xian, who was already an adult, inherited the family business and requested that the title be returned to his father.

古文：先朝诏终鉴身，听如其请。
现代文：先朝诏令在元鉴逝世后，可如他所请。
English: After the death of Yuan Jian, the previous emperor issued an edict that he could do as he pleased.

古文：鉴既薨逝，和求袭封。
现代文：元鉴逝世后，元和请求继承爵位。
English: After the death of Yuan Jian, Yuan He requested to inherit the peerage.

古文：谨寻诏旨，听传子显，不许其身。
现代文：恭谨考索韶书旨意，准许传给他的儿子元显，没准许他本人受爵。
English: In accordance with the will of the Emperor, he allowed his son, Yuan Xian, to inherit the title, but did not allow him to be knighted.

古文：和先让后求，有乖道素，请令伯宗承袭。 
现代文：元和先让爵后求爵，违背了大道的根本，请求命伯宗继承。 
English: Yuanhe first gave a peerage and then asked for a peerage, violating the fundamental principle of the Great Road, and asked for the succession of Bo Zong.

古文：世宗诏曰： 和初以让鉴，而鉴还让其子，交让之道，于是乎著。
现代文：世宗下诏说： 元和起初让爵位给元鉴，而元鉴又让给元和的儿子，交相推让的道理，于是乎颢明。
English: Emperor Sejong issued an edict saying: Yuanhe initially gave the title to Yuanjian, and Yuanjian in turn gave it to Yuanhe's son, so the principle of reciprocity became clear.

古文：其子早终，可听和袭。 
现代文：元和的儿子早死，可准许元和继承。 
English: The early death of Yuan He's son may allow Yuan He's succession.

古文：寻拜谏议大夫、兼太子率更令，转通直散骑常侍、兼东中郎将。
现代文：不久被任命为谏议大夫、兼太子率更令，改任通直散骑常侍、兼束中郎将。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a doctor of the imperial court, and was also given the title of prince, and was reappointed as a regular attendant of the imperial cavalry, and also as a middle-rank general of the shogunate.

古文：肃宗时，出为辅国将军、凉州刺史，坐事免。
现代文：肃宗时，外任为辅国将军、凉州刺史，因事获罪免官。
English: At the time of Emperor Suzong's death, he was appointed as a general of an auxiliary province, and as a member of the Council of State of Liangzhou, but he was exonerated for the crime.

古文：久之，除东郡太守。
现代文：遇了很久，授任东郡太守。
English: It took a long time, but he was appointed the governor of Higashi-gun.

古文：正光四年薨。赠安东将军、相州刺史。
现代文：正光四年逝世，追赠他为安束将军、相州刺史。
English: When Masamitsu died four years later, he was posthumously given the titles of General Anzaku and Soushū Shishi.

古文：子谦，字思义，袭爵。
现代文：儿子元谦，字思义，继承爵位。
English: Yuan Qian's son, Zi Si Yi, succeeded to the title.

古文：后拜前军将军、征蛮都督。
现代文：后来被任命为前军将军、征蛮都督。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general of the former army and the governor of the capital.

古文：庄帝初，于河阴遇害。
现代文：庄帝初年，在河阴遇害。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was killed in Hebei Province.

古文：赠散骑常侍、征东大将军、仪同三司、相州刺史。
现代文：追赠他为散骑常侍、征束大将军、仪同三司、扭丛刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of strolling equerry, grand marshal of the expeditionary force, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the history of twisting bushes.

古文：子棽袭。
现代文：儿子五茎继承爵位。
English: His son Itsuki succeeded to the peerage.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：变迩接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：鉴弟荣，字瓫生。
现代文：亘鉴的弟弟正荣，字盖生。
English: Watakan's younger brother, Zheng Rong, was born.

古文：高祖时直寝，从驾征新野。
现代文：产趄时守卫宫廷，跟随皇帝征讨新野。
English: She guarded the court during childbirth and followed the emperor to conquer Niijima.

古文：终于羽林监。
现代文：担任羽林监时去世。
English: He died while working as a forestry inspector.

古文：荣弟亮，字辟邪。
现代文：五荣的弟弟五亮，字壁邪。
English: Goryo's younger brother, Goryo, is a wordsmith.

古文：威远将军、羽林监。
现代文：担任威远将军、羽林监。
English: He served as General Wei Yuan and Ulin Supervisor.

古文：卒，赠河间太守。
现代文：去世，追赠河间太守。
English: He died and was posthumously awarded the title of Kawama Taishu.

古文：亮弟馗，字道明。
现代文：五亮的弟弟五馗，字道明。
English: Goryeo's younger brother Goryeo, the word is clear.

古文：太尉府行参军、司徒掾、镇远将军、太仆少卿。
现代文：担任过太尉府行参军、司徒掾、镇远将军、太仆少卿。
English: He served as a captain in the army, a magistrate, a general of Zhenyuan, and a servant.

古文：出除安西将军、东秦州刺史。
现代文：外任为安西将军、塞童业刺史。
English: General Anxi was appointed as an outside director, and Say Tongye stabbed history.

古文：建义初，卒于州。赠征东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：建盏初年，在州中去世，追赠征东将军、壹丛刺史。
English: In the first year of Jian Zhan, he died in the middle of the state, posthumously awarded the title of General of the Eastern Expedition, and the title of General of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：河间王修，天赐四年封。
现代文：河间王五赵，型彊四年封。
English: Kawama Wang Wuzhao, type seal four years old.

古文：泰常元年薨，无子。
现代文：台鲎元年逝世，没有儿子。
English: He died in the first year of the Taishō era without a son.

古文：世祖继绝世，诏河南王曜之子羯兒袭修爵，改封略阳。
现代文：世祖连接断绝的世序，诏令河南王元曜的儿子羯儿继承元脩的爵位，改封为略阳王。
English: The ancestor connected the severed line of succession, and ordered the son of Henan King Yuan You, Xing Er, to inherit the title of Yuan Xuan, and changed his title to Liaoyang King.

古文：后与永昌王健督诸军讨秃发保周于番和，徙张掖民数百家于武威，遂与诸将私自没入。
现代文：后来和永昌王元健统领各军在番和讨伐秃发保周，迁徙张掖民众几百家到武威，就和各将领私自没收为家奴。
English: Later, together with Wang Yuanjian, the commander of Yongchang, he led the armies in the watch and the crusade against baldness protection week, migrated hundreds of Zhangye people to Wuwei, and confiscated them as domestic slaves together with the generals.

古文：坐贪暴，降爵为公。
现代文：因贪婪暴虐获罪，降爵位为公。
English: He was found guilty of greed and brutality, and was stripped of his knighthood.

古文：后统河西诸军袭蠕蠕，至于漠南。
现代文：后来统领黄河以西各军袭击蠕蠕，到达沙漠南面。
English: Later, he led the armies west of the Yellow River to attack Cm Cm and reached the south of the desert.

古文：仍复王爵，加征西大将军。
现代文：不久恢复王爵，加授征西大将军。
English: He was soon reinstated as a prince and given the additional title of General of the Western Expedition.

古文：正平初，有罪赐死，爵除。
现代文：正平初年，犯罪被赐令自杀，爵位削除。
English: In the first year of Zhengping, the criminal was ordered to commit suicide, and his title was removed.

古文：长乐王处文，天赐四年封。
现代文：长乐王处文，天赐四年封。
English: Changle Wang Zhenwen, heaven's gift of four years.

古文：聪辩夙成。
现代文：聪明善辩而早熟。
English: Smart, articulate and precocious.

古文：年十四，泰常元年薨。太宗悼伤之，自小敛至葬，常亲临哀恸。
现代文：十四岁，台鲎元年逝世，主塞悼念伤心，从小殓到安葬，时常亲临哭泣。
English: At the age of fourteen, he passed away in the first year of the Taichung Reunification, and the chief abbot mourned and grieved. From the time of his birth to the time of his burial, he often wept in person.

古文：陪葬金陵。无子，爵除。
现代文：在金陆陪葬。没有儿子，爵位削除。
English: He was buried in Jinlu. Without a son, his title was removed.

古文：广平王连，天赐四年封。
现代文：广平王元连，天赐四年封。
English: Guangping Wang Yuanlian, with a four-year appointment by God.

古文：始光四年薨，无子。
现代文：始光四年逝世，没有儿子。
English: Shigemitsu died four years later without a son.

古文：世祖继绝世，以阳平王熙之第二子浑为南平王，以继连后，加平西将军。
现代文：世祖连接断绝的世序，封阳平王元熙的第二个儿子元浑为南平王，来继承元连为后嗣，加授干西将军。
English: The second son of the Yongping King Yuan Xi, Yuan Hun, became the King of Nanping to succeed Yuan Lian as his heir, and was awarded the title of General of the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：浑好弓马，射鸟，辄历飞而杀之，时皆叹异焉。
现代文：元浑喜爱射箭骑马，射乌，能在乌飞翔时射死它们，当时人都赞叹称奇。
English: Yuanhun loved archery, horse riding, shooting owls, and was able to shoot them dead when they were flying. At the time, everyone was amazed.

古文：世祖尝命左右分射，胜者中的，筹满，诏浑解之，三发皆中，世祖大悦。
现代文：世祖曾命令左右的人分别射击，胜者中靶，壶矢满，韶令元浑解下它们，元浑三次发射都射中，世祖大喜。
English: The founder had ordered the left and right people to shoot separately, the winner hit the target, the jug was full of arrows, and he ordered Yuanhun to solve them. Yuanhun hit all three shots, and the founder was overjoyed.

古文：器其艺能，常引侍左右，赐马百匹，僮仆数十人。
现代文：器重他的武艺才能，时常招引侍奉左右，赐给他马一百匹，奴仆几十人。
English: Valuing his martial skills, he often brought in servants, giving him a hundred horses and dozens of servants.

古文：后拜假节、都督平州诸军事、领护东夷校尉、镇东大将军、仪同三司、平州刺史，镇和龙。
现代文：后来任命他为假节、都督平州诸军事、领护束夷校尉、镇束大将军、仪同三司、平州刺史，镇守和龙。
English: Later, he was appointed as the False Section, the military governor of Pingzhou, the leader of the guards, the lieutenant of Sokuei, the general of Zhenzuka, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, the historian of Pingzhou, the town guard and the dragon.

古文：在州绥导有方，民夷悦之。
现代文：在州中安抚引导有方法，民众夷人都喜爱他。
English: There is a way to pacify and guide in the state, and the people of Yiwu all love him.

古文：徙凉州镇将、都督西戎诸军事、领护西域校尉，赐御马二匹。
现代文：改任凉州镇将、都督西戎诸军事、领护西域校尉，赐给皇帝骑的马二匹。
English: He was appointed as the commander of the town of Liangzhou, the military governor of West Rong Province, and the lieutenant of the western region, and the emperor was given two horses to ride.

古文：临镇清慎，恩著凉土。
现代文：到镇所后清廉慎重，恩德遍布凉塑。
English: After arriving at the town hall, he was scrupulously clean and honest, and his benevolence was all over the cold plastic.

古文：更满还京，父老皆涕泣追送，若违所亲。
现代文：任期满后回京城，父老都流着眼泪追赶送他，如同失去父母。
English: When he returned to Beijing after completing his term of office, his parents chased after him with tears streaming down their faces, as if they had lost a parent.

古文：太和十一年，从驾巡方山，道薨。
现代文：太和十一年，跟随皇帝巡视方山，在途中逝世。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taihe era, he accompanied the emperor on a tour of Fangshan and died on the way.

古文：子飞龙，袭，后赐名霄。
现代文：儿子飞龙，继承爵位，后来皇帝赐名为霄。
English: His son, Fei Long, inherited the title and was later given the name Xiao by the emperor.

古文：身长九尺，腰带十围，容貌魁伟。
现代文：身长九尺，腰带至十围，身材魁伟。
English: He is nine feet tall, with a girdle up to ten girths, and a powerful build.

古文：雅有风则，贞白卓然，好直言正谏，朝臣惮之。
现代文：言谈举止很有风度，贞洁出众，喜好直言规劝，朝中大臣畏惧他。
English: He speaks and behaves with great style, is remarkably chaste, and likes to speak frankly and persuade. The ministers of the two Koreas are afraid of him.

古文：高祖特垂钦重，除宗正卿、右光禄大夫。诏曰： 自今奏事，诸臣相称可云姓名，惟南平王一人可直言其封。 
现代文：高祖特别加以钦敬重用，授任他为宗正卿、右光禄大夫，下韶说： 自现在起上奏政事，各臣属互相称呼可说姓名，衹有南平王一人可称他的封爵。 
English: Gao Zu especially honored and reused him, and appointed him as Zong Zhengqing and Uguanglu Daifu. The lower eunuch said, "From now on, when reporting government affairs, all subjects can call each other by their names, and only Nanping Wang can be called his knight."

古文：迁左光禄大夫。
现代文：升为左光禄大夫。
English: He was reassigned to the position of Sakoroku doctor.

古文：太和十七年薨。赐朝服一具、衣一袭、东园第一秘器、绢千匹。
现代文：太和十七年逝世，赐给入朝礼服一套、单衣夹衣一套、棺材一副、绢一千匹。
English: When the Empress Dowager passed away in 17 A.D., she was given a set of ceremonial robes, a single jacket, a pair of coffins, and a thousand yakitori.

古文：高祖缌衰临霄丧，哀恸左右，宴不举乐。
现代文：高祖穿鳃麻丧服前往元霄的丧葬地，悲哀感动左右，宴席不奏乐。
English: Gao Zu wore a nettle mourning dress and went to the burial place of Yuan Xiao. He was deeply moved by the sorrow. No music was played at the banquet.

古文：赠卫将军、定州刺史，赐帛五百匹。
现代文：追赠卫将军、定州刺史，赐帛五百匹。
English: General Wei and Dingzhou Shishi were posthumously awarded 500 horses.

古文：谥曰安王。
现代文：谧号为安王。
English: His nickname was An Wang.

古文：子纂，袭。
现代文：儿子元纂，继承爵位。
English: His son, Gensan, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：纂亦有誉于时，除恢武将军，进平西将军，领西中郎将，出为安北将军、平州刺史。
现代文：元纂也在当时有声誉，授任他为恢武将军，升平西将军，兼领西中郎将，外任为安北将军、平州刺史。
English: Yuan Zuo also had a reputation at that time. He was awarded the titles of General Gaowu, promoted to General Pingxi, and concurrently held the title of West Vice Admiral, as well as the titles of General Anbei and General Pingzhou.

古文：景明元年，薨于平城。
现代文：景明元年，在平城逝世。
English: He died in Pingcheng in the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingming.

古文：子伯和，袭。
现代文：儿子伯和，继承爵位。
English: His son, Bohe, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：永平三年薨。赠散骑侍郎，谥曰哀王。
现代文：永平三年逝世，追赠他为散骑侍郎，谧号为哀王。
English: Yongping died three years later, and he was posthumously given the title of horseback riding attendant, and his nickname was Maowang.

古文：阙一版统卒，赠凉州刺史。
现代文：阙统去世，追赠凉州刺史。
English: Zhaotong died, posthumously awarded the title of Liangzhou Sashihong.

古文：子思略，武定末瀛州治中。
现代文：儿子思略，武定末年担任瀛州治中。
English: His son Siyaku, and in his later years, Wuding served as the Vice-governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：思略弟叔略，武定中太尉主簿。
现代文：思略的弟弟叔略，武定年间担任太尉主簿。
English: Shi Liang's younger brother, Shu Liang, served as the captain's secretary during the Wuding era.

古文：京兆王黎，天赐四年封，神元年薨。
现代文：京兆王元黎，天赐四年封，神庞元年逝世。
English: King Yuanli of Jingzhao, who was given four years by heaven, died in the first year of Shimpang.

古文：子根，袭，改封江阳王，加平北将军。
现代文：儿子五担，继承爵位，改封为辽垦延，加授平北将军。
English: His son, Wutan, inherited the title of nobility, changed his title to Liao Zhenyan, and was awarded the title of General of Pingbei.

古文：薨，无子，显祖以南平王霄第二子继为根后。
现代文：逝世，没有儿子，题趄命南平王五霓的第二个儿子五銮作为五担的后嗣。
English: He died without a son, and the second son of Nanping King Wuzhong, Wuzhong, was named as the heir of Wuzhong.

古文：继，字世仁。
现代文：元继，字世仁。
English: Yuan Zhi, also known as Shiren.

古文：袭封江阳王，加平北将军。
现代文：继承封爵江阳王，加授平北将军。
English: He inherited the title of Prince Jiangyang and was awarded the title of General Pingbei.

古文：高祖时，除使持节、安北将军、抚冥镇都大将，转都督柔玄、抚冥、怀荒三镇诸军事、镇北将军、柔玄镇大将。
现代文：高祖时，授任他为使持节、安北将军、抚冥镇都大将，改任都督柔玄、抚冥、怀荒三镇诸军事、镇北将军、柔玄镇大将。
English: At the time of Gao Zu, he was appointed as the envoy of Ji Jie, the general of Anbei, and the general of Fudu Town, and was reappointed as the general of Ju Xuan, Fudu, and Huai Ara three towns, the general of Zhenbei, and the general of Zhuoxuan.

古文：入为左卫将军，兼侍中，又兼中领军，留守洛京。
现代文：召入任左卫将军，兼任侍中，又兼中领军，留守洛阳京城。
English: Summoned to serve as General of the Left Division, he also served as an aide-de-camp and the leader of the middle army, and remained in Luoyang Capital.

古文：寻除持节、平北将军，镇摄旧都。
现代文：不久授任持节、平北将军，镇守管辖旧都城。
English: He was soon given the title of Jisai, or General of the North, and governed the old capital as the town guard.

古文：高车酋帅树者拥部民反叛，诏继都督北讨诸军事，自怀朔已东悉禀继节度。
现代文：高车首领树者聚集部落民众反叛。诏令元继为都督北讨诸军事，从怀朔以东都接受元继的调度。
English: The leader of the high-wheeled chariot, Shu, rallied the tribal people to rebel. He ordered Yuan Sui to become the governor of the north and gather the military, and everyone east of Waishuo accepted Yuan Sui's dispatch.

古文：继表： 高车顽党，不识威宪，轻相合集，背役逃归。
现代文：元继上奏疏： 高车顽固的同党，不懂得法令威严，轻意地互相鸠合，躲避征役逃回去。
English: Yuan Zi Shang Song So: Gao Che's stubborn party comrade, who did not understand the majesty of the law, easily colluded with each other, evaded conscription and fled back.

古文：计其凶戾，事合穷极，若悉追戮，恐遂扰乱。
现代文：核计他们的凶恶暴戾，事实该处死刑，如全部追加杀戮，恐怕纷扰骚乱。
English: In view of their heinous brutality, the fact that the death penalty was imposed, if all the additional killings, I'm afraid there will be riots.

古文：请遣使镇别推检，斩愆首一人，自余加以慰喻，若悔悟从役者，即令赴军。 
现代文：请求派遣使者逐镇推求，处死首恶分子一人，其余的加以安抚晓谕，如果能醒悟服从征役的，就命他们赶往军队中。 
English: He requested that a messenger be sent from town to town to plead for the death of the first villain and the pacification of the rest, and ordered that those who were able to come to their senses and obey the conscription should be sent to the army.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏采纳他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：于是叛徒往往归顺。
现代文：于是叛变的人都能归附。
English: As a result, all those who had rebelled could return to the fold.

古文：高祖善之，顾谓侍臣曰： 江阳良足大任也。 
现代文：高祖认为元继做得好，回头对侍奉的臣属说： 江阳王实在足以担当大任。 
English: Gao Zu thought that Yuan Zhi had done a good job, and turned back to his subordinates who were serving him and said, "King Jiangyang is really good enough to take on such a big responsibility."

古文：车驾北巡，至鄴而高车悉降，恆朔清定。
现代文：皇帝向北巡视，到达邺撼而高车全部投降，恒山朔方肃清平定。
English: The emperor went on a tour to the north, and when he arrived, all the wagons surrendered, and Hengshan was completely pacified.

古文：继以高车扰叛，频表请罪。高祖优诏喻之。
现代文：元继因高车骚扰叛乱，接连上奏疏请求治罪，高祖下诏优待开导他。
English: Due to the rebellion caused by the harassment of the high-speed train, Yuan Jie successively petitioned for punishment, and Gao Zu issued an edict to treat and enlighten him.

古文：世宗时，除征虏将军、青州刺史，转平北将军、恆州刺史，入为度支尚书。
现代文：世宗时，授任征虏将军、青州刺史，改任平北将军、恒州刺史，召入为度支尚书。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he was awarded the title of Conscript General and the title of Grand Historian of Qingzhou, and was reappointed to the title of General of Pingbei and Grand Historian of Hengzhou, and was called to the position of Grand Historian.

古文：继在青州之日，民饥馁，为家僮取民女为妇妾，又以良人为婢，为御史所弹，坐免官爵。
现代文：元继在青州的时候，民众饥饿，为家奴娶平民女子为妻妾，又使用良民为侍婢，遭御史弹劾，获罪免除官职爵位。
English: When Yuan Zhi was in Qingzhou, the people were starving, he married a commoner woman as a wife and concubine for his domestic slave, and he also used good people as servants. He was impeached by the imperial court and was convicted and relieved of his official position and peerage.

古文：后大将军高肇伐蜀，世宗以继为平东将军，镇遏徐扬。
现代文：后来大将军高肇征伐蜀地，世宗任命元继为平束将军，镇守阻遏徐州扬州。
English: Later, the great general Gao Zhaozhong conquered Shu, and Shizong appointed Yuan Zhi as the general of Pingzhu, and the town guards blocked Xuzhou and Yangzhou.

古文：世宗崩，班师。
现代文：世宗逝世，撤回军队。
English: When Sejong died, the army was withdrawn.

古文：及灵太后临朝，继子叉先纳太后妹，复继尚书本封，寻除侍中、领军将军。
现代文：等到灵太后临朝听政，元继的儿子元叉原先娶太后的妹妹为妻，太后恢复元继的尚书职位、本来封爵，不久授任侍中、领军将军。
English: When the spiritual empress Dowager Lin came to listen to politics, Yuan Zha, the son of Yuan Jie, originally married the sister of the empress dowager. The empress dowager reinstated Yuan Jie's position of Shangshu, originally knighted, and soon appointed him as an attendant and leading general.

古文：又除特进、骠骑将军。侍中、领军如故。
现代文：又授任特进、骠骑将军，侍中、领军职位照旧。
English: He was also appointed as a special advance and cavalry general, and the positions of attendant and leader of the army remained unchanged.

古文：继频表固让，许之。
现代文：元继频繁上奏执意推让，答应了他。
English: Mototsugu, who frequently insisted on making concessions, agreed.

古文：又诏还依前授。
现代文：又下韶仍依照先前的任命。
English: He will continue to serve in accordance with his previous appointment.

古文：太师、高阳王雍，太傅、清河王怿，太保、广平王怀及门下八座，奏追论继太和中慰喻高车、安辑四镇之勋，增邑一千五百户。
现代文：太师、高阳王元雍，太傅、清河王元惮，太保、广平王元怀和门下八座，奏请追论元继在太和年间安抚晓谕高车、安宁四镇的功勋，增加食邑一千五百户。
English: Taishi, Goyang Wang Yuan Yong, Taifu, Qinghe Wang Yuan Shuo, Taipo, Guangping Wang Yuan Huai and eight disciples, please follow up on the merits of Yuan Sui in pacifying the four towns of Gaochao and Anning during the Taiping era, and increase the food villages by 1,500 households.

古文：继又上表陈让，诏听减户五百。
现代文：元继又上奏疏推让，诏令准许减少五百户。
English: Yuan Jie again appealed for concessions, and the imperial edict permitted the reduction of five hundred households.

古文：灵太后以子叉姻戚，数与肃宗幸继宅，置酒高会，班赐有加。
现代文：灵太后囚他儿子元叉的姻亲关系，多次和肃宗前往元继的住宅，设酒席大聚会，多有赏赐。
English: As the daughter-in-law of the late Empress Dowager and the in-law of his son Yuan Zha, she and Su Zong went to Yuan Zhi's residence many times and held large gatherings at the banquet table, which brought many rewards.

古文：寻加侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司，特进、领军如故。
现代文：不久加授元继为侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司，特进、领军职位照旧。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain, grand general of cavalry, grand secretary of ceremony, special envoy, and leader of the army as before.

古文：徙封京兆王。继疾患积年，枕养于家，每至灵太后与肃宗游幸于外，时令扶入，居守禁内。
现代文：改封为京兆王元继患病多年，在家中疗养，每至灵太后和肃宗到外地游览时，常令扶他入宫，住在宫中守卫。
English: Wang Yuan, who had been ill for many years and was recuperating at home, was renamed as the Prince of Jing Zhao. Whenever the Dowager Empress Dowager Su Zong visited other places, she often ordered him to enter the palace and live in the palace as a guard.

古文：及节庆宴飨，皆力疾参焉。
现代文：到节庆宴乐时，都抱病参加。
English: When it came to the festival banquet, everyone was too sick to attend.

古文：迁司空公，侍中如故。
现代文：升为司空公，侍中照旧。
English: He was promoted to tsukugo, but remained a chamberlain.

古文：宽和容裕，号为长者。
现代文：宽厚和气容纳人，被称为长者。
English: Generous and accommodating, they are known as elders.

古文：神龟末，子叉得志，转司徒公，仍加侍中。
现代文：神龟末年，儿子元义得势，元继改任司徒公，又加授侍中。
English: At the end of the Turtle's life, his son, Motoyoshi, gained power, and Mototsugu was appointed to the position of Sito-ko, and was also awarded the position of Samurai Junior High School.

古文：继以蕃王，宿宦旧贵，高祖时历内外显任，意遇已隆。
现代文：元继因是藩王，家门旧曰尊贵，高祖时历任内外显要职位，待遇已很隆盛。
English: Yuan Jieyin was the king of the domain, the family was once said to be noble, and Gao Zu served in important positions at home and abroad, and the treatment has been very prosperous.

古文：灵太后临朝，入居心膂，兼处门下，历转台司，叉又居权重，荣赫一世。
现代文：玺立后临朝听政，丞继入宫为心腹，兼处门下省，历任台阁职位，元叉又处于权力中心，荣耀显赫于当时。
English: After the rise of the Lin Dynasty, he listened to the government, and he was a confidant after entering the palace. He also served as a subordinate province, held successive cabinet positions, and was in the center of power. The glory was outstanding at that time.

古文：继频表逊位，乞以司徒授崔光。
现代文：元继频繁上奏退位，请求将司徒授予崔光。
English: Mototsugu frequently petitioned for abdication and requested that the post be given to Choe Kwang.

古文：诏遣侍中、安丰王延明，给事黄门侍郎卢同敦劝。
现代文：诏令派遣侍中、安丰王延明，给事黄门侍郎卢同劝告。
English: The imperial edict dispatched a chamberlain, Anfeng Wang Yanming, to advise Huangmen chamberlain Lu Tong.

古文：继又启固让。转太保，侍中如故，加后部鼓吹。频表陈辞，不许。
现代文：元继又上疏执意推让，改任太保，侍中照旧，加授后部仪仗和鼓吹，频繁上疏推辞，不准许。
English: Yuan Jie once again insisted on making concessions, and was reassigned to the position of eunuch, and the chamberlains continued as before, with the addition of ceremonial battles and propaganda in the rear. He frequently made excuses, which was not allowed.

古文：诏曰： 至节嘉辰，礼有朝庆；亲尊戚老，理宜优异。
现代文：下诏说： 重要的节日，依礼仪有朝廷的庆典，亲近尊敬亲戚老人，按道理应优待。
English: The following edict said: On important festivals, according to the etiquette, there should be a celebration of the imperial court, close respect for relatives and the elderly, and preferential treatment should be given according to reason.

古文：王位高年宿，可依齐郡王简故事，朝讫引坐，免其拜伏。 
现代文：王地位高年纪老，可依照齐郡王元简旧例，朝见后引到座位上，免去叩拜伏地。 
English: The king's status is high and he is old, so he can follow the old example of the king of Qi County, Wang Yuanjian, and be led to his seat after the morning meeting, so that he does not have to bow to the ground.

古文：转太傅，侍中如故。频让不许，又遣使敦劝，乃受之。
现代文：改任太傅，侍中照旧多次推让不准许，又派遣使者劝告，才接受。
English: He was reappointed taifu, but the chamberlains, as usual, repeatedly refused to allow him to do so, and sent an envoy to advise him before he accepted.

古文：时叉执杀生之柄，威福自己，门生故吏遍于省闼。拜受之日，送者倾朝，当世以为荣，有识者为之致惧。
现代文：当时元叉掌握生死大权，作威作福任凭自己，门生故吏遍布于台阁宫廷，元继就职的日子，欢送的人布满朝廷，当世以为荣耀，有见识的人为之感到畏惧。
English: At that time, Yuan Shikai held the power of life and death, and he was allowed to do as he pleased. His disciples and dignitaries were all over the Taigakou Palace. On the day of his inauguration, the Imperial Court was full of people who were glad to see him off. It was considered an honor in the past, and people with insight were afraid of it.

古文：太官给酒膳，供宾客。
现代文：太官供给酒肉膳食，招待宾客。
English: The eunuch provided meat and wine, and invited guests.

古文：又诏令乘步挽至殿庭，两人扶侍，礼秩与丞相高阳王相埒。
现代文：又诏令乘坐人力车到宫殿庭院，两人搀扶侍奉，礼仪品级和丞相高阳王相等。
English: In addition, it was decreed to take a rickshaw to the palace courtyard, and two people assisted the attendants. The etiquette level was equal to that of the prime minister Gaoyang Wang.

古文：后除使持节、侍中、太师、大将军、录尚书事、大都督，节度西道诸军。
现代文：随后授任使持节、侍中、太师、大将军、录尚书事、大都督，调度西路各军。
English: Subsequently, he was appointed to the post of envoy, chamberlain, grand master, general, secretary, grand governor, and dispatched the armies of the West Road.

古文：及出师之日，车驾临饯，倾朝祖送，赏赐万计。
现代文：等到出兵的日子，皇帝亲临饯别，满朝官员饯行，赏赐数以万计。
English: On the day of the dispatch of troops, the emperor himself came to bid farewell, the officials of the whole dynasty came to visit, and tens of thousands of rewards were given.

古文：转太尉公，侍中、太师、录尚书、都督并如故。
现代文：改任太尉公，侍中、太师、录尚书、都督各官职都照旧担任。
English: He was reappointed to the rank of taifu (second lieutenant), and he continued to hold the positions of samurai, daishi (grand master), rokusho (deputy shogun) and governor-general.

古文：寻诏班师。
现代文：不久诏令撤军。
English: Soon after, the imperial edict ordered the withdrawal of the troops.

古文：继启求还复江阳，诏从之。
现代文：元继上奏请求改回江阳王，韶令依从他的意见。
English: At the request of the emperor, the play was changed back to King Jiangyang, and the imperial edict followed his advice.

古文：继晚更贪婪，聚敛无已。
现代文：元继晚年更为贪婪，聚敛没有止境。
English: In his later years, Yuan Jie became even more greedy, and his hoarding knew no bounds.

古文：牧守令长新除赴官，无不受纳货贿，以相托付。
现代文：州牧郡守县官新任赶往任职处，元继无不接受财货贿赂，以相依托。
English: The newly appointed prefectural governor of Maki County rushed to the post office, and Yuan successively accepted money and goods bribes to support each other.

古文：妻子各别请属，至乃郡县微吏，亦不得平心选举。
现代文：妻子儿女分别请托，以至于郡县小官吏，也不能公平地选拔。
English: Wives and children are appointed separately, to the extent that minor officials in counties and counties cannot be selected fairly.

古文：凭叉威势，法官不敢纠擿，天下患之。
现代文：仗恃元叉的声威势力，执法的官员不敢纠察指摘，天下人怨恨他。
English: Deterred by Yuan Xuan's power, law enforcement officials did not dare to correct the impeachment, and the whole world suffered from his scourge.

古文：叉黜，继废于家。
现代文：元叉被罢黜，元继免职在家中。
English: After Yuan Zha was deposed, Yuan Jie also returned home.

古文：初，尔朱荣之为直寝也，数以名马奉叉，叉接以恩意，荣甚德之。
现代文：当初，氽朱荣做守卫宫廷小官时，多次将名马送给元叉，元叉以恩德相交接，余朱荣十分感激他。
English: At the beginning, when Yu Zhu Rong was a minor official guarding the palace, he repeatedly sent famous horses to Yuan Zhao. Yuan Zhao passed them to Yu Zhu Rong, and Yu Zhu Rong was very grateful to him.

古文：建义初，复以继为太师、司州牧。
现代文：建义初年，又任命元继为太师、司州牧。
English: At the beginning of the Jianyi era, he also appointed Yuan Jie as Taishi and Sizhou Patriarch.

古文：永安二年薨，赠假黄钺、都督雍华泾邠秦岐河梁益九州诸军事、大将军、录尚书、大丞相、雍州刺史，王如故。
现代文：永安元年逝世，追赠假黄钹、都督雍华泾邯秦岐河梁益九州诸军事、大将军、录尚书、大丞相、雍州刺史，王爵照旧。
English: He died in the first year of the Yongan era, and was posthumously awarded the title of pseudo-Yellow Emperor, the title of the governor of Yonghua, the title of the governor of Qin, the title of the governor of Qighe, the title of the governor of Kyushu, the title of the military, the title of the general, the title of the record, the title of the prime minister, the title of the governor of Yongzhou, and the title of the king.

古文：谥曰武烈。
现代文：谧号为武烈。
English: His nickname was Wu Rong.

古文：叉，继长子，字伯亻隽，小字夜叉。
现代文：元叉，是元继的长子，字伯俊，小名叫夜里。
English: Yuan Zha is the eldest son of Yuan Zhi, his nickname is Bo Jun, and his nickname is Yali.

古文：世宗时，拜员外郎。
现代文：世宗时，被任命为员外郎。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed as a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：灵太后临朝，以叉妹夫，除通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政，因元叉是她的妹夫，授任通直散骑侍郎。
English: Lingdai's Empress Dowager Lin listened to the government, because Yuan Zha was her brother-in-law, he was awarded the position of Zongzhizan riding attendant.

古文：叉妻封新平郡君，后迁冯翊郡君，拜女侍中。
现代文：元叉的妻子被封为新平郡君，后来改为冯翊郡君，任命为女侍中。
English: Yuan Zha's wife was named Xinping County Jun, later changed to Fengye County Jun, and appointed as a maid of honor.

古文：叉以此意势日盛，寻迁散骑常侍，光禄少卿，领尝食典御，转光禄卿。
现代文：元叉因此权势曰益强盛，不久调任散骑常侍，光禄少卿，兼领尝食典御，改任光禄卿。
English: As a result, Yuan Zha's power was said to be growing stronger and stronger, and he was soon transferred to the position of strolling equerry, Guanglu Shaoqing, and concurrently to the position of food minister, and then to the position of Guanglu Qing.

古文：叉女夭，灵太后诏曰： 叉长女，年垂弱笄，奄致夭丧，悼念兼怀，可赠乡主。 
现代文：元叉的女儿夭折，灵太后下诏说： 元叉的长女，年近成人，忽然夭折，悼念充满心中，可追赠乡主称号。 
English: Yuan Zha's daughter died young, and the Reverend Mother issued an edict saying: Yuan Zha's eldest daughter, who was nearly an adult, died suddenly, and her heart is filled with mourning. She can be posthumously awarded the title of village head.

古文：寻迁侍中，余官如故，加领军将军。
现代文：元叉不久升为侍中，其他职位照旧，加授领军将军。
English: Yuan Zha soon rose to the rank of chamberlain, the other positions remained the same, and he was also awarded the rank of general leading the army.

古文：既在门下，兼总禁兵，深为灵太后所信委。
现代文：他既在门下省，加之总领禁卫军，深受灵太后的信任重用。
English: He was also in charge of the general ban on soldiers under his command, and was deeply trusted by the Empress Dowager.

古文：太傅、清河王怿，以亲贤辅政，参决机事，以叉恃宠骄盈，志欲无限，怿裁之以法。
现代文：太傅、清河王元惮，以亲属贤明辅佐朝政，参与决断机密事务，因元叉仗恃宠信骄傲自大，志向欲望没有止境，元惮用法令制裁他。
English: Taifu, the king of Qinghe, Yuan Shao, supported the imperial government with the help of his relatives, and participated in the decision-making of confidential affairs. Because Yuan Shao was proud and arrogant, and his ambition and desire had no limits, Yuan Shao sanctioned him with laws and regulations.

古文：叉轻其为人，每欲斥黜之。
现代文：元叉轻视元择的为人，时常要排斥罢黜他。
English: Yuan Xuan despised Yuan Zhao as a person, and often had to expel and oust him.

古文：叉遂令通直郎宋维告司染都尉韩文殊欲谋逆立怿，怿坐禁止。
现代文：元叉于是使通直郎宋维告发司染都尉韩文殊打算策谋作乱立元恽，元惮因之被禁止自由活动。
English: Yuan Zha then ordered Tong Naorang Song Wei to report to Han Wenshu, the Dyeing Captain of the Ministry of Finance, that he intended to conspire to overthrow the establishment of the Yuan Dynasty. As a result, Yuan Zha was banned from free activities.

古文：后穷治无实，怿虽得免，犹以兵卫守于宫西别馆。
现代文：后来极力追查没有这事，元惮虽然得以活命，还是用兵士将他看守在宫廷西面单独的房舍中。
English: Although he was able to survive, he was guarded by soldiers in a separate building on the west side of the palace.

古文：久之，叉恐怿终为己害，乃与侍中刘腾密谋。
现代文：过了很久，元叉担心元恽终将成为自己的祸害，就和侍中刘腾秘密策划。
English: After a long time, Yuan Xuan worried that Yuan Xuan would eventually become his own scourge, and secretly plotted with the chamberlain Liu Teng.

古文：灵太后时在嘉福，未御前殿，腾诈取主食中黄门胡玄度、胡定列诬怿，云许度等金帛，令以毒药置御食中以害帝；自望为帝，许度兄弟以富贵。
现代文：灵太后当时在嘉福殿，没到前殿，刘腾诈称取得主食中黄门胡玄度、胡定诬告元恽的供词，说是元悍答应给胡玄度等人金银布帛，使他们将毒药放在皇廷食物中来谋害皇帝，自己盼望做皇帝，答应玄度兄弟获得富贵。
English: At that time, the Dowager Empress was in the Jiafu Hall, but she did not go to the front hall. Liu Teng fraudulently claimed to have obtained the confessions of Huangmen Hu Xundu and Hu Ding, who falsely accused Yuan Zang, saying that Yuan Zang promised to give Hu Xundu and others gold and silver cloth, so that they would put poison in the royal food to assassinate the emperor. He hoped to become the emperor and promised the Xundu brothers to become rich.

古文：腾以具奏，肃宗闻而信之，乃御显阳殿。
现代文：刘腾同元叉一起上奏，肃宗听说后相信了，就前往显阳殿。
English: Liu Teng played the harp together with Yuan Zha, and Su Zong believed after hearing about it and went to the Xianyang Palace.

古文：腾闭永巷门，灵太后不得出。
现代文：刘腾关闭永巷门，灵太后不能出去。
English: Liu Teng closed the Yongxiang Gate, and the Empress Dowager could not get out.

古文：怿入，遇叉于含章殿后，欲入徽章东阁，叉厉声不听。
现代文：元恽进入，在含章殿后面遇见元叉，想要进入徽章东合，元叉高声喝令不准许。
English: Yuan Xuan entered, met Yuan Zha in the back of the Hall of the Emblem. If he wanted to enter the Hall of the Emblem, Yuan Zha shouted loudly that he was not allowed to enter.

古文：怿曰： 汝欲反邪？ 
现代文：元恽说： 你想反叛吗? 
English: Yuan Zang said: Do you want to rebel?

古文：叉曰： 元叉不反，正欲缚反人。 
现代文：元叉说： 元叉不反叛，正要捆绑反叛的人。 
English: Yuan Zha said: Yuan Zha is not a rebel, he is just trying to tie up the rebels.

古文：叉命宗士及直斋等三十人执怿衣袂，将入含章东省，使数十人防守之。
现代文：元叉命令宗士和直斋等三十人抓住元惮的衣袖，带入含章束省，派几十人防守他。
English: Yuan Zha ordered his thirty men, including Zoji and Zhizhai, to seize the sleeve of Yuan Shuo's coat, take him into the province of Han Zhaozhuang, and send dozens of people to defend him.

古文：腾称诏召集公卿，议以大逆论，咸畏惮叉，无敢异者。
现代文：刘腾口称韶令召集公卿，商议以大逆不道的罪名处治，众人都畏惧元叉，没有敢持异议的人。
English: Liu Tengkou said that the imperial edict summoned the nobles to discuss the punishment of the crime of high treason. Everyone was afraid of Yuan Zha, and no one dared to dissent.

古文：唯仆射游肇执意不同。
现代文：仅仆射游肇坚持己见不附和。
English: Only You Zhao firmly disagreed.

古文：语在其《传》。
现代文：记载在他的《列传》中。
English: It is recorded in his "Biography."

古文：叉、腾持公卿议入奏，俄而事可，夜中杀怿。
现代文：元叉、刘腾带着公卿的商议进宫上奏，不久事情就被批准，夜裹杀死元择。
English: Yuan Zha and Liu Teng went to the palace with the nobles to discuss the matter. Soon, the matter was approved, and Yuan Zhao was killed in the night.

古文：于是假为灵太后辞逊之诏。
现代文：于是假称灵太后辞让听政的韶书。
English: As a result, the fake imperial edict of the Empress Dowager Jing resigned to listen to the government.

古文：叉遂与太师高阳王雍等辅政，常直禁中，肃宗呼为姨父。
现代文：元叉就和太师高阳王元雍等人辅佐朝政，时常在宫中值勤，肃宗称呼他为姨父。
English: Yuan Zha, together with Grand Master Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong and others, assisted the imperial government. He was often on duty in the palace, and Su Zong called him his uncle.

古文：自后专综机要，巨细决之，威振于内外，百僚重迹。
现代文：从此以后专掌机要大权，大小事务由他决断，威风震动朝廷内外，百官都非常惧怕他。
English: From then on, the emperor wanted to wield great power, and he decided all matters, large and small. His authority shook the imperial court and beyond, and all the officials were very afraid of him.

古文：相州刺史、中山王熙抗表起义，以讨叉为名，不果，见诛。
现代文：相州刺史、中山王元熙上疏仗义起兵，以讨伐元叉为名，没有成功，被杀。
English: According to the history of Xiangzhou, King Yuanxi of Zhongshan led a detachment of soldiers to fight for justice, in the name of fighting Yuan forks. He was not successful and was killed.

古文：叉寻迁卫将军，余如故。
现代文：元叉不久调任卫将军，其余职位照旧。
English: Yuan Xuan was soon transferred to the post of General of the Guards, and the rest of the posts remained unchanged.

古文：后灵太后与肃宗宴于西林园，日暮还宫，右卫将军奚康生复欲图叉，不克而诛。
现代文：后来灵太后和肃宗在西林园宴饮，天晚回宫，右卫将军奚康生又想图谋元旦，不成功而被杀。
English: Later, Empress Dowager Ling and Emperor Su Zong had a banquet in the West Forest Garden and returned to the palace late in the day. The right guard general Jie Kang Sheng also tried to plot on New Year's Day, but was unsuccessful and was killed.

古文：语在其《传》。
现代文：记载在他的《列传》中。
English: It is recorded in his "Biography."

古文：是后，肃宗徙御徽音殿，叉亦入居殿右。
现代文：此后，卢宗迁居徽音殿，元叉也迁入住在殿右面。
English: After that, Lu Zong moved to Huiyin Hall, and Yuan Zhao also moved to the right side of the hall.

古文：既在密近，曲尽佞媚，以承上旨，遂蒙宠信。
现代文：相距很近，曲意献媚，来迎合皇帝旨意，于是得到宠信。
English: The distance is very close, the melody is flattering, to cater to the emperor's will, and thus get favor.

古文：出入禁中，恆令勇士持刀剑以自先后，公私行止，弥加威防。
现代文：出入宫廷，时常命勇士拿着刀剑走在前后，公私的行动，越发加以防备。
English: Entering and leaving the court, the ever-vital warrior walked back and forth holding a sword. Public and private actions became more and more guarded.

古文：叉于千秋门外厂下施木阑槛，有时出入，止息其中，腹心防守，以备窃发。人物求见者，遥对之而已。
现代文：元叉在千秋门外厂下设置木栏槛，时而出入，在裹面停息，派心腹防守，来防备突然发生的事件，人们有请求见面的，衹远远地对着他而已。
English: Yuan Fork set up a wooden bar threshold under the factory outside the Qianqiu Gate. He went in and out from time to time, paused at the shrouded face, and sent a confidant to guard against sudden events. People had requests to meet, but they only stared at him from a distance.

古文：乃封其子亮平原郡开国公，食邑一千户。
现代文：封元旦的儿子五亮为平原郡开国公，食邑一千户。
English: The son of Feng Yuandan, Woliang, was the founding father of Pingyuan County, with a thousand households.

古文：及拜，肃宗御南门临观，并赐御马，帛千匹。
现代文：到封授时，卢宗前往南门观看，并且赏赐皇帝用的马，布帛一百匹。
English: At the time of the conferment, Lu Zong went to the south gate to watch, and rewarded the emperor with a hundred cloth horses.

古文：初，叉之专政，矫情自饰，劳谦待士，时事得失，颇以关怀，而才术空浅，终无远致。
现代文：起初，元叉专擅朝政，掩饰真情来装扮自己，勤谨谦虚地对待士人，政事的得失，时常放在心上，然而才能空疏浅薄，终归没有远大目标。
English: At first, Yuan Xuan was good at politics, disguised his true feelings to dress himself up, treated scholars with diligence and modesty, and always kept in mind the gains and losses of politics. However, his talent was empty and shallow, and he ultimately had no lofty goal.

古文：得志之后，便骄愎，耽酒好色，与夺任情。
现代文：得势以后，就骄傲刚愎自用，沉溺于酒色中，给与夺取任凭心意。
English: After gaining power, he became proud and self-indulgent, indulging in alcohol and giving and taking whatever he wanted.

古文：乃于禁中自作别库掌握之，宝充牣其中。
现代文：在宫中自己建立另外的库房加以掌管，宝物堆积在裹面。
English: He built another storehouse in the palace and took charge of it. Treasures piled up in piles.

古文：又曾卧妇人于食舆，以帕覆之，令人舆入禁内，出亦如之。直卫虽知，莫敢言者。
现代文：又曾经让女人睡在食车上，用手帕覆盖，派人用车接入宫内，出去也如此，当班守卫的虽然知道，没有敢于说出来的。
English: He also once had a woman sleep on the dining car, covered with a handkerchief, and sent someone to use the car to access the womb, and to go out, although the guard on duty knew, he did not dare to speak out.

古文：轻薄趣势之徒，以酒色事之，姑姊妇女，朋淫无别。
现代文：轻浮刻薄趋炎附势的人，用酒色侍奉他，姑母和媳妇，在一起淫乱没有分别。
English: A frivolous, mean-spirited man, with power, serves him with wine, his aunt and his daughter-in-law, together fornicating without distinction.

古文：政事怠惰，纲纪不举，州镇守宰，多非其人。
现代文：政事懈怠懒惰，纲纪不整，州镇郡县长官，多不是合适人选。
English: Political affairs are slack and lazy, discipline is not in order, and the prefect of a prefecture, town, county, or county is not a suitable candidate.

古文：于是天下遂乱矣。
现代文：于是天下就混乱了。
English: As a result, the world was thrown into chaos.

古文：从刘腾死后，防卫微缓。叉颇亦自宽，时宿于外，每日出游，留连他邑。
现代文：自从刘腾死了以后，防卫稍微松缓，元叉也自己宽心，时常住在外面，每天出游，留恋其他地方。
English: Since Liu Teng's death, the defense has been relatively lax, and Yuan Xuan also feels more at ease, often staying outside, traveling every day, and staying in other places.

古文：灵太后微察知之。
现代文：灵太后暗中观察知道这些情况。
English: The Dowager Empress was also slightly aware of it.

古文：叉积习生常，无复虞虑。
现代文：元叉习以为常，不再防备担忧。
English: You get used to it, you don't worry about it.

古文：其所亲谏叉，叉又不纳。
现代文：所亲近的人规劝元叉，元叉又不接受。
English: People close to him advised him against it, but he did not accept.

古文：正光五年秋，灵太后对肃宗谓君臣曰： 隔绝我母子，不听我往来兒间，复何用我为？
现代文：正光五年秋天，灵太后面对着肃宗对群臣说： 隔断我们母子，不准许我来往于儿子之间，还要我有什么用?
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of the Zhengguang era, the spiritual empress said to the courtiers, facing Su Zong: "If you cut off our mother and son, and do not allow me to come and go between our sons, what use would you have of me?

古文：放我出家，我当永绝人间，修道于嵩高闲居寺。
现代文：放我出家，我将永远断绝人间事务，在嵩高山闲居寺修道。
English: Let me become a monk, I will give up worldly affairs forever and live in a monastery in Song Gaoshan.

古文：先帝圣鉴，鉴于未然，本营此寺者正为我今日。 
现代文：先帝有圣明的远见，能在事情没发生时预见，本来修建这所寺院就是为了我现在。 
English: The former emperor had a divine foresight and was able to foresee when things would not happen. Originally, this temple was built for me.

古文：欲自下发。
现代文：就要自己剪下头发。
English: You have to cut your own hair.

古文：肃宗与群臣大惧，叩头泣涕，殷勤苦请。
现代文：肃宗和群臣大为害怕，叩头流泪哭泣，苦苦地哀求。
English: Su Zong and his courtiers were terrified. They bowed their heads, wept, and begged for mercy.

古文：灵太后声色甚厉，意殊不回。
现代文：灵太后声音和脸色都很严厉，意向没有改变。
English: The Empress Dowager's voice and face were stern, and her intention remained unchanged.

古文：肃宗乃宿于嘉福殿，积数日，遂与太后密谋图叉。
现代文：肃宗就住宿在嘉福殿，接连几天，于是和太后密谋图取元叉。
English: Sozong stayed at Jiafu Hall for several days in a row, and then plotted with the empress dowager to take Yuan Zhao.

古文：肃宗内虽图之，外形弥密，灵太后真忿之言，欲得往来显阳之意，皆以告叉。
现代文：肃宗心中虽然图取元叉，外表更加细密，灵太后发怒忿恨的话，想要来往显阳殿的心意，都告诉了元叉。
English: Although Su Zong's heart was drawn to Yuan Zha, his appearance was more delicate. When the Empress Dowager became angry and resentful, she told Yuan Zha about her intention to visit Xianyang Palace.

古文：又对叉流涕，叙太后欲出家，忧怖之心，如此密言，日有数四。
现代文：又对着元叉流下眼泪，叙述太后要出家，自己担忧恐惧的心情。如此秘密的话，每天有好几次。
English: She also shed tears for Yuan Xuan, recounting the empress dowager's desire to become a nun, and her own feelings of worry and fear. If it were such a secret, it would happen several times a day.

古文：叉殊不为疑，乃劝肃宗从太后意。
现代文：元叉一点不怀疑，就劝肃宗顺从太后的意思。
English: Without the slightest doubt, Yuan Zha persuaded Su Zong to obey the empress dowager's will.

古文：于是太后数御显阳，二宫无复禁碍。
现代文：于是太后多次前往显阳殿，两宫不再有禁令阻碍。
English: As a result, the empress dowager sat in the Hall of the Rising Sun many times to listen to the government, and there was no longer an obstacle between the two palaces.

古文：叉举其亲元法僧为徐州刺史，法僧据州反叛。灵太后数以为言，叉深愧悔。
现代文：元叉推举他的亲信元法僧担任徐州刺史，法僧占据州城反叛，灵太后多次提起遣件事，元叉深感惭愧后悔。
English: Yuan Zha was deeply ashamed and regretted that he had appointed his close friend, the former Buddhist monk, as the governor of Xuzhou. The Buddhist monk occupied the city of Xuzhou and rebelled, and the empress dowager repeatedly brought up the matter of his dismissal.

古文：丞相、高阳王雍，虽位重于叉，而甚畏惮，欲进言于肃宗，而事无因。
现代文：丞相、高阳王元雍，虽然地位高于元叉，却十分畏惧元叉，想向肃宗进言，而事情没有机会。
English: The prime minister, Goyang Wang Yuan Yong, although his status was higher than Yuan Zha, was very afraid of Yuan Zha and wanted to speak to Su Zong, but there was no opportunity.

古文：会太后与肃宗南游洛水，雍邀请，车驾遂幸雍第。
现代文：遇到太后和肃宗向南到洛水游览，元雍邀请，皇帝于是前往元雍的宅第。
English: Encountering the Empress Dowager and Su Zong heading south to Luoshui for a tour, invited by Yuan Yong, the emperor then went to Yuan Yong's residence.

古文：日晏，肃宗及太后至雍内室，从者莫得而入，遂定图叉之计。
现代文：天晚，肃宗和太后到元雍的内室。跟从的人不能进入，于是定下对付元叉的计策。
English: In the evening, Su Zong and the empress dowager went to the inner room of Yuan Yong. The followers could not enter, so they decided on a strategy to deal with Yuan Yong.

古文：后雍从肃宗朝太后，乃进言曰： 臣不虑天下诸贼，唯虑元叉。
现代文：后来元雍跟随肃宗朝见太后，就进言说： 臣下不忧虑天下所有贼寇，仅忧虑元叉。
English: Later, Yuan Yong followed Su Zong to see the empress dowager, and said: My vassals do not worry about all the thieves and robbers in the world, they only worry about Yuan Zheng.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：叉总握禁旅，兵皆属之；父率百万之众，虎视京西；弟为都督，总三齐之众。
现代文：因为元叉总领宫廷军队，兵士都隶属于他；他的父亲率领百万军队，在京城西面虎视眈眈；弟弟做都督，总领三齐的军队。
English: Because Yuan Zha was the commander-in-chief of the palace army, the soldiers were all subordinate to him; his father led a million-man army and was on the west side of the capital; his brother was the governor-in-chief and the commander-in-chief of the three armies.

古文：元叉无心则已，若其有心，圣朝将何以抗？
现代文：元叉没有心思便罢，如果他有心思，朝廷该如何抵抗?
English: Even if Yuan Xuan did not have a mind, if he did have a mind, how could the imperial court resist?

古文：叉虽曰不反，谁见其心？
现代文：元叉虽然说不谋反，谁能看到他的心?
English: Although Yuan Xuan said not to rebel, who can see his heart?

古文：而不可不惧。 
现代文：因而不可不畏惧。 
English: That's why we have to be afraid.

古文：太后曰： 然。
现代文：太后说： 是的。
English: The Empress Dowager said: Yes.

古文：元郎若忠于朝廷而无反心，何故不去此领军，以余官辅政？ 
现代文：元郎如果忠于朝廷而没有反叛的心，为什么不辞掉这个领军职位，以其余的官职辅佐政事呢? 
English: If Genro was loyal to the imperial court and did not have a rebellious heart, why did he not resign from this leading position and use the remaining official position to assist the government?

古文：叉闻之，甚惧，免冠求解。
现代文：元叉听说后，十分畏惧，取下帽子请求解职。
English: After hearing this, Yuan Xuan was very afraid and took off his hat to ask for dismissal.

古文：乃以叉为骠骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书令、侍中、领左右。
现代文：于是任命元叉为骠骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书令、侍中、领左右。
English: As a result, Yuan Zha was appointed as the commander of the imperial cavalry, the third secretary of the imperial etiquette, the third secretary of the imperial etiquette, the third secretary of the imperial etiquette, the third secretary of the imperial etiquette, the third secretary of the imperial etiquette, the third secretary of the imperial etiquette, the third secretary of the imperial etiquette, and the third secretary of the imperial etiquette.

古文：叉虽去兵权，然总任内外，殊不虑有黜废之理也。
现代文：元叉虽然失去兵权，然而总领内外事务，一点也不考虑有遭废黜的道理。
English: Although Yuan Zha had lost military power, he was still the commander-in-chief of domestic and foreign affairs, without any consideration for the reason of being deposed.

古文：后叉出宿，遂解其侍中。
现代文：后来元叉出宫住宿，就解除他的侍中职位。
English: Later, Yuan Zha went out to stay and was relieved of his position as an attendant.

古文：旦欲入宫，门者不纳。
现代文：早上想要进宫，守门的人不放行。
English: In the morning he tried to enter the palace, but the gatekeepers would not let him in.

古文：寻除名为民。
现代文：不久削除名籍成为平民。
English: He was soon stripped of his citizenship and became a civilian.

古文：初，咸阳王礻喜以逆见诛，其子树奔萧衍，衍封为鄴王。
现代文：当初，咸阳王元禧因作乱被杀，他的儿子元树投奔萧衍，萧衍封为邺王。
English: At first, King Yuanxi of Xianyang was killed for causing a disturbance, and his son, Yuan Shu, threw in his lot with Xiao Yan, who was crowned the king of Qi.

古文：及法僧反叛后，树遗公卿百僚书曰：魏室不造，奸竖擅朝，社稷阽危，缀旒非譬。
现代文：到法僧反叛以后，元树给公卿百官写信说：魏国处置失所，奸猾的小人专擅朝政，社稷危险，连缀的悬垂玉串不足为喻。
English: After the monks rebelled, Yuan Shu wrote a letter to the nobles and officials saying, "Wei has lost control of the country, treacherous villains are exclusively in charge of the government, the society is in danger, and the interlocking hanging strings of beads are not enough as a metaphor.

古文：元叉险慝狼戾，人伦不齿，属籍疏远，素无问望，特以太后姻娅，早蒙宠擢。
现代文：元叉凶险残忍，被人极端鄙视，服属疏远，一向没有声望，仅因是太后妹夫，早获宠信提拔。
English: Yuan Fork was cruel and dangerous, extremely despised by others, subordinate and estranged, and always had no reputation, but because he was the sister-in-law of the empress dowager, he was favored and promoted early.

古文：曾不怀音，公行反噬，肆兹悖逆，人神同愤。
现代文：竟然不感念恩德，公然反咬一口，放肆进行这一狂悖之事，入神为之一同愤恨。
English: He didn't even think about the kindness, he openly bit back, he brazenly carried out this outrageous act, he was filled with indignation.

古文：自顷境土所传，皆云：叉狼心虿毒，藉权位而日滋；含忍谄诈，与日月而弥甚。
现代文：近来境内传言，都说：元叉豺狼的心肝蝎子的恶毒，凭藉权力地位而逐日滋长；残忍好诈，随着日月而更加厉害。
English: Recently, rumors within the country all say that the viciousness of the Scorpion, the heart and soul of the Forked Jackal, grows day by day due to its position of power; it is cruel and deceitful, and becomes more severe with each passing day.

古文：无君之心，非复一日；篡逼之事，旦暮必行。
现代文：谋害君主的心，不止一天；篡夺逼宫的事，早晚必然施行。
English: It takes more than one day to plot the murder of a monarch; the usurpation of a palace is bound to happen sooner or later.

古文：抑又闻之，夫名以出信，信以制义，山川隐疾，且犹不以名，成师兆乱，巨君不臣，求之史籍，有自来矣。
现代文：又听说过，名字用来表达信实，以信实确定含义，山和疾病，还不可用来起名，成师预兆祸乱，巨君目无君主，从史书中寻求，是早就存在的。
English: I have also heard that names are used to express trustworthiness and to determine meaning with trustworthiness, that mountains and diseases cannot be used to give names, that becoming a teacher portends disaster, and that there is no such thing as a tyrant. If you look for them in history books, they have existed for a long time.

古文：元叉本名夜叉，弟罗实名罗刹，夜叉、罗刹，此鬼食人，非遇黑风，事同飘坠。
现代文：元叉本名夜叉，弟弟元罗实际名为罗刹，夜叉、罗刹，这种鬼吃人，不遇到黑风，人事零落。
English: Yuan Zhao's real name is Yasha, and his brother Yuan Luo's real name is Luo Xi, Yasha, Luo Xi. This kind of ghost eats people, does not encounter the black wind, and the personnel is scattered.

古文：呜呼魏境，离此二灾！
现代文：可悲啊魏国疆域遭到这两个灾难。
English: Sadly, the territory of the State of Wei suffered from these two disasters.

古文：恶木盗泉，不息不饮；胜名枭称，不入不为。
现代文：恶木下盗泉旁，不歇息不饮水；极盛放肆的名称，不考虑不使用。
English: Next to the evil tree stolen spring, do not rest and do not drink water; the most extravagant name, do not consider not to use.

古文：况昆季此名，表能噬物，日露久矣，始信斯言。
现代文：何况兄弟这种名字，表示能够吃人，显露的日子已经很久了，才相信这个话。
English: What's more, it's been a long time since the brothers, whose name means "man-eaters," revealed themselves, so I'm inclined to believe them.

古文：况乃母后幽辱，继主蒙尘，释位挥戈，言谋王室，不在今日，何谓人臣！
现代文：况且母后遭囚禁，嗣君蒙受尘土，放弃地位拿起兵器，谋取王室，不在于现在，哪裹还谈臣属!
English: Moreover, after his mother was imprisoned, his father-in-law suffered the dust, gave up his position, took up arms, and sought the royal family. Not now, how can we even talk about subjects!

古文：诸贤或奕世载德，或将相继踵，或受任累朝，或职居机要，或姻戚匪他，或忠义是秉，俯眉逆手，见制凶威，臣节未申，徒有勤悴。
现代文：各位贤人有的世代充满德行，有的将相相继，有的几朝受任，有的处于机要地位，有的是亲属联娴，有的秉持忠义，却低头拱手，受制于凶恶淫威，臣子的气节没有表达，徒有勤劳忧伤。
English: Esteemed sages, some generations are full of virtue, some will succeed one another, some will be appointed for several dynasties, some will be in an important position, some will be relatives, some will uphold loyalty, but bow their heads and give up, constrained by viciousness and arrogance, the temperament of a courtier is not expressed, and hard work is in vain.

古文：又闻自叉专政，亿兆离德，重以岁时灾厉，年年水旱，牛马殪踣，桑柘焦枯，饥馑相仍，菜色满道，妖灾告谴，人皆叹息。
现代文：又听说自从元叉专擅朝政，百姓离心离德，加上接连的灾祸，每年的水旱，牛马死亡倒仆，桑树焦枯，饥荒不断，面色饥饿的人充满道路，妖孽灾祸的谴告，使人们都叹息。
English: It was also said that since Yuan Zhaopeng took over the government, the people had become alienated from the country, and the successive disasters, such as the annual drought, the death of cattle and horses, the burnt mulberry trees, the continuous famine, the roads full of hungry-looking people, and the condemnation of witchcraft and disasters, made people sigh.

古文：瀍涧西北，羌戎陆梁；泗汴左右，戍漕流离。
现代文：涟水涧水的西北，羌戎横行；泅水汴水两岸，戍守运输的人流浪。
English: In the northwest of Surabaya and Surabaya, there is rampant vagrancy in Surabaya; on both sides of Surabaya and Surabaya, people who guard transportation are wandering.

古文：加以剖斮忠贤，歼殄宗室，哀彼本邦，一朝横溃。
现代文：加上屠杀忠臣贤人，消灭宗室成员，可悲我国，一时之间横遭崩溃。
English: Add to this the slaughter of loyal and wise men, the extermination of family members, and, sadly, our country collapsed in an instant.

古文：今既率师，将除君侧。
现代文：现在率领军队，将要除掉君主身边的恶人。
English: Now leading the army, he is going to get rid of the villains around the monarch.

古文：区区之怀，庶令冠屦得所，大憝同必诛之戮，魏祀无忽诸之非。
现代文：我的心思，希望使上下各得其所，大恶人同受必定诛灭的惩罚，魏国祭祀没有忽然断绝的过失。
English: In my heart, I hope that everyone will be able to find their place, that the great evildoers will receive the punishment of certain annihilation, and that the sacrificial rites of the State of Wei will not suddenly be cut off.

古文：叉为远近所恶如此。
现代文：元叉就是如此被远近的人所厌恶。
English: The Yuan fork has been loathed by people near and far to such an extent!

古文：其后灵太后顾谓侍臣曰： 刘腾、元叉昔邀朕索铁券，望得不死，朕赖不与。 
现代文：后来灵太后回头对侍奉的臣属说： 刘腾、元叉从前向我索求铁券，希望得到不处死刑的证物，我幸亏没有给与。 
English: Later, the spiritual empress Dowager Cixi once said to her attendants: Liu Teng and Yuan Zha had previously asked me for iron coupons, hoping to be exempted from the death penalty, but I deliberately delayed giving them to him.

古文：中书舍人韩子熙曰： 事关杀活，岂计与否？
现代文：中书舍人韩子熙说： 事情关系到生死，哪裹计较给了没有?
English: Han Zixi, a scholar at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, said: "This is a matter of life and death.

古文：陛下昔虽不与，何解今日不杀？ 
现代文：陛下从前虽然不曾给与，如何解释今不杀他? 
English: Your Majesty, although you didn't give it to me before, how do you explain not killing me today?

古文：灵太后怃然。
现代文：灵太后不高兴。
English: When the Reverend Mother heard about it, she was stunned.

古文：未几，有人告叉及其弟爪谋反，欲令其党攻近京诸县，破市烧邑郭以惊动内外，先遣其从弟洪业率六镇降户反于定州，又令人勾鲁阳诸蛮侵扰伊阙，叉兄弟为内应。
现代文：不久，有人告发元叉和他的弟弟元爪图谋反叛，想使他们的党羽攻打靠近京城的各县，攻破城池烧毁城郭来惊动京城内外，先派他的堂弟洪业率领六镇投降在定州反叛，又派人勾结鲁阳的蛮入侵犯骚扰伊阙，元叉兄弟作为内应。
English: Soon, someone accused Yuan Zha and his brother Yuan Jia of plotting a rebellion, wanting to make their followers attack the counties near the capital, break through the city and burn the city walls to alarm the capital and beyond. First, he sent his cousin Hong Ye to lead six towns to surrender in the Dingzhou rebellion, and then sent someone to collude with Luyang's invasion to harass Ili, with the Yuan Zha brothers as the internal response.

古文：起事有日，得其手书。
现代文：起事有日期，获取了他的亲笔信。
English: We have the date of the incident, we have his handwritten letter.

古文：灵太后以妹婿之故，未忍便决。
现代文：灵太后因妹夫的缘故，不忍心当机立断。
English: For the sake of her brother-in-law, the Empress Dowager could not bear to make a hasty decision.

古文：黄门侍郎李琰之曰： 元叉之罪，具腾遐迩，岂容复停，以惑视听。 
现代文：黄门侍郎李琰之说： 元叉的罪恶，传遍了远近，岂容再停留，来迷惑众人的视听? 
English: Li Yanzhi, a waiter at the Yellow Gate, said: The evil of Yuan Xuan has spread far and wide. Will it be allowed to stay longer to confuse everyone's audio-visual?

古文：黄门徐纥趋前欲谏，逡巡未敢。
现代文：黄门徐纥赶到前面想劝阻，犹豫不敢开。
English: Huangmen Xu Yao hurried to the front to dissuade, hesitating to open.

古文：群臣固执不已，肃宗又以为言，太后乃从之。
现代文：群臣执意坚持不停止，肃宗又加以论说，太后才听从了他们的意见。
English: The courtiers were adamant that they would not stop, Su Zong argued further, and the empress dowager finally listened to their opinion.

古文：于是叉及弟爪并赐死于家。
现代文：于是元叉和他的弟弟元爪都被赐令死在家中。
English: As a result, Yuan Zha and his younger brother, Yuan Jiao, were allowed to die at home.

古文：太后犹以妹故，复追赠叉侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书令、冀州刺史。
现代文：太后还因妹妹的缘故，又追赠元叉为侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书令、冀州刺史。
English: For the sake of her younger sister, the empress dowager also posthumously bestowed Yuan Xuan with the titles of Chamberlain, General of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Imperial Household, Grand Secretary of the People's Commissariat of Education, Grand Secretary of the People's Commissariat of Education, and Grand Historian of Jizhou.

古文：叉子亮，袭祖爵。
现代文：元叉的儿子元亮，继承祖父的爵位。
English: Yuan Zha's son, Yuan Liang, succeeded to his grandfather's title.

古文：齐受禅，例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，依例降爵。
English: After accepting the compromise, the peerage was reduced as usual.

古文：叉庶长子稚，秘书郎中。
现代文：元叉的庶出长子元稚，任秘书郎中。
English: Motosaki, the eldest son of Motosaki's illegitimate child, became the secretary's junior.

古文：叉死之后，遂亡奔萧衍。
现代文：元叉死后，就逃奔投靠萧衍。
English: After the death of Yuan Zha, he ran away to help Xiao Yan.

古文：叉弟罗，字仲纲，以俭素著称。
现代文：元叉的弟弟元罗，宇仲纲，以节俭朴素着称。
English: Yuan Zha's younger brother, Yuan Luo, also known as Yu Zhong Gang, was famous for his frugality and simplicity.

古文：起家司空参军事，转司徒主簿，领尝食典御、散骑侍郎、散骑常侍。
现代文：最初担任司空参军事，改任司徒主簿，兼领尝食典御、散骑侍郎、散骑常侍。
English: At first, he served as a military flight attendant, then he was appointed as the chief steward, and he also served as a food steward, horseback riding attendant, and horseback riding attendant.

古文：虽父兄贵盛，而虚己谦退，恂恂接物。
现代文：虽然父兄尊贵强盛，却虚心谦让，恭顺地接待别人。
English: Although his father and brother were powerful and respected, they were humble and courteous, and received others respectfully.

古文：迁平东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：升平东将军、青州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Eastern General and made history in Qingzhou.

古文：叉当朝专政，罗望倾四海，于是才名之士王元景、刑子才、李奖等咸为其宾客，从游青土。
现代文：元叉在朝中当权，元罗的声望遍布天下，这时才学著名的士人王元景、邢子才、李奖等人都成为他的宾客，随从到青州疆域。
English: Yuan Zha was in power in the Middle Kingdom, and Yuan Luo's reputation spread all over the world. At that time, the famous scholar Wang Yuanjing, Zang Zi Cai, Li Xuan and others became his guests and followed him to the Qingzhou region.

古文：时萧衍遣将寇边，以罗行抚军将军，都督青光南青三州诸军事。
现代文：这时萧衍派遣将领侵犯边境，任命元罗为代理抚军将军、都督青光南青三州诸军事。
English: At this time, Xiao Yan dispatched generals to invade the border and appointed Yuan Luo as the acting general of the army and the military governor of the Southern Qing Dynasty.

古文：罢州，入为宗正卿。
现代文：解除州职，召入任宗正卿。
English: He was relieved of his state post and appointed to the post of Zongzhengqing.

古文：孝庄初，除尚书右仆射、东道大使。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，授任尚书右仆射、东道大使。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, he was awarded the title of Shangshu Rongsha, the host ambassador.

古文：出帝时，迁尚书令，寻除使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、梁州刺史。
现代文：出帝时，调任尚书令，不久授任使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、梁州刺史。
English: When he became emperor, he was transferred to the post of Shang Shuling, and soon he was appointed to the post of Envoy, General of the Cavalry, Kaifu Yi and Three Departments, and Liangzhou Jishi.

古文：罗既懦怯，孝静初，萧衍遣将围逼，罗以州降。
现代文：元罗性格怯懦，孝静帝初年，萧衍派遣将领围困逼迫，元罗献出州城投降。
English: The character of Yuanluo was cowardly. In the first year of Emperor Xiao Jing, Xiao Yan sent generals to besiege and persecute Yuanluo, and Yuanluo surrendered the state capital.

古文：叉死之后，罗逼叉妻，时人秽之。
现代文：元叉死了以后，元罗逼奸元叉的妻子，当时人认为他很丑陋。
English: After Yuan Zha's death, Yuan Luo forced Yuan Zha's wife to commit adultery. At that time, people thought he was very ugly.

古文：或云其救命之计也。
现代文：有人说这是他救命的计策。
English: Some say it was a life-saving measure.

古文：罗弟爽，字景并。
现代文：元罗的弟弟元爽，字星益。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Luo is Yuan Shuang, also known as Xing Yi.

古文：少而机警，尤为父所宠爱。
现代文：年轻时机敏警惕，格外被父亲所宠爱。
English: The young opportunist is alert and is especially loved by his father.

古文：解褐秘书郎，稍迁给事黄门侍郎、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：出仕秘书郎，逐渐升为给事黄门侍郎、金紫光禄大夫。
English: He served as a secretary, and gradually rose to the position of the Yellow Gate Attendant, and the Golden Purple Light Doctor.

古文：永熙二年卒，赠使持节、都督泾岐秦三州诸军事、卫将军、尚书左仆射、秦州刺史，谥曰懿。
现代文：丞毖二年去世，追赠使持节、都督迳蛙台三州诸军事、卫将军、尚书左仆射、台业刺史，谧号为懿。
English: He died two years later, and was posthumously awarded the title of envoy to Jizhixi, the military of the three states, the general of Wei, the left-handed shooters of Shangshu, and the stabbers of Taiye, with the posthumous title of.

古文：爽子德隆，武定末，太子中庶子。
现代文：元爽的儿子德隆，武定末年，担任太子中庶子。
English: Motosho's son, Deron, who was an illegitimate son of Prince Takeda in his later years, served as the second son of the crown prince.

古文：爽弟蛮，武定末，光禄卿。
现代文：元爽的弟弟元蛮，武定末年，担任光禄卿。
English: Motosho's younger brother, Motomaru, who was in the last years of Wuding's life, served as the new Kōroku-kyō.

古文：爪字景邕，给事中。
现代文：元巫字星邕，担任给事中。
English: Former Wu Zi Xing Yao, currently serving as a middle-ranking official.

古文：与兄叉同以罪诛。
现代文：和哥哥五旦一起因有罪被杀。
English: He was found guilty and killed together with his brother Gotan.

古文：继弟罗侯，迁洛之际，以坟陵在北，遂家于燕州之昌平郡。
现代文：互銮的弟弟罗堡，迁到渔鳗的时候，因坟墓在北方，于是定居在遮州的旦垩塑。
English: Mutually estranged brother Roburg, when he moved to Yuyao, because the grave was in the north, he settled in Danzhong, Chuzhou.

古文：内丰资产，唯以意得为适，不入京师。
现代文：家内资产丰富，仅以意愿得偿为适宜，不进入京城。
English: The family is rich in assets, and it is only appropriate to use the will to obtain compensation, and not to enter the capital.

古文：有宾客往来者，必厚相礼遗，豪据北方，甚有声称。
现代文：有宾客来往时，一定厚加接待迹赠，雄踞于北方，十分有声望。
English: When there are guests coming and going, there must be a generous reception gift, which is very popular in the north and very prestigious.

古文：叉权重，以罗侯不乐入仕，就拜昌平太守。
现代文：元叉权势大，因罗侯不乐意入京为官，就地任命为昌平太守。
English: Yuan Zha had great power, and because Luo Hou was not willing to enter Beijing as an official, he was appointed to the position of Changping Governor on the spot.

古文：正光末，逆贼大俄佛保陷郡，见害。
现代文：正光末年，叛逆的贼寇大俄佛保攻占郡城，罗侯被杀害。
English: At the end of Zheng Guang's life, the rebellious thief and robber Great Russian Buddhists captured the county seat, and Luo Hou was killed.

古文：子景遵，直寝，太常丞。
现代文：儿子景遵，守卫皇宫，担任太常丞。
English: His son, Jingsun, guarded the imperial palace and served as the Grand Prince.

古文：史臣曰：枭镜为物，天实生之，知母忘父，盖亦禽兽，元绍其人，此之不若乎！
现代文：史臣曰：猫头鹰和獍作为凶恶的禽兽，上天生下它们，知道母亲忘记父亲，大概也如禽兽，元绍这个人，连禽兽都不如吧!
English: Shichen said: Owls and storks are ferocious beasts. God gave birth to them. Knowing that a mother forgets her father, they are probably also beasts. This person, Yuan Shao, is not even a beast!

古文：阳平以下，降年夭促，英才武略，未显于时。
现代文：阳平王以下，寿命短暂，卓越的才能和勇武的谋略，没有显赫于当时。
English: Below Yang Ping Wang, life expectancy was short, and outstanding talent and courageous strategy were not prominent at that time.

古文：静、简二王，为时称首。
现代文：静、简二王，当时声誉最佳。
English: Jing and Jane, the two kings, had the best reputation at the time.

古文：鉴既有声，浑亦见器。
现代文：元鉴有声名，元浑也受重用。
English: The Yuanxuan has a reputation, and the Yuanhun is also heavily used.

古文：霄荷遇高祖，继受任太和，苟无其才，名位岂徒及也。
现代文：元霄受到高祖赏识，元继在太和年间受到委任，如果没有才能，名誉地位哪能平白到身上呢?
English: The founder was appreciated by Gao Zu, and the successor was appointed during the Taizu era. If there is no talent, how can the honorary position be leveled to the body?

古文：叉阶缘宠私，智小谋大，任重才弱，遂乱天下，杀身全祀，不亦幸哉！
现代文：元叉凭藉私宠，智慧小而谋划大，责任重而才能小，于是扰乱天下，身死而保全了祭祀，不也是很幸运的吗?
English: Yuan Xuan relied on his personal favor, small wisdom but great planning, heavy responsibility but small talent, so he disturbed the world and saved the sacrificial rites with his life. Isn't he also very lucky?

