古文：悦，蚤孤，母更嫁平卢戍卒，悦随母转侧淄、青间。
现代文：田悦，小时候死了父亲，母亲再嫁给平卢的戍卒，田悦就随母亲转侧到淄州、青州之间。
English: Tian Yue's father died when she was a child, and her mother remarried Pinglu's brother-in-law. Tian Yue followed her mother to Shanzhou and Qingzhou.

古文：承嗣得魏，访获之，年十三，拜伏有礼，承嗣异之，委以号令，裁处皆与承嗣意合。及长，剽悍善斗冠军中，贼忍狙诈，外饬行义，轻财重施，以钩美誉，人皆附之。
现代文：田承嗣据有了魏州，访问找到了他。那时田悦十三岁，应答进退彬彬有礼，田承嗣甚觉诧异，交给他去办一些事，安排处理得都与田承嗣的意思相合，及至长大，魁梧剽悍，善于战斗，是军中的第一好手，且又残忍奸诈，外表却做得谨细好义，轻财重施，以之沽名钓誉，人们都愿归附他。
English: At that time, Tian Yue was 13 years old. He was polite and courteous, and Tian Yue was very surprised. He was given some tasks to do, and the arrangements and handling were all in line with Tian Yue's intention. When he grew up, he was strong and brave, good at fighting, the best in the army, and cruel and treacherous, but his appearance was careful and righteous, and he spent money lightly. With his reputation, people were willing to follow him.

古文：承嗣爱其才，将死，顾诸子弱，乃命悦知节度事，令诸子佐之。
现代文：田承嗣爱其才，在将死时，看到自己的儿子都孱弱，于是让他管理节度事，却让各儿子佐助。
English: Tian Chengzhe loved his talent, and when he was about to die, he saw that his sons were weak, so he let him manage the festival, but let each son assist.

古文：帝因诏悦自中军兵马使、府左司马擢留后，俄检校工部尚书，为节度使。
现代文：皇帝诏令田悦从中军兵马使、府左司马提升为留后，不久升检校工部尚书，任节度使。
English: After Emperor Zhao ordered Tian Yue to stay on as the Chinese military's envoy and the prefecture's left-hand secretary, he was soon promoted to inspector of the school's engineering department and appointed as the festival's envoy.

古文：悦始招致贤才，开馆宇，礼天下士，外示恭顺，阴济其奸。
现代文：田悦招致贤才，开馆宇，礼纳天下之士，外表恭顺，实质为他的奸邪找助力。
English: Tian Yue invited sages, opened museums, and rewarded the world's people. Outwardly, he was obedient, but in reality, he was looking for help for his treachery.

古文：帝晚年尤宽弛，悦所奏请无不从。
现代文：代宗皇帝晚年时格外随和宽容，田悦有所奏请，没一件不得允许。
English: When Emperor Daizong was in his later years, he was exceptionally easygoing and tolerant. Tian Yue had something to ask for, and nothing was not allowed.

古文：德宗立，不假借方镇，诸将稍惕息。
现代文：德宗即位，不借方镇之力，藩镇各将稍有收敛。
English: When Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, not thanks to the power of Fangzhen, the various towns of the domain gradually converged.

古文：会黜陟使洪经纶至河北，闻悦养士七万，辄下符罢其四万归田亩。
现代文：正遇黜陟使洪经纶到河北，听说田悦养兵达七万之多，于是下令罢去四万，让他们回去搞农业生产。
English: It was just a chance meeting that made Hong Jingjun go to Hebei. He heard that Tian Yue had raised as many as seventy thousand soldiers, so he ordered forty thousand to leave and let them go back to engage in agricultural production.

古文：悦即奉命，因大集将士，以好言激之曰： 而等籍军中久，仰缣廪养父母妻子，今罢去，何恃而生？ 
现代文：田悦当即奉命，随即大集将士，假意关心实质激怒他们说： 你们在军中已很久了，靠军饷供养父母妻儿，如今黜陟使要你们退回乡里去，你们将靠什么为生？ 
English: Tian Yue was immediately ordered to immediately gather a large number of soldiers, pretending to be concerned about the substance and angering them by saying: You have been in the army for a long time, supporting your parents, wife and children with military pay, and now the emperor wants you to return to the countryside. What will you live on?

古文：众大哭。
现代文：众人听了都大哭。
English: Everyone burst into tears.

古文：悦乃悉出家赀给之，各令还部，自此，魏人德悦。
现代文：田悦就拿出全部家产分给众人，让他们回去。从此，魏州人都感恩田悦。
English: Tian Yue took out all of her family's belongings and distributed them to the people so that they could return home. From then on, the people of Weizhou have been grateful to Tian Yue.

古文：及刘晏死，籓帅益惧，又传言帝且东封泰山，李勉遂城汴州；而李正己惧，率兵万人屯曹州，乃遣人说悦同叛。
现代文：及至刘晏被赐死、刘文喜被杀，各藩帅都有戒心，又传说皇帝将东行封泰山，李勉乃在汴州固城筑工事；李正己则率兵一万人屯扎曹州，同时派人劝说田悦同时作乱，田悦就与梁崇义联结，相约互为援应。
English: By the time Liu Bei was put to death and Liu Wenxi was killed, the commanders of all the domains were wary. It was also rumored that the emperor would go east to conquer Mount Tai, and that Li Mian would build a fortress in Zhangzhou. Li Zhengqi led ten thousand soldiers to occupy Caozhou, and at the same time sent someone to persuade Tian Yue to make a disturbance at the same time. Tian Yue then made contact with Liang Chongyi, and they agreed to support each other.

古文：悦因与梁崇义等阻兵连和，以王侑、扈趯、许士则为腹心；邢曹俊、孟希祐、李长春、符璘、康愔为爪牙。
现代文：以王侑、扈萫、许士则为心腹，以邢曹俊、孟希、李长春、符瞞、康忄音为左右手。
English: Wang Qian, Yao, and Xu Shi were the confidants, and Yao Cao Jun, Meng Xi, Li Changchun, Fuxi, and Kang Qianyin were the right and left hands.

古文：建中二年，镇州李惟岳、淄青李纳求袭节度，不许，悦为请，不答，遂合谋同叛。
现代文：建中二年，镇州的李惟岳、淄青的李纳均奏请承袭节度之职，德宗为欲革除旧弊不许。
English: In the second year of Jianzhong, Li Weiyue from Zhenzhou and Li Na from Jiaqing were both asked to take over the duties of the festival, but Dezong did not want to do away with the old evils.

古文：会于邵、令狐峘等表汰浮图，悦乃诈其军曰： 有诏阅军之老疾疲弱者。 
现代文：田悦又代李惟岳请求，仍然不许，于是他们合谋同叛。正好那时于邵、令狐山亘等上表请求清除佛教徒。田悦借此事骗军人们说： 皇帝下诏，要检阅清除军中的老弱病伤者。 
English: Tian Yue also made a request on behalf of Li Wei Yue, but it was still not allowed, so they conspired to rebel together. At that time, Yu Shao, Ling Shanshan and others made a request to purge the Buddhists. Tian Yue used this matter to deceive the soldiers and said: The emperor issued a decree to review and purge the old, weak, sick and wounded in the army.

古文：繇是举军咨怨。
现代文：于是全军都埋怨不平。
English: As a result, the entire army complained.

古文：悦与纳会濮阳，纳分兵佐悦。
现代文：田悦与李纳在氵仆阳会兵，李纳分兵助田悦。
English: Tian Yue and Li Na are serving as servants of the Yang Clan, and Li Na's soldiers are helping Tian Yue.

古文：会幽州硃滔等奉诏讨惟岳，悦乃遣孟希祐以兵五千助惟岳；别遣康愔以兵八千攻邢州；杨朝光以兵五千壁卢疃，绝昭义饷道。
现代文：那时，幽州节度使朱滔等奉诏讨伐李惟岳，田悦派孟希率五千人马去援李惟岳；另又派康忄音率八千人马去攻邢州；派杨朝光率五千人马坚守卢疃，断绝昭义的粮道。
English: At that time, the Yuzhou Festival sent Zhu Tao and others to fight against Li Wei Yue, and Tian Yue sent Meng Xi with five thousand horses to aid Li Wei Yue; he also sent eight thousand horses with eight thousand horses to attack Zhangzhou; he sent five thousand horses with five thousand horses to Yang Chaoguang to defend Luye and cut off Zhao Yi's food supply.

古文：悦自将兵数万继进，又使朝光攻临洺将张伾。
现代文：田悦自己率领几万人为后续，包围临氵名，又让杨朝光去攻临氵名。临氵名守将张亻丕坚守数月。
English: Tian Yue himself led tens of thousands of people as a follow-up, encircled Linyi, and let Yang Chaoguang attack Linyi. Linyi's governor Zhang Jian held out for several months.

古文：伾固守，食且尽，赏赐不足，乃饰爱女示众曰： 库廪竭矣，愿以此女代赏。 
现代文：城中粮食将尽，无物赏赐，于是将自己的女儿打扮好了来见将士，张亻丕说： 我们的仓库空了，粮食也要光了，我家没有别的东西，愿意把这女儿代作赏赐。 
English: The food in the city was running out and there was nothing to reward, so he dressed up his daughter and came to see the soldiers. Zhang Ye said: "Our warehouse is empty, the food is running out, my family has nothing else, I would like to reward this daughter instead."

古文：士感泣，请死战，大破悦军。
现代文：众人均感动泪下，愿意死战，竟然将田悦军打得大败。
English: Everyone was moved to tears and was willing to fight to the death to defeat Tian Yue's army.

古文：有诏河东马燧、河阳李芃与昭义军救伾。
现代文：皇帝诏令河东节度使马燧、河阳节度使李秡与昭义军前往救张亻丕。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered the Hedong Festival to send Ma Jun and the Heyang Festival to send Li Jun and the Shouyi Army to rescue Zhang Jun.

古文：三节度次狗、明二山间，未进。
现代文：三位节度使到达狗、明二山之间，未及时进军。
English: The three knights did not advance in time, because they were too late to reach the dog and the Ming two mountains.

古文：伾急，以纸为风鸢，高百馀丈，过悦营上，悦使善射者射之，不能及。
现代文：张亻丕急了，用纸扎了个大风筝，高飞一百多丈。飞过田悦军营，田悦派弓箭好手射箭，箭高不过风筝。
English: Zhang Yao was in a hurry, and used paper to tie a large kite, flying more than a hundred feet high. He flew over Tian Yue's military camp. Tian Yue was a good archer, and his arrows were not as high as the kite.

古文：燧营噪迎之，得书言 三日不解，临洺士且为悦食。 
现代文：马燧营见了呼叫着把风筝收入。见风筝上写着 ：如果三天还不能解围，临氵名的人都会成为田悦的点心了。 
English: On the kite was written: "If the siege is not lifted in three days, everyone in Linfen will become Tian Yue's snack."

古文：燧乃自壶关鼓而东，破卢疃，战双冈，禽贼大将卢子昌而杀朝光，悦遁保洹水。
现代文：马燧乃从壶关严阵东进，攻破卢疃，战于双冈，俘获贼大将卢子昌，斩杀杨朝光，田悦逃走，到洹水坚守。
English: Ma Xuan marched eastward from Kuguan Yiming, broke through Lushan, fought in Shuanggang, captured the thief general Lu Zichang, killed Yang Chaoguang, Tian Yue fled, and held on to Surabaya.

古文：于是曹俊为贝州刺史，乃承嗣时旧将，果而谋。
现代文：那时，邢曹俊为贝州刺史，他是田承嗣时的旧将，果敢而有谋。
English: At that time, Zou Cao Jun was the governor of Bozhou. He was the old general at the time of Tian Chengzhi, bold and resourceful.

古文：悦未得志，召问计安出，对曰： 兵法，十则攻，今公以逆干顺，势不敌也。
现代文：田悦被马燧等击败，就召曹俊来研究办法。曹俊说： 兵法上说，十倍于敌则可攻。现在公是以逆来犯顺，气势上就敌不过。
English: When Tian Yue was defeated by Ma Jun and others, he summoned Cao Jun to study the methods. Cao Jun said: In terms of military tactics, it is possible to attack ten times more than the enemy. Now the general is breaking the rules by doing the opposite, and the momentum is too much for the enemy.

古文：宜留兵万人屯崞阝口，以遏西师，则举河北二十四州，惟公所命。
现代文：最好留兵一万人屯守郭口，用以阻遏西面来的军队。这样，整个河北二十四州全都惟公命是听了。
English: It is best to keep ten thousand soldiers stationed at Guokou to deter the army coming from the west. In this way, the entire twenty-four states of Hebei have all listened to the public order.

古文：今攻临洺，粮竭卒老，不见其可。 
现代文：现在去攻临氵名，粮食吃完了，军队拖疲了，这是不可取的。 
English: It is not advisable to attack Linfen now, when the grain has been eaten and the army is exhausted.

古文：悦所昵扈趯、孟希祐等皆訾短之，故悦不听其言。
现代文：田悦的亲信扈萫、孟希等人都批评指责他的计划不解近渴。
English: Tian Yue's close confidants Zhai, Meng Xi and others have criticized and accused his plan of being insincere.

古文：燧等距悦军三十里，筑垒相望。
现代文：田悦也因此不采纳他的建议。马燧等人在距离田悦军队三十里处筑堡垒，与之相望。
English: As a result, Tian Yue did not accept his suggestion. Ma Jun and others built a fortress thirty miles away from Tian Yue's army, facing it.

古文：悦与纳合兵三万，阵洹水。
现代文：田悦与李纳合兵三万，在洹水列阵。
English: Tian Yue and Li Na, together with 30,000 soldiers, formed a line in Surabaya.

古文：燧引神策将李晟夹攻悦，悦大败，死伤二万计，引壮骑数十夜奔魏，其将李长春拒关不内，以须官军。而三帅顿不进。
现代文：马燧让神策将李晟与自己夹攻田悦，田悦大败，死伤两万多人。田悦带领精壮骑兵几十人乘夜逃奔魏州，守将李长春闭关不接纳他们，等待官军到来，但官军三帅却滞留不进。
English: Ma Zhe let Shen Zhe pin Li Zhe and himself together to attack Tian Yue. Tian Yue suffered a crushing defeat, with more than 20,000 killed and wounded. Tian Yue led dozens of elite cavalrymen to flee to Weizhou at night. The guard Li Changchun closed the gate and did not accept them, waiting for the official army to arrive, but the official army's three marshals did not enter.

古文：明日，悦得入，杀长春，持佩刀立军门，流涕曰： 悦藉伯父馀业，与君等同休戚。
现代文：第二天，李长春开关，田悦入城，杀了李长春，提着佩刀站在军门，流着泪对大家说 ：我田悦靠了伯父的业绩，得与君等同休戚共甘苦。
English: The next day, Li Changchun switched off, Tian Yue entered the city, killed Li Changchun, stood at the military gate with a saber, and said to everyone with tears: I Tian Yue relied on my uncle's performance, and had to share the hardships with you.

古文：今败亡及此，不敢图全。
现代文：如今败亡到这一步，不敢偷生。
English: Now, defeated to this point, I dare not take my own life.

古文：然悦久稽天诛者，特以淄青、恒冀子弟不得承袭，既弗能报，乃至用兵，使士民涂炭。
现代文：但我所以久违天谴而苟全的原因，只是由于淄青、恒冀的子弟未能得到承袭职位。既不能得到皇帝的恩准，乃至于用兵，致使士民遭到屠戮与不幸。
English: But the reason why I have been so diligent for so long, in defiance of Heaven's punishment, is only because the sons of Ao Qing and Heng Ji were not able to inherit the position. They could not get the emperor's approval, nor could they use soldiers, which led to the slaughter and misfortune of the soldiers and the people.

古文：悦正缘母老不能自刭，愿公等斩悦首以取富贵，无庸俱死。 
现代文：我只因老母尚在，不能自杀，愿君等将我的头斩下投降官军以取得前途，免得与我同死。 
English: I can't commit suicide only because my mother is still alive. I hope you will cut off my head and surrender to the government army so that I can have a future, so that you won't die with me.

古文：乃自投于地。
现代文：说完，跪在地下。
English: After that, kneel on the ground.

古文：众怜，皆抱持之曰： 今士马之众，尚可一战，事脱不济，死生以之。 
现代文：众人动了怜悯之心，争前将他扶起说： 我们现有的人马，尚可一战，如事情实在无奈，我们愿意生死相共。 
English: Moved with compassion, the crowd helped him to his feet and said: "Our current manpower can still fight a battle, if things are really hopeless, we are willing to live and die together."

古文：悦收泪曰： 诸公不以悦丧败，誓同存亡，纵身先地下，敢忘厚意乎？ 
现代文：田悦拭去眼泪说 ：诸位不因我丧败而弃我，誓与我同存亡。我即使先去地下，也不敢忘了诸位的厚意。 
English: Wiping away her tears, Tian Yue said, "All of you, do not abandon me because of my defeat, vow to survive with me. Even if I go underground first, I dare not forget your kindness."

古文：乃断发为誓，将士亦断发，约为兄弟；乃率富民大家财及府库所有，大行赐与。
现代文：于是抽刀割发盟誓，将士们也都割发盟誓，相约为兄弟。于是将富户家的财物及府库中的全部东西都拿出来赏给众人。
English: So the swordsmen swore an oath, and the soldiers also swore an oath, as they were all brothers. So they brought out the wealth of the rich family and everything in the treasury to reward the people.

古文：而李再春及其子瑶以博州降，悦从兄昂以洺州降，燧等受之、悦皆族昂等家。
现代文：另一面，李再春及其子李瑶带领博州降官军，田悦的堂哥田昂带领氵名州降，马燧等都接纳了。田悦将田昂等人的家属全部杀死。
English: On the other hand, Li Zhaichun and his son Li Yao led Bo Prefecture to surrender, and Tian Yue's cousin Tian Ang led Shennai Prefecture to surrender, which was accepted by Ma Yao and others. Tian Yue killed all the family members of Tian Ang and others.

古文：悦自视兵械乏，众单耗，惧，不知所出，复召曹俊与之谋。
现代文：田悦看到自己兵械短缺，士兵死亡甚众，心中害怕，不知该怎么办，又召来邢曹俊商议，邢曹俊替他整顿军队，修筑工事，振奋士气，大家才又有了信心。
English: When Tian Yue saw that he was short of weapons and that many soldiers had died, he was afraid and did not know what to do. He summoned Yao Cao Jun for consultation. Yao Cao Jun reorganized the army for him, carried out construction work, and boosted morale. Only then did everyone have confidence again.

古文：曹俊为整军完垒以振士气，群心复坚，后十馀日，燧等始进薄城下。未几，王武俊杀惟岳，而深州降硃滔，滔分兵守之。
现代文：十多天后，马燧等人才进到城下。不久，李惟岳的兵马使王武俊杀死李惟岳，深州刺史杨荣国、定州刺史杨正义向范阳节度使朱滔投降。朱滔分兵守二州。
English: After more than ten days, Ma Xuan and other talents entered the city. Soon, Li Wei Yue's soldiers and horses were sent by Wang Wujun to kill Li Wei Yue, and Yang Rongguo and Yang Zhengyi from Shenzhou and Fan Yang Jiedu from Dingzhou ordered Zhu Tao to surrender. Zhu Tao was divided into two states.

古文：天子授武俊恒州刺史，以康日知为深、赵二州观察使。
现代文：天子授官王武俊恒州刺史，派康日知为深、赵二州的观察使。
English: Wang Wujun, the emperor's second-in-command, was a historian of Hengzhou. He was deeply devoted to Kang Rizhi, and was an observer of Zhao Erzhou.

古文：武俊恨赏薄，滔怨不得深州，悦知二将可间，乃昽路使王侑、许士则说滔曰： 司徒奉诏讨贼，不十日，拔束鹿，下深州，惟岳势蹙，故王大夫能得逆首。
现代文：王武俊怨恨赏赐太薄，朱滔则因得不到深州而怀怨。田悦得知此情，认为可以离间他二人与朝廷的关系，乃派王侑、许士则去劝说朱滔 ：司徒您奉诏讨贼，不到十天就攻克束鹿，招降深州，李惟岳困窘。王大夫才得以取得李惟岳的首级。
English: Wang Wujun resented that the reward was too meager, while Zhu Tao held a grudge because he did not get Shenzhou. When Tian Yue learned of this, he thought it would be possible to sever the relationship between the two of them and the imperial court. Instead, he sent Wang Xi and Xu Shi to persuade Zhu Tao: "Stu, you issued an edict against thieves, and in less than ten days you conquered Sokcho, invited the surrender of Shenzhou, and embarrassed Li Weiyue. Dr. Wang was able to obtain the first rank of Li Weiyue.

古文：闻出幽州日，有诏破惟岳得其地即隶麾下，今乃以深州与康日知，是朝廷不信于公也。
现代文：听说兵出幽州时，有诏令说谁攻破李惟岳攻克其地，就将那地归属于他麾下。如今却把深州给了康日知，显而易见是朝廷不相信司徒您。
English: I heard that when the soldiers left Yuzhou, there was a decree saying that whoever defeated Li Wei Yue and conquered his land would have that land under his command. Now, however, he has given Shenzhou to Kang Rong Zhi. It is obvious that the court does not trust you, Sitoru.

古文：且上英武独断，有秦皇、汉武风，将诛豪桀，扫除河朔，不使父子相袭。
现代文：再说如今皇上英武独断，有秦皇汉武之风，将要诛杀豪杰，扫除河朔藩将，不让父子相袭。
English: Besides, nowadays, the Emperor Yingwu is arbitrary, with the Qin Emperor Han's martial style, he is going to fight and kill heroes, sweep away the general of the Hexuo clan, and prevent father and son from attacking each other.

古文：又功臣刘晏等皆旋踵破灭，杀梁崇义，诛其口三百馀，血丹汉江。
现代文：您看功臣刘晏等人都是转眼就遭诛灭，杀梁崇义时，杀了他家三百多人，汉江都被染红。
English: You can see that the hero Liu Bei and others were annihilated in the blink of an eye. When Liang Chongyi was killed, more than three hundred members of his family were killed, and the Han River was dyed red.

古文：今日破魏，则取燕、赵如牵辕下马耳。
现代文：司徒若今日破魏州，则收取燕、赵就好像牵一头辕下之马那么方便。
English: If Szeto were to defeat Weizhou today, it would be as convenient to receive Yan and Zhao as if they were leading a team of horses.

古文：夫魏博全则燕、赵安，鄙州尚书必以死报德。
现代文：从形势看，若魏博保全了，燕、赵就能安宁，鄙州的田尚书定会以死来报司徒之德。
English: From the perspective of the situation, if Wei Bo is preserved, Yan and Zhao will be able to rest in peace, and Tian Shangshu of Minzhou will certainly die to report the virtue of the scholar.

古文：且合从连衡，救灾恤患，不朽之业也，尚书愿上贝州以广汤沐，使侑等奉簿最孔目，司徒朝至魏则夕入贝，惟孰计之。 
现代文：何况或合纵或连横，或援救灾难或抚恤忧患，都是不朽的功业。我们田尚书愿将贝州奉与司徒以广司徒的封邑，派我等奉帐务出纳条目文书。司徒早上到魏州，则晚上就奉上贝州。
English: What's more, it is an immortal deed to unite the east and the west, or to unite the north and the south, or to rescue disaster victims, or to relieve suffering. We, Tian Shangshu, are willing to offer Bei Zhou to the Szeto as the fiefdom of the Guangxi Szeto, and send us to serve as accountants to cash the entry documents. If the Szeto arrives in Weizhou in the morning, it will be offered to Bei Zhou in the evening.

古文：滔心素欲得贝，即大喜，使侑先还告师期。
现代文：愿司徒多加思考。 朱滔心里早就垂涎贝州，听到这话，十分高兴，让王侑先回去报告师到之期，使他心中有数地坚守。
English: Zhu Tao had long coveted Bei Zhou in his heart, and was very happy to hear this, so he let Wang Yao go back first to report that the teacher was due, so that he could stick to it.

古文：先是，诏武俊出恒冀粟三十万赐滔，使还幽州，以突骑五百助燧军。
现代文：起先，皇帝下诏令王武俊拿出恒冀之粟三十万石赐给朱滔，要他回幽州，派突击骑兵五百人去助马燧军。
English: At first, the emperor issued a decree ordering Wang Wujun to give Zhu Tao 300,000 koku of millet from Hengji, asking him to return to Yuzhou and send 500 assault cavalrymen to help the Ma Jun army.

古文：武俊惧悦破，将起师北伐，不肯归粟、马。
现代文：王武俊害怕田悦被攻破后会起师北伐，因此不肯送粟和马。
English: Wang Wujun was afraid that Tian Yue would start the Northern Expedition after being defeated, so he refused to send corn and horses.

古文：滔因使王郅说武俊曰： 天子以君善战，天下无前，故分散粟、马以弱君军。
现代文：朱滔就此事派王郅去劝说王武俊 ：天子因为您善战，天下无双，所以分散您的粟和马，削弱您的军力。
English: Zhu Tao sent Wang Yao to persuade Wang Wujun on this matter: "Son of heaven, because you are good at fighting, there is no match in the world, so scatter your corn and horses and weaken your military strength.

古文：今若举魏博，则王师北向，漳、滏势危。
现代文：若是魏博被攻下，王师当即就会北上，即就漳州，滏州危如累卵了。
English: If Weibo is conquered, Wang Shi will immediately go to the north, that is, to Ganzhou. Ganzhou is in danger.

古文：诚能连营南旆，解田悦于倒县，大夫之利也，岂特粟不出窖，马不离厩，又有排危之义，声满天下。
现代文：如能连营南下，帮助田悦解困，那大夫您之利就不仅是粟不出窑、马不离厩了，且又有解人危难之恩义，将会声誉满天下。
English: If you can go south together and help Tian Yue out of her predicament, then your advantage as a doctor will not only be that the poppy will not go out of the kiln and the horse will not leave the stable, but you will also have the gratitude of solving people's difficulties, and your reputation will spread all over the world.

古文：大夫亲断逆首，血衊衅衣袖，日知不出赵城，何功于国，而坐兼二州。
现代文：大夫您亲自斩断逆贼之头，血染襟袖，康日知身不出赵城，有什么功劳，却坐得两州。
English: Doctor, you personally cut off the head of the traitor, blood stained the sleeves, Kang Ritsu knew that he would not leave Zhaocheng, what is the merit, but he sat in two states.

古文：河北士以不得深州为大夫耻。 
现代文：河北之士因大夫不能得到深州而深以为耻。 
English: The people of Hebei are deeply ashamed that their doctors can't get into Shenzhen.

古文：武俊既得深，亦喜，即日使使报滔。
现代文：朱滔答应将深州给王武俊，武俊心喜，即刻派使者向朱滔回报。
English: Zhu Tao promised to give Shenzhou to Wang Wujun. Wujun was delighted and immediately sent an envoy to Zhu Tao to reciprocate.

古文：于是滔率兵二万屯宁晋，武俊以兵万五千会之。
现代文：三方密约就此形成。那时，朱滔带兵两万屯驻在宁晋，王武俊带一万五千人马与之相合。
English: At that time, Zhu Tao stationed in Ningjin with 20,000 soldiers, and Wang Wujun with 15,000 horses joined him.

古文：悦恃救至，使康愔督兵与王师战御河上，大败，弃甲走城。悦怒，闭门不内，蹈藉死堑中者甚众。
现代文：田悦依恃救兵将至，将派康忄音督促士兵在御河与王师交战，大败，弃甲逃回城里，田悦怒，闭门不接纳逃归者，败兵逃避中相互践踏而死在堑中的很多。
English: Tian Yue will send Kang Yueyin to urge the soldiers to fight with Wang Shi in Okawa, and they will be defeated. They will abandon their armor and flee back to the city. Tian Yue will be angry, and will not accept the escapees behind closed doors. The defeated soldiers will trample each other while escaping, and many will die in the hail.

古文：其夏，滔、武俊军至，悦具牛酒迎犒。
现代文：夏天，朱滔及王武俊的兵马到了，田悦准备了酒肉迎接犒劳。
English: In the summer, Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun's soldiers and horses arrived, and Tian Yue prepared meat and wine to welcome them.

古文：燧等营魏河西，武俊、滔、悦壁河东，起楼橹营中，两军相持，自秋汔冬。
现代文：马燧等在魏河西扎营，王武俊、朱滔在河东筑工事，还在营中建望台，两军相持，自秋至冬。
English: Ma Jun and others set up camp on the west side of the Wei River, while Wang Wujun and Zhu Tao carried out construction work on the east side of the river and built a watchtower in the camp. The two armies stood side by side from autumn to winter.

古文：燧遣晟以兵三千，自邢、赵与张孝忠合攻涿、莫二州，以绝幽、蓟路。
现代文：马燧派李晟率兵三千从邢州、赵州过去与张孝忠合攻涿州、莫州，截断幽州、蓟州的道路。
English: Ma Jun sent Li Jun and 3,000 soldiers from Ganzhou and Zhaozhou to attack Ganzhou and Mozhou with Zhang Xiaozhong, cutting off the roads of Yuzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：悦重德滔，欲推为盟主而臣之。
现代文：田悦极感朱滔之恩，想推他为盟主，自己听命于他。
English: Tian Yue was extremely grateful to Zhu Tao, and wanted to promote him as the leader, and obey his orders.

古文：滔不敢当，乃更议如七国故事。
现代文：朱滔不敢当，于是讨论研究想仿效战国时七国的旧例。
English: Zhu Tao did not dare to do so, so he discussed and studied the old example of wanting to follow the example of the seven countries during the Warring States Period.

古文：悦国号魏，僭称魏王，以府为大名府，署子为府留后；以扈趯为留守，许士则为司武，曾穆司文，裴抗司礼，封演司刑，并为侍郎；刘士素为内史舍人，张瑜、孙光佐为给事中，邢曹俊、孟希祐为左右仆射，田晁、高缅为征西节度使，蔡济、薛有伦为虎牙将军，高崇节知军前兵马，夏侯为兵马使。
现代文：田悦国号魏，僭称魏王，以所在府称大名府，任儿子为府留后；任扈萫为留守，任许士则为司武，任曾穆为司文，任裴抗为司礼，任封演为司刑，这些人都位侍郎；任刘士素为内史舍人，任张瑜、孙光佐为给事中，任邢曹俊、孟希为左右仆射，任田晁、高缅为征西节度使，任蔡济、薛有伦为虎牙将军，派高崇节掌管军前兵马，夏侯赤贞为兵马使。
English: Tian Yue's country name was Wei, and his nickname was Wei Wang, and his capital was Daimyofu (大名府) according to the capital he was in, and his son was Remnant; Tian Yue was Remnant, and his sons were Sifu (司武), Zeng Mu (曾穆) was Sifu (司文), Pei Nang (裴抗) was Sifu (司礼), and Feng Xuan (任封演) was Sifu (司刑), and they were all attendants; Liu Shisu was Neishi (内史舍人), Zhang Yu (张瑜) and Sun Guangza (孙光佐) were

古文：晁以兵数千助李纳守郓。
现代文：田晁派出几千人马去帮助李纳守郓州。
English: Tianyao sent several thousand horses to help Li Na defend Ganzhou.

古文：明年夏，滔屯河间，留大将马寔以兵万人戍魏。
现代文：第二年夏，朱滔屯驻河间，留大将马萛带领一万兵马戍守魏州。
English: In the summer of the following year, Zhu Tao was stationed in Haima, leaving General Ma Jun to lead ten thousand soldiers and horses to defend Weizhou.

古文：会硃泚乱，帝出奉天，燧还太原，武俊等皆罢，悦饯之，厚遗武俊、寔，官属皆有赠。
现代文：正遇朱氵此作乱，皇帝避难前往奉天，马燧乃回太原，王武俊等人也罢兵，田悦为他们饯行。厚赠王武俊及马萛，所有官属均有馈赠。
English: In the face of Zhu Xi's rebellion, the emperor fled to Fengtian, Ma Xunai returned to Taiyuan, Wang Wujun and others also withdrew, and Tian Yue accompanied them. Wang Wujun and Ma Xun were presented with gifts, and all officials received gifts.

古文：兴元元年，滔自将兵欲南度河助泚，使王郅见悦计事曰： 顷大王在重围，孤与赵刻日赴王难以全魏、贝。
现代文：兴元元年，朱滔自己带兵准备南下渡河援助朱氵此，派王郅去见田悦与他商议 ：目前大王在重围之中，我与赵王即刻来助王解难，保全魏州、贝州。
English: In the first year of Xingyuan, Zhu Tao himself led troops to prepare to cross the river to the south to help Zhu Xi, and sent Wang Xi to meet Tian Yue and discuss with him: At present, the great king is under heavy siege, and I and King Zhao will immediately come to help the king solve the problem and protect Weizhou and Beizhou.

古文：今秦帝已据关中，孤以步骑十万与回纥趋东都相应接，王能从孤济河，合势以取大梁，孤得西收巩、陕，与秦兵会，天下可定也。
现代文：现在秦帝已据有关中，我将率十万人马与回纥兵去东都与之接应，大王如能与我一同渡河，合力攻取大梁，我就去西取巩州、陕州，与秦兵会合。如此就天下大定了。
English: Now that the Qin Emperor has been informed, I will lead 100,000 horses and Hui soldiers to the east to meet him. If the great king can cross the river with me and work together to capture the girder, I will go to the west to take Gongzhou and Shaanxi to meet the Qin soldiers. This is the world's fate.

古文：则王与赵王永无南虑，为脣齿之国，幸速计之。 
现代文：这样，王与赵王永无南方之患，且能成为唇齿相依之国。
English: In this way, Wang and Zhao Wang will never have the problem of the south, and can become a country with lips and teeth.

古文：是时，悦闻天子已赦罪，复官爵，心不欲行，重遽绝滔，阳遣薛有伦报滔如约。
现代文：希望您尽快考虑决断。 这时，田悦听说天子已广泛赦罪，恢复自己的官爵，心中不想去，又不想断然拒绝，就假意派薛有伦去回报朱滔同意如约出兵。
English: At this time, when Tian Yue heard that Tian Zi had widely pardoned and restored his official title, he did not want to go in his heart, nor did he want to flatly refuse, so he pretended to send Xue Yulun to return Zhu Tao's agreement to send troops as agreed.

古文：滔大喜，复使舍人李琯申固所言，悦犹豫，许士则谏曰： 冀王勇决权略，一世之雄也，杀怀仙，屠希彩，讠术兄使如京师而夺之权，有恩者诛，同谋者覆，彼心腹渠可量哉？
现代文：朱滔大喜，又派舍人李再来敲定。田悦犹豫了。许士则劝他 ：冀王的勇敢果断，权谋策略，堪称一世之雄，他杀李怀仙，斩朱希彩，把哥哥骗去京师而夺了哥哥的权。对他有恩的也被杀了，与他同谋的也覆败了。他的心腹谁能估量得到？
English: Zhu Tao was overjoyed and sent his subordinate Li to finalize the matter. Tian Yue hesitated. Xu Shi advised him, "Ji Wang's brave and decisive, power-plotting strategy is worthy of being called the hero of the first century. He killed Li Huaixian, beheaded Zhu Xi Cai, and deceived his brother into going to Beijing to seize his brother's power. Those who were kind to him were also killed, and those who conspired with him were overthrown. Who can measure his henchman?

古文：今大王之亲不加泚，勇不加怀仙、希彩也，而念恩不已，拘挛匹夫义，出且见禽。
现代文：如今大王您之与他，论亲，比不上他哥哥朱氵此；论勇，比不上李怀仙、朱希彩。而居然还念恩不止，倘若执著于匹夫之义，您一出去就会被擒。
English: Today, Your Majesty is not as good as his brother Zhu Xi; he is not as brave as Li Huaixian and Zhu Xicai, but he is still very kind. If you cling to his righteousness, you will be arrested as soon as you go out.

古文：彼得魏博，北联幽蓟，南入梁、郑而与泚合，其理然也。
现代文：他得到了魏博，然后北联幽州、蓟州，南下入梁州、郑州去与朱氵此会合，这是明摆着的一条路。
English: He got Weibo, and then connected Yuzhou and Zhangzhou in the north, and went to Liangzhou and Zhengzhou in the south to meet with Zhu Xi. This is a clear path.

古文：大王不如伪许出迎，遣州县具牛酒，至则以事自解，不可顾恩取祸也。 
现代文：大王不如假装同意，出去迎师，派州县准备酒肉犒劳。他们来了，就借有事推托同行。千万不可为报恩而取祸。 
English: It is better for the great king to pretend to agree, go out to meet the teacher, and send the prefectures to prepare the meat and wine. When they come, they will borrow something from their counterparts. Do not take misfortune for reward.

古文：悦然之。
现代文：田悦同意他的话。
English: Tian Yue agreed with his words.

古文：先是，武俊阴约悦背滔，使相望。
现代文：起先，王武俊曾私下里约田悦背弃朱滔，各据守相持。
English: At first, Wang Wujun had secretly persuaded Tian Yue to turn his back on Zhu Tao.

古文：及闻滔要悦西，使田秀驰说悦曰： 闻大王欲从滔度河，为泚掎角，非也。
现代文：及至听说朱滔邀田悦西行，就派田秀急驰来劝田悦： 听说大王准备跟从朱滔渡河，与朱氵此形成掎角。此举实在错误。
English: When he heard that Zhu Tao had invited Tian Yue to go west, he sent Tian Xiurong to rush to persuade Tian Yue: I heard that the king was preparing to follow Zhu Tao across the river and form a quarrel with Zhu Xi. This move was really a mistake.

古文：方泚未盗京师时，滔为列国，且自高，如得东都，与泚连祸，兵多势张，返制于竖于乎？
现代文：那时朱氵此还未袭取京都，朱滔为列国之一，已经自以为高人一等了。如果他得了东都，与朱氵此连手为祸，兵多威振，我们岂不将受制于这小子了？
English: At that time, Zhu Xi did not yet attack Kyoto. Zhu Tao was one of the nations, and he already thought he was superior. If he won the eastern capital, it would be a disaster to join hands with Zhu Xi, and the soldiers would be more powerful. Wouldn't we be controlled by this boy?

古文：今日天子复官赦罪，乃王臣，岂舍天子而北面滔、泚耶！
现代文：如今天子复我等官职且赦我等之罪，还封我等为王。我们为什么要舍天子而去向朱滔、朱氵此称臣呢？
English: If today's son restores our official positions and forgives our sins, and also appoints us as kings, why should we forsake the heavenly son and go to Zhu Tao and Zhu Xi to praise them?

古文：愿大王闭垒不出，武俊须昭义军出，为王讨之。 
现代文：希望大王您能闭城不出，武俊待昭义军出兵，为大王讨伐。 
English: I hope that you, the great king, will not close the city, and Taketoshi will wait for the rebel army to send troops to fight for the great king.

古文：悦因秀还，具道其谋，而遣曾穆报滔。
现代文：田悦要田秀回去把他的计划告诉王武俊，同时派曾穆到朱滔处回报。
English: Tian Yue asked Tian Xiu to go back and tell Wang Wujun about his plan, and sent Zeng Mu to Zhu Tao to reciprocate.

古文：滔喜，自河间悉师而南，逾贝州，次清河，使人报悦，悦不至。
现代文：朱滔很高兴，从河间带领全部人马南下，越过贝州，到达清河，派人报告田悦，田悦托辞不去。
English: Zhu Tao was very happy. He led all the people south from Hama, crossed Bechu, and reached Qinghe. He sent someone to report to Tian Yue, but Tian Yue refused to go.

古文：进屯永济，使王郅等督之曰： 王约出馆陶与大王会，乃济河。 
现代文：朱滔又进军永济，派王郅等来催促田悦，说： 我王相约出馆陶与大王会师，然后一同渡河。 
English: Zhu Tao also marched into Yongji, and sent Wang Qi and others to urge Tian Yue, saying, "My king made an appointment to go out of the pavilion to meet with Tao, and then cross the river together.

古文：悦良久曰： 始约从王，今举军持悦曰： 魏比困侵掠，供拟屈竭。 
现代文：田悦沉吟了好久说 ：当初是与冀王约好相随的。但现在我全军胁持我说： 魏州才受侵掠，供应短缺。 
English: Tian Yue pondered for a long time and said, "In the beginning, I made an agreement with King Ji to accompany him. But now my entire army is threatening me and saying, "Weizhou has just been invaded and plundered, and supplies are in short supply."

古文：以悦日拊循，犹恐人且携间，一日去城邑，朝出夕变，且何归？
现代文：如今我每日设法抚慰，还怕下属有二心。一旦我离开城邑，定会早上出去，晚即生变，我还将归往何处。
English: Now I try to soothe myself every day, and I am afraid that my subordinates will have second thoughts. Once I leave the city, I will definitely go out in the morning, and later I will change, and where will I go?

古文：不然，悦不敢背约。
现代文：若不是处在这种困境，我定不敢违背约定。
English: If I wasn't in this predicament, I wouldn't dare to renege on the agreement.

古文：今遣孟希祐悉兵五千助王。 
现代文：现在先派孟希带五千人马去助王。 
English: Now Meng Xi first sent five thousand horses to assist the king.

古文：因使其属裴抗、卢南史报命。
现代文：同时派属下裴抗、卢南史前去回复。
English: At the same time, he sent his subordinates Pei Gan and Lunanshi to reply.

古文：滔怒骂曰： 逆虏前日求救，许我贝州，我不取；尊我为天子，我与同为王；教我远来而不出。
现代文：朱滔得知后骂道 ：好个逆贼，以前求我救援，答应把贝州给我，我没取；尊我为天子，我谦让与你同列称王；现在叫我远道而来，你却自己不出兵。
English: When Zhu Tao learned of this, he scolded: "What a traitor. You used to beg me for help and promised to give me Bechu, but I didn't take it. You revered me as the son of heaven, and I humbly agreed to be crowned king with you. Now you ask me to come all the way from afar, but you won't go to war yourself."

古文：是贼不击，尚何诛？ 
现代文：这样的逆贼不敲敲他，还有谁值得诛杀的？ 
English: If such a traitor doesn't knock him down, who else is worth fighting?

古文：乃囚抗等，使马寔取数县，已而释抗还之，悦兵不敢出，遂围贝州。
现代文：于是把裴抗等人囚禁起来，派马萛一路略取了几个县，然后释放裴抗等人回去。田悦不敢出兵，朱滔围贝州。
English: Therefore, he imprisoned Pei Quan and others, sent Ma Jun to capture several counties along the way, and then released Pei Quan and others to go back. Tian Yue did not dare to send troops, and Zhu Tao encircled Bozhou.

古文：滔取武城，通德、棣，供军馈，尽囚诸县官吏，唯清阳不下，滔围之。
现代文：朱滔攻取了武城，打通了德州、棣州之路，供应军需，把各县的官吏全都囚禁起来。只有清阳攻不下，朱滔将兵包围。
English: Zhu Tao captured Wucheng, opened the roads to Dezhou and Zhangzhou, supplied military supplies, and imprisoned all the officials in each county. Only Qingyang could not be captured, and Zhu Tao surrounded the soldiers.

古文：寔拔清平，杀五百人，俘男女赀财去。
现代文：马萛打下了清平，杀五百人，俘获了男女财货而去。
English: Ma Xun defeated Qingping, killed five hundred people, captured men and women and goods and went away.

古文：于是李抱真、武俊约出兵救魏。
现代文：那时，李抱真、王武俊相约出兵援助田悦。
English: At that time, Li Bozhen and Wang Wujun agreed to send troops to aid Tian Yue.

古文：会有诏拜悦检校尚书右仆射，封济阳郡王，而给事中孔巢父持节宣劳。
现代文：正在此时，皇帝下诏授田悦为检校尚书右仆射，封爵济阳郡王。给事中孔巢父持节前来宣谕慰劳。
English: It was at this time that the emperor issued an imperial edict awarding Tian Yue the title of the king of Jiyang County for being the right-hand man of the school inspector Shang Shu. During this event, Kong Xue's father came to offer his condolences.

古文：始悦阻兵凡四年，狂愎少谋，亟战数北，死者什八，士苦之，且厌兵。
现代文：当初，田悦掌兵四年，狂妄固执而又少谋略，屡战屡败，战死者几达八成，士兵甚以为苦，也不想再有战争。
English: At the beginning, Tian Yue had been a soldier for four years. He was arrogant and obstinate, but lacked strategy. He repeatedly lost battles, and nearly 80% of his soldiers died in battle. The soldiers were very bitter and did not want to have another war.

古文：既巢父至，莫不欣然。
现代文：所以见孔巢父来了，没一人不高兴。
English: That's why no one was unhappy to see Kong Xuefu arrive.

古文：悦与巢父张饮，门阶皆彻卫。
现代文：田悦与孔巢父设宴饮酒，门前阶下的守卫都撤了。
English: Tian Yue and Kong Xue's father held a banquet and drank alcohol. The guards in front of the door all withdrew.

古文：至夜分，从弟绪与族人私语曰： 仆射妄起兵，几赤吾族。
现代文：到半夜，他的堂弟田绪与族人私下议论说 ：仆射胡乱起兵，几乎使我族人全死光。
English: In the middle of the night, his cousin, Tian Xu, had a private discussion with the members of his tribe and said: "Our soldiers fired indiscriminately and almost killed all of our people.

古文：以金帛厚天下，而不至兄弟。 
现代文：他把财宝厚赠天下人，却不给我们兄弟。 
English: He gave away his wealth to the world, but not to our brothers.

古文：或谏止之，绪怒，杀谏者，乃与左右逾垣入。
现代文：打算杀了田悦。有人劝说不可胡来，田绪怒，把劝谏的人杀了。于是与左右翻墙入内。
English: He planned to kill Tian Yue. Someone tried to persuade him not to do something stupid, but Tian Xuan got angry and killed the person who was trying to persuade him. So he climbed over the wall left and right and went inside.

古文：悦方醉，寝酣。
现代文：田悦正喝醉了，睡得很沉。
English: Tian Yuesheng was drunk and slept very soundly.

古文：绪挺刃升堂，二弟谏止，绪斩之，因手刺悦，并杀基母妻。
现代文：田绪举刀进入堂屋，二弟又劝，田绪把二弟也杀了。轻易地把田悦刺杀，又杀了他的母亲及妻子。
English: Tianxu raised his sword and entered the hall, his second brother also persuaded him, and Tianxu also killed his second brother. He easily stabbed Tian Yue to death, and also killed his mother and wife.

古文：悦死，年三十四。
现代文：田悦死时才三十四岁。
English: Tian Yue was only thirty-four years old when she died.

古文：比明，以悦命召许士则、蔡济计事，至则杀之。
现代文：天亮后，田绪以田悦的名义召许士则、蔡济来商议事情，两人一进来，也都被杀。
English: After dawn, Tian Xu, in the name of Tian Yue, summoned Xu Shizhe and Cai Jie to discuss the matter. As soon as they came in, they were both killed.

古文：刘忠信者，悦常使防督绪直寝门，绪呼曰： 忠信刺仆射，与扈趯反。 
现代文：刘忠信，往日田悦常派他提防监督田绪，且派他在寝室前守卫。田绪就大喊 ：刘忠信刺杀了仆射，与扈萫一起反叛了。 
English: Liu Zhongxin, in the past, Tian Yue often sent him to guard and supervise Tian Xun, and sent him to guard in front of the bedroom. Tian Xun shouted: Liu Zhongxin assassinated Huxia, and rebelled with Yao.

古文：众执之，语曰： 无之。 
现代文：众人把他抓住。刘忠信只说了句 ：没这样的事。 
English: The crowd grabbed him. Liu Zhongxin only said one sentence: "There is no such thing."

古文：支已殊绝。
现代文：就被杀了。
English: He was killed.

