古文：○太祖三五年春正月壬辰朔，雨雪，不御殿。
现代文：开宝五年春正月初一，降雪，太祖不上殿处理政事。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the fifth year of spring in Kepo, it snowed, and the great-grandfather did not go to the palace to deal with political affairs.

古文：禁铁铸浮屠及佛像。
现代文：禁止用铁铸造宝塔和佛像。
English: It is forbidden to cast iron pagodas and Buddha statues.

古文：庚子，前卢氏县尉鄢陵许永年七十有五，自言父琼年九十九，两兄皆八十余，乞一官以便养。
现代文：初九，前任卢氏县尉郡陵人许永年龄七十五岁，自己说父亲许琼年龄九十九岁，两位哥哥都有八十多岁了，请求朝廷委派他一个官职以便奉养父兄。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Xu Yong, the seventy-five-year-old former mortuary man of Lu County, said that his father Xu Qiong was ninety-nine years old, and both brothers were over eighty years old. He asked the court to assign him an official post in order to support his father and brother.

古文：因召琼厚赐之，授永鄢陵令。
现代文：因此太祖召见许琼并厚厚地赏赐了他，任命许永为郡陵县令。
English: Therefore, the great-grandfather summoned Xu Qiong and rewarded him generously, appointing Xu Yong as the county magistrate.

古文：壬寅，省州县小吏及直力人。
现代文：十一日，减少州县小吏和为衙门服役的人。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the number of minor officials in counties and prefectures and the number of people serving at the gate will be reduced.

古文：乙巳，罢襄州岁贡鱼。
现代文：十四日，停止襄州每年进贡鱼。
English: On the 14th, the annual tribute fish from Yangzhou was stopped.

古文：二月丙子，诏沿河十七州各置河堤判官一员。
现代文：二月十五日，太祖下诏沿黄河的十七个州各设立河堤判官一名。
English: On February 15, the great-grandfather issued an edict to set up a dike adjudicator in each of the seventeen states along the Yellow River.

古文：庚辰，以凤州七房银冶为开宝监。
现代文：十九日，在凤州七房冶炼银子的地方设立开宝监。
English: On the 19th, a treasure-hunting supervisor was set up in the place where silver was smelted in Qifang, Fengzhou.

古文：庚寅，以兵部侍郎刘熙古参知政事。
现代文：二十九日，任命兵部侍郎刘熙古为参知政事。
English: On the 29th, he appointed Liu Xigu, an attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, as a member of the Council of State.

古文：闰月壬辰，礼部试进士安守亮等诸科共三十八人，召对讲武殿，始放榜。
现代文：闰二月初三，礼部考试合格进士安守亮和诸科共三十八人，太祖召他们到讲武殿回答问题，然后才张榜公布。
English: On the third day of the second month of the leap year, a total of thirty-eight people, including Anshu Liang and various disciplines who passed the examination of the Ministry of Ceremonies, were summoned by Taizu to the lecture hall to answer questions, and then the list was announced.

古文：庚戌，升密州为安化军节度。
现代文：二十日，把密州升为安化军节度。
English: On the 20th, Mizhou was promoted to the Anhua Army.

古文：三月庚午，赐颍州龙骑指挥使仇兴及兵士钱。
现代文：三月十一日，赐钱给颖州龙骑指挥使仇兴和他的士兵。
English: On March 11th, he gave money to Yingzhou dragon cavalry commander Zhu Xing and his soldiers.

古文：辛未，占城国王波美税遣使来献方物。
现代文：十二日，占城国王波美税派遣使臣来进贡当地土产。
English: On the 12th, the king of Zhancheng, Bomei, sent an envoy to bring tribute to the local local products.

古文：壬申，幸教船池习战。
现代文：十三日，太祖亲临教船池进行作战演习。
English: On the 13th, the great-grandfather himself came to teach the boat pool to conduct combat exercises.

古文：乙酉，殿中侍御史张穆坐赃弃市。
现代文：二十六日，殿中侍御史张穆因贪赃在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 26th, the palace attendant Zhang Mu Rong was beheaded in public for corruption.

古文：夏四月庚寅朔，三佛齐国主释利乌耶遣使来献方物。
现代文：夏四月初一，三佛齐国主释利乌耶派遣使臣来进贡当地土产。
English: On the first day of April in summer, Shiliuye, the ruler of Sanfoqi, sent envoys to pay tribute to local products.

古文：丙午，遣使检视水灾田。
现代文：十七日，太祖派遣使臣查看遭受水灾的田地。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Taizu sent an envoy to inspect the flooded fields.

古文：丙寅，遣使诸州捕虎。
现代文：丙寅日，派遣使臣到各个州郡捕捉老虎。
English: Hsin Yin Day, dispatched envoys to various states and counties to catch tigers.

古文：五月庚申，赐恩赦侯刘鋹钱一百五十万。
现代文：五月初二，赐给恩赦侯刘长一百五十万贯钱。
English: On the second day of the fifth month of the year, one and a half million crowns were given to the pardoned Hou Liu Chang.

古文：乙丑，命近臣祈晴。
现代文：初七，太祖命令亲近大臣祈祷天气放晴。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the great-grandfather ordered the minister to pray for the weather to clear.

古文：并广南州十三、县三十九。
现代文：合并掉广南十三个州、三十九个县。
English: Thirteen provinces and thirty-nine counties in Guangnan were merged.

古文：丙寅，罢岭南采珠媚川都卒为静江军。
现代文：初八，废除岭南专门采集珍珠的媚川都，并把原有士兵改编为静江军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Meichuan capital, which specialized in collecting pearls in Lingnan, was abolished, and the original soldiers were converted into the Jingjiang Army.

古文：辛未，河决濮阳，命颍州团练使曹翰往塞之。
现代文：十三日，黄河在攫阳决口，太祖命令颖州团练使曹翰前去堵塞决口。
English: On the 13th day, the Yellow River at the Poyang mouth, the great-grandfather ordered the Yingzhou group to send Cao Han to block the mouth.

古文：甲戌，以霖雨，出后宫五十余人，赐予以遣之。
现代文：十六日，因为阴雨连绵，放出后宫五十多名宫女，赏赐后把她们送回家。
English: On the sixteenth day, because of the continuous rain, more than fifty maids of honor were released from the harem, and they were sent home after being rewarded.

古文：丁亥，河南、北淫雨，澶、滑、济、郓、曹、濮六州大水。
现代文：二十九日，河南、河北接连下大雨，擅、滑、济、军仔、曹、攫六个州发大水。
English: On the 29th, Henan and Hebei had heavy rain in succession, and six prefectures, including Shanshan, Nanning, Jie, Junzi, Cao and Handan, had heavy rain.

古文：六月己丑，河决阳武，汴决谷熟。
现代文：六月初二，黄河在阳武决口，汁水在谷熟决口。
English: On the second day of June, the Yellow River is at the Yangwu mouth, and the juice is at the Guju mouth.

古文：丁酉，诏：淫雨河决，沿河民田有为水害者，有司具闻除租。
现代文：初十，太祖下诏说：大雨连绵，黄河决口，黄河沿岸百姓农田有遭水灾的地方，有关机构全部报告朝廷免除田租。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the great-grandfather issued an edict saying: Heavy rain has been continuous, the Yellow River has broken through, and there are places along the Yellow River where people's farmlands have been flooded. All relevant agencies have reported to the court to exempt the field rent.

古文：戊申，修阳武堤。
现代文：二十一日，修复阳武地区的黄河河堤。
English: On the 21st, the Yellow River embankment in Yangwu District was repaired.

古文：秋七月己未，右拾遗张恂坐赃弃市。
现代文：秋七月初二，右拾遗张间因贪赃在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhanzhong Zhiqi was beheaded in the city center for corruption.

古文：癸未，邕、容等州獠人作乱。
现代文：二十六日，琶、容等州郡的撩人发生叛乱。
English: On the 26th, there was a rebellion by the people of Pao, Rong and other counties in Shandong Province.

古文：八月庚寅，高丽国王王昭遣使献方物。
现代文：八月初三，高丽国王王昭派遣使臣来进贡当地土产。
English: On the third day of the eighth month, King Wang Zhao of Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute to local products.

古文：己亥，广州行营都监朱宪大破獠贼于容州。
现代文：十二日，广州行营都监朱宪在容州大破撩人贼寇。
English: On the 12th, Zhu Xian, the procurator of Guangzhou, defeated the bandits in Yongzhou.

古文：癸卯，升宿州为保静军节度，罢密州仍为防御。
现代文：十六日，把宿州升为保静军节度，废密州安化军节度，仍旧为防御州。
English: On the 16th, Chofu was elevated to the status of a military garrison, and the military garrison of Anhua in Myeongju was abolished, but remained as a defensive state.

古文：九月丁巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse.

古文：癸酉，李崇矩以镇国军节度使罢。
现代文：十七日，李崇矩被免去枢密使，出任镇国军节度使。
English: On the 17th, Li Chongzhen was removed from the position of privy envoy and appointed as the envoy of the town's military festival.

古文：冬十月庚子，幸河阳节度使张仁超第视疾。
现代文：冬十月十四日，太祖亲临河阳节度使张仁超府第探视他的病情。
English: On the 14th day of October in winter, the great-grandfather personally came to Heyang Festival to have Zhang Renchao visit his illness.

古文：甲辰，试道流，不才者勒归俗。
现代文：十八日，举行道士考试，学业不够格的人被强迫还俗。
English: On the 18th, the Daoist examination was held, and those who did not pass the examination were forced to return to secular life.

古文：十一月己未，李继明、药继清大破獠贼于英州。
现代文：十一月初三，李继明、药继清在英州大破撩贼。
English: On the third day of November, Li Jiming and Yue Jiching broke up a gang of thieves in Yingzhou.

古文：癸亥，禁僧道习天文地理。
现代文：初七，禁止僧人道士学习天文地理。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, monks and nuns were forbidden to study astronomy and geography.

古文：己巳，禁举人寄应。
现代文：十三日，禁止举人寄住他处参加进士科举考试。
English: On the 13th, it was forbidden to send people to stay elsewhere to take the entrance examination.

古文：庚辰，命参知政事薛居正、吕余庆兼淮、湖、岭、蜀转运使。
现代文：二十四日，任命参知政事薛居正、吕余庆兼任淮、湖、岭、蜀转运使。
English: On the 24th, Xue Juzheng and Lyu Yuqing, both of whom are political advisors to the governor, were appointed as envoys to Huai, Hu, Ling and Shu.

古文：十二月乙酉朔，祈雪。
现代文：十二月初一，祈祷降雪。
English: On the first day of December, pray for snow.

古文：己亥，畋近郊。
现代文：十五日，太祖到近郊打猎。
English: On the fifteenth day, the great-grandfather went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：开封尹光义暴疾，遂如其第视之。
现代文：开封尹赵光义突然生病，太祖于是到他府第探视病情。
English: When Yin Zhao Guangyi suddenly fell ill in Kaifeng, the great-grandfather went to his prefecture to check on his condition.

古文：甲寅，内班董延谔坐监务盗刍粟，杖杀之。
现代文：三十日，内班董延愕因监守自盗草料粮食，处以杖死之刑。
English: On the 30th, Naibang Dong Yanapeng was sentenced to death with a cane for guarding himself from stealing grass grain.

古文：诏合入令、录者引见后方注。
现代文：太祖下诏符合条件担任令录的人引对之后才能注官。
English: The great-great-grandfather issued an edict that those who meet the conditions to serve as the order book can only be appointed after being introduced.

古文：乙卯，大雨雪。
现代文：三十一日，降大雪。
English: On the 31st, heavy snow fell.

古文：是岁，大饥。
现代文：这一年，发生大饥荒。
English: This year, famine.

古文：六年春正月丙辰朔，不御殿。
现代文：开宝六年春正月初一，太祖不上殿处理政事。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the sixth year of Kaibao, the great-grandfather did not go to the palace to deal with political affairs.

古文：置蜀水陆转运计度使。
现代文：设置蜀水陆转运计度使。
English: Set up the Shu water and land transfer measurement system.

古文：癸酉，修魏县河。
现代文：十八日，修缮魏县境内的黄河堤。
English: On the 18th, the Yellow River dike in Wei County was repaired.

古文：二月丙戌朔，棣州兵马监押、殿直傅延翰谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二月初一，棣州兵马监押、殿直傅延翰谋划反叛被处死刑。
English: On the first day of February, Dian Zhaofu Yanhan, a prisoner of the Bozhou Military Region, was sentenced to death for plotting a rebellion.

古文：丙申，曹州饥，漕太仓米二万石振之。
现代文：十一日，曹州发生饥荒，运京师太仓大米二万石救济灾荒地区。
English: On the 11th day of the month, a famine occurred in Caozhou, and 20,000 koku of rice from Taicang was sent to Beijing to help the famine-stricken areas.

古文：己亥，吴越国进银装花段、金香师子。
现代文：十四日，吴越国进贡用银子装饰的花舫、用黄金香料装饰的狮子。
English: On the 14th, Wuyue paid tribute with silver-decorated wreaths and gold-decorated lions.

古文：三月乙卯朔，周郑王殂于房州，上素服发哀，辍朝十日，谥曰恭帝，命还葬庆陵之侧，陵曰顺陵。
现代文：三月初一，后周郑王在房州逝世，太祖穿素色衣服发布哀丧，停止上朝十天，赐溢号为恭帝，命令把棺木运回来葬在庆陵的旁边，称为顺陵。
English: On the first day of March, after Zhou Zheng Wang died in Fangzhou, the great-grandfather, dressed in plain clothes, issued a mourning, stopped the Shang Dynasty for ten days, gave the exclamation mark as Emperor Gong, and ordered the coffin to be transported back and buried next to the Qing Mausoleum, known as the Shun Mausoleum.

古文：己未，复密州为安化军节度。
现代文：初五，恢复密州为安化军节度。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the restoration of Myizhou was the highest point of the Anhua Army.

古文：庚申，覆试进士于讲武殿，赐宋准及下第徐士廉等诸科百二十七人及第。
现代文：初六，太祖在讲武殿复试进士，赐给宋准以及落第的徐士廉等诸科考生一百二十七人及第。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, Taizu gave 127th and 127th places to Song Jun and Xu Shillian, who failed the entrance examination.

古文：乙亥，赐宋准等宴钱二十万。
现代文：二十一日，赐给宋准等人宴会钱二十万贯。
English: On the twenty-first day, Song Jun and others were given banquet money of two hundred thousand yuan.

古文：大食国遣使来献。
现代文：大食国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: Gluttonous countries sent envoys to collect tribute.

古文：翰林学士、知贡举李昉坐试人失当，责授太常少卿。
现代文：翰林学士、知贡举李意因考试举人不得当，被贬为太常少卿。
English: Hanlin Baccalaureate, Zhigong Zhou Li Ying was demoted to Taizhang Shaoqing due to his poor performance in the examination.

古文：试朝臣死王事者子陆坦等，赐进士出身。
现代文：考试朝廷官员中因公事死亡人员的儿子陆坦等人，赐给他们进士出身。
English: Lu Tan, the son of one of the imperial court officials who died in the line of duty, and others were given the title of Jin Shi.

古文：丙子，幸相国寺观新修塔。
现代文：二十二日，太祖亲临相国寺观看新修建成的宝塔。
English: On the 22nd, Taizu himself visited Shokoku-ji Temple to see the newly built pagoda.

古文：夏四月丁亥，召开封尹光义、天平军节度使石守信等赏花、习射于苑中。
现代文：夏四月初三，太祖召来开封尹赵光义、天平军节度使石守信等人在御苑中赏花练习射箭。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Emperor Taizu called Yin Zhao Guangyi to Kaifeng, and the Tianping Army Festival made Shi Shushin and others enjoy flowers in the imperial garden and practice archery.

古文：辛丑，遣卢多逊为江南国信使。
现代文：十七日，派遣卢多逊为江南国信使。
English: On the 17th, Ludoson was sent as a messenger to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：甲辰，占城国王悉利陀盘印茶遣使来献方物。
现代文：二十日，占城国王悉利陀盘印茶派遣使臣来进贡当地土产。
English: On the 20th, the king of Zhancheng, Xili Dabanyingcha, sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local local products.

古文：丙午，黎州保塞蛮来归。
现代文：二十二日，黎州保塞蛮来归顺朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, Li Zhou Bose came to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：戊申，诏修《五代史》。
现代文：二十四日，太祖下诏撰写瓦代史。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to write a history of the Wada period.

古文：五月庚申，刘熙古以户部尚书致仕。
现代文：五月初七，刘熙古以户部尚书的身份退休。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, Liu Xigu retired as the leader of the Household Division.

古文：诏：中书吏擅权多奸赃，兼用流内州县官。
现代文：太祖下诏说：中书吏人揽权又大多贪赃受贿，现在兼用人流的州县官员担任堂吏。
English: The great-great-grandfather said: Most of the officials of the Chinese Academy of Letters were greedy for power and bribed, and now they also use the state and county officials of the flow of people to serve as officials.

古文：己巳，交州丁琏遣使贡方物。
现代文：十六日，交州丁琏遣使进贡当地土产。
English: On the 16th, Jiaozhou Dingya sent an envoy to pay tribute to local local products.

古文：幸玉津园，观刈麦。
现代文：太祖亲临玉津园观看收割小麦。
English: The great-grandfather himself came to see the wheat harvest in the Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：辛巳，杀右拾遗马适。
现代文：二十八日，杀右拾遗马适。
English: On the 28th, kill the right and pick up the left horse.

古文：六月辛卯，阅在京百司吏，黜为农者四百人。
现代文：六月初九，太祖召试在京各个机构的吏员，把其中的四百人罢默为农民。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, Taizu summoned the officials of various institutions in Beijing, and 400 of them were silenced as farmers.

古文：癸巳，占城国遣使献方物。
现代文：十一日，占城国派遣使臣进贡当地土产。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhancheng dispatched envoys to collect tribute from local products.

古文：隰州巡检使李谦溥拔北汉七砦。
现代文：曝州巡检使李谦溥攻克北汉的七个寨子。
English: The inspection tour of Xianzhou enabled Li Qianyao to conquer seven stockades in North Han.

古文：癸卯，雷有邻告宰相赵普党堂吏胡赞等不法，赞及李可度并批籍没。
现代文：二十一日，雷有邻控告宰相赵普袒护堂吏胡赞等人违法，胡赞和李可度都受杖刑、登记抄没家产。
English: On the 21st, Lei's neighbor accused Hu Zan and others of violating the law. Hu Zan and Li Kedu were both caned and had their property confiscated.

古文：庚戌，诏参知政事与宰相赵普分知印押班奏事。
现代文：二十八日，太祖下诏让参知政事薛居正和宰相赵普分别掌管宰相印信，上朝时分别领班启奏政事。
English: On the 28th, the great-grandfather issued an edict to let Xue Juzheng, the political advisor to the prefectural governor, and Zhao Pu, the prime minister, respectively, take charge of the prime minister's seal, and when the emperor ascended to the throne, they were respectively the leader of the political affairs.

古文：秋七月壬子朔，诏诸州府置司寇参军，以进士、明经者为之。
现代文：秋七月初一，太祖下诏各州府设置司寇参军，让考中进士、明经科的人担任这个职务。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to all prefectures to set up scouts to join the army, allowing those who had passed the junior high school entrance examination and those who had studied classics to hold this position.

古文：丙辰，减广南无名率钱。
现代文：初五，减免广南地区无名率钱。
English: On the fifth day of the new year, the Guangnan area had the highest rate of reduction and exemption.

古文：八月乙酉，罢成都府伪蜀嫁装税。
现代文：八月初四，废除成都府后蜀时期的嫁妆税。
English: On August 4th, the dowry tax of the post-Shu period in Chengdu was abolished.

古文：辛卯，赐布衣王泽方同学究出身。
现代文：初十，赐给平民王泽方同学究出身。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wang Zefang was given to the commoners.

古文：丁酉，泗州推官侯济坐试判假手，杖、除名。
现代文：十六日，泅州推官侯济因在考试据律断案时让别人顶替自己，被处以杖刑，除名。
English: On the 16th, Zhangzhou magistrate Hou Jiyin was punished with a cane and expelled for letting someone else take his place when deciding a case according to the law.

古文：甲辰，赵普罢为河阳三城节度使、同平章事。
现代文：二十三日，罢免赵普宰相职务，任命他为河阳三城节度使、同平章事。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Pu was removed from the post of prime minister and appointed as the festival envoy for the three cities of Hebei and Hebei.

古文：辛酉，幸都亭驿。
现代文：辛酉日，太祖亲临都亭骚。
English: On that fateful day, the great-grandfather himself came to the capital.

古文：九月丁卯，余庆以尚书左丞罢。
现代文：九月十七日，吕余庆任尚书左承，免去他的参知政事职务。
English: On September 17th, Lyu Yuqing became the successor of Shang Shuxu, and was relieved of his position as senator.

古文：己巳，封光义为晋王、兼侍中，德昭同中书门下平章事，薛居正为门下侍郎、同平章政事，户部侍郎、枢密副使沈义伦为中书侍郎、同平章事，石守信兼侍中，卢多逊中书舍人、参知政事。壬申，诏晋王光义班宰相上。
现代文：十九日，太祖封赵光义为晋王，兼任侍中，封赵德昭同中书门下平章事，任命薛居正为门下侍郎、同平章事，任命石守信兼任侍中，任命卢多逊为中书舍人、参知政事。二十二日，太祖下诏晋王赵光义班位在宰相之上。
English: On the 19th, the great-grandfather appointed Zhao Guangyi as the king of Jin, also serving as an attendant, appointed Zhao Dezhao as a subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordin

古文：冬十月甲申，葬周恭帝，不视朝。
现代文：冬十月初四，安葬周恭帝，太祖不上朝处理政务。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, Emperor Zhou was buried, and the great-grandfather did not go to the court to deal with government affairs.

古文：丁亥，幸玉津园观稼。
现代文：初七，太祖亲临玉津园视察庄稼。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the great-grandfather came to inspect the crops in Tamatsu Garden in person.

古文：戊子，流星出文昌、北斗。
现代文：初八，流星在文昌星、北斗星处出现。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a meteor appeared at the intersection of Wenchang Star and Big Dipper Star.

古文：甲辰，特赦诸官吏奸赃。
现代文：二十四日，太祖特赦犯有隐瞒贪污受贿的官吏。
English: On the 24th, Taizu pardoned officials who had committed the crime of concealing corruption and accepting bribes.

古文：十一月癸丑，诏常参官进士及第者各举文学一人。
现代文：十一月初三，太祖下诏常参官进士及第的人各自推荐文学之才一人。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, there was only one person who was recommended for literature by the first and second person respectively.

古文：十二月壬午，命近臣祈雪。
现代文：十二月初二，太祖命令自己左右的大臣祈祷降雪。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Taizu ordered the ministers around him to pray for snow.

古文：丙午，前中书舍人、参知政事多逊起复视事。行《开宝通礼》。
现代文：二十六日，前任中书舍人、参知政事卢多逊服丧期没满又被起用处理政事，推行开宝通字巨。
English: On the 26th, Ludoson, a former member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and a member of the Council of Elders, was appointed to handle political affairs after his term of mourning had not yet expired.

古文：限度僧法，诸州僧帐及百人，岁许度一人。
现代文：颁布限数剃度平民为僧的法令，规定各州据僧帐现管数目满百人每年准许剃度一人出家。
English: Enacted a law limiting the number of lay people who can become monks, stipulating that each state is allowed to allow one lay person to become a monk each year once the number of lay people exceeds 100.

古文：七年春正月庚戌，不御殿。
现代文：开宝九年春正月初一，太祖不上殿处理政务。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the ninth year of Kaibao, the great-grandfather did not go to the palace to deal with government affairs.

古文：庚申，占城国王波美税遣使献方物。
现代文：十一日，占城国王波美税派遣使臣进贡当地土产。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the king of Zhancheng, Bomei, sent envoys to pay tribute to the local local products.

古文：齐州野蚕成茧。
现代文：齐州的野蚕结出蚕茧。
English: Wild silkworms in Qizhou produce cocoons.

古文：癸亥，左拾遗秦亶、太子中允吕鹄并坐赃，宥死，杖、除名。
现代文：十四日，左拾遗秦、太子中允吕鹊因贪污受贿，免于死刑，服杖刑，取消他们的原有身份。
English: On the 14th, Zuo Zhi Yi Qin and the prince's middle son, Yun Lv, were exempted from the death penalty for corruption and bribery, and served a cane sentence, and their original status was canceled.

古文：二月庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：丙戌，日有二黑子。
现代文：初七，太阳中出现二颗黑子。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, two spots appeared in the sun.

古文：癸卯，命近臣祈雨。
现代文：二十四日，太祖命令身边的大臣祈求降雨。
English: On the 24th, the great-grandfather ordered the ministers around him to pray for rain.

古文：诏：《诗》、《书》、《易》三经学究，依三经、三传资叙入官。
现代文：太祖下诏：诗、书、易三经学究，依照三经、任传资格按规定的等级次第授予官职。
English: The great-grandfather issued an edict: students of the three classics of poetry, calligraphy, and poetry should be awarded official posts in accordance with the qualifications of the three classics and appointment according to the prescribed level.

古文：乙巳，太子中舍胡德冲坐隐官钱，弃市。
现代文：二十六日，太子中舍胡德冲因为隐没官钱，在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 26th, the middle son of the crown prince, Shehu Dechong, was publicly beheaded in the city because he had lost government money.

古文：三月乙丑，三佛齐国王遣使献方物。
现代文：三月十六日，三佛齐国王派遣使臣进贡当地土产。
English: On March 16th, King Sanfo Qi sent envoys to collect tribute from local products.

古文：夏四月丙午，遣使检岭南民田。
现代文：夏四月二十八日，太祖派遣使臣检查岭南地区百姓的田地。
English: On the 28th day of the 4th month of the summer, Emperor Taizu sent an envoy to inspect the fields of the people in the Lingnan region.

古文：五月戊申朔，殿中侍御史李莹坐受南唐馈遗，责授右赞善大夫。
现代文：五月初一，殿中侍御史李莹因为接受南唐馈赠的礼物，贬为右赞善大夫。
English: On the first day of May, the palace attendant Li Ying, because of accepting the gift from the Southern Tang Dynasty, was relegated to the position of "Uzanshen doctor."

古文：甲寅，以布衣齐得一为章丘主簿。
现代文：初七，任命平民齐得一为章丘县主簿。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, all civilians were appointed as the main book of Zhangqiu County.

古文：乙丑，诏市二价者以枉法论。
现代文：十八日，太祖下诏自今买卖官物不得与时价不同，如有抬高或压低价钱的以违法论处。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizu decreed that from now on, the sale and purchase of government goods must not differ from the current price. If there is an increase or decrease in price, it will be illegal.

古文：丙寅，幸讲武池，观习水战。
现代文：十九日，太祖亲临讲武池视察水战训练。
English: On the 19th, the great-grandfather personally visited the battlefield to inspect the water battle training.

古文：丙子，又幸讲武池，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：二十九日，太祖又到讲武池，于是又去了玉津园。
English: On the 29th, the great-grandfather went to the battlefield again, and then went to the Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：六月丙申，河中府饥，发粟三万石振之。
现代文：六月十九日，河中府发生饥荒，调运三万石谷子救济受灾地区。
English: On June 19th, a famine occurred in Kawakuchu prefecture, and 30,000 koku of rice was sent to the stricken area for relief.

古文：己亥，淮溢入泗州城。壬寅，安阳河溢，皆坏民居。
现代文：二十二日，淮河水溢出河道流人泅州城；二十五日，黄河水在安阳溢出河道，这两次水灾都淹坏了百姓房屋。
English: On the 22nd, water from the Huaihe River overflowed its course and flooded the city of Ganzhou; on the 25th, water from the Yellow River overflowed its course in Anyang. Both floods inundated people's houses.

古文：秋七月壬子，幸讲武池，观习水战，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：秋七月初六，太祖亲临讲武池视察水战训练，于是又到玉津园。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the great-grandfather personally visited the battlefield to inspect the water battle training, and then went to the Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：丙辰，南丹州溪洞酋帅莫洪燕内附。
现代文：十五日，南丹州溪洞军帅莫洪燕归顺朝廷。
English: On the 15th, Mo Hongyan, the military commander of Xidong in Nantan Province, returned to the imperial court in Shun.

古文：诏减成都府盐钱。
现代文：太祖下诏降低成都府盐价。
English: Emperor Taizu decreed to reduce the price of salt in Chengdu.

古文：庚午，太子中允李仁友坐不法，弃市。
现代文：二十九日，太子中允李仁友因为犯法，在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 29th, Prince Zhongyun Li Renyou was beheaded in public in downtown for breaking the law.

古文：八月戊寅，吴越国王遣使来朝贡。
现代文：八月初三，吴越国王派遣使臣来朝拜进贡。
English: On the third day of the eighth month, King Wu Yue sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁亥，谕吴越伐江南。
现代文：十二日，太祖通知吴越出兵讨伐江南。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Taizu notified Wu Yue to send troops to fight in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：戊子，陈州贡芝草，一本四十九茎。
现代文：十三日，陈州进贡芝草，一棵草有四十九条茎。
English: On the 13th, Chenzhou paid tribute to the grass. One grass has 49 stems.

古文：己丑，幸讲武池，赐习水战军士钱。
现代文：十四日，太祖亲临讲武池，赐钱给进行水战训练的将士。
English: On the 14th, the great-grandfather personally visited the battlefield and gave money to the soldiers who were training for water combat.

古文：戊戌，殿中丞赵象坐擅税，除名。
现代文：二十三日，殿中承赵象因为擅自收税，被取消原有身份。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Xiang, a member of the imperial court, was stripped of his former status for collecting taxes without authorization.

古文：甲辰，幸讲武池，观习水战，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：二十九日，太祖亲临讲武池视察水战训练，于是又到了玉津园。
English: On the 29th, the great-grandfather personally visited the battlefield to inspect the water battle training, and then went to the Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：九月癸亥，命宣徽南院使、义成军节度使曹彬为西南路行营马步军战翟都部署，山南东道节度使潘美为都监，颍州团练使曹翰为先锋都指挥使，将兵十万出荆南，以伐江南。
现代文：九月十八日，太祖任命宣徽南院使、义成军节度使曹彬为西南路行营马步军战掉都部署，山南东道节度使潘美为都监，颖州团练使曹翰为先锋都指挥使，率领十万大军从荆南出发，征伐江南。
English: On September 18th, Emperor Taizu appointed the envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui Province, the military commander of Yicheng Province, Cao Bin, as the commander of the cavalry and infantry of the southwest road, the host of Shannan Province, Pan Mei as the governor of the capital, and the regimental commander of Yingzhou Province, Cao Han, as the commander of the vanguard of the capital, and led the 100,000-strong army from Jingnan Province to conquer the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：将行，召曹彬、潘美，戒之曰： 城陷之日，慎无杀戮。设若困斗，则李煜一门，不可加害。 
现代文：大军即将出发时，太祖召曹彬、潘美来，告诫他们说： 攻陷升州的时候，重要的是不要杀戮；假如守军作困兽犹斗的话，那么李煜一家，不可以杀害。 
English: When the great army was about to set out, the great ancestor called Cao Bin and Pan Mei to come and warned them: When attacking and capturing Shingzhou, it is important not to kill; if the defending army is a beast of burden, then the Li Xi family should not be killed.

古文：丁卯，以知制诰李穆为江南国信使。
现代文：二十二日，派知制浩李穆担任江南国信使。
English: On the 22nd, he sent Zhisheng Hao Li Mu to serve as the messenger of Jiangnan Province.

古文：冬十月甲申，幸迎春苑，登汴堤观战舰东下。
现代文：冬十月初十，太祖亲临迎春苑，登上汁水河堤观看战舰顺水东下。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the winter, the great-grandfather personally visited Yingchunyuan, climbed onto the Jishui River embankment to watch the battleship sailing eastward.

古文：丙戌，又幸迎春苑，登汴堤观诸军习战，遂幸东水门，发战翟东下。
现代文：十二日，太祖又亲临迎春苑，登上汁水河堤视察各军作战训练，于是又到了东水门，命令战舰出发顺水东下。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Taizu visited Yingchun Yuan again in person, boarded the Zhishui River Embankment to inspect the combat training of the various armies, and then went to the East Water Gate and ordered the warships to sail east along the water.

古文：江南进绢数万，御衣、金带、器用数百事。
现代文：江南进贡几万匹绢、皇帝的御衣、金带、几百件器皿用品。
English: The tributes from Jiangnan included tens of thousands of horses and mules, the emperor's robes, gold belts, and hundreds of utensils and dishes.

古文：壬辰，曹彬等将舟师、步骑发江陵，水陆并进。
现代文：十八日，曹彬等人率领水军、步兵、骑兵从江陵出发，水陆并进。
English: On the 18th, Cao Bin and others led the navy, infantry and cavalry from Gangneung, marching on land and sea.

古文：丁酉，命吴越王钱俶为升州东南行营招抚制置使。
现代文：二十三日，太祖任命吴越王钱为升州东南行营招抚制置使。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Taizu appointed Wu Yue Wang Qian as the envoy to the southeast of Shengzhou.

古文：己亥，曹彬收下峡口，获指挥使王仁震、王宴、钱兴。
现代文：二十五日，曹彬攻克峡口，俘虏江南指挥使王仁震、王宴、钱兴。
English: On the 25th, Cao Bin conquered the mouth of the gorge and captured Wang Renzhen, Wang Ying and Qian Xing, the commanding officers of the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：闰月己酉，克池州。
现代文：闰十月初五，攻克池州。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th lunar month, Chizhou was conquered.

古文：丁巳，败江南军于铜陵。
现代文：十三日，在铜陵击败江南军队。
English: On the 13th, the Southern Jiangsu Army was defeated in Tongling.

古文：庚申，命宰相、参知政事更知日历。
现代文：十六日，太祖命令宰相、参知政事交替主持按日记载朝政事务的日历工作。
English: On the 16th, the great-grandfather ordered the prime minister and the councillor to take turns presiding over the calendar work of recording the political affairs of the dynasty on a daily basis.

古文：壬戌，彬等拔芜湖、当涂两县，驻军采石。
现代文：十八日，曹彬等人攻克芜湖、当涂两个县，在采石驻扎军队。
English: On the 18th, Cao Bin and others conquered Wuhu and Dangtu two counties and stationed troops in the quarry.

古文：癸亥，诏减湖南新制茶。
现代文：十九日，太祖下诏减免湖南新制茶叶。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to reduce and exempt Hunan's newly made tea.

古文：甲子，薛居正等上新编《五代史》，赐器币有差。
现代文：二十日，薛居正等人进上新编的瓦代史，太祖赐给他们器皿钱财多少不等。
English: On the 20th, Xue Juzheng and others entered the newly compiled history of Wada. The great-grandfather gave them a number of utensils and money.

古文：丁卯，彬败江南军于采石，擒兵马部署杨收、都监蔡震等千人，为浮梁以济。
现代文：二十三日，曹彬在采石打败江南军队，活捉江南兵马部署杨收、都监孙震等一千人；在长江上架设浮桥让大军渡过长江。
English: On the 23rd, Cao Bin defeated the Southern Yangtze River army in quarrying, captured the Southern Yangtze River soldiers and horses alive, deployed 1,000 soldiers including Yang Jie and Sun Zhen, the governor of the capital, and erected a floating bridge on the Yangtze River to let the large army cross the Yangtze River.

古文：十一月癸未，黥李从善部下及江南水军一千三百九十人为归化军。
现代文：十一月初九，在李从善部下以及江南水军一千三百九十人脸上刺字，编为归化军。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, 1,390 people from Li Congshan's subordinates and the Southern Yangtze River Naval Force had their faces tattooed and were classified as naturalized soldiers.

古文：甲申，诏省剑南、山南等道属县主簿。
现代文：初十，太祖下诏减省剑南、山南等道属县的主簿。
English: In the early 10th century, Emperor Taizu decreed that the provinces of Jian'nan, Shannan and other provinces should be reduced to the main book of counties.

古文：丁亥，秦、晋旱，免蒲、陕、晋、绛、同、解六州逋赋，关西诸州免其半。
现代文：十三日，秦、晋地区干早，免除蒲、陕、晋、绛、同、解六个州拖欠的赋税，关西地区各州减免一半。
English: On the 13th, the Qin and Jin regions were the first to exempt the tax arrears of the six states of Pu, Shaanxi, Jin, Handan, Tong and Jie, and the states in the Kansai region were exempted by half.

古文：己丑，知汉阳军李恕败江南水军于鄂。
现代文：十五日，知汉阳军李恕在鄂州击败江南水军。
English: On the 15th, Li Shou of the Zhihanyang Army defeated the Southern Jiangsu Navy in Ezhou.

古文：甲午，曹彬败江南军于新林砦。
现代文：二十日，曹彬在新林寨击败江南军队。
English: On the 20th, Cao Bin defeated the Jiangnan army in Xinlinzhai.

古文：辛丑，命知雄州孙全兴答涿州修好书。
现代文：二十七日，太祖命令知雄州孙全兴回信答复契丹琢州守臣重新和好的书信。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Taizu ordered Sun Quanxing of Chixiong Prefecture to reply to the letter from Khitan Takuzhou Shoucheng.

古文：壬寅，大食国遣使献方物。
现代文：二十八日，大食国派遣使臣进贡当地土产。
English: On the 28th, the big-eating country sent envoys to collect tribute from local products.

古文：十二月己酉，彬败江南军于白鹭洲。
现代文：十二月初六，曹彬在白鹭州打败江南军队。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Cao Bin defeated the Southern Jiangsu army in Baiyanzhou.

古文：辛亥，命近臣祈雪。
现代文：初八，太祖命令身边的亲近大臣祈祷降雪。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the great-grandfather ordered the close ministers around him to pray for snow.

古文：甲子，吴越王帅兵围常州，获其人马，寻拔利城砦。
现代文：二十一日，吴越王率领军队包围常州，俘获一些江南守军人马；不久攻克利城寨。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wu Yue Wang led the army to encircle Changzhou, captured some soldiers guarding the south of the Yangtze River, and soon attacked the city of Cli.

古文：丙寅，彬败江南军于新林港。
现代文：二十三日，曹彬在新林港打败江南军队。
English: On the 23rd, Cao Bin defeated the Jiangnan army at Xinlin Port.

古文：己巳，左拾遗刘祺坐受赂，黥面、杖配沙门岛。
现代文：二十六日，左拾遗刘棋因接受贿赂，被脸上刺字、服杖刑流放沙门岛。
English: On the 26th, because of accepting bribes, Liu Qi, who was left behind, was banished to Shamen Island with a tattoo on his face and a cane.

古文：庚午，北汉寇晋州，守臣武守琦败之于洪洞。
现代文：二十七日，北汉侵犯晋州，晋州守臣武守琦在洪洞打败北汉军队。
English: On the 27th, the Northern Han invaded Jinzhou, and the Jinzhou vassal, Wu Shouyi, defeated the Northern Han army in Hongdong.

古文：壬申，吴越王败江南军于常州北界。
现代文：二十九日，吴越王在常州北界打败江南军队。
English: On the 29th, Wu Yue Wang defeated the Southern Jiangsu army in the northern border of Changzhou.

古文：八年春正月甲戌朔，以出师，不御殿。
现代文：开宝八年春正月初一，太祖因军队出征，不上殿处理政事。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of the spring of Kibo, the great-grandfather went on a military expedition and did not go to the palace to deal with political affairs.

古文：丙子，知池州樊若水败江南军于州界，田钦祚败江南军于溧水，斩其都统使李雄。
现代文：初三，知池州樊若水在池州附近打败江南军队，田钦柞在漂水打败江南军队，斩杀江南军都统使李雄。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhichizhou Xiangruoshui defeated the Jiangnan army in the vicinity of Chizhou, Tian Qinqian defeated the Jiangnan army in the drifting water, and killed the Jiangnan army general Li Xiong.

古文：乙酉，御长春殿，谓宰相曰： 朕观为臣者比多不能有终，岂忠孝薄而无以享厚福耶？ 宰相居正等顿首谢。
现代文：十二日，太祖在长春殿听政时，对宰相说： 我看做臣子的人大都不能把名节保持到晚年，难道是他们忠孝很薄因而没法享受厚福吗了宰相薛居正等人叩头谢罪。
English: On the 12th, when the great-grandfather was listening to the government in Changchun Palace, he said to the prime minister: I think that most of the courtiers cannot keep the name day until their old age. Is it because their loyalty and filial piety are very thin that they cannot enjoy the blessings? The prime minister Xue Juzheng and others bowed down and repented.

古文：庚寅，曹彬拔升州城南水砦。
现代文：十七日，曹彬攻克升州城南水寨。
English: On the seventeenth day, Cao Bin conquered Shengzhou Seongnam Water Town.

古文：二月癸丑，彬败江南军于白鹭洲。乙卯，拔升州关城。
现代文：二月初十，曹彬在白鹭州打败江南军队。十二日，攻克升州关城。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month, Cao Bin defeated the Southern Jiangsu army in Baiyanzhou. On the 12th day, he conquered Shengzhou Guancheng.

古文：丁巳，太子中允徐昭文坐抑人售物，除籍。
现代文：十四日，太子中允徐昭文因抑制百姓出售货物获罪，从簿籍上除去姓名。
English: On the 14th, Prince Zhongyong Xu Zhaowen was found guilty of suppressing the sale of goods by the people, and his name was removed from the book.

古文：甲子，知扬州侯陟败江南军于宣化镇。
现代文：二十一日，知扬州侯陆在宣化镇打败江南军队。
English: On the 21st, Hou Lu of Zhiyang Province defeated the Southern Jiangsu Army in Xuanhua Town.

古文：戊辰，覆试进士于讲武殿，赐王嗣宗等三十一人、诸科纪自成等三十四人及第。
现代文：二十五日，太祖在讲武殿举行进士复试，赐给进士王嗣宗等三十一人、纪自成等诸科三十四人及第。
English: On the 25th, Taizu held a second examination for new recruits at the Kenmu-den, awarding new recruits 31 people, including Wang Shizong, and 34 people, including Ji Zicheng, in various disciplines.

古文：三月乙酉，赐王嗣宗等宴钱二十万。
现代文：三月十三日，赐给王嗣宗等人宴会钱二十万贯。
English: On March 13th, Wang Shizong and others were given 200 thousand yuan for the banquet.

古文：己丑，命祈雨。
现代文：十七日，太祖命令祈求降雨。
English: On the seventeenth day, the great-grandfather ordered to pray for rain.

古文：庚寅，彬败江南军于江北。
现代文：十八日，曹彬在长江中打败江南军队。
English: On the 18th, Cao Bin defeated the Southern Jiangsu army in the middle of the Yangtze River.

古文：己亥，契丹遣使克沙骨慎思以书来讲和。
现代文：二十七日，契丹派遣使臣克沙骨慎思带着国书来讲和。
English: On the 27th, Khitan dispatched the envoy, Keshak Shansi, to bring the national document to talk about peace.

古文：知潞州药继能拔北汉鹰涧堡。
现代文：知潞州药继能攻克北汉鹰涧堡。
English: Zhifang Zhou Yijie was able to conquer the North Han Eagle Fortress.

古文：辛丑，召契丹使于讲武殿观习射。
现代文：二十九日，太祖召契丹使臣到讲武殿观看演习射箭。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Taizu summoned the Qidan envoys to the Great Hall of the People to watch the archery drill.

古文：壬寅，遣内侍王继恩领兵赴升州。
现代文：三十日，太祖派遣太监王继恩率领军队赴升州。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Taizu sent the eunuch Wang Jiong to lead the army to Shengzhou.

古文：大食国遣使来朝献。
现代文：大食国派遣使臣来朝拜进贡。
English: The gluttonous country sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：夏四月乙巳，幸东水硙。
现代文：夏四月初三，太祖亲临东水视察。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, the great-grandfather personally visited Dongshui to inspect it.

古文：癸丑，幸都亭驿，阅新战船。
现代文：十一日，太祖到都亭骚检阅新造的战船。
English: On the 11th day, Taizu went to Du Tingsao to inspect the newly built warship.

古文：丁巳，吴越王拔常州。
现代文：十五日，吴越王攻克常州。
English: On the 15th, Wu Yue Wang conquered Changzhou.

古文：壬戌，彬等败江南军于秦淮北。
现代文：二十日，曹彬等人在秦淮北面打败江南军队。
English: On the 20th, Cao Bin and others defeated the Jiangnan army on the north side of Qinhuai.

古文：戊辰，幸玉津园，观种稻，遂幸讲武池，观习水战。
现代文：二十六日，太祖亲临玉津园观看种植水稻，于是又亲临讲武池视察水军作战训练。
English: On the 26th, the great-great-grandfather personally visited the Tamatsu Garden to watch the planting of rice, and then he also personally visited the Keibu Pond to inspect the navy's combat training.

古文：庚午，诏岭南盗赃满十贯以上者死。
现代文：二十八日，太祖下诏岭南地区盗窃赃物满十贯钱以上的处以死刑。
English: On the 28th, a man was sentenced to death for stealing more than 10 million yuan worth of stolen goods in Lingnan District.

古文：幸西水硙。
现代文：太祖亲临西水视察。
English: The great-grandfather visited Xishui to inspect it in person.

古文：五月壬申朔，以吴越国王钱俶守太师、尚书令，益食邑。
现代文：五月初一，任命吴越国王钱为太师、尚书令，增加食邑。
English: On the first day of May, he appointed King Qian of Wuyue as the Grand Master, Shang Shuling, and increased the amount of food.

古文：知桂阳监张侃发前官隐没羡银，追罪兵部郎中董枢、右赞善大夫孔璘，杀之，太子洗马赵瑜杖配海岛；侃受赏，迁屯田员外郎。
现代文：知桂阳监张侃揭发前任官隐瞒并吞没多余的银子，追究处罚兵部郎中董枢、右赞善大夫孔瞒，斩首，太子洗马赵瑜服杖刑，流放海岛；张侃受到赏赐，升任屯田员外郎。
English: Zhang Kan, a well-informed Guiyang inspector, revealed that the previous officials had concealed and swallowed up the excess silver. He investigated and punished Dong Zu, the head of the military department, and Kong Zhe, the doctor of the right Zanzan, and beheaded them. The prince Zema Zhao Yu served a cane sentence and was exiled to the island; Zhang Kan received a reward and was promoted to the tutian member.

古文：辛巳，祈晴。
现代文：初十，祈祷天气放晴。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I prayed for the weather to clear up.

古文：甲申，江南宁远军及沿江砦并降。
现代文：十三日，江南宁远军和沿江营寨投降。
English: On the 13th, the Ningyuan Army in the south of the Yangtze River and the Yingzhai Army along the Yangtze River surrendered.

古文：乙酉，诏武冈、长沙等十县民为贼卤掠者，蠲其逋租，仍给复一年。
现代文：十四日，太祖下诏武冈、长沙等十县百姓遭盗贼掠夺的人家减免拖欠的田租，并免除一年摇役。
English: On the 14th, the great-grandfather issued an edict to the people of ten counties including WuGang and Changsha, who had been plundered by thieves, to reduce and waive the arrears of farm rents, and to exempt them from one year of forced labor.

古文：甲午，安南都护丁琏遣使来贡。
现代文：二十三日，安南都护丁琏派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 23rd, Annan sent an envoy to collect the tribute.

古文：辛丑，河决濮州。
现代文：三十日，黄河在攫州决口。
English: On the 30th, the Yellow River burst its banks in Zhangzhou.

古文：六月壬寅，曹彬等遣使言，败江南军于其城下。
现代文：六月初一，曹彬等人派遣使者报告说，在升州城下打败江南军队。
English: On the first day of June, Cao Bin and others sent an envoy to report that they had defeated the Jiangnan army under the city of Shengzhou.

古文：丁未，宋州观察判官崔绚、录事参军马德休并坐赃弃市。
现代文：初六，宋州观察判官崔绚、录事参军马德休都因贪赃受贿在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Songzhou observation judge Cui Hua and record-keeping soldier Ma Dexiu were beheaded in the downtown for corruption and bribery.

古文：辛亥，河决澶州顿丘。
现代文：初十，黄河在擅州顿丘决口。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Yellow River is at the junction of Dunguo and Xiangzhou.

古文：甲子，彗出柳，长四丈，辰见东方。
现代文：二十三日，彗星在柳宿出现，四丈长，辰时出现在东方。
English: On the 23rd, the comet appeared in Yagyu-juku, Shijo-naga, and Tatsuchi in the east.

古文：秋七月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。
English: Autumn, the first day of July, a solar eclipse.

古文：庚辰，遣阁门使郝崇信、太常丞吕端使契丹。
现代文：初十，太祖派遣旬门使郝崇信、太常承吕端出使契丹。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month, Emperor Taizu dispatched the envoy of Shun-men, Zou Chongxin, and Emperor Taizong dispatched the envoy of Lydon, Qidan.

古文：癸未，西天东印土王子穰结说啰来朝献。
现代文：十三日，西天东印土王开嚷结曲罗来朝贡。
English: On the thirteenth day, the king of the East Indies began to call for tribute.

古文：甲申，诏吴越王班师。
现代文：十四日，太祖诏令吴越王钱班师。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Taizu ordered Wu Yue Wang Qian's division to leave.

古文：己亥，山后两林鬼主、怀化将军勿尼等来朝献。
现代文：二十九日，山后两林鬼主、怀化将军勿尼等人来朝贡。
English: On the 29th, the ghosts of the two forests behind the mountain, Huaihua General Beni and others came to pay tribute.

古文：八月乙卯，幸东水硙观鱼，遂幸北园。
现代文：八月十六日，太祖亲临东水观赏游鱼。于是又去了北园。
English: On August 16th, the great-grandfather came to the East Water to watch the fish swimming. So he went to the North Garden.

古文：辛酉，诏权停今年贡举。
现代文：二十二日，太祖下诏暂停今年的科举考试。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to suspend this year's imperial examinations.

古文：壬戌，契丹遣左卫大将军耶律霸德等致御衣、玉带、名马。
现代文：二十三日，契丹派遣左卫大将军耶律霸德等人送来皇帝穿的衣服、玉带、名马。
English: On the 23rd, Khitan dispatched the General of the Left Division, Yerutabad, and others to bring clothes worn by the emperor, a jade belt, and a famous horse.

古文：西南蕃顺化王子若废等来献名马。
现代文：西南夷顺化王子若废等人来进贡名马。
English: Southwest Yixian, Hunhua, Prince Ruka, and others came to pay tribute to the famous horse.

古文：癸亥，丁德裕败润州兵于城下。
现代文：二十四日，丁德裕在润州城下打败守军。
English: On the 24th, Ding Deyu defeated the defenders at the foot of Runzhou Castle.

古文：九月壬申，狩近郊，逐兔，马蹶坠地，因引佩刀刺马杀之。
现代文：九月初三，太祖在近郊打猎，骑马追赶免子时，马突然跌倒，太祖摔在地上，因此太祖拔出佩刀刺死了这匹马。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, when the great-grandfather was hunting in the suburbs and riding a horse to chase his son, the horse suddenly fell and the great-grandfather fell to the ground. Therefore, the great-grandfather pulled out a saber and stabbed the horse to death.

古文：既而悔之，曰： 吾为天下主，轻事畋猎，又何罪马哉！ 自是遂不复猎。
现代文：立刻就又后悔做了这件事，说： 我是天下的主人，轻率地出来打猎，又为什么要处罚马匹呢了于是自此以后不再打猎。
English: He immediately regretted what he had done, and said, "I am the master of the whole world, I have come out to hunt rashly, and why should I punish the horses?" So he never hunted again.

古文：戊寅，润州降。
现代文：初九，润州投降。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Runchu surrendered.

古文：冬十月己亥朔，江南主遣徐铉、周惟简来乞缓师。
现代文：冬十月初一，江南主派遣徐铰、周惟简来朝乞求宋军暂缓进攻。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the Southern Lord of the Yangtze River sent Xu Xi and Zhou Wei Jian to the North to beg the Song Army to postpone the attack.

古文：辛亥，诏郡国令佐察民有孝悌力田、奇材异行或文武可用者遣，诣阙。
现代文：十三日，太祖下诏州县令佐官员察举百姓中孝顺父母敬爱兄长努力耕种田地、具有非凡才能和优异行为或者文武才能可以任用的人送到朝廷。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the deputy governor of Zhaozhou County under the Great Ancestor surveyed the people and sent to the imperial court those who were filial, obedient to their parents, respected their elders, worked hard to cultivate the fields, and had extraordinary talents and excellent behavior or literary and military talents.

古文：丁巳，修西京宫阙。
现代文：十九日，修建西京宫殿。
English: On the 19th, the construction of the Saikyo Palace began.

古文：江南主贡银五万两、绢五万匹，乞缓师。
现代文：江南国主李煜进贡银子五万两、绢五万匹，乞求暂缓进攻。
English: South of the Yangtze River, the lord of the country, Li Qizhong, paid a tribute of fifty thousand taels of silver and fifty thousand horses, and begged for a delay in the attack.

古文：戊午，改润州镇海军节度为镇江军节度。
现代文：二十日，改润州镇海军节度为镇江军节度。
English: On the 20th, the Renzhou Town Navy Festival was changed to the Zhenjiang Army Festival.

古文：幸晋王北园。
现代文：太祖亲监晋王赵光义的北园。
English: His great-grandfather oversaw the Northern Garden of the Jin King Zhao Guangyi.

古文：己未，曹彬遣都虞候刘遇破江南军于皖口，擒其将朱令赟、王晖。
现代文：二十一日，曹彬派遣都虞候刘遇在皖口击溃江南军队，擒获江南军将领朱令贾、王晖。
English: On the twenty-first day, Cao Bin dispatched the prefectural governors to wait for Liu Yu to defeat the Jiangnan army at Hukou, and captured the generals of the Jiangnan army, Zhu Lingjia and Wang Yao.

古文：十一月辛未，江南主遣徐铉等再奉表乞缓师，不报。
现代文：十一月初三，江南主李煜派遣徐铰等人再次带着表章乞求宋军暂缓进攻，没有得到答复。
English: On the 3rd day of the first month of November, the leader of the southern part of the Yangtze River, Li Xi, sent Xu Xi and others to beg the Song army to postpone the attack, but they did not receive a reply.

古文：甲申，曹彬夜败江南军于城下。
现代文：十六日夜里，曹彬在升州城下打败江南军队。
English: On the night of the 16th, Cao Bin defeated the Southern Jiangsu army at the foot of the city of Shengzhou.

古文：丙戌，以校书郎宋准、殿直邢文庆充贺契丹正旦使。
现代文：十八日，任命校书郎宋准、殿直邢文庆担任贺契丹正旦使。
English: On the 18th, he appointed Song Jun, the school secretary, and Tenenagao Wenqing as the envoys of He Qidan Zhengtan.

古文：乙未，曹彬克升州，俘其国主煜，江南平，凡得州十九、军三、县一百八十、户六十五万五千六十。
现代文：二十七日，曹彬攻克升州，俘虏江南国主李煜，江南平定，一共得到十九个州、三个军、一百八十个县、百姓六十五万五千零六十户。
English: On the 27th, Cao Bin conquered Shengzhou, captured the Southern Jiangsu's ruler Li Xi, and pacified the Southern Jiangsu, gaining a total of nineteen prefectures, three armies, one hundred and eighty counties, and six hundred and fifty-five thousand and sixty households.

古文：临视新龙兴寺。
现代文：太祖亲临视察新建的龙兴寺。
English: Grandfather personally inspected the newly built Longxing Temple.

古文：十二月庚子，幸惠民河，观筑堰。
现代文：十二月初三，太祖亲临惠民河视察修筑堤堰。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the great-grandfather personally visited Huiminhe to inspect the construction of the dike.

古文：辛丑，赦江南，复一岁；兵戈所经，二岁。
现代文：初四，在江南地区实行大赦，免除一年摇役；经过战争的地区，免除两年摇役。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, an amnesty will be implemented in the south of the Yangtze River, exempting one year of service; in areas that have experienced war, exempting two years of service.

古文：戊申，三佛齐遣使来献方物。
现代文：十一日，三佛齐国派遣使者来进贡当地土产。
English: On the 11th day, the Three Buddhas and the State of Qi sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local local products.

古文：己酉，幸龙兴寺。
现代文：十二日，太祖亲临龙兴寺。
English: On the 12th, the great-grandfather himself visited Longxing Temple.

古文：辛亥，免开封府诸县今年秋租十之三。
现代文：十四日，减免开封府所属各县今年十分之三的秋租。
English: On the 14th, three-tenths of this year's autumn rent in the counties belonging to Kaifeng Prefecture was reduced or exempted.

古文：己未，以恩赦侯刘鋹为彭城郡公。
现代文：二十二日，任命恩赦侯刘银为彭城郡公。
English: On the 22nd, the pardoned Hou Liu Yin was appointed Pengcheng County magistrate.

古文：甲子，契丹遣使耶律乌正来贺正旦。
现代文：二十七日，契丹派遣使臣耶律乌正来朝廷祝贺正旦。
English: On the 27th, the Khitan sent an envoy, Yerut Wuzhen, to the imperial court to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：丁卯，吴越国王乞以长春节朝觐，从之。
现代文：三十日，吴越国王钱请求在长春节来朝见太祖，太祖同意了他的请求。
English: On the 30th, King Qian of Wuyue requested to come to the imperial court to see the great-grandfather on the Spring Festival. The great-grandfather agreed to his request.

古文：九年春正月辛未，御明德门，见李煜于楼下，不用献俘仪。
现代文：开宝九年春正月初四，太祖来到明德门，在楼下接见李煜，没有用进献俘虏的仪式。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 9th year of the Khao dynasty, the great-grandfather came to the Mingde Gate and met Li Yao downstairs. He did not use the ceremony of dedicating the captives.

古文：壬申，大赦，减死罪一等。
现代文：初五，大赦天下，犯有死罪的减刑一等。
English: On the fifth day of the new year, the world was amnestied, and the commutation of the death penalty was the first.

古文：乙亥，封李煜为违命侯，子弟臣僚班爵有差。
现代文：初八，太祖封李煜为违命侯，他的子弟和臣僚也都封爵不等。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the great-grandfather was given the title of marquis for disobeying orders, and his children and ministers were also knighted.

古文：己卯，江南昭武军节度使留后卢绛焚掠州县。
现代文：十二日，江南昭武军节度使留后卢绛焚烧并掠夺州县。
English: On the 12th, the Southern Zhaowu Army of the Yangtze River stayed in Luye to burn and loot counties.

古文：庚辰，诏郊西京。
现代文：十三日，太祖下诏在西京举行祭祀活动。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Taizu held a memorial service in West Kyoto.

古文：癸巳，晋王率文武上尊号，不允。
现代文：二十六日，晋王赵光义率领满朝文武官员进上尊号，太祖不允许。
English: On the 26th, the Jin king, Zhao Guangyi, led a full court of civil and military officials to enter the honorary title, which the great-grandfather did not allow.

古文：二月癸卯，三上表，不允。
现代文：二月初六，三次上表进尊号，太祖还是不同意。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the lunar calendar, the name Jin Zun appeared three times, but the great ancestor still did not agree.

古文：庚戌，以曹彬为枢密使。
现代文：十三日，任命曹彬为枢密使。
English: On the 13th, Cao Bin was appointed as the envoy.

古文：辛亥，命德昭迎劳吴越国王钱俶于宋州。
现代文：十四日，太祖命令赵德昭在宋州迎接慰劳吴越国王钱。
English: On the 14th, the great-grandfather ordered Zhao Dezhao to meet the consolation of King Qian of Wuyue in Songzhou.

古文：契丹遣使耶律延以御衣、玉带、名马、散马、白鹘来贺长春节。
现代文：契丹派遣使臣耶律延布万带着御衣、玉带、名马、散马、白鹊来庆贺长春节。
English: Khitan dispatched the envoy, Yerut Yanbuwan, to celebrate the Chinese New Year with imperial robes, jade belts, famous horses, loose horses, and egrets.

古文：乙卯，吴越王奏内客省使丁德裕贪狠，贬房州刺史。
现代文：十八日，吴越国王钱上奏朝廷指责内客省使丁德裕贪婪凶狠，丁德裕被贬为房州刺史。
English: On the 18th, King Qian of Wuyue made a report to the imperial court accusing Neige Province of making Ding Deyu greedy and ferocious. Ding Deyu was relegated to being a ghost of Fangzhou.

古文：丁巳，观礼贤宅。
现代文：二十日，太祖视察礼贤宅。
English: On the 20th, the great-grandfather inspected the house of Li Xian.

古文：戊午，以卢多逊为吏部侍郎，仍参知政事。
现代文：二十一日，任命卢多逊为吏部侍郎，仍旧担任参知政事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Ludoson was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department, and still served as the co-governor.

古文：己未，吴越国王钱俶偕子惟濬等朝于崇德殿，进银绢以万计。
现代文：二十二日，吴越国王钱和他的儿子钱惟浚等人在崇德殿朝见太祖，进贡银绢数以万计。
English: On the 22nd, King Qian of Wuyue and his son Qian Weizhong and others paid tribute of tens of thousands of silver ingots to the Great Ancestor at the Chongde Hall.

古文：赐俶衣带鞍马，遂以礼贤宅居之，宴于长安殿。
现代文：太祖赐给他衣带和鞍马，于是让钱等人住在礼贤宅，太祖在长安殿设宴款待他们。
English: The great-grandfather gave him a sash and a pommel horse, so he let Qian and others live in the house of Li Xian, and the great-grandfather entertained them with a banquet in Chang'an Hall.

古文：壬戌，钱俶进贺平升州银绢、乳香、吴绫、绵、钱茶、犀象、香药，皆亿万计。
现代文：二十五日，钱进贡庆贺平定升州的银绢、乳香、吴绩、丝绵、钱茶、犀象、香药，都以亿万计。
English: On the 25th, the silver ingots, frankincense, wuxia, silk, money tea, rhinoceros horns, and incense, all of which originated from Pinghe Ding and Shengzhou, were donated in the hundreds of millions.

古文：甲子，召晋王、吴越国王并其子等射于苑中，俶进御衣、寿星通犀带及金器。
现代文：二十七日，太祖召晋王赵光义、吴越国王钱以及他的儿子等人在御苑中射箭，钱奉上皇帝的御衣、寿星、通犀带以及金器。
English: On the 27th, the Great Ancestor summoned the King of Jin, Zhao Guangyi, the King of Wuyue, Qian, and his sons to shoot arrows in the imperial garden. Qian presented the emperor's robe, birthday star, rhinoceros hair band, and goldware.

古文：丁卯，幸礼贤宅，赐俶金器及银绢倍万。
现代文：三十日，太祖亲临礼贤宅，赐给钱金器以及银绢数万。
English: On the 30th, the great-grandfather personally visited the house of Laixian and gave him tens of thousands of money, gold and silver ingots.

古文：三月己巳，俶进助南郊银绢、乳香以万计。
现代文：三月初二，钱进贡帮助南郊祭祀的银绢、乳香数以万计。
English: On the second day of March, tens of thousands of silver ingots and frankincense were donated to help the Nanjiao sacrificial rites.

古文：庚午，赐俶剑履上殿，诏书不名。
现代文：初三，太祖赐钱可以佩剑穿履朝见皇帝，诏书中不写他的名字。
English: On the third day of his junior year, the great-grandfather gave him money so that he could wear a sword and go to see the emperor, but his name was not written in the imperial edict.

古文：癸酉，以皇子德芳为检校太保、贵州防御使，中书侍郎、同平章事沈义伦为大内都部署，右卫大将军王仁赡权判留司、三司兼知开封府事。
现代文：初六，任命皇子赵德芳为检校太保、贵州防御使，中书侍郎、同平章事沈义伦为大内都部署，右卫大将军王仁赡权判留司、三司兼知开封府事。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the prince Zhao Defang was appointed as the school inspector and the Guizhou defense envoy, the chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters, Tongping Zhangji Shen Yilun was deployed to the capital, and the right guard general Wang Renyu was appointed as the chief of the residence division and the third chief of the palace division.

古文：丙子，幸西京。
现代文：初九，太祖去西京。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the great-grandfather went to West Beijing.

古文：己卯，次巩县，拜安陵，号恸陨绝者久之。
现代文：十二日，太祖在巩县停留，朝拜安陵，痛哭悲号很长时间。
English: On the twelfth day, the great ancestor stayed in Gong County, paid homage to the tomb, and cried for a long time.

古文：庚辰，赐河南府民今年田租之半，奉陵户复一年。
现代文：十三日，太祖赐河南府百姓今年田租减免一半，侍奉陵墓的百姓家庭免除一年的摇役。
English: On the 13th, the great-grandfather gave the people of Henan Province half of this year's field rent reduction and exemption, and the people's families who served the mausoleum were exempted from one year's labor.

古文：辛巳，至洛阳。
现代文：十四日，太祖到达洛阳。
English: On the 14th, Taizu arrived in Luoyang.

古文：庚寅，大雨，分命近臣诣诸祠庙祈晴。
现代文：二十三日，大雨，太祖分别命令左右亲近大臣到各个寺观庙宁祈祷天晴。
English: On the 23rd, there was a heavy rain, and Taizu ordered the ministers to go to various temples to pray for a fine weather.

古文：辛卯，幸广化寺，开无畏三藏塔。
现代文：二十四日，太祖亲临广化寺，正式开放无畏三藏塔。
English: On the 24th, the great-grandfather himself came to Guanghua Temple to officially open the Three Fearless Pagodas.

古文：夏四月己亥，雨霁。
现代文：夏四月初三，雨停。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, the rain stopped.

古文：庚子，有事圆丘，回御五凤楼，大赦，十恶、故杀者不原，贬降责免者量移叙用，诸流配及逋欠悉放，诸官未赠恩者悉覃赏。
现代文：初四，太祖在圆丘祭天，回来时到五凤楼大赦天下，十恶、故意杀人者不赦免，贬滴降官受责免官的人酌情移近安置分级进用，各种流放以及拖欠赋税的人全部释放免于追究，官吏中没有得到赐恩的人也都广泛地得到赏赐。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the great-grandfather sacrificed to the heavens in the round mound, and when he came back to the five phoenix tower, he pardoned the whole world, and did not pardon the ten evils and intentional murderers. Those who were demoted, demoted, and removed from office were moved closer to the placement and grading as appropriate. All kinds of exiles and tax defaulters were released from investigation. Those who did not receive the blessing of officials were also widely rewarded.

古文：壬寅，大宴，赐亲王、近臣、列校袭衣、金带、鞍马、器币有差。
现代文：初六，太祖举行盛大宴会，赐给亲王、左右亲近大臣、将帅们一套衣裳、金带、带鞍的马匹、器皿钱币多少不等。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the great-grandfather held a grand banquet and gave the prince, the ministers close to him on both sides, and the generals a set of clothes, a gold belt, horses with saddles, utensils, and money.

古文：丙午，驾还。
现代文：初十，太祖起驾回京。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Taizu started driving back to Kyoto.

古文：辛亥，上至自洛。
现代文：十五日，太祖从洛阳回到开封。
English: On the 15th, Taizu returned to Kaifeng from Luoyang.

古文：丁巳，曹翰拔江州，屠之，擒牙校宋德明、胡则等。
现代文：二十一日，曹翰攻克江州，屠城，擒获牙校宋德明、胡则等人。
English: On the twenty-first day, Cao Han conquered Jiangzhou and Tu Cheng and captured Song Deming, Hu Ze and others.

古文：诏益晋王食邑，光美、德昭并加开府仪同三司，德芳益食邑，薛居正、沈义伦加光禄大夫，枢密使曹彬、宣徽北院使潘美加特进，吴越国王钱俶益食邑，内外文武臣僚咸进阶封。
现代文：太祖下诏增加晋王赵光义的食邑，赵光美、赵德昭都加封开府仪同三司，增加赵德芳食邑，薛居正、沈义伦加封光禄大夫，枢密使曹彬、宣徽北院使潘美加封为特进，吴越国王钱增加食邑，朝廷内外的文武官员都得到封赏，提升了官阶。
English: The great-grandfather issued an edict to increase the food allowance of the Jin king Zhao Guangyi, Zhao Guangmei and Zhao Dezhao were all awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Zhao Defang was awarded the food allowance, Xue Juzheng and Shen Yilong were awarded the food allowance of Guanglu Daifu, the confidential envoy Cao Bin and the Northern Court of Xuanhui were awarded the food allowance of Pan Mei, and King Qian of Wu Yue was awarded the food allowance. The civil and military officials both inside and outside the imperial court were rewarded and promoted to higher ranks.

古文：己未，著令旬假为休沐。
现代文：二十三日，太祖立官吏每十天休假一天以休息沐浴的诏令。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Taizu decreed that officials should take a day off every ten days to rest and bathe.

古文：丙寅，大食国王珂黎拂遣使蒲希密来献方物。
现代文：三十日，大食国王坷黎拂派遣使者蒲希密来进贡当地土产。
English: On the 30th, the king of gluttony, Bu Lihu, sent an emissary, Bu Xi Mi, to bring tribute of local produce.

古文：五月己巳，幸东水硙，遂幸飞龙院，观渔金水河。
现代文：五月初三，太祖亲临东水视察，于是又到了飞龙院，观看在金水河中捕鱼。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the great-grandfather personally visited Dongshui to inspect, so he also went to Feilongyuan to watch the fishing in the Jinshui River.

古文：甲戌，遣司勋员外郎和岘往江南路采访。
现代文：初八，太祖派遣司勋员外郎和崛前往江南路采访民情。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizu dispatched Grand Officers Gairo and Hori to Jiangnan Road to interview the people.

古文：杀卢绛。
现代文：处死卢绛。
English: Lu Yao was executed.

古文：庚辰，幸讲武池，遂幸玉津园观稼。
现代文：十四日，太祖亲临讲武池，于是又到玉津园视察庄稼。
English: On the 14th, the great-grandfather himself came to visit the battlefield, and then he went to the Tamatsuen Garden to inspect the crops.

古文：宋州大风，坏城楼、官民舍几五千间。
现代文：宋州大风吹坏城楼官民房屋近五千间。
English: Nearly 5,000 public and private houses in Songzhou have been damaged by the strong winds.

古文：甲申，以阁门副使田守奇等充贺契丹生辰使。
现代文：十八日，任命阎门副使田守奇等人担任贺契丹生辰使。
English: On the 18th, Yanmen deputy envoy Tian Shouqi and others were appointed as He Qidan's envoys.

古文：晋州以北汉岚、石、宪三州巡检使王洪武等来献。
现代文：晋州把北汉岚、石、宪三州巡检使王洪武等人送来献给朝廷。
English: Wang Hongwu and others were sent to the Imperial Court from Jinzhou to present the Northern Han Dynasty seal, stone, and Constitution to the Imperial Court.

古文：六月庚子，步至晋王邸，命作机轮，輓金水河注邸中为池。
现代文：六月初五，太祖步行来到晋王赵光义的府邸，命令建造抽水的机轮，汲取金水河水灌注到赵光义府邸形成池塘。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, Emperor Taizu walked to the residence of the King of Jin, Zhao Guangyi, and ordered the construction of a water pumping wheel to draw water from the Jinshui River and pour it into the residence of Zhao Guangyi to form a pond.

古文：癸卯，吴越王进银、绢、绵以倍万计。
现代文：初八，吴越国王钱进贡银两、绢帛、丝绵以数万计。
English: At the beginning of the eighth century, the king of Wuyue paid tribute of money, silver, silk and silk in tens of thousands.

古文：乙卯，荧惑入南斗。
现代文：二十日，火星进人南斗。
English: On the 20th, Mars entered the Southern Cross.

古文：秋七月戊辰，幸晋王第观新池。
现代文：秋七月初三，太祖亲临晋王赵光义府邸视察新挖成的池塘。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of the autumn, the great-grandfather personally visited the residence of the Jin king Zhao Guangyi to inspect the newly dug pond.

古文：丙子，幸京兆尹光美第视疾。
现代文：十一日，太祖亲临京兆尹赵光美府第探视他的病情。
English: On the 11th day, the great-grandfather personally visited the Beijing Zhaoying Zhao Guangme Prefecture to visit his illness.

古文：戊寅，再幸光美第。
现代文：十三日，太祖再次亲临赵光美府第。
English: On the 13th, the great-grandfather once again visited Zhao Guangme Prefecture.

古文：泉州节度使陈洪进乞朝觐。
现代文：泉州节度使陈洪进请求来朝廷勤见太祖。
English: The Quanzhou Festival made Chen Hongjin request to come to the imperial court to see the great ancestor.

古文：丙戌，命近臣祈晴。
现代文：二十一日，命令左右亲近大臣祈祷天晴。
English: On the twenty-first day, the order was given to the left and right to approach the minister and pray for good weather.

古文：丁亥，命修先代帝王及五岳、四渎祠庙。
现代文：二十二日，太祖命令修建先代帝王以及五岳四读的祠庙。
English: On the 22nd, the great-grandfather ordered the construction of the ancestral temple of the previous emperor and the four readings of the five mountains.

古文：庚寅，幸光美第。
现代文：二十五日，太祖亲临赵光美府第。
English: On the 25th, the great-grandfather personally visited Zhao Guangme's residence.

古文：八月乙未朔，吴越国王进射火箭军士。
现代文：八月初一，吴越国王钱进献会发射火箭的军士。
English: On the first day of August, King Qianjin of Wuyue offered a gift to the sergeant who launched the rocket.

古文：己亥，幸新龙兴寺。
现代文：初五，太祖亲临新建的龙兴寺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the great-grandfather visited the newly built Longxing Temple in person.

古文：辛丑，太子中允郭思齐坐赃弃市。
现代文：初七，太子中允郭思齐因贪赃在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the middle son of the crown prince, Yun Guo Siqi, was beheaded in the middle of the city for corruption.

古文：乙巳，幸等觉院，遂幸东染院，赐工人钱。
现代文：十一日，太祖到等觉院，于是又去了东染院，赐给工人钱币。
English: On the 11th day, the great-grandfather went to Tokei-in Temple, and then went to Higashi-zome-in Temple to give coins to the workers.

古文：又幸控鹤营观习射，赐帛有差。
现代文：又到控鹤营视察将士练习射箭，赐给将士布帛多少不等。
English: He also went to Henghe Camp to inspect soldiers practising archery, and gave soldiers varying amounts of cloth brooms.

古文：又幸开宝寺观藏经。
现代文：又亲临开宝寺观看藏经。
English: He also visited Kaiboji Temple in person to view the collection of sutras.

古文：丁未，遣侍卫马军都指挥使党进、宣徽北院使潘美伐北汉。
现代文：十三日，太祖派遣侍卫马军都指挥使党进、宣徽北院使潘美征伐北汉。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Taizu dispatched his bodyguards to command the Horse Army to advance the party, and the Northern Court of the State Council sent Pan Mei to invade Northern Han.

古文：丙辰，遣使率兵分五道入太原。
现代文：二十二日，派遣西上间门使等率领军队分五路进攻太原。
English: On the twenty-second day, the western gatekeepers were sent to lead the army in a five-pronged attack on Taiyuan.

古文：九月甲子，幸绫锦院。
现代文：九月初一，太祖亲临绩锦院。
English: On the first day of September, the great-grandfather himself came to the school.

古文：庚午，权高丽国事王伷遣使来朝献。
现代文：初七，权高丽国事王了由派遣使臣来朝拜进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Emperor Goryeo sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：党进败北汉军于太原城北。
现代文：党进在太原城击败北汉军队。
English: Dangjin defeated the Northern Han Army in Taiyuan City.

古文：辛巳，命忻、代行营都监郭进迁山后诸州民。
现代文：十八日，太祖命令忻、代行营都监郭进迁徙山后各州的百姓。
English: On the 18th day, Emperor Taizu ordered the, acting as camp inspector, to enter and relocate the people of the states behind the mountains.

古文：庚寅，幸城南池亭，遂幸礼贤宅，又幸晋王第。
现代文：二十七日，太祖亲临城南池亭，于是又到礼贤宅，又去了晋王赵光义的府第。
English: On the 27th, the great-grandfather came to Seongnam Chieting in person, and then went to the house of Li Xian and the residence of the Jin king Zhao Guangyi.

古文：冬十月甲午朔旦，赐文武百官衣有差。
现代文：冬十月初一，太祖赐给文武百官衣服多少不等。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the great-grandfather gave clothes to hundreds of civil and military officials.

古文：丁酉，兵马监押马继恩率兵入河东界，焚荡四十余砦。
现代文：初四，兵马监押马继恩率领军队进人河东境内，焚烧扫荡了四十多处营寨。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the army and horse overseer, Ma Jian, led the army into the territory of Henan and Hedong, and burned and swept more than forty camps.

古文：己亥，幸西教场。
现代文：初六，太祖亲临西教场。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, the great-grandfather came to the West Campus.

古文：庚子，镇州巡检郭进焚寿阳县，俘九千人。
现代文：初七，镇州巡检郭进焚烧寿阳县，俘虏九千人。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Zhenzhou Inspection Corps entered and burned Shouyang County, taking nine thousand prisoners.

古文：辛丑，晋、隰巡检穆彦璋入河东，俘二千余人。
现代文：初八，晋、曝巡检穆彦璋进人河东，俘虏二千多人。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Jin and Muyan entered the eastern part of the river and captured more than two thousand people.

古文：党进败北汉军于太原城北。己酉，吴越王献驯象。
现代文：党进在太原城北击败北汉军队。十六日，吴越国王钱进贡经过驯养的大象。
English: Dangjin defeated the North Han army in the north of Taiyuan City. On the 16th, King Qian of Wuyue paid tribute with a domesticated elephant.

古文：癸丑夕，帝崩于万岁殿，年五十。殡于殿西阶，谥曰英武圣文神德皇帝，庙号太祖。
现代文：二十日晚上，太祖在万岁殿逝世，终年五十岁，灵枢停放在进万岁殿的西雨道中，溢号为英武圣文神德皇帝，庙号为太祖。
English: On the evening of the 20th, Taizu passed away in the Hall of Eternal Life, at the age of fifty. His spiritual center was placed in the west avenue of the Hall of Eternal Life. His posthumous name was Yingwu Shenwen Shinde Emperor, and his temple name was Taizu.

古文：太平兴国二年四月乙卯，葬永昌陵。
现代文：太宗太平兴国二年四月二十五日，安葬在永昌陵。
English: Taizong Taiping was buried in Yongchang Mausoleum on April 25, the second year of the reign of Emperor Xing.

古文：大中祥符元年，加上尊谥曰启运立极英武睿文神德圣功至明大孝皇帝。
现代文：真宗大中样符元年，加上尊崇太祖的溢号为启运立极英武睿文神德圣功至明大孝皇帝。
English: In the first year of the Shinshu Daizhong Sampu, together with the exclamation mark of revering the great-grandfather, it was the start of the movement to establish the most heroic, brave, moral, and sacred virtue to the Emperor Mingdaxiao.

古文：帝性孝友节俭，质任自然，不事矫饰。
现代文：太祖皇帝天性孝顺父母，友爱兄弟，节约俭省，秉性任其自然，不故意矫揉造作以掩饰自己。
English: The great-grandfather emperor was naturally filial and obedient to his parents, fraternal and affectionate, frugal and thrifty, and let nature take its course, and did not deliberately make a fuss to disguise himself.

古文：受禅之初，颇好微行，或谏其轻出。
现代文：接受后周禅让的初期，很喜欢便装出行，有人劝说他不要轻易出去。
English: In the early days after accepting Zhou Zhenya, he liked to travel in casual clothes, and someone persuaded him not to go out easily.

古文：曰： 帝王之兴，自有天命，周世宗见诸将方面大耳者皆杀之，我终日侍侧，不能害也。 
现代文：太祖说： 帝王的兴起，自有天命，周世宗看到将领中有方脸大耳的人都把他们杀死，我整天侍奉在他身边，他也不能危害我。 
English: The great-grandfather said: The rise of the emperor has its own destiny. Zhou Shizong saw that the generals with square faces and big ears were killing them. I served beside him all day, and he could not harm me.

古文：既而微行愈数，有谏，辄语之曰： 有天命者任自为之，不汝禁也。 
现代文：这之后便装出宫的次数更加多了，有人规劝他，就对规劝的人说： 享有天命的人任他自己做事，你不要禁止。 
English: After that, the number of times he went out of the palace in disguise increased. When he was reprimanded, he said to the person who reprimanded him, "A person who enjoys the fate of heaven is allowed to do things on his own, you should not forbid it."

古文：一日，罢朝，坐便殿，不乐者久之。
现代文：有一天，太祖退朝下来，坐在便殿中不高兴了很长时间。
English: One day, the great-grandfather retired and sat in the toilet for a long time.

古文：左右请其故。
现代文：左右侍从问太祖为了什么事？
English: The left and right attendants asked the great-grandfather why?

古文：曰： 尔谓为天子容易耶？
现代文：太祖说： 你们认为当天子是件容易的事吗？
English: The great-grandfather said, "Do you think it's easy to become a monk?

古文：早作乘快误决一事，故不乐耳。 
现代文：我在早朝时乘一时高兴而错误地处理了一件事，因此不高兴。 
English: I didn't enjoy myself in the early hours of the morning when I took a momentary pleasure in mishandling an issue.

古文：汴京新宫成，御正殿坐，令洞开诸门，谓左右曰： 此如我心，少有邪曲，人皆见之。 
现代文：汁京新建的宫殿落成，太祖来到正殿坐下，命令把殿门全部打开，对左右说： 这好比是我的内心，很少有不正的地方，人们都可以看见的。 
English: When the newly built palace in the capital was completed, the great-grandfather came to the main hall and sat down, ordered all the doors of the hall to be opened, and said to the right and left: This is like my heart, there are few wrong places, people can see it.

古文：吴越钱俶来朝，自宰相以下咸请留俶而取其地，帝不听，遣俶归国。
现代文：吴越国王钱来朝廷，自宰相以下的文武官员都请求太祖留下钱而收取他的土地，太祖不听这种意见，放他回国。
English: King Qian of Wuyue came to the imperial court, and the civil and military officials from the prime minister down requested that the great-grandfather keep the money and collect his land. The great-grandfather did not listen to this opinion and let him return to the country.

古文：及辞，取群臣留俶章疏数十轴，封识遗俶，戒以途中密观，俶届途启视，皆留己不遣之章也。
现代文：等到钱辞行的时候，太祖取来大臣们请求留下钱的几十件章疏，密封后交给他，告诉他在路上秘密观看。钱到途中启封阅读，都是要求太祖把自己留下而不要遣还吴越的奏章。
English: When Qian was about to leave, the great-grandfather took dozens of scrolls that the ministers had asked Qian to leave behind, sealed them, and gave them to him, telling him to watch them secretly on the way. Qian opened and read them on the way, all of which asked the great-grandfather to stay and not to return Wu Yue's scrolls.

古文：俶自是感惧，江南平，遂乞纳土。
现代文：他从这件事之后既感激又恐惧。江南平定，于是请求把国土归宋。
English: He was both grateful and fearful after this event. The south of the Yangtze River was pacified, so he asked for the land to be returned to Song.

古文：南汉刘鋹在其国，好置酖以毒臣下。既归朝，从幸讲武池，帝酌卮酒赐鋹。鋹疑有毒，捧杯泣曰： 臣罪在不赦，陛下既待臣以不死，愿为大梁布衣，观太平之盛，未敢饮此酒。 
现代文：南汉刘长在自己的国家里，喜好在酒中放毒药毒死臣下，不久归顺朝廷，跟着太祖来到讲武池，太祖倒了一杯酒赐给刘长，刘长环疑酒中有毒药，捧着杯子哭泣着说： 我犯的罪是在不赦之列的，陛下既然不以死罪对待我，我愿意做一名大宋的平民百姓，亲眼看看太平盛世，我不敢饮下这杯酒。 
English: In his own country, Liu Chang of the Southern Han Dynasty liked to put poison in his wine to poison his dead vassals. He soon surrendered to the imperial court and followed his great-grandfather to Ke Wu Chi. The great-grandfather poured a glass of wine and gave it to Liu Chang. Liu Changhuan suspected that there was poison in the wine, holding the glass and crying, "The crime I committed is one of the unforgivable ones. Since your majesty does not treat me as a capital crime, I am willing to be a commoner in the Great Song Dynasty. I would like to see Taiping in its prime with my own eyes. I dare not drink this glass of wine."

古文：帝笑而谓之曰： 朕推赤心于人腹中，宁肯尔耶？ 即取鋹酒自饮，别酌以赐鋹。
现代文：太祖笑着对他说： 我把自己的一颗赤诚之心放到别人的胸膛里，我怎么会这样做呢了立即拿过刚给刘长倒的酒自己喝了下去，另外倒了一杯酒赐给他。
English: The great-grandfather smiled and said to him, "I put my sincere heart into someone else's chest. How could I do that? I immediately took the wine that had just been poured for Liu Chang and drank it myself. I poured another glass of wine and gave it to him.

古文：王彦升擅杀韩通，虽预佐命，终身不与节钺。
现代文：王彦升擅自杀死韩通，虽然参预辅佐太祖建立王朝，但终身没有得到大将的符节和斧锁。
English: Wang Yansheng killed Han Tong without permission. Although he assisted the founding of the dynasty, he did not receive the general's seal and axe lock for life.

古文：王全斌入蜀，贪恣杀降，虽有大功，即加贬绌。
现代文：王全斌进人西川，贪婪放纵，屠杀降兵，虽然立有大功，也立即被贬官默责。
English: Wang Quanbin marched into the West River, indulged in greed, massacred soldiers, and was immediately demoted and silenced, despite his great achievements.

古文：宫中苇帘，缘用青布；常服之衣，浣濯至再。
现代文：皇宫中的苇帘，用青布包边；太祖经常穿的衣服，洗过多次还在穿。
English: The curtains in the imperial palace are edged with blue cloth; the clothes often worn by the great-grandfather have been washed many times and are still being worn.

古文：魏国长公主襦饰翠羽，戒勿复用，又教之曰： 汝生长富贵，当念惜福。 
现代文：魏国长公主短袄上装饰着翠鸟的羽毛，太祖告诫她不要再用了，又教诲她说： 你生长在富贵之中，应当懂得珍惜福分。 
English: The great-grandmother of the eldest princess of the State of Wei had the feathers of a kingfisher decorated on her short pigtail. Her great-grandfather warned her not to use them anymore, and also taught her: You grew up in wealth and should know how to cherish your blessings.

古文：见孟昶宝装溺器，摏而碎之，曰： 汝以七宝饰此，当以何器贮食？
现代文：看见孟爬用珠宝装饰的小便器具，就把它捣毁打碎，说： 你用七种宝石装饰便器，那么应该用什么器皿来盛放食物？
English: Seeing the urinal decorated with jewels, Meng Lai smashed it and said: If you decorate the urinal with seven kinds of jewels, then what kind of vessel should be used to hold food?

古文：所为如是，不亡何待！ 晚好读书，尝读二典，叹曰： 尧、舜之罪四凶，止从投窜，何近代法网之密乎！ 谓宰相曰： 五代诸侯跋扈，有枉法杀人者，朝廷置而不问。人命至重，姑息藩镇，当若是耶？
现代文：你这样的所作所为，不亡国还等什么了太祖晚年喜好读书，曾经读《尚书的浇典、舜典，叹息说： 尧、舜处罚四个凶人，也仅仅把他们流放出去，为什么近代法网如此严密啊了对宰相说： 五代时期诸侯骄横，有违法杀人的人，朝廷也置之不问；人命至关重要，姑息纵容藩镇，应当是这样的吗？
English: In his later years, the great-grandfather was fond of reading, and once read the "Shangshu Gaotian, Sanzhuan," and said with a sigh:,  punished four murderers, but only exiled them. Why is the modern legal network so strict? He said to the prime minister: In the Five Dynasties period, the princes were arrogant, and the imperial court did not ask about those who killed people illegally; human life is very important, and the towns and villages were indulgent. Should it be like this?

古文：自今诸州决大辟，录案闻奏，付刑部覆视之。 
现代文：自现在开始各州判处犯人死刑的，要记录好案情上奏朝廷，交给刑部重新审查复核。 
English: From now on, when the states sentence a prisoner to death, they should record the case and report it to the imperial court, and submit it to the criminal department for re-examination and review.

古文：遂著为令。
现代文：于是立为法令。
English: It was then passed into law.

古文：乾德改元，先谕宰相曰： 年号须择前代所未有者。 
现代文：乾德改年号，太祖事先告诉宰相说： 年号必须选择以前朝代没有使用过的文辞。 
English: When Emperor Qiande changed the name of the year, the great-grandfather told the prime minister in advance: The name of the year must be chosen from words that have not been used in previous dynasties.

古文：三年，蜀平，蜀宫人入内，帝见其镜背有志 乾德四年铸 者，召窦仪等诘之。
现代文：乾德三年，后蜀平定，后蜀宫女来到太祖内宫，太祖看到她们使用的铜镜背后铸有 乾德四年铸 这样的文字，把窦仪等人召来查问这件事。
English: Qiande three years, after Shu Pingding, after Shu palace maidens came to the inner palace of the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather saw that the bronze mirror they used had the words "Qiande four years of casting" behind it, and summoned Dou Yi and others to investigate the matter.

古文：仪对曰： 此必蜀物，蜀主尝有此号。 
现代文：窦仪回答说： 这一定是前蜀的东西，前蜀皇帝曾经使用过这个年号。 
English: Dou Yi replied: This must be something from the former Shu, the former Shu emperor once used this year.

古文：乃大喜曰： 作相须读书人。 
现代文：太祖于是很高兴地说： 担任宰相的还应该是读书人。 
English: The great-grandfather was pleased and said, "A prime minister should also be a reader."

古文：由是大重儒者。
现代文：自此以后十分器重读书人。
English: Since then, I've become a very serious reader.

古文：受命杜太后，传位太宗。
现代文：太祖接受杜太后之命，把皇位传给太宗。
English: Emperor Taizu accepted Empress Dowager Du's order to pass the imperial throne to Emperor Taizong.

古文：太宗尝病亟，帝往视之，亲为灼艾，太宗觉痛，帝亦取艾自灸。
现代文：太宗曾经病得很重，太祖前去看望他，亲自为太宗用艾草灼烧穴位，太宗感到疼痛，太祖也拿艾草烧灼自己的穴位。
English: Emperor Taizong was once seriously ill. Emperor Taizu went to visit him and personally used wormwood to burn the acupoints for Emperor Taizong. Emperor Taizong felt pain, and Emperor Taizu also used wormwood to burn his own acupoints.

古文：每对近臣言： 太宗龙行虎步，生时有异，他日必为太平天子，福德吾所不及云。 
现代文：他经常对左右亲近大臣们说： 太宗龙行虎步，出生时有奇异的现象发生，以后一定成为太平天子，论福分我不及他。 
English: He often said to his close ministers on both sides: Taizong is a dragon and walks in the footsteps of a tiger. A strange phenomenon occurred when he was born. He will surely become the Taiping Heavenly Son in the future. In terms of fortune, I am not as good as him.

古文：赞曰：昔者尧、舜以禅代，汤、武以征伐，皆南面而有天下。
现代文：评论说：过去唐尧、虞舜因为禅让，商汤、周武因为征伐，都面南背北而有天下。
English: He commented: In the past, Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan ruled the world because of Zen Zhan, and Shang Tang and Zhou Wu ruled the world because of conquest.

古文：四圣人者往，世道升降，否泰推移。
现代文：四位圣人之后，世道升降，否极泰来。
English: After the four sages, the world is ascending and descending.

古文：当斯民涂炭之秋，皇天眷求民主，亦惟责其济斯世而已。
现代文：正当百姓灾难困苦的时刻，皇天顾视而求的百姓主人，也仅要求他能救助这个世界而已。
English: At the time of the people's calamity and hardship, Emperor Tian, the people's master, only asked him to save the world.

古文：使其必得四圣人之才，而后以其行事畀之，则生民平治之期，殆无日也。
现代文：假如一定要求他具备四位圣人一样的才能，而后才把天下事务交给他处理，那么百姓盼望平定治理的日子，大概遥遥无期了。
English: If he is required to have the same talent as the four saints, and then the affairs of the world are handed over to him to deal with, then the day when the people hope for peaceful governance is probably far away.

古文：五季乱极，宋太祖起介胄之中，践九五之位，原其得国，视晋、汉、周亦岂甚相绝哉？
现代文：五代时期天下极为混乱，宋太祖从行伍起家，登上皇帝的宝座，推究他取得国家的根源，比晋、汉、周又难道有什么独一无二的条件吗？
English: During the Five Dynasties period, the world was extremely chaotic. Song Taizu started his career in the military and ascended to the throne of the emperor. Investigate the roots of his acquisition of the country. Are there any unique conditions compared to Jin, Han, and Zhou?

古文：及其发号施令，名藩大将，俯首听命，四方列国，次第削平，此非人力所易致也。
现代文：等到他发号施令，著名的藩镇大将，俯首听命，四方诸侯列国，依次削平，这不是人力容易做到的。
English: Wait until he gives the order, the famous general of the clan and town will bow down and obey, and the four provinces and provinces of the country will be flattened in turn, which is not easy to do by manpower.

古文：建隆以来，释藩镇兵权，绳赃吏重法，以塞浊乱之源。州郡司牧，下至令录、幕职，躬自引对。务农兴学，慎罚薄敛，与世休息，迄于丕平。治定功成，制礼作乐。
现代文：建隆以来，解除藩镇兵权，用重法绳治贪官污吏，以堵塞混乱的根源；上自州郡长吏、下到令录、幕职官，亲自接见问对；专力农业，振兴学校，慎重刑罚、减轻赋敛，给全国休养生息，终于获得太平；治定功成之后，制礼作乐。
English: Since Jianlong, he has removed the military power of the domain and town, used the heavy law to deal with corrupt officials to plug the root cause of chaos; from the state and county governors, down to the record of orders, the officials of the shogunate, he personally received and questioned; concentrated on agriculture, revitalized schools, carefully punished, mitigated and restrained, and gave the whole country rest and recuperation, and finally achieved peace; after the success of the treatment, the system of etiquette made music.

古文：在位十有七年之间，而三百余载之基，传之子孙，世有典则。
现代文：太祖在位十七年时间，而把宋朝三百多年的基业，传给了子孙，世代有了常典法则。
English: The great-grandfather reigned for seventeen years, and passed on the Song Dynasty's more than three hundred years of heritage to his children and grandchildren, and the generation had a canon law.

古文：遂使三代而降，考论声明文物之治，道德仁义之风，宋于汉、唐，盖无让焉。
现代文：即使从三代以下，考评声教文明、典章制度之治，道德仁义之风，宋代和汉、唐相比，也没有什么可以逊让之处。
English: Even from the third generation and below, the evaluation of the civilization of sound doctrine, the rule of the award system, the style of morality and benevolence, the Song Dynasty and the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, there is nothing to be inferior.

古文：乌呼，创业垂统之君，规模若是，亦可谓远也已矣！
现代文：鸣呼，创基业垂统绪的帝王，规模如宋太祖这样，也可以说影响很深远的啊！
English: The emperor who created the foundation and unified the country, the scale of which is like that of Song Taizu, can also be said to have a profound influence!

