古文：杨镳张璟崔从事王审知张怀武李玫赵瑜关承湍妻李冰祠郑君雄
现代文：杨镳张璟崔从事王审知张怀武李玫赵瑜关承湍妻李冰祠郑君雄
English: Yang Jie Zhang Jie Cui Engaged in Wang Jianchi Zhang Huaiwu Li Mei Zhao Yu Guan Succession to His Wife Li Bingzhi Zheng Junxiong

古文：钟离王祠盘古祠狄仁杰祠葛氏妇马希声庞式
现代文：钟离王祠盘古祠狄仁杰祠葛氏妇马希声庞式
English: Zhongli Wang Ancestral Hall Pan Ancient Ancestral Hall Di Renjie Ancestral Hall Ge's wife Ma Xisheng Pang style

古文：杨镳
现代文：杨镳
English: by Yang Hui

古文：唐杨镳，相国收之子，少年为江西从事。
现代文：杨镳是唐相国杨收的儿子。年轻时当过江西从事。
English: Yang Xuan is the son of Yang Jie of Tang Dynasty China. When he was young, he worked as a carpenter in Jiangxi Province.

古文：秋祭大孤神，镳悦神像之容，偶以言戏之。
现代文：秋天去庙里祭祀大孤神。看见女神像的容貌很美，就对神像说了不敬的玩笑话。
English: In autumn, he went to a temple to offer sacrifices to the Great Solitary God. Seeing that the statue of the goddess was very beautiful, he made an irreverent joke about the statue.

古文：祭毕回舟，而见空中云雾，有一女子，容质甚丽，诣镳，呼为杨郎，云：家姊多幸，蒙杨郎采顾，便希回桡，以成礼也，故来奉迎。
现代文：祭祀完毕坐船回去，忽然看见空中云雾里有一个容貌很好的女子来见他，称他为杨郎，并说，我的姐姐能被杨郎看上，感到荣幸。希望你把船摇回去，好举行婚礼。
English: After the ritual, he went back on the boat. Suddenly, he saw a beautiful woman coming out of the clouds in the sky to meet him. She called him Yang Lang and said, "I am honored that my sister can be favored by Yang Lang. I hope you will rock the boat back so that the wedding can take place."

古文：镳惊怪，乃曰：前言戏之耳。
现代文：杨镳又惊又奇怪，就说，我刚才只不过开了个玩笑。
English: Surprised and puzzled, Yang Xuan said, "I was just joking."

古文：神女曰：家姊本无意辄慕君子，而杨郎先自发言。
现代文：神女说，我姐姐根本没有倾慕你的意思，是你先向我姐姐求的婚。
English: The goddess said, "My sister didn't want to fall in love with you at all. You asked my sister to marry you first."

古文：苟或中辍，立恐不利于君。
现代文：如果你说了不算，马上就会对你不利！
English: If you say it doesn't count, it will be used against you immediately!

古文：镳不得已，遂诺之。希从容一月，处理家事。
现代文：杨镳不得已，只好答应了婚事，但是向神女请求能给一个月的时间，回去处理家事。
English: As a last resort, Yang Lu had no choice but to agree to the marriage, but she asked the goddess to give her one month to go back and take care of the housework.

古文：归家理命讫，仓卒而卒，似有鬼神迎也。
现代文：于是杨镳回到家里，刚刚把家事料理完，就突然死去。
English: So Yang Hui returned home, and just after finishing the housework and cooking, he suddenly died.

古文：补阙薛泽，与镳有姻，尝言此事甚详。
现代文：补阙薛泽，是杨镳的姻亲，他讲这件事说得十分详细。
English: Xue Ze, a relative by marriage of Yang Hui, told the story in great detail.

古文：近者故登州节度判官史在德郎中，子光泽，甚聪俊，方修举业。
现代文：又有个原任邓州节度判官的史在德郎中，有个儿子叫史光泽，十分聪慧英俊。
English: There was also a son of Shi Guangze, the former judge of the Dengzhou Festival, who was very intelligent and handsome.

古文：自别墅归，乘醉入泰山庙，谓神曰：与神做第三儿可乎？
现代文：有一天光泽从学馆里读完书回家，喝醉了酒进了泰山庙，对泰山神像说，我给泰山神作三儿子，怎么样？
English: One day, after reading a book at school, she came home drunk and entered the temple of Mount Tai. She said to the statue of Mount Tai, "How about making me the third son of Mount Tai?"

古文：自是归家精神恍惚，似有召之者，逾月而卒。
现代文：回到家后，光泽就变得精神恍惚，好像有人召去他的魂。过了一个月就死了。
English: After returning home, Sheen became delirious, as if someone had summoned his soul. He died a month later.

古文：张璟
现代文：张璟
English: Zhang Ye

古文：庐山书生张璟，乾宁中，以所业之桂州。
现代文：庐山书生张璟，乾宁年间凭着自己的学业到桂州谋职。
English: Zhang Yao, a student from Lushan, and Qian Ning went to Guizhou to look for a job during their studies.

古文：至衡州犬嗥滩，损船上岸，寝于江庙，为神所责。
现代文：船到衡州犬嗥滩坏了，只好上岸，睡在江边的一个庙里。
English: The boat to Hengzhou Yunnan beach broke down, so I had to go ashore and sleep in a temple by the river.

古文：璟以素业对之，神为改容。延坐从容，云：有巫立仁者，罪合族，庙神为理之于岳神，无人作奏。
现代文：庙里的神责备他不该贸然闯进庙里住宿，张璟就以所学课业回答他，神就高兴了，请他坐下，并说，有个叫巫立仁的，犯了该灭族的罪，我想替他到岳神那儿据理申诉，但没人给我写状子。
English: The god in the temple reproached him for not rushing into the temple to stay, and Zhang Ye answered him with his schoolwork. The god was pleased and asked him to sit down. He said that there was a man named Wuliren who had committed the crime of exterminating the people. I wanted to go to his father-in-law to make a reasoned appeal on his behalf, but no one wrote me a letter.

古文：璟为草之，既奏，岳神许之，庙神喜，以白全十鉼为赠。
现代文：张璟就为庙神写了状子。状子递上去后，岳神准了，庙神非常高兴，拿出十块白金赠给张璟。
English: Zhang Ye wrote a petition for the god of the temple. After the petition was submitted, Yue Shen agreed, and the god of the temple was very happy and gave Zhang Ye ten pieces of platinum.

古文：刘山甫与校书郎廖隙。亲见璟说其事甚详。
现代文：刘山甫和校书郎廖隙，亲自见过张璟，他们说这个事说得很详细。
English: Liu Shanfu and school teacher Liao Jie have personally met Zhang Ye, and they said that this matter is very detailed.

古文：崔从事
现代文：崔从事
English: Cui engaged in

古文：福建崔从事，忘其名，正直检身，幕府所重。
现代文：福建有位姓崔的从事，忘了他叫什么名。为人正直做事检点，幕府很器重他。
English: In Fujian, there was a man by the name of Cui. I forget his name, but he was very respected by the shogunate for his honesty.

古文：奉使湖湘，复命，在道遇贼。同行皆死，唯崔仓惶中，忽有人引路获免。
现代文：有一次他奉命到湖湘去公干，办完公事回去交差，路上遇到了强盗，一起的人都被强盗杀了，而崔从事却在仓惶奔逃中，忽然遇见一个人给他指路，才幸免于难。
English: Once he was ordered to go to Hunan to do business. After finishing his business, he went back to the crossroads. On the way, he encountered robbers. All the people together were killed by the robbers. While Cui was running away in a panic, he suddenly met a person to show him the way, and he survived.

古文：中途复患疟疾，求药无所。途次延平津庙，梦为药神赐药三丸，服之，惊觉顿愈。
现代文：后来在途中又得了疟疾病，无处求医，住在延平河神庙里，梦见庙神给了他三个药丸，吃下以后，惊醒了，病也好了。
English: Later, on the way, he got malaria again and had nowhere to seek medical treatment. He lived in the Yanping River God Temple. He dreamed that the god of the temple gave him three pills. After he ate them, he woke up and his illness was cured.

古文：彭城刘山甫自云，外族李敬彝为郎中，宅在东都毓财坊，土地最灵。
现代文：彭城刘山甫自己说，他的亲戚李敬彝当郎中，家住东都毓财坊，那里的土地神非常灵。
English: Pengcheng Liu Shanfu himself said that his relative, Li Jingyao, was one of his sons, and lived in Dongduan Zaifang, where the land god was very spiritual.

古文：家人张行周，事之有应。
现代文：他家的仆人叫张行周，每次求土地神都能灵验。
English: The servant of his family is called Zhang Xingzhou, and every time he asks the earth god, he is successful.

古文：未大水前，预梦告张，求饮食。
现代文：有一次发大水之前，土地神托梦告诉了张行周，并向他要吃的东西。
English: Once, before a big flood, the land god Tong Meng told Zhang Xingzhou and told him what to eat.

古文：至其日，率其类遏水头，并不冲圮李宅。
现代文：洪水到来的那天，土地神领着人堵住水头，洪水就没有冲毁李家的宅院。
English: On the day of the flood, the land god led people to block the head of the water, and the flood did not destroy the Li family's house.

古文：王审知
现代文：王审知
English: Wang Xizhi

古文：福州海口黄碕岸，横石免巉峭，常为舟楫之患。
现代文：福州海口的黄碕岸一带，怪石嶙峋，是海上行船的一大障碍。
English: The area around the coast of Huangyan in Haikou, Fuzhou, with its strange rock formations, is a major obstacle to maritime navigation.

古文：王审知为福建观察使，思欲制置，惮于役力。
现代文：王审知在福建当观察使的时候，打算好好解决一下，但苦于人力不足。
English: When Wang Xizhi was an observation envoy in Fujian, he intended to solve the problem properly, but suffered from a shortage of manpower.

古文：乾宁中，因梦金甲神，自称吴安王，许助开凿。
现代文：乾宁年间，他梦见一个穿铠甲的大神，自称是吴安王，答应帮助解决这个困难的工程后。
English: During Qianning's lifetime, he dreamed of a great god in armor, who claimed to be Wu An Wang, and promised to help solve this difficult project.

古文：及觉，言于宾寮。因命判官刘山甫往设祭，祭未终，海内灵怪俱见。
现代文：梦醒后，他把这事说给客人和下属，并派判官刘山甫前去祭祀金甲神。祭祀还没结束，忽然看见海上浮起了许多水怪。
English: After he woke up from his dream, he told his guests and subordinates about this, and sent the judge Liu Shanfu to sacrifice to the Golden Armor God. Before the sacrifice was over, he suddenly saw many water monsters floating in the sea.

古文：山甫息于僧院，凭高观之。
现代文：当时刘山甫在庙里休息，就登高观望。
English: At that time, Liu Shanfu was resting in the temple and climbed up to watch.

古文：风雷暴兴，见一物，非鱼非龙，鳞黄鬣赤。
现代文：只见海上风雷滚滚，有一个水怪，既不是鱼也不是龙，黄鳞红须。
English: I saw the storm rolling in the sea. There was a water monster, neither fish nor dragon, with yellow scales and red whiskers.

古文：凡三日，风雷乃霁。
现代文：这样过了三天，风停云开。
English: After three days of this, all hell broke loose.

古文：已别开一港，甚便行旅。
现代文：一看已经另外开出一个港弯，行船非常方便。
English: At a glance, a separate port bend has been opened, which is very convenient for sailing.

古文：驿表以闻，赐号甘棠港。闽从事刘山甫，乃中朝旧族也，著《金溪闲谈》十二卷，具载其事。
现代文：在福建当从事的刘山甫，是本朝的旧族，他写的《金溪闲读》十二卷，其中记载着这件事。
English: Liu Shanfu, who was engaged in Fujian at the time, was an old member of this dynasty. He wrote "Jinxi idle reading" in twelve volumes, in which he recorded this event.

古文：张怀武
现代文：张怀武
English: Zhang Huayu

古文：南平王钟傅，镇江西。遣道士沈太虚，祷庐山九天使者庙。
现代文：南平王钟傅镇守江西时，曾派道士沈太虚到庐山的九天神庙祭礼。
English: When King Zhongfu of Nanping was in charge of the western part of Jiangxi Province, he sent the Taoist Shen Taihu to attend the Nine Devas Temple Festival in Lushan.

古文：太虚醮罢，夜坐廊庑间。
现代文：沈太虚祭祀完了。晚上坐在庙的偏厦里，恍恍然像在做梦。
English: In the evening, sitting in a side building of the temple, I felt like I was dreaming.

古文：怳然若梦，见壁画一人，前揖太虚曰：身张怀武也，常为将军。
现代文：只见墙上的画中有一个人向他施礼说：我的真身是张怀武，曾经在军伍中做过将军。
English: One of the people in the painting on the wall bowed to him and said, "My true identity is Zhang Huaiwu. I was once a general in the army."

古文：上帝以微有阴功及物，今配此庙为灵官。
现代文：上天因为我曾积过些阴功救助了他人，所以让我在这个庙里当灵官。
English: Because I had accumulated some yin gong and helped others, God let me work as a mortician in this temple.

古文：既寤，起视壁画，署曰五百灵官。太虚归，以语进士沈彬。
现代文：太虚道士醒后，起来细看壁画，见画上写的画题是五百灵官，太虚道士回来后，把这事说给进士沈彬。
English: After waking up, the Taoist monk Tai Hui got up and carefully looked at the mural. He saw that the theme written on the painting was the Five Hundred Spiritual Officers. After the Taoist monk Tai Hui returned, he told this to the priest Shen Bin.

古文：彬后二十年，游澧陵，县令陆生客之。
现代文：二十年后，沈彬到澧陵游玩，县令陆生请他作客宴饮。
English: Twenty years later, Shen Bin went to Fuling to play, and the county magistrate Lu Sheng invited him to a banquet.

古文：方食，有军吏许生后至，语及张怀武，彬因问之。
现代文：刚要开宴。有位军官许生也来赴宴。在席间，许生提到了张怀武，引起沈彬的注意，沈彬就问张怀武到底是什么人。
English: The banquet was about to begin. An officer named Xu Sheng also came to the banquet. During the meal, Xu Sheng mentioned Zhang Huaiwu, which attracted Shen Bin's attention. Shen Bin then asked who Zhang Huaiwu really was.

古文：许曰：怀武者，蔡之裨将，某之长史也。
现代文：许生说：张怀武原是蔡州部队里的一名副将，也曾是我的长史。
English: Xu Sheng said: Zhang Huaiwu was a vice-general in the Caizhou army, and he was also my long history.

古文：顷甲辰年大饥，闻预章独稔。
现代文：甲辰那年蔡州闹饥荒，部队断了粮。
English: In the year of Jia Chen, there was a famine in Caizhou, and the troops ran out of food.

古文：即与一他将，各率共属奔预章。
现代文：听说预章那边庄稼收成好，张怀武就和另外一个将军各自率领着自己的部队奔预章去就食。
English: Hearing that the crops had a good harvest on the other side of the forecastle, Zhang Huaiwu and another general each led their own troops to rush to the forecastle to eat.

古文：既即路，两军稍不相能。
现代文：上路以后，两支部队各不相让，发生了矛盾。
English: After going on the road, the two forces did not concede to each other, and a conflict occurred.

古文：比至五昌，一隙大构。克日将决战，禁之不可。
现代文：走到五昌地方，两支部队的矛盾更激烈了，为了一件小事互不相让，眼看就要火拼决战，带兵的统帅也压服不了。
English: When they got to the Wuchang area, the conflict between the two forces became more intense. They wouldn't give in to each other for a small matter, and it looked like they were going to fight a decisive battle. Even the commander with the soldiers couldn't be convinced.

古文：怀武乃携剑上戌楼，去其梯，谓其徒曰： 吾与汝今日之行，非有他图，直救性命耳。
现代文：张怀武就带着宝剑登上城楼，撤去了梯子，对城下他的部队说： 这次我带你们出来并没有任何别的图谋，是为了让大家不要饿死。
English: Zhang Huaiwu went up to the castle tower with his sword, removed the ladder, and said to his troops below the castle: This time I brought you out without any other plan, so that everyone would not starve to death.

古文：奈何不忍小忿，而相攻战。
现代文：可是你们不能克制忍受一些小的矛盾，竟要去和另一支部队拚杀。
English: But you can't handle a few minor disagreements, so you pick a fight with another army.

古文：夫战，必疆者伤而弱者亡。
现代文：如果真打起来，必然是强者伤弱者亡，两败俱伤。
English: If a real fight breaks out, it is inevitable that the strong will hurt the weak and the weak will die, and both will lose.

古文：如是则何以去父母之国，而死于道路耶？
现代文：这样将来还怎么回到家乡见自己的父母乡亲，只能惨死在道路旁。
English: In this way, how can I return to my hometown in the future to see my parents and countrymen, only to die miserably on the side of the road.

古文：凡两军所以致争者，以有怀武故也。
现代文：现在两支部队相争，是因为有我张怀武。
English: Now the two forces are fighting, because I have Zhang Huaiwu.

古文：今为汝等死，两军为一。
现代文：我现在决定为你们而死。我死后，两支军队必然会合而为一，就不会再继续闹矛盾了。
English: Now I have decided to die for you. After my death, the two armies will inevitably meet and become one, and there will be no more conflict.

古文：无构难也。
现代文：说罢，就拔出剑来自杀了。
English: After saying this, he pulled out his sword and killed himself.

古文：遂自刎，于是两军之士，皆伏楼下恸哭。遂相与和亲，比及预章，无一逃亡者。
现代文：城楼下的两支部队的士兵都趴在城楼下痛哭失声，从此合成一支部队，亲密友好，一起开到了预章，没有一个人逃亡。
English: The soldiers of the two units under the castle all lay down crying their eyes out under the castle. From then on, they formed a unit, were close and friendly, and went to the preliminary chapter together. Not a single person fled.

古文：许但怀其旧恩，亦不知灵官之事，彬因述记，以申明之。
现代文：许生当时是张怀武的部属，对张怀武怀着深深的感恩之情，他并不知张怀武死后当了庙中灵官的事。沈彬把这件事记述下来，希望能让人们明白真相。
English: Xu Sheng was a subordinate of Zhang Huaiwu at that time, and he was deeply grateful to Zhang Huaiwu. He did not know that Zhang Huaiwu became a spiritual officer in the temple after his death. Shen Bin recorded this matter, hoping to let people understand the truth.

古文：岂天意将感发死义之事，故以肸蚃告人乎？
现代文：这件事难道不是充分说明，上天也为仁人义士的作为所感动，因而才不让他们默默无闻吗？
English: Doesn't this matter fully illustrate that God is also moved by the deeds of the benevolent and righteous, and thus does not let them go unnoticed?

古文：李玫
现代文：李玫
English: Li Mei

古文：天祐初，舒州有仓官李玫，自言少时有病，遂见鬼，为人言祸福，多中。
现代文：天祐初年，舒州有个管仓库的官叫李玫。说他小时得了一次病之后就能见到鬼。
English: In the first year of Tianyu, there was an official in charge of a warehouse in Shuzhou named Li Mei. He said that he was able to see a ghost after getting sick once.

古文：淮南大将张颢，专废立之权，威振中外。
现代文：从此李玫为别人说祸福方面的事都说得很准。当时淮南大将张颢大权在握，甚至可以左右皇帝的废和立，不论宫廷内和外界都怕他的权势。
English: From then on, Li Mei was very accurate in telling others about misfortunes and blessings. At that time, Zhang Ye, the general of Huainan, held great power and could even influence the emperor's abdication and enthronement. Both inside and outside the court were afraid of his power.

古文：玫时宿于灊山司命真君庙。翌日，与道士崔繟然数人，将入城。
现代文：李玫有一次住在灊山的司命真君庙里，第二天，和道士崔繟然等回城里去。
English: Once, Li Mei stayed at the Shimen Zhenjun Temple in Lushan. The next day, she went back to the city with Taoist priest Cui Yulan.

古文：去庙数里，忽止同行于道侧，自映大树以窥之。
现代文：离开司命真君庙几里地时，李玫忽然让同行的人赶快停在道旁，他自己躲在一棵树后偷看，过了很久才出来。
English: When he was a few miles away from the Shimin Zhenjun Temple, Li Mei suddenly asked his companions to quickly stop by the side of the road. He himself hid behind a tree and peeked out. It was a long time before he came out.

古文：良久乃行，繟然曰：复见鬼耶？
现代文：繟然道士问他，是不是又看见鬼了？
English: Suddenly, the priest asked him if he had seen the ghost again.

古文：曰：向见一人，桎梏甚严，吏卒数十人卫之，向庙而去，是必为真君考召也。
现代文：李玫说，是的。我刚才看见一个人，披枷戴锁，被几十个人押着直奔真君庙而去，大概是被真君召去拷问审判了。
English: Li Mei said, "Yes. Just now, I saw a man, shackled and chained, being pushed by dozens of people straight to Zhenjun Temple. He was probably summoned by Zhenjun for interrogation and trial."

古文：虽意气尚在，已不自免矣。
现代文：看那戴枷的人还挺不在乎，但是绝对难免一死的。
English: The man in the shackles doesn't seem to care, but he's going to die anyway.

古文：或问为谁，久之乃肯言曰：张颢也。
现代文：大家问他是谁，他半天之后才说，就是那权势极大的淮南大将张颢。
English: Everyone asked him who he was, and it took him half a day to say that it was the very powerful Huainan general Zhang Xuan.

古文：闻者皆惧，共秘之，不旬日而闻颢诛。
现代文：大家一听都非常害怕，互相说好决不敢泄露出去。果然，不到十天就传来张颢被杀的消息。
English: Everyone was very scared when they heard about it, and they promised each other that they would never dare to leak it. Sure enough, less than ten days later, the news of Zhang Ye's murder came.

古文：李宗造开元寺成，大会文武僧道于寺中。
现代文：还有一次，李宗建造开元寺竣工以后，在寺里召集了很多文武僧道聚会。
English: On another occasion, after the completion of Li Zong's construction of Kaiyuan Temple, he convened a number of gatherings of scholars and monks in the temple.

古文：既罢，玫复谓繟然曰：向坐中有客，为二吏固揖之而去，是不久矣。
现代文：聚会结束后，李玫又对繟然道士说，我刚才看见有一个客人被两个阴间的官员给请走了，看样那位客人是活不了多久了。
English: After the party, Li Mei said to the Taoist monk, I just saw a guest being asked to leave by two officials from the underworld. It looks like that guest won't live long.

古文：言其衣服容貌，则团练巡官陈绛也。
现代文：听李玫描述那被请走的客人的相貌服饰，是当团练巡官的陈绛。
English: Listening to Li Mei describe the appearance and clothing of the guest who was asked to leave, it was Chen Xing, who was a group training inspector.

古文：不数日，绛暴疾卒。
现代文：果然，没过几天，陈绛得了急病而死。
English: Sure enough, a few days later, Chen Yao suddenly fell ill and died.

古文：道士邵修默，崔之弟子，视见之。
现代文：繟然道士的弟子邵修默道士，亲眼看见过这件事。
English: Taoist disciple Shao Xiu Miao, a disciple of the Taoist, has seen this with his own eyes.

古文：赵瑜
现代文：赵瑜
English: Zhao Yu

古文：明经赵瑜，鲁人，累举不第，困厄甚。
现代文：秀才赵瑜是山东人，参加会考几次都没考中。
English: Talented Zhao Yu is from Shandong Province. She failed the entrance examination several times.

古文：因游太山，祈死于岳庙。
现代文：由于十分穷困。活不下去了。就去游览太山，向岳庙中的神求死。
English: Since he was very poor, he couldn't go on living. So he went to visit Mount Tai and asked the god in the mountain temple to let him die.

古文：将出门，忽有小吏自后至曰：判官召。
现代文：刚走出庙门，忽然有一个小官员在身后喊他说，阴间的判官召你去一趟。
English: As soon as he stepped out of the temple gate, a minor official suddenly shouted behind him, "The judge of the underworld is calling you for a visit."

古文：随之而去。
现代文：赵瑜就跟着走。
English: Zhao Yu followed suit.

古文：奄至一厅事，帘中有人云：人所重者生，君何为祈死？
现代文：来到一个大厅上，听见门帘子后面有人说，人们都十分看重生命，你怎么偏要求死呢？
English: I came to a hall and heard someone behind the door curtain say that people value life very much, so why do you want to die?

古文：对曰：瑜应乡荐，累举不第。
现代文：赵瑜说，我参加会考，几次都考不中。
English: Zhao Yu said, "I took the entrance examination and failed several times.

古文：退无躬耕之资，湮厄贫病。
现代文：连回家种田的钱都没有，又贫病交加。
English: They don't even have money to go back home to farm, and they are poor and sick.

古文：无复生意，故祈死耳。
现代文：实在活不下去了，所以才求死。
English: I really can't go on living, that's why I want to die.

古文：至门外，空中飘大桐叶至瑜前，视之，乃书巴豆丸方于其上，亦与人间之方正同。
现代文：过了半天，只听见帘子里传来翻查簿子的声音，然后帘里的人又说，已经给你查过了，你这一辈子既不能中榜也不能作官，这是你命中注定的。但是我打算帮你一把，送给你一个药方。这个药方可以使你有吃有穿，但你不能靠药方广置家产，否则，你就还得受穷。去吧。
English: After half a day, I only heard the sound of someone rummaging through a book in the curtain, and then the person in the curtain said, "I've already checked it for you, you can neither get into the list nor become an official in this lifetime, this is your fate. But I'm going to help you, give you a prescription. This prescription can keep you fed and clothed, but you can't rely on the prescription to build up your household wealth, otherwise, you'll still be poor. Go ahead."

古文：瑜遂自称前长水令，卖药于夷门市。
现代文：于是赵瑜就自称过去当过长水县令，在街上摆摊卖药。
English: As a result, Zhao Yu claimed to have been a magistrate of Changshui County in the past and set up a stall to sell drugs on the street.

古文：饵其药者，病无不愈，获利甚多。
现代文：吃了他药的人，病都能治好，他也得了不少钱。
English: Anyone who took his medicine was cured, and he made a lot of money.

古文：道士李德阳，亲见其桐叶，已十余年，尚如新。
现代文：道士李德阳，曾亲眼看见过赵瑜的那片桐叶。虽然已经十多年了，桐叶还象新的一样。
English: The Taoist priest Li Deyang once saw Zhao Yu's piece of paulownia with his own eyes. Although it has been more than ten years, the paulownia leaf is still like new.

古文：关承湍妻
现代文：关承湍妻
English: Guan Cheng's wife

古文：青城县岷江暴涨，漂垫民居。
现代文：青城县的岷江发大水，淹没了不少房屋。
English: The Lijiang River in Qingcheng County has flooded, inundating many houses.

古文：县民关承湍妻计氏，有孩提子在怀抱，乃上木柜，为骇浪推漾大江。唯见赤帻佩刀者，洎朱衣秉简者，安存之，令洎县溉植。
现代文：县民关承湍的妻子计氏，抱着个孩子伏在一个木柜上，被大浪推到洪水中，她看见一个戴红头巾佩腰刀的人和一个穿红衣手拿竹板的人在水上稳站着，保护着并说叫到县城护城河去。
English: The wife of Guan Chengyong, a resident of the county, was holding a child on a wooden cabinet and was pushed into the flood by a large wave. She saw a man wearing a red bandana and a waist knife and a man in a red coat holding a bamboo board standing firmly on the water, protecting and calling to the county moat.

古文：乃随流泛泛，至县溉，为舟子迎拯而出，子母无恙。
现代文：于是木柜随水漂行，漂到护城河后被划船的救出来，母子都很平安。
English: As a result, the wooden cabinet drifted with the water, and after drifting to the moat, it was rescued by a rowing boat, and both mother and child were safe.

古文：李冰祠
现代文：李冰祠
English: Li Bing Ancestral Hall

古文：天祐七年夏，成都大雨，江涨，坏京口江灌堰上。
现代文：天祐七年夏天，成都下大雨，岷江猛涨，势将冲毁京口江的护江大堤。
English: In the summer of the seventh year of Tianyu, Chengdu had heavy rain, and the Lijiang River surged, threatening to wash away the large river embankment of the Jingkou River.

古文：夜闻呼噪之声，千百人，炬无数，风暴雨而火影不灭。
现代文：这天夜里，人们都听见江上传来一片呐喊呼叫的声音，好像江中有好几千人。还看见江上有无数火把，虽然大雨如注火把仍不熄灭。
English: That night, people all heard the sound of cormorants crying out from the river, as if there were several thousand people in the river. They also saw countless torches on the river, although the heavy rain did not extinguish the torches.

古文：及明，堰移数百丈，堰水入新津江。
现代文：天明一看，大堤已移动了几百丈，洪水流入了新津江。
English: At first glance, the levee had moved several hundred feet, and the floodwaters flowed into the Xinjin River.

古文：李阳冰祠中所立旗帜皆湿。
现代文：李阳冰的祠庙中，神像两边的旗帜都是湿的。
English: In Li Yangbing's ancestral temple, the flags on both sides of the statues are wet.

古文：是时，津嘉眉水害尤多，京江不加溢焉。
现代文：此时，新津嘉眉一带常常闹水灾，但京江却没有泛滥。
English: At this time, floods often occurred around Xinjin Jiamei, but the Jingjiang River did not flood.

古文：郑君雄
现代文：郑君雄
English: Zheng Junxiong

古文：郑君雄为遂州刺史，一日晚，忽见兵士数千人，在水东灞内，旗帜弋甲，人物喧闹，与军行无异。
现代文：郑君雄在遂州当刺史时，有天晚上，忽然看见灞水东面大堤里开来好几千军队，旗帜刀枪齐备，一片人声喧哗，和行军一模一样。
English: When Zheng Junxiong was making history in Suizhou, one night, he suddenly saw several thousand troops coming out of the dike on the east side of Surabaya, with flags, swords and guns, and a din of human voices, exactly the same as a march.

古文：不敢诘问，警备而已。
现代文：郑君雄不敢去问，只是密切监视着。
English: Zheng Junxiong did not dare to ask, but just watched closely.

古文：未晓，密侦之，大军已去，只三五人在后。
现代文：天快亮的时候，派人偷偷侦察，大军已经撤走，只有落在后面的三五个人。
English: When it was almost dawn, they sent someone to secretly investigate. The large army had already withdrawn, and only three or five people remained behind.

古文：侦者问之，曰：江囗神也。
现代文：侦察的人问，他们说：我们是江神的队伍。
English: The scouts asked, and they said, "We are Jiang Sheng's team."

古文：数年川府不安，移在峡内。今远近安矣，却归川中。
现代文：四川前几年大乱，我们随江神转移到峡内，现在那边安定了，我们就回四川去了。
English: Sichuan was in turmoil a few years ago, and we followed the river god into the gorge. Now that things have stabilized there, we went back to Sichuan.

古文：复视之，有下营及火幕踪迹，一一可验焉。
现代文：再仔细看，地上有安营扎寨和生火的踪迹，而且看得十分清楚。
English: If you look closely, you can see the traces of camp and fire on the ground, and they are very clear.

古文：钟离王祠
现代文：钟离王祠
English: Zhongli Wang Ancestral Hall

古文：遂州东岸唐村，云，昔有一人，衣大袖，戴古冠帻，立于道左。语村人曰：我钟离王也。
现代文：遂州东岸有个唐村，村里传说当年曾有一个人，穿着宽袖的袍子，戴着古代人的头巾，站在道旁，对村里人说：我是钟离王。
English: There is a Tang village on the east coast of Suizhou. According to the village legend, there was once a man, dressed in a wide-sleeved robe and wearing an ancient headscarf, who stood by the roadside and said to the villagers: I am Zhong Li Wang.

古文：旧有神在下流十余里，因水摧损。今像溯流而止，将至矣。汝可于此为我立庙。
现代文：我的庙在河的上游十几里地，因为大水把庙冲毁，我的神像逆流而上，马上就要到了，你们可以在这里给我盖个庙。
English: My temple is in the upper reaches of the river, more than ten miles away. Because the flood destroyed the temple, my statues are floating upstream. They will be here soon. You can build a temple for me here.

古文：村人诣江视之，得一木人，长数尺，遂于所见处立庙，号唐村神。
现代文：村里人跑到河上去看，果然顺水漂下来一个木头神像，有几尺长。大家就在那神现形的地方盖了座庙，叫做唐村神庙。
English: The villagers ran to the river to look, and sure enough, a wooden statue of the god, several feet long, floated down the river. Everyone built a temple in the place where the god was, called the Tang Village Temple.

古文：至今祷祈皆验。
现代文：到现在这个神仍十分灵验。
English: To this day, this god is still very effective.

古文：或云，初见时如道士状。盘古祠
现代文：有的人还说，那个现形的钟离王像个道士。盘古祠
English: Some people also said that the present-day Zhongli Wang looked like a Taoist.

古文：广都县有盘古三郎庙，颇有灵应。
现代文：广都县有座盘古三郎庙，庙里的神很灵应。
English: There is a Pan Guzaburo Temple in Guangdu County, and the gods in the temple are very responsive.

古文：民之过门，稍不致敬，多为殴击，或道途颠蹶。
现代文：若有人走过庙门不叩拜行礼，不是狠狠被敲一家伙，就是无缘无故摔个大跟头。
English: If someone walks through the temple gate without knocking or bowing, they will either be knocked down hard or fall down for no reason.

古文：县民杨知遇者，尝受正一明威录。一夕醉甚，将还其家。路远月黑，无伴还家，愿得神力，示以归路。
现代文：有个叫杨知遇的，曾学过正一明威录，有一天喝得大醉往回走，天黑路远，又没有同伴陪他，路过神庙的时候，就让神帮一把好找到回家的路。
English: There was a man named Yang Zhi Rong, who had studied Zheng Yi Ming Wei Lu. One day, he got very drunk and walked back. It was dark and the road was far away, and he had no companion to accompany him. When he passed the temple, he asked God to help him find his way home.

古文：俄有一炬火，自庙门出，前引至其家。
现代文：顿时就有一个火把从庙门里出来，在前面为他照亮道路。
English: Suddenly, a torch came out from the temple gate to light the way ahead of him.

古文：二十余里，虽狭桥编路，无蹉跌，火炬亦无见矣。
现代文：杨某一直走了二十多里，经过很窄的桥，走过很偏僻的小道，却一次也没摔倒。
English: Yang walked for more than 20 miles, crossing a very narrow bridge and a very remote path, but he did not fall once.

古文：乡里之人尤惊。
现代文：到家了，火把也没了。人们都十分惊奇。
English: When they got home, the torches were gone. People were very surprised.

古文：狄仁杰祠
现代文：狄仁杰祠
English: Di Renjie Ancestral Hall

古文：魏州南郭狄仁杰庙，即生祠堂也。
现代文：魏州南城有座狄仁杰祠，是狄仁杰活着时给立的生祠。
English: There is a Di Renjie ancestral hall in Nancheng, Weizhou, which was the birthplace of Di Renjie when he was alive.

古文：天后朝，仁杰为魏州刺史，有善政，吏民为之立生祠。
现代文：武则天皇后执政时，狄仁杰是魏州刺史，政声很好，当地官员和百姓就为他立了生祠来表彰他。
English: When Emperor Wuzhe was in power, Di Rongjie was the most influential person in the history of Weizhou. He had a good political reputation, and local officials and people set up an ancestral shrine to honor him.

古文：及入朝，魏之士女，每至月首，皆诣祠奠醊。
现代文：后来狄仁杰到朝廷里作官，魏州的百姓每到月初一，还是到祠里去用酒供奉。
English: Later, Di Renjie became an official in the imperial court, and the people of Weizhou still went to the ancestral hall to offer wine on the first day of every month.

古文：仁杰方朝，是日亦有醉色。天后素知仁杰初不饮酒，诘之，具以事对。
现代文：狄仁杰每月初一去上朝，就也带着醉意，则天皇后知道狄仁杰向来不喝酒，就问是怎么回事。
English: On the first day of every month, when Di Renjie went to visit the emperor, he was also drunk. The empress knew that Di Renjie never drank alcohol, so she asked what was going on.

古文：天后使验问，乃信。
现代文：狄仁杰就说因为每月初一魏州人到他的生祠献酒。
English: Di Renjie said that because on the first day of every month, people from Weizhou come to his ancestral shrine to offer wine.

古文：庄宗观霸河朔，尝有人醉宿庙廊之下。
现代文：天后派人调查果然是这样，才相信了。庄宗镇守河朔时，曾有个人醉后住在狄仁杰祠的庙廊下。
English: The Empress Dowager sent someone to investigate and found that this was indeed the case, only then did she believe it. When Zhuozong Zhen was in charge of Heshaku, there was once a man who got drunk and lived in the corridor of the temple of Di Renjie's ancestral hall.

古文：见有人于堂陛下，罄折咨事，堂中有人问之，对曰：奉符于魏州索万人。
现代文：半夜酒醒，看见有人站在庙堂的台阶下拿着奏折请示公事。堂上的人问是什么事，那人说，奉上天之命，要在魏州索取一万人的性命。
English: Waking up drunk in the middle of the night, he saw someone standing at the foot of the steps of the temple, holding a petition. The people in the court asked what it was, and the man said, "By order of heaven, I will claim the lives of ten thousand people in Weizhou."

古文：堂中语曰：此州虚耗，灾祸频仍，移于他处。
现代文：堂上的人说：魏州这地方很穷困，灾祸连年不断，还是到别的地方找这一万人吧。
English: The people in the court said: "Weizhou is a very poor place, the disaster continues year after year, let's look for these ten thousand people somewhere else."

古文：此人曰：诺。
现代文：奏事的答应说，我这就去向上面报告。
English: "I'll go and report it to the higher-ups," the informant promised.

古文：请往白之。遂去。少顷复至，则曰：已移命于镇州矣。
现代文：不一会他又回来了，对堂上说，已经决定到镇州去办了。
English: A short while later he returned and told the court that he had decided to go to Zhenzhou.

古文：语竟不见。是岁，庄宗分兵讨镇州，至于攻下，两军所杀甚众焉。
现代文：说完就都消失了，这一年，庄宗分兵讨伐镇州，两军在战场上死了很多人。
English: After saying that, they all disappeared. This year, Zhuangzong's detachment fought against Zhenzhou, and many people from both armies died on the battlefield.

古文：葛氏妇
现代文：葛氏妇
English: Mrs. Gurdjieff

古文：兖之东钞里泗水上有亭，亭下有天齐王祠，中有三郎君祠神者。
现代文：兖州的东钞里泗水上有个亭子，亭子下有座天齐王庙。庙里供有三郎神散文神像。
English: In the eastern bank of Luzhou, there is a pavilion on the floodplain, and under the pavilion there is a temple of King Tianqi. The temple is dedicated to the statue of the god of prose, the god of the god of prose.

古文：巫云，天齐王之爱子，其神甚灵异。
现代文：巫师说，三郎是天齐王最喜爱的儿子，三郎神也最灵。
English: The sorcerer said that Saburo was the favorite son of King Tenchi, and Saburo-god was also the most spiritual.

古文：相传岱宗之下，樵童牧竖，或有逢羽猎者，骑从华丽，有如侯王，即此神也。鲁人畏敬，过于天齐。
现代文：传说在泰山下面，曾有打柴少年或放羊孩子遇见过三郎神出去打猎，带着很多侍从和仆人，那排场不亚于人间的王侯出巡。山东人对三郎神的敬畏超过了对天齐王。
English: Legend has it that, at the foot of Mount Tai, a woodcutter or a shepherd once met the god Saburo when he was out hunting. He was accompanied by many attendants and servants, and the scene was no less than that of a human prince on a hunting trip. Shandong people's reverence for the god Saburo exceeds that for King Tianqi.

古文：朱梁时，葛周镇兖部署，尝举家妇女游于泗亭，遂至神祠。
现代文：朱梁年间，葛周镇守兖州，有一天带着全家男女老少游泗水亭，然后又进了天齐王庙。
English: In Zhu Liang's time, Ge Zhou Town guarded Luzhou. One day, he took his whole family to visit the Yuanshui Pavilion, and then went to the Tianqi Wang Temple.

古文：周有子十二郎者，其妇美容止，拜于三郎君前，熟视而退。
现代文：葛周有个儿子十二郎，十二郎的妻子美艳绝伦。进庙后，十二郎的夫人跪拜二郎钟，拜后两眼把三郎神像盯了半天才走。
English: Ge Zhou had a son, Juro, and Juro's wife was stunningly beautiful. After entering the temple, Juro's wife knelt down to worship Jiro's bell. After the worship, she stared at the statue of the god Saburo for half a day before leaving.

古文：俄而病心痛，踣地闷绝久之。
现代文：接着她就犯了心痛病，一头栽到地上喘不上气来。
English: Then she had a heart attack and fell to the floor gasping for breath.

古文：举族大悸，即祷神，有顷乃瘳。
现代文：全家吓坏了，赶快向神祷告，少妇人才稍微好些。
English: The whole family was terrified. They quickly prayed to God, and the young woman felt a little better.

古文：自是神情失常，梦寐恍惚，尝与神遇。
现代文：但从此神情就不正常了，睡梦中也恍恍惚惚地遇见三郎神。
English: But from then on, his look was not normal, and in his sleep he also met Saburo deity in a trance.

古文：其家惧，送妇往东京以避之。
现代文：家里人十分恐慌，就把少夫人送到东京去躲了起来。
English: The family panicked and sent the young woman to Tokyo to hide.

古文：未几，其神亦至，谓妇曰：吾寻汝久矣，今复相遇。
现代文：没过多久，三郎神也追到东京，并对少夫人说，我找你很久了，今天我们才又重逢！
English: It didn't take long for Saburojin to catch up to Tokyo and say to the young lady, "I've been looking for you for a long time, and today we meet again!"

古文：其后信宿辄来，每神将至，妇则先伸欠呵嚏，谓侍者曰：彼已至矣。
现代文：打这以后，三郎神每两夜就来。每次三郎神来时，少夫人就又伸懒腰又打喷嚏，并对身旁的丫环说，他已经来了。
English: After that, Saburo-shin came every two nights. Every time Saburo-shin came, the young lady stretched her waist and sneezed, and told the maidservant next to her that he had arrived.

古文：即起入帷中，侍者属耳伺之，则闻私窃语笑，逡巡方去。
现代文：说完就钻进帐子里去了。丫环在帐子外偷偷听，就听见帐内男女窃窃私语和调笑声，过了很久三郎神就走了。
English: After he had said this, he went into the tent. The maidservant was eavesdropping outside the tent, and she heard men and women whispering and laughing inside the tent. After a long time, Saburo Shin left.

古文：率以为常。
现代文：这样的事已习以为常了。
English: This sort of thing has become normalised.

古文：其夫畏神，竟不敢与妇同居，久之妇卒。
现代文：十二郎十分怕神，所以一直不敢和自己的妻子同居。过了很长的时间，妻子终于死去。
English: Juroku was very afraid of the gods, so he never dared to live with his wife. After a long time, his wife finally died.

古文：马希声
现代文：马希声
English: Ma Xisheng

古文：湖南马希声，嗣父位。
现代文：湖南马希声继承了父亲的官职。
English: Hunan Ma Xisheng inherited his father's official post.

古文：连年亢旱，祈祷不应。乃封闭南岳司天王庙，及境内神祠。
现代文：当时连年大旱，祈祷求雨也不灵应，马希声就下令把南岳司天王庙和他所管的境内所有的庙都封闭了。
English: At that time, after years of drought, prayers for rain were not answered, and Ma Xisheng ordered the closure of the Nanyue King Temple and all the temples in his jurisdiction.

古文：竟亦不雨。
现代文：然而仍然不下雨。
English: However, it still doesn't rain.

古文：其兄希振，入谏之，饮酒至中夜而退。
现代文：马希声的哥哥希振来劝他别这样做，两个人喝酒，到半夜，希振才回去。
English: Ma Xisheng's brother Xizhen came to persuade him not to do so. The two of them drank, and Xizhen did not return until midnight.

古文：闻堂前喧噪，连召希振复入，见希声倒立于阶下，衣裳不披，其首已碎。
现代文：刚走出门，就听到院里人声喧哗，有人召呼希振快进院看看。希振一回院子，就见弟弟马希声头朝下倒栽在台阶下，身上衣服也都没有了，脑袋已经碎了。
English: As soon as he walked out of the door, he heard a commotion in the courtyard. Someone called for Xizhen to quickly go into the courtyard to take a look. Once in the courtyard, Xizhen saw his brother Ma Xi face down at the bottom of the steps, with no clothes on his body and his head crushed.

古文：令亲信舆上，以帛蒙首。
现代文：于是赶快把尸体抬到车上，用白绸子蒙上他的头。
English: So they quickly carried the body to the car and covered his head with white silk.

古文：翌日发丧，以弟希范嗣位。
现代文：第二天为马希声办完丧事，让他的弟弟马希范继承了官职。
English: The next day, a funeral was held for Ma Xisheng, and his younger brother Ma Xifan succeeded to the post.

古文：先是大将周达，自南岳回，见江上云雾中，拥执希声而去，秘不敢言。
现代文：在这事发生之前，就有一个大将周达从南岳回来时，看见江上的云雾中，鬼卒们拥着马希声而去。回来后周达没敢说。
English: Before this happened, there was a general, Zhou Da, who, when returning from Nanyue, saw the ghostly soldiers hugging Ma Xisheng in the fog on the river. After returning, Zhou Da did not dare to say anything.

古文：夕有物如黑幕，突入空堂，即时而卒。
现代文：这天晚上，空中突然飘下一大块黑幕闯入了马希声的屋子，马希声立刻就死了。
English: That evening, a large black curtain suddenly floated down from the sky and broke into Ma Xisheng's house. Ma Xisheng died immediately.

古文：庞式
现代文：庞式
English: Pang style

古文：唐长兴三年，进士庞式，疑业于嵩阳观之侧，临水结庵以居。
现代文：唐代长兴三年，庞式没有中进士时，在嵩阳观的旁边临水盖了间茅屋读书。
English: In the third year of the Tang Dynasty in Changxing, when Pang Shih did not have any junior high school students, he built a thatched cottage next to Songyang View to study.

古文：一日，晨往前村未返。
现代文：一天年上，庞式到前村去没有回来，茅屋里只有一个薛生。
English: One year later, Pang Shih went to the previous village and did not return. There was only one Xue Sheng in the hut.

古文：庵内唯薛生，东郡人也，少年纯悫，师事于式。
现代文：薛生是东郡人，是个单纯诚实的少年，跟着庞式学习。
English: Xue Sheng is from Dong County. He is a simple and honest boy who follows the Pang style of learning.

古文：晨兴，就涧水盥漱毕，见庵之东南林内，有五人，皆星冠霞帔，或缝掖之衣，衣各一色，神彩俊拔，语音清响，目光射人，香闻十余步。
现代文：一大清早他到门外小河边洗脸漱口，看见茅屋东南的树林里有五个人，都穿着神仙穿的衣服，有的穿着儒生的衣着，各人的服色也不一样。看这五个人都是神采超然，语声朗朗，目光炯炯有神，身上发散着香气，十几步外都能闻到。
English: Early one morning, he went to the small river outside his door to wash his face and rinse his mouth, and saw five people in the woods southeast of the cottage, all wearing clothes worn by gods and goddesses, some wearing Confucian clothing, and each person's clothing color was different. Look at these five people, they are transcendent, their voices are loud, their eyes are bright, and their bodies exude aroma, which can be smelled more than a dozen steps away.

古文：薛生惊异，遍拜之。
现代文：薛生十分惊奇，就走过去一一拜见。
English: Xue Sheng was very surprised, so he walked over to meet him one by one.

古文：问薛曰：尔何人？
现代文：他们问薛生，你是什么人？
English: They asked Xue Sheng, who are you?

古文：生具以对。
现代文：薛生就把自己的情况如实说了。
English: Xue Sheng told the truth about his situation.

古文：又问：尔能随吾去否？
现代文：他们又问，能不能跟我们走？
English: They also asked if they could come with us.

古文：薛辞以父母年老，期之异日。
现代文：薛生推辞说，自己的父母年纪大了，要去也只能以后再去。
English: Xue Sheng declined, saying that his parents were too old and that he could only visit them later.

古文：又曰：尔既不去，吾当书尔之背志之。
现代文：其中一个人说，如果你以后不去呢？我给你背上写几个字，好能记着。
English: One of them said, "What if you don't come back? I'll write a few words on your back so you'll remember."

古文：遂令肉袒。
现代文：说罢就让薛生脱下上衣把后背露出来。
English: As soon as he said that, Xue Sheng took off his shirt to reveal his back.

古文：唯觉其背上如风之吹，书毕，却入林中，并失其处。
现代文：薛生只觉得好象有风在后背上吹过。写完了，那五个人就消失在林子深处，不知道他们到那里去了。
English: Xue Sheng only felt like the wind was blowing on his back. After he finished writing, the five people disappeared into the depths of the forest, and he did not know where they had gone.

古文：斯须庞式至，具述，且示之背，见朱书字一行，字体杂以篆籀，唯两字稍若官体贵人字，余皆不别。
现代文：过了一阵庞式回来后，薛生就把刚才的事说了，并把后背给庞式看。只见后背上写着一行红色的字，字体是大篆小篆交替着使用，只有两个字象当时通用的字体贵人，其余的字都认不清楚。
English: After a while, Pang returned, and Xue Sheng told Pang what had just happened and showed him the back. All he could see was a line of red writing on the back. The fonts were used alternately, large and small. There were only two characters that resembled the then common font, "贵人," and the rest of the characters were unrecognizable.

古文：薛生又以手扪之，数字拿破，色鲜如血，数日，香尚不销。
现代文：薛生又用手摸后背，把好几个字抹破了，颜色象血一样鲜红，过了好几天，字的香气都不消失。
English: Xue Sheng touched his back with his hand again and erased several words. The color was as bright red as blood. After several days, the fragrance of the words did not disappear.

古文：后庞式登第，除乐乡县令，为叛帅安从进所杀，薛氏子寻归滑台，殂于家。
现代文：后来庞式中了进士，被任命为乐乡县令，结果被叛将安从进杀了。薛生的儿子把他的棺木运回滑台，在他家乡下葬。
English: Later, Pang was promoted to the position of county magistrate of Lexiang County, but he was killed by the traitor An Congjin. Xue Sheng's son carried his coffin back to the slide and buried him in his hometown.

