古文：仆散安贞，本名阿海，以大臣子充奉御。
现代文：仆散安贞，原名阿海，因为是大臣的儿子而充当了奉御。
English: Dousan Anzhen, whose original name was Ahai, served as a minister because he was the minister's son.

古文：父揆，尚韩国公主，郑王永蹈同母妹也。
现代文：他的父亲叫揆，娶了韩国公主，即郑王永蹈的同母妹妹。
English: His father, surnamed Zou, married a Korean princess, the half-sister of Zheng Wang Yongbai.

古文：永蹈诛，安贞罢归，召为符宝祗候。
现代文：永蹈被诛杀后，仆散安贞罢职归田，被召用为符宝祗候。
English: After Yongtu was killed, his servant San Anzhen resigned from his post and returned to the field. He was called to serve as a treasure hunter.

古文：复为奉御，尚邢国长公主，加驸马都尉，袭胡王爱割蛮猛安。历尚衣直长、御院通进、尚药副使。
现代文：他再次充任奉御时，娶了邢国长公主，被加封为驸马都尉，承袭胡土爱割蛮猛安，历任尚衣直长、御院通进、尚药副使。
English: When he was appointed to the imperial court again, he married the princess of Shandong Province, and was given the additional title of Lieutenant of Shandong Province. He inherited the coat of arms of Shandong Province, and successively held the posts of Shangyi Zhichang, Miiin Tongjin, and Shangye Vice-Envoy.

古文：丁母忧，起复，转符宝郎，除同知定海军节度使事。
现代文：他的母亲亡故，守丧期满他便转而就任符宝郎，受职同知定海军节度使事。
English: After his mother's death, he was transferred to the position of a treasure hunter at the end of the mourning period, and was assigned to work with the Zhidong Naval Festival.

古文：历邳、淄、涿州刺史，拱卫直都指挥使。
现代文：后历任邳、淄、涿州刺史，拱卫直都指挥使。
English: After that, he successively held the posts of,, 州刺史 and 拱卫直.

古文：贞祐初，改右副点检兼侍卫亲军副都指挥使，迁元帅左都监。
现代文：贞祐初年，仆散安贞改任右副点检兼侍卫亲军副都指挥使，又升迁为元帅左都监。
English: In the first year of Zhenyu's reign, his servant Anzhen was promoted to the position of right deputy inspector of points and deputy commander of the imperial guard, and was also promoted to the position of marshal of the imperial guard.

古文：二年，中都解严，河北州郡未破者惟真定、大名、东平、清、沃、徐、邳、海州而已。
现代文：贞祐二年，中都解除戒严，河北没有攻占下的州郡只有真定、大名、东平、清、沃、徐、邳、海州而已。
English: In the second year of Zhenyu, martial law was lifted in all of China, and the only prefectures and counties in Hebei that were not occupied were Zhending, Daimyo, Dongping, Qing, Wa, Xu, Handan, and Haizhou.

古文：朝廷遣安贞与兵部尚书裴满子仁、刑部尚书武都分道宣抚。
现代文：朝廷派仆散安贞与兵部尚书裴满子仁、刑部尚书武都分道前去平定。
English: The imperial court sent a servant, San Anzhen, to subdue the warlord, Pei Man Ziren, and the warlord, Shang Shubu.

古文：于是除安贞山东路统军安抚等使。
现代文：由此，授予安贞山东路统军安抚等使官职衔。
English: As a result, Anzheng Mountain East Road was awarded the title of envoy to pacify the unified army.

古文：初，益都县人杨安国自少无赖，以鬻鞍材为业，市人呼为 杨鞍儿 ，遂自名杨安儿。
现代文：当初，益都县人杨安国从小强横霸道，以卖马鞍材料为职业，市人称呼他为 杨鞍儿 ，于是他自己起名为杨安儿。
English: At first, Yang An Guo, a resident of Yidu County, had been a bully from an early age, selling saddle materials as his profession. The townspeople called him Yang Aner, so he named himself Yang Aner.

古文：泰和伐宋，山东无赖往往相聚剽掠，诏州郡招捕之。
现代文：泰和年间攻伐宋国，山东的无赖之徒常常聚在一起剽窃抢掠，皇上诏令各州郡把他们招收逮捕。
English: During the invasions of the Song Dynasty during the reign of Emperor Taizong, the ruffians of Shandong often gathered together to pillage and plunder. The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering all prefectures and counties to recruit and arrest them.

古文：安儿降，隶诸军，累官刺史、防御使。
现代文：杨安儿投降，在各部军中服差役，后来步步做官至刺史、防御使。
English: Yang An'er surrendered and served in various military departments. Later, he worked his way up from officer to historian and defense envoy.

古文：大安三年，招铁瓦敢战军，得千余人，以唐括合打为都统，安儿为副统，戍边。
现代文：大安三年，我国用招降的办法得到铁瓦的敢战军一千多人，任用唐括合打为都统，杨安儿为副统，戍守边防。
English: In the third year of the Taian era, China used the method of recruiting and demoting to get more than a thousand brave soldiers of the iron tile, appointed Tang Parenthesis as the general of the capital, Yang An'er as the deputy general, and guarded the border defense.

古文：至鸡鸣山不进。
现代文：军队到达鸡鸣山后不前进。
English: The army did not advance after reaching Jining Mountain.

古文：卫绍王驿召问状，安儿乃曰： 平章参政军数十万在前，无可虑者。
现代文：卫绍王在驿所召见杨安儿询问情况，杨安儿说： 平章参政军有数十万人在前面，没什么可忧虑的。
English: Yang An'er was summoned by Wei Shao Wang to inquire about the situation. Yang An'er said: There are hundreds of thousands of Pingzhang political party members in front, there is nothing to worry about.

古文：屯驻鸡鸣山，所以备间道透漏者耳。 
现代文：屯驻鸡鸣山是为了防备半道上漏网逃脱的人。 
English: The reason for the stationing on Mt. Chiming is to guard against people escaping from the net halfway up.

古文：朝廷信其言。
现代文：朝廷听信了他的话。
English: The court took him at his word.

古文：安儿乃亡归山东，与张汝楫聚党攻劫州县，杀略官吏，山东大扰。
现代文：杨安儿于是逃回山东，与张汝楫聚结党羽打劫各州县，杀戮官吏，山东大乱。
English: Yang An'er then fled back to Shandong, where he and Zhang Ruxuan rallied their followers to loot various prefectures and counties, kill officials, and cause the Shandong Rebellion.

古文：安贞至益都，败安儿于城东。安儿奔莱阳。
现代文：仆散安贞前往益都，在城东打败杨安儿。杨安儿逃奔莱阳。
English: The servant Anzhen went to Yidu and defeated Yang An'er in the east of the city. Yang An'er fled to Laiyang.

古文：莱州徐汝贤以城降安儿，贼势复振。
现代文：莱州徐汝贤献城投降杨安儿，贼人气势重又振奋。
English: Laizhou Xu Ruxian offered the city to surrender to Yang An'er, and the thieves were energized.

古文：登州刺史耿格开门纳伪邹都统，以州印付之，郊迎安儿，发帑藏以劳贼。
现代文：登州刺史耿格打开城门接收伪邹都统，把州印交给他，在城郊迎接杨安儿，发送国库中所藏财帛犒劳贼子。
English: The crown prince Geng Ge opened the city gate to receive the pseudo-dictator, handed over the seal of the state to him, greeted Yang An'er on the outskirts of the city, and sent the thieves of wealth and labor hidden in the national treasury.

古文：安儿遂僣号，置官属，改元天顺，凡符印诏表仪式皆格草定，遂陷宁海，攻濰州。
现代文：杨安儿于是冒用帝王的尊位，设置官职，改元天顺，凡是符印、诏表的仪式都由耿格草拟制定。接着，他们攻陷宁海，进犯潍州。
English: Yang An'er then pretended to use the emperor's dignity, set up official positions, changed the era to Tianshun, and all the ceremonies of the seal and the imperial edict were drafted by Geng Ge. Next, they invaded Ninghai and invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：伪元帅方郭三据密州，略沂、海。
现代文：伪元帅方郭三占领密州，侵夺沂州、海州。
English: The pseudo-Marshal Fang Guosan occupied Myizhou, invaded and seized Ganzhou and Haizhou.

古文：李全略临朐，扼穆陵关，欲取益都。
现代文：李全侵占临朐，扼守穆陵关，要攻取益都。
English: Li Quan invaded and occupied Linyi, closely guarded Muling Pass, and wanted to capture Yidu.

古文：安贞以沂州防御使仆散留家为左翼，安化军节度使完颜讹论为右翼。
现代文：仆散安贞任沂州防御使仆散留家为左翼、安化军节度使完颜讹论为右翼。
English: Dousan Anzhen's appointment to the defense of Bozhou made Dousan's stay at home the left wing, and the Anhua Army's victory made it the right wing.

古文：七月庚辰，安贞军昌邑东，徐汝贤等以三州之众十万来拒战。
现代文：七月十七日，仆散安贞驻军于昌邑东边，徐汝贤等人带三个州的十万军兵前来对抗。
English: On July 17th, when Anzhen's troops were stationed in the east of Changyi, Xu Ruxian and others brought 100,000 soldiers from three states to fight against them.

古文：自午抵暮，转战三十里，杀贼数万，获器械不可胜计。
现代文：从中午到傍晚，转战三十里，杀死数万贼兵，缴获的器械不可胜数。
English: From noon to evening, they fought for thirty miles, killed tens of thousands of bandits, and captured countless pieces of equipment.

古文：壬午，贼棘七率众四万阵于辛河。
现代文：十九日，贼子棘七率四万人马在辛河摆下阵势。
English: On the 19th, the seven thieves and seven thorns led 40,000 people to set up a position in the Xinhe River.

古文：安贞令留家由上流胶西济，继以大兵，杀获甚众。
现代文：仆散安贞命令仆散留家从上游的胶西赶来，用大部队接济，杀死或抓住了众多贼兵。
English: Anzhen ordered his retainers to come from the upper reaches of Jiaoxi, with a large force to help, and killed or captured many soldiers.

古文：甲申，安贞军至莱州，伪宁海州刺史史泼立以二十万阵于城东。
现代文：二十一日，仆散安贞的军队到达莱州，伪宁海州刺史史泼立带领二十万人镇守城东。
English: On the twenty-first day, Anzhen's army arrived in Laizhou, and the pseudo-Ninghai cadet Shishi Pali led two hundred thousand people to defend the east of the city.

古文：留家先以轻兵薄贼，诸将继之，贼大败，杀获且半，以重赏招之，不应。
现代文：仆散留家率轻锐军兵逼近贼人，诸将跟随其后，贼兵大败，被杀、被擒了半数，用重赏招降史泼立，他不顺从。
English: The light-hearted soldiers led by the retainers approached the bandits, and the generals followed. The bandits were soundly defeated, and half of them were killed or captured. With a heavy reward, they invited Shi to stand up, but he did not obey.

古文：安贞遣莱州黥卒曹全、张德、田贵、宋福诈降于徐汝贤以为内应。
现代文：仆散安贞让莱州的黥卒曹全、张德、田贵、宋福向徐汝贤诈降，作为内应。
English: His servant, Anzhen, had Cao Quan, Zhang De, Tian Gui, and Song Fu, who were his subordinates in Lai Zhou, betray Xu Ruxian as an inside job.

古文：全与贼西南隅戍卒姚云相结，约纳官军。
现代文：曹全与贼军中的西南隅戍卒姚云相交结，收纳官兵。
English: Cao Quan crossed paths with Yao Yun, the southwestern corner soldier of the thief army, and received officers and soldiers.

古文：丁亥夜，全缒城出，潜告留家。
现代文：二十四日夜里，曹全顺绳索翻越出城，暗暗告知仆散留家。
English: On the night of the 24th, Cao Quan Shun climbed over the rope and left the city, secretly telling his servants to stay at home.

古文：留家募勇敢士三十人从全入城，姚云纳之，大军毕登，遂复莱州，斩徐汝贤及诸贼将以徇。安儿脱身走，讹论以兵追之。
现代文：仆散留家招募了勇士三十人跟曹全进城，姚云把他们接进来，大军也全部登城，于是收复莱州，把徐汝贤以及各贼子斩杀并示众，杨安儿脱身逃走，完颜讹论带兵追击。
English: Minxuan stayed at home and recruited thirty warriors to follow Cao Quan into the city. Yao Yun brought them in, and the army also all went to the city. So he recovered Laizhou, killed Xu Ruxian and all the thieves and showed them to the public. Yang An'er escaped and fled, and then led the soldiers to pursue.

古文：耿格、史泼立皆降。
现代文：耿格、史泼立都投降了。
English: Geng Ge and Spalding both surrendered.

古文：留家略定胶西诸县，宣差伯德玩袭杀方郭三，复密州。
现代文：仆散留家平定胶西各县，宣差伯德玩袭击并杀死了方郭三，收复密州。
English: Zhu Xuan stayed at home to pacify the counties west of Jiaozuo, while Xuan Zhaobao attacked and killed Fang Guo San and recaptured Fuzhou.

古文：余贼在诸州者皆溃去。
现代文：剩余的在各州都溃散开了。
English: The rest scattered across the states.

古文：安儿尝遣梁居实、黄县甘泉镇监酒石抹充浮海赴辽东构留哥，已具舟，皆捕斩之。
现代文：杨安儿曾经派梁居实、黄县甘泉镇的监酒石抹充渡海前往辽东攻打留哥，已准备好船，这时，他们都被捕获斩杀。
English: Yang An'er once sent Liang Jushi and the jailer Shi Mufeng from Ganquan Town, Huang County, to cross the sea to Liaodong to attack Liu Ge. The ship was ready, but they were all captured and killed.

古文：十一月戊辰，曲赦山东，除杨安儿、耿格及诸故官家作过驱奴不赦外，刘二祖、张汝楫、李思温及应胁诱从贼，并在本路自为寇盗，罪无轻重，并与赦免。
现代文：十一月八日，皇上赦免山东的部分贼人，除杨安儿、耿格及以前在官宦家中做过驱使奴才的人不赦免外，刘二祖、张汝楫、李思温以及受引诱随从贼人，并在本路自成盗寇者，罪行无论轻重，一律给予赦免。
English: On November 8, the emperor pardoned some of the thieves in Shandong. In addition to Yang An'er, Geng Ge and those who had previously driven slaves in the official's family, Liu Erzu, Zhang Ruxuan, Li Siwen and those who were lured to follow the thieves and became thieves themselves along the way, regardless of the severity of the crime, were all pardoned.

古文：获杨安儿者，官职俱授三品，赏钱十万贯。
现代文：抓获杨安儿的人授予三品官职，赏钱十万贯。
English: The person who captured Yang An'er was awarded three official ranks and a reward of 100,000 yuan.

古文：十二月辛亥，耿格伏诛，妻子皆远徙。
现代文：十二月二十一日，耿格被诛杀，他的妻儿都迁往远方。
English: On December 21, Geng Ge was beaten to death, and his wife and children moved far away.

古文：诸军方攻大沫堌，赦至，宣抚副使、知东平府事乌林答与即引军还。
现代文：各军正攻打大沫，赦令下达，宣抚副使、知东平府事乌林答与随即领军返回。
English: All the armies were attacking Taemo, a pardon order was issued, and the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Publicity, Zhidong Pingfu Zhi Wulin, responded and immediately led the army back.

古文：贼众乘之，复出为患。
现代文：众贼子乘这个时机又出来祸患为害。
English: The thieves took advantage of this opportunity to come out and wreak havoc.

古文：诏以陕西统军使完颜弼知东平府事，权宣抚副使。
现代文：皇上诏令任命陕西统军使完颜弼为知东平府事，行使宣抚副使之职权。
English: The Emperor's edict appointed the Shaanxi United Army to complete the tasks of the Zhidongping Prefecture and exercise the functions of the deputy of the proclamation.

古文：其后杨安儿与汲政等乘舟入海，欲走岠嵎山。
现代文：随后杨安儿与汲政等人坐船到海上，要从穤萮山逃走。
English: Subsequently, Yang An'er and Qi Zheng and others took a boat to the sea to escape from Lushan.

古文：舟人曲成等击之，坠水死。
现代文：船公曲成等人击打他们，使他们落水而死。
English: Shipmaster Qu Cheng and others beat them, causing them to fall into the water and die.

古文：三年二月，安贞遣提控纥石烈牙吾塔破巨蒙等四堌，及破马耳山，杀刘二祖贼四千余人，降余党八千，擒伪宣差程宽、招军大使程福，招降胁从百姓三万余人。
现代文：贞祐三年二月，仆散安贞派遣提控纥石烈牙吾塔攻打巨蒙等四座河堤，到攻占马耳山时，杀死刘二祖的四千多贼兵，收降其余的党匪八千人，捉住了伪宣差程宽、招军大使程福，并招降被迫跟随贼兵的百姓三万多人。
English: In February of the third year of Zhengyu, Anzhen's servant dispatched the control of the flint and stone "Fierce Tooth" to attack the four river banks of the Giant Mongoose, and when he captured the Malta Mountain, he killed more than four thousand thieves of Liu Erzu, captured and surrendered the remaining eight thousand party bandits, captured the false propaganda leader Cheng Kuang and the recruiting ambassador Cheng Fu, and recruited and surrendered more than thirty thousand people who were forced to follow the thieves.

古文：安贞遣兵会宿州提控夹谷石里哥同攻大沫堌，贼千余逆战。
现代文：仆散安贞派兵会合宿州提控夹谷石里哥的军队，共同攻打大沫，贼兵一千多人相抵抗。
English: The vassal An Zhen sent soldiers to join the army of Shiligo, who had taken control of Jinggu in Cangzhou, and together they attacked Daming. More than a thousand soldiers resisted.

古文：石里哥，以骑兵击之，尽殪。
现代文：夹谷石里哥发骑兵出击，把贼兵全部消灭。
English: He sent cavalry to attack and destroy all the bandits.

古文：提控没烈夺其北门以入，别军取贼水寨，诸军继进，杀贼五千余人。
现代文：提控没烈夺下北门进城，其他军队攻取贼军的水寨，各军继续前进，杀死贼兵五千多人。
English: After taking control of the north gate and entering the city, other armies captured the water fort of the thief army, and the armies continued to advance, killing more than five thousand thief soldiers.

古文：刘二祖被创，获之，及伪参谋官崔天佑，杨安儿伪太师李思温。
现代文：刘二祖被打伤，并被抓获，一起被抓的还有伪参谋官崔天、杨安儿的伪太师李思温。
English: Liu Erzu was wounded and captured, along with the fake staff officer Cui Tian and Yang An'er's fake grandmaster Li Siwen.

古文：余众保大小峻角子山，前后追击，杀获以万计，斩刘二祖。
现代文：其余众人保守大小峻角子山，我军前后追击，杀死并俘虏的贼兵数以万计，并且斩杀了刘二祖。
English: The rest of the people guarded the large and small steep Kakunotsiyama, and our army chased them back and forth, killing and capturing tens of thousands of thieves, and killed Liu Erzu.

古文：诏迁赏没烈等有差。
现代文：皇上下诏对没烈等人给予不同的提升奖赏。
English: The Emperor's edict gave different promotion awards to those who were not martyrs.

古文：诏尚书省曰： 山东东、西路贼党犹啸聚作过者，诏书到日，并与免罪，各令复业。
现代文：皇上诏令尚书省说： 山东东、西路的贼党若还有煽动聚众闹事的，诏书到日，一并免去他们的罪过，命令他们各自恢复旧业。
English: The Emperor's edict to Shang Shuxuan said: If there are still bandits in the east and west of Shandong instigating riots, the edict will absolve them of their sins on the same day and order them to resume their old businesses.

古文：在处官司尽心招抚，优加存恤，无令失所。 
现代文：各处官司尽心招抚他们，优厚地加以抚恤，不要让他们流离失所。 
English: All departments of the procuratorate should do their best to appease them, provide them with generous benefits, and not allow them to be displaced.

古文：十月，安贞迁枢密副使，行院于徐州。
现代文：十月，安贞升迁为枢密副使，行院在徐州。
English: In October, An Zhen was promoted to the position of Privy Vice-Envoy, and was stationed in Xuzhou.

古文：四年二月，杨安儿余党复扰山东。
现代文：贞祐四年二月，杨安儿的残余党徒再次骚扰山东。
English: In February of the fourth year of Zhengyu, the remnants of Yang An'er's party once again harassed Shandong.

古文：诏安贞与蒙古纲、完颜弼以近诏招之。
现代文：皇上诏令仆散安贞与蒙古纲、完颜弼拿着刚下达的诏书招安杨安儿。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering his servants to disperse to Anzhen and Mongolia, and Yang An'er took the newly issued imperial edict and went to Anzhen.

古文：五月，安贞遣兵讨郝定，连战皆克，杀九万人，降者三万余，郝定仅以身免。
现代文：五月，仆散安贞发兵讨伐郝定，连战连胜，敌军被杀死九万人，投降了三万多人，仅有郝定一人幸免。
English: In May, An Zhen sent troops to fight against Luding, and won back-to-back victories. Ninety thousand enemy troops were killed, and more than thirty thousand surrendered. Only one person from Luding survived.

古文：获伪金银牌、器械甚众，来归且万人，皆安慰复业。
现代文：安贞缴获很多伪金银牌及器械，前来归顺的有近万人，安贞把他们都安抚好，恢复其职业。
English: An Zhen captured many fake gold and silver medals and equipment. Nearly ten thousand people came to surrender. An Zhen appeased them all and resumed his profession.

古文：自杨安儿、刘二祖败后，河北残破，干戈相寻。
现代文：自从杨安儿、刘二祖战败后，河北残破，战争不断发生。
English: Since the defeat of Yang An'er and Liu Erzu, Hebei has been devastated and war has continued to occur.

古文：其党往往复相团结，所在寇掠，皆衣红纳袄以相识别，号 红袄贼 。
现代文：贼党常常反复勾结，进行盗窃抢掠的人，都穿红色袄以便相互识别，别号 红袄贼 。
English: Thieves often repeatedly collude, and those who carry out theft and looting wear red bands to identify each other, aka red bandits.

古文：官军虽讨之，不能除也。
现代文：官军虽然攻讨过，却不能把他们消灭。
English: Although the government army attacked and defeated them, it was unable to eliminate them.

古文：大概皆李全、国用安、时青之徒焉。
现代文：大概都是李全、国用安、时青一类人。
English: Most of them are Li Quan, Guoyuan and Shi Qing.

古文：兴定元年十月，诏安贞曰： 防河卒多老幼疲软不胜执役之人，其令速易之。 
现代文：兴定元年十月，皇帝诏令仆散安贞道 ：防守黄河的士卒大多是老幼疲弱、不能胜任兵役的人，命令他们快速更换。 
English: In October of the first year of Xingding, the emperor issued an edict to his servants to disperse the Anzhen Road: most of the soldiers defending the Yellow River were old and weak, unable to perform military service, and ordered them to be quickly replaced.

古文：二年十二月，开封治中吕子羽等以国书议和于宋，宋人不受。
现代文：兴定二年十二月，开封治中吕子羽等人带国书到宋国议和，宋人不接受。
English: In December of the 2nd year of Xingding, Lu Zi Yu and others from Kaifeng and Zhizhong brought the imperial rescript to the Song Dynasty to discuss peace, but the Song Dynasty did not accept it.

古文：以安贞为左副元帅权参知政事行尚书省元帅府，及唐、息、寿、泗行元帅府分道各将兵三万，安贞总之，画定期日，下诏伐宋。
现代文：皇上任仆散安贞为左元帅，行使参知政事的职权，执管尚书省元帅府；唐、息、寿、泗各路元帅府分路带领三万军兵，由安贞统率，定好日期，下诏攻伐宋国。
English: The emperor's newly appointed servant, San Anzhen, was the left field marshal, exercised the powers of the councillor of state affairs, and administered the marshal's office of Shangshu Province; the marshal's office of Tang, Xixi, Shou, and Qian led 30,000 soldiers, led by Anzhen, and set a date to attack Song.

古文：安贞至安丰，宋兵七千拒战，权都事完颜胡鲁剌冲击败之，追至淝水，死者二千余人。
现代文：安贞到了安丰，宋兵七千人抵抗，权都事完颜胡鲁剌奋力冲杀，击败宋兵，追击到淝水，宋兵战死二千多人。
English: Anzhen arrived in Anfeng, Song soldiers seven thousand people resisted, the power of the capital was over, Yan Hulun fought hard, defeated Song soldiers, pursued to Surabaya, Song soldiers killed more than two thousand people.

古文：安贞至大江，乃班师。
现代文：安贞赶到大江，随之回军。
English: Anzhen rushed to Dajiang and then returned to the army.

古文：三年闰月，安贞至自军中，入见于仁安殿。
现代文：兴定三年闰四月，安贞从军中来，入朝在仁安殿进见皇上。
English: In April of the third year of Xingding, Anzhen came from the army and entered the court to see the emperor at the Jinan Palace.

古文：胡鲁剌进一阶。
现代文：完颜胡鲁剌进升一级官职。
English: Yan Hulun was promoted to the first-level official post.

古文：久之，安贞燕见，奏曰： 淝水之捷，胡鲁剌功第一，臣之兵事皆咨此人，功厚赏薄，乞加赏以劝来者。 
现代文：很久以后，安贞进见皇上，禀奏道： 淝水一战的胜利，完颜胡鲁剌的功劳为第一，臣用兵的事情都同此人商议，他的功劳大但得到的赏赐少，乞请陛下增加封赏以勉励后来人。 
English: After a long time, An Zhen went to see the emperor, and played a gong: "The victory of the First Battle of Surabaya, the merit of Guan Huluchan is the first, and the matter of the use of soldiers by the minister is discussed with this person. His merit is great but the reward is small. I beg Your Majesty to increase the reward to encourage future generations."

古文：尚书省奏： 凡行省行院帅府参议左右司经历官都事以下皆迁一官，所以绝求请之路，塞奸幸之门也。
现代文：尚书省奏道 ：凡行省、行院、帅府、参议、左右司、经历官都事以下都提升一级官职，之所以断绝请求这条路，是因为要堵住奸辛之门。
English: Shangshu Province Song Tao: All provinces, prefectures, prefectures, councillors, left and right departments, experienced officials have been promoted to the first level of official positions. The reason for cutting off the request for this road is to block the door of treachery.

古文：安贞之请不可从。 
现代文：安贞的请求不能听从。 
English: An Zhen's request could not be obeyed.

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是皇上没有答应安贞。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：五年，复伐宋。
现代文：兴定五年，皇上再次攻伐宋国。
English: In the fifth year of Xingding, the emperor invaded Song again.

古文：二月，安贞出息州，军于七里镇，宋兵据净居山，遣兵击败之。
现代文：二月，安贞从息州出发，在七里镇驻军，宋兵占据净居山，安贞派兵击败了宋兵。
English: In February, Anzhen set out from Xizhou and garrisoned troops in Qili Town. Song soldiers occupied Qinju Mountain, and Anzhen sent troops to defeat Song soldiers.

古文：宋兵保山寺。
现代文：宋兵保守山中寺院。
English: Song soldiers guard a mountain temple.

古文：纵火焚寺，乘胜追至洪门山。
现代文：安贞放火焚烧山寺，并乘胜追击到洪门山。
English: Anzhen set fire to the mountain temple, and chased it to Hongmen Mountain.

古文：宋兵方浚濠立栅，安贞军亟战，夺其栅。
现代文：宋兵正挖濠沟、修栅栏，安贞的军队急速出击，夺取了宋兵的栅栏。
English: Song soldiers were digging trenches and repairing fences. Anzhen's army made a rapid attack and captured Song soldiers' fences.

古文：宋黄统制团兵五千保黄土关，关绝险，素有备，坚壁不出。
现代文：宋国黄统制集中五千军兵护守黄土关，黄土关极为险峻，一向有战备，宋兵坚守关隘，并不出战。
English: Five thousand soldiers were concentrated to guard the Loess Pass in the Song Dynasty's Huang Di system. The Loess Pass was extremely dangerous and was always prepared for battle. The Song soldiers held fast to the Pass and did not go to war.

古文：安贞遣轻兵分为左右军潜登，别以兵三千直逼关门。
现代文：安贞派轻装兵士分别为左右军悄悄登上黄土关，另外派三千军兵直逼关门。
English: The light-armed soldiers of the Anzhen faction quietly boarded the Loess Pass for the left and right armies respectively, and sent another three thousand soldiers to close the gate.

古文：翼日，左右军会于山颠，俯瞰关内。
现代文：第二天，左右军在山顶会合，俯瞰关内。
English: The next day, the left and right armies met at the top of the mountain, overlooking the pass.

古文：宋人守关者望之，骇〈目咢〉不能立。
现代文：宋军守关的人望见，惊骇得站立不住。
English: The guards of the Song Army were so shocked that they could not stand.

古文：中军急攻，宋兵溃，遂夺黄土关。
现代文：中间部队急速进攻，宋兵溃败，于是夺取黄土关。
English: The middle force quickly attacked, the Song soldiers were routed, and thus the Loess Pass was captured.

古文：遂入梅林关，拔麻城县，抵大江，至黄州，克之。
现代文：随后进入梅林关，攻下麻城县，抵达大江，赶到黄州并攻克下来。
English: Subsequently, they entered Meiling Pass, conquered Macheng County, arrived at Dajiang, and arrived at Huangzhou and conquered it.

古文：进克蕲州，前后杀略不可胜计。
现代文：又进军攻克蕲州，前后杀死的宋兵不可胜数。
English: He also marched into and conquered Bozhou, killing countless Song soldiers.

古文：获宋宗室男女七十余口，献之，师还。
现代文：安贞擒获宋国皇室宗亲男女七十多人，献给朝廷，班师回来。
English: An Zhengyi won more than seventy male and female relatives of the Song Dynasty, dedicated to the imperial court, and the teacher came back.

古文：安贞每获宋壮士，辄释不杀，无虑数万，因用其策，辄有功。
现代文：安贞每次抓住宋国壮士，就释放而并不杀掉，放了大约数万人，使用他这条政策的人，就算有功。
English: An Zhen released tens of thousands of strong men of Song without killing them every time he caught them, and those who used this policy of his were considered to be meritorious.

古文：宣宗谓宰臣曰： 阿海将略善固矣，此辈得无思归乎？
现代文：宣宗对宰相大臣说： 阿海的谋略固然好，这些人哪会不想归附？
English: Xuan Zong said to the Prime Minister: Although Ahai's strategy is good, which of these people will not want to join?

古文：自以积愆之著，必非公宪所容，欲结近臣之欢心，俾伺内庭之指意，如衅端之少露，得先事而易图。
现代文：南京离宋国国境极近，这些人既然不能杀尽，该安排在哪里呢？朕想把他们驱赶到边境，送他们回去，怎么样？ 
English: Nanjing is very close to the border of the Song Dynasty. Since these people cannot be killed, where is the arrangement? I want to drive them to the border and send them back, how about that?

古文：因其方握兵权，得以谋危庙祝愿祏，事或不济，计即外奔。
现代文：宰相大臣不做回答。
English: The Prime Minister did not reply.

古文：前日之俘，随时诛戮，独于宋族，曲活全门，示其悖德于敌仇，豫冀全身而纳用。 
现代文：六月一日，尚书省禀奏安贞谋反。宣宗对平章政事英王守纯说 ：朕观察这份奏书，都是虚饰之词，不合实际，责令他们重新审察。 
English: On June 1st, the Ministry of Education and Culture instigated a rebellion against Anzhen. Emperor Xuanzong said to the political officer of Pingzhang, Yingwang Shujun, "I have observed that this report is all false words, unrealistic, and ordered them to re-examine it.

古文：初，安贞破蕲州，获宋宗室不杀而献之，遂以为罪。
现代文：二十五日，安贞连同他的两个儿子一起被杀，因为他的祖父忠义，父亲揆立有大功，才免除他的兄弟连坐。当初，安贞攻下蕲州，捕获宋国宗室，不杀掉而进献给朝廷，于是成为罪过。
English: On the 25th, An Zhen was killed together with his two sons. It was only because of his grandfather's loyalty and his father's great service that his brother was exempted from being executed. At the beginning, An Zhen captured Zhangzhou, captured Song Guo's family, and presented it to the imperial court without killing it, so it became a crime.

古文：安贞忧谗，以贿近侍局，乃以质成其诬。安贞典兵征伐，尝曰： 三世为将，道家所忌。 
现代文：安贞担心谗言，因而贿赂近侍局，于是这事被拿来当作诬陷他的证据，安贞率军征伐，曾经说： 三代为将，是道家所忌讳的。 
English: An Zhen was afraid of criticism, so he bribed the Privy Council, and this was used as evidence to frame him. An Zhen led the army to conquer. He once said: "Three generations of generals is a taboo in Taoism."

古文：自忠议、揆至安贞，凡三世大将焉。
现代文：从忠义、揆到安贞，共三代人是大将。
English: A total of three generations of generals have risen to the top, from Tadayoshi and Iwao to Anzhen.

古文：初，安贞破蕲州，所得金帛，分给将士。
现代文：当初，安贞攻下蕲州，收缴的金银丝帛，分给了将士。
English: At first, Anzhen captured Zhangzhou, and the collected gold and silver ingots were distributed to the soldiers.

古文：南京都转运使行六部事李特立，金安军节度副使纥石烈蒲剌都、大名路总管判官银术可因而欺隐。
现代文：南京都转运使行六部事李特立、金安军节度副使纥石烈蒲剌都、大名路总管判官银术可因此而欺瞒、隐藏金帛。
English: For this reason, Li Teli, who was in charge of the six departments of the South Kyoto Transportation Bureau, Shishi Retsubo, the vice-commander of the Jinan Army, and Daimyo Road Chief Magistrate Ginjutsu could deceive and hide the gold ingots.

古文：事觉，特立当死、蒲剌都、银术可当杖一百除名。
现代文：事情被发觉后，李特立被处死，纥石烈蒲剌都、银术可被杖罚一百并革除官名。
English: After the matter was discovered, Li Teli was put to death, and Zhi Shi Lai Po Xiu Du and Yin Shu could be punished with a hundred canes and stripped of their official titles.

古文：诏薄其罪，特立夺三官、降三等，蒲剌都、银术可夺两官、降二等云。
现代文：皇上下诏审察他们的罪状，李特立被革去三个官职，下降三级，蒲剌都、银术可被革去两个官职、下降两级。
English: Li Teli was stripped of three official positions, down three levels, while Pu Badu and Yin Shu could be stripped of two official positions, down two levels.

古文：田琢，字器之，蔚州定安人。
现代文：田琢，字器之，蔚州定安人。
English: Tian Taku, a calligrapher, and Ulshu Dingan.

古文：中明昌五年进士，调宁边、茌平主簿，潞州观察判官，中都商税副使。
现代文：明昌五年考中进士，调任宁边、花平主簿，潞州观察判官，中都商税副使。
English: He was promoted to middle school student in the Mingchang five-year examination, and was transferred to be the chief accountant of Ningbo and Huaping, the observer and adjudicator of Zhangzhou, and the vice-envoy of commerce and taxation of Zhongdu.

古文：丁父忧，起复怀安令，补尚书省令史。
现代文：他父亲去世，守丧期满他便出任怀安令，替补尚书省令史。
English: After his father's death, he was appointed to the post of the governor of Huai'an, replacing the governor of Shangshu.

古文：贞祐二年，中都被围，琢请由间道往山西招集义勇，以为宣差兵马提控、同知忠顺军节度使事，经略山西。
现代文：贞祐二年，中都被包围，田琢请命从偏僻小路去山西招集义勇兵士，他被派做宣差兵马提控、同知忠顺军节度使事，并为山西经略。
English: In the second year of Zhengyu, when all of China was besieged, Tian Taku was ordered to go to Shanxi from a remote path to recruit volunteer soldiers. He was sent as an envoy to control the soldiers and horses, as well as the festival of the Tongzhi Zhongshun Army, and as a strategist for Shanxi.

古文：琢与弘州刺史魏用有隙，琢自飞狐还蔚州，用伏甲于路，将邀而杀之。
现代文：田琢与弘州刺史魏用有矛盾，田琢从飞狐回蔚州，魏用在途中埋下伏兵，要拦截并杀死他。
English: There is a conflict between Tian Taku and the Hongzhou assassin Shi Wei. Tian Taku is returning to Ulsan from the Flying Fox, and Wei Wei has planted an ambush on the way to intercept and kill him.

古文：琢知其谋，自别道入定安。
现代文：田琢知道魏用的阴谋，就从另一条路进入定安。
English: Knowing Wei's plot, Tian Taku entered Ding'an from another road.

古文：用入蔚州，杀观察判官李宜，录事判官马士成、永兴县令张福，劫府库仓禀，以兵攻琢于定安。
现代文：魏用进了蔚州，杀死观察判官李宜、录事判官马士成、永兴县令张福，抢劫官府的库房粮仓，在定安领兵攻打田琢。
English: Wei went to Ulshu, killed the observation judge Li Yi, the record judge Ma Shicheng, and the Yongxing County magistrate Zhang Fu, robbed the warehouse of the government, and led the army to attack Tian Tuo in Ding'an.

古文：琢与战，败之。
现代文：田琢与之交战，把他打败。
English: Tian Taku fought with him and defeated him.

古文：用脱身走，易州刺史蒲察缚送中都元帅府杀之。
现代文：魏用脱身逃走，被易州刺史蒲察绑送到中都元帅府杀掉了。
English: Wei Wei escaped and was killed by Yizhou assassin Pu Zha, who took him to Zhongdu Marshal's Office.

古文：是时，劝农副使侯挚提控紫荆等关隘，朝廷闻蔚州乱，欲以挚就代琢守蔚州，令军中推可为管押者，即以魏用金牌佩之，以安其众。
现代文：这时，劝农副使侯挚守卫紫荆等关隘，朝廷闻听蔚州叛乱，就要让侯挚代替田琢把守蔚州，命令军中推荐出可以管押田琢的人，便把魏用的金牌给他佩带，以安抚众人。
English: At this time, he advised the vice-agricultural envoy Hou Zhi to guard the Bauhinia and other passes, and the imperial court heard about the Ulshu rebellion, and it was necessary to let Hou Zhi guard Ulshu instead of Tian Tuo. He ordered the army to recommend a person who could control Tian Tuo, and then gave him a gold medal used in Wei to appease everyone.

古文：丞相承晖奏： 田琢实得军民心，谙练山西利害，魏用将士本无劳效，以用弄兵死祸，遽尔任用，恐开幸门。 
现代文：丞相承晖禀奏说 ：田琢实际上深得军民之心，熟悉山西的势态优劣。魏用的将士原本没有功劳，因为魏用挑起战乱的祸事就突然任用他们，恐怕会打开奸癰之门。 
English: The chancellor said: Tian Taku actually deeply won the hearts of the military and the people, and was familiar with the situation in Shanxi. The soldiers used by Wei originally had no merit, because Wei suddenly appointed them by provoking the scourge of war, and I am afraid that it will open the door to treachery.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇上诏令听从他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：琢至蔚州，诛与用同恶数人。
现代文：田琢回到蔚州，诛灭了数个与魏用一同作恶的人。
English: Tian Taku returned to Ulshu and wiped out several people who had committed evil deeds with Wei Ying.

古文：募兵旬日，得二万人。
现代文：招募兵卒十天，招到二万人。
English: It took ten days to recruit 20,000 soldiers.

古文：十月，琢兵败，仅以身免。
现代文：十月份，田琢战败，仅自己一人幸免。
English: In October, Tian Taku was defeated, and only he was spared.

古文：招集散亡，得三万余，入中山界屯驻，而遣沈思忠招集西京荡析百姓，得万余人，皆愿徙河南。
现代文：他招集逃散的军兵，得到三万多人，进入中山地区屯驻，并派沈思忠招集西京离散的百姓，招得一万多人，都愿意迁徙到河南。
English: He called up the dispersed soldiers and got more than 30,000 of them to enter and settle in the Zhongshan region. He also sent Shen Sizhong to call up the dispersed people in West Beijing and recruited more than 10,000 people, all of whom were willing to migrate to Henan.

古文：琢上书： 此辈与河南镇防，往往乡旧，若令南渡，择壮健为兵，自然和协，且可以招集其余也。 
现代文：田琢上书道 ：这些人与镇守河南的军士往往是老乡，如果令他们南渡，挑选强健者当兵，当然和谐，而且可以借此招集其余的人。 
English: Tian Takujo said, "These people are often fellow villagers with the sergeants who guard Henan Province. If they are allowed to go south, and the strong ones are selected to be soldiers, of course, there will be harmony, and the rest of the people can be recruited.

古文：从之。加沈思忠同知深州军州事。
现代文：皇上应允，并加封沈思忠同知深州军州事。
English: The emperor agreed, and Shen Sizhong and Zhizhong were given the title of Shenzhou Military Governor.

古文：琢复遣沈思忠、宫楫招弘州、蔚州百姓，得五万余人，可充军者万五千人，分屯蔚州诸隘，皆愿得沈思忠为将。
现代文：田琢又派沈思忠、宫楫招集弘州、蔚州百姓，招来五万多人，可以充军的有一万五千人，分别屯驻在蔚州各个关隘，都愿意有沈思忠做将帅。
English: Tian Taku also sent Shen Sizhong and Gong Li to recruit the people of Honshu and Ulshu, and more than 50,000 people were recruited, and 15,000 people who could join the army were stationed in various passes in Ulshu. They were all willing to have Shen Sizhong as a general.

古文：诏加思忠顺天军节度副使，提控弘、蔚州军马，宫楫副之。
现代文：皇上诏令进升沈思忠为顺天军节度副使，掌管弘、蔚州军队，宫楫为其副职。
English: By imperial decree, Shen Sizhong was promoted to vice-envoy of the Shun Tien Army, in charge of the Hong and Ulshu armies, with the palace as his vice-post.

古文：顷之，西山诸隘皆不能守。
现代文：不久，西山各关隘都守不住了。
English: Soon, it was impossible to defend every pass in the western mountains.

古文：琢移军沃州。
现代文：田琢将部队迁移到沃州。
English: Tian Taku moved his troops to Vaud.

古文：沃州刺史完颜僧家奴奏： 田琢军二千五百人，官廪不足，发民窖粟犹不能赡。
现代文：沃州刺史完颜僧家奴上奏道： 田琢的军队有二千五百人，官库不充足，征发民间贮存粮食仍不能养活。
English: A monk from Vaud cites history: There are two and a half thousand soldiers in Tian Tuo's army, the official treasury is insufficient, and the requisition of grain stored by the people is still unable to feed them.

古文：其中多女直人，均为一军，不可复有厚薄，可令于卫、辉、大名就食。 
现代文：其中有很多女真人，但都在一支军队中，不能再厚此薄彼，可以让他们到卫、辉、大名去吃饭。 
English: Many of them were Jurchens, but they were all in the same army, and they could no longer be treated differently. They could go to dine with Wei, Hui, and daimyo.

古文：制可。加琢河北西路宣抚副使，遥授浚州防御使，屯浚州。
现代文：皇上下令许可，并提升田琢为河北西路宣抚副使，遥授予他州防御使之职，驻扎在州。
English: With the permission of the emperor's order, Tian Taku was promoted to the vice-envoy of Hebei West Road, and Yao granted him the post of state defense, stationed in the state.

古文：琢欲陂西山诸水以卫浚州。
现代文：田琢想要堵住西山各条流水来保卫州。
English: Tian Taku wants to block all the flowing water in the West Mountain to defend the state.

古文：贞祐三年十一月，河北行省侯挚入见，奏： 河北兵食少，请令琢汰遣老弱，就食归德。 
现代文：贞祐三年十一月，河北行省侯挚入朝进见，启奏道： 河北军兵粮食缺少，请陛下命令田琢遣散老弱兵丁，到归德去吃饭。 
English: In November of the 3rd year of Zhengyu, Hebei Provincial Prince Zhengyu went to the North to visit the North, and he began to sing: Hebei soldiers are short of food, please ask Your Majesty to order Tian Tuo to send away the old and weak soldiers to return to Germany for dinner.

古文：琢奏： 此辈岭外失业，父子兄弟合为一军，若离而分之，定生他变，乞以全军南渡，或徙卫州防河。 
现代文：田琢禀奏道 ：这些人在岭外失去家业，父子兄弟合起来参加一支军队，如果分离他们，必定发生其他变故，请陛下让臣带全军南渡，或者迁往卫州防守黄河。 
English: Tian Takuo said, "These people lost their family business outside of Ling, and father and son joined an army together. If they are separated, other things will surely happen. I would like to ask His Majesty to let his vassal take the whole army to the south, or to move to Weizhou to defend the Yellow River."

古文：诏尽徙屯陕。
现代文：皇上诏令他们全部移驻陕西。
English: The emperor ordered them all to move to Shaanxi.

古文：琢复奏： 臣幸徙安地，然浚乃河北要郡，今见粮可支数月，乞俟来春乃行。 
现代文：田琢再次禀奏说 ：臣庆幸能迁移到安全地带，然而州是河北重要郡县，现在粮食还可以支撑数月，乞请等来年春天再走。 
English: Tian Taku said again, "Chen Qing is lucky to be able to move to a safe area, but the prefecture is an important county in Hebei, and now the grain can still be supported for several months. Please wait until next spring before leaving."

古文：数日，琢复奏： 浚不可守，惟当迁之。 
现代文：几天后，田琢又奏道： 州守不住，只有搬迁。 
English: A few days later, Tian Tuo also said: The state cannot be protected, it can only be relocated.

古文：宰臣劾琢前后奏陈不一，请逮鞫问。
现代文：宰臣弹劾田琢前后奏词不一样，请求逮捕他来审问。
English: The vice-minister's impeachment of Tian Taku was preceded and followed by different speeches, requesting that he be arrested for interrogation.

古文：宣宗不许。
现代文：宣宗不准许。
English: Shengzong does not allow it.

古文：琢至陕，上书曰： 河北失业之民侨居河南、陕西，盖不可以数计。
现代文：田琢来到陕西，上书说： 河北丧失家业的百姓侨居河南、陕西的，人数不可胜数。
English: When Tian Tuo came to Shaanxi, he wrote: The number of people from Hebei who have lost their family businesses and live in Henan and Shaanxi is countless.

古文：百司用度，三军调发，一人耕之，百人食之，其能赡乎？
现代文：百司的用度，三军的调遣，一个人耕作，上百人吃食，怎能赡养得过来？
English: With the expenditure of a hundred divisions, the deployment of three armies, one person farming, and hundreds of people eating, how can they be supported?

古文：春种不广，收成失望，军民俱困，实系安危。
现代文：春天播种不多，收成失去希望，军民都很困难，实在有关安危。
English: Spring sowing is not enough, the harvest has lost hope, the military and civilians are very difficult, and it is really about safety and security.

古文：臣闻古之名将，虽在征行，必须屯田，赵充国、诸葛亮是也。
现代文：臣听说古代名将，即使正在出征，也必然屯田，赵充国、诸葛亮便是这样。
English: The minister heard that the famous generals of ancient times, even if they were on a campaign, would inevitably be stationed in the field. This was the case with Zhao Chongguo and Zhuge Liang.

古文：古之良吏，必课农桑以足民，黄霸、虞诩是也。
现代文：古代优良的官员，必然倡导督促农桑以使百姓富足，黄霸、虞诩即是如此。
English: In ancient times, excellent officials would inevitably advocate and urge farmers to make the people rich. This was the case with Huangba and Yuxuan.

古文：方今旷土多，游民众，乞明敕有司，无蹈虚文，严升降之法，选能吏劝课，公私皆得耕垦。
现代文：如今荒地广阔，游民众多，乞求陛下明令有司，不要舞弄虚假文章，而要严格升降法度，选择能史规劝农桑，使公私田地都得以耕植。
English: Nowadays, the wasteland is vast, and there are many tourists, begging His Majesty to make a clear ruling, not to play with false articles, but to strictly raise and lower the law, to choose and advise agricultural mulberry, so that both public and private fields can be cultivated.

古文：富者备牛出种，贫者佣力服勤。若又不足，则教之区种，期于尽辟而后已。
现代文：富者准备耕牛、交出粮种，贫者准备劳力、从事耕作，如果这样还不足以保障粮食供应的充足，则可倡导百姓开垦荒地，寄希望于广种薄收。
English: The rich are ready to farm cattle and hand over grain seeds, while the poor are ready to work and engage in farming. If this is not enough to ensure an adequate supply of grain, the people can be encouraged to reclaim wasteland and hope for a wide variety of crops.

古文：官司圉牧，势家兼并，亦籍其数而授之农民，宽其负算，省其徭役，使尽力南亩，则蓄积岁增，家给人足，富国强兵之道也。 
现代文：官府所属的牧场，豪强兼并的土地，应尽数授予农民，放宽赋税，减免徭役，使民众尽力事农，那样就是使积贮年年增加、家庭丰裕、人民富足，这是富国强兵之路啊。 
English: The pastures belonging to the government and the land annexed by the powerful should be granted to the peasants as much as possible, the taxation should be relaxed, the corvee service should be reduced and exempted, and the people should be encouraged to do their best in agriculture. That is to increase the accumulation year by year, the family should be affluent, and the people should be rich. This is the road to a rich country and a strong army.

古文：宣宗深然之。
现代文：宣宗深为赞同。
English: Xuan Zong thinks this is quite right.

古文：陕西元帅府请益兵，诏以琢众与之。
现代文：陕西元帅府请求增兵，宣宗诏令把田琢的军队派给他。
English: The Shaanxi Marshal's Office requested an increase in troops, and Emperor Xuanzong ordered that Tian Tuo's army be sent to him.

古文：兴定元年，朝廷易置诸将，迁山东西路转运使。
现代文：兴定元年，朝廷改换各将帅，田琢进升为山东西路转运使。
English: In the first year of Xingding, the imperial court replaced the generals, and Tian Tuo Jin was promoted to the mountain east-west road transfer envoy.

古文：二年，改山东东路转运使，权知益都府事，行六部尚书宣差便宜招抚使。
现代文：兴定二年，又改任山东东路转运使，掌管知益都府事务，兼做六部尚书宣差便宜招抚使。
English: In the second year of Xingding, he was reappointed as the Shandong East Road Transfer Envoy, in charge of the intellectual property affairs of the capital, and also served as the sixth Shangshu Xuancheng Cheap Recruitment Envoy.

古文：李旺据胶西，琢遣益都治中张林讨之，生擒李旺。
现代文：李旺占领胶西，田琢派益都治中张林去讨伐，活捉了李旺。
English: Li Wang occupied Jiaoxi, Tian Taku sent Yidu Zhi Zhong Zhanglin to fight, and captured Li Wang alive.

古文：八月，莱州经略使术虎山寿袭破李旺党伪邹元帅于小堌，获其前锋于水等三十人，追击伪陈万户，斩首八百级。
现代文：八月，莱州经略使术虎山寿在小战败李旺的同党伪邹元帅，抓住前锋于水等三十人，追击伪陈万户，斩下首级八百颗。
English: In August, Hushan Shou, the governor of Laizhou Province, defeated Li Wang's fellow party member, the pseudo-Marshal Zou, in a small battle. He caught the front runner in the water and thirty others, chased the pseudo-Chen Wanhu, and cut off eight hundred heads.

古文：明日，复破之于朱寒寨。
现代文：第二天，又在朱寒寨战败敌军。
English: The next day, the enemy army was defeated again in Zhu Kanzhai.

古文：胶西、高密官军亦屡破之于诸村及海岛间。
现代文：胶西、高密的官兵也在各村庄及海岛之间打败了他们。
English: The officers and soldiers of Guoxi and Gaomi also defeated them between villages and islands.

古文：是月，棣州裨将张聚杀防御使斜卯重兴，遂据棣州，袭滨州，其众数千人。
现代文：当月，棣州副将张聚杀死防御使斜卯重兴，于是占领棣州，攻打滨州，手下有数千人。
English: In the same month, Zhang Jiu, the vice-general of Zhangzhou, killed the defenders and revived Xiang Yu. He then occupied Zhangzhou and attacked Binzhou, with thousands of men under his command.

古文：琢遣提控纥石烈丑汉会兵讨之。
现代文：田琢派提控纥石烈丑汉会集军队前去征讨。
English: Tian Taku's faction raised the control of flint-hearted villains and gathered an army to go and fight.

古文：聚弃滨专保棣州。
现代文：张聚舍弃滨州专保棣州。
English: Zhang Jiushe abandons Binzhou Special Protection Zone for Ganzhou.

古文：诸军趣棣，聚出战，败之，斩首百级，生擒伪都统王仙等十三人。
现代文：各路军队赶赴棣州。张聚出来迎战，被战败，手下军兵被斩杀上百人，伪都统王仙等十三人被活捉，其余军民奔逃溃散。
English: The armies from all directions rushed to Zhangzhou. Zhang gathered to fight, but was defeated. Hundreds of his subordinates were killed, and thirteen people, including the pseudo-metropolitan Wang Xian, were captured alive. The rest of the soldiers and civilians fled and dispersed.

古文：余众奔溃，追及于别寨，攻拔之，聚仅以身免。
现代文：追击到另一山寨，攻占下来，只有张聚一人幸免。
English: They chased it to another cottage, captured it, and only Zhang Ju was spared.

古文：遂复二州。
现代文：田琢于是收复这两个州。
English: Tian Taku then recaptured the two states.

古文：李全据安丘，琢遣总领提控王政、王庭玉讨之。
现代文：李全占领安丘，田琢派总领提控王政、王庭玉去讨伐。
English: Li Quan occupied Anqiu, and the general leader of the Tian Tuo faction took control of Wang Zheng and Wang Tingyu to fight.

古文：宣差提控、太府少监伯德玩率政兵攻安丘，败焉，提控王显死之。
现代文：宣差提控、太府少监伯德玩率领王政的军队攻打安丘失败，提控王显战死。
English: Wang Xian, who was sent by the emperor to take control of the situation, and Wang Zheng's army, which was led by the minor superintendent of Taifu, Baode Gang, failed to attack Anqiu, and Wang Xian died in the battle.

古文：琢奏： 伯德玩本相视山东山堌水寨，未尝遍行，独留密州，辄为此举，乞治其罪。 
现代文：田琢向皇上奏道 ：伯德玩原本看管山东山水寨，没有四处行动，独自留守密州，忽然做出此举，乞请治他的罪责。 
English: Tian Taku reported to the emperor: "Bird, who was originally in charge of the Shandong mountain water village, did not move around and stayed alone in Mizhou, but suddenly made this move, begging to be punished for his guilt.

古文：诏遣官鞫玩，会赦而止。
现代文：皇上下诏派官吏审察伯德玩，适逢颁布赦令便停止审察。
English: The emperor sent officials up and down the country to investigate the Byrd play, and when the pardon was issued, the investigation was stopped.

古文：既而昌乐县令术虎桓都、临朐县令兀颜吾丁、福山县令乌林答石家奴、寿光县巡检纥石烈丑汉破李全于日照县，琢承制各迁官一阶，进职一等，诏许之。
现代文：不久，昌乐县令术虎桓都、临朐县令兀颜吾丁、福山县令乌林答石家奴、寿光县巡检纥石烈丑汉，在日照县战败李全，田琢按制度把他们分别提升一级，进职一等，皇上下诏准许。
English: Soon, the commander of Changle County, the commander of Linyang County, the commander of Linyang County, the commander of Ulsan County, the commander of Wulin County, the commander of Shijiazhuang County, and the patrol commander of Shuguang County, Li Quan, defeated Li Quan in Rizhao County. According to the Tian Tuo system, they were promoted to the first level, promoted to the first grade, and approved by the imperial edict.

古文：三年，沂州注子堌王公喜构宋兵据沂州，防御使徒单福定徒跣脱走，百姓溃散。
现代文：兴定三年，沂州注子王公喜勾结宋军占领沂州，防御使徒单福定赤脚逃走，百姓溃散。
English: In the third year of Xingding, King Gongxi of Luzhou Province, in collusion with the Song Army, occupied Luzhou Province and fled barefoot in defense of the single apostle Fu Ding. The people dispersed.

古文：琢奏： 去岁顾王二尝据沂州，邳州总领提控纳合六哥前为同知沂州防御事，招集余众攻取之，百姓归心。
现代文：田琢禀奏说： 去年顾王二曾经占领沂州，邳州总领提控纳合六哥先前是同知沂州防御事，他招集残余众人攻取了沂州，百姓人心归附。
English: Tian Taku said: Last year, Gu Wangyi occupied Ganzhou. The general leader of Ganzhou charged Nahe Liugo with the defense of Ganzhou. He called up the remaining people to capture Ganzhou, and the people's hearts were attached.

古文：可用六哥取沂州，今方在行省侯挚麾下，乞发还，取便道进讨。 
现代文：可以任用纳合六哥攻打沂州，他现正在行省侯挚手下，乞请把他发放回来，从小路前来征讨王公喜。 
English: You can appoint Nahe six brothers to attack Zhangzhou. He is currently serving as a provincial prince's loyal subordinate. Please send him back and come to recruit Wang Gongxi from the side streets.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇上应允。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：既而莒州提控燕宁复沂州，王公喜复保注子堌。
现代文：不久，莒州提控燕宁收复沂州，王公喜又保守注子。
English: Soon after, Bozhou took control of Yanning and recovered Bozhou, and Wang Gongxi became a conservative ruler.

古文：琢奏： 沂州须知兵者守之。
现代文：田琢上奏道 ：沂州需要懂兵法的人把守。
English: Tian Taku gave the following speech: Zhangzhou needs someone who understands the art of war to guard it.

古文：徒单福定已衰老，纳合六哥善治兵，识沂形势。 
现代文：徒单福定已经衰老，纳合六哥善于治军，熟悉沂州形势。 
English: Tushan Fuding has been aging, and Nahe Six Brother is good at governing the army and is familiar with the situation in Zhangzhou.

古文：诏福定专治州事，以六哥为沂州总领。
现代文：皇上诏令徒单福定专门管理州中事情，任命纳合六哥为沂州总领。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to Tushan Fuding to specifically manage the affairs of the state, and appointed Naha Liugo as the general leader of Zhangzhou.

古文：琢奏： 濰州刺史致仕独吉世显能招集猛安余众及义军，却李全，保濰州。
现代文：田琢禀奏道 ：潍州刺史致仕独吉世显能招集猛安余留人员及忠义军士，打退李全，保全潍州。
English: Tian Takuan said, "Bozhou stabbed history and sent a soldier, Dujie Shixian, who was able to call up the remaining personnel of Meng'an and the loyal sergeants to beat back Li Quan and protect Bozhou."

古文：六哥破灰山堌，沂境以安。
现代文：纳合六哥攻破灰山，沂州境域因而平安。
English: The Naha six brothers broke through the gray mountain, and the territory of Luzhou was safe.

古文：守兖州观察判官梁昱尝摄淄州刺史，率军民力田，征科有度，馈饷不乏，保全淄州，土贼不敢发。
现代文：驻守兖州的观察判官梁昱曾任淄州刺史，率军民屯种田地，征敛赋税有限度，粮饷供给不缺乏，保卫淄州安全，当地贼寇不敢发难。
English: The observation magistrate stationed in Zhangzhou, Liang Jun, once served as the history of Zhangzhou, led the army to cultivate the fields, collected the limited amount of taxes, did not lack the supply of grain and straw, defended the security of Zhangzhou, and the local thieves and robbers did not dare to attack.

古文：前猗氏主簿张亚夫尝权行部官，主饷密州，委曲购得粮二万斛，兵储乃足，行至高密，征他州兵拒李全。 
现代文：先前猗氏主簿张亚夫曾任行部官职，主管密州粮饷，辗转购得二万斛粮食，军队储备才充足，走到高密，又征招其他州的军兵抵御李全。 
English: Previously, Zhang Yafu, the main bookkeeper of the Min clan, had served as an executive official, in charge of the Mizhou grain market. He bought 20,000 mu of grain, and the army reserve was sufficient. When he went to Gaomi, he recruited soldiers from other states to resist Li Quan.

古文：诏世显升职从四品，遥授同知海州事。
现代文：皇上下诏把独吉世显的官职提升为四品，遥授予他同知海州事之职。
English: The imperial edict elevated the official post of Dukjishixian to Shipon, and Yao awarded him the post of Tongzhihaizhou.

古文：六哥迁一官，升一等，充沂州宣差都提控。
现代文：把纳合六哥升迁一级官阶，职位提高一等，充任沂州宣差都提控。
English: The promotion of Nahe six brothers to the first-level official rank, the promotion of the position to the first-class, and the appointment of the Zhangzhou envoy are all under control.

古文：梁昱迁一官，同知淄州事。
现代文：梁昱升迁一级官阶，任同知淄州事。
English: Liang Jun was promoted to the first-level official, and was appointed to the State Council.

古文：张亚夫迁两官，密州观察判官。
现代文：张亚夫升迁两级官阶，任密州观察判官。
English: Zhang Yafu was promoted two levels of official ranks and appointed as the observation magistrate of Mizhou.

古文：初，张林本益都府卒，有复立府事之功，遂为治中，而凶险不逞，耻出琢下。
现代文：当初，张林原本是益都府的兵卒，因为有重建府衙的功劳，就担任了治中，但在险恶情况中不能施展手脚，耻于在田琢的手下做事。
English: At first, Zhang Lin was originally a soldier of Yidu Prefecture. Because of his contribution to the reconstruction of the prefectural capital, he served as a middle-ranking official, but in a dangerous situation, he could not use his hands and feet. He was ashamed to work under Tian Tuo.

古文：琢在山东征求过当，颇失众心，林欲因众以去琢，未有间也。
现代文：田琢在山东征收赋税过于不当，很失人心，张林想随众人离开田琢，却没有机会。
English: Tian Tuo's imposition of taxes in Shandong was too improper and very unpopular. Zhang Lin wanted to leave Tian Tuo with everyone else, but he didn't have the chance.

古文：会于海、牟佐据莱州，琢遣林分兵讨之。
现代文：适逢于海、牟佐占据莱州，田琢派张林分领军民去征讨。
English: When Yuhai and Muza occupied Laizhou, Tian Tuo sent Zhang Lin to lead the army and people to investigate.

古文：林既得兵，伺琢出，即率众噪入府中。
现代文：张林得到军兵后，等田琢出了军营，就率兵哗然冲进帅府。
English: After Zhang Lin got the soldiers, Toda Taku came out of the military camp and led the soldiers to storm into Shuaifu.

古文：琢仓猝入营，领兵与林战，不胜，欲就外县兵，且战且行。
现代文：田琢仓猝回到军营，带兵与张林作战，战不赢，想借助外县军队，就边战边走。
English: Tian Takukang suddenly returned to the military camp, led the soldiers to fight against Zhang Lin, but could not win the battle. If he wanted to take advantage of the out-of-county army, he would walk on the side of the battle.

古文：至章丘，兵变，求救于邻道，不时至。东平行省蒙古纲以状闻。
现代文：到了章丘，军队发生兵变，田琢向邻近处求救，援兵不一会儿就赶到了，东平行省蒙古纲把情况报告给皇上。
English: When they arrived at Zhangqiu, there was a mutiny in the army, and Tian Tuo called for help from a nearby place. Reinforcements arrived soon after, and the East Parallel Province Mongolian Gang reported the situation to the emperor.

古文：宣宗度不能制林，而欲驯致之，乃遣人召琢还。
现代文：宣宗猜度不能制伏张林，想把他驯服招降，就派人把田琢召回来。
English: Xuanzong guessed that he could not subdue Zhang Lin, and wanted to tame him into submission, so he sent someone to call Tian Tuo back.

古文：行至寿张，疽发背卒。
现代文：田琢走到寿张时，因脊背上痈疽病发作而去世。
English: When Tian Taku walked to Shou Zhang, he died from an attack of gangrene on his spine.

古文：完颜弼，本名达吉不，盖州猛安人。
现代文：完颜弼，原名达吉不，是盖州猛安人。
English: Yanqianqian, formerly known as Dagi, is a native of Meng'an, Gaizhou.

古文：充护卫，转十人长。
现代文：他先是充当护卫，又转为十人长。
English: He first served as an escort and then as a captain.

古文：从丞相襄戍边，功最，除同知德州防御使事，武卫军钤辖，转宿直将军、深州刺史。
现代文：跟随丞相襄戍守边疆时，功劳最大，受任同知德州防御使事、武卫军钤辖，又转任宿直将军、深州刺史。
English: He made the greatest contribution when he guarded the frontier with Emperor Joseph II, and was appointed as the Texas defense envoy and the commander of the armed forces, and was also transferred to the post of general and the governor of Shinshu.

古文：泰和六年，从左副元帅完颜匡攻襄阳，破雷太尉兵，积功加平南荡江将军。
现代文：泰和六年，完颜弼跟随左副元帅完颜匡攻打襄阳，战败雷太尉的军队，因功而加职做平南荡江将军。
English: In the sixth year of the Taihe era, Guan Yanjun followed the left vice-marshal Guan Yankuang to attack Xiangyang, defeated the army of Lieutenant Lei, and was promoted to the post of Pingnan Zhangjiang General for his service.

古文：丁母忧，起复。
现代文：他的母亲逝世，守丧期满他便应召任职。
English: When his mother died, he was called to duty after the period of mourning had expired.

古文：八年，除南京副留守、寿州防御使。
现代文：泰和八年，他官拜南京副留守、寿州防御使。
English: In the 8th year of the Taihe era, he was appointed as the vice-resident of Nanjing and the defense envoy of Shoushou.

古文：大安二年，入为武卫军副都指挥使。
现代文：大安二年，完颜弼受职为武卫军副都指挥使。
English: In the second year of the Taian era, Guan Yanjun was appointed as the deputy commander of the armed forces.

古文：三年，以本官领兵驻宣德。
现代文：大安三年，他做为此官而带兵驻守宣德。
English: In the third year of the Taian era, he served as this officer and stationed soldiers in Xuande.

古文：会河之败，弼被创，马中流矢，押军千户夹谷王家奴以马授弼，遂得免。
现代文：会河之战失败，完颜弼受伤，战马被流箭击中，押军千户夹谷王家奴把马送给完颜弼，完颜弼才得以幸免于难。
English: The battle of Huihe was a failure, Guan Yanqi was injured, the horse was hit by a flying arrow, the king's son of the thousand-household valley gave the horse to Guan Yanqi, and Guan Yanqi was able to survive.

古文：迁右副都点检。
现代文：随后，他升迁为右副都点检。
English: Subsequently, he was promoted to the position of right-hand deputy inspector.

古文：至宁元年，东京不守，弼为元帅左监军，捍御辽东。
现代文：至宁元年，东京把守不住，完颜弼任元帅左监军，捍卫辽东。
English: In the first year of the Ning Dynasty, Tokyo could not defend itself, and Yan Xuan was appointed marshal of the Left Supervision Army to defend Liaodong.

古文：请 自募二万人为一军，万一京师有急，亦可以回戈自救。
现代文：他请求 自己招募二万人作为一支军队，万一京师有危急，也可以回兵自救。
English: He asked himself to recruit twenty thousand people as an army, and in the event that the Beijing division was in danger, he could also return to the army to save himself.

古文：今驱市人以应大敌，往则败矣。 
现代文：现在驱动市民应付大敌，如果前去就会战败 。
English: Now the citizens are driven to deal with the great enemy, and if they go forward, they will be defeated.

古文：卫绍王怒曰： 我以东北路为忧，卿言京师有急何邪？
现代文：卫绍王发怒说： 我认为东北路是忧患，卿说京师有危急，是什么呢？
English: Wei Shao Wang said angrily, "I think the Northeast Road is in trouble. Your Excellency said that Beijing-Shi is in danger. What is it?

古文：就如卿言，我自有策。
现代文：就算是像卿说的那样，我也自有对策。
English: Even if, as you say, I have my own countermeasures.

古文：以卿皇后连姻，故相委寄，乃不体朕意也。 
现代文：因为卿与皇后是姻亲，所以委托重任，卿却不体察朕的心意。 
English: Because the lord and the queen are in-laws, they are entrusted with heavy responsibilities, but the lord does not understand my heart.

古文：弼曰： 陛下勿谓皇后亲姻俱可恃也。 
现代文：完颜弼说 ：陛下不要以为与皇后是姻亲就都可以恃强。 
English: Yan Xuan said, "Your Majesty, don't think that just because you are related to the Empress, you can be stubborn.

古文：时提点近侍局驸马都尉徒单没烈侍侧，弼意窃讥之。
现代文：这时，提点近侍局驸马都尉徒单没烈侍立在旁边，完颜弼的意思是暗暗讥讽他。
English: At this time, the close attendant of the close attendant bureau, the captain of the horse, stood next to him, and the meaning of the expression was to secretly ridicule him.

古文：卫绍王怒甚，顾谓没烈曰： 何不叱去？ 
现代文：卫绍王更加恼怒，回头对徒单没烈说： 为何不把他呵斥走？ 
English: King Weishao became even more angry and turned back to the ruffian and said, "Why don't you drive him away?"

古文：没烈乃引起，付有司。论以奏对无人臣礼，诏免死，杖一百，责为云内州防御使。
现代文：徒单没烈于是把他拉起来，交给有司，有司论断完颜弼回奏皇上问话而没有君臣礼法，皇上诏令免去他死罪，罚以杖刑一百，责贬为云内州防御使。
English: Thereupon, he pulled him up and handed him over to Yuzhi. After Yuzhi's judgment, Yan Xuan played back the emperor's question without the etiquette of a prince and a minister. The emperor's edict exempted him from the death penalty, punished him with a hundred strokes of the cane, and demoted him to a defense envoy of Yunnan Province.

古文：贞祐初，宣宗驿召弼赴中都，是时云内已受兵，弼善马槊，与数骑突出，由太原出泽、潞，将从清、沧赴阙。
现代文：贞祐初年，宣宗派驿使把完颜弼召往中都，此时云内已经遭受敌军进攻，完颜弼擅长在马上使用长矛，他与数名骑兵突出城去，从太原跑到泽、潞，要从清、沧赶奔宫阙。
English: In the first year of Zhengyu, the Xuan sect sent an envoy to summon Gan Yan Yan to Zhongdu. At this time, Yunnan had already been attacked by enemy forces. Gan Yan Yan was good at using a spear on a horse. He and several cavalrymen went to the city, ran from Taiyuan to Ze and Handan, and wanted to catch up with Gongyuan from Qing and Cang.

古文：会有诏除定武军节度使，寻为元帅左都监，驻真定。
现代文：恰逢有诏书授任他为定武军节度使，不久又任元帅左都监，驻守真定。
English: Coincidentally, there was an imperial edict appointing him as the festival envoy of the Dingwu army, and soon he was appointed marshal and left-wing inspector, stationed in Zhending.

古文：弼奏： 赏罚所以劝善惩恶，有功必赏，有罪必罚，而后人可使、兵可强。
现代文：完颜弼禀奏道： 赏罚是勉励善行、惩戒恶行的，有功必赏，有罪必罚，然后人才可以使用，军队才可以强壮。
English: Guan Yanxuan said: Reward and punishment is to encourage good deeds and punish evil deeds. Merit must be rewarded, and crime must be punished. Only then can talent be used, and only then can the army be strong.

古文：今外兵日增，军无斗志。
现代文：现在外敌日日增加，而部队没有斗志。
English: Now the foreign enemies are increasing day by day, and the troops have no fighting spirit.

古文：亦有逃归而以战溃自陈者，有司从而存恤之，见闻习熟，相效成风。 
现代文：也有逃命回来、说自己是战败溃散的，有司听信他们并留下给予抚恤，耳闻目睹，习以为常，便相互仿效成为风气。 
English: There were also those who fled for their lives and returned, saying that they had been defeated and dispersed, and there were those who listened to them and left them to give them a pension. Hearing and witnessing, they became accustomed to it, and it became a custom to imitate each other.

古文：又曰： 村寨城邑，兵退之后，有心力勇敢可使者，乞招用之。 
现代文：完颜弼说 ：村寨城邑中，军队撤退之后，有心力勇敢可以使用之人，乞请招用他们。 
English: Guan Yanqi said: In villages and towns, after the withdrawal of the army, if there are people who have the courage to use them, please recruit them.

古文：又曰： 河朔郡县，皆以拘文不相应救，由此残破。
现代文：并说 ：河朔各个郡县，都因为受法令限制而不去相互救应，所以残坏破败。
English: And he said: "All counties in Hexuo have been devastated because they are restricted by laws and regulations and do not help each other.

古文：乞敕州府，凡有告急征兵，即须赴救，违者坐之。 
现代文：乞请陛下令各州府，凡是有告急征兵的情况，就必须赶去援救，违者治罪。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to order all prefectures to rush to the rescue whenever there is a case of emergency conscription. Violators will be punished.

古文：又曰： 河北军器，乞权宜弛禁，仍令团结堡寨以备外兵。 
现代文：又说 ：河北的军用器械，乞请陛下适当约制，还是命令他们巩固城堡村寨以防备外敌。 
English: He also said, "As for the military equipment in Hebei Province, please ask Your Majesty to properly restrict it, or order them to consolidate their castles and villages to guard against foreign enemies."

古文：又曰： 今虽议和，万一轻骑复来，则吾民重困矣。
现代文：他还说： 现在虽然议和，但万一轻锐骑兵再来攻打，那么我方百姓将重新被困。
English: He also said: Although peace is being negotiated now, if the light cavalry attacks again, then our people will be trapped again.

古文：愿速讲防御之策。 
现代文：请陛下快速商讨防御策略。 
English: I would ask Your Majesty to quickly discuss a defense strategy.

古文：及劝迁都南京，阻长淮，拒大河，扼潼关以自固。
现代文：并劝说宣宗迁都到南京，倚仗漫长的淮水阻兵，宽大的黄河拒敌，扼制潼关，从而巩固自身。
English: He also persuaded Xuan Zong to move the capital to Nanjing, relying on the long Huai River to resist the enemy, the broad Yellow River to resist the enemy, and the Shaoguan Pass to strengthen himself.

古文：宣宗将迁汴，弼兼河北西路兵马都总管。
现代文：宣宗要迁往汴州，完颜弼兼任河北西路兵马都总管。
English: Xuan Zong wanted to move to Bozhou, and Yan Zang also served as the head of the West Hebei Military Command.

古文：宣宗次真定，弼言： 皇太子不可留中都，盖军少则难守，军多则难养。 
现代文：宣宗走到真定时，完颜弼说 ：皇太子不能留在中都，军队少则难守，军队多则难养。 
English: When Emperor Xuanzong arrived at Zhending, Yan Yan said, "The crown prince cannot stay in Zhongdu. If the army is small, it is difficult to defend, and if the army is large, it is difficult to maintain."

古文：又奏： 将帅以阃外为威，今生杀之权皆从中覆。 
现代文：又奏道： 将帅由于执管军务而逞威，如今生杀之权都因之颠倒败坏。 
English: He also said, "The generals are arrogant because they are in charge of military affairs, and now the power of life and death has been turned upside down and corrupted.

古文：又奏： 瑞州军颇狡，左丞尽忠多疑，乞付他将。 
现代文：再奏道 ：瑞州军队非常狡诈，左丞尽忠生性多疑，乞请陛下另派将帅。 
English: Replay: The Ruizhou army is very cunning, and Zuo Zheng is suspicious of loyalty, and begs His Majesty to send another commander.

古文：宣宗颇采用其言。
现代文：宣宗采纳了他的许多言论。
English: Xuanzong adopted many of his sayings.

古文：大名军变，杀蒲察阿里，诏弼镇抚之。
现代文：大名军队叛变，杀死蒲察阿里，宣宗诏令完颜弼去平定叛乱。
English: The daimyo's army mutinied, killed Pucha Ali, and proclaimed the Emperor's edict to suppress the rebellion.

古文：未几，改陕西路统军使、京兆兵马都总管。
现代文：不久，完颜弼改任陕西路统军使、京兆兵马都总管。
English: Soon after, Guan Yanqi was appointed as the envoy of the Shaanxi Road Union and the general manager of the Beijing Zhao Terracotta Army.

古文：宣抚副使乌古论兖州置秦州榷场，弼以擅置，移文问之。
现代文：宣抚副使乌古论兖州设置秦州榷场，完颜弼以擅自设置榷场为理由，写文书质问他。
English: Wu Gu, vice-commissioner of the General Office of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), questioned him in a written document on the setting up of the Qin-Zhou Stadium in Ganzhou, accusing him of setting the stadium without authorization.

古文：兖州曰： 近日入见，许山外从宜行事，秦州自宋兵焚荡榷场，几一年矣，今既安帖，复宜开设，彼此获利，岁收以十万计。
现代文：乌古论兖州说： 近几天朝见君王，恩许在山外看情形做事。秦州自从宋兵扫荡焚毁榷场之后，将近一年了，现在既然和平，应该重新开设，彼此得到利益，每年收入可以以十万计算。
English: Wu Gu said of Bozhou: In recent days, I have met with the king, and he has allowed me to see the situation and do things outside the mountains. Qinzhou has been at peace for nearly a year since the Song soldiers swept and burned the market, so it should be reopened and benefit from each other. The annual income can be calculated at 100,000 yuan.

古文：对境天水军移文来请，如俟报可，实虑后时。 
现代文：对面国境的天水军写信来邀请，如果等到禀报后许可，实在担心以后如何。 
English: On the other side of the border, the Tianshui Army wrote a letter to invite me. If I wait until after the invitation is sent, I am really worried about what will happen next.

古文：弼奏其事，宰臣以兖州虽擅举而无违失，苟利于民，专之亦可。
现代文：完颜弼向宣宗奏明此事，宰相臣子因为乌古论兖州虽然擅自举动却没有违令过失，且对百姓有利，特许他这样做也是可以的。
English: After Yan Zang reported the matter to Xuan Zong, the Prime Minister Minzhi, because although he acted without authorization, he did not violate the order and was beneficial to the people, it was also possible to grant him special permission to do so.

古文：宣宗曰： 朕固尝许其从宜也。 
现代文：宣宗说 ：朕原本曾经准许他根据情况行事。 
English: "I originally gave him permission to act according to the situation," he said.

古文：三年，改知东平府事、山东西路宣抚副使。
现代文：贞祐三年，完颜弼改任知东平府事、山东西路宣抚副使。
English: In the third year of her reign, she was appointed vice-envoy of the Chidongping prefectural government, and vice-envoy of the Shandong East-West Road.

古文：是时，刘二祖余党孙邦佐、张汝楫保济南勤子堌，弼遣人招之，得邦佐书云： 我辈自军兴屡立战功，主将见忌，阴图陷害，窜伏山林，以至今日，实畏死耳。
现代文：这时，刘二祖的残余党羽孙邦佐、张汝楫护守济南勤子，完颜弼派人招降他们，得到孙邦佐的书信，信上说： 我们这些人自从起兵屡立战功，主将显出妒忌，阴谋陷害我们，我们躲在山林直到今天，其实是惧怕死而已。
English: At this time, the remnants of Liu Erzu's party veterans, Sun Bangzo and Zhang Rong, protected the diligent sons of Jinan, and finally sent people to recruit them. They received a letter from Sun Bangzo, which said: "Since we have repeatedly made military achievements, the master will show jealousy and plot to frame us. We have been hiding in the mountains until today, but in fact we are afraid of death.

古文：如蒙湔洗，便当释险面缚，余贼未降者保尽招之。 
现代文：假如承蒙洗清罪过，便会放弃险境，当面受绑，其余没有投降的贼人，我们保证全部招来。 
English: If you accept our forgiveness and are cleansed of your sins, you will give up the dangerous situation and be tied up in front of us. The rest of the thieves who did not surrender, we promise to summon them all.

古文：弼奏： 方今多故，此贼果定，亦一事毕也。
现代文：完颜弼上奏道 ：如今事故太多，此贼如果平定，也是完结了一件事。
English: Kanen Shoko said, "Nowadays, there are too many accidents. If this thief is subdued, it will be the end of the matter."

古文：乞明以官赏示之。 
现代文：乞请陛下把官职赏予他们。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to reward them with high office.

古文：诏曰： 孙邦佐果受招，各迁五官职。 
现代文：宣宗诏令说： 孙邦佐如果受招，给他们各升五级官职。 
English: The edict of Emperor Xuanzong said: If Sun Bangzo is recruited, they will each be promoted to a five-level official post.

古文：于是邦佐、汝楫皆降。
现代文：于是，孙邦佐、张汝楫都投降了。
English: As a result, Sun Bangzu and Zhang Rugao both surrendered.

古文：邦佐遥授濰州刺史，汝楫遥授淄州刺史，皆加明威将军。
现代文：孙邦佐被遥授潍州刺史，张汝楫被遥授淄州刺史，并都加封为明威将军。
English: Sun Bangzo was awarded the Distinguished Service Order of the People's Republic of China, Zhang Rugao was awarded the Distinguished Service Order of the People's Republic of China, and both were awarded the title of Mingwei General.

古文：顷之，弼荐邦佐、汝楫改过用命，招降甚众，稍收其兵仗，放归田里。
现代文：不久，完颜弼举荐孙邦佐、张汝楫，说他们改正罪过，奉守职命，招降者众多，并渐渐收缴他们的兵器，放他们回归田里。
English: Soon, Sun Bangzo and Zhang Rugao were recommended by Guan Yin, who said that they had rectified their sins, fulfilled their duties, and recruited a large number of subordinates. Gradually, their weapons were confiscated and they were allowed to return to the fields.

古文：诏邦佐遥授同知益都府事，汝楫遥授同知东平府事，皆加怀远大将军。
现代文：宣宗诏令遥授孙邦佐同知益都府事，遥授张汝楫同知东平府事，并都加封怀远大将军。
English: Emperor Xuanzong decreed that Sun Bangsa and Zhiyi were to be given the posts of prefectural governors, Zhang Rong and Zhidongping were to be given the posts of prefectural governors, and Huaiyuan was to be given the post of general.

古文：梁聚宽遥授泰定军节度副使，加宣武将军。
现代文：梁聚宽被遥授为泰定军节度副使，加封宣武将军。
English: Liang Jukang was awarded the title of Vice-Envoy of the Taiding Army and the title of General Xuanwu.

古文：四年，弼迁宣抚使。
现代文：贞祐四年，完颜弼升迁为宣抚使。
English: In the fourth year of Zhengyu, she was promoted to the post of Xuanfu envoy.

古文：已而汝楫复谋作乱，邦佐密告弼，弼飨汝楫，伏甲庑下，酒数行，钟鸣伏发，杀汝楫并其党与。
现代文：不久，张汝楫重又谋反作乱，孙邦佐秘密报告完颜弼，完颜弼设酒宴款待张汝楫，在廊下埋伏军兵，酒喝过几道，钟声鸣响，伏兵出现，杀死了张汝楫及其党羽。
English: Soon after, Zhang Rucheng again plotted to rebel and create turmoil. Sun Bangzo secretly reported that he had killed Zhang Rucheng, set up a banquet to entertain Zhang Rucheng, ambushed soldiers in the corridor, drank a few glasses of wine, the bells rang, the ambush appeared, and killed Zhang Rucheng and his party.

古文：手诏褒谕，封密国公。
现代文：皇上亲自书写诏书下令褒奖，封完颜弼为密国公。
English: The emperor personally wrote an imperial edict ordering the award, and Yan Xuan was crowned as the Prince of the Secret State.

古文：其后邦佐屡立功。
现代文：此后，孙邦佐屡次立功。
English: Since then, Sun Bonzo has repeatedly distinguished himself.

古文：元光末，累官知东平府事、山东西路兵马都总管，充宣差招抚使。
现代文：元光末年，他逐步升官至知东平府事、山东西路兵马都总管，充任宣差招抚使。
English: At the end of Yuan Guang's life, he was gradually promoted to the post of Chidongping prefectural governor and the head of the Shanxi-Tianjin-Hebei Military and Equestrian Capital, and served as the envoy of the emperor.

古文：弼上书曰： 山东、河北、河东数镇仅能自守，恐长河之险有不足恃者。
现代文：完颜弼上书说 ：山东、河北、河东几个镇仅能自守，恐怕长河之险峻不足以依仗。
English: Finally, the letter said: Shandong, Hebei, and several towns in Hedong can only defend themselves. I am afraid that the steepness of the Yangtze River is not enough to rely on war.

古文：河南尝招战士，率皆游惰市人，不闲训练。
现代文：河南曾征招战士，大都是闲散市民，不习惯训练。
English: Henan used to recruit soldiers, but most of them were idle citizens who were not used to training.

古文：若迁签驱丁监户数千，别为一军，立功者全户为良，必将争先效命以取胜矣。
现代文：如果选拔几千驱丁监户，另成一军，立功的全户成为良民，兵士必将争先效力去赢取胜利。
English: If we select several thousand households to drive out the evil overseers and form another army, and all the meritorious households become good citizens, the soldiers will surely strive to win victory.

古文：武卫军家属尝苦于兵，人人怀愤，若择骁悍千余，加以爵赏，亦可得其死力。 
现代文：武卫军家属曾经因战乱受苦，人人心怀怨愤，如果挑出上千骁悍兵士，给予封赏，也可使得他们拼死效力。 
English: The families of the armed guards once suffered from the war, and everyone harbored resentment. If you pick out thousands of brave soldiers and give them rewards, you can also make them work hard.

古文：又曰： 老病之官，例许致仕，居河北者嫌于避难，居河南者苟于尸禄，职事旷废。
现代文：他又说 ：老迈病弱的官吏，按条例准许辞官，居住河北的人近似于避难，居住河南的人苟且受禄却不尽职，公务荒废。
English: He also said: the old and sick officials are allowed to resign according to the regulations, the people living in Hebei are close to refuge, the people living in Henan are well paid but do not perform their duties, and the official duties are wasted.

古文：乞遍谕核实，其精力可用者仍旧，年高昏聩不事事者罢之。 
现代文：乞请陛下核实情况，对精力可以使用者仍然照旧，对年纪高而昏聩不做事者罢除职务。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to verify the situation, to continue to treat those who can use their energy as before, and to dismiss those who are too old and too weak to work.

古文：又曰： 赋役频烦，河南百姓新强旧乏，诸路豪民行贩市易，侵土人之利，未有定籍，一无庸调，乞权宜均定。
现代文：完颜弼还说 ：赋税劳役频繁琐细，河南百姓刚刚强健却长期困乏，各路豪强乡绅贩卖交易总侵犯当地人利益，没有固定征籍，如同没有庸调制度，乞请陛下权衡决定。
English: Guan Yanqi also said: taxation and labor are frequently trivial, the people of Henan are just strong but have long-term poverty, the sale and trade of local strongmen and gentry always infringe on the interests of local people, there is no fixed enrollment, as if there is no mediocrity system, please His Majesty weigh the decision.

古文：如知而辄避、事过复来者，许诸人捕告，以军兴法治之。 
现代文：如果有知道法令却避开、事情过后又重来的人，允许众人捕捉报告，按军法惩治他们。 
English: If there are people who know the law but evade it, and things come up again later, allow everyone to capture the report and punish them according to military law.

古文：诏下尚书省议，惟老病官从所言，余皆不允。
现代文：宣宗下诏令尚书省商议，只有对老迈病弱官吏的处理听从完颜弼的建议，其余都不应允。
English: Under the edict of Emperor Xuanzong, Shangshu Province deliberated, only the treatment of old and weak officials followed the suggestion of Yan Kun, and the rest did not agree.

古文：大元兵围东平，弼百计应战，久之，乃解围去。
现代文：大元的军队围攻东平，完颜弼千方百计应付作战，过了很久才解围退敌。
English: Great Yuan's army besieged Dongping, and made every effort to fight, but it took a long time to break the siege and defeat the enemy.

古文：宣宗赐诏，奖谕将士，赏赉有差。
现代文：宣宗赐下诏书，传令奖励将士，赏赐各有不同。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong issued an imperial edict, and soldiers were rewarded according to the edict, but the rewards varied.

古文：是岁五月，疽发于脑。
现代文：这年五月，完颜弼头部发了痈疽病。
English: In May of this year, Ms. Guan suffered from gangrene on her head.

古文：诏太医诊视，赐御药。
现代文：皇上诏令太医去诊治，又赐给御用药物。
English: The emperor ordered the imperial physician to diagnose and treat him, and gave him the royal medicine.

古文：俄卒。
现代文：不久，完颜弼去世。
English: He died shortly afterwards.

古文：弼平生无所好，惟喜读书，闲暇延引儒士，歌咏投壶以为常。
现代文：完颜弼平生无所嗜好，只喜爱读书，闲暇时间邀请儒士，常常歌咏诗文、投壶游戏。
English: She has no hobbies in her life. She only likes to read. In her leisure time, she invites Confucian scholars, often sings poetry, and plays pot games.

古文：所辟如承裔、陀满胡士门、纥石烈牙吾塔，皆立方面功。
现代文：由他征召的人，比如承裔、陀满胡土门、纥石烈牙吾塔，都立有军功。
English: The people he conscripted, such as Cheng Zi, Dumang Hutu Men, and Zangshi Renga Wuta, all achieved military merit.

古文：治东平，爱民省费，井邑之间，军民无相讼，有古良将之风焉。
现代文：他治理东平时，爱护百姓，节省费用，城邑之中军民没有相互告状的，很有古代良将的风范。
English: When he governed Dongping, he loved the people, saved expenses, and the soldiers and civilians in the towns did not sue each other. He had the demeanor of an ancient good general.

